Spirit Teachings (William Stainton Moses, 1883)
===============================================
William Stainton Moses — Automatic-writing revelations through 'Imperator' — the English spiritualist classic. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (spiritteachings00moseiala) — 1898 edition.

Ex  Libris
C.  K.  OGDEN

SPIRIT  TEACHINGS

THROUGH  THE  MEDIUMSHIP  OF

WILLIAM    STAINTON    MOSES
(M.A.,  OXON.\

AUTHOR  OF  "-PSYCHOGRAPHY,"   "SPIRIT  IDENTITY,"   "HIGHER  ASPECTS  OF

SPIRITUALISM,"   "PERSONAL  REMINISCENCES  OF  EPES  SARGENT,"

"  SPIRITUALISM  AT  THE  CHURCH  CONGRESS,"  ETC.,  ETC.

flDemorial  j6Mtion.

LONDON:

LONDON     SPIRITUALIST     ALLIANCE,     LTD.
110,  ST.  MARTIN'S  LANE,  LONDON,  W.C.

1898.

SPIRIT    TEACHINGS.

2015315

PEEFACE.

THIS  reprint  of  the  Memorial  Edition  of  "  Spirit  Teachings
received  through  the  mediumship  of  the  late   Mr.  Stainton
Moses,  M.A.    (Oxon.),   has,    in    compliance   with   the    urgent
request    of     many    friends,    been    issued    by     the    London
Spiritualist  Alliance,  Ltd.,  110,  St.  Martin's  Lane,  London,  W.C.

1898.

BIOGRAPHY  OF  V.  STAINTON  MOSES.

WILLIAM  STAINTON  MOSES  was  born  at  the  village  of  Don-
nington,  in  Lincolnshire,  on  the  fifth  of  November,  1839.  His
father,  William  Moses,  was  the  Head  Master  of  the  Grammar
School,  and  his  mother  the  daughter  of  Thomas  Stainton,  of
Alford,  Lincolnshire.  His  education  was  commenced  at  the
school  of  which  his  father  was  Principal,  and  was  afterwards
continued  with  a  private  tutor,  who,  impressed  by  his  great
abilities,  strongly  urged  Mr.  Moses  to  send  his  son  to  a  public
school.  His  advice  was  acted  upon,  and  in  August,  1855,
young  Stainton  Moses,  then  in  his  16th  year,  was  placed  at  the,
Grammar  School  at  Bedford.  Here  he  remained  for  nearly
three  years,  winning  golden  opinions  from  all  the  masters  on
account  not  only  of  his  brilliant  abilities  but  also  of  his  con-
spicuous industry,  regularity,  and  general  attention  to  all  his
duties.  In  one  term  alone  he  carried  off  four  prizes  ;  and  shortly
before  he  left  he  was  elected  to  one  of  the  two  exhibitions
which  had  been  founded  in  connection  with  the  school.  On
leaving,  he  received  from  the  Head  Master  testimonials  of  the
most  flattering  nature,  speaking  in  high  terms  of  the  very
rapid  progress  he  had  made  in  all  departments  of  study,  and
also  of  the  uniform  excellence  and  correctness  of  his  school
conduct.

From  Bedford  Stainton  Moses  went  to  Exeter  College
Oxford,  which  he  entered  at  the  commencement  of  Michaelmas
term,  1858.  His  college  life  was  in  every  way  as  successful  as
his  school  life  had  been,  and  great  hopes  were  formed  by  all  con-
nected with  him  that  at  the  end  of  his  Oxford  career  he  would
take  the  highest  honours  open  to  him.  This,  however,  was  not
to  be — overwork  gradually  told  upon  him,  but  he  refused  to  rest
or  in  any  way  relax  his  studies  ;  and  so,  sad  to  relate,  on  the  very
day  before  the  commencement  of  his  last  examination  his  health
gave  way  completely,  and  he  broke  down,  absolutely  worn  out
in  mind  and  body.  For  some  time  he  was  very  ill,  but  on

VI  BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

regaining  convalescence  he  was  ordered  abroad.  ,He  spent  nearly-
a  year  travelling  on  the  Continent  with  friends,  and,  with  a  view
to  complete  restoration,  he  visited  many  different  scenes  and
climates.  St.  Petersburg  was  the  farthest  limit  of  his  wander-
ings, and  on  his  return  journey  he  lingered  for  six  months  at  the
old  Greek  Monastery  of  "  Mount  Athos."  Curiosity  apparently
guided  him  thither,  and  his  strong  desire  for  rest  and  meditation
doubtless  impelled  him  to  remain  for  so  long  a  time  in  that  re-
mote, old-world  spot.  Many  years  afterwards  he  learned  from
Imperator,  his  controlling  spirit,  that  he  had  been  influenced
even  then  by  his  unseen  guides,  who  had  impressed  him  to  go
to  "  Mount  Athos  "  as  part  of  his  spiritual  training

At  the  age  of  23,  Stainton  Moses  returned  to  England  and
took  his  degree,  leaving  Oxford  finally  in  the  year  1863.  Though
much  improved  in  health  by  his  foreign  travel,  he  was  not  yet
strong ;  so,  acting  on  the  advice  of  his  doctor,  who  insisted  on  a
quiet  rural  life,  he  accepted  a  curacy  at  Maughold,  near  Ramsey,
Isle  of  Man.  Here  he  remained  for  nearly  five  years,  and
succeeded  during  that  period  in  gaining  the  affection  and
esteem  of  all  his  parishioners.  The  Rector,  a  very  old  and
infirm  man,  was  practically  unable  to  render  any  assistance  in
the  work  of  the  parish,  so  that  the  whole  of  the  duties  con-
nected with  the  church  and  the  district  derolved  upon  Stainton
Moses.  During  his  stay  at  Maughold,  a  severe  epidemic  of
small-pox  broke  out  in  the  village  and  surrounding  neighbour-
hood ;  and  it  was  then  that  the  utter  fearlessness  of  his  nature
was  strikingly  manifested.  There  was  no  resident  doctor  in  the
district,  but  having  at  different  times  acquired  some  little  know-
ledge of  medicine,  Stainton  Moses  was  enabled  to  minister  to-
&  certain  extent  to  the  bodily  necessities  of  his  parishioners,  as-
well  as  to  their  spiritual  needs.  Day  and  night  he  was  in  attend-
ance at  the  bedside  of  some  poor  victim  who  was  stricken  by  the
fell  disease,  and  in  one  or  two  cases  when,  after  an  unsuccessful
struggle  with  the  enemy,  he  had  soothed  the  sufferer's  dying-
moments  by  his  ministrations,  he  was  compelled  to  combine  the
offices  of  priest  and  grave-digger,  and  conduct  the  interment
with  his  own  hands.  Such  was  the  panic,  inspired  by  the  fear
of  infection,  that  it  was  sometimes  found  impossible  to  induce
men  to  dig  graves  for  the  dead  bodies  of  the  victims,  or  even  to-

BIOGRAPHY  OF   W.   STAINTON  MOSES.  Vll

remove  the  coffins  containing  them.  But  through  all  this
terrible  time  Stainton  Moses  never  flinched,  and,  notwithstand-
ing the  threefold  nature  of  the  duties  thus  compulsorily  thrust
upon  him,  he  was  fortunate  in  escaping  the  malady,  and  though
he  steadily  remained  at  his  post  single-handed,  from  the  com-
mencement to  the  end  of  the  outbreak,  he  was  spared  any  un-
easiness on  the  score  of  his  own  health.  It  may  be  readily
imagined  how  greatly  he  endeared  himself  to  all  those  around
him  by  his  courageous  devotion  and  strong  sense  of  duty  during
such  an  anxious  and  critical  period ;  but  the  feelings  which  he
inspired  in  his  parishioners,  and  everyone  with  whom  he  came
in  contact  at  Maughold,  will  be  best  appreciated  by  a  perusal
of  the  address  presented  to  him  on  relinquishing  his  curacy
there.  It  reads  as  follows  : —

"Rsv.  AND  DEAR  SIR, — We,  the  undersigned  parishioners  of
Maughold,  are  much  concerned  to  learn  that  it  is  your  intention
shortly  to  resign  the  position  which  you  have  for  some  years  past
so  usefully  and  honourably  occupied  amongst  us.  We  beg  to  assure
you  that  your  labours  have  been  greatly  appreciated  in  the  parish.
The  longer  we  have  known  you,  and  the  more  we  have  seen  of  your
work,  the  greater  has  our  regard  for  you  increased.  The  congrega-
tions at  both  the  churches  under  your  charge  are  very  different  in
numbers  to  what  they  were  some  time  ago.  The  schools  have  been
better  looked  after ;  the  aged  and  infirm  have  been  visited  and
comforted ;  and  the  poor  have  been  cheered  and  helped  by  your
kindness  and  liberality.  By  your  courteous  demeanour,  by  your
friendly  intercourse,  and  by  your  attention  to  the  duties  of  the
parish  generally,  you  have  greatly  endeared  yourself  to  us  all ;  and
not  least  to  our  respected  and  venerable  Vicar,  whose  hands  we  are
well  satisfied  you  have  done  all  you  possibly  could  to  strengthen.
We  cannot  but  feel  that  your  loss  will  be  a  very  serious  one  to  the
parish,  and  we  should  be  glad  if  you  could  see  your  way  to  remaining
some  time  longer  with  us.  By  reconsidering  your  determination  and
consenting  to  remain,  you  would  place  us  under  a  deep  debt  of
gratitude  and  obligation."

Here  follow  the  signatures  of  the  Rector  and  Churchwardens,
also  of  fifty-four  of  the  principal  inhabitants  of  the  district.
Such  a  document,  spontaneously  presented,  speaks  for  itself.
However,  in  spite  of  the  unanimous  wish  of  the  inhabitants
that  he  should  remain,  Stainton  Moses  found  that  the  work  of

Viil  BIOGRAPHY  OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

looking  after  two  parishes,  practically  single-handed,  made  too
great  demands  upon  his  health,  and  so  in  the  spring  of  1868  he
reluctantly  relinquished  his  charge  at  Maughold,  and  accepted
the  curacy  of  St.  George's,  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man.  Here  he  first
met  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer,  and  the  acquaintance  thus
commenced  soon  ripened  into  an  intimacy  which  was  destined
to  exercise  a  very  important  influence  upon  the  future  of  the
three  persons  concerned.  Very  soon  after  taking  up  his  duties
at  St.  George's,  Stainton  Moses  was  laid  up  with  a  sharp  attack
of  congestion  of  the  liver,  which  confined  him  to  his  bed  for
some  little  time.  Dr.  Speer  attended  him  through  this  illness
(although  he  had  retired  from  active  practice  for  some  years),  and
was  successful  in  effecting  a  complete  cure.  In  September  of
1869  Stainton  Moses  left  Douglas,  where  he  had  made  a  great
impression  by  his  preaching  and  ministrations  among  the  poor
of  the  parish,  and  took  up  the  post  of  locum  tenens  at
Langton  Maltravers,  in  Dorsetshire.  Here  he  remained  for  two
months,  when  he  was  transferred  to  a  curacy  in  the  diocese  of
Salisbury,  the  last  ecclesiastical  appointment  he  held.

At  this  time  he  was  troubled  by  an  affection  of  the  throat,
which  rapidly  became  worse,  and  necessitated  a  complete  rest,
and  the  relinquishing  of  all  public  speaking  and  preaching.
Acting,  therefore,  upon  medical  advice,  Stainton  Moses  gave  up
his  curacy,  and  came  to  London  with  the  intention  of  turning
his  attention  to  tuition.  This  practically  severed  his  con-
nection with  the  Church.  Had  his  health  permitted  him  to
follow  his  original  career,  he  would  no  doubt  have  attained  a
distinguished  position,  as  he  was  a  powerful  and  original  preacher,
a  successful  organiser,  and  an  earnest  and  efficient  worker
among  the  poor.

On  coining  to  London  Stainton  Moses  stayed  with  Dr.  and
Mrs.  Speer  for  nearly  a  year,  during  which  time  he  superintended
privately  the  education  of  their  son,  the  present  writer.  About
the  close  of  1870  or  the  beginning  of  1871,  he  obtained  the
appointment  of  English  Master  in  University  College  School,
which  position  he  held  until  1889.  Little  need  be  said  of  his
work  there,  further  than  that  as  long  as  his  health  permitted
it  was  always  done  well.  As  one  of  the  English  masters  in  a
great  school,  his  opportunities  of  influencing  the  boys  under  his

BIOGRAPHY   OF  W.    STAINTON    MOSES.  12

•charge,  in  respect  of  literary  taste  and  style,  were  considerable;
and  of  those  opportunities  he  made  good  use.  Many  will
remember  his  excellent  suggestions,  and  kindly  criticisms  of
their  essays.  A  portion  of  his'  work  consisted  of  preparing  a
«lass  for  the  Matriculation  of  the  University  of  London.  The
peculiarly  crabbed  philological  and  historical  knowledge  required
for  that  examination  was  uncongenial  to  Stainton  Moses's  mind,
.as  in  literature  he  liked  to  have  a  free  hand ;  yet  the  work  was
•done,  and  done  well,  and  during  the  years  he  spent  at  the  school
he  embodied  in  a  manuscript  volume  a  vast  number  of  valuable
notes  bearing  upon  this  subject.

Even  more  striking  than  his  success  as  a  master  was  the
personal  influence  exercised  by  him  over  his  pupils.  One  of
the  peculiar  institutions  at  University  College  School  is  that  by
which  a  certain  number  of  boys  are  especially  attached  to
certain  senior  masters,  with  whom  they  can  take  counsel  and
from  whom  they  can  seek  advice  in  all  matters  pertaining  to
their  well-being,  moral,  intellectual,  and  physical.  Over  the
boys  thus  placed  under  his  immediate  care  the  strong  person-
ality of  Stainton  Moses  had  an  enormous  influence,  often
extending  over  a  period  long  subsequent  to  their  leaving  school.
Many  a  time  in  after  life  his  advice  has  been  sought  by  old
pupils  on  important  matters,  and  whenever  he  felt  he  could  help
them  it  was  always  a  real  pleasure  to  him  to  do  so  to  the  best
of  his  ability.  His  geniality,  his  knowledge  of  the  world  and
of  men,  his  invariable  straightforwardness  and  kindness,  all
combined  to  strengthen  the  affectionate  regard  in  which  he  was
held  by  those  boys  who  had  the  good  fortune  to  be  under  his
especial  supervision.  On  resigning  his  post  through  ill-health
the  Council  of  University  College  passed  a  resolution  conveying
to  Stainton  Moses  their  best  thanks  for  his  long  and  valuable
service  to  the  school,  and  a  special  letter  of  affectionate  regret
was  also  sent  to  him  signed  by  twenty-eight  of  his  colleagues.
Of  his  capacity  for  imparting  his  ideas  to  others  I  can  speak
from  a  personal  experience  extending  over  seven  years,  during
which  period  our  relations  as  master  and  pupil  were  continuous
and  unbroken.  Nothing  could  have  been  kinder  or  more  con-
vincing than  his  method  of  imparting  knowledge  and  informa-
tion ;  nothing  clearer  or  more  helpful  than  his  manner  of

X  BIOGRAPHY  OF  W.   STAINTON  MOSES.

explaining  all  difficulties;  and  no  trouble  was  too  great  for  him
to  take  in  smoothing  away  all  obstacles  to  a  clear  understanding
of  the  matter  in  hand.

It  was  during  Stainton  Moses's  visit  to  Dr.  Speer  in  1870
that  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  was  first  brought  prominently
before  him.  For  some  time  he  and  Dr.  Speer  had  been  in  the
habit  of  discussing  various  topics  bearing  upon  religious  belief.
Both  were  gradually  drifting  into  an  unorthodox,  almost
agnostic,  frame  of  mind,  and  both  were  becoming  more  and
more  dissatisfied  with  existing  doctrines,  and  longing  for  absolute
truth  as  regards  the  future  life,  and  for  some  demonstration  of
the  certainty  of  immortality.  To  obtain  any  proof  of  such
immortality  founded  upon  a  strictly  scientific  basis  seemed
impossible,  and  Dr.  Speer  was  rapidly  becoming  a  materialist  of
the  most  hard  and  fast  nature.  A  note  received  by  him  from
Stainton  Moses,  together  with  a  copy  of  W.  R.  Greg's  "  Enigmas
of  Life,"  may  prove  interesting  to  those  who  would  fain  have
some  inkling  of  the  inner  working  of  these  two  friends'  minds,
at  a  time  when  the  old  faith  had  lost  its  hold  upon  them,  and
they  were  standing  upon  the  brink  of  a  newer  Revelation: —

"  MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — You  and  I  have  tackled  some  '  Enigmas  of
Life '  together,  and  if  we  have  not  always  solved  them,  we  have
generally  agreed  in  our  opinion  respecting  them.  I  offer  you  the
opinions  of  a  great  thinker,  which  will  be,  in  their  outcome,  very
similar  to  what  we  have  thought  out  for  ourselves.  And  if  the  half
century,  during  which  your  life  here  has  lasted,  leaves  much
unknown,  and  much  that  even  another  such  period  will  not  unravel,
I  hope  at  least  that  during  such  part  of  it  as  we  are  here  together
we  may  continue  to  talk  and  speculate  together. — Your  sincere
friend,  W.  S.  M."

It  will  be  interesting  to  note  the  circumstances  under  which,
during  this  visit  to  Dr.  Speer,  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  pressed
itself  upon  Stainton  Moses's  attention.  Mrs.  Speer  had  been  con-
fined to  her  room  by  illness  for  three  weeks,  during  which  period
she  had  occupied  herself  in  reading  Dale  Owen's  "  The  Debat-
able Land."  It  interested  her  much,  and  on  being  able  to  rejoin
the  family  circle  she  asked  Stainton  Moses  to  read  the  book,
and  endeavour  to  discover  whether  there  was  any  truth  in  the
experiences  therein  narrated.  Though  at  that  time  he  took  no

BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.  XI

interest  in  Spiritualism,  regarding  it  merely  as  trickery  and
fraud,  yet  he  promised  Mrs.  Speer  to  go  into  the  matter  with
the  view  of  ascertaining  whether  there  might  be  some  germs  of
truth  underlying  the  mass  of  jugglery  and  imposture ;  and  so-
began  those  astounding  experiences  of  his,  which,  commencing
at  that  time,  extended  over  a  period  of  more  than  twenty  years.
In  those  days,  although  dissatisfied  with  the  cut-and-dried
doctrines  of  the  Church,  and  with  the  manner  in  which  its
teachings  were  expounded  from  the  pulpit  and  elsewhere,
Stainton  Moses  was,  nevertheless,  immensely  interested  in  all
religious  subjects,  and  his  reading  of  everything  that  bore  upon
them  was  enormous.  No  book,  pamphlet,  or  magazine  likely  to
throw  any  light  upon  the  questions  which  perplexed  him  was
overlooked,  and  even  after  his  regular  intercourse  with  the  un-
seen world  had  commenced  he  did  not  entirely  give  up  his  faith
in  the  Church  without  an  arduous  and  prolonged  struggle.  The
reality  of  the  struggle  may  be  clearly  discerned  in  the  pages  of
"  Spirit  Teachings,"  and  in  his  other  automatic  writings ;  but
when  he  had  fully  satisfied  himself  of  the  reality  of  those
"  Teachings,"  and  of  the  truthfulness  and  integrity  of  his  spirit-
guides,  his  faith  never  faltered,  and  his  zeal  in  the  prosecution
of  the  work  entrusted  to  him  never  flagged.  Previous  to  his
own  development  as  a  medium,  Stainton  Moses  had  been
present  at  various  sittings  with  other  mediums.  Mrs.  Speer
having  been  so  immensely  impressed  by  her  perusal  of  the
"  Debatable  Land "  he  determined  to  read  it  for  himself,  and
in  consequence  became  almost  as  anxious  as  she  was  for  fuller
information.  This  was  the  more  curious  as,  only  a  month  before,
he  had  tried  in  vain  to  read  Lord  Adare's  record  of  private
seances  with  D.  D.  Home,  but,  as  he  said  himself,  it  had
absolutely  no  interest  for  him.  His  first  noteworthy  experiences
were  with  Lottie  Fowler,  in  the  spring  of  1872;  and  soon  after-
wards Dr.  Speer — although  at  that  time  regarding  the  whole
subject  of  Spiritualism  as  "stuff  and  nonsense" — was  persuaded
to  join  him  in  a  visit  to  the  medium  Williams.  They  went  several
times,  and  were  soon  convinced  that  there  was  some  force  out-
side the  medium  at  work — in  which  conviction  they  were  much
strengthened  by  a  remarkable  seance  held  shortly  afterwards
in  Dr.  Speer's  house,  when  Williams  was  again  the  medium.

Xll  BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

About  this  time  Stainton  Moses's  own  mediumistic  powers
began  to  be  developed.  It  is  unnecessary  to  give  a  detailed
description  of  that  development,  as  a  full  and  exhaustive  account
may  be  found  in  Mrs.  Speer's  "  Records,"  which  have  lately
appeared  in  Light ;  but  I  think  that  some  of  my  own  recollec-
tions of  the  stances,  at  which  I  had  the  privilege  of  being
present  during  the  last  two  years  of  Stainton  Moses's  active
mediumship  may  be  of  some  interest.  At  any  rate  they  will
place  on  record  the  impressions  of  another  witness,  and  may
possibly  be  of  service  as  bearing  additional  testimony  to  the
wonderful  powers  of  the  medium,  and  the  absolute  reality  of
the  phenomena  given  fcfirough  him.

It  is  important  to  note  that  at  these  stances  no  less  than
ten  different  kinds  of  manifestations  took  place,  with  more  or
less  frequency.  On  occasions  when  there  were  fewer  varieties
•we  were  usually  told  that  the  conditions  were  not  good.  When
they  were  favourable  the  manifestations  were  more  numerous,
the  raps  more  distinct,  the  lights  brighter,  and  the  musical
sounds  clearer.  The  various  occurrences  may  be  briefly  enu-
merated as  follows : —

1.  Great  variety  of  raps,  often  given    simultaneously,  and

ranging  in  force  from  the  tapping  of  a  finger-nail  to
the  tread  of  a  foot  sufficiently  heavy  to  shake  the  room.
Each  spirit  always  had  its  own  distinctive  rap,  many
of  them  so  peculiar  as  to  be  immediately  recognisable  ;
and  these  sounds  often  took  place  in  sufficient  light  for
the  sitters  to  see  each  other's  features,  and — I  suppose
more  important — hands.  Raps  also  were  frequently
heard  on  the  door,  sideboard,  and  wall,  all  some  distance
removed  from  the  table  at  which  we  sat  ;  these  raps
could  not  possibly  have  been  produced  by  any  human
agency ;  of  that  I  satisfied  myself  in  every  conceivable
way.

2.  Raps  which  answered  questions  coherently  and  with  the

greatest  distinctness,  and  also  gave  messages,  sometimes
of  considerable  length,  through  the  medium  of  the
alphabet.  At  these  times  all  the  raps  ceased  except
the  one  identified  with  the  communicating  spirit,  and
perfect  quiet  prevailed  until  the  message  had  beeu

BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.  XH1>

delivered:  We  could  almost  always  tell  immediately
with  which  spirit  we  were  talking,  owing  to  the  perfectly
distinct  individuality  of  each  different  rap.  Some  of
the  higher  spirits  never  manifested  by  raps  at  all,  after
the  first  few  seances,  but  announced  their  presence  by
a  note  of  music,  or  the  flash  of  a  light ;  but  among  those
who  did  manifest  in  the  usual  way  it  would  be  difficult
to  forget  Rector's  heavy  and  ponderous  tread,  which
shook  the  whole  room  with  its  weight, while  it  appeared
to  move  slowly  round  the  circle.

3.  Numerous  lights  were  generally  visible  to  all  the  sitters.
These  lights  were  of  two  different  kinds — objective  and
subjective.  The  former  usually  resembled  small  illu-
minated globes,  which  shone  brightly  and  steadily,  often
moved  rapidly  about  the  room,  and  were  visible  to  all
the  sitters.  A  curious  fact  in  connection  with  these
lights  always  struck  me,  viz.,  that  looking  on  to  the  top
of  the  table  one  could  see  a  light  slowly  ascending  from
the  floor,  and  to  all  appearance  passing  out  through  the
top  of  the  table — the  table  itself  apparently  not  afford-
ing any  obstacle  to  one's  view  of  the  light.  It  is  a  little
difficult  to  explain  my  meaning  exactly,  but  had  the  top
of  the  table  been  composed  of  plain  glass,  the  effect  of  the
ascending  light,  as  it  appealed  to  one's  organs  of  vision,
would  have  been  pretty  much  the  same  as  it  was,  seen
through  the  solid  mahogany.  Even  then,  to  make  the
parallel  complete,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  a  hole
in  the  glass  top  of  the  table,  through  which  the  light
could  emerge.  The  subjective  lights  were  described  as
being  large  masses  of  luminous  vapour  floating  round
the  room  and  assuming  a  variety  of  shapes.  Dr.  Speer
and  myself,  being  of  entirely  unmediumistic  tempera-
ments, were  only  able  to  see  the  objective  lights,  but
Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  Mrs.  Speer,  and  other  occasional
sitters  frequently  saw  and  described  those  which  were
merely  subjective.  Another  curious  point  in  relation  to
the  objective  lights  was  that,  however  brightly  they
might  shine,  they  never,  unlike  an  ordinary  lamp,  threw
any  radiance  around  them,  or  illuminated  the  smallest

ilV  BIOGRAPHY  OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

portion  of  the  surrounding  darkness — when  it  ivas  dark
— in  the  slightest  degree.

4.  Scents  of  various  descriptions  were  always  brought  to  the

circle — the  most  common  being  musk,  verbena,  new-
mown  hay,  and  one  unfamiliar  odour,  which  we  were
told  was  called  spirit-scent.  Sometimes  breezes  heavy
with  perfume  swept  round  the  circle ;  at  other  times
quantities  of  liquid  musk,  &c.,  would  be  poured  on  to
the  hands  of  the  sitters,  and  also,  by  request,  on  to
our  handkerchiefs.  At  the  close  of  a  stance  scent  was
nearly  always  found  to  be  oozing  out  of  the  medium's
head,  and  the  more  frequently  it  was  wiped  away  the
stronger  and  more  plentiful  it  became.

5.  The  musical  sounds,  which  were  many  and  varied,  formed

a  very  important  item  in  the  list  of  phenomena  which
occurred  in  our  presence.  Having  myself  had  a  thorough
musical  education,  I  was  able  to  estimate  at  its  proper
value  the  importance  of  these  particular  manifesta-
tions, and  was  also  more  or  less  in  a  position  to
judge  of  the  possibility  or  impossibility  of  their  being
produced  by  natural  means,  or  through  human  agency.
These  sounds  may,  roughly  speaking,  be  divided  into  two
classes — those  which  obviously  proceeded  from  an
instrument— a  harmonium — in  a  room,  whilst  the
hands  of  all  the  sitters  were  joined  round  the  table ;
and  those  which  were  produced  in  a  room  in  which
there  was  no  instrument  of  any  kind  whatever.  These
latter  were,  of  course,  by  far  the  most  wonderful.  As
regards  the  musical  sounds  produced  in  the  room  in
which  there  was  no  instrument,  they  were  about  four  in
cumber.  First,  there  were  what  we  called  "  The  Fairy
Bells."  These  resembled  the  tones  produced  by  striking
musical  glasses  with  a  small  hammer.  The  sounds
given  forth  were  clear,  crisp,  and  melodious.  No  definite
tune  was  ever  played,  but  the  sounds  were  always
harmonious,  and  at  the  request  of  myself,  or  any  other
member  of  the  circle,  the  "  bells  "  would  always  run  up
or  down  a  scale  in  perfect  tune.  It  was  difficult  to
judge  where  the  sound  of  these  "  fairy  bells  "  came  from,

BIOGRAPHY  OF   W.   STAINTON  MOSES.  XV

but  I  often  applied  my  ear  to  the  top  of  the  table,  and
the  music  seemed  to  be  somehow  in  the  wood — not
underneath  it,  as  on  listening  under  the  table  the
music  would  appear  to  be  above.  Next  we  had  quite  a
different  sound — that  of  a  stringed  instrument,  more
nearly  akin  to  a  violoncello  than  anything  else  I  have
ever  heard.  It  was,  however,  more  powerful  and
sonorous,  and  might  perhaps  be  produced  by  placing  a
'cello  on  the  top  of  a  drum,  or  anything  else  likely  to
increase  the  vibration.  This  instrument  was  only  heard
in  single  notes,  and  was  used  only  by  one  spirit,  who
employed  it  usually  for  answering  questions — in  the
same  way  that  others  did  by  raps.  The  third  sound  was
an  exact  imitation  of  an  ordinary  handbell,  which  would
be  rung  sharply  by  way  of  indicating  the  presence  of
the  particular  spirit  with  whom  it  was  associated.
We  naturally  took  care  to  ascertain  that  there
was  no  bell  of  any  kind  in  the  room  at  the  time.
Even  if  there  had  been,  it  would  have  been  a  matter  of
some  difficulty  to  ring  it  all  round  the  walls  and
even  up  to  the  ceiling,  and  this  particular  sound  pro-
ceeded indifferently  from  all  parts  of  the  room.
Lastly,  we  had  a  sound  of  which  it  is  exceedingly
difficult  to  offer  an  adequate  description.  The  best
idea  of  it  I  can  give  is  to  ask  the  reader  to  imagine  the
soft  tone  of  a  clarionet  gradually  increasing  in  intensity
until  it  rivalled  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  then,  by
degrees,  diminishing  to  the  original  subdued  note  of
the  clarionet  until  it  eventually  died  away  in  a  long
drawn-out  melancholy  wail.  This  is  a  very  inefficient
description  of  this  really  extraordinary  sound,  but  as  I
have  in  the  whole  course  of  my  experience  never  heard
anything  else  at  all  like  it,  it  is  impossible  to  give  to
those  who  have  not  heard  it  a  more  accurate  idea  of
what  it  was  like.  As  was  the  case  with  the  two  previous
sounds  I  have  described,  it  was  always  associated  with
one  spirit.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  in  no  case  did
the  controlling  agencies  produce  more  than  single  notes
or  at  best  isolated  passages.  This  they  accounted  for

XVI  BIOGRAPHY   OF  W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

as  due  to  the  peculiarly  unmusical  organisation  of  the
medium.  At  any  rate,  the  production  of  these  sounds
was  wonderful  enough  in  itself,  as  I  over  and  over  again
satisfied  myself  fully  that  there  were  no  materials  in
the  room  which  could  in  any  way  assist  in  the  making
of  any  kind  of  musical  tones  ;  and  the  clarionet  and
trumpet  sound  was  one  that  I  should  be  utterly  at  a  loss
to  give  at  all  an  adequate  imitation  of,  whatever
materials  might  be  at  my  disposal.  Before  I  joined
the  circle  several  other  musical  sounds  were  frequently
heard,  and  all  were  given  with  greater  variety,  both  of
manipulation  and  tone ;  but  as  I  am  now  only  giving  a
brief  epitome  of  what  actually  happened  under  my  own
observation,  I  refrain  from  alluding  to  occurences  which
took  place  when  I  was  not  present.

C.  Direct  writing  was  often  given,  sometimes  on  a  sheet  of
paper  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  table,  and  equi-
distant from  all  the  sitters  ;  at  other  times  one  of  us
would  place  our  hands  on  a  piece  of  paper  previously
dated  and  initialled,  and  usually  a  message  was  found
written  upon  it  at  the  conclusion  of  the  seance.  We
usually  placed  a  pencil  upon  the  paper,  but  sometimes
we  only  provided  a  small  piece  of  lead — the  results
being  the  same  in  both  cases.  Usually,  the  writing
took  the  form  of  answering  questions  which  we  had
asked,  but  sometimes  short,  independent  communi-
cations were  given,  and  also  messages  of  greeting.

7.  Movements  of  heavy  bodies,  such  as  tables  and  chairs,
were  by  no  means  infrequent.  Sometimes  the  table
would  be  tilted  up  at  a  considerable  angle  ;  at  other
times  the  chairs  of  one  or  more  of  the  sitters  would  be
pushed  more  or  less  forcibly  away  from  the  table,  until
they  touched  the  wall  behind  ;  or  the  table  would  move
away  from  the  sitters  on  one  side,  and  be  propelled
irresistibly  against  those  on  the  other,  compelling  them
to  shift  their  chairs  in  order  to  avoid  the  advance  of
so  heavy  a  piece  of  furniture.  The  table  in  question,
at  which  we  usually  sat,  was  an  extremely  weighty
dining-table  made  of  solid  Honduras  mahogany,  but

BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.    STAINTON    MOSES.  XV11

•at  times  it  was  moved  with  much  greater  ease  than
the  combined  efforts  of  all  the  sitters  could  aecompli.vh  ;
and  these  combined  efforts  were  powerless  to  prevent
it  moving  in  a  certain  direction,  if  the  unseen  force
willed  it  to  do  so.  We  frequently  tested  the  strength
of  this  force  by  trying  to  check  the  onward  movement
of  the  table,  but  without  success.

S.  The  passage  of  matter  through  matter  was  sometimes
strikingly  demonstrated  by  the  bringing  of  various
articles  from  other  rooms,  though  the  doors  were  closed
and  bolted.  Photographs,  picture-frames,  books,  and
other  objects  were  frequently  so  brought,  both  from
rooms  on  the  same  floor  and  from  those  above.  How
they  came  through  the  closed  doors  I  cannot  say,
except  by  some  process  of  de-materialisation,  but  come
they  certainly  did,  apparently  none  the  worse  for  the
process,  whatever  it  might  have  been.

:9.  The  direct  spirit  voice,  as  opposed  to  the  voice  of  a  spirit
speaking  through  the  mediun.  while  in  a  state  of  trance,
was  very  seldom  heard,  and  never  with  any  clearness  or
distinctness.  But  occasiouallv  it  was  attempted,  and
by  listening  carefully  we  could  distinguish  one  or  two
broken  sentences  which  were  hissed  out  in  a  sort  of
husky  whisper.  These  sounds  generally  seemed  to  be  in
the  air  above  us,  but  they  were  produced  with  evident
difficulty,  and  there  being  so  many  other  methods  of
communication,  the  direct  voice  was  essayed  but  seldom.

10.  The  inspirational  addresses  given  by  various  spirits
through  Stainton  Moses  when  in  an  entranced  condition
have  been  so  thoroughly  dealt  with  by  Mrs.  Speer  in
her  "Records"  that  I  can  add  nothing  as  regards  the
matter  thus  expounded.  Touching  the  manner  of
these  addresses  (one  or  more  of  which  Ave  had  at
almost  every  seance)  I  can  only  say  that  they  were
delivered  in  a  dignified,  temperate,  clear  and  convincing
tone,  and  that  though  the  voice  proceeded  from  the
medium,  it  was  always  immediately  apparent  that  the
personality  addressing  us  was  not  that  of  the  medium.
'The  voice  was  different,  and  the  ideas  were  often  not  in

xviii  BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

accordance  with  those  held  at  the  time  by  the  medium.
An  important  fact,  too,  was  that  although  many  spirits-
exercised  this  power  of  control,  the  voice  which  spoke
was  always  different ;  and  in  the  case  of  those  spirits
which  controlled  regularly  we  came  to  know  perfectly
well  which  intelligence  was  communicating,  by  the  tone
of  the  voice  and  the  method  of  enunciation.
So  far,  in  this  enumeration  of  the  various  phenomena,  I
have  spoken  generally  of  the  manifestations  which  usually
occurred  at  most  of  our  sittings,  but  in  conclusion  I  will  give
two  particular  instances,  one  of  direct  writing,  and  one  of
identity,  both  of  which  I  think  are  interesting,  and  which
certainly  impressed  me  considerably.  On  one  occasion  we  were
told  to  cease  for  a  time,  and  resume  the  seance  later  on.  I  asked
the  communicating  intelligences  if  they  would  during  the
interval  give  me  a  sample  of  direct  writing  under  test  con-
ditions. Having  received  an  affirmative  reply,  I  procured  a
piece  of  my  own  note-paper,  and,  unknown  to  the  other  members
of  the  circle,  I  dated  and  initialled  it,  and  also  put  a  private
mark  in  a  corner  of  the  sheet.  The  others  having  retired
from  the  dining  to  the  drawing  room,  I  placed  my  piece  of
paper  with  a  pencil  under  a  table  in  the  study,  and  having
thoroughly  searched  the  room  I  barred  the  shutters,  bolted  and
locked  the  dcor,  and  put  the  key  in  my  pocket.  I  did  not  lose
sight  of  the  door  until  I  re-entered,  when  to  my  great  satis-
faction I  found  a  message  clearly  written  on  the  paper.  As  we
had  not  been  sitting  in  the  study,  and  as  I  can  positively  aver
that  no  one  entered  the  room  after  I  had  left  it  until  I  myself
unlocked  the  door,  I  have  always  considered  this  particular
instance  of  direct  spirit  writing  as  a  most  satisfactory  and
conclusive  test.  The  other  occurrence  which  I  consider  specially
worthy  of  mention  took  place  as  follows.  We  were  sitting  one
night  as  usual,  and  I  had  in  front  of  me,  with  my  hand  resting
upon  it,  a  piece  of  note-paper,  with  a  pencil  close  by.  Suddenly
Stainton  Moses,  who  was  sitting  exactly  opposite  me,  exclaimed>
"  There  is  a  very  bright  column  of  light  behind  you."  Soon
afterwards  he  said  that  the  column  of  light  had  developed  into
a  spirit-form.  I  asked  him  if  the  face  was  familiar  to  him,  and
he  replied  in  the  negative,  at  the  same  time  describing  the  head

BIOGRAPHY   OF  W.   STAINTON   MOSES.  XIX

and  features.  When  the  seance  was  concluded  I  examined  my
sheet  of  paper,  which  my  hand  had  never  left,  and  found  written
on  it  a  message  and  signature.  The  name  was  that  of  a  distin-
guished musician  who  died  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
century.  I  purposely  refrain  from  specifying  him,  as  the  use  of
great  names  very  frequently  leads  to  results  quite  different  from
those  intended.  However,  now  comes  the  most  extrordinary
part  of  the  affair.  I  asked  Stainton  Moses — without,  of  course
showing  him  the  written  message — whether  he  thought  he  could
recognise  the  spirit  he  saw  behind  my  chair  if  he  saw  a  portrait
of  him.  He  said  he  thought  he  could,  so  I  gave  him  several
albums,  containing  likenesses  of  friends  dead  and  alive,  and  also
portraits  of  various  celebrities.  On  coming  to  the  photograph
of  the  composer  in  question  he  at  once  said,  without  hesitation,
"  That  is  the  face  of  the  spirit  I  saw  behind  you."  Then,  for  the
first  time,  I  showed  him  the  message  and  signature.  I  regarded
the  whole  incident  as  a  very  fair  proof  of  spirit  identity,  and
I  think  that  most  people  would,  at  any  rate,  consider  the
occurrence  one  of  interest.

During  the  time  of  Stainton  Moses's  active  mediumship,  he
was  often  busily  engaged  in  assisting  in  the  formation  of  various
societies,  whose  primary  object  was  the  investigation  of  Spirit-
ualism and  other   occult,  though  kindred,  subjects.     He  took
part  in  the  establishment  of  the  British  National  Association
of   Spiritualists   in   1873.     He  was  also   connected  with  the
Psychological  Society  of  Great  Britain,  which  was  inaugurated
in  April,  1875,  and  of  the  Council  of  that  Society  he  was  one
of  the  original  members.     In  1882,   Stainton  Moses  took  an
active  interest  in  the  formation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  ;  and  in  1884  he  established  "The  London  Spiritualist
Alliance,"  and  became  its  first  President,  which  post  he  filled  up
to  the  time  of  his  death.     For  the  last  few  years  of  his  life,  he
added  to  his  other  duties  the  editorship  of  Light,  and  though
his  active  mediumship,  as  regards  physical  phenomena,  had
then  almost  entirely  ceased,  yet  his  power  of  automatic  writing
remained  with  him  to  the  end.     For  the  last  three  or  four
years  of   his  life  he  suffered  from   failing  health,  and  many
successive  attacks  of  influenza  gradually  undermined  a  constitu-
tion which  had  never  been  conspicuously  robust.     Though  he

XX  BIOGRAPHY  OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

gradually  became  worse  he  was  never  supposed  to  be  in  any
real  danger,  and  when  the  end  came  on  September  5th,  1892,
it  was  a  terrible  shock  to  all  those  who  knew  him,  and  who
realised  what  a  loss  to  themselves  personally,  and  to  the  cause
of  Spiritualism  generally,  his  death  would  prove.

Far  more  interesting  to  those  who  knew  him  intimately  was
Stain  ton  Moses's  personality  than  his  life.  The  latter,  as  all
who  read  this  brief  sketch  will  readily  see  for  themselves,  was,
with  the  exception  of  the  wonderful  spiritual  experiences  so  in-
dissolubly  linked  with  it,  unmomentous  and  uneventful.  But
his  individuality  and  force  of  character  were  immense  ;  his
ability  was  quite  out  of  the  common ;  and  more  than  all,  the
-versatility  of  his  talents  was  perhaps  one  of  his  most  striking
features.  No  study  was  too  dry  or  uninteresting  for  him  to
master,  no  subject  so  apparently  unimportant  and  unworthy  his
attention  but  he  would  easily  acquire  an  intelligent  conception
of  its  details.  And  this  applies  equally  to  the  whole  range  of
more  or  less  trivial  matters  which  make  up  the  sum  total  of
nineteenth-century  e very-day  life,  as  well  as  to  those  deeper  and
more  serious  subjects  which,  being  akin  to  his  own  especial  one,
naturally  engrossed  most  of  his  attention.  From  the  time
that  he  first  began  to  realise  of  what  vast  importance  it  was  to
establish  the  possibility  of  communion  with  the  world  of  the
future,  to  the  end  of  his  life,  his  zeal  in  proving  the  truth  of  his
teachings  never  failed.  In  spite  of  the  demands  made  upon  his
time  by  school  and  press  work,  he  contrived  to  bestow  an
immense  amount  of  energy  upon  his  Spiritualistic  researches ;
his  enormous  correspondence  with  thousands  of  inquirers  all  over
the  world  affording  quite  sufficient  material  to  occupy  the  life
of  any  ordinary  man.  But  in  this  as  in  everything  else  he  was
conscientious  to  the  last  degree,  and  never  considered  time
wasted  that  was  expended  in  answering  the  queries  and  solving,
to  the  best  of  his  ability,  the  doubts  of  earnest  seekers  after
truth.  A  certain  proportion  of  his  time  was  devoted  to  visiting
many  of  the  most  important  people  in  the  country — important
both  socially  and  politically — and  also  those  who  were
distinguished  for  their  eminence  in  the  scientific,  literary,  and
artistic  world.  During  the  lifetimes  of  such  people  their  names
cannot  be  divulged,  but  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  Stainton

BIOGRAPHY   OF   W.   STAINTON   MOSES.  XXI

Moses  had  interviews,  more  or  less  frequently,  with  most  of  the
illustrious  personages  of  his  day ;  and  all  who  took  any  interest
in  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  whatever  their  position  or
attainments,  were  alike  anxious  to  hear  his  opinions  and  experi-
ences of  that  subject  on  which  none  were  so  well  qualified  to-
speak  as  himself.

Apart  from  Spiritualism,  Stainton  Moses  possessed  in  his
own  character  a  rare  combination  of  remarkable  qualities,  not
often  met  with  in  the  same  individual.  He  had  the  keenest
sense  of  justice  and  equity,  his  judgment  was  invariably  sound
and  discreet,  and  in  addition  to  all  this,  no  man  ever
possessed  a  kinder  heart  or  livelier  sympathies,  or  was  more
ready  to  assist  with  counsel  or  advice  those  who  came  to  him
for  either.  Notwithstanding  his  varied  spiritual  experiences,
unique  in  themselves,  he  was  never  puffed  up  by  them  in  the
smallest  degree,  and  though  impatient  of  mere  frivolous  or
ignorant  opposition,  he  would  never  refuse  to  join  issue  in
friendly  argument  with  any  opponent — however  much  beneath
his  attention.  In  these  various  encounters,  Stainton  Moses's
clear  understanding  and  extremely  logical  habits  of  mind
enabled  him  to  score  heavily  and  with  decisive  effect  off  those
antagonists  who  sometimes  had  the  temerity  to  attack  him  with
very  little  reason  and  still  less  knowledge.  His  crushing
rejoinder  to  Dr.  Carpenter,  who  some  eighteen  or  twenty  years
ago  lectured  at  the  London  Institution  on  the  "  Fallacies  of
Modern  Spiritualism,"  will  probably  be  still  remembered  by  a
good  many  people  as  a  striking  instance  of  logical  reasoning
and  effective  sarcasm,  which,  significantly  enough,  was  never
answered.  Considering  the  then  unpopular  nature  of  the  sub-
ject which  he  had  so  unmistakably  made  his  own,  and  of  the
conclusions  which  he  deduced  from  a  close  and  systematic  study
of  the  same,  it  is  a  matter  to  be  wondered  at  that  he  was  not
more  often  attacked  by  narrow-minded  religious  bigots,  pseudo-
scientists,  and  superficial  penny-a-liners.  But  however  this
may  be,  the  fact  remains  that  with  a  few  insignificant  exceptions
he  was  not  so  attacked ;  when  he  was,  his  power  of  showing  up
the  weakness  of  his  opponent's  case  and  ignorance  of  the  matters
on  which  he  presumed  to  dogmatise  was  only  equalled  by  the
polite  ridicule  and  quiet  satire  which  he  was  always  ready  to-

XXli  BIOGRAPHY  OF  W.   STAINTON   MOSES.

bring  to  bear  upon  the  author  of  any  unprovoked  piece  of
aggressive  meddling.

It  was  a  noteworthy  feature  about  Stainton  Moses,  that
in  spite  of  his  being  compulsorily  drawn  in  many  ways  into
a  conspicuously  public  position,  no  man  ever  hated  publicity
more  than  he  did.  Retiring  and  modest  by  nature,  he
detested  the  making  of  speeches,  delivering  of  addresses,
presiding  over  meetings,  and  other  similar  functions  for  which
the  singularity  of  his  powers  and  the  extent  of  his  knowledge
naturally  marked  him  out  as  being  eminently  fitted.  Though
richly  endowed  with  gifts  sufficient  to  stamp  him  in  any
age  as  a  leader  of  men,  his  own  inclinations  would,  had  he
been  untrammelled  by  force  of  circumstances,  have  led  him  to
prefer  a  life  of  studious  ease  and  unostentatious  retirement.
But  this  was  not  to  be  ;  so  he  trod  his  allotted  path  with  zeal,
courage,  and  discretion ;  did  his  duty  with  an  utter  abnegation
of  self ;  and  died  at  his  post  in  the  prime  of  manhood,  carrying
with  him  to  the  grave  the  affectionate  regard  and  esteem  of
hundreds  who  will  cherish  the  memory  of  his  friendship  as  one
of  their  most  precious  legacies.

It  is  quite  impossible  within  the  limits  of  a  short  biography
like  the  present  to  do  more  than  present  a  brief  sketch  of  the
character  of  Stainton  Moses;  but  I  should  like  to  once  more
insist  upon  the  entirely  admirable  ingredients  of  which  that
character  was  composed,  and  I  might  fill  volumes  in  dilating
upon  his  utter  absence  of  pride,  fanaticism,  arrogance,  or  conceit;
upon  his  love  of  truth,  purity,  and  integrity ;  and  upon  his
absolute  fearlessness,  generous  large-heartedness,  and  wholly
sympathetic  friendship.  But  of  what  avail  ?  He  has  crossed
the  bar,  and  gone  from  our  mortal  vision  for  ever.  And  what-
ever I  could  say  in  his  praise  would  not  heighten  the  affection
and  esteem  of  those  who  knew  him  ;  and  those  who  did  not
would  gain  but  a  poor  idea  of  his  worth  and  talents  from  any
paltry  efforts  of  mine.  So  let  us  gain  what  benefit  we  can
from  the  words  of  those  inspirational  teachings  which  he  has
left  behind,  and  to  which  this  short  memoir  is  intended  to  serve
as  a  humble  introduction,  and  then,  for  a  time  at  any  rate,  let
us  re-echo  the  old  formula,  Requiescat  in  Pace.

CHARLTON  TEMPLEMAN  SPEER.

PREFACE  TO  THE  MEMORIAL  EDITION.

'Tflis  Edition  of  "  Spirit  Teachings  "  is  issued  by  the  Council
of  the  London  Spiritualist  Alliance  in  affectionate  memory  of
their  friend,  Mr.  W.  Stainton  Moses,  to  whom  the  Alliance  owed
its  existence,  and  who  was  its  first  and  only  President  from  its
formation  in  1884  to  the  time  of  his  decease  on  September  5th,
1892.  Anxious  to  show  their  loving  regard  for  one  with  whom
it  had  been  their  pleasure  and  privilege  to  co-operate  in  the
•work  which  was  so  dear  to  him,  and  to  which  he  gave  so  large  a
portion  of  his  very  busy  life,  the  Council  have  concluded  that
the  fittest  memorial  to  his  worth,  and  to  the  value  of  his  labours,
•would  be  the  re-issue  of  the  book  which  he  himself  regarded  as
the  most  generally  useful  of  his  publications.  Others,  no  doubt,
have  each  a  special  interest  of  its  own;  but  "  Spirit  Teachings  "
— revealing  as  it  does  the  struggles  of  a  robust  mind  against
•new  phases  of  thought,  and  its  gradual  acceptance,  as  truth,  of
what  was  at  first  suspected  and  feared  as  dangerous  heresy —
will  always  possess  a  peculiar  charm  for  the  many  who,  in  these
days  of  intellectual  daring,  having  become  impatient  of  old
•creeds,  are  striving  for  greater  liberty  and  clearer  light.  The
Council,  therefore,  trust  that  the  re-publication  of  "Spirit
Teachings"  will  meet  with  a  very  general  acceptance.

By  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Charlton  T.  Speer,  who  enjoyed  the
close  personal  friendship  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  they  are  able
to  include  in  the  volume  a  valuable  biographical  notice,  which
•cannot  but  add  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  work.

Signed  on  behalf  of  the  Council  of  the  London  Spiritualist  Alliance,

E.  DAWSOX  ROGERS,

President.
110,  ST.  MARTIN'S  LANE,  LONDON,  W.C.

PREFACE    TO    FIEST  EDITION.

SOME  apology  may  be  deemed  necessary  for  the  publication-
of  this  book.  My  excuse  is  to  be  found  in  the  following
facts.

When  these  communications  first  saw  the  light  they  at-
tracted a  large  amount  of  attention,  and  brought  me  much
correspondence.  Many  found  in  them  words  which  were
suitable  to  their  own  experience,  and  more  or  less  helpful  to-
themselves.  It  seemed  that  no  case  is  quite  singular,  and
that  the  record  of  my  own  spiritual  education  was  not
merely  of  private  application.

Since  that  time  many  requests  have  been  made  for  the
publication  of  these  Teachings  in  a  connected  form.  The
compliance,  however,  did  not  rest  with  me,  and  it  is  only
lately  that  I  have  been  enabled  to  present  the  complete
series,  duly  revised,  by  the  same  method  as  was  originally
employed  in  writing  them,  and  arranged  in  such  order  as
was  possible  with  so  disconnected  a  mass.  For  these  are
but  specimens  taken  from  a  great  bulk,  and  from  them
are  excluded  some  of  the  most  striking  by  reason  of  their
purely  personal  application.

They  are  now  strung  together  on  a  thread  that  is  strong
enough,  perhaps,  to  hold  them  together  in  some  sort  of
relation.  But  no  attempt  of  mine  can  even  faintly  re-
produce their  force  and  coherence  when  originally  given.
They  must  go  forth,  a  curious  record  of  an  educational
influence  brought  to  bear  from  without  and  unsought  on  a,
mind  that  endeavoured  strenuously  to  sift  and  probe  what
was  said.  They  pretend  to  no  dogmatic  authority,  to  no
literary  completeness.  They  will  be  to  each  reader  only
what  he  makes  them.

(M.A.  OXON.).

CORRECTION. — The  word  "voice"  in  the  20th  line  of  page  24  is
a  misprint  for  "  vict."

INDEX.

PAOK

PREFACE,    ....---.••»•  iv

INTRODUCTION.

The  method  by  which  the  messages  were  received  (1) — The  character
of  the  writing  (2) — The  communicating  spirits  (3) — The  circum-
stances under  which  the  messages  were  written  (4) — How  far
were  they  tinged  by  the  mind  of  the  medium  ?  (5) — Power  of
controlling  by  will  the  production  of  writing  (6) — These  com-
munications mark  a  period  of  spiritual  education  (7) — And,
though  to  him  who  received  them  of  great  value,  are  published
with  no  such  claim  on  others  (8),  ......  1-g.

SECTION  I.

Special  efforts  to  spread  progressive  truth  at  this  special  epoch
thwarted  by  the  Adversaries  (9) — Obstacles  in  the  way — The
efforts  now  made  greater  than  men  think  (10) — Eevelation:  its
continuity — Its  deterioration  in  men's  hands — The  work  of
destruction  must  precede  that  of  construction  (11) — Spirit-
guides  :  how  given — Spirits  who  return  to  earth — The  Ad-
versaries and  their  work  (12) — Evil — The  perpetuation  of  the
nature  generated  on  earth — The  growth  of  character  (13) —
Each  soul  to  his  own  place,  and  to  no  other — The  Devil  (14),  -  9-14

SECTION  II.

"he  true  philanthropist  the  ideal  man — The  notes  of  his  character
(15) — The  true  philosopher — The  notes  of  his  character —
Eternal  life — Progressive  and  contemplative — God,  known  only
by  his  acts  (16) — The  conflict  between  good  and  evil  (a  typical
message  of  this  period) — These  conflicts  periodic,  especially
consequent  on  the  premature  withdrawal  of  spirits  from  the
body  :  e.g.,  by  wars,  suicide,  or  by  execution  for  murder — The
folly  of  our  methods  of  dealing  with  crime  (17) — Of  herding
criminals  together  and  banging  the  worst  of  them — Remedial
methods  preferable  (18)— For  in  sending  a  spirit  prematurely
forth  from  its  body  with  rage  and  vengeance,  we  send  him
with  enlarged  opportunity  to  work  mischief — We  do  this  in
the  name  of  God,  of  whom  we  have  a  very  false  conception  (19)
— Pity  and  Love  are  mere  potent  than  Vengeance — The  sub-
limity of  the  idea  of  God  revealed  in  Spirit-Teaching  compared
with  the  old  idea  (20,  21), 15-21

SECTION  m.

Physical  results  of  the  rapid  writing  of  the  last  message  :  headache,
and  great  prostration — Explanation  (22) — Punitive  and  re-
medial legislation — Asylums  and  their  abuses — Mediums  in

INDEX

madhouses  (23) — Obsessing  spirits  living  over  again  their  base
lives  vicariously  (24 )— Children  in  the  spirit-world :  their  train-
ing and  progress— Love  and  knowledge  as  aids — Purification
by  trial — Motives  that  bring  spirits  to  earth  again  (25) —
Return  to  earth  not  the  only  mode  of  progression — States  of
probation  or  purgation,  and  spheres  of  contemplation  (26) —
Spheres  and  states  within  them — The  descent  of  spirit  through
hoice  of  evil  (27) — Its  hatred  of  good  and  gradual  assumption
of  materiality  till  it  sinks  lower  and  lower  (28) — The  Unpar-
donable Sin  (29),

SECTION  IV.

Time  :  April  and  May,  1873— Facts  of  a  minute  nature  given  through
writing,  all  unknown  to  me  (31) — Spirit  reading  a  book  and
reproducing  a  sentence,  through  the  writing,  from  Virgil  and
from  an  old  book,  Rogers'  Antipopopriestian — Experiment

reversed  (33),

SECTION  V.

Mediumship  and  its  varieties — The  physical  medium  (34) — Clairvoy-
ants— Recipients  of  teaching,  whether  by  objective  message  or
by  impression — The  mind  must  be  receptive,  free  from  dog-
matism, inquiring,  and  progressive  (35) — Not  positive  or
antagonistic,  but  truthful  and  fearless  (36) —Selfishness  and
vaingloriousness  must  be  eradicated — The  self-abnegation  of
Jesus  Christ  (37) — A  perfect  character,  fostered  by  a  secluded
life,  the  life  of  contemplation  (39),  ------

SECTION  VI.

The  Derby  Day  and  its  effects  spiritually  (40)— National  Holidays,
their  riot  and  debauchery — Spirit  photographs  and  deceiv-
ing spirits  (41) — Explanation  of  the  event :  a  warning  for  the
future  (42) — Passivity  needed :  the  circle  to  be  kept  unchanged :
not  to  meet  too  soon  after  eating  (43) — Phosphorescent  lights
varying  according  to  conditions  (44) — The  marriage  bond  in  the
future  state  (45) — The  law  of  Progress  and  the  law  of  Associa-
tion (46) — Discrepancies  in  communications  (47),  ...

SECTION  VII.

The  Neo-Platonic  philosophy — Souffism — Extracts  from  old  poets,
Lydgate,  and  others  written — Answers  to  theological  questions
(48) — The  most  difficult  to  approach  are  those  who  attribute
everything  to  the  devil — The  pseudo-scientific  man  of  small
moment  (49) — The  ignorant  and  uncultured  must  bide  their
time — The  proud  and  arrogant  children  of  routine  and  respect-
ability are  passed  by — The  receptive  are  too  often  cramped  by
a  human  theology  which  stifles  true  religious  instincts  (50) —
They  are  armed  at  all  points,  and  their  honest  but  mistaken
arguments  are  very  saddening — Reason,  the  final  Court  of
Appeal  (51) — How  far  does  Reason  prove  us  of  the  devil,  and
our  creed  diabolic  (52)  ........

INDEX.

SECTION   VIII.

The  writer's  personal  beliefs  and  theological  training — A  period  of  great
spiritual  exaltation  (53) — The  dual  aspect  of  religion — The  spirit-
creed  respecting  God — The  relations  between  God  and  man  (54)
— Faith — Belief — The  theology  of  spirit  (55) — Human  life  and  its
issues — Sin  and  its  punishment — Virtue  and  its  reward — Divine
justice  (56) — The  spirit-creed  drawn  out — Revelation  not  con-
fined to  Sinai — No  revelation  of  plenary  inspiration  (57) — But
to  be  judged  by  reason  (58), 53-58

SECTION   IX.

The  writer's  objections — The  reply  :  necessary  to  clear  away  rubbish —
The  atonement  (60) — Further  objections  of  the  writer — The
reply  (61) — The  sign  of  the  cross — The  vulgar  conception  of
plenary  inspiration  (62) — The  gradual  unfolding  of  the  God-
idea  (63) — The  Bible  the  record  of  a  gradual  growth  in  know-
ledge easily  discernible  (64) — The  inspiration  divine,  the  medium
human — Hence  each  finds  in  the  Bible  the  reflex  of  his  own
mind — And  so  the  Bible  becomes  an  armoury  for  all  (65) — And
too  much  stress  is  laid  on  isolated  texts,  and  words  and  phrases
(66) — At  variance  with  these  views,  spirits  endeavour  to  eradi-
cate what  is  so  false  as  not  to  be  put  right,  otherwise  they  take
existing  opinions  and  mould  them  into  closer  semblance  of
truth  (67) — So  theological  views  are  toned  down,  not  eradi-
cated— Opinions  are  spiritualised  (68) — In  this  way  has  this
teaching  been  given — How  the  sign  of  the  cross  can  be  prefixed
to  it  (69-71), 59-71

SECTION  X.

further  objections  of  the  writer — The  reply  (72) — A  comparison
between  these  objections  and  those  which  assailed  the  work  of
Jesus  Christ  (73) — Spiritualised  Christianity  is  as  little  accept-
able now  (74) — The  outcome  of  spirit-teaching — How  far  is  it
reasonable? — An  exposition  of  the  belief  compared  with  the
orthodox  creed  (75-79),  --------  72-79

SECTION  XI.

The  powerful  nature  of  the  spiritual  influence  exerted  on  the  writer —
His  argument  resumed  (80) — The  rejoinder — No  objection  to
honest  doubt  (81) — The  decision  must  be  made  on  the  merits  of
what  is  said,  its  coherence,  and  moral  elevation  (82) — The
almost  utter  worthlessness  of  what  is  called  opinion — Religion
not  so  abstruse  a  problem  as  man  imagines  (83) — Truth  the
appanage  of  no  sect — To  be  found  in  the  philosophy  of  Atheno-
dorus,  of  Plotinus,  of  Algazzali,  of  Achillini  (84)— To  whom
earth-opinions  are  of  little  moment  now — All  may  work  in  such
work  as  this,  and  there  is  no  discrepancy  (85) — Every  statement
made,  scrupulously  exact,  though  some  may  have  been  distorted

INDEX

•MB
In  transit  (86) — This  attempt  to  teach  is  one  of  many  made  to

many  different  minds  (87) — The  prospects  of  acceptance  and
rejection  (88-89) — The  position  assigned  to  Jesus  the  Christ
(90-91), 80-91

SECTION    XII.

The  writer's  difficulties — Spirit  identity — Divergence  among  spirits
in  what  they  taught  (92) — The  reply — The  root-error  is  a  false
conception  of  God  and  His  dealings  with  man — Elucidation  at
length  of  this  idea  (93-97) — The  devil — Risk  of  incursion  of  evil
and  obsession  applies  only  to  those  who,  by  their  own  debased
nature,  attract  undeveloped  spirits  (99), 92-100*

SECTION   XIII.

Further  objections  of  the  writer,  and  statement  of  his  difficulties
(101) — The  reply — Patience  and  prayerfulness  needed — Prayer
(103)— Its  benefits  and  blessings— The  spirit- view  of  it  (104-108)
— A  vehemently-written  communication — The  dead  past  and
the  living  future  (106-107) — The  attitude  of  the  world  to  the
New  Truth  (108-109), 101-10O

SECTION  XIV.

The  conflict  between  the  writer's  strong  opinions  and  those  of  the  Un-
seen Teacher  (110) — Difficulties  of  belief  in  an  Unseen  In-
telligence— The  battle  with  intellectual  doubt  (111) — Patience
needed  to  see  that  the  world  is  craving  for  something  real  in
place  of  the  creed  outworn  (112) — The  result  of  the  contention
was  that  the  writer,  having  carried  his  point,  was  lifted  out  of
the  personal  dispute  about  the  Messenger  into  a  grasp  of  the
dignity  and  beauty  of  the  message — Statement  of  his  mental
condition  (113) — His  own  contention  (114,  115) — The  reiterated
claim  to  be  an  enunciation  of  a  Divine  Message  (116) — Spirit
intercourse  governed  by  laws — No  proper  care  of  mediums
(117,  118), -  -  110118-

SECTION  XV.

The  religious  teaching  of  Spiritualism — Deism,  Theism,  Atheism  (119)
— No  absolute  Truth — A  motiveless  religion  not  that  of  Spirit-
teaching — Man,  the  arbiter  of  his  own  destiny — Judged  by  his
works,  not  in  a  far  hereafter,  but  at  once — A  definite,  intel-
ligible system — The  greatest  incentive  to  holiness  and  deterrent
from  crime  (120-122) — Spiritualism  not  bad  in  the  mass — Hard
for  those  who  are  in  the  midst  to  judge — Means  are  adapted  to
ends — A  multiplicity  of  minds  are  being  operated  on  by  methods
best  adapted  to  reach  them,  hence  the  apparent  din  and  con-
fusion (123-125) — The  question  of  Evil — Popular  Spiritualism
—Not  only  a  profoundly  external  revelation,  but  assurance  of
reunion,  a  gospel  of  consolation  (126-128),  ....  119128-

INDEX.

SECTION  XVI

The  summing  up — Religion  has  little  hold  of  men,  and  they  can  find
nothing  better — Investigation  paralysed  by  the  demand  for
blind  faith  (129) — A  matter  of  geography  what  form  of  religious
faith  a  man  professes — No  monopoly  of  truth  in  any  (130) —
This  geographical  sectarianism  will  yield  to  the  New  Revela-
tion (131)— Theology  a  bye-word  even  amongst  men — Life  and
Immortality  (133), 129-132

SECTION  XVII.

The  request  of  the  writer  for  independent  corroboration,  and  further
criticism  (134) — The  reply — Refusal — General  retrospect  of  the
argument — Temporary  withdrawal  of  Spirit-influence  to  give
time  for  thought  (134-136) — Attempts  at  establishing  facts
through  another  medium  futile  (137)  —  "You  cannot  have
mathematical  proof"  (138) — •"!  and  my  Father  are  one"  ex-
plained in  reference  to  the  Divinity  of  Christ  (139) — Further
message  from  IMPERATOB  during  my  absence  from  home,  and
more  evidence  of  identity  (139, 140) — Advice  to  review  patiently
the  past,  and  seek  composure  (140,  141),  ....  134-141

SECTION  XVIII.

Difficulty  of  getting  communications  when  it  was  not  desired  to  give
them— The  mean  in  all  things  desirable  (142) — The  religion  of
body  and  soul— Spiritualising  of  already  existing  knowledge
(143) — Cramping  theology  worse  than  useless — Such  are  not
able  to  tread  the  mountain-tops  but  must  keep  within  their
walls,  not  daring  to  look  over  (144) — Their  father's  creed  is
sufficient  for  them,  and  they  must  gain  their  knowledge  in  an-
other state  of  being  (145) — Others  do  not  think  at  all :  they
want  things  settled  for  them — With  all  these  we  have  nothing
to  do,  for  nothing  can  be  done — The  way  to  know  of  the  things
of  spirit  is  free,  and  that  man  who  struggles  up  to  light  gains
more  than  he  does  who  lets  others  do  his  thinking  for  him  (147)
— That  is  now  being  done  for  Christianity  that  Jesus  did  for
Judaism:  it  is  being  Spiritualised  (148) — Christ  was  the  Great
Social  Reformer,  teaching  liberty  without  license,  elevating
man,  and  living  among  the  common  people — We  declare  truths
identical  with  those  preached  then  (149,  150) — The  spiritual
return  of  Christ  (151), 142-151

SECTION  XIX.

Outline  of  the  religious  faith  here  taught — O-od  and  man  (153) — The
duty  of  man  to  God,  his  fellow,  and  himself  (154) — Progress,
Culture,  Purity  (155) — Reverence,  Adoration,  Love  (156) —
Man's  Destiny  (157) — Heaven,  how  gained  (158) — Helps  :  com-
munion with  Spirits  (159) — Individual  belief  of  little  moment-
Religion  of  acts  and  habits  which  produce  character,  and  for
which  in  result  each  is  responsible — Religion  of  body  and  soul
(160), 152-161

INDEX.

SECTION  XX.

More  evidence  of  identity  of  spirits  communicating — Perplexity
caused  by  a  name,  written  psychographically,  being  wrongly
spelt:  explanation  (163) — The  writer's  disturbed  and  anxious
state  reacting  on  the  communications — Doubt  and  its  effects
(165) — No  use  to  maintain  a  dogmatic  attitude  against  facts —
The  trustful  spirit — Advice  as  to  the  future — Withdrawal  of
further  communication  (166-169), 162-16£>

SECTION  XXI.

The  writer's  condition,  a  personal  explanation  (170-171) — The  reply  :
reiterated  advice  to  ponder  on  the  past  and  seek  seclusion  (172)
— Final  address  by  IMPERATOB,  retrospective,  and  closing  for
the  time  the  argument:  October  4,  1873  (172-177),  -  -  -170-177

SECTION  XXII.
IMPERATOR'S  despairing  view  of  his  work  (178-181) — A  striking  case

of  identity  (181) — Personal  explanation  of  the  writer  (183),      -   178-183

SECTION  XXHL

Progressive  Revelation  (184) — The  chain  of  spiritual  influence  from
Melchizedek,  through  Moses,  Elijah,  to  the  Mount  of  Transfigu-
ration, and  the  Apocalyptic  Vision  (185-187) — The  Pentateuch
(188) — Abraham  not  on  the  highest  plane — Translations  of
Enoch  and  Elijah  (189) — Legendary  Beliefs  in  the  Sacred
Records  to  be  carefully  discriminated  (190-193),  ...  184-193

SECTION  XXIV.

The  intervening  peiiod  between  the  records  of  the  Old  and  New
Testaments — A  period  of  darkness  and  desolation,  the  night
succeeding  a  day  of  revelation  (194-195) — The  internal  craving
for  advanced  truth  corresponds  to  external  revelation  (196-197)
— Points  to  be  considered  in  the  records  of  the  Old  Testament
of  the  life  of  Christ  for  the  writer's  own  instruction — A  glimpse
of  the  method  of  guidance  exercised  over  him  (198,  199),  -  -  194-199

SECTION  XXV.

Pursuing  his  studies  on  the  lines  indicated  the  writer  found  evidence
of  the  work  of  various  hands  in  the  Mosaic  Records — A  message
thereupon,  and  a  dissertation  on  the  danger  of  quoting  isolated
texts,  and  relying  on  the  plenary  inspiration  of  a  translation
(200-202)— The  compilation  in  Ezra's  day— The  Elohistic  and
Jehovistic  legends — The  Canon  of  the  Old  Testament,  how
settled  (203) — Daniel,  a  great  seer  (204) — The  progressive  idea
of  God  in  the  Bible  developed  and  elucidated  (204-206),  -  -  200-206
*)

SECTION  XXVI.

Changes  in  the  communications — A  retrospect  marking  the  close  of
another  phase  in  the  writer's  relations  to  his  Teachers  (207-209)

INDEX.

PAW

— The  writer's  mental  state,  and  the  various  phenomena  that
were  presented,  bearing  on  the  attempts  to  lift  him  into  a  more
passive  condition  (210) — Music — Autographs  of  two  celebrated
composers  authenticating  a  communication  (211),  ...  207-211

SECTION  XXVH.

India  as  the  cradle  of  races  and  religions — A  communication  from
PRUDENS  (212-214) — The  man  crushed  by  a  steam-roller  who
communicated  immediately  after  death  (vide  Spirit-Identity,
app.  iii,  p.  103) :  explanations  (215,  216),  ....  212-216

SECTION  XXVIII.

A  communication  in  hieroglyphics  by  an  old  Egyptian  (217) — Par-
ticulars about  Egyptian  theology,  and  its  relation  to  Judaism
(218-220)— The  prophet  of  Ra,  at  On,  who  lived  1630  B.C.  (220)
The  religion  of  daily  life  as  exemplified  in  Egypt  (221) — The
trinity  (223-224) — India  and  Egypt  (225) — Progress  in  religious
knowledge  not  necessarily  connected  with  any  special  belief
(226)— General  judgment— The  fulness  of  spirit  (227-229),  -  217-229-

SECTION  XXIX.

Danger  of  deception  by  personating  spirits — A  case  in  point,  and  an
emphatic  warning  on  the  subject  (230) — The  adversaries —
Obsessing  spirits — The  earth-bound  and  undeveloped — Tempta-
tion by  them  (231 ) — The  danger  from  these  to  those  on  whom
they  are  able  to  fasten  most  real  and  terrible  (232) — Civilisation
and  its  results — Christianity  as  in  England — Missionaries  to  the
heathen — Our  great  cities,  foul,  weltering  masses  of  vice  and
cruelty  (233) — The  atmosphere  of  them  intolerable  to  spirit
(234) — The  other  side  not  dwelt  on  now,  but  conspicuous  ex-
ceptions admitted — These  causes  hamper  the  good,  and  swell
the  army  of  the  adversaries,  one  of  whose  ready  devices  is  to
personate  truthful  spirits,  and  so  to  introduce  doubt  and  fraud
(235-237)  —  The  phenomenal  illusory  —  The  spiritual  real  —
Higher  revealings  wait  for  those  who  can  hear  (239) — How  to
know  a  personating  spirit  (240) — The  subject  to  be  approached
with  care,  whereas  it  is  recklessly  and  idly  meddled  with
(241,  242) — Frolicsome  spirits,  not  evil,  but  sportive,  foolish,
with  no  sense  of  responsibility  (243)  —  Avoid  the  personal
element  as  far  as  possible  (244), 230-244

'  SECTION  XXX.

Easter  Day  Teaching  (1874), 245-249

(1875), 249-255

„         (1876), 255-259

(1877), 259-268

Specimens  of  various  teachings  given  on  anniversaries,  to  which
spirits  always  seem  to  pay  great  regard.

INDEX.

SECTION  XXXI

A  photograph  at  Hudson's,  and  a  communication  thereupon  (269)  —
Suicide  and  its  consequences  (270-272)  —  The  story  of  a  wasted
life,  selfish  and  useless—  A  stagnant  life  breeds  corruption  (273)

—  Experiences  of  the  Spirit  when  the  cord  of  earth-life  was
severed  —  Remorse  the  road  to  progress  —  Work  the  means  of
progression   (274)  —  Help   from   Spirit-ministers  —  The  fire  of
purification  (275)  —  Selfishness  and  sin  bring  misery  and  remorse

—  And  thus  sore  judgment  —  No  paraphernalia  of  assize  (276)—
Man  makes  his  own  future,  stamps  his  own  character,  suffers
for  his  own  sins,  and  must  work  out  his  own  salvation  (277)  —
The  threefold  life  of  meditation  and  prayer  :  worship  and  adora-

tion :  conflict  (278)—  Accountability  (279),         ....   2G9-27&

SECTION  XXXII.

It  is  necessary  that  afflictions  come  —  A  period  of  conflict  is  a  period
of  progress  (280)  —  Revelation  overlaid  bit  by  bit  —  Then  comes
the  question,  What  is  Truth  ?  —  The  answer  in  a  new  revelation
,  —  Esoteric  at  first,  then  adapted  to  general  needs  (281)  —  All
cannot  know  truth  in  the  same  degree  —  Truth  is  many-sided  —
The  purest  truth  must  not  be  proclaimed  on  the  house-top,  or
it  becomes  vulgarised  (282)  —  The  pursuit  of  Truth  for  its  own
sake  the  noblest  end  of  life  (283)  —  Having  passed  the  Exoteric,
it  is  well  to  dwell  on  the  Esoteric  (284)—  Loving  Truth  as  a
Deity,  following  it  careless  whither  it  may  lead  (285),  -  -  280-285

SECTION  XXXIII.

Further  evidences  of  Spirit-Identity  —  John  Blow  —  Extracts  from
ancient  chronicles  —  Norton,  the  Alchymist  —  Specimens  from  a
large  number  (286,  287)  —  Charlotte  Buckworth  and  the  verifi-
cation of  the  story  concerning  her  (288,  290)  —  Conclusion,  -  286-291

SPIBIT-TEACHINGS.

INTRODUCTION.

THE  communications  which  form  the  bulk  of  this  volume
were  received  by  the  process  known  as  Automatic  or  Passive
Writing.  This  is  to  be  distinguished  from  Psychography.
In  the  former  case,  the  Psychic  holds  the  pen  or  pencil,  or
places  his  hand  upon  the  Planchette,  and  the  message  is  writ-
ten without  the  conscious  intervention  of  his  mind.  In  the
latter  case,  the  writing  is  direct,  or  is  obtained  without  the
use  of  the  hand  of  the  psychic,  and  sometimes  without  the
aid  of  pen  or  pencil.

Automatic  Writing  is  a  well-known  method  of  communi-
cation with  the  invisible  world  of  what  we  loosely  call  Spirit.
I  use  that  word  as  the  most  intelligible  to  my  readers,  though
I  am  well  aware  that  I  shall  be  told  that  I  ought  not  to  apply
any  such  term  to  many  of  the  unseen  beings  who  commu-
nicate with  earth,  of  whom  we  hear  much  and  often  as  being
the  reliquiae  of  humanity,  the  shells  of  what  once  were  men.
It  is  no  part  of  my  business  to  enter  into  this  moot  question.
My  interlocutors  call  themselves  Spirits,  perhaps  because  I
so  called  them,  and  .Spirits  they  are  to  me  for  my  present
purposes.

These  messages  began  to  be  written  through  my  hand  just
ten  years  since,  March  30,  1873,  about  a  year  after  my  first
introduction  to  Spiritualism.  I  had  had  many  communica-
tions before,  and  this  method  was  adopted  for  the  purpose  of'

2  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

convenience,  and  also  to  preserve  what  was  intended  to  be  a
connected  body  of  teaching.  The  laborious  method  of  rapping
out  messages  was  manifestly  unfitted  for  communications
such  as  those  which  I  here  print.  If  spoken  through  the
lips  of  the  medium  in  trance,  they  were  partially  lost,  and
it  was,  moreover,  impossible  at  first  to  rely  upon  such  a
measure  of  mental  passivity  as  would  preserve  them  from
admixture  with  his  ideas.

I  procured  a  pocket-book,  which  I  habitually  carried  about
with  me.  I  soon  found  that  writing  flowed  more  easily  when
I  used  a  book  that  was  permeated  with  the  psychic  aura,  just
as  raps  come  more  easily  on  a  table  that  has  been  frequently
used  for  the  purpose,  and  as  phenomena  occur  most  readily
in  the  medium's  own  room.  When  Slade  could  not  get  mes-
sages on  a  new  slate,  he  rarely  failed  to  get  one  on  his  own
seasoned  one.  I  am  not  responsible  for  the  fact,  the  reason
for  which  is  sufficiently  intelligible.

At  first  the  writing  was  very  small  and  irregular,  and  it
was  necessary  for  me  to  write  slowly  and  cautiously,  and
to  watch  the  hand,  following  the  lines  with  my  eye,  other-
wise the  message  soon  became  incoherent,  and  the  result  was
mere  scribble.

In  a  short  time,  however,  I  found  that  I  could  dispense  with
these  precautions.  The  writing,  while  becoming  more  and
more  minute,  became  at  the  same  time  very  regular  and  beau-
tifully formed.  As  a  specimen  of  caligraphy,  some  of  the
pages  are  exceedingly  beautiful.  The  answers  to  my  questions
(written  at  the  top  of  a  page)  were  paragraphed,  and  arranged
as  if  for  the  press  :  an3  the  name  of  God  was  always  written
in  capitals,  and  slowly,  and,  as  it  seemed,  reverentially.  The
subject-matter  was  always  of  a  pure  and  elevated  character,
much  of  it  being  of  personal  application,  intended  for  my  own
guidance  and  direction.  I  may  say  that  throughout  the  whole

INTRODUCTION  3

of  these  written  communications,  extending  in  unbroken  con-
tinuity to  the  year  1880,  there  is  no  flippant  message,  no
attempt  at  jest,  no  vulgarity  or  incongruity,  no  false  or  mis-
leading statement,  so  far  as  I  know  or  could  discover;  nothing
incompatible  with  the  avowed  object,  again  and  again  repeated,
of  instruction,  enlightenment,  and  guidance  by  Spirits  fitted
for  the  task.  Judged  as  I  should  wish  to  be  judged  myself,
they  were  what  they  pretended  to  be.  Their  words  were
words  of  sincerity,  and  of  sober,  serious  purpose.

The  earliest  communications  were  all  written  in  the  minute
characters  that  I  have  described,  and  were  uniform  in  style,
and  in  the  signature,  "Doctor,  the  Teacher":  nor  have  his
messages  ever  varied  during  all  the  years  that  he  has  written.
Whenever  and  wherever  he  wrote,  his  handwriting  was  un-
changed, showing,  indeed,  less  change  than  my  own  does
during  the  last  decade.  The  tricks  of  style  remained  the
.same,  and  there  was,  in  short,  a  sustained  individuality
throughout  his  messages.  He  is  to  me  an  entity,  a  per-
sonality, a  being  with  his  own  idiosyncrasies  and  char-
acteristics, quite  as  clearly  defined  as  the  human  beings
with  whom  I  come  in  contact,  if,  indeed,  I  do  not  do  him
injustice  by  the  broad  comparison.

After  a  time,  communications  came  from  other  sources,  and
these  were  distinguished,  each  by  its  own  handwriting,  and
l>y  its  own  peculiarities  of  style  and  expression.  These,  once
assumed,  were  equally  invariable.  I  could  tell  at  once  who
was  writing  by  the  mere  characteristics  of  the  caligraphy.

By  degrees  I  found  that  many  Spirits,  who  were  unable  to
influence  my  hand  themselves,  sought  the  aid  cf  a  Spirit
•"  Rector,"  who  was  apparently  able  to  write  more  freely,  and
with  less  strain  on  me,  for  writing  by  a  Spirit  unaccustomed
to  the  work  was  often  incoherent,  and  always  resulted  in  a
serious  drain  upon  my  vital  powers.  They  did  not  know  how

4  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

easily  the  reserve  of  force  was   exhausted,  and   I   suffered
proportionately.

Moreover,  the  writing  of  the  Spirit  who  thus  became  a  sort
of  amanuensis  was  fluent  and  easy  to  decipher,  whereas  that
of  many  Spirits  was  cramped,  archaic  in  form,  and  frequently
executed  with  difficulty,  and  almost  illegible.  So  it  came  to-
pass,  that,  as  a  matter  of  ordinary  course,  Rector  wrote  :  but,
when  a  Spirit  came  for  the  first  time,  or  when  it  was  desired
to  emphasise  a  communication,  the  Spirit  responsible  for  the
message  wrote  for  himself.

It  must  not  be  assumed,  however,  that  all  messages  pro-
ceeded from  one  solitary  inspiration.  In  the  case  of  the
majority  of  the  communications  printed  in  this  volume  this
is  so.  The  volume  is  the  record  of  a  period  during  which
"Imperator"  was  alone  concerned  with  me;  though,  as  he
never  attempted  writing,  Rector  acted  as  his  amanuensis.  At
other  times,  and  especially  since  that  time,  communications
have  apparently  proceeded  from  a  company  of  associated
Spirits,  who  have  used  their  amanuensis  for  the  purpose  of
their  message.  This  was  increasingly  the  case  during  the
last  five  years  that  I  received  these  communications.

The  circumstances  under  which  the  messages  were  written
were  infinitely  various.  As  a  rule,  it  was  necessary  that  I
should  be  isolated,  and  the  more  passive  my  mind  the  mo:  e
easy  was  the  communication.  But  I  have  received  these
messages  under  all  sorts  of  conditions.  At  first  they  came
with  difficulty,  but  soon  the  mechanical  method  appeared  to
be  mastered,  and  page  after  page  was  covered  with  matter  of
which  the  specimens  contained  in  this  book  will  enable  the
public  to  judge.

What  is  now  printed  has  been  subjected  to  revision  by
a  method  similar  to  that  by  which  it  was  first  written.
Originally  published  in  the  Spiritualist  newspaper,  the

INTRODUCTION.  5

messages  have  been  revised,  but  not  substantially  altered,  by
those  who  first  wrote  them.  When  the  publication  in  the
Spiritualist  was  commenced  I  had  no  sort  of  idea  of  doing
what  is  now  being  done.  Friends  desired  specimens  to  be
published,  and  the  selection  was  made  without  any  special
regard  to  continuity.  I  was  governed  only  by  a  desire  to
avoid  the  publication  of  what  was  of  personal  interest  only :
and  I  perforce  excluded  much  that  involved  allusion  to  those
still  living  whom  I  had  no  right  to  drag  into  print.  I  dis-
liked printing  personal  matter  relating  to  myself :  I  had
obviously  no  right  to  print  that  which  concerned  others.
Some  of  the  most  striking  and  impressive  communications
have  thus  been  excluded :  and  what  is  printed  must  be
regarded  as  a  mere  sample  of  what  cannot  see  the  light  now,
and  which  must  be  reserved  for  consideration  at  a  remote
period  when  I  and  those  concerned  can  no  longer  be  aggrieved
by  its  publication.

It  is  an  interesting  subject  for  speculation  whether  my  own
thoughts  entered  into  the  subject-matter  of  the  communica-
tions. I  took  extraordinary  pains  to  prevent  any  such
admixture.  At  first  the  writing  was  slow,  and  it  was  neces-
sary for  me  to  follow  it  with  my  eye,  but  even  then  the
thoughts  were  not  my  thoughts.  Very  soon  the  messages
assumed  a  character  of  which  I  had  no  doubt  whatever  that
the  thought  was  opposed  to  my  own.  But  I  cultivated  the
power  of  occupying  my  mind  with  other  things  during  the
time  that  the  writing  was  going  on,  and  was  able  to  read  an
abstruse  book,  and  follow  out  a  line  of  close  reasoning,  while
the  message  was  written  with  unbroken  regularity.  Messages
so  written  extended  over  many  pages,  and  in  their  course
there  is  no  correction,  no  fault  in  composition,  and  often  a
sustained  vigour  and  beauty  of  style.

I  am  not,  however,  concerned  to  contend   that   my  own

6  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

mind  was  not  utilised,  or  that  what  was  thus  written  did
not  depend  for  its  form  on  the  mental  qualifications  of  the
medium  through  whom  it  was  given.  So  far  as  I  know,  it  is
always  the  case  that  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  medium  arc
traceable  in  such  communications.  It  is  not  conceivable  that
it  should  be  otherwise.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  mass  of
ideas  conveyed  to  me  were  alien  to  my  own  opinions,  were
in  the  main  opposed  to  my  settled  convictions,  and,  moreover,
that  in  several  cases  information,  of  which  I  was  assuredly
ignorant,  clear,  precise,  and  definite  in  form,  susceptible  of
verification,  and  always  exact,  was  thus  conveyed  to  me  As
at  many  of  the  stances  spirits  came  and  rapped  out  on  the
table  clear  and  precise  information  about  themselves,  which
we  afterwards  verified,  so  on  repeated  occasions  was  such
information  conveyed  to  me  by  this  method  of  automatic
writing.

I  argue  from  the  one  case  to  others.  In  one  I  can  positively
assert  and  prove  the  conveyance  of  information  new  to  me.
In  others  I  equally  believe  that  I  was  in  communication  with
an  external  intelligence  that  conveyed  to  me  thoughts  other
than  my  own.  Indeed,  the  subject-matter  of  many  of  the
communications  printed  in  this  volume  will,  by  its  own
inherent  quality,  probably  lead  to  the  same  conclusion.

I  never  could  command  the  writing.  It  came  unsought
usually  :  and  when  I  did  seek  it,  as  often  as  not  I  was  unable
to  obtain  it.  A  sudden  impulse,  coming  I  knew  not  how,  led
me  to  sit  down  and  prepare  to  write.  Where  the  messages
were  in  regular  course,  I  was  accustomed  to  devote  the  first
hour  of  each  day  to  sitting  for  their  reception.  I  rose  early,
and  the  beginning  of  the  day  was  spent,  in  a  room  that  I  used
for  no  other  purpose,  in  what  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes
a  religious  service.  These  writings  frequently  came  then,  but
I  could  by  no  means  reckon  on  them.  Other  forms  c/f  spirit-

INTRODUCTION.  I

manifestation  came  too:  I  was  rarely  without  some,  unless
ill-health  intervened,  as  it  often  did  of  late  years,  until  the
messages  ceased.

The  particular  communications  which  I  received  from  the
spirit  known  to  me  as  IMPERATOR,  mark  a  distinct  epoch  in  my
life.  I  have  noted  in  the  course  of  my  remarks  the  intense
exaltation  of  spirit,  the  strenuous  conflict,  the  intervals  of
peace  that  I  have  since  longed  for,  but  have  seldom  attained,
which  marked  their  transmission.  It  was  a  period  of  educa-
tion in  which  I  underwent  a  spiritual  development  that  was,
in  its  outcome,  a  very  regeneration.  I  cannot  hope,  I  do  not
try,  to  convey  to  others  what  I  then  experienced.  But  it
may  possibly  be  borne  in  upon  the  minds  of  some,  who  are
not  ignorant  of  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  in  their  own
inner  selves,  that  for  me  the  question  of  the  beneficent  action
of  external  Spirit  on  my  own  self  was  then  finally  settled.  I
have  never  since,  even  in  the  vagaries  of  an  extremely  sceptical
mind,  and  amid  much  cause  for  questioning,  ever  seriously
entertained  a  doubt.

This  introduction  has  become  autobiographical  in  a  way
that  is  extremely  distasteful  to  me.  I  can  only  plead  that  I
have  reason  to  know  that  the  history  of  the  pleading  of  Spirit
with  one  struggling  soul  has  been  helpful  to  others.  It  is
unfortunately  necessary  for  me  to  speak  of  myself  in  order
to  make  what  follows  intelligible.  I  regret  the  necessity,  and
acquiesce  in  it  only  from  the  conviction  that  what  I  record
may  be  of  use  to  some  to  whom  my  experiences  may  come
home  as  typical.  I  presume  that  no  two  of  us  ever  struggle
up  to  light  by  precisely  similar  methods.  But  I  believe  that
the  needs  and  difficulties  of  individual  souls  have  a  family
likeness,  and  it  may  be  in  the  future,  as  I  am  thankful  to
know  that  it  has  been  in  the  past,  serviceable  to  some  to  learn
by  what  methods  I  was  educated.

8  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Besides  this — the  subject  matter  of  these  communications,
and  their  bearing  educationally  on  myself — the  form  and
manner  of  their  delivery  is  of  infinitely  small  importance.
It  is  their  intrinsic  claim,  the  end  disclosed,  the  inherent  and
essential  truth  that  they  contain,  which  marks  their  value.
To  many  they  will  be  utterly  valueless,  because  their  truth
is  not  truth  to  them.  To  others  they  will  be  merely  curious.
To  some  they  will  be  as  an  idle  tale.  I  do  not  publish  them
in  any  expectation  of  general  acceptance.  I  shall  be  quite
content  that  they  be  at  the  service  of  any  who  can  find  them
helpful.

M.  A.  (OxoN.)

March  SO,  1SSS.

SECTION  I

[After  a  conversation  on  this  special  epoch  in  the
world's  history,  and  its  characteristics,  it  was
written]  : —

Special  efforts  are  being  made  now  to  spread  a  knowledge  of
progressive  truth  :  efforts  by  the  messengers  of  God,  which  are
resisted,  now  as  ever,  by  the  hosts  of  the  adversaries.  The
history  of  the  world  has  been  the  story  of  the  struggle  between
the  evil  and  the  good ;  between  God  and  gdodness  on  the  one
side,  and  ignorance,  vice,  and  evil — spiritual,  mental,  and  cor-
poreal— on  the  other  side.  At  certain  times,  of  which  this  is
one,  extraordinary  efforts  are  made.  The  army  of  the  messen-
gers of  God  is  massed  in  greater  force :  men  are  influenced :
knowledge  is  spread  :  and  the  end  draws  nigh.  Fear  for  the
deserters,  the  half-hearted,  the  temporisers,  the  merely  curious.
Fear  for  them :  but  fear  not  for  the  cause  of  God's  truth.

Yes.  But  hoiv  are  many  doubting  souls  to  know  what  is
God's  truth  ?  Many  look  anxiously,  but  cannot  find.

None  anxiously  look  who  do  not  find  in  the  end,  though
they  may  have  long  to  wait — yes,  even  till  they  reach  a  higher
sphere  of  being.  God  tries  all :  and  to  those  only  who  are
fitted  is  advanced  knowledge  granted.  The  preparation  must
foe  complete  before  the  step  is  gained.  This  is  an  unalterable
law.  Fitness  precedes  progression.  Patience  is  required.

Yes.  The  obstacles  from  internal  dissension,  from  the
impossibility  of  bringing  home  evidence  to  many,  from
prejudice,  from  many  other  causes,  seem  almost  in-
vincible.

To  you.     Why  interfere  with  that  which  is  God's  work  ?

'Obstacles !      You  know  not  what  they  are  compared  with

10  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

what  we  have  had  to  endure  in  times  past.  Had  you  lived  on
earth  in  the  later  days  of  Rome's  imperial  sway,  when  every-
thing spiritual  had  fled  in  horror  from  a  realm  steeped  in
debauchery,  sensuality,  and  all  that  is  base  and  bad,  you
would  have  known  then  what  the  banded  powers  of  darkness
can  effect.  The  coldness  was  the  coldness  of  despair :  the
darkness  was  the  gloom  of  the  sepulchre.  The  body,  the  body
was  all :  and  the  guardians  fled  in  dismay  from  a  scene  on
which  they  could  not  gaze,  and  whose  pangs  they  could  not
alleviate.  Faithlessness  there  was  indeed,  and  worse.  The
world  scorned  us  and  our  efforts,  laughed  at  all  virtue,  derided
the  Supreme,  mocked  at  immortality,  and  lived  but  to  eat  and
drink  and  wallow  in  the  mire — the  degraded,  down-stricken,
animals  they  had  made  themselves.  Ah,  yes!  say  not  that
evil  is  invincible  when  the  power  of  God  and  of  his  Spirits
has  prevailed  to  cleanse  even  such  a  sink  as  that.

[More  was  said  as  to  the  repeated  failure  of  plans  for
man's  benefit  through  his  ignorance  and  obstinacy.
I  asked  if  this  were  to  be  another  failure.]

God  is  giving  far  more  than  you  think.  In  all  parts  are
springing  up  centres  from  which  the  truth  of  God  is  being;
poured  into  longing  hearts,  and  permeating  thinking  minds.
There  must  be  many  to  whom  the  gospel  given  of  old  is  satis-
fying yet,  and  who  are  not  receptive  of  further  truth.  With
these  we  meddle  not.  But  many  there  are  who  have  learned
what  the  past  can  teach,  and  who  are  thirsting  for  further
knowledge.  To  these  it  is  given  in  such  measure  as  the  Most
High  sees  fit.  And  from  them  it  flows  to  others,  and  the
glorious  tidings  spread  until  the  day  comes  when  we  shall  be
called  on  to  proclaim  them  from  the  mountain  top !  and  lo  T
God's  hidden  ones  shall  start  up  from  the  lowly  places  of  the
earth  to  bear  witness  to  that  which  they  have  seen  and
known :  and  the  little  rills  that  man  has  heeded  not  shall
coalesce,  and  the  river  of  God's  truth,  omnipotent  in  its-
energy,  shall  flood  the  earth,  and  sweep  away  in  its  resistless-
course,  the  ignorance  and  unbelief,  and  folly  and  sin  which

REVELATION:   OLD   AND   NEW.  11

This  New  Revelation  of  which  you  speak :  is  it  contrary
to  the  Old  ?    Many  are  exercised  on  that  point.

Revelation  is  from  God :  and  that  which  He  has  revealed
at  one  time  cannot  contradict  that  which  He  has  revealed  at
another,  seeing  that  each  is,  in  its  kind,  a  revealing  of  truth,
but  of  truth  revealed  in  proportion  to  man's  necessities,  and
in  accordance  with  his  capacities.  That  which  seems  contra-
dictory is  not  in  the  Word  of  God,  but  in  the  mind  of  man.
Man  was  not  content  with  the  simple  message.  He  has  adul-
terated it  with  his  glosses,  overlaid  it  with  his  deductions  and
speculations.  And  so,  as  years  go  by,  it  comes  to  pass  that
what  came  from  God  is  in  no  sense  what  it  was.  It  has-
become  contradictory,  impure,  and  earthy.  When  a  further
revelation  comes,  instead  of  fitting  it  reasonably,  it  becomes-
necessary  to  clear  away  much  of  the  superstition  that  has
been  built  on  the  old  foundations ;  and  the  work  of  destruc-
tion must  precede  the  work  of  addition.  The  revelations  are
not  contradictory;  but  it  is  necessary  to  destroy  man's  rubbish
before  God's  truth  can  be  revealed.  Man  must  judge  accord-
ino-  to  the  light  of  reason  that  is  in  him.  That  is  the  ultimate

O  O

standard,  and  the  progressive  soul  will  receive  what  the
ignorant  or  prejudiced  will  reject.  God's  truth  is  forced  on
none.  So  for  a  time,  during  the  previous  processes,  this  must
be  a  special  revelation  to  a  special  people.  It  has  ever  been
so.  Did  Moses  obtain  universal  acceptance  even  amongst  his
own  people  ?  Did  any  of  the  seers  ?  Did  Jesus  even  ?  Did
Paul  ?  Did  any  reformer  in  any  age,  amongst  any  people  \
God  changes  not.  He  offers,  but  he  does  not  force  acceptance,
He  offers,  and  they  who  are  prepared  receive  the  message.
The  ignorant  and  unfit  reject  it.  It  must  be  so;  and  the
dissensions  and  differences  which  you  deplore  are  but  for  the
sifting  of  the  false  from  the  true.  They  spring  from  un-
worthy causes,  and  are  impelled  by  malignant  spirits.  You
must  expect  annoyance,  too,  from  the  banded  powers  of  evil.
But  cast  your  eyes  beyond  the  present.  Look  to  the  far
future,  and  be  of  good  courage.

12  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Touching  Spirit-guides.  How  are  they  appointed  ?
Spirit-guides  are  not  always  attracted  to  those  whom  they
direct,  though  this  is  usually  the  case.  Sometimes  they  are
selected  for  their  own  fitness.  They  are  naturally  apt  to
teach.  Sometimes  they  are  charged  with  a  special  com-
mission. Sometimes  they  are  picked  because  they  are  able  to
supply  what  is  wanting  in  the  characters  which  they  train.
Sometimes  they  themselves  select  a  character  which  they
wish  to  mould.  This  is  a  great  pleasure  to  the  higher  spirits.
Sometimes  they  desire,  for  their  own  spiritual  progress,  to  be
attached  to  a  soul,  the  training  of  which  is  irksome  and
difficult  They  toil  upward  along  with  the  soul.  Sometimes
they  are  attracted  by  pure  affinity,  or  by  the  remains  of  earth-
love.  Very  frequently,  when  there  is  no  special  mission  for
the  soul,  the  guides  are  changed  as  the  soul  progresses.

Who  are  the  Spirits  who  return  to  earth?     Of  wliat

class?

Principally  those  who  are  nearest  to  the  earth,  in  the  three
lower  spheres  or  states  of  being.  They  converse  most  readily
with  you.  Of  the  higher  spirits,  those  who  are  able  to  return
are  they  who  have  what  is  analogous  to  mediumistic  power  on
earth.  We  cannot  tell  you  more  than  that  we  higher  spirits
find  it  very  difficult  to  find  a  medium  through  whom  we  can
communicate.  Many  spirits  would  gladly  converse,  but  for
the  want  of  a  suitable  medium,  and  from  their  unwillingness
to  prolong  their  research  for  one,  they  will  not  risk  the  waste
of  time.  Hence,  too,  communications  vary  much  at  times.
Communications  which  you  discover  to  be  false  are  not
always  wilfully  so.  As  time  goes  on  we  shall  know  more  of
the  conditions  which  affect  communication.

You  have  spoken  of  adversaries.  Who  are  they  ?
The  antagonistic  spirits  who  range  themselves  against  our
mission ;  who  strive  to  mar  its  progress  by  counterfeiting  our
influence  and  work,  and  by  setting  men  and  other  spirits
against  us  and  it.  These  are  spirits  who  have  chosen  the
evil,  have  put  aside  promptings  and  influences  of  good,  and

THE  ADVERSARIES.  13

have  banded  themselves  under  the  leadership  of  intelligence
still  more  evil  to  malign  us  and  to  hamper  our  work.  Such
are  powerful  for  mischief,  and  their  activity  shows  itself  in.
evil  passions,  in  imitating  our  work,  and  so  gaining  influence
over  the  deluded,  and  most  of  all,  in  presenting  to  inquiring
souls  that  which  is  mean  and  base,  where  we  would  tenderly
lead  to  the  noble  and  refined.  They  are  the  foes  of  God  and
man  ;  enemies  of  goodness ;  ministers  of  evil.  Against  them
we  wage  perpetual  war.

It  is  very  startling  to  hear  of  such  a  poiverful  organisa-
tion of  evil.  There  are  some,  you  knmv,  who  deny  the
existence  of  evil  altogether,  and  teach  that  all  is  good
though  disguised.

Alas!  alas!  most  sad  is  the  abandonment  of  good  and  choice
of  evil.  You  wonder  that  so  many  evil  spirits  obstruct.
Friend,  it  is  even  so,  and  it  is  not  astonishing.  As  the  soul
lives  in  the  earth-life,  so  does  it  go  to  spirit-life.  Its  tastes,,
its  predilections,  its  habits,  its  antipathies,  they  are  with  it.
still.  It  is  not  changed  save  in  the  accident  of  being  freed  from
the  body.  The  soul  that  on  earth  has  been  low  in  taste  and
impure  in  habit,  does  not  change  its  nature  by  passing  from
the  earth-sphere,  any  more  than  the  soul  that  has  been  truth-
ful, pure,  and  progressive,  becomes  base  and  bad  by  death.
Wonderful  that  you  do  not  recognise  this  truth  !  You  would
not  fancy  a  pure  and  upright  soul  degenerating  after  it  has
passed  from  your  gaze.  Yet  you  fable  a  purification  of  that
which  has  become  by  habit  impure  and  unholy,  hating  God
and  goodness,  and  choosing  sensuality  and  sin.  The  one  is  no
more  possible  than  the  other.  The  soul's  character  has  been
a  daily,  hourly  growth.  It  has  not  been  an  overlaying  of  the
soul  with  that  which  can  be  thrown  off.  Rather  it  has  been
a  weaving  into  the  nature  of  the  spirit  that  which  becomes
part  of  itself,  identified  with  its  nature,  inseparable  from  its
character.  It  is  no  more  possible  that  that  character  should
be  undone,  save  by  the  slow  process  of  obliteration,  than  that
the  woven  fabric  should  be  rudely  cut  and  the  threads  remain
intact.  Nay  more.  The  soul  has  cultivated  habits  that  hav&

14  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

become  so  engrained  as  to  be  essential  parts  of  its  indivi-
duality. The  spirit  that  has  yielded  to  the  lusts  of  a  sensual
body  becomes  in  the  end  their  slave.  It  would  not  be  happy
in  the  midst  of  purity  and  refinement.  It  would  sigh  for  its
old  haunts  and  habits.  They  are  of  its  essence.  So  you  see
that  the  legions  of  the  adversaries  are  simply  the  masses  of
unprogressed,  undeveloped  spirits,  who  have  banded  together
from  affinity  against  all  that  is  pure  and  good.  They  can
only  progress  by  penitence,  through  the  instruction  of  higher
intelligences,  and  by  gradual  and  laborious  undoing  of  sin
and  sinful  habit.  There  are  many  such,  and  they  are  the
adversaries.  The  idea  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  evil,  no
antagonism  to  good,  no  banded  company  of  adversaries  who
resist  progress  and  truth,  and  fight  against  the  dissemination
of  what  advantages  humanity,  is  an  open  device  of  the  evil
ones  for  your  bewilderment.

Have  they  a  Chief — a  Devil  ?

Chiefs  many  who  govern ;  but  not  such  a  Devil  as  theolo-
gians have  feigned.  Spirits,  good  and  bad  alike,  are  subject
to  the  rule  of  commanding  Intelligences.

SECTION  II.

[The  answers  given  in  this  section  are  from  the  same
source.  The  conversation  commenced  by  some
questions  as  to  what  the  life  of  spirit  showed  to
be  most  serviceable  work  in  the  training  school  of
life  here.  Much  was  made  of  the  heart  as  well  as
of  the  head,  and  the  orderly  development  of  the
whole  powers  of  body,  and  intellect,  and  affection
was  insisted  on.  It  was  said  that  want  of  balance
was  a  great  cause  of  retrogression,  or  of  inability,
at  any  rate,  to  progress.

I  suggested  the  Philanthropist  as  the  man  who
came  nearest  to  the  ideal.     The  reply  was]  : —

The  true  philanthropist,  the  man  who  has  the  benefit  and
progress  of  his  fellows  most  at  heart,  is  the  true  man,  the  true
child  of  the  Almighty  Father,  who  is  the  great  Philanthropist
The  true  philanthropist  is  he  who  grows  likest  God  every
hour.  He  is  enlarging  by  constant  exercise  the  sympathies
which  are  eternal  and  undying,  and  in  the  perpetual  exercise
of  which  man  finds  increasing  happiness.  The  philanthropist
arid  the  philosopher,  the  man  who  loves  mankind,  and  the
man  who  loves  knowledge  for  its  own  sake,  these  are  God's
jewels  of  priceless  value,  and  of  boundless  promise.  The
one,  fettered  by  no  restrictions  of  race  or  place,  of  creed  or
name,  embraces  in  his  loving  heart  the  whole  brotherhood  of
humanity.  He  loves  them  as  friends,  as  brethren.  He  asks
not  what  are  their  opinions,  he  only  sees  their  wants,  and  in
ministering  to  them  progressive  knowledge  he  is  blest.  This
is  the  true  philanthropist,  though  frequently  the  counterfeit,
who  loves  those  who  think  with  him,  and  will  help  those  who
fawn  on  him,  and  give  alms,  so  the  generous  deed  be  well
known,  robs  the  fair  name  of  philanthropy  of  that  all-
embracing  beneficence  which  is  its  true  mark.

16  SPIRIT-TEACHINGa.

The  other,  the  philosopher,  hampered  by  no  theories  of  what
ought  to  be,  and  what  therefore  must  be — bound  by  no  sub-
servience to  sectarian  opinion,  to  the  dogmas  of  a  special
school,  free  from  prejudice,  receptive  of  truth,  whatever  that
truth  may  be,  so  it  be  proven — he  seeks  into  the  mysteries  of
Divine  wisdom,  and,  searching,  finds  his  happiness.  He  need
have  no  fear  of  exhausting  the  treasures,  they  are  without
end.  His  joy  throughout  life  shall  be  to  gather  ever  richer
stores  of  knowledge,  truer  ideas  of  God.  The  union  of  those
two — the  philanthropist  and  the  philosopher — makes  the  per-
fect man.  Those  who  unite  the  two,  progress  further  than,
spirits  who  progress  alone.

"His  life,"  you  say.     Is  life  eternal?

Yes ;  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  so.  Life  is  of  two-
stages — progressive  and  contemplative.  We,  who  are  still
progressive,  and  who  hope  to  progress  for  countless  myriads
of  ages  (as  you  say),  after  the  farthest  point  to  which  your
finite  mind  can  reach,  we  know  naught  of  the  life  of  contem-
plation. But  we  believe  that  far — far  in  the  vast  hereafter —
there  will  be  a  period  at  which  progressive  souls  will  even-
tually arrive,  when  progress  has  brought  them  to  the  very
dwelling-place  of  the  Omnipotent,  and  that  there  they  will
lay  aside  their  former  state,  and  bask  in  the  full  light  of
Deity,  in  contemplation  of  all  the  secrets  of  the  universe.  Of
this  we  cannot  tell  you.  It  is  too  high.  Soar  not  to  such
vast  heights.  Life  is  unending,  as  you  count  it,  but  you  are
concerned  with  the  approach  to  its  threshold,  not  with  the
inner  temple.

Of  course.     Do  you  know  more  of  God  than  you  did  on
earth  ?

We  know  more  of  the  operations  of  His  love — more  of  the
operations  of  that  beneficent  Power  which  controls  and  guides
the  worlds.  We  know  of  Him,  but  we  know  Him  not ;  nor
shall  know,  as  you  would  seek  to  know,  until  we  enter  on  the
life  of  contemplation.  He  is  known  to  us  only  by  His  acts.

THE   SPIRITUAL  CONFLICT.  17

[In  further  conversation  I  alluded  again  to  the  conflict
between  good  and  evil ;  and  a  long  answer  to  my
question,  or,  rather,  to  what  was  in  my  mind,  was
written.  The  storm  was  spoken  of  as  one  that
would  rage,  with  intervals  of  lull,  till  some  ten  or
twelve  years  had  passed,  when  a  period  of  repose
would  ensue.  This  is  almost  the  only  case  I  have
noted  in  which  a  prophecy  was  ventured  upon.
Though  the  ideas  in  the  message  have  since  been
conveyed  repeatedly,  and  with  more  precision  and
power,  I  leave  it  untouched  to  show  the  character
of  the  teaching  at  the  time.]

What  you  hear  are  the  first  rnutterings  of  a  conflict  which
will  be  long  and  arduous.  Such  are  of  periodical  occurrence.
If  you  could  read  the  story  of  the  world  with  spirit-sight,  you
would  see  that  there  have  always  been  periodic  battles  be-
tween the  evil  and  the  good.  There  have  recurred  seasons  when
undeveloped  intelligences  have  had  predominance.  Especially
are  such  seasons  consequent  on  great  wars  among  you.  Many
spirits  are  prematurely  withdrawn  from  the  body.  They  then
pass  before  they  are  fit ;  and  at  the  moment  of  departure  they
are  in  evil  state,  angry,  blood-thirsty,  filled  with  evil  passion.
They  do  mischief  great  and  long  in  after-life.

Nothing  is  more  dangerous  than  for  souls  to  be  rudely
severed  from  their  bodily  habitation,  and  to  be  launched  into
spirit-life,  with  angry  passions  stirred,  and  revengeful  feelings
dominant.  It  is  bad  that  any  should  be  dismissed  from  earth-
life  suddenly,  and  before  the  bond  is  naturally  severed.  It  is
for  this  reason  that  all  destruction  of  bodily  life  is  foolish  and
rude :  rude,  as  betokening  a  barbarous  ignorance  of  the  condi-
tions of  life  and  progress  in  the  hereafter  ;  foolish,  as  releasing
an  undeveloped  angry  spirit  from  its  trammels,  and  enduing
it  with  extended  capacity  for  mischief.  You  are  blind  and
ignorant  in  your  dealings  with  those  who  have  offended
against  your  laws  and  the  regulations,  moral  and  restrictive,
by  which  you  govern  intercourse  amongst  yourselves.  You
find  a  low  and  debased  intelligence  offending  against  morality,
or  against  constituted  law.  Straightway  you  take  the  readiest
means  of  aggravating  his  capacity  for  mischief.  Instead  of
3

18  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

separating  such  an  one  from  evil  influence,  removing  him
from  association  with  sin,  and  isolating  him  under  the  edu-
cating influence  of  true  purity  and  spirituality,  where  the
more  refined  intelligences  may  gradually  operate  and  counter-
act the  baleful  power  of  evil  and  evil  ministrations,  you
place  him  in  the  midst  of  evil  associations,  in  company  with
offenders  like  himself,  where  the  very  atmosphere  is  heavy
with  evil,  where  the  hordes  of  the  undeveloped  and  unpro-
gressed  spirits  most  do  congregate,  and  where,  both  from
human  associates  and  spirit  influence,  the  whole  tendency  is
evil.

Vain  and  short-sighted  and  ignorant  folly  !  Into  your  dens
of  criminals  we  cannot  enter.  The  missionary  spirits  pause
and  find  their  mission  vain.  The  good  angels  weep  to  find  an
associated  band  of  evil — human  and  spiritual — massed  against
them  by  man's  ignorance  and  folly.  What  wonder  that  you
have  gathered  from  such  experience  the  conviction  that  a  ten-
dency to  open  crime  is  seldom  cured,  seeing  that  you  your-
selves are  the  plainest  accomplices  of  the  spirits  who  gloat
over  the  fall  of  the  offender.  How  many  an  erring  soul —
erring  through  ignorance,  as  frequently  as  through  choice —
has  come  forth  from  your  jails  hardened  and  attended  by  evil
guides  you  know  not,  and  can  never  know.  But  were  you  to
pursue  an  enlightened  plan  with  your  offenders,  you  would
find  a  perceptible  gain,  and  confer  blessing  incalculable  on  the
misguided  and  vicious.

You  should  teach  your  criminals :  you  should  punish  them,
as  they  will  be  punished  here,  by  showing  them  how  they  hurt
themselves  by  their  sin,  and  how  they  retard  their  future
progress.  You  should  place  them  where  advanced  and  earnest
spirits  among  you  may  lead  them  to  unlearn  their  sin,  and  to
drink  in  wisdom  :  where  the  Bands  of  the  Blessed  may  aid
their  efforts,  and  the  spirits  of  the  higher  spheres  may  shed  on
them  their  benign  and  elevating  influence.  But  you  horde
together  your  dangerous  spirits.  You  shut  them  up,  and  con-
fine them  as  those  who  are  beyond  hope.  You  punish  them
vindictively,  cruelly,  foolishly  :  and  the  man  who  has  been  the
victim  of  your  ignorant  treatment  pursues  his  course  of  foolish,

CRIME   AND   ITS  PUNISHMENT.  19

suicidal  sin,  until  in  the  end  you  add  to  the  list  of  your  foolish
deeds  this  last  and  worst  of  all,  that  you  cut  him  off,  debased
degraded,  sensual,  ignorant,  mad  with  rage  and  hate,  thirsting
for  vengeance  on  his  fellows  :  you  remove  from  him  the  great
bar  on  his  passions,  and  send  him  into  spirit-life  to  work  out
without  hindrance  the  devilish  suggestions  of  his  inflamed
passions.

Blind !  blind  !  you  know  not  what  you  do.  You  are  your
own  worst  enemies,  the  truest  friends  of  those  who  fight
against  God,  and  us,  and  you.

Ignorant  no  less  than  blind !  for  you  spend  vast  trouble  to
aid  your  foes.  You  cut  from  a  spirit  its  bodily  life.  You
punish  vengefully  the  erring.  You  falsely  arrogate  to  your-
selves the  right  by  law  divine  to  shed  human  blood.  You  err,
and  know  not  that  the  spirits  you  so  hurt  shall  in  their  turn
avenge  themselves  upon  you.  You  have  yet  to  learn  the
earliest  principles  of  that  Divine  tenderness  and  pity  which
labours  ever  through  us  to  rescue  the  debased  spirit,  to  raise
it  from  the  depths  of  sin  and  passion,  and  to  elevate  it  to
purity  and  progress  in  goodness.  You  know  naught  of  God
when  you  do  such  deeds.  You  have  framed  for  yourselves  a
God  whose  acts  accord  with  your  own  instincts.  You  have
fabled,  that  He  sits  on  high,  careless  of  His  creatures,  and
jealous  only  of  His  own  power  and  honour.  You  have  fabri-
cated a  monster  who  delights  to  harm,  and  kill,  and  torture :
a  God  who  rejoices  in  inflicting  punishment  bitter,  unending,
umnitigable.  You  have  imagined  such  a  God,  and  have  put
into  His  mouth  words  which  He  never  knew,  and  laws  which
His  loving  heart  would  disown.

God — our  God  Good,  Loving,  Tender,  Pitiful — delighting  in
punishing  with  cruel  hand  His  ignorantly-erring  sons  '  Base
fable  !  Base  and  foolish  fancy,  produced  of  man's  cruel  heart,
of  man's  rude  and  undeveloped  mind.  There  is  no  such  God !
there  is  none.  He  has  no  place  with  us :  none,  save  in  man's
degraded  mind.

Great  Father  '  reveal  Thyself  to  these  blind  wanderers,  and
teach  them  of  Thyself.  Tell  them  that  they  dream  bad  dreams
of  Thee,  that  they  know  Thee  not,  nor  can  know  till  they

20  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

unlearn  their  ignorant  conceptions  of  Thy  Nature  and  Thy
Love.

Yes,  friend,  your  jails  and  your  legalised  murder,  the  whole
tenor  of  your  dealings  with  criminals,  are  based  on  error  and
ignorance.

Your  wars  and  your  wholesale  murderings  are  even  more
fearful.  You  settle  your  differences  with  your  neighbours,
who  should  be  your  friends,  by  arraying  against  each  other
masses  of  spirits — we  see  not  the  body ;  we  care  only  for  the
spirit  temporarily  clothed  with  those  human  atoms — and  those
spirits  you  excite  to  full  pitch  of  rage  and  fury,  and  so  you
launch  them,  rudely  severed  from  their  earth-bodies,  into  spirit
life.  You  inflame  their  passions,  and  give  them  full  vent.
Vengeful,  debased,  cruel,  earth-bound  spirits  throng  around
jrour  earth-sphere,  and  incite  the  debased  who  are  still  in  the
body  to  deeds  of  cruelty  and  lust  and  sin.  And  this  for  the
satisfying  of  ambition,  for  a  passing  fancy,  for  an  idle  princely
whim,  for  lack  of  something  else  to  occupy  a  king.

Ah !  friend,  you  have  much,  very  much  to  learn :  and  you
will  learn  it  by  the  sad  and  bitter  experience  of  undoing  here-
after that  which  you  have  now  done.  You  must  learn  the
golden  lesson,  that  Pity  and  Love  are  truer  wisdom  than  ven-
geance and  vindictive  punishment ;  that  were  the  Great  God
to  deal  with  us  as  you  deal  with  your  fellows,  and  as  you  have
falsely  fabled  that  He  will,  you  would  be  justly  sent  to  your
own  imagined  hell.  You  must  know  of  God,  and  of  us,  and  of
yourselves,  ere  you  can  progress  and  do  our  work  instead  of
our  adversaries'.

Friend,  when  others  seek  from  you  as  to  the  usefulness  of
our  message,  and  the  benefit  which  it  can  confer  on  those  to
whom  the  Father  sends  it,  tell  them  that  it  is  a  Gospel  which
will  reveal  a  God  of  tenderness  and  pity  and  love,  instead  of
a  fabled  creation  of  harshness,  cruelty,  and  passion.  Tell  them
that  it  will  lead  them  to  know  of  Intelligences  whose  whole
life  is  one  of  love  and  mercy  and  pity  and  helpful  aid  to  man,
combined  with  adoration  of  the  Supreme.  Tell  them  that  it
will  lead  man  to  see  his  own  folly,  to  unlearn  his  fancied
theories,  to  learn  how  to  cultivate  his  intelligence  that  it  may

BENEFITS   OF   SPIRITUALISM.  21

progress,  to  use  his  opportunities  that  they  may  profit  him,  to
serve  his  fellow- men,  so  that  when  they  and  he  meet  in  the
hereafter,  they  may  not  be  able  to  reproach  him  that  he  has
been,  so  far  as  he  could,  a  clog  and  an  injury  to  them.  Tell
them  that  such  is  our  glorious  mission ;  and  if  they  sneer,  as
the  ignorant  will,  and  boast  of  their  fancied  knowledge,  turn
to  the  progressive  souls  who  will  receive  the  teaching  of  wis-
dom :  speak  to  them  the  message  of  Divine  truth  that  shall
regenerate  and  elevate  the  world :  and  for  the  blind  ones  pray
that,  when  their  eyes  are  opened,  they  may  not  despair  at  the
sight  which  they  shall  see.

f     22

SECTION   III

[The  intensity  with  which  the  above  message  was  writ-
ten out  was  something  quite  new  to  me.  The  hand
traversed  sheet  after  sheet  of  my  book,  tracing
the  most  minute  characters,  always  emphasising
the  name  of  God  with  capitals,  and  paragraphing
and  keeping  a  margin,  so  that  the  writing  struck
the  eye  as  a  beautiful  piece  of  caligraphy.  The
hand  tingled,  and  the  arm  throbbed,  and  I  was
conscious  of  waves  of  force  surging  through  me.
When  the  message  was  done,  I  was  prostrate  with
exhaustion,  and  suffered  from  a  violent  headache
at  the  base  of  the  brain.  On  the  next  day  I  asked
the  cause,  and  the  following  message  was  given,
but  much  more  quietly  ]  : —

Your  headache  was  the  result  of  the  intensity  of  the  power,
and  the  rapidity  with  which  it  was  withdrawn  from  you.  We
could  not  write  on  such  a  subject  without  displaying  eager-
ness :  for  it  is  one  of  most  vital  concern  to  those  to  whom  we
are  sent.  We  would  fain  impress  on  you  the  paramount  im-
portance of  obeying  ever  those  unalterable  laws  which  God  has
laid  down  for  you,  and  which  you  violate  at  your  own  peril.

Wars  are  but  the  product  of  your  lust  for  gain,  your  ambi-
tion, your  angry,  proud,  vengeful  passions.  And  what  is  the
product  ?  God's  fair  works  destroyed  and  trampled  under
foot :  the  lovely  and  peaceful  results  of  man's  industry  de-
stroyed :  the  holy  ties  of  home  and  kindred  severed  :  thousands
of  families  plunged  into  distress :  rivers  of  blood  shed  wan-
tonly :  souls  unnumbered  rent  from  their  earth-body  to  rush
unprepared,  uneducated,  unpurified  into  the  life  of  spirit.
Bad,  all  bad  !  earthy !  evil  sprung  from  earth,  and  resulting
in  misery.  Till  you  know  better  than  this,  your  race  will
progress  but  slowly;  but  you  are  perpetually  sowing  seed
which  produces  a  crop  of  obstacles  to  our  work.

THE   MESSENGERS  AND  THE   MESSAGE.  23

Much  there  is  in  social  knowledge,  and  in  the  conduct  of
State  affairs  that  you  must  unlearn :  much  that  is  to  be  added
to  your  knowledge.

For  instance,  you  legislate  for  the  masses,  but  you  deal  only
with  the  offender.  Your  legislation  must  be  punitive,  but  it
should  be  remedial  too.  Those  whom  you  think  insane  you
shut  up  fast  lest  they  should  injure  others.  A  few  years  ago,
and  you  tortured  them,  and  filled  your  madhouses  with  many
whose  only  crime  it  was  to  differ  from  the  foolish  notions  of
their  fellows,  or  to  be — as  many  were,  and  are,  whom  you  have
thought  mad — recipients  of  undeveloped  spirit  influence.  This
you  will  one  day  know  to  your  sorrow — that  to  leave  the
beaten  track  is  not  always  evidence  of  a  wandering  mind;
and  to  be  the  vehicle  of  spirit-teaching  is  not  proof  of  a  mind
unhinged.  From  many  the  power  of  proclaiming  their  mis-
sion has  been  taken  away,  and  it  has  been  falsely  said  that  we
have  filled  the  asylums,  and  driven  our  mediums  to  madness,
because  blind  and  ignorant  men  have  chosen  to  attribute  in-
sanity to  all  who  have  ventured  to  proclaim  their  connection
with  us  and  our  teaching.  They  have  decided,  forsooth,  that
to  be  in  communion  with  the  world  of  spirit  is  evidence
of  madness ;  therefore,  all  who  claim  to  be  are  mad,  and
consequently  must  be  shut  up  within  the  madhouse.  And
because  by  lying  statements  they  have  succeeded  in  affixing
the  stigma,  and  in  incarcerating  the  medium,  they  further
charge  on  us  the  sin  they  have  invented  of  driving  our
mediums  to  madness.

Were  it  not  ignorance,  it  would  be  blasphemy.  We  have
brought  nought  but  blessing  to  our  friends.  We  are  to  them
the  bearers  of  Divine  Truth.  If  man  has  chosen  to  attract  by
his  evil  mind  and  evil  life  congenial  spirits  who  aggravate  his
wickedness,  on  his  head  be  the  sin.  They  have  but  tended
the  crop  which  he  has  already  sown.  He  was  mad  already ;
mad  in  neglect  of  his  own  spirit  and  body ;  mad  in  that  he
has  driven  far  from  him  the  holy  influences.  But  we  deal  not
with  such.  Far  more  mad  indeed  are  those  besotted  drunkards
whom  you  deem  not  mad.  To  spirit-eye  there  is  no  more
fearful  sight  than  those  dens  of  wickedness  and  impurity

24  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

where  the  evil  men  gather  to  steep  their  senses  in  oblivion,  to
excite  the  lustful  and  sensual  passions  of  their  debased  bodies,
to  consort  with  the  degraded  and  the  impure,  and  to  otter
themselves  the  ready  prey  of  the  basest  and  worst  spirits  who
hover  around  and  find  their  gratification  in  living  over  again
their  bodily  lives.  These  are  dens  of  basest,  most  hideous
degradation ;  a  blot  on  your  civilisation,  a  disgrace  to  your
intelligence.

What  do  you  mean  by  living  over  again  their  base
lives  ?

These  earth-bound  spirits  retain  much  of  their  earthy
passion  and  propensity.  The  cravings  of  the  body  are  not
extinct,  though  the  power  to  gratify  them  is  withdrawn.
The  drunkard  retains  his  old  thirst,  but  exaggerated ;  aggra-
vated by  the  impossibility  of  slaking  it.  It  burns  within  him,
the  unquenched  desire,  and  urges  him  to  frequent  the  haunts
of  his  old  vices,  and  to  drive  wretches  like  himself  to  further
degradation.  In  them  he  lives  again  his  old  life,  and  drinks
in  satisfaction,  grim  and  devilish,  from  the  excesses  which  he
causes  them  to  commit.  And  so  his  -veiee-  perpetuates  itself,
and  swells  the  crop  of  sin  and  sorrow.  The  besotted  wretch,
goaded  on  by  agencies  he  cannot  see,  sinks  deeper  and  deeper
into  the  mire.  His  innocent  wife  and  babe  starve  and  weep
in  silent  agony,  and  near  them  hovers,  and  over  them  broods
the  guardian  angel  who  has  no  power  to  reach  the  sodden
wretch  who  mars  their  lives  and  breaks  their  hearts.

This  we  shadow  forth  to  you  when  we  tell  you  that  the
earth-bound  spirit  lives  again  its  life  of  excess  in  the  excesses
of  those  whom  it  is  enabled  to  drive  to  ruin.  The  remedy
is  slow,  for  such  vices  perpetuate  themselves.  It  can  only  be
found  in  the  moral  and  material  elevation  of  the  race ;  in  the
gradual  growth  of  purer  and  truer  knowledge ;  in  advanced
education,  in  its  widest  and  truest  sense.

This  would  prevent  obsession  such  as  you  picture  ?

Yes,  in  the  end :  and  nothing  else  will,  so  long  as  you  keep
up  the  supply  at  the  rate  you  now  do.

RETURN   OF   SPIRITS   TO   EARTH.  25

Do  children  pass  at  once  to  a  high  sphere  ?
No :  the  experience  of  the  earth-life  cannot  so  be  dispensed
with.  The  absence  of  contamination  ensures  a  rapid  passage
through  the  spheres  of  purification,  but  the  absence  of  experi-
ence and  knowledge  requires  to  be  remedied  by  training  and
education,  by  spirits  whose  special  care  it  is  to  train  these
tender  souls,  and  supply  to  them  that  which  they  have  missed.
It  is  not  a  gain  to  be  removed  from  earth-life,  save  in  one
way — that  misuse  of  opportunities  might  have  entailed  greater
loss  and  have  more  retarded  progress.  The  soul  that  gains
most  is  the  soul  that  keeps  ever  before  it  the  work  that  has
been  allotted  to  it,  which  has  laboured  zealously  for  its  own
improvement  and  the  benefit  of  its  fellows,  which  has  loved
and  served  God,  and  has  followed  the  guidance  of  its
guardians.  This  is  the  soul  which  has  least  to  unlearn,  and
which  progresses  rapidly.  All  vanity  and  selfishness  in  every
form,  all  sluggishness  and  indolence,  all  self-indulgence  mars
progress.  We  say  nought  of  open  vice  and  sin,  nor  of
obstinate  refusal  to  learn  and  to  be  taught.  Love  and  know-
ledge help  on  the  soul.  The  child  may  have  the  one  qualifica-
tion ;  it  cannot  have  the  other  save  by  education,  which  is
frequently  gained  by  its  being  attached  to  a  medium,  and
living  over  the  earth-life  again.  But  many  a  child-spirit
leaves  the  earth-life  pure  and  unsullied  who  would  have  been
exposed  to  temptation  and  grievous  trial ;  and  so  it  gains  in
purity  what  it  has  lost  in  knowledge.  The  spirit  who  has
fought  and  won  is  the  nobler  one.  Purified  by  trial,  it  rises
to  the  sphere  set  apart  for  the  proven  souls.  Such  experience
is  essential ;  and  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  it  many  spirits
elect  to  return  to  earth,  and,  by  attaching  themselves  to  a
medium,  gain  the  special  phase  of  experience  which  they  need.
To  one  it  is  the  cultivation  of  the  affections  that  is  necessary ;
to  another  the  experience  of  suffering  and  sorrow  ;  to  another
mental  culture ;  to  another  the  curbing  and  restraining  of  the
impulses  of  the  spirit,  evenness  of  balance.  All  who  return,
save  those  who,  like  ourselves,  are  charged  with  a  mission,
have  an  object  to  gain  :  and  in  being  associated  with  us  and
with  you  they  gain  their  progress.

26  8PI1UT-TKACHINGS.

This  is  the  one  desire  of  spirit.  More  progress  !  More
knowledge  !  More  love !  till  the  dross  is  purged  away,  and
the  soul  soars  higher  and  yet  higher  towards  the  Supreme.

Return  to  earth  is  not  the  only  method  of  progression.

No :  nor  even  the  usual  one.  We  have  with  us  many
schools  of  instruction :  and  we  do  not  employ  a  second  time
one  that  has  proved  a  failure.

[Some  further  conversation  having  taken  place  respect-
ing the  home  and  occupation  of  Spirit,  I  enquired,
not  getting  much  information  that  I  could  assim-
ilate, whether  the  writer  knew  anything  of  states
of  being  outside  of  his  own,  or  rather  above  it;
and  whether  he  knew  of  states  of  being  inferior
to  that  of  incarnation  on  this  earth.  In  reply,  it
was  affirmed  that  spirits  had  no  power  to  take  in
so  vast  a  prospect  as  the  range  of  spiritual  exist-
ence :  and  that  their  knowledge  was  barred  by
the  gulf  fixed  between  what  were  called  spheres
of  probation,  or  sometimes  of  purgation,  in  which
the  soul  was  developed  and  perfected,  and  the
spheres  of  contemplation  into  which  it  then  passed,
never  (except  in  rare  cases)  to  return.  It  was
said]  : —

The  passage  from  the  highest  of  the  seven  spheres  of  pro-
bation, to  the  lowest  of  the  seven  spheres  of  contemplation,  is
a  change  analogous  to  what  you  know  as  death.  We  hear
little  from  beyond,  though  we  know  that  the  blessed  ones  who
dwell  there  have  power  to  help  and  guide  us  even  as  we  watch
over  you.  But  we  know  nothing  by  experimental  knowledge
of  their  work,  save  that  they  are  occupied  with  nearer  views
of  the  Divine  perfection,  in  closer  contemplation  of  the
causes  of  things,  and  in  nearer  adoration  of  the  Supreme.
We  are  far  from  that  blissful  state.  We  have  our  work  yet
to  do ;  and  in  doing  it  we  find  our  delight.  It  is  necessary
for  you  to  remember  that  spirits  speak  according  to  their
experience  and  knowledge.  Some  who  are  asked  abstruse
questions  give  replies  according  to  the  measure  of  their  know-
ledge, and  are  in  error.  But  do  not,  therefore,  blame  them.
We  believe  that  we  state  what  is  accurate  when  we  say  that

INFLUENCE   OF   DEBASED    SPIRITS.  27

your  earth  is  the  highest  of  seven  spheres;  that  there  are
.succeeding  the  earth-life  seven  spheres  of  active  work,  and
succeeding  these,  seven  spheres  of  Divine  contemplation.  But
each  sphere  has  many  states.  We  have  said  something  to  yon
of  the  reasons  why  the  voluntary  degraded  souls  sink  until
they  pass  the  boundary  beyond  which  restoration  becomes
hard.  The  perpetual  choosing  of  evil  and  refusing  of  good
breeds  necessarily  an  aversion  to  that  which  is  pure  and  good,
and  a  craving  for  that  which  is  debased.  Spirits  of  this
character  have  usually  been  incarned  in  bodies  where  the-
animal  passions  had  great  sway.  They  began  by  yielding  to
animal  desires,  and  ended  by  being  slaves  of  the  body.  Noble
aspirations,  godlike  longings,  desire  for  holiness  and  purity,  all
are  quenched,  and  in  place  of  spirit  the  body  reigns  supreme,
dictating  its  own  laws,  quenching  all  moral  and  intellectual
light,  and  surrounding  the  spirit  with  influences  and  associa-
tions of  impurity.  Such  a  spirit  is  in  perilous  case.  The
guardians  retire  affrighted  from  the  presence ;  they  cannot
breathe  the  atmosphere  which  surrounds  it ;  other  spirits  take
their  place ;  spirits  who  in  their  earth-life  had  been  victims  ta
kindred  vices.  They  live  over  again  their  earthly  sensual  lives,
and  find  their  gratification  in  encouraging  the  spirit  to  base
and  debasing  sin.  This  tendency  of  bodily  sin  to  reproduce
itself  is  one  of  the  most  fearful  and  terrible  of  the  conse-
quences of  conscious  gross  transgression  of  nature's  laws.
The  spirit  has  found  all  its  pleasure  in  bodily  gratifications,
and  lo !  when  the  body  is  dead,  the  spirit  still  hovers  round
the  scene  of  its  former  gratifications,  and  lives  over  again  the
bodily  life  in  the  vices  of  those  whom  it  lures  to  sin.  Round
the  gin-shops  of  your  cities,  dens  of  vice,  haunted  by  miser-
able besotted  wretches,  lost  to  self-respect  and  sense  of  shame,
hover  the  spirits  who  in  the  flesh  were  lovers  of  drunkenness
and  debauchery.  They  lived  the  drunkard's  life  in  the  body,
they  live  it  over  again  now,  and  gloat  with  fiendish  glee  over
the  downward  course  of  the  spirit  whom  they  are  leagued  to
ruin.  Could  you  but  see  how  in  spots  where  the  vicious  con-
gregate the  dark  spirits  throng,  you  would  know  something
of  the  mystery  of  evil.  It  is  the  influence  of  these  debased

t>S  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

spirits  which  tends  so  much  to  aggravate  the  difficulty  of
retracing  lost  steps,  which  makes  the  descent  of  Avernus  so
•easy,  the  return  so  toilsome.  The  slopes  of  Avernus,  are
dotted  with  spirits  hurrying  to  their  destruction,  sinking  with
mad  haste  to  ruin.  Each  is  the  centre  of  a  knot  of  malignant
spirits,  who  find  their  joy  in  wrecking  souls  and  dragging
them  down  to  their  own  miserable  level.

Such  are  they  who  gravitate  when  released  from  the  body
to  congenial  spheres  below  the  earth.  They  and  their  tempters
find  their  home  together  in  spheres  where  they  live  in  hope
of  gratifying  passions  and  lusts,  which  have  not  faded  with
the  loss  of  the  means  of  satisfying  their  cravings.

In  these  spheres  they  must  remain  subject  to  the  attempted
influence  of  missionary  spirits,  until  the  desire  for  progress  is
renewed.  When  the  desire  rises,  the  spirit  makes  its  first
step.  It  becomes  amenable  to  holy  and  ennobling  influence,
and  is  tended  by  those  pure  and  self -sacrificing  spirits  whose
mission  it  is  to  tend  such  souls.  You  have  among  you  spirits
bright  and  noble,  whose  mission  in  the  earth-life  is  among  the
dens  of  infamy  and  haunts  of  vice,  and  who  are  preparing  for
themselves  a  crown  of  glory,  whose  brightest  jewels  are  self-
sacrifice  and  love.  So  amongst  us  there  are  spirits  who  give
themselves  to  work  in  the  sphere  of  the  degraded  and  aban-
doned. By  their  efforts  many  spirits  rise,  and  when  rescued
from  degradation,  work  out  long  and  laborious  purification
in  the  probation  spheres,  where  they  are  removed  from  influ-
ences for  evil,  and  entrusted  to  the  care  of  the  pure  and
good.  So  desire  for  holiness  is  encouraged  and  the  spirit  is
purified.  Of  the  lower  spheres  we  know  little.  We  only  know
vaguely  that  there  are  separations  made  between  degrees  and
sorts  of  vice.  They  that  will  not  seek  for  anything  that
is  good,  that  wallow  in  impurity  and  vice,  sink  lower  and
lower,  until  they  lose  conscious  identity,  and  become  practi-
cally extinct,  so  far  as  personal  existence  is  concerned ;  so  at
least  we  believe.

Alas  !  alas !  sad  and  sorrowful  is  the  thought.  Mercifully,
such  cases  are  rare,  and  spring  only  from  deliberate  rejection
by  the  soul  of  all  that  is  good  and  ennobjing.  This  is  the  sin

THE   UNPARDONABLE  SIN.  29

unto  death  of  which  Jesus  told  His  followers ;  the  sin  against
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  of  which  you  are  told.  The  sin,  viz.,,
of  rejecting  the  influences  of  God's  holy  angel  ministers,  and
of  preferring  the  death  of  vice  and  impurity  to  the  life  of  holi-
ness and  purity  and  love.  It  is  the  sin  of  exalting  the  animal
to  the  extinction  of  the  spiritual ;  of  degrading  even  the  cor-
poreal ;  of  cultivating  sensual  earthly  lusts ;  of  depraving  even
the  lowest  tastes  ;  of  reducing  the  human  to  the  level  of  the
lowest  brute.  In  such  the  Divine  essence  is  quenched ;  the
baser  elements  are  fostered,  forced,  developed  to  undue  excess,
They  gain  absolute  swray,  they  quench  the  spirit,  and  ex-
tinguish all  desire  for  progress.  The  vice  perpetuates  itself,,
and  drags  the  wretch  who  has  yielded  himself  to  the  animal
enjoyments  further  and  further  from  the  path  of  progress,
until  even  the  animal  becomes  vitiated  and  diseased ;  the  un-
healthily stimulated  passions  prey  on  themselves;  and  the
voice  of  the  spirit  is  heard  no  more.  Down  must  the  soul
sink,  down,  and  yet  down  further  and  further  until  it  is  lost
in  fathomless  obscurity.

This  is  the  unpardonable  sin.  Unpardonable,  not  because
the  Supreme  will  not  pardon,  but  because  the  sinner  chooses
it  to  be  so.  Unpardonable,  because  pardon  is  impossible  where
sin  is  congenial,  and  penitence  unfelt.

Punishment  is  ever  the  immediate  consequence  of  sin ;  it  is
of  its  essence,  not  arbitrarily  meted  out,  but  the  inevitable
result  of  the  violation  of  law.  The  consequences  of  such
transgression  cannot  be  altogether  averted,  though  they  may
be  palliated  by  remorse,  the  effect  of  which  is  to  breed  a
loathing  for  sin  and  a  desire  for  good.  This  is  the  first  step,
the  retracing  of  false  steps,  the  undoing  of  error,  and  by  con-
sequence, the  creation  in  the  spirit  of  another  longing.  The
spiritual  atmosphere  is  changed,  and  into  it  good  angels  enter
readily  and  aid  the  striving  soul.  It  is  isolated  from  evil
agencies.  Remorse  and  sorrow  are  fostered.  The  spirit  be-
comes gentle  and  tender,  amenable  to  influences  of  good.  The-
hard,  cold,  repellant  tone  is  gone,  and  the  soul  progresses.  So
the  results  of  former  sin  are  purged  away,  and  the  length  and
bitterness  of  punishment  alleviated.  This  is  true  for  all  time..

430  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

It  was  on  this  principle  that  we  told  you  of  the  folly  which
dictates  your  dealings  with  the  transgressors  of  your  laws.
Were  we  to  deal  with  offenders  so,  there  would  be  no  restora-
tion, and  the  spheres  of  the  depraved  would  be  crowded  with
lost  and  ruined  souls.  But  God  is  wiser,  and  we  are  His
ministers.

SECTION   IV.

[The  above  are  selections  from  a  great  number  of  mes-
sages which  were  written  during  April  and  May,
1873.  By  this  time  the  writing  had  become  easy
and  fluent,  and  there  was,  apparently,  less  difficulty
in  finding  appropriate  words.

Already  several  facts  and  precise  records  of  the  life  of
some  spirits  had  been  given.  For  instance,  on
May  22nd,  I  was  writing  on  quite  another  subject
when  the  message  broke  off,  and  the  name  of
Thomas  Augustine  Arne  was  written.  It  was  said
that  he  had  been  brought  into  relation  with  me
through  his  connection  with  a  son  of  Dr.  Speer's,
a  pupil  of  mine,  who  displayed  great  musical
ability.

I  was  at  this  time  greatly  impressed  with  the  character
of  the  automatic  writing  and  with  the  information
given.  I  inquired  at  once  if  I  could  ascertain  from
Arne,  through  the  medium  of  the  spirit  DOCTOR,
who  was  writing,  any  precise  facts  as  to  his  life.
The  request  was  at  once  complied  with,  there
being  no  interval  between  my  question  and  the
reply.  The  date  of  his  birth  (1710) ;  his  school
(Eton)  ;  his  instructor  in  the  violin  (Festing).  His
works,  or  at  any  rate  some  eight  or  nine  of  them ;
the  fact  that  "  Rule  Britannia  "  was  contained  in
the  masque  of  Alfred  ;  and  a  number  of  other
minute  particulars  were  given  without  the  least
hesitation.  Profoundly  astonished  at  receiving
such  a  mass  of  information,  foreign  not  only  to  my
mind  in  its  details,  but  utterly  foreign  to  my  habit
of  thought — for  I  know  absolutely  nothing  about
music,  and  have  read  nothing  on  the  .subject — I
inquired  how  it  was  possible  to  give  information
so  minute.  It  was  said  to  be  extremely  difficult,
possible  only  when  an  extremely  passive  and  re-
ceptive state  in  the  medium  were  secured.  More-
over, spirits  were  said  to  have  access  to  sources  of

32  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

information  so  that  they  could  refresh  their  im-
perfect recollection.

I  asked  how  ?  By  reading  ;  under  certain  conditions,
and  with  special  end  in  view ;  or  by  inquiry,  as
man  does,  only  to  spirits  it  would  be  more  diffi-
cult, though  possible.

Could  my  friend  himself  so  acquire  information  ?  No ;
he  had  too  long  left  the  earth,  but  he  mentioned
the  names  of  two  spirits  accustomed  occasionally
to  write,  who  could  perform  this  feat.  I  asked
that  one  of  them  should  be  brought.  I  was  sitting
waiting  for  a  pupil  in  a  room,  not  my  own,  which
was  used  as  a  study,  and  the  walls  of  which  were
covered  with  bookshelves.

The  writing  ceased,  and  after  an  interval  of  some
minutes,  another  kind  of  writing  appeared.  I
inquired  if  the  newly  arrived  spirit  could  demon-
strate to  me  the  power  alleged.]

Can  you  read  ?

No,  friend,  I  cannot,  but  ZACHARY  GRAY  can,  and  RECTOR   I
am  not  able  to  materialise  myself,  or  to  command  the  elements.

Are  either  of  those  spirits  here  ?
I  will  bring  one  by  and  by.   I  will  send  ....   RECTOR  is  here.

/  am  told  you  can  read.     Is  that  so  ?     Can  you  read  a

book  ?

[Spirit  hand-writing  changed.]
Yes,  friend,  with  difficulty.

Will  you  write  /or  me  the  last  line  of  the  Jirst  book  of  the
jEneid  ?

Wait "Omnibus  errantem  terrw  et  fluctibus  cestas."

[This  was  right.]

Quite  so.  But  I  might  have  known  it.  Can  you  go  to  the
book-case,  take  the  last  book  but  one  on  the  second  shelf,
and  read  me  the  last  paragraph  on  the  ninety-fourth
2)ttye?  I  have  not  seen  it,  and  do  not  even  know  its
name.

"  I  will  curtly  prove,  by  a  short  historical  narrative  that
popery  is  a  novelty,  and  has  gradually  arisen  or  grown  up

READING  A  BOOK.  33

since  the  primitive  and  pure  time  of  Christianity,  not  only
since  the  apostolic  age,  but  even  since  the  lamentable  union  of
kirk  and  the  state  by  Constantine."

[The  book  on  examination  then  proved  to  be  a  queer
one  called  "Rogers  Antipopopriestian,  an  attempt
to  liberate  and  purify  Christianity  from  Popery,
Politikirkality,  and  Priestrule."  The  extract  given
above  was  accurate,  but  the  word  "narrative"  was
substituted  for  "account."]

How  came  I  to  pitch  on  so  appropriate  a  sentence?

I  know  not,  my  friend.  It  was  by  coincidence.  The  word
was  changed  by  error.  I  knew  it  when  it  was  done,  but  would
not  change.

Hoiu  do  you  read  ?    You  wrote  more  slowly,  and  by  fits  and
starts.

I  wrote  what  I  remembered,  and  then  I  went  for  more.  It
is  a  special  effort  to  read,  and  useful  only  as  a  test.  Your
friend  was  right  last  night :  we  can  read,  but  only  when  con-
ditions are  very  good.  We  will  read  once  again,  and  write,
and  then  impress  you  of  the  book: — "Pope  is  the  last  great
writer  of  that  school  of  poetry,  the  poetry  of  the  intellect,  or
rather  of  the  intellect  mingled  with  the  fancy."  That  is  truly
written.  Go  and  take  the  eleventh  book  on  the  same  shelf.
,[I  took  a  book  called  Poetry,  Romance,  and  Rhetoric.]  It
will  open  at  the  page  for  you.  Take  it  and  read,  and  recog-
nise our  power,  and  the  permission  which  the  great  and  good
•God  gives  us,  to  show  you  of  our  power  over  matter.  To
Him  be  glory.  Amen.

[The  book  opened  at  page  145,  and  there  was  the
quotation  perfectly  true.  I  had  not  seen  the  book
before ;  certainly  had  no  idea  of  its  contents.]

SECTION  Y.

[On  the  following  day  I  had  a  long  conversation  as  ix>
the  power  exercised  by  spirits  on  our  earth,  which
was  said  to  be  great  and  wide-spread.  I  asked  as
to  the  power  over  individuals,  and  was  pointed  to
cases  where  it  was  said  absolute  obsession  was
established.  It  was  said  that  this  power  over  men
was  being  so  wide-spread,  it  were  wise  to  place  it
in  the  reach  only  of  spirits  of  integrity  and  wis-
dom, and  to  give  conditions  for  its  exercise  by
them,  and  so  to  drive  away  obsessing  and  unde-
veloped spirits,  or  to  materially  reduce  their  sphere
of  action.  It  was  insisted  that  spirit-action  was
universal,  and  that  it  was  a  question  for  man,  to  a
great  extent,  whether  that  action  was  beneficent
or  not.  I  asked  what  character  was  most  suitable
for  such  influence.]

There  are  varieties  of  mediumship  as  you  know,  and  there
are  divers  modes  in  which  spirit  influence  is  exercised.  Some
are  selected  for  the  mere  physical  peculiarities  which  make
them  the  ready  vehicles  of  spirit  power.  Their  bodily  organi-
sation is  adapted  for  the  purpose  of  manifesting  external
spiritual  influence  in  its  simplest  form.  They  are  not  influ-
enced mentally,  and  information  given  by  the  spirits  who  use
them  would  be  of  a  trifling  or  even  foolish  nature,  and  un-
trustworthy. They  are  used  as  the  means  of  demonstrating
spirit  power,  the  external  invisible  agency  capable  of  producing
objective  phenomenal  results.

These  are  known  to  you  as  the  instruments  through  whom
the  elementary  phenomena  are  manifested.  Their  work  is
not  less  significant  than  that  which  is  wrought  through  others.
They  are  concerned  with  the  foundation  of  belief.

And  some  are  chosen  because  of  their  loving  gentle  nature.
They  are  not  the  channels  of  physical  phenomenal  action,  in

.DIVERSITY   OF   SPIRITUAL   GIFTS.  35

many  cases,  not  even  of  conscious  communication  with  the
spirit  world ;  but  they  are  the  recipients  of  spirit  guidance,
and  their  pure  and  gentle  souls  are  cultivated  and  improved
by  angel  superintendence.  By  degrees  they  are  prepared  to
be  the  conscious  recipients  of  communications  from  the
spheres ;  or  they  are  permitted  with  clairvoyant  eye  to  catch
stray  glimpses  of  their  future  home.  A  loving  spirit  friend
is  attracted  to  them,  and  they  are  impressionally  taught  and
guided  day  by  day.  These  are  the  loving  souls  who  are  sur-
rounded by  an  atmosphere  of  peacefulness  and  purity  of  love.
They  live  as  bright  examples  in  the  world,  and  pass  in  ripe
maturity  to  the  spheres  of  rest  and  peace  for  which  their
earth  life  has  fitted  them.

Others,  again,  are  intellectually  trained  and  prepared  to
give  to  man  extended  knowledge  and  wider  views  of  truth.
Advanced  spirits  influence  the  thoughts,  suggest  ideas,  furnish
means  of  acquiring  knowledge,  and  of  communicating  it  to
mankind.  The  ways  by  which  spirits  so  influence  men  are
manifold.  They  have  means  that  you  know  not  of  by  which
events  are  so  arranged  as  to  work  out  the  end  they  have  in
view.  The  most  difficult  task  we  have  is  to  select  a  medium
through  whom  the  messages  of  the  higher  and  more  advanced
spirits  can  be  made  known.  It  is  necessary  that  the  mind
chosen  should  be  of  a  receptive  character,  for  we  cannot  put
into  a  spirit  more  information  than  it  can  receive.  Moreover,
it  must  be  free  from  foolish  worldly  prejudices.  It  must  be  a
mind  that  has  unlearned  its  youthful  errors,  and  has  proved
itself  receptive  of  truth,  even  though  that  truth  be  unpopular.

More  still.  It  must  be  free  from  dogmatism.  It  must  not
be  rooted  and  grounded  in  earth  notions.  It  must  be  free
from  the  dogmatism  of  theologies  and  sectarianism  and  rigid
creed.  It  must  not  be  bound  down  by  the  fallacies  of  half-
knowledge  which  is  ignorant  of  its  own  ignorance.  It  must
be  a  free  and  inquiring  soul.  It  must  be  a  soul  that  loves
progressive  knowledge,  and  that  has  the  perception  of  truth
afar  off.  One  that  yearns  for  fuller  light,  for  richer  know-
ledge than  it  has  yet  received ;  one  that  knows  no  hope  of
cessation  in  drinking  in  the  truth.

36  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Again,  our  work  must  not  be  marred  by  the  self-assertion
of  a  positive  antagonistic  mind,  nor  by  the  proud  obtruding
of  self  and  selfish  ends  and  aims.  With  such  we  can  do  very
little,  and  that  little  must  all  tend  to  the  gradual  obliteration
of  selfishness  and  dogmatism.  We  desire  a  capable,  earnest,
truth-seeking,  unselfish,  loving  spirit  for  our  work.  Said  we
not  well  that  such  was  difficult  to  find  among  men  ?  Difficult
indeed,  well-nigh  impossible.  We  select,  then,  such  a  soul  as
we  can  best  find,  and  prepared  by  constant  training  for  its
appointed  work.  We  inspire  into  it  a  spirit  of  love  and
tolerance  for  opinions  that  do  not  find  favour  with  its  own
mental  bias.  This  raises  it  above  dogmatic  prejudice,  and
paves  the  way  for  the  discovery  that  truth  is  manifold,  and
not  the  property  of  any  individual.  Store  of  knowledge  is
given  as  the  soul  can  receive  it ;  and,  the  foundation  of  know-
ledge once  laid,  the  superstructure  may  be  safely  raised.  The
opinions  and  tone  of  thought  are  moulded  by  slow  degrees,  so
that  they  harmonise  with  the  end  we  have  in  view.

Many  and  many  fail  here,  and  we  abandon  our  work  with
them,  finding  that  not  in  this  world  of  yours  can  they  receive
the  truth ;  that  old  earth-born  prejudices  are  firm,  dogmatic
beliefs  ineradicable,  and  so  that  they  must  be  left  to  time,  and
are  to  us  of  no  avail.

Moreover,  a  perfect  truthfulness  and  absence  of  fearfulness
and  anxiety  are  the  steady  growth  of  our  teaching.  We  lead
the  soul  to  rest  in  calm  trust  on  God  and  His  spirit  teachers.
We  infuse  a  spirit  of  patient  waiting  for  that  which  we  are  per-
mitted to  do  and  teach.  This  spirit  is  the  very  reverse  of  that
fretful,  restless  querulousness  which  characterises  many  souls.

Here,  too,  many  fall  away.  They  are  fearful  and  anxious,
and  beset  with  doubt.  The  old  theology  tells  them  of  a  God,
who  watches  for  their  fall ;  and  of  a  devil,  who  lays  perpetual
traps  for  them.  They  wonder  at  the  novelty  of  our  teaching ;
their  friends  are  ready  to  point  to  so-called  prophecies  which
tell  of  anti-Christ.  The  old  foundations  are  shaken,  and  the
new  are  not  yet  laid ;  and  so  the  adversaries  creep  in  and
tempt  the  wavering  soul,  and  it  fears  and  falls  away,  and  is
useless  to  us.

SELFISHNESS  AND   SELF-ABNEGATION.  87

Yet  more,  we  must  eradicate  selfishness  in  all  its  many
forms.  There  must  be  no  obtruding  of  self,  or  we  can  do
nothing.  There  is  nothing  so  utterly  fatal  to  spirit  influence
as  self-seeking,  self -pleasing,  boastfulness,  arrogance,  or  pride.
The  intelligence  must  be  subordinated,  or  we  cannot  work
upon  it.  If  it  be  dogmatic,  we  cannot  use  it.  If  it  be
arrogant  and  selfish,  we  cannot  come  near  it.  Self-abneo-ation

o  *  o

has  been  the  virtue  which  has  graced  the  wise  and  holy  men
of  all  time.  The  seers  who  bore  of  old  the  flag  on  which  was
inscribed  for  their  generation  the  message  of  progressive  truth
were  men  who  thought  little  of  themselves,  and  much  of  their
work.  They  who  spoke  to  the  Jews,  whose  messages  you
have  in  your  sacred  records,  were  men  of  self-denying  purity
and  singleness  of  life.  Jesus,  when  He  lived  amongst  men,
was  a  grand  and  magnificent  instance  of  the  highest  self-
abnegation  and  earnestness  of  purpose.  He  lived  with  you  a
life  of  pure  self-denial  and  practical  earnest  work,  and  He
died  a  death  of  self-sacrifice  for  truth.  In  Him  you  have  the
purest  picture  that  history  records  of  man's  possible.  They
who  since  have  purged  the  world  from  error,  and  have  shed
on  it  the  beams  of  truth,  have  been  one  and  all  men  of  self-
denial  and  earnest  devotion  to  a  work  which  they  knew  to  be
that  for  which  they  were  set  apart.  Socrates  and  Plato,  John
and  Paul,  the  pioneers  of  truth,  the  heralds  of  progress,  all
have  been  unselfish  souls — souls  who  knew  naught  of  self-
seeking,  of  proud  aggrandizement,  of  boastful  arrogance.  To
them  earnestness  and  singleness  of  purpose,  devotion  to  their
appointed  work,  forgetfulness  of  self  and  its  interests  were
given  in  a  high  degree.  Without  that  they  could  not  have
effected  what  they  did.  Selfishness  would  have  eaten  out  the
heart  of  their  success.  Humility,  sincerity,  and  earnestness
bore  them  on.

This  is  the  character  we  seek.  Loving  and  earnest,  self-
denying  and  receptive  of  truth;  with  single  eye  to  God's
work,  and  with  forgetfulness  of  earthly  aims.  Rare  it  is,  rare
as  it  is  beautiful.  Seek,  friend,  the  mind  of  the  philosopher,
calm,  reliant,  truthful,  and  earnest !  Seek  the  spirit  of  the
philanthropist,  loving,  tolerant,  ready  to  help,  quick  to  give

SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

the  needed  aid.  Add  the  self-abnegation  of  the  servant  of
God  who  does  his  work  and  seeks  for  no  reward.  For  such  a
character  work,  high,  holy,  noble,  is  possible.  Such  we  guard
and  watch  witli  jealous  care.  On  such  the  angels  of  the
Father  smile,  and  tend  and  protect  them  from  injury.

Bat  you  have  described  a  perfect  character.

Ah  no  !  You  have  now  no  conception  of  what  the  perfect
spirit  is.  You  cannot  know;  you  cannot  even  picture  it.
Nor  can  you  know  how  the  faithful  soul  drinks  in  the  spirit-
teaching  and  grows  liker  and  liker  to  its  teacher.  You  see
not  as  we  see  the  gradual  growth  of  the  seed  which  it  has  cost
us  so  much  labour  to  plant  and  tend.  You  only  know  that
the  soul  grows  in  kindly  graces,  and  becomes  more  lovely  and
more  loveable.  The  character  we  have  faintly  pictured  in
such  terms  as  are  intelligible  to  you  is  not  perfect,  nor  aught
but  a  vague  and  distant  resemblance  of  that  which  it  shall
become.  With  you  is  no  perfectness.  Hereafter  is  progres-
sion and  constant  development  and  growth.  What  you  call
perfect,  is  blotted  and  blurred  with  faults  to  spirit  vision.

Yea,  surely.    But  very  few  such  are  to  be  found.

Few,  few :  and  none  save  in  the  germ.  There  is  the
capability  on  which  we  work  with  thankfulness.  We  seek
not  for  perfection  :  we  do  but  desire  sincerit}7  and  earnest
desire  for  improvement :  a  mind  free  and  receptive  ;  a  spirit
pure  and  good.  Wait  in  patience.  Impatience  is  a  dire  fault.
Avoid  over-carefulness  and  anxiety  as  to  causes  which  are
beyond  your  control.  Leave  that  to  us.  In  patience  and
seclusion  ponder  what  we  say.

I  suppose  a  secluded  life   is  favourable  for  your  in-
fluence, rather  than  the  busy  whirl  of  town.

[Here  the  writing  suddenly  changed  from  the  minute
and  very  clear  writing  of  Doctor  to  a  most  peculiar
archaic  writing,  almost  indecipherable,  and  signed
Prudens.]

The  busy  world  is  ever  averse  from  the  things  of  spirit
life.  Men  become  absorbed  in  the  material,  that  which  they

THE   LIFE   OF   CONTEMPLATION.  39

can  see,  and  grasp,  and  hoard  up,  and  they  forget  that  there  is
•a  future  and  spirit-life.  They  become  so  earthly  that  they
-are  impervious  to  our  influence ;  so  material  that  we  cannot
come  near  them  ;  so  full  of  earthly  interests  that  there  is  no
room  for  that  which  shall  endure  when  they  have  passed
.away.  More  than  this,  the  constant  pre-occupation  leaves  no
time  for  contemplation,  and  the  spirit  is  wasted  for  lack  of
sustenance.  The  spiritual  state  is  weak  :  the  body  is  worn
and  weary  with  weight  of  work  and  anxious  care,  and  the
spirit  is  well-nigh  inaccessible.  The  whole  air,  moreover,  is
heavy  with  conflicting  passions,  with  heart-burnings  and
jealousies,  and  contentions  and  all  that  is  inimical  to  us.
Round  the  busy  city  with  its  myriad  haunts  of  vice,  its  detest-
able allurements,  its  votaries  of  folly  and  sin,  hover  the  legions
of  the  opposing  spirits  who  watch  for  opportunity  to  lure  the
wavering  to  their  ruin.  They  urge  on  many  to  their  grief
hereafter,  and  cause  us  many  sorrows  and  much  anxious  care.

The  life  of  contemplation  is  that  which  most  suits  com-
munion with  us.  It  is  not  indeed  to  supersede  the  life  of
action,  but  may  be  in  some  sort  combined  with  it.  It  is  most
readily  practised  where  distracting  cares  come  not  in,  and
where  excessive  toil  weakens  not  the  bodily  powers.  But  the
<lesire  must  be  inherent  in  the  soul ;  and  where  that  is,  neither
distracting  cares  nor  worldly  allurements  avail  to  prevent  the
recognition  of  a  spirit  world,  and  of  communion  with  it.  The
heart  must  be  prepared.  But  it  is  easier  for  us  to  make  our
presence  felt  when  the  surroundings  are  pure  and  peaceful.

SECTION     VI.

[At  this  time  I  met  Mr.  Home.  It  chanced  to  be  the
Derby  Day,  and  it  was  said  through  him  that  con-
ditions were  so  interfered  with  that  spirits  could  do
nothing.  On  the  next  day  (May  29)  I  had  some
conversation  on  the  subject,  in  the  course  of  which
it  was  written,] —

Any  such  occasion  disturbs  the  moral  conditions,  and  renders
it  hard  for  us  to  reach  you.  The  spirits  who  are  antagonistic
to  us  are  massed  together  in  great  force  whenever  any  occa-
sion is  offered  for  them  to  operate  successfully  on  men  who  are
gathered  together  for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  their  bodily
passions.  Yesterday  there  were  vast  masses  whose  passion  of
cupidity  was  excited  to  an  enormous  degree.  They  were  the
point  of  attack  from  similar  spirits.  Others  there  were  whose
bodies  were  wildly  excited  by  intoxicating  drinks ;  others
who  were  feverish  with  expectation  of  coming  gains ;  others
again  plunged  into  depths  of  despair  by  loss  of  all,  the  ready
prey,  these  last,  of  the  suggestions  of  tempting  spirits ;  and
even  when  these  baser  passions  were  not  actively  excited,  the
moral  balance  was  upset ;  that  calmness  and  equability  which
should  regulate  the  temper,  and  which  are  as  a  shield  against
the  foe,  were  absent,  and  so  a  chance  of  favourable  assault
was  given.  For,  short  of  absolute  evil,  much  ground  for
assault  is  given  by  an  ill-regulated,  disordered  mind,  by  minds
unhinged  and  ill-balanced.  Avoid  all  such.  They  are  fre-
quently the  ready  agents  of  spirit  influence,  but  of  undeveloped
and  unwelcome  guides.  Beware  of  immoderate,  unreasoning,
excited  frames  of  mind.

For  these  reasons  the  occasion  to  which  you  refer  is  one
that  would  make  largest  demands  on  the  efforts  of  the  agents

NATIONAL   HOLIDAYS.  41

of  good,  lest   the   undeveloped,  massed   and  disciplined   for
assault,  succeed  and  draw  down  souls.

But  what  you  say  would  apply  to  all  national  holidays  ?

Not  necessarily  so.     So  long  as  a  holiday  is  associated  with
giving  a  loose  rein  to  passion,  with  the  immoderate  use  of  fiery,
intoxicating  poison,  with  sensual  gratifications,  with  the  body
and  not  with  the  spirit,  it  must  needs  be  so.     The  body  so
situated  places  the  spirit  at  the  mercy  of  the  adversaries.     But
the  holiday  that  is  associated  with  rest  of  body  and  refresh-
ment of  spirit  is  far  from  being  such.   When  the  bodily  powers
which  have  been  drained  by  overtaxing  work  are  recuperated
by  genial  and  moderate  rest ;  when  the  mind,  vexed  and  ha-
rassed by  the  worries  and  anxieties  of  daily  toil,  is  refreshed
by  moderate  amusement,  and  by  being  relaxed  and  plunged
for  awhile  in  oblivion  of  anxious  care,  the  while  it  is  braced
and  stimulated  by  pleasant  change ;  when  this  is  so,  a  gentle
calm  pervades  the  spirit,  and  renders  it  peculiarly  open  to  the
beneficent  influences  of  the  heavenly  guardians.     Thus  the
power  of  angel  ministry  is  strengthened,  and  the  plans  of  the
most  powerful  adversaries  are  set  at  nought.     You  must  pro-
gress far  in  knowledge  of  spirit  guidance  and  of  the  duties
you  owe  to  yourselves  before  your  national  holidays  become
aught  but  opportunities  for  the  degradation  of  your  people.
The  holiday  that  is  marked  by  riot  and  debauchery,  by  sensu-
ality and  gambling,  and  evil,  angry  passion  and  despair,  this
is  no  holy  day  to  us,  but  one  to  be  dreaded  and  watched  and
prayed  over.     God  help  and  guard  the  blind  souls  in  their
insensate  folly !

[I  find  that  our  seance  was  disturbed  at  this  time  by
some  erratic  manifestations,  and  an  attempt  to
obtain  photographs  of  some  of  the  communicating
spirits  resulted  in  failure.  Although  the  spirit
whose  figure  was  on  the  plate  claimed  the  name  of
Rector,  it  was  said  by  my  friend  that  it  was  a  spirit
with  whom  they  had  no  connection,  a  deceptive
spirit,  unknown  to  any  of  them.  I  sat  down  to
obtain  further  information,  but  got  nothing  that
•was  intelligible,  and  was  obliged  to  cease.

42  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

On  the  next  day,  when  I  had  regained  my  usual
passive  state,  the  writing  came  unasked.  Re-
specting the  difficulties  that  had  arisen  in  mani-
festing, I  enquired  if  we  could  help  in  any  way.]

Hector  could  not  communicate  with  you  on  account  of  your
disturbed  condition,  consequent  on  the  sitting  which  had
severely  taxed  you.  The  information  given  was  quite  unre-
liable. Your  mind  was  violently  positive.  You  had  assumed
the  picture  to  be  that  of  Rector,  and  he  was  not  sufficiently
acquainted  with  this  kind  of  communication  to  know  that
your  unhinged  and  feverish  state,  coupled  with  a  positive  and
unimpressionable  state  of  mind,  made  it  impossible  to  convey
any  true  information  to  you.

When  you  feel  such  conditions  present,  seek  no  communica-
tions on  any  subject.  They  will  be  unreliable  or  imperfect
tinder  such  circumstances,  and  in  many  cases  hurtful.

[I  was  much  annoyed,  and  complained  that  my  scanty
stock  of  faith  would  be  drained  by  many  such
occurrences.  It  had  never  occurred  before.  It
was  replied] —

You  have  never  placed  yourself  in  communication  save  when
I  (Doctor)  or  some  one  who  can  warn  and  guard  you  has  been
present.  You  have  done  so  when  the  spirits  who  control  the
physical  elements  in  the  circle  have  alone  been  present,  and
the  results  were  violent  and  unmanageable.  You  were  warned
then:  this  is  another  warning.  Your  positive  mind  Rector
could  not  influence :  and  your  fevered  state  made  it  impossible
to  control  you.

[Since  then  I  have  been  scrupulously  careful  never  to
attempt  automatic  writing  when  I  am  physically
ill  or  in  pain  :  mentally  worried  or  anxious,  or  near
any  person  so  suffering,  or  in  the  midst  of  any
influences  that  might  be  disturbing.  To  this  pre-
caution I  attribute  much  of  the  regular  and  equa-
ble character  of  my  communications.  As  a  rule,
they  are  curiously  fluent ;  the  books  in  which  they
are  written  show  no  erasure  or  alteration :  and  the
tone  of  the  messages  is  very  level  and  sustained.]

CONDITIONS  OF  COMMUNICATION.  43

Keep  yourself  as  passive  and  quiet  as  you  can.  When  over-
iired  with  work,  or  fretted  with  care,  or  exhausted,  do  not
.attempt  to  seek  communion  with  us.  Do  not  add  to  the  circle
.any  new  elements  which  do  but  disturb  and  perplex  condi-
tions. Suffer  us  to  perfect  our  experiments  before  you  inter-
fere to  spoil  them.  We  will  advise  you  of  any  change  we
wish  in  the  composition  of  our  circle.  Do  not  alter  the  room
in  which  you  meet :  and  strive  in  so  far  as  may  be,  to  meet
with  a  passive  mind  and  a  healthy  body.

Yes,  working  all  day  with  body  and  brain  does  not  im-
prove,  conditions,  I  suppose.  But  Sunday  is  generally
worse.

It  is  not  a  favourable  day  for  us,  because,  when  the  strain
is  removed  from  mind  and  body,  the  reaction  leaves  the  spirit
•disinclined  for  action  and  more  apt  for  repose.  We  are  fear-
ful of  cultivating  new  manifestations  with  you ;  we  fear
-experimenting  with  physical  manifestations  lest  they  do  harm.
Moreover,  they  are  not  our  object,  only  subsidiary  to  it.  They
are  but  the  signs  which  witness  to  our  mission  ;  and  we  do  not
desire  that  you  rest  in  them.  There  is  also  a  special  reason
why  we  are  unable  to  manifest  on  Sunday  for  you.  You  do
not  know  the  difficulty  which  changes  in  conditions  make  to
us.  You  have  heard  before  that  sitting  down  immediately
•after  a  meal  is  not  good.  The  bodily  conditions  which  we
seek  for  are  passivity  and  quickness  of  receptivity :  but  not
the  passivity  which  comes  from  sluggishness  and  torpor.  No
worse  condition  can  be  than  that  state  of  somnolence  and
torpor  which  follows  on  a  plentiful  meal  during  which  stimu-
lating drink  has  been  taken.  Such  stimulus  may  aid  the
physical  manifestations  in  some  cases,  but  it  is  a  bar  to  us.  It
opens  the  door  for  the  advent  of  the  more  material  spirits,
and  stops  our  power.  We  have  frequently  found  our  plans
frustrated  by  such  means.  You  would  do  well  to  think  of
this  and  guard  yourselves  against  excess  in  any  way  when
you  are  about  to  seek  communion  with  us.  The  body  should
not  be  heated  nor  torpid  with  food :  nor  the  mind  drowsy  and
inactive.  Both  conditions  prevent  us  from  operating  freely.

44  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

They  react  on  us,  and  sensibly  mar  our  power.  One  such
member  in  a  circle,  even  as  one  ailing  or  suffering,  will  create
conditions  which  we  cannot  overcome.

But  a  weak  body  and  temper  disturbed  by  want  of  food

is  bad  surely  ?

We  do  but  counsel  moderation.  The  body  should  be  strength-
ened with  food,  but  you  should  not  sit  down  until  the  food  is
assimilated.  You  require  moderate  stimulant  to  fit  you  for
your  daily  work,  but  that  should  be  guardedly  taken,  and  you
should  see  that  you  do  not  enter  into  communion  with  us  save
under  such  conditions  as  we  have  stated.  When  mind  or  body
is  predisposed  to  sleep  or  indisposed  to  sustained  attention,  or
sick  or  suffering,  it  is  better  not  to  sit  save  under  direction.
Equally  when  the  body  is  replete  with  food,  the  grosser
spirits  may  be  expected  to  be  in  the  ascendant,  and  we  are
unable  to  operate.  Even  the  physical  phenomena  are  then  of
a  ruder  and  more  violent  character,  and  not  of  the  delicate
and  beautiful  description,  which  they  would  assume  under
more  favourable  circumstances.  We  do  not  desire  extremes.
A  body  wasted  by  fasting  is  not  in  any  way  profitable :  but
neither  is  a  body  which  is  clogged  and  loaded  by  over-indul-
gence. Temperance  and  moderation  are  what  help  us.  If
you  desire,  friend,  to  facilitate  our  work,  and  to  attain  the-
best  results,  you  should  bring  to  the  sitting  a  body  healthy
and  sound,  senses  clear  and  watchful,  and  a  mind  passive  and
receptive.  Then  we  can  do  for  you  more  than  you  think.
With  a  circle  harmonious  and  properly  constituted  the  mani-
festations would  be  more  delicate,  and  the  teaching  given  more
refined  and  trustworthy.  Even  the  light  of  which  you  spoke*
under  such  conditions  is  pale,  clear,  and  smokeless:  under
unfavourable  conditions  would  be  dull,  dirty,  and  smoky  in.
appearance.

*  At  this  time  we  had  a  number  of  large  phosphorescent  lights  at  our  ordi-
nary sittings :  clear  and  of  a  pale  yellow  under  good  conditions ;  red,  and
smoky  when  anything  was  wrong.  These  lights  were  similar  to  the  lamp  borne
by  the  spirit  John  King,  and  attained  a  great  size  under  favourable  conditions.
A  full  description  will  be  found  in  my  forthcoming  volume  of  Personal  Re-
searches in  the  objective  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.

THE   MARRIAGE   BOND.  45

It  having  been  said  that  a  friend  and  his  wife  who  had
frequently  manifested  were  now  removed  to  other
spheres  of  work,  I  asked  whether  the  marriage  ties
were  perpetuated.

That  depends  entirely  on  similarity  of  taste  and  equality  of
•development.  In  the  case  of  this  being  attained,  the  spirits
•can  progress  side  by  side.  In  our  state  we  know  only  of  com-
munity of  taste  and  of  association  between  those  who  are  on
the  same  plane,  and  can  be  developed  by  mutual  help.  All
things  with  us  are  subordinated  in  the  education  of  the  spirit
which  is  perpetually  being  developed.  There  can  be  no  com-
munity of  interest  save  between  congenial  souls.  Consequently
no  tie  can  be  perpetuated  which  is  not  a  help  to  progress.  The
uncongenial  bonds  which  have  embittered  the  soul's  earth  life,
and  marred  its  upward  progress  cease  with  the  bodily  exist-
ence. The  union  of  soul  with  soul  which  in  the  body  has  been
-a  source  of  support  and  assistance  is  developed  and  increased
after  the  spirit  is  free.  The  loving  bonds  which  encircle  such
souls  are  the  greatest  incentive  to  mutual  development,  and
so  the  relations  are  perpetuated,  not  because  they  have  once
•existed,  but  because  in  the  eternal  fitness  of  things  they  min-
ister to  the  spirit's  education.  In  such  cases  the  marriage  tie
is  perpetuated,  but  only  in  such  sort  as  the  bond  of  fellowship
between  friends  endures,  and  is  strengthened  by  mutual  help
and  progress.  All  souls  that  are  mutually  helpful  remain  in
loving  intercourse  so  long  as  it  is  profitable  for  them.  When
the  period  arrives  at  which  it  is  more  profitable  for  them  to
separate  they  go  their  way  without  sorrow,  for  they  can  still
commune  and  share  each  other's  interests.  The  reverse  of  such
law  would  only  perpetuate  misery,  and  eternally  bar  progress.
Nothing  is  permitted  to  do  this.

No.  But  some,  I  can  conceive,  may  not  be  exactly  on  the
same  mental  or  moral  plane,  and  yet  be  full  of  mutual
love.

Spirits  filled  with  mutual  love  can  never  be  really  separated.
You  are  hampered  in  understanding  our  state  by  consider-
ations of  time  and  space.  You  cannot  understand  how  souls

46  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

can  be  far  apart,  as  you  count  space,  and  yet  be,  as  you  would
say,  intimately  united.  We  know  no  time,  no  space.  We
could  not  obtain  really  close  union  with  any  spirit  unless  the
intelligence  be  absolutely  on  the  same  mental  and  progressive
plane.  Indeed,  any  such  union  would  be  impossible  for  us.
Soul  may  be  linked  with  soul  in  bonds  of  affection,  without
any  intimate  connection  such  as  we  mean  by  being  on  the
same  plane  of  development.  Love  unites  spirits  at  whatever
distance.  You  see  that  in  your  low  state  of  existence.  The
brother  loves  the  brother,  though  vast  expanse  of  ocean  sepa-
rates their  homes,  the  long  years  have  rolled  away  since  the  eye
looked  on  the  form,  and  the  ear  listened  to  the  words  of  the
absent  one.  Their  pursuits  may  be  widely  different :  they  may
have  no  mutual  idea,  yet  mutual  love  exists.  The  wife  loves
the  degraded  besotted  ruffian  who  mutilates  her  body,  and
strives  to  crush  her  spirit.

The  hour  of  dissolution  will  free  her  from  slavery  and  pain.
She  will  soar  while  he  will  sink ;  but  the  bond  of  love  will
not  be  snapped,  though  the  spirits  may  no  longer  consort
together.  Even  here  space  is  annihilated;  with  us  it  does
not  exist.  And  so  you  may  dimly  understand  that  with  us
union  means  identity  of  development,  community  of  interest,
mutual  and  affectionate  progression..  We  know  no  such  indis-
soluble ties  as  exist  with  you.

Then  the  Bible  words  are  true,  "  They  neither  marry  nor
are  given  in  marriage,  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God."

It  was  truly  said.  We  have  before  told  you  of  the  law  of
Progress,  and  of  the  law  of  Association.  They  are  invariable.
Much  that  now  seems  good  to  you,  ye  will  throw  aside  with
the  body.  Your  state  now  colours  your  views.  Much  we  are
obliged  to  clothe  in  allegory,  and  to  elucidate  by  borrowing
your  phraseology.  So  that  you  must  not  insist  too  strongly  on
literal  meanings  of  words  used  by  us  to  describe  what  exists
only  with  us,  which  finds  no  counterpart  in  your  world,  and
transcends  your  present  knowledge,  and  which  therefore  can
only  be  approximately  described  in  language  borrowed  from
earth.  This  is  a  necessary  caution.

DISCREPANCIES   IN   COMMUNICATIONS.  47

Yes.  That  would  account  for  discrepancies  in  spirit
communications  in  some  cases.

Such  differences  arise  in  many  cases  from  want  of  know-
ledge on  the  part  of  the  spirits  themselves ;  from  their  inability
to  get  their  ideas  through  the  channel  of  communication :  from
imperfect  conditions  at  the  time  of  the  communication  and
from  other  causes.  Doubtless,  one  cause  is,  that  curious  and
foolish  questions  bring  foolish  answers  from  spirits  on  the
plane  of  the  questioner.

Bat  would  not  a  high  spirit  endeavour  to  raise  the  ques-
tioner instead  of  "  answering  a  fool  according  to  his
folly"?

Yes,  were  it  possible ;  but  the  foolish  frame  of  mind  pre-
cludes too  frequently  such  raising.  Like  attracts  like,  and
the  silly  curious  enquirers  who  ask  from  no  desire  for  infor-
mation, but  only  to  gratify  a  whim  or  an  idle  curiosity,  or  to
entangle  us  in  our  talk,  is  answered,  if  at  all,  by  a  spirit  like
to  himself.  Such  is  not  the  frame  of  mind  in  which  to  seek
communion  with  us.  A  reverent,  earnest  mind  gains  for  itself
that  information  and  instruction  which  it  is  capable  of  receiv-
ing. The  self-conceited,  flippant,  ignorant,  and  curious  receive
only  what  they  seek,  and  are  sent  away  without  reply,  or  with
such  as  suits  their  query.  Flee  such.  They  are  empty  and
foolish.

SECTION   VII.

[Some    communications    respecting  the   Neo-Platonic
philosophy  followed.    A  spirit  with  whose  features
I  was  familiar,  had  been  photographed,  and  his
dress  was  something  I  was  unused  to.     I  enquired
and  was  told  that  the  conditions  under  which  the
partial  materialisation  necessary  for  photography
are  possible,  differ  from  those  in  which  the  spirit
presents  himself  to  clairvoyant  vision.
The  account  of  the  special  phase  of  the  Neo-Platonic
teaching  was  most  minute  and  entirely  new  to  me.
Souffism,  the  ecstatic  meditation  that  endeavours
by  transport  to  throw  off  all  that  is  not  God,  and
to  attain  truth  by  transfusion  into  the  Divine,  was
expounded  at  length,  and  illustrated  in  the  person
of  one  of  its  professors.     I  thus  learned  much  that
I  have  since  been  able  to  trace  in  operation,  and
especially  in  the  teachings  of  the  spirit  in  question,
albeit  toned  down  and  modified  by  experience.
After  this  there  was  a  short  cessation ;  and  another
evidence  of  imposture  at  a  circle  which  I  attended
caused  me  much   questioning.      I  was  urged  to
refrain  from  attending  any  circles  at  all  so  long  as
our  own  was  held ;  and  it  was  explained  that  it
was  of  the  greatest  importance  to  avoid  coming
into  contact  with  mediums,  or  strong  magnetic  in-
fluence of  any  kind.     I  should  act  as  a  disturbing
element  in  other  circles,  and  bring  away  disturbing
influences  to  our  own.

Some  remarkable  extracts  from  old  poems,  chiefly  of
Lydgate's,  were  now  written  by  a  spirit  who
seemed  to  delight  in  such  work,  who  did  nothing
else,  and  who  used  a  very  marked  handwriting.
Afterwards  at  a  stance  held,  June  13th,  1873,  many
questions  were  put  on  points  of  theology,  and  a
long  trance-address  was  delivered,  which  was  par-
tially taken  down  at  the  time,  but  many  points
were  necessarily  omitted,  or  imperfectly  recorded.

WHAT    IS   AIMED   AT  BY  SPIRITS.  49

On  the  following  day,  without  questioning,  it  was
written  by  the  same  communicating  spirit  who  had
spoken  on  the  previous  evening] —

There  was  much  in  what  was  said  last  night  that  was
imperfectly  said,  and  hurriedly,  and  that  was  not  accurately
preserved  in  the  record  which  was  taken  at  the  time.  It  is  of
the  last  importance  that,  on  a  subject  so  momentous,  we  should
speak  with  care,  and  that  you  should  understand  exactly  what
we  wish  to  convey.  We  therefore  wish  to  state  more  clearly
what  we  said  imperfectly  to  the  circle.  The  conditions  of
control  do  not  always  enable  us  to  be  so  precise  in  speech  as
we  are  studious  to  be  when  communicating  thus  with  you.
Perfect  isolation  commands  conditions  suitable  for  precision
and  accuracy.

We  were  dealing  with  the  Divine  mission  which  we  have
in  charge.  Of  the  many  difficulties  which  beset  our  path  this
is  one  of  the  most  considerable,  that  those  who  are  most  con-
genial to  our  purpose,  and  whose  co-operation  we  most  desire,
are  usually  so  hampered  by  preconceived  theological  notions,
or  are  so  fearful  of  what  seems  to  contradict  some  things
which  they  have  learned,  that  we  are  unable  to  influence
them,  and  grieve  sorrowfully  to  find  that  which  is  derived
from  God  charged  on  the  adversaries,  and  boldly  attributed  to
an  all-powerful  and  malignant  Devil.

Of  all  classes  of  our  opponents  these  are  to  us  the  most  sad.
The  pseudo-scientific  man,  who  will  look  at  nothing  save
through  his  own  medium,  and  on  his  own  terms — who  will
deal  with  us  only  so  that  he  may  be  allowed  to  prescribe
means  of  demonstrating  us  to  be  deluders,  liars,  figments  of
&  disordered  brain — he  is  of  little  moment  to  us.  His  blinded
eye  cannot  see,  and  his  cloudy  intelligence,  befogged  and
•cramped  with  life-long  prejudice,  can  be  of  little  service  to  us.
He  can  at  best  penetrate  but  little  into  the  mysteries  of  com-
munion with  the  spheres,  and  the  foundation  of  knowledge
that  he  could  acquire,  though  useful  and  valuable  even,  would
be  of  little  service  to  us  in  our  special  work.  We  deal  with
other  issues  than  those  which  would  principally  engage  the
attention  of  those  few  men  of  science  who  deign  to  notice  the

50  SPI1UT-1  BACKINGS.

phenomenal  aspect  of  our  work.  The  mind  long  trained  in
observation  of  the  phenomena  of  physics,  is  best  devoted  to
the  elucidation  of  those  facts  which  come  within  its  province.
Our  sphere  is  different,  connected  rather  with  the  influence  of
spirit  upon  spirit,  and  the  knowledge  of  spirit-destiny  that
we  can  impart.

And  the  ignorant  and  uncultured  mind  which  knows  not  of
what  we  would  tell,  and  cannot  know  until  a  long  course  of
preliminary  training  has  prepared  the  way — this  class  of  mind,
though  hereafter  it  may  attain  to  a  plane  of  knowledge  on
which  we  can  work,  is  of  no  service  now.

To  the  proud,  the  arrogant,  the  wise  in  their  own  conceits,
the  children  of  routine  and  respectability,  we  can  say  very
little.  The  more  physical  evidence  is  necessary  to  reach
them.  The  story  which  we  are  charged  with  would  be  but
an  idle  tale  to  them.

It  is  to  the  receptive  souls  who  know  of  God  and  heaven,
and  love  and  charity,  and  who  desire  to  know  of  the  hereafter
and  of  the  haven  to  which  they  tend,  that  we  turn  with  ear-
nest longing.  But,  alas!  too  often  we  find  the  natural  religious
instincts,  which  are  God-implanted  and  spirit-nurtured,  choked
or  distorted  by  the  cramping  influence  of  a  human  theology,
the  imperceptible  growth  of  long  ages  of  ignorance  and  folly.
They  are  armed  at  all  points  against  the  truth.  Do  we  speak
of  a  revelation  of  the  Great  Father? — they  already  have  a
revelation  which  they  have  decided  to  be  complete.  Do  we
tell  them  of  its  inconsistencies,  and  point  out  that  it  nowhere
pretends  to  the  finality  and  infallibility  which  they  would
assign  to  it? — they  reply  to  us  with  stray  words  from
the  formularies  of  a  Church,  or  by  an  opinion  borrowed  and
adapted  from  some  person  whom  they  have  chosen  to  consider
infallibly  inspired.  They  apply  to  us  a  test  drawn  from  some
one  of  the  sacred  records  which  was  given  at  a  special  time
for  a  special  purpose,  and  which  they  imagine  to  be  of  uni-
versal application.

Do  we  point  to  our  credentials,  and  to  the  miracles  so-called,
which  attest  the  reality  of  our  mission,  even  as  they  attested
the  mission  of  those  whom  we  influenced  of  old  ? — they  tell

WHAT  TKUE   RELIGION   IS.  51

us  that  the  age  of  such  miracles  is  past,  and  that  only  the
inspired  of  the  Holy  Ghost  long  centuries  ago  were  permitted
to  work  such  wonders  as  evidence  of  Divine  teaching.  They
tell  us  that  the  Devil,  whom  they  have  imaged  for  themselves,,
has  power  to  counterfeit  God's  work,  and  they  consign  us  and
our  mission  to  darkness  and  outer  antagonism  to  God  and
goodness.  They  would  be  willing  to  help  us ;  for,  indeed,  we
say  that  which  is  probable,  but  that  we  are  of  the  Devil.  We
must  be,  because  in  the  Bible  it  is  said  that  false  and  deceiv-
ing spirits  will  come ;  and  so  we  must  be  the  deceivers.  It
must  be  so,  for  did  not  a  holy  and  elevated  Teacher  prophesy
of  those  who  should  deny  the  Son  of  God  ?  And  do  not  we
practically  remove  Him  and  His  work  from  the  place  in  which
God  has  placed  it  and  Him  ?  It  must  be  so ;  for  do  we  not
place  human  reason  above  faith  ?  Do  we  not  preach  and
teach  a  seductive  Gospel  of  good  works,  and  give  credit  to  the
doer  of  them  ?  And  is  not  all  this  the  work  of  the  arch-fiend
transformed  into  an  angel  of  light,  and  striving  to  win  souls,
to  ruin  ?

It  is  such  arguments,  honestly  put  forward  by  those  whose
respect  we  fain  would  win,  that  are  to  us  a  bitter  sorrow.
They  are  in  many  cases  loving,  earnest  souls,  who  need  but  the
progressive  tendency  to  make  them  bright  lights  in  the  world's-
gloom.  To  them  we  fain  would  give  our  message ;  but  before
we  can  build  on  the  sure  foundation  which  they  already  have
of  knowledge  of  God  and  duty,  we  must  perforce  clear  away
the  rubbish  which  renders  further  elevation  unsafe.

Religion,  to  be  worthy  the  name,  must  have  its  two  sides
— the  one  pointing  to  God,  the  other  to  man.  What  has  the
received  faith,  which  is  called  orthodox  by  its  professors,  to
say  on  these  points  ;  and  wherein  do  we  differ  in  our  message ;
and  how  far  is  such  difference  on  our  part  in  accord  with
reason  ?  For,  at  the  very  outset,  we  claim,  as  the  only  court
to  which  we  can  as  yet  appeal,  the  Reason  which  is  implanted
in  man.  We  claim  it ;  for  it  was  by  Reason  that  the  sages
settled  the  list  of  the  writings  which  they  decided  to  be  the
exclusive  and  final  revelation  of  God.  To  Reason  they
appealed  for  their  decision.  To  Reason  we  appeal  too  Or

52  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

do  our  friends  claim  that  Divine  guidance  prescribed  for  them
what  should  be  for  all  time  the  body  of  revealed  truth  ?  We,
too,  are  the  messengers  of  the  Most  High,  no  less  surely  sent
than  the  spirits  who  guided  the  Hebrew  seers,  and  who
ministered  to  those  whose  fiat  settled  the  Divine  word.

We  are  as  they :  our  message  as  their  message,  only  more
advanced ;  our  God  their  God,  only  more  clearly  revealed,  less
human,  more  Divine.  Whether  the  appeal  be  to  Divine  in-
spiration or  not,  human  Reason  (guided  doubtless  by  spirit
agency,  but  still  Reason)  sways  the  final  decision.  And  those
who  reject  this  appeal  are  out  of  their  own  mouths  convicted
of  folly.  Blind  faith  can  be  no  substitute  for  reasoning  trust.
For  the  faith  is  faith  that  either  has  grounds  for  its  trust  or
not.  In  the  former  case  the  ground  is  reasonable ;  in  which
case  Reason  again  is  the  ultimate  judge ;  or  it  is  not,  in  which
case  it  would  commend  itself  to  none.  But  if  the  faith  rest
on  no  ground  at  all,  we  need  not  further  labour  to  show  it
baseless  and  untrustworthy.

To  Reason,  then,  we  turn.  How  far  are  we  proved  reason-
ably to  be  of  the  Devil  ?  How  far  is  our  creed  an  evil  one  ?
In  what  respect  are  we  chargeable  with  diabolic  tendency  ?
These  are  points  on  which  we  will  instruct  you.

SECTION    VIIL

[After  a  long  trance  address  on  the  subjects  dealt  with
in  the  last  communication,  the  writing  was  resumed
on  the  following  day,  by  the  same  spirit,  Imperator
using  the  ordinary  amanuensis,  who  was  known  as
Rector.  After  this  was  written,  a  stance  was  held
in  which  some  discussion  took  place  on  what  had
been  said.  Something  further  was  added,  and
especially  an  attempt  was  made  to  refute  the
charges  that  I  brought  against  the  teaching  given.
From  the  standpoint  that  I  then  occupied  it  seemed
to  me  that  such  teachings  might  be  called  by
opponents  atheistic  or  diabolic,  I,  at  anyrate,  should
call  them  latitudinarian,  and  I  maintained  at  some
length,  views  more  nearly  approaching  to  orthodox
teaching.

In  order  to  follow  the  argument  which  I  was  now
entering  upon,  it  is  necessary  for  the  reader  to
remember  that  I  was  trained  in  strict  accordance
with  Protestant  Church  principles :  that  I  had
spent  much  time  in  reading  the  theologies  of  the
Greek  and  Roman  Churches,  and  that  I  had
accepted,  as  most  nearly  according  with  the  views
at  wrhich  I  had  arrived,  the  tenets  of  that  portion
of  the  Church  of  England  called  Anglican.  I  had
seen  cause  to  revise  some  of  my  strong  beliefs,  but
substantially  I  was  what  would  be  called  a  sound
High  Churchman.

From  this  time  commences  that  state,  to  which  I
shall  have  often  to  refer,  of  great  spiritual  exalta-
tion, during  which  I  was  profoundly  conscious  of
the  presence  and  influence  of  one  commanding  In-
telligence, and  of  an  action  on  my  mind  which
eventuated  in  a  development  of  thought  amounting
to  nothing  short  of  spiritual  regeneration.]

You  have  objected  to  our  teachings  that  they  are  not  con-
sistent with  the  received  creed  of  orthodoxy.  We  have  more
to  say  on  this  subject.

54  SPI1UT-TEACHINGS.

Religion,  the  spirit's  healthful  life,  has  two  aspects — the  one
pointing  to  God,  the  other  to  man.  What  says  the  spirit-
•creed  of  God  ?

In  place  of  an  angry  jealous  tyrant  it  reveals  a  loving
Father  who  is  not  loving  in  name  alone,  but  in  very  deed  and
truth  ;  into  whose  dealings  nought  but  love  can  enter ;  who  is
just  and  good  and  full  of  affection  to  the  lowest  of  His
creatures.

It  does  not  recognise  any  need  of  propitiation  towards  this
God.  It  rejects  as  false  any  notion  of  this  Divine  Being
vindictively  punishing  a  transgressor,  or  requiring  a  vicarious
sacrifice  for  sin.  Still  less  does  it  teach  that  this  omnipotent
Being  is  enthroned  in  a  heaven  where  His  pleasure  consists
in  the  homage  of  the  elect,  and  in  the  view  of  the  tortures  of
the  lost,  who  are  for  ever  excluded  in  quenchless  misery  from
light  and  hope.

No  such  anthropomorphism  finds  any  place  in  our  creed.
•God,  as  we  know  Him  in  the  operation  of  His  laws  is  perfect,
pure,  loving,  and  holy,  incapable  of  cruelty,  tyranny,  and  other
such  human  vices:  viewing  error  with  sorrow  as  knowing  that
sin  contains  its  own  sting,  but  eager  to  alleviate  the  smart  by
any  means  consistent  with  the  immutable  moral  laws  to  which
all  alike  are  subject.  God,  the  centre  of  light  and  love  !  God,
operating  in  strict  accordance  with  those  laws  which  are  a
necessity  of  orderly  existence  !  God,  the  grand  object  of  our
adoration,  never  of  our  dread  !

We  know  of  Him  as  ye  cannot  know,  as  you  cannot  even
picture  in  imagination  :  yet  none  has  seen  Him  :  nor  are  we
content  with  the  metaphysical  sophistries  with  which  prying
curiosity  and  over-subtle  speculation  have  obscured  the
primary  conception  of  God  amongst  men.  We  pry  not.  The
first  conception  with  you  even,  is  grander,  nobler,  more  sub-
lime. We  wait  for  higher  knowledge.  You  must  wait  too.

On  the  relations  between  God  and  His  creatures  we  speak
at  large.  Yet  here,  too,  we  clear  off  many  of  the  minute
points  of  human  invention  which  have  been  from  age  to  age
accumulated  round  and  over  the  central  truths.  We  know
nothing  of  election  of  a  favoured  few.  The  elect  are  they  who

THE   SPIRIT-CKEED.  55

work  out  for  themselves  a  salvation  according  to  the  laws
which  regulate  their  being.

We  know  nothing  of  the  potency  of  blind  faith  or  credulity.
We  know,  indeed,  the  value  of  a  trustful  receptive  spirit,  free
from  the  littleness  of  perpetual  suspicion.  Such  is  God-like,
and  draws  down  angel  guidance.  But  we  abjure,  and  denounce
that  most  destructive  doctrine  that  faith,  belief,  assent  to
dogmatic  statements,  have  power  to  erase  the  traces  of  trans-
gression ;  that  an  earth  life-time  of  vice  and  sloth  and  sin
can  be  wiped  away,  and  the  spirit  stand  purified  by  a  blind
acceptance  of  a  belief,  of  an  idea,  of  a  fancy,  of  a  creed.  Such
teaching  has  debased  more  souls  than  anything  else  to  which
we  can  point.

Nor  do  we  teach  that  there  is  a  special  and  potent  efficacy
in  any  one  belief  to  the  exclusion  of  others.  We  do  not  be-
lieve that  truth  is  the  perquisite  of  any  creed.  In  all  there  is
a  germ  of  truth ;  in  all  an  accretion  of  error.  We  know,  as
you  know  not,  the  circumstances  which  decide  to  what  special
form  of  faith  a  mortal  shall  give  in  his  adherence,  and  we
value  it  accordingly.  We  know  exalted  intelligences  who
stand  high  in  spirit  life,  who  were  enabled  to  progress  in  spite
of  the  creed  which  they  professed  on  earth.  We  value  only
the  earnest  seeking  after  truth  which  may  distinguish  the
professors  of  creeds,  the  most  widely  dissimilar.  We  care  not
for  the  minute  discussions  which  men  delight  in.  We  shrink
from  those  curious  pryings  into  mysteries  transcending  know-
ledge which  characterise  your  theologies.  The  theology  of
the  spirit  is  simple  and  confined  to  knowledge.  We  value  at
nothing  mere  speculation.  We  care  not  for  sectarianism,  save
that  we  know  it  to  be  a  mischievous  provoker  of  rancour,  and
spite,  and  malice,  and  ill-will.  *

We  deal  with  religion  as  it  affects  us  and  you  in  simpler
sort.  Man — an  immortal  spirit,  so  we  believe, — placed  in
earth-life  as  a  school  of  training,  has  simple  duties  to  perform,
and  in  performing  them  is  prepared  for  more  advanced  and
progressive  work.  He  is  governed  by  immutable  laws,  which,
if  he  transgresses  them,  work  for  him  misery  and  loss ;  which,
Jil so,  if  respected,  secure  for  him  advancement  and  satisfaction.

56  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

He  is  the  recipient  of  guidance  from  spirits  who  have  trod
the  path  before  him,  and  who  are  commissioned  to  guide  him
if  he  will  avail  himself  of  their  guidance.  He  has  within  him
a  standard  of  right  which  will  direct  him  to  the  truth,  if  he
will  allow  himself  to  be  guided  to  keep  it  and  protect  it  from
injury.  If  he  refuse  these  helps,  he  falls  into  transgression
and  deterioration.  He  is  thrown  back  and  finds  misery  in
place  of  joy.  His  sins  punish  themselves.  Of  his  duties  he
knows  by  the  instinct  of  his  spirit  as  well  as  by  the  teaching
of  his  guardians.  The  performance  of  those  duties  brings
progress  and  happiness.  The  spirit  grows  and  gains  newer
and  fuller  views  of  that  which  makes  for  perfect,  satisfying
ioy  and  peace.

This  mortal  existence  is  but  a  fragment  of  life.  Its  deeds
and  their  results  remain  when  the  body  is  dead.  The  ramifi-
cations of  wilful  sin  have  to  be  followed  out,  and  its  results
remedied  in  sorrow  and  shame.

The  consequences  of  deeds  of  good  are  similarly  permanent,
and  precede  the  pure  soul  and  draw  around  it  influences  which
welcome  and  aid  it  in  the  spheres.

Life,  we  teach  you,  is  one  and  indivisible.  One  in  its  pro-
gressive development :  and  one  in  the  effect  on  all  alike  of  the
eternal  and  immutable  laws  by  which  it  is  regulated.  None
are  excused  as  favourites ;  none  are  punished  mercilessly  for
error  which  they  were  unable  to  avoid.  Eternal  justice  is  the
correlative  of  eternal  love.  Mercy  is  no  divine  attribute.  It
is  needless ;  for  mercy  involves  remission  of  a  penalty  inflicted,
and  no  such  remission  can  be  made  save  where  the  results
have  been  purged  away.  Pity  is  Godlike.  Mercy  is  human.

We  know  nought  of  that  sensational  piety  which  is  wholly
wrapped  up  in  contemplation  to  neglect  of  duty.  We  know
that  God  is  not  so  glorified.  We  preach  the  religion  of  work,
of  prayer,  of  adoration.  We  tell  you  of  your  duty  to  God,  to
your  brother,  and  to  yourself — soul  and  body  alike.  We  leave
to  foolish  men,  groping  blindly  in  the  dark,  their  curious
quibbles  about  theological  figments.  We  deal  with  practical
life ;  and  our  creed  may  be  briefly  written : —

THE   SPIRIT-CREED.

Duty  to  God
Duty  to  neighbour.

*Duty  to  self.

Honour  and   love  your  Father,  God.
(Worship)      ...         ...

Help  your  brother  onward  in  the  path

of  progress.  (Brotherly  love)
Tend  and  guard  your  own  body.  (Bodily

culture)
Cultivate   every  means  of  extending

knowledge.  (Mental  progress)
Seek  for  fuller  views  of  progressive

truth.  (Spiritual  growth)     ...
Do  ever  the  right  and  good  in  accord-
ance with  your  knowledge.  (Integ-
rity)

Cultivate  communion  with  the  spirit-
land  by  prayer  and  frequent  inter-
course. (Spiritual  nurture)  ...
Within  these  rules  are  roughly  indicated  most  that  concerns-
you  here.  Yield  no  obedience  to  any  sectarian  dogmas.  Give
no  blind  adherence  to  any  teaching  that  is  not  commended  by
reason.  Put  no  unquestioning  faith  in  communications  which
were  made  at  a  special  time,  and  which  are  of  private  applica-
tion. You  will  learn  hereafter  that  the  revelation  of  God  i»
progressive,  bounded  by  no  time,  confined  to  no  people.  It
has  never  ceased.  God  reveals  Himself  as  truly  now  as  of  old
He  was  revealed  on  Sinai.  God  does  not  shut  off  the  progres-
sive revealing  of  Himself  in  measure  as  man  can  bear  it

You  will  learn  also  that  all  revelation  is  made  through  a
human  channel :  and  consequently  cannot  but  be  tinctured  in
some  measure  with  human  error.  No  revelation  is  of  plenary
inspiration.  None  can  demand  credence  on  any  other  than
rational  grounds.  Therefore  to  say  of  a  statement  that  it  i»
not  in  accord  with  what  was  given  through  a  human  medium
at  any  stated  time,  is  no  derogation  necessarily  from  the  truth
of  that  statement.  Both  may  in  their  kind  be  true ;  yet  each
of  different  application.  Set  up  no  human  standard  of  judg-
ment other  than  that  of  right  reason.  Weigh  what  is  said.
If  it  be  commended  by  reason,  receive  it ;  if  not,  reject  it.  If
what  is  put  before  you  be  prematurely  said,  and  you  are  unable

,58  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

to  accept  it ;  then  in  the  name  of  God  put  it  aside,  and  cling
to  aught  that  satisfies  your  soul,  and  helps  its  onward  progress.
The  time  will  come  when  what  we  lay  before  you  of  divine
truth  will  be  valued  amongst  men.  We  are  content  to  wait,
and  our  prayers  shall  join  with  yours  to  the  supreme  and  all-
wise  God  that  He  will  guide  the  seekers  after  truth,  wherever
they  may  be,  to  higher  and  more  progressive  knowledge,  to
richer  and  fuller  insight  into  truth.  May  His  blessing  rest
on  you  1

SECTION    IX.

[I  objected  to  this  statement,  which  did  not  "by  any
means  commend  itself  to  me  in  my  then  state  of
opinion,  that  it  was  incompatible  with  the  received
teaching  of  Orthodox  churches,  and  that,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  it  traversed  some  cardinal  dogmas
of  the  Christian  faith.  I  suggested  that  the  mes-
sage might  have  been  adulterated  in  passage :  and
that  much  was  omitted  that  I  regarded  as  essen-
tial. If  it  were  pretended  that  such  a  code  was
complete  as  a  rule  of  life  I  was  prepared  to  argue
against  it.  It  was  said  in  reply] —

That  which  has  been  told  to  you  in  its  outline  is  so  far
correct ;  but  it  does  not  pretend  to  be  a  perfect  delineation  of
truth.  It  is  but  a  faint  outline,  blurred  and  blotted  in  many
ways,  but  substantially  truthful.  Doubtless  it  contravenes
-much  which  you  have  been  taught  to  believe  as  necessary  to
salvation.  No  doubt  it  seems  to  the  unprepared  spirit  to  be
new,  and  destructive  of  older  forms  of  faith.  But  it  is  not  so.
In  its  broad  outlines  the  spirit-creed  would  be  accepted  by  all
who  have  thought  at  all  on  theological  subjects  without
trammel  of  preconceived  ideas,  and  without  fear  of  the  con-
sequences of  seeking  into  the  truth.  It  would  be  commendable
to  all  who  are  not  hampered  by  old  prejudices.  We  said  that
we  must  clear  away  much  rubbish  ;  that  the  work  of  destruc-
iion  must  precede  the  work  of  construction ;  that  the  old  and
unserviceable  must  first  give  place ;  that,  in  short,  we  must
•clear  before  we  can  build.

Yes ;  but  the  rubbish  which  you  seem  to  me  to  be  clearing
away  is  precisely  what  Christians  have  agreed  in  all
ages  to  consider  cardinal  doctrines  of  the  faith.

No,  friend ;  not  quite  so.  You  exaggerate  there.  If  you
will  read  the  records  which  so  imperfectly  record  the  earth
Jife  of  Jesus,  you  will  not  find  that  He  claimed  for  Himself

60  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

any  such  position  as  the  Christian  Church  has  since  forced
upon  Him.  He  was  more  such  as  we  preach  Him  than
such  as  the  Church  called  by  his  name  has  made  Him.

/  cannot  think  so.    And  the  Atonement :  What  do  you
make  of  that  ?

It  is  in  some  sense  true.  We  do  not  deny  it ;  we  do  but
fight  against  that  crude  human  view  which  renders  God  con-
temptible, and  makes  Him  a  cruel  tyrant  who  needed  to  be
propitiated  by  His  Son's  death.  We  do  not  detract  from
Jesus'  work  when  we  disavow  the  false  and  dishonouring
fables  which  have  gathered  round  His  name,  and  have  ob-
scured the  simple  grandeur  of  His  life,  the  moral  purpose
of  His  sacrifice.  We  shall  have  somewhat  to  say  to  you  here-
after on  the  growth  of  dogma  until  an  assumption  becomes-
established  as  de  fide,  and  its  rejection  or  denial  passes  for
mortal  sin.  Were  God  to  leave  man  to  his  own  ends  it  would
be  held  to  be  a  mortal  heresy,  deserving  of  eternal  burnings,
to  deny  that  the  Supreme  has  delegated  to  a  man  one  of  His
own  inalienable  prerogatives.  One  great  section  of  the
Christian  Church  would  claim  infallible  knowledge  for  its
head,  and  persecute  in  life,  and  condemn  in  death,  even  to-
everlasting  shame  and  torment,  those  who  receive  it  not.
This  is  a  dogma  of  late  growth  in  your  very  midst ;  but  so  all'
dogmas  have  grown  up.  So  it  has  become  difficult,  nay  im-
possible, for  unaided  human  reason  to  distinguish  God's  truth
from  man's  glosses  upon  it.  So  all  who  have  had  the  boldness-
to  clear  away  the  rubbish  have  been  held  accursed.  It  has
been  the  story  of  all  time.  And  we  are  not  justly  chargeable
with  wrong-doing  if  from  our  superior  stand-point  of  know-
ledge we  point  out  to  you  human  figments  of  error,  and  endea-
vour to  sweep  them  away.

Yes ;  that  may  be.  But  the  belief  in  the  Divinity  of
Christ,  and  in  His  Atonement  can  scarcely  be  called
dogmas  which  are  of  human  growth.  You  always  pre-
fix to  your  name  the  sign  of  the  Cross  [+  IMPERATOR.]
/  presume,  therefore,  that  in  your  lifetime  on  earth
you  must  have  held  these  dogmas.  +  RECTOR, — an-
other communicating  spirit,  who  also  uses  the  sign

THE   CROSS.  01

of  the  Cross,  must  almost  if  not  altogether  have  died
for  them.  Here  then  seems  to  me  to  be  a  contradiction.
Suppose  the  dogmas  to  be  unnecessary  or  mistalcen
truths — suppose  them  even  to  be  false — what  am  I  to
conclude?  Have  you  changed  your  opinions?  Or
were  you  a  Christian  while  you  lived  on  earth?  or
ivere  you  not  ?  If  not,  why  the  Cross  ?  If  you  were,
why  the  change  of  sentiment?  The  whole  question
intimately  concerns  your  identity.  I  cannot  see  how
your  teaching  coincides  with  your  belief  when  you  lived
on  earth.  It  is  pure  and  beautiful,  but  surely  it  is
not  Christian.  Nor  is  it  the  teaching  which  one  who
uses  the  sign  of  the  Cross  tuould  reasonably  be  expected
to  promulgate.  So  it  seems  to  me.  If  I  speak  in
ignorance,  enlighten  rny  ignorance.  If  I  seem  to  be  too
curious,  I  must  be  excused,  seeing  that  I  have  no  means
of  judging  you  but  by  your  words  and  deeds.  So  far
as  I  am  able  to  judge,  your  words  and  deeds  are  alike
noble  and  elevated,  pure  and  rational,  but  not  Christian.
I  only  desire  such  reasonable  ground  for  forming  an
opinion  as  may  satisfy  my  present  doubts  and  diffi-
culties.

It  shall  be  given  in  due  course.     Cease  now.

[The  writing,  though  I  earnestly  desired  and  strove  to
obtain  it,  did  not  come  until  June  20th.  The
previous  message  was  written  on  the  16th.]  (tf"

I  salute  you,  good  friend.  We  would  now  give  you  more
information,  touching  points  which  have  perplexed  and  dis-
tressed you.  You  would  know  how  far  the  sign  of  the  Cross
may  legitimately  be  associated  with  our  teaching.  We  will
show  you  of  this.

Friend,  the  sign  which  is  emblematic  of  the  life  and  work
of  Jesus  the  Christ  is  one  that  cannot  fairly  be  prefixed  to
much  that  now  passes  current  for  His  teaching.  The  tendency
of  all  classes  of  religionists  has  ever  been  to  make  much  of
the  letter  and  to  neglect  the  spirit:  to  dwell  at  large  on
expressions  drawn  from  individual  writers,  and  to  neglect  the

62  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

general  drift  of  teaching.  Men  have  gone  with  preconceived
notions  to  search  for  the  truth,  and  have  found  that  which
they  expected.  Single  words  and  expressions  have  been
drawn  out  of  their  context  by  those  who  have  professed  to
comment  on  the  texts  of  your  sacred  books  until  they  have
been  made  to  bear  a  meaning  which  their  writers  never  in-
tended. Others  have  gone  to  the  authors  solely  to  find  words
to  prop  up  a  theory  without  even  the  poor  pretence  of  seeking
after  the  truth ;  and  they,  too,  have  been  able  to  dig  out
something  which  has  served  their  purpose.  And  so,  by  slow
degrees,  the  edifice  has  grown,  built  up  laboriously  by  men
who  delight  to  dwell  on  peculiarities  of  language  and  expres-
sion, and  by  men  who,  having  evolved  for  themselves  an  idear
strive  only  that  it  may  be  confirmed.  Neither  class  has  any
idea  beyond  the  text  of  the  sacred  records  which  lies  before
him.

We  said  before,  that  much  of  what  we  should  have  to  say
to  you  would  turn  on  what  you  understand  by  Divine  inspira-
tion.

Those  who  are  known  to  you  as  the  orthodox  defenders  of
the  Christian  creed  tell  you  that  a  mysterious  person — one  of
the  three  individual  persons  who  compose  the  Undivided
Trinity — took  possession  of  the  minds  of  certain  men,  and
through  their  organisms  gave  to  your  world  a  body  of  truth,
which  was  whole,  complete,  and  of  eternal  force :  a  system  of
Divine  philosophy  from  which  nothing  might  be  removed
under  the  direst  ban;  to  which  nothing  would  ever  be  added ;
and  which  was  the  immediate  word,  the  very  utterance,  the
mind  and  will  of  God,  containing  within  it  the  whole  body  of
truth,  actual  and  potential,  contained  in  divinely  worded  phrases
and  expressions.  Not  only  are  the  sentiments  of  David  and
Paul,  Moses  and  John,  consonant  with  the  will  of  the  Supreme,
but  they  are  the  very  thoughts  of  Deity.  Not  only  are  the
words  divinely  approved,  but  they  are  the  very  diction  of  the
Supreme.  In  short,  the  Bible  is  the  very  Word  of  God,  both
in  matter  and  form :  every  word  of  it  Divine,  and  fit  to  be
studied  and  expounded  as  such,  even  in  that  version  of  it
which  is  translated  into  your  language  by  men  who,  to  com-

INSPIRATION.  63-

plete  the  maryel,  are  again  supposed  to  be  in  their  turn  the
recipients  of  Divine  truth  and  guidance  in  their  worV-  of
translation.

Hence,  you  will  see,  that  doctrines  the  most  tremendous,,
and  conclusions  the  most  far-reaching  may  be  founded  upon
mere  words  and  expressions,  for  is  not  every  word  and  turn
of  phrase  the  revelation  of  God  divinely  preserved  from
admixture  of  human  error  ?  These  are  they  who  have
grounded  a  number  of  dogmas  on  phrases  picked  out  at  their -
pleasure,  neglecting  and  passing  over  all  that  pleases  them,
not.  To  such  the  Bible  is  the  direct  utterance  of  the  Supreme.

Those  who  have  abandoned  this  view  have  entered  upon  a.
process  of  destructive  handling  of  the  Bible,  the  only  termina-
tion of  which  is  the  view  which  we  shall  put  for  your  acceptance.
They  revere  the  sacred  records  which  compose  your  Bible  as-
being  the  records  of  God's  truth  revealed  to  man  from  age  to-
age,  even  as  it  is  still  being  revealed.     They  study  the  records
as  showing  man's  progressive  grasp  of  knowledge  of  God  and
of  the  destiny  of  the  spirit.     They  watch  the  gradual  unfold-
ing of  this  revelation  from  times  of  ignorance  and  brutal
barbarism  when  He  was  known  as  the  friend  of  Abraham,
who  ate  and  conversed  at  the  tent  door,  or  the  Judge  who-
governed  His  people,  or  the  King  who  fought  at  the  head  of"
the  armies  of  Israel,  or  the  Tyrant  revealed  through  the  medium
of  some  seers,  down  to  the  time  when  He  became  known  in
His  truer  character  of  tenderness,  and  love,  and  fatherly  kind-
ness and  compassion.     In  all  this  they  see  growth,  and  they
will  believe,  if  they  pursue  their  investigations  to  the  end,.
that  such  growth  has  never  ceased  ;   that  such  progressive
revelation  has  never  been  closed  ;  and  that  man's  knowledge
of  his  God  is  far  from  complete,  though  his  capacity  for  receiv-
ing that  knowledge  is  ever  enlarging  his  means  of  satisfying
the  craving  that  is  within  him.     And  so  the  seeker  after  truth
will  be  prepared  to  receive  our  teaching  on  this  head  at  least.
To  such  we  address  ourselves.     To  those  who  fondly  fancy
that  they  possess  a  perfect  knowledge  we  say  nothing.     Before
we  can  deal  with  them  they  must  learn  to  know  their  ignor-
ance of  all  that  concerns  God  and  Revelation.     Anything  that

€4  SPIKIT-TEACHINGS.

tee  could  say  would  glide  off  the  impenetrable  defence  of
ignorance,  self-conceit,  and  dogmatism  in  which  they  are  en-
•cased.  They  must  be  left  to  unlearn  hereafter  in  pain  and
sorrow  that  which  has  so  retarded  their  spiritual  growth,  and
will  be  so  dire  a  barrier  to  future  progress.  If  you  have
rightly  understood  what  we  have  previously  put  before  you,
we  may  now  proceed  to  add  further  some  words  on  the  nature
of  revelation,  and  the  character  of  inspiration.

We  say  then,  to  you,  that  the  sacred  books  which  make  up
your  Bible,  together  with  many  others  which  are  not  included
in  it,  are  the  records  of  that  gradual  growth  in  knowledge  of
Himself  which  the  great  and  good  God  has  given  to  man.
The  principle  which  pervades  all  these  utterances  is  one  and
the  same  :  identical  with  that  which  governs  our  intercourse
-with  you.  So  much  of  truth  is  given  as  man  can  grasp  ;  no
more  under  any  circumstances,  but  just  so  much  as  he  can
grasp,  so  much  as  suffices  for  his  present  craving.  That  truth
is  revealed  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  man,  and  is  always
more  or  less  mixed  with  the  thoughts  and  opinions  of  the
medium.  Nay,  the  communicating  spirits  are  perforce  obliged
to  use  the  material  which  is  found  in  the  medium's  mind,
moulding  and  fashioning  it  for  their  purpose :  erasing  fallacies,
inspiring  new  views  of  truth,  but  working  on  the  material
which  is  already  gathered.  The  purity  of  the  spirit  message
depends  much  on  the  passivity  of  the  medium,  and  on  the  con-
ditions under  which  the  message  is  communicated.  Hence,  in
your  Bible  there  are  traces  here  and  there  of  the  individu-
ality of  the  medium;  of  errors  caused  by  imperfect  control;  of
the  colour  of  his  opinions ;  as  well  as  of  special  peculiarities
addressed  to  the  special  needs  of  the  people  to  whom  the
message  was  first  given,  and  for  whose  case  it  was  primarily
adapted.

You  may  see  for  yourself  numerous  cases  of  this.  If
Isaiah  spoke  to  the  people  the  words  of  the  message  with
which  he  was  charged,  he  impressed  upon  that  message  the
individuality  of  his  own  mind,  and  adapted  it  to  the  peculiar
needs  of  the  people  to  whom  he  spoke.  He  told,  indeed,  of
the  one  Supreme  God.  but  he  told  of  Him  in  strains  of  poesy

METHODS   OF   INSPIRATION.  G5

and  ecstatic  imagery  far  different  from  the  metaphorical  and
characteristic  imagery  of  Ezekiel.  Daniel  had  his  visions  of
glory.  Jeremiah,  his  burdens  of  the  Lord  who  spoke
through  him.  Hosea,  his  mystic  symbolism  :  each  in  his  indi-
vidual fashion  told  of  the  same  Jehovah,  as  he  knew  Him,  but
each  told  his  message  in  his  own  style,  as  it  had  been  revealed
to  him.  Similarly,  in  later  days,  the  characteristic  nature  of
individual  communications  was  preserved.  If  Paul  and  Peter
found  occasion  to  speak  of  the  same  truth,  they  almost  neces-
sarily viewed  it  from  different  sides.  The  truth  was  not  less
true  because  two  men  of  varying  minds  viewed  it  from  differ-
ent points,  and  dealt  with  it  in  his  own  way.  The  individu-
ality of  the  medium  is  palpable  in  the  manner  if  not  in  the
matter  of  the  communication.  The  inspiration  is  Divine,  but
the  medium  is  human.

Hence  it  is  that  man  may  find  in  the  Bible  the  reflex  of  his
own  mind,  whatever  the  tone  of  that  mind  may  be.  The  know-
ledge of  God  is  so  small :  that  which  man  has  grasped  of  His  na-
ture is  so  little,  that  each  person  who  lives  on  past  revelations,
and  cannot  or  will  not  extend  them,  must  find  in  the  Bible  the
reflex  of  his  mind.  He  goes  to  find  his  own  ideal,  and  lo !
it  is  mirrored  for  him  in  the  utterances  of  those  who  spoke
for  persons  on  his  mental  plane.  If  no  one  seer  can  satisfy  his
ideal,  he  selects  from  many  the  points  which  please  him,
rejects  the  remainder,  and  manufactures  his  own  revelation
piecemeal.  So  it  is  with  all  sects.  Each  frames  its  own  ideal,
and  proves  it  by  revelations  taken  from  the  Bible.  None  can
accept  the  whole,  because  the  whole  is  not  homogeneous.  But
each  picks  out  its  suitable  pieces,  and  from  them  frames  its
revelation.  When  they  are  brought  face  to  face  with  others
who  have  picked  out  other  passages,  then  comes  the  twisting
and  distorting  of  words,  the  explanation  (so  they  calHt)  and
the  commenting  on  texts:  the  darkening  of  plain  meaning:  the
interpreting  of  sayings  in  a  sense  never  meant  either  by  the
communicating  spirit,  or  by  the  prophet  or  teacher.  By  this
means  inspiration  becomes  a  vehicle  for  sectarian  opinion ;
the  Bible,  an  armoury  from  which  each  disputant  may  draw
his  favourite  weapon  ;  and  theology,  a  matter  of  private  notion,
backed  up  by  false  and  misleading  interpretation.
6

66  SPIRIT- TEACHINGS.

With  a  theology  so  framed,  we  are  accused  of  being  at  vari-
ance. It  is  true.  We  have  no  commerce  with  it.  It  is  of
the  earth,  earthy  ;  base  and  low  in  its  conception  of  God  ;
degrading  in  its  influence  on  the  soul ;  insulting  to  the  Deity
whom  it  professes  to  reveal.  We  have  no  part  in  it.  We  do
indeed  contradict  and  disown  it.  It  is  our  mission  to  reverse
its  teaching,  to  substitute  for  it  truer  and  nobler  views  of  God
and  of  the  Spirit.

Another  reason  why  much  that  is  false  with  respect  to  God
is  current  among  you,  as  derived  from  the  Bible,  is,  that  the
assumption  of  infallible  inspiration  leads  men  not  only  to  lay
too  much  stress  on  words  and  phrases,  but  also  to  fall  into  the
error  of  interpreting  too  literally  that  which  was  intended
to  be  of  spiritual  and  typical  interpretation.  In  communicat-
ing to  your  mental  plane  ideas  which  are  to  you  inconceivable,
we  are  obliged  to  use  expressions  which  are  borrowed  from
your  ways  of  thought.  We  ourselves  are  very  frequently  at
fault  in  misusing  such  expressions ;  or  they  are  themselves
inadequate  to  convey  our  meaning.  Almost  all  spirit  utter-
ances are  typical.  Especially  when  spirits  have  endeavoured
to  convey  to  men  ideas  of  the  great  God  of  whom  they  them-
selves know  so  little,  the  language  used  is  necessarily  very
imperfect,  inadequate,  and  frequently  ill  chosen.  But  it  is
always  typical,  and  must  be  so  understood.  To  press  to  the
end  of  literal  accuracy  any  spirit-teaching  about  God  is  mere
folly.

Moreover,  the  revelations  of  God  have  been  made  in  lan-
guage suited  to  the  capacities  of  those  to  whom  they  were
originally  given,  and  are  to  be  so  interpreted.  But  they  who
have  framed  for  themselves  the  idea  of  an  infallible  revela-
tion applicable  through  all  time,  interpret  every  word  literally,
and  so  deduce  erroneous  conclusions.  The  hyperbole  which
was  intelligible  in  the  mouth  of  the  impulsive  seer  who  uttered
it  to  an  imaginative  and  enthusiastic  Eastern  hearer,  becomes
overstrained,  untrue,  and  misguiding  when  coldly  interpreted
in  the  light  of  comment  and  verbal  exactness  to  those  whose
habits  of  thought  and  language  are  widely  different  or  even
totally  dissimilar  ,

REVELATION.  C7

It  is  to  this  cause  that  we  must  attribute  many  views  of  the
Supreme  which  are  alike  false  and  dishonouring  to  Him.  The
original  language  was  inadequate  enough ;  it  has  become  col-
oured more  or  less  by  the  medium  through  whom  it  has  passed,
and  is  then  less  adequate  than  before.  But  interpreted  as  we
have  pointed  out,  it  becomes  positively  false;  and  is  in  no  sense
the  revelation  of  God.  Rather  it  is  man's  notion  about  a  Deity
whom  he  has  framed  for  himself — framed  as  really  as  the  image
which  the  savage  forms  for  his  fetish.

With  such  views,  again,  we  have  no  accord.  Them,  too,  we
denounce,  and  our  mission  is  to  substitute  for  them  a  truer
and  nobler  knowledge.  Moreover,  in  dealing  with  you,  spirits
always  proceed  in  one  uniform  manner.  They  are  sent  to
communicate  through  a  human  medium  some  portion  of  Divine
truth.  In  the  medium's  mind  they  find  a  growth  of  opinions,
some  false,  some  partly  true,  some  distorted  and  befogged  by
early  prejudice  and  training.  Are  these  to  be  eradicated
before  the  truer  ideas  are  suggested  ?  Is  the  mind  to  be  com-
pletely cleared  of  all  preconceived  ideas  ?  By  no  means.  It
is  not  so  we  act.  Were  we  to  do  so  the  work  of  eradication
would  be  so  tedious  that  we  should  risk  leaving  the  mind  bare
of  teaching  altogether,  and  should  have  destroyed  without
being  able  to  create.  No ;  we  take  the  opinions  already  exis-
tent, and  mould  them  into  closer  semblance  of  truth.  All  have
in  some  sort  the  germ  of  truth,  or  we  destroy  them.  With
such  as  contain  truth,  we  strive  to  grapple,  and  to  mould  and
form  them  to  progress  and  advancement  in  knowledge.  We
know  of  how  little  worth  are  the  theological  notions  to  which
men  attach  so  much  importance ;  and  we  are  content  to  leave
them  to  die  in  the  brighter  light  to  which  we  lead  the  soul,
while  we  supply  the  needed  information  on  important  topics.
Only  we  must  eradicate  dogmatism.  That  is  all-important.
Opinion,  when  harmless,  we  do  not  meddle  with.

Hence  it  is  that  theological  notions  may  remain  very  much
what  they  were,  only  toned  down  and  softened  in  their
asperities.  So  men  falsely  say  that  spirits  always  teach  that
which  a  man  has  previously  believed.  It  is  far  from  being  so.
What  we  now  teach  you  is  sufficient  proof  of  that.  The  spirit-

68  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

guides  do  indeed  work  on  that  which  they  find  already  in  the
mind :  but  they  mould  and  temper  it,  and  imperceptibly
change  and  adapt  it  to  their  ends.  It  is  only  when  the  views
held  are  such  as  they  cannot  work  upon,  or  of  a  positive  and
dogmatic  type,  that  the  change  wrought  becomes  plain  to
your  eyes.  You  find  a  man  who  has  denied  the  existence  of
God  and  of  spirit,  who  has  believed  only  what  he  can  see  and
feel  and  handle ;  such  a  materialist  you  see  converted  to  a
belief  in  God  and  a  future  existence,  and  you  wonder  at  the
change.  But  the  spirit  that  has  been  tempered,  and  chastened
and  softened  :  that  has  been  purified,  and  refined,  and  elevated:
whose  rude  and  rough  beliefs  have  been  toned  and  softened,  of
this  change  you  make  no  note,  because  it  is  too  gradual  and
subtle  to  be  perceptible  to  ycrur  senses.  Yet  such  are  the
glorious  results  of  our  daily  work.  The  crude  is  softened  ;  the
hard,  and  cold,  and  cheerless  are  warmed  into  loving  life  ;  the

O  '

pure  is  refined ;  the  noble  ennobled ;  the  good  made  better ;
the  yearning  soul  satisfied  with  richer  views  of  its  God  and  of
its  future  happiness.

The  opinions  have  not  been  suppressed,  but  they  have  been
modified  and  changed.  This  is  the  real  existent  spirit  influence
all  around  of  which  ye  know  nothing  as  yet :  the  most  real
and  blessed  part  of  spirit  ministry.

When,  therefore,  men  say  that  spirits  speak  only  the
medium's  preconceived  opinions,  they  are  partly  right.  The
opinions,  in  so  far  as  they  are  harmless,  are  the  previous  ones,
only  moulded  in  a  way  not  perceptible  to  your  gaze  as  yet.
When  the  opinions  are  hurtful,  they  are  eradicated  and
destroyed.

When  we  deal  with  special  forms  of  theological  creed,  we
strive,  in  so  far  as  we  can,  to  spiritualise  previous  opinion
rather  than  to  eradicate  it.  We  know — as  you  cannot  know
— of  how  trifling  moment  are  forms  of  faith,  provided  the
faith  be  alive  and  spiritual :  and  we  strive,  therefore,  to  build
on  the  foundation  already  laid.  To  this  end,  however,  whilst
the  broad  outlines,  which  are  in  themselves  partially  truthful,
or  which  embody  as  much  of  truth  as  the  intelligence  can
grasp,  are  preserved,  much  that  is  false  and  delusive  must  be

DEVELOPMENT.  fi9

cleared  away.  So  the  work  of  destruction  precedes  the  work
of  construction.  The  soul  is  purged  of  gross  error,  and  the
truth  is  refined  and  purified  as  far  as  may  be.  Hence  it  is
that  we  do  usually  teach  a  modification  of  the  views  of  truth
held  by  those  to  whom  we  speak.

And  now,  friend,  you  will  see  the  bearing  of  this  on  your
difficulty.  We  have  endeavoured,  not  to  uproot  from  your
mind  the  views  which  you  have  entertained  of  theology,  but
to  modify  them.  If  you  will  recall  the  past,  you  will  see  how
your  creed  has  been  gradually  widened  from  a  very  narrow
basis  to  a  comprehensive  and  rational  one.  You  have,  under
our  guidance,  been  made  acquainted  with  the  theological  tenets
of  many  churches  and  sects.  You  have  been  led  to  see,  in
-each,  the  germ  of  truth,  more  or  less  developed,  but  clouded
with  human  error.  You  have  studied,  for  yourself,  the
writings  of  the  teachers  of  religion  among  the  Christian
world,  and  your  own  creed  has  been  toned  down  and  softened
in  its  asperities  by  the  divergent  views  of  truth  so  let  in  upon
it.  The  process  has  been  long  and  gradual  from  the  days
when  you  were  influenced  to  the  study  of  ancient  philosophies
to  later  days,  when  systems  of  theology  filtered  through  it,  and
left  behind  them  that  which  you  were  able  to  assimilate.

The  fixed  and  changeless  creed  of  the  Eastern  branch  of  the
•Christian  Church,  with  its  crystallised  dogmas  no  longer
living  and  breathing  truths ;  the  destructive  criticism  of  Ger-
man scholars  who  have  dealt  a  much-needed  blow  to  blind
belief  in  the  verbal  exactitude  of  human  utterances;  the
speculations  of  advanced  thought  in  your  own  country  and
Church ;  the  ideas  of  those  external  to  it,  and  even  to  the
creed  of  Christendom — of  all  these  have  you  learned,  and
liave  retained  from  the  several  systems  that  which  was  ser-
viceable to  you.  It  has  been  a  long  and  very  gradual  work,
.•and  now  we  wish  to  carry  you  further,  and  to  show  you  the
ideal  truth,  spiritual,  impalpable,  but  most  real,  which  under-
lies all  with  which  you  are  familiar.  We  would  strip  off  the
earthly  body,  and  show  you  the  real,  vital  truth  in  its  spirit-
ual significance.

We  would  have  you  know  that  the  spiritual  ideal  of  Jesus

70  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

the  Christ  is  no  more  like  the  human  notion,  with  its  acces-
sories of  atonement  and  redemption,  as  men  have  grasped
them,  than  was  the  calf  ignorantly  carved  by  the  ancient
Hebrews  like  the  God  who  strove  to  reveal  Himself  to  them.
We  wish  to  show  you,  as  you  can  grasp  it,  the  spiritual  truths
which  underlie  the  life  of  Him  who  is  known  to  you  as  the
Saviour,  the  Redeemer,  the  Son  of  God.  We  would  tell  you
of  the  true  significance  of  the  life  of  the  Christ,  and  show  you,
as  we  can,  how  low  and  mean  are  the  views  of  Him  which  we
are  striving  to  do  away  with.

You  ask  how  the  sign  of  the  Cross  can  be  prefixed  to  such
teaching.  Friend,  the  spiritual  truth  of  which  that  sign  is
typical  is  the  very  cardinal  truth  which  it  is  our  special
mission  to  declare.  The  self-denying  love  which  would
benefit  humanity  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  life  and  home  and
earthly  happiness — the  pure  spirit  of  the  Christ,  this  is  what
we  would  declare  to  you  as  the  godlike  spirit.  This  is  the
true  salvation  from  meanness  and  self-aggrandisement,  and
self-pleasing  and  luxurious  sloth,  which  can  redeem  humanity,
and  make  of  men  the  children  of  God.  This  self-abnegation
and  incarnate  love  is  that  which  can  atone  for  sin,  and  make
man  like  to  God.  This  is  the  true  atonement !  Not,  indeed,
a  reconciliation  of  sin-stained  humanity  to  an  angry  and  holy
God,  purchased  by  the  sacrifice  of  His  sinless  son,  but  a  higher
and  truer  atonement  in  the  ennobling  of  the  nature,  the
purifying  of  the  spirit;  the  making  of  the  human  and  the
divine,  ONE  in  aim  and  purpose : — the  drawing  of  man's  spirit,
even  whilst  incarned,  up  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  Divine.

This  was  the  mission  of  the  Christ.  In  this  He  was  a  mani-
festation of  God :  the  son  of  God  :  the  Saviour  of  man :  the
Reconciler :  the  Atoner :  and  herein  we  perpetuate  His  work,
we  carry  oil  His  mission,  we  work  under  His  symbol,  we  fight
against  the  enemies  of  His  faith,  against  all  who  ignorantly
or  wilfully  dishonour  Him,  even  though  it  be  under  the
banner  of  orthodoxy  and  under  the  protection  of  His  Name.

Much  that  we  teach  must  still  be  new  and  strange  even  to
those  who  have  progressed  in  knowledge ;  but  the  days  shall
come  when  men  shall  recognise  the  oneness  of  Christ's  teach-

SPIRIT-CREED  AND  THE   CROSS.  71

ing  on  earth  with  ours;  and  the  human  garb,  gross  and
material,  in  which  it  has  been  shrouded,  shall  be  rent  asunder,
and  men  shall  see  the  true  grandeur  of  the  life  and  teaching
of  Him  whom  they  ignorantly  worship.  In  those  days  they
shall  worship  with  no  less  reality,  but  with  a  more  perfect
knowledge ;  and  they  shall  know  that  the  sign  under  which
we  speak  is  the  symbol  of  purity  and  self-sacrificing  love  to
them  and  to  their  brethren  for  all  time.  This  end  it  is  our
earnest  endeavour  to  attain.  Judge  of  our  mission  by  this
standard,  and  it  is  of  God,  godlike:  noble  as  He  is  noble:  pure
as  He  is  pure :  truthgiving  as  He  is  true :  elevating,  and
saving,  and  purifying  the  spirit  from  the  grossness  of  earthly
conceptions  and  raising  it  to  the  very  atmosphere  and  neigh-
bourhood of  the  spiritual  and  the  divine.

Ponder  our  words :  and  seek  for  guidance,  if  not  through
us,  then  through  Him  who  sent  us,  even  as,  in  earlier  days,
He  sent  that  exalted  spirit  of  purity,  charity  and  self-sacrifice,
whom  men  called  Jesus,  and  who  was  the  Christ.

Him  we  adore  even  now.     His  Name  we  reverence.

His  words  we  echo.     His  teaching  lives  again  in  ours.

He  and  we  are  of  God  :  and  in  His  Name  we  come.

+  IMPERATOR.

SECTION   X.

[I  was  not  content,  and  took  time  to  consider  what  had
been  written.  It  was  very  contrary  to  any  opinions
I  then  held,  but  I  was  conscious  of  an  extremely
powerful  and  elevating  influence  during  the  time
the  writing  was  going  on.  I  wished  to  get  rid  of
the  influence  before  I  replied.

On  the  following  day  I  had  an  opportunity  of  resuming
my  argument.  I  objected  to  what  had  been  said,
that  such  a  creed  would  not  be  acknowledged  as
Christian  by  any  member  of  a  Christian  Church
that  it  was  contradictory  to  the  plain  words  of  the
Bible ;  and  that  such  views  appeared  even  to  be  the
subject  of  special  denunciation  as  those  of  Anti-
Christ.  Moreover,  I  suggested  that  such  vaguely
beautiful  views,  as  I  admitted  them  to  be,  had  a
tendency  to  take  the  backbone  out  of  faith.  It
was  replied] —

Friend,  you  have  opened  points  cm  which  we  shall  be  glad
to  speak  with  you.  As  to  our  authority,  we  have  touched  on
that  point  before.  We  claim  it  to  be  divine,  and  we  await
with  confidence  the  acceptance  of  our  mission  when  the  times
are  ripe  for  our  teaching.  That  time  must  come  after  much
steady  preparation,  and  we  are  quite  prepared  to  find  that
none  can  yet  accept  in  full  the  teaching  which  we  promulgate,
save  the  little  band  to  whom  it  is  given  to  precede  in  pro-
gressive knowledge  the  rest  of  their  fellows.  We  say  that
this  does  not  strike  us  with  surprise.  For,  think  !  has  it  ever
been  that  a  fuller  revelation  has  found  acceptance  among  men
at  once  ?  The  ignorant  cry  has  always  been  raised  against
progress  in  knowledge  that  the  old  is  sufficient :  that  it  has
been  proven  and  tried,  whilst  of  the  new,  men  say  that  they
know  nothing  save  that  it  is  new  and  contradictory  of  the  old.
It  was  the  self-same  cry  that  assailed  Jesus.  Men  who  had
laboriously  elaborated  the  Mosaic  theology,  which  had  served
its  time,  and  was  to  give  place  to  a  higher  and  more  Spiritual

THE   GREAT  TEACHER.  73

religion :  men  who  had  drawn  out  the  minutiae  of  this  system
until  they  had  reduced  it  to  an  aimless  mass  of  ritual,  a  body
without  a  spirit,  aye,  a  corpse  without  life :  these  cried  out
that  this  blasphemer  (so  they  impiously  called  the  Saviour  of
man's  religion)  would  destroy  the  law  and  dishonour  God.
The  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  guardians  of  orthodox  religion,
were  unanimous  in  their  disbelief  of  Him  and  of  His  preten-
sions. It  was  they  who  raised  the  howl  which  finally  led  the
Great  Teacher  to  the  Cross.  You  know  now  that  He  did  not
dishonour  God :  and  that  He  did  but  demolish  man's  glosses
on  God's  revealed  law  in  order  that  He  might  refine  and
spiritualise  its  commands,  and  raise  it  from  the  dead  by  infus-
ing into  it  spiritual  life  and  power,  by  breathing  into  it  vitality
.and  giving  it  renewed  vigour.

In  place  of  the  cold  and  cheerless  letter  of  the  law  which
prescribed  outward  duty  to  a  parent, — a  duty  discharged
without  heart  of  love,  with  scanty  dole  grudgingly  offered, —
he  taught  the  spirit  of  filial  affection  springing  from  a  loving
heart,  and  offering  the  unbought  and  ungrudged  tribute  of
affection  to  earthly  parents  and  to  the  Great  Father.  The
formalism  of  mere  external  conventionality  he  replaced  by  the
free-will  offering  of  the  heart.  Which  was  the  truer,  the
nobler  creed  ?  Did  the  latter  override  the  former,  or  did  it
not  stand  to  it  rather  as  the  living  man  to  the  breathless
•corpse  ?  Yet  they  who  were  content  to  buy  off  from  filial
duty  at  the  poor  cost  of  a  few  paltry  coins  scornfully  given
were  they  who  finally  crucified  the  Christ,  as  a  man  who
taught  a  new  religion  blasphemously  subversive  of  the  old.
'The  scene  on  Calvary  was  the  fitting  culmination  to  such  a
religion.

Again,  when  the  followers  of  the  crucified  stood  forth  to
•declare  their  gospel  to  a  world  that  cared  not  for  it,  and  which
was  not  prepared  to  receive  it,  the  charge  against  them
perpetually  was  that  they  taught  new  doctrine  which  was
subversive  of  the  old  faith.  Men  taxed  their  ingenuity  to
discover  horrible  accusations  which  they  might  charge  upon
them.  They  found  nothing  too  monstrous  to  be  believed  by
those  who  were  eager  to  credit  any  accusation  of  the  new

74i  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

faith  which  "everywhere  was  spoken  against."  They  were
lawless ;  yet  so  rigidly  respectful  to  the  established  faith,  and
to  the  "  powers  that  be,"  that  no  cause  of  blame  could  be  dis-
covered. They  were  devourers  of  infants :  they  who  were  the
followers  of  the  loving  and  gentle  Jesus.  Nothing  was  too
monstrous  to  be  believed  about  them ;  even  as  men  now  wish
to  believe  everything  that  can  discredit  us  and  our  mission.

Has  it  not  been  so  ever  since  ?  It  is  the  story  of  all  time-
that  the  new  is  spoken  against  and  discredited  in  religion,  in
science,  in  all  with  which  man's  finite  mind  deals.  It  is  an
essential  quality  of  his  intelligence  that  such  should  be  the
case.  The  familiar  commends  itself :  the  new  and  strange  is-
viewed  with  suspicion  and  mistrust.

Hence  it  is  not  any  legitimate  cause  for  surprise  that  when
we  teach  a  spiritualised  Christianity  we  should  at  first  be  met
with  incredulity.  The  time  will  come  when  all  men  will
admit,  as  you  do,  the  beauty  of  the  creed  and  recognise  ite
divine  origin.

It  is  not  wonderful  that  our  message  should  seem  to  con-
tradict some  human  utterances.  Nay,  that  it  should  really
controvert  some  details  of  the  teaching  given  through  human
minds  more  or  less  undeveloped  in  days  long  past  is  to  be
expected.  We  have  no  desire  to  hide  the  plain  fact  that  there
is  much  in  some  parts  of  the  Bible  which  does  not  amalgamate
with  our  teaching,  being,  indeed,  the  admixture  of  human
error  which  came  through  the  mind  of  the  chosen  medium.
We  need  not  repeat  on  this  head  our  previous  argument  which
is  familiar  to  you.

Revelation,  as  contained  in  your  Bible,  includes  many  pro-
gressive developments  of  the  knowledge  of  God  which  are  in
themselves  irreconcileable  in  minute  detail.  And  moreover,
it  contains  much  admixture  of  human  error  which  has  filtered
in  through  the  medium.  You  can  only  arrive  at  the  truth  by
judging  of  the  general  drift.  Private  opinions  selected  without
reference  to  the  body  of  teaching  are  but  the  sentiments  of
the  individual,  valuable  as  showing  his  mind,  but  not  in  any
way  binding  as  of  faith.  To  imagine  that  an  opinion  uttered
many  centuries  ago  is  of  binding  force  eternally  is  mere  folly.

PROGRESSIVE   REVELATION.  75

Indeed,  all  such  opinions  are  contradictory  in  themselves,  and
are  contradicted  by  other  and  opposite  opinions  contained
within  the  same  volume.  No  doubt  it  was  a  current  belief,
at  the  time  when  many  of  the  writers  of  books  in  the  Bible
composed  the  treatises  which  you  call  inspired,  that  Jesus  was
God,  and  harsh  denunciations  are  made  against  any  who
should  deny  the  dogma.  No  doubt  also  that  the  same  men
believed  also  that  he  would,  in  mysterious  manner,  return  in
the  clouds  to  judge  the  world,  and  that  before  their  generation
should  die.  They  were  mistaken  in  both  beliefs,  and  over  one
at  least  more  than  1800  years  have  rolled  and  still  the  return
is  unaccomplished.  So  we  might  push  the  argument  were  it
necessary.

What  we  wish  to  impress  on  you  is  this  You  must  judge
the  Revelations  of  God  by  the  light  which  is  given  you :  in
the  mass,  not  by  the  dicta  of  its  preachers :  by  the  spirit  and
general  tendency,  not  by  the  strict  literal  phraseology.  You
must  judge  of  us  and  our  teaching,  not  by  conformity  to  any
statement  made  by  any  men  at  any  special  time ;  but  by  the
the  general  fitness  and  adaptability  of  our  creed  to  your  wants,
to  your  relations  with  God,  and  to  the  progress  of  your  spirit.

What,  then,  is  the  outcome  of  our  teaching  ?  How  far  does
it  square  with  right  reason  ?  How  does  it  teach  you  of  God  ?
How  does  it  help  your  spirit  ?

You  have  been  taught  in  the  creeds  of  the  orthodox  churches
fco  believe  in  a  God  who  was  propitiated  by  the  sacrifice  of  his
Son,  so  far  as  to  allow  a  favoured  few  of  His  children  to  be
admitted  to  an  imagined  heaven,  where  for  ever  and  for  ever
more,  with  monotonous  persistence,  their  occupation  should  be
the  sino-ing  His  praise.  The  rest  of  the  race,  unable  to  gain
admission  to  this  heaven,  were  consigned  to  a  hell  of  indescrib-
able torment,  perpetual,  endless,  and  intolerable.

These  miserable  ones  failed  of  bliss,  some  of  them  because
they  had  not  faith ;  and  others,  because  they  had  evil  sur-
rounding by  which  they  were  degraded.  And  others  fell,
bem-  alsailed  with  fierce  temptations,  by  which  they  were
led  away  and  seduced  to  sin.  And  others  were  beamed
in  debasing  and  sensual  bodies,  and  were  overcome  of

•ft

76  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

ungoverned  passions.  And  others  could  not  understand
what  was  wanted  from  them,  though  they  tried,  and
would  fain  have  done  what  they  could.  And  others  had  in-
tellectual inabilility  to  accept  certain  dogmatic  propositions
which  they  had  been  taught  to  believe  essential  to  their  sal-
vation. And  others  had  not,  when  bodily  existence  ceased,
assented  to  certain  statements  which  were  able  to  secure
them  the  entry  into  the  heaven  we  have  described.  And  so
they  perished  everlastingly;  and  on  their  endless  torments,
from  a  height  serene  and  secure,  the  blessed  who  have  gained
their  bliss  through  a  faith  in  certain  dogmatic  assertions,
though  many  of  them  had  been  men  of  grievous  and  degraded
lives,  look  with  the  satisfaction  of  undisturbed  and  changeless
repose.

A  life  of  gross  sensuality,  or  of  sloth,  or  of  offence  against
all  law,  you  are  taught  is  remediable  by  an  act  of  faith.  The
grossest  and  most  sensual  ruffian  may,  by  a  cry  on  his  death-
bed, find  himself  instantaneously  fitted  for  admission  into  the
immediate  presence  of  the  God  whom  he  has  all  his  life  blas-
phemed. He,  the  impure,  base,  degraded,  earthy  spirit  ad-
mitted to  association  with  the  refined,  the  noble,  the  pure,  the
holy,  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  stainless  perfection  of
the  all-pure  God  !

And  yet  the  half  is  not  told,  but  enough  by  way  of  contrast.
We  tell  you  nothing  of  such  a  God — a  God  o£  whom  reason
cannot  think  without  a  shudder,  and  from  whom  the  fatherly
instinct  must  shrink  in  disgust.  Of  this  God  of  love,  who
shows  his  love  in  such  a  fashion,  we  know  nothing.  He  is  of
man's  fashioning,  unknown  to  us.  We  pause  not  to  expose
the  miserable  pretence  that  such  a  human  idol  can  ever  have
boen  aught  but  the  figment  of  a  barbarous  mind.  We  do  but  ask
you  to  wonder  with  us  at  the  presumptuous  ignorance  and
folly  which  has  dared  to  paint  such  a  caricature  of  the  pure
and  holy  God.  Surely,  friend,  man  must  have  been  in  a  de-
graded spiritual  condition  ere  he  could  have  pictured  such  a
Deity.  Surely,  too,  they  who  in  this  age  have  not  shrunk
from  such  a  creation,  must  have  sore  need  of  a  Gospel  such  as
that  we  preach.

HEAVEN  AND  HELL.  77

The  God  whom  we  know  and  whom  we  declare  to  you  is  in
very  truth  a  God  of  Love — a  God  whose  acts  do  not  belie
His  name,  but  whose  love  is  boundless,  and  His  pity  unceas-
ing to  all.  He  knows  no  partiality  for  any,  but  deals  out
unwavering  justice  to  all.  Between  him  and  you  are  ranks  of
minstering  spirits,  the  bearers  of  His  loving  message,  the  reveal-
ers  from  time  to  time  of  His  will  to  man.  By  His  spirit  mes-
sengers the  train  of  ministering  mercy  is  never  suffered  to  fail.
This  is  our  God,  manifested  by  His  works,  and  operating
through  the  agency  of  His  ministering  angels.

And  you  yourselves,  what  of  you  ?  Are  ye  immortal  souls
who,  by  a  cry,  a  word,  by  an  act  of  faith  in  an  unintelligible
and  monstrous  creed  can  purchase  a  heaven  of  inactivity,  and.
avoid  a  hell  of  material  torment  ?  Verily,  nay.  Ye  are  spirits
placed  for  a  while  in  a  garb  of  flesh  to  get  training  for  an
advanced  spirit-life,  where  the  seeds  sown  in  the  past  bear
their  fruit,  and  the  spirit  reaps  the  crop  which  it  has  prepared.
No  fabled  dreamy  heaven  of  eternal  inactivity  awaits  you,  but
a  sphere  of  progressive  usefulness  and  growth  to  higher  per-
fection.

Immutable  laws  govern  the  results  of  deeds.  Deeds  of  good
advance  the  spirit,  whilst  deeds  of  evil  degrade  and  retard  it.
Happiness  is  found  in  progress,  and  in  gradual  assimilation  to-
the  Godlike  and  the  perfect.  The  spirit  of  divine  love  ani-
mates the  acts,  and  in  mutual  blessing  the  spirits  find  their
happiness.  For  them  there  is  no  craving  for  sluggish  idleness;.
no  cessation  of  desire  for  progressive  advancement  in  know-
ledge. Human  passions,  and  human  needs  and  wishes  are
gone  with  the  body,  and  the  spirit  lives  a  spirit  life  of  purity,.
progress,  and  love.  Such  is  its  heaven.

We  know  of  no  hell  save  that  within  the  soul:  a  hell  which
is  fed  by  the  flame  of  unpurified  and  untamed  lust  and
passion,  which  is  kept  alive  by  remorse  and  agony  of  sorrow:
which  is  fraught  with  the  pangs  that  spring  unbidden  from
the  results  of  past  misdeeds ;  and  from  which  the  only  escape
lies  in  retracing  the  steps,  and  in  cultivating  the  qualities
which  shall  bear  fruit  in  love  and  knowledge  of  God.

Of  punishment  we  know  indeed,  but  it  is  not  the  vindictive

78  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

lash  of  an  angry  God,  but  the  natural  outcome  of  conscious
sin,  remediable  by  repentance  and  atonement  and  reparation
personally  wrought  out  in  pain  and  shame,  not  by  coward
cries  for  mercy,  and  by  feigned  assent  to  statements  which
ought  to  create  a  shudder.

Happiness  we  know  is  in  store  for  all  who  will  strive  for  it
toy  a  consistent  course  of  life  and  conduct  commendable  to
reason  and  spiritual  in  practice.  Happiness  is  the  outcome  of
right  reason,  as  surely  as  misery  is  the  result  of  conscious
violation  of  reasonable  laws,  whether  corporeal  or  spiritual.

Of  the  distant  ages  of  the  hereafter  we  say  nothing,  for  we
know  nothing.  But  of  the  present  we  say  that  life  is  governed,
with  you  and  with  us  equally,  by  laws  which  you  may  discover,
and  which,  if  you  obey  them,  will  lead  to  happiness  and  con-
tent, as  surely  as  they  will  reduce  you  to  misery  and  remorse
if  you  wilfully  violate  them.

We  need  not  specify  at  length  now  the  creed  we  teach  as  it
affects  man  in  his  relation  to  God,  to  his  fellows,  and  to  him-
self. You  know  its  main  features.  One  day  you  shall  know
it  more  fully.  Sufficient  has  now  been  said  to  point  the  con-
trast, and  to  reply  to  our  question :  Whether  such  a  view  as
this  be  not  pure,  divine,  ennobling,  the  natural  complement  of
that  which  Jesus  himself  preached  ?

Is  it  less  definite,  more  vague  than  the  orthodox  ?  It  may
be  less  minute  in  details  which  are  repulsive,  but  it  breathes
.a  nobler  and  purer  atmosphere ;  it  teaches  a  higher,  holier
religion ;  it  preaches  a  diviner  God.  It  is  not  vaguer,  not  less
•definite.  But  even  were  it  so,  it  deals  with  subjects  into
which  the  reverent  mind  will  not  curiously  pry.  It  throws  a
veil  over  the  unknown,  and  refuses  to  substitute  speculation
for  knowledge,  or  to  apply  the  cruder  human  notions  to  the
very  nature  and  attributes  of  the  Supreme.

If  it  be  vagueness  to  vail  the  curious  eye  before  the  foot-
stool of  the  divine  and  incomprehensible,  then  are  we  vague
in  our  knowledge,  and  indistinct  in  our  teaching.  But  if  it
l>e  the  part  of  the  wise  to  dwell  only  on  the  known  and
the  comprehensible;  to  act  rather  than  to  speculate;  to  do
rather  than  to  believe,  then  is  our  belief  dictated  by  wisdom,
•comformable  to  right  reason,  and  inspired  by  God  himself.

A   SUBLTMER   CREED.  79

It  will  bear  the  test  of  rational  sifting  and  experiment.  It
will  endure,  and  inspire  the  myriad  souls  in  distant  ages  when
those  who  cavil  at  its  teachings  and  insult  its  authors  shall  be
working  out  in  sorrow  and  remorse  the  consequences  'of  their
folly  and  sin.  It  will  have  conducted  countless  myriads  of
pure  spirits,  who  have  progressed  in  its  faith,  to  happiness
and  advancement,  when  that  which  it  is  destined  to  spiritualise
shall  have  shared  the  fate  of  the  mouldering  body  from  which
the  spirit  is  withdrawn.  It  will  live  and  bless  its  votaries  in
spite  of  the  foolish  ignorance  which  would  charge  its  divine
precepts  on  a  devil,  and  anathematise  its  votaries  as  the

children  of  darkness.

+  IMPERATOE.

That  seeins  to  vie  rational  and  beautiful.  And  I  think  you
meet  the  charge  of  vagueness.  But  I  fancy  most  people
would  say  that  you  do  practically  upset  popular  Chris-
tianity. I  should  like  to  have  from  you  some  ideas  on
the  general  outcome  of  Spiritualism,  more  especially  as
it  affects  the  undeveloped,  whether  incarnated  or  not.

We  will  speak  to  you  of  this  in  due  course.  But  not  yet.
Ponder  what  has  been  said  before  you  seek  for  further  mes-
sages. May  the  Supreme  enable  us  to  guide  you  aright !

+  IMPERATOB.

SECTION  XI.  .

[By  this  time  the  influence  upon  me  had  become  so
powerful  as  to  shut  out  all  other  communications.
On  June  24, 1  attempted  strongly  to  establish  com-
munication with  the  spirit  who  had  usually  written,
but  in  vain.  The  influence  was  of  a  singularly
elevating  character,  and  dominated  my  mind.
Though  I  did  my  daily  work  with  punctuality,  I
devoted  every  minute  that  I  could  spare  from  it  to
pondering  on  this  strange  influence,  and  on  the
teaching  which  was  so  new  to  me.  As  I  pondered,
it  seemed  to  grow  into  my  mind,  and  to  present
itself  with  a  force  and  orderly  beauty  that  I  had
not  recognised  before.  Though  I  had  studied
theologies  long  and  deeply,  I  had  not  by  any
means  studied  the  various  systems  with  a  view  to
pick  holes  in  them.  I  had  collated  rather  than
criticised  them.  But  now  I  was  confronted  with
a  totally  new  view,  and  one  which  seemed  to  me
to  strike  at  the  root  of  much  that  I  had  previously
accepted  as  de  fide.  On  the  26th  I  recurred  to
what  had  been  said  by  IMPERATOR,  and  put  my
case  thus] : —

I  have  thought  very  much  of  what  has  been  said  by  you
and  I  have  read  some  of  it  to  a  friend  in  whose
judgment  I  rely.  It  is  startling  to  find  doctrines  of
Christianity,  ivhich  we  have  been  taught  to  consider  as
essential  dogmas  of  the  faith,  denied  under  the  symbol
of  the  Cross.  I  cannot  more  strongly  put  my  difficulty
than  by  saying  that  though  your  statements  command
my  assent  intellectually,  still  the  faith  of  Christendom
which  has  lasted  now  1800  years,  and  more,  cannot
lightly  be  upset  by  statements,  however  reasonable  they
'may  seem  to  me,  ivhich  are  not  authenticated  by  any
authority  that  I  can  test.  Will  you  state  clearly  for
me  what  position  you  assign  to  Jesus  Christ  ?  what
authority  you  can  show  ivhich  gives  you  any  power  to

THE   PROPER  ATTITUDE   OF  MIND.  81

reverse  or  develop  teaching  which  bears  his  name,  and
to  substitute  a  new  gospel  for  the  old  one  ?  Can  you
give  me  satisfactory  evidence  of  your  own  identity
and  of  the  reality  of  the  mission  which  you  claim  I
Evidence  that  would  be  accepted  by  plain  reasonable
men.  I  cannot  undertake  to  accept  what  seems  to  me
so  revolutionary  a  change  as  of  Divine  origin  and
binding  force,  on  the  unsupported  word  of  any  angel
or  man,  whoever  he  may  be.  Nor  ought  I  to  be  asked
to  do  so.  Though  the  change  is  very  gradual,  I  think
I  discover  a  perceptible  difference  in  your  communica-
tions. And  there  seems  to  be  a  divergence  in  teaching-
between  some  spirits  who  have  communicated  through
you:  while  the  bond  which  can  unite  a  number  of
opinions  which  profess  to  come  from  such  discordant
sources  must  be  slight.

Friend,  it  is  to  us  a  source  of  pleasure  that  we  have  so  far
stirred  your  mind  as  to  draw  from  you  so  earnest  and  rational
a  series  of  questions  as  these.  Believe  us,  so  far  at  least  as
this,  that  no  frame  of  mind  is  more  pleasing  to  the  Supreme
than  that  which  seeks  earnestly  and  intelligently  for  truth ;
refusing  mere  dogmatic  statements  from  whatever  source  they
come ;  weighing  all  in  the  balance  of  right  reason,  and  pre-
pared honestly  to  accept  the  result.  Far  from  wishing  to
quarrel  with  such  a  temper,  we  hail  it  as  the  evidence  of  a
receptive  and  honest  mind,  which  will  not  resign  a  former
belief  without  substantial  reason,  but  which,  yet,  is  willing  to
learn  new  views  of  truth  so  they  be  authenticated  by  reason-
able internal  and  external  evidence.  Such  doubts  and  difficul-
ties are  worth  far  more  to  us  than  the  credulous  frame  of  mind
which  gulps  down  indiscriminately  all  that  comes  under
specious  colour ;  far,  far  more  than  that  stagnant  temper  which
no  storm  can  stir,  whose  glassy  surface  no  breeze  can  ruffle,
and  on  whose  impassive,  uninterested  content  no  word  of  spirit
warning  can  make  any  impression.

We  hail  your  doubts  as  the  best  evidence  of  our  successful
dealing  with  you  ;  we  welcome  your  arguments  as  the  intelli-
7

82  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

gent  proof  that  you  have  seen  the  full  proportions  of  the  claims
we  make  as  the  messengers  of  the  Most  High.  Your  difficul-
ties shall  be  answered  so  far  as  we  have  power  to  answer
them.  There  is  a  point  beyond  which  it  is  impossible  for  us
to  present  evidence.  Of  that  you  are  aware.  We  labour
under  one  great  disadvantage,  as  compared  with  human  wit-
nesses ;  we  are  not  of  your  earth,  and  cannot  produce  for  you
the  kind  of  evidence  which  would  weigh  in  your  courts  of
justice.  We  can  but  state  for  your  acceptance  the  evidence  on
which  we  ground  our  claims  to  your  hearing  and  acceptance,
leaving  to  your  own  mind  in  fairness  to  decide  upon  the  points
which  we  cannot  clear  up  by  evidence.

For  our  own  statements  must  to  a  very  great  extent  be  un-
supported, save  by  statements  of  those  who  work  with  us.
Many  of  us  have  told  you  of  our  earth  identity,  and  have
given  to  you  proof  that  ought  to  be  conclusive  that  we  are
fully  acquainted  with  the  earth  lives  of  those  whose  names
we  bear,  even  in  the  minutest  particulars.  If  that  is  not  con-
vincing to  you:  if  you  reply  that  such  information  might
have  been  gained  by  false  and  deceiving  spirits,  who  might  have
gathered  the  facts  for  the  very  purpose  of  deluding,  we  point
to  the  tenor  of  our  intercourse  with  you,  and  remind  you  of
the  standards  of  judgment  set  up  by  Jesus  Himself,  "  By  their
fruits  shall  ye  know  them."  "  Men  do  not  gather  grapes  of
thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles."  We  fearlessly  refer  you  to  the
whole  tenor  of  our  teaching  for  proof  that  it  is  Divine.

It  would  not  consist  with  the  dignity  of  our  mission  were
we  to  dwell  longer  on  this  point.  We  are  not  surprised  that
you  should  have  referred  to  it ;  but  if  our  reply  be  not  con-
vincing to  you,  we  have  nothing  further  which  we  can  add  to
it,  and  must  await  in  patient  prayer  the  time  when  the  evi-
dence will  come  home  to  you.  We  would  not  have  you  to
accept  our  words  before.  We  will  patiently  abide  the  issue.

With  respect  to  the  union  of  spirits  who  were  in  their  earth-
life  divergent  in  their  views  of  God  and  the  hereafter ;  who
dwelt  in  different  climes,  at  different  ages  of  the  world's  history,
we  could  say  much,  and  will  at  another  season.

For  the  present  we  point  to  a  misconception  which  is  in-

WHAT   IS   RELIGION  ?  83

separable  from  the  state  in  which  you  live.  You  cannot  see,
as  we  see,  the  almost  utter  worthlessness  of  what  you  call
opinion.  You  cannot  know  while  yet  the  eye  is  veiled,  how
the  veil  is  rent  by  the  dissolution  of  the  spirit  from  the  earth-
body  ;  how  the  speculations  that  have  seemed  so  all-important
are  seen  to  be  but  idle,  baseless  fancies ;  while  the  germ  of
truth  that  has  underlaid  the  theological  creed  is  found  to  be
very  similar  in  essence,  albeit  of  divers  degrees  of  development.
Ah,  friend  !  religion  is  not  so  abstruse  a  problem  as  man  has
made  it.  It  is  comprised  within  narrow  limits  for  the  in-
telligence that  is  domiciled  on  earth.  And  the  theological
speculations,  the  dogmatic  definitions  with  which  man  has
overlaid  the  revelation  of  God,  serve  but  to  perplex  and
bewilder,  and  to  involve  the  spirit  struggling  up  to  light  in
the  mists  and  fogs  of  ignorance  and  superstition.  The  groping
after  truth  which  has  been  characteristic  of  the  progressive
spirit  in  every  age  has  been  but  the  same  story,  different,
indeed,  in  detail,  but  identical  in  issue.  As  with  the  blinded
eye  of  sense,  so  with  the  spirit  that  gropes  blindly  to  the  light.
The  mazes  of  superstition  bewilder  it;  the  mists  of  human
ignorance  close  around  it.  It  staggers  and  wanders  on  its
devious  way,  now  here,  now  there,  now  cast  down  to  earth  and
trodden  under  foot  by  the  adversaries,  but  rising  anon,  and
with  outstretched  arms  struggling  onwards  still.  Those
wanderings  seem  to  you  similar,  and  when  confined  within  the
limits  of  a  single  sect  they  are  indeed  alike,  but  to  spirit  gaze
they  have  very  many  points  of  difference.  The  struggling
spirits  who  in  all  ages  have  been  groping  their  way  through
the  maze  of  human  opinion  to  the  fount  of  light  have  pushed
their  way  through  tortuous  paths  which  bear  only  a  superficial
similarity.  To  us  the  theological  opinions  which  have  char-
acterised certain  sets  of  men  called  churches  are  not  so
identical  as  you  think.  We  see  the  inner  points  of  diver-
gence ;  and  we  know  that  to  no  two  spirits  yet  created  were
precisely  identical  views  of  the  unknown  ever  presented.
They  have  framed  for  themselves  ideas  more  or  less  like  those
of  other  spirits,  but  never  identical  with  them.  It  is  only
when  the  veil  is  removed  that  the  fog  lifts ;  the  speculations

84  SPIKIT-TEACHINGS.

die  with  the  body  of  earth,  the  opinions  shift  aside,  and  the
purged  eye  sees  what  it  has  dimly  pictured,  and  corrects  by
the  quickened  senses  the  impressions  of  earth.  Then  it  sees
how  the  germ  of  truth  is  at  the  base,  helped  in  some  to  pro-
gress by  a  receptive  mind  and  a  clearer  spiritual  vision  ;
hampered  and  clogged  in  others  by  a  cramped  intelligence,
and  a  debased  earth-body.  But  in  all  cases  of  yearning  souls
thirsting  for  true  knowledge  of  God  and  of  their  destiny,  the
opinions  of  earth  rapidly  fade,  and  the  spirit  sees  how  baseless
and  unreal  they  were.  It  is  only  when  there  is  no  desire  for
truth  that  error  is  permanent.

So  you  see,  friend,  that  truth  is  the  exclusive  heritage  of  no
man,  of  no  sect.  It  may  and  does  underlie  the  philosophy  of
Athenodorus,  as  he  yearned  after  the  refining  of  the  spirit,
and  the  subjection  of  the  flesh  in  ancient  Rome.  It  was  as
really  existent  in  the  groping  after  union  with  his  Master
which  enabled  Hippolytus  to  endure  the  loss  of  earthly  exist-
ence in  sure  anticipation  of  a  real  life,  even  though  he  only
dimly  saw  its  characteristics.  The  self-same  seeking  after
truth  elevated  and  ennobled  Plotinus,  and  raised  him,  even  in
earth-life,  above  and  beyond  the  earth-sphere.  It  dwelt  in  the
breast  of  Algazzali,  in  spite  of  the  errors  by  which  it  was
dimmed.  It — the  same  blessed  germ  of  Divine  truth —
lightened  the  speculations  of  Alessandro  Achillini,  and  gave
force  and  reality  to  the  burning  words  which  fell  from  his
lips.  The  same  pure  jewel  shines  now  in  one  and  all  of  them.
It  is  the  common  heritage  which  enables  them  to  be  banded
together  in  a  common  work  and  for  a  common  end — the  puri-
fying of  that  desposit  of  the  truth  which  man  has  from  his  God
— and  the  ennobling  and  elevating  of  man's  destiny  by  the
outpouring  of  more  spiritual  views  of  God  and  of  the  destiny
of  spirit.  To  them  their  earth-opinions  are  of  little  moment
now.  They  have  vanished  long  ago,  and  have  left  behind
them  no  trace  of  the  prejudice  which  clouded  the  soul  on
earth  and  hampered  its  progress.  They  have  died  and  are
buried,  and  over  their  grave  no  tear  of  sorrow  is  dropped.  No-
resurrection  awaits  them :  they  are  for  ever  done  with :  but
the  jewel  which  they  once  enshrined  shines  with  ever-increus.-

THE   UNITY  OF   THE  TEACHING.  85

ing  lustre,  and  is  imperishable  and  eternal.  In  its  illuminating
influences,  in  the  aspirations  which  its  presence  inspires,  lies
the  mysterious  bond  of  sympathy  which  is  powerful  to  unite
in  one  work  spirits  who,  in  earth-life,  were  so  apparently
divergent  in  opinion.

This  may  serve  to  suggest  for  your  consideration  reasons
why  it  may  not  be  so  strange  as  it  now  seems  to  you,  that  we
should  be  now  banded  together  for  a  common  object,  conse-
crated to  a  common  work  by  one  earnest  desire  to  spread
abroad  the  knowledge  of  a  higher  and  purer  religion,  through
an  instrument  chosen  by  us  for  special  indications  of  fitness,  of
which  we  are  the  best  judges.

We  are  confident  that  continued  thought  will  lead  you  to
recognise  the  reasonableness  of  what  we  say.  For  definite
proof  you  must  be  content  to  wait  until  you,  too,  have  rent
the  veil,  and  stand  with  unclouded  eye  in  our  company.  The
most  we  hope  for  now  is  the  gradual  establishment  of  convic-
tion. We  desire  that  you  should  apply  to  us  the  same  law  by
which  the  Master  judged — the  Divine  law  of  judging  others
as  you  would  yourself  be  judged.

You  err  in  supposing  that  there  has  ever  been  any  discre-
pancy in  our  teaching  to  you.  Arguments  have  been  variously
put,  and  different  points  have  been  taken  by  different  intelli-
gences who  have  communicated  with  you.  We  do  not  deny
that  we  have  gradually  led  you  up  to  the  general  idea  which
we  have  wished  to  convey,  and  we  have,  in  so  doing,  avoided
points  of  indifferent  opinion  which  were  not  essential  to  our
message,  as  well  as  points  on  which  we  know  full  well  that
your  previous  notions  were  rooted  firm,  and  would  clash  with
our  knowledge.  We  have  sought  rather  to  develop  the  germs
of  truth  which  we  discovered  than  to  come  into  contact  with
the  singularities  of  opinion  which  exist.  To  this  end  we  have
seized  upon  points  of  contact,  and  have  made  much  of  them ;
while  we  have  not  dwelt  on  disputed  and  unimportant  points,
and  have  avoided  discussing  matters  that  do  not  lie  in  our
path.  Hereafter  many  points  that  at  present  are  slurred  over,
or  avoided,  will  be  taken  up.  But  when  you  have  sought  infor-
mation on  points  whereon  we  knew  your  opinion  to  be  errone-

8C  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

ous  and  untenable  for  long,  we  have  not  scrupled  to  enlighten
you.  We  can  see  well  when  the  drift  of  thought  is  carrying-
you  away  from  old  mooring-places  which  no  longer  afford  safe
anchorage  for  your  spirit ;  and,  seeing  this,  we  have  preferred
to  pilot  you  rather  than  to  allow  you  to  drop  down  the
stream  at  the  mercy  of  wind  and  current,  and  at  risk  of  ship-
wreck. We  have  loosened  the  ropes,  one  by  one,  gently  and
gradually,  and  we  Jiave  charged  ourselves  with  the  mission  of
landing  you  in  safer  and  surer  harbourage.  Had  we  tightened
the  moorings,  the  old  ropes  would  have  broken,  and  your
spirit  would  have  been  tossed  helpless  on  a  stormy  sea  of
doubt  and  difficulty,  with  no  pilot  at  the  helm,  and  no  port  in
view,  at  the  mercy  of  wind  and  wave,  and  with  scant  pros-
pect of  rescue.  Do  not  blame  us  that  we  have  chosen  to  anti-
cipate the  inevitable,  and  to  smooth  the  rough  passage.  We
could  not  prevent ;  we  may  and  can  assist.  We  would  not,,
if  we  could,  have  added  to  the  chains  which  would  bind  your
spirit  to  the  dead  past.  We  will,  if  you  co-operate  with  us,,
enable  it  to  rise  superior  to  the  storm,  and  to  emerge  with  a
new  and  living  faith,  on  a  calmer  and  more  open  sea,  ready
to  cross  what  yet  remains  between  the  probation  of  earth  and
the  haven  of  peace.

In  this  endeavour  we  have  studiously  guarded  ourselves-
from  inflicting  on  you  any  rude  shocks.  We  have  not  misled
you  on  any  point.  We  have  never  deceived  you  in  aught.
Scrupulous  exactness  has  characterised  all  our  statements  to
you.  But  we  have  preferred  to  take  the  ideas  which  we=
found  in  your  mind,  and  to  enlarge  and  develop  them.  We
have  fostered,  directed,  instilled  newer  and  truer  views,  but
we  have  in  no  point  falsified,  distorted,  or  misled.

Nor  is  there  actually  any  divergence  in  the  teachings  of
those  who  have  spoken  to  you.  Any  apparent  discrepancy  is
referable  to  difficulties  of  communication,  to  the  varying  influ-
ence of  your  own  mind,  to  the  state  of  your  bodily  health  ;  to
the  novelty  of  the  work  to  some ;  and  especially  to  your  own
circumscribed  views.  We  cannot  teach  what  you  cannot
receive.  We  can  only  dimly  symbolise  truths  which  one  day
your  unclouded  eye  will  see  in  their  full  splendour.  We  can-

THE   OLD   FAITH   AND   THE   NEW.  87

not  speak  with  clearness  when  the  spirit  of  our  medium  is
troubled,  when  his  body  is  racked  with  pain,  or  his  mental
state  vitiated  by  disease.  Nay,  even  a  lowering  atmosphere,
or  electric  disturbance,  or  the  neighbourhood  of  unsympathetic
and  unfavourable  human  influences,  may  colour  a  communi-
cation, or  prevent  it  from  being  clear  and  complete.  Hence
the  various  discrepancies  which  your  minute  gaze  has  detected.
They  are  small  enough  and  few  enough,  and  they  will  all
vanish  when  the  difficulties  are  removed.  Then  will  you
recognise  the  superior  insight  which  has  guided  you  in  a
time  of  no  ordinary  difficulty  and  peril.

You  complain  that  there  is  little  chance  of  the  acceptance
of  such  views  as  we  have  put  forward.  Of  this  you  can  know
very  little.  The  time  is  far  nearer  than  you  think  when  the
old  faith  which  has  worn  so  long,  and  which  man  has  patched
so  clumsily,  will  be  replaced  by  a  higher  and  nobler  one — one
not  antagonistic,  but  supplementary — and  the  pure  Gospel
which  Jesus  preached  shall  find  its  counterpart  again  on  an
advanced  plane  of  knowledge.  For  know,  good  friend,  that
no  effort  which,  as  this,  is  the  plan  of  the  Supreme,  is  entered
on  untimely,  or  with  disregard  of  the  correlation  between
God's  Gospel  and  man's  wants.  What  comes  to  you  from
us  is  coming  to  others  too.  This  is  but  one  among  many
branches  of  one  great  plan.  It  will  go  on  gradually  and
spread  steadily  among  the  children  of  faith  who  are  fitted
to  receive  it.  The  Master  has  so  willed  it.  His  time  is  not
yours,  nor  is  our  vision  circumscribed  as  yours.  In  due  time
the  knowledge  which  we  come  to  spread  will  be  known  among
men.  Meantime,  progressive  souls  are  being  educated;  precious
seed  is  being  sown,  and  the  reaping  and  garnering  shall  come
in  their  course.  For  that  you  and  we  alike  must  wait.

If  you  will  now  think  carefully  over  what  has  been  said,
you  will  see  that  the  nature  of  the  case  precludes  more  than
presumptive  proof  being  given  of  the  validity  of  our  claims.
We  say  again,  that  God  forces  blessings  on  none.  He  offers  :
the  responsibility  of  acceptance  or  refusal  rests  with  you.  The
internal  evidence  will  be  admitted  by  you  and  by  all  to  whom
we  are  now  concerned  to  address  ourselves.  None  but  those

S8  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

•who  are  hopelessly  involved  in  the  meshes  of  the  shallowest
bigotry,  who  are  bound  by  the  fetters  of  a  conventional  theo-
logy, and  shackled  by  an  iron  dogmatism,  will  refuse  to
acknowledge  the  internal  evidence  of  a  Divine  origin  in  the
creed  which  we  put  forward.  With  such  as  we  have  enumer-
ated, the  dogmatist,  the  bigot,  the  narrow-minded,  the  wise  in
their  own  conceit,  we  have  no  dealings.  Nay,  we  do  not  even
speak  to  those  who  find  in  the  faith  which  has  become
ingrained  in  their  very  souls  a  sure  and  sufficient  guide.  In
God's  name  let  them  cling  to  it.  Hereafter  their  time  of  pro-
gress will  come.  It  is  not  yet.  To  you,  and  to  those  who
have  advanced  far  enough  to  think  with  you,  we  need  not
further  prove  that  we  are  not  of  diabolic  origin  or  intent.

If  you  will  further  consider  the  views  which  we  have  put
forward  with  respect  to  inspiration,  you  will  see  that  we
claim  for  our  teaching  that  it  is  just  one  of  those  rungs  in  the
ladder  of  progressive  knowledge  of  God,  which  mankind  has
been  gradually  mounting  from  the  time  when  man  framed  for
himself  a  god  like  himself  to  the  present,  when  you  are  slowly
learning  that  to  attribute  human  infirmities  and  passions  to
the  Supreme  is  not  to  do  Him  honour.  Our  revelation  is  in
no  respect  different  from  that  which  has  preceded,  rave  that  it
is  a  step  in  advance,  even  as  each  development  of  human
knowledge  has  been.  Our  knowledge  flows  from  the  same
source,  and  is  made  known  through  similar  channels.  They
are  now,  as  then,  human,  fallible,  and  at  times  wrong.  It  must
be  so,  as  long  as  God  reveals  Himself  through  human  agencies.

If  you  will  further  recollect  the  standpoint  we  have  selected,
you  will  see  that  in  place  of  blind  faith,  which  accepts  tradi-
tional teaching — the  old,  merely  because  it  is  old — we  appeal
to  your  reason  :  and  in  place  of  credulity  we  demand  rational,
intelligent  investigation,  and  acceptance  grounded  on  convic-
tion. So  far  from  desiring  you  to  accept  what  we  tell  you  simply
because  we  are  spirit-messengers — the  new  merely  because  it
is  new — we  ask  you  to  weigh  in  the  scales  of  reason,  to  pon-
der in  the  light  of  intellect,  to  reject  if  you  be  not  satisfied,  in
no  case  to  assent  or  to  act  until  conviction  has  been  thoroughly
established.

THE   CLAIM   MADE.  89

So  that  not  only  is  the  matter  of  the  spirit-creed  eminently
conformable  to  right  reason,  but  the  grounds  on  which  we  ask
you  to  accept  it  are  those  which  a  rational  and  logical  mind
will  be  most  disposed  to  accept.  God  forbid  that  we  should
•even  seem  to  hurry  any  man  into  antagonism,  real  or  fancied,
with  a  creed  which  has  for  eighteen  hundred  years  and  more
been  adorned  by  the  lives  of  many  myriads  of  earnest  and
progressive,  as  well  as  earnest  though  mistaken  souls.  The
fact  that  it  has  long  endured  entitles  it  to  the  reverence  due
to  antiquity,  though  with  our  extended  view  we  can  see  that
it  also  makes  it  needful  that  some  of  its  provisions,  ad-
mirably suited  as  they  were  for  a  less  advanced  generation,
•should  now  fitly  be  enlarged  and  spiritualised.  At  any  rate,  we
would  not  disturb  its  reign  with  violent  revolution.  We  would
refine  and  infuse  new  life ;  we  would  not  dethrone  and  humble
in  the  dust.  As  the  Saviour  told,  in  the  accents  of  a  life  of
loving  and  self-sacrificing  purity,  the  story  of  a  nobler  faith
than  that  which  Sinai  had  revealed  in  accents  of  thunder,  so  we
take  up  the  Divine  story  at  a  later  day,  and  proclaim  for  a
world's  acceptance  a  creed  more  fitted  to  its  advanced  capa-
cities, more  suited  to  its  later  wants.

"It  will  reject  it !"  Well,  then,  we  at  least  have  offered  it,
and  to  those  who  will  surely  grasp  at  it,  its  blessed  influence
shall  seem  the  brighter  from  the  contrast.  It  is  long  frequently
between  the  first  promulgation  of  a  truth  and  its  final  accept-
ance. The  seed-time  must  precede  the  crop,  and  the  rain  and
the  frost  and  the  cheerless  wintertide  may  seem  to  be  long
•drawn  out,  but  the  sun  bursts  forth  at  length,  and  the  crop
springs  up,  and  the  glad  summer  comes  with  the  reaping  and
housing  of  the  fruit.  The  day  of  preparation  may  be  long,
the  night  during  which  the  sower  waits  may  be  weary,  but
the  harvest  surely  comes.  You  cannot  retard  it ;  you  may  aid
in  reaping  it ;  you  may  even  assist  in  sowing  the  seed ;  but
in  spite  of  man's  opposition,  whether  he  aids  or  not,  God's
work  will  be  done.  It  is  to  the  individual  alone  that  accept-
ance or  rejection  of  the  Divine  message  matters  materially.
A  soul  is  advanced  or  retarded  in  the  life  of  progress ;  and
the  angels  rejoice  or  mourn  over  the  issue.  That  is  all.

90  SPIRIT-TEACHLNGS.

You  inquire  from  us  what  position  we  assign  to  Jesus  the-
Christ.  We  arc  not  careful, to  enter  into  curious  comparisons
between  different  teachers  who,  in  different  ages,  have  been
sent  from  God.  The  time  is  not  yet  come  for  that ;  but  this,
we  know,  that  no  spirit  more  pure,  more  godlike,  more  noble,,
more  blessing  and  more  blessed,  ever  descended  to  find  a  home
on  your  earth.  None  more  worthily  earned  by  a  life  of  self-
sacrificing  love  the  adoring  reverence  and  devotion  of  mankind
None  bestowed  more  blessings  on  humanity ;  none  wrought  a
greater  work  for  God.  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should
enter  into  curious  comparisons  between  God's  great  teachers.
Rather  would  we  give  to  all  the  meed  of  praise  that  is  their
due,  and  hold  up  the  example  of  self-denial,  self-sacrifice,  and
love  to  the  imitation  of  a  generation  which  sadly  needs  such
a  pattern.  Had  men  devoted  their  energies  to  the  imitation
of  the  simplicity  and  sincerity,  the  loving  toil  and  earnest
purpose,  the  self-sacrifice  and  purity  of  thought  and  life  which
elevated  and  distinguished  the  Christ,  they  had  wrangled  less
of  His  nature,  and  had  wasted  fewer  words  upon  useless  meta-
physical sophistries.  Those  of  your  theologians  who  dwelt  in.
the  days  of  darkness,  and  who  have  left  to  you  an  accursed
heritage  in  their  idle  and  foolish  speculations,  would  have
turned  their  minds  into  a  more  useful  channel,  and  have  been  a
blessing  instead  of  a  curse  to  mankind.  Men  would  not  have
derogated  from  the  honour  due  to  the  great  God  alone,  but
would  have  accepted,  as  Jesus  intended,  the  simple  Gospel  that
He  preached.  But  instead  of  this  they  have  elaborated  an
anthropomorphic  theology  which  has  led  them  to  wander
further  and  further  from  the  simplicity  of  His  teaching;  which
has  turned  His  name  and  creed  into  a  battle-ground  of  sects ;.
and  has  resulted  in  a  parody  on  his  teachings — a  sight  on
which  His  pure  spirit  looks  with  sorrow  and  pity.

Friend,  you  must  discriminate  between  God's  truth  and
man's  glosses.  We  do  not  dishonour  the  Lord  Jesus — before
whose  exalted  majesty  we  bow — by  refusing  to  acquiesce  in  a-
fiction,  which  He  would  disown,  and  which  man  has  forced  upon
His  name.  No,  assuredly :  but  they  who  from  a  strict  adherence
to  the  literal  text  of  Scripture — a  text  which  they  have  not

A   SPIRITUALIZED   RELIGION.  91

understood,  and  the  Spirit  of  which  they  have  never  grasixxl
— have  dishonoured  the  Great  Father  of  Him,  and  of  all  alike,
and  have  impiously,  albeit  ignorantly,  derogated  from  the
honour  due  to  the  Supreme  alone.  Not  we,  but  they  dis-
honour God !  Not  we,  but  they,  though  they  have  the  pre-
scription of  long  usage,  though  their  words  be  coloured  by
extracts  from  writings  which  they  have  decided  to  be  Divine :
and  though  in  those  writings  there  be  found  words  which
pronounce  a  curse  on  any  who  may  disagree  with  what  is
stated  there.  We  do  not  regard  such  curses  save  with  pity.
We  do  not  labour  to  upset  belief  when  it  is  a  harmless
error,  but  we  can  lend  no  countenance  to  views  that  dishonour
God,  and  retard  a  soul's  progress.  The  attributing  to  a  man
of  Divine  honour,  to  the  exclusion  in  very  many  cases  of  per-
sonal honour  and  love  for  the  Great  Father,  is  a  mischievous
error  which  derogates  from  the  duty  of  man  to  his  God.
The  holding  of  a  narrow,  cold,  dogmatic  creed,  in  all  its  rigid,
lifeless  literalism,  cramps  the  soul,  dwarfs  its  spirituality,
clogs  its  progress,  and  stunts  its  growth.  "  The  letter,"
says  your  Scripture,  "the  letter  killebh,  but  the  spirit  giveth
life."  Hence  we  denounce  such  views  of  God  as  are  con-
tained in  the  fable  of  a  material  hell ;  and  we  proclaim  to
you  purer  and  more  rational  ideas  than  are  contained  in  the
orthodox  notions  of  Atonement  and  vicarious  sacrifice.  We
proclaim  to  you  a  spiritualised  religion.  We  call  you  from
the  dead  formalism,  the  lifeless,  loveless  literalism  of  the  past,
to  a  religion  of  spiritualised  truth,  to  the  lovely  symbolism  of
angel  teaching,  to  the  higher  planes  of  spirit,  where  the  mate-
rial finds  no  place,  and  the  formal  dogmatism  of  the  past  is
for  ever  gone.

We  have  spoken  to  you  with  care,  and  with  a  due  sense  of
the  importance  of  what  we  say.  Dwell  on  it  with  care.
Ponder  it  with  single  desire  for  truth,  and  seek  the  Divine
aid  ministered  to  all  who  pray  for  it.

-f  IMPERATOK.

SECTION   XIL

fl  am  reluctant  to  publish  what  is  so  private  in  its
nature  and  bearings :  but  I  am  constrained  to  do
so,  and  my  justification  is  that  what  was  the  ex-
perience of  one  may  be  the  experience  of  many,
and  the  history  of  my  mental  and  spiritual
struggles  may  be  helpful  to  others  who  are  passing
through  a  similar  phase.  After  an  interval  of
some  days,  during  which  I  received  no  communi-
cation on  the  subject  of  the  religious  teaching
of  spirits,  I  requested  permission  to  state  further
objections  which  pressed  strongly  on  my  mind.
As  I  recall  my  state,  I  was  perplexed  and  startled
by  what  had  been  said.  I  was  unable  to  accept
what  was  so  new;  and  the  great  point  that
weighed  with  me  was  that  of  "  Spirit  Identity."
It  seemed  in  my  then  state  that  I  must  have  com-
plete proof  of  the  earth  identity  of  the  communi-
cating spirit  before  I  could  accept  the  statements
made.  I  believed  such  direct  demonstration  to  be
procurable  ;  and  I  was  distressed  that  it  was  not
given.  I  did  not  then  know  (July,  1873)  as  I  do
now  that  the  evidence  of  conviction  is  what  alone
is  to  be  had ;  and  that  no  cut-and-dried  plan  such
as  I  propounded  would  really  have  carried  with  it
the  conviction  I  imagined.  Moreover,  I  was  dis-
tressed by  the  feeling  that  much  that  passed
current  for  spirit  communication  was  silly  and
frivolous,  if  not  mischievous.  I  compared  the
teaching  of  the  Christian  moralists  with  spirit
teaching  very  much  to  the  disadvantage  of  the
.  latter.  I  also  considered  that  there  was  very  wide
divergence  between  teachings  given  by  spirits,  and
that  all  sorts  of  opinions  were  professed.  Most  of
these  I  disliked  personally,  and  I  did  not  believe
that  they  benefited  the  people  who  received  them.
I  fancied  that  many  such  were  enthusiasts  and
fanatics,  and  was  repelled  by  the  idea.  Neither
from  internal  nor  external  evidence  was  I  greatly

THE   GOD-IDEA.  Q$

attracted,  and  the  objections  that  I  put  at  that
time  were  directed  to  the  points  above  noticed.
They  related  principally  to  evidence  about  iden-
tity, to  what  I  thought  would  be  the  probable
dealings  of  God  with  mankind,  and  to  the  general
character  and  outcome  of  Spiritualism.  The  next
answer  made  to  me  was  as  follows]  : —

Friend,  we  are  pleased  to  converse  with  you  again;  and  if
it  be  impossible  for  us  to  answer  all  your  queries,  and  to
solve  all  your  problems,  we  can  at  least  rectify  some  errors
into  which  you  have  fallen  as  to  the  dealings  of  God  with
man,  and  the  tendency  of  the  mission  which  we  have  in
charge.

The  root  of  your  error  seems  to  lie  in  a  false  conception
of  God  and  of  His  dealings  with  mankind.  Surely  the  page
of  human  history  bears  upon  it  the  story  of  one  uniformly
progressive  revelation  of  One  and  the  same  God.  The
attempts  of  men  to  realise  and  picture  to  themselves  the  God
whom  they  ignorantly  worship  have  led  to  the  strangest  and
most  fallacious  notions  as  to  His  nature  and  operations.

In  the  early  days  of  man's  history  the  crude  notion  of  a
God  inherent  in  his  spiritual  nature  took  shape  as  a  fetish,
which  was  alternately  prayed  to  with  reverence  or  east  aside
with  contumely,  in  proportion  as  the  prayer  was  granted  or
delayed.  Men  knew  not  that  the  block  before  which  they
bowed  was  powerless,  and  that  round  them  hovered  ever  the-
bands  of  spirit  ministers  who  were  ready  to  succour  and
defend  them,  and  to  bear  to  them  answers  to  their  reasonable
prayers.  They  could  grasp  no  more  of  God  than  that.  The-
tangible,  palpable  image  was  to  them  the  embodiment  of  their
idea.  Mark  this  !  of  their  idea  of  God,  not  of  God  Himself,
but  of  the  crude  conception  which  was  the  best  idea  they
could  frame.  Drawing  their  information  from  their  own
dealings,  they  imagined  for  themselves  certain  rules  of  con-
duct by  which  they  proceeded  to  judge  the  God  whom  they
had  created.  They  feigned  for  Him  human  passions  such
as  they  found  worthy  of  respect  in  their  fellows.  They  cred-
ited Him  with  some  failings  which  were  inseparable  from

04  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

humanity  as  they  knew  it.  He  was  jealous  of  His  honour;  long-
suffering  and  of  tender  pity;  according  as  they  who  spoke  of
Him  imagined  that  He  ought  to  be.  He  was,  in  short,  a
glorified  man — a  man  endued  with  omnipotence,  omniscience,
-and  omnipresence.  They  feigned  Him  such  and  made  Him
act  accordingly.  Consequently  all  the  revelation  of  God  is
characteristic  of  the  age  in  which  it  is  given.  It  grows  with
human  development,  and  is  progressively  proportioned  to  the
•development  of  human  intellect  and  refinement,  simply  because
the  human  medium  becomes  capable  of  being  impressed  with
more  accurate  views  of  the  Deity  in  proportion  as  he  has
shaken  himself  free  from  his  former  fetters  of  ignorance,  and
has  himself  progressed  towards  light  and  knowledge.

We  have  frequently  said  that  God  reveals  Himself  as  man
can  bear  it.  It  must  needs  be  so.  He  is  revealed  through  a
human  medium,  and  can  only  be  made  known  in  such  measure
&s  the  medium  can  receive  the  communication.  It  is  impossible
that  knowledge  of  God  should  outstrip  man's  capacity.  Were
we  now  to  tell  you — if  we  could — of  our  more  perfect  theology
it  would  seem  to  you  strange  and  unintelligible.  We  shall,
by  slow  degrees,  instil  into  your  mind  so  much  of  truth  as
you  can  receive,  and  then  you  will  see  your  present  errors.
But  that  is  not  yet.  Indeed,  since  the  conception  which  each
frames  for  himself  is  to  him  his  God,  it  cannot  be  that  revela-
tion can  be  in  advance  of  capacity.  It  is  in  the  nature  of
things  impossible.

Hence  you  see  that  when  you  credit  God  with  motives  and
say  "This  cannot  be.  God  is  acting  here  contrary  to  His
nature.  He  cannot  so  act  now,  because  He  did  not  so  act
then,"  you  are  simply  saying,  "  My  idea  of  God  is  so  and  so,
and  I  cannot  at  present  get  another  one.  According  to  what
I  believe,  my  God  would  not  do  so."  And  that  is  precisely
what  we  say.  You  have  made  your  God,  and  you  have  made
Him  act  as  you  see  fit.  By  and  bye,  as  your  mind  expands —
either  in  your  present  state  of  being  or  in  another — you  will
get  fresh  light,  and  then  you  will  say,  "  Now  I  see  that  I  was
wrong.  God  is  not  what  I  fancied  at  all.  How  could  I  evei
have  entertained  such  notions  ! "

THE   GOD-IDEA.  95

This  is  very  much  the  case  with  all  progressive  minds.  To
some  the  time  of  development  comes  not  in  this  life.  They
must  wait  for  a  newer  light  in  a  newer  life.  But  to  some
there  comes  a  flood  of  knowledge  even  in  their  present  place
of  existence.  The  old  grows  flat  and  profitless.  The  soul
craves  for  a  newer  and  truer  revelation  ;  for  something  which
shall  be  as  the  spirit  among  the  dry  bones,  and  shall  give
thorn  a  resurrection  unto  life.

Well,  you  have  had,  or  you  are  having,  your  revelation.
Your  mind,  as  some  would  say,  has  widened,  and  has  pictured
&  God  more  in  accordance  with  its  advanced  capacities.

You  have  received  from  an  external  source — the  same
whence  all  other  Divine  knowledge  flows  down  to  man — a
newer  and  richer  revealing  of  the  Supreme,  others  may  say.

Call  it  what  you  will.  The  two  operations  of  revelation
and  comprehension,  of  knowledge  and  capacity,  must  be
correlative.  The  knowledge  does  not  come  until  there  is
capacity  to  receive  it.  Neither  does  the  mind  get  higher
revelation  until  it  has  so  far  advanced  as  to  feel  the  want  of
it ;  and  that  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  is  itself  the  agent
through  which  comes  the  revelation  of  which  it  is  the  recipient.

All  your  fancied  theories  about  God  have  filtered  down  to
you  through  human  channels ;  the  embodiments  of  human
cravings  after  knowledge  of  Him  ;  the  creation  of  minds  that
were  undeveloped,  whose  wants  were  not  your  wants,  whose
God,  or  rather  whose  notions  about  God  are  not  yours.  You
try  hard  to  make  the  ideas  fit  in,  but  they  will  not  fit,  because
they  are  the  produce  of  divers  intelligences  in  divers  degrees
of  development.

Think  !  You  say  to  us  that  we  are  not  of  God,  because  our
ideas  of  Him  made  known  to  you  are  not  compatible  with
some  notions  which  you  have  derived  from  certain  of  the
books  in  your  sacred  records.  Tell  us  which  is  the  God  with
whom  we  are  at  variance  in  our  ideal.  Is  it  the  God  who
walked  in  human  form  with  Adam,  and  is  fabled  to  have

wreaked  direful  vengeance  on  the  io-norant  creatures  who  are

&

said  to  have  committed  what  you  now  see  to  be  a  very  venial
fault  ?     Or,  is  it  the  God  who  commanded  his  faithful  friend

96  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

to  sacrifice  to  Him  the  only  child  of  His  love  as  an  acceptable-
offering  ?  Or  is  it  the  God  who  reigned  over  Israel  as  an
earthly  monarch,  and  whose  care  was  feigned  to  be  devoted
to  the  enunciation  of  sanitary  laws,  or  to  the  construction  of  a
tabernacle,  who  went  forth  with  the  armies  of  Israel  to  battle,
and  issued  bloodthirsty  laws  and  regulations  for  the  extir-
pation of  innocent  and  unoffending  peoples  ?  Or  is  it,
perchance,  the  God  who  enabled  his  servant  Joshua  to  arrest
the  course  of  the  universe  and  to  paralyse  the  solar  system,  in
order  that  the  Israelites  might  revel  a  few  hours  more  in  gore
and  carnage  ?  Or  is  it  rather  with  the  God  who  was  feigned
to  be  so  angry  with  His  chosen  people  because  they  wished  for
a  visible  monarch,  that  He  visited  upon  them  an  elaborate  re-
venge extending  over  many  hundred  of  years  ?  Or  with  which
of  the  Gods  of  the  prophets  are  we  at  variance  ?  with  Isaiah's
God,  or  with  Ezekiel's  ?  or  with  the  lugubrious  Deity  that
Jeremiah's  morbid  mind  imagined  ?  or  with  David's  Divinity ;
half  father,  half  tyrant,  cruel  and  yielding  by  turns,  always
inconsistent  and  irrational  ?  or  with  Joel's  ?  or  with  John's  ?
or  with  Paul's  calvinistic  conception,  imagined  and  painted
with  horrid  phantasies  of  predestination,  and  hell,  and  election,
and  a  dreamy  listless  heaven  ?  Are  we  at  variance  with  Paul,
or  John,  or  Jesus  ?

But  there  is  no  need  to  press  the  fact  that  Revelation  has
always  been  proportioned  to  man's  capacity,  and  coloured  by
man's  mind.  The  idea  of  God  has  been  throughout  the  ages
the  conception,  more  or  less  vivid,  of  those  who  have  been  the
media  of  revelation.  The  implanted  idea  has  taken  form  and
shape  from  the  mental  surroundings  of  the  medium  through
whom  it  was  given.  Such  portion  of  truth  as  the  teachers
have  been  able  to  impart  has  been  moulded  by  the  spirit  of
the  medium  into  an  individual  shape.  To  none  has  complete
truth  been  given,  only  so  much  of  truth,  such  aspect  of  truth
as  was  necessary  for  a  particular  age  and  people.  Hence  it  is
that  the  conceptions  of  God,  such  as  those  we  have  now
alluded  to,  are  various  and  divergent.  Of  course  we  and  our
God  are  not  Joshua  and  his  God :  neither  are  we  Paul  and  his
God  :  though  we  challenge  comparison  between  the  God  we

THE   NATURE   OF   GOD.  97

know  and  reveal,  and  that  God  who  was  dimly  shadowed
forth  to  a  people  that  knew  Him  not,  by  Him  who  knew  Him
best,  and  lived  nearest  to  Him,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  He
had  received  conceptions  of  Deity  far  clearer  than  any  which.
His  followers  have  grasped ;  His  religion  was  simple,  plain,,
and  earnest.  His  theology  was  equally  plain.  The  cry  to-
"  Our  Father  who  art  in  Heaven,"  how  widely  does  it  differ
from  the  elaborate  dissertations  on  theology  in  which  the
Supreme  is  first  informed  of  the  character  which  man  has-
assigned  to  Him,  and  then  is  requested  to  act  up  to  it  with
especial  reference  to  the  wants  or  fancied  wants  which  the
ignorant  worshipper  puts  forward  !

God!  Ye  know  Him  not!  One  day,  when  the  Spirit
stands  within  the  veil  which  shrouds  the  spirit  world  from,
mortal  gaze,  you  shall  wonder  at  your  ignorance  of  Him  whom
you  have  so  foolishly  imagined !  He  is  far  other  than  you  have
pictured  Him.  Were  He  such  as  you  have  pictured  Him,,
were  He  such  as  you  think,  He  would  avenge  on  pre-
sumptuous man  the  insults  which  he  puts  on  his  Creator.
But  He  is  other,  far  other  than  man's  poor  grovelling  mind
can  grasp,  and  He  pities  and  forgives  the  ignorance  of  the
blind  mortal  who  paints  Him  after  a  self-imagined  pattern.
He  blames  not  the  ignorance.  That  is  no  shame,  so  it  be  not-
wilful.  But  He  blames  the  folly  which  hugs  a  low  concep-
tion of  Him,  and  will  have  no  light  let  in  on  the  dark  and
musty  temple  in  which  that  idol  is  enshrined.  He  blames  the
lovers  of  darkness,  the  haters  of  light,  who  cling  to  the  un-
developed fancies  of  the  past,  and  can  see  no  beauty  in  the
simple  moral  grandeur  of  the  God  whom  Christ  revealed,  but
must  needs  graft  on  to  that  noble  conception  the  anthropo-
morphic fancies  of  previous  unenlightened  ages.  Of  such
there  are  not  a  few  who  cannot  receive  higher  teachings  yet.
But  of  such  are  not  you  !  When  you  rashly  complain  of  us
that  our  teaching  to  you  controverts  that  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, we  can  but  answer  that  it  does  indeed  controvert  that
old  and  repulsive  view  of  the  good  God  which  made  Him  an
angry,  jealous,  human  tyrant :  but  that  it  is  in  fullest  accord
8

98  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

with  that  divinely-inspired  revelation  of  Himself  which  He
gave  through  Jesus  Christ — a  revelation  which  man  has  done
so  much  to  debase,  and  from  which  the  best  of  the  followers  of
Christ  have  so  grievously  fallen  away.

If  there  be  nought  in  what  we  say  of  God  and  of  man's
after-life  that  commends  itself  to  you,  it  must  be  that  your
mind  has  ceased  to  love  the  grander  and  simpler  conceptions
which  it  had  once  learned  to  drink  in.  It  must  be  that  the
machinations  of  the  adversaries  have  availed  to  reach  your
spirit,  and  that  the  dark  edge  of  that  cloud  which  they  have
interposed  between  your  world  and  its  God,  is  resting  with
baleful  influence  upon  you.  We  pray  that  we  may  be  per-
mitted to  raise  it,  and  to  pour  into  your  soul  once  more  the
beams  of  enlightenment  and  peace.  We  do  not  fear  that  any
permanent  harm  will  rest  with  you.  Nor  do  we  regret  that
you  should  try  the  foundations  on  which  your  knowledge
rests.  It  will  not  be  wasted  time  to  do  so.

Cease  to  be  anxious  about  the  minute  questions  which  are
of  minor  moment.  Dwell  much  on  the  great,  the  overwhelm-
ing necessity  for  a  clearer  revealing  of  the  Supreme  :  on  the
blank  and  cheerless  ignorance  of  God  and  of  us  which  has
crept  over  the  world :  on  the  noble  creed  we  teach,  on  the
bright  future  we  reveal.  Cease  to  be  perplexed  by  thoughts
of  an  imagined  Devil.  For  the  honest,  pure,  and  truthful  soul
there  is  no  Devil  nor  Prince  of  Evil  such  as  theology  has
feigned.

Evil  comes  not  nigh  him ;  the  adversaries  flee  from  his
presence,  and  the  powers  of  evil  are  powerless  before  him.
He  is  guarded  around  by  angel  guards,  ministered  to  by  bright
spirits,  who  watch  over  him  and  direct  his  footsteps.  For
him  there  waits  a  career  of  progressive  increase  in  knowledge,
and  in  all  that  elevates  and  ennobles  the  intelligence.  He
need  fear  no  Devil,  unless  he  creates  one  for  himself.  His
affinity  for  good  draws  around  him  influences  for  good.  He
is  fenced  around  by  guardians  ;  nor  can  he,  save  by  voluntary
surrender,  fall  a  final  victim  to  the  foe.  His  is  no  exemption
from  temptation,  from  the  snares  of  the  destroyer,  or  from  the

THE  DEVIL.  99

atmosphere  which  during  his  probation  time  he  must  breathe.
The  clouds  of  sorrow  and  anguish  of  soul  may  gather  round
him,  and  his  spirit  may  be  saddened  with  the  burden  of  sin —
weighed  down  with  consciousness  of  surrounding  misery  and
guilt,  but  no  fabled  Devil  can  gain  dominion  over  him,  or  pre-
vail to  drag  down  his  soul  to  hell.  All  the  sadness  of  spirit,
the  acquaintance  with  grief,  the  intermingling  with  guilt,  is
part  of  the  experience,  in  virtue  of  which  his  soul  shall  rise
hereafter.  The  guardians  are  training  and  fitting  it  by  those
means  to  progress,  and  jealously  protect  it  from  the  dominion
of  the  foe.

It  is  only  they  who,  by  a  fondness  for  evil,  by  a  lack  of
spiritual  and  excess  of  corporeal  development,  attract  to  them-
selves the  congenial  spirits  of  the  undeveloped  who  have  left
the  body,  but  have  not  forgotten  its  desires.  These  alone  risk
incursion  of  evil.  These  by  proclivity  attract  evil,  and  it
dwells  with  them  at  their  invitation.  They  attract  the  lower
spirits  who  hover  nearest  Earth,  and  who  are  but  too  ready
to  rush  in  and  mar  our  plans,  and  ruin  our  work  for  souls.
These  are  they  of  whom  you  speak  when  you  say  in  haste,
that  the  result  of  Spiritualism  is  not  for  good.  You  err,
friend.  Blame  not  us  that  the  lower  spirits  manifest  for
those  who  bid  them  welcome.  Blame  man's  insensate  folly,
which  will  choose  the  low  and  grovelling  rather  than  the  pure
and  elevated.  Blame  his  foolish  laws,  which  daily  hurry  into
a  life  for  which  they  are  unprepared,  thousands  of  spirits,  ham-
pered and  dragged  down  by  a  life  of  folly  and  sin,  which  has
been  fostered  by  custom  and  fashion.  Blame  the  ginshops,  and
the  madhouses,  and  the  prisons,  and  the  encouraged  luste  and
fiendish  selfishness  of  man.  This  it  is  which  damns  legions  of
spirits — not,  as  ye  fancy,  in  a  sea  of  material  fire,  but  in  the
flames  of  perpetuated  lust,  condemned  to  burn  itself  out  in
hopeless  longing  till  the  purged  soul  rises  through  the  fire  and
surmounts  its  dead  passions.  Yes,  blame  these  and  kindred
causes,  if  there  be  around  undeveloped  intelligences  who  shock
you  by  their  deception,  and  annoy  you  by  frivolity  and  false-
hood.

1QO  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

More  of  this  hereafter.    Already  we  have  said  more  than
we  had  intended.     And  for  myself,  I  hear  the  call  which
summons  me  to  the  adoration  of  the  Supreme,  when  my
prayer  shall  rise  to  the  throne  of  Divine  pity  that  a  rill
that  consoling  grace  may  trickle  down  to  your  vexed  spirit,
and  may  shed  on  it  healing  and  peace— the  peace  of
quietness  of  assurance  and  peace.

SECTION   XIII.

![ON  reading  over  consecutively  this  series  of  communica-
tions which  I  had  received,  1  was  more  than  ever
struck  by  their  beauty,  both  of  form  and  matter.
When  I  considered  that  they  were  written  with
vast  rapidity,  without  conscious  thought  on  my  part,
that  they  were  free  from  blot  or  blemish  of  gram-
matical construction,  and  that  there  was  no  inter-
lineation or  correction  throughout  their  whole
course,  I  could  not  but  wonder  at  their  form.
As  regards  the  subject-matter,  I  was  still  in  diffi-
culty. There  was  much  in  them  with  which  I
sympathised;  but  at  the  same  time  I  could  not  get
rid  of  the  idea  that  the  faith  of  Christendom  was
practically  upset  by  their  issue.  I  believed  that,
however  it  might  be  disguised,  such  would  be  their
outcome  in  the  end.  No  man,  I  reasoned,  could
accept  such  teaching,  in  its  spirit  as  well  as  in  its
letter,  without  being  led  to  throw  aside  very  much
that  the  Christian  world  had  agreed  to  receive
as  de  fide.  The  central  dogmas  seemed  especially
attacked :  and  it  was  this  that  startled  me.  A
very  extended  acquaintance  with  the  writings  of
theologians — Greek,  Roman,  Anglican,  and  Pro-
testant, especially  those  of  the  modern  German
school  of  thought — had  prepared  me  to  make  little
•of  divergence  of  opinion  on  minor  matters.  I  knew
that  such  divergences  were  inseparable  from  the
•subject.  I  also  knew  that  individual  opinion  on
.abstruse  mysteries  of  revelation  is  of  little  worth.
I  should  have  even  been  prepared  for  startling
;  statements  on  such  matters.  But  here  was  a  very
different  matter.  The  points  impugned  seemed  to
me  to  be  of  the  very  essence  of  the  Christian
religion.  To  "spiritualise,"  or,  as  I  preferred  to
•call  it,  to  explain  away  these,  seemed  to  me  abso-
lutely fatal  to  my  belief  in  any  revelation  whatso-
ever. After  long  and  patient  thought,  I  could  come
to  no  other  conclusion ;  and  I  shrank  from  accept-
ing such  momentous  issues  on  the  ipse  dixit  of  an

102  SPIK1T-TEACHINGS.

intelligence  of  whom  I  knew,  and  could  know,  80
little.  I  felt  that  I  must  have  more  time  for
thought :  and  that  I,  at  any  rate,  was  not  ripe  for
the  acceptance  of  a  creed,  however  beautiful,  which
was  not  better  attested,  and  less  iconoclastic.  These
objections  I  stated.  In  answer  it  was  written] : —

You  have  said  wisely.  Time  is  requisite  that  you  may-
ponder  deeply  that  which  is  indeed  of  vital  import.  We  leave-
you  to  think  over  what  we  have  advanced  with  a  full  con-
viction that  you  will,  in  time,  assimilate  the  teaching,  and
appreciate  its  importance.  Should  you  desire  enlightenment
from  us  on  any  points,  it  shall  be  given;  but  we  will  not  force
upon  you  other  communications  until  time  has  done  for  you
what  you  require.  Let  patience  and  earnest  prayerfulness
have  full  sway.

You  know  not  in  your  cold  earth  atmosphere,  so  chilling,  so-
repellent  to  spirit  life,  how  the  magnetic  rapport  between  your
spirit  and  the  guides  who  wait  to  bear  its  petition  upwards  is
fostered  by  frequent  prayer.  It  is  as  though  the  bond  were
tightened  by  frequent  use;  as  though  the  intimacy  ripened
by  mutual  association.  You  would  pray  more  did  you  know
how  rich  a  spiritual  blessing  prayer  brings.  Your  learned  sages
have  discussed  much  of  the  value  of  prayer,  and  have  wandered
in  a  maze  of  opinion,  befogged  and  ignorant  of  the  real  issue.
They  do  not  know — how  should  they? — of  the  angel  messengers
who  hover  round  ready  to  help  the  spirit  that  cries  to  its  God.
They  know  not  of  the  existence  of  such,  for  they  cannot  test
their  presence  by  human  science  in  its  present  state ;  and  so,
with  crude  effort,  they  would  reduce  the  results  of  prayer  to
line  and  measure.  They  try  to  gauge  its  results,  and  to  esti-
mate its  effect  by  the  compilation  of  statistics.  And  still  they
find  themselves  in  difficulty,  for  though  they  grasp  the  shell,
the  spirit  eludes  their  ken.  Such  results  are  not  to  be  so
measured,  for  they  are  imperceptible  by  man's  science.  They
are  spiritual,  varying  in  various  cases:  different  as  are  the^
agencies  at  work.

Frequently  it  is  the  unspoken  petition  which  is  not  granted
that  is  the  cause  of  richest  blessing  to  the  praying  soul.  The:

PKAYER.

very  cry  of  the  burdened  spirit  shot  forth  into  the  void, — a
cry  wrung  out  by  bitter  sorrow — is  an  unknown  relief.  The
spirit  is  lightened,  though  the  prayer  is  not  granted  in  the
terms  of  its  petition.  You  know  not  why :  but  could  you  see,  as
we  see,  the  guardians  labouring  to  pour  into  the  sorrow-laden
soul  the  balm  of  sympathy  and  consolation,  you  would  know
whence  comes  that  strange  peace  which  steals  over  the  spirit,
and  assures  it  of  a  sympathising  and  consoling  God.  The
prayer  has  done  its  work,  for  it  has  drawn  down  an  angel
friend :  and  the  bursting  heart,  crushed  with  its  load  of  care
and  sorrow,  is  comforted  by  angel  sympathy.

This,  the  magnetic  sympathy  which  we  can  shed  around
those  with  whom  we  are  in  close  communion,  is  one  of  the
blessed  effects  which  can  be  wrought  by  the  cry  of  a  human
soul  reaching  upward  to  its  God.  And  under  no  other  condi-
tions can  the  full  blessedness  of  spirit  intercourse  be  realised
It  is  the  spirit  that  is  most  spiritualised  that  alone  can  enter
into  the  secret  chambers  where  the  angels  dwell.  It  is  to  the
soul  that  lives  in  frequent  communion  with  us  that  we  are  best
able  to  come  nigh.  This,  friend,  is  invariable:  another  part  of
that  unchangeable  law  which  governs  all  our  intercourse  with
your  world.  To  the  spiritual  soul  come,  in  richest  measure,
spiritual  gifts.

Nor  is  it  always  the  answer  which  man  in  his  ignorance
expects,  that  is  the  truest  response  to  his  petition.  Many
times  to  grant  his  request  would  be  to  do  him  grievous  harm.
He  has  asked  ignorantly,  petulantly,  foolishly:  and  his  prayer
is  unheeded  in  its  request:  but  it  has  availed  to  place  his
spirit  in  communion  with  an  intelligence  which  is  waiting
an  opportunity  of  approach,  and  which  can  minister  to  him
strength  and  consolation  in  his  necessity.

'Twere  well  if  men  would  more  strive  to  live  a  life  of  prayer.
Not  the  morbid  life  of  devotion  falsely  so-called,  which  con-
sists in  neglecting  duty  and  in  spending  the  precious  hours  of
the  probation  life  in  morbid  self-anatomy  :  in  developing  un-
healthy self -scrutiny :  in  idle  dreamy  contemplation,  or  in
forced  and  unreal  supplication.  The  life  of  prayer  is  far  other,
as  we  advise  it.  Prayer  to  be  real  must  be  the  heart-cry,

104  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

spontaneous  and  impulsive,  to  friends  who  hover  near.  The
fancy  of  a  prayer  to  the  ear  of  an  ever-present  God  who  is
willing  to  alter  unalterable  laws  in  response  to  a  capricious
request,  has  done  much  to  discredit  the  idea  of  prayer  alto-
gether. Believe  it  not !  Prayer — the  spontaneous  cry  of  the
soul  to  its  God  through  the  friends  who,  it  knows,  are  near,
and  are  ever  ready  to  catch  up  the  unuttered  petition  and
bear  it  upwards  and  ever  upwards  till  it  reach  a  power  that
can  respond — this  is  no  matter  of  formal  preparation.  It  con-
sists not  in  any  act  of  outward  show.  It  is  not  necessarily
syllabled  in  utterance :  far  less  is  it  trammelled  by  conven-
tional form,  or  bound  up  in  stereotyped  phraseology.  True
prayer  is  the  ready  voice  of  spirit  communing  with  spirit :  the
cry  of  the  soul  to  invisible  friends  with  whom  it  is  used  to
speak  :  the  flashing  along  the  magnetic  line  a  message  of  re-
quest which  brings,  swift  as  thought,  its  ready  answer  back.

It  is  the  placing  of  a  suffering  soul  in  union  with  a  minis-
tering spirit  who  can  soothe  and  heal.  It  needs  no  words,  no
attitude,  no  form.  It  is  truest  when  these  are  absent,  or  at
least  unstudied.  It  needs  but  a  recognition  of  a  near  guar-
dian, and  an  impulse  to  communion.  To  this  end  it  must  be
habitual :  else,  like  the  limb  long  disused  the  impulse  is  par-
alysed. Hence,  it  is  those  of  you  who  live  most  in  the  spirit
who  penetrate  deepest  into  the  hidden  mysteries.  We  can
come  nearest  to  them.  We  can  touch  hidden  chords  in  their
nature  which  vibrate  only  to  our  touch,  and  are  never  stirred
by  your  world's  influences.  'Tis  they  who  reach  highest  in
their  earth-life,  for  they  have  learned  already  to  commune
with  spirit,  and  are  fed  with  spiritual  food.  For  them
are  opened  mysteries  closed  to  more  material  natures :  and
their  perpetual  prayer  has  wrought  for  them  this  at  least,  that
they  live  above  the  sufferings  and  sorrows  from  which  it  can-
not exempt  them,  seeing  that  such  are  necessary  to  their
development.

Alas !  alas  i  we  speak  of  that  which  is  little  known.  Were
this  grand  truth  better  realised,  man  would  live  in  the  atmos-
phere of  the  pure  and  elevated  spirits.  His  spiritual  attitude
would  drive  from  him  the  base  and  baleful  influences  which

PRAYER.  105

too  often  beset  those  who  pry  unbidden  into  mysteries  that
.are  too  high  for  them,  and  which,  alas  !  beset  and  annoy  even
the  best  at  times.  If  it  prevailed  not  to  obtain  exemption  it
would  provide  protection,  and  do  more  to  strengthen  us  than
all  else  that  man  could  do.  It  would  avail  more  to  sanctify
the  acts,  to  purify  the  motives,  and  to  keep  alive  the  reality
of  spirit  communion  than  anything  which  we  know  of.

Pray  then ;  but  see  that  you  pray  not  with  formality,  heart-
lessly, and  with  unreal  supplication.  Commune  with  us  in
communion  of  the  spirit.  Keep  a  single  eye  to  the  issues  of
such  communion  as  respect  your  own  spirit.  The  rest  will
follow  in  due  course.  Leave  abstruse  and  perplexing  questions
•of  man's  theological  controversy,  and  keep  close  to  the  central
truths  which  so  intimately  affect  the  well-being  of  your  spirit.
The  vain  bewilderments  which  man  has  cast  around  the  sim-
plicity of  truth  are  manifold.  Nor  is  it  for  you  to  disentangle
them,  nor  to  decide  what  is  or  is  not  essential  in  that  which
lias  hitherto  been  revealed.  You  will  learn  hereafter  to  view
much  that  you  now  regard  as  vitally  essential  truth,  rather  as
a  passing  phase  of  teaching  which  was  necessary  for  those  to
whom  it  was  given.  It  is  human  weakness  that  impels  you
to  rush  to  the  end.  You  must  tarry,  friend,  tarry  long  yet  in
the  early  search  ings  before  you  reach  the  goal.  You  have
much  to  unlearn  before  you  can  penetrate  all  mysteries.

We  have  more  to  say  to  you  on  this.  But  for  the  present
enough  has  been  written.  May  the  Supreme  keep  us  and
you,  and  enable  us  so  to  lead  and  guide  you  that  in  the  end
truth  may  shine  on  your  darkened  soul,  and  peace  may  dwell
Avithin  your  spirit.

+  IMPERATOR.

[I  made  no  rejoinder  to  what  was  last  said,  but  I
thought  over  it,  and  was  preparing  to  say  some-
what, when  I  was  imperiously  stopped.  The  hand
dashed  off  with  violent  speed,  and  the  communica-
tion following  was  written  without  pause  in  an
incredibly  short  space  of  time.  So  vehement  was
the  effort  that  I  was  in  a  state  of  semi-trance  until
it  was  complete.]

10G  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Stay!  stay!  stay!  Attempt  not  now  to  argue,  but  learn
yet  again  of  the  truth.  You  are  impatient,  and  it  is  in  your
mind  to  say  foolish  things.  What  matters  it  to  you  if  what
we  say  contradicts  that  which  others  have  believed  ?  Why
shrink  back  at  that  ?  Does  not  all  faith  firmly  grasped  con-
tradict some  other  faith  ?  Nay,  does  not  each  faith  contain,
within  itself  elements  of  contradiction  ?  If  you  know  not  so
much  as  that,  then  are  you  not  fit  to  go  forward.  From
those  old  creeds  and  faiths,  venerable  in  their  antiquity,  but-
crude  too  frequently  in  development,  men  have  derived  com-
fort. They  have  found  their  utterances  convenient  and  suit-
able for  them.  They  have  derived  from  them  a  satisfaction,
which  they  do  not  bring  to  you.  Why  ?  Because  your  spirit
has  outgrown  those  old,  and  to  you  lifeless,  utterances.  They
benefit  you  not.  They  are  powerless  to  stir  your  soul.  They
have  no  voice  for  your  spirit:  no  remedy  for  your  wants.
They  are  but  faint  and  far-off  echoes  of  what  to  some  was  a.
living  voice,  but  which  to  you  is  cold  and  meaningless.

Why,  then,  perplex  yourself  at  that  ?  Why  linger,  striving,
in  vain  to  extract  a  meaning  from  that  which  to  you  has  none  ?
Why  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  living  voice  which  cries  to  your
soul  from  the  land  beyond  in  accents  which  are  living,  burn-
ing, true  ?  Why  refuse  to  listen  when  the  voice  speaks  of  the
true,  the  spiritual,  the  noble,  of  all  that  is  real  and  actual  in,
place  of  the  dying  or  the  dead  ?  Why,  for  a  fancy — from
reverence  for  a  lifeless  past — cut  yourself  off  from  the  living,
present,  from  the  communion  of  spirits,  from  the  society  of
those  who  can  tell  you  noble  truths  of  God  and  of  your  destiny  T

Surely  this  is  but  madness,  only  the  influence  of  spirits  who
would  gladly  hold  back  the  soul,  and  drag  it  down  to  earth.
Were  our  revelation  a  blank  contradiction  of  the  old,  what  is
that  to  you  ?  Ours  speaks  in  living  accents  to  your  spirit ;
you  know  it ;  you  drink  it  in,  and  find  it  to  be  a  blessed  influ-
ence. The  old  is  dead  to  you.  Why  linger  round  the  lifeless
form  ?  Why  embrace  the  mouldering  corpse  which  was  once-
a  living  being  instinct  with  Divine  truth  ?

Your  sacred  records  tell  you  how,  at  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus,,
the  angel  message  to  the  sorrowing  friends  was  one  of  aspira-

THE   DEAD   PAST  107

tion.  "  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead  ?  He  is  not
here,  He  is  risen."  So,  friend,  we  say  to  you.  Why  linger  in.
the  dead  past,  the  sepulchre  of  buried  truth,  seeking,  in  fruit-
less sorrow,  for  that  which  is  no  longer  there?  It  is  not
there,  it  is  risen.  It  has  left  the  body  of  dogmatic  teaching
which  once  for  a  restless  age  enshrined  Divine  truth.  There
remains  but  the  dead  casket.  The  jewel  is  gone.  The  spirit
has  risen,  and  lo  !  we  proclaim  to  you  sublime  truth,  a  nobler
creed,  and  a  Diviner  God.

The  voice  which  in  ages  past  has  sounded  in  the  ears  of
those  to  whom  has  been  entrusted  the  Divine  mission  on  their
earth  and  to  their  generation,  reaches  even  to  this  age  and  to-
you.  It  has  ever  been  so.  God  deals  now  in  no  other  sort
than  he  has  ever  dealt  with  men.  He  calls  them  up  to  fuller
light,  to  higher  truth.  It  is  theirs  to  accept  or  to  reject  the
heavenly  message.  Probably  it  has  been  to  each  aspiring  soul
a  difficulty  that  the  past,  the  familiar,  the  venerable  faith,  has-
charms  from  which  it  is  hard  to  sever.  In  the  first  blush  of
perplexity  it  seems  to  the  bewildered  spirit  that  all  must  go-
that  is  old  and  cherished,  and  the  new  and  untried  must  be
accepted.  It  seems  to  be  a  death;  and  man  shrinks  from
death.  Yes ;  but  it  is  a  death  unto  life.  It  is  a  passage
through  the  tomb  to  a  land  of  life  and  hope.  Even  as  the
spirit  soars  in  freedom  from  the  body  of  death  from  which  it
has  been  emancipated,  so  does  the  enfranchised  spirit,  set  free
from  the  trammels  of  the  past,  soar  aloft  in  liberty,  the  liberty
of  the  truth  which,  Jesus  said,  alone  can  make  man  free.
You  know  it  not  now ;  but  you  shall  know  it  hereafter.

This,  then,  is  our  cry  to  you.  Why  turn  your  face  to  the
dead  past,  when  the  living  present  and  the  bright  future
attract,  and  promise  rich  store  of  blessing  ?  Were  we  in  our
mission  the  absolute  contradiction  of  the  old,  what  is  that  to
you  ?  The  old  words  are  spiritless,  and  you  cannot  infuse  into
them  again  the  spirit  that  is  gone.  Leave  them  to  those  for
whom  they  still  have  a  voice  and  a  meaning,  and  follow  with
unfaltering  step  the  impulses  of  the  Divine  Spirit  which  lures
you  on  to  higher  views  of  truth.  Quit  the  dead  past,  though
it  be  to  journey  through  a  new  present  to  an  unknown  future.

108  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

But,  friend,  it  is  not  so.  The  past  casts  a  glamour  over  you.
•and  you  share  the  common  idea  that  the  new  must  utterly
destroy  the  old.  Did  Jesus  so  say  ?  Did  He  counsel  the
abolition  of  the  Mosaic  teaching?  Yet,  as  we  have  before
said,  our  teaching  is  no  more  startling  development  as  com-
pared with  His  than  was  His  as  compared  with  Moses'.  That
which  we  present  for  your  acceptance  is  the  complement
rather  than  the  contradiction  of  the  old;  the  growth  to  a
fuller  stature ;  the  development  of  a  wider  knowledge.

If  you  meditate  deeply  on  the  state  of  the  world  when  Jesus
proclaimed  to  it  His  reformed  faith,  you  will  see  many  points
•of  similarity  to  that  which  now  obtains  among  men.  It  is
not,  we  reiterate,  more  startling  to  read  the  gospel  which  we
preach  alongside  of  that  which  passes  current  among  men  for
religion,  than  it  was  to  put  the  gospel  of  Jesus  in  juxtaposition
to  the  ritual  of  Pharisaism,  or  the  sceptical  indifterentism  of
Sadducee.  The  world  then  needed  a  new  revelation,  even  as  it
•does  now ;  and  that  which  it  received  was  not  less  startling
than  is  this  to  those  who  love  the  old,  and  desire  not  to  be
stirred  from  the  paths  to  which  they  are  accustomed.

In  those  days,  even  as  now,  the  revelation  of  God,  which
had  been  adapted  to  the  special  wants  of  a  special  people,  had
been  overlaid  with  rubbish,  until  it  had  become  a  mass  of
ritual  without  a  meaning  and  without  life.  For  many  long
years  the  voice  of  God  had  not  been  heard,  and  man  had
begun  to  crave,  as  he  craves  now,  for  a  renewal  of  the  Divine
message.  The  old  had  become  dead,  and  he  sought  for  a  new
and  living  voice.  It  came  to  him — this  Divine  utterance — in
the  voice  of  Jesus ;  from  a  source  the  most  unlikely,  as  men
think ;  from  a  quarter  least  calculated  to  command  the  respect
of  the  educated  Pharisee,  or  to  carry  conviction  to  the  scoffing
Sadducee.  Yet  that  voice  prevailed,  and  for  1800  years  has
animated  the  religious  life  of  Christendom.  The  creed  so
originated  has  become  debased,  but  the  spirit  of  the  Crucified
is  in  it  even  now ;  and  it  needs  but  the  vivifying  touch  to  call
it  forth  into  new  life.  The  old  rags  with  which  man  has
thought  to  clothe  it  may  readily  be  thrown  aside,  and  the
truth  shine  all  the  brighter  for  their  loss.

THE   ATTITUDE   OF  THE  WORLD  TO   NEW  TRUTH.

The  source  from  which  our  revelation  comes  is  not  more
strange  than  was  the  source  of  that  power  wielded  by  Him
who  was  to  His  generation  the  despised  carpenter  of  Nazareth.
Men  sneered  at  Him  in  the  plenitude  of  their  scorn  ;  even  as
they  have  sneered  at  everything  new ;  even  as  they  sneer  at
us.  They  were  ready  to  stare  at  His  marvels ;  they  would
follow  Him  in  hosts  to  marvel  at  the  physical  miracles  which
were  wrought  through  Him;  but  they  were  not  sufficiently
spiritual  to  drink  in  His  teachings.  They  are  ready  now  to
wonder  at  us  and  our  mighty  works,  even  as  they  wondered
then.  Even  as  then  they  sought  for  yet  further  and  further
tests — "  Come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  on
thee  " — so  now  there  is  even  one  more  test  which  is  necessary
to  ensure  complete  conviction.  They  called  Him  a  deceiver,
even  as  they  cry  out  now.  They  hooted  Him  out  of  their
society;  they  drove  Him  out  of  their  midst,  and  they  strove
by  their  laws  and  by  their  influence  to  crush  out  the  new
doctrine  from  their  land.  New  it  was  indeed,  but  the  truth
that  it  enshrined  was  old,  old  as  the  God  who  gave  it,  only
new  in  form.  Ours  is  new  now,  but  the  time  shall  come
when  men  shall  see  that  it  is  but  the  risen  truth  of  ages  past,
rejuvenescent  and  eternal.

The  Divine  truth  which  we  proclaim  is  not  more  strange  to
you  than  was  the  message  of  Jesus  to  His  age — the  age  that
sneeringly  asked  whether  any  educated  person  of  position  and
respectability— "  any  of  the  Pharisees  or  the  rulers  "—had
believed  on  him.  Both  were  progressive  developments  of  the
same  continuous  stream  of  truth,  suited  to  the  wants  and
cravings  of  those  to  whom  they  were  vouchsafed.  Meditate
on  the  mental  condition  of  Nicodemus,  and  contrast  it  with
that  of  many  such  in  your  own  day.  And  be  assured  that-
the  same  power  which  availed  to  stir  the  dead  faith  of  the
Jew,  and  to  reveal  his  God  more  clearly,  is  still  able  to  infuse
new  life  into  the  well-nigh  lifeless  body  of  Christian  faith,,
and  to  restore  it  to  energy  and  vitality.

May  the  All-wise  guide,  bless,  and  keep  you,

-t-  IMPERATOR.

c  no

SECTION  XIV.

£THE  communication  last  recorded  produced  consider-
able effect  on  me,  and  it  was  some  days  before  I
replied.  When  I  did  so,  I  objected  thus] : —

The  parallel  between  the  days  of  Christ  and  the  present
days  is  comprehensible.  1  can  quite  imagine  an
educated  Sadducee  looking  on  the  pretensions  of  Christ
with  scorn  ;  and  he  would  have  been  wrong,  as  we  now
know ;  but,  as  I  think,  very  excusably  wrong.  Judged
by  the  mere  light  of  reason,  they  would  seem  monstrous.
And  a  Sadducee  of  that  day,  whose  tone  of  mind  was
set  against  the  supernatural,  would  excusably  refuse  to
credit  what  must  seem  to  him  a  lie,  or  a  delusion.
For  myself,  I  do  not  see  how  he  could  do  anything  else.
Yet  he  had  a  concrete  man  before  him — one  whom  he
could  see,  and  whose  words  he  could  hear ;  one  whose
life  he  could  test  as  to  whether  it  was  in  accord  with
the  holy  teaching  which  feU  from  His  lips.  I  am  so
far  worse  off  that  I  have  only  an  impersonal  influence
to  deal  with,  only  utterances  which  may  conceivably  be
the  voice  of  my  spirit  questioning  with  itself.  I  have
nothing  to  lay  hold  of.  Att  around  me  I  see  Spirit-
ualism vague,  and  frequently  contemptible  in  its
utterance.  Its  revelations  are  shadowy  where  they  are
not  silly  ;  and  frequently  one  is  shocked  by  that  which
passes  current  under  its  name.  I  cannot  see  my  way.
As  to  you,  I  know  nothing  of  you,  even  if  you  be  an
entity  at  all.  I  do  not  see  any  way  of  satisfying
myself  about  you ;  nor  would  it  help  me  very  much  if
you  were  to  assume  shape  as  a  previous  dweller  on  this
earth.  Had  you  ever  a  personality,  or  are  you  merely
an  influence  ?  It  would  help  me  somewhat  if  I  could
picture  you  as  a  definite  individuality.  But,  on  the
whole,  I  wish  you  would  leave  me  alone.

DIFFICULTIES  OF   BELIEF.  HI

{I  had  in  fact  become  wearied  out  with  this  strenuous
conflict  between  my  own  strongly -conceived
opinions  and  those  of  an  Intelligence  so  powerful
in  statement  and  so  coherent  in  argument.  I  was
torn  by  conflicting  emotions,  and  undergoing,  no
doubt,  a  state  of  preparation  necessary  for  what
was  to  follow.  The  answer  came  thus] : —

Friend,  we  sympathise  with  your  questionings,  and  will  try
to  aid  you.  You  say  that  the  sceptical  Sadducee  was  better  off
in  that  he  had  the  definite  personal  Jesus  before  him.  Doubt-
less he  had  ;  but,  so  far  from  that  being  a  help  to  him,  it  would
be  an  additional  cause  of  perplexity.  He  would  find  it  far
harder  to  associate  the  son  of  the  carpenter  of  Nazareth  with
God's  new  revelation,  of  which  he  recognised  the  want,  than
you  do  to  associate  us  with  the  Supreme.  "  Is  not  this  the
carpenter  ? "  would  be  to  him  a  far  more  serious  difficulty
than  your  query,  "  Is  this  an  individuality  ? "  For  he  would
see  all  around  him  the  tangible  and  palpable  difficulties  which
he  could  not  surmount.  The  lowly  origin,  the  humble  friends,
the  world's  scorn,  the  rejection  of  the  mission  by  all  on  whose
opinion  he  had  been  accustomed  to  rely,  all  this  would  form  a
real  and  very  insuperable  difficulty ;  one  which,  if  your  words
are  to  be  taken  literally,  you  would  yourself  hold  him  justified
in  considering  final.  And,  assuredly,  if  in  the  end  he  failed
to  grasp  the  message  and  to  accept  the  Messenger,  he  would,
if  honest,  be  guilty  of  no  sin.  He  would  but  have  lost  an
opportunity  of  progress  which  would  recur  when  he  was  more
fitted  to  avail  himself  of  it.

With  you  the  case  is  otherwise.  You  have  to  deal  with  no
•external  difficulties.  You  have  simply  to  battle  with  intel-
lectual doubt.  You  know  and  acknowledge  that  the  words
which  have  been  spoken  to  you  are  such  as  you  might  reason-
ably expect  from  a  teacher  sent  from  God.  They  are  fraught
with  a  message  the  need  of  which  you  feel,  the  beauty  of
which  you  admit,  and  the  moral  grandeur  of  which  commends
itself  to  all  who  are  fitted  to  receive  it.  You  know  full  well
that  it  originates  in  some  source  external  to  yourself.  You
must  know  that  no  unconscious  effort  of  your  own  mind  could

112  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS

produce  that  which  contradicts  the  outcome  of  your  own
thoughts.  Were  the  thoughts  we  utter  those  which  would
naturally  spring  from  your  own  mind,  you  might  have  room
for  hesitation.  But  it  is  not  so.  And  no  theory  of  self-ques-
tioning, however  ingenious,  will  satisfy  your  mind.  You
know  that  it  is  not  so ;  and  the  phase  of  doubt  through  which
you  now  pass,  and  which  is  so  evanescent,  can  exercise  no-
permanent  influence  upon  you.  When  it  is  gone,  you  will
wonder  how  you  can  ever  have  imagined  that  I  am  not  an
entity  as  real  as  yourself,  as  real  as  any  embodied  intelligence
whom  you  call  "  man."

Yes,  friend,  time  is  all  that  you  require ;  time  for  patient
thought;  time  to  weigh  issues,  to  estimate  evidence,  and  to
tabulate  results.  The  words  which  have  stirred  you  so  deeply
— you  know  not  how  deeply — are  the  words  of  one  who  sees
your  thoughts,  who  sympathises  with  your  difficulties,  and
not  least  with  those  very  doubts  and  questionings  which  now
perplex  you.  During  my  earth  life  I  was  a  prominent  actor
in  scenes  of  difficulty  not  unlike  those  which  preceded  the
life  of  the  Christ,  and  which  are  now  recurring.  It  has  been,
so  in  all  cycles  where  the  revolving  course  of  time  brings  round
a  similar  condition  of  things.  Man  in  all  ages  has  been  con-
stituted mentally  the  same.  He  is  developed  :  he  progresses ;.
he  thinks  more  deeply ;  he  knows  more.  But  sure  as  in  your
world  night  succeeds  to  day,  so  surely  there  comes  a  time
when  his  conceptions  of  the  Deity  become  faint  and  unreal ;
when  the  spark  of  Divinity  within  him  craves  for  a  fuller
knowledge,  and  cries  to  heaven  for  a  message  from  its  God.
A  new  revelation  is  needed.  The  craving  spirit  of  man  yearns
for  it.  The  old  has  done  its  work,  and  from  its  ashes  rises
the  new,  which  is  to  the  receptive  soul  the  voice  from  on  high
that  speaks  words  of  consolation  and  comfort.  It  has  ever
been  so.  You  know  it.  You  can  trace  it  all  through  the
history  of  God's  dealings  with  mankind.  And  why  should  it
cease  to  be  so  now  ?  Why  now,  when  man  most  needs  it,
should  the  voice  be  dumb,  and  the  ear  of  the  Supreme  be  deaf  ?

You  say  that  you  know  nothing  of  me.  Why  will  you
confuse  the  messenger  with  his  message,  why  will  you  insist

A  POWER,    EXTERNAL,   TRUTHFUL,   PURE.  113

•on  associating  with  that  which  is  Divine  the  vehicle  through
•whom  it  is  conveyed  ?

[The  result  of  the  argument  was  that,  in  reference  to
my  weak-kneed  faith,  I  got  what  I  obstinately
fought  for.  And  when  I  had  so  far  prevailed,  I
saw  how  hollow  was  the  boon  for  which  I  had
contended.  I  began  to  grasp,  as  I  had  been  unable
to  grasp  before,  the  tendency  of  the  teaching,  and
to  separate  it  from  the  individuality  of  the  messen-
ger. I  went  back  over  the  time  during  which  this
argument — portions  of  which  only  I  think  it  well
to  print — had  been  in  process,  and  I  grasped  as  I
could  not  grasp  before  wrhat  was  to  me,  in  very
truth,  a  new  Revelation.  The  messenger  became
lost  in  the  importance  to  me  of  his  message  :  and
the  desire  to  probe  and  prove  minute  points  of
detail  was  lost  in  the  full  blaze  of  conviction  that
then  first  burst  upon  me.

This  state,  however,  was  evanescent.    I  was  too  wedded
to   old   habits   of    analysis    to    let    impulse    and
enthusiasm  take  the  place  of  logical   conviction.
Moreover,  early  religious  training  asserted  itself,
and  I  recurred  to  my  old  theological  objections.
The  first  effect  passed,  and  after  an  interval  of  two
days  I  resumed  my  objections.     During  that  time
I  had  carefully  read  over  and  over  again  all  that
has  been  printed  here,  and  much  that  is  too  personal
for  publication.     I  had  estimated  the  experience
of    a    year,   during   which   I   could   discover  no
departure  from  strict  truth.     And  I  came  clearly
to  the  conclusion  that  the  Power  which  was  in
action  was — (1)  External  to  myself ;  (2)  Truthful
.and  consistent  in  its  statements ;   (3)  Pure  and
elevated  in  the  religious  teaching  which  it  con-
veyed.    This  seemed  clear  to  me  :  and  I  turned  to
•consider  the  question  of  identity,  and  the  claims
put  forward.    As  to  other  matters,  I  felt  that  they
might  wait.     The  points  which  had  settled  them-
selves in  my  mind  raised  a  strong  presumption
that   the   truthful   intelligence   of  the  past   was
truthful  still.     But  then  came  the  doubt  as  to  how
far  all  might  be  the  work  of  "  Satan  transformed
into  an  angel  of  light,"  labouring  for  the  subversion
of  the  faith.    My  exact  objection  was  put  thus] : —
-9

114  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

May  it  not  be  said  with  some  pretence  of  fair  criticism
that  your  teaching  tends  to  what  men  call  Deism,.
Pantheism,,  or  (ivrongly,  I  know)  even  to  Atheism  ?'
Does  it  not  degrade  God  to  the  level  of  a  Force,  and
tend  to  breed  in  man  a  doubt  as  to  the  absolute  truth
of  anything  ?  God,  one  begins  to  think,  is  only  a  name
for  the  influence  which  permeates  the  universe,  pictured'
differently  by  different  peoples  in  different  ages.  The
revelation  of  Him  comes  ab  intra,  imagined  in  the
mind,  not  revealed  to  it.  Christianity  is  one  of  many
forms  of  faith,  all  more  or  less  mistaken.  Man  gropes
on  more  or  less  blindly,  evolving  for  himself,  from  time
to  time,  ideas  more  or  less  erroneous.  Since  God  exists
only  in  the  conceptions,  each  man  has  his  God  peculiar
to  himself.  Absolute  truth  out  of  mathematics  does  not
exist.  And  so  man,  at  his  best,  becomes  a  solitary  unit,
alone  with  his  oivn  spirit,  replying  to  its  questionings,
evolving  vieivs  ^uhich  satisfy  for  a  moment,  only  to  be
succeeded  by  others,  which  in  their  turn  give  way  to
newer  ideas ;  unless,  indeed,  intellect  becomes  fossilised,
and  the  old  views  are  permanent  because  they  have
ceased  to  live.

This  colourless  idea  is  to  supplant  a  Gospel  which  bears
the  Divine  imprimatur :  whose  precepts  are  precise,
whose  morality  is  as  elevated  as  most  men  can  grasp,
and  which  is  enforced  by  a  system  of  definite  reward
and  punishment  such  as  experience  has  always  found
necessary  in  dealing  with  men.  This  Gospel,  so  backed,
has  not  been,  as  you  say,  successful  in  raising  men  to  •
a  very  high  pitch  of  moral  perfection.  Hmv,  then,  am
I  to  expect  that  a  philosophy  such  as  yours,  which  has
a  shadow  of  good,  indeed,  but  a  shadow  only,  dim,
vague,  and  impalpable,  which  is  destructive  of  the  past,,
without  the  power  to  construct  for  the  future ;  how  can
I  believe  that  this  can  hold  in  hand  rebellious  minds
which  have  chafed  under  a  religion  so  precise  in  its
moral  dicta,  so  forcible  in  its  appeals  to  human  interests,
so  commended  by  its  Divine  origin  and  by  the  halo-

THE  OUTCOME  OF  THE  TEACHING.          115

shed  around  it  from  the  saintliest  life  ever  held  up
for  human  imitation ?  It  seems  to  me  most  unlikely'
I  do  not  noiv  repeat  ^vhat  I  have  said  about  the  hazy
source  from  which  this  teaching  comes :  nor  do  I  insist
upon  the  dangers  ivhich  I  foresee  from  its  general
adoption.  That  danger  is  too  remote  to  need  enlarging
on.  At  the  same  time  it  is  an  important  factor  in  the
argument,  that  your  teaching  would,  as  it  seems  to  me,
relax  many  of  the  wholesome  bonds  which  have  been
valuable  morally,  socially,  and  religiously  to  mankind.
And  were  that  ivhich  we  knoiv  as  Spiritualism  to  flood
the  community,  I  sadly  fear  that  it  would  leave  men
enthusiasts  and  fanatics ;  and  that  the  ivorld,  so  far
from  having  gained  ground,  would  have  relapsed  into
the  blindest  superstition,  and  the  shallowest  credulity.
I  may  be  utterly  wrong  ;  but  so  it  strikes  me.  I  cannot
see  that  your  teaching  is  any  substitute  for  what  men
have  believed.  Even  if  it  be  what  it  pretends  to  be,
surely  man  is  no  more  fit  to  be  governed  according  to
such  notions  than  he  is  to  live  on  angels'  food.  Even
in  its  highest  form  it  is  of  doubtful  practical  utility,
while,  in  many  of  its  more  vulgar  shapes,  it  seems
simply  pernicious  and  demoralising.

In  the  name  of  the  Supreme,  we  greet  you.  It  is  not  in
our  power  to  help  you  now.  What  we  say  seems  to  you
other  than  it  is.  The  upheaval  which  has  so  disturbed  your
mind,  has  left  it  in  a  condition  little  fit  to  weigh  niceties.
For  that  you  must  bide  your  time  as  patiently  as  may  be ;
meantime  the  training  is  valuable  to  you.  You  will  know
the  why  as  you  knew  it  not  before ;  and  impulse  and  enthusi-
asm will  yield  to  experimental  knowledge  and  calm  conviction.
The  venerable  belief  which  has  been  assented  to  rather  than
accepted,  will  pale  before  the  knowledge  of  truth  which  is
born  of  investigation  and  logical  analysis.  What  we  have
said  merits  the  deepest  study.  We  would  have  you  take
every  opportunity  of  reading  over  consecutively  what  has
been  written ;  and  of  thinking  deeply  on  the  whole  tenor  of

116  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

our  intercourse  with  you.  We  claim  to  be  judged  by  our
whole  communion  with  you,  by  words  and  doeds  alike;  by
the  moral  effect  of  our  teaching,  no  less  than  by  its  relation
to  previous  creeds ;  by  the  spiritual  atmosphere  which  we
bring  with  us,  no  less  than  by  the  imperfect  utterances  in
which  logical  subtlety  may  readily  find  a  flaw.

For  the  present  it  is  enough  that  we  solemnly  reiterate  our
claim  to  be  the  bearers  of  a  Divine  message.  The  words  we
speak  are  the  words  of  God.  You  know  it ;  and  no  additional
argument  can  add  any  weight  to  our  claim  on  this  head.  You
are  no  more  the  sport  of  evil,  than  you  are  deluded  by  phanta-
sies of  a  diseased  brain.  Evil  does  not  tell  of  God,  as  we  tell.
Nor  can  any  brain  tell  you  what  we  have  told,  and  give  you
evidence  such  as  we  have  given.  When  you  are  more  calm
you  will  see  this.  Were  you  in  other  state  now,  we  should
have  somewhat  to  say  concerning  the  sin  of  curiously  seeking
out  indication  of  evil  which  may  be  fastened  on  that  which  is
holy  and  divine,  even  as  when  the  holy  Jesus  walked  your
earth  'mid  its  corruptions  and  its  curses,  the  devils  whom  He
ejected  turned  on  Him  through  the  mouths  of  the  orthodox
religionists,  and  charged  Him  with  association  with  Beelzebub.
We  do  not  care  to  answer  such  objections.  They  bear  on  their
face  their  own  sufficient  refutation.  When  you  have  had
time  to  think  calmly,  we  will  make  such  answer  to  your
objections  as  may  be  requisite.  For  the  present  it  is  better
that  you  give  yourself  to  meditation  and  prayer.  Pray,  friend,
with  zeal  and  earnestness,  that  you  may  be  guided  into  all
truth.

That  prayer  at  least  you  cannot  refuse  to  put  up,  even
though  it  be  dictated  by  the  very  Tempter.  Pray,  in  company
with  us,  for  enlightenment  and  patience ;  for  power  to  see,  and
for  grace  to  follow  the  truth.  Pray  that  you  may  be  released
from  the  fetters  of  dogmatism  which  would  bind  your  aspiring
soul ;  and  that  being  released  you  may  be  guided  in  your  up-
ward progress,  lest  you  soar  and  fall.  Pray  that  the  influence
of  others  may  be  separated  from  your  own  soul's  wants ;  that
you  may  have  grace  to  choose  the  right,  and  to  leave  others  to
select  what  they  find  suitable  for  them.  Pray  that  you

.   SILENT   GROWTH.  IJT

may  realise  clearly  the  responsibility  of  choice  or  rejection,  and
that  you  may  be  saved,  on  the  one  hand,  from  obstinate
prejudice,  and  on  the  other,  from  hasty  acceptance.  And,
above  all,  pray  for  honesty,  sincerity,  and  humility,  that  you
may  not  mar  God's  work  by  pride,  by  obstinacy,  or  by  un-
worthiness.

And  our  prayers  shall  join  with  yours  to  draw  down  an
answering  message  of  love  and  consolation  from  those  who
watch  on  high,  in  anxious  expectation  of  the  spread  of  Divine
Truth.  We  have  answered  so  much  of  your  objection  as
relates  to  the  general  outcome  of  the  movement  at  large.  We
have  shown  you  that  deep  down  below  the  surface  there  is  a
something  which  does  not  meet  the  eye.  As  in  the  days  of  the
development  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  in  whatever  age  it  may
occur,  there  are  many  silent  devotees  of  whom  the  world
knows  little,  who  grow  steadily  up  to  more  and  more  perfect
knowledge,  so  we  have  told  you  it  is  now.  Many  there  are,
very  many,  who  deplore  the  unlicensed  vagaries  which  shock
and  distress  them,  but  which  have  no  power  to  alter  or
diminish  the  faith  which  is  founded  on  experience.

We  would  further  point  out  to  you  that  all  our  intercourse
with  the  material  plane  is  governed  by  laws  which  your  science
has  not  yet  defined.  Neither  we  nor  you  know  as  yet  many
of  the  causes  which  interfere  with  our  power.  We  are  not
able  to  lay  down  laws  for  your  guidance,  scarce  even  for  our
own.  With  you  the  vast  importance  of  the  subject  is  little
appreciated  even  by  those  who  interest  themselves  in  our
work.  In  many  cases  sentiments  of  mere  curiosity  predomi-
nate. With  some,  even  lower  motives  obtain.  No  proper  care
is  taken  of  our  mediums.  The  instrument  is  out  of  tune,  un-
strung, or  overworked.  The  atmospheric  conditions  vary.  We
know  not  always  how  to  meet  the  various  effects  so  caused.
Circles  are  not  properly  composed ;  and  many  things  combine
to  make  it  impossible  that  phenomena  should  always  be  similar
in  their  nature,  or  be  evoked  with  precise  regularity.

This  will  account  for  much  of  the  erratic  character  of  the
phenomena,  as  well  as  for  the  influence  which  is  exercised
over  the  curious  who  obtrude  themselves  perpetually  into

118  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.  '

Communion  with  the  spheres,  and  attract  spirits  congenial  to
themselves.  Much  might  fitly  be  said  on  this  topic,  but  other
matters  press.  What  has  been  hinted  may  suggest  to  you
another  reason  for  dealing  mercifully  in  your  estimate  of  the
vagaries  of  some  circles.  Nothing  now  is  said  of  those  into
which  deceit  is  admitted.  There  none  but  the  most  unde-
veloped spirits  enter,  and  all  is  untrustworthy  and  repellent.

You  can  do  much  to  aid  us.  You  may  help  us  to  crush  out
idle  curiosity  and  deceit.  You  know  well  how,  in  our  own
circle,  the  manifestations  have  gradually  developed  as  you
have  followed  our  advice.  You  may  say  to  others  that  they
should  use  the  same  means.  The  cloud  will  in  time  be  blown
away.  Meantime,  the  causes  which  produce  it  are  at  least  as
much  in  your  hands  as  in  ours.

•f-  IZIPEIIATOB.

119

SECTION   XV.

{The  argument  was  continued,  almost  without  a  break,
and  with  much  energy  and  under  powerful  influ-
ence. I  cannot  hope  to  convey  any  idea  of  the
influence  that  possessed  me,  and  seemed  to  inspire
my  thoughts.]

RELIGIOUS  TEACHING  OF  SPIRITUALISM.

You  question  whether  the  tendency  of  our  teaching  be  not
Deism,  or  pure  Theism,  or  even  Atheism.  It  is  indicative  of
iihe  ignorance  which  obtains  among  you,  that  one  usually
•accurate  in  thought  and  well-informed  should  class  Theism
with  Atheism.  We  know  nothing  of  that  cheerless,  futile
nonsense  which  denies  the  existence  of  a  God  whose  acts  are
palpable  to  all,  even  to  the  meanest  comprehension  amongst
the  most  debased  of  His  creatures.  Were  it  not  that  we  know
how  man  can  blind  himself,  we  should  refuse  to  believe  that
.any  one  could  so  blunt  his  senses.

Doubtless  we  teach  that  there  is  one  Supreme  Being  over
.all :  one  who  is  not  manifested  as  man  has  fancied,  but  who
lias  always  announced  to  His  creatures  from  time  to  time
such  facts  about  Himself  as  they  are  able  to  comprehend ;  or,
more  strictly,  has  enabled  them  to  develop  in  their  minds
truer  views  of  Himself  and  of  His  dealings.  We  tell  you,  as
-Jesus  told  His  followers,  of  a  loving,  holy,  pure  God,  who
guides  and  governs  the  universe ;  who  is  no  impersonal  con-
ception of  the  human  mind,  but  a  real  spiritual  Father ;  who
is  no  embodiment  or  personification  of  a  force,  but  a  really-
existent  Being,  albeit  known  to  you  only  by  His  operations,
.and  through  your  conceptions  of  His  nature  and  attributes.
This  is  what  we  have  spoken  to  you,  eradicating,  so  far  as  we
Lave  been  able,  that  which  in  your  mind  seemed  to  us  to  be
dishonouring  to  the  All- Wise  Father,  but  leaving  undisturbed
other  theological  fancies  which  are  not  of  special  import.

120  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

If  you  say  that  our  teaching  tends  to  show  that  there  is  no-
such  thing  as  absolute  truth  in  such  matters,  we  can  but
express  our  thankfulness  that  we  have  so  far  made  ourselves
intelligible.  No  doubt  there  is  for  you,  in  your  present
imperfect  state,  no  such  thing  as  absolute  truth,  as  there  is  no-
such  thing  as  absolute  perfection.  You  surely  do  not  expect
that  your  eye  can  gaze  undimmed  into  mysteries  which  dazzle
the  vision  of  the  highest  intelligences.  Surely  you  do  not
hope  that  your  circumscribed  mind  can  grasp  the  Infinite  and
Incomprehensible ;  that  which  to  us  in  remotest  cycles  shall
still  remain  a  subject  of  adoring  wonder.  The  suggestion  can
but  be  born  of  ignorance  caused  by  the  imperfect  state  of
development  in  which  you  now  live.  For  you  truth  must  be
variable,  not  to  be  grasped  in  its  entirety,  not  to  be  viewed  in
minute  detail,  but  seen  only  in  shadowy  outline  through  an
encircling  veil.  We  do  not  even  pretend  that  we  reveal  ta
you  absolute  truth,  seeing  that  we  ourselves  are  yet  ignorant^
longing  to  dive  deeper  into  much  that  is  still  mysterious.
We  do  but  give  you  such  aid  as  we  are  permitted  in  shadowing
forth  for  yourself  conceptions  of  the  Supreme,  which  are  less
widely  removed  from  truth  than  those  which  have  passed
current  among  you  as  the  immediate  revelation  of  the  Most
High.

We  have  succeeded  in  evolving  a  system  of  theology  which
you  admit  to  be  coherent,  beautiful,  and  elevated,  and  which
is  acceptable  to  your  mind.  We  have  not  ventured  to  do-
more.  We  have  shown  you  a  God  who  commands  your
adoration  and  respect.  We  have  displayed  to  you  a  rational
and  comprehensible  view  of  your  duty  to  Him,  to  mankind,
and  to  your  own  self;  and  we  have  established  our  moral
code  not  by  the  persuasive  inducements  of  a  heaven  and  hell
such  as  you  are  wont  to  hear  of,  but  by  arguments  not  less
persuasive,  by  inducements  which  do  not  come  home  less
forcibly  to  the  mind.

To  say  that  we  teach  a  motiveless  religion  is  surely  the
strangest  misconception.  What !  is  it  nothing  that  we  teach
you  that  each  act  in  this,  the  seed-time  of  your  life,  will  bear
its  own  fruit ;  that  the  results  of  conscious  and  deliberate  ski

THE    INCENTIVE   TO  A   HOLY   LIFE.  121

must  be  remedied  in  sorrow  and  shame  at  the  cost  of  painful
toil  in  far  distant  ages ;  that  the  erring  spirit  must  gather  up
the  tangled  thread  and  unravel  the  evil  of  which  it  was  long
ages  ago  the  perpetrator  ?

Is  it  nothing  that  we  tell  you  that  words  and  deeds  are  as-
the  pebble  thrown  into  the  stream  which  causes  an  ever-
widening  ripple,  ceaselessly  enlarging  in  its  effects ;  and  that,
fo  such  influence  you  are  accountable ;  that  every  word,
every  act,  is  of  incalculable  import  in  its  results  and  influence  -r
that  the  good  which  your  influence  produces  is  to  you  a  source
of  gratification  hereafter,  while  of  the  ill  you  must  view  the
baleful  effects  in  agony  and  remorse  ?

Is  it  nothing  that  we  tell  you  that  reward  and  punishment
are  not  delayed  till  a  far-off  day  faintly  imagined,  after  a*
period  of  torpor,  almost  of  death,  but  are  instant,  immediate,
supervening  upon  sin  by  the  action  of  an  invariable  law,  and
acting  ceaselessly  until  the  cause  which  produced  it  is  removed  ?

Is  this  no  incentive  to  a  life  of  sanctity  and  holiness  ?
Which,  say  you,  is  the  most  potent  incentive  to  a  holy  life  of
progress  :  that  creed  which  we  have  indicated  ?  or  that  which.
teaches  that  a  man  may  live  as  seems  to  him  good,  may  wrong;
his  neighbours,  insult  his  God,  and  debase  his  own  spirit,  may
break  all  laws  divine  and  human,  may  be  loathsome  in  hi»
moral  nature,  a  blot  on  the  name  of  man,  and  then,  by  a
fanatical  cry,  by  a  fancied  faith,  by  a  momentary  operation  of
the  mind,  may  be  fitted  to  enter  into  a  dreamy  heaven,  where
his  sole  joy  is  to  be  that  which  his  nature  would  view  with
distaste,  but  which,  now  that  the  magic  change  has  been
effected,  is  to  become  the  congenial  occupation  of  eternity  ?
Which  faith  will  move  the  degraded  most  ?  To  tell  him  that
for  each  sin,  discovered  or  undiscovered  by  his  fellow,  he  will
have  to  repent ;  that  each  must  be  remedied,  not  by  another,
but  by  himself ;  and  that  no  happiness  is  possible  for  him  till
he  grows  a  purer,  better,  truer  'man  ?  or,  to  tell  him  that,  do
what  he  will,  heaven  is  open  to  the  vilest  reprobate,  and  that
a  dying  cry  when  fainting  nature  is  wrung  with  agony,  can
magically  change  his  spirit,  and  send  it,  after  a  distant  judg-
ment, pure  and  good,  in  the  immediate  presence  of  his  God,  in

122  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

«,  heaven  where  his  unvarying  occupation  will  be  that  which
he  would  now  regard  as  most  insipid  and  undesirable  ?

We  know  and  you  know  which  faith  is  most  likely  to  appeal
to  a  man's  reason  and  judgment ;  which  would  be  the  strongest
•deterrent  from  sin;  which  would  keep  a  wanderer  in  the
paths  of  rectitude  most  surely.  And  yet  you  say  that  we
preach  a  vague  religion  in  place  of  a  definite ;  a  colourless
gospel  in  place  of  one  backed  by  a  definite  system  of  reward
•and  punishment.  Nay,  nay.  We  are  they  who  preach  a
-definite,  intelligible,  clear  system  of  reward  and  punishment,
but  in  doing  so  we  do  not  feign  a  fabled  heaven,  a  brutal  hell,
•and  a  human  God.  You  are  they  who  relegate  to  a  far  oft
«peck  the  day  of  retribution,  and  encourage  the  vilest  to
believe  that  he  may  enter  into  the  very  presence  of  the  Most
High  sometime,  somewhere,  somehow,  if  he  will  only  assent
to  statements  which  he  does  not  understand,  which  he  does
not  believe,  and  in  the  truth  of  which  he  feels  no  sort  of  real
interest.

We  boldly  assert  that  we  teach  a  faith  which  is  more
•calculated  to  deter  from  open  sin  than  any  yet  propounded
for  man's  acceptance ;  one  that  holds  out  to  him  more  rational
hopes  for  his  hereafter,  one  that  is  to  him  more  real,  more
•comprehensible  than  any  which  has  yet  been  put  before  him.
That  faith,  we  say  again,  is  Divine.  It  comes  to  you  as  the
revelation  of  God.  We  do  not  expect  or  wish  that  it  should
become  current  among  men  until  they  are  fitted  to  receive  it.
For  that  time  we  wait  in  patient  prayer.  When  it  does  spread
.among  men  and  they  can  yield  its  precepts  an  intelligent
obedience,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  man  will  sin  less  in
hope  of  a  cheap  salvation ;  that  he  will  be  guided  by  a  more
intelligent  and  intelligible  future;  that  he  will  need  fewer
coercive  regulations,  fewer  punishments  by  human  law,  and
that  the  motive-spring  within  him  will  be  found  to  be  not  less
forcible  and  enduring  than  the  debased  system  of  heavenly
inducements  and  hellish  deterrents  which  can  stand  no  serious
probing,  and  which,  when  once  rationally  examined,  ceases  to
allure  or  to  deter,  and  crumbles  into  dust,  baseless,  irrational,
and  absurd.

SILENT  WORKING.  123

[In  answer  to  my  objection  that  the  outcome  of  Spirit-
ualism was  bad  in  the  mass,  or,  at  anyrate,  of
mixed  benefit,  it  was  written,  July  10th,  1873]  : —

We  would  speak  to  you  on  this  point,  and  endeavour  to
show  you  the  errors  into  which  you  have  fallen.  You  fall,
first  of  all,  into  a  mistake  almost  inseparable  from  your  cir-
cumscribed vision.  You  mistake  the  results  which  obtrude
themselves  on  your  notice  for  the  total  outcome  of  the  move-
ment. You  are  as  they  who  are  bewildered  by  the  din  and
outcry  of  a  small  sect  of  enthusiasts,  and  who  mistake  them
and  their  vociferations  for  a  mighty  power,  for  the  voice  of  a
representative  body  of  opinion ;  and  lo !  they  heed  not  tha
silent  power  which  works  deep  down  below,  which  is  seen  only
in  its  results,  and  is  not  heard  by  its  much  crying.  You  hear
much  of  a  noisy,  undisciplined  mass,  not  numerous,  indeed,  but
obtrusive ;  and  you  say  well  that  it  is  not  such  cries  that  can
regenerate  the  world.  You  shrink  intellectually  from  their
utterances,  and  are  inclined  to  question  whether  this,  that  is
so  forbidding,  can  indeed  be  of  God,  and  for  good.  A  part
only  is  visible  to  you,  and  that  part  but  dimly.  Of  the  hidden
silent  votaries  of  a  faith  which  comes  to  them  from  the  God
who  is  revealing  Himself  to  them  in  ways  which  come  home
to  their  several  necessities,  you  hear  and  know  nothing.  Such
are  outside  of  your  ken;  though  they  may  and  do  exist  all
around  you,  the  faithful  communers  with  the  spheres,  who
know  in  what  they  have  believed,  and  who  drink  in,  hour  by
hour,  fresh  store  of  grace  and  knowledge,  waiting  for  the  time
when  they,  too,  shall  be  emancipated  from  the  prison-house  of
the  body,  and  rise  to  take  their  part  in  the  glorious  work.

And  so  it  chances  that,  both  from  the  obtrusive  crying  of
the  one  and  from  the  silence  of  the  other,  both  from  the
limited  nature  of  your  faculties  and  from  the  still  more  limited
opportunities  for  observation,  you  take  a  narrow  view,  and
substitute  a  part  for  the  whole,  representing  the  great  body
by  that  limb  which  is  least  fairly  a  specimen  of  it.  We  are
•disposed  to  question  your  conclusion  as  to  any  phase  of  Spirit-
ualism being  bad  or  mischievous  in  its  outcome,  while  we  deny

124  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

altogether  your  ability  to  pronounce  any  opinion  upon  the-
broad  question  in  its  ultimate  issues.

For  what  is  the  real  truth  ?  The  operations  of  the  Supreme
are  uniform  in  this  as  in  all  things  else.  The  evil  and  the
good  are  mingled.  He  does  not  use  great  messengers  for  that
work  which  can  be  accomplished  by  more  ordinary  spirits.
He  does  not  send  the  high  and  exalted  ones  to  minister  con-
viction to  an  undeveloped  and  earth-bound  spirit.  Far  other-
wise: He  proportions  his  causes  to  the  effects  which  they  are
intended  to  produce.  In  the  operation  of  the  ordinary  pro-
cesses of  nature,  He  does  not  produce  insignificant  results-
from  gigantic  causes.  So  in  this  domain  of  spirit  agency.
They  who  are  crude  in  intellect,  and  undeveloped  in  aspiration,,
whose  souls  do  not  soar  to  heights  of  moral  and  intellectual
grandeur,  such  are  the  charge  of  spirits  who  know  best  how
to  reach  and  touch  them;  who  proportion  their  means  to  the
end  in  view;  and  who  most  frequently  use  material  means  for
operating  on  an  undeveloped  intelligence.  To  the  uneducated
in  mind  and  soul,  the  spiritually  or  intellectually  unprogressed,.
they  speak  in  the  language  most  intelligible  to  their  wants.
The  physical  operation  of  force  that  can  be  gauged  by  external
sense  is  necessary  to  assure  some — nay,  very  many,  of  exist-
ence beyond  the  grave.

Such  receive  their  demonstration,  not  from  the  inspiring
voices  of  angels,  such  as  those  who  in  every  age  have  spoken
to  the  inner  souls  of  the  man  who  formed  and  guided  that-
age,  but  from  spirits  like  unto  themselves,  who  know  their
wants,  their  mental  habits  and  altitudes,  and  who  can  supply
that  proof  which  will  come  home  to  and  be  acceptable  by  those
to  whom  they  minister.  And  you  require  to  remember,  good
friend,  that  extreme  intellectual  may  co-exist  with  scarce  any
spiritual  development;  even  as  a  progressive  spirit  may  be
hampered  by  the  body  in  which  it  is  confined,  or  bound  down
by  imperfect  mental  culture.  Not  to  every  soul  is  the  spirit
voice  audible.  Not  to  every  spirit  is  the  same  proof  made
clear.  And  it  is  very  frequently  the  case  that  souls  which
have  been  so  hampered  by  superabundance  of  corporeal  or

METHODS   OF   INFLUENCE.  125

deficiency  of  mental  development,  find  their  spiritual  progress
in  a  sphere  where  those  faults  are  remedied.

For  nature  is  not  changed  all  at  once  as  by  a  magic  wand.
Idiosyncrasy  is  gradually  modified  and  elevated  by  slow  de-
grees. Hence,  to  one  who  has  been  born  with  mental  faculties
in  a  high  state  of  development,  and  who  has  improved  them
by  perpetual  culture,  the  means  employed  to  reach  the  unedu-
cated and  unrefined  must  needs  seem  coarse  and  rude,  even  as
the  issues  must  seem  rough  and  undesirable.  The  voice  is
iharsh,  and  the  zeal  evoked  is  not  according  to  discretion.  The
nature  is  being  gradually  changed  from  a  blank  and  cheerless
materialism,  or  a  still  more  hopeless  indiff'erentism,  and  there
springs  within  them  an  enthusiasm  at  the  new  life  which  they
feel  swelling  in  their  souls.  They  give  vent  to  the  joy  they
feel  in  tones  not  cultured  but  not  less  real,  not  pleasing,  per-
haps, to  your  critical  ear,  but  not  less  grateful  to  the  ear  of
the  Good  Father  than  the  cry  of  the  returning  son  who  has
wandered  from  his  home  and  disowned  his  kindred.  The
voice  is  real,  and  that  is  what  He  and  we  regard.  We  are  not
scrupulously  nice  to  mark  the  exact  accents  in  which  the  cry
is  syllabled.

So  to  the  spiritually  undeveloped  the  means  used  to  insure
conviction  are  not  the  voices  of  the  Angels  who  minister  be-
tween God  and  man,  for  they  would  cry  in  vain.  Means  are
used  which  may  lead  the  spirit  to  ponder  on  spiritual  things,
and  guide  it  to  discern  them  spiritually.  Through  the  agency
of  material  operations  the  spirit  is  led  up  to  the  spiritual.
Such  operations  you  are  familiar  with,  and  the  time  will  never
come  when  they  will  be  unnecessary.  To  some  it  will  always
be  requisite  that  such  training  should  be  the  commencement
of  their  spiritual  life.  And  none  can  deny  the  wisdom  of
adapting  means  to  ends,  but  those  who  are  unwise  and  narrow
in  the  view  they  take.  The  only  danger  is  in  substituting  the
physical  for  the  spiritual,  and  resting  in  it.  It  is  but  a  means,
a  valuable  and  indispensable  means  to  some,  which  is  intended
to  eventuate  in  spiritual  development.

So,  then,  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  more  conspicuous  ex--
ample which  offends  you— the  rude,  uncultured,  undeveloped

126  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

spirit.  Is  the  voice  which  cries  to  Him  in  tones  which  sound
so  harsh,  and  which  produces  such  results,  the  voice  of  evil  as
you  seem  to  fancy  ?

With  the  question  of  evil  we  have  dealt  before  and  shall
deal  again;  but  here  we  fearlessly  say  that,  save  in  cases
readily  discernible,  and  which  bear  on  their  face  the  marks  of
their  origin,  it  is  not  as  you  fancy.

Evil  there  is  enough,  alas  !  nor  will  it  cease  till  the  adver-
saries be  overthrown,  and  the  victory  be  complete.  We  are
far  from  denying  or  making  light  of  the  danger  which
encompasses  us  and  you ;  but  it  is  not  such  as  you  imagine.
Not  everything  ill-regulated,  uncultured,  or  rude  is  necessarily
bad.  Far  from  it !  There  is  little,  very  little  there  that  is
bad ;  while  evil  may  lurk  where  you  least  suspect  it.  Those
struggling  souls,  so  young  in  their  spiritual  life,  are  learning
to  know  that  an  existence  of  infinite  progression  is  before
them,  and  that  their  progress  then  depends  on  their  mental,
bodily,  and  spiritual  development  now.  So  they  try  to  care
for  their  bodies.  In  place  of  grovelling  drunkards  they
become  enthusiastic  abstainers  from  intoxicating  drinks ;  and
in  their  zeal  they  would  force  the  habit  upon  all.  They
cannot  discern  nice  shades  of  difference.  And  frequently
their  zeal  outruns  their  discretion.  But  is  the  rabid  enthusiast,
with  all  his  illogical  reasonings  and  his  exaggerated  utterances
offensive  to  cultured  taste,  is  he  a  worse  man  spiritually  than
was  the  loutish,  loafing  sot,  whose  mind  was  paralysed  with
fiery  drink,  whose  body  was  defiled  with  sensuality,  and
whose  moral  and  spiritual  progress  was  utterly  checked  by
habitual  intoxication  ?  You  know  that  he  is  not ;  that  he  is
alive  and  awake  to  what  he  believes  to  be  his  duty ;  that  he
is  not  the  hopeless,  aimless  creature  that  he  was ;  that  he  has
risen  from  the  dead,  a  resurrection  which  causes  joy  and
thankfulness  amongst  the  angels  of  God.  What  if  his  cries
lack  in  logic  what  they  gain  in  zeal  and  energy !  They  are
the  voice  of  conviction,  the  cry  of  a  spirit  awaking  from  the
lethargy  of  death.  There  is  more  value,  friend,  to  us  and  to
our  God  in  the  one  earnest,  honest  voice  of  a  spirit  struggling
to  make  its  new-found  convictions  heard,  more  to  gladden  us

ENTHUSIASM  AND   CONVENTIONALITY.  127"

in  our  mission,  and  to  cheer  us  on  to  renewed  exertion  than>
in  the  conventional,  dreamy  dilettante  respectability  which
will  only  utter  its  half  convictions  in  the  monotonous  drawl
of  decorous  fashion,  and  will,  moreover,  be  studious  to  avoid,
even  a  whisper  that  may  chance  to  be  unpopular.

You  say  that  popular  or  vulgar  Spiritualism  is  undesirable  ;
that  its  utterances  are  rude,  and  its  tone  repellent.  We  tell
you  nay.  Those  who  thus  forcibly  state  their  convictions  in
terms  not  very  exact  and  polished  come  home  to  the  masses
far  more  than  any  others  could  with  polite  and  polished
utterance.  The  rough  jagged  stone  shot  from  their  sling  with
all  the  rude  energy  of  assured  conviction,  is  more  forcible
than  the  calculated  utterance  of  the  most  cultured  and  refined
mind,  whose  words  are  measured  by  custom,  and  toned  down
to  the  line  of  respectable  moderation.  Because  they  are  rough,
they  are  serviceable ;  and  because  they  deal  with  actual
physical  facts  they  come  home  to  minds  which  are  incapable
of  discerning  metaphysical  distinctions.

In  the  army  of  the  spirit  messengers  there  are  ministers
suited  to  every  want.  There  is  for  the  hard  materialist  who
knows  of  nought  but  matter,  the  spirit  that  can  show  him  of
an  invisible  force  superior  to  material  laws.  To  the  shrinking,,
timid  soul  which  cares  not  for  great  issues,  so  it  can  be  assured
of  the  welfare  of  its  own  loved  ones  and  of  reunion  with
them,  there  comes  the  voice  of  the  departed,  breathing  in.
recognisable  accents,  the  test  needed  for  conviction,  or  convey-
ing assurance  of  reunion  and  of  affectionate  intercourse  in  the
hereafter.  To  the  spirit  that  is  best  approached  through  the
avenues  of  the  mind  by  processes  of  logical  argument,  there
comes  the  voice  that  demonstrates  external  agency,  evolves
orderly  and  sequential  proof,  and  builds  up  by  slow  degrees
an  edifice  of  conviction  founded  on  indisputable  fact.  Aye,
and  above  all,  to  those  who  have  passed  beyond  the  alphabet
of  spiritual  agency,  and  who  long  to  progress  further  and
further  into  the  mysteries  which  are  not  penetrable  by  the
eye  of  sense,  to  such  come  teachers  who  can  tell  of  the  cJeep
things  of  God,  and  reveal  to  the  aspiring  soul  richer  views  of
Him  and  of  its  destiny.  To  each  there  is  the  suitable-

128  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

messenger  and  the  appropriate  message,  even  as  God  has  ever
adapted  his  means  to  the  end  in  view.

Yet  once  again.  Remember  that  Spiritualism  is  not,  as  was
the  Gospel  message  of  old,  a  professedly  external  revelation,
•coming  from  the  spiritual  hierarchy  to  mankind :  proclaimed
AS  a  revelation,  as  a  religion,  as  a  means  of  salvation.  It  is
all  this :  but  it  is  also  other  than  this.  To  you,  and  to  such
AS  approach  it  from  your  point  of  view,  it  is  this :  but  to  the
lowly  and  suffering,  the  sorrow-laden  and  ignorant,  it  is  other
far.  It  is  the  assurance  of  personal  expectation  of  reunion ;
An  individual  consolation,  of  private  application  first  of  all.
It  is,  in  effect,  the  bridging  over,  for  divers  purposes,  of  the
gulf  which  separates  the  world  of  sense  from  the  world  of
spirit.  With  the  disembodied  as  with  the  incarned,  degrees
-of  development  differ :  and  to  the  undeveloped  man  comes
most  readily  the  spirit  who  is  on  his  own  mental  plane.
Hence  it  is  that  manifestations  vary  in  kind  and  in  degree ;
and  that  frequently  enough  the  scum  rises  to  the  surface,  and
prevents  you  from  seeing  what  is  going  on  beneath.

Could  you  see,  as  you  now  see,  the  signs  which  have
-attended  and  followed  similar  movements  in  other  ages  of  the
world,  you  would  not  fall  into  the  error  of  supposing  that
these  signs  are  exclusively  confined  to  our  mission.  They  are
inherent  in  your  human  nature,  inseparable  from  anything
which  deeply  stirs  the  heart  of  man.  They  attended  the
mission  of  Moses  to  the  Israelites  of  old,  of  the  Hebrew
Prophets,  as  well  as  of  the  Christ.  They  have  appeared  at
•every  fresh  epoch  in  the  history  of  man,  and  they  attend  the
present  development  of  divine  knowledge.  They  are  no  more
a  sample  of  our  work  than  in  your  political  history  are  the
ravings  of  the  excited  demagogue  evidence  of  real  and
influential  political  opinion.

You  must  distinguish :  and  to  one  who  lives  in  the  midst
of  a  great  movement,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  do  so.     It  will
be  easier  when,  in  the  time  to  come,  you  look  back  upon  the
.struggle  which  is  now  seething  around  you.

We  shall  have  more  to  say  in  answer  to  you.

For  the  present — Farewell.

+  IMPERATOR.

(    129    )

SECTION    XVI.

[As  I  attempted  to  put  other  objections,  many  of
which  occurred  to  me,  I  was  stopped.]

We  have  something  to  say  by  way  of  summing  up  what
has  already  been  spoken.  You  do  not  sufficiently  grasp  the
fact  that  religion  has  a  very  scanty  hold  on  the  mass  of
mankind;  nor  do  you  understand  the  adaptability  of  what
we  say  to  the  needs  and  aspirations  of  mankind.  Or  perhaps
it  is  necessary  that  you  be  reminded  of  what  you  cannot  see
clearly  in  your  present  state,  and  in  the  midst  of  your  present
associations.  You  cannot  see  as  we  see  the  carelessness  that
has  crept  over  men  as  to  the  future  state.  Those  who  have
thought  about  their  future  condition  have  come  to  know  that
they  can  find  out  nothing  about  it  except  that  the  prevalent
notions  are  vague,  foolish,  contradictory,  and  unsatisfying.
Their  reasoning  faculties  convince  them  that  the  Revelation  of
God  which  they  are  taught  to  believe  to  be  of  plenary  inspira-
tion, contains  plain  marks  of  human  adulteration ;  that  it  will
not  stand  the  test  of  sifting  such  as  is  applied  to  works  profess-
edly of  human  origin;  and  that  the  priestly  fiction  that  reason  is
no  measure  of  revelation,  that  it  must  be  left  behind  upon  the
threshold  of  inquiry,  and  give  place  to  faith,  is  a  cunningly-
planned  means  of  preventing  man  from  discovering  the  errors
.and  contradictions  which  throng  the  pages  of  that  infallible
.guide  which  is  forced  upon  him.  Those  who  use  the  touch-
-stone  of  reason  discover  them  readily  enough :  those  who  do
not,  betake  themselves  to  the  refuge  of  faith,  and  become
blind  devotees,  fanatical,  bigoted,  and  irrational ;  conformed
to  a  groove  in  which  they  have  been  educated,  and  from  which
they  have  not  broken  loose  simply  because  they  have  not
•dared  to  think.

It  would  be  hard  for  man  to  devise  a  means  of  cramping
the  mind  and  dwarfing  the  spirit  more  complete  than  this
persuading  a  man  that  he  must  not  think  about  matters  of
10

130  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

religion.  It  is  one  which  paralyses  all  freedom  of  thought,
and  renders  it  almost  impossible  for  the  soul  to  rise.  The
spirit  is  condemned  to  a  hereditary  religion,  whether  suited  or
not  to  its  wants.  It  is  absolutely  without  choice  as  to  that
which  is  the  food  of  its  real  life.  That  which  may  have  suited
a  far-off  ancestor  may  be  quite  unsuited  to  a  struggling  spirit
that  lives  in  other  times  from  those  in  which  such  ideas  had
force  and  vitality.  And  so  the  spirit's  vital  nourishment  is
made  a  question  of  birth  and  locality.  It  is  a  matter  over
which  they  can  exercise  no  personal  control,  whether  they  are
to  be  Christian,  Mahommedan,  or,  as  you  say,  heathen ;  whether
their  God  is  to  be  the  Great  Spirit  of  the  Red  Indian,  or  the
fetish  of  the  savage ;  whether  his  prophet  be  Christ,  or  Maho-
met, or  Confucius ;  in  short,  whether  their  notion  of  religion
be  that  prevalent  in  east,  west,  north,  or  south;  for  in  all  quar-
ters they  have  evolved  for  themselves  a  theology  which  they
teach  their  children  as  of  binding  force,  as  supremely  necessary
for  salvation.

It  is  important  that  you  ponder  well  this  matter.  The
assumption  that  any  one  religion,  which  may  commend  itself
to  any  one  race,  in  any  portion  of  your  globe,  has  a  monopoly
of  Divine  Truth,  is  a  human  fiction,  born  of  man's  vanity  and
pride.  There  is  no  such  monopoly  of  truth  in  any  system  of
theology  which  flourishes  or  has  flourished  among  men.  Each
is,  in  its  degree,  imperfect ;  each  has  its  points  of  truth  adapted
to  the  wants  of  those  to  whom  it  was  given,  or  by  whom  it
was  evolved.  Each  has  its  errors :  and  none  can  be  com-
mended to  those  whose  habits  of  thought  and  whose  spiritual
necessities  are  different,  as  being  the  spiritual  food  which  God
has  given  to  man.  It  is  but  human  frailty  to  fancy  such  a
thing.  Man  likes  to  believe  that  he  is  the  exclusive  possessor
of  some  germ  of  truth.  We  smile  as  we  see  him  hugging
himself  in  the  delusion,  congratulating  himself  on  the  fancied
possession,  and  persuading  himself  that  it  is  necessary  for  him
to  send  missionaries  far  and  wide,  to  bear  his  nostrum  to  other
lands  and  other  peoples,  who  do  but  laugh  at  his  pretensions
and  deride  his  claims.

It  is,  indeed,  supremely  marvellous  to  us  that  your  wise  men

NO  MONOPOLY  OF  TRUTH  IN  ANY  ONE  RELIGION.       131

have  been  and  are  unable  to  see  that  the  ray  of  truth  which
has  shone  even  unto  them,  and  which  they  have  done  their
best  to  obscure,  is  but  one  out  of  many  which  have  been  shed
by  the  Sun  of  Truth  on  your  world.  Divine  Truth  is  too  clear
a  light  to  be  tolerated  by  human  eyes.  It  must  be  tempered
by  an  earthly  medium,  conveyed  through  a  human  vehicle,
and  darkened  somewhat  lest  it  blind  the  unaccustomed  eye.
Only  when  the  body  of  earth  is  cast  aside,  and  the  spirit  soars
to  higher  planes,  can  it  afford  to  dispense  with  the  interpos-
ing medium  which  has  dulled  the  brightness  of  the  heavenly
light.

All  races  of  men  have  had  a  beam  of  this  light  amono-st

O  O

them.  They  have  received  it  as  best  they  might,  have  fos-
tered it  or  dimmed  it  according  to  their  development,  and
have  in  the  end  adapted  to  their  different  wants  that  which,
they  were  able  to  receive.  None  has  reason  to  vaunt  itself  in
exclusive  possession,  or  to  make  futile  efforts  to  force  on  others
its  own  view  of  truth.  So  long  as  your  world  has  endured,  so
long  has  it  been  true  that  the  Brahmin,  the  Mahommedan,  the
Jew,  and  the  Christian,  has  had  his  peculiar  light,  which  he  has
considered  to  be  his  special  heritage  from  heaven.  And,  as  if
to  make  the  fallacy  more  conspicuous,  that  Church  which
claims  to  itself  an  exclusive  possession  of  Divine  Truth,  and
deems  it  right  to  carry  the  lamp  throughout  all  lands,  is  most
conspicuous  for  its  own  manifold  divisions.  Christendom's
divisions,  the  incoherent  fragments  into  which  the  Church  of
Christ  is  rent,  the  frenzied  bitterness  with  which  each  assails
other  for  the  pure  love  of  God ;  these  are  the  best  answers  to
the  foolish  pretension  that  Christianity  possesses  a  monopoly
of  Divine  Truth.

But  the  days  are  approaching  when  a  new  ray  of  light  shall
be  shed  on  this  mist  of  human  ignorance.  This  geographical
sectarianism  shall  give  place  before  the  enlightenment  caused
by  the  spread  of  the  New  Revelation,  for  which  mankind  is
riper  than  you  think.  They  shall  be  made  to  see  that  each
system  of  religion  is  a  ray  of  truth  from  the  Central  Sun,
dimmed,  indeed,  by  man's  ignorance,  but  having  within  it  a
a  oferm  of  vital  truth.  Each  must  see  the  truth  in  his

132  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

neighbour's  belief,  and  learn  that  best  of  lessons,  to  dwell  on
the  good  rather  than  on  the  evil;  to  recognise  the  Divine  even
through  human  error,  and  to  acknowledge  the  godlike  even  in
that  which  has  not  commended  itself  to  his  own  wants  hitherto.
The  time  draws  nigh  when  the  sublime  truths  which  we  are
commissioned  to  proclaim,  rational  and  noble  as  they  are,  when
viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  reason,  shall  wipe  away  from
the  face  of  God's  earth  the  sectarian  jealousy  and  theological
bitterness,  the  anger  and  ill-will,  the  rancour  and  Pharisaic
pride  which  have  disgraced  the  name  of  religion,  and  have
rendered  theology  a  bye  word  amongst  men.  Alas !  alas !  that
that  divine  science  which  should  tell  man  of  the  nature  of
his  God,  and  in  telling  should  breathe  into  his  soul  some-
what of  that  divine  love  which  emanates  from  Deity ;  alas !
that  it  should  have  become  the  battle-ground  for  sects  and
parties,  the  arid  plain  where  the  pettiest  prejudices  and  the
meanest  passions  may  be  aired,  the  barren,  cheerless  waste,
where  man  may  most  surely  demonstrate  his  own  ignorance
of  his  God,  about  whose  nature  and  operations  he  so  bitterly
disputes !

Theology !  it  is  a  bye-word  even  amongst  you.  You  know
how,  in  the  ponderous  volumes  which  contain  the  records  of
man's  ignorance  about  his  God,  may  be  found  the  bitterest
invective,  the  most  unchristian  bitterness,  the  most  unblush-
ing misrepresentation.  Theology !  it  has  been  the  excuse  for
quenching  every  holiest  instinct,  for  turning  the  hand  of  the
f oeman  against  kindred  and  friends,  for  burning  and  torturing
and  rending  the  bodies  of  the  saintliest  of  mankind,  for
exiling  and  ostracising  those  whom  the  world  should  have
delighted  to  honour,  for  subverting  man's  best  instincts  and
quenching  his  most  natural  affections.  Aye,  and  it  is  still  the
arena  in  which  man's  basest  passions  vaunt  themselves,  stalk-
ing with  head  erect  and  brazen  front  over  all  that  dares  to
separate  itself  from  the  stereotyped  rule.  "  Avaunt !  there  is
no  room  for  reason  where  theology  holds  sway."  It  is  still
the  cause  for  most  that  may  make  true  men  to  blush,  for  in
its  stifling  atmosphere  free  thought  gasps,  and  man  becomes
an  unreasoning  puppet.

THE   OLD   ORDER,   AND  THE   NEW.

To  such  base  ends  has  man  degraded  the  science  which
should  teach  him  of  his  God.

We  tell  you,  friend,  that  the  end  draws  nigh.  It  shall  not
be  always  so.  As  it  was  in  the  days  which  preceded  the  com-
ing of  the  Son  of  Man,  as  it  has  been  in  the  midnight  hours
which  precede  every  day-dawn  from  on  high,  so  it  is  now.
The  night  of  ignorance  is  fast  passing  away.  The  shackles
which  priestcraft  has  hung  around  struggling  souls  shall  be
knocked  off;  and  in  place  of  fanatical  folly,  and  ignorant  Phari-
saism, and  misty  speculation,  you  shall  have  a  reasonable  reli-
gion and  a  Divine  Faith.  You  shall  have  richer  views  of  God,
truer  notions  of  your  duty  and  destiny ;  you  shall  know  that
they  whom  you  call  dead  are  alive  amongst  you ;  living,  as
they  lived  on  earth,  only  more  really ;  ministering  to  you  with
undiminished  love ;  animated  in  their  unwearying  intercourse
with  the  same  affection  which  they  bore  to  you  whilst  they
were  yet  incarned.

It  was  said  of  the  Christ  that  he  brought  life  and  immor-
tality to  light.  It  is  true  in  a  wider  sense  than  the  writer
meant.  The  outcome  of  the  Revelation  of  Christ,  which  is
only  now  beginning  to  be  seen  amongst  men,  is  in  its  truest
sense  the  abolition  of  death,  the  demonstration  of  immortality.
In  that  great  truth — man  never  dies,  cannot  die,  however  he
may  wish  it— in  that  great  truth  rests  the  key  to  the  future.
The  immortality  of  man,  held  not  as  an  article  of  faith,  a
clause  in  a  creed,  but  as  a  piece  of  personal  knowledge  and
individual  experience,  this  is  the  key-note  of  the  religion  of
the  future.  In  its  trail  come  all  the  grand  truths  we  teach,
all  the  noblest  conceptions  of  duty,  the  grandest  views  of
destiny,  the  truest  realisations  of  life.

You  cannot  grasp  them  now.  They  daze  and  bewilder  your
spirit,  unaccustomed  to  such  a  glare.  But,  mark  well,  friend
brief  space  shall  pass  before  you  recognise  in  our  words  the
lineaments  of  truth,  the  aspect  of  the  divine.

+  IMPERATOB,

(     134    )

SECTION    XVII.

[I  THINK  that  all  my  friends  were  satisfied  that  I  was
too  persistent  in  my  objections.  I,  however,  felt
that  I  had  no  conscientious  course  open  but  to  do
my  best  to  probe  to  the  very  depths  this  strange
message  that  stirred  me  so  violently.  I  could  not
satisfy  myself :  nor  could  I  rest  unsatisfied.  I
recurred  to  the  strife.  IMPERATOR'S  argument
being  concluded,  I  pondered  it  carefully,  and  two
days  after  (July  14th,  1873)  made  a  rejoinder  on
the  points  which  still  seemed  difficult  to  me.  These
referred  to — 1,  Identity ;  2,  The  nature  and  work
of  Jesus  Christ ;  3,  External  evidence  confirmatory
of  the  claims  made. — I  requested  that  independent
communications  should  be  made  through  another
medium,  and  expressed  my  intention  of  seeking
out  some  medium  with  a  view  to  getting  such
authentication.  I  also  traversed  the  views  put
forward  respecting  the  teachings  in  many  ways
which  it  is  not  now  important  to  particularise.
My  answer  expressed  fairly  my  convictions  at
that  time ;  but  I  see  now  that  my  rejoinders  were
based  upon  insufficient  knowledge,  and  they  have
since  been  met  in  many  ways ;  sufficiently,  at  any
rate,  to  assure  me  that  what  remains  unanswered
will  in  due  time  receive  its  reply.  But,  at  the
time,  I  was  very  far  from  being  satisfied,  and
expressed  my  dissent  emphatically.  In  reply  it
was  written  as  follows] : —

Friend,  your  statement  has  the  merit  of  candour  and  per-
spicuity, which  you  allege  that  ours  lacks.  We  have  no
difficulty  in  seeing  your  difficulty,  though  we  find  it  impossible
to  supply  it ;  and  undesirable  even  if  it  were  possible..  If  we
fail  at  once  to  comply  with  all  the  conditions  which  you
prescribe,  we  say  again  that  it  is  from  no  lack  of  desire  to
afford  you  every  satisfaction.  We  desire  earnestly  to  bear
conviction  in  upon  your  mind ;  but  in  so  doing  we  must  use

OBJECTIONS  AND   REJOINDERS.  135

our  own  means  at  our  own  time.  It  would  be  to  us  most  sad,
most  deplorable,  that  our  work  should  be  marred  or  delayed
fay  the  failure  of  part  of  our  plans.  If  it  were  so  we  should
regret  it  both  on  your  account  and  on  our  own ;  but  we  are
unable  to  change  the  result.  We  are  not  omnipotent ;  and  we
•cannot  influence  you  save  by  the  ordinary  processes  of  argu-
ment and  evidence  which  do  not  now  reach  your  mind.  That
being  so,  we  recognise  the  fact  that  you  are  not  yet  prepared
to  receive  our  words,  and  we  wait  in  patience  for  the  time
when  they  shall  find  an  entrance  into  your  mind.

Into  most  of  the  questions  which  you  have  raised  we  do
not  follow  you.  They  have  been  answered  before,  so  far  as
it  is  now  desirable  to  answer  them.  Nothing  that  we  could
now  say  would  add  any  force  to  the  replies  which  have  been
.already  given.  Into  matters  of  opinion  it  is  idle  for  us  to
enter.  Whether  what  we  say  seems  to  you  consistent  with
what  we  do  or  have  previously  done,  is  a  very  small  matter.
You  are  not  now.  in  the  best  condition,  to  judge  dispassionately
on  such  a  matter.  Whether  the  eventual  outcome  of  what
you  call  Spiritualism  is  what  we  say,  or  what  you  think,  is
equally  beside  the  point.  We  view  the  question  from  a  more
extended  standpoint,  one  to  which  you  are  not  yet  able  to
mount.  Your  vision  is  circumscribed,  and  we  see  with  clearer
-eye  than  yours.  Whether  you  consider  our  teaching  to  be  a
legitimate  development  of  Christianity  is  also  of  small  moment.
You  admit  its  moral  grandeur,  and  we  need  not  discuss  the
meaning  of  development.  Whether  you  believe  it  or  not,  it
is  teaching  of  which  the  world  stands  in  sore  need ;  teaching
which  it  will  sooner  or  later  receive  with  thankfulness,  whether
you  accept  it  or  not ;  whether  or  not  you  receive  us,  and  are
prepared  to  aid  us  in  disseminating  it.  We  had  hoped  that
we  had  found  an  instrument  suited  to  our  wants.  We  hope
so  still ;  for  we  know  that  the  phase  through  which  you  are
now  passing  is  but  a  transient  one,  soon  to  give  place  to  that
assured  conviction  which  is  born  of  doubt.  But  even  if  it
were  not  so,  we  must  bow  to  the  Almighty  fiat,  and  seek  anew
for  means  of  carrying  on  the  work  which  we  have  in  charge.
.No  instrument  is  necessary  to  our  end ;  though  a  good  one  is

136  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

desirable.  We  should  deplore  greatly  that  you  should  put
aside  what  is  to  you  a  means  of  enlightenment  and  progress.
But  over  the  issue  we  have  no  power.  Should  you,  in  the
freedom  of  your  will,  decide  to  do  so,  we  shall  bow  to  the
decision,  and  regret  that  your  mind  is  not  sufficiently  devel-
oped to  accept  what  we  have  presented  to  it.

Any  attempt  to  prove  identity  by  such  imposed  tests  as  yon
have  put  upon  us  would  be  worse  than  useless.

It  would  probably  end  in  failure ;  and  would  certainly  fail
to  ensure  conviction.  It  may  be  possible  for  us  to  give  colla-
teral proofs  from  time  to  time.  If  it  be  so,  we  shall  gladly
avail  ourselves  of  the  opportunity;  and  if  your  connection
with  us  is  prolonged,  you  will  find  hereafter  that  many  such
proofs  are  accumulated.  But  the  validity  of  our  claims  must
rest  on  some  more  solid  foundation  than  that.  The  evidence
is  not  to  be  built  on  so  shadowy  a  foundation.  It  would  not
stand  the  test  of  time.  It  is  on  moral  grounds  that  we  must
appeal  to  you ;  and  you  yourself,  we  trust,  will  one  day  see
that  the  physical  is  transient  and  unsatisfactory.  For  the
present  your  mind  is  not  sufficiently  calm  to  weigh  judicially
the  moral  evidence.  We  are  either  of  God  or  of  the  devil.  If
of  God,  as  our  words  argue,  then  we  shall  not  be  likely  to
fabricate  a  story  which,  as  you  say,  the  world  would  receive
with  derision.  But  if  we  are,  as  you  incline  to  think,  of  evil,
then  it  rests  with  you  to  account  for  a  story,  which  bears  on
its  face  the  marks  of  a  Divine  origin,  coming  from  an  evil
source.  We  do  not  trouble  ourselves  much  on  this  score.  We
have  no  fear  that  what  we  have  said  will,  in  the  end  when
fairly  weighed,  be  held  to  be  attributable  to  an  evil  source.
It  is  to  the  matter  of  the  message  rather  than  to  the  character
of  the  messenger  that  we  direct  attention.

For  ourselves  it  is  a  small  matter.  For  God's  work  and
God's  truth  it  is  serious.  For  you  and  for  your  future  it  is
of  most  vital  moment.  It  may  be  well  that  you  should  have
time  for  thought  and  reflection.  The  growth  of  the  revela-
tion which  has  centred  round  you  has  been  rapid  and
dazzling.  It  may  be  well  that  you  should  have  time  for
serious  and  sober  thought  before  we  say  more.  We  think

FUTILE   ATTEMFfS  AT   CORROBORATION.  137

that  we  may  well  withdraw  for  a  time,  and  allow  you  to  be-
at peace  with  your  thoughts.  We  do  not  leave  you  alone  -r
but  rather  with  guardians  more  vigilant,  and  with  guides-
more  experienced.  It  is  better,  too,  for  us ;  for  time  may  de-
cide whether  it  be  possible  for  us  to  continue  the  work  begun ^
or  whether  precious  time  has  been  wasted,  and  the  work  must
be  begun  anew.  It  must  in  any  case  be  a  grievous  disappoint-
ment that  the  fruit  of  so  many  labours,  of  so  many  prayers,
should  drop  untimely  to  the  ground.  But  we  and  you  must
act  according  to  that  light  which  is  in  us  as  the  guide  of  our
actions.  We  are  responsible  in  the  sight  of  God  for  so  much
as  that ;  and  we  must  see  to  it  that  we  weigh  the  issues  aright.
Our  prayers  shall  be  not  less  frequent  nor  less  earnest  than
heretofore.  We  trust  that  they  may  be  more  effectual.
Farewell :  and  may  the  Great  God  guide  and  direct  you.

+  IMPERATOR.

[After  this  I  made  several  attempts  at  communication.
I  also  went,  as  I  had  intimated,  to  a  medium  to
whom  I  was  not  known.  I  tried  to  the  best  of  my
power  to  elicit  some  information  as  to  my  guides,
and  especially  as  to  the  identity  of  Imperator.
The  effort  was  vain.  All  I  got  was  that  the  spirit
with  me  was  Zoud,  a  Russian  historian.  I  in-
quired as  soon  as  I  got  home  by  writing,  and  was
told  that  the  statement  was  false.  It  was  said]  : —

We  are  not  able  to  advise  you  to  place  reliance  on  the  state-
ments made.  They  are  not  trustworthy.  If,  contrary  to  oui
advice,  you  place  yourself  in  communication  with  strange
spirits  who  do  not  know  you,  and  who  are  not  in  harmony
with  us,  you  will  receive  communications  which  are  perplexing:
and  unreliable.

[I  remonstrated  energetically,  and  said  that  it  would
have  been  so  easy  to  satisfy  my  reasonable  desire.]

No.  We  wish  to  give  you  every  satisfaction  ;  but  the  chief
ordered  us  not  to  attend,  and  we  were  unable  to  prevent  you
from  going.  You  get  more  harm  than  you  can  know  from.

138  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

«uch  experiments  in  your  present  state.  We  urge  you  very
•earnestly  to  refrain  from  such  sittings  in  your  present  state,
lest  evil  ensue.  You  require  only  patience.  Impatient
attempts  to  force  matters  on  do  but  cause  annoyance  and  dis-
tress to  all  of  us.  Far  better  that  you  rest  in  peace,  and  await
the  issue.  The  chief  will  do  what  is  right,  and  any  premature
steps  are  mistaken.

But  (I  remonstrated)  you  all  seem  leagued  to  bewilder  us.
Can  you  do  nothing  that  I  ask  ?

Friend,  you  cannot  have  the  mathematical  proof  that  you
crave.  Nor  can  we  give  you  proof  exactly  when  you  wish
for  it.  Nor  would  it  be  good  for  you  if  we  were  able.  All
is  arranged  wisely  and  well.

{The  spirit  who  communicated  thus  is  the  same  who
gave  the  earlier  messages.  I  was  fain  to  stop,  for
I  could  get  no  satisfaction.  On  July  24th,  some
questions  were  put  on  theological  questions,  one
touching  the  passage,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  one  "
(John  x.  30).  I  had  insisted,  in  the  course  of  con-
versation, that  they  were  incompatible  with  Im-
perator's  statements.  A  question  was  accordingly
asked,  and  the  explanation  given  was  as  follows] : —

The  words  which  you  have  quoted  must  be  taken  in  their
context.  Jesus  was  at  Jerusalem  at  the  Feast  of  the  Dedica-
tion, and  the  old  question  was  put  by  the  Jews — "  If  thou  be
the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly?"  They  wished  for  a  sign  as  you
wish  for  some  resolution  of  your  doubts.  He  referred  them,
as  we  have  referred  you,  to  the  works  and  tenor  of  his  teach-
ing, as  evidences  of  its  Divine  origin.  Those,  he  said,  who
were  prepared — his  "Father's  sheep" — heard  and  answered  his
voice.  They  accepted  his  mission.  The  questioners  could  not
accept,  because  they  could  not  understand,  and  were  not  pre-
pared to  believe.  The  prepared  ones  heard  and  followed  Jesus
to  eternal  life,  to  progress  and  happiness.  Such  was  the  Father's
will,  and  no  man  had  power  to  hinder  it.  They  were  kept  in
the  Father's  hand,  and  in  the  mission  which  was  to  regenerate

"I  AND  MY  FATHEE  ARE  ONE."  139

them  and  mankind  at  large,  the  Father  and  the  Teacher  were
One — "  I  and  my  Father  are  One."

Such  were  the  claims  put  forward.  The  Jews  understood
them  as  an  assumption  of  Divine  honour,  and  stoned  him.
But  he  justified  himself.  How  ?  By  admitting  his  Divinity,
.and  defending  the  claim — I  am  the  Son  of  God,  and  I  prove
it?  Nay,  verily.  But  he,  the  pure,  truthful  Spirit,  over
whose  transparent  sincerity  no  shadow  of  duplicity  ever  passed,
he  asked,  in  amazement,  for  which  of  his  miracles  they  were
•about  to  stone  him.  For  none,  his  accusers  said,  but  for
blasphemously  claiming  union  with  the  undivided  Godhead.
Thus  challenged,  he  distinctly  put  aside  the  claim.  Why,  he
«ays,  in  your  own  sacred  records,  the  term  is  applied  to  many
on  whom  the  Spirit  was  outpoured,  "Ye  are  gods."  How
then  can  it  be  blasphemy  to  say  of  Him  whom  the  Father
himself  hath  sanctified  and  separated  for  so  special  a  work,
He  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  If  you  doubt,  regard  the  works  I  do.
There  is  no  claim  of  Divinity  there,  but  the  reverse.

[On  July  25th,  we  had  a  sitting  at  which  Imperator
controlled,  and  some  information  was  given ;  but
nothing  that  touched  my  mental  condition.  The
other  members  of  the  circle  were  not  in  sympathy
with  my  difficulties,  and  during  the  control  their
questions  were  answered,  and  their  difficulties
solved.  My  spirit  being  in  abeyance  did  not
affect  the  conditions.  Then  a  friend  of  mine,
lately  passed  from  earth,  was  brought,  and  strong
proof  of  identity,  by  means  of  reference  to  events
known  only  to  me  and  him,  was  given.  Though
impressed,  I  was  not  satisfied.  Then  came  the
vacation,  and  I  left  London  for  Ireland.  Then  I
had  curious  communications  respecting  a  friend
who  lay  sick  in  London,  but  nothing  that  bore
upon  the  question  now  at  issue.  I  then  went  on
to  Wales,  and  received  on  August  24th  another
message  from  Imperator,  which  it  is  necessary  to
transcribe.  I  had  endeavoured  to  eJicit  answers,
.and  was  warned  that  it  was  not  well  for  me  to  do
so.  My  bodi.y  condition  was  below  par,  and  my
mental  state  was  disturbed.  I  was  advised  to

140  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

review  the  past  rather  than  to  attempt  to  look
further  into  the  future.]

Employ  yourself  in  meditating  on  the  past.  Think  care-
fully over  that  which  we  have  been  permitted  to  do  for  you.
Weigh  again  and  again  the  total  outcome  of  what  is  before-
you.  Estimate  its  value,  and  watch  the  moral  tendency  of  our
words.  We  do  not  blame  you  for  doubts  which  have  been
the  natural  outcome  of  your  peculiar  frame  of  mind.  It
is  inevitable  that  you  should  weigh  and  test  everything,  and
your  impetuous  nature  hurries  you  along  too  fast,  while  a
mind  naturally  inclined  to  doubt  conflicts  with  the  two  eager
impetuosity.  Hence  your  distracted  state  of  mind.  Hence
the  difficulties  in  your  way.  We  do  not  blame :  we  do  but
point  out  that  such  a  frame  of  mind  is  not  that  which  is  best
fitted  for  impartial  judgment.  It  needs  that  you  should  curb-
your  impetuous  mind,  and  resist  the  tendency  to  form  hasty
conclusions  on  the  one  hand,  while  you  put  aside  carping
criticism,  and  allow  weight  to  that  which  we  may  call  the
constructive  side  of  our  teaching.  At  present,  you  dwell  too
exclusively  on  the  destructive.

And  remember,  friend,  that  your  doubts  and  difficulties
must,  until  they  are  removed,  operate  as  a  barrier  to  our  fur-
ther progress.  They  have  already  hindered  us  much,  and
caused  us  to  withhold  much.  This  is  unavoidable.  We  urge
you,  then,  to  clear  your  mind  once  and  for  ever,  by  stern
exercise  of  will,  of  all  the  mists  which  now  becloud  your
judgment.  This  is  what  we  hope  for  as  the  result  of  rest  and
isolation.  It  is  all  important  that  the  circle  to  whom  we  com-
municate should  be  in  perfect  harmony.  Rising  doubts  are
to  us  as  the  fogs  of  earth  which  bewilder  the  traveller,  and
hinder  him  on  his  way.  We  cannot  work  in  the  midst  of
them.  They  must  be  removed.  And  we  do  not  doubt  that
an  honest  and  unprejudiced  survey  of  the  past  will  clear
them  away :  as  the  sun  of  truth  rises  on  your  horizon,  they
will  disperse,  and  you  will  be  astonished  at  the  prospect  that
shall  dawn  upon  you.

Be  not  too  eager.     If  anything  seems  new  and  strange  to-

"WAIT  AND   PRAY."

you,  do  not  therefore  reject  it.  Estimate  it  according  to  your
light,  and,  if  need  be,  put  it  aside  to  wait  for  further  enlighten-
ment. To  the  honest  and  true  heart  all  else  will  come  in
God's  time.  In  the  end  you  will  arrive  at  a  plane  of  know-
ledge, when  much  that  now  seems  so  new  and  strange  will  be
revealed  and  explained.  Only  keep  before  you  the  fact  that
there  is  much  that  is  new  and  true  of  which  you  now  know
nothing ;  many  fresh  truths  to  be  learned ;  many  old  errors
to  be  dissipated  Wait  and  pray.

4-  IMPERATOR.

(     142    )

SECTION    XVIII.

[On  Aug.  26,  1873,  I  had  been  reading  over  previous
communications,  and  had  thought  much  about  the
symbolic  nature  of  spirit  utterances.  I  had  won-
dered whether  we  erred  in  being  too  literal  in  their
interpretation.  I  put  the  question,  and  was  told
that  I  was  in  no  fit  state  for  communing.  This  is
one  instance  out  of  many  where  the  difficulty  of
communication  was  apparent.  I  was  told  to  re-
fresh myself.  The  day  was  rainy,  dreary,  and
comfortless.  I  was  below  par,  and  in  a  strange
place,  being  from  home  on  a  visit.  I  did  as  I  was
bid,  and  then  it  was  written,  at  first  with  pain
and  slowly,  then  more  easily] : —

The  conditions,  though  still  unfavourable,  are  better.  You
would  be  well  advised  to  prepare  yourself  always,  both  men-
tally and  bodily,  for  communion.  As  we  have  before  said
that  we  cannot  operate  when  the  body  is  overloaded  with
food,  so  now  we  say,  that  a  system  depressed  and  weak  is  not
favourable  for  our  purposes.  We  do  not  advocate  the  depres-
sion of  the  vital  powers  by  neglect  of  due  food  any  more  than
we  countenance  gluttony  and  drunkenness.  We  preach  the
mean  in  all  things  where  it  is  knowable.  Asceticism  and
self-indulgence  are  the  extremes  which  are  evil  in  their
results.  That  is  the  mean  for  each  which  leaves  the  bodily
powers  in  perfect  play  whilst  it  leaves  the  mental  faculties
unclouded  and  unexcited.  A  clear,  active,  undepressed  yet
unexcited  mind  we  ask  for,  and  a  body  whose  powers  are
vigorous  and  neither  in  excess  nor  defect  of  their  capacity.
Each  man  might  do  much  by  the  exercise  of  a  judicious  self-
control,  to  render  himself  better  fitted  both  for  his  work  on
earth,  and  also  for  receiving  instruction  from  those  who  are
sent  to  minister  to  him.  The  habits  of  daily  life  are  frequently
unwise,  and  lead  to  a  diseased  state  of  body  and  mind.  We

THE  EELIGION   OF  THE  BODY,  AND  OF  TRE  SOUL.       143

lay  down  no  rule  beyond  the  general  one  of  care  and  moder-
ation. We  can  only  tell  what  suits  individual  wants  by  being-
brought  into  personal  contact.  Each  must  learn  to  settle  for
himself  what  is  best  for  him.

It  is  part  of  our  mission  to  teach  the  religion  of  the  body
as  well  as  of  the  soul.  We  proclaim  to  you,  and  to  all,  that
the  due  care  of  the  body  is  an  essential  prerequisite  to  the
progress  of  the  soul.  So  long  as  spirit  is  prisoned  in  the  earth
body  through  the  avenues  of  which  it  finds  its  expression  on
the  plane  of  matter,  it  is  essential  that  you  care  intelligently
for  that  body,  lest  it  react  on  the  spirit  and  affect  it  injuri-
ously. Yet  it  is  only  in  rare  cases  that  intelligent  discrimi-
nation is  exercised  with  regard  to  food  and  clothing,  and  the
habits  of  life  which  have  so  great  an  effect  on  spirit.  The
artificial  state  of  existence  which  prevails,  the  ignorance  with
respect  to  all  or  nearly  all  that  influences  health,  the  vicious
habits  of  excess  that  are  so  nearly  universal,  these  are  all  bars
and  hindrances  to  true  spiritual  life.

Touching  the  matters  on  which  you  question,  we  remind
you  that  we  have  many  times  said  that  we  take  the  knowledge
already  existing  in  the  mind,  refine  and  spiritualise  it,  and
build  upon  it  as  a  foundation,  only  rejecting  that  which  is-
noxious  and  untrue.  We  deal  with  old  opinions  as  Jesus  dealt
with  the  Jewish  law.  He  apparently  abrogated  the  letter
while  He  gave  to  the  spirit  a  newer  and  nobler  meaning.  We
do  the  same  with  the  opinions  and  dogmas  of  modern  Chris-
tianity as  He  did  with  the  dicta  of  the  Mosaic  law,  and  the
glosses  of  Pharisaical  and  Rabbinical  orthodoxy.  Even  as  He
proclaimed  the  truth,  true  for  all  ages,  that  the  letter  might
well  be  dispensed  with,  so  that  the  spirit  were  retained ;  so  do
we,  in  words  drawn  from  your  own  teachings,  say  to  you  that
the  letter  kills,  but  the  spirit  gives  life.  Rigid  adherence  to-
the  strict  letter  of  the  law  is  quite  compatible  with — nay,
usually  leads  to — neglect  of  the  true  spirit.  The  man  who
begins  by  observing  scrupulously  the  minutiae  of  the  ritual
law  ends  by  becoming  the  proud,  arrogant,  unlovely  Pharisee,
whose  religion  is  swallowed  up  by  his  theology,  and  who  yet
can  thank  God  that  he  is  not  like  other  men.

144  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

It  is  against  this  insidious  form  of  religion  that  we  wage
•determined  war.  Better  for  each  struggling  spirit  that  it
should  grope  unaided  after  its  God,  trusting  in  the  end  to  find
Him,  though  after  many  wanderings,  than  that  it  should  be
•cramped  and  confined  by  the  trammels  of  an  earth-born  ortho-
doxy, which  prescribes  the  God,  as  well  as  the  way  to  reach
Him — that  way  being  through  a  wicket  of  which  it  holds  the
•only  key — which  cramps  all  natural  aspirations,  drowns  all
soaring  thoughts,  and  condemns  the  free  spirit  to  mere  me-
chanical action  without  a  particle  of  true  spiritual  religion
in  it.  Better,  we  say,  anything  than  this  parody  on  spiritual
religion.

Some  there  are,  and  they  not  the  noblest  of  your  race,  for
whom  it  is  essential  that  deep  subjects  of  religion  should  be
thought  out  ready  to  their  hand.  For  them  free  spiritual
thought  would  mean  doubt,  indecision,  despair,  death.  They
•cannot  climb  the  giddy  heights  where  man  must  gaze  into
hidden  mysteries,  and  face  the  unclouded  radiance  of  the  Sun
of  Truth.  Not  for  them  the  pinnacles  which  overhang  preci-
pices deep  down  in  which  lie  hid  the  Eternal  Verities.  They
cannot  gaze  lest  they  fall :  they  cannot  endure  the  ordeal :
they  must  fall  back  on  safer  and  more  beaten  paths,  where
others  have  walked  before,  even  though  the  way  be  tortuous
and  uncertain.  They  must  be  hemmed  in  between  high  walls
over  which  they  dare  not  look.  They  must  walk  warily,  pick-
ing their  way  step  by  step,  and  avoiding  all  inequalities,  lest
they  stumble  and  fall.  And  so  they  fall  back  on  the  pre-
scribed dogmas  of  unyielding  orthodoxy.  So  it  has  been
•decided  by  the  wisdom  of  the  Church  is  the  answer  of  their
priests.  Doubt  is  ruin ;  thought  only  ends  in  bewilderment ;
faith  is  the  only  safetj7.  Believe  and  be  saved.  Believe  not,
and  be  damned.  They  are  not  able  to  receive  these  things.
How  should  they  ?  They  have  not  yet  grasped  the  fragments
of  truth  that  lie  on  the  very  threshold  of  knowledge.  How,
then,  should  they  enter  in  and  dwell  in  the  penetralia  where
truth  is  enshrined  in  fulness  ?

Some  there  are  who  are  not  merely  unable,  but  unwilling,
to  receive  or  entertain  anything  which  militates  against  that

THOSE  FOR  WHOM  THE  OLD  SUFFICES.        145

ancient  and  received  theology  which  they  have  learned  to  con-
sider as  the  embodiment  of  Divine  truth.

It  has  sufficed  the  needs  of  the  saints  of  Christendom.  It
has  cheered  the  martyr  at  the  stake,  and  consoled  the  dying
saint  in  ages  long  gone  by  even  as  now.  It  was  their  fathers'
creed.  It  was  the  gospel  of  salvation  which  they  learned
from  a  mother's  lips.  It  is  that  which  they  have  received  as
the  deposit  of  the  truth,  and  which  they  are  determined  to
teach  their  children,  that  they  in  turn  may  hand  on  the  truth
whole  and  undefiled.  And  so  a  feeling  of  heroic  determina-
tion comes  over  them  that  they  will  not  even  touch  that  which
seems  to  contravene  this  faith  of  theirs,  consecrated  to  them
by  so  many  associations,  and  endeared  by  so  many  memories.
They  are,  as  they  fancy,  defenders  of  the  faith  :  and  all  a
martyr's  zeal  burns  within  them.  They  cannot  be  reached  by
any  influence  that  we  can  bring  to  bear.  Nor  would  we  will-
ingly interfere  with  so  comfortable  a  faith.  Were  we  to  make
the  attempt,  we  should  need  to  upset  from  the  very  founda-
tions the  edifice  they  have  reared.  We  should  need  to  make
war  on  this  faith  which  they  love  so  well,  and  hew  it  down
with  merciless  axe.  Their  Immutable  God  and  their  stereo-
typed religion,  changeless  and  unchangeable,  we  should  need
to  attack,  and  show  that  though  God  changes  not,  yet  the
mind  of  man  does,  and  that  what  was  sufficient  for  the  past
may  be,  and  often  is,  quite  inadequate  for  the  future.  We
must  show  them — what  they  could  never  see — the  progressive
march  of  revelation,  the  gradual  enlightenment  of  man  in
proportion  to  the  freedom  of  his  thought  and  the  enormous
mass  of  purely  human  fiction  which  they  have  dignified  by
the  title  of  Divine  Revelation.  The  task  would  be  vain :  and
we  are  not  so  foolish  as  to  attempt  it.  They  must  gain  their
knowledge  in  another  sphere  of  being.

Some,  again,  have  never  thought  about  the  matter  at  all.
They  have  a  sort  of  conventional  idea  about  the  external
profession  of  religion,  because  they  cannot  get  on  well  socially
without  it.  But  it  is  of  the  slenderest  make,  and  will  go  into
very  small  compass  when  not  in  use.  It  is  indeed  but  the
outside  covering,  which  is  not  intended  for  anything  but
11

146  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

show.  So  long  as  it  looks  well  from  a  distance,  it  serves  the
purpose  for  which  they  use  it.  These  and  such  as  these  are
our  bitterest  opponents.  To  force  them  to  think  about
religion  is  most  irksome  and  annoying  to  them.  The  subject
is  distasteful,  tolerated  only  in  its  lightest  form  from  sheer
necessity.  It  is  the  business  of  priests  to  settle  what  is  right,
they  take  as  much  as  is  necessary  on  trust.  To  force  them
not  only  to  see  the  flaws  in  the  old  faith,  but  to  admire  the
excellencies  in  the  new,  is  a  double  aggravation,  involving
double  trouble.  They  will  have  none  of  it.  They  cling  to
the  past,  and  live  in  it.  They  are  well  as  they  are.  Progress
they  hate.  Freedom  they  know  nothing  of  save  in  that
conventional  sense  in  which  it  approaches  very  near  to  slavery.
Free  thought  to  them  means  scepticism,  doubt,  atheism,  and
these  all  are  not  respectable.  They  are  social  blunders.
Progress  means  something  which  politically  and  religiously  is
horrible  to  them.  They  not  only  shrink  from  it,  but  they
view  it  with  loathing  and  contempt.  The  good  old  times
enshrine  their  ideal ;  and  in  the  good  old  times  such  things
were  never  heard  of.  Hence  they  are  manifestly  wicked,  and
to  be  avoided.

It  is,  no  doubt,  plain  to  you  that  we  have  no  dealings  with
these  three  classes,  and  with  the  myriads  who  lie  in  between
them,  enclosed  within  the  poles  of  inability  and  unwillingness,
or  positive  aversion.  Hereafter  you  will  learn  that  it  does  not
rest  with  us  to  choose  in  the  matter.  We  cannot  reach  them
even  if  we  would.

We  strive  to  inculcate  on  all  that  the  way  to  know  God  is
open  and  free,  and  that  the  man  who  prefers  stagnation  to
progress  is  violating  one  of  the  first  conditions  of  his
being.  We  say  that  man  has  no  right  to  close  the  road
to  God,  and  to  lock  up  the  wicket,  compelling  all  to
pass  through  his  door.  We  say  again  that  rigid  orthodoxy,
dogmatic  faith  prescribed  in  human  words,  inflexible  lines
within  which  he  who  walks  not  is  therefore  lost — these  are
human  figments,  bonds  of  man's  making  to  tie  down  aspiring
souls,  and  pin  them  to  earth.  Better,  we  reiterate,  for  each
struggling  spirit  to  wand'.-r  forth  with  no  guide  but  its  ap-

THE  GREAT  EXEMPLAR.  147

pointed  angel,  to  pray  for  itself,  to  think  for  itself,  to  work
for  itself  till  the  day-dawn  of  truth  rise  upon  it,  than  that  it
should  surrender  its  freedom  and  accept  its  religion  at  the  dic-
tation of  any.  Far,  far  better  that  the  wanderings  should  be
tortuous  and  long  drawn  out,  and  the  creed  scant  and  little
satisfying  ;  better  that  the  cold  winds  should  brace  it,  and  the
storms  of  heaven  beat  upon  it,  than  that  it  should  be  cramped
within  the  narrow,  choking,  airless  avenue  of  human  dogma-
tism, gasping  for  breath,  crying  for  bread,  and  fed  only  with
the  stones  of  an  ancient  creed,  the  fossilised  imaginings  of
human  ignorance.  Better,  far  better,  that  the  shallowest  and
crudest  notions  'of  the  Great  Father  should  come  to  His  child
direct  from  spirit  to  spirit,  the  Divine  inbreathing  of  Divine
truth,  than  that  he  should  consent  to  receive  the  most  elaborate
theology  which  fits  and  suits  him  not,  and  dream  on  in  drowsy
carelessness  through  the  probation  life,  only  to  awake  to  a  bitter
consciousness  of  the  falsity  of  that  which  he  has  so  heedlessly
accepted.  Honesty  and  fearlessness  are  the  search  after  the
first  pro-requisites  for  finding  truth.  Without  these  no  spirit
soars.  With  these  none  fail  of  progress.

We  have  yet  to  show  you  more  of  this  as  exemplified  in  the
Life  and  Example  of  the  Lord  Jesus.

We  have  shown  you  what  to  the  enlightened  mind  is  the
true  attitude  of  the  spirit.  This  fearless  thinking  out  of  the
way  to  God  by  those  who  are  enabled  to  attempt  it,  will  infal-
libly lead  to  what  we  unceasingly  proclaim,  a  spiritual,  refined,
and  elevated  religion,  in  place  of  a  literal,  dogmatic  interpre-
tation of  the  words  of  your  sacred  records.  For  all  utterances
of  spirits  through  man  have  a  spiritual  interpretation  as  well
as  a  material  one  which  meets  the  eye.  And  it  is  this  spiritual
interpretation  which  is  entirely  missed  by  a  materialistic  age.
Man  has  gradually  built  around  the  teachings  of  Jesus  a  wall
of  deduction,  and  speculation,  and  material  comment,  similar
to  that  with  which  the  Pharisee  had  surrounded  the  Mosaic  law.
The  tendency  has  increasingly  been  to  do  this  in  proportion  as
man  has  lost  sight  of  the  spiritual  world.  And  so  it  has  come
to  pass  that  we  find  hard,  cold  materialism  deduced  from  teach-
ings which  were  intended  to  breathe  spirituality,  and  to  do
away  with  sensuous  ritual.

14S  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

It  is  our  task  to  do  for  Christianity  what  Jesus  did  for
Judaism.  We  would  take  the  old  forms  and  spiritualise  their
meaning,  and  infuse  into  them  new  life.  Resurrection  rather
than  abolition  is  what  we  desire.  We  say  again,  that  we  do
not  abolish  one  jot  or  one  tittle  of  the  teaching  which  the
Christ  gave  to  the  world.  We  do  but  wipe  away  man's
material  glosses,  and  show  you  the  hidden  spiritual  meaning
which  he  has  missed.  We  strive  to  raise  you  in  your  daily
life  more  and  more  from  the  dominion  of  the  body,  and  to
show  you  more  and  more  of  the  mystic  symbolism  with  which
spirit  life  is  permeated.  They  take  but  a  shallow  view  of  our
teaching  who  pin  themselves  to  the  letter.  We  would  rai.se
you  from  the  life  of  the  body  to  that  which  shall  be  to  you
the  fit  approach  to  the  state  disembodied.  There  is  but  a
glimpse  possible  as  yet ;  but  the  time  will  come  when  you
will  be  able  to  see,  as  we  cannot  explain  to  you  in  your  present
state,  the  true  dignity  of  man's  higher  life  even  on  the  earth
sphere,  and  the  hidden  mysteries  with  which  that  life  is
teeming.

Before  you  can  reach  so  far  you  must  be  content  to  learn
that  there  is  a  spiritual  meaning  underlying  everything ;  that
your  Bible  is  full  of  it ;  man's  interpretations,  and  definitions,
and  glosses  being  but  the  material  husk  which  enshrines  the
kernel  of  divine  truth.  Were  we  to  throw  away  this  husk
the  tender  kernel  would  wither  and  die.  So  we  content
ourselves  with  pointing  out,  as  you  can  bear  and  understand,
the  living  verity  which  underlies  the  external  fact  with  which
you  are  familiar.

This  was  the  mission  of  the  Christ.  He  claimed  for  Himself
that  fulfilment  of  the  law,  not  its  abolition  or  abrogation,  was
His  intent.  He  pointed  out  the  truth  which  was  at  the  root
of  the  Mosaic  commandment.  He  stripped  off  the  rags  of
Pharisaical  ritual,  the  glosses  of  Rabbinical  speculation,  and
laid  bare  the  divine  truth  that  was  beneath  all.  the  grand
principles  divinely  inspired  which  man  had  well-nigh  buried.
He  was  not  only  a  religious  but  a  social  reformer ;  and  the
grand  business  of  His  life  was  to  elevate  the  people,  spirit  and
body,  to  expose  pretenders,  and  to  strip  off  the  mask  of
hypocrisy ;  to  take  the  foot  of  the  despot  from  the  neck  of

THE   GREAT  SOCIAL   REFORMER.  149

the  struggling  slave,  and  to  make  man  free  by  virtue  of  that
truth  which  He  came  from  God  to  declare.  "  Ye  shall  know
the  truth,"  He  told  His  followers,  "and  the  truth  shall  make
you  free :  and  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."

He  reasoned  of  life  and  death  and  eternity;  of  the  true
nobility  and  dignity  of  man's  nature;  of  the  way  to  progressive
knowledge  of  God.  He  came  as  the  Great  Fulfiller  of  the
law ;  the  man  who  showed,  as  never  man  showed  before,  the
end  for  which  the  law  was  given — the  amelioration  of
humanity.  He  taught  men  to  look  into  the  depths  of  their
hearts,  to  test  their  lives,  to  try  their  motives,  and  to  weigh
all  they  did  by  the  one  ascertained  balance — the  fruits  of  life
as  the  test  of  religion.  He  told  men  to  be  humble,  merciful,
truthful,  pure,  self-denying,  honest  in  heart  and  intent ;  and
He  set  before  them  a  living  example  of  the  life  which  He
preached.

He  was  the  great  social  reformer,  whose  object  was  at  least
as  much  to  benefit  man  corporeally,  and  to  reveal  to  him  a
salvation  from  bigotry  and  selfishness,  and  narrow-mindedness
in  this  life,  as  it  was  to  reveal  glimpses  of  a  better  life  in  the
hereafter.  He  preached  the  religion  of  daily  life,  the  moral
progress  of  the  spirit  in  the  path  of  daily  duty  forward  to  a
higher  knowledge.  Repentance  for  the  past,  amendment  and
progress  in  the  future,  summed  up  most  of  his  teaching.  He
found  a  world  buried  in  ignorance,  at  the  mercy  of  an
unscrupulous  priesthood  in  matters  religious ;  under  the
absolute  sway  of  a  tyrant  in  matters  political.  He  taught
liberty  in  both ;  but  liberty  without  license ;  the  liberty  of  a
responsible  spirit  with  duties  to  God  and  to  itself ;  of  a  spirit
corporeally  enshrined  with  a  corresponding  duty  to  its  brethren
in  the  flesh.  He  laboured  to  show  the  true  dignity  of  man.
He  would  elevate  him  to  the  dignity  of  the  truth,  the  truth
which  should  make  him  free.  He  was  no  respecter  of  persons.
He  chose  His  associates  and  His  apostles  from  the  mean  and
poor.  He  lived  amongst  the  common  people ;  of  them,  with
them,  in  their  homes ;  teaching  them  simple  lessons  of  truth
which  they  needed  and  which  they  could  receive.  He  went
but  little  among  those  whose  eyes  were  blinded  by  the  mists

150  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

of  orthodoxy,  respectability,  or  so-called  human  wisdom.  He
fired  the  hearts  of  His  listeners  with  a  yearning  for  something
nobler,  better,  higher  than  they  yet  possessed ;  and  He  told
them  how  to  get  it.

The  gospel  of  humanity  is  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  It
is  the  only  gospel  that  man  needs ;  the  only  one  that  can
reach  his  wants  and  minister  to  his  necessities.

We  continue  to  preach  that  same  evangel.  By  commission
from  the  same  God,  by  authority  and  inspiration  from  the
same  source,  do  we  come  now  as  apostles  of  this  heaven-sent
gospel.  We  declare  truths  the  same  as  Jesus  taught.  We
preach  His  gospel,  purified  from  the  glosses  and  misinterpre-
tations which  man  has  gathered  around  it.  We  would
spiritualise  that  which  man  has  hidden  under  the  heap  of
materialism.

We  would  bring  forth  the  spirit  truth  from  the  grave  in
which  man  has  buried  it,  and  would  tell  to  the  listening  souls
of  men  that  it  lives  still ;  the  simple  yet  grand  truth  of  man's
progressive  destiny,  of  God's  unceasing  care,  of  Spirit's  un-
slumbering  watch  over  incarnated  souls.

The  burdens  that  a  dogmatic  priesthood  has  bound  upon,
men's  backs,  we  fling  them  to  the  winds ;  the  dogmas  which
have  hampered  the  soul,  and  dragged  down  its  aspirations,  we
tear  them  asunder,  and  bid  the  soul  go  free.  Our  mission  is
the  continuation  of  that  old  teaching  which  man  has  so  strangely
altered ;  its  source  identical ;  its  course  parallel ;  its  end  the
same.

[I  inquired  whether  I  rightly  understood  that  the  work
of  teaching,  a  section  of  which  is  under  the  direc-
tion of  Imperator,  derived  its  mission  from  Christ.]

You  understand  aright.  I  have  before  said  that  I  derive
my  mission,  and  am  influenced  in  my  work,  by  a  spirit  who
has  passed  beyond  the  spheres  of  work  into  the  higher  heaven
of  contemplation.  *  *  *  Jesus  Christ  is  now  arranging  His-
plans  for  the  gathering  in  of  His  people,  for  the  further  revela-
tion of  the  truth,  as  well  as  for  the  purging  away  of  the
erroneous  beliefs  which  have  accumulated  in  the  past.

THE  SPIRITUAL  COMING  OF  THE  CHRIST.  151

7  have  heard  something  of  this  from  other  sources.    Is
this  then  the  return  of  Christ  ?

It  is  the  spiritual  return.  There  will  be  no  such  physical
return  as  man  has  dreamed  of.  This  will  be  the  return  to  His
people,  by  the  voice  of  His  Messengers  speaking  to  those
whose  ears  are  open ;  even  as  He  himself  said,  "  He  that  hath
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear ;  he  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let  him
receive  it."

Is  this  message  coming  to  many  ?

Yes,  to  many  it  is  being  made  known  that  God  is  now
specially  influencing  man  at  this  epoch.  We  may  not  say
more.  May  the  blessing  of  the  Supreme  rest  on  you.

+  IMPERATOR.

(    132

SECTION  XIX.

[Some  reiterated  objections  of  mine,  which  have  been
stated  before,  were  finally  answered  thus  (Aug.  31,
1873)]:—

We  propose  to  speak  to  you  on  a  subject  of  which  we  have
before  treated,  but  not  at  large.  You  have  alleged,  and  it  has
frequently  been  said,  that  the  creed  we  profess  and  the  system
of  religion  which  we  teach,  are  vague,  shadowy,  and  im-
palpable. It  has  been  said  that  the  effect  of  our  teaching  is  to
unsettle  men's  minds  as  to  the  old  faith,  without  providing  a
new  and  rational  form  of  belief.  Many  of  these  objections  we
have  dealt  with  separately,  but  we  have  not  yet  attempted  to
set  before  you  an  exhaustive  outline  of  the  religion  which  we
desire  to  see  rooted  among  men.  This  we  propose  to  do  now,
so  far  as  it  is  possible.

We  commence  with  God,  the  Supreme,  All-Wise  Ruler  of
the  universe,  who  is  enthroned  over  all  in  eternal  calm,  the
Director  and  Judge  of  the  totality  of  creation.  Before  His
Majesty  we  bow  in  solemn  adoration.  We  have  not  seen  Him,
nor  do  we  hope  yet  to  approach  His  presence.  Millions  of
ages,  as  you  count  time,  must  run  their  course,  and  be  suc-
ceeded by  yet  again  myriads  upon  myriads  ere  the  perfected
spirit — perfected  through  suffering  and  experience — can  enter
into  the  inner  sanctuary  to  dwell  in  the  presence  of  the  All-
pure,  All-holy,  All-perfect  God.

But  though  we  have  not  seen  Him,  we  know  yet  more  and
more  of  the  fathomless  perfection  of  His  nature,  through  a
more  intimate  acquaintance  with  His  works.  We  know,  as
you  cannot,  the  power  and  wisdom,  the  tenderness  and  love
of  the  Supreme.  We  trace  it  in  a  thousand  ways  which  you
cannot  see.  We  feel  it  in  a  thousand  forms  which  never  reach

GOD   AND   MAN.  1")3

your  lower  earth.  And  while  you,  poor  mortals,  dogmatise  as
to  His  essential  attributes,  and  ignorantly  frame  for  yourselves
-a  being  like  unto  yourselves,  we  are  content  to  feel  and  to  know
His  power  as  the  operation  of  a  Wise  and  Loving  and  All-
pervading  Intelligence.  His  government  of  the  universe
reveals  Him  to  us  as  potent,  wise,  and  good.  His  dealings
with  ourselves  we  know  to  be  tender  and  loving.

o

The  past  has  been  fruitful  of  mercy  and  loving-kindness ;
the  present  has  been  instinct  with  love  and  tender  consider-
ations ;  into  the  future  we  do  not  pry.  We  are  content  to
trust  it  in  the  hands  of  One  whose  power  and  love  we  have
experienced.  And  we  do  not,  as  curious  mortals  please  them-
-selves  with  imagining,  picture  a  future  which  has  its  origin  in
our  own  intelligence,  and  is  disproved  by  each  advancement
in  knowledge.  We  trust  Him  too  really  to  care  to  speculate.
We  live  for  Him  and  to  Him.  We  strive  to  learn  and  do  His
will,  sure  that  in  so  doing  we  shall  benefit  ourselves  and  all
•created  beings  whom  we  tend ;  the  while  we  pay  to  Him  the
honour  which  is  His  due,  and  the  only  homage  which  His
Majesty  can  accept.  We  love  Him ;  we  worship  Him ;  we
adore  Him  ;  we  obey  Him  ;  but  we  do  not  question  His  plans,
or  pry  into  His  mysteries.

Of  man  we  know  more  than  we  are  permitted  to  tell,  as  yet.
We  are  not  charged  to  gratify  curiosity,  nor  to  open  out  to
you  views  and  speculations  which  would  but  bewilder  your
mind.  Of  the  origin  of  man  you  may  be  content  to  know  that
the  day  will  come  when  we  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  more
-certainly  of  the  spiritual  nature,  its  origin  and  destiny;  whence
it  came  and  whither  it  is  going.  For  the  present  you  may
know  that  the  theological  story  of  a  fall  from  a  state  of  purity
to  a  state  of  sin,  as  usually  detailed  and  accepted,  is  mislead-
ing. Few,  perhaps,  even  of  those  among  you  who  have  pon-
dered on  the  subject,  have  not  given  up  all  attempts  to
reconcile  with  reason  so  distorted  a  legend.  You  may  better
•direct  your  attention  for  the  present  to  man's  condition  as  an
incarnated  spirit,  and  seek  to  learn  how  progressive  develop-
ment, in  obedience  to  the  laws  which  govern  him,  leads  to
happiness  in  the  present  and  advancement  in  the  immediate

154  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

future.  The  far  off  spheres,  into  which  only  the  refined  and
purified  can  enter,  you  may  leave  in  their  seclusion.  It  is  not-
for  mortal  eye  to  gaze  into  their  secrets.  Sufficient  that  you
know  that  they  unfold  their  portals  only  to  the  blessed  ones,,
and  that  you  and  all  may  be  ranked  within  them  after  due
preparation  and  development.

It  is  more  important  that  we  speak  of  man's  duty  and  work
in  the  earth-life.  Man,  as  you  know,  is  a  spirit  temporarily
enshrined  in  a  body  of  flesh ;  a  spirit  with  a  spiritual  body
which  is  to  survive  its  severance  from  the  earth  body,  as  one
of  your  teachers  has  inculcated  rightly,  though  he  erred  in.
minor  particulars.  This  spiritual  body  it  is  the  object  of  your
training  in  this  sphere  of  probation  to  develop  and  fit  for  its
life  in  the  sphere  of  spirit.  That  life,  so  far  as  it  concerns
you  to  know,  is  endless.  You  cannot  grasp  what  eternity
means.  Sufficient  now  that  we  demonstrate  to  you  enduring
existence,  and  intelligence  existing  after  the  death  of  the
physical  body.

This  Being,  temporarily  enshrined  in  the  body  of  earth,  we
regard  as  a  conscious,  responsible  intelligence,  with  duties  to-
perform,  with  responsibilities,  with  capacities,  with  account-
ability, and  with  power  of  progress  or  retrogression.  The
incarnated  spirit  has  its  conscience,  rude  frequently  and  unde-
veloped, of  inherent  right  and  wrong.  It  has  its  opportunities
of  development,  its  degrees  of  probation,  its  phases  of"
training,  and  its  helps  in  progression  if  it  will  use  them.
Of  these  we  have  spoken  before,  and  shall  say  more  here-
after. For  the  present  we  tell  you  of  man's  duty  in  the  sphere^
of  probation.

Man,  as  a  responsible  spiritual  being,  has  duties  which  con-
cern himself,  his  fellow-man,  and  his  God.

Your  teachers  have  sufficiently  outlined  the  moral  code
which  affects  man's  spirit,  so  far  as  their  knowledge  has
extended,  and  has  been  communicable  to  you.  But  beside
and  beyond  what  they  have  taught  you  lies  a  wide  domain.
The  influence  of  spirit  upon  spirit  is  only  now  beginning  to
be  recognised  among  men;  yet  therein  lie  some  of  the  mightiest
helps  and  bars  to  human  progress.  Of  this,  too,  you  will

THE   SPIRIT-CREED.

learn  more  hereafter ;  but  for  the  present  we  may  sum  up
man's  highest  duty  as  a  spiritual  entity  in  the  word  PROGRESS
—in  knowledge  of  himself,  and  of  all  that  makes  for  spiritual
development.  The  duty  of  man  considered  as  an  intellectual
being,  possessed  of  mind  and  intelligence,  is  summed  up  in  the
word  CULTURE  in  all  its  infinite  ramifications;  not  in  one  direc-
tion only,  but  in  all ;  not  for  earthly  aims  alone,  but  for  the
grand  purpose  of  developing  the  faculties  which  are  to  be
perpetuated  in  endless  development.  Man's  duty  to  himself
as  a  spirit  incarnated  in  a  body  of  flesh  is  PURITY"  in  thought,
word,  and  act.  In  these  three  words,  Progress,  Culture,  Purity,
we  roughly  sum  up  man's  duty  to  himself  as  a  spiritual,  an
intellectual,  and  a  corporeal  being.

Respecting  the  duty  which  man  owes  to  the  race  of  which
he  is  a  unit,  to  the  community  of  which  he  is  a  member,  we
strive  again  to  crystallise  into  one  word  the  central  idea  which
should  animate  him.  That  word  is  CHARITY.  Tolerance  for
divergence  of  opinion ;  charitable  construction  of  doubtful
words  and  deeds ;  kindliness  in  intercourse ;  readiness  to  help,
without  desire  for  recompense ;  courtesy  ancj  gentleness  of
demeanour ;  patience  under  misrepresentation ;  honesty  and
integrity  of  purpose,  tempered  by  loving-kindness  and  for-
bearance; sympathy  with  sorrow;  mercy,  pity,  and  tenderness
of  heart ;  respect  for  authority  in  its  sphere,  and  respect  for
the  rights  of  the  weak  and  frail :  these  and  kindred  qualities,
which  are  the  very  essence  of  the  Christ-like  character,  we
sum  up  in  the  one  word  Charity,  or  Active  Love.

As  to  the  relation  between  man  and  his  God,  it  should  be
that  which  befits  the  approach  of  a  being  in  one  of  the  lowest
stages  of  existence  to  the  Fountain  of  Uncreated  Light,  to  the
great  Author  and  Father  of  all.  The  befitting  attitude  of
spirit  before  God  is  typified  for  you  in  the  language  of  your
sacred  records  when  it  is  said  that  the  exalted  ones  veil  their
faces  with  their  wings  as  they  bow  before  His  throne.  This
in  a  figure  symbolises  the  REVERENCE  and  ADORATION  which
best  become  the  spirit  of  man.  Reverence  and  awe,  not
slavish  fear.  Adoring  worship,  not  cowering,  prostrate  dread.
Mindful  of  the  vast  distance  that  must  separate  God  from  man.

156  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

and  of  the  intermediary  agencies  which  minister  between  the
Most  High  and  His  children,  man  should  not  seek  to  intrude
himself  into  the  presence  of  the  Supreme,  least  of  all  should
he  obtrude  his  curiosity,  and  seek  to  pry  into  mysteries  which
are  too  deep  for  angel-minds  to  grasp.  REVERENCE,  ADORA-
TION, LOVE  ;  these  are  the  qualities  that  adorn  a  spirit  in  its
relation  to  its  God.

Such,  in  vaguest  outline,  are  the  duties  which  man  owes  to
himself,  to  his  fellow,  and  to  his  God.  They  may  be  filled  in
by  future  knowledge;  but  you  will  find  that  they  include
within  them  those  qualities  which  fit  a  man  for  progress  in
knowledge,  and  render  him  a  good  citizen,  and  a  model  for
imitation  in  all  the  walks  of  life.  If  there  be  nothing  said  of
that  external  and  formal  duty  which  is  made  so  much  of  by
the  Pharisaic  mind,  both  now  and  heretofore,  it  is  not  that  we
do  not  recognise  the  importance  of  external  acts.  So  long  as
man  is  a  physical  being,  physical  acts  will  be  of  importance.
It  is  because  we  have  no  fear  that  sufficient  importance  will
not  be  attached  to  them  that  we  have  not  dwelt  on  this
side  of  the  question.  We  are  concerned  rather  with  spirit,
and  with  the  hidden  spring,  by  which,  if  it  be  working  aright,
the  external  acts  will  be  duly  done.  We  carry  throughout  the
principle  on  which  we  have  always  dealt  with  you,  of  referring
you  back  to  that  which  is  your  true  self,  and  of  urging  you  to
consider  all  you  do  as  the  outcome  and  external  manifestation
of  an  internal  spirit,  which,  when  you  leave  this  sphere,  will  de-
termine your  future  condition  of  existence.  This  is  the  true
wisdom ;  and  in  so  far  as  you  recognise  the  spirit  that  ani-
mates everything,  that  is  the  soul  of  all,  the  life  and  reality
which  underlies  Nature  and  Humanity,  in  all  their  several
manifestations,  are  you  actuated  by  true  wrisdom.  This  being
the  duty  of  man  in  such  sort  as  we  are  now  able  to  put  it
before  you,  we  have  now  to  deal  with  the  results  of  the  dis-
charge of  that  duty,  or  its  neglect.  He  who  fulfils  it  accord-
ing to  his  ability,  with  honesty  and  sincerity  of  purpose,  and
with  a  single  desire  to  discharge  it  aright,  earns  his  legitimate
reward  in  happiness  and  progress.  We  say  progress,  because
man  is  apt  to  lose  sight  of  this  enduring  fact,  that  m  progress

MAN'S  DESTINY.  157

man's  spirit  finds  its  truest  happiness.  Content  is,  in  the  pure
soul,  only  retrospective.  It  cannot  rest  in  that  which  is  past  •
at  best  it  views  the  achievements  of  the  bygone  days  only  as
incentives  to  further  progress.  Its  attitude  to  the  past  is  one
of  content,  to  the  future,  of  hope  and  expectation  of  further
development.  That  soul  which  shall  slumber  in  satisfaction,
and  fancy  that  it  has  achieved  its  goal,  is  deluded,  and  in  peril
of  retrogression.  The  true  attitude  of  the  spirit  is  one  of
striving  earnestly  in  the  hope  of  reaching  a  higher  position
than  that  which  it  has  attained.  In  perpetually  progressing
it  finds  its  truest  happiness.  There  is  no  finality  ;  none,  none,
none !

And  this  applies  not  only  to  the  fragment  of  existence
which  you  call  life,  but  to  the  totality  of  being.  Yea ;  even
the  deeds  done  in  the  body  have  their  issue  in  the  life  disem-
bodied. Their  outcome  is  not  bounded  by  the  barrier  which
you  call  death.  Far  otherwise ;  for  the  condition  of  the  spirit
at  its  inception  of  its  real  life  is  determined  by  the  outcome
of  its  bodily  acts.  The  spirit  which  has  been  slothful  or
impure  gravitates  necessarily  to  its  congenial  sphere,  and
commences  there  a  period  of  probation  which  has  for  its  object
the  purification  of  the  spirit  from  the  accumulated  habits  of
its  earth-life ;  the  remedying  in  remorse  and  shame  of  the  evil
done ;  and  the  gradual  rising  of  itself  to  a  higher  state  to  that
which  each  process  of  purification  has  been  a  step.  This  is
the  punishment  of  transgression,  not  an  arbitrary  doom
inflicted  to  all  eternity  by  an  angry  God,  but  the  inevitable
doom  of  remorse  and  repentance  and  retribution,  which  results
invariably  from  conscious  sin.  This  is  the  lash  of  punishment,
but  it  is  not  laid  on  by  a  vengeful  Deity ;  a  loving  Father
leads  his  child  to  see  and  remedy  his  fault.

Similarly,  reward  is  no  sensuous  ease  in  a  heaven  of  eternal
rest ;  no  fabled  psalm-singing  around  the  great  white  throne,
whereon  sits  the  GOD  ;  no  listless,  .dreamy  idleness,  cheaply
gained  by  cries  for  pity,  or  by  fancied  faith ;  none  of  these,
but  the, consciousness  of  duty  done,  of  progress  made,  and
of  capacity  for  progress  increased ;  of  love  to  God  and  man
fostered,  and  the  jewel  of  truth  and  honesty  preserved.  This-

158  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

is  the  spirit's  reward,  and  it  must  be  gained  before  it  can  be
enjoyed.  It  comes  as  the  rest  after  toil,  as  the  food  to  the
hungry,  as  the  draught  to  the  parched,  as  the  pulsation  of
delight  when  the  wanderer  sights  his  home.  But  it  is  only
the  toil-worn,  the  travel-stained,  the  hungry,  the  parched
traveller  who  can  enter  into  the  full  zest.  And  it  is  not  with
us  the  reward  of  indolent,  sensuous  content.  It  is  the  gratifi-
•cation  which  has  been  earned,  and  which  is  but  an  additional
spur  to  future  progress.

In  all  this  you  will  see  that  we  have  dealt  with  man  as  a
living  intelligence,  alone  in  his  responsibilities,  and  alone  in
his  struggles.  We  have  not  thought  it  necessary  here  to
touch  upon  the  aid  ministered  by  guardian  spirits,  nor  upon
the  impulses  and  impressions  which  flow  in  unon  the  receptive
soul.  We  are  concerned  now  with  that  phase  of  man's  exist-
ence which  is  open  to  your  inspection,  and  which  is  manifested
to  your  eye.  Neither  have  we  made  any  mention  of  a  bound-
less store  of  merit  laid  up  for  him  by  the  death  of  the  sinless
Son  of  God,  or  of  the  Co-equal  Partner  of  the  Throne  of  Deity
— a  store  on  which  he  may  draw  at  will  to  make  up  for  his  own
shortcomings.  We  have  not  spoken  of  such  an  atonement  of
magical  potency  and  universal  application  in  answer  to  a  cry
of  faith.  Nor  have  we  told  you  that  a  death-bed  repentance
has  power  to  obtain  for  man — base,  evil,  grovelling  animal  as
he  may  be — an  entrance  into  the  very  society  of  God  and  the
blessed  ones,  by  the  charm  of  imputed  righteousness  bought
by  vicarious  suffering.  We  have  not  pointed  to  any  such
conception  of  a  debased  and  foolish  imagination.  Man  has
helps,  powerful,  near,  always  available.  But  he  has  no  reserve
fund  of  merit  on  which  he  can  draw  at  large  at  the  close  of  a
lifetime  of  debauchery,  sensuality,  and  crime,  when  he  has
drunk  to  the  very  dregs  the  cup  of  physical  enjoyment,  and
so  go  straight  to  the  holy  of  holies  and  the  sanctuary  of  God.
He  has  no  vicarious  sacrifice  on  whom  he  can  call  to  suffer  in
his  stead  when  his  coward  heart  is  wrung  with  fear  at  the
prospect  of  dissolution,  and  his  base  spirit  trembles  at  the
prospect  which  remorse  conjures  up.  Not  for  such  base  uses
would  any  of  the  messengers  come  ;  not  to  such  would  the

PRAYER.  159

ministers  bring  consolation.  They  would  let  the  coward  feel
his  danger,  if  perchance  he  may  see  and  repent  him  of  his  sin.
They  would  let  the  lash  be  laid  on,  knowing  that  so  only  can
the  hard  heart  be  made  to  feel.  Yet  for  such,  your  teachers
tell  you,  the  Son  of  God  came  down,  and  died !  Such  are  the
choicest  recipients  of  mercy!  the  most  appropriate  subjects
for  divine  compassion !

No  such  fable  finds  a  place  in  our  knowledge.  We  know
of  no  store  of  merit  save  that  which  man  lays  up  for  himself
by  slow  and  laborious  processes.  We  know  of  no  entrance  to
the  spheres  of  bliss  save  by  the  path  which  the  blessed  them-
selves have  trod ;  no  magical  incantation  by  which  the  sinner
may  be  transformed  into  the  saint,  and  the  hardened  reprobate,
the  debased  sensualist,  the  purely  physical  animal  become
spiritualised,  refined,  glorified,  and  fitted  for  what  you  call
heaven.  Far  from  us  such  blasphemous  imaginations.

And  while  man  feigns  for  himself  such  ignorant  and  impos-
sible fancies,  he  neglects  or  ignores  those  helps  and  protections
which  encircle  him  all  around.  We  have  no  power,  indeed,  to
work  out  for  man  the  salvation  which  he  must  work  out  for
himself;  but  we  are  able  to  aid,  to  comfort,  and  to  support.
Appointed  by  a  loving  God  to  minister,  each  in  our  several
spheres,  to  those  who  need  it,  we  find  our  power  curtailed,
and  our  efforts  mocked  at  by  those  who  have  become  too
gross  to  recognise  spirit-power,  and  too  earthy  to  aspire  to
spiritual  things.  These  helps  man  has  ever  round  about
him;  helps  which  he  may  draw  to  himself  by  the  mighty
engine  of  prayer,  and  knit  to  him  by  frequent  communion
with  them.

Ah !  you  little  know  what  power  you  neglect  when  you
omit  to  foster,  by  perpetual  prayer,  communion  with  the
spirits,  holy,  pure,  and  good,  who  are  ready  to  stand  by  and
assist  you.  Praise,  which  attunes  the  soul  to  God,  and  prayer,
which  moves  the  spirit  agencies — these  are  engines  ever  ready
to  man's  service.  And  yet  he  passes  them  idly  by,  and  makes
his  hopes  of  future  bliss  rest  on  a  faith,  on  a  creed,  on  an
assent,  on  a  vicarious  store  of  merit,  on  any  shadowy,  baseless
fio-ment  rather  than  on  fact.

160  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

We  attach  little  importance  to  individual  belief:  that  is
altered  soon  enough  by  extended  knowledge.  The  creed
which  has  been  fought  over  with  angry  vehemence  during
the  years  of  an  earth  lifetime  is  surrendered  by  the  enfran-
chised spirit  without  a  murmur.  The  fancies  of  a  lifetime  on
earth  are  dissipated  like  a  cloud  by  the  sunlight  of  the  spheres.
We  care  little  for  a  creed,  so  it  be  honestly  held  and  humbly
professed ;  but  we  care  much  for  acts.  We  ask  not  what  has
such  an  one  believed,  but  what  has  he  done  ?  For  we  know
that  by  deeds,  habits,  tempers,  characters  are  formed,  and  the
condition  of  spirit  is  decided.  Those  characters  and  habits,
too,  we  know  are  only  to  be  changed  after  long  and  laborious
processes ;  and  so  it  is  to  acts  rather  than  words,  to  deeds
rather  than  professions,  that  we  look.

The  religion  which  we  teach  is  one  of  acts  and  habits,  not
of  words  and  fitful  faith.  We  teach  religion  of  body  and
religion  of  soul ;  a  religion  pure,  progressive,  and  true ;  one
that  aims  at  no  finality,  but  leads  its  votary  higher  and  higher
through  the  ages,  until  the  dross  of  earth  is  purged  away,  the
spiritual  nature  is  refined  and  sublimated,  and  the  perfected
spirit — perfected  through  suffering,  and  toil  and  experience —
is  presented  in  glorified  purity  before  the  very  footstool  of  its
God.  In  this  religion  you  will  find  no  place  for  sloth  and
carelessness.  The  note  of  spirit-teaching  is  earnestness  and
zeal.  In  it  you  will  find  no  shirking  of  the  consequences  of
acts.  Such  shirking  is  impossible.  Sin  carries  with  it  its
own  punishment.  Nor  will  you  find  a  convenient  substitute
on  whose  shoulders  you  may  bind  the  burdens  which  you  have
prepared.  Your  own  back  must  bear  them,  and  your  own
spirit  groan  under  their  weight.  Neither  will  you  find  en-
couragement to  live  a  life  of  animal  sensuality  and  brutish
selfishness,  in  the  hope  that  an  orthodox  belief  will  hide  your
debased  life,  and  that  faith  will  throw  a  veil  over  impurity.
You  will  find  the  creed  taught  by  us  is  that  acts  and  habits
are  of  more  moment  than  creeds  and  faith  ;  and  you  will  dis-
cover that  that  flimsy  veil  is  rent  aside  with  stern  hand,  leav-
ing the  foul  life  laid  bare,  and  the  poor  spirit  naked  and  open
to  the  eye  of  all  who  gaze  upon  it.  Nor  will  you  find  any

RELIGION   OF  BODY    AND  SPIRIT.  161

hope  that  after  all  you  may  get  a  cheap  reprieve — that  God
is  merciful,  and  will  not  be  severe  to  mark  your  sins.  Those
human  imaginings  pale  in  the  light  of  truth.  You  will  gain
mercy  when  you  have  deserved  it ;  or  rather  repentance  and
amendment,  purity  and  sincerity,  truth  and  progress  will  bring
their  own  reward.  You  will  not  then  require  either  mercy  or
pity.

This  is  the  religion  of  body  and  spirit  which  we  proclaim.
It  is  of  God,  and  the  days  draw  nigh  when  man  shall  know  it.

12

SECTION  XX.

[At  this  time  many  communications  were  made  to  me
from  various  sources  with  the  avowed  purpose  of
accumulating  evidence  and  producing  conviction
in  my  mind.  One  of  these  was  a  well-known  per-
son with  whom  I  had  been  acquainted.  I  asked
permission  to  bring  the  fact  of  his  communicating
under  the  notice  of  his  relatives.  It  was  replied]  : —

It  is  impossible  and  unwise  to  attempt  it.  They  know  not
of  the  truth  of  spirit  communion,  nor  could  we  manifest  to
them.  Were  you  to  tell  them,  they  would  receive  your  word
as  the  idle  tale  of  a  madman.  You  would  not  be  able  to  reach
them.  This  is  one  of  the  sore  trials  of  those  who  endeavour
to  communicate  with  the  world  which  they  have  lately  quitted.
Usually  they  cannot  reach  personal  friends.  The  very  anxiety
with  which  they  strive,  prevents  the  realisation  of  their  wishes.
It  seems  to  them  so  important,  so  desirable,  that  personal  evi-
dence should  be  given  to  their  friends,  that  their  very  eager-
ness, coupled  with  the  sorrowing  tearfulness  of  their  friends,
places  an  impassable  barrier  between  them.  It  is  not  till  the
eagerness  is  past,  and  they  have  soared  above  the  atmosphere
of  personal  feeling,  that  they  are  able  to  reach  your  sphere.
You  will  know  more  of  this  hereafter.

Our  friend  who  now  communicates  is  shut  off  from  those
who  were  united  to  him  by  ties  of  kindred.  Any  attempt  to
force  on  them  knowledge  for  which  they  are  unprepared,
would  be  mischievous  and  fruitless.  This  is  one  of  the  un-
alterable laws  with  which  we  have  no  power  to  interfere,  we
can  no  more  force  on  men  a  knowledge  for  which  they  are
unfit  than  you  can  explain  to  a  child  the  deep  mysteries  of
science  into  which  your  sages  gaze  with  wonder.  Nay,  less,
the  child  would  not  understand,  indeed,  but  he  would  not  be
injured.  We,  on  the  contrary,  should  retard,  by  unconscious

DIRECT  WRITING.  163

forcing,  the  end  we  have  in  view,  and  should  injure  those
whom  we  would  benefit.  No  such  attempt  is  made  by  the
wise.  They  see,  as  you  cannot,  that  if  they  were  able  to  force
on  the  unprepared  advanced  knowledge,  and  to  anticipate  the
orderly  working  of  Divine  laws,  your  world  would  cease  to  be
a  sphere  of  probation.  It  would  become  merely  a  field  for  the
experiments  of  any  spirits  who  desired  to  try  their  power,  and
there  would  be  an  end  to  law  and  order.  No  such  reversal  of
law  would  be  permitted.  Rest  assured  of  that.

{About  this  same  time,  my  perplexity  as  to  the  question
of  ^Identity  was  much  increased  by  the  fact  that  a
spirit  who  had  written  his  name  "direct," i.e.,  with-
out the  intervention  of  any  human  agency,  had
spelt  it  wrongly.  Here,  apparently,  tbe  fault  could
not  be  charged  on  the  medium :  and  I  put  it
strongly  that  I  could  not  be  expected  to  believe  in
the  identity  of  a  spirit  that  gave  a  well-known
name  which  it  could  not  even  spell.  IMPERATOR
replied] : —

We  do  not  desire  to  argue  out  the  question  of  identity,  but
the  incident  to  which  you  refer  is  susceptible  of  a  ready  ex-
planation. The  identity  of  the  spirit  was  avouched  by  me,
and  you  have  at  least  found  my  words  to  be  accurate.  The
error  was  committed  by  the  manifesting  spirit  who  wrote.
The  intelligences  who  are  able  to  compass  the  particular  mani-
festation which  you  call  direct  writing,  and  for  which  you
had  on  this  particular  occasion  expressed  a  strong  wish,  are
few.  Most  frequently  the  actual  writing  is  done  by  one  who
is  accustomed  to  manifest  in  that  way,  and  who  acts,  as  it
"were,  as  the  amanuensis  of  the  spirits  who  wish  to  communi-
•cate.  In  many  cases  several  spirits  are  concerned.  The  error
which  arose  in  this  way  through  inadvertence,  was  during  the
stance  corrected  in  a  communication  given  through  the  table ;
'but  it  would  seem  to  have  escaped  you.  It  is  well  that  you
inquire  patiently  into  seeming  errors  and  contradictions.
Many,  so  inquired  into,  would  be  found  susceptible  of  explan-
ation, even  as  this.

164  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

[The  disturbed  state  of  my  mind  now  caused  our  sit-
tings to  be  disturbed.  Phenomena  were  evolved!
in  a  very  erratic  fashion,  violently  at  times,  and
with  great  irregularity.  It  was  said  that  "  the
instrument  being  out  of  tune,  the  notes  extracted
from  it  were  jarring  and  discordant."  Sometimes
a  sitting  would  soothe  me,  but  sometimes  it  would
work  me  up  to  a  pitch  of  nervous  tension,  which
was  extremely  painful.  It  was  written  on  Sept.
30,1873]:—

Sometimes  we  are  able  to  quiet  and  soothe,  but  not  when
every  nerve  is  quivering,  and  the  over-wrought  system  is
strained  to  an  extremity  of  tension.  We  have  little  power
then,  and  at  best  can  only  save  you  from  the  risk  you  run  of
being  seized  upon  by  undeveloped  spirits  who  are  attracted
by  your  state.  We  urge  you  not  at  such  times  to  place  your-
self in  communion  with  our  world.  Be  wary  of  the  future
for  many  reasons.  Your  greater  development,  which  is  rapid
and  progressive,  will  render  you  more  and  more  amenable  to
spiritual  influence  of  all  kinds.  Such  spirits  will  endeavour
to  approach  you,  and  by  sitting  you  facilitate  their  entry  to
the  circle.  You  need  fear  no  evil,  but  you  may  have  disturb-
ance. It  is  well  for  all  highly-developed  mediums  to  be  chary
of  sitting  in  circles  where  influences  other  than  those  which
surround  them  are  gathered.  Danger  always  attends  such
experiments,  and  your  present  tone  and  temper  of  mind  lays
you  doubly  open  to  assault.  Try  to  bring  to  the  circle  a
patient  and  a  passive  mind.  Your  evidence  will  be  the  more
readily  attained  if  you  are  content  so  to  act.

[I  replied  that  I  wished  so  to  do,  but  that  I  must
estimate  everything  according  to  my  own  reason.
I  put  two  or  three  points  which  seemed  to  me  to
be  of  crucial  importance,  far  more  than  the  com-
munications given  from  spirits  who  had  borne
great  names  on  earth ;  and  who  rather  perplexed
me  than  otherwise.  I  did  not  think  it  likely  that
the  world's  celebrities  would  come  back  for  the
purpose  of  giving  me  little  bewildering  messages.
I  asked  for  good  and  plentiful  evidence  of  the
return  of  a  friend  who  had  lately  passed  from

SPIRIT  IDENTITY.  165

among  us,  and  who  had  been  most  deeply  interested
in  our  circle.  That  seemed  to  me  to  be  an  oppor-
tunity which  might  settle  the  identity  question
definitely.  And  I  further  asked  very  earnestly
for  clear  and  conclusive  statements  as  to  the  origin,
scope,  and  issue  of  the  movement,  specially  as  to
spirit  identity.  Assuming  the  truth  of  statements
already  made,  I  pointed  out  that  it  was  vitally
important  that  the  necessary  proofs  to  withstand
scoffing  and  sceptical  criticism  should  be  full  and
unmistakeable.  At  present  I  had  no  shred  of
proof  of  anything  beyond  the  existence  of  certain
phenomena,  and  the  presence  of  some  external
intelligence.  I  could  not  act  on  that.  Even  if  I
were  willing  I  was  not  able  to  go  on  till  doubts
which  I  could  not  dispel  were  cleared  from  my
mind.  An  answer  came  to  me,  Oct.  1,  1873]  : —

May  the  blessing  of  the  Allwise  rest  upon  you !  If  we  do
not  follow  you  into  all  the  points  or  discuss  all  the  questions
which  you  have  mooted,  you  must  attribute  it  to  the  impossi-
bility of  giving  you  complete  evidence  which  shall  be  satis-
i'actory  to  you  in  your  present  frame  of  mind.  Though  we
«,re  thankful  to  recognise  in  many  particulars  a  fair  and
candid  spirit  in  your  objection,  still  we  cannot  fail  to  know
that  at  the  root  of  them  lies  mistrust  of  our  statements  and
want  of  confidence  in  our  claims.  This  is  painful  to  us,  and,
as  we  feel,  unjust.  Doubt  is  sin  in  none.  Intellectual  inability
to  accept  certain  statements  is  not  matter  for  blame.  But
refusal  to  weigh  evidence  fairly,  and  inclination  to  set  up  a
personal  standard  of  evidence  which  is  fictitious  and  selfish,
may  end  in  grievous  consequences,  and  this  is  the  ground  of
our  complaint.  We  respect  your  doubts,  and  shall  rejoice
with  you  when  they  are  removed.  But  we  blame  and  censure
the  attitude  which  makes  it  well-nigh  impossible  for  us  to
remove  them;  which  fences  you  in  as  with  an  icy  barrier
"beyond  which  we  cannot  pass ;  which  degrades  a  candid  and
progressive  soul  to  a  state  of  isolation  and  retrogression,  and
binds  the  spirit  to  the  dark  regions  of  the  nether  earth.  Such
temper  of  mind  is  the  baleful  result  of  evil  influence,  and,  if
it  be  not  checked,  it  may  become  a  permanent  bar  to  progress.

166  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS

We  have  not  deserved  of  you  that  you  should  receive  us  irk
such  a  spirit,  or  that  all  our  attempts  at  communion  should
be  viewed  with  jealous  and  suspicious  eye.  You  are  fond  of
comparing  the  state  of  the  world  and  the  favoured  few  in
Judaea  with  that  which  now  obtains.  We  will  give  you  a
parallel  from  the  very  mouth  of  Jesus  in  His  answer  to  thoso
who  asked  of  Him  a  sign.  You  know  that  none  was  given,
save  one  which  He  Himself  selected.  We  care  not  now  as  to-
the  why  and  wherefore.  Perhaps  it  was  impossible  :  perhaps
it  was  undesirable:  perhaps  the  very  attitude  of  mind  pre-
cluded the  possibility  of  granting  the  request.  Such  is
precisely  the  case  with  you  in  this  respect.  The  temper  of
mind  which  dictates  such  arguments  as  you  have  addressed  to-
ns makes  it  impossible  for  us  to  reply  to  them  in  terms
pleasing  to  you.  The  reasons  which  presumably  operated  in.
the  one  case  now  operate  in  the  other.  And  it  should  scarcely
be  necessary  to  remind  you  that  it  was  not  to  the  Phariseeer
the  Sadducee,  or  the  wise  in  their  own  conceit,  who  came  to-
Him  seeking  to  entangle  Him  in  His  talk,  that  Jesus  vouch-
safed either  His  words  of  comfort  or  His  miracles  of  mercy  r
but  to  the  humble  and  the  meek,  to  the  poor  in  spirit,  the
faithful,  earnest  souls  who  were  too  careful  to  gather  up  the
blessed  truths,  and  to  reap  the  precious  fruit,  to  care  very
curiously  to  inquire  in  what  form  it  came  or  under  what
conditions  it  was  bestowed.  It  was  so  throughout  His  earthly
career  :  and  in  so  doing  He  did  but  act  as  the  Father  Himself
deals  with  man.  The  proud,  dogmatic,  haughty  man  who
informs  Omnipotence  of  what  he  wants,  and  murmurs  if  it  be
not  instantly  bestowed,  is  not  the  recipient  of  Divine  bene-
diction, but  the  humble,  trustful,  prayerful  soul,  whose  cry
from  the  depths  of  an  earnest  and  loving  heart  is,  "  Father,,
not  my  will  but  Thine  be  done."

This  is  the  law  which  governs  all  Divine  manifestations..
We  say  nothing  now  of  the  identical  law  which  operates
amongst  you.  But  we  deal  thus  with  you ;  and  we  complain
that  the  positive  tone  of  your  mind,  and  the  line  of  dogmatic-
argument  which  you  have  determined  to  follow,  is  one  that  is-
little  fitting  in  your  case.  We  are  compelled,  however

THE  CLAIM  MADE.  107

unwillingly,  to  visit  it  with  censure.  Review  the  past.  Let
your  mind  recur  to  that  phase  of  your  life  which  you  know
to  have  been  associated  with  us.  Of  the  previous  care  of  your
guardians  extending  throughout  your  life  you  can  have  no
knowledge  yet.  The  watchful  care  which  developed  in  you
the  struggling  germ  of  progress;  the  tender  care  of  those
angel-guards  whose  watchful  protection  never  failed ;  the
preservations  from  evil ;  the  guidance  in  difficulty ;  the  direc-
tion in  the  onward  path ;  the  raising  of  your  soul  from
ignorance  and  error  to  knowledge  of  the  truth — this  unseen
working  is  to  you  unknown.  But  our  efforts  have  not  been
entirely  secret.  During  the  immediate  past  we  have  been
around  and  about  you  day  by  day.  You  have  known  our
words  and  acts ;  you  have  received  from  us  constant  messages,
records  of  which  remain  with  you.  Did  a  word  of  ours  ever
strike  your  mind  as  false  ?  Did  an  act  ever  seem  to  you
mean,  or  selfish,  or  unkind  ?  Have  we  committed  ourselves  ?
Have  we  spoken  to  you  words  that  were  degrading  or  foolish  ?
Have  we  influenced  you  by  wiles  which  were  earthy,  by
motives  that  were  sordid  ?  Have  we  led  you  to  a  course  that
is  retrogressive?  In  short,  by  our  fruits  if  we  are  judged,  has
the  influence  on  you  been  for  evil  or  for  good  ?  for  God  or  for
His  foes  ?  You  yourself,  are  you  better  or  worse  for  it  ?  more
or  less  ignorant  ?  more  or  less  useful  ?  more  or  less  happy  ?

We  dare  any  to  say  of  us  aught  that  may  reasonably  reflect
on  us,  on  our  acts,  or  on  our  teaching.  We  assert  in  the  face
of  all  who  hear  that  it  is  God-like,  and  that  our  mission  is  of
and  from  Him.

Nor  have  we  failed  to  justify  our  claims  by  signs  following,
even  as  Jesus  did  and  said.  We  have  placed  before  you  a
body  of  convincing  evidence  to  which  it  would  be  difficult  to
add.  We  have  not  been  chary  of  complying  with  your  wishes
for  manifestations  of  power.  Nay,  we  have  even  risked  doing
harm  to  you  in  our  desire  to  gratify  our  friends  by  the  exhi-
bition of  the  more  remarkable  manifestations.  We  have  cheer-
fully granted  all  requests  made  to  us,  when  it  was  possible,
and  as  we,  in  the  exercise  of  wider  wisdom,  judged  desirable
to  do  so.  When  we  have  refused  your  requests  it  has  been

108  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

because  you  have  asked  impossibilities,  or  because  in  your
ignorance  you  have  wished  for  what  would  do  you  harm.  It
is  necessary  to  remind  you  that  we  see  from  a  clearer  stand-
point, and  with  a  more  piercing  vision  than  man  has  yet
attained ;  and  we  are  frequently  obliged  to  refuse  requests
made  in  ignorance  and  folly.  But  what  has  been  refused,
never  without  good  reason,  is  as  a  speck  to  the  mountain  of
evidence  which  has  been  given — evidence  which  is  sufficient
to  prove  over  and  over  again  the  existence  of  a  power  external
to  earth,  beneficent  in  its  action,  elevating  in  its  operation,  and
blessed  in  its  issue — a  power  which  can  come  from  none  but
God,  since  it  is  Divine  in  act  and  outcome.  Yet  that  power,
so  proven,  so  known  to  you,  you  distrust,  and  seriously  ques-
tion the  statements  which  we  make  to  you  as  to  our  identity.
It  is  to  you,  forsooth,  a  stumbling-block  that  names  which
you  have  exalted  should  stoop  to  concern  themselves  with  a
Divine  Work,  under  the  leadership  of  Divinely-sent  messen-
gers, and  designed  for  the  amelioration  of  man's  destiny.  And
so  you  refuse  credence,  and,  with  daring  ignorance,  charge  on
us  that  we  are,  or  at  least  may  be,  impostors,  and  that  we  are
performing  acts  of  beneficence  with  a  lie  in  our  mouths.  This
you  do  though  you  know  that  you  can  devise  no  reason  why
we  should  deceive,  no  source  but  God  from  which  we  can  be
derived,  no  errand  but  mercy  on  which  we  can  be  sent,  no  end
but  man's  eternal  benefit  on  which  we  can  be  employed.

It  is  this  that  constitutes  your  fault,  and  we  are  bound  to
censure  it  in  you.  We  tell  you  that  it  is  in  you  sin,  and  that
we  will  have  no  dealings  with  you  on  such  terms.  We  will
give  no  signs  so  demanded.  We  have  reached  the  limits  be-
yond which  we  will  not  go,  and  warn  you  that  it  is  at  your
own  peril  that  you  despise  what  has  been  placed  before  you.
We  charge  you  solemnly  that  you  meditate  on  the  past,  that
you  ponder  its  lessons,  weigh  its  evidence,  and  pause  before
you  wilfully  put  aside  such  a  body  of  teaching,  and  such  a
mass  of  evidence  merely  for  an  idea.

More  we  will  not  now  give.  We  refuse  to  be  judged  as  you
would  judge ;  and  we  appeal  from  yourself  blind  and  foolish,
to  that  calmer  and  truer  self  whom  we  chose  originally  as  the

THE   REPLY  TO   OBJECTIONS.  1G9

recipient  of  our  teaching.  That  appeal  you  must  entertain
according  to  the  ability  and  honesty  which  is  in  you.  By  it
we  stand  or  fall  as  regards  you.  We  wish  you  to  decide  fairly,
and  as  in  the  sight  of  God — not  hastily  or  rashly,  but  as  one
who  knows  the  magnitude  of  the  issues,  and  the  vastness  of
the  responsibility  of  decision.

Meantime  seek  not  for  further  evidence ;  it  will  not  be  given.
We  warn  you  to  avoid  mixing  with  other  circles.  At  your
risk  do  you  seek  communications  thus.  You  will  but  perplex
and  bewilder  yourself,  and  render  our  task  more  difficult.  We
will  afford  you  information  on  points  that  may  arise ;  and  we
•do  not  absolutely  forbid,  though  we  discourage  the  meeting  of
our  own  circle.  We  can  give  no  new  evidence  there,  and,  if
you  meet,  it  must  be  with  a  desire  for  explanation,  and  for
the  promotion  of  harmonious  intercourse.  We  hinted  to  you
long  ago  that  rest  and  reflection  are  needful  for  you.  We  now
•enjoin  them  on  you.  If  our  circle  will  meet,  we  will  join
them  occasionally  under  certain  conditions,  which  we  will  tell
you  of.  But  we  discourage  any  such  meetings.  You  will  not
be  left  alone ;  rather  you  will  be  doubly  guarded.  We  leave
you  with  our  blessing,  and  we  guard  you  with  our  prayers.
May  the  All-wise  guide  you !  May  He  direct  you,  for  you
cannot  direct  yourself.

+  IMPEBATOB.

(     170    )

SECTION    XXI.

[During  this  time  my  state  was  such  as  to  preclude  any
sort  of  manifestation  that  could  bring  satisfaction-
to  my  mind.  I  was  powerfully  influenced,  and  all
my  endeavours  could  not  bring  me  any  satisfaction.
I  was  forced  to  recur  to  the  past,  and  to  try  and
gain  some  coherent  view  of  what  had  been  said.
Though  I  did  not  in  the  least  realise  what  was
going  on  in  me,  I  can  see  now  that  this  was  part
of  the  educational  process  to  which  I  was  being
subjected.  I  was  compelled  to  traverse  the  past
again  and  again,  to  review  the  arguments  from
every  possible  standpoint,  and  to  tear  them  to  pieces
again.  I  hardly  rested  day  or  night  so  vehement
was  the  influence  that  dominated  me.  Only  when
at  work,  with  which  I  never  suffered  anything  to
interfere,  was  my  mind  occupied  with  any  other
subject.  I  made  a  stern  rule,  which  has  never
been  broken  in  these  ten  years,  that  I  would  always
do  my  daily  work  before  I  permitted  myself  to-
think  on  these  engrossing  subjects.  When  I  did
turn  to  them,  the  mind  wTas  absolutely  filled  by-
them.

As  the  result  of  all  my  pondering  I  came  to  the  conclu-
sion that  no  good  end  could  be  served  by  reiter-
ating objections  which  I  was  far  from  considering
that  IMPERATOR  had  met.  I  regarded  his  reply  as
a  piece  of  special  pleading.  I  never  denied  the
claims  put  forward  by  him,  and  he  ignored  utterly
what  seemed  to  me  of  the  last  importance.  I  con-
sidered that  I  had  a  complete  right  to  require
proof  which  should  satisfy  my  own  judgment  as-
to  identity,  and  which  should  establish  in  my  mind
a  conviction  that  I  was  not  the  sport  of  my  own
fancy,  or  of  a  delusion,  or  of  an  organised  attempt
to  deceive.  So  I  simply  stated  again  what  my
difficulty  was,  saying  that  it  had  not  been  met,  and
that  a  threat  of  withdrawal  only  made  matters-
worse.  I  professed  my  readiness  to  wait,  to  review
what  had  been  said,  and  to  hear  and  weigh  any-

DIFFICULTIES   11ESTATED.  171

thing  that  might  be  added.  But  I  stated  firmly
that  I  could  go  no  step  further  until  my  judgment
was  satisfied.  I  pointed  out  that  vague  denuncia-
tion was  not  with  us  considered  to  be  reply,  and
that  a  frame  of  mind  such  as  mine  was  not  fairly
described  in  terms  that  had  been  used.  Moreover,
I  submitted  that  to  tell  me  that  Jesus  Christ  re-
fused all  tests  save  those  of  His  own  choosing —
while  undoubtedly  a  strong  point — was  perhapl  a
dangerous  argument  to  advance.  As  to  the  threat
of  withdrawal,  I  said  that  it  would  only  be  to
leave  me  in  my  present  state  of  uncertainty,  not
to  say  of  disbelief,  and  its  result  must  be  to  cause
me  to  throw  over  the  whole  matter  as  a  tangled
web  which  I  could  not  unravel :  which  might  be
useful  if  one  could  disentangle  it,  but  which  might
be  useless  and  unprofitable,  and  which  probably
was  not  worth  the  trouble.  The  answer  came  at
once] : —

Friend,  we  have  weighed  what  you  say,  and  we  are  dis-
posed to  recognise  the  cogency  of  your  reply.  We  did  not
intend  in  the  words  which  we  felt  constrained  to  employ  to
censure  your  desire  for  information,  but  rather  the  attitude  of
mind  which  seemed  to  prescribe  to  us  conditions  with  which
we  felt  ourselves  unable  to  comply.  And  we  intended  to  con-
vey forcibly  to  your  mind  the  impression  which  was  made
upon  us  by  constant  opposition,  or  at  least  by  the  perpetual
presence  in  your  mind  of  anxiety  and  mistrust.  Such  inhar-
monious conditions  hamper  us.  We  have  a  mission  to  discharge,
and  we  are  not  content  to  wait  and  waste  precious  time  and
opportunity.  We  have  a  work  to  do,  and  it  must  be  done ;  if
not  through  this  circle  of  friends,  then  through  others.  And
we  did  but  state  our  intention  of  withdrawing  from  you  be-
cause we  accepted  your  own  statement  that  it  was  impossible
for  you  to  go  forward  until  we  had  complied  with  your  condi-
tions. We  could  not  do  so,  and  felt  the  necessity  of  withdrawal.
We  have  no  wish  to  break  the  connection  we  have  formed,
and  to  undo  the  work  which  has  been  so  laboriously  accom-
plished. It  may  be  that  in  the  future  we  may  influence  you
more  fully.  It  may  be  that  rest  and  reflection  may  help  us

172  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

And  you.  We  urge  you  to  ponder  and  meditate,  and  to  ask
only  at  rare  intervals  for  communications  in  circle.  Only
when  an  earnest  desire  for  communion  exists  will  we  give  it.
We  are  not  desirous  indeed  to  add  anything  to  what  has
already  been  given.  The  additions  to  our  circle  which  you
speak  of  are  not  desirable.  Every  such  addition  involves  a
change  of  conditions  which  causes  much  anxious  care  and
trouble  to  us,  which  we  do  not  grudge  when  there  is  prospect
of  advantage.  In  this  case  there  is  not,  and  we  must  dis-
courage the  scheme.

All  attempts  at  physical  experiment  with  yourself  we  ab-
solutely forbid.  You  are  certainly  unable  to  bear  the  strain
which  such  could  involve ;  especially  now,  you  set  too  much
store  by  mere  physical  marvels.  They  are  at  best  subsidiary.
And  you  run  risk  of  injury  by  sitting  in  strange  circles.  We
discourage  all  such  attempts.  They  do  but  retard  progress,
and  will  end  in  injury  and  disappointment.  Such  a  course  is
never  beneficial  to  you ;  and  though  we  have  not  interfered
to  prevent  you  from  joining  other  circles,  we  tell  you  that  we
must  repress  such  attempts  now.  If  we  are  to  work  with
you,  you  must  seclude  yourself  from  other  influences.  This
is  essential.  If  you  do  not,  you  render  yourself  so  far  the
worse  for  our  work,  and  run  grave  risk  of  possession  by  intel-
ligences whom  you  would  avoid,  did  you  know  more  of  the
risk  you  run,  and  with  whom  we  could  have  no  part.  You
err  in  supposing  that  your  power  is  of  value  to  other  spirits
in  other  circles.  We  prevent  that ;  and  you  will  gain  no  proofs
in  that  way,  nor  be  of  service  in  helping  other  mediums ;  rather
the  reverse.  We  cannot  allow  you  to  be  so  used.

For  the  present  we  do  not  enter  further  into  the  points
raised.  Did  we  not  know  integrity  and  truth  to  govern  your
mind,  we  should  long  since  have  ceased  to  take  pains  which
yield  so  little  fruit.  Ignorance  has  caused  3rou  to  do  much
that  you  would  not  have  done  had  you  been  wiser.  And
though  our  friends  have  not  aided  us  as  we  hoped,  we  have
desired  to  do  all  we  can  to  benefit  them  and  you.  But  there
is  a  limit  to  our  power  and  will  in  such  matters,  and  we  should
act  unwisely  did  we  attempt  to  force  on  you  thpt  for  which

REASONING  AND   REBUKE.  173

collectively  you  are  not  fit.  Hereafter  it  may  be  done ;  now
we  see  it  is  impossible  to  do  more.  We  shall  not  attempt  fresh
efforts.  We  cannot  spend  further  time  and  pains  on  that
which,  you  have  convinced  us,  is  useless.  Your  argument*
prove  at  anyrate  that  your  mind  has  not  grasped  the  true
nature  of  our  work.  We  are  not  able,  nor  indeed  are  we  will-
ing, to  comply  with  the  suggested  tests  which  you  prescribe.
It  is  not  thus  that  conviction  is  assured,  and  God's  messenger*
avouched.  Compliance  would  but  cause  further  demands;  and
conviction  cannot  be  established  by  any  such  material  means.

Meditate  rather  on  what  has  been  done.  You  have  put-
aside  what  we  have  laid  before  you.  We  do  not  blame  you
for  honestly  rejecting  what  does  not  commend  itself  to  you.
But  this  done,  we  have  no  alternative.  The  choice  is  of  eter-
nal import,  and  you  appear  to  have  made  it;  whether  wisely,
time  will  show  you ;  and  it  may  then  be  possible  for  you  to
undo  some  of  the  effects  of  your  choice.  We  would  even  yet
hope  that  a  careful  review  of  your  position  may  induce  you-
to  retreat  from  it.

+  IMPERATOR.

[On  the  following  day,  Oct.  4,  1873,  the  writing  was
resumed.  Some  of  it  is  so  purely  personal  that  I
prefer  not  to  print  it.  It  was  couched  throughout
in  terms  of  great  solemnity  and  commenced  with
an  invocation.  The  gist  of  it  all  was  the  reiter-
ation of  the  claims  previously  made,  and  the  con-
cession of  some  points  which  I  had  insisted  on,
especially  that  of  the  threatened  withdrawal.  On
this  point  the  reply  shows  such  evidence  of  pure
human  reason,  and  is  so  typical  of  the  logical
method  in  which  this  Intelligence  has  always  dealt
with  my  arguments,  that  I  print  it  as  it  stands,
though  so  personal  in  its  nature.  It  was  written
with°  great  clearness  and  rapidity,  and  entirely
without  knowledge  on  my  part  of  what  the  sub-
stance was  until  it  was  complete]: —

I,  the  servant  of  God,  the  minister  of  the  Most  High,  and1
the  guide  and  guardian  of  your  spirit,  implore  upon  you  the-
divine  benediction.  The  Holy  and  Loving  Father  bless  you.

174  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

May  the  influences,  invisible  but  potent,  by  which  you  are
surrounded  be  gracious  and  powerful  for  your  good.  It  has
been  strongly  urged  on  us  that  we  should  pause  before  we
.abandon  all  our  efforts  to  act  further  upon  you.  This  has

especially  been  put  forward  by [a  friend  recently  dead,

who  had  communicated  with  me  very  soon  after  his  departure]
whose  knowledge  of  the  conditions  of  belief  which  beset  you
is  more  fresh  and  vivid  than  our  own.  It  has  been  urged  that,
while  our  work  must  be  done  through  others  if  not  through
you,  still  that  time  should  be  given  for  consideration,  and  that
no  one  who  has  received  the  mass  of  evidence  which  you  have
•can  in  the  end  resist  complete  conviction  of  the  truth.  The
point  of  view  from  which  you  see,  the  mists  of  prejudice  which
enshroud  even  a  candid  mind,  the  influences  which  the  adver-
.saries  are  able  to  throw  around  you,  the  difficulties  which  must
beset  attempts  at  spirit  intercourse — all  these  are  points  which
.are  to  be  borne  in  mind.  And  while  we,  knowing  as  we  do

7  O

the  truth  and  sincerity  of  all  that  seems  to  you  dubious,  can
scarcely  grasp  your  position,  we  are  still  hopeful  that  the
earnestness  and  reality  of  your  doubts  will  be  the  measure  of
the  strength  of  your  conviction  in  the  future.

So  long  as  your  frame  of  mind  did  not  surround  you  with
.an  atmosphere  in  which  we  were  not  able  to  act  upon  you,  we
•  confined  ourselves  to  replying  to  your  difficulties.     But  when
the  circle  which  we  had  gathered  with  such  pains  and  care
became  so  broken  as  to  be  useless,  and  so  inharmonious  that
it  was  impossible  for  us  to  establish  a  control  in  most  cases,
our  plans  were  f rustrated,  and  we  were  forced  to  consider  if
.any  good  could  come  of  further  efforts.     The  constant  repeti-
tion of  physical  phenomena  was  far  from  our  wish.     It  is  not
for  such  purpose  that  we  are  with  you.     And  even  if  it  were,
we  could  not  use  your  organism  for  that  mode  of  manifesta-
tion.    The  daily  demand  which  you  make  upon  your  vital
power,  and  the  peculiar  nature  of  your  bodily  strength,  con-
.  stantly  fluctuating,  preclude  any  such  attempts.     It  needs  a
ruder  organism  on  which  no  other  demands  are  made  to  safely
-carry  out  such  experiments.     We  have  indeed  successfully
•communicated  to  you  in  this  way  by  writing  much  that  we

KEITERATED   CLAIMS.  175

•desired  to  say.  But,  after  all,  we  found  that  a  great  part  of
•our  work  was  confined  to  answering  your  objections,  and,  as
regards  our  circle,  the  great  end  we  have  in  view  remained
unaccomplished.

It  was  while  we  were  perplexed  and  troubled  thus  that  you
put  forward  a  demand  for  certain  tests  which  we  found  it
impossible  as  well  as  undesirable  to  give.  We  felt  that  they
would  but  be  the  prelude  to  more ;  and  we  knew  that  you
liad  not  sufficiently  weighed  the  evidence  already  given.
Moreover,  we  could,  at  our  own  opportunity,  supply  better
proof  than  that  which  you  ignorantly  asked  for.  So  we
decided  that  if  you  were  withdrawn  from  spirit  communion,
by  the  withdrawal  of  communications,  your  mind  would  pro-
bably recur  to  the  past,  and  learn  its  lessons  aright.  But  we
have  in  view  the  alternative  prospect,  which  is  that  we  are
unable  to  cut  off  the  power  which  is  in  you,  though  we  may
refuse  to  use  it ;  and  so  that  you  would  run  the  risk  of  its  being
seized  upon  by  others,  and  deceit  and  falsehood  might  find  an
entry,  and  our  work  be  utterly  set  at  naught.  We  dare  not
ignore  this  risk.  Nor  can  we  refuse  to  acknowledge  that  to
leave  you  now  might  be  to  allow  you  to  relapse  into  disbelief.
From  the  habit  of  pure  logical  deduction,  which  in  you  super-
sedes intuition  to  a  great  extent,  it  might  result  that  you
would  cease  to  believe  what  had  ceased  to  recur  daily.  Im-
pressions would  fade,  and  gradually  die  out.

It  seems,  then,  that  patient  waiting  is  the  only  course  that
does  not  present  difficulty.  We  are  not  able  to  prophesy
results ;  but  we  know  the  two  roads  that  lie  before  you,  and
that  you  will  pursue  whichever  of  them  your  reason  chooses.
We  have  no  power,  even  if  we  had  the  wish,  to  force  your
choice.  Its  responsibility  rests  solely  on  yourself.  You  may
choose  well,  and  your  spirit  be  put  on  the  road  to  progress  and
enlightenment ;  or  you  may  refuse  the  opportunity,  and  find
that  you  have  thereby  consigned  yourself  to  darkness  and
Tetrogression  in  the  future.  That  rests  with  you.  We  abate
not  a  jot  of  our  claims :  rather  do  we  magnify  them.  You
will  know  in  the  future  more  clearly  what  they  are.  For  the
present,  earnest,  prayerful,  and  careful  study  is  due  to  us,  and

17G  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

what  we  have  put  before  you.  Go  over  the  past :  weigh  its
teachings,  study  its  records,  draw  out  in  words  your  conclu-
sions from  it.  Mark  the  progress  made.  Record  with  minute
care  the  process  by  which  what  you  admit  to  be  a  Divine
Creed  has  been  elaborated ;  and  then  carry  on  your  mind  to
the  future.  Look  down  the  vista  of  the  ages  yet  to  come ;
reflect  that  you  stand  but  on  the  very  threshold — that  much
remains  to  be  eradicated  before  your  spirit  can  progress — that
much  has  to  be  cleared  away  before  the  building  can  be  raised
— that  eternity  is  before  you,  and  that  we  proffer  to  you  the
key  of  knowledge.

Pause,  we  implore  you,  before  you  reject  what  comes  a
second  time  to  none.  Rejected,  it  will  be  a  curse  that  shall
rest  like  a  dark  shadow  on  your  soul  through  the  ages.
Accepted,  it  shall  be  a  jewel  that  shall  shine  with  increasing
lustre,  brighter  and  brighter  yet  through  eternity.

Pray  rather,  pray  to  the  Great  Father  that  He  will  bless
your  work,  and  allow  us  to  guide  you  still.  Pray  that  your
spirit  may  be  raised  from  the  cold,  cheerless  atmosphere  of
earth  to  commune  with  the  bright  intelligences  that  wait  to
instruct  you.  Few  have  been  so  tended ;  shall  it  be  that  few
have  so  little  benefited  ?  Our  prayer  shall  mingle  with  yours
that  such  may  not  be,  but  that  you  may  be  protected  from
influences  of  ill,  bodily  and  spiritual,  and  that  you  may  be  led
on  to  higher  fields  of  knowledge,  and  to  clearer  and  more
perfect  trust.

Father ! — Eternal,  Infinite,  All-wise — we  draw  near  to  Thee,
and  lay  before  thee  our  petitions,  knowing  that  Thou  dost
hear  us  and  wilt  answer  our  prayers.  Eternal  God,  remove
from  our  path  the  bars  and  clogs  that  hinder  and  hamper  us.
Loving  Father,  shed  into  the  doubting  heart  a  beam  of  light
to  illumine  the  dark  corners,  and  to  drive  out  the  lurking  foe.
Mighty  Master,  bear  down  to  us  that  consolation  which  we
need  in  our  labour.  Great  the  labour,  great  must  be  the  love.
Great  is  the  work,  great  must  be  the  power.  Grant  it,  Almighty
Power  !  and  to  Thee  will  we  render  our  praises.  Before  Thee
we  will  testify  of  our  grateful  adoration,  and  to  Thee  will  we
bring  the  free-will  offering  of  our  loving  homage.  Glory  and

REITERATED  CLAIMS.  177

blessing  and  honour  and  praise  be  to  Thee  from  angel  and
spirit  through  Thy  universe !

+  IMPERATOH

[The  above  communication  was  practically  the  conclu-
sion of  this  phase  of  the  argument.  I  did  not  feel
immediately  convinced,  but  the  cessation  of  argu-
ment, and  to  a  great  extent  of  communication  of
all  kinds  with  the  world  of  spirit,  left  me  free  to
estimate  the  past.  I  could  judge  more  calmly
when  direct  influence  was  in  abeyance,  and  con-
viction of  the  honesty,  sincerity,  and  truth  of  the
communications  grew  by  slow  degrees  from  this
date ;  or  rather,  perhaps,  I  should  say  that  faith
was  perceptibly  deepened,  and  doubt  imperceptibly
removed.]

13

(    178    )

SECTION    XXIL

PMPERATOR  having  been  absent,  I  asked  some  questions
as  to  the  cause,  and  was  told  that  he  had  other
work,  not  in  this  world,  which  had  detained  him.
He  was  able,  he  said,  to  influence  me  without
actual  presence  with  me,  as  I  should  understand
the  term,  but  that  this  required  the  direction  of
thought  (so  to  say)  to  me.  Preoccupation  would
prevent  that.  And  on  this  and  other  occasions  he
spoke  of  what  I  may  call  a  meeting  of  the  spirits
for  solemn  adoration,  and  prayer,  and  praise,  and
intercession.  More  questions  elicited  amongst
other  answers  the  following  on  Oct.  12,  1873] : —

We  had  betaken  ourselves  to  prayer  and  intercession,  and
had  withdrawn  for  awhile  from  the  cares  and  anxieties  which
beset  a  mission  to  your  nether  sphere,  into  the  peaceful  seclu-
sion and  harmonious  atmosphere  of  the  sphere  of  adoration.
It  is  well  that  we  refresh  ourselves  at  times  with  rest  and  the
society  of  the  blessed  lest  we  fail  and  faint  in  our  work ;  lest
we  grow  sad  and  weary  in  spirit,  and  cease  to  labour  with
zeal  and  success.

Ah  !  you  who  in  your  earth-life  have  toiled  among  the  lanes
and  alleys  of  your  crowded  cities,  who  have  trodden  the  haunts
of  vice  in  the  mission  of  mercy,  who  have  breathed  the  stifling
air  fever,  laden  and  noisome  in  its  impurity ;  who  have  watched
the  scenes  of  misery  and  sin,  and  have  felt  yourselves  powerless
to  alleviate,  much  more  to  remove  distress  and  want — you  may
know  what  are  the  feelings  with  which  we  minister  amongst
you.  You  have  felt  sick  at  heart,  or  you  have  pondered  over
the  ignorance  and  folly  and  vice  which  you  have  no  means  of
removing.  You  have  felt  prostrate  with  association  with
poverty  and  crime,  and  mind  and  body  has  wavered  under
the  thankless  toil.  Yet  what  do  you  see  and  feel  compared
with  what  we  do  ?  You  are  apt  to  think  of  us  as  mysterious
far-off  beings  who  have  no  interest  in  your  lives,  no  knowledge

EABTH   IN   THE  VIEW  OF  SPIRIT.  17<J

of  your  miseries,  and  no  share  in  the  troubles  that  beset  you.
You  do  not  understand  that  we  can  enter  into  your  feelings
And  know  the  hidden  griefs  that  vex  you,  even  more  really
than  your  fellow  man  can.  You  think  of  us  as  dissociated
from  earth,  whereas  we  have  very  real  knowledge  alike  of  its
sorrows  and  its  delights.  And  you  fancy  that  the  miseries,
physical  and  spiritual,  which  crowd  around  the  lives  of  some
are  beyond  our  ken.  It  is  far  otherwise.  "We  see  far  more
•clearly  than  you  the  causes  that  produce  sorrow,  the  tempta-
tions that  beset  the  criminal,  the  miseries  that  drive  to  despair,
the  hordes  of  the  undeveloped  who  throng  around  and  tempt
to  vice  and  sin.

Our  view  is  not  alone  of  material  misery,  but  of  spiritual
temptation;  not  alone  of  the  sorrows  that  meet  the  eye  of
sense,  but  of  the  hidden  grief  of  which  man  knows  nothing.
Do  not  fancy  that  we  are  unable  to  see  and  to  know  your
sorrows  and  crimes,  nor  that  we  can  mix  with  your  people,
and  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  your  world  without  drinking
in  somewhat  of  its  curse.

What  is  the  contrast  from  your  life  to  that  of  the  outcast
in  the  noisome  atmosphere  of  some  foul  den  in  a  back  alley  of
your  crowded  cities — the  home  of  misery  and  crime — com-
pared with  that  which  strikes  cold  and  chilling  on  us  as  we
come  to  your  lower  spheres !  We  come  from  the  land  of  light
and  purity  and  beauty,  wherein  is  naught  that  is  unclean,
unholy,  or  impure — from  a  scene  blurred  with  no  disfigure-
ment, where  is  no  shadow  of  darkness — nothing  but  radi-
ance and  unspotted  purity.  We  leave  the  society  of  the
perfected,  and  the  atmosphere  in  which  dwells  peace ;  we  quit
the  light  and  love,  the  harmony  and  adoration  of  the  spheres,
and  we  descend  to  your  cold  earth,  to  a  clime  of  darkness  and
despair — to  an  atmosphere  of  repulsion  and  sorrow — to  an  air
heavy  with  misery  and  guilt — to  a  people  disobedient,  unbe-
lieving, steeped  in  materialism,  and  dead  to  spirit  influence —
to  a  world  crowded  thick  with  vice,  surrounded  by  the  spirits
of  the  undeveloped,  and  deaf  to  the  voice  of  God.  We  quit
the  home  where  God's  light  and  truth  prevail,  for  the  outer
darkness  of  your  earth,  where  only  the  faintest  glimmer  of

180  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

spirit-truth  from  circles  rare,  and  few  greets  our  eyes.  Har-
mony and  peace  we  exchange  for  turbulence  and  discord,  for
war  and  turmoil;  the  society  of  the  pure  and  peaceful  for  the
chilling  company  of  the  sceptic  and  scorner,  or  even  of  the
drunkard  and  sensualist,  the  outcast  and  the  thief.  We  leave
temples  where  we  adore  the  God  of  heaven  for  your  nether
world,  where  our  God  is  unknown,  and  where  a  being  of  man's
own  imagining  reigns  in  His  place,  save  when  even  that  idol
has  been  dethroned,  and  man  has  relapsed  into  absolute  dis-
belief in  all  spirit  and  all  incorporeal  existence.

This  we  do,  only  in  most  cases  to  find  a  people  who  are  deaf
and  dead  to  us ;  aye,  and  even  those  who  do  in  a  measure
listen  to  our  words  so  long  as  they  please  them,  and  coincide
with  what  they  have  themselves  fancied — even  they  will  turn
away  from  following  when  we  would  raise  them  to  a  higher
level  and  show  them  a  purer  light.  The  story  of  Jesus  is  ful-
filled again.  The  people  will  wonder  at  miraculous  works ;
they  will  follow  so  long  as  personal  interest  is  excited,  and
personal  curiosity  gratified ;  but  when  we  raise  them  from
that  level,  when  we  cut  out  the  egoistic  element,  and  deal
with  eternal  and  imperial  facts,  they  turn  back — they  are  not
able  to  receive  what  is  too  high  for  them.  And  so  the  designs
of  God  are  thwarted,  and  the  benefits  which  we  are  commis-
sioned to  bestow  are  cast  aside  with  thanklessness ;  and  the
chilling  sense  of  threatened  failure  is  added  to  our  sorrow.
So  it  is ;  and  we  withdraw  at  times  for  rest  and  refreshment,
and  return  with  some  of  the  harmony  of  the  spheres  to  cheer
and  comfort  us  in  the  midst  of  our  labours  in  a  cheerless
world,  and  among  a  thankless  people.

[I  had  not  received  a  communication  before  which  so
savoured  of  pure  human  weakness,  almost  of  the
tone  of  despair.  There  had  before  been  a  tone  of
dignity  which  seemed  to  be  above  that  of  earth.
Nothing,  indeed,  was  more  striking  in  the  pres-
ence and  words  of  IMPERATOR  than  his  absolute
superiority  to  the  weaknesses,  the  petty  cares  and
concerns  of  earth.  He  seemed  to  move,  as  indeed
he  did,  in  another  world,  and  to  be  at  once  careless
and  unconcerned  by  the  things  which  filled  our

HUMAN  WEAKNESS.  181

human  gaze.  He  was  superior  to  them :  his  views
were  wide,  and  concerned  with  matters  of  imperial
significance.  Yet  he  was  always  tender  and  com-
passionate to  our  weakness,  and  quite  undisturbed
by  any  gusts  of  human  passion.  He  was  "  in  the
world,  but  not  of  it,"  a  visitor  from  a  calmer  and
more  peaceful  sphere,  bringing  with  him  somewhat
of  its  repose.  I  remarked  the  tone  of  his  words,
and  it  was  replied] : —

We  complain,  but  we  do  not  faint.  Association  with  you
and  with  your  surroundings  causes  us  to  imbibe  somewhat  of
the  tone  of  your  mind.  We  have  said  what  we  have  said  that
you  may  know  that  we  sacrifice  somewhat,  and  that  we  are
amenable  to  the  same  feelings  which  sway  you.  We  suffer
mental  agony  and  spiritual  distress.  We  feel  pangs  as  real  as
those  which  wring  the  hearts  of  men.  Were  we  not  (as  you
say)  human  in  our  sympathies,  we  could  not  enter  into  your
necessities.  You  will  know,  too,  one  day,  that  by  a  law  as  yet
unknown  to  you,  the  spirit  returning  to  earth  takes  on  much
of  the  pure  human  tone  which  it  loses  when  absent.  It  be-
comes assimilated  to  earth  and  earthly  ideas.

JThe  advice  to  refrain  from  seeking  too  frequent  com-
munication, and  to  ponder  the  past,  was  repeated.
The  production  of  physical  phenomena  in  excess
was  said  to  be  dangerous  for  me,  the  drain  on  the
vital  power  being  too  great.  Above  all,  I  was
warned  not  to  join  mixed  circles,  except  in  cases  of
necessity,  as  for  the  observing  of  phenomena  which
I  wished  to  describe  in  print.  Moderation  in  all
things  was  urged,  in  work  as  well  as  other  things,
and  reflection  and  rest  encouraged.  We  did  not
omit  sitting,  but  did  not  meet  so  frequently  as
before.  It  was  noticeable  that  great  efforts  were
made  to  bring  home  evidence  of  identity.  One
very  striking  case  occurred  (Oct.  14)  thus :  A  spirit
who  had  long  communicated  with  us  was  cross-
examined  by  one  of  our  circle  from  a  book  which
recorded  some  facts  in  his  life.  The  book  had
lately  been  published,  and  no  one  of  us  except  the
questioner  had  seen  it.  The  names  and  dates
had  got  jumbled  in  his  head,  and  it  was  most

182  SP11UT-TEACHINGS.

striking  to  find  the  unseen  intelligence  correcting
every  mistake,  refusing  flatly  and  persistently  to-
acquiesce  in  an  error  and  even  spelling  out  words,
that  bad  been  mispronounced.

The  sounds  made  were  most  expressive  of  annoyance,
irritation,  and  vexation.  The  corrections  were
rapped  out  with  the  greatest  promptness  before  a
question  was  complete,  and  in  all  cases  with  literal
exactness.  It  was  impossible  to  doubt  that  one
was  dealing  with  an  entity  whose  individuality
was  as  strong  as  ever,  whose  memory  was  by  no
means  impaired,  and  who  had  lost  nothing  of  the
energy  that  characterised  him  in  his  embodied
state.  I  refer  to  that  evening  the  growth  in  my
mind  of  a  strong  conviction  that  the  intelligences
who  communicated  were  really  the  persons  they
pretended  to  be.  The  accent  of  denial  was  so  per-
fect, the  irritable  rejoinder  and  correction  were  so
human,  so  natural,  that  I  do  not  believe  a  per-
sonator  could  have  done  it,  or  would  have  thought
of  such  a  subtle  trait.  On  the  following  morning
I  questioned  on  the  subject] : —

1  was  much  struck  by  your  corrections  last  night.

The  book  was  wrong,  and  imperfect  in  many  ways.     I  did

make  acquaintance  with before  he  became  my  pupil,  and

I  told  you  truly  that  I  studied  at  Paris.

I  don't  doubt  it.  You  were  evidently  in  earnest,  and
quite  angry.

It  is  provoking  to  me  to  be  questioned  wrongly,  and  from
imperfect  information  imperfectly  remembered.  I  knew  what
I  said.

/  can't  affect  to  be  sorry ;  for  it  brought  out  the  best  proof
of  identity  I  have  had  yet.  Of  course  we  only  value  it
as  such.

Yes.     But  you  watch  for  an  opportunity  of  entangling.

Oh,  no  !    I  only  ivant  proof.
You  have  proof  which  it  would  be  hard  to  increase.

PERSONAL  NARRATIVE.  183

[My  faith  in  the  information  given,  and  especially  in
the  tests  furnished,  though  what  was  said  was
always  true,  suffered  many  relapses.  I  was
haunted  by  a  suspicion  which,  if  vague,  was  none
the  less  real,  that  what  was  pretended  was  not
literally  true ;  that  the  information  given  did  not
really  come  from  those  whose  names  were  used ;
that,  in  short,  there  was  a  mystery  or  an  allegory
in  all,  which  might  be  deception,  or  simply  some-
thing which  I  could  not  understand.  This  frame  of
mind,  the  very  worst  in  which  to  seek  communion
with  the  spheres,  caused  our  circle  to  be  practi-
cally broken  up.  We  all  saw.  I  think,  the  wisdom
of  discontinuing  our  sittings,  and  IMPERATOR
strongly  urged,  and  finally  enforced,  that  course
upon  us.  He  left  us — so  far  as  our  sittings  were
concerned — with  an  injunction  to  ponder  over  the
past,  and  with  a  very  strong  warning  as  to  the  risk
we  should  run  by  attempting  to  join  other  stances,
or  to  ourselves  meet  after  nis  withdrawal.  The
automatic  writing  continued  somewhat  fitfully.
I  made  many  inquiries  as  to  what  was  proposed,
and  the  answers  I  received  showed  just  the  same
determined  will  working  out  its  own  purpose  as  I
always  found  in  IMPERATOR.  The  most  cogent
evidence  was  given  of  a  clear  and  decisive  intelli-
gence operating  in  antagonism  to  my  own  mind.
At  no  period  had  I  more  forcible  evidence  of
external  intelligence  than  now.  Elaborate  plans
were  made  and  carried  out,  convincing  and  logical
arguments  used  to  defend  them,  and  I  was  forced
to  admit  the  coherence  of  all.

It  was  at  this  time  that  a  long  account  was  written
out  of  the  spiritual  influence  which  had  been
brought  to  bear  upon  my  whole  life.  The  narra-
tive startled  me  very  much,  and  renewed  my
conviction  of  the  sincerity  and  reality  of  the
intelligence  that  was  dealing  with  me.  Though  I
am  going  a  long  way  in  laying  bare  so  much  that  I
should  prefer  to  keep  secret,  I  cannot  bring  myself
to  print  what  is  of  so  purely  personal  a  nature.  I
print  personal  remarks  and  details  only  so  far  as
they  tend  to  throw  light  upon  the  general  course
of  teaching  and  proof  of  Spirit  Identity.]

SECTION    XXIII

[On  Nov  2,  1873,  a  question  which  I  proposed  to  put
was  set  aside,  and  a  communication  was  made  as
to  the  progressive  revelation  of  God  in  that  part
of  the  universal  Church  of  which  we  have  the
record  in  our  Bible.  I  had  been  told  before  that
this  was  but  one  of  many  collateral  revelations] : —

We  would  speak  to  you  of  the  revelation  of  God  amongst
men  in  times  of  old  by  agencies  similar  to  those  which  we  use
now.  Throughout  the  history  of  which  you  possess  the  recoro
in  the  earlier  part  of  your  Bible  there  stand  out  noble  spirits
who,  during  their  bodily  lives,  shone  as  lights  of  truth  and
progress,  and  who,  when  released  from  the  flesh,  inspired  in
their  turn  those  who  were  to  succeed  them.  Such,  in  the
early  days  when  God  was  fabled  to  deal  with  man  more
personally  than  now — such  was  he  whom  you  know  as
Melchizedek.  He  blessed  and  conveyed  to  Abram  the  seal  of
Divine  favour.  He  was  the  chosen  vehicle  of  spirit  power  in
a  day  when  man  had  not  cut  himself  off  from  belief  in  spirit
intercourse.  He  was  the  light  shining  in  darkness,  the  prophet
of  God  to  one  section  of  His  people.

And  it  is  well  that  we  warn  you  here,  on  the  threshold  of
your  enlightenment,  that  you  must  learn  to  discriminate  in
the  ancient  records  between  that  which  is  record  of  fact  and
that  which  is  only  expression  of  belief.  The  writings  which
give  the  history  of  those  early  days  are  full  of  inconsistent
statements.  They  were  not,  as  we  assert  to  you,  the  compila-
tion of  their  reputed  author,  but  were  compiled  from  tradi-
tional beliefs  in  a  far  later  age,  at  a  time  when  history  had
merged  into  legend,  and  much  of  mere  opinion  and  belief  had
become  stamped  with  the  mark  of  authenticity.  So,  though
it  be  most  true  that  fact  is  embodied  in  these  records,  as  indeed
in  the  sacred  books  of  other  faiths,  you  must  beware  how  you
accord  implicit  belief  to  every  isolated  statement  contained  in

EARLY   BIBLE   STORIES.

them.  Hitherto  you  have  read  these  stones  from  a  standpoint
of  unquestioning  assent.  It  is  needful  now  that  you  study
them  in  a  new  light — one  more  profitable,  and  not  less  in-
teresting.

God  did  not  associate  with  man  after  the  anthropomorphic
fashion  described  in  Genesis ;  nor  did  He  personally  govern  a
favoured  nation  save  through  His  selected  instruments.

His  dealings  with  man  have  been  uniform  through  the  ages
— intimate  in  proportion  as  man  cultivates  sphituality,  remote
as  his  animal  nature  asserts  itself,  and  he  becomes  corporeal
and  material  in  his  instincts.

So,  in  those  now  distant  days,  it  was  Melchizedek  who
bore  to  the  chosen  Abram  the  Divine  Benediction.  He  whom
Christian  and  Mahommedan  alike  have  agreed  to  exalt  was
not  the  immediate  recipient  of  spirit  guidance  as  was  the
Priest-King  of  Salem.  Abram  faded  from  power  when  he
passed  from  the  body,  and  in  the  centuries  since  his  incarna-
tk  he  has  been  but  little  concerned  in  influencing  men.  It
may  seem  strange  that  it  should  be  so ;  but  it  is  so  with  many
a  spirit  whose  name  fills  a  large  place  in  your  world's  history.
The  work  has  been  done,  and  the  new  work  does  not  bring
the  spirit  in  contact  with  matter.  Or,  perchance,  the  work
has  been  badly  done,  the  chosen  vessel  has  lost  its  perfume,
and  becomes  in  spirit-land  savourless  and  useless.

Melchizedek  returned  again  to  influence  the  most  powerful
reformer  your  world  then  had — the  leader  of  the  Israelites
out  of  Egypt,  and  the  Lawgiver  who  framed  for  them  their
code  and  constitution.  He  was  a  most  powerfully  organised
and  developed  instrument  of  spirit-power.  A  keen  intelli-
gence had  been  developed  in  what  was  then  the  best  school,
the  esoteric  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians.  A  powerful  magnetic
will  fitted  him  for  the  post  of  ruler ;  and  a  powerful  band  of
spirits  operated  on  the  Jewish  nation  through  him,  and  through
them  on  the  world.  A  code  of  religious  observance  was  per-
fected, a  system  of  government  elaborated,  and  laws  and
regulations  laid  down  which  were  adapted  for  the  specific
necessities  of  a  great  people  in  a  great  crisis  of  their  history.
The  Jews  were  then  passing  through  a  phase  not  unlike  that

186  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

which  has  come  to  other  people  in  later  days — one  to  which
the  present  age  bears  some  noteworthy  points  of  resemblance,.
a  period  of  development  of  knowledge,  when  old  things  are
passing  away,  and  the  creative  spirit  makes  all  things  new.

Here  again  beware  of  false  deductions.  The  laws  then  given
were  not  meant  for  all  time,  as  some  of  your  teachers  falsely
pretend.  They  were  the  power  of  God  to  that  distant  age —
so  much  of  truth  as  man  could  grasp,  inspired  in  the  same
way,  and  in  no  other,  as  have  been  all  the  utterances  of  truth
which  the  good  God  permits  His  messengers  to  declare  to  men.
They  set  forth  the  needed  truth  that  the  One  Supreme  God
rules  over  His  people  and  cares  for  their  well-being.  The
love  due  to  God  and  the  charity  and  loving-kindness  due  to
the  brother  were  embodied  for  a  nation  which  had  drunk  in
the  baser  forms  of  Egyptian  polytheistic  teaching,  and  had
had  no  part  in  the  inner  mysteries  where  alone  truth  dwells.

These  commandments  which  have  been  perpetuated  till  now,
embodied  for  a  changeful  age  a  phase  of  truth.  They  contain
laws  of  action  which  are  true  in  spirit,  but  not  binding  in
literal  exactness  on  those  who  have  outgrown  the  necessity
for  them.  They  were  given  by  the  spirit-guides  to  Moses  on
the  secluded  top  of  Sinai,  above  the  turmoil  of  Israel,  and
removed  from  the  lower  influences  of  earth.  They  knew  then
what  man  has  forgotten  now — how  that  perfect  isolation  is
requisite  for  perfect  communing,  and  that  if  you  would  have
pure  and  unadulterated  spirit-teaching,  it  must  be  communi-
cated to  one  who  has  been  removed  from  the  mixed  influences,
the  cares  and  anxieties,  the  jealousies  and  disputes  which  crowd
the  lower  air.  So  is  the  message  more  pure,  and  so  does  the
medium  hear  and  receive  with  sincerity  and  truth.

Moses  was  to  select  seventy  elders — men  of  spiritual  devel-
opment, for  such  alone  were  then  chosen  for  offices  of  power
— upon  whom  his  own  influence  was  perpetually  brought  to-
bear,  and  who  were  the  channels  by  which  that  influence  per-
meated the  people.  So  the  code  was  elaborated  and  set  in
operation,  and  when  the  great  Lawgiver  passed  from  his  work
on  earth  he  became  an  exalted  spirit  whose  name  is  emblaz-
oned for  all  ages  as  a  benefactor  of  men.

THE   CHAIN   OF  SPIRIT   INFLUENCE.

He,  too,  in  his  turn,  influenced  men  after  many  generations,
as  the  inspiring  guide  of  Elijah.  We  intentionally  pass  over
the  other  manifestations  of  spirit-power  which  occur  in  othei
directions,  in  order  that  we  may  preserve  intact  the  grand
chain  which  stretched  from  Melchizedek  to  the  Christ.  Nor
do  we  name  more  than  it  is  necessary  to  indicate  in  order  to
show  you  the  continuity,  and  to  press  on  you  the  fact  that
these,  who  had  been  great  workers  for  God  during  their  live*
on  earth,  did  influence  man's  destinies  even  after  their  with
drawal  from  the  body.  Many  other  chains  of  influence  there
were,  and  many  other  centres  from  which  truth,  more  or  less
advanced,  was  diffused,  but  you  are  not  concerned  with  them.
That  which  culminated  in  Jesus  Christ  is  that  with  which  you
are  concerned,  though  we  implore  you  to  cast  aside  that  igno-
rant and  selfish  sectarianism  which  would  arrogate  to  itself
the  sole  proprietorship  of  truth.

Elijah,  the  great  master,  the  grandest  spirit  who  ever  graced
the  nation  of  Israel,  was  in  a  very  high  degree  the  recipient
of  spiritual  guidance  from  Him  who  had  been  the  Leader  of
His  people.  The  traditional  reverence  for  Moses  and  Elia*
felt  by  the  Jewish  people  is  shown  you  in  the  fable  that  God-
buried  the  body  of  Moses,  while  he  caught  up  Elijah  in  a
chariot  and  horses  of  fire  to  the  skies  where  the  fancied  heaven,
lay.  Such  was  the  reverence  felt,  that  they  were  fabled  to  be
singular  even  in  death.  We  need  not  tell  you  that  no  mate-
rial body  was  ever  translated  to  lead  a  corporeal  life  in  the
land  of  spirit.  You  know  that  such  is  but  an  allegory  to
indicate  the  glorious  translation  of  an  exalted  spirit  from  a
sphere  where  his  work  is  done,  to  one  where  his  extended  in-
fluence is  to  begin.  He  left  to  his  successor  a  two-fold  portion,
of  his  spirit,  not  indeed  in  that  Elisha  was  endued  with  double-
virtue,  for  that  was  far  from  being  so,  but  that  the  glorious-
results  of  Elijah's  power  showed  with  two-fold  force  in  the
days  of  his  successor,  who  seconded  his  efforts  and  carried  oik
his  work.

He,  too,  reappeared  in  after  ages,  and  exercised  his  great
influence  again,   and   stood,  as  you  know,  with   his  Master'
side  by  side  with  the  Christ  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,

188  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

And  in  the  vision  of  John  the  Divine,  they  are  again  depicted
as  coming  to  revisit  the  earth  in  still  later  days.

[I  did  not  at  all  understand  the  allusion  made  to  this
return  in  later  days  when  the  communication  was
written,  November  2, 1873.  It  has  only  been  lately
that  I  have  been  led  to  refer  it  to  "  the  two  wit-
nesses "  mentioned  in  Revelation  xi.  3,  etc.  Nor
should  I  have  noticed  this  at  all,  but  for  a  pamphlet
on  the  Apocalypse  which  some  unknown  friend
sent  to  me.  The  pamphlet  deals  with  these  wit-
nesses, and  their  prophesyings,  and  came  to  me
most  opportunely  to  elucidate  what  I  could  not
understand.

I  asked  some  questions  at  the  time,  and,  among  others,
whether  there  were  not  some  before  Melchizedek
who  were  the  recipients  of  Divine  inspiration.  It
was  replied] : —

Assuredly.  We  commenced  with  the  first  link  in  the
chain  which  culminated  with  Jesus.  In  it  we  left  many  links
unnoticed,  and  we  expressly  said  that  out  of  it  there  were
many  wbo  were  recipients  of  Divine  inspiration.  Such  was
Enoch,  a  highly-gifted  spirit.  Noah,  in  like  manner,  but
imperfectly.  Deborah  was  highly  favoured,  and  all  they
whom  history  calls  Judges  of  Israel,  were  chosen  for  the  special
reason  that  they  were  amenable  to  spirit-influence.  It  were
long  to  particularise  all,  and  we  shall  speak  hereafter  of  other
manifestations  of  spiritual  power  in  the  Jewish  records.  For
you  will  see  that  we  confine  ourselves  now,  first,  to  the  Jewish
records  ;  and,  next,  to  one  particular  chain  in  these  records.

You,  said  that  the  ancient  records  were  not  to  be  depended
on  for  literal  accuracy.  As  to  the  Pentateuch,  is  it  the
work  of  one  author  ?

The  Books  to  which  you  refer  are  the  compilation  of  the
days  of  Ezra.  They  were  compiled  from  more  ancient  records,
which  were  in  danger  of  being  lost,  and  some  parts  of  which
had  to  be  supplied  from  tradition  or  memory.  The  original
records  of  the  days  previous  to  Moses  did  not  exist ;  and  the
record  which  you  have  in  Genesis  is  partly  imaginary,  partly

LEGENDARY   BELIEFS.  18{>

legendary,  and  partly  the  transcript  of  records.  The  account
of  the  Creation  and  the  story  of  the  Deluge  are  legendary.
The  account  of  the  Egyptian  Ruler,  Joseph,  is  transcribed  from
records.  But  in  no  case  are  the  books  as  they  now  stand  the-
work  of  their  reputed  author.  They  are  the  compilation  of
Ezra  and  his  scribes,  and  do  but  embody  the  conceptions  and
legends  of  the  period.  The  accounts  which  concern  the  Mosaic
law  are  more  exact,  because  precise  records  of  the  code  were
preserved  as  sacred  books,  and  from  thence  the  particulars^
were  drawn  up.  We  mention  this  to  avoid  at  once  the  neces-
sity of  replying  to  any  texts  from  these  books  which  may  be
quoted  as  an  argument.  The  records  themselves  are  not  of
literal  accuracy — in  the  earlier  portions  not  to  be  relied  on  at
all,  and  in  the  later,  only  where  they  refer  to  that  part  of  the-
Mosaic  record  which  was  preserved.

Imaginary,  you  say.

It  was  necessary  to  supply  lost  books,  and  what  was  drawn*
up  was  from  memory  or  legend.

Abraham.     You  speak  slightingly  of  him.

No ;  but  in  comparison  with  the  great  spirit,  who  was  to
him  God's  messenger,  he  was  on  a  lower  plane.  We  do  not
show  man's  opinion  in  all  such  matters.  His  name  has  been,
widely  known ;  but  he  has  played  no  great  part  with  us.

The  translations  of  Enoch  and  Elijah.     What  were  they?

Legendary  beliefs.  A  halo  of  glory  was  shed  around  even
the  death  of  those  whom  men  reverenced.  In  earliest  days
the  man  who  attracted  to  himself  the  reverence  of  his  fellows,,
and  round  whose  name  a  certain  reverential  awe  had  gathered,
was  fabled  to  have  been  taken  to  join  his  God  in  the  heaven
for  which  his  life  had  fitted  him.  Moses,  the  mysterious  agent
of  Divine  power,  the  commanding  head  of  his  people,  was  so-
fabled  to  be  mysteriously  removed  from  earth.  He  had  talked
familiarly  with  the  Deity  whom  he  had  revealed,  and  now  he
was  to  go  to  join  Him.  Elijah,  in  like  manner,  the  strange,
weird,  mysterious  power,  who  came  and  went  as  with

190  SPIRIT -TEACHINGS.

freedom  of  air,  who  seemed  to  be  guided  by  no  human  laws,
governed  by  no  such  restrictions  as  fence  in  man's  movements
— he,  too,  it  was  imagined,  was  translated  from  earth  to
heaven  in  such  sort  as  he  had  lived.  In  all  cases  it  was  the
imaginings  concerning  an  anthropomorphic  God  and  a  material
heaven  that  lay  at  the  root  of  the  fancy.  We  have  before
told  you  that  man  can  only  receive  such  ideas  about  God  and
heaven  as  he  is  fitted  to  grasp  by  his  spiritual  development.
In  the  early  days  of  your  world's  history  man  pictured  a  God
who  was  but  an  omnipotent  man — a  man  in  every  respect,
with  certain  qualities  superadded,  those  qualities  being  such  as
man  would  fancy  as  natural  additions  to  the  being  with  which
he  was  already  acquainted.  In  other  words,  man  took  the
highest  ideal  of  humanity,  and  added  to  it  certain  qualities  ;
the  result  he  called  Deity.  In  this  he  was  doing  only  what
man  has  always  done.  The  human  conception  of  Deity  must
ever  be  clouded  with  mortal  mist,  even  as  the  revelation  of
God  can  only  come  through  a  mortal  medium,  and  be  propor-
tioned to  human  capacity.  This  is  a  natural  and  invariable
consequence  of  the  conditions  under  which  you  exist.  So,  the
knowledge  of  God  being  progressive,  and  man  having  grown
in  wisdom,  he  discovers  from  time  to  time  that  his  conception
of  God  must  be  revised.  The  need  is  felt,  and  the  additional
light  is  given.  (This  is  the  best  answer  to  those  among  you
who  fancy  that  man  can  learn  nothing  from  us  of  God  and  the
spirit's  life  and  progress.)

So  it  is  with  regard  to  heaven.  You  have  unlearned  much
that  previous  ages  have  fancied  about  heaven.  And  none  save
the  most  ignorant  would  now  imagine  that  a  material  body
could  find  a  home  in  heaven,  as  once  men  thought  it  could.
The  time  of  material  heavens,  into  which  mysterious  beings
who  had  been  deified  on  earth  were  translated  bodily  into  the
society  of  an  anthropomorphic  God,  is  past.  You  do  not
imagine  God  as  an  omnipotent,  omnipresent  man,  living  in  a
place  where  His  throne  is  surrounded  by  a  throng  who  do
nought  else  but  worship  and  adore,  as  men  would  worship
were  they  to  see  God  amongst  them  on  earth.  Such  a  heaven
is  but  a  baseless  dream.  Into  spirit-life  spirit  alone  can  enter.

OLD  IDEAS  ABOUT  HEAVEN.  191

You  know  that  you  have  outgrown  the  fable  of  the  bodily
translation  of  a  material  frame  somewhere  into  the  skies,  there
to  live  as  it  had  lived  on  earth,  in  the  society  of  a  God  who
was  human  in  all  respects  save  that  He  was  superhuman,  in  a
heaven  which  was  borrowed  from  the  images  of  a  vision
which  typified  under  a  symbol  spiritual  truth  to  John  the
Seer.  You  know  that  no  such  God  exists.  A  translation  will
await  each  good  and  true  man,  but  not  of  his  human  flesh  and
bones.  His  glorified  spirit  shall  rise  from  the  dead  and  worn-
out  shroud  of  flesh  that  has  served  its  purpose,  to  a  brighter
life  than  man  has  pictured,  in  a  brighter  heaven  than  human
seer  has  ever  imaged.

No  doubt  there  are  a  number  of  legends  which  come  in
the  end  to  be  accepted  as  truth.  The  difficulty  is  to
know  truth  from  legend,  and  the  danger,  to  uproot  the
tares  with  the  wheat.  And  even  a  inytJi  may  have  a
very  discernible  meaning,  and  embody  truth.

It  is  so.  The  legends  of  which  your  sacred  records  are  full
are  in  very  many  cases  superstitious  beliefs  that  have  centred
round  great  names.  There  is  a  nucleus  of  truth  enveloped  in
a  surrounding  of  myth.  We  have  frequently  told  you  that
man  has  erred  greatly  in  his  conceptions  of  us  and  of  our
influence  and  work.  Some  causes  which  have  produced  this
result  are  beyond  his  control,  others  he  can  govern.  He  can-
not in  the  childhood  of  his  intellect  grasp  knowledge  which
his  mind  has  not  the  power  to  comprehend.

That  is  unavoidable.  He  cannot  picture  correctly  a  condi-
tion of  life  which  is  utterly  different  from  the  state  in  which
he  has  lived,  and  with  which  alone  ho  is  acquainted.  He
must  be  taught  by  illustration  and  analogy.  That  too  is  un-
avoidable. But  he  heaps  together  words  and  ideas  which  were
intended  to  be  figurative,  and  constructs  from  them  a  notion
which  is  incoherent  and  absurd,  Each  step  of  knowledge  will
lead  you  to  see  this  more  clearly.

Moreover,  man  has  fancied  that  each  revelation  of  God  en-
shrines permanent  truth  of  universal  application,  of  literal
and  exact  accuracy.  He  did  not  see  that  man  is  taught  by  us

192  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

as  man  teaches  his  own  children;  and  accurate  definitions  of
abstract  truth  do  not  suit  the  comprehension  of  a  child.  With
all  the  literalness  of  a  child,  he  accepts  the  very  words  of
revelation  as  mathematically  and  logically  accurate,  and  builds
upon  them  a  number  of  theories,  absurd  in  their  nature,  and
conflicting  among  themselves.  The  child  accepts  the  parent's
word  unhesitatingly,  and  quotes  it  as  law.  It  is  only  later
that  he  learns  that  he  was  being  taught  in  parables.  Man  has
dealt  with  Revelation  in  the  same  way.  He  has  assumed
literal  exactness  where  there  is  only  Oriental  imagery,  and
mathematical  accuracy  where  he  has  only  a  very  fallible  and
frequently  legendary  record.  So  he  has  perpetuated  ignorant
ideas  about  a  jealous  God,  and  a  fiery  hell,  and  a  heaven  in  the
skies  where  the  elect  are  gathered,  and  a  physical  resurrection,
and  a  universal  assize,  and  such  notions,  which  belong  to  the
age  of  childhood  and  are  outgrown  by  the  developed  man.
The  man  should  put  aside  the  notions  of  the  child,  and  soar
to  higher  knowledge.

But  in  place  of  that  legendary  belief,  primitive  superstitions,
ignorant  fancies,  are  perpetuated.  The  hyperbolical  visions
of  an  imaginative  people  are  taken  for  hard  fact ;  and  a  medley
of  fancy,  folly,  and  truth  is  jumbled  together,  which  no  reflect-
ing mind  on  an  advanced  plane  of  knowledge  can  continue  to
accept  as  matter  of  belief.  Faith  is  the  cord  that  has  bound
together  this  incoherent  mass.  We  cut  that  cord,  and  bid  you
use  your  reason  to  try  that  which  has  been  received  and  held
by  faith  alone.  You  will  find  much  in  the  mass  that  is  of
human  invention,  dating  from  the  infancy  of  man's  mind.
You  will  reject  much  that  is  both  cumbersome  and  profitless.
But  you  will  find  a  residue  that  commends  itself  to  reason,  is
attested  by  your  own  experience,  and  is  derived  from  God.
You  will  gather  hints  of  what  the  good  God  destines  for  his
creatures.  You  cannot  get  more  in  your  present  state.  Suffi-
cient that  you  enter  on  a  new  phase  of  being  free  from  the
blunders  and  misconceptions  too  rife  in  the  present.  You  will
see  by  degrees  that  the  past  is  valuable  principally  for  the
light  which  it  sheds  on  the  present,  and  the  glimpses  which  it
gives  you  of  the  future.

DESTRUCTION    PRIOR  TO   CONSTRUCTION.  193

This,  as  you  should  know  by  this,  is  the  purpose  of  our
present  work — to  lead  to  purer  and  less  dishonouring  views
of  God,  of  life,  and  of  progress,  than  have  hitherto  obtained
among  you.  To  this  end  we  must  first  point  out  the  errors
in  your  creed,  the  human  figments  that  have  passed  current
for  Divine  truth,  and  the  legendary  fancies  that  have  become
crystallized  into  history,  accepted  by  faith,  but  rejected  by
right  reason.  We  do  but  require  patient  and  honest  thought
on  your  part.  Nor  think  that  our  work  is  all  destruction.
We  shall  be  able  to  construct  when  the  rubbish  is  removed.
Till  then,  if  we  seem  to  be  scattering  destruction  broadcast,
bethink  you  that  we  are  but  gathering  the  rubbish  in  heaps,
and  removing  it,  preparatory  to  the  erection  of  a  nobler
edifice,  a  holier  temple  to  a  Diviner  God

+  IMPERATOR.

SECTION    XXIV.

£1  asked  a  question  as  to  that  interval  of  time  between
the  records  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  of
which  we  have  no  account  in  the  Bible.]

Of  that  age  you  have  no  record,  because  the  influence  of
the  Spirit  was  withdrawn  save  in  cases  of  rare  influence  rarely
exerted.  We  do  not  dwell  on  that,  because  we  wish  to  point
out  the  grand  chain  of  spiritual  influence  from  Melchizedek
to  Jesus.  Sufficient  now  that  you  know  that  it  was  a  period
of  darkness  and  desolation  and  spiritual  dearth,  after  which
we  \vere  again  enabled  to  awaken  in  the  minds  of  men  an
expectation  of  dawning  light.  The  first  ray  of  light  shot  across
tht  world — that  portion  of  it  with  which  alone  we  are  now
concerned — when  men  were  led  to  feel  their  blindness,  and  to
look  onward  to  a  time  when  the  pall  should  be  lifted,  and  the
light  should  shine  again.

It  is  ever  so  with  the  races  of  men.  Though  the  corporeal
may  so  far  assert  itself  from  time  to  time  that  the
spiritual  be  to  all  appearance  completely  eclipsed,  it  is  not
actually  so.  The  period  of  darkness  gives  place  to  dawning
light,  and  the  spiritual  germ  asserts  its  existence.  The  spirit-
power  is  renewed,  and  man  awakes  to  the  knowledge  of  divine
truths  higher  than  he  had  before  conceived.  It  is  as  with
the  man  who  has  laid  him  down  to  rest,  tired  with  the  labours
of  the  day.  Darkness  has  gathered  around  him ;  his  spirit
is  chafed  and  wearied  with  toil ;  his  body  tired  and  worn,
(rloom  outer  and  inner  settles  on  his  spirit,  and  he  falls  into
sleep.  Tired  nature  is  restored,  the  wearied  mind  is  recu-
perated, and  he  wakes  again  to  find  the  bright  sun  shining
with  its  blessed  beams  upon  him.  Elasticity  returns  to  mind
and  body,  and  his  spirit  rejoices  in  the  life  and  beauty  that
surround  him.  The  joy  of  the  morning  is  come.

Even  so  it  is  with  the  spiritual  experiences  of  the  genera-
tions of  mankind.  There  come  epochs  when  the  old  spirit-

DARKNESS  BEFORE   LIGHT.  195

teachings  which  were  so  satisfying  pall  on  the  understanding.
The  mind  of  man  wearies  itself  with  questionings.  The
material  side  of  humanity  predominates.  Doubts  and  diffi-
culties creep  in,  take  root,  bear  fruit.  One  truth  after
another  is  questioned,  one  fact  after  another  denied,  until  man
feels  that  the  blessed  sunlight  of  Divine  truth  is  being  veiled
from  his  eyes.  The  sun  sinks  below  the  spiritual  horizon,
anr'  the  night  of  inaction,  and  weariness,  and  thick  darkness
begins.  The  Spirit  of  God  strives  not ;  the  night  of  ignorance
tmd  gloomy  despair  reigns,  and  the  spirit-messengers  bide
their  time,  waiting  for  the  moment  when  the  sleeping  souls
shall  stir  again  and  turn  towards  the  light.  Sure  as  that
man's  spirit  is  not  dead  but  sleepeth,  that  moment  comes,  and
in  the  dawning  of  the  morn  the  messengers  of  God  sing  their
tin  them  of  praise  to  Him  who  brings  light  and  joy  out  of  dark-
ness and  despair.

Such  period  intervened  between  the  spiritual  epoch  which
closed  with  the  Old  Testament  record  and  that  when  the  voice
of  the  forerunner  sounded.  Such  has  recurred  in  days  imme-
diately preceding  your  own.  We  are  directing  you  to  the
dawn,  and  doubt  not  that  it  shall  be  now  as  ever,  that  the  morn-
ing shall  be  one  •  of  increased  knowledge,  of  extended  experience,
of  more  assured  belief.  The  morning  light  shall  be  stronger
raid  clearer  than  the  twilight  that  has  preceded  it  Only
wait  and  watch.  Be  ready  to  catch  the  inspiration  lest  it  fail
nnd  pass  away,  and  you  turn  again  to  slumber,  and  the  oppor-
tunity be  lost.

[I  inquired  whether  such  a  period  of  darkness  invari-
ably followed  one  epoch  of  revelation  and  pre-
ceded another.]

It  is  necessary  to  be  more  precise.  It  is  not  always  a  period
of  darkness,  but  at  times  a  period  of  rest  and  repose  after
excitement  and  deep  stirring.  To  borrow  again  an  illustration
from  your  eartk.  The  body  needs  repose  for  a  period  of  as-
similation. So  much  of  truth  has  been  given  as  the  world
can  assimilate,  and  the  process  goes  on  till  more  is  needed.
The  craving  precedes  the  revelation.

Then  revelation  is  more  from  within — subjective  ?

196  SPIRIT   TEACHINGS.

The  internal  craving  is  correspondent  to  the  external  revela-
tion :  we  have  said  before  that  man  cannot  receive  more  than
he  is  prepared  for.  He  is  gradually  led  by  spirit-guidance
to  a  higher  plane  of  knowledge,  and  then,  when  the  need  is
felt,  advanced  and  progressive  information  is  given  to  him.
Those  of  you  who  have  questioned  whether  man  does  not  evolve
for  himself  a  theoretic  or  speculative  system  which  comes
entirely  from  within,  are  not  informed  as  to  the  operation*
of  the  Divine  messengers.  At  the  very  outset  of  our  informa-
tion to  you  we  explained  that  man  was  only  the  vehicle  of  spirit-
guidance.  AVhat  he  wrongly  imagines  to  be  the  evolution
of  his  own  mind  is  in  reality  the  outcome  of  spirit-teaching
which  acts  through  him.  Some  of  your  greater  minds  have
wandered  near  the  truth  when  they  have  so  speculated.  Did
they  but  know  enough  of  spirit-teaching  to  be  aware  of  the
influence  that  acts  upon  them,  they  would  be  far  nearer  the
truth  than  those  who  have  fancied  that  their  Bible  contains
a  complete  and  infallible  Revelation,  to  which  nothing  will
evor  be  added,  and  from  which  no  scrap  may  ever  be  removed
as  useless.  It  is  not  necessary  for  practical  purposes  in  your
life  on  earth  to  speculate  on  the  exact  correlation  between
man's  mental  action  and  God's  revelation.  You  may  easily
bewilder  yourself  by  vain  attempts  to  separate  the  insepar-
able and  to  define  the  indefinable.  Sufficient  that  we  tell  you
that  spirit-preparation  precedes  your  knowledge,  and  enables
the  progressive  mind  to  evolve  for  itself  higher  views  of  truth,
those  very  views  being  not  the  less  the  very  voice  of  the
messenger  of  truth.  And  so  revelation  is  correlative  with
man's  needs.

It  is  to  us  curious  how  perpetually  man  seeks  to  define  his
own  part  in  our  work.  What  if  we  use  the  readiest  means
to  our  hand,  and  instead  of  keeping  to  the  sterile  work  of  act-
ing without  human  agency,  influence  the  mind  and  mould  the
thoughts  of  those  whom  we  influence?  Is  that  a  less  noble
and  profitable  work  than  producing  some  curious  phenomenal
acrion  apart  from  human  means — as  the  juggler  who
astonishes  and  amuses  by  apparently  inexplicable  tricks?
W  e  have  done  enough  to  show  an  independent  action.  Cease
to  tie  down  our  work  by  confining  it  to  so  narrow  a  groove,

REVELATION.  197

and  learn  to  receive  the  impressions  which  we  can  convey  to
the  mind,  and  which  will  be  all  the  more  vivid  because  we
find  material  stored  up  there.  You  need  not  fear  that  we  shall
find  there  anything  which  will  supersede  the  necessity  for
our  teaching.

Scarcely.  But  I  want  to  keep  my  own  individuality  out
of  the  question.  And,  on  wider  grounds,  many  great
thinkers  have  doubled  the  possibility  of  Divine  revela-
tion at  all.  They  argue  that  man  cannot  receive  what  he
cannot  understand,  and  that  no  external  revelation
can  make  a  home  in  his  mind  which  he  could  not  have
evolved  for  himself.

Thev  are  answered  in  what  has  been  already  written.  You
will  see  as  time  goes  on  how  wrong  is  such  conclusion.  We
do  but  protest  against  the  mechanical  nature  of  the  work  to
which  you  would  condemn  us.  Even  when  you  imagine  your
own  inind  to  be  most  assuredly  acting  you  err,  for  there  is  no
such  thing  with  you  as  independent  action.  You  have  always
been  guided  and  influenced  by  us.

[Some  days  after  the  above  communication,  I  asked  as
to  some  conclusions  to  which  I  had  come  in  read-
ing over  the  Gospels  with  the  new  lig-ht  which  I
had  received.  I  seemed  to  see  them  in  a  new  light
altogether.  I  wondered  whether  my  conclusions
were  true,  and  whether  they  were  new.]

The  result  is  in  the  main  correct.  The  conclusions  are  not
new.  They  have  been  reached  long  ago  by  those  who  have
been  enabled  to  cast  aside  trammels,  and  pursue  truth  without
clogs  and  fetters.  It  has  been  given  to  many.

Then  why  cannot  I  read  their  works?    It   would  save

trouble.

Better  you  should  arrive  by  your  own  paths  at  the  results,
which  you  may  then  compare  with  the  conclusions  of  others.

You  always  work  so.  It  seems  roundabout.  If  this  be
so,  why  was  I  allowed  to  live  so  long  in  error  ?

We  have  told  you  already  that  you  were  not  fitted  to  receive
truth.  Your  past  life,  which  has  not  been  so  long  as  you

198  SPIRIT  TEACHINGS.

imagine,  was  a  careful  preparation  for  progress.  It  was  in
its  day  useful  and  progressive,  but  only  as  leading  you  on  to
higher  planes  of  knowledge.  The  time  will  come  when  yon
will  look  back  on  this  too,  which  now  is  new  and  strange,
and  wonder  how  it  could  have  seemed  to  you  so  startling.

Life,  the  totality  of  your  being,  is  progressive  throughout ;
and  its  early  stages  are  but  preparatory  to  its  later  develop-
ment.

Theology  was  a  necessary  phase  in  your  training,  and  we
were  both  unwilling  and  unable  to  prevent  you  from  taking
erroneous  views.  Be  content  to  pursue  your  present  path.
.It  has  been  one  of  our  chiefest  difficulties  to  uproot  false
dogmas  from  your  mind.  It  has  been  a  steady  work,  and  now
we  hope  that  you  may  find  out  much  respecting  the  question
of  revelation  which  will  enable  us  to  clear  away  false  opinions
and  infuse  true  knowledge.  We  can  do  little  so  long  as  tradi-
tional reverence  for  any  mere  words,  however  venerable  in
their  associations,  is  implanted  in  your  mind.  We  must  wait
till  you  can  appreciate  at  its  real  value  each  utterance  made
through  man,  whether  that  utterance  be  contained  in  your
Bible  or  not.  So  long  as  you  reply  to  our  arguments  with  a
text  we  cannot  teach  you.  Any  one  who  can  so  reply  is
beyond  reach  of  reasonable  teaching.

There  are  many  points  to  which  you  may  well  direct  your
mind  in  the  life  and  teachings  of  the  Christ  before  we  throw
upon  it  the  light  which  we  are  able  to  give.  Your  study  of
the  records  of  His  life  may  lead  you  to  discuss  the  question
of  their  reliability,  the  source  from  which  they  were  derived,
the  authority  which  they  claim.  You  may  deal  with  such
questions  as  these  :  the  account  of  the  incarnation  ;  the  atone-
ment, as  grounded  on  the  words — first  of  Jesus,  and  then  of
those  who  spoke  in  His  name ;  the  miracles ;  the  crucifixion
und  resurrection.  You  may  ponder  these  points :  the  teach-
ing of  the  Christ  about  man's  duty  to  God  and  his  fellow  as
compared  with  ours;  Jesus'  views  on  prayer,  and  those  of
His  followers;  the  duty  of  resignation  and  self-abnegation
as  put  forth  by  Him  and  them ;  charity ;  pardon  on  repent-
ance and  conversion ;  heaven  and  hell ;  reward  and  punish-
ment.

On  such  questions  as  these  you  are  now  prepared  to  enter

THE    CRITICAL   SPIRIT   NEEDED.  199

honestly.  Prior  to  this  you  -would  have  sought  only  to  find
a  preconceived  conclusion.  Weigh  first  the  validity  of  the
records.  Settle  the  exact  weight  to  be  given  to  their  state-
ments ;  and  then  select  the  teaching  of  Jesus  in  such  way  as
you  would  select  the  teaching  and  system  of  a  Socrates,  a
Plato,  or  an  Aristotle.  Translate  Eastern  hyperbole  into
sober  fact.  Estimate  the  utterances  of  enthusiasm  by  calm
reason.  Cast  aside  that  which  is  merely  legendary,  mythical,
or  traditional,  and  dare  to  walk  alone,  untrammelled  by  any
bonds,  and  unfettered  by  dread  of  any  conclusion  at  which
you  may  arrive.  Dare  to  trust  God,  and  seek  for  truth.
Dare  to  think  soberly,  calmly,  about  revelation.

To  such  a  seeker  shall  come  a  knowledge  of  which  he  little
dreams ;  a  comfort  which  no  creed  of  tradition  can  afford.  He
will  know  of  God  and  of  His  truth  as  none  can  know  who  has
not  trodden  the  path  of  personal  investigation.  He  will  know
of  things  Divine  as  the  traveller  knows  of  a  far-off  country
•when  he  has  himself  visited  it  and  lived  amongst  its  people.
Round  him  will  centre  the  ministry  of  enlightenment,  the
guidance  of  the  spirits  whose  mission  it  is  to  proclaim  truth
and  progress  to  mankind.  Old  prejudices  will  fall  away ;
old  fallacies  will  shrink  from  the  new  light  into  congenial
darkness ;  and  the  soul  will  stand  unbound  in  the  presence
of  Truth.  Be  of  good  cheer.  Jesus  it  was  who  said,  "  The
Truth  shall  make  you  free,  and  you  shall  be  free  indeed."

[I  said  it  was  worth  any  cost,  if  attainable.  I  was  not
sanguine,  and  rather  grumbled  at  being  left  to
•grope,]

We  do  not  leave  you.  We  help,  but  we  may  not  save  you
from  personal  labour.  You  must  do  your  part.  When  you
h;-ve  laboured,  we ,  will  direct  and  guide  you  to  knowledge.
Believe  us,  it  is  best  that  you  do  this.  In  no  other  way
can  you  learn  the  truth.  If  we  told  you  you  would  not
believe  us,  nor  would  you  understand.  There  is  much  out-
side of  this  question  of  the.  Christian  revelation  that  you  must
look  to  ;  other  Divine  words ;  other  spiritual  influences ;  but
not  yet.

Cease  :   and  may  the  Blessed  One  illuminate  you  !

+  IMPERATOR.

(     200     )

SECTION    XXV.

[Following  up  the  investigation  into  the  nature  of  the
Mosaic  record  with  the  new  light  which  I  had  re-
ceived, I  detected  plain  traces  of  a  gradual  evolu-
tion of  the  idea  of  God,  which  seemed  to  point  to
the  conclusion  that  the  Pentateuch  was  not  the
work  of  one  author,  but  a  compilation  of  many
legends  and  traditions.  I  inquired  as  to  .this.]

In  the  investigation  to  which  you  have  been  directed  you
have  arrived  at  correct  'conclusions.  We  have  directed  you
to  it  in  order  that  you  may  see  how  little  reliance  is  to  be
placed  upon  isolated  texts  taken  from  books  which  do  but
embody  the  floating  legends  and  traditions  of  an  ancient
people,  decipherable  only  by  those  who  had  the  key.  We
wir,h  to  insist  on  this  point.  The  amount  of  credence  to  be
placed  in  any  statement  drawn  from  the  ancient  .books  of
your  religion  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  book  from  which  it
is  taken,  and  on  the  specific  nature  of  the  utterance  itself,  as
well  as  on  your  understanding  of  its  true  meaning.  It  is  pos-
sible for  you  to  select  from  your  oldest  books  words  which
sublimely  picture  an  elevated  conception  of  Deity.  It  is
possible,  on  the  other  hand,  to  select  from  other  and  later
writings  conceptions  of  God  the  most  dishonouring,  the  most
human,  the  most  repellent.  Such  are  they  which  represent
the  Pure  and  Holy  One  as  wrestling  in  human  form  with
man ;  as  discussing  with  a  mortal  his  plans  for  vengeance
on  an  offending  city;  as  a  monster  of  cruelty  and  carnage,
levelling  in  gore,  and  glutted  with  the  blood  of  his  enemies:
yea,  even  as  a  man  who  sat  at  the  tent  door  of  his  friend  and
consumed  the  flesh  of  a  kid  and  cakes  of  bread.  You  may
select  conceptions  the  most  dissimilar,  and  no  separate  utter-
ance can  be  of  more  than  the  individual  weight  judged  by  the
rules  of  right  reason.  And  even  thus  it  behoves  you  to  see

INSPIRATION.  201

well  that  you  understand  aright  the  hidden  meaning  which
frequently  underlies  such  passages,  lest  you  wander  from  truth
and  err  through  ignorance.

Inspiration,  we  again  say,  is  not  different  in  kind  in  differ-
ent ages.,  but  only  in  degree.  The  words  in  all  cases  are  the
words  of  the  inspiring  spirit  conveyed  through  a  human
medium ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  medium  is  pure  and  ele-
vated are  the  utterances  trustworthy  and  the  conceptions  sub-
lime. The  plane  of  knowledge  of  the  medium  is  the  plane  of
revelation  through  him.  And  we  need  not  say  at  length  that
in  the  world's  earlier  days — such  as  those  spoken  of  in  the
ancient  records  of  the  Jews — that  plane  was  low,  and  these
conceptions,  save  in  rare  instances,  anything  but  sublime.

Man  has  progressed  in  knowledge  since  the  days  when  he
feigned  for  himself  a  vacillating,  puny  God  who  repented
and  was  grieved  at  the  failure  of  his  plans  in  man's  creation,
and  who  was  compelled  to  undo  them  as  a  failure.  If  you
seek  for  conceptions  more  sublime  and  true,  you  will  go  to  a
later  age,  when  man  had  unlearned  somewhat  of  his  folly,
and  had  ceased  to  be  content  with  a  God  framed  after  the  de-
vices of  a  barbarous  imagination  and  an  undeveloped  mind.
The  barbarous  age  could  grasp  nothing  nobler,  and  accord-
ingly nothing  nobler  could  be  revealed.  That  is  in  accord
with  the  universal  practice,  viz,,  that  God's  revelation  is  pro-
portional to  man's  mental  plane.  The  error  has  been  that
3'ou  have  laboured  to  perpetuate  these  foolish  and  crude  views.
They  have  been  held  by  your  theologians  to  be  of  Divine  in-
spiration, binding  for  all  time.  This  fallacy  we  desire  utterly
to  uproot.

Another  error  even  more  destructive  of  truth  is  the  fable
that  Divine  inspiration,  plenarily  communicated,  guided  all
the  writers  of  all  the  books  of  your  Bible  into  absolute  truth ;
.and  that,  as  God  was  in  every  case  the  Author,  so  each  indi-
vidual utterance  of  each  scribe  is  of  paramount  as  well  as
permanent  authority.  This  error  we  have  uprooted  in  your
mind,  for  you  now  know  that  God  cannot  be  the  Author  of
contradictions,  nor  can  He  have  said  at  one  time  what  He  con-
tradicts at  another.  The  light  shone  through,  a  dark
medium,  and  was  distorted  in  the  passage.

202  SPIRIT  TEACHINGS.

In  place  of  these  false  views  we  have  taught  you  that  in-
spiration is  the  control  of  the  inspiring  spirit;  of  various
degrees  of  elevation,  perfection,  or  reliability;  to  be  judged
in  each  case  by  reason,  and  to  be  estimated  in  precisely  such
manner  as  you  would  criticise  and  judge  works  of  professedty
human  source.  You  will  therefore  accept  no  text  as  an  argu-
ment. You  will  deal  with  these  ancient  books  as  you  deal
with  all  that  is  put  before  you.  And  in  criticising  them  you
will  find  it  necessary  to  deny  much  that  has  been  affirmed
and  believed  with  respect  to  them  and  their  contents.

You  have  asked  information  respecting  the  Pentateuch.
It  is,  as  we  have  before  hinted,  the  compilation  by  Ezra  of
legends  and  traditions  which  had  been  orally  handed  down
from  generation  to  generation,  and  which  were  collected  by
him  to  prevent  their  loss.  Some  parts  of  the  Pentateuch,
especially  the  early  portions  of  Genesis,  are  mere  legendary
speculations  collected  and  arranged  by  the  scribe.  Such  are
the  Noachic  and  Abrahamic  legends  which  exist  in  collateral
forms  in  the  sacred  books  of  other  peoples.  Such,  in.  another
way,  are  the  statements  of  the  book  Deuteronomy,  which  are
the  direct  additions  of  Ezra's  day.  For  the  rest,  the  compila-
tion was  made  from  previous  imperfect  collections  made  in  the
days  of  Solomon  and  Josiah,  themselves  in  turn  records  of
previous  legends  and  traditions  which  again  had  a  still  more
remote  origin.  In  no  case  were  they  the  very  words  of  Moses ;
nor  do  they  embody  truth,  save  where,  in  dealing  with  the  law,
they  draw  their  information  from  authentic  sources.

We  shall  dwell  hereafter  on  the  notion  of  God  which  per-
vades the  early  books  of  your  Bible.  Sufficient  that  we  now
point  out  that  the  mythical  and  legendary  sources  from  which
most  of  them  were  compiled  forbid  you  to  attribute  any  weight
to  their  historical  statements  or  moral  precepts,  save  when
they  are  confirmed  by  reasonable  evidence  from  other  sources.

[I  found  this  communication  to  confirm  my  own  re-
searches. I  thought  I  could  trace  the  two  sources —
Elohistic  arid  Jehovistic — from  which  the  compiler
drew  his  information:  as  in  the  account  of  the
creation,  Gen.  i.,  ii.  3,  compared  with  Gen.  ii.

THE  CANON  OF  SCRIPTURE.  203

iii.  24,  and  in  the  seizure  of  Sarah  at  Gerar  by
Abimelech  (Gen.  xx.),  compared  with  xii.  10-19
and  xxvi.  1-11.  I  inquired  if  I  was  right.]

What  you  have  given  is  but  an  instance  out  of  many.
When  you  recognise  the  fact,  you  will  see  evidences  of  it  all
around  you.  The  documents  in  question  were  the  legendary
sources  of  the  compilation  of  Ezra's  scribes,,  Elnathan  and
uoiarib.  They  were  many  in  number,  some  compiled  in  the
days  of  Saul,  some  even  earlier,  in  the  days  of  the  Judges  of
Israel,  and  some  in  the  days  of  Solomon,,  Hezekiah,  and
Josiah — crystallisations  of  the  floating  legends  which  had
been  orally  handed  down.  We  have  already  pointed  out  to
you  the  true  line  of  inspiration  from  Melchizedek.  All  prior
to  that  is  untrustworthy :  and  not  all,  indeed,  that  is  recorded
concerning  the  lives  of  the  real  recipients  of  spirit-guidance
is  accurate.  But  on  the  whole,  the  channel  of  Divine  teaching
was  such  as  we  have  said.

[If  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  Canon  of  the  Old
Testament  was  settled,  I  inquired  how  far  the  case
was  the  same  with  the  Prophecies.]

The  books  you  name  were  all  added  and  arranged  from
existing  sources  by  Ezra's  authority,  isave  and  except  those
which  were  afterwards  added — those  called  by  the  names  of
Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi.  Haggai  was  concerned  in
the  compilation  of  the  book  Ezra,  and  he  and  Malachi  finally
completed  the  Old  Testament  by  the  addition  of  the  later
books.  They,  with  Zechariah,,  were  much  in  communion,
having  been  the  privileged  attendants  of  Daniel  when  he  saw
his  great  vision  and  received  his  commission  from  Gabriel,
the  Archangel  of  God,  the  Chief  of  the  Ministering  Angels,
and  from  Michael  the  Archangel,  the  Chief  of  the  Hosts  of
the  Lord  against  the  adversaries.  Of  a  surety  Daniel  the  seer
was  a  highly-favoured  recipient  of  Divine  inspiration.  The
great  God  be  thanked  for  His  mercy,  and  for  the  manifesta-
tion of  His  power.

204  SPIRIT  TEACHINGS.

la  that  the  vision  recorded  in  Daniel  x.  ?
That  by  the  banks  of  the  Hiddekel.

The  same.  Then  selections  only  were  chosen  from  the
utterances  of  the  prophets  ?

Only  selections,  and  they  chiefly  for  some  hidden  meaning,
"which  does  not  lie  on  the  surface.  As  the  open  vision  was  about
tc  cease,  selections  were  made  from  the  records  of  the  past,
and  the  canon  was  closed  until  the  days  when  the  voice  of
spirit-teaching  should  sound  again  amongst  men.

You  speak  of  Daniel  as  a  great  seer  or  medium.  Do  you
know  if  the  gift  was  common  ?

He  was  a  very  favoured  recipient  of  spirit  power.  Such
beca  ne  more  rare  as  the  spiritual  age  was  about  to  close.  But
men  cultivated  the  power  more  then.  They  valued  more  and
knew  more  of  spirit  power  and  teaching.

Vast  masses  of  trance  addresses,  visions,  and  the  like,  such
as  those  preserved  in  the  Old  Testament,  must  have  been
lost  ?

Assuredly.  There  was  no  need  to  preserve  them.  And
many  that  were  preserved  are  now  excluded  from  your  Bible.

[A  few  days  later  (November  16th,  1873)  I  asked  that
the  promised  communication  about  the  idea  of  God
might  be  given.]

We  have  already  spoken  in  passing  of  the  conception  of
Deity  in  your  Bible.  We  desire  now  to  draw  out  more  clearly
this  fact,  that  the  growth  of  the  idea  of  God  was  a  gradual
cue:  that  the  God  of  Abraham  was  an  inferior  conception
to  the  God  of  Job :  that  the  cardinal  truth  which  we  have  ever
insisted  on  is  manifest  in  your  Bible  even  as  elsewhere,  viz.,
that  God's  Revelation  is  correlative  with  man's  spiritual  de-
velopment, and  that  He  is  revealed  in  proportion  to  man's
capacity.

You  have  but  to  read,  with  this  idea  prominent  to  your  mind,
the  records  of  the  lives  of  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  Joshua,
David,  Ezekiel,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  to  see  that  this  is  so.  In  early

THE   GROWTH   OF    THE   GOD   IDEA.  205

patriarchial  times,  God,  the  Supreme,  was  adored  under  many
anthropomorphic  representations.  The  Grod  of  Abraham,  Isaac,
and  Jacob  was  superior,  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  wor-
shipped him  tinder  that  title,  but  only  superior,  to  the  gods  of
their  neighbours.  The  father  of  Abraham,  as  you  know,  wor-
shipped strange  gods,  i.e.,  gods  other  than,  his  son's  God.
Xay,  this  was  invariably  the  case,  each  family  having  its  own
representative  deity  by  which  its  members  vowed  and  swore.
The  name  given  to  the  Supreme,  Jehovah  Elohim,  shows  you
so  much  as  that.

Laban,  too,  remember,  pursued  and  threatened  Jacob  for
having  stolen  his  gods.  And  the  same  patriarch  collected  on
one  occasion  the  images  of  his  household  gods,  and  hid  them
under  an  oak  tree.  Here  you  see  that  Jehovah  was,  as  he  was
constantly  called,  the  God  of  Abraham,,  Isaac,  and  Jacob :  not
the  One  Only  God,  but  a  family  deity.

It  was  only  when  the  children  of  Israel  grew  into  a  nation
that  the  idea  gradually  enlarged  itself  to  that  of  the  national
God  of  Moses  and  Joshua.  Even  the  great  lawgiver,  in  his
elevated  conception  of  the  Supreme,  was  not  entirely  emanci-
pated from  the  notion  of  a  superior  God ;  for  he  says  expressly
that  there  is  none  like  to  Jehovah  among  the  gods.  And  many
like  sentiments  are  to  be  found  in  the  recorded  sayings.  In-
deed, in  the  commandments  given  as  the  veiy  words  of  the
Supreme  Himself,  it  is  said  that  the  Israelites  should  have  no>
other  God  before  Him.  Read  Joshua's  dying  address,  and  you
will  see  in  it,  too,  the  notion  of  a  Superior  Deity.

It  was  not  until  the  development  of  the  nation  had  so  far-
progressed  as  to  make  these  anthropomorphic  notions  repul-
sive, that  you  find  truer  ideas  of  God  becoming  rife.  In  the
prophetical  and  poetical  books  of  your  Bible  you  get  far  nobler
conceptions  of  the  Deity  than  in  the  earlier  portions.

This  is  assured.  God  is  revealed  in  your  Bible  in  many
forms.  Some  are  noble  and  elevated,  as  the  books  of  Job  and
Daniel.  Some  are  grovelling  and  mean,  as  the  books  which
are  called  historical.  In  all  you  see  an  exemplification  of  the
truth  that  God  is  revealed  in  proportion  to  man's  capacity.

And  it  was  not  always  a  progressive  revelation.  As  master
minds  stood  forth  so  was  the  God-idea  chastened  and  refined.

206  SPIRIT   TEACHINGS.

It  has  ever  been  so.  It  was  markedly  so  when  Jesus  revealed
to  man  His  conception  of  the  Supreme.  It  is  so  still,  as,  one
by  one,  exalted  spirits  have  found  an  aspiring  soul  to  whom
they  could  convey  noble  ideas  of  the  Great  Father,and  through
thenV  shed  forth  a  brighter  beam  of  truth.  Such  have  stood
forth  in  well-nigh  all  your  generations,  and  through  them
from  time  to  time  revealings  of  Deity  have  been  vouchsafed
brighter  than  ever  were  shed  forth  before.  And  an  unpre-
pared world  has  blinked  and  shielded  its  eyes  from  the  un-
wonted glare,  and  has  chosen  the  gloom,  for  that  it  was  not
prepared  for  the  full  radiance  of  the  Divine  truth.

Handers-on  of  the  courier  fire.  Yes  :  it  is  easy  to  see  in
history  men  who  were,  as  we  say,  in  advance  of  their
age.  Isupp  se  the  history  of  the  world  is  a  met*e  record
of  development,  and  that  man  cannot  grasp  more  of
truth  than  his  faculties  fit  him  to  understand.  Other-
wise, where  would  be  the  eternal  growth  ?  At  any  rate,
little  enough  is  known  yet.

It  is  well  that  you  recognise  your  own  ignorance.  It  is  the
first  step  to  progress.  You  are  but  now  standing  in  the  out-
most court,  far  away  from  the  temple  of  truth.  You  must
walk  round  and  round,  until  you  know  the  outer  precincts,
before  you  can  penetrate  the  inner  courts ;  and  long  and  labo-
rious efforts  must  precede  and  fit  you  for  eventual  entrance
within  the  temple.  Be  content.  Wait  and  pray,  and  keep
yourself  in  silence  and  patient  watching.

+  IMPERATOR.

(     207     )

SECTION    XXVI.

[Jan.  18,  1874.  There  had  been  a  considerable  lack  of
communication  for  some  time  past,  and  the  work
seemed  to  be  passing  into  another  phase,  or  being
quenched  by  my  inability  to  obtain  conviction  on
matters  respecting  which  I  was  in  doubt.  This
retarded  everything,  and  caused  our  sittings  as
well  as  these  communications  to  be  interrupted.

At  this  date  various  changes  were  made,  fresh  direc-
tions given,  and  a  kind  of  retrospect  written,  from
which  I  extract  the  least  personal  part.]

It  may  be  well  that  we  review  the  course  of  teaching  by
which  we  have  endeavoured  to  influence  your  mind  aright.
We  may  at  least  urge  you  to  go  over  in  detail  what  has  been
said,  and  to  survey  the  broad  expanse  of  truth — such  as-  is
suited  to  your  present  needs — which  we  have  mapped  out  for
vou.  You  will  see  that  we  have  preached  to  you  a  nobler
gospel  revealing  a  diviner  God  than  you  had  previously  con-
ceived. To  your  objections,  again  and  again  reiterated,  de-
manding proofs  and  tests  which  it  would  have  been  vain  to
grant,  we  have  replied  step  by  step.  And  if  we  have  not
succeeded  in  effacing  from  your  mind  doubts  that  have
lingered  there,  it  is  because  the  doubting  habit  of  mind  has
become  so  natural  that  we  have  found  only  rare  intervals  dur-
ing which  we  could  penetrate  through  the  fog.  You  have
wrapped  yourself  in  an  impenetrable  veil,  and  it  is  only  now
and  then  that  it  has  been  lifted.

We  have  dealt  more  successfully  with  other  friends  who
have  witnessed  our  dealings  with  you;  and  we  thankfully
look  on  that  as  proof  of  final  success.  We  shall  in  the  end
prevail  even  over  that  sceptical  frame  of  mind  which  is  the
hardest  to  approach.  We  are  most  hampered  by  the  impossi-
bility of  bringing  home  evidence  to  the  mind  which,  however
honestly,  is  unable  to  accept  the  grounds  on  which  we  work :

208  SPIRIT  TEACHINGS.

more  especially  since  it  is  in  almost  all  cases  impossible  for  us
to  grant  specified  tests  imposed  by  you  with  great  force  of
will  and  in  total  ignorance  of  the  conditions  which  beset  us.
This  is  a  fact  which  you  will  do  well  to  recognise  and  bear  in
mind.  The  spirit  of  mistrust  and  eager  desire  to  entrap  and
ensnare  us  by  a  predetermined  test  is  one  which  defeats  its  own
end.  If  we  be  such  as  ,you  suspect,  it  would  be  well  that  you
have  nothing  further  to  do  with  such  emissaries  of  evil.  If
that  be  to  you  a  position  you  would  not  assume,  then  we
counsel  you  to  put  aside  mistrust,  and  cultivate  a  feeling  of
frankness  and  receptivity.  A  brief  time  spent  with  such  a
temper  would  enable  us  to  do  far  more  than  many  years  of
such  intercourse  as  your  present  frame  of  mind  necessitates.
It  is  not,  as  you  imagine,  that  we  will  not,  but  that  we  cannot
help  you  now.  We  treasure  up,  indeed,  the  reasonable  requests
of  our  friends,  and  if  we  cannot  comply  with  them  literally,
we  do  so  in  substance  at  another  time.  The  history  of  our
intercourse  with  you  throughout  will  attest  this.  It  is,
indeed,  a  general  law  of  spirit-communion.

Moreover,  when  your  demand  for  a  prescribed  test,  on  which
your  mind  is  strongly  fixed,  takes  the  form  of  a  request  for
some  special  information,  the  answer,  if  given  as  you  wish.
would  in  most  cases  be  imperfect  and  unreliable,  from  the
admixture  of  your  own  mental  action  and  that  of  the  circle,
so  that  in  any  case  your  end  would  be  frustrated.  But  we
have  cheerfully  done  so  much  as  we  could.  The  question  on
which  your  mind  has  been  set,  that  of  the  identity  of  spirits,,
has  received  more  than  one  illustration  of  late,  and  you  have
been  compelled  to  admit  their  strength.

We  have  not  done  more  of  late  than  we  have  always  done,
but  we  instance  what  has  been  done  as  an  argument  for  the
wisdom  of  our  advice  to  you,  that  both  in  circle  and  in  your
private  communion  with  us  you  seek  to  maintain  an  attitude
of  perfect  passivity,  accepting  or  rejecting  what  is  offered
according  as  reason  dictates,  and  deferring  to  a  convenient
time  your  final  judgment  Remember  that  there  are  degrees
of  proof,  and  that  evidence  very  insignificant  in  itself  may  be
vastly  enhanced  by  preceding  or  succeeding  facts  or  argu-
ments.

EVIDENCE   OF  IDENTITY  209

That  which  seems  to  you  vague  now  may  be  rendered  pre-
cise by  some  further  point  long  after ;  and  many  proofs  ex-
tended over  long  time  have  a  daily  added  weight.  More
especially  is  this  the  case  when  the  general  and  special  results
show  unvarying  truthfulness  in  us  who  speak  to  you.  At
least  you  are  not  able  to  allege  that  we  deceive  you.  Our  in-
fluence is  not  for  evil ;  our  words  are  words  of  truth  and
soberness.  We  are  the  preachers  of  a  Divine  gospel,  suited  to
your  needs,  and  elevating  to  your  mind.

It  is  for  you,  then,  to  accept  the  individual  responsibility,
from  which  none  may  relieve  you,  of  deciding  whether,  being
what  we  are,  we  are  deceivers  in  matters  of  vital  and  eternal
import.  Such  a  conclusion,  in  the  face  of  all  evidence  and  fair
inference,  is  one  which  none  could  accept  save  a  perverted  and
unbalanced  mind,  least  of  all  one  who  knows  us  as  you  now
do.  Ponder  our  words,  and  may  the  All  Wise  guide  us  and
you.

+  IMPERATOR.

[From  this  time  forward  repeated  evidence  of  individu-
ality perpetuated  after  bodily  death  was  brought
home  to  me.  I  do  not  interrupt  the  course  of  the
teachings  to  detail  them.  Some  were  written  com-
munications, in  which  peculiarities  of  handwriting,
spelling,  and  diction  were  accurately  reproduced.
Some  were  verbal  communications  made  through
my  own  guide.  Some  were  laboriously  rapped  out
in  the  circle.  Some  were  corroborated  by  my  clair-
voyant vision.  The  ways  used  to  convey  the
information  were  various,  but  all  agreed  in  one
particular.  The  facts  given  were  invariably  liter-
ally and  exactly  true.  In  most  cases  they  related
to  persons  not  known  to  us  except  by  name,  some-
times not  even  by  so  much  as  that.  In  other  cases
they  related  to  friends  and  acquaintances.  This
course  of  evidence  continued  for  a  long  time ;  and
collaterally  I  developed  a  power  of  clairvoyant
vision  which  rapidly  increased,  until  I  was  able  to
see  and  converse  at  length  with  my  invisible
friends.  The  inner  faculties  seemed  to  be  opened,
so  that  the  information  given  received  new  con-
firmation from  my  clairvoyant  sight.  This  power
15

210  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

eventually  developed  to  a  very  high  degree.  I  had
a  number  of  extremely  vivid  visions  in  which  my
spirit  appeared  to  act  independently  of  the  body.
During  some  of  them  I  was  conscious  of  living  and
acting  among  scenes  not  of  this  earth  ;  in  others
dramatic  tableaux  were  enacted  before  me,  the
object  evidently  being  to  represent  some  spiritual
truth  or  teaching  to  me.  In  two  cases  only  was  I
able  to  satisfy  myself  by  collateral  evidence  of  the
reality  of  my  vision.  I  was  in  deep  trance  during
each  occasion,  and  could  not  distinguish  between
the  subjective  impressions  of  a  dream  and  the  real
occurrence  of  what  I  so  vividly  saw  before  me,
save  that  I  could  confirm  in  these  two  cases  what
I  saw  and  heard  in  vision  by  what  I  afterwards
discovered  from  external  sources.  The  scene  in
these  cases  was  real,  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  it
was  so  in  all.  This  is  not,  however,  the  place  to-
discuss  such  a  point.  I  do  but  note  these  visions
as  a  phase  of  the  development  of  my  spiritual  edu-
cation. It  was  always  represented  to  me  that
what  was  shown  to  me  had  a  real  existence,  and
that  my  inner  senses  were  opened  for  the  purpose
of  instructing  me  and  of  confirming  my  faith  in
things  unseen  by  the  natural  eye.
In  the  month  of  January,  1874,  some  communications
were  printed  relative  to  spiritual  influences  which
were  round  a  son  of  Dr.  Speer's,  and  which,  I  was
told,  influenced  his  musical  powers.  These  were
written  out  April  14th  and  September  12th,  1873.
Some  question  which  I  put  on  February  1st,  1874,
caused  more  information  to  be  given  on  the  same
subject.  After  some  personal  information,  it  was
written] : —

The  conditions  were  bad  last  night  for  the  music.  You  are
yet  to  learn  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  be  had.  Not
until  you  hear  the  music  of  the  spheres  will  you  know  the
true  poetry  of  sound.  Music  depends,  far  more  than  your
wise  men  have  dreamed,  on  these  self -same  spiritual  conditions
of  which  we  say  so  much.  The  spiritual  elements  must  be  in
harmonious  arrangement  before  a  good  development  of  that
which  is  attainable  even  on  earth  can  be  reached.  Only  then
does  the  inspiration  really  flow  in.  The  room  in  which  the

MUSIC.  211

boy  was  rendering  the  thoughts  of  the  Master  was  filled  with
an  inharmonious  atmosphere ;  hence  we  say  that  the  result  was
inadequate.  It  is  with  the  musician  as  with  the  orator.  An
harmonious  rapport  must  exist  with  the  audience  before  the
words  can  make  their  mark.  This  the  speaker  feels,  though
frequently  he  knows  not  that  his  words  fall  dead  because  the
spirit  bond  does  not  exist,  and  the  inspiration  cannot  run  on
the  mesmeric  chain  between  the  orator  and  his  audience.  The
best  results  are  had  when  the  musician,  the  orator,  is  surrounded
by  a  band  of  spirits  who  can  so  dispose  his  mind  as  to  refine,
harmonise,  and  spiritualise  his  thoughts,  or  the  thoughts  of
which  he  is  the  interpreter.

Even  as  there  is  vast  difference  between  a  word  coldly  slurred
or  heartlessly  spoken,  and  the  same  when  it  syllables  the  utter-
ance'of  heart  emotion,  so  is  it  with  music.  The  body  of  sound
may  be  there,  but  the  soul  may  be  absent.  And,  though  you
know  not  why,  you  mark  the  difference  and  feel  the  want.
It  is  cold  and  trivial,  and  thin — mere  sound ;  you  shudder,  and
are  not  content.  Again  it  is  full,  rich,  the  soul's  voice  of
melody,  speaking  thoughts  that  are  born  in  fairer  spheres  and
purer  air  than  earth's-spirit  uttering  cry  to  spirit.  The  sounds
are  instinct  with  soul;  they  have  a  language  for  the  most
irresponsive.  They  breathe  their  message  to  the  spirit,  the
while  they  subdue  the  bodily  senses,  and  harmonise  the  dis-
cordant jarrings  of  the  mind.  The  dead  body  of  sound  is
animated  with  the  soul  of  music.  You  hear,  and  are  satisfied.
It  is  the  whole  difference  between  the  body  of  earth  and  the
spirit  that  soars  to  heaven  :  the  gap  that  separates  the  material
and  earthy  from  the  heavenly  and  spiritual.  Hence  it  is  that
conditions  under  which  true  music  is  evolved  rarely  occur,  at
least  on  occasions  of  great  public  gatherings.  It  is  in  more
harmonious  air  that  the  inarticulate  voice  of  spirit  best  unfolds
its  story.

[The  communication  was  signed  with  the  autographs
(exact  fac-siiniles)  of  two  well-known  composers,
as  well  as  by  some  other  names  known  to  me.]

212

SECTION    XXVII.

[I  had  read  something  about  India  as  the  cradle  of
races  and  religions,  and  something  had  been  said
about  the  subject  at  one  of  our  meetings.  I  in-
quired further.]

What  was  said  is  true.  India  is  the  source  from  which  is
derived  much  of  the  religious  idea  which  pervades  your  faith.
From  India  the  chain  has  been  perpetuated  through  many
nations  of  antiquity.  The  myths  which  have  centred  round
the  plain  truths  of  revelation  owe  their  origin  to  India.  The
Messianic  legends  date  from  the  earliest  days.  Men  have
always  pictured  to  themselves  a  Saviour  of  their  race,  ajid  the
best  record  of  your  gradual  growth  is  to  be  found  in  tracing
the  early  religious  history  of  India.  As  the  study  of  Indian
lore  bears  much  on  the  scientific  aspect  of  language  which  you
have  studied  and  taught  to  others,  so  is  the  study  of  the
religious  aspect  of  Indian  history  in  the  far,  dim  past,  essential
for  yourself  now.  Direct  your  mind  to  it.  We  have  those
with  us  who  can  aid  you.

India,  Persia,  Egypt,  Greece,  Rome,  Judea — of  these  and  of
God's  dealings  with  them  in  revealing  the  Divine  Ideal  as  man
has  been  able  to  grasp  it,  it  behoves  you  to  know.  You
must  learn  how  Djeminy  and  Veda  Vyasa  were  the  pre-
decessors of  Socrates  and  Plato.  You  will  be  told  of  this  by
those  who  know,  and  whose  earth-life  was  spent  at  that  epoch.
But,  first,  you  must  labour  to  gather  up  for  yourself  such
knowledge  as  is  stored  up.  That  done  you  will  be  guided
further.

You  must  learn,  too,  from  similar  sources  how  that  man  in
every  age  has  felt  his  need  of  a  Saviour  outside  of  himself,
and  how  the  legends  that  cluster  round  these  Messiahs  repeat
themselves  from  time  to  time.  The  mythic  source  from  which
many  a  legend  sprang  you  will  find  in  the  story  of  Chrishna,
the  miraculous  son  of  the  pure  virgin  Devanagny.  Hence  you
will  get  light  on  subjects  yet  dark  to  you.  This  is  the  special

INDIA:  THE  CRADLE   OF  RELIGIONS.  213

information  of  which  we  spoke  long  ago,  but  which  the  pecu-
liar attitude  of  your  mind,  combined  with  its  black  ignorance
on  these  subjects,  compelled  us  to  withhold.

We  have  still  much  to  clear  away  before  we  can  build  safely.
There  is  much  in  the  mere  outlines  that  will  be  strange  to  you,
and  you  must  be  familiarised  with  them  before  we  can  go  into
detail.  You  must  know  that  Egypt,  Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  the
great  kingdoms  of  the  world,  owed  their  philosophy  and
religion  very  largely  to  India.  Manou,  the  great  Indian  re-
former and  teacher,  reappears  as  the  Manes  of  Egypt,  the
Minos  of  Greece,  the  Moses  of  Hebrew  story.  The  name  is.
impersonal,  and  is  the  appellative  "  man  "  in  its  simplest  form.
The  great  pioneers  of  truth  to  their  respective  peoples  were
called,  by  emphatic  eminence,  "  The  Man."  They  were  to  their
fellows  the  highest  embodiment  of  human  power,  dignity,  and
knowledge.

Manou  of  India  was  a  learned  and  erudite  scholar,  a  pro-
found student  of  philosophy,  more  than  three  thousand  years
before  the  Christ  was  born  among  you.  Nay,  he  in  his  turn
was  but  a  late  reformer  compared  with  those  whose  words  are
written  in  the  ancient  commentaries  which  belong  to  vener-
able Brahminical  lore  thousands  of  years  before  Manou  ex-
pounded philosophically  the  mysteries  of  God,  of  creation,
and  of  man's  destiny.

To  him  Zaratushta,  or  Zoroaster,  owed  whatever  of  truth  he
tauo-ht  of  old  in  Persia.  All  the  sublimest  conceptions  of  God
date  from  him.  The  influence  of  India  on  all  ancient  races,  in
legislation,  in  theology,  in  philosophy,  in  science,  is  as  surely
proven  to  you  as  the  fact  that  the  language  which  you  use  is  the
same  tongue  as  that  spoken  by  Manou  himself.  The  adultera-
tions of  modern  times  have  so  changed  it  that  you  can  hardly
trace  the  resemblance,  yet  your  learned  philologists  will  tell  you
that  it  is  the  same.  The  religions  of  the  world  bear  to  a  super-
ficial eye  no  apparent  identity  with  the  ideas  which  are  en-
shrined in  Brahminical  lore,  yet  they  are  derived  frequently
from  those  primitive  teachings  which  Manou  systematised,
which  Manes  naturalised  in  Egypt,  and  which  Moses  introduced
amon^  the  Hebrews.

214  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Hindi"!  ideas  permeate  all  systems  of  philosophy  and  theo-
logy. The  Devadassi,  the  holy  virgins  who  in  Hindu  temples
devoted  themselves  to  the  pure  worship  of  the  Supreme,  accord-
ing to  their  idea  of  Him,  have  had  their  successors  in  the  con-
secrated virgins  of  the  Egyptian  temples  of  Osiris,  in  the
inspired  pythonesses  of  Delphi,  in  the  priestesses  of  Ceres,  in
the  vestal  virgins  of  later  Rome.

This  is,  indeed,  but  a  solitary  instance  of  what  we  wish  to
point  out  to  you.  We  do  but  direct  your  mind ;  and  our  bare
sketch  will  be  plentifully  filled  in  hereafter.  You  are  not  yet
able  to  comprehend  more  than  the  outline.

Certainly  I  am  ignorant  enough.  You  speak  as  if  man
was  a  mere  vehicle  for  spirit ;  more  or  less  perfect,  and
so  more  or  less  instructed.

We  have  told  you  frequently  that  all  knowledge  is  from  us.
With  us  is  the  substance,  with  you  the  shadow  only.  Even  as
in  your  world,  they  learn  most  who  are  most  teachable,  so  in
intercourse  with  ours.  We  can  teach,  if  you  are  willing  to
learn.

Not  much  merit  in  man,  then  ?

The  merit  of  obedience  and  humility.  So  he  best  grows  in
knowledge.

And  suppose  his  teachers  teach  him  wrong  f

All  truth  is  mixed  with  error.  The  dross  will  be  purged
away.

All  spirits  teach  differently.  Who,  then,  is  right?  What
is  truth?

It  is  not  so.  We  teach  independently,  and  so  details  vary
while  the  broad  outline  remains  the  same.  You  will  know
one  day  that  evil,  as  you  call  it,  is  but  the  reverse  of  good.  You
can  have  no  unmixed  good  in  your  present  state.  It  is  an  idle
dream.  Truth  to  you  is  relative,  and  must  long  remain  so.
Be  content  to  crawl  before  you  walk,  to  step  before  you  run,
to  run  before  you  soar.

PRUDENS.

MAN  CRUSHED  BY  STEAM-ROLLER.  215

[It  was  at  this  time  that  there  occurred  that  singular
instance  of  the  power  of  a  spirit  lately  released
from  the  body  to  communicate,  which  I  have  re-
corded in  SPIRIT-IDENTITY.  A  man  had  met  an
awful  death  by  being  crushed  beneath  a  steam-
roller used  for  making  a  road  near  Baker  Street.
I  had  passed  the  spot  during  the  day :  without,
however,  being  conscious  of  the  event.  In  the
evening  I  met  the  Baron  Dupotet  at  Mrs.  Mack-
dougall  Gregory's,  and  the  spirit  manifested  its
presence.  On  23rd  Feb.,  1874,  I  inquired  about
the  matter,  and  the  story  told  by  the  spirit  was
confirmed.]

It  surprises  us  much  that  he  should  have  been  able  to  attach
himself  to  you.  It  was  owing  to  his  being  near  the  place
when  he  met  his  bodily  death.  Do  not  direct  your  mind
strongly  to  the  subject,  lest  he  vex  you.

How  comes  it  that  he  is  awake  at  once,  whereas  our  friend
[who  had  passed  away  recently]  is  not  ?

He  has  not  rested  after  the  violent  separation  from  the  body.
Well  for  him  if  he  does  so.  If  not  he  will  remain  an  earth-
bound  spirit  for  long.  Rest  is  a  step  to  progress  in  the  case
of  such  a  spirit.  It  is  to  be  desired  that  the  poor  soul  may
rest  and  not  haunt  the  sphere  of  vice  in  which  his  earth  life
was  spent.

7s  the  spirit,  then,  unharmed  by  such  a  ghastly  muti-
lation ?

The  mutilation  of  the  body  does  not  harm  the  spirit,  except
by  the  rude  shock.  And  that  would  stir  it  into  action  rather
than  lull  it  into  repose.

The  spirit  haunted  the  place  of  death  ?    How  did  it  reach
me?

It  is  usual  for  a  spirit  so  severed  from  the  body  to  haunt
the  spot  for  long  after.  You  passed :  and  being  in  a  highly
sensitive  condition  attracted  any  spiritual  influences  that
came  within  your  sphere,  as  the  magnet  attracts  iron.  This
power  of  sympathetic  attraction  is  mysterious  to  you.  Yet  it

216  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

should  not  be,  for  you  see  it  in  action  in  a  lower  degree  in
your  world.  Attraction  and  repulsion  operate  strongly  in
daily  intercourse.  Most  are  unconscious  of  the  fact,  yet  all
especially  the  sensitive,  act  upon  it  This  is  intensified  once
the  body  is  done  with.  The  wider  methods  which  it  supplies
through  the  avenues  of  the  senses  are  replaced  by  this  intui-
tive faculty  of  sympathy,  and  its  correlative,  repulsion.

But  do  not  fix  your  mind  on  the  subject,  or  you  will  find
that  the  law  of  attraction  is  set  to  work  again,  and  you  will
have  drawn  to  yourself  the  plague  of  an  undeveloped  spirit.
There  is  no  reason,  seeing  that  you  could  not  benefit  the  poor
soul

-f-  IMPERATOR.

(    217

SECTION    XXVIII.

[Feb.  26th,  1874. — At  one  of  our  circles  we  had  had  a
piece  of  direct  writing  of  which  we  could  make
nothing.  It  was  written  in  curious  hieroglyphics.
I  inquired  about  it.]

The  writing,  though  unintelligible  to  you,  was  the  work  of
a  high  intelligence,  who  on  your  earth  was  incarnated  amongst
the  nation  who  was  then  most  spiritual,  the  great  nation  of
the  Egyptians.  They  had  a  more  real  belief  in  the  existence
and  intervention  of  spiritual  agencies  than  you  now  have.
They  cherished  a  firmer  belief  in  immortality  of  the  human
spirit ;  and  of  the  indestructibility  of  all  spirits  than  your  wise
men  have  yet  attained  to.  Their  civilisation  you  yourself
know  to  be  vast ;  their  erudition  such  that  they  were  the
depositary  of  the  knowledge  of  their  age.

Aye,  verily ;  and  they  had  knowledge  which  a  material  age
has  lost ;  knowledge  which  illumined  the  souls  of  Pythagoras
and  Plato,  and  which  has  filtered  down  to  you  only  through
their  teachings.  The  pncient  Egyptians  were  wise  and  erudite
philosophers,  and  our  friend  may  well  teach  you  much  of
which  you  are  yet  ignorant.  After  an  interval  of  three
thousand  years  and  over,  one,  who  in  his  earth-life  knew  of
God  and  the  hereafter,  comes  to  witness  to  the  abiding  nature
of  his  faith.  The  time — so  long  in  its  seeming  to  your  con-
tracted vision — during  which  our  friend  has  been  a  denizen  of
spirit-land,  has  served  to  open  new  vistas  of  truth,  to  remove
old  errors,  to  throw  light  on  old  speculations,  but  it  has  served
also  to  deepen  and  confirm  faith  in  the  Supreme,  and  in  the
immortal  destiny  of  man's  spirit.

[I  suggested  that  I  still  did  not  see  why  he  should
write  unintelligible  hieroglyphics;  and  asked  his
name.]

You  shall  know  of  him ;  but  his  earth  identity  is  long  lose,

218  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS

you  would  know  it  no  more  than  you  know  his  signs  on
the  paper.  He  knew  even  in  the  body  that  bodily  life  was
but  the  first  short  stage  of  perpetuated  existence  ;  and  he  has
gone  onwards,  as  he  believed,  upward  to  Ha,  the  source  of
light,  to  whom  his  gaze  was  turned.

[I  inquired  if  he  believed  in  absorption  into  the  God-
head after  a  course  of  progress.]

The  Egyptian  faith  was  of  some  such  sort.  Their  philoso-
phers believed  in  gradual  progress  until  the  dross  was  purged
away  and  the  spirit  completely  purified.  His  religion  was  one
of  faith  in  future  progress,  and,  for  the  present,  of  high
morality  in  life.  Duty  to  man  and  to  self  was  not  forgotten,
and  religion  was  made  a  business  of  daily  life.  We  may
touch  on  this  again  as  we  develope  in  you  a  wider  knowledge.
For  the  present  it  is  enough  that  you  know  that  the  special
peculiarities  of  Egyptian  theology  —  the  sanctity  of  the  body
—  had  its  true  and  false  side.

The  Great  God  was  to  them  represented  by  every  living
thing,  and  the  human  body  was  so  sacred  that  it  was  pre-
served from  natural  decay  as  far  as  might  be  ;  and  so  well
was  this  done,  that  some  still  exist  among  you.  The  undue
care  of  the  body  was  error,  but  the  due  preservation  of  bodily
health  was  true  and  wise.  When  they  saw  God  in  everything,
they  did  well  ;  when  they  reduced  Him  to  bodily  form,  their
care  for  the  body  misled  them.  Their  doctrine  of  transmigra-
tion through  vast  ages  and  cycles  was  an  error  which  sym-
bolised and  typified  eternal  and  unceasing  progress.  These
errors,  which  led  to  the  worahip  of  animal  life  in  all  its  forms,
as  symbolising  the  Creator,  and  as  being  the  future  home  of
the  spirit  in  its  manifold  transmigrations,  the  spirit  unlearns
as  it  progresses.  But  it  preserves  the  great  truth  of  progres-
sive development  and  growth  in  presence  of  the  Great  Creative
Force,  of  which  they  were  the  outward  symbols.

If  it  seem  to  you  foolish  and  unwise  to  worship  animal  life,
as  needs  it  must,  remember,  too,  that  worship  may  be  directed
through  an  external  symbolical  manifestation  to  that  spiritual
essence  which  it  typifies  ;  and  that  errors  which  enshrine

EGYPTIAN  THEOLOGY.  219

truths  are  husks  which  die  in  time  and  leave  the  kernel  safe.
Ideas,  germs  of  truth,  never  die.  They  may  be  viewed  through
a  distorted  medium,  and  so  take  a  disproportioned  form ;  but
when  the  distorted  medium  is  removed,  the  true  form  is  seen.
So  our  friend  and  his  brethren  see  now  that  all  nature  in  your
world  is  a  phenomenal  manifestation  of  the  Supreme;  and
that  if  life  in  all  its  varied  forms  may  not  be  held  up  as  an
object  of  adoration,  still  the  groping  spirit  who  strives  to  reach
up  through  nature  to  its  God  is  not  to  be  visited  with  un-
reasoning blame.  Do  you  not  see  this  ?

In  a  way.  I  can  understand  tJce  use  of  all  helps  to
realising  God.  But  I  thought  that  Egyptian  theology
was  material  and  earthy  compared  with  that  of  India.
The  communications  which  you  wrote  out  as  to  the
religions  of  the  world,  left  on  me  the  impression  that
Egypt  reacted  from  India.  I  suppose  all  error  in-
cludes some  truth,  just  as  every  truth  has  an  admixture
of  error,  both  terms  being  relative  and  not  absolute.

We  do  not  now  dwell  on  the  characteristic  points  of  Indian
theology.  What  you  say  is  true.  We  only  desire  now  to
show  you  how,  under  forms  most  repulsive  to  your  present
ideas,  there  was  a  lurking  germ  of  truth,  and  that  such  truth,
known  to  the  ancients,  has  in  many  cases  perished  from  among
you  It  is  well  that  you  learn  to  be  modest  in  estimating  both
your  own  knowledge  and  that  of  the  ancients.

Tes ;  I  am  not  aware  that  I  have  any  particular  know-
ledge except  of  the  prevalent  ignorance  touching  these
matters.  And  it  is  silly  to  laugh  at  any  form  of
religion.  Our  friend  lived  long  since.  An  Egyptian
priest,  was  he  ?

He  was  one  of  the  prophets  of  Osiris,  and  was  in  his  time
learned  in  the  mysteries  esoteric  and  unmentionable  to  the
vulgar.  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus— this  was  the  Trinity  he  wor-
shipped. Osiris,  the  Supreme ;  Isis,  the  All-Mother ;  Horus,
the  Child,  sacrifice  for  human  sin.  He  knew  God  as  your
.sacred  historian  revealed  Him,  in  terms  borrowed  from  Egypt

220  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

— I  am  the  I  am — the  Universal  Essence  ;  the  Source  of  Life-
and  Light.  This  title  of  Jehovah,  Moses  borrowed  from  the-
priests  of  Thebes.

What  was  the  original  name  ?

NUK-PU-NUK.      I  AM  THE   I  AM.

He  who  inspires  this  communication  was  Prophet  of  Ra,  at
On,  the  City  of  Light,  which  the  Greeks  call  Heliopolis,  City
of  the  Sun,  and  he  lived  sixteen  hundred  and  thirty  years
before  the  era  which  you  call  Christian.  His  name  was  Chom^
and  he  speaks  to  you  a  witness  for  immortality  from  the  ages
that  have  long  passed.  And  I  bear  him  witness  that  his  testi-
mony is  true.

+  IMPERATOR.

[I   inquired   if   there   were  any  available   records   of
Egyptian  theology  to  which  I  could  get  access.]

It  is  not  necessary.  All  that  remains  of  the  old  Hermaic-
books  is  little.  The  writings  in  the  mummy  cases  from  the
Ritual  of  the  Dead  are  excerpts  from  them.  The  care  for  the
body,  we  have  said,  was  the  distinguishing  mark  of  Egyptian
religion.  The  funeral  ceremonies  were  very  long  and  minute,,
and  the  writings  on  the  tombs  and  on  the  caskets  which
enshrined  the  bodies  of  the  departed  are  the  earliest  records-
of  Egyptian  faith.

You  will  not  need  to  dive  into  these  matters.  It  is  needful
only  that  you  see  and  grasp  this  great  truth,  that  the  despised
knowledge  of  the  past  had  its  germ  of  truth.

Nay,  more.  Religion  was  to  the  Egyptian  the  master  prin-
ciple of  daily  life,  to  which  all  else  was  subservient.  Art,,
literature,  science,  were  the  handmaids  of  religion,  and  the
daily  life  itself  was  an  elaborate  ritual.  The  faith  in  which,
he  lived  was  incorporated  in  every  act.  The  Sun-God,  as  it
arose  and  set  typified  the  life  which  was  then  but  beginning
and  which  in  the  twin  Sothriac  cycles  would  return  again  after
three  thousand  years  of  progressive  education  to  earth,  only
to  be  absorbed  at  last  in  the  pure  beams  of  Ra,  the  source  and
spring  of  life  and  light.

THE  RELIGION  OF  DAILY  LIFE.  221

The  ceremonial  purifications  of  worship  pervaded  his  daily
work,  and  gave  a  tone  of  spirituality  to  the  businesses  of  life
All  that  the  Egyptian  did  had  reference  to  the  life  hereafter
on  which  his  stedfast  gaze  was  fixed.  Every  day  had  its
special  presiding  spirit,  or  deity,  under  whose  protection  it  was
placed.  Every  temple  had  its  great  staff  of  prophets,  priests,
pontiffs,  judges,  scribes.  These  were  versed  in  mystic  lore,
and  spent  lives  of  purity  and  chastity  in  penetrating  into
nature's  hidden  secrets,  and  the  mysteries  of  spirit  intercourse.
They  were  a  pure,  learned,  spiritual  race,  albeit  their  know-
ledge of  some  things  known  to  men  now  was  but  slight.  But
we  may  say  to  you  that  in  deep,  philosophical  knowledge,  in
•clearness  of  spiritual  perception,  your  wise  men  have  no  claim
to  rank  with  them.

Nor  in  practical  religion  can  your  people  equal  the  oiu
Egyptians.  We  have  learned  long  since  to  estimate  man's
Teligion  by  acts  rather  than  by  words ;  and  we  pay  little  heed
to  the  character  of  that  ladder  by  which  man  climbs  heaven-
ward. False  faiths  abound  still.  Man  now,  as  heretofore
befogs  himself  with  foolish  imaginings  which  he  calls  Divine
Revelation.  And  though  the  faith  of  Egypt  were  erroneous
in  much,  it  possessed  that  which  redeemed  its  errors  and  en
nobled  the  lives  of  its  professors.  They  at  least  had  not
clothed  their  lives  with  a  dead  materialism.  They  had  not
closed  every  avenue  to  the  higher  life  of  spirit.  They  recog-
nised their  god  in  every  act  of  daily  life,  even  though  their
idea  of  the  god-principle  was  crude.  They  would  not  buy  and
•sell  and  trade  with  deliberate  purpose  to  defraud  and  over-
reach. They  would  not  ignore  all  else  but  dead  matter,  even
though  they  did  pay  undue  reverence  to  the  perishable  and
material.

You  know  how  far  it  is  true  of  your  age,  that  it  is  material,
earthy,  grovelling ;  that  its  thoughts  and  aspirations  have  been
earth-bound ;  that  it  is  unspiritual,  without  lofty  aspirations,
without  deep  spiritual  insight,  without  active  faith  in  spirit-
life  and  intercourse.  You  can  draw  the  contrast  for  yourself.
In  pointing  it  out  we  do  not  exalt  Egyptian  religion,  save  to

222  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

show  you  that  what  seems  to  you  so  earthy  and  vile  was,  m
some  of  its  aspects,  a  living  faith,  powerful  in  daily  life,  and
possessing  deep  spiritual  wisdom.

Yes,  in  a  way,  no  doubt.  It  seems  that  so  much  may  be
said  for  every  form  of  faith.  They  are  all  man's  grop-
ing after  immortality,  and  vary  in  degree  of  tintth
according  to  his  enlightenment.  But  you  are  hardly
fair  to  this  age.  No  doubt  there  is  a  deal  of  Materialism,
but  there  is  also  a  deal  of  striving  to  avoid  it.  Few  are
Materialists  from  choice.  And  if  ever  there  were  a  time
when  thought  about  religion  and  God,  and  the  hereafter,
might  be  said  to  be  rife,  it  is  now.  It  seems  to  me  that
your  strictures  would  suit  better  a  bygone  age  of  apathy
than  one  ivhich  is  at  least  awake  and  alive  to  the  'mo-
mentous questions  on  which  you  speak.

It  may  be.  There  is,  as  you  say,  much  tendency  to  look
into  these  matters;  and  where  that  exists  there  is  hope.  But
there  is  also  a  strong  desire  to  exclude  all  reference  to  spirit
as  a  factor  in  human  existence :  to  refer  all  to  matter,  and
crush  out  all  seeking  into  spirit  intercourse  and  the  spirit  life
as  at  least  unpractical,  if  not  unreal  and  delusive.  It  is,  per-
haps, necessary  that  the  temper  of  your  age  should  take  its
tone  from  the  peculiar  religious  epoch  through  which  you  are
passing.  The  transition  state  that  intervenes  between  one
form  of  faith  and  its  successor,  is  necessarily  one  of  con-
vulsion. The  old  is  fading,  and  the  new  is  not  yet  clear.
Man  must  pass  through  this,  and  it  has  a  tendency  to  distort
his  vision.

Yes.  Things  seem  in  a  fluidic  state,  shifting,  and
obscure.  Then,  of  course,  there  are  many  who  do  not
want  to  be  disturbed.  They  resent  being  roused  from
their  dreams.  And  some  have  dealt  with  matter  so
long  that  they  cannot  bear  to  think  that  after  all  it  is
only  the  vail  of  spirit.  But  this  does  not  affect  my
belief  that  no  age  that  I  know  of,  shoi't  of  that  grand
era  in  old  Greece,  shows  anything  like  the  same  active

THE   PRESENT  AN  AGE   OF  HONEST   INQUIRY.  2i£

and  intelligent  seeking  into  deep  spiritual  and  natural
truths.

It  is  well  that  you  think  so  ;  nor  do  we  desire  to  shake  that
opinion.  We  have  but  striven  to  show  you  by  a  typical  in-
stance that  there  are  truths  hidden  even  in  those  faiths  which
to  you  seem  most  gross  and  earthy.

I  suppose  the  Jewish  Lawgiver,  "  leaded  in  all  the  wis-
dom of  the  Egyptians,"  incorporated  a  good  deal  of  it
into  his  code.

Yes,  indeed.  The  ceremony  of  circumcision  was  borrowed
from  the  Egyptian  mysteries.  All  the  ceremonial  purifica-
tions of  the  Jewish  temple  were  borrowed  from  Egypt.  From
the  same  source  came  the  linen  dresses  of  the  priests ;  the-
mystic  cherubim  that  guarded  the  mercy-seat :  nay,  the  very
idea  of  the  Holy  place,  and  Holy  of  Holies,  were  but  adapta-
tions of  the  plan  of  Egyptian  temples.  But  Moses,  skilled  as
he  was  in  the  learning  of  the  priests  by  whom  he  was  trained
did  not  in  borrowing  ritual,  borrow  also  the  spiritual  ideas
which  it  typified.  The  grand  doctrines  of  immortality  and
spirit  agency  find  no  real  place  in  his  writings.  The  destiny
of  spirit,  as  you  know,  he  never  alluded  to.  The  appearances
of  spirits  are  mere  phenomenal  manifestations  incidentally
introduced,  and  the  great  doctrine  is  untouched.

Yes.  The  rite  of  Circumcision  existed  in  Egypt  before
the  time  of  Moses  ?

Oh,  yes.  Bodies  which  were  so  religiously  preserved  by
them  at  a  date  previous  to  Abraham,  and  which  still  exist
among  you,  prove  that,  if  you  need  proof.

/  did  not  know  that.  Did  he  borroiv  any  articles  of
faith  ?

The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  existed  in  Egypt  as  well  as  in
India.  The  Mosaic  code  reproduced  much  of  the  minute-
character  of  Egyptian  ritual  without  its  spirituality.

224  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

How  cornea  it  that  such  mines  of  knowledge  as  Egypt  had
should  be  closed  to  us  ?  Confucius,  Buddha,  Moses
Mohammed  live.  Why  not  Manes  ?

He  lives  only  in  the  effect  he  had  on  others.  The  religion
of  Egypt  was  confined  to  a  favoured  class,  and  was  not  suffi-
ciently extended  beyond  the  country  to  be  permanent.  It  was
a  religion  confined  to  a  priestly  sect,  and  it  died  with  them.
Its  effects  are  seen  in  other  faiths.

The  idea  of  the  Trinity,  was  it  Indian  or  Egyptian  ?

The  Trinity  of  Creative  Power,  Destructive  Power,  and
Mediatorial  Power,  existed  in  India  as  Brahm,  Siva,  Vishnu ;
in  Egypt  as  Osiris,  Typhon,  Horus.  There  were  many  Trinities
in  Egyptian  theology.  The  same  existed  in  Persia  as  Ormuzd,
Ahriman,  Mithra  (the  Reconciler).

Different  parts  of  Egypt  had  their  different  theologies.
Pthah,  the  Supreme  Father  :  Ra,  the  Sun-God,  manifestation
of  the  Supreme :  Amun,  the  Unknown  God,  were  all  various
manifestations  of  the  God-idea.

1  thought  you  said  that  Osiris,  Isis,  Horus,  made  the
Egyptian  Trinity  ?

We  did  but  put  in  Isis  as  the  Productive  principle — Osiris,
{Creator ;  Isis,  Principle  of  Fecundity ;  Horus,  non  of  Osiris
and  Isis.  There  were  many  developments  of  the  idea  of  the
Trinity.  It  is  not  important,  save  that  it  bears  upon  the  broad
question.

Then  did  Egypt  get  its  religion  from  India  ?

Partly :  but  on  that  point  we  have  no  one  who  can  speak.

PRUDENS.

[The  foregoing  was  written  February  28th,  1874.  On
April  8th,  the  answer  was  written,  much  other
matter  having  been  given  in  the  meantime.]

You  inquired  as  to  the  connection  between  India  and  Egypt.
The  religion  of  Egypt  was  essentially  a  religion  of  body,  as
that  of  India  was  of  spirit.  Egypt  had  multifarious  acts  of

INDIA  AND   EGYPT.  225

external  ritual ;  India  cultivated  contemplation.  God  to  the
Hindu,  was  an  undiscoverable  essence;  to  the  Egyptian  he
was  manifested  in  every  type  of  animal  existence.  To  the
Hindu  time  was  nothing ;  eternity,  all.  To  the  Egyptian
every  passing  moment  had  its  consecrated  work.  Egypt  was
the  antipodes  of  India.  Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that  Egypt
received  its  first  religious  imspiration  from  India,  even  as  did
Zoroaster  in  Persia.

We  have  told  you  before  that  the  special  grandeur  of  Egypt's
faith  was  the  consecration  to  religion  of  daily  life.  It  was
a  faith  which  influenced  daily  acts.  Therein  lay  its  power.
It  was  a  faith  which  recognised  God  in  all  nature,  and
especially  in  all  animal  life.  It  was  the  mystery  of  existence,
the  highest  manifestation  of  Divine  power  that  the  Egyptian
worshipped, when,  as  you  imagine,  he  bowed  down  before  an  idol
graven  in  the  image  of  an  ox It  would  be  well  that  the

o  o

same  care  for  the  body,  the  same  present  view  of  religious
duty,  the  same  perception  of  an  all-pervading  Deity  which
formed  the  creed  of  ancient  Egypt,  and  which  enters  so  largely
into  ours,  should  be  again  prevalent  among  you.

/  suppose,  in  effect,  that  Egyptian  theology  was  a  reaction
from  Hindu  'mysticism.  You  speak  as  if  that  elabora-
tion of  ritual  was  a  good  thing.  I  should  have  thought
that  the  Egyptian  priest  wasted  a  deal  of  time,  and
that  his  punctilious  washings  and  shavings  were  merely
silly.

Not  so.  The  ritual  was  necessary  for  the  age  and  people.
We  are  not  concerned  with  anything  but  the  underlying  idea.
Art,  literature,  and  science  laboured  for  religion :  and  so  far
from  worship  absorbing  the  work  of  life,  it  was  rather  that
every  act  of  common  life  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  an  act  of
worship.  In  this  sense  only  is  it  true :  and  a  nobler  truth  can
hardly  be  declared.  To  live  in  the  presence  of  Deity— to  see
His  image  all  around,  to  consecrate  every  act  to  His  service,  to
keep  mind,  spirit,  body,  pure  as  He  is  pure,  consecrated  to  Him,
and  to  Him  alone— this  is  to  lead  the  godlike  life,  even  though
it  contain  mistaken  details.
16

226

SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

JVo  doubt  prejudice  hampers  us  greatly.  But  you  would
not  say  (ivould  you  ?)  that  a  man's  faith  is  entirely
indifferent  in  its  substance,  so  he  honestly  professes  it.
For  instance,  £gypt  reproduced  now  would  not  be  the
ideal  you  seem  to  paint.

Surely  not.  The  world  progresses,  and  gains  higher  know-
ledge. It  may  not  recur  to  that  which  was  fitted  for  another
people  in  an  earlier  stage  of  development.  But  though  the
world  has  gained,  it  has  lost  also ;  and  among  the  things  which
it  has  lost  is  that  which  may  belong  equally  to  all  forms  of
faith,  the  devotion  of  self  to  duiy  and  to  God.  This  is  no
inseparable  quality  of  Egyptian  faith.  Rather  was  it  ampli-
fied and  exemplified  in  a  higher  degree  in  the  life  and  teaching
of  the  Christ.  But  you  have  forgotten  it — you  have  lost
that  mark  of  true  religion.  It  needs  that  you  see  that  in
this  point  you  were  surpassed  by  those  whom  you  despise
and  contemn.

\Ve  do  say,  we  have  always  said,  thac  man's  responsibility
is  in  proportion  to  the  light  which  is  in  him ;  that  man's
duty  is  not  lessened  but  increased  by  the  quality  of  the  revel-
ation of  which  he  is  the  recipient.  We  tell  you  that  many  a
soul  has  progressed  in  spite  of  its  creed  by  honesty  and  sin-
cerity and  singleness  of  purpose ;  and  that  many  a  soul  has
been  dragged  down  by  the  very  load  of  that  faith  in  which  its
hopes  were  centred.  We  know  that  it  is  so,  and  that  man's
faith  in  its  external  presentment — the  outer  shell  which  alone
you  can  see — is  of  comparatively  little  moment.  He  must
perforce  take  that  which  falls  to  his  lot,  and  according  to  the
use  he  makes  of  it  is  his  progress.  It  is  an  accident  whether
an  incarnated  soul  be  Jew  or  Turk,  Mahommedan,  Christian,
Brahmin,  or  Parsee ;  but  it  is  of  the  essence  of  that  soul's  pro-
gress whether  it  so  uses  its  opportunities  as  to  progress,  or  so
abuses  them  as  to  retrograde.  Souls  have  different  opportu-
nities here,  and  according  as  they  use  them  they  have  increased
or  diminished  capacity  for  progress  in  the  after  state  for  which
they  have  fitted  themselves.  This  you  know  ;  and  the  chance
of  progress  may  be  as  great  with  the  despised  and  humble  soul

THE   JUDGMENT   OF   SOULS.  227

on  whom  the  Pharisaical  Christian  looks  down  with  contempt
as  with  one  incarnated  amidst  every  influence  of  good,  and
every  opportunity  of  progress.  It  is  a  pure  question  of  spirit,
into  which  you  cannot  yet  enter.  You  are  concerned  with  the
husk  here ;  you  have  not  reached  the  kernel.

But  surely  one  ivJio  acts  up  to  his  knowledge  as  a
Christian,  that  knoivledge  being  high,  and  th&  acts
good  and  complete,  according  to  capacity  and  oppor-
tunity, gets  a  long  start  of  the  barbarous  fetish-wor-
shipper, however  honest  he  may  be.

In  this  small  fragment  of  existence  it  is  not  possible  that
any  gain  be  snatched  which  may  not  be  readily  made  up  in
another  state.  You  are  hampered  by  the  limited  nature  of
your  vision  and  knowledge.  The  accidents  which  seem  to  you
such  bars,  may  be  but  the  means  selected  to  bring  out  some
needed  quality — endurance,  patience,  trust,  or  love ;  whilst  the
luxurious  surroundings,  the  poisonous  flattery,  the  complacent
self-satisfaction  may  be  the  engines  of  the  adversaries  who  are
dragging  down  and  stifling  a  soul.

You  judge  too  hastily  and  imperfectly,  and  from  ex-
ternal signs  only.  Nor  are  you  able  to  see  what  the  guar-
dians intend,  nor  to  make  due  allowance  for  temptation  and
its  results.  These  are  questions  which  now  are  beyond  your
judgment.

Further,  as  to  your  question,  it  is  a  bounden  duty  in  each  to
accept  and  act  up  to  the  highest  view  of  Divine  Truth  which
is  revealed  in  him,  and  which  he  is  able  to  accept.  By  this  his
progress  will  be  judged.

Do  you  teach  a  General  Judgment  ?

No.  The  judgment  is  complete  when  the  spirit  gravitates
to  the  home  which  it  has  made  for  itself.  There  can  be  no
error.  It  is  placed  by  the  eternal  law  of  fitness.  That  judg-
ment is  complete,  until  the  spirit  is  fitted  to  pass  to  a  higher
sphere,  when  the  same  process  is  repeated,  and  so  on  and  on
until  the  purgatorial  spheres  of  work  are  done  with,  and  the
soul  passes  within  the  inner  heaven  of  contemplation.

228  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Then,  in  fact,  there  are  many  judgments  ?

Yes  and  no.  Many  and  none.  Judgment  is  ceaseless,  for
the  soul  is  ever  fitting  itself  for  its  change.  No  such  arraign-
ment before  the  assembled  universe  as  is  in  your  mind.  That
is  an  allegory.

In  each  stage  of  probation  the  spirit  builds  up  a  character
by  its  constant  acts,  which  fits  it  for  a  certain  position.  To
that  position  it  goes  of  necessity,  without  what  you  mean  as
judgment.  Sentence  results  at  once ;  just  as  the  total  of  a
number  of  items  is  ascertained  without  argument  or  judgment.
There  is  no  need  for  the  process  of  a  court  of  justice  as  you
understand  it  on  earth.  The  soul  is  the  arbiter  of  its  own
destiny;  its  own  judge.  This  is  so  in  all  cases  of  progress  or
retrogression.

Is  each  entry  into  a  neiv  sphere  or  state  marked  by  a
change  analogous  to  death  ?

Analogous,  in  that  there  is  a  gradual  sublimation  or  refine-
ment of  the  spirit-body,  until  by  degrees  all  gross  elements  are
purged  away.  The  higher  the  sphere  the  more  refined  and
ethereal  the  body.  The  change  is  not  so  mateiial  as  that
which  you  call  death,  for  there  is  no  corporeal  envelope  to
lay  aside,  but  it  is  analogous  to  it  in  that  it  is  a  process  of
development,  the  entry  of  the  spirit  into  a  higher  state  of
existence.

And  when  all  the  gross  elements  are  gone,  the  spirit  enters
the  spheres  of  contemplation,  and  is  rejined  till  all  may
be  rejined  aivay  ?

Not  so.  It  is  refined  until  the  dross  is  gone,  and  the  pure
spiritual  gold  remains.  We  know  not  of  its  life  in  the  inner
heaven.  We  only  know  that  it  grows  liker  and  liker  to  God,
nearer  and  nearer  to  His  image.  It  may  well  be,  good  friend,
that  the  noblest  destiny  of  the  perfected  spirit  may  be  union
with  the  God  into  whose  likeness  it  has  grown,  and  whose
portion  of  divinity,  temporarily  segregated  during  its  pilgrim-
age, it  so  renders  up  to  Him  who  gave  it.  These  to  us,  as  to
you,  are  but  speculations.  Leave  them  and  be  content  to  know

THE  PURIFICATION   OF  SOULS.  229

that  which  is  alone  worth  knowing.  Could  you  penetrate  all
mysteries  there  would  be  no  longer  occupation  for  your  mind.
You  can  know  but  little  here;  but  you  can  aspire,  and  in
aspiring,  raise  your  spirit  above  the  sordid  cares  of  earth  to
its  truer  home.  May  the  blessing  of  the  Blessed  One  rest
on  youl

-|-  JMPEKATOB.

(    230

SECTION   XXTX.

[March  15,  ]874. — We  had  received  many  warnings
as  to  the  danger  of  deception  by  personating  spirits,
and  the  warning  had  gained  force  by  a  particular
case  occurring  in  our  experience,  though  outside  of
our  circle,  in  which  such  an  attempt  had  been  made.
Many  very  striking  messages  were  given  on  the
subject,  of  which  the  only  one  sufficiently  public  in
interest,  is  the  following]  : —

We  have  been  particular  in  our  statements,  because  we  are
anxious  to  reiterate  the  warnings  we  have  frequently  given,
as  to  the  danger  of  attack  by  deceptive  and  personating  spirits,
whom  you  know  as  The  Undeveloped.  Of  late,  too,  we  have
told  you  that  trouble  and  perplexity  were  at  hand  through
this  same  cause,  and  we  gave  you  special  warning  lest  you
should  fall  a  prey  to  their  attacks.  We  have  ascertained  that
the  spirit  who  falsely  pretended  to  be  working  with  us  is  a
personating  spirit,  whose  aim  is  to  injure  and  retard  our  work.

We  need  to  explain  fully  on  this  point.  You  have  heard  of  the
antagonism  between  the  adversaries  and  the  divine  work  which
is  in  process  amongst  you.  There  is  direct  antagonism  between
them  and  us,  between  the  work  which  is  for  man's  develop-
ment and  instruction,  and  their  efforts  to  retard  and  thwart  it.
It  is  the  old  battle  between  what  you  call  the  good  and  the
evil — between  the  progressive  and  the  retrogressive.  Into  the
ranks  of  that  opposing  armv  gravitate  spirits  of  all  degrees
of  malignity,  wickedness,  cunning  and  deceit :  those  who  are
actively  spurred  on  by  the  hatred  of  light  which  an  unen-
lightened spirit  has,  and  those  who  are  animated  by  sportive-
ness  rather  than  by  actual  malice.  It  includes,  in  short,  the
undeveloped  of  every  grade  and  class  :  spirits  who  are  opposed,
for  infinitely  varying  reasons,  to  the  organised  attempt  to  lead
men  upward  from  darkness  to  light,  with  which  we  are  asso-
ciated, in  company  with  hosts  of  othera

TEMPTATION   BY   UNDEVELOPED   SPIRITS.  231

It  would  appear  that  your  inability  to  see  the  operations  of
these  adversaries  renders  you  unable  to  grasp  their  existence,
or  to  appreciate  the  magnitude  of  their  influence  in  your  world.
Not  till  your  spiritual  eyes  are  open  will  you  really  under-
stand how  great  it  is,  and  how  present.  To  those  ranks  gravi-
tate, of  necessity,  the  earth-bound  and  unprogressed  spirits  to
whom  incarnation  has  brought  no  gain,  and  whose  affections,
centred  on  the  earth,  where  all  their  treasure  is,  can  find  no
scope  in  the  pure  spiritual  joys  of  the  spheres  of  spirit-life.
Hovering  over  their  old  haunts,  they  live  over  again  their
wretched,  polluted  earth-lives,  by  influencing  congenial  spirits
still  in  the  body,  and  so  gratifying  their  lusts  and  passions  at
second  hand.

The  poor  wreck  whose  lusts  have  survived  the  death  of  that
body  in  which  and  for  which  alone  he  lived,  have  survived  the
means  of  direct  bodijy  gratification,  finds  his  resource  in  seiz-
ing on  an  impressionable  medium,  and  goading  him  on  to  sin,
so  that  he  may  get  such  poor  enjoyment  as  alone  remains  for
him.  The  debauched  drunkard,  who  sank  his  body  in  disease,
and  soddened  his  spirit  with  the  poisoned  draughts  of  liquid
fire,  now  haunts  the  dens  where  his  pleasure  used  to  be,  and
goads  on  the  wretches  whom  it  finds  it  possible  to  influence.
He  leers  with  spite  as  he  drives  one  more  soul  to  a  lower  state
of  misery,  and  gloats  as  he  draws  his  own  foul  gratification,
though  it  spread  broadcast  ruin  and  woe  among  innocent
women  and  their  babes,  and  foster  in  the  midst  of  your  centres
of  knowledge  and  refinement  a  sink  of  infamy  and  disgrace.
These  things  go  on  all  around  you,  and  attract  your  notice  scarce
at  all.  Where  are  the  denunciations  that  should  ring  from  end
to  end  of  your  world  while  such  plague-spots  linger— nay,
flourish  and  abound  amongst  you  ?  Why  is  no  voice  uplifted  ?
Why?  but  that  the  dark  influence  of  those  baleful  spirits
avails  to  blind  your  eyes  and  to  paralyse  the  voice  of  truth
within  you.  Not  in  the  gin-den  alone,  but  far  round  it  as
from  a  centre,  the  malign  influence  radiates,  and  the  vice  per-
petuates itself.  The  sot,  dead— as  you  falsely  think —is  a  sot
in  spirit  still,  and  his  influence  perpetuates  his  vice  among
congenial  spirits  yet  on  earth.

232  aPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

The  murderer,  again,  whom  your  blindness  has  cut  off  from
the  trammels  of  the  body,  and  let  loose  in  fury  on  your  earth,
is  not  idle.  With  all  his  envenomed  passions  stirred  within
him,  mad  with  wrath  and  sense  of  wrong — for  his  sin  is  fre-
quently the  result  of  your  civilisation,  and  he  is  what  you
have  made  him — he  goes  forth  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on
those  who  have  wronged  him.  He  incites  to  rage  and  destruc-
tion of  life.  He  is  the  prolific  inciter  of  crime,  and  perpetuates
the  circumstances  of  which  he  was  the  victim.  When  will
you  learn  that  crimes  for  which  you  daily,  hourly,  visit  rude
vengeance  are  but  the  necessary  product  of  those  mixed  con-
ditions of  life  which  obtain  in  your  crowded  centres  of  life  ?
Why  lop  off  an  ugly  branch  here  and  there  when  the  root  is
rotten  ?  Why  punish  the  wretch  because  he  is  what  you
made  him  ?  Nay,  if  you  be  but  selfish,  why  let  loose  on  you
a  wrathful  avenger  to  your  own  hurt  ?  Ah  !  friend,  you  must
pass  through  many  cycles  of  progress  before  you  learn  that
your  old  criminal  code  is  founded  on  fallacy,  and  works  to
mischief  and  perpetuation  of  the  abuses  it  is  intended  to
prevent.

These  and  such  as  these,  coming  from  your  world  such  as
you  have  made  them,  are,  of  necessity,  enemies  of  progress,
purity,  and  peace;  adversaries  of  ours,  and  leaders  in  the
attack  on  the  work  in  which  we  share.  What  else  can  they
be  ?  Can  that  spirit  whose  earth-life  has  been  one  long  scene
of  debauchery  and  degradation  become  of  a  sudden  pure  and
good  ?  Can  the  sensualist  be  changed  into  one  who  lives  for
purity,  or  the  degraded  animal  into  a  progressive  and  aspiring
spirit  ?  You  know  it  cannot  be.  They  are,  in  company  with
hosts  of  others,  the  foes  of  man  and  spirit  so  far  as  their  desire
is  to  thwart  progress  and  keep  down  truth.  Count  on  them
as  a  perpetual  source  of  antagonism,  and  if  you  cannot  realise
to  the  full  their  influence  for  evil,  do  not  ignore  their  power,
or  invite  their  attacks  by  exposing  yourself  to  them.

We  will  leave  no  word  of  warning  unuttered,  for  the  dan-
ger is  all  the  more  real  that  it  is  so  secret  and  so  far-  reaching.
To  their  efforts  operating  on  congenial  spirits  in  your  world
you  must  refer  much  of  crime  and  misery  that  exists  among

WHAT  OUR  RELIGION   HAS   DONE  FOR  US.  233

you :  war  with  its  attendant  horrors  which  yet  disgrace  and
defile  your  world,  and  hlots  your  boasted  civilisation  and
refinement.  To  them  attribute  the  fostering  of  the  crimes
that  befoul  your  great  cities,  that  spread  a  mantle  of  corrup-
tion over  them,  and  make  them  homes  of  iniquity  and  dwell-
ing-places of  shame.

You  tell  of  your  progress  in  knowledge,  in  art  and  science,
in  culture  and  refinement.  You  boast  of  your  civilisation,  and
.are  at  pains  to  send  to  far  distant  peoples  the  religion  which
.adorns  and  elevates  your  own  country.  Nay,  you  even  force
it  on  them  as  that  Divinely-given  panacea  for  human  ills  of
which  you  are  the  favoured  recipients.  It  would  be  well  that
you  should  keep  silence  over  the  fruits  which  religion  and
•civilisation  between  them  have  produced  among  you.  For
your  religion  we  have  said  frequently  that  it  is  a  degenerate
•offspring  of  that  simple  and  pure  faith  which  alone  deserves
the  name  of  Christianity.  For  your  civilisation  and  culture
they  are  but  of  the  surface,  and  do  but  faintly  hide  festering
sores,  all  too  plain  to  spirit  gaze,  while  in  their  ultimate  efi'ect
upon  the  nature  they  are  too  frequently  demoralising  to  the
truest  and  noblest  instincts,  and  productive  of  hollowness,
deceit,  and  selfishness.  The  Arab  of  the  desert,  the  Indian  of
the  far  west,  in  whom  nature's  instincts  have  not  been  dwarfed,
•distorted,  paralysed  by  civilisation,  is  frequently  a  nobler  man
than  the  crafty  trader,  who  thinks  it  clever  to  outwit  and
overreach,  or  than  that  baser  product  of  civilised  life  from
whose  foul  tongue  no  character  is  safe,  and  whose  lustful,  sen-
sual life  marks  none  as  sacred  from  attack.

Foul,  weltering  masses  of  vice  and  cruelty,  and  selfishness,
.and  heartlessness,  and  misery  that  your  great  cities  are  !  In
them  the  spirit  is  starved  and  crushed ;  dwelling  in  an  atmos-
phere through  which  life-giving  influence  can  hardly  pene-
trate, it  groans  in  agony  as  it  aspires  to  a  purer  and  serener
.air ;  but  its  groans  ascend  hardly  above  the  pall  of  darkness
that  hovers  round.  The  aspirations  are  crushed  out  by  re-
iterated temptation;  good  resolves  are  stolen  away  by  the
.adversaries  nigh  at  hand,  and  the  spirit  cares  less  and  less
.to  nti-uo-o-le  against  the  efforts  of  its  foes.  These  are  only  too

2o*  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

well  seconded  by  the  recklessness  and  folly  which  offer  a.
premium  to  vice,  and  make  virtue  well-nigh  impossible.

And  even  when  the  body  is  removed  from  those  dens  of
impurity,  sensuality,  and  woe,  which  are  tenanted  by  so  many
of  your  fellows  even  within  reach  of  your  own  homes,  where
riches  secure  exemption  from  bodily  distress,  what  is  the  result  ?
We  do  not  see  gross  vice,  shameless  physical  surroundings,,
open  degradation  of  soul  and  body,  but  we  breathe  an  atmos-
phere scarcely  less  spiritually  bad.  Money-hunting  is  the
business  of  life,  and  pleasure  is  too  often  found  in  bodily  gra-
tification and  sensuous  enjoyment.  The  air  is  thick  with  the
greed  of  gold,  with  lust  of  power,  with  self-seeking  in  all  its
myriad  forms.  The  spirit — do  you  ever  think  what  is  the
state  of  such  a  spirit  ?  It  has  no  food,  no  development,  no-
occupation.  It  is  dwarfed,  or  compelled  to  occupy  itself  in
concerns  which  drag  it  back,  and  give  the  adversaries  their
best  chance  of  fostering  and  inflaming  passions  and  desires
which  are  to  us  detestable.  Hardly  can  we  reach  these  more
than  the  debased,  where  in  the  crowded  alleys  and  lanes  vice
has  its  home — where  in  the  thronged  exchanges  and  marts,
money  rules  supreme,  and  breeds  its  progeny  of  selfishness
and  greed,  and  larceny — there  the  adversaries  have  their
centres  of  action,  from  which  their  baleful  influence  radiates.

But  you  know  it  not.  You  are  ignorant  in  respect  of  the
world  of  causes,  and  foolish  in  respect  of  what  you  do  in  your
world  in  providing  conditions  favourable  to  crime  and  sin.
Your  ignorance  perpetuates  these  conditions,  and  renders  it-
more  hard  for  us  to  impress  upon  you  the  true  principles  which
should  govern  the  origination  and  development  of  life  upon
your  globe,  and  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  progress.  Some
of  your  more  advanced  reformers  have  seen  the  vast  import-
ance which  attaches  to  the  subject  of  marriage  ;  and  we  have
endeavoured  to  put  forward  such  views  as  you  were  fitted  to-
receive.  Much  remains  to  be  said  when  the  world  is  ready,,
but  that  is  not  yet.  We  do  but  allude  to  the  subject  as  being
intimately  bound  up  with  the  great  questions  of  disease,  crime,,
poverty,  insanity,  which  vex  and  disturb  us  in  our  dealings
with  men.  To  the  folly,  and  worse,  to  the  criminal  reckless-

MARRIAGE.  235

ness,  and  not  less  criminal  and  more  foolish  conventional  law
which  governs  the  marriage  customs  among  you,  very  much
is  chargeable.  And  this  no  less  among  those  whom  you  call
the  educated  and  refined  than  among  the  ignorant  and  uncul-
tured, rather,  perhaps,  does  the  greater  sin  rest  with  the  rich.
You  must  unlearn  much  that  men  have  dreamed ;  you  must
undo  much  that  society  has  sanctioned  in  the  trafficking  that
goes  under  the  name  of  marriage;  and  you  must  learn  truer
and  diviner  rules  for  happiness  and  progress  than  you  now
tolerate,  before  you  wipe  away  the  great  original  source  of
deterioration  and  retrogression.  Mistake  us  not!  We  are
no  advocates  of  license — no  apostles  of  social  freedom  so  called.
Liberty  ever  degenerates  with  the  foolish  into  license.  We
spurn  such  notions  with  contempt,  even  with  more  than  we
view  the  infamous  buying  and  selling,  the  social  slavery  into
which  you  have  degraded  the  holiest  and  divinest  law  of  life.

Nor  have  you  yet  learned  that  the  body  is  the  avenue  of
spirit,  and  that  laws  of  health  and  conditions  under  which
bodily  development  are  possible  are  essential  for  man  incar-
nated on  earth.  We  have  spoken  before  of  this.  Now  we
only  say  that  in  this,  as  in  the  other  matter,  you  are  in  alli-
ance with  our  foes.  Nineteen  centuries  have  passed  since  the
pure  and  refined  teachings  which  you  profess  to  treasure  were
.spoken  amongst  men ;  and  you  are  but  little  better  in  all  that
makes  for  true  progress,  but  little  wiser  in  real  wisdom,  but
little  advanced  in  pure  religion ;  nay,  you  are  worse  than  the
Essenes,  amongst  whom  Jesus  lived  and  was  trained.  You  are
as  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  drew  from  Him  his  bit-
terest denunciations.

And  you  know  it  not.  In  matters  of  body  and  spirit — matters
of  vital  import  that  touch  both  the  life  here  and  the  life  here-
after— you  have  well-nigh  all  to  learn.

These  are  some  of  the  adversaries  of  whom  we  have  told
you  aforetime.  They  are  massed  in  force,  ever  ready  to  thwart,
and  vex,  and  injure  us.  Their  ranks  are  being  perpetually
swelled  by  spirits  debased  and  degraded  by  human  ignorance.

In  all  that  we  have  said  we  have  made  no  account  of  those
who  strive  to  do  for  their  race  and  for  its  development  what

236  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

in  them  lies.     We  have  said  nothing  of  the  acts  of  self-sacrifice
and  devotion,  the  simple  noble  lives,  the  generous  acts  that
redeem  your  race,  and  make  us  hopeful  of  its  future.     Our
business  now  is  to  paint  the  dark  side  of  the  picture :  and  we
have  so  drawn  it  as  best  to  attract  your  attention  to  it.     We
earnestly  warn  you  that  its  lineaments  are  sketched  with  the
pencil  of  truth ;  and  we  warn  you  in  all  solemnity  that  the
great  truth  which  underlies  this  message,  viz.,  the  antagonism
between  good  and  evil,  and  the  fostering  of  evil  by  human  folly
and  ignorance,  is  one  which  vitally  concerns  you  and  us  in  the
future  of  the  work  which  we  have  in  charge.     In  what  has
now  been  said,  we  have  but  recapitulated  what  has  been  said
before  of  the  organised  opposition  from  those  who  are  our
opponents.     But  one  special  form  of  attack,  which  will  become
more  and  more  frequent,  we  have  not  yet  dealt  with.     As
objective  spiritual  manifestations  become  more  and  more  fre-
quent, and   as  the  inconsiderate  craving  for  them  increases,
so  will  it  come  to  pass  that  powerful  instruments  will  be
developed  through  whom  our  adversaries  may  be  enabled  to
produce  their  frivolous  or  tricky  manifestations,  so  as  to  dis-
credit the  true  spiritual  work.     This  is  one  of  the  special  forms
of  opposition,  and  the  most  dangerous :  for  in  proportion  to  the
undeveloped  character  of  the  spirit  will  be  its  power  over  gross
matter,  its  cunning,  and,  in  some  cases,  its  malignity.     Power-
ful agencies  are  even  now  at  work,  as  we  are  assured,  who  will
seize  every  opportunity  of  developing  mediums  through  whom
phenomena  the  most  startling  may  be  produced,  so  as  to  con-
vince the  inquirers  of  supernatural  power  so  called.      This
done,  the  rest  is  easy.     By  degrees  trick  and  fraud  are  allowed
to  creep  in,  the  moral  teachings  are  allowed  to  appear  in  their
true  light,  doubt  is  insinuated,  and  the  uncertainty  and  sus-
picion which  have  become  the  fixed  attitude  of   the  mind
regarding  phenomena  which  at  first  seemed  so  surely  spiritual,
gradually  extend  to  all  manifestations  and  teachings.

No  more  sure  means  of  discrediting  the  teaching  of  those
who  are  sent  to  instruct,  and  not  merely  to  astonish  or  amuse,
was  ever  devised  by  cunning.  For  men  say:  We  have  tried,  we
have  tested  for  ourselves,  and  we  have  found  it  out.  Either

THE   WILES   OF  THE   ADVERSARIES.  237

it  is  connected  with  fraud,  or  it  teaches  base  and  immoral
doctrines,  or  it  is  full  of  falsehood ;  in  short,  it  is  diabolical.
It  is  no  use  to  appeal  to  such,  and  tell  them  that  they
must  discern  between  the  true  and  the  false,  for  their  shaken
faith  will  not  allow  of  this.  They  have  proved  what  they
trusted  to  be  false,  and  the  whole  edifice  of  their  belief  lies  in
ruins  around  them.  The  foundation  is  not  secure,  and  will  not
support  the  building.

We  say  again  that  no  more  diabolical  device  for  paralysing
our  work  was  ever  planned.  We  solemnly  warn  you  of  it.
See  to  it  that  you  act  upon  our  warning.  Beware  of  encour-
aging the  promiscuous  evolution  of  violent  physical  power.
Such  comes  generally  from  the  lower  and  more  undeveloped ;.
and  its  development  is  frequently  attended  by  spirits  for
whose  absence  you  should  pray.  In  the  encouragement,,
especially  in  newly-formed  circles,  of  undue  care  for  physical
marvels  is  a  great  risk.  Such  are  necessary  to  the  work,  and
we  do  not  in  any  degree  undervalue  their  importance  to  certain
minds.  We  desire  to  bring  home  evidence  to  all ;  but  we  do-
not  desire  that  any  should  rest  in  that  material  form  of  belief,
in  an  external  something  which  is  of  little  service  to  any  soul.
We  labour  for  something  higher  than  to  show  curious  minds,
that  we  can  do  badly  under  certain  conditions  what  man  can,
do  better  under  other  conditions.  Nor  do  we  rest  content  even,
with  showing  man  that  beings  external  to  himself  can  inter-
fere in  the  order  of  his  world.  If  that  were  all,  he  might  be-
so  much  the  worse  for  knowing  it.  We  have  before  us  one
sole  aim,  and  that  alone  has  brought  us  to  your  earth.  You
know  our  mission.  In  days  when  faith  has  grown  cold,  and
belief  in  God  and  immortality  is  waning  to  a  close,  we
come  to  demonstrate  to  man  that  he  is  immortal,  by  virtue  of
the  possession  of  that  soul  which  is  a  spark  struck  off  from
Deity  itself.  We  wish  to  teach  him  of  the  errors  of  the  past,
to  show  him  the  life  that  leads  to  progress,  to  point  him  to
the  future  of  development  and  growth.

It  is  not  with  such  an  end  before  us  that  we  can  tamely  allow
our  work  to  be  set  aside  for  the  development  of  any  strange
phenomenal  power  that  spirits  may  possess  over  gross  matter.

•238  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

If  we  use  such  power  at  all  it  is  because  we  find  it  necessary,
not  because  we  think  it  desirable,  save  always  as  a  means  to
An  end.  Were  it  harmless  we  should  say  so  much.  But  bein-
what  it  is,  an  engine  of  assault  from  the  adversaries,  the  worst
we  have  to  dread,  we  are  urgent  in  warning  you  against  pro-
miscuous seeking  after  these  physical  marvels,  and  against
resting  in  them  as  the  end  and  aim  of  intercourse  with  us.

Regard  them  only  as  means  of  conviction,  as  so  many  proofs
to  your  minds  of  actual  intervention  from  the  world  of  spirit
with  the  world  of  matter.  Look  upon  them  a,s  such  only,  and
use  them  as  the  material  foundation  on  which  the  spiritual
temple  may  be  built.  Rest  assured  that  they  of  themselves
can  teach  you  no  more  than  that ;  nay,  if  the  operating  spirits
find  in  you  no  capacity  to  grasp  more,  they  will  gradually
give  way  to  those  vyho  can  do  such  work  better  than  they  can
and  so  the  means  of  further  knowledge  will  pass  away.  From
that  basis  you  must  go  on  to  further  steps.  You  must  seek
to  know  of  the  nature  of  the  agency,  of  its  source  and  intent.
Surely  you  would  desire  to  be  assured  that  it  is  of  God,  benefi-
cent and  pure  in  origin  and  intent.  Surely  you  would  seek  to
know  how  much  the  visitors  from  beyond  the  grave  can  tell
you  of  that  universal  dwelling-place  of  your  race;  how  tlu-y
can  satisfy  you  of  your  own  soul's  destiny,  and  of  the  means
by  which  you  may  best  fit  yourself  for  the  change  which  you
call  death.  For  if  we  be  not  as  you,  how  is  our  experience
fruitful  to  you  ?  If  we  cannot  tell  you  of  your  own
immortality,  what  profits  it  that  we  prove  to  you  never
so  conclusively  that  we  ourselves  exist  ?  Such  may  be  a
curious  fact ;  it  can  never  be  more.

When  you  can  reach  out  beyond  the  phenomenal  to  the
actual  investigation  of  Truth  for  its  own  sake — when,  in  short,
you  can  believe  our  pretensions — then  we  can  open  out  to  you
a  realm  of  which  you  are  yet  ignorant,  and  which  has  been
far  more  fully  revealed  to  earnest  seekers  in  other  lands  than
yours.  To  few  only  in  your  land  have  the  higher  reveaHngs
of  spiritual  truth  been  vouchsafed.  Even  this  means  of  com-
muning by  writing,  which  seems  to  you  such  an  advance  on
the  clumsy  rapping  out  of  messages  and  such  material  means

RECEPTIVITY   PRECEDES   DEVELOPMENT.  239

•of"  communication,  is  as  nothing,  compared  with  the  inner
•communing  of  spirit  with  spirit  without  the  intervention  of
-material  signs.  In  America,  the  land  from  which  dates  this
movement  in  your  days,  there  are  many  who  have  been  so  far
developed  as  to  lead  a  dual  life,  and  to  hold  face  to  face  inter-
course with  us.  We  have  even  now  a  band  of  workers  there
•who  are  achieving  results  which  we  cannot  command  here
through  faithlessness  of  mind,  materiality  of  interests,  and
even  grossness  of  atmospheric  surroundings.  It  is  not  with
•our  work  as  with  your  mundane  affairs.  We  read  the  heart,
and  it  is  useless  to  feign  interest  which  you  do  not  feel — that
you  would  not  do — or  to  proceed  on  our  way  while  faith  is
lacking.  It  has  been  so  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  Efforts  have
been  made  from  time  to  time  to  pour  in  advanced  knowledge;
it  has  been  found  that  the  time  was  not  come,  and  the  effort
has  been  withdrawn.  But  this  is  not  what  we  wish  to  say.
We  desire  only  to  warn  you  against  a  danger,  and  to  encourage
you  to  rise  above  the  material  to  the  spiritual  plane.  Recep-
tivity must  precede  higher  development :  bub  we  yearn  and
pray  for  the  time  when  you  shall  have  shaken  yourselves  free
from  earthly  trammels,  and  seek  only  after  the  higher  reveal-
ings  of  Truth.  To  that  end  you  must  have  singleness  of  pur-
pose :  you  must  have  shaken  yourselves  free  from  human
opinion,  and  have  dissociated  yourselves  from  the  material
plane,  so  far  as  an  occupant  of  earth  may  do  so.

Eternal  Father  !  Thou  in  Whose  Name  we  work,  and  for
the  revealing  of  Whose  Truth  we  are  sent  to  earth,  enable  us
to  elevate  and  purify  the  hearts  of  those  to  whom  we  speak,
that  they  may  rise  from  earth  and  open  their  spiritual  senses
to  discern  the  things  which  we  reveal.  May  Faith  grow  in
them,  so  that  they  may  aspire  to  Truth,  and,  leaving  earthy
interests  behind,  press  on  to  learn  the  Revelation  of  the  Spirit.

+  IMPERATOR.

[I  remarked  that  I  had  no  doubt  that  all  that  was
said  was  true,  and  I  added  that  I  had  difficulty  in
understanding  why  some  law  and  order  did  not
ootain  on  the  spiritual  side,  so  as  to  curb  those  un-
rulv  spirits.  They  seemed  to  do  what  they  pleased,

240  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

and  to  be  under  no  governance.  Also  I  expressed
my  wonder  at  their  false  statements.  I  could  not
see  why  a  spirit  should  take  pleasure  in  persona-
tion.]

You  err  in  supposing  there  is  no  law  and  order  with  us.
It  is  that  the  neglect  of  conditions  on  your  part  frustrates
orderly  effort.  You  must  learn  to  fence  your  circles  round
with  proper  conditions,  and  then  you  will  eliminate  half  the
trickery  and  contradiction.  The  time  will  not  come  when  all
that  you  call  evil  will  be  wiped  out ;  for  this  is  a  matter  of
spiritual  training,  and  we  have  no  power  to  save  you  from
the  process,  which  is  for  your  progressive  development.  It  is
necessary  that  you  pass  through  it.  You  have  much  to  learn,
and  this  practical  experience  is  one  of  the  ways  of  learning.

As  to  personation  you  will  learn  more  hereafter.  For  the
present,  we  tell  you  that  there  are  spirits  who  delight  in
such  personation,  and  who  have  the  power,  under  certain
conditions,  of  carrying  out  elaborate  deception.  Such  take
names  which  they  see  to  be  desired,  and  would  reply  equally
to  any  name  given  them.  They  may  usually  be  excluded
by  a  careful  attention  to  conditions,  and  by  the  efforts  of
a  strong  guardian  who  is  able  to  protect  the  circle.  Those
who  sit  frequently  and  in  open  circles,  where  no  care  is  taken
of  the  spiritual  conditions,  and  who  have  no  powerful  spirit
friends  to  protect  them,  are  in  danger  of  incursion  from
these.  In  most  circles,  as  far  as  we  know,  every  facility  is
given  for  the  intervention  of  tricky  spirits.  The  phenomena
are  sought  after  in  a  spirit  of  mere  curiosity.  Personal  friends
are  greedily  summoned,  and  no  pains  taken  to  ascertain
whether  the  spirit  answering  be  indeed  a  friend  or  a  de-
ceiver. Foolish  queries  are  addressed,  and  foolish  replies
eagerly  swallowed.  What  wonder  that  such  are  the  sport
of  the  undeveloped !

How  is  one  to  know  that  this  personation  does  not  extend
to  all  ?  and  that  what  in  Spiritualism  appears  good
and  coherent,  will  not  in  the  end  prove  to  be  only  a
cleverer  trick  ?  If  such  powers  are  behind,  who  is
safe  ?

POSSIBLE   DANGERS.  241

We  can  but  give  you  the  answer  you  have  had  before.  We
have  proved  to  you  our  good  faith,  our  truth,  our  external
individuality.  We  have  given  you  proof  upon  proof.  We
have  shown  our  moral  consciousness  by  consistent  truthfulness
in  all  things — by  the  presence  of  a  tone  in  our  teachings  to
you,  which  you  must  estimate  for  yourself.  When  complete
they  shall  stand  forth  to  all  as  pure  and  good.  Even  now
you  admit  them  to  be  elevated  and  good  in  tendency.  Your
knowledge  of  us,  of  our  work,  and  of  our  aims,  must  lead  you
to  a  judgment  such  as  you  would  frame  of  a  fellow-man  under
similar  circumstances.

Yes.  This  personating  spirit,  by  peaking  of  whom  I
commenced,  ivould  upset  one's  faith  very  soon,  if  it  had
got  access.

It  might  have  been  so ;  we  cannot  tell  how  far  we  could
have  counteracted  the  effort ;  but  we  do  not  wish  to  run  the
risk.  For  contradicting  statements  would  surely  have  been
made,  personation  carried  on,  and  in  the  end  the  scanty  faith
you  have  would  have  sustained  a  rude  shock.  This  is  a  real
danger  to  you ;  for  the  introduction  of  false  and  contradic-
tory statements  would  do  more  to  foster  a  suspicious  feeling
in  your  mind  than  anything.  In  the  end  it  would  undermine
us  and  drive  us  away.

Really  the  subject  seems  to  be  a  most  dangerous  one  to
meddle  with.

The  abuse  of  everything  is  bad ;  the  use,  good  and  com-
mendable. To  those  who  in  frivolous  frame  of  mind  place
themselves  in  communion  with  the  spheres ;  to  those  who
force  themselves  from  low  motives  in  that  which  is  to  them
only  a  curious  thing ;  to  the  vain  in  their  own  conceit,  the
triflers,  the  untruthful,  the  worldly,  the  sensual,  the  base,  the
flippant  there  is  doubtless  danger.  We  never  advise  any  of
unbalanced  mind  to  meddle  with  the  mysteries  of  mediumship.
It  is  direful  risk  to  them.  Those  only  who  are  protected  and
guarded  round,  who  act  from  no  inner  motive,  but  in  obedience
to  the  impulse  of  the  guardians,  who  are  wise  and  powerful

SPIRIT-TEAC1JIXGS.

to  protect,  should  meddle,  and  they  carefully  and  with  earnest
prayer.  We  deprecate  always  any  unlicensed  meddling.  Nor
can  any  safely  mingle  with  the  spirit-world,  and  so  intro-
duce one  more  disturbing  element  into  his  earth-life,  except  he
be  of  even  mind  and  steady  temper.  Any  unhinged  mind,  spas-
modic temperament,  fitful,  purposeless  character,  becomes  the
ready  prey  of  the  undeveloped.  Doubtless  it  is  perilous  for
such  to  meddle,  more  especially  if  their  interest  be  only  in  the
marvellous,  to  gratify  an  idle  curiosity,  or  to  solace  their  own
vanity.  The  higher  messages  of  the  Supreme  are  not  audible
to  such.  Would  that  they  who  can  hear  them  would  forsake
the  trifling  of  the  lower  spirits,  and,  leaving  the  inferior  planes,
press  on  to  the  purer  atmosphere  of  the  higher  spheres  of
knowledge.

But  all  this  is  caviare  to  the  ivorld.  They  think  far  more
of  a  good  thump  on  the  head,  or  of  a  floating  chair,
than  of  all  your  information,  which,  by-the-by,  is  hard
enough  to  get,

True,  we  know  it  only  too  well.  The  present  phase  of  our
work  is  one  that  must  be  passed  through.  The  physical
accompanies,  but  is  no  real  part  of  our  work.  It  must,  as  we
say,  precede  the  real  development  for  which  we  wait.  It  will
go  on  all  around  you  with  increasing  development ;  and  while
we  warn  you  against  the  dangers  which  accompany  it,  we  do
not  disguise  the  necessity  for  it  in  the  present  material  state
of  your  knowledge.  V/hile  we  deplore  we  acknowledge  the
necessity.  We  have  more  to  add  to  what  has  been  said,  but
not  now.  For  the  present,  cease.

[After  a  short  rest,  this  addition  was  made  to  what  had
been  said.]

We  have  told  you  of  the  operations  of  the  adversaries,  and
of  the  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  them.  But  others  there
are  who,  without  being  malignant  foes,  are  nevertheless  a  cause
of  trouble  to  us.  Many  of  those  who  are  withdrawn  from
earth  are  not,  as  you  know,  very  progressive,  nor,  on  the  con-
trary, very  undeveloped.  The  majority  of  those  who  pass
from  the  body  is  neither  very  evil  nor  very  good  in  spirit

PERSONATING   SPIRITS.  243

Such,  indeed,  as  are  so  far  progressive  as  to  gravitate  rapidly
through  the  spheres  nearest  the  earth,  do  not  return  unless
called  to  a  special  mission.  The  earth-bound  we  have  already
told  you  of.

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  agency  of  a  class  of  spirits  who,
from  mischievous  design,  or  from  pure  sportive  fun,  or  from
love  of  mystification,  frequent  circles,  counterfeit  manifesta-
tions, assume  names,  and  give  erroneous  or  misleading  informa-
tion. Such  are  not  evil,  but  unbalanced,  spirits  who  lack  even
balance,  and  who  delight  in  plaguing  mediums  and  circles :  in
giving  exaggerated  tone  to  communications,  in  introducing
false  elements,  or  in  personating  friends,  and  reading  in  the
thought  the  answer  which  they  give  to  a  query.  The  work  of
.such  is  that  which  causes  you  to  say  that  Spiritual  manifesta-
tions are  frequently  foolish  or  silly.  This  is  due  to  the  efforts  of
these  spirits  who,  from  fun  or  mischief,  counterfeit  our  work,
and  play  on  the  feelings  of  those  who  trust  them.  These  are
they  who  personate  relatives  whose  presence  is  desired,  and
answer  to  their  names.  These  are  they  who  make  true  identi-
fication of  friends  in  mixed  circles  impossible.  Most  of  the
stories  current  of  such  return  of  friends  are  due  to  the  work
of  these  spirits.  These  are  they  who  infuse  the  comic  or
foolish  element  into  communications.  They  have  no  true
moral  consciousness,  and  will  pray  readily,  if  asked,  or  will  do
anything  for  frolic  or  mischief.  They  have  no  aspiration
beyond  the  present :  no  desire  to  injure,  but  only  to  amuse
themselves.

These  are  they  who  allure  to  wrong  paths,  and  suggest
wrong  desires  and  thoughts.  They  secretly  influence  mediums
much,  and  prevent  noble  aspirations.  They  view  with  im-
patience noble  and  elevated  aims,  and  suggest  the  material.
They  act  as  bars  and  clogs.  They  are  greatly  concerned  with
physical  manifestations.  They  are  usually  shrewd  and  clever
at  such  work,  and  they  delight  in  presenting  bewildering
phenomena  for  the  purpose  of  disturbing  the  mind.  They
victimise  mediums  in  divers  ways,  and  find  a  pleasure  in  the
bewilderment  of  mind  which  they  cause.  Obsession  and
possession,  and  the  various  forms  of  spiritual  annoyance,  pro-

244  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

ceed  very  frequently  from  such.     They  are  able  to  psycholo-

gise  a  mind  over  which  they  have  gained  influence

These  again  are  spirits  who  befool  inquirers  who  have  asked
for  personal  information.  They  return  plausible  answers,  and
bewilder  the  deluded  inquirers,  or  if  a  personal  friend  have
once  appeared,  and  given  a  good  test,  his  or  her  place  on  the
next  occasion  may  be  filled  by  one  of  these  spirits,  who  takes
the  name  and  replies  to  queries,  giving  vague  and  unsatis-
factory replies,  or  telling  false  stories.  It  is  always  well  to-
put  the  personal  element  as  far  from  you  as  possible,  lest  you
open  the  way  to  deceit.

•  •••••

+  IMPERATOR.

(     245     )

SECTION   XXX.

[The  fondness  of  spirits  for  anniversaries  has  led  to  my
receiving  a  number  of  special  teachings  on  Church
Festivals.  As  a  specimen  I  give  the  Easter  Teach-
ings for  three  consecutive  years.  It  will  be  seen
that  the  words  written  in  1875,  and  signed  by
another  name  to  those  who  have  given  other
teachings,  breathes  a  different  spirit,  and  is  con-
ceived from  another  standpoint.]

[Easter  Day,  1874.  I  referred  to  a  communication  given
on  the  corresponding  day  of  the  year  previous  from
DOCTOR  and  PRUDENS.]

It  may  serve  as  a  landmark  for  estimating  progress,  if  you
review  your  feelings  then,  and  contrast  them  with  what  you
now  know.  You  will  see  how  much  you  have  both  learned
and  unlearned  on  matters  all-important.  We  taught  you  then
of  the  resurrection  of  the  soul,  in  opposition  to  the  resurrection
of  the  body.  We  explained  the  true  theory  of  the  rising  of
the  spirit,  not  in  a  far  distant  hereafter,  but  at  the  moment  of
bodily  dissolution.  This  was  new  to  you ;  it  is  not  so  now.
You  have  now  knowledge  of  what  then  seemed  unintelligible
to  your  mind.  We  have  told  you  too  of  the  mission  of  Jesus,
and  of  His  present  work  among  you  through  His  messengers.
We  have  shown  to  you  the  true  Divinity,  the  real  grandeur
of  the  Lord  whom  you  had  ignorantly  worshipped.  We  have
shown  Him  to  you  as  He  was,  as  He  always  described  Him-
self, a  man  like  yourselves,  only  the  noblest  of  the  children  of
men,  the  likest  God,  the  truest  and  purest  ideal  of  man's  per-
fection. If  we  have  taken  from  the  Christ  the  halo  which  a
foolish  and  human  creed  had  spread  around  Him,  we  have
shown  you  the  man  Christ  Jesus  in  divinest  form,  the  full
realisation  of  human  perfection  on  this  earth.

His  body  has  not  indeed  been  raised,  but  He  has  never  died,
and  in  spirit  He  manifested  to  His  friends,  walked  with  them,
as  we  may  one  day  walk  with  you,  and  taught  them  of  the
truth.

21G  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

What  you  are  now  witnessing  are  the  feigns  and  wonders
that  prelude  the  opening  of  a  new  dispensation,  the  advent  of
the  Lord,  not  as  man  has  fancied  and  as  your  teachers  have
vainly  taught,  in  bodily  presence  to  judge  an  arisen  humanity,
but  in  His  new  mission  (the  fulness  of  the  old),  through  us,
His  messengers  and  ministers,  in  the  declaration  of  a  new
evangel  to  your  world.  In  those  events  which  even  now  tran-
spire among  you  we  bear  our  part.  It  is  our  mission,  under
the  sacred  guidance  of  Him  in  whose  name  we  speak,  to  tell
to  a  world  only  partly  able  to  bear  it  a  new  Gospel  which,  in
after  ages,  shall  take  its  place  among  the  revelations  of  the
Supreme  to  man,  and  shall  be  valued  as  the  outcome  of  the  past.

We  have  lately  been  able  to  act  more  directly  on  you,  be-
cause of  your  increased  passivity,  and  more  receptive  frame
of  mind.     We  earnestly  encourage  you  to  prayerfulness  and
stedfastness,  together  with  patient  watching.     Be  not  diverted
from  the  purpose  for  which  we  labour.     Meditate  long  and
frequently  on  the  sacred  message  which  God  now  sends  to-
earth.     Strive  to  throw  aside  obstacles  and  bars  to  progress.
We  would  not  have  you  neglect  your  daily  work.     The  time
will  come  when  we  shall  be  able  to  use  you  more  frequently.
That  time  is  not  yet  come.     It  is  necessary  that  you  go  through
this  additional  trial  and  preparation ;  meantime,  dear  friend,
remember  that  you  need  training,  even  as  by  fire    .    .    .    you
must  endeavour  to  rise  above  the  plane  of  earth  to  the  higher
spheres,  where  the  higher  spirits  dwell.     This  is  our  Easter
message  to  you.     Awake  and  arise  from  the  dead.     Cast  aside
the  gross  cares  of  your  lower  world.     Throw  off  the  material
bonds  that  bind  and  clog  your  spirit.     Rise  from  dead  matter
to  living  spirit ;  from  earthly  care  to  spiritual  love ;  from  earth
to  heaven.     Emancipate  your  spirit  from  earthly  cares  which
are  earth-born  and  unspiritual.     Cast  aside  the  material  and
the  physical  which  have  been  the  necessary  aids  to  your  pro-
gress, and  rise  from  engrossing  interest  in  the  worldly  to  a
due  appreciation  of  Spiritual  Truth.     As  the  Master  said  to
His  friends,  "  Be  in  the  world,  but  not  of  the  world."     So  shall
those  other  words  of  your  Sacred  Records  be  fulfilled  in  you  :
"  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ
shall  give  thee  light."

SPIRITUAL   DEVELOPMENT.  247

You  speak  as  ij  I  wasted  time  on  worldly  things.

No ;  we  have  said  that  it  must  needs  be  that  your  earthly
work  must  be  accomplished  even  at  the  risk  of  preventing
the  education  of  your  spirit.  But  we  would  have  you  to
devote  your  care  to  higher  spiritual  teaching,  and  to  leave  the
lower  planes  of  objective  evidence,  which  should  no  longer  be
required.  We  would  have  you  to  progress.  And  what  we
say  to  you  we  say  to  all.

[After  some  further  questions  I  suggested  that  develop-
ment might  go  on  till  one  became  quite  unfit  for
work  in  the  world ;  so  sensitive  as  fit  only  to  be
shut  up  in  a  glass  case ;  so  absorbed  in  spirit-land
as  to  be  useless  for  a  workaday  world:  that  indeed
being  the  perfection  of  mediumship.]

Doubtless  it  might  be  so  with  another  type  of  spirit  placed
in  other  circumstances  and  under  other  guardianship.  We
shall  see  to  that.  We  have  made  our  choice  with  a  view  to  it,
and  have  preferred  to  risk  delay  rather  than  to  choose  an
instrument  who  would  be  ill-regulated  in  mind,  and  a  prey  to
the  fantasies  of  every  vagrant  spirit.  We  have  trusted  that
the  fulness  of  time  will  lessen  the  weight  of  doubt  and  diffi-
culty, and  that  assured  confidence  being  established,  and  over-
carefulness  diminished,  we  may  progress  with  speed  and  safety.
We  cannot  hasten  that  time ;  we  would  not  if  we  could.  But
we  shall  not  cease  to  urge  on  all  our  friends  the  necessity  for
higher  aspirations ;  nor  to  impress  on  them  that  the  physical
foundation  having  been  laid  it  is  time  to  raise  the  spiritual
superstructure.

»

[I  repeated  what  I  had  before  said,  viz.,  that  I  would
go  where  I  saw  my  way;  but  that  I  thought
much  that  passed  current  for  Spiritualism  to  be
unworthy  and  even  mischievous ;  that  mediumship
was  anything  but  an  unmixed  blessing,  and,  when
exercised  in  mixed  circles,  a  very  dangerous  thing.
I  added  that  faith  was  no  doubt  necessary,  but
that  I  had  about  as  much  as  I  ever  should  have.
And  quite  certainly  no  amount  of  physical  proof
beyond  what  we  had  received  would  add  one  iota
to 'it.]

248  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

You  are  mistaken  in  supposing  your  faith  to  be  as  strong  as
it  will  be.  When  enlarged  and  purified  it  will  be  a  vastly
different  power  from  that  cold,  calculating,  nerveless  assent
which  ycu  now  call  Faith.  The  faith  you  now  possess  would
pale  and  fade  away  before  real  obstacles.  It  has  no  hold  upon
your  mind,  is  no  factor  in  your  life.  In  one  way  it  would  be
strengthened  by  opposition,  but  a  severe  spiritual  attack  from
the  adversaries  would  well-nigh  extinguish  it.  Faith  to  be
real  must  be  outside  the  limits  of  caution,  and  be  fired  by
something  more  potent  and  effective  than  calculating  prudence,
or  logical  deduction,  or  judicial  impartiality.  It  must  be  the
fire  that  burns  within,  the  mainspring  that  regulates  the  life,
the  overmastering  force  that  will  not  be  at  rest.  This  is  that
faith  that  Jesus  spoke  of  when  He  said  of  it  that  it  was  able
to  move  mountains.  This  is  that  which  braves  death  and  tor-
ture, braces  up  the  feeble  knees  for  long  and  hard  endurance,
and  conducts  its  possessor  safe  at  last  through  any  perils  that
may  assail  him  to  the  goal  where  faith  finds  its  reward  in
fruition.

Of  this  you  know  nothing.  Yours  is  not  Faith,  but  only
logical  assent ;  not  spontaneous  living  faith,  but  a  hard-wrung
intellectual  assent  weighted  always  with  a  mental  reservation.
That  which  you  have  would  move  no  mountain,  though  it
might  suffice  to  select  a  safe  way  round  it.  It  would  be
powerless  to  animate  and  stir  the  spirit,  though  it  would  be
fitted  to  estimate  evidence  and  weigh  probabilities.  It  would
suffice  for  purposes  of  intellectual  defence,  but  it  is  not  the
faith  that  springs  unceasing  in  the  innermost  soul,  and  be-
comes, by  virtue  of  its  power,  an  over-mastering  leader,  a
mainspring  of  action,  of  high  and  holy  purpose,  at  which  the
world  may  sneer,  and  the  wise  may  scoff,  but  which  is  tho
central  spring  of  all  that  is  best  and  noblest  in  man's  life.

Of  this  you  know  nothing.  But,  mark  us,  the  time  will
come  when  you  will  marvel  how  you  could  have  ever  digni-
fied this  calculating  caution  by  the  name  of  faith,  or  have
dreamed  that  to  its  hesitating  knock  can  ever  be  unbarred  the
portals  of  Divine  truth.  You  must  wait,  and  when  the  time
comes  you  will  not  set  up  that  pale  marble  statue  in  place  of

THE   INSURRECTION.  24'J

should  be  a  living  body,  instinct  with  conviction,  and
-energised  by  the  loftiest  purpose.     You  have  no  faith.

You  have  a  way  of  putting  things,  which,  however  true,  is
slightly 'discomfiting.  However,  since  "  Faith  is  the  gift
of  God,"  I  can't  see  hoiu  I  am  to  blame.  I  am  as  I  ^vas
'made.

Nay,  friend,  but  you  are  what  you  have  made  yourself
-through  a  life  which  has  been  moulded  both  from  within  and
from  without.  You  are  what  external  circumstances,  and
internal  predilections,  and  spirit  guidance  have  made  you.
You  misunderstand.  We  did  but  rebuke  you  for  your  vaunt-
ing that  as  faith  which  has  no  claim  to  the  name.  Be  content.
You  are  on  the  road  to  higher  knowledge  of  a  nobler  truth.
Withdraw  (so  far  as  may  be)  from  the  external,  and  cultivate
the  interior  and  spiritual.  Cease  not  to  pray  for  faith,  that
what  you  well  call,  "the  gift  of  God,"  may  be  poured  into
your  spirit,  and  energise  through  it  to  a  higher  knowledge.
You  retard  us  by  your  very  anxiety.

+  IMPERATOR.

[Easter  Day,  1875.  I  had  been  conscious  of  the  presence
of  a  great  number  of  spirits  in  the  morning.  After
some  reference  to  this,  it  was  written  under  an
entirely  new  influence,  though  by  the  usual  amanu-
ensis] : —

We  have  told  you  that  we  always  celebrate  anniversaries,
.and  Easter  is  with  us  a  festival  as  well  as  with  you:  though  we
celebrate  it  from  other  reasons,  and  with  a  higher  knowledge.
Easter  is  to  us  the  Festival  of  Resurrection,  but  not  of  the
body.  To  us  it  symbolises  not  Resurrection  of  matter,  but
Resurrection  from  matter,  the  Resurrection  of  Spirit:  and  not
this  alone,  but  Resurrection  of  Spirit  from  material  beliefs  and
surroundings :  the  emancipation  of  the  soul  from  the  earthy
.and  material,  even  as  the  spirit  rises  from  the  dead  body  with
which  it  has  done  for  ever.

You  have  learned  that  there  is  a  spiritual  significance  in
•everything,  even  as  there  is  a  spirit  underlying  every  material
•object.  So  the  dogma  that  Christendom  celebrates  to-day  is

2.50  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

to  us  of  special  significance.  Christians  keep  festival  in
memory  of  the  rescue  of  their  Master,  the  Lord  Jesus,  from
the  grasp  of  death  :  and  though  they  erroneously  believe  that-
the  material  body  was  revived,  they  do  in  ignorance  celebrate
the  great  spiritual  truth  that  there  is  no  death.  The  festival
to  us  is  one  of  joy  over  the  partial  recognition  of  a  truth
divinely  seen  by  men :  and  of  still  greater  rejoicing  over  the
mighty  work  consummated  on  this  day.  It  is  not  that  death
was  vanquished,  as  you  say,  but  that  man  began  dimly  to  see
a  vision  of  eternal  life.

[I  enquired  as  to  the  character  of  Christ's  human  body,
and  the  spiritual  significance  of  his  life.]

It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  Incarnation  of  an  exalted
spirit  for  the  purpose  of  regenerating  mankind  is  not  con-
fined to  a  single  instance.  The  special  salvation  which  man-
kind derives  from  these  special  Saviours  is  that  of  which  at
the  time  it  stands  in  need.  These  special  Incarnations  you
will  know  more  of  hereafter.  For  the  present  we  say  only
that  they  are  in  degree  different  from  that  of  ordinary  men,
even  as  among  men  there  is  every  grade  of  nationality  in  the
body :  some  gross  and  sensual,  others  refined  and  ethereal.
The  human  body  of  Jesus  was  of  the  most  ethereal  and  perfect
nature,  and  it  was  trained  and  prepared  during  thirty  years  of
seclusion  from  the  three  years  of  active  work  that  the  spirit
had  to  do.

You  err  in  supposing  [the  thought  had  crossed  my  mind,
How  disproportionate  the  preparation  to  the  work  /]  that  the
work  done  by  an  incarnated  spirit  is  to  be  bounded  by  the
span  of  earthly  existence.  It  is  very  frequently,  as  in  the  case
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  after  effect  of  the  life  that  is  the
truest  part  of  the  work.  So,  though  the  work  was  begun
during  these  three  years,  it  has  been  carried  on  ever  since.

It  was  the  union  of  the  majestic  with  the  humble  that  was
the  note  of  his  life.  Majesty  and  meanness  combined.  The
majesty  shone  out  at  seasons — at  his  birth,  at  his  death,  at
intervals  during  his  life,  as  at  Jordan  when  the  attesting
voice  of  spirit  sanctified  his  mission.  Men  knew  of  him,  all

THE  LIFE   OF  THE  CHRIST.  251

his  life  through,  that  he  was  not  as  other  men  :  that  his  life
was  not  to  be  bound  by  social  or  domestic  ties :  though  the
harmony  of  the  social  circle  was  pleasant  to  him.  Men  knew
this :  and  your  Bible  gives  you,  in  this  respect,  a  most  imper-
fect idea  of  the  influence  he  exercised  on  all  who  came  near
him.  It  dwells  too  little  on  the  moral  effect  his  words  and
actions  caused,  and  too  much  on  the  ignorant  misconceptions
of  the  learned  and  respectable  classes  who  then,  as  always,
were,  the  bitterest  foes  of  new  truth.  The  Scribes  and  Rulers,
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  were  the  ignorant  foes  of  the
Christ,  even  as  your  learned  men  and  doctors,  your  theologians
and  men  of  science  so-called,  hate,  and  would  persecute,  the
mission  that  springs  from  Christ  now.

When  you  come  to  write  the  story  of  our  work,  you  would
not  seek  for  its  records  among  such  classes  of  men ;  and  the
fault  is,  that  those  who  have  given  you  the  only  record  you
have  of  the  life  of  Jesus  have  insisted  too  much  on  his  perse-
cution by  learned  ignorance,  and  too  little  on  the  moral  dignity
of  his  life  amongst  those  who  lived  with  him.  They  had  not
access  to  the  original  recipients  of  his  teaching,  and  borrowed
at  tenth  hand  stories  that  were  rife.  It  is  as  though,  cen-
turies hence,  men  should  compile  a  history  of  these  days  from,
the  current  stories  of  society.  It  is  important  to  mark  this.

The  life  of  the  Christ,  so  far  as  it  was  public,  was  comprised
within  three  years  and  a  few  months.  For  that  the  previous-
thirty  years  had  been  a  preparation.  During  all  that  time  he
was  receiving  instruction  from  those  exalted  angels,  who
inspired  him  with  zeal  and  love  for  his  mission.  He  was  a
constant  communer  with  the  world  of  spirit;  and  was  the
more  able  to  drink  in  their  teachings  that  his  body  was  no-
bar  to  his  spirit.

In  the  case  of  most  incarnate  spirits,  who  have  descended
to  minister  on  earth,  the  assumption  of  corporeity  dims-
spiritual  vision,  and  cuts  it  off  from  remembrance  of  its  pre-
vious existence.  Not  so  with  him.  So  little  did  his  ethereal
body  blind  the  sense  of  spirit,  that  he  could  converse  with  the
angels  as  one  of  their  own  order,  who  was  cognisant  of  their
life,  and  remembered  his  own  part  in  it  before  incarnation.

'252  Sl'IUIT-TEACHIXGS.

His  remembrance  of  previous  life  was  never  blunted,  and
=a  great  part  of  his  time  was  spent  in  disunion  from  the
body,  and  in  conscious  communion  with  spirit.  Long  trances,
as  you  call  the  interior  state,  fitted  him  for  this,  as  you  may
see  in  some  distorted  passages  of  your  records,  the  supposed
Temptation,  for  instance,  or  that  which  speaks  of  his  habit  of
meditating  and  praying  alone  on  the  mountain-top,  or  in  the
•Garden  Agony.

O  v

You  may  also  detect  by  the  light  we  now  give  you  flashes
of  recollection  of  his  state  before  incarnation,  even,  as  he  is
recorded  to  have  said,  in  the  glory  of  the  Father  before  the
world  began.  There  are  many  such.

His  life,  but  little  hampered  by  the  body — which,  indeed,
was  but  a  temporary  envelope  to  his  spirit,  assumed  only
when  it  was  necessary  for  the  spirit  to  come  in  contact  with
material  things, — was  different  in  degree,  though  not  in  kind,
from  the  ordinary  life  of  man — purer,  simpler,  nobler,  more
loving,  and  more  loved.  Such  a  life  could  never  be  understood
aright  by  those  who  were  contemporary  with  it.  It  is  of
necessity  that  such  lives  should  be  misunderstood,  misinter-
preted, maligned,  and  mistaken.  It  is  so  in  a  degree  with  all
that  step  out  from  the  ranks,  but  especially  with  him.

Prematurely  was  that  Divine  Life  cut  short  by  human
ignorance  and  malignity.  Little  do  men  grasp  the  significance
of  the  truth  to  which  they  carelessly  give  utterance  when  they
say  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  die  for  it.  He  did  so
come  :  but  in  the  sense  of  these  enthusiasts,  he  came  not.  The
drama  of  Calvary  was  of  man's  not  God's  devising.  It  was
not  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  that  Jesus  should  die  when
the  work  of  the  Christ  was  but  just  commencing.  That  was
man's  work,  foul,  evil,  accursed.

Christ  came  to  die  for  and  to  save  man  in  the  same,  though
in  a  higher  sense,  that  all  regenerators  of  men  have  been  their
Saviours,  and  have  yielded  up  bodily  existence  in  devotion  to
an  over-mastering  idea.  In  this  sense  He  came  to  save  and
die  for  men :  but  in  the  sense  that  the  scene  on  Calvary  was
foreordained  to  occur  when  man  consummated  his  foul  deed,
lie  came  not.  And  this  is  a  mighty  truth.

LAND   MARKS   IN   THE   LIFE   OF  THE   CHRIST.  2:>:?

Had  the  full  life  of  Jesus  been  completed  on  earth,  what
vast,  what  incalculable  blessings  would  men  have  reaped  ?  But
they  were  not  fitted,  and  they  pushed  aside  the  proffered,
blessings,  having  but  just  tasted  them.  They  were  not  pre-
pared. So  with  all  great  Lives.  Men  take  from  them  only
that  which  they  can  grasp,  and  leave  the  rest  for  after  ages  ;
or  they  push  them  impatiently  aside,  and  will  have  none  of
them :  and  after  ages  worship  and  revere  a  spirit  incarned  too-
soon.  This  too  is  a  mighty  truth.

It  is  not  permitted  us,  nay,  it  is  not  in  the  counsels  of  the-
Supreme  Himself,  to  force  on  man  a  truth  for  which  he  is  not
ripe.  There  must  be,  throughout  God's  universe,  orderly  pro-
gression, and  systematic  development.  So  it  is  now.  Were
men  fitted  to  receive  the  truths  we  tell  of,  the  world  would  be
blest  with  a  revelation  such  as  it  has  not  had  since  last  the-
Angels  shed  on  it  the  beams  of  Divine  Truth.  But  it  is  not-
prepared:  and  only  the  f.ew  who  have  learned  wisdom  will
receive  now  what  future  ages  will  drink  in  with  gladness.  In.

o  o

this  sense  the  Christ  life  was  a  failure  during  his  existence  on
earth,  and  a  potent  vivifying  influence  among  men  afterwards.

Guided  by  angel-influence,  the  Church,  that  bears  his  name,
has  gathered  up  the  germs  of  truth  that  that  life  typified,,
though  now,  alas  !  long  custom  has  familiarised  men  too  much
with  the  old  ideas,  and  they  have  lost  their  chief  power.

You  know  that  the  three  branches  of  the  Church  of  Christ
are  agreed  in  celebrating  certain  festivals  in  memory  of  events
in  the  life  of  Jesus.  They  who,  outside  the  Church,  have
refused  to  keep  fast  and  festival  are  not  wise.  They  cut-
themselves  off  from  a  portion  of  the  truth.  But  the  Christian
Church  keeps  in  memory  of  its  Head,  Christmas,  Epiphany,
Lent,  Easter,  Ascension,  and  Whitsuntide.  Those  are  the  land-
marks in  the  Christ  life,  and  each  represents  an  event  in  his.
life  with  a  hidden  spiritual  significance.

The  Christmas  Festival  of  the  Birth  of  the  Spirit  on  the-
plane  of  Incarnation  typifies  Love  and  Self-denial.  The-
exalted  spirit  tabernacles  in  flesh,  abnegates  Self,  animated  by
Love.  It  is  to  us  the  Festival  of  Self-denial.

The  Epiphany,  the  Festival  of  the  manifestation  of  this  new

254  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

light  to  the  world,  is  to  us  the  Festival  of  Spiritual  Enlighten-
ment :  the  shining  of  the  True  Light  that  lighteth  every  one
that  is  born  into  the  world  :  not  the  carrying  of  it  to  men,  but
the  uplifting  of  the  Light  so  that  they  who  can  see  may  come
to  it.

The  Fast  of  Lent  typifies  to  us  the  struggles  of  Truth  with
•darkness.  It  is  the  Wrestling  with  the  Adversaries.  The
recurring  season  shadows  forth  a  constantly  recurring  struggle.
It  is  the  Fast  of  Conflict  :  of  wrestling  with  evil :  of  the
•endeavour  to  overcome  the  world.

Good  Friday  typifies  to  us  the  consummation  of  the  struggle,
the  end  that  awaits  all  such  conflicts  in  your  world — Death  :
t>ut  Death  in  Life.  It  is  the  Festival  of  Triumphant  Self-
sacrifice  :  the  realization  and  consummation  of  the  Christ  Life.
It  is  to  us  no  Fast,  but  a  Festival  of  Triumphant  Love.

Easter,  the  Festival  of  the  Resurrection,  typifies  to  us  the
perfected  life,  the  risen  life,  the  glorified  life.  It  is  the  Festi-
val of  Spirit,  conquering  and  to  conquer :  of  the  risen  life,
•enfranchised  and  set  free.

Whitsuntide,  which  Christendom  associates  with  the  bap-
tism of  the  Spirit  is  to  us  a  Festival  of  great  import.  It
typifies  the  outpouring  of  a  large  measure  of  spiritual  truth
•on  those  who  have  accepted  the  Christ-life.  It  is  the  Festival
which  is  the  complement  of  Good  Friday.  As  human  ignor-
ance slays  the  truth  that  it  cannot  receive:  so,  as  a  consequence,
from  the  higher  realm  of  spirit  comes  a  blessing  on  those  who
have  embraced  what  the  world  has  crucified.  It  is  the  Festival
•of  the  outpoured  Spirit,  of  increased  grace,  of  richer  truth.

Ascension,  lastly,  is  the  Festival  of  the  completed  life,  of  the
return  of  the  Spirit  to  its  home,  of  the  final  sundering  from
matter.  It  is  the  end  as  Christmas  was  the  beginning  :  not
of  life  but  of  earth  life  :  not  the  end  of  existence  but  of  that
.span  consecrated  by  love  and  self-denial  to  mankind.  It  is
the  Festival  of  the  completed  work.

These  are  the  spiritual  ideas  which  underlie  the  Festivals
•of  your  Church.  It  is  not  because  she  has  not  fully  grasped
their  meaning  that  she  has  not  done  well  to  celebrate  them.
A.nd  as  the  spirit  who  has  charge  of  us  and  of  our  work  has

THK   SIGNIFICANCE   OF   FESTIVALS.  "H

broken  down  for  you  the  wall  of  dogmatism  and  has  shed  light
on  the  superstitions  of  the  Church,  so  it  is  permitted  to  us^to
show  you  that  beneath  all  lies  enshrined  the  germ  of  truth  :
and  when  man's  error  is  removed,  God's  truth  is  more  plainly
seen.

We  have  desired  to  complement  the  teaching  you  have
received.  As  it  was  necessary  to  destroy,  so  is  it  to  conserve.
Even  as  He,  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Saviour  of  men,  rescued
Divine  Truth  from  Jewish  ignorance  and  superstition,  so  do
we  rescue  Divine  Verities  from  the  crushing  weight  of  man's
theology.  As  He,  the  great  Healer  of  the  nations,  unloosed
the  struggling  souls,  and  released  them  from  the  dominion  of
spiritual  evil :  so  do  we  set  free  the  spirit  from  the  bonds  of
human  dogma,  and  bid  the  enfranchised  Truth  to  soar  so  that
men  may  see  it  and  know  that  it  is  of  God.

CKUCIFIXION    AND  RESURRECTION. — SELF-SACRIFICE  AND
REGENERATION.

An  Easter  Message,  1876.

[I  asked  for  further  teaching  on  the  subject  of  Death
and  Life,  especially  in  the  symbolic  aspects  in
which  they  present  themselves  to  Spirit.

In  the  question  put  by  me,  I  alluded  to  the  spiritual
symbolism  between  the  Death  and  Resurrection,
and  suggested  that  it  typified  death  as  the  portal
of  life ;  and  spiritual  death  as  the  road  to  spiritual
regeneration.]

Refer  to  what  we  wrote  for  you  on  the  last  Festival  of
Easter.  The  symbolism  to  which  3^011  allude  was  then  ex-
plained :  viz.,  resurrection  from  matter,  not  of  matter.  We
explained  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  various  Festivals
which  the  Christian  Church  has  always  kept.  Refer.

[I  referred  to  the  message  which  immediately  precedes
this ;  in  the  course  of  which  the  Church  Festivals
are  symbolically  explained  ;  Christmas,  self-denial ;
Epiphany,  spiritual  enlightenment;  Lent,  spiritual
conflict;  Good  Friday,  triumphant  love;  Easter
the  risen  life;  Whitsuntide,  the  outpoured  spirit;
Ascension,  the  completed  work.]

25G  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

So  it  is.  The  whole  course  of  the  typical  life  of  the  Pattern
Man  is  emblematic  of  the  progressive  development  of  the  life
begun  oh  earth,  completed  in  heaven  (so  to  use  your  terms)r
born  of  self-denial,  and  culminating  in  spiritual  ascension.  la
the  Christ-life,  as  in  a  story,  man  may  read  the  tale  of  the
progress  of  spirit  from  incarnation  to  enfranchisement.  Thirty
years  and  more  of  angelic  preparation  fitted  the  Christ  for  His
mission :  three  short  years  sufficed  to  discharge  so  much  of  it
as  man  could  bear.  So  man's  spirit  in  its  development  pro-
gresses through  the  course  covered  by  the  Festivals  of  the-
Christian  Church,  from  the  birth  of  self-denial  to  the  festival
of  the  completed  life.  Born  in  self-denial,  progressing  through
self-sacrifice,  developed  by  perpetual  struggles  with  the
adversaries  (the  antagonistic  principles  which  must  be  con-
quered in  daily  life,  in  self,  and  in  the  foes),  it  dies  at  length
to  the  external,  and  rises  on  its  Easter  morn  from  the  grave-
of  matter,  and  lives  henceforth,  baptized  by  the  outpoured
spirit  of  Pentecost,  a  new  and  risen  life,  till  it  ascends  to  the
place  prepared  for  it  by  the  tendency  of  its  earth  life.

This  is  the  Spirit's  progress,  and  it  may  be  said  to  be  a  process
of  regeneration,  shortly  typified  by  crucifixion  and  resurrection.
The  old  man  dies,  the  new  man  rises  from  his  grave.  The  old
man,  with  his  lusts,  is  crucified ;  the  new  man  is  raised  up  to
live  a  spiritual  and  holy  life.  It  is  regeneration  of  spirit  that
is  the  culmination  of  bodily  life,  and  the  process  is  crucifixion
of  self,  a  daily  death,  as  Paul  was  wont  to  say.  In  the  life  of
spiritual  progress,  there  should  be  no  stagnation,  no  paralysis.
It  should  be  a  growth  and  a  daily  adaptation  of  knowledge ;
a  mortification  of  the  earthy  and  sensual,  and  a  corresponding
development  of  the  spiritual  and  heavenly.  In  other  words,
it  is  a  growth  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Christ ;
the  purest  type  of  human  life  presented  to  your  imitation.
It  is  a  clearing  away  of  the  material,  and  a  development  of
the  spiritual — a  purging  as  by  fire,  the  fire  of  a  consuming
zeal ;  of  a  life-long  struggle  with  self,  and  all  that  self  includes;
)f  an  ever  widening  grasp  of  Divine  truth.

By  no  other  means  can  spirit  be  purified.  The  furnace  is
one  of  self-sacrifice:  the  process  the  same  for  all.  Only  in

SPIRITUAL   FOES.  257

some  souls,  wherein  the  Divine  flame  burns  more  brightly,  the
process  is  rapid  and  concentrated;  while  in  duller  natures  the
fires  smoulder,  and  vast  cycles  of  purgation  are  required.
Blessed  are  they  who  can  crush  out  the  earthy,  and  welcome
the  fiery  trial  which  shall  purge  away  the  dross.  To  such,
progress  is  rapid  and  purification  sure.

Yes;  the  struggle  is  severe,  and  one  hardly  Jcnmvs  what  to
fight  against

Begin  within.  The  ancients  were  wise  in  their  description
of  the  enemies.  A  spirit  has  three  foes— itself ;  the  external
world  around  it ;  and  the  spiritual  foes  that  beset  the  upward
path.  These  are  described  as  the  World,  the  Flesh,  and  the
Devi).

Begin  with  self— the  Flesh.  Conquer  it,  so  that  you  are  no
longer  slave  to  appetite,  to  passion,  to  ambition :  so  that  self
can  be  abnegated,  and  the  spirit  can  come  forth  from  its
hermit-cell,  and  live  and  breathe  and  act  in  the  free  scope
of  the  universal  brotherhood.  This  is  the  first  step.  Self
must  be  crucified,  and  from  the  grave  where  it  lies  buried  will
rise  the  enfranchised  spirit  untrammelled,  free  from  material
clogs.

This  done,  the  soul  will  have  no  difficulty  in  despising  the
things  which  are  seen,  and  in  aspiring  to  the  eternal  verities.
It  will  have  learned  that  truth  is  to  be  found  in  them  alone ;
and,  seeing  this,  it  will  maintain  a  deathless  struggle  with  all
external  and  material  forms,  as  being  only  adumbrations  of
the  true,  too  often  deceptive  and  unsatisfying.  Matter  will
be  regarded  as  the  husk  to  be  stripped  off  before  the  kernel
of  truth  can  be  got  at.  Matter  will  be  the  deceptive,  fleeting
phantasm  behind  which  is  veiled  the  truth  on  which  none  but
the  purged  eye  may  gaze.  Such  a  soul,  so  taught,  will  not
need  to  be  told  to  avoid  the  external  in  all  things,  and  to
penetrate  through  the  husk  to  the  truth  that  lies  below.  It
Mail  have  learned  that  the  surface-meanings  of  things  are  for
the  babes  in  spiritual  knowledge,  and  that  beneath  an  obvious
fact  lurks  a  spiritual  symbolic  truth.  Such  a  soul  will  see  the
correspondence  of  matter  and  spirit,  and  will  recognise  in  the
18

258  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

external  only  the  rude  signs  by  which  is  conveyed  to  the  child
so  much  of  spiritual  truth  as  its  finite  mind  can  grasp.  To  it,
in  veriest  truth,  to  die  has  been  gain.  The  life  that  it  leads
is  a  life  of  the  spirit ;  for  flesh  has  been  conquered,  and  the
world  has  ceased  to  charm.

But  in  proportion  as  the  spiritual  perceptions  are  quick-
ened, so  do  the  spiritual  foes  come  into  more  prominent  view.
The  adversaries,  who  are  t,he  sworn  enemies  of  spiritual  pro-
gress and  enlightenment,  will  beset  the  aspirant's  path,  and
remain  for  him  a  ceaseless  cause  of  conflict  throughout  his
career  of  probation.  By  degrees  they  will  be  vanquished  by
the  faithful  soul  that  presses  on,  but  conflict  with  them  will
never  wholly  cease  during  the  probation-life,  for  it  is  the
means  whereby  the  higher  faculties  are  developed,  and  the
steps  by  which  entrance  is  won  to  the  higher  spheres  of  bliss.

This,  briefly,  is  the  life  of  the  progressive  spirit — self -sacri-
fice, whereby  self  is  crucified  ;  self-denial,  whereby  the  world
is  vanquished ;  and  spiritual  conflict,  whereby  the  adversaries
are  beaten  back.  In  it  is  no  stagnation ;  even  no  rest ;  no
finality.  It  is  a  daily  death,  out  of  which  springs  the  risen
life.  It  is  a  constant  fight,  out  of  which  is  won  perpetual
progress.  It  is  the  quenchless  struggle  of  the  light  that  is
within  to  shine  out  more  and  more  into  the  radiance  of  the
perfect  day.  And  thus  only  it  is  that  what  you  call  heaven
is  won.

Sic  itur  ad  astra.  That  is  very  much  the  central  idea  of
Christianity,  and  also  of  Buddhism,  as  well  as  of  the
Occultists.  Christ's  sayings  teem  with  the  notion  which
animated  his  own  life.  The  great  difficulty  is  to  carry
out  such  an  abstract  system  into  operation  in  the  world.

Therein  is  the  struggle,  as  He  himself  said,  to  be  in  the
world,  but  not  of  the  world.  The  high  ideal  is  well  nigh  im-
possible for  those  who  have  upon  them  the  care  of  daily  toil.
Hence  it  is  that  we  have  striven  to  withdraw  you,  so  far  as
we  can,  from  the  objective  side  of  spirit-intercourse,  foreseeing
that  it  would  be  hurtful  to  you.  You  must  strive  to  rise  above
the  material,  and  to  leave  it  behind.  Such  intercourse  is

RESURRECTION  AND   RENEWAL   OF   LIFE.  259

fitted  only  for  those  who  can  be  secluded  from  the  cares  of
daily  life.

/  said  long  ago  that  I  believed  mediumship,  if  carried
out,  to  be  incompatible  with  daily  work  in  the  world.
The  very  development  of  sensitiveness,  which  grows  so
rapidly,  is  quite  enough  to  unfit  the  medium  for  rude
contact  with  the  world :  or,  at  any  rate,  to  encourage  in
him  moods,  and  draw  round  him  influences,  which
make  him  unfit  for  work.

To  a  great  extent  it  is  so :  and,  therefore,  we  have  with-
drawn the  more  material  side  of  mediumship  from  you,  and
that  should  develop  the  spiritual,  in  which  no  such  danger
lurks.  At  any  rate,  you  may  trust  us  to  do  what  is  wise.  The
danger  is  when  they  who  guide  are  unfit  for  the  work.  It  is
then  that  risk  becomes  serious.  Be  content ;  your  course  is
clear.  Only  remember  that  now  is  the  hour  and  power  of

•darkness.     Be  patient.

+  IMPERATOR.
[Easter  Day,  1877.]

May  the  blessing  of  the  Supreme  and  All-good  be  on  you !
"We  have  somewhat  to  say  to  you,  as  our  habit  is  at  this
season,  of  resurrection  and  renewal  of  life.

We  will  leave  the  plain  symbolism  of  the  Christian  festival,
of  which  we  have  before  discoursed.  We  have  told  you  of
conflict  followed  by  victory.  You  have  learned  how  the  life
of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  was  a  symbolic  representation  of  the
progress  of  spirit.  It  may  be  well  that  we  remind  you  here
of  this  symbolism.

Descending  from  His  spiritual  life  in  the  spheres  of  bliss,
the  Anointed  One  came  to  your  earth  to  fulfil  His  Divine
mission.  Vailing  in  human  flesh  the  radiance  of  His  pure
spirit,  He  took  a  body  in  the  manger  of  Bethlehem,  and  be-
came man,  with  all  the  imperfections  and  frailties  of  humanity,
subject  to  the  sorrows,  the  temptations,  the  discipline  through
which  alone  progress  is  gained.

In  this  read  a  type  of  the  descent  of  spirit  into  matter  as
its  sole  means  of  progress.  Spirit,  existent  in  the  asres  past,

260  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

having  won  for  itself  the  requisite  development,  descends  to
incarnation,  so  that  by  conflict  and  by  discipline  it  may  be
purified  and  made  fit  for  the  progress  it  cannot  otherwise  gain.

Born  thus  into  the  sphere  of  humanity,  the  Anointed  One
became  subject  at  once  to  persecution  and  assault  from  a
Prince  of  the  world.  The  powers  of  the  sphere  into  which
He  came  were  arrayed  against  Him,  and  sought  to  try  and
prove  Him.  The  word  went  forth  to  slay  the  Anointed  One
because  His  royal  claims  were  thought  to  be  in  conflict  with
the  pretensions  of  the  earthly  monarch.

A  type  this  of  the  conflict  that  besets  the  incarnate  spirit
from  the  moment  of  its  entrance  into  the  sphere  of  earth.

At  the  threshold  of  every  new  sphere  of  development  stand,
as  we  have  told  you,  the  guardians  from  whom  the  benefits
to  be  gained  by  entering  it  are  won  only  after  wrestling  and
agony  [i.e.,  as  aftei^wards  explained,  conflict].  These  blessings
are  not  to  be  gathered  idly  and  dreamily,  without  risk  and
strenuous  labour.  Were  it  so,  the  benefit  would  cease  to  be.
It  is  in  the  conflict  that  the  blessing  lies,  in  overcoming  the
foes,  in  victory  after  the  battle  is  over.  Lay  it  to  your  account
that  this  is  so,  and  that  for  the  incarnate  spirit  there  is  always.
a  persecutor  who  seeks  to  slay.

Threatened  by  these  enemies  the  young  child  was  with-
drawn to  Egypt,  where  He  was  safe,  and  where  from  a  full
storehouse  He  gathered  in  a  rich  store  of  knowledge.  Egypt
had  been,  since  earliest  days,  the  receptacle  of  mystic  know-
ledge, and  there  was  derived  much  of  that  mystic  knowledge
that  the  Anointed  One  displayed  in  after  years.

You  will  not  need  to  seek  far  for  the  significance  of  this
type.  Where  shall  the  spirit,  beset  and  threatened  by  the  foes
that  throng  around  it,  find  its  sanctuary  at  once  and  its
armoury  more  surely  than  in  the  mystic  lore  stored  up  for  it
by  those  who  have  preceded  it  in  trial,  and  have  left  for  it
records  of  their  experience?  In  the  Egypt  of  esoteric  lore  is
that  armoury  whence  the  militant  spirit  may  find  power  tc
overcome,  thoroughly  furnished  and  equipped  for  the  conflict,
instructed  and  edified  by  what  it  has  learned.  For,  be  it
known  to  you,  the  withdrawal  to  Egypt  has  a  double  signifi-

ESOTERIC  AND  EXOTERIC  TRUT3.  2G1

cance.  It  is  not  only  a  retreat  to  a  place  of  safety,  but  a
sojourning  in  a  school  of  instruction.  The  spirit  that  seeks
to  withdraw  into  the  esoteric  sphere  of  instruction,  so  as  to
be  edified  there,  draws  from  that  edification  its  spiritual  wea-
pons of  conflict,  the  while  it  rests  and  refreshes  itself  in  an
atmosphere  of  comparative  peace.  Meditation,  edification,
growth  to  the  full  stature  of  the  warrior — even  as  the  Anointed
One  grew  from  puny  childhood  to  the  vigour  of  youth,  and  was
edified  in  mind  by  the  knowledge  He  acquired  in  proportion
.as  His  body  increased  in  strength.  He  increased,  as  it  is  said,
in  wisdom  and  stature.

This  closes  a  typical  epoch  in  the  symbolic  life  of  the
Anointed  One.  The  seed-time  closes  with  the  commencement
of  the  public  life.  The  spirit  that  has  nerved  itself  for  the
life  of  progress  and  for  development  during  the  time  of  incar-
nation beyond  what  is  sought  by  the  mass  of  its  fellows,  is
permitted  to  pass  through  a  process  of  preparation,  during
which  it  receives  so  much  of  truth  as  it  can  assimilate,  prior
to  the  second  period,  the  missionary  period,  as  we  may  call  it,
of  its  life  on  earth.  You  do  not  need  to  be  told  that  it  is  an
essential  condition  of  spiritual  progress  that  selfishness  in  all
its  forms  be  crushed  out,  that  no  gift  be  kept  for  private  and
isolated  use,  but  that  in  all  things  the  precept  be  obeyed,
JTreely  ye  have  received,  freely  give.

So  that  which  has  been  given  must  be  shared  with  those
who  seek  to  partake  of  it.  The  truth,  in  its  exoteric  form  at
least,  must  be  proffered  to  the  world,  while  the  inner  and
diviner  secrets  must  be  cherished  and  kept  pure,  so  that  the
soul  may  refresh  itself  in  the  intervals  of  conflict,  as  the
Anointed  One  retired  to  the  solitudes  of  the  mountain-top,
that  he  might  commune  with  himself  in  lonely  meditation,
and  be  refreshed  by  association  with  those  who  were  not  of
earth.  For  him  no  companionship  then.  His  spirit  soared
too  high,  his  associates  were  too  exalted  for  the  gaze  even  of
his  nearest  friends,  save  one,  who  on  many  occasions  was
privileged  to  see  the  glories  that  surrounded  the  chosen
Messenger  of  the  Most  High  in  his  moments  of  chiefest
exaltation.

22  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

[This  was  afterwards  explained  as  referring  to  Saint
John,  who,  on  many  occasions  not  specifically
named,  enjoyed  a  near  view  of  the  glory  of  his
Master.]

Blessed  in  this  respect  are  they  who  can  journey  with  a
kindred  soul,  and  derive  mutual  support  and  joy  from  an
earthly  as  well  as  a  heavenly  communion.  The  esoteric  truth
loses  no  bloom  by  such  handling.  The  lamp  sheds  no  less
light,  and  that  light  no  less  pure,  because  another  eye  beholds
it,  if  only  the  eye  be  single  and  the  sympathy  sincere  and
perfect.  But  it  is  rare  that  two  can  walk  thus,  even  if  they
be  agreed,  and  there  must  always  be,  for  those  who  aspire,  the
mountain-top  of  silent  reverence  and  prayer,  to  which  they
resort  alone,  knowing  that  for  each  there  is  the  peculiar  path
which  it  is  necessary  for  his  feet  to  tread.

The  life  of  instruction,  complemented  by  the  life  of  aspira
tion,  prepares  for  the  public  life  of  ministration.

When  the  Anointed  One  came  forth  from  the  seclusion  of
His  preparatory  training,  instructed  in  the  wisdom  of  Egypt,
and  nurtured  in  silent  meditation,  clothed  in  purity,  animated
by  charity,  instinct  with  zeal,  He  went  forth  to  His  people  to
preach  the  gospel  He  had  learned.  There  glowed  within  Him
a  holy  boldness  for  the  truth,  but  He  was  no  iconoclast.  Not
to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil,  was  His  aim.  Not  to  lay  desolate
and  to  waste,  but  to  plough,  and  to  till,  and  to  sow  the  seed,
so  that  the  crop  might  spring  up,  and  the  desert  and  the
waste  place  might  blossom  and  be  glad.  The  materials  ready
at  hand  were  used,  the  dross  was  purged  away,  and  the  life-
less ceremony,  touched  by  the  magic  of  His  word  of  truth,
was  transmuted  into  the  symbolism  of  a  living  verity.  The
dry  bones  lived,  the  spirit  returned  to  the  corpse,  the  dead
arose  and  stood  upon  their  feet.

In  all  this,  be  it  observed  by  the  faithful  watcher,  there
was  no  rude  severance,  no  harsh  closing  of  an  epoch,  no  gulf
between  the  present  and  the  past.  All  was  transition  and
gradual  awakening,  just  as  it  is  in  Nature  now.  There  is  no
rude  severance  between  the  death  and  resurrection  of  the
vear.  You  hardly  know  what  power  has  rolled  away  the

NATURE'S  PARABLE  OF  RESURRECTION.  203

stone  from  the  sepulchre  in  which  the  year  lay  buried.  One
day  all  is  cold,  lifeless,  cheerless,  and  you  mourn  over  the
glories  that  seem  to  be  past  and  gone  for  ever,  replaced  by
abiding  gloom.  But,  by-and-by,  the  change  comes,  not  by
might,  nor  by  power,  as  man  sees,  but  by  the  potent  spirit.
The  sun  shines  forth,  and  his  rays  unlock  the  prison-house
in  which  the  dead  year  has  lain,  and  buds  begin  to  peep,  and
flowers  to  lift  their  heads  shyly  and  half  in  fear,  and  the
emerald  carpet  grows  beneath  your  feet,  and  the  mantle  of
tender  green  is  spread  around,  and  behold  !  the  dry  bones
live.  The  season  of  resurrection  has  burst  upon  you,  or  rather
has  grown  upon  you  silently,  a  development  of  the  dead  past.
It  is  Nature's  yearly  parable  of  regeneration.

Head  the  lesson  in  the  life  of  the  Anointed  One.  When
he  came  forth  to  teach  His  people  wisdom,  the  whole  of  the
spiritual  life  of  the  Jewish  nation  was  cold  and  bare  as  the
leafless  tree  in  winter.  The  sap  had  ceased,  it  seemed,  to
flow.  The  branches  were  bare  and  gaunt,  devoid  of  their
seemly  covering  of  leaves.  The  weary  traveller  should  look
in  vain  for  fruit,  or  seek  a  stray  flower  to  gladden  his  eyes.
The  death-plague  was  on  all.  He  came,  the  Anointed
Messenger  of  God,  the  chosen  Messiah,  on  his  missionary
labours,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  and  Truth— the  Son  who
was  also  the  Sun,  for  there  was  no  difference  there— shed  his
beams  of  enlightenment  and  warmth  on  those  dead,  dry,
naked  branches,  and  see  the  change!  Empty  formalism
glowed  again  with  spiritual  truth,  cold  precepts  were  vivified
again  into  exuberant  life.  What  had  been  said  by  them  of
ofd  time  gained  a  new  and  extended  significance.  Social  life
was  elevated,  reformed,  ennobled.  Religion  was  raised  to  a
pitch  of  spirituality  it  had  never  reached  before.  In  place
of  selfishness  there  was  taught  charity ;  in  place  of  formalism,
spirituality;  in  place  of  ostentatious  ritual,  silent,  secret
prayer ;  in  place  of  open  parade  of  religion— the  seeking  to
be  seen  of  men— the  seclusion  of  the  secret  chamber,  the
lonely  communing  between  self  and  God.  In  a  word,  vulgar
empty  proud,  unreal  externalism  was  abolished  and  replaced
by  the  meek,  spiritual,  aspiring  life  of  the  soul,  the  truest

264  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

exemplification  of  which  was  not  in  the  market-place,  but  in
the  silent  chamber ;  not  in  the  Pharisee,  but  in  the  Publican ;
not  in  the  eyes  of  men,  but  before  the  searching  scrutiny  of
the  Supreme.

The  parable  of  Nature  and  of  the  Pattern  Life,  runs  through
the  life  of  spirit  too.  Duly  prepared,  educated,  edified  with
such  knowledge  as  it  has  been  able  to  acquire,  the  spirit  that
has  passed  its  probation  goes  forth  on  its  journey  in  the  new
life.  The  dead  past  of  formalism,  of  externalism,  is  transmuted
by  the  touch  of  spirit,  and  a  new  life  opens.  The  veriest
physical  fact  gains  a  new  significance  as  the  spiritual  meaning
that  underlies  it  becomes  plainer  to  the  purged  eye  of  faith.
The  bare  boughs  are  clothed  with  living  green :  the  dry  bones
of  externalism  that  lay  apparently  dead,  arise  under  the
quickening  touch  of  spirit,  and  live  a  new  life.  It  is  not  that
the  old  is  abolished  ;  it  is  that  it  is  transmuted.  It  is  not  that
the  duties  of  life  are  neglected :  rather  are  they  discharged
with  a  quickened  zeal,  and  a  more  loving  care.  It  is  not  that
the  weary  round  of  toil  is  shortened :  it  is  that  its  lengthened
path  is  cheered  and  dignified  by  the  spiritual  significance  of
even  the  meanest  act.

Those  dry  and  sapless  forms  of  devotion  that  seemed  so  cold
and  dead  that  the  soul  has  often  cried  in  despair,  "  O  Lord !
can  these  dry  bones  live  ?"  are  found  to  be  touched  with  life,
and  warmth,  and  reality,  as  the  resurrection  spirit  quickens
them.  The  old  forms  that  have  served  their  purpose  are  re-
generated into  a  life  more  suited  to  the  new  conditions.  They
live  again  with  more  than  the  old  vitality,  with  a  loveliness
more  spiritual  than  that  of  the  past.  They  have  renewed
their  youth,  and  it  is  seen  by  the  spiritually-enlightened  that
no  atom  of  truth  can  perish,  but  is  renewed  and  re-combined
as  there  is  need  of  it  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Master.

And  so  the  spirit  shares  in  the  general  resurrection  that
surrounds  it.  It  renews  its  life,  soars  to  higher  planes  of
knowledge,  learns  deeper  truths,  and  goes  forth,  in  the  might
of  that  knowledge,  to  teach  to  others  the  Divine  methods  of
enlightenment,  development,  and  growth.  Not  as  man  sees
does  it  see :  not  as  man  acts  does  it  act.  Beneath  the  most

A   TEACHER   IN   ADVANCE   OF   HIS  AGE.  2C5

unpromising  exterior  it  sees  Divine  possibilities.  The  veriest
cumberer  it  would  not  cut  down,  save  in  so  far  as  pruning  may
facilitate  growth,  and  the  lopping  off  of  dead  wood  may  allow
the  young  and  living  branches  to  find  place.  Side  by  side
Tvith  this  public  work  is  the  unceasing  esoteric  life  of  growth
in  spirit,  a  life  of  aspiration  and  development,  of  communing
with  the  spirit  of  truth,  of  rising  more  and  more  above  the
material  and  the  earthy,  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the
fulness  of  the  Anointed  One.

Silent  spiritual  growth  is  the  source  of  public  spiritual
teaching.

The  closing  scenes  of  the  earth  life  of  the  Anointed  One
•carry  their  symbolic  meaning  too.  It  is  the  lot  of  a  teacher
who  combats  the  prejudices  of  an  age,  to  incur  the  enmity,  the
.scorn,  the  persecution,  that  is  the  world's  requital  for  unwel-
come truth.  You,  who  regard  these  records  of  the  Pattern
Life  as  matter  of  history,  can  see  now  how  impossible  it  was
that  teaching  such  as  His  should  meet  with  other  fate  than  it
•did.  That  prosperous  shams  should  have  been  laid  bare  with-
out those  who  made  gain  by  them  being  arrayed  against  the
daring  innovator — that  pompous  and  pretentious  Pharisaism
.should  have  been  denounced  in  terms  more  vigorous  than  were
"bestowed  on  the  Magdalene  and  the  Publican  without  setting
the  Pharisee  in  outraged  wrath  against  his  accuser — that  the
national  religion,  with  its  cheap  ceremonialism,  and  its  easy
path  for  those  who  could  pave  it  with  gold,  should  be  re-
formed, and  the  path  made  easier  for  Publicans  and  harlots
than  for  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  without  bringing  down  the
-wrath  of  those  in  place  and  power  on  the  despised  Nazarene,
who  dared  to  lay  his  impious  hand  on  God's  own  ark — this
you  can  see  to  be  impossible.

He  was  too  pure  and  good  to  escape  envy,  too  uncompromis-
ing and  earnest  not  to  provoke  jealousy.  His  doctrines  were
too  searching  to  be  popular ;  His  life  precepts  too  spiritual  to
.suit  an  age  of  luxury  and  ease.  And  so  the  age  that  could  not
receive  the  advanced  truth,  crucified  Him  who  taught  it.  The
Age  of  hollowness  and  impurity  revenged  itself  on  the  pure
.and  holy  Son  of  Truth  by  hanging  Him  on  the  tree  of  shame
between  the  representatives  of  crime.

266  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.  '

So  it  was.  So  in  many  cases  it  is  still  in  intent,  if  not  in
deed.  There  have  been  reformers  who  have  meted  out  to  an
age,  over  which  a  wave  of  Divine  enthusiasm  has  just  passed,
that  aspect  of  truth  which  commends  itself  to  them,  and  so-
have  found  acceptance  for  their  message,  and  have  won  honour
and  renown  in  its  preaching.  There  have  been  others,  too,
who  have  had  more  of  the  world's  wisdom  and  discretion,  and
so  have  been  of  higher  service.  But  these  are  rare.  To  most,
as  to  the  Anointed  One,  death  comes  with  contumely  and  open
shame  as  the  reward  of  truth.  Death  to  the  Teacher,  but
resurrection  and  new  life  to  His  teaching.  It  is  not  till  the
instrument  is  lost  sight  of  that  the  value  of  the  message  is
realised.  We  need  not  draw  out  the  parable  at  length.

Hanging  on  the  cross,  the  friends  of  the  Christ  were  few  in-
deed— a  few  women  whose  readier  instincts  and  affections  were
true  and  firm  in  the  hour  of  deepest  darkness;  and  two  of  those-
who  should  have  been  nearest  at  hand,  Joseph  and  Nicodemus,
the  two,  be  it  known,  who  had  made  least  open  profession,  and
had  even  seemed  most  cowardly.  All  the  rest  were  fled.  The
teacher  of  new  truth,  the  preacher  of  a  new  dispensation,  where
was  He  ?  Dead.  And  where  was  His  gospel  ?  Dead,  too,  to  all
appearance.  None  remembered,  none  heeded  it  or  Him.  But
men  judge  hastily.  None  knew  who  rolled  that  stone  from
the  tomb's  mouth,  save  that  it  was  done  by  that  might  of
Spirit  wherewith  .ever  and  anon  your  world  is  regenerated,
and  death  turned  into  new  life.  An  angel  did  it ;  and  the
same  power  that  opened  that  tomb  and  stirred  its  occupant
whom  men  thought  dead  and  buried  out  of  sight,  availed  to
vivify  His  message,  and  to  nurture  it  through  evil  and  good
report,  until  it  dominated  the  nations,  and  became  in  its  age  a.
mighty  engine  of  spiritual  truth.

Turn  now  to  the  individual  soul.  Its  lot  is  much  the  same.
Whether  its  message  of  what  to  it  is  Divine  truth  is  one  that
makes  its  impress  on  the  age  or  not :  whether,  if  it  do,  it  be
received  as  the  needful  word  in  season,  or  as  the  impertinence
of  a  meddling  innovator,  it  will,  almost  surely,  have  to  make
its  way  through  conflict  to  acceptance.  Such  is  the  Divine-
method  of  sifting.  And  in  proportion  to  the  severity  of  that

THE    LAW   OF   LOVE.  207

conflict  will  be  the  vigour  with  which  it  will  be  found  to  have
taken  hold  of  men.  The  roots  will  be  all  the  deeper  and
firmer  fixed  in  proportion  as  the  ground  above  has  been
trampled  down  by  contending  feet.  Whether  the  life  of  con-
flict end,  as  did  the  life  we  contemplate,  or  whether  feebler
zeal  or  larger  discretion  preserve  the  teacher  from  the  same
fate,  matters  little.  The  word  of  truth  must  pass  through  the
conflict  to  final  victory,  even  as  the  soul  in  its  solicitude  and
isolation  must  contend  with  tempters  and  with  foes  till  it
becomes  perfect  through  suffering,  and  wins  the  crown  by  the
cross.

The  life  of  the  Christ  during  such  time  as  He  remained  on
it  after  His  resurrection  was  symbolic  of  the  change  that  passes
on  the  risen  life  of  spirit.  In  the  world,  but  not  o/it :  moving
in  it  as  a  visitor  who  conforms  to  but  does  not  belong  to  it.
He  was  animated  by  that  most  potent  law  of  spirit  which  you
may  trace  in  all  the  ways  of  spirit-influence — the  law  of  love.
Whenever  He  appeared,  whatever  He  did,  this  was  the  motive.
The  records  left  to  you,  both  meagre  and  erroneous  as  they
are,  are  yet  sufficiently  full  to  show  this.  He  fulfilled  the  law
of  love,  and  then  ascended  to  His  own  proper  sphere  :  no  longer
seen,  but  felt :  no  longer  a  personal  presence,  but  an  effluence
and  influence  of  grace.

So  the  souls  who  voluntarily  linger  around  your  earth  are
those  whose  motive-spring  is  love,  or  they  whose  mission  is
animated  by  the  same  master  principle.  Personal  affection  or
universal  love  are  the  motives  that  draw  the  higher  spirits
down  to  you.  And  when  the  duty  is  discharged  they  too  will
ascend  to  the  common  Father  and  the  Universal  God.

Be  of  good  hope !  You  are  too  apt  to  fancy  that  truth  is
dead.  When  the  cold  dark  days  of  winter  are  with  you,  you
are  chilled.  You  forget  the  spring  that  has  dawned  on  many
a  winter  past.  You  forget  that  death  leads  to  resurrection,
and  on  to  regenerated  life— life  in  a  wider  sphere,  with  ex-
tended usefulness,  with  nobler  aims,  with  truer  purpose.  You
foro-et  that  death  must  precede  such  life— that  what  you  call
dea°th,  so  far  as  it  can  affect  Divine  Truth,  is  but  the  dying  of
the  grain  of  seed  which  is  the  condition  of  abundant  increase

268  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Death  in  life  is  the  spiritual  motto.  Death  culminating  in  a
higher  life.  Victory  in  the  grave,  and  through  death.  In
dealing  with  spiritual  truth  do  not  forget  this.

In  times  of  brightness  and  calm  you  may  fear.  When  the
air  is  stagnant  and  the  heat  scorching,  when  the  moisture  is
dried  up,  and  the  fierce  sun  beats  down  with  untempered
splendour,  the  tender  plant  may  wither  and  fade.  And  so
in  days  of  ease  and  smoothness,  when  all  goes  swimmingly,
when  all  men  seem  to  speak  well  of  the  Word  of  Truth,  you
may  with  good  reason  fear  lest  it  fade,  and  its  outlines  be
blurred,  and  its  tone  assimilated  to  the  conventional  fashion
of  the  world.  You  may  settle  with  yourselves  that  if  all
accept  unquestioned  the  truth  presented  to  them,  then  that
phase  of  truth  needs  changing,  and  some  stronger  form  is
requisite.  But  when  it  is  born  in  conflict  be  of  good  cheer,
for  by  such  birth -pangs  man-children  are  brought  forth,
whose  vigour  and  energy  shall  suffice  to  resist  attack,  and  to
carry  on  the  Divine  standard  to  a  further  vantage-ground.

It  was  in  some  such  sort  that  the  life  of  the  Anointed  One
began  and  ran  its  course  to  the  final  consummation.  It  is  a
parable  for  all  time.

+  IMPERATOB.

(    269    )

SECTION    XXXI.

LIFE  AND  DEATH  :  PROGRESS  AND  RETROGRESSION.

[April  28,  1876. — The  following  message  relates  to  a
case  in  which  the  personal  identity  of  the  com-
municating spirit  was  established  by  very  strong
evidence.  Among  many  such  this  seems  to  me  to
stand  out  prominently,  and,  making  all  allowance
for  willingness  and  ability  to  deceive,  I  find  it
impossible  to  understand  how  so  coherent  and  com-
plete a  series  of  proofs  can  be  explained  away  by
any  theory  of  personation  or  self-deception.  The
messages  relate  to  the  death,  under  melancholy
circumstances,  of  a  friend  whom  I  had  known  in-
timately all  his  life.  A  sitting  at  Mr.  Hudson's
had  resulted  in  his  image  appearing  on  the  photo-
graphic plate,  and  I  have  since  seen  and  known
the  presence  of  the  spirit  about  me  continually.
When  the  photograph  was  taken  I  was  entranced,
and  the  name  of  the  spirit  was  given  to  me,
another  spirit  at  the  same  time  describing  the
position  in  which  the  figure  had  placed  itself.  The
development  of  the  plate  showed  this  description
to  be  correct,  and  I  have  no  difficulty  in  recognis-
ing a  bad  image  or  simulacrum  of  my  friend  who
had  been  specially  brought  before  my  mind  before
going  to  Hudson's.  There  was  another  and  more
striking  point  connected  with  this  matter  which  I
cannot  print:  it  must  suffice  that  I  state  that
identity,  both  of  external  form  and  of  mental
characteristics,  is  distinctly  made  out  to  my  mind.

The  first  message  I  received  respecting  this  photo-
graph related  to  the  method  of  its  production.
It  was  said  that  a  spirit  who  just  then  was _ very
active  about  me  had  directed  Hudson's  invisible
operators.  The  shroud-like  drapery  which  charac-
terises all  Hudson's  pictures  was  described  as  an
expedient  for  saving  time  and  power :  the  head
beino-  fully  formed,  the  rest  "  sketched  in,"  as  one

270  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

might  say.  There  were  a  number  of  these  spiritual
operators  who  did  the  mere  mechanical  work  of
partial  materialisation  as  they  had  learned  to  do
it.  Hence  there  is  a  family  likeness  in  all  the
pictures  produced  by  a  particular  photographer.

The  whole  manifestation  was  described  as  being  con-
trary to  the  wish  of  IMPEHATOR  who  "  did  not
wish  that  I  should  be  brought  again  within  the
physical  phase  of  manifestation."  "  It  was  only
when  we  found  that  we  could  not  prevent  that  we
aided."

The  spirit  had  been  in  my  company :  there  had  been
special  reasons  for  his  being  attracted  that  day,
and  so  it  was  easier  to  produce  his  image  than
that  of  any  other  spirit :  though  I  went  with  two
friends  in  the  hope  of  securing  some  evidence  for
them  and  not  for  myself.

This  being  so,  he  was  taken  in  hand  by  M.,  who
directed  Hudson's  spirit-people  to  mould  a  repre-
sentation of  his  face  and  to  sketch  drapery.  The
simulacrum,  was  made  of  spirit-substance,  actually
posed,  and  photographed.

After  this  IMPERATOR  said]  : —

We  would  speak  with  you  of  your  friend.  But  first,  we
wish  to  explain  that  we  prevented,  so  far  as  we  could,  any
return  of  physical  manifestations  to  you.  We  did  not  wish
the  medial  power  to  recur  to  that  phase.  Hence  we  have
prevented  you  from  being  placed  in  circumstances  where  it
would  be  likely  to  be  encouraged.  We  have  explained  before
that  we  do  not  wish  you  to  remain  on  the  physical  plane,
and  have  therefore  discontinued  our  meetings.  Nor  did  we
wish  that  your  friend  should  become  attached  to  you.  His
spiritual  state  is  low,  and  it  would  have  been  well  that  you
had  not  attracted  him.  Since  you  have  done  so  you  must
now  help  him  to  progress.  M.  has  rightly  told  you  that  you
had  entered  into  his  sphere  from  association  and  conversa-
tion with ,  and  from  your  thoughts  being  directed  towards

him  strongly.     That  is  the  law  of  attraction  of  spirit  to  spirit.
T  ou  know  this  ?

Yes ;  but  it  does  not  always  act,  or  rather  its  results  are
seldom  manifest  to  us.     Is  he  unhappy  ?

SUICIDE.  271

How  should  he  be  blest?  He  lifted  sacrilegious  hands
against  the  shrine  in  which  the  All- Wise  had  placed  his
spirit  for  its  progress  and  development.  He  wasted  oppor-
tunities and  destroyed,  so  far  as  he  was  able,  the  temple  in
which  dwelt  the  Divine  spark,  which  was  his  portion.  He
sent  forth  his  spirit  alone  and  friendless  into  a  strange  world
•where  no  place  was  yet  prepared  for  it.  He  impiously  flew
in  the  face  of  the  Great  Father.  How  should  he  be  blest  ?
Impious,  disobedient,  wilful  in  his  death,  heedless,  idle,  selfish
in  his  life,  and  yet  more  selfish  in  bringing  pain  and  sorrow
on  his  earthly  friends  by  his  untimely  death, — how  should  he
find  rest  ?  The  wasted  life  cries  out  for  vengeance.  The  fos-
tered self -hood  dominates  him  still,  and  makes  him  ill  at  ease.
Selfish  in  his  life,  selfish  in  his  earthly  end,  he  is  selfish  still.
Miserable,  blind,  and  undeveloped,  there  is  no  rest  for  such  as
he  till  repentance  has  had  its  place,  and  remorse  leads  to
regeneration.  He  is  outcast.

What  hope  of  progress  ?

Yes;  there  is  hope.  Already  there  stirs  within  him  the
consciousness  of  sin.  He  sees  dimly  through  the  spiritual
gloom  how  foolish  and  how  wicked  was  his  life.  He  begins
to  wake  to  some  faint  knowledge  of  his  desolation,  and  to
strive  for  light.  Hence  he  remains  near  you.  You  must  help
him  though  at  your  own  cost.

Willingly ;  but  how  ?

By  prayer  first.  By  fostering  the  dawnings  of  the  higher
life.  By  allowing  the  unhappy  spirit  to  breathe  the  higher
atmosphere  of  work.  His  spirit  knows  not  what  that  pure
and  bracing  atmosphere  is.  You  must  teach  him,  though  his
presence  be  unpleasant  to  you.  You  have  summoned  him,
and  he  comes  obedient  to  your  call.  You  must  bear  with  him
now.  You  cannot  undo  what  you  have  done  in  spite  of  us
and  of  our  wishes.  Your  consolation  must  be  that  you  will
be  eno-ao-ed  in  a  work  that  is  blessed.

O     O

It  is  not  jair  to  say  I  summoned  him;  but  I  witt  do
anything.    He  was  mad  and  not  accountable.

272  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

He  was  and  is  accountable,  and  he  begins  to  know  it.  The
seeds  of  his  final  sin  wherewith  he  has  cursed  himself  were
sown  in  a  life  of  idle  uselessness.  He  fostered  and  encouraged
morbid  self-introspection.  He  brooded  over  self,  not  for  the
purpose  of  progress  and  development,  not  to  eradicate  faults
and  foster  virtues,  but  in  selfish  exclusiveness.  He  was  en-
wrapped in  a  cloud  of  distorted  selfishness.  This  bred  in  him
disease,  and  in  the  end  he  fell  a  prey  to  tempters  in  the
spirit,  who  fastened  on  him  and  drove  him  to  his  ruin.  He
exposed  himself  a  prey  to  those  who  are  always  ready  to
seduce  to  ruin,  and  so  far  he  was  mad,  as  you  say ;  but  the
mad  act  was  the  result  of  his  own  acts.  And  now  he
throws  the  same  influence  around  those  whom  he  wounded
in  his  death.  A  curse  to  himself  he  becomes  a  curse  to
those  he  loves.

Horrible  !  That  seems  to  me  the  very  bitterness  of  retri-
bution. I  can  understand  how  an  idle,  selfish  life
breeds  spiritual  disease.  Selfishness  seems  to  me  to  be
the  roo  sin.

It  is  the  plague-spot  of  the  spirit,  that  which  wrecks  more
souls  than  you  dream  of.  It  is  the  very  paralysis  of  the  soul.
And  when  to  it  is  added  this  moreover,  that  the  selfishness  is
passive,  it  becomes  more  fatal.  There  is  a  selfishneas  which
is  far  less  baleful  in  its  poison,  and  which  finds  its  counter-
acting power  in  activity,  and  which  even  becomes  the  spring
of  actions  which  have  in  them  a  form  of  good.  There  is  a
selfishness  which  causes  a  spirit  to  do  well  that  it  may  have
the  good  report  of  its  fellows:  and  there  is  a  selfishness  which
is  content  to  do  good  so  it  be  not  vexed  or  troubled,  which
will  yield  to  any  influence,  so  it  may  escape  anxiety.  These
are  faults  which  hold  the  spirit  back  from  progress ;  but  they
are  not  the  baleful  plague  which  ate  into  this  spirit's  life,  and
drove  it  to  despair  and  death.  That  was  the  meaner  selfish-
ness which  stirred  him  not  to  any  deeds  or  to  action  of  any
kind.  It  was  idle  and  useless,  no  less  than  self -pleasing;  nay,
it  was  not  even  self-pleasing,  for  the  whole  life  was  blurred
and  blotted  with  morbid  scrutiny  of  self,  till  its  very  linea-

THE   LAW  OF   EXISTENCE   IS  WORK.  273

ments  were  eaten  out.  This  selfishness  was  cruel  alike  t«;
himself  and  to  his  friends.  There  are  grades  of  sin,  and  his
was  deep.  Listen  while  the  story  is  recounted  for  your  in-
struction. But  rest  awhile,  and  we  will  remove  the  disturbing
influence  from  your  mind.

[I  was  a  good  deal  disturbed:  but  I  fell  into  a  deep
trance-like  sleep,  during  which  I  had  a  soothing
vision  and  from  it  I  awoke  refreshed.]

It  is  not  necessary  to  go  through  in  detail  the  story  of  that
wasted  life.  Its  spirit  was  eaten  out  with  cruel  selfishness,
and  its  end  was  destruction  of  self -consciousness.  Mad  lie
was,  as  you  estimate  madness.  None  lifts  the  hand  of  the
suicide  against  himself  save  when  the  disordered  mind  has
lost  its  power  of  judgment.  The  balance  is  destroyed,  and  the
spirit  has  fallen  a  prey  to  the  tempters  which  surround  it.

But  your  estimates  of  sin  are  rude.  The  state  was  self-
induced.  The  spirit  delivered  itself  over  to  the  foes,  and
wrought  its  own  ruin.  This  was  not  one  of  the  cases  where
hereditary  conditions  of  disease  unfitted  a  spirit  for  judgment
and  right  action.  The  suicide  was  the  outcome  of  the  selfish
idler.  It  was  an  access  of  temptation  that  withdrew  the  power
of  reason,  and  caused  the  crime.  In  others  the  temptation
might  have  taken  other  forms ;  but  whether  it  led  to  destruc-
tion of  self,  or  to  ruin  or  hurt  of  others,  to  whatever  gratifi-
cation of  self  it  tended,  the  root  is  the  same.

That  spirit  which  neglects  to  use  its  powers,  which  acts  not,
but  morbidly  dwells  on  fancied  ills  or  sufferings,  assuredly
breeds  in  itself  disease.  The  law  of  existence  is  work — for
God,  for  brethren,  for  self;  not  for  one  alone,  but  for  all.
Transgress  that  law,  and  evil  must  ensue.  The  stagnant
life  becomes  corrupt,  and  acts  as  a  corrupter  of  others.  It
is  vicious  and  noisome ;  hurtful  to  the  community,  in  that  it
defrauds  it  of  its  due  from  one  of  its  members,  and  sets  uj.
a  plague  spot  of  infection  which  becomes  a  fertile  centre  of
mischief.  It  matters  not  what  course  the  evil  takes,  ife
source  is  still  the  same.  In  this  case  the  evil  eventuated  in
personal  harm,  and  in  the  wrecking  of  a  wasted  life.  It  ha*
19

274  SPiUIT-TEACUiNQS.

tended  in  sorrow  and  shame  to  the  injury  of  all  who  were
associated  with  him.

When  the  cord  of  earth-life  was  severed,  the  spirit  found
itself  in  darkness  and  distress.  For  long  it  was  unable  to
sever  itself  from  the  body.  It  hovered  round  it  even  after  the
grave  had  closed  over  the  shrine  which  it  had  violated.  It
was  unconscious,  without  power  of  movement,  weak,  wounded,
and  distressed.  It  found  no  rest,  no  welcome  in  the  world  to
which  it  had  come  unbidden.  Darkness  surrounded  it,  and
through  the  gloom  dimly  flitted  the  forms  of  congenial  spirits
who  had  made  shipwreck  of  themselves,  and  were  in  unrest-
ful  isolation.  These  drew  near,  and  their  atmosphere  added
vague  discomfort  to  the  half-conscious  spirit.

It  was  not  till  the  first  shudder  of  awakening  conscience
attracted  the  ministering  spirits,  that  anything  could  be  done
to  palliate  the  misery,  not  yet  half  felt  or  acknowledged,  or  to
minister  healing  to  the  soul.  When  it  stirred  amid  the  dark-
ness, the  ministers  drew  near  and  strove  to  quicken  the  seared
conscience  and  to  awaken  remorse.  In  seeming  cruelty  they
strove  to  bring  home  a  knowledge  of  its  state,  and  to  paint
before  it  a  picture  of  its  sin.  Only  through  the  portal  of  re-
morse could  it  enter  into  rest ;  and  so  the  conscience  must  be
quickened  at  the  cost  of  pain.

For  long  their  efforts  availed  little ;  but  by  degrees  they
succeeded  in  awakening  some  measure  of  consciousness  of  sin,
and  the  spirit  began  to  grope  blindly  for  some  means  of  escape
from  a  state  which  had  become  loathsome  to  it.  Frequent
relapses  dragged  it  back.  The  tempters  were  all  around  it,
and  no  effort  of  theirs  was  spared  to  mete  out  to  the  spirit  the
full  measure  of  its  lawful  penalty.  They  know  it  not;  they
do  but  gratify  their  debased  instincts,  but  they  are  the  aveng-
ing ministers  of  doom.

The  hope  for  the  spirit  is  that  it  may  be  nerved  to  occupy
itself  with  some  beneficent  work,  and  so  to  work  out  its  own
salvation.  To  this  end  it  must  journey  on  through  remorse
and  uncongenial  labour :  for  by  no  other  means  can  it  be  puri-
fied. Selfishness  must  be  eradicated  by  self-sacrifice.  Idle-
ness must  be  rooted  out  by  laborious  toil.  The  spirit  must  be

A   SPIRIT  IN   DARKNESS.  £75

purified  by  suffering.  This  is  for  it  the  only  upward  path  of
progress ;  a  path  that  its  past  has  made  it  difficult,  nearly  im-
possible, for  it  to  tread.  Reiterated  efforts  must  secure  each
onward  step,  and  frequent  slips  and  backslidings  will  try  en-
durance to  the  utmost.  Step  by  step  the  way  must  be  won
in  sorrow,  remorse,  and  shame,  with  faintings  and  cries  of  the
despairing  soul;  won,  too,  against  temptation  all  around,  against
the  suggestions  of  the  foe  who  will  not  fail  to  goad  the  aspir-
ing soul ;  won  as  through  a  baptism  of  fire.  Such  is  the
penalty ;  such  the  road  to  the  heaven  that  can  be  won  in  no
other  way.

Such  help  as  the  ministers  can  give  will  not  be  withholden.
It  is  their  glorious  mission  to  help  on  the  aspiring,  and  to
cheer  the  fainting  soul.  But,  though  they  may  comfort,  they
cannot  save  one  pang,  nor  palliate  by  one  jot  the  penalty  of
transgression.  No  vicarious  store  of  merit  can  avail ;  no  friend
may  bear  the  burden,  or  lift  it  from  the  weary  back.  It  must
be  borne  by  the  soul  that  sinned,  though  helps  and  aids  be
given  to  strengthen  and  support  the  failing  energies.

This  is  the  inevitable  penalty  of  a  wasted  life.  It  may  be
that  the  half-quenched  spark  may  be  quickened  again,  and  be
fanned  into  a  flame  strong  enough  to  light  the  spirit  onward.
It  may  be  that  the  spirit  may  wander  in  gloom  and  desolation,
deaf  to  the  voice  of  the  ministers,  and  groaning  in  lonely  un-
rest, nerveless  for  the  struggle,  till  the  sin  through  cycles  of
purgatorial  suffering,  has  eaten  out  its  virulence.  It  may  be
that  the  time  consumed  in  such  purgation  may  seem  to  you  an
eternity ;  or  the  soul  may  wake  and  stir  before  its  condition
has  become  fixed ;  and  so  by  an  effort  of  despairing  energy
may  struggle  up  to  light,  and  may  welcome  the  suffering  that
leads  to  purification,  and  may  have  strength  not  all  sapped  to
cast  off  the  habits  of  earth,  and  wake  to  newness  of  life.

It  may  be ;  but  such  are  rare  cases.  Characters  are  not  so
easily  changed;  nor  does  the  fire  of  purification  work  so
rapidly.  Too  frequently  he  that  died  selfish  or  filthy  is  selfish
or  filthy  still,  and  the  present  proves  only  a  perpetuation  of
the  past.  Pray  for  strength  to  minister  to  him  who  has  in
him  the  first  faint  dawnings  of  progression.  Fray  that  his

276  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

darkness  may  be  enlightened,  and  his  unrest  soothed  by  the
angelic  ministrations.  Such  prayers  are  the  most  potent
medicine  for  his  disease.

[On  reading  over  what  had  been  written,  I  suggested
that  the  picture  was  one  to  strike  dismay  into  a
man,  however  much  he  strove  to  progress.  I  said
the  ideal  was  too  high  for  earth.]

Nay !  We  have  not  painted  the  picture  in  all  its  details ;
nor  have  we  overdrawn  or  overcoloured  it  in  any  way.  We
are  not  able  to  bring  home  to  you  the  full  horror  of  the  desola-
tion and  misery  of  such  a  wasted  life.  No  words  that  we  can
write  would  express  the  full  measure  of  the  woe  felt  by  a  soul
that  has  awakened  to  remorse  after  a  life  such  as  this  of  which
we  speak.  For  the  rest,  we  are  not  responsible  for  any  ideal.
We  put  forward  none,  save  that  which  exists  in  the  eternal
and  unalterable  sequence  of  events.  Selfishness  and  sin  bring
misery  and  remorse  before  they  can  be  purged  away.  It  is
not  we  who  laid  down  that  law,  but  the  Eternal  and  All- wise.
We  have  but  pointed  out  to  you  once  again  the  operation  of  a
law  the  working  of  which  you  may  see  all  around  you.  We
desired  to  point  out  what  men  are  apt  to  forget,  that  though
there  be  no  formal  judgment  such  as  has  been  imagined,  at  a
far  distant  day,  in  presence  of  an  assembled  universe,  when
the  Kecording  Angel  shall  produce  the  Books  of  Doom,  and  the
Christ  shall  sit  in  judgment,  and  shall  condemn  the  sinner  to
an  everlasting  hell :  though  there  be  none  of  this,  yet  that
every  act  is  registered,  every  thought  recorded,  every  habit
known  as  a  factor  in  the  future  character.  We  would  show
you  that  the  judgment  of  condemnation  needs  no  parapher-
nalia of  assize,  but  is  conducted  in  the  silent  recesses  of  the
soul  itself.  No  judge  is  there  but  the  voice  of  Spirit  com-
muning with  itself,  and  reading  its  own  doom.  No  books  but
the  records  of  conscience;  no  hell  but  the  flame  of  remorse
that  shall  eat  into  the  soul  and  purge  it  as  by  fire.

And  this,  not  in  a  far-off  future  when  the  arisen  myriads  of
humanity  shall  all  have  been  gathered  up,  but  instant  on
death,  quick  as  consciousness  awakes,  sure  as  the  soul  stirs  in

MAX   MAKES   HIS   OWN   FUTURE.

2V  7

the  new  life.  This  too,  not  subject  to  a  faint  perhaps,  in  a
dim  and  hazy  light  seen  far  off  down  the  vista  of  the  future,
but  sure  and  certain,  instant  and  inevitable.  We  would  teach
you  this.  For  it  has  been  said  of  us  that  our  Gospel  re-
moves the  terror  from  religion,  by  which  motive  alone  the
most  of  men  may  be  governed  and  restrained,  and  substitutes
for  it  a  faith  which  teaches  salvation  for  all,  whatever  their
deeds  may  be,  whatever  creed  they  may  profess.  We  do  not
teach  any  such  insensate  creed.  You  know  it ;  but  you  need
to  have  repeated  again  and  again  the  truth  on  which  we  have
been  insisting:  Man  makes  his  own  future,  stamps  his  own
character,  suffers  for  his  own  sins,  and  must  work  out  his  own
salvation.

We  did  but  dwell  on  this  side  because  the  story  of  that
wasted  life  invited  by  its  example.  We  have  dwelt  often
•enough  on  the  lighter  side  of  grace  and  beauty  and  angelic
ministration.  You  need  not  to  be  told  of  the  abounding
mercy  and  love  of  the  Supreme,  nor  of  the  tender  watchful
care  which  is  ceaselessly  exercised  by  those  who  minister
between  Him  and  you.  It  is  well  sometimes  to  show  the  dark
side  of  loneliness  and  desolation,  and  temptation  by  the  foes.

The  ideal  was  not  high :  and  if  it  were,  high  ideals  serve
•only  to  brace  the  aspiring  soul :  they  are  too  high  for  those
only  who  have  no  ambition  to  ascend :  not  for  those  whose
lives  have  not  been  eaten  out  by  selfishness  and  sin,  whose
energies  are  yet  strong,  and  will  grow  stronger  by  the  exercise
of  them.  Be  assured,  good  friend,  that  the  grand  truth  can
never  be  escaped.  Life  is  a  journey,  a  conflict,  a  development.
The  journey  is  up-hill,  and  the  way  is  thorn-beset  and  difficult
The  conflict  is  unending  till  victory  crowns  the  final  effort.
The  development  is  spiritual  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  plane,
from  the  child  of  earth  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the
Christ.  You  cannot  change  the  unalterable.  You  cannot
reach  the  Perfect  Good,  save  after  a  conflict  with  evil.  It  is
an  eternal  necessity  that  you  be  purified  through  struggles
with  the  evil  that  surrounds  you.  It  is  the  means  by  which
the  spark  once  struck  off  from  the  Divine  Soul  wins  back  its
way  to  Him  arid  enters  into  its  rest.

278  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Do  you  need  to  be  told  that  true  happiness  is  to  be  had
only  by  living  up  to  the  highest  ideal  ?  That  the  idler  and
the  sluggard  know  it  not  ?  That  the  vicious  man  and  the
evil-doer,  who  sins  of  choice  and  by  preference,  have  no  part  in
it  ?  That  peace  on  earth  springs  up  only  in  the  soul  that  soars
heavenwards,  and  finds  its  happiness  in  viewing  the  dangers
and  difficulties  that  have  been  overpassed  ?  Do  you  need  to>
be  told  again  that  the  angels  watch  over  such  to  bear  them.,
up — that  the  ministers  count  it  honour  to  support  them,  and
that  no  final  harm  can  fasten  on  the  spirit  which  keeps  a  high
ideal  before  it  ?  Victory  is  assured :  but  it  would  not  be  vic-
tory were  it  found  without  a  struggle  in  selfish  and  inglorious
ease,  by  those  who  would  not  value  what  every  idle  hand
might  pluck.  Victory  comes  after  conflict :  peace  after  tribu-
lation :  development  after  steady  growth.

/  replied  that  this  seemed  to  me  matter  of  course ;  and  that
in  the  seed  time  of  life  man  must  get  as  much  know-
ledge, do  as  much  work,  and  enjoy  such  peace  as  he  can*
But  the  ^uork  and  the  knowledge  (especially  of  God
Himself  and  His  future)  must  precede  Peace,  or  Rest.
Perhaps  too  little  room  was  left  for  meditation.

No ;  the  life  is  threefold  :  of  meditation  and  prayer  :  of
worship  and  adoration  :  and  of  conflict  with  the  threefold
enemy.  The  meditation  is  necessary  to  self-knowledge.  It
is  an  element  of  steady  growth.  With  it  goes  prayer,  the
communion  of  the  prisoned  soul  with  the  Father  of  spirits,
and  with  us  His  ministers.  Worship  and  adoration,  in  any  of
the  countless  phases  that  the  soul  seeks  out  for  itself,  whether
in  silent  solitude  beneath  the  heavens  that  speak  to  him  of  his-
God,  or  in  communion  with  Nature,  the  external  and  material
manifestation  of  Deity,  or  in  the  solemn  service  of  song  within
some  stately  temple  which  man  has  separated  for  God :  or  in
the  upward  aspiration  of  the  heart  unuttered  and  unheard  of
man — in  any  or  all  of  these  ways  the  instinct  of  adoration
divinely  implanted  may  find  its  vent.  These  are  the  necessary
helps  for  the  sustained  conflict.  We  do  not  undervalue  them :
rather  do  we  insist  on  them.  We  tell  you  that  it  would  be

ACCOUNTABILITY.  279

well  if  you  devoted  more  time  to  peaceful  thought.    Your  life
lacks  quietness.

As  to  the  accountability  of  this  spirit  for  its  rash  act,
surely  you  admit  some  cases  where  the  spirit  is  not
accountable.

Assuredly.  The  human  instrument  may  be  jarred  and  out
of  tune,  and  so  may  faultily  transmit  the  will  of  the  spirit
within.  There  are  many  cases  in  which  madness  is  the  result
of  bodily  disease.  For  such  the  spirit  is  not  blameworthy.
Accidental  injury  may  derange,  or  congenital  defect,  or  over-
strain of  trouble  and  distress.  For  such  causes  the  spirit  is
blamed  by  none,  least  of  all  by  the  Holy  and  Just  One,  who
deals  not  with  body  but  with  spirit,  and  who  judges  according
to  spiritual  motive  and  intent.  We  reprobated  the  case  on
which  we  spoke,  because  the  end  was  the  result  of  life-long
sin.  He  was  and  is  responsible,  and  he  begins  to  know  it.

May  the  Allwise  foster  and  increase  the  knowledge.

Hh  IMPERATOB.

(    280    )

SECTION   XXXII.

[As  a  specimen  of  a  message  written  at  a  later  period,  I
append  the  following.  It  is  a  fair  sample  of  some
of  the  more  elevated  teaching.  It  was  written  with
vast  rapidity,  and  is  printed  precisely  as  written.
There  was  no  need  to  alter  a  word.  As  it  was
being  given,  I  was  conscious  of  a  most  powerful
and  elevating  influence  which  permeated  my  whole
being.]

TRUTH.

The  blessing  of  the  Blessed  One  rest  on  you.  We  have
opportunity  now  which  may  not  recur  of  answering  some  of
your  inquiries,  and  of  conveying  to  you  some  necessary  truth.
From  letters  which  you  have  received  of  late  you  will  be  led
to  see  that  the  times  of  trouble  and  distress  which  we  have
warned  you  of  are  expected  by  others  as  well  as  by  us.  Be
prepared  for  trouble :  it  will  assuredly  come.  It  is  necessary
that  afflictions  come.  Jesus  knew  and  taught  that.  It  is
necessary  for  the  training  of  the  soul.  It  is  as  necessary  as
physical  discipline  for  the  body.  No  deep  knowledge  is  to
be  had  without  it.  None  is  permitted  to  scale  the  glorious
heights  but  after  discipline  of  sorrow.  The  key  of  knowledge
is  in  spirit-hands,  and  none  may  wrest  it  to  himself  but  the
earnest  soul  which  is  disciplined  by  trial.  Bear  that  in  mind.

Ease  and  luxury  are  the  pleasant  paths  in  which  the  soul
lingers  and  dreams  away  the  summer  day.  Self-denial,  self-
sacrifice,  self-discipline  are  the  upward  tracks,  thorn-vext  and
rocky,  which  lead  to  the  heights  of  knowledge  and  power.
Study  the  life  of  Jesus  and  be  wise.

Moreover,  the  present  is  a  time  of  hard  and  bitter  conflict
between  us  and  our  foes.  We  have  told  you  that  you  feel
the  reflex  of  that  struggle.  It  accompanies  every  great
development  of  Divine  Truth.  It  is,  as  it  were,  the  darkness
that  precedes  the  dawn :  the  gloom  which  is  the  pre-requisite
for  growth :  the  period  of  trial  wherein  the  earnest  soul  is
purified.  "  Your  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness,"  said  Jesus

WHAT   IS  TRUTH  ?  281

as  he  agonised  in  Gethsemane.  It  is  so  now :  and  it  will  not
pass  lightly.  The  cup  must  be  drained.

As  each  revelation  of  the  Supreme  grows  old,  it  is  overlaid
by  man's  errors,  and  loaded  with  his  inventions.  It  dies
gradually,  and  loses  its  hold  on  men.  Bit  by  bit  human  error
is  pared  away,  unable  to  stand  the  shock  of  criticism,  and
men's  faith  is  shaken,  and  they  ask  with  old  Pilate — What  is
truth  ?  Then  comes  the  answer  in  the  new  birth  of  a  higher
revelation.  The  throes  of  its  birth  shake  the  world,  and
around  its  cradle  the  powers  of  the  Spiritual  world  contend.
Great  is  the  dust  and  din  of  the  contention.

As  the  light  dawns  upon  the  world,  and  the  clouds  lift,  the
watchers,  whose  eyes  are  spiritually  opened  to  discern  the
signs  of  the  times,  they  who  stand  on  the  watch-towers  to
catch  the  first  gleams,  these  are  ready  and  welcome  with  joy
the  break  of  day.  "Joy  comes  with  the  morning."  "  Sorrow
and  sighing  flee  away."  The  terrors  of  the  night,  "  the  powers
of  darkness,"  are  past.  But  not  for  all.  Full  many  there  will
always  be  for  whom  no  ray  of  light  is  visible  till  the  sun  has
oained  his  meridian  and  splendour.  They  slumber  on,  heedless
of  the  light  that  is  breaking  on  the  world.

Hence  the  days  will  never  come  to  your  world  when  all
equally  will  know  of  the  truth.  There  will  always  be  many
for  whom  it  has  no  charms,  for  whom  it  would  be  fraught
with  danger  to  tread  the  upward  paths  of  progress,  and  who
prefer  the  beaten  track  worn  by  the  feet  of  those  who  have
trod  it  through  the  ages  past.  There  will  be  such  always,
even  as  there  will  be  souls  who  catch  the  foregleams  that
herald  the  dawn.  So  do  not  hope  that  the  open  vision  will
ever  be  the  same  to  all.  No  such  dream  of  equality  is  pos-
sible. Nor  is  it  more  desirable  than  possible.  To  some  are
given  powers  that  can  safely  pry  into  mysteries  which  others
must  perforce  avoid.  These  must  be  the  leaders  and  guides
among  men.  And  those  who  are  so  called,  are  they  on  whom
lies  the  most  solemn  duty  of  personal  preparation  and  earnest,
life-long  struggle  with  self,  until  it  is  dominated  and  subdued,
and  the  free  soul  soars  untrammelled.  We  have  long  since
told  you  of  this.  See  you  heed  it

282  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

Do  not  be  discouraged  that  so  much  of  what  most  believe
as  truth  seems  to  you  hollow  and  uncertain.  It  is  so.  There
are  divers  degrees  of  truth.  From  the  manjr-sided  crystal
gleams  are  shot  off  in  many  directions.  And  it  is  not  every
soul  that  can  receive  even  one  ray  unclouded.  To  few,  very
few,  comes  more  than  a  stray  glimpse,  and  even  that  is  filtered
through  many  a  medium,  until  its  clearness  is  all  dimmed.  It
must  needs  be  so.  Hence  the  varied  views  of  truth.  Hence
the  divergent  notions,  the  errors,  the  mistakes,  the  fallacies
that  pass  current  among  you.  Men  think  they  see  a  momen-
tary gleam.  They  grasp  some  view,  enlarge  on  it,  add  to  it,
develop  it,  until  the  tiny  light  is  quenched,  and  what  was  a
ray  of  truth  is  distorted  and  destroyed.  And  so  the  truth  is
maligned,  whereas  it  should  be  the  imperfection  of  the  inter-
vening medium  that  is  blamed.

Or,  to  take  another  view.  That  which  came  as  the  answer
to  the  yearnings  of  some  aspiring  soul  is  deemed  to  be  of
universal  application.  The  truth  was  so  beautiful,  so  enno-
bling, so  pure  and  holy  in  its  essence,  that  it  must  surely  be
so  to  all.  And  the  jewel  is  dragged  out  from  casket,  and
prepared  for  open  exhibition.  The  lily  is  plucked  from  its
stem,  and  paraded  before  rqen.  And  it  loses  its  purity;  its
vitality  diminishes ;  it  withers  and  dies ;  and  he  to  whom  it
was  so  fair,  so  lovely,  wonders  to  find  that  it  loses  its  freshness
in  the  heat  and  dust  of  the  world's  busy  strife.  He  marvels
that  what  was  so  pure  and  true  to  him  in  the  heart's  secluded
temple  should  seem  tame  and  out  of  place  when  advertised  to
the  world.  He  learns,  if  he  is  wise,  that  the  dew  of  Hermon
is  distilled  in  the  silence  and  solitude  of  the  heart ;  that
the  flower  springs  up  in  the  gloom  of  night,  and  withers
beneath  the  noon-day  beams;  that  truth,  the  holiest  and
purest,  comes  direct  from  spirit  to  spirit,  and  may  not  be
proclaimed  on  the  world's  house-top.

Doubtless  there  are  coarse  views  of  truth,  rude  blocks  which
man  has  hewn,  and  which  all  may  use  alike.  These  are  the
foundation  stones  which  every  builder  must  use.  But  the
richest  and  purest  gems  must  be  preserved  in  the  spirit-shrine,
and  be  gazed  upon  in  silence  and  alone.  So  when  John  the

TRUTH  IS  MANY-SIDED.  283

Seer  told  of  the  jewelled  walls  and  pearly  gates  of  the
Heavenly  City,  he  spoke  of  the  outer  truths  which  all  must
see ;  but  in  the  inner  temple  he  placed  nor  jewel  nor  purest
ray  of  light,  but  only  the  Presence  and  the  Glory  of  the  Lord.

Marvellous  it  is  that  you  do  not  see  this.  That  which  to
you  is  Divine  Truth  is  only  that  atom,  that  speck  of  the  whole
unbroken  circle  which  has  been  cast  off  in  answer  to  your  cry.
You  needed  it,  and  it  came.  To  you  it  is  perfection ;  it  is
God.  To  another  it  would  be  incomprehensible,  without  a
voice  to  answer  to  his  cry,  without  any  beauty  that  he  should
desire  it.  You  cannot  parade  it  if  you  would.  It  would  die,
and  its  hidden  charm  would  make  no  convert.  It  is  yours
and  yours  alone,  a  special  creation  for  a  special  want,  an
answer  from  the  great  Spirit  to  the  yearning  aspiration  of
your  soul.

This  Truth  will  always  be  esoteric.  It  must  be  so ;  for  only
to  the  soul  that  is  prepared  can  it  be  given.  Its  fragrance  is
too  evanescent  for  daily  common  use.  Its  subtle  perfume  is
shed  only  in  the  inner  chamber  of  the  spirit.  Remember  this ;
and  remember  toe  that  violence  is  done  to  Truth  by  forcing  it
on  unprepared  minds,  while  harm,  great  and  far-reaching,  is-
done  to  those  who  cannot  receive  what  is  a  revelation  to  you
but  not  to  them.

Moreover,  remember  that  the  pursuit  of  truth  for  its  own
sake  as  the  altogether  lovely  and  desirable  end  of  life  is  the
highest  aim  of  spirit  on  your  plane  of  being,  higher  than  earth's
ambitions,  nobler  than  any  work  that  man  can  do.  We  do  not
now  take  note  of  any  of  the  vulgar  aims  that  fill  up  human
life.  The  struggles  and  ambitions  that  exercise  mankind,  born
of  vanity,  nurtured  in  jealousy,  and  ending  in  disappointment
—these  are  plain  to  view  as  Sodom  apples.  But  there  is  a
subtler  temptation  to  more  refined  souls— that  of  doing  good
to  their  fellows  and  adding  another  stone  to  the  cairn  that  the
pioneers  of  the  past  have  raised.  To  them  comes  the  desire  to
proclaim  in  accents  of  enthusiasm  some  truth  which  has  taken
hold  upon  their  lives.  They  are  possessed  with  it;  the  fire
burns  within  them,  and  they  speak.  It  may  be  a  noble  word
they  utter,  and,  if  it  meets  the  needs  of  men,  it  is  re-echoed

284  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

and  taken  up  by  other  souls  like-minded,  and  developed  till
men  are  stirred  and  benefited  by  it.  But  it  may  be  the  re-
verse. The  Truth,  so  true  to  one,  is  true  to  him  alone,  and  his
voice  is  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  a  proclaimer
of  idle  tales.  He  speaks  in  vain,  and  it  had  been  well  that  he
had  saved  his  energies  for  the  quest  of  truth,  and  have  learned
more  before  he  spake  to  men.

It  is  well  to  teach,  but  better  still  to  learn  :  nor  is  it  impos-
sible to  do  both.  Only  remember  that  learning  must  precede
teaching :  and  be  sure  that  the  truth  is  one  that  man  needs.
The  student  who  dives  deep  into  the  mysteries  that  enshrine
Truth  will  not  recklessly  violate  the  seclusion  in  which  alone
she  dwells  at  ease.  He  will  tell  of  her  beauties,  and  proclaim
to  those  who  have  ears  to  hear  the  words  of  healing  which  his
inner  sense  has  caught  from  her  lips  :  but  there  will  always  be
to  him  a  sacred  reserve,  a  holy  silence,  an  esoteric  revelation
too  pure,  too  dear  for  utterance.

[In    answer    to    some    unimportant    question   it    was
written]  : —

Nay :  you  will  be  informed  in  time.  We  may  not  save  you
the  exercise  which  is  part  of  your  discipline.  Be  content
to  walk  in  the  path.  It  leads  direct  to  truth ;  but  you  must
tread  it  in  care  and  pain.  We  have  directed  you  to  it  because
it  is  well  for  you  to  garner  up  the  wisdom  of  the  past,  and  to
learn  of  those  who  are  gone  before  you.  We  foresaw  long
ago  that  those  who  should  faithfully  pursue  the  study  of  the
intercourse  between  our  world  and  yours,  would  receive  rude
shocks  from  the  follies  and  falsities  that  cluster  round  the
subject  in  its  most  exoteric  aspect.  We  looked  with  confidence
for  the  time  when  these  should  force  themselves  into  promin-
ence, and  we  prepared  for  it.  We  would  teach  you  that  there
are,  and  ever  must  be,  two  sides  to  this  science,  as  there  were
in  the  mysteries  of  the  ages  past.  Having  passed  the  one,  it
is  necessary  that  you  penetrate  the  other.

To  this  end  you  must  learn  who  and  what  are  those  who
do  communicate  with  men.  Not  otherwise  can  you  read
aright  the  riddle  that  now  perplexes  you.  You  must  know

THE  CONDITIONS  OF  SUCCESS  285

how  and  under  what  conditions  truth  can  be  had :  and  how
error  and  deceit,  and  frivolity  and  folly  may  be  warded  off.
All  this  man  must  know  if  he  is  safely  to  meddle  with  our
world.  And  when  he  has  learned  this,  or  while  he  is  learning
it,  he  must  see,  too,  that  on  himself  depends  most  or  all  of  the
success.  Let  him  crush  self,  purify  his  inmost  spirit,  driving-
out  impurity  as  a  plague,  and  elevating  his  aims  to  their
highest  possible :  let  him  love  Truth  as  his  Deity,  to  which  alZ
else  shall  bow;  let  him  follow  it  as  his  sole  aim,  careless  whether
the  quest  may  lead  him,  and  round  him  shall  circle  the
Messengers  of  the  Most  High,  and  in  his  inmost  soul  he  shall

see  light.

-  IMTEIUTOB.

(     286     )

SECTION  xxxm

{In  Section  IV.  reference  is  made  to  some  extremely
minute  particulars  which  were  written  concerning
the  life  of  Arne,  the  musical  composer.  On  Sept.
12th,  1873,  a  number  of  other  facts  and  dates
equally  minute  and  accurate  were  given  respecting
other  composers,  Dr.  Benjamin  Cooke,  Pepusch,
Wellesley  Earl  of  Mornington,  respecting  whose
very  names  I  was  ignorant.  The  details  are
absurdly  minute,  comprising  just  such  a  brief
record  as  would  be  found  in  a  Biographical  Dic-
tionary. They  were  described  by  DOCTOR,  in
whose  writing  they  appear,  as  "worthless,  save
for  your  conviction.  That  is  the  end  we  have  in
view.  Details  of  earth  life  are  of  little  interest  to
us  now."

On  July  16th,  1874,  being  then  confined  to  my  room  by
illness,  I  received  a  further  communication  respect-
ing these  musical  spirits  who  were  so  completely
outside  of  my  own  personal  interests,  and  yet  so
intimately  connected  with  one  with  whom  I  was
brought  into  daily  contact.  This  time  it  was  John
Blow,  described  as  "  pupil  of  Christopher  Gibbon,
and  the  successor  of  Purcell  in  the  Abbey,  West-
minster :  a  composer  even  as  a  boy."  Further
inquiry  elicited  his  date,  1648-1768.  This  was  the
result  apparently  of  a  chance  visit  to  my  room,
when  I  was  in  a  supersensitive  condition,  of  the
link  between  me  and  these  spirits.

On  October  5th,  1873,  more  personal  evidence  was
brought.  The  same  spirit  who,  in  Section  IV.,  was
described  as  being  able  to  write  out  an  extract
from  a  book,  transcribed  some  particulars  about
ancient  Chronicles,  which  in  their  broad  outline
would  not  be  unfamiliar  to  my  mind,  since  the
subject  came  within  the  scope  of  my  study.  In
the  extremely  minute  and  precise  manner  in  which
they  were  given,  they  are  quite  out  of  my  mental
scope :  seeing  that  it  is  a  peculiarity  of  my  mind
to  be  unable  to  retain  and  reproduce  minute  and

EVIDENCE  OF   EXTERNAL  INTELLIGENCE.  287

precise  facts,  and  especially  dates.  Both  from
natural  inability  to  use  such  facts,  and  from  a
belief  that  wide  views,  and  a  general  grasp  of  a
subject  in  its  broad  bearings  are  most  serviceable,
1  have  always  endeavoured  to  cultivate  such  a
habit  of  mind.

It  is  a  singular  fact  in  this  connection  that  almost  all
the  communications  written  through  my  hand  are
distinguished  by  microscopic  minuteness  of  detail,
and  by  a  general  absence  of  breadth  and  diversity
of  view,  except  in  the  case  of  those  proceeding
directly  from  IMPERATOR.

At  this  same  time  twenty-six  lines  from  the  works  of
Norton,  an  old  Alchymist,  were  written  out  in  a
curious  archaic  hand,  quite  different  from  any  that
had  been  used  before.  The  extract  I  afterwards
verified  with  difficulty,  for  the  book  is  scarce,  and
little  is  known  of  Norton,  his  very  date  being
involved  in  obscurity.  It  was  said  of  him  that  he
was  an  old  student  of  the  occult :  a  medium  in  his
life,  and  so  more  able  to  return  to  earth.  His
poem  was  called  "  The  Ordinal  or  Manual  of
Chemical  Art,"  and  was  written  for  his  patron,
Archbishop  Neville  of  York.

I  might  adduce  other  cases,  but  they  would  prove  no
more  than  those  already  adduced.  I  have  selected
almost  at  random  a  few  cases  out  of  a  great
number.

One  more,  however,  I  will  quote,  because  of  the  re-
markable manner  in  which  the  communication
was  verified.  It  seemed  that  the  same  power  that
gave  the  fact  pointed  to  its  method  of  verification,
and  it  has  the  merit  of  being  absolutely  external  to
the  knowledge  of  any  person  present.  I  quote
from  my  records.

March  25th,  1874. — A  spirit  communicated  through
the  table,  name  and  particulars  both  unknown  to
any  member  of  the  circle.  I  inquired  on  the  fol-
lowing day  about  the  circumstance.]

The  spirit  said  truly  that  she  was  named  Charlotte  Buck-
worth.  She  has  no  special  connection  with  us,  but  was  per-
mitted to  speak  as  she  chanced  to  be  present,  and  for  evidence
to  you.  The  conditions  were  unfavourable  for  our  work ;  we
were  not  able  to  harmonise  the  conditions,  which  were  dis-

288  SPIRIT- TEACHINGS

turbed.  It  is  always  so  after  such  a  day  as  you  passed.  The
different  influences  of  those  with  whom  you  were  thrown
would  introduce  elements  of  disturbance  which  we  could  not
harmonise.

/  had  been  with  four  persons  all  more  or  less  medium-
istic.  I  always  am  affected  by  being  in  the  society  of
such.

You  do  not  know  how  much  you  are  sensitive  to  such
influence.  The  spirit  who  came  to  you  was  one  who  has
passed  from  among  you  now  for  more  than  a  hundred  years,
having  made  a  sudden  and  unprepared  entrance  into  spirit-
life  in  the  year  1773.  She  passed  away  at  the  hou^e  of  a  friend
in  Jermyn-street,  whither  she  had  gone  on  a  party  of  pleasure.
She  will  probably  be  able  to  say  more  to  you ;  but  we  have
no  control  over  her.

/  asked  that  she  should  be  fetched,  but  was  told  that  the
communicating  spirit  had  no  control  over  her.  I  then
inquired  if  anything  more  were  known  about  her.

Yes.  She  was  very  anxious  to  say  more,  but  the  power
was  exhausted.  She  has  been  occupied  in  her  special  sphere
of  work  after  awaking  from  a  long  sleep,  and  has  not  been
brought  within  the  atmosphere  of  earth  until  lately.  She  is
attracted  to  circles  where  harmony  prevails,  being  herself  of
a  loving  nature.  Her  departure  from  your  earth  was  instan-
taneous ;  for  she  dropped  down  at  a  party  of  pleasure,  and  at
once  passed  from  the  body.

/  inquired  the  cause  of  death.

Weakness  of  the  heart,  increased  by  violent  dancing.  She
was  but  a  thoughtless  girl,  though  of  a  gentle  and  loving  dis-
position.

/  asked  what  house  and  where  ?

We  cannot  say.  She  will  probably  be  able  to  say  for
herself.

[Other  subjects  were  then  written  about,  and  no  more
was  said  of  this.     In  the  afternoon  of  the  same

THE  VERIFICATION  OF  THE  MESSAGE.  289

day  a  brief  communication  was  made.  Though  I
resisted  the  impression  to  write,  being  busyand
not  at  home,  I  was  compelled  to  allow  the  message
to  be  given.]

We  have  ascertained  that  it  was  at  the  house  of  one  Doctor
Baker  that  Lottie  departed.  The  day  was  the  fifth  of
December.  We  are  not  able  to  tell  you  more ;  but  enough
has  been  said.

RECTOR.

[The  verification  of  this  statement  was  as  unexpected
as  was  the  message  itself.  We  had  decided  that  no
means  of  verification  was  open;  and  the  matter
passed  from  our  minds.  Some  time  after,  Dr.  Speer
had  a  friend  at  his  house  who  was  fond  of  old
books.  We  three  were  talking  in  a  room  in  which
there  were  a  number  of  books  rarely  used,  arranged
in  shelves  extending  from  floor  to  ceiling.  Dr.

Speer'.s  friend,  whom  I  will  call  Mr.  A ,  mounted

a  chair  to  get  at  the  topmost  row,  which  was  com-
posed entirely  of  volumes  of  the  Annual  Register.
He  took  one  down  amid  a  cloud  of  dust,  and  com-
mented on  it  as  a  valuable  record  of  events  from
year  to  year.  Almost  anything,  he  said,  could  be
found  in  it.  As  he  said  this,  the  idea  flashed  into
my  mind  at  once  most  vividly  that  there  was  the
place  to  verify  the  information  that  had  been  given
about  this  death.  It  was  one  of  these  utterly  un-
accountable impressions,  or  rather  communications
with  which  those  who  commune  with  spirits  are
familiar.  It  was  as  if  a  voice  spoke  to  my  inner
sense.  I  hunted  out  the  volume  for  1773,  and  there
I  found,  among  the  notable  deaths,  a  record  of  this
occurrence,  which  had  apparently  made  a  sensation
as  occurring  at  a  festivity  in  a  fashionable  house.
The  volume  was  thickly  covered  with  dust,  and  had
lain  undisturbed  in  its  place  since  it  had  been  put
there  some  five  years  before.  I  remember  the  books
being  arranged,  and  they  had  never  been  disturbed

since  ;  nor,  but  for  Mr.  A :s  antiquarian  tastes,

would  it  ever  have  occurred  to  any  of  us  to  pull
them  down.

I  may  add   in   this  connection,  that   on   March  29th,
1874,  a  communication  was  written  out  in  my  book,
20

200  SPIRIT-TEACHINGS.

of  which  at  first  I  could  make  nothing.  The  hand-
writing was  like  none  I  had  seen  before,  very  shaky
and  tremulous,  like  that  of  an  extremely  old  and
feeble  person.  Though  a  name  was  apparently
signed,  I  could  not  read  it  at  all  until  it  was  deci-
phered for  me  by  the  spirit-amanuensis.  The  mes-
sage was  from  a  very  old  woman,  of  whom  I  had
never  before  heard,  who  passed  away  at  upwards
of  90  years  of  age  at  a  house  not  far  from  the  place
where  our  circle  meets.  For  obvious  reasons  I  am
unable  to  print  the  name  and  address.  I  have
neither  authority  nor  wish  to  seek  it  from  friends
still  living.  But  the  name,  place  of  residence,  both
in  earlier  years  and  at  the  time  of  death,  age,
and  date  of  decease,  were  given  with  exact  accuracy.
The  remarkable  fact,  for  which  (apparently)  the
message  was  given,  was  that  the  time  of  departure
from  earth  was  in  the  month  of  December,  1872,
since  which  time,  as  was  said,  "  the  spirit  being  full
of  years  in  its  earth-life  had  rested  from  its  earthly
toil."  On  awaking  it  had  been  attracted  to  its  old
home,  and  thence  to  the  circle  in  the  immediat
neighbourhood.

I  believe  that  in  this,  as  in  all  cases  of  identity,  the
information  was  brought  at  the  instance  of  IM-
PERATOR,  and  for  the  definite  purpose  of  supplying
to  me  evidence  which  I  very  much  desired  of
spirit-identity,  or  rather  of  individuality  perpetu-
ated after  bodily  death.  The  cases  were  apparently
selected  by  design,  and  I  have  never  been  able  to
procure  evidence  suggested  by  myself,  or  to  inter-
fere successfully  with  this  apparently  pre-arranged
plan.

Here  the  continuity  of  the  messages  is  broken,  and  the
series  may  well  terminate.  The  power  recurred
at  times,  but  never  with  the  sustained  vigour
manifested  in  the  mass  of  these  Teachings.  The
end  in  view  had  been  obtained,  and  though  much
was  written  afterwards,  the  periods  of  intermis-
sion became  more  frequent  until,  about  the  year
1879,  this  method  of  communication  was  practically
abandoned  for  an  easier  and  simpler  one.  It  would
be  easy  to  select  from  my  various  books  other
striking  teachings.  Hereafter  I  may  possibly  do
80.  For  the  present,  this  series  complete  in  itself

CONCLUSION.  29?

so  far  as  it  goes,  may  suffice  as  a  specimen  of  a
unique  experience.

In  concluding,  I  may  venture  to  say  that  I  propound
these  Teachings  as  specimens  of  influence  brought
powerfully  to  bear  upon  an  independent  mind  from
without.  The  opinions  expressed  may  be  dismissed
or  accepted  by  each  reader  according  as  they  com-
mend themselves  to  him.  But  he  will  miss  the  true
significance  of  this  volume  if  he  does  not  recognise
a  sustained  and  successful  effort  of  intelligence
apart  from  a  human  brain  to  influence  one  who
claims  for  himself  no  other  merit  than  that  of
having  honestly  and  very  laboriously  endeavoured
to  arrive  at  truth.

TEE  BSD.

FRIARS  PRINTING  ASSOCIATION,  LTD  ,  26a,  Tudor-street,  London,  E.C.

University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.

DUE  2  WKS  FROM  DAT    RECEIVED

MAY  0  1  2007

UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

A     000108095     1
