T'>'

LfBRARY)

UNIVERSITY  OF I
CALIFORNIA  I

SAN  DIEGO !

THE  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY

BHIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SAN  DIEGO

LA  JOLLA.  CALIFORNIA

W3

IvlipreveU,  pnxit.

PKINCE MADRIC']'.

landem  fit  buiculus  aiLo

i'^rontispii-ce.  Vol .  i  I

HISTORY

UNITED NETHERLANDS

FROM  THE  DEATH  OF  WILLIAM  THE  SILENT  TO
THE  TWELVE  YEARS'  TRUCE-IG09.

By  JOHN  LOTHKOP  MOTLEY,  D.C.L.

.CORRESrOXDING  MEMBER  OF  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE,
AUTHOR  OF  '  THE  RISE  OF  THE  DCTCH  REPUBLIC.'

IN  FOUR  VOLUMES.— Vol.  III.
1 590-1600.

NEW  EDITION.

WITH PORTRAITS.

LONDON:
JOHN MUREAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1869.

The  Right  of  Translation  is  reserved.

LOKDOiJ: PRKJTKD  BV W  CLOWES  AKD  SCKS,  UOKE  SIKKET,  STAMFORD  srSEET,
AND  CILAKIKG  CROSS.

ADVERTISEMENT

TO THE  *

TWO CONCLUDING  VOLUMES.

It  will  be  seen  that  a  change  has  been  made  in  the  epoch
at  which  it  was  originally  meant  to  close  this  wo]-k.
Instead  of  going  on  with  the  exclusive  history  of  the
Netherlands  until  the  synod  of  Dort,  the  author  has
thought  it  more  strictly  in  accordance  with  his  general
plan,  as  well  as  more  convenient  for  the  reader,  to  pause
with  the  narrative  at  the  point  of  time  when  the  Republic
was  formally  admitted  into  the  family  of  nations  by  the
treaty  of  twelve  years'  Truce,  and  when  its  independence
was  vii'tually  admitted  by  Spain.

The  history  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War,  with  which
the  renewed  conflict  between  the  Dutch  Commonwealth
and  the  Spanish  Monarchy  was  blended,  until  the  termi-
nation of  the  great  European  struggle  by  the  peace  of
Westphalia,  involves  all  the  most  important  episodes  in
the  progress  of  the  Netherlands  until  the  year  1648.

Upon  this  history,  which  is  the  natural  complement
to  the  Author's  two  works — '  The  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Re-
public '  and  '  The  History  of  the  United  Netherlands,' —
he  is  now  engaged,  and  he  hopes  at  a  future  day  to  ask
for  it  the  indulgence  which  has  been  generously  accorded
to  its  predecessors.

London,  JhhhsI,  18G7.

a  2

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III.

CHAPTER  XXL

Effect  of  the  Assassination  of  Henry  III.  —  Concentration  of  forces  for  tlie
invasion  of  France  —  The  Netherlands  determine  on  striking  a  blow  for
freedom  —  Organization  of  a  Dutch  army  —  Stratagem  to  surprise  the
castle  of  Breda — •Intrepidity  and  success  of  the  enterprise .. Page  1

CHAPTER  XXII.

Struggle  of  the  United  Provinces  against  Philip  of  Spain  —  Progress  of  the
Republic  —  Influence  of  Geographical  position  on  the  fate  of  the  Nether-
lands—  Contrast  offered  by  America — Miserable  state  of  the  so-called
"  obedient"  provinces  —  Prosperity  of  the  Commonwealth  —  Its  internal
government  —  Tendency  to  provincialism  —  Quibbles  of  the  English
Members  of  the  Council,  Wilkes  and  Bodley — Exclusion  of  Olden-
Barneveld  from  the  State-Council  —  Proposals  of  Philip  for  mediation
with  the  United  Provinces  —  The  Provinces  resolutely  decline  all  proffers
of  intervention 16

CHAPTER  XXin.

PhiUp's  scheme  of  aggrandizement  —  Projected  invasion  of  France  —
Internal  condition  of  France  —  Character  of  Henry  of  Navarre  —  Pre-
paration for  action  —  Battle  of  Ivry  —  Victory  of  the  French  king  over
the  League  —  Reluctance  of  the  king  to  attack  the  French  capital  —
Siege  of  Paris  —  The  Pope  indisposed  towards  the  League  —  Extra-
ordinary demonstration  of  ecclesiastics  —  Influence  of  the  priests  —
Extremities  of  the  siege  —  Attempted  negotiation  —  State  of  Philip's
ai-my  —  Difficult  position  of  Farnese  —  March  of  the  allies  to  the  relief
of  Paris  —  Lagny  taken  and  the  city  relieved  —  Desertion  of  the  king's
army — Siege  of  Corbeil — Death  of  Pope  Sixtus  V. —  Ke-capture  of
Lagny  and  Corbeil  —  Return  of  Parma  to  the  Netherlands — Result
of  the  expedition 40

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  111.

CHAPTER  XXIV.

Prince  Maurice  —  State  of  the  Republiain  army  —  Martial  science  of  the
pei-iod  —  Reformation  of  the  militaiy  system  by  Prince  Maurice — His
military  genius  —  Campaign  in  the  Netherlands  —  The  fort  and  town  of
Zutphen  taken  by  the  States'  forces  —  Attack  upon  Deventer  —  Its
capitulation  —  Advance  on  Groningen,  Delfzyl,  Opslag,  Yementil,
Steenwyk,  and  other  places,. —  Farnese  besieges  Fort  Knodsenburg  —
Prince  Maurice  hastens  to  its  relief — A  skirmish  ensues,  resulting  in
the  dit^comfiture  of  the  Spanish  and  Italian  troops  —  Surrender  of  Hulst
and  Nymegen  —  Close  of  military  operations  of  the  year . . Page  87

CHAPTER  XXV.

War  in  Brittany  and  Normandy  —  Death  of  La  Noue — Religious  and
political  persecution  in  Paris  —  Murder  of  President  Brisson,  Larcher,
and  Tardif — The  sceptre  of  France  offered  to  Philip — The  Duke  of
Mayenne  punishes  the  murderers  of  the  magistrates  —  Speech  of  Henry's
envoy  to  the  States-General  —  Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Henry  —
Siege  of  Rouen  —  Farnese  leads  an  army  to  its  relief — The  king  is
wounded  in  a  skirmish  —  Siege  of  Rue  by  Farnese — Heniy  raises  the
siege  of  Rouen  —  Siege  of  Caudebec  —  Critical  position  of  Fai-nese  and
his  army  —  Victory  of  the  Duke  of  Mercceur  in  Brittany .. .. 114

CHAPTER  XXVI.

Return  of  Prince  Maurice  to  the  siege  of  Steenwyk  —  Capitulation  of  the
besieged  —  Effects  of  the  introduction  of  mining  operations  —  Maurice
besieges  Coeworden  —  Verdugo  attempts  to  relieve  the  city,  but  fails
—  The  city  capitulates,  and  Prince  Maurice  retreats  into  winter
quarters 148

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Negotiations  between  Queen  Elizabeth  and  the  States  —  Aspect  of  affairs
between  England  and  the  Netherlands  —  Complaints  by  the  Hollandei-s
of  the  piratical  acts  of  the  English  —  The  Dutch  Envoy  and  the  English
Government —  Caron's  interview  with  Elizabeth  —  The  Queen  promises
redress  of  grievances 161

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Influence  of  the  rule  and  character  of  Philip  H.  —  Heroism  of  the  sixteenth
century  —  Contest  for  the  French  throne  —  Character  and  policy  of  the

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III.  vii

Duke  of  Mayenne  —  Escape  of^Hhe  Duke  of  Guise  from  Castle  Tours  —
Propositions  for  the  marriage  of  the  Infanta  —  Plotting  of  the  Catholic
party  —  Grounds  of  Philip's  pretensions  to  the  crown  of  France  —  Motives
of  the  Duke  of  Parma  maligned  by  Commander  Moreo  —  He  justifies
himself  to  the  king — View  of  the  private  relations  between  Philip  and
the  Duke  of  IMayenne  and  their  sentiments  towards  each  other  —  Dis-
position of  the  French  politicians  and  soldiers  towards  Philip  —  Peculiar
commercial  pursuits  of  Philip  —  Confused  state  of  afiairs  in  France  —
Treachery  of  Philip  towards  the  Duke  of  Parma  —  Recall  of  the  duke  to
Spain  —  His  sufferings  and  death Page  176

CHAPTER  XXIX.

Effect  of  the  death  of  Farnese  upon  Philip's  schemes  —  Priestly  flattery
and  counsel  —  Assembly  of  the  States-General  of  France  —  Meeting  of
the  Leaguers  at  the  Louvre  —  Conference  at  Surene  between  the  chiefs
of  the  League  and  the  "  political  "  leaders  —  Henry  convokes  an  assembl  v
of  bishops,  theologians,  and  others  —  Strong  feeling  on  all  sides  on  the
subject  of  the  succession  —  Philip  commands  that  the  Infanta  and  the
Duke  of  Guise  be  elected  King  and  Queen  of  France  —  Manifesto  of
the  Duke  of  Mayenne  —  Formal  re-admission  of  Henry  to  the  Roman
faith  —  The  pope  refuses  to  consent  to  his  reconciliation  with  the  Church
—  His  consecration  with  the  sacred  oil  —  entry  of  the  king  into  Paris  —
Departure  of  the  Spanish  garrison  from  the  capital  —  Dissimulation  of
the  Duke  of  Mayenne  —  He  makes  terms  with  Henry  —  Grief  of  Queen
Elizabeth  on  receipt  of  the  communications  from  France .. .. 215

CHAPTER  XXX.

Prince  Maurice  lays  siege  to  Gertruydenberg  —  Advantages  of  the  new
system  of  warfare  —  Progress  of  the  besieging  operations  —  Superiority
of  Maurice's  manoeuvres  —  Adventure  of  Count  Philip  of  Nassau  —
Capitulation  of  Gertruydenberg  —  Mutiny  among  the  Spanish  troops  —
Attempt  of  Verdugo  to  retake  Coeworden  —  Suspicions  of  treason  in  the
English  garrison  at  Ostend  —  Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Sir  Edward
Norris  on  the  subject  —  Second  attempt  on  Coevforden  —  Assault  on
Groningen  by  Maurice  —  Second  adventure  of  Philip  of  Nassau  —  Narrow
escape  of  Prince  Maurice  —  Surrender  of  Groningen  —  Particulars  of  the
siege  —  Question  of  religious  toleration  —  Progress  of  the  United  Nether-
lands—  Condition  of  the  "obedient"  Netherlands  —  Incompetency  of
Peter  Mansfeld  as  Governor —  Archduke  Ernest,  the  successor  of  Farnese
—  Difficulties  of  his  position  —  His  unpopularity  —  Grjat  achievements
of  the  republicans  —  Triumphal  entry  of  Ernest  into  Brussels  and
Antwerp  —  Magnificence  of  the  spectacle  —  Disaffection  of  the  Spanish

iii  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  111.

troops  —  Great  military  rebellion  —  Philip's  proposal  to  destroy  the
English  fleet —  His  assassination  plans  —  Plot  to  poison  Queen  Elizabeth
—  Conspiracies  against  Prince  Maurice  —  Futile  attempts  at  Negotia-
tion —  Proposal  of  a  marriage  between  Henry  and  the  Infanta  —  Secret
mission  from  Henry  to  the  King  of  Spain  —  Special  despatch  to  England
and  the  States  —  Henry  obti^ins  further  aid  from  Queen  Elizabeth  and
the  States-Council  —  Anxiety  of  the  Protestant  countries  to  bring
about  a  war  with  Spain  —  Aspect  of  affairs  at  the  close  of  the  year
1594  Page  241

CHAPTER  XXXI.

Fonnal  declaration  of  war  against  Spain  —  Marriage  festivities  —  Death  of
Archduke  Ernest  —  His  year  of  government  —  Fuentes  declared  governor-
general  —  Disaffection  of  the  Duke  of  Arschot  and  Count  Arenberg  —
Death  of  the  Duke  of  Arschot  —  Fuentes  besieges  Le  Catelet  —  The
fortress  of  Ham,  sold  to  the  Spanish  by  De  Gomeron,  besieged  and  taken
by  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  —  Execution  of  De  Gomeron  —  Death  of  Colonel
Verdugo  —  Siege  of  Dourlens  by  Fuentes  —  Death  of  La  Motte  —  Death
of  Charles  Mansfeld  —  Total  defeat  of  the  French  —  Murder  of  Admiral
De  Villars  —  Dourlens  captured,  and  the  garrison  and  citizens  put  to  the
sword  —  jStilitary  operations  in  eastern  Netherlands  and  on  the  Rhine  —
Maurice  lays  siege  to  Groento  —  Mondragon  hastening  to  its  relief,
Prince  Maurice  raises  the  siege  —  Skirmish  between  Maurice  and
Itlondragon  —  Death  of  Philip  of  Nassau  —  Death  of  Jlondragon  —
Bombardment  and  surrender  of  Weerd  Castle  —  Maurice  retires  into
winter  quarters  —  Campaign  of  Henry  IV.  —  He  besieges  Dijon  —  Sur-
render of  Dijon.  Absolution  granted  to  Henry  by  the  pope  —  Career  of
Balagny  at  Cambray  —  Progress  of  the  siege  —  Capitulation  of  the
town  —  Suicide  of  the  Princess  of  Cambray,  wife  of  Balagny .. 299

CHAPTER  XXXri.

Archduke-Cardinal  Albert  appointed  Governor  of  the  Netherlands —  Return

of  Philip  William  from  captivity  —  His  adherence  to  the  King  of  Spain

Notice  of  the  Marquis  of  Varambon,  Count  Varax,  and  other  new  officers

—  Henry's  communications  with  Queen  Elizabeth  —  Madame  de  Mon-
ceaux — Conversationof  Henry  with  the  English  Ambassador  —  Marseilles
secured  by  the  Duke  of  Guise  —  The  fort  of  Rysbank  taken  bv  De  Rosne

—  Calais  in  the  hands  of  the  Spanish  —  Assistance  from  England  solicited
by  Henry  —  Unhandsome  conditions  proposed  by  Elizabeth  —  Annexation
of  Calais  to  the  obedient  provinces  —  Pirates  of  Dunkirk  —  Uneasiness
of  the  Netherjanders  with  regard  to  the  designs  of  Elizabeth  —  Her  pro-
testations  of  sincerity  —  Expedition  of  Dutch  and English forces to

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III.  ix.

Spain  —  Attack  on  the  Spanish  war-ships  —  Victory  of  the  allies —  Flag
of  the  Republic  planted  on  the  fortress  of  Cadiz  —  Capitulation  of  the
city  —  Letter  of  Elizabeth  to  the  Dutch  admiral  —  State  of  affairs  in
France — Proposition  of  the  Duke  of  Montpensier  for  the  division  of  the
kingdom  —  Successes  of  the  Cardinal  Archduke  in  Normandy — He  pro-
ceeds to  Flanders — Siege  and  capture  of  Hulst  —  Projected  alliance
against  Spain  —  Interview  of  De  Sancy  with  Lord  Burghley — Diplo-
matic coni'eience  at  Greenwich —  Formation  of  a  league  against  Spain  —
Duplicity  of  the  treaty  —  Afi'airs  in  Germany  —  Battle  between  the
Emperor  and  the  Grand  Turk  —  Endeavour  of  Philip  to  counteract
the  influence  of  the  league  —  His  interference  in  the  affairs  of  Germany  —
Secret  intrigue  of  Henry  with  Spain  —  Philip's  second  attempt  at  the
conquest  of  England P;ige  332

CHAPTER  XXXIII.

Struggle  of  the  Netherlands  against  Spain  —  March  to  Tarnhout  —  Retreat
of  the  Spanish  commander  — •  Pursuit  and  attack  —  Demolition  of  the
Spanish  army  —  Surrender  of  the  garrison  of  Turnhout  —  Improved
military  science  —  Moral  effect  of  the  battle  —  The  campaign  in  France

—  Attack  on  Amiens  by  the  Spaniards  —  Sack  and  burning  of  the  city  —
De  Rosny's  plan  for  reorganization  of  the  finances  —  Jobbery  and  specu-
lation—  Philip's  repudiation  of  his  debts  —  Effects  of  the  measure  —
Renewal  of  persecution  by  the  Jesuits  —  Contention  between  Turk  and
Christian  —  Envoy  from  the  King  of  Poland  to  the  Hague  to  plead  fur
reconciliation  with  PhiLp — .His  subsequent  presentation  to  Queen
Elizabeth  —  Military  events — •Recovery  of  Amiens  —  F"eeble  operations
of  the  confederate  powers  against  Spain  —  Marriage  of  the  Princess
Emilia,  sister  of  Maurice —  Reduction  of  the  castle  and  town  of  Alphen  —
Surrender  of  Rheiuberg  —  Capitulation  of  Meurs  —  Surrender  of  Grol  -  —
Storming  and  taking  of  Brevoort  —  Capitulation  of  Enschede,  Ootmarsum,
Oldenzaal,  and  Lingen  —  Rebellion  of  the  Spanish  garrisons  in  Antwerp
and  Ghent  —  Progress  of  the  peace  movement  between  Henry  and  Philip

—  Relations  of  the  three  confederate  powers  —  Henry's  scheme  for  recon-
ciliation with  Spain  —  His  acceptance  of  Philip's  ofier  of  peace  announce<i
to  Elizabeth  —  Endeavours  for  a  general  peace 397

CHAPTER  XXXIV.

Mission  of  the  States  to  Henry  to  prevent  tlie  consummation  of  peace  with
Spain — Proposal  of  Henry  to  elevate  Prince  Maurice  to  the  sovereignty
of  the  States — Embarkation  of  the  States'  envoys  for  England  —  Their
interview  with  Queen  Elizabeth  —  Return  of  the  envoys  from  England  —
Demand  of  Elizabeth  for  repayment  of  her  advances  to  the  republic  —
Second  embassy  to  England  —  Final  arrangement  between  the  Queen  and

the  States 44(3

VOL. III.  b

X  .  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III.

CHAPTER  XXXV.

Negotiations  between  France  and  Spain  —  Conclusion  of  the  treaty  of
peace  —  Purchase  of  the  allegiance  of  the  French  nobles  —  Transfer
of  the  Netherlands  to  Albert  and  Isabella  —  Marriages  of  the  Infante
and  Infanta — Illness  of  Philip  II.  —  Horrible  nature  of  his  malady  —
His  last  hours  and  death  —  Keview  of  his  reign  —  Extent  of  the  Spanish
dominions  —  Causes  of  the  greatness  of  Spain,  and  of  its  downfall  —
Philip's  wars  and  their  expenses  —  The  Crown  revenues  of  Spain  —
Character  of  the  people  —  Their  inordinate  self-esteem  —  Consequent
deficiency  of  labour  —  Ecclesiastical  Government  —  Revenues  of  the
Church  —  Characteristics  of  the  Spanish  clergy  —  Foreign  commerce  of
Spain  —  Governmental  system  of  Philip  II.  —  Founded  on  the  popular
ignorance  and  superstition  —  Extinction  of  liberty  in  Spain  —  The  Holy
Inquisition  —  The  work  and  character  of  Philip Page  468

CHAPTER  XXXVI.

Commercial  prospects  of  Holland  —  Travels  of  John  Huygen  van  Linschoten
—  Their  eflect  on  the  trade  and  prosperity  of  the  Netherlands  —  Progress
of  nautical  and  geographical  science  —  Maritime  exploi'ation  —  F"'autastic
notions  respecting  the  polar  regions  —  State  of  nautical  science  —  First
arctic  expedition  —  Success  of  the  voyagers  —  Failure  of  the  second  expe-
dition—  Third  attempt  to  discover  the  north-east  passage — Discovery  of
Spitzbergen  —  Scientific  results  of  the  voyage  —  Adventures  in  the  frozen
regions  —  Death  of  William  Barendz  —  Return  of  the  voyagers  to  Am-
sterdam—  Southern  expedition  against  the  Spanish  power  —  Disasters
attendant  upon  it  —  Extent  of  Dutch  discovery 511

CHAPTER  XXXVII.

Military  operations  in  the  Netherlands  —  Designs  of  the  Spanish  Com-
mander—  Siege  of  Orsoy  —  Advance  upon  Rheinberg  —  Murder  of  the
Count  of  Broeck  and  his  garrison  —  Capture  of  Rees  and  Emmerich  —
Outrages  of  the  Spanish  soldiers  in  the  peaceful  provinces  —  Inglorious
attempt  to  avenge  the  hostilities  —  State  of  trade  in  the  Provinces  —
Naval  expedition  under  Van  der  Does  —  Arrival  of  Albert  and  Isabella
at  Brussels  —  Military  operations  of  Prince  Maurice  —  Negotiations
between  London  and  Brussels  —  Henry's  determination  to  enact  the
Council  of  Trent  —  His  projected  marriage  —  Queen  Elizabeth  and
Envoy  Caron — Peace  proposals  of  Spain  to  Elizabeth  —  Conferences  at
Gerlruydenberg — Uncertain  state  of  aflairs 54(J

THE UNITED NETHERLANDS.

CHAPTEE XXL

Effect  of  the  Assassination  of  Henry  III. — Concentration  of  forces  for  the  invasion
of  France — The  Netherlands  determine  on  striking  a  blow  for  freedom — Organi-
zation of  a  Dutch  army— Stratagem  to  surprise  the  castle  of  Breda — Intrepidity
and  success  of  the  enterprise.

The  dagger  of  Jacques  Clement  had  done  much,  and
was  likely  to  do  more,  to  change  the  face  of  Europe.
Another  proof  was  afforded  that  assassination  had  be-
come a  regular  and  recognised  factor  in  the  political
problems  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Another  illustration
was  exhibited  of  the  importance  of  the  individual — even
although  that  individual  was  in  himself  utterly  despi-
cable— to  the  woiking  out  of  great  historical  results.
It  seemed  that  the  murder  of  Henry  III. — that  forlorn
caricature  of  kingship  and  of  manhood — was  likely  to
prove  eminently  beneficial  to  the  cause  of  the  Xether-
land  commonwealth.  Five  years  earlier,  the  murder
of  William  the  Silent  had  seemed  to  threaten  its  very
existence.

For  Philip  the  Prudent,  now  that  Fi-ance  was  de-
prived of  a  head,  conceived  that  the  time  had  arrived
when  he  might  himself  assume  the  sovereignty  of  that
kingdom.  While  a  thing  of  straw,  under  the  name  of
Charles  X.  and  shape  of  a  Cardinal  Bourbon,  was  set  up
to  do  battle  with  that  living  sovereign  and  soldier,  the
heretic  Bcarnese,  the  Duke  of  Parma  was  privately
ordered  to  bend  all  his  energies  towards  the  conquest  of
the  realm  in  dispute,  under  pretence  of  assisting  the
Holy  League.

Accordingly,  early  in  the  3-ear  1590,  Alexander  cou-

VOL. III.  B

2  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXI.

centrated  a  considerable  force  on  the  French  frontier  in
Artois  and  Hainault,  apparently  threatening  Bergen-op-
Zoom  and  other  cities  in  South  Holland,  but  in  reality
preparing  to  invade  France.  The  Duke  of  Mayenne,
who  had  assumed  the  title  of  lieutenant-general  of  that
kingdom,  had  already  visited  him  at  Brussels  in  order
to  aiTange  the  plan  of  the  campaign.^

While  these  measures  were  in  preparation,  an  oppor-
tunity was  likely  to  be  aflbrded  to  the  Netherlanders  of
striking  a  blow  or  two  for  liberty  and  independence ;
now  that  all  the  force  that  possibly  could  be  spared  w^as
to  be  vrithdrawn  by  their  oppressors  and  to  be  used  for
the  subjugation  of  their  neighbours.  The  question  was
whether  there  would  be  a  statesman  and  a  soldier  ready
to  make  use  of  this  golden  opportunity.

There  was  a  statesman  ripe  and  able  who,  since  the
death  of  the  Taciturn,  had  been  growing  steadily  in  the
estimation  of  his  countrymen  and  who  already  was
paramount  in  the  councils  of  the  States-General.  There
was  a  soldier,  still  very  young,  who  was  possessed  of  the
strongest  hereditary  claims  to  the  coniidence  and  affec-
tion of  the  United  Provinces  and  who  had  been  passing
a  studious  youth  in  making  himself  worth}^  of  his  father
and  his  country.  Fortunately,  too,  the  statesman  and
the  soldier  were  working  most  harmoniously  together.
•John  of  Olden-Barneveld,  with  his  great  experience  and
vast  and  steady  intellect,  stood  side  by  side  with  young
Maurice  of  Nassau  at  this  important  crisis  in  the  history
of  the  new  commonwealth.

At  length  the  twig  was  becoming  the  tree — tandem  fit
surculus  arbor — according  to  the  device  assumed  by  the
son  of  William  the  Silent  after  his  father's  death.

The  Netherlands  had  sore  need  of  a  practical  soldier
to  contend  with  the  scientific  and  professional  tyrants
against  w^hom  they  had  so  long  been  struggling,  and
Maurice,  although  so  young,  was  pre  eminently  a  prac-
tical man.  He  was  no  enthusiast :  he  w^as  no  poet.  He
was  at  that  period  certainly  no  politician.  Not  often  at
the  ago  of  twenty  has  a  man  devoted  himself  for  years
to  pure  mathematics  for  the  purpose  of  saving  his
country.  Yet  this  was  Maurice's  scheme.  Fi/ur  years
long  ai  d  more,  when  most  other  youths  in  his  position

1  Bor.  vol.  III.  B,  xxvi.  pp.  516,  518.

1590. INTELLECTUAL  TRAINING  OF  PRINCE  MAURICE. 3

and  at  that  epoch  would  have  been  alternating  between
frivolous  pleasures  and  brilliant  exploits  in  the  field,  the
young  prince  had  spent  laborious  days  and  nights  with
the  learned  Simon  Steviniis  of  Bi-uges.  The  scientific
work  which  they  composed  in  common,  the  credit  of
which  the  master  assigned  to  the  pu})il,  might  have
been  more  justly  attributed  perhaps  to  the  professor
than  to  the  prince,  but  it  is  certain  that  Maurice  was  an
apt  scholar.

In  that  country,  ever  held  in  existence  by  main
human  force  against  the  elements,  the  arts  of  engi-
neering, hydrostatics  and  kindred  branches  were  of
necessity  much  cultivated.  It  was  reserved  for  the
young  mathematician  to  make  them  as  potent  against  a
human  foe.

Moreover,  there  were  symptoms  that  the  military
discipline,  learning  and  practical  skill,  which  had  almost
made  Spain  the  mistress  of  the  world,  were  sinking  into
decay.  Farnese,  although  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  was
broken  in  health,  and  there  seemed  no  one  fit  to  take
the  place  of  himself  and  his  lieutenants  when  they
should  be  removed  from  the  scene  where  they  had
played  their  parts  so  consummately.  The  army  of  the
Netherlands  was  still  to  be  created.  Thus  far  the
contest  had  been  mainly  carried  on  by  domestic  militia
and  foreign  volunteers  or  hirelings.  The  train-bands
of  the  cities  were  aided  in  their  struggles  against
Spanish  pikemen  and  artillerists,  Italian  and  Albanian
cavalry  by  the  German  riders,  whom  every  little  poten-
tate was  anxious  to  sell  to  either  combatant  according
to  the  highest  bid,  and  by  English  mercenaries,  whom
the  love  of  adventure  or  the  hope  of  plunder  sent  forth
under  such  well-seasoned  captains  as  Williams  and
Morgan,  Vere  and  the  Norrises,  Baskerville  and  Wil-
loughby.

But  a  Dutch  army  there  was  none,  and  Maurice  had
determined  that  at  last  a  national  force  should  be  created.
In  this  enterprise  he  was  aided  and  guided  by  his
cousin  Lewis  William,  Stadtholder  of  Friesland — the
quaint,  rugged  little  hero,  young  in  years  but  almost  a
veteran  in  the  wars  of  freedom,  who  was  as  genial  and
intellectual  in  council  as  he  was  reckless  and  impulsive
in  the  field.

B  2

4  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXI.

Lewis  William  had  felt  that  the  old  military  ait  was
dying  out,  and  that  there  was  nothing  to  take  its  place.
He  was  a  diligent  student  of  antiquity.  He  had  revived
in  the  swamps  of  Friesland  the  old  mancBuvres,  the
quickness  of  wheeling,  the  strengthening,  without
breaking  ranks  or  cohimns,  by  which  the  ancient
Eomans  had  performed  so  much  excellent  work  in  their
day,  and  which  seem.^d  to  have  passed  entirely  into
oblivion.  Old  colonels  and  rittmasters,  who  had  never
heard  of  Leo  the  Thracian  nor  the  Macedonian  phalanx,
smiled  and  shrugged  their  shoulders  as  they  listened  to
the  questions  of  the  young  count,  or  gazed  with  pro-
found astonishment  at  the  eccentric  evolutions  to  which
he  was  accustoming  his  troops.  From  the  heights  of
superior  wisdom  they  looked  down  wdth  pity  upon  these
innovations  on  the  good  old  battle  order.  They  were
accustomed  to  great  solid  squares  of  troops  wheeling  in
one  way,  steadily,  deliberately,  all  together,  by  one
impulse  and  as  one  man.  It  was  true  that  in  narrow
fields,  and  when  the  enemy  was  pressing,  such  stately
evolutions  often  became  impossible,  or  ensured  defeat;
but  when  the  little  Stadtholder  drilled  his  soldiers  in
small  bodies  of  various  shapes,  teaching  them  to  turn,
advance,  retreat,  wheel  in  a  variety  of  ways,  sometimes
in  considerable  masses,  sometimes  man  by  man,  sending
the  foremost  suddenly  to  the  I'ear,  or  bringing  the  hind-
most ranks  to  the  front,  and  began  to  attempt  all  this  in
narrow  fields  as  well  as  in  wide  ones,  and  when  the
enemy  was  in  sight,  men  stood  aghast  at  his  want
of  reverence,  or  laughed  at  him  as  a  pedant.  But
there  came  a  day  when  they  did  not  laugh,  neither
friends  nor  enemies.  Meantime  the  two  cousins,  who
directed  all  the  military  operations  in  the  provinces,
understood  each  other  thoroughly  and  proceeded  to
perfect  their  new  system,  to  be  adopted  at  a  later
period  by  all  civilized  nations.^

The  regular  army  of  the  Netherlands  was  small  in
number  at  that  moment — not  more  than  twenty  thou-
sand foot  with  two  thousand  hotse — but  it  was  well
disciplined,  well  equipped,  and,  what  was  of  great  im-
portance, regularly  paid.  Old  campaigners  complained
that  in  the  halcyon  days  of  paper  enrolments,  a  captain

2  Kt-yd,  viii.  162.

1590. ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  REPUBLICAN  ARMY.  5

could  earn  moi'e  out  of  his  company  than  a  colonel  now
received  for  his  whole  regiment.  The  days  when  a
thousand  men  were  paid  for,  with  a  couple  of  hundred
in  the  field,  were  passing  away  for  the  United  Provinces
and  existed  only  for  Italians  and  SjDaniards.  While,
therefoie,  mutiny  on  an  organized  and  extensive  scale
seemed  almost  the  normal  condition  of  the  unpaid  legions
of  Philip,  the  little  army  of  Maurice  was  becoming  the
model  for  Europe  to  imitate.

The  United  Provinces  were  as  yet  very  far  ftom
being  masters  of  their  own  teridtory.  Many  of  their
most  important  cities  still  held  for  the  king.  In  Brabant,
such  towns  as  Breda  with  its  many  dependencies  and
Gertruydenherg ;  on  the  Waal,  the  strong  and  wealthy
Nymegen  which  Martin  Schenk  had  perished  in  attempt-
ing to  surprise ;  on  the  Yssel,  the  thriving  city  of
Zutphen,  whose  fort  had  been  surrendered  by  the  traitor
York,  and  the  stately  De venter,  which  had  been  placed
in  Philip's  possession  by  the  treachery  of  Sir  William
Stanley  ;  on  the  borders  of  Drenthe,  the  almost  impreg-
nable Koevorden,  key  to  the  whole  Zwollian  country ;
and  in  the  ver}^  heart  of  ancient  Netherland,  Groningen,
capital  of  the  province  of  the  same  name,  which  the
treason  of  Kenneberg  had  sold  to  the  Spanish  tyrant ; —
all  these  flourishing  cities  and  indispensable  strong-
holds were  garrisoned  by  foreign  troops,  making  the
idea  of  Dutch  independence  a  delusion.

While  Alexander  of  Parma,  sorely  against  his  will
and  in  obedience  to  what  he  deemed  the  insane  sugges-
tions of  his  master,  was  turning  his  back  on  the  Nether-
lands in  order  to  relieve  Paris,  now  hard  pressed  by  the
Bearnese,  an  opportunity  offered  itself  of  making  at
least  a  beginning  in  the  great  enterpiise  of  recovering
these  most  valuable  possessions.

The  fair  and  pleasant  city  of  Breda  lies  on  the  Merk,
a  slender  stream,  navigable  for  small  vessels,  which
finds  its  way  to  the  sea  through  the  great  canal  of  the
Dintel.  It  had  been  the  property  of  the  Piinces  of
Orange,  Barons  of  Breda,  and  had  passed  with  the  other
possessions  of  the  family  to  the  house  of  Chiilons-Nassau.
Henry  of  Nassau  had,  half  a  century  before,  adorned  and
strengtliened  it  by  a  splendid  palace  fortress  which,
surrounded  by  a  deep  and  double  moat,  th)roiighly  com-

G  THE  UNITED  NETliERI.ANDS.  Chap.  XXI.

maiided  the  town.  A  garrison  of  five  companies  of
Italian  infantry  and  one  of  cavaliy  lay  in  this  castle,
which  was  under  the  command  of  Edward  Lanzavecchia,
governor  both  of  Breda  and  of  the  neighbouring  Ger-
tniydenberg.

Breda  was  an  important  strategical  position.  It  was
moreover  the  feudal  superior  of  a  large  number  of  adja-
cent villages  as  well  as  of  the  cities  Osterhout,  Steenberg
and  Eosendaal.  It  was  obviously  not  more  desirable
for  Maurice  of  Nassau  to  recover  his  patrimonial  city
than  it  was  for  the  States-General  to  drive  the  Spaniards
from  so  impoitant  a  position.^

In  the  month  of  February,  1590,  Maurice,  being  then
at  the  castle  of  Voom  in  Zeeland,  received  a  secret  visit
from  a  boatman,  Adrian  van  der  Berg  by  name,  who
lived  at  the  village  of  Leur,  eight  or  ten  miles  from
Breda,  and  who  had  long  been  in  the  habit  of  supplying
the  castle  with  turf  In  the  absence  of  woods  and  coal
mines,  the  habitual  fuel  of  the  country  was  furnished  by
those  vast  relics  of  the  antediluvian  forests  which
abounded  in  the  still  partially  submerged  soil.  The
skipper  represented  that  his  vessel  had  passed  so  often
into  and  out  of  the  castle  as  to  be  hardly  liable  to
search  by  the  guard  on  its  entrance.  He  suggested  a
stratagem  by  which  it  might  be  possible  to  surprise  the
stronghold.

The  prince  approved  of  the  scheme  and  immediately
consulted  with  Bameveld.  That  statesman  at  once
proposed,  as  a  suitable  man  to  carry  out  the  daring
venture,  Captain  Charles  de  Heraugiere,  a  nobleman  of
Cambray,  who  had  been  long  in  the  service  of  the
States,  had  distinguished  himself  at  Sluys  and  on  other
occasions,  but  who  had  been  implicated  in  Leicester's
nefarious  plot  to  gain  possession  of  the  city  of  Leyden  a
few  years  before.*  The  Advocate  expressed  confidence
that  he  would  be  grateful  for  so  signal  an  opportunity
of  retrieving  a  somewhat  damaged  reputation.  Herau-
giere, who  was  with  his  company  in  Voorn  at  the
moment,  eagerly  signified  his  desire  to  attempt  the
entei^prise  as  soon  as  the  matter  was  communicated  to

»  Bor,  III.  xxvi.  518,  seqq. Giucciar- voglio,  II.  v.  336,  333.
dini  in  voce. Meteren,  xvl.  290,  291. *  Vol.  il.  of  this  work,  ch.  xvii.  p. 331
Km.  van Keyd. viii. 162-163. Benti- s&jq.

1590. PROJECT  TO  SURPRISE  THE  CASTLE  OF  BREDA.  7

him ;  avowing  the  deepest  devotion  to  the  house  oi
William  the  Silent  and  perfect  willingness  to  sacrifice
his  life,  if  necessary,  in  its  cause  and  that  of  the  country.
Philip  Nassau,  cousin  of  Prince  Maurice  and  brother  of
Lewis  William,  governor  of  Gorcum,  Dorcum,  and  Lowen-
stein  Castle,  and  colonel  of  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  was  also
taken  into  the  secret,  as  well  as  Count  Hohenlo,  President
Van  der  Myle  and  a  few  others ;  but  a  mystery  was
carefully  spread  and  maintained  over  the  undertaking.

Heraugiere  selected  sixty-eight  men,  on  whose  per-
sonal daring  and  patience  he  knew  that  he  could  rely,
from  the  regiments  of  Philip  Nassau  and  of  Famars,
governor  of  the  neighbouring  city  of  Heusden,  and  from
his  own  company.  Besides  himself,  the  officers  to  com-
mand the  party  were  captains  Logier  and  Fervet,  and
lieutenant  Matthew  Held.  The  names  of  such  devoted
soldiers  deserve  to  be  commemorated  and  are  still  freshly
remembered  by  their  countrymen.

On  the  26th  of  February,  Maurice  and  his  staff"  went
to  Willemstad  on  the  Isle  of  Klundert,  it  having  been
given  out  on  his  departure  from  the  Hague  that  his
destination  was  Dort.  On  the  same  night  at  about
eleven  o'clock,  by  the  feeble  light  of  a  waning  moon,
Heraugiere  and  his  band  came  to  the  Swertsenburg
ferry,  as  agreed  upon,  to  meet  the  boatman.  They
found  neither  him  nor  his  vessel,  and  they  wandered
about  half  the  night,  very  cold,  very  indignant,  much
perplexed.  At  last,  on  their  way  back,  they  came  upon
the  skipper  at  the  village  of  Terheyde,  who  made  the
extraordinary  excuse  that  he  had  overslept  himself  and
that  he  feared  the  plot  had  been  discovered.  It  being
too  late  to  make  any  attempt  that  night,  a  meeting  was
arranged  for  the  following  evening.  No  suspicion  of
treachery  occurred  to  any  of  the  party,  although  it
became  obvious  that  the  skipper  had  grown  faint-
hearted. He  did  not  come  on  the  next  night  to  the
appointed  place,  but  he  sent  two  nephews,  boatmen  like
himself,  whom  he  described  as  dare-devils.

On  Monday  night,  the  26th  of  February,  the  seventy
went  on  board  the  vessel,  which  was  apparently  filled
with  blocks  of  turf,  and  packed  themselves  closely  in
the  hold.^ They  moved  slowly  during  a  little  time  on

'  Bor,  lUyd,  Metoren,  Buntivoglio,  vhi  sup.

8  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXI.

their  perilous  voyage ;  for  the  winter  wind,  thick  with
fog  and  sleet,  blew  dii'ectly  down  the  river,  biinging
along  with  it  huge  blocks  of  ice  and  scooping  the  water
out  of  the  dangerous  shallows,  so  as  to  render  the  vessel
at  any  moment  liable  to  be  stranded.  At  last  the  navi-
gation became  impossible  and  they  came  to  a  standstill.
From  Monday  night  till  Thursday  morning  those
seventy  Hollanders  lay  packed  like  herrings  in  the
hold  of  their  little  vessel,  suffering  from  hunger,  thirst,
and  deadly  cold;  yet  not  one  of  them  attempted  to
escaj^e  or  murmured  a  wish  to  abandon  the  enterprise.
Even  when  the  third  morning  da^\Tied  there  was  no
better  prospect  of  proceeding ;  for  the  remorseless  east
wind  still  blew  a  gale  against  them,  and  the  shoals
which  beset  their  path  had  become  more  dangerous  than
ever.  It  was,  however,  absolutely  necessary  to  recruit
exhausted  nature,  unless  the  adventurers  were  to  drop
powerless  on  the  threshold  when  they  should  at  last
arrive  at  their  destination.  In  all  secrecy  they  went
ashore  at  a  lonely  castle  called  iSordam,  where  they
remained  to  refresh  themselves  until  about  eleven  at
night,  when  one  of  the  boatmen  came  to  them  with  the
intelligence  that  the  wind  had  changed  and  was  now
blowing  freshly  in  from  the  sea.  Yet  the  voyage  of  a
few  leagues,  on  which  they  were  embai'ked,  lasted
nearly  two  whole  days  longer.  On  Saturday  afternoon
they  passed  through  the  last  sluice,  and  at  about  three
o'clock  the  last  boom  was  shut  behind  them.  There
was  no  retreat  possible  for  them  now.  The  seventy
were  to  take  the  strong  castle  and  city  of  Breda  or  to
lay  down  their  lives,  every  man  of  them.  No  quarter
and  short  shrift — such  was  their  certain  destiny,  should
that  half-crippled,  half  frozen  little  band  not  succeed  in
their  task  before  another  suniise.

They  were  now  in  the  outer  harbour  and  not  far  from
the  Watergate  which  led  into  the  inner  castle-haven.
Presently  an  officer  of  the  guard  put  off  in  a  skiff"  and
came  on  board  the  vessel.  He  held  a  little  conversation
with  the  two  boatmen,  observed  that  the  castle  was
much  in  want  of  fuel,  took  a  survey  of  the  tuif  with
which  the  ship  was  apparently  laden,  and  then  lounged
into  the  little  cabin.  Here  he  was  only  separated  by  a
tliding  trap-door  from  the  interior  of  the  vessel. Those

1590.  PERILS  OF  THE  UNDERTAKING.  9

inside  could  liear  and  see  liis  eveiy  movement.  Had
there  been  a  single  congli  or  sneeze  from  within,  the
true  character  of  the  cargo,  then  making  its  way  into
the  castle,  would  have  been  discovered  and  every  man
would  within  ten  minutes  have  been  butchered.  But
the  officer,  imsuspecting,  soon  took  his  departure,  saying
that  he  would  send  some  men  to  warp  the  vessel  into
the  castle  dock.

Meantime,  as  the  adventurers  were  making  their  way
slowly  towards  the  Watergate,  they  struck  upon  a  hidden
obstruction  in  the  river  and  the  deeply  laden  vessel
sprang  a  leak.  In  a  few  minutes  those  inside  were
sitting  up  to  their  knees-  in  water — a  circumstance
Avhich  scarcely  improved  their  already  sufficiently
dismal  condition.  The  boatmen  vigorously  plied  the
pumps  to  save  the  vessel  from  sinking  outright ;  a  party
of  Italian  soldiers  soon  arrived  on  the  shore,  and  in  the
course  of  a  couple  of  hours  they  had  laboriously
dragged  the  concealed  Hollanders  into  the  inner  har-
bour and  made  their  vessel  fast,  close  to  the  guard-house
of  the  castle.

And  now  a  crowd  of  all  sorts  came  on  board.  The
winter  nights  had  been  long  and  fearfully  cold,  and
there  was  almost  a  dearth  of  fuel  both  in  town  and
fortress.  A  gang  of  labourers  set  to  work  discharging
the  turf  from  the  vessel  with  such  rapidity  that  the  de-
parting daylight  began  to  shine  in  upon  the  prisoners
much  sooner  than  they  wished.  Moreover,  the  thorough
wetting,  to  which  after  all  their  other  inconveniences
they  had  just  been  exposed  in  their  narrow  escape  from
foundering,  had  set  the  whole  party  sneezing  and
coughing.  Never  was  a  catarrh  so  sudden,  so  universal,
or  so  ill-timed.  Lieutenant  Held,  unable  to  control
the  violence  of  his  cough,  drew  his  dagger  and  eagerly
imploi'ed  his  next  neighbour  to  stab  him  to  the  heart,
lest  his  infirmity  should  lead  to  the  discovery  of  the
whole  party.  But  the  calm  and  wary  skipper  who
stood  on  the  deck  instantly  commanded  his  companion
to  work  at  the  pump  with  as  much  clatter  as  possible,
assuring  the  persons  present  that  the  hold  was  nearl}'
full  of  water.  By  this  means  the  noise  of  the  coughing
was  effectually  drowned.  Most  thoroughly  did  the  liold
boatman  deserve  the  title  of  dare-devil,  bestowed  by  his

10  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXT.

more  faint-liearted  uncle.  Calmly  looking  death  in  the
face,  he  stood  there  quite  at  his  ease,  exchanging  jokes
with  his  old  acquaintances,  chaffering  with  the  eager
purchasers  of  peat,  shouting  most  noisy  and  supeifluous
orders  to  the  one  man  who  composed  his  crew,  doing
his  utmost,  in  short,  to  get  rid  of  his  customers  and
to  keep  enough  of  the  turf  on  board  to  conceal  the  con-
spirators."

At  last,  when  the  case  seemed  almost  desperate,  he
loudly  declared  that  sufficient  had  been  unladen  for  that
evening  and  that  it  was  too  dark  and  he  too  tired  for
further  work.  So,  giving  a  handful  of  stivers  among
the  workmen,  he  bade  them  -go  ashore  at  once  and  have
some  beer  and  come  next  morning  for  the  rest  of  the
cargo.  Fortunately,  they  accepted  his  hospitable  pro-
position and  took  their  departure.  Only  the  servant  of
the  captain  of  the  guard  lingered  behind,  complaining
that  the  turf  was  not  as  good  as  usual  and  that  his
master  would  never  be  satisfied  with  it.

"  Ah  !  "  returned  the  cool  skipper,  "  the  best  imrt  of  the
cargo  is  underneath.  This  is  expressly  reserved  for  the  cap-
tain. He  is  sure  to  get  enough  of  it  to-morrow."  ^

Thus  admonished,  the  servant  departed  and  the  boat-
man was  left  to  himself.  His  companion  had  gone  on
shore  with  secret  orders  to  make  the  best  of  his  way  to
Prince  Maurice,  to  inform  him  of  the  arrival  of  the  ship
within  the  fortress,  and  of  the  important  fact  wdiich
they  had  just  learned,  that  Governor  Lanzavecchia,  who
had  heard  rumours  of  some  projected  enterprise  and
who  suspected  that  the  object  aimed  at  was  Gertruy-
denberg,  had  suddenly  taken  his  departure  for  that
city,  leaving  as  his  lieutenant  his  nephew  Paolo,  a  raw
lad  quite  incompetent  to  provide  for  the  safetv  of
P.reda.«

A  little  before  midnight.  Captain  Heraugiere  made
a  brief  address  to  his  comrades  in  the  vessel,  telling
them  that  the  hour  for  carrjung  out  their  undertaking
had  at  length  arrived.  Ketreat  was  impossible,  defeat
was  cei-tam  death,  only  in  complete  victory  lay  their

«  Rpyd,  ubi  sup.  in  real  life.

■  Reyd. This  answer,  which  is  his- s  Bentivoglio, Bor, Meteren, Reyd,

torical,  is  as  good  a  specimen  of  ready  ubi  sup.
wit  in  an  emergency  as  is  often  met  with

1590.  THE  ADVENTURERS  PROCEED  TO  ACTION.  11

own  safety  and  a  great  advantage  for  the  common-
wealth. It  was  an  honour  to  them  to  be  selected  for
such  an  enterprise.  To  show  cowardice  now  would
be  an  eternal  shame  for  them,  and  he  would  be  the
man  to  strike  dead  with  his  own  hand  any  traitor  or
poltroon.  But  if,  as  he  doubted  not,  every  one  was
prepared  to  do  his  duty,  their  success  was  assured,  and
he  was  himself  ready  to  take  the  lead  in  confronting
every  danger.

He  then  divided  the  little  band  into  two  companies,
one  under  himself  to  attack  the  main  guard-house,  the
other  under  Fervet  to  seize  the  arsenal  of  the  fortress.

Noiselessly  they  stole  out  of  the  ship  where  they
had  so  long  been  confined,  and  stood  at  last  on  the
ground  within  the  precincts  of  the  castle.  Heraugiere
marched  straight  to  the  guard-house.

"Who  goes  there? "cried  a  sentinel,  hearing  some
movement  in  the  darkness.

"  A  friend,"  replied  the  captain,  seizing  him  by  the
throat,  and  commanding  him,  if  he  valued  his  life,  to
keep  silence  except  when  addressed  and  then  to  speak
in  a  whisper.

"  How  many  are  there  in  the  garrison  ? "  muttered
Heraugiere.

"  Three  hundred  and  fifty,"  whispered  the  sentinel.

"How  many?"  eagerly  demanded  the  nearest  fol-
lowers, not  hearing  the  reply.

"  He  says  there  are  but  fifty  of  them,"  said  Herau-
giere, prudently  suppressing  the  three  hundred,  in  order
to  encourage  his  comrades.

Quietly  as  they  had  made  their  approach,  there  was
nevertheless  a  stir  in  the  guard-house.  The  captain  of
the  watch  sprang  into  the  courtyard.

"  Who  goes  there?"  he  demanded  in  his  turn.

"  A  friend,"  again  replied  Heraugiere,  striking  him
dead  with  a  single  blow  as  he  spoke.

Others  emerged  with  torches.  Heraugiere  was
slightly  wounded,  but  succeeded  after  a  brief  struggle,
in  killing  a  second  assailant.  His  followeis  set  upon
the  watch  who  retreated  into  the  guard-house.  Herau-
giere commanded  his  men  to  fire  through  the  doors  and
windows,  and  in  a  few  minutes  every  one  of  the  enemy
lay  dead.

12  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXI

It  was  not  a  moment  for  making  prisoners  or  speaking
of  quarter.  Meantime  Fervet  ami  his  band  had  not
been  idle.  The  magazine-house  of  the  castle  was  seized,
its  defenders  slain.  Yonng  T.anzavecchia  made  a  sally
from  the  palace,  was  wounded  and  driven  back  together
with  a  few  of  his  adherents.

The  rest  of  the  garrison  fled  helter-skelter  into  the
town.  Kever  had  the  musketeers  of  Italy — for  they  all
belonged  to  Spinola's  faaious  Sicilian  Legion — behaved
so  badly.''  They  did  not  even  take  the  precaution  to
destroy  the  bridge  between  the  castle  and  the  town  as
they  tied  panic-stricken  before  sevent}''  Hollanders.  In-
stead of  encouraging  the  burghers  to  their  support  they
spread  dismay,  as  they  ran,  througb  every  street.

Young  Lanzavecchia,  penned  into  a  corner  of  the
castle,  began  to  parley ;  hoping  for  a  rally  before  a
surrender  should  be  necessary.  In  the  midst  of  the
negotiation  and  a  couple  of  hours  before  dawn,  Hohenlo,
duly  apprised  by  the  boatman,  arrived  with  the  van-
guard of  Maurice's  troops  beft)re  the  field-gate  of  the
fort.  A  vain  attempt  was  made  to  force  this  portal
open,  but  the  winter's  ice  had  fixed  it  fast.  Hohenlo
was  obliged  to  batter  down  the  palisade  near  the  water-
gate,  and  enter  by  the  same  road  through  which  the
fatal  turf-lioat  had  passed.

Soon  afler  he  had  mai'ched  into  the  to"Rm  at  the  head
of  a  stiong  detachment.  Prince  Maurice  himself  arrived
in  great  haste,  attended  by  Philip  Nassau,  the  Admiral
Justinus  Nassau,  Count  Solms,  Peter  van  der  Does,  and
Sir  Francis  Vere,  and  followed  by  another  body  of
picked  troops ;  the  musician*^  playing  merrily  that
national  air,  then  as  now  so  dear  to  Netherlanders  —

"  Wilhelmus  van  Nassouwen
Ben  ick  van  Duytsem  bloed."

The  fight  was  over.  Some  forty  of  the  garrison  had
been  killed,  but  not  a  man  of  the  attacking  party.  The
burgomaster  sent  a  trumpet  to  the  prince,  asking  per-
mission to  come  to  the  castle  to  arrange  a  cajiitulation ;
and  before  suniise  the  city  and  fortress  of  Breda  had

'  "  Xon  fece  mai  la  soldatesca  Italiaua  piu  imlcgna  attioue  di  questa,"  says  Car-
dinal Bfntivoglio,  loc.  cit.

1590.  SUCCESS  OF  THE  PROJECT.  13

surrendered  to  the  authority  of  the  States-General  and
of  his  Excellency.^"

The  terms  were  moderate.  The  plundering  was
commuted  for  the  payment  of  two  months'  wages  to
every  soldier  engaged  in  the  atfair.  Burghers  who
might  prefer  to  leave  the  city  were  allowed  to  do  so
with  protection  to  life  and  propeity.  Those  who  were
willing  to  remain  loyal  citizens  were  not  tu  be  molested,
in  their  consciences  or  their  households,  in  regai'd  to
religion.  The  public  exercise  of  Catholic  rites  was
however  suspended  until  the  States-General  should
make  some  universal  provision  on  this  subject.

Subsequently,  it  must  be  allowed,  the  bargain  of
commutation  proved  a  bad  one  for  the  buighers.  Seventy
men  had  in  reality  done  the  whole  work,  but  so  many
soldiers,  belonging  to  the  detachments  who  marched  in
after  the  fortress  had  been  taken,  came  forward  to
claim  their  months'  wages,  as  to  bring  the  whole
amount  required  above  one  hundred  thousand  florins.
The  Spaniards  accordingly  reproached  Prince  Maui  ice
with  having  fined  his  own  patrimonial  cit}^  more  heavily
than  Alexander  Farnese  had  mulcted  Antweip,  which
had  been  made  to  pay  but  four  hundred  thousand  florins,
a  for  less  sum  in  proportion  to  the  wealth  and  import-
ance of  the  place.

Already  the  Prince  of  Parma,  in  the  taking  of  Breda,
saw  verified  his  predictions  of  the  disasters  about  to  fall
on  the  Spanish  interests  in  the  Netherlands,  by  reason
of  Philip's  obstinate  determination  to  concentrate  all  his
energies  on  the  invasion  of  France.  Alexander  had
been  unable,  in  the  midst  of  preparations  for  his  French
campaign,  to  arrest  this  sudden  capture,  but  his  Italian
blood  was  on  fire  at  the  ignominy  which  had  come  upon
the  soldiership  of  his  countrymen.  Five  companies  of
foot  and  one  of  hoi'se — picked  troops  of  Spain  and  Italy
— had surrendered a  wealthy, populous  town,  and a

'"  Bor,  Bentivoglio,  Reyd,  Meteren,  ubi  at  variance  with every  other  account,

sitji. Count  William  Lewis  in  a  letter  to  and  especially  with  the  elaborate  narra-

his  father,  datrd  1  March,  O,  S.  1590,  in  tive  of  Eberhard  van  Reyd,  Secretary  to

giving  a  very  brief  account  of  this  enter-  Count  William Lewis, that I cannot

prise,  speaks of three turf  vessels as  duubt  the  Count  had  at  first  been  misin-

haviiig  been employed; "in drie torff  formed. Groen v.  Prinsterar  ArcLives,

schuitn  uiiter  dem  holtz  verborgcn  80  &c.  II.  serie  i.  127.
Boldaten,"  but  this  statement  is  so  much

14  TIIK  UNITKD  N'KTIIERLANDS.  CiiAi-.  XXI.

wcll-fortificd  castlo  to  a  mud-scow,  and  liad  fled  slu-icking
in  dismay  from  the  onset  of  seventy  fi-ost-bitton  Hol-
landers.

It  was  too  lato  lo  save  the  town,  but  ho  could  punish,
as  it  deserved,  the  pusillanimity  of  the  gari'ison.

Three  captains — one  of  them  rejoicing  in  the  martial
name  of  Cesar  Cuorra — were  publicly  beheaded  in
Brussels.  A  fourth,  Ventimiglia,  was  degi-aded,  but
allowed  to  escape  with  life,  on  account  of  his  near
relationship  to  the  Duke  of  Terranova,  while  Clovernor
Lanzavecchia  was  obliged  to  resign  the  command  of
Gertruydenberg.  The  great  commander  knew  better
than  to  encourage  the  yielding  up  of  cities  and  for-
tresses by  a  mistaken  lenity  to  their  unlucky  defenders."

Prince  Maurice  sent  off  letters  the  same  night  announ-
cing liis  success  to  the  States-Cieneral.  Jlohenlo  wrote
pithily  to  Oldcn-Piarneveld — "The  castle  and  town  of
Breda  are  ours,  without  a  single  man  dead  on  our  side.
The  garrison  made  no  resistance,  but  ran  distracted  out
of  the  town."  '■^

The  church  bells  rang  and  bonfiies  blazed  and  cannon
thundered  in  every  city  in  the  United  Provinces  to
commemorate  this  auspicious  event.  Olden-Barneveld,
too,  whose  part  in  ai'i-anging  the  scheme  was  known  to
have  been  so  valuable,  received  from  the  Slates-General
a  magnificent  gilded  vase  with  sculptured  rej)resenta-
tions  of  the  various  scenes  in  the  drama,'^  and  it  is
probable  that  not  moje  unmingled  satisfaction  had  been
caused  by  any  one  event  of  the  war  than  by  this  surprise
of  Breda.

Tlie  captui-e  of  a  single  town,  not  of  first-rate  im-
portance either,  would  hardly  seem  to  merit  so  minute
a  description  as  has  been  given  in  the  preceding  pages.
But  the  event,  with  all  its  details,  has  been  preserved
with  singular  vividness  in  IVcstherland  story.  As  an
example  of  daring,  patioice,  and  complete  success,  it  has
served  to  encourage  the  bold  s])irits  of  every  generation
and  will  always  inspire  emulation  in  patriotic  hearts  of
every  age  and  clime,  while,  as  the  first  of  a  series  (jf
audacious  enterprises  by  which  Dutch  victories  were  to
take  the  place  of  a  long  procession  of  Spanish  triumphs

1'  The  story  is  briefly  told  by  J'umm  iii  liis  correspondence  with  the  king,  14
March,  ir/JO. Archives  of  Simancas  MS.  ^'^  iinT,ubi.  gup.  •*  Ibid.

I

1090. BKKDA IN  TIIK  HANDS  OK  THE  NKTHliKLANDEILS. lo

on  tlio  bluod-Htained  Koil  of  tlio  provinces,  it  merits,
from  its  chronological  position,  a  more  than  ordinal  y
attention.

In  the  course  of  the  srunnier  I'l-ince  Maurice,  carrying
out  into  practice  the  leKson.s  which  he  had  no  steadily
been  pondering,  reduced  the  towns  and  strong  places  of
Heyl,  Flcmert,  Elshout,  Crevcccxiur,  Hay  den,  Steenberg,
Rosendaal,  and  Osterhout.''  But  his  time,  duiing  the
remainder  of  the  year  1590,  was  occupied  with  prepara-
tions for  a  campaign  on  an  extended  scale,  and  with
certain  foreign  negotiations  to  which  it  will  soon  be
necessary  to  direct  the  reader's  attention.

»*  .Mctercn,  xvi.  284.

16  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXH

CHAPTEE XXII.

struggle  of  the  Uuitcd  Province.'  against  Philip  of  Spain  —  Progress  of  the  Republic

influence  of  Geographical  position  on  the  fate  of  the  Netherlands  —  Contrast

offered  by  America  —  Miserable  state  of  the  so-called  "obedient"  provinces  —
Prosperity  of  the  Commonwealth  —  Its  internal  government  —  Tendency  to  pro-
\'incialism  — Quibbles  of  the  English  Members  of  the  Council,  Wilkes  and  Bodley

Exclusion  of  Olden- Rirneveld  from  the  State  Council  —  Proposals  of  Philip  for

mediation  .viththe  United  Provinces  —  The  Provinces  resolutely  decUne  all  proffers
of  intervention.

The  United  Provinces  had  now  been  engaged  in  un-
broken civil  war  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.  It  is,
however,  inaccurate  to  designate  this  great  struggle
with  tyranny  as  a  civil  war.  It  was  a  war  for  inde-
pendence, maintained  by  almost  the  whole  population
of  the  United  Provinces  against  a  foreigner,  a  despot,
alien  to  their  blood,  ignorant  of  their  language,  a  hater
of  their  race,  a  scorner  of  their  religion,  a  trampler  upon
their  liberties,  their  laws,  and  institutions — a  man  who
had  publicl}^  declared  that  he  would  rather  the  whole
nation  were  exterminated  than  permitted  to  escape
from  subjection  to  the  Church  of  Eome.  Liberty  ot
speech,  liberty  of  tho  press,  liberty  of  thought  on
political,  religious,  and  social  questions  existed  within
those  Dutch  pastures  and  Frisian  swamps  to  a  far
gi'eater  degi'ee  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world  at
that  day  ;  than  in  verj^  many  regions  of  Christendom  in
our  own  time.  Personal  slavery  was  unknown.  In  a
large  portion  of  their  territory  it  had  never  existed.
The  free  Frisians,  nearest  blood-relations  of,  in  this
respect,  the  less  favoured  Anglo-Saxons,  had  never
bowed  the  knee  to  the  feudal  system,  nor  worn  nor
caused  to  be  worn  the  collar  of  the  serf.  In  the  battles
for  human  liberty  no  nation  has  stood  with  cleaner
hands  before  the  gieat  tribunal,  nor  offered  more  spot-
less examples  of  patriotism  to  be  emulated  in  all  suc-
ceeding ages,  than  the  K  etherlanders  in  their  gigantic
struggle  with  Philip  of  Spain.  It  was  not  a  class
struggling  for  their  own  privileges,  but  trampling  on

1590.  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  PHILIP  OF  SPAIN.  17

their  fellow-men  in  a  lower  scale  of  hnmanity.  King:-
and  aristocrats  sneered  at  the  vulgar  republic  where
Hans  Miller,  Hans  Baker,  and  Hans  Brewer  enjoyed
political  rights,  and  prated  of  a  sovereignty  other  than
that  of  long  descended  races  and  of  anointed  heads.'
Yet  the  pikemen  of  Spain  and  the  splendid  cavalry  and
musketeers  of  Italy  and  Burgundy,  who  were  now  begin-
ning to  show  their  backs  both  behind  entrenchments
and  in  the  open  field  to  their  republican  foes,  could  not
deny  the  valour  with  which  the  battles  of  liberty  were
fought ;  while  Elizabeth  of  England,  maintainor,  if  such
ever  were,  of  hereditary  sovereignty  and  hater  of
popular  freedom,  acknowledged  that  for  wisdom  in
council,  dignity  and  adroitness  in  diplomatic  debate,
there  were  none  to  surpass  the  plain  burgher  statesmen
of  the  new  republic.

And  at  least  these  Ketherlanders  were  consistent
with  themselves.  They  had  come  to  disbelieve  in  the
mystery  of  kingcraft,  in  the  divine  speciality  of  a  few
transitory  mortals  to  direct  the  world's  events  and  to
dictate  laws  to  their  fellow-creatures.  What  they
achieved  was  for  the  common  good  of  all.  They  chose
to  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  blood  and  fire  for  generation
after  generation  rather  than  flinch  from  their  struggle
with  despotism,  for  they  knew  that,  cruel  as  the  sea,  it
would  swallow  them  all  at  last  in  one  common  destruc-
tion if  they  faltered  or  paused.  They  fought  for  the
liberty  of  all.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  history
of  this  great  conflict  deserved  to  be  deeply  pondered  by
those  who  have  the  instinct  of  human  freedom.  Had
the  Hollanders  basely  sunk  before  the  power  of  Spain,
the  proud  history  of  England,  France,  and  Germany,
would  have  been  written  in  far  different  terms.  The
blood  and  tears  which  the  Ketherlanders  caused  t»  flow
in  their  own  stormy  days  have  turned  to  blessings  for
remotest  climes  and  ages.  A  pusillanimous  jDeace,
always  possible  at  any  period  of  their  war,  would  have
been  hailed  with  rapture  by  contemporary  statesmen,
whose  names  have  vanished  from  the  world's  memory  ;
but  would  liave  sown  with  curses  and  raiser}^  the  soil
of  Eui'ope  for  succeeding  ages. The  territory  of  the

1  Hor,  III.  205.  Compare  Fruin,  Tien  .Jaren  uit  den  Tagtigjarigen  Ooilog.  ].,  27.
A  work  of  remarkable  research  and  power.

VOL. 111.  O

18  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap  X.XII.

Netherlands  is  narrow  and  meagre.  It  is  bnt  a  slender
kingdom  now  among  the  powers  of  the  earth.  The
political  grandeur  of  nations  is  determined  by  physical
causes  almost  as  much  as  by  moral  ones.  Had  the
cataclysm  which  separated  the  fortunate  British  Islands
from  the  mainland  happened  to  occur,  instead,  at  a
neighbouring  point  of  the  earth's  crust ;  had  the  Belgian,
Dutch,  German  and  Danish  Netherland  floated  off  as
one  island  into  the  sea,  while  that  famous  channel
between  two  great  rival  nations  remained  dry  land,
there  would  have  been  a  different  history  of  the  world.

But  in  the  16th  century  the  history  of  one  country
was  not  an  isolated  chapter  of  personages  and  events.
The  history  of  the  Netherlands  is  the  history  of  liberty.
It  was  now  combined  with  the  English,  now  with
French,  now  with  German  struggles  for  political  and
religious  freedom,  but  it  is  impossible  to  separate  it
from  the  one  great  complex  which  makes  up  the  last
half  of  the  sixteenth  and  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth
centuries.

At  that  day  the  Netherland  republic  was  already
becoming  a  power  of  importance  in  the  political  family
of  Christendom.  If,  in  spite  of  her  geographical  dis-
advantages, she  achieved  so  much,  how  much  vaster
might  her  power  have  grown,  how  much  stronger
through  her  example  might  popular  institutions  through-
out the  world  have  become,  and  how  much  more  pacific
the  relations  of  European  tribes,  had  nature  been  less
niggard  in  her  gifts  to  the  young  commonwealth.  On
the  sea  she  was  strong,  for  the  ocean  is  the  best  of
fi'ontiers ;  but  on  land  her  natural  boundaries  faded
vaguely  away,  without  strong  physical  demarcations
and  with  no  sharply  defined  limits  of  tongue,  history,  or
race.  Accident  or  human  caprice  seemed  to  have
divided  German  Highland  from  German  Netherland  ;
Belgic  Gaul  fi'om  the  rest  of  the  Gallic  realm.  And
even  from  the  slender  body,  which  an  arbitrary  destiny
had  set  off  fur  centuries  into  a  separate  organism,
tyranny  and  religious  bigotry  had  just  hewn  another
portion  away.  But  the  connnonwealth  was  already  too
highly  vitalized  to  permit  peaceful  dismemberment.
Only  the  low  organisms  can  live  in  all  their  parts  after
violent  separations. The  trunk  remained,  bleeding  but

1590.  CONTRAST  OFFERED  BY  AMERICA.  19

alive  and  vigorous,  while  tlie  amputated  portion  laj  for
centuries  in  fossilized  impotence.

Never  more  plainly  than  in  the  histoiy  of  this  com-
monwealth w^as  the  geographical  law  manifested  by
which  the  fate  of  nations  is  so  deeply  influenced.  Courage,
enterprise  amounting  almost  to  audacity,  and  a  deter-
mined will  confronted  for  a  long  lapse  (;f  time  the
inexorable,  and  permitted  a  great  empire  to  germinate
out  of  a  few  sand-banks  held  in  defiance  of  the  ocean,
and  protected  from  human  encroachments  on  the  in-
lerior  only  by  the  artificial  barrier  of  custom-house  and
foit.

'J  hus  foredoomed  at  birth,  it  must  increase  our  admi-
ration of  human  energj^  and  of  the  sustaining  influence
of  municipal  liberty,  that  the  republic,  even  if  transi-
tor}"-,  bhould  yet  have  girdled  the  earth  with  its  posses-
sions and  held  for  a  considerable  period  so  vast  a  portion
of  the  world  in  fee.

What  a  lesson  to  our  transatlantic  commonwealth,
whom  bountiful  nature  had  blessed  at  her  birth  beyond
all  the  nations  of  history  and  seemed  to  speed  upon  an
unlimited  career  of  freedom  and  peaceful  prosperity,
should  she  be  capable  at  the  first  alarm  t.n  her  track  to
throw  away  lier  inestimable  advantages  !  If  all  history
is  not  a  mockery  and  a  fable,  she  may  be  sure  that  the
nation  which  deliberately  carves  itself  in  pieces  and
substitutes  artificial  boundaries  for  the  natural  and
historic  ones,  condemns  itself  either  to  extinction,  or  to
the  lower  life  of  political  insignificance  and  petty  war-
fare, with  the  certain  loss  of  liberty  and  national  inde-
pendence at  last.  Better  a  terrible  struggle,  better  the
sacrifice  of  prosperity  and  happiness  for  years,  than  the
eternal  setting  of  that  great  popular  hope,  the  United
American  Eepublic.^

I  speak  in  this  digression  onl}'-  of  the  relations  of
physical  nature  to  liberty  and  nationality,  making  no
allusion  to  the  equally  stringent  moral  laws  which
no  people  can  violate  and  yet  remain  in  health  and
vigour.

Despite  a  quarter  of  a  ceninvy  of  what  is  commonly
termed  civil  war,  the  United  Netherlands  were  pro.s-
peious  and  full  of  life. It  was  in  the  provinces  which

2  Written  in  1S63.

o  2

20  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXII.

had  seceded  from  the  union  of  Utrecht  that  there  was
silence  as  of  the  grave,  destitution,  slavery,  abject  sub-
mission to  a  foreign  foe.  The  leaders  in  the  movement
which  had  brought  about  the  scission  of  1579— com-
monly called  the  '  Keconciliation ' — enjoyed  military
and  civil  posts  under  a  foreign  tyrant,  but  were  poorly
rewarded  for  subserviency  in  fighting  against  their  own
brethren  by  contumely  on  the  part  of  their  masters.
As  for  the  mass  of  the  people  it  would  be  difiicult  to  find
a  desolation  more  complete  than  that  recorded  of  the
"obedient"  provinces.  Even  as  six  years  before,
wolves  littered  their  whelps  in  deserted  farm-houses,
cane-brake  and  thicket  usurped  the  place  of  cornfield
and  orchard,  robbers  swarmed  on  the  highways  once
thronged  by  a  most  thriving  population,  nobles  begged
their  bread  in  the  streets  of  cities  whose  merchants
once  entertained  emperors  and  whose  wealth  and  trafiic
were  the  wonder  of  the  world,  while  the  Spanish  vicero}'-
formally  permitted  the  land  in  the  agricultural  districts
to  be  occupied  and  farmed  by  the  first  comer  for  his
own  benefit,  until  the  vanished  proprietors  of  the  soil
should  make  their  reappearance.^

"  Administered  without  justice  or  policy,"  said  a
Netherlander  who  was  intensely  loyal  to  the  king  and
a  most  uncompromising  Catholic,  "  eaten  up  and  aban-
doned for  that  pui-pose  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  foreigners
who  suck  the  substance  and  marrow  of  the  land  without
benefit  to  the  king,  gnaw  the  obedient  cities  to  the
bones,  and  plunder  the  open  defenceless  country  at
their  pleasure,  it  may  be  imagined  how  much  satis-
faction these  provinces  take  in  their  condition.  Com-
merce and  trade  have  ceased  in  a  country  which  traffic
alone  has  peopled,  for  -odthout  it  no  human  habitation
could  be  more  miserable  and  poor  than  our  land."  *

3  Jleteren,  xvi.  297.  mas  en  la  gente  de  guerra,  haze  que  no

*  Discours  du  Seigneur  de  Champc^ny  solo  todos  los  de  los  estados  mas ann

sur  les  affaires  des  Pays  Bas,  21 Dec.  que  quantos  con  el  han  de  negociar  pier-

1589. Bibl. de Bourgogne, MS. No.  dan  toda  opinion  no  solo  de  su  discretion

12,962.  o  prudencia  mas  del  respeto  que  devria

"  Considerando  assi  mismo  el  mal  ter-  tener  al  Rey. Asi  manejandose  todo  sin

mino  que  con  todos  usa,  los  pocos  consejos  justicia  y  policia, comidos todos estoi

el  desauctorisar  los  que  el  Rey  a  puesto,  e.-tados  y  abandonados  por  esta  al  alvidrio

y  que  solo  lo  emprende  y  maneje  todo  y  goviemo  de  esirangeros  qui  cbupan  la

con  sushechuras  para  aprovecharlas,  y  la  sustancia  del  pays  sin  beneficio  del  Rey,

Uioreyble  disorden  no  solo  en  lo  politico  y  solos  tenieudo  credito  con  e.ste  hombre

1590.  REGENERATIVE  PROPOSALS.  21

Nothing  could  be  more  gloomy  than  the  evils  thus
described  by  the  Netherland  statesman  and  soldier,
except  the  remedy  which  he  suggested.  The  obedient
provinces,  thus  scourged  and  blasted  for  their  obedience,
wei-e  not  advised  to  improve  their  condition  by  joining
hands  with  their  sister  States,  who  had  just  constituted
themselves  by  their  noble  resistance  to  royal  and
ecclesiastical  tjrranny  into  a  free  and  powerful  com-
monwealth. On  the  contrary,  two  great  sources  of
regeneration  and  prosperity  were  indicated,  but  very
different  ones  from  those  in  which  the  republic  had
sought  and  found  her  strength.  In  the  first  place,  it
was  suggested  as  indispensable  that  the  obedient  pro-
vinces should  have  more  Jesuits  and  more  Friars.  The
mendicant  orders  should  be  summoned  to  renewed
exertions,  and  the  king  should  be  requested  to  send
seminary  priests  to  every  village  in  numbers  propor-
tionate to  the  population,  who  should  go  about  from
house  to  house,  counting  the  children,  and  seeing  that
they  learned  their  catecViism  if  their  parents  did  not
teach  them,  and,  even  in  case  they  did,  examining
whether  it  was  done  thoroughly  and  without  deception.

In  the  second  place  it  was  laid  down  as  important
that  the  bishops  should  confirm  no  one  who  had  not
been  sufficiently  catechised.  "And  if  the  mendicant
orders,"  said  Champagny,  "are  not  numerous  enough
for  these  catechisations,  the  Jesuits  might  charge  them-
selves therewith,  not  more  and  not  less  than  the  said
mendicants,  some  of  each  being  deputed  to  each  parish.
To  this  end  it  would  be  well  if  his  Majesty  should  obtain
from  the  Pope  a  command  to  the  Jesuits  to  this  effect,
since  otherwise  they  might  not  be  willing  to  comply.
It  should  also  be  ordered  that  all  Jesuits,  natives  of
these  provinces,  should  return  hither,  instead  of  wan-

(Farnese)  royendose  quantas  villas  ternan  nuestras  promesas,  representando  la  mi-
a  I'obedieiicia  del  Rey  hasta  los  huessos  y  seria  y  calamidad  en  que  viven  los  re-
el plat  pays  sin  defeusa  contra  el  eneniigo  duzidos  por  la  violencia  y  cohechos  de
que  come  y  roba  a  todas  partas  como  nuestra  propria  gente,  governandose  todo
quiere — se  puede  coligar  desto  la  satis-  sin  policia,  justicia,  verdad  ni  consejo  por
faccion  que  del  tendran  todos  estados  que  cabezas  codiciosas  sin  otra  njira  que  a  su

indifferentemente assi prclados, nobles  provecho  y  ninguna  al  del  Rey

conio  villas  y  pueblos  no  solo  murmuran  que  solo  el  trato  puebla,  porque  cessando

del  mas  lo  dizen  y  a  vozes,"  etc.  etc.  etc.  la  comodidad  del,  no  ay  abitacion  mas

"  demas  que  destos  los  rebeldes  s'endures-  miserable  y  pobre."
cen  diziendo  que no se deven  fiar  de

22 '  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXTL

dering  about  in  other  regions  as  if  tlieir  help  were  not
so  necessary  here."®

It  was  also  recommended  that  the  mendicant  friars
should  turn  their  particular  attention  to  Antwerp,  and
that  one  of  them  should  preach  in  French,  another  in
German,  another  in  English,  every  day  at  the  opening
of  the  Exchange.

With  these  appliaryies  it  was  thought  that  Antwerp
would  revive  out  of  its  ruins  and,  despite  the  blockade
of  its  river,  renew  its  ancient  commercial  glories.
Founded  on  the  substantial  rocks  of  mendicancy  and
Jesuitism,  it  might  again  triumph  over  its  rapidly  rising
rival,  the  heretic  Amsterdam,  which  had  no  better  basis
for  its  grandeur  than  religious  and  political  liberty,  and
imcontrolled  access  to  the  ocean.

Such  were  the  aspirations  of  a  distinguished  and  loyal
Netherlander  for  the  regeneration  of  his  countiy.  Such
were  his  opinions  as  to  the  true  sources  of  the  wealth
and  greatness  of  nations.  Can  we  wonder  that  the
country  fell  to  decay,  or  that  this  experienced  statesman
and  brave  soldier  should  himself,  after  not  many  years,
seek  to  hide  his  dishonoured  head  under  the  cowl  of  a
monk  ?

The  coast  of  the  obedient  provinces  was  thoroughly
blockaded.  The  United  Pi'ovinces  commanded  the  sea,
their  cruisers,  large  and  small,  keeping  diligent  watch
off  every  port  and  estuary  of  the  Flemish  coast,  so  that
not  a  herring-boat  could  enter  without  their  permission.
Antwerp,  when  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniard,
sank  for  ever  from  its  proud  position.  That  city  which
Venetians  but  lately  had  confessed  with  a  sigh  to  be
superior  in  commercial  grandeur  to  their  own  magnifi-

5  "  Por  lo  Qual  primero  encargiiense  de  bastan  para  estas  catpcisationes  las  or-
iiuevo  todas  las  ordenes  mendicantes  en  denes  mendicantes,  pucden  se  encargar
las  quales  santissamente  el  Rey  n™  Senor  deste  los  Jesuitas  ne  mas  ne  m'cnos  con
introduze  seminaiios  a  que  como  sietnpre  dichos  mendicantes,  deputando  algunos
en  estos  ostados  han  sido  el  socorro  de  los  deUos  juiitamente  con  esotroa  por  las
curas  que  a  cada  parochia  acuden  dellos  parochias.  Para  esto  mesnio  seria  bien
a  catcchisar  conforme  al  niimero  de  las  su  Mag*  Impetrasse  del  papa  mandado  a
casas  que  debaxo  de  las  parochias  re-  los  Jesuitas  porque  de  otra  manera  no
sultan,  y  de  casa  en  casa  vayan,  scaviendo  querran  submitirse  a  ello,  y  para  que
que  niios  ay,  y  que  entieiiden  en  catechi-  buelvan  a  estos  estados  todos  los  Jesnitas
sarlos  quando  los  mismos  padres  no  lo  naturales  del  que  distraydos  en  otras
hagan,  y  aunque  esso  sea  que  lo  hagan  provincias,  dexan  esta  como  si  aqui  no
no  sea  sin  su  examinacion  porque  no  aya  fuesse  lanto  menester  su  asistencia."
engafio Quando tambien no .—Ibid.

1590.  RAPID  DEVELOPMENT  OF  INDUSTRY.  23

cent  capital,  had  ceased  to  be  a  seaport.  Slmt  in  from
the  ocean  by  Fhishing  —  firmly  held  by  an  Engiisli
garrison  as  one  of  the  cautionary  towns  for  the  Queen's
loan — her  woi'ld-wide  commerce  withered  bei'ore  men's
eyes.  Her  population  was  dwindling  to  not  much  more
than  half  its  former  numbers,  while  Ghent,  Bruges,  and
other  cities  were  diminished  by  two-thirds.

On  the  other  hand,  the  commerce  and  manufactures
of  the  United  Republic  had  enormously  augmented.  Its
bitterest  enemies  bore  witness  to  the  sagacity  and
success  by  which  its  political  affairs  were  administered,
and  to  its  vast  superiority  in  this  respect  over  the
obedient  provinces.  "  The  rebels  are  not  ignorant  of
our  condition,"  said  Champagny,  "  they  are  themselves
governed  with  consummate  wisdom,  and  they  mock  at
those  who  submit  themselves  to  the  Duke  of  Parma.
They  are  the  more  confirmed  in  their  rebellion,  when
they  see  how  many  are  thronging  from  iis  to  them,  com-
plaining of  such  bad  government,  and  that  all  take
refuge  in  flight  who  can  from  the  misery  and  famine
which  it  has  caused  throughout  these  provinces  ! "  ^  The
industrial  population  had  flowed  from  the  southern  pro-
vinces into  the  north,  in  obedience  to  an  irresistible
law.  The  workers  in  iron,  paper,  silk,  linen,  lace,  the
makers  of  brocade,  tapestry,  and  satin,  as  well  as  of  all
the  coarser  fabrics,  had  fled  from  the  land  of  o])pression
to  the  land  of  liberty.  Never  in  the  history  of  civiliza-
tion had  there  been  a  more  rapid  development  of  human
industr}'  than  in  Holland  during  these  years  of  bloodiest
waifare.  The  towns  were  filled  to  overflowing.  Ams-
terdam multiplied  in  wealth  and  population  as  fast  as
Antwerp  shrank.  Almost  as  much  might  be  said  of
Middelbui-g,  Enkliuyzen,  Horn,  and  man}-  other  cities.
It  is  the  epoch  to  which  the  greatest  expansion  of
municipal  architecture  is  traced.  Warehouses,  palaces,
docks,  arsenals,  fortifications,  dykes,  splendid  streets
and  suburbs,  were  constructed  on  every  side,  and  still
there  was  not  room  for  the  constantly  increasing  popu-

6  Discours  du  Seigneur  de  Champagny.  quantos  van  a  ellos  quexosos  de  tan  mal

"  Esto  no  ignoran  los  Rebeldes  que  con  govierno,  y  quantos  pueden,  huyen  con  la

grandissima  policia  governados  se  burlan  niiseria.hambre,  pobrezay  carestiacausada

de  lo  que  se  fumetten  al  1).  de  Parma  y  se  generalraente  por  esto  en  todas  partes,"

oonf.rman  mas  en  sti  rebelion,  con  ver  etc.  etc.  etc.

24  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXH.

lation,  large  numbers  of  which  habitually  dwelt  in  the
shipping.  For  even  of  that  narrow  span  of  earth  called
the  province  of  Holland,  one-third  was  then  interior
water,  divided  into  five  considerable  lakes,  those  of
Harlem,  Schermer,  Beemster,  W'aert,  and  Purmer.  The
sea  was  kept  out  by  a  magnificent  system  of  dykes  under
the  daily  superintendence  of  a  board  of  officers,  called
dyke-graves,  while  the  rain  water,  which  might  other-
wise have  drowned  ihe  soil  thus  painfully  reclaimed,
was  pumped  up  by  windmills  and  drained  off  through
sluices  opening  and  closing  with  the  movement  of  the
tides.

The  province  of  Zeeland  was  one  vast  "  polder."  It
was  encircled  by  an  outer  dyke  of  forty  Dutch,  equal
to  one  hundred  and  fifty  English,  miles  in  extent,  and
traversed  by  many  interior  barriers.  The  average  cost
of  dyke-building  was  sixty  florins  the  rod  of  twelve
feet,  or  84,000  floiins  the  Dutch  mile.  The  total  cost
of  the  Zeeland  dykes  was  estimated  at  3,360,000  florins,
besides  the  annual  repairs.'

But  it  was  on  the  sea  that  the  Netherlanders  were
really  at  home,  and  they  always  felt  it  in  their  power —
as  their  last  j-esource  against  foreign  tyranny — to  bury
their  land  for  ever  in  the  ocean,  and  to  seek  a  new
country  at  the  ends  of  the  earth.  It  has  always  been
difficult  to  doom  to  political  or  personal  slaveiy  a  nation
accustomed  to  maritime  pursuits.  Familiarity  with  the
boundless  expanse  of  ocean,  and  the  habit  of  victo-
riously contending  with  the  elements  in  their  stormy
strength,  would  seem  to  inspire  a  consciousness  in
mankind  of  human  dignity  and  worth.  With  the  ex-
ception of  Spain,  the  chief  seafaring  nations  of  the
world  were  already  protestant.  The  counter-league,
which  was  to  do  battle  so  strenuously  with  the  Holy
Confederacy,  was  essentially  a  maritime  league.  "  All
the  maritime  heretics  of  the  world,  since  heresy  is  best
suited  to  navigators,  will  be  banded  together,"  said
Champagny,  "and  then  woe  to  the  Spanish  Indies,
which  England  and  Holland  are  already  threatening."*

The  Netherlanders  had  been  noted  from  earliest  times

'  Meteren,  xvi.  288,  289,  290.  quasi todos sino sola Espafia  .  .  .  .  y

8  Discours  du  Seigneur  de  Champagny.  puts  la  he  esia  es  lo  que  mas  tonforme  en
"  T'xloj  los  hcrejes  del  oceano  que  lo  son estos  maritimos,"  etc.  etc.  etc.

1590.  INFLUENCE  OF  FREEDOM.  2fi

for  a  free-spoken  and  independent  personal  demeanour.
At  this  epoch  they  were  taking  the  lead  of  the  whole
world  in  marine  adventure.  At  least  three  thousand
vessels  of  between  one  hundred  and  four  hundred  tons,
besides  innumerable  doggers,  busses,  cromstevens,  and
similar  craft  rised  on  the  rivers  and  in  fisheries,  were
to  be  found  in  the  United  Provinces,  and  one  thousand,
it  was  estimated,  were  annually  built.®

They  traded  to  the  Baltic  regions  for  honey,  wax,
tallow,  lumber,  iron,  turpentine,  hemp.  They  brought
from  farthest  Indies  and  from  America  all  the  fabrics
of  ancient  civilization,  all  the  newly  dit^covered  pro-
ducts of  a  virgin  soil,  and  dispensed  them  among  the
less  industrious  nations  of  the  earth.  Enterprise,  led  on
and  accompanied  by  science,  was  ah'eady  planning  the
boldest  flights  into  the  unknown  yet  made  by  mankind,
and  it  will  soon  be  necessary  to  direct  attention  to
those  famous  arctic  voyages,  made  by  Hollanders  in
pursuit  of  the  north-west  passage  to  Cathay,  in  which
as  much  heroism,  audacity,  and  scientific  intelligence
were  displayed  as  in  later  times  have  made  so  many
men  belonging  to  both  branches  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
race  illustrious.  A  people,  engaged  in  perennial  con-
flict with  a  martial  and  sacerdotal  despotism  the  most
powerful  in  the  world,  could  yet  spare  enough  from  its
superfluous  energies  to  confront  the  dangers  of  the  polar
oceans,  and  to  bring  back  treasures  of  science  to  enrich
the  world.

Such  was  the  spirit  of  freedom.  Inspired  by  its
blessed  influence  this  vigorous  and  inventive  little
commonwealth  triumphed  over  all  human,  all  physical
obstacles  in  its  path.  It  organized  armies  on  new
principles  to  drive  the  most  famous  legions  of  history
from  its  soil.  It  built  navies  to  help  rescue,  at  critical
moments,  the  cause  of  England,  of  protestantism,  of
civil  liberty,  and  even  of  Erench  nationality.  More
than  all,  by  its  trade  with  its  arch-enemy,  the  republic
constantly  multiplied  its  resources  for  destroying  his
power  and  aggrandizing  its  own.

The  war  navy  of  the  United  Provinces  was  a  regulai-
force  of  one  hundred  ships — large  at  a  period  when  a
vessel  of  thirteen hundred tons was  a  monster — to-

9  Meteren,  itbi  suj).

26  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap  XXII.

o-ether  with  an  indefinite  number  of  smaller  craft,
which  could  be  put  into  the  public  service  on  short
notice.'"  In  those  days  of  close  quarters  and  light
artillery  a  merchant  ship  was  converted  into  a  cruiser
by  a  very  simple  process.  The  navy  was  a  self-sup-
porting one,  for  it  was  paid  by  the  produce  of  con-
voy fees  and  licenses  to  trade.  It  must  be  confessed
that  a  portion  of  these  revenues  savoured  much  of
black-mail  to  be  levied  on  friend  and  foe;  for  the
distinctions  between  freebooter,  privateer,  pirate,  and
legitimate  sea-robber,  were  not  very  closely  drawn  in
those  early  days  of  seafaring.

Prince  Maiirice  of  Nassau  was  lord  high  admiral,  but
he  was  obliged  to  listen  to  the  counsels  of  various  pro-
vincial boards  of  admiralty,  which  often  imjDeded  his
action  and  interfered  with  his  schemes.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  inherent  vice  of  the
Netherland  polity  was  already  a  tendency  to  decen-
tralization and  provincialism.  The  civil  institutions  of
the  country,  in  their  main  characteristics,  have  been
frequently  sketched  in  these  pages.  At  this  period  they
had  entered  almost  completely  into  the  forms  which
were  destined  to  endure  until  the  commonwealth  fell
in  the  great  crash  of  the  French  Kevolution.  Their
beneficial  effects  were  more  visible  now — sustained  and
bound  together  as  the  nation  was  by  the  sense  of  a  com-
mon danger,  and  by  the  consciousness  of  its  daily  deve-
loping strength — than  at.  a  later  day  when  prosperity
and  luxury  had  blunted  the  fine  instincts  of  patriotism.

The  supreme  power,  after  the  deposition  of  Philip,
and  the  refusal  by  France  and  by  England  to  accept  the
sovereignty  of  the  provinces,  was  definitely  lodged  in
the  States-General.  But  the  States-General  did  not
technically  represent  the  people.  Its  members  were
not  elected  by  the  people.  It  was  a  body  composed  of
delegates  from  each  provincial  assembly,  of  which  there
were  now  five — Holland,  Zeeland,  Friesland,  Utrecht,
and  Gelderland.  Each  provincial  assembly  consisted
again  of  delegates,  not  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  pro-
Adnces,  but  from  the  magistracies  of  the  cities.  Those
magistracies,  again,  were  not  elected  by  the  citizens.
They  elected  themselves  by  renewing  their  own  vacan-

i*  JMeieren.  ubi  siq).

1590.  CHARACTER  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  27

cies,  and  were,  in  short,  immortal  corporations.  Tims.
in  final  analysis,  the  supreme  power  was  distrihnted
and  localized  among  the  mayors  and  aldermen  of  a  large
number  of  cities,  all  independent  alike  of  the  people
below  and  of  any  central  powei'  above.

It  is  true  that  the  nobles,  as  a  class,  had  a  voice  in
the  provincial  and  in  the  general  assembly,  both  for
themselves  and  as  technical  representatives  of  the
smaller  towns  and  of  the  rural  popnlation.  But,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  the  influence  of  this  caste  had  of  late
years  very  rapidly  diminished,  through  its  decrease  in
numbers,  and  the  far  more  rapid  increase  in  wealth  and
power  of  the  commercial  and  manufacturing  classes.
Individual  nobles  were  constantly  employed  in  the
military,  civil,  and  diplomatic  service  of  the  republic,
but  their  body  had  ceased  to  be  a  power.  It  had  been
the  policy  of  William  the  Silent  to  increase  the  number
of  cities  entitled  to  send  deputies  to  the  States ;  for  it
was  among  the  cities  that  his  resistance  to  the  tyranny
of  Spain,  and  his  efforts  to  obtain  complete  indepen-
dence for  his  country,  had  been  mainly  supported.
Many  of  the  great  nobles,  as  has  been  seen  in  these
pages,  denounced  the  liberator,  and  took  sides  with  the
tyrant.  Lamoral  Egmont  had  walked  to  the  scaffold
to  which  Philip  had  condemned  him,  chanting  a  prayer
for  Philip's  welfare.  Egmont's  eldest  son  was  now
foremost  in  the  Spanish  army,  doing  battle  against  his
own  country  in  behalf  of  the  tyrant  who  had  taken  his
father's  life.  Aremberg  and  Ligny,  Arschot,  Chimay,
Groy,  Capres,  Montigny,  and  most  of  the  great  patrician
families  of  the  Nethevland;^,  fought  on  the  royal  side.

The  revolution  which  had  saved  the  country  from
perdition  and  created  the  great  Netherland  republic
was  a  burgher  revolution,  and  burgher  statesmen  now
controlled  the  State.  The  burgher  class  of  Europe  is
not  the  one  that  has  been  foremost  in  the  revolutionary
movements  of  history,  or  that  has  distinguished  itself —
especially  in  more  modem  times— by  a  passionate  love
of  liberty.  It  is  always  easy  to  sneer  at  Hans  Miller
and  Hans  Baker,  and  at  the  country  where  such
plebeians  are  powerful.  Yet  the  burghers  played  a  pro-
minent part  in  the  great  drama  which  fonns  my  theine,
and  there  has  rarely  been  seen  a  more  solid  or  powerful

28  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXII.

type  of  their  class  than  the  burgher  statesman,  John  of
Olden-Barneveld,  who,  since  the  death  of  William  the
Silent  and  the  departure  of  Lord  Leicester,  had  mainly-
guided  the  destinies  of  Holland.  Certainly  no  soldier
nor  statesman  who  ever  measured  intellects  with  that
potent  personage  was  apt  to  treat  his  genius  otherwise
than  with  profound  respect.

But  it  is  difficult  to  form  a  logical  theory  of  govern-
ment, except  on  the  fiction  of  divine  right  as  a  basis,
luiless  the  fact  of  popular  sovereignty,  as  expressed  by
a  majority,  be  frankly  accepted  in  spite  of  philosophical
objections.

In  the  Netherlands  there  was  no  king,  and  strictly
speaking  no  people.  But  this  latter  and  fatal  defect
was  not  visible  in  the  period  of  danger  and  of  contest.
The  native  magistrates  of  that  age  were  singularly  pure,
upright,  and  patriotic.  Of  this  there  is  no  question
whatever.  And  the  people  acquiesced  cheerfully  in
their  authority,  not  claiming  a  larger  representation
than  such  as  they  virtually  possessed  in  the  multiple
power  exercised  over  them,  by  men  moving  daily
among  them,  often  of  modest  fortunes  and  of  simple
lives.  Two  generations  later,  and  in  the  wilderness  of
Massachusetts,  the  early  American  colonists  voluntarily
placed  in  the  hands  of  their  magistrates,  few  in  number,
unlimited  control  of  all  the  functions  of  government,
and  there  was  hardly  an  instance  known  of  an  impure
exercise  of  authority.  Yet  out  of  that  simple  kernel
gi'ew  the  least  limited  and  most  powerful  democracy
ever  known.

In  the  later  days  of  Netherland  history  a  different
result  became  visible,  and  with  it  came  the  ruin  of  the
State.  The  governing  class,  of  burgher  origin,  gradu-
ally separated  itself  from  the  rest  of  the  citizens,  with-
drew from  commercial  pursuits,  lived  on  hereditary
fortunes  in  the  exercise  of  functions  which  were  likewise
virtually  hereditary,  and  so  became  an  oligarchy.  This
result,  together  with  the  physical  causes  already  in-
dicated, made  the  downfall  of  the  commonwealth  pro-
bable whenever  it  should  be  attacked  by  an  overwhelm-
ing foi-ce  from  without.

Tiie  States-General,  however,  at  this  epoch — although
they  had  in  a  manner  usurped  the sovereignty,  which

1590.  THE  REPUBLICAN  RULE.  29

in  tbe  absence  of  a  feudal  lord  really  belonged  to  the
whole  people,  and  had  silently  repossessed  themselves
of  those  executive  functions  which  the}^  had  themselves
conferred  upon  the  state  council — were  at  any  rate
without  self-seeking  ambition.  The  Hollanders,  as  a
race,  were  not  office-seekers,  but  were  singularly  docile
to  constituted  authority,  while  their  regents — as  the
municipal  magistrates  were  commonly  called — were  not
very  far  removed  above  the  mass  by  birth  or  habitual
occupation.  The  republic  was  a  social  and  political
fact,  against  which  there  was  no  violent  antagonism
either  of  laws  or  manners,  and  the  people,  although
not  technically  existing,  in  reality  was  all  in  all.  In
Netherland  story  the  People  is  ever  the  true  hero.  It
was  an  almost  unnoticed  but  significant  revolution —
that  by  which  the  state  council  was  now  virtually  de-
prived of  its  authority.  During  Leicester's  rule  it  had
been  a  most  important  college  of  administration.  Since
his  resignation  it  had  been  entrusted  by  the  States-
General  with  high  executive  functions,  especially  iiv
war  matters.  It  was  an  assembly  of  learned  counsellors
appointed  from  the  various  provinces  for  wisdom  and
experience,  usually  about  eighteen  in  number,  and
sworn  in  all  things  to  be  faithful  to  the  whole  republic.
The  allegiance  of  all  was  rendered  to  the  nation.  Each
individual  member  was  required  to  "  forswear  his  native
province  in  order  to  be  true  to  the  generality."  They
deliberated  in  common  for  the  general  good,  and  were
not  hampered  by  instructions  from  the  provincial  diets,
nor  compelled  to  refer  to  those  diets  for  decision  when
important  questions  were  at  issue.  It  was  an  inde-
pendent executive  committee  for  the  whole  republic."

11  "  Sa  Majeste  voit  joumellement  par  sequemment  met  S.  M.  et  ces  provinces  en

experience  qu'a  cause  que  I'autoritd  qui  plus  grand  trouble  et  despense  quaultre-

appartient  au  conseil  d'etat  de  ces  pro-  ment  ne  requerroit  le  maintien  de  cos

vinces  suivant  les  articles  du  contract  guerres ;  eu  esgard  de  quoi  je  suis  charge

faict  entre  S.  M.  et  ces  pays  cy  luy  est  en  de  par  S M.  de  vous  signifier,  qu'cUe

plusieurs  points  du  tout  ostee  et  quasi  desire  de  V.  S.  que  quelque  pouvoir  qui  a

Hu  tout  fort  raccourcie  par  V.  S. De  la  este  bailie  au  conseil  d'etat  par  la  susdicte

naist  une  telle  confusion  et  desordre  au  convention,  soit  aussi  plcincnient  restitue

gouvemement  de  ces  provinces  que  non  et  establi,"  etc.  etc.  etc. (Paper  sent  to

seulement  c'est  I'occasion  de  beaucoup  de  the  States-General  by  Sir  Thomas  Bodley,

nialentenduz  et mescontentemens,  mais  '26  April,  1590; Archives  of  the  Hague

aussi  faict  que  I'ennemi  n'est  si  vivement  MS.)
repousse  comme  il  pourrait  estre,  et  con-

30  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXII.

But  Leicester  had  made  it  unpopular.  His  intrigues,
in  the  name  of  democracy,  to  obtain  possession  of
sovereign  power,  to  inflame  the  lower  classes  against
the  municipal  magistiacies,  and  to  excite  the  clergy  to
claim  a  political  influence  to  which  they  were  not  en-
titled and  which  was  most  mischievous  in  its  eifects,
had  exposed  the  state  council,  with  which  he  had  been
in  the  habit  of  consulting,  to  suspicion.

The  Queen  of  England,  by  virtue  of  her  treaty,  had
the  right  to  appoint  two  of  her  subjects  to  be  members
of  the  council.  The  governor  of  her  auxiliary  forces
was  also  entitled  to  a  .-eat  there.  Since  the  malpractices
of  Leicester  and  the  danger  to  which  the  country  had
been  subjected  in  consequence  had  been  discovered,  it
was  impossible  that  there  should  be  very  kindly  feeling
towards  England  in  the  public  mind,  however  neces-
sary a  sincere  alliance  between  the  two  countries  was
known  to  be  for  the  welfare  of  both.

The  bickering  of  the  two  English  councillors,  Wilkes
and  Bodley,  and  of  the  governor  of  the  English  con-
tingent with  the  Hollanders,  was  incessant.  The  Eng-
lishmen went  so  far  as  to  claim  the  right  of  veto
upon  all  measures  passed  by  the  council,  but  the
States-General  indignantly  replied  that  the  matters
deliberated  and  decided  upon  by  that  board  were
their  own  affairs,  not  the  state  affairs  of  England.
The  two  members  and  the  military  officer  who  to-
gether represented  her  Majesty  were  entitled  to  par-
ticipate in  the  deliberations  and  to  vote  with  their
brother  membeis.  For  them  to  claim  the  right,  how-
ever, at  will  to  annul  the  proceedings  was  an  intoler-
able assumption,  and  could  not  be  listened  to  for  a
moment.  Certainly  it  would  have  been  strange  had
two  Dutchmen  undertaken  to  veto  every  measure
passed  by  the  Queen's  council  at  Eichmond  or  \\  indsor,
and  it  was  difticult  to  say  on  what  article  of  the  contract
this  extraordinary  privilege  was  claimed  by  Englishmen
at  the  Hague.^^

12  "  In  den  Kaedt  van  State  deser  Lan-  daoromme t-n connen die staten niel

den,"  said  the  States-General  to  the  Eng-  verstaen  dat  tot  dicnste  van  dese  Landen

lish  councillors,  "  worden  gehandclt,  ge-  ofte  van  baer  Mu'  by  forme  van  ecn  nega-

consulteert  ende  geresolveert  de  saecken  tive  voix  am  worden  geprocedeert  omme

d.-n staet  derzelver Landen aengaende  den  voortganct  der  rasolutie  te  beletten,

ende  niet  den  staet  van  Engolant. Ende  maer  hebben  den  gouverneur  van  hara

1590.  QUARRELS  IN  THE  STATE  COUNCIL.  31

Another  cause  of  quarrel  was  the  inability  of  the  Eng-
lishmen to  understand  the  language  in  which  the  debates
of  the  state  council  were  held.

According  to  a  custom  not  entirely  unexampled  in
parliamentary  history  the  members  of  assembly  and
council  made  use  of  their  native  tongue  in  discussing
the  state  affairs  of  their  native  land.  It  was  however
considered  a  grievance  by  the  two  English  members
that  the  Dutchmen  should  speak  Dutch,  and  it  wais
demanded  in  the  Queen's  name  that  they  should  employ
some  other  language  which  a  foreigner  could  more  easily
understand.^"

The  Hollanders  however  refused  this  request,  not  be-
lieving that  in  a  reversed  case  her  Majesty's  Council  or
Houses  of  Parliament  would  be  likely  or  competent  to
carry  on  their  discussions  habitually  in  Italian  or  Latin
for  the  benefit  of  a  couple  of  strangers  who  might  not  be
familiar  with  English.  The  more  natural  remedy  would
have  been  for  the  foreigners  to  take  lessons  in  the  tongue
of  the  country,  or  to  seek  for  an  interpreter  among  their
colleagues;  especially  as  the  States,  when  all  the  IS  ether-
lands  were  but  provinces,  had  steadily  refused  to  adopt
any  language  but  their  mother  tongue,  even  at  the  demand
of  their  sovereign  prince."

Ma'  secours  ende  de  Raeden  by  haere  mittecrden  der  S'taten  van  de  respective

Ma'  geintroduceert  hare  stemmeii  nega-  provincieu  in  de  zaecljen  van  deu  Lande

live  ofte  afBrmative  te  geven  als  andere  geen  anderalsdeNederlandtschespraecke

van  den  Raede." (Answer  to  Wilkes  gebruycken. Daeromme  en  is  niet  prac-

and  Bodley,  15  Oct.  1590 ; Hague  Ar-  ticabael  en  dit  punct  eenige  veranderinglie

chives  MS.)  inne te voeien. Temin nademael  die

'3  "  S.  Majeste  trouvant  estrange  que  Staten  der  voorscreven  respective  pro-

voulsis-siez  que les  siens  demeurassent  vincien  noyt  hebben  willen  gedoogen  dat

par  ce  moyen  muets  au  dit  coiiseil,  re-  haere  Gccommitteerden  iu  saeckeu der

quiert  que  des  a  present  et  a  I'avenir  Landen  vreemde  spraecken  zouden  ge-

toutes  les  propositions,  consultations,  con-  bruycken ; oock  niettegestaende  het  ver-

i'erences  et  deliberations  qui  se  leront  an  zoeck  van  haerlicker  priucen  selfs  geschiet

dit  conseil  soyeiit tousjours  es langues  uit wichtige ende wel  gefondeerde re-

Latine  ou  Francoise,  et  que  les  actes  et  denen. Ende  daer  zulcx  in  eenige  zaecken

registres  desdictes  consultations,  resolu-  specialyck met veele difflculteyten is

tions,  et  deliberations  se  tieiinenten  I'une  geconsenteert  geweest,  ten  tyde  als  in  de

deux  langues  susdictes." (Wilkes  and  vergaderinge  van  de  Staten  verscheyden

Bodley  to  the  States-General,  20  July,  provincien  van Walscher  sprake  warcii

1590  ;  Hague  Archives  MS.)  tomparerende  hebben  de  princen  daervan

'■•  "  AUe  de provincien,  Steden  ende  den  Staten  gegeven  solennele  acte  van

Leden  van  dien  jegenwoordig  in  de  Unie  non-prejuditie  met  belofte  dat  zulcx  niet

wezende,"  said  the  States,  "gebruycken  in  consequentie  zoude  worden  getoogtn.

de  Nederlantsche  spraecke.ende  volgende  Ende  hebben  de  ondersaten van liaerc

verschi-yde  privilegien,  ende  rechten  dor  Ma'  hen  betor  te  laeten  ouderrichten  in

voorscreven  Landen  en  niogende  Gecom-  den Raedt  van  staet  vant  gunt  aldaer

32  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Cuap.  XXII.

At  tliis  moment,  Sir  Thomas  Bodley  was  mainly  en-
trusted with  her  Majesty's  ailuirs  at  the  Hague,  but  his
overhearing  demeanour,  intemperate  language,  and  pas-
sionate style  of  correspondence  with  the  States  and  with
the  royal  government,  did  much  injury  to  both  countries.
The  illustrious  AValsingham — whose  death  in  the  spring
of  this  year  England  had  so  much  reason  to  deplore —
had  bitterly  lamented,  just  before  his  death,  having  re-
commended so  nnqiiiei  a  spirit  for  so  important  a  place.
Ortel,  envoy  of  the  States  to  London,  expressed  his  hopes
that  affairs  would  now  be  handled  more  to  the  satisfac-
tion of  the  States ;  as  Bodle}^  would  be  obliged,  since
the  death  of  Sir  Francis,  to  address  his  letters  to  the
Lord  High  Treasurer,  with  whom  it  would  be  impos-
sible for  him  to  obtain  so  much  influence  as  he  had
enjoyed  with  the  late  Secretary  of  State.^^

Moreover  it  was  exactly  at  this  season  that  the  Advo-
cate of  Holland,  Olden-Sarneveld,  was  excluded  from
the  state  council.^''  Already  the  important  province  of
Holland  was  dissatisfied  with  its  influence  in  that  body.
Bearing  one  half  of  the  whole  burthen  of  the  war,  it  was
not  content  with  one  quarter  of  the  council  vote,  and
very  soon  it  became  the  custom  for  the  States-General
to  conduct  all  the  most  important  affairs  of  the  re-
public." The  state  -  council  complained  that  even  in
war  matters  it  was  not  consulted,  and  that  most  impor-
tant enterprises  were  undertaken  by  Prince  Maurice
without  its  knowledge,  and  on  advice  of  the  Advocate
alone.  Doubtless  this  was  true,  and  thus,  most  unfortu-
nately, the  commonwealth  was  degraded  to  a  confederacy
instead  of  becoming  an  incorporate  federal  State.  The
members  of  the  States- Geneial — as  it  has  been  seen —
were  responsible  only  to  their  constituents,  the  separate
provinces.  They  avowed  allegiance,  each  to  his  own
province,  none  to  the  central  government.  Moreover
they  were  not  representatives,  but  envoys,  appointed  by
petty  provinces,  bound  by  written  orders,  and  obliged  to
consult  at  every  step  with  their  sovereigns  at  home.
The  Netherland  polity  was  thus  stamped  almost  at  its

geproponeert  ende  gedelibereert  zal  wor-  zaeck:?n  vreemde  spraecke  zouden  niooton

den,  dan  datde  Ingesetenendeser  Laiiden  gebiuycken." Ibid.

jegens  de  rechten  ende  privilegieii  derzel-  '5  goj-^  m  xxvii.  530.

ver  in  de  beleydinghe  van  des  Landes  is  Fruin,  24. i"  Ibid.

1590.  EFFECT  OF  THE  STRUGGLE  ON  NEUTRAL  NATIONS.  33

birth  with  a  narrow  provincialism.  Delay 'and  hesita-
tion thus  necessarily  engendered  were  overcome  in  the
days  of  danger  by  patriotic  fervour.  The  instinct  of
union  for  the  sake  of  the  national  existence  was  suffi-
ciently strong,  and  the  robust,  practical  common  sense  of
the  people  sufficiently  enlightened  to  prevent  this  weak-
ness from  degenerating  into  impotence  so  long  as  the
war  pressure  remained  to  mould  them  into  a  whole.
But  a  day  was  to  come  for  bitterly  rueing  this  paralj^sis
of  the  imperial  instincts  of  the  people,  this  indefinite
decentralization  of  the  national  strength.

For  the  present,  the  legislative  and  executive  body
was  the  States-General.  But  the  States-General  were
in  reality  the  States  provincial,  and  the  States  provincial
were  the  city  municipalities,  among  which  the  magis-
tracies of  Holland  were  preponderant.

Ere  long  it  became  impossible  for  an  individual  to  re-
sist the  decrees  of  the  civic  authorities.  In  1591,  the
States-General  passed  a  I'esolution  by  which  these  arro-
gant corporations  virtually  procured  their  exemption
from  any  process  at  the  suit  of  a  private  person  to  be
placed  on  record.  So  far  could  the  principle  of  sove-
reignty be  pulverized.  City  council  boards  had  become
supreme."

It  was  naturally  impossible  during  the  long  continu-
ance of  this  great  struggle,  that  neutral  nations  should
not  be  injuriously  atfected  by  it  in  a  variety  of  ways.
And  as  a  matter  of  course  neutral  nations  were  disposed
to  counsel  peace.  Peace,  peace,  peace  was  the  sigh  of
the  bystanders  whose  commerce  was  impeded,  whose  in-
ternational relations  were  complicated,  and  whose  own
security  was  endangered  in  the  course  of  the  blood}^  con-
flict. It  was  however  not  very  much  the  fashion  of  that
day  for  governments  to  obtrude  advice  upon  each  other,
or  to  read  to  each  other  moral  lectures.  It  was  assumed
that  when  the  expense  and  sacrifice  of  war  had  been
incurred,  it  was  for  cause,  and  the  discovery  had  not  yet
been  made  that  those  not  immediately  interested  in  the
fray  were  better  acquainted  with  its  merits  than  the
combatants  themselves,  and  were  moreover  endued  with
superhuman  wisdom  to  see  with  perfect  clearness  that

18  Kluit,  iii.  52. Compare  Fruin,  iv.  pp.  18-31,  to  whose  lucid  atiJ  learned  exposi-
tion of  the  Netherland  polity  I  am  under  great  obligations.

VOL.  III.  1>

34  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXII.

future  issue  which  to  the  parties  themselves  was  con-
cealed.

Cheap  apothegms  upon  the  blessings  of  peace  and
upon  the  expediency  of  curbing  the  angry  passions,
uttered  by  the  belligerents  of  yesterday  to  the  bellige-
rents of  to-day,  did  not  then  pass  current  for  profound
wisdom.

Still  the  emperor  Eudolph,  abstaining  for  a  time  from
his  star-gazing,  had  again  thought  proper  to  make  a
feeble  attempt  at  intervention  in  those  sublunary  mat-
ters which  were  supposed  to  be  within  his  sphere.^*

It  was  perfectly  well  known  that  Philip  was  inca-
pable of  abating  one  jot  of  his  pretensions,  and  that  to
propose  mediation  to  the  United  Provinces  was  simply
to  request  them,  for  the  convenience  of  other  powers,  to
return  to  the  slavery  out  of  which,  by  the  persistent
eflbrts  of  a  quarter  of  a  century,  they  had  struggled.
Nevei'theless  it  was  formally  proposed  to  re-open  those
lukewarm  fountains  of  diplomatic  common-place  in  which
healing  had  been  sought  during  the  peace  negotiations  of
Cologne  in  the  year  1579.  But  the  iStates-General  reso-
lutely kept  them  sealed.  They  simply  answered  his
imperial  Majesty  by  a  communication  of  certain  inter-
cepted correspondence  between  the  King  of  Spain  and
his  ambassador  at  Vienna,  San  Clemente,  through  which
it  was  satisfactorily  established  that  any  negotiation
would  prove  as  gigantic  a  comedy  on  the  pait  of  Spain
as  had  been  the  memorable  conferences  at  Ostend,  by
which  the  invasion  of  England  had  been  masked.^"

There  never  was  a  possibility  of  mediation  or  of  com-
promise except  by  complete  submission  on  the  part  of
the  Netherlanders  to  Crown  and  Church.  Both  in  this,  as
well  as  in  previoi;s  and  subsequent  attempts  at  negotia-
tions, the  secret  instructions  of  Philip  forbade  any  real
concessions  on  his  side.  He  was  always  ready  to  nego-
tiate, he  was  especially  anxious  to  obtain  a  suspension  of
arms  fi'otn  the  rebels  during  negotiation,  but  his  agents
were  instructed  to  use  great  dexterity  and  dissimula-
tion in  order  that  the  proposal  for  such  armistice,  as
well  as  for  negotiation  at  all,  should  appear  to  proceed,
not  from  himself  as  was  the  fact,  but  from  the  emperor
as  a  neutral  potentate. The  king  uniformly  proposed

19  Meteren,  xvi.  297.  =»  Ibid.

1590. PHILIP'S  PROPOSALS  FOR  A  COMPROMISE.  35

three  points ;  firstly,  that  the  rebels  should  reconvert
themselves  to  the  Catholic  religion  ;  secondly-,  that  they
should  return  to  their  obedience  to  himself;  thirdly,
that  they  should  pay  the  expenses  of  the  war.  Number
three  was,  however,  usually  inserted  in  order  that,  by
conceding  it  subsequently,  after  much  contestation,  he
might  appear  conciliatory.  It  was  a  vehicle  of  magna-
nimity towards  men  grown  insolent  with  temporaiy
success.^^ Numbers  one  and  two  were  immutable.

Especially  upon  number  one  was  concession  impos-
sible. "  The  Catholic  religion  is  the  first  thing,"  said
Philip,  "  and  although  the  rebels  do  not  cease  to  insist
that  liberty  of  conscience  should  be  granted  them,  in
order  that  they  may  preserve  that  which  they  have  had
during  these  past  years,  this  is  never  to  be  thought  of  in
any  event."  The  king  always  made  free  use  of  the  ter-
rible weapon  which  the  Protestant  princes  of  Germany
had  placed  in  his  bands.  For  indeed  if  it  were  right
that  one  man,  because  possessed  of  hereditary  power
over  millions  of  his  fellow  creatures,  should  compel
them  all  to  accept  the  dogmas  of  Luther  or  of  Calvin
because  agreeable  to  himself,  it  was  difficult  to  say  why
another  man,  in  a  similarly  elevated  position,  might  not
compel  his  subjects  to  accept  the  creed  of  Trent,  or  the
doctrines  of  Mahomet  or  Confucius.  The  Netherlanders
were  fighting — even  more  than  they  knew — for  liberty
of  conscience,  for  equality  of  all  religions;  not  for  Moses,
nor  for  Melancthon ;  for  Henry,  Philip,  or  Pius ;  while
Philip  justly  urged  that  no  prince  in  Christendom  per-
mitted license.  "  Let  them  well  undeistand,"  said  his
Majesty,  "  that  since  others,  who  live  in  error,  hold  the
opinion  that  vassals  are  to  conform  to  the  religion  of
tlieir  master,  it  is  insufferable  that  it  should  he  ijroposed  to
vie  that  my  vassals  should  have  a  different  religion  from  mine
— and  that  too  being  the  true  religion,  proved  by  so
many  testimonies  and  miracles,  Avhile  all  others  are
deception.  This  must  be  an-anged  with  the  authority
of  the  commissioners  of  the  emperor,  since  it  is  well

21  Miiiuta  de  iustrucion  al  Marques  d"  futidamento,  por  desviarlos  dellos  se  dclxn

Carvalho,  25  Jan.  1592,  Arch,  dc  Siman-  a  lo  menos  deshecharlos  con  esta  recom-

cas,  MS. "  Como  hombres  insolentes  con  pensa  de  gastos  las  otras  pretenciones  que

los  buenos  sucesos  destus  dias,  pidieren  tuvieren  roal  fundadas."
quo  se  hagan  con  eltos  alguiiajj  cusas  sin

1)  2

36  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXII.

understood  by  them  that  the  vassal  is  never  to  differ  from
the  opinion  of  his  master."'^  Certainly  it  was  worth  an
eighty  years'  war  to  drive  such  blasphemous  madness  as
this  out  of  human  heads,  whether  crowned  or  shaven.

There  was  likewise  a  diet  held  during  the  sum-
mer of  this  year,  of  the  circles  of  the  empire  nearest
to  the  Netherlands — Westphalia,  Cleves,  Juliers,  and
Saxony — from  which  commissioners  were  deputed  both
to  Brussels  and  to  the  Hague,  to  complain  of  the  mis-
fortunes suffered  by  neutral  and  neighbouring  nations  in
consequence  of  the  civil  war.

They  took  nothing  by  their  mission  to  the  Duke  of
22  Aug. Parma. At  the  Hague  the  deputies  were  heaid

1590.  on  the  22nd  August,  1690.  They  complained
to  the  States-General  of  "  brandschatting"  on  the  border,
of  the  holding  of  forts  beyond  the  lines,  and  of  other  in-
vasions of  neutral  territory,  of  the  cruising  of  the  war-
vessels  of  the  States  off  the  shores  and  on  the  rivers,  and
of  their  interference  with  lawful  traders.  Threats  were
made  of  forcible  intervention  and  reprisals.^^

The  united  States  replied  on  the  loth  September.  Ex-
pressing deep  regret  that  neutral  nations  should  suffer,
they  pronounced "  it  to  be  impossible  but  that
^^  ■  some  sparks  from  the  great  fire,  now  deso-
lating their  land,  should  fly  over  into  their  neighbours'
gi-ound.  The  States  were  fighting  the  battle  of  liberty
against  slavery,  in  which  the  future  generations  of  Ger-
many, as  well  as  of  the  Netherlands,  were  interested.
They  were  combating  that  hL,>rrible  institution,  the  Holy

22  "Lo  de  la  religion  Catulica  es  la  Tn  July  of  this  year,  Farnese  had  much

primera  cosa ; y  aunque  no  dexaran  de  talk with the Elector of Cologne at

Insistir  rebeldes  en  que  se  les  de  libertad  Spa  about  peace  with  the  rebels  through

de  concicntia  por  conseivar  la  que  ban  the  mediation  of  the  Kmperor. It  was

tenido  e.stos  ailos,  no  se  ha  de  dar  lugar  a  agreed  that a  congress  ishould  be  pro-

esto  por  ninguno  caso — dando  les  bien  a  posed  at  Cologne,  but  the  suggestion  was

entender  que  pues  otros  qui viven en  not to  appear  as  coming  from Philip,

errores  tienen  por  opinion  que  sus  vas-  and  Farnese  informed  his  master  that  the

salos  se  ban  de  conformar  con  la  religion  Duke  of  Wirtemberg  and  the  Landgrave

de  su  Seflor,  no  se  sufre  que  a  mi  se  me  of  Hesse  would  both  attend. Although

proponga  que  los  mios  la  tengau  diferente  heretics,  they  were  described  as  pacific

que  yo,  siendo  esta  la  verdadera  y  probada  and  profoundly  of  opinion  "  that  in  the

con  tantos  testimoiiios  y  milagrcjs,  y  todo  mutter  of  religion  vassals  were  necessarily

lo  demas  engano,  y  esto  se  ha  de  procurar  to  conform  to  the  will  and  command  of

con  la  autoridad  de  los  comisarios  del  their  princes." Parma  to  Philip,  21  July,

emperador  pues  es  muy  recibido  enfre  1590 ;  (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

ellos  de  no  liaberse  de  apartar  el  vassallo  ^  Meteren,  xvi.  295,  seqq.
de  la  opinion  de  su  senor." Ibid.

1590. COMPLAINTS  OF  NEIGHBOURING  NATIONS.  37

Inquisition.  They  were  doing  their  best  to  strike  down
the  nniversal  monarchy  of  Spain,  which  they  described
as  a  bloodthirsty,  insatiable,  insolent,  absolute  dominion
of  Saracenic,  Moorish  Christians.^''  They  warred  with  a
system  which  placed  inquisitors  on  the  seats  of  judges,
which  made  it  unlawful  to  read  the  Scriptures,  which
violated  all  oaths,  suppressed  all  civic  freedom,  trampled
on  all  laws  and  customs,  raised  inordinate  taxes  by  arbi-
trary decree,  and  subjected  high  and  low  to  indiscri-
minate murder.  Spain  had  sworn  the  destruction  of
the  provinces  and  their  subjugation  to  her  absolute  do-
minion, in  order  to  carry  out  her  scheme  of  universal
empire.

These  were  the  deeds  and  designs  against  which  the
States  were  waging  that  Avar,  concerning  some  inconve-
nient results  of  which  their  neighbours,  now  happily
neutral,  were  complaining.  But  the  cause  of  the  States
was  the  cause  of  humanity  itself.  This  Saracenic,  Moor-
ish, universal  monarchy  had  been  seen  by  Germany  to
murder,  despoil,  and  trample  upon  the  Netherlands.  It
had  murdered  millions  of  innocent  Indians  and  Grana-
dians.  It  had  kept  Naples  and  Milan  in  abject  slavery.
It  had  seized  Portugal.  It  had  deliberately  planned  and
attempted  an  accursed  invasion  of  England  and  Ireland.
It  had  overrun  and  plundered  many  cities  of  the  empire.
It  had  spread  a  web  of  secret  intrigue  about  Scotland.
At  last  it  was  sending  great  armies  to  conquer  France
and  snatch  its  crown.  Poor  France  now  saw  the  plans
of  this  Spanish  t^'ranny  and  bewailed  her  misery.  The
subjects  of  her  lawful  king  were  ordered  to  rise  against
him,  on  account  of  religion  and  conscience.  Such  holy
pretexts  were  used  by  these  Saracenic  Christians  in  order
to  gain  possession  of  that  kingdom.

For  all  these  reasons,  men  should  not  reproach  the
inhabitants  of  the  Netherlands,  because  seeing  the  aims
of  this  accursed  tyranny,  they  had  set  themselves  to
resist  it.  It  was  contrary  to  reason  to  consider  them  as
disturbers  of  the  general  peace,  or  to  hold  them  guilty
of  violating  their  oaths  or  their  duty  to  the  laws  of  the
holy  empiie.  The  States- General  were  sure  that  they
had  been  hitherto  faithful  and  loyal,  and  they  were
resolved  to  continue  in  that  path.

2*  Metercn,  xvi.  295,  sejq.

38  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXJI.

As  members  of  the  holy  empire,  in  part — as  of  old
they  were  considered  to  be — they  had  rather  the  right
to  expect,  instead  of  reproaches,  assistance  against  the
enormous  power  and  inhuman  oppression  of  their  ene-
mies. They  had  demanded  it  heretofore  by  their  ambas-
sadors, and  they  still  continued  to  claim  it.  They  urged
that,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  empire,  all  foreign
soldiers,  Spaniards,  .Saracens,  and  the  like  should  be
driven  out  of  the  limits  of  the  empire.  Through  these
means  the  German  Highland  and  the  German  Nether-
land  might  be  restored  once  more  to  theii'  old  friendship
and  unity,  and  might  deal  with  each  other  again  in  amity
and  commerce.

If,  however,  such  requests  could  not  be  granted,  they
at  least  begged  his  electoral  highness  and  the  other
dukes,  lords,  and  states  to  put  on  the  deeds  of  Kether-
landers  in  this  laborious  and  heavy  war  the  best  inter-
pretation, in  Older  that  they  miglit,  with  the  better
courage  and  resolution,  bear  those  inevitable  burthens
which  were  becoming  daily  heavier  in  this  task  of  re-
sistance and  self-protection  ;  in  order  that  the  pi'ovinces
might  not  be  utterly  conquered,  and  serve,  with  their
natural  resources  and  advantageous  situation,  as  sedes  et
media  belli  for  the  destruction  of  neighbouring  States  and
the  building  up  of  the  contemplated  universal,  absolute
monarchy."^*

The  Inited  Provinces  had  been  compelled  by  over-
powering necessity  to  take  up  arms.  That  which  had
I'esulted  was  and  remained  in  terminis  defensionis.  Their
object  was  to  protect  what  belonged  to  them,  to  recover
that  which  by  force  or  fraud  had  been  taken  from  them.

In  regard  to  excesses  committed  by  their  troops  against
neutral  inhabitants  on  the  border,  they  expressed  a  strong
regret,  together  with  a  disposition  to  make  all  proper
retribution  and  to  cause  all  crimes  to  be  punished.

They  alluded  to  the  enormous  sins  of  this  nature  prac-
tised by  the  enemy  against  neutral  soil.  They  recalled
to  mind  that  the  Spaniards  paid  their  troops  ill  or  not  at
all,  and  that  they  allowed  them  to  plunder  the  innocent
and  the  neutial,  while  the  united  States  had  paid  tbeir
troops  better  wages,  and  more  punctually,  than  had  ever
been  done  by  the  greatest  potentates  of  Europe. It  was

•J5  Meteien,  xvi.  295,  seqq.

1590.  KEPLY  OF  THE  STATES-GENERAL.  39

true  that  the  States  kept  many  cruisers  off  the  coasts  and
upon  the  rivers,  but  these  were  to  protect  their  own
citizens  and  friendly  traders  against  pirates  and  against
the  common  foe.  Germany  derived  as  much  benefit  from
this  system  as  did  the  Provinces  themselves.^''

Thus  did  the  States-General,  respectfully  but  re-
solutely, decline  all  proffers  of  intervention,  which,  as
they  were  well  aware,  could  only  enure  to  the  benefit  of
the  enemy.  Thus  did  they  avoid  being  entrapped  into
negotiations  which  could  only  prove  the  most  lamentable
of  comedies.

26  Moteren,  xvi.  295,  teqq.

40  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Philip's  scheme  of  aggrandizement  —  Projected  invasion  of  France  —  Internal  con-
dition of  France— Character  of  Henry  of  Navarre  —  Preparation  for  action  —
Battle  of  Ivry  —  Victory  of  the  French  king  over  the  League  —  Reluctance  of  the
king  to  attack  the  French  capital  —  Siege  of  Paris  — The  pope  indisposed  towards

the  League Extraordinary  demonstration  of  ecclesiastics  —  Influence  of  the

priests— Extremities  of  the  siege  —  Attempted  negotiation  —  State  of  Philip's
army  —  Difticult  position  of  Farnese  — March  of  the  allies  to  the  relief  of  Paris  —
I^gny  taken  and  the  city  relieved — Desertion  of  the  king's  army  —  Siege  of
Corljeil  — Dtath  of  Pope  Sixtus  V.  — Re-capture  of  Lagny  and  Corbeil  —  Return
of  Parma  to  the  Netherlands  —  Picsult  of  the  expedition.

The  scene  of  the  narrative  shifts  to  France.  The  history
of  the  United  Netherlands  at  this  epoch  is  a  vv^orld-
history.  Were  it  not  so,  it  would  have  far  less  of  moral
and  instruction  for  all  time  than  it  is  really  capable  of
affording.  The  battle  of  liberty  against  despotism  was
now  fought  in  the  hop-fields  of  Brabant  or  the  polders  of
Friesland,  now  in  the  narrow  seas  which  encircle  Eng-
land, and  now  on  the  sunny  j^lains  of  Dauphiny,  among
the  cragg)^  inlets  of  Brittany,  or  along  the  high  roads
and  rivers  which  lead  to  the  gates  of  Paris.  But  every-
where a  noiseless,  secret,  but  ubiquitous  negotiation  was
speeding  with  never  an  instant's  pause  to  accomplish  the
work  which  lansqxienettes  and  riders,  pikemen  and  cara-
bineers were  contending  for  on  a  hundred  battle-fields
and  amid  a  din  of  arms  which  for  a  quarter  of  a  century
had  been  the  regular  hum  of  human  industry.  For  nearly
a  generation  of  mankind,  Germans  and  Hollanders,  Eng-
lishmen, Frenchmen,  Scotchmen,  Irishmen,  Spaniards
and  Italians  seemed  to  be  bom  into  the  world  mainly  to
fight  for  or  against  a  system  of  universal  monarchy,  con-
ceived for  his  own  benefit  l)y  a  quiet  old  man  who  passed
his  days  at  a  writing  desk  in  a  remote  comer  of  Europe.
It  must  be  confessed  that  Philip  II.  gave  the  world  work
enough.  Whether — had  the  peoples  governed  them-
selve.s — their  energies  might  not  have  been  exerted  in
a  diSerent  direction,  and  on  the  whole  have  produced
more  of  good  to  the  human  race  than  came  of  all  this
blood  and  smoke,  may  be  questioned.

1590.  SCHEMES  OF  PHILIP  II.  41

But  the  divine  right  of  kings,  associating  itself  with
the  power  supreme  of  the  Church,  was  struggling  to
maintain  that  old  mastery  of  mankind  which  awakening
reason  was  inclined  to  dispute.  Countries  and  nations
being  regarded  as  private  property  to  be  inherited  or
bequeathed  by  a  few  favoured  individuals— provided
always  that  those  individuals  were  obedient  to  the
chief-priest — it  had  now  become  right  and  proper  tor
the  Spanish  monai'ch  to  annex  Scotland,  England,  and
France  to  the  very  considerable  possessions  which  were
already  his  own.  Scotland  he  claimed  by  virtue  of  tlie
expressed  wish  of  Maiy  to  the  exclusion  of  her  heretic
son.  France,  which  had  been  unjustly  u&urped  by
another  family  in  times  past  to  his  detriment,  and  Avhich
only  a  mere  human  invention — "  a  pleasantly  "  as  Alva
had  happily  termed  it,  "called  the  Salic  law" — pre-
vented from  passing  quietly  to  his  daughter,  as  heiress
to  her  mother,  daughter  of  Henry  II.,  he  was  now  fully
bent  upon  making  his  own  without  further  loss  of
time.  England,  in  consequence  of  the  mishap  of  the
year  eighty-eight,  he  was  inclined  to  defer  appropriating
until  the  possession  of  the  French  coasts,  together  with
those  of  the  Netherlands,  should  enable  him  to  risk  the
adventure  with  assured  chances  of  success.

The  Netherlands  were  fast  slipping  beyond  his  control,
to  be  sure,  as  he  engaged  in  these  endless  schemes ;  and
ill-disposed  people  of  the  day  said  that  the  king  was  like
jiEsop's  dog,  lapping  the  river  dry  in  order  to  get  at  the
skins  floating  on  the  surface.  The  Duke  of  Parma  was
driven  to  his  wits'  ends  for  expedients,  and  beside  him-
self with  vexation,  when  commanded  to  withdraw  his
ill-paid  and  mutinous  army  from  the  Provinces  for  the
purpose  of  invading  France.^  Most  importunate  were
the  appeals  and  potent  the  arguments  by  which  he
attempted  to  turn  Philip  from  his  purpose.  It  was  in
vain.  Spain  was  the  great,  aggressive,  over-shadowing
power  at  that  day,  before  whose  plots  and  whose  violence
the  nations  alternately  trembled,  and  it  was  France  that
now  stood  in  danger  of  being  conquered  or  dismembered
by  the  common  enemy  of  all. That  unhappy  kingdom,

1  "  Con  todo,  claro  es,"  said  Champagny,  menos  para  si  nos  engolfamos  en  la  de
with  bitterness,  "  que  no  bastando  ya  Franciai" — Discours  sur  lea  affaiies  dca
para la guerra que tenemos, mucho Pays  Bus. (MS.  before  cited.)

42  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap,  XXHI.

torn  by  intestine  conflict,  naturally  invited  the  ambition
and  the  greediness  of  foreign  powers.  Civil  war  had
been  its  condition,  with  brief  intervals,  for  a  whole
generation  of  mankind.  During  the  last  few  years,  the
sword  had  been  never  sheathed,  while  "  the  holy  Con-
federacy" and  the  Bearnese  struggled  together  for  the
mastery.  Religion  was  the  mantle  under  which  the  chiefs
on  both  sides  concealed  their  real  designs  as  they  led
on  their  followers  year  after  year  to  the  desperate  con-
flict. And  their  followers,  the  masses,  were  doubtless
in  earnest.  A  great  principle — the  relation  of  man  to
his  Maker  and  his  condition  in  a  future  world  as  laid
down  by  rival  priesthoods — has  in  almost  every  stage  of
history  had  power  to  influence  the  multitude  to  fury  and
to  deluge  the  world  in  blood.  And  so  long  as  the  super-
stitious element  of  human  nature  enables  individuals  or
combinations  of  them  to  dictate  to  their  fellow-creatures
those  relations,  or  to  dogmatize  concerning  those  con-
ditions— to  take  possession  of  their  consciences  in  short,
and  to  interpose  their  mummeries  between  man  and  his
Creator — it  is  probable  that  such  scenes  as  caused  the
nations  to  shudder  throughout  so  large  a  portion  of
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  will  continue
to  repeat  themselves  at  intervals  in  various  parts  of  the
earth.  Nothing  can  be  more  sublime  than  the  self-
sacrifice,  nothing  more  demoniac  thaa  the  crimes,  which
human  creatures  have  seemed  alw^ays  ready  to  exhibit
undo)'  the  name  of  religion.

It  was  and  had  been  really  civil  war  in  France.  In
the  Netherlands  it  had  become  essentially  a  struggle  for
independence  against  a  foreign  monarch ;  although  the
germ  out  of  wdiich  both  conflicts  had  grown  to  their
enormous  proportions  was  an  effort  of  the  multitude  to
check  the  growth  of  papacy.  In  France,  accordingly,
civil  war,  attended  by  that  gaunt  sisterhood,  murder,
pestilence,  and  famine,  had  swept  from  the  soil  almost
oA'erything  that  makes  life  valuable.  It  had  not  brought
in  its  train  that  extraordinary  material  prosperity  and
intellectual  development  at  which  men  wondered  in  the
Netherlands,  and  to  which  allusion  has  just  been  made.
But  a  fortunate  conjunction  of  circumstances  had  now
placed  Henry  of  Navarre  in  a  position  of  vantage.  He
lepresented  the  principle  of  nationality,  of  French  unity.

Id90.  claims  of  henry  OF  NAVARRE.  4o

It  was  impossible  to  deny  that  lie  was  in  the  regular  line
of  succession,  now  that  luckless  Ileniy  of  Valois  slept
with  his  fathers,  and  the  principle  of  nationality  might
perhaps  prove  as  vital  a  force  as  attachment  to  the  Roman
Church.  Moreover,  the  adroit  and  unscrupuhnis  Bear-
nese  knew  well  how  to  shift  the  mantle  of  religion  from
one  shoulder  to  the  other,  to  serve  his  purposes  or  the
humours  of  those  whom  he  addressed.

''  The  King  of  Spain  would  exclude  me  from  the  king-
dom and  heritage  of  my  father  because  of  my  religion,"
he  said  to  the  Duke  of  Saxony ;  "but  in  that  religion  I
am  determined  to  persist  so  long  as  I  shall  live.^'  ^  The  hand
was  the  hand  of  Henry,  but  it  was  the  voice  of  Duplessis
Morna}'.

"  Were  there  thirty  crowns  to  win,"  said  he,  at  about
the  same  time  to  the  Sta'es  of  France,  "  Iwoiild  not  change
my  religion  on  compulsion,  the  dagger  at  my  throat.  In-
struct me,  instruct  me,  I  am  not  obstinate.''''  ^  There  spoke
the  wily  fiee-thinker,  determined  not  to  be  juggled  out
of  w^hat  he  considered  his  property  by  fanatics  or  priests
of  either  church.  Had  Henry  been  a  real  devotee,
the  fate  of  Christendom  might  have  been  different.  The
world  has  long  known  how  much  misery  it  is  in  the
power  of  crowned  bigots  to  inflict.

On  the  other  hand,  the  Holy  League,  the  sacred  Con-
federacy, was  catholic  or  nothing.  Already  it  was  more
papist  than  the  pope,  and  loudly  denounced  Sixtus  Y.
as  a  Huguenot  because  he  vpas  thought  to  entertain  a
weak  admiration  both  for  Henry  the  heretic  and  for  the
Jezebel  of  England.

But  the  holy  confederacy  vp-as  bent  on  destroying
the  national  government  of  France,  and  dismember-
ing the  national  domain.  To  do  this  the  pretext  of
trampling  out  heresy  and  indefinitely  extending  the
power  of  Eome,  was  most  influential  with  the  multi-
tude, and  entitled  the  leaders  to  enjoy  immense  power
for  the  time  being,  while  maturing  their  schemes  for
acquiring  permanent  possession  of  large  fragments  of
the  national  territory.  Mayenne,  Nemours,  Aumale,
Mercoeur longed to convert temporary governments

*  Lettre  du  Eoy au Due de Saxe, 3  Lettre du Roy de Navarre aux
dressee  par  Duplessis. Mem.  and  Cor- etats  de  ce  royaume. Ibid.  322,  s.tq(i.
resp.  de  Duplessis  Jlornay,  iv,  491.

44  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIII

into  independent  principalities.  The  Duke  of  Lorraine
looked  with  longing  eyes  on  Verdun,  Sedan,  and  the
other  fair  cities  within  the  territories  contiguous  to
his  own  domains.  The  reckless  house  of  Savoy,  with
whom  freebooting  and  land-robbery  seemed  geographi-
cal and  hereditary  necessities,  was  busy  on  the  southern
borders,  while  it  seemed  easy  enough  for  Philip  II.,  in
right  of  his  daughter,  to  secure  at  least  the  duchy  of
Brittany  before  enteiing  on  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole
kingdom.

To  the  eyes  of  the  world  at  large  France  might  well
seem  in  a  condition  of  hopeless  disintegration  ;  the
restoration  of  its  unity  and  former  position  among
the  nations,  under  the  government  of  a  single  chief,  a
weak  and  wicked  dream.  Furious  and  incessant  were
the  anathemas  hurled  on  the  head  of  the  Beamese  for
his  persistence  in  drowning  the  land  in  blood  in  the  hope
of  recovering  a  national  capital  which  never  could  be
his,  and  of  wresting  from  the  control  of  the  confederacy
that  power  which,  whether  usurped  or  rightful,  was
considered,  at  least  by  the  peaceably  inclined,  to  have
become  a  solid  fact.

The  poor  puppet  locked  in  the  tower  of  Fontenay,  and
entitled  Charles  X.,  deceived  and  scared  no  one.  Such
money  as  there  was  might  be  coined  in  its  name,  but
Madam  League  reigned  supreme  in  Paris.  The  con-
federates, inspired  by  the  eloquence  of  a  cardinal  legate,
and  supplied  with  funds  by  the  faithful,  were  ready  to
dare  a  thousand  deaths  rather  than  submit  to  the  rule  of
a  tyrant  and  heretic.

What  was  an  authority  derived  from  the  laws  of  the
land  and  the  history  of  the  race  compared  with  the  dogmas
of  Rome  and  the  trained  veterans  of  Spain  ?  It  remained
to  be  seen  whether  nationality  or  bigotry  would  triumph.
But  in  the  early  days  of  1590  the  prospects  of  nationality
were  not  encouraging.

Fran9ois  de  Luxembourg,  due  de  Pincey,  was  in  Eome
at  that  moment,  deputed  by  such  catholic  nobles  of  France
as  were  friendly  to  Henry  of  Navarre.*  Sixtus  might
perhaps  be  influenced  as  to  the  degree  of  respect  to  be
accorded  to  the  envoy's  representations  by  the  events
of  the  campaign  about  to  open. Meantime  the  legate

<  De  Tliou,  xi.  97,  pp.  100-103.

1590.  POWER  OF  THE  LEAGUE  IN  PARIS.  45

Gaetano,  young,  rich,  eloquent,  unscrupulous,  distin-
guished alike  for  the  splendour  of  his  house  and  the
brilliancy  of  his  intellect,  had  arrived  in  Paris.°

Followed  by  a  great  train  of  adherents  he  had  gone
down  to  the  House  of  Parliament,  and  was  about  to  seat
himself  under  the  dais  reserved  for  the  king,  when
Brisson,  first  President  of  Parliament,  plucked  him  back
by  the  arm,  and  caused  him  to  take  a  seat  immediately
below  his  own.''

Deeply  was  the  bold  president  to  expiate  this  defence
of  king  and  law  against  the  Holy  League.  For  the
moment  however  the  legate  contented  himself  with  a
long  harangue,  setting  forth  the  power  of  Home,  while
Brisson  replied  by  an  oration  magnifying  the  grandeur
of  France.

Soon  afterwards  the  cardinal  addressed  himself  to  the
counteraction  of  Henry's  projects  of  conversion.  For
well  did  the  subtle  priest  understand  that  in  purging
himself  of  heresy,  the  Bearnese  was  about  to  cut  the
ground  from  beneath  his  enemies'  feet.  In  a  letter  to
the  archbishops  and  bishops  of  Fi-ance  he  argued  the
matter  at  length.  Especially  he  denied  the  necessity
or  the  legality  of  an  assembly  of  all  the  prelates  of
France,  such  as  Henry  desired  to  afford  him  the  requisite
"  instruction  "  as  to  the  respective  merits  of  the  Koman
and  the  reformed  Church.  Certainl}^,  he  urged,  the
Prince  of  Bearne  could  hardly  require  instruction  as
to  the  tenets  of  either,  seeing  that  at  different  times  he
had  faithfully  professed  both.''

But  while  benches  of  bishops  and  doctors  of  the  Sor-
bonne  were  burnishing  all  the  arms  in  ecclesiastical  and
legal  arsenals  for  the  approaching  fray,  the  sound  of
louder  if  not  more  potent  artillery  began  to  be  heard  in
the  vicinity  of  Paris.  The  candid  Henry,  while  seeking
ghostly  instruction  with  eagerness  from  his  papistical
patrons,  was  equally  persevering  in  applying  for  the
assistance  of  heretic  musketeers  and  riders  from  his
protestant  friends  in  England,  Holland,  Germany,  and
Switzerland.

Queen  Elizabeth  and  the  States-General  vied  M'ith
each  other  in  generosity  to  the  great  champion  of  pro-

5  Dondinl. De  rebus  in  Gallia  gestis  ab  Alexandre  Farnesio,  i.  131.

6  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  p.  108  ^  Ibid.

46  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap,  XXIII.

testantism,  who  was  combating  the  Holy  League  so
valiantly,  and  rarely  has  a  great  historical  figure  pre-
sented itself  to  the  world  so  bizarre  of  aspect,  and  under
such  shifting  perplexity  of  light  and  shade,  as  did  the
Bearnese  in  the  early  spring  of  1590.

The  hope  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  catholic
nobility  of  his  realm,  although  himself  an  excommuni-
cated heretic  ;  the  mainstay  of  Calvinism  while  secretly
bending  all  his  energies  to  effect  his  reconciliation  with
the  pope  ;  the  idol  of  the  austere  and  grimly  puritanical,
while  himself  a  model  of  profligacy ;  the  leader  of  the
earnest  and  the  true,  although  false  as  water  himself  in
every  relation  in  which  human  beings  can  stand  to  each
other ;  a  standard-bearer  of  both  great  branches  of  the
Christian  Church  in  an  age  when  religion  was  the  atmo-
sphere of  men's  daily  lives,  yet  finding  his  sincerest
admirer,  and  one  of  his  most  faithful  allies,  in  the  Grand
Turk,^  the  representative  of  national  liberty  and  human
rights  against  regal  and  sacerdotal  absolutism,  while
himself  a  remorseless  despot  by  nature  and  education,
and  a  believer  in  no  rights  of  the  people  save  in  their
privilege  to  be  ruled  by  himself,  it  seems  strange  at
first  view  that  Henry  of  Navarre  should  have  been  for
centuries  so  heroic  and  popular  an  image.  But  he  was
a  soldier,  a  wit,  a  consummate  politician  ;  above  all,  he
was  a  man,  at  a  period  when  to  be  a  king  was  often  to
be  something  much  less  or  much  worse.

To  those  accustomed  to  weigh  and  analyse  popular
forces  it  might  well  seem  that  he  was  now  playing  an
utterly  hopeless  game. His  capital  garrisoned  by  the

8  A  portion  of  the  magnificently  pro-  qu'ayant  en  horreur  cette  cause  qui  ne  tend

tective letter of Sultan Amurath, in  qu'au  profit  particulier  de ccux  qui  se

which  he  complimented  Henry  on  his  sont  eleves  centre  toi,  je  veux  prendre

religious  stedfastness,  might  almost  have  ta protection et  tellemcnt  dompter  la

made  the  king's  cheek  tingle.  folie  de  tes  ennemis  et  de  I'Espagnol  qui

" ....  "a  toi,  Henri  de  Navarre  de  t'occupe  injustemeut  le  royaume  de  Na-

la  race invincible  des Bourbons, nous  varre,  qu'il  en  sera  memoire  a  jamais,  et

avons  entendu  que  Lon  Philippe,  de la  te  rendant  victorieux,  je  veux  te  retablir

maison  d'Autriche,  favorisant  aucuns  de  avec  ma  puissance  redoutable  par  tout

tes  ennemis, tache  de  te priver  de  la  le  mend-  au  grand epouvantement  de

succession  legitime  qui  t'appartient  au  tons  las  rovs.  avant  moyen  de  les  reduire

royaume  de France qui est de notre  en  telle extremite quils  ne  te feront

alliance  et  confederation  en  haine  de  ce  jamais  ennui."  Arch,  de  Simancas  (Paris)

que  tu  dete.'ftes  Us  faux  iervicesdfx  iddles,  17

t/es deplauantes  au  grand  Dieu,  pour  ^-  ^^~- ^^^'^'^  ^y  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la

tenir  puremeiit  ce  que  tu  tiens  qui  ett  le  Peforme,  de  la  Ligue  et  du  rfegne  de

meilUur  du  monde ;  Je te  fais  assavoir  Henri  IV.  v.  361.

1590. RELATIVE  POWER  OF  PHILIP  AND  HEI'RY.  47

Pope  and  the  King  of  Spain,  with  its  grandees  and  its
populace  scoffing  at  his  pretence  of  authority  and  loath-
ing his  name  ;  with  an  exchequer  consisting  of  what  he
could  beg  or  borrow  from  Queen  Elizabeth — most  parsi-
monious of  sovereigns  reigning  over  the  half  of  a  small
island — and  from  the  States-General  governing  a  half-
born,  half-drowned  little  republic,  engaged  in  a  quarter
of  a  century's  warfare  with  the  greatest  monarch  in  the
world ;  with  a  wardrobe  consisting  of  a  dozen  shirts  and
five  pocket-handkerchiefs,'-'  most  of  them  ragged,  and
with  a  commissariat  made  up  of  what  could  be  brought
in  the  saddle-bags  of  his  Huguenot  cavaliers,  who  came
to  the  charge  with  him  to-day,  and  to-morrow  were
dispersed  again  to  their  mountain  fastnesses;  it  did  not
seem  likely  on  any  reasonable  theory  of  dynamics  that
the  power  of  the  Bearnese  was  capable  of  outweighing
Pope  and  Spain,  and  the  meaner  but  massive  populace
of  France,  and  the  Sorbonne,  and  the  great  chiefs  of  the
confederacy,  wealthy,  long  descended,  allied  to  all  the
sovereigns  of  Christendom,  potent  in  territorial  posses-
sions and  skilful  in  wielding  political  influences.

"  The  Bearnese  is  poor,  but  a  gentleman  of  good
family,"  ^°  said  the  cheerful  Henry,  and  it  remained  to
be  seen  whether  nationality,  unity,  legitimate  authority,
history,  and  law  would  be  able  to  neutralize  the  powerful
combination  of  opposing  elements.

The  king  had  been  besieging  Dreux  and  had  made
good  progress  in  reducing  the  outposts  of  the  city.  As
it  was  known  that  he  was  expecting  considerable  rein-
forcements of  English  ships,  K  etherlanders,  and  Germans,
the  chiefs  of  the  league  issued  orders  from  Paris  for  an
attack  before  he  should  thus  be  strengthened.

For  Parma,  unwillingly  obeying  the  stringent  com-
mands of  his  master,  had  sent  from  Flanders  eighteen
hundred  picked  cavalry  under  Count  Philip  Egmont  to
join  the  army  of  Mayeune.  This  force  comprised  five
hundred  Belgian  heavy  dragoons  under  the  chief  nobles
of  the  land,  together  with  a  selection,  in  even  pro-
portions, of  Walloon,  German,  Spanish,  and  Italian
troopers.

Mayenne  accordingly  crossed  the  Seine  at  Mantes
with an  army of ten thousand foot, and, ir  c]  uding

»  L'Estoile,  p.  203.  i»  Ibid.

48  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIII,

Egmont's  contingent,  about  four  thousand  horse.  A
force  under  Marshal  d'Aumont,  which  lay  in  Ivry  at  the
passage  of  the  Eure,  fell  back  on  his  approach,  and
ioined  the  remainder  of  the  king's  army.  The  siege  of
*Dreux  was  abandoned,  and  Henry  withdrew  to  the
neighbourhood  of  Nonancourt.  It  was  obvious  that  the
duke  meant  to  offer  battle,  and  it  was  rare  that  the  king
under  any  circumstances  could  be  induced  to  decline  a
combat."

On  the  night  of  the  12th-]  3th  March,  Henry  occupied
Saint  Andre,  a  village  situated  on  an  elevated  and
extensive  plain  four  leagues  from  Nonancourt,  in  the
direction  of  Ivry,  fringed  on  three  sides  by  villages  and
by  a  wood,  and  commanding  a  view  of  all  the  approaches
from  the  country  between  the  Seine  and  Eure.  It
would  have  been  better  had  Mayenne  been  beforehand
with  him,  as  the  sequel  proved ;  but  the  Duke  was  not
famed  for  the  rapidity  of  his  movements.  During  the
greater  part  of  the  night,  Henry  was  employed  in
distributing  his  orders  for  that  conflict  which  was
inevitable  on  the  following  day.  His  army  was  drawn
up  according  to  a  plan  jjrepared  by  himself,  and  sub-
mitted to  the  most  experienced  of  his  generals  for  their
approval.  He  then  personally  visited  every  portion  of
the  encampment,  speaking  words  of  encouragement  to
his  soldiers,  and  perfecting  his  arrangements  for  the
coming  conflict.  Attended  by  Marshals  D'Aumont  and
Biron  he  remained  on  horseback  during  a  portion  of  the
night,  having  ordered  his  ofGcers  to  their  tents  and
reconnoitred  as  well  as  he  could  the  position  of  the
enemy.  Towards  morning  he  retired  to  his  head-
quarters at  Fourainville,  where  he  threw  himself  half
dressed  on  his  truckle  bed,  and  although  the  night  was
bitterly  cold,  with  no  covering  but  his  cloak.  He  was
startled  from  his  slumber  before  the  dawn  by  a  move-
ment of  lights  in  the  enemy's  camp,  and  he  sprang  fo
his  feet  supposing  that  the  duke  was  stealing  a  march
upon  him  despite  all  his  precautions.  The  alarm  proved
to  be  a  false  one,  but  Henry  lost  no  time  in  ordering
his  battle.  His  cavalry  he  divided  in  seven  troops  or
squadrons. The  first,  forming  the  left  wing,  was  a  body

n  De  Thou,  t.  xi.  lib.  97,  pp.  116,  seqq. Coloraa,  Guerras  de  los  EsUidos  Baxos,
ii.  43,  seqq. Pamia  to  Philip,  24  March,  1590,  (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

1590.  PREPARATION  FOR  ACTION.  49

of  three  Inindved  under  Marshal  d'Aumont,  supported
by  two  regiments  of  French  infantry.  Next,  separated
by  a  short  interval,  was  another  troop  of  three  hundred
under  the  Duke  of  Montpensier,  suj^ported  by  two  other
regiments  of  foot,  one  Swiss  and  one  German.  In  front
of  Montpensier  was  Baron  Biron  the  younger,  at  the
head  of  still  another  body  of  three  hundred.  Two
troops  of  cuirassiers,  each  four  hundred  strong,  were  on
Biron's  left,  the  one  commanded  by  the  Grand  Prior  of
France,  Charles  d'Angouleme,  the  other  by  Monsieur  de
Givry.  Between  the  Prior  and  Givry  were  six  pieces
of  heavy  artilleiy,  while  the  battalia,  formed  of  eight
hundred  horse  in  six  squadrons,  was  commanded  by  the
king  in  person,  and  covered  on  both  sides  by  English
and  Swiss  infantry,  amounting  to  some  four  thousand
in  all.  The  right  wing  was  under  the  charge  of  old
Marshal  Biron,  and  comprised  three  troops  of  horse,
numbering  one  hundred  aud  fifty  each,  two  companies  of
German  riders,  and  four  regiments  of  French  infantry.
These  numbers,  which  are  probably  given  with  as  much
accuracy  as  can  be  obtained,  show  a  force  of  about  three
thousand  horse  and  twelve  thousand  foot.

The  Duke  of  Mayenne,  seeing  too  late  the  advantage
of  position  which  he  might  have  easily  secured  the  day
before,  led  his  army  forth  with  the  early  light,  and
arranged  it  in  an  order  not  very  different  from  that
adopted  by  the  king,  and  within  cannon-shot  of  his
lines.  The  right  wing  under  Marshal  de  la  Chatre
consisted  of  three  regiments  of  French  and  one  of
Germans,  supporting  three  regiments  of  Spanish  lanceis,
two  coi'nets  of  German  riders  tinder  the  Bastard  of
Brunswick,  and  four  hundred  cuirassiers.  The  battalia,
which  was  composed  of  six  hundred  splendid  cavalry,
all  noblemen  of  France,  guarding  the  white  banner  of
the  Holy  League,  and  supported  by  a  column  of  three
thousand  Swiss  and  two  thousand  French  infantry,  was
commanded  by  Mayenne  in  person,  assisted  by  his  half-
brother,  the  Duke  of  Nemours.  In  front  of  the  infantry
was  a  battery  of  six  cannon  and  three  culveiines.  The
left  wing  was  commanded  by  Marshal  de  Bene,  with  six
regiments  of  French  and  Lorrainers,  two  thousand
Germans,  six  hundred  French  cuirassiers,  and  the
mounted troopers  of  Count  Egmont. It is probable

VOL. III.  E

50  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXIII.

that  Mayenne's  whole  force,  therefore,  amotinted  to
nearly  four  thousand  -cavahy  and  at  least  thirteen
thousand  foot.^"

Very  different  was  the  respective  appearance  of  the
two  armies,  so  far,  especially,  as  regarded  the  horsemen
on  both  sides.  Gay  in  their  gilded  armour  and  waving
plumes,  with  silken  scarves  across  their  shoulders,  and
the  fluttering  favours  of  fair  ladies  on  their  arms  or
in  their  helmets,  tht,  brilliant  champions  of  the  Holy
Catholic  Confederacy  clustered  around  the  chieftains  of
the  great  house  of  Guise,  impatient  for  the  conflict.  It
was  like  a  muster  for  a  brilliant  and  chivalrous  tourna-
ment. The  Walloon  and  Flemish  nobles  outrivalling
even  the  self-confidence  of  their  companions  in  arms,
taunted  them  with  their  slowness.  The  impetuous
Egmont,  burning  to  eclipse  the  fame  of  his  ill-fated
father  at  Gravelines  and  St.  Quintin  in  the  same  holy
cause,  urged  on  the  battle  with  unseemly  haste,  loudly
proclaiming  that  if  the  French  were  faint-hearted  he
would  himself  giVe  a  good  account  of  the  Navarrese
prince  without  any  assistance  from  them.^^

A  cannon-shot  away,  the  grim  puritan  nobles  who
had  come  forth  from  their  mountain  fastnesses  to  do
battle  for  king  and  law  and  for  the  rights  of  conscience
against  the  Holy  League— men  seasoned  in  a  hundred
battle-fields,  clad  all  in  iron,  with  no  dainty  ornaments
nor  holiday  luxury  of  warfare — knelt  on  the  ground,
smiting  their  mailed  breasts  with  iron  hands,  invoking
blessings  on  themselves  and  curses  and  confusion  on
their  enemies  in  the  coming  conflict,  and  chanting  a
stern  psalm  of  homage  to  the  God  of  battles  and  of
wrath.  And  Henry  of  France  and  Navarre,  descendant
of  Lewis  the  Holy  and  of  Hugh  the  Great,  beloved
chief  of  the  Calvinist  cavaliers,  knelt  among  his  heretic
brethren,  and  prayed  and  chanted  with  them.  But  not
the  staunchest  Huguenot  of  them  all,  not  Duplessis,  nor
D'Aubigue,  nor  De  la  Noue  with  the  iron  arm,  was
more  devoted  on  that  day  to  crown  and  coimtry  than
were  such  papist  supporters  of  the  rightful  heir  as  had
sworn  to  conquer  the  insolent  foreigner  on  the  soil  of
France  or  die.

«  De  Thou,  Coloma,  M6t«iy3.  Dondini,  i.  UO,  seqq.  Meteren,  xvi,  292.  Parm.Vs
letters  before  cited.  n  jjg  xhuu,  ubi  sup.

1590.  THE  BATTLE  OF  IVRY.  51

When  this  brief  prehide  was  over,  Henry  made  an
address  to  his  soldiers,  but  its  language  has  not  been
preserved.  It  is  known,  however,  that  he  wore  that
day  his  famous  snow-white  plume,  and  that  he  ordered
his  soldiers,  should  his  banner  go  down  in  the  conflict,
to  follow  wherever  and  as  long  as  that  plume  should  be
seen  waving  on  SiXiy  part  of  the  field.  He  had  taken  a
position  by  which  his  troops  had  the  sun  and  wind  in
their  backs,  so  that  the  smoke  rolled  toward  the  enemy
and  the  light  shone  in  their  eyes.  The  combat  began
with  the  play  of  artillery,  which  soon  became  so  warm
tliat  Egmont,  whose  cavalry — suffering  and  galled —
soon  became  impatient,  ordered  a  charge.  It  was  a
most  brilliant  one.  The  heavy  troopers  of  Flanders
and  Hainault,  following  their  spirited  chieftain,  dashed
upon  old  Marshal  Biron,  routing  his  cavalry,  charging
clean  up  to  the  Huguenot  guns  and  sabring  the  can-
noneers. The  shock  was  square,  solid,  irresistible,  and
was  followed  up  by  the  German  riders  under  Eric  of
Brunswick,  who  charged  upon  the  battalia  of  the  royal
army,  where  the  king  commanded  in  person.

There  was  a  panic.  The  whole  royal  cavalr}'  wavered,
the  supporting  infantry  recoiled,  the  day  seemed  lost
before  the  battle  was  well  begun.  Yells  of  "  Victory  !
VictorjM  up  with  the  Holy  League,  down  with  the
heretic  Bearnese,"  resounded  through  the  Catholic
squadrons.  The  king  and  Marshal  Biron,  who  were
near  each  other,  were  furious  with  rage,  but  already
doubtful  of  the  result.  They  exerted  themselves  to
rally  the  troops  under  their  immediate  command,  and  to
reform  the  shattered  ranks."

The  German  riders  and  French  lancers  under  Brims-
wick  and  Bassompierre  had,  however,  not  done  their
work  as  thoroughl}^  as  Egmont  had  done.  The  ground
was  so  miry  and  soft  that  in  the  brief  space  which
separated  the  hostile  lines  they  had  not  power  to  urge
their  horses  to  full  speed.  Throwing  away  their  useless
lances,  they  came  on  at  a  feeble  canter,  sword  in  hand,
and  were  unable  to  make  a  very  vigorous  impression  on
the  more  heavily  armed  troopers  opposed  to  them.
Meeting  with  a  firm  resistance  to  their  career,  they
wheeled, faltered a little and fell a short distance

'♦  De  Thou,  Dondini,  Coloma,  Metereii,  ubi  sup.

E 2

52  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. CiiAP.  XXIII,

back."  J\lany  of  the  riders  being  of  the  reformed  re-
li<'-ion,  refused  moreover  to  fire  lapon  the  Huguenots,
and  discharged  their  carbines  in  the  air.^®

The  king,  whose  glance  on  the  battle-field  was  like
inspiration,  saw  the  blot,  and  charged  upon  them  iu
person  with  his  whole  battalia  of  cavalry.  The  veteran
Biron  followed  hard  upon  the  snow-white  plume.  The
scene  was  changed,  victory  succeeded  to  impending
defeat,  and  the  enemy  was  routed.  The  riders  and
cuirassiers,  broken  into  a  struggling  heap  of  confusion,
strewed  the  ground  with  their  dead  bodies,  or  carried
dismay  into  the  ranks  of  the  infantry  as  they  strove  to
escape.  Brunswick  went  down  in  the  inelee,  mortally
wounded  as  it  was  believed.  Egmont,  renewing  the
charge  at  the  head  of  his  victorious  Belgian  troopers,
fell  dead  with  a  musket-ball  through  his  heart.  The
shattered  Gennan  and  A\'alloon  cavalry,  now  pricked
forward  by  the  lances  of  their  companions,  under  the
passionate  commands  of  Mayenne  and  Aumale,  now
falling  back  before  the  furious  charges  of  the  Huguenots,
were  completely  overthrown  and  cut  to  pieces.  Seven
times  did  Henry  of  Navarre  in  person  lead  his  troopers
to  the  charge ;  but  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  din  of
battle  and  the  cheers  of  victory,  a  message  of  despair
went  from  lip  to  lip  throughout  the  royal  lines.  The
king  had  disappeared.  He  was  killed,  and  the  hopes  of
Piotestantism  and  of  France  were  fallen  for  ever  with
him.  The  white  standard  of  his  battalia  had  been  seen
floating  wildly  and  purposelessly  over  the  field ;  for  his
bannerman.  Pot  de  lihodes,  a  young  noble  of  Dauphiny,
wounded  mortally  in  the  head,  with  blood  streaming
over  his  face  and  blinding  his  sight,  was  utterly  unable
to  control  his  horse,  who  galloped  hither  and  thither  at
his  own  caprice,  misleading  many  troopers  who  followed
in  his  erratic  career. A  cavalier,  armed  in  proof,  and

IS  William  Lyly  to  Sir  F.  Walsingham.  the  whole  army  of  the  League  displayetl
20  March,  1590  (S.  P.  Office  MS.),  a  the  same  remarkable  valour  as  was  mani-
blunt,  plain-spolren  Englishman  and  eye-  fested  by  Egmont's  command.  The  right
witness,  writing  from  the  spot.  Memoires  of  the  royal  cavalry  broke  into  a  panic
de  Sully,  cd.  Londrcs,  1747,  iii.  L.  163,  flight,  after  the  hand  to  hand  combat  had
169.  The  Due  de  Sully,  who  fought  in  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  the  left
the  squadron  which  sustained  Egmont's  was  broken  and  thrown  into  utter  con-
first  onset,  and  who  received  seven  fusion.
wounds,  states  expressly  that  the  king  w  .Sully,  ubi  sup.
would  have  been  hopelessly  defeated,  had

1590.  VICTORY  OF  HENRY  OVER  THE  LEAGUE.  53

wearing  tlie  famous  suow-white  plume,  after  a  hand  to
hand  struggle  with  a  veteran  of  f 'ount  Bossu's  regiment,
was  seen  to  fall  dead  by  the  side  of  the  hannerman.
The  Fleming,  not  used  to  boast,  loudly  asserted  that  he
had  slain  the  Bearnese,  and  the  news  spread  rapidly
over  the  battlefield.  The  defeated  Confederates  gained
new  courage,  the  victorious  royalists  were  beginning  to
waver,  when  suddenly,  between  the  hostile  lines,  in  the
very  midst  of  the  battle,  the  king  galloped  forward,
bareheaded,  covered  with  blood  and  dust,  but  entirely
unhurt.  A  wild  shout  of  "  Vive  le  JRoi  !  "  rang  through
the  air.  Cheerful  as  ever,  he  addressed  a  few  encou-
raging words  to  his  soldiers,  with  a  smiling  face,  and
again  led  a  charge.  It  was  all  that  was  necessary  to
complete  the  victory.  'Ilie  enemy  broke  and  ran  away
on  eveiy  side  in  wildest  confusion,  followed  by  the
royalist  cavalry,  who  sabred  them  as  they  fled.  The
panic  gained  the  foot-soldiers,  who  should  have  sup-
ported the  cavalry,  but  had  not  been  at  all  engaged  in
the  action.  The  French  infantry  threw  away  their
arms  as  they  rushed  from  the  field  and  sought  refuge
in  the  woods.  The  Walloons  were  so  expeditious  in
the  race,  that  they  never  stopped  till  they  gained  their
own  frontier."  The  day  was  hopelessly  lost,  and
although  Mayenne  had  conducted  himself  well  in  the
early  part  of  the  day,  it  was  certain  that  he  was  excelled
by  none  in  the  celerity  of  his  flight  when  the  rout  had
fairly  begun.  Pausing  to  draw  breath  as  he  gained  the
wood,  he  was  seen  to  deal  blows  with  his  own  sword
among  the  mob  of  fugitives,  not  that  he  might  rally
them  to  their  flag  and  drive  them  back  to  another  en-
counter, but  because  they  encumbered  his  own  retreat.^**
The  Walloon  carbineers,  the  German  riders,  and  the
French  lancers,  disputing  as  to  the  relative  blame  to  be
attached  to  each  corps,  began  shooting  and  sabring  each
other,  almost  before  they  were  out  of  the  enemy's  sight.

1'  Lyly's letter before cited. Com-  ran  away,  Mayenne  to  Ivry,  where  the

pare  Coloma,  Dondini,  de  Thou,  Meteren,  Walloons  and  Reitel's  followed  so  fast,

ubi  sup.  that there standing, hasting to draw

M  Decorous  Chroniclers like Dondini  breath,  and  not  able  to  speak,  he  was

(i.  143)  and  others,  represent  the  duke  as  constrained  to  draw  his  sword  to  strike

vigorously rallying and rebuking the  the  flyers to  malce jjluce  for  his  own

fugitives;  but,  says  honest  William  Lyly,  fliglit." (MS.  letter  before  cited.)
telling  what  he  saw: "The  enemy  thus

0-i  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXHI.

Many  were  thus  killed.  The  lansquenets  were  all  put
to  the  sword.  The  Swiss  infantry  were  allowed  to
depart  to  their  own  country  on  pledging  themselves  not
again  to  bear  anns  against  Henry  IV.  It  is  probable
that  eight  himdred  of  the  leaguers  were  either  killed  on
the  battle-field  or  drowned  in  the  swollen  river  in  their
retreat.  About  one-fourth  of  that  number  fell  in  the
army  of  the  king.  Tt  is  certain  that  of  the  contingent
from  the  obedient  Netherlands,  two  hundred  and  seventy,
including  their  distinguished  general,  lost  their  lives. ^^
The  Bastard  of  Brunswick,  crawling  from  beneath  a
heap  of  slain,  escaped  with  life.^"  Mayenne  lost  all  his
standards  and  all  the  baggage  of  his  army,  while  the
army  itself  was  for  a  time  hopelessly  dissolved.^^

Few  cavalry  actions  have  attained  a  wider  celebrity
in  history  than  the  fight  of  Ivry.  Yet  there  have  been
many  hard-fought  battles,  where  the  struggle  was  fiercer
and  closer,  where  the  issue  was  for  a  longer  time  doubtful,
where  far  more  lives  on  either  side  were  lost,  where  the
final  victory  was  immediately  productive  of  very  much
greater  results,  and  which,  nevertheless,  have  sunk  into
hopeless  oblivion.  The  personal  details  which  remain
concerning  the  part  enacted  by  the  adventurous  king
at  this  most  critical  period  of  his  career,  the  romantic
interest  which  must  always  gather  about  that  ready-
witted,  ready-sworded  Gascon,  at  the  moment  when,  to
contemporaries,  the  result  of  all  his  struggles  seemed  so
hopeless  or  at  best  so  doubtful ;  above  all,  the  numerous
royal  and  princely  names  which  embellished  the  roll-call
of  that  famous  passage  of  arms,  and  which  were  supposed,
in  those  days  at  least,  to  add  such  lustre  to  a  battle-field,
as  humbler  names,  however  illustrious  by  valour  or
virtue,  could  never  bestow,  have  made  this  combat  for
ever  famous.

Yet  it  is  certain  that  the  most  healthy  moral,  in
military  affairs,  to  be  derived  from  the  event,  is  that  the
importance  of  a  victory  depends  less  upon  itself  than  on
the  use  to  be  made  of  it.  Mayenne  fled  to  Mantes,  the
Duke  of  Nemours  to  Chartres,  other  leaders  of  the  League

'9  De  Thou  says  eight  hundred,  Don-  "«  So  says  Dondmi,  i.  149.  Coloma  says

(llni four  hundred,  but  Farnese  in his  he  was  killed.

letter  to  the  Itiug  says  two  hundred  and  21  Dondini,  De  Thou,  Coloma,  Meteren,

sfiventy.  Parmas  letters,  Lyly's  letter.

1590.  VICTORY  OF  HENRY  OVER  THE  LEAGUE.  55

in  varioiis  directions.  Mayenne  told  everybody  he  met
that  the  Bearnese  was  killed,  and  that  although  his  own
army  was  defeated,  he  should  soon  have  another  one  on
foot.  The  same  intelligence  was  communicated  to  the
Duke  of  Parma,  and  by  him  to  Philip.  Mendoza  and
the  other  Spanish  agents  went  about  Paris  spreading  the
news  of  Henry's  death,  but  the  fact  seemed  woefully  to
lack  confirmation,  while  the  proofs  of  the  utter  overthrow
and  shameful  defeat  of  the  Leaguers  were  visible  on
every  side.  The  Parisians — many  of  whom  the  year
before  had  in  vain  hired  windows  in  the  principal
streets,  in  order  to  witness  the  promised  entrance  of  the
Bearnese,  bound  hand  and  foot,  and  with  a  gag  in  his
mouth,^"  to  swell  the  triumph  of  Madam  League — were
incredulous  as  to  the  death  now  reported  to  them  of
this  very  lively  heretic,  by  those  who  had  fled  so
igTiominiously  from  his  troopers.

De  la  Noue  and  the  other  Huguenot  chieftains  earnestly
urged  upon  Henry  the  importance  of  advancing  upon
Paris  without  an  instant's  delay,  and  it  seems  at  least
extremely  probable  that,  had  he  done  so,  the  capital
would  have  fallen  at  once  into  his  hands.  It  is  the
concuirent  testimony  of  contemporaries  that  the  panic,
the  destitution,  the  confusion  would  have  made  resistance
impossible  had  a  determined  onslaught  been  made.^
And  Henry  had  a  couple  of  thousand  horsemen,  flushed
with  victory,  and  a  dozen  thousand  foot  who  had  been
compelled  to  look  upon  a  triumph  in  which  they  had  no
opportunity  of  sharing.  Success  and  emulation  would
have  easily  triumphed  over  dissension  and  despair.

But  the  king,  yielding  to  the  councils  of  Biron  and
other  catholics,  declined  attacking  the  capital,  and  prefer-
red waiting  the  slow,  and  in  his  circumstances  eminently
hazardous,  operations  of  a  regular  siege.  Was  it  the  fear
of  giving  a  signal  triumph  to  the  cause  of  protestantism
that  caused  the  Huguenot  leader — so  soon  to  become  a
renegade — to  pause  in  his  career?  Was  it  anxiety  lest
his  victorious  entrance  into  Paris  might  undo  the
diplomacy  of  his  catholic  envoys  at  Eome?  or  was  it
simply  tlie  mutinous  condition  of  his  army,  especially
of  the  Swiss  mercenaries,  who refused to advance a

--  L'Kstoile  Reg.  Journal  de  Hfnii  IV.  p.  6.

^  J)ondini,  Coloma,  ubi  sup Compare  De  Thou,  Meteren,  Sully,  et  mult.  al.

o6  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIII.

step  unless  their  arrears  of  pay  were  at  once  furnished
them  out  of  the  utterly  empty  exchequer  of  the  king  ?  ^^
'Whatever  may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  delay,  it  is
certain  that  the  golden  fruit  of  victory  was  not  plucked,
and  that  although  the  confederate  anny  had  rapidly
dissolved,  in  consequence  of  their  defeat,  the  king's  own
forces  manifested  as  little  cohesion.

And  now  began  that  slow  and  painful  siege,  the
details  of  which  are  as  terrible,  but  as  universally  known,
as  those  of  any  chapters  in  the  blood-stained  history  of
the  century.  Henry  seized  upon  the  towns  guarding  the
rivers  Seine  and  Marne,  twin  nurses  of  Paris.  By
controlling  the  course  of  those  streams  as  well  as  that  of
the  Yonne  and  Oise — especially  by  taking  firm  possession
of  Lagny  on  the  Marne,  whence  a  bridge  led  from  the
Isle  of  France  to  the  Brie  country — great  thoroughfare
of  wine  and  corn — and  of  Corbeil  at  the  junction  of  the
little  river  Essonne  with  the  Seine — it  was  easy  in  that
age  to  stop  the  vital  circulation  of  the  imperial  city.

By  midsummer,  Paris,  unquestionably  the  first  city  of
Europe  at  that  day,-^  was  in  extremities,  and  there  are
few  events  in  history  in  which  our  admiration  is  more
excited  by  the  power  of  mankind  to  endure  almost
preternatui-al  misery,  or  our  indignation  more  deepl}'
aroused  by  the  cruelty  with  which  the  sublimest  prin-
ciples of  human  nature  may  be  made  to  serve  the
purposes  of  !<elfish  ambition  and  grovelling  superstition,
than  this  famous  leaguer.

liarely  have  men  at  any  epoch  defended  their  father-
land against  foreign  oppression  with  more  heroism  than
that  which  was  manifested  by  the  Parisians  of  1590  in
resisting  religious  toleration,  and  in  obeying  a  foreign  and
priestly  despotism.  Men,  women,  and  children  cheer-
fully laid  down  their  lives  by  thousands  in  order  that
the  papal  legate  and  the  king  of  Spain  might  trample
upon  that  legitimate  sovereign  of  France  who  was  one
day  to  become  the  idol  of  Paris  and  of  the  whole
kingdom.

A  census  taken  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege  had
showed  a  population  of  two  hundred  thousand  souls,
with  a  sufficiency  of  provisions,  it  was  thought,  to  last

-*  Memoirfs  de  Sully,  lib.  iv.  177,  seqg.

25  ■■  AquelU  vasta  ciudad,  sin  disputa  la  mayor  de  Europa,"  says  Coloma,  ili.  45.

1590.  SIEGE  OF  PARIS.  57

one  month.^*'  But  before  the  terrible  summer  was  over
— so  completely  had  the  city  been  invested — the  bushel
of  wheat  was  worth  three  hundred  and  sixty  crowns,
rye  and  oats  being  but  little  cheaper.^^  Indeed,  grain
might  as  well  have  cost  three  thout^and  crowns  the
bushel,  for  the  prices  recoided  placed  it  beyond  the  reach
of  all  but  the  extremely  wealthy.  The  flesh  of  horses,
asses,  dogs,  cats,  rats  had  become  rare  luxuries.  There
was  nothing  cheap,  said  a  citizen  bitterly,  but  sermons.^'*
And  the  priests  and  monks  of  every  order  went  daily
about  the  streets,  preaching  fortitude  in  that  great
resistance  to  heresy,  by  which  I*aris  was  earning  for
itself  a  crown  of  glory,  and  promising  the  most  direct
passage  to  paradise  for  the  souls  of  the  wretched  victims
who  fell  daily,  starved  to  death,  upon  the  pavements.
And  the  monks  and  priests  did  their  work  nobly,  aiding
the  general  resolution  by  the  example  of  their  own
courage.  Better  fed  than  their  fellow  citizens,  they  did
military  work  in  trench,  guard-house  and  rampart,  as
the  population  became  rapidly  unfit,  from  physical
exhaustion,  for  the  defence  of  the  city.

The  young  Duke  of  Kemours,  governor  of  the  place,
manifested  as  much  resolution  and  conduct  in  bringing
his  countrymen  to  perdition  as  if  the  work  in  which  he
was  engaged  had  been  the  highest  and  holiest  that  ever
tasked  human  energies.  He  was  sustained  in  his  task  by
that  proud  princess,  his  own  and  Mayenne's  mother,
by  Madame  Montpensier,  by  the  resident  triumvirate  of
Spain,  Mendoza,  Commander  Moreo,  and  John  Baj^tist
Tassis,  by  the  cardinal  legate  Gaetano,  and,  more  than
all,  by  the  sixteen  chiefs  of  the  wards,  those  municipal
tyrants  of  the  unhappy  populace.^"

Pope  Sixtus  himself  was  by  no  means  eager  for  the
success  of  the  League.  After  the  battle  of  Ivry  he  had
most  seriously  inclined  his  ear  to  the  representations  of
Henry's  envoy,  and  showed  much  willingness  to  admit
the  victorious  heretic  once  more  into  the  bosom  of  the
Church. Sixtus  was not desirous of  contributing to

2S';De  Thou,  t.  xi.  lib.  97,  162.  persuadant  qu'il  valoit  mieux  tuer  ses

-'  *Bor,  HI.  xviii.  535.  propres  enfants,  nayant de quoi leur

-*  L'Estoile,  23 — "  Tout  ce  qui  estoit donner  a  manger,  que  de  recevoir  et  re-

bon  marche  a  Paris  etoient  les  sermons connoltre  un  roy  hereticque,"  &c.

oil  ou  repaissoit  le  pauvre  monde  a£fame ^j  L'Estoile,  23, seqq. De  Thou,  uh%

de  vent,  c'est  a  dire  de  meuteries  .  .  .  • iup,,  162,  seqq. Bor,  ubi  sup.

58  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIII.

the  advancement  of  Philip's  power.  He  feared  his  de-
signs on  Italy,  being  himself  most  anxious  at  that  time
to  annex  Naples  to  the  holy  see.  He  had  amassed  a
large  treasure,  but  he  liked  best  to  spend  it  in  splendid
architecture,  in  noble  fountains,  in  magnificent  collections
of  art,  science,  and  literature,  and  above  all,  in  building
up  fortunes  for  the  children  of  his  sister  the  washer-
woman, and  in  allying  them  all  to  the  most  princely
houses  of  Italy,  while  never  allowing  them  even  to
mention  the  name  of  their  father,  so  base  was  his  degree ;
but  he  cared  not  to  disburse  from  his  hoarded  dollars  to
supply  the  necessities  of  the  League.^"

But  Gaetano,  although  he  could  wring  but  fifty
thousand  crowns  from  his  Holiness  after  the  fatal  fight
of  Ivry,  to  further  the  good  cause,  was  lavish  in  expen-
ditures from  his  own  purse  and  from  other  sources,  and
this  too  at  a  time  when  thirty-three  per  cent,  interest
was  paid  to  the  usurers  of  Antwerp  for  one  month's  loan
of  ready  money .^^  He  was  indefatigable,  too,  and  most
successful  in  his  exhortations  and  ghostly  consolations
to  the  people.  Those  proud  priests  and  great  nobles
were  pla^'ing  a  reckless  game,  and  the  hopes  of  mankind
beyond  the  grave  were  the  counters  on  their  table.  For
themselves  there  were  rich  prizes  for  the  winning.
Should  they  succeed  in  dismembering  the  fair  land  where
they  were  enacting  their  fantastic  parts,  there  were
temporal  principalities,  great  provinces,  petty  sovereign-
ties, to  be  carved  out  of  the  heritage  which  the  Beamese
claimed  for  his  own.  Obviously  then,  their  consciences
could  never  permit  this  shameless  heretic,  by  a  simulated
conversion  at  the  critical  moment,  to  block  their  game
and  restore  the  national  unity  and  laws.  And  even
should  it  be  necessary  to  give  the  whole  kingdom,  in-
stead of  the  mere  duchy  of  Brittany,  to  Philip  of  Spain,
still  there  were  mighty  guerdons  to  be  bestowed  on  his
supporters  before  the  foreign  monarch  could  seat  himself
on  the  throne  of  Henry's  ancestors.

As  to  the  people  who  weie  fighting,  starving,  dying
by  thousands  in  this  great  caiise,  there  were  eternal  re-
wards in  another  world  profusely  promised  for  their
heroism  instead  of  the  more  substantial  bread  and  beef
for  lack  of  which  they  were  laying  down  their  lives.

»  De  Thou,  lib.  97.  3i  Meteren,  xvi.  293.

1590.  ECCLESIASTICAL  DEMONSTRATIONS.  59

It  was  estimated  that  befuro  Jul.y  twelve  thousand
human  beings  in  Paris  had  died,  for  want  of  food,  within
three  months.  But  as  there  were  no  signs  of  the  pro-
mised relief  by  the  army  of  Parma  and  Mayenne,  and
as  the  starving  people  at  times  appeared  faint-hearted,
their  courage  was  strengthened  one  day  by  a  stirring-
exhibition.

An  astonishing  procession  marched  through  the  streets
of  the  city,  led  by  the  Bishop  of  Senlis  and  the  Prior  of
Chartreux,  each  holding  a  halberd  in  one  hand  and  a
crucifix  in  the  other,  and  graced  by  the  presence  of  the
cardinal-legate,  and  of  many  prelates  from  Italy.  A
lame  monk,  adroitly  manipulating  the  staff  of  a  drum-
major,  went  hopping  and  limping  before  them,  much  to
the  amazement  of  the  crowd.  Then  came  a  long  file  of
monks — Capuchins,  Bernardists,  Minimes,  Franciscans,
Jacobins,  Carmelites,  and  other  orders— each  with  his
cowl  thrown  back,  his  long  robes  trussed  up,  a  helmet
on  his  head,  a  cuirass  on  his  breast,  and  a  halberd  in
his  hand.  The  elder  ones  marched  first,  grinding  their
teeth,  rolling  their  eyes,  and  making  other  ferocious
demonstrations.  Then  came  the  younger  friars,  similarly
attired,  all  armed  with  arquebusses,  which  they  occa-
sionally and  accidentally  discharged  to  the  disadvantage
of  the  spectators,  several  of  whom  were  killed  or  wounded
on  the  spot.  Among  others  a  servant  of  Cardinal  Gaetano
was  thus  slain,  and  the  event  caused  much  commotion,
until  the  cardinal  proclaimed  that  a  man  thus  killed  in
so  hoi}'-  a  cause  had  gone  straight  to  heaven  and  had
taken  his  place  among  the  just.  It  was  impossible,  thus
argued  the  people  in  their  simplicity,  that  so  wise  and
virtuous  a  man  as  the  cardinal  should  not  know  what
was  best.

The  procession  marched  to  the  church  of  our  Lady
of  Loretto,  where  they  solemnly  promised  to  the  blessed
Virgin  a  lamp  and  a  ship  of  gold — should  she  be  will-
ing to  use  her  influence  in  behalf  of  the  suftering  city —
to  be  placed  on  her  shrine  as  soon  as  the  siege  should  be
raised.^^

But  these  demonstrations,  however  cheering  to  the
souls,  had  comparatively  little  effect  upon  the  bodies  of
the  sufferers. It  was  impossible  to  walk  through  the

3»  De  Thou,  t.  si.  lib.  97,  p.  161. Herrera.  P.  iii.  lib.  v.  q1.  210.

60  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXIII.

streets  of  Paris  without  stumbling  over  the  dead  bodies
of  the  citizens.  Trustworthy  eye-witnesses  of  those
dreadful  days  have  placed  the  number  of  the  dead  dur-
ing the  summer  at  thirty  thousand. ^^  A  tumultuous
assemblage  of  the  starving  and  the  forlorn  rushed  at  last
to  the  municipal  palace,  demanding  peace  or  bread.
The  rebels  were  soon  dispersed  however  by  a  charge,
headed  by  the  Chevalier  d'Aumale,  and  assisted  by  the
chiefs  of  the  wards,  and  so  soon  as  the  riot  was  quelled,
its  ringleader,  a  leading  advocate,  Renaud  by  name,  Avas
hanged.^^

Still,  but  for  the  energy  of  the  priests,  it  is  doubtful
whether  the  city  could  have  been  held  by  the  Confede-
i-acy.  The  Duke  of  Nemours  confessed  that  there  were
occasions  when  they  never  would  have  been  able  to  sus-
tain a  determined  onslaught,  and  they  were  daily  expect-
ing to  see  the  Prince  of  Bearne  battering  triumphantly
at  their  gates.  But  the  eloquence  of  the  preachers,  espe-
cially of  the  one-eyed  father  Boucher,  sustained  the  faint-
ing spirits  of  the  people,  and  consoled  the  sufferers  in
their  dying  agonies  by  glimpses  of  paradise.  Sublime
was  that  devotion,  superhuman  that  craft,  but  it  is  only
by  weapons  from  the  armoury  of  the  Unseen  that  human
creatures  can  long  confront  such  horrors  in  a  wicked
cause.  Superstition,  in  those  days  at  least,  was  a  politi-
cal force  absolutely  without  limitation,  and  most  adroitly
did  the  agents  of  Spain  and  Eome  handle  its  tremendous
enginry  against  unhappy  France.  For  the  hideous  details
of  the  most  dreadful  sieges  recorded  in  ancient  or  modern
times  were  now  reproduced  in  Paris.  Not  a  revolution-
aiy  circumstance,  at  which  the  wurld  had  shuddered  in
the  accounts  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  was  spared.  Men
devoured  such  dead  vermin  as  could  be  found  lying  in  the
streets.  They  crowded  greedily  around  stalls  in  the
public  squares  where  the  skin,  bones,  and  offal  of  such
dogs,  cats,  and  unclean  beasts  as  still  remained  for  the
consumption  of  the  wealthier  classes  were  sold  to  the
populace.  Over  the  doorways  of  these  flesh  markets
might  be  read  "  Haec  sunt  mimera  pro  lis  qui  vitam  pro
Plulippo  profuderunt."  ^^ Men  stood  in  archways  and  nar-

"  L'^i^toile,  p.  25.  Ilerrera  says  ==  L'Estojig^  27.  "De  ce  que  j'ecris,"
60  000,  loc  cit.  adds  the  journalist,  "  mes  yeux  ont  ven

^  Dc  Thou,  ubi  sup,  V  7.  une  bonne  partie."

1590.  SUFFERINGS  OF  THE  BESIEGED.  61

row  passages  lying  in  wait  for  'wliatever  stray  dogs  still
remained  at  large,  noosed  them,  strangled  them,  and
like  savage  beasts  of  prey  tore  thein  to  pieces  and  de-
voured them  alive.^^  And  it  sometimes  happened,  too,
that  the  equally  hungry  dog  proved  the  more  successful
in  the  foul  encounter,  and  fed  upon  the  man.  A  lady
visiting  the  Duchess  of  Kemours — called  for  the  high
pretensions  of  her  sons  by  her  two  marriages  the  queen-
mother — complained  bitterly  that  mothers  in  Paris  had
been  compelled  to  kill  their  own  children  outright  to
save  them  from  starving  to  death  in  lingering  agony.
"  And  if  you  are  brought  to  that  extremity,"  replied  the
duchess,  "  as  for  the  sake  of  our  holy  religion  to  be
forced  to  kill  your  own  children,  do  you  think  that  so
great  a  matter  after  all?  \\  hat  are  your  children  made
of  more  than  other  people's  children  i*  What  are  we  all
but  dirt  and  dust?"^^  Such  was  the  consolation  ad-
ministered by  the  mother  of  the  man  who  governed
Paris,  and  defended  its  gates  against  its  lawful  sove-
reign at  the  command  of  a  foreigner ;  while  the  priests
in  their  turn  persuaded  the  populace  that  it  was  far
more  righteous  to  kill  their  own  children,  if  they  had
no  food  to  give  them,  than  to  obtain  food  by  recognizing
a  heretic  king.^^

It  was  related,  too,  and  believed,  that  in  some  instances
mothers  had  salted  the  bodies  of  their  dead  children  and
fed  upon  them,  day  by  day,  until  the  hideous  repast
would  no  longer  support  their  own  life.  They. died,  and
the  secret  was  revealed  by  servants  who  had  partaken  of
the  food.^^  The  Spanish  ambassador,  Mendoza,  advised
recourse  to  an  article  of  diet  which  had  been  used  in
some  of  the  oriental  sieges.  The  counsel  at  first  was
rejected  as  coming  from  the  agent  of  Spain,  who  wished
at  all  hazards  to  save  the  capital  of  France  from  falling
out  of  the  hands  of  his  master  into  those  of  the  heretic.
But  dire  necessity  prevailed,  and  the  bones  of  the  dead
were  taken  in  considerable  quantities  fiom  the  ceme-
teries, ground  into  flour,  baked  into  bread,  and  con-
sumed. It  was  called  Madame  Montpensier's  cake,
because  the  duchess  earnestly  proclaimed  its  merits  to
the  poor  Parisians.  "  She  was  never  known  to  taste
it  herself,  however,"  bitterly  obsei-ved  one  who  lived  in

»  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  177.  ^  J.'Estoilc,  29.  3S  ibid.  23. »  jbjd  25.

62  THE  UNITED NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXHI.

Paris  through  that  horrible  summer.  She  was  right  to
abstain,  for  all  who  ate  of  it  died,  and  the  Montpensier
flour  fell  into  disuse.'*"

Lansquenets  and  other  soldiers,  mad  with  hunger  and
rage,  when  they  could  no  longer  find  dogs  to  feed  on,
chased  children  through  the  streets,  and  were  known  in
several  instances  to  kill  and  devour  them  on  the  spot."
To  those  expressing  horror  at  the  perpetration  of  such  a
crime,  a  leading  personage,  member  of  the  Council  of
Nine,  maintained  that  there  was  less  danger  to  one's
soul  in  satisfying  one's  hunger  with  a  dead  child,  in  case
of  necessity,  than  in  recognizing  the  heretic  Bearnese,
and  he  added  that  all  the  best  theologians  and  doctors  of
i'aris  were  of  his  opinion  .^^

As  the  summer  wore  on  to  its  close,  through  all  these
horrors,  and  as  there  were  still  no  signs  of  Mayenne  and
Parma  leading  their  armies  to  the  relief  of  the  city,  it
became  necessary  to  deceive  the  people  by  a  show  of
negotiation  with  the  beleaguering  army.  Accordingly,
the  Spanish  ambassador,  the  legate,  and  the  other  chiefs
of  the  Holy  League  appointed  a  deputation,  consisting
of  the  Cardinal  Gondy,  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  and
the  Abbe  d'Elbene,  to  Henry .''^  It  soon  became  evident
to  the  king,  however,  that  these  commissioners  were  but
trifling  with  him  in  order  to  amuse  the  populace.  His
attitude  was  dignified  and  determined  throughout  the
interview.  The  place  appointed  was  St.  Anthony's
Abbey,  ■  before  the  gates  of  Paris.  Henry  wore  a  cloak
and  the  order  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  was  surrounded
by  his  council,  the  princes  of  the  blood,  and  by  more
than  four  hundred  of  the  chief  gentlemen  of  his  army.

*o  L'Kstoile,  25.  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  177.  c'l-stoit  verite,  confesse  et  temoigne  par

♦i  L'Estoile,  30.  les  propres  bouches  des  lansquenets. De

«  Ibid. "  LansquRnets,  gens  de soi  moi  j'ai  ou'i  tenir  ceste  proposition  U  un

barbares  et  inhuniaiiis,  mourans  de  male  grand  Catholique  de  Paris  qui  estoit  du

rage  et  faim,  conimencbrent  a  chasser  aux  Conseil  des  Neuf  qu'il  y  avoit  moins  de

enl'ans  comma  au.K  cliiens,  et  en  mange-  danger  de  s'accomoder  d'un  enfant  mort

rent  trois,  deux  a  I'hostel  Saint  Denis  et  on  telle  necessite  que  de  reconnoitre  le

un  a  I'hdtel  de  Palaiseau,  et  fut  commis  Bearnais,  estant herdticque comme il

ce  cruel  et  barbare  acte  dans  I'enccinte  e.stoit,  e.l  que  de  son  opinion  estoient  tous

des  murailles  de  Paris,  tant  I'ire  de  Dieu  les  meilleurs  theologiens  et  docteurs  de

estoit  embrassee  sur  nos  testes. Ce  qui  Paris." Compare  Meteren,  xvi.  293,  who

tenant  du  commencement  pour  une  fable  relates  that  eighteen  children  were  said  tc

Dour  ce  que  me  sembloit  que  hoc  erat  have  been  eaten.

jXrocius vera, j'ai trouvd depuis que  ■"  De  Thou,  «bt  sm^.

1590.  PRETENDED  NEGOTIATIONS.  63

After  passing  the  barricade,  the  deputies  were  received
by  old  Marshal  Biron,  aud  conducted  by  him  to  the
king's  chamber  of  state.  When  they  had  made  their
salutations,  the  king  led  the  way  to  an  inner  cabinet,
but  his  progress  was  much  impeded  by  the  crowding  of
the  nobles  about  him.  Wishing  to  excuse  this  apparent
rudeness,  he  said  to  the  envoys :  "  Gentlemen,  these
men  thrust  me  on  as  fast  to  the  battle  against  the
foreigner  as  they  now  do  to  my  cabinet.  Therefore
bear  with  them."  Then  turning  to  the  crowd,  he  said  :
"  Room,  gentlemen,  for  the  love  of  me,"  upon  which  they
all  retired.**

The  deputies  then  stated  that  they  had  been  sent  by
the  authorities  of  Paris  to  consult  as  to  the  means  of
obtaining  a  general  peace  in  France.  They  expressed
the  hope  that  the  king's  disposition  was  favourable  to
this  end,  and  that  he  would  likewise  permit  them  to  con-
fer with  the  Duke  of  Mayenne.  This  manner  of  address-
ing him  excited  his  choler.  He  told  Cardinal  Gondy,
who  was  spokesman  of  the  deputation,  that  he  had  long
since  answered  such  propositions.  He  alone  could  deal
with  his  subjects.  He  was  like  the  woman  before  Solo-
mon ;  he  would  have  all  the  child  or  none  of  it.*®  Eather
than  dismember  his  kingdom  he  would  lose  the  whole.
He  asked  them  what  they  considered  him  to  be.  They
answered  that  they  knew  his  rights,  but  that  the  Pari-
sians had  different  opinions.  If  Paris  would  only  ac-
knowledge him  to  be  king  there  could  be  no  more
question  of  war.  He  asked  them  if  they  desired  the
King  of  Spain  or  the  Duke  of  Mayenne  for  their  king,
and  bade  them  look  well  to  themselves.  The  King  of
Spain  could  not  help  them,  for  he  had  too  much  business
on  hand  ;  while  Mayenne  had  neither  means  nor  courage,
having  been  within  three  leagues  of  them  for  three  weeks
doing  nothing.  JS' either  king  nor  duke  should  have  that
which  belonged  to  him,  of  that  they  might  be  assured.*®
He  told  them  he  loved  Paris  as  his  capital,  as  his  eldest
daughter.  If  the  Parisians  wished  to  see  the  end  of
their  miseries  it  was  to  him  they  should  appeal,  not
to  the  Spaniard  nor  to  the  Duke  of  Mayenne. By  the  grace

■M  W.  Lyly  to  Sir  E  Stafford,  —"^^'1590. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

8  Aug.  ^  '

*s  Ibid.  «  Ibid. Compare  De  Thou,  xi.  97.

64  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

of  God  and  the  swords  of  his  brave  gentlemen  he  would
prevent  the  King  of  Spain  from  making  a  colony  of  France
as  he  had  done  of  Brazil.  He  told  the  commissioners  that
they  ought  to  die  of  shame  that  they,  born  Frenchmen,
should  have  so  forgotten  their  love  of  country  and  of
liberty  as  thus  to  bow  the  head  to  the  Spaniard,  and —
while  famine  was  carrying  otf  thousands  of  their  coun-
trymen before  their  eyes — to  be  so  cowardly  as  not  to
utter  one  word  for  the  public  welfare  from  fear  of  offend-
ing Cardinal  Gaetano,  Mendoza,  and  Moreo.*''  He  said
that  he  longed  for  a  combat  to  decide  the  issue,  and
that  he  had  charged  Count  de  Brissac  to  tell  Mayenne
that  he  would  give  a  finger  of  his  right  hand  for  a
battle,  and  two  for  a  general  peace.*^  He  knew  and
pitied  the  sufferings  of  Paiis,  but  the  horrors  now  raging
there  were  to  please  the  King  of  Spain.  That  monarch
had  told  the  Duke  of  Parma  to  trouble  himself  but  little
about  the  Netherlands  so  long  as  he  could  preserve  for
him  his  city  of  Paris.  But  it  was  to  lean  on  a  broken
reed  to  expect  support  from  this  old,  decrepit  king,
whose  object  was  to  dismember  the  flourishing  king-
dom of  France,  and  to  divide  it  among  as  many  tyrants
as  he  had  sent  viceroj's  to  the  Indies.*^  The  crown  was
his  own  birthright.  Were  it  elective  he  should  receive
the  sutfrages  of  the  great  mass  of  the  electors.  He
hoped  soon  to  drive  those  red-crossed  foreigners  out  of
his  kingdom.  Should  he  fail,  they  would  end  by  expel-
ling the  Duke  of  Mayenne  and  all  the  rest  who  had
called  them  in,  and  Paris  would  become  the  theatre  of
the  bloodiest  tragedy  ever  yet  enacted.*^  The  king  then
ordered  Sir  Roger  Williams  to  see  that  a  collation  was
prepared  for  the  deputies,  and  the  veteran  Welshman
took  occasion  to  indulge  in  much  blunt  conversation
with  the  guests.  He  informed  them  that  he,  Mr.  Sack-
ville,  and  many  other  strangers  were  serving  the  king
from  the  hatred  they  bore  the  Spaniards  and  Mother
League,  and  that  his  royal  mistress  had  always  8000
Englishmen  ready  to  maintain  the  cause.

While  the  conferences  were  going  on,  the  officers  and
soldiers  of  the  besieging  army  tiaronged  to  the  gate,
and  had  much  talk  with  the  townsmen.  Among  others,
time-honoured  La  None  with  the  iron  arm  stood  near  the

f  De  Thou,  uhi  sup.  48  ibid.  4S  jbjjj  5«  1^;,].

1590.  STATE  OF  PARIS.  65

gate  and  harangued  the  Parisians.  "  We  are  here,"  said
he,  "five  thousand  gentlemen;  we  desire  your  good,  not
your  ruin.  We  will  make  you  rich:  let  us  participate
in  your  labour  and  industry.  Undo  not  yourselves  to
serve  the  ambition  of  a  few  men."  The  townspeople,
hearing  the  old  warrior  discoursing  thus  earnestly,  asked
who  he  was.  When  informed  that  it  was  La  Noue  they
cheered  him  vociferously,  and  applauded  bis  speech  with
the  greatest  vehemence.*^  Yet  La  Noue  was  the  foremost
Huguenot  that  the  sun  shone  upon,  and  the  Parisians
were  starving  themselves  to  death  out  of  hatred  to
heresy.  After  the  collation  the  commissioners  were  per-
mitted to  go  from  the  camp  in  order  to  consult  Mayenne.

Such  then  was  the  condition  of  Paris  dui  ing  that  me-
morable summer  of  tortures.  What  now  were  its  hopes
of  deliverance  out  of  this  Gehenna  ?  The  trust  of  French-
men was  in  Philip  of  Spain,  whose  legions,  under  com-
mand of  the  great  Italian  chieftain,  were  daily  longed
for  to  save  them  from  rendering  obedience  to  their  lawful
prince.

For  even  the  king  of  straw — the  imprisoned  cai'dinal
— was  now  dead,  and  there  was  not  even  the  effigy  of
any  other  sovereign  than  Plenry  of  Bourbon  to  claim
authority  in  France.  Mayenne,  in  the  cotirse  of  long
interviews  with  the  Duke  of  Parma  at  Conde  and  Brus-
sels, had  expressed  his  desire  to  see  Philip  king  of
France,  and  had  promised  his  best  efforts  to  biing  aboiit
such  a  result.  Li  that  case  he  stipulated  for  the  second
place  in  the  kingdom  for  himself,  together  with  a  good
rich  province  in  perpetual  sovereignty,  and  a  large
sum  of  money  in  hand.  Should  this  course  not  run
smoothly,  he  would  be  willing  to  take  the  crown  him-
self, in  which  event  he  would  cheerfully  cede  to  Philip
the  sovereignty  of  Brittany  and  Burgundy,  besides  a
selection  of  cities  to  be  arranged  for  at  a  later  day.
Although  he  spoke  of  himself  with  modesty,  said  Alex-
ander, it  was  very  plain  that  he  meant  to  arrive  at  the
crown  himself. ^^  Well  had  the  Bearnese  alluded  to  the
judgment  of  Solomon.  Were  not  children,  thus  ready  to
dismember  their  mother,  as  foul  and  unnatural  as  the
mother  who  would  divide  her  child  ?

51  Lely's  letter  before  cited.

^'^  Parma  to  Philip,  20  May,  1590. (Arch.  Je  Simancas  M  i.)
VOL.  III.  F

G6  THE  UJNITED  NETHEIlLAiSDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

And  what  was  this  dependence  on  a  foreign  tyi'ant
really  wuith  ?  As  we  look  back  upon  those  dark  days
with  the  light  of  what  was  then  the  almost  immediate
future  tiirned  full  and  glaring  upon  them,  we  find  it
difficult  to  exaggerate  the  folly  of  the  chief  actors  in
those  scenes  of  crime.  Did  not  the  penniless  advenr
turer,  whose  keen  insight  and  wise  recklessness  were
passing  for  hallucination  and  foolhardiness  in  the  eyes
of  his  contemporaries,  understand  the  game  he  was  play-
ing better  than  did  that  profound  thinker,  that  myste-
rious but  infallible  politician,  who  sat  in  the  Escurial
and  made  the  world  tremble  at  every  hint  of  his  lips,
every  stroke  of  his  pen  ?

The  Netherlands  —  that  most  advanced  portion  of
Philip's  domain,  without  the  possession  of  which  his
conquest  of  England  and  his  incorporation  of  France
were  but  childish  visions,  even  if  they  were  not  mon-
strous chimeras  at  best — were  to  be  in  a  manner  left  to
themselves,  while  their  consummate  governor  and  gene-
ral was  to  go  forth  and  conquer  France  at  the  head  of  a
force  with  which  he  had  been  in  vain  attempting  to
hold  those  provinces  to  their  obedience.  At  that  very
moment  the  rising  young  chieftain  of  the  Netherlands
was  most  successfully  inaugurating  his  career  of  mili-
tary success.  His  armies  well  drilled,  well  disciplined,
well  paid,  full  of  heart  and  of  hope,  were  threatening
their  ancient  enemy  in  every  quarter,  while  the  veteran
legions  of  Spain  and  Italy,  heroes  of  a  hundred  Flemish
and  P\-isian  battle-fields,  were  disorganized,  starving,
and  mutinous.  The  famous  ancient  legion,  the  terzo
viejo,  had  been  disbanded  for  its  obstinate  and  confirmed
unruliness.  The  legion  of  Manrique,  sixteen  hundred
strong,  was  in  open  mutiny  at  Courtray.  Farnese  had
sent  the  Prince  of  Ascoli  to  negotiate  with  them,  but  his
attempts  were  all  in  vain.^^  Two  years'  aiTearages — to
be  paid,  not  in  cloth  at  four  times  what  the  contractors
had  paid  for  it,  but  in  solid  gold — were  their  not  unrea-
sonable demands  after  years  of  as  hard  fighting  and
severe  suffering  as  the  world  has  often  seen.  But
Philip,  instead  of  ducats  or  cloth,  had  only  sent  orders
to  go  forth  and  conquer  a  new  kingdom  for  him.  Ver-
dugo,  too,  from  Friesland  was  howling  for  money,  gar-

M  I'amia  to  I'liilip, lo  April,  1590. (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1590.  FALSE  COMPLAINTS  AGAINST  FARNESE.  67

rotting  and  hanging  his  mutinous  veterans  every  day,"
and  sending  complaints  and  most  dismal  forebodings  as
often  as  a  courier  could  make  his  way  through  the
enemy's  lines  to  Farnese's  headquarters.  And  Farnese,
on  his  part,  was  garrotting  and  hanging  the  veterans.^*

Alexander  did  not  of  course  inform  his  master  that  he
was  a  mischievous  lunatic,  who  upon  any  healthy  prin-
ciple of  human  government  ought  long  ago  to  have  been
shut  up  from  all  communion  with  his  species.  It  was
very  plain,  however,  from  his  letters,  that  such  was  bis
innermost  thought,  had  it  been  safe,  loyal,  or  courteous
to  express  it  in  plain  langiuige.

He  was  himself  stung  almost  to  madness  moreover  by
the  presence  of  Commander  Moreo,  who  hated  him,  who
was  perpetually  coming  over  from  France  to  vit^it  him,
who  was  a  spy  upon  all  his  actions,  and  who  was  regu-
larly distilling  his  calumnies  into  the  ears  of  Secretary
Idiaquez  and  of  Philip  himself.^"  The  king  was  informed
that  Farnese  was  working  for  his  own  ends,  and  was  dis-
gusted with  his  sovereign ;  that  there  never  had  been
a  petty  prince  of  Italy  that  did  not  wish  to  become  a
greater  one,  or  that  was  not  jealous  of  Philip's  power,
and  that  there  was  not  a  villain  in  all  Christendom  but
wished  for  Philip's  death.  Moreo  followed  the  prince
about  to  Antwerp,  to  Brussels,  to  Spa,  whither  he  had
gone  to  drink  the  waters  for  his  failing  health,  pestered
him,  lectured  him,  pried  upon  him,  counselled  him.
enraged  him.  Alexander  told  him  at  last  he  cared  not  if
the  whole  world  came  to  an  end  so  long  as  Flanders  re-
mained, which  alone,had  been  entrusted  to  him,  and  that,
if  he  was  expected  to  conquer  France  it  woukl  be  as  well
to  give  him  the  means  of  performing  that  exploit.  So
Moreo  told  the  king  that  Alexander  was  wasting  time  and
wasting  money,  that  he  was  the  cause  of  Egmont's  over-
thi'ovv,  and  that  he  would  be  the  cause  of  the  loss  of  Paris
and  of  the  downfall  of  the  whole  French  scheme  ;  for
that  he  was  determined  to  do  nothing  to  assist  Mayenne,
or  that  did  not  conduce  to  his  private  advantage.''^

Yet  Farnese  had  been  not  long  before  informed  in

^  Parma  to Philip, 24  June, 1590. ^^  Moreo  to Idiaqucz,  30 Jan. 1590.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  JIS.)  (Ibid.-)

55  Same  to  fame,  26  June  and  22  July,  ^7  ji^i-go  to  Philip,  22  June,  1590
1590. Clbid.)  (Ibid.)

F 2

68  thp:  united  Netherlands. Cnxr.  xxiii.

sufficiently  plain  language,  and  by  personages  of  great
influence,  that  in  case  he  wished  to  convert  his  vice-
royalty  of  the  Netherlands  into  a  permanent  sovereignty,
he  might  rely  on  the  assistance  of  Henry  of  Navarre,
and  perhaps  of  Queen  Elizabeth/^  The  scheme  would
not  have  been  impracticable,  but  the  duke  never  listened
to  it  for  a  moment.

K  he  were  slow  in  advancing  to  the  relief  of  starving,
agonising  Paris,  there  were  sufficient  reasons  for  his
delay.  Most  decidedly  and  bitterly,  but  loyally,  did  he
denounce  the  madness  of  his  master's  course  in  all  his
communications  to  that  master's  private  ear.

He  told  him  that  the  situation  in  which  he  found
himself  was  horrible.  He  had  no  money  for  his  troops,
he  had  not  even  garrison  bread  to  put  in  their  mouths.  He
had  not  a  single  stiver  to  advance  them  on  account.  From
Friesland,  from  the  Rhine  country,  from  every  quarter,
cries  of  distress  were  rising  to  heaven,  and  the  lamenta-
tions wei'e  just.  He  was  in  absolute  peniiry.  He  could
not  negotiate  a  bill  on  the  royal  account,  but  had  bor-
rowed on  his  own  private  security  a  few  thousand
crowns  which  he  had  given  to  his  soldiers.  He  was
pledging  his  jewels  and  furniture  like  a  bankrupt,  but
all  was  now  in  vain  to  stop  the  mutiny  at  Courtray.  If
that  went  on  it  would  be  of  most  pernicious  example,  for
the  whole  army  was  disorganised,  malcontent,  and  of
portentous  aspect.  "These  things,"  said  he,  "ought  not
to  surprise  people  of  common  understanding,  for  without
money,  without  credit,  without  provisions,  and  in  an
exhausted  country,  it  is  impossible  to  satisfy  the  claims,
or  even  to  support  the  life  of  the  army.^^  When  he  sent
the  Flemish  cavalry  to  Mayenne  in  March,  it  was  under
the  impression  that  with  it  that  prince  would  have  main-
tained his  reputation  and  checked  the  progress  of  the
Bearnese  until  greater  reinforcements  could  be  for-
warded. He  was  now  glad  that  no  larger  number  had
been  sent,  for  all  would  have  been  sacrificed  on  the  fatal
field  of  Ivry.«°

The  country  around  him  was  desperate,  believed  itself
abandoned,  and  was  expecting  fresh  horrors  eyerj  day.

"  Duplessis to Biizanval. Mem.  et 14  March,  24  March,  30  March,  19  April,
Corresp.  de  Duplessis  Mornay,  iv.  270.  1590. (Arch,  de  .'jim.  MS  )

••  Parma  to  Philip,  30  Jan. 20  Feb. «>  Ibid.

1590.  UNREASONABLE  DEMANDS  OF  PHILIP.  69

He  had  been  obliged  to  remove  portions  of  the  garrisons
at  De venter  and  Zutphen  purely  to  save  them  from
starving  and  despeiation.  Every  day  he  was  informed
by  his  garrisons  that  they  could  feed  no  longer  on  fine
words  or  hopes,  for  in  them  they  found  no  sustenance.*^

But  Philip  told  him  that  he  must  proceed  forthwith  to
France,  where  he  was  to  raise  the  siege  of  Paris,  and
occupy  Calais  and  Boulogne  in  order  to  prevent  the
English  from  sending  succour  to  the  Bearnese,  and  in
order  to  facilitate  his  own  designs  on  England.  Every
effort  was  to  be  made  before  the  Bearnese  climbed  into
the  seat.  The  Duke  of  Parma  was  to  talk  no  more  of
difficulties,  but  to  conquer  them ;  *^-  a  noble  phrase  on
the  battle-field,  but  comparatively  easy  of  utterance  at
the  writing-desk !

At  last,  Philip  having  made  some  remittances,  miser-
ably inadequate  for  the  necessities  of  the  case,  but
sufficient  to  repress  in  part  the  mutinous  demonstrations
throughout  the  army,  Famese  addressed  himself  with  a
heavy  heart  to  the  work  required  of  him.  He  confessed
the  deepest  apprehensions  of  the  result  both  in  the
Netherlands  and  in  France.  He  intimated  a  profound
distrust  of  the  French,  who  had  ever  been  Philip's
enemies,  and  dwelt  on  the  danger  of  leaving  the  pro-
vinces, unable  to  protect  themselves,  badly  garrisoned,
and  starving.  "  It  grieves  me  to  the  soul,  it  cuts  me  to
the  heart,"  he  said,  "  to  see  that  your  Majesty  commands
things  which  are  impossible,  f  )r  it  is  our  Lord  alone  that
can  work  miracles.  Your  Majesty  supposes  that  with
the  little  money  you  have  sent  me,  I  can  satisfy  all  the
soldiers  serving  in  these  provinces,  settle  with  the
Spanish  and  the  German  mutineers — because,  if  they  are
to  be  used  in  the  expedition,  they  must  at  least  be
quieted — give  money  to  Mayenno  and  the  Parisians,  pay
retaining  wages  (wartgeld)  to  the  German  Riders  for  the
protection  of  these  provinces,  and  make  sure  of  the  mari-
time places  where  the  same  mutinous  language  is  held
as  at  Courtray.  The  poverty,  the  discontent,  and  the
desperation  of  this  ttnhappy  country,"  he  added,  "  have
been  so  often  described  to  your  Majesty  that  I  have  no-
thing to  add. I  am  hanging  and  garrotting  my  veterans

f'l  Parma  to  Philip,  30  Jan.  20  Feb.,  It  March,  24  March,  30  March,  19  April  159a
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  ^  Philip  to  Parma,  20  June,  1590. ibid.

70  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIIl.

everywhere,  only  because  they  have  rebelled  for  want  of
pay  without  committing  any  excess.  Yet  under  these
circumstances  1  am  to  march  into  Prance  with  twenty
thousand  troops — the  least  number  to  effect  anything
withal.  I  am  confused  and  perplexed  because  the  whole
world  is  exclaiming  against  me,  and  protesting  that
through  my  desertion  the  country  entrusted  to  my  cai-e
will  come  to  utter  perdition.  On  the  other  hand,  the
French  cry  out  upon  me  that  I  am  the  cause  that  Paris
is  going  to  destruction,  and  with  it  the  Catholic  cause
in  France.  Every  one  is  pursuing  his  private  ends.  It
is  impossible  to  collect  a  force  strong  enough  for  the
necessary  work.  Paris  has  reached  its  extreme  unction,
and  neither  Mayenne  nor  any  one  of  the  confederates
has  given  this  invalid  the  slightest  morsel  to  support
her  till  your  Majesty's  forces  should  arrive.'"'"

He  reminded  his  sovereign  that  the  country  around
Paris  was  eaten  bare  of  food  and  forage,  and  yet  that  it  was
quite  out  of  the  question  for  him  to  undertake  the  trans-
portation of  supplies  for  his  army  all  the  way — su])plies
from  the  starving  Netherlands  to  stai^ving  France.  Since
the  king  was  so  peremptor}',  he  had  nothing  for  it  but  to
obey,  but  he  vehemently  disclaimed  all  responsibility
for  the  expedition,  and  in  case  of  his  death,  he  called  on
his  Majesty  to  vindicate  his  honour,  which  his  enemies
were  sure  to  assail."

The  messages  from  Mayenne  becoming  daily  more
pressing,  Farnese  hastened  as  much  as  possible  those
preparations  which  at  best  were  so  woefully  inadequate,
and  avowed  his  determination  not  to  fight  the  Bearnese
if  it  were  possible  to  avoid  an  action.  He  feared,  how-
ever, that  with  totally  insufficient  forces  he  should  be
obliged  to  accept  the  chances  of  an  engagement.^*

With  twelve  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse
Farnese  left  the  Netherlands  in  the  beginning  of  August,
and  arrived  on  the  3rd  of  that  month  at  Valenciennes.
His  little  army,  notwithstanding  his  bitter  complaints,
was  of  imposing  appeaiance.®''  The  archers  and  hal-
berdiers of  his  bodyguard  were  magnificent  in  tafiety
and  feathers  and  surcoats  of  cramoisy  velvet.  Four
hundred  nobles  served  in  the  cavalry. Arenberg  and

"  Parma  to  Philip,  22  July,  1590. (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  ^  Ibid.

^  Same  to  same,  23  July,  1590. ibid. <=6  Same  to  same,  23  Aug.  lofto. Ibid.

l.-,9;").  EXPEDITION  FOR  THE  RELIEF  OF  PARIS.  71

Barlaymont  and  Chimay,  and  other  gi-andees  of  the
Netherlands,  in  comjiany  with.  Ascoli  and  the  sons  of
Terranova  and  Pastraria,  and  many  more  great  lords
of  Italy  and  Spain  were  in  immediate  attendance  on  the
illnstrions  captain.  The  son  of  Philip's  Secretary  of
State,  Idiaqnez,  and  the  nephew  of  the  cardinal-legate,
Gaetano,  were  among  the  marshals  of  the  camp."

Alexander's  own  natural  authority  and  consummate
powers  of  organization  had  for  the  time  triumphed  over
the  disintegrating  tendencies  which,  it  has  been  seen,
were  everywhere  so  rapidly  destroying  the  foremost
military  establishment  of  the  world.  Nearly  half  his
forces,  both  cavalry  and  infantry,  were  Netherlanders ;
for — as  if  there  were  not  graves  enough  in  their  own
little  territory — those  Flemings,  Walloons,  and  Hol-
landers were  destined  to  leave  their  bones  on  both  sides
of  every  well-stricken  field  of  that  age  between  liberty
and  despotism.  And  thus  thousa'nds  of  them  had  now
gone  forth  under  the  banner  of  Spain  to  assist  their  own
tyrant  in  carrying  out  his  designs  iipon  the  capital  of
France,  and  to  struggle  to  the  death  with  thousands
of  their  own  countrymen  who  were  following  the  for-
tunes of  the  Bearnese.  Truly  in  that  age  it  was  religion
that  drew  the  boundary  line  between  nations.

The  army  was  divided  into  three  portions.  The  van-
guard was  under  the  charge  of  the  Netherland  General,
Marquis  of  Renty.  The  battalia  was  commanded  by
Farnese  in  person,  and  the  rearguard  was  entrusted  to
that  veteran  Netherlander  La  Motte,  now  called  the
Count  of  Everbeck.  Twenty  pieces  of  artillery  followed
the  last  division."^  At  Valenciennes  Farnese  remained
eight  days,  and  from  this  place  Count  Charles  Mansfeld
took  his  departure  in  a  great  rage — resigning  his  post  as
chief  of  artillery  because  La  Motte  had  received  the
appointment  of  general-marshal  of  the  camp — and  re-
turned to  his  father,  old  Peter  Ernest  Mansfeld,  who
was  lieutenant-governor  of  the  Netherlands  in  Parma's
absence.''^

»'  Bor,  III.  xviii.  535. Coloma,  iii.  47.  Metei-pn,  xvi.  29:1.  fc  q.

Bentivoglio,  P.  II.  lib.  iv.  340,  seqq.  ^  Letters  of  Maiislvld  to  P'.iilip  and  to

6»  Bor,  Coloiiiii,  ubi  sup. Doiulini,  ii.  Parma,  11 Aug. 1590. (Arch,  de Sim.

300,  seqq. De Thou,  t.  l.xi.  lib.  97.  p.  183,  MS.)
fcqq.  Bentiv(jglio,  P.  II.  lib.  iv.  340,^627.

72  l^HE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  CiiAr.  XXIII.

Leaving  Valenciennes  on  the  llth,  the  army  pro-
ceeded by  way  of  Quesney,  Guise,  Si)issons,  Fritemilon
to  Meaux.  At  this  place,  which  is  ten  leagues  from  Paris,
Farnese  made  his  junction,  on  the  22nd  of  August,  with
Mayenne,  who  was  at  the  head  of  six  thousand  infantry —
one  half  of  them  Germans  under  Cobalto,  and  the  other
half  French — and  of  two  thousand  horse.™

On  arriving  at  Meaux,  Alexander  proceeded  straight-
way to  the  cathedral,  and  there,  in  presence  of  all,  he
solemnly  swore  that  he  had  not  come  to  France  in  order
to  conquer  that  kingdom  or  any  portion  of  it,  in  the
interests  of  his  master,  but  only  to  render  succour  to
the  Catholic  cause  and  to  fi'ee  the  friends  and  con-
federates of  his  Majesty  from  violence  and  heretic
oppression.''' Time  was  to  show  the  value  of  that  oath.

Here  the  deputation  from  Paris — the  Archbishop  of
Lyons  and  his  colleagues,  whose  interview  with  Henry
has  just  been  narrated — were  received  by  the  two  dukes.
They  departed,  taking  with  them  promises  of  immediate
relief  fur  the  starving  city.  The  allies  remained  five
days  at  Meaux,  and  leaving  that  place  on  the  27th,
ariived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Chelles,  on  the  last  day
but  one  of  the  summer.  They  had  a  united  force  of  five
thousand  cavalr}'  and  eighteen  thousand  foot.'^^

The  summer  of  horrors  was  over,  and  thus  with  the
first  days  of  autumn  there  had  come  a  ray  of  hope  for
the  proud  city  which  was  lying  at  its  last  gasp.  When
the  allies  came  in  sight  of  the  monastery  of  Chelles  they
found  themselves  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the
Bearnese.

The  two  great  captains  of  the  age  had  at  last  met  face
to  face.  They  were  not  only  the  two  first  commanders
of  their  time,  but  there  was  not  a  man  in  Europe  at  that
day  to  be  at  all  compared  to  either  of  them.  The  youth,
concerning  whose  earliest  camj^aign  an  account  will  be
given  in  the  following  chapter,  had  hardly  yet  struck
his  first  blow.  Whether  that  blow  was  to  reveal  the
novice  or  the  master  was  soon  to  be  seen.  Meantime  in
1590  it  would  have  been  considered  a  foolish  adulation

'"  Losucedidoaestefelicissinioexercito  'i  Coloma,  iii.  47™.

despuos  que  entro  en  Francia  hasta  el  3  '•-  Lo  sucedido,  &c.,  uhi  sup. Parma'a

de  Oclubre. Arch,  de Simancas. MS.  letter  last  cited.
Parma  to  Philip,  28  Aug.  isao. Ibid.

1590.  MEETING  OF  HENRY  AND  FARNESE.  73

to  mention  the  name  of  Maurice  of  Nassau  in  the  same
breath  with  that  of  Navarre  or  of  Farnese.

The  scientific  duel  which  was  now  to  take  place  was
likely  to  task  the  genius  and  to  bring  into  full  display
the  peculiar  powers  and  defects  of  the  two  chieftains  of
Europe.  Each  might  be  considered  to  be  still  in  the
prime  of  life,  but  Alexander,  who  was  turned  of  forty-
five,  was  already  broken  in  health,  while  the  vigorous
Henry  was  eight  years  younger,  and  of  an  iion  constitu-
tion. Both  had  passed  their  lives  in  the  field,  but  the
king,  from  nature,  education,  and  the  force  of  circum-
stances, preferred  pitched  battles  to  scientific  combina-
tions, while  the  duke,  having  studied  and  practised  his
art  in  the  great  Spanish  and  Italian  schools  of  warfare,
was  rather  a  profound  strategist  than  a  professional
fighter,  although  capable  of  great  promptness  and  intense
personal  energy  when  his  judgment  dictated  a  battle.
Both  were  born  with  that  invaluable  gift  which  no
human  being  can  acquire,  authority,  and  both  were
adored  and  willingly  obeyed  by  their  soldiers,  so  long  as
those  soldiers  were  paid  and  fed.

The  prize  now  to  be  contended  for  was  a  high  one.
Alexander's  complete  success  would  tear  from  Henry's
grasp  the  first  city  of  Christendom,  now  sinking  ex-
hausted into  his  hands,  and  would  place  Prance  in  the
power  of  the  Holy  League  and  at  the  feet  of  Philip,
Another  Ivry  would  shatter  the  confederacy,  and  carry
the  king  in  triumph  to  his  capital  and  his  ancestral
throne.  On  the  approach  of  the  combined  armies  under
Parma  and  Mayenne,  the  king  had  found  himself  most
reluctantly  compelled  to  suspend  the  siege  of  Paris.
His  army,  which  consisted  of  sixte*en  thousand  foot  and
five  thousand  horse,  was  not  sufficiently  numerous  to
confront  at  the  same  time  the  relieving  force  and  to  con-
tinue the  operations  before  the  city."  So  long,  however,
as  he  held  the  towns  and  bridges  on  the  great  rivers,  and
especially  those  keys  to  the  Seine  and  Marne,  Corbeil
and  Lagny,  he  still  controlled  the  life-blood  of  the
capital,  which  indeed  had  almost  ceased  to  flow.

On  the  31st  August  he  advanced  towards  the  enemy.
Sir  Edward  StaS'ord,  Queen  Elizabeth's  ambassador,
arrived  at  St.  Denis  in  the  night  of  the  30th  August.

?3  De  Thou,  ubi  svp.

74  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIIl.

At  a  very  early  hour  next  morning  he  heard  a  shout
31  Aug.  Tinder  his  window,  and  looking  down  beheld
1590.  King  H  enry  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  cheerfnll}'
calling  Gilt  to  his  English  friend  as  he  passed  his  door.
"  Welcoming  us  after  his  familiar  manner,"  said  Staiford,
"he  desired  us,  in  re.spect  of  the  battle  every  hour
expected,  to  come  as  his  fiieuds  to  see  and  help  him,  and
not  to  treat  of  anytuing  which  afore  we  meant,  seeing
the  present  state  to  require  it,  and  the  enemy  so  near
that  we  might  well  have  been  interrupted  in  half-an-
hour's  talk,  and  necessity  constrained  the  king  to  be  in
every  corner,  where  for  the  most  part  we  follow  him."''*
That  day  Henry  took  up  his  headquartei's  at  the  monas-
tery of  Chelles,  a  fortified  place  within  six  leagues  of
Paris,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Marne.  His  army  was
drawn  up  in  a  wide  valley  somewhat  encumbered  with
wood  and  water,  extending  through  a  series  of  beautiful
pastures  towards  two  hills  of  moderate  elevation.  Lagny,
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  was  within  less  than  a  league
of  him  on  his  right  hand.  On  the  other  side  of  the  hills,
hardly  out  of  cannon-shot,  was  the  camp  of  the  allies.
Henry,  whose  natural  disposition  in  this  respect  needed
no  prompting,  was  most  eager  for  a  decisive  engagement.
The  circumstances  imperatively  required  it  of  him.  His
infantry  consisted  of  Frenchmen,  Netherlanders,  English,
Germans,  Scotch ;  but  of  his  cavalry  four  thousand  were
French  nobles,  serving  at  their  own  expense,  who  came
to  a  battle  as  to  a  banquet,  but  who  were  capable  of
riding  off  almost  as  rapidly,  should  the  feast  be  denied
them.  The}^  were  volunteers,  bringing  with  them  rations
for  but  a  few  days,  and  it  could  hardly  be  expected  that
they  would  remain  as"  patiently  as  did  Parma's  veterans,
who,  now  that  their  mutiny  had  been  appeased  by  pay-
ment of  a  portion  of  their  arrearages,  had  become  docile
again.  All  the  great  chieftains  who  surrounded  Henry,
whether  Catholic  or  Protestant — Montpensier,  Nevers,
Soissons,  Conti,  the  Birons,  Lavradin,  d'Aumont,  Tre-
mouille,  Turenne,  Chatillon,  La  None — were  urgent  for
the  conflict,  concerning  the  expediency  of  which  there
could  indeed  be  no  doubt,  while  the  king  was  in  raptures
at  the  opportunity  of  dealing  a  decisive  blow  at  the  con-

"4  Stafford  to  Burghley,  -^^>  1590. (s.  p.  Office  MS.)

1590.  ANXIETY  FOR  A  DECISIVE  BATTLE.  75

federacv  of  foreigners  and  rebels  who  had  so  long  defied
his  authority  and  deprived  him  of  his  rights.

Stattbrd  came  np  with  the  king,  according  to  his
cordial  invitation,  on  the  same  day,  and  saw  the  army  all
drawn  up  in  battle  array.  While  Henry  was  "  eating  a
morsel  in  an  old  house,"  Turenne  joined  him  with  six
or  seven  hundied  horsemen  and  between  four  and  five
thousand  infantry.  "  They  were  the  likeliest  footmen,"
said  Stafford,  "  the  best  countenanced,  the  best  furnished
that  ever  I  saw  in  my  life ;  the  most  part  of  them  old
soldiers  that  had  served  under  the  king  for  the  Eeligion
all  this  while."

The  envoy  was  especially  enthusiastic,  however,  in
regard  to  the  French  cavalry.  "  There  are  near  six
thousand  horse,"  said  he,  "  whereof  gentlemen  above
four  thousand,  about  twelve  hundred  other  French,  and
eight  hundred  reitern.  I  never  saw,  nor  I  think  never
any  man  saw,  in  France  such  a  company  of  gentlemen
together  so  well  horsed  and  so  well  armed."''®

Henry  sent  a  herald  to  the  camp  of  the  allies,  formally
challenging  them  to  a  general  engagement,  and  express-
ing a  hope  that  all  differences  might  now  be  settled  by
the  ordeal  of  battle,  rather  than  that  the  sufferings  of
the  innocent  people  should  be  longer  protracted.'^®

Farnese,  on  arriving  at  Meaux,  had  resolved  to  seek
the  enemy  and  take  the  hazaids  of  a  stricken  field.  He
had  misgivings  as  to  the  possible  result,  biit  he  expressly
announced  this  intention  in  his  letters  to  Philip,  and
Mayenne  confirmed  him  in  his  determination.''''  Never-
theless, finding  the  enemy  so  eager  and  having  reflected
more  maturely,  he  saw  no  reason  for  accepting  the
chivalrous  cartel.  As  commander-in-chief — for  Mayenne
willingly  conceded  the  supremacy  which  it  would  have
been  absurd  in  him  to  dispute — he  accordingly  replied
that  it  was  his  custom  to  refuse  a  combat  when  a  refusal
seemed  advantageous  to  himself,  and  to  offer  battle  when-
ever it  suited  his  purposes  to  fight.  When  that  moment
should  arrive  the  king  would  find  him  in  the  field.  And,
having  sent  this  courteous,  but  unsatisfactory  answer  to

7t  c.»  n- J  * T) 1,1 28  August  Bentivdglio,  Meteren,  tibi  SJtp.

'5  Stafford  to  Burghley, '1590. -,  „  . i>i -i- oo a  icr.^

° •'7  Sept.  ''  Parma to Phihp, 28 Aug. 1590k

S.  P.  Office  MS.)  (Arch.  Ue  Sim.  MS.)

'"  Bor, Coloma, Dondiiii, De Thou,

II.

7G  TlIK  UMTKI)  NKTIIKIil.ANDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

tlio  inipationt  "Roarnese/'  ho  gavo  orders  to  fortify  his
camp,  whicli  was  already  BTifficiontly  Ktrorif:^.  Seven  days
loii}^  tlie  two  aniiic^s  lay  faco  to  faee — Henry  and  his
chivalry  chalinij;  in  vain  for  the  h)n<j;ed-for  en<:;a}j;enient —
and  noMiin<i;  occnrred  hc.tween  tliose  forty  or  iilty  thou-
sand mortal  oneniies,  en(;ani|u'd  williin  a  milo  or  two  of
each  oth(M%  save  trifling  skiniiislieH  h'adinji;  to  no  result.'"

At  last  Farnese  <;,ive  orders  for  an  advance.  Jilonty,
commander  of  the  van<:;nard,  consistinj^  of  nearly  all  the
cavalry,  was  insirncted  to  move  slowly  forward  over
the  two  hills,  and  descending  on  the  opposite  side,  to
deploy  his  forces  in  two  great  wings  to  iho  right  and
left.  He  Avas  secretly  directed  in  this  movoment  to
magnify  as  much  as  possible  the  apparent  dimensions
of  liis  force.  Slowly  the  columns  moved  over  the  hills.
Scpiadion  after  scpiadron,  nearly  all  of  thorn  lancors,
with  their  pennons  flaunting  gaily  in  the  summer  wind,
displayed  Ihemselves  deliberately  and  ostentatiously  in
the  face  of  the  lioyalists.  Tho  splendid  light-horse  of
Basti,  tho  ponderous  troopers  of  the  Flemish  bands
of  ordnance  under  Chimay  and  Berlaymont,  and  tho
famous  Albanian  ami  Italian  cavalry,  were  mingled
with  the  vetc^ran  Leaguers  of  Franco  who  had  fought
under  tho  Halafre,  and  who  now  followed  the  fortunes
of  his  brother  ]\layenno.  It  was  an  imposing  demon-
stration.'"'

Henry  could  hardly  bolievo  his  eyes  as  tho  much-
coveted  oppoitunity,  of  which  he  had  been  so  many
days  dis!ippoint,ed,  at  last  pi'escntcd  itself,  and  he  waited
with  more  than  his  usual  caution  until  the  plan  of
attack  should  be  developed  by  his  great  antagonist.
Tarma,  on  his  side,  ]uossed  the  hand  of  Mayenne  as
ho  watched  the  movement,  saying  (]uietly,  "Wo  havo
already  fought  our  battle  and  gained  the  victory.'""  He
tlion  issued  orders  lor  tho  whole  battalia — which,  since
the  junctiim,  had  been  under  command  of  l\layenne,
Farneso  reserving  for  himself  tho  siqxqintendence  of
tho  entire  army — to  countermarch  rapiilly  towaids  tho

"  Colomn,  Bcntlvogllo,  Do  Thou,  uhi  forcns  of  Mayoniie  iinil  l''iiriiofl(>,  as  wo

*"/'■  liiivc  H('<Mi,  aniutintcil  to  18,000  foot  and

'"  Alrxnndor  estimated the foroi's  of  noon  Imrsc.

Henry  nt I. 1,000 foot uiul 5000  horse.  «'  Hor,  Coloiiia,  Bentlvogllo, Dondinl,

Sljidord  placed  them  at  17,000  foot  and  De  Thou,  Mctoren,  iibi  mp.

eooo  horse. Letters  cited. Tho  united  »'  Bentlvogllo,  loc.  eit.

1590,  rUKPAKATlON KOK  ATTACK.  77

Marno  and  tako  iij)  a  ]i(isili(i7i  (ii)])(iNil()  La;2;iiy.  La  Motto,
witli  tlio  iciu-^uard,  was  diioctcd  iiuiiu'diatcly  to  follow.
'J'lio  battalia  had  thus  Ixuiomo  tho  van,  tlio  rear<;uard  the
})attalia,  wliiUj  tho  wliolo  cavalry  corps  hy  tlii.s  niove-
iiiunt  had  b<>on  translbinicd  tVoiu  tho  vanf2;uaid  into  tho
rear.  ]{oiity  was  instructed  to  protect  his  manoeuvres,
to  restrain  the  skirniishin^i;  as  niiu^h  as  ])()ssil)le,  and  to
keep  theconimander-in-chicfconstaTilly  inl'onued  (il'every
occurrence.  In  the  ni<;ht  ho  was  to  intiench  and  fortify
himself  rajjidly  and  thoroughly,  without  changing  his
position.

Under  cover  of  this  feigned  attack,  Farneso  arrived  at
the  river  side  on  the  15th  Septend)er,  1590,  15  Sept.
soiz.ed  an  open  village  directly  oi)p(jsito  Lagny,  '''''"■
which  was  connected  with  it  by  a  stone  biidgo,  and
planted  a  battery  of  nine  pieces  of  heavy  artillery  directly
opi)OHite  the  town.  l-agny  was  foiiiiied  in  the  old-
fashioned  manner,  with  not  very  thick  walls,  and  with-
out a  terreplain.  its  ])osit ion,  however,  and  its  connnand
of  the  biidi;e,  seemed  to  render  an  assault  impossible,
and  J)e  la  Fin,  who  lay  there  with  a  garrison  of  twelve
hundred  Fi'onch,  had  no  fear  for  the  security  of  tho
place.  ]')ut  Farneso,  with  tho  ])recision  and  celerity
which  characterized  his  movements  on  special  occasions,
had  thrown  pontoon  bridges  across  the  river  three  miles
above,  and  sent  a  considoiable  force  of  Spanish  and
Walloon  infantry  to  the  other  side.  These  troops  were
ordered  to  hokl  themselves  leady  i'or  an  assault,  so  soon
as  tho  bat  1  caries  o])posi(e  should  eti'ect  a  piacticable  breach.
The  next  day  Henry,  reconnoitring  the  scene,  saw,  with
intense  indignation,  that  ho  had  been  completely  out-
generalled.  Jjagny,  the  key  to  tho  Marne,  by  holding
which  ho  had  cdosed  tho  door  on  nearly  all  the  food
8U]>plies  for  Paris,  was  about  to  be  wr(!sted  from  him.
What  should  he  do?  Should  ho  throw  himself  across
the  river  and  rescue  the  |)lace  befoie  it  fell  ?  'J'his  was
not  to  be  thought  of  even  by  the  aiulacious  156arneso.
]n  the  attemi)t  to  cross  tho  river,  under  tho  enemy's  fiie,
he  was  likely  to  lose  a  large  portion  of  his  army.  Should
ho  lling  himscdf  upon  Iventy's  division  which  had  so
ostentatiously  olVered  battU)  the  day  before?  This  at
least  might  be  attempted,  although  not  so  advantage-
ously as  would  have  been  the  case  on  tho  previous  after-

78  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

noon.  To  undevtake  this  was  tlie  result  of  a  I'apid
council  of  generals.  It  was  too  late.  Eenty  held  the
hills  so  firmly  entrenched  and  fortified  that  it  was  an
idle  hope  to  carry  them  by  assault.  He  might  hurl
column  after  column  against  those  heights,  and  pass
the  day  in  seeing  his  men  mowed  to  the  earth  without
result.

His  soldiers,  magnificent  in  the  open  field,  could  not
be  relied  upon  to  carry  so  strong  a  position  by  sudden
storm,  and  there  was  no  time  to  be  lost.  He  felt  the
enemy  a  little.  There  was  some  small  skirmitshing,  and
while  it  was  going  on,  Farnese  opened  a  tremendous  fire
across  the  river  upon  Lagny.  The  weak  walls  soon  crum-
bled, a  breach  was  effected,  the  signal  for  assault  was
given,  and  the  troops,  posted  on  the  other  side,  after  a
brief  but  sanguinary  struggle,  overcame  all  resistance,
and  were  masters  of  the  town.  The  whole  garrison,
twelve  hmidred  strong,  was  butchered, ^^  and  the  city
thoroughly  sacked  ;  for  Farnese  had  been  brought  up  in
the  old-fashioned  school  of  Alva  and  Julian  Eomero  and
Commander  Eequesens.

Thus  Laguy  was  seized  before  the  eyes  of  Henry,  who
was  forced  to  look  helplessly  on  his  great  antagonist's
triumph.*^  He  had  come  forth  in  full  panoply  and
abounding  confidence  to  ofler  battle.  He  was  foiled
of  his  combat,  and  he  had  lost  the  prize.  Never  was
blow  more  successfully  parried,  a  counter-stroke  more
ingeniously  planted.  The  bridges  of  Charenton  and  St.
Maur  now  fell  into  Farnese's  hands  without  a  contest.
In  an  incredibly  short  space  of  time  provisions  and  muni-
tions were  poured  into  the  starving  city,  two  thousand
boat-loads  arriving  in  a  single  day.  Paris  was  relieved.^
Alexander  liad  made  his  demonstration,  and  solved  the
problem.  He  had  left  the  Netherlands  against  his  judg-
ment, but  he  had  at  least  accomplished  his  French  work
as  none  but  he  could  have  done  it.  The  king  was  now
in  worse  plight  than  ever.**^ His  army  fell  to  pieces.

»•-  Cnloma,  loc.  cit.  cyniraUy,  "  If  with  his  loss  was  lost  DO-
S' Coloiua,  De  Thou, Dondini,  Benti-  thing 1 would care but  little,  though
TOglio,  Meteren,  uU  sup.  somewhat  for  Christianity,  but  it  makelh
*'  Ibid.  my  heart  bleed  to  thinlc  if  the  Spaniard
»5  "  I  dare  assure  you  this  l<ing  run-  grow  here  (as  he  beginueth  to  settle,  and
neth  as  hard  a  fortune  as  ever  he  did  in  that  deeplier  than  I  could  ever  have  be-
hid  life,"  said  Stafford,  adding  somewhat  lieved  trenchmen's  hearts  would  have

1590.  DESERTION  OF  THE  KING'S  ARMY.  79

His  cavaliers,  cheated  of  their  battle,  and  having  neither
food  nor  forage,  rode  oif  by  hundreds  every  day,  "  Our
state  is  such,"  said  Stalibrd,  on  the  IGth  September,
"  and  so  far  unexpected  and  wonderful,  that  I  am  almost
ashamed  to  vi^rite,  because  methinks  everybody  should
think  I  dream.  Myself  seeing  of  it  methinketh  that  I
dream.  For,  my  lord,  to  see  au  army  such  a  one  I  think
as  I  shall  never  see  again — especially  for  horsemen  and
gentlemen — to  ttike  a  mind  to  disband  upon  the  taking
of  such  a  paltry  thing  as  Lagny,  a  town  no  better  indeed
than  Eochester,  it  is  a  thing  so  strange  to  me  that  seeing
of  it  I  can  scarce  believe  it.  They  make  their  excuses
of  their  want,  which  1  know  indeed  is  gi-eat — for  there
were  few  left  with  one  penny  in  their  purses — but  yet
that  extremity  could  not  be  such  but  that  they  might
have  tarried  ten  da3's  or  fifteen  at  the  most  that  the  king

desired  of  them From  six  thousand  horse  that

we  were  and  above,  we  are  come  to  two  thousand — and
I  do  not  see  an  end  of  our  leave-takers,  for  those  be
hourly.

"  The  most  I  can  see  we  can  make  account  of  to  tarry
are  the  Viscount  Turenne's  troops,  and  Monsieur  de  Cha-
tillon's,  and  our  Switzers,  and  Lansquenettes,  which
make  very  near  five  thousand.  The  first  that  went
away,  though  he  sent  word  to  the  king  an  hour  before
he  would  tarry,  was  the  Count  Soissons,  by  whose  parting
on  a  sudden  and  without  leave-taking,  we  judge  a  discon-
tentment." ^"^

The  king's  army  seemed  fading  into  air.  Making
virtue  of  necessity  he  withdrew  to  St.  Denis,  and
decided  to  disband  his  forces,  reserving  to  himself  only
a  flying  camp  with  which  to  harass  the  enemy  as  often
as  opportunity  should  ofl'er.

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  Bearnese  had  been
thoroughly  out-generalled.  "  It  was  not  God's  will,"
said  Stafford,  who  liad  been  in  constant  attendance  upon
Henry  through  the whole  business;  "we  deserved it

endured)  what  miscliiof  will  follow  to  us ;  that  the  helps  out  of  Germany  may  bring

and  therefore  in  the  mean  time,  while  iliey  . r* „ t^ « j  ^ r. i< 2s  Aug.

u -^  A  r -r  ,-u \, .  hereafter." Stafford  to  Burghley,  irz—,-

may  be  provided  for,  if  there  be  not  pre-  7  feept.

sent  order  given  to  send  men  into  Flanders 1590. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

to  make  a  present  retractive  for  the  Prince 86  Stafford  to  Burghley,  -  Sept  1590

of  Parma,  I  dj  not  only  doubt,  hut  I  do  16 *  '

a.ssure myself  that we shall  not  have i^-  ^-  ^^^^  MS.)

leisure  to  tarry  here,  or  expect  the  good

80  THE  UNITED  NETHEIiLANDS.  Chap.  XXIII,

not ;  for  the  king  might  as  easily  have  had  Paris  as
drunk,  four  or  five  times.  And  at  the  last,  if  he  had
not  committed  those  faults  that  children  would  not  have
done,  only  with  the  desire  to  fight  and  give  the  battle
(which  the  other  never  meant),  he  had  had  it  in  the
Duke  of  i'arma's  sight  as  he  took  Lagny  in  ours."*^  He
had  been  foiled  of  the  battle  on  which  he  had  set  his
heart,  and  in  which  he  felt  confident  of  overthrowing
the  great  captain  of  the  ago,  and  trampling  the  League
■under  his  feet.  His  capital  just  ready  to  sink  exhausted
into  his  hands  had  been  wrested  from  his  grasp,  and  was
alive  with  new  hope  and  new  defiance.  The  League
was  triumphant,  his  own  army  scattering  to  the  four
winds.  Even  a  man  of  high  courage  and  sagacity  might
have  been  in  despair.  Yet  never  were  the  magnificent
hopefulness,  the  wise  audacity  of  Henry  more  signally
manifested  than  now  when  he  seemed  most  blunder-
ing and  most  furlorn.  His  hardy  nature  ever  met  dis-
aster with  so  cheerful  a  smile  as  almost  to  perplex
disaster  herself.

Unwilling  to  relinquish  his  grip  without  a  last  efi'ort,
he  resolved  on  a  midnight  assault  upon  Paris.  Hoping
that  the  joy  at  being  relieved,  the  unwonted  feasting
which  had  succeeded  the  long  fasting,  and  the  conscious-
ness of  security  from  the  presence  of  the  combined
armies  of  the  victorious  League,  would  throw  garrison
and  citizens  off"  their  guard,  he  came  into  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  Faubourgs  St,  Jacques,  St.  Germain,  St.
Marcel,  and  St.  Michel  on  the  night  of  9th  September.
A  despei-ate  effort  was  made  to  escalade  the  walls  be-
tween St.  Jacques  and  St.  Germain.  Jt  was  foiled,  not
by  the  soldiers  nor  the  citizens,  but  by  the  sleepless
Jesuits,  who,  as  often  before  during  this  memorable
siege,  had  kept  guard  on  the  ramparts,  and  who  now
gave  the  alarm.***  The  first  assailants  were  hurled  from
their  ladders,  the  city  was  roused,  and  the  Duke  of
Nemours  was  soon  on  the  spot,  ordering  burning  pitch
hoops,  stones,  and  other  missiles  to  be  thrown  down
upon  the  invaders.  The  escalade  was  baffled  ;  yet  once
more  that  night,  jnat  before  dawn,  the  king  in  person

^  Stafford  to  Burghley.  1  Sopt.  1590. ^l^.^'^r;;^^:^^  t^^l^
(S.  P.  OfBce  MS.  Coloma,  lii.  51.

"8  "Acudierou  log  primeros  li  la  mu-

I

1590.  ATTEMPTED  ESCALADE.  81

renewed  the  attack  on  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain.
The  faithful  Stafford  stood  by  his  side  in  the  trenches,
and  was  witness  to  his  cool  determination,  his  indomi-
table hope.  La  None  too  was  there,  and  was  wounded
in  the  leg — an  accident  the  results  of  which  were  soon
to  cause  much  weeping  through  Christendom.*^  Had
one  of  those  garlands  of  blazing  tar  which  all  night
had  been  fluttering  from  the  walls  of  Paris  alighted  by
chance  on  the  king's  head  there  might  have  been  an-
other history  of  Fi-ance.  The  ladders,  too,  proved
several  feet  too  short,  and  there  were  too  ft)W  of  them.
Had  they  been  more  numerous  and  longer,  the  tale
misrht  have-  been  a  different  one.  As  it  was,  the  king;
was  forced  to  retire  with  the  approaching  daylight.^"

The  characteristics  of  the  great  commander  of  the
Huguenots  and  of  the  Leagueis'  chieftain  respectively
were  well  illustrated  in  several  incidents  of  this  memor-
able campaign.  Farnese  had  been  informed  by  scoiits
and  spies  of  this  intended  as^sault  by  Henry  on  the
walls  of  Paris.  With  his  habitual  caution  he  discredited
the  stoiy.^^  Had  he  believed  it,  he  might  have  fol-
lowed the  king  in  overwhelming  force  and  taken  him
captive.  The  penalty  of  Henry's  unparalleled  boldness
was  thus  remitted  by  Alexander's  exuberant  discre-
tion.

Soon  afterwards  Farnese  laid  siege  to  Coi-beil.  This
little  place — owing  to  the  extraordinary  skill  and  de-
termination of  its  commandant,  Kigaut,  an  old  Hugue-
not officer,  who  had  fought  with  La  ISoue  in  Flanders
— resisted  for  nearly  four  weeks. It  was  assaulted  at

^  Meteren,  ubi  sup.  when  we  came  there  our  ladders  were  too

*•  Colonia, Bontivoglio, Pniidini, De  shon  by  five  loot,  the  larme  in  the  town

Thou,  Meteren,  ubi  sup. '•  The  king  to  an  hour  before  and  no  word  of  any  iiitel-

stay awhile,  his  troops  togt'ther  had  an  ligence,  and  so  we  retired  without  Paris,

enterprise  on  Paris  this  day  se"iiight  at  whicli  I  dare  assure  you  the  king  might

night,  and,  with  some  intelligence  that  have  bad  above  iive  times  within  these

lie  said  he  had  in  it  which  1  could  per-  Cve  months,  but  he  is  too  pood  a  king,

wive no  token  of,  had  an  enterprise  to  and  lovcth  his  subjects  too  well  tliat  hatp

take  it  by  escalade,  and  to  that  purpose  him  deadly. There  was  upon  tlie  return

had 600IJ footmen  and  12UU  horse tliat  of  that  enterprise  no  stay,  but  everybody

passed  the bridge that  he  had  made  at  would  be  gone,  and  tlie  king,  seeing  that

Gonlolar  with  boats. The  king  himself  there  was  no  remedy,  gave  iheni  leave  on

was  in  the  enterprise,  and  J  with  him,  and  promise  of  return."  Stafford  to  Binghley,

in  the  ditch  with  hiin,  ihongh  when  he  ggpt.  -  1590. (S.  P.  Office  M.S.)
told  me  the  manner  1  saw  it  impossible,  ">

yet  1  went  with  him  because  he  should "'  Co'oraa.iii.  51".
aot  say  1  was  against  it  for  fear. B>it

VOL.  III.  a

82  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

last,  Eigaut  killed,  the  gaiTi.son  of  one  thousand  French
soldiers  put  to  the  sword,  and  the  town  sacked.  With
the  fall  of  Corbeil  both  the  Seine  and  Marne  were  re-
opened.^^

Alexander  then  made  a  visit  to  Paris,  where  he  was
received  with  great  enthusiasm.  The  legate,  whose
29  August,  efforts  and  whose  money  had  so  much  contri-
1590.  buted  to  th»3  successful  defence  of  the  capital,

had  returned  to  Italy  to  participate  in  the  election  of  a
new  pope.  For  the  "  Huguenot  pope,"  ^^  Sixtus  V.,  had
died  at  the  end  of  August,  having  never  bestowed  on
the  League  any  of  his  vast  accumulated  treasures  to
help  it  in  its  utmost  need.  It  was  not  surprising  that
Philip  was  indignant,  and  had  resorted  to  menace  of
various  kinds  against  the  holy  father,  when  he  found
him  swaying  so  perceptibly  in  the  direction  of  the
hated  Bearnese.  Of  course  when  he  died  his  complaint
was  believed  to  be  Spanish  poison.  In  those  days,  none
but  the  very  obscure  were  thought  capable  of  dying
natural  deaths,  and  Philip  was  esteemed  too  consum-
mate an  artist  to  allow  so  formidable  an  adversary  as
Sixtus  to  pass  away  in  God's  time  only.  Certainly  his
death  was  hailed  as  matter  of  great  rejoicing  by  the
Spanish  party  in  Rome,  and  as  much  ignominy  be-
stowed upon  his  memory  as  if  he  had  been  a  heretic  ;
while  in  Paris  his  decease  was  celebrated  with  bonfires
and  other  marks  of  popular  hilarity.^

To  circumvent  the  great  Huguenot's  reconciliation
with  the  Roman  Church  was  of  course  an  indispensable
portion  of  Philip's  plan ;  for  none  could  be  so  dull  as
not  to  perceive  that  the  resistance  of  Paris  to  its  heretic
sovereign  would  cease  to  be  very  effective,  so  soon  as
the  sovereign  had  ceased  to  be  heretic.  It  was  most
important  therefore  that  the  successor  of  Sixtus  should
be  the  tool  of  Spain.  The  leading  confederates  were
well  aware  of  Henry's  intentions  to  renounce  the  re-
formed faith,  and  to  return  to  the  communion  of  Rome
whenever  he  could  formally  accomplish  that  measure.

^  Coloma,  iii.  51,  seoq. Betitivoolio,  o.  o,  „ „ U  „

Dondini,  I)e  Thou,  Meteren.  vbi  sup.  '  ^Ufford  to  Burghley.  -  Sept.  1590.

93  "  At  Paris  the  pope  is  accounted  a  (S.  V.  Office  MS.) De  Thou,  t.  xi.  lib.  97

Huguenot." Lyly  to  Walsitigbam,  April  pp.  270-273.

^1590. (S.  P.  Office  MS )

1590.  HENRY'S  CONTEMPLATED  CONVERSION.  83

The  crafty  Bearnese  knew  full  well  that  the  road  to
Paris  lay  through  the  gates  of  Kome.  Yet  it  is  proof
either  of  the  privacy  with  which  great  public  matters
were  then  transacted,  or  of  the  extraordinary  powers  of
deceit  with  which  Henry  was  gifted,  that  the  leaders
of  protestantism  were  still  hoodwinked  in  regard  to  his
attitude.  Notwithstanding  the  embassy  of  Luxembourg,
and  the  many  other  indications  of  the  king's  intentions,
Queen  Elizabeth  continued  to  regard  him  as  the  great
champion  of  the  reformed  faith.  IShe  had  just  sent  him
an  emerald,  which  she  had  herself  worn,  accompanied
by  the  expression  of  her  wish  that  the  king  in  wearing
it  might  never  strike  a  blow  without  demolishing  an
enemy,  and  that  in  his  farther  progress  he  might  put
all  his  enemies  to  rout  and  confusion.  "  You  will
remind  the  king,  too,"  she  added,  "  that  the  emerald
has  this  virtue,  never  to  break  so  long  as  faith  remaint;
entire  and  firm.^'"

And  the  shrewd  Stafford,  who  was  in  daily  atten-
dance upon  him,  informed  his  sovereign  that  there  were
no  symptoms  of  wavering  on  Henry's  part.  "The
Catholics  here,"  said  he,  "  cry  hard  upon  the  king  to  be
a  Catholic  or  else  that  he  is  lost,  and  they  would  per-
suade him  that  for  all  their  calling  in  the  Spaniards,
both  Paris  and  all  other  towns  will  yield  to  him,  if
he  will  but  assure  them  that  he  will  become  a  Ca-
tholic. For  my  part,  1  think  they  would  laugh  at
him  when  he  had  done  so,  and  so  1  find  he  believeth
the  same,  if  he  had  mind  to  it,  which  I  find  no  dis-
position in  him  unto  it.'"'"'  The  not  very  distant  futuri;
was  to  show  what  the  disposition  of  the  bold  Gascon
really  was  in  this  great  matter,  and  whether  he  was
likely  to  reap  nothing  but  ridicule  from  his  apostasy,
should  it  indeed  become  a  fact.  Meantime  it  was  the
opinion  of  the  wisest  sovereign  in  Europe,  and  of  one  of
the  most  adroit  among  her  diplomatists,  that  there  was
really  nothing  in  the  rumours  as  to  the  king's  contem-
plated conversion.

95  <■  Vous  ferez souvenir  au  roi  que from  hunting." 13  Aug.  1590. (S. i'.

Tesnieraude  a  ceste  vertu  de ne point Office  MS.)

rompre  (a  ce  que  Ton  diet)  tant  que  la <«  c.  „ ,  , „ i, l*  r. .

t A  .• ..  <• ,^  ^  S  alTord  to  Burgbley,  —  Sept.  15»0

foy  dfineure  eiitiere  et  tc-rme. Queen  to  ° •^24 f  • "  "

the  Fiench  Ambas,<ador,  "  trom  Oallands, Ibid.

oa  a  Saturday  night,  after  her  coming

G 2

84  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap,  XXIH-

It  was,  of  course,  unfortunate  for  Henry  that  his
staunch  friend  and  admirer  Sixtus  was  no  more.  But
English  diplomacy  could  do  but  little  in  Eome,  and  men
were  trembling  with  apprehension  lest  that  arch-enemy
of  Elizabeth,  that  devoted  friend  of  Philip,  the  English
Cardinal  Allen,  should  be  elected  to  the  papal  throne.
"  Great  ado  is  made  in  Eome,"  said  Stafford,  "  by  the
Spanish  ambassador,  by  all  corruptions  and  waj'S  that
may  be,  to  make  a  pope  that  must  needs  depend  and
be  altogether  at  the  King  of  Spain's  devotion.  If  the
princes  of  Italy  put  not  their  hands  unto  it,  no  doubt
they  will  have  their  wills,  and  I  fear  greatly  our  villan-
ous  Allen,  fi)r,  in  my  judgment,  I  can  comprehend  no
man  more  with  reason  to  be  tied  altogether  to  the  King
of  Spain's  will  than  he.  I  pray  God  send  him  either  to
God  or  the  Devil  first.  An  evil-minded  Englishman,
tied  to  the  King  of  Spain  by  necessity,  finding  almost
four  millions  of  money,  is  a  dangerous  beast  for  a  pope
in  this  time."*'

Cardinal  Allen  was  doomed  to  disappointment.  His
candidacy  was  not  successful,  and,  after  the  brief  reign
— thirteen  days  long — of  Urban  VII.,  Sfondrato  wore  the
triple  tiara  with  the  title  of  Gregory  XIV.  Before
the  year  closed,  that  pontiff"  had  issued  a  brief  urging
the  necessity  of  extirpating  heresy  in  France,  and  of
electing  a  Catholic  king,  and  asserting  his  determina-
tion to  send  to  Paris — that  bulwark  of  the  Catholic  faith
— not  empty  words  alone  but  troops,  to  be  paid  fifteen
thousand  crowns  of  gold  each  month,  so  long  as  the  city
should  need  assistance.'''*  It  was  therefore  probable  that
the  great  leader  of  the  Huguenots,  now  that  he  had  been
defeated  by  Farnese,  and  that  his  capital  was  still  loj^al
to  the  League,  would  obtain  less  favour — however  con-
scientiously he  might  instract  himself — from  Gregory
XIV.  than  he  had  begun  to  find  in  the  eyes  of  Sixtus
after  the  triumph  of  Ivry.

Parma  refreshed  his  army  by  a  fortnight's  repose,  and
early  in  November  determined  on  his  return  to  the
Netherlands.  The  Leaguers  were  aghast  at  his  decision,
and  earnestly  besought  him  to  remain.  But  the  duke
had  given  them  back  their  capital,  and  although  this
had  been  accomplished  without  much  bloodshed  in  theii

9?  MS.  letter  last  cited.  ^  De  Thou,  t.  xi.  Ub.  97,  p.  343.

1590.  RE-CAPTURE  OF  LAGNY  AND  CORBEIL.  85

army  or  liis  own,  sickness  was  now  making  sad  ravages
among  his  troops,  and  there  was  small  supply  of  food  or
forage  for  such  large  forces  as  had  now  been  accumulated
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris.  Moreover,  dis.sensions
were  breaking  out  between  the  Spaniards,  Italians,  and
Netherlanders  of  the  relieving  army  with  their  French
allies.  The  soldiers  and  peasants  hated  the  foreigners
w^ho  came  there  as  victors,  even  although  to  assist  the
Leaguers  in  overthrovnng  the  laws,  government,  and
nationality  of  France.  The  stragglers  and  wounded  on
Farnese's  march  were  killed  by  the  country  people  in
considerable  numbers,  and  it  was  a  pure  impossibility
for  him  longer  to  delay  his  return  •  to  the  provinces
which  so  much  against  his  will  he  had  deserted.

He  marched  back  by  way  of  Champagne  7-ather  than
by  that  of  Picardy,  in  order  to  deceive  the  king.
Scarcely  had  he  arrived  in  Cham])agne  when  he  heard
of  the  retaking  of  Laguy  and  Corbeil.  So  soon  as  his
back  was  turned,  the  League  thus  showed  its  impotence
to  retain  the  advantage  which  his  genius  had  won.
Corbeil,  which  had  cost  him  a  month  of  hard  work,
was  recaptured  in  two  days.  Lagny  fell  almost  as
quickly.  Earnestly  did  the  confederates  implore  him
to  return  to  their  rescue,  but  he  declined  almost  con-
temptuously to  retrace  his  steps.  His  march  was  con-
ducted in  the  same  order  and  with  the  same  precision
which  had  marked  his  advance.  Henry,  with  his  flying
camp,  hung  upon  his  track,  harassing  him  now  in  front,
now  in  rear,  now  in  flank.  None  of  the  skirmishes  were
of  much  military  importance.  A  single  cavalry  com-
bat, however,  in  which  old  Marshal  Biron  was  nearly
surrounded  and  was  in  imminent  danger  of  death  or
capture,  until  chivalrously  rescued  by  the  king  in  person
at  the  head  of  a  squadron  of  lancers,  will  always  possess
romantic  interest.^^  In  a  subsequent  encounter,  near
Baroges  on  the  Vesle,  Henry  had  sent  Biron  forward
with  a  few  companies  of  horse  to  engage  some  five
hundred  carabineers  of  Farnese  on  their  march  towards
the  frontier,  and  had  himself  followed  close  upon  the
track  with  his  usual  eagerness  to  witness  or  participate
in  every  battle. Suddenly  Alphonse  Corse,  who  rode

»  Bentivoglio,  P.  II.  lib.  v.  348.  349.  Dondini,  ii.  363,  seiq.  Coloma,  iii.  52,  sc'ig.
Report  of  the  Kings  actions  by  Grimstone,  23-28  Nav.  1590. (S.  P.  Office  MS.J

86  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIII.

at  Henry's  side,  pointed  out  to  him,  not  more  than  a
hundred  paces  off,  an  officer  wearing  a  felt  hat,  a  great
ruff,  and  a  little  furred  cassock,  mounted  on  a  horse
without  armour  or  caparisons,  galloping  up  and  down
and  brandishing  his  sword  at  the  carabineers  to  compel
them  1o  fall  back.  This  was  the  Duke  of  Parma,  and
thus  the  two  great  champions  of  the  Huguenots  and  of
the  Leaguers — the  tivo  foremost  captains  of  the  age —
had  met  face  to  face.""  At  that  moment  La  Noue,  riding
up,  informed  the  king  that  he  had  seen  the  whole  of
the  enemy's  horse  and  foot  in  battle  array,  and  Henry,
suspecting  the  retreat  of  Farnese  to  be  a  feint  for  the
purpose  of  luring  him  on  with  his  small  force  to  an
attack,  gave  orders  to  retire  as  soon  as  possible."^

At  Guise,  on  the  frontier,  the  duke  parted  with
Mayenne,  leaving  with  him  an  auxiliary  force  of  four
thousand  foot  and  five  hundred  horse,  which  he  could
ill  spare.  He  then  returned  to  Brussels,  which  city
4  Dec.  he  reached  on  the  4th  December,  filling  every
1590.  hotel  and  hospital  with  his  sick  soldiers,  and
having  left  one-third  of  his  numbers  behind  him.  He
had  manifested  his  own  militarj^  skill  in  the  adroit  and
successful  manner  in  which  he  had  accomplished  the
relief  of  Paris,  while  the  barrenness  of  the  result  from
the  whole  expedition  vindicated  the  political  sagacity
with  which  he  had  remonstrated  against  his  sovereign's
infatuation.

Paris,  with  the  renewed  pressure  on  its  two  great
arteries  at  Lagny  and  Corbeil,  soon  fell  into  as  great
danger  as  befoie ;  the  obedient  Netherlands  during  the
absence  of  Farnese  had  been  sinking  rapidly  to  ruin,
while,  on  the  other  hand,  great  progress  and  still  greater
prepaiations  in  aggressive  warfare  had  been  made  by
the  youthful  general  and  stadholder  of  the  Eepublic."^

'"o  Grimstone's  letter. MS.  last  cited.  Lo  succdido,  &c. (Arch, de  Sim.  MS.)

Compare  Coloma, Dondini,  Benlivoglio,  Tarma  to  Philip,  3  and  21  Oct.  1590. —

ubisup.  Ibid. Same to  same,  19  Nov.  1590. —

'"1  Ibid.  Ibid. S.ime  to  same,  28  Nov. 1590. —

lo^  Coloma,  Dondini,  Bendvogli  >,  uhi  Hid. Same  to  same,  31  Dec. 1590.—

tup. De  Thou,  t.  xi  lib.  p.  97,  205,  setiq.  Ibid.

1590.  STATE  OF  THE  REPUBLICAN  ARMY".  87

CHxiPTEE XXIV.

Prince  Maurice — State  of  the  Republican  army — Martial  science  of  the  period — Re-
formation of  the  military  system  by  Prince  Maurice — His  military  genius — Cam-
paign in  the  Netherlands — The  fort  and  town  of  Zutphen  taken  by  the  States'
forces — Attack  upon  Deventer — Its  capitulation — Advance  on  Groningen,  Delfzyl,
Opslag,  Yementil,  Steen-n-yk,  and  other  places — Famese  besieges  Fort  linodsen-
burg — Prince  Maurice  hastens  to  its  relief — A  skirmish  ensues  resulting  in  the
discomfiture  of  the  Spanish  and  Italian  troopa — Surrender  of  Hulst  and  Nymegen
— Close  of  military  operations  of  the  year.

Whilk  the  events  revealed  in  the  last  chapter  had  been
occupying  the  energies  of  Farnese  and  the  resources  of
his  sovereign,  there  had  been  ample  room  for  Prince
Maurice  to  mature  his  projects,  and  to.  make  a  satis-
factory beginning  in  the  field.  Although  Alexander
had  returned  to  the  Netherlands  before  the  end  of  the
year  1590,  and  did  not  set  forth  on  his  second  French
campaign  until  late  in  the  following  year,  yet  the  con-
dition of  his  health,  the  exhaustion  of  his  funds,  and  the
dwindling  of  his  army,  made  it  imposhible  for  him  to
render  any  effectual  opposition  to  the  projects  of  the
youthful  general.

For  the  first  time  Maurice  was  ready  to  put  his  theories
and  studies  into  practice  on  an  extensive  scale.  Com-
pared with  modern  armaments,  the  warlike  machineiy
to  be  used  for  liberating  the  repriblic  from  its  foreign
oppressors  woiild  seem  almost  diminutive.  But  the
science  and  skill  of  a  commander  are  to  be  judged  by
the  results  he  can  work  out  with  the  materials  within
reach.  His  progress  is  to  be  measured  by  a  comparison
with  the  progress  of  his  contemporaiies — coheirs  with
him  of  what  Time  had  thus  far  bequeathed.

The  regular  army  of  tlie  lepubiic,  as  reconstructed,
was  but  ten  thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse,  but
it  was  capable  of  being  largely  expanded  by  the  train-
bands of  the  cities,  well  disciplined  and  enured  to  hard-
ship, and  by  the  levies  of  German  reiters  and  other
foreign  auxiliaries  in  such  numbers  as  could  be  paid
for  by  the  hard-pressed  exchequer  of  the  provinces.

88  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIV.

To  the  state-council,  according  to  its  original  consti-
tution, belonged  the  levying  and  disbanding  of  troops,
the  conferring  of  military  offices,  and  the  supervision  of
military  operations  by  sea  and  land.  It  was  its  duty  to
see  that  all  officers  made  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United
Provinces.

The  course  of  Leicester's  administration,  and  especially
the  fatal  treason  of  Stanley  and  of  York,  made  it  seem
important  for  the  true  lovers  of  their  country  to  vprest
from  the  state-council,  vv^here  the  English  had  two  seats,
all  political  and  military  power.  And  this,  as  has  been
seen,  was  practically  but  illegally  accomplished.  The
silent  revolution  by  which  at  this  epoch  all  the  main
attributes  of  government  passed  into  the  hands  of  the
States-General — acting  as  a  league  of  sovereignties — has
already  been  indicated.  The  period  during  which  the
council  exercised  functions  conferred  on  it  by  the  States-
General  themselves  was  brief  and  evanescent.  The
jealousy  of  the  separate  provinces  soon  prevented  the
state-council — a  supreme  executive  body  entrusted  with
the  general  defence  of  the  commonwealth — from  causing
troops  to  pass  into  or  out  of  one  province  or  another
without  a  patent  from  his  Excellency  the  Prince,  not  as
chief  of  the  whole  army,  but  as  governor  and  captain-
general  of  Holland,  or  Gelderland,  or  Utrecht,  as  the  case
might  be.

The  highest  military  office  in  the  Netherlands  was  that
of  captain-general  or  supreme  commander.  This  quality
was  from  earliest  times  united  to  that  of  stadholder,
who  stood,  as  his  title  implied,  in  the  place  of  the  reign-
ing sovereign,  whether  count,  duke,  king,  or  emperor.
After  the  foundation  of  the  Republic  this  dynastic  form,
like  many  others,  remained,  and  thus  Prince  Maurice
was  at  first  only  captain-general  of  Holland  and  Zee-
land,  and  subsequently  of  Gelderland,  Utrecht,  and
(Jveryssel,  after  he  had  been  appointed  stadholder  of
those  three  provinces  in  151(0  on  the  death  of  Count
Nieuwenaar.  However  much  in  reality  he  was  general-
in-chief  of  the  army,  he  never  in  all  his  life  held  the
appointment  of  captain-general  of  the  Union.

To  obtain  a  captain's  commission  in  the  army,  it  was
necessary  to  have  served  four  years,  while  three  years'
service  was  the  necessary  preliminary  to  the  post  of

1590.  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION,  89

lieutenant  or  ensign.  Three  candidates  were  presented
by  the  province  for  each  office,  from  whom  the  stad-
holder  appointed  one.  The  commissions,  except  those
of  the  highest  commanders,  were  made  out  in  the  name
of  the  States-General,  by  advice  and  consent  of  the
council  of  state.  The  oath  of  allegiance,  exacted  from
soldiers  as  well  as  officers,  mentioned  the  name  of  the
particular  province  to  which  they  belonged,  as  well  as
that  of  the  States-General.^  It  thus  appeared  that,  espe-
cially after  Maurice's  first  and  successful  campaigns,
the  supreme  authority  over  the  army  really  belonged  to
the  States-General,  and  that  the  powers  of  the  state-
council  in  this  regard  fell,  in  the  course  of  four  years,
more  and  more  into  the  back-ground,  and  at  last  disap-
peared almost  entirely.  During  the  active  period  of  the
war,  however,  the  effect  of  this  revcjlution  was  in  fact
rather  a  greater  concentration  of  military  power  than  its
dispersion,  for  the  States-General  meant  simply  the  pro-
vince of  Holland. Holland  was  the  republic.

The  organization  of  the  infantry  was  very  simple.  The
tactical  unit  was  the  company.  A  temporary  combina-
tion of  several  companies  made  a  regiment,  commanded
by  a  colonel  or  lieutenant-colonel,  but  f  n-  such  regiments
there  was  no  regular  organization.  Sometimes  six  or
seven  companies  were  thus  combined,  sometimes  three
times  that  number,  but  the  strength  of  a  force,  however
large,  was  always  estimated  by  the  number  of  companies,
not  of  regiments.^

The  normal  strength  of  an  infantry  company,  at  the

1  For  example,  the  oath  for  a  soldier  of  Lodewijk  Mulder,  Kapitein  derlnfanterie.

Holland  was: — I  promise  and swear  to  's  Gravenhage  Martinus  Nyhoff,  1862,  pp.

the  States-General  of  the  United  Nether-  xlvi.  xlvii. All  lovers  of  Dutch  hisloiy

lands  who  remain  by  the  Union,  and  by  must  sincerely  rejoice  that  this  valuable

the  maintenance  of  the  reformed  religion,  contemporary  manuscript  is  at  lu-st in

and also to the knights, nobles, and  course  of  publication,  and  that  it  is  in  the

regents (magistrates),  of  the  countship  hands  of  so  accomplished and  able  an

and  province  of  Holland  represcntmg  the  editor. I  am  under  the  deepest  obliga-

States  of  said  province,  and  therewith  to  tious  to  Cai^tain  Mulder  for  ttie  inlorma-

the  States  of  the  other  provinces  in  which  tion  derived,  in regard  to the military

J may  be employed,  and also to the  history  of  this  epoch  in  the  Nt  therlands,

regents  of  the  cities as  weU  within  as  from  his  learned  and  lucid  introduction,

without  the  province  of  Holland  where  I  and  in  drawing  largely  and  almost  exdu-

may  be  placed  in  garrison  to  be  faithful  sively  from  this  source  in  the  first  part  of

and  true. See  'Journaal  van Anthoms  the present  diapter,  I  desire  to  express

iJuyck  ' (i:j91  — 1602): uitgegeven op  my  thanks  in  the  warmest  manner.
I.ast  van  het  Departemtnt  van  Oorlog, ^  Mulder,  Inleiding,  L  li.
met  Inleiding en Aaiiteelceningen  door

90  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIV.

beginning  of  Maurice's  career,  may  be  stated  at  one
hundred  and  thirteen,  comminded  by  one  captain,
one  lieutenant,  one  ensign,  and  by  the  usual  non-com-
missioned officers.  Each  company  was  composed  of
musketeers,  harquebusseers,  pikemen,  halberdeers,  and
buckler-men.  Long  after  portable  firearms  had  come
into  use,  the  greater  portion  of  foot  soldiers  continued
to  be  armed  with  pikes,  until  the  introduction  of  the
fixed  bayonet  enabled  the  musketeer  to  do  likewise
the  duty  of  pikeman.  Maurice  was  among  the  first  to
appreciate  the  advantage  of  portable  firearms,  and  he
accordingly  increased  the  proportion  of  soldiers  armed
with  the  musket  in  his  companies.  In  a  company  of  a
hundred  and  thiiteen,  including  officers,  he  had  sixty-
four  armed  with  firelocks  to  thirty  carrying  pikes  and
halberds.  As  before  his  time  the  proportion  between
the  arms  had  been  nearly  even,  he  thus  more  than
doubled  the  number  of  firearms.^

Of  these  weapons  there  were  two  sorts,  the  musket
and  the  harquebus.  The  musket  was  a  long,  heavy,
unmanageable  instrument.  When  fired  it  was  placed
upon  an  iron  gaffle  or  fork,  which  the  soldier  carried
with  him,  and  stuck  before  him  into  the  ground.  The
bullets  of  the  musket  were  twelve  to  the  pound.*

The  harquebus — or  hak-bus,  hook-gun,  so  called  be-
cause of  the  hook  in  the  front  part  of  the  barrel  to  give
steadiness  in  firing — was  much  lighter,  was  discharged
from  the  hand,  and  carried  bullets  of  twenty-four  to  the
pound. Both  weapons  had  matchlocks.^

The  pike  was  eighteen  feet  long  at  least,  and  pikemen
as  well  as  halberdsmen  carried  rapiers.^

There  were  three  buckler-men  to  each  company,  in-
troduced by  Maurice  for  the  personal  protection  of  the
leader  of  the  company.  The  prince  was  often  attended  by
one  himself,  and,  on  at  least  one  memorable  occasion,  was
indebted  to  this  shield  for  the  preservation  of  his  life.''

The  cavalry  was  divided  into  lancers  and  carabineers.
The  unit  was  the  squadion,  varying  in  number  from
sixty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty,  until  the  year  1591,
when  the  regular  complement  of  the  squadron  was  fixed
at  one  hundred  and  twenty.*

Mulder,  Inleiding,  li.  lii.  *  Ibid.  liv.  ^  ibid.  liv.  lix.  ^  ibid.

'  Ibid.  8  Ibid.

1590.  MILITARY  OTIOANIZATION.  91

As  the  nse  of  cavalry  on  ihe  battle-field  at  that  (l;iy,
or  at  least  in  the  Ketherlands,  was  n(jt  in  rapidity  of
motion,  nor  in  severity  of  shock  —  the  attack  usually
taking  place  on  a  trot — Maurice  gradually  displaced  the
lance  in  favour  of  the  carbine.^  His  troopers  thus  be-
came rather  mounted  infantry  than  regular  cavalry.

The  carbine  was  at  least  three  feet  long,  with  wheel-
locks,  and  carried  bullets  of  thirty  to  the  pound.^*^

The  artillery  was  a  peculiar  organization.  It  was  a
guild  of  citizens,  rather  than  a  strictly  military  force
like  the  cavalry  and  infantry.  The  arm  had  but  just
begun  to  develope  itself,  and  it  was  cultivated  as  a
special  trade  by  the  guild  of  the  holy  Barbara  existing
in  all  the  principal  cities.  Thus  a  municipal  artillery
gradually  organized  itself,  under  the  direction  of  the
gun-masters  (bus-meesters),  who  in  secret  laboured  at
the  perfection  of  their  art,  and  who  taught  it  to  their
apprentices  and  journeymen,  as  the  principles  of  other
crafts  were  conveyed  by  master  to  pupil.  This  system
furnished  a  powerful  element  of  defence  at  a  period
when  every  city  had  in  great  measure  to  provide  for
its  own  safety."

In  the  earlier  campaigns  of  Maurice  three  kinds  of
artillery  were  used  ;  the  whole  cannon  (kartow)  of  forty-
eight  pounds  ;  the  half-cannon,  or  twenty-four  pounder  ;
and  the  field-piece  carrying  a  ball  of  twelve  pounds.  The
two  first  were  called  battering  pieces  or  siege-guns.  All
the  guns  were  of  bronze.^^

The  length  of  the  whole  cannon  was  about  twelve  feet ;
its  weight  one  hundred  and  fifty  times  that  of  the  ball,
or  about  seven  thousand  pounds.  It  was  reckoned  that
the  whole  kartow  could  fire  from  eighty  to  one  hundred
shots  in  an  hour.  Wet  hair  cloths  were  used  to  cool
the  piece  after  every  ten  or  twelve  discharges.  The
usual  charge  was  twenty  pounds  of  powder.^^

The  whole  gun  was  drawn  by  thirty-one  horses,  the
half  cannon  by  twenty-three.^*

The  field-piece  required  eleven  horses,  but  a  regular
field  artillery,  as  an  integral  part  of  the  anny,  did  not
exist,  and  was  introduced  in  much  later  times. In  the

9  Mulder,  liv.-lix.  lo  ibid. ,  "  Ibid.  ILx.-lxxiv.

12  ibid.  13  Ibid.  I*  Ibid.

92  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Ciiap.  XXIV.

greatest  pitched  battle  ever  fought  by  Mavirice,  that  of
Nieuport,  he  had  but  six  field-pieces.^®

The  prince  also  employed  mortars  in  his  sieges,  from
which  were  thrown  grenades,  hot  shut,  and  stones ;  but
no  greater  distance  was  reached  than  six  hundred  yards.
Bomb-shells  were  not  often  used  although  they  had  been
known  for  a  century.^'^

Before  the  days  of  Maurice  a  special  education  for
engineers  had  never  been  contemplated.  Persons  who
had  privately  acquired  a  knowledge  of  fortification  and
similar  branches  of  the  science  were  emplo3'ed  upon
occasion,  but  regular  corps  of  engineers  there  were  none.
The  prince  established  a  course  of  instruction  in  this
profession  at  the  University  of  Leyden,  according  to  a
system  drawn  up  by  the  celel)rated  Stevinus."

Doubtless  the  most  important  innovation  of  the  prince,
and  the  one  which  required  the  most  energy  to  enforce,
was  the  use  of  the  spade.  His  soldiers  were  jeered  at  by
the  enemy  as  mere  boors  and  day  labourers  who  were
dishonouring  themselves  and  their  profession  by  the  use
of  that  implement  instead  of  the  sword.  Such  a  novelty
was  a  shock  to  all  the  military  ideas  of  the  age,  and  it
was  only  the  determination  and  vigour  of  the  prince
and  of  his  cousin  Lewis  William  that  ultimately  tri-
umphed over  the  tmiversal  prejudice.^"*

I'he  pay  of  the  common  soldier  varied  from  ten  to
twenty  florins  the  month,  but  every  miner  had  eighteen
florins,  and,  when  actually  working  in  the  mines,  thirty
florins  monthly.  Soldiers  used  in  digging  trenches  re-
ceived, over  and  above  their  regular  pay,  a  daily  wage
of  from  ten  to  fifteen  styvers,  or  nearly  a  shilling
sterling.^*

Another  most  wholesome  improvement  made  by  the
prince  was  in  the  payment  of  his  troops.  The  system
prevailing  in  every  European  country  at  that  day,  by
which  Governments  were  defrauded  and  soldiers  starved,
was  most  infamous.  The  soldiers  were  paid  through  the
captain,  who  received  the  wages  of  a  full  company,  when
perhaps  not  one-third  of  the  names  on  the  muster-roll
were  living  human  beings.  Accordingly  two-thirds  of
all  the  money  stuck  to  the  officer's  fingers,  and  it  was

15  Mulder,  lix.-lxxiv.  i6  Ibid.  v  ibid.  Ixxiv.-lxxix.

18  Rryd,  ix.  180,  ieqi-  19  Muldi-r,  uhi  sup.

1590.  IMPROVEMENTS  IN  MARTIAL  SCIENCE.  9.'J

not  tliongbt  a  disgrace  to  cheat  the  Government  by
dressing  and  equipping  for  the  day  a  set  of  ragamuffins,
caught  up  in  the  streets  for  the  purpose,  and  made  to
pass  muster  as  regular  soldiers.'^"

These  passe-volants,  or  scarecrows,  were  passed  freely
ahout  from  one  company  to  another,  and  the  indecency
of  the  fraud  was  never  thought  a  disgi'ace  to  the  colours
of  the  company.

Thus,  in  the  Armada  year,  the  queen  had  demanded
that  a  portion  of  her  auxiliary  force  in  the  Netherlands
should  be  sent  to  England.  The  States  agreed  that
three  thousand  of  these  English  troops  together  with  a
few  cavalry  companies,  should  go,  but  stipulated  that
two  thousand  should  remain  in  the  provinces.  The
queen  accepted  the  proposal,  but  when  the  two  thou-
sand had  been  counted  out  it  appeai'ed  that  there  was
scarcely  a  man  left  for  the  voyage  to  England.  Yet
every  one  of  the  English  captains  had  claimed  full  pay
for  his  company  from  her  Majesty's  exchequer.^'

Against  this  tide  of  peculation  and  corruption  the
strenuous  Maurice  set  himself  with  heart  and  soul,  and
there  is  no  doubt  that  to  his  reformation  in  this  vital
matter  much  of  his  military  success  was  owing.  It  is
impossible  that  roguery  and  venality  should  ever  fur-
nish a  solid  foundation  for  the  martial  science.

To  the  student  of  military  history  the  campaigns  and
sieges  of  Maurice,  and  especially  the  earlier  ones,  are  of
great  importance.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever,  that
the  youth  who  now,  after  deep  study  and  careful  prepa-
ration, was  measuring  himself  against  the  first  captains
of  the  age,  was  founding  the  great  modern  school  of
military  science.  It  was  in  this  Ketherland  academy,
and  under  the  tuition  of  its  consummate  professor,  that
the  commanders  of  the  seventeenth  century  not  only
acquired  the  rudiments,  but  perfected  themselves  in  the
higher  walks  of  their  art.  Therefore  the  siege  opera-
tions, in  which  all  that  had  been  invented  by  modern
genius  or  rescued  from  the  oblivion  which  had  gathered
over  ancient  lore  during  the  more  vulgar  and  common-
place practice  of  the  mercenary  commanders  of  the  day
was  brought  into  successful  application,  must  always
sngage  the  special  attention  of  the  military  student.

"0  Mulder,  xciv.  xcv.  "  Ibid.  xcix.

94  THE  UNITED  NFTHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIV

To  the  general  reader,  more  interested  in  marking  the
progress  of  civilization  and  the  advance  of  the  people  in
the  path  of  development  and  true  liberty,  the  spectacle
of  the  young  stadholder's  triumphs  has  an  interest  of
another  kind.  At  the  moment  when  a  thorough  prac-
tical soldier  was  most  needed  by  the  struggling  little
commonwealth,  to  enable  it  to  preserve  liberties  par-
tially secured  by  its  unparalleled  sacrifices  of  blood  and
treasure  during  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and  to  expel  the
foreign  invader  from  the  soil  which  he  had  so  long  pro-
faned, it  was  destined  that  a  soldier  should  appear.

Spade  iu  hand,  with  his  head  full  of  Eoman  castra-
metation  and  geometrical  problems,  a  prince,  scarce
emerged  from  boyhood,  presents  himself  on  that  stage
where  grizzled  Mansfelds,  drunken  Hohenlos,  and  trucu-
lent Verdugos  have  been  so  long  enacting  that  artless
military  drama  which  consists  of  Imrd  knocks  and  whole-
sale massacres.  The  novice  is  received  with  universal
hilarity.  But  although  the  macliinery  of  war  varies  so
steadily  from  age  to  age  that  a  commonplace  commander
of  to-day,  rich  in  the  spoils  of  preceding  tiaie,  might
vanquish  the  Alexandei"s,  and  (Jtesai's,  and  Frederics,
with  their  antiquated  enginry,  yet  the  moral  stuff  out  of
which  great  captains,  great  armies,  great  victories  are
created,  is  the  simple  material  it  was  in  the  days  of
Sesostris  or  Cyrus.  The  moral  and  physiological  ele-
ments remain  essentially  the  same  as  when  man  first
began  to  walk  up  and  down  the  earth  and  destroy  his
fellow-creatures.

To  make  an  army  a  thorough  mowing-machine,  it  then
seemed  necessary  that  it  should  be  disciplined  into  com-
plete mechanical  obedience.  To  secure  this,  prompt
payment  of  wages  and  inexorable  punishment  of  delin-
q[uencies  were  indispensable.  Long  arrearages  were  now
converting  Farnese's  veterans  into  systematic  marauders  ;
for  unpaid  soldiers  in  every  age  and  country  have  usually
degenerated  into  highwaymen,  and  it  is  an  impossibility
for  a  sovereign,  with  the  strictest  intentions,  to  persist
in  starving  his  soldiers  and  in  killing  them  for  feeding
themselves.  In  Maurice's  little  army,  on  the  contrary,
there  were  no  back-wages  and  no  thieving.  At  the  siege
of  Delfzyl  Maurice  hung  two  of  his  soldiers  for  stealing,
the  one  a  hat  and  the  other  a  poniard,  from  the  towns-

1590.  IMPROVEMENTS  IN  MARTIAL  SCIENCE.  95

folk,  after  the  place  had  capitulated.^^  At  the  siege  of
Hulst  he  ordered  another  to  be  shot,  before  the  whole
camp,  for  robbing  a  woman.-^  This  seems  sufficiently
harsh,  but  war  is  not  a  pastime  nor  a  very  humane  occu-
pation. The  result  was,  that  robbery  disappeared,  and
it  is  better  for  all  that  enlisted  men  should  be  soldiers
rather  than  thieves.  To  secure  the  ends  which  alone
can  justify  war — and  if  the  Netherlanders  engaged  in  de-
fending national  existence  and  human  freedom  against
foreign  tyranny  were  not  justifiable,  then  a  just  war  has
never  been  waged — a  disciplined  army  is  vastly  more
humane  in  its  operations  than  a  band  of  brigands.
Swift  and  condign  punishment  by  the  law-martial  for
even  trifling  oft'ences,  is  the  best  means  of  discipline
yet  devised.

To  bring  to  utmost  perfection  the  machinery  already
in  existence,  to  encourage  invention,  to  ponder  the  past
with  a  practical  application  to  the  present,  to  court
fatigue,  to  scorn  pleasure,  to  concentrate  the  energies  on
the  work  in  hand,  to  cultivate  quickness  of  eye  and
calmness  of  nerve  in  the  midst  of  danger,  to  accelerate
movements,  to  economise  blood  even  at  the  expense  of
time,  to  strive  after  ubiquity  and  omniscience  in  the  de-
tails of  person  and  place,  these  were  the  characteristics  of
Maurice,  and  they  have  been  the  prominent  traits  of  all
commanders  who  have  stamped  themselves  upon  their
age.  Although  his  method  of  war-making  differed  as
far  as  possible  from  that  of  the  Bearnese,  yet  the  two
had  one  quality  in  common,  personal  insensibility  to
fear.  But  in  the  case  of  Henry,  to  confront  danger  for
its  own  sake  was  in  itself  a  pleasure,  while  the  calmer
spirit  of  Maurice  did  not  so  much  seek  the  joys  of  the
combat  as  refuse  to  desist  from  scientific  combinations
in  the  interests  of  his  personal  safety.  Very  frequently,
in  tlie  course  of  his  early  campaigns,  the  prince  was
formally  and  urgently  requested  by  the  States-General
not  to  expose  his  life  so  recklessly,  and  before  he  had
passed  his  twenty-fi.fth  year  he  had  received  wounds
which,  but  for  fortunate  circumstances,  would  have
proved  mortal,  because  he  was  unwilling  to  leave  special
operations  on  which  much  was  depending  to  other  eyes
than his own. The details  of  his  campaigns  are, of

22  Reyd,  i.\.  171.  »  Van  der  Kemp,  112.

96  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  Chap.  XXIV.

necessity,  the  less  interesting  to  a  general  reader  from
their  very  completeness.  Desultory  or  semi-civilized
warfare,  where  the  play  of  the  human  passions  is  dis-
tinctly visible,  where  individual  man,  whether  in  buff
jerkin  or  Milan  coat  of  proof,  meets  his  fellow  man  in
close  mortal  combat,  where  men  starve  by  thousands  or
are  massacred  by  town-fulls,  where  hamlets  or  villages
blaze  throughout  whole  districts  or  are  sunk  beneath  the
ocean — scenes  of  rage,  hatred,  vengeance,  self-sacrifice,
patriotism,  where  all  the  virtues  and  vices  of  which
humanity  is  capable  stride  to  and  fro  in  their  most  vio-
lent colours  and  most  colossal  shape — where  man  in  a
moment  rises  almost  to  divinit3%  or  sinks  beneath  the
beasts  of  the  field  —  such  tragical  records  of  which
the  sanguinary  story  of  mankind  is  full — and  no  portion
of  them  more  so  than  the  Netherland  chronicles — appeal
more  vividly  to  the  imagination  than  the  neatest  solu-
tion of  mathematical  problems.  Yet  if  it  be  the  legiti-
mate end  of  military  science  to  accomplish  its  largest
purposes  at  the  least  expense  of  human  suffering ;  if  it
be  progress  in  civilization  to  acquire  by  scientific  com-
bination what  might  be  otherwise  attempted,  and  per-
haps vainly  attempted,  by  infinite  carnage,  then  is  the
professor  with  his  diagrams,  standing  immoved  amid
danger,  a  more  truly  heroic  image  than  Coeur-de-Lion
with  his  battle-axe,  or  Alva  with  his  trimcheon.

The  system— then  a  new  one — which  Maurice  intro-
duced to  sustain  that  little  commonwealth  from  sinking
of  which  he  had  become  at  the  age  of  seventeen  the  pre-
destined chief,  was  the  best  under  the  circumstances  that
could  have  been  devised.  Patriotism  the  most  passionate,
the  most  sublime,  had  created  the  republic.  'J'o  main-
tain its  existence  against  perpetual  menace  required  the
exertion  of  perpetual  skill.

Passionless  as  algebra,  the  genius  of  Maurice  was  ready
fur  the  task.  Strategic  points  of  immense  value,  impor-
tant cities  and  fortresses,  vital  river-courses  and  com-
munications— which  foreign  t^-ranny  had  acquired  during
the  tragic  past  with  a  patient  iniquity  almost  without  a
parallel,  and  which  patriotism  had  for  years  vainly
struggled  to  recover — were  the  earliest  trophies  and
prizes  of  his  art.  But  the  details  of  his  victories  may  be
nriefly  indicated,  for  they  have  none  of  the  picturesque-

1590.  MILITARY  GENIUS  OF"  PRINCP:  MAURICE.  07

ness  of  crime.  The  sieges  of  Naarden,  Harlem,  Leydeu,
"wei'e  tragedies  of  maddening  interest,  bnt  the  recovery
of  Zutjihen,  Deventer,  Nymegcn,  Groningen,  and  manj'
other  places  —  all  important  though  they  were  —  was
accomplished  with  the  calmness  of  a  consummate  player,
who  throws  down  on  the  table  the  best  half-dozen  invin-
cible cards  which  it  thus  becomes  superfluous  to  play.

There  were  several  courses  open  to  the  prince  before
taking  the  field.  It  was  desirable  to  obtain  control  of
the  line  of  the  Waal,  by  which  that  heart  of  the  re-
public— Holland — would  be  made  entirely  secure.  To
this  end,  Gertruydenberg — lately  surrendered  to  the
enemy  by^  the  perfidy  of  the  Englishman  Wingfield,  to
whom  it  had  been  entrusted— Bois  le  Due,  and  Nymegen
were  to  be  wrested  from  Spain.

It  was  also  important  to  hold  the  Yssel,  the  course  of
which  river  led  directly  through  the  United  Kether-
lands,  quite  to  the  Zuyder  Zee,  cutting  ofi'  Friesland,
Groningen,  and  Gelderlandfrom  their  sister  provinces  of
Holland  and  Zeeland.  And  here  again  the  keys  to  this
river  had  been  lost  b\^  English  treason.  The  fort  of
Zutphen  and  the  city  of  Deventer  had  been  transferred
to  the  Spaniard  by  Koland  Yorke  and  Sii-  William
Stanley,^*  in  whose  honour  the  republic  had  so  blindl}'
confided,  and  those  cities  it  was  now  necessary  to  reduce
b_v  regular  siege  before  the  communications  between  the
eastern  and  western  portions  uf  the  little  commonwealth
could  ever  be  established.

Still  farther  in  the  ancient  Frisian  depths,  the  memor-
able treason  of  that  native  Netherlander,  the  high-born
Kenneberg,  had  opened  the  way  for  the  Spaniard's  foot
into  the  city  of  Groningen.  Thus  this  whole  important
province — with  its  capital- — -long  subject  to  the  foreign
oppressor,  was  garrisoned  with  his  troops.

Verdugo,  a  veteran  officer  of  Portuguese  birth,  who
had  risen  from  the  position  of  hostler^*  to  that  of  colonel
and  royal  stadholder,  commanded  in  Friesland.  He  had
in  vain  demanded  reinforcements  and  supplies  from
Farnese,  who  most  reluctantly  was  obliged  to  refuse
them  in  order  that  he  might  obey  his  master's  commands
to  neglect  everything  fo*;  the  sake  of  the  campaign  ia
France

^  Vol.  II.  of  this  work,  chap.  xiii.  -^  Keyd,  is 172.

VOL. III.  H

>)8  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIV.

And  Verdugo,  stripped  of  all  adequate  forces  to  pro-
tect his  important  province,  was  equally  destitute  of
means  for  feeding  the  troops  that  were  left  to  him,  "  I
hope  to  God  that  I  may  do  m};-  duty  to  the  king  and  your
highness,"  he  cried,  "  but  I  find  myself  sold  up  and
pledged  to  such  an  extent  that  I  am  poorer  than  when
I  was  a  soldier  at  four  crowns  a  month.  And  everybody
in  the  town  is  as  desj^^erate  as  myself."^"

Maurice,  after  making  a  feint  of  attacking  Gertruy-
denberg  and  Bois  le  Due,  so  that  Farnese  felt  compelled,
with  considerable  difficulty,  to  strengthen  the  garrison
of  those  places,  came  unexpectedly  to  Arnhem  with  a
force  of  nine  thousand  foot  and  sixteen  hundred  horse.
He  had  previously  and  with  great  secrecy  sent  some
companies  of  infantry  under  Sir  Francis  Vera  to  Does-
burg.

On  the  23rd  May  (1591)  five  peasants  and  six  peasant.

23  May, women  made  their  appearance  at  dawn  of  day

1591.  before  the  chief  guard-house  of  the  great  fort  in
the  Bad  meadow  (Vel-uwe),  opposite  Zutphen,  on  the
west  side  of  the  Yssel.  It  was  not  an  unusual  occur-
rence. These  boors  and  their  wives  had  brought
baskets  of  eggs,  butter,  and  cheese,  for  the  garrison,  and
they  now  set  themselves  quietly  down  on  the  ground
before  the  gate,  waiting  for  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison
to  come  out  and  traffic  with  them  for  their  supplies.
Very  soon  several  of  the  gnard  made  their  appearance,
and  began  to  chaffer  with  the  peasants,  when  suddenly
one  of  the  women  plucked  a  pistol  from  under  her
petticoats  and  shot  dead  the  soldier  who  was  cheapening
her  eggs.  The  rest  of  the  party,  transformed  in  an
instant  from  boors  to  soldiers,  then  sprang  ujjon  the  rest
of  the  guard,  overpowered  and  bound  them,  and  took
possession  of  the  gate.  A  considerable  force,  which  had
been  placed  in  ambush  by  Prince  Maurice  near  the  spot,
now  rushed  forward,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  great
fort  of  Zutphen  was  mastered  by  the  States'  forces  with-
out the  loss  of  a  man.  It  was  a  neat  and  perfectly
successful  stratagem.^''

Next  day  Maurice  began  the  regular  investment  of  the
city. On the 26th, Count Lewis William arrived

^  Groen  v.  Prinsterer.  (Archives,  &c.,  II.  Serie  1.  1280
^  Meteren,  xv.  29S. llor.  111.  x.wiii.  560,  50i.

I

I

1591.  FORT  OF  ZUTPHEN  TAKEN.  99

with  some  Frisian  companies. On the  27th,  Maurice
threw  a  bridge  of  boats  from  the  Bad-meadow
side,  across  the  river  to  the  ^Veert  before  the
city. On the 28th he had got batteries, mounting
thirty-two  guns,  into  position,  commanding  the  place  at
tlrree  points. On  the  oOth  the  town  capitulated.
Thus  within  exactly  one  week  from  the  firing
of  the  pistol  shot  by  the supposed  butterwoman,  this
fort  and  town,  which  had  so  long  resisted  the  eiforts  of
the  States,  and  were  such  important  possessions  of  the
Spaniards,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Maurice. The  terms  of
surrender  were  easy. The  city  being  more  important
than  its  garrison,  the  soldiers  w^ere  permitted  to  depart
with  bag  and  baggage. The  citizens  were  allowed  three
daj's  to  decide  whether  to  stay  under  loj^al  obedience  to
the  States-General,  or  to  take  their  departure. Those
who  chose  to  remain  were  to  enjoy  all  the  privileges  oi
citizens  of  the  United  Provinces."**

But  ver}'  few  substantial  citizens  were  left,  fur  sucli
had  been  the  tyranny,  the  misery,  and  the  misrule
during  the  long  occupation  by  a  foreign  soldiery  of  wliat
was  once  a  thriving  Dutch  town,  that  scarcely  anybody
but  paupers  and  vagabonds  weie  left.  One  thousand
houses  were  ruined  and  desolate.  It  is  superfluous
to  add  that  the  day  of  its  restoration  to  the  authority
of  the  Union  was  the  beginning  of  its  renewed
prosperity.

Maurice,  having placed a  national  garrison in  the
place,  marched  the  same  evening  straight  upon  Deventer,
seven  miles  farther down the river,  without
pausing  to  sleep  upon  his  victory. His  artil-
lery and  munitions  were  sent  rapidly  down  the  Yssel.

Within  five  days  he  had  thoroughly  invested  the  city,
and  brought  twenty-eight  guns  to  bear  upon  the  weakest
part  of  its  defences.

It  was  a  large,  populous,  well-built  town,  once  a
wealthy  member  of  the  Hanseatic  League,  full  of  fine
buildings,  both  public  and  private,  the  capital  of  the  rich
and  fertile  province  of  Overyssel,  and  protected  by  a
strong  wall  and  moat — as  well-fortified  a  place  as  could
be  found  in  the  Netherlands.""  The  garrison  consisted
of  fourteen  hundred  Spaniards  and  Walloons,  under  the

*  Box,  Metcren,  nbi  sup. Duyck,  6-14.  29  Guicdardini,  in  voce

H 2

too  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIV.

command  of  Count  Herman  van  den  Berg,  first  cousin
of  Prince  Maurice.

No  sooner  bad  the  States  army  come  before  the  city
than  a  Spanish  captain  observed—"  We  shall  now  have
a  droll  siege — cousins  on  the  outside,  cousins  on  the
inside.  There  will  be  a  sham  fight  or  two,  and  then
the  cousins  will  mak'5  it  up,  and  arrange  matters  to  suit
tlieraselves."  ^^

Such  hints  had  deeply  wounded  Van  den  Berg,  who
was  a  fervent  Catholic,  and  as  loyal  a  servant  to
Philip  II.  as  he  could  have  been,  had  that  monarch
deserved,  by  the  laws  of  nature  and  by  his  personal
services  and  virtues,  to  govern  all  the  swamps  of
Friesland.  He  slept  on  the  gibe,  having  ordered  all  Ihe
colonels  and  captains  of  the  garrison  to  attend  at  solemn
mass  in  the  great  church  the  next  morning.  He  there
declared  to  them  all  publicly  that  he  felt  outraged  at
the  suspicious  concerning  his  fidelity,  and  after  mass  he
took, the  sacrament,  solemnly  swearing  never  to  give  up
the  city  or  even  to  speak  of  it  until  he  had  made  such
resistance  that  he  must  be  carried  from  the  breach.  So
long  as  he  could  stand  or  sit  he  would  defend  the  city
entrusted  to  his  care.^^

The  whole  council  who  had  come  from  Zutphen  to
Maurice's  camp  were  allowed  to  deliberate  concerning
the  siege.  The  enemy  had  been  seen  hovering  about
the  neighbourhood  in  considerable  numbers,  but  had  not
ventured  an  attempt  to  throw  reinforcements  into  the
place.  Many  of  the  counsellors  argued  against  the  siege.
It  was  urged  that  the  resistance  would  be  determined
and  protracted,  and  that  the  Duke  of  Parma  was  sure  to
take  the  field  in  person  to  relieve  so  important  a  city,
before  its  reduction  could  be  efiected.

But  Maurice  had  thrown  a  bridge  across  the  Yssel
above  and  another  below  the  town,  had  carefully  and
rapidly  taken  measures  in  the  success  of  which  he  felt
confident,  and  now  declared  tliat  it  would  be  cowardly
and  shameful  to  abandon  an  enterprise  so  well  begun.

The  city  had  been  formally  summoned  to  surrender,
and  a  calm  but  most  decided  refusal  had  been  returned.

9  June, On  the  9th  June  the  batteries  began  playing,

1591. ^j^(j  j^fjjjj,  f^jy,.  thousand  six  hundred  shots  a

^  Reyd,  ix.  169.  3i  Ibid.

1591.  ATTACK  ON  DEVENTER.  101

good  breach  had  been  effected  in  the  defences  along
the  Kaye — an  earthen  work  lying  between  two  strong
walls  of  masonrj".

The  breach  being  deemed  practicable,  a  storm  was
ordered.  To  reach  the  Kaye  it  was  necessary  to  cross
a  piece  of  water  called  the  Haven,  over  which  a  pontoon
bi'idge  was  hastily  thrown.  There  was  now  a  disi^nte
among  the  English.  Scotch,  and  Netherlanders  for  pre-
cedence in  the  assault.  It  was  idtimately  given  to  the  Eng-
lish, in  order  that  the  bravery  of  that  nation  might  now
on  the  same  spot  wipe  out  the  disgrace  inflicted  upon  its
name  by  the  treason  of  Sir  William  Stanley.  The  English
did  their  duty  well,  and  rushed  forAvard  merrily,  but  the
bridge  proved  too  short.  Some  sprang  over  and  pushed
boldly  for  the  breach.  Some  fell  into  the  moat  and  were
drowned.  Others,  sustained  by  the  Netherlanders  under
Solms,  Meetkerke,  and  Brederode,  effected  their  passage
by  swimming,  leaping,  or  wading,  so  that  a  resolute
attack  was  made.  Herman  van  den  Berg  met  them  in
the  breach  at  the  head  of  seven  companies.  The  de-
fenders were  most  ferocious  in  their  resistance.  They
were  also  very  drunk.  The  count  had  placed  many
casks  of  Ehenish  and  of  strong  beei'  within  reach,  and
ordered  his  soldiei's  to  drink  their  fill  as  they  fought.^^
He  was  himself  as  vigorous  in  his  potations  as  he  was
chivalrous  with  sword  and  buckler.  Two  pages  and  two
lieutenants  fell  at  his  side,  but  still  he  fought,  at  the
head  of  his  men  with  a  desperation  worthy  of  his  a^ow,
until  he  fell  wounded  in  the  eye  and  was  carried  fi'om
the  place.  Notwithstanding  this  disaster  to  the  com-
mander of  the  town,  the  assailants  were  repulsed,  losing-
two  hundred  and  twenty-five  in  killed  and  wounded —
Colonel  Meetkerke  and  his  brother,  two  most  valuable
Dutch  officers,  among  them.^^

32  Reyd,  ix.  169.  younger  brothers  Baldwin  and  Adolph,

33  Ibid.  Bor,  III.  xxviii.  563,  564.  were  both  in  the  army.  Adolph  was  !^hot
Meteren,  xvi.  298.  Duyck,  20,  21.  Colonel  through  the  body  in  (his  same  storming
Nicolas  Meetkerke  died  of  his  wounds  in  party  in  which  Nicolas  was  killed,  but
this  assault.  He  was  less  than  thirty  seems  to  have  recovered.  They  were  the
yoars  of  age,  but  already  a  veteran  sons  of  Adolph  Meetkerke,  formerly  pre-
soldier,  and  had  distinguished  himself  in  sident  of  Flanders,  who,  on  account  of  his
the  English-Dutch  expfdilion,  under  participation  in  Leicester's  attempt  upon
Essex,  against  Portugal  in  15S7.  His  Leyden  (see  vol.  II.  of  this  work,  chap.
elder  brother  Anthony  had  been  kil^d  xvii.)  was  a  refugee  in  England.  .See
before  Zutphen fort in  15S6. His  two  Mulder's  note  to  Duyck,  p.  20. [How

102  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIV.

During  the  whole  of  the  assault,  a  vigorous  cannonade
had  been  kept  tip  xtpon  other  parts  of  the  town,  and
houses  and  church-towers  were  toppling  down  in  all
directions.  Meanwhile  the  inhabitants — for  it  was  Sun-
day— instead  of  going  to  service  were  di'iven  towards  the
breach  by  the  serjeant-major,  a  truciilent  Spaniard,  next
in  command  to  Van  den  Beig,  who  ran  about  the  place
with  a  great  stick,  summoning  the  Dutch  burghers  to
assist  the  Spanish  garrison  on  the  wall.**  It  was  thought
after wai'ds  that  this  warrior  would  have  been  better
occupied  among  the  soldiers,  at  the  side  of  his  com-
mander.

A  chivalrous  incident  in  the  open  field  occuiTed  during
the  assault.  A  gigantic  Albanian  cavalry  officer  came
prancing  out  of  Deventer  into  the  spaces  between  the
trenches,  defying  any  officer  in  the  States'  army  to  break
a  lance  with  him.  Prince  Maurice  forbade  any  accept-
ance of  the  challenge,  but  Lewis  van  der  Cathulle,  son
of  the  famous  Eyhove  of  Ghent,  unable  to  endure  the
taunts  and  bravado  of  this  champion,  at  last  obtained
permission  to  encounter  him  in  single  combat.  They  met
accordingly  wdth  much  ceremony,  tilted  against  each
other,  and  shivered  their  lances  in  good  style,  but  with-
out much  effect.  The  Albanian  then  drew  a  pistol.
Cathulle  had  no  weapon  save  a  cutlass,  but  with  this
weapon  he  succeeded  in  nearly  cutting  off"  the  hand
which  held  the  pistol.  He  then  took  his  enemy  prisoner,
the  vainglorious  challenger  throwing  his  gold  chain
around  his  conqueror's  neck  in  token  of  his  victory.
Prince  Maurice  caused  his  wound  to  be  bound  up  and
then  liberated  him,  sending  him  into  the  city  with  a
message  to  the  governor.^^

During  the  following  night  the  bridge,  over  which  the
assailants  had  nearly  foiced  their  way  into  the  town,  was
vigorously  attacked  by  the  garrison,  but  Count  Lewis
AVilliam,  in  person,  with  a  chosen  band,  defended  it
storaly  till  morning,  beating  hack  the  Spaniards  with
heavy  loss  in  a  sanguinar}-  midnight  contest.**'

H'jw  much  does  the  brief  martial  re-  in  the  great  war  now  waging for  the

cord  of  these  lour  brothers  in  this  war  of  same  object! (1863.)

Dutch  Burghers  for  natioual  existence  re-  3*  Reyd,  ubi  sup.

mind  US  of  the  simple  but  heroic  annals  35  MiHen-n,  ubi  sup.

of  many  a  family  of  our  own  countrjTnen  se  Bor,  ubi  sup.

1591.  CAPITULATION  OF  DEVENTER.  103

Next  morning  tliere  was  a  nnanimoTis  outcry  on  the
part  of  the  besieged  for  a  capitulation.  It  was  j^ne  lo,
obvious  that,  with  the  walls  shot  to  ruins  as  i^^i-
they  had  been,  the  place  was  no  longer  tenable  against
Maurice's  superior  forces.  A  trumpet  was  sent  to  the
prince  before  the  dawn  of  day,  and  on  the  10th  of  June,
accoidingly,  the  place  capitulated.^"

It  was  arranged  that  the  garrison  should  retire  with
arms  and  baggage  whithersoever  they  chose.  Van  deu
Berg  stipulated  nothing  in  favour  of  the  citizens,  whether
through  forgetfulness  or  spite  does  not  distinctly  ap-
pear. But  the  burghers  were  received  like  brothers.
No  plunder  was  permitted,  no  ransom  demanded,  and
the  city  took  its  place  among  its  sisterhood  of  the  United
Provinces.^^  Van  den  Berg  himself  was  received  at  the
prince's  head-quarters  with  much  cordiality.  He  was
quite  blind ;  but  his  wound  seemed  to  be  the  eftect  of
exterior  contusions,  and  he  ultimately  recovered  the
sight  of  one  eye.  There  was  much  free  conversation  be-
tween himself  and  his  cousins  duriug  the  brief  interval
in  v,'hich  he  was  their  guest.

"  I've  often  told  Veidugo,"  said  he,  " that  the  States
had  no  power  to  make  a  I'egular  siege,  nor  to  come  with
proper  artillery  into  the  field,  and  h(^  agreed  with  me.
But  we  were  both  wrong,  for  I  now  see  the  contrary."

To  which  Count  Lewis  William  replied  with  a  laugh  :
"  M}^  dear  cousin,  I've  observed  that  in  all  your  actions
3'ou  were  in  the  habit  of  despi.^ing  us  Beggars,  and  I
have  said  that  you  would  onS  day  diaw  the  shortest
straw  in  consequence.  I'm  glad  to  hear  this  avowal
from  your  own  lips."

Herman  attempted  no  reply  but  let  the  subject  drop,
seeming  to  regret  having  said  so  much.^'-'

Soon  afterwards  he  was  forwarded  by  Maurice  in  his
own  coach  to  Ulff,  where  he  was  attended  by  the  prince's
body  physician  till  he  was  re-established  in  health.*"

Thus  within  ten  days  of  his  first  appearance  before
its  walls,  the  city  of  Deventer,  and  with  it  a  whole
province,  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Maurice.  It  began
to  be  understood  that  the  young  pedant  knew  something

3'  Bor,  uhi  sup.  Meten'n,  llL-yJ,  v.hi  sup.  Duyclc,  20-25.  Piirma  to  Pliilip,  in  Junb,
15D1.  (.Ircli.  d.'Sim.  MS.)  as  ibid.  sa  li,.y^\ubi  sup.  *"  Lot,  ubi  sup

104

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXIV.

about  his  profession,  and  that  he  had  not  been  fagging
so  hard  at  the  science  of  war  for  nothing.*^

The  city  was  in  a  sorry  plight  when  the  States  took
possession  of  it.  As  at  Zutphen,  the  substantial  burghers
had  wandered  awa}^  and  the  foreign  soldiers  bivouacing
there  so  long  had  turned  the  stately  old  Hanseatic  city
into  a  brick  and  mortar  wilderness.  Hundreds  of  houses
had  been  demolished  by  the  garrison,  that  the  iron
might  be  sold  and  the  woodwork  burned  for  fuel ;  for
the  enemy  had  conducted  himself  as  if  feeling  in  his
heart  that  the  occupation  could  not  be  a  permanent  one,
and  as  if  desirous  to  make  the  place  as  desolate  as
possible  for  the  Beggars  when  they  should  retui-n.'*^

The  dead  body  of  the  traitor  Yorke,  who  had  died
and  been  liuried  in  De venter,  was  taken  from  the  tomb,
after  the  capture  of  the  city,  and  with  th3  vulgar  fero-
city so  characteristic  of  the  times,  was  hung,  coffin
and  all,  on  the  gibbet  for  the  delectation  of  the  States'
soldiery.'*^

Maurice,  having  thus  in  less  than  three  weeks  reco-
vered two  most  important  cities,  paused  not  an  instant
in  his  career  but  moved  at  once  on  Groningen.  There
was  a  strong  pressure  put  upon  him  to  attempt  the
capture  of  N_ymegen,  but  the  understanding  with
the  Frisian  stadholder  and  his  troops  had  been  that  the
enterprise  upon  Groningen  should  follow  the  reduction
of  Deventer.

On  the  26th  June  Maurice  appeared  before  Groningen.
Next  da}',  as  a'  precautionary  step,  he  moved
to  the  right  and  attacked  the  strong  city  of
Delfzyl.  This  place  capitulated  to  him  on  the
2nd  July.  The  fort  of  Opslag  surrendered  on
the  7th  July.  He  then  moved  to  the  west  of
Groningen,  and  attacked  the  forts  of  Yementil
and  Lettebaest,  which  fell  into  his  hands  on
the 11th  July. He then moved  along the Kyenoort

26  June,
1591.

2  Ju\y,
1591.

7  .July.
11  July.

*i  Turenne  (Due  de  Bouillon)  was  ex-  reputation  que  le  Due  de  Parme  a  acquis

cessively enrhusiastic. "  Je ne vous  en  dix  ans,  et  faict  bien  paraistre  que  la

5(;auroy  dire  la  joie,"  he  wrote  to  Count  vertu  et  generosiie  de  sa  Maison  est  im

John  the  Elder, "  que  j'ay  de  I'honneur  mortelle." Groen  v. Prinsterer. (Ar

que  Monsieur  le  Conite  Maurice  votre  chives,  II.  s.  i.  169.)
Qepveu  a  acquis  en  la  prise  de  Zutplien  *^  Keyd,  iibi  sup.  '
it  Deventer. II  a  efface  en  liuict  jours  la «  Bor,  F^yd,  Meteren,  ubi  stip.

i

1591  SIEGE  OF  GRONINGEN.  105

through  the Seven  Wolds and  Drenthe  to  Steenwyk,

before  wliich  strongly  fortified  city  he  arrived

on  the  loth  Jiily.*^  "^'

Meantime,  he  received  intercepted  letters  from  Ver-
diigo  to  the  Duke  of  Parma,  dated  19th  June  from
Groningen.  In  these,  the  Spanish  stadholder  informed
Farnese  that  the  enemy  was  hovering  about  his  neigh-
bourhood, and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  duke
to  take  the  field  in  person  in  considerable  force,  or  that
Groningen  would  be  lost,  and  with  it  the  Spanish  forces
in  the  province.  He  enclosed  a  memorial  of  the  course
proper  to  be  adopted  by  the  duke  for  his  relief.'"^

Notwithstanding  the  strictness  by  which  Philip  had
tied  his  great  general's  hands,  Farnese  felt  the  urgency
of  the  situation.*'^  By  the  end  of  June,  accordingly,
although  full  of  his  measures  for  marching  to  the  relief
of  the  Leaguers  in  Normandy,  he  moved  into  Gelderland,
coming  by  way  of  Xanten,  Eee.s,  and  neighbouring  places.
Here  he  paused  for  a  moment  perplexed,  doubting
whether  to  take  the  aggressive  in  Gelderland  or  to  march
straight  to  the  relief  of  Groningen.  He  decided  that  it
was  better  for  the  moment  to  protect  the  line  of  the
^Vaal.  Shipping  his  army  accordingly  into  the  Batavian
Island  or  Good-meadow  (Bet-uwe),  which  lies  between
the  two  great  horns  of  the  Rhine,  he  laid  siege  to  Fort
Knodsenburg,  which  Maurice  had  built  the  year  be-
fore, on  the  right  bank  of  the  Waal  for  the  purpose  of
attacking  Nymegen.  Farnese,  knowing  that  the  general
of  the  States  was  occupied  with  his  whole  army  far  away
to  the  north,  and  sepai'ated  from  him  by  two  great
rivers,  wide  and  deep,  and  by  the  whole  breadth  of  that
dangerous  district  called  the  Foul-meadow  (Vel-uwe),
and  by  the  vast  quagmire  known  as  the  Eouvenian
morass,  which  no  artillery  nor  even  any  organised  forces
had  ever  traversed  ■*'  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  had
felt  no  hesitation  in  throwing  his  army  in  boats  across
the  Waal.  He  had  no  doubt  of  reducing  a  not  very
powerful  fortress  long  before  relief  could  be  brought  to
It,  and  at  the  same  time  of  distuibing  by  his  presence

+*  I3or,  III.  x.wiii.  566-569. Meteren,  «  Bor,  ubi  sup.  570,  seqq. Meteren,

xvii.  298,  299.  Eeyd,  ix.  169-172.  Duyck,  vhi  sitp.

25-34.  47  Van  der  Kemp,  i.  111.

*5  Bor,  ubi  sup.  568.

106  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXIV.

in  Batavia  the  combinations  of  his  young  antagonist  in
Frieslaud  and  Groningen.^*

So  with  six  thousand  foot  and  one  thousand  horse,^**
Alexander  came  befoi-e  Knodsenburg.  The  news  reached
Maurice  at  Steenwyk  on  the  15th  July.  Instantly
changing  his  plans,  the  prince  decided  that  Farnese
must  be  faced  at  once,  and,  if  possible,  driven  from
the  ground,  thinking  It  more  impoi-fant  to  maintain,  by
concentration,  that  which  had  already  been  gained,  than
to  weaken  and  diifuse  his  forces  in  insufficient  attem))ts  to
acquire  more.  Before  two  days  had  passed,  he  was  on
the.  march  southward,  having  left  Lewis  ^V^illiam  with
a  sufficient  force  to  threaten  Groningen.  Coming  by
way  of  Hasselt  Zwol  to  Deventer,  he  crossed  the  Yssel
18  July,  on  a  bridge  of  boats  on  the  18th  of  July,  and
1591.  proceeded  to  Arnhem.®'*  His  army,  although
excessively  fatigued  by  forced  marches  in  very  hot
weather,  over  nearly  impassable  roads,  was  full  of  courage
and  cheerfulness,  having  learned  implicit  confidence  in
20  July,  their  commander.  On  the  20th  he  was  at
22  July.  Arnhem.  On  the  22nd  his  bridge  of  boats  was
made,  and  he  had  thrown  his  little  army  across  the
Khine  into  Batavia,  and  entrenched  himself  with  his
six  thousand  foot  and  fourteen  hundred  horse  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  Farnetse — Foul-meadow  and
Good-meadow,  dyke,  bog,  wold,  and  quagmire,  had  been
successfully  traversed,  and  within  one  week  of  his
learning  that  the  great  viceroy  of  Philip  had  reached
the  Batavian  island,  Maurice  stood  confronting  that
famous  chieftain  in  battle-array.

On  the  22nd  July,  Farnese,  after  firing  two  hundred
and eighty-five shots at Fort Knodsenburo;,

*'2  July  o t/  _  _  &'

ordered  an  assault,  expecting  that  so  trifling

a  work  could  hardly  withstand  a  determined  onslaught

by  his  veterans. To  his surprise  they  were  so  warmly

I'eceived  that  two  hundred  of  the  assailants  fell  at  the  first

onset,  and  the  attack  was  must  conclusivel}^  repulsed.®^

And  now  Maurice  had  appeared  upon  the  scene,  de-

24  July, termined  to  relieve  a  place  so  important  for  his

'^^^- ulterior  designs. On  the  24th  July  he  sent  out

**  Bor,  Meteren,  ubi  sup. Parma  to ^  Parma's  letter  last  cited.
Philip,  24  July,  1591. (Arch,  de  Sim. ^°  Bor,  Meteren,  ubi  svp.
MS.)  SI  Bor,  .Meteren,  ubi  sup.

1591, ASSAULT  ON  THE  FOKT  OF  KNODSENBURG.  107

a  small  brit  picked  force  of  cavalry  to  reconnoitre  the
enemy.  They  were  attacked  by  a  consideiable  body  of
Italian  and  Spanish  horse  from  the  camp  before  Knod-
senburg,  including  Alexander's  own  company  of  lancers
nnder  Nicelli.  The  States  troops  fled  before  them  in
apparent  dismay  for  a  little  distance,  hotly  pursued  by
the  royalists,  until,  making  a  sudden  halt,  they  turned
to  the  attack,  accompanied  by  five  fresh  companies  of
cavalry  and  a  thousand  musketeers,  who  fell  upon  the
foe  from  all  directions.  It  was  an  ambush,  which  had
been  neatly  prepared  by  Maurice  in  person,  assisted  by
Sir  Francis  Vere.  Sixty  of  the  Spaniards  and  Italians
were  killed  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  prisoners,  includ-
ing Captain  Nicelli,  taken,  while  the  rest  of  the  party
sought  safety  in  ignominious  flight.*^  This  little  skir-
mish, in  which  ten  companies  of  the  picked  veterans
of  Alexander  Farnese  had  thus  been  utterly  I'outed  be-
fore his  eyes,  did  much  to  inspire  the  States  troops  with
confidence  in  themselves  and  their  leader.^^

Parma  was  too  experienced  a  ca:upaigner,  and  had
too  quick  an  eye,  not  to  recognize  the  error  which  he
had  committed  in  placing  the  dangerous  river  Waal,
without  a  bridge,  between  himself  and  his  supplies.
He  had  not  dreamed  that  his  antagonist  would  be  capa-
ble of  such  celerity  of  movement  as  he  had  just  displayed,
and  his  first  business  now  was  to  extricate  himself  from
a  position  which  might  soon  become  fatal.  Without
hesitation,  he  did  his  best  to  amuse  the  enemy  in  front
of  the  fort,  and  then  passed  the  night  in  planting  bat-
teries upon  the  banks  of  the  river,  under  cover  of  which
he  succeeded  next  day  in  transporting  in  feriy-boats  iiis
whole  force,  artillery  and  baggage,  to  the  opposite  shore,
without  loss,  and  with  his  usual  skill.*^*

He  remained  but  a  short  time  in  Nymegcn,  but  ho
was  hampered  by  the  express  commands  of  the  king.
Moieover,  his  broken  health  imperatively  required  that

52  Bor,  Meteren,  ubi sup. Groen  v.  or  provinces could  liitherto  resist,  and
Prinsterer. (Archives,  II.  s.  i.  172.)  who  therefore  has  usurped  the  title  of

53  Ouyck,  38,  39. Bor,  Meteren,  tUd  the great  Alexander, now with great
sup.  sliame  and  loss  has  been  obliged  to  re-

5*  Duyck,  41.  "We  may  thanlc  God  Al-  treat  from  before  tlie  single  fort  of  Ivnod-

mighty,"  says,  under  date  of  27  July,  the  senburg." Compare  Bor,  Meteren,  ubi

faithful  journalist  of  these  transactions,  sup. Van  der  Kemp,  i.  111. Coloma, iv.

"  that  he  has  so  guided  our  afl'airs  that  the  74*°
Duke  of  Parma,  whom  hardly  any  cities

108  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIV.

he  should  once  more  seek  the  healing  influence  of  the
waters  of  Spa,  before  setting  forth  on  his  new  French
expedition.  Meanwhile,  although  he  had  for  a  time
protected  the  Spanish  possessions  in  the  north  by  his
demonstration  in  Gelderland,  it  must  be  confessed  that
the  diversion  thus  given  to  the  plans  of  Maurice  was
but  a  feeble  one.

Having  assured  thu  inhabitants  of  Nymegen  that  he

would  watch  over  the  city  like  the  apple  of  his

"^' eye,^*  he  took his departure on the 4th of

August  for  Spa. He  was  accompanied  on  his  journey

by  his  son,  Prince  Kanuccio,  just  arrived  from  Italy.

After  the  retreat  of  Farnese,  Maurice  mustered  his
forces  at  Arnhem,  and  found  himself  at  the  head  of
seven  thousand  foot  and  fifteen  hundred  horse.  It  was
expected  by  all  the  world  that,  being  thus  on  the  very
spot,  he  would  forthwith  pioceed  to  reduce  the  ancient,
wealthy,  imperial  city  of  Nymegen.  The  garrison  and
burghers  accordingly  made  every  preparation  to  resist
the  attack,  disconcerted  as  they  were,  however,  by  the
departure  of  Parma,  and  by  the  apparent  incapacity  of
Verdugo  to  bring  them  effectual  relief.

But  to  the  surprise  of  all  men,  the  States  forces  sud-
denly disappeared  from  the  scene,  having  been, as  it
were,  spirited  away  by  night-time,  along  those silent
watery  highways and crossways of  canal, river, and
estuary — the  military  advantages  of  which  to  the  Nether-
lands, Maurice  was  the  first  thoroughly  to  demonstrate.
Having  previously  made  great  preparations  of  munitions
and  provisions  in  Zeeland,  the  young  general,  who  was
thought  hard  at  work  in  Gelderland,  suddenly  presented
himself, on  the 19th September, before the
^^  ■ gates  of  Hulst,  on  the  border  of  Zeeland  and
Brabant. It  was  a  place  of  importance  from  its  situa-
tion, its possession by  the enemy  being  a perpetual
thorn  in  the  side  of  the  States,  and  a  constant  obstacle
^  to the plans  of  Maurice. His arrangements

having been  made  with  the  customary  neat-
ness, celerity,  and  completeness,  he  received  the sur-
render of  the  city  on  the  fifth  day  after  his  arrival/^
Its commander,  Castillo, could offer no resistance,

55  Meteren,  xvi.  299,  300.

56  Meteren,  ubi  sup. I5.;r,  ubi  sup.  574. Duyok,  18-53.

1591.  SURRENDER  OF  HULST.  109

and  was  subsequently,  it  is  said,  beheaded  by  order  of
the  Duke  of  Parma  for  his  negligence/'  The  place  is
but  a  dozen  miles  from  Antwerp,  which  city  was  at  the
very  moment  keeping  great  holiday  and  outdoing  itself
in  magnificent  festivals  in  honour  of  young  Eanuccio.'*
The  capture  of  Hulst  before  his  eyes  w^as  a  demonstra-
tion quite  unexpected  by  the  pi'ince,  and  great  was  the
wrath  of  old  Sloudragon,  governor  of  Antwerp,  thus
bearded  in  his  den.  I'he  veteran  made  immediate  pre-
parations for  chastising  the  audacious  beggars  of  Zee-
land  and  their  pedantic  young  commander,  but  no
sooner  had  the  Spaniards  taken  the  field  than  the  wily
foe  had  disappeared  as  magically  as  he  had  come.

The  Flemish  earth  seemed  to  have  bubbles  as  the  water
hath,  and  while  Mondragon  was  beating  the  air  in  vain
on  the  margin  of  the  Scheld,  Maurice  was  back  again
upon  the  Waal,  horse,  foot,  and  artillery,  bag,  baggage,
and  munition,  and  had  fairly  set  himself  down  in  earnest
to  besiege  Nymegen,  before  the  honest  burghers  and
the  garrison  had  finished  drawing  long  breaths  at  their
recent  escape.  Between  the  14th  and  16th  u-ie  Oct.
October  he  had  bridged  the  deep,  wide,  and  ^^^^•
rapid  river,  had  transported  eight  thousand  five  hundred
infantiy  and  sixteen  companies  of  cavalry  to  the  southern
side,  had  entrenched  his  camp  and  made  his  approaches,
and  had  got  sixty-eight  pieces  of  artillerj'  into  three
positions  commanding  the  weakest  part  of  the  defences
of  the  city  between  the  Falcon  Tower  and  the  Hoender
gate.^"  The  fort  of  Knodsenburg  was  also  ready  to
throw  hot  shot  across  the  river  into  the  town.  Not  a
detail  in  all  these  preparations  escaped  the  vigilant  eye
of  the  Commander-in-Chief,  and  again  and  again  was  he
implored  not  so  recklessly  to  expose  a  life  already
become  precious  to  his  country.  On  the  20th
October,  Maurice  sent  to  demand  the  surrender
of  the  city. The  reply  was  facetious  but  decisive.

The  prince  was  but  a  young  suitor,  it  was  said,  and
the  city  a  spinster  not  so  lightly  to  be  won.  A  longer
courtship  and  more  trouble  would  be  necessary.'^"

Whereupon  the  suitor  opened  all  his  batteries  without
further  delay,  and the  spinster  gave  a  fresh  example

^'  Mcteren,  ubi  sup.  ss  Jbid.

5»  Mcteren,  xvi.  300. Bor,  xxviii.  575. Duyck,  59-67. •»  Meteren,  ubi  sjtp.

no  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIV.

of  the  inevitable  fate  of  talking  castles  and  listening
ladies.

Nymegen,  despite  ber  saucy  answer  on  tbe  20tb,  sur-
rendered on  tbe  21st.  Belief  was  impossible.
Keitber  Parma,  now  on  bis  way  to  France,
nor  Verdugo,  sbut  up  in  Friesland,  could  come  to  tbe
rescue  of  tbe  place,  and  tbe  combinations  of  Maurice
were  an  inexorable  demonstration.

Tbe  terms  of  tbe  surrender  were  similar  to  tbose
accorded  to  Zutpben  and  Deventer.  In  regard  to  tbe
religious  point  it  was  expressly  laid  down  by  Maurice
tbat  tbe  demand  for  permission  to  exercise  publicly  tbe
Eoman  Catholic  religion  should  be  left  to  tbe  decision  of
tbe  States-General."^

And  thus  another  most  important  city  bad  been
added  to  tbe  domains  of  tbe  republic.  Another  triumph
was  inscribed  on  the  record  of  tbe  young  commander.
The  exultation  was  very  great  throughout  tbe  United
Netherlands,  and  heartfelt  was  the  homage  rendered
by  all  classes  of  his  countrymen  to  tbe  son  of  William
tbe  Silent.

Queen  Elizabeth  wrote  to  congratulate  him  in  warmest
terms  on  his  great  successes,  and  even  tbe  Spaniards
began  to  recognize  the  merits  of  tbe  new  chieftain.  An
intercepted  letter  from  Verdugo,  wlio  bad  been  foiled
in  his  efforts  to  arrest  tbe  career  of  Maurice,  indicated
great  respect  for  his  prowess.  "  I  have  been  informed,"
said  tbe  veteran,  "  tbat  Count  Maurice  of  Nassau  wishes
to  fight  me.  Had  I  the  opportunity  I  assure  you  that
I  should  not  fail  him,  for  even  if  ill  luck  were  my  por-
tion, I  should  at  least  not  escape  the  honour  of  being
beaten  by  such  a  personage.  I  beg  you  to  tell  him  so
with  my  affectionate  compliments.  Yours,  Francis
Verdogo."®^

These  chivalrous  sentiments  towards  Prince  Maurice
bad  not  however  prevented  Verdugo  from  doing  bis
best  to  assassinate  Count  Lewis  William.  Two  Span-
iards bad  been  arrested  in  tbe  States  camp  this  summer,
who  came  in  as  deserters,  but  who  confessed  "with
little,  or  mostly  without  torture,"  tbat  they  had  been
sent  by  their  governor  and  colonel  with  instructions  to
seize  a  favourable  opportimity  to  shoot  Lewis  William

'1  Metcn-n,  Ecr,  Duyck,  ubi  sup. Van  der  Kemp,  i.  113. «  Bor,  ubi  sup.  578.

1591.  CAPTURE  OF  NYMEGEN,  111

and  set  fire  to  his  camp.  But  sncli  practices  were  so
comiuon  on  the  part  of  the  Spanish  commandeis  as  to
occasion  no  surprise  whatever.*^^

It  will  be  remembered  that  two  years  before,  the
famous  Martin  Schenk  had  come  to  a  tragic  end  at
Nymegen.*^*  He  had  been  drowned,  fished  np,  hanged,
drawn,  and  quartered ;  after  which  his  scattered  frag-
ments, having  been  exposed  on  all  the  principal  towers
of  the  city,  had  been  put  in  pickle  and  deposited  in  a
chest.  They  were  now  collected  and  buried  triumph-
antly in  the  tomb  of  the  Dukes  of  Gelderland.  Thus
the  shade  of  the  grim  freebooter  was  at  last  ap-
peased.*^®

The  government  of  the  city  was  conferred  upon  Count
Lewis  William,  with  Gerard  de  Jonge  as  his  lieutenant.
A  substantial  garrison  was  placed  in  the  city,  and,  the
season  being  nuw  far  advanced,  Maurice  brox;ght  the
military  operations  of  the  year,  saving  a  slight  pre-
liminary demonstration  against  Gerti-uydenberg,  to  a
close.*'"  He  had  deserved  and  attained  considerable
renown.  He  had  astoni.shed  the  leisurel}'  wai'-makers
and  phlegmatic  veterans  of  the  time,  both  among  friends
and  foes,  by  the  unexampled  rapiditj-  of  his  mnvements
and  the  concentration  of  his  attacks.  He  had  carried
great  waggon  trains  and  whole  parks  of  siege  artillery
- — the  heaviest  then  known — over  roads  and  swamps
which  had  been  deemed  impassable  even  for  infantry.
He  had  traversed  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  republic
in  a  single  campaign,  taken  two  great  cities  in  Over-
yssel,  picked  up  cities  and  fortresses  in  the  province  of
Groningen,  and  threatened  its  capital,  menaced  Steenwyk,
relieved  Knodsenburg  though  besieged  in  person  by
the  greatest  commander  of  the  age,  beaten  the  most
famous  cavalry  of  Spain  and  Italy  under  the  eyes  of
their  chieftain,  swooped  as  it  were  through  the  air  upon
Brabant,  and  carried  ofl'  an  important  city  almost  in  the
sight  of  Antwerp,  and  sped  back  again  in  the  freezing
weather  of  early  autumn,  with  his  splendidly  served
and  invincible  artillery,  to  the  imperial  city  of  Kymegen,
which  Farnese  had  sworn  to  guard  like  the  apple  of  his

^  Groen  v.  Prinsterer. (Archives,  11. *5  Bor,  ubi  sttp.
Serie  i.  148.)  m  Bor,  Meteren,  Duyck.  uhi  sup.

**  Vol.  11.  of  tliis  work,  chap.  xx.

112

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXIV.

eve,  and  wliicli,  with  consummate  skill,  was  forced  out
•jf  his  grasp  in  five  days.

"  Some  might  attribute  these  things  to  blind  fortune,"
says  an  honest  chronicler  who  had  occupied  important
posts  in  the  service  of  the  prince  and  of  his  cousin
Lewis  William,  "  but  they  who  knew  the  prince's  con-
stant study^  and  laborious  attention  to  detail,  who  were
awaie  that  he  never  committed  to  another  what  he  could
do  himself,  who  saw  his  sobriety,  vigilance,  his  perpetual
.study  and  holding  of  council  with  Count  Lewis  W  illiam
(himself  possessed  of  all  these  good  gifts,  perhaps  even
in  greater  degree),  and  who  never  found  him  seeking,
like  so  many  other  commanders,  his  own  ease  and  com-
fort, would  think  dilferently."^'

^'  Keyd,  ix.  175.

It  is  indeed  impossible  to  regard  llie
simple,  earnest,  genial,  valorous,  and
itudious  character  of  Lewis  William
without  affecuon.  His  private  letiers
ire  charming.  In  the  intervals  of  his
Dusy  campaignings,  he  found  time  not
July  for  his  own  studies,  but  also  for
iuperintending  the  education  of  his  two
j-ounger  brothers.  It  hail  at  first  been
proposed  that  they  should  go  to  an  Eng-
lish university,  but  old  Count  John  ob-
lected  to  the  expense,  and  to  the  luxurious
Habits  which  they  would  encounter  there.
He  liked  not  the  "mores"  of  the  young
I'^nglish  nobles,  he  said,  while  he  de-
nounced in  vehement  language  the  drunk-
enness and  profligacy  of  the  Germans.  It
was  now  decided  that  Coimt  Lewis  Wil-
liam should  take  charge  of  them  himself:
"As  there  is  no  good  opportunity  for
them  at  Dillenburg,"  he  wrote  to  his
father,  "and  as  the  expense  ot  Leyden
seems  too  great,  it  is  better  that  they
should  remain  with  me.  Although
living  is  veiy  dear  here  and  my  house-
keeping is  very  hard  upon  me,  yet  are
my  young  brothers,  and  their  good  edu-
cation, on  which  their  weal  and  woe
depend,  so  dear  to  me  that  1  will  take
charge  of  them  with  all  my  heart.  In
this  Gise  youi'  grace  will  ph-ase  send
tliem  a  Ic-arned  preceptor,  and  pay  for
bib  .salarj'  and  for  my  brothers'  cloth-
ing. For  the  rest  1  will  provide;  and
1  will  myself  be  their  tutor  in  read-
ing and  studying,  in  which  I  exercise
myself  as  much  as  I  have  opportunity

to  do,  and  I  will  take  them  with  me
to  the  field  whenever  there  is  anything
to  see  there,  and  anything  going  on
against  the  enemy."  Gioen  v.  Prinsterer.
(Archives,  II.  S.  i.  149,  2i1,  131,  144.

This  was  the  stuff  out  of  which  the
Nassaus  were  made.  William  the  Silent
and  his  three  Ijrethren  had  already  laid
down  their  lives  for  the  commonwealth
which  he  had  founded,  and  now  there
were  his  son  and  nine  more  of  the  race  in
arms  for  its  defence,  or  devoting  all  their
energies  and  th'ar  means  to  emulate  thi-
example  set  them  by  their  predecessors.
Nor  can  I  refrain  in  this  connection  from
citing  the  noble  language  in  wliich  the
pairiarch  of  the  Nassaus,  Count  John  the
Elder,  urged  upon  his  sons  and  nephews
the  necessity  of  establishing  a  system  of
common  schools  in  the  United  Provinces
— an  institution  which,  when  adopted  in
that  commonwealth,  became  a  source  ot
incalculable  good,  and  whicb,  transplanted
in  the  next  generation  by  English  pil-
grims from  Leyden  to  Massachusetts,  ant
vastly  developed  in  the  virgin  soil  of
America,  has  long  been  the  chief  safe-
guard and  the  peculiar  glory  of  our  own
republic.  "You  must  urge  upon  the
States-General,"  said  the  only  surviving
brother  of  William  the  Silent,  "  that  they,
according  to  the  example  of  the  Pope  and
the  Jesuits  should  est.\blish  free  schools
where  children  of  quality  as  well  as  of
poor  families,  for  a  very  small  sum,  could
be  well  and  Christianly  educated  and
brought  up.  This  would  be  the  greatest
and  most useful  work,  and  the  highest

1591. CHARACTER  OF  LEWIS  WILLIAM.  113

!:er\ice  that  you  could  ever  accomplish  munitions,  alliances,  and  treaties  that

for  God  and  Christiunity,  and  especially  can  be  liad  or  imagined  in  the  world.

for  the  Netherlands  themselves Pray urge upon his

In  summa,  one  may  jeer  at  ihis  as  popish  Grace  (Prince  Maurice),  in  cousinly  and

trlckerj-,  and undervalue  it  as  one  will,  friendly manner, that he should not

there  still  remains  in  the  work  an  inox-  shrink  from  nor  find  shame  or  difficulty

pressible  benefit. Soldiers  and  patii.ts  in  these  things,  nor  cease,  under  iuvoca-

ihus  educated,  with  a  true  kiimoledge  of  tion  of  Divine  aid,  from  reflecting  upon

Ood  and  a  Christian  conscience:  item,  them,  and  furthering  them  with  earnest

churches and schouls, good libraries,  diligence." Groen  v.  I'rinsterer. (Arcti-

books,  and  printing-presses,  are  better  ives,  11.  S.  i.  Letter  95,  p.  210  se^g.
tluin  all  aiinies,  arsenals, armouries

VOL. III.

114  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

CHAPTEE XXV.

War  in  Brittany  and  Normandy — Death  of  La  None — ^Religious  and  political  per-
secution in  Paris  —  Murder  of  President  Brisson,  Larcher,  and  Tardif — The
sceptre  of  France  offered  to  Philip — The  Dulce  of  Mayenne  punishes  the  murderers
of  the  magistrates — Speecti  of  Henry's  envoy  to  the  States-General — Letter  of
Queen  Elizabeth  to  Henry — Siege  of  Rouen — Farnese  leads  an  army  to  its  relief
— The  king  is  wounded  in  a  skirmish — Siege  of  Rue  by  Farnese — Henry  raises
the  siege  of  Rouen — Siege  of  Caudebec — Critical  position  of  Farnese  and  his
army — Victory  of  the  Duke  of  Mercceur  in  Brittany.

Again  tbe  central  point  towards  which  the  complicated
events  to  be  described  in  this  history  gravitate  is  found
on  the  soil  of  France.  Movements  apparently  desultory
and  disconnected — as  they  may  have  seemed  to  the  con-
temporaneous obsei-ver,  necessarily  occupied  with  the
local  and  daily  details  which  make  up  individual  human
life — are  found  to  be  necessary  parts  of  a  whole,  when
regarded  with  that  breadth  and  clearness  of  vision  which
is  permitted  to  human  beings  only  when  they  can  look
backward  tipon  that  long  sequence  of  events  which  make
up  the  life  of  nations  and  which  we  call  the  Past.  It  is
only  by  the  anatomical  study  of  what  has  ceased  to
exist  that  we  can  ctjme  thoroughly  to  comprehend  the
framework  and  the  vital  conditions  of  that  which  lives.
It  is  only  by  patiently  lifting  the  shroud  from  the  Past
that  we  can  enable  ourselves  to  make  even  wide  guesses
at  the  meaning  of  the  dim  Present  and  the  veiled
Future.  It  is  only  thus  that  the  continuity  of  human
history  reveals  itself  to  us  as  the  most  important  of
scientific  facts.

If  ever  commonwealth  was  apparently  doomed  to
lose  that  national  existence  which  it  had  maintained  for
a  brief  period  at  the  expense  of  infinite  sacrifice  of  blood
and  treasure,  it  was  the  republic  of  the  United  Nether-
lands in  the  period  immediately  succeeding  the  death
of  William  the  Silent.  Domestic  treason,  secession  of
important  provinces,  religious  liatred,  foreign  intrigue,
and  foreign  invasion — in  such  a  sea  of  troubles  was  the

1591.  PROSPECTS  OF  THE  REPUBLIC.  115

republic  destined  generations  long  to  struggle.  "Who
but  the  fanatical,  the  shalluw-niituled,  or  the  corrupt
could  doubt  the  inevitable  issue  of  the  conflict?  iJid
not  groat  sages  and  statesmen  whose  teachings  seemed
so  much  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  untaught
impulses  of  the  great  popular  heart,  condemn  over  and
over  again  the  hopeless  struggles  and  the  atrocioirs
bloodshed  which  were  thouglit  to  disgrace  the  age,
and  by  which  it  was  held  impossible  that  the  cause  of
human  liberty  should  ever  be  advanced  ?

To  us  who  look  back  from  tlie  vantage  summit  which
humanity  has  reached — thanks  to  the  toil  and  sacrifices
of  those  who  have  preceded  us — it  may  seem  doubtful
whether  a  premature  peace  in  the  Netherlands,  France,
and  England  would  have  been  an  unmitigated  blessing,
however  easily  it  might  have  been  purchased  by  the
establishment  all  over  Europe  of  that  holy  institution
called  the  Inquisition,  and  by  the  tranquil  acceptance  of
the  foreign  domination  of  Spain.

If,  too,  ever  country  seemed  destined  to  the  painful
process  of  national  vivisection  and  final  dismemberment,
it  was  France.  Its  natural  guardians  and  masters,
save  one,  were  in  secret  negotiation  with  foreign
powers  to  obtain  with  their  assistance  a  portion  of  the
national  territory  under  acknowledgment  of  foreign
supremacy.  There  was  hardly  an  inch  of  French  soil
that  had  not  two  possessors.  In  Burgundy  Baron  Biron
was  battling  against  the  Viscount  Tavannes ;  in  the
Lyonese  and  Dauphiny  Marshal  des  Digiueres  was
fighting  with  the  Dukes  of  Savoy  and  Nemours :  in
Provence,  Epernon  was  resisting  Savo}' ;  in  Languedoc,
Constable  Montmorency  contended  with  the  Duke  of
Joyeuse ;  in  Brittany,  the  Brince  of  Donibes  was
struggling  with  the  Duke  of  Mei'cojur.

But  there  was  one  adventurer  who  thought  he  could
show  a  better  legal  title  to  the  throne  of  Fi-ance  than  all
the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne  could  furnish  to  Philip  11.
and  his  daughter,  and  who  still  trusted,  through  all  the
disasters  which  pursued  him,  and  despite  the  machina-
tions of  venal  warriors  and  mendicant  princes,  to  his
good  right  and  his  good  sword,  and  to  something  more
potent  than  buth,  the  cause  of  national  unity.  His
rebuke  to the intriguing  priests  at  the  interview  of

I  2

116

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXV.

St.  Denis,  and  his  reference  to  the  judgment  of  Solomon
formed  the  text  to  his  whole  career.

The  brunt  of  the  war  now  fell  upon  Brittany  and
Normandy.  Three  thousand  Spaniards  under  Don  John
de  Aquila  had  landed  in  the  port  of  Blavet,  which  they
had  fortified  as  a  stronghold  on  the  coast.^  And  thither,
to  defend  the  integrity  of  that  portion  of  France,  which,
in  Spanish  hands,  was  a  perpetual  menace  to  her  realm,
her  crown,  even  to  her  life,  Qiieen  Elizabeth  had  sent
some  three  thousand  Englishmen,  under  commanders
well  known  to  France  and  the  Netherlands.  There  was
black  Norris  again  dealing  death  among  the  Spaniards
and  renewing  his  perpetual  squabbles  with  Sir  Eoger
Williams.  There  was  that  doughty  AVelshman  himself,
truculent  and  caustic  as  ever,  and  as  ready  with  sword
or  pen,  foremost  in  every  mad  adventure  or  every
forlorn  hope,  criticising  with  sharpest  tongue  the  blun-
ders and  shortcomings  of  friend  and  foe,  and  devoting
the  last  drop  in  his  veins  with  chivalrous  devotion  to
his  Queen.  "The  world  cannot  deny,"  said  he,  "that
any  carcase  living  ventured  himself  freer  and  oftener
for  his  prince,  state,  and  friends  than  I  did  mine.  There
is  no  more  to  be  had  of  a  poor  beast  than  his  skin,  and
for  want  of  other  means  I  never  respected  mine  in  the
least  respect  towards  my  sovereign's  service,  or  country."^

1  Coloma,  iv.  61^».

''  Williams  lo  Burgbley,  Feb.  15,  1592.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

A  most  brilliant  combat  had  recently
occurred  before  Dieppe,  in  which  Sir
Roger,  at  the  head  of  six  hundred  men —
four  hundred  of  them  English — had  at-
tacked two  full  regiments  of  the  League
in  their  intrenchments,  and  routed  them
utterly,  with  the  loss  of  five  hundred
killed  and  wounded,  four  hundred  pri-
soners, and  sustaining  but  little  loss  him-
self. The  achievement  seems  an  extraor-
dinary one,  but  is  vouched  for  by  the  Go-
vernor of  Dieppe,  on  whose  authority  it
was  communicated  by  the  French  am-
bassador in  London  to  the  Queen :  "  Glory
to  God  and  to  the  said  Sir  'Williams,"  said
the  ambassador,  "  who  has  not  belied  by
this  action  the  good  opinion  that  all  good
people  of  both  nations  had  of  him  tliis
long  time,  and  has  shown  us  that  the
Eoglisb  of  our  day  have  not  degenerated

from  the  ancient  virtue  of  their  fathers."
Beauvoir  la  Node  to  Burghley,  May  24,
1591. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

No  one  gave  better  or  blunter  advice
to  both  Queen  and  King  than  this  hard-
fighting,  sharp-writing  Welshman.  No
one  insisted  more  earnestly  than  he  did
on  the  entire  union  in  interest  and  danger
of  Elizabeth,  Henry,  and  the  Dutch  Re-
public ;  and  that  every  battle  gained  in
Brittany,  Norm.andy,  or  the  Netherlands,
was  a  blow  struck  in  immediate  defence
of  England's  very  existence, — "  Therefore,
S.icred  Majesty,"  wrote  Williams,  "  If
you  can,  help  the  King  to  take  Rouen.  ]f
he  be  in  Rouen,  your  Majesty  may  be  as-
sured this  king  is  on  his  horseback  in
such  sort  that  all  Spain  and  their  con-
federators  will  shake  and  dare  think  on
nothing  else  but  how  to  prevent  him.
Then  shall  he  be  well  able  to  maintain
himself,  and  your  Majesty's  purse  be  well
spared,  but  doth  he  not  take  Rouen,  and

1591.  SIR  ROGER  WILLIAMS— LA  NOUE.  117

And  so  passing  his  life  in  the  saddle  and  under  fire,  yet
finding  leisure  to  collect  the  materials  for,  and  to
complete  the  execution  of,  one  of  the  most  valuable  and
attractive  histories  of  the  age,  the  bold  Welshman
again  and  again  appears,  wearing  the  same  humorous
but  truculent  aspect  that  belonged  to  him  when  he  was
wont  to  run  up  and  down  in  a  great  morion  and  feathers
on  Flemish  battle-fields,  a  mark  for  the  Spanish  sharp-
shooters.

There,  too,  under  the  banner  of  the  Bearnese,  that
other  historian  of  those  sanguinary  times,  who  had
fought  on  almost  every  battle-field  where  tyranny  and
liberty  had  sought  to  smite  each  other  dead,  on  French
or  Flemish  soil,  and  who  had  prepared  liis  famous
political  and  military  discourses  in  a  foul  dungeon
swarming  with  toads  and  rats  and  other  villanous
reptiles  to  which  the  worse  than  infernal  tyi'anny  of
Philip  II.  had  consigned  him  for  seven  years  long  as  a
prisoner  of  war — the  brave  and  good  La  jSoue,  with  the
iron  arm,  hero  of  a  hundred  combats,  was  fighting  his
last  fight.  At  the  siege  of  Lamballe  in  Brittany,  he  had
taken  off  his  casque  and  climbed  a  ladder  to  examine

the  Spaniards  enter  into  these  parts,  as  necessaries." Williams  to  the Queen,

Villars  and  Tavannes  doth  demand  them,  from  Dieppe,  4  June 1591. (S.  P.  Office

then  be  assured  all  the  charges  of  tliese  MS.)

wars  must  be  on  your  Majesty,  for  the  And  again : — "  Doth  the  King  prosper,

poor  king  shall  not  be  able  to  pay  500  your Majesty and estate must needs

soldiers. If  he  should  be  beaten,  be  as-  flourish,  for  the  wars  will  rest  all  on  hini.

suredin  few  months  to  fight  for  the  Kng-  Doth  he  decay,  your  Majesty  must  needs

lish  ports,  in  such  sort  that  I  pray  God  I  maintain  his  wars,  or  in  a  short  time  light

may  never  see  it. I  fear  I  angered  the  of  yourself,  not  only  against  the  Spanish,

king, if  he be  doing me right,  your  but  again^t  all  the  League,  the  which  will

Majesty  and  the  world  found  me  ever  his  increase  daily,  for  all  the  mercenaries

servant  to  the  uttermost  of  my  power,  will  follow  the  fortunate,  1  mean  the  vic-

I found him sometimes speaking he  torious. Doth  tlie  Spanish  ruin  Ibis  king,

would  besiege  Poiitoise,  sometimes  Sancy  Holland  and  Zeeland  will  be  found  good

in  Champagne,  and  how  he  should  jtnn  cheap,  and  England  in  that  case  i  pray

with  the  Almayn  army. Besides  otlier  God never  to  see it. Therefore, most

speeches,  although  not  flattering,  I  am  sacred  Sovereign,  a  penny  to  save  a  pound

assured  honest,  1  told  his  Majesty,  Sir,  if  is  well  bestowed,  and  to  ruin  a  suburb  to

you  will  have  the  world  to  confess  you  save  a  city  is  done  to  good  purpose. My

as  great  a  captain  as  yourself,  and  all  we  meaning  is  better  to  spend  part  of  your

here  think  you  to  be,  you  must  recover  or  wealth  and  subjects  than  to  hazard  the

at  least  save  your  seaports,  rather  than  whole. This  king  is  on  making  or  mar-

those  bicocques,  or  places  of  small  im-  ring,  resolving  only  on your Majesty's

portance  in  re-pect  of  them,  else  your  succour. Having  it,  he  dnubts  nothing  to

best  Irieiids  will  despair  of  your  govern-  take  Houen." Williams  to  the  Queen,  9

ment,  and  in  short  time  not  able  to  sue-  June,  1591. (S.  P.  Ollice  MS.J
eour  you  for  want  of  ports  to  land  your

118  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

the  breach  effected  by  the  batteries.  An  arquebus  shot
from  the  town  grazed  his  forehead,  and,  without  in-
flicting a  severe  wound,  stunned  him  so  much  that  he
lost  his  balance  and  fell  head  foremost  towards  the
ground ;  his  lex,  which  had  been  wounded  at  the  mid-
night assaitlt  upon  Paris,  where  he  stood  at  the  side  of
King  Henry,  caught  in  the  ladder  and  held  him  sus-
pended. His  head  was  severely  bruised,  and  the  con-
tusions and  shock  to  his  war-worn  frame  were  so  great
that  he  died  after  lingering  eighteen  days.

His  son  de  Teligny,  who  in  his  turn  had  just  been
exchanged  and  released  from  the  prison  where  he  had
lain  since  his  capture  before  Antwerp,  had  hastened
with  joy  to  join  his  father  in  the  camp,  but  came  to
close  his  eyes.  The  veteran  caused  the  chapter  in  Job
on  the  resurrection  of  the  body  to  be  read  to  him  on  his
death-bed,  and  died  expressing  his  firm  faith  in  a  here-
after. Thus  passed  away,  at  the  age  of  sixty,  on  the
4th  August,  1591,  one  of  the  most  heroic  spirits  of
France.  Prudence,  courage,  experience,  military  know-
ledge both  theoretic  and  practical,  made  him  one  of  the
first  captains  of  the  age,  and  he  was  not  more  distin-
guished for  his  valour  than  for  the  pui-ity  of  his  life,  and
the  moderation,  temperance,  and  justice  of  his  character.^
The  Prince  of  Dombes,  in  despair  at  his  death,  raised
the  siege  of  Lamballe.

There  was  yet  another  chronicler,  fighting  among  the
Spaniards,  now  in  Brittany,  now  in  Normandy,  and  now
in  Flanders,  and  doing  his  work  as  thoroughly  with  his
sword  as  afterwards  with  his  pen,  Don  Carlos  Coloma,
captain  of  cavalry,  afterwards  financier,  envoy,  and
historian.  For  it  was  thus  that  those  writers  prepared
themselves  for  their  work.  They  were  all  actors  in  the
great  epic,  the  episodes  of  which  they  have  preserved.
They  lived  and  fought,  and  wrought  and  suffered  and
wrote.  Eude  in  tongue,  aflame  with  passion,  twisted
all  awry  by  prejudice,  violent  in  love  and  hate,  they
have  left  us  nan-atives  which  are  at  least  full  of  colour
and  thrilling  with  life.

Thus  Ketherlanders,  Englishmen,  and  Frenchmen
were  again  mingling  their  blood  and  exhausting  their
energies on a  hundred  petty  battle-fields  of  Brittany

3  De  Thou,  t.  si.  lib.  97,  pp.  397,  398.

1591.  PARTIZANS  OF  PHILIP  IN  PARIS,  119

and  Normandy ;  but  perhaps  to  few  of  those  hard
fighters  was  it  given  to  discern  the  great  work  which
they  were  slowly  and  painfully  achieving.

In  Paris  the  League  still  maintained  its  ascendencv.
Henry,  having  again  withdrawn  from  his  attempts  to
reduce  the  capital,  had  left  the  sixteen  ty]-ants  Avho
governed  it  more  leisure  to  occupy  themselves  with
internal  politics.  A  network  of  intrigue  was  spread
through  the  whole  atmosphere  of  the  place.  The  Six-
teen, sustained  by  the  power  of  Spain  and  Eome,  and
fearing  nothing  so  much  as  the  return  of  peace,  by
which  their  system  of  plunder  would  come  to  an  end,
proceeded  with  their  pei'secution  of  all  heretics,  real  or
supposed,  who  were  rich  enough  to  oifer  a  reasonable
chance  of  spoil.  The  soul  of  all  these  intrigues  was  the
new  legate  Sega,  bishop  of  Piacenza.  Letters  from  him
to  Alexander  Farnese,  intercepted  by  Henry,  showed  a
determination  to  ruin  the  Duke  of  Mayenno  and  Count
Belin  governor  of  Paris,  whom  he  designated  as  Colossus
and  Eenard,  to  extirpate  the  magistrates,  and  to  put
Spanish  partizans  in  their  places,  and  in  general  to
perfect  the  machinery  by  which  the  authority  of  Philip
was  to  be  established  in  France.  He  was  perpetually
urging  upon  that  monarch  the  necessity  of  spendin""
more  money  among  his  creatures  in  order  to  carry  out
these  projects.''

Accordingly  the  attention  of  the  Sixteen  had  been
directed  to  i'resident  Brisson,  who  had  already  made
himself  so  dangerously  conspicuous  by  his  resistance
to  the  insolent  assumption  of  the  cardinal-legate.  This
eminent  juris-consult  had  succeeded  Pomponne  de  Bel-
lievT-e  as  first  president  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris.  He
had  been  distinguished  for  talent,  learning,  and  eloquence
as  an  advocate,  and  was  the  author  of  several  im-
portant legal  works.  His  ambition  to  fill  the  place  of
first  president  had  caused  him  to  remain  in  Paris  after
its  revolt  against  Henry  III.  Pie  was  no  leaguer,  and,
since  his  open  defiance  of  the  ultra-Catholic  party,  he
had  been  a  marked  man — doomed  secretly  by  the  con-
federates who  ruled  the  capital.  He  had  fondly
imagined  that  he  could  govern  the  Parisian  populace
as  easily  as  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  influencing  the

*  De  Thou,  433,  430.

120  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

Parliament  or  directing  his  clients.  He  expected  to
restore  the  city  to  its  obedience  to  the  constituted
authorities.  He  hoped  to  be  himself  the  means  of
bringing  Henry  IV.  in  triumph  to  the  throne  of  his
ancestors.  He  found,  however,  that  a  revolution  was
more  difficult  to  manage  than  a  law  case,  and  that  the
confederates  of  the  Holy  League  were  less  tractable
than  his  clients  had  usually  been  found.

On  the  night  of  the  14th  November, 1591,  he  was

14  Nov. seized  on  the  bridge  St.  Michel,  while  on  his

1591.  .^ay  to  Parliament,  and  was  told  that  he  was
expected  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville.  He  was  then  brought
to  the  prison  of  the  little  Chatelet.

Hardly  had  he  been  made  secure  in  the  dimly-lighted
dungeon,  when  Crome,  a  leader  among  the  Parisian
populace,  made  his  appearance,  accompanied  by  some  of
his  confedeiates,  and  dressed  in  a  complete  suit  of  mail.
He  ordered  the  magistrate  to  take  off  his  hat  and  to
kneel.  He  then  read  a  sentence  condemning  him  to
death.  Profoundly  astonished,  Brisson  demanded  to
know  of  what  crime  he  was  accused,  and  under  what
authority.  The  answer  was  a  laugh,  and  an  assurance
that  he  had  no  time  to  lose.  He  then  begged  that  at
least  he  might  be  imprisoned  long  enough  to  enable
him  to  com[)lete  a  legal  work  on  which  he  was  engaged,
and  which,  by  his  yjremature  death,  would  be  ]o.st  to  the
commonwealth.  This  request  produced  no  doubt  more
merriment  than  his  previous  demands.  His  judges
were  inflexible,  and  allowed  him  hardly  time  to  confess
himself. He  was  then  hanged  in  his  dungeon.®

Two  other  magistrates,  Larcher  and  Tardif,  were
executed  in  the  same  way,  in  the  same  place,  and  on
the  same  night.  The  crime  charged  against  them  was
having  spoken  in  a  public  assembly  somewhat  freely
against  the  Sixteen,  and  having  aided  in  the  circulation
in  Paris  of  a  paper  drawn  up  by  the  Duke  of  Nevers,
filled  with  bitterness  against  the  Lorraine  princes  and
the  League,  and  addressed  to  the  late  Pope  Sixtus.*^

The  three  bodies  were  afterwards  gibbeted  on  the
Greve  in  front  of  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  and  exposed  for
two  days  to  the  insults  and  fury  of  the  populace.

This  was  the  culminating  point  of  the  reign  of  terror

5  DeThou,  4-12,  443.  6  Ibid.

1591. THE  SCEPTRE  OF  FRANCE  OFFERED  TO  PHILIP. 121

in  Paris,  Never  had  the  sixteen  tyrants,  lords  of  the
market-halls,  who  governed  the  capital  by  favour  of
and  in  the  name  of  the  populace,  seemed  more  omni-
potent. As  representatives  or  plenipotentiaries  of
Madam  League  they  had  laid  the  crown  at  the  feet  of
tlie  King  of  Spain,  hoping  by  still  further  drafts  on  his
exchequer  and  his  credulity  to  prolong  indefinitely  their
own  ignoble  reign.  The  extreme  democratic  party,
which  had  hithei-to  supported  the  House  of  Lorraine,
and  had  seemed  to  idolize  that  family  in  the  person  of
the  great  Balafre,  now  believed  themselves  possessed  of
sufficient  power  to  control  the  Duke  of  Mayenne  and  all
his  adherents.  They  sent  the  Jesuit  Claude  Mathieu
with  a  special  memorial  to  Philip  II.  That  monarch
was  implored  to  take  the  sceptre  of  France,  and  to  reign
over  them,  inasmuch  as  they  most  willingly  threw
themselves  into  his  arms.''  They  assured  him  that  all
reasonable  people,  and  especially  the  Holy  League,
wished  him  to  take  the  reins  of  government,  on  con-
dition of  exterminating  heresy  throughout  the  kingdom
by  force  of  arms,  of  j^ublishing  the  Council  of  Trent,
and  of  establishing  everywhere  the  Holy  Inqiiisition —
an  institution  formidable  onl}^  to  the  wicked  and  de-
sirable for  the  good.  It  was  suggested  that  Philip
should  not  call  himself  any  longer  King  of  Spain  nor
adopt  the  title  of  King  of  France,  but  that  he  should
proclaim  himself  the  Great  King,  or  make  use  of  some
similar  designation,  not  indicating  any  specialty  but
importing  universal  dominion.^

Should  Philip,  however,  be  disinclined  himself  to
accept  the  monarchy,  it  was  suggested  that  the  yoimg
Duke  of  Guise,  son  of  the  first  martyr  of  France,  would
be  the  most  appropriate  personage  to  be  honoured  with
the  hand  of  the  legitimate  Queen  of  France,  the  Infanta
Clara  Isabella.

But  the  Sixteen  were  reckoning  without  the  Duke  of
Mayenne.  That  great  personage,  although  an  indif-
ferent warrior  and  an  utterly  unprincipled  and  venal
statesman,  was  by  no  means  despicable  as  a  fisherman

'  Arch.  deSimancas  (Paris)  B.  71,'^'. ^'g^'"'''-  ^^ S'««"^°s (P*^"*) B- "

cited  by  Capefigue,  Hist,  de  la  Ligue,  &c.  ' ^^^^-  P-  ^^^*

VL  64i  seqq.

122  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap,  XXV.

in  the  troubled  waters  of  revolution.  He  knew  how  to
manage  intrigues  with  both  sides  for  his  own  benefit.
Had  he  been  a  bachelor  he  might  have  obtained  the
Infanta  and  shared  her  prospective  throne.  Being
encumbered  with  a  wife  he  had  no  hope  of  becoming
the  son-in-law  of  Philip,  and  was  determined  that  his
nephew  Guise  should  not  enjoy  a  piece  of  good  fortune
denied  to  himself.  The  escape  of  the  young  duke  from
prison  had  been  the  signal  for  the  outbreak  of  jealousies
between  uncle  and  nephew,  which  Parma  and  other
agents  had  been  instructed  by  their  master  to  foster  to
the  utmost.  "  They  must  be  maintained  in  such  dispo-
sition in  regard  to  me,"  he  said,  "  that  the  one  being
ignorant  of  my  relations  to  the  other,  both  may  without
knowing  it  do  my  will."''

But  Mayenne,  in  this  grovelling  career  of  self-
seeking,  in  this  perpetual  loading  of  dice  and  marking
of  cards,  which  formed  the  main  occupation  of  so  many
kings  and  princes  of  the  period,  and  which  passed  for
Machiavellian  politics,  was  a  fiiir  match  for  the  Spanish
king  and  his  Italian  viceroy.  He  sent  President  .Jeannin
on  special  mission  to  Philip,  asking  for  two  armies,  one
to  be  under  his  command,  the  other  under  that  of
Farnese,  and  assured  him  that  he  should  be  king  him-
self, or  appoint  any  man  ho  liked  to  the  vacant  throne.
Thus  he  had  secured  one  liundred  thousand  crowns  a
month  to  carry  on  his  oAvn  game  withal.  "  The  main-
tenance of  these  two  armies  costs  me  261,000  crowns  a
month,"  said  Philip  to  his  envoy  Ybarra.^'^

And  what  was  the  result  of  all  this  expenditure  of
money,  of  all  this  l3'ing  and  counter-lying,  of  all  this
fiantic  effort  on  the  part  of  the  most  powerful  monarch
of  the  age  to  obtain  property  which  did  not  belong  to
him — the  sovereignty  of  a  great  kingdom,  stocked  with
a  dozen  millions  of  human  beings — of  all  this  endless
bloodshed  of  the  people  in  the  interest  of  a  high-born
family  or  two,  of  all  this  infamous  brokerage  charged  by
great  nobles  for  their  attempts  to  transfer  kingdoms  like
private  farms  from  one  owner  to  another  ?  Time  was
to show. Meanwhile  men trembled  at the  name of

s  Arch,  de  Simancas  (Paris)  57,  — • cited  by  Capefigue,  vi.  193.

1591.  POLICY  OF  MAYENNE.  123

Philip  IT.,  and  grovelled  before  liim  as  the  incarnation
of  sagacity,  high  policy,  and  king-craft.

But  Mayenne,  while  taking  the  brokerage,  was  less
anxious  about  the  transfer.  He  had  fine  instinct  enough
to  suspect  that  the  Bearnese,  ontcast  though  he  seemed,
might  after  all  not  be  playing  so  desperate  a  game  against
the  League  as  it  was  the  fashion  to  suppose.  He  knew
whether  or  not  Henry  was  likely  to  prove  a  more  fonatical
Huguenot  in  1592  than  he  had  shown  himself  twenty
years  before  at  the  Bartholomew  festival.  And  he  had
wit  enough  to  foresee  that  the  "instruction"  which  the
gay  free-thinker  held  so  cautiously  in  his  fingers  might
perhaps  turn  out  the  trump  card.  A  bold,  valorous
Frenchman  with  a  flawless  title,  and  washed  whiter
than  snow  by  the  freshest  of  holy  water,  might  prove
a  more  formidable  claimant  to  the  allegiance  of  French-
men than  a  foreign  potentate,  even  though  backed  by  all
the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne.

The  murder  of  President  Brisson  and  his  colleagues
by  the  confederates  of  the  sixteen  quarters,  was  in  truth
the  beginning  of  the  end.  What  seemed  a  proof  of
supreme  power  was  the  precursor  of  a  counter-revolu-
tion, destined  ere  long  to  lead  farther  than  men  dreamed.
The  Sixteen  believed  themselves  omnipotent.  Mayenne
being  in  their  powei-,  it  was  for  them  to  bestow  the
crown  at  their  will,  or  to  hold  it  suspended  in  air  as
long  as  seemed  best  to  them.  They  felt  no  doubt  that
all  the  other  great  cities  in  the  kingdom  would  follow
the  example  of  Paris.  *

But  the  lieutenant-general  of  the  realm  felt  it  time  for
him  to  show  that  his  authority  was  not  a  shadow — that
he  was  not  a  pasteboard  functionary  like  the  deceased
cardinal-king,  Charles  X.  The  letters  entrusted  by  the
Sixteen  to  Claude  Mathieu  were  intercepted  b}'  Henry,
and,  very  probably,  an  intimation  of  their  contents  was
furnished  to  Mayenne.  At  any  rate,  the  duke,  who  lacked
not  courage  nor  promptness  when  his  own  interests  were
concerned,  who  felt  his  authority  slipping  away  from  him,
now  that  it  seemed  the  object  of  the  Spaniards  to  bind  the
democratic  party  to  themselves  by  a  complicity  in  crime,
hastened  at  once  to  Paris,  determined  to  crush  these
intrigues  and  to  punish  the  murderers  'i  the  judges."

11  De  Thou,  xi.  446.

124  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

The  Spanish  envoy  Ybarra,  proud,  excitable,  violent,
who  had  been  privy  to  the  assassinations,  and  was
astonished  that  the  deeds  had  excited  indignation  and
fury  instead  of  the  terror  counted  \ipon,  remonstrated
with  Mayenne,  intimating  that  in  times  of  civil  commo-
tion it  was  often  necessary  to  be  blind  and  deaf.

In  vain.  The  duke  carried  it  with  a  high  and  firm
4  Dec.  hand.  He  t^rrested  the  ringleaders,  and  hanged
1591.  fgyj.  Qf  them  in  the  basement  of  the  Louvre
within  twenty  days  after  the  commission  of  their  crime.
The  energy  was  well-timed  and  perfectly  successful.  The
power  of  the  Sixteen  was  struck  to  the  earth  at  a  blow.
The  ignoble  tyrants  became  in  a  moment  as  despicable
as  they  had  been  formidable  and  insolent.  Crome,  more
fortunate  than  many  of  his  fellows,  contrived  to  make
his  escape  out  of  the  kingdom.^'^

Thus  Mayenne  had  formally  broken  with  the  demo-
cratic party,  so  called — with  the  market-halls  oligarchy.
In  thus  doing,  his  ultimate  rupture  with  the  Spaniards
was  foreshadowed.  The  next  combination  for  him  to
strive  for  would  be  one  to  unite  the  moderate  catholics
and  the  Bearnese.  Ah!  if  Henry  would  but  "instruct"
himself  out  of  hand,  what  a  game  the  duke  might
play!

The  burgess-party,  the  mild  royalists,  the  disgusted
portion  of  the  Leaguers,  coalescing  with  those  of  the
Huguenots  whose  fidelity  might  prove  stanch  even
against  the  religious  apostasy  contemplated  by  their
chief — ^tliis  combination  might  prove  an  over-match  for
the  ultra-leaguers,  the  democrats,  and  the  Spaniards.
The  king's  name  would  be  a  tower  of  strength  for  that
"  third  party,"  which  began  to  rear  its  head  very  boldly
and  to  call  itself  "  Folitica."  Madam  League  might
succumb  to  this  new  rival  in  the  fickle  hearts  of  the
French.

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1591,  Buzanval  had  pre-
26  Jan.  sented  his  credentials  to  the  States-General  at
'^^^-  the  Hague  as  envoy  of  Henry  IV.  In  the
speech  which  he  made  on  this  occasion  he  expressed
the  hope  that  the  mission  of  the  Viscount  Turenne,  his
Majesty's  envoy  to  England  and  to  the  Netherlands,  had
made  known  the  ro^'al  sentiments  towards  the  States  and

12  Dp.  Tbon,  xi.  447.  413.

1591.  HENRY'S  ENVOY  AT  THE  HAGUE.  125

the  great  satisfaction  of  the  king  with  their  energetic  sj'm-
pathy  and  assistance.  It  was  notorious,  said  Buzanval,
that  the  King  of  Spain  for  many  years  had  been  governed
by  no  other  motive  than  to  bring  all  the  rest  of  Christen-
dom under  his  dominion,  while  at  the  same  time  he  forced
upon  those  already  placed  under  his  sceptre  a  violent
tyrann}',  passing  beyond  all  the  bounds  that  God,  nature,
and  reason  had  set  to  lawful  forms  of  government.  In
regard  to  nations  born  under  other  laws  than  his,  he  had
used  the  pretext  of  religion  for  reducing  them  to  servi-
tude. The  w^ars  stirred  up  by  his  family  in  Germany,
and  his  recent  invasion  of  England,  were  j)roofs  of  this
intention,  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  all  men.  Still  more
flagrant  were  his  machinations  in  the  present  troubles  of
France.  Of  his  dealings  with  his  hereditary  realms,  the
condition  of  the  noble  provinces  of  the  Netherlands,  once
so  blooming  under  reasonable  laws,  furnished  a  sufficient
illustration.  You  see,  my  masters,  continued  the  envoy,
the  subtle  plans  of  the  Spanish  king  and  his  counsellors
to  reach  with  certainty  the  object  of  their  ambition.
They  have  reflected  that  Spain,  which  is  the  outeiinost
corner  of  Europe,  cannot  conveniently  make  war  upon
other  Christian  realms.  They  have  seen  that  a  central
position  is  necessaiy  to  enable  them  to  stretch  their  arms
to  every  side.  They  have  remembered  that  princes  who
in  earlier  days  were  able  to  spread  their  wings  over  all
Christendom  had  their  throne  in  France,  like  Charles  the
Great  and  his  descendants.  Therefore  the  king  is  now
earnestly  bent  on  seizing  this  occasion  to  make  himself
master  of  France.  The  death  of  the  late  king  (Henry
111.)  had  no  sooner  occurred,  than — as  the  blood  through
great  terror  rushes  from  the  extremities  and  overflows
the  heart — they  here  also,  fearing  to  lose  their  oppor-
tunity and  astonished  at  the  valour  of  our  present  king,
abandoned  all  their  other  enterprises  in  order  to  jiour
themselves  upon  France.^^

Buzanval  further  reminded  the  States  that  Ilenrj'-  had
received  the  most  encouraging  promises  from  the  pi'o-
testant  princes  of  Germany,  and  that  so  great  a  per-
sonage as  the  Viscount  Turenne,  who  had  now  gone
thither  to  reap  the  fruit  of  those  promises,  would  not
have  been  sent  on  such  a  mission  except  that  its  result

13  Bor,  111.  xxviii.  D51  552

126  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

was  certain.  The  Queen  of  England,  too,  liad  promised
his  Majesty  most  liberal  assistance.

It  was  not  necessary  to  argue  as  to  the  close  con-
nection between  the  cause  of  the  Netherlands  and  that
of  France.  The  king  had  beaten  down  the  mutiny  of
his  own  subjects,  and  repulsed  the  invasion  of  the  Dukes
of  Savoy  and  of  Lorraine.  In  consideration  of  the  assist-
ance promised  by  Germany  and  England — for  a  powerful
army  would  be  at  the  command  of  Henry  in  the  spring
— it  might  be  said  that  the  Netherlands  might  repose  for
a  time  and  recmit  their  exhausted  energies,  under  the
shadow  of  these  mighty  preparations."

"  I  do  not  believe,  however,"  said  the  minister,  "  that
you  will  all  answer  me  thus.  The  faint-hearted  and
the  inexperienced  might  flatter  themselves  with  such
thoughts,  and  seek  thus  to  cover  their  cowardice,  but
the  zealous  and  the  courageous  will  see  that  it  is  time
to  set  sail  on  the  ship,  now  that  the  wind  is  rising  so
freshly  and  favourably.

"  For  there  are  many  occasions  when  an  army  might
be  ruined  for  want  of  twenty  thousand  crowns.  What  a
pity  if  a  noble  edifice,  furnished  to  the  roof-tree,  should
fall  to  decay  for  want  of  a  few  tiles.  No  doubt  your
own  interests  are  deeply  connected  with  our  own.  Men
may  say  that  our  proposals  should  be  rejected  on  the
principle  that  the  shirt  is  nearer  to  the  skin  than  the  coat,
but  it  can  be  easily  proved  that  our  cause  is  one.  The
mere  rumour  of  this  army  will  prevent  the  Di;ke  of
Parma  from  attacking  you.  His  forces  will  be  drawn
to  France.  He  will  be  obliged  to  intercept  the  crash  of
this  thunderbolt.  The  assistance  of  this  army  is  worth
millions  to  you,  and  has  cost  you  nothing.  To  bring
France  into  hostility  with  Spain  is  the  very  policy  that
you  have  always  pursued  and  always  should  pursue  in
order  to  protect  your  freedom.  You  have  always  desired
a  war  between  France  and  Spain,  and  here  is  a  fierce
and  cruel  one  in  which  you  have  hazarded  nothing.  It
cannot  come  to  an  end  without  bringing  signal  advan-
tages to  yourselves.

"  You  have  always  desired  an  alliance  with  a  French
sovereign,  and  here  is  a  firm  friendship  offeied  you  by
our  king,  a  natural  alliance.

'*  Bor.  111.  xxviii.  551,  552.

1591.  SPEECH  OF  HENRY'S  ENVOY.  127

"  You  know  how  unstable  are  most  treaties  that  are
founded  on  shifting  interests,  and  do  not  concern  the
freedom  of  bodies  and  souls.  The  first  aie  written  with
pen  upon  paper,  and  are  generally  as  light  as  paper.
They  have  no  roots  in  the  heart.  Those  founded  on
mutual  assistance  on  trying  occasions  have  the  perpetual
strength  of  nature.  They  bring  always  good  and  endur-
ing fruit  in  a  rich  soil  like  the  heart  of  our  king ;  that
heart  which  is  as  beautiful  and  as  pure  from  all  untruth
as  the  lil)'  upon  his  shield.

"  You  will  derive  the  first  profits  from  the  army  thus
raised.  From  the  moment  of  its  mustering  under  a  chief
of  such  experience  as  Turenne,  it  will  absorb  the  whole
attention  of  Spain,  and  will  draw  her  thoughts  from  the
Netherlands  to  France."

All  this  and  more  in  the  same  earnest  manner  did  the
envoy  urge  upon  the  consideration  of  the  States-General,
concluding  with  a  demand  of  100,000  florins  as  their
contribution  towards  the  French  campaign. ^^

His  eloquence  did  not  fall  upon  unwilling  ears ;  for
the  States-General,  after  taking  time  to  deli-  9  May,
berate,  replied  to  the  propositions  by  an  ex-  ^^^i-
pression  of  the  strongest  sympathy  with,  and  admiration
for,  the  heroic  efforts  of  the  King  of  France.  Accord-
ingly, notwithstanding  their  own  enormous  expenses,
past  and  present,  and  their  strenuous  exertions  at  that
very  moment  to  form  an  army  of  foot  and  horse  for  the
campaign,  the  brilliant  results  of  which  have  already
been  narrated,  they  agreed  to  furnish  the  required  loan
of  100,000  florins  to  be  repaid  in  a  year,  besides  six  or
seven  good  ships  of  war  to  co-operate  with  the  fleets  of
England  and  France  upon  the  coasts  of  Normandy. '**
And  the  States  were  even  better  than  their  word.

Before  the  end  of  autumn  of  the  year  1591,  Henrv
had  laid  siege  to  Rouen,  then  the  second  city  of  the
kingdom.  To  leave  much  longer  so  important  a  place
— dominating,  as  it  did,  not  only  Normandy  but  a  prin-
cipal portion  oi  the  maritime  borders  of  Franc:e — imder
the  control  of  the  League  and  of  Spain  was  likely  to  be
fatal  to  Henry's  success.  It  was  perfectly  sound  in
Queen  Elizabeth  to  insist  as  she  did,  with  more  than  her
usual  imperiousness  towards  her  excellent  brother,  that

15  Bor,  III.  .xxviii.  551,  5n2.  16  Ibid.  552,  553.

128  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

he  should  lose  no  more  time  before  reducing  that  city.
It  was  obvious  that  Eoueu  in  the  hands  of  her  aich-
enemy  was  a  perpetual  menace  to  the  safety  of  her  own
kingdom.  It  was  therefore  with  correct  judgment,  as
well  as  with  that  high-flown  gallantry  so  dear  to  the
heart  of  Elizabeth,  that  her  roj'al  champion  and  devoted
slave  assured  her  of  his  determination  no  longer  to  defer
obeying  her  commands  in  this  respect.

The  queen  liad  repeatedly  warned  him  of  the  necessity
of  defending  the  maritime  frontier  of  his  kingdom,  and
she  was  not  sparing  of  her  reproaches  that  the  large
sums  which  she  expended  in  his  cause  had  been  often
ill  bestowed.  Her  criticisms  on  what  she  considered
his  military  mistakes  were  not  few,  her  threats  to  with-
draw her  ^ibsidies  frequent.  "  Owning  neither  the
East  nor  the  West  Indies,"  she  said,  "  we  are  unable  to
supply  the  constant  demands  upon  us ;  and  although
we  have  the  reputation  of  being  a  good  housewife,  it
does  not  follow  that  we  can  be  a  housewife  for  all  the
world.""  She  was  persistently  warning  the  king  of  an
attack  upon  Dieppe,  and  I'cbuking  him  for  occupying
himself  with  petty  enterprises  to  the  neglect  of  vital
points.  She  expressed  her  surprise  that  after  the  de-
parture of  Parma,  he  had  not  driven  the  Spaniards  out
of  Brittany,  without  allowing  them  to  fortify  themselves
in  that  countr3\  "  I  am  astonished,"  she  said  to  him,
"  that  your  eyes  are  so  blinded  as  not  to  see  this  danger.
Kemember,  my  dear  brother,"  she  frankly  added,  "  that
it  is  not  only  Erance  that  I  am  aiding,  nor  are  my  own
natural  realms  of  little  consequence  to  me.  Believe  me,
if  I  see  that  you  have  no  more  regard  to  the  ports  and
maritime  places  nearest  to  us,  it  will  be  necessary  that
my  prayers  should  serve  you  in  place  of  any  other  assist-
ance, because  it  does  not  please  me  to  send  my  people  to
the  shambles  where  they  may  perish  before  having  ren-
dered you  any  assistance.  I  am  sure  the  Spaniards  will
soon  besiege  Dieppe.  Beware  of  it,  and  excuse  my  blunt-
ness,  for  if  in  the  beginning  you  had  taken  the  maritime
forts,  which  are  the  very  gates  uf  your  kingdom,  Paris
would  not  have  been  so  well  furnished,  and  other  places
nearer  the  heart  of  the  kingdom  would  not  have  received
so  much  foreign  assistance,  without  which  the  others

1"  Queen  to  the  Duke  d'Espernon,  19  I'eb.  1592. (S.  P.  Office  JIS.I

1591.  SIEGE  OF  EOUEN.  129

would  have  soon  been  vanqxiislied.  Pardon  my  sim-
plicity as  belonging  to  my  own  sex  wishing  to  give  a
losson  to  one  who  knows  better,  but  my  experience  in
government  makes  me  a  little  obstinate  in  believing
that  I  am  not  ignorant  of  that  which  belongs  to  a  king,
and  I  persuade  myself  that  in  following  my  advice  yon
will  not  fail  to  conquer  your  assailants."^*

Before  the  end  of  the  year  Heniy  had  obtained  control
of  the  Seine,  both  above  and  below  the  city,  holding
Pont  de  I'Arche  on  the  north — where  was  the  last  bridge
aqross  the  river;  that  of  Kouen,  built  by  the  English
when  they  governed  Normandy,  being  now  in  ruins — and
Caudebec  on  the  south  in  an  ii'on  grasp.  Sevei'al  war-
vessels  sent  by  the  Hollanders,  according  to  the  agree-
ment with  Buzanval,  cruised  in  the  north  of  the  river
below  Caudebec,  and  rendered  miicli  service  to  the  king
in  cutting  off  supplies  from  the  beleaguered  place,  while
the  investing  army  of  Henry,  numbeiing  twenty-five
thousand  foot — inclusive  of  the  English  contingent,  and
three  thousand  Ketherlanders — and  ten  thousand  cavalrj",
nearly  all  French,  was  fast  reducing  the  place  to  ex-
tremities.

Parma,  as  usual,  in  obedience  to  his  master's  orders,
but  entirel}'  against  his  own  judgment,  had  again  left
ihe  rising  young  general  of  the  Netherlands  to  pro-
ceed from  one  triumph  to  another,  while  he  transferred
beyond  the  borders  of  that  land  which  it  was  his  first
business  to  protect,  the  whole  weight  of  his  military

18  Queen to the King of  Fiance,  1  to  conduct  them,  but  how  contrarily  the

March,  1592. (S.  P.  Office  MS.  in  French,  King  took  another  course  to  seek  other

in  her  own  hand.)  "  The  poor  king,"  said  towns  and  places,  and  to  permit  her  M.'s

Umton,  "  must  be  miraculously  defended  forces  to  remain  about  Dieppe  almost  two

by  God,  or  else  he  cannot  long  subsist,  months  without  any  use  but  to  spend  her

He  wanteth  means  and  has  need  of  mira-  M.'s  money,  and  to  waste  her  people,  and

cles,  and  without  her  Majesty's  uphold,  instead  of  besieging  of  Rouen,  suffered  it

ing would quickly perish. She only  to  be  victualled,  manned,  and  fortified  in

givcth  life  to  bis  actions  and  terror  to  his  such  sort  as  experience  hath  tauglit  the

enemies." To  Burghley,  from  Dieppe,  15  King  how  difficult,  or  rather  how  des-

March,  1592. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  perate,  it  hath  been  as  yet  to  recover  it.

"  Knowing," said Sir Robert Cecil,  .... And  of  this  error  hath  fof-

"  that  no  place  in  all  France,  no,  not  Paris  lowed  the  opportunity  of  the  Duke  of

itself,  was  of  more  importance  to  be  re-  Parma's entering with so mighty an

covered  than  Rouen  and  Newhaven,  the  army,  and  the  King's  professed  dkabilitv

Queen  levied  and  sent  over  troops  with  to  fight  with  him." Mr.  Wilkes's  Instrur-

Buch  speed  as  the  like  hiis  seldom  been  tions  to  the  French  King ;  the  whole  in

seen,  being  performed  within  twenty  days.  Sir  R. Cecil's  handwriting; 19 March

sending  also  a  nobleman  of  her  own  realm  1592. (S.  P.  Offlce  M.S.)

VOL.  III.  K

130  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  Chap,  XXV.

genius  and  the  better  portion  of  his  well-disciplined
forces.

Most  bitterly  and  indignantly  did  he  express  himself,
both  at  the  outset  and  during  the  whole  progress  of  the
expedition,  concerning  the  utter  disproportions  between
the  king's  means  and  aims.  The  want  of  money  was  the
cause  of  wholesale  disease,  desertion,  mutiny,  and  death
in  his  slender  army.  Such  great  schemes  as  his  master's
required,  as  he  perpetually  urged,  liberality  of  expendi-
ture and  measures  of  breadth.  He  protested  that  he  was
not  to  blame  for  the  ruin  likely  to  come  upon  the  whole
enterprise.  He  had  besought,  remonstrated,  reasoned
with  the  king  in  vain.  He  had  seen  his  beard  first
grow,  he  said,  in  the  king's  service,  and  he  had  grown
gray  in  that  service,  but  rather  than  be  kept  longer  in
such  a  position,  without  money,  men,  or  means  to  accom-
pli.sli  the  great  pui-poses  on  which  he  was  sent,  he  pro-
tested that  he  would  abandon  his  office  and  retire  into
the  woods  to  feed  on  roots,^*  Repeatedly  did  he  implore
his  master  for  a  large  and  powerful  army ;  for  money
and  again  money.  The  royal  plans  should  be  enforced
adequately  or  abandoned  entirely.  To  spend  money  in
small  sums,  as  heretofore,  was  only  throwing  it  into  the
sea.'"

It  was  deep  in  the  winter,  however,  before  he  could
January, .  fairl)^  come  to  the  rescue  of  the  besieged  city,

1592.  Towards  the  end  of  January,  1592,  he  moved
but  of  Hainault,  and  once  more  made  his  junction  at
Guise  with  the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  At  a  review  of  his
forces  on  16th  January,  1592,  Alexander  found  himself
at  the  head  of  thirteen  thousand  five  hundred  and  six-
teen infantry  and  four  thousand  and  sixty-one  cavalry.
The  Duke  of  Mayenne's  army,  for  payment  of  which
that  personage  received  from  Philip  100,000  dollars
a  month,  besides  10.000  dollars  a  month  for  his  own
pocket,  ought  to  have  numbered  ten  thousand  foot  and
three  thousand  horse,  according  to  contract,  but  was  in
reality  much  less.^*

The  Duke  of  Montemarciano,  nephew  of  Gregory  XIV.,
had  brought  two  thousand  Swiss,  furnished  by  the  pon-

i»  Parma  to  Philip,  II  March,  1592. "  Que  antes  me  detemiinarla  a  recogerme  en
un  bosque  a  comer  raices." (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  20  ibi(j_

2'  From  a  statement  in  the  Archives  of  Simancas,  dated  25  Nov.  1591,  it  appears

1592.  SIEGE  OF  ROUEN.  131

tiff  to  tlie  cause  of  the  League,  and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine
had  sent  his  kinsmen,  the  Counts  Chaligny  and  Vaude-
niont,  with  a  force  of  seven  hundred  lancers  and
cuirassiers.^

The  town  of  Fere  was  assigned  in  pledge  to  Farnese
to  hold  as  a  convenient  mustering-place  and  station  in
proximity  to  his  own  borders,  and,  as  usual,  the  chief
command  over  the  united  armies  was  placed  in  his
hands.  I'hese  arrangements  concluded,  the  allies  moved
slowly  forward  much  in  the  same  order  as  in  the  previous
year.  The  young  Duke  of  Guise,  who  had  just  made
his  escape  from  the  prison  of  Tours,  where  he  had  been
held  in  durance  since  the  famous  assassination  of  his
father  and  uncle,  and  had  now  come  to  join  his  uncle
Mayenne,  led  the  vanguard.  Ranuccio,  son  of  the  duke,
rode  also  in  the  advance,  while  two  experienced  com-
manders, Vitry  and  De  la  Chatre,  as  well  as  the  famous

that  the  force  called  the  "  greater  army  of  France  "  (el  ejercito  mayor  de  Francia),
provided  by  PhUip,  and  imder  command  of  Farnese,  was  composed  of —
Infantry  . .  . .  . . 23,512 Costing  per  month 115,981  dols.

Cavalry  ..  ..  ..  4,969  „  „  44,505 „

Other  expenses  of  the  army,  including

12,629  dols.  per  month  for  artillery ;

salaries, of which the Duke of

Parma's  was  3600  dols.  per  month,

and  other  contingencies . .  . .  „  „  42,321 „

Besides a large monthly sum for

secret  miUtary  service

Thus  the  whole  force  was  .. 28,481  men,  costing  per  montli 202,807 „

But  there  were  76S1  wanting  to  the

number determined upon, which

added  would  give  a  total  of  . . 7,681

36,162  men,  costing  per  month 250,871 „

The  force  included— of  Spanish  infantry. .  , .  . .  . . 6,078  men

German „  ..  ..  .. 11,518 „

The  rest  being  Walloons  and  Italians.
The  lesser  army  of  France  (qercito  menor  de  Francia)  was  stated  at —
10,000  foot ..  ..  ..  ., costing  per  month 49,912  dole.

3,000  horse ..  ..  ..  ..  „  „ 49,750 „

Total ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  99,662 .,

and  was  commanded  by  the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  but  paid  by  the  King  of  Spain.

To  the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  in  person,  according  to  order,  10,000  dols.  per  month. —
("  A  la  persona  del  Duque  de  Umena  conforme  la  orden.")

The  totiil  of  the  King's  army  in  the  Netherlands  was  stated  at  29,233  men,  at  a
monthly  cost  of  149,187  dols.;  but  there  was  a  large  number  wanting.  The  total
force  of  the  three  armies  paid  for  by  Philip  was  intended  to  be  86,561  men,  at  a
monthly  cost  of  542,428  dols.

22  De  Thou,  t.  xl.  452,  se2<2. Bentivoglio.  P.  II  lib.  vi  p.  356-369.

K 2

132  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV

Marquis  del  Vasto,  formerly  general  of  ca^'alry  in  the
Netlierlancis,  who  had  been  transferred  to  Italy  but  was
now  serving  in  the  League's  army  as  a  volunteer,  were
associated  with  the  young  princes.  Parma,  Mayenne,
and  Montemarciano  rode  in  the  battalia,  the  rear  being
under  command  of  the  Duke  of  Aumale  and  the  Count
Chaligny.  AViugs  of  cavalry  protected  the  long  trains
of  wa<''ons  which  we/e  arranged  on  each  flank  of  the
invading  army.  The  march  was  very  slow,  it  being
Farnese's  uniform  practice  to  guard  himself  scrupulously
against  any  possibility  of  surprise  and  to  entrench  him-
self thoroughly  at  nightfall.'^^

By  the  middle  of  Febniaiy  they  reached  the  vicinity
of  Aumale  in  Picardy.  Meantime  Henry,  on  the  news
of  the  advance  of  the  relieving  army,  had  again  the  same
problem  to  solve  which  had  been  presented  to  him  before
Paris  in  the  summer  of  1590.  Should  he  continue  in
the  trenches,  pressing  more  and  more  closely  the  city
already  reduced  to  great  straits  ?  Should  he  take  the
open  field  against  the  invaders  and  once  more  attempt  to
crush  the  League  and  its  most  redoubtable  commander
in  a  general  engagement  ?  Biron  strenuously  advised
the  continuance  of  the  siege.  Turenne,  now,  through
his  recent  marriage  with  the  heiress,  called  Due  de
Bouillon,  great  head  of  the  Huguenot  party  in  France,
counselled  as  warmly  the  open  attack.  Henry,  hesi-
tating more  than  was  customary  with  him,  at  last
decided  on  a  middle  course.  The  resolution  did  not
seem  a  very  wise  one,  but  the  king,  who  had  been  so
signally  out-generalled  in  the  preceding  campaign  by
the  groat  Italian,  was  anxious  to  avoid  his  former  errors,
and  might  perhaps  fall  into  as  great  ones  by  attempting
two  inconsistent  lines  of  action.  Leaving  Biron  in  com-
mand of  the  infantry  and  a  portion  of  the  horse  to  con-
tinue the  siege,  he  took  the  field  himself  with  the  greater
part  of  the  cavalry,  intending  to  intercept  and  harass  the
enemy  and  to  prevent  his  manifest  purpose  of  throwing
reinforcements  and  supplies  into  the  invested  city.

Proceeding  to  Neufcbatel  and  Aumale,  he  soon  found
himself  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Leaguers,  and  it  was
not  long  before  skirmishing  began.  At  this  time,  on  a
memorable  occasion,  Heniy,  forgetting  as  usual  in  his

«  Eentivoglio,  uhi  sup. De  Thou,  ubi  sup. Dondini,  iii.  i74,  seqq.

1592,  NARROW  ESCAPE  OF  THE  KING.  133

eagerness  for  the  joys  of  the  convbat  that  he  was  not  a
young  captain  of  cavalry  with  his  spurs  to  win  by  dash-
ing into  every  mad  adventure  that  might  pi-esent  itself,
but  a  king  fighting  for  his  crown,  with  the  welfare  of  a
whole  people  depending  on  his  fortunes,  thought  proper
to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  a  handful  of  troopers  to
]-econnoitre  in  person  the  camp  of  the  Leaguers.  Start-
ing with  fiv^e  hundred  horse,  and  ordering  Lavardin  and
Givry  to  follow  with  a  larger  body,  while  the  Dukes  of
Nevers  and  Longueville  were  to  move  out,  should  it
prove  necessary,  in  force,  the  king  rode  forth  as  merrily
as  to  a  hunting  party,  drove  in  the  scouts  and  pickets  of
the  confederated  armies,  and,  advancing  still  farther  in
his  investigations,  soon  found  himself  attacked  by  a
cavalry  force  of  the  enemy  much  superior  to  his  own.
A  skirmish  began,  and  it  was  necessary  for  the  little
troop  to  beat  a  hasty  retreat,  fighting  as  it  ran.  It  was
not  long  before  Henry  was  recognised  by  the  enemy,  and
the  chase  became  all  the  more  lively  ;  George  Basti,  the
famous  Albanian  trooper,  commanding  the  force  which
pressed  most  closely  upon  the  king.  The  news  spread
to  the  camp  of  the  League  that  the  Bearnese  was  the
leader  of  the  skirmishers.  Mayenne  believed  it,  and
urged  the  instant  advance  of  the  flying  squadron  and  of
the  whole  vanguard.  Farnese  refused.  It  was  impos-
sible that  the  king  should  be  there,  he  said,  doing  picket
duty  at  the  head  of  a  company.  It  was  a  clumsy  ambush
to  bring  on  a  general  engagement  in  the  open  field,  and
he  was  not  to  be  diawn  out  of  his  trenches  into  a  trap  by
such  a  shallow  device.  A  French  captain,  who  by  com-
mand of  Henry  had  purposely  allowed  himself  to  be
taken,  informed  his  captors  that  the  skirmishers  were  in
reality  supported  by  a  heavy  force  of  infantry.  This
Kugo;estion  of  the  ready  Bearnese  confirmed  the  doubts
of  Alexander.  Meantime  the  skirmishing  steeplechase
went  on  before  his  eyes.  The  king  dashing  down  a  hill
received  an  arquebus  shot  in  his  side,  but  still  rode  for
his  life.  Lavardin  and  Givry  came  to  the  rescue,  but  a
panic  seized  their  followers  as  the  rumour  flew  that  the
king  was  mortally  wounded — was  already  dead — so  that
they  hardly  brought  a  sufficient  force  to  beat  back  the
Leaguers.  Givry's  horse  was  soon  killed  under  him,
and  his  own  thigh  crushed  ;  Lavardin  was  himself  dan-

134  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

gerously  wounded.  The  king  was  more  hard  pressed
than  ever,  men  were  falling  on  every  side  of  him,  when
four  hundred  French  dragoons— as  a  kind  of  musketeers
who  rode  on  hacks  to  the  scene  of  action  but  did  their
work  on  foot,  were  called  at  that  day — now  dismounted
and  threw  themselves  between  Henry  and  his  pursuers.
Nearly  every  man  of  them  laid  down  his  life,  but  they
paved  the  king's.  Their  vigorous  hand  to  hand  fighting
kept  off  the  assailants  until  Nevers  and  Longueville
received  the  king  at  the  gates  of  Aumale  with  a  force
before  which  the  Leaguers  were  fain  to  retreat  as
rapidly  as  they  had  come.^^

In  this  remarkable  skirmish  of  Aumale  the  opposite
qualities  of  Alexander  and  of  Henry  were  signally  illus-
trated. The  king,  by  his  constitutional  temerity,  by  his
almost  puerile  love  of  confronting  danger  for  the  danger's
sake,  was  on  the  verge  of  sacrificing  himself,  with  all  the
hopes  of  his  house  and  of  the  nobler  portion  of  his  people,
for  an  absolute  nothing;  while  the  duke,  out  of  his
superabundant  caution,  peremptorily  refused  to  stretch
out  his  hand  and  seize  the  person  of  his  great  enemy
when  directly  within  his  grasp.  Dead  or  alive,  the
Bearnese  was  unquestionably  on  that  day  in  the  power
of  Farnese,  and  with  him  the  whole  issue  of  the  cam-
paign and  of  the  war. Kever  were  the  narrow  limits

**  Bentivoglio,  ubi  svp. Dondini,  iii.  Umpton,  son  of  Sir  Edward  Umpton,  by

480-494. Coloma,  V.  81,  segq.,  ■who  gives  Anne,  relict  of  John  Dudley,  Earl  of  Wai-

the  date  of  this  remarkable  skirmish  as  wick,  and  eldest  daughter  of  Edward  Sey-

Feb.  16,  while  Umton  fXimishes  a  descrip-  mour,  Duke  of  Somerset. In  the  spring

tion  of  the  affair  in  his  letter  of  |^  °J  ^^'^  ^^^^  ^«  challenged  the  Duke  of

6  ieb.  Guise for  speaking  of  (jueeu  Elizabeth

Both  were  present  on  the  ground.  « impudently, lightly, and overboldly,

"The  king  was  most  unhappily  shot  whose  sacred  person  he  represented."  He

into  the  lowest  part  of  his  reins,  which  proposed  to  meet  the  Duke  with  whatever

did  nothing  amaze  him,  and  he  notwith-  arms  he  should  choose,  and  on  horseback

standing,  with  great  resolution,  comforted  or  foot. "Nor  would I  have  you  to

the  rest,  and  made  his  retreat think,"  said  the  envoy,  "any  inequality

The  shot  entered  with  obliquity  down-  of  person  between  us,  1  being  issued  of  as

wards  into  the  flesh,  and  not  directly  into  great  a  race  and  noble  house  every  way

the  body,  so  that  great  hope  is  received  of  as  yourself. .... If  you consent

his  short  rewA-ery,  and  the  surgeon  is  of  not  to  meet  me,  I  wiU hold you,  and

opinion  that  no  vital  part  is  offended."  cause  you  to  be  generally  held,  for  the  er

Umton  (who  made  the  whole  campaign  rantest  coward,  and  most  slanderous  slave

with  the  King)  to  Burghley,  .rLi^H;  ^^^2.  ^^^^  '^^®*  '^  ^^^  Fiance." Nothing  came

(S  P  OfBce  5IS  ) ^  ^^^  °^  ^^^  challenge.  Umpton  died  four  years

"  Sir'  E.  Staftord.  who  died  towards  the  f te'-";^'^^ j°  tlj*  French  Kings  camp  at

end  of  ,590,  was  succeeded  as  arZSidor  ^  f"'' '  f"'^'  '''^- ^''^^  ^'''''"*

to  Henry  IV.  by  Sir  Henry  Umt^n  ^  ^''''^"''-  ^"^^  '■  PP"  '''  ^^  ^"^-  '^''^-

1592.  ADVANCE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  PARMA.  135

that  separate  valour  on  the  one  side  and  discretion  on
the  other  from  unpardonable  lunacy  more  nearly  ell'aced
than  on  that  occasion.

\\'hen  would  such  an  opportunity  occur  again  ?

The  king's  wound  proved  not  very  dangerous,  although
for  many  days  troublesome,  and  it  required,  on  account
of  his  general  state  of  health,  a  thorough  cure.  Mean-
time the  royalists  fell  back  from  Aumale  and  Neufchatel,
both  of  which  places  were  at  once  occupied  by  the
Leaguers.

In  pursuance  of  his  original  plan,  the  Duke  of  Parma
advanced  with  his  customary  steadiness  and  delibera-
tion towards  Eouen.  It  was  his  intention  to  assault  the
king's  army  in  its  entrenchments  in  combination  with  a
determined  sortie  to  be  made  by  the  besieged  garrison.
His  preparations  for  the  attack  were  ready  on  the  26th
February,  when  he  suddenly  received  a  communication
from  De  Villars,  who  had  thus  far  most  ably  and  gallantly
conducted  the  defence  of  the  place,  informing  him  that
it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  make  a  general  attack.  On
the  day  before  he  had  made  a  sally  from  the  four  gates
of  the  city,  had  fallen  upon  the  besiegers  in  great  force,
had  wounded  Biron  and  killed  six  hundred  of  his
soldiers,  had  spiked  several  pieces  of  artillery  and  cap-
tured others  which  he  had  successfully  brought  into  the
town,  and  had  in  short  so  damaged  the  enemy's  works
and  disconcerted  him  in  all  his  plans,  that  he  was  con-
fident of  holding  the  place  longer  than  the  king  could
afford  to  stay  in  front  of  him.^*  All  he  wished  was  a
moderate  reinforcement  of  men  and  munitions.  Farnese
by  no  means  sympathized  with  the  confident  tone  of
Villars  nor  approved  of  his  proposition.  He  had  come
to  relieve  Rouen  and  to  raise  the  siege,  and  he  preferred
to  do  his  work  thoroughly.  Mayenne  was  however  most
heartily  in  favour  of  taking  the  advice  of  Villars.  Ho
urged  that  it  was  difficult  for  the  Bearnese  to  keep  an
army  long  in  the  field,  still  more  so  in  the  trenches.
Let  them  provide  for  the  immediate  wants  of  the  city ;
then  the  usual  process  of  decomposition  would  soon  be
witnessed  in  the  ill-paid,  ill-fed,  desultoiy  forces  of  the
lieretic  pretender.

25  Panna  to  Philip,  U  Marcb,  1592. 'Arch,  de  Sim.  M.S.) Compare  Bentivoglio,
ubi  sup. J)e  Thou,  xi.  47u,  seqq.

136  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  Chap.  XXV.

Alexander  deferred  to  the  wishes  of  Mayenne,  although
against  his  better  judgment.  Eight  hundred  infantry
were  successfully  sent  into  Rouen.  The  army  of  the
League  then  countermarched  into  Picardy  near  the  con-
tines  of  Artois.*'^

They  were  closely  followed  by  Henry  at  the  head  of
his  cavalry,  and  lively  skirmishes  were  of  frequent
occurrence.  In  a  military  point  of  view  none  of  these
affairs  were  of  consequence,  but  there  was  one  which
partook  at  once  of  the  comic  and  the  pathetic.  For  it
chanced  that  in  a  cavalry  action  of  more  than  common
vivacity  the  Count  Chaligny  found  himself  engaged  in
a  hand  to  hand  conflict  with  a  very  dashing  swordsman,
who,  after  dealing  and  receiving  many  severe  blows,  at
last  succeeded  in  disarming  the  count  and  taking  him
prisoner.  It  was  the  fortune  of  war,  and,  but  a  few  days
before,  might  have  been  the  fate  of  the  great  Henry  him-
self. But  Chaligny's  mortification  at  his  captivity
became  intense  when  he  discovered  that  the  knight  to
whom  he  had  surrendered  was  no  other  than  the  king's
jester.-^  That  he,  a  chieftain  of  the  Holy  League,  the
long-descended  scion  of  the  illustrious  house  of  Lorraine,
brother  of  the  great  Duke  of  Mercoeur,  should  become
the  captive  of  a  Huguenot  buffoon  seemed  the  most  sting-
ing jest  yet  perpetrated  since  fools  had  come  in  fashion.
The  famous  Chicot — who  was  as  fond  of  a  battle  as  of  a
gil)e,  and  who  was  almost  as  reckless  a  rider  as  his
master — proved  on  this  occasion  that  the  cap  and  bells
could  cover  as  much  magnanimity  as  did  the  most
chivalrous  crest.  Although  desperately  wounded  in  the
stiuggle  which  had  resulted  in  his  triumph,  he  gene-
i-ously  granted  to  the  Count  his  freedom  without  ransom.
The  proud  Lorrainer  returned  to  his  Leaguers,  and  the
poor  fool  died  afterwards  of  his  wounds.^*

The  army  of  the  allies  moved  through  Picardy  towards
the  confines  of  Artois,  and  sat  down .  leisurely  to  be-
leaguer liue,  a  low-lying  place  on  the  banks  and  near
the  mouth  of  the  Somme,  the  only  town  in  the  province
Avhich  still  held  for  the  king.  It  was  sufficiently  fortified
to  withstand  a  good  deal  of  battering,  and  it  certainly

26  Bcntivoglio,  ubi  sup.  Dondini  iii.  "  De  Thou,  uU  sup.  468.  Uiiiton  to
407-630.  Columa,  V.  s-S-SS.  Meteien,  xvi.  Burghley,  8  Feb.  1592.  (S.  P.  Office  ilS.)
■M-2,  303. 13or,  HI  xxviii.  616-620.  28  De  Thou,  loc.  cit.

1592.  SIEGE  OF  RUE  BY  FARXESE.  137

seemed  mere  trifling  for  the  great  Duke  of  Parma  to
leave  the  Ketlierluuds  in  such  Cdnfu.sion,  with  young
Maurice  of  Nassau  carrying  everylliing  before  him,  and
to  come  all  the  way  into  Normandy  in  order,  with  the
united  armies  of  Spain  and  the  League,  to  besiege
the  insignificant  town  of  Eue.

And  this  was  the  opinion  of  Farnese,  but  he  had
chosen  throughout  the  campaign  to  show  great  defer-
ence to  the  judgment  of  Mayenne.  Meantime  the  month
of  March,  wore  away,  and  what  had  been  predicted  came
to  pass.  Henry's  forces  dwindled  away  as  usual.  His
cavaliers  rode  oif  to  forage  for  themselves,  when  their
battles  -were  denied  them,  and  the  king  was  now  at  the
head  of  not  more  than  sixteen  thousand  foot  and  five
thousand  horse.  On  the  other  hand  the  Leaguers'  army
had  been  melting  quite  as  rapidly.  With  the  death  of
Pope  Sfondrato,  his  nephew  Montemarciano  had  disap-
peared with  his  two  thousand  Swiss ;  while  the  French
cavalry  and  infantry,  ill-fed  and  uncomfortable,  were
diminishing  daily.  Especially  the  Walloons,  Flemings,
and  other  Netherlanders  of  Parma's  army,  took  advan-
tage of  their  proximity  to  the  borders,  and  escaped  in
large  numbers  to  their  own  homes.  It  was  but  meagre
and  profitless  campaigning  on  both  sides  during  those
wretched  months  of  winter  and  early  spring,  although
there  was  again  an  opportunity  for  Sir  Koger  "Williams,
at  the  head  of  two  hundred  musketeers  and  one  hundred
and  fifty  pikemen,  to  make  one  of  his  brilliant  skirmishes
under  the  eye  of  the  Bearnese.  Surprised  and  without
armour,  he  jumped  in  doublet  and  hose,  on  horseback,  and
led  his  men  merrily  against  five  squadrons  of  Spanish
and  Italian  horse,  and  six  companies  of  Spanish  in-
fantry ;  singled  out  and  unhorsed  the  leader  of  the
Spanish  troopers,  and  nearly  cut  off  the  head  of
the  famous  Albanian  chief  George  Basti  with  one  swing-
ing blow  of  his  sword.  Then,  being  reinforced  by  some
other  English  companies,  he  succeeded  in  driving  the
whole  body  of  Italians  and  Spaniards,  with  great  loss,
quite  into  their  entrenchments.  "  The  king  doth  com-
mend him  very  highly,"  said  Umton,  "and  doth  more
than  wonder  at  the  valour  of  our  nation.  I  never  heard
him  give  more  honour  to  any  service  nor  to  an}'  man
than  he  doth  to  Sir  Roger  \\  illiams  and  the  lest,  whom

138  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

he  held  as  lost  men,  and  for  which  he  has  caused  public
thanks  to  be  given  to  God."^^

At  last  Villars,  who  had  so  peremptorily  rejected  assist-
ance at  the  end  of  Febiuary,  sent  to  say  that  if  he  were
not  relieved  by  the  middle  of  April  he  should  be  obliged
to  surrender  the  city.  If  the  siege  were  not  raised  by
the  twentieth  of  the  month  he  informed  I'arma,  to  his
profound  astonishment,  that  Eouen  would  be  in  Henry's
hands.^°

'In  effecting  this  result  the  strict  blockade  maintained
by  the  Dutch  squadron  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and
the  resolute  manner  in  which  those  cruisers  dashed  at
every  vessel  attempting  to  bring  relief  to  Eouen,  were
mainly  instrumental.  As  usual  with  the  stern  Hol-
landers and  Zeelanders  when  engaged  at  sea  with  the
Spaniards,  it  was  war  to  the  knife.  Early  in  April
twelve  large  vessels,  well  armed  and  manned,  attempted
to  break  the  blockade.  A  combat  ensued,  at  the  end
of  which  eight  of  the  Spanish  ships  were  captured,  two
were  sunk,  and  two  were  set  on  fire  in  token  of  victory,
every  man  on  board  of  all  being  killed  and  thrown
into  the  sea.  Queen  Elizabeth  herself  gave  the  first
news  of  this  achievement  to  the  Dutch  envoy  in  Lon-
don. "And  in  truth,"  said  he,  "her  Majesty  expressed
herself,  in  communicating  these  tidings,  with  such  affec-
tion and  extravagant  joy  to  the  glory  and  honour  of
our  nation  and  men-of-war's-men,  that  it  wonderfully
delighted  me,  and  did  me  good  into  my  veiy  heart  to
hear  it  from  her."^^

Instantly  Farnese  set  himself  to  the  work,  which,  had
he  followed  his  own  judgment,  would  already  have  been
accomplished.  Henry  with  his  cavalry  had  established
himself  at  Dieppe  and  Arques,  within  a  distance  of  five
or  six  leagues  from  the  infantry  engaged  in  the  siege
of  Rouen.  Alexander  saw  the  profit  to  be  derived  from
the  separation  between  the  different  portions  of  the
enemy's  forces,  and  marched  straight  upon  the  enemy's
entrenchments.  He  knew  the  disadvantage  of  assailing
a  strongly  fortified  camp,  but  believed  that  by  a  well-

29  Umton  to  Burghley,  21  April,  1592.  3i  ^oel  de  Caron  to the  States-Gene-

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  ral, 22  April,  1592. (Hague  Archives

3*  Bentivoglio,  Dondini,  Coloma,  Mete-  MS.)
reu,  Bor,  ubi  sup.

1592.  RELIEF  OF  EOUEN.  139

concerted,  simultaneous  assault  by  Villars  from  within
and  the  Leaguers  from  without,  the  king's  forces  would
be  compelled  to  raise  the  siege  or  be  cut  iip  in  their
trenches.

But  Henry  did  not  wait  for  the  attack.  He  had
changed  his  plan,  and,  for  once  in  his  life,  substitTited
extreme  caution  for  his  constitutional  temerity.  Keither
awaiting  the  assault  upon  his  entrenchments  nor  seek-
ing his  enemy  in  the  open  field,  he  ordered  the  whole
camp  to  be  broken  up,  and  on  the  20th  of  April  raised
the  siege.^"

Farnese  marched  into  Eouen,  whei'e  the  Leaguers
were  received  with  tumultuous  joy,  and  this  cit_y,  most
important  for  the  purposes  of  the  League  and  for  Philip's
ulterior  designs,  was  thus  rescued  from  the  grasp  just
closing  upon  it.  Henry's  main  army  now  concentrated
itself  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dieppe,  but  the  cavalry
under  his  immediate  superintendence  continued  to  harass
the  Leaguers.  It  was  now  determined  to  lay  siege  to
Caudebec,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Seine,  three  leagues
below  Eouen  ;  the  possession  of  this  place  by  the  enemy
being  a  constant  danger  and  difficulty  to  Eouen,  whose
supplies  by  the  Seine  were  thus  cut  off.

Alexander,  as  usual,  superintended  the  planting  of  the
batteries  against  the  place.  He  had  been  suffering  during
the  whole  campaign  from  those  dropsical  ailments  which
were  making  life  a  torture  to  him ;  yet  his  indomitable
spirit  rose  superior  to  his  physical  disorders,  and  ho
wrought  all  day  long  on  foot  or  on  horseback,  when  he
seemed  only  fit  to  be  placed  on  his  bed  as  a  rapid  pas-
sage to  his  grave.  On  this  occasion,  in  company  with
the  Italian  engineer  Properzio,  he  had  been  for  some
time  examining  with  critical  nicety  the  preliminaries  for
the  siege,  when  it  was  suddenly  observed  by  those
around  him  that  he  was  growing  pale.  It  then  appeared
that  he  had  received  a  musket-ball  between  the  wrist
and  the  elbow,  and  had  been  bleeding  profusely ;  but
had  not  indicated  by  a  word  or  the  movement  of  a
muscle  that  he  had  been  wounded,  so  intent  was  he  upon
carrying  out  the  immediate  task  to  which  he  had  set  him-
self. It  was  indispensable,  however,  that  he  should  now

*2  Noel  de  Caron  to  the  States-General,  22  April,  1592.  (Hague  Archives  MS.)
Parma  to  Philip,  25  April,  1592. (Arch,  de  Slmancas  MS.) Same  to  same,  2  June,

140  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  Chap.  XXV.

take  to  his  coucli.  The  wound  was  not  trifling,  and  to
one  in  his  damaged  and  dropsical  condition  it  was  dan-
gerous. Fever  set  in,  with  symptoms  of  gangrene,  and
it  became  necessary  to  entrust  the  command  of  the
League  to  Mayenne.^^  But  it  was  hai-dly  concealed  from
Panna  that  the  duke  was  playing  a  double  game.  Prince
Ranuccio,  according  to  his  father's  express  wish,  was
placed  provisionally  at  the  head  of  the  Flemish  forces.
This  was. conceded,  however,  with  much  heart-burning,
and  with  consequences  easily  to  be  imagined.

Meantime  Caudebec  fell  at  once.  Henry  did  nothing
to  relieve  it,  and  the  place  could  offer  but  slight  resist-
ance to  the  force  arrayed  against  it.  The  bulk  of  the
king's  army  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dieppe,  where
they  had  been  recently  strengthened  by  twenty  companies
of  Netherlanders  and  Scotchmen  brought  by  Count
Philip  Nassau.^*  The  League's  headquarters  were  in  the
village  of  Yvetot,  capital  of  the  realm  of  the  whimsical
little  potentate  so  long  renowned  under  that  name.^^
The  king,  in  pursuance  of  the  plan  he  had  marked  out
3  May,  for  himself,  restrained  his  skirmishing  more
^^^2.  than  was  his  wont.  Nevertheless  he  lay  close
to  Yvetot.  His  cavalry,  swelling  and  falling  as  usual
like  an  Alpine  torrent,  had  now  filled  up  its  old  channels
again,  for  once  more  the  mountain  chivalry  had  poured
themselves  around  their  king.  With  ten  thousand  horse-
men he  was  now  pressing  the  Leaguers,  from  time  to
time,  very  hard,  and  on  one  occasion  the  skirmishing  be-
came so  close  and  so  lively  that  a  general  engagement
seemed  imminent.  Young  Ranuccio  had  a  horse  shot
under  him,  and  his  father — suffering  as  he  was — had
himself  dragged  out  of  bed  and  brought  on  a  litter  into
the  field,  where  he  was  set  on  horseback,  trampling  on
wounds  and  disease,  and,  aS  it  were,  on  death  itself,  that
he  might  by  his  own  unsurpassed  keenness  of  eye  and
quickness  of  resource  protect  the  army  which  had  been
entrusted  to  his  care.  The  action  continued  all  day ;
young  Bentivoglio,  nephew  of  the  famous  Cardinal,
historian  and  diplomatist,  receiving  a  bad  wound  in  the
leg,  as  he  fought  gallantly  at  the  side  of  Ranuccio. Carlo

23  BentivogUo, Dondini, Coloma, De *<  Bor,  III.  xxviii.  604.
Thou,  Mctercn,  Bor,  ubi  sup. (Letter  of 35  Dg  Thou,  xi.  481,  seqq.
Purma  last  cited.)

1592.  DANGEROUS  POSITION  OF  FARNESE.  141

Coloma  also  distinguished  himself  in  the  engagement.
Night  separated  the  combatants  before  either  side  had
gained  a  manifest  advantage,  and  on  the  morrow  it
seemed  for  the  interest  of  neither  to  resume  the
struggle.^"

The  field  where  this  campaign  was  to  be  fought  was  a
narrow  peninsula  enclosed  between  the  sea  and  the
rivers  Seine  and  Dieppe.^''  In  this  peninsula,  called  the
Land  of  Caux,  it  was  Henry's  intention  to  shut  \ip  his
enemy.  Farnese  had  finished  the  work  that  he  had
been  sent  to  do,  and  was  anxious,  as  Henry  was  aware,
to  return  to  the  Netherlands.  Eouen  was  relieved,
Caudebec  had  fallen.  There  was  not  food  or  forage
enough  in  the  little  peninsula  to  feed  both  the  city  and
the  whole  army  of  the  League.  Shut  up  in  this  narrow
area,  Alexander  must  starve  or  surrender.  His  only
egress  was  into  Picardy  and  so  home  to  Artois,  through
the  base  of  the  isosceles  triangle  between  the  two  rivers
and  on  the  holders  of  Picardy.  On  this  base  Henrj^  had
posted  his  whole  army.  Should  Farnese  assail  him,
thus  provided  with  a  strong  position  and  superiority  of
force,  defeat  was  certain.  Should  he  remain  where  he
was,  he  must  inevitably  starve.  He  had  no  communica-
tions with  the  outside.  The  Hollanders  lay  with  their
ships  below  Caudebec,  blockading  the  river's  mouth  and
the  coast.  His  only  chance  of  extrication  lay  across  the
Seine.  But  Alexander  was  neither  a  bird  nor  a  fish,  and
it  was  necessary,  so  Henry  thought,  to  be  either  the  one
or  the  other  to  cross  that  broad,  deep,  and  rapid  river,
where  there  were  no  bridges,  and  where  the  constant
ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide  made  transportation  almost
impossible  in  face  of  a  powerful  army  in  rear  and  flank.
Farnese's  situation  seemed  desperate,  while  the  shrewd
Bearnese  sat  smiling  serenely,  carefully  watching  at  the
mouth  of  the  trap  into  which  he  had  at  last  inveigled  his
mighty  adversary.  Secure  of  his  triumph,  he  seemed  to
have  changed  his  nature,  and  to  have  become  as  sedate
and  waiy  as,  by  habit,  he  was  impetuous  and  hot.

And  in  truth  Farnese  found  himself  in  very  narrow
quarters. There  was  no  hay  for  his  horses,  no  bread  for

3«  Bentivoglio,  Dondini,  Coloma,  Me-  at  Dieppe,  was  then  calkd  by  the  same
teren,  Bor,  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  name  as  the  town.

37  The  stream,  the  mouth  of  which  is

142  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

his  men.  A  penny  loaf  was  sold  for  two  shillings.  A
jug  of  water  was  worth  a  crown.  As  for  meat  or  wine,
they  were  hardly  to  be  dreamed  of.^*  His  men  were
becoming  furious  at  their  position.  They  had  enlisted
to  fight,  not  to  starve,  and  they  murmured  that  it  was
better  for  an  army  to  fall  with  weapons  in  its  hands
than  to  drop  to  pieces  hourly  with  the  enemy  looking
on  and  enjoying  their  agony.

It  was  obvious  to  Farnese  that  there  were  but  two
ways  out  of  his  dilemma.  He  might  throw  himself  upon
Henry — strongly  entrenched  as  he  was,  and  with  much
superior  forces  to  his  own,  upon  ground  deliberately
chosen  for  himself — defeat  him  utterly,  and  march  over
him  back  to  the  Netherlands.  This  would  be  an  agree-
able result ;  but  the  undertaking  seemed  difficult,  to  say
the  least.  Or  he  might  throw  his  army  across  the
Seine  and  make  his  escape  through  the  isle  of  France
and  Southern  Picardy  back  to  the  so-called  obedient
provinces.  But  it  seemed  hopeless  without  bridges  or
pontoons  to  attempt  the  passage  of  the  Seine.

There  was,  however,  no  time  left  for  hesitation.
Secretly  he  took  his  resolution  and  communicated  it  in
strict  confidence  to  Mayenne,  to  Ranuccio,  and  to  one  or
two  other  chiefs.  He  came  to  Caudebec,  and  there,  close
to  the  margin  of  the  river,  he  threw  up  a  redoubt.  On
the  opposite  bank  he  constructed  another.  On  both  he
planted  artillery,  placing  a  force  of  eight  hundred
Netherlanders  under  Count  Bossu  in  the  one  and  an
equal  number  of  the  same  nation,  Walloons  chiefly,
under  Barlotte  in  the  other.  He  collected  all  the  ves-
sels, flatboats,  wherries,  and  rafts  that  could  be  found  or
put  together  at  Rouen,  and  then  under  cover  of  his  forts
he  transported  all  the  Flemish  infantry,  and  the  Spanish,
French,  and  Italian  cavalry,  during  the  night  of  22nd  May
22  May, to  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Seine. Next  mom-

1592.  jjjg  i^Q  ggj^^  up  ^\i  ^}jQ  artillery  together  with
the  Flemish  cavalry  to  Rouen,  where,  making  what  use
he  could  by  temporary  contrivances  of  the  broken  arches
of  the  broken  bridge,  in  order  to  shorten  the  distance
from  shore  to  shore,  he  managed  to  convey  his  whole
army  with  all  its  trains  across  the  river.^*

33  Bor,  III.  xxviii.  619.  Thou,  Bor,  Meteren.  ubi  sup. Letter  of

38  BentivogUo,  Dondini,  Coloma, De Parma  last  cited.

1592.  ESCAPE  OF  FARNESE  AND  HIS  ARMY.  143

A  force  was  left  behind,  up  to  the  last  moment,  to
engage  in  the  customary  skirmishes,  and  to  display  them-
selves as  largely  as  possible  for  the  purpose  of  imposing
upon  the  enemy.  The  young  Prince  of  Parma  had  com-
mand of  this  rearguard.  The  device  was  perfectly  suc-
cessful. The  news  of  the  movement  was  not  brought  to
the  ears  of  Henry  until  after  it  had  been  accomplished.
When  the  king  reached  the  shore  of  the  Seine,  he  saw  to
his  infinite  chagrin  and  indignation  that  the  Ip-  strag-
glers of  the  army,  including  the  garrison  of  the  fort  on
the  right  bank,  were  just  ferrying  themselves  across
under  command  of  Kanuccio.*"

Furious  with  disappointment  he  brought  some  pieces
of  artillery  to  bear  upon  the  triumphant  fugitives.  Kot
a  shot  told,  and  the  Leaguers  had  the  satisfaction  of
making  a  bonfire  in  the  king's  face  of  the  boats  which
had  brought  them  over.  Then,  taking  up  their  line  of
march  rapidly  inland,  they  placed  themselves  completely
out  of  the  reach  of  the  Huguenot  guns.

Henry  had  a  bridge  at  Pont  de  I'Ai-che,  and  his  first
impulse  was  to  pursue  with  his  cavalry,  but  it  was
obvious  that  his  infantry  could  never  march  by  so
circuitous  a  route  fast  enough  to  come  up  with  the
enemy,  who  had  already  so  prodigious  a  stride  in
advance.*^

There  was  no  need  to  disguise  it  to  himself.  Henry
saw  himself  for  the  second  time  out-generalled  by  the
consummate  Farnese.  The  trap  was  broken,  the  game
had  given  him  the  slip.  The  manner  in  which  the  duke
had  thus  extricated  himself  from  a  profound  dilemma,
in  which  his  fortunes  seemed  hopelessly  sunk,  has  usually
been  considered  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  exploits
of  his  life.^^

Precisely  at  this  time,  too,  ill  news  reached  Henry
from  Brittany  and  the  neighboui'ing  country.  The
Princes  Conti  and  Dombes  had  been  obliged,  on  the  13th
May,  1592,  to  raise  the  siege  of  Crayon,  in  consequence
of  the  advance  of  the  Duke  of  Mercoeur,  with  a  force  of
seven  thousand  men.*^  They  numbered,  including  lanz-
knechts  and  the  English  contingent,  about  half  as  many,
and  before  they  could  effect  their  retreat  were  attacked

■"'  Bentivoglio,  Dondini,  Coloma,  De  Thou,  Bor,  Meteren,  uU  sup.  <'  Ibid.

*-  Ibid.  «  Umton  to  Burghley,  24  May,  1592,  0.  S. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

144  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  Chap.  XXV

by  Mercoeur,  and  utterly  routed.  The  English,  who
alone  stood  to  their  colours,  were  nearly  all  cut  to
pieces.  The  rest  made  a  disorderly  retreat,*^*  but  were
ultimately,  with  few  exceptions,  captured  or  slain.  1'he
duke,  following  up  his  victory,  seized  Chateau  Gontier
and  La  Val,  important  crossing  places  on  the  river
Mayenne,  and  laid  siege  to  Mayenne,  capital  city  of  that
region.  The  panic,  spreading  through  Biittany  and
Maine,  threatened  the  king's  cause  there  with  complete
overthrow,  hampered  his  operations  in  Normandy,  and
vastly  encouraged  the  Leaguers.  It  became  necessary
for  Henry  to  renounce  his  designs  upon  Eouen,  and  the
pursuit  of  Parma,  and  to  retire  to  Vernon,  there  to
occupy  himself  with  plans  for  the  relief  of  Brittany.  In
vain  had  the  Earl  of  Essex,  whose  brother  had  already
been  killed  in  the  campaign,  manifested  such  head-long
gallantry  in  that  country  as  to  call  forth  the  shai-pest
rebukes  from  the  admiring  but  anxious  Elizabeth.  The
handful  of  brave  Englishmen  who  had  been  withdrawn
from  the  Netherlands,  much  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  the
States-General,  in  order  to  defend  the  coasts  of  Brittany,
would  have  been  better  employed  under  Maurice  of
Nassau.  So  soon  as  the  heavy  news  reached  the  king,
the  faithful  Umton  was  sent  for.  "  He  imparted  the
same  unto  me,"  said  the  envoy,  "with  extraordinary
passion  and  discontent.  He  discoursed  at  large  of  his
miserable  estate,  of  the  factions  of  his  servants,  and  of
their  ill-dispositions,  and  then  required  my  opinion
touching  his  course  for  Brittany,  as  also  what  further
aid  he  might  expect  from  her  majesty ;  alleging  that
unless  he  were  presently  strengthened  by  England  it
was  impossible  for  him  longer  to  resist  the  greatness  of
the  King  of  Spain,  who  assailed  his  countr}^  by  Brittany,
Languedoc,  the  Low  Countries  by  the  Duke  of  Saxony
and  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  and  so  ended  his  speech
passionately."^®  Thus  adjured.  Sir  Henr}'-  spoke  to  the
king  firmly  but  courteously,  reminding  him  how,  con-
trary to  English  advice,  he  had  followed  other  counsellors
to  the  neglect  of  Brittany,  and  had  broken  his  promises
to  the  queen.  He  concluded  by  urging  him  to  advance
into  that  country  in  person,  but  did  not  pledge  himself
on behalf  of  her  Majesty to any further assistance.

«  Umton  to  Burghlpy,  24  Hay,  1592,  0.  S.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  «  Ibid.

.1592.  COUNSEL  OF  THE  ENGLISH  AMBASSADOR.  145

"To  this,"  said  Umton,  "the  king  gave  a  willing  car,
and  replied,  with  many  thanks,  and  Avithout  disallow-
ing of  anything  that  1  alleged,  yielding  many  excuses
of  his  want  of  means,  not  of  disposition,  to  provide  a
remedy,  not  forgetting  to  acknowledge  her  Majesty's
care  of  him  and  his  country,  and  especially  of  Brittany,
excusing  much  the  bad  disposition  of  his  counsellors,
and  inclining  much  to  my  motion  to  go  in  person  thither,
especially  because  he  might  thereby  give  her  Mnjesty
better  satisfaction  ;  .  .  .  .  and  protesting  that  he  would
either  immediately  himself  make  war  there  in  those
parts  or  send  an  army  thither.  J  do  not  doubt,"  added
the  ambassador,  "  but  with  good  handling  her  Majesty
may  now  obtain  any  reasonable  matter  for  the  conserva-
tion of  Brittany,  as  also  foi  a  place  of  retreat  for  the
English,  and  I  urge  continually  the  yielding  of  Brest
into  her  Majesty's  hands,  whereunto  I  find  the  king  well
inclined,  if  he  might  bring  it  to  pass."*"

Alexander  passed  a  few  days  in  Paris,  where  he  was
welcomed  with  much  cordiality,  recruiting  his  army  for
a  brief  period  in  Ihe  land  of  Brie,  and  then — broken  in
health  but  entirely  successful — he  dragged  himself  once
more  to  Spa  to  drink  the  waters.  He  left  an  auxiliary'
force  with  Mayenne,  and  promised — infinitely  against
his  own  wishes — to  obey  his  master's  commands  and
return  again  before  the  winter  to  do  the  League's  work.*"

And  thus  Alexander  had  again  solved  a  difficult  pro-
blem. He  had  saved  for  his  master  and  for  the  League
the  second  city  of  France  and  the  whole  coast  of  JSor-
mand3%  Eouen  had  been  relieved  in  masterly  manner
even  as  Paris  had  been  succoured  the  year  before.  He
had  done  this,  although  opposed  by  the  sleepless  energy
and  the  exuberant  valour  of  the  quick-witted  Navarre,
and  although  encumbered  b}-  the  assistance  of  the  pon-
derous Duke  of  Mayenne.  His  military  reputation,
through  these  two  famous  reliefs  and  retreats,  grew
greater  than  evei'.

No  commander  of  the  age  was  thought  capable  of  dicing
what  he  had  thus  done.  Yet,  after  all,  what  had  lie  ac-
complished ■?  Did  he  not  feel  in  his  heart  of  hearts  that
he  was  but  a  strong  and  most  skilful  swimmer  struggling

le  Umton  to  Burghley,  21  M.iy,  1592,  0.  S. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  *?  Ibid.

VOL.  III.  L

146  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXV.

for  a  little  while  against  an  ocean-tide  which  was  steadily
sweeping  him  and  his  master  and  all  their  fortunes  far
out  into  the  infinite  depths?

Something  of  this  breathed  ever  in  his  most  secret
ntterances.  But,  so  long  as  life  was  in  him,  his  sword
and  his  genius  were  at  the  disposal  of  his  sovereign,
to  carry  out  a  series  of  schemes  as  futile  as  they  were
uefarious.

For  us,  looking  hack  upon  the  Past,  which  was  then
the  Future,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  remorselessly^  the  great
cui'rent  of  events  was  washing  away  the  system  and  the
personages  seeking  to  resist  its  power  and  to  oppose  the
great  moral  principles  by  which  human  affairs  in  the  long
run  are  invariably  governed.  Spain  and  Rome  were  endea-
vouring to  obliterate  the  landmarks  of  race,  nationality,
historical  institutions,  and  the  tendencies  of  awakened
popular  conscience,  throughoiat  Christendom,  and  to  sub-
stitute for  them  a  dead  level  of  conformity  to  one  regal
and  sacerdotal  despotism.

England,  Holland,  the  Navarre  party  in  France,  and
a  considerable  part  of  Germany  were  contending  for
national  unity  and  independence,  for  vested  and  re-
corded rights.  Much  farther  than  they  themselves  or
their  chieftains  dreamed  those  millions  of  men  were
fighting  for  a  system  of  temperate  human  freedom ;  for
that  emancipation  under  just  laws  from  arbitrary  human
control,  which  is  the  right — however  frequently  trampled
upon — of  all  classes,  conditions,  and  races  of  men ;  and
for  which  it  is  the  instinct  of  the  human  race  to  continue
to  struggle  under  every  disadvantage,  and  often  against
all  hope,  throughout  the  ages,  so  long  as  the  very  prin-
ciple of  humanity  shall  not  be  extinguished  in  those  who
have  been  created  after  their  Maker's  image.

It  may  safely  be  doubted  whether  the  great  Queen,
the  Bearnese,  Alexander  Farnese,  or  his  master,  with
many  of  tlieir  respective  adherents,  differed  very  essen-
tially from  each  other  in  their  notions  of  the  right  divine
and  the  right  of  the  people.  But  histoiy  has  shown  us
Avhich  of  them  best  understood  the  spirit  of  the  age,  and
had  the  keenest  instinct  to  keep  themselves  in  the  ad-
vance by  moving  fastest  in  the  direction  whither  it  was
marshalling  all  men.  There  were  many  earnest,  hard-
toiling  men  in those days,  men  who  believed  in  the

1592. PROGPtESS  OF  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  FREEDOM. 147

work  to  which  they  devoted  their  lives.  Perhaps,  too,
the  devil-worshippers  did  their  master's  work  as  stienu-
ously  and  heartily  as  any,  and  got  fame  and  pelf  for
their  pains.  Fortunately,  a  good  portion  of  what  they
so  laboriously  wrought  for  has  vanished  into  air ;  while
humanity  has  at  least  gained  something  from  those  who
deliberately  or  instinctively  conformed  themselves  to  her
eternal  laws.

l2

148  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXVI.

CHAPTEK XXVI.

Keturn  of  Prince  Maurice  to  tlit  siege  of  Steenwyck  —  Capitulation  of  the  besieged

—  Effects  of  the  introduction  of  mining  operations  —  Maurice  be.-;ieges  Coewovden

—  Verdugo  attempts  to  relieve  the  city,  but  fails  —  The  city  capitulates,  and  Prince
Maurice  retreats  into  winter-quarters.

While  Farnese  had  thus  been  strengthening  the  bul-
warks of  Philip's  iiniversal  monarchy  in  that  portion  of
his  proposed  French  dominions  -which  looked  towards
England,  there  had  been  opportunity  for  Prince  Maurice
to  make  an  assault  iipon  the  Frisian  defences  of  this  vast
realm.  It  -was  difficult  to  make  half  Europe  into  one
great  Spanish  fortification,  guarding  its  every  bastion
and  every  point  of  the  curtain,  without  far  more  exten-
sive armaments  than  the  "  Great  King,"  as  the  Leaguers
proposed  that  Philip  should  entitle  himself,  had  ever  had
at  his  disposal.  It  might  be  a  colossal  scheme  to  stretch
the  rod  of  empire  over  so  large  a  portion  of  the  earth,
but  the  dwarfish  attempts  to  carr}'  the  design  into  execu-
tion hardly  reveal  the  hand  of  genius.  It  is  aistonishing
to  contemplate  the  meagre  numbers  and  the  slender  funds
with  which  this  world-empire  was  to  be  asserted  and
maintained.  The  armies  arrayed  at  any  important  point
hardly  exceeded  a  modern  division  or  two;  Avhile  the
I'esources  furnished  for  a  year  would  hardly  pay  in  later
days  for  a  few  weeks'  campaign.

When  Alexander,  the  fij'st  commander  of  his  time,
moved  out  of  Flanders  into  France  with  less  than
twenty  thousand  men,  he  left  most  vital  portions  of
his  master's  hereditary  dominions  so  utterly  unprotected
that  it  was  possible  to  attack  them  with  a  handful  of
troops.  The  young  disciple  of  Simon  Stevinus  now  re-
stimed  that  practical  demonstration  of  his  principles
which  had  been  in  the  previous  year  so  well  begun.

On  the  28th  May,  1592,  jMaurice,  taking  the  field  with
28  May, six  thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse,  came

1592.  once  more  before  Steenwyck.  It  will  be  re-
membered that  he  had  been  obliged  to  relinquish  the

ir)92.  IIETUKX  OF  MAURICE  TO  STEENWYCK.  14!)

siege  of  this  place  in  order  to  confront  tlio  Dnko of
I'arma  in  July,  1591,  at  Nymegen.

The  city — very  important  fiom  its  position,  being  ihu
key  to  the  province  of  Drenthe  as  well  as  one  of  the  safe-
guards of  Frieslaiid — had  been  besieged  in  vain  by  Count
Kennebei'g  after  his  treasonable  sixrrender  of  Groningen,
of  which  he  was  governor,  to  the  Spaniards,  but  had  been
subsequently  surprised  by  Tassis.  Since  that  time  it  had
held  for  tlie  king.  Its  fortifications  were  strong,  and  of
the  best  description  known  at  that  day.  Its  regular  gar-
rison was  sixteen  companies  of  foot  and  some  cavalry
under  Antoine  de  Quocqueville,  militaiy  governor.  T3e-
sides  these  troops  were  twelve  hundred  \\'alloon  infantry,
commanded  by  Lewis,  youngest  Count  van  den  Bei-g,  a
brave  lad  of  eighteen  years,  with  whom  were  the  lord  of
Waterdyck  and  other  Ketherland  nobles.^

To  the  military  student  the  siege  may  possess  impor-
tance as  marking  a  transitional  epoch  in  the  history  of
the  beleaguering  science.  To  the  general  reader,  as  in
most  of  the  exploits  of  the  young  Poliorcetes,  its  details
have  but  slender  interest.  Peihaps  it  was  here  that  the
spade  first  vindicated  its  dignity,  and  entitled  itself  to
be  classed  as  a  military  weapon  of  value  along  with  pike
and  arquebus.  It  was  here  that  the  soldiers  of  Maurice,
buri'owing  in  the  ground  at  ten  stuyvers  a  day,  were
jeered  at  by  the  enemy  from  the  battlements  as  boors
and  ditchers,  who  had  forfeited  their  right  to  30  May,
be  considered  soldiers — but  jeered  at  for  the  ^  J""«-
last  time.

From  30th  May  to  9th  June  the  prince  was  occupied
in  throwing  up  earthworks  on  the  low  grounds  in  oider
to  bring  his  guns  into  position.  On  the  13th
June  he  began  to  batter  with  forty-five  pieces,
but  effected  little  more  than  to  demolish  some  of  the
breast-works.  He  threw  liot  shot  into  the  town  very
diligently,  too,  but  did  small  damage.  The  cannonading
went  on  for  nearly  a  week,  but  the  practice  was  so
very  indifferent — notwithstanding  the  protection  of  the
blessed  Barbara  and  the  tuition  of  the  busmastors — that,
the  besieged  began  to  amuse  themselves  with  .  th(i.-e
empty  and  monotonous  salvos  of  the  honourable  Artil-

'  Bor,  III.  xxviii.  62.S-633. Mpteren,  x\i.  304,  305. I?pyd,  ix.  177-180.  Colomj.
9!>.  100.

1 50  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXVI

lery  Gnild.  When  all  this  blazing  and  thundering  had
led  to  no  better  result  than  to  convert  a  hundred  thou-
sand good  Flemish  florins  into  noise  and  smoke,  the
thrifty  Netherlanders  on  both  sides  the  walls  began  to
disparage  the  young  general's  reputation.  After  all,
they  said,  the  Spaniards  were  right  when  they  called
artillery  mere  espanta-vellacos  or  scare-cowards.^  This
burrowing  and  bello\ving  must  at  last  give  place  to  the
old-fashioned  push  of  pike,  and  then  it  would  be  seen
who  the  soldiers  were.  Observations  like  these  were
freely  made  under  a  flag  of  truce ;  for  on  the
19  th  June  —  notwithstanding  their  contempt
for  the  espanta-vellacos  —  the  besieged  had  sent  out  a
deputation  to  treat  for  an  honourable  surrender,  Mau-
rice entertained  the  negotiators  hospitably  in  his  own
tent,  but  the  terms  suggested  to  him  were  inadmis-
sible. Nothing  came  of  the  conference  therefore  but
mutual  criticisms,  friendly  enough,  although  sufiSciently
caustic.

Maurice  now  ceased  cannonading,  and  burrowed  again
for  ten  days  withoiit  interruption.  Four  mines,  leading
to  different  points  of  the  defences,  were  patiently  con-
structed, and  two  large  chambers  at  the  terminations,
neatly  finished  off  and  filled  respectively  with  five  thou-
sand and  twenty-five  hundred  pounds  of  powder,  were
at  last  established  under  two  of  the  principal  bastions.^

During  all  this  digging  there  had  been  a  couple  of
sorties  in  which  the  besieged  had  inflicted  gi-eat  damage
on  their  enemy,  and  got  back  into  the  town  with  a  few
prisoners,  having  lost  but  six  of  their  own  men.^  Sir
Francis  Vere  had  been  severely  wounded  in  the  leg,  so
that  he  was  obliged  to  keep  his  bed  during  the  rest
of  the  siege.  Verdugo,  too,  had  made  a  feeble  attempt
to  reinforce  the  place  with  three  hundred  men,  sixty  or
seventy  of  whom  had  entered,  while  the  rest  had  been
killed  or  captured.®  On  such  a  small  scale  was  Philip's
world- empire  contended  for  by  his  stadholder  in  Fries-
land  :  yet  it  was  certainly  not  the  fault  of  the  stout  old
Portuguese.  Verdugo  would  rather  have  sent  thirty
thousand  men  to  save  the  front  door  of  his  great  province

5  Keyd,  ubi  sup.  *  Ibid. Coloma  says  that  three  hun-

*  Bar,  Meteren,  Reyd,  Coloma,  uhi  dred  of  the  besiegers  were  killed  in  thii
SKP-  sally.  s  Ibid.

1592.  ASSAULT  AND  CAPITULATIOX,  151

tban  three  hundred.  But  every  available  nian — and  fevv
enough  of  them  they  were — had  been  sent  out  of  the
Netherlands,  to  defend  the  world-empire  in  its  outpoints
of  Normandy  and  Brittany.

This  was  Philip  the  Prudent's  system  for  conquering
the  world,  and  men  looked  upon  him  as  the  consuuniia-
tion  of  kingcraft.

On  the  3id  July  Maurice  ordered  his  whole  force  to  be
in  readiness  for  the  assault. The  mines  were  ^

then  sprung.  The  bastion  of  the  east  gate  was
blown  to  ruins.  The  mine  under  the  Gast-Huys  bul-
wark burst  outwardly,  and  buried  alive  many  Hol-
landers standing  ready  for  the  asssault.'^  At  this  un-
toward accident  Maurice  hesitated  to  give  the  signal
for  storming  the  breach,  but  the  panic  within  the  town
was  so  evident  that  Lewis  William  lost  no  time  in  seiz-
ing the  overthrown  eastern  bulwark,  from  the  ruins  of
which  he  looked  over  the  whole  city.'  The  other  bi-oken
bastion  was  likewise  easily  mastered,  and  the  besieged,
seeing  the  storm  about  to  burst  upon  them  with  irre-
sistible fury,  sent  a  trumpet.  Meantime  Maurice,  in-
specting the  effects  of  the  explosion  and  preparing  for
the  assault,  had  been  shot  through  the  left  cheek.  The
wound  was  not  dangerous,  and  the  prince  extracted  the
bullet  with  his  own  hand,^  but  the  change  of  half  an
inch  would  have  made  it  fatal.  He  was  not  incapaci-
tated— after  his  wound  had  been  dressed,  amidst  the
remonsti'ances  of  his  friends  for  his  temerity  —  from
listening  to  the  propositions  of  the  city.  They  were
refused,  for  the  prince  was  sure  of  having  his  town  on
his  own  teiins.

Next  day  he  permitted  the  garrison  to  depart ;  the
officers  and  soldiers  pi'omising  not  to  serve  the  ^  j^^j
King  of  Spain  on  the  Netherland  side  of  the
Ehine  for  six  months.  They  were  to  take  their  baggage
but  to  leave  arms,  flags,  munitions,  and  provisions.
Both  Maurice  and  Lewis  William  were  for  insisting
on  sterner  conditions,  but  the  States'  deputies  and  mem-
bers of  the  council  who  were  present,  as  usual,  in  camp
urged  the  building  of  the  golden  bridge. After  all,  a

s  Bor,  Metercn,  Reyd,  Coloma,  iibi  his  father,  in  Gropn  v.  Prlnsterer.
mip.  7  Ibid.  (Archives  JI.  s.  i.  19s.)

"  Ibid. Letter  of  John  the  Younger  to

152  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,  CfiAr.  XXn.

fortified  city,  the  second  in  importance  after  Groningen
of  all  those  regions,  was  the  real  prize  contended  for.
The  garrison  was  meagre  and  lunch  reduced  dniing  the
siege.  The  fortifications,  of  masonry  and  earthwork
combined,  were  neaidy  as  strong  as  ever.  Saint  Bar-
bara had  done  them  but  little  damage,  but  the  town
itself  was  in  a  sorry  plight.  Churches  and  houses  were
nearly  all  shot  to  pieces,  and  the  inhabitants  had  long
been  dwelling  in  the  cellars.  Two  hundred  of  the  gar-
rison remained,  severely  wounded,  in  the  town ;  three
hundred  and  fifty  had  been  killed,  among  others  the
young  cousin  of  the  Nassaus,  Count  Lewis  van  den
Berg.  The  remainder  of  the  royalists  marched  out,
and  were  treated  with  courtesy  by  Maurice,  who  gave
them  an  escort,  permitting  the  soldiers  to  retain  their
side-arms,  and  fiirnishing  horses  to  the  governor.

In  the  besieging  army  five  or  six  hundred  had  been
killed  and  many  wounded,  but  not  in  numbers  bearing
the  same  proportion  to  the  slain  as  in  modern  battles.''

The  siege  had  lasted  forty-four  days.  When  it  was
over,  and  men  came  out  from  the  town  to  examine  at
leisure  the  prince's  camp  and  his  field  of  operations,
they  were  astounded  at  the  amount  of  labour  performed
in  so  short  a  time.  The  oldest  campaigners  confessed
that  they  never  before  had  understood  what  a  siege
really  was,  and  they  began  to  conceive  a  higher  respect
for  the  art  of  the  engineer  than  they  had  ever  done  be-
fore. "  Even  those  who  were  wont  to  rail  at  science
and  labour,"  said  one  who  was  present  in  the  camp  of
Maurice,  "declared  that  the  siege  would  have  been
a  far  more  arduous  undertaking  had  it  not  been  for
those  two  engineers,  Joost  Matthes  of  Alost,  and  Jacob
Kemp  of  Gorcum.  It  is  high  time  to  take  from  soldiers
the  false  notion  that  it  is  shameful  to  work  with  the
spade ; an  error  which  was  long  prevalent  among  the

'  At  least  this  is  the  t?stiiiiony  of  nil  many  wounded  that  not  5000  were  l^'ft

the  liutch  historians,  but— as has  been  unhurt  in  their  camp,  out  of  10,000  with

the  case  in  all  sieges  and  liuttles  since  which  the si<  ge began. On the other

mea  began  to  besiege  and  to  fij^ht  battles  hand,  according  to  the  same authority,

— the  evidence  given  by  the  two  tides  is  the  besieged  had  lost  but  15()  killed,  and  a

in  almost  direct  conflict.  few  more  than  that  number  wounded  :  f.

According  to  C-oloma,  thirteen  hundred  99"". But  we  have  seen  that  the  whole

of  the  besiegi  rs  had  been  kilbd  outright  of  the  besieging  army  amounted  only  to

during  the  assaults,  and there  were  so  800o.

1592,  SIKGE  OF  COKWOliDEN.  153

Ncthcvlanders,  and  still  prevails  among  the  Frencili,  to
the  great  detriment  of  the  king's  allairs,  as  may  be  seen
in  his  sieges.'""

Certainly  the  resiilt  of  Henry's  reocnt  campaign  before
Eouen  had  proved  sufficiently  how  much  better  it  would
have  been  for  him  had  there  been  some  Dutch  Joosts
and  Jacobs  with  their  picks  and  shovels  in  his  army  at
that  critical  period.  They  might  perhaps  have  baffled
Parma  as  they  had  done  Verdugo.

Without  letting  the  grass  grow  under  his  feet,  Maurice
now  led  his  army  from  Steenwyck  to  Zwol  and 26  July,
arrived  on  the  26th  July  before  Coeworden. ^^^2-

This  place,  very  strong  by  art  and  still  stronger  by
nature,  was  the  other  key  to  all  north  Netherland —
Friesland,  Groningen,  and  Drenthe.  Should  it  fall  into
the  hands  of  the  republic  it  would  bo  impossible  for  the
Spaniards  to  retain  much  longer  the  rich  and  important
capital  of  all  that  countiy,  the  city  of  Groningen.  Coe-
worden lay  between  two  vast  morasses,  one  of  which —
the  Bourtange  swamp — extended  some  thirty  miles  to  the
bay  of  theDollart;  while  the  other  spread  nearly  as
far  in  a  westerly  direction  to  the  Zuyder  Zee.  Thus
these  two  great  marshes  were  a  frame — an  almost  im-
passable barrier — by  which  the  northern  third  of  the
whole  territory  of  the  republic  was  encircled  and  de-
fended. Throughout  this  great  morass  there  was  not  a
liandbreadth  of  solid  ground — not  a  resting-place  for
a  human  foot,  save  the  load  which  led  through  Coewor-
den. This  passage  lay  upon  a  natural  deposit  of  hard,
dry  sand,  interposed  as  if  by  a  caprice  of  nature  be-
tween the  two  swamps,  and  was  about  half  a  mile  in
width.'^

The  town  itself  was  well  fortified,  and  Verdugo  had
been  recently  strengthening  the  position  with  additional
earthworks.^"  A  thousand  veterans  foimed  the  garrison
under  command  of  another  Van  den  Berg,  the  Count
Frederic.^^  It  was  the  fate  of  these  sister's-children  of
the  great  founder  of  the  republic  to  sei-ve  the  cause
of  foreign  despotism  with  remarkable  temicit}'  against
their  own  countrymen,  and  against  their  nearest  blood
relations. On  many  conspicuous  occasions  they  were

'*  Rpyd,  i(ti  s»p  11  Guicoiardini  i«  rwe. lieycl,  ix  If-e,  .te'/'/.

12  lbi(i.  13  lleyd,  «t)t  s«^. Muteren,  xvi.  3C6. Jiur,  111.  xxviii.  OJU,  ^ajv-

154  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXVI.

almost  as  useful  to  Spain  and  the  Inquisition  as  the  son
and  nearly  all  the  otlier  kinsmen  of  William  the  Silent
had  rendered  themselves  to  the  cause  of  Holland  and  of
freedom.

Having  thoroughly  entrenched  his  camp  before  Coe-
worden  and  begun  the  regTilar  approaches  Maurice  left
his  cousin  Lewis  William  to  superintend  the  siege
operations  for  the  moment,  and  advanced  towards
Ootmarsum,  a  frontier  town  which  might  give  him  trouble
if  in  the  hands  of  a  relieving  force.  The  place  fell  at
once,  with  the  loss  of  but  one  life  to  the  States  army,
but  that  a  very  valuable  one ;  General  de  Famai's,  one
of  the  original  signers  of  the  famous  Compromise,  and
a  most  distinguished  soldier  of  the  republic,  having
been  killed  before  the  gates.

On  the  31st  July,  Maurice  returned  to  his  entrench-
Juiy  31, ments. The  enemy  professed  unbounded  con-

1592.  fidence  ;  Van  den  Berg  not  doubting  that  he
should  be  relieved  b}'  Verdugo,  and  Verdugo  being  sure
that  Van  den  Berg  would  need  no  relief.  The  Portu-
guese veteran  indeed  was  inclined  to  wonder  at  Maurice's
presumption  in  attacking  so  impregnable  a  fortress.
"  If  Coeworden  does  not  hold,"  said  he,  "there  is  no
place  in  the  world  that  can  hold."^*

Coimt  Peter  Ernest  was  still  acting  as  governor-
general  ;  for  Alexander  Famese,  on  returning  fiom  his
second  French  campaign,  had  again  betaken  himself,
shattered  and  melanchol}-,  to  the  waters  of  Spa,  leaving
the  responsibility  for  Xetherland  affairs  upon  the  German
octogenarian.^^  To  him,  and  to  the  nonagenarian  Mon-
dragon  at  Antwerp,  the  veteran  Verdugo  now  called
loudly  for  aid  against  the  youthful  pedant,  whom  all
men  had  been  laughing  at  a  twelvemonth  or  so  before.
The  Macedonian  phalanx,  Simon  Stevinus,  and  delving
Dutch  boors — unworthy  of  the  name  of  soldiers — seemed
to  be  steadily  digging  the  ground  from  under  Philip's
feet  in  his  hereditary  domains.

What  would  become  of  the  world-empire,  where  was
the  great  king — not  of  Spain  alone,  nor  of  France  alone
— but  the  great  monarch  of  all  Christendom,  to  plant  his
throne  securely, if  his  Frisian stronghulds, his  most

i«  KQyi.ubisup,  1592. Same to Philip,  24  Aug. 1592

15  Parma  to  P.  E.  Mansfeld,  16  Aug. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

1592.  FORMAL  SUMMONS  TO  SURRENDER.  155

important  northern  outposts,  were  to  fall  before  an
almost  beardless  youth  at  the  head  of  a  handful  of
republican  militia  ?

Verdugo  did  his  best,  but  the  best  was  little.  The
Spanish  and  Italian  legions  had  been  sent  out  of  the
^  etherlands  into  France.  Many  had  died  there,  many
were  in  hospital  after  their  return,  nearly  all  the  rest  were
mutinous  for  want  of  pay.

On  the  16th  August,  Maurice  formally  summoned
Coeworden  to  surrender.  After  the  trumpeter  le  Aug.
had  blown  thrice.  Count  Van  den  Berg  forbidding  ^^°'
all  others,  came  alone  upon  the  walls  and  demanded  his
message.  "  To  claim  this  city  in  the  name  of  Prince
Maurice  of  Nassau  and  of  the  States-General,"  was  the
reply.

"  Tell  him  first  to  beat  down  my  walls  as  flat  as  the
ditch,"  said  Van  dgn  Berg,  "  and  then  to  bring  five  or
six  storms.  Six  months  after  that  I  will  think  whether
I  will  send  a  trumpet."  -"^

The  prince  proceeded  steadily  with  his  approaches,
but  he  was  infinitely  chagrined  by  the  departure  out  of
his  camp  of  Sir  Francis  A^ere  with  his  English  contingent
of  thi  ee  regiments,  whom  Queen  Elizabeth  had  peremp-
toiily  ordered  to  the  relief  of  King  Heniy  in  Brlttan}'.

Kothing  amazes  the  modern  mind  so  much  as  the
exquisite  paucity  of  forces  and  of  funds  by  which
the  world-empire  was  fought  for  and  resisted  in  France,
Holland,  Spain,  and  England.  The  scenes  of  war  were
rapidly  shifted — almost  like  the  slides  of  a  magic -
lantern — from  one  country  to  another;  the  same  con-
spicuous personages,  almost  the  same  individual  armies,
perpetually  re- appearing  in  different  places  as  if  a  wild
phantasmagoria  were  capriciously  repeating  itself  to  be-
wilder the  imagination.  Essex,  and  Vere,  and  Roger
Williams,  and  Black  Norris — Van  der  Does,  and  Admiral
Nassau,  the  Meetkerks  and  Count  Philip — Fainese  and
Mansfeld,  George  Basti,  Arenberg,  Berlaymont,  La  None
and  Teligny,  Aquila  and  Goloma — were  seen  alternately
fighting,  retreating,  triumphant,  beleaguering,  campaign-
ing all  along  the  great  territory  which  extends  from
the  Bay  of  Biscay  to  tbe  crags  of  Brittany,  and  across  the
narrow  seas  to  the  bogs  of  Ireland,  and  thence  through

18  Bor,  Rcyd,  Metx;ren,  ubi  sup.

156

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXVI.

the  plains  of  Picardy  and  Flanders  to  the  swamps  of
Groningen  and  the  frontiers  of  the  Khine.

This  was  the  arena  in  which  the  great  struggle  was
ever  going  on,  but  the  champions  were  so  few  in  number
that  their  individual  shapes  become  familiar  to  us  like
the  figures  of  an  oft-repeated  pageant.  And  now  the
withdrawal  of  certain  companies  of  infantry  and  squa-
drons of  cavalry  from  the  Spanish  armies  into  France,
had  left  obedient  Netherland  too  weak  to  resist  rebel-
lious Netherland,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  with-
drawal of  some  twenty  or  thirty  companies  of  English
auxiliaries — most  hard-fighting  veterans  it  is  true,  but
very  few  in  number — was  likely  to  imperil  the  enterprise
of  Maurice  in  Friesland.

The  removal  of  these  companies  from  the  Low
Countries  to  strengthen  the  Bearnese  in  the  north  of
France,  formed  the  subject  of  much  bitter  diplomatic
conference  between  the  States  and  England ;  the  order
having  been  communicated  by  the  great  queen  herself
in  many  a  vehement  epistle  and  caustic  speech,  enforced
by  big,  manly  oaths.^^

17  The  cautionary  towns  required  to
be  held  at  this  se.ison  with  a  firm  hand.
The  days  were  gone  when  the  States
looked  up  to  the  representative  of  the
queen  as  a  "  Messiah,"  and  felt  that  she
alone  sustained  them  from  sinking  into
ruin.  A  series  of  victories  over  the
Spaniards,  and  the  amazing  fatuity  of  the
Spanish  policy,  had  given  them  vast  con-
fidence in  themselves,  and  a  growmg
contempt  for  their  great  enemy.  They
did  not  feel  themselves  entirely  dependent
on  England,  but  considered  the  services
rendered  by  each  country  to  the  other
as  fairly  equal,  and  they  therefore  the
more  keenly  resented  the  withdrawal  of
troops  to  which  they  believed  themselves
thoroughly  entitled  by  their  contract.
It  was  an  infraction  of  the  treaty,  in  their
opinion,  to  hold  their  cities,  yet  to  send
the  English  auxiliaries  into  France.  There
were  rising  commotions  in  Flushing  and
Ostend,  while  at  the  same  time  it  was
felt  that  the  foreign  enemy  at  any  mo-
ment was  capable  of  making  a  sudden
assault  on  those  most  vital  places.  "It
is  advertised  me  out  of  England,"  said  Sir
Robert  Sidney,  Governor  of  Flushing,
"  tlv-*  thpre  be  some  m'/n  of  war  that  say

that  Flushing  may  be  kept  with  a  white
rod.  I  know  not  whether  they  have  the
Caduceus  which  the  poets  write  that
Mercury  had,  which  was  offeree  to  bring
sleep  upon  all  men.  If  they  have  not,
truly  they  little  know  this  town,  or  per-
haps will  not  say  what  indeed  they  think,
being  not  in  their  own  particular  in-
terested in  the  good  or  ill  of  it

The  burghers,  I  confess,  carry  themselves
very  honestly,  and  I  persuade  myself  that
the  queen  hath  many  true  servants  among
them,  notwithstanding  the  chief  way  to
keep  them  still  honest  is  to  have  such  a
garrison  as  may  pay  them  at  any  time
the  price  of  doing  ill."  The  governor
protested  that  twenty-two  companies  of
135  men  each  were  not  a  stronger  gar-
rison for  his  town  than  five  companies
had  been  a  few  years  before.  The  repub-
lican sentiment  had  so  much  displaced
the  feeling  of  dependence  on  a  foreign
sovereign  that  the  protectors  were  grown
to  appear  almost  like  enemies.  Formerly
matters  were  very  different.  "  Then  was
the  name  of  the  queea  reverenced  in  all
these  countries,"  he  said,  "as  of  another
saviour;  and  there  was  love  unto  her,
and  unto  her  subjects,  such  as  if  they

1592,

EFFECT  OF  THE  WITHDRAWAL  OF  FORCMS.

157

Verdngo,  although  confident  in  the  strength  of  the
place,  had  represented to  Parma  and  to  Mausfeld the

would  become  untenable.  Then,  without
additional  expense,  the  States  would  be
able  to  take  the  field  with  25,000  men,
with  which  they  thought  themselves
quite  capable  of  holding  the  Kingof  Sp;un
iu  play,  especially  embarked  as  he  was
with  Kngland  and  Fraijce.  "Yet  do  1
not  think,"  he  added,  "that  the  Suites
will  be  willing  to  have  the  English  com-
panies drawn  away,  they  being,  although
but  few,  a  great  part  of  the  r.putation  of
the  army ;  neither  do  1  think  that  they
would  yet  be  willing  to  have  the  con-
tract with  her  ihijesty  broken  off,  be-
cause it  is  one  of  the  principal  chains
that  holds  these  provinces  in  union
together,  and  one  of  the  best  graces  they
have  with  the  princes  abroad;  and  because,
by  the  amity  with  England,  they  have
the  free  use  of  the  sea  by  which  they  live.
Though  these  men  be  her  Majesty's  sub-
jects, yet  in  respect  that  by  the  contract
they  were  lent  unto  them,  and  that  to
have  them  they  put  their  towns  Into  her
Majesty's  hands,  they  think  they  may
challenge  a  great  right  unto  them ;  and
truly  I  was  in  a  manner  asked  whether
the  queen,  withdrawing  her  forces,  would
still  retain  the  cjiutionary  towns."  Truly
the  question  seemed  a  pertinent  one;  and
it  would  have  been  difficult  for  an  honest
man  to  explain  why  the  mortgage  should
remain  when  the  loan  was  withdrawn.
It  needed  no  Solomon  or  Daniel  to  decide
so  plain  a  matter,  and  the  .States  had  an
uncomfortable  habit  of  insisting  on  their
rights,  even  in  the  very  lace  of  the  Eng-
lish queen.  "These  men,  how  simple
show  soever  they  bear  outwardly,  have
hearts  high  enough,"  said  Sidney ;  "  and
look  to  be  respected  as  they  which  hold
themselves  chief  rulers  of  the  provinces;
which  have  so  long  maintained  war
against  the  King  of  Spain ;  and  truly  1
do  not  think  that  secretly  anything  is  so
much  indigested  by  theuj  as  the  httle
respect  as  they  imagine  is  had  of  them  in
England,  and  herein  they  did  look  that
her  M;ije.sty  should  have  proceeded  by
way  of  intreating  with  them,  as  was  done
two  years  ago,  w  hen  Sir  John  Norris  led
the  first  troops  into  Britanny."  Sidney
to  Burghley.  14  July,  1592.  (.S.  P.  Office
MS.)  Same  to  same,  4  Ang.  1592.
(Ibid.)

had  been  all  of  one  nation.  The  Earl  of
Leicester,  in  name  and  effect,  was  Gover-
nour-General  of  the  whole  country.  My
brother  (Sir  Philip  Sydney)  had,  joined  to
the  government  which  now  I  have,  the
regiment  of  Zeeland,  which  are  the  troops
from  which  this  garrison  has  to  fear  most
any  sudden  harm.  The  provinces  then
were  poor,  and  ill  order  among  them,  and
the  States  generally  hated  of  the  people.
Every  day  a  town  lost,  the  King  of
Spain's  army  mighty,  himself  entangled
with  no  other  wars,  and  to  all  these
harms  there  was  no  show  of  hope  but
from  the  queen,  all  other  princes  directly
shunning  their  alliance.  The  people  saw
that  the  queen's  taking  the  cause  In  hand,
and  the  succour  she  sent,  had  been  the
only  pillar  which,  after  the  loss  of  Ant-
werp, had  held  up  their  State  from  utter
ruin,  which  bred  a  love  for  the  queen,  and

a  fear  of  displeasing  her »  .  All

this  has  since  been  changed :  there  is  a
new  face  on  the  State  and  people ;  the
goveniour-general  has  lost  all  authority ;
all  the  commandment  of  the  armies  is  in
their  hands."  The  governour  then  as-
signed many  pregnant  reasons  for  the
withdrawing  of  love  from  the  English  and
their  queen  on  part  of  the  Netherlanders,
prominent  among  which  were  the  mal-
practices of  the  English  in  Campveer,
Medenblick,  and  Gertruydenberg,  but
especially  the  interference  by  the  English
cruisers  with  their  sea-going  ships,  and
the  frequent  piracies  committed  on  their
merchantmen  by  her  M.ijestys  navy.
"  The  hindrance  of  their  free  traffic,"  he
said, "  and  the  despoiling  of  many  of  their
ships  by  such  as  have  commission  by  the
queen  to  go  to  sea,  are  what  they  ex-
claim against  extreme  ly."  He  paid  an
honest  tribute  to  the  national  unity  which
had  grown  up  in  the  republic,  and  to  the
good  administration  of  their  affairs.
"  Nov^  are  the  States  and  the  people
firmly  united,"  he  said;  "the  soldiers
thoroughly  contented  by  the  good  govern-
ment of  the  count  and  the  good  payment

made  to  them T'he  fear  of  the

King  of  Spain  is  almost  worn  out,  their
army  having  now,  the  third  year,  almost
without  opposition  kept  the  field."  It
was  Sidnej-'s  opinion  that  Coeworden
would  soon  fall,  after  which  Groningen

158  THE  UNITED  NETHEr?LANDS.  Chap.  XXVI.

immense  importance  of  relieving  Coeworden.  The  city,
he  said,  was  more  valuable  than  all  trie  towns  taken
the  year  before.  All  Friesland  hung  upon  it,  and  it
would  be  impossible  to  save  Groningen  should  Coeworden
fall.

Meantime  Count  Philip  Nassau  ariived  from  the
campaign  in  France  with  his  three  regiments  which  he
threw  into  garrison,  ^■ad  thus  set  free  an  equal  number
of  fresh  troops,  which  were  forthwith  sent  to  the  camp
of  Maurice.^^  The  prince  at  the  same  time  was  made
aware  that  Verdugo  was  about  to  receive  impoi'tant
succour,  and  he  was  advised  by  the  deputies  of  the
States-General  present  at  his  headquarters  to  send  out
his  German  Reiters  to  intercept  them.  Maurice  refused.
Should  his  cavalry  be  defeated,  he  said,  his  whole  army
would  be  endangered.  He  determined  to  await  within
his  fortified  camp  the  attack  of  the  relieving  force.

During  the  whole  month  of  August  he  proceeded
steadily  with  his  sapping  and  mining.  By  the  middle
of  the  month  his  lines  had  come  through  the  ditch,
which  he  drained  of  water  into  the  counterscarp.  By
the  beginning  of  September  he  had  got  beneath  the
principal  fort,  which,  in  the  course  of  three  or  four
days,  he  expected  to  blow  into  the  air.  The  rainy
weather  had  impeded  his  operations  and  the  march  of
the  relieving  army.  Nevertheless  that  army  was  at  last
approaching.  The  regiments  of  Mondragon,  Charles
Mansfeld,  Gonzaga,  BerJaymont,  and  Arenberg  had  been

23  A  despatched  to  reinforce  Verdugo.  On  the  23rd
August,  having  crossed  the  lihine  at  Ehein-
berg,  they  reached  Olfen  in  the  country  of  Benthem,
ten  miles  from  Coeworden.  Here  they  threw  up
rockets  and  made  other  signals  that  relief  was  approach-
ing the  town.  On  the  Hrd  of  September  Verdugo,  with
the  whole  force  at  his  disposal,  amounting  to  four  thou-
sand foot  and  eighteen  hundred  horse,  was  at  the
village  of  Emblichen,  within  a  league  of  the  besieged
citj'.  That  night  a  peasant  was  captured  with  letters
from Verdugo to  the  governor of  Coeworden,  -giving

6  7  Se  t iiifoi'iiiation that he intended to make an
assault  on  the  besiegers  on  the  night  of  6th-7th
September.

IS  Bor,  Keyd,  MetL-ren,  uhi  sup.

1592.  ATTACK  ON  MAURICE'S  CAMP.  159

Thus  forewarned,  Maurice  took  the  best  precautions
and  calmly  within  his  entrenchments  awaited  the  on-
slaught. Punctual  to  his  appointment,  Verdugo  with
his  whole  force,  yelling  "Victoria!  Victoria!"  made  a
shirt-attack,  or  camiciata — the  men  wearing  their  shirts
outside  their  armour  to  distinguish  each  other  in  the
darkness — upon  that  portion  of  the  camp  which  was
under  command  of  Hohenlo.  They  were  met  with
determination  and  repulsed,  after  fighting  all  night,
with  a  loss  of  three  hundred  killed  and  a  proportionate
number  of  wounded.  The  Nethcrlanders  had  but  three
killed  and  six  wounded.  Among  the  latter,  however,
w^as  Lewis  William,  who  received  a  musket-ball  in  the
belly,  but  remained  on  the  ground  until  the  enemy  had
letreated.  It  was  then  discovered  that  his  wound  was
not  mortal — the  intestines  not  having  been  injured —
and  he  was  soon  about  his  work  again.^''  Prince  Maurice,
too,  as  usual,  incurred  the  remonstrances  of  the  deputies
and  others  for  the  reckless  manner  in  which  he  ex])osed
himself  wherever  the  fire  was  hottest.^"  He  resolutely
refused,  however,  to  permit  his  cavalry  to  follow  the
retreating  enemy.  His  object  was  Coeworden — a  prize
more  important  than  a  new  victory  over  the  already
defeated  Spaniards  would  prove — and  this  object  he
kept  ever  before  his  eyes.

This  was  Verdugo's  first  and  last  attempt  to  relieve
the  cit3^  He  had  seen  enough  of  the  young  prince's
tactics  and  had  no  further  wish  to  break  his  teeth
against  those  scientific  entrenchments.  The  Spaniards
at  last,  whether  they  wore  their  shirts  inside  oi'  outside
their  doublets,  could  no  longer  handle  the  Dutchmen  at
pleasure.  That  people  of  butter,  as  the  iron  duke  of
Alva  was  fond  of  calling  the  Netlierlanders,  were  grown
hai'der  with  the  pressure  of  a  twenty-five  years'  war.

Five  days  after  the  sanguinary  camiciata  the  besieged
offered  to  capitulate. The  trumpet  at  which ,^o.  ,
the  proud  Van  den  Berg  had  hinted  for  six

i»  Bor,  Reyd,  Meteren,  uhi  sup. "  My  niaiiicd  more  than  an  hour  fighting  on

brother William,"  wrote  Count  John  to  horseback  and  afoot  before  his  wound  was

his  father,  "was  shot  in  the  right  side,  so  bound  up,  and  he  could  not  be  induced

that  the  ball  came out  again  near  the  by  any  persuasion  to  leave  the  ground."

navil;  but,  thank  God,  there  is  no  danger  — Groen  v.  Prinsterer,  Archives  IL  s.  i.

of  his  life,  as  all  the  barbers  agree 207,  2(JS.

After he hud received the ^hot  lie  re-  ^^  Bor,  Keyd,  Meteren,  m6i  «u^.

160  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXVI,

}nontlis  later  arrived  on  the  12th  September.  Maurice
was  glad  to  get  his  town.  His  "  little  soldiers"  did  not
insist,  as  the  Spaniards  and  Italians  were  used  to  do  in
the  good  old  days,  on  unlimited  murder,  rape,  and  fii"e
as  the  natural  solace  and  reward  of  their  labours  in
the  trenches.  Civilization  had  made  some  progress,  at
least  in  the  Netherlands.  Maurice  gi-anted  good  terms,
such  as  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  conceding  to  all
captured  towns.  Van  den  Berg  was  courteously  re-
ceived by  his  cousins,  as  he  rode  forth  from  the  place  at
the  head  of  what  remained  of  his  garrison,  five  hundred
in  number,  with  colours  flying,  matches  burning,  bullet
in  mouth,  and  with  all  their  arms  and  baggage,  except
artillery  and  ammunition,  and  the  heroic  little  Lewis,
notwithstanding  the  wound  in  his  belly,  got  on  horse-
back and  greeted  him  with  a  cousinly  welcome  in  the
camp."^

The  city  was  a  most  important  acquisition,  as  already
sufliciently  set  forth,  but  Queen  Elizabeth,  much  misin-
formed on  this  occasion,  was  inclined  to  undervalue  it.
She  Avrote  accordingly  to  the  States,  reproaching  them
for  using  all  that  artillery  and  that  royal  force  against
a  mere  castle  and  earth-heap,  instead  of  attempting  some
considerable  capital,  or  going  in  force  to  the  relief  of
Brittany.^^  The  day  was  to  come  when  she  would
acknowledge  the  advantage  of  not  leaving  this  earth-
heap  in  the  hands  of  the  Spaniard.  Meantime,  Prince
Maurice — the  season  being  so  far  advanced — gave  the
world  no  further  practical  lessons  in  the  engineering
science,  and  sent  his  troops  into  winter  quarters.

These  were  the  chief  military  phenomena  in  France
and  Flanders  during  three  years  of  the  great  struggle
to  establish  Philip's  universal  dominion.

21  Bor,  Keyd,  Meteren.  perte  de  Bretagne,  le  recouvrement  voiis

22  "  Hasardants  vos  gens  es  entreprinses  devroit  estre  beaucoup  plus  recomirande
incertaines  et  de  peu  de  consequence  eu  que  de  vous  attaquer  a  ung  petit  chateau
esgard  que  le  poids  des  affaires  qui  con-  tel  qu'est  Co^vorden  ouaultre  semblablc."
cement  le  bien  de  notre  estat  et  du  Queen  to  the  Stat'^s-General,  23  July,
vutre  consi.ste  plus  tost  a  empecher  la  1592. (Hague  ArchiTes  MS.)

4 1592. ANTU'ATHy  BETWEEN  ENGLAND  AND  THE  STATKS. 1  (i  1

CHAPTER XXVII.

Kegoliations  between  Queen  Elizabeth  and  the  States  —  Aspect  of  affah-s  between
Kngland  and  the  Netherlands  —  Conipluiiits  of  the  Hollanders  on  the  piratical  acis
of  the  English  — The  Dutch  Envoy  and  the  English  Government  —  Caron's  inter-
view with  Elizabeth  —  The  Queen  promises  redress  of  grievances.

It  is  now  necessarj^  to  cast  a  glance  at  certain  negotia-
tions on  delicate  topics  which  had  nieaiitiine  been  occur-
ring between  Queen  Elizabeth  and  the  States.

England  and  the  republic  were  bound  together  by
ties  so  close  that  it  was  impossible  for  either  to  injure
the  other  without  inflicting  a  corresponding  damage  on
itself.  Nevertheless  this  very  community  of  interest,
combined  with  a  close  national  relationship  — for  in  the
European  family  the  K  etherlanders  and  English  were
but  cousins  twice  removed — with  similarity  of  pursuits,
with  commercial  jealousy,  with  an  intense  and  ever-
growing rivalry  for  that  supremacy  on  the  ocean  towards
which  the  monarchy  and  the  republic  were  so  earnestly
struggling,  with  a  common  passion  for  civil  and  religious
freedom,  and  with  that  inveterate  habit  of  self-assertion
— the  healthful  but  not  engaging  attribute  of  all  vigorous
nations — which  strongly  marked  them  both — was  rapidl}'
producing  an  antipathy  between  the  two  countries
which  time  was  likely  I'ather  to  deepen  than  efiace.
And  the  national  divergences  were  as  potent  as  the
traits  of  resemblance  in  creating  this  antagonism.

The  democratic  element  was  expanding  itself  in  the
republic  so  rapidly  as  to  stifle  for  a  time  the  oligarchical
principle  which  might  one  day  be  developed  out  of  tlie
same  matrix ;  while,  despite  the  hardy  and  adventurous
spirit  which  characterised  the  English  nation  through-
out all  its  grades,  there  was  never  a  more  intensely
aristocratic  influence  in  the  world  than  the  governing
and  directing  spirit  of  the  England  of  that  age.

It  was  impossible  that  the  courtiers  of  Elizabeth  and
the  burgher-statesmen  of  Holland  and  Frieslaud  should

VOL.  in.  M

162  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIf,

sympathise  with  each  other  in  sentiment  or  in  manner.
The  republicans  in  their  exuberant  conscioiisness  of
having  at  last  got  rid  of  kings  and  kingly  paraphernalia
in  their  own  land — for  since  the  rejection  of  the  sove-
reignty offered  to  France  and  England  in  1585  this
feeling  had  become  so  predominant  as  to  make  it  diffi-
cult to  believe  that  those  oilers  had  been  in  reality  so
recent — were  insensibly  adopting  a  frankness,  perhaps  a
roughness,  of  political  and  social  demeanour  which  was
far  from  palatable  to  the  euphuistic  formalists  of  other
countries.

Especially  the  English  statesmen,  trained  to  approach
their  sovereign  with  almost  Oriental  humility,  and  accus-
tomed to  exact  for  themselves  a  large  amount  of  de-
ference,^ could  ill  brook  the  free  and  easy  tone  occasionally
adopted  in  diplomatic  and  official  intercourse  by  these
upstart  republicans.  A  queen,  who  to  loose  morals,
imperious  dispositicm,  and  violent  temper  united  as
inordinate  a  personal  vanit}'  as  was  ever  vouchsafed  to
woman,  and  who  up  to  the  veige  of  decrepitude  was
addressed  by  her  courtiers  in  the  language  of  love-lorn
swain  to  blooming  shepherdess,^  could  naturally  find  but

'  The  Venetian  ambassador  Contaiini  goddess,  angel,  thus  adjurtd  for  pity,  had

relates  that  in  the  reign  of  James  I.  the  just  turned  lier  sixtieth  yi-ar.

great  nobles  of  England  were  served  at  The  Chevalier  Du  Maurier  relates  in

table  by  lackeys  on  their  knees.  his  memoirs  a  little  incident  which  he

2  Take,  for  example,  among  a  thousand  witnessed  when  residing  as  a  boy  near

similar  eiTusions,  the  language  used  by  the  Hague,  his  father  being  then  t'rench

Sir  Walter  Raleigli  at  exactly  the  period  envoy  to  the  Stiites ;  and  which  indicates

with  which  we  are  now  occupied:  that  the  rustic  and uncourtly  indepen-

"  I  that  was  wont  to  behold  her  riding  dence  of  the  repubhcans  had  not  dimin-

like  Alexander,  walking  like  Venus,  the  isbed  with  the  lapse  of  a  few  more  years,

gentle  wind  blowing  her  fair  hair  about  and  with  the  corresponding increase  of

her  pure  cheeks,  like  a  nymph ;  sometimes  popular  wealth  and  strength  throughout

sitting  in  the  shade  like  a  goddess,  some-  the  commonwealth. The  unlucky  elector

times  singing  like  an  angel,  sometimes  palatine,  ex-king  of  Bohemia,  a  refugee

playing  like  Orpheus. All  wounds  have  in  Holland  since  tlie  battle  of  Prague,  war>

scars  but  those  of  fantasy,  all  affections  hunting  hares  in  the  neighboin-hood  of  Du

their  relenting  but  those  of  womankind.  Maurier's  house. In  the  ardour  of  the

All  those  times  past,  the  loves,  the  siglis,  ch.ise,  Frederick,  having  intrudfd wit'..

the  sorrows, the  desires,  can they  not  dogs  and  horses  upon  the  turnip-field  of  a

weigh  down  one  frail  misfortune.'  Cannot  wealthy peasant, saw himselt pursued

one  drop  of  gall  be  hidden  in  so  great  with  loud  cries  by  the  incensed  proprietor,

heaps  of  sweetness?"  &c.  &c.  &c. "Do  accompanied  by  a  very  big  farm -servant.

with  me  now  therefore  what  you  list— I  Both were  armed  with  pitchforks,  and

»m  weary  of  life,"  &c.  &c.  &c. Sir  W.  tlie farmer himself presented  a truly

llaleigh to Sir R. Cecil, July, 1592.  respectable  as  well  as  formidable  appear-

(.Murdin  State  Papers,  ii.  657.) Let  it  be  ance,  dressed  as  he  happened  to  be  in  his

remembered that the Venus, nymph,  holiday suit of black Spanish broad-

1592. DISSATISFACTION  A]\:ONG  THE  NETIIEULANDEUS. 1()3

little  to  her  taste  in  the  hierarchy  of  Hans  Brewer  and
Huns  Baker.  Thus  her  Maje.sty  and  her  conrtiers,
accustomed  to  the  faded  galkxntries  with  which  the
serious  aftairs  of  State  were  so  grotesquely  intermingled,
took  it  ill  when  they  were  bluntly  informed,  for  in-
stance, that  the  State  council  of  the  Netherlands,  nego-
tiating on  Netherland  affairs,  could  not  permit  a  veto
to  the  representatives  of  the  queen,  and  that  this  same
body  of  Dutchmen  discussing  their  own  business  insisted
upon  talking  Hutch  and  not  Latin.

It  was  impossible  to  deny  that  the  young  Stadholder
was  a  gentleman  of  a  good  house,  but  how  could  the
insolence  of  a  common  citizen  like  John  of  Olden-
Barneveld  be  digested?  It  was  certain  that  behind
those  shaggy,  overhanging  brows  there  was  a  [)Owerfnl
brain  stored  with  legal  and  historic  lore,  which  supplied
eloquence  to  an  ever-ready  tongue  and  pen.  Yet  these
facts,  difficult  to  gainsay,  did  not  make  the  demands  t-o
frequently  uiged  by  the  States-General  upon  the  English
Government  for  the  enforcement  of  Dutch  rights  and  the
redress  of  English  wrongs  the  more  acceptable.

Bodley,  Gilpin,  and  the  rest  were  in  a  chronic  state
of  exasperation  with  the  Hollanders,  not  only  because
of  their  perpetual  complaints,  but  because  their  com-
plaints were  perpetually  just.

The  States-General  were  dissatisfied,  all  the  Nethei-
landers  were  dissatisfied  —  and  not  entirely  without
reason — that  the  English,  with  whom  the  republic  was
on  terms  not  only  of  friendship  but  of  alliance,  should
burn  their  ships  on  the  high  seas,  plunder  their  mer-

clotli,  with  an  nnder  jacket  of  Florence  Perhaps  it  was  as  well  for  the  progress

ratinet, adorned with massive silver  of  mankind — even  at  the  occasional  sacri-

lyi'tons. Flourishing  liis  pitchfork,  and  fice  of  courtesy  to  royalty  in  difficulties —

making  no  other  salutition,  he  bawled  that  there  should  liave  been  a  corner  of

out,  "  King  of  Bohemia,  King  of  liohemia,  the earth where the  theory  of  natural

what  do  you  mean  by  trampling  on  my  masters  and  guardians  for  the  people  had

turnips? Don't  you know how much  already  received  so  rude  a  shock  as  in

pains it  costs to plant and to weed  Holland,  and  where  not  only  the  boor  hut

them  ?  " The  luckless  son-in  law  of  the  the  boor's  turnips  were  safe  from  being

British  sovereign  had  notliing  for  it  but  trampled upon. What more poignant

to  apologize  for  the  trespass,  and  to  beat  satire  on  human  nature  than  is  contained

as  rapid  a  retreat  before  the  Dutch  farmer  in this very English  word  boor! Tiic

as  he  had  recently  done  before  the  Duke  builder, the planter, the creator — the

of  Lorraine  and  the  Emperor  Ferdinand.  Bauer  in  short — is  made  to  be  identical

Memoiresde  Messire  Aubcry  du  llaurier,  with  iho  vulgar  clown.
pp.  252,  253.

M 2

164

THE  UNITED  NETHPIRLANDS.

Chap.  XXVIL

chants,  and  torture  their  sea-captains  in  order  to  extort
ijiformation  as  to  the  most  precious  portions  of  their
cargoes.* Sharp language against such malpractices

5  "  Nommemcnt  que  pardessus  ung
iiombre  iiitini  de  pilleries,  forces  et  out-
r.iges,  certain  navire  de  Pierre  Piateoz,  au
commencement  de  ce  mois  venant  d'Ks-
liaigue  vers  ces  Provinces  Unies  charge
d'lme  grande  somme  d'argent  et  mar-
chandises  pre.cieuses  a  ete  force,  prins  et
mene  a  Plym"Uth  par  le  subject  de  V.
M.  le  Capitaine  Martin  Frobisber  avec
ung  aultre  uavire  charge  de  sel.  Lesquuls
navires  sout  tonus  comme  pour  boime
prinse  soubs  pretexte  premierement,
comme  nous  entendons,  que  le  diet  Pierre
se  seroit  mis  en  defence  contre  le  navire
de  v.  M.  lequel  il  na  cognu  ny  peu  cog-
noistre  pour  le  grand  nombre  de  la  diver-
site  des  navires  mesmes  des  pirates  qui
journellement  s'aydant  en  mer  du  nom
des  navires  et  gens  de  V.  M.  forcent  et
pillent  les  navires  et  marchandises  des
inhabitants  de  ce  pays  soubs  toute  couleur
et  pretexte  traictans  les  marlniers  de
toutes  sortes  de  tourments.  Et  seconde-
ment  qu'ils  disent  qu'en  iceux  deux
na\ires  auroient  este  quelques  biens  et
marchandises  appartenans  aux  Espagnols
ou  autres  subjects  et  tenants  le  parti  des
ennemis :  le  tout  contre  la  verite  et  dont
il  n'apparoistra  jamais  ainsi  que  le  les
proprietaires  et  mariniers  disent.  Ces
practiques  et  traverses  dont  ils  usent
journellement  meme  par  menaces,  con-
cussions et  violences  pour  faire  confesser
aux  boiis  gens  ce  quon  veuille  ou  de  les
constraindre  a  abandonner  leurs  biens  et
marchandises  ainsi  prinses,  sont  si  notoiree
et  en  si  grand  nombre  que  nous  tenons
tout  certain  qu'elles  sont  assez  cognues  et
decouvertes  et  indubitalilement  appa-
roistront  encores  avec  le  temps  plus
claireraent  a  V.  M.''  &c.  &c.  &c.  States-
General  to  the  Queen,  1  Nov.  1590.
(Hague  Archives  MS.)

"  11  n'y  a  chose  que  nous  faisons  avecq
plus  de  regret  que  de  molester  si  sou-
ventes  fois  V.  M.  par  nos  plainctes  a
iVndroict  des  doleances  des  marchants  de
ces  pays,  des  pilleries,  dommages  et  exces
que  leur  font  continuellement  en  mer  les
subjects  d'Icelle  par  pure  force  et  violence
sans  cause  ny  aulcune  raison,  au  lieu  de
I'ordre  et  remede  qui  leur  avoit  este  pro-
mis  et  asseure. D'aultant  que syavons

combien  cela  doibt  desplaire  a  une  Prin-
cesse  Chretieune  et  droicturiere  dont  V.
M.  est  si  renommee  par  tout  le  monde.
Mais  comme  voyons  les  diets  exces
s'accroistre  journellement  en  telles  exor-
bitances, et  plus  ni  moings  si  les  Anglais
s'estoient  declares  ennemis  de  ces  pays  et
fai»oient  leur  equippaige  tout  expres  pour
quant  nos  marcliands  ruiner,  aussi  du
tout  nostre  estat,  ou  du  moins  par  ce
moyen  le  mettre  en  rage  et  desespoir  du
peuple ;  si  comme  nous  est  apparu  par
verifications  legitimes  et  auctentiques
que  le  24^  du  mois  de  Mai  dernier  une
pinasse  nomme  le  Jeune  Lion  ou  estoit
capitaine  ung  appelle  Manser  et  deux
aultres  navires  Anglois  dont  I'ung  avoit
nom  Susan  et  estoit  commande  par  le
capitaine  Henry,  ont  sans  mot  sonner
furieusement  attaque  par  coups  d'artil-
lerie  et  investie  ung  navire  de  la  Veere
appelle  leGriphon,quiavoit  pour  marinier
Gole  Adriunszoen,  parti  auparavant  de
St.  Lucas  et  estoit  charge  de  grande
quantite  d'argent,  perles  et  conchenille  le
quel  ils  ont  entierement  spolie  et  pille
apres  qu'ils  avoient  faict  prisonniers  et
gehenne  inhumainement  plusieurs  de
ceulx  qui  y  estoient  dedans,  les  contrai-
gnants  de  signer  qu'ils  n'avoient  prins  que
dix-sept  sacqs  d'argent  et  huici  tonneaux
de  la  dicte  conch  n  He  en  lieu  de  cent  et
quinze  sacqs,  toutes  les  perles  et  con-
chenille ;  non  obstant  que  le  dit  maistre
marinier  leur  fait  voir  qu'ils  estoient  de
la  Vere  et  que  le  tout  appartenoit  a  des
marchands  de  Zelande,"  &c.  &c.  &c.
States-General  to  the  Queen,  26  June,
1592. (Hague  Archives  MS.)

"Outre  le  mescontement  que  les
peuples  ont  par  les  continuelles  larcins
et  pilleries  de  la  mer  par  oti  ils  sont
entierement  aUenez  de  I'affection  quils
souloient  porter  h  la  nation  Anglaise,"
&c.  &o.  &c.  Noel  de  Caron  to  the  Lord
Treasurer,  July,  1592.  (Hague  Archives
MS.)

"  The  merchants  of  Middleburgh  have
of  late  received  such  losses  as  they  say
by  our  countrymen  that  her  M.'s  letter
whereby  she  signifies  the  release  of  four
ships  is  not  medicine  strong  enough  any
way  to  appease  their  griefs. They  com-

1.59-'. DISSATISFACTION  AMONG  THE  NETIIERl.ANDLRS. 105

was  considered  but  proof  of  democratic  vulgarity.  Yet
it  would  be  hard  to  maintain  that  Martin  Frobisher,
Mansfield,  Grenfell,  and  the  rest  of  the  sea-kings,  Avitli
all  their  dash  and  daiing  and  patriotism,  were  not  as
miscrupulous  pirates  as  ever  sailed  blue  water,  or  that
they  were  not  apt  to  commit  their  depredations  upon
fiiend  and  foe  alike.

On  tbe  other  hand,  by  a  liberality  of  commerce
in  extraordinary  contrast  with  the  practice  of  modern
times,  the  Nelherlanders  were  in  the  habit  of  tiading
directly  with  the  arch-enemy  of  both  Holland  and
England,  even  in  the  midst  of  their  conflict  with  him,
and  it  was  complained  of  that  even  the  munitions  of
war  and  the  implements  of  navigation  by  which  Spain
had  been  enabled  to  effect  its  foot-hold  in  Brittany,  and
thus  to  threaten  the  English  coast,  were  derived  from
this  very  traffic*

pUin  of  two  ships  taken  on  the  coast  of
I'ljitugal  worth  30,000/.  sterling,  and  the
same  day  I  did  deliver  the  queen's  letter
they  had  already  had  news  of  the  taking
of  lour  ships  more  going  out  of  this  river
\vorth  as  they  say  as  much  as  the  other
two.  These  actions  make  them  almost
desperate,  as  1  will  write  more  at  large
unto  y"'  Lo. :  upon  the  return  of  the  de-
puties, which  they  of  Zeland  did  send
unto  Holl''  to  let  them  know  of  these
prisals,  and  to  take  some  course  for  it.
....  1  am  assured  that  before  this
happened  all  the  countrj'  except  Amster-
dam were  resolved  to  give  contentment
unto  the  queen  touching  the  articles  of
the  traffic.  What  tliey  will  now  do  I
know  not,  for  these  things  have  greatly
stirred  the  humours  here,  and  if  it  be
continued,  not  unlikely  that  some  incon-
venience may  happen  which  in  my
opinion  were  good  for  her  M.  to  foresee,
since  the  profit  comes  little,  us  far  as  I
can  see,  to  herself,  and  the  merchants  and
committee  of  these  towns,  who  are  the
men  that  most  affect  her  M.  and  hir
service,  will  have  their  hearts  alienated
from  her  if  they  see  their  goods,  which
is  their  life,  taken  from  them  by  her
M.'s  subjects,  where  they  look  to  be
protected  by  her."  Sir  R.  Sidney  to
Burghley,  29  Oct.  1590.  (S.  P.  Office
MS.)
*  "Touchant ce aue vous li.bvriez

prohiber  le  commerce  et  transportement
de  vivres  et  munitions  d'icy  en  Ksjiagne.
Qui  est  une  chose  practique  aussi  ouverte-
ment  et  hardiment  par  certains  marchands
de  Hollande  et  Zelande  que  s'il  ny  avoit
point  d'inimilie  entre  Ics  Kspaignols  et
eux.  Tenement  que  si  les  uavires  du
Roy  en  Biscaye  et  Gallice  Gales  et  aultres
parties  meridionales  d'Kspagne  n'eusseut
point  este  fournis  I'an  passe  et  ce  prin-
tems  de  poudre  et  de  cordage  par  les
marchands  de  ces  pays  cy,  ii'auroit  peu
envoyer  aulcunes  forces  en  Brolagiie.
Or  sur  ces  vostres  procedures  et  aultres
semblables  le  roy  de  France  et  shs  con-
seillers,  le  Prince  Dombes  son  lieutenant
en  Bretagne  et  son  anibassadeur  in
Angleterre,  et  de  faict  tous  honinies  en
general  tant  princes  qu'aullres  qui  on;  la
commune  cause  en  recommendation,  se
plaignent  grandenient  tous  les  jours  el
addressi'Ut  leurs  plaintes  a  S.  M.  ])rc-
sumans  qu'tUe  ayant  pris  la  protection
de  ces  pays  cy  pourroit  et  debvroit  par
ses  movens  et  aulhorite  redresser  uiig  si
notoire  desordre  pour  la  pTe^ervation
d'elle  mcsme  et  de  tous  ceux  qui
sont  touchez  en  mesme  cas.  Alesmes
dans  ce  peu  de  jours  ledlct  Arabassadeur
a  informe  S.  M.  d'une  grande  quantite
de  munitions  porte  ^  S.  Malo  et  Names
en  Bretagne  et  de  plus  de  20  navires
charges  de  ble  et  de  quelque  provision
de  poudre Ces  actions  illicites

166

THE  UNITED  NETHEKLANDS.

Chap.  XXVII.

The  Hollanders  replied  that,  according  to  their  con-
tract with  England,  they  were  at  libeity  to  send  as
many  as  forty  or  fifty  vessels  at  a  time  to  Spain  and
Portugal,  that  they  had  never  exceeded  the  stipulated
number,  that  England  freely  engaged  in  the  same
traffic  herself  with  the  common  enemy,  that  it  was  not
reasonable  to  consider  cordage  or  dried  fish  or  shocks
and  staves,  butter,  eggs,  and  corn  as  contraband  of  war,
that  if  the}'  were  illegitimate  the  English  trade  was
vitiated  to  the  same  degree,  and  that  it  would  be  utterly
hopeless  for  the  provinces  to  attempt  to  carry  on  the
war,  except  by  enabling  themselves,  through  the  widest
and  most  unrestricted  foreign  commerce,  even  including
the  enemy's  realms,  to  provide  their  nation  with  the
necessaiy  wealth  to  sustain  so  gigantic  a  conflict.^

ivndent  S.  M.  tellement  offensee  qu'elle
ptnsj  avoir  cause  de  se  repentir  d'avoir
oncques  pris  la  defence  de  ces  pays  centre
Ic  Roy  d'Kspagne,  considerant  que  les
avmes  et  les  forces  d'Jcelluy  par  beaucoiip
d'annees  ont  ete  entreienues  et  niain-
Kuues  en  ces  Pays  Bas  par  le  conimun
transportement  de  vivres  et  fourniture  de
guerre  a  Icelles  qui  s'est  faict  par  per-
nilssion  et  licence  d'icy,"  &c.  &c.  &c.
liodley  to  the  States-General,  2  June,
1591. (Hague  Archives,  MS.)

"  Quand  vous  aultres  pour  vos  advan-
tages pardculiers  laissez  fournir  de  toutes
sortes  de  conimodites  le  diet  ennenii  com-
mun  el  puissant,  et  a  ceste  heure  mesme
que  pour  I'amour  de  vous  nous  sommes
foreclose  de  lout  commerce  a  la  ruine
totale  de  pluj.ieursde  nos  subjects,  lesqiiels
(.'omme  ils  nous  ont  este  plus  chers  que
la  vie  ain^i  ne  pouvons  que  nous  ressentir
de  leurs  plain  les  touchant  les  traffiques
((ui  se  font  journellement  soubz  des  noms
enipriuites  et  simulez.ce  qui  s'est  directe-
ment  decouvert,"  &c.  &c.  &c.  Queen  to
the  States- General,  13  Feb.  1593.  (Hague
Archives  MS.)

5  "  Nous  n'avons  encore  peu  persuader
a  V.  M.  combien  le  transport  dc  quelques
vivres  ensemble  la  navigalion  el  Irafficq
avecq  et  vers  le  pays  de  West  impoitent
an  bien  et  conservation  de  noslre  estat.
Car  ny  ayant  mine  d'or  ni  d'autre  metal
f'S  diets  pays  dont  I'on  pourroit  lirer  les
frais  d'icelle  guerre,  d'aultre  part  I'atQu-
ence  annueUe  que  Dieu  ydonnede  beurre,
fromaKO et  quelques autres vivres, y

estant  par  Sa  divine  graca  si  abondante
que  la  dixiemc  part  ny  peult  estre  con-
sumee,  et  la  multitude  du  peuple  addonne
an  trafficque  et  manufacture  y  estant
grande  et  si  independante  que  faisant
tant  seulenient  le  moindre  semblant  de
les  y  vouloir  empesclier,  la  plus  grande
parlie  d'iceux  s'en  departiroit  vers  les
pays  voisins  tirani  quand  a  eulx  une  In-
finiie  de  navires  et  mariniers  comma
I'experience  a  assez  montre  mesme  du
tcms  du  dit  feu  Mons"'  le  Comte  de  Ley-
cester  que  nous  peult  on  imputcr  que  les
beneficions  et  en  tirons  les  moyens  de
nostre  conservaticin  ?  L'on  nous  objecte
que  les  notres  vout  querir  les  grains  en
Oostlande  et  les  meinent  vers  les  pays  de
West  subjects  a  I'enneuiy,  qu'icelluy  s'en
nourrit  et  foriifie.  Nous  le  croions,  mais
Ton  ne  nous  sauroit  persuader  (encores
que  le  trafficq  des  no4res  cessat)  que
ceulx  d'Oostlande  vouldroient  oil  pour-
raient  laisser  perir  I'alxindance  des  grains
y  croissant  annu>  Uemente  (qui  sont
presque  I'lmicque  nioyen  de  leur  trafficq
et  soutien  de  leur  vie)  et  que  sachant
qu'aill'-urs  y  en  auroit  disette  et  traitte,
eux  et  autrej  marcUants  et  mariniers  de
divers  roj'aunies  et  pays  ne  lea  y  irans-
porteut  et  ny  a  apparence  de  la  leur
pouvoir  empesclier  (quant  ce  ne  servit
que  pour  le  gaing  exorbitant  et  com-
moditez  qu'ils  en  tirent)  non  plus  que
d'empescher  le  Roy  d'Espagne  de  s'en
faire  jiouvoir  a  quelque  prix  que  ce  fust
d'illccq  01  d'ailleurs.  Kt  dependant  le
transj  ort  de  grains  cstrangcrs  d'icy,  que

1592. THE  BRITISH  GOVERNMENT  AND  THE  STATES.

107

Here  were  ever  flowing  fountains  of  bitterest  dis-
cus^ion  and  recrimination.  It  must  be  admitted  how-
ever that  there  was  occasionally  an  advantage  in  the
despotic  and  summary  manner  in  which  the  queen  took
matters  into  her  own  hands.  It  was  lefreshing  to  see
this  gi-eat  sovereign — who  was  so  well  able  to  grapple
with  questions  of  State,  and  wliose  very  impcriousiiess
of  temper  impelled  her  to  trample  on  shallow  sophisti'ies
and  specious  technicalities — dealing  diiectly  with  cases
of  piracy  and  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  the  counsellors,  who
in  that,  as  in  every  age,  were  too  prone  to  shove  by
international  justice  in  order  to  fulfil  municipal  forms.

It  was.  however,  with  much  difficulty  that  the  envoy
of  the  republic  was  able  to  obtain  a  direct  hearing  from
her  Majesty  in  order  to  press  the  long  list  of  complaints

deviendra  si  grande  quantite  qui  y  est  ?
puisque  par  la  grace  de  Dieu  ces  pays  en
produisfnt  aultant  et  plus  qu'il  en  fault
pour  la  nourriture  des  manans  d'iceulx.
Et  qui  croira  qu'on  y  amenera  d'aultres
pour  y  demourer  establiz  comma  en  ung

sacq  en  peril  de  sy  gaster Cepen-

dant  cesseroient  les  convois  et  licentes
d'entree  et  issue  (principal  revenu  de  ces
pays)  et  les  marchants  et  mariniers  qui
n'ont  aultre  moyen  de  vivre  et  nourrir
Ifurs  femmes  et  enfans  se  transporteroicnt
avec  leur  navires  en  Danemark,  Nor-
weghen,  Hambourg,  Dansig,  voire  menies

en  Pologne  et  ailleurs Dent

ensuivroit  non  seuleraent  tres  grande
diminution  des  imports  et  autres  moyens
destines  pour  I'enlritien  de  la  guerre,
mais  aussl  transport  et  alienation  des
navires  et mariniers  (principale force

de  ces  pays) 11  faut  que  ce  n'est

pas  par  gaiete  de  coeur  que  toutes  nos
terres,  maisons  rentes  et  aullres  bien  im-
meublcs,  mesmes  aussi  du  bestail,  nous
paions  liberalement  une  grande  partie  du
fruit  et  revenu  d'iceulx  et  que  de  nostre
manger,  boire,  vestemens,  chaufFage  et
autres  aonsumptions  pardessus  le  prix
nous  pai/ons  pour  impots  presqve  la
valeur  d'icelles.  Kt  toutes  fois  tout  cela
n'est  bastant  pour  en  fournir  la  moilie
des  frais  de  notre  guerre  sans  y  com-
prendre  une  infinite  de  dettes  es  quellos
le  pays  demeure  oblige  pardessus  toutes
autres  charges,  que  les  provinces  sup-
portent  a  I'entrttien  de  leurs  dicqucs
oscluses  et  depcndanrcs  contre  les  iiion-

dations  des  rivieres  et  de  la  mer  contre
lesqtiels  ils  soutiennent  aussi  coiiime  unt

continuelle  guerre 11  est  evident

qu'il  iiiiporte  singulierement  pour  la  con-
servation do  c^  s  dits  pays  et  service  de  la
cause  commune  que  la  navigation  et
trafficque  des  dits  vivres  demeurent
libres.  Et  supplions  tres  humblement
qu'il  plaise  a  V.  M.  donner  I'ordre  que
convient  a  ce  que  au  dehors  et  centre
icelluy  placcart  ladite  navigation  trafficq
et  transport  ne  soicnt  par  ces  subjects
aucuneiuent  empeschez  ou  soubs  quelque
pretexte  que  ce  soit  retardes,  mesmes
aus.sy  de  vouloir  relaxer  et  indemuer
ceux  qui  sont  encore  eiupesches  et  cn-
dommages,"  &c.  &c.  &c.  Stales-G  ncral
to  the  Queen,  4  May,  1592.  (Hague
Archives  MS.)

"  l)at  de  sfaten  eens  met  haer  geaccor-
deert  waion  dat  zy  maer  veertig  ofte
vyitig  schepen  tefFens  en  zouden  zcnden.

Nochtaens  dat  iclc  liaere  Mat.

mochte  verrekcren  datter  geen  vyitig
schepen  in  alle  de  vlote  naer  Spagnicn  en

wilden,  &c.  &c Want  ick  haer

verzekirde  dat  ons  Land  (Got  lof)
treffelycke  Coepluyden  hadde  die  t'  in
alien  eecken  van  der  werelt  b^sochten.
I)at  selfs  haere  natie  met  donse  td  Spaig-
nien  trafBcqueerde  endedat  douse  ondcrde
namenvan  de  Oosterlinghcn  Deynenende
andersints  nioesten  traiiicqueren,  anders
d.it  zy  in  groot  peryckel  waren  als  zy
ontdekt  wierdin,"  &c.  &c.  &c.  Caron
to  the  States-Geniral,  18  Nov.  1592.
(Hague  Archives  MS.)

16b  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XX\  II.

on  account  of  the  English  piratical  proceedings  upon
her  attention.  He  intimated  that  there  seemed  to  be
special  reasons  why  the  great  ones  about  her  throne
were  disposed  to  deny  him  access  to  the  qneen,  know-
ing as  they  did  in  what  intent  he  asked  for  interviews.
They  described  in  strong  language  the  royal  wrath  at
the  opposition  i-ecently  made  by  the  States  to  detaching
the  English  auxiliaries  in  the  Netherlands  for  the  ser-
vice of  the  French  king  in  Normandy,  hoping  thereby
to  deter  him  from  venturing  into  her  pres^ence  -with  a
list  of  grievances  on  the  part  of  his  Government.  "  I
did  my  best  to  indicate  the  danger  incurred  by  such
transferring  of  troops  at  so  critical  a  moment,"  said  Noel
de  Caron,  "  showing  that  it  was  directly  in  opposition
to  the  contract  made  with  her  Majesty.  But  I  got  no
answer  save  very  high  words  from  the  Lord  Treasurer,
to  the  eti'ect  that  the  States-General  were  never  willing
to  agree  to  any  of  her  Majesty's  propositions,  and  that
this  matter  was  as  necessary  to  the  States'  service  as  to
that  of  the  French  king.  In  effect,  he  said  peremptorily
that  her  Majesty  willed  it  and  would  not  recede  from
her  resolution.'"^

The  envoy  then  requested  an  interview  with  the
queen  before  her  departure  into  the  country.

Next  day,  at  noon,  Lord  Buighley  sent  word  that  she
28  July, was  to  leave  between  five  and  six  o'clock  that
1592. evening,  and  that  the  minister  would  be  wel-
come meantime  at  any  hour.

"  But  notwithstanding  that  I  presented  myself,"  said
Caron,  "  at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I  was  unable
to  speak  to  her  Majesty  until  a  moment  before  she  was
aboTit  to  mount  her  horse.  Her  language  was  then  "^^ery
curt.  She  persisted  in  demanding  her  troops,  and
strongly  expressed  her  dissatisfaction  that  we  should
have  refused  them  on  what  she  called  so  good  an  occa-
si(jn  for  using  them.  I  was  obliged  to  cut  my  replies
very  short,  as  it  was  already  between  six  and  seven
o'clock,  and  she  was  to  ride  nine  English  miles  to  the  place
where  she  was  to  pass  the  night.  I  was  quite  sensible,
however,  that  the audience was  arranged  to  be  thus

«  "In  ctTocte  zeyde  absolutelycken  dat States-General,  30  July, 1592. (Hague
H;ier  Mat  die  liegeerde,  ende  van  der  re- Archives  MS.)
wjlutie  nict  soude  afstaen." — Caron  to  the

159:.  DISCL^SSION  OF  COMPLAINTS.  169

brief,  in  order  that  T  should  not  be  able  to  stop  long
enough  to  give  trouble,  and  perhaps  to  find  occasion  to
renew  our  complaints  touching  the  plunderiugs  and
robberies  committed  upon  us  at  sea.  This  is  what  some
of  the  great  personages  here,  without  doubt,  are  afraid
of,  for  they  were  wonderfully  well  overhauled  in  my
last  audience.  I  shall  attempt  to  speak  to  her  again
before  she  goes  very  deep  into  the  country."'

It  was  not  however  before  the  end  of  the  year,  after
Caron  had  made  a  voyage  to  Holland  and  had  returned,
that  he  was  able  to  bring  the  subject  thoroughly  14  Nov.
before  her  Majestj^  On  the  14th  November  ^^'•'2-
he  had  preliminary  interviews  with  the  Lord  High
Admiral  and  the  Lord  Treasurer  at  Hampton  Court,
where  the  Queen  was  then  residing.  The  plundering
business  was  warmly  discussed  between  himself  and  the
Admiral,  and  there  was  much  quibbling  and  special
pleading  in  defence  of  the  practices  which  had  created
80  much  irritation  and  pecuniary  loss  in  Holland.
The^-e  was  a  good  deal  of  talk  about  want  of  evidence
and  conflict  of  evidence,  which,  to  a  man  who  felt  as
sure  of  the  facts  and  of  the  law  as  the  Dutch  envoy  did
—unless  it  were  according  to  public  law  for  one  friend
and  ally  to  plunder  and  burn  the  vessels  of  another
friend  and  ally — was  not  encouraging  as  to  the  proba-
ble issue  of  his  interview  with  her  Majesty.  It  would
V)e  tedious  to  report  the  conversation  as  fully  as  it  was
laid  by  Noel  de  Caron  before  the  States-General ;  but
at  last  the  admiral  expressed  a  hope  that  the  injured
parties  would  be  able  to  make  good  their  case.  At  any
rate  he  assured  the  envoy  that  he  would  take  care  of
Captain  Mansfield  for  the  present,  who  was  in  prison
with  two  other  captains,  so  that  proceedings  might  be
had  against  them  if  it  was  thouglit  worth  while.*

Caron  answered  with  Dutch  bluntness.  "I  recom-
mended him  very  earnestly  to  do  this,"  he  said,  "  and
told  him  roundly  that  this  was  by  all  means  necessary

'  Carun  to  the  States-Genoral,  30  July,  t?r  zee  te  vernyruwen  twcick  soniinigc

1592. "  Enimers  ick  hebbe  wel  gevotlt  groote allhier zoiidcr twyffel vreesen.

dat  deze  audienile  voor  my  zoo  coit  geap-  Want  zy  wondcrlyckcn zeer  overhaelt

posteen  was  omme  dat  ick  haer  niet  te  wii-nicn  in  niyne  leste  aiulicniic,"  &c.  &c.

lange  zoude  blyvuii  troubleren  ende  mis-  *  Canm  to  th.'  Stat('s-(ifn('ral,  la  Nuv.

cliicn occa^ie crygcn om onse  clagten  1592. (Hague  Archives  MS.)
nopende  de  plondefiiigen tnde roveri'  n

170  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVII,

for  the  sake  of  his  own  honour.  Otherwise  no  man
could  ever  be  made  to  believe  that  his  Excellency  was
not  seeking  to  get  his  own  profit  out  of  the  affair.  But
he  vehemently  swore  and  protested  that  this  was  not
the  case."^

He  then  went  to  the  Lord  Treasurer's  apartment,
where  a  long  and  stormy  interview  followed  on  the
subject  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  English  troops.  Caron
warmly  insisted  that  the  measure  had  been  full  of
danger  for  the  States ;  that  they  had  been  ordered  out
of  Prince  Maurice's  camp  at  a  most  critical  moment ;
that,  had  it  not  been  for  the  Stadholder's  promptness
and  military  skill,  very  gi-eat  disasters  to  the  common
cause  must  have  ensued  ;  and  that,  after  all,  nothing
had  been  done  by  the  contingent  in  any  other  field,  fur
they  had  been  fur  six  months  idle  and  sick,  without
ever  reaching  Brittany  at  all.

"  The  Lord  Treasurer,  who,  contrary  to  his  custom,"
said  the  envoy,  "  had  been  listening  thus  long  to  wliat
I  had  to  say,  now  observed  that  the  States  had  treated
her  Majesty  very  ill,  that  they  had  kept  her  running
after  her  own  troops  nearly  half  a  year,  and  had  offered
no  excuse  for  their  proceedings."^"

It  would  be  superfluous  to  repeat  the  arguments  by
which  Caron  endeavoured  to  set  forth  that  the  English
troops,  sent  to  the  Netherlands  according  to  a  special
cotnjjact,  for  a  special  service,  and  for  a  special  consi-
deration and  equivalent,  could  not  honestly  be  employed,
contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  States -General,  upon  a
totally  different  service  and  in  another  country.  The
queen  willed  it,  he  was  informed,  and  it  was  ill-treat-
ment of  her  Majesty  on  the  part  of  the  Hollanders  to
oppose  her  will. This  argument  was  unanswerable.

Soon  afterwards,  Caron  was  admitted  to  the  presence
of  Elizabeth,  He  delivered,  at  first,  a  letter  from  the
States-General,  touching  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops.
The  queen  instantly  broke  the  seal  and  read  the  letter
to the end. Coming to the concluding passage, in

9  "  Ick  hebbe  hem  tzelve  zeer  ernste-  zyne proufiBt gedoen. Zoo  hy  hooche-

lycken  gerecommandeert  ende  hem  ron-  lyken  swoer  ende  protesteerde dat  hy

delyck  uiigeseyt  dat  zulcx  cm  zyn  eere-  niet  en  hadde  nochte  oock  en  zoude  wil-

wilie  allesints  betaemde  anders  dat  men  len  doen." Caron  to  the  States-General,

nyeraant  en  sonde  connen  doen  gelooven  18  Nov.  1592. (Hague  Archives  MS.)

oft  zyne  E.  en  zoude  willen  in  dese  zaecke  w  Ibid.

1592.  CARON'S  INTlT.VIEW  WITH  ELIZABCTH.  171

whicli  the  States  observed  that  tliey  had  great  and  just
cause  highly  to  complain  on  that  subject,  she  paused,
reading  the  sentences  over  twice  or  thrice,  and  then
remarked  :

"Truly  these  are  comical  people."  I  have  so  often
been  complaining  that  they  refused  to  send  my  troops,
and  now  the  States  complain  that  they  are  ol)liged  to
let  them  go.  Yet  my  intention  is  only  to  borrow  them
for  a  little  while,  because  I  can  give  my  brother  of
France  no  better  succour  than  by  sending  him  these
soldiers,  and  this  I  consider  better  than  if  1  should  send
him  four  thousand  men.  I  say  again,  I  am  only  borrow-
ing them,  and  surely  the  States  ought  never  to  make
such  complaints,  when  the  occasion  was  such  a  favour-
able one,  and  they  had  received  already  sufficient  aid
frt)m  these  troops,  and  had  liberated  their  whole  country.
I  don't  comprehend  these  grievances.  They  complain
that  I  withdraw  my  people,  and  meantime  they  are  still
holding  them  and  have  brought  them  ashore  again.
They  send  me  frivolous  excuses  that  the  skip|iers  don't
know  the  road  to  my  islands,  which  is,  after  all,  as  easy
to  find  as  the  way  to  Caen,  for  it  is  all  one.  1  have  also
sent  my  own  pilots ;  and  I  complain  bitterly  that  by
making  this  difficulty  they  will  cause  the  loss  of  all
Brittany.  The}'  run  with  their  people  far  away  from
me,  and  meantime  they  allow  the  enemy  to  become
master  of  all  the  coasts  lying  opposite  me.  But  if
it  goes  badly  with  me  they  will  rue  it  deeply  them-
selves."^^

There  was  considei-able  reason,  even  if  theie  were  but
little  justice,  in  this  strain  of  lemarks.  Her  Majesty
continued  it  for  some  liiile  time  longer,  and  it  is  in-
teresting to  see  the  diiect  and  personal  manner  in  which
this  great  princess  handled  the  weightiest  affairs  of
state.  The  transfer  of  a  dozen  companies  of  English
infantry  from  Friesland  to  Brittany  was  su]iposed  to  be
big  with  the  fate  of  France,  England,  and  the  Dutch
republic,  and  was  the  subject  of  long  and angry  con-

11  "  Voor  wapr  zy  zyn  schacke  luyden."  Dutch,  it  is  not  possible  to  give  the  exact

Caron  to  the  States-General,  18  Nov.  1592.  word  which  the  queen  used. It  may  be

(Hague  Archives  MS.) The  conversation  rendered  crafty,  queer,  droll,  cunning,  or

was  of  course  in  French,  but  as  the  envoy  funny,

made  his  report  to  the  States-General  in  12  xbia.

172  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXVII.

troversy,  not  as  a  contested  point  of  principle  in  regard
to  which  numbers,  of  couiise,  are  nothing,  but  as  a
matter  of  practical  and  pressing  importance.

"  Her  Majesty  made  many  more  observations  of  this
nature,"  said  Caron,  "but  without  getting  at  all  into  a
pa.ssion,  and,  in  my  opinion,  her  discourse  was  sensible,
and  she  spoke  with  more  moderation  than  she  is  wont
at  other  times."  ^*

The  envoy  then  presented  the  second  letter  from  the
States-General  in  regard  to  the  outrages  inflicted  on  the
Dutch  merchantmen.  The  queen  read  it  at  once,  and
expressed  herself  as  very  much  displeased  with  her
people.  She  said  that  she  had  received  similar  infor-
mation from  Counsellor  Bodley,  who  had  openly  given
her  to  understand  that  the  enormous  outrages  which  her
people  were  committing  at  sea  upon  the  Netherlanders
were  a  public  scandal.  It  had  made  her  so  angry,  she
said,  that  she  kiiew  not  which  way  to  turn.  She  would
take  it  in  hand  at  once,  for  she  would  rather  make  oath
never  more  to  permit  a  single  ship  of  war  to  leave  her
ports  than  consent  to  such  thieveries  and  villanies.  She
told  Caron  that  he  would  do  well  to  have  his  case  in
regard  to  these  matters  verified,  and  then  to  give  it  into
her  own  hands,  since  otherwise  it  would  all  be  denied
her  and  she  would  find  herself  unable  to  get  at  the
truth.i*

"  I  have  all  the  proofs  and  documents  of  the  merchants
by  me,"  replied  the  envoy,  "  and,  moreover,  several  of
the  sea-captains  who  have  been  robbed  and  outraged
have  come  over  with  me,  as  likewise  some  merchants
who  were  tortured  by  burning  of  the  thumbs  and  other
kinds  of  torments."^''

13  "Doch sender haer  eenighsints  te  hadde  datse  niet  wiste  waer  haer  keeren,

moveren,  dan  naer  myns  bedunkens  dis-  datse  oock  eens  voor  haer  zoude  nemeu

cours  gewys  eiide  veel  meerder  mode-  eude  liever  versweren  niuimermeer  meer

ratie  dan  zy  op  ander  tyden  wel  was  te  conseuteren  eenich  schip  van  ourlogen

gewnon." Caron  to  the  States-General,  te  lalen  uitgaen  dan  occasie  van  zulcke

18  Nov.  1592. (Hague  Archives  MS.)  dievereyen  ende  schelraeryen  te  conseu-

1*  "  Endi'  haer  zeer  tonvreden  gchuuden  teren,  dat  ick  daeromme  wel  zoude  doen

jegeiis  haer  volck,  seyde  oock  diergelyck  myn  zaecke  in  dit  regard  te  doen  verifie-

virstaen te  hebben  van  den  Raeisheer  ren,  ende  t'zelve  haer  in  handen  te  geven,

Itodley  die  haer  opentlycken  adverteerde  wantanders  men  tzelve  haer  al  ontkende

ilat  het  een  open  schandael  was  te  ver-  ende  daer  geensints  tuschen  en conste

Btaeu  d'enorme  stukken  die  haer  volck  ter  geraeken." Ibid.

zee op  de onsen  waren  doende,  twelck  is  "  Ick  zeyde  aen  haere  Ma'  dat  irk

i^bOu  sy  seyde)  haer  zik>  tornich  gemaeckt  alle  de  bewysen  code  documenien  van  de

1592.  THE  QUEEN'S  PKO-MISE  OF  REDIIESS.  173

This  disturbed  the  qneeii  very  nnxch,  and  she  ex-
pressed her  wish  that  Caron  should  nut  allow  himself  to
be  put  off  with  delays  by  the  council,  but  should  insist
upon  all  dut  criminal  punishment,  the  infliction  of
which  she  promised  in  the  strongest  terms  to  order ;
for  she  could  never  enjoy  peace  of  mind,  she  said,  so
long  as  such  scoundrels  were  tolerated  in  her  kingdom,'^

The  envoy  had  brought  with  him  a  summary  of  the
cases,  with  the  names  of  all  the  merchants  interested,
and  a  list  of  all  the  marks  on  the  sacks  of  money  which
had  been  stolen.  The  queen  looked  over  it  very  care-
fully, declaring  it  to  be  her  intention  that  there  should
be  no  delays  interposed  in  the  conduct  of  this  affair  by
forms  of  special  pleading,  but  that  speedy  cognizance
should  be  taken  of  the  whole,  and  that  the  propert}^
should  forthwith  be  restored."

She  then  sent  for  Sir  Robert  Cecil,  whom  she  directed
to  go  at  once  and  tell  his  father,  the  Lord  Treasurer,
that  he  was  to  assist  Caron  in  this  afi'air  exactly  as  if  it
were  her  own.  It  was  her  intention,  she  said,  that  her
people  were  in  no  wise  to  trouble  the  Hollanders  in  legi-
timate mercantile  pursuits.  She  added  that  it  was  not
enough  for  her  people  to  say  that  they  had  only  been
seizing  Spaniards'  goods  and  money,  but  she  meant  that
they  should  prove  it,  too,  or  else  they  should  swing
for  W

Caron  assured  her  Majesty  that  he  had  no  other  com-
mission fiom  his  masters  than  to  ask  for  justice,  and  that
he  had  no  instructions  to  claim  Spanish  property  or
enemj^'s  goods.  He  had  brought  sufficient  evidence
with  him,  he  said,  to  give  her  Majesty  entire  satisfac-
tion.

coopluyden by  my  hadde,  oyck mede  "*  "Dede dien volgende roupen Sir

datter  eenige  scliippers  die  meu  bcroolt  Robert  Cecil  die  zy  belaste  aen  den  Tre-

eiide  geoultrageen  hadde  met  my  waren  sorier  zynen  vadcr  te  gaen  zcggen  dat  hy

geciimmen,  oock  coopluyden  die  men  de  my  hieiinne  zoude  assioteren  al  oft  haer

duymen  hadde  gebrant  ende  andere  tor-  eygen  zaecke  waere,  want  huere  intentie

mentcn  van  pjiiigen  aen  hadde gedaen,  (zoo  zy  zeyde)  niet  en  was  dat  men  ens

tvvelck  haer  oock  zeer  on tstelde,"  &c,  &c.  eenigsins in  onse  coophandelinge  sonde

ftc. Caron  to  the  States-General,  18  Nov.  troubleren  als  wy  dacriiine  op  recht  han-

1592. (Hague  Archives  MS.)  deldon.  Seyde  oock  dat  haer  niet  genoeck

10  "Seggende  dat zy  in gerusticheyt  en  was  dai  haer  volck  zeyde  dat  seSpaig-

niet  conde  geleven  als  men  zulcke  schel-  naerts  gelt  ende  goetgeattrajjeert  hadden,

men  in  haer  Rycke  langer  zoude  verdra-  maer  ver.^tont  dat  zy  tzelve  zouden  doen

gen." Ibid.  biycken  ofte  met  hareii  haU  betaelen."

»■  Ibid.  Ibid.

17-1  THE  UNITED  NtTHERLANDS. Ciiai'.  XXVII.

It  is  not  necessary  to  pursue  the  subject  any  fur-
ther. The  great  nobles  still  endeavoured  to  interpose
delays,  and  urged  the  propriety  of  taking  the  case
before  the  common  couits  of  law.  Caron,  strong  in
the  support  of  the  qiieen,  insisted  that  it  sh(j;ild  be
settled,  as  her  Majesty  had  commanded,  by  the  council,
and  it  was  finally  arranged  that  the  judge  of  admiralty
should  examine  the  evidence  on  both  sides,  and  then  com-
municate the  documents  at  once  to  the  Lord  Tieasurer.
Meantime  the  money  was  to  be  deposited  with  certain
aldermen  of  London,  and  the  accused  parties  kept  in
prison.  The  ultimate  decision  was  then  to  be  made  by
the  council,  "  not  by  form  of  process,  but  by  commission
thereto  ordained."  ^^  In  the  course  of  the  many  inter-
views which  followed  between  the  Dutch  envoy  and  the
privy  counsellors,  the  Lord  Admiral  stated  that  an  Eng-
lish merchant  residing  in  the  Netherlands  had  sent  to
offer  him  a  present  of  two  thousand  pounds  sterling,  in
case  the  affair  should  be  decided  against  the  Hollanders.
He  communicated  the  name  of  the  individual  to  Caron
undersea!  of  secrecy,  and  reminded  tlie  Lord  Treasurer
that  he  too  had  seen  the  letter  of  the  Englishman.  Lord
Burghley  observed  that  he  remembered  the  fact  that
certain  letters  had  been  communicated  to  him  by  the
Lord  Admiral,  but  that  he  did  not  know  from  whence
they  came,  nor  anything  about  the  person  of  the
writer.^"

The  case  of  the  plundered  merchants  was  destined  to
drag  almost  as  slowly  before  the  council  as  it  might
have done  in  the ordinary  tribunals,  and Caron  was

1'  Caron  to  thfi  States-General,  18  Nov.  Adrairael zeyde  dat  het een Engelsch

1592. (Hague  Archives  MS.) Also  Same  Coopman  was  die  hy  oock  noemde. Doch

to  Same,  12  Dec.  1592. (Hague  Archives  detie  my  erst  belooven  dat  ick  bem  niet

MS.)  en  zoude  willen  ontdecken,  zal  daeromme

20  "Den  grooten  Admirael  began  we-  synen  naem  hiernaergelaten  worden,  ter

deromme  te  segg^-nvan  zyneadverteniien  wylen ick  oock  tzelve alsoo beloofde,

die  hy  op  dil  s.uck  sell's  hadde  gecrygen  muer  nocht  ans  adviseren  zulcke  ordre

uit  Zeelant,  dat  eenige  Coopluyden  hem  daerinne te  stellen als  den  dienst  van

hiidden duen  preseiiteren twee  duysent  den lande  wel is  verbeyschende. Den

pond  sterlincx,  seggende totten  grooten  Admirael zeyde  oock  dat  hy  wel  wiste

Tresorier  dat  hy  bem selfs  de brieven  dat  den  zelven  Coopman  alreede  derwacrts

hadde gecommuniceert die darop  ant-  over  in  dangiere  hadde  geweest,  twelck

woorde wel  brieven  gesien te hebben,  my  dede  antwoorden  dat  hydan  voerdees

maer  wiste  niet  van  wiens  die  quamen  tyt  voor  sulcx  most  wesen  bekant." Ke-

doerdien  by  den  persoon  die  dezelve  ges-  port of Caron to the SUites-General.

creven hadde niet en kende,  vraegde  10  Deo.  1592. (Hague  Archives  ilS.)
daeromme  van  wat  natie  hy  was,  deu

1592.  JUSTICE  DONE  TO  THE  SUFFERERS.  175

"  kept  running,"  as  he  expresssed  it,  "  from  the  court  to
London,  and  from  London  to  the  cjiirt,"  and  it  was  long
before  justice  was  done  to  the  sutierers.^^  Yet  the  ener-
getic manner  in  which  the  queen  took  the  case  into  her
own  hands,  and  the  intense  indignation  with  which  she
denounced  the  robberies  and  outrages  whicli  had  been
committed  by  her  subjects  upon  her  friends  and  allies,
were  effective  in  restraining  such  wholesale  piracy  in
the  future.

On  the  whole,  however,  if  the  internal  machiner}'  is
examined  by  which  the  masses  of  mankind  were  moved
at  this  epoch  in  various  parts  of  Christendom,  we  shall
not  find  much  reason  to  applaud  the  conformity  of
Governments  to  the  principles  of  justice,  reason,  or
wisdom.

21  Letters  and  reports  of  Caron,  to  the  States-General, 10  Dec.  1592. (Haguo
Archives  HIS.)  ,

176  THE  UiNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

CHAPTEE XXVIIl.

Influence  of  the  rule  and  character  of  Philip  II.— Heroism  of  the  sixteenth  century
—Contest  for  the  French  throne— Cliaracter  and  policy  of  the  Duke  of  Mayei.r'p—
Escape  of  the  I)iike  of  Guise  from  Castle  Tours — Propositions  for  the  marriage  ot
the  Infanta — Plotting  of  the  Cathohc  part}' — Grounds  of  Philip's  pretensions  to  the
crown  of  France — Motives  of  the  Duke  of  Parma  maligned  by  Commander  Morio
— He  justifies  himself  to  the  king — View  of  the  private  relations  between  Philip
and  the  Duke  of  Mayenne  and  their  sentiments  towards  eacli  other — Disposition  of
the  French  politicians  and  soldiers  towards  Philip — Peculiar  commercial  pursui's
of  Philip — Confused  state  of  affairs  in  France — Treachery  of  Philip  towards  the
Duke  of  Parma — Recall  of  the  Duke  to  Spain — His  sufferings  and  death.

The  People — which  has  been  generally  regarded  as
something  naturally  below  its  rulers,  and  as  bom  to  be
protected  and  governed,  paternally  or  otherwise,  by  an
accidental  selection  from  its  own  species,  which  by  some
mysterious  process  has  shot  up  much  nearer  to  heaven
than  itself — is  often  described  as  brutal,  depraved,  self-
seeking,  ignorant,  passionate,  licentious,  and  greedy.

It  is  fitting,  therefore,  that  its  protectors  should  be
distinguished,  at  great  epochs  of  the  world's  history,  by
an  absence  of  such  objectionable  qualities.

It  mi;st  be  confessed,  however,  that  if  the  world  had
waited  for  heroes  during  the  dreary  period  which  fol-
lowed the  expulsion  of  something  that  was  called
Henry  III.  of  France  from  the  gates  of  his  capital,  and
especially  during  the  time  that  followed  hard  upon  the
decease  of  that  embodiment  of  royalty — its  axis  must
have  ceased  to  turn  for  a  long  succession  of  years.  The
Bearnese  was  at  least  alive,  and  a  man.  He  played  his
part  with  consummate  audacity  and  skill ;  but  alas  for  an
epoch  or  a  country  in  which  such  a  shape — notwithstand-
ing all  its  engaging  and  even  commanding  qualities — is
looked  upon  as  an  incarnation  of  human  greatness !

But  the  chief  mover  of  all  things — as  far  as  one  man
can  be  prime  mover — was  still  the  diligent  scribe  who
lived  in  the  Escorial.  It  was  he  whose  high  mission  it
was  to  blow  the  bellows  of  civil  war,  and  to scatter

1592,  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  RULE  OF  PHILIP  II.  177

curses  over  what  had  once  been  the  smiling  abodes  of
human  creatures,  throughout  the  leading  countries  of
Christendom.  The  thi'one  of  France  was  vacant,  nomi-
nally as  well  as  actually,  since  the  year  1589,  During
two-and-twenty  years  preceding  that  epoch  he  had
scourged  the  provinces,  once  constituting  the  richest  and
most  enlightened  portions  of  his  hereditary  domains,
upon  the  theory  that  without  the  Spanish  Inqui.sition  no
material  prosperity  was  possil)le  on  earth,  nor  any
entrance  permitted  to  the  realms  of  bliss  beyond  the
grave.  Had  every  Netherlander  consented  to  burn  his
Bible,  and  to  be  burned  himself  should  he  be  found
listening  to  its  holy  precepts  if  read  to  him  in  shop,  cot-
tage, farm-house,  or  castle ;  and  had  he  furthermore
consented  to  renounce  all  the  liberal  institutions  which
his  ancestors  had  earned,  in  the  struggle  of  centuries,  by
the  sweat  (;f  their  brows  and  the  blood  of  their  hearts ;
his  benignant  proprietor  and  master,  who  lived  at  the  ends
of  the  earth,  would  have  consented  at  almost  any  moment
to  peace.  His  arms  were  ever  open.  Let  it  not  be  sup-
posed that  this  is  the  language  of  sarcasm  or  epigram.
Stripped  of  the  decorous  sophistications  by  which  human
beings  are  so  fond  of  concealing  their  naked  thoughts
from  each  other,  this  was  the  one  simple  dogma  always
propounded  by  Philip,  Grimace  had  done  its  worst,
however,  and  it  was  long  since  it  had  exercised  any
power  in  the  Netherlands.  The  king  and  the  Dutchmen
understood  each  other ;  and  the  plain  truths  with  Avhich
those  republicans  answered  the  imperial  proffers  of
mediation,  so  frequently  renewed,  were  something  new,
and  perhaps  not  entirely  unwholesome  in  diplomacy.

It  is  not  an  inviting  task  to  abandon  the  comparatively
healthy  atmosphere  of  the  battle-field,  the  blood-stained
swamp,  the  murderous  trench — where  human  beings,
even  if  communing  only  by  bullets  and  pu^^h  of  pike,
were  at  least  dealing  truthfully  with  each  othei- — and  to
descend  into  those  subterranean  regions  where  the
effluvia  of  falsehood  becomes  almost  too  foul  for  ordinary
human  organization.

Heroes  in  those  days,  in  any  country,  thei'e  were  few,
William  the  Silent  was  dead,  De  la  None  was  dead.
Duplessis-Mornay  was  living,  but  his  influence  over  his
royal  master  was rapidly  diminishing, Cecdl,  Hattou,

VOL. III.  N

178  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIil.

Essex,  Howard,  Ealeigh,  James  Croft,  Valentine  Dale,
John  Norris,  Eoger  Williams,  the  "  Virgin  Queen  "  her-
self— does  one  of  these  chief  agents  in  public  affairs,  or
do  all  of  them  together,  furnish  a  thousandth  part  of
that  heroic  whole  which  the  England  of  the  sixteenth
century  presents  to  every  imagination?  Maurice  of
Nassau— excellent  soldier  and.  engineer  as  he  hid  already
proved  himself — had  certainly  not  developed  much  of
the  heroic  element,  although  thus  far  he  was  walking
straightforward  like  a  man,  in  the  path  of  duty,  with
the  pithy  and  substantial  Lewis  \Villiam  ever  at  his
side.  Olden-Barneveld — tough  burgher-statesman,  hard-
headed,  indomitable  man  of  granite — was  doing  more
work,  and  doing  it  more  thoroughly,  than  any  living
politician,  but  he  was  certainly  not  of  the  mythological
brotherhood  who  inhabit  the  serene  regions  of  space
beyond  the  moon.  He  was  not  the  son  of  god  or  god-
dess, destined,  after  removal  from  this  sphere,  to  shine
with  planetary  lustre,  among  other  constellations,  ujoon
the  scenes  of  mortal  action.  Those  of  us  who  are  will-
ing to  rise — or  to  descend,  if  the  phrase  seems  wiser —
to  the  idea  of  a  self-governing  people  must  content  our-
selves, for  this  epoch,  with  the  fancy  of  a  hero-people
and  a  people-king.

A  plain  little  republic,  thnisting  itself  uninvited  into
the  great  political  family-party  of  heaven-anointed
sovereigns  and  long  descended  nobles,  seemed  a  some-
what repulsive  phenomenon.  It  became  odious  and
dangerous  when  by  the  blows  it  could  deal  in  battle,  the
logic  it  could  chop  in  council,  it  indicated  a  remote
future  for  the  world,  in  which  right-divine  and  regal
paraphernalia  might  cease  to  be  as  effective  stage-pro-
perties as  they  had  always  been  considered.

Yet  it  will  be  difficult  for  us  to  find  the  heroic  indi-
vidualized very  perceptibly  at  this  period,  look  where
we  may.  Already  there  seemed  ground  for  questioning
the  comfortable  fiction  that  the  accidentally  dominant
families  and  castes  were  by  nature  wiser,  better,  braver
than  that  much-contemned  entity,  the  People.  What  if
the  fearful  heresy  should  gain  ground  that  the  People
was  at  least  as  wise,  honest,  and  brave  as  its  masters?
What  if  it  should  become  a  recognised  fact  that  the  great
individuals  and  castes,  whose  wealth  and station  fur-

1592.  CONTEST  FOR  THE  THRONE  OF  FRANCE.  179

nisbed  them  with  ample  time  and  means  for  perlecting
themselves  in  the  science  of  guvernment,  were  rather
devoting  their  leisure  to  the  systematic  filling  of  their
own  pockets  than  to  the  hiving  up  of  knowledge  for  the
good  of  their  fellow  creatures  ?  What  if  the  whole
theory  of  hereditary  superiority  should  suddenly  exhale?
What  if  it  were  found  out  that  we  were  all  fellow- wo rm,«
together,  and  that  those  which  had  crawled  highest  were
not  necessarily  the  least  slimy  ?

Meantime  it  will  be  well  for  us,  in  order  to  under-
stand what  is  called  the  Past,  to  scrutinize  somewhat
closely  that  which  was  never  meant  to  be  revealed.  To
know  the  springs  which  once  controlled  the  world's
movements,  one  must  ponder  the  secret  thoughts,  pur-
poses, aspiiations,  and  baffled  attempts  of  the  few  dozen
individuals  who  once  claimed  that  world  in  fee-simple.
Such  researches  are  not  in  a  cheerful  field ;  for  the
sources  of  history  are  rarely  fountains  of  crystal,  bub-
bling through  meadows  of  asphodel.  Vast  and  ntjisome
are  the  many  sewers  which  have  ever  run  beneath
decorous  Christendom.

Some  of  the  leading  military  events  in  France  and
Flanders,  patent  to  all  the  woi'ld,  which  grouped  them-
selves about  the  contest  for  the  French  throne,  as  the
central  point  in  the  history  of  Philip's  proposed  world-
empire,  have  already  been  indicated.

It  was  a  species  of  triangular  contest — so  far  as  the
chief  actors  were  concerned — for  that  vacant  throne.
Philip,  Mayenne,  Henry  of  Navarre,  with  all  the  adroit-
ness which  each  possessed,  were  playing  for  the  splendid
jDrize.

Of  Philip  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak.  The  preceding
volumes  of  this  work  have  been  written  in  vain,  if  the
reader  has  not  obtained  from  irrefragable  testimony —
the  monarch's  own  especially— a  sufficient  knowledge  of
that  human  fetish  before  which  so  much  of  contemporary-
humanity  grovelled.

The  figure  of  Navarre  is  also  one  of  the  most  familiar
shapes  in  history.

As  for  the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  he  had  been,  since  the
death  of  his  brother  the  Balafre,  ostensible  leader  of
the  League,  and  was  playing,  not  without  skill,  a  triple
game.

N  2

180  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI.

Firstly,  he  hoped  for  the  throne  for  himself.

[Secondly,  he  was  assisting  the  King  of  Spain  to  obtain
that  dignity.

Thirdly,  he  was  manoeuvring  in  dull,  dumb,  but  not
inettective  manner,  in  favour  of  Xavarre.

So  comprehensive  and  self-contradictory  a  scheme
would  seem  to  indica+e  an  elasticity  of  principle  and  a
fertility  of  resource  not  often  vouchsafed  to  man.

Certainly  one  of  the  most  pregnant  lessons  of  history
is  furnished  in  the  development  of  these  cabals,  nor  is  it,
in  this  regard,  of  great  importance  whether  the  issue  was
to  prove  them  futile  or  judicious.  It  is  sufficient  for  us
now,  that  when  those  vanished  days  constituted  the  Pre-
sent— the  vital  atmosphere  of  Christendom — the  world's
aflairs  were  controlled  by  those  plotters  and  their
subordinates,  and  it  is  therefore  desirable  for  us  to  know
what  manner  of  men  they  were,  and  how  they  played
their  parts.

Kor  should  it  ever  be  forgotten  that  the  leading
motive  with  all  was  supposed  to  be  religion.  It  was  to
maintain  the  supremacy  of  the  Roman  Church,  or  to  vin-
dicate, to  a  certain  extent,  liberty  of  conscience,  through
the  establishment  of  a  heterodox  organization,  that  all
these  hmnan  beings  of  various  lineage  and  language
throughout  Christendom  had  been  cutting  each  other's
throats  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.

Mayenne  was  not  without  courage  in  the  field  when
he  found  himself  there,  but  it  was  observed  of  him  that
he  spent  more  time  at  table  than  the  Bearnese  in  sleep,
and  that  he  was  so  fat  as  to  require  the  assistance  of
twelve  men  to  put  him  in  the  saddle  again  whenever
he  fell  from  his  horse.  Yet  slow  fighter  as  he  was,
he  was  a  most  nimble  intriguer.  As  for  his  private
character,  it  was  notoi'iously  stained  with  eYery  vice,  nor
was  there  enough  of  riatnral  intelligence  or  superior
acquirement  to  atone  for  his  crapulous,  licentious,  shame-
less life.  His  militar}'  efficiency  at  important  emer-
gencies was  impaired  and  his  life  endangered  by  vile
diseases.  He  was  covetous  and  greedy  beyond  what  was
considered  decent  even  in  that  cynical  age.  He  received
subsidies  and  alms  with  both  hands  from  those  who  dis-
trusted and  despised  him,  but  who  could  not  eject  him
from  his  advantageous  position.

1592,  CHARACTER  AND  POLICY  OF  MAYENNE.  181

He  wislied  to  ai'rive  at  the  throne  of  France.  As  son
of  Francis  of  Guise,  as  brother  of  the  great  Balafre,  he
considered  himself  entitled  to  the  homage  of  tiie  fish-
women  and  the  butchers'  halls.  The  constitution  of  the
country  in  that  age  making  a  People  impossible,
the  subtle  connection  between  a  high-born  intriguer
and  the  dregs  of  a  populace,  which  can  only  exist  in
societies  of  deep  chasms  and  precipitous  contrasts,  was
easily  established.

The  duke's  summary  dealing  with  the  sixteen  tyrants
of  Paris  in  the  matter  of  the  president's  murder  had,
however,  loosened  his  hold  on  what  was  considered  the
democracy ;  but  this  was  at  the  time  when  his  schemes
were  silently  swinging  towards  the  Protestant  aristo-
cracy; at  the  moment  when  Politica  was  taking  the
place  of  Madam  League  in  his  secret  affections.  Is  ever-
theless,  so  long  as  there  seemed  a  chance,  he  was  disposed
to  work  tlie  mines  for  his  own  benefit.  His  position  as
lieutenant-general  gave  him  an  immense  advantage  for  in-
triguing with  both  sides,  and — in  case  his  aspirations  for
royalty  were  baffled — for  obtaining  the  highest  possible
price  for  himself  in  that  auction  in  which  Philip  and  the
Bearnese  were  likely  to  strain  all  their  resources  in  out-
bidding each  other.

On  one  thing  his  heart  was  fixed.  His  brother's
son  should  at  least  not  secure  the  golden  prize  if  he
could  prevent  it.  The  young  Duke  of  Guise,  who  had
been  immured  in  Castle  Tours  since  the  famous  murder
of  his  father  and  uncle,  had  made  his  escape  by  a  rather
neat  stratagem.  Having  been  allowed  some  liberty  for
amusing  himself  in  the  corridors  in  the  neighbourhood
of  his  apartment,  he  had  invented  a  game  of  hop,  skip,
and  jump  up  stairs  and  down,  which  he  was  wont  to  play
with  the  soldiers  of  the  guard,  as  a  solace  to  the  tedious-
ness  of  confinement.  One  day  he  hopped  and  skipped
up  the  staircase  with  a  rapidity  which  excited  the
admiration  of  the  companions  of  his  sport,  slipped  into
his  room,  slammed  and  bolted  the  doors,  and  when  the
guard,  after  in  vain  waiting  a  considerable  time  for  him
to  return  and  resume  the  game,  at  last  forced  an  entrance,
they  found  the  bird  flown  out  of  window.  Eope-ladders,
confederates,  fast-galloping  post-horses  did  the  rest,  and
at  last  the  young  duke  joined  his  afi'ectionate  uncle  in

182  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI.

camp,  much  to  that  eminent  relative's  discomfiture.'
Philip  gave  allernately  conflicting  instructions  to  Far-
nese — sometimes  that  he  should  encourage  the  natural
jealousy  between  the  pair ;  sometimes  that  he  should
cause  them  to  work  harmoniously  together  for  the  com-
mon good — that  common  good  being  the  attainment  by
the  King  of  Spain  of  the  sovereignty  of  Fi'ance.

But  it  was  imposi-'ible,  as  already  intimated,  for
Mayenne  to  work  harmoniously  with  his  nephew.  The
Duke  of  Guise  might  marry  with  the  Infanta  and  thus
become  King  of  France  by  the  grace  of  God  and  Philip.
To  such  a  consummation  in  the  case  of  his  uncle  there
stood,  as  we  know,  an  insuperable  obstacle  in  the  shape
of  the  Duchess  of  Mayenne.  Should  it  come  to  this  at
last,  it  was  certain  that  the  Duke  would  make  any  and
every  combination  to  frustrate  such  a  scheme.  Mean-
time he  kept  his  own  counsel,  worked  amicably  with
Philip,  Parma,  and  the  young  duke,  and  received  money
in  overflowing  measure,  and  poured  into  his  bosom,  from
that  Spanish  monarch  whose  veterans  in  the  Netherlands
were  maddened  by  starvation  into  mutiny.

Philip's  plans  were  a  series  of  alternatives.  France
he  regarded  as  the  property  of  his  family.  Of  that  there
could  be  no  doubt  at  all.  He  meant  to  put  the  crown
upon  his  own  head,  unless  the  difficulties  in  the  way
shorild  pi'ove  absolutely  insuperable.  In  that  case  he
claimed  France  and  ail  its  inhabitants  as  the  property
of  his  daughter.  The  Salic  law  was  simpl}^  a  pleasantry,
a  bit  of  foolish  pedantry,  an  absurdity.  If  Clara  Isabella,
as  daughter  of  Isabella  of  France,  as  grandchild  of  Henry
IE.,  were  not  manifestly  the  owner  of  France — queen-
proprietary,  as  the  Spanish  doctors  called  it — then  there
was  no  such  thing,  so  he  thought,  as  inheritance  of  castle,
farm-house,  or  hovel — no  such  thing  as  property  any-
where in  the  world.  If  the  heiress  of  the  Valois  could
not  take  that  kingdom  as  her  private  estate,  what  security
could  there  ever  be  for  any  possessions  public  or  private?

This  was  logical  reasoning  enough  for  kings  and  their
counsellors.  There  was  much  that  might  be  said,  how-
ever, in  regard  to  special  laws.  There  was  no  doubt
that  great  countries,  with  all  their  live-stock — human  or
otherwise — belonged  to  an  individual,  but  it  was  not

'  De  Thou,  xi.

1592. PLANS  FOR  THE  MAItUIAGE  OF  THE  INFANTA. 18.'}

always  so  clear  who  that  individual  was.  This  donbt
gave  much  work  and  comfortable  fees  to  the  lawyers.
There  was  much  learned  lore  concerning  statutes  of
descent,  cutting  off  of  entails,  actions  for  ejectment,  diffi-
culties of  enforcing  prucesses,  and  the  like,  to  occupy  the
attention  of  diplomatists,  politicians  and  other  sages.
It  would  have  caused  general  hilarity,  however,  cuuld
it  have  been  suggested  that  the  live-stock  had  art  or
part  in  the  matter ;  that  sheep,  swine,  or  men  could
claim  a  choice  of  their  shepherds  and  butchers.

Philip — humbly  satisfied,  as  he  always  expressed  him-
self, so  long  as  the  purity  of  the  Komau  dogmas  and  the
supremacy  of  the  Komish  Church  over  the  whole  earth
were  maintained — affected  a  comparative  indifference  as
to  whether  he  should  put  the  crown  of  St.  Louis  and  of
Hugh  Capet  upon  his  own  grey  head  or  whether  he
should  govern  France  through  his  daughter  and  her
husband.  Happ}^  the  man  who  might  exchange  the
symbols  of  mutual  affection  with  Philip's  daughter.

The  king  had  various  plans  in  regard  to  the  bestowal
of  the  hand  thus  richly  endowed.  First  and  foremost  \t
was  suggested — and  the  idea  was  not  held  too  monstrous
to  be  even  believed  in  by  some  conspicuous  individuals
—that  he  proposed  espousing  his  daughter  himself.  The
pope  was  to  be  relied  on,  in  this  case,  to  give  a  special
dispensation.  Such  a  marriage,  between  parties  too
clasely  related  to  be  usually  united  in  wedlock,  might
otherwise  shock  the  prejudices  of  the  orthodox.  His
late  niece  and  wife  was  dead,  so  that  there  was  no  in-
convenience on  that  score,  should  the  interests  of  his
dynasty,  his  family,  and,  above  all,  of  the  Church,  impel
hiiu,  on  mature  reflection,  to  take  for  his  fourth  marriage
one  step  farther  within  the  forbidden  degrees  than  he
had  done  in  his  third.  Here  is  the  statement,  which,
if  it  have  no  other  value,  serves  to  show  the  hideous
designs  of  which  the  enemies  of  Philip  sincerely  believed
that  monarch  capable.

"  Bat  God  is  a  just  God,"  wrote  Sir  Edward  Stafford,
"  and  if  with  all  things  past,  that  be  true  that  the  king
(videlicet  Henry  IV.)  yesterday  assured  me  to  be  true,
and  that  both  his  am'nassador  from  Venice  writ  to  him
and  Monsieur  de  Luxembourg  from  Pome,  that  the
Count  Olivarez  had  made  a  great  instance  to  the  pope

184  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chah.  XXVIII.

(Sixtus  V.)  a  little  afore  his  death,  to  permit  his  master
to  marry  his  daughter,  no  doubt  God  will  not  leave  it
long  unpunished."'

Such  was  the  horrible  tale  which  was  circulated  and
believed  in  by  Henry  the  Great  of  France  and  by
eminent  nobles  and  ambassadors,  and  at  least  thought
possible  by  the  English  envoy.  By  such  a  family
arrangement  it  was  obvious  that  the  conflicting  claims
of  father  and  daughter  to  the  proprietorship  of  France
would  be  ingeniously  adjusted,  and  the  children  of  so
well  assorted  a  marriage  might  reign  in  undisputed
legitimacy  over  France  and  Spain,  and  the  rest  of  the
world-monarchy.  Should  the  king  decide  on  the  whole
against  this  matrimonial  project,  should  Innocent  or
Clement  prove  as  intractable  as  Sixtns,  then  it  would
be  necessary  to  decide  among  various  candidates  for  the
Infanta's  hand.

In  Mayenue's  opinion  the  Duke  of  Guise  was  likely  to
be  the  man ;  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  Philip,  in  case
these  more  cherished  schemes  should  fail,  had  made  up
his  mind — so  far  as  he  ever  did  make  up  his  mind  upon
anything — to  select  his  nephew  the  Archduke  Ernest,
brother  of  the  Emperor  Eudolph,  for  his  son-in-law.  But
it  was  not  necessary  to  make  an  immediate  choice.  His
quiver  was  full  of  archdukes,  any  one  of  whom  would  be
an  eligible  candidate,  while  not  one  of  them  would
be  likely  to  reject  the  Infanta  with  France  on  her
wedding-finger.  Meantime  there  was  a  lion  in  the
path  in  the  shape  of  Henry  of  Navarre.

Those  who  disbelieve  in  the  influence  of  the  individual
on  the  fate  of  mankind  may  ponder  the  possible  results
CO  history  and  humanity,  had  the  dagger  of  Jacques
Clement  entered  the  stomach  of  Henry  IV.  rather  than
of  Henry  III.  in  the  summer  of  1589,  or  the  perturba-
tions in  the  world's  movements  that  might  have  puzzled
philosophers  had  there  been  an  unsuspected  mass  of  reli-
gious conviction  revolving  unseen  in  the  mental  depths
of  the  Bearnese.  Conscience,  as  it  has  from  time  to  time
exhibited  itself  on  this  planet  of  ours,  is  a  powerful  agent
in  controlling  political  combinations ;  but  the  instances
are  unfortunately  not  I'are,  so  far  as  sublunary  progress
is concerned,  in  which  the  absence  of  this  dominant

Stafford  to  Biirghley,  It  Oct.  1590. (S.  I'.  Offici,'  MS.)

1592,  THE  PKINCE  OF  BEARXE.  185

influence  permits  a  prosperous  rapidity  to  individual
careers.  Eternal  honour  to  the  noble  beings,  true
chieftains  among  men,  who  have  forfeited  worldly  power
or  sacrificed  life  itself  at  the  dictate  of  religious  or  moral
conviction — even  should  the  basis  of  such  conviction
appear  to  some  of  us  unsafe  or  unreal.  Shame  on  the
tongue  which  would  malign  or  ridicule  the  martyr  or
the  honest  convert  to  an}-  form  of  Christian  faith  !  But
who  can  discover  aught  that  is  inspiring  to  the  sons  of
men  in  conversions — whether  of  princes  or  of  peasants
— wrought,  not  at  risk  of  life  and  pelf,  but  for  the  sake
of  securing  and  increasing  the  one  and  the  other  ?

Certainly  the  Bearnese  was  the  most  candid  of  men.
It  was  this  very  candour,  this  freedom  from  bigotry,  this
want  of  conviction,  and  this  openness  to  conviction,  that
made  him  so  dangerous  and  caused  so  much  anxiety  to
Philip.  The  Eoman  Church  might  or  might  not  be
strengthened  by  the  re-conversion  of  the  legitimate  heir
of  France,  but  it  was  certain  that  the  claims  of  Philip
and  the  Infanta  to  the  proprietorship  of  that  kingdom
would  be  weakened  by  the  process.  While  the  Spanish
king  knew  himself  to  be  inspired  in  all  his  actions  by  a
single  motive,  the  maintenance  of  the  supremac}'  of  the
Eoman  Church,  he  was  perfectly  aware  that  the  Prince
of  Bearne  was  not  so  single-hearted  nor  so  conscientioiis
as  himself.

The  Prince  of  Bearne — heretic,  son  of  heretics,  great
chieftain  of  heretics — was  supposed  capable  of  becoming
orthodox  whenever  the  Pope  would  accept  his  conver-
sion. Against  this  possibility  Philip  struggled  with  all
his  strength.

Since  Pope  Sixtus  V.,  who  had  a  weakness  for  Henry,
there  had  been  several  jiopes.  Urban  V^IL,  his  imme-
diate successor,  had  reigned  but  thirteen  days.  Gregory
XIV.  (Sfondrato)  had  died  15th  October,  1591,  ten
months  after  his  election.  Fachinetti,  with  the  title
of  Innocent  IX.,  had  reigned  two  months,  from  29th
October  to  29th  December,  1591.  He  died  of  "  Spanish
poison,"  said  Envoy  Umton,  as  coolly  as  if  speaking  of
gout,  or  typhus,  or  any  other  recognised  disorder.  Cle-
ment Vlll.  (Aldobrandini)  was  elected  oOth  January,
1592,  He  was  no  lover  of  Henry,  and  lived  in  niui'tal
fear  of  Philip,  while  it  must  be  conceded  that  the  Spanish

186  THE  UNITED  NETHEFtLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII,

ambassador  at  Rome  was  much  given  to  brow-beating
his  Holiness,  Should  he  dare  to  grant  that  aVwolution
which  was  the  secret  object  of  the  Bearnese,  there  was
no  vengeance,  hinted  the  envoy,  that  Philip  would  not
wreak  on  the  holy  father.  He  would  cut  off  his  sup-
plies from  Naples  and  Sicily,  and  starve  him  and  all  his
subjects ;  he  would  frustrate  all  his  family  schemes,  he
would  renounce  him,  he  would  unpope  him,  he  would
do  anything  that  man  and  despot  could  do,  should  the
great  shepherd  dare  to  re-admit  this  lost  sheep,  and  this
very  black  sheep,  into  the  fold  of  the  faithful.

As  for  Henry  himself,  his  game — for  in  his  eyes  it  was
nothing  but  a  game — lay  every  day  plainer  and  plainer
before  him.  He  was  indispensable  to  the  heretics.
Neither  England,  nor  Holland,  nor  Protestant  Germany,
could  renounce  him,  even  should  he  renounce  "  the  reli-
gion." Nor  could  the  French  Huguenots  exist  without
that  protection  which,  even  although  Cath(jlic,  he  could
still  extend  to  them  when  he  should  be  accepted  as  king
'by  the  Catholics.

Hereditary  monarch  by  French  law  and  history,  re-
leased from  his  heresy  by  the  authority  that  could  bind
and  loose,  purged  as  with  hyssop  and  washed  whiter
than  snow,  it  should  go  hard  with  him  if  Philip,  and
Farnese,  and  Mayenne,  and  all  the  pikemen  and  reiters
they  might  muster,  could  keep  him  very  long  from  the
throne  of  his  ancestors.

Nothing  could  match  the  ingenuousness  with  which
he  demanded  the  instruction  whenever  the  fitting  time
for  it  should  arrive  ;  as  if,  instead  of  having  been  a  pro-
fessor both  of  the  (Jalvinist  and  Catholic  persuasion,  and
having  relapsed  from  both,  he  had  been  some  innocent
Peruvian  or  Hindoo,  who  was  invited  to  listen  to  preach-
ings and  to  examine  dogmas  for  the  veiy  first  time  in
his  life.

Yet  Philip  had  good  grounds  for  hoping  a  favourable
result  from  his  political  and  military  manoeuvre.  He
entertained  little  doubt  that  France  belonged  to  him  or
to  his  daughter ;  tliat  the  most  powerful  party  in  the
country  was  in  favour  of  his  claims,  provided  he  would
pay  the  voters  liberally  enoiigli  for  their  support,  and
that  if  the  worst  came  to  the  worst  it  would  always  be
in  his  power  to  dismember  the  kingdom,  and  to  reserve

1592.  PLOTTING  OF  THE  CATHOLIC  PARTY.  187

the  lion's  share  for  himself,  while  distributing  some  of
the  provinces  to  the  most  prominent  of  his  confederates.

The  sixteen  tyrants  of  Paris  had  already,  as  we  have
seen,  urged  the  Cirown  upon  liim,  provided  he  would
establish  in  France  the  Inquisition,  the  council  of  Trent,
and  other  acceptable  institutions,  besides  distributing
judiciously  a  good  many  lucrative  offices  among  various
classes  of  his  adherents.

The  Duke  of  Ma^'enne,  in  his  own  name  and  that  of
all  the  Catholics  of  France,  formally  demanded  of  him  to
maintain  two  armies,  foity  thousand  men  in  all,  to  be
respectively  under  command  of  the  duke  himself  and
of  Alexander  Farnese,  and  legularly  to  pay  for  them.
These  propositions,  as  has  been  seen,  were  carried  into
effect  as  nearly  as  possible,  at  enormous  expense  to
Philip's  exchequer,  and  he  naturally  expected  as  good
faith  on  the  part  of  JMayenne.

In  the  same  paper  in  which  the  demand  was  made
Philip  was  urged  to  declare  himself  king  of  France.  lie
was  assured  that  the  measure  could  be  accomplished
"by  freely  bestowing  marquisates,  baronies,  and  peer-
ages, in  order  to  content  the  avarice  and  ambition  of
many  persons,  without  at  the  same  time  dissipating
the  greatness  from  which  all  these  meml)ers  depended.
Pepin  and  Charlemagne,"  said  the  memorialists,  "  who
were  foreigners  and  Saxons  by  nation,  did  as  much  in
order  to  get  possession  of  a  kingdom  to  which  they  had
no  other  right  except  that  which  they  acquired  there  by
their  prudence  and  force,  and  after  them  Plugh  Capet,
much  inferior  to  them  in  force  and  authority,  following
their  example,  had  the  same  good  fortune  for  himself  and
his  posterity,  and  one  which  still  endures.

"  If  the  authority  of  the  holy  see  could  support  the
scheme  at  the  same  time,"  continued  Mayenne  and
friends,  "  it  would  be  a  great  help.  But  it  being  peril-
ous to  ask  for  that  assistance  before  striking  the  blow,  it
would  be  better  to  obtain  it  after  the  execution."^

That  these  wholesome  opinions  were  not  entirely
original  on  the  part  of  Mayenne,  nor  produced  spon-
taneously, was  plain  from  the  secret  instructions  given
by  Philip  to  his  envoys,  Don  Bernardino  de  Mendcjza,

3  Arch,  de  Siniancas  (Paris),  \.  57,  — . MS.

188  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

Jolin  Baptist  de  Tassis,  and  the  commander  Moreo,
whom  he  had  sent  soon  after  tlie  death  of  Henry  III.
to  confer  with  Cardinal  Gaetano  in  Paris.

They  were  tohl,  of  course,  to  do  everything  in  their
power  to  prevent  the  election  of  the  Prince  of  Bearne,
"  being  as  he  was  a  heretic,  obstinate  and  confirmed,
who  had  sucked  heresy  with  his  mother's  milk."  The
legate  was  warned  that  "if  the  Bearnese  should  make
a  show  of  converting  himself,  it  would  be  frigid  and
fabricated."*

If  they  were  asked  whom  Philip  desired  for  king — a
question  which  certainly  seemed  probable  i;nder  the  cir-
cumstances— they  were  to  reply  that  his  foremost  wish
was  to  establish  the  Catholic  religion  in  the  kingdom,
and  that  whatever  was  most  conducive  to  that  end
would  be  most  agreeable  to  him.  "  As  it  is  however
desirable,  in  order  to  arrange  matters,  that  you  should
be  informed  of  everything,"  said  his  Majesty,  "it  is
proper  that  you  should  know  that  I  have  two  kinds  of
right  to  all  that  there  is  over  there.  Firstly,  because
the  crown  of  France  has  been  usurped  from  me,  my
ancestors  having  been  unjustly  excluded  by  foreign
occupation  of  it;  and  secondly,  because  I  claim  the
same  crown  as  first  male  of  the  house  of  Valois."^

Here  certainly  were  comprehensive  pretensions,  and
it  was  obvious  that  the  king's  desire  for  the  establish-
ment of  the  Catholic  religion  must  have  been  very
lively  to  enable  him  to  invent  or  accept  such  astonish-
ing fictions.

But  his  own  claims  were  but  a  portion  of  the  case.
His  daughter  and  possible  spouse  had  rights  of  her  own,
hard,  in  his  opinion,  to  be  gainsaid.  "  Over  and  above
all  this,"  said  Philip,  "  my  eldest  daughter,  the  Infanta,
has  two  other  rights ;  one  to  all  the  states  which  as
dower-property  are  joined  by  matrimony  and  through
females  to  this  crown,  which  now  come  to  her  in  direct
line,  and  the  other  to  the  crown  itself,  which  belongs

*  Instruccion  que  se  dio  i  Don  B.  de  corona  aviendo  lo  ocupado  injustatnente

Mendoza,  J.  B.de  Tassis,  y  el  Com.  Moreo,  a  mios  pasados,  y  por  otra  a  la  misma

anno  15S9. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  corona  como  Varon  mayor  de  dias  de  la

5  "  Es  buen  que  sepays  que  yo  tengo  dos  casa  Valesia — y  que  de  mas  desto  tiene

maneras  de  derccho  a  lo  de  ay;  por  una  otros  dos  derechos la  Infanta  mi  hija

parte  a  lo  que  me  tiene  usurpado  essa  mayor,"  &c.

1592. PHILIP'S  CLAIMS  TO  THE  CROWN  OF  FRANCb. 189

directly  to  the  said  Infanta,  the  matter  of  the  Salic  law
being  a  mere  invention.'"^

Thus  it  would  aj^pear  that  Philip  was  the  legitimate
representative,  not  only  of  the  ancient  races  of  French
monarchs  —  whether  Merovingians,  Carloviugians,  or
otherwise  was  not  stated — but  also  of  the  usurping
houses  themselves,  by  whose  intrusion  those  earlier
dynasties  had  been  ejected,  being  the  eldest  male  heir
of  the  extinct  line  of  Valois,  while  his  daughter  was,  if
possible,  even  more  legitimately  the  sovereign  and  pro-
prietor of  France  than  he  Avas  himself.

Nevertheless  in  his  magnanimous  desire  for  the  peace
of  the  world  and  the  advancement  of  the  interests  of
the  Church,  he  was,  if  reduced  to  extremities,  willing
to  forego  his  own  individual  rights — when  it  should
appear  that  they  could  by  no  possibility  be  enforced —
in  favour  of  his  daughter  and  of  the  husband  whom  he
sliould  select  for  her.

"Thus  it  may  be  seen,"  said  the  self-denying  man,
"  that  I  know  how,  for  the  sake  of  the  public  repose,
to  strip  mj'self  of  my  private  property." '^

Afterwards,  when  secretly  instructing  the  Duke  of
Feria,  about  to  proceed  to  Paris  for  the  sake  of  settling
the  sovereignty  of  the  kingdom,  he  I'eviewed  the  whole
subject,  setting  forth  substantially  the  same  intentions.
That  the  Prince  of  Bearne  could  ever  possibly  succeed
to  the  throne  of  his  ancestors  was  an  idea  to  be  treated
only  with  sublime  scorn  by  all  right-minded  and  sensi-
ble men.  "  The  members  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,"
said  he,  "  pretend  that  by  right  of  blood  the  crown
belongs  to  them,  and  hence  is  derived  the  pretension
made  b}''  the  Prince  of  Bearne  ;  but  if  there  were  want-
ing other  very  sufficient  causes  to  prevent  this  claim —
which  however  are  not  wanting — it  is  quite  enough
that  he  is  a  relapsed  heretic,  declared  to  be  such  by
tlie  Apostolic  See,  and  pronounced  incompetent,  as  well
as  the  other  members  of  his  house,  all  of  them,  to  say

*  Note  last  cited.  Infanta  y  por  via  de  casamiento  que  estu-
'  "Tros  eito,  como  yo  tiro  el  suave  re-  viesse  bien  a  totlos — quo  menos  somtiras
paro  desse  reyiio  mas  que  a  interesses  y  <;elos  aiusaria  los  invidiosos  de  fuera —
proprios  facilraente  nie  absteiria  de  las  assi  para  que  se  vea  que  sabe  por  el  sos-
pretenciones  que  me  tocan,  con  saber  que  siego  publico  iesnudarme  de  mi  par-
son muy  bien  fundailas  si  viesse  abrirse  titulif.r."  (MS  eat  cited.)
puerta  a  que  consiguiendo  las  suyas  la

190  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

the  least,  encouragers  of  heresy ;  so  that  not  one  of
them  can  ever  be  king  of  France,  where  there  have
been  such  religious  princes  in  time  past,  who  have
justly  merited  the  name  of  Most  Christian :  and  so
there  is  no  possibility  of  permitting  him  or  any  of  his
house  to  aspire  to  the  throne,  or  to  have  the  subject
even  treated  of  in  the  estates.  It  should  on  the  con-
trary be  entirely  excluded  as  prejudicial  to  the  realm
and  unworthy  to  be  even  mentioned  among  persons  so
Catholic  as  tliose  about  to  meet  in  that  assembly."^

The  claims  of  the  man  whom  his  supporters  already
called  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France  being  thus  disposed
of,  Philip  then  again  alluded  with  his  usual  minuteness
to  the  various  combinations  which  he  had  formed  for  the
tranquillity  and  good  government  of  that  kingdom  and
,»f  the  other  provinces  of  his  world-empire.

It  must  moreover  be  never  forgotten  that  what  he  said
passed  with  his  contemporaries  almost  for  oracular  dis-
pensations. What  he  did  or  ordered  to  be  done  was  like
the  achievements  or  behests  of  a  superhuman  being.
Time,  as  it  rolls  by,  leaves  the  wrecks  of  many  a
stranded  reputation  to  bleach  in  the  sunshine  of  after-
ages.  It  is  sometimes  as  piofitable  to  learn  what  was
not  done  by  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  in  spite  of  all
their  efforts,  as  to  ponder  those  actual  deeds  which  are
patent  to  mankind.  The  Past  was  once  the  Pieserit,
and  once  the  Future,  bright  with  rainbows  or  black
with  impending  storm  ;  for  history  is  a  continuous  whole
of  which  we  see  only  fragments.

He  who  at  the  epoch  with  which  we  are  now  occupied
was  deemed  greatest  and  wisest  among  the  sons  of  earth,
at  whose  threats  men  quailed,  at  whose  vast  and  intricate
schemes  men  gasped  in  pale-faced  awe,  has  left  behind  him
the  record  of  his  interior  being.  Let  us  consider  whether
he  was  so  potent  as  his  fellow  mortals  believed,  or  whether
his  greatness  was  merely  their  littleness  ;  whether  it  was
carved  out  of  the  inexhaustible  but  artificial  quarry  of
human  degradation.  Let  us  see  whether  the  execution  was
consonant  with  the  inordinate  plotting  ;  whether  the  price
in  money  and  blood — and  certainly  fewhuman  beings  have

'  Instnicciou  general  para  el  Diique  de  Feria,  Madrid,  2  Kiiero,  1592,  A.  57,
l^i  MS.

1592.  BRITTANY  ASSIGNED  TO  THE  INFANTA.  191

squandered  so  mncli  of  either  as  did  Pliilip  the  Prudent
in  his  long  career — was  high  or  low  for  the  work  achieved.

Were  after  generations  to  learn,  only  after  curious
research,  of  a  pretender  who  once  called  liimself,  to  the
amusement  of  his  contemporaries,  Heniy  the  Fourth  of
France ;  or  was  the  world-empire  for  which  so  many
armies  were  marshalled,  so  many  ducats  expended,  so
many  falsehoods  told,  to  prove  a  bubble  after  all  ?  Time
was  to  show.  Meantime  wise  men  of  the  day  who,  like
the  sages  of  every  generation,  read  the  future  like  a
printed  scroll,  were  pitying  the  delusion  and  lebuking
the  wickedness  of  Henry  the  Bearnese  ;  persisting  as  he
did  in  his  cruel,  sanguinary,  hopeless  attempt  to  establish
a  vanished  and  impossible  authority  over  a  land  distracted
by  civil  war.

Nothing  could  be  calmer  or  more  reasonable  than  the
language  of  the  great  champion  of  the  Inquisition.

"And  as  President  Jeannin  informs  me,"  he  said,
"  that  the  Catholics  have  the  intention  of  electing  me
king,  that  appearing  to  them  the  gentlest  and  safest
method  to  smooth  all  rivalries  likely  to  arise  among  the
princes  aspiring  to  the  cnnvn,  1  reply,  as  you  will  see
by  the  copy  herewith  sent.  You  will  obser\e  that  after
not  refusing  myself  to  that  which  may  be  the  will  of  our
Lord,  should  there  be  no  other  mode  of  serving  Him,
above  all  I  desire  that  which  concerns  my  daughter,
since  to  her  belongs  the  kingdom.  I  desire  nothing  else
nor  anything  for  myself,  nor  for  anybody  else,  except  as
a  means  for  her  to  arrive  at  her  right.'"'

He  had  taken  particular  pains  to  secure  his  daughter's
right  in  Brittany,  while  the  Duchess  of  Mercoeur,  by  the
secret  orders  of  her  husband,  had  sent  a  certain  ecclesias-
tic to  Spain  to  make  over  the  sovereignty  of  tliis  pro-
vince to  the  Infanta.  Philip  directed  that  the  utmost
secrecy  should  be  observed  in  regard  to  this  transaction

9  "  Y  pnr  que  dixo  que  avia  voluntad  en  do  no  huviesse  otro  medio  para  su  ser-
ies Catolicos  de  nombrarme  a  mi  por  su  vicio,  lo  que  sobre  todo  desseo  es  lo  que
rey,  parecietidoles  esto  mas  suave  y  seguro  toca  a  mi  hija,  puos  a  ella  venga  el  reyno ;
para  allaiSar  las  competencias  que  puede  J'o  no  quicMO  otra  cosa  ni  nada  para  mi
aver  entre  los  mismos  principes  que  as-  ni  para  otro,  sino  es  por  tor(,edur  y  medio
piran  a  cstos,  se  le  respondio  lo  que  vereys  para  que  ella  consiga  su  derecho."  In-
per  la  copia  que  con  esta  se  embia  por  struccion  General  para  el  Duque  de Fcria,
donde  entcndercys  que  tras  no  negarme  a  &c.  (MS.  before  cited.)
lo  que  fuessa  voluntad  de  n™  S^nor  qiiaii-

192  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

with  the  duke  and  duchess,  and  promised  the  duke,  as
his  reward  for  these  projoosed  services  in  dismembering
his  coi^ntry,  the  government  of  the  province  for  himself
and  his  heirs.^"

For  the  king  was  quite  determined — in  case  his  efforts
to  obtain  the  crown  for  himself  or  for  his  daughter  were
unsuccessful — to  dismember  Frarice,  Avith  the  assistance
of  those  eminent  Frenchmen  who  w^ere  now  so  indus-
triously aiding  him  in  his  projects.

"  And  in  the  third  place,"  said  he,  in  his  secret  instruc-
tions to  Feria,  "  if  for  tlie  sins  of  all,  we  don't  manage  to
make  any  election,  and  if  therefore  the  kingdom  (of
France)  has  to  come  to  separation  and  to  be  divided
into  many  hands ;  in  this  case  we  must  propose  to  the
Duke  of  Mayenne  to  assist  him  in  getting  possession  of
Normandy  for  himself,  and  as  to  the  rest  of  the  kingdom,
1  shall  take  for  myself  that  which  seems  good  to  me — all
of  us  assisting  each  other."  "

But  unfortunately  it  was  difficult  for  any  of  these
fellows-labourers  to  assist  each  other  very  thoroughly,
while  they  detested  each  other  so  cordially  and  suspected
each  other  with  such  good  reason.

Moreo,  Ybarra,  Feria,  Parma,  all  assured  their  master
that  Mayenne  was  taking  Spanish  money  as  fast  as  he
could  get  it,  but  with  the  sole  purpose  of  making  himself
king.  As  to  any  of  the  House  of  Lori-aine  obtaining  the
hand  of  the  Infanta  and  the  throne  with  it,  Fei"ia  assured
Philip  that  Maj'enne  "  would  sooner  give  the  crown  to
the  Grand  Turk."^^

Nevertheless  Philip  thought  it  necessary  to  continue
making  use  of  the  duke.  Both  were  indefatigable  there-
fore in  expressing  feelings  of  boundless  confidence  each
in  the  other.

10  Instruccion  secreta  para  Don  Mendo  ayudando  nos  Hen  nno  a  otro."

de  la  Desma,  2  March,  1591. (Arch,  de  Instruccion secrota lo  que  vos  Don

Simancas,  A  57.  -.  MS.)  J^'^'"^"™  '^"^'•^^^  '^'^  Figueroa,  Duque  de

Fena,  mi  primo  aveys  de  llevar  entendi-

11  "P:1  tercero,  si  por  pecados  de  todos  do  de  mas  que  contiene  la  instruccion
uo  se  acertasse  a  hazer  election  ninguna,  general  que  llevays.  2  Enero,  1592,
y  assi  huviesse  de  venir  a  quel  reyno  en  .  ,  ,  „.  ,„  .  ,,,  .  IBl
disipacion,  y  dividirse  en  muchos  mauos.  ^'''^-  ^^  Snnancas  (Pans)  Mb.  A.  57,  .
y  en  este  caso  se  ofrecio  al  Duque  de  i'^  Duke  of  Feria  to  Pliilip.  Arch,  de
Umena  de  asistirle  para  que  se  apodere  Simancas  (Parisi,  13.  75,  26  to  30,  cited  by
de  Normandia  para  si,  y  que  de  lo  denias  Cajietigue,  vi.  259.

tome yo  para  mi  lo  que me pareciere,

1592. CALUMNIES  AGAINST  THE  DUKE  OF  PAiaiA.  19:5

It  has  been  seen  too  how  entirely  the  king  relied  on
the  geuiiis  and  devotion  of  Alexander  Farnese  to  cany
out  his  great  schemes  ;  and  certainly  never  had  monarch
a  more  faithful,  unscrupulous,  and  dexterous  servant.
Eemonstrating,  advising,  but  still  obeying  —  entirely
without  conscience,  unless  it  were  coiiscience  to  carry
out  his  master's  commands,  even  when  most  puerile  or
most  diabolical — he  was  nevertheless  the  object  of
Philip's  constant  suspicion,  and  felt  himself  placed  under
perpetual  though  secret  supervision.

Commander  Moreo  was  unwearied  in  blackening
the  duke's  character,  and  in  maligning  his  every
motive  and  action,  and  greedily  did  the  king  incline
his  ear  to  the  calumnies  steadily  instilled  by  the
(diivalrous  spy.

"  lie  has  caused  all  the  evil  we  are  suffering,"  said
Moreo.  "  When  he  sent  Egmont  to  France  'twas  with-
out infantry,  although  Egmont  begged  hard  for  it,  as
did  likewise  the  Legate,  Don  Bei'nardino,  and  Tassis.
Had  he  done  this  there  is  no  doubt  at  all  that  the  Catho-
lic cause  in  France  would  have  been  safe,  and  your
Majesty  would  now  have  the  control  over  that  kingdom
which  you  desire.  This  is  the  opinion  of  friends  and
foes.  1  went  to  the  Duke  of  Parma  and  made  free  to
tell  him  that  the  whole  world  would  blame  him  for
the  damage  done  to  Christianity,  since  your  Majesty  had
exonerated  yourself  by  ordering  him  to  go  to  the  assist-
ance of  the  French  Catholics  with  all  the  zeal  possible.
Upon  this  he  was  so  disgusted  that  he  has  never  shown
me  a  civil  face  since.  I  doubt  whether  he  will  send  or
go  to  France  at  all,  and  although  the  Duke  of  Mayenne
despatches  couriers  every  day  with  protestations  and
words  that  would  soften  rocks,  I  see  no  indications  of  a
movement."'^

Thus,  while  the  duke  was  making  great  military  pre-
paratit)ns  for  invading  Fiance  without  means  ;  pawning
his  own  property  to  get  bread  for  his  starving  veterans,
and  hanging  those  veterans  whom  starving  had  made
mutinous,  he  was  depicted,  to  the  most  suspicious  and
unforgiving  mortal  that  ever  wore  a  crown,  as  a  traitor
and  a  rebel,  and  this  while  he  was  renouncing  his  own

13  .VloffO  to  Philip,  22  June,  1500. (Aah.  dc  Siniaiicas  :\IS  )

VOL.  in,  o

194  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI.

judicious  and  well-considered  policy  in  obedience  to  the
wild  schemes  of  his  master.

"  I  must  make  bold  to  remind  your  Majesty,"  again
whispered  the  spy,  "  that  there  never  was  an  Italian
prince  who  failed  to  pursue  his  own  ends,  and  that  there
are  few  in  the  world  that  are  not  wishing  to  become
gi'eater  than  they  are.  Tliis  man  here  could  strike  a
greater  blow  than  all  the  rest  of  them  put  together.
Eemember  that  there  is  not  a  villain  anywhere  that  does
not  desire  the  death  of  your  Majesty.  Believe  me,  and
send  to  cut  off  my  head  if  it  shall  be  found  that  I  am
speaking  from  passion,  or  from  other  motive  than  pure
zeal  for  your  royal  service."^'

The  reader  will  remember  into  what  a  paroxysm  of
rage  Alexander  was  thrown  on  a  former  occasion,  when
secretly  invited  to  listen  to  propositions  by  which  the
sovereignty  over  the  Netherlands  was  to  be  secured  to
himself,  and  how  near  he  was  to  inflicting  mortal  punish-
ment with  his  own  hand  on  the  man  who  had  ventured
to  broach  that  treasonable  matter.^^

Such  projects  and  propositions  were  ever  floating,  as
it  were,  in  the  atmosphere,  and  it  was  impossible  for
the  most  just  men  to  escape  suspicion  in  the  mind  of
a  king  who  fed  upon  suspicion  as  his  daily  bread.  Yet
notliing  could  be  fouler  or  falser  than  the  cahimny
which  described  Alexander  as  unfaithful  to  Philip.
Had  he  served  his  God  as  he  served  his  master,  per-
haps his  record  before  the  highest  tribunal  would  have
been  a  clearer  one.

And  in  the  same  vein  in  which  he  wrote  to  the
monarch  in  person  did  the  ciafty  Moreo  write  to  the
principal  secretary  of  state,  Idiaquez,  whose  mind,  as
well  as  his  master's,  it  was  useful  to  poison,  and  who  was
in  daily  communication  with  Philip.

"  Let  us  make  sure  of  Flanders,"  said  he,  "  otherwise  we
shall  all  of  us  be  well  cheated.  I  will  tell  you  something
of  that  which  I  have  already  told  his  Majesty,  only  not

'■t  Moreo  to  Philip,  22  June,  1590.  "  Me  que  no  hay  hombre  malo  qui  no  dessee  la

atrevere  a  decir  que  se  acuerde  V.  M.  muerte  de V.  M*. Crealo  y  mandame

que  no  hay  principe  in  Italia  qui  deje  de  cortar  la  cabeza  si  hallare  que  digo  pur

tener  sus  fines,  y  que  hay  pocos  eii  el  pasion  ni  otro  que  <;elo  limpio  del  servicio

inundo  qui  no  tengan  puesta  la  mira  a  de  V.  M<i."

scT  mas — y  el  de  aqui  podria  si  quiere  i^  See  vol.  ii.  of  this  work,  p.  511.
dar  mayor  golps  que  todos  los  demus — y

.592.

CALUMNIES  AGAINST  THE  DUKE  OF  PARMA.

195

all,  referring  you  to  Tassis,  who,  as  a  personal  witness
to  many  things,  will  have  it  in  his  power  to  undeceive
his  Majesty.  I  have  seen  very  clearly  that  the  duke
is  disgusted  with  his  Majesty,  and  one  day  he  toid  me
that  he  cared  not  if  the  whole  world  went  to  destruc-
tion, only  not  Flanders. ^"^

"  Another  day  he  told  me  that  there  was  a  report
abroad  that  his  Majesty  was  sending  to  arrest  him,  by
means  of  the  Duke  of  Pastrana,  and  looking  at  me  he
said ;  '  See  here,  seignior  commander,  no  threats,  as  if
it  were  in  the  power  of  mortal  man  to  arrest  me,  much
less  of  such  fellows  as  these.'"

"  But  this  is  but  a  small  part  of  what  I  could  say,"
continued  the  detective  knight-commander,  "  for  1  don't
like  to  trust  these  ciphers.  But  be  certain  that  no-
body in  Flanders  wishes  well  to  these  estates  or  to  the
Catholic  cause,  and  the  associates  of  the  Duke  of  Parma
go  about  saying  that  it  does  not  suit  the  Italian  poten-
tates to  have  his  Majesty  as  great  a  monarch  as  he  is
trying  to  be."  ^^

This  is  but  a  sample  of  the  dangerous  stuff  with
which  the  royal  mind  was  steadily  drugged,  day  after
day,  by  those  to  whom  Farnese  was  especially  enjoined
to  give  his  confidence.  Later  on  it  will  be  seen  how
much  effect  was  thus  produced  both  upon  the  king  and
upon  the  duke.  Moreo,  Mendoza,  and  Tassis  were  placed
about  the  governor- general,  nominally  as  his  counsellors,
in  reality  as  police-officers.

"You  are  to  confer  regularly  with  Mendoza,  Tassis,
and  Moreo,"  said  Philip  to  Farnese.^^

"  You  are  to  assist,  correspond,  and  harmonize  in
every  way  with  the  Duke  of  Parma,"  wrote  Philij^  to
Mendoza,  Tassis,  and  Moreo.-"  And  thus  cordially  and
harmoniously  were  the  trio  assisting  and  corresponding
with  the  duke.

But  Moreo  was  right  in  not  wishing  to  trust  the
ciphers,  and  indeed he had trusted them too  much,

18  Moreo  to  Don  I.  de  Idiaquez,  30  Jan.  is  Ibid.

1 590. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  w  PhUip  to  Parma,  30  Jan.  1590.  (Arcli,

1'  Ibid.  "  Y  viendome  dixo,  mire  Senor  de  Simancas  MS.)

Comdor  que  calle  de  amonazas,  coiuo  si  20  Jnstruccion  que  S.  M.  dio  a  J.  B.

fuese  en  poder  de  hombre  humano  que  Tassis,  para Don  B.  de Mendoza and

me  pudicse  prender,  quanto  mas  seme-  Com'i'"!'""  Moreo,  May  3,  1590. (Areli.  de

jante  gente,"  &c.  Simancas  i\IS.)

0  2

196  THE  UNITED  NETHERLAJSDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

for  Farnese  was  very  well  aware  of  his  intrigues,
and  complained  bitterly  of  them  to  the  king  and  to  Idia-
j[uez.

Most  eloquently  and  indignantly  did  be  complain  of
the  calumnies,  ever  renewing  themselves,  of  which  he
was  the  subject.  "  'Tis  this  good  Moreo  who  is  the
author  of  the  last  falsehoods,"  said  he  to  the  secretary  ;
"  and  this  is  but  poor  payment  for  my  having  neglected
my  family,  my  parents  and  children  for  so  many  years
in  the  king's  service,  and  put  my  life  ever  on  the  hazard,
that  these  fellows  should  be  allowed  to  revile  me  and
make  game  of  me  now,  instead  of  assisting  me."  ^^

He  was  at  that  time,  after  almost  superhuman  exer-
tions, engaged  in  the  famous  relief  of  Paris.  He  had
gone  there,  he  said,  against  his  judgment  and  remon-
strating with  his  Majesty  on  the  insufficiency  of  men
and  money  for  such  an  enterprise.  His  army  was  half-
mutinous  and  unpiovided  with  food,  artillery,  or  muni-
tions ;  and  then  he  found  himself  slandered,  ridicided,
his  life's  life  lied  away.  'Twas  poor  payment  for  his
services,  he  exclaimed,  if  his  Majesty  shoidd  give  ear  to
these  calumniators,  and  should  give  him  no  chance  ol
confronting  his  accusers  and  clearing  his  reputation.
Moreo  detested  him,  as  he  knew,  and  Prince  Doria  said
tliat  the  commander  once  spoke  so  ill  of  Farnese  in
Genoa  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  beating  him;  while
Moreo  afteivvards  told  the  story  as  if  he  had  been  mal-
treated because  of  defending  Farnese  against  Doria's
slanders.^^

And  still  more  vehemently  did  he  inveigh  against
Moreo  in  his  direct  appeals  to  Philip. ^^  He  had  in-
tended to  pass  over  his  calumnies,  of  which  he  was  well
aware,  because  he  did  not  care  to  trouble  the  dead — for
Moreo  meantime  had  suddenly  died,  and  the  gossips,  of
course,  said  it  was  of  Farnese  poison^ — but  he  had  just
discovered  by  documents  that  the  commander  had  been

21  Parma  to  Idiaquez,  20 Oct. 1590. lero  de  Malta,  Uego  d  ser  primer  Mobil
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  de las furiosas guen'as  que  abrasaror

22  Parma  to  Philip ;  same  date. Ibid. tantos  aiios  a  Francia,  excessive  gastadoi

23  Ibid.  de  la  hazicnda  del  rey,  y  atrevidissimc
2*  "Murio  en  Miaux  a  los  treynta  de comprador  de  voluntades;  estf-  gano  la

Agosto (1590) el Gomendador Juan  del  Duque  deGuisa  de  manera  que  le  hizo

Moreo,"  says  Coloma  (iii. -17,  48,)  bombre  Espailol  de  corazon,  y  le  confirmo  on  el

de  ingenio  prompto  y  artiticioso,  que  ae  aborrecimiento  contra  los  htrejes,  y  sus

raoderados  principios  de  un  pobre  Cabal-  fautores  sin  excepciun  de  persona,  tan  i

1592.  PltOTKSTATIONS  OF  THK  DUKE  OF  PARMA.  197

steadily  and  constantly  ponring  these  liis  calumnies  into
the  monarch's  ears.  lie  denounced  every  charge  as  lies,
and  demanded  proof.  IMoreo  had  further  been  endea-
vouring to  prejudice  the  l)uke  of  Ma}-enne  against  the
King  of  Spain  and  himself,  saying  that  he,  Farnese,  had
been  connnissioned  to  take  Mayenne  into  custody,  with
plenty  of  similar  lies.

'•  But  what  I  most  feel,"  said  Alexander,  with  honest
wrath,  "  is  to  see  that  your  Majesty  gives  ear  to  them
withotit  making  the  demonstration  which  my  services
merit,  and  has  not  sent  to  inform  me  of  them,  seeing
that  they  may  involve  my  reputation  and  honour.  Peo-
ple have  made  more  account  of  these  calumnies  than  of
my  actions  performed  upon  the  theatre  of  the  world.  I
complain,  after  all  my  toils  and  dangers  in  your  Ma-
jesty's service,  just  when  I  stood  with  my  soul  in  my
mouth  and  death  in  my  teeth,  forgetting  children,  house,
and  friends,  to  be  treated  thus,  instead  of  receiving  re-
wards and  honour,  and  being  enabled  to  leave  to  my
children,  what  was  better  than  all  the  riches  the  ro^al
hand  could  bestow,  an  unsullied  and  honourable  name.""^

He  protested  that  his  reputation  had  so  much  suifered
that  he  would  prefer  to  retire  to  some  remote  corner  as
an  humble  servant  of  the  king,  and  leave  a  post  which
had  made  him  so  odious  to  all.  Above  all,  he  entreated
his  Majesty  to  look  upon  this  whole  affair  "  not  only  like
a  king  but  like  a  gentleman."^''

Philip  answered  these  complaints  and  reproaches  be-
nignantly,  expressed  unbounded  confidence  in  the  duke,
assitred  him  that  the  calumnies  of  his  supposed  enemies
could  produce  no  effect  upon  the  royal  mind,  and  coolly
professed  to  have  entirely  ibrgotten  having  received  any
such  letter  as  that  of  which  his  nephew  complained.
"  At  any  rate  I  have  mislaid  it,"  he  said,  "  so  that  you
see  how  much  account  it  was  with  me."^"

As  the  king  was  in  the  habit  of  receiving  such  letters
eveiy  week,  not  only  from  the  commander,  since  de-

la  descubici'ta  que  le  costo  la  vida :  a  el  ^^  \bid.

se  dixo  que  le  costd  la  suya  lo  que  escii-  -°  Parma  to  Philip,  20  Oct.  1590.  (Arcli.

vio  ai  rey  contra  el  Duque  de  Parma;  de  Simancas  MS.) "S(;a  scrvido  V.  M''

murio  casi  al  improvise  dospup.s  de  ciiTto  considerar  no  tan  solamente  con  ojos  di-

banquetp,  que  ocasiono  esta lama,  y  en  rey  mas  de  cavallcio  esto  negocio."

que  le  tra^o  no  menos  infamia  que  acre-  ^^  Philip  to  Parma,  5  Dec.  1590.  (Arch.

centamitnto."  de  Simancas  MS.)

198  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI.

ceased,  but  from  Ybarra  and  others,  his  memory,  to  say
the  least,  seemed  to  have  grown  remarkably  feeble.  But
the  sequel  will  very  soon  show  that  he  had  kept  the
letters  by  him  and  pondered  them  to  much  purpose.
To  expect  frankness  and  sincerity  from  him,  however,
even  in  his  most  intimate  communications  to  his  most
trusted  servants,  would  have  been  to  "  swim  with  fins  of
lead."

Such  being  the  private  relations  between  the  conspi-
rators, it  is  instructive  to  observe  how  they  dealt  with
each  other  in  the  great  game  they  were  playing  for  the
first  throne  in  Christendom.  The  military  events  have
been  sufiiciently  sketched  in  the  preceding  pages,  but
the  meaning  and  motives  of  public  affairs  can  be  best
understood  by  occasional  glances  behind  the  scenes.  It
is  well  for  those  who  woukl  maintain  their  faith  in  popu-
lar Governments  to  study  the  workings  of  the  secret,
irresponsible,  arbitrary  system ;  for  every  Government,
as  every  individual,  must  be  judged  at  last  by  those
moral  laws  which  no  man  born  of  woman  can  evade.

During  the  first  French  expedition — in  the  course  of
which  Farnese  had  saved  Paris  from  falling  into  the
hands  of  Henr}^  and  had  been  doing  his  best  to  convert
it  prospectively  into  the  capital  of  his  master's  empire —
it  was  his  duty,  of  course,  to  represent  as  accurately  as
possible  the  true  state  of  France.  He  submitted  his
actions  to  his  master's  will,  but  he  never  withheld  from
him  the  advantage  that  he  might  have  derived,  had  he
so  chosen,  from  his  nephew's  luminous  intelligence  and
patient  observation.

With  the  chief  personage  he  had  to  deal  with  he  pro-
fessed himself,  at  first,  well  satisfied.  "  The  Duke  of
Mayenne,"  said  he  to  Philip,  "  persists  in  desiring  your
Majesty  only  as  King  of  France,  and  will  hear  of  no
other  candidate,  which  gives  me  satisfaction  such  as
can't  be  exaggerated.""^  Although  there  were  difl&-
cultiys  in  the  way,  Farnese  thought  that  the  two  toge-
ther with  God's  help  might  conquer  them.  "Certainly
it  is  not  impossible  that  your  Majesty  may  succeed,"  he
said,  "  although  very  problematical ;  and  in  case  your

28  Panna  to  Philip,  21  Oct.  1590.  (Arch,  que  V.  M"*  en  este  reyno  lo  cual  nos
de  Simancas  MS.)  "  Que  es  persistir  el  viene  tan  a  cuento  que  no  hay  para  que
D.  de  Umena  en  no  pretender  otn rey encarescello.''

I

1592. RELATIONS  BETWEEN  I'HILIP  AND  MAYENNE. 199

Majest}"  does  succeed  in  that  which  Ave  all  desire  and
are  struggling  for,  Mayeune  not  only  demands  the
second  place  in  the  kingdom  for  himself,  but  the  fief
of  some  great  province  for  his  family."  -^

Should  it  not  be  possible  for  Philip  to  obtain  the
crown,  Farnese  was,  on  the  Avhole,  of  opinion  that
Mayenne  had  better  be  elected.  In  that  event  he
would  make  over  Brittany  and  Biirgi;ndy  to  Philip,
together  with  the  cities  opposite  the  English  coast.  If
they  Avere  obliged  to  make  the  duke  king,  as  Avas  to  be
feared,  they  should  at  any  rate  exclude  the  Prince  of
Bearne,  and  secure,  what  Avas  the  chief  point,  the  Catho-
lic religion,  "  This,"  said  Alexander,  "is  about  Avhat  1
can  gather  of  Mayenne's  A'iews,  and  perhaps  he  Avill  put
them  down  in  a  despatch  to  your  Majesty."^**

After  all  the  duke  Avas  explicit  enough.  He  was  for
taking  all  he  could  get — the  Avhole  kingdom  if  possible
— but  if  foiled,  then  as  large  a  slice  of  it  as  Philip  would
giA'e  him  as  the  price  of  his  serAdces.  And  I'hilip's  ideas
Avere  not  materially  different  from  those  of  the  other
conspirator.

Both  were  agreed  on  one  thing.  The  true  heir  must
be  kept  out  of  his  rights,  and  the  Catholic  religion  be
maintained  in  its  pxirity.  As  to  the  inclination  of  the
majority  of  the  inhabitants,  they  could  hardly  be  in  the
dark.  They  knew  that  the  Bearnese  Avas  instinct lA'ely
demanded  by  the  nation ;  for  his  accession  to  the  throne
would  furnish  the  only  possible  solution  to  the  entangle-
ments which  had  so  long  existed.^'

As  to  the  true  sentiments  of  the  other  politicians  and
soldiers  of  the  League  Avith  whom  Farnese  came  in  con-
tact in  France,  he  did  not  disguise  from  his  master  that
they  Avere  anything  but  favourable.

"  That  you  may  know  the  humour  of  this  kingdom,"
said  he,  "  and  the  difficulties  in  Avhich  I  am  placed,  I
must  tell  you  that  I  am  by  large  experience  much  con-
firmed in  that  which  I  have  always  suspected.  Men
don't  love  nor  esteem  the  royal  name  of  your  Majesty ;
and  whatever  the  benefits  and  assistance  they  get  from
you  they  have  no  idea  of  anything  redounding  to  your
benefit  and  royal  service,  except  so  far  as  implied  in

29  Letter  last  cit^d.  30  ibid.

31  Parma  to  Philip,  Oct.  3,  1590. (Arch,  de  Simancas  Mi)

200  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

maintaining  the  Catholic  religion  and  keeping  out  the
Bearne.  These  two  thing.s,  however,  they  liold  to  be  so
entirely  to  yonr  Majesty's  profit,  that  all  you  are  doing
appears  the  fulfilment  of  a  simple  obligation.  Tliey  are
filled  with  fear,  jealousy,  and  suspicion  of  your  Majesty.
They  dread  your  acquiring  power  here.  Whatever  nego-
tiations they  pretend  in  regard  to  putting  the  kingdom
or  any  of  their  cities  under  your  protection,  they  have
never  had  any  real  intention  of  doing  it,  but  their  only
object  is  to  keep  up  our  vain  hopes  while  they  are
cariying  out  their  own  ends.  If  to-day  they  seem  to
have  agreed  upon  any  measure,  to-morrow  they  are  sure
to  get  out  of  it  again.  This  has  always  been  the  case,
and  all  your  Majesty's  ministers  that  have  had  dealings
here  would  say  so,  if  they  chose  to  tell  the  truth.  Men
are  disgusted  with  the  entrance  of  the  army,  and  if  they
were  not  expecting  a  more  advantageous  peace  in  the
kingdom  with  my  assistance  than  without  it,  I  don't
know  what  they  would  do ;  for  I  have  heard  what  I
have  heard  and  seen  what  I  have  seen.  They  are  afraid
of  our  army,  but  they  want  its  assistance  and  our
money."  ^"

Certainly  if  Philip  desired  enlightenment  as  to  the
real  condition  of  the  cormtry  he  had  determined  to  ap-
propriate, and  the  true  sentiments  of  its  most  influential
inhabitants,  here  was  the  man  most  competent  of  all  the
world  to  advise  him,  describing  the  situation  for  him,
day  by  day,  in  the  most  faithful  manner.  And  at  every
step  the  absolutely  puerile  inadequacy  of  the  means  em-
plo3'ed  by  the  king  to  accomplish  his  gigantic  purposes
became  apparent.  If  the  crime  of  subjugating  or  at
least  dismembering  the  great  kingdom  of  France  were
to  be  attempted  with  any  hope  of  success,  at  least  it  might
have  been  expected  that  the  man  employed  to  consum-
mate the  deed  would  be  furnished  with  more  troops  and
money  than  would  be  required  to  appropriate  a  savage
island  in  the  Caribbean,  or  a  German  principality.  But
Philip  expected  miracles  to  be  accomplished  by  the  mere
private  assertion  of  his  will.  It  was  so  easy  to  conquer
realms  at  the  writing  table.

"I  don't  say,"  continued  Farnese,  "  if  I  could  have
entered  France  with  a  competent  army,  well  paid  and

32  Parma  to  Philip,  Oct.  3,  1590.  (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

1

1592.  COMMERCIAL  PURSUITS  OF  PHILIP.  201

disciplined,  with  plenty  of  artillery  and  munitions,  and
with  funds  enough  to  enable  Mayenne  to  buy  up  the
nobles  of  his  party,  and  to  conciliate  the  leaders  gene-
rally with  presents  and  piomises,  that  perhaps  they
might  not  have  softened.  I'erhaps  interest  and  fear
would  have  made  that  name  agreeable  which  pleases
them  so  little,  now  that  the  very  reverse  of  all  this  has
occurred.  My  want  of  means  is  causing  a  thousand  dis-
gusts among  the  natives  of  the  country,  and  it  is  this
penury  that  will  be  the  chief  cause  of  the  disasters  which
may  occur."  ^^

Here  was  sufficiently  plain  speaking.  To  conquer  a
warlike  nation  without  an  army,  to  purchase  a  rapacious
nobility  with  an  empty  puise,  were  tasks  which  inight
bi-eak  the  stoutest  heart.  They  were  breaking  Alex-
ander's.

Yet  Philip  had  funds  enough,  if  he  had  possessed
financial  ability  himself,  or  any  talent  for  selecting
good  financiers.  The  richest  countries  of  the  old  world
and  the  new  were  under  his  sceptre  ;  the  mines  of  Peru
and  ]\lexico,  the  wealth  of  farthest  Ind,  were  at  his  dis-
position ;  and  moreover  he  drove  a  lucrative  traffic  in
the  sale  of  papal  bulls  and  mass-books,  which  were  fur-
nished to  him  at  a  very  low  figure,  and  which  he  com-
pelled the  wild  Indians  of  America  and  the  savages  of
the  Pacific  to  purchase  of  him  at  an  enormous  advance.
That  veiy  year,  a  Spanish  carrack  had  been  captured
by  the  English  ofi"  the  Barbary  coast.  Math  an  assorted
cargo,  the  miscellaneous  nature  of  which  gives  an  idea
of  royal  commercial  pursuits  at  that  period.  Besides
wine  in  large  quantities,  there  were  fourteen  hundred
chests  of  quicksilver,  an  article  indispensable  to  the
working  of  the  silver  mines,  and  which  no  one  but
the  king  could,  upon  pain  of  death,  send  to  America.
He  received,  according  to  contract,  for  every  pound  of
quicksilver  thus  delivered  a  pound  of  pure  silver,  weight
for  weight.  The  ship  likewise  contained  ten  cases  of
gilded  mass- books  and  papal  bulls.  The  bulls,  two  mil-
lion and  seventy  thousand  in  number,  for  the  dead  and
the  living,  were  intended  for  the  provinces  of  New
Spain,  Yucatan,  Guatemala,  Honduras,  and  the  Philip-
pines. The  quicksilver and  the  bulls cost  the  king

33  I'aima  to  Philip,  Oct.  3,  1590. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

202  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI,

three  hundred  thousand  florins,  Iwt  he  sold  them  for
five  million.  The  price  at  which  the  bulls  were  to  be
sold  varied — according  to  the  letters  of  advice  found  in
the  ships — from  two  to  four  reals  a  piece,  and  the  inha-
bitants of  those  conquered  regions  were  obliged  to  buy
them.^  "  From  all  this,"  says  a  contemporary  chro-
nicler, "is  to  be  seen  what  a  thrifty  trader  was  the
king."^^

The  affairs  of  France  were  in  such  confusion  that  it
was  impossible  for  them,  according  to  Farnese,  to  remain
in  such  condition  much  longer  without  bringing  about
entire  decomposition.  Every  man  was  doing  as  he  chose
— whether  governor  of  a  city,  commander  of  a  district,
or  gentleman  in  his  castle.  Many  important  nobles  and
prelates  followed  the  Bearnese  party,  and  Mayenne  was
entitled  to  credit  for  doing  as  well  as  he  did.  There
was  no  pretence,  however,  that  his  creditable  conduct
was  due  to  anything  but  the  hope  of  being  well  paid.
"  If  your  Majesty  should  decide  to  keep  Mayenne,"  said
Alexander,  "you  can  only  do  it  with  large  sums  of
money.  He  is  a  good  Catholic  and  very  firm  in  his
purpose,  but  is  so  much  opposed  by  his  own  party,  that
if  I  had  not  so  stimulated  him  by  hopes  of  his  own  gran-
deur, he  would  have  grown  desperate — such  small  means
has  he  of  maintaining  his  party — and,  it  is  to  be  feared,
he  would  have  made  arrangements  with  Bearne,  who
offers  him  carte-blanche."^"

The  disinterested  man  had  expressed  his  assent  to  the
views  of  Philip  in  regard  to  the  assembly  of  the  estates
and  the  election  of  king,  but  had  claimed  the  sum  ol
six  hundred  thousand  dollars  as  absolutely  necessary  to
the  support  of  himself  and  followers  until  those  events
should  occur.^^  Alexander  not  having  that  sum  at  his
disposal  was  inclined  to  defer  matters,  but  was  more  and
more  confirmed  in  his  opinion  that  the  Duke  was  a
"man  of  truth,  fciith,  and  his  word."^^  He  had  dis-
tinctly agreed  that  no  king  should  be  elected,  not  satis-
factoiy  to  Philip,  and  had  "  stipulated  in  return  that  he
should  have  in  this  case,  not  only  the  second  place  in

31  Meteren,  xvi.  300.  «  ibid.

36  Parma  to  Philip,  Oct.  3,  1590. (Arch,  de  .SimancasMS.)
^'*  "  Hombre  de  verdad,  fe  y  palabra." (Ibid.)

i

IS'J-J.  STATE  OF  AFFAIRS  IN  FRANCE.  203

the  kingdom,  but  some  very  great  and  special  reward
in  full  property."^''

TluTs  the  man  of  truth,  faith,  and  his  word  had  no
idea  of  selling  himself  cheap,  but  numifested  as  much
commercial  genius  as  the  Fuggers  themselves  could  have
displayed,  had  they  been  employed  as  brokers  in  these
mercantile  transactions.

Above  all  things,  Alexander  implored  the  king  to
be  expeditious,  resolute,  and  liberal ;  for,  after  all,  the
Bearnese  might  prove  a  more  formidable  competitor
than  he  was  deemed.  "These  matters  must  be  ar-
ranged while  the  iron  is  hot,"  he  said,  "in  order  that
the  name  and  memory  of  the  Bearne  and  of  all  his  family
may  be  excluded  at  once  and  for  ever ;  for  your  Majesty
must  not  doubt  that  the  whole  kingdom  inclines  to  him.
both  because  he  is  natural  successor  to  the  crown,  and
because  in  this  way  the  civil  war  would  cease.  The
only  thing  that  gives  trouble  is  the  religious  defect,  so
that  if  this  should  be  remedied  in  appearance,  even  if
falsely,  men  would  spare  no  pains  nor  expense  in  his
cause."'"'

No  human  being  at  that  moment,  assuredly,  could
look  into  the  immediate  future  accurately  enough  to
see  whether  the  name  and  memory  of  the  man,  whom
his  adherents  called  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France,  and
whom  Spaniards,  legitimists  and  enthusiastic  papists,
called  the  Prince  of  Bearne,  were  to  be  for  ever  ex-
cluded from  the  archives  of  France ;  whether  Henrj-,
after  spending  the  whole  of  his  life  as  a  pretender,  was
destined  to  bequeath  the  same  empty  part  to  his  descen-
dants, should  they  think  it  worth  their  while  to  play  it.
Meantime  the  sages  smiled  superior  at  his  delusion ;
while  Alexander  Farnese,  on  the  contrary,  better  under-
standing the  chances  of  the  great  game  which  they  were
all  playing,  made  bold  to  tell  his  master  that  all  hearts
in  France  were  inclining  to  their  natural  lord.  "  Differ-
ing from  your  Majesty,"  said  he,  "  I  am  of  opinion  that
there  is  no  better  means  of  excluding  him  than  to  make
choice  of  the  Duke  of  Maj-enne,  as  a  person  agreeable  to

39  Parma to Philip, Oct. 3, 1590.  de  Bearne  y  do  los  de  sn  casa,  a  quien

(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  no  dude  V. I\I''  de que  el royno todo

w  ibid. "  Que  con  esto  quedara cs-  inclina,  aai  por  ser  naturalcmente  suco

cluido  totalmente  el  nouibrc  y  memoria  sores  del,"  &c.

204  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. C.iAr.  XXVIIl.

the  people,  and  who  could  only  reign  by  yonr  permission
and  support."  ^^

Thus,  after  nauch  hesitation  and  circnnilocution,  the
nephew  made  xip  his  mind  to  chill  his  uncle's  hopes  of
the  crown,  and  to  speak  a  decided  opinion  in  behalf
of  the  man  of  his  word,  faith,  and  truth.

And  thus  through  the  whole  of  the  two  memorable
campaigns  made  by  Alexander  in  France,  he  never  failed
to  give  his  master  the  most  accurate  pictures  of  the
country,  and  an  interior  view  of  its  politics ;  urging
above  all  the  absolute  necessity  of  providing  much  more
liberal  supplies  for  the  colossal  adventure  in  which  he
was  engaged.  "  Money  and  again  money  is  what  is
required,"  he  said.  "  The  principal  matter  is  to  be  ac-
complished with  money,  and  the  particular  individuals
must  be  bought  with  money.  The  good  will  of  every
French  city  must  be  bought  with  money.  Mayenne
must  be  humoured.  He  is  getting  dissatisfied.  Very
probably  he  is  intriguing  with  Bearne.  Everybody  is
pursuing  his  private  ends.  Mayenne  has  never  aban-
doned his  own  wish  to  be  king,  although  he  sees  the
difficulties  in  the  way ;  and  while  he  has  not  the  power
to  do  us  as  much  good  as  is  thought,  it  is  certainly  in
his  hands  to  do  us  a  great  deal  of  injury."*^

When  his  army  was  rapidly  diminishing  by  disease,
desertion,  mutiny,  and  death,  he  vehemently  and  per-
petually denounced  the  utter  inadequacy  of  the  king's
means  to  his  vast  projects.  He  protested  that  he  was
not  to  blame  for  the  ruin  likely  to  come  upon  the  whole
enterprise.  He  had  besought,  remonstrated,  reasoned
with  Philip — in  vain.*^  He  assured  his  master  that  in
the  condition  of  weakness  in  which  they  found  them-
selves, not  very  triumphant  negotiations  could  be  ex-
pected, but  that  he  would  do  his  best.  "  The  French-
men," he  said,  "are  getting  tired  of  our  disorders,  and
scandalized  by  our  weakness,  misery,  and  poverty.  They
disbelieve  the  possibility  of  being  liberated  through
us.""

He  was  also  most  diligent  in  setting  before  the  king's
eyes  the  dangerous  condition  of  the  obedient  Nether-
lands, the  poverty  of  the  finances,  the  mutinous  degene-

•n  Letter  last  cited. ''■-  I'arma  to  Philip,  11  Marcb,  1592.  (Arcb.  de  Simancas  MS.)
«  ibid.  **  Same  to  same,  2  June,  1592. (Ibid.)

1592.  DISCOVERY  OF  RELICS  BY  FARNESE.  205

ration  of  tlie  once  magnificent  Sjianisli  army,  the  misery
of  the  country,  the  ruin  of  tlie  people,  the  discontent  of
the  nobles,  the  rapid  strides  made  by  the  republic,  the
vast  iin]n-ovemeut  in  its  military  oiganizatiun,  the  rising
fame  of  its  young  stadliulder,  the  thrift  of  its  exchequer,
the  rapid  development  of  its  commerce,  the  menacing
aspect  which  it  assumed  towards  all  that  was  left  of
Spanish  power  in  those  regions.

Moreover,  in  the  midst  of  the  toils  and  anxieties  of
war-making  and  negotiation,  he  had  found  time  to
discover  and  to  send  to  his  master  the  left  leg  of  the
glorious  apostle  St.  Philip,  and  the  head  of  the  glorious
martyr  St.  Lawrence,  to  enrich  his  collection  of  relics ;
and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  these  treasures  weie  not
as  welcome  to  the  king  as  would  have  been  the  news  of
a  decisive  victory.*^

During  the  absence  of  Farnese  in  his  expeditions
against  the  Bearnese,  the  government  of  his  provinces
was  temporaiily  in  the  hands  of  Teter  Ernest  Mansfeld.

This  grizzled  old  fighter — testy,  choleric,  superan-
nuated—was utterly  incompetent  for  his  post.  He  was
a  mere  tool  in  the  hands  of  his  son.  Count  Charles
hated  Parma  very  cordiall}',  and  old  Count  Peter  was
made  to  believe  himself  in  danger  of  being  poisoned
or  poniarded  by  the  duke.  He  was  perpetually  wrang-
ling with,  importuning  and  insulting  him  in  conse-
quence, and  writing  malicious  letters  to  the  king  in
regard  to  him.'"^  TJ:ie  great  nobles,  Arschot,  Chimay,
Berlaymont,  Champagu}',  Arenberg,  and  the  rest,  were
all  bickering  among  themselves,  and  agreeing  in  nothing-
save  in  hatred  to  Farnese.

«  Parma to Philip, 4 July, 1592.  Peter Ernest Mansfeld, 6 Aug. 1592.

(Arch, de Simancas MS.) Philip to  Mansfeld  to  Philip,  8  Aug.  1592. Parma

Parma,  1  Aug.  1592. Ibid. "Quanto a  to  Mansfeld,  IB Aug. 1592. Partua  to

lacabeza  del  glorioso  San  Lorenzo,  agra-  Philip,  24 Aug.  1592. "  Porque  con  su

dezco  OS  el  cuydado  que  mostrais  de  ha-  largavejez,"  s.iid  Fuentes  of  Peter  Krnest,

berla,  yosentargo  que  lo  Ueveis  adelante  "  se  halla  muy  decrepito  y  dosacordado

hasta salir  con  ello  que  os  tcndrd en  que  esto  y  ver  quan  sugeto  c.st.a  al  hijo

mucho  particular  servicio  que  se  hagapor  qui le  govierna  como a una  criatura."

vuestro medio."' Parma  to Philip, 24  Fuentes  to  Philip,  13  Dec.  1592. (Arch.

Aug. 1592. Ibid. Philip to Parma, 11  de  Simancas  MS.) Esteven  de  Yvarra  to

Sept. 1592. Letter  to  Parma. (Arch.  ,  9 April, 1593— Ibid. Fuentes  to

,„ .  ^  ,,„ . 33 ,,^  ^  Philip,  28  April,  1593— Ibid. Ybarra  to

de  Simancas  (Pans)  MS.  A  56,  -• MS.)  ^ ^  May,  1593-lbid.  Same  to  Philip,

^6  Parma to Philip, 31 July, 1592.  26  July, 1593— Ibid. Fuentes to the

Arch, de Simancas MS.) Parma  to  Secretaries  of  State,  2  «ept.  1593 — Ibid.

206  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI.

A  tight  rein,  a  full  exchequer,  a  well-ordered  and
well-paid  armj',  and  his  own  constant  patience,  were
necessary,  as  Alexander  too  well  knew,  to  make  head
against  the  republic,  and  to  hold  what  was  left  of  the
Netherlands.  But  with  a  monthly  allowance,  and  a
military  force  not  equal  to  his  own  estimates  for  the
Netherland  work,  he  was  ordered  to  go  forth  from  the
Netherlands  to  conquer  France — and  with  it  the  do-
minion of  the  world — for  the  recluse  of  the  Escorial.

Very  soon  it  was  his  duty  to  lay  bare  to  his  master,
still  more  unequivocally  tlian  ever,  the  real  heart  of
Mayenne.  No  one  could  sui-pass  Alexander  in  this
skilful  vivisection  of  political  characters  ;  and  he  soon
sent  the  information  that  the  duke  was  in  reality  very
near  closing  his  bargain  with  the  Bearnese,  while
amusing  Philip  and  drawing  largely  from  his  funds.

Thus,  while  faithfully  doing  his  master's  work  with
sword  and  pen,  with  an  adroitness  such  as  no  other  man
could  have  matched,  it  was  a  necessary  consequence
that  Philip  should  suspect,  should  detest,  should  resolve
to  sacrifice  him.  While  assuring  his  nephew,  as  we
have  seen,  that  elaborate,  slanderous  reports  and  pro-
tocols concerning  him,  sent  with  such  regularity  by  the
chivalrous  Moreo  and  the  other  spies,  had  been  totally
disregarded,  even  if  they  had  ever  met  his  eye,  he  was
quietly  preparing  —  in  the  midst  of  all  these  most
strenuous  efforts  of  Alexander,  in  the  field  at  peril  of
his  life,  in  the  cabinet  at  the  risk  of  his  soul — to  deprive
him  of  his  office,  and  to  bring  him,  by  stratagem  if
possible,  but  otherwise  by  main  force,  from  the  Nether-
lands to  Spain.

This  project,  once  resolved  upon,  the  king  proceeded
to  execute  with  that  elaborate  attention  to  detail,  with
that  feline  stealth  which  distinguished  him  above  all
kings  or  chiefs  of  police  that  have  ever  existed.  Had
there  been  a  murder  at  the  end  of  the  plot — as  perhaps
there  was  to  be — Philip  could  not  have  enjoyed  himself
more.  Nothing  surpassed  the  industry  for  mischief  of
this  royal  invalid.

The  first  thing  to  be  done  was  of  course  the  inditing
of  a  most  affectionate  epistle  to  his  nephew.

"  Nephew,"  said  he,  "  you  know  the  confidence  which
I  have  always  placed  in  you  and  all  that  I  have  put  in

1592.  PLOT  AGAINST  FARNESE.  207

your  hands ;  aBd  I  know  how  much  yon  are  to  me,  and
how  earnestly  you  work  in  my  service,  and  so,  if  I  could
have  you  at  the  same  time  in  several  places,  it  would  be
a  great  relief  to  me.  Since  1his  cannot  he  however,  1
wish  to  make  use  of  your  assistance,  according  to  the
times  and  occasions,  in  order  that  I  may  have  some
certainty  as  to  the  manner  in  which  all  this  business
is  to  be  managed,  may  see  why  the  settlement  of  afiairs
in  France  is  thus  delayed,  and  what  the  state  of  things
in  Christendom  generally  is,  and  may  consult  with  you
about  an  army  which  I  am  getting  levied  here,  and
about  certain  schemes  now  on  foot  in  legard  to  the
remedy  for  all  this ;  all  which  makes  me  desire  your
presence  here  for  some  time,  even  if  a  short  time,  in
oi'der  to  resolve  upon  and  arrange,  with  the  aid  of  your
advice  and  opinion,  many  afiairs  concerning  the  public
good,  and  facilitate  their  execution  by  means  of  your
encouragement  and  presence,  and  to  obtain  the  repose
which  1  hope  for  in  putting  them  into  your  hands.  And
so  I  charge  and  command  you  that,  if  you  desire  to
content  me,  you  use  all  possible  diligence  to  let  me  see
A'ou  here  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  you  start  at  once
JFor  Genoa." ''

He  was  further  directed  to  leave  Count  Mansfeld  at
the  head  of  aifairs  during  this  temporary  absence, — as
had  been  the  case  so  often  before, — instmcting  him  to
make  use  of  the  Marquis  of  Cerralbo,  who  was  already
there,  to  lighten  labours  that  might  prove  too  much  for
a  man  of  Mansfeld's  advanced  age.

''  1  am  writing  to  the  marquis,"  continued  the  king,
"  telling  him  that  he  is  to  obey  all  your  orders.  As  to
the  reasons  of  your  going  away,  you  will  give  out  that
it  is  a  decision  of  your  own,  founded  on  good  cause,  or
that  it  is  a  summons  of  mine,  but  full  of  confidence  and
good  will  towards  you,  as  you  see  that  it  is."  *^

The  date  of  this  letter  was  20th  February,  1592.

The  secret  instructions  to  the  man  who  was  thus  to
obey  all  the  duke's  orders  were  explicit  enough  upon
that  point,  although  they  were  wrajiped  in  the  usual
closely-twisted  phraseology  which  distinguished  Fhilip's
style  when  his  purpose  was  most  direct.

Cerralbo  was  entrusted  with  general  directions  as  to

«  Philip  to  Parma,  20  Feb.  1592. (Arch,  ile  Simancas  MS.)  «  Ibid.

208  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVIII.

the  French  matter,  and  as  to  peace  nesrotiations  with
"  the  Islands  ;"  but  the  main  purport  of  his  mission  was
to  remove  Alexander  Farnese.  This  was  to  be  done  by
fair  means,  if  possible  ;  if  not,  he  was  to  be  deposed  and
sent  home  by  force.

This  was  to  be  the  reward  of  all  the  toil  and  danger
through  which  he  had  grown  grey  and  broken  in  the
king's  service.

"  When  yon  get  to  the  Netherlands"  (for  the  instruc-
tions were  older  than  the  letter  to  Alexander  just
cited),  "j-ou  are,"  said  the  king,  "to  treat  of  the  other
two  matters  until  the  exact  time  arrives  for  the  third,
taking  good  care  not  to  cut  the  thread  of  good  progress
in  the  affaii's  of  France  if  by  chance  they  are  geiing  on
well  there.

"  When  the  time  arrives  to  treat  of  commission
number  three,"  continued  his  I\Iajesty,  "  you  will  take
occasion  of  the  arrival  of  the  courier  of  20th  February,
and  will  give  with  much  secresy  the  letter  of  tliat  date
to  the  duke  ;  showing  him  at  the  same  time  the  first  of
the  two  which  you  will  have  received."

If  the  duke  showed  the  letter  addressed  to  him  by
his  uncle — which  the  reader  has  already  seen — then
the  marquis  was  to  discuss  with  him  the  details  of
the  journe}^  and  comment  upon  the  benefits  and  in-
creased reputation  which  would  be  the  result  of  his
return  to  Spain.

"  But  if  the  duke  should  not  show  yon  the  letter,"
proceeded  Philip,  "  and  you  suspect  that  he  means  to
conceal  and  equivocate  about  the  particulars  of  it,  you
can  show  him  your  letter  number  two,  in  Avhich  it  is
stated  that  you  have  received  a  copy  of  the  letter  to  the
duke. This  will  make  the  step  easier."

Should  the  duke  declare  himself  ready  to  proceed  to
Spain  on  the  ground  indicated — that  the  king  had  need
of  his  services — the  marquis  was  then  to  hasten  his
departure  as  earnestly  as  possible.  Ever}^  pains  were  to
be  taken  to  overcome  any  objections  that  might  be
made  by  the  dulce  on  the  score  of  ill  health,  while  the
great  credit  whicih  attached  to  this  summons  to  consult
with  the  king  in  such  arduous  affairs  was  to  be  duly
enlarged  upon.  Should  Count  Mansfeld  meantime  die
of  old  age,  and  should Farnese insist  the  more  vehe-

1592,  PHILIP'S  TREACHERY  TOWARDS  FARNESE.  209

mently,  on  that  account,  upon  leaving  his  son  tlie
Prince  Ranuccio  in  his  post  as  governor,  the  marquis
was  authorised  to  accept  the  proposition  for  the  moment
— although  secretly  instructed  that  such  an  appointment
was  really  quite  out  of  the  question — if  by  so  doing  the
father  could  be  torn  from  the  place  immediately.

But  if  all  would  not  do,  and  if  it  should  become
certain  that  the  duke  would  definitively  refuse  to  take
his  departure,  it  would  then  become  necessary  to  tell
him  clearly,  but  secretly,  that  no  excuse  would  be
accepted,  but  that  go  he  must ;  and  that  if  he  did  not
dej^art  voluntarily  within  a  fixed  time,  he  would  be
publicly  deprived  of  office,  and  conducted  to  Spain  by
force  .*^

But  all  these  things  were  to  be  managed  with  the
secrecy  and  mystery  so  dear  to  the  heart  of  Philip.
The  marquis  was  instructed  to  go  first  to  the  castle  of
Antweip,  as  if  upon  financial  business,  and  there  begin
his  operations.  Should  he  find  at  last  all  his  private
negotiations  and  coaxings  of  no  avail,  he  was  then  to
make  use  of  his  secret  letters  from  the  king  to  the  army
commanders,  the  leading  nobles  of  the  country,  and  the
neighbouring  princes,  all  of  whom  were  to  be  unde-
ceived in  regard  to  the  duke,  and  to  be  informed  of  the
will  of  his  majesty.''"

The  real  successor  of  Farnese  was  to  be  the  Archduke
Albert,  Cardinal  of  Austria,  son  of  Archduke  Ferdinand,
and  the  letters  on  this  subject  were  to  be  sent  by  a
"  decent  and  confidential  person  "  so  soon  as  it  should
become  obvious  that  force  would  be  necessary  in  order
to  compel  the  departure  of  Alexander.  For  if  it  came
to  open  rupture,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  the
cardinal  ready  to  take  the  place.  If  the  affair  were
arranged  amicably,  then  the  new  governor  might  proceed
more  at  leisure.  The  marquis  was  especially  enjoined,
in  case  the  duke  should  be  in  France,  and  even  if  it
should  be  necessary  for  him  to  follow  him  there  on
account  of  commissions  number  one  and  two,  not  to  say
a  word  to  him  then  of  his  recall,  for  fear  of  damaging
matters  in  that  kingdom. He  was  to do  his  best  to

«  Sumario  de  lo  que  S.  M*  es  servido  de  palabra. 31 Dec.  1591. (Arcli. de

que  baga  V.  en  su  coniisiun principal  Simancjis  MS.)
como  mas  paiticularmente  se  le  ha  dicho so  ibid.

VOL. HI.  P

210  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXVni.

induce  him  to  return  to  Flanders,  and  when  they  were
both  there,  he  was  to  begin  his  operations,^^

Thus,  with  minute  and  artistic  treachery,  did  Philip
provide  for  the  disgrace  and  ruin  of  the  man  who  was
his  near  blood  relation,  and  who  had  served  him  most
faithfully  from  earliest  youth.  It  was  not  possible  to
carry  out  the  project  immediately,  for,  as  it  has  already
been  narrated,  Farnese,  after  achieving,  in  spite  of
great  obstacles  due  to  the  dulness  of  the  king  alone,  an
extraordinary  triumph,  had  been  dangerously  wounded,
and  was  unable  for  a  brief  interval  to  attend  to  public
afi'airs.

On  the  conclusion  of  his  Eouen  campaign  he  had
returned  to  the  Netherlands,  almost  immediately  be-
taking himself  to  the  waters  of  Spa.  The  Marquis  de
Cerralbo  meanwhile  had  been  superseded  in  his  im-
portant secret  mission  by  the  Count  of  Fuentes,  who
received  the  same  instructions  as  had  been  provided  for
the  marquis.

But  ere  long  it  seemed  to  become  unnecessary  to
push  matters  to  extremities.  Farnese,  although  nomi-
nally the  governor,  felt  himself  unequal  to  take  the
field  against  the  vigorous  young  commander  who  was
carrying  everything  before  him  in  the  north  and  east.
Upon  the  Mansfelds  was  the  responsibility  for  saving
Steenwyk  and  Coeworden,  and  to  the  Mansfelds  did
Verdugo  send  piteously,  but  in  vain,  for  efficient  help.
For  the  Mansfelds  and  other  leading  personages  in  the
obedient  Netherlands  were  mainly  occupied  at  that
time  in  annoying  Farnese,  calumniating  his  actions,
laying  obstacles  in  the  way  of  his  administration,  mili-
tary and  civil,  and  bringing  him  into  contempt  with  the
popiilace.  When  the  weary  soldier — broken  in  health,
wounded  and  harassed  with  obtaining  triumphs  for  his
master  such  as  no  other  livir.g  man  could  have  gained
with  the  means  placed  at  his  disposal — returned  to
drink  the  waters  previously  to  setting  forth  anew  upon
the  task  of  achieving  the  impossible,  he  was  made  the
mark  of  petty  insults  on  the  part  of  both  the  Mansfelds.
Neither  of  them  paid  their  respects  to  him,  ill  as  he
was,  until  four  days  after  his  arrival. When  the  duke

^1  MS.  last  cited.  Also  Philip  to  the  Duke  of  Sessa,  ambassador  at  Rome,  3  Nov.
1592. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.) Philip  to  Parma,  same  date. (Ibid.)

1592.  CONDUCT  OF  THE  MANSFELDS.  211

subsequently  called  a  council,  Count  Peter  refused  to
attend  it  on  account  of  having  slept  ill  the  night  before.
Champagny,  who  was  one  of  the  chief  mischief  niaker«,
had  been  banished  by  Parma  to  his  house  in  Burgundy.
He  became  very  much  alarmed,  and  was  afraid  of  losing
his  head.  He  tried  to  conciliate  the  duke,  but  finding
it  difficult  he  resolved  to  turn  monk,  and  so  went  to  the
convent  of  Capuchins,  and  begged  hard  to  be  admitted  a
member.  They  refused  him  on  account  of  his  age  and
infinnities.  He  tried  a  Franciscan  monastery  with  not
much  better  success,  and  then  obeyed  orders  and  went
to  his  Burgundy  mansion,  having  been  assured  by
Farnese  that  he  was  not  to  lose  his  head.  Alexander
was  satisfied  with  that  arrangement,  feeling  sure,  he
said,  that  so  soon  as  his  back  was  turned  Champagny
would  come  out  of  his  convent  before  the  term  of
probation  had  expired,  and  begin  to  make  mischief
again.  A  once  valiant  soldier,  like  Champagny,  whose
conduct  in  the  famous  "  fury  of  Antwerp "  was  so
memorable,  and  whose  services  both  in  field  and  cabinet
had  been  so  distinguished,  fallen  so  low  as  to  be  used  as
a  tool  by  the  Mansfelds  against  a  man  like  Farne.se^  and
to  be  rejected  as  unfit  company  by  Flemish  friars,  is  not
a  cheerful  spectacle  to  contemplate.

The  walls  of  the  Mansfeld  house  and  gardens,  too,
were  decorated  by  Count  Charles  with  caricatures,
intending  to  illustrate  the  indignities  put  upon  his
father  and  himself.  Among  others,  one  picture  repre-
sented Count  Peter  lying  tied  hand  and  foot,  while
people  were  throwing  filth  upon  him  :  Count  Charles
being  pourtrayed  as  meantime  being  kicked  away  from
the  command  of  a  battery  of  cannon  by  l)e  la  Motte.
It  seemed  strange  that  the  Mansfelds  should  make
themselves  thus  elaborately  ridiculous,  in  order  to
irritate  Farnese ;  but  thus  it  was.  There  was  so  much
stir  about  these  works  of  art  that  Alexander  trans-
mitted copies  of  them  to  the  king,  whereupon  Charles
Mansfeld,  being  somewhat  alarmed,  endeavoured  to
prove  that  they  had  been  entirely  misunder.-tood.  The
venerable  personage  lying  on  the  ground,  he  explained,
was  not  his  father,  but  Socrates.  He  found  it  difficult
however,  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  La  Motte,
with  his  one  arm  wanting  and  with  artillery  by  his  side,

i>  2

212  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap,  XXVIII.

because,  as  Farnese  justly  remarked,  artilleiy  had  not
been  invented  in  the  time  of  Socrates  ^^  nor  was  it  re-
corded that  the  sage  had  lost  an  arm.

Thus  passed  the  autumn  of  1592,  and  Alexander,
having  as  he  supposed  somewhat  recruited  his  failing
strength,  prepared,  according  to  his  master's  orders,  for  a
new  campaign  in  France.  For  with  almost  preterhuman
malice  Philip  was  employing  the  man  whom  he  had
doomed  to  disgrace,  perhaps  to  death,  and  whom  he  kept
under  constant  secret  supervision,  in  those  laborious
efforts  to  conquer  without  an  army  and  to  purchase  a
kingdom  with  an  empty  purse,  in  which,  as  it  was  des-
tined, the  very  last  sands  of  Parma's  life  were  to  run
away.

Suffering  from  a  badly  healed  wound,  from  water  on
the  chest,  degeneration  of  the  heart,  and  gout  in  the
limbs,  dropsical,  enfeebled,  broken  down  into  an  old  man
before  his  time,  Alexander  still  confronted  disease  and
death  with  as  heroic  a  front  as  he  had  ever  manifested
in  the  field  to  embattled  Hollanders  and  Englishmen,
or  to  the  still  more  formidable  array  of  learned  pedants
and  diplomatists  in  the  hall  of  negotiation.  This  wreck
of  a  man  was  still  fitter  to  lead  armies  and  guide  councils
than  any  soldier  or  statesman  that  Philip  could  call
into  his  service,  yet  the  king's  cruel  hand  was  ready  to
stab  the  dying  man  in  the  daik.

Nothing  could  surpass  the  spirit  with  which  the  soldier
was  ready  to  do  battle  with  his  best  friend  coming  in
the  guise  of  an  enemy.  To  the  last  moment,  lifted
into  the  saddle,  he  attended  personally  as  usual  to  the
details  of  his  new  campaign,  and  was  dead  before  he
would  confess  himself  mortal. °^  On  the  3rd  of  December,
1592,  in  the  city  of  Arras,  he  fainted  after  retiiing
at  his  usual  hour  to  bed,  and  thus  breathed  his
last.

According  to  the  instructions  in  his  last  will  he  was
laid  out  barefoot  in  the  robe  and  cowl  of  a  Capuchin
monk.  Subsequently  his  remains  were  taken  to  Parma,
and  buried  under  the  pavement  of  the  little  Franciscan

w  Parma to Philip, 28 Oct. 1592.  confesarsi mortale." Compare  Coloma,

(Arch,  de  Simancas  ilS.)  v. 106. Meteren, xvi.  306. Bor, Hi.

"  Bentivoglio,  t.  ii.  lib.  vi.  p.  370. "E  xxix.  661. Keyd,  is.  195. Dondini,  iii.

prima coaosciuto  si  ruorto  che  voUsse  6^9,  seqq.

1592.

DEATH  AND  BURIAL  OF  FARNESE.

213

church.^  A  pompons  funeral,  in  which  the  Italians  and
Spaniards  quarrelled  and  came  to  blows  for  precedence,
was  celebrated  in  Brussels,  and  a  statue  of  the  hero  was
erected  in  the  capital  at  Kdme.

The  first  soldier  and  most  unscruptilous  diplomatist
of  his  age,  he  died  when  scarcely  past  his  prime,  a
wearied,  broken-hearted  old  man.  His  triumphs,  mili-
tary and  civil,  have  been  recorded  in  these  pages,  and
his  character  has  been  elaborately  pourtrayed.  Wei'e  it
possible  to  conceive  of  an  Italian  or  Spaniard  of  illus-
trious birth  in  the  sixteenth  centur}^  educated  in  the
school  of  Machiavelli,  at  the  feet  of  Philip,  as  anything
but  the  supple  slave  of  a  master  and  the  blind  instru-
ment of  a  Church,  one  might  for  a  moment  regret  that
so  many  gifts  of  genius  and  valour  had  been  thrown
away  or  at  least  lost  to  mankind.  Could  the  light  of
truth  ever  pierce  the  atmosphere  in  which  such  men
have  their  being ;  could  the  sad  music  of  humanity  ever
penetrate  to  their  ears ;  could  visions  of  a  world — on
this  earth  or  beyond  it — not  exclusivel}^  the  property  of
kings  and  high-priests  be  revealed  to  them,  one  might
lament  that  one  so  eminent  among  the  sons  of  women
had  not  been  a  great  man.  But  it  is  a  weakness  to
hanker  for  any  possible  connection  between  truth  and
Italian  or  Spanish  statecraft  of  that  day.  The  truth
was  not  in  it  nor  in  him,  and  high  above  his  heroic

M  Bentivoglio,  t.  ii.  lib.  vl.  p.  370.
The  inscription  over  his  tomb  was  as
follows  :—

Alexander  Farnesius,

Belgis  Devictis

Et  Francis  obsidione  levatia

Ut  humili  hoc  loco

Ejus  cadaver  reponeretur

Mandavit  iiii.  Non  Decemb.

An.  MDXcii.

Dondini,  iii.  642.
It appears by  a letter of Marquis
d'Havre  to  Philip  that  the  death  of  Far-
nese  toolt  place  on  the  3rd  December.
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

So  soon  as  his  decease  was  known  at
Madrid,  the  first  thought  of  Philip  was  to
conceal  from  the  pope  that  it  had  been
his  Intention  forcibly  to  recall  him  from
the  Netherlands.  The  Spanish  ambas-
sador at  Rome  was  accordingly  instructed
to  burn  the  papers  which  had  been  sent

to  him,  and  to  suppress  all  tlie  communi-
cations which  he  had  been  on  the  point  of
maliing  to  the  pope.

"Don  Cristoval  and  Don  Juan  are  of
opinion,"  !~aid  their  minute  laid  before
the  Iving,  "  that  since  the  notification
sent  to  Rome  was  to  remedy  the  damage
that  the  report  of  the  recall  might  cause
at  tliat  court,  now  that  all  this  has  ceased
with  the  death  of  the  recalled,  ....  it  is
best  to  conceal  that  intention  from  the
pope  and  from  all  others,  and  that  it  is
sufficient  for  the  Duke  of  Sessa  to  be  in-
formed of  the  truth,"  &c.

Philip  noted  on  this  memoranda  with
his  own  hand  a  decided  approval  of  the
suggestion,  ordering  it  to  be  carried  into
effect,  adding,  "  Let  the  Duke  of  Sessa  be
totd  to  bum  the  letter  and  the  copy  that
was  sent  with  it,"  &c.  (Arch,  de  Si-
mancas MS.)

214

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXVHI.

achievements,  his  fortitude,  his  sagacity,  his  chivalrous
self-sacrifice,  shines  forth  the  baleful  light  of  his  pei-pe-
tual  falsehood. ^^

55  I  pass  over,  as  beneath  the  level  of
histoiy,  a  great  variety  of  censorious  and
probably  calumnious  reports  as  to  the
private  character  of  Farnese,  with  which
the  secret  archives  of  the  times  ire  filled.
Especially  Champagny,  the  man  by  whom
the  duke  was  most  hated  and  feared,
made  himself  busy  in  compiUng  the
slanderous  chronicle  in  which  tlie  enemies
of  Farnese,  both  in  Spain  and  the  Nether-
lands, took  so  much  delight.  According
to  the  secret  history  thus  prepared  for
the  enlightenment  of  the  king  and  his
ministers,  the  whole  adraiuistraiion  of
the  Netherlands — especially  the  financial
department,  with  the  distribution  of
offices — was  in  the  hands  of  two  favour-
ites, a  beardless  secretary  named  Cosmo
de  Massi,  and  a  lady  of  easy  virtue  called
Franoeline,  who  seems  to  have  had  a  nu-
merous host  of  relatives  and  friends  to
provide  for  at  the  public  expense.  To-
wards the  latter  end  of  the  duke's  life.  It
was  even  said  that  the  seal  of  the  finance
department  was  in  the  hands  of  bis
valet-de-chambre,  who,  in  his  master's
frequent  absences,  was  in  the  habit  of
issuing  drafts  upon  the  receiver-general.
As  the  valet-de-chambre  was  described  as
an  idiot  wlio  did  not  know  how  to  read,
it  may  be  believed  that  the  finances  fell
into  confusion.  Certainly,  if  such  state-
ments were  to  be  accepted,  it  would  be

natural  enough  that  for  every  million
dollars  expended  by  the  king  in  the  pro-
vinces, not  more  than  one  hundred  thou-
sand were  laid  out  for  the  public  service  ;
and  this  is  the  estimate  made  by  Cham-
pagny, who,  as  a  distinguished  financier
and  once  cliief  of  the  treasury  in  the  pro-
vinces, might  certainly  be  thought  to
know  something  of  the  subject.  But
Champagny  was  so  beside  himself  with
rage,  hatred,  and  terror,  where  Alex-
ander was  concerned,  that  he  is  as  unfit
a  guide  for  those  who  wish  the  truth  as
Commander  Moreo  or  Ybarra.

"  Juan  Baptista  ayuda  de  camera,
Italiano — para  mas  vilipendicia  de  finan-
zas  el  sello  deltas,  que  solia  guardar  uno
de  los  chefs,  a  estado  en  nianos  de  Juan
Baptista — se  sellan  sin  el  (Farnese)  mas
al  alvidrio  de  Baptista  idiota  que  no  scave
leer  o  de  Einaldi.  ...  En  suma  es  todo
confusion  y  desorden  y  redu/.ir  solo  apro-
vecho  destos  y  talis  quanto  se  haze.  .  .  .
Denias  las  mohatras  de  los  usureros  y
mercaderes  que  con  sus  cambios  y  recam-
bios  pagas  en  panos  y  sedas  y  otras
trampas,  entendlendose  con  estos  refor-
zando  el  dinero  en  diversos  partes  hay  en
que  no  viene  a  resultar  al  rey  su  milion
quasi  en  cien  mil  escudos,"  &c.  Discours
du  Seigneur  de  Champagny  sur  Ics
affaires  des  Pays  Bas,  21  Dec.  1589.  Biblio-
theque  de  Bourgogne,  MS.  No.  12,962.

1593.  SPANISH  FORCES  SENT  TO  FRANCE.  215

CHAPTEE XXIX.

EEfect  of  the  death  of  Farnese  upon  Philip's  schemes— Priestly  flattery  and  counsel
— Assembly  of  the  States-General  of  France — Meeting  of  tlie  Leaguers  at  the
Louvre— Conference  at  Stirdne  between  tlie  chiefs  of  the  League  and  the
"political''  leaders — Henry  convokes  an  assembly  of  bishops,  theologians,  and
others — Strong  feeling  on  all  sides  on  the  subject  of  the  succession — Philip  com-
mands that  the  Infanta  and  the  Duke  of  Guise  be  elected  King  and  Queen  of
France — Manifesto  of  the  Duke  of  Mayenne — Formal  re-admission  of  Henry  to
the  Roman  faith — The  pope  refuses  to  consent  to  his  reconciliation  with  the
Church  —  His  consecration  with  the  sacred  oil — Entry  of  the  king  into  Paris  —
Departure  of  the  Spanish  garrison  from  the  capital — Dissimulation  of  the  Duke
of  Mayenne — He  makes  terms  with  Henry — Grief  of  Queen  Elizabeth  on  re-
ceipt of  the  communications  from  France.

During  the  past  quarter  of  a  century  there  had  been
tragic  scenes  enough  in  France,  but  now  the  only  man
■who  could  have  conducted  Philip's  schemes  to  a  tragic
if  not  a  successful  issue  was  gone.  Friendly  death  had
been  swifter  than  Philip,  and  had  removed  Alexander
from  the  scene  before  his  master  had  found  fitting
opportunity  to  inflict  the  disgrace  on  which  he  was  re-
solved. Meantime,  Charles  Mansfeld  made  a  feeble
attempt  to  lead  an  army  from  the  Netherlands  into
France,  to  support  the  sinking  fortunes  of  the  League ;
but  it  was  not  for  that  general  of  artillery  to  attempt
the  well -graced  part  of  the  all-accomplished  Farnese
with  much  hope  of  success.  A  considerable  force  of
Spanish  infantry,  too,  had  been  sent  to  Paris,  where
they  had  been  received  with  much  enthusiasm  ;  a  very
violent  and  determined  churchman,  Sega,  archbishop  of
Piacenza,  and  cardinal-legate,  having  arrived  to  check
on  the  part  of  the  holy  father  any  attempt  by  the  great
wavering  heretic  to  get  himself  readmitted  into  the  fold
of  the  faithful.^

The  King  of  Spain  considered  it  his  duty,  as  well  as
his  unquestionable  right,  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of
r}ance,  and  to  save  the  cause  of  religion,  civilization
and  humanity,  in  the  manner  so  dear  to  the  civilization-
savers, by reducing that distracted country — utterly

1  De  Thou,  xi.  675.

216  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

unable  to  govern  itself — under  his  sceptre.  To  achieve
this  noble  end  no  bribery  was  too  wholesale,  no  violence
too  brutal,  no  intrigue  too  paltiy.  It  was  his  sacred
and  special  mission  to  save  France  from  herself.  If  he
should  fail,  he  could  at  least  carve  her  in  pieces,  and
distribute  her  among  himself  and  friends.  Frenchmen
might  assist  him  in  either  of  these  arrangements,  but  it
was  absui-d  to  doubt  that  on  him  devolved  the  work  and
the  responsibility.  Yet  among  his  advisers  were  some
who  doubted  whether  the  purchase  of  the  grandees  of
France  was  really  the  most  judicious  course  to  pursue.
There  was  a  general  and  uneasy  feeling  that  the  grandees
were  making  sport  of  the  Spanish  monarch,  and  that
they  would  be  inclined  to  remain  his  stipendiaries  for
an  indefinite  period,  without  doing  their  share  of  the
work.  A  keen  Jesuit,  who  liad  been  much  in  France,
often  whispered  to  Philip  that  he  was  going  astray.
"  Those  who  best  understand  the  fit  remedy  for  this
unfortunate  kingdom,  and  know  the  tastes  and  temper
of  the  nation,"  said  he,  "doubt  giving  these  vast  pre-
sents and  rewards  in  order  that  the  nobles  of  France
may  affect  your  cause  and  further  your  schemes.  It  is
the  greatest  delusion,  because  they  love  nothing  but
their  own  interest,  and  for  this  reason  wish  for  no
king  at  all,  but  prefer  that  the  kingdom  should  remain
topsy-tui-vy  in  order  that  they  may  enjoy  the  Spanish
doubloons,  as  they  say  themselves  almost  publicly,
dancing  and  feasting;  that  they  may  take  a  castle  to-day,
and  to-morrow  a  city,  and  the  day  after  a  province,  and
so  on  indefinitely.  \\Tiat  matters  it  to  them  that  blood
flows,  and  that  the  miserable  people  are  destroyed,  who
alone  are  good  for  anything?  "  ^

"  The  immediate  cause  of  the  niin  of  France,"  con-
tinued the  Jesuit,  "  comes  from  two  roots  which  must
be  torn  up ;  the  one  is  the  extreme  ignorance  and
scandalous  life  of  the  ecclesiastics,  the  other  is  the
tyranny  and  the  abominable  life  of  the  nobility,  who
with  sacrilege  and  insatiable  avarice  have  entered  upon
the  property  of  the  Church.  This  nobility  is  divided
into three factions. The  first,  and not  the least,  is

2  Relacion  del  Padre  An'"  Crespo  acer- of  John  de  Zelander  and  Father  Odo),
ca  de las  cosas  de Flandes y  Francia 1593. (Arch,  de  Siniancas  MS.)
(citing  the  conversations  and  statementa

1593.  JESUITICAL  COUNSEL.  217

heretic;  tlie  second  and  the  most  pernicious  is  politic
or  atheist ;  the  third  and  least  is  catholic.  All  these,
although  they  difi'er  in  opinion,  are  the  .same  thing  in
corruption  of  life  and  manners,  so  that  there  is  no  choice
among  them."  He  then  proceeded  to  set  forth  how
entirely  the  salvatit)n  of  France  depended  on  the  King
of  Spain.  "  Morally  speaking,"  he  said,  "  it  is  impos-
sible for  any  Frenchman  to  apply  the  remedy.  For  this
two  things  are  wanting ;  intense  zeal  for  the  honour  of
God,  and  power.  I  ask  now  what  Frenchman  has  both
these,  or  either  of  them.  No  one  certainly  that  we  know.
It  is  the  King  of  Spain  who  alone  in  the  world  has  the
zeal  and  the  power.  No  man  who  knows  the  insolence
and  arrogance  of  the  French  nature  will  believe  that
even  if  a  king  should  be  elected  out  of  France  he  would
be  obeyed  by  the  others.  The  first  to  oppose  him
would  be  Mayenne,  even  if  a  king  were  chosen  from  his
family,  unless  everything  should  be  given  him  that  he
asked,  which  would  be  impossible."

Thus  did  the  wily  priest  instil  into  the  ready  ears  of
Philip  additional  reasons  for  believing  himself  the  incar-
nate providence  of  God.  When  were  priestly  flatterers
ever  wanting  to  pour  this  poison  into  the  souls  of
tyrants  ?  It  is  in  vain  for  us  to  ask  why  it  is  permitted
that  so  much  power  for  evil  should  be  within  the  grasp
of  one  wretched  human  creature,  but  it  is  at  least  always
instructive  to  ponder  the  career  of  these  crowned  con-
spirators, and  sometimes  consoling  to  find  its  conclusion
different  from  the  goal  intended.  So  the  Jesuit  advised
the  king  not  to  be  throwing  away  his  money  upon  parti-
cular individuals,  but  with  the  funds  which  they  were
so  unprofitably  consuming  to  form  a  jolly  army  (gallardo
egercito)  of  fifteen  thousand  foot,  and  five  thousand  horse,
all  Spaniards,  under  a  Spanish  general — not  a  French-
man being  admitted  into  it, — and  then  to  march  forward,
occupy  all  the  chief  towns,  putting  Spanish  garrisons
into  them,  but  sparing  the  people,  who  now  considered
the  war  eternal,  and  who  were  eaten  up  by  both  armies.
In  a  short  time  the  king  might  accomplish  all  he  wished,
for  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  Bearnese  to  make  con-
siderable resistance  for  anj^  length  of  time.^

This  was  the  plan  of  Father  Odo  for  putting  Philip  ou

'  MS.  last  cited.

218  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

the  throne  of  France,  and  at  the  same  time  lifting  np  the
down  trodden  Church,  whose  priests,  according  to  his
statement,  were  so  profligate,  and  whose  tenets  were
rejected  by  all  but  a  small  minority  of  the  governing
classes  of  the  country.  Certainly  it  did  not  lack  preci-
sion, but  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether  the  Bearnese
was  to  prove  so  very  insignificant  an  antagonist  as  the
sanguine  priest  supposed.

For  the  third  party — the  moderate  Catholics — had
been  making  immense  pi'ogress  in  France,  while  the
diplomacy  of  Philip  had  thus  far  steadily  counteracted
their  efforts  at  Eome.  In  vain  had  the  Marquis  Pisani,
envoy  of  the  politicians' party,  endeavoured  to  soften  the
heart  of  Clement  towards  Henry.  The  Pope  lived  in
mortal  fear  of  Spain,  and  the  Duke  of  Sessa,  Philip's
ambassador  to  the  holy  see,  denouncing  all  these  attempts
on  the  part  of  the  heretic  and  his  friends,  and  urging
that  it  was  much  better  for  Kome  that  the  pernicious
kingdom  of  France  should  be  dismembered  and  sub-
divided, assured  his  holiness  that  Rome  should  be
starved,  occupied,  annihilated,  if  such  abominable
schemes  should  be  for  an  instant  favoured.

Clement  took  to  his  bed  by  sickness  brought  on  by
all  this  violence,  but  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  meet
Pisani  and  other  agents  of  the  same  cause  with  a
peremptory  denial,  and  send  most  stringent  messages  to
his  legate  in  Paris,  who  needed  no  prompting.*

There  had  already  been  much  issuing  of  bulls  by  the
pope,  and  much  burning  of  bulls  by  the  hangman,  accord-
ing to  decrees  of  the  parliament  of  Chalons  and  other
friendly  tribunals,  and  burning  of  Chalons  decrees  by
Paris  hangmen,  and  edicts  in  favour  of  Protestants  at
Nantz  and  other  places® — measures  the  enactment,  re-
peal, and  re-enactment  of  which  were  to  mark  the  ebb
and  flow  of  the  great  tide  of  human  opinion  on  the  most
important  of  subjects,  and  the  traces  of  which  were  to
be  for  a  long  time  visible  on  the  shores  of  time.

Early  in  1593  Mayenne,  yielding  to  the  pressure  of
the  Spanish  party,  reluctantly  consented  to  assemble  the
States- General  of  France,  in  order  that  a  king  might  be
chosen.®  The  duke,  who  came  to  be  thoroughly  known
to  Alexander  Farnese  before  the  death  of  that  subtle

♦  De  Thou,  xii.  120.  '  Ibid.  xi.  369,  370,  seqq.  •  Ibid.  665-670.

1593.  ARRANGEMENTS  FOR  ELECTION  OF  KING.  219

Italian,  relied  on  his  capacity  to  outwit  all  the  other
champions  of  the  League  and  agents  of  Philip  now  that
the  master-spirit  had  been  removed.  As  firmly  opposed
as  ever  to  the  election  of  any  other  candidate  but  him-
self, or  possibly  his  son,  according  to  a  secret  proposition
which  he  had  lately  made  to  the  pope,''  he  felt  himself
obliged  to  confront  the  array  of  Spanish  diplomatists,
Roman  prelates,  and  learned  doctors,  by  whom  it  was
proposed  to  exclude  the  Prince  of  Bearne  from  his  pre-
tended rights.  But  he  did  not,  after  all,  deceive  them
as  thoroughly  as  he  imagined.  The  Spaniards  shrewdly
suspected  the  French  tactics,  and  the  whole  business
was  but  a  round  game  of  deception,  in  which  no  one  was
much  deceived,  whoever  might  be  destined  ultimately
to  pocket  the  stakes.  "I  know  from  a  very  good
source,"  said  Fuentes,  "  that  Mayenne,  Guise,  and  the
rest  of  them  are  struggling  hard  in  order  not  to  submit
to  Bearne,  and  will  suffer  everything  your  Majesty  may
do  to  them,  even  if  you  kick  them  in  the  mouth,  but
still  there  is  no  conclusion  on  the  road  we  are  travelling,
at  least  not  the  one  which  your  Majesty  desires.  They
will  go  on  procrastinating  and  gaining  time,  making
authority  for  themselves  out  of  your  Majesty's  grandeur,
until  the  condition  of  things  comes  which  they  are  de-
siring. Feria  tells  me  that  they  are  still  taking  your
Majesty's  money,  but  I  warn  your  Majesty  that  it  is
only  to  fight  off  Bearne,  and  that  they  are  only  pursuing
their  own  ends  at  your  Majesty's  expense."*

Perhaps  Mayenne  had  already  a  sufficiently  clear
insight  into  the  not  far-distant  future,  but  he  still  pre-
sented himself  in  Spanish  cloak  and  most  ultramontane

^  "  Entrando  en  platicas  con  el  comisario '  "  Tambien  he  sabido  de  buen  original

del  papa  qui  vino  de  Francia  ha  veuido  que  el  I),  de  Umena,  Guisa  y  los  demas

declararnie  en  gran  secreto  que  el  Duca  de  por  no  venir  ul  partido  con  el  de  Bearne,

Umena  le  dixo  con  el  mismo  no  vendria  aunque  vicareen,  sufriran todo  lo  que

en  la  election  sino  fuese  en  su  hijo  como  V.  M'^  hiziere  con  ellos  aunque  les  pise  la

lo  escrivia  al  papa  y  a  el  pidio  lo  hiziesse  boca,  y  que  en  quanto  se  fuere  por  el  ca-

y  dixesse  convenia  para  el  bien  de  aquel  mino  que  agora,  no  habra  conclusion,  a

reyno." Fuentes  to  Philip,  9  June,  1593.  lo  menos  la  que  V. M<'.  dcssea,  y  que

(Arch,  de  Simaticas  MS.)  Iran  dando  muchas  largas  para  dar  tiempo

"Mostrome  algo  de  lo  que  le  escriven  al  tiempo,  autorizaiidose  en  tanto  con  la

en  esto  y  demas  de  lo  que  de  Roma  le  grandeza  de  V.  M''.  hasta  llegar  el  estado

avisa  que  el  de  Umena  haze instancia  que  dessean." Fuentes  to  Philip,  9  June,

para  que  la  gente  del  papa  se  de  a  su  1593. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.) Same

hyo  y  que  anda  separada  de  la  de  V.  M*."  to  same,  20  June,  1593. (Ibid.)
Same  to  same,  20  June,  1593. (Ibid.)

220  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

physiognomy.  His  pockets  vi'^ere  indeed  full  of  Spanish
coin  at  that  moment,  for  lie  had  just  claimed  and  re-
ceived eighty-eight  thousand  nine  hundred  dollars  for
back  debts,  together  with  one  hundred  and  eighty  thou-
sand dollars  more  to  distribute  among  the  deputies  of
the  estates.^  "  All  I  can  say  about  France,"  said
Fuentes,  "is  that  it  is  one  great  thirst  for  money.  The
Duke  of  Feria  believes  in  a  good  result,  but  I  think  that
Mayenne  is  only  trying  to  pocket  as  much  money  as  he
can."i«

Thus  fortified,  the  Duke  of  Mayenne  issued  the  address
to  the  States-General  of  the  kingdom,  to  meet  at  an
early  day  in  order  to  make  arrangements  to  secure
religion  and  peace,  and  to  throw  off  the  possible  yoke  of
the  heretic  pretender.  The  great  seal  affixed  to  the
document  represented  an  empty  throne,  instead  of
the  usual  effigy  of  a  king."

The  cardinal-legate  issued  a  thundering  manifesto  at
the  same  time  sustaining  Mayenne  and  virulently
denouncing  the  Bearnese.^^

The  politicians'  party  now  seized  the  opportunity  to
impress  upon  Henry  that  the  decisive  moment  was
come.

The  Spaniard,  the  priest,  and  the  League,  had  heated
the  furnace.  The  iron  was  at  a  white  heat.  Now
was  the  time  to  strike.  Secretary  of  State  Eevol,  Gaspar
de  Schomberg,  Jacques  Auguste  de  Thou,  the  eminent
historian,  and  other  influential  personages,  urged  the
king  to  give  to  the  great  question  the  only  possible
solution.

Said  the  king  with  much  meekness,  "  If  I  am  in  error,
let  those  who  attack  me  with  so  much  fury  instruct  me,
and  show  me  the  way  of  salvation.  I  hate  those  who
act  against  their  conscience.  I  pardon  all  those  who  are
inspired  by  truly  religious  motives,  and  I  am  ready  to
receive  all  into  favour  whom  the  love  of  peace,  not  the
chagrin  of  ill-will,  has  disgusted  with  the  war."^*

There  was  a  great  meeting  of  Leaguers  at  the  Louvre,

9  Feria to Philip, 20 March, 1593. temo  tan  ruyn  suceso  como  en  todo,"  &c
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  Fuentes  to  ,  22  May,  1593. (Arch.

10  "  Lo  que  puedo  dezir  de  Francia  es de  Simancas  MS.)
todo  sed  de  dinero^el  de  Umena  como  se n  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.

espera sacarle quanto dinero pudiere, ''-  Ibid.  si.  675.  13  ibid.  683.

1593.  ASSEMBLY  OF  THE  ESTATES  OF  FRANCE.  221

to  listen  to  Mayenne,  the  cardinal-legate,  Cardinal  Pel-
leve,  the  Duke  of  Guise,  and  other  chieftains.  The
Duke  of  Feria  made  a  long  speech  in  Latin,  setting  forth
the  Spanish  policy,  \eiled  as  usual,  but  already  suffi-
ciently well  known,  and  assuring  the  assembly  that  the
King  of  Spain  desired  nothing  so  much  as  the  peace  of
France  and  of  all  the  world,  together  with  the  supremacy
of  the  Eoman  Church.  Whether  these  objects  could
best  be  attained  by  the  election  of  Philip  or  of  his
daughter,  as  sovereign,  with  the  Archduke  Ernest  as
king-consort,  or  with  perhaps  the  Duke  of  Guise  or  some
other  eligible  husband,  were  fair  subjects  for  discussion.
No  selfish  motive  influenced  the  king,  and  he  placed  all
his  wealth  and  all  his  armies  at  the  disposal  of  the
League  to  carry  out  these  great  projects."

Then  there  was  a  conference  at  Surene  between  the
chiefs  of  the  League  and  the  "  political"  leaders ;  27  April,
the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  the  cardinal-legate,  ^^^^■
Villars,  Admiral  of  France  and  defender  of  Eouen,  Belin,
Governor  of  Paris,  President  Jeannin,  and  others  upon
one  side ;  upon  the  other,  the  Archbishop  of  Bourges,
Bellievre,  Schomberg,  Eevol,  and  De  Thou.^^

The  Archbishop  of  Lyons  said  that  their  party  would
do  nothing  either  to  frustrate  or  to  support  the  mission
of  Pisani,  and  that  the  pope  would,  as  ever,  do  all  that
could  be  done  to  maintain  the  interests  of  the  true
religion.^®

The  Archbishop  of  Bourges,  knowing  well  the  mean-
ing of  such  fine  phrases,  replied  that  he  had  much
respect  for  the  holy  father,  but  that  popes  had  now
become  the  slaves  and  tools  of  the  King  of  Spain,  who,
because  he  was  powerful,  held  them  subject  to  his
caprice."

At  an  adjourned  meeting  at  the  same  place,  the  Arch-
bishop of  Lyons  said  that  all  questions  had  10  May,
been  a^,ked  and  answered.  All  now  depended  ^^^•^•
on  the  pope,  whom  the  League  would  always  obey.  If
the  pope  would  accept  the  reconciliation  of  the  Prince  of
Bearne  it  was  well.  He  hoped  that  his  conversion
would  be  sincere.^*

The  political  archbishop  (of  Bourges)  replied  to  the

1*  DeThou,  xi.  703-705.  "  Ibid.  719-755.  is  Ibid.

17  Ibid.  18  Ibid.

222  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

League's  archbisliop,  tliat  there  was  no  time  for  delays,
and  for  journeys  by  land  and  sea  to  Rome.  The  least
obstruction  might  prove  fatal  to  both  parties.  Let  the
Leaguers  now  show  that  the  serenity  of  their  faces  was
but  the  miiTor  of  their  minds.

Biit  the  Leaguers'  archbishop  said  that  he  could  make
no  further  advances. So  ended  the  conference."

The  chiefs  of  the  politicians  now  went  to  the  king  and
informed  him  that  the  decisive  moment  had  arrived.^"

Henry  had  preserved  his  coolness  throughoiit.  Amid
all  the  hubbub  of  learned  doctors  of  law,  archbishops —
Leaguer  and  political — Sorbonne  pedants,  solemn  gran-
dees from  Spain  with  Latin  orations  in  their  pockets,
intriguing  Guises,  huckstering  Mayennes,  wrathful
Huguenots,  sanguinary  cardinal-legates,  threatening
world-monarchs — heralded  by  Spanish  musketeers,  Ita-
lian lancers,  and  German  reiters — shrill  screams  of
warning  from  the  English  queen,  grim  denimciations
from  Dutch  calvinists,  scornful  repulses  from  the  holy
father;  he  kept  his  temper  and  his  eye-sight,  as  perfectly
as  he  had  ever  done  throi;gh  the  smoke  and  din  of  the
wildest  battle-field.  None  knew  better  than  he  how  to
detect  the  weakness  of  the  adversary,  and  to  sound  the
charge  upon  his  wavering  line.

He  blew  the  blast — sure  that  loyal  Catholics  and  Pro-
testants alike  would  now  follow  him  pell-mell.

On  the  l6th  May,  1593,  he  gave  notice  that  he  con-

16  May, sented  to  get  himself  instructed,  and  that  he

1593. summoned  an  assembly  at  Mantes  on  the  15  th

July,  of  bishops,  theologians,  princes,  lords,  and  courts

of  parliament  to  hold  council,  and  to  advise  him  what

was  best  to  do  for  religion  and  the  State.^^

Meantime  he  returned  to  the  siege  of  Dreux,  made  an
assault  on  the  place,  was  repulsed,  and  then  hung  nine
prisoners  of  war  in  full  sight  of  the  garrison  as  a  punish-
ment for  their  temerity  in  resisting  him.'^^  The  place
soon  after  capitulated  (8th  July,  159o).

The  interval  between  the  summons  and  the  assembling
of  the  clerical  and  lay  notables  at  Mantes  was  employed
by  the  Leaguers  in  frantic  and  contradictory  efforts  to
retrieve  a  game  which  the  most  sagacious  knew  to  be

19  I)e  Thou,  si.  719-755.  20  iiji3_  743  11  jjjjj^  ^51.

"  Ibid.  xii.  6.

1593.  MEETINGS  OF  THE  LEAGUERS  IN  PARIS.  223

lost.  But  the  politicians  were  equal  to  the  occasion,
and  baffled  them  at  every  point.

The  Leaguers'  archbishop  inveighed  bitterly  against
the  abominable  edicts  recently  issued  in  favour  of  the
Protestants.

The  political  archbishop  (of  Bourges)  replied  not  by
defending,  but'  by  warmly  disapproving,  those  decrees
of  toleration,  by  excusing  the  king  for  having  granted
them  for  a  temporary  purpose,  and  by  asserting  posi-
tively that,  so  soon  as  the  king  should  be  converted,  he
would  no  longer  countenance  such  measures."^

It  is  superfluous  to  observe  that  very  diiferent  language
was  held  on  the  part  of  Henry  to  the  English  and  l3utch
Protestants,  and  to  the  Huguenots  of  his  own  kingdom.

And  there  were  many  meetings  of  the  Leaguers  in
Paris,  many  belligerent  speeches  by  the  cardinal-legate,
proclaiming  war  to  the  knife  rather  than  that  the  name
of  Heniy  the  heretic  should  ever  be  heard  of  again  as
candidate  for  the  throne,  various  propositions  spasmodi-
cally made  in  full  assembly  by  Feria,  Ybarra,  Tassis,
the  jurisconsult  Mendoza,  and  other  Spanish  agents  in
favour  of  the  Infanta  as  queen  of  France,  with  Arch-
duke Ernest  or  the  Duke  of  Guise,  or  any  other  eligible
prince,  for  her  husband.

The  League  issued  a  formal  and  furious  invective  in
answer  to  Henry's  announcement ;  proving  by  copious
citations  from  Jeremiah,  St.  Epiphany,  St.  Jerome,  St.
Cyprian,  and  St.  Bernard,  that  it  was  easier  for  a  leopard
to  change  his  spots  or  for  a  blackamoor  to  be  washed
white,  than  for  a  heretic  to  be  converted,  and  that  the
king  was  thinking  rather  of  the  crown  of  France  than
of  a  heavenly  crown,  in  his  approaching  conversion — an
opinion  which  there  were  few  to  gainsay."*

And  the  Duke  of  Nemours  wrote  to  his  half-brother,
the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  offering  to  use  all  his  influence  to
bring  about  Mayenne's  election  as  king  on  condition
that  if  these  efibrts  failed,  Mayenne  should  do  his  best
to  procure  the  election  of  Nemours.^^

And  the  Parliament  of  Paris  foimally  and  prospectively
proclaimed  any  election  of  a  foreigner  null  and  void,  and
sent  deputies  to  Mayenne  urging  him  never  to  consent
to  the  election  of  the  Infanta.

M  De  Thou,  xi.  753.  2*  Ibid.  TGI.  25  ibid.  779.

224  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX

What  help,  said  they,  can  the  League  expect  from  the
old  and  broken  Philip,  from  a  king  who  in  thirty  years
had  not  been  able,  with  all  the  resources  of  his  king-
doms, to  subdue  the  revolted  provinces  of  the  Nether-
lands ?  How  can  he  hope  to  conquer  France  ?  Pay  no
further  heed  to  the  legate,  they  said,  who  is  laughing  in
his  sleeve  at  the  miseries  and  distractions  of  our  country.^
So  spake  the  deputies  of  the  League-Parliament  to  the
great  captain  of  the  League,  the  Luke  of  Mayenne.  It
was  obvious  that  the  "  great  and  holy  confederacy  "  was
becoming  less  confident  of  its  invincibility.  Madam
League  was  suddenly  grown  decrepit  in  the  eyes  of  her
adorers.

Mayenne  was  angry  at  the  action  of  the  Parliament,
and  vehemently  swore  that  he  would  annul  their  decree.
Parliament  met  his  threats  with  dignity,  and  resolved
to  stand  by  the  decree,  even  if  they  ail  died  in  their
places.^^

At  the  same  time  the  Duke  of  Feria  suddenly  pro-
duced in  full  assembly  of  Leaguers  a  written  order  from
Philip  that  the  Duke  of  Guise  and  the  Infanta  should  at
once  be  elected  king  and  queen.^^  Taken  by  surprise,
Mayenne  dissembled  his  rage  in  masterly  fashion,  pro-
mised Feria  to  support  the  election,  and  at  once  began
to  higgle  for  conditions.  He  stipulated  that  he  should
have  for  himself  the  governments  of  Champagne,  Bur-
gundy, and  La  Brie,  and  that  they  should  be  hereditary
in  his  family.  He  furthermore  demanded  that  Guise
should  cede  to  him  the  principality  of  Joinville,  and
that  they  should  pay  him  on  the  spot  in  hard  money
two  hundred  thousand  crowns  in  gold,  six  hundred
thousand  more  in  dilferent  payments,  together  with  an
annual  payment  of  fifty  thousand  crowns.^''

It  was  obvious  that  the  duke  did  nut  undervalue  him-
self, but  he  had  after  all  no  intention  of  falling  into  the
trap  set  for  him.  "  He  has  made  these  promises  (as
above  given)  in  writing,"  said  the  Duke  of  Savoy's  envoy
to  his  master,  "  but  he  will  never  keep  them.  The
Duchess  of  Mayenne  could  not  help  telling  me  that
her  husband  will  never  consent  that  the  Duke  of  Guise
should  have  the  throne.""" From  this  resolve  he  had

26  De  ThoiT,  xi.  784.  27  jbid.  787.  2s  ibid.  xii.  8.

»  Ibid.  10.  30  MS.  (ie  Mesmes,  t.  xi.  893,  cited  by  Capefigue,  vi.  268.

1593.  MANIFESTO  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  MAYENNE.  225

never  wavered,  and  was  not  likely  to  do  so  now.  Ac-
cordingly the  man  "of  his  word,  of  faith,  and  truth,"
whom  even  the  astute  Farnese  had  at  times  half  be-
lieved in,  and  who  had  received  milliuns  of  Pliilip's
money,  now  thought  it  time  to  break  with  Philip.

He  issued  a  manifesto, ^^  in  which  he  observed  that  the
States-General  of  Fiance  had  desired  that  Philip  should
be  elected  King  of  France,  and  carry  out  his  design  of  a
universal  monarchy,  as  the  only  means  of  ensuring  the
safety  of  the  Catholic  religion  and  the  pacification  of
the  world.  It  was  feared,  however,  said  Mayenne,  that
the  king  might  come  to  the  same  misfortunes  which
befell  his  father,  who,  when  it  was  supjjosed  that  he
was  inspired  only  by  private  ambition,  and  by  the  hope
of  placing  a  hereditarj'  universal  ciowu  in  his  family,
had  excited  the  animosity  of  the  princes  of  the  empire.
"  If  a  mere  suspicion  bad  caused  so  gr^at  a  misfortune  in
the  empire,"  continued  the  man  of  his  word,  "  what  will
the  princes  of  all  Europe  do  when  they  find  his  Majesty
elected  king  of  France,  and  grown  by  increase  of  power
so  formidable  to  the  world?  Can  it  be  doubted  that
they  will  fly  to  arms  at  once,  and  give  all  their  support
to  the  King  of  Navarre,  heretic  though  he  be  ?  What
motive  had  so  many  princes  to  traverse  Philip's  designs
in  the  Netherlands,  but  desire  to  destroy  the  enormous
power  which  they  feared?  Therefore  had  the  Queen  of
England,  although  refusing  the  sovereignty,  defended
the  independence  of  the  Netherlands  these  fifteen  years.

"  However  desirable,"  continued  Mayenne,  "  that  this
universal  monarchy,  for  which  the  house  of  Austi'ia  has
so  long  been  working,  should  be  established,  yet  the
king  is  too  prudent  not  to  see  the  difficulties  in  his  way.
Although  he  has  conquered  Portugal,  he  is  prevented  by
the  fleets  of  Holland  and  England  from  taking  possession
of  the  richest  of  the  Portuguese  possessions,  tlie  islands
and  the  Indies.  He  will  find  in  France  insuperable
objections  to  his  election  as  king,  for  he  could  in  this
case  well  reproach  the  Leaguers  with  having  been
changed  from  Frenchmen  into  Spaniards.  He  must  see
that  his  case  is  hopeless  in  Fiance,  he  who  for  thirty
years  has  been  in  vain  endeavouring  to  re-establish  his
authority  in  the  Netherlands. It  would  be  impossible

31  Ue  Thou,  xii.  13-24.
VOL. III.  Q

226  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

in  the  present  position  of  affairs  to  become  either  the
king  or  the  protector  of  France.  The  dignity  of  France
allows  it  not."  ^^

Mayenne  then  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  a  truce  with
the  royalists  or  politicians,  and,  assembling  the  estates
at  the  Louvre  on  the  4th  July,  he  read  a  written  paper
declining  for  the  moment  to  hold  an  election  for  king.^^

John  Baptist  Tassis,  next  day,  replied  by  declaring
that  in  this  case  Philip  would  send  no  more  succours  of
men  or  money  ;  for  that  the  only  effectual  counter-poison
to  the  pretended  conversion  of  the  prince  of  Bearne  was
the  immediate  election  of  a  king.^*

Thus  did  Mayenne  escape  from  the  snare  in  which  the
Spaniards  thought  to  catch  the  man  who,  as  they  now
knew,  was  changing  every  day,  and  was  true  to  nothing
save  his  own  interests.

And  now  the  great  day  had  come.  The  conversion  of
Henry  to  the  Koman  faith,  fixed  long  before  for  the  23rd
July,  1593,  formally  took  place  at  the  time  appointed.^
From  six  in  the  morning  till  the  stroke  of  noon  did
Henry  listen  to  the  exhortations  and  expoundings  of  the
learned  prelates  and  doctors  whom  he  had  convoked,
the  politic  Archbishop  of  Bourges  taking  the  lead  in
this  long-expected  instruction.  After  six  mortal  hours
had  come  to  an  end,  the  king  rose  from  his  knees,  some-
what wearied,  but  entirely  instructed  and  convinced.
He  thanked  the  bishops  for  having  taught  him  that  of
which  he  was  before  quite  ignorant,  and  assured  them
that,  after  having  invoked  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost
upon  his  musings,  he  should  think  seriously  over  what
they  had  just  taught  him,  in  order  to  come  to  a  resolu-
tion salutary  to  himself  and  to  the  State.^®

Nothing  could  be  more  candid.  Next  day,  at  eight  in
the  morning,  there  was  a  great  show  in  the  cathedral  of
Saint  Denis,  and  the  population  of  Paris,  notwithstand-
ing the  prohibition  of  the  League  authorities,  rushed
thither  in  immense  crowds  to  witness  the  ceremony  of
the  reconciliation  of  the  king.  Henry  went  to  the
cliurch,  clothed  as  became  a  freshly  purified  heietic,
in  white  satin  doublet  and  hose,  white  silk  stockings,
and  white  silk  shoes  with  white  roses  in  them ;  but  with

32  De  Thou,  xil.  13-24.  33  ibid.  24.  34  ibid.

45  Ibid.  30-35.  36  Ibid.

1593.  "INSTRUCTION"  OF  HENRY.  227

a  black  hat  and  a  black  mantle.^''  There  was  a  great
procession  with  blare  of  trumpet  and  beat  of  drum.  The
streets  were  strewn  with  flowers.

As  Henry  entered  the  great  portal  of  the  church,  he
found  the  Archbishop  of  Bourges,  seated  in  state,  eii'ul-
gent  in  mitre  and  chasuble,  and  surrounded  by  other
magnificent  prelates  in  gorgeous  attire.

"  Who  are  you,  and  what  do  you  want?"  said  the  arch-
bishop.

"  1  am  the  king,"  meekly  replied  Henry,  "  and  I
demand  to  be  received  into  the  bosom  of  the  ftoman
Catholic  Church."

"  Do  you  wish  it  sincerely?"  asked  the  prelate.

"  I  wish  it  with  all  my  heart,"  said  the  king."*
,  Then  throwing  himself  on  his  knees,  the  Bearne —
great  champion  of  the  Huguenots — protested  before  God
that  he  would  live  and  die  in  the  Catholic  faith,  and  that
he  renounced  all  heresy.  A  passage  was  with  difficulty
opened  through  the  crowd,  and  he  was  then  led  to  the
high  altar,  amid  the  acclamations  of  the  people.  Here
he  knelt  devoutly  and  repeated  his  protestations.  His
unction  and  contrition  were  most  impressive,  and  the
people,  of  couise,  wept  piteously.  The  king,  during
the  progress  of  the  ceremony,  with  hands  clasped  together
and  adoring  the  Eucharist  with  his  eyes,  or,  as  the  Host
was  elevated,  smiting  himself  thrice  upon  the  breast,
was  a  model  of  passionate  devotion  "'^

Afterwards  he  retired  to  a  pavilion  behind  the  altar,
where  the  archbishop  confessed  and  absolved  him.  Then
the  Te  Deum  sounded,  and  high  mass  was  celebrated  by
the  Bishop  of  Nantes.  Then,  amid  acclamations  and
blessings,  and  with  largess  to  the  crowd,  the  king
returned  to  the  monastery  of  Saint  Denis,  where  he
dined  amid  a  multitude  of  spectators,  who  thronged  no
thickly  around  him  that  his  dinner-table  was  nearly
overset.  These  were  the  very  Parisians,  ^^  ho,  but  three
years  before,  had  been  feeding  on  rats  and  dogs  and
dead  men's  bones,  and  the  bodies  of  their  own  children,

37  Fontanieu portefeuiDes, Nos. 416,  eut  perpetuellement les  mains j(  int<s,

417,  cited  by  Capetigue,  vi.  325.  les yeux adorant rEuchaiistie, ayant

^  Ibid. De  Thou,  ubi  siqj.  f'rappe  .<a  poitrine  trois  fois  tant  a  IV-leva-

M"La devotion  fut reniaiquee tres  tiondeEucliavistie  que  du  calice." — Font.

grande  en  sa  Maj.,  laquelle  pendant  la  portefeuilles,  ubi  sup.

tonsecration  et  elevation  de  rEucliaiisiie

y  2

228  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

rather  than  open  their  gates  to  this  same  Prince  of
Bearne.

Now,  although  Mayenne  had  set  strong  guards  at  those
gates,  and  had  most  strictly  prohibited  all  egi-ess,  the
city  was  emptied  of  its  populace,  which  pressed  in  trans-
ports of  adoration  *°  around  the  man  so  lately  the  object
of  their  hate.  Yet  few  could  seriously  believe  that  much
change  had  been  effected  in  the  inner  soul  of  him,  whom
the  legate,  and  the  Spaniard,  and  the  holy  father  at  Eome
still  continued  to  denounce  as  the  vilest  of  heretics  and
the  most  infamuus  of  impostcn's.

The  comedy  was  admirably  played  out  and  was  entirely
successful.  It  may  be  supposed  that  the  chief  actor  was,
however,  somewhat  wearied.  In  private,  he  mocked  at
all  this  ecclesiastical  mummery,  and  described  himself  as
heartily  sick  of  the  business.  "  I  arrived  here  last  even-
ing,'' he  wrote  to  the  beautiful  Gabrielle,  "  and  was  im-
portuned with  '  God  save  you  '  till  bed-time.  In  regard
to  the  Leaguers  I  am  of  the  order  of  St.  Thomas.  I  am
beginning  to-morrow  morning  to  talk  to  the  bishops,
besides  those  I  told  you  about  yesterday.  At  this
moment  of  writing  I  have  a  hundred  of  these  impor-
tunates  on  my  shoulders,  who  will  make  me  hate  Saint
Denis  as  much  as  you  hate  Mantes.  'Tis  to-morrow
that  I  take  the  perilous  leap.  I  kiss  a  million  times  the
beautiful  hands  of  my  angel  and  the  mouth  of  my  dear
mistress.""

A  truce — ^i-enewed  at  intervals — with  the  Leaguers
lasted  till  the  end  of  the  year.  The  Duke  of  N overs
was  sent  on  special  mission  to  Eome  to  procure  the  holy
father's  consent  to  the  great  heretic's  leconciliation  to
the  Church,  and  he  was  instructed  to  make  the  king's
submission  in  terms  so  wholesale  and  so  abject  that  even
some  of  the  life-long  papists  of  France  were  disgusted,
while  every  honest  Protestant  in  Europe  shrank  into
himself  for  shame.'*^ But  Clement,  overawed  by  Philip

■«>  De  Thou,  xii.  35.  will  appear  to  your  lo.  how  abjectedly  be
*i  Mem.  de  M.  deJ'Kstoile,  MS.  Cot.  P.  doth  therein  debase  the  Icing's  authority
No.  30,  cited  by  Capefigue,  vi.  354.  and  dignity,  wherewith  the  most  supersti-
*-  "Herewith  enclosed,''  wrote  the  tious  Catholics  here  are  so  despited,  as
English  envoy,  "  your  lordship  shall  re-  they  promise  to  procure  the  same  to  be
ceive  a  copy  of  the  retiuest  which  M.  de  disavowed  by  the  courts  of  parliament  as
Nevcrs  presented  to  the  pope  on  the  derogating  from  the  dignity  of  the  Gal-
king's  behalf— by  the  sight  whereof  it  lican Church." Kdmouds (who was

1593.  THE  HOLY  OIL  AT  RHEIMS.  229

and  his  ambassador,  was  deaf  to  all  the  representations
of  the  French  envoy.  He  protested  that  he  wonld  not
believe  in  the  sincerity  of  the  Bearne's  conversion  unless
an  angel  from  Heaven  should  reveal  it  to  him.  So  Nevers
left  Home  highly  exasperated,  and  professing  that  he
would  rather  have  lost  a  leg,  that  he  would  rather  have
been  sewn  in  a  sack  and  tossed  into  the  Tiber,  than
bear  back  such  a  message.  The  pope  ordered  the  pre-
lates who  had  accompanied  Nevers  to  remain  in  Rome
and  be  tried  by  the  Inquisition  for  misprision  of  heresy,
but  the  duke  jtlaced  thein  by  his  side  and  marched  out
of  the  Porta  del  Popolo  with  them,  threatening  to  kill
any  man  who  should  attempt  to  enforce  the  command.''"

Meantime  it  became  necessary  to  follow  up  the  St.
Denis  comedy  with  a  still  more  exhilarating  popular
spectacle.  The  heretic  had  been  purified,  confessed,
absolved.  It  was  time  for  a  consecration.  But  there
was  a  difficulty.  Although  the  fever  of  loyalty  to  the
ancient  house  of  Bourbon,  now  redeemed  from  its
worship  of  the  false  gods,  was  spreading  contagiously
through  the  provinces ;  although  all  the  white  silk  in
Lyons  had  been  cut  into  scarves  and  banners  to  cele-
brate the  reconciliation  of  the  candid  king  with  mother
Church  ;  although  that  ancient  city  was  ablaze  with
bonfires  and  illuminations,  while  its  streets  lan  red,
with  blood  no  longer,  but  with  wine ;  and  although
Madam  League,  so  lately  the  ol)ject  of  fondest  adora-
tion, Avas  now  publicly  burned  in  the  effigy  of  a  grizzly
hag;"  yet  Paris  still  held  for  that  deciepit  beldame,
and  closed  its  gates  to  the  Bearnese.

The  city  of  Rheims,  too,  had  not  acknowledged  the
former  HiTguenot,  and  it  was  at  Pheims,  in  the  church
of  St.  Remy,  that  the  Holy  Bottle  was  preserved.  With
what  chrism,  by  what  prelate,  should  the  consecration  of
Henry  be  performed  ?  Five  years  before,  the  League
had  proposed  in  the  estates  of  Blois  to  place  among  the
fundamental  laws  of  the  kingdom  that  no  king  should
be  considered  a  legitimate  sovereign  whose  head  had  not
been  anointed  by  the  bishop  at  Rheims  with  oil  from
that  holy  bottle. But  it  was  now  decided  that  to  ascribe

secretary  to  Sir  H.  Umpton,  and  in  his MS.) Compare  De  Tliou,  xii.  38,  and

absence agent  or  charge  d'affaires) to Bur,  B.  xxxii.  p.  151.

Burghley,  30 Dec. 1593. (S. K  Office ^  Ue  Thou,  xii.  S3-94. *'  Iljid.  114.

230  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX

a  monopoly  of  sanctity  to  that  prelate  and  to  that  bottle
would  be  to  make  a  schism  in  the  Church.*^

Moreover  it  was  discovered  that  there  was  a  chrism
in  existence  still  more  efScacious  than  the  famous  oil  of
St.  Eemy.  One  hundred  and  twelve  years  before  the
baptism  of  Clovis,  St.  Martin  had  accidentally  tumbled
down  stairs,  and  lay  desperately  bruised  and  at  the
point  of  death.  But,  according  to  Sulpicius  Severus,  an
anoel  had  straightway  descended  from  heaven,  and  with
a  miraculous  balsam  had  anointed  the  contusions  of  the
saint,  Avho  next  day  felt  no  farther  inconveniences  from
his  fall.  The  balsam  had  ever  since  been  preserved
\n  the  church  of  Marmoutier  near  Tours.  Here,  then,
was  the  most  potent  of  unguents  brought  directly  from
heaven.  To  mix  a  portion  thereof  with  the  chrism  of
consecration  was  clearly  more  judicious  than  to  make
use  of  the  holy  bottle,  especially  as  the  holy  bottle  was
not  within  reach.  The  monks  of  Marmoutier  consented
to  lend  the  sacred  phial  containing  the  famous  oil  of  St.
Martin  for  the  grand  occasion  of  the  royal  consecration.

Accompanied  by  a  strong  military  escort  provided  by
Giles  de  Souvri,  governor  of  Touraine,  a  deputation  of
friars  brought  the  phial  to  Chartres,  where  the  con-
secration was  to  take  place.  Prayei's  were  offered  up,
without  ceasing,  in  the  monastery  during  their  absence
that  no  mishap  should  befal  the  sacred  treasure.  When
the  monks  arrived  at  Chartres,  four  young  barons  of  the
first  nobility  were  assigned  to  them  as  hostages  for
the  safe  I'estoration  of  the  phial,  which  was  then  borne
in  triumph  to  the  cathedral,  the  streets  through  which
it  was  carried  being  covered  with  tapestry.  There  was
26  Feb.  a  great  ceremony,  a  splendid  consecration  ;  six
1594.  bishops,  with  mitres  on  their  heads  and  in  gala
robes,  officiating;  after  which  the  king  knelt  before  the
altar  and  took  the  customary  oath.***

Thus  the  champion  of  the  fierce  Huguenots,  the  well-
beloved  of  the  dead  La  Noue  and  the  living  Duplessis
Mornay,  the  devoted  knight  of  the  heretic  Queen  Eliza-
beth, the  sworn  ally  of  the  stout  Dutch  Calvinists,  was
pompously  reconciled  to  that  Eome  which  was  the  object
of  their  hatred  and  their  fear.

The  admirably  arranged  spectacles  of  the  instruction  at

15  De  Thou,  xii.  120-129.  ic  Ibid.

1593.  HENRY'S  ENTRY  INTO  PARIS,  231

St.  Denis  and  the  consecration  at  Chartres  were  followed
on  the  day  of  the  vernal  equinox  by  a  third  and  most
conclusive  ceremony.

A  secret  arrangement  had  been  made  with  De  Cosse-
Brissac,  governor  of  Pai  is,  by  the  king,  accord-  21-22  Mar.
ing  to  which  the  gates  of  Paris  were  at  last  to  ^•'*^^-
be  opened  to  him.''^  The  governor  obtained  a  high  price
for  his  services — three  hundred  thousand  livres  in  hard
cash,  thirty  thousand  a  year  for  his  life,  and  the  truncheon
of  marshal  of  France.''*'  Thus  purchased,  Brissac  made
his  preparations  with  remarkable  secrecy  and  skill.
Envoy  Ybarra,  who  had  scented  something  suspicious
in  the  air,  had  gone  straight  to  the  governor  for  informa-
tion, but  the  keen  Spaniard  was  thrown  out  by  the
governor's  ingenuous  protestations  of  ignorance.  The
next  morning,  March  22nd,  was  stormy  and  rainy,  and
long  before  daylight  Ybarra,  still  uneasy  despite  the
statements  of  Brissac,  was  wandering  about  the  streets
of  Paris  when  he  became  the  involuntary  witness  of  an
extraordinary  spectacle."'^

Through  the  wind  and  the  rain  came  trampling  along
the  dark  streets  of  the  capital  a  body  of  four  thousand
troopers  and  lansquenettes.  Many  torch-bearers  attended
on  the  procession,  whose  flambeaux  threw  a  lurid  light
upon  the  scene.  Theie,  surrounded  by  the  swart  and
grizzly  bearded  visages  of  these  strange  men-at-arms,
who  were  dischai'ging  their  arquebuses,  as  they  advanced
i;pon  any  bystanders  likely  to  oppose  their  progress  ;  in
the  very  midst  of  this  sea  of  helmed  heads,  the  envo}''
was  enabled  to  recognise  the  martial  figure  of  the  Prince
of  Bearne.  Armed  to  the  teeth,  with  sword  in  hand  and
dagger  at  side,  the  hero  of  Ivry  rode  at  last  through  the
barriers  which  had  so  long  kept  him  from  his  ca])ital.
"  'Twas  like  enchantment,"  said  Ybarra.*  The  first  Bour-
bon entered  the  city  through  the  same  gate  out  of  which
the  last  Valois  had,  five  years  before,  so  ignominiously
fled.  It  was  a  midnight  surprise,  although  not  fully
accomplished  until  near  the  dawn  of  day.  It  was  not  a.
triumphal  entrance ;  nor  did  Henry  come  as  the  victori-

1"  De  Thou,  xii.  138-141.  *^  Capefigue,  vii.  ]22.

222
■^  Ybarra  to ,  23  March,  1594. (Arch,  de  Siraancas,  B.  79,  —  cited  by  Cape-
figue, vii.  151.)  50  Ibid.

232  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

ous  standard-bearer  of  a  great  principle.  He  had  defeated
the  League  in  many  battle-fields,  but  the  League  still
hissed  defiance  at  him  from  the  very  hearthstone  of  his
ancestral  palace.  He  had  now  crept,  in  order  to  con-
quer, even  lower  than  the  League  itself;  and  casting  oif
his  Huguenot  skin  at  last,  he  had  soared  over  the  heads
of  all  men,  the  presiding  genius  of  the  holy  Catholic
Church.

Twenty-one  years  before,  he  had  entered  the  same  city
on  the  conclusion  of  one  of  the  truces  which  had  varied
the  long  monotony  of  the  religious  wars  of  France.  The
youthful  son  of  Antony  Bourbon  and  Joan  of  Albret  had
then  appeared  as  the  champion  and  the  idol  of  the
Huguenots,  In  the  same  year  had  come  the  fatal  nuptials
with  the  bride  of  St.  Bartholomew,  the  first  Catholic
conversion  of  Henry  and  the  massacre  at  which  the
world  still  shudders.

Now  he  was  chief  of  the  "  Politicians,"  and  sworn
supporter  of  the  Coimcil  of  Trent.  Earnest  Huguenots
were  hanging  their  heads  in  despair.

Lie  lepi'esented  the  principle  of  national  unity  against
national  dismemberment  by  domestic  treason  and  foreign
violence.  Had  that  principle  been  his  real  inspiration,
as  it  was  in  tiuth  his  sole  .supj^ort,  history  might
judge  him  more  leniently.  Had  he  relied  upon  it
entirely  it  might  have  been  strong  enough  to  restore
him  to  the  throne  of  his  ancestors,  without  the  famous
religious  apostasy  with  which  his  name  is  for  ever  asso-
ciated. It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  permanent  reli-
gious toleration  might  not  have  been  tlie  result  of  his
mounting  the  throne,  only  when  he  could  do  so  without
renouncing  the  faith  of  his  fathers.  A  day  of  civiliza-
tion may  come  perhaps,  sooner  or  later,  when  it  will  be
of  no  earthly  consequence  to  their  fellow  cieatures  to
what  creed,  what  Christian  chTirch,  what  religious  dogma
kings  or  humbler  individuals  may  be  partial ;  when  the
relations  between  man  and  his  Maker  shall  be  undefiled
by  political  or  social  intrusion.  But  the  day  will  never
come  when  it  can  be  otherwise  than  damaging  to  public
morality  and  humiliating  to  human  dignity  to  forswear
principle  for  a  price,  and  to  make  the  most  aAvful  ot
mysteries  the  subject  of  political  legerdemain  and
theatrical  buffoonery.

1594.  DEPARTURE  OF  THE  SPANISH  GARRISON.  233

The  so-called  conversion  of  the  king  marks  an  epoch
in  Imman  history.  It  strengthened  the  Koman  Church
and  gave  it  an  indefinite  renew^al  of  life  ;  bnt  it  sapped
the  foundations  of  religious  faith.  The  appearance  of
Henry  the  Huguenot  as  the  champion  of  the  Council  of
Trent  was  of  itself  too  biting  an  epigram  not  to  be  exten-
sively destructive.  Whether  for  good  or  ill,  religion
was  fast  ceasing  to  be  the  mainspring  of  political  com-
binations, the  motive  of  great  wars  and  national  convul-
sions. The  age  of  religion  was  to  be  succeeded  by  the
age  of  commerce.

But  the  king  was  now  on  his  throne.  All  Paris  was
in  rapture.  There  was  Te  Deum  with  high  mass  in
Notre  Dame,  and  the  populace  was  howling  itself  hoarse
with  rapture  in  honour  of  him  so  lately  the  object  of  the
general  curse.  Even  the  Sorbonne  declared  in  favour  of
the  reclaimed  heretic, °^  and  the  decision  of  those  sages
had  vast  influence  with  less  enlightened  mortals.
There  was  nothing  left  for  the  Duke  of  Feria  but  to
take  himself  off  and  make  Latin  orations  in  favour  of
the  Infanta  elsewhere,  if  fit  audience  elsewhere  could  be
found.  A  week  after  the  entrance  of  Henry,  the  Spanish
garrison  accordingly  was  allowed  to  leave  Paris  28  March,
with  the  honours  of  war.  ^^^*-

"  We  marched  out  at  2  p.m.,"  wrote  the  duke  to  his
master,  "  with  closed  ranks,  colours  displayed,  and
drums  beating.  First  came  the  Italians  and  then  the
Spaniards,  in  the  midst  of  whom  was  myself  on  horse-
back, with  the  Walloons  marching  near  me.  The
Prince  of  Bearne  "• — it  was  a  solace  to  the  duke's  heart,
of  which  he  never  could  be  deprived,  to  call  the  king
by  that  title — "  was  at  a  window  over  the  gate  of  St.
Denis  through  which  we  took  our  departure.  He  was
dressed  in  light  grey,  with  a  black  hat  surmounted  by
a  great  white  feather.  Our  displayed  standards  rendered
him  no  courteous  salute  as  we  passed.'""^

Here  was  another  solace  !

Thus  had  the  game  been  lost  and  won,  but  Philip
as  usual  did  not  acknowledge  himself  beaten.  Mayenne,
too,  continued  to  make  the  most  fervent  promises  to  all

51  April  22,  1594. Capefigue,  vii.  183-4.

62

w  Feria  to  Philip,  Arch,  de  Simancas  (Paris),  B.  78,  —  in  Capefigue,  vii.  161.

234  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

that  was  left  of  the  confederates.  He  betook  himself  tc
Brussels,  and  by  the  king's  orders  was  courteously  re-
ceived by  the  Spanish  authorities  in  the  Netherlands.
In  the  midst  of  the  tempest  now  rapidly  destroying  all
rational  hopes,  Philip  still  clung  to  Mayenne  as  to  a  spar
in  the  shipwreck.  For  the  king  ever  possessed  the
virtue,  if  it  be  one,  of  continuing  to  believe  himself
invincible  and  infallible,  when  he  had  been  defeated  in
every  quarter,  and  when  his  calculations  had  all  proved
ridiculous  mistakes.

When  his  famous  Armada  had  been  shattered  and
sunk,  have  we  not  seen  him  peevishly  requiring  Alexan-
der Farnese  to  construct  a  new  one  immediately  and  to
proceed  therewith  to  conquer  England  out  of  hand  ?
Was  it  to  be  expected  that  he  would  renounce  his  con-
quest of  France,  although  the  legitimate  king  had
entered  his  capital,  had  reconciled  himself  to  the  Church,
and  was  on  the  point  of  obtaining  forgiveness  of  the
pope  ?  If  the  Prince  of  Bearne  had  already  destroyed
the  Holy  League,  why  should  not  the  Duke  of  Mayenne
and  Archduke  Ernest  make  another  for  him,  and  so  con-
quer France  without  further  delay  ?

But  although  it  was  still  possible  to  deceive  the  king,
who  in  the  i;niversality  of  his  deceptive  powers  was  so
prone  to  delude  himself,  it  was  difficult  even  for  so
accomplished  an  intriguer  as  Mayenne  to  hoodwink  much
longer  the  shrewd  Spaniards  who  were  playing  so  losing
a  game  against  him.

"  Our  afiairs  in  France,"  said  Ybarra,  "  are  in  such
condition  that  we  are  losing  money  and  character  there,
and  are  likely  to  lose  all  the  provinces  here,  if  things  are
not  soon  taken  up  in  a  large  and  energetic  manner.
Money  and  troops  aie  what  is  wanted  on  a  great  scale
for  France.  The  king's  agents  are  mightily  discontented
with  Mayenne,  and  with  I'eason ;  but  they  are  obliged  to
dissimulate  and  to  hold  their  tongues.  We  can  send
them  no  assistance  from  these  regions,  unless  from  down
yonder  you  send  us  the  cloth  and  the  scissors  to  cut  it
with."^^

w  Ybarra  to  the  Secretaries,  18  Jan.  Mayenne has always been managing

1594. (Arch,  de  Simaiicas  M.S.)  Charles  affair.s  for  bis  own  ends,  cheating your

Mansfeld,  too,  held  the  same  language.  M;yesty,  and  this  opinion  1  have  always

"  I  have  had  a  talk  with  Tassis,"  he  wrote  held."
to  the  king, "and  we  both  agree  that

1594.  DISSIMULATION  OF  MAYENNE.  235

And  the  arcliduke  Ernest,  althongli  he  invited
Mayeime  to  confer  with  him  at  Brussels,  under  the  im-
pression that  he  could  still  keep  him  and  the  Duke  of
Guise  from  coming  to  an  arrangement  with  Bearne,
hardly  felt  more  confidence  in  the  man  than  did  Feria
or  Ybarra.  "  Since  the  loss  of  Paris,"  said  Ernest,  "  I
have  had  a  letter  from  Mayenne,  in  which,  deeply
affected  by  that  event,  he  makes  me  great  offers,  even  to
the  last  drop  of  his  blood,  vowing  never  to  abandon  the
cause  of  the  League.  But  of  the  intentions  and  inner
mind  of  this  man  I  find  such  vague  information,  that  I
don't  dare  to  expect  more  stability  from  him  than  may  be
founded  upon  his  own  interest."'^*

And  so  Mayenne  came  to  Brussels  and  passed  three
days  with  the  archduke.  "  He  avows  himself  ready  to
die  in  our  cause,"  said  Ernest.  "  If  your  Majesty  will
give  men  and  money  enough,  he  will  undertake  so  to
deal  with  Bearne  that  he  shall  not  think  himself  safe  in
his  own  house."  The  archduke  expiessed  his  dissatis-
faction to  Mayenne  that  with  the  money  he  had  already
received,  so  little  had  been  accomplished,  but  he  still
aifected  a  confidence  which  he  was  far  from  feeling,
"  because,"  said  he,  "  it  is  known  that  Mayenne  is
already  treating  with  Bearne.  If  he  has  not  concluded
those  arrangements,  it  is  because  Bearne  now  offers  him
less  mone}'  than  before."  °°  The  amount  of  dissimula-
tion, politely  so-called,  practised  by  the  grandees  of  that
age,  to  say  nothing  of  their  infinite  capacity  for  pecu-
niary absorption,  makes  the  brain  reel  and  enlarges  one's
ideas  of  the  human  faculties  as  exerted  in  certain  direc-
tions. It  is  doubtful  whether  plain  Hans  Miller  or
Hans  Baker  could  have  risen  to  such  a  level.^^

5+  Emest  to  Philip,  30  March,  1594.  loss  of  Paris,  but  that  nevertheless  it  was
Ibid.  The  legate  had  at  last  informed  necessary  to  affect  confidence  in  him.
Mayenne  that  "the  actions  of  Navarre  The  war  would  be  carried  on,  and  the
were  not  of  men,  but  the  works  of  God's  king  had  so  inlormed  the  pope.  The
hand,  and  that  the  forces  of  Spain  were  salaries  paid  to  personages  in  Fiance  be-
not  sufficient  to  prevent  him  establish-  fore  the  loss  of  Paris  would  be  continued,
ing  himself  absolute  king  of  France,  and  Philip  to  Ernest,  4  June,  1594.  (Arch.
so  it  would  be  better  that  he  should  be  de  Sinianras  MS.)

established  by  means  of  a  general  peace."  =5  Kelacion  de  cartas  del  Archiduque,
Suniilrio  de  una  relacion  que  hizo  .i.'^oanio  para  S.  JW''  sobre  las  cosas  de  Francia.
Solferini,  27  April,  1594.  (Arch,  de  Si-  (Arch,  de  Siniancas  MS.)
mancas  MS  )  Philip  replied  to  the  Arch-  ^s  Even  bo  late  as  the  winter  of  this
duke  tlial  Mayenne  could  scaicely  be  ac-  year,  Mayenne  wrote  in  a  deeply  in-
quitted  of  evil  intentions  iu  regard  to  the  jured  tone  to  the  archduke,  expressinR

236  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

The  Duke  of  Feria  and  the  other  Spanish  envoys  had
long  since  thoroughly  understood  the  character  of
Mayenne — that  great  broker  between  Philip,  the  Bear-
nese,  and  the  League.

Feria  wrote  a  despatch  to  the  king,  denouncing
August,  Mayenne  as  false,  pernicious  to  the  cause  of
^^^■*-  Spain  and  of  Catholicism,  thoroughly  self-seek-
ing: and  vile,  and  as  now  most  traitorous  to  the  cause  of
the  coiifederac}^  engaged  m  surrendering  its  strong
places  to  the  enemy,  and  preparing  to  go  over  to  the
Prince  of  Bearne,

'•  If,"  said  he,  "  I  were  to  recount  all  his  base  tricks,
I  should  go  on  till  midnight,  and  perhaps  till  to-morrow
morning."  ^^

This  letter,  being  intercepted,  was  sent  with  great  glee
by  Henry  IV.,  not  to  the  royal  hands  for  which  it  was
destined,  but  to  the  Duke  of  Mayenne.  Great  was  the
wrath  of  that  injured  personage  as  he  read  svich  libellous
truths.  He  forthwith  fulminated  a  scathing  reply,
addressed  to  Philip  IL,  in  which  he  denounced  the
Duke  of  Feria  as  "  a  dirty  ignoramus,  an  impudent
coward,  an  impostor,  and  a  blind  thief ;  "  adding,  after
many  other  unsavoury  epithets,  "  but  I  will  do  him  an
honour  which  he  has  not  merited,  proving  him  a  liar  with
my  sword  ;  and  I  humbly  pray  your  Majesty  to  grant  me
this  favour  and  to  pardon  my  just  grief,  which  causes
me  to  depart  from  the  respect  due  to  your  Majesty  when
I  speak  of  this  impostor  who  has  thus  wickedly  torn  my
reputation."  ^^

His  invectives  were,  however,  much  stronger  than  his
arguments  in  defence  of  that  tatteied  reputation.  'I'he
defiance  to  mortal  combat  went  for  nothing  ;  and,  in  the

surprise that "pledges should be  de-  Mayenne  about  his  hook  by  allowing  bini

manded  of  him,  and  suspicions  entertained  to  nibble  at  very  small  bait. "  You  must

concerning  hiiu,  alter  all  the  proofs  he  try  to keep him dependent on me,"*

had  given  of  his  fidelity  and  constancy."  he  said  to  ICrnest,  "not  giving  him  any

Mayenne  to  Ernest,  Sept.  1,  1594.  (Arch,  more  money  than  is  necessary  to  prevent

de  Simancas  MS.) "  He  offers  very  mag-  him from  falUng away  entirely,  for  to

nificently to die for  the  cause," said  content  his  appetite  completely  there  is

Ernest,  "but  his  deeds  resolve  themselves  not  a  fortune  in the  world that  would

into  remote  and  general  offers,  and  into  suffice." Philip  to  Ernest,  2  Dec.  1594.

begging  for  ready  money  in  present  pay-  Ibid. Compare  paper  of  L>iego  de  Pi-

ment for  what he  is to  do for  your  mental,  23  Nov.  1594. Ibid.

My-  in  future." Ernest  to  PhUip,  6  Sept.  57  Feria  to  PhiUp,  Aug.  1594. MSS.  de

1594.  ibid.  And  to  the  very  last  moment  Colbert,  vol.  33,  in  Capefigue,  vii.  229.

Philip  persisted  in  endeavouring  to  keep  ss  Capefigue,  vii.  229, ieqq.

1.594.  TREATY  BETWEEN  HENRY  AND  MAYENNE. 237

ooiirse  of  the  next  year,  the  injured  Mayenne  turned  his
back  on  Philip  and  the  Spaniards,  and  conduded  his
bargain  with  the  Prince  of  Bearne.  He  obtained  good
terms;  the  government  of  Burgundy,  payment  of  his
debts,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  crowns  in
hard  cash.^^  It  is  not  on  record  that  the  man  of  his
word,  of  credit,  and  of  truth,  ever  restored  a  penny  of
the  vast  sums  which  lie  had  received  from  Philip  to
carry  on  the  business  of  the  League.

Subsequently  the  duke  came  one  verj'  hot  summer's-
day  to  Monceaus  to  thank  the  king,  as  he  expressed  it,
for  "  delivering  him  from  Sj^anish  arrogance  and  Italian
wiles  ;  "  and  having  got  with  much  difficulty  lapon  his
knees,  was  allowed  to  kiss  the  royal  hand.  Henry  then
insisted  upon  walking  about  with  him  through  the  park
at  a  prodigious  rate,  to  show  him  all  the  improvements,
while  the  duke  panted,  groaned,  and  perspired  in  his
vain  efforts  to  keep  pace  with  his  new  sovereign.

"  If  I  keep  this  fat  fellow  walking  about  in  the  sun
much  longer,"  whispered  the  king  to  Ue  Bethune,  who
was  third  in  the  party,  "  I  shall  be  sufficiently  avenged  for
all  the  mischief  he  has  done  us."

At  last,  when  the  duke  was  forced  to  admit  himself  to
be  on  the  point  of  expiring  with  fatigue,  he  was  dis-
missed to  the  palace  with  orders  to  solace  himself  with
a  couple  of  bottles  of  excellent  wine  of  Arbois,  expressly
provided  for  him  by  the  king's  direction.  And  this  was
all  the  punishment  ever  inflicted  by  the  good-humoured
monarch  on  the  corpulent  conspirator. '^'^

The  Duke  of  Guise  made  his  arrangements  with  the
cx-Huguenot  on  even  better  terms  and  at  a  still  earlier
day ;  '^^  -while  Jo3euse  and  Mercoeur  stuod  out  a  good
while  and  higgled  hard  for  conditions.  "  These  people
])ut  such  a  high  price  on  themselves,"  said  one  of  Henry's
diplomatists,  "  that  one  loses  almost  more  than  one  gains
in  buying  them.  They  strip  and  plunder  us  even  in  our
nakedness,  and  we  are  obliged,  in  order  to  conciliate  such

59  Capefigue,  vii.  333-5.  to  have  his  allowance  continued,  and  the

w  Memoires  de Sully, liv.  viii.  454.  king left  it  to  his  governor-general to

This  interview  was  in  the  spring  of  1596,  decide  whether  to  do  so  or  not. Philip

while  Henry  was  occupied  with  the  siege  to Archduke Albert, 24 April, 1596.

of La  Fere. At the  very  same time,  (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

possibly  on  the  self-same  day,  Mayenne  ci  Capefigue,  vii.  321,  322.
was  sending  an  emissary  to  Philip,  begging

238  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

harpies,  to  employ  all  that  we  can  scrape  out  of  our  sub-
stance and  our  blood.  I  think,  however,  that  we  ought
to  gain  them  by  whatever  means  and  at  whatever
price."  ^^

Thus  Henry  IV.,  the  man  whom  so  many  contempo-
rary sages  had  for  years  been  rebuking  or  ridiculing  for
his  persistency  in  a  hopeless*  attempt  to  save  his  country
from  dismemberment,  to  restore  legitimate  authority,  and
t(j  resist  the  "  holj'  confederacy "  of  domestic  traitors,
aided  by  foreign  despots  and  sympathizers,  was  at  last
successful,  and  the  fratricidal  war  in  France  was  approach-
ing its  only  possible  conclusion.

Bat,  alas !  the  hopes  of  those  who  loved  the  reformed
Church  as  well  as  they  loved  their  country  were  sadly
blasted  by  the  apostasy  of  their  leader.  From  the  most
eminent  leaders  of  the  Huguenots  there  came  a  wail,
which  must  have  penetrated  even  to  the  well-steeled
heart  of  the  cheerful  Gascon.  "•  It  will  be  difiBculr,"  they
said,  "  to  efface  very  soon  from  your  memory  the  names
of  the  men  whom  the  sentiment  of  a  common  religion,
association  in  the  same  perils  and  persecutions,  a  com-
mon joy  in  the  same  deliverance,  and  the  long  experi-
ence of  so  many  faithful  services,  have  engraved  there
with  a  pencil  of  diamond.  The  remembrance  of  these
things  pursues  you  and  accompanies  you  everywhere ;
it  interrupts  your  most  important  aiiairs,  your  most
ardent  pleasures,  your  most  profound  slumber,  to  repre-
sent to  you,  as  in  a  picture,  yourself  to  yourself:  your-
self not  as  you  are  to-day,  but  such  as  you  Tvere  when,
pursued  to  the  death  by  the  greatest  princes  of  Europe,
you  v/ent  on  conducting  to  the  harbour  of  safety  the  little
vessel  against  which  so  many  tempests  were  beating."*^^

6~  "  Je  ne  doutf  point  que  I'acconimo-  que  prix  que  ce  puisse  etre."  Bongars.
(lenent  de  M.  do  May?nne  ne  soil  fait  Lettres,  pp.  331,  332.
et  j'espere  que  ctluy  de  M.  de  Joyouse  ^^  Requete  au  Roy  par  ceux  de  la  ra-
se fera  encore.  M.  de  Mercoeur  88  rend  ligion,  1593.  Colbert  MSS.  vol  xsxi.
plus  difficile.  Cts  geus-lii  se  mottcnt  h,  apud  Capeiigue,  vi.  317.
si  haut  pri.x  qu'on  perd  presque  plus  "  Je  plains  etpleursau  fond  demon  anie
qu'on  ne  gagne  ii  Ics  acheter.  lis  nous  la  gehenne  de  S.  Maj.,"  wrote  Duplessis
depouiUent  dans  uotre  nudite  mesme,  et  Mornay,  11  Aug.  1593,  to  De  Lomenie,
il  I'aut  employer  pour  reconcilier  ces  "je  vous  prie  de  lui  dire  que  s'il  lui
harpies  tout  ce  que  nous  pouvons  tirer  prend  jamais  envie  de  sortir  de  cette  cap-
de  nutre  substance  et  de  notre  sang.  Je  tivite  et  spiritnelle  et  temporelle,  je  ne
crois  neaiitmoins  que  nous  les  devons  puis  croistre  de  Cdelite  mais  Je  doublerai
gaigner par  quclque moyen  ct  a quel-  de  courage  ....  lis  ne  lui  donuent  pas

1594.  INDIGNATION  OF  ELIZABETH.  239

The  States  of  the  Dutch  republic,  where  the  afikir  of
Henry's  conversion  was  as  much  a  matter  of  domestic
personal  interest  as  it  could  he  in  France — for  religion
up  to  that  epoch  was  the  true  frontier  between  nation  and
nation— debated  the  question  most  earnestly  while  it  was
yet  doubtful.  It  was  proposed  to  send  a  fuimal  deputation
to  the  king,  in  order  to  divert  him,  if  possible,  from  the
fatal  step  which  he  was  about  to  take.  After  ripe  deli-
beration, however,  it  was  decided  to  leave  the  matter
"  in  the  hands  of  God  Almighty,  and  to  pray  Hirn
earnestly  to  guide  the  issue  to  His  glory  and  the  welfare
of  the  Churches."  "*

The  Queen  of  England  was,  as  might  be  supposed,
beside  herself  with  indignation,  and  in  consequence  of  the
great  apostasy  and  of  her  chronic:  dissatisfaction  with
the  manner  in  which  her  contingent  of  tioops  had  been
handled  in  France,  she  determined  to  withdraw  every
English  soldier  from  the  support  of  Henry's  cause.  The
unfortunate  French  ambassador  in  London  was  at  his
wits'  ends.  He  vowed  that  he  could  not  sleep  of  nights,
and  that  the  gout  and  the  cholic,  to  which  he  was  always
a  martyr,  were  nothing  to  the  anguish  which  had  now
come  upon  his  soul  and  brain,  such  as  he  had  never
suffered  since  the  blood3^  day  of  St.  Barthohimcw.''^

"  Ah,  my  God !  "  said  he  to  Burghley,  "  is  it  possible
that  her  just  choler  has  so  suddenly  passed  over  the
great  glory  which  she  has  acquired  by  so  many  benefits
and  liberalities?"'^*'  But  he  persuaded  himself  that  her
majesty  would  after  all  not  persist  in  her  fell  resolution.
To  do  so,  he  vowed,  would  only  be  boiling  milk  for  the
French  papists,  who  would  be  sure  to  make  the  most  of
the  occasion  in  order  to  precipitate  the  king  into  the
abyss,  to  the  border  of  which  they  had  already  brought
him.  He  so  dreaded  the  ire  oi  the  queen  that  he  pro-
tested he  was  trembling  all  over  merely  to  see  the  pen
of  his  secretary  wagging  as  he  dictated  his  despatch."
Nevertheless  it  was  his  teri-ible  duty  to  face  her  in  her
wrath,  and  he  implored  the  lend  treasurer  to  accompany

la  paix  do I'tsiat  et  lui  ostent  la  paix  de  Duplessis  Mornay,  iv.  511.

dc  la  conscience lis  ne  lui  ren- ^  Dor,  III.  7CC.

dent  point  son  voyaunic,  car  c'c st  a  iJiou m  Beauvuir  la Noclo  to  Burgliliy,  21

et  nou  au  diable  a  le  donner,  et  lui  fout  Aug,  1D93. (S.  P.  Oflice  MS.)
renouter  autant  qu'en  eulx  e.-;t  le  roy- C6  Jijid.  67  Ibid.

aume  dcs  cicus." Mem.  et  Correspond.

240  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXIX.

him  and  to  shield  him  at  the  approaching  intei'view.
"  Protect  me,"  he  cried,  "  by  yonr  wisdom  from  the  ire
of  this  great  princess;  for  by  the  living  God,  when  I
see  her  enraged  against  any  person  whatever,  I  wish
myself  in  Calcutta,  fearing  her  anger  like  death  itself."  *^^

When  all  was  over,  Henry  sent  De  Morlans  as  special
envoy  to  communicate  the  issue  to  the  Governments  of
England  and  of  Holland.  But  the  queen,  although  no
longer  so  violent,  was  less  phlegmatic  than  the  States-
General,  and  refused  to  be  comforted.  She  subsequently
receded,  however,  from  her  determination  to  withdraw
her  troops  from  France.

"  Ah!  what  grief;  ah  !  what  regrets;  ah  !  what  groans,
have  I  felt  in  my  soul,"  she  wrote,  "  at  the  sound  of
the  news  brought  to  me  by  Moidans  !  My  God  !  Is  it
possible  that  any  worldly  respect  can  efface  the  terror  of
Divine  wrath  ?  Can  we  by  reason  even  expect  a  good
sequel  to  such  iniquitous  acts  ?  He  who  has  maintained
and  preserved  you  by  His  mercy,  can  you  imagine  that
He  permits  you  to  walk  alone  in  your  utmost  need  ?
'Tis  bad  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come  of  it.  Meantime
I  shall  not  cease  to  put  you  in  the  first  rank  of  my
devotions,  in  order  that  the  hands  of  Esau  may  not  spoil
the  blessings  of  Jacob.  7^s  to  3"0ur  promises  to  me  of
friendship  and  tidelity,  I  confess  to  have  dearly  deserved
them,  nor  do  I  repent,  provided  you  do  not  change  your
Father — otherwise  I  shall  be  your  bastard  sister  by  the
father's  side — for  I  shall  ever  love  a  natural  better  than
an  adopted  one.  I  desire  that  God  may  guide  you  in  a
straight  road  and  a  better  path.  Your  most  sincere
sister  in  the  old  fashion.  As  to  the  new,  I  have  nothing
to  do  with  it.

"  Elizabeth  K  " '•'

65  Beauvoir  la  Xocle  to  Burghley,  24  Aug.  1593. (S.  P.  OESce  MS.)
ra  Bibl.  du  Roi,  MSS.  Colbert  in  fol.  M.  R.  I K  vol.  xvi.,  fol.  329,  aptid  Capefigiie.
vi.  352.

1593  SIEGE  OF  GERTRUYDENBERG.  241

CHAPTER XXX.

Pi'ince  Maurice  lays  siege  to  Gertruydenberg — Advantages  of  the  new  system  of  war-
fare— Progress  of  the  besieging  operations — Superiority  of  Maurice's  manoeuvres —
Adventure  of  Count  Philip  of  Nassau — Capitulation  of  Gertruydenberg — Mutiny
among  the  Spanish  troops — Attempt  of  Verdugo  to  retalie  Coeworden — Suspicions
of  treason  in  the  English  garrison  at  Ostend — Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Sir
Edward  Norris  on  the  subject — Second  attempt  on  Coeworden — Assault  on
Qroningen  by  Maurice — Second  adventure  of  Philip  of  Nassau— Narrow  escape  of
Prince  Maurice — Surrender  of  Groningen — Particulars  of  the  siege — Question  of
religious  toleration — Progress  of  the  United  Netherlands — Condition  of  the
"obedient"  Netherlands- Incompetency  of  Peter  Mansfeld  as  Governor — Arch-
duke Ernest,  the  successor  of  Farnese — Difficuliies  of  his  position — His  unpopu-
larity— Great  achievements  of  the  republicans — Triumphal  enlry  of  Ernest  into
Brussels  and  Antwerp  —  Magnificence  of  the  spectacle  —  Disaffection  of  the
Spanish  troops — Great  military  rebellion — Philip's  proposal  to  destroy  the  English
fleet — His  assassination  plans — Plot  to  poison  Queen  Elizabeth — Conspiracies
against  Prince  Maurice — Futile  attempts  at  negotiation — Proposal  of  a  marriage
between  Henry  and  the  Infanta — Secret  mission  from  Henry  to  the  King  of  Spain
— Special  dispatch  to  England  and  the  States — Henry  obtains  further  aid  from
Queen  Elizabeth  and  the  States-Council — Anxiety  of  the  Protestant  countries  to
bring  about  a  war  with  Spain — Aspect  of  affairs  at  the  close  of  the  year  1594.

While  Philip's  world-empire  seemed  in  one  direction  to
be  so  rapidly  fading  into  cloudland  there  were  substan-
tial possessions  of  the  Spanish  crown  which  had  been
neglected  in  Brabant  and  Friesland.

Two  very  important  cities  still  held  for  the  King  of
Spain  within  the  territories  of  what  could  now  be  fairly
considered  the  United  Dutch  Eepublic — St.  Gertruyden-
berg and  Groningen.

Early  in  the  spring  of  1593,  Maurice  had  completed
his  preparations  for  a  siege,  and  on  the  24th  March
appeared  before  Gertruydenberg.

It  was  a  stately,  ancient  city,  important  for  its  wealth,
its  strength,  and  especially  for  its  position.  For  with-
out its  possession  even  the  province  of  Holland  could
hardly  consider  itself  mistress  of  its  own  little  domains.
It  was  seated  on  the  ancient  Meuse,  swollen  as  it  ap-
proached the  sea  almost  to  the  dimension  of  a  gulf,  while
from  the  south  another  stream,  called  the  Donge,  very
brief  in  its  course,  but  with  considerable  depth  of  water,
came  to  mingle  itself  with  the  Meuse,  exactly  under  the
walls  of  the  city.

VOL. III.  R

242  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

The  site  of  the  place  was  so  low  that  it  was  almost
hidden  and  protected  by  its  surrounding  dykes.  These
afforded  means  of  fortification,  which  had  been  well
improved.  Both  by  nature  and  art  the  city  was  one  of
the  strongholds  of  the  Netherlands.

Maurice  had  given  the  world  a  lesson  in  the  beleaguer-
ing science  at  the  siege  of  Steenwyk,  such  as  had  never
before  been  dreamt  of;  but  he  was  resolved  that  the
operations  before  Gertruydenberg  should  constitute  d,
masterpiece.

Nothing  could  be  more  beautiful  as  a  production  of
military  art,  nothing,  to  the  general  reader,  more  insipid
than  its  details.

On  the  land  side,  Hohenlo's  headquarters  were  at
Eamsdonck,  a  village  about  a  German  mile  to  the  east
of  Gertruydenberg.  Maurice  himself  was  established
on  the  west  side  of  the  city.^  Two  bridges  constructed
across  the  Donge  facilitated  the  communications  between
the  two  camps,  while  great  quantities  of  planks  and
brush  were  laid  down  across  the  swampy  roads  to  make
them  passable  for  waggon-trains  and  artillery.  The
first  care  of  the  young  general,  whose  force  was  not
more  than  twenty  thousand  men,  was  to  protect  himself
rather  than  to  assail  the  town.

His  lines  extended  many  miles  in  a  circuit  around  the
place,  and  his  forts,  breastworks,  and  trenches  were  very
numerous.

The  river  was  made  use  of  as  a  natural  and  almost
impassable  ditch  of  defence,  and  windmills  were  freely
employed  to  pump  water  into  the  shallows  in  one
direction,  while  in  others  the  outer  fields,  in  quarters
whence  a  relieving  force  might  be  expected,  were  turned
into  lakes  by  the  same  machinery.  Farther  outside,  a
system  of  palisade  work  of  caltrops  and  man-traps —
sometimes  in  the  slang  of  the  day  called  Turkish  ambas-
sadors— made  the  country  for  miles  around  impenetrable
or  very  disagreeable  to  cavalry.^  In  a  shorter  intei-val
than  would  have  seemed  possible,  the  battlements  and
fortifications  of  the  besieging  army  had  risen  like  an
exhalation  out  of  the  morass. The  city  of  Gertruyden-

1  See,  for  the  details  of  this  remarliable  Duyck,  161-245,  especially.  Bentivoglio,
siege,  Meteren,  xvi.  321.  322.  Bar,  111.  P.  IJI.  lib.  i.  pp.  383-387.  Coloma,  vi.
690-698. Rcyd,  X. 198-2U5. Mulder's 119-122.  ^  He^i],  ubi  sup.

159.3.  WORK  OF  THE  BESIEGING  ARMY.  243

berg  was  encompassed  bj  another  city  as  extensive  and
apparently  as  impregnable  as  itself.  Then,  for  the  first
time  in  that  age,  men  thoroughly  learned  the  meaning
of  that  potent  implement  the  spade.

Three  thousand  pioneers  worked  night  and  day  with
pickaxe  and  shovel.  The  soldiers  liked  the  business  ;
for  every  man  so  employed  received  his  ten  stivers  a
day  additional  wages,  punctually  paid,  and  felt  moreover
that  every  stroke  was  bringing  the  work  nearer  to  its
conclusion.

The  Spaniards  no  longer  railed  at  Maurice  as  a  hedger
and  ditcher.  When  he  had  succeeded  in  bringing  a
hundred  great  guns  to  bear  upon  the  beleaguered  city
they  likewise  ceased  to  sneer  at  heavy  artillery.

The  Kartowen  and  Half  Kartowen  were  no  longer
considered  "  espanta  vellacos."

Meantime,  from  all  the  country  round,  the  peasants
flocked  within  the  lines.  Nowhere  in  Europe  were  pro-
visions so  plentiful  and  cheap  as  in  the  Dutch  camp.
Nowhere  was  a  readier  market  for  agricultural  products,
prompter  payment,  or  more  perfect  security  for  the  life
and  property  of  non-combatants.  Not  so  much  as  a
hen's  egg  was  taken  unlawfully.*  The  country  people
found  themselves  more  at  ease  within  Maurice's  lines
than  in  any  other  part  of  the  provinces,  obedient  or
revolted.  They  ploughed  and  sowed  and  reaped  at
their  pleasure,  and  no  more  striking  example  was  ever
afforded  of  the  humanizing  effect  of  science  upon  the
barbarism  of  war,  than  in  this  siege  of  Gertruydenberg.''
Certainly  it  was  the  intention  of  the  prince  to  take  his
city,  and  when  he  fought  the  enemy  it  was  his  object
to  kill ;  but,  as  compared  with  the  bloody  woik  which
Alva,  and  Eomero,  and  Eequesens,  and  so  many  others
had  done  in  those  doomed  provinces,  such  war-making
as  this  seemed  almost  like  an  institution  for  beneficent
and  charitable  purposes.

Visitors  from  the  neighbourhood,  from  other  provinces,
from  foreign  countries,  came  to  witness  the  extraordinary
spectacle,  and  foreign  generals  repaired  to  the  camp  of
Maurice  to  take  practical  lessons  in  the  new  art  of  war.*

*  Duyck,  201.  envoy  of  Heni-y  IV.,  "qui  est  alle  dans  le

♦  Meteren,  Bor,  Keyil,  vbi  svp.  camp  des  Holkinduis  par  la  seule  curi-
a  "  Uu  des  mes  amis,"  wrote  Bongars, osite  de  le  voir,  m'a  ecrit  qu'il  ji'a  jamais

R 2

244  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Old  Peter  Eniest  Mansfeld,  who  was  nominal  governor
of  the  Spanish  Netherlands  since  the  death  of  Farnese,
rubbed  his  eyes  and  stared  aghast  when  the  completeness
of  the  preparations  for  reducing  the  city  at  last  broke  in
upon  his  mind.  Count  Fuentes  was  the  true  and  con-
fidential regent  however  until  the  destined  successor  to
Parma  should  arrive  •  but  Fuentes,  although  he  had
considerable  genius  for  assassination,  as  will  hereafter
appear,  and  was  an  experienced  and  able  commander  of
the  old-fashioned  school,  was  no  match  for  Maurice  in  the
scientific  combinations  on  which  the  new  system  was
founded.

In  vain  did  the  superannuated  Peter  call  aloud  upon
his  son  and  governor,  Count  Charles,  to  assist  him  in
this  dire  dilemma.  That  artillery  general  had  gone  with
a  handful  of  Germans,  Walloons,  and  other  obedient
Netherlanders — too  few  to  accomplish  anything  abroad,
too  many  to  be  spared  from  the  provinces — to  besiege
Noyon  in  France."^  But  what  signified  the  winning  or
losing  of  such  a  place  as  Noyon  at  exactly  the  moment
when  the  Prince  of  Bearne,  assisted  by  the  able  general-
ship of  the  Archbishop  of  B(jurges,  had  just  executed
those  famous  flanking  movements  in  the  churches  of
St.  Denis  and  Chartres,  by  which  the  world-empire
had  been  eti'ectually  shattered,  and  Philip  and  the  Pope
completely  out-manoeuvred.

Better  that  the  five  thousand  fighters  under  Charles
Mansfeld  had  been  around  Gertruydenberg.  His  aged
father  did  what  he  could.  As  many  men  as  could  be
spared  from  the  garrison  of  Antwerp  and  its  neighbour-
hood were  collected,  but  the  Spaniards  were  reluctant
to  march,  except  under  old  Mondragon.  That  hero,  who
had  done  much  of  the  haidest  work,  and  had  fought  in
most  of  the  battles  of  the  century,  was  nearly  as  old  as
the  century.  Being  now  turned  of  ninety,  he  thought
best  to keep house in  Antwerp  Castle. Accordingly

ni vu iii  entendu  parlor  d'une armee  serve  I'etot  par  le  soin  de  ses  magistrats

campee  ou  il  parut  plus  de  courage  et  en  et  par  I'obeissance  de  ses  citoyens  qu'iibe

meme  temps  plus  do  discipline. II  dit  troupe  confuse  de  gens  armes." — Lettres,

que  les  fortifications  sont  si  eleveos  qu'-  65,  p.  223.

dies  egalent les ouvrage'i  des  anclcns  ^  He  bad  but  4300  foot  and  800  horse.

Ilomains  et  que  tout  s'y  conduit  avec  tant  Charles  Mans-feld  to  Fuentes, 5 April,

il'ordre  et  de  silence  qu'on  croirait  plutOt  1593. (Arch,  de  Sitnancas  MS.)
Voir  I'etat  paisible  d'une  ville  qui  se  con-

15«)3.  SKIRMISH  NEAR  TURXHOUT.  245

twelve  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse  took  the
field  under  the  more  youthful  Peter  Ernest.''  But
Peter  Ernest,  when  his  son  was  not  there  to  superintend
his  operations,  was  nothing  but  a  testy  octogenarian,
while  the  two  together  were  not  equal  to  the  little  finger
of  Farnese,  whom  Philip  would  have  displaced,  had  he
not  fortunately  died.

"  Nothing  is  to  be  expected  out  of  this  place  but  toads
and  poison,"  wrote  Ybarra  in  infinite  disgust  to  the  two
secretaries  of  state  at  Madrid.  "  I  have  done  my  be^;t
to  induce  Fuentes  to  accept  that  which  the  patent
secured  him,  and  Count  Peter  is  complaining  that  Fuentes
showed  him  the  patent  so  late  only  to  play  him  a  trick.
There  is  a  rascally  pack  of  meddlers  here,  and  the  worst
of  them  all  are  the  women,  whom  I  particularly  give  to
the  devil.  There  is  no  end  to  the  squabbles  as  to  who
shall  take  the  lead  in  relieving  Gertruydenberg."^

Mansfeld  at  last  came  ponderously  up  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Turnhout.  There  was  a  brilliant  little
skirmish,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  this  place,  in  which
a  hundred  and  fifty  Dutch  cavalry  under  the  famous
brothers  Bax  defeated  four  hundred  picked  lancers  of
Spain  and  Italy.^  But  Mansfeld  could  get  nothing  but
skirmishes.  In  vain  he  plunged  about  among  the  caltrops
and  man-traps.  In  vain  he  knocked  at  the  fortifications
of  Hohenlo  on  the  east  and  of  Maurice  on  the  west.
He  found  them  impracticable,  impregnable,  obdurate.
It  was  Maurice's  intention  to  take  his  town  at  as  small
sacrifice  of  life  as  possible.  A  trumpet  was  sent  on
some  trifling  business  to  Mansfeld,  in  reply  to  a  commu-
nication made  by  that  general  to  Maurice.

"  Why  does  your  master,"  said  the  choleric  veteran  to
the  trumpeter,  "  why  does  Prince  Maurice,  being  a  lusty
young  commander  as  he  is,  not  come  out  of  his  trenches
into  the  open  field  and  fight  me  like  a  man,  where
honour  and  fame  await  him?"

"  Because  my  master,"  answered  the  triimpeter,
"means  to  live  to  be  a  lusty  old  commander  like  your

'  Relacion  de  la  gente  effectiva  de  S.  8  yiiarra  to  Don  Cristoval  Mora  and

Md.  para  el  socorro  de  S'  Gertuydenberg.  Don  Juan Idiaqiiez,  from  Antwerp,  22

With  levies  expected,  the  number  is  stated  May,  1593. (Ibid.)

at  13,000  foot  and  2600  bor.se,  besides  the  "  Bor,  Meteren,  lleyd,  uhi  supra.  Duyok,

forces  under  Verdugo.  (Arch,  de  Simancas  214,  215. Compare  Coloma,  Bentivofedio,

MS.)  vbi  j«p.

246  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

excellency,  and  sees  no  reason  to-day  to  give  you  an
advantage."

At  this  the  bystanders  langhed,  rather  at  the  expense
of  the  veteran.^''

Meantime  there  were  not  many  incidents  within  the
lines  or  within  the  city  to  vary  the  monotony  of  the
scientific  siege.

On  the  land  side,  as  has  been  seen,  the  city  was
enclosed  and  built  out  of  human  sight  by  another  Ger-
truydenberg.  On  the  wide  estuary  of  the  Meuse,  a
chain  of  war  ships  encircled  the  sea-front,  in  shape  of
a  half  moon,  lying  so  close  to  each  other  that  it  was
scarcely  possible  even  for  a  messenger  to  swim  out  of  a
dark  night.

The  hardy  adventurers  who  attempted  that  feat  with
tidings  of  despair  were  almost  invaiiablj^  captured.

This  blockading  fleet  took  regular  part  in  the  daily
cannonade ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  artillery
practice  from  the  land-batteries  of  Maurice  and  Hohenlo
was  more  perfect  than  anything  ever  known  before  in
the  Netherlands  or  France.

And  the  result  was  that  in  the  course  of  the  can-
nonade, which  lasted  nearly  ninety  days,  not  more  than
four  houses  in  the  city  escaped  injury.  The  approaches
were  brought,  every  hour,  nearer  and  nearer  to  the
walls.  \\  ith  subterranean  lines  converging  in  the  form
of  the  letter  Y,  the  prince  had  gradually  burrowed  his
way  beneath  the  principal  bastion."

Hohenlo,  representative  of  the  older  school  of  stra-
tegy, had  on  one  occasion  ventured  to  resist  the  aiitho-
rity  of  the  commander-in-chief.  He  had  constructed  a
fort  at  Eamsdonck.  Maurice  then  commanded  the  erec-
tion of  another,  fifteen  hundred  yards  farther  back.  It
was  as  much  a  part  of  his  purpose  to  defend  himself
against  the  attempts  of  Mansfeld's  relieving  force,  as  to
go  forward  against  the  city,  Hohenlo  objected  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  sustain  himself  against  a  sudden
attack  in  so  isolated  a  position.  Maurice  insisted.  In
the  midst  of  the  altercation  Hohenlo  called  to  the  men
engaged  in  throwing  up  the  new  fortifications :  "  Here,
you  captains  and  soldiers,"  he  cried,  "  you  are  delivered

10  Meteren.  ubi  sup.  l22.  h  Bor,  Meteren,  Reyd,  Duyck,  iibi  siip.

1593.  COUNT  PHILIP'S  ADVENTURE.  247

up  here  to  be  butchered.  You  may  drop  work  and  fol-
low me  to  the  old  fort."

"  And  I  swear  to  you,"  said  Maurice  quietly,  "  that
the  first  man  who  moves  from  this  spot  shall  be
hanged."

No  one  moved.  The  fort  was  completed  and  held  to
the  end  ;  Hohenlo  sulkily  acquiescing  in  the  superiority
which  this  stripling — his  former  pui)il — had  at  last  vin-
dicated over  all  old-fashioned  men-at-arms.-'"

From  the  same  cause  which  was  apt  to  render  Ho-
henlo's  services  inefficient,  the  prince  was  apt  to  suffer
inconvenience  in  the  persons  placed  in  still  nearer  rela-
tion to  himself.  Count  Philip  of  Nassau,  brother  of  the
wise  and  valiant  Lewis  William,  had  already  done
much  brilliant  campaigning  against  the  Spaniards  both
in  France  and  the  provinces.  Unluckily,  he  was  not
only  a  desperate  fighter  but  a  mighty  drinker,  and  one
day,  after  a  dinner-party  and  potent  carouse  at  Colonel
Brederode's  quarters,  he  thought  proper,  in  doublet  and
hose,  without  armour  of  any  kind,  to  mount  his  horse,  in
order  to  take  a  solitary  survey  of  the  enemy's  works.
Not  satisfied  with  this  piece  of  reconnoitring — which  lie
effected  with  much  tipsy  gravity,  but  probably  without
deriving  any  information  likely  to  be  of  value  to  the
commanding  general — he  then  proceeded  to  charge  in
person  a  distant  battery.  The  deed  was  not  commend-
able in  a  militaiy  point  of  view.  A  fire  was  opened
upon  him  at  long  range  so  soon  as  he  was  discovered,
and  at  the  same  time  the  sergeant-major  of  his  regimoit
and  an  equerry  of  Prince  Maurice  started  in  pursuit,
determined  to  bring  him  oft'  if  possible,  before  his  life
had  been  thus  absurdly  sacrificed.  Fortunately  for  him
they  came  to  the  rescue  in  time,  pulled  him  from  his
horse,  and  succeeded  in  bringing  him  away  unharmed.
The  sergeant-major,  however,  ISinisky  by  name,  while
thus  occupied  in  preserving  the  count's  life,  was  badly
wounded  in  the  leg  by  a  musket-shot  from  the  fort ;
which  casualty  was  the  only  result  of  this  after-dinner
assault."

As  the  siege  proceeded,  and  as  the  hopes  of  relief  died
away,  great  confusion  began  to  reign  within  the  city.

12  Reyd,  uhi  siq}.  203.  13  Duyck,  130. Compare  Bur,  Meteren,  R'.yd,  ubi  sup.

248  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

The  garrison,  originally  of  a  thousand  veterans,  besides
1  June,  burgher  militia,  had  been  much  diminished.
1593.  Two  commandants  of  the  place,  one  after
another,  had  lost  their  lives.  On  the  1st  of  June,  Go-
vernor De  Masieres,  Captain  Mongyn,  the  father-con-
fessor of  the  garrison,  and  two  soldiers,  being  on  the  top
of  the  great  church  tower  taking  observations,  were  all
brought  down  with  one  cannon-shot."  Thus  the  uses  of
artillery  were  again  proved  to  be  something  more  than
to  scare  cowards.

The  final  result  seemed  to  have  been  brought  about
24  June,  almost  by  accident,  if  accident  could  be  ad-
1593.  Biitted  as  a  factor  in  such  accurate  calculations
as  those  of  Maurice.  On  the  24th  June  Captains  Haen
and  Bievry  were  relieving  watch  in  the  trenches  near
the  great  north  ravelin  of  the  town — a  bulwark  which
had  already  been  much  undermined  from  below  and
weakened  above.  Being  adventurous  officers,  it  occurred
to  them  suddenly  to  scale  the  wall  of  the  fort  and  leccm-
noitre  what  was  going  on  in  the  town.  It  was  hardly
probable  that  they  would  come  back  alive  from  the  ex-
pedition, but  they  nevertheless  threw  some  planks  across
the  ditch,  and  taking  a  few  soldiers  with  them,  climbed
cautiously  up.  Somewhat  to  his  own  surprise,  still  more
to  that  of  the  Spaniish  sentinels,  Bievry  in  a  few  minutes
found  himself  within  the  ravelin.  He  was  closely  fol-
lowed by  Captain  Haen,  Captain  Kalf,  and  by  half  a
company  of  soldiers.  The  alarm  was  given.  There  was
a  fierce  hand-to-hand  struggle.  Sixteen  of  the  bold
stormers  fell,  and  nine  of  the  garrison  of  the  fort.  The
rest  fled  into  the  city.  The  governor  of  the  place,  Cap-
tain Gysant,  rushing  to  the  rescue  without  staying  to  put
on  his  armour,  was  killed.  Count  Solms,  on  the  other
hand,  came  from  the  besieging  camp  into  the  ravelin  to
investigate  the  sudden  uproar.  To  his  profound  astonish-
ment, he  was  met  there,  after  a  brief  interval,  by  a
deputation  from  the  city,  asking  for  terms  of  surrender.
The  envoys  had  already  been  for  some  little  time  look-
ing in  vain  for  a  responsible  jjerson  with  whom  to  treat.
When  Maurice  was  informed  of  the  propositions  he
thought  it  at  first  a  trick :  for  he  had  known  nothing  of

n  Dujck.

1593.  CAPITULATION  OF  GERTRUYDENBERG.  249

the  little  adventure  of  the  three  captains.  Soon  afterwards
he  came  into  a  battery  whither  the  depnties  had  been
brought,  and  the  terms  of  capitulation  were  soon  agreed
upon.'*

'Next  day  the  garrison  were  allowed  to  go  out  with
side-arms  and  personal  baggage,  and  fifty  wag- 25  June,
gons  were  lent  them  by  the  victor  to  bring ^^^•^•
their  wounded  men  to  Antwerp.

Thus  was  Gertruydenberg  surrendered  in  the  very
face  of  Peter  Mansfeld,  who  only  became  aware  of  the
fact  by  the  salvos  of  artillery  fired  in  honour  of  the
triumph,  and  by  the  blaze  of  illumination  which  broke
forth  over  camp  and  city.

The  sudden  result  was  an  illustration  of  the  prince's
perfect  arrangements.  \\  hen  Maurice  rode  into  the
town,  he  found  it  strong  enough  and  sufficiently  well  provi-
sioned to  have  held  out  many  a  long  day.  But  it  had  been
demonstrated  to  the  besieged  that  relief  was  impossible,
and  that  the  surrender  on  one  day  or  another,  after  the
siege  operations  should  be  brought  to  their  close,  was
certain.  The  inexorable  genius  of  the  commander —
skilled  in  a  science  which  to  the  coarser  war-makers
of  that  age  seemed  almost  superhuman — hovered  above
them  like  a  fate.  It  was  as  well  to  succumb  on  the  24th
June  as  to  wait  till  the  24th  July.'"

Moreover  the  gi'eat  sustaining  principle — resistance  to
the  foreigner — which  had  inspired  the  deeds  of  daring,
the  wonders  of  endurance,  in  the  Dutch  cities  beleaguered
so  remorselessly  by  the  Spaniard  twenty  years  earlier  in
the  century,  was  wanting.

15  Duyck,  234,  seqq.  Meteren,  Bor,  moins  practiqiiee  des  plus  grands  capi-
Eeyd,  tibi  snp.  taines  modernes ;  par  oil  renuemi  a  ce

16  Thus  modestly  did  William  Lewis,  to  coup  plus  perdu  de  sa  reputation  que
whom  so  large  a  part  of  the  glory  of  all  re^u  de  dommage  par  les  autres  plusieurs
these  achievements  belongs,  express  him-  belles  et  grandes  victoires;  tellement
self  in  a  congratulatory  letter  to  his  cousin  que  si  Messieurs  les  Etats  seconderoient
Maurice : — J'estime  de  ne  faire  que  nion  en  forces  ce  que  la  guerre  a  augmente  en
devoir  de  congratuler  V.  E.  d'uiie  victoire  experience  a  bon  dioit,  se  pourroit  on
si  signalee,en  ce  qu'avez  laict  une  preuve  promcttre  une  bonne  et  heureuse  issue  de
tant  remarquable,  que  la  conduite  et  tra-  laquelle  je  pile  Dieu  de  faire  k  ce  pauvre
vail  en  la  gutrre  domine  la  force,  dont  ce  Pays  Bas  une  fois  jouir,  et  a  voire  Exc«.
siege  pent  estre  nomme  a  droict  la  se-  I'honneur  en  recompense  de  ses  genereux
conde  Alexia  et  une  grande  restauration  et  heroicqne  desseings  et  grands  travaulx
en  partie  de  la  vieille  art  et  science  niili-  de  bientost  triumpher."— Groen  v.  Priu-
taire,  laquelle  a  estd  mocquee,  voire  n'a  sterer,  Archives  11.  S.  i.  245

sceu estre comprehendee,  ou poiu- le

250  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

In  siTrrendering  to  tlie  born  Netherlander — the  heroic
chieftain  of  the  illustrious  house  of  Nassau — these
Netherlanders  were  neither  sullying  their  flag  noi'
injuring  their  country.  Enough  had  been  done  for
military  honour  in  the  gallant  resistance,  in  which  a
large  portion  of  the  garrison  had  fallen.  Nor  was  that
religious  superstition  so  active  within  the  city  which
three  years  before  had  made  miracles  possible  in  Paris
when  a  heretic  sovereign  was  to  be  defied  by  his  own
subjects.  It  was  known  that  even  if  the  public  cere-
monies of  the  Catholic  Church  were  likely  to  be  sus-
pended for  a  time  after  the  surrender,  at  least  the  rights
of  individual  conscience  and  pi'ivate  worship  within
individual  households  would  be  tolerated,  and  there  was
no  papal  legate  with  fiery  eloquence  persuading  a  city
full  of  heroic  dupes  that  it  was  more  virtuous  for  men
or  women  to  eat  their  own  children  than  to  forego  one
high  mass,  or  to  wink  at  a  single  conventicle.

After  all,  it  was  no  such  bitter  hardship  for  the
citizens  of  Gertruydenberg  to  participate  in  the  pros-
perity of  the  rising  and  thriving  young  republic,  and  to
enjoy  those  municipal  and  national  liberties  which  her
sister  cities  had  found  so  sweet.

Nothing  could  be  calmer  or  more  reasonable  than  snch
a  triumph,  nothing  less  humiliating  or  less  disastrous
than  such  a  surrender.

The  problem  was  solved,  the  demonstration  was  made,
To  open  their  gates  to  the  soldiers  of  the  Union  was  not
to  admit  the  hordes  of  a  Spanish  commander  with  the
avenging  furies  of  murder,  pillage,  rape,  which  ever  fol-
lowed in  their  train  over  the  breach  of  a  captured  city.

To  an  enemy  hated  or  dreaded  to  the  uttermost  mortal
capacity,  that  well-fortified  and  opulent  city  might  have
held  oiit  for  months,  and  only  when  the  arms  and  the
fraud  of  the  foe  without,  and  of  famine  within,  had  done
their  work,  could  it  have  bowed  its  head  to  the  con-
queror, and  submitted  to  the  ineffable  tortures  which
would  be  the  necessary  pimishment  of  its  courage.

Four  thousand  shots  had  been  fired  from  the  siege-
guns  upon  the  city,  and  three  hundred  upon  the  relieving
force.

The  besieging  army  numbered  in  all  nine  thousand
one  hundred  and  fifty  men  of  all  arms,  and  they  lost

i

1593.  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SURRENDER.  251

during  the  eiglity-five  days'  siege  three  hundred  killed
and  four  hundred  wounded."

After  the  conclusion  of  these  operations,  and  the
thorough  remodelling  of  the  municipal  government  of
the  important  city  thus  regained  to  the  republicj  Mau-
rice occupied  himself  with  recruiting  and  refreshing  his
somewhat  exliausted  little  army.  On  the  other  hand,
old  Count  Mansfeld,  dissatisfied  with  the  impotent  con-
clusion to  his  attempts,  retired  to  Brussels  to  be  much
taunted  by  the  insolent  Fuentes.  He  at  least  escaped
very  violent  censure  on  the  part  of  his  son  Charles,  for
that  general,  after  his  superfluous  conquest  of  Koyon,
while  returning  towards  the  Netherlands,  far  too  tardily
to  succour  Gertruydenberg,  had  been  paralyzed  in  all
his  movements  by  a  very  extensive  mutiny  which  broke
out  among  the  Spanish  troops  in  the  province  of  Artois.^^
The  disorder  went  through  all  its  regular  forms.  A
town  was  taken,  an  Eletto  was  appointed.  The  country-
side was  black-mailed  or  plundered,  and  the  rebellion
lasted  some  thirteen  months.  Before  it  was  concluded
there  was  another  similar  outbreak  among  the  Italians,
together  with  the  Walloons  and  other  obedient  Nether-
landers  in  Hainault,  who  obliged  the  city  of  Mons  to
collect  nine  hundred  florins  a  day  for  them."  The  con-
sequence of  these  military  rebellions  was  to  render  the
Spanish  crown  almost  powerless  during  the  whole  year,
within  the  provinces  nominally  subject  to  its  sway.
The  cause — as  always — was  the  non-payment  of  these
veterans'  wages,  year  after  year.  It  was  impossible  for
Philip,  with  all  the  wealth  of  the  Indies  and  Mexico
pouring  through  the  Danaid  sieve  of  the  Holy  League  in
France,  to  find  the  necessary  funds  to  save  the  bronzed
and  war-worn  instruments  of  his  crimes  in  the  Nether-
lands from  starving  and  from  revolt.

Meantime  there  was  much  desultory  campaigning  in
Friesland. Verdugo  and  Frederic  van  den  Berg  picked
up  a  few  cities  and  strong  jilaces  which  had  thrown  off
their  allegiance  to  the  king — Auerzyl,  Schloch- September,
teren, Winschoten, Wedde, Ootmarzum — and ^^^^•

17  Duyck,  241. There  were  six  hun-  is  Meteren,  xvi.  323.  Coloma,  vi.  123™.

dred  and  fifty  English  and  seven  hundred  Bor,  111.  VIO.

German  riders  in  Maurice's  camp. The  is  Meteren,  xvi.  323.
rest  of  his  army  were  IS'etherlanders.

252  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

invested  the  much  more  important  town  of  Coeworden,
which  Maurice  had  so  recently  reduced  to  the  authority
of  the  Union.  Verdugo's  force  was  insufficient,  however,
and  he  had  neither  munitions  nor  provisions  for  a  long
siege.  Winter  was  coming  on  ;  and  the  States,  aware  that
he  would  soon  be  obliged  to  retire  from  before  the  well-
garrisoned  and  fortified  place,  thought  it  unnecessary  to
interfere  with  him.  After  a  very  brief  demonstration,  the
Portuguese  veteran  was  obliged  to  raise  the  siege.^'^

There  were  also  certain  vague  attempts  made  by  the
enemy  to  re-possess  himself  of  those  most  important  sea-
ports which  had  been  pledged  to  the  English  queen.  On
a  previous  page  the  anxiety  has  been  indicated  with
which  Sir  Eobert  Sidney  regarded  the  withdiawal  of  the
English  troops  in  the  Netherlands  for  the  sake  of  assist-
ing the  French  king.  This  palpable  breach  of  the  treaty
had  necessaril}^  weakened  England's  hold  on  the  affec-
tions of  the  Nether  landers,  and  awakened  dark  suspicions
that  treason  might  be  impending  at  Flushing  or  Ostend.
The  suspicions  were  unjust — so  far  as  the  governors  of
those  places  wei'e  concerned — for  Sidney  and  Norris
were  as  loyal  as  they  were  intelligent  and  brave ;  but
the  trust  in  their  characters  was  not  more  implicit  than
it  had  been  in  that  of  Sir  William  Stanley  before  the
commission  of  his  crime.  It  was  now  believed  that
the  enemy  was  preparing  for  a  sudden  assault  upon
Ostend,  with  the  connivance,  it  was  feared  of  a  certain
portion  of  the  Engli.'sh  garrison.  The  intelligence  was
at  once  conveyed  to  her  Majesty's  Government  by  Sir
Edward  Norris,  and  they  determined  to  take  a  lesson
from  jjast  experience.  Norris  was  at  once  informed  that
in  view  of  the  attack  which  he  apprehended,  his  garrison
should  be  strengthened  b}-  five  hundred  men  under  Sir
Conyers  Clifford  from  certain  companies  in  Flushing,  and
that  other  reinforcements  should  be  sent  from  the  Eng-
lish troops  in  Normandy.  Tlie  governor  was  ordered  to
look  well  after  his  captains  and  soldiers,  to  remind  them,
in  the  queen's  name,  of  their  duty  to  herself  and  to  the
States,  to  bid  all  beware  of  sullying  the  English  name,
to  make  close  investigations  into  any  possible  intrigues
of the garrison with the enemy, and, should any

2"  Bor,  III.  714-718.

1593.  SUSPICION  OF  TREASON.  253

culprits  be  found,  to  bring  them  at  once  to  condign
punishment.^^

The  queen,  too,  determined  that  there  should  be  no
blighting  of  English  honour,  if  she  could  prevent  it  by
her  warnings,  indited  with  her  own  hand  a  characteristic
letter  to  Sir  Edward  Norris,  to  accompany  the  more
formal  despatch  of  Lord  Buighley. Thus  it  ran : —

"  Ned  ! — Though  you  have  some  tainted  sheep  among
your  flock,  let  not  that  serve  for  excuse  for  the  rest.
We  trust  you  are  so  carefully  regarded  as  not;ght  shall
be  left  for  your  excuses,  but  eitlier  ye  lack  heart  or  want
will ;  for  of  fear  we  will  not  make  mention,  as  that  our
soul  abhors,  and  we  assure  ourselves  you  will  never  dis-
cern suspicion  of  it.  Now  or  never  let  for  the  honour  of
us  and  our  nation,  each  man  be  so  much  of  bolder  heart
as  their  cause  is  good,  and  their  honour  must  be  accord-
ing, remembering  the  old  goodness  of  our  God,  who
never  yet  made  us  fail  His  needful  help,  who  ever  bless
you  as  I  with  my  prince's  hand  beseech  Him."^^

The  warnings  and  preparations  proved  sufficiently
effective,  and  the  great  schemes  with  which  the  new
royal  governor  of  the  Netherlands  was  supposed  to  be
full — a  mere  episode  in  which  was  the  conquest  of
Ostend — seemed  not  so  formidable  as  their  shadows  had
indicated.  There  was,  in  the  not  very  distant  future,  to
be  a  siege  of  Ostend,  which  the  world  would  not  soon
forget,  but  perhaps  the  place  would  not  yield  to  a  sudden
assault.  Its  resistance,  on  the  contrary,  might  prove
more  protracted  than  was  then  thought  possible.  But
the  chronicle  of  events  muist  not  be  anticipated.  For  the
present,  Ostend  was  safe.^^

'1  The  Queen's  minute  to  Sir  Edward  means  to  settle  those  parts  in  some  sort

Noixis,  partly  in  Burghley's  hand,  Oct.  of  peace,  truce,  or  quiet  by  the  talking  ol

1593. (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Ostend,  whilst  he  might  employ  his  whole

22  "A  clause  written  in  the  letter  to  Sir  forces  upcai  greater  enterprises. 1  thinli

Ed.  Norris,  witli  her  Majesty's  own  hand."  he  >s  now  out  of  hope  of  any,  for  he  finds

(S.  P.  OfBce  iVlS.)  no  lilcelihood  of  peace,  and  as  for  the

^  "  It  appears  by  those  advertisements  taldng  of  this  place  (OstendJ,  which  the

that  come unto  me out  of  the  land,"  people flattered themselves so much

wrote  Sir  Ed.  Norris  to  Lord  Burghley,  withal,  raethinks  the  hope  of  it  isdelaycd:

" that  the great  expectation  which  was  for  the  great  works  i,\bich  were  in  hand

had  of  the  coming  of  this  new  great  go-  at Newport  and  Bruges  are  laid  aside,

vernour  is  almost  gone,  who  neither  for  and  all  the  workmen  licensed  to  go  home,

peace  nor  war  doth  seem  likely  to  per-  liut  to  be  ready  at  a  day's  warning."—

form  that  which  he  promised Noiris  to  Burghley,  6  March,  1594.  (S.  P,

It  appears  that  his  intention  was  by  all  Office  MS.)

254  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Early  in  the  following  spring,  Verdugo  again  appeared
before Coeworden  in  force. It  was  obvious  that  the

April, great  city  of  Groningen,  the  mistress  of  all  the

1594.  north-eastern  provinces,  would  soon  be  at-
tacked, and  Coeworden  was  the  necessary  base  of  any
operations  against  the  place.  Fortunately  for  the  States,
\Villiam  Lewis  had  in  the  preceding  autumn  occupied
and  fortified  the  only  avenue  through  the  Bourtange
morass,  so  that  when  Verdugo  sat  down  before  Coe-
worden, it  was  possible  for  Maurice,  by  moving  rapidly,
1o  take  the  I'oyal  governor  at  a  disadvantage.^*

Verdugo  had  eight  thousand  picked  troops,  including
two  thousand  Walloon  cavalry,  troopers  who  must  have
been  veiy  formidable,  if  they  were  to  be  judged  by  the
prowess  of  one  of  their  captains,  Gaucier  by  name.  This
obedient  Netherlander  was  in  the  habit  of  boasting  that
he  had  slain  four  hundred  and  ten  men  with  his  own
hand,  including  several  prisoners  and  three  preachers;^*
but  the  rest  of  those  warriors  were  not  so  famed  for  their
martial  achievements.

The  peril,  however,  was  great,  and  Prince  Maurice,
trifling  not  a  moment,  threw  himself  with  twelve  thoii-
sand  infantry,  Germans,  Frisians,  Scotch,  English,  and
Hollanders,  and  nearly  two  thousand  horse,  at  once
upon  the  road  between  the  Yecht  and  the  Bourtange

5  May. luorass. On  the  Cth  of  May,  Vcrdugo  found  the

6  May.  States  commander-in-chief  entrenched  and  im-
pregnable, squarely  established  upon  his  line  of  com-
munications. He  reconnoitred,  called  a  council  of  war,
and  decided  that  to  assail  him  were  madness  ;  to  remain,
destruction.  On  the  night  of  the  6th  of  May,  he  broke
up  his  camp  and  stole  away  in  the  darkness,  without
sound  of  drum  or  trumpet,  leaving  all  his  fortifications
and  burning  all  his  huts.^*^

Thus  had  Maurice,  after  showing  the  world  how  strong
places  were  to  be  reduced,  given  a  striking  exhibition  uf
the  manner  in  which  they  were  to  be  saved.

Coeworden,  after  thirty-one  weeks'  investment,  was
relieved.

The  stadholder  now  marched  upon  Groningen.  This
city  was  one  of  the  most  splendid  and  opulent  of  all  the

^  Bor,  in.  794-798. Meteren,  xvi.  328-330.
■■"  Metereu,  Reyd,  i.\.  231.  26  xbid.

1594.  SIEGE  OF  GRONINGEN.  255

Netherland  towns.  Certainly  it  should  have  teen  one
of  the  most  ancient  in  Europe,  since  it  derived  its  name —
according  to  that  painstaking  banker,  Francis  Guic-
ciardini — "from  Grun,  a  Trojan  gentleman,"  who  never-
theless, according  to  Munster,  was  "  a  Frenchman  by
birth."  "  Both  theories,  however,  might  be  true,"  added
the  conscientious  Florentine,  "  as  the  French  have
always  claimed  to  be  descended  from  the  relics  of
Troy."^^  A  simi^ler-minded  antiquary  might  have
babbled  of  green  fields,  since  groenighe,  or  greenness,
was  a  sufficiently  natural  appellation  for  a  town  sur-
rounded as  was  Grouiugen  on  the  east  and  west  by  the
greenest  and  fattest  of  pastures.  In  population  it  was
only  exceeded  by  Antwerp  and  Amsterdam. ^^  Situate
on  the  line  where  upper  and  nether  Germany  blend  into
one,  the  capital  of  a  great  province  whose  very  name
was  synonymous  with  liberty,  and  whose  hardy  sons  had
done  fierce  battle  with  despotism  in  every  age,  so  long
as  there  had  been  human  lecord  of  despotism  and  of
battles,  Groningen  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the
foreign  foe,  not  through  the  prowess  of  the  Spaniard  but
the  treason  of  the  Netherlander.  The  baseness  of  the
brilliant,  trusted,  valiant,  treacherous  young  Eenneberg
has  been  recorded  on  a  previous  page  of  these  volumes.^^
For  thirteen  years  long  the  republic  had  chafed  at  this
acquisition  of  the  hated  enemy  M'ithin  its  very  heart.
And  now  the  day  had  come  when  a  blow  should  be
struck  for  its  deliverance  by  the  ablest  soldier  that  had
ever  shown  himself  in  those  regions,  one  whom  the
commonwealth  had  watched  over  from  his  cradle.

For  in  Groningen  there  was  still  a  considerable  party
in  favour  of  the  Union,  although  the  tieason  of  Eenne-
berg had  hitherto  prevented  both  city  and  province  from
incorjDorating  themselves  in  the  body  politic  of  the
United  Netherlands.  Within  the  precincts  were  five
hundred  of  Verdugo's  veterans  under  George  Lanckema,
stationed  at  a  faubourg  called  Schuytendiess.^"  In  the
city  there  was,  pioperly  speaking,  no  garrison, ^^  for
the  citizens  in  the  last  few  years  had  come  to  value

27  Guicciardini,  in  voce.  29  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic,  vol.  iii.

2*  Guicciardini,  in  1585,  says that  no  part  vi.  chap.  iii.

Netherland  city  exceeded  it  in  popula-  so  Metercn, xvi.  330,  seqq. Bor,  III.

tion.  808,  seqq. ^'  IbUi.

256  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

themselves  on  their  fidelity  to  church  and  king,  and  to
take  a  sorry  pride  in  being  false  to  all  that  was  noble  in
their  past.  Their  ancestors  had  wrested  privilege  after
privilege  at  the  sword's  point  from  the  mailed  hands
of  dukes  and  emperors,  until  they  wei"e  almost  a  self-
governing  republic ;  their  courts  of  justice  recognizing
no  appeal  to  higher  powers,  even  under  the  despotic
sway  of  Charles  V.  And  now,  under  the  reign  of  his
son,  and  in  the  feebler  days  of  that  reign,  the  capital  of
the  free  Frisians — the  men  whom  their  ancient  pagan
statutes  had  once  declared  to  be  "free  so  long  as  the
wind  blew  out  of  the  clouds  " — relied  upon  the  trained
bands  of  her  burghers  enured  to  arms  and  well-provided
with  all  munitions  of  war  to  protect  her,  not  against
foreign  tyranny  nor  domestic  sedition,  but  against  liberty
and  against  law.

For  the  representative  of  the  most  ancient  of  the
princely  houises  of  Europe,  a  youth  whose  ancestors
had  been  emperors  when  the  forefathers  of  Philip,  long
descended  as  he  was,  were  but  country  squires,  was
now  knocking  at  their  gates.  Xot  as  a  conqueror  and
a  despot,  but  as  the  elected  first  magistrate  and  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  freest  commonwealth  in  the
world,  Maurice  of  Nassau,  at  the  head  of  fifteen  thou-
sand Xetherlanders,  countrymen  of  their  own,  now
summoned  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and  province  to
participate  with  tbeir  fellow-citizens  in  all  the  privi-
leges and  duties  of  the  prosperous  republic.

It  seemed  impossible  that  such  an  appeal  could  be
resisted  by  force  of  arms.  Eather  it  would  seem  that
the  very  walls  should  have  fallen  at  his  feet  at  the  first
blast  of  the  trumpet;  but  there  was  military  honour,
there  was  religious  hatred,  there  was  the  obstinac}^  of
party.  More  than  all,  there  were  half  a  dozen  Jesuits
within  the  town,  and  to  those  ablest  of  generals  in
times  of  civil  war  it  was  mainly  owing  that  the  siege  of
Groningen  was  protracted  longer  than  under  other
ciicumstances  would  have  been  possible.^"

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  describe  in  detail  the  scientific

20  May, Operations  during  the  sixty -five  days  between

•^4  July', the  20th  May  and  the  24th  July. Again  the

commander-in-chief  enlightened  the  world  by

32  Steteven,  ubi  sup.

I

1594.  SECOND  ADVENTURE  OF  COUNT  PHILIP.  257

an  exhibition  of  a  more  artistic  and  humane  st}'le  of
warfare  than  previously  to  his  appearance  on  the  mili-
tary stage  had  been  known.  But  the  daily  phenomena
of  the  Leaguer — although  they  have  been  minutely
preserved  b}'  most  competent  eye-witnesses— are  hardly
entitled  to  a  place  except  in  special  military  histories,
where,  however,  they  should  claim  the  furemost  rank.^^
The  fortifications  of  the  city  were  of  the  most  splendid
and  substantial  character  known  to  the  age.  The
ditches,  the  ravelins,  the  curtains,  the  towers  wei'e  as
thoroughly  constructed  as  the  defences  of  any  place  in
Europe.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  Maurice  and
his  cousin  Lewis  should  employ  all  their  learning,  all
their  skill,  and  their  best  artillery  to  reduce  this  great
capital  of  the  Eastern  Netherlands.  Again  the  scientific
coil  of  approaches  wound  itself  around  and  around  the
doomed  stronghold ;  again  were  constructed  the  gal-
leries, the  covered  ways,  the  hidden  mines,  where
soldiers,  transformed  to  gnomes,  burrowed  and  fought
within  the  bowels  of  the  earth ;  again  that  fatal  letter
Y  advanced  slowly  under  ground,  stretching  its  deadly
prongs  nearer  and  nearer  up  to  the  walls  ;  and  again
the  system  of  defences  against  a  relieving  force  was  so
perfectly  established  that  Verdugo  or  Mansfeld,  with
what  troops  they  could  muster,  seemed  as  powerless  as
the  pewter  soldiers  with  which  Maurice  in  his  boyhood
— not  yet  so  long  passed  away — was  wont  to  puzzle
over  the  problems  which  now  practically  engaged  his
early  manhood.  Again,  too,  strangely  enough,  it  is
recorded  that  Philip  Nassau,  at  almost  the  same  period
of  the  siege  as  in  that  of  Gertruydenberg,  signalized
himself  by  a  deed  of  drunken  and  superfluous  n  juiy,
daring.  This  time  the  dinner  party  was  at  the  ^^^^•
quarters  of  Count  Solms,  in  honour  of  the  Prince  of
Anhalt,  where,  after  potations  pottle  deep.  Count  Philip
rushed  from  the  dinner-table  to  the  breach,  not  yet
thoroughly  practicable,  of  the  north  ravelin,  and,
entirely  without  armour,  mounted  pike  in  hand  to  the
assault,  proposing  to  carry  the  fort  by  his  own  unaided
exertions. Another  officer,  one  Captain  Vaillant, still

S3  See,  in  particular,  Journal  von  Duyck,  scientifically  recorded. Bor,  III. 81'6-

ed.  Mulder,  394-465,  in  which  every  daily  835. Meteren,  xvi.  330,  seqq,
incident  of  the  siege is minutely  and

VOL. 111.  8

258  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

more  beside  himself  than  was  the  count,  inspired  him
to  these  deeds  of  valour  by  assuring  him  that  the  mine
was  to  be  sprung  under  the  ravelin  that  afternoon,  and
that  it  Avas  a  plot  on  the  part  of  the  Holland  boatmen
to  prevent  the  soldiers  who  had  been  working  so  hard
and  so  long  in  the  mines  from  taking  part  in  the
honours  of  the  assauH.  The  count  was  with  difficulty
brought  off  with  a  whole  skin  and  put  to  bed.^*  Yet
despite  these  disgraceful  pranks  there  is  no  doubt  that
a  better  and  braver  officer  than  he  was  hardly  to  be
found  even  among  the  ten  noble  Nassaus  who  at  that
moment  were  fighting  for  the  cause  of  Dutch  liberty —
fortunately  with  more  sobriety  than  he  at  all  times
displayed.

On  the  following  day,  Prince  Maurice,  making  a
reconnaissance  of  the  works  with  his  usual  calmness,
yet  with  the  habitual  contempt  of  personal  danger
which  made  so  singular  a  contrast  with  the  cautious
and  painstaking  characteristics  of  his  strategy,  very
narrowly  escaped  death.  A  shot  from  the  fort  struck
so  hard  upon  the  buckler  under  cover  of  which
he  was  taking  his  observations  as  to  fell  him
to  the  ground.^^  Sir  Francis  Vere,  who  was  with  the
prince  under  the  same  buckler,  likewise  measured  his
length  in  the  trench,  but  both  escaped  serious  injury .^''
I'auli,  one  of  the  States  commissioners  present  in  the
camp,  wrote  to  Barneveld  that  it  was  to  be  hoped  that
the  accident  might  prove  a  warning  to  his  Excellency.
He  had  repeatedly  remonstrated  with  him,  he  said,
against  his  reckless  exposure  of  himself  to  unnecessary
danger,  but  he  was  so  energetic  and  so  full  of  courage
that  it  was  impossible  to  restrain  him  from  being  every-
where every  day.^^

Three  days  later,  the  letter  Y  did  its  work. At  ten

15  July, o'clock  of  the  night  of  the  15th  July,  Prince

1^^*- Maurice  ordered  the  mines  to  be  sprung,  when

the north ravelin  was  blown into  the  air, and  some

forty  of  the garrison with it.^^ Two of  them came

flying  into  the  besiegers'  camp,  and,  strange  to  say,  one

^'  Duyck,  448. Bor,  lit.  832,  no mention of Vere in this connec-

s^  Bor,  ubi  sup. Duyck,  448. Mcteren,  tion.

3:;o.  37  Bor, ubi  sup.

»"  Bor,  ubi  sup. But Duyck makes  M  Duyck,  452,  453. Bor. Mfteren.

1594.  GHONINGEN  ADDED  TO  THE  UNION.  259

was  alive  and  soimd.^^  The  catasti-ophe  finished  the
sixty-five  days'  siege,  the  breach  was  no  longer  de-
fensible, the  obstinacy  of  the  burghers  was  exhausted,
and  capitulation  followed.  In  truth,  there  had  been  a
subterranean  intrigue  going  on  for  man}^  weeks,  which
was  almost  as  eflective  as  the  mine.  A  certain  Jan  te
Boer  had  been  going  back  and  forth  between  camp  and
city,  under  various  pretexts  and  safe-conducts,  and  it
had  at  last  appeared  that  the  Jesuits  and  the  five  hun-
dred of  Verdugo's  veterans  were  all  that  prevented
Groningen  from  returning  to  the  Union.  There  had
been  severe  fighting  within  the  city  itself,  for  the
Jesuits  had  procured  the  transfer  of  the  veterans  22  July,
froiu  the  faubourg  to  the  town  itself,  and  the  ^^^*-
result  of  all  these  operations,  political,  military,  and
Jesuitical,  was  that  on  22nd  July  articles  of  surrender
were  finally  agreed  upon  between  Maurice  and  a  depu-
tation from  the  magistrates,  the  guilds,  and  commander
Lanckema.*"

The  city  was  to  take  its  place  thenceforth  as  a  member
of  the  Union.  William  Lewis,  alieady  stadholder  of
Friesland  for  the  united  States,  was  to  be  recognised  as
chief  magistrate  of  the  whole  province,  which  was  tlius
to  retain  all  its  ancient  privileges,  laws,  and  rights  of
self-government,  while  it  exchanged  its  dependence  on
a  distant,  foreign,  and  decaying  despotism  for  incorjiora-
tion  with  a  young  and  vigorous  commonwealth.

It  was  arranged  that  no  religion  but  the  refr)rmed
religion,  as  then  practised  in  the  united  republic,  shoidd
be  publicly  exercised  in  the  province,  but  that  no  man
should  be  questioned  as  to  his  faith,  or  troubled  in  his
conscience.  Cloisters  and  ecclesiastical  property  were
to  remain  in  statu  quo,  until  the  States-General  should
come  to  a  definite  conclusion  on  these  subjects."

'9  Metercn,  330.  city,  were  reprebended  by  many. 'J'iie

*>  Bor. Meteren. Duyck,  456-464.  king  sensibly  answered,  said  t!ie  envoy,

*•  Art.  VI. Meteren,  331. Bor,  835.  that the townsjieople had theniselvcs

The  int:'Uigenc«  of  the  capture  of  Gronin-  been  the  cause  of  this,  never  having  been

gen  excited  great  enthusiasm  in  the  court  willing  to  p?rmit  a  church  for  the  re-

of  the  French  kins,  causing  "  the  power  formed  faith. Now  they  were  tripped  up

of  the  States  and  the  name  of  the  prince  in  the  same  way  since  they  found  tlicni-

to  be  extolled  to  heaven,"  according  to  selves  conquered. His  Majesty  added  that

Calvaert. "  The entire suspension of  your  highness  s,  when  the  Spaniards  had

Catholic  worship,  however,  and  the  intro-  been  completely  driven  out  of  the  country.

duction  of  ihe  reformed  religion  in  the  would willingly re-open the Cath'ilic

s  2

2G0  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Universal  amnesty  was  proclaimed  for  all  offences
and  quarrels.  Every  citizen  or  resident  foreigner  was
free  to  remain  in  or  to  retire  from  the  town  or  province,
with  full  protection  to  his  person  and  property,  and  it
was  expressly  provided  in  the  articles  granted  to  Lanc-
kema  that  his  soldiers  should  depart  with  arms  and
baggage,  leaving  to  I  rince  Maurice  their  colours  only,
while  the  prince  furnished  sufficient  transportation  for
their  women  and  their  wounded.  The  property  of
Verdugo,  royal  stadholder  of  the  province,  was  to  be
respected,  and  to  remain  in  the  city,  or  to  be  taken
thence  under  safe  conduct,  as  might  be  preferred.*^  Ten
thousand  cannon-shot  had  been  fired  against  the  city.
The  cost  of  powder  and  shot  consumed  was  estimated
at  a  hundred  thousand  florins.  Four  hundred  of  the
besiegers  had  been  killed,  and  a  much  larger  number
wounded.  The  army  had  been  further  weakened  by
sickness  and  numerous  desertions.  Of  the  besieged  three
hundred  soldiers  in  all  were  killed,  and  a  few  citizens.

Thirty-six  cannon  were  taken,  besides  mortars,  and  it
was  said  that  eight  hundred  tons  of  powder,  and  plenty
of  other  ammunition  and  provisions  were  found  in  the
place.*^

churches  in  your  provinces,  if  the  others  the  Netherlands  by  the  adherents  of  the

would  do  the  same  towards  the  reformed  Spanish  king and  the  enemies  of the

ones;  asking  me  if  it  were  not  so. I  Sfcites was pronounced altogether too

answered  yes,  enlarging  on  the  topic  in  rash. It  was  inferred,  from  the  eagerness

such  wise  as  I  thought  suited  the  occa-  manifested on this  occasion, that the

sion ;  and  my  language  seemed  to  miti-  French  king  would  be  easily  induced  to

gate  the  said  offence." Devcnter,  Gedenk-  make  war  on  those  of  the  reformed  reli-

stukken,  ii.  p.  32.  gion  in  case  they  were  nut  willing  to

Here  ceriainly  seemed  progress  in  the  submit  themselves  to  his  discretion,  and

history  ot  civilization. The  French  king  the  Queen  of  England  was  perpetually

and  the  republican  envoy  agreeing  that  intimating  such  a  suspicion  to  the  States.

Catholics  and  Protestants  ought  to  have  Duyck,  475.

and  were  to  have  equal  rights  of  public  ^^  Bor,  Meteren,  ubi  svp.

worship,  showed  an  advance  on  the  doc-  *3  Duyck,  464,  465^ Yet  Coloma,  vi.

trine  of  Philip  and  of  the  German  Pro-  133,  and  v",  ascribes  the  loss  of  the  city

testant  princes  that  the  vassal  w;is to  mainly to two ca-oses  —  the uant of

have  no  opinion  but  his  master's. Never-  powder,  and  the  flatteries  and  vUe  per-

theless the States-General were not  suasions  of  the  wives  of  thij  burghers,

pleased  that  their envoy should have  any  one  of which artful women  was

answered  the  newly  converted  Henry  so  equal,  he  says,  to  three  dissembling  men.

glibly  on  the  great  subject  of  protection  As  in  every  part  of  the  Netherlands,  he

to  Catholics. He  was  asked  by  what  adds,  women exercise great influence,

authority  he  had  given  so  categorical  an  even  in  the  most  grave  affairs,  so  there

answer,  and  he  was  directed  in  future  to  is  no  doubt  that  In  (ironingen  they  are,

think  twice,  and  ask  for  instructions  in  and  have  always  been,  more  powerful

such  emergencies. To  promise  pulilic  than  elsewhere,
worship  of  a  religion  professed  mainly  in

1594.  PROGRESS  OF  THE  REPUBLIC.  261

On  the  23rd  July  Maurice  and  William  Lewis  entered
the  city.  Some  of  the  soldiers  were  disappointed  at  the
inexorable  prohibition  of  pillage  ;  but  it  was  the  purpose
of  Maurice  as  of  the  States- General,  to  place  the  sister
province  at  once  in  the  unsullied  possession  of  the
liberty  and  the  order  for  which  the  struggle  with  Spain
had  been  carried  on  so  long.  If  the  limitation  of  public
religious  worship  seemed  harsh,  it  should  be  remem-
bered that  Eomanism  in  a  city  occupied  by  Sj^anish
troops  had  come  to  mean  unmitigated  hostility  to  the
republic.  In  the  midst  of  civil  war,  the  hour  for  that
religious  liberty  which  was  the  necessary  issue  of  the
great  conflict  had  not  yet  struck.  It  was  surely  some-
thing gained  for  humanity  that  no  man  should  be  ques-
tioned at  all  as  to  his  creed  in  countries  where  it  was  so
recently  the  time-honoured  practice  to  question  him  on
the  rack,  and  to  burn  him  if  the  answer  was  objection
able  to  the  inquirer.

It  was  something  that  the  holy  Inquisition  had  been
for  ever  suppressed  in  the  land.  It  must  be  admitted,
likewise,  that  the  terms  of  surrender  and  the  spectacle
of  re-established  law  and  order  which  succeeded  the
capture  of  Groningen  furnished  a  wholesome  contrast  to
the  scenes  of  inetfable  horror  that  had  been  displayed
whenever  a  Dutch  town  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of
Philip.

And  thus  the  commonwealth  of  the  United  Nether-
lands, through  the  practical  military  genius  and  perse-
verance of  Maurice  and  Lewis  William,  and  the  sub-
stantial statesmanship  of  Barneveld  and  his  colleagues,
had  at  last  rounded  itself  into  definite  shape ;  while  in
all  directions  toward  which  men  turned  their  eyes,
world-empire,  imposing  and  goi'geous  as  it  had  seemed
for  an  interval,  was  vanishing  before  its  votaries  like  a
mirage.  The  republic,  placed  on  the  solid  foundations
of  civil  liberty,  self-government,  and  reasonable  law,
was  steadily  consolidating  itself.

Ko  very  prominent  movements  were  undertaken  by
the  forces  of  the  Union  during  the  remainder  of  the
year.  According  to  the  agreements  with  Henry  IV.  it
had  been  necessary  to  provide  that  monarch  with  con-
siderable assistance  to  carry  on  his  new  campaigns,  and
it  was  therefore  difficult  for  Maurice  to  begin  for  the

262  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

moment  upon  the  larger  scliemes  which  he  had  contem-
plated.

Meantime  the  condition  of  the  obedient  Netherlands
demands  a  hasty  glance.

On  the  death  of  brother  Alexander  the  Capuchin,
Fuentes  produced  a  patent  by  which  Peter  Ernest
Mansfeld  was  provisicnally  appointed  governor,  in  case
the  post  should  become  vacant.  During  the  year  which
followed,  that  testy  old  campaigner  had  indulged  him-
self in  many  petty  feuds  with  all  around  him,  but  had
effected,  as  we  have  seen,  very  little  to  maintain  the
king's  authority  either  in  the  obedient  or  the  disobedient
provinces.

His  utter  incompetency  soon  became  most  painfully
apparent.  His  more  than  puerile  dependence  upon  his
son,  and  the  more  than  paternal  severity  exercised  over
him  by  Count  Charles,  were  made  manifest  to  all  the
world.  The  son  ruled  the  trembling  but  peevish  old
warrior  with  an  iron  rod,  and  endless  was  their  wi-ang-
ling  with  Fuentes  and  all  the  other  Spaniards.  Between
the  querulousness  of  the  one  and  the  ferocity  of  the
other,  poor  Fuentes  became  sick  of  his  life.  "  'Tis  a
diabolical  genius,  this  Count  Charles,"  said  Ybaria,
"and  so  full  of  ambition  that  he  insists  on  governing
everybody  just  as  he  rules  his  father.  As  for  me,  until
the  archduke  comes  I  am  a  fish  out  of  water."  ^

The  true  successor  to  Farnese  was  to  be  the  Archduke
Ernest,  one  of  the  many  candidates  for  the  hand  of  the
Infanta,  and  for  the  throne  of  that  department  of  the
Spanish  dominions  which  was  commonly  called  France.
Should  Philip  not  appropriate  the  throne,  without
further  scruple,  in  person,  it  was  on  the  whole  decided
that  his  favourite  nephew  should  be  the  satrap  of  that
outlying  district  of  the  Spanish  empire.  In  such  case
obedient  France  might  be  annexed  to  obedient  Nether-
lands, and  united  under  the  sway  of  Archduke  Ernest.

But  these  dreams  had  proved  in  the  cold  air  of
reality  but  midsummer  madness.  Wben  the  name  of
the  archduke  was  presented  to  the  estates  as  King
Ernest  I.  of  Fiance,  even  the  most  unscrupulous  and
impassioned  Leaguers  of  that  country  fairly  hung  their

<»  Ybana  to  the  Secretaries,  5  Oct.  153C. (Arch  de  Simancas  .\1S.)

1594.  THE  SUCCESSOR  OF  FARNESE.  263

heads.*®  That  a  foreign  prince,  whose  very  name  had
never  before  been  heard  of  by  the  vast  bulk  of  the
French  population,  should  be  deliberately  placed  upon
the  throne  of  St.  Louis  and  Hugh  Capet  was  a  humilia-
tion hard  to  defend,  profusely  as  Philip  had  scattered
the  Peruvian  and  Mexican  dollars  among  the  great  ones
of  the  nation,  in  order  to  accomplish  his  purpose.

So  Archduke  Ernest,  early  in  the  year  1594,  came  to
Brussels,  but  he  came  as  a  gloomy,  disappointed  January,
man.  To  be  a  bachelor-governor  of  the  im-  ^^^'*-
poverished,  exhausted,  half-rebellious,  and  utterly  for-
lorn little  remnant  of  the  Spanish  Netherlands,  was  a
different  position  from  that  of  husband  of  Clara  Isabella
and  king  of  France,  on  which  his  imagination  had  been
feeding  so  long.

For  nearly  the  whole  twelvemonth  subsequent  to  the
death  of  Farnese,  the  Spanish  envoy  to  the  Imperial
court  had  been  endeavouring  to  arrange  for  the  de-
parture of  the  archduke  to  his  seat  of  government  in  the
Netherlands.  The  prince  himself  was  willing  enough,
but  there  were  many  obstacles  on  the  part  of  the
emperor  and  his  advisers.  "  Especially  there  is  one
very  great  impossibility,"  said  San  Clemente,  "  and  that
is  the  poverty  of  his  Highness,  which  is  so  great  that
my  own  is  not  greater  in  my  estate.  So  I  don't  see  how
he  can  stir  a  step  without  money.  Here  they'll  not
fuinish  him  with  a  penny,  and  for  himself  he  possesses
nothing  but  debts."  "*"  The  emperor  was  so  little  pleased
with  the  adventure  that  in  truth,  according  to  the  same
authority,  he  looked  upon  the  new  viceroy's  embarrass-
ments with  considerable  satisfaction,  so  that  it  was
necessary  for  Philip  to  provide  for  his  travelling  ex-
penses.*^

Ernest  was  next  brother  of  the  Emperor  Eudolph,
and  as  intensely  devoted  to  the  interests  of  the  Roman

••^ ''lis  fuTent presque tous frappea  yo  como  podra  dar  iin  passo  sin  dinero,  y

d'horreur  en  considerant  I'extremite  oil  de  aqui  no  le  socoiTeren  con  un  real,  ni  el

etaient  reduits  les Fran(;ais de  penser  tiene  sino  deudas." — G.  de  San  Clemente

choisir  pour  Roy  unhomme  qu'ils  ne  sea-  to  Fuentes, 14  March  1593. (Arch,  de

vaient  seulement  qu'il  fust  au  monde." —  Simancas  MS.)

Leltres  deBongars,  24  July,  1593,  p.  235.  <^  San  Clemente  to  Fuentes,  2  May,

46  "Una  imposibilidad  muy  grande  es  1593. (Arch  de  .'^imancas  MS.) Same

BU  pobreza  que  esta  de  manera  que  no  cs  to  same,  3  Aug.  1593. (Ibid.)
mayor  la  mia  en  mi  estado,  y  assi  no  se

264  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Church  as  was  that  potentate  himself,  or  even  his  uncle
Philip.

He  was  gentle,  weak,  melancholy,  addicted  to  plea-
sure, a  martyr  to  the  gout.  He  bi'ought  no  soldiers  to
the  provinces,  for  the  emperor,  threatened  with  another
world-empire  on  his  pagan  flank,  had  no  funds  nor  troops
to  send  to  the  assistance  of  his  Christian  brother-in-law
and  uncle.  Moreover,  it  may  be  imagined  that  Rudolph,
despite  the  bonds  of  religion  and  consanguinity,  was
disposed  to  look  coldly  on  the  colossal  projects  of  Philip.

So  Ernest  brought  no  troops,  but  he  brought  six
hundred  and  seventy  gentlemen,  pages,  and  cooks,  and
five  hundred  and  thirty-four  horses,  not  to  charge  upon
the  rebellious  Dutchmen  withal,  but  to  draw  coaches
and  six.*^

There  was  trouble  enough  prepared  for  the  new
governor  at  his  arrival.  The  great  Flemish  and  Walloon
nobles  were  quarrelling  fiercely  with  the  Spaniards  and
among  themselves  for  office  and  fi  tr  precedence.  Arschot
and  his  brother  Havre  both  desired  the  government  of
Flanders  ;  so  did  Arenberg.  All  three,  as  well  as  other
gentlemen,  were  scrambling  for  the  major-domo's  office
in  Ernest's  palace.  Havre  wanted  the  finance  depart-
ment as  well,  but  Ybarra,  who  was  a  financier,  thought
the  public  funds  in  his  hands  would  be  in  a  perilous
condition,  inasmuch  as  he  was  accounted  the  most  covet-
ous man  in  all  the  provinces.^^

So  soon  as  the  archduke  was  known  to  be  approaching
the  capital  there  Avas  a  most  ludicrous  race  run  by  all
these  giandees,  in  order  to  be  the  first  to  greet  his  High-
ness. While  Mansfeld  and  Fuentes  were  squabbling,  as
usual,  Arschot  got  the  start  of  both,  and  arrived  at
Treves.  Then  the  decrepit  Peter  Ernest  struggled  as
far  as  Luxembourg,  while  Fuentes  posted  on  to  Samur.®°
The  archduke  was  much  perplexed  as  to  the  ari-anging
of  all  these  personages  on  the  day  of  his  entrance  into
Brussels.  In  the  council  of  state  it  was  still  worse.
Arschot  claimed  the  first  place  as  duke  and  as  senior
member,  Peter  Ernest  demanded  it  as  late  governor-
general  and  because  of  his  grey  hairs.'^ Never was

*M!or,  III.  T82. Reyd,  ix.  220.  ^^  Papel  sobre  las  precedencius. (IbiU.^

'9  Ybarra to , 22 Nov. 1593. ^i  ib^jj

(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

1594.  HAUGHTINESS  OF  ARCHDUKE  ERNEST.  265

imperial  highness  more  disturbed,  never  was  clamour
for  loaves  and  fishes  more  deafening.  The  caustic
financier — whose  mind  was  just  then  occupied  with  the
graver  matter  of  assassination  on  a  considerable  scale —
looked  with  profound  contempt  at  the  spectacle  thus
presented  to  him.  "  There  has  been  the  devil's  own
row,"  said  he,  "  between  these  counts  about  offices,  and
also  about  going  out  to  receive  the  most  serene  arch-
duke. I  have  had  such  work  with  them  that  by  the
salvation  of  my  soul  I  swear  if  it  were  to  last  a  fortnight
longer  I  would  go  off  afoot  to  Spain,  even  if  I  were  sure
of  dying  in  jail  after  I  got  there.  I  have  reconciled  the
two  coxmts  (Fuentes  and  Mansfeld)  with  each  other  a
hundred  times,  and  another  hundred  times  they  have
fallen  out  again,  and  behaved  themselves  with  such  vul-
garity that  I  blushed  for  them.*^  They  are  both  to
blame,  but  at  any  rate  we  have  now  got  the  archduke
housed,  and  he  will  get  us  out  of  this  embarrassment."

The  archduke  came  with  rather  a  prejudice  against
the  Spaniards — the  result  doubtless  of  his  disappoint-
ment in  regard  to  France — and  he  manifested  at  first  an
extreme  haughtiness  to  those  of  that  nation  with  wdiom
he  came  in  contact.  A  Castilian  noble  of  high  rank,
having  audience  with  him  on  one  occasion,  replaced  his
hat  after  salutation,  as  he  had  been  accrastomed  to  do —
according  to  the  manner  of  grandees  of  Spain — during
the  government  of  Farnese.  The  hat  was  rudely  stiuck
from  his  head  by  the  archduke's  chamberlain,  and  he
was  himself  ignominiously  thrust  out  of  the  presence.*^
At  another  time  an  interview  was  granted  to  two
Spanish  gentlemen  who  had  business  to  transact.  They
made  their  appearance  in  magnificent  national  costume,
splendidly  embroidered  in  gold.  After  a  brief  hearing
they  were  dismissed,  with  appointment  of  another  audi-
ence for  a  few  days  later.  \\  hen  they  again  presented
themselves  they  found  the  archduke  with  his  court-jester
standing  at  his  side,  the  buffoon  being  attired  in  a  suit

52  " Ha  pasado  aqui  una  baraunda  del  supiera  morlr  en  la  carcel. 'luve  los

diablo  entre  estos  senores  Condes  sobre  la  concertados  clen  vezes  y  otras  ciento  se

reformacion  y  despues  sobre  el  salir  a  ban  desconcertado  y  tratado  por  un  tcr-

recibii'  al  Ser"'"  Archiduqup,  y  tanto  tra-  mino  tan  vulgar  que  yo  estoy  corrido,"

bajo  mio,  que  por  la  salvacion  do  mi  &c. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

alma  juro  que  si  liubiera  de  durar  esto  15  53  Keyd,  ix.  222.
dias  mas  me  fuera  a  pie  a  Espaiia  aunque

266  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

precisely  similar  to  their  own,  which  in  the  interval  had
been  prepared  by  the  court  tailor.^

Such  amenities  as  these  did  not  increase  the  popularity
of  Ernest  with  the  high-spirited  Spaniards,  nor  was  it
palatable  to  them  that  it  should  be  proposed  to  super-
sede the  old  fighting  Portuguese,  Verdugo,  as  governor
and  commander-in-ch'ef  for  the  king  in  Friesland,  by
Frederic  van  den  Berg,  a  renegade  Netherlander,  un-
worthy cousin  of  the  Kassaus,  who  had  never  shown
either  military  or  administrative  genius.

Nor  did  he  succeed  in  conciliating  the  Flemings  or
the  Germans  by  these  measures.  In  truth  he  was,
almost  without  his  own  knowledge,  under  the  controll-
ing influence  of  Fuentes,^^  the  most  unscrupulous  and
dangerous  Spaniard  of  them  all,  while  his  every  pro-
ceeding was  closely  watched  not  only  by  Diego  and
Stephen  Ybarra,  but  even  by  Christoval  de  Moura,  one
of  Philip's  two  secretaries  of  state  who  at  this  crisis
made  a  visit  to  Brussels.®'^

These  men  were  indignant  at  the  imbecility  of  the
course  pursued  in  the  obedient  provinces.  They  knew
that  the  incapacity  of  the  Government  to  relieve  the
sieges  of  Gertruydenberg  and  Groningen  had  excited  the
contempt  of  Europe,  and  was  producing  a  most  damag-
ing efi'ect  on  Spanish  authority  throughout  Christen-
dom.®^ They  were  especially  irritated  at  the  presence  of
the  arch-intriguer,  Mayenne,  in  Brussels,  even  after  all
his  double  dealings  had  been  so  completely  exposed  that
a  blind  man  could  have  read  them.  Yet  there  was
Mayenne,  consorting  with  the  archduke,  and  running  up
a  great  bill  of  sixteen  thousand  florins  at  the  hotel,  which
the  royal  paymaster  declined  to  settle  for  want  of  funds,

5<  Reyd,  ix.  222.  lieutenant-general  of  the  Cardinal  of
55  "  Fuentes  was  not  a  favourite  with  Austria,  in  order  to  carry  out  what  had
Queen  Elizabeth.  When  informed  that  been  left  unfinished  by  the  duke.  She
he  was  to  succeed  to  the  government  of  doubted  not,  she  said,  that  he  would
the  provinces  after  the  death  of  Parma,  attempt  the  same  practices  in  the  ^i  ether-
she  remarked  to  Noel  de  Caron  that  it  lands,  but  she  hoped  that  a  Spanish
was  the  same  Count  Fuentes  who  had  so  governor  would  never  be  tolerated  there."
shamefully  run  away  when  S^arl  Essex  Noel  de  Caron  to  the  States-General,  10
and  her  people  were  before  Lisbon,  that  Dec.  1592.  (Hague  Archives  MS.)  Com-
he  was  a  timid  old  woman,  but  none  the  pare  Duyck,  465.

less  a  great  tyrant,  and  that  therefore  he  56  Intercepted  letters  of  San  Clemente

had  been  sent,  after  the  death  of  the  Duke  in  Boi.  III.  852-S55.

of Alva, to Portugal, and appointed  57  Jbid.

1594.  YBARRA  DENOUNCES  ERNEST.  267

notwithstanding  Ernest's  order  to  that  effect,*^  and  there
was  no  possibility  of  inducing  the  viceroy  to  arrest  him,
much  as  he  had  injured  and  defrauded  the  king.

How  severely  Ybarra  and  Feria  denounced  Mayenne
has  been  seen ;  but  remonstrances  about  this  and  other
grave  mistakes  of  administration  were  lust  upon  Ernest,
or  made  almost  impossible  by  his  peculiar  temper.  "  If
I  speak  of  these  things  to  his  Highness,"  said  Ybarra,
"he  will  begin  to  cr3%  as  he  always  does."^**

Ybarra,  however,  thought  it  his  duty  secretly  to  give
the  king  frequent  information  as  to  the  blasted  and  for-
lorn condition  of  the  provinces.  "  This  sick  man  will
die  in  our  arms,"  he  said,  "  without  our  wishing  to  kill
him."*''  He  also  left  no  doubt  in  the  royal  mind  as  to
the  utter  incompetency  of  the  archduke  for  his  office.
Although  he  had  much  Christianity,  amiability,  and  good
intentions,  he  was  so  unused  to  business,  so  slow  and  so
lazy,  so  easily  persuaded  by  those  around  him,  as  to  be
always  falling  into  errors.  He  was  the  servant  of  his
own  servants,  particularly  of  those  least  disposed  to  the
king's  service  and  most  attentive  to  their  own  interests.
He  had  endeavoured  to  make  himself  beloved  by  the
natives  of  the  country,  while  the  very  reverse  of  this  had
been  the  result.  "  As  to  his  agility  and  the  strength  of
his  body,"  said  the  Spaniard,  as  if  he  were  thinking  of
certain  allegories  which  were  to  mark  the  archduke's
triumphal  entry,  "  they  are  so  deficient  as  to  leave  him
unfit  for  arms.  1  consider  him  incapable  of  accompany-
ing an  army  to  the  field,  and  we  find  him  so  new  to  all
such  affairs  as  constitute  government  and  the  conduct  of
warlike  business,  that  he  could  not  steer  his  way  without
some  one  to  enlighten  and  direct  him.""

It  was  sometimes  complained  of  in  those  days — and
the  thought  has  even  prolonged  itself  until  later  times
— that  those  republicans  of  the  United  Netherlands  had
done  and  could  do  great  things  ;  but  that,  after  all,  there
was  no  grandeur  about  them.  Certainly  they  had  done
great  things.  It  was  something  to  fight  the  Ocean  for
ages,  and  patiently  and  firmly  to  shut  him  out  from  his
own  domain. It  was  something  to  extinguish  the  Spanish

»^  Reyd.  is.  243.  ^  ibid.  242.  medad  de  esto  cuerpo  es  muy  aparojado

f'3  Ybarra to l^hilip,  21 June, 1594. para  que  se  lo  muera  en  los  brazos  sin
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.) "  La  enter- quererle  mutar,"  &c.  «'  Ibid.

268  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Inquisition — a  still  more  cruel  and  devouring  enemy  than
the  sea.  It  was  something  that  the  fugitive  spirit  of
civil  and  religious  liberty  had  found  at  last  its  most  sub-
stantial and  steadfast  home  upon  those  storm-washed
shoals  and  shifting  sandbanks.  It  was  something  to  come
to  the  rescue  of  England  in  her  great  agony  and  help  to
save  her  from  invasion.  It  was  something  to  do  more
than  any  nation  but  England,  and  as  much  as  she,  to
assist  Henry  the  Huguenot  to  the  throne  of  his  ancestors
and  to  preserve  the  national  unity  of  Fiance  which  its
own  great  ones  had  imperilled.  It  was  something  to
found  two  magnificent  universities,  cherished  abodes  of
science  and  of  antique  lore,  in  the  midst  of  civil  commo-
tions and  of  resistance  to  foreign  oppression.  It  was
something,  at  the  same  period,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a
system  of  common  schools — so  cheap  as  to  be  nearly  free
— for  rich  and  poor  alike,  which,  in  the  words  of  one  of
the  greatest  benefactors  to  the  young  republic,  "  would
be  worth  all  the  soldiers,  arsenals,  armouries,  munitions,
and  alliances  in  the  world."  It  was  something  to  make
a  revolution,  as  humane  as  it  was  eifective,  in  military
afFaii's,  and  to  create  an  array  whose  camps  were  Euro-
pean academies.  It  was  something  to  organize,  at  the
same  critical  period,  on  the  most  skilful  and  liberal  scale,
and  to  carry  out  with  unexampled  daring,  sagacity,  and
fortitude,  great  voyages  of  discovery  to  the  polar  regions,
and  to  open  new  highways  for  commerce,  new  treasures
for  science.  Many  things  of  this  nature  had  been  done
by  the  new  commonwealth ;  but,  alas !  she  did  not  drape
herself  melodramatically,  nor  stalk  about  with  heroic
wreath  and  cothurn.  She  was  altogether  without  gran-
deur.

When  Alva  had  gained  his  signal  victories,  and  fol-
lowed them  up  by  those  prodigious  massacres  which,  but
for  his  own  and  other  irrefragable  testimony,  would  seem
too  monstrous  for  belief,  he  had  erected  a  colossal  statue
to  himself,  attired  in  the  most  classical  of  costumes,  and
surrounded  with  the  most  mythological  of  attributes.
Here  was  grandeur.  But  William  the  Silent,  after  he
had  saved  the  republic,  for  which  he  had  laboured  dur-
ing his  whole  lifetime  and  was  destined  to  pour  out  his
heart's  blood,  went  about  among  the  brewers  and  burghers
with  unbuttoned  doublet  and  woollen  bary-eman's  waist-

1594.  JOHN  BAPTIST  HOUWAERTS.  269

coat.  It  was  justly  objected  to  his  clotlies,  by  the
euphuistic  Fulke  Greville,  that  a  mean-boin  student  of
the  Inns  of  Court  woixld  have  been  ashamed  to  walk
about  London  streets  in  them.*^^

And  now  the  engineering  son  of  that  shabbily-dressed
personage  had  been  giving  the  whole  world  lessons  in
the  science  of  war,  and  was  fairly  perfecting  the  work
which  William  and  his  great  contemporaries  had  so  well
begun.  But  if  all  this  had  been  merely  doing  great
things  without  greatness,  there  was  one  man  in  the
Ketherlands  who  knew  what  grandeur  was.  He  was  not
a  citizen  of  the  disobedient  republic,  however,  but  a
loyal  subject  of  the  obedient  provinces,  and  his  name
was  John  Baptist  Houwaerts,  an  eminent  schoolmaster
of  Brussels.  He  was  still  more  eminent  as  a  votary  of
what  was  called  "  Ehetoric "  and  as  an  arranger  of
triumphal  processions  and  living  pictures.

The  arrival  of  Archduke  Ernest  at  the  seat  of  the  pro-
vincial Government  offered  an  opportunity,  which  had
long  been  wanting,  for  a  display  of  John  Baptist's
genius.  The  new  viceroy  was  in  so  shattered  a  condi-
tion of  health,  so  crippled  with  the  gout,  as  to  be  quite
unable  to  stand,  and  it  required  the  services  of  several
lackeys  to  lift  him  into  and  out  of  his  carriage.^^  A  few
days  of  repose  therefore  were  indispensable  to  him  before
he  could  make  his  "  joyous  entrance  "  into  the  capital.
But  the  day  came  at  last,  and  the  exhibition  was  a
masterpiece.

It  might  have  seemed  that  the  abject  condition  of  the
Spanish  provinces — desolate,  mendicant,  despairing. —
would  render  holiday-making  impossible.  But  although
almost  every  vestige  of  the  ancient  institutions  had
vanished  from  the  obedient  Netherlands  as  a  reward  for
their  obedience ;  although  to  civil  and  religious  liberty,
law,  order,  and  a  thriving  commercial  and  manufactur
ing  existence,  such  as  had  been  rarely  witnessed  in  the
world,  had  succeeded  the  absolute  tyranny  of  Jesuits,
universal  beggary,  and  a  perennial  military  mutiny —
setting  Government  at  defiance  and  plundering  the
people— there  was  one  faithful  comforter  who  never
deserted  Belgica,  and  that  was  Ehetoric.

62  Vol.  I.  of  this  work,  p.  350. Brooke's  Sidney,  IC,  sejg.
ra  Reyd,  ix.  220-222. Bor,  III.  V»2.

270  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Neither  the  magnificence  nor  the  pedantry  of  the  spec-
tacles by  which  the  entry  of  the  mild  and  inefficient
Ernest  into  Brussels  and  Antwerp  was  now  solemnized
had  ever  been  surpassed.  The  town  councils,  stimulated
by  hopes  absolutely  without  foundation  as  to  great  results
to  follow  the  advent  of  the  emperor's  brother,  had  voted
large  sums  and  consumed  many  days  in  anxious  delibera-
tion upon  the  manner  in  which  they  should  be  expended
so  as  most  to  redound  to  the  honour  of  Ernest  and  the
reputation  of  the  country.

In  place  of  the  "  bloody  tragedies  of  burning,  murder-
ing, and  ravishing,"  of  which  the  provinces  had  so  long
been  the  theatre,  it  was  resolved  that  "  Rhetoric's  sweet
comedies,  amorous  jests,  and  farces,"  should  gladden  all
eyes  and  hearts."  A  stately  procession  of  knights  and
burghers  in  historical  and  mythological  costumes,  fol-
lowed by  ships,  dromedaries,  elephants,  whales,  giants,
dragons,  and  other  wonders  of  the  sea  and  shore,  escorted
the  archduke  into  the  city.  Every  street  and  square  was
filled  with  triumphal  arches,  statues  and  platforms,  on
which  the  most  ingenious  and  thoroughly  classical  living
pictures  were  exhibited.  There  was  hardly  an  eminent
deity  of  Olympus,  or  hero  of  ancient  history,  that  was
not  revived  and  made  visible  to  mortal  eyes  in  the  person
of  Ernestus  of  Austria.

On  a  framework  fifty-five  feet  high  and  thirty-three
feet  in  breadth  he  was  represented  as  Apollo  hurling  his
darts  at  an  enormous  Python,  under  one  of  whose  fore-
paws  struggled  an  unfortunate  burgher,  while  the  other
clutched  a  whole  city ;  Tellus,  meantime,  with  her  tower
on  her  head,  kneeling  anxious  and  imploring  at  the  feet
of  her  deliverer.  On  another  stage  Ernest  assiuned  the
shape  of  Perseus  ;  Belgica  that  of  tlie  bound  and  despair-
ing Andromeda.  On  a  third,  the  interior  of  Etna  was
revealed,  where  Vulcan  was  seen  urging  his  Cyclops  to
forge  for  Ernest  their  most  tremendous  thunderbolts  with
which  to  smite  the  f^es  of  the  provinces,  those  enemies
being  of  course  the  English  and  Hollanders.  Venus,  the
while,  timidly  presented  an  arrow  to  her  husband,  which

"  Descriptio  et  Explicatio  pegmatorutn  Houwaert's  Moralisatie  op  de  Komst  van

et  spectaculoi-um  quae  Briixella;  exbibita  de  hoogbgeboren,  macbtigen  en  seer  dcor-

fuere sub ingressum Sere"" principis  lugtigon Vorst  Ernesto,  &c. Bruessel,

Ernesti, &c. BruxeiUe, 159:i (S. V.)  I.y  Jan  Mommaert,  1594.

1594.  PAGEANT  IN  HONOUR  OF  ERNEST.  271

he  was  requested  to  sharpen,  in  order  that  when  the
wars  were  over  Cupid  therewith  might  pierce  the  heart
of  some  beautiful  virgin,  whose  charms  should  reward
Ernest — fortunately  for  the  female  world,  still  a  bachelor
— for  his  victories  and  his  toils. ''^

The  walls  of  every  house  were  hung  with  classic
emblems  and  inscribed  with  Latin  verses.  All  the  peda-
gogues of  Brussels  and  Antwerp  had  been  at  work  for
months,  determined  to  amaze  the  world  with  Iheir  dithy-
rambics  and  acrostics,  and  they  had  outdone  themselves.

Moreover,  in  addition  to  all  these  theatiical  spectacles
and  pompous  processions — accompanied  as  they  were  by
blazing  tar-barrels,  flying  dragons,  and  leagues  of  flaring
torches — John  Baptist,  who  had  been  director-in-chief  of
all  the  shows  successively  arranged  to  welcome  Don
John  of  Austria,  Archduke  Matthias,  Francis  of  Alengon,
and  even  William  of  Orange,  into  the  capital,  had  pre-
pared a  feast  of  a  specially  intellectual  character  for  the
new  governor-general.

The  pedant,  according  to  his  own  account,  so  soon  as
the  approach  of  Ernest  had  been  announced,  fell  straight-
way into  a  trance."'^  While  he  was  in  that  condition,  a
beautiful  female  apparition  floated  before  his  eyes,  and,
on  being  questioned,  announced  her  name  to  be  Moraliza-
tion.  John  Baptist  begged  her  to  inform  him  whether  it
were  true,  as  had  been  stated,  that  Jupiter  had  just  sent
Mercury  to  the  Netherlands.  The  phantom,  correcting
his  mistake,  observed  that  the  king  of  gods  and  men  had
not  sent  Hermes  but  the  Archduke  Ernestus,  beloved  of
the  three  Graces,  favourite  of  the  nine  Muses,  and,  in
addition  to  these  advantages,  nephew  and  brother-in-law
of  the  King  of  Spain,  to  the  relief  of  the  suffering  pro-
vinces. The  Netherlands,  it  was  true,  for  their  religious
infidelity,  had  justly  incurred  great  disasters  and  miseiy  ;
but  benignant  Jove,  who,  to  the  imagination  of  this
excited  Fleming,  seemed  to  have  been  converted  to
Catholicism  while  still  governing  the  universe,  had  now
sent  them  in  mercy  a  deliverer.  The  archduke  would
speedily  relieve  "  bleeding  Belgica  "  from  her  sufl'erings,
bind  up  her  wounds,  and  annihilate  her  enemies.  The
spirit  further  informed  the  poet  that  the  forests  of  tlie

6* Houwaert's  Moralisatie,  4c.,  ubisup.  •"  Ibid.

272  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Low  Countries — so  long  infested  by  brigands,  wood-
beggars,  and  malefactors  of  all  kinds — would  thence-
forth swarm  with  "  nymphs,  rabbits,  hares,  and  animals
of  that  nature."*^''

A  vision  of  the  conquering  Ernest,  attended  by
"  eight-and-twenty  noble  and  pleasant  females,  marching
two  and  two,  half  naked,  each  holding  a  torch  in  one
hand  and  a  laurel-wreath  in  the  other,"  now  swept
before  the  dreamer's  eyes.^^  He  naturally  requested  the
"  discreet  spirit  "  to  mention  the  names  of  this  bevy  of
imperfectly  attired  ladies  thronging  so  lovingly  around
the  fortunate  archduke,  and  was  told  that  "  they  were
the  eight-and-twenty  virtues  which  chiefly  characterized
his  serene  Highness."''^  Prominent  in  this  long  list,  and
they  were  all  faithfully  enumerated,  were  Philosoph}',
Audacit}'',  Acrimony,  Virility,  Equity,  Piety,  Velocity,
and  Alacrity.™  The  two  last-mentioned  qualities  could
hardly  be  attributed  to  the  archduke  in  his  decrepit
condition,  except  in  an  intensely  mythological  sense.
Certainly,  they  would  have  been  highly  useful  vir-
tues to  him  at  that  moment.  The  prince  who  had  just
taken  Gertruydenberg,  and  was  then  besieging  Gronin-
gen,  was  manifesting  his  share  of  audacity,  velocity,  and
other  good  gifts  on  even  a  wider  platform  than  that
erected  for  Erne^st  bj'^  John  Baptist  Houwaerts ;  and
there  was  an  admirable  opportunity  for  both  to  develope
their  lespective  characteristics  for  the  world's  judgment.

Meantime  the  impersonation  of  the  gentle  and  very
gout}'  invalid  as  Apollo,  as  Pei'seus,  as  the  feather-heeled
Mercury,  was  highly  applauded  by  the  burghers  of
Brussels.

G^  "  lu  -plaefcse dat  de bosscheu plachten te  En  warom  dat  sy  hem  bebben  geconyoy-

sijne  eert?

Vol  kuevelaers  en  roovers  in  alle quar-  Drom  de  Nympbe  heeft  gerespondeert

tiereu  lie agt en twintig Nymphen die met

Soo  waren  sy  wederom ten selven ter-  vreughden

mijne  Twee  en  twee  tegader  bebben  gemarsch-

Vol  Nymphen,  basen,  conijnen  en  ghelijcke  eert

Diereu."  Da  sijn  des  doorlngtigben  Princen  deugii-

Houwaert's  Moralisiitie,  &c.  <ie"."  *".

6" Ibid.  ^^''^'

'0  "En  i  rtese  deughtlijcke  Nymphen  dit  sijn

C'J  '•  Acht  en  twintig  edel  Nymphen  playsant  genaempt

Sach  ich  voor  den  prince  haer  vertoonen  Pliilosophia  en  Intelligentia

Andacia  en  Magnaiiimitas  unheschaempt

Tocn  spraeck  ick,  O  Vrindinue,  wilt  mv  Aorimonia  en  Virilifas

noch  bedien '  Secui-itas  en  Clenientia

De  namen  van  die  nymphen  weirt  gehono-  Firmitudo  en  Velo.itas

reert,  Alacritas  en  Pietatis  abundantia

Die ick voort, by,  en achter Einestum  Potentia  en  Opportunitas  gheheescn  " \c

geeicn, ,  l!)i(l.

1 59  k  VISION  OF  JOHN  BAPTIST  HOUWAERTS.  273

And  so  the  dreamer  dreamed  on,  and  the  discreet
nymph  continued  to  disconrse,  until  John  Baptist,  start-
ing suddenly  from  his  trance,  beheld  tliat  it  was  all  a
truth  and  no  viyion.  Ernest  was  really  about  to  enter
the  Netherlands,  and  with  him  the  millennium.  The
pedant  therefore  proceeded  to  his  desk,  and  straightway
composed  the  ver}"  worst  poem  that  had  ever  been  written
in  any  language,  even  Flemish.

There  were  thousands  of  lines  in  it,  and  not  a  line
without  a  god  or  a  goddess.

Mars,  Nemesis,  and  Ate,  Pluto,  Ehadamanthus,  and
Minos,  the  Fates  and  the  Furies,  togethoi-  with  Charon,
Calumnia,  Bellona,  and  all  such  objectionable  divinities,
were  requested  to  disappear  for  ever  from  the  Low
Countries  ;  while  in  their  Btead  were  confidenily  invoked
Jupiter,  Apollo,  Triptulemus,  and,  last  but  not  least,
Ehetorica.^^

Enough  has  been  said  of  this  laree-shovv  to  weary  the
reader's  patience,  but  not  more  than  enoi^gh  to  show  the
docile  and  enervated  nature  of  this  porti(jn  of  a  people
who  had  lost  everything  for  which  men  cherish  their
fatherland,  but  who  could  still  tind  relief — after  thirty
}ears  of  horrible  civil  war — in  painted  pageantry,  Latin
versification,  and  the  classical  dictionary.

Yet  there  was  nothing  much  more  important  achieved
by  the  archduke  in  the  brief  period  for  which  his
administration  was  destined  to  endure.  Three  pheno-
mena chiefly  marked  his  reign,  but  his  own  part  in  the
three  was  rather  a  passive  than  an  active  one — mutiny,
assassination,  and  negotiation — the  two  last  attempted  on
a  considerable  scale  but  ending  abortively.

It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  misery  of  the
obedient  provinces  at  this  ejwch.  The  insane  attempt
of  the  King  of  Spain,  with  such  utterly  inadequate
machinery,  to  conquer  the  world  has  been  sufficiently
dilated  upon.  The  Spanish  and  Italian  and  Walloon
soldiers  were  starving  in  Brabant  and  Flanders  in  order
that  Si)anish  gold  might  be  poured  into  the  bottomless
pit  of  the  Holy  League  in  Fi  ance.''^

'I  Hoiiwaert's  Moralisatie,  &c.

'^  It  is  instructive  to  linow  the  exact  sums  of  money  repulaiiy  expended  by  the
King  of  Spain  each  mouth,  at  tliis  period,  in  Fiance  and  the  N'.therlandB.  In

VOL. III.  T

274  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

The  mutiny  that  had  broken  forth  the  preceding  year  in
Artois  and  Hainault  was  now  continued  on  a  vast  scale
in  Brabant.  Never  had  that  national  institution — a
Spanish  mutiny — been  more  tlioroiighly  organized,  more
completely  carried  out  in  all  its  details.  All  that  was
left  of  the  famous  Spanish  discipline  and  military  science
in  this  their  period  of  rapid  decay,  seemed  monopolized
by  the  mutineers.  Some  two  thousand  choice  troops
(horse  and  foot),  Italians  and  Spanish,  took  possession  of
two  considerable  cities,  Sichem  and  Arschot,  and  ulti-
mately Concentrated  themselves  at  Sichem,  which  they
thoroughly  fortified.  Having  chosen  their  Eletto  and
other  officers  they  proceeded  regularly  to  business.  To
the  rallying  point  came  disaffected  troops  of  all  nations
from  far  and  near.  Never  since  the  beginning  of  the
great  war  had  there  been  so  extensive  a  military  rebel-
in Flanders and Friesland was an

army  of 23,952  men,  costing  per  month  206,431  dols.

The  anny  of  France  was  estimated  at 18,921  „  „  li5,370 „

Total  42,873

Certain  Individuals,  very  few  in  num-
ber, maintained  in  France*  „  „  42,360 „

Besides  the  above,  all  supplied  from
Spain,  there  were  maintained  by
contributions,  aids,  and  licenses  in
the  provinces 6,715  „  „  38,239  „

Expenses  of  navy „  „  10,958 „

Total  per  month  . . . . . . 473,358 „

Uelacion  de  lo  que  monta  la  paga  de  los  exercitos  que  su Jlagii.  entreliene  en
Flandes,  Brabante,  Frisia,  y  Francia,  1593. (Arch,  de  Simancas  IWS.)

By  another  paper  it  appears  th.it  at  this  time  there  were  serving  the  King  of  Spain
in  France  and  the  Netherlands —

German  infantry — Soldiers 1-1,994

Officers 1,298

16,292

Italian  Infantry — Soldiers 3  397

Officers ,.  ..  ..  ..  ,.  423

3,S20
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  Anno  1594,  MS.)
*  These  favoured  personages  were—

DukeofMayeniiB per  month,  12,000  dols.

Duke  of  Guise q  qqq

Balajrny ^^  7,200

Duko  of  Aumale  ^  1*800 "

M.  de Rosne '  *  "  IHoo "

M.  di-  St.  Pol  and  his  cavalry .  . *  ]  "  9960 "

Certain  gentlemen  in  Picardy .  . .  .  \[  2-100 "

Governor  of  La  Fere "  l!200 "

42,360 „

1594.  MUTINY  OF  SPANISH  TROOPS.  275

lion,  nor  one  in  which  so  many  veteran  officers,  colonels,
captains,  and  svibalterns,  took  part.  The  array  of  Philip
liad  at  last  grown  more  dangerous  to  himself  than  to  the
Hollanders.

The  council  at  Brussels  deliberated  anxiously  upon
the  course  to  be  pursued,  and  it  was  decided  at  last  to
negotiate  with  instead  of  attacking  them.  But  it  was
soon  found  that  the  mutineers  were  as  hard  to  deal  with
as  were  the  republicans  on  the  other  side  the  border.
They  refused  to  hear  of  anything  short  of  complete  pay-
ment of  the  enormous  arrears  due  to  them,  with
thorough  guarantees  and  hostages  that  any  agreement
made  between  themselves  and  the  archduke  should  be
punctually  carried  oiit.  IMcauwhile  they  ravaged  the
country  far  and  near,  and  levied  their  contributions  on
towns  and  villages,  up  to  the  very  walls  of  Brussels,  and
before  the  very  eyes  of  the  viceroy.

Moreover  they  entered  into  negotiation  with  Piince
Maurice  of  Nassau,  not  offering  to  enlist  under  his  flag,
but  asking  for  protection  against  the  king  in  exchange
for  a  pledge  meanwhile  not  to  serve  his  cause.  At  last
the  archduke  plucked  up  a  heart  and  sent  some  troops
against  the  rebels,  who  had  constructed  two  forts  on  the
river  Demer  near  the  city  of  iSichem.  In  vain  Velasco,
commander  of  the  expedition,  endeavoured  to  cut  off  the
supplies  for  these  redoubts.  The  vigour  and  audacity  of
the  rebel  cavalry  made  the  process  impossible.  Velascc
then  attempted  to  storm  the  lesser  stronghold  of  the
two,  but  was  repulsed  with  the  loss  of  two  hundred
killed.  Among  these  were  many  officers,  one  of  whom,
Captain  Porto  Carrero,  was  a  near  relative  of  Fuentes.
After  a  siege,  Velasco,  who  was  a  marshal  of  the  camp
of  considerable  distinction,  succeeded  in  driving  the
mutineers  out  of  the  forts  ;  who,  finding  their  position
thus  weakened,  renewed  their  negotiations  with  iMaurice.
They  at  last  obtained  permission  from  the  prince  to
remain  under  the  piotection  of  Gertru^ydenbnrg  and
Breda  until  they  could  ascertain  what  decision  the  aich-
duke  would  take.  Moie  they  did  not  ask  of  Maurice,
nor  did  he  require  more  of  them.

The  mutiny,  thus  described  in  a  few  lines,  had  occu-
pied nearly  a  year,  and  had  done  much  to  paralyze  for
that period  all the royal operations in the Nether-

T  2

276  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX,

lauds.  In  December  the  rebellions  troops  marched  out
December,  of  Sicbem  in  perfect  order,  and  came  to  Lang-
1594. straet  within  the  territory  of  the  republic.''^

The  archdiike  now  finding  himself  fairly  obliged  to
treat  with  them,  sent  an  otfer  of  the  same  terms  which
had  been  pro]iosed  to  mutineers  on  previous  occasions.
At  first  they  flatly  reused  to  negotiate  at  all,  but  at  last,
with  the  permission  of  Maurice,  who  conducted  himself
throughout  with  scrupulous  delicacy  and  made  no
attempts  to  induce  them  to  violate  their  allegiance  to
the  king,  they  received  Count  Bolgioso,  the  envoy  of  the
archduke.  They  held  out  for  payment  of  all  their
arrears  up  to  the  last  farthing,  and  insisted  on  a  hostage
of  rank  until  the  debt  should  be  discharged.  Full  for-
givement  of  their  rebellious  proceedings  was  added  as  a
matter  of  course.  Their  terms  were  accepted,  and  Fran-
cisco Tadiglia  was  assigned  as  a  hostage.  They  then
established  themselves,  according  to  agreement,  at  Tirle-
raont,  which  they  were  allowed  to  fortify  at  the  expense
of  the  province  and  to  hold  until  the  money  for  their
back  wages  could  be  scraped  together.  Meantime  they
received  daily  wages  and  rations  from  the  Government
at  Brussels,  including  thirty  stivers  a  day  for  each
horseman,  thirteen  crowns  a  day  for  the  Eletto,  and  ten
crowns  a  day  for  each  counsellor,  making  in  all  five
hundred  crowns  a  day.  And  here  they  remained,  living
exceedingly  at  their  ease  and  enjoying  a  life  of  leisure
for  eighteen  months,  and  until  long  after  the  death  of
the  archduke,  for  it  was  not  until  the  administra-
tion of  Cardinal  Albert  that  the  funds,  amounting  to
three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  crovms,  could  be
collected.'^

These  were  the  chief  military  exploits  of  the  podagric
Perseus  in  behalf  of  the  Flemish  Andromeda.

A  very  daring  adventure  was  however  proposed  to  the
archduke.  Philip  calmly  suggested  that  an  expedition
should  be  rapidly  fitted  out  in  Dunkirk,  which  should
cross  the  channel,  ascend  the  Thames  as  far  as  Rochester,
and  burn  the  English  fleet.  "  1  am  informed  Vjy  persons
well  acquainted  with  the  English  coast,"  said  the  king,
"  that  it  would  be  an  easy  matter  for  a  few  quick-sailing

73  Bentivoglio,  P.  III.,  lib.  i.  399,  400.  Metereu,  340,  341.  Coloma,  vii.  ISO",
ieqq.  '*  Bentivoglio,  et  al.,  ubi  sup.

1594. PHILIP'S  DESIGNS  ON  THE  ENGLISH  FLEET.  277

vessels  to  accomplish  tliis.  Two  or  three  thousand
soldiers  might  be  landed  at  Rochester  who  might  burn
or  sink  all  the  unarmed  vessels  they  could  find  there^
and  the  expedition  could  return  and  sail  oft'  again  before
the  people  of  the  country  could  collect  .in  sufticient  num-
bers to  do  them  any  damage."  The  archduke  was  in-
structed to  consult  with  Fuentes  and  Ybarra  as  to
whether  this  little  matter,  thus  parenthetically  indicated,
could  be  accomplished  without  too  much  risk  anil
trouble."

Certainly  it  would  seem  as  if  the  king  believed  in  the
audacity,  virility,  velocity,  alacrity,  and  the  rest  of  the
twenty-eight  virtues  of  his  governor-general,  even  more
seriously  than  did  John  Baptist  Houwaerts.  The  rmfor-
tunate  archduke  would  have  needed  to  be,  in  all  earnest-
ness, a  mythological  demigod  to  do  the  work  required  of
him.  With  the  best  part  of  his  army  formally  main-
tained by  him  in  recognised  mutiny,  with  the  great
cities  of  the  Ketherlands  yielding  themselves  to  the
republic  with  hardly  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  royal
forces  to  relieve  them,  and  with  the  country  which  he  was
supposed  to  govern,  the  very  centre  of  the  obedient  pro-
vinces, ruined,  sacked,  eaten  up  by  the  soldiers  of  Spain  ;
villages,  farmhouses,  gentlemen's  castles,  churches  plun-
dered ;  the  male  population  exposed  to  daily  butchery,
and  the  women  to  outrages  worse  than  death ; '''  it
seemed  like  the  bitterest  irony  to  propose  that  he  shoxild
seize  that  moment  to  outwit  the  English  and  Dutch  sea-
kiijgs  who  were  perpetually  cruising  in  the  channel,  and
to  undertake  a  "  beard-singeing "  expedition,  such  as
even  the  dare-devil  Drake  would  hardly  have  attempted.

"5  Philip to Ernest, 19 Feb. 1594.  manoas  MS.)

(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  "  As  to  getting  a  good  deal  of  money

"6  Such  pictures  are  painted  not  only  out  of  the  provinces  here  by  gentleness
by  republican  contempor.iries,  but  by  the  and  pernuasiun,  according  to  your  Ma-
governors  and  grandees  of  the  obedient  jesty's  suggestion,"  wrote  the  archduke,
provinces.  "Couio  va  arruinado,"  wrote  "your  Majesty  must  be  undeceived,
the  royal  governor  of  Hainault,  Prince  Jjothing  can  be  got  from  the  provinces.
CliitDay,  to  the  king,  "  cumido,  saqueado,  because  the  whole  patrimony  thereof  is
saquearan  las  aldeas,  casas  de  gentiles  consumed,  the  private  fortunes  are
hombres  y  iglesias,  se  matan  los  hombres,  destroyed,  and  everything  is  in  such  a
se  desvirgen  las  mozas  j'  mugeres  y  otros  brittle  condition  that  nothing  whatever
mil  maldades  que  se  conieten  cada  dia  a  can  be  undertaken  in  these  regions." —
mi  pesar  y  sin  que  de  ellas  se  ha  hecho  Instruecion  que  el  Archfl"^  Krnesto  dio
alguna  justicia  aunque  me  soy  quejado  y  al  B""  Max  Dietrichsteiu,  12  April,  1594.
lamentado  muchas  veces."— Chiniay  to  (Ibid.)
Philip,  17  March, 1594. (Arch,  de Si-

278  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Such  madcap  experiments  might  perhaps  one  day,  in
the  distant  future,  be  tried  with  reasonable  success,  but
hardly  at  the  beck  of  a  Spanish  king  sitting  in  his  easy
chair  a  thousand  miles  off,  nor  indeed  by  the  servants  of
any  king  whatever.

The  plots  of  murder  arranged  in  Brussels  during  this
administration  wei-e  on  a  far  more  extensive  scale  than
were  the  military'  plans.

The  Count  of  Fuentes,  general  superintendent  of
foreign  affairs,  was  especially  charged  with  the  depart-
ment of  assassination.  This  office  was  no  sinecure  ;  for
it  involved  much  correspondence,  and  required  great
personal  attention  to  minute  details.  Philip,  a  consum-
mate artist  in  this  branch  of  industry,  had  laid  out
a  good  deal  of  such  work  which  he  thought  could  best
be  carried  out  in  and  from  the  Netherlands.  Especially
it  was  desirable  to  take  oii",  by  poison  or  otherwise,
Henry  IV.,  Queen  Elizabeth,  Maurice  of  Nassau,  Olden-
Barneveld,  St.  Aldegonde,  and  other  less  conspicuous
personages.

Henry's  physician-in-chiet",  De  la  Eiviere,  was  at  that
time  mainly  occupied  with  devising  antidotes  to  poison,
which  he  well  knew  was  offered  to  his  master  on  frequent
occasions,  and  in  the  most  insidious  ways.  Andrada,
the  famous  Portuguese  poisoner,  amongst  others  is  said,
under  direction  of  Fuentes  and  Ybarra,  to  have  attempted
his  life  by  a  nosegay  of  roses  impregnated  with  so  subtle
a  powder  that  its  smell  alone  was  relied  upon  to  cause
death,"  and  De  la  Eiviere  was  doing  his  best  to  search
for  a  famous  Saxon  drug,  called  fable-powder,  as  a
counter-poison.  "  The  Turk  alarms  us,  and  well  he
may,"  said  a  diplomatic  agent  of  Henry,  "  but  the
Spaniard  allows  us  not  to  think  of  the  Turk.  And  what
a  strange  manner  is  this  to  exercise  one's  enmities  and
vengeance  by  having  recourse  to  such  damnable  artifices,
after  force  and  arms  have  not  succeeded,  and  to  attack
the  person  of  princes  by  poisonings  and  assassina-
tions." ''^

A  most  elaborate  attempt  upon  the  life  of  Queen
Elizabeth  early  in  this  year  came  near  being  successful.
A  certain  Portuguese  Jew,  Dr.  Lopez,  had  for  some
time  been  her  physician-in-ordinary. He  had  first  been

■^  Metenn,  xvi.  334.  '8  Bongar's  Lettres,  p.  271.

1594.  PLOT  TO  POISON  QUEKN  ELIZA I'.ETH.  279

received  into  her  service  on  the  recommendation  of
Don  Antonio,  the  pretender,  and  liad  the  reputation  of
great  learning  and  skill.  With  this  man  Count  Fiieiites
and  Stephen  Ybarra,  chief  of  the  financial  department  at
Brussels,  had  a  secret  understanding.  Their  chief  agent
was  Emanuel  Andrada,  who  was  also  in  close  communi-
cation with  Bernardino  de  Mendoza  and  other  leading
personages  of  the  Spanish  court.  Two  years  jireviously,
rhilip,  by  the  hands  of  Andrada,  had  sent  a  very  valu-
able ring  of  rubies  and  diamonds  as  a  present  to  Lopez,
and  the  dootur  had  bound  himself  to  do  any  service  for
the  King  of  Spain  that  might  be  required  of  hint.  An-
drada accordingly  wrote  to  Mendoza  that  he  had  gained
over  this  eminent  physician,  but  that  as  Lopez  was  poor
and  laden  with  debt,  a  high  price  would  be  required  for
his  work.  Hereupon  Fuentes  received  orders  from  the
King  of  Spain  to  give  the  Jew  all  that  he  could  in  reason
demand,  if  he  would  undertake  to  poison  the  queen. '^'*

It  now  became  necessary  to  handle  the  matter  with
great  delicacy,  and  Fuentes  and  Ybarra  entered  accord-
ingly into  a  correspondence,  not  with  Lopez,  but  with  a
certain  Ferrara  de  Gama.  These  letters  were  entrusted
to  one  Emanuel  Lewis  de  Tinoco,  secretly  informed  of
the  plot,  for  delivery  to  Ferrara.  Fuentes  charged
Tinoco  to  cause  Ferrara  to  encourage  Lopez  to  poison
her  Majesty  of  England,  that  they  might  all  have  "  a
merry  Easter."  ^^  Lopez  was  likewise  requested  to
inform  the  King  of  Spain  when  he  thought  he  could
accomplish  the  task.  The  doctor  ultimately  agreed  to
do  the  deed  for  fifty  thousand  crowns,  but  as  he  had
daughters  and  was  an  affectionate  parent,  he  stipulated
for  a  handsome  provision  in  marriage  for  those  young
ladies.*^  The  terms  were  accepted,  but  Lopez  wished  to
be  assured  of  the  money  first.

"  Having  once  undertaken  the  work,"  said  Lord
Burghley,  if  he  it  were,  "  he  was  so  gr-eedy  to  perform  it
that  he  would  ask  Ferrara  every  da}^,  '  When  will  the
money  come?  I  am  ready  to  do  the  service  if  the
answer  were  come  out  of  Spain.'  "  **^

"^  Account of Dr. Lopez's treason — "i  "  And  further  to  set  him  on,  he  was

doubtless  by  Lord  Burghley— in  Murdin's  to  be  put  in  mind  that  he  had  d;iughters

State  Papers,  ii.  669-t)75. Meteren,  xvi.  to  marry,  for  whom  the  king  would  pro-

334,  seqq. Reyd,  ix.  247,  218.  vide,  and  what  great  honours  and  rewards

**  Account  of  Dr.  Lopez's  treason,  &c.  he  should  have." — ibid.  *^  Ibid.

280  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XX.\'.

But  Philip,  as  has  been  often  seen,  was  on  principle
averse  to  paying  for  work  before  it  had  been  done.  Some
delay  occnrring,  and  the  secret,  thns  confided  to  so  many,
having  floated  as  it  were  imperceptibly  into  the  air,
Tinoco  was  arrested  on  suspicion  before  he  had  been
able  to  deliver  the  letters  of  Fuentes  and  Ybarra  to
Ferrara,  for  Ferrara,  too,  had  been  imprisoned  before  the
arrival  of  Tinoco.  Tne  whole  correspondence  was  dis-
covered, and  both  Ferrara  and '  Tinoco  confessed  the
plot.  Lopez,  when  first  arrested,  denied  his  guilt  very
stoutly,  but,  being  confronted  with  Ferrara,  who  told  the
whole  story  to  his  face  in  presence  of  the  judges,  he  at
last  avowed  the  crime.^^

They  were  all  condemned,  executed,  and  quartered  at
London  in  the  spring  of  1594.  The  queen  wished  to
send  a  special  envoy  to  the  archduke  at  Brussels,  to  com-
plain that  Secretary  of  State  Cristoval  de  Moura,  Count
Fuentes,  and  Finance  Minister  Ybarra — all  three  then
immediatel}'  about  his  person — were  thus  implicated  in
the  plot  against  her  life,  to  demand  their  punishment,  or
else,  in  case  of  refusal,  to  convict  the  king  and  the  arch-
duke as  accomplices  in  the  crime. ^  Safe  conduct  was
requested  for  such  an  envoy,  which  was  refused  by
Ernest  as  an  insulting  proposition  both  to  his  uncle  and
himself  The  queen  accordingly  sent  word  to  President
Kichardot  by  one  of  her  council,  that  the  whole  story
would  be  published,  and  this  was  accordingly  done.^^

83  Accmiiit of Dr. Lopez's treason,  and sovereign  a  princess  as ever the

Meteren,  Re3'd,  ubi  sup. ^  Rej-d,  2J8.  world  did  enjoy,  we  are  loalli,  in  reverend

85  Ibid. "But  because  by  fame  and  regard  of  the  name  and  title  oi' royal  and

hearsay,"  says  the  writ'^r  of  the  account,  suprerae  dignity,  to  have  him  vamed.other-

no  doubt  Lord  Burgliley, "  things  take  not  wise  than  cannot  he  avoided  in  the  simple

always  a  true  report,  and  1  know  the  narration  of  the  cause,  and  indeed,  if  1

quality  of  those  treasons  are  of  the  sort  may  utter  my  concaU,  a  greater  indignitij

so  heinous  as  all  sorts  of  men  desire  to  be  nor  breach  of  honour  never  was  gicen  to

truly  informed  of  the  same,  I  have  set  that  hiyh  degree,  violated  brj  the  havds  of

down  a  plain  and  short  declaration  of  the  him  irho should chiefly sustain that

treason of this perjured murtbering  calling. I  leave  him  to  the  judgment  of

traitor, without  alleging proofs,  which  God,  King  of  kings,  who  taketh  account

may  be  done  hereafter  at  large, of  their  doings What  may  be

and  also  that  the  practices  were  set  at  thought  of  them  who  use  so  higli,  so  holy

work,  as  manifestly  appeared  to  autheti-  so  reverent  a  thing  (the profession  of

tioal  proof,  by  him  who  either  in  respect  religion)  to  cloke  ambition,  revenge,  and

»f  bis  calling  or  of  her  Majesty's  deserv-  wicked  pr.actices  ?  Truly  the  age  wherein

iiig,  should  least  of  all  others  have  con-  we  are  born  sliall  endure  hereafter  note  of

sented  to  so  unprincely  an  act. Yet  it  is  reproach  for  tliis  kind  of  impiety  and

a  strange thing to  consider,  that  in  so  profanation." Most  truly,  0  Lord  High

cvid.'nt  a  matter,  touching  as  virtuous  Treasurer !

]a94.  CONSPIRACY  AGAINST  PRINCE  MAURICE.  281

Eai'ly  in  the  spring  of  this  same  year,  a  certain  Eeni-
chon,  priest  and  schuuhna.ster  of  Karaiir,  was  summoned
fiom  his  school  to  a  private  interview  with  Count
Berlaymont.  That  nobleman  very  secretly  informed  the
priest  that  the  King  of  Spain  wished  to  make  nse  of  him
in  an  affair  of  great  importance,  and  one  which  would  be
very  profitable  to  himself.  The  pair  then  went  together
to  Brussels,  and  proceeded  stiaightway  to  the  palace.
They  were  secretly  admitted  to  the  apartments  of  the
archduke,  but  the  priest,  meaning  to  follow  his  conductor
into  the  private  chamber,  where  he  pretended  to  recog-
nise the  person  of  Ernest,  was  refused  admittance.  The
door  was,  however,  not  entirely  closed,  and  he  heard,  as
he  declared,  the  conversation  between  his  liighness  and
Berlaymont,  which  was  carried  on  partly  in  Latin  and
partly  in  Spanish.  He  heard  them  discussing  the  ques-
tion— so  he  stated — of  the  recompense  to  be  awarded  for
the  business  about  to  be  undertaken,  and  after  a  brief
conversation,  distinctly  understood  the  archduke  to  say,
as  the  count  w^as  approaching  the  door,  "  I  will  satisfy
him  abundantly  and  with  interest."***^

Berlaymont  then  invited  his  clerical  guest  to  svipper —
so  ran  his  statement — and,  after  that  repast  was  finished,
informed  him  that  he  was  requested  by  the  ai'chduke  to
kill  Piince  Maurice  of  Nassau.  For  this  piece  of  work
he  was  to  receive  one  hundred  Philip-dollars  in  hand,
and  fifteen  thousand  more,  which  were  lying  ready  for
him,  so  soon  as  the  deed  should  be  done.

The  schoolmaster  at  first  objected  to  the  enterprise,
but  ultimately  yielded  to  the  persuasions  of  the  count
He  was  informed  that  Maurice  was  a  friendly,  familiar
gentleman,  and  that  there  would  be  opportunities  enough
for  carrying  out  the  project  if  he  took  his  time.  He  was
to  buy  a  goixl  pair  of  pistols  and  remove  to  the  Hague,
where  he  was  to  set  up  a  school,  and  wait  for  the  arrival
of  his  accomplices,  of  whom  there  were  six.  Berlaymont
then  caused  to  be  summoned  and  introduced  to  the  peda-
gogue a  man  whom  he  described  as  one  of  the  six.  Tlie
new  comer,  hearing  that  Eenichon  had  agreed  to  the
propositions  made  to  him,  hailed  him  cordially  as  comrade
and  promised  to  fJlow  him  very  soon  into  Holland.

86  Bor,  III.  815,  817.  Reyd,  i.x.  223-22S.  Metoren,  xvi.  335.  " Cumulate  et  largo
foeuore  satisfaciam."

282  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

Berlaymont  then  observecj  that  there  were  several  per-
sonages to  be  made  away  with,  besides  Prince  Maurice —
especially  Barneveld  and  St.  Aldegonde — and  that  the
hix  assassins  had,  since  the  time  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,
been  kept  in  the  pay  of  the  King  of  Spain  as  nobles,  to
be  employed  as  occasion  should  serve.

His  new  comrade  accompanied  lienichon  to  the  canal
boat,  conversing  by  the  way,  and  informed  him  that
they  were  both  to  be  sent  to  Leyden  in  order  to  entice
away  and  murder  the  young  brother  of  Maurice,  Frederic
Heruy,  then  at  school  at  that  place,  even  as  Philip
William^  eldest  of  all  the  brothers,  had  been  kidnapped
five-and-twenty  years  before  from  the  same  town.

Kenichon  then  disguised  himself  as  a  soldier,  proceeded
to  Antwerp,  Avhere  he  called  himself  Michael  de  Tri-
viere,  and  thence  made  his  way  to  Breda,  provided  with
letters  fiom  Berlaymont.  He  was,  however,  arrested  on
suspicion  not  long  after  his  arrival  there,  and  upon  trial
the  whole  plot  was  discovered.  Having  unsuccessfully
attempted  to  hang  himself,  he  subsequently,  without
torture,  made  a  full  and  minute  confession,  and  was
executed  on  the  3rd  June,  1594.*''

Later  in  the  year,  one  Pierre  du  Four,  who  had  been  a
soldier  both  in  the  States  and  the  French  service,  was
engaged  by  General  La  Motte  and  Counsellor  Assonle-

87  Bor,  Reyd,  Meteren,  ubi  sup. "I  regard  to  the  propoS'-.d  negotiations  lor

have  been,  with  others  of  the  council  of  peace,  in  which  these  murderous  attempts

state,  twice  or  thrice  at  the  examination  of  the  Spanish  king  and  his  represtnta-

of  the  prisoner. He  declareth  his  coming  tives  were  to  be  hurled  in  his  face  with

to  have  been  about  an  attempt  against  terrible  emphasis,  and spolie of them

Breda  (which  is  taken  to  be  but  a  made  with  the  indignation  of  an  lionest  English-

and  coloured  thing),  and  withal  to  see  if  man: — "  The  States-Oeneral,  not  doubting

be  could kill  the  Count  Maurice — that  but  that  the  discovery  of  the  said  murder,

B,Tlaymont  was  the  niov  'r  and  Krnestus  when  it  shall  be  made  known  and  pub-

pnvy  to  all,  but  as  yet  the  truth  of  the  lished  (whereby  it  may  appear  to  the

practice and circumstances he  opcneth  world  what  a  most  barbarous  and  abumin-

not  flatly,  which  will  be  drawn  from  him  able  course  the  King  of  Spain  and  his  do

ere  he be left. Of profession  he  is a  hold  by  practices  against  the  persons  of

priest  and  born  in  Namur,  having  named  kings and princes), will not only

six  others  employed  about  the  same  mis-  strengthen  and  confirm  the  people  here

chief,  but  the  follow  is  subtle  and  ready  in  their  resolution  to  continue  their  de-

In  his  words  to  colour  and  answer  any-  fence and wars, but make all other

thing,  so  that  all  is  not  to  be  credited  that  potentates and countries dislike and

conieth  from  him." — Gilpin  to  Burghley,  detest such heathenish  and wicked  at-

■2  April,  1594. (S.  P.  OfHce  MS  )  tempts  and  proceedings  to  the  p  rpetual

The  commissioner  alluded  to  the  forth-  dishonour,  reproach, and  infamy  of  the

coming  answer  of  the  States-General  in  author  and  dealers." — Ibid.

1594.  SECOND  PLOT  AGAINST  PRINCE  3IAURICE.  283

ville  to  attempt  the  assassination  of  Piince  Maurice.'''
La  Motte  took  the  man  to  the  palace,  and  pretended  at
least  to  introduce  him  to  the  chamber  of  the  archduke,
who  was  said  to  be  lying  ill  in  bed.  Du  Four  was
advised  to  enrol  himself  in  the  bod^'-guard  at  the  Hague,
and  to  seek  an  opportunity  when  the  prince  went  hunt-
ing, or  was  mounting  his  horse,  or  was  coming  from
church,  or  at  some  such  unguarded  moment,  to  take
a  shot  at  him.  "  Will  you  do  what  I  ask  ?  "  demanded
from  the  bed  the  voice  of  him  who  was  said  to  be  Ernest,
"will  you  kill  this  tyrant?"  "I  will,"  replied  the
soldier.  "Then  my  son,"  was  the  parting  benedic-
tion of  the  supposed  archduke,  "  3'ou  will  go  straight
to  paradise."  *^

Afterwards  he  received  good  advice  from  Assonleville,
and  was  assured  that  if  he  would  come  and  hear  a  mass
in  the  royal  chapel  next  morning,  that  religions  cere-
mony would  make  him  invisible  when  he  should  make
his  attempt  on  the  life  of  Maurice,  and  while  he  should
be  effecting  his  escape.""  The  poor  wretch  accordingly
came  next  morning  to  chapel,  where  this  miraculous
mass  was  duly  performed,  and  he  then  received  a  certain
portion  of  his  promised  reward  in  ready  money.  He
was  also  especially  charged,  in  case  he  should  be  arrested,
not  to  make  a  confession — as  had  been  done  by  those
previously  emjoloyed  in  such  work — as  all  complicity
with  him  on  part  of  his  employers  would  certainly
be  denied."^

The  miserable  dupe  was  arrested,  convicted,  executed  ;
and  of  c(mrse  the  denial  was  duly  made  on  the  17  Nov.
part  of  the  archduke,  La  Motte,  and  Assonle-  ^^^*-
ville.  It  was  also  announced,  on  behalf  of  Ernest,  that
some  one  else,  fraudulently  impersonating  his  Highness,
had  lain  in  the  bed  to  which  the  culprit  had  been  taken,
and  every  one  must  hope  that  the  statement  was  a  true
one.^^

Enough  has  been  given  to  show  the  peculiar  school  of
statesmanship  according  to  the  precepts  of  which  the
internal  concerns  and  foreign  allairs  of  the  obedient
Netherlands  were  now  administered. Poison  and  pistols

88  Meteren,  xvi.  335. Bor,  III.  882,  883. Reyd,  ix.  247.

89  Ibid. "  Figliol  mio,  ee tar?to quello che  m'avete  promossu  d'ainazzar  quel
tyranno,  andareto  diritto  in  Paradise."  'JO  Bor,  ubi  sup. ^i  ibij. 92  ibid

284  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX,

in  tlie  hands  of  obscure  priests  and  deserters  were  relied
on  to  bring  about  great  political  triumplis,  while  the
mutinous  royal  armies,  entrenched  and  defiant,  were
extorting  capitulations  from  their  own  generals  and  their
own  sovereign  upon  his  own  soil.

Such  a  record  as  this  seems  rather  like  the  exaggera-
tion of  a  diseased  fancy,  seeking  to  pander  to  a  coiTupt
public  taste,  which  feeds  greedily  upon  horrors ;  but,
unfortunate]}',  it  is  derived  from  the  register  of  high
courts  of  justice,  from  diplomatic  correspondence,  and
from  the  confessions,  without  torture  or  hope  of  free
pardon,  of  criminals.  For  a  crowned  king  and  his  high
functionaries  and  generals  to  devote  so  much  of  their
time,  their  energies,  and  their  money  to  the  murder  of
brother  and  sister  sovereigns,  and  other  illustrious  pei--
sonages,  was  not  to  make  after  ages  in  love  with  the
monarchic  and  aristocratic  system,  at  least  as  thus
administered.  Popular  governments  may  be  deficient  in
polish,  but  a  system  resting  for  its  chief  support
upon  bribery  and  murder  cannot  be  considered  lovely
by  any  healthy  mind.  And  this  is  one  of  the  lessons  to
be  derived  from  the  history  of  Philip  II,  and  of  the
Holy  League.

But  besides  mutiny  and  assassination  there  were  also
some  feeble  attempts  at  negotiation  to  characterize  the
Ernestian  epoch  at  Brussels.  The  subject  hardly  needs
more  than  a  passing  alhision.

Two  Flemish  juris-consults,  Otto  Hertius  and  Jer(une
Comans,  ottered'  their  services  to  the  archduke  in  the
peace-making  department.  Ernest  accepted  the  propo-
sition— although  it  was  strongly  opposed  by  Fuentes,
who  relied  upon  the  more  practical  agency  of  Dr.  Lopez,
Andrada,  Renichon,  and  the  rest — and  the  peace-makers
accordingly  made  their  a]-)pearance  at  the  Hague,  under
safe  conduct,  and  provided  with  very  conciliatory  letters
from  his  Highness  to  the  States-General.^^  In  all  ages
and  under  all  circumstances  it  is  safe  to  enlarge,  with
whatever  eloipience  may  be  at  command,  upon  the  bless-
ings of  peace  and  upon  the  horrors  of  war ;  for  the
appeal  is  not  difficult  to  make,  and  a  response  is  certain
in  almost  every  human  breast.  But  it  is  another  matter
to  descend  from  the  general  to  the  particular, and  to

93  Beutivogau,  P.  III.  lib.  i.  p.  330. Buv,  III.  810-812.

I

1594.  FUTILE  ATTEMPTS  AT  NEGOTIATION.  28-5

demonstrate  how  the  desirable  may  be  attained  and  the
horrible  averted.  The  letters  of  Ernest  were  full  of
benignity  and  aitection,  breathing  a  most  ardent  desire
that  the  miserable  war,  now  a  quarter  of  a  century  old,
should  be  then  and  there  terminated.  But  not  one  atom
of  concession  was  offered,  no  whisper  breathed  that  the
republic,  if  it  should  choose  to  lay  down  its  victorious
arms,  and  renounce  its  dearly  gained  independence,
should  share  any  different  fate  from  that  under  which  it
saw  the  obedient  provinces  gasping  before  its  eyes.  To
renounce  religious  and  political  liberty  and  self-govern-
ment, and  to  submit  unconditionally  to  the  authority  of
Philip  II.  as  administered  by  Ernest  and  Fuentes,  was
hardly  to  be  expected  as  the  result  of  the  three  years'
campaigns  of  Maurice  of  Nassau.

The  two  doctors  of  law  laid  the  affectionate  common-
places of  the  archduke  before  the  States-General,  each  of
them  making,  moreover,  a  long  and  flowery  oration  in
which  the  same  protestations  of  good  will  and  hopes  of
future  good-fellowship  were  distended  to  formidable
dimensions  by  much  windy  rhetoric.  Tlie  accusations
which  had  l)een  made  against  the  Government  of  Brussels
of  complicity  in  certain  projects  of  assassination  were
repelled  with  virtuous  indignation.^*

The  answer  of  the  States-General  was  wrathful  and
decided. ''°  They  informed  the  Commissioners
that  they  had  taken  up  arms  for  a  good  cause
and  meant  to  retain  them  in  their  hands.  They  ex-
pressed their. thanks  for  the  expressions  of  good  Avil]
which  had  been  offeied,  but  avowed  their  right  to  com-
plain before  God  and  the  world  of  those  who  under  pre-
text of  peace  were  attempting  to  shed  the  innocent  blood
of  Christians,  and  to  procure  the  ruin  and  destruction  of
the  Netherlands.  To  this  end  the  state-council  of  Spain
was  more  than  ever  devoted,  being  guilty  of  the  most
cruel  and  infamous  proceedings  and  projects.  They
threw  out  a  rapid  and  stinging  summary  of  their  wrongs ;
and  denounced  with  scorn  the  various  ln)llow  attempts
at  negotiation  during  the  preceding  twenty-five  years.
Coming  down  to  the  famous  years  1587  and  1588,  they
alluded  in  vehement  terms  to  the  fraudulent  peace  propo-
sitions which  had  been  thrown  as  a  veil  over  the  Spanish

»*  Bor,  HI.  810-812.  93  See  the  document  in  full  in  Bur,  HI.  813-815.

286  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

invasion  of  England  and  the  Armada ;  and  they  glanced
at  the  mediation-projects  of  the  emperor  in  1591  at  the
d  >ire  of  Spain,  while  armies  were  moving  in  force  from
Germany,  Italy,  and  the  Netherlands  to  crush  the  King
of  France,  in  order  that  Philip  might  establish  his
tyranny  overall  kings,  princes,  provinces,  and  republics.
That  the  Spanish  Government  was  secretly  dealing  with
the  emperor  and  other  German  potentates  for  the  exten-
sion of  his  universal  empire  appeared  from  intercepted
letters  of  the  king — copies  of  which  were  communicated
— from  which  it  was  sufficiently  plain  that  the  purpose
of  his  Majesty  was  not  to  bestow  peace  and  tranquillity
upon  the  Netherlands.  The  names  of  Fuentes,  Cle-
mente,  Ybarra,  were  sufficient  in  themselves  to  destroy
any  such  illusion.  They  spoke  in  blunt  terms  of  the
attempt  of  Dr.  Lopez  to  poison  Queen  Elizabeth,  at  the
instigation  of  Count  Fuentes,  for  fifty  thousand  crowns
to  be  paid  by  the  King  of  Spain  :  they  charged  upon
the  same  Fuentes  and  upon  Ybarra  that  they  had
employed  the  same  Andrada  to  murder  the  King  of
France  with  a  nosegay  of  roses ;  and  they  alluded
further  to  the  revelations  of  Michael  Eenichon,  who  was
to  murder  Maurice  of  Nassau  and  kidnap  Fi'ederic
William,  even  as  their  father  and  brother  had  been
already  murdered  and  kidnapped.^'^

For  such  reasons  the  archduke  might  understand  by
what  persons  and  what  means  the  good  people  of  the
Netherlands  were  deceived,  and  how  difficult  it  was  for
the  States  to  foi'get  such  lessons,  or  to  imagine  anything
honest  in  the  present  propositions.

The  States  declared  themselves,  on  the  contrary,  more
called  upon  than  ever  before  to  be  upon  tlie  watch
against  the  stealthy  proceedings  of  the  Spanish  council
of  state — bearing  in  mind  the  late  execrable  attempts  at
assassination,  and  the  open  war  which  was  still  carried
on  against  the  King  of  France.

And  although  it  was  said  that  his  Highness  was  dis-
pleased with  such  murderous  and  hostile  proceedings,
still  it  was  necessary  for  the  States  to  beware  of  the
nefarious  projects  of  the  King  of  Spain  and  his  council.-'

96  Bor,  III.  813-815.  of  th?  States,  and  characterised  it  as  so

37  Ibid. 'I'lie aroliduke,  as  micht  be arrogant  and  outrageous  that  he  would

Bupposcd,  was  not  pleased  with  the  reply not  have  allowed  his  Majesty's  ears  to

1594.  SECRET  MISSION  FROM  HENRY  TO  PHILIP.  287

After  the  conversion  of  Henry  IV.  to  the  Eoman
Church  had  been  duly  accomplished,  that  27  May,
monarch  had  sent  a  secret  envoy  to  Spain.  The  ^^^■'•
mission  of  tliis  agent — De  Varenne  Ly  name — excited
intense  anxiety  and  suspicion  in  England  and  Holland
and  among  the  Protestants  of  France  and  Germany.  It
was  believed  that  Henry  had  not  only  made  a  proposi-
tion of  a  separate  peace  with  Philip,  but  that  he  had
formally  but  mysteriously  demanded  the  hand  of  the
Infanta  in  marriage.  Such  a  catastrophe  as  this  seemed
to  the  heated  imaginations  of  the  great  body  of  Calvi-
nists  throughout  Europe,  who  had  so  faithfully  supported
the  King  of  Navarre  up  to  the  moment  of  his  great
apostasy,  the  most  cruel  and  deadly  treachery  of  all.
That  the  princess  with  the  many  suitors  should  come  to
reign  over  France  after  all — not  as  the  bride  of  her
own  father,  not  as  the  queen-consort  of  Ernest  the
Habsburger  or  of  Guise  the  Lorrainer,  but  as  the  lawful
wife  of  Henry  the  Huguenot — seemed  almost  too  as-
tounding for  belief,  even  amid  the  chances  and  changes
of  that  astonishing  epoch.  Yet  Duplessis-Mornay  avowed
that  the  project  was  entertained,  and  that  he  had  it
from  the  very  lips  of  the  secret  envoy  who  was  to
negotiate  the  marriage.  "  La  Varenne  is  on  his  way
to  Spain,"  wrote  Duplessis  to  the  Duke  of  Bouillon,
"  in  company  with  a  gentleman  of  Don  Bernardino  de
Mendoza,  who  brought  the  first  overtures.  He  is  to
bring  back  the  portrait  of  the  Infanta.  'Tis  said  that
the  marriage  is  to  be  on  condition  that  the  Queen
and  the  Netherlands  are  comprised  in  the  peace,  but
you  know  that  this  cannot  be  satisfactorily  arranged  for
those  two  parties.  All  this  was  once  guess-work,  but  is
now  history.'""*

That  eminent  diplomatist  and  soldier  Mendoza  had
already  on  his  return  from  France  given  the  King  of
Sjiain  to  understand  that  there  were  no  hopes  of  his
obtaining  the  French  crown  either  for  himself  or  lor
his  daughter,  that  all  the  money  lavished  on  the  chiefs

be  offended  by  it  had not  the  States,  98  "Je  le  sais  de  la  bouche  du  porteur,

like  insolent  people  as  they  were,  already  qui ne  le  m'osa  deguiser, parceque je

caused  it  to  be  printed  and published,  monstrai  en etre iiifvcrii,  ....  c'etait

Ernest  to  Philip,  4  Sept.  1594. (Arch,  alors  devination,  maintenant  histoire." —

de  Simancas  M^.)  Mem.  et  Covrsp.  iv.  5li3. 18  Sep'..  1593.

288  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  CaAP.  XXX

of  the  League  was  thrown  away,  and  that  all  theii"  pro-
mises were  idle  wind.  Menduza  in  consequence  had
fallen  into  contempt  at  court,  hut  Philip,  observing
apparently  that  there  might  have  been  something  correct
in  his  statements,  had  recently  recalled  him,  and,  nof-
withstanding  his  blindness  and  other  infii-mities,  was
disposed  to  make  ut-e  of  him  in  secret  negotiations.
Mendoza  had  accordingly  sent  a  confidential  agent  to
Henry  IV.  offering  his  good  offices,  now  that  the  king
had  i-eturned  to  tlie  bosom  of  the  Cln;reh.

This  individual,  whose  name  was  Nunez,  was  admitted
by  De  Bethune  (afterwards  the  famous  Due  de  Sully)
to  the  presence  of  the  king,  but  De  Bethune,  believing
it  probable  that  the  Spaniard  had  been  sent  to  assassinate
Henry,  held  both  the  hands  of  the  emissary  during  the
whole  interview,  besides  subjecting  him  to  a  strict  per-
sonal visitation  beforehand.  Nunez  stated  that  he  was
authorized  to  propose  to  his  Majesty  a  marriage  with
the  Infanta  Clara  Isabella,  and  Henry,  much  to  the
discontent  of  De  Bethune,  listened  eagerly  to  the  sug-
gesi'ion,  and  promised  to  send  a  secret  agent  to  Spain  to
confer  on  the  subject  with  Mendoza.

The  choice  he  made  of  La  Varenne,  whose  real  name
was  Guillaume  Fouquet,  for  this  mission  was  still  moi'e
oifensive  to  De  Bethune.  Fouquet  had  originally  been
a  cook  in  the  service  of  Madame  Catheiine,  and  was
famous  for  his  talent  for  larding  poultry,  but  he  had
subsequently  entered  the  household  of  Henry,  where  he
had  been  employed  in  the  most  degrading  service  which
one  man  can  render  to  another."^

On  his  appointment  to  this  office  of  secret  diplomacy
he  assumed  all  the  airs  of  an  ambassador,  while  Henry
took  great  pains  to  contradict  tlie  reports  which  were
spread  as  to  the  true  nature  of  this  mission  to  Spain.^°°

Duplessis  was,  in  truth, not  very far  wrong  in  his

98  "La  Varenne,"  said  Madame  Ca-  married  into  noblest  families;  "which  is

therine  on one  occasion, "tu as plus  the  more  remarkable,"  adds  Winwood,

gagne  a  porter  les  poulets  de  mon  frere,  " considering  the  services  wherein  he  is

liu'^  piqucr  les  miens." Memoires  de  employed  about  the  king,  which  is  to  be

Sully.  Llv.  vi.  p.  296,note  6. He  accumu-  the  Mezzano  for  his loves; the  place

lated  a  large  fortune  in  these  dignified  from  whence  he  came,  which  is  out  of

pursuits— having,  according  to  Winwood,  the  kitchen  of  Madame  the  king's  sister."

landed  estates  to  the  aimual  amount  of  —Memorials,  i.  380.

sixty  thousand  francs  a-year-and  gave  loo  Mem.  do  Sully,  iibi  sup.
la,  ge  dowries  to  his  daughters,  whom  he

1594-.  MISSION  OF  VAKENNE  TO  SPAIN.  289

conjectures,  but,  as  might  be  supposed,  Henry  was  most
anxious  to  conceal  these  secret  negotiations  with  his
Catholic  Majesty  from  the  Huguenot  chiefs  whom  he
had  so  recently  deserted.  "  'J'his  is  all  done  without
the  knowledge  of  the  Duke  of  Bouillon,"'  said  Calvaert,
'•  or  at  least  under  a  very  close  disguise,  as  he  himself
keenly  feels  and  confesses  to  me."'°'  The  envoy  of  the
republic,  as  well  as  the  leaders  of  the  Protestant  party
in  France,  were  resolved  if  possible  to  break  off  these
dark  and  dangerous  intrigues,  the  nature  of  which  they
so  shrewdly  suspected,  and  to  substitute  for  them  an
open  rupture  of  Henry  with  the  King  of  Spain,  and  a
formal  declaration  of  war  against  him.  None  of  the
diplomatists  or  political  personages  engaged  in  tliese
great  affairs,  in  which  the  whole  world  was  so  deeply
interested,  manifested  more  sagacity  and  insight  on  this
occasion  than  did  the  Dutch  statesmen.  We  have  seen
that  even  Sir  Edward  Stafford  was  deceived  up  to  a
very  late  moment,  as  to  the  rumoured  intentions  of
Henry  to  enter  the  Catholic  Chuicli.  Envoy  Edmonds
was  now  equally  and  completely  in  the  dark  as  to  the
mission  of  Varenne,  and  informed  his  Government  that
the  only  result  of  it  was  that  tlie  secret  agent  to  Spain
was  favoured,  through  the  kindness  of  Mendoza,  with  a
distant  view  of  Philip  II.  with  his  son  and  daughter  at
their  devotions  in  the  chapel  of  the  Escorial.  This  was
the  tale  generally  recounted  and  believed  after  the
agent's  return  from  Spain,  so  that  Varenne  was  some-
what laughed  at  as  having  gone  to  Spain  on  a  fool's
errand,  and  as  having  got  nothing  from  Mendoza  but  a
disavowal  of  his  former  propositions.  But  the  shrewd
Calvaert,  who  had  entertained  familiar  relations  with
La  Varenne,  received  from  that  personage  after  his  re-
turn a  very  different  account  of  his  excursion  to  the
Escorial  from  the  one  generally  circulated.  "  Coming
from  Monceaux  to  Paris  in  his  company,"  wrote  Calvaert
in a  secret  dispatch  to  the  States, "  I  had  the  whole

joi  Dcvcnter. Gedenkstukken,  &c.  u.  historians  show  the  writers  to  have  been

37. In  this  most  valu  ible  contribution  to  kei)t  as  much  in  the  dark  as  the  Enfclish

the  history  of  the Netherlands  and of  envoy  was,  an  cxiract  from  whoso  private

Europe,  the  learned  editor  has  bL'en  the  letter  to  Lord  Burglilcy  will  be  found  in

first  to  give -so  far  as  I  am  aware — the  note  2,  p. 216. Compare  13or,  111,  75ii.

true  history  of  tliis  remarkable  negotia-  763.
tion. The accounts by contemporary

VOL. III.  11

290  THE  UMTED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

story  from  liim.  The  chief  part  of  his  negotiations  with
Don  Bernardino  de  Mendoza  was  that  if  his  Majesty  (the
French  king)  would  abandon  the  Queen  of  England  and
your  Highnesses  (the  States  of  the  Netherlands),  there
were  no  conditions  that  would  be  refused  the  king,
including  the  hand  of  the  Infanta,  together  with  a  good
recompense  for  the  kingdom  of  Navarre.  La  Varenne
maintained  that  the  King  of  Spain  had  caused  these
negotiations  to  be  entered  upon  at  this  time  with  him
in  the  certain  hope  and  intention  of  a  definite  conclusion,
alleging  to  me  many  pertinent  reasons,  and  among  others
that  he,  having  been  lodged  at  Madrid,  through  the
adroitness  of  Don  Bernardino,  among  all  the  agents  of
the  League,  and  hearing  all  their  secrets  and  negotia-
tions, had  never  been  discovered,  but  had  always  been
supposed  to  be  one  of  the  League  himself.  He  said
also  that  he  was  well  assured  that  the  Infanta  in  her
heart  had  an  affection  for  the  French  king,  and  notwith-
standing any  resolutions  that  might  be  taken  (to  which
I  referred,  meaning  the  projects  for  bestowing  her  on
the  house  of  Austria)  that  she  with  her  father's  consent
or  in  case  of  his  death  would  not  fail  to  carry  out  this
marriage.  You  may  from  all  this,  even  oiit  of  the  pro-
posal for  compensation  for  the  kingdom  of  Navarre  (of
which  his  Majesty  also  let  out  something  to  me  inadver-
tently), collect  the  reasons  wliy  such  feeble  progress  is
made  in  so  great  an  occasion  as  now  presents  itself  for
a  declaration  of  war  and  an  open  alliance  with  your
Highnesses.  I  shall  not  fail  to  watch  these  events,  even
in  case  of  the  p;  ogress  of  the  said  resolutions,  notwith-
standing the  effects  of  which  it  is  my  opinion  that  this
secret  intrigue  is  not  to  be  abandoned.  To  this  end,
besides  the  good  intelligence  which  one  gets  by  means
of  good  fiiends,  a  continual  and  agreeable  presentation  of
oneself  to  his  Majesty,  in  order  to  see  and  hear  every-
thing, is  necessary." ^"'^

Certainly,  here  were  reasons  more  than  sufficient  wh}'
Henry  should  be  making  but  feeble  preparations  for
open  war  in  alliance  with  England  and  the  republic
against  Philip,  as  such  a  step  was  hardly  compatible
with  the  abandonment  of  England  and  the  republic
and  the  espousal  of  Philip's  daughter — projects  which

It''  Deventer,  ubi  sup.

1594.  MISSION  OF  VARENNE  TO  SPAIN.  201

Henry's  commissioner  had  just  been  discussing  with
Philip's  agent  at  Madrid  and  the  Escorial.

Truly  it  was  well  for  the  republican  envoy  to  watch
events  as  closely  as  possible,  to  make  the  most  of  intel-
ligence from  his  good  friends,  and  to  present  himself  as
frequently  and  as  agreeably  as  possible  to  his  Majesty,  that
he  might  hear  and  see  everything.  There  was  much  to
see  and  to  hear,  and  it  needed  adroitness  and  courage,
not  to  slip  01-  stumble  in  such  dark  ways  where  the  very
ground  seemed  often  to  be  sliding  from  beneath  the  feet.

To  avoid  the  catastrophe  of  an  alliance  between  Henry,
Philip,  and  the  Pope  against  Holland  and  England,  it
was  a  pressing  necessity  fur  Holland  and  England  to  force
Henry  into  open  war  against  Philip.  To  this  end  the
Dutch  statesmen  were  bending  all  their  energies.  Mean-
time Elizabeth  regarded  the  campaign  in  Artois  and
Hainault  with  little  favour.

As  he  took  leave  on  departing  for  France,  La  Varenne
had  requested  Mendoza  to  write  to  King  Henry,  but
the  Spaniard  excused  himself — although  professing  the
warmest  friendship  for  his  Majesty — on  the  ground  of
the  impossibility  of  addressing  him  correctly.  "  If  I
call  him  here  King  of  Navarre,  I  might  as  well  put  my
head  on  the  block  at  once,"  he  observed  ;  "  if  I  call  him
King  of  France,  my  master  has  not  yet  recognized
him  as  such ;  if  I  call  him  anything  else,  he  will  him-
self be  offended." '"=*

And  the  vision  of  Philip  in  black  on  his  knees,  with
his  children  about  him,  and  a  rapier  at  his  side,  passed
with  the  contemporary  world  as  the  only  f)henomenon
of  this  famous  secret  mission.^'**

i<»  Bor,  III.  759-763.  La  Varenne  therefore,  seeing  he  could

If**  Ibid. Envoy  Edmondes  gave  a  de-  draw  no  other  payment  from  him,  prayed

tailed  account  of  the  matter,  so  far  as  he  him,  to  the  end  his  journey  miglit  not  be

understood  it,  from  Dieppe: — "DonBer-  to  him  altogether  fruilli  ss, to procure

nardino,"  he  says,  "  asked  to  hear  what  that  he  might  have  a  sight  of  the  king

he  (La  Varenne)  had  in  charge,  to  which  and  the beauiios of the Scurinll, his

the  other  made  answer  to  have  nothing,  house,  which  he  accordingly  performed,

only  to  have  brought  eyes  to  see  and  ears  causing  him  to  be  secretly  brought  into

to  hear  what  he  would  propound the  chapel,  where he  saw  the  king  at

Whereupon Bernardino  made  him an-  mass,  of  purpose  attired  in  extraordinary

Bwer  that  he  wa.s  to  avow  nothing  that  demonstration  of  li\eliness,  wearing  tlie

his  said  servant  had  delivered,  which  he  sword  and  cape,  which  he  had  not  before

said  to  be  in  liim  a  less  shame  than  in  done  in  two  years ; w  ith  also  the  young

Mons. de Mayne having disavowed a  prince  and  the  Infanta  in  like  colour,  was

person  of  the  qiwlitv  of  Mons  de  Vill°roy.  brought  another  time  to  sec  him  walking

u  2

292

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXX.

But  Henry,  besides  this  demonstration  towards  Spain,
lost  no  time  in  despatching  a  special  minister  to  the
republic  and  to  England,  v/ho  was  instructed  to  make
the  most  profuse,  elaborate,  and  conciliatory  explana-
tions as  to  his  recent  conversion  and  as  to  his  future
intentions."^  Never  would  he  make  peace,  he  said,
with  Spain  without  the  full  consent  of  the  States  and  of
England ;  the  dearest  object  of  his  heart  in  making
his  peace  with  Iiome  having  been  to  restore  peace  to  his
own  distracted  realm,  to  bring  all  Christians  into  one
brotherhood,  and  to  make  a  united  attack  upon  the
grand  Turk — a  vision  which  the  cheerful  monarch
hardly  intended  should  ever  go  beyond  the  ivory  gate
of  dreams,  but  which  furnished  substance  enough  for
several  well-rounded  periods  in  the  orations  of  De
Morlans.

That  diplomatist,  after  making  the  strongest  represen-
tations to  Queen  Elizabeth  as  to  the  faithful  friendship
of  hif5  master,  and  the  necessity  he  was  under  of  pecuniary

in  tbe  garden,  but  without  speaking  at
all  unto  him.  Being  therein  so  satisfied,
and  therewith  dismissed,  Don  Bernardino
prayed  him  at  his  departure  to  excuse
him  to  the  king  for  not  writing  unto  him,
which  he  said  he  could  not  do  in  qualify-
ing him  as  appertained  n  ithout  disproving
the  justness  of  his  master's  quarrel,  and
thereby  incur  peril ;  and  to  give  him  an
undue  title,  that  he  was  too  much  his
servant,  and  only  therefore  to  let  him
know  that  so  as  tlie  pope  would,  speak  in
tbe  king's  favour,  there  is  very  good
rea?on  to  make  the  King  of  Spain  fo
underatand  to  a  union  with  hira,  and
that  is  all  the  return  he  briiigeth  of  his
negotiation ;  but  the  king  to  cover  the
shame  thereof  doth  pay  himself  with
great  contentment  of  the  good  service
which  by  that  occasion  he  hath  otherwise
done  him,  in  discovering,  by  haunting
uiikuown  divers  French  there  of  the
League,  a  dangerous  enterprise  xipon
Bordeaux,  which  having  on  his  return
declared  to  Slarshal  Matignon,  he  hath
thereupon  apprehended  certain  of  the
principal  of  the  town  conspirators  there-
in," iic.  Edmondes  to  Burghley,  13  Noy.
15D3.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Compare  Bor,
tihi  sup.

La  Varenne  was  subsequently  sent  to
England  to  give  a  report — more  or  less

ingenuous — of  his  Spanish  mission  to  tlie
queen.  She  at  first  refused  to  receive
him  on  the  ground  that  he  had  formerly
used  disrespectful  language  concerning
herself,  but  she  subsequently  relented.
He  reported  that  he  had  I'ound  the  king
remarkably  jolly  (gaillard)  and  healthy
for  his  years,  and  had  also  seen  the  rest
of  the  royal  family.  Don  Bernardino,
he  said,  who  liad  given  the  king  to
understand,  now  that  he  was  Catholic,
that  he  could  find  means  to  reconcile
him  with  the  king  his  master,  whereby
he  might  maintain  himself  peaceably
in  his  kingdom,  had  nevertheless
professed  ignorance  of  any  such  matter
when  he  found  that  Varenne  had  no
commission  except  to  see  arid  to  hear.
So  the  agent  was  fain — according  to  his
public  statement — to  content  himself  with
a  distant  view  of  the  most  catholic  king
at  his  devotions.  Noel  de  Caron  to  the
States-General,  4  Dec.  1593.  (Hague
Archives.)  No  one  but  Calvaert  seems
to  Ijave  succeeded  in  pumping  the  secret
envoy,  but  by  Calvaert  the  States-General
were  enlightened,  and  put  thoroughly  on
their  guard  as  to  the  possible  designs  of
Henry.

iia  De  Morlans  to  the  States-General,  in
Bor,  III.  721-726. 26  Aug.  1593.

1594. HENRY'S  PROFESSIONS  TOWARDS  THE  STATES. 293

and  military  assistance,  liad  received  generous  promises
of  aid  both  in  men  and  money — tliree  thousand  men
besides  the  troops  actual!}'  serving  in  Brittany— fiom
that  sagacious  sovereign,  notwithstanding  the  vehement
language  in  which  she  had  rebuked  her  royal  brother's
apostas3\"^  He  now  came-  for  the  same  purpose  to  the
Hague,  where  he  made  very  eloquent  harangues  to
the  States-General,  acknowledging  that  the  republic  had
ever  been  the  most  upright,  perfect,  and  undisguised
friend  to  his  master  and  to  France  in  their  darkest  days
and  deepest  affliction ;  that  she  had  loved  the  king  and
kingdom  for  themselves,  not  merely  hanging  on  to  their
prosperity,  but,  on  the  contrary,  doing  her  best  to  pro-
duce that  prosperity  by  her  contributions  in  soldiers,
ships,  and  subsidies.  "  The  king,"  said  De  Morlans,  "  is
deeply  grieved  that  he  can  prove  his  gratitude  only  in
words  for  so  many  benefits  conferred,  which  are  abso-
lutely without  example,  but  he  has  commissioned  nie  to
declare  that  if  God  should  ever  give  him  the  occasion,
he  will  piove  how  highly  he  places  your  friendship."

The  envoy  assured  the  States  that  all  fears  entertained
by  those  of  the  reformed  religion  on  account  of  the
conversion  of  his  Majesty  were  groundless.  Kothing
was  farther  from  the  king's  thoughts  than  to  injure
those  noble  spirits  with  whom  his  soul  had  lived  so
long,  and  whom  he  so  much  loved  and  honoured.  No
man  knew  better  than  the  king  did  the  character  of
those  who  professed  the  Meligion,  their  virtue,  valour,
resolution,  and  patience  in  adversity.  Their  numbers
had  increased  in  war,  their  virtues  had  been  purified  by
affliction,  they  had  never  changed  their  position,  whether
battles  had  been  won  or  lost.  Should  ever  an  attempt
be  made  to  take  up  arms  against  them  within  his  realms,
and  should  there  be  but  five  hundred  of  them  against
ten  thousand,  the  king,  remembering  their  faithful  and
ancient  services,  would  leave  the  greater  number  in
order  to  die  at  the  head  of  his  old  friends.  He  was
determined  that  they  should  participate  in  all  the
honours  of  the  kingdom,  and  with  regard  to  a  peace
with  Spain,  he  would  have  as  much  care  for  the  in-
terests of  the  United  Provinces  as  for  his  own.  But  a
peace  was  impossible  with  that  monarch,  whose  object

i»o  Bor.  III.  719.

294  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX,

was  to  maintain  Lis  own  realms  in  peace  while  he  kept
France  in  perpetual  revolt  against  the  king  whom  God
had  given  her.  The  King  of  Spain  had  trembled  at
Henry's  cradle,  at  his  yonth,  at  the  bloom  of  his  man-
hood, and  knew  that  he  had  inflicted  too  much  injury
upon  him  ever  to  be  on  friendly  terms  with  him.  The
envoy  was  instructv''d  to  say  that  his  master  never
expected  to  be  in  amity  with  one  who  had  ruined  his
house,  confiscated  his  property,  and  caused  so  much
misery  to  France ;  and  he  earnestly  hoped — without
presuming  to  dictate — that  the  States-General  would  in
this  critical  emergency  manifest  their  generosity.  If  the
king  were  not  assisted  now,  both  king  and  kingdom
would  perish.  If  he  were  assisted,  the  succour  would
bear  double  fruit. ^°^

The  sentiments  expressed  on  the  part  of  Henry
towards  his  faithful  subjects  of  the  Eeligion,  the  heretic
Queen  of  England,  and  the  stout  Dutch  Calvinists  who
had  so  long  stood  by  him,  were  most  noble.  It  was
pity  that,  at  the  same  moment,  he  was  proposing  to
espouse  the  Infanta,  and  to  publish  the  Council  of
Trent.

The  reply  of  the  States-General  to  these  propositions
of  the  French  envoy  was  favourable,  and  it  was  agreed
that  a  force  of  three  thousand  foot  and  five  hundred
horse  should  be  sent  to  the  assistance  of  the  king.
Moreover,  the  state-paper  drawn  up  on  this  occasion  was
conceived  with  so  much  sagacity  and  expressed  with  so
much  ehiquence,  as  particularly  to  charm  the  English
queen  when  it  was  communicated  to  her  Majesty.  She
protested  veiy  loudly  and  vehemently  to  Noel  de  Caron,
envoy  from  the  provinces  at  London,  that  this  response
on  the  part  of  his  Government  to  De  Morlans  was  one  of
the  wisest  documents  that  she  had  ever  seen.  "  In  all
their  actions,"  said  she,  ''  the  States-General  show  their
sagacity,  and  indeed,  it  is  the  wisest  Government  ever
known  among  republics.  I  would  show  you,"  she
added  to  the  gentlemen  around  her,  "  the  whole  of  the
paper  if  it  were  this  moment  at  hand."  ^°*

After  some  delays,  it  was  agreed  between  the  French
Government  and  that  of  the  United  Provinces,  that  the
king  should  divide  his  army  into  three  parts,  and  renew

W  Address  of  De  Morlans,  uM  sup.  los  ]Jor,  m.  726.

1594.  PREPARATIONS  FOR  WAR  WITH  SPAIN.  295

the  military  operations  against  Spain  with  the  expiration
of  the  tiaice  at  the  end  of  the  year  (1593).

One  body,  composed  of  the  English  contingent,  to-
gether with  three  thousand  French  horse,  three  thou-
sand Swiss,  and  four  thousand  French  harqnebus-men,
were  to  be  under  his  own  immediate  command,  and
were  to  act  against  the  enemy  wherever  it  shoidd  appear
to  his  Majesty  most  advantageous.  A  second  army  was
to  expel  the  rebels  and  their  foreign  allies  from  Nor-
mandy and  reduce  Rouen  to  obedience.  A  third  was
to  make  a  campaign  in  the  provinces  of  Artois  and
Hainault,  under  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  (more  commonly
called  the  Viscount  Turenne),  in  conjunction  with  the
forces  to  be  supplied  by  the  republic.  "  Any  treaty  of
peace  on  our  part  with  the  King  of  Spain,"  said  the
States -General,  "is  our  certain  ruin.  This  is  an  axiom.
That  monarch's  object  is  to  incorporate  into  his  own
realms  not  only  all  the  states  and  possessions  of  neigh-
bouring kings,  principalities,  and  powers,  but  also  all
Christendom,  aye,  the  whole  world,  were  it  possible.  We
joyfully  concur  then  in  your  Majesty's  resolution  to
carry  on  the  war  in  Artois  and  Hainault,  and  agree  to
your  suggestion  of  diversions  on  our  part  by  sieges  and
succour  by  contingents."  -"^^

Balagny,  meantime,  who  had  so  long  led  an  inde-
pendent existence  at  Cambray,  now  agreed  to  recognise
Henr3''s  authority,  in  consideration  of  sixty-seven  thou-
sand crowns  yearly  pension,  and  the  dignity  of  Marshal
of  France.'^"

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1594,  Buzanval,  the
regular  French  envoy  at  the  Hague,  began  to  insist
more  warmly  than  seemed  becoming  that  the  campaign
in  Artois  and  Hainault — so  often  the  base  of  military
operations  on  the  part  of  Spain  against  France — should
begin.  Further  achievements  on  the  part  of  Maurice
after  the  fall  of  Groningen,  were  therefore  renounced
for  that  year,  and  his  troops  went  into  garrison  and
winter  quarters."^  The  States-Geneial,  who  had  also
been  sending  supplies,  troops,  and  t^hips  to  Brittany  to
assist  the  king,  now,  after  soundly  rebuking  Buzanval
for  his  intemperate  language,  entrusted  their  contingent

iM  Bor,  III.  760.  110  Buzanval  to  the  States-General,  8  Dec.  1593,  apud

IkT,  ill.  76:),  76li.  "1  Bor,  846-«J9,

296  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

for  the  proposed  frontier  campaign  to  Count  Philip
Nassau,  who  accordingly  took  the  field  toward  the  end
of  the  year  at  the  head  of  twenty-eight  companies  of
foot  and  five  squadrons  of  cavalry.  He  made  his
junction  with  Turenne-Bouillon,  but  the  duke,  although
provided  with  a  tremendous  proclamation,  was  but  in-
differently supplied  with  troops.  The  German  levies,
long-expected,  were  slow  in  moving,  and  on  the  whole
it  seemed  that  the  operations  might  have  been  con-
tinued by  Maurice  with  more  eifect,  according  to  his
original  plan,  than  in  this  rather  desultory  fashion."^
The  late  winter  campaign  on  the  border  was  feeble  and
a  failure.

The  bonds  of  alliance,  however,  were  becoming  ver}'-
close  between  Henry  and  the  republic.  Despite  the
change  in  religion  on  the  part  of  the  king,  and  the
pangs  which  it  had  occasioned  in  the  hearts  of  leading
Netherlanders,  there  was  still  the  traditional  attraction
between  Fiance  and  the  States,  which  had  been  so
remarkably  manifested  during  the  administration  of
William  the  Silent.  The  republic  was  more  restive
than  ever  under  the  imperious  and  exacting  friendship
of  Elizabeth,  and,  feeling  more  and  more  its  own
strength,  was  making  itself  more  and  more  liable  to  the
charge  of  ingratitude,  so  constantly  huiied  in  its  face
by  the  queen.  And  Henry,  now  that  he  felt  himself
really  king  of  France,  was  not  slow  to  manifest  a
similar  ingratitude  or  an  equal  love  of  independence.
Both  monarch  and  repiiblic,  chafing  under  the  protection
of  Elizabeth,  were  drawn  into  so  close  a  union  as  to
excite  her  anger  and  jealousy — sentiments  which  in
succeeding  years  were  .to  become  yet  more  apparent.
And  now,  while  Henry  still  retained  the  chivalrous  and
flowery  phraseology,  so  sweet  to  her  ears,  in  his  per-
sonal communications  to  the  queen,  his  ministers  were
in  the  habit  of  using  much  plainer  language.  "  Mr.
de  Sancy  said  to  me,"  wrote  the  Netherland  minister  in
France,  Calvaert,  "  that  his  Majesty  and  your  High-
nesses (the  States-General)  must  without  long  delay
conchide  an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive.  In  regard
to  England,  which  perhaps  might  look  askance  at  this
matter,  he told me it  would be invited  also by  his

11-  Bor,  S46-ci59.

1594.  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  HENEY  AND  THE  REPUBLIC. 207

Majesty  into  the  same  alliance ;  but  if,  according  to
custom,  it  shilly-shallied,  and  without  coming  to  deeds
or  to  succour  should  put  him  off  with  words,  he  should
in  that  case  proceed  with  our  alliance  without  England,
not  doubting  that  many  other  potentates  in  Italy  and
Germany  would  join  in  it  likewise.  He  said  too,  that
he,  the  day  before  the  departure  of  the  English  ambas-
sador, had  said  these  words  to  him  in  the  presence  of
his  Majesty  ;  namely,  that  England  had  entertained  his
Majesty  sixteen  months  long  with  far-fetched  and  often-
repeated  questions  and  discontents,  that  one  had  sub-
mitted to  this  sort  of  thing  so  long  as  his  Majesty  was
only  king  of  Mantes,  Dieppe,  and  Louviers,  but  that  his
Majesty  being  now  king  of  Paris,  would  be  no  longer  a
sei"vaut  of  those  who  should  advise  him  to  suffer  it  any
longer  or  accept  it  as  good  pajment ;  that  England
must  treat  his  Majesty  according  to  his  quality,  and
with  deeds,  not  words.  He  added  that  the  ambassador
had  veiy  anxiously  made  answer  to  these  words,  and
had  promised  that  when  ho  got  back  to  England  he
would  so  arrange  that  his  Majesty  should  be  fully  satis-
fied, insisting  to  the  last  on  the  alliance  then  pro-
posed." ^^^

In  German}',  meanwhile,  there  was  much  protocolling,
and  more  hard  drinking,  at  the  Diet  of  Eatisbon.  The
Protestant  princes  did  little  for  their  cause  against  the
new  designs  of  Sj)ain  and  the  moribund  League,  while
the  Catholics  did  le^s  to  assist  Philip.  In  truth,  the
holy  Eoman  Empire,  threatened  with  a  Tuikish  invaision,
had  neither  power  nor  inclination  to  help  the  new
universal  emjjire  of  the  west  into  existence.  So  the
princes  and  grandees  of  Germany,  while  Amuiuth  was
knocking  at  the  imperial  gates,  busied  themselves  with
banqueting  atid  other  diplomatic  work,  but  feont  few
reiters  either  to  the  east  or  west."*

Philip's  envoys  were  indignant  at  the  apathy  dis-
c's M.  L.  van  Deventer — Gedenkstuk-  primipally  in  consideration  and  respect
ken  van  Johan  van  Oldenbarnevelt  en for  the  States,  whose  autliority  he  wishes

ziprn  Tijd,  ii.  20,  21. (22  April,  1594.)  De to  establish declaring  with  many

Sancy  expressed  himself  in  slill  stronger  -words  that  your  Highnesses  are  exactly
language  a  few  weeks  later :  "  Sliould  the  power  in  the  whole  world  to  which
England  delay  or  interpose  difficulties,"  the  King  is  under  the  greatest  obligation,
said  he,  "then  the  king  will  at  once  go  and  in  which  he  places  his  chief  con-
into  company  with  the  States-General;  fidence."  Ibid.  pp.  24,  25  (U  May,
aye,  he  will  brin^;  this  alliance  forwaid 1594.)  i"  Bor,  111.  852-85-1.

298  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXX.

played  towards  the  great  Catholic  cause,  and  felt
hiimbled  at  the  imbecility  exhibited  b}'  Spain  in  its
efforts  against  the  Netherlands  and  Fi-ance.  San
Clemen te,  who  was  attending  the  diet  at  Eatisbon,  was
shocked  at  the  scenes  he  witnessed.  "  In  less  than
three  months,"  said  that  temperate  Spaniard,  "  they
have  drunk  more  than  five  million  florins'  worth  of
wine,  at  a  time  when  the  Turk  has  invaded  the  frontiers
of  Germany  ;  and  among  those  who  have  done  the  most
of  this  consumption  of  wine,  there  is  not  one  who  is
going  to  give  any  assistance  on  the  frontier.  In  conse-
quence of  these  disorders  my  purse  is  drained  so  low,
that  unless  the  king  helps  me  I  am  ruined.  You  must
tell  our  master  that  the  reputation  of  his  grandeur  and
strength  has  never  been  so  low  as  it  is  now  in  Germany.
1  he  events  in  France  and  those  which  followed  in  the
Netherlands  have  thrown  such  impediments  in  the
negotiations  here,  that  not  only  our  enemies  make  sport
of  Marquis  Havre  and  myself,  but  even  our  friends —
who  are  very  few — dare  not  go  to  public  feasts,  wed-
dings, and  dinners,  because  they  are  olDliged  to  apologize
for  us."  ""^

Truly  the  world-empire  was  beginning  to  crumble.
"  The  emperor  has  been  desiring  tweuty  times,"  con-
tinued the  envoy,  "  to  get  back  to  Prague  from  the  Diet,
but  the  people  hold  him  fast  like  a  steer.  As  I  think
over  all  that  passes,  I  lose  all  judgment,  for  I  have  no
money,  nor  influence,  nor  leputation.  Meantime  I  see
this  rump  of  an  empire  keeping  itself  with  difficulty
upon  its  legs.  'Tis  full  of  wrangling  and  discord  about
religion,  and  yet  there  is  the  Turk  with  two  hundred
thousand  men  besieging  a  place  forty  miles  from  Vienna,
which  is  the  last  outpost. God  grant  it  may  last."  "®

Such  was  the  aspect  of  the  Christian  world  at  the
close  of  the  year  1594.

"5  Intercepted  letters  of  San  Clemente  to  Idiaquez,  30  Aug.  1594. Apud  Bor,  ubi
sup.  116  Ibid.

1595.  DECLARATION  OF  WAR  AGAINST  SPAIN.  299

CHAP  TEE XXXI.

Formal  declaration  of  war  against  Spain  —  Marriage  Festivities  —  Death  of  Archduke
Ernest  —  His  year  of  goYemment — Fuentes  declared  governor-general  —  Dis-
affection of  the  Duke  of  Arsohot  and  Count  Arenberg — heath  of  the  Duke  of
Arschut  —  Fuentes  besieges  Le  Catelet  —  The  fortress  of  Ham,  sold  to  the  Spanish
by  De  Gomeron,  besieged  and  taken  by  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  -  Execution  of  De
Gomeron  —  Deatli  of  Colonel  Verdugo  —  Siege  of  Dourlens  by  FuenttF—  Death  of
La  IMotte  —  Death  of  Charles  Mansfeld — Total  defeat  of  the  French  —  Murder
of  Admiral  de  ViUars  —  Dourlens  captured,  and  tlie  srarrison  and  citizens  put  to
the  sword  —  Military  operations  in  eastern  Netherlands  and  on  the  Khine  —
Maurice  lays  siege  to  Giroento  —  Mondragon  hastening  to  its  relief,  I'rince
Maurice  raises  the  siege  —  .Skh'mish  between  Maurice  and  Mondragon  —  Death  of
Philip  of  Nassau  —  Death  of  Mondragon  —  Bombardment  and  surrender  of  Weerd
Castle  —  Maurice  retires  into  winter  quarters  —  Campaign  of  Henry  IV  — He
besieges  Dijon  —  Surrender  of  Dijun.  Absolution  granted  to  Henry  hy  the  Pope  —
Career  of  Balagny  at  Cambray  —  Progress  of  the  siege  —  Capitulation  of  the  town
—  Suicide  of  the  Princess  of  Cam  bra j-,  wife  of  Balagny.

The  year  1595  opened  with  a  formal  declaration  of  war
by  the  King  of  France  against  the  King  of  iv  jan.
Spain.^  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  for  exactly  ^^^^■
how  many  years  the  war  now  declared  had  already  been
waged,  but  it  was  a  considerable  advantage  for  the
United  Netherlands  that  the  manifesto  had  been  at  last
regularly  issued.  And  the  manifesto  was  certainly  not
deficient  in  bitterness.  Xot  often  in  Christian  history
has  a  monarch  been  solemnly  and  officially  accused  by  a
brother  sovereign  of  suborning  assassins  against  his
life.  Bribery,  stratagem,  and  murder,  were,  however,  so
entirely  the  commonplace  machinery  of  Philip's  ad-
ministration as  to  make  an  allusion  to  the  late  attempt
of  Chastel  appear  quite  natural  in  Henry's  declaration  of
war.  The  king  further  stigmatized  in  energetic  lan-
guage the  long  succession  of  intrigues  by  which  the
monarch  of  Spain,  as  chief  of  the  tloly  League,  had
been  making  war  upon  him  by  means  of  his  own  sub-
jects, for  the  last  half  dozen  years.  Certainly  there  was
hardly  need  of  an  elaborate  statement  of  grievances.
The  deeds  of  Philip  required  no  herald,  unless  Henry
was  prepared  to  abdicate  his  hardly-earned  title  to  the
throne  of  France.

1  Bor,  IV.  XXX.  2,  seqq. Do  Thou,  xii.  lib.  iii.  pp.  312,  segg,

300  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

Nevertheless  the  politic  Gascon  subsequently  re-
gretted the  fierce  style  in  which  he  had  fulminated  his
challenge.  He  was  accustomed  to  observe  that  no  state
paper  required  so  much  careful  pondering  as  a  declara-
tion of  war,^  and  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  draw
up  such  a  document  without  committing  many  errors  in
the  phraseology.  The  man  who  never  knew  fear,  de-
spondency, nor  resentment,  was  already  instinctively
acting  on  the  principle  that  a  king  should  deal  with  his
enemy  as  if  sure  to  become  his  friend,  and  with  his
friends  as  if  they  might  easily  change  to  foes.^

The  answer  to  the  declaration  was  delayed  for  two
months.  When  the  reply  came  it  of  course  breathed
nothing  but  the  most  benignant  sentiments  in  regard  to
7  March,  France,  while  it  expressed  regret  that  it  was
1595.  necessary  to  carry  fire  and  sword  through  that
country  in  order  to  avert  the  unutterable  woe  wliich
tlie  crimes  of  the  heretic  Prince  of  Bearne  were  bringing
upon  all  mankind.*

It  was  a  solace  to  Philip  to  call  the  legitimate  king
by  the  title  borne  by  him  when  heir  presumptive,  and
to  persist  in  denying  to  him  that  absolution  which,  as
the  whole  world  was  aware,  the  Vicar  of  Christ  was  at
that  very  moment  in  the  most  solemn  manner  about  to
bestow  upon  him.

More  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  France  than  were  the
French  themselves,  he  was-  determined  that  a  foreign
prince — him.self,  his  daughter,  or  one  of  his  nephews —
should  supplant  the  descendant  of  St.  Louis  on  the
French  throne.  More  catholic  than  the  pope,  he  could
not  permit  the  heretic,  whom  his  Holiness  was  just
washing  whiter  than  snow,  to  intrude  himself  into  the
society  of  Christian  sovereigns.

The  winter  movements  by  Bouillon  in  Luxembourg,
sustciined  by  Philip  Nassau  campaigning  with  a  meagre
force  on  the  French  frontier,  were  not  very  brilliant
The  Netherland  regiments  quartered  at  Yssoire,  La
Ferte,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  accomplished  ver)'-
little,  and  their  numbers  were  sadly  thinned  by  dysen-
tery. A  sudden  and  successful  stroke,  too,  by  which
that  daring  soldier  Heiaugiere,  who  had  been  the  chief

2  Bor. De  Thou,  itbi  stip.  3  Sullj-,  I.  lib.  vii.  p.  412.

*  Bur. De  Thou,  ubi  suii.

1595. MARRIAGE  FESTIVITIES— DEATH  OF  ERNEST,  301

captor  of  Breda,  obtained  possession  of  the  town  and
castle  of  Hny,  produced  no  permanent  advantage.  This
place,  belonging  to  the  Bishop  of  Liege,  with  its  stone
bridge  over  the  Meuse,  was  an  advantageous  position
from  which  to  aid  the  operations  of  Bouillon  in  Luxem-
bourg. Heraugiere  was,  however,  not  sufficiently  rein-
forced, and  Huy  was  a  month  later  re-captured  by  La
Motte.^  The  campaigning  was  languid  during  that
winter  in  the  United  Ketherlands,  but  the  merry-making
was  energetic.  The  nuptials  of  Hohenlo  with  Mary,
eldest  daughter  of  William  the  Silent  and  own  sister  of
the  captive  Philip  William ;  of  the  Duke  of  Bouillon
with  Elizabeth,  one  of  the  daughters  of  the  same  illus-
trious prince  by  his  third  wife,  Charlotte  of  Bourbon ;
and  of  Count  Everard  Solms,  the  famous  general  of  the
Zeeland  troops,  with  Sabina.  daughter  of  the  tmfortunate
Lamoral  Egmont,  were  celebrated  with  much  pomp
during  the  months  of  February  and  March ."^  The  IStates
of  Holland  and  of  Zeeland  made  magnificent  presents  of
diamonds  to  the  brides  ;  the  Countess  Hohenlo  receiving
besides  a  yearly  income  of  three  thousand  florins  for  the
lives  of  herself  and  her  husband.^

In  the  midst  of  these  merry  marriage  bells  at  the
Hague  a  ftmeral  knell  was  sounding  in  Brussels.  20  FcTj.
On  the  20th  February,  the  governor-general  of  ^"^^•
the  obedient  Netherlands,  Archduke  Ernest,  breathed
his  last.  His  career  had  not  been  so  illustrious  as  the
promises  of  the  Spanish  king  and  the  allegories  of  school-
master Houwaerts  had  led  him  to  expect.  He  had  not
espoused  the  Infanta,  nor  been  crowned  King  of  France.
He  had  not  blasted  the  rebellious  Netherlands  with
Cyclopean  thunderbolts,  nor  unbound  the  Belgic  Andro-
meda from  the  rock  of  doom.  His  brief  year  of  govern-
ment had  really  been  as  dismal  as,  according  to  the
announcement  of  his  sycophants,  it  should  have  been
amazing.  He  had  accomplished  nothing,  and  all  that
was  left  him  was  to  die  at  the  age  of  forty-two,  over
head  and  ears  in  debt,  a  disappointed,  melancholy  man.
He  was  very  indolent,  enormously  fat,  very  chaste,  very
expensive,  fond  of  fine  liveries  and  fine  clothes,  so  solemn
and  stately  as  never  to  be  known  to  laugh,  but  utterly
without  capacity  either  as  a  statesman  or  a  soldier.* He

s  Bor.  IV  8,  10.  «  Ibid.  13.  ~  Ibid.  s  Ibid.  12. Coloma,  vlii.  162

302  THE  UMTED  ISETHERLANDS,  Chap.  XXXI.

"Would  have  shone  as  a  portly  abbot  niling  over  peaceful
friars,  but  he  was  not  born  to  ride  a  revolutionary  whirl-
wiud,  nor  to  evoke  older  out  of  chaos.  Past  and  Pre-
sent were  contending  with  each  other  in  fierce  elemental
strife  within  his  domain.  A  world  was  in  dying  agon3%
another  world  was  coming,  full-armed,  into  existence
within  the  hand-brcc.dth  of  time  and  of  space  where  he
played  his  little  part,  but  he  dreamed  not  of  it.  He
passed  away  like  a  shadow,  and  was  soon  forgotten.

An  effort  was  made,  during  the  last  illness  of  Ernest,
to  procure  from  hiui  the  appointment  of  the  elector  of
Cologne  as  temporary  successor  to  the  government,  but
Count  Fuentes  was  on  the  spot  and  was  a  man  of  action.
He  produced  a  power  in  the  French  language  from
Philip,  with  a  blank  for  the  name.  This  had  been  in-
tended for  the  case  of  Peter  Ernest  Mansfeld's  possible
death  during  his  provisional  administration,  and  Fuentes
now  claimed  the  right  of  inserting  his  own  narae.^

The  dying  Ernest  consented,  and  upon  his  death
Fuentes  was  declared  governor-general  until  the  king's
further  pleasure  should  be  known.

Pedro  de  Guzman,  Count  of  Fuentes,  a  Spaniard  of
the  hard  and  antique  type,  was  now  in  his  sixty-fourth
year.  The  pupil  and  near  relative  of  the  Duke  of  x\lva,
he  was  already  as  odious  to  the  Netherlanders  as  might
have  been  inferred  from  such  education  and  such  kin.
A  dark,  grizzled,  baldish  man,  with  high  steep  forehead,
long,  haggaid,  leathern  visage,  sweeping  beard,  and
large,  stern,  commanding,  menacing  eyes,  with  his
Brussels  I'utf  of  point  lace  and  his  Milan  coat  of  proof,
he  was  in  personal  appearance  not  unlike  the  terrible
duke  whom  men  never  named  without  a  shudder,
although  a  quarter  of  a  century  had  passed  since  he  had
ceased  to  curse  the  Netherlands  with  his  presence.
Elizabeth  of  England  was  accustomed  to  sneer  at  Fuentes
because  he  had  retreated  before  Essex  in  that  daring
commander's  famous  foray  into  Portugal.^"  The  queen
called  the  Spanish  general  a  timid  old  woman.  If  her
gibe  were  true,  it  was  fortunate  for  her,  for  Henry  of
France,  and  for  the  republic,  that  there  were  not  many
more  such  old  women  to  come  from  Spain  to  take  the

9  r)ipgo  de  Ybarra  to  Philip,  19  Feb.  1595.  Est.  de  Ybarra  to  the  Secretaries,
same  date. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  lo  Vol.  II.  of  this  worli,  p.  527.

1595.  FUENTES  APPOINTED  GOVERNOR-GENERAL.  303

place  of  the  veteran  cliief tains  who  were  destined  to  dis-
appear so  rapidly  during  this  year  in  Flanders.  He  was
a  soldier  of  fortune,  loved  fighting,  not  only  for  the  fight-
ing's sake,  but  for  the  prize-money  which  was  to  be
accumulated  by  campaigning,  and  he  was  wont  to  say
that  he  meant  to  enter  Paradise  sword  in  hand."

Meantime  his  appointment  excited  the  wrath  of  the
provincial  magnates.  The  Duke  of  Arschot  was  beside
himself  with  frenzy,  and  swore  that  he  would  never
serve  i;nder  Fuentes  nor  sit  at  his  council-board.  The
duke's  brother,  Marquis  Havre,  and  his  son-in-law,
Count  Arenberg,  shared  in  the  hatred,  although  they
tried  to  mitigate  the  vehemence  of  its  expression.  But
Arschot  swore  that  no  man  had  the  right  to  take  prece-
dence of  him  in  the  council  of  state,  and  that  the  appoint-
ment of  this  or  any  Spaniard  was  a  violation  of  the
charters  of  the  provinces  and  of  the  promises  of  his
Majesty. ^^  As  if  it  were  for  the  nobles  of  the  obedient
provinces  to  prate  of  charters  and  of  oaths !  Their
brethren  under  the  banner  of  the  republic  had  been
tea(;hing  Philip  for  a  whole  generation  how  they  could
deal  with  the  privileges  of  freemen  and  with  the  per-
jury of  tja-ants.  It  was  late  in  the  day  for  the  obedient
Netherlanders  to  remember  their  rights.  Havre  and
Arenberg,  dissembling  their  own  wrath,  were  abused
and  insulted  by  the  duke  when  they  tried  to  pacify  him.
They  proposed  a  compromise,  according  to  which
Arschot  should  be  allowed  to  preside  in  the  council  of
state  while  Fuentes  should  content  himself  with  the
absolute  control  of  the  army.  This  would  be  putting  a
bit  of  ftvt  in  the  duke's  mouth,  they  said."  Fuentes
would  hear  of  no  such  arrangement.  After  much  talk
and  daily  attempts  to  pacify  this  great  Netherlander,  his
relatives  at  last  persuaded  him  to  go  home  to  his  country
place.  He  even  promised  Arenberg  and  his  wife  that
he  would  go  to  Italy,  in  pursuance  of  a  vow  made  to  our
lady  of  Loretto.  Arenberg  privately  intimated  to
Stephen  Ybarra  that  there  was  a  certain  oil,  A^ery  apt  to
be  efficacious  in  similar  cases  of  irritation,  which  might
be  applied  with  prospect  of  success. If  his  father-in-law

11  Fruin. Tien  Jaaren,  &c.,  192,  note. is  Ybarra  to Philip,  6  March, 1595.

12  Est.  de  Ybarra  to  I'hilip,  6  March,  (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  "Unapellade
15?o. (Arch,  de  Simunca.s  M.^.)  sebo  en  la  boca  para  acquietarle."

304  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

could  only  receive  some  ten  thousand  florins  which  he
claimed  as  due  to  him  from  G(jvernment,  this  would  do
more  to  quiet  him  than  a  regiment  of  soldiers  could.  He
also  suggested  that  Fuentes  should  call  upon  the  duke,
while  Secretary  Ybarra  should  excuse  himself  by  sick-
ness for  not  having  ali-eady  paid  his  respects.  This  was
done.  Fuentes  call'^d.  The  duke  returned  the  call,  and
the  two  conversed  amicably  about  the  death  of  the
archduke,  but  entered  into  no  political  discussion.

Arschot  then  invited  the  whole  council  of  state,  except
John  Baptist  Tassis,  to  a  great  dinner.  He  had  prepaied
a  paper  to  read  to  them  in  which  he  represented  the
great  dangers  likely  to  ensue  from  such  an  appointment
as  this  of  Fuentes,  but  declared  that  he  washed  his  hands
of  the  consequences,  and  that  he  had  determined  to  leave
a  countjy  where  he  was  of  so  little  accotmt.  He  would
then  close  his  eyes  and  ears  to  everything  that  might
occur,  and  thus  escape  the  infamy  of  remaining  in  a
country  where  so  little  account  was  made  of  him.  He
was  urged  to  refrain  from  reading  this  paper  and  to
invite  Tassis.  After  a  time  he  consented  to  suppress  the
document,  but  he  manfully  refused  to  bid  the  objection-
able diplomatist  to  his  banquet."

The  dinner  took  place  and  passed  off  pleasantly
enough.  Arschot  did  not  read  his  manifesto,  but,  as  he
warmed  with  wine,  he  talked  a  great  deal  of  nonsense
which,  according  to  Stephen  Ybarra,  much  resembled  it,
and  he  vowed  that  thenceforth  he  would  be  blind  and
dinnb  to  all  that  might  occur.^^  A  few  days  later,  he
paid  a  visit  to  the  new  governor-general,  and  took  a
peaceful  farewell  of  him.  "Your  Majesty  knows  very
well  what  he  is,"  wrote  Fuentes :  "  he  is  nothing  but
talk."^®  Before  leaving  the  country  he  sent  a  bitter
complaint  to  Ybarra,  to  the  effect  that  the  king  had
entirely  forgotten  him,  and  imploring  that  financier's
influence  to  procure  fa-  him  some  gratuity  from  his
Majesty.  He  was  in  such  necessity,  he  said,  that  it
was  no  longer  possible  for  him  to  maintain  his  house-
hold."

And  with  this  petition  the  grandee  of  the  obedient

I*  Ybarra  to Philip,  6 March, 1595. Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.) "  Es  el  que  V,
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.) i^  Ibid.  Magd.  sabe,  contentandose  con  hablar."

>6  Fuentes  to  Philip,  23  March,  1595, i'  Letters  of  Ybarra,  mM  sty).

1595.  OPENING  OF  THE  CAMPAIGN.  306

provinces  shook  the  dust  from  his  shoes,  and  left  his
natal  soil  for  ever.  He  died  on  the  11th  December  of
the  same  year  in  Venice.

His  son  the  Prince  of  Chimay,  his  brotlier,  and  son-in-
law,  and  the  other  obedient  nobles,  soon  accommodated
themselves  to  the  new  administration,  much  as  they
had  been  inclined  to  bluster  at  first  about  theii-  privi-
leges. The  governor  soon  reported  that  matters  were
proceeding  very  smoothly.^*  1'here  was  a  genei'al
return  to  the  former  docility  now  that  such  a  disci-
plinarian as  Fuentes  held  the  reins.

The  opening  scenes  of  the  campaign  between  the
Spanish  governor  and  France  were,  as  usual,  in  Picardy.
The  Marquis  of  Varambon  made  a  demonstration  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Dourlens — a  fortified  town  on  the
river  Authie,  lying  in  an  open  plain,  very  deep  in  that
province — while  Fuentes  took  the  field  with  eight
thousand  men,  and  laid  siege  to  Le  Catelet.  He  had
his  eye,  howevei",  upon  Ham.  That  important  strong-
hold was  in  the  hands  of  a  certain  nobleman  called  iJe
Gomeron,  who  had  been  an  energetic  Leaguer,  and  was
now  disposed,  for  a  handsome  consideration,  to  sell  him-
self to  the  King  of  Spain.  In  the  auction  of  governors
and  generals  then  going  on  in  eveiy  part  of  France  it
had  been  generally  found  that  Henry's  money  was  more
to  be  depended  upon  in  the  long  run,  although  Philip's
bids  were  often  very  high,  and,  for  a  considerable  period,
the  payments  regular.  Gomeron's  upset  price  for  him-
self was  twenty-five  thousand  crowns  in  cash,  and  a
pension  of  eight  thousand  a  year.  Upon  these  terms  he
agreed  to  receive  a  Spanish  gai-rison  into  the  town,  and
to  cause  the  French  in  the  citadel  to  be  sworn  into  the
service  of  the  Spanish  king.  Fuentes  agreed  to  the  bar-
gain and  paid  the  adroit  tradesman,  who  knew  so  well
how  to  turn  a  penny  for  himself,  a  lai'ge  portion  of  the
twenty-five  thousand  crowns  upon  the  nail.

De  Gomeron  was  to  proceed  to  Brussels  to  receive  the
residue.  His  brother-in-law,  M.  d'Orville,  commanded
in  the  citadel,  and  so  soon  as  the  Spanish  troops  had
taken  possession  of  the  town  its  governor  claimed  full
payment  of  his  services.

18  Ybiirra  to  Philip,  16  March,  1595.
VOL. III.  X

306  THE  UNITED  KETIIERLANDS. Chap.  XXXI.

But  difficulties  awaited  liim  in  Brussels.  He  was
informed  that  a  Frencli  garrison  could  not  be  depended
upon  for  securing  the  fortress,  but  that  town  and  citadel
mast  both  be  placed  in  Spanish  hands.  De  Gomeron
loudly  protesting  that  this  was  not  according  to  contract,
was  calml}'  assured,  by  command  of  Fuentes,  that  unless
the  citadel  were  at  once  evacuated  and  surrendered,  he
would  not  receive  the  balance  of  his  twenty-five  thou-
sand crowns,  and  that  be  should  instantl}^  lose  his  head.
Here  was  more  than  De  Gomeron  had  bargained  for;
but  this  particular  branch  of  commerce  in  revolutionary
times,  although  lucrative,  has  always  its  risks.  De
Gomeron,  thus  driven  to  the  wall,  sent  a  letter  by  a
Spanish  messenger  to  his  brother-in-law,  ordering  him
to  surrender  the  fortress.  D'Orville — who  meantime
had  been  making  his  little  arrangements  with  the  other
pai'ty — protested  that  the  note  had  been  written  under
duress,  and  refused  to  comply  with  its  directions.

Time  was  pressing,  for  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  and  the
Count  of  St.  Pol  lay  with  a  considerable  force  in
the  neighbourhood,  obvi()usly  menacing  Ham.

Fuentes  accordingly  sent  that  distinguished  soldier
and  historian,  Don  Carlos  Coloma,  with  a  detachment
of  soldiers  to  Brussels,  with  orders  to  bring  Gomeron
into  camp.  He  was  found  seated  at  supper  with  his  two
young  brothers,  aged  respectively  sixteen  and  eighteen
years,  and  was  just  j^uttiug  a  cherry  into  his  mouth
as  Coloma  entered  the  room.  He  remained  absorbed  in
thought,  trifling  with  the  cherry  without  eating  it,
which  Don  Cai-los  set  down  as  a  proof  of  guilt.  The
three  brothers  were  at  once  put  in  a  coach,  together
with  their  sister,  a  nun  of  the  age  of  twenty,  and  con-
veyed to  the  head-quarters  of  Fuentes,  who  lay  before
Le  Catelet,  but  six  leagues  from  Ham.

Meantime  D'Orville  had  completed  his  negotiations
with  Bouillon,  and  had  agreed  to  surrender  the  fortress
so  soon  as  the  Spanish  troops  should  be  driven  fiom  the
town.  The  duke  knowing  that  there  was  no  time  to
lose,  came  with  three  thousand  men  before  the  place.
His  summons  to  surrender  was  answered  by  a  volley  of
cannon-shot  from  the  town  defences.  An  assault  was
made  and  i-epulsed,  D'lliunieres,  a  most  gallant  officer
and  a  favourite  of  King  Henry,  being  killed,  besides  at

1595.  HAM  TAKEN  BY  THE  FIIENCH.  307

least  two  hundred  soldiers.  The  next  attack  was  suc-
cessful, the  town  was  carried,  and  the  Spanish  garrison
put  to  the  sword.

D'Orville  then,  befcH'e  giving  up  the  citadel,  demanded
three  hostages  for  the  lives  of  his  three  brothers-in-
law.

The  hostages  availed  him  little.  Fuentes  had  already
sent  word  to  Gomerou's  mother,  that  if  the  bargain  were
not  fulfilled  he  would  send  her  the  heads  of  her  three
sons  on  three  separate  dishes.  The  distracted  woman
made  her  way  to  D'Orville,  and  fell  at  his  ieet  with
tears  and  entreaties.  It  was  too  late,  and  D'Orville,
imable  to  bear  her  lamentations,  suddenly  rushed  from
the  castle,  and  nearly  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards
as  he  fled  from  the  scene.  Two  of  the  four  cuirassiers,
who  alone  of  the  whole  garrison  accompanied  him,  were
taken  prisoners.  The  governor  escaped  to  unknown
regions.  Madame  de  Gomeron  then  appeared  before
Fuentes,  and  tried  in  vain  to  soften  him.  De  Gomeron
was  at  once  beheaded  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  camp.
The  two  younger  sons  were  retained  in  prison,  but  ulti-
mately set  at  liberty,"  The  town  and  citadel  were  thus
permanently  acquired  by  their  lawful  king,  who  was
said  to  be  more  afflicted  at  the  death  of  D'Humieres
than  rejoiced  at  the  capture  of  Ham.

Meantime  Colonel  Yerdugo,  royal  governor  of  Fries-
land,  whose  occupation  in  those  provinces,  now  so
nearl}'  recovered  by  the  republic,  was  gone,  had  led  a
force  of  six  thousand  foot  and  twelve  hundred  horse
across  the  French  border,  and  was  besieging  La  Ferte
on  the  Cher.  The  siege  was  relieved  by  Bouillon  on
the  26th  May,  and  the  Spanish  veteran  was  then  ordered
to  take  command  in  Burgundy.  But  his  days  26  May,
were  numbered,  lie  had  been  sick  of  dysenteiy  1595.
in  Luxembourg  during  the  summer,  but  after  apparent
recovery  died  suddenly  on  the  2nd  September,  and  of
course  was  supposed  to  have  been  poisoned.""  He  was
identifi.ed  with  the  whole  history  of  the  Netherland  wars.
Born  at  Talavera  de  la  Eeyna,  of  noble  parentage,  as  he
asserted — although  his  mother  was  said  to  have  sold
dogs'  meat,  and  he  himself  when  a  youth  was  a  private

19  Bor,  IV.  18,  19,  27. Metereii,  355,  336. De  Tliou,  .\ii.  38a,  se-^';. Coloma,  173.

20  Duyck,  662. Compare  Bor,  IV.  29.

X  2

308  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

soldier — lie  rose  by  steady  conduct  and  hard  fighting
to  considerable  eminence  in  his  profession.  He  was
governor  of  Harlem  after  the  famous  siege,  and  exerted
himself  with  some  success  to  mitigate  the  ferocity  of  the
Spaniards  towards  the  Netherlanders  at  that  epoch.
He  was  marshal-general  of  the  camp  under  Don  John  of
Austria,  and  distingiushed  himself  at  the  battle  of  Gem-
blours.  He  succeeded  Count  Eenneberg  as  governor  of
Friesland  and  Groningen,  and  bore  a  manful  part  in
most  of  the  rough  business  that  had  been  going  on  for
a  generation  o|^  mankind  among  those  blood-stained
wolds  and  morasses.  He  was  often  victorious,  and  quite
as  often  soundly  defeated  ;  but  he  enjoyed  campaigning,
and  was  a  glutton  of  work.  He  cared  little  for  parade
and  ceremony,  but  was  fond  of  recalling  with  pleasure
the  days  when  he  was  a  soldier  at  four  crowns  a  month,
v/ith  an  undivided  fourth  of  one  cloak,  which  he  and
three  companions  wore  by  turns  on  holidays.  Although
accused  of  having  attempted  to  procure  the  assassinati(jn
of  William  Lewis  Nassau,  he  was  not  considered  ill-
natured,  and  he  possessed  much  admiration  for  Prince
Maurice.  An  iron-clad  man,  who  had  scarcely  taken
harness  from  his  back  all  his  life,  he  was  a  type  of  the
Spanish  commanders  who  had  imjilanted  international
hatred  deeply  in  the  jSTetherland  soiil,  and  who,  now  that
this  result  and  no  other  had  been  accomplished,  were
rapidly  passing  away.  He  had  bean  baptised  Franco,
and  his  family  appellation  of  Verdugo  meant  execu-
tioner. Punning  on  these  names  he  was  wont  to  say,
that  he  was  frank  for  all  good  people,  but  a  hangman
for  heretics ;  and  he  acted  up  to  his  gibe.^^

Foiled  at  Ham,  Fuentes  had  returned  to  the  siege  of
Catelet,  and  had  soon  reduced  the  place.  He  then  turned
his  attention  again  to  Dourlens,  and  invested  that  city.
During  the  preliminary  operations,  another  veteran  com-
mander in  these  wars,  Valentin  Pardieu  de  la  Motte,
recently  created  Count  of  Eveibecque  by  Philip,  who
had  been  for  a  long  time  general-in-chief  of  the  artiileiy,
and  was  one  of  the  most  famous  and  experienced  officers
in  the  Spanish  service,  went  out  one  fine  moonlight
night  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy,  and  to  superintend  the
erection  of  batteries. As  he  was  usually  rather  careless

21  Ctoloma,  168™.

1595.  DEATH  AND  HISTORY  OF  LA  MOTTE,  309

of  liis  personal  safety,  and  rarely  known  to  put  on  his
armour  when  going  for  such  purposes  into  the  trenches,
it  was  remarked  with  some  surprise,  on  this  occasion,
that  he  ordered  his  page  to  bring  his  accoutrements,  and
that  he  armed  himself  cap-a-pie  before  leaving  his
quarters.  Nevertheless,  before  he  had  reached  tlie
redoubt,  a  bullet  from  the  town  struck  him  between
the  fold  of  his  morion  and  the  edge  of  his  buckler,  and
he  fell  dead  without  uttering  a  sound.-^

Here  again  was  a  great  loss  to  the  king's  service.  La
Motte,  of  a  noble  family  in  Burgundy,  had  been  educated
in  the  old  fierce  traditions  of  the  Spanish  system  of  war-
fare in  the  Netherlands,  and  had  been  one  of  the  very
hardest  insti'uments  that  the  despot  could  use  for  his
bloody  work.  He  had  commanded  a  company  of  horse
at  the  famous  battle  of  St.  Quentin,  and  since  that  open-
ing event  in  I'hilip's  reign  he  had  been  unceasingly
engaged  in  the  Flemish  wars,  Alva  made  him  a  colonel
of  a  Walloon  regiment ;  the  grand  commander  Eequesens
appointed  him  governor  of  Gravelines.  On  the  whole
he  had  been  tolerably  faithful  to  his  colours ;  having
changed  sides  but  twice.  After  the  pacification  of
Ghent  he  swore  allegiance  to  the  States-General,  and
assisted  in  the  bombardment  of  the  citadel  of  that  place.
Soon  afterwards  he  went  over  to  Don  John  of  Austria,
and  surrendered  to  him  the  town  and  fortress  of  Grave-
lines,  of  which  he  then  continued  governor  in  the  name
of  the  king.  He  was  fortunate  in  the  accumulation  of
office  and  of  money  ;  rather  unlucky  in  his  campaigning.
He  was  often  wounded  in  action,  and  usually  defeated
when  commanding  in  chief.  He  lost  an  arm  at  the
siege  of  Sluys,  and  had  now  lost  his  life  almost  by  an
accident.  Although  twice  married  he  left  no  children
to  inherit  his  great  estates,  while  the  civil  and  militar}'^
offices  left  vacant  by  his  death  were  sufficient  to  satisfy
the  claims  of  five  aspiring  individuals.  The  Count  of
Varax  succeeded  him  as  general  of  artillery  ;  but  it  was
difficult  to  find  a  man  to  replace  La  INIotte,  possessing
exactly  the  qualities  which  had  made  that  warrior  so
valuable  to  his  king.  The  type  was  ra])idly  disappear-
ing, and  most  fortunately  for  humanity,  if  half  the  stories
told  of  him  by  grave  chroniclers,  accustomed  to  discri-

22  Bur,  \  11.  39. Metercn,  356. Columa,  176.

310  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

minate  between  history  and  gossip,  are  to  be  believed.
He  had  committed  more  than  one  cool  homicide.
Although  not  rejoicing  in  the  same  patronymic  as  his
Spanish  coUeagne  of  Friesland,  he  too  was  ready  on
occasion  to  perform  hangman's  work.  ^\  hen  sergeant-
major  in  Flanders,  he  had  himself  vohmteered — so  ran
the  chronicle — to  do  execution  on  a  poor  wret(;h  found
guilty  of  professing  the  faith  of  Calvin ;  and,  with  his
own  hands,  had  prepared  a  fire  of  straw,  tied  his  victim
to  the  stake,  and  burned  him  to  cinders."^  Another
Netherlander  for  the  same  crime  of  heresy  had  been
condemned  to  be  torn  to  death  by  horses.  No  one  could
be  found  to  carry  out  the  sentence.  The  soldiers  under
La  Motte's  command  broke  into  mutiny  rather  than
permit  themselves  to  be  used  for  such  foul  purposes;
but  the  ardent  young  sergeant-major  came  forward,  tied
the  culprit  b\'  the  arms  and  legs  to  two  horses,  and  him-
self whipped  them  to  their  work  till  it  was  duly  accom-
plished.^* Was  it  strange  that  in  Philip's  reign  such
energy  should  be  rewarded  by  wealth,  rank,  and  honour  ?
Was  not  such  a  labourer  in  the  vineyard  worthy  of  his
hire  ?

Still  another  eminent  chieftain  in  the  king's  service
disappeared  at  this  time — one  who,  although  unscrupu-
lous and  mischievous  enough  in  his  day,  was  however
not  stained  by  any  suspicion  of  crimes  like  these.  Count
Charles  Mansfeld,  tired  of  governing  his  decrepit  parent
Peter  Ernest,  who,  since  the  appcjintment  of  Fuentes;,
had  lost  all  further  chance  of  governing  the  Netherlands,
had  now  left  Philip's  service  and  gone  to  the  Turkish
wars.  For  Amurath  111.,  who  had  died  in  the  early
days  of  the  year,  had  been  succeeded  by  a  sultan  as  war-
like as  himself.  Mahomet  III.,  having  strangled  his
nineteen  brothers  on  his  accession,  handsomely  buried
them  in  cypress  coifins  by  the  side  of  their  father,  and
having  subsequent!}^  sacked  and  drowned  ten  infant
princes  posthumously  born  to  Amui-ath,-^  was  at  leisure
to  carry  the  war  through  Transylvania  and  Hungary,
up  to  the  gates  of  Vienna,  with  renewed  energy.  The
Turk,  who  could  enforce  the  sti-enuous  rules  of  despotism
by  which  all  secundogenitures  and  collateral  claimants

23  Metcren,  nhi  sup.  2+  Ibid

25  l^e  Thou,  XIJ.  lib.  cxiv.  pp.  500,  feijq. Compare  Hcncra,  iii,  4T6,  411.

1595.  DEATH  Ob CHARLES  MANSFELD.  oil

in  the  Ottoman  family  were  tlius  provided  for,  was  a  foe
to  be  dealt  with  seriously.  The  power  of  the  Moslems
at  that  day  was  a  full  match  for  the  holy  Eoman  Empire,
riie  days  were  far  distant  when  the  grim  Turk's  head
was  to  become  a  mockery  and  a  show ;  and  when  a  pagan
empire,  born  of  carnage  and  bai'barism,  was  to  be  kept
alive  in  Europe  when  it  was  ready  to  die,  by  the  col-
lective efforts  of  Christian  princes.  Charles  Mansfeld
had  been  received  with  great  enthusiasm  at  the  court  of
Kudolph,  where  he  was  created  a  prince  of  the  Empire,
and  appointed  to  the  chief  command  of  the  Imperial
armies  under  the  Archduke  Matthias.  But  his  warfare
was  over.  At  the  siege  of  Gran  he  was  stricken  with
sickness  and  removed  to  Comorn,  where  he  lingered
some  weeks.  There,  on  the  2-1  th  August,  as  he  lay  half-
dozing  on  his  couch,  he  was  told  that  the  siege  was  at
last  successful ;  upon  which  he  called  for  a  goblet  of
wine,  drained  it  eagerly,  and  then  lay  resting  his  head
on  his  hand,  like  one  absorbed  in  thought.  W  hen  they
came  to  arouse  him  from  his  reverie  they  found  that  he
was  dead.""  His  father  still  remained  superfluous  in  the
Netherlands,  hating  and  hated  oy  Fuentes ;  but  no  longer
able  to  give  that  governor  so  much  annoyance  as  during
his  son's  life-time  the  two  had  been  able  to  create  for
Alexander  Farnese.  The  octogenarian  was  past  work
and  past  mischief  now ;  but  there  was  one  older  soldier
than  he  still  left  upon  the  stage,  the  grandest  veteran  in
Philip's  service,  and  now  the  last  survivor,  except  the
decrepit  Peter  Ernest,  of  the  grim  commanders  of  Alva's
school.  Christopher  IMondragon — that  miracle  of  human
endurance,  who  had  been  an  old  man  when  the  great
duke  arrived  in  the  Netherlands — was  still  governor  of
Antwerp  citadel,  and  men  were  to  speak  of  him  yet  once
more  befoi'e  he  passed  from  the  stage.

1  return  from  this  digression  to  the  siege  of  Doui'lens.
The  deathof  La  Motte  made  no  difference  in  the  plans  of
Fuentes.  He  was  determined  to  reduce  the  place  pre-
paratively  to  more  important  operations.  Bouillon  was
disposed  to  i-elieve  it,  and  to  that  end  had  assembled  a
force  of  eight  thousand  men  within  the  city  of  Amiens
By  midsummer  the  Spaniards  had  advanced  with  their
mines  and  galleries  close  to  the  walls  of  the  city. Mean-

26  Bor,  IV.  30. Mtteren,  349^o. De  Thou,  xii.  5'J3.

312  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

time  Admiral  Villars,  who  had  gained  so  much  renown
by  defending  Rouen  against  Henry  IV.,  and  who  had
subsequently  made  such  an  excellent  baigain  with  that
monarch  before  entering  his  service,^  arrived  at  Amiens.
24  July,  t)n  the  24th  July  an  expedition  was  sent  from
1595.  '  that  city  towards  Dourlens.  Bouillon  and  St.
Pol  commanded  in  person  a  force  of  six  hundred  picked
cavalry.  Villars  and  Sanseval  each  led  half  as  many,
and  there  was  a  supporting  body  of  twelve  hundred  mus-
keteers. This  little  army  convoyed  a  train  of  wagons,
containing  ammunition  and  other  supplies  for  the
beleaguered  town.  But  Fuentes,  having  sufficiently
strengthened  his  works,  sallied  forth  with  two  thousand
infantry,  and  a  flying  squadron  of  Spanish  horse,  to
intercept  them.  It  was  the  eve  of  Sr.  James,  the  patron
saint  of  Spain,  at  the  sound  of  whose  name  as  a  war-cry
so  many  battle-fields  had  been  won  in  the  Netherlands,  so
many  cities  sacked,  so  many  wholesale  massacres  per-
petrated. Fuentes  rode  in  the  midst  of  his  troops  with
the  royal  standard  of  Spain  floating  above  him.  On  the
other  hand  Villars,  glittering  in  magnificent  armour  and
mounted  on  a  superbly  caparisoned  charger,^^  came  on,
with  his  three  hundred  troopers,  as  if  about  to  ride  a
course  in  a  tournament.  The  battle  which  ensued  was
one  of  the  most  bloody  for  the  numbers  engaged,  and  the
victory  one  of  the  most  decisive  recordeel  in  this  war,
Villars  charged  prematurely,  furiously,  foolishly.  He
seemed  jealous  of  Bouillon,  and  disposed  to  show  the
sovereign  to  whom  he  had  so  recently  given  his  allegi-
ance that  an  ancient  Leaguer  and  Papist  was  a  better
soldier  for  his  purpose  than  the  most  grizzled  Huguenot
in  his  army.  On  the  other  hand  the  friends  of  Villars
accused  the  duke  of  faint-heartedness,  or  at  least  of  an
excessive  desire  to  save  himself  and  his  own  command.
The  first  impetuous  onset  of  the  admiral  was  successful,
and  he  drove  half-a-dozen  companies  of  Spaniards  before
him. But  he  had  ventured  too  far  from  his  supports.

27  He  hiid  been  receiving  six  thousiind  with  the  office of  Admiral  of France,

per  mouth  from  the  liing  of  Spain,  but  on  For  thr>se  considerations  he  had  surren-

reconciling  himself  wiih  Henry  after  the  dered  Rouen,  Havre  de Gran,  and the

surrender  of  Paris,  he  received  a  sum  of  castle  of  Pont  de  I'Arche. — Heriera,  Hist,

three  liundred  thousand ducatg, secured  geu.  del  Mimdo,  iii.  423.

by  estates  in  Normandy,  and a  yearly  ^s  "I\1uy  vistoso  y  galan  y  en  gallardo

pensionof'nii'ty  thousand  ducats,  together  cavallo.'"  Columa,  l.su.

1595.  DEFEAT  OF  THE  FRENCH  AT  DOURLENS.  313

Bouillon  bad  only  intended  a  feint,  instead  of  a  desperate
charge ;  the  Spaniards  were  rallied,  and  the  day  was
saved  by  that  cool  and  ready  soldier,  Carlos  Coloma.  In
less  than  an  hour  the  French  were  utterly  defeated  and
cut  to  pieces.  Bouillon  escaped  to  Amiens  with  five
hundred  men ;  this  was  all  that  was  left  of  the  expedi-
tion. The  horse  of  Yillars  was  shot  under  him,  and  the
admiral's  leg  was  broken  as  he  fell.  He  was  then  taken
prisoner  by  two  lieutenants  of  Carlos  Coloma ;  but  while
these  warrioi'S  were  enjoying,  by  anticipation,  the  enor-
mous ransom  they  should  derive  from  so  illustrious  a  cap-
tive, two  other  lieutenants  in  the  service  of  Marshal  de
Eosnes  came  up  and  claimed  their  share  in  the  prize.
While  the  four  were  wrangling,  the  admiral  called  out
to  them  in  excellent  Spanish  not  to  dispute,  for  he  had
money  enough  to  satisfy  them  all.  Meantime  the  Spanish
oommisi~ary-geneial  of  cavalry,  Contreras,  came  up,  re-
buked this  unseemly  dispute  before  the  enemy  had  been
fairly  routed,  and,  in  order  to  arrange  the  quan-el  im-
partiall}',  ordered  his  page  to  despatch  De  Villars  on  the
spot.  The  page,  without  a  word,  placed  his  arquebus  to
the  admiral's  forehead  and  shot  him  dead.

So  perished  a  bold  and  brilliant  soldier,  and  a  most  un-
scrupulous politician.  \\  hether  the  cause  of  his  murder
was  mere  envy  on  the  part  of  the  commissary  at  having
lost  a  splendid  opportunity  for  prize-money,  or  hatred  to
an  ancient  Leaguer  thus  turned  renegade,  it  is  fruitless
now  to  enquire.  Villars  would  have  paid  two  hundred
thousand  crowns  for  his  ransom,  so  that  the  assassination
was  bad  as  a  mercantile  speculation ;  but  it  was  pre-
tended by  the  friends  of  Contreras  that  rescue  was  at
hand.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  nothing  was  attempted
by  the  French  to  redeem  their  total  overthrow.  Count
Belin  was  wounded,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  Coloma.
Sanseval  was  killed  ;  and  a  long  list  of  some  of  the  most
brilliant  nobles  in  France  was  published  by  the  Spaniai  ds
as  having  perished  on  that  bloody  field.  This  did  not
prevent  a  large  number  of  these  victims,  however,  from
enjoying  excellent  health  for  many  long  years  after-
wards, although  their  deaths  have  been  duly  recorded  in
chronicle  from  that  day  to  our  own  times.-'-'

-'9  Bor,  IV.  28-30. Meteren,  356,  seqq. 413. De  Thou,  xii.  403,  seqq.
Culorua,  180,  se^'i- BeiUivoglio,  411,  412, Cuutit Lewis Nassau wrote to

his

314  THb;  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXL

But  Villars  and  Sanseval  were  certainly  slain,  and
Puentes  sent  their  bodies,  with  a  courteous  letter,  to  the
Duke  of  Nevers,  at  Amiens,  who  honoured  them  with  a
stately  funeral.^"

There  was  much  censure  cast  on  both  Bouillon  and
Villars  respectively  by  the  antagonists  of  each  chieftain  ;
and  the  contest  as  to  the  cause  of  the  defeat  was  almo.st
as  animated  as  the  skirmish  itself.  Bouillon  was  cen-
sured for  grudging  a  victory  to  the  Catholics,  and  thus
leaving  the  admiral  to  his  fate.  Yet  it  is  certain  that
the  Huguenot  duke  himself  commanded  a  sqiiadron  com-
posed almost  entirely  of  papists.  Villars,  on  the  other
hand,  was  censured  for  rashness,  obstinacy,  and  greedi-
ness for  distinction  ;  yet  it  is  probable  that  Fuentes  might
have  been  defeated  had  the  charges  of  Bouillon  been  as
determined  and  frequent  as  wei'e  those  of  his  colleague.
Savigny  de  Rosnes,  too,  the  ancient  Leaguer  who  com-
manded under  Fuentes,  was  accused  of  not  having  suffi-
ciently followed  up  the  victory,  because  unwilling  that
his  Spanish  friends  should  entirely  trample  upon  his  own
countrymen.  Yet  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  De
Eosnes  was  as  bitter  an  enemy  to  his  own  country  as  the
most  ferocious  Spaniard  of  them  all.  It  has  rarely  been
found  in  civil  war  that  the  man  who  draws  his  sword
against  his  fatherland,  under  the  banner  of  the  foreigner,
is  actuated  by  any  lingering  tenderness  for  the  nation
he  betrays ;  and  the  renegade  Frenchman  was  in  truth
the  animating  spirit  of  Fuentes  during  the  whole  of
his  brilliant  campaign.  The  Spaniard's  victories  were,
indeed,  mainly  attributable  to  the  experience,  the  genius,
and  the  rancour  of  De  Itosnes.^'

But  debates  over  a  lost  battle  are  apt  to  be  barren.
Meantime  Fuentes,  losing  no  time  in  controversy,  ad-
brother  John  that  besides  the  admiral could hardly be doubtful, but Count
(Villars),  not  more  than  three  or  at  most Lewis  was  not  in  the  battle,  nor  in  Franco
four  nobles  of  distinction  perished. He  at  the  time,  and  the  news  received  by
also  ascribes  the  defeat  entirely  to  the him  was  probably  inaccurate,
fuolhardiness  of  the  French,  who,  accord- 1  have  preferred  to rely mainly on
ing  to  his  statement,  charged  up  hill  and Carlos  Coloma,  who  fought  in  the  action,
through  a  narrow  road,  with  a  force  of  upon De Thou,  and upon the Dutch
one thousur.d foot  and three hundred chroniclers,  Bur,  Meteren,  and  others.
cavalry,  against  the  enemy's  whole  army. See  Groen  v.  Prinsterer. (Archives  II.
drawn  up  in  battle  array,  and  consisting Serie,  i.  342.)
of  two  thousand  hoi'se  and  ten  thousand so  j)ji,i.

infantry, well provided  with  artillery. 3i  f)e  Thou,  Bor,  Coloma,  Bentivoglio,
■Jertainly  the  result  of  such  an  encounter  et  al. Uhi  supra.

1593.  CArTURE  AND  SACK  OF  DOURLENS.  315

vanced  upon  the  city  of  Doiirlens,  was  rcpnlsed  twice,  and
carried  it  on  the  third  assault,  exactly  one  week  3;  juiy,
after  the  action  just  recounted.  The  Spaniards  1^95.
and  Leaguers,  howling  "  Eem ember  Ham !"  butchered
without  mercy  the  garrison  and  all  the  citizens,  save  a
small  number  of  prisoners  likely  to  be  lucrative.  Six
hundred  of  the  townspeople  and  two  thon.sand  five
hundred  French  soldiers  were  killed  within  a  few  hours.
\V'ell  had  Fuentes  profited  by  the  relationship  and  tuition
of  Alva !

The  Count  of  Dinant  and  his  brother  De  Eonsoy  were
both  slain,  and  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  florins
were  paid  in  ransom  by  those  who  escaped  with  life.
The  victims  were  all  buried  outside  of  the  town  in  one
■vast  trench,  and  the  effluvia  bred  a  fever  which  carried
off  most  of  the  surviving  inhabitants.  Dourlens  became
for  the  time  a  desert.^'"

Fuentes  now  received  deputies  with  congratulations
from  the  obedient  provinces,  especially  from  Hainault,
Artois,  and  Lille.  He  was  also  strongly  urged  to
attempt  the  immediate  reduction  of  Cambray,  to  which
end  those  envoys  were  empowered  to  offer  contributions
of  four  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  florins  and  a  con-
tingent of  seven  thousand  infantry.  Berlaymont,  too,
bishop  of  Tournay  and  archbishop  of  Cambray,  was
ready  to  advance  forty  thousand  florins  in  the  same
cause.

Fuentes,  in  the  highest  possible  spirits  at  his  success,
and  having  just  been  reinforced  by  Count  Bucquoy  with
a  fresh  Walloon  regiment  of  fifteen  hundred  foot  and
with  eight  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  mutineers  from
Tirlemont  and  Chapelle,  who  were  among  the  choicest
of  Spanish  veterans,  was  not  disposed  to  let  the  grass
grow  under  his  feet.  Within  four  days  after  the  sack  of
Dourlens  he  broke  up  his  camp,  and  came  before  Cam-
bray with  an  army  of  twelve  thousand  foot  and  nearly
four  thousand  horse.  But  before  narrating  the  further
movements  of  the  vigorous  new  governor-geneial,  it  is
necessary  to  glance  at  the  military  operations  in  the
eastern  part  of  the  Netherlands  and  upon  the  lihine.

Tlie  States-General  had  reclaimed  to  their  authority
nearly  all  that  important  region  l}"ing  be}ond  the  Yssel

32  i)e  Thou,  Bor,  Culoma,  Bontivoglio,  et  al. Ubi  supra.

316  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap,  XXXI

— the  solid  Frisian  bulwark  of  the  i-epublic— but  there
were  certain  points  nearer  the line  where  Upper  and
Nether  (_Jermauy  almost  blend  into  one,  which  yet  ac-
knowledged the  name  of  the  king. The  city  of  Groenlo,
or  Grol,  not  a  place  of  much  inteiest  or  importance  in
14  July, itself, but  close to the  frontier,  and  to  that
1595. destined  land  of  debate,  the  duchies  of  Cleves,
Juliers,  and  Bei'g, still  retained  its  Spanish  garrison.
On  the  14th  July  Prince  Maurice  of  Nassau  came  before
the  city  with  six  thousand  infantry,  some  companies  of
cavalry,  and  sixteen  pieces  of  artillery. He  made  his
21  July, approaches  in  form,  and  after  a  week's  opera-
1595. tions  he  fired  three  volleys,  according  to  his
custom,  and  summoned  the  place  to  capitulate.^^  Governor
Jan  van  Stirum  replied  sioutly  that  he  would  hold  the
place  for  God  and  the  king  to  tlie  last  drop  of  his  blood.
Meantime  there  was  hope  of  help  from  the  outside.

Maurice  was  a  vigorous  young  commander,  but  there
v«ras  a  man  to  be  dealt  with  who  had  been  called  the
"  good  old  Mondragon "  when  the  prince  was  in  his
cradle;  and  who  still  governed  the  citadel  of  Antwerp,
and  was  still  ready  for  an  active  campaign.

Christopher  Mondragon  was  now  ninety-two  years
old.  Not  often  in  the  world's  history  has  a  man  of  that
age  been  capable  of  personal  participation  in  the  joys  of
the  battle-field,  whatever  natural  reluctance  veterans
are  apt  to  manifest  at  relinquishing  high  military  control.
But  Mondragon  looked  not  with  env}'-  but  with  ad-
miration on  the  growing  fame  of  the  Nassau  chieftain,
and  was  disposed,  before  he  himself  left  the  stage,  to
match  himself  with  the  young  cdiampion.

!So  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  intended  demonstration  of
Maurice  against  Grol,  the  ancient  governor  of  x'Vntwerp
collected  a  little  army  by  throwing  together  all  the  troops
that  could  be  spared  from  the  vaiious  garrisons  within
his  command.  With  two  Spanish  regiments,  two  thou-
sand Swiss,  the  W^alloon  troops  of  De  Grisons,  and  the
Irish  regiment  of  Stanley — in  all  seven  thousand  foot  and
thirteen  hundred  horse — Mondragon  marched  straight
across  Brabant  and  Gelderland  to  the  Rhine.  At  Kaisei'-
werth  he  reviewed  his  forces,  and  announced  his  inten-
tion of  immediately  crossing  the  river. There  was  a

33  Bur,  XJI.  42.

1595.  KELIEF  OF  GROL.  317

mixrmiir  of  disapprobation  among  officers  and  men  at
what  they  considered  the  foolhardy  scheme  of  mad  old
Mondragon.  But  the  general  had  not  campaigned  a
generation  before,  at  the  age  of  sixty-nine,  in  the  bottom
of  the  sea,  and  waded  chin-deep  for  six  hours  long  of  an
October  night,  in  the  face  of  a  rising  tide  from  tlie  Ger-
man Ocean  and  of  an  army  of  Zeelanders,  to  be  frightened
now  at  the  summer  aspect  of  the  peaceful  iihine.

The  wizened  little  old  man,  walking  with  difficulty
by  the  aid  of  a  staif,  but  armed  in  proof,  with  plumes
waving  gallantly  from  his  iron  headpiece,  and  with  his
rapier  at  his  side,  ordered  a  chair  to  be  brought  to  the
river's  edge.  Then  calmly  seating  himself  in  the  pre-
sence of  his  host,  he  stated  that  he  should  not  lise  from
that  chair  until  the  last  man  had  crossed  the  river. ''^
Furthermore,  he  observed  that  it  was  not  only  his  pur-
pose to  relieve  the  city  of  Grol,  but  to  bring  Maurice  to
an  action,  and  to  defeat  him,  unless  he  retired.  The
soldiers  ceased  to  murmur,  the  pontoons  were  laid,
the  river  was  passed,  and  on  the  25th  July,  25  July,
Maurice,  hearing  of  the  veteran's  approach,  and  ^^^^•
not  feeling  safe  in  his  position,  raised  the  siege  of  the
city.^^  Burning  his  camp  and  everything  that  could  not
be  taken  with  him  on  his  march,  the  prince  came  in
perfect  order  to  Borkelo,  two  Dutch  miles  from  Grol.
Here  he  occupied  himself  for  some  time  in  cleaiing  the
country  of  brigands  who  in  the  disguise  of  soldiers  in-
fested that  region  and  made  the  little  cities  of  Deutecom,
Anholt,  and  Heerenberg  unsafe.  He  ordered  the  in-
habitants of  these  places  to  send  out  detachments  to
beat  the  bushes  for  his  cavalry,  while  Hohenlo  was
ordered  to  hunt  the  heaths  and  wolds  thoroughly  with
packs  of  bloodhounds  until  every  man  and  beast  to  be
found  lurking  in  those  wild  regions  should  be  extir-
pated. By  these  vigorous  and  cruel,  but  perhaps  neces-
sary, measures  the  brigands  were  at  last  extirpated,  and
honest  people  began  to  sleep  in  their  beds.^'^

On  the  18th  August  Maurice  took  up  a  strong  position
at  Bislich,  not  far  from  Wesel,  where  the  Kiver  jg  August.
Lippe  empties  itself  into  the Ehine. Mon-  1^95.
dragun,  with  his  army  strengthened  by  reinforcements

**  Camero,  lib.  xi.  cap.  xvi.  p.  374.  ^5  ibid. ;  compare  Bor,  XII.  42.

=«  Bor,  IV.  43.

318  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXI.

from  garrisons  in  Gelderland,  and  by  four  hundred  men
brought  by  Frederic  van  den  Berg  from  Grol,  had  ad-
vanced to  a  place  called  Walston  in  den  Ham,  in  the.
neighbourhood  of  \\'esel.  The  Lippe  flowed  between
the  two  hostile  forces.  Although  he  had  broken  up  his
sieo'e,  the  prince  was  not  disposed  to  renounce  his  whole
campaign  before  tiying  conclusions  with  his  veteran
antagonist.  He  accordingly  arranged  an  ambush  with
much  skill,  by  means  of  which  he  hoped  to  bring  on  a
general  engagement  and  destroy  Mondragon  and  his
little  army.

His  cousin  and  favourite  lieutenant,  Philip  Nassau,
isept.  was  entrusted  with  the  preliminaries.  That
1595.  adventurous  commander,  with  a  picked  force
of  seven  hundred  cavalry,  moved  quietl}'^  from  the  camp
on  the  evening  of  the  1st  [September.  He  took  with  him
his  two  younger  brothers,  Ernest  and  Lewis  Gunther,
who,  as  has  been  seen,  had  received  the  promise  of  the
eldest  brother  of  the  family,  William  Lewis,  that  they
should  be  employed  from  time  to  time  in  any  practical
work  that  might  be  going  forward.  Besides  these  young
gentlemen,  several  of  the  most  famous  English  and
Dutch  commanders  were  on  the  expedition  ;  the  brothers
Paul  and  Marcellus  Bax,  Captains  Parker,  Cutler,  and
Robert  Vere,  brother  of  Sir  Francis,  among  the  number.
Early  in  the  morning  of  the  2nd  September  the  force
2  Sept.  crossed  the  Lippe,  according  to  orders,  keepiug
1595.  a  pontoon  across  the  stream  to  secure  their
retreat.  They  had  instructions  thus  to  feel  the  enemy
at  early  dawn,  and,  as  he  was  known  to  have  foraging
parties  out  every  morning  along  the  margin  of  the  river,
to  make  a  sudden  descent  upon  their  pickets,  and  to
capture  those  companies  before  they  could  effect  their
escape  or  be  reinforced.  Afterwards  they  were  to  re-
treat across  the  Lippe,  followed,  as  it  was  hoped  would
be  the  case,  by  the  troops  of  Mondragon,  anxious  to
punish  this  piece  of  audacity.  Meantime  Maurice  with
five  thousand  infantry,  the  rest  of  his  cavalry,  and
several  pieces  of  artillery,  awaited  their  coming,  posted
behind  some  hills  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wesel.

The  plot  of  the  young  commander  was  an  excellent
one,  but  the  ancient  campaigner  on  the  other  side  or
the  river  had  not  come  all  the  way  from  his  comfortable

1595.  EXPLOIT  OF  MONDRAGON.  319

quarters  in  Antwerp  to  be  caught  ncapping  on  that
September  morning.  Mondragon  had  received  accurate
information  from  his  scouts  as  to  what  was  going  on  in
the  enemy's  camp,  and  as  to  the  exact  position  of  Mau-
rice. He  was  up  k)ng  before  daybreak — "  the  good  old
Christopher" — and  himself  personally  arranged  a  counter-
ambush.  In  the  fields  lying  a  little  back  from  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Lippe  he  posted  the
mass  of  his  cavalry,  supported  by  a  well-concealed  force
of  infantry.  The  pickets  on  the  stream  and  the  foiaging
companies  were  left  to  do  their  usual  work  as  if  nothing
were  likely  to  happen.

Philip  Nassau  galloped  cheerfully  forward,  according
to  the  well-concerted  plan,  sending  Cutler  and  Marcellus
Bax  with  a  handful  of  troopers  to  pounce  up(m  the
enemy's  pickets.  \\'hen  those  officers  got  to  the  usual
foraging  ground  they  came  upon  a  much  larger  cavalry
force  than  they  had  looked  for;  and,  suspecting  some-
thing wrong,  dashed  back  again  to  give  information  to
Count  Philip.  That  impatient  commander,  feeling  sure
of  his  game  unless  this  foolish  delay  should  give  the
foraging  companies  time  to  escajDe,  ordered  an  imme-
diate advance  with  his  whole  cavalry  force.  The  sheriff
of  Zallant  was  ordered  to  lead  the  way.  He  objected
that  the  pass,  leading  through  a  narrow  lane  and  open-
ing by  a  gate  into  an  open  field,  was  impassable  for
more  than  two  troopers  abreast,  and  that  the  enemy
was  in  force  bey(5nd.  Philip,  scorning  these  words  of
caution,  and  exclaiming  that  seventj^-five  lancers  were
enough  to  put  fifty  carabineers  to  rout,  put  on  his
casque,  drew  his  sword,  and  sending  his  brother  Lewis
to  summon  Kinski  and  Honck,  dashed  into  the  pass,
accompanied  b}^  the  two  counts  and  a  couple  of  other
nobles.  'I'he  sheriff,  seeing  this,  followed  him  at  full
gallop,  and  after  him  came  the  troopers  of  Barchon,  of
Du  Bois,  and  of  Paul  Bax,  riding  single  file  but  in  much
disorder.  When  they  had  all  entered  inextiicably  into
the  lane,  with  the  foremost  of  the  lancers  already  pass-
ing through  the  gate,  they  discovered  the  enemy's
cavalry  and  infantry  drawn  up  in  force  upon  the  watery,
heathery  pastures  beyond.  There  was  at  once  a  scene
of  confusion.  To  use  lances  was  impossible,  while  they
were  all  struggling  together  through  the  narrow  passage,

320  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXI.

offering  themselves  an  easy  prey  to  the  enemy  as  they
slowly  emerged  into  the  fields.  The  foremost  defended
themselves  with  sabre  and  pistol  as  well  as  they  could.
The  hindmost  did  their  best  to  escape,  and  rode  for
their  lives  to  the  other  side  of  the  river.  All  trampled
upon  each  other  and  impeded  each  other's  movements.
Thei-e  was  a  brief  engagement,  bloody,  desperate,  hand
to  hand,  and  many  Spaniards  fell  before  the  en-
trapped Netherlanders.  But  there  could  not  be  a
moment's  doubt  as  to  the  issue.  Count  Philip  went
down  in  the  beginning  of  the  action,  shot  through  the
body  by  an  arquebus,  discharged  so  close  to  him  that
his  clothes  were  set  on  fire.  As  there  was  no  water
within  reach  the  flames  could  be  extinguished  at  last
only  by  rolling  him  over  and  over,  wounded  as  he  was,
among  the  sand  and  heather.  Coimt  Ernest  Solms
was  desperately  wounded  at  the  same  time.  For  a
moment  both  gentlemen  attempted  to  effect  tlieir  escape
by  moimting  on  one  horse,  but  both  fell  to  the  ground
exhausted  and  were  taken  prisoners.  Ernest  Nassau
was  also  captured.  His  young  brother,  Lewis  Gunther,
saved  himself  by  swimming  the  liver.  Count  Kinski
was  mortally  wounded.  Robert  Vere,  too,  fell  into  the
enemy's  hands,  and  was  afterwards  murdered  in  cold
blood.  Marcellus  Bax,  who  had  returned  to  the  field
by  a  circuitous  path,  still  under  the  delusion  that  he
was  about  handsomely  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the
foraging  companies,  saved  himself  and  a  handful  of
cavalry  by  a  rapid  flight,  so  soon  as  he  discovered  the
enemy  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle.  Cutler  and  Parkei-
were  equally  fortunate.  There  was  less  than  a  hundred
of  the  States'  troops  killed,  and  it  is  probable  that  a
larger  number  of  the  Spaniards  fell.  But  the  loss  of
Philip  Nassau,  despite  the  debauched  life  and  somewhat
reckless  valour  of  that  soldier,  was  a  very  severe  one
to  the  army  and  to  his  family.  He  was  conveyed  to
Rheinberg,  where  bis  wounds  were  dressed.  As  he  lay
dying  he  was  courteously  visited  by  Mondragon,  and  by
many  other  Spanish  officers,  anxious  to  pay  their  re-
spects to  so  distinguished  and  warlike  a  member  of  an
illustrious  house.  He  received  them  with  dignity,  and
concealed  his  physical  agony  so  as  to  respond  to  their
conversation  as  became  a  Nassau. His  cousin,  Frederic

1595.  DEATH  OF  PHILIP  NASSAU.  32)

van  den  Beig,  who  was  among  the  visitors,  indecently
taunted  him  with  his  position  ;  asking  him  what  he  h:»d
expected  by  serving  the  cause  of  the  Beggars.  Pliilip
turned  from  him  with  impatience  and  bade  him  hold
his  peace. At  midnight  he  died.

William  of  Oi'ange  and  his  three  brethren  had  already
laid  down  their  lives  for  the  republic,  and  now  his
eldest  brother's  son  had  died  in  the  same  cause.  "  He
has  carried  the  name  of  Nassau  with  honour  into  the
grave,"  said  his  brother,  Lewis  William,  to  their  father. ^^
Ten  others  of  the  house,  besides  many  collateral  rela-
tions, were  still  in  arms  for  their  adopted  country.
Earely  in  history  has  a  single  noble  race  so  entirely
identified  itself  with  a  nation's  record  in  its  most  lieroic
epoch  as  did  that  of  Orange-Nassau  with  the  liberation
of  Holland.

Young  Ernest  Solms,  brother  of  Count  Everard,  lay
in  the  !~ame  chamber  with  Philip  K  assau,  and  died  on  the
following  day.  Their  bodies  were  sent  by  Mondragou
with  a  courteous  letter  to  Maurice  at  Bisslich.  Ernest
Nassau  was  subsequently  ransomed  for  ten  thousand
florins.^*®

This  skirmish  on  the  Lippe  has  no  special  significance
in  a  military  point  of  view,  but  it  derives  more  than
a  passing  interest,  not  only  from  the  death  of  many  a
brave  and  distinguished  soldier,  but  for  the  illustration
of  human  vigour  triumphing,  both  physically  and  men-
tally, over  the  infirmities  of  old  age,  given  by  the
achievement  of  Christopher  Mondragon.  Alone  he  had
planned  his  expedition  across  the  country  from  Antwerp,
alone  he  had  insisted  on  crossing  the  Ehine,  while
younger  soldiers  hesitated ;  alone  with  his  own  active
brain  and  busy  hands,  he  had  outwitted  the  famous
young  chieftain  of  the  Netherlands,  counteracted  his
subtle  policy,  and  set  the  counter-ambush  by  which  his
choicest  cavalry  were  cut  to  pieces,  and  one  of  his
bravest  generals  slain.  So  far  could  the  icy  blood  of
ninety -two  prevail  against  the  vigour  of  twenty- eight.

The  two  armies  lay  over  against  each  other,  with  the

37  Groen  v.  Priiisterer. (Archives  I.  2nd  series,  345.)

33  Bor,  IV.  42-44.  Metereu,  361'".  Uoyd,  xi.  271.  Coloma,  192.  Carncro,
xi.  xvi.  p.  574,  seqq.  Bentivoglio,  422,  423.  l>uyck,  052-659 ;  are  chief  authorities
for  the  Incidents  of  this  skirmish.

VOL. 111.  Y

322  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXL

river  between  them,  for  some  days  longer,  but  it  was
obvious  that  nothing  further  would  be  attempted  on
either  side.  Mondragon  had  accomplished  the  object
f(jr  which  he  had  marched  from  Brabant.  He  had
spoiled  the  autumn  campaign  of  Maurice,  and  was  now
disposed  to  return  before  winter  to  his  own  quarters.
He  sent  a  trumpet  accordingly  to  his  autagonist,  begging
him,  half  in  jest,  to  have,  more  consideration  for  his
iufinnities  than  to  keep  him  out  in  his  old  age  in  such
foul  weather,  but  to  allow  him  the  military  honour  of
being  last  to  break  up  camp.  Should  Maurice  consent
to  move  away,  Mondragon  was  ready  to  pledge  himself
not  to  pursue  him,  and  within  three  days  to  leave  his
own  entrenchments.

The  prop'jsition  was  not  granted,  and  very  soon  after-
11  Oct.  wards  the  Spaniard,  deciding  to  retire,  crossed
'593-  the  Ehine  on  the  11th  October.  Maurice  made
a  slight  attempt  at  pursuit,  sending  Count  ^Villiam
Lewis  with  some  cavalry,  who  succeeded  in  cutting  off
a  few  wagons.  The  army,  however,  returned  safely,  to
be  dispersed  into  various  garrisons.^®

This  was  Mondragoii's  last  feat  of  arms.  Less  than
3  Jan.  three  months  afterwards,  in  Antwerp  cita-
1096.  ^qI^  as  the  veteran  was  washing  his  hands
previously  to  going  to  the  dinner-table,  he  sat  down
and  died.***  Strange  to  say,  this  man — who  had  spent
almost  a  centuiy  on  the  battle-field,  who  had  been  a
soldier  in  nearly  every  war  that  had  been  waged  in  any
part  of  Europe  during  that  most  belligerent  age,  who
had  come  an  old  man  to  the  Netherlands  before  Alva's
arrival,  and  had  ever  since  been  constantly  and  per-
sonally engaged  in  the  vast  Flemish  tragedy  which  had
now  lasted  well  nigh  thirty  yeai-s — had  never  himself
lost  a  drop  of  blood.  Ilis  battle-fields  had  been  on  land
and  water,  on  ice,  in  fire,  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,
but  he  had  never  received  a  wound.  Nay,  more;  he  had
been  blown  up  in  a  fortress — the  castle  of  Danvilliers
in  Luxomlxjurg,  of  which  ho  was  goveinor—  where
all  perished  save  his  wife  and  himself,  and,  when  they
came  to  dig  among  the  ruins,  they  excavated  at  last  the
ancient  couple,  protected  by  the  framework  of  a  window

"  UijT. Metorcn. Reyd. Coloma. C'amero. Uentlvoglio. Duyck. Uhi  tup
■to  Bor,  IV.  167.

1595.  SURRENDER  OF  WEERD  CASTLE.  323

in  the  embrasure  of  which  they  had  been  seated,  with-
out a  scratch  or  a  bruise.*^  He  was  a  Biscayan  by
descent,  but  born  in  Medina  del  Campo.  A  strict  dis-
ciplinarian, very  resolute  and  pertinacious,  he  had  the
good  fortune  to  be  beloved  by  his  inferiors,  his  equals,
and  his  superiors.  He  was  called  the  fathei-  of  his  sol-
diers, the  good  Mondragon,  and  his  name  was  unstained
by  an 3'  of  those  deeds  of  ferocity  which  make  the
chronicles  of  the  time  resemble  rather  the  history  of
wolves  than  of  men.  To  a  married  daughter,  mother
of  several  children,  he  left  a  considerable  fortune."^

Maurice  broke  up  his  camp  soon  after  the  departure
of  his  antagoni^^t,  and  paused  for  a  few  days  at  Arnheim
to  give  honourable  burial  to  his  cousin  Philip  and  Count
Solms.  Meantime  Sir  Francis  Yere  was  detached,  with
three  regiments,  which  were  to  winter  in  Overyssel,
towards  Weerd  castle,  situate  at  a  league's  distance
from  Ysselsburg,  and  defended  by  a  gaiTison  of  twenty-
six  men  under  Captain  Pruys.  That  doughty  command-
ant, on  being  summoned  to  surrender,  obstinately
refused.  Vere,  according  to  Maurice's  orders,  then
opened  with  his  artillery  against  the  place,  which  soon
capitulated  in  great  panic  and  confusion.  The  captain
demanded  the  honours  of  war.  Vere  told  him  in  reply
that  the  honours  of  war  were  halters  for  the  garrison
who  had  dared  to  defend  such  a  hovel  against  artillery.
The  twenty-six  were  accordingly  ordered  to  draw  black
and  white  straws.  This  was  done,  and  the  twelve
drawing  white  straws  were  immediately  hanged  ;  the
thirteenth  receiving  his  life  on  consenting  to  act  as
executioner  for  his  comrades.  The  commandant  was
despatched  first  of  all.  The  rope  broke,  but  the  English
soldiers  held  him  under  the  water  of  the  ditch  until  he
was  drowned.  The  castle  was  then  thoroughly  sacked,
the  women  being  sent  unharmed  to  Ysselsburg.^^

Maurice  then  shipped  the  remainder  of  his  troops
along  the  Ehine  and  Waal  to  their  winter  quarters  and

*i  Bor,  IV.  167. Carriero,  378,  3(9.  dentation; looking  plain  and practical

■**  Bor,  IV.  167.  enough  among  the  holiday  suits  of  etvel

In  the  Ambras  Mus«um  in  the  Im-  inlaid  with  gold,  whicli  make  this  col-

periftl  Belvedere  palace  at  Vienna  may  lection  of  old  armour  tlie  most  reniarkuble

still  be  seen  a  black,  battered,  old iron  in  the  world.

oorslet  of  Mondragon,  with  many  an  in-  w  Bur,  IV.  47,  131.

Y 2

324  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

returned  to  the  Hague. It  was  the  feeblest  year's  work
yet  duue  by  the  stadholder.

Meantime  his  great  ally,  the  Huguenot-Catholic
Prince  of  Bearne,  was  making  a  dashing,  and,  on  the
whole,  successful  campaign  in  the  heart  of  his  own
kingdom.  The  constable  of  Castile,  Don  Ferdinando
de  Velasco,  one  of  Spain's  richest  grandees  and  poorest
generals,  had  been  sent  with  an  army  of  ten  thousand
men  to  take  the  field  in  Burgundy  against  the  man  with
whom  the  great  Farnese  had  been  measuring  swords  so
lately,  and  with  n(jt  unmingled  success,  in  Picardy.
Biron,  with  a  sudden  sweep,  took  possession  of  Aussone,
Autun,  and  Beaune,  but  on  one  adventurous  day  found
liimself  so  deeply  engaged  with  a  superior  force  of  the
enemy  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Fontaine  Fran^aise,  or
St.  Seine,  where  France's  great  river  takes  its  rise,  as
to  be  nearly  cut  oif  and  captured.  But  Henry  himself
was  already  in  the  field,  and  by  one  of  those  mad,  I'eck-
less  impulses  which  made  him  so  adorable  as  a  soldier
and  yet  so  profoundly  censurable  as  a  commander-in-
chief,  he  flung  himself,  like  a  young  lieutenant,  with  a
mex'e  handful  of  cavalry,  into  the  midst  of  the  fight,  and
at  the  imminent  peril  of  his  own  life  succeeded  in  res-
cuing the  marshal  and  getting  otf  again  unscathed.  On
other  occasions  Henry  said  he  had  fought  for  victory,
but  on  ihs.t  fur  dear  life;  and,  even  as  in  the  famous
and  foolish  skirmish  at  Aumale  three  years  before,  it
was  absence  of  enterprise  or  lack  of  cordiality  on  the
part  of  his  antagonists,  that  alone  prevented  a  captive
king  from  being  exhibited  as  a  trophy  of  triumph  for
the  expiring  League."

But  the  constable  of  Castile  was  not  born  to  cheer  the
heart  of  his  prudent  master  with  such  a  magnificent
spectacle.  Velasco  fell  back  to  Gray  and  obstinately
refused  to  stir  from  his  entrenchments,  while  Henry
28  June,  before  his  eyes  laid  siege  to  Dijon.  On  the
^^^^-  28th  June  the  capital  of  Burgundy  surrendered
to  its  sovereign,  but  no  temptations  could  induce  the
constable  to  try  the  chance  of  a  battle.*^  Henry's  move-
ments in  the  interior  were  more  successful  than  were
the  operations  nearer  the  frontier,  but  while  the  mon-

■"  Bor,  IV.  52,  seqq. De  Thou,  xii.  359-361,  seqq.  1.  112. Perefixe,  191,  192.
«  Bit,  ubC  sup.

1595.  HENRY  OBTAINS  ABSOLUTION.  325

arch  was  thus  cheerfully  fighting  for  his  crown  in
France,  his  envoys  were  winning  a  still  more  decisive
campaign  for  him  in  liome.

D'Ossat  and  I'erron  had  accomplished  their  diplomatic
task  with  consummate  ability,  and,  notwithstanding  the
efibrts  and  the  threats  ot  the  Spanish  ambassador  and  the
intrigues  of  his  master,  the  absolution  was  granted.  The
pope  arose  early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  August,  and
walked  barefoot  from  his  palace  of  Mount  Cavallo  to  the
church  of  Maria  Maggiore,  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  the
ground,  weeping  loudly  and  praying  fervently.  He  cele-
brated mass  in  the  church,  and.  then  returned  as  he  went,
saluting  no  one  on  the  road  and  shutting  himself  up  in
his  palace  afterwards.  The  same  ceremony  was  performed
ten  days  later  on  the  festival  of  our  Lady's  Ascension.
In  vain,  however,  had  been  the  struggle  on  the  part  of
his  Holiness  to  procure  from  the  Ambassador  15  August,
the  deposition  of  the  crown  of  France  in  his  '^'*^-
hands,  in  order  that  the  king 'might  receive  it  back
again  as  a  free  gift  and  concession  from  the  chief  pontifl".
Such  a  triumph  was  not  for  Eome,  nor  could  even  the
pul)lication  of  the  Council  of  Trent  in  France  be  con-
ceded except  with  a  saving  clause  "  as  to  matters  which
could  not  be  put  into  operation  without  troubling  the
repose  of  the  kingdom."  And  to  obtain  this  clause  the
envoys  declared.  "  that  they  had  been  obliged  to  sweat
blood  and  water."  *"

On  the  1 7th  day  of  September  the  absolution  was  pro-
claimed with  great  pomp  and  circumstance  from  the
gallery  of  St.  Peter's,  the  holy  father  seated  on  the
highest  throne  of  majesty,  with  his  triple  crown  on  his
head,  and  all  his  cardinals  and  bishops  about  him  in
their  most  effulgent  robes. ^'

The  silver  trumpets  were  blown,  while  artillery
roared  from  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,  and  for  two  succes-
sive nights  Rome  was  in  a  blaze  of  bonfires  and  illumina-
tion, in  a  whirl  of  bell-ringing,  feasting,  and  singing  of
hosannahs.  There  had  not  been  such  a  merry-making
in  the  eternal  city  since  the  pope  had  celebrated  solenni
thanksgiving  for  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew.  The
king  was  almost  beside  himself  with  raptxire  when  the

*'■  Lelttis  of  b'Ossat,  iu  Uor,  IV.  107,  seqq. Ue  Thou,  xii.  -168-179,  I.  113. *~  Jbid,

326  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap,  XXXI.

great  news  reached  him,  and  he  straight waj-  wrote  letters,
overflowing  with  gz-atitude  and  religious  enthusiasm,  to
the  pontiff,  and  expressed  his  regret  that  military  opera-
tions did  not  allow  him  to  proceed  at  once  to  Eome  in
person  to  kiss  the  holy  father's  feet.^

The  narrative  returns  to  Fuentes,  who  w^as  left  before
the  walls  of  Cambray.

That  venerable  ecclesiastical  city,  pleasantly  seated
amid  gardens,  orchards,  and  green  pastures,  watered  by
the  winding  Scheld,  was  well  fortified  a^er  the  old
manner,  but  it  was  especially  defended  and  dominated
by  a  splendid  pentagonal  citadel  built  by  Charles  V.  It
was  filled  with  fine  churches,  among  which  the  magnifi-
cent cathedral  was  pre-eminent,  and  with  many  other
stately  edifices.  The  population  was  thrifty,  active,  and
turbulent,  like  that  of  all  those  Flemish  and  Walloon
cities  which  the  spirit  of  mediaeval  industry  had  warmed
for  a  time  into  vehement  little  republics.

But,  as  has  already  been  depicted  in  these  pages,  the
Celtic  element  had  been  more  apt  to  receive  than  consis-
tent to  retain  the  generous  impress  which  had  once  been
stamped  on  all  the  Netherlands.  The  Walloon  provinces
had  fallen  away  from  their  Flemish  sisters  and  seemed
likely  to  accept  a  permanent  yoke,  while  in  the  territory
of  the  united  States,  as  John  Baptist  Tassis  was  at  that
very  moment  pathetically  observing  in  a  piivate  letter
to  Philip,  "  with  the  coming  up  of  a  new  generation
educated  as  heretics  from  childhood,  Mho  had  never
heard  what  the  word  king  means,  it  was  likely  to  happen
at  last  that  the  king's  memory  being  wholly  forgotten,
nothing  v.-ould  remain  in  the  land  but  heresy  alone."  *^
From  this  sad  fate  Cambray  had  been  saved.  Gavre
d'lnchy  had  seventeen  years  before  surrendered  the  city
t<)  the  Duke  of  Alen9on  during  that  unlucky  personage's
brief  and  base  career  in  the  Netherlands,  all  that  was
left  of  his  visit  being  the  semi-sovereignty  which  the
notorioiis  Balagny  had  since  that  time  enjoyed  in  the
ai'chiepiscopal  city.  This  personage,  a  natural  son
of  Monluc,  Bi.shop  of  Valence,  and  nephew  of  the  distin-
guished Marshal  Monluc,  was  one  of  the  most  fortunate

«8  MS.  Bethune.  Bibl.  Imp.  N".  8967,  fols.  10  and  20,  cited  In  Capefigne,  vii.  292,
iciq.  Feria  to  Philip,  17  Sept.  1595.  Arch,  de  Simancas  (laris)  b.  84.  2°,  oited  by
Capefigue,  uhi  sup.  «  Letter  ot  Ia<sis,  in  Bor.  IV \2G.

1595.  CAREER  OF  P.ALAGNY  AT  CAMliRAY.  327

and  the  most  ignoble  of  all  the  soldiers  of  fortune  who
had  played  their  parts  at  this  epoch  in  the  Netherlands.
A  poor  creature  himself,  he  had  a  heroine  for  a  wife.
Renee,  the  sister  of  Bussy  d'Amboise,  had  vowed  to
unite  herself  to  a  man  who  would  avenge  the  assassina-
tion of  her  brother  by  the  Count  Montsoreau.*  Balagny
readily  agreed  to  perform  the  deed,  and  accordingly
espoused  the  high-born  dame,  but  it  does  not  appear  that
he  ever  wreaked  her  vengeance  on  the  murderer.  He
had  now  governed  Cambray  until  the  citizens  and  the
whole  countiy-side  were  galled  and  exhausted  by  his
grinding  tj'ranny,  his  inordinate  pride,  and  his  infamous
extortions.^^  His  latest  achievement  had  been  to  force
upon  his  subjects  a  copper  currency  bearing  the  nominal
value  of  silver,  with  the  same  blasting  effects  which
such  experiments  in  political  economy  are  apt  to  produce
on  princes  and  peoples.  He  had  been  a  Eoyalist,  a
Guisist,  a  Leaguer,  a  Dutch  republican,  by  turns,  and
had  betrayed  all  the  parties,  at  whose  expense  he  had
alternately  filled  his  cofters.  During  the  past  yea)'  he
had  made  up  his  mind — like  most  of  the  conspicuous
politicians  and  campaigners  of  France — that  the  mori-
bund League  was  only  fit  to  be  trampled  upon  by  its
recent  worshippers,  and  he  had  made  accordingly  one  of
the  very  best  bargains  with  Henry  IV.  that  had  yet
been  made,  even  at  that  epoch  of  self-vending  grandees.
Henry,  by  treaty  ratified  in  August,  1594,  had  created
him  Prince  of  Cambray  and  Marshal  of  France,  so  that
the  man  who  had  been  receiving  up  to  that  very  moment
a  monthly  subsidy  of  seven  thousand  two  hundred
dollars  from  the  King  of  Spain  was  now^  gratified  with  a
pension  to  about  the  same  yearly  amount  by  the  King  of
France.^^  During  the  autumn  Henry  had  visited  Cam-
bray, and  the  new  prince  had  made  wondrous  exliibi-
tions  of  lo3"alty  to  the  sovereign  whum  he  had  done  liis
best  all  his  life  to  exclude  from  his  kingdom.  There
had  been  a  ceaseless  round  of  tournaments,  festivals,  and

5*  De  Thou,  xii.  414,  415. si  ibid,  this,  Balagriy  received  property  in  France

52  De  Thou,  xii.  291,  serjq. Seventy  equal  in  value  tu  twcniy  thousand  livres

thousand  crowns  a  year  were  to  be  paid  a  year,  to  reimburse  liim  for  expenses  in

according  to  agreement  by  Hen ry  1 V.  to  lortifying  and  defending  Cambray.

Baligny.ti)  maintain  city  and  citadel  of  The  sums  paid  to  him  simultaneously  by

Cambray,  by  treaty  made  29  Nov.  I.^gs,  Philip  II.  for  opposing  Henry  have  been

but  ratified  in  August, 1594. Kcsides  already  meniionud.

328  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

masquerades^^  in  the  city  in  honour  of  the  Huguenot
chieftain,  now  changed  into  the  most  orthodox  and  most
legitimate  of  monarchs,  but  it  was  not  until  midsummer
of  the  present  year  that  Balagny  was  called  on  to  defend
his  old  possessions  and  his  new  principality  against  a
well-seasoned  army  and  a  vigorous  commander.  Mean-
while his  new  patron  was  so  warmly  occupied  in  other
directions  that  it  Uiight  be  difficiilt  for  him  to  send
assistance  to  the  beleaguered  city.

On  the  14th  August  Fuentes  began  his  siege  operations.
14  August,  Before  the  investment  had  been  completed  the
1595.  young  Prince  of  Ehetelois,  only  fifteen  years  of

age,  son  of  the  Duke  of  Nevers,  made  his  entrance  into
the  city  attended  by  thirty  of  his  father's  archers.  De
Vich,  too,  an  experienced  and  faithful  commander,  suc-
ceeded in  bringing  four  or  five  hundred  dragoons  through
the  enemy's  lines.  These  meagre  reinforcements  were
all  that  reached  the  place ;  for,  although  the  States-
General  sent  two  or  three  thousand  Scotchmen  and  Zee-
landers,  under  Justinus  of  Nassau,  to  Heniy,  that  he
might  be  the  better  enabled  to  relieve  this  important
frontier  city,  the  king's  movements  were  not  sufficiently
prompt  to  turn  the  force  to  good  account.  Balagny  wat^
left  with  a  garrison  of  three  thousand  French  and  Wal-
loons in  the  citj%  besides  five  hundred  French  in  the
fortress.

After  six  weeks  steady  drawing  of  parallels  and  dig-
26  Sept.  ging  of  mines  Fuentes  was  ready  to  open  his
1595.  batteries.  On  the  26th  September  the  news,
very  much  exaggerated,  of  Mondragdn's  brilliant  victoiy
near  \Vesel.  and  of  the  deaths  of  Philip  Kassau  and  Ernest
Solms,  reached  the  Spanish  camp.  Immense  was  the
I'ejoicing.  Triumphant  salutes  from  eighty-seven  cannon
and  many  thousand  muskets  shook  the  earth  and  excited
bewilderment  and  anxiety  within  the  walls  of  the  city.
Almost  immediately  afterwards  a  tremendous  cannonade
was  begun  and  so  vigorously  sustained  that  the  burghers
and  part  of  the  garrison,  already  half  rebellious  with
hatred  to  Balagny,  began  loudly  to  murmur  as  the  balls
came  flying  into  their  streets.  A  few  daj's  later  an
insurrection  broke  out.  Three  thousand  citizens,  with
red  flags  flying,  and  armed  to  the  teeth,  were  discovered

53  ])e  Thi)U.  uVi  siq).

1595.  SIEGE  OF  CAMBRAY.  329

at  daylight  drawn  up  in  the  market-place.  2  October,
Balagny  came  down  from  the  citadel  and  ^^^^•
endeavoured  to  calm  the  tumult,  but  was  received  with
execrations.  They  had  been  promised,  shouted  the
insurgents,  that  every  road  about  Cambiay  was  to  swarm
with  French  soldiers  under  their  formidable  king,  kick-
ing the  heads  of  the  Spaniards  ^  in  all  directions.  And
what  had  they  got  ?  a  child  with  thirty  archers  sent  by
his  father,  and  half  a  man  at  the  head  of  four  hundred
dragoons.^'^  To  stand  a  siege  under  such  circumstances
against  an  army  of  fifteen  thousand  Spaniards,  and  to
take  Balagny 's  copper  as  if  it  were  gold,  was  more  than
could  be  asked  of'respectable  burghers.

The  alhision  to  the  young  prince  Ehetelois  and  to  De
Vich,  who  had  lost  a  leg  in  the  wars,  was  received  with
much  enthusiasm.  Balagny,  appalled  at  the  fury  of  the
people,  whom  he  had  so  long  been  trampling  upon  while
their  docility  lasted,  shrank  back  before  their  scornful
denunciations  into  the  citadel.

But  his  wife  was  not  appalled.  This  princess  had
from  the  beginning  of  the  siege  showed  a  courage  and  an
energy  worthy  of  lier  race.  Kightand  day  she  had  gone
the  rounds  of  the  ramparts,  encouraging  and  directing
the  elforts  of  the  garrison.  She  had  pointed  batteries
against  the  enemy's  works,  and.  with  her  own  hands,
had  fired  the  cannon.  She  now  made  her  appearance  in
the  market-place,  after  her  husband  had  fled,  and  did  her
best  to  assuage  the  tumult,  and  to  arouse  the  mutineers
to  a  sense  of  duty  or  of  shame.  She  plucked  fiom  her
bosom  whole  handfuls  of  gold  which  she  threw  among
the  bystandeis,  and  she  was  followed  by  a  number  of
carts  filled  with  sacks  of  coin  ready  to  be  exchanged  for
the  debased  currency.

Expressing  contempt  for  the  progress  made  by  the
besieging  army,  and  for  the  slight  impression  so  far  pro-
duced upon  the  defences  of  the  city,  she  snatched  a  pike
fiom  a  soldier  and  ottered  in  person  to  lead  the  garrison
to  the  breach.  Her  audience  knew  full  well  that  this
was  no  theatrical  display,  but  that  the  princess  was
ready  as  the  boldest  wairior  to  lead  a  forlorn  hope  or  to
repel  the  bloodiest  assault. Nor,  from  a  military  point

51  Culuniii,  195 — "Su  rey  formiUabile  pisamio  las  cabeijas  de  los  IDspaiioles,"  &c.  &c.
55  Ibid.

330  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXI.

of  view,  was  their  situation  desperate.  But  their  hatred
and  scorn  for  Balagny  could  not  be  overcome  by  any
passing  sentiment  of  admiration  for  his  valiant  though
imperious  wife.  No  one  followed  her  to  the  breach.
Exclaiming  that  she  at  least  would  never  surrender,  and
that  she  would  die  a  sovereign  princess  rather  than  live
a  subject,  Eenee  de  Balagny  returned  to  the  citadel.

The  town  soon  afterwards  capitulated,  and,  as  the
Spanish  soldiers,  on  entering,  observed  the  slight  damage
that  had  been  caused  by  their  batteries,  they  were  most
grateful  to  the  faint-hearted  or  mutinous  condition  of  the
garrison  by  which  they  had  been  spared  the  expense  of
an  assault.

Oct.  3-9, The  citadel  was  now  summoned  to  surrender,

1595.  Q^j^^  Balagny  agreed,  in  case  he  should  not  be
relieved  within  six  daj^s,  to  accept  what  was  considered
honourable  terms.  It  proved  too  late  to  expect  succour
from  Henry,  and  Balagny,  but  lately  a  reigning  prince,
was  fain  to  go  forth  on  the  appointed  day  and  salute  his
conqueror.  But  the  princess  kept  her  vow.  She  had
done  her  best  to  defend  her  dominions  and  to  live  a
sovereign,  and  now  there  was  nothing  left  her  but  to
die.  With  bitter  reproaches  on  her  liusband's  pusillani-
mity, with  tears  and  sobs  of  rage  and  shame,  she  refused
food,  spurned  the  idea  of  capitulation,  and  expired
before  the  9th  of  October,^^

On  that  day  a  procession  moved  out  of  the  citadel
gates.  Balagny,  with  a  son  of  eleven  years  of  age,  the
Prince  of  Rhetelois,  the  Commander  De  Vich,  and  many
other  distinguished  personages,  all  magnificently  attired,
came  forth  at  the  head  of  what  remained  of  the  garri-
son. Tlie  soldiers  numbering  thirteen  hundred  foot
and  two  hundred  and  forty  horse,  marched  with  colours
flying,  drums  beating,  bullet  in  mouth,  and  all  the
other  recognised  palliatives  of  military  disaster.  Last
of  all  came  a  hearse,  bearing  the  coffin  of  the  Princess  of
Cambray.  Fuentes  saluted  the  living  leaders  of  the
procession,  and  the  dead  heroine,  with  staiely  courtesy,
and  ordered  an  escort  as  far  as  Peronne.^^

=0  Bor,  IV.  54-56. Bentivoglio,  416-  All the  historians, French, Italian,

421. De  Thou,  xii.  414-436. Coloma,  Spanish, Flemish, give the same ac-

185-19S,  et mult, al., for  the siege  of  count  of  the  conduct  and  death of  the

Cambray.  princess. st  Ibid.

1595.  SECOND  MARRIAGE  OV  BALAGNY.  331

Balagny  met  with  a  cool  reception  from  Henry  at  St.
Quintin,  but  subsequently  made  his  peace,  and  espoused
the  sister  of  the  king's  mistress,  Gabrielle  d'Estrees.^'
The  body  of  Gavre  d'Inchy,  which  had  been  buried  for
years,  was  dug  up  and  thrown  into  a  gutter.^^

58  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  59  ibid.

332  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIT.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Archduke  Cardinal  Albert  appointed  governor  of  the  Netherlands  —  Return  of  Philip
William  frcm  captivity  —  His  adherence  to  the  King  of  Spain — Notice  of  the
Marquis  of  Varambon,  Count  Varax,  and  other  new  officei's  —  Henry's  com-
munications with  Queen  Elizabeth  —  Madame  de  ftlonceaux  —  Conversation  of
Henry  with  the  English  ambassador  —  Marseilles  secured  by  tho  Duke  of.'^'uise  —
The  fort  of  Hysbank  taken  by  De  Kosne  —  Calais  in  the  hands  of  the  Spanish  —
Assistance  from  England  solicited  by  Henry  —  Unhandsome  conditions  proposed
by  Elizabeth  —  Annexation  of  Calais  to  the  obedient  provinces — Pirates  of  Dun-
kirk—  Uneasiness  of  the  Netherlands  with  regard  to  the  designs  of  Ehzabeth  —
Her  protestations  of  sincerity  —  Expedition  of  Dutch  and  English  forces  to  Spain

—  Attack  on  the  Spanish  war-ships  —  Victory  of  the  allies  —  Flag  of  the  Re-
public planted  on  the  fortress  of  Cadiz  —  Capitulation  of  the  city  —  Letter  of
Elizabeth  to  the  Dutch  Admiral  —  State  of  aflairs  in  France  —  Proposition  of  the
Duke  of  Montpeasier  for  the  division  of  the  kingdom  —  Successes  of  the  Cardinal
Archduke  in  Normandy  —  He  proceeds  to  Flanders  —  Siege  and  capture  of  Hulst

—  Projected  alliance  against  Spain  —  Interview  of  De  Sancy  with  Lord  Burghley

—  Diplomatic  conference  at  Greenwich  —Formation  of  a  league  against  Spain  —
Duplicity  of  the  treaty  —  Affairs  in  Germany  —  Battle  between  the  Emperor  and
the  Grand  Turk  —  Endeavour  of  Philip  to  counteract  the  itifluenco  of  the  league  —
His  interference  in  the  affairs  of  Germany  —  Secret  intrigue  of  Henry  with  Spain

—  Philip's  second  attempt  at  the  conquest  of  England

Another  governor- general  arrived  in  the  eai-ly  days  of
rhe  year  1596,  to  take  charge  of  the  obedient  provinces.
It  had  been  rumoured  for  many  months  that  Philip's
choice  was  at  last  fixed  upon  the  Archduke  Cardinal
Albert,  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  youngest  of  the  three
surviving  brothers  of  the  Emperor  Eudolph,  as  the  can-
didate for  many  honours.  He  was  to  espouse  the  Infanta,
he  was  to  govern  the  Netherlands,  and,  as  it  was
supposed,  there  were  wider  and  wilder  schemes  for  the
aggrandisement  of  this  fortunate  ecclesiastic  brooding  in
the  mind  of  Philip  than  yet  had  seen  the  light.

Meantime  the  cardinal's  first  care  was  to  unfrock  him-
self. He  had  also  been  obliged  to  lay  down  the  most
lucrative  episcopate  in  Christendom,  that  of  Toledo,  the
revenues  of  which  amounted  to  the  enormous  sum  of
three  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year.^ Of  this  annual

'  Sor.mzo,  Relazione  apud  Baruzzi  et  Berchel.  Le  Eelazioni  degli  Ambnsciatori
Veneti,  i.  45.

1596.  THE  NEW  GOVERNOU-GENERAL.  333

income,  however,  he  pnidently  reserved  to  himself  fifty
thousand  dollars,  by  contract  with  his  destined  suc-
cessor.

The  cardinal  reached  the  Netherlands  before  the  end
of  January.  He  brought  with  him  thiee  thou-  29  Jan.
sand  Spanish  infantry,  and  some  companies  of  ^^^^•
cavalry,  while  his  personal  baggage  was  transported  on
three  hundred  and  fifty  mules. ^  Of  course  there  was  a
triumphal  procession  when,  on  the  11th  Feb-  n  Feb.
ruary,  the  new  satrap  entered  the  obedient  ^^^^•
Netherlands,  and  there  was  the  usual  amount  of  bell-
ringing,  cannon-firing,  trumpet-blowing,  with  torchlight
processions,  blazing  tar  barrels,  and  bedizened  platforms,
where  Allegoiy,  in  an  advanced  stage  of  lunacy,  per-
formed its  wonderful  antics.  It  was  scarcely  possible
for  human  creatures  to  bestow  more  adulation,  or  to
abase  themselves  more  thoroughly,  than  the  honest
citizens  of  Brussels  had  so  recently  done  in  honour  of
the  gentle,  gouty  Ernest,  but  they  did  their  best.  That
mythological  conqueror  and  demigod  had  sunk  into  an
unhonoured  grave,  despite  the  loud  hosannahs  sung  to
him  on  his  arrival  in  Belgica,  and  the  same  nobles,
pedants,  and  burghers  were  now  ready  and  happy  to
grovel  at  the  feet  of  Albert.  But  as  it  proved  impos-
sible to  surpass  the  glories  of  the  holiday  which  had
been  culled  out  for  his  brother,  so  it  would  be  super-
fluous now  to  recall  the  pageant  which  thus  again  de-
lighted the  capital.

But  there  was  one  personage  who  graced  this  joyous
entrance  whose  presence  excited  perhaps  more  interest
than  did  that  of  the  archduke  himself.  The  procession
was  headed  by  three  grandees  riding  abreast.  There
was  the  Duke  of  Aumale,  pensionary  of  Philip,  and  one
of  the  last  of  the  Leaguers,  who  had  just  been  con-
demned to  death  and  executed  in  effigy  at  Paris,  as  a
traitor  to  his  king  and  country ;  there  was  the  Prince
of  Chimay,  now  since  the  recent  death  of  his  father  at
Venice  become  Duke  of  Arschot ;  and  between  the  two
rode  a  gentleman  forty-two  years  of  age,  whose  grave,
melancholy  features — althoiigh  wearing  a  painful  ex-
pression of  habitual  restraint  and  distrust — suggested,

2  Bor,  IV.  16".

334  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

more  than  did  those  of  lhe  rest  of  his  family,  the  phy-
siognomy of  William  the  Silent^  to  all  who  remembered
that  illustrious  rebel.

It  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  great  founder  of  the
Dutch  republic.  Philip  William,  I'rince  of  Orange,  had
at  last,  after  twenty-eight  years  of  captivity  in  Spain,
retui'ned  to  the  Ketherlands,  whence  he  had  been  kid-
napped while  a  schoolboy  at  Lou  vain,  by  order  of  the
Duke  of  Alva.  Earely  has  there  been  a  more  dreary
fate,  a  more  broken  existence  than  his.  His  almost
life-long  confinement,  not  close  nor  cruel,  but  strict  and
inexorable,  together  with  the  devilish  arts  of  the  Jesuits,
had  produced  nearly  as  blighting  an  effect  upon  his
moral  nature  as  a  closer  dungeon  might  have  done  on
his  phj'sical  constitution.  Although  under  perpetual
arrest  in  Madrid,  he  had  been  allowed  to  ride  and  to
hunt,  to  go  to  mass,  and  to  enjoy  many  of  the  pleasures
of  youth.  But  he  had  been  always  a  prisoner,  and  his
soul — a  hopeless  captive — could  no  longer  be  liberated
now  that  the  tyrant,  in  order  to  further  his  own  secret
purposes,  had  at  last  released  his  body  from  gaol.
Although  the  eldest-born  of  his  father,  and  the  inheritor
of  the  great  estates  of  Orange  and  of  Buren,  he  was  no
longer  a  Nassau,  except  in  name.  The  change  wrought
by  the  pressure  of  the  Spanish  atmosphere  was  complete.
All  that  was  left  of  his  youthful  self  was  a  passionate
reverence  for  his  father's  memory,  strangely  combined
with  a  total  indifference  to  all  that  his  father  held  dear,
all  for  which  his  father  had  laboured  his  whole  lifetime,
and  for  which  his  heart's  blood  had  been  shed.  On
being  at  last  set  fiee  from  bondage  he  had  been  taken
to  the  Escorial,  and  permitted  to  kiss  the  hand  of  the
king — that  hand  still  reeking  with  his  father's  murder.
He  had  been  well  received  by  the  Infante  and  the
Infanta,  and  by  the  empress- mother,  daughter  of
Charles  V.,  while  the  artistic  treasures  of  the  palace  and
cloister  were  benignantly  pointed  out  to  him.  It  was
also  signified  to  him  that  he  was  to  receive  the  oixler  of
the  Golden  Fleece,  and  to  enter  into  possession  of  his
paternal  and  maternal  estates.  And  Philip  William
had  accepted  these  conditions  as  if  a  born  loyal  subject
of  his  Most  Catholic  Majesty.

•  Fruiii,  207,  note.

1596.  PHILIP  WILLIAM,  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE.  335

Could  better  proof  be  wanting  that  in  that  age  reli-
gion was  the  only  fatherland,  and  that  a  true  papist
could  sustain  no  injury  at  the  hands  of  his  Most  Catholic
Majesty?  If  to  be  kidnapped  in  boyhood,  to  be  im-
prisoned during  a  whole  generation  of  mankind,  to  be
deprived  of  vast  estates,  and  to  be  made  orphan  by  the
foulest  of  assassinations,  could  not  engender  resentment
against  the  royal  perpetrator  of  these  crimes  in  the
bosom  of  his  victim,  was  it  strange  that  Philip  should
deem  himself  something  far  more  than  man,  and  should
placidly  accept  the  worship  rendered  to  him  by  in-
terior beings,  as  to  the  holy  impersonation  of  Almighty
Wrath  '

Yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  prince  had  a  sincere
respect  for  his  father,  and  had  bitterly  sorrowed  at  his
death.  When  a  Spanish  officer,  playing  chess  with  him
in  prison,  had  ventured  to  speak  lightly  of  that  father,
Philip  William  had  seized  him  bodily,  thrown  him  from
the  window,  and  thus  killed  him  on  the  spot.*  And
when  on  his  arrival  in  Brussels  it  was  suggested  to  him
by  President  Eiohardot  that  it  was  the  king's  intention
to  reinstate  him  in  the  possession  of  his  estates,  but  that
a  rent-charge  of  eighteen  thousand  florins  a  year  was
still  to  be  paid  from  them  to  the  heirs  of  Balthazar
Gerard,  his  father's  assassin,  he  flamed  into  a  violent
rage,  drew  his  poniard,  and  would  have  stabbed  the
president,  had  not  the  bystanders  forcibly  interfered.*
In  consequence  of  this  refusal — called  magnanimous  by
contemporary  writers  —  to  accept  his  property  under
such  conditions,  the  estates  were  detained  from  him  for
a  considerable  time  longer.  During  the  period  of  his
captivity  he  had  been  allowed  an  income  of  fifteen
thousand  livres  ;  but  after  his  restoration  his  household,
gentlemen,  and  servants  alone  cost  him  eighty  thousand
livres  annually.  It  was  supposed  that  the  name  of
Orange-Nassau  might  now  be  of  service  to  the  king's
designs  in  the  Netherlands.  Philip  William  had  come
by  way  of  Eome,  where  he  had  been  allowed  to  kiss  the
pope's  feet,  and  had  received  many  demonstrations  of
favour,  and  it  was  fondly  thought  that  he  would  now
prove  an  instrument  with  which  king  and  pontiff  might

*  De  la  Pise  in  voce. The  anecdote  has  already  been  mentioned  in  the  '  Rise  of
the  Dutch  Republic'  s  ibid.

336  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

pipe  back  the  rebellious  republic  to  its  ancient  allegiance.
But  the  Dutcbmen  and  Frisians  were  deaf.  They  had
tasted  liberty  too  long,  they  had  dealt  too  many  hard
blows  on  the  head  of  regal  and  sacerdotal  despotism,  to
be  deceived  by  coarse  artifices.  Especially  the  king
thought  that  something  might  be  done  with  Count
Hohenlo.  That  turbulent  personage  having  recently
married  the  full  sister  of  Philip  W  illiam,  and  being
already  at  variance  with  Count  Maurice,  both  for  mili-
tary and  political  causes,  and  on  account  of  family  and
pecuniary  disputes,  might,  it  was  thought,  be  purchased
by  the  king,  and  perhaps  a  few  towns  and  castles  in  the
united  Netherlands  might  be  thrown  into  the  bargain.
In  that  huckstering  age,  when  the  loftiest  and  most
valiant  nobles  of  Europe  were  the  most  shameless  sellers
of  themselves,  the  most  cynical  mendicants  for  alms  and
the  most  infinite  absorbers  of  bribes  iu  exchange  for
their  temporary  fealty ;  when  Mayenne,  Mercosur,
Guise,  Villars,  Egmont,  and  inniimerable  other  posses-
sors of  ancient  and  illustrious  names,  alternately  and
even  simultaneously  drew  pensions  from  both  sides  in
the  great  European  conflict,  it  was  not  wonderful  that
Philip  should  think  that  the  boisterous  Hohenlo  might
be  bought  as  well  as  another.  The  prudent  king,  how-
ever, gave  his  usual  order  that  nothing  was  to  be  paid
beforehand,  but  that  the  service  was  to  be  rendered  first,
and  the  price  received  afterwards.®

The  cardinal  applied  himself  to  the  task  on  his  first
arrival,  but  was  soon  obliged  to  report  that  he  could
make  but  little  progi-ess  in  the  negotiation.''

The  king  thought,  too,  that  Heraugiere,  who  had
commanded  the  memorable  expedition  against  Bieda,
and  who  was  now  governor  of  that  stronghold,  might
be  purchased,  and  he  accordingly  instructed  the  cardinal
to  make  use  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  in  the  negotiations
to  be  made  for  that  purpose.  The  cardinal,  in  eflect,
received  an  ofi'er  from  Heraugiere  in  the  course  of  a  few
months  not  only  to  suri'ender  Breda,  without  previous
recompense,  but  likewise  to  place  Gertruydenberg,  the
governor  of  which  city  was  his  relative,  in  the  king's

*  "Qiie  entiodas  platicas  semejantes  ha  de  preceder  el  servicio  a  la  recompensa  que
se  ofreciere  a  trueco  de  el." — Philip  to  Archduke  Albert,  13  Jan.  1596.  (Arch,  de
Sim.  MS.)  7  Albert  to  Philip,  2S  March,  1596. (Arch,  de  Simancas  M.S.)

1506.  NOTICE  OF  THE  CARDINAL-ARCHDUKE.  3:^7

possession.  But  the  cardinal  was  afi-aid  df  a  trick,  for
Heraiigiere  was  known  to  be  as  artful  as  he  was  brave,
and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  Netherlander
was  only  disposed  to  lay  an  ambush  fur  the  governor-
general.*

And  thus  the  son  of  William  the  Silent  made  his
leappearance  in  the  streets  of  Brussels,  after  twenty-
eight  years  of  imprisonment,  riding  in  the  procession  of
the  new  viceroy.  The  cardinal-archduke  came  next,
with  Fuentes  riding  at  his  left  hand.  That  vigorous
soldier  and  politician  soon  afterwards  left  the  Nether-
lands to  assume  the  government  of  Milan.

There  was  a  correspondence  between  the  Prince  of
Oiatige  and  the  States-General,  in  which  the  lepublican
auihorities,  after  expressing  themselves  towards  him
with  great  propriety  and  affectionate  respect,  gave  him
plainly  but  delicately  to  undeistand  that  his  presence  at
that  time  in  the  United  Provinces  would  neither  be
desirable,  nor,  without  their  passports,  possible.''  Tliey
were  quite  aware  of  the  uses  to  which  the  king  was
hoping  to  turn  their  reverence  for  the  memory  and  the
family  of  the  great  martyr,  and  were  determined  to  foil
such  idle  projects  on  the  threshold.

The  Archduke  Albert,  born  on  3rd  of  November,
1560,  was  now  in  his  thirty-sixth  year.  A  small,  thin,
pale-faced  man,  with  fair  hair  and  beard,  commonplace
features,  and  the  hereditary  underhanging  Burgundian
jaw  prominentl}'  developed,  he  was  not  without  a  certain
nobility  of  presence.  His  manners  were  distant  to
haughtiness  and  grave  to  solemnity.  He  spoke  very
little  and  ver}'  slowly.  He  had  resided  long  in  Spain,
where  he  had  been  a  favourite  with  his  uncle — as  much
as  any  man  could  be  a  favourite  with  Philip — and  lie
had  carefully  formed  himself  on  that  royal  model,  lie
looked  upon  the  King  of  Spain  as  the  greatest,  wisest,
and  best  of  created  beings,  as  the  most  illustiious
specimen  of  kingcraft  ever  yet  vouchsafed  to  the  world.
He  did  his  best  to  look  sombre  and  Spanish,  to  turn  his
visage  into  a  mask,  to  conceal  his  thoughts  and  emotions,
not  only  by  the  expression  of  his  features  but  by  direct
misstatements  of  his  tongue,  and  in  all  things  to  present

8  Albert  to  Philip,  18  July,  1596. fArch.  do  Slmancas  MS.)
3  lior,  IV.  153,  154,  seqq.
VOL. III.  Z

338  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII,

to  the  obedient  Flemings  as  elaborate  a  reproduction  of
his  great  prototype  as  copy  can  ever  recall  inimitable
original.  Old  men  in  tlie  Netherlands,  who  remembered
in  how  short  a  time  Philip  had  succeeded,  by  the  baleful
etfect  of  his  personal  presence,  in  lighting  up  a  hatred
which  not  the  previous  twenty  years  of  his  father's
burnings,  hangings,  and  butcherings  in  those  provinces
had  been  able  to  excite,  and  which  forty  subsequent
years  of  bloodshed  had  not  begun  to  allay,  might  well
shake  their  heads  when  they  saw  this  new  representa-
tive of  Spanish  authority,  it  would  have  been  wiser —
so  many  astute  politicians  thought — for  Albert  to  take
the  Emperor  Charles  for  his  model,  who  had  always  the
power  of  making  his  tyranny  actceptable  to  the  Flemings,
through  the  adroitness  with  which  he  seemed  to  be
entirely  a  Fleming  himself.^"

But  Albert,  although  a  German,  valued  himself  on
appearing  like  a  Spaniard.  He  was  industrious,  regular
in  his  habits,  moderate  in  eating  and  drinldng,  fond  of
giving  audiences  on  business.  He  spoke  German,
Spanish,  and  Latin,  and  understood  French  and  Italian.
He  had  at  times  been  a  student,  and,  especially,  had
some  knowledge  of  mathematics.  He  was  disposed  to
do  his  duty — so  far  as  a  man  can  do  his  duty,  who
imagines  himself  so  entirely  lifted  above  his  fellow-
creatures  as  to  owe  no  obligation  except  to  exact  their
obedience  and  to  personify  to  them  the  will  of  the
Almighty.  To  Philip  and  the  Pope  he  was  ever  faithful.
He  was  not  without  pretensions  to  military  talents,  but
his  gravity,  slowness,  and  silence  made  him  fitter  to
shine  in  the  cabinet  than  in  the  field.  Henry  IV.,  who
loved  his  jest,  whether  at  his  own  expense  or  that  of
friend  or  foe,  was  wont  to  observe  that  there  were  three
things  which  nobody  would  ever  believe,  and  which  yet
were  very  true  ;  that  Queen  Elizabeth  deserved  her
title  of  the  throned  vestal,  that  he  was  himself  a  good
Catholic,  and  that  Cardinal  Albert  was  a  good  general.
It  is  probable  that  the  assertions  were  all  equally
accurate.

The  new  governor  did  not  find  a  very  able  group  of
generals  or  statesmen  assembled  about  him  to  assist  in

"  Bentivoglio,  Kelazione  delle  Provincie  ubbedienti  di  Fiandra.  Soranzo,  Rclazioce.

1596.  OFFICERS  OF  THE  NEW  GOVERNOR.  339

■the  difficult  task  Avhich  be  had  undertaken.  There  were
I  dent}'  of  fine  gentlemen,  with  ancient  names  and  lefty
pi'etensions,  but  the  working  men  in  field  or  council  liad
mostly  disappeared.  Mondragon,  La  Motte,  Charles
Mansfeld,  Frank  Verdugo  were  all  dead.  Fuentes  was
just  taking  his  departure  for  Italy.  Old  Peter  Ernest
was  a  cipher;  and  his  son's  place  was  filled  by  the
Marquis  of  Varambon,  as  principal  commander  in  active
military  operations.  This  was  a  Burgundian  of  con-
siderable military  ability,  but  with  an  inordinate  opinion
of  himself  and  of  his  family.  "  Accept  the  fact  that  his
lineage  is  the  highest  possible,  and  that  he  has  better
connections  than  those  of  anybody  else  in  the  whole
world,  and  he  will  be  perfectly  contented,"  said  a  sharp,
splenetic  Spaniard  in  the  cardinal's  confidence.  "  'Tis  a
faithful  and  loyal  cavalier,  but  full  of  impertinences."^'
The  brother  of  Vaiambun,  Count  Varax,  had  succeeded
La  Motte  as  general  of  artillery,  and  of  his  doings  there
was  a  tale  ere  long  to  be  told.  On  the  whole,  the  best
.soldier  in  the  archduke's  service  for  the  moment  was
the  Frenchman  iSavigny  de  Rosne,  an  ancient  Leaguer,
and  a  passionate  hater  of  the  Bearnese,  of  heretics,  and
of  France  as  then  constituted.  He  had  once  made  a
contract  with  Heniy  by  which  he  bound  himself  to  his
service ;  but  after  occasioning  a  good  deal  of  injury  by
his  deceitful  attitude,  he  had  accepted  a  large  amount  of
Spanish  dollars,  and  had  then  thrown  off  the  mask  and
proclaimed  himself  the  deadliest  foe  of  his  lawful  sove-
reign. "  He  was  foremost,"  said  Carlos  Coloma,  "  among
those  who  were  successfully  angled  for  by  the  Com-
mander Moreo  with  golden  hooks."  '^  Although  prodi-
giously fat,  this  renegade  was  an  active  and  experienced
campaigner,  while  his  personal  knowledge  of  his  own
countiy  made  his  assistance  of  much  value  to  those  who
were  attempting  its  destruction.

The  other  great  nobles,  who  were  pressing  themselves
about  the  new  viceroy  with  enthusiastic  words  of
welcome  were  as  like  to  give  him  embarrassment  as
support.  All  wanted  office,  emoluments,  distinctions,
nor  could  much  dependence  be  placed  on  the  ability  or

'1  Relacion  de  los  Senores  de  rttulo  y  otras  personas  de  qualidad  que  hay  en
ostos  estiidos;  diose  a  su  Alt's,  en  Valenciennes,  2  Abiil,  1596.  (Arch,  de  Siui.in-
cas  MS.)  1^  Coloma,  229. Calvaert's  letter,  in  Deventer,  ii.  lOb.

z  2

;U0  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

the  character  of  any  of  them.  The  new  dnke  of  Arschot
had  in  times  passt,  as  prince  of  Chimay,  fonght  against
the  king,  and  had  even  imagined  himself  a  Calvinist,
while  his  wife  was  still  a  determined  lieretic.  It  is  true
tliat  she  was  separated  from  her  husband.  He  was  a
man  of  more  quickness  and  acuteness  than  his  father
had  been,  but  if  possible  more  mischievous  both  to
friend  and  foe  ;  being  subtle,  restless,  intriguing,  fickle,
ambitious,  and  deceitful.  The  Prince  of  Orange  was
considered  a  man  of  very  ordinary  intelligence,  not
more  than  half-witted,  according  to  Queen  Elizabeth,^^
and  it  was  probable  that  the  peculiar  circumstances  of
his  life  would  extinguish  any  influence  that  he  might
otherwise  have  attained  with  either  paity.  He  was
likely  to  affect  a  neutral  position,  and,  in  times  of  civil
war,  to  be  neutral  is  to  be  nothing.

Arenberg,  unlike  the  great  general  on  the  Catholic
side  who  had  made  the  name  illustrious  in  the  opening
scenes  of  the  mighty  contest,  was  disposed  to  quiet  ob-
scurity so  far  as  was  compatible  with  his  rank.  Having
inherited  neither  fortune  nor  talent  with  his  ancient
name,  he  was  chiefly  occupied  with  providing  for  the
wants  of  his  numerous  family.  A  good  papist,  well-
inclined  and  docile,  he  was  strongly  recommended  for
the  post  of  admiral,  not  because  he  had  naval  acquire-
ments, but  because  he  had  a  great  many  children."  The
Marquis  of  Havre,  uncle  to  the  Duke  of  Arschot,  had
played  in  his  time  many  prominent  parts  in  the  long
Netherland  tragedy.  Although  older  than  he  was  when
Kequesens  and  Don  John  of  Austria  had  been  governors,
he  was  not  mxich  wiser,  being  to  the  full  as  vociferous,  as
false,  as  insolent,  as  self-seeking,  and  as  mischievous
as  in  his  youth.  Alternately  making  appeals  to  popular
passions  in  his  capacity  of  high-born  demagogue,  or
seeking  crumbs  of  bounty  as  the  supple  slave  of  his
sovereign,  he  was  not  more  likely  to  acquire  the  con-
fidence of  the  cardinal  than  he  had  done  that  of  his
predecessors.

The  most  important  and  opulent  grandee  of  all  the
provinces  was  the  Count  de  Ligne,  who  had  become  by
marriage  or  inheritance  Prince  of  Espinay,  Seneschal  of

's  "£nde  niet  halff  wys." Caron  to  States-General,  in  Deventer,  ii.  121.
1*  Relacion  de  los  Renores,  &c.,  ubi  sup.

I

1596.  OFFICERS  OF  THE  NEW  GOVERNOR.  341

Hainaiilt,  and  Viscount  of  Ghent.  But  it  was  only  his
enormous  estates  that  gave  him  consideration,  for  he  was
not  thought  capable  of  either  good  or  bad  intentions.
He  had,  however,  in  times  past,  succeeded  in  the  chief
object  of  his  ambition,  which  was  to  keep  out  of  trouble,
and  to  preserve  his  estates  from  confiscation.  His  wife,
who  governed  him,  and  had  thus  far  guided  him  safely,
hoped  to  do  so  to  the  end.  The  cardinal  was  informed
that  the  Golden  Fleece  would  be  all-sufficient  to  keep
him  upon  the  right  track.^^

Of  the  Egmonts,  one  had  died  on  the  famous  field
of  Ivry,  another  was  an  outlaw,  and  had  been  accused  of
participation  in  plots  of  assassination  against  William
of  Orange ;  the  third  was  auw  about  the  archduke's
court,  and  was  supposed  to  be  as  dull  a  man  as  Ligne,
but  likely  to  be  serviceable  so  long  as  he  could  keep  his
elder  brother  out  of  his  inheritance.  Thus  devoted  to
( 'hurch  and  King  were  the  sons  of  the  man  whose  head
Philip  had  taken  off  on  a  senseless  charge  of  treason.
The  two  Counts  Van  den  Berg— Frederic  and  Hermann
— sons  of  the  sister  of  William  the  Silent,  were,  on  the
whole,  as  brave,  efficient,  and  trustworthy  servants  of
the  king  and  cardinal  as  were  to  be  found  in  the
obedient  provinces.

The  new  governor  had  come  well  provided  with  funds,
being  supplied  for  the  first  three-quarters  of  the  year
with  a  monthly  allowance  of  1,100,000  florins.^''  For
reasons  soon  to  appear,  it  was  not  probable  that  the
States  General  would  be  able  very  soon  to  make  a
vigorous  campaign,  and  it  was  thought  best  for  the
cardinal  to  turn  his  i aimed  iate  attention  to  France.

The  negotiations  for  effecting  an  alliance  offensive  and
defensive,  between  the  three  powers  most  interested  in
opposing  the  projects  of  Spain  for  universal  empire,  were
not  yet  begun,  and  will  be  reserved  for  a  subsequent
chapter.  Meantime  there  had  been  much  informal  dis-
cussion and  diplomatic  trifling  between  France  and
England  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  about  a  sincere  co-
operation of  the  two  crowns  against  the  Fifth  Monarchy
— as  it  was  much  the  fashion  to  denominate  Philip's
proposed  dominion.

llenry  had  suggested  at  different  times  to  Sir  Robert

15  Rrlacion  de  los  Sefiores,  &c.,  ubi  sup.  i^  IVyd,  275.

342  THE  UNITED  NETHEKLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

Sidney,  during  his  fi-equent  pi'esence  in  Fiance  as  special
envoy  for  the  queen,  the  necessity  of  such  a  step,  but
had  not  always  found  a  hearty  sympathy.  But  as  the
king  began  to  cool  in  his  hatred  to  Sj)ain,  after  his  de-
claration of  war  against  that  power,  it  seemed  desirable
to  Elizabeth  to  fan  his  resentment  afresh,  and  to  revert  to
those  propositions  which  had  been  so  coolly  received
when  made.  Sir  Harry  Umton,  ambassador  from  her
Majesty,  was  accordingly  provided  with  especial  letters
on  the  subject  from  the  queen's  own  hand,  and  presented
them  early  in  the  year  at  Coucy  (Feb.  13,  1596).  •  No
man  in  the  world  knew  better  the  tone  to  adopt  in  his
communications  with  Elizabeth  than  did  the  chivalrous
king.  No  man  knew  better  than  he  how  impossible  it
was  to  invent  terms  of  adulation  too  gross  for  her  to
accept  as  spontaneous  and  natural  etfusions  of  the  heart.
He  received  the  letters  from  the  hands  df  Sir  Henry,
read  them  with  rapture,  heaved  a  deep  f-igh,  and  ex-
claimed :  '•  Ah !  Mr.  Ambassador,  what  shall  I  say  to
you?  This  letter  of  the  queen,  my  sister,  is  full  of
sweetness  and  aifection.  I  see  that  she  loves  me,  while
that  I  love  her  is  not  to  be  doubted.  Yet  your  commis-
sion shows  ine  the  contrary,  and  this  proceeds  from  her
ministers.  How  else  can  these  obliquities  stand  with
her  jDrofessions  of  love  ?  I  am  forced,  as  a  king,  to  take
a  course  which,  as  Henry,  her  loving  brother,  I  could
never  adopt."

They  then  walked  out  in  the  park,  and  the  king  fell
into  frivolous  discourse,  on  purpose  to  keep  the  envoy
from  the  important  subject  which  had  been  discussed  in
the  cabinet.  Sir  Henry  brought  him  back  to  business,
and  insisted  that  there  was  no  disagreement  between
her  Majesty  and  her  counsellors,  all  being  anxious  to
do  what  she  wished.  The  envoy,  who  shared  in  the
prevailing  suspicions  that  Henry  was  about  to  make  a
truce  with  Spain,  vehemently  protested  against  such
a  step,  complaining  that  his  ministers,  whose  minds
were  distempered  with  jealousy,  were  inducing  him  to
sacrifice  her  friendship  to  a  fiilse  and  hollow  leconcilia-
tion  with  Spain.  Henry  protested  that  his  preference
would  be  for  England's  amity,  but  regretted  that  the
English  delays  were  so  great,  and  that  such  dangeis
were  ever  impending  over  his  head as  to  make  it  im-

159G. KING  HENRY  AND  THE  ENGLISH  AMBASSADOR. 'Si'o

possible  for  him,  as  a  king,  to  follow  the  inclinations  of
his  heart.

They  then  met  Madame  de  Monceaux,  the  lieautiful
Gabrielle,  who  was  invited  to  join  in  the  walk,  the  king
saying  that  she  was  no  meddler  in  politics,  but  of  a
tractable  spirit.

This  remark,  in  Sir  Henry's  opinion,  was  just,  for,
said  he  to  Buighley,  she  is  thought  incapable  of  affairs,
and  very  simple.  The  duchess  unmasked  very  graciously
as  the  ambassador  was  presented  ;  but,  said  the  splenetic
diplomatist,  "  I  took  no  pleasure  in  it,  nor  held  it  any
grace  at  all."  "She  was  attired  in  a  plain  satin  gown,"
he  continued,  "  with  a  velvet  hood  to  keep  her  from  the
weather,  which  became  her  very  ill.  In  my  opinion,
she  is  altered  very  much  for  the  worse,  and  was  very
grossly  painted."  The  three  walked  together  discoursing
of  trifles,  much  to  the  annoyance  of  Umton.  At  last,
a  shower  forced  the  lady  into  the  house,  and  the  king
soon  afterwards  took  the  ambassador  to  his  cabinet.  "  He
asked  me  how  I  liked  his  mistress,"  wrote  Sir  Henry  to
Burghley,  "  and  I  answered  sparingly  in  her  j^raise,
and  told  him  that  if  without  offence  I  might  speak  it,
I  had  the  picture  of  a  far  more  excellent  mistress,  and
yet  did  her  picture  come  far  from  the  perfection  of  her
beauty."

"  As  you  love  me,"  cried  the  king,  "  show  it  me,  if
you  have  it  about  you  !  "

"I  made  some  difficulty,"  continued  Sir  Henry,  "yet
upon  his  importunity  I  offered  it  to  his  view  very
secretly,  still  holding  it  in  my  hand.  He  beheld  it  with
passion  and  admiration,  saying  that  I  was  in  the  right."
"  I  give  in,"  said  the  king,  "  Je  me  rends."

Then,  protesting  that  he  had  never  seen  such  beauty
all  his  life,  he  kissed  it  reverently  twice  or  thrice,
Sir  Henry  still  holding  the  miniature  lirmly  in  hiij
hand.

The  king  then  insisted  upon  seizing  the  picture,  and
there  was  a  charming  struggle  between  the  two,  ending
in  his  Majesty's  triumph.  He  then  told  Sir  Henry  that
he  might  take  his  leave  of  the  portrait,  for  he  would
never  give  it  up  again  for  any  tieasure,  and  that  to
possess  the  favour  of  the  original  he  would  for.-ake  all
the  world. He  fell  into  many  more  such  passionate  and

344  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

incoherent  expressions  of  rhapsody,  as  of  one  suddenly
smitten  and  spell-bound  with  hapless  love,  bitterly  re-
proaching the  ambassador  for  never  having  brought  him,
any  answers  to  the  many  affectionate  letters  which  he
had  written  to  the  queen,  whose  silence  had  made  him
so  wretched.  Sir  Henry,  perhaps  somewhat  confounded
at  being  beaten  at  his  own  fantastic  game,  answered  as
well  as  he  could,  "bi;t  I  found,"  said  he,  "  that  the  dumb
picture  did  draw  on  more  speech  and  affection  from  him
than  all  my  best  arguments  and  eloquence.  This  was
the  effect  of  our  conference,  and,  if  infiniteness  of  vows
and  outward  professions  be  a  strong  argument  of  inward
affection,  there  is  good  likelihood  of  the  king's  conti-
nuance of  amity  with  her  Majesty;  only  I  fear  lest  his
necessities  may  inconsiderately  draw  him  into  some
hazardous  treaty  with  Spain,  which  I  hope  confidently
it  is  yet  in  the  power  of  her  Majesty  to  prevent.""

The  king,  while  performing  these  apish  tricks  about
the  picture  of  a  lady  with  beady  black  eyes,  a  hooked
nose,  black  teeth,  and  a  red  wig,  who  was  now  in  the
sixty -fourth  year  of  her  age,  knew  very  well  that
the  whole  scene  would  be  at  once  repeated  to  the  fair
object  of  his  passion  by  her  faithful  envoy  ;  but  what
must  have  been  the  opinion  entertained  of  Elizabeth
by  contemporary  sovereigns  and  statesmen  when  such
fantastic  folly  could  be  rehearsed  and  related  every  day
in  the  year !

And  the  king  knew,  after  all,  and  was  destined  very
soon  to  acquire  proof  of  it  which  there  was  no  gain-
saying, that  the  beautiful  Elizabeth  had  exactly  as  much
affection  for  him  as  he  had  for  her,  and  was  as  capable
of  sacrificing  his  interests  for  her  own,  or  of  taking
advantage  of  his  direct  necessities  as  cynically  and  as
remorselessly,  as  the  King  of  Spain,  or  the  Duke  of
Mayenne,  or  the  Pope  had  ever  done.

Henry  had  made  considerable  progress  in  re-estab-
lishing his  authority  over  a  large  portion  of  the  howling
wilderness  to  which  forty  years  of  civil  war  had  leduced
his  hereditary  kingdom.  There  was  still  gieat  danger,
however,  at  its  two  opposite  extremities.  Calais,  key
to  the  Norman  gate  of  France,  was  feebly  held  ;  while
Marseilles,  seated  in  such  dangerous  proximity  to  Spain

1"  S>r  Henry  Umton  to  her  Majesty,  Coucy,  3  Feb.  1595-6.

1

159S. MARSEILLES  SECURED  BY  THE  DUKE  OF  GUISE. 345

on  the  one  side,  and  to  the  Eepnhlic  of  Genoa,  that  alert
vassal  of  Spain,  on  the  other,  was  still  in  the  possession
of  the  League.  A  concerted  actiun  was  undertaken  by
means  of  John  Andrew  Doria,  with  a  Spanish  tleet  from
Genoa  on  the  outside  and  a  well-organised  ccjnspiracy
from  within,  to  carry  the  city  bodily  over  to  Philip.
Had  it  succeeded,  this  great  Mediterranean  sea-port
would  have  become  as  much  a  Spanish  possession  as
Barcelona  or  Naples,  and  infinite  might  have  been  the
damage  to  Henry's  future  prospects  in  consequence.  But
there  was  a  man  in  Marseilles,  Petrus  Libertas  by  name,
whose  ancestors  had  gained  this  wholesome  family  ap-
pellation by  a  successful  etibrt  once  made  by  them  to
rescue  the  little  town  of  ('alvi,  in  Corsica,  frcjm  the
tyranny  of  Genoa.  Peter  Liberty  needed  no  prompting
to  vindicate,  on  a  fitting  occasion,  his  right  to  his
patronymic.  In  conjunction  with  men  in  Marseilles  who
hated  oppression,  whether  of  kings,  priests,  or  renegade
jepublics,  as  much  as  he  did,  and  with  a  secret  and
well-arranged  understanding  with  the  Duke  of  Guise,
who  was  burning  with  ambition  to  render  a  signal
l)enefit  to  the  cause  which  he  had  ju.st  espoused,  this
bold  tribune  of  the  people  succeeded  in  stirring  the
population  to  mutiny  at  exactly  the  light  moment,  and
in  opening  the  gates  of  Marseilles  to  the  Duke  n  Feb.
of  Guise  and  his  forces  before  it  was  possible  ^^^^•
for  the  Leaguers  to  admit  the  fleet  of  Doria  into  its
harbour.  Thus  was  the  capital  of  Mediterranean  France
lost  and  won.^*  Guise  gained  great  favour  in  Henry's
eyes,  and  with  reason  ;  for  the  son  of  the  great  Balafre,
Avho  was  himself  the  League,  had  now  giA^en  the  League
tlie  stroke  of  Tuercy.  Peter  Liberty  became  consul  of
Marseilles,  and  received  a  patent  of  nobility.  It  was
difficult,  however,  for  any  diploma  to  confer  anything
moie  noble  upon  him  than  the  name  which  he  had
inherited,  and  to  which  he  had  so  well  established  his
right.

But  while  Henry's  cause  had  thus  been  so  well  sei-ved
in  the  south,  there  was  danger  impending  in  the  north.
The  king  had  been  besieging,  since  autumn,  the  town
of  La  Fere,  an  important  military  and  strategic  position,
which  had  been  Farnese's  basis  of  operations  duiing  his

18  De  Thou,  xii.  613,  seqq.  1116. Bor.  IV.  177-179.

346  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

memorable  campaigns  in  France,  and  which had  ever
since  remained  in  tlie  hands  of  the  League.

The  cardinal  had  taken  the  field  with  an  army  of
fifteen  thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse,  assembled
at  Valenciennes,  and  after  hesitating  some  time  whether
or  not  he  should  attempt  to  relieve  La  Fere,  he  decided
instead  on  a  diversion.  In  the  second'  week  of  April,
De  Eosne  was  detached  at  the  head  of  four  thousand
men,  and  suddenly  appeared  before  Calais. ^^  The  city
had  been  long  governed  by  De  Gordan,  but  this  wary
and  experienced  commander  had  unfortunately  been  for
two  years  dead.  Still  more  unfortunately,  it  had  been
in  his  power  to  bequeath,  not  only  his  fortune,  which
was  very  large,  but  the  government  of  Calais,  considered
the  most  valuable  command  in  France,  to  his  nephew,
De  Vidosan.  He  had,  however,  not  bequeathed  to  him
his  administrative  and  militaiy  genius.

The  fortress  called  the  Risban,  or  Eysbank,  which
entirely  govei-ned  the  harbour,  and  the  possession  of
which  made  Calais  nearly  impregnable,  as  inexhaustible
supplies  could  thus  be  poured  into  it  by  sea,  had  fallen
into  comparative  decay.  De  Gordan  had  been  occupied
in  strengthening  the  work,  biit  since  his  death  the
nephew  had  entireh'  neglected  the  task.  On  the  land
side,  the  bridge  of  xsivelet  Avas  the  key  to  the  place.
The  faubourg  was  held  by  two  Dutch  companies,  under
Captains  Le  Gros  and  Dominique,  who  undertook  to  pre-
vent the  entrance  of  the  archduke's  forces.  Vidosan,  how-
ever, ordered  these  faithful  auxiliaries  into  the  citadel.

De  Rosne,  acting  with  great  promptness,  seized  both
the  bridge  of  Nivelet  and  the  fort  of  Rysbank,  by  a
sudden  and  well-concerted  movement.  This  having
been  accomplished,  the  city  was  in  his  power,  and,  after
sustaining  a  brief  cannonade,  it  surrendered.  Vidosan,
17  AprU,  with  his  garrison,  however,  retired  into  the
1596.  citadel,  and  it  was  agreed  between  himself  and
De  Rosne  that  unless  succour  ^hould  be  received  from
the  French  king  before  the  expiration  of  six  days,  the
citadel  should  also  bo  evacuated.

Meantime Henry,  who  was at  Boulogne, much  dis
gusted at this unexpected  disaster,  had  sent  couriers
to  the  Netherlands,  demanding  assistance  of  the  States-
is  De  Thou.  xii.  cai

1596. CALAIS  IN  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  SPANIARDS. 34-7

General  and  of  the  stadholdor.  Mam-ice  had  speedily
responded  to  the  appeal.  Piooeeding  himself  to  Zealand,
he  had  shipped  fifteen  companies  of  picked  troops  from
Middelbnrg,  together  with  a  flotilla  laden  with  munitions
and  provisions  enough  to  withstand  a  siege  of  several
weeks.  W  hen  the  arrangements  were  completed,  he
went  himself  on  board  of  a  ship  of  war  to  take  command
of  the  expedition  in  person.^"  On  the  17th  of  April  he
arrived  with  liis  succours  off  the  harbour  of  Calais,  and
found  to  his  infinite  disappointment  that  the  Eysbank
fort  was  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy .^^  As  not  a  vessel
could  pass  the  bar  without  almost  touching  that  fortress,
the  entrance  to  Calais  was  now  imjiossible.^^  Had  the
incompetent  Vidosan  heeded  the  advice  of  his  brave
Dutch  ofBceis,  the  place  might  still  have  been  saved,  for
it  had  suirendered  in  a  panic  on  the  very  day  when  the
fleet  of  Maurice  arrived  off  the  port.

Heniy  had  lost  no  time  in  sending,  also,  to  his
English  allies  for  succour.  The  possession  of  Calais  by
the  Spaniards  might  well  seem  alarming  to  Elizabeth,
who  could  not  well  forget  that  up  to  the  time  of  her
sister  this  important  position  had  been  for  two  centuries
an  English  stronghold.  The  defeat  of  the  Spanish
husband  of  an  English  queen  had  torn  from  England
the  last  tiophies  of  the  Black  Prince,  and  now  the  prize
had  again  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Spain ;  but  of  Spain
no  longer  in  alliance,  but  at  war,  with  England.  Ob-
viousl}'  it  was  most  dangerous  to  the  interests  and  to
the  safety  of  the  English  realm,  that  this  threatening
position,  so  near  the  gates  of  London,  should  be  in  the
hands  of  the  most  powerful  potentate  in  the  world  and
the  diie  enemy  of  England.  In  response  to  Henry's
appeal,  the  Earl  of  Essex  was  despatched  with  a  force
of  six  thousand  men — raised  by  express  command  of  the
queen  on  Sunday  when  the  people  were  all  at  church —
to  Dover,  where  shipping  was  in  readiness  to  tiansport
the  troops  at  once  across  the  Channel.  At  the  same
time,  the  politic  queen  and  some  of  her  counsellors
thought  the  opening  a  good  one  to  profit  by  the  calamity
of  their  dear  ally.  Certainly  it  was  desirable  to  pre
vent  Calais  from  falling  into  the  grasp  of  Philip.  But
it  was  perhaps  equally  desiiable, now  that  the  place

20  Bor,  IV.  18S.  21  Ibid.  -^  Ibid

348  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXH.

witliout  the  assistance  of  Elizabeth  could  no  longer  be
preserved  by  Henry,  that  Elizabeth,  and  not  Henry,
should  henceforth  be  its  possessor.  To  make  this  pio-
positicjn  as  clear  to  the  French  king  as  it  seemed  to  the
English  queen,  Sir  Eobert  Sidney  was  despatched  in  all
haste  to  Boulogne,  even  while  the  guns  of  De  Rosne
were  pointed  at  Calais  citadel,  and  while  Maurice's  fleet,
batfled  by  the  cowardly  surrender  of  the  Kisban,  was  on
its  retreat  from  the  harbour.

At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  21st  of  April,
21  April.  Sidney  landed  at  Boulogne.  Henry,  who  had
1596.  been  intensely  impatient  to  hear  from  England,
and  who  suspected  tliat  the  delay  was  boding  no  good  to
his  cause,  went  down  to  the  strand  to  meet  the  enroj,
with  whom  then  and  there  he  engaged  instantly  in  the
most  animated  discourse.

As  there  was  little  time  to  be  lost,  and  as  Sidney  on
getting  out  of  the  vessel  found  himself  thus  confronted
with  the  soldier-king  in  person,  he  at  once  made  the
demand  which  he  had  been  sent  across  the  Channel  to
make.  He  requested  the  king  to  deliver  up  the  town
a,nd  citadel  of  Calais  to  the  Queen  of  England  as  soon  as,
with  her  assistance,  he  should  succeed  in  recovering  the
place.  He  assigned  as  her  Majesty's  reasons  for  this
peremptory  summons  that  she  would  on  no  other  terms
find  it  in  her  power  to  furnish  the  required  succour.
Her  subjects,  she  said,  would  never  consent  to  it  except
on  these  conditions.  It  was  perhaps  not  very  common
with  the  queen  to  exhibit  so  much  deference  to  the
popular  will,  but  on  this  occasion  the  supposed  inclina-
tions of  the  nation  furnished  her  with  an  excellent  pre-
text for  carrying  out  her  own.  Sidney  urged  moreover
that  her  Majesty  felt  certain  of  being  obliged — in  case
she  did  not  take  Calais  into  her  own  safe  keeping  and
protection — to  come  to  the  rescue  again  within  four  or
six  months  to  prevent  it  once  more  from  being  besieged,
conquered,  and  sacked  by  the  enemy.

'ihe  king  had  feared  some  such  proposition  as  this,
and  had  intimated  as  much  to  the  States'  envoy,  Cal-
vaert,  who  had  walked  with  him  down  to  the  strand,
and  had  left  him  when  the  conference  began.  Henry
was  not  easily  thrown  from  his  equanimity,  nor  wont  to
exhibit  passion  on  anv  occasion  least  of  all  in  his  dis-

1596.  PROPOSAL  OF  QUEEN  ELIZABETH.  349

cussions  with  the  ambassadors  of  England,  but  the  cool
and  insolent  egotism  of  this  communication  was  too
much  for  him.

He  could  never  have  believed,  he  said  in  reply,  that
after  the  repeated  assurances  of  her  Majesty's  affection
for  him  which  he  had  received  from  the  late  tSir  Henry
Umton^^  in  their  recent  negotiations,  her  Majesty  would
now  so  discourteously  seek  to  make  her  profit  out  of  his
misery.  He  had  come  to  Boulogne,  he  continued,  on  the
pledge  given  by  the  Earl  of  E.^sex  to  assist  him  with
seven  or  eight  thousand  men  in  the  recovery  of  Calais.
If  this  after  all  should  fail  him — although  his  own
reputation  would  be  more  injured  by  the  capture  of
the  place  thus  before  his  eyes  than  if  it  had  happened
in  his  absence^ — he  would  rather  a  hundred  times  endure
the  loss  of  the  place  than  have  it  succoured  with  such
injurious  and  dishonourable  conditit)ns.  After  all,  he
said,  the  loss  of  Calais  was  substantially  of  more  import-
ance to  the  queen  than  to  himself.  To  him  the  chief
detriment  would  be  in  the  breaking  up  of  his  easy  and
regular  communications  with  his  neighbours  through
this  position,  and  especially  with  her  Majesty.  But  as
her  affection  for  him  was  now  proved  to  be  so  slender  as
to  allow  her  to  seek  a  jn-ofit  from  his  misfortune  and  dis-
honour, it  would  be  better  for  him  to  dispense  with  her
friendship  altogether  and  to  strengthen  his  connections
with  truer  and  more  honourable  friends.  Should  the
worst  come  to  the  worst,  he  doubted  not  that  he  should
be  able,  being  what  he  was  and  much  more  than  he  was
of  old,  to  make  a  satisfactory  arrangement  with  the  King
of  Spain.  He  was  ready  to  save  Calais  at  the  peril  of  his
life,  to  conquer  it  in  person,  and  not  by  the  hands  of  any
of  his  lieutenants  ;  but  having  done  so,  he  was  not  will-
ing— at  so  great  a  loss  of  reputation  without  and  at  so
much  peril  within — to  deliver  it  to  her  Majesty  or  to
any  one  else.  He  would  far  rather  see  it  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  Spaniards.

Thus  warmly  and  frankly  did  Henry  denounce  the  un-
handsome projDosition  made  in  the  name  of  the  queen,
while,  during  his  vehement  expostulations,  Sidney  grew
red  with  shame,  and  did  not  venture  to  look  the  king  for

23  Sir  Henry  Umton  had  died  in  France  soon  aft^r  the  interview  with  Henry  lY
mentioned  on  a  jjrevious  page  of  this  volume. Mcieren,  371.

350  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIL

oue  raoraent  in  the  face.^  He  then  sought  to  mitigate
the  effect  of  his  demand  by  intimating,  with  much  em-
barrassment of  demeanour,  that  perhaps  her  Majesty
would  be  satisfied  with  the  possession  of  Calais  for  her
own  life-time,  and — as  this  was  at  once  plumply  refused
— by  the  suggestion  of  a  pledge  of  it  for  the  term  of  one
year.  But  the  king  only  grew  the  more  indignant  as
the  bargaining  became  more  paltry,  and  he  continued  to
heap  bitter  reproaches  upon  the  queen,  who,  without
having  any  children  or  known  inheritor  of  her  posses-
sions, should  nevertheless  be  so  desirous  of  compassing
his  eternal  disgrace  and  of  exciting  the  discontent  of  his
subjects  for  the  sake  of  an  evanescent  gain  for  herself.
At  such  a  price,  he  avowed,  he  had  no  wish  to  purchase
her  Majesty's  friendship.

After  this  explosion  the  conference  became  more  amica-
ble. The  English  envoy  assured  the  king  that  there  could
be,  at  all  events,  no  doubt  of  the  arrival  of  Essex  with
eight  thousand  men  on  the  following  Thursday  to  assist
in  the  relief  of  the  citadel ;  notwithstanding  the  answer
which  he  had  received  to  the  demand  of  her  Majesty.

He  furthermore  expressed  the  strong  desire  which  he
felt  that  the  king  might  be  induced  to  make  a  personal
visit  to  the  queen  at  Dover,  whither  she  would  gladly
come  to  receive  him,  so  soon  as  Calais  should  have  been
saved.  To  this  the  king  replied  with  gallantry,  that  it
was  one  of  the  things  in  the  world  that  he  had  most  at
heart.  The  envo}'  rejoined  that  her  Majesty  would  con-
sider such  a  visit  a  special  honour  and  favour.  She  had
said  that  she  could  leave  this  world  more  cheerfully,
when  God  should  ordain,  after  she  had  enjoyed  two
hours'  conversation  with  his  Majesty.

Sidney  on  taking  his  departure  repeated  the  assurance
that  the  troops  under  Essex  would  arrive  before  Calais
by  Thiirsday,  and  that  they  were  fast  marching  to  the
English  coast ;  forgetting,  apparently,  that,  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  interview,  he  had  stated,  according  to  the
queen's  instructions,  that  the  troops  had  been  forbidden
to  march  imtil  a  favourable  answer  had  been  I'eturned
by  the  king  to  her  proposal.

^  "Deur  (Jewel  ke  S.  M.  den  voorg.  Ambassadeur  soo  schaemroot  maekte,  dat
hy  (soo  S.  M«  my  gheseyt  heeft)  S.  M.  niet  in't  aensicht  dorste  te  sien,"  &c.,  &c,
Caivaert's  hespatch  in  Deventer,  U.  106.

1598.  FAILURE  OF  SIDNEY'S  MISSION.  351

Henry  then  retired  to  his  head-qnaiters  for  the  pur-
pose of  drawing  up  information  for  his  minister  in  Eng-
land, De  Sancy,  who  had  not  yet  been  received  by  the
queen,  and  who  had  been  kept  in  complete  ignorance  of
this  mission  of  Sidney  and  of  its  purport.

While  the  king  was  thus  occupied,  the  English  envoy
was  left  in  the  company  of  Calvaert,  who  endeavoured,
without  much  success,  to  obtain  from  him  the  result  of
the  conference  which  had  just  taken  place.  Sidney  was
not  to  be  pumped  by  the  Dutch  diplomatist,  adroit  as
he  unquestionably  was ;  but,  so  soon  as  the  queen's  am-
bassador was  fairly  afloat  again  on  his  homeward  track
— which  was  the  case  within  three  hours  after  his  an-ival
at  Boulogne — Calvaert  received  from  the  king  a  minute
account  of  the  whole  conversation.^^

Henry  expressed  unbounded  gratitude  to  the  States-
General  of  the  republic  for  their  prompt  and  liberal
assistance,  and  he  eagerly  contrasted  the  conduct  of
Prince  Maurice — sailing  forth  in  person  so  chivalrously
to  his  rescue — A^dth  the  sharp  bargainings  and  short-
comings of  the  queen.  He  despatched  a  special  messenger
to  convey  his  thanks  to  the  prince,  and  he  expressed  his
hope  to  (3alvaert  that  the  States  might  be  willing  that
their  troops  should  return  to  the  besieged  place  under
the  command  of  Maurice,  whose  presence  alone,  as  he
loudly  and  publicly  protested,  was  worth  four  thousand
men.

But  it  was  too  late.  The  six  days  were  rapidly  pass-
ing away.  The  governor  of  Boulogne,  Campagnolo,
succeeded,  by  Henry's  command,  in  bringing  a  small
reinforcement  of  two  or  three  hundred  men  into  the
citadel  of  Calais  during  the  night  of  the  22nd  of  April.
This  devoted  little  band  made  their  way,  when  the  tide
was  low,  along  the  flats  which  stretched  between  the
fort  of  Rysbank  and  the  sea.  Sometimes  wading  up  to
the  neck  in  water,  sometimes  swimming  for  their  lives,
and  during  a  greater  part  of  their  peiilous  march  cling-
ing so  close  to  the  hostile  fortress  as  almost  to  touch  its
guns,  the  gallant  adventurers  succeeded  in  getting  into
the  citadel  in  time  to  be  butchered  with  the  iX'St  of
the  garrison  on  the  following  day. For  so  soon  as  the

25  Calvaert's  Letter  of  22  April,  1596,  recounting  this  remarkable  interview,  is
given  at  length  in  Van  Deventer's  valuable  publication,  ii-  105-110.

352  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXH.

handful  of  men  had  gained  admittance  to  the  gates — ■
atthough  otherwise  the  aspect  of  ai't'aiis  was  quite  un-
changed— the  rash  and  weak  De  Vidosau  proclaimed
that  the  reinforcements  stipulated  in  his  conditional
capitulation  having  arrived,  he  should  now  resume
hostilities.  Whereupon  he  opened  fiie  upon  the  town,
and  a  sentry  was  killed.  De  Rosne,  furious  at  what  he
considered  a  breach  of  faith,  directed  a  severe  cannonade
against  the  not  very  formidable  walls  of  the  castle.  Dur-
ing the  artillery  engagement  which  ensued  the  Prince  of
Orange,  who  had  accompanied  De  Eosne  to  the  siege,
had  a  very  narrow  escape.  A  cannon-ball  from  the  town
took  off  the  heads  of  two  Spaniards  standing  near  him,
bespattering  him  with  their  blood  and  brains.  He  was
urged  to  retire,  but  assured  those  about  him  that  he
came  of  too  good  a  house  to  be  afraid.  His  courage  was
commendable,  but  it  seems  not  to  have  occurred  to  him
that  the  place  for  his  father's  son  was  not  at  the  side  of
the  general  who  was  doing  the  work  of  his  father's  mur-
derer. \\  hile  his  brother  Maurice  with  a  fleet  of  twenty
Dutch  war-ships  was  attempting  in  vain  to  rescue  Calais
from  the  grasp  of  the  Spanish  king,  Philip  William  of
Nassau  was  looking  on,  a  pleased  and  passive  spectator
of  the  desperate  and  unsuccessf id  efforts  at  defence.  I'he
assault  was  then  ordered.^"  The  first  storm  was  repulsed,
mainly  by  the  Dutch  companies,  who  fought  in  the  breach
until  most  of  their  numbers  were  killed  or  wounded,  their
captains  Dominique  and  Le  Gros  having  both  fallen.
The  next  attack  was  successful,  the  citadel  was  carried,
and  the  whole  garrison,  with  exception  of  what  remained
of  the  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,  put  to  the  sword.  De
Vidosan  himself  perished.  Thus  Calais  was  once  more
a  Spanish  city,  and  was  re-annexed  to  the  obedient  pro-
vinces of  Flanders.  Of  five  thousand  persons,  soldiers
and  citizens,  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  castle,  all  were
killed  or  reduced  to  captivity.^

The  conversion  of  this  important  naval  position  into  a
Spanish-Flemish  station  was  almost  as  disastrous  to  the
republic  as  it  was  mortifying  to  France  and  dangerous
to  England. The  neighbuuring  Dunkirk  had  long  been

26  Meteren,  370. De  la  Mse.

27  Bor,  IV.  184-183. De  Thou,  xii.  631-637. Meteren,  369,  370. Bentivi.glio,  439
440. Coloma,  211-217. Albert  to  Philip,  24  April,  1596. (Arch,  de  Siraancas,  MS.)

1596.  PIRATES  OF  DUNKIRK.  353

a  nest  of  piiate.s,  whence  small,  fast-sailing  vessels  issued,
daily  and  nightly,  to  prey  indifscriminately  upon  the
commerce  of  all  nations.  These  coisairs  neither  gave
nor  took  quarter,  and  were  in  the  habit,  after  they  had
plundered  their  prizes,  of  setting  them  adrift,  with  the
sailors  nailed  to  the  deck  or  chaiued  to  the  rigging  ;
Avhile  the  officers  were  held  for  ransom.  In  case  the
vessels  themselves  were  wanted,  the  crews  were  indis-
criminately tossed  overboard  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,
the  buccaneers  rarely  hesitated  to  blow  up  their  own
ships  when  unable  to  escape  from  superior  force.  Cap-
ture was  followed  by  speed}'  execution,  and  it  was  but
recently  that  one  of  these  fi-eebooters  having  been  brought
into  Rotterdam,  the  whole  crew,  forty-four  in  number,
were  hanged  on  the  day  of  their  arrival,  while  some  five
and  twenty  merchant-captains  held  for  ransom  by  the
pirates  thus  obtained  their  liberty."*

And  now  Calais  was  likely  to  become  a  second  and
more  dangerous  sea-robbers'  cave  than  even  Dunkirk
had  been.

Notwithstanding  this  unlucky  beginning  of  the  cam-
paign for  the  three  allies,  it  was  determined  to  proceed
with  a  considerable  undertaking  which  had  been  ari-anged
between  England  and  the  republic.  For  the  time,  there-
fore, the  importunate  demands  of  the  queen  for  repay-
ment by  the  States  of  her  disbursements  during  the  past
ten  years  were  suspended.  It  had,  indeed,  never  been
more  difficult  than  at  that  moment  for  the  republic  to
furnish  extraoidinary  sums  of  money.  The  year  1695
had  not  been  prosperous.  Although  the  general  advance
in  commerce,  manufactures,  and  in  every  department  of
national  development  had  been  very  remarkable,  yet
there  had  recently  been,  for  exceptional  causes,  an
apparent  falling  off  ;-^  while,  on  the  other  hand,  there
had  been  a  bad  harvest  in  the  north  of  Europe.  In
Holland,  whei'e  no  grain  was  grown,  and  which  yet  was
the  granary  of  the  world,  the  prices  were  tiebled.  One
hundred  and  eight  bushels  (a  last)  of  rye,  which  ordinarily
was  worth  fifty  florins,  now  sold  for  one  hundred  and  fifty
florins,  and  other  objects  of  consumption  were  equally
enhanced  in  value.^°  On  the  other  hand,  the  expenses
of  the  war  were  steadily  increasing,  and  were  fixed  for

S3  Bor,  IV.  50,  129. Metcren,  Reyd. »  Rcyd,  300. >»  Bor,  IV.  152.
VOL. III.  2 A

354  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

this  5'ear  at  five  millions  of  florins.  The  republic,  and
especially  the  States  of  Holland,  never  hesitated  to  tax
heroically.  The  commonwealth  had  no  income  except
that  which  the  several  provinces  chose  to  impose  upon
themselves  in  order  to  fill  the  quota  assigned  to  them  by
the  States-General ;  but  this  defect  in  their  political
organization  was  not  sensil)ly  felt  so  long  as  the  en-
thusiasm for  the  war  continned  in  full  force.  The
people  of  the  Netherlands  knew  full  well  that  there
was  no  liberty  for  them  without  fighting,  no  fighting
without  an  army,  no  army  without  wages,  and  no  wages
without  taxation  ;  and  although  by  the  end  of  the  centuiy
the  imposts  had  become  so  high  that,  in  the  language
of  that  keen  observer,  Cardinal  Bentivoglio,  nuncio  at
Brussels,  they  could  scarcely  be  imagined  higher,  yet,
according  to  the  same  authorit}'',  they  were  laid  unflinch-
ingly and  paid  by  the  people  without  a  murmur.^'
During  this  year  and  the  next  the  States  of  Holland,
whose  proportion  often  amounted  to  fifty  per  cent,  of
the  whole  contribution  of  the  United  Provinces,  and
who  ever  set  a  wholesome  example  in  taxation,  raised
the  duty  on  imports  and  all  internal  taxes  by  one-eighth,
and  laid  a  fresh  impost  on  such  articles  of  luxury  as
velvets  and  satins,  pleas  and  processes.  Starch,  too,
became  a  source  of  considerable  revenue.  With  the  fast-
lising  prosperity  of  the  country  luxury  had  risen  like-
wise, and,  as  in  all  ages  and  countries  of  the  world  of
which  there  is  record,  woman's  dress  signalized  itself  by
extravagant  and  very  often  tasteless  conceptions.  In  a
country  where,  before  the  doctrine  of  popular  sovereignty
had  been  broached  in  any  part  of  the  world  by  the  most
speculative  theorists,  very  vigorous  and  practical  ex-
amples of  democracy  had  been  afforded  to  Europe;  in
a  countrj^  where,  ages  before  the  science  of  political
economy  had  been  dreamed  of,  lessons  of  free-trade  on
the  largest  scale  had  been  taught  to  mankind  by  re-
publican traders  instinctivel}'  breaking  in  many  direc-
tions through  the  nets  by  which  monarchs  and  oligarchs,
guilds  and  corporations,  had  hampered  the  movements
of  commerce ;  it  was  natural  that  fashion  should  instinc-
tively rebel  against  restraint.  The  honest  burgher's
vrow  of  Middelburg  or  Enkhuyzen  claimed  the  right  to

*l  U  ■luziotif-  delle  ProviiiRie  Unite.

1596.  RESTRICTION  IN  THE  USE  OF  STARCH.  355

make  herself  as  grotesque  as  Queen  Elizabeth  in  all  her
glory.  Sumptuary  laws  were  an  unwholesome  part  of
feudal  tyranny,  and,  as  such,  were  natu7-ally  dropping
into  oblivion  on  the  free  soil  of  the  Netherlands.  It  was
the  complaint  therefore  of  moralists  that  unproductive
consumption  was  alarmingly  increasing.  Foimerly  starch
had  been  made  of  the  refuse  parts  of  corn,  but  now  the
manufacturei's  of  that  article  made  use  of  the  bloom  of
the  wheat  and  consumed  as  much  of  it  as  would  have
fed  great  cities.  In  the  little  village  of  Wormer  the
starch-makers  used  between  three  and  foTir  thousand
bushels  a  week.  Thus  a  substantial  gentlewoman  in
fashionable  array  might  bear  the  food  of  a  parish  upon
her  ample  bosom.  A  single  manufacturer  in  Amsterdam
required  four  hundred  weekly  bushels.  Such  was  the
demand  for  the  stiffening  of  the  vast  ruffs,  the  wonder-
ful head-gear,  the  elaborate  lace-work,  stomachers  and
streamers,  without  which  no  lady  who  respected  herself
could  possibly  go  abroad  to  make  her  daily  purchases  of
eggs  and  poultry  in  the  market-place.

"  May  God  preserve  us,"  exclaimed  a  contemporary
chronicler,  unreasonably  excited  on  the  starch  question,
"from  farther  luxury  and  wantonness,  and  abuse  of  His
blessings  and  good  gifts,  that  the  punishment  of  Jero-
boam, which  followed  upon  Solomon's  fortunate  I'eign
and  the  gold-ships  of  Ophir,  may  not  come  upon  us."  ^-

The  States  of  Holland  not  confounding — as  so  often
has  been  the  case — the  precepts  of  moral  philosophy
with  those  of  political  economy,  did  not,  out  of  fear  for
the  doom  of  Jeroboam,  forbid  the  use  of  starch.  They
simply  laid  a  tax  of  a  stiver  a  pound  on  the  commodit}^,'^^
or  about  six  per  cent,  ad  valorem ;  and  this  was  a  more
wholesome  way  of  serving  the  State  than  by  abridging
the  liberty  of  the  people  in  the  choice  of  personal  attire.
Meantime  the  preachers  were  left  to  thunder  from  their
pulpits  upon  the  sinfulness  of  starched  ruffles  and  orna-
mental top-knots,  and  to  threaten  their  fair  hearers  with
the  wrath  to  come,  with  as  much  success  as  usually
attends  such  eloquence.

There  had  been  uneasiness  in  the  provinces  in  regard
to  the  designs  of  the  queen,  especially  since  the  States
had  expressed  their  inability  to  comply  in  full  with  her

32  Reyd,35].  '3  Hiki.

2  A  2

356  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

demands  for  repayment.  Spanish  emissaries  had  been
busily  circulating  calumnious  reports  that  her  Majesty
was  on  the  eve  of  concluding  a  secret  peace  with  Philip,
and  that  it  was  her  intention  to  deliver  the  cautionary
towns  to  the  king.  The  Government  attached  little
credence  to  such  statements,  but  it  was  natural  that
Envoy  Caron  should  be  anxious  at  their  perpetual  re-
currence both  in  England  and  in  the  provinces.  So,
one  day,  he  had  a  long  conversation  with  the  Earl  of
Essex  on  the  subject ;  for  it  will  be  recollected  that
Lord  Leicester  had  strenuously  attempted  at  an  earlier
day  to  get  complete  possession,  not  only  of  the  pledged
cities  but  of  Leyden  also,  in  order  to  control  the  whole
country.  Essex  was  aiSame  with  indignation  at  once,
and  expi'essed  himself  with  his  customary  recklessness.
He  swore  that  if  her  ]\Iajesty  were  so  far  forsaken  of
God  and  so  forgetful  of  her  own  glory,  as  through  evil
counsel  to  think  of  -making  any  treaty  with  Spain,  with-
out the  knowledge  of  the  States-General  and  in  order  to
cheat  them,  he  would  himself  make  the  matter  as  public
as  it  was  possible  to  do,  and  would  place  himself  in
direct  opposition  to  such  a  measure,  so  as  to  show  the
whole  world  that  his  heart  and  soul  were  foreign  at  least
to  any  vile  counsel  of  the  kind  that  might  have  been
given  to  his  Sovereign.^*  Caron  and  Essex  conversed
much  in  this  vein,  and,  although  the  envoy  especially
requested  him  not  to  do  so,  the  earl,  who  was  not  dis-
tinguished for  his  powers  of  dissimulation,  and  who
suspected  Burleigh  of  again  tampering,  as  he  had  often
before  tampered,  with  secret  agents  of  Philip,  went
straight  to  the  queen  with  the  story.  Next  day,  Essex
invited  Caron  to  dine  and  to  go  with  him  after  dinner
to  the  queen.  This  was  done,  and,  so  soon  as  the  States'
envoy  was  admitted  to  the  royal  presence,  her  Majesty
at  once  opened  the  subject.  IShe  had  heard,  she  said,
that  the  reports  in  .question  had  been  spread  through
the  provinces,  and  she  expressed  much  indignation  in
regard  to  them.  She  swore  very  vehemently,  as  usual,
and  protested  that  she  had  better  never  have  been  born
than  prove  so  miserable  a  princess  as  these  tales  would
make  her.  The  histories  of  England,  she  said,  should
never  describe  her  as  guilty  of  such  falsehood. She

*»  Letter  of  Caron,  3  Dec.  1595,  apud  Bor,  IV.  150,  151.

1596. ELIZABETH'S  PROTESTATIONS  OF  SINCERITy. 357

could  find  a  more  honourable  and  fitting  means  of
making  peace  than  by  delivering  up  cities  and  strong-
holds so  sincerely  and  confidingly  placed  in  her  hands.
She  hoped  to  restore  them  as  faithfully  as  they  had
loyally  been  entrusted  to  her  keeping.  She  begged
Caron  to  acquaint  the  States-General  with  these  asseve-
rations ;  declaring  that  never  since  she  had  sent  troops
to  the  Netherlands  had  she  lent  her  ear  to  those  who
had  made  such  underhand  propositions.  She  was  aware
that  Cardinal  Albert  had  propositions  to  make,  and  that
he  was  desirous  of  inducing  both  the  French  king  and
herself  to  consent  to  a  peace  with  Spain  ;  but  she  pro-
mised the  States'  envoy  solemnly  before  God  to  apprise
him  of  any  such  overtures,  so  soon  as  they  should  be
made  known  to  herself.^^

Much  more  in  this  strain,  with  her  usual  vehemence
and  mighty  oaths,  did  the  great  queen  aver,  and  the
republican  envoy,  to  whom  she  was  on  this  occasion
very  gracious,  was  fain  to  believe  in  her  sincerity.  Yet
the  remembrance  of  the  amazing  negotiations  between
the  queen's  ministers  and  the  agents  of  Alexander
Farnese,  by  which  the  invasion  of  the  Armada  had  been
m.asked,  could  not  but  have  left  an  uneasy  feeling  in
the  mind  of  every  Dutch  statesman.  "  I  trust  in  God,"
said  Caron,  "  that  He  may  never  so  abandon  her  as  to
permit  her  to  do  the  reverse  of  what  she  now  protests
with  so  much  passion.  Should  it  be  otherwise — which
God  forbid— I  should  think  that  He  would  send  such
chastisement  upon  her  and  her  people  that  other  princes
would  see  their  fate  therein  as  in  a  mirror,  should  they
make  and  break  such  oaths  and  promises.  I  tell  you
these  things  as  they  occur,  because,  as  I  often  feel  uneasi-
ness myself,  I  imagine  that  my  friends  on  the  other  side
the  water  may  be  subject  to  the  same  anxiety.  Never-
theless, beat  the  bush  as  I  may,  I  can  obtain  no  better
information  than  this  which  1  am  n<^w  sending  you."^''

It  had  been  agreed  that  for  a  time  the  queen  should
desist  from  her  demands  for  repayment — which,  accord-
ing to  the  Treaty  of  1585,  was  to  be  made  only  after
conclusion  of  peace  between  Spain  and  the  provinces,  but
which  P^lizabeth  was  frequently  urging  on  the  ground
that  the  States  could  now  make  that  peace  when  they

35  Letter  of  Caron,  libi  sup.  36  lya.

358  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIJ.

chose — and  in-  return  for  such  remission  the  republic
promised  to  furnish  twenty-four  ships  of  war  and  four
tenders  for  a  naval  expedition  which  was  now  projected
against  the  Spanish  coast.  These  war-sLips  were  to  be
of  four  hundred,  three  hundred,  and  two  hundred  tons
— eight  of  each  dimension — and  the  estimated  expense
of  their  fitting  out  for  five  months  was  5 12,796  florins.''^
Before  the  end  of  April,  notwithstanding  the  dis-
appointment occasioned  in  the  Netherlands  by  the  loss
of  Calais,  which  the  States  had  so  eneigetically  striven
to  prevent,  the  fleet  under  Admiral  John  of  Duven-
woord,  Seigneur  of  Warmond,  and  Vice-Adtnirals  Jan
Gerbrantz  and  Cornelius  Leusen,  had  arrived  at  Ply-
mouth, ready  to  sail  with  their  English  allies.^^  There
were  three  thousand  sailors  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  on
board,  the  best  mariners  in  the  world,  and  two  thou-
sand two  hundred  picked  veterans  from  the  garrisons  of
the  Netherlands.^^  These  land-troops  were  English,  but
they  belonged  to  the  States'  army,  which  was  composed
of  Dutch,  German,  Walloon,  Scotch,  and  Irish  soldiers,
and  it  was  a  liberal  concession  on  the  yjart  of  the  repub-
lican Government  to  allow  them  to  serve  on  the  present
expedition.  By  the  terms  of  the  treaty  tlie  qneen  had
no  more  power  to  send  these  companies  to  invade  Spain
than  to  campaign  against  Tyr  Owen  in  Ireland,  while
at  a  moment  when  the  cardinal  archduke  had  a  stronger
and  better-appointed  army  in  Flanders  than  had  been
seen  for  many  years  in  the  provinces,  it  was  a  most
hazardous  experiment  for  the  States  to  send  so  consider-
able a  portion  of  their  land  and  naval  foices  upon  a
distant  adventure.  It  was  also  a  serious  V)low  to  them
to  be  deprived  for  the  whole  season  of  that  valiant  and
experienced  commander,  Sir  Fiancis  Vere,  the  most
valuable  lieutenant,  save  Lewis  William,  that  Maurice
had  at  his  disposition.  Yet  Vere  was  to  take  command
of  this  contingent  thus  sent  to  the  coast  of  Spain,  at  the
very  moment  when  the  republican  army  ought  to  issue
from  their  winter  quarters  and  begin  active  operations
in  the  field.  The  consequence  of  this  diminution  of  their
strength  and  drain  upon  their  resouices  was  that  the
States  were  unable  to  put  an  army  in  the  field  during
the  current  year,  or  make  any  attempt  at  a  campaign.

37  Bor,  IV.  148.  182.  38  lijid.  191.  89  ibid.

i:)93.  EXPEDITION  AGAINST  SPAIN.  359

The  queen  wrote  a  warm  letter  of  thanks  to  Admiral
Warmond  for  the  promptness  and  efficiency  with  which
he  had  brought  his  fleet  to  the  place  of  rendezvous,  and
now  all  was  bustle  and  preparation  in  the  English  ports
for  the  exciting  expedition  resolved  iipon.  !N'ever
during  Philip's  life-time,  nor  for  several  years  before
his  birth,  had  a  hostile  foot  trod  the  soil  of  Spain,
except  during  the  brief  landing  at  Corunna  in  1590,
and,  although  the  king's  beard  had  been  well  singed
ten  years  previously  by  Sir  Francis  Drake,  and  although
the  coast  of  Portugal  had  still  more  recently  been  in-
vaded by  Essex  and  Vere,  yet  the  present  adventure
was  on  a  larger  scale,  and  held  out  brighter  prospects
of  success  than  any  preceding  expedition  had  clone.
In  an  age  when  the  line  between  the  land  and  sea
service,  between  regular  campaigners  and  volunteers,
between  public  and  private  warfare,  between  chivalrous
knights-arrant  and  buccaneers,  was  not  very  distiuctl}^
drawn,  there  could  be  nothing  more  exciting  to  adven-
turous spirits,  more  tempting  to  the  imagination  of  those
who  hated  the  Pope  and  Philip,  who  loved  fighting,
prize-money,  and  the  queen,  than  a  foray  into  Spain.

It  was  time  to  return  the  visit  of  the  Armada.  Some
of  the  sea-kings  v^ere  gone.  Those  magnificent  free-
booters, Drake  and  Hawkins,  had  just  died  in  the  West
Indies,  and  doughty  Sir  Roger  Williams  had  left  the
world  in  which  he  had  bustled  so  effectively,  bequeath-
ing to  posterity  a  clasfsic  memorial  of  near  a  half  centuiy
of  hard  fighting,  written,  one  might  almost  imagine,  in
his  demi-pique  saddle.  But  that  most  genial,  valiant,
impracticable,  reckless,  fascinating  hero  of  romance,  the
Earl  of  Essex — still  a  youth  although  a  veteran  in
fevvice — was  in  the  spring-tide  of  favour  and  gloiy,
and  was  to  command  the  land-forces  now  assembled  at
I'lymouth.  That  other  corsair^ — as  the  Spaniards
called  him — that  other  charming  and  heroic  shape  in
England's  chequered  chronicle  of  chivalry  and  crime — •
famoxis  in  arts  and  arms,  politics,  science,  literature,  en-
dowed with  so  many  of  the  gifts  by  which  men  confer
lustre  on  their  age  and  country,  whose  name  was  already
a  part  of  England's  eternal  glory,  whose  tragic  destiny

■«'  "Otro  corsario  llamado  Guateral,"  says  the  historian  Herrera,  ingeniouslj'
fusing  into  one  the  Christian  and  family  names  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  iii.  5:S5.

360  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXH.

was  to  be  her  undying  shame — Raleigh,  the  soldier,
sailor,  scholar,  statesman,  poet,  historian,  geographical
discoverer,  planter  of  empires  yet  unborn — was  also  pre-
sent, helping  to  organize  the  somewhat  chaotic  elements
(jf  which  the  chief  Anglo-Dutch  enterprise  for  this  year
against  the  Spanish  world-dominion  was  compounded.

And,  again,  it  is  not  superfluous  to  recal  the  compara-
tively slender  materials,  both  in  bulk  and  numbers,
over  which  the  vivid  intelligence  and  restless  energy
of  the  two  leading  Protestant  powers,  the  kingdom  and
the  republic,  disposed.  Their  contest  against  the  over-
shadowing empiie,  which  was  so  obstinately  striving  to
become  the  fifth-monarchy  of  history,  was  waged  by
land  and  naval  forces,  which  in  their  aggregate  numbers
would  scarce  make  a  startling  list  of  killed  and  wounded
in  a  single  modern  battle ;  by  ships  such  that  a  whole
fleet  of  them  might  be  swept  out  of  existence  with  half-
a-dozen  modern  broadsides ;  by  weapons  which  would
seem  to  modern  eyes  like  clumsy  toys  for  children.
Such  was  the  machinery  by  which  the  world  was  to  be
lost  and  won,  less  than  three  centuries  ago.  Could
science,  which  even  in  that  age  had  made  gigantic
strides  out  of  the  preceding  darkness,  have  revealed  its
later  miracles,  and  have  presented  its  terrible  powers  to
the  despotism  which  was  seeking  to  crush  all  Christen-
dom beneath  its  feet,  the  possible  result  might  have
been  most  tragical  to  humanity.  While  there  are  few
inventions  in  morals,  the  demon  Intellect  is  ever  at  his
work,  knowing  no  fatigue  and  scorning  contentment  in
his  restless  demands  upon  the  infinite  Unknown.  Yet
moral  truth  remains  unchanged,  gradually  through  the
ages  extending  its  influence,  and  it  is  only  by  conformity
to  its  simple  and  eternal  dictates  that  nations,  like  in-
dividuals, can  preserve  a  healthful  existence.  In  the
unending  warfare  between  right  and  wrong,  between
liberty  and  despotism,  Evil  has  the  advantage  of  rapidly
assuming  many  shapes.  It  has  been  well  said  that
constant  vigilance  is  the  price  of  libert}'.  The  tendency
of  our  own  times,  stimulated  by  scientific  discoveries
and  their  practical  application,  is  to  political  consolida-
tion, to  the  absorption  of  lesser  communities  in  greater,
just  as  disintegration  was  the  leading  characteristic  of
the  darker  ages.  The  scheme  of  Charlemagne  to  organize

1596. STRUGGLE  BETWEEN  LIBERTY  AND  DESPOTLSM. 361

Europe  into  a  single  despotism  was  a  brilliant  failure
because  the  forces  which  were  driviijg  human  society
into  local  and  gradual  reconstruction  around  various
centres  of  crystallization  were  irresistible  to  any  coun-
tervailing enginry  which  the  emperor  had  at  his  disposal.
The  attempt  of  Philip,  eight  centuries  later,  at  universal
monarchy,  was  frivolous,  although  he  could  dispose  of
material  agencies  which  in  the  hands  of  Charlemagne
might  have  made  the  dreams  of  Charlemagne  possible.
It  was  frivolous  because  the  rising  instinct  of  the  age
was  for  religious,  political,  and  commercial  freedom  in
a  far  intenser  degree  than  those  who  lived  in  that  age
were  themselves  aware.  A  considerable  republic  had
been  evolved  as  it  were  involuntarily  out  of  the  neces-
sities of  the  time  almost  without  self-consciousness  that
it  was  a  republic,  and  even  against  the  desire  of  many
who  were  guiding  its  destinies.  And  it  found  itself  in
constant  combination  with  two  monarchs  despotic  at
heart  and  of  enigmatical  or  indifferent  religious  convic-
tions, who  yet  reigned  over  peoples  largely  influenced
by  enthusiasm  for  freedom.  Thus  liberty  was  pre-
served for  the  world  ;  but,  as  the  law  of  human  progress
would  seem  to  be  ever  by  a  spiral  movement,  it  seems
strange  to  the  supeificial  observer  not  prone  to  general-
izing, that  Calvinism,  which  unquestionably  was  the
hard  receptacle  in  which  the  germ  of  human  freedom
was  preserved  in  various  countries  and  at  different
epochs,  should  have  so  often  degenerated  into  tyranny.
Yet  notwithstanding  the  burning  of  Servetus  at  Geneva,
and  the  hanging  of  Mary  Dyer  at  Boston,  it  is  certain
that  France,  England,  the  Netherlands,  and  America,
owe  a  large  share  of  such  political  liberty  as  they  have
enjoyed  to  Calvinism.  It  may  be  possible  for  large
masses  of  humanity  to  accept  for  ages  the  idea  of  one
infallible  Church,  however  tj'rannical :  but  the  idea
on(;e  admitted  that  there  may  be  many  churches ;  that
what  is  called  the  State  can  be  separated  fi'om  what  is
called  the  Church ;  the  idea  of  infallibility  and  of
authority  soon  becomes  ridiculous — a  mere  fiction  of
political  or  fashionable  quickery  to  impose  upon  the
uneducated  or  the  unreflecting.

And  now  Essex,  Kaleigh  and Howard, Vere,  War-
mond  and  Nassau  were  about  to  invade  the  shores  of

362  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXII.

the  despot  who  sat  in  his  study  plotting  to  annex  Eng-
land, Scotland,  Ireland,  France,  the  Dutch  republic,  and
the  German  empire  to  the  realms  of  Spain,  Portugal,
Kaples,  Milan,  and  the  Eastern  and  Western  Indies,
over  which  he  already  reigned.

The  fleet  consisted  of  fifty- seven  ships  of  war,  of  which
13  Jan.  twenty-four  were  Dutch  vessels  under  Admiral
1596.  Warmond,  with  three  thousand  sailors  of  Hol-
land and  Zeeland.  Besides  the  sailors,  there  was  a
force  of  six  thousand  foot  soldiers,  including  the  English
veterans  from  the  Netherlands  under  Sir  Francis  Vere.
There  were  also  fifty  transports  laden  with  ammunition
and  stores.  The  expedition  was  under  the  joint  com-
mand of  Lord  High  Admiral  Howard  and  of  the  Earl  of
Essex.  Many  noble  and  knightly  volunteers,  both  from
England  and  the  republic,  were  on  board,  including,
besides  those  already  mentioned.  Lord  Thomas  Howard,
son  of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  Sir  John  VVingfield,  who
had  commanded  at  Gertruydenbeig,  when  it  had  been
so  treacherously  surrendered  to  Farnese ;  Count  Lewis
Gunther  of  Nassau,  who  had  so  recently  escaped  from
the  disastrous  fight  with  Mondragon  in  the  Lippe,  and
was  now  continuing  his  education  according  to  the
plan  laid  down  for  him  by  his  elder  brother  Lewis
\\  illiam  ;  Nicolas  Meetkerk,  Peter  Kegesmortes,  Don
Christopher  of  Portugal,  son  of  Don  Antonio,  and  a
host  of  other  adventurers.

On  the  last  day  of  June  the  expedition  arrived  oil'
Cadiz.  Next  morning  they  found  a  splendid  Spanish
fleet  in  the  harbour  of  that  city,  including  four  of  the
famous  apostolic  great  galleons,  St.  Philip,  St.  Matthew,
St.  Thomas  and  St.  Andrew,  with  twenty  or  thirty  great
war-ships  besides,  and  fifty-seven  well-armed  Indiamen,
which  were  to  be  convoyed  on  their  outward  A^oyage,
with  a  cargo  estimated  at  twelve  millions  of  ducats.

The  St.  Philip  was  the  phenomenon  of  naval  archi-
tecture of  that  day,  larger  and  stronger  than  any  ship
1  July,  before  known.  She  was  two  thousand  tons  bur-
1596.  ^gj^^  carried  eighty-two  bronze  cannon,  and  had
a  crew  of  twelve  hundred  men.  The  other  three  apostles
carried  each  fifty  guns  and  four  hundred  men.  The
armament  of  the  other  war-ships  varied  from  fifty-two  to
eighteen  guns  each. The  presence  of  such  a  formidable

1596.  ATTACK  ON IHE  SPANISH  fLEET.  363

force  might  have  seemed  a  motive  for  discouragemeut,  or
at  least  of  caution.  On  the  contrary,  the  adventurers
clashed  at  once  upon  their  prey;  thus  finding  a  larger
booty  than  they  had  dared  to  expect.  There  was  but  a
brief  engagement.  At  the  outset  a  Dutch  ship  accident-
ally blew  up,  and  gave  much  encouragement  to  the
Spaniards.  Their  joy  was  but  short-lived.  Two  of  the
great  galleons  were  soon  captured,  the  other  two,  the  St.
Philip  and  the  St.  Thomas,  were  run  aground  and
burned.  The  rest  of  the  war-ships  were  driven  within
the  harbour,  but  were  unable  to  prevent  a  landing  of  the
enemy's  forces.  In  the  eagerness  of  the  allies  to  seize
the  city,  they  unluckily  allowed  many  of  the  Indiamen
to  effect  their  escape  through  ihe  piiente  del  Zuazzo,
which  had  not  been  supposed  a  navigable  passage  for
ships  of  such  burthen.  Nine  hundred  soldiers  under
Essex,  and  four  hundred  noble  volunteers  under  Lewis
Gunther  of  Nassau,  now  sprang  on  shore,  and  drove
some  eleven  hundred  Spanish  skirmishers  back  within  the
gates  of  the  city,  or  into  a  bastion  recently  raised  to
fortify  the  point  when  the  troops  had  landed.  young-
Nassau  stormed  the  bulwark  sword  in  hand,  carried  it  at
the  first  assault,  and  planted  his  colours  on  its  battle-
ment. It  was  the  flag  of  William  the  Silent;  for  the
republican  banner  was  composed  of  the  family  colours  of
the  founder  of  the  new  commonwealth."  The  blazonry
of  the  proscribed  and  assassinated  rebel  waved  at  last
defiantly  over  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  Spain.  Essex  and
Nassau  and  all  the  rest  then  entered  the  city.  There
was  little  fighting.  Twenty-five  English  and  Hollanders
were  killed,  and  about  as  many  Sf)aniards.  Essex
knighted  about  fifty  gentlemen.  Englishmen  and  Hol-
landers, in  the  square  of  Cadiz  for  their  gallantry.
Among  the  number  were  Lewis  Gunther  of  Nassau,
Admiral  Warmond,  and  Peter  Kegesmortes.  Colonel
Nicolas  Meetkerke*^  was  killed  in  the  brief  action,  and

*i  Fruin,  357.  xviii.,  fol.  333,  and  388,  3S9,  and  otlier
♦2  It  will  be  observed  that  the  officer  conieniporaiy  authorities,  state  the  fact
mortally  wounded  at  the  talking  of  Cadiz,  witlioutcnmmont  on  iho  identity  of  name.
2nd  July,  1596,  bears  in  the  text  the  same  It  is  po-silile,  however,  tliat  the  Meet-
name— Nicolas  Meetkerke — with  that  of  kerke  killed  at  Cadiz  was  one  of  the
the  Colonel  killed  at  the  capture  of  De-  two  remaining  sons  of  the  President  of
venter,  10th  June,  1591  (see  p.  101  of  1- landers,  and  that  his  Christian  name
this vol., rwte). Meteren,  B. xvi. and  was  Baldwin  or  Adclph.

364  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

Sir  John  Win gfield,  who  insisted  upon  prancing  about  on
horseback  without  his  armour,  defying  the  townspeople
and  neglecting  the  urgent  appeal  of  Sir  Francis  Vere,
was  also  slain.  The  Spanish  soldiers,  discoui-aged  by
the  defeat  of  the  ships  on  which  they  had  relied  for  pro-
tection of  the  town,  retreated  with  a  great  portion  of  the
inhabitants  into  the  citadel.  Next  morning  the  citadel
cajjitulated  without  striking  a  blow,  although  there
were  six  thousand  able-bodied,  well-armed  men  within
its  walls.  It  was  one  of  the  most  astonishing  panics
ever  recorded. The  great  fleet,  making  a  third

2  July.  .  .

of  the  king's  nav)',  the  city  of  Cadiz and  its

fortress,  were  surrendered  to  this  audacious  little  force,
which  had  only  ariived  oif  the  harbour  thirty-six  hours
before.  The  invaders  had,  however,  committed  a  great
mistake.  They  had  routed,  and,  as  it  were,  captured
the  Spanish  galleons,  but  they  had  not  taken  possession
of  them,  such  had  been  their  eagerness  to  enter  the  city.
It  was  now  agreed  that  the  fleet  should  be  ransomed  for
two  million  ducats,  but  the  proud  Duke  of  Medina
Sidonia,  who  had  already  witnessed  the  destruction  of
one  mighty  armada,  preferred  that  these  splendid  ships
too  should  perish  rather  than  that  they  should  pay
tribute  to  the  enemy.  Scorning  the  capitulation  of  the
commandant  of  the  citadel,  he  ordered  the  fleet  to  be  set
on  fire.  Thirty-two  ships,  most  of  them  vessels  of  war  of
the  highest  class,  were  burned  with  all  their  equipments.
Twelve  hundred  cannon  sank  at  once  to  the  bottom  of  the
Bay  of  Cadiz,  besides  arms  for  five  or  six  thousand  men.
At  least  one-third  of  Philip's  effective  navy  was  thus
destroyed.

The  victors  now  sacked  the  city  very  thoroughly,  but
the  results  were  disappointing.  A  large  portion  of  the
portable  wealth  of  the  inhabitants,  their  gold  and
their  jewelry,  had  been  so  cunningly  concealed  that,
although  half  a  dozen  persons  were  tortured  till  they
should  reveal  hidden  treasures,  not  more  than  five  hun-
dred thousand  ducats  worth  of  plunder  was  obtained.
Anotlier  sum  of  equal  amount  having  been  levied  upon
the  citizens,  forty  notable  personages,  among  them
eighteen  ecclesiastical  dignitaries,  were  carried  oif  as
hostages  for  its  payment. The  city  was  now  set  on  fire

1596.  CADIZ  SACKED  AND  BURNT.  365

by  command  of  E.ssex  in  four  different  quarters.  Espe-
cially the  cathedral  and  other  chuiches,  the  convents
and  the  hospitals,  were  burned.  It  was  perhaps  not
unnatural  that  both  Englishmen  and  Hollanders  should
be  disposed  to  wreak  a  barbarous  vengeance  on  ever}'-
thing  representative  of  the  Church  which  they  abhorred,
and  from  which  such  endless  misery  had  issued  to  the
uttermost  corners  of  their  own  countries.  But  it  is  at
any  rate  refreshing  to  record  amid  these  acts  of  pillage
and  destruction,  in  which,  as  must  ever  be  the  case,  the
innocent  and  the  lowly  were  made  to  suffer  for  the
crimes  of  crowned  and  mitred  culprits,  that  not  many
special  acts  of  cruelty  were  committed  upon  individuals.
No  man  was  murdered  in  cold  blood,  no  woman  was
outraged.^^  The  beautiful  city  was  left  a  desolate  and
blackened  ruin,  and  a  geneial  levy  of  spoil  was  made  for
the  benefit  of  the  victors,  but  there  was  no  infringement
of  the  theory  and  practice  of  the  laws  of  war  as  under-
stood in  that  day  or  in  later  ages.  It  is  even  recorded
that  Essex  ordered  one  of  his  soldiers,  who  was  found
stealing  a  woman's  gown,  to  be  hanged  on  the  spot,  but
that,  wearied  by  the  intercession  of  an  ecclesiastic  of
Cadiz,  the  canon  Quesada,  he  consented  at  last  to  pardon
the  marauder.**

It  was  the  earnest  desire  of  Essex  to  hold  Cadiz
instead  of  destroying  it.  With  three  thousand  men,  and
with  temporary  supplies  from  the  fleet,  the  place  could
be  maintained  against  all  comers  ;  Holland  and  England
together  commanding  the  seas.  Admiral  Warmond  and
all  the  Netherlanders  seconded  the  scheme,  and  offered
at  once  to  put  ashore  from  their  vessels  food  and  muni-
tions enough  to  serve  two  thousand  men  for  two  months.
If  the  English  admiral  would  do  as  much,  the  place
might  be  afterwards  supplied  without  limit  and  held
till  doomsday,  a  perpetual  thorn  in  Philip's  side.  Sir
Francis  Vere  was  likewise  warmly  in  favour  of  the  pro-
ject, but  he  stood  alone.  All  the  other  Englishmen
opposed  it  as  hazardous,  extravagant,  and  in  direct  con-
travention of  the  minute  instructions  of  the  queen. With

♦3  This  is  the  express  testimony  of  the  this expedition are Bor, IV. 232-235.

Spanish  historian  Herrera,  whose  evidence  Metcren,  374-377. Reyd,  278-281. Her-

will  hardly  be  disputed. Herrera,  iii.  645.  rera,  iii.  632-645. De  Thou,  xii.  671-674,

♦*  The  chief  authorities  consulted  for  L  116. Camden,  517-523. Fruin,  353-360.

3G6  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXII.

a  sigh  or  a  curse  for  what  he  considered  the  superfluous
caution  of  his  royal  mistress,  and  the  exaggerated  docility
of  Lord  High  Admiral  Howard,  Essex  was  fain  to  con-
tent himself  with  the  sack  and  the  conflagration,  and  the
allied  fleet  sailed  away  from  Cadiz.

On  their  way  towards  Lisbon  they  anchored  off  Faro,
and  landed  a  force,  chiefly  of  Netherlanders,  who  expe-
ditiously burned  and  plundered  the  place.  When  they
reached  the  neighbourhood  of  Lisbon,  they  received
information  that  a  great  fleet  of  Indiamen,  richly  laden,
were  daily  expected  from  the  Flemish  islands,  as  the
Azores  were  then  denominated.  Again  Essex  was
vehemently  disposed  to  steer  at  once  for  that  station,  in
order  to  grasp  so  tempting  a  prize  ;  again  he  was  strenu-
ously supported  by  the  Dutch  admiral  and  Vere,  and
again  Lord  Howard  peremptorily  interdicted  the  plan.
It  was  contrary  to  his  instructions  and  to  his  ideas  of
duty,  he  said,  to  risk  so  valuable  a  portion  of  her
Majesty's  fleet  on  so  doubtful  a  venture.  His  ships
were  not  fitted  for  a  winter's  cruise,  he  urged.  Thus,
although  it  was  the  very  heart  of  midsummer,  the  fleet
was  ordered  to  sail  homeward.  The  usual  result  of  a
divided  command  was  made  manifest,  and  it  proved  in
the  sequel  that,  had  they  sailed  for  the  islands,  they
would  have  pounced  at  exactly  the  right  moment  upon
an  unprotected  fleet  of  merchantmen,  with  cargoes  valued
at  seven  millions  of  ducats.  Essex,  not  being  willing  to
undertake  the  foray  to  the  Azores  with  the  Dutch  ships
alone,  was  obliged  to  digest  his  spleen  as  best  he  could.
Meantime  the  English  fleet  bore  away  for  England,
leaving  Essex  in  his  own  ship,  together  with  the  two
captured  Spanish  galleons,  to  his  fate.  That  fate  might
have  been  a  disastrous  one,  for  his  prizes  were  not  fully
manned,  his  own  vessel  was  far  from  powerful,  and  there
were  many  rovers  and  cruisers  upon  the  seas.  The
Dutch  admiral,  with  all  his  ships,  however,  I'emained  in
14  Aug.  company,  and  safely  convoyed  him  to  Plymouth,
1596.  where  they  arrived  only  a  day  or  two  later
than  Howard  and  his  fleet.'*^  Warmond,  who  had  been
disposed  to  sail  up  the  Thames  in  order  to  pay  his
respects  to  the  queen,  was  informed  that  his  presence
would  not  be  desirable,  but  rather  an  embarrassment.

*5  Bcr,  Meteren,  Rcyd,  De  Tlioii,  ubi  sup.

1596,  LETTER  OF  ELIZABETH  TO  WARMOND.  367

He, however, received the  following  letter from  the
hand  of  Elizabeth.

"  MoNSiKUR  DuvENWooRD, — The  report  made  to  me  by
the  generals  of  our  fleet,  just  happily  arrived  from  the
coast  of  Spain,  of  the  devoirs  of  those  who  have  been
partakers  in  so  famous  a  victory,  ascribes  so  much  of  it
to  the  valour,  skill,  and  readiness  exhibited  by  yourself
and  our  other  friends  from  the  Netherlands  under  your
command,  duiing  the  whole  course  of  the  expedition,  as
to  fill  our  mind  with  special  joy  and  satisfaction,  and
with  a  desire  to  impart  these  feelings  to  you.  No  other
means  presenting  themselves  at  this  moment  than  that  of
a  letter  (in  some  sense  darkening  the  picture  of  the  con-
ceptions of  our  soul),  we  are  willing  to  make  use  of  it
while  waiting  for  means  more  efiectual.  Wishing  thus
to  disburthen  ourselves  we  find  ourselves  confused,  not
knowing  where  to  begin,  the  greatness  of  each  part
exceeding  the  merit  of  the  other.  For  the  vigour  and
promptness  with  which  my  lords  the  States-General
stepped  into  the  enterprise,  made  us  acknowledge  that
the  good  favour,  which  we  have  always  borne  the  United
Provinces  and  the  proofs  thereof  which  we  have  given
in  the  benefits  conferred  by  us  upon  them,  had  not  been
ill-bestowed.  The  valour,  skill,  and  discipline  manifested
by  you  in  this  enterprise  show  that  j^ou  and  your  whole
nation  are  worthy  the  favour  and  protection  of  princes
against  those  who  wish  to  tyrannize  over  you.  But
the  honourableness  and  the  valour  shown  by  you.  Sir
Admiral,  towards  our  cousin  the  Earl  of  Essex  on  his
return,  when  he  unfortunately  was  cut  off  from  the
fleet,  and  deep  in  the  night  was  deprived  of  all  support,
when  you  kept  company  with  him  and  gave  him  escort
into  the  harbour  of  Plymo^^th,  demonstrate  on  the  one
hand  your  foresight  in  providing  thus  by  your  pains  and
patience  against  all  disasters,  which  through  an  accident
falling  upon  one  of  the  chiefs  of  our  armada  might  have
darkened  the  great  victory  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  the
fervour  and  fire  of  the  afiection  which  you  bear  us,
increasing  thus,  through  a  double  bond,  the  obligations
we  are  owing  you,  which  is  so  great  in  our  hearts  that
we  have  felt  bound  to  discharge  a  part  of  it  by  means  of
this  writing,  which  we  beg  you  to  communicate  to  the

368  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXH.

whole  company  of  our  friends  under  your  command ;
saj'ing  to  them  besides,  that  they  may  feel  assured  that
even  as  we  have  before  given  proof  of  our  goodwill  to
their  fatherland,  so  henceforth — incited  by  their  devoirs
and  merits — we  are  ready  to  extend  our  bounty  and
affection  in  all  ways  which  may  become  a  piincess
recompensing  the  virtues  and  gratitude  of  a  nation  so
worthy  as  yours.

"Elizabeth  E.
"  lAth  August,  1596."  «

This  letter  was  transmitted  by  the  admiral  to  the
States-General,  who  furnished  him  with  a  copy  of  it,  but
enrolled  the  original  in  their  archives  ;  recording  as  it
did,  in  the  hand  of  the  great  English  queen,  so  striking
a  testimony  to  the  valour  and  the  good  conduct  of  Ne-
therlanders."*^

The  results  of  this  expedition  were  considerable,  for
the  king's  navy  was  crippled,  a  great  city  was  destroyed,
and  some  millions  of  plunder  had  been  obtained.  But
the  permanent  possession  of  Cadiz,  which,  in  such  case,
Essex  hoped  to  exchange  for  Calais,  and  the  destruction
of  the  fleet  at  the  Azores — possible  achievements  both,
and  unwisely  neglected — would  have  been  far  more
profitable,  at  least  to  England.  It  was  also  matter  of
deep  regret  that  there  was  much  quarrelling  between  the
Netherlanders  and  the  Englishmen  as  to  their  respective
share  of  the  spoils  ;  the  Ketherlauders  complaining  loudly
that  they  had  been  defrauded.  Moreover  the  merchants
of  Middelburg,  Amsterdam,  and  other  commercial  cities
of  Holland  and  Zeeland  were,  as  it  proved,  the  real
owners  of  a  large  portion  of  the  property  destroyed  or
pillaged  at  Cadiz  ;  so  that  a  loss  estimated  as  high  as
three  hundred  thousand  florins  fell  upon  those  unfor-
tunate traders  through  this  triumph  of  the  allies.**

+6  The  letter,  translated  of  course  into  Duvenvord  appears. The  English  histo-

Flemish,  is  given  in  full  by  Bor,  IV.  235.  rian, iudeed, carefully suppresses the

Incredible  as  it  may  seem,  Camden  not  share  taken  by  the  sailors  and  soldiers  of

only  makes  no  allusion  to  this  special  and  the l)ulch republic  in  the expedition;

memorable  service  of  the  Dutch  Admiral,  scarcely  the  faintest  allusion  being  made

and  to  the  enthusiastic  approbation  be-  to  them  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of

stowed upon  him  and  bis  comrades  by  his  narrative. The  whole  affair  is  rcpre-

the  queen,  but  he  never  once  mentions  sented  as  a  purely  English  adventure  and

him  in  his  account,  save  that  towards  the  English  triumph,

end  of  a  list  of  persons  knighted  after  the  *'  Bor,  ubi  sup.

taking  of  the  city  the  name  of  John  van  ♦*  Bor,  Mtteren,  Reyd,  ubi  sup.

159G.  PROPOSED  DISEMBMERMENT  OF  FRANCR.  369

The  internal  consequences  of  the  fall  of  Calais  had
threatened  at  the  first  moment  to  be  as  disastrous  as  the
international  results  of  that  misfortune  had  already
proved.  The  hour  for  the  definite  dismemberment  and
partition  of  the  French  kingdom,  not  bj-  foieign  con-
querors but  among  its  own  self-seeking  and  disloyal
grandees,  seemed  to  have  struck.  The  indomitable
Henry,  ever  most  buoyant  when  most  pressed  by  misfor-
tune, was  on  the  way  to  his  camp  at  La  Fere,  encourag-
ing the  faint-hearted,  and  providing  as  well  as  he  could
for  the  safety  of  the  places  most  menaced,  when  be  was
met  at  St.  Quentin  by  a  solemn  deputation  of  the  prin-
cipal nobles,  military  commanders,  and  provincial  gover-
nors of  France.  The  Duke  of  Montpensier  was  spokes-
man of  the  assembly,  and,  in  an  harangue  carefully
prepared  for  the  occasion,  made  an  elaboi'ate  proposition
to  the  king  that  the  provinces,  districts,  cities,  castles,
and  other  strongholds  throughout  the  kingdom  should
now  be  formally  bestowed  upon  the  actual  governors
and  commandants  thereof  in  perpetuity  and  as  hereditary
property,  on  condition  of  rendering  a  certain  military
service  to  the  king  and  his  descendants.  It  seemed  so
amazing  that  this  temporary  disaster  to  the  national
arms  should  be  used  as  a  pretext  for  parcelling  out
France,  and  converting  a  great  empire  into  a  number  of
insignificant  duchies  and  petty  principalities  ;  that  this
movement  should  be  made,  not  by  the  partis^ans  of  Spain,
but  by  the  adherents  of  the  king ;  and  that  its  leader
should  be  his  own  near  relative,  a  prince  of  the  blood,
and  a  possible  successor  to  the  crown,  that  Henry  was
struck  absolutel}'  dumb.  Misinterpreting  his  silence,
the  duke  proceeded  very  confidently  with  his  well-
conned  harangue  ;  and  was  eloquently  demonstrating
that,  under  such  a  system,  Henry,  as  principal  feudal
chief,  would  have  greater  military  forces  at  his  disposal
whenever  he  chose  to  summon  his  faithful  vassals  to  the
field,  than  could  be  the  case  while  the  mere  shadow  of
royal  power  of  dignity  was  allowed  to  remain  ;  when
the  king,  finding  at  last  a  tongiie,  rebuked  his  cousin,
not  angrily,  but  with  a  grave  melancholy  which  was
more  impressive  than  wrath.

He  expressed  his  pity  for  the  duke  that  designing
intriguers should have thus taken advantage of  his

VOL.  m.  2  b

370  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

facility  of  character  to  cause  him  to  enact  a  part  so
entirely  unworthy  a  Frenchman,  a  gentleman,  and  a
prince  of  the  blood.  He  had  himself,  at  the  outset  of
his  career,  been  much  farther  from  the  throne  than
iMontpensier  was  at  that  moment;  but  at  no  period  of
liis  life  would  he  have  consented  to  disgrace  himself  by
attempting  the  dismemberment  of  the  realm.  So  far
from  entering  for  a  moment  into  the  subject-matter  of
the  duke's  discourse,  he  gave  him  and  all  his  colleagues
distinctly  to  understand  that  he  M'ould  rather  die  a
thousand  deaths  than  listen  to  suggestions  which  would
cover  his  family  and  the  royal  dignity  with  infamy.'"'

Rarely  has  political  cynicisFu  been  displayed  in  more
revolting  shape  than  in  this  deliberate  demonstration  by
the  leading  patricians  and  generals  of  France,  to  whom
patriotism  seemed  an  unimaginable  idea.  Thus  signally
was  their  greediness  to  convert  a  national  disaster  into
personal  profit  rebuked  by  the  king.  Heniy  was  no
respecter  of  the  People,  which  he  regarded  as  something
immeasurably  below  his  feet.  On  the  contrary,  he  was
the  most  sublime  self-seeker  of  them  all ;  but  his  courage,
his  intelligent  ambition,  his  breadth  and  strength  of
purpose,  never  permitted  him  to  doubt  that  his  own
greatness  was  inseparable  from  the  greatness  of  France.
Thus  he  represented  a  distinct  and  wholesome  principle —
the  national  integrity  of  a  great  homogeneous  people  at  a
period  when  that  integrity  seemed,  through  domestic
treason  and  foreign  hatred,  to  be  ho])elessly  lost.  Hence
it  is  not  unnatural  that  he  should  hold  his  place  in  the
national  chronicle  as  Henry  the  Great.

Meantime,  while  the  militar}-  events  just  recorded
had  been  occurring  in  the  southern  peninsula,  the  pro-
gress of  the  archduke  and  his  lieutenants  in  the  north
against  the  king  and  against  the  republic  had  been
gratifying  to  the  ambition  of  that  martial  ecclesiastic.
22-23  May,  Soon  after  the  fall  of  Calais,  De  Eosne  had
1596.  seized  the  castles  of  Guynes  and  Hames,  while

De  Mexia  laid  siege  to  the  important  stronghold  of
Ai'dres.  The  garrison,  commanded  by  C'ount  Belin,  was
sufficiently  numerous  and  well  supplied  to  maintain  the
place  until Henry,  whose  triumph  at  La  Fere  could

•»»  Sully,  Tklcraoirs,  t.  i.  lib.  vii.  pp.  417,  ilK Conii)arc  JDo  Thou,  t.  xiii  lib.  cxriii

1596. SUCCESSES  OF  THE  ARCHDUKE  IN  NORMANDY. 371

hardly  be  mucli  longer  delayed,  should  come  to  its
relief.  To  the  king's  infinite  dissatisfaction,  however,
precisely  as  Don  Alvario  de  Osorio  was  surrendering
La  Feie  to  him,  after  a  seven  months'  siege,  Ardres  was
capitulating  to  De  Mexia.  The  reproaches  upon  Belin
for  cowardice,  imbecility,  and  bad  faith  were  bitter  and
genei'al.  All  his  officeis  had  vehemently  protested
against  the  surrender,  and  Henry  at  first  talked  of
cutting  off  his  head,^°  It  was  hardly  probable,  however
— had  the  surrender  been  really  the  result  of  treachery
— that  the  governor  would  have  put  himself,  as  he  did
at  once,  in  the  king's  power ;  for  the  garrison  marched
out  of  Ardres  with  the  commandant  at  their  head,
banners  displaj^ed,  drums  beating,  matches  lighted  and
bullet  in  mouth,  twelve  hundred  fighting  men  strong,
besides  invalids.  Belin  was  possessed  of  too  much  in-
fluence, and  had  the  means  of  rendering  too  many  pieces
of  service  to  the  politic  king,  whose  rancour  against
Spain  was  perhaps  not  really  so  intense  as  was  commonly
supposed,  to  meet  with  the  condign  punishment  whicli
might  have  been  the  fate  of  humbler  knaves.

These  successes  having  been  obtained  in  Normandy,
the  cardinal  with  a  force  of  nearly  fifteen  thousand  men
now  took  the  field  in  Flanders  ;  and,  after  hesitating  foj-
a  time  whether  he  should  attack  Breda,  Bergen,  Ostend,
or  Gertruj^denberg, — and  after  making  occasional  feints
in  vaiious  directions, — came,  towards  the  end  of  June,
before  Hulst.  This  rather  insignificant  place,  with  a
population  of  but  one  thousand  inhabitants,  was  defended
by  a  strong  garrison  under  command  of  that  eminent
and  experienced  officer.  Count  Everard  Solms.  Its  de-
fences were  made  more  complete  by  a  system  of  sluices,
through  which  the  country  around  could  be  laid  under
water ;  and  Maiirice,  whose  capture  of  the  town  in  the
year  1591  had  been  one  of  his  earliest  military  achieve-
ments, was  disposed  to  hold  it  at  all  hazards.  He  came
in  person  to  ins]>ect  the  fortifications,  and  appeared  to
be  so  eager  on  the  subject,  and  so  likely  to  encounter
unnecessary  hazards,  that  the  States  of  Holland  passed
a  resolution  imploring  him  "  that  he  would  not  in  his
heroic  enthusiasm  and  laudable  personal  service,  expose

'■^  So  .Jusljnus  of  Xas5au  wrote  to  Princ2  Maurice. Bor,  IV.  Ifll.

2  B  2

372  THE  Uis'ITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXII,

a  life  on  which  the  country  so  much  depended  to  mani-
fest dangers."  ^^  The  place  was  soon  thoroughly  invested,
and  the  usual  series  i)f  minings  and  counter-minings,
assaults,  and  sorties  followed,  in  the  course  of  which
that  courageous  and  corpulent  renegade,  De  Eosne,  had
his  head  taken  off"  by  a  cannon-ball,  while  his  son,  a  lad
of  sixteen,  was  fighting  by  his  side.^^  On  the  16th
August  the  cardinal  formally  demanded  the  surrender  of
the  place,  and  received  the  magnanimous  reply  that
Hulst  would  be  defended  to  the  death.  This  did  not,
however,  prevent  the  opening  of  negotiations  the  very
same  day.  All  the  officers,  save  one,  united  in  uiging
Solms  to  capitulate ;  and  Solms,  for  somewhat  myste-
rious reasons,  and,  as  was  stated,  in  much  confusion,
gave  his  consent.  The  single  malcontent  was  the  well-
named  Matthew  Held,  whose  family  name  meant  Hero,
and  who  had  been  one  of  the  chief  actors  in  the  far-
famed  capture  of  Breda.  He  was  soon  afterwards  killed
in  an  unsuccessful  attack  made  by  Maurice  upon  Venlo.
Hulst  capitulated  on  the  18th  August.^^  The  terms
18  Aug.  were  honourable  ;  but  the  indignation  through-
1596.  out  the  country  against  Count  Solms  was  very
great.  The  States  of  Zeeland,  of  whose  regiment  he  had
been  commander  ever  since  the  death  of  Sir  Philip
Sidney,  dismissed  him  from  their  service,  while  a  torrent
of  wrath  flowed  upon  him  from  every  part  of  the
country.  Members  of  the  States-General  refused  to
salute  him  in  the  streets ;  eminent  personages  turned
their  backs  upon  him,  and  for  a  time  there  was  no  one
willing  to  listen  to  a  word  in  his  defence.  The  usual
reaction  in  such  cases  followed ;  Maurice  sustained  the
commander,  who  had  doubtless  committed  a  grave  error,
but  who  had  often  rendered  honourable  service  to  the
republic,  and  the  States-General  gave  him  a  command  as
important  as  that  of  which  he  had  been  relieved  by  the
Zeeland  States.  It  was  mainly  on  account  of  the  tempest
thus  created  within  the  Netherlands,  that  an  affair  of
such  slight  importance  came  to  occupy  so  large  a  space
in  contemporary  history.  The  defenders  of  Solms  told
wild stories  about the losses of  the  besieging  army.

^1  Van  dcr  Kemp,  iii.  162.  52  Bor,  IV.  219. Bentivoglio,  440.

M  For  the  .-ijege  and  eai-ture  of  Hulst,  see  Bor,  IV.  213-230. !Meteren,  3S0  ieqq
Benthoglio,  439,  410. Reyd,  2a5-2S7. Coloma,  225-2:i9.

II

1596.  SIEGE  AND  CAPTURE  OF  HULST.  373

The  cardinal,  who  was  thought  prodigal  of  hlood,  and
who  was  often  quoted  as  saying  "his  soldiers'  lives
belonged  to  God  and  their  bodies  to  the  king,"  ^*  had
[sacrificed,  it  was  ridiculously  said,  according  to  the
statement  of  the  Spaniards  themselves,  five  thousand
soldiers  before  the  walls  of  Hulst.^^  It  was  very  logically
deduced  therefrom  that  the  capture  of  a  few  more  towns
of  a  thousand  inhabitants  each  would  cost  him  his
whole  army.  People  told  each  other,  too,  that  the
conqueror  had  refused  a  triumph  which  the  burghers  of
Brussels  wished  to  prepare  for  him  on  his  entrance  into
the  capital,  and  that  he  had  administered  the  very
proper  rebuke  that,  if  they  had  more  money  than  they
knew  what  to  do  with,  they  should  expend  it  in  aid  of
the  wounded  and  of  the  families  of  the  fallen,  rather
than  in  velvets  and  satins  and  triumphal  arches.'^"  The
humanity  of  the  suggestion  hardly  tallied  with  the
bloodthirstiness  of  which  he  was  at  the  same  time  so
unjustly  accused — although  it  might  well  be  doubted
whether  the  commander-in-chief,  even  if  he  could  witness
unflinchingly  the  destruction  of  five  thousand  soldiers
on  the  battle-field,  would  dare  to  confront  a  new  de-
monstration of  schoolmaster  Houwaerts  and  his  fellow-
pedants.

The  fact  was,  however,  that  the  list  of  casualties  in
the  cardinal's  camp  during  the  six  weeks'  siege  amounted
to  six  hundred,  while  the  losses  within  the  city  were  at
least  as  many.^''  There  was  no  attempt  to  relieve  the
place ;  for  the  States,  as  before  observed,  had  been  too
much  cramped  by  the  strain  upon  their  resources  and
by  the  removal  of  so  many  veterans  for  the  expedition
against  Cadiz  to  be  able  to  muster  any  considerable
forces  in  the  field  during  the  whole  of  this  year.

For  a  vast  war  in  which  the  four  leading  powers  of
the  earth  were  engaged,  the  events,  to  modem  eyes,  of
the  campaign  of  1596  seem  sufficiently  meagre.  Mean-
time, during  all  this  campaigning  by  land  and  sea  in
the  west,  there  had  been  great  but  profitless  bloodshed
in  the  east. With  difficulty  did  the  holy  Eoman  Empire

5*  Reyd,  ubi  sup.  Hulst  en  Flandes,  17  Aug.  1596. 'lliere

5s  Bor,  Meteren,  Reyd,  Coloma,  vhi  sup.,  seems  no  reason  why  the  cardinal  in  these

especially  Reyd.  ss  Reyd.  private  despatches  should  not  ha\e  told

5"  Relacion  de  la  presa  de  la  villa  de  the  truth.

374  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  :SXXIL

withstand  the  terrible,  ever-renewed  assaults  of  the
unholy  realm  of  Ottoman — then  in  the  full  flush  of  its
power — but  the  two  empires  still  counterbalanced  each
other,  and  contended  with  each  other  at  the  gates  of
Vienna.

As  the  fighting  became  more  languid,  however,  in
the  western  part  of  Christendom,  the  negotiations  and
intrignes  grew  only  the  more  active.  It  was  most
desirable  for  the  republic  to  effect,  if  possible,  a  formal
alliance  offensive  and  defensive  with  France  and  England
against  Spain.  The  diplomacy  of  the  Netherlands  had
been  very  efficient  in  bringing  about  the  declaration  of
war  by  Henry  against  Philip,  by  which  the  current
year  had  opened,  after  Henry  and  Philip  had  been
doing  their  best  to  destro}'  each  other  and  eacli  other's
subjects  during  the  half-dozen  previous  years.  Eliza-
beth, too,  although  she  had  seen  her  shores  invaded  by
Philip  with  the  most  tremendous  armaments  that  had
ever  floated  on  the  seas,  and  although  she  had  herself
just  been  sending  fire  and  sword  into  the  heart  of
Spain,  had  very  recently  made  the  observation  ^*  that
she  and  i'hilip  were  not  formally  at  war  with  each
other.  It  seemed,  therefore,  desirable  to  the  States-
C4eneral  that  this  very  practical  warfare  should  be.  as  it
were,  reduced  to  a  theorem.  In  this  case  the  position  of
the  republic  to  both  powers  and  to  Spain  itself  might
perhaps  be  more  accurately  defined.

Calvaert,  the  States'  envoy — to  use  his  own  words —
haimted  Henry  like  his  perjjetual  shadow,  and  was  ever
doing  his  best  to  persuade  him  of  the  necessity  of  this
alliance.^^  De  Sancy,  as  we  have  seen,  had  just  arrived
in  England,  when  the  cool  proposition  of  the  queen  to
rescue  Calais  from  1^'hilip  on  condition  of  keeping  it  for
herself  had  been  brought  to  Boulogne  by  Sidney.  Not-
withstanding the  indignation  of  the  king,  he  had  been
induced  directl}'  afterwards  to  send  an  additional  em-
bassy to  Elizabeth,  with  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  at  its
head  ;  and  he  had  insisted  upon  Calvaert's  accompan^'ing
the  mission.  He  had,  as  he  frequently  observed,*'  no
.secrets  from  the  States-General,  or  from  Calvaert,  who
had  been  negotiating  upon  these  affairs  for  two  j-eais

^  "  'T  welck  haer  Mag.  pretenilperde  tot  noch  nj.t  ged.if  n  te  hebben." CalvMl
to  the  States-General,  apud  neventcv,  ii.  117.  -^  ibid.  ;14.  «>  Ibid.  118.

159G.  PROJECTED  ALLIANCE  AGAINST  SPAIN.  375

past  and  was  so  well  acquainted  with  all  their  bearings.
The  Dutch  envoy  was  leluctant  to  go, — fin-  he  was
seriously  ill  and  very  poor  in  purse, — but  Henry  nrged
the  point  so  vehemently  that  Calvaert  found  himself  on
board  sliip  within  six  hours  of  the  making  of  the  propo-
sition." The  incident  shows  of  how  much  account  the
republican  diplomatist  was  held  by  so  keen  a  judge  of
mankind  as  the  Bearnese ;  but  it  will  subsequently
appear  that  the  candour  of  the  king  towards  the  States-
General  and  their  representative  was  by  no  means
without  certain  convenient  limitations.

l)e  Sancy  had  arrived  just  as — -without  his  knowledge
— Sidney  had  been  despatched  across  the  channel  with
the  brief  mi.^sion  already  mentioned.  When  he  was
presented  to  the  queen,  the  next  day,  she  excused  her-
self for  the  propositions  b}^  which  Henry  had  been  so
much  enraged,  by  assuring  the  envoy  that  it  had  been
her  intention  only  to  keep  Calais  out  of  the  enemy's
hand,  so  long  as  the  king's  forces  were  too  much
occupied  at  a  distance  to  provide  for  its  safety.  As
diplomatic  conferences  were  about  to  begin  in  which —
even  more  than  in  that  age,  at  least,  was  nsiially  the
case — the  object  of  the  two  conferring  powers  was  to
deceive  each  other,  and  at  the  same  time  still  more
decidedly  to  defraud  other  states,  Sancy  accepted  the
royal  explanation,  although  Henry's  special  messenger,
Lomenie,  had  just  brought  him  from  the  camp  at
Boulogne  a  minute  account  of  the  propositions  of
Sidney.*^^

The  envoy  had,  immediately  afterwards,  an  interview
with  Lord  Burghley,  and  at  once  perceived  that  be  was
no  friend  to  his  master.  Cecil  observed  that  the  queen
had  formerly  been  much  bound  to  the  king  for  religion's
sake.  As  this  tie  no  longer  existed,  there  was  nothing
now  to  unite  them  save  the  proximity  of  the  two  States
to  each  other  and  their  ancient  alliances,  a  bond  purely
of  intei'est  which  existed  only  so  long  as  princes  found
therein  a  special  advantage.

De  Sancy  replied  that  the  safety  of  the  two  crowns
depended upon their close alliance against a very

"  Calvert  to  the  Sates-General,  apud  Deventer,  ii.  118.

52  See especially for  these negotiations,  De  Thou,  t.  xii.  lib.  116,  p.  247,  srqi.
Compare  Bor,  IV.  253-257.

376  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

powerful  foe  who  was  equally  menacing  to  them  both.
Cecil  ]ejoined  that  he  considered  the  Spaniards  de-
serving of  the  very  highest  praise  for  having  been  able
to  plan  so  important  an  enterprise,  and  to  have  so  well
deceived  the  King  of  France  by  the  promptness  and  the
secrecy  of  their  operations  as  to  allow  him  to  concei\  e  no
suspicion  as  to  their  designs.

To  this  not  very  friendly  sarcasm  the  envoy,  in-
dignant that  Fiance  should  thus  be  insulted  in  her
misfortunes,  exclaimed  that  he  prayed  to  God  that  the
affairs  of  Englishmen  might  never  be  reduced  to  such  a
point  as  to  induce  the  world  to  judge  by  the  result
merely,  as  to  the  sagacity  of  their  counsels.  He  added
ihat  there  were  many  passages  through  which  to  enter
France,  and  that  it  was  difficult  to  be  present  every-
where, in  order  to  defend  them  all  against  the  enemy.

A  few  days  afterwards  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  arrived
1  May,  ill  London.  He  had  seen  Lord  Essex  at  Dover
1596.  as  he  passed,  and  had  endeavoured  without
success  to  dissuade  him  from  his  expedition  against  the
Spanish  coast.  The  conferences  opened  on  the  7th  May,
at  Greenwich,  between  Burghley,  Cobham,  the  Lord
Chamberlain,  and  one  or  two  other  commissioners  on  the
part  of  the  queen,  and  Bouillon,  Sancy,  Du  Vair,  and
Ancel,  as  plenipotentiaries  of  Henry.

There  was  the  usual  indispensable  series  of  feints  at
the  outset,  as  if  it  were  impossible  for  statesmen  to  meet
around  a  green  table  except  as  fencers  in  the  field  or
pugilists  in  the  ring.

'*  We  have  nothing  to  do,"  said  Burghley,  "except
to  listen  to  such  propositions  as  may  be  made  on  the
part  of  the  king,  and  to  repeat  them  to  her  Highness
the  queen."

"  You  cannot  be  ignorant,"  replied  Bouillon,  "  of  the
purpose  for  which  we  have  been  sent  hither  by  his  Very
Christian  Majesty.  You  know  very  well  that  it  is  to
conclude  a  league  with  England.  'Tis  necessary,  there-
fore, for  the  English  to  begin  by  declaring  whether
they  are  disposed  to  enter  into  such  an  alliance.  This
point  once  settled,  the  French  can  make  their  proposi-
tions, but  it  would  be  idle  to  dispute  about  the  con-
ditions of  a  treaty,  if  there  is  after  all  no  treaty  to  be
lna<le."

1596. DIPLOMATIC  CONFERENCE  AT  GRE1-:X\VICH.  377

To  this  Cecil  rejoined,  that,  if  the  king  were  reduced
to  the  necessity  of  asking  succonr  from  the  queen,  and
of  begging  for  her  alliance,  it  was  necessary  for  them,
on  the  other  hand,  to  see  what  he  was  ready  to  do  for
the  queen  in  leturn,  and  to  learn  what  advantage  she
could  expect  from  the  league.

The  duke  said  that  the  English  statesmen  were  per-
fectly aware  of  the  French  intention  of  proposing  a
league  against  the  common  enemy  of  both  nations,  and
that  it  would  be  unquestionably  for  the  advantage  of
both  to  unite  their  forces  for  a  vigorous  attack  upon
Spain,  in  which  case  it  would  be  more  difficult  for  the
Spanish  to  resist  them  than  if  each  were  acting  sepa-
rately. It  was  no  secret  that  the  Spaniards  would
rather  attack  England  than  France,  because  their  -war
against  England,  being  coloured  by  a  religious  motive,
would  be  much  less  odious,  and  would  even  have  a
specious  pretext.  Moreover  the  conquest  of  England
would  give  them  an  excellent  vantage  ground  to  recover
what  they  had  lost  in  the  Netherlands.  If,  on  the
contrary,  the  enemy  shoitld  throw  himself  with  his
whole  force  upon  France,  the  king,  who  would  perhaps
lose  many  places  'at  once,  and  might  hardly  be  able  to
maintain  himself  single-handed  against  domestic  treason
and  a  concentrated  effort  on  the  part  of  Spain,  would
probably  find  it  necessary  to  make  a  peace  with  that
power.  Nothing  could  be  more  desirable  for  Spain  than
such  a  result,  for  she  would  then  be  free  to  attack
England  and  Holland,  undisturbed  by  any  fear  of
France.  This  was  a  piece  of  advice,  the  duke  said,
which  the  king  offered,  in  the  most  friendly  spirit,  and
as  a  proof  of  his  affection  to  her  Majesty's  earnest  con-
sideration.

Burghley  replied  that  all  this  seemed  to  him  no
reason  for  making  a  league.  "  What  more  can  the
queen  do,"  he  observed,  "  than  she  is  already  doing  ?
She  has  invaded  Spain  by  land  and  sea,  she  has  sent
troops  to  Spain,  France,  and  the  Netherlands ;  she  has
lent  the  king  fifteen  hundred  thousand  crowns  in  gold.
In  short,  the  envoys  ought  rather  to  be  studying  how  to
repay  her  Majesty  for  her  former  benefits  than  to  be
soliciting  fresh  assistance."  He  added  that  the  king
was  so  much  stronger  by  the  recent  gain  of  Marseilles

378  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXII.

as  to  be  easily  able  to  bear  the  loss  of  places  of  far  less
importance,  while  Ireland,  on  the  contiary,  was  a
constant  danger  to  the  queen.  That  country  was  already
in  a  blaze,  on  account  of  the  recent  landing  eifected
there  by  the  Spaniards,  and  it  was  a  verj^  ancient
provei'b  among  the  English,  that  to  attack  England  it
was  necessary  to  take  the  I'oad  of  Ii'eland.

Bouillon  replied  that  in  this  war  there  was  much
difference  between  the  position  of  France  and  that  of
England.  The  queen,  notwithstanding  hostilities,  ob-
tained her  annual  revenue  as  usual,  while  the  king  was
cut  off"  fiom  his  resources  and  obliged  to  ruin  his  king-
dom in  order  to  wage  war.  Sancy  added,  that  it  mu.->t
be  obvious  to  the  English  ministers  that  the  peril  of
I  lolland  was  likewise  the  peiil  of  England  and  of  France,
but  that  at  the  same  time  they  could  plainly  see  that  the
king,  if  not  succoured,  would  be  forced  to  a  peace  with
Spain.  All  his  counsellors  were  urging  him  to  this,  and
it  was  the  interest  of  all  his  neighbours  to  prevent  such
a  step.  Moreover,  the  proposed  league  could  not  but  be
advantageous  to  the  English ;  whether  by  restraining
the  Spaniards  from  entering  England,  or  by  facilitating
a  combined  attack  upon  the  commtjn  enemy.  The  queen
might  invade  any  portion  of  the  Flemish  coast  at  her
pleasure,  Avhile  the  king's  fleet  could  sail  with  troops
from  his  ports  to  prevent  any  attack  upon  her  realms.

At  this  Burghley  turned  to  his  colleagues  and  said,  in
English,  "  The  French  are  acting  according  to  the  pro-
verb ;  they  wish  to  sell  us  the  bear-skin  before  they  have
killed  the  bear."  ^^

Sancy,  who  understood  English,  rejoined,  "  We  have
no  bear-skin  to  sell,  but  we  are  giving  you  a  very  good
and  salutary  piece  of  advice.  It  is  for  you  to  profit  by
it  as  you  may."

"  Where  are  these  ships  of  war,  of  which  you  were
speaking?"  asked  Burghley.

"  They  are  at  Rochelle,  at  Bordeaux,  and  at  St.  Malo,"
replied  de  Sancy.

"  And  these  ports  are  not  in  the  king's  possession,"
said  the  Lord  Treasurer.

The  discussion  was  growing  warm. The  Duke of

M  Oe  Thou, 653. The  historian,  probably,  according  to  Fruin,  3-16,  took  his
account  from  thp  papers  of  r)i.i  Vair.

1596.  FURTHER  DIPLOMATIC  CONFERENXE.  379

Bouillon,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  it,  said  that  what
England  had  most  to  fear  was  a  descent  by  Spain  upon
her  coasts,  and  that  the  true  way  to  pievent  this  was
to  give  occupation  to  Philip's  army  in  Flanders.  The
soldiers  in  the  fleet  then  preparing  were  raw  levies  with
\Nhich  he  would  not  venture  to  assail  her  kingdom.  The
veterans  in  Flanders  were  the  men  on  whom  he  relied
for  that  purpose.  Moreover  the  queen,  who  had  great
influence  with  the  States-General,  would  procui-e  from
them  a  pi'ohibition  of  all  commerce  between  the  pro-
vinces and  Spain  ;  all  the  Netherlands  ^vould  be  lost  to
Philip,  his  armies  would  disperse  of  their  own  accord ;
the  princes  of  Ital}',  to  whom  the  power  of  Spain  was  a
perpetual  menace,  would  secretly  supply  funds  to  the
allied  powers,  and  the  Germans,  declared  enemies  of
Philip,  would  furnish  ti'oops.

Burghley  asserted  confidently  that  this  could  never  be
obtained  from  the  Hollanders,  who  lived  by  commerce
alone.  Upon  wliich  Sancy,  wearied  by  all  these  diffi-
culties, interrupted  the  Lord  Treasurer  by  exclaiming,
"  If  the  king  is  to  expect  neither  an  alliance  nor  any
succoiir  on  your  part,  he  will  be  very  much  obliged  to
the  queen  if  she  will  be  good  enough  to  inform  him  of
the  decision  taken  by  her,  in  order  that  he  maj",  upon
his  side,  take  the  steps  most  suitable  to  the  present  posi^
tion  of  his  aflFairs."

The  session  then  terminated.  Two  days  afterwards,  in
another  conference,  Burghley  offered  three  thousand  men
on  the  part  of  the  queen,  on  condition  that  they  should
be  raised  at  the  king's  expense,  and  that  they  should  not
leave  England  until  they  had  received  a  month's  pay  in
advance.

The  Duke  of  Bouillon  said  this  was  far  from  bein.;
what  had  been  expected  of  the  generosity  of  her  Majesty,
that  if  the  king  had  money  he  would  find  no  difficulty  in
raising  troops  in  Switzerland  and  Germany,  and  that
there  was  a  very  great  diiference  between  hired  princes
and  allies.*''  The  English  ministers  having  answered
that  this  was  all  the  queen  could  do,  the  duke  and  Sancy
rose  in  much  excitement,  saying  that  they  had  then  no
further  business  than  to  ask  for  an  audience  of  leave,  and
to  return  to  France  as  fast  as  possible.

^  "  Beaucoup  de  difference  entre  dps  princes  a  gages  et  des  allies." — De  'I'liuu,  655.

380  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

Before  tliey  bade  farewell  to  the  queen,  however,  the
envoys  sent  a  memoir  to  her  Majesty,  in  which  they  set
forth  that  the  first  proposition  as  to  a  league  had  been
made  by  Sir  Henry  Umton,  and  that  now,  when  the  king
had  sent  commissioners  to  treat  concerning  an  alliance,
already  recommended  by  the  queen's  ambassador  in
France,  they  had  been  received  in  such  a  wa}"-  as  to
indicate  a  desire  to  mock  them  rather  than  to  treat
with  them.  They  could  not  believe,  they  said,  that  it
was  her  Majesty's  desire  to  use  such  language  as  had
been  addressed  to  them,  and  they  therefore  implored  her
plainly  to  declare  her  intentions,  in  order  that  they  might
waste  no  more  time  unnecessarily,  especially  as  the  high
ofifices  with  which  their  sovereign  had  honoured  them
did  not  allow  them  to  remain  for  a  long  time  absent
from  France.

The  eifect  of  this  memoir  upon  the  queen  was,  that
fresh  conferences  were  suggested,  which  took  place  at
intervals  between  the  11th  and  the  26th  of  May.  They
were  characterized  by  the  same  mutual  complaints  of
overreachings  and  of  shortcomings  by  which  all  the  pre-
vious discussions  had  been  distinguished.  On  the  17th
May  the  French  envoys  even  insisted  on  taking  formal
farewell  of  the  queen,  and  were  received  by  her  Majesty
for  that  purpose  at  a  final  audience.  After  they  had  left
the  presence — the  preparations  for  their  home-
^^"  ward  journey  being  already  made — the  queen
sent  Sir  Kobert  Cecil,  Henry  Brooke,  son  of  Lord  Cob-
ham,  and  La  Fontaine,  minister  of  a  French  church  in
England,  to  say  to  them  how  very  much  mortified  she
was  that  the  state  of  her  affairs  did  not  permit  her  to
give  the  king  as  much  assistance  as  he  desired,  and
to  express  her  wish  to  speak  to  them  once  more  before
their  departure.

The  result  of  the  audience  given  accordingly  to  the
envoys,  two  days  later,  was  the  communication  of  her
decision  to  enter  into  the  league  proposed,  but  withuut
definitely  concluding  the  treaty  until  it  should  be  ratified
by  the  king.

On  the  26th  May  articles  were  finally  agreed  upon,  by

which  the  king  and queen  agreed  to  defend

^^' each  other's  dominions,  to  unite  in  attacking

the  common  enemy,  and  to  invite  other princes and

1596.  FORMATION  OF  THE  ALLIANCE.  381

states  equally  interested  with  themselves  in  resisting
tlie  ambitions  projects  of  Spain,  to  join  in  the  league.
It  was  arranged  that  an  army  should  be  put  in  the  field
as  soon  as  possible,  at  the  expense  of  the  king  and  queen,
and  of  such  other  powers  as  should  associate  themselves
in.  the  proposed  alliance ;  that  this  army  should  invade
the  dominions  of  the  Spanish  monarch,  that  the  king  and
queen  were  never,  without  each  other's  consent,  to  make
peace  or  truce  with  Philip ;  that  the  queen  should  im-
mediately raise  four  thousand  infantry  to  serve  six
months  of  every  year  in  Picardy  and  Normandy,  with
the  condition  that  they  were  never  to  be  sent  to  a  dist-
ance of  more  than  fifty  leagues  from  Boulogne  ;  that
when  the  troubles  of  Ireland  should  be  over  the  queen
should  be  at  liberty  to  add  new  troops  to  the  four  thou-
sand men  thus  promised  by  her  to  the  league ;  that  the
queen  was  to  furnish  to  these  four  thousand  men  six
months'  pay  in  advance  before  they  should  leave  Eng-
land, and  that  the  king  should  agree  to  repay  the  amount
six  months  afterwards,  sending  meanwhile  four  nobles
to  England  as  hostages.  If  the  dominions  of  the  queen
should  be  attacked  it  was  stipulated  that,  at  two  months'
notice,  the  king  should  raise  four  thousand  men  at  the
expense  of  the  queen  and  send  them  to  her  assistance,
and  that  they  were  to  serve  for  six  months  at  her  charge,
but  were  not  to  be  sent  tt)  a  distance  of  more  than  fifty
leagues  from  the  coasts  of  France. ""^

The  English  were  not  willing  that  the  States-General
should  be  comprehended  among  the  powers  to  be  invited
to  join  the  league,  because  being  under  the  protection  of
the  Queen  of  England  they  were  supposed  to  have  no
will  but  hers.""  Burghley  insisted  accordingly  that,  in
speaking  of  those  who  were  thus  to  be  asked,  no  mention
was  to  be  made  of  peoples  nor  of  states,  for  fear  lest  the
States-General  miglit  be  included  under  those  terms'."
i'he  queen  was,  however,  brought  at  last  to  yield  the
point,  and  consented,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  French
envoys,  that  to  the  word  princes  should  be  added  the
general  expression  orders  or  estates."^  The  obstacle  thus
interposed  to  the  formation  of  the  league  by  the  hatred
of  the  queen  and  of  the  privileged  classes  of  England  to

65  De  Thou,  647-660,  seqq.  ««  Ibid.  6C0.

W  Bfir,  iV.  256. De  Thou,  uU  sup.  «  ii,i,j.

382  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

popular  liberty,  and  by  tlie  .secret  desire  entertained  of
regaining  that  sovereignty  over  the  provinces  which  had
been  refused  ten  years  before  by  Elizabeth,  was  at  length
set  aside.  The  republic,  which  might  have  been  stifled
at  its  birth,  was  now  a  formidable  fact,  and  could  neither
be  annexed  to  the  English  dominions  nor  deprived  of  its
existence  as  a  new  member  of  the  European  family.

It  being  no  longer  possible  to  gainsay  the  presence  of
the  young  commonwealth  among  the  nations,  the  next
best  thing — so  it  was  thought— was  to  defraud  her  in
the  treaty  to  which  she  was  now  invited  to  accede.
This,  as  it  will  presently  appear,  the  King  of  France
and  the  Queen  of  England  succeeded  in  doing  very
thoroughly,  and  they  accomplished  it  notwithstanding
the  astuteness  and  the,  diligence  of  the  States'  envoy,
who  at  Henry's  urgent  request  had  accompanied  the
French  mission  to  England.  Calvaert  had  been  very
active  in  bringing  about  the  arrangement,  to  assist  in
which  he  had,  as  we  have  seen,  risen  from  a  sick  bed
and  made  the  juurney  to  England.  "The  proposition
for  an  offensive  and  defen.sive  alliance  was  agreed  to  by
her  Majesty's  Council,  but  under  intolerable  and  im-
practicable conditions,"  said  he,  "  and,  as  such,  rejected
by  the  duke  and  Sancy,  so  that  they  took  leave  of  her
Majesty.  At  last,  after  some  negotiation  in  which,  with-
out boasting,  I  ma}"  say  that  1  did  some  service,  it  was
again  taken  in  hand,  and  at  last,  thank  God,  althougli
with  much  difficulty,  the  league  has  been  concluded."  "^^

When  the  task  was  finished  the  French  envoys  de-
parted to  obtain  their  master's  ratification  of  the  treaty.
Elizabeth  expressed  herself  warmly  in  regard  to  her
royal  brother,  inviting  him  earnestly  to  pay  her  a  visit,
in  which  case  she  said  she  would  gladly  meet  him  half
way  ;  for  a  sight  of  him  would  be  her  only  consola-
tion in  the  midst  of  her  adversity  and  annoyance.  "  He
may  see  other  princesses  of  a  more  lovely  appearance,"
she  added,  "  but  he  will  never  make  a  visit  to  a  more
faithful  friend."™

But  the  treaty  thus  concluded  was  for  the  public.  The
real  agreement  between  France  and  England  was  made
by  the  conimis^ioners  a  few  days  later,  and  reduced  the
I  stensible  arrangement  to  a  sham,  a  mere  decoy  to  foreign

<^  Calvaert's  Keport,  in  Deventer,  U7.  :»  Ibid.

139G.  DUPLICITY  OF  THE  TREATY.  383

nations,  especially  to  the  Dutcli  repixblic,  to  induce  them
to  imitate  England  in  joining  the  league,  and  to  emulate
her  likewise  in  alFording  that  substantial  assistance  to
the  league  which  in  reality  England  was  very  far  from
givino;.

"  Two  contracts  were  made,"  said  Secretary  of  State
Villeroy  ;  "  the  one  public,  to  give  credit  and  i-eputation
to  the  said  league,  the  other  secret,  which  destroyed  the  effects
and  the  promises  of  the  first.  By  the  first,  his  Majesty  was
to  be  succoured  by  four  thousand  infantry,  which  niimher
was  limited  hy  the  second  contract  to  two  thousand,  who  icere
to  reside  and  to  serve  only  in  the  cities  of  Botdogne  and  Mon-
treuil,  assisted  by  an  equal  number  of  French,  and  not
otherwise,  and  on  condition  of  not  being  remtjved  from
those  towns  unless  his  Majesty  should  be  personally
present  in  Picardy  with  an  army,  in  which  case  they
might  serve  in  Picardy  but  nowhere  else."'^

An  English  garrison  in  a  couple  of  French  seaports,
over  against  the  English  coast,  would  hardly  have  seemed
a  sufficient  inducement  to  other  princes  and  states  to  put
large  armies  in  the  field  to  sustain  the  Protestant  league,
had  they  known  that  this  was  the  meagre  result  of  the
protocolling  and  disputations  that  had  been  going  on  all
the  summer  at  Greenwich.

Nevertheless  the  decoy  did  its  work.  The  envoys
returned  to  France,  and  it  was  not  until  three  og  Aug.
months  later  that  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  again  i^^e.
made  his  appearance  in  England,  bringing  the  treaty  duly
ratified  by  Henry.  The  league  was  then  solemnized,  on
the  26th  August,  by  the  queen  with  much  pomp  and
ceremony.  Three  peers  of  the  realm  waited  upon  the
French  ambassador  at  his  lodgings,  and  escorted  him
and  his  suite  in  seventeen  royal  coaches  to  the  Tower.
Seven  splendid  barges  then  conveyed  them  along  the
Thames  to  Greenwich.  On  the  pier  the  ambassador  was
received  by  the  Earl  of  Derby  at  the  head  of  a  great

71  Fruin,  in  his  masterly  '  Tien  Jaren  this  year  no  more  than  two  thousand

uit  den  tachtigjaiigen  Oorlog,'  is  the  first,  English  should  be  sent  over,  which  should

so  far  as  I  know,  that  ever  called  public  serve  only  in  Boulogne  and Monstreul,

attention  to  the  extraordinary  perfidy  of  unless  the  king  should  come  personally  to

these  transactions. See  in  particular,  pp.  Picardy,  &c.  (b.  iv.  p.  525). But  the  es-

372-374.  sence  of  this  "other  treaty"  was,  that  it

Camden,  however,  alludes  to  the  fact  was kept  secret  from those most  io-

that  "  shortly  after  there  was another  terested  in  knowing  its  existence.
tr^atly  had,  wherein  it  was  agreed  that

384  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXH.

sviite  tif  nobles  and  higli  fimctionaries,  and  conducted  to
the  palace  of  Konesucli.^^

Tliere  was  a  religious  ceremony  in  the  royal  chapel,
where  a  special  pavilion  had  been  constructed.  Stand-
ing within  this  sanctuary,  the  qtieen,  with  her  hand  on
her  breast,  swore  faithfully  to  maintain  the  league  just
conchuled.  She  then  gave  her  hand  to  the  Duke  of
Bouillon,  who  held  it  in  both  his  own,  while  psalms
were  sung  and  the  organ  resounded  through  the  chapel.
Afterwards  there  was  a  splendid  banquet  in  the  palace,
the  duke  sitting  in  solitary  grandeur  at  the  royal  table,
being  placed  at  a  respectful  distance  from  her  Majesty,
and  the  dishes  being  placed  on  the  board  by  the  highest
nobles  of  the  realm,  who,  upon  their  knees,  served  the
queen  with  wine.  No  one  save  the  ambassador  sat  at
Elizabeth's  table,  but  in  the  same  hall  was  spread  another,
at  which  the  Earl  of  Essex  entertained  many  distin-
guished guests,  young  Count  Lewis  Gunther  of  Nassau
among  the  number.

In  the  midsummer  twilight  the  brilliantly  decorated
barges  were  again  floating  on  the  historic  river,  the
gaily-coloured  lanterns  lighting  the  sweep  of  the  oars,
and  the  sound  of  lute  and  viol  floating  merrily  across
the  water.  As  the  ambassador  came  into  the  courtyard
of  his  house,  he  found  a  crowd  of  several  thousand  people
assembled,  who  shouted  welcome  to  the  representative
of  Henry,  and  invoked  blessings  on  the  head  of  Queen
Elizabeth  and  of  lier  royal  brother  of  France.  Mean-
while all  the  bells  of  London  were  ringing,  artillery  was
thundering,  and  bonfires  were  blazing,  until  the  night
was  half  spent."^

Such  was  the  holiday-making  by  which  the  league
between  the  great  Protestant  queen  and  the  ex-chief  of
the  Huguenots  of  France  was  celebrated  within  a  year
after  the  pope  liad  received  him,  a  repentant  sinner,  into
the  fold  of  the  Church.  Truly  it  might  be  said  that
religion  was  rapidly  ceasing  to  be  the  line  of  demarca-
tion among  the  nations,  as  had  been  the  case  for  the  two
last  generations  of  mankind.

The  Duke  of  Bouillon  soon  afterwards  departed  for  the
Netherlands,  where  the  regular  envoy  to  the  common-
wealth, Paul  Chouart  Seigneur  de  Buzanval,  had  already

■  Hot,  IV.  256,  257.  73  Ibid.

159t'.  OBJECTS  OF  THE  CATHOLIC  LEAGUE.  385

been  preparing  the  States-General  for  their  entrance  into
the  league.  Of  course  it  was  duly  impressed  n  Sept.
upon  those  republicans  that  they  should  tliink  i^ae.
themselves  highly  honoured  by  the  privilege  of  associat-
ing themselves  with  so  august  an  alliance.  The  queen
wrote  an  earnest  letter  to  the  States  urging  them  to  join
the  league.  "  Especially  should  3'ou  do  so,"  she  said,
"  on  account  of  the  reputation  which  you  will  thei-eby
gain  for  j'our  affairs  with  the  people  who  are  under  you,
seeing  you  thus  sustained  (besides  the  certainty  wliich
you  have  of  our  favour)  by  the  friendship  of  other  con-
federated princes,  and  particularly  by  that  of  the  most
Christian  king."''*

On  the  31st  October  the  articles  of  agreement  under
which  the  republic  acceded  to  the  new  con-  3,  oct.
federation  were  signed  at  the  Hague.  Of  course  i^ae.
it  was  not  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  famous  Catholic
association.  Madam  League,  after  struggling  feebly  for
the  past  few  years,  a  decrepit  beldame,  was  at  last  dead
and  buried.  But  there  had  been  a  time  when  she  was
filled  with  exuberant  and  terrible  life.  Slie,  at  least,
had  known  the  object  of  her  creation,  and  never,  so  long
as  life  was  in  her,  had  she  faltered  in  her  dread  purpose.
To  extirpate  Protestantism,  to  murder  Protestants,  to
burn,  hang,  butcher,  bury  them  alive,  to  dethrone  every
Protestant  sovereign  in  Europe,  especially  to  assassinate
the  Queen  of  England,  the  Prince  of  Orange,  with  all  his
race,  and  Henry  of  Navarre,  and  to  unite  in  the  accom-
plishment of  these  simple  purposes  all  the  powers  of
Christendom  under  the  universal  monarchy  of  Philip
of  Spain — for  all  this,  blood  was  shed  in  tiirrents,  and
the  precious  metals  of  the  "  Indies"  squandered  as  fast
as  the  poor  savages,  who  were  thus  taking  their  first
lessons  in  the  doctrines  of  Jesus  of  iS'azareth,  could  dig  it
from  the  mines. For  this  America  had  been  summoned.

I  as  it  were  by  almighty  fiat,  out  of  previous  darkness,  in
order  that  it  might  furnish  money  with  which  to  massacre
all  the  heretics  of  the  earth.  For  this  great  purpose  was
the  sublime  discovery  of  the  Genoese  sailor  to  be  turned
to  account.  These  aims  were  intelligible,  and  had  in
})art  been  attained. William  of  Orange  had  fallen,  and

«  Bor,  IV.  260.
VOL.  III.  2  c

386  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  xXXH.

a  patent  of  nobility,  with  a  handsome  fortune,  had  been
bestowed  upon  his  assassin.  Elizabeth's  life  had  been  fre-
quently attempted.  So  had  those  of  Heniy,  of  Maurice,
of  Olden-Barneveld.  Divine  providence  might  perhaps
guide  the  hand  of  future  murderers  with  greater  accu-
racy, for  even  if  Madam  League  were  dead,  her  ghost
still  walked  among  the  Jesuits  and  summoned  them  to
complete  the  crimes  left  yet  unfinished.

But  what  was  the  design  of  the  new  confederacy  ?  It
was  not  a  Protestant  league.  Henry  of  Navarre  could
no  longer  be  the  chief  of  such  an  association,  although  it
was  to  Protestant  powers  only  that  he  could  turn  for
assistance.  It  was  to  the  commonwealth  of  the  Nether-
lands, to  the  northern  potentates  and  to  the  Calvinist  and
Lutheran  princes  of  Germany,  that  the  king  and  queen
could  alone  appeal  in  their  designs  against  Philip  of
Spain.

The  position  of  Henry  was  essentially  a  false  one  from
the  beginning.  He  felt  it  to  be  so,  and  tlie  ink  was
scarce  dry  with  which  he  signed  the  new  treaty  before
he  was  secretly  casting  about  him  to  make  peace  with
that  power  with  which  be  was  appa^-ently  summoning  all
the  nations  of  the  earth  to  do  battle.  Even  the  cautious
Elizabeth  was  deceived  by  the  crafty  Beamese,  while
both  united  to  hoodwink  the  other  states  and  princes.
On  the  31st  October,  accordingly',  the  States-General
31  Oct.  agreed  to  go  into  the  league  with  England  and
1596.  France  "  in  order  to  resist  the  enterprises  and
ambitious  designs  of  the  King  of  Spain  against  all  the
princes  and  potentates  of  Christendom."  As  the  queen
had  engaged — according  to  the  public  treaty  or  decoy —
to  furnish  four  thousand  infantry  to  the  league,  the  States
now  agreed  to  raise  and  pay  for  another  four  thousand,
to  be  maintained  in  the  king's  service  at  a  cost  of  four
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  florins  annually,  to  be  paid
by  the  month.  The  king  promised,  in  case  the  Nether-
lands should  be  invaded  by  the  enemy  with  the  greater
part  of  his  force,  that  these  four  thousand  soldiers  should
return  to  the  Netherlands.  The  king  further  bound
himself  to  carry  on  a  sharp  offensive  war  in  Artois  and
Hainault."

"»  Articles  of  agreement  between  the  King  and  the  States-General  of  the  Xcther
Ian  !s,  signed  l<y  Kouillon  and  Buzanvnl,  31  Oct.  1.596,  apud  Bor,  IV.  265-267.

1596.  AFFAIRS  IN  GERMANY.  387

The  States-General  would  have  liked  a  condition  in-
serted in  the  treaty  that  no  peace  should  be  made  with
Spain  by  England  or  France  without  the  consent  of  the
provinces  ;  but  this  was  peremptorily  refused.

Perhaps  the  republic  had  no  special  reason  to  be
grateful  for  the  grudging  and  almost  contemptuous
manner  in  which,  it  had  thus  been  virtually  admitted
into  the  community  of  sovereigns ;  but  the  men  who
directed  its  aiiairs  were  far  too  enlightened  not  to  see
how  great  a  step  was  taken  when  their  political  position,
now  conceded  to  them,  had  been  secured.  In  good  faith
they  intended  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  the  new
treaty,  and  they  immediately  turned  their  attention  to
the  vital  matters  of  making  new  levies,  and  of  imposing
new  taxes,  by  means  of  which  they  might  render  them-
selves useful  to  their  new  allies.

Meantime  Ancel  was  deputed  by  Henry  to  visit  the
various  courts  of  Germany  and  the  north  in  order  to
obtain,  if  possible,  new  members  for  the  league.'"^  But
Germany  was  difficult  to  rouse.  The  dissensions
among  Protestants  were  ever  inviting  the  assaults  of
the  Papists.  Its  multitude  of  sovereigns  were  passing
their  leisure  moments  in  wrangling  among  themselves
as  usual  on  abstruse  points  of  theology  and  devoting
their  serious  hours  to  banquetting,  deep  drinking,  and
the  pleasures  of  the  chase.  The  jeremiads  of  old  John
of  Kassau  grew  louder  than  ever,  but  his  voice  was  of
one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  The  wrath  to  come  of
that  horrible  Thirty  Years'  War,  which  he  was  not  to
witness,  seemed  to  inspire  all  his  prophetic  diatribes.
But  there  were  few  to  heed  them.  Two  great  dangeis
seemed  ever  impending  over  Christendom,  and  it  is
difficult  to  decide  which  fate  would  have  been  the  more
terrible,  the  establishment  of  the  universal  monarchy  of
Philip  II.,  or  the  conquest  of  Germany  by  the  Grand
Turk.  But  when  Ancel  and  other  emissaries  sought  to
obtain  succour  against  the  danger  from  the  south-west,
he  was  answered  by  the  clash  of  arms  and  the  shrieks
of  horror  which  came  daily  from  the  south-east." In

"6  See  an  account  of  Anoel's  missions,  afin  de  donner  par  la  une.iuste  ide?  ilc  la

speeches,  and  negotiations,  in  Dc  Thou,  splendeur  de  I'Empire  Ottoman,  de  s(»

xili.  77-87,  1.  118. Bor,  IV.  289.  richesscs,  de  sa  puissance  ct  de  la  disci-

7"  "  J'ai  cru  de  devoir  ici  sur  la  foi  de  pline  e.xacte  qui  s'observe  au  flodans  ( t  au

ceux qui  en ont  eti  temoins  oculaires,  duhors,  afin  que  nos  peuples  ne  soi-,-nt

3  c  2

388  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXH.

vain  was  it  urged,  and  urged  with  triith,  that  the
Alcoran  was  less  cruel  than  the  Inquisition,  that  the
soil  of  Europe  might  be  overrun  by  Turks  and  Tartars,
and  the  crescent  planted  triumphantly  in  every  village,
with  less  disaster  to  the  human  I'ace,  and  with  better
hope  that  the  germs  of  civilization  and  the  precepts  of
Christianity  might  survive  the  invasion,  than  if  the
systems  of  Philip,  ot  Torqueraada,  and  of  Alva,  should
become  the  universal  law.  But  the  Turk  was  a  frank
enemy  of  Christianity,  while  Philip  murdered  Christians
in  the  name  of  Christ,  The  distinction  imposed  upon
the  multitudes,  with  whom  words  were  things.  i\lore-
over,  the  danger  from  the  young  and  enterprising
Mahomet  seemed  more  appalling  to  the  imagination
than  the  menace,  from  which  experience  had  taken
something  of  its  terrors,  of  the  old  and  decrepit  Philip.

The  Ottoman  empire,  in  its  exact  discipline,  in  its
terrible  concentration  of  purj^ose,  in  its  contempt  for  all
arts  and  sciences,  and  all  human  occupation  save  the
trade  of  war  and  the  pursuit  of  military  dominion,
offered  a  strong  contrast  to  the  distracted  condition  of
the  holy  Roman  empire,  where  an  intellectual  and  in-
dustrious people,  distracted  by  half  a  century  of  reli-
gious conti'oversy  and  groaning  under  one  of  the  most
elaborately  perverse  of  all  the  political  systems  ever
invented  by  man,  seemed  to  oiFer  itself  an  easy  pi'ey  to
any  conqueror.  The  Turkish  power  was  in  the  fulness
of  its  aggressive  strength,  and  seemed  far  more  formid-
able than  it  would  have  done  had  there  been  clearer
perceptions  of  what  constitutes  the strength  and  the

plus  etonnes  ni  si  indignes,  si  tandis  que  man  and  historian  as  Jacques  Auguste  de

nos  princt's  Chretiens  languisseut  dans  Thou,  xii.  StiO,  I.  115.
loiVivete  ct  dans  inie  moUesse  infame  et "  Wol  zu  wilnschen  wehre,"  said  old

travaillcnt  sans  cet-se  a  se  detruire  les  uns  John  of  Nassau,  "  das  man  in  Zeiten  uff

Ics  autres  par  Icurs  haines  ou  par  leurs  wachen  und  uff  diewe&e  gedenken  wolte,

jalousies,  les  Turcs  dont  les  commence-  wie  nicht  allein  diesem  bluthundt  dem

ments  ont  et6  si  peu  de  chose  out  forme  Tiirken  sondern  auch  d^m  Pabst,  wehhcn

11  n  si  grand  empire. Quand  on  fera  re-  D.  liUther  seliger  in  seinem  christlichen

liexion  sur  la  severite  de  leur  discipline,  Gesang, '  lirhalt  uns  Herr  bei  deinem

sur  leur  eloignement  du  luxe  et  de  tons  Wort,'  vor  und  den  Turken  nachsetzt,

les  vices  que  traine  avec  sol  la  moUesse,  mit  verleihung  Giittlirher  hulffe  niuge

et  qu'il  n'y  a  point  d'autre  route  parmi  wiilerstanden,  und  viel  jamerundehlendt

eux  pour  s'elever  aux  grands  emplois,  ct  und blut  vergiessen,  ja die  verherung

fairc  de  grandes  fortunes,  que  les  vertus  der  ganzen  Teutscben  nation  sambt  an-

militaires,  leurs  vastes  progres  n'auront  dren  christlichen  Kiinigreichen  und  Lan-

plus  rien  qui  surprenne." Such  are  the  dern  vorkommen  wcrden,"  &c.,  &c.  Groen

.admiring  words  of  so  enlightened  a  states-  v.  Prinsterer,  A  rchives,  I.  330  (2«  serie).

1596.  THE  TURKISH  CAMPAIGN.  389

wealth  of  nations.  Coiild  the  simple  tnith  have  been
thoroughly  comprehended  that  a  realm  founded  upon
such  principles  was  the  grossest  of  absurdities,  the
Eastern  might  have  seemed  less  terrible  than  the
Western  danger.

But  a  great  campaign,  at  no  considerable  distance
from  the  walls  of  Vienna,  had  occupied  the  attention  of
Germany  during  the  autumn.  Mahomet  had  taken  the
field  in  person  Avith  a  hundred  thousand  men,  and  the
emperor's  brother,  Maximilian,  in  conjunction  with  the
Prince  of  Transylvania,  at  the  head  of  a  force  of  equal
magnitude,  had  gone  forth  to  give  him  battle.  Between
the  Theiss  and  the  Danube,  at  Keveste,  not  far  26  Oct.
from  the  city  of  Erlau,  on  the  26th  October,  the  i^^^.
terrible  encounter  on  which  the  fate  of  Christendom
seemed  to  hang  at  last  took  place,  and  Europe  held  its
breath  in  awful  suspense  mitil  its  fate  should  be  decided.
When  the  result  at  last  became  known,  a  horrible
blending  of  the  comic  and  the  tragic,  such  as  has  rarely
been  presented  in  history,  startled  the  world.  Seventy
thousand  human  beings — Moslems  and  Christians —
were  lying  dead  or  wounded  on  the  banks  of  a  nameless
little  stream  which  flows  into  the  Theiss,  and  the  com-
manders-in-chief of  both  armies  were  running  away  as
fast  as  horses  could  carry  them.  Each  army  believed
itself  hopelessly  defeated,  and  abandoning  tents,  baggage,
artillery,  ammunition,  the  remnants  of  each  betook  them-
selves to  panic-stricken  flight.  Generaliissimo  Maximi-
lian never  looked  behind  him  as  he  fled,  until  he  had
taken  refuge  in  Kaschau,  and  had  thence  made  his  way,
deeply  mortified  and  despondent,  to  Vienna.  The  Prince
of  Transylvania  retreated  into  the  depths  of  his  own
principality.  Mahomet,  with  his  principal  officers,  shut
himself  up  in  Buda,  after  which  he  returned  to  C'on-
stantinople  and  abandoned  himself  for  a  time  to  a  volup-
tuous ease,  inconsistent  with  the  Ottoman  projects  of
conquering  the  world.  The  Turks,  less  prone  to  des-
pei"ation  than  the  Christians,  had  been  utterly  overthrown
in  the  early  part  of  the  action,  but  when  the  victors
were,  as  usual,  greedily  bent  upon  plunder  before  the
victory  had  been  fairly  secured,  the  tide  of  battle  was
turned  by  the  famous  Italian  renegade  Cicala.  The
Turks,  too,  had  the  good  sense  to  send  two  days  aftei-

390  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXK.

wards  and  recover  their  artillery,  trains,  and  other  pro-
perty, which  ever  since  the  battle  had  been  left  at  the
mercy  of  the  first  comers.™

So  ended  the  Turkish  campaign  of  the  year  1596.^'
Ancel,  accordingly,  fared  ill  in  his  negotiations  in  Ger-
man}'. On  the  other  hand  Mendoza,  Admiral  of  Arragon,
had  been  industriously  but  secretly  canvassing  the  same
regions  as  the  representative  of  the  Spanish  king.**'  It
was  important  for  Philip,  who  put  more  faith  in  the
league  of  the  three  powers  than  Henry  himself  did,  to
lose  no  time  in  counteracting  its  influence.  The  con-
dition of  the  holy  Roman  empire  had  for  some  time
occupied  his  most  serious  thoughts.  It  seemed  plain
that  Rudolph  would  never  marry.  Certainly  he  would
never  marry  the  Infanta,  although  he  was  very  angrj'
that  his  brother  should  aspire  to  the  hand  which  he
himself  rejected.  In  case  of  his  death  without  children,
Philip  thought  it  possible  that  there  might  be  a  Pro-
testant revolution  in  Germany,  and  that  the  house  of
Habsburg  might  lose  the  imperial  crown  altogether.
It  was  even  said  that  the  emperor  was  himself  of  that
opinion,  and  prefeired  that  the  empire  should  end  with
his  own  life.^^  Philip  considered*^  that  neither  Matthias
nor  Maximilian  was  fit  to  succeed  their  brother,  being
both  of  them  lukewarm  in  the  Catholic  faith.^  In  other
words,  he  chose  that  his  destined  son-in-law,  the  Car-
dinal Albert,  should  supersede  them,  and  he  was  anxious
to  have  him  appointed  as  soon  as  possible  King  of  the
Romans.

"  His  Holiness  the  Pope  and  the  King  of  Spain,"  said
the  Admiral  of  Arragon,  "  think  it  necessary  to  apply
most  stringent  measures  to  the  emperor  to  compel  him
to  appoint  a  successor,  because,  in  case  of  his  death
without  one,  the  administration  during  the  vacancy
would  fall  to  the  elector  palatine, — a  most  perverse
Calvinistic  heretic,  and  as  great  an  enemy  of  the  house
of  Austria  and  of  our  holy  religion  as  the  Turk  himself

■^  De  Thou,  xii.  567-594, 1.  115. Me-  y  en  la  corte  Cesarea  tratando  con  per-

teren,  388. Keyd,  297.  sonas  prudentes  cerca  el  neg°  de  Rey  de

7i  Ibid. 80  Bor,  IV.  293.  Eonianos  y  sucesion  a  los  estados  electi-

si  "Siendo  comnn  opinion  en  Alemania  vos  de  Bohemia,  Moravia,  Silesia,  y  Un-

que  disea  que  con  su  niuerte  se  acabe  el  gria. (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

imperio  en  estas  partes." — Relacion  de  lo  s2  Admiral  of  Arragon  to  Philip,  17  Dec.

que  el  Almirante  de  Aragon  ha  colegido  1596. (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

eii  el  tiempo  que  ha  estado  en  Alemaiia  83  ibid.

/59o.  PHILIP'S  INTERFEPvENCE  IN  GERMANY.  391

— as  sufficiently  appears  in  those  diabolical  laws  of  his
published  in  the  palatinate  a  few  months  since.  A
vacancy  is  so  dreadful,  that  in  the  north  of  Germany
the  world  would  come  to  an  end  ;  yet  the  emperor,  being
of  rather  a  timid  nature  than  otherwise,  is  inclined  to
quiet,  and  shrinks  from  the  discussions  and  conflicts
likely  to  be  caused  by  an  appointment.  Therefore  his
Holiness  and  his  Catholic  Majesty,  not  choosing  that
we  should  all  live  in  danger  of  the  world's  falling  in
ruins,  have  resolved  to  provide  the  remedy.  They  are
to  permit  the  electors  to  use  the  faculty  which  they
possess  of  suspending  the  emperor  and  depriving  him
of  his  power;  there  being  examples  of  this  in  other
times  against  emperors  who  governed  ill."**

The  Admiral  farther  alluded  to  the  great  effort  made
two  years  before  to  elect  the  King  of  Denmark  emperor,
reminding  Philip  that  in  Hamburg  they  had  erected
triumphal  arches,  and  made  other  preparations  to  receive
him.  This  year,  he  observed,  the  Protestants  were
renewing  their  schemes.  On  the  occasion  of  the  bap-
tism of  the  child  of  the  elector  palatine,  the  English
envoy  being  present,  and  Queen  Elizabeth  being  god-
mother, they  had  agreed  upon  nine  articles  of  faith
much  more  hostile  to  the  Catholic  creed  than  anything
ever  yet  professed.  In  case  of  the  death  of  the  em-
peror, this  elector  palatine  would  of  course  make  much
trouble,  and  the  emperor  should  therefore  be  induced,
by  fair  means  if  possible,  on  account  of  the  great  incon-
venience of  forcing  him,  but  not  without  a  hint  of
compulsion,  to  acquiesce  in  the  necessary  measures.
Philip  was  represented  as  willing  to  assist  the  empire
with  considerable  force  against  the  Turk — as  there
could  be  no  doubt  that  Hungary  was  in  great  danger —
but  in  recompense  it  was  necessary  to  elect  a  King  of
the  Eomans  in  all  respects  satisfactory  to  him.  There
were  three  objections  to  the  election  of  Albert,  whose
recent  victories  and  great  abilities  entitled  him  in
Philip's  opinion  to  the  crown.  Firstly,  there  was  a
doubt  whether  the  kingdoms  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia
were  elective  or  hereditary,  and  it  was  very  important
that  the  King  of  the  Eomans  should  succeed  to  those
two  crowns, because the electors and other princes

w  Relacion  del  Almirante  de  Aragon,  &c.,  ubi  tup.

392  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXH.

having  fiefs  witliin  those  kingdoms  would  be  tinvvilling
to  swear  fealty  to  two  suzerains,  and  as  Albert  was
younger  than  his  brothers  he  could  scarcely  expect  to
take  by  inheritance.

Secondly,  Albert  had  no  property  of  his  own,  but  the
Admiral  suggested  that  the  emperor  might  be  made  to
abandon  to  him  the  income  of  the  Tyrol.

Thirdly,  it  was  undesirable  for  Albert  to  leave  the
Netherlands  at  that  juncture.  Nevertheless,  it  was
suggested  by  the  easy-going  Admiral,  with  the  same
tranquil  insolence  which  marked  all  his  proposed
arrangements,  that  as  Rudolph  would  retire  from  the
government  altogether,  Albeit,  as  king  of  the  Eomans
and  acting  emperor,  could  very  well  take  care  of  the
Netherlands  as  part  of  his  whole  realm.  Albert  being
moreover  about  to  marry  the  Infanta,  the  handsome
dowry  which  he  would  receive  with  her  from  the  king
would  enable  him  to  sustain  his  dignity.*^

Thus  did  Philip,  who  had  been  so  industrious  during
the  many  past  years  in  his  endeavours  to  expel  the
heretic  Queen  of  England  and  the  Huguenot  Henry
from  the  realms  of  their  ancestors,  and  to  seat  himself
or  his  daughter,  or  one  or  another  of  his  nephews,  in
their  places,  now  busy  himself  with  schemes  to  discrown
Eudolph  of  Habsburg,  and  to  place  the  ubiquitous  In-
fanta and  her  future  husband  on  his  throne.  Time
would  show  the  result.

Meantime,  while  the  Protestant  Ancel  and  other
agents  of  the  new  league  against  Philip  were  travelling
about  from  one  court  of  Europe  to  another  to  gain  ad-
herents to  their  cause,  the  great  founder  of  the  confede-
2'acy  was  already  secretly  intriguing  for  a  peace  with
that  monarch.  The  ink  was  scarce  dry  on  the  treaty
to  which  he  had  afiBxed  his  signature  before  he  was
closeted  with  the  agents  of  the  Archduke  Albert,  and
receiving  affectionate  messages  and  splendid  presents
from  that  military  ecclesiastic.

In  November,  1596,  La  Balvena,  formerly  a  gentle-
man of  the  Count  de  la  Fera,  came  to  Eouen.
He  had  a  very  secret  interview  with  Plenry  IV.
at  three  o'clock  one  morning,  and  soon  afterwards  at  a
Very  late  hour  in  the  night. The  king  asked  him  why

'•'  Relaciou  del  Alniirant?,  ubi.  sup. Letter  of  the  Admiral,  IT  Dec.  1596,  last  cited.

1590.  HENRY'S  INTRIGUE  WITH  PHILIP.  393

the  archduke  was  not  willing  to  make  a  general  peace,
including  England  and  Holland.  Balvena  replied  that
he  had  no  authority  to  treat  on  that,  subject ;  it  being
well  known,  however,  that  the  King  of  Spain  would
never  consent  to  a  peace  with  the  rebels,  except  on  the
ground  of  the  exclusive  maintenance  of  the  Catholic
religion.*^*^

He  is  taking  the  very  course  to  destroy  that  religion,
said  Henry.  The  king  then  avowed  himself  in  favour
of  peace  for  the  sake  of  the  poor  afflicted  people  of  all
countries.  He  was  not  tired  of  arms,  he  said,  which
were  so  familiar  to  him,  but  his  wish  was  to  join  in  a
general  crusade  against  the  Turk.  This  would  be
better  for  the  Catholic  religion  than  the  present  occupa-
tions of  all  parties.  He  avowed  that  the  Queen  of
England  was  his  very  good  friend,  and  said  he  had
never  yet  broken  his  faith  with  her,  and  never  would
do  so.  She  had  sent  him  the  Garter,  and  he  had
accepted  it,  as  his  brother  Henry  III.  had  done  before
him,  and  he  would  negotiate  no  peace  which  did  not
include  her.*''  The  not  very  distant  future  was  to  show
how  much  these  stout  professions  of  sincerity  were
worth.  Meantime  Henry  charged  Balvena  to  keep  their
interviews  a  profound  secret,  especially  from  every  one
in  France.  The  king  expressed  great  anxiety  lest  the
Huguenots  should  hear  of  it,  and  the  agent  observed
that  any  suspicion  of  peace  negotiations  would  make
great  disturbance  among  the  heretics,  as  one  of  the
conditions  of  the  king's  absolution  by  the  pope  was
supposed  to  be  that  he  should  make  war  upon  his
Protestant  subjects.  On  his  return  from  Eouen  the
emissary  made  a  visit  to  Monlevet,  marshal  of  the  camp
to  Henry  IV.  and  a  Calvinist.  There  was  much  con-
versation about  peace,  in  the  course  of  which  Monlevet
observed,  "  We  are  much  afraid  of  you  in  negotiation,  for
we  know  that  you  Spaniards  far  surpass  us  in  astuteness."

S6  Relacion  de  lb  que  ha  hecha  la  Bal-  however,  difficult  to  ascertain  how  ob-

vena. November,  1596. (Arch,  de  Si-  scurer  men  were  correctly  called  in  days

mancas  MS.)  when  grave  historians  could  designate  so

I  am  not  quite  sure  as  to  the  orthogra-  illustrious  a  personage  as  Sir  Walter  Ra-

phy  of  the  name  of  this  secret  agent,  leigh  as  Guateral.

Van  Ueventer,  ii.  141-14  6,  prints  it  Vul-  87  2"  ReLicion  que  Balvena  ha  hecha  d

neve,  but  as  the  B  and  V  in  Spanish  are  su AUeza volviendo  de Francia. De-

nearly  identical,  I  am  inclined  to  prefer  cember, 1596. (Archives  de  Simancas

the  name given in the text. It is,  MS.)

394  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXH.

"  Nay,"  said  Balvena,  "  I  will  only  repeat  the  words
of  the  Emperor  Charles  V. — '  The  Spaniards  seem  wise,
and  are  madmen  ;  the  French  seem  madmen,  and  are
wise/^ ' "

A  few  weeks  later  the  archduke  sent  Balvena  again
to  Rouen. He  had  another  interview  with  the

Dec.  1596

king,  at  which  not  only  Villeroy  and  other
Catholics  were  present,  but  Monlevet  also.  This  proved
a  great  obstacle  to  freedom  of  conversation.  The  result
was  the  same  as  before.  There  were  strong  professions
of  a  desiie  on  the  part  of  the  king  for  a  peace,  but  it
was  for  a  general  peace  ;  nothing  further.

On  the  4th  December  Balvena  was  sent  for  by  the
king  before  daylight,  just  as  he  was  mounting  his  horse
for  the  chase.

"  Tell  his  Highness,"  said  Henry,  "  that  I  am  all
frankness,  and  incapable  of  dissimulation,  and  that  I
believe  him  too  much  a  man  of  honour  to  wish  to  deceive
me.  Go  tell  him  that  I  am  most  anxious  for  peace,  and
that  I  deeply  regret  the  defeat  that  has  been  sustained
against  the  Turk.  Had  I  been  there  1  would  have
come  out  dead  or  victorious.  Let  him  arrange  an
agreement  between  us,  so  that  presto  he  may  see  me
there  with  my  brave  nobles,  with  infantry  and  with
plenty  of  Switzers.  Tell  him  that  I  am  his  friend.
Begone. Be  diligent."*^

On  the  last  day  but  two  of  the  year,  the  archduke,

29  Dec. having heard  this  faithful  report  of  Henry's

1596.  affectionate  sentiments,  sent  him  a  suit  of
splendid  armour,  such  as  was  then  made  better  in
Antwerp  than  anywhere  else,  magnificently  burnished
of  a  blue  colour,  according  to  an  entirely  new  fashion.^"

With  such  secret  courtesies  between  his  most  Catholic
Majesty's  vicegerent  and  himself,  was  Henry's  league
with  the  two  Protestant  powers  accompanied.

Exactly  at  the  same  epoch  Philip  was  again  preparing
an  invasion  of  the  queen's  dominions.  An.  armada  of  a
hundred  and  twenty-eight  ships,  with  a  force  of  fourteen
thousand  infantry  and  three  thousand  horse,  had  been
assembled  during  the  autumn  of  this  year  at  Lisbon,  not-

83  "  Los  Espaiioles  parecen  eabios  y  son  (Arch, de Simancas MS.) "  ArmaB

locos,  y  los  Franceses  parecen  locos  y  son  buenas  de  las  que  se  labran  en  Anveres

sabios."  89  2'>  Relacion,  &c.  que  son  palxinadas  de  cierta  labor  nueva  "

*o  Albert to Philip, 29 Dec. 1596.  Compare  Reyd,  290.

1596.  PHILIP'S  DESIGNS  AGAINST  ENGLAND.  395

withstanding  the  almost  crushing  blow  that  the  English
and  Hollanders  had  dealt  the  king's  navy  so  j-ecently  at
Cadiz."  This  new  expedition  was  intended  for  Ireland,
where  it  was  supposed  that  the  Catholics  would  be  easily
roused.  It  was  also  hoped  that  the  King  of  Scots  might
be  induced  to  embrace  this  opportunity  of  wreaking
vengeance  on  his  mother's  destroyer.  "  He  was  on  the
watch  the  last  time  that  my  armada  went  forth  against
the  English,"  said  Philip,  "  and  he  has  now  no  reason  to
do  the  contrary,  especially  if  he  remembers  that  here  is
a  chance  to  requite  the  cruelty  which  was  practised  on
his  mother."  ^^

The  fleet  sailed  on  the  5th  October  under  the  com-
mand of  the  Count  Santa  Gadea.  Its  imme-  5  oct.
diate  destination  was  the  coast  of  Ireland,  ^^^^•
where  they  were  to  find  some  favourable  point  for  dis-
embarking the  troops.  Having  accomplished  this,  the
ships,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  light  vessels,  were  to
take  their  departure  and  pass  the  winter  in  Ferrol.  In
case  the  fleet  should  be  forced  by  stress  of  weather  on
the  English  coast,  the  port  of  Milford  Haven  in  Wales
was  to  be  seized,  "  because,"  said  Philip,  "  there  are
great  many  Catholics  there  well  affected  to  our  cause,  and
who  have  a  special  enmity  to  the  English."  In  case  the
English  fleet  should  come  forth  to  give  battle,  Philip
sent  directions  that  it  was  to  be  conquered  at  once,  and
that  after  the  victory  Milford  Haven  was  to  be  firmly
held.«^

This  was  easily  said.  But  it  was  not  fated  that  this
expedition  should  be  more  triumphant  than  that  of  the
unconquerable  armada  which  had  been  so  signally
conquered  eight  years  before.  Scarcely  had  the  fleet
put  to  sea  when  it  was  overtaken  by  a  tremendous
storm,  in  which  forty  ships  foundered  with  five  thousand
men.^*  The  shattered  remnants  took  refuge  in  Ferrol.
There  the  ships  were  to  refit,  and  in  the  spring  the
attempt  was  to  be  renewed.  Thus  it  was  ever  with  the
King  of  Spain.  There  was  a  placid  unconsciousness  on
his  part  of  defeat  which  sycophants  thought  sublime.
And  such  insensibility  might  have  been  sublimity  had

=1  Philip  to  Albert,  4  October,  1596. (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  92  Ibid.

93  PhiUp  to  Albert,  5  October,  1596. (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)
M  Same  to  same,  31  December,  1596. (Ibid.) Reyd,  297.

39G  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXII.

the  monarcli  besn  in  person  on  the  deck  of  a  frigate  in  the
howling  tempest,  seeing  ship  after  ship  go  down  before
his  eyes,  and  exerting  himself  with  tranquil  energy  and
skill  to  encourage  his  followers,  and  to  preserve  what
remained  afloat  from  destruction.  Certainly  such  exhi-
bitions of  human  superiority  to  the  elements  are  in  the
highest  degree  inspiring.  His  father  had  shown  him-
self on  more  than  one  occasion  the  master  of  his  fate.
The  King  of  France,. too,  bare-headed,  in  his  iron  corslet,
leading  a  forlorn  hope,  and,  by  the  personal  charm  of
his  valour,  changing  fugitives  into  heroes  and  defeat  into
victory,  had  aiforded  many  examples  of  sublime  uncon-
sciousness of  disaster,  such  as  must  ever  thrill  the  souls
of  mankind.  But  it  is  more  difficult  to  be  calm  in  battle
and  shipwreck  than  at  the  writing  desk  ;  nor  is  that  the
highest  degree  of  fortitude  which  enables  a  monarch —
himself  in  safety  —  to  endiTre  without  flinching  the
destruction  of  his  fellow  creatures.

No  sooner,  however,  was  the  remnant  of  the  tempest-
tost  fleet  safe  in  Ferrol  than  the  king  lequested  the  car-
dinal to  collect  an  army  at  Calais  and  forthwith  to  invade
England.  He  asked  his  nephew  whether  he  could  not
manage  to  send  his  troops  across  the  channel  in  vessels
of  light  draught,  such  as  he  already  had  at  command,
together  with  some  others  which  might  be  furnished
him  from  Spain.  In  this  way  he  was  directed  to  gain  a
foot-hold  ill  England,  and  he  was  to  state  immediately
whether  he  could  accomplish  this  with  his  own  resources,
or  should  require  the  assistance  of  the  fleet  at  Eerrol.
The  king  further  suggested  that  the  enemy,  encouraged
by  his  success  at  Cadiz  the  previous  summer,  might  be
preparing  a  fresh  expedition  against  Spain,  in  which  case
the  invasion  of  England  would  be  easier  to  accomplish.

Thus  on  the  last  day  of  1 596,  Philip,  whose  fleet  sent
forth  for  the  conquest  of  Ireland  and  England  had  been
too  crippled  to  prosecute  the  adventuie,  was  proposing
to  his  nephew  to  conquer  England  without  any  fleet  at
all.  He  had  given  the  same  advice  to  Alexander  Farnese
so  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  destruction  of  the  invincible
armada.

1597.  OPERATIONS  IN  BRABANT.  397

CHAPTEE XXXIII.

struggle  of  the  Netherlands  against  Spain  —  March  to  Turnhout  —  Retreat  of  the
Spaniih  commander  —  Pursuit  and  at;ack  —  Demolition  of  the  Spanish  army  —
Surrender  of  the  garrison  of  Turnhout  —  Improved  military  science  —  Moral  effect
of  the  battle  —  The  campaign  in  France  —  Attack  on  Amiens  by  the  Spaniards  —
Sack  and  burnins  of  the  city  —  De  Rosny's  plan  for  reorganization  of  the  finances
—  Jobbery  and  speculation  —  Philip's  repudiation  of  his  debts — Eifects  of  the
measure  —  Renewal  of  persecution  by  the  Jesuits — Contention  between  Turk
and  '  hristian  —  Envoy  from  the  King  of  Poland  to  the  Hague  to  plead  for  recon-
ciliation with  Philip  —  His  subsequent  presentation  to  Queen  Elizabeth — Military
events  —  Recovery  of  Amiens  —  Feeble  operations  of  the  confederate  powers
against  Spain  —  Marriage  of  the  Princess  Eniili^i,  sister  of  Maurice  —  Pveduction  of
the  castle  and  town  of  Al|)hen  —  Surrender  of  liheinberg  —  Capitulation  of  Meurs
— Surrender  of  Grill—  Storming  and  taking  of  Brevoort  —  Capitulation  of  Enschede,
Ootmarsum,  Oldenzaal,  and  Liugen  —  Rebellion  of  the  Spanish  garrisons  in  Ant-
werp and  Ghent  —  Progress  of  the  peaco  movement  between  Henry  and  Philip  —
Relations  of  the  three  confederate  powers — Henry's  scheme  for  reconciliation
with  Spain  —  His  acceptance  of  Philip's  offer  of  peace  announced  to  Elizabeth  —
Endeavours  for  a  general  peace.

The  old  year  Lad  closed  with  an  abortive  attempt  of
Philip  to  fulfil  his  favourite  dream — the  conquest  of
England.  The  new  year  opened  with  a  spirited  effort
of  Prince  Maurice  to  measure  himself  in  the  open  field
with  the  veteran  legions  of  fSpain.

Turnhout,  in  Brabant,  was  an  open  village  —  the
largest  in  all  the  Netherlands — lying  about  twenty-five
English  miles  in  almost  a  direct  line  south  from  Gertruy-
denberg.  It  was  nearly  as  far  distant  in  an  easterly
direction  from  Antwerp,  and  was  about  five  miles  nearer
Breda  than  it  was  to  G  ertruydenberg.

At  this  place  the  cardinal-archduke  had  gathered  a
considerable  force,  numbering  at  least  four  thoiisand  of
his  best  infantry,  with  several  squadrons  of  cavalry,  the
whole  under  command  of  the  general-in-chief  of  artillery,
Count  Varax.  People  in  the  neighbourhood  were  grow-
ing uneas3%  for  it  was  uncertain  in  what  direction  it
might  be  intended  to  use  this  formidable  force.  It  was
perhaps  the  cardinal's  intention  to  make  a  sudden  assault
upon  Breda,  the  governor  of  which  seemed  not  inclined
to  carry  out  his  proposition  to  transfer  that  important

398  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

city  to  tlie  king,  or  it  was  thought  that  he  might  take
advantage  of  a  hard  frost  and  cross  the  frozen  morasses
and  estuaries  into  the  land  of  Ter  Tholen,  where  he
might  overmaster  some  of  the  important  strongholds  of
Zeeland.

Marcellus  Bax,  that  boldest  and  most  brilliant  of  Hol-
land's cavalry  officers,  had  come  to  Maurice  early  in
January  with  an  urgent  suggestion  that  no  time  might
be  lost  in  making  an  attack  upon  the  force  at  Tumhout,
before  they  should  succeed  in  doing  any  mischief.  The
prince  pondered  the  proposition,  for  a  little  time,  by
himself,  and  then  conferred  very  privately  upon  the
subject  with  the  state-council.  On  the  14th  January  it
was  agreed  with  that  body  that  the  enterprise  should  be
attempted,  but  with  the  utmost  secrecy.  A  week  later
the  council  sent  an  express  messenger  to  Maurice  xirging
him  not  to  expose  his  own  life  to  peril,  but  to  apprise
them  as  soon  as  possible  as  to  the  results  of  the  adven-
ture.

Meantime  patents  had  been  sent  to  the  various  garri-

22  Jan. sons for  fifty  companies  of  foot  and  sixteen
1597. squadrons of  horse. On  the 22nd January

Maurice  came  to  Gertruydenberg,  the  place  of  rendez-
vous, attended  by  Sir  Francis  Vere  and  Count  Solms.
Colonel  Kloetingen  was  already  there  with  the  transports
of  ammunition  and  a  few  pieces  of  artillery  from  Zeeland,
and  in  the  course  of  the  day  the  whole  infantry  force  had
assembled.  Nothing  could  have  been  managed  with
greater  promptness  or  secrecy.

Next  day,  before  dawn,  the  march  began. The  battalia

23  Jan.  was  led  by  Van  der  Noot,  with  six  companies  of
1597.  Hollanders.  Then  came  Vere,  with  eight  com-
panies of  the  reserve,  Dockray  with  eight  companies  of
Englishmen,  Murray  with  eight  companies  of  Scotch,  and
Kloetingen  and  La  Corde  with  twelve  companies  of  Dutch
and  Zeelanders.  In  front  of  the  last  troop  under  La
Corde  marched  the  commander  of  the  artillery,  with
two  demi-cannon  and  two  field-pieces,  followed  by  the
ammunition  and  baggage  trains.  Hohenlo  arrived  just
as  the  march  was  beginning,  to  whom  the  stadholder,
notwithstanding  their  frequent  differences,  communi-
cated his  plans,  and  entrusted  the  general  command  of
the  cavalry. That  force  met  the  expedition  at  Oster-

1597.  MARCH  OF  MAURICE  TO  TURNHOUT.  399

tout,  a  league's  distance  from  Gertrujdenberg,  and  con-
sisted of  the  best  mounted  companies,  English  and
Dutch,  from  the  garrisons  of  Breda,  Bergen,  Nymegen,
and  the  Zutphen  districts.

It  was  a  dismal,  drizzly,  foggy  morning ;  the  weather
changing  to  steady  rain  as  the  expedition  advanced.
There  had  been  alternate  frost  and  thaw  for  the  few
previous  weeks,  and  had  that  condition  of  the  atmo-
sphere continued  the  adventure  could  not  have  been
attempted.  It  had  now  turned  completely  to  thaw.  The
roads  were  all  under  water,  and  the  march  was  suffi-
ciently difficult.  Nevertheless,  it  was  possible ;  so  the
stout  Hollanders,  Zeelanders,  and  Englishmen  struggled
on  manfully,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  through  the  mist  and
the  mire.  By  nightfall  the  expedition  had  reached
Eavels,  at  less  than  a  league's  distance  from  Turnhout,
having  accomplished,  under  the  circumstances,  a  very
remarkable  march  of  over  twenty  miles.  A  stream  of
water,  the  Neethe,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Scheld,
separated  Ravels  from  Turnhout,  and  was  crossed  by  a
stone  bridge.  It  was  an  anxious  moment.  Maurice  dis-
covered by  his  scouts  that  he  was  almost  within  cannon-
shot  of  several  of  the  most  famous  regiments  in  the  Spanish
army,  lying  fresh,  securely  posted,  and  capable  of  making
an  attack  at  any  moment.  lie  instantly  threw  forward
Marcellus  Bax  with  four  squadrons  of  Bergen  cavalry,
who,  jaded  as  they  were  by  their  day's  work,  were  to
watch  the  bridge  that  night,  and  to  hold  it  against  all
comers  and  at  every  hazard.

The  Spanish  commander,  on  his  part,  had  reconnoitred
the  advancing  foe,  for  it  was  impossible  for  the  move-
ment to  have  been  so  secret  or  so  swift  over  those  inun-
dated roads  as  to  be  shrouded  to  the  last  moment  in  com-
plete mystery.  It  was  naturally  to  be  expected  there-
fore that  those  splendid  legions — the  famous  Neapolitan
tercio  of  Trevico,  the  veteran  troops  of  Sultz  and  Ilachi
couT-t,  the  picked  Epirote  and  Spanish  cavalry  of  Nicolas
Basta  and  Guzman — would  be  hurled  upon  tlie  wearied,
benumbed,  bemired  soldiers  of  the  republic,  as  they  came
slowly  along  after  their  long  march  through  the  cold
winter's  rain.

Varax  took  no  such  heroic  resolution.  Had  he  done
so  that January  afternoon, the career of  Maurice  of

400  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHI.

Nassau  might  have  been  brought  to  a  sudden  close,
despite  the  affectionate  warning  of  the  state-council.
Certainly  it  was  difficult  for  any  commander  to  be  placed
in  a  more  perilous  position  than  that  in  which  the  stad-
holder  found  himself.  He  remained  awake  and  afoot  the
whole  night,  perfecting  his  arrangements  for  the  morn-
ing, and  watching  every  indication  of  a  possible  advance
on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  Marcellus  Bax  and  his
troopers  remained  at  the  bridge  till  morning,  and  were
so  near  the  Spaniards  that  they  heard  the  voices  of  their
pickets,  and  could  even  distinguish  in  the  distance  the
various  movements  in  their  camp.

But  no  attack  was  made,  and  the  little  army  of  Maurice
was  allowed  to  sleep  off"  its  fatigue. With  the  dawn  of

2t  Jan. the  24th  January,  a  reconnoitring  party,  sent

^^^^-  out  from  the  republican  camp,  discovered  that
Varax,  having  no  stomach  for  an  encounter,  had  given
his  enemies  the  slip.  Long  before  daylight  his  baggage
and  ammunition  trains  had  been  sent  off"  in  a  southerly
direction,  and  his  whole  force  had  already  left  the  village
of  Turnhout.  It  was  the  intention  of  the  commander  to
take  refuge  in  the  fortified  city  of  Herenthals,  and  there
await  the  attack  of  Maurice.  Accordingly,  when  the
stadholder  arrived  on  the  fields  beyond  the  immediate
precincts  of  the  village,  he  saw  the  last  of  the  enemy's
rearguard  just  disappearing  from  view.  The  situation
was  a  very  peculiar  one.

The  rain  and  thaw,  following  upon  frosty  weather,
had  converted  the  fenny  country  in  many  directions  into
a  shallow  lake.  Tlie  little  river  which  flowed  by  the
village  had  risen  above  its  almost  level  banks,  and  could
with  difficulty  be  traversed  at  any  point,  while  there  was
no  permanent  bridge,  such  as  there  was  at  Eavels.  The
retreating  Spaniards  had  made  their  way  through  a  nar-
row passage,  where  a  roughly-constructed  causeway  of
planks  had  enabled  the  infantry  to  cross  the  waters
almost  in  single  file,  while  the  cavalry  had  floundered
through  as  best  they  might.  Those  who  were  acquainted
with  the  country  reported  that  beyond  this  defile  there
was  an  upland  heath,  a  league  in  extent,  full  of  furze
and  thickets,  where  it  would  be  easy  enough  for  Varax
to  draw  up  his  army  in  battle  array,  and  conceal  it  from
view. Maurice's  scouts,  too,  brought  information  that

i597.  FLIGHT  OF  THE  SPANISH  ARMY.  401

tlie  Spanish  commander  had  left  a  force  of  musketeers  to
guard  the  passage  at  the  farther  end.

This  looked  \erj  like  an  ambush.  In  the  opinion  of
Hohenlo,  of  Solms,  and  of  Sidney,  an  advance  was  not
to  be  thought  of;  and  if  the  adventure  seemed  perilous
to  such  hardy  and  experienced  campaigners  as  these
three,  the  stadholder  might  well  hesitate.  Nevertheless,
Maurice  had  made  up  his  mind.  Sir  Francis  Vere  and
Marcellus  Bax  confirmed  him  in  his  determination,  and
spoke  fiercely  of  the  disgrace  which  would  come  upon
the  arms  of  the  republic  if  now,  after  having  made  a
day's  march  to  meet  the  enemy,  they  should  turn  their
backs  upon  him  ju.->t  as  he  was  doing  his  best  to  escape.

On  leave  i.)btained  from  the  prince,  these  two  cham-
pions, the  Englishman  and  the  Hollander,  spurred  their
horses  thiough  the  nan'ow  pass,  with  the  waters  up  to
the  saddle-bow,  at  the  head  of  a  mere  handful  of  troopers,
not  more  than  a  dozen  men  in  all.  Two  hundred  mus-
keteers followed,  picking  their  way  across  the  planks.
As  they  emeiged  into  the  open  country  beyond,  the
Spanish  soldiers  guarding  the  passage  fled  without  firing
a  shot.  Such  was  already  the  discouraging  effect  pro-
duced upon  veterans  by  the  unexpected  order  given  that
morning  to  retreat.  Vere  and  Bax  sent  word  for  all  the
cavalry  to  advance  at  once,  and  meantime  hovered  about
the  rearguard  of  the  retreating  enemy,  ready  to  charge
upon  him  so  soon  as  they  should  be  strong  enough.

Maurice  lost  no  time  in  plunging  with  his  whole
mounted  force  through  the  watery  defile  ;  dii'ecting  the
infantry  to  follow  as  fast  as  practicable.  When  the
commander-in-chief  with  his  eight  hundred  horsemen.
Englishmen,  Zeelanders,  Hollanders,  and  Germans  came
npon  the  heath,  the  position  and  purpose  of  the  enemy
were  plainl}-  visible.  He  was  not  drawn  up  in  battle
<n'der,  waiting  to  sweep  down  upon  his  rash  assailants  so
soon  as,  after  struggling  through  the  difficult  pass,  they
should  be  delivered  into  his  hands.  On  the  contrary,  it
Avas  obvious  at  a  glance  that  his  object  was  still  to  escape.
The  heath  of  Tiel,  on  which  Spaniards,  Italians,  Wal-
loons, Germans,  Dutchmen,  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish-
men now  all  found  themselves  together,  was  a  ridgy,
spongy  expanse  of  country,  bordered  on  one  side  by
the  swollen  river,  here  flowing  again  through  steeper

VOL. HI.  2 D

402  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIIl.

banks  which  were  overgrown  with  alders  and  pollard
willows.  Along  the  left  of  the  Spanish  army,  as  they
moved  in  the  direction  of  Herenthals,  was  a  continuous
fringe  of  scrub-oaks,  intermixed  with  tall  beeches,  skirt-
ing the  heath,  and  forming  a  leafless  but  almost  imper-
vious screen  for  the  movements  of  small  detachments  of
troops.  Quite  at  the  termination  of  the  open  space,
these  thickets,  becoming  closely  crowded,  overhung
another  extremely  narrow  passage,  which  formed  the
only  outlet  from  the  plain.  Thus  the  heath  of  Tiel,  upon
that  winter's  morning,  had  but  a  single  entrance  and
a  single  exit,  each  very  dangerous  or  very  fortunate  for
those  capable  of  taking  or  neglecting  the  advantages
offered  by  the  position.

The  whole  force  of  Varax,  at  least  five  thousand  strong,
was  advancing  in  close  marching  order  towards  the
narrow  passage  by  which  only  they  could  emerge  from
the  heath.  Should  they  reach  this  point  in  time,  and
thus  eftect  their  escape,  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt  to
follow  them,  for,  as  was  the  case  with  the  first  defile,
it  was  not  possible  for  two  abreast  to  go  through,  while
beyond  was  a  swampy  country  in  which  military  opera-
tions were  impossible.  Yet  there  remained  less  than  half
a  league's  space  for  the  retreating  soldiers  to  traverse,
while  not  a  single  foot-soldier  of  Maurice's  army  had
thus  fur  made  his  appearance  on  the  heath.  All  were
still  wallowing  and  struggling,  single  file,  in  the  marshy
entrance,  through  which  only  the  cavalry  had  forced
their  way.  Here  was  a  dilemma.  Should  Maurice  look
calmly  on  while  the  enemy,  whom  he  had  made  so
painful  a  forced  march  to  meet,  moved  off  out  of  ]-each
before  his  eyes  ?  Yet  certainly  this  was  no  slight
triumph  in  itself.  There  sat  the  stadholder  on  his
horse  at  the  head  of  eight  hundred  carabineers,  and
there  marched  four  of  Philip's  best  infantry  I'egiments,
garnished  with  some  of  his  most  renowned  cavalry
squadrons,  anxious  not  to  seek  but  to  avoid  a  combat.
First  came  the  Germans  of  Count  Sultz,  the  musketeers
in  front,  and  the  spearsmen,  of  which  the  bulk  of  this
and  of  all  the  regiments  was  composed,  marching  in
closely  serried  squares,  with  the  company  standards
waving  over  each.  Kext,  arranged  in  the  same  manner,
came  the  Walloon  regiments  of  Ilachicouit  and  of  La

1597. RETREAT  OF  THE  SPANIARDS  INTERCEPTED. 403

Barlotte.  Fourth  and  last  came  the  famous  Neapolitans
of  Marquis  Trevico.  The  cavalry  squadrons  rode  on  the
left  of  the  infantry,  and  were  commanded  by  Nicolas
Basta,  a  man  who  had  been  trampling  upon  the  Nether-
landers  ever  since  the  days  of  Alva,  with  whom  he  had
first  come  to  the  country.

And  these  were  the  legions — these  very  men  or  their
immediate  predecessors — these  Italians,  Spaniards,  Ger-
mans, and  \Valloons,  who  during  so  many  terrible  years
had  stormed  and  sacked  almost  every  city  of  the  Nether-
lands, and  swept  over  the  whole  breadth  of  those  little
provinces  as  with  the  besom  of  destruction.

Both  infantry  and  cavalry,  that  picked  little  army  of
Varax  was  of  the  veiy  best  that  had  shared  in  the
devil's  work  which  had  been  the  chief  industiy  practised
for  so  long  in  the  obedient  Netherlands.  Was  it  not
madness  for  the  stadholder,  at  the  head  of  eight  hundred
horsemen,  to  assail  such  an  army  as  this  ?  Was  it  not  to
invoke  upon  his  head  the  swift  vengeance  of  Heaven  ?
Nevertheless,  the  painstaking,  cautious  Maurice  did  not
hesitate.  He  ordered  Hohenlo,  with  all  the  Brabantine
cavalry,  to  ride  as  rapidly  as  their  horses  could  carry
them  along  the  edge  of  the  plain,  and  behind  the  tangled
woodland,  by  which  the  movement  would  be  concealed.
He  was  at  all  hazards  to  intercept  the  enemy's  vanguard
before  it  should  reach  the  fatal  pass.  Vere  and  Marcellus
Bax  meanwhile,  supported  now  by  Edmont  with  the
Nymegen  squadrons,  were  to  threaten  the  Spanish  rear.
A  company  or  two  under  Laurentz  was  kept  by  Maurice
near  his  person  in  reserve.

The  Spaniards  steadily  continued  their  march,  but  as
they  became  aware  of  certain  slight  and  indefinite  move-
ments on  the  left,  their  cavalry,  changing  their  position,
were  transferred  from  the  right  to  the  left  of  the  line  of
march,  and  now  rode  between  the  infantry  and  the  belt
of  woods.

In  a  few  minutes  after  the  orders  given  to  Hohenlo,
that  dashing  soldier  had  circumvented  the  Spaniards,
and  emerged  upim  the  plain  between  them  and  tlie
entrance  to  the  defile.  The  next  instant  the  trumjDets
sounded  a  charge,  and  Hohenlo  fell  upon  the  foremo,-t
regiment,  that  of  Sultz,  while  the  rearguard,  consisting  of
Trevico's  Neapolitan  regiment,  was  assailed  by  Du  Bois,

a  n  ii

404  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIIL

Donck,  Kysoir,  Marcellus  Bax,  and  Sir  Francis  Vere.
The  effect  seemed  almost  supernatural.  The  Spanish
cavalry — those  far-famed  squadrons  of  Guzman  and  Basta
— broke  at  the  first  onset  and  galloped  off  for  the  pass
as  if  they  had  been  riding  a  race.  Most  of  them  escaped
through  the  hollow  into  the  morass  beyond.  The  mus-
keteers of  Suliz's  regiment  hardly  fired  a  shot,  and  fell
back  in  confusion  upon  the  thickly  clustered  pikemen.
The  assailants,  every  one  of  them  in  complete  armour,
on  powerful  horses,  and  armed  not  with  lances  but  with
carbines,  trampled  over  the  panic-struck  and  struggling
mass  of  leather-jerkined  pikemen  and  shot  them  at  arm's
length.  The  charge  upon  Trevico's  men  at  the  same
moment  was  just  as  decisive.  In  less  time  than  it
took  afterwards  to  describe  the  scene  those  renowned
veterans  were  broken  into  a  helpless  mass  of  dying,
wounded,  or  fugitive  creatures,  incapable  of  striking  a
blow.  Thus  the  Germans  in  the  front  and  the  Neapolitans
in  the  rear  had  been  simultaneously  shattered,  and
rolled  together  upon  the  two  other  regiments,  those  of
Hachicourt  and  La  Barlotte,  which  were  j^laced  between
them.  Nor  did  these  troops  offer  any  better  resistance,
but  were  paralysed  and  hurled  out  of  existence  like
the  rest.  In  less  than  an  hour  the  Spanish  army  was
demolished.  Varax  himself  lay  dead  upon  the  field,  too
fortunate  not  to  survive  his  disgrace.  It  was  hardly
moie  than  daylight  on  that  dull  January  morning ;  nine
o'clock  had  scarce  chimed  from  the  old  brick  steeples  of
Turnhout,  yet  two  thousand  Spaniards  had  fallen  before
the  blows  of  eight  hundred  Netherlanders,  and  there
were  five  hundred  prisoners  beside.  Of  Maurice's  army
not  more  than  nine  or  ten  were  slain.  The  story
sounds  like  a  wild  legend.  It  was  as  if  the  arm  of  each
Netherlander  had  been  nerved  by  the  memory  of  fifty
years  of  outrage,  as  if  the  spectre  of  their  half-century
of  crime  had  appalled  the  soul  of  every  Spaniard.  Like
a  thunderbolt,  the  son  of  William  the  Silent  smote  that
army  of  Philip,  and  in  an  instant  it  lay  blasted  on  the
heath  of  Tiel.  At  least  it  could  hardly  be  called  saga-
cious generalship  on  the  part  of  the  stadholder.  The
chances  were  all  against  him,  and  if  instead  of  Varax
those  legions  had  been  commanded  that  morning  by  old
Christopher  Mondragon,  there  might  perhaps  have  been

1597.  VICTORY  OF  THE  NETHERLANDERS.  405

another  tale  to  tell.  Even  as  it  was,  there  had  been  a
supreme  moment  when  the  Spanish  disaster  had  nearlj'-
been  changed  to  victor^'.  The  fight  was  almost  done,
when  a  small  party  of  States'  cavalry,  who  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  action  had  followed  the  enemy's  horse  in
its  sudden  retreat  through  the  gap,  came  whirling  back
over,  the  plain  in  wild  confusion,  pursued  by  about
forty  of  the  enemy's  lancers.  They  swept  by  the  spot
where  Maurice,  with  not  more  than  ten  horsemen  around
him,  was  directing  and  Avatching  the  battle,  and  in
vain  the  prince  threw  himself  in  front  of  them  and
strove  to  check  their  flight.  They  were  panic-struck,
and  Maurice  would  himself  have  been  swept  off  the  field,
had  not  Marcellus  Bax  and  Edmont,  with  half  a  dozen
heavy  troopers,  come  to  the  rescue.  A  grave  error  had
been  committed  by  Parker,  who,  upon  being  ordered  by
Maurice  to  cause  Louis  Laurentz  to  charge,  had  himself
charged  with  the  whole  reserve  and  left  the  stadholder
almost  alone  upon  the  field.  Thus  the  culprits — who
after  pursuing  the  Spanish  cavalry  through  the  pass
had  begun  plundering  the  enemy's  baggage  until  they
were  set  upon  by  the  handfixl  left  to  guaid  it,  and  had
become  fugitives  in  their  turn — might  possibly  have
caused  the  loss  of  the  day  after  the  victory  had  been
won,  had  there  been  a  man  on  the  Spanish  side  to  take
in  the  situation  at  a  glance.  But  it  is  probable  that
the  rout  had  been  too  absolute  to  allow  of  any  such
sudden  turning  to  account  of  the  serious  errors  of  the
victors.  The  cavalry,  except  this  handful,  had  long
disappeared,  at  least  half  the  infantry  lay  dead  or
wounded  on  the  field,  while  the  remainder,  throwing
away  pike  and  matchlock,  were  running  helter-skelter
for  their  lives.

Besides  Prince  Maurice  himself,  to  whom  the  chief
credit  of  the  whole  expedition  justly  belonged,  neai-ly
all  the  commanders  engaged  obtained  great  distinction
by  their  skill  and  valour.  Sir  Francis  Vere,  as  usual,
was  ever  foremost  in  the  thickest  of  the  fray,  and  had
a  horse  killed  under  him.  Parker  erred  by  too  much
readiness  to  engage,  but  bore  himself  manfully  through-
out the  battle.  Hohenlo,  Solius,  Sidney,  Louis  Laurentz,
Du  Bois,  all  displayed  their  usual  prowess  ;  but  the  real
hero  of  the  hour,  the  personal  embodiment  of  the  foi--

406  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

timate  madness  which  prompted  and  won  the  battle,
was  nndoTibtedly  Marcellns  Bax.^

Manrice  remained  an  hour  or  two  on  the  field  of  battle,
and  then,  i-eturning  towards  the  village  of  Turnhout,
STimmoned  its  strf)nghold.  The  garrison  of  sixty,  under
daptain  Van  der  Delf,  instantly  surrendered.  The  victor
allowed  these  troops  to  go  off  scot  free,  saying  that
tliere  had  been  blood  enough  shed  that  day.  Every
standard  borne  by  the  Spaniards  in  the  battle — thirty-
eight  in  number — was  taken,  besides  nearly  all  their
arms.  The  banners  were  sent  to  the  Hague  to  be
hung  up  in  the  great  hall  of  the  castle.  The  dead
body  of  Varax  was  sent  to  the  archduke  with  a  courte-
ous letter,  in  which,  however,  a  categorical  explanation
was  demanded  as  to  a  statement  in  circulation  that
Albert  had  decided  to  give  the  soldiers  of  the  republic
no  quarter.^

No  answer  being  immediately  returned,  Maurice  or-
dered the  five  hundred  prisoners  to  be  hanged  or  drowned
unless  ransomed  within  twenty  days,  and  this  horrible
decree  appears  from  official  documents  to  be  consistent

1  I  place  together  in  one  note  the  may  conduct  myself  as  I  shall  find  most
authorities  used  by  me  for  this  famous  fitting.  Herewith  I  humbly  kiss  the
action.  Not  an  incident  is  mentioned  bands  of  your  Highness,  and  pray  God  to
that  is  not  vouched  for  by  one  or  more  give  you  long  and  healthy  life.

of  the  contemporary  chroniclers  or  letter-  ■'  Turiihout,  25  January,  1597."
writers  cited,  but  1  have  not  thought  it  Xhe  archduke  thus  replied  : —
necessary  to  encumber  each  paragiaph  "Count— I  have  received  your  letter,
with  reference  to  a  footnote.  Bor,  IV.  and  can  do  no  otherwise  than  praise  the
301-304.  Meteren,  393,  394.  Bentivog-  courtesy  which  you  have  manifested  fo-
lio, 443,  444.  Reyd,  302,  seqq.  Carnero,  wards  the  dead  body  of  the  late  Count
402-107.  Coloma,  237.  Albert  to  Philip,  Varax,  and  signify  to  you  the  thanks
30  Jan.  1597.  (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  which  you  deserve,  and  which  I  render
Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  25-29,  167-171.  you  from  my  heart. Touching  the  other

2  The  letter  of  Maurice  *as  as  fol-  point  you  will  not  find  that  I  have  thus
lows : —  far  resolved  on  keeping  no  quarter,  and  I

"SiK  — I  had intended to send  the  hope  never  to  have  occasion  for  such  a

.'oUliers  who  were  taken  prisoners  yester-  determination,  inasmuch  as  to  do  so  is

day,  and  to  manifest  the  same  courtesy  against  my  nature. And,  inasmuch  as

which  I  am  accustomed  to  show  towards  ;„  this  conjuncture  you  use  the  courtesy

tliose  who  fall  into  my  hands. But  as  I  towards  me  which  you  signify  in  your

liave  been  apprised  that  your  Highness  letter,  I  shall  take  care  to  do  the  same

lias  published  an  order,  according  to  which  when  occasions  present  themselves. And

militarj'  commanders  are  forbidden  hence-  herewith  I  pray  the  Creator  to  have  you

forth  to  give  quarter  to  those  of  this  side,  j^  his  holy  keeping.

1  h^vve  desired  first  to  have  this  doubt  .,  ^^^^ ^  f^ie^.d,

made  clear  to  me,  before  I  permit  them  to  ° , ,, ,. ,

„.,',.,. J . 1  Albert,  Cardmal.
fro  free,  in  order  that,  having  understood

your  Highness's  intention  on  this  point,  I  "  Brussels,  28  Jan.  1597."

1597.  MAGNITUDE  OF  THE  ACHIEVEMENT.  407

with  the  military  -usages  of  the  period.  The  arrival  of
the  letter  from  the  cardinal-archduke,  wlio  levied  the
money  for  the  ransom  on  the  villages  of  Brabant,^  pre-
vented, however,  the  execution  of  the  menace,  which
could  hardly  have  been  serionslj^  intended.*

Within  a  week  from  the  time  of  liis  departure  from
the  Hague  to  engage  in  this  daring  adventure,  the  stad-
holder  had  returned  to  that  little  capital,  having  achieved
a  complete  success.  The  enthusiastic  demonstrations
throughout  the  land  on  account  of  so  signal  a  victor}^
can  easily  be  imagined.  Nothing  like  this  had  ever
before  been  recorded  in  the  archives  of  the  young
commonwealth.  There  had  been  glorious  defences  of
beleaguered  cities,  where  scenes  of  heroic  endiirance  and
self-sacrifice  had  been  enacted,  such  as  never  can  be
forgotten  so  long  as  the  history  of  human  liberty  shall
endure,  but  a  victory  won  in  the  open  field  over  the
most  famous  legions  of  Spain  and  against  overwhelming
numbers,  was  an  achievement  entirely  without  example.
It  is  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  force  under  Varax  was
at  least  four  times  as  large  as  that  portion  of  the  States'
army  which  alone  was  engaged ;  for  Maurice  had  not  a
foot-soldier  on  the  field  until  the  battle  was  over,  save
the  handful  of  musketeers  who  had  followed  Vere  and
Bax  at  the  beginning  of  the  action.

Therefore  it  is  that  this  remarkable  action  merits  a
much  more  attentive  consideration  than  it  might  deserve,
regarded  purely  as  a  military  exploit.  To  the  military
student  a  mere  cavalry  affair,  fought  out  iipon  an  obscure
Brabantine  heath  between  a  party  of  Dutch  carabineers
and  Spanish  pikemen,  may  seem  of  little  account — a
subject  fitted  by  picturesque  costume  and  animated
action  for  the  pencil  of  a  Wouvermanns  or  a  Terburg,
but  conveying  little  instruction.  As  illustrating  a  period
of  transition  in  which  heavy  armoured  troopers — each  one
a  human  iron-clad  fortress  moving  at  speed  and  furnished
with  the  most  formidable  portable  artillery  then  known
— could  overcome  the  resistance  of  almost  any  number
of  foot  soldiers  in  light  marching  gear  and  armed  with
the  antiquated  pike,  the  affair  may  be  worthy  of  a
moment's  attention ; and  for  this improvement — itself

s  Meteren,  b.  xix.  394.  *  Ibid.  Van  der  Kemp,  28,  lYl,  who  cites  ResoL

St.  Gen.  18  May,  1599,  fur  an  example.

408  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIH.

now  as  obsolete  as  the  slings  and  cataphracts  of  Roman
legions — the  world  was  indebted  to  Maurice.  But  the
shock  of  mighty  armies,  the  manoeuvring  of  vast  masses
in  one  magnificent  combination,  by  which  the  fate  of
empires,  the  happiness  or  the  misery  of  the  peoples  for
generations,  may  perhaps  be  decided  in  a  few  hours,
undoubtedly  require  a  higher  constructive  genius  than
could  be  displayed  in  any  such  hand-to-hand  encounter
as  that  of  Turnhout,  scientifically  managed  as  it  un-
questionably was.  The  true  and  abiding  interest  of  the
battle  is  derived  from  its  moral  effect,  from  its  influence
on  the  people  of  the  Netherlands.  And  this  could
scarcely  be  exaggerated.  The  nation  was  electrified,
transformed  in  an  instant.  Who  now  should  henceforth
dare  to  say  that  one  Spanish  fighting-man  was  equal  to
five  or  ten  Hollanders  ?  At  last  the  days  of  Jemmingen
and  Mooker-heath  needed  no  longer  to  be  remembered
by  every  patriot  with  a  shudder  of  shame.  Here  at  least
in  the  open  field  a  Spanish  army,  after  in  vain  refusing
a  combat  and  endeavouring  to  escape,  had  literally  bitten
the  dust  before  one  fourth  of  its  own  number.  And  this
elfect  was  a  pei-manent  one.  Thenceforth  for  foreign
powers  to  talk  of  mediation  between  the  republic  and
the  ancient  master,  to  suggest  schemes  of  reconciliation
and  of  a  return  to  obedience,  was  to  offer  gratuitous  and
trivial  insult,  and  we  shall  very  soon  have  occasion  to
mark  the  simple  eloquence  with  which  the  thirty-eight
Spanish  standards  of  Turnhout,  hung  up  in  the  old
hall  of  the  Hague,  were  made  to  reply  to  the  pompous
rhetoric  of  an  interfering  ambassador.

This  brief  episode  was  not  immediately  followed  by
other  militar}"  events  of  importance  in  the  provinces
during  what  remained  of  the  winter.  Very  early  in
the  spring,  however,  it  was  probable  that  the  campaign
might  open  simultaneously  in  France  and  on  the  frontiers
of  Flanders.  Of  all  the  cities  in  the  north  of  France
there  was  none,  after  Eouen,  so  important,  so  populous,
so  wealthy  as  Amiens.  Situate  in  fertile  fields,  within
three  days  march  of  Paris,  with  no  intei^vening  forests
or  other  impediments  of  a  physical  nature  to  free  com-
munication, it  was  the  key  to  the  gates  of  the  capital.
It  had  no  garrison,  for  the  population  numbered  fifteen
thousand  men  able  to  bear  arms,  and  the  inhabitanta

1597.  ATTACK  AND  CAPTURE  OF  AMIEiNS.  409

valued  themselves  on  the  prowess  of  their  trained  nali-
tiamen,  five  thousand  of  whom  they  boasted  to  be  able
to  bring  into  the  field  at  an  hour's  notice  — and  they
were  perfectly  loj'al  to  Henry.

One  morning  in  March  there  came  a  party  of  j^easauts,
fifteen  or  twenty  in  number,  laden  with  sacks  u  March,
of  chestnuts  and  walnuts,  to  the  northernmost  ^•''^'^•
gate  of  the  town.  They  offered  them  for  sale,  as  usual,
to  the  soldiers  at  the  guard-house,  and  chaffered  and
jested — as  boors  and  soldiers  are  wont  to  do — over  their
wares.  It  so  happened  that  in  the  course  of  the  bar-
gaining one  of  the  bags  became  untied,  and  its  contents,
much  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  proprietor,  were  emptied
on  the  ground.  There  was  a  scramble  for  the  walnuts,
and  much  shouting,  kicking,  and  squabbling  ensued,
growing  almost  into  a  quarrel  between  the  burgher-
soldiers  and  the  peasants.  As  the  altercation  was  at  its
height  a  heavy  wagon,  laden  with  long  planks,  came
towards  the  gate  for  the  use  of  carpenters  and  architects
within  the  town.  The  portcullis  was  diawn  Tip  to  admit
this  lumbering  vehicle,  but  in  the  confusion  caused  by
the  chance  medley  going  on  at  the  guard-house,  the  gate
dropped  again  before  the  wagon  had  fairly  got  through
the  passage,  and  remained  resting  upon  the  timber  with
which  it  was  piled.

At  that  instant  a  shrill  whistle  was  heard,  and  as  if  by
magic  the  twenty  chestnut-selling  peasants  were  sud-
denly transformed  to  Spanish  and  Walloon  soldiers  armed
to  the  teeth,  who  were  presently  reinforced  by  as  many
more  of  their  comrades,  Avho  sprang  from  beneath  the
plank-work  by  which  the  real  contents  of  the  wagon  had
thus  been  screened.  Captain  Dognano,  his  brother  the
sergeant-major.  Captain  dArco,  and  other  officers  of  a
Walloon  regiment  stationed  in  Dourlans,  were  the  leaders
of  the  little  party,  and  while  they  were  busily  occupied
in  putting  the  soldiers  of  the  watch,  thus  taken  un-
awares, to  death,  the  master-spirit  of  the  whole  adventure
suddenly  made  his  appearance  and  entered  the  city  at
the  head  of  fifteen  hundred  men.  This  was  an  extremely
small,  yellow,  dried  up,  energetic  Spanish  cajitain,''  with
a  long  red  beard,  Heinan  Tello  de  Porto  Carrero  by
name,  governor  of  the  neighbouring  city  of  Dourlans,

5  Coloma,  262.

410  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIH.

who  had  conceived  this  plan  for  obtainincj  possession  of
Amiens.  Having  sent  these  disguised  soldiers  on  before
him,  he  had  passed  the  night  with  his  men  in  ambush
until  the  signal  should  sound.  The  burghers  of  the
town  were  mostly  in  church  ;  none  were  dreaming  of  an
attack,  as  men  rarely  do — for  otherwise  how  should  they
ever  be  surprised — and  in  half  an  hour  Amiens  was  the
property  of  Philip  of  Spain.  There  were  not  very  many
lives  lost,  for  the  resistance  was  small,  but  great  numbers
were  tortured  for  ransom  and  few  women  escaped  out-
rage. The  sack  was  famous,  for  the  city  was  rich  and
the  captors  were  few  in  number,  so  that  each  soldier  had
two  or  three  houses  to  plunder  for  his  own  profit,

\Vhen  the  work  was  done,  the  faubourgs  were  all
destroyed,  for  it  was  the  intention  of  the  cunqtierors  to
occupy  the  place,  which  would  be  a  most  convenient
basis  of  operations  for  any  attack  upon  Paris,  and  it  was
desirable  to  contract  the  limits  to  be  defended.  Fifteen
hundred  houses,  many  of  them  beautiful  villas  surrounded
with  orchards  and  pleasure  gardens,  were  soon  in  flames,
and  afterwards  razed  to  the  ground.  The  governor  of
the  place,  Count  St.  Pol,  managed  to  effect  his  escape.
His  place  was  now  supplied  by  the  Marquis  of  Monte-
negro, an  Italian  in  the  service  of  the  Spanish  king.
Such  was  the  fate  of  Amiens  in  the  month  of  March,
1597*';  such  the  result  of  the  refusal  by  the  citizens  to
accept  the  garrison  urged  upon  them  by  Henry.

It  would  be  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  consterna-
tion produced  throughout  France  by  this  astotmding  and
altogether  unlooked  for  event.  "  It  seemed,"  said  Pre-
sident De  Thou,  "  as  if  it  had  extinguished  in  a  moment
the  royal  majesty  and  the  French  name."  A  few  nights
later  than  the  date  of  this  occurrence,  Maximilian  de
Bethune^  (afterwards  Duke  of  Sully,  but  then  called
Marquis  de  Eosny)  was  asleep  in  his  bed  in  Paris.  He
bad  returned,  at  past  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  from  a
magnificent  ball  given  by  the  Constable  of  France.  The
cajiital  had  been  uncommonly  brilliant  during  the  winter
with  banquets  and  dances,  tournays  and  masquerades,  as
if  to  cast  a  lurid  glare  over  the  unutterable  misery  of  the

6  Bor,  IV.  314,  315. Meteren,  395, 396. Bentivoglio,  447. Coloma,  238-262. De
rhou,  xiii.  103-109,  118. Albert  to  Philip,  14  March,  1597. (Aroh.  deSimancas  MS.)
'  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  109.

1597.  CONSTERNATION  OF  THE  KING.  411

people  and  the  complete  desolation  of  the  country  ;  but
this  entertainment — given  by  Montmorency  in  honour
of  a  fair  dame  with  whom  he  supposed  himself  desperately
in  love,  the  young  bride  of  a  very  ancient  courtier — sur-
passed in  splendour  every  festival  that  had  been  heard
of  for  years.  De  Bethune  had  hardly  lost  himself  in
slumber  when  he  was  startled  by  Beringen,  who,  on
drawing  his  curtains  in  this  dead  hour  of  the  night,  pre-
sented such  a  ghastly  visage  that  the  faithful  friend  of
Henry  instantly  imagined  some  personal  disaster  to
his  well-beloved  sovereign.  "Is  the  King  dead?"  he
cried.*

Being  re-assured  as  to  this  point  and  told  to  hasten  to
the  Louvre,  Eosny  instantly  complied  with  the  com-
mand. When  he  reached  the  palace  he  was  admitted  at
once  to  the  royal  bed-chamber,  where  he  found  the  king
in  the  most  unsophisticated  of  costumes,  striding  up  and
down  tlie  room,  with  his  hands  clasped  together  behind
his  head,  and  with  an  expression  of  agony  upon  his  face.
Many  courtiers  were  assembled  there,  stuck  all  of  them
like  images  against  the  wall,  staring  before  them  in  help-
less perplexity.^

Henry  rushed  forward  as  Eosny  entered,  and  wringing
him  by  the  hand,  exclaimed,  "  Ah,  my  friend,  what  a
misfortune,  Amiens  is  taken  ! "

"  Very  well,"  replied  the  financier,  with  unperturbed
visage  ;  "  I  have  just  completed  a  plan  which  will  restore
to  your  Majesty  not  only  Amiens  but  many  other  places."

The  king  drew  a  great  sigh  of  relief  and  asked  for  his
project.  Eosny,  saying  that  he  would  instantly  go  and
fetch  his  papers,  left  the  apartment  for  an  interval,  in
order  to  give  vent  to  the  horrible  agitation  which  he
had  been  enduring  and  so  bravely  concealing  ever  since
the  fatal  words  had  been  spoken.  That  a  city  iso  im-
portant, the  key  to  Paris,  without  a  moment's  warning,
without  the  semblance  of  a  siege,  should  thus  fall  into
the  hands  of  the  enemy,  was  a  blow  as  directly  to  the
heart  of  De  Bethune  as  it  could  have  been  to  any  other
of  Henry's  adherents.  But  while  they  had  been  dis-
tracting the  king  by  unavailing  curses  or  wailings,
Henry,  who  had  received  the  intelligence  just  as  he  was
getting  into  bed,  had  sent  for  support  and  consolation  to

8  Sully,  Memoires,  i.  484,  se//^.  '  Ibid.

412  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHI.

the  tried  friend  of  years,  and  he  now  reproachfully  con-
ti.xsted  their  pusillanimity  with  De  Eosny's  fortitude.

A  great  plan  for  reorganising  the  finances  of  the  king-
dom was  that  very  night  submitted  by  Rosny  to  the
king,  and  it  was  wrought  upon  day  by  day  thereafter
until  it  was  carried  into  effect.

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  crudities  and  immoralities
which  the  project  revealed  do  not  inspire  the  political
student  of  modem  days  with  so  high  a  conception  of  the
financial  genius  of  the  great  minister  as  his  calm  and
heroic  deportment  on  trying  occasions,  whether  on  the
battle-field  or  in  the  council-chamber,  does  of  his  natural
authority  over  his  fellow-men.  The  scheme  was  devised
to  put  money  in  the  king's  cofi'ers,  which  at  that  moment
were  completely  empt}'.  Its  chief  features  were  to  create
a  great  many  new  offices  in  the  various  courts  of  justice
and  tribunals  of  administration,  all  to  be  disposed  of  b}^
sale  to  the  highest  bidder ;  to  extort  a  considerable  loan
from  the  chief  courtiers  and  from  the  richest  burghers  in
the  principal  towns  ;  to  compel  all  the  leading  peculators
— whose  name  in  the  public  sei'vice  was  legion — to  dis-
gorge a  portion  of  their  ill-gotten  gains,  on  being  released
from  prosecution  ;  and  to  increase  the  tax  upon  t-alt.'**

Such  a  project  hardly  seems  a  masterpiece  of  ethics  or
political  economy,  but  it  was  hailed  with  rapture  by  the
needy  monarch.  At  once  there  was  wild  excitement
amongst  the  jobbers  and  speculators  in  places.  The
creation  of  an  indefinite  number  of  new  judgeships  and
magistracies,  to  be  disposed  of  at  auction,  was  a  tempt-
ing opportunity  even  in  that  age  of  corruption.  One  of
the  most  notorious  traders  in  the  judicial  ermine,  limp-
ing Eobin  de  Tours  by  name,  at  once  made  a  private
visit  to  Madame  de  Eosny  and  offered  seventy-two  thou-
sand crowns  for  the  exclusive  right  to  distribute  these
new  offices.  If  this  could  be  managed  to  his  satisfaction,
he  promised  to  give  her  a  diamond  worth  two  thousand
crowns,  and  another,  worth  six  thousand,  to  her  husband.
The  wife  of  the  great  minister,  who  did  not  comprehend
the  whole  amount  of  the  insult,  presented  Eobin  to  her
husband.  She  was  enlightened,  however,  as  to  the  bare-
faced iniquity  of  the  offer,  when  she  heard  De  Bethune's
indignant  reply,  and  saw  the  jobber  limp  away,  crest-

>'  Sully,  Memoires,  i.  lib.  Ix.  p.  4S5,  seqq.

1597.  DE  BETHUNE'S  FINANCIAL  SCHEME.  413

fallen  and  amazed.  That  a  financier  or  a  magistrate
should  decline  a  bribe  or  inteifere  Avith  the  private  sale
of  places,  which  were  after  all  objects  of  merchandise,
was  to  him  incompiehensible.  The  indnstiioiis  Kubin,
accordingly,  recovering  from  his  discomfiture,  went
straightway  to  the  chancellor,  and  concluded  the  same
bargain  in  the  council  chamber  which  had  been  rejected
by  De  Bethune,  with  the  slight  difference  that  the  dis-
tribution of  the  places  was  assigned  to  the  speculator  for
seventy-five  thousand  instead  of  seventy-two  thousand
crowns.  It  was  with  great  difficulty  that  De  Bethune,
who  went  at  once  to  the  king  with  complaints  and  in-
sinuations as  to  the  cleanness  of  the  chancellor's  hands,
was  able  to  cancel  the  operation."  The  day  was  fast
approaching  when  the  universal  impoverishment  of  the
great  nobles  and  landholders — -the  result  of  the  long,
hideous,  senseless  massacres  called  the  wars  of  religion
— was  to  open  the  way  for  the  labouring  classes  to  ac-
quire a  property  in  the  soil.  Thus  that  famous  fowl  in
every  pot  was  to  make  its  appearance,  which  vulgar
tradition  ascribes  to  the  bounty  of  a  king  who  hated
everj'thing  like  popular  rights,  and  loved  nothing  but
his  own  glory  and  his  own  amusement.  It  was  not  until
the  days  of  his  grandchildren  and  great-grandchildren
that  Privilege  could  renew  those  horrible  outrages  on
the  People,  which  were  to  be  avenged  by  a  dread  series
of  wars,  massacres,  and  crimes,  compared  to  which  even
the  religious  conflicts  of  the  sixteenth  century  grow  pale.
Meantime  De  Bethune  comforted  his  master  with
these  financial  plans,  and  assured  him  in  the  spirit  of
prophecy  that  the  King  of  Spain,  now  tottering  as  it
was  thought  to  his  grave,  would  soon  be  glad  to  make  a
favourable  peace  with  France,  even  if  he  felt  obliged  to
restore  not  only  Amiens  but  every  other  city  or  strong-
hold that  he  had  ever  conquered  in  that  kingdom.  Time
would  soon  show  whether  this  prediction  were  coiTect
or  delusive  ;  but  while  the  secret  negotiations  between
Henry  and  the  Pope  were  vigorously  proceeding  for  that
peace  with  Spain  which  the  world  in  general  and  the
commonwealth  of  the  Netherlands  in  particular  thought
to  be  farthest  from  the  warlike  king's  wishes,  it  was
necessary  to  set  about  the  siege  of  Amiens.

11  Sully,  Memolres,  i.  lib.  ix.  p.  490.

414  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHI.

Henry  assembled  a  force  of  some  twelve  or  fifteen
thousand  men  for  that  purpose,  while  the  cardinal-
archduke,  upon  his  part,  did  his  best  to  put  an  anny
in  the  field  in  order  to  relieve  the  threatened  city  so
recently  acquired  by  a  coarse  but  successful  artifice.

But  Albert  was  in  even  a  worse  plight  than  that  in
which  his  great  antagonist  found  himself.  When  he
had  first  arrived  in  the  provinces,  his  exchequer  was
overflowing,  and  he  was  even  supposed  to  devote  a
considerable  portion  of  the  military  funds  to  defray  the
expenses  of  his  magnificent  housekeeping  at  Brussels.^^
But  those  halcyon  days  were  over.  A  gigantic  fraud,
just  perpetrated  by  Philip,  had  descended  like  a  thunder-
bolt upon  the  provinces  and  upon  all  commercial  Europe,
and  had  utterly  blasted  the  unfortunate  viceroy.  In  the
latter  days  of  the  preceding  year  the  king  had  issued  a
general  repudiation  of  his  debts.

He  did  it  solemnly,  too,  and  with  great  religious  unc-
tion, for  it  \yas  a  peculiarity  of  this  remarkable  sovereign
that  he  was  ever  wont  to  accomplish  his  darkest  crimes,
whether  murders  or  stratagems,  as  if  they  were  acts  of
Virtue.  Perhaps  he  really  believed  them  to  be  such,  for
a  man,  before  whom  so  many  millions  of  his  fellow  worms
had  been  writhing  for  half  a  century  in  the  dust,  might
well  imagine  himself  a  deity.

So  the  king,  on  the  20th  November,  1596,  had  publicly
revoked  all  the  assignments,  mortgages,  and  other  deeds
by  which  the  royal  domains,  revenues,  taxes,  and  other
public  property  had  been  transferred  or  pledged  for
moneys  already  advanced  to  merchants,  bankers,  and
other  companies  or  individuals,  and  formally  took  them
again  into  his  own  possession,  on  the  ground  that  his
exertions  in  carrying  on  this  long  war  to  save  Christianity
from  destruction  had  reduced  him  to  beggary,  while  the
money-lenders,  by  charging  him  exorbitant  interest,  had
all  grown  rich  at  his  expense.^^

12  "  Xon  possiede  1'  amore  di  quel  po-  di  quella  guerra  prendono  sempre  peggior

piili qiianto  bisogiierebbe,  oltrecche  ha  piega." — Soranzo.  Relazione,  before  cited,

iiume  di  non  favorir  molto  la  soldatesca  p.  IGS.

e  di  gettar  gran  parte  di  denaro  clie  dove-  13  "Whereas  it  has  come  to  our  Isnow-
rebbe  esser  distribuito  alle  milizie  in  ledge,"  so  ran  tliis  famous  proclamation
qiielli  della  sua  propria  casa  e  nel  sosten-  of  repudiation  in  its  principal  para-
tar  la  propria  albagia.  IJa  the  nasce  poi  graphs,  •'  that  notwithstanding  all  which
(.•he  si  veggono  tante  solli.'vazioni  e  lo  coie  our  royal incomes  from  this  monarciiy

1597.

PHILIP'S  REPUDIATION  OF  HIS  DEBTS.

415

This  was  perfectly  simple. There  was  no  attempt  to
disguise  the  villauy  of  the  transaction. The  massacre  vi

and  from  without  have  yit  hied ;  together
with  the  assistance  reudcvcd  to  us  by  his
Holiness  to  maintain  the  war  against  the
English,  and  to  protect  the  Catholic  reli-
gion, and  with  the  steady  burthens  borne
for  this  object  by  the  subjects  and  vassals
of  the  crown,  according  to  their  ancient
and  great  fidelity ;  and,  besides  the  great
abundance  of  the  gold  and  silver  produced
by  our  Indies  ;  likewise  all  that  has  come
from  the  sums  turrjished  by  the  fanners
of  our  finances  and  revenues,  we  find
ourselves  now  so  wholiy  exhausted  and
ruined,  and  our  royal  inherited  estates  so
diminished,  and  as  it  were  reduced  to  no-
tliing,  that,  although  the  foremost  cause
of  this  ruin  is  the  great  and  incredible
expense  which  we  have  sustained  and
are  still  enduring  for  the  protection  of
Christendom,  of  our  kingdom  and  do-
mains ;  other  chief  causes  are  the  griev-
ous damages,  discounts,  and  interest
which  have  been  forced  upon  us,  and
which  at  present  obtain  in  the  finances,
bills  of  exchange,  and  other  obligations,
which  have  been  made  and  taken  up  in
our  name,  since  we  could  not  escape  the
same  in  order  to  be  able  to  provide  for
our  so  entirely  necessary  and  pressing
necessities.  Thus  all  our  domains,  taxes,
revenues,  and  all  ordinary  and  extraor-
dinary resources  stand,  burtbened  and
covered  with  obligations  in  the  hands  of
merchants.  And  what  is  most  oppres-
sive, our  affairs  are  come  to  extremities
through  our  having  no  means  by  which
we  might  help  ourselves,  nor  do  we  know
of  any  other  resources  that  we  can  make
use  of.  And  now  the  said  merchants,
who  hitherto  have  given  on  bills  of  ex-
change such  monies  as  were  necessaiy  to
provide  for  the  protection  of  our  royal
state  and  to  carry  on  the  war  which  we
are  waging  for  these  righteous  and  spe-
cial reasons,  refuse  to  do  this  any  longer,
and  make  difficulties  in  further  dealing
with  us,  seeing  that  they  have  in  their
own  hands  and  pnver  all  the  royal  reve-
nues by  means  of  the  said  pledges,  cer-
tificates, and  transfers,  and  hereljy  such
embarrassments  arise,  that  if  they  are  not
provided  against,  it  would  be  enough  to
put  in  hazard  all  that  v.hich  God  the  Lord
has  so  highly  comin.'indid  us  to  perform,

namely,  the  protection  and  maintenana
of  the  Catholic  Church,  of  our  subject?
and  va8sah<, and all those  who  dwell

under  our  government

"  Therefore  to  put  an  end  to  such
financiering  and  unhallowed  practicef
with  bills  of  exchange  which  have  been
introduced  and  have  spread  abroad
among  so  many  people,  who  in  order  to
follow  such  pursuits  have  abandoned
agriculture,  cattle-raising,  and  mechani-
cal works,  and  embarked  in  trade,  finding
therein  gain  and  profit  to  the  disservice
of  the  Lord  God  and  of  us, with  great

injury  to  our  kingdom and

which  have  brought  great  masses  of  coin
and  sp  cies  to  flow  out  of  India  (i.  e.
America)  into  the  kingdoms  and  lands  of
the  rebels  and  foes  of  Christianity  and  ol
us,  enabling  them  to  keep  everything  in
commotion,  so  that  we  are  compelled  to
increase  our  armaments  and  our  forces,
and  to  incur  more  expenses.  We  have
now  given  command  to  devise  some
means  of  restoring  order,  and  of  accom-
plishing in  the  best  possible  way  that
which  we  are  so  highly  and  legally  bound
to  do,  whereupon  hang  the  protection  ol
Christendom  and  the  security  of  our
realms ;  and  we  have  found  no  other  re-
medy than  to  call  in  and  to  disbm-then
our  royal  incomes,  liberating  the  same
from  the  unjust  damage  put  upon  them
through  this  financiering  and  bills  ol
exchange,  which  we  have  suffered  and  are
continuing  to  suffer  at  the  time  we  made
such  contracts,  in  order  to  avoid  still
greater  embarrassments  that  would  have
arisen  had  there  been  want  of  provision
for  our  miUtary  affairs Hav-
ing decided  to  cancel  and  annihilate  aU
the  aforesaid  interests  and  im|iosi  lions,
we  shall  afterwards  meditate  upon  ways
and  means  by  which  may  be  paid  to
the  merchants  and  traders  what  may
seem  to  us  properly  due  to  them  in  re-
gard to  these  contracts,  transfers,  and  ais-

signmenls Accordingly we

suspend  and  declare  susjiended  all  such
assignations  maile  by  us  in  any  manner
whaisoever  since  Sept.  1,  1575,  and  Dec.
1,  15t7,  unto  this  date,  to  the  said  mer-
chants and  traders,  whether  of  taxes,
girts,  domains,  routs,  or  any  olher  pri>

416  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

so  many  millions  of  Protestants,  the  gigantic  but  pi^erile
attempts  to  subjugate  the  Dutch  republic,  and  to  annex
France,  England,  and  the  German  empire  to  his  here-
ditary dominions,  had  been  attended  with  more  expense
than  Philip  had  calculated  upon.  The  enormous  wealth
which  a  long  series  of  marriages,  inheritances,  conquests,
and  maritime  discoveries  had  heaped  upon  Spain  had
been  exhausted  by  the  insane  ambition  of  the  king  to
exterminate  heresy  throughout  the  world,  and  to  make
himself  the  sovereign  of  one  undivided,  universal,  ca-
tholic monarchy.  All*  the  gold  and  silver  of  America
had  not  sufficed  for  this  purpose,  and  he  had  seen,  with
an  ever-rising  indignation,  those  very  precious  metals
which,  in  his  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  trade,  he  con-
sidered his  exclusive  property,  flowing  speedily  into  the
coffers  of  the  merchants  of  Europe,  especially  those  of
the  hated  commonwealth  of  the  rebellious  Netherlands.

Therefore  he  solemnly  renounced  all  his  contacts,
and  took  God  to  witness  that  it  was  to  serve  His  Divine
will."  How  else  could  he  hope  to  contini;e  his  massacre
of  the  Protestants?

The  effect  of  the  promulgation  of  this  measure  was
instantaneous.  Two  millions  and  a  half  of  bills  of
exchange  sold  by  the  Cardinal  Albert,  came  back  in  one
day  protested.  The  chief  merchants  and  bankers  of
Europe  suspended  payment.  Their  creditors  became
bankrupt.  At  the  Frankfort  fair  there  were  more
failures  in  one  day  than  there  had  ever  been  in  all  the
years  since  Frankfort  existed.^''  In  Genoa  alone  a
million  dollars  of  interest  were  confiscated.^^  It  was  no
better  in  Antwerp;  but  Antwerp  was  already  ruined.
There  was  a  general  howl  of  indignation  and  despair
upon  every  exchange,  in  every  counting-room,  in  every
palace,  in  every  cottage  of  Christendom.  Such  a  tremen-
dous repudiation  of  national  debts  was  never  heard  of
before. There  had  been  debasements  of  the  currency,

perty  or  revenues  whatsover,  on  account Bor,  III.  318,  319. Herrera,  iii,  711,

of  such  bills  of  exchange  or  other  ad-  seqq. Compare  Eeyd, 301, 302. Me-

vances.  And  we  order  the  monies  coming  teren,  3&>i-;!91. It  was  found  necessary

from  such  pledged  property  to  be  hence-  alter  the  expiration  of  a  year  to  revoke

forth  paid  into  our  royal  treasury,  for  the  these  orders,  as  the  usual  consequences

support  of  our  own  necfssities,  declaring  of  repuiliation  followed,
from  this  day  forth  all  payments  other- i*  Bor,  Herrera,  iibi  stija.
wise  made  to  be  null  and  void.  is  Bor,  Reyd,  tibi  sup.

•■  20  yovember,  1596."  "  Ibid.

1597.  RENEWED  ACTIVITY  OF  THE  JESUITS.  417

petty  frauds  by  kings  upon  their  unfortunate  peoples,
but  sucb  a  crime  as  this  had  never  been  conceived  by
human  heart  before.

The  archduke  w^as  fain  to  pawn  his  jewelry,  his  plate,
his  furniture,  to  support  the  daily  expenses  of  his  house-
hold. Meantime  he  was  to  set  an  army  in  the  field  to
relieve  a  city,  beleaguered  by  the  most  warlike  monarch
in  Chi-istendom.  Fortunately  for  him,  that  prince  was
in  very  similar  straits,  for  the  pressure  upon  the  public
swindlers  and  the  auction  sales  of  judicial  ermine
throughout  his  kingdom  were  not  as  rapidly  productive
as  had  been  hoped.

It  was  precisely  at  this  moment,  too,  that  an  incident
of  another  nature  occurred  in  Antwerp,  which  did  not
tend  to  make  the  believers  in  the  pc-ssibility  of  religious
or  political  freedom  more  in  love  with  the  system  of
Spain  and  Rome.  Those  blood-dripping  edicts  against
heresy  in  the  Netherlands,  of  which  enough  has  been
said  in  previous  volumes  of  this  history,  and  which  had
caused  the  deaths  by  axe,  faggot,  halter,  or  burial  alive,
of  at  least  fifty  thousand  human  creatures — however
historical  scepticism  may  shut  its  eyes  to  evidence — had
now  been  dormant  fur  twenty  years.  Their  activity
had  ceased  with  the  pacification  of  Ghent ;  but  the
devilish  spirit  which  had  inspired  them  still  lived  in
the  persons  of  the  Jesuits,  and  there  were  now  more
Jesuits  in  the  obedient  provinces  than  there  had  been
for  years.  We  have  seen  that  Champagny's  remedy  for
the  ills  the  country  was  enduring  was  "more  Jesuits."
And  this,  too,  was  Albert's  recipe.  Always  more
Jesuits.^^  Aiid  now  the  time  had  come  when  the  Jesuits
thought  that  they  might  step  openly  with  their  works
into  the  daylight  again.  Of  late  years  they  had  shrouded
themselves  in  comparative  mystery,  but  from  their
seminaries  and  colleges  had  gone  forth  a  plentiful
company  of  assassins  against  Elizabeth  and  Henry,
Nassau,  Barneveld,  and  others  who,  whether  avowedly
or  involuntarily,  were  prominent  in  the  party  of  human
progress.  Some  important  murders  had  already  been
accomplished,  and  the  prospect  was  fair  that  still  others
might follow, if the Jesuits persevered. Meantime

17  ^Mbert  to  Philip,  3  M.\y,  1^96 (Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)
VOL. III.  2 E

418  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHI.

those  ecclesiastics  thoxiglit  that  a  wholesome  example
might  be  set  to  humbler  heretics  by  the  spectacle  of  a
public  execution.

Two  maiden  ladies  lived  on  the  north  rampart  ot
Antwerp.  They  had  formerly  professed  the  Protestant
religion,  and  had  been  thrown  into  prison  for  that
crime  ;  but  the  fear  of  further  persecution,  human  weak-
ness, or  perhaps  sincere  conviction,  had  caused  them  to
renounce  the  error  of  their  ways,  and  they  now  went  to
mass.  But  they  had  a  maid-servant,  forty  years  of  age,
Anna  van  den  Hove  by  name,  who  was  staunch  in  that
reformed  faith  in  which  she  had  been  born  and  bred.
The  Jesuits  denounced  this  maid-servant  to  the  civil
authority,  and  claimed  her  condemnation  and  execution
under  the  edicts  of  1540,  decrees  which  every  one  had
supposed  as  obsolete  as  the  statutes  of  Draco,  which
they  had  so  entirely  put  to  shame.

The  sentence  having  been  obtained  from  the  docile
and  priest-ridden  magistrates,  Anna  van  den  Hove  was
brought  to  Brussels  and  informed  that  she  was  at  once
to  be  buried  alive.  At  the  same  time,  the  Jesuits  told
her  that  by  converting  herself  to  the  Church  she  might
escape  punishment."

When  King  Henry  IV.  was  summoned  to  renounce
that  same  Huguenot  faith  of  which  he  was  the  political
embodiment  and  the  military  champion,  the  candid
man  answered  by  the  simple  demand  to  be  instructed.
W  hen  the  proper  moment  came,  the  instruction  was
accomplished  by  an  archbishop  with  the  rapidity  of
magic.  Half  an  hour  undid  the  work  of  half  a  life-time.
Thus  expeditiously  could  religious  conversion  be  effected
when  an  earthly  crown  was  its  guerdon.  The  poor
serving-maid  was  less  open  to  conviction.  In  her
simple  fanaticism  she  too  talked  of  a  crown,  and  saw  it
descending  from  heaven  on  her  poor  forlorn  head  as  the
reward,  not  of  apostasy,  but  of  steadfastness.  She  asked
her  tormentors  how  they  could  expect  her  to  abandon
her  religion  f  )r  fear  of  death.  She  had  read  her  Bible
eveiy  day,  she  said,  and  had  found  nothing  there  of  the
pope  or  purgatoiy,  masses,  invocation  of  saints,  or  the
absolution  of  sins  except  through  the  blood  of  the
blessed Eedeemer. She interfered  with  no one who

18  Bor,  IV.  334.  335. Mctoron,  40O.

1597,  ANNA  VAN  DEN  HOVE  BURIED  ALIVE.  410

thought  differently  ;  she  quarrelled  with  no  one's  reli-
gious belief.  She  had  prayed  for  enlightenment  from
Him,  if  she  were  in  error,  and  the  result  was  that  she
felt  strengthened  in  her  simplicity,  and  resolved  to  do
nothing  against  her  conscience.  Rather  than  add  this
sin  to  the  manifold  ones  committed  by  her,  she  prefened
she  said,  to  die  the  death.  So  Anna  van  den  Hove  was
led,  one  fine  midsummer  morning,  to  the  hay-field  out-
side of  Brussels,  between  two  Jesuits,  followed  by  a
number  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  monks  called  love-brothers.
Those  holy  men  goaded  her  as  she  went,  telling  her
that  she  was  the  devil's  carrion,  and  calling  on  her  to
repent  at  the  last  moment,  and  thus  save  her  life  and
escape  eternal  damnation  beside.  But  the  poor  soul  had
no  ear  for  them,  and  cried  out  that,  like  Stephen,  she
saw  the  heavens  opening,  and  the  angels  stooping  down
to  conduct  her  far  away  from  the  power  of  the  evil  one.
When  they  came  to  the  hay-field  they  found  the  pit
already  dug,  and  the  maid-servant  was  ordered  to  de-
scend into  it.  The  executioner  then  covered  her  with
earth  up  to  the  waist,  and  a  last  summons  was  made  to
her  to  renoun(!e  her  errors.  She  refused,  and  then  the
earth  was  piled  upon  her,  and  the  hangman  jumped
upon  the  grave  till  it  was  flattened  and  firm.^^

Of  all  the  religious  murders  done  in  that  hideous
sixteenth  century  in  the  Netherlands,  the  burial  of  the
Antwerp  servant-maid  was  the  last  and  the  worst.  The
worst,  because  it  was  a  cynical  and  deliberate  attempt
to  revive  the  demon  whose  thirst  for  blood  had  been  at
last  allayed,  and  who  had  sunk  into  rejjose.  And  it
was  a  spasmodic  revival  only,  for,  in  the  provinces  at
least,  that  demon  had  finished  his  work.

Still,  on  the  eastern  borders  of  what  was  called  civili-
zation, Turk  and  Christian  were  contending  for  the
mastery.  The  great  battle  of  Kovesd  had  decided
nothing,  and  the  crescent  still  shone  over  the  fortified
and  most  important  Hungarian  stronghold  of  Eaab,
within  arm's  length  of  Vienna.  How  rapidly  might
that  fatal  and  menacing  emblem  fill  its  horns,  should  it
once  be  planted  on  the  walls  of  the  Imperial  capital !
It  was  not  wonderful  that  a  sincere  impatience  should

13  JJor,  Metereii,  ubi  sup.

2  E  2

420  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

be  felt  by  all  the  frontier  States  for  the  termination  of
the  insurrection  of  the  Netherlands.  Would  that  rebel-
lious and  heretical  republic  only  consent  to  go  out  ol
existence,  again  bow  its  stubborn  knee  to  Philip'  and  the
Pope,  what  a  magnificent  campaign  might  be  made
against  Mahomet!  The  King  of  Spain  was  the  only
potentate  at  all  comparable  in  power  to  the  grand  Turk.
The  King  of  France,  most  warlike  of  men,  desired
nothing  better,  as  he  avowed,  than  to  lead  his  brave
nobles  into  Hungary  to  smite  the  unbelievers.  Even
Prince  Maurice,  it  was  fondly  hoped,  might  be  induced
to  accept  a  high  command  in  the  united  armies  of
Christendom,  and  seek  for  glory  by  campaigning,  in
alliance  with  Philip,  Rudolph,  and  Henry  against  the
Ottoman,  rather  than  against  his  natural  sovereign.
Such  were  the  sagacity,  the  insight,  the  power  of  fore-
casting the  future  possessed  in  those  days  by  monarchs,
statesmen,  and  diplomatists  who  were  imagining  that
they  held  the  world's  destiny  in  their  hands.

There  was  this  summer  a  solemn  embassy  from  the
emperor  to  the  States-General,  prop(jsing  mediation,
referring  in  the  usual  conventional  phraseology  to  the
right  of  kings  to  command,  and  to  the  duty  of  the
people  to  submit,  and  urging  the  gentle-mindedness
and  readiness  to  forgive  which  characterised  the  sove-
reign of  the  Netherlands  and  of  Spain.

And  the  statesmen  of  the  republic  had  answered  as
they  always  did,  showing  with  courteous  language,
irresistible  logic,  and  at  unmerciful  length,  that  there
never  had  been  kings  in  the  Netherlands  at  all,  and
that  the  gentle-mindedness  of  Philip  had  been  exhibited
in  the  massacre  of  a  hundred  thousand  Netherlanders  in
various  sieges  and  battles,  and  in  the  murder,  under  the
Duke  of  Alva  alone,  of  twenty  thousand  human  beings
by  the  hangman.^"

They  liked  not  such  divine  right  nor  such  gentle-
mindedness.  They  recognised  no  duty  on  their  part  to
consent  to  such  a  system.  Even  the  friendly  king  of
Denmark  sent  a  legation  for  a  similar  pui-pose,  which
was  respectfnlly  but  very  decidedly  allowed  to  return
as  it  came  ;  ^^  but  the  most  persistent  in  schemes  of
interference  fur  the  purpose  of  putting  an  end to  the

=«  Bur.  IV.  35  ^.  21  Ibii  376.

i

1597,  EMBASSY  FROM  THE  KING  OF  POLAND.  421

efifusion  of  blood  in  the  Netherlands  was  Sigismnnd  of
Poland.  This  monarch,  who  occupied  two  very  incom-
patible positions,  being  sovereign  at  once  of  fanatically
Protestant  Sweden  and  of  orthodox  Poland,  and  who
was,  moreover,  son-in-law  of  Archduke  Charles  of
Styria — whose  other  daughter  was  soon  to  be  espoused
by  the  Prince  of  Spain — was  personally  and  geogra-
phically interested  in  liberating  Philip  from  the  incon-
venience of  his  Netherland  war.  Only  thus  could  he
hope  to  bring  the  Spanish  power  to  the  rescue  of  Chris-
tendom against  the  Turk.  Troubles  enough  were  in
store  for  Sigismund  in  his  hereditary  northern  realms,
and  he  was  to  learn  that  his  intermarriage  with  the
great  Catholic  and  Imperial  house  did  not  enable  him  to
trample  out  Protestantism  in  those  hardy  Scandinavian
and  Flemish  regions  where  it  had  taken  secure  root.
Meantime  he  despatched,  in  solemn  mission  to  the
republic  and  to  the  heretic  queen,  a  diplomatist  whose
name  and  whose  oratorical  elforts  have  by  a  caprice  of
history  been  allowed  to  endure  to  our  times.

Paul  Dialyn  was  solemnly  received  at  the  Hagiie  on
21st  July,^^  A  pragmatical  fop,  attired  in  a  21  July,
long,  magnificent  Polish  robe,  covered  with  ^^^''■
diamonds  and  other  jewels,  he  was  yet  recognised  by
some  of  those  present  as  having  been  several  years
before  a  student  at  Ley  den  under  a  different  name,  and
with  far  less  gorgeous  surroundings.^^  He  took  up  his
position  in  the  council-chamber,  in  the  presence  of  the
stadholder  and  the  leading  members  of  the  States-
General,  and  pronounced  a  long  Latin  oration,  in  the
manner,  as  it  was  said,  of  a  monk  delivering  a  sermon
from  the  pulpit.  He  kept  his  eyes  steadily  fixed  on  the
ceiling,  never  once  looking  at  the  men  whom  he  was
addressing,  and  speaking  in  a  loud,  nasal,  dictatorial
tone,  not  at  all  agreeable  to  the  audience.  He  dwelt  in
terms  of  extravagant  eulogy  on  the  benignity  and  gentle-
ness of  the  King  of  Spain — qualities  in  which  he
asserted  that  no  prince  on  earth  could  be  compared  to
him — and  he  said  this  to  the  very  face  of  Maurice  of
Nassau.  That  the  benignant  and  gentle  king  had
caused  the  stadholder's  father  to  be  assassinated,  and
that he  had rewarded the murdeier's family  with  a

22  Bor,  IV.  332-334. Eeyd,  304-305. 23  Reyd,  ubi  sup.

422  THE  UNITED  NETHEl'.LANDS. CHAr.  XXXIII.

patent  of  nobility,  and  witli  an  ample  revenue  taken
from  the  murdered  man's  property,  appeared  of  no
account  to  the  envoy  in  the  full  sweep  of  his  rhetoric.
Yet  the  reminiscence  caused  a  shudder  of  disgust  in  all
who  heard  him.

He  then  stated  the  wish  of  his  master  the  Polish  king
to  be  that,  in  consideration  of  the  present  state  of
Europe  in  regard  to  the  Turk,  the  provinces  might
reconcile  themselves  to  their  natural  master,  who  was
the  most  powerful  monarch  in  Christendom,  and  the
only  one  able  to  make  head  against  the  common  foe.
They  were  solemnly  warned  of  the  enormous  power  and
resources  of  the  great  king,  with  whom  it  was  hopeless
for  them  to  protract  a  struggle  sure  to  end  at  last  in
their  uttermost  destruction.  It  was  for  kings  to  issue
commands,  he  said,  and  for  the  people  to  obey ;  but
Philip  was  full  of  sweetness,  and  would  accord  them
full  forgiveness  for  their  manifold  sins  against  him.
The  wish  to  come  to  the  rescue  of  Christendom,  in  this
extreme  peril  from  the  Turk,  was  with  him  paramount
to  all  other  considerations."*

Such,  in  brief,  was  the  substance  of  the  long  Latin
harangue  by  which  it  was  thought  possible  to  induce
those  sturdy  republicans  and  Galvinists  to  renounce
their  vigorous  national  existence  and  to  fall  on  their
knees  before  the  most  Catholic  king.  This  was  nnder-
stond  to  be  mediation,  statesmanship,  diplomacy,  in
deference  to  which  the  woild  was  to  pause  and  the
course  of  events  to  flow  backwards.  Truly,  despots  and
their  lackeys  were  destined  to  learn  some  rude  lessons
from  that  vigorous  little  commonwealth  in  the  North
Sea,  before  it  should  have  accomplished  its  mission  on
earth.

The  States-General  dissembled  their  disgust,  however,
for  it  was  not  desirable  to  make  open  enemies  of  Sigis-
mund  or  Eudolph.  They  refused  to  accept  a  copy  of
the  oration,  but  they  promised  to  send  him  a  categorical
answer  to  it  in  writing.  Meantime  the  envoy  had  the
honour  of  walking  about  the  castle  with  the  stadholder,
and,  in  the  course  of  their  promenade,  Maurice  pointed
to  the  thirty-eight  standards  taken  at  the  battle  of
Turnhout,  which  hung  from  the  cedarn  rafters  of  the

-■i  lior,  ubi  sup.

1597.  DIALYN'S  RECEPTION  BY  ELIZABETH.  423

ancient  banquetting  hall.-*  The  mute  eloquence  of
those  tattered  banners  seemed  a  not  illogical  reply  to
the  diplamatic  Paul's  rhetoric  in  regard  to  the  hopeless-
ness of  a  contest  with  Spanish  armies.

Next,  Van  der  Werken — pensionary  of  Leyden,  and  a
classical  scholar — waited  upon  the  envoy  with  03  July,
a  Latin  reply  to  his  harangue,  together  with  a  i^^''-
courteous  letter  for  Sigismund.  Both  documents  were
scathing  denunciations  of  the  policy  pursued  by  the
King  of  Spain  and  by  all  his  aiders  and  abettors,  and  a
distinct  but  polished  refusal  to  listen  to  a  single  word
in  favour  of  mediation  or  of  peace.

Paul  Dialyn  then  received  a  courteous  permission  to
leave  the  territory  of  the  republic,  and  was  subsequently
forwarded  in  a  States'  vessel  of  war  to  England.

His  reception,  about  a  month  later,  by  Queen  Eliza-
beth is  an  event  on  which  all  English  historians  are
fond  of  dwelling.  The  pedant,  on  being  presented  to
that  imperious  and  accomplished  sovereign,  deported
himself  with  the  same  ludicrous  arrogance  which  had
characterised  him  at  the  Hague.  His  Latin  oration,
which  had  been  duly  drawn  up  for  him  by  the  Chan-
cellor of  Sweden,  was  quite  as  impertinent  as  his
harangue  to  the  States- General  had  been,  and  was  de-
livered with  the  same  conceited  air.  The  queen  replied
on  the  instant  in  the  same  tongue.  She  was  somewhat
in  a  passion,  but  spoke  with  majestic  moderation.^''

"  Oh,  how  I  have  been  deceived !  "  she  exclaimed.
"  I  expected  an  ambassador,  and  behold  a  herald !  In
all  my  life  T  never  heard  of  such  an  oration.  Your
boldness  and  unadvised  temerity  I  cannot  sufficiently
admire.  But  if  the  king  your  master  has  given  you
any  such  thing  in  charge — which  I  much  doubt — I
believe  it  is  because,  being  but  a  young  man,  and  lately
advanced  to  the  crown,  not  by  ordinary  succession  of
blood,  but  by  election,  he  understandeth  not  j^et  the
way  of  such  affairs."  And  so  on  for  several  minutes
longer.

Never  did  envoy  receive  such  a  setting  down  from
sovereign.

"  God's  death,  my  lords,"  said  the  queen  to  her  minis-

25  Bor,  ubi  sup.  26  Camden,  536,  537, Bor,  IV.  350. Wright,  '  Qiiien

Elizabeth  and  her  Times,'  il.  4bO.

424  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chaf.  XXXIII.

ters,  as  she  concluded,  "  I  have  been  enforced  this  day  to
scour  up  my  old  Latin  that  hath  lain  long  in  rusting.^^

This  combination  of  ready  wit,  high  spirit,  and  good
Latin,  justly  excited  the  enthusiasm  of  the  queen's  sub-
jects, and  endeared  her  still  more  to  ever}^  English  heart.
It  may,  however,  be  doubted  whether  the  famous  reply
was  in  reality  so  entirely  extemporaneous  as  it  has
usually  been  considered.  The  States-General  had  lost
no  time  in  forwarding  to  England  a  minute  account  of
the  proceedings  of  Paul  Dialyn  at  the  Hague,  together
with  a  sketch  of  his  harangue  and  of  the  reply  on  behalf
of  the  States.^*  Her  Majesty  and  her  coimsellors  there-
fore, knowing  that  the  same  envoy  was  on  his  way  to
England  with  a  similar  errand,  may  be  supposed  to  have
had  leisure  to  prepare  the  famous  impromptu.  More-
over, it  is  difficult  to  understand,  on  the  presumption
that  these  classic  utterances  were  purely  extempora-
neous, how  they  have  kept  their  place  in  all  chronicles
and  histories  from  that  day  to  the  present,  without
change  of  a  word  in  the  text.  Surely  there  was  no
stenographer  present  to  take  down  the  queen's  words
as  they  fell  from  her  lips.

The  military  events  of  the  year  did  not  testify  to  a
much  move  successful  activity  on  the  part  of  the  new
league  in  the  field  than  it  had  displayed  in  the  sphere
of  diplomac3^  In  vain  did  the  envoy  of  the  republic
urge  Henry  and  his  counsellors  to  follow  up  the  crush-
ing blow  dealt  to  the  cardinal  at  Tumhout  by  vigorous
operations  in  conjunction  with  the  States'  forces  in  Artois
and  Hainault.^^  For  Amiens  had  meantime  been  taken,
and  it  was  now  necessary  for  the  king  to  employ  all  his
energy  and  all  his  resources  to  I'ecover  that  important
city.  So  much  damage  to  the  cause  of  the  republic  and
of  the  new  league  had  the  little  yellow  Spanish  captain
inflicted  in  an  hour,  with  his  bags  of  chestnuts  and
walnuts.  The  siege  of  Amiens  lasted  nearly  six  months,
and  was  the  main  event  of  the  campaign,  so  far  as  Henry
was  concerned.  It  is  true — as  the  reader  has  already
seen,  and  as  will  soon  be  more  clearly  developed — that
Henrj-'s  heart  had  been  fixed  on  peace,  from  the  moment
that  he  consented  in  conjunction  with  the  republic  to

^  Wright,  ubi  sup.  ■*  Bor,  ubi  sup.

29  Calvaert  to  the  States-General,  in  I3eventer,  ii.  141,  seqq.

1597.  SIEGE  AND  RECOVERY  OF  AMIENS.  425

declare  war,  and  that  he  had  entered  into  secret  and
separate  negotiations  for  that  purpose  with  the  agents
of  Philip  so  soon  as  he  had  bound  himself  by  solemn
covenant  with  Elizabeth  to  have  no  negotiations  what-
ever with  him  except  with  her  full  knowledge  and
consent.

The  siege  of  Amiens,  however,  was  considered  a  mili-
tary masterpiece,  and  its  whole  progress  showed  the
revolution  which  the  stadholder  of  Holland  had  already
effected  in  European  warfare.  Henry  IV.  beleagueied
Amiens  as  if  he  were  a  pupil  of  Maurice,  and  contempo-
raries were  enthusiastic  over  the  science,  the  patience,
the  inventive  ingenuity  which  were  at  last  crowned
with  success.  The  heroic  Hernan  Telle  de  Porto  Car-
rero  was  killed  in  a  sortie  during  the  defence  of  the
place  which  he  had  so  gallantly  won,  and  when  the  city
was  surrendered  to  the  king  on  the  19th  of  19  sept.
September  it  was  stipulated  in  the  first  article  i^^'-
of  the  capitulation  that  the  tomb,  epitaph,  and  trophies,
by  which  his  memory  was  honoured  in  the  principal
church,  should  not  be  disturbed,  and  that  his  body
might  be  removed  whenever  and  whither  it  seemed
good  to  his  sovereign.  In  vain  the  cardinal  had  taken
the  field  with  an  army  of  eighteen  thousand  foot  and
fifteen  hundred  light  cavalry.  The  king  had  learned  so
well  to  entrench  himself  and  to  moderate  his  ardour  for
inopportune  pitched  battles,  that  the  relieving  force
could  find  no  occasion  to  effect  its  purpose.  The  arch-
duke retired.  He  came  to  Amiens  like  a  soldier,  said
Henry,  but  he  went  back  like  a  priest.  Moreover,  he
was  obliged  to  renounce,  besides  the  city,  a  most  tempt-
ing prize  which  he  thought  that  he  had  secured  within
the  city.  Alexander  Farnese,  in  his  last  French  cam-
paign, had  procured  and  sent  to  his  uncle  the  foot  of  St.
Philip  and  the  head  of  St.  Lawrence  ;  but  what  was
Albert's  delight  when  he  learned  that  in  Amiens  cathe-
dral there  was  a  large  piece  of  the  head  of  John  the
Baptist !  "  There  will  be  a  great  scandal  about  it  in
this  kingdom,"  he  wrote  to  Philip,  "  if  I  undertake  to
transport  it  out  of  the  country,  but  I  will  try  to  contrive
it  as  your  Majesty  desires."^"

30  Albert  to  Philip,  14  March,  159Y.  Same  to  samo,  16  Aug.  159Y.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  M.*;.)
"  Es  cosa  cierta  que  estii  en  Amiens  gran  parte  do  la  caljeza  de  San  Juan  Bap-

426  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIU.

But  the  military  events  of  the  year  prevented  the  car-
dinal from  gratifying  the  king  in  regard  to  these  choice
curiosities.

After  the  reduction  of  the  city,  Henry  went  a  con-
siderable distance  with  his  army  towards  the  frontier
of  Flanders,  in  order  to  return,  as  he  said,  his  cousin's
visit."^  But  the  recovery  of  Amiens  had  placed  too
winning  a  card  in  th?  secret  game  which  he  was  then
playing  to  allow  him  to  push  his  nominal  adversary  to
extremities.

The  result,  suspected  very  early  in  the  year  by  the
statesmen  of  the  republic,  was  ab'eady  very  plainly  fore-
shadowing itself  as  the  winter  advanced.

Nor  had  the  other  two  members  of  the  league  effected
much  in  the  field.  Again  an  expedition  had  been  fitted
forth  under  Essex  against  the  Spanish  coast  to  return
the  compliment  which  Philip  had  intended  with  the
unlucky  armada  under  Santa  Gadea ;  and  again  Sir
Francis  Vere,  with  two  thousand  veterans  from  the
Netherlands,  and  the  Dutch  admirals,  with  ten  ships
of  war  and  a  large  number  of  tenders  and  transports,
had  faithfully  taken  part  in  the  adventure.

The  fleet  was  tempest-tossed  for  ten  days,  during
which  it  reached  the  threatened  coast  and  was  blown
off  again.  It  returned  at  last  into  the  English  ports,
having  accomplished  nothing,  and  having  expended  su-
perfluously a  considerable  amount  of  money  and  trouble.
Essex,  with  a  few  of  the  vessels,  subsequently  made  a
cruise  towards  the  Azores,  but,  beyond  the  capture  of
a  Spanish  merchantman  or  two,  gained  no  glory  and
inflicted  no  damage.^^

Nothing  cuuld  be  feebler  than  the  military  operations
of  the  three  confederated  powers  ever  since  they  had  so
solemnly  confederated  themselves.

Sick  at  heart  with  the  political  intrigues  of  his  allies,
which  had  brought  a  paralysis  upon  his  arms  which  the
blows  of  the  enemy  could  hardly  have  effected,  Maurice
took  the  field  in  August  for  an  autumnal  campaign  on

tista.  Aun  podiia  causar  en  aquel Reyno  Thou,  siii.  109.126. Meteren,  396.  Ben-

algun  scanrtalo  el  tratar de  un  trasla-  tivoglio, 458,  seqq. Carnero,  407,  seqq.,

cion,  pero  procurare  que  se  guie  como  mas  and  especially  Coloma,  238-271. Albert

convenga  conforme  a  lo  que  V.  Mag^.  me  to  Philip,  3'>  Sept.  1597. (Arch.de  Si-

mauda,"  &c.  &c.  mancas  MS.)
31  For  the siege of  Amiens, see  De 32  Bor,  IV.  335-337. Camden,  529-535.

1597.  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  PRINCESS  EMILIA.  427

the  eastern  frontier  of  the  republic.  Foiled  in  his
efforts  for  a  combined  attack  by  the  whole  force  of  the
league  upon  Philip's  power  in  the  west,  he  thought  it  at
least  expedient  to  liberate  the  Ehine,  to  secure  the  im-
portant provinces  of  Zutphen,  Gelderland,  and  Overyssel
from  attack,  and  to  provide  against  the  dangerous  in-
trigues and  concealed  warfare  carried  on  by  Spain  in
the  territories  of  the  mad  Duke  of  Juliers,  Cleves  and
Berg.  For  the  seeds  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War  of  Ger-
many were  already  sown  broadcast  in  those  fatal  duchies,
and  it  was  the  determination  of  the  agents  of  Spain  to
acquire  the  masteiy  of  that  most  eligible  military  posi-
tion, that  excellent  sedes  belli,  whenever  Protestantism
was  to  be  assailed  in  England,  the  Netherlands,  or  Ger-
many.

Meantime  the  Hispaniolated  counsellors  of  Duke  John
had  strangled — as  it  was  strongly  suspected — his  duchess,
who  having  gone  to  bed  in  perfect  health  one  evening
was  found  dead  in  her  bed  next  morning,  with  an  ugly
mark  on  her  throat ;  ^^  and  it  was  now  the  purpose  of
these  statesmen  to  find  a  new  bride  for  their  insane
sovereign  in  the  ever  ready  and  ever  orthodox  house
of  Lorraine.^*  And  the  Protestant  brothers-in-law  and
nephews  and  nieces  were  making  every  possible  combi-
nation in  order  to  check  such  dark  designs,  and  to  save
these  important  territories  from  the  ubiquitous  power
of  Spain.

The  stadholder  had  also  family  troubles  at  this  period.
His  sister  Emilia  had  conceived  a  desperate  passion  for
Don  Emmanuel,  the  pauper  son  of  the  forlorn  pretender
to  Portugal,  Don  Antonio,  who  had  at  last  departed  this
life.  Maurice  was  indignant  that  a  Catholic,  an  outcast,
and,  as  it  was  supposed,  a  bastard,  should  dare  to  mate
with  the  daughter  of  William  of  Orange-Nassau ;  and
there  were  many  scenes  of  tenderness,  reproaches,  re-
criminations, and  hysterica  j^assio,  in  which  not  only  the
lovers,  the  stadholder  and  his  family,  but  also  the  high
and  might}'  States-General,  were  obliged  to  enact  their
parts.  The  chronicles  are  filled  with  the  incidents,
which,  however,  never  turned  to  tragedy,  nor  even  to
romance,  but  ended,  without  a  catastrophe,  in  a  rather
insipid  marriage. The  Princess  Emilia  remained  true

33  Reyd,  319.  34  Ibid.

428  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIH.

both  to  her  religion  and  her  husband  during  a  some-
what obscure  wedded  life,  and  after  her  death  Don
Emmanuel  found  means  to  reconcile  himself  with  the
King  of  Spain  and  to  espouse,  in  second  nuptials,  a
Spanish  lad3\^^

On  the  4th  of  August,  Maurice  arrived  at  Arnhem
4  Aug.  with  a  force  of  seven  thousand  foot  and  twelve
1597.  hundred  horse.  Hohenlo  was  with  him,  and
William  Lewis,  and  there  was  yet  another  of  the  illus-
trious house  of  Nassau  in  the  camp,  Frederick  Henry,  a
boy  in  his  thirteenth  year,  the  youngest  born  of  William
the  Silent,  the  grandson  of  Admiral  de  Coligny,  now
about,  in  this  his  first  campaign,  to  take  the  first  step  in
a  long  and  noble  career.^"

Having  reduced  the  town  and  castle  of  Alphen,  the
stadholder  came  before  Rheinberg,  which  he  very  ex-
peditiously iuvested.  During  a  preliminary  skirmish
William  Lewis  received  a  wound  in  the  leg,  while
during  the  brief  siege  Maurice  had  a  narrow  escape
from  death,  a  cannon-ball  passing  through  his  tent  and
over  his  head  as  he  lay  taking  a  brief  repose  upon  his
couch.^^

On  the  1 9th,  Rheinberg,  the  key  to  that  portion  of  the
19  Aug.  river,  surrendered.  On  the  31st  the  stadholder
1597.  opened  his  batteries  upon  the  city  of  Meurs,
w^hich  capitulated  on  the  2nd  of  September;  the  com-
mandant, Andrew  Miranda,  stipulating  that  he  should
carry  oif  an  old  fifty  pounder,  the  only  piece  of  cannon
in  the  place.  Maurice  gave  his  permission  with  a  laugh,
begging  Miranda  not  to  batter  down  any  cities  with  his
biof  gun.^^

On  the  8  th  September  the  stadholder  threw  a  bridge
over  the  Rhine,  and  crossing  that  river  and  the  Lippe,
came  on  the  11th  before  Grol.  There  was  no  Christo-
pher Mondragon  now  in  his  path  to  check  his  progress
and  spoil  his  campaign,  so  that  in  seventeen  days  the
city,  being  completely  surrounded  with  galleries  and
covered  ways  up  to  its  waUs,  surrendered.  Count  van
Stirum,  royal  governor  of  the  place,  dined  with  the  stad-
holder on  that  day,  and  the  garrison,  from  twelve  hun-
dred to  fifteen  hundred  strong,  together  with  such  of

35  Bor,  IV.  322-324. Van der  Kemp,  ii.  36-40, 182-194 36  Van der  Kemp,  li,  31-32.
37  Bor,  IV.  345. Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  32.  3s  Reyd,  xiv.  312.

1597.  MAURICE'S  CAMPAIGN.  429

the  townsfolk  as  chose  to  be  subjects  of  Philip  rather
than  citizens  of  the  republic,  were  permitted  to  depart
in  peace.^^

On  the  9th  October  the  town  and  castle  of  Brevoort
were  taken  by  storm  and  the  town  was  burned.'^

On  the  18th  October,  Maurice  having  summoned  Ens-
chede,  the  commandant  requested  permission  to  examine
the  artillery  by  which  it  was  proposed  to  reduce  the
city.  Leave  being  granted,  two  captains  were  de-
puted accordingly  as  inspectors,  who  reported  that
resistance  was  useless.  The  place  accordingly  capitu-
lated at  once.'*^

Here,  again,  was  an  improvement  on  the  heroic  prac-
tice of  Alva  and  Eomero.

On  the  21st  and  22nd  October,  Ootmarsum  and  Olden-
zaal  were  taken,  and  on  the  28th  the  little  army  came
before  Lingen.  This  important  city  surrendered  after  a
fortnight's  siege.

Thus  closed  a  sagacious,  business-like,  three-months'
campaign,  in  the  course  of  which  the  stadholder,  al-
though with  a  slender  foice,  had  by  means  of  his  excel-
lent organization  and  his  profound  practical  science,
achieved  very  considerable  results.  He  had  taken  nine
strongly-fortified  cities  and  five  castles,  opened  the  navi-
gation of  the  Rhine,  and  strengthened  the  whole  eastern
bulwarks  of  the  republic.*^  He  was  censured  by  the  su-
perficial critics  of  the  old  school  for  his  humanity
towards  the  coiiquered  garrisons.  At  least  it  was  thought
quite  superfluous  to  let  these  Spanish  soldiers  go  scot
free.  Five  thousand  vetei'ans  had  thus  been  liberated
to  swell  the  ranks  of  the  cardinal's  army,  but  the  result
soon  proved  the  policy  of  Maurice  to  be,  in  many  ways,
wholesome.  The  great  repudiation  by  Philip,  and  the
consequent  bankruptcy  of  Albert,  converted  lai-ge  num-
bers of  the  royal  tioops  into  mutineers,  and  these  gar-
risons from  the  eastern  frontier  were  glad  to  join  in  the
game.

After  the  successful  siege  of  Hulst  in  the  jDrevious
year  the  cardinal  had  reduced  the  formidable  mutiny
which  had  organized  itself  at  Tirlemont  and  Chapelle  in

S9  Bor,  IV.  349. Meteren,  411-417.  *o  ibid.

*i  Letter  of  MaiiriCP,  in  Van  dcr  Kemp,  ii.  ISO.

*^  Bor,  IV,  345-363. Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  31-35,  177,  scqq. Macren,  ubi  sup.

430  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

the  days  of  liis  luckless  predecessor.  Those  rebels  had
been  paid  off  and  had  mainly  returned  to  Italy  and  other
lands  to  spend  their  money.  But  soon  a  new  rebellion
in  all  the  customary  forms  established  itself  in  Antwerp
citadel  during  the  temporary  absence  of  Mexia,  the
governor,  and  great  was  the  misery  of  the  unhappy
burghers  thus  placed  at  the  mercy  of  the  guns  of  that
famous  pentagon.  They  were  obliged  to  furnish  large
sums  to  the  whole  garrison,  paying  every  common  foot-
soldier  twelve  stivers  a  day  and  the  officers  in  propor-
tion, while  the  great  Eletto  demanded,  beside  his  salary,
a  coach  and  six,  a  state  bed  with  satin  curtains  and
fine  linen,  and  the  materials  for  banquetting  (Sumptu-
ously every  day.^^  At  the  slightest  demur  to  these  de-
mands the  bombardment  from  the  citadel  would  begin,
and  the  accurate  artillery  practice  of  those  experienced
cannoneers  soon  convinced  the  loj'al  citizens  of  the
propriety  of  the  arrangement.'"  The  example  spread.
The  garrison  of  Ghent  broke  into  open  revolt,  and
a  general  military  rebellion  lasted  for  more  than  a
year.

While  the  loyal  cities  of  the  obedient  provinces  were
thus  enjoying  the  fruits  of  their  loyalty  and  obedience,
the  rebellious  capital  of  the  republic  was  receiving  its
stadholder  with  exuberant  demonstrations  of  gratitude.
The  year  begun  with  the  signal  victory  of  Tunahout,
had  worthily  terminated,  so  far  as  military  events  were
concerned,  with  the  autumnal  campaign  on  the  Rhine,
and  great  were  the  rejoicings  throughout  the  little  com-
monwealth.

Thus,  with  diminished  resources,  had  the  republic  been
doing  its  share  of  the  work  which  the  anti-Spanish  league
had  been  called  into  existence  to  accomplish.  But,  as  al-
ready intimated,  this  league  was  a  mere  fraud  upon  the
Netherlands,  which  their  statesmen  were  not  slow  in
discovering.  Of  course  it  was  the  object  of  Philip  and
of  the  pope  to  destroy  this  formidable  triple  alliance
as  soon  as  formed,  and  they  found  potent  assistance,  not
only  in  Henry's  counsellors,  but  in  the  bosom  of  that
crafty  monarch  himself.  Clement  hated  Philip  as  much
as  he  feared  him,  so  that  the  prospect  both  of  obtaining
Henry  as  a  counterpoise  to  his  own  most  oppressive  and

• «  Bor,  IV.  468  «  Ibid.

1597.  POSITION  OF  THE  ANTI-SPANISH  LEAGUE.  431

most  Catholic  protector,  and  of  breaking  np  the  great  con-
vert's alliance  with  the  heretic  queen  and  the  rebellious
republic,  was  a  most  tempting  one  to  his  Holiness.  There-
fore he  employed,  indefatigably,  the  matchless  powers  of
intrigue  possessed  by  Eome  to  effect  this  great  purpose.  As
for  Elizabeth,  she  was  weary  of  the  war,  most  anxious  to  be
reimbursed  her  advances  to  the  States,  and  profoundly  jea-
lous of  the  rising  commercial  and  naval  greatness  of  the
new  commonwealth.  If  the  league  therefore  proved  impo-
tent from  the  beginning,  certainly  it  was  not  the  fault  of  the
United  Netherlands.  We  have  seen  how  much  the  king
deplored,  in  intimate  conversation  with  De  Bethune,^""*
his  formal  declaration  of  war  against  France  which  the
Dutch  diplomatists  had  induced  him  to  make ;  and  in-
deed nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  this  public
declaration  of  war,  and  this  solemn  formation  of  the
triple  alliance  against  Philip,  were  instantly  accompa-
nied on  Henry's  part  by  secret  peace  negotiations  with
Philip's  agents.  Villeroy  told  Envoy  Calvaert  that  as
for  himself  he  always  trembled  when  he  thought  on
what  he  had  done,  in  seconding  the  will  of  his  Majesty
in  that  declaration  at  the  instance  of  the  States-General,
of  which  measure  so  many  losses  and  such  bitter  fruits
had  been  the  result.^**  He  complained,  too,  of  the  little
assistance  or  co-operation  yielded  by  England.*''  Calvaert
replied  that  he  had  nothing  to  say  in  defence  of  Eng-
land,''* but  that  certainly  the  king  could  have  no  cause
to  censure  the  States.  The  republic,  however,  had  good
ground,  he  said,  to  complain  that  nothing  had  been  done
by  France,  that  all  favourable  occasions  had  been  ne-
glected, and  that  there  was  a  perpetual  change  of  coun-
sels. The  envoy  especially,  and  justly,  reproached  the
royal  govei'nment  for  having  taken  no  advantage  of  the
opportunity  offered  by  the  victory  of  Turnhout,  in  which
the  republic  had  utterly  defeated  the  principal  forces  of
the  common  enemy.  He  bluntly  lemarked,  too,  that  the
mysterious  comings  and  goings  of  Balvena  had  naturall}'
excited  suspicions  in  the  Netherlands,  and  that  it  would
be  better  that  all  such  practices  should  be  at  once  aban-
doned. They  did  his  Majestj'  no  service,  and  it  was  no

*5  Antea,  Vide  Sully, Memoires  I.  viii.  412. Van  Deventer,  ii.  142.
«  Calvacrt's  letter,  in  Deventer,  ii.  141-146.  •'"  ibid.

♦8  Ibid. "  I)at  ick  EnRlaiid  daer  liet."

432  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHL

wonder  tbat  they  caused  uneasiness  to  his  allies.  Ville-
roy  replied  that  the  king  had  good  reasons  to  give  satis-
faction to  those  who  were  yeaining  for  peace.*'*

As  Henry  himself  was  yearning  in  this  regard  as  much
as  any  of  his  subjects,  it  was  natural  enough  that  lie
should  listen  to  Balvena  and  all  other  informal  negotia-
tors whom  Cardinal  Albert  might  send  from  Brussels  or
Clement  from  Rome.  It  will  be  recollected  that  Henry's
parting  words  to  Balvena  at  Eouen  had  been  :  "  Tell  the
archduke  that  I  am  very  much  his  friend.  Let  him
arrange  a  peace. Begone. Be  diligent."  *"

But  the  king's  reply  to  Calvaert,  when,  after  the  inter-
view with  Villeroy,  that  envoy  was  admitted  to  the
royal  dressing-room  for  private  conversation  and  took  the
occasion  to  remonstrate  with  his  Majesty  on  these
intrigues  with  the  Spanish  agent,  was  that  he  should
send  off  Balvena  in  such  fashion  that  it  would  take  from
the  cardinal-archduke  all  hope  of  troubling  him  with
any  further  propositions.^^

It  has  been  seen,  too,  with  what  an  outbreak  of
wrath  the  proposition,  made  by  Elizabeth  through
Robert  Sydney,  that  she  should  succour  Calais  on  con-
dition of  keeping  it  for  herself,  had  been  received  by
Henry.  At  a  somewhat  later  moment,  when  Calais  had
passed  entirely  into  the  possession  of  Spain,  the  queen
oU'ered  to  lay  siege  to  that  city  with  twelve  thousand
men,  but  with  the  itnderstanding  that  the  success  was  to
be  entirely  for  her  own  profit.  Again  the  king  had
expressed  great  astonishment  and  indignation  at  the
proposition. '^^

Nevertheless,  after  Amiens  had  been  lost,  Henry  had
sent  Fonquerolles  on  a  special  mission  to  England,^
asking  Elizabeth's  assistance  in  the  siege  for  its  re-
covery, and  offering  that  she  should  keep  Calais  as  a
pledge  for  expenses  thus  incun-ed,  on  the  same  terms  as
those  on  which  she  held  the  Brill  and  Flushing  in  the
Netherlands.  This  proposal,  however,  to  make  a  con-
sidei-able  campaign  in  Picardy,  and  to  be  indemnified  by
Henry  for  her  trouble  with  the  pledge  of  a  city  which
was  not  his  property,  did  not  seem  tempting  to  Eliza-

«  Calvaert's  letter,  in  Devenier  ii.  141- H  6.  so  Antea.

5'  Caron  to  tlie  Slates,  in  Devcnter,  uhi  sup.  53  ibid.

^  Instructions  for  fonquerolles,  in  Prevott  I'aradul,  F^lizalA'tU  et  Henri  IV.

1597. BUZANVAL'S  COMMUNICATION  TO  THE  STATES. 433

beth.  The  mission  of  Fonquerolles  was  fruitless,  as
might  have  been  supposed.^  Nothing  certainly  in  the
queen's  attitude,  up  to  that  moment,  coiild  induce  the
supposition  that  she  would  help  to  reduce  Amiens
for  the  sake  of  the  privilege  of  conquering  Calais  if  she
could.

So  suuu  as  her  refusal  was  made  certain,  Henry
dropped  the  mask,  Buzanval,  the  regular  French  envoy
at  the  Hagae^even  while  amazing  the  States  by  rebukes
for  their  short-comings  in  the  field  and  b}-  demands  for
immediate  co-operation  in  the  king's  campaign,  when
the  king  was  doing  nothing  but  besiege  Amiens —
astonished  the  republican  statesmen  still  further  by  tell-
ing them  that  his  master  was  listening  seriously  to  the
pope's  secret  offers.*^

His  Holiness  had  assured  the  king,  through  the  legate
at  Paris,  that  he  could  easil}^  bring  about  a  peace
between  him  and  Philip,  if  Henry  would  agree  to  make
it  alone,  and  he  woiild  so  manage  it  that  the  king's
name  should  not  be  mixed  up  with  the  negotiations,  and
that  he  should  not  apj^ear  as  seeking  for  peace.  It  was
to  be  considered  however — so  Henry's  envoy  intimated
both  at  Greenwich  and  the  Hague — that  if  the  king
should  accept  the  pope's  intervention  he  would  be
obliged  to  exclude  from  a  share  in  it  the  queen  and  all
others  not  of  the  Catholic  religion,  and  it  was  feared
that  the  same  necessity  which  had  compelled  him  to
listen  to  these  overtures  would  force  him  still  further  in
the  same  path.  He  dreaded  lest,  between  peace  and
war,  he  might  fall  into  a  position  in  which  the  law
would  be  dictated  to  him  either  by  the  enemy  or  by
those  who  had  undertaken  to  help  him  out  of  danger.

Much  more  information  to  this  effect  did  Buzanval
communicate  to  the  States  on  the  authority  of  a  private
letter  from  the  king,  telling  him  of  the  ill-success  of  the
mission  of  Fonquerolles. °"  That  diplomatist  had  brought
back  nothing  from  England,  it  appeared,  save  excuses,
general  phrases,  and  many  references  to  the  troubles  in
Ireland  and  to  the  danger  of  a  new  Spanish  Armada.

It  was  now  for  the  first  time,  moreover,  that  the
States learned how they had been duped both by

"  Calvaert  to  states-General,  In  Deventer,  il.  47.  "  Bor,  IV.  824,  325.

56  An  abstract  of  the  letter  is  given  by  Bor,  ubi  sup.
VOL. III.  2 F

434  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

England  and  France  in  the  matter  of  tlie  League.  To
their  surprise  they  were  informed  that  while  they  were
themselves  furnishing  four  thousand  men,  according  to
the  contract  signed  by  the  three  powers,  the  queen  had
in  reality  only  agreed  to  contribute  two  thousand
soldiers,  and  these  only  for  four  months'  service,  within
a  very  strict  territorial  limit,  and  under  promise  of
immediate  reimbursement  of  the  expenses  thus  in-
curred.^^

These  facts,  together  with  the  avowal  that  their  mag-
nanimous ally  had  all  along  been  secretly  treating  for
]3eace  with  the  common  enemy,  did  not  make  a  cheerful
impression  upon  those  plain-spoken  republicans,  nor  was
it  much  consolation  to  them  to  receive  the  assurance
that  "  after  tlie  king's  death  his  affection  and  gratitude
towards  the  States  would  be  found  deeply  engraved
upon  his  heart."  ®*

The  result  of  such  a  future  autopsy  might  seem  a
matter  of  comparative  indifference,  since  meantime  the
present  effect  to  the  republic  of  those  deep  emotions  was
a  treacherous  desertion.  Calvaert,  too,  who  had  so  long
haunted  the  king  like  his  perpetual  shadow,  and  who
had  believed  him — at  least  so  far  as  the  Netherlands
were  concerned — to  be  almost  without  guile,^''  had  been
destined  after  all  to  a  rude  awakening.  Sick  and  suffer-
ing, he  did  not  cease,  so  long  as  life  was  in  him,  to  warn
the  States-General  of  the  dangers  impending  over  them
from  the  secret  negotiations  which  their  royal  ally  was
doing  his  best  to  conceal  from  them,  and  as  to  which  he
had  for  a  time  succeeded  so  dexterously  in  hoodwinking
their  envoy  himself.  But  the  honest,  and  energetic
agent  of  the  republic  did  not  live  to  see  the  consum-
mation of  these  manoeuvres  of  Henry  and  the  pope.
He  died  in  Paris  during  the  month  of  June  of  this
year.'^'

Certainly  the  efforts  of  Spanish  and  Papal  diplomacy
had  not  been  unsuccessful  in  bringing  about  a  dissolution

37  Bor,  ubi  sup. Vide  Antea.  woorden,  en  soo  ick  geloove  sender  fictie

58  Bor,  ubi  sup.  (die  in  hem  cleyn  is)  [ !  ]  dat  hy  niet

w  "  Deurdien,  S.M.,"  wrote  Calvaert  in  begeerde  de  kennis  syner handelingen

June,  1596,  "(Sender jactantiegesproken)  desen  oorlog  raakende,  aen  U.  M.  E.  te

binuen  den  tyi  ick  by  hem  geweest  ben,  onttrecken." Calvaert to the States-

niy luttel particulariteiten verborgen  General,  I>eventer,  ii.  US.

aeeft,  seggende dikmael met cxpres.se  ">  v^jn  i  )eventer,  ii.  148.

^597.  TRAFFIC  OF  THE  STATES  WITH  SPAIN.  435

of  the  bonds  of  amity  by  which  the  three  powers
seemed  so  lately  to  be  drawing  themselves  very
closely  together.  The  republic  and  Henry
IV.  were  now  on  a  most  uncomfortable  footing  towaids
each  other.  On  the  other  hand,  the  queen  wan  in  a
very  ill  humour  with  the  States  and  very  angry  with
Henry.  Especially  the  persistent  manner  in  which  the
Hollanders  carried  on  trade  with  Spain,  and  were  at  the
same  time  making  fortunes  for  themselves  and  feeding
the  enemy,  while  Englishmen,  on  pain  of  death,  were
debarred  from  participation  in  such  traffic,  excited  great
and  general  indignation  in  England.  In  vain  was  it
represented  that  this  tiade,  if  prohibited  to  the  common-
wealth, would  fall  into  the  hands  of  neutral  powers,  and
that  Spain  would  derive  her  supplies  from  the  Baltic  and
other  regions  as  regularly  as  ever,  while  the  republic,
whose  whole  life  was  in  her  foreign  commerce,  would
not  only  become  incapable  of  carrying  on  the  war  but
would  perish  of  inanition.  The  English  statesmen
threatened  to  declare  all  such  trade  contraband,  and
vessels  engaging  in  it  lawful  prize  to  English  cruisers.'''

Burghley  declared,  with  much  excitement,  to  Caron,
that  he,  as  well  as  all  the  council,  considered  the  con-
duct of  the  Hollanders  so  unjustifiable  as  to  make  them
regret  that  their  princess  had  ever  embarked  with  a
State  which  chose  to  aid  its  own  enemies  in  the  destruc-
tion of  itself  and  its  allies.  Such  conduct  was  so  mon-
strous that  those  who  were  told  of  it  would  hardly
believe  it.*'^

The  Dutch  envoy  observed  that  there  were  thirty
thousand  sailors  engaged  in  this  trade,  and  he  asked  the
Lord  Treasurer  whether  he  proposed  that  these  people
should  all  starve  or  be  driven  into  the  service  of  the
enemy.  Burghley  rejoined  tliat  the  Hollanders  had  the
whole  world  beside  to  pursue  their  traffic  in,  that  they
did  indeed  trade  over  the  whole  world,  and  had  thereby
become  so  extraordinarily,  monstrously  rich  that  there
was  no  believing  it.®^

Caron  declared  his  sincere  wish  that  this  was  true,  but
said,  on  the  contrary,  that  he  knew  too  well  what  ex-

61  "Ende  voor  vrybuyt  doen  verklaron  alle  sulckc  schepeii,"  &c. — Caron  lo  the
S*ates-General,  24  Sept.  1597,  in  Devonter,  157-161.

f»  Caron's  despateii,  last  cited.  "  ibid.

2  F  2

436  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXIII.

treme  trouble  and  labour  the  States-General  bad  in  pro-
viding for  the  expenses  of  the  war  and  in  extracting  the
necessary  funds  from  the  various  communities.  This
would  hardly  be  the  case  were  such  great  wealth  in  the
land  as  was  imagined.  But  still  the  English  counsellors
protested  that  they  would  stop  this  trading  with  the
enemy  at  every  hazard.®*

On  the  question  of  peace  or  war  itself  the  republican
diplomatists  were  often  baffled  as  to  the  true  intentions
of  the  English  Government.  "  As  the  queen  is  fine  and
false,"  said  Marquis  Havre,  observing  and  aiding  in  the
various  intrigues  which  were  weaving  at  Brussels,  "  and
her  council  much  the  same,  she  is  practising  towards  the
Hollanders  a  double  stratagem.  On  the  one  hand  she
induces  them  to  incline  to  a  general  peace.  On  the
other,  her  adherents,  ten  or  twelve  in  number  of  those
who  govern  Holland  and  have  credit  with  the  people,
insist  that  the  true  interest  of  the  State  is  in  a  continua-
tion of  the  war.'"^^

But  Havre,  adept  in  diplomatic  chicane  as  he  un-
doubtedly was,  would  have  found  it  difficult  to  find  any
man  of  intelligence  or  influence  in  that  rebellious  com-
monwealth, of  which  he  was  once  a  servant,  who  had
any  doubt  on  that  subject.  It  needed  no  English  argu-
ment to  persuade  Olden-Barneveld,  and  the  other  states-
men who  guided  the  destiny  of  the  republie,  that  peace
would  be  destruction.  Moreover,  there  is  no  question
that  both  the  qiieen  and  Burghley  would  have  been
truly  grateful  had  the  States-General  been  willing  to
make  peace  and  return  to  the  allegiance  which  they  had
long  since  spurned.

Nevertheless  it  is  difficult  to  say  whether  there  were
at  this  moment  more  of  animosity  in  Elizabeth's  mind
towards  her  blacksliding  ally,  with  whom  she  had  so
recently  and  so  pompously  sworn  an  eternal  friendship,
or  towards  her  ancient  enemy.  Although  she  longed  for
peace,  she  hardly  saw  her  way  to  it,  for  she  felt  that  the
secret  movements  of  Henry  had  in  a  manner  barred  the
path.  She  confessed  to  the  States'  envoy  that  it  was  as
easy  for  her  to  make  black  white  as  to  make  peace  with
Spain.'''^ To  this  Caron  cordially  assented,  saying  with

6*  Caron's  despatch,  last  cited.

65  De venter,  169,  from  the  Belgian  Archives. Havre  to  Archduke  Albert.

66  Caron  to  the  States-General,  Sept.  lo97. Ueventer  U.  153-156.

1597,  ELIZABETH  ON  THE  PEACE  QUESTION.  437

much  energy,  "  There  is  as  much  chance  for  your
Majesty  and  for  us  to  make  peace,  during  the  life
of  the  present  King  of  Spain,  as  to  find  redemption  in
hell."  "

To  the  Danish  ambassadors,  who  had  come  to  England
with  proposals  of  mediation,  the  queen  had  replied  that
the  King  of  Spain  had  attacked  her  dominions  many
times,  and  had  very  often  attempted  her  assassination  ;  ^
that  after  long  patience  she  had  begun  to  defend  herself,
and  had  been  willing  to  show  him  that  she  had  the
courage  and  the  means,  not  only  to  maintain  herself
against  his  assaults,  but  also  to  invade  his  realms ;  that,
therefore,  she  was  not  disposed  to  speak  first,  nor  to  lay
down  any  conditions.  Yet,  if  she  saw  that  the  King  of
Spain  had  any  remorse  for  his  former  offences  against
her,  and  wished  to  make  atonement  for  them,  she  was
willing  to  declare  that  her  heart  was  not  so  alien-
ated from  peace,  but  that  she  could  listen  to  propositions
on  the  subject. *^^

She  said,  too,  that  such  a  peace  must  be  a  general  one,
including  both  the  King  of  France  and  the  States  of  the
Netherlands,  for  with  these  powers  she  had  but  lately
made  an  offensive  and  defensive  league  against  the
King  of  Spain,  from  which  she  protested  that  for
no  consideration  in  the  world  would  she  ever  swerve
one  jot.

Certainly  these  were  words  of  Christian  charity  and
good  faith,  but  such  professions  are  the  common  staple  of
orations  and  documents  for  public  consumption.  As  the
accounts  became  more  and  more  minute,  however,  of
Henry's  intrigues  with  Albert,  Philip,  and  Clement,  the
queen  grew  more  angry.

She  told  Caron  that  she  was  quite  aware  that  the  king
had  long  been  in  communication  with  the  car-  ■  le  Nov.
dinal's  emissaries,  and  that  he  had  even  sent  ^^^'•
some  of  his  principal  counsellors  to  confer  with  the
cardinal  himself  at  Arras,  in  direct  violation  of  the
stipulations  of  the  league.  She  expressed  her  amaze-
ment at  the  king's  conduct ;  for  she  knew  veiy  well,  she
said,  that  the  league had  hardly  been  confirmed  and

^  Caron  to  the  States-General,  Sept.  159Y. Dervenfer,  ii.  156.
68  "  Ende  seer  dictmael  naer  haer  lyf  ende  leven  heeft  doen  staon." — Caron  t«
States-Genei  al,  24  Sept.  1597. Deveuter,  ii.  159.  ='■'  Ibid.

438  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIII.

sworn  to,  before  he  was  treating  witli  secret  agents
sent  to  him  by  the  cardinal.  "  And  now,"  she  continued,
"  they  propose  to  send  an  ambassador  to  inform  me  of  the
whole  proceeding,  and  to  ask  my  advice  and  consent  in
regard  to  negotiations  which  they  have,  perchance,
entirely  concluded."

She  further  ipformed  the  republican  envoy  that  the
king  had  recently  been  taking  the  ground  in  these  deal-
ings with  the  common  enem}' ;  that  the  two  kingdoms
of  France  and  England  must  first  be  provided  for  ;  that
when  the  basis  between  these  powers  and  Spain  had
been  arranged,  it  would  be  time  to  make  arrangements
for  the  States,  and  that  it  would  probably  be  found
advisable  to  obtain  a  truce  of  three  or  four  years  between
them  and  Spain,  in  which  interval  the  government  of
the  provinces  might  remain  on  its  actual  footing.
During  this  armistice  the  King  of  Spain  was  to  withdraw
all  Spanish  troops  from  the  Netherlands,  in  consequence
of  which  measure  all  distrust  would  by  degrees  vanish,
and  the  community,  becoming  more  and  more  encour-
aged, would  in  time  recognise  the  king  for  their  sove-
reign once  more.™

This,  according  to  the  information  received  by  Eliza-
beth from  her  resident  minister  in  France,  was  Henry's
scheme  for  carrying  out  the  principles  of  the  offensive
and  defensive  league,  which  only  the  year  before  he  had
so  solemnly  concluded  with  the  Dutch  republic.  Instead
of  assisting  that  commonwealth  in  waging  her  war  of
independence  against  Spain,  he  would  endeavour  to
make  it  easy  for  her  to  return  peacefully  to  her  ancient
thraldom."

The  queen  asked  Caron  what  he  thought  of  the  pro-
ject. How  could  that  diplomatist  reply  but  with  polite
scorn  ?  Not  a  year  of  such  an  armistice  would  elapse,  he
said,  before  the  Spanish  partisans  would  have  it  all  their
own  way  in  the  Netherlands,  and  the  King  of  Spain
would  be  master  of  the  whole  country.  Again  and
again  he  repeated  that  peace,  so  long  as  Philip  lived,  was
an  impossibility  for  the  States.  No  doubt  that  monarch
would  gladly  consent  to  the  proposed  truce,  for  it  would
be  indeed strange  if  by  means  of  it  he  could  not  so

w  Caron  to  States-General,  19  Nov.  1597. Dcventer,  ii.  161-164. "i  Ibid.

1597. CONFERENCES  WITH  THE  FRENCH  AMBASSADOR. 439

establisli  himself  in  the  provinces  as  to  easily  overthrow
the  sovereigns  who  were  thus  helping  him  to  so  advan-
tageous a  position.'^

The  queen  listened  patiently  to  a  long  and  earnest  re-
monstrance in  this  vein  made  by  the  envoy,  and  assured
him  that  not  even  to  gain  another  kingdom  would  she
be  the  cause  of  the  return  of  the  provinces  to  the
dominion  of  Spain.  She  would  do  her  best  to  dissuade
the  king  from  his  peace  negotiations;  but  she  would
listen  to  De  Maisse,  the  new  special  envoy  from  Henry,
and  would  then  faithfully  report  to  Caron,  by  word  of
mouth,  the  substance  of  the  conversation.  The  States-
General  did  not  deserve  to  be  deceived,  nor  Avould  she
be  a  party  to  any  deception,  unless  she  were  first
cheated  herself.  "  I  feel  indeed,"  she  added,  "  that
matters  are  not  always  managed  as  they  should  be  by
your  Government,  and  that  you  have  not  always  treated
princes,  especially  myself,  as  we  desei've  to  be  treated.
Nevertheless,  your  State  is  not  a  monarchy,  and  so  we
must  take  all  things  into  considei-ation,  and  weigh  its
faults  against  its  many  perfections.""

With  this  philosophical  —  and  in  the  mouth  of
Elizabeth  Tudor,  surely  very  liberal — reflection,  the
queen  terminated  the  interview  with  the  republican
envoy.

Meantime  the  conferences  with  the  special  ambassador
of  France  proceeded.  For,  so  soon  as  Henry  had  com-
pleted all  his  arrangements,  and  taken  his  decision  to
accept  the  very  profitable  peace  offered  to  him  by  Spain,
he  assumed  that  air  of  frankness  which  so  well  became
him,  and  candidly  avowed  his  intention  of  doing  what  he
had  already  done.  Hurault  de  Maisse  arrived  in  Eng-
land not  long  before  the  time  when  tlie  peace-commis-
sioners were  about  assembling  at  Vervins.  He  was
instructed  to  inform  her  Majesty  that  he  had  done  his
best  to  bring  about  a  general  alliance  of  the  European
powers  from  which  alone  the  league  concluded  between

72  Caron  to States-General, 19  Nov.  wy  wol  in  hun  regart  verdient  hcbben ;

1597. Deventer,  ii.  161-164.  doch  hun  staet  is  oock  geen  monarchie,

T3  "  Ick  bevinde  wel  (seide  sy)  dat  hot  en  daarom  wy  moetpn  alios  considi.Tcren

niet  al  ret-hi  soo  't  behoorde  in  hunne  en  de  faulten  met  vele  perfectien  die  sy

regeeringe  toegaet,  en  dat  sy  niet  altyts  hebben  tegen  tlkander  laeteu gemoeten.'

de  Prinoen  immers  niet  my  tracteren  soo  Caron's  Desputcli,  last  cited.

440  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHI.

England,  France,  and  the  Netherlands  would  have
derived  substantial  strength.'^*

But  as  nothing  was  to  be  hoped  for  from  Germany,  as
England  offered  but  little  assistance,  and  as  France  was
exhausted  by  her  perpetual  conflicts,  it  had  become
necessary  for  the  king  to  negotiate  for  a  peace.  He  now
wished  to  prove,  therefore,  to  the  queen,  as  to  a  sister  to
whom  he  was  under  such  obligations,  that  the  interests
of  England  were  as  dear  to  him  as  those  of  France.

The  proof  of  these  generous  sentiments,  did  not,  how-
ever, seem  so  clear  as  could  be  wished,  and  there  were
very  stormy  debates,  so  soon  as  the  ambassador  found
himself  in  conference  with  her  Majesty's  counsellors.
The  English  statesmen  bitterly  reproached  the  French
for  having  thus  lightly  thrown  away  the  alliance  between
the  two  countries,  and  they  insisted  upon  the  duty  of
the  king  to  fulfil  his  solemn  engagements.

The  reply  was  very  frank  and  very  decided.  Kings,
said  De  Maisse,  never  make  treaties  except  with  the
tacit  condition  to  embrace  every  thing  that  may  be  use-
ful to  them,  and  carefully  to  avoid  ever}^  thing  prejudicial
to  their  interests.'^''

The  corollary  from  this  convenient  and  sweeping
maxim  was  simple  enough.  The  king  could  not  be
expected  by  his  allies  to  reject  an  offered  peace  which
was  very  profitable,  nor  to  continue  a  war  which  was
very  detrimental.  All  that  they  could  expect  was  that
he  should  communicate  his  intentions  to  them,  and  this
he  was  now  very  cheerfully  doing.  Such  in  brief  were
the  statements  of  De  Maisse.™

The  English  were  indignant.  They  also  said  a  stout
word  for  the  provinces,  although  it  has  been  made  suffi-
ciently clear  that  they  did  not  love  that  upstart  republic.
But  the  French  ambassador  replied  that  his  master  really
meant  secretly  to  assist  the  States  in  carrying  on  the  war
until  the}''  should  make  an  arrangement."  He  should
send  them  very  powerful  succours  for  this  purpose,  and
he  expected  confidently  that  England  would  assist  him
in this line of conduct.'^^ Thus  Henry  was  secretly

1*  De  Tbou,  xiii.  206,  seqg.,  1.  120.  puissans  secours  jusqu'a  ce  que  leur  ac-

"5  Ibid. "s  Ibid. 77  Ibid.  commodemente  ftit  fait,  es  qu'il  souhaitoit

■js  "  yu'en faisant la pais avec les  sejoindre  avecVAngleterre  pour  les  aider

Espagnols  il  ne  Lusseroit  pas  de  fournir  et  les soutenir, soit  en paix,  soit  en

necrctement aux Etats  -  Generaux de  guerre." — De  Thou,  uhi  sup.

1597.  DUPLICITY  OF  HENRY'S  CONDUCT.  441

pledging  himself  to  make  iinderhand  but  substantial  war
against  Spain,  with  which  power  he  was  at  that  instant
concluding  peace,  while  at  the  same  time  he  was  aban-
doning his  warlike  league  with  the  qneen  and  the
republic,  in  order  to  efiect  that  very  pacification.  Truly
the  morality  of  the  govei'ning  powers  of  the  earth  was
not  entirely  according  to  the  apostolic  standard.

The  interviews  between  the  queen  and  the  new  ambas-
sador were,  of  course,  on  his  part,  more  courteous  in  tone
than  those  with  the  counsellors,  but  mainly  to  the  same
effect.  De  Maisse  stated  that  the  Spanish  kiug  had
offered  to  restore  every  place  that  he  held  in  France,
including  Calais,  Brittany,  and  the  IMarquisate  of  Saluces,
and  as  he  likewise  manifested  a  willingness  to  come  to
favourable  terms  with  her  Majesty  and  with  the  States,
it  was  obviously  the  duty  of  Henry  to  make  these  matters
known  to  her  Majesty,  in  whose  hands  was  thus  placed
the  decision  between  peace  or  continuation  of  the  war.''^
The  queen  asked  what  was  the  authority  for  the  suppo-
sition that  England  was  to  be  included  by  Spain  in  the
pacification.  De  Maisse  quoted  President  Eichardot.
In  that  case,  the  queen  remarked,  it  was  time  for  her  to
prepare  for  a  third  Spanish  armada.  When  a  former
envoy  from  France  had  alluded  to  Eichardot  as  ex-
pressing the  same  friendly  sentiments  on  the  part  of
bis  sovereign  and  himself,  she  had  replied  by  referring
to  the  sham  negotiations  of  Bourbourg,  by  which  the
famous  invasion  of  1588  had  been  veiled,  and  she  had
intimated  her  expectation  that  another  Spanish  fleet
would  soon  be  at  her  throat.  And  within  three  weeks
of  the  utterance  of  her  prophecy  the  second  armada,
under  Santa  Gadea,  had  issued  from  Spain  to  assail  her
realms.  Now  then,  as  Eichardot  was  again  cited  as  a
peace  negotiator,  it  was  time  to  look  for  a  third  invasion.
It  was  an  impertinence  for  Secretary  of  State  Villeroy
to  send  her  word  about  Eichardot.  It  was  not  an  imper-
tinence in  King  Henry,  who  understood  war-matters
better  than  he  did  afl'airs  of  state,  in  which  kings  were
generally  governed  by  their  counsellors  and  secretaries,
but  it  was  very  strange  that  Villeroy  should  be  made
quiet  with  a  simple  declaration  of  Eichardot.*"

5*  Carontothe  States-General,  loDecomber,  1597  (O.S.),  in  Deventer,  ii.  165-168.
i'>  Ibia.

442  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXUI.

The  gueen  protested  that  she  would  never  consent  tc
a  peace  with  Spain,  except  with  the  knowledge  and
consent  of  the  States.  De  Maisse  replied  that  the  king
was  of  the  same  mind,  upon  which  her  Majesty  remarked
that  in  that  case  he  had  better  have  apprised  her  and
the  States  of  his  intentions  before  treating  alone
aud  secretly  with  the  enemy.  The  envoy  denied  that
the  king  had  been  treating.  He  had  only  been  listening
to  what  the  King  of  Spain  had  to  propose,  and  suggest-
ing his  own  wishes  and  intentions.  The  queen  rejoined
that  this  was  treating  if  anything  was,  and  certainly  her
Majesty  was  in  the  right  if  the  term  has  any  meaning
at  all.

Elizabeth  further  reproachfully  observed,  that  although
the  king  talked  about  continuing  the  war,  he  seemed
really  tired  of  that  dangerous  pursuit,  in  which  he  had
exercised  himself  so  many  long  years,  and  that  he  was
probably  beginning  to  find  a  quiet  and  agreeable  life
more  to  his  taste.  She  expressed  the  hope,  however,  that
he  would  acquit  himself  honourably  towards  herself  and
her  allies,  and  keep  the  oaths  which  he  had  so  solemnly
sworn  before  God.

Such  was  the  substance  of  the  queen's  convei-sations
with  De  Maisse,  as  she  herself  subsequently  reported
them  to  the  States'  envoy.**'

The  republican  statesmen  had  certainly  cause  enough
to  suspect  Henry's  intentions,  but  they  did  not  impli-
citly trust  Elizabeth.  They  feared  that  both  king  and
queen  were  heartily  sick  of  the  war,  and  disposed  to
abandon  the  league,  while  each  was  bent  on  securing
better  terms  than  the  other  in  any  negotiations  for
peace.  Barneveld — on  the  whole  the  most  sagacious  of
the  men  then  guiding  the  afltairs  of  Europe,  although  he
could  dispose  of  but  comparatively  slender  resources,  and
was  merely  the  chief  minister  of  a  scarcely  bom  little
commonwealth  of  some  three  million  souls — was  doing
his  best  to  save  the  league  and  to  divert  Henry  from
thoughts  of  peace.  Feeling  that  the  queen,  notwith-
standing her  professions  to  Caron  and  others,  would
have  gladly  entered  into  negotiations  with  Philip,  had
she  found  the  door  as  wide  open  as  Henry  had  found  it,
he  did  his  best  to  prevent  both  his  allies  from  proceed-

81  Carou's  despatch,  last  cital.

1597.  EXERTIONS  OF  BARNEVELD.  4-13

ing  farther  in  that  direction.  He  promised  the  French
envoy  at  the  Hague  that  not  only  would  the  republic  con-
tinue "to  finnish  the  four  thousand  soldiers  as  stipulated
in  the  league,  but  that  if  Henry  would  recommence
active  operations,  a  States'  army  of  nine  thousand  foot
and  two  thousand  horse  should  at  once  take  the  field  on
the  Flemish  frontier  of  France,  and  aid  in  the  campaign
to  the  full  extent  of  their  resoui-ces.*^  If  the  king  were
disposed  to  undertake  the  siege  of  Calais,  the  Advocate
engaged  that  he  should  be  likewise  energetically  assisted
in  that  enterprise.*'^  Nor  was  it  suggested  in  case  the
important  maritime  stronghold  were  recovered  that  it
t-hould  be  transferred,  not  to  the  sovereign  of  Fiance,  but
to  the  dominions  of  the  republic.  That  was  the  queen's
method  of  assisting  an  ally,  but  it  was  not  the  practice
of  the  States.  Bvizanval,  who  was  quite  aware  of  his
master's  decision  to  conclude  peace,  suggested  Henry's
notion  of  a  preliminary  and  general  truce  for  six  months.
But  of  course  Barneveld  rejected  the  idea  with  horror.
He  felt,  as  every  intelligent  statesman  of  the  common-
wealth could  not  but  feel,  that  an  armistice  would  be  a
death-blow.  It  would  be  better,  he  said,  for  the  States
to  lose  one  or  two  towns  than  to  make  a  truce,  for  there
were  so  many  people  in  the  commonwealth  sure  to  be
dazzled  by  the  false  show  of  a  pacification,  that  they
would  be  likely,  after  getting  iuto  the  suburbs,  to  wish
to  enter  the  heart  of  the  city.  "  If,"  said  the  Advocate,
"the  French  and  the  English  know  what  they  are  doing
when  they  are  facilitating  the  Spanish  dominion  in  the
provinces,  they  would  prefer  to  lose  a  third  of  their
own  kingdoms  to  seeing  the  Spaniard  absolute  master
here."^

It  was  determined,  in  this  grave  position  of  affairs,  to
send  a  special  mission  both  to  France  and  to  England
with  the  Advocate  as  its  chief.  Henry  made  no  objec-
tions to  this  step,  but,  on  the  contrary,  afi'ected  much
impatience  for  the  arrival  of  the  envoys,  and  ascribed
the  delay  to  the  intrigues  of  Elizabeth.  He  sent  word
to  Prince  Maurice  and  to  Barneveld  that  he  suspected
the  queen  of  endeavouring  to  get  before  him  in  nego-
tiating with  Spain  in  order  to  obtain  Calais  for  herself.^

S2  Letters  of  Buzanval,  cited  by  Deventer,  ii.  164,  1 65.  83  ii,jd.  84  ibid.

85  Verhaal  van  Olden-Barueveld,  in  Deventer,  ii.  171.

444  THE  .UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXHI.

And,  in  truth,  Elizabeth  very  soon  afterwards  informed
Barneveld  that  she  might  really  have  had  Calais,  and
have  got  the  better  of  the  king  in  these  secret  transac-
tions. *''

Meantime,  while  the  special  mission  to  France  and

England was getting ready to depart, an

amateur  diplomatist  appeared  in  Brussels,  and

made  a  feeble  effort  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between

the  republic  and  the  cardinal.

This  was  a  certain  Van  der  Meulen,  an  Antwerp
merchant,  who,  for  religious  reasons,  had  emigrated  to
Leyden,  and  who  was  now  invited  by  the  cardinal-arch-
duke to  Brussels  to  confer  with  his  counsellors  as  to  the
possibility  of  the  rebellious  States  accepting  his  autho-
rity.*^ For,  as  will  soon  be  indicated,  Philip  had
recently  resolved  on  a  most  important  step.  He  was
about  to  transfer  the  sovereignty  of  all  the  Netherlands
to  his  daughter  Isabella  and  her  destined  husband,  Car-
dinal Albert.  It  would  obviously,  therefore,  be  an
excessively  advantageous  arrangement  for  those  new
sovereigns  if  the  rebellious  States  would  join  hands  with
the  obedient  provinces,  accept  the  dominion  of  Albert
and  Isabella,  and  give  up  their  attempt  to  establish  a
republican  government.  Accordingly  the  cardinal  had
intimated  that  the  States  would  be  allowed  the  practice
of  their  religion,  while  the  military  and  civil  function-
aries might  retain  office.  He  even  suggested  that  he
would  appoint  Maurice  of  Nassau  his  stadholder  for  the
northern  provinces,  unless  he  should  prefer  a  high  posi-
tion in  the  Imperial  armies.**  Such  was  the  general
admiration  felt  in  Spain  and  elsewhere  for  the  military
talents  of  the  prince,  that  he  would  probably  be  ap-
pointed commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  against  Ma-
homet.*^ Van  der  Meulen  duly  reported  all  these
ingenious  schemes  to  the  States,  but  the  sturdy  repub-
licans only  laughed  at  them.  The}^  saw  clearly  enough
through  such  slight  attempts  to  sow  discord  in  their
commonwealth,  and  to  send  their  great  chieftain  to
Turkey.

A  m(jst  affectionate  letter,  written  by  the  cardinal-
archduke  to  the  States-General,  inviting  them  to  accept

86  Verli;ial  van  Olilen-Bameveld,  in  Deventer,  ii.  171.  S7  Bor,  IV.  468.

ss  Ibid.  S9  Ibid.

1598.  ATTEMPT  AT  RECONCILIATION.  445

his  sovereignty,  and  another  from  the  o'bedient  pro-
vinces to  the  united  States  of  the  same  purport,  remained
unanswered.^''

But  the  Antwerp  merchant,  in  his  interviews  with  the
crafty  politicians  who  surrounded  the  cardinal,  was  able
at  least  to  obtain  some  insight  into  the  opinions  pre-
valent at  Brussels ;  and  these  were  undoubtedly  to  the
effect  that  both  England  and  France  were  willing  enough
to  abandon  the  cause  of  the  Netherlands,  provided  only
that  they  could  obtain  satisfactory  arrangements  for
themselves.

Van  der  Meulen  remarked  to  Eichardot  that  in  all
their  talk  about  a  general  peace  nothing  had  been  said
of  the  Queen  of  England,  to  whom  the  States  were  under
so  great  obligations,  and  without  whom  they  would  never
enter  into  any  negotiations.

Eichardot  replied  that  the  queen  had  very  sagaciously
provided  for  the  safety  of  her  own  kingdom,  and  had
kept  up  the  fire  everywhei'e  else  in  order  to  shelter  her-
self. There  was  moi-e  difficulty  for  this  lady,  he  said,
than  for  any  of  the  rest.  She  had  shown  herself  very
obstinate,  and  had  done  them  a  great  deal  of  mischief.
They  knew  very  well  that  the  King  of  France  did  not
love  her.  Nevertheless,  as  they  had  resolved  upon  a
general  peace,  they  were  willing  to  treat  with  her  as  well
as  with  the  others.^'

90  Bor.  IV.  408.  '1  Verhaiil  van  Van  der  Meulen,  cited  by  Deventer,  ii.  173.

446  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Mission  of  the  States  to  Henry  to  prevent  the  consummation  of  peace  with  Spain  —
Proposal  of  Henry  to  elevate  Prince  Maurice  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  States  —
Embarkation  of  the  States'  envoys  for  England  —  Their  interview  with  Queen
ICUzabeth  —  Return  of  the  envoys  from  England  —  Demand  of  Elizabeth  for  repay-
ment of  her  advances  to  the  republic  —  Second  embassy  to  England  —  Final
arrangement  between  the  Queen  and  the  States.

The  great  Advocate  was  now  to  start  on  his  journey  in
order  to  make  a  supreme  effort  both  M'ith  Henry  and
with  Elizabeth  to  prevent  the  consummation  of  this  fatal
peace.  Admiral  Justiuus  of  Nassau,  natural  son  of
William  the  Silent,  was  associated  with  Barneveld  in
the  mission,  a  brave  fighting  man,  a  staunch  patriot,  and
a  sagacious  counsellor ;  but  the  Advocate  on  this  occasion,
as  in  other  vital  emergencies  of  the  commonwealth,  was
all  in  all.

The  instructions  of  the  envoys  were  simple.  They
were  to  summon  the  king  to  fulfil  his  solemnly  sworn
covenants  with  the  league.  The  States-General  had
never  doubted,  they  said,  that  so  soon  as  the  enemy  had
begun  to  feel  the  effects  of  that  league  he  would  endea-
vour to  make  a  composition  with  one  or  other  of  the
parties  in  order  to  separate  them,  and  to  break  up  that
united  strength  which  otherwise  he  could  never  resist.
The  king  was  accordingly  called  upon  to  continue  the
war  against  the  common  enemy,  and  the  States-General
offered,  over  and  above  the  four  hundred  and  fift}'
thousand  florins  promised  by  them  for  the  support  of  the
four  thousand  infantry  for  the  year  1598,  to  bring  their
whole  military  power,  horse  and  fcjot,  into  the  field  td
sustain  his  Majesty  in  the  war,  w^hether  separately  or  in
conjuncticm,  whether  in  the  siege  of  cities  or  in  open
campaigns.'  Certainly  they  could  hardly  offer  fairer
terms  than  these.

Henry  had  complained,  and  not  unreasonably,  that
Elizabeth  had  made  no  offers  of  assistance  for  cairying

1  Instructions,  itc,  in  Dcventer,  ii.  177-181.

1.598.  MISSION  OF  THE  STATES  TO  HENRY.  447

on  the  war  either  to  Fonquerolles  or  to  Hurault  de  Maisse ;
but  he  certainly  could  make  no  reproach  of  that  nature
against  the  republic,  nor  assign  their  lukewarmness  as  an
excuse  for  his  desertion.

The  envoys  were  ready  to  take  their  departure  for
France  on  the  last  day  of  J  anuary.

It  might  be  a  curious  subject  to  consider  how  far  his-
torical events  are  modified  and  the  world's  destiny
affected  by  the  different  material  agencies  which  man  at
various  epochs  has  had  at  his  disposal.  The  human
creature  in  his  passions  and  ambitions,  his  sensual  or
sordid  desires,  his  emotional  and  moral  nature,  under-
goes less  change  than  might  be  hoped  from  age  to  age.
The  tyrant,  the  patriot,  the  demagogue,  the  voluptuary,
the  peasant,  the  trader,  the  intriguing  politician,  the
hair-splitting  diplomatist,  the  self-sacrificing  martyr,  the
self-seeking  courtier,  present  essentially  one  type  in  the
twelfth,  the  sixteenth,  the  nineteenth,  or  any  other  cen-
tury. The  human  tragi-comedy  seems  ever  to  repeat
itself  wdth  the  same  bustle,  with  the  same  excitement  for
immediate  interests,  for  the  development  of  the  instant
l^lot  or  passing  episode,  as  if  the  universe  began  and
ended  with  each  generation — as  in  reality  it  would  appear
to  do  for  the  great  multitude  of  the  actors.  There  seems
but  a  change  of  masks,  of  costume,  of  phraseology,  com-
bined with  a  noisy  but  eternal  monotony.  Yet  while
men  are  produced  and  are  whirled  away  again  in
endless  succession,  Man  remains,  and  to  all  appear-
ance is  perpetual  and  immortal  even  on  this  earth.
Whatever  science  acquires,  man  inherits.  Whatever
steadfastness  is  gained  for  great  moral  truths  which
change  not  through  the  ages — however  they  may  be
thought,  in  dark  or  falsely  brilliant  epochs,  to  resolve
themselves  into  elemental  vapour — gives  man  a  securer
foothold  in  his  onward  and  upward  progress.  The
great,  continuous  history  of  that  progress  is  not  made
up  of  the  reigns  of  kings  or  the  lives  of  politicians,  with
whose  names  history  has  often  found  it  convenient  to
mark  its  epochs.  These  are  but  milestones  on  the  turn-
pike. Human  progress  is  over  a  vast  field,  and  it  is
only  at  considerable  intervals  that  a  i-etrospective  view
enables  us  to  discern  whether  the  movement  has  been
kIow  or  rapid,  onward  or  retrogiade.

448  THE  UKITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV

The  record  of  our  race  is  essentially  unwritten.  What
we  call  history  is  but  made  up  of  a  few  scattered  frag-
ments, while  it  is  scarcely  given  to  human  intelligence
to  comprehend  the  great  whole.  Yet  it  is  strange  to
reflect  upon  the  leisurely  manner  in  which  great  affairs
were  conducted  in  the  period  with  which  we  are  now
occupied,  as  compared  with  the  fever  and  whirl  of  our
own  times,  in  which  the  stupendous  powers  of  steam  and
electricity  are  ever  ready  to  serve  the  most  sublime  or
the  most  vulgar  purposes  of  mankind.  W  hether  there
were  ever  a  critical  moment  in  which  a  rapid  change
might  have  been  effected  in  royal  or  national  councils,
had  telegraphic  wires  and  express  trains  been  at  the
command  of  Henry,  or  Burghley,  or  Barneveld,  or  the
Cardinal  Albert,  need  not  and  cannot  be  decided.  It  is
almost  diverting,  however,  to  see  how  closely  the  in-
trigues of  cabinets,  the  movements  of  armies,  the  plans
of  patriots,  were  once  dependent  on  those  natural  ele-
ments over  which  man  has  now  gained  almost  despotic
control.

Here  was  the  republic  intensely  eager  to  prevent,
with  all  speed,  the  consummation  of  a  treaty  between  its
ally  and  its  enemy — a  step  which  it  was  feared  might  be
fatal  to  its  national  existence,  and  concerning  which
there  seemed  a  momentary  hesitation.  Yet  Barneveld
and  Justinus  of  Nassau,  althougli  ready  on  the  last  day
of  January,  were  not  able  to  sail  from  the  Brill  to  Dieppe
until  the  18th  March,  on  account  of  a  persistent  south-
west wind.

After  forty-six  days  of  waiting,  the  envoys,  accom-
18  March,  panied  by  Buzanval,  Henry's  resident  at  the
159S.  Hague,  were  at  last,  on  the  18th  March,  enabled
to  set  sail  with  a  favourable  breeze.  As  it  was  neces-
sary for  travellers  in  that  day  to  provide  themselves
with  every  possible  material  for  their  journey — carriages,
horses,  hosts  of  servants,  and  beds,  fortunate  enough  if
they  found  roads  and  occasionally  food — Barneveld  and
Nassau  were  furnished  with  three  ships  of  war,  while
another  legation  on  its  way  to  England  had  embarked  in
two  other  vessels  of  the  same  class.  A  fleet  of  forty  or
fifty  merchantmen  sailed  under  their  convoy.  Depart-
ing from  the  Brill  in  this  imposing  manner,  they  sailed
by  Calais,  varying  the  monotony  of  the  voyage  by  a

1593.  DELAYS  OF  THE  VOYAGE.  4-19

trifling  sea-figlit  with  some  criu.sers  fiom  that Sjianish
l)ort,  neither  t^ide  receiving  any  damage.^

Landing  at  Dieppe  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  the
envoys  were  received  with  much  ceremony  at  the  city
gates  by  the  governor  of  the  place,  who  conducted  them
in  a  stately  manner  to  a  house  called  the  king's  mansion,
which  he  politely  placed  at  their  disposal.  "  As  we
learned,  however,"  says  Barneveld,  with  grave  simplicity,
"  that  there  was  no  fuiniture  whatever  in  that  royal
abode,  we  thanked  his  Excellency,  and  declared  that  wo
would  I'ather  go  to  a  tavern."

After  three  days  of  repose  and  preparation  in  Dieppe
they  started  'at  dawn  on  their  journey  to  Eouen, 23  March,
where  they  arrived  at  sundown.  i^s*-

On  the  next  morning  but  one  they  set  off  again  on
their  travels,  and  slept  tliat  night  at  Louviers.  ^5  March
Another  long  day's  journey  brought  them  to
Evreux.  On  the  27th  they  came  to  Dreux,  on  the  28th
to  Chartres,  and  on  the  29th  to  Chateaudun.  On  the
30th,  having  started  an  hour  before  sunrise,  they  were
enabled  after  a  toilsome  journey  to  reach  Blois  at  an
hour  after  dark.  Exhausted  with  fatigue,  they  reposed
in  that  city  for  a  day,  and  on  the  1st  April  proceeded,
partly  by  the  liver  Loire  and  partly  by  the  i-oad,  as  far
as  Tours.  Here  they  were  visited  by  nobod}^,  said  Barne-
veld, but  fiddlers  and  drummers,  and  were  execrably
lodged.  Nevertheless  they  thought  the  town  in  other
respects  agieeable,  and  apparently  beginning  to  struggle
out  of  the  general  desolation  of  France.  On  the  2nd
April  the}^  slept  at  Langeais,  and  on  the  night  of
the  3rd  reached  Saumur,  where  they  were  disappointed
at  the  absence  of  the  illustrious  Duplessis  Mornay,
then  governor  of  that  city.  A  glance  at  any  map  of
Erance  will  show  the  course  of  the  journey  taken
by  the  travellers,  which, after very hard  work and

'  The  journey  and  the  whole  progress  jaero 1598 (Minuut  van Olden-Barne-

of  the  negotiations  have  been  minutely  velt)."

described by Olden-Barneveld, in his  Of  this  very  important  MS.,  long  un-

Report to  the States-General,  made  5  published,  1  possess  a  copy,  Uikvn  from

June,  1598.  the  original  in  tlie  royal  Archives  of  the

"  Verhaal  van  ons  Justinus  ende  Johan  Hague. Subsequently,  however,  it  lias

van  Olden-Barnevelt  van  het besoigne  been  printed,  for  the  first  time,  ]  believe,

gevallen  in  onse I^egatie  aan  de  Con.  by Deventer,  in  l-is  valuable  collection,

Mat,  van Vranckrycli gedaea in  den  No.  cxvi.  vol.  ii.  pp.  176-245.

VOL.  III.  2 G

450  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. CifAP.  XXXIV.

great  fatigue,  had  thus  broiight  them  from  Dieppe  to
Saumur  in  about  as  much  tiuie  as  is  now  coussuuied  by
an  aveiage  voyage  from  Europe  to  America.  In  their
whole  journej^  from  Holland  to  Saumur,  inclusive  of  the
waiting  upon  the  wind  and  other  enforced  delays,  more
than  two  months  had  been  consumed.  Twenty-four
hours  would  suffice  at  present  for  the  excursion.

At  Saumur  they  received  letters  informing  them  that
the  king  was  "  expecting  them  with  great  devotion  at
Anglers."  A  despatch  from  Cecil,  who  was  already
with  Henry,  also  apprised  them  that  he  found  "  matter's
entirely  arranged  for  a  peace."  This  would  be  very
easily  accomplished,  he  said,  for  France  and  England,
but  the  great  difficulty  was  for  the  Netherlands.  He
had  come  to  France  principally  for  the  sake  of  managing
affairs  for  the  advantage  of  the  States,  but  he  begged  the
envoys  not  to  demean  themselves  as  if  entirely  bent  on
war.^

They  arrived  at  Anglers  next  day  before  dark,  and
. ., wei'e  met  at  a  league's  distance  from  the  gates

4  A.pril  ^^

by  the  governor  of  the  castle,  attended  by
young  Prince  Frederic  Henry  of  Nassau,  followed  by  a
Lmg  train  of  nobles  and  mounted  troops.  Welcomed  in
this  stately  manner  on  behalf  of  the  king,  the  envoys
were  escorted  to  the  lodgings  provided  for  them  in  the
city.  The  same  evening  they  waited  on  the  widowed
princess  of  Orange,  Louisa  of  Coligny,  then  residing
temporarily  with  her  son  in  Anglers,  and  were  informed
by  her  that  the  king's  mind  was  irrevocably  fixed  on
peace.  She  communicated,  however,  the  advice  of  her
step-son  in  law,  the  Duke  of  Bouillon,  that  they  should
openly  expiess  their  determination  to  continue  the  war,
notwithstanding  that  both  their  Majesties  of  England
and  France  wished  to  negotiate.  Thus  the  counsels  of
Bouillon  to  the  envoys  were  distinctly  opposed  to  those
of  Cecil,  and  it  was  well  known  to  them  that  the  duke
was  himself  sincerely  anxious  that  the  king  should
refuse  the  pacific  offers  of  Spain.

Next  morning,  5th  April,  they  were  received  at  the
gates  of  the  castle  by  the  governor  of  Anjou  and  the  com-
mandant of  the  citadel  of  Anglers,  attended  by  a  splen-
did retinue,  and  were  coiiducted  to  the  king,  who  was

3  VovlMal,  Ic.

1598.  RECEPTION  BY  HENRY  OF  THE  ENVOYS.  451

walking  in  the  garden  of  the  fortress.  Henry  received
them  with  great  demonstrations  of  respect,  assuring
them  that  he  considered  the  States-General  the  best  and
most  faithful  friends  that  he  possessed  in  the  world,
and  that  he  had  always  been  assisted  by  them  in  time  of
his  utmost  need  with  resoluteness  and  afit'ection.

The  approach  of  the  English  ambassador,  accompanied
by  the  Chancellor  of  F]  ance  and  several  other  persons,
soon  brought  the  interview  to  a  termination.  Barneveld
then  presented  several  gentlemen  attached  to  the  mis-
sion, especially  his  son  and  Hugo  Grotius,  then  a  lad  of
fifteen,  but  who  had  already  gained  such  distinction  at
Leyden  that  Scaliger,  Pontanus,  Heinsius,  Dousa,  and
other  professors,  foretold  that  he  would  become  more
famous  than  Erasmus.  They  were  all  very  cordially
received  by  the  king,  who  subsequently  bestowed
especial  marks  of  his  consideration  upon  the  youthful
Grotius.

The  same  day  the  betrothal  of  Monsieur  Caesar  with
the  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Mercoeur  was  celebrated,
and  there  was  afterwaids  much  dancing  and  banqueting
at  the  castle.  It  was  obvious  enough  to  the  envoys  that
the  matter  of  peace  and  war  was  decided.  The  general
of  the  Franciscans,  sent  by  the  pope,  had  been  flitting
very  busily  for  many  months  between  Eome,  Madrid,
Brussels,  and  Paris,  and  there  could  be  little  doubt  that
every  detail  of  the  negotiations  between  France  and
Spain  had  been  arranged  while  Olden-Barneveld  and  his
colleague  had  been  waiting  for  the  head-wind  to  blow
itself  out  at  the  Brill.

Nevertheless  no  treaty  had  as  yet  been  signed,  and  it
was  the  business  of  the  republican  diplomatists
to  prevent  the  signature  if  possible.  They  felt,
however,  that  they  were  endeavouring  to  cause  water
to  I'un  up  hill.  Villeroy,  De  Maisse,  and  Buzanval
came  to  them  to  recount,  by  the  king's  oider,  everything
that  had  taken  place.  This  favour  was,  however,  the
less  highly  appreciated  by  them,  as  they  felt  that  the
whole  world  was  in  a  very  short  time  to  be  taken  as
well  into  the  royal  confidence.

These  French  politicians  stated  that  the  king,  after
receiving  the  most  liberal  otters  of  peace  on  the  part  of
Spain,  had  communicated  all  the  fticts  to  the  queen,  and

2  G  2

452  THE  UNITED  NETHERLAJvDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

had  proposed,  notwitli.standing  these  most  profitable
overtures,  to  continue  the  war  as  long  as  her  Majesty
and  the  States-General  would  assist  him  in  it.  De
Maisse  had  been  informed,  however,  by  the  queen  that
she  had  no  means  to  assist  the  king  withal,  and  was,  on
the  contrary,  very  well  disposed  to  make  peace.*  The
lord  treasurer  had  avowed  the  same  opinions  as  his
sovereign,  had  declared  himself  to  be  a  man  of  peace,
and  had  exclaimed  that  peace  once  made  he  would  sing
"  Nunc  dimitte  servum  tuum  Domine."^  Thereupon,
at  the  suggestion  of  the  legate,  negotiations  had  begun
at  Vervins,  and  although  nothing  was  absolutely  con-
cluded, yet  Sir  Eobert  Cecil,  having  just  been  sent  as
special  ambassador  from  the  queen,  had  brought  no
propositions  whatever  of  assistance  in  carrying  on  the
war,  but  plenty  of  excuses  about  armadas,  Irish  rebel-
lions, and  the  want  of  funds.  There  was  nothing  in  all
this,  they  said,  but  want  of  good  will.  The  queen  had
done  nothing  and  would  do  nothing  for  the  league
herself,  nor  would  she  solicit  for  it  the  adherence  of
other  kings  and  princes.  The  king,  by  making  peace,
could  restore  his  kingdom  to  prosperity,  relieve  the
distress  of  his  subjects,  and  get  back  all  his  lost  cities —
Calais,  Ardres,  Dourlens,  Blavet,  and  many  more — with-
out any  expense  of  treasure  or  of  blood.

(.^ertainly  there  was  cogency  in  this  reasoning  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  French  king,  but  it  would  have
been  as  well  to  state,  when  he  was  so  pompously  making
a  league  for  ofi'ensive  and  defensive  war,  that  his  real
interests  and  his  real  purposes  were  peace.  Much
excellent  diplomacy,  much  ringing  of  bells,  firing  of
artillery,  and  singing  of  anthems  in  royal  chapels,  and
much  disappointment  to  honest  Dutchmen,  might  have
thus  been  saved.  It  is  also  instructive  to  observe  the
difference  between  the  accounts  of  De  Maisse's  nego-
tiations in  England  given  by  that  diplomatist  himself,
and  those  rendered  by  the  queen  to  the  States'  envoy.

Of  course  the  objurgations  of  the  Hollanders  that  the
king,  in  a  very  fallacious  hope  of  temporary  gain  to
himself,  was  about  to  break  his  solemn  promises  to  his
allies  and  leave  them  to  their  fate,  drew  but  few  teais

*  Verh.-i.lL  &c.,  190.  5  Ibid.

1598.  BARREN  RESULT  OF  THE  MISSION.  45:)

down  the  iron  cheeks  of  such  practised  diplomatists  as
Villeroy  and  his  friends.

The  envoys  visited  De  Eosny,  who  assured  them  that
he  was  very  much  their  friend,  but  gave  them  to  under-
stand that  there  was  not  the  slightest  possibility  of
inducing  the  king  to  break  otf  the  negotiations.

Before  taking  final  leave  of  his  Majesty  they  con-
cluded, by  advice  of  the  Princess  of  Orange  and  of
Buzanval,  to  make  the  presents  which  they  had  brought
with  them  from  the  States-General.  Accordingly  they
sent,  through  the  hands  of  the  princess,  four  pieces  of
damask  linen  and  two  pieces  of  fine  linen  to  the  king's
sister,  Madame  Catherine,  two  pieces  of  linen  to  Villeroy,
and  two  to  the  beautiful  Gabrielle.  The  two  remaining
pieces  were  bestowed  upon  Buzanval  for  his  pains  in
accompanying  tliem  on  the  journey  and  on  their  arrival
at  court.^

The  incident  shows  the  high  esteem  in  which  the
Netherland  fabrics  were  held  at  that  period.

There  was  a  solemn  conference  at  last  between  the
leading  counsellors  of  the  king,  the  chancellor,  the
Dukes  of  Espernon  and  Bouillon,  Count  Schomberg,  and
De  Sancy,  Plessis,  Buzanval,  Maisse,  the  Dutch  envoys,
and  the  English  ambassador  and  commissioner  Herbert.
Cecil  presided,  and  Barneveld  once  more  went  over  the
whole  ground,  I'esuming  with  his  usual  vigour  all  the
arguments  by  which  the  king's  interest  and  honour
were  proved  to  require  him  to  desist  from  the  peace
negotiations.  And  the  orator  had  as  much  success  as
is  usual  with  those  who  argue  against  a  foregone  con-
clusion. Everyone  had  made  up  his  mind.  Everyone
knew  that  peace  was  made.  It  is  unnecessary,  there-
fore, to  repeat  the  familiar  train  of  reasoning.  It  is
superfluous  to  say  that  the  conference  was  barren.  On
the  same  evening  Villeroy  called  on  the  States'  envoys,
and  informed  them  plainly,  on  the  part  of  the  king,
that  his  Majesty  had  fully  made  uj)  his  mind.

On  the  23rd  April — thiee  mortal  weeks  having  thus
been  wasted  in  diplomatic  trifling — Barneveld  was  ad-
mitted to  his  Majesty's  dressing-room.  The  advocate  at
the  king's  request  came  Avithout  his  colleague,  and  was
attended  only  by  his  son. Xo  other  persons  were  pre-

«  Verhaal,  &c.,  201.

454  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. CiiAr.  XXXIV.

gent  in  the  chamber,  save  Buzanval  and  Beringen.  The
king  on  this  occasion  confi]-med  what  had  so  recently
been  stated  by  Villeroy.  He  had  thoroughly  pondered,
he  said,  all  the  arguments  used  by  the  States  to  dissuade
him  from  the  negotiation,  and  had  found  them  of  much
weight.  The  necessities  of  his  kingdom,  however,  com-
pelled him  to  accept  a  period  of  repose.  He  would  not,
however,  in  the  slightest  degree  urge  the  States  to  join
in  the  treaty.  He  desired  their  security,  and  would  aid
in  maintaining  it.  What  had  most  vexed  him  was  that
the  Protestants  with  great  injustice  accused  him  of
intending  to  make  war  upon  them.  But  innumerable
and  amazing  reports  were  flying  abroad,  both  among
his  own  subjects,  the  English,  and  the  enemies'  spies,
as  to  these  secret  conferences.  He  then  said,  that  he
would  tell  the  Duke  of  Bouillon  to  speak  with  Sir
Kobert  Cecil  concerning  a  subject  which  now  for  the
first  time  he  would  mention  privately  to  Olden-Barne-
veld.

'J'he  king  then  made  a  remarkable  and  unexpected
suggestion.  Alluding  to  the  constitution  of  the  Nether-
lands, he  remarked  that  a  popular  government  in  such
emergencies  as  those  then  existing  was  subject  to  more
danger  than  monarchies  were,  and  he  asked  the  Advo-
cate if  he  thought  there  was  no  disposition  to  elect  a
prince.^

Barneveld  replied  that  the  general  inclination  was
rather  for  a  good  republic;.  The  government,  however,
he  said,  was  not  of  the  people,  but  aristocratic,  and  the
state  was  administered  according  to  laws  and  charters
by  the  principal  inhabitants,  whether  nobles  or  magis-
trates of  cities.  Since  the  death  of  the  late  Prince  of
Orange,  and  the  offer  made  to  the  King  of  France,  and
subsequently  to  the  Queen  of  England,  of  the  sove-
reignty, there  had  been  no  moi'e  talk  on  that  subject,
and  to  discuss  again  so  delicate  a  matter  might  cause
divisions  and  other  difficulties  in  the  State. ^

Henry  then  spoke  of  Prince  Maiirice,  and  asked
Avhether,  if  he  should  be  supported  by  the  Queen  of
England  and  the  King  of  Prance,  it  would  not  be  pos-
sible to  confer  the  sovereignty  upon  him.

7  Verhaal,  &c.,  218,  and  Toespraak  van  Olden-Barnevelt  tot  Elizabetb. Deventei,
ii.  246.  >*  Toespraak,  &c. Deventer,  ii.  2-ili.

1598.  FRUITLESS  CONFERENCES.  455

Here  certainly  was  an  astounding  question  to  he  dis-
charged like  a  pistol-shot  full  in  the  face  of  a  repiihlican
minister.

The  answer  of  the  Advocate  was  sufficiently  adroit
if  not  excessively  sincere.

If  your  Majesty,  said  he,  together  with  her  Majesty
the  queen,  think  the  plan  expedient,  and  are  both
willing  on  this  footing  to  continue  the  war,  to  rescue
all  the  Netherlands  fioni  the  hands  of  the  Spaniaixls
and  their  adherents,  and  thus  render  the  States  eternally
obliged  to  the  sovereigns  and  kingdoms  of  Fiance  and
England,  my  lords  the  States-General  would  probably
be  willing  to  accept  this  advice.^

But  the  king  replied  by  repeating  that  repose  was
indispensable  to  him.^"

Without  inquiring  for  the  present  whether  the  pro-
ject of  elevating  Maurice  to  the  sovereignty  of  the
Netherlands,  at  the  expense  of  the  republican  constitu-
tion, was  in  harmony  or  not  with  the  private  opinions
of  Barneveld  at  that  period,  it  must  be  admitted  that
the  condition  he  thus  suggested  was  a  very  safe  one
to  offer.  He  had  thoroughly  satisfied  himself  during
the  period  in  which  he  had  been  bafHcd  by  the  south-
west gales  at  the  Brill  and  by  the  still  luoie  persistent
headwinds  which  he  had  found  prevailing  at  the  French
court,  that  it  was  hopeless  to  strive  for  that  much-
desired  haven,  a  general  war.  The  admiral  and  himself
might  as  well  have  endeavoured  to  persuade  Mahomet
III.  and  Sigismund  of  Poland  to  join  the  States  in  a
campaign  against  Cardinal  Albert,  as  to  hope  for  the
same  good  offices  from  Elizabeth  and  Henry.

Having  received  exactly  the  answer  which  he  ex-
pected, he  secretly  communicated,  next  day,  to  Cecil
the  proposition  thus  made  by  the  king.  Subsequently
he  narrated  the  whole  conversation  to  the  Queen  of
England.

On  the  27th  April  both  Barneveld  and  Nassau  were
admitted  to  the  royal  diessing-room  in  Nantes 27  April
citadel  for  a  final audience. Plere,  after  the
usual  common-places  concerning his affection  for  the
Netherlands,  and  the  bitter  necessity  which  compelled
him  to  desert  the  alliance,  Henry  again  referred  to  his

»  Toefpraak,  &c. Deventer.  ii.  246.  '"  ibid.

456  THE  UXITP:D  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

suggestion  iu  regard  to  Prince  Maurice  ;  urging  a  change
from  a  republican  to  a  inonarchical  form  of  government
as  the  best  means  of  preserving  the  State.

The  envoys  thanked  the  king  for  all  the  honours
conferred  upon  them,  but  declared  themselves  grieved
to  the  heart  by  his  refusal  to  grant  their  request.  The
course  pursued  by  his  Majesty,  they  said,  would  be
found  very  hard  of  digestion  by  the  States,  both  in
regard  to  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  which  would
now  come  upon  their  throats,  and  because  of  the  bad
example  thus  set  for  other  powers.

They  then  took  leave,  with  the  usual  exchange  of
compliments.  At  their  departure  his  Majesty  personally
conducted  them  through  various  apartments  until  they
came  to  the  chamber  of  his  mistress,  the  Duchess  of
Beaufort,  then  lying  in  childbed.  Here  he  drew  wide
open  the  bed-curtains,  and  bade  them  kiss  the  lady.
They  complied,  and  begging  the  duchess  to  use  her
influence  in  their  behalf,  respectfully  bade  her  farewell.
She  promised  not  to  forget  their  request,  and  thanked
them  for  the  presents  of  damask  and  fine  linen.

Such  was  the  result  of  the  mission  of  the  great  Advo-
cate and  his  colleague  to  Henry  IV.,  from  which  so  much
had  been  hoped  ;  and  for  anything  useful  accomplished,
after  such  an  expenditure  of  time,  money,  and  eloquence,
the  whole  transaction  might  have  begun  and  ended  in
this  touching  interview  with  the  beautiful  Gabrielle.

On  the  lUth  of  May  the  envoys  embarked  at  Dieppe
•"  Ma  ^'^^'  E^gl^^^,  and  on  the  25th  were  safely
lodged  with  the  resident  minister  of  the  re-
public, Koel  de  Caron,  at  the  village  of  Clapham."

Having  so  ill-succeeded  in  their  attempts  to  prevent
the  treaty  between  France  and  Spain,  they  were  now
engaged  in  what  seemed  also  a  forlorn  hope,  the  pre-
servation of  their  oii'ensive  and  defensive  alliance  with
England.  They  were  well  aware  that  many  of  the
leading  counsellors  of  Elizabeth,  especially  Burghley
and  Buckhurst,  were  determined  upon  peace.  They
knew  that  the  queen  was  also  heartily  weary  of  the  war
and  of  the  pugnacious  little  commonwealth  which  had
caused  h(.'r  so  much  expense.  But  they  knew,  too,  that
Henry,  having  now  secured  the  repose  of  his  own  king-

11  Verhaal,  &c.,  233.

1598.  ELIZABETH  DISPOSED  FOR  PEACE.  457

dom,  was  anything  but  desirous  that  his  deserted  allies
should  enjuy  the  same  advantage.  The  king  did  not
cease  to  assure  the  States  that  he  would  secretly  give
them  assistance  in  their  warfare  against  his  new  ally,
while  Secretary  of  State  Villeroy,  as  they  knew,  would
place  every  possible  impediment  in  the  way  of  the
queen's  negotiations  with  Spain. ^^

Elizabeth,  on  her  part,  was  vexed  with  everybody.
What  the  States  most  feared  was  that  she  might,  in  her
anger  or  her  avarice,  make  use  of  the  cautionary  towns
in  her  negotiations  with  Philip.  At  any  rate,  said
Francis  Aerssens,  then  States'  minister  in  France,  she
will  bring  us  to  the  brink  of  the  precipice,  that  we  may
then  throw  ourselves  into  her  arms  in  despair.^^

The  queen  was  in  truth  resolved  to  conclude  a  peace
if  a  peace  could  be  made.  If  not,  she  was  determined
to  make  as  good  a  bargain  with  the  States  as  possible,
in  regard  to  the  long  outstanding  account  of  her  ad-
vances. Certainly  it  was  not  unreasonable  that  she
should  wish  to  see  her  exchequer  reimbursed  by  people
who,  as  she  believed,  were  rolling  in  wealth,  the  fruit
of  a  contraband  commerce  which  she  denied  to  her  own
subjects,  and  who  were  in  honour  bound  to  pay  their
debts  to  her  now,  if  they  wished  her  aid  to  be  continued.
Her  subjects  were  impoverished  and  panting  for  peace,
and  although,  as  she  remarked,  "  their  sense  of  duty
restrained  them  from  the  slightest  disobedience  to  her
absolute  commands,"  still  she  could  not  forgive  herself
for  thus  exposing  them  to  perpetual  danger.^^

She  preferred  on  the  whole,  however,  that  the  com-
monwealth should  consent  to  its  own  dissolution  ;  for
she  thought  it  unreasonable  that — after  this  war  of
thirty  years,  during  fifteen  of  which  she  had  herself
actively  assisted  them — these  republican  Calvinists
should  refuse  to  return  to  the  dominion  of  their  old
tyrant  and  the  pope.  To  Barneveld,  Maurice  of  Nassau,
and  the  States-General  this  did  not  seem  a  very  logical
termination  to  so  much  hard  fishtino;.

1'  Aerssens  to  Olden-Barneveld,  29  desobeissauce  centre  ses  absolutes  corn-
May,  159H,  in  Deventer,  248-250. "Ibid,  mandements," &c. &c. — Proposition by

1*  "Et  nonobstant  que  sa  Mat.  lepeust  Vere  and Gilpin to  the  Statts-General,

dire  avecq un singulier contentement  29 June, 1598, in Deventer, ii. 259

que  leur  debvoir  les  retient  do  la  moindre  seqq.

458  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

Accordingly,  when  on  the  26th  of  May  the  two
•26  May,  envovs  fell  on  their  knees — as  the  custom  was
1598.  — before  the  great  queen,  and  had  been  raised
by  her  to  their  feet  again,  they  found  her  Majesty  in
marvellously  ill-humour.  Olden -Barne veld  recounted
to  her  the  results  of  their  mission  to  France,  and  said
that  from  beginning  to  end  it  had  been  obvious  that
there  could  be  no  other  issue.  The  king  was  indifferent,
he  had  said,  whether  the  States  preferred  peace  or  war,
but  in  making  his  treaty  he  knew  that  he  had  secured  a
profit  for  himself,  inflicted  damage  on  his  enemy,  and
done  no  harm  to  his  friends.^*

Her  Majesty  then  interrupted  the  speaker  by  violent
invectives  against  the  French  king  for  his  treachery.
She  had  written  with  her  own  hand,  she  said,  to  tell
him  that  she  never  had  believed  him  capable  of  doing
what  secretaries  and  other  servants  had  reported  con-
cerning him,  but  which  had  now  proved  true.

Then  she  became  very  abusive  to  the  Dutch  envoys,
telling  them  that  they  were  quite  unjustifiable  in  not
following  Sir  Robert  Cecil's  advice,  and  in  not  engaging
with  him  at  once  in  peace  negotiations ;  at  least  so  far
as  to  discover  what  the  enemy's  intentions  might  be.
She  added,  pettishly,  that  if  Prince  Maurice  and  other
functionaries  were  left  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  offices,
and  if  the  Spaniards  were  sent  out  of  the  country,  there
seemed  no  reason  why  such  terms  should  not  be  ac-
cepted.

Barneveld  replied  that  such  accommodation  was  of
course  impossible,  unless  they  accepted  their  ancient
sovereign  as  prince.  Then  came  the  eternal  two  points
— obedience  to  God,  which  meant  submission  to  the
pope,  and  obedience  to  the  king,  that  was  to  say,  sub-
jection to  his  despotic  authority.  Thus  the  Christian
religion  would  be  ruined  throughout  the  provinces,  and
the  whole  land  be  made  a  bridge  and  a  ladder  for
Spanish  ambition.

The  queen  here  broke  forth  into  mighty  oaths,  inter-
rupting the  envoy's  discourse,  protesting  over  and  over
again  by  the  living  God  that  she  would  not  and  could
not  give  the  States  any  further  assistance ;  that  she
would  leave  them  to  their  fate ;  that  her  aid  rendered

15  Verhaal,  kc,  before  cited,  234

1598.  THE  DUTCH  ENVOY  AND  ELIZABETH.  459

in  their  war  tad  lasted  much  longer  than  the  siege  of  Ti'O}'
did,  and  swearing  that  she  had  been  a  foul  to  help  them
and  the  King  of  France  as  she  had  done,  for  it  was  nothing
but  evil  passions  that  kept  the  States  so  obstinate.''^

The  envoy  endeavoured  to  sooth  her,  urging  that  as
she  had  gained  the  reputation  over  the  whole  world  of
administering  her  aft'airs  with  admirable,  3'ea  with
almost  divine  wisdom,  she  should  now  make  use  of  that
sagacity  in  the  present  very  difficult  matter.  She  ought
to  believe  that  it  was  not  evil  passion,  nor  ambition,  nor
obstinacy  that  prevented  the  States  from  joining  in
these  negotiations,  but  the  determination  to  maintain
their  national  existence,  the  Christian  religion,  and
their  ancient  liberties  and  laws.  They  did  not  pre-
tend, he  said,  to  be  wiser  than  great  monarchs,  or
their  counsellors,  but  the  diiference  between  their  form
of  government  and  a  monarchy  must  be  their  excuse.

Monarchs,  when  they  made  treaties,  remained  masters,
and  could  protect  their  realms  and  their  subjects  from
danger.  The  States-General  could  not  accept  a  prince
without  placing  themselves  under  his  absolute  authority,
and  the  Netherlanders  would  never  subject  themselves
to  their  deadly  enemy,  whom  they  had  long  ago  solemnly
renounced."

Surely  these  remarks  of  the  Advocate  should  have
seemed  entirely  unanswerable.  Surely  there  was  no
politician  in  Europe  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know  that
any  treaty  of  peace  between  Philip  and  the  States  meant
their  unconditional  subjugation  and  the  complete  aboli-
tion of  the  Protestant  religion.  Least  of  all  did  the
Queen  of  England  require  information  on  this  great
matter  of  state.  It  was  cruel  trifling  therefore,  it  was
inhuman  insolence  on  her  part,  to  suggest  anything  like
a  return  of  the  States  to  the  dominion  of  Spain.

But  her  desire  for  peace  and  her  determination  to  get
back  her  money  overpowered  at  that  time  all  other
considerations.

16  "Haere  Mat. interrompeerde ons  hadde  geduurt,  seggende  dat  sy  sot  wad

Tnit  exclaraatie  ende  protestatie  repete-  gnweest  dutnde  sulcke  assistentie  acn  0119

rende  dickwils,  par  le  Dieu  vivant,  dat  sy  ende  den  Coninck  van  Vianckryck  dat

niet  en  wilde  nochte  en  konde  den  Staten  het nict  den  passien  en  waeren  die  da

vorder  assisteren,  dat  sy  henselven  wilden  Staten  dus  obstinaet  hielden." — Verhaal,

verlaten,  dat  sy  langer  haer  assistentie  &c.,  236.

hadde  gedaen  als  het  oorloge  van  Troien  i'  Ibid.  237.

460  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

The  States  wished  to  govern  themselves,  she  said  ;
why  then  could  they  not  make  arrangements  against  all
dangers,  and  why  could  they  not  lay  down  conditions
under  which  the  king  would  not  really  be  their  master  ;
especially  if  France  and  England  should  guarantee  them
against  any  infraction  of  their  rights.  By  the  living
God  !  by  the  living  God  !  by  the  living  God !  she  swore
over  and  over  again  as  her  anger  arose,  she  would  never
more  have  anything  to  do  with  such  people;  and  she
deeply  regretted  having  thrown  away  her  money  and
the  lives  of  her  subjects  in  so  stupid  a  manner."

Again  the  grave  and  experienced  envoy  of  the  republic
strove  with  calm  and  earnest  words  to  stay  the  toixent
of  her  M^-ath ;  representing  that  her  money  and  her
pains  had  by  no  means  been  wasted,  that  the  enemy  had
been  brought  to  shame  and  his  finances  to  confusion ;
and  urging  her,  without  paying  any  heed  to  the  course
pursued  by  the  King  of  France,  to  allow  the  republic
to  make  levies  of  troops,  at  its  own  expense,  within  her
kingdom.

But  her  Majesty  was  obdurate.  "How  am  I  to  defend
myself?"  she  cried;  "how  are  the  affairs  of  Ireland  to
be  provided  for  ?  how  am  I  ever  to  get  back  my  money  ?
who  is  to  pay  the  garrisons  of  Brill  and  Flushing  ? "
And  with  this  she  left  the  apartment,  saying  that  her
counsellors  would  confer  with  the  envoys.'^

From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  interview  the
queen  was  in  a  very  evil  temper,  and  took  no  pains  to
conceal  her  dist^atisfaction  with  all  the  world.

Now  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  subsidies
furnished  by  England  to  the  common  cause  were  very
considerable,  amounting  in  foiirteen  years,  according  to
the  queen's  calcvTlation,  to  nearly  fourteen  hundred
thousand  pounds  sterling.  But  in  her  interviews  with
the  republican  statesmen  she  was  too  prone  to  forget
that  it  'was  a  common  cause,  to  forget  that  the  man  who
had  over  and  over  again  attempted  her  assassination,
who  had  repeatedly  attempted  the  invasion  of  her  realms
with  the  whole  strength  of  the  most  powerful  military
organization  in  the  world,  whose  dearest  wish  on  earth
was  still  to  accomplish  her  dethronement  and  murder,
to  extirpate  from  England  the  religion  professed  by  the

18  Verhaal,  &c.,  237.  w  Ibid.

1598. ENGLISH  STATESMEN  FAVOURABLE  TO  PEACE. 461

majority  of  living  Englishmen,  and  to  place  upon  her
vacant  throne  a  Spanish,  German,  or  Italian  prince,  was
as  much  her  enemy  as  he  was  the  foe  of  his  ancient
oubjects  in  the  Netherlands.  At  that  very  epoch  I'hilip
was  occupied  in  reminding  the  pope  that  the  two  had
always  agreed  as  to  the  justice  of  the  claims  of  the  In-
fanta Isabella  to  the  English  crown,  and  calling  on  his
Holiness  to  sustain  those  pretensions,  now  that  she  had
been  obliged,  in  consequence  of  the  treaty  with  the
Prince  of  Bearne,  to  renounce  her  right  to  reign  over
France.^"

Certainly  it  was  fair  enough  for  the  queen  and  her
counsellors  to  stand  out  for  an  equitable  arrangement  of
the  debt ;  but  there  was  much  to  dispute  in  the  figures.
\\  hen  was  ever  an  account  of  fifteen  years'  standing
adjusted,  whether  between  nations  or  individuals,  without
much  wrangling  ?  Meantime  her  Majesty  held  excellent
security  in  two  thriving  and  most  important  Netherland
cities.  But  had  the  States  consented  to  re-establish  the
Spanish  authority  ov(5r  the  whole  of  their  little  Protestant
republic,  was  there  an  English  child  so  ignorant  of  arith-
metic or  of  history  as  not  to  see  how  vast  would  be
the  peril,  and  how  incalculable  the  expense,  thus  caused
to  England  ?

Yet  besides  the  Cecils  and  the  lord  high  admiral,
other  less  influential  counsellors  of  the  crown — even  the
upright  and  accomplished  Buckhurst,  who  had  so  often
proved  his  friendship  for  the  States — were  in  favour  of
negotiation.  There  were  many  conferences  with  meagre
results.  The  Englishmen  urged  that  the  time  had  come
for  the  States  to  repay  the  queen's  advances,  to  relieve
her  from  future  subsidies,  to  assume  the  payment  of  the
garrisons  in  the  cautionary  towns,  and  to  furnish  a  force
in  defence  of  England  when  attacked.  Such  was  the
condition  of  the  kingdom,  they  said — being,  as  it  was,
entirely  without fortified cities — that a single battle

20  "  Y  aqui  sera  bien  q\ie  acordeis  aSu  a  la  recompeiisa  de  los  exccsivos  gastos

Sant''.  asimismo  lo  que  mas  de  irnavez  os  hecbos  eii  su  beneticio  y  vtreis  si  poraqui

ba  dicho  de  quanta  deseaba  eiicaminar  hi  podreis  incliiiar  al  papa  a  que  trata  de

sucesion  de  la  Infanta  mi  hija  a  Vngla-  desunir  a  franceses  de  ingles('S,acordando

terra  quedando  reyno  por  si  y  allanando  a  los  franceses  que  los  ingloses  son  sua

para  ello  los  impedimeiitos  de  Francia  y  antiques  enemigos,' &c. kc. — Philip  to

lun  prucurando  su  ayuda  en  consideracion  Duke  of  Sesa,  his  envoy at Rome, 16

de  remitir  les  desta  parte los  grandes  March,  1597. (Arch,  de  Siniamsi  MS.)
derechos  de  la  Infanta  y  tanil>ieii  los  niios

4-62  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

would  imperil  the  whole  realm,  so  that  it  was  necessary
to  keep  the  enemy  out  of  it  altogether.^^

These  arguments  were  not  unreasonable,  but  the  in-
ference was  surely  illogical.  The  special  envoys  from
the  republic  had  not  been  instructed  to  treat  about  the
debt.  This  had  been  the  subject  of  perpetual  negotia-
tion. It  was  discussed  almost  every  day  by  the  queen's
commissioners  at  the  Hague  and  by  the  States'  resident
minister  at  London.  Olden-Barneveld  and  the  admiral
had  been  sent  forth  by  the  States  in  what  in  those  days
was  considered  great  haste  to  prevent  a  conclusion  of  a
treaty  between  their  two  allies  and  the  common  enemy.
They  had  been  too  late  in  France,  and  now,  on  arriving
in  England,  they  found  that  government  steadily  drifting
towards  what  seemed  the  hopeless  shipwreck  of  a  general
peace.

What  must  have  been  the  grief  of  Olden-Barneveld
when  he  heard  from  the  lips  of  the  enlightened  Buckhurst
that  the  treaty  of  1585  had  been  arranged  to  expire —
according  to  the  original  limitation — with  a  peace,  and
that  as  the  States  could  now  make  peace  and  did  not
choose  to  do  so,  her  Majesty  must  be  considered  as  re-
lieved from  her  contract  of  alliance,  and  as  justified  in
demanding  repayment  of  her  advances  !  -'^

To  this  perfidious  suggestion  what  could  the  States'
envoy  reply  but  that  as  a  peace  such  as  the  treaty  of
1585  presupposed — to  wit,  with  security  for  the  Pro-
testant religion  and  for  the  laws  and  liberties  of  the
provinces — was  impossible,  should  the  States  now  treat
with  the  king  or  tlie  cardinal  ?

The  envoys  had  but  one  more  interview  with  the
queen,  in  which  she  was  more  benignant  in  manner  but
quite  as  peremptory  in  her  demands.  Let  the  States
either  thoroughly  satisfy  her  as  to  past  claims  and
present  necessities,  or  let  them  be  prepared  for  her
immediate  negotiation  with  the  enemy.  Should  she
decide  to  treat,  she  would  not  be  unmindful  of  their
interests,  she  said,  nor  deliver  them  over  into  the
enemy's  hands.  She  repeated,  however,  the  absurd
opinion  that  there  were  means  enough  of  making  Philip
.  nominal  sovereign  of  all  the  Netherlands,  without  allow-
ing him  to  exercise  any  authority  over  them. As  if  the

2'  V';rh,ial,  Jtc,  239.  22  Ibid.

1598. DEPARTURE  OF  THE  ENVOYS  FROM  LONDON. 463

most  Catholic  aud  most  absolute  mouarch  that  ever
breathed  could  be  tied  down  by  the  cobwebs  of  constitu-
tional or  treaty  stipulations;  as  if  the  previous  forty
years  could  be  effaced  from  the  record  of  history.

She  asked,  too,  in  case  the  rumours  of  the  intended
transfer  of  the  Netherlands  to  the  cardinal  or  the  Infanta
should  prove  true,  which  she  doubted,  whether  this
arrangement  v^rould  make  any  difference  in  the  senti-
ments of  the  States.

Barneveld  replied  that  the  transfer  was  still  uncertain,
but  that  they  had  no  more  confidence  in  the  cardinal  or
the  Infanta  than  in  the  King  of  Spain  himself.

On  taking  leave  of  the  queen  the  envoys  waited  upon
Lord  Burghley,  whom  they  found  sitting  in  an  arm-
chair in  his  bedchamber,  suffering  from  the  gout  and
virith  a  very  fierce  countenance.^^  He  made  no  secret  of
his  opinions  in  favour  of  negotiation,  said  that  the  con-
tracts made  by  monarchs  should  always  be  interpreted
reasonably,  and  pronounced  a  warm  eulogy  on  the  course
pursued  by  the  King  of  France.  It  was  his  Majesty's
duty,  he  said,  to  seize  the  best  opportunity  for  restoring
repose  to  his  subjects  aud  his  realms,  and  it  was  the
duty  of  other  sovereigns  to  do  the  same.

The  envoys  replied  that  they  were  not  disposed  at
that  moment  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  king's  actions.
They  would  content  themselves  with  remarking  that  in
their  opinion  even  kings  and  princes  were  bound  by
their  contracts,  oaths,  and  pledges  before  God  and  man  :
and  with  this  wholesome  sentiment  they  took  leave  of
the  lord  high  treasurer.^*

They  left  Loudon  immediately,  on  the last  day of
May,  without  passports  or  despatches  of  recal, 31  May,
and  embarked  at  Gravesend  in  the  midst  of  a ^^'"^•
gale  of  wind.

Lord  Essex,  the  sincere  friend  of  the  republic,  was
both  surprised  and  disturbed  at  their  sudden  departure,
and  sent  a  special  courier  after  them  to  express  his
regrets  at  the  unsatisfactory  termination  to  their  mission.

2^'  "  Toonende  een  fier  gelaat." — Ver-  tracten,  beloftfn ende  cwien  vour  Gtxil

haal,  &c.,  243.  ende  de  werplt  veibonden  wareii ;  daer-

2*  "  Wy  sej-den  dat  ons  niet  toe  en  niede  wy  van  den  voorschr. HtereGroote

stonde  van  de  actie  van  den  Coninck  te  Tresoiier  syn gescheyden." — Verliaal,  &c,

oordelen  maer  dat  wy  meinden  dat  oock  244.
Coningeu  ende Prinseu aea Viaei con-

464  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap,  XXXIV

"My  mistress  knows  very  well,"  said  he,  "that  she  is
an  absolute  princess,  and  that,  when  her  ministers  have
done  their  extreme  duty,  she  wills  what  she  wills."'"''

The  negotiations  between  England  and  Spain  were
deferred,  however,  for  a  brief  space,  and  a  special  message
was  despatched  to  the  Hagne  as  to  the  arrangement  of
the  debt.  "  Peace  at  once  with  Philip,"  said  the  queen,
"  or  else  full  satisfaction  of  my  demands."

Now  it  was  close  dealing  between  such  very  thrifty
and  acute  bargainers  as  the  queen  and  the  Netherland
republic.

Two  years  before,  the  States  had  offered  to  pay  twenty
thousand  pounds  a  year  on  her  Majesty's  birthday  so
long  as  the  war  should  last,  and  after  a  peace,  eighty
thousand  pounds  annually  for  four  years.^''  The  queen,
on  her  part,  fixed  the  sum  total  of  the  debt  at  nearly  a
million  and  a  half  sterling,  and  required  instant  pa3-ment
of  at  least  one  hundred  thousand  pounds  on  account,
besides  provision  for  a  consideiable  annual  refunding,
assumption  by  the  States  of  the  whole  cost  of  the  garri-
sons in  the  cautionaiy  towns,  and  assurance  of  assistance
in  case  of  an  attack  upon  England.-'  Thus  there  was  a
whole  ocean  between  the  disputants.

Vere  and  Gilpin  were  protocolling  and  marshalling
accounts  at  the  Hague,  and  conducting  themselves  with
much  arrogance  and  bitterness,  while,  meantime,  Barne-
veld  had  hardly  had  time  to  set  his  foot  on  his  native
shores  before  he  was  sent  back  again  to  England  at  the
head  of  another  solemn  legation.  One  more  effort  was
to  be  made  to  arrange  this  financial  problem  and  to  de-
feat the  English  peace  party.

The  oifer  of  the  year  1596  just  alluded  to  was  renewed
and  instantly  rejected.  Naturally  enough,  the  Dutch
envoys  were  disposed,  in  the  exhausting  warfare  which
was  so  steadily  draining  their  finances,  to  pay  down  as
little  as  possible  on  the  nail,  while  providing  for  what
they  considered  a  liberal  annual  sinking  fund.

The  English,  on  the  contrary,  were  for  a  good  round
sum  in  actual  cash,  and  held  the  threatened  negotiation

*5  Kssex  to  Nassau  and  Olden-Barne-  ministres  ont  fait  lour  estreme  devoyp?

veld,  22  May,  1598.  (O.S.)  elle veult  ce  qu'elle  veiilt." — Deventer,

"  Et  que  ma  maitressescait  bien  qu'elle  iii.  2i1.  21;  AgreemeDt  in  Bor,  IV.  245.
e3t  princesso  absolue,  et  que  quant  s^s w  Meteren,  4U6. Devciiter,  il.  2o8.

1598.  SECOND  EMBASSY  TO  ENGLAND.  4G5

with  Spain  over  the  heads  of  the  uufortunate  envoys
like  a  whip.

So  the  queen's  connsellors  and  the  repnhlican  envoys
travelled  aajain  and  ajraiu  over  the  well-worn

29  June

path.  On  the  29  th  June,  Buckhurst  took  Olden-
Barneveld  into  his  cabinet  and  opened  his  heart  to  him,
not  as  a  servant  of  her  Majesty,  he  said,  but  as  a  private
Englishman.^*  He  was  entirely  for  peace.  Now  that
peace  was  offered  to  her  Majesty,  a  continuation  of  the
war  Avas  unrighteous,  and  the  Lord  God's  blessing  could
not  be  upon  it.  Without  God's  blessing  no  resistance
could  be  made  by  the  queen  nor  by  the  States  to  the
enemy,  who  was  ten  times  more  powerful  than  her
Majesty  in  kingdoms,  provinces,  number  of  subjects,  and
money.  He  had  the  pope,  the  emperor,  the  l)ukes  ot
Savoy  and  Lorraine,  and  the  republic  of  Genoa,  for  his
allies.  He  feared  that  the  war  might  come  upon  Eng-
land, and  that  they  might  be  fated  on  one  single  day  to
win  or  lose  all.  The  queen  possessed  no  mines,  and
was  obliged  to  carry  on  the  war  by  taxing  her  people.
The  king  had  ever-flowing  fountains  in  his  mines ;
the  queen  nothing  but  a  stagnant  pool,  which,  when
all  the  water  was  pumped  out,  must  in  the  end  be
dry.  He  concluded,  therefore,  that  as  her  ]\Iajesty
had  no  allies  but  the  Ketherlands,  peace  was  best  for
England,  and  advisable  for  the  provinces.  Arrange-
ments could  easily  be  made  to  limit  the  absolute  authority
of  Spain.^^

This  highly  figurative  view  of  the  subject — more  be-
coming to  the  author  of  Ferrex  and  Porrex  than  to  so
experienced  a  statesman  as  Sackville  had  become  since
his  dramatic  days — did  not  much  impress  Barneveld.
He  answered  that,  although  the  King  of  Spain  was  un-
questionably very  powerful,  the  Lord  God  was  still
stronger ;  that  England  and  the  Netherlands  together
could  maintain  the  empire  of  the  seas,  which  was  of  the
utmost  importance,  especially  for  England ;  but  that  it
the  republic  were  to  make  her  submission  to  Spain,  and
become  incorporate  with  that  powei",  the  control  of  the
seas  was  lost  for  ever  to  England.^"

The  Advocate  added  the  unanswerable  argument  that

28  Conference  between  Olden-Bameveld  and  Buckhurst,  in  Devcntcr,  ii.  26 1-26C.

29  Conference,  &c.,  uH  su^.  ^"  Ibid.

VOL. III.  2 H

466  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIV.

to  admit  Philip  as  sovereign,  and  then  to  attempt  a
limitation  of  his  despotism,  was  a  foolish  dream.

Buckhurst  repeated  that  the  republic  was  the  only  ally
of  England,  that  there  was  no  confidence  to  be  placed  by
her  in  any  other  power,  and  that  for  himself  he  was,  as
always,  very  much  the  friend  of  the  States.

Olden-Bameveld  might  well  have  prayed,  however,  to
be  delivered  from  such  friends.  To  thrust  one's  head
into  the  lion's  mouth,  while  one's  friends  urge  modera-
tion on  the  noble  animal,  can  never  be  considered  a
cheeiful  or  prudent  proceeding.

At  last,  after  all  offers  had  been  rejected  which  the
envoys  had  ventured  to  make,  Elizabeth  sent  for  Olden-
Bameveld  and  Caron  and  demanded  their  ultimatum
within  twenty-four  hours.  Should  it  prove  unsatisfactory,
she  would  at  once  make  peace  with  Spain."^

On  the  1st  August  the  envoys  accordingly  proposed  to
Cecil  and  the  other  ministers  to  pay  thirty  thousand
pounds  a  year,  instead  of  twenty  thousand,  so  long  as
the  war  should  last,  but  they  claimed  the  right  of  re-
deeming the  cautionary  towns  at  one  hundred  thousand
pounds  each.  This  seemed  admissible,  and  Cecil  and
his  colleagues  pronounced  the  affair  arranged.  But  they
had  reckoned  without  the  queen  after  all.

Elizabeth  sent  for  Caron  as  soon  as  she  heard  of  the
agreement,  flew  into  a  great  rage,  refused  the  terms,
swore  that  she  would  instantly  make  peace  with  Spain,
and  thundered  loudly  against  her  ministers.

"  They  were  great  beasts,"  she  said,  "  if  they  had
stated  that  she  would  not  treat  with  the  enemy.  She
had  merely  intended  to  defer  the  negotiations.""^

So  the  whole  business  was  to  be  done  over  again.  At
last  the  sum  claimed  Vjy  the  queen,  fourteen  hundred
thousand  pounds,  was  reduced  by  agreement  to  eight
hundred  thousand,  and  one-half  of  this  the  envoys  under-
took on  the  part  of  the  States  to  refund  in  annual  pay-
ments of  thirty  thousand  pounds,  while  the  remaining
iour  hundred  thousand  should  be  provided  for  by  some
subsequent arrangement. All attempts, however, to

»i  Minutes  of  Olden-Bamcvcld. De-  viand  tractf^ren  sonde ;  sy  wilde  dc  han-

Tcnter,  il.  267,  268.  delinge  slechts  differereri." — Verhaal  vun

"  "  Sy  waren  groote  beeslen,  indien  «y  lAiivenoorde  Olden-Barnevelt,  eaz.,  cited

ODB  gcseit  badden  dat  sy  nitt  m'-.t  d'  n  by  Deventcr,  ii.  288.

1598.  FINAL  AGREEMENT  WITH  ELIZABETH.  4fi7

obtain  a  promise  from  the  queen  to  restore  the  caution-
ary towns  to  the  republic  in  case  of  a  peace  between
Spain  and  England  remained  futile.^

That  was  to  be  a  bone  of  contention  for  many  years.

It  was  further  agreed  by  the  treaty,  which  was  de-
jBnitely  signed  on  the  16th  August,  that,  in  case le  Aug.
England  were  invaded  by  the  common  enemy, ^^^^■
the  States  should  send  to  the  queen's  assistance  at  least
thirty  ships  of  war,  besides  five  thousand  infantry  and
five  bquadrons  of  horse.^

»3  Verhaal,  &c.,  last  cited.  s*  Treaty,  apud  Bor,  IV.  476-478.

2  H  2

468  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

CHAPTEE XXXV.

Negotiations  between  France  and  Spain  —  Conclusion  of  the  treaty  of  peace  —
Purchase  of  the  allegiance  of  the  French  nobles  —  Transfer  of  the  Netherlands  to
Albert  and  Isabella  —  Marriage  of  the  Infante  and  the  Infanta  —  lUness  of  Philip
II.  —  Horrible  nature  of  his  malady  —  His  last  hours  and  death  —  Review  of  his
reign  —  Extent  of  the  Spanish  dominions  —  Causes  of  the  greatness  of  Spain,  and
of  its  downfall  —  Philip's  wars  and  their  expenses  —  The  Crown  revenues  of
Spain  —  Character  of  the  people  —  Their  inordinate  self-esteem  —  Consequent
deficiency  of  labour  —  Ecclesiastical  Government  —  Revenues  of  the  Chm-ch  —
Characteristics  of  the  Spanish  clergy  —  Foreign  commerce  of  Spain  —  Govern-
mental system  of  Philip  II.  —  Founded  on  the  popular  ignorance  and  superstition
—  Extinction  of  liberty  in  Spain  —  The  Holy  Inquisition  —  The  worli  and  charac-
ter of  Phihp.

While  the  utterly  barren  conferences  had  been  going
on  at  Anglers  and  Nantes  between  Henry  IV.  and  the
republican  envoys,  the  negotiations  had  been  proceeding
at  Vervins.

President  Kichardot  on  behalf  of  Spain,  and  Secretary
of  State  Villeroy  as  commissioner  of  Henry,  were  the
chief  negotiators.^

Two  old  acquaintances,  two  ancient  Leaguers,  two
bitter  haters  of  Protestants  and  rebels,  two  thorough
adepts  in  diplomatic  chicane,  they  went  into  this  contest
like  gladiators  who  thoroughly  understood  and  respected
each  other's  skill.

Eichardot  was  recognised  by  all  as  the  sharpest  and
most  imscrupulous  politician  in  the  obedient  Netherlands.
Villeroy  had  conducted  every  intrigue  of  France  during
a  whole  generation  of  mankind.  They  scarcely  did  more
than  measure  swords  and  test  each  other's  objects,  before
arriving  at  a  conviction  as  to  the  inevitable  result  of  the
encoimter.

It  was  obvious  at  once  to  Villeroy  that  Philip  was
determined  to  make  peace  with  France  in  order  that  the
tri2:)le  alliance  might  be  broken  up.  It  was  also  known
to  the  French  diplomatist  that  the  Spanish  king  was
ready  for  almost  every  concession  to  Henry  in  order  that
this  object  might  be  accomplished.

1  Relazion  del  Presidente  Richardot,  April,  159S. (Arch,  de  Siniancas  i"'

1598.  FRANCO-SPANISH  NEGOTIATIONS.  469

All  that  Eichardot  hoped  to  save  out  of  the  various
coBquests  made  by  Spain  over  France  was  Calais.

But  Villeroy  told  him  that  it  was  useless  to  say  a
word  on  that  subject.  His  king  insisted  on  the  restora
tion  of  the  place.  Otherwise  he  would  make  no  peace.
It  was  enough,  he  said,  that  his  Majesty  said  nothing
about  Navarre.

Eichardot  urged  that  at  the  time  when  the  English
had  conquered  Calais  it  had  belonged  to  Artois,  not  to
France.  It  was  no  more  than  equitable,  then,  that  it
should  be  retained  by  its  original  proprietor.

The  general  of  the  Franciscans,  who  acted  as  a  kind
of  umpire  in  the  transactions,  then  took  each  negotiator
separately  aside  and  whispered  in  his  ear.^

Villeroy  shook  his  head,  and  said  he  had  given  his
ultimatum.  Eichardot  acknowledged  that  he  had  some-
thing in  reserve,  upon  which  the  monk  said  that  it  was
time  to  make  it  known.

Accordingly — the  two  being  all  ears — Eichardot  ob-
served that  what  he  was  about  to  state  he  said  with  fear
and  trembling.  He  knew  not  what  the  King  of  Spain
would  think  of  his  proposition,  but  he  would,  neverthe-
less, utter  the  suggestion  that  Calais  should  be  handed
over  to  the  pope.^

His  Holiness  would  keep  the  city  in  pledge  until  the
war  with  the  rebels  was  over,  and  then  there  would  be
leisure  enough  to  make  definite  arrangements  on  the
subject.

Now  Villeroy  was  too  experienced  a  practitioner  to  be
imposed  upon  by  this  ingenious  artifice.  Moreover,  he
happened  to  have  an  intercepted  letter  in  his  possession
in  which  Philip  told  the  cardinal  that  Calais  was  to  bo
given  up  if  the  French  made  its  restitution  a  sine  qua
non.  So  Villeroy  did  make  it  a  sine  qua  non,  and  the
conferences  soon  after  terminated  in  an  agreement  on
the  part  of  Spain  to  surrender  all  its  conquests  in
France.*

Certainly  no  more  profitable  peace  than  this  could
have  been  made  by  the  French  king  under  such  ciicum-
stances,  and  Philip  at  the  last  moment  had  consented  to
pay  a  heavy  price  for  bringing  discord  between  the
three friends. The  treaty  was signed  at  Vervins  on

2  Relazion,  &c.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  »  Ibid.  *  Ibid.

470  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV

the  2nd  May,  and  contained  thirty-five  articles.  Its
basis  was  that  of  the  treaty  of  Cateau  Cambresis  of
1559,  Eestitution  of  all  places  conquered  by  either
party  within  the  dominions  of  the  other  since  the  day
of  that  treaty  was  stipulated.  Henry  recovered  Calais,
Ardres,  Dourlens,  Blavet,  and  many  other  places,  and
gave  up  the  country  of  Charolois.  Prisoners  were  to
be  surrendered  on  both  sides  without  ransom,  and  such
of  those  captives  of  war  as  had  been  enslaved  at  the
galleys  should  be  set  free.

The  pope,  the  emperor,  all  his  cousins,  and  those
electors,  states,  and  cities  under  their  obedience  or  con-
trol, the  Duke  of  Savoy,  the  King  of  Poland  and  Sweden,
the  Kings  of  Denmark  and  Scotland,  the  Dukes  of  Lor-
raine and  Tuscany,  the  Doge  of  Venice,  the  republic  of
Genoa,  and  many  lesser  states  and  potentates,  were  in-
cluded in  the  treaty.  The  famous  Edict  of  Nantes  in
favour  of  the  Protestant  subjects  of  the  French  king  was
drawn  up  and  signed  in  the  city  of  which  it  bears  the
name  at  about  the  same  time  with  these  negotiations.
Its  publication  was,  however,  deferred  until  after  the
departure  of  the  legate  from  France  in  the  following
year.^

The  treaty  of  Cateati  Cambresis  had  been  pronounced
the  most  disgraceful  and  disastrous  one  that  had  ever
been  ratified  by  a  French  monarch ;  and  surely  Henry
had  now  wiped  away  that  disgrace  and  repaired  that
disaster.  It  was  natural  enough  that  he  should  con-
gratulate himself  on  the  rewards  which  he  had  gathered
by  deserting  his  allies.

He  had  now  sufficient  occupation  for  a  time  in  devis-
ing ways  and  means,  with  the  aid  of  the  indefatigable
Bethune,  to  pay  the  prodigious  sums  with  which  he  had
purchased  the  allegiance  of  the  great  nobles  and  lesser
gentlemen  of  France.  Thirty-two  millions  of  livres
were  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  these  patriots,
most  of  whom  had  been  drawing  enormous  pensions
from  the  King  of  Spain  up  to  the  very  moment,  or  be-
yond it,  when  they  consented  to  acknowledge  the  sove-
reign of  their  own  country.  Scarcely  a  great  name  in
the  golden  book  of  France  but  was  recorded  among  these
bills  of  sale.

5  Treaty,  apud  Bor,  IV.  445-450. De  Thou,  xiii.  203,  seqq.,  I.  120.

1598. TRANSFER  OF  THE  NETHERLANDS  TO  ISABELLA. 471

Mayenne,  Lorraine,  Guise,  Nemours,  Mercoeur,  Mont-
pensier,  Joyeuse,  Epernon,  Brissac,  D'Arlincourt,  Ba-
lagny,  Rocliefort,  Villeroy,  Villars,  Montespan,  Leviston,
Beauvillars,  and  countless  otliers,  figured  in  the  great
financier's  terrible  account-book,  from  Mayenne,  set
down  at  the  cool  amount  of  three  and  a  half  millions,  to
Beativoir  or  Beauvillars  at  the  more  modest  price  of  a
hundred  and  sixty  thousand  livres.  "  I  should  appal  my
readers,"  said  De  B^thune,  "if  I  should  show  to  them
that  this  sum  makes  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  amounts
demanded  from  the  royal  treasury,  either  by  Frenchmen
or  by  strangers,  as  pay  and  pension,  and  yet  the  total
was  thirty- two  millions."*^

And  now  the  most  Catholic  king,  having  brought  him-
self at  last  to  exchange  the  grasp  of  friendship  with  the
great  ex-heretic,  and  to  recognize  the  Prince  of  Bearne
as  the  legitimate  successor  of  St.  Louis,  to  prevent
which  consummation  he  had  squandered  so  many  thou-
sands of  lives,  so  many  millions  of  treasure,  and  brought
ruin  to  so  many  prospeious  countries,  prepared  himself
for  another  step  which  he  had  long  hesitated  to  take.

He  resolved  to  transfer  the  Netherlands  to  his  daughter
Isabella  and  to  the  Cardinal  Archduke  Albert,  who,  as
the  king  had  now  decided,  was  to  espouse  the  Infanta.

The  deed  of  cession  was  signed  at  Madrid  on  the  6tli
May,  1598. It  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  of eMay,
the  same  date  from  the  Prince  Philip,  heir  ap- ^^^*-
parent  to  the  crown.

On  the  30th  May  the  Infanta  executed  a  procuration
by  which  she  gave  absolute  authoiity  to  her  future
husband  to  rule  over  the  provinces  of  the  Netherlands,
Burgundy,  and  Charolois,  and  to  receive  the  oaths  of
the  estates  and  of  public  functionaries.''

It  was  all  Yery  systematically  done. No  transfer  of

6  Sully. Memoires,  lib.  x.  560.  General  of  Franciscans — diplomatist  and

7  See  all  the  deeds  and  documents  in  father  confessor — and  was  supported  by
Bor,  IV.  461-466.  Compare  Herrera,  iii.  much  collateral  evidence.  Hence  all
766-770.  these  careful  stipulations  were  a  solemn

Very  elaborate  provisions  were  made  jest,  like  much  of  the  diplomatic  work  of

in regard  to  the  children  and grand-  this  reign. See  lett'T  of  F.  d'Acrssens  to

children  to  spring  from  this  marriage,  but  States-General, 27  May,  1599,  in  Lettres

it  was  generally  understood  at  the  time  et  Negotiations  deBuzanval  etD'Aerssens,

that  no  issue  was  to  be  expected. The  par  G.  G. Vrede,  Leidc, I8J6,  p. 190.

incapacity  of  the  cardinal  seems  to  have  But  compare  Sorauzo,  Rclazione,  before

b}en  revealed  by  an  indiscretion  of  the  cited,  p  169.

472  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

real  estate,  no  donatio  inter  vivos  of  mansions  and  mes-
suages, parks  and  farms,  herds  and  flocks,  could  have
been  effected  in  a  more  business-like  manner  than  the
gift  thus  made  by  the  most  prudent  king  to  his  beloved
daughter.

The  quit-claim  of  the  brother  was  perfectly  regular.

So  also  was  the  power  of  attorney,  by  which  the  In-
fanta authorised  the  middle-aged  ecclesiastic  whom  she
was  about  to  espouse  to  take  possession  in  her  name  of
the  ver}^  desirable  property  which  she  had  thus  acquired.

It  certainly  never  occun-ed,  either  to  the  giver  or  the
receivers,  that  the  few  millions  of  Netherlanders,  male
and  female,  inhabiting  these  provinces  in  the  North  Sea,
were  entitled  to  any  voice  or  opinion  as  to  the  transfer
of  themselves  and  their  native  land  to  a  young  lady
liA'ing  in  a  remote  country.  For  such  was  the  blasphe-
mous system  of  Europe  at  that  daj'.  Property  had
rights.  Kiugs,  from  whom  all  property  emanated,  were
enfeoffed  directly  fi-om  the  Almighty ;  they  bestowed
certain  privileges  on  their  vassals,  but  man  had  no  rights
at  all.  He  was  property,  like  the  ox  or  the  ass,  like  the
glebe  which  he  watered  with  the  sweat  of  his  brow.

The  obedient  Netherlands  acquiesced  obediently  in
these  new  arrangements.  They  wondered  only  that  the
king  should  be  willing  thus  to  take  from  his  crown  its
choicest  jewels — for  it  is  often  the  vanity  of  colonies  and
dependencies  to  consider  themselves  gems.

The  republican  Netherlanders  only  laughed  at  these
arrangements,  and  treated  the  invitation  to  transfer
themselves  to  the  new  sovereigns  of  the  provinces  with
silent  contempt .**

The  cardinal-archduke  left  Brussels  in  September,
having  accomplished  the  work  committed  to  14  Sept.
him  by  the  power  of  attorney,  and  having  left  ^^^^•
Cardinal  Andrew  of  Austria,  bishop  of  Constantia,  son  of
the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  to  administer  affairs  during
his  absence.  Francis  de  Mendoza,  Admiral  of  Arragon,
was  entrusted  with  the  supreme  military  command  for
the  same  interval.

The  double  marriage  of  the  Infante  of  Spain  with  the
Archduchess  Margaret  of  Austria,  and  of  the  unfrocked
Cardinal Albert of Austria with the Infanta Clara

8  Bur.  IV.  467.

1598.  ILLNESS  OF  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN.  473

Eugenia  Isabella,  was  celebrated  by  proxy,  with  im-
meuse  j^omp,  at  Ferrara,  the  pope  himself  officiating  with
the  triple  crown  upon  his  head.'-'

Meantime,  Philip  II.,  who  had  been  of  delicate  consti-
tution all  his  life,  and  who  had  of  late  years  been  a  con-
firmed valetudinarian,  had  been  rapidly  failing  ever
since  the  transfer  of  the  Netherlands  in  May.  Longing
to  be  once  ■  more  in  his  favourite  retirement  of  the
Escorial,  he  undertook  the  journey  towards  the  begin-
ning of  June,  and  was  carried  thither  from  Madiid  in  a
litter  borne  by  servants,  accomplishing  the  journey  of
seven  leagues  in  six  days.

"When  he  reached  the  palace  cloister,  he  was  unable  to
stand.  The  gout,  his  life-long  companion,  had  of  late  so
tortured  him  in  the  hands  and  feet  that  the  mere  touch
of  a  linen  sheet  was  painful  to  him.  By  the  middle  of
July  a  low  fever  had  attacked  him,  which  rapidly  re-
duced his  strength.  Moreover,  a  new  and  terrible
symptom  of  the  utter  disintegration  of  his  physical  con-
stitution had  presented  itself.  Imposthumes,  from  which
he  had  suffered  on  the  breast  and  at  the  joints,  had  been
opened  after  the  usual  ripening  applicatioiis,  and  the  re-
sult was  not  the  hoped  relief,  but  swarms  of  vermin,
innumerable  in  quantities,  and  impossible  to  extirpate,
which  were  thus  generated  and  reproduced  in  the
monarch's  blood  and  flesh.

The  details  of  the  fearful  disorder  may  have  attraction
for  the  pathologist,  but  have  no  especial  interest  for  the
general  reader.  Let  it  suffice  that  no  torture  ever  in-
vented by  Torquemada  or  Peter  Titelman  to  serve  the
vengeance  of  Philip  and  his  ancestors  or  the  pope  against
the  heretics  of  Italy  or  Flanders,  could  exceed  in  acute-
ness  the  agonies  which  the  most  Catholic  king  was  now
called  iipon  to  endure.  And  not  one  of  the  long  line  of
martyrs,  who  by  decree  of  Charles  or  Philip  had  been
strangled,  beheaded,  burned,  or  buried  alive,  ever  faced
a  death  of  lingering  torment  with  more  perfect  fortitude,
or  was  sustained  by  more  ecstatic  visions  of  heavenly
mercy,  than  was  now  the  case  with  the  great  monarch  of
Spain.

That  the  grave-worms  should  do  their  office  before
soul  and  bod}"  were  parted,  was  a  torment  such  as  the

9  Bor,  IV.  4T0-1T2.

474  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

imagination  of  Dante  might  have  invented  for  the  lowest
depths  of  his  "  Inferno."  "

On  the  22nd  July,  the  king  asked  Dr.  Mercado  if  his
sickness  was  likely  to  have  a  fatal  termination.  The
physician,  not  having  the  courage  at  once  to  give  the
only  possible  reply,  found  means  to  evade  the  question.
On  the  1st  August  hi.?  Majestj-'s  confessor,  father  Diego
de  Yepes,  after  consultation  v/ith  Mercado,  announced  to
Philip  that  the  only  issue  to  his  malady  was  death.
Already  he  had  been  lying  for  ten  days  on  his  back,  a
mass  of  sores  and  corruption,  scarcely  able  to  move,  and
requiring  foixr  men  to  turn  him  in  his  bed.

He  expressed  the  greatest  satisfaction  at  the  sincerity
which  had  now  been  used,  and  in  the  gentlest  and  most
benignant  manner  signified  his  thanks  to  them  for  thus
removing  all  doubts  fr-om  his  mind,  and  for  giving  him
information  which  it  was  of  so  much  importance  for  his
eternal  welfare  to  possess.

His  first  thought  was  to  request  the  papal  nuncio,
Gaetano,  to  despatch  a  special  courier  to  Kome  to  re-
quest the  pope's  benediction.  This  was  done,  and  it
was  destined  that  the  blessing  of  his  holiness  should
arrive  in  time.

He  next  prepared  himself  to  make  a  general  confes-
sion, which  lasted  three  days,  father  Diego  having
drawn  up  at  his  request  a  full  and  searching  interroga-
tory. The  confession  may  have  been  made  the  more
simple,  however,  by  the  statement  which  he  made  to
the  priest,  and  subsequently  repeated  to  the  Infante  his
son,  that  in  all  his  life  he  had  never  consciously  done
wrong  to  any  one.  If  he  had  ever  committed  an  act  of
injustice,  it  was  unwittingly,  or  because  he  had  been
deceived  in  the  circumstances.  This  internal  conviction
of  general  righteousness  was  of  great  advantage  to  him
in  the  midst  of  his  tenible  sufferings,  and  accounted  in
great  degree  for  the  gentleness,  though tfulness  for
others,  and  perfect  benignity,  which,  according  to  the
unanimous  testimony  of  many  witnesses,  characterised
his  conduct  during  this  whole  sickness.

After  he  had  completed  his  long  general  confession,

'"  A  great  English  poet  has  indeed  expressed  the  horrible  thought:
"It  is  as  if  the  dead  could  feel
The  icy  worm  about  them  steal." — Byrox.

1598.  PHILIP'S  LAST  HOURS.  475

the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  administered  to
him.  Subseqiiently,  the  same  rites  were  more  briefly
performed  every  few  days.

His  sufferings  were  horrible,  but  no  saint  could  have
manifested  in  them  more  gentle  resignation  or  angelic
patience.  He  moralized  on  the  condition  to  which  the
greatest  princes  might  thus  be  brought  at  last  by  the
hand  of  God,  and  bade  the  prince  observe  well  his
father's  present  condition,  in  order  that,  when  he  too
should  be  laid  thus  low,  he  might  likewise  be  sustained
by  a  conscience  void  of  offence.  He  constantly  thanked
his  assistants  and  nurses  for  their  care,  insisted  upon
their  reposing  themselves  after  their  daily  fatigues,  and
ordered  others  to  relieve  them  in  their  task.

He  derived  infinite  consolation  from  the  many  relics
of  saints,  of  which,  as  has  been  seen,  he  had  made  plenti-
ful provision  during  his  long  reign.  Especially  a  bone
of  St.  Alban,  presented  to  him  by  Clement  VIII. ,  in
view  of  his  present  straits,  was  of  great  service.  With
this  relic,  and  with  the  arm  of  St.  Vincent  of  Ferrara,
and  the  knee-bone  of  St.  Sebastian,  he  daily  rubbed  his
sores,  keeping  the  sacred  talismans  ever  in  his  sight  on
the  altar,  which  was  not  far  from  his  bed.  He  was  much
pleased  when  the  priests  and  other  bystanders  assured
him  that  the  remains  of  these  holy  men  would  be  of
special  efficacy  to  him,  because  he  had  cherished  and
worshipped  them  in  times  when  misbelievers  and
heretics  had  treated  them  with  disrespect.

On  a  sideboard  in  his  chamber  a  human  skull  was
placed  and  upon  this  skull — in  ghastly  mockery  of
royalty,  in  truth,  yet  doubtless  in  the  conviction  that
such  an  exhibition  showed  the  superiority  of  anointed
kings  even  over  death — he  ordered  his  servants  to  place  a
golden  crown."  And  thus,  during  the  whole  of  his  long
illness,  the  Antic  held  his  state,  while  the  poor  mortal
representative  of  absolute  power  lay  living  still,  but
slowly  mouldering  away.

With  perfect  composure,  and  with  that  minute  atten-
tion to  details  which  had  characterised  the  king  all  his
lifetime,  and  was  now  more  evident  than  ever,  he  caused
the  provisions  for  his  funeral  obsequies  to  be  read  aloud
one  day  by  Juan  Euys  de  Velasco,  in  order  that  his  chil-
li Bor,  IV.  473.

476  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXV

dren,  his  ministers,  and  the  great  officers  of  state  who
were  daily  in  attendance  upon  him,  might  thoroughly
learn  their  lesson  before  the  time  came  for  performing
the  ceremony.

"  Having  governed  my  kingdom  for  forty  years,"  said
he,  "  I  now  give  it  back,  in  the  seventy-first  year  of  my
age,  to  God  Almight}^,  to  whom  it  belongs,  recommend-
ing my  soul  into  his  blessed  hands,  that  His  Divine
Majesty  may  do  what  he  pleases  therewith."

He  then  directed  that  after  his  body  should  have  been
kept  as  long  as  the  laws  prescribed,  it  should  be  buried
thus : —

The  officiating  bishop  was  to  head  the  procession,
bearing  the  crucifix,  and  followed  by  the  clergy.

The  Adelantado  was  to  come  next,  trailing  the  royal
standard  along  the  ground.  Then  the  Duke  of  Novara
was  to  appear,  bearing  the  crown  on  an  open  salver,
covered  with  a  black  cloth,  while  the  Marquis  of  Avil-
laer  carried  the  sword  of  state.

The  coffin  was  to  be  borne  by  eight  principal  gi-an-
dees,  clad  in  mourning  habiliments,  and  holding  lighted
torches.

The  heir  apparent  was  to  follow,  attended  by  Don
Garcia  de  Loyasa,  who  had  just  been  consecrated,  in  the
place  of  Cardinal  Albert,  as  Archbishop  of  Toledo.

The  body  was  to  be  brought  to  the  church,  and  placed
in  the  stately  tomb  already  prepared  for  its  reception.
"  Mass  being  performed,"  said  the  king,  "  the  prelate
shall  place  me  in  the  grave  which  shall  be  my  last  house
until  I  go  to  my  eternal  dwelling.  Then  the  prince,
third  king  of  my  name,  shall  go  into  the  cloister  of  St.
Jerome  at  Madrid,  where  he  shall  keep  nine  days'
mourning.  My  daughter,  and  her  aunt — my  sister,  the
ex-empress — shall  for  the  same  purpose  go  to  the  con-
vent of  the  grey  sisters."  ^^

The  king  then  charged  his  successor  to  hold  the
Infanta  in  especial  affection  and  consideration ;  "  for,"
said  he,  "  she  has  been  my  mirror,  yea,  the  light  of  my
eyes."  He  also  ordered  that  the  Marquis  of  Mondejar
be  taken  from  prison  and  set  free,  on  condition  never  to
show  himself  at  Court.  The  wife  of  Antonio  Perez  was
also  to  be  released  from  prison,  in  order  that  she  might

12  Bor,  IV.  473,  iU.

1598.  PHILIPS  PREPARATION  FOR  DEATH.  477

be  immured  in  a  cloister,  her  property  being  bestowed
upon  her  daughters.

As  this  unfortunate  Lidy's  only  crime  consisted  in  her
husband's  intiigiie  with  the  king's  mistress,  Princess
Eboli,  in  which  she  could  scarcely  be  considered  an
accomplice,  this  permission  to  exchange  one  form  of
incarceration  for  another  did  not  seem  an  act  of  very
great  benignity.

Philip  further  provided  that  thirty  thousand  masses
should  be  said  for  his  soul,  five  hundred  slaves  liberated
from  the  galleys,  and  five  hundred  maidens  provided  with
marriage  portions.

After  these  elaborate  instructions  had  been  read,  the
king  ordered  a  certain  casket  to  be  brought  to  him  and
opened  in  his  presence.  From  this  he  took  forth  a
diamond  of  great  price  and  gave  it  to  the  Infanta,  say-
ing that  it  had  belonged  to  her  mother,  Isabella  of
France.  He  asked  the  prince  if  he  consented  to  the
gift. The  prince  answered  in  the  affinnative.

He  next  took  from  the  cofler  a  written  document,
which  he  handed  to  his  son,  saying,  "  Herein  you  will
learn  how  to  govern  your  kingdoms."

Then  he  produced  a  scourge,  which  he  said  Avas  the
instrument  with  which  his  father,  the  emperor,  had  been
in  the  habit  of  chastising  himself  during  his  retreat  at
the  monastery  of  Juste.  He  told  the  b3'-standers  to
observe  the  imperial  blood  b}^  which  the  lash  was  still
slightly  stained.

As  the  daj'S  wore  on  he  felt  himself  steadily  sinking,
and  asked  to  receive  extreme  unction.  As  he  had  never
seen  that  rite  performed  he  chose  to  rehearse  it  before-
hand, and  told  Euys  Velasco,  who  was  in  constant
attendance  upon  him,  to  go  for  minute  instructions  on
the  subject  to  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo.  The  sacra-
ment having  been  duly  administered,  the  king  subse-
quently, on  the  1st  September,  desired  to  receive  it  once
more.  The  archbishop,  fearing  that  the  dying  monarch's
strengtli  would  be  insufficient  for  the  repetition  of  the
function,  informed  him  that  the  regulations  of  the  Church
required  in  such  cases  only  a  compliance  with  certain
trifling  forms,  as  the  ceremonj'-  had  been  already  once
thoroughly  carried  out.  But  the  king  expressed  himself
as  quite  determined  that  the  sacrament  should  be  re-

478  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XXXV.

peated  in  all  its  parts ;  that  he  should  once  more  be
anointed — to  use  the  phrase  of  brother  Francis  Neyen —
■with  the  oil  which  holy  athletes  require  in  their  wrestle
with  death.

This  was  accordingly  done  in  the  presence  of  his  son
and  daughter,  and  of  his  chief  secretaries,  Christopher
de  Moura  and  John  de  Idiaquez,  besides  the  Counts
Chinchon,  Fuensalido,  and  several  other  conspicuous
personages.  He  was  especially  desirous  that  his  son
should  be  present,  in  order  that,  when  he  too  should
come  to  die,  he  might  not  find  himself,  like  his  father,
in  ignorance  of  the  manner  in  which  this  last  sacrament
was  to  be  performed.

When  it  was  finished  he  described  himself  as  infinitely
consoled,  and  as  having  derived  even  more  hajDpiness
from  the  rite  than  he  had  dared  to  anticipate.

Thenceforth  he  protested  that  he  would  talk  no  more
of  the  world's  affairs.  He  had  finished  Avith  all  things
below,  and  for  the  days  or  hours  still  remaining  to  him
he  would  keep  his  heart  exclusively  fixed  upon  Heaven.
Day  by  day  as  he  lay  on  his  couch  of  unutterable  and
almost  unexampled  misery,  his  confessors  and  others
read  to  him  from  religious  works,  while  with  perfect
gentleness  he  would  insist  that  one  reader  should  relieve
another,  that  none  might  be  fatigued.

On  the  11th  September  he  dictated  these  words  to
Christopher  de  Moura,  who  was  to  take  them
to  Diego  de  Yepes,  the  confessor : —

"Father  Confessor,  you  are  in  the  place  of  God,  and
1  protest  thus  before  His  presence  that  I  will  do  all  that
you  declare  necessary  for  my  salvation.  Thus  upon  you
will  be  the  responsibility  for  my  omissions,  because  I  am
ready  to  do  all."

Finding  that  the  last  hour  was  approaching,  he  in-
formed Don  Fernando  de  Toledo  where  he  could  find
some  candles  of  our  lady  of  Montserrat,  one  of  which
he  desired  to  keep  in  his  hand  at  the  supreme  moment.
He  also  directed  Euys  de  Velasco  to  take  from  a  special
shrine — which  he  had  indicated  to  him  six  years  before
— a  crucifix  which  the  emperor  his  father  had  held  upon
his  death-bed.  All  this  was  accomplished  according
to  his  wish.

He  had  already  made  arrangements  for  his  funeral

1598.  PHILIP'S  PREPARATION  FOR  DEATH.  479

procession,  and  had  subsequently  provided  all  the  details
of  his  agony.  It  was  now  necessary  to  give  orders  as
to  the  particulars  of  his  burial.

He  knew  that  decomposition  had  made  such  progress
even  while  he  was  still  living  as  to  render  embalming
impossible.  He  accordingly  instructed  Don  Christopher
to  see  his  body  wrapped  in  a  shroud  just  as  it  lay,
and  to  cause  it  to  be  placed  in  a  well-soldered  metallic
coffin  already  provided.  The  coffin  of  state,  in  which
the  leaden  one  was  to  be  enclosed,  was  then  brought
into  the  chamber  by  his  command,  that  he  might  see  if
it  was  entirely  to  his  taste.  Having  examined  it,  he
ordered  that  it  should  be  lined  with  white  satin  and
ornamented  with  gold  nails  and  lace-work.  He  also
described  a  particular  brocade  of  black  and  gold,  to  be
found  in  the  jewel-room,  which  he  desired  for  the  pall.

Kext  morning  he  complained  to  Don  Christopher  that
the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  had  not  12  Sept.
been  administered  to  him  for  several  days.  It  ^^^^•
was  xirged  that  his  strength  was  deemed  insufficient,
and  that,  as  he  had  received  that  rite  already  four  times
during  his  illness,  and  extreme  unction  twice,  it  was
thought  that  the  additional  fatigue  might  be  spared
him.  But  as  the  king  insisted,  the  sacrament  was  once
more  performed  and  prayers  were  read.  He  said  with
great  fervour  many  times,  "  Pater,  non  mea  voluntas,
sed  tua  fiat."  He  listened,  too,  with  much  devotion,  to
the  Psalm,  "As  the  hart  jianteth  for  the  water-brooks  ; "
and  he  spoke  faintly  at  long  intervals  of  the  Magdalen,
of  the  prodigal  son,  and  of  the  paralytic.

When  these  devotional  exercibes  had  been  concluded,
father  Diego  expressed  the  hope  to  him  that  he  might
then  pass  away,  for  it  would  be  a  misfortune  by  tem-
porary convalescence  to  fall  from  the  exaltation  of  piety
which  he  had  then  reached.  The  remark  was  heard  by
Philip  with  an  expression  of  entire  satisfaction.

That  day  both  the  Infanta  and  the  prince  came  for
the  last  time  to  his  bedside  to  receive  his  blessing.  He
tenderly  expressed  his  regret  to  his  daughter  that  he  had
not  been  permitted  to  witness  her  marriage,  but  charged
her  never  to  omit  any  exertion  to  augment  and  sustain
the  holy  Roman  Catholic  religion  in  the  Netherlands.
It  was  in  the  interest  of  that  holy  Church  alone  that  ho

480  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

had  endowed  her  with  those  provinces,  and  he  now
urged  it  upon  her  with  his  dying  breath  to  impress  upon
her  future  husband  the&e  his  commands  to  both.

His  two  children  took  leave  of  him  with  tears  and
sobs.  As  the  prince  left  the  chamber  he  asked  Don
Christopher  who  it  was  that  held  the  key  to  the
treasury.

The  secretary  replied,  "  It  is  I,  Sir."  The  prince
demanded  that  he  should  give  it  into  his  hands.  But
Don  Christopher  excused  himself,  saying  that  it  had
been  entrusted  to  him  by  the  king,  and  that  without  his
consent  he  could  not  part  with  it.  Then  the  prince  re-
turned to  the  king's  chamber,  followed  by  the  secretary,
who  narrated  to  the  dying  monarch  what  had  taken  place.

"  You  have  done  wrong,"  said  Philip ;  whereupon
Don  Christopher,  bowing  to  the  earth,  presented  the  key
to  the  prince.

The  king  then  feebly  begged  those  about  his  bedside
to  repeat  the  dying  words  of  our  Saviour  on  the  cross,
in  order  that  he  might  hear  them  and  repeat  them  in
his  heart  as  his  soul  was  taking  flight.

His  father's  crucifix  was  then  placed  in  his  hands,
and  he  said  distinctly,  "  I  die  like  a  good  Catholic,  in
faith  and  obedience  to  the  holy  Koman  Church."  Soon
after  these  last  words  had  been  spoken,  a  paroxysm,
followed  by  faintness,  came  over  him,  and  he  lay
entirely  still.

They  had  covered  his  face  with  a  cloth,  thinking  that
he  had  already  expired,  when  he  suddenly  started,  with
great  energy,  opened  his  eyes,  seized  the  crucifix  again
from  the  hand  of  Don  Fernando  de  Toledo,  kissed  it,
and  fell  back  again  into  agon}'.

The  archbishop  and  the  other  priests  expressed  the
opinion  that  he  must  have  had,  not  a  paroxysm,  but  a
celestial  vision,  for  human  powers  would  not  have
enabled  him  to  arouse  himself  so  quickly  and  so  vigor-
ously as  he  had  done  at  that  crisis.

He  did  not  speak  again,  but  lay  unconsciously  dying
for  some  hours,  and  breathed  his  last  at  five  in
the  morning  of  Sunday  the  13th  September.'^

1' The  last  illness  of  Philip  is  described  472-474;  and  by  Herrera,  iii.  774-77S.
with  every  minute  detail,  derived  from  Compare  also  the  Relazione  of  F.  Soranzo
narratives  of  eye-witnesses,  by  Bor,  IT. already  cited,  150-153.

1598.  REVIEW  OF  PHILIP'S  REIGN.  481

Plis  obsequies  were  celebrated  according  to  the  direc-
tions which  he  had  so  minutely  given.

These  volumes  will  have  been  written  in  vain  if  it  be
now  necessary  to  recall  to  my  readers  the  leading  events
in  the  history  of  the  man  who  had  thus  left  the  world
where,  almost  invisible  himself,  he  had  so  long  played
a  leading  part.  It  may  not  be  entirely  useless,  however,
to  throw  a  parting  glance  at  a  character  which  it  has
been  one  of  the  main  objects  of  this  work,  thioughout
its  whole  course,  to  pourtray.  My  theme  has  been  the
reign  of  Philip  II.  because,  as  the  less  is  included  in
the  greater,  the  whole  of  that  reign,  with  the  exception
of  a  few  episodes,  is  included  in  the  vast  movement  out  of
which  the  Ee public  of  the  United  Netherlands  was  born
and  the  assailed  independence  of  France  and  England
consolidated.  The  result  of  Philip's  efforts  to  establish
a  universal  monarch}^  was  to  hasten  the  decline  of  the
empire  which  he  had  inherited,  by  aggravating  the  evils
which  had  long  made  that  downfall  inevitable.

It  is  from  no  abstract  hatred  to  monarchy  that  I  have
dwelt  with  emphasis  upon  the  crimes  of  this  king,  and
upon  the  vices  of  the  despotic  system,  as  illustrated
during  his  lifetime.  It  is  not  probable  that  the  military-
monarchical  system — founded  upon  conquests  achieved
by  barbarians  and  pirates  of  a  distant  epoch  over  an  effete
civilization  and  over  antique  institutions  of  intolerable
profligacy — will  soon  come  to  an  end  in  the  older  world.
And  it  is  the  bu.siness  of  Europeans  so  to  deal  with  the
institutions  of  their  inheritance  or  their  choice  as  to
ensure  their  steady  melioration  and  to  provide  for  the
highest  interests  of  the  people.  It  matters  comparatively
little  by  what  name  a  government  is  called,  so  long  as
the  intellectual  and  moral  development  of  mankind,
and  the  maintenance  of  justice  among  individuals,  are
its  leading  principles.  A  government,  like  an  indivi-
dual, may  remain  far  below  its  ideal;  but,  without  an
ideal,  governments  and  individuals  are  alike  contemp-
tible. It  is  tyranny  only — whether  individual  or  popular
— that  utters  its  feeble  sneers  at  the  ideologists,  as  if
mankind  were  brutes  to  whom  instincts  were  all  in  all
and  ideas nothing. Where intellect  and  justice are

VOL.  ni.  2  I

452  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS Chap.  XXXV.

enslaved  by  that  tmlioly  trinity — Force,  Dogma,  and
Ignorance — tile  tendency  of  government*,  and  of  those
suhjected  to  them,  must  of  necessity  be  retrograde  and
d'  vm'wurd.

There  can  be  little  doubt  to  those  who  tbserve  the
movements  of  mankind  during  the  coirrse  of  the  fourteen
centuries  since  the  full  of  the  Koman  Empire — a  mere
fcigment  of  htiman  history — that  its  progress,  however
concealed  or  impeded,  and  whether  for  weal  or  woe,  is
towards  democracy  :  for  it  is  the  tendency  of  science  to
liberate  and  to  equalize  the  physical  and  even  the  intel-
lectual forces  of  htimanity.  A  horse  and  a  suit  of  armour
would  now  hardly  enable  the  fortunate  possessor  of  such
advantages  to  conquer  a  kingdom,  nor  can  wealth  and
learning  be  mc»nopolised  in  these  latter  days  by  a  favouivd
few.  Yet  veneration  for  a  croNvu  and  a  privileged  church
— as  if  without  them  and  withotit  their  close  connection
with  each  other  law  and  religion  were  imjx^ssible —
makes  hereditary  authority  sacred  to  great  masses  of
mankind  in  the  old  world.  The  obligation  is  the  more
stringent,  therefore,  on  men  thus  set  apart  as  it  were
by  primordial  selection  for  niling  and  instructing  their
fellow- creatures,  to  keep  their  edicts  and  their  practice
in  harmony  with  divine  justice.  For  these  rules  cannot
be  violated  with  impunity  during  a  long  succession  of
years,  and  it  is  usually  left  for  a  comparatively  innocent
generation  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  their  forefathei^s.  If
history  does  not  teach  this  it  teaches  uothiug,  and  as  the
roles  of  morality,  whether  for  individuals  or  for  nations,
are  simple  imd  devoid  of  mysteiy.  there  is  the  less  excuse
for  governments  which  habitusilly  and  cynically  violate
the  eternal  law.

Among  self-evident  truths  not  one  is  more  indisputable
than  that  which,  in  the  immortal  words  of  our  Declara-
tion of  Independence,  asserts  the  right  of  every  human
being  to  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness :  but
the  only  happiness  that  can  be  recognised  by  a  true
statesman  as  the  birthright  of  mankind  is  that  which
comes  from  intellectxtjil  and  moral  development,  and
from  the  subjugati^-n  of  the  brutal  instincts.

A  system  according  to  which  cIon^tis  remain  clowns
through  all  the  ages,  tmless  when  extraordinary  genius
or  fortunate  accident  enables  an  excepti<mal  individual

EXTENT  OF  TH1-:  Sl'AXlSH  DOMINIONS.  483

to  overleap  the  barrier  of  caste,  necessarily  retards  the
resxilt  to  which  the  philosopher  looks  forward  with
perfect  faith.

For  us,  whose  business  it  is  to  deal  with,  and,  so  far  as
human  fallibility  will  permit,  to  improve  our  inevitable
form  of  government — which  may  degenerate  into  the
most  intolerable  of  polities  unless  we  are  ever  mindful
that  it  is  yet  in  its  rudimental  condition ;  that,  although
an  immense  step  has  been  taken  in  the  right  direction
by  the  abolition  of  caste,  the  divorce  of  Church  and
State,  and  the  limitation  of  intrusion  by  either  on  tlie
domain  of  the  individual,  it  is  yet  only  a  step  from
which,  without  eternal  vigilance,  a  falling  back  is  very
easy ;  and  that  here,  more  than  in  other  lands,  ignorance
of  the  scientific  and  moral  tniths  on  which  national
happiness  and  prosperity  depend,  deserves  bitter  denun-
ciation— for  us  it  is  wholesome  to  confirm  our  faith  in
democracy,  and  to  justify  our  hope  that  the  People  will
prove  itself  equal  to  the  awful  responsibility  of  self-
goverament  by  an  occasional  study  of  the  miseries  which
the  opposite  system  is  capable  of  producing.  It  is  f(jr
this  reason  that  the  reign  of  the  sovereign  whose  closing
moments  have  just  been  recorded  is  especially  worthy
of  a  minute  examination,  and  I  still  invite  a  paiiing
glance  at  the  spectacle  thus  presented,  before  the  curtain
falls.

The  Spanish  monarchy,  in  the  reign  of  Philip  II.  was
not  only  the  most  considerable  empire  then  existing,
but  probably  the  most  powerful  and  extensive  emj)ire
that  had  ever  been  known.  Certainly  never  before
had  so  great  an  agglomeration  of  distinct  and  separate
sovereignties  been  the  result  of  accident.  For  it  was
owing  to  a  series  of  accidents — in  the  common  acceptation
of  that  term — that  Philip  governed  so  mighty  a  realm.
According  to  the  principle  that  vast  tracts  of  the  earth's
surface,  with  the  human  beings  feeding  upon  them,
were  transfeiable  in  fee-simple  from  one  man  or  woman
to  another  by  marriage,  inheritance,  or  gift,  a  heteroge-
neous collection  of  kingdoms,  principalities,  provinces,
and  wildernesses  had  been  consolidated,  without  geo-
graphical continuity,  into  an  artificial  union — the
populations  differing  from  each  other  as  much  as  human
beings  can  differ,  in  race,  language,  institutions,  and

2  I  2

484  THE  UNITED  KETHERLANDS. Cuat.  XXXV.

historical  traditions,  and  resembling  each  other  in  little,
save  in  being  the  property  alike  of  the  same  fortunate
individual.

Thus  the  dozen  kingdoms  of  Spain,  the  seventeen
provinces  of  the  Netherlands,  the  kingdoms  of  the  two
Sicilies,  the  duchy  of  Milan,  and  certain  fortresses  and
districts  of  Tuscany,  In  Europe ;  the  kingdom  of  Bar-
bary,  the  coast  of  Guinea,  and  an  indefinite  and  un-
measured expanse  of  other  territory,  in  Africa ;  the
controlling  outposts  and  cities  all  along  the  coast  of  the
tvyo  Indian  peninsulas,  w^ith  as  much  of  the  country  as
it  seemed  good  to  occupy,  the  straits  and  the  great
archipelagos,  so  far  as  they  had  been  visited  by  Euro-
peans, in  Asia ;  Peru,  Brazil,  Mexico,  the  Antilles —
the  whole  recently-discovered  fourth  quarter  of  the
world  in  short,  from  the  "  Land  of  Fire  "  in  the  South  to
the  frozen  regions  of  the  North — as  much  territory  as
the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  sea-captains  could  circum-
navigate and  the  pope  in  the  plenitude  of  his  power  and
his  generosity,  could  bestow  on  his  fortunate  son,  in
America  ;  all  this  enormous  proportion  of  the  habitable
globe  was  the  private  property  of  Philip,  who  was  the
son  of  Charles,  w^ho  was  the  son  of  Joanna,  who  was
the  daughter  of  Isabella,  whose  husband  was  Ferdinand.
By  what  seems  to  us  the  most  whimsical  of  political
arrangements,  the  Papuan  islander,  the  Calabrian  peasant,
the  Amsterdam  merchant,  the  semi-civilized  Aztec,  the
Moor  of  Barbary,  the  Castilian  grandee,  the  roving
Camanche,  the  Guinea  negro,  the  Indian  Brahmin,  found
themselves — could  they  but  have  known  it — fellow-
citizens  of  one  commonwealth.  Statutes  of  family
descent,  aided  by  fraud,  force,  and  chicane,  had  annexed
the  various  European  sovereignties  to  the  crown  of
Spain ;  the  genius  of  a  Genoese  sailor  had  given  to  it
the  New  World,  and  more  recently  the  conquest  of
Portugal,  torn  from  hands  not  strong  enough  to  defend
the  national  independence,  had  vested  in  the  same  sove-
reignty those  Oriental  possessions  which  were  due  to
the  enterprise  of  Vasco  de  Gama,  his  comrades  and
f'uccessors.  The  voyager,  setting  forth  from  the  straits
of  Gibraltar,  circumnavigating  the  African  headlands
and  Cape  Comorin,  and  sailing  through  the  Molucca
channel  and  past  the  isles  which  bore  the  name  of  Philip

EXTENT  OF  THE  SPANISH  DOMINIONS.  485

in  the  Eastern  sea,  gave  the  hand  at  last  to  his  aclven-
turons  comrade,  who,  starting  from  the  same  point,  and
following  westward  in  the  track  of  Magellaens  and
under  the  Southern  Cross,  coasted  the  shore  of  Pata-
gonia, and  threaded  his  path  through  unmapped  and
unnumbered  clusters  of  islands  in  the  W'estei-n  Pacific  ;
and  during  the  spanning  of  the  earth's  whole  circum-
ference not  an  inch  of  land  or  water  was  traversed  that
was  not  the  domain  of  Philip.

For  the  sea,  too,  was  his,  as  well  as  the  dry  land.

From  Borneo  to  California  the  great  ocean  was  but  a
Spanish  lake,  as  much  the  king's  private  property  as  his
fish-ponds  at  the  Escorial  with  their  carp  and  perch.
No  subjects  but  his  dared  to  navigate  those  sacred
waters.  Not  a  common  highway  of  the  world's  com-
merce, but  a  private  path  for  the  gratification  of  one
human  being's  vanity,  had  thus  been  laid  out  by  the
bold  navigators  of  the  sixteenth  century.

It  was  for  the  Dutch  rebels  to  try  conclusions  upon
this  point,  as  they  had  done  upon  so  many  others,  with
the  master  of  the  land  and  sea.  The  opening  scenes
therefore  in  the  great  career  of  maritime  adventure
and  discovery  by  which  theye  republicans  were  to  make
themselves  famous  will  soon  engage  the  reader's  atten-
tion.

Thus  the  causes  of  what  is  called  the  greatness  of
Spain  ai'e  not  far  to  seek.  Spain  was  not  a  nation,  but
a  temporary  and  factitious  conjunction  of  several  nations,
which  it  was  impossible  to  fuse  into  a  permanent  whole,
but  over  whose  imited  resources  a  single  monarch  for  a
time  disposed.  And  the  very  concentration  of  these
vast  and  unlimited  powers,  fortuitous  as  it  was,  in  this
single  hand,  inspiring  the  individual,  not  unnaturally,
with  a  consciousness  of  superhuman  grandeur,  impelle'd
him  to  those  frantic  and  puerile  eiforts  to  achieve  the
impossible  which  resulted  in  the  downfall  of  Spain.
The  man  who  inherited  so  much  material  greatness
believed  himself  capable  of  destroying  the  invisible  but
omnipotent  spirit  of  religious  and  political  liberty  in
the  Netherlands,  of  trampling  out  the  national  existence
of  France  and  of  England,  and  of  annexing  those  realms
to  his  empire.  It  has  been  my  task  to  relate,  with  much
minuteness,  how  miserably  his  efforts  failed.

486  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

But  his  resources  were  great.  All  Italy  was  in  his
hands,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  Venetian  re-
public ;  for  the  Grand  Duke  of  Florence  and  the  so-
called  republic  of  Genoa  were  little  more  than  his
vassals,  the  pope  was  generally  his  other  self,  and  the
Duke  of  Savoy  was  his  son-in-law.  Thus  his  armies,
numbering  usually  a  hundred  thousand  men,  were
supplied  from  the  best  possible  sources.  The  Italians
were  esteemed  the  best  soldiers  for  siege,  assault,  light
skirmishing.  The  German  heavy  troopers  and  arque-
buseers  were  the  most  effective  for  open  field  work,  and
these  were  to  be  purchased  at  reasonable  prices  and  to
indefinite  amount  from  any  of  the  three  or  four  hundred
petty  sovereigns  to  whom  what  was  called  Germany
belonged.  The  Sicilian  and  Neapolitan  pikemen,  the
Milanese  light  horse,  belonged  exclusively  to  Philip,
and  were  used,  year  after  year,  for  more  than  a  genera-
tion of  mankind,  to  fight  battles  in  which  they  had
no  more  interest  than  had  their  fellow-subjects  in
the  Mohiccas  or  in  IMexico,  but  which  constituted  for
them  personally  as  lucrative  a  trade  on  the  whole
as  was  afforded  them  at  that  day  by  any  branch  of
industry.

Silk,  corn,  wine,  and  oil  were  fui-nished  in  profusion
from  these  favoured  regions,  not  that  the  inhabitants
might  enjoy  life,  and,  by  accumulating  wealth,  increase
the  stock  of  human  comforts  and  contribute  to  intellec-
tual and  scientific  advancement,  but  in  order  that  the
proprietor  of  the  soil  might  feed  those  eternal  armies
ever  swarming  from  the  south  to  .scatter  desolation  over
the  plains  of  France,  Burgundy,  Flanders,  and  Holland,
and  to  make  the  crown  of  Spain  and  the  office  of  the
Holy  Inquisition  supreme  over  the  world.  From  Naples
and  Sicily  were  derived  in  great  plenty  the  best  mate-
rials and  conveniences  for  ship-building  and  marine
equipment.  The  galleys  and  the  galley-slaves  furnished
by  these  subject  realms  formed  the  principal  part  of  the
royal  navy.  From  distant  regions,  a  confmerce  which
in  Philip's  days  had  become  oceanic  supplied  the  crown
with  as  much  revenue  as  could  be  expected  in  a  period
of  gross  ignorance  as  to  the  causes  of  the  true  grandeiir
and  the  true  wealth  of  nations.  Especially  fiom  the
mines of  Mexico came an  annual  average  of  ten or

GREATNESS  OF  PHILIP'S  RESOURCES,  487

twelve  millions  of  precious  metals,  of  which  the  kin'i^
took  twenty-five  per  cent,  for  himself.

It  would  be  difficult  and  almost  siiperfluons  to  in-
dicate the  various  resources  placed  in  the  hands  of  this
one  personage,  who  thns  controlled  so  large  a  portion  of
the  earth.  All  that  breathed  or  grew  belonged  to  him,
and  most  steadily  was  the  stream  of  blood  and  treasure
poured  through  the  sieve  of  his  perpetual  war.  His
system  was  essentially  a  gigantic  and  perpetual  levy
of  contributions  in  kind,  and  it  is  only  in  this  vague
and  unsatisfactory  manner  that  the  revenues  of  his
empire  can  be  stated.  A  despot  really  keeps  no  accounts,
nor  need  to  do  so,  for  he  is  responsible  to  no  man  for
the  way  in  which  he  husbands  or  squanders  his  own.
Moreover,  the  science  of  statistics  had  not  a  beginning
of  existence  in  those  days,  and  the  most  common  lacts
can  hardly  be  obtained  even  by  approximation.  The
usual  standard  of  value,  the  commodity  which  we  call
money — gold  or  silver — is  well  known  to  be  at  best  a
fallacious  guide  for  estimating  the  comparative  wealth
of  individuals  or  of  nations  at  widely  ditferent  epochs.
The  dollar  of  Philip's  day  was  essentially  the  same  bit
of  silver  that  it  is  in  our  time  in  Spain,  Naples,  Eome,
or  America,  but  even  should  an  elaborate  calculation  be
made  as  to  the  quantity  of  beef  or  bread  or  broadcloth
to  be  obtained  for  that  bit  of  silver  in  this  or  that  place
in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  result,  as
compared  with  prices  now  prevalent,  would  show  many
remarkable  discrepancies.  Thus  a  bushel  of  wheat  at
Antwerp  during  Philip's  reign  might  cost  a  quarter  of  a
dollar  in  average  years,  and  there  have  been  seasons  in
our  own  time  when  two  bushels  of  wheat  could  have
been  bought  for  a  quarter  of  a  dollar  in  Illinois.  Yet  if,
notwithstanding  this,  we  should  allow  a  tenfold  value
in  exchange  to  the  dollar  of  Philip's  day,  we  should  be
surprised  at  the  meagreness  of  his  revenues,  of  his
expenditures,  and  of  the  debts  which  at  the  close  of
nis  career  brought  him  to  bankruptc}'^ ;  were  the  sums
estimated  in  coin.

Thus  his  income  was  estimated  by  careful  contem-
poraiy  statesmen  at  what  seemed  to  them  the  prodigious
annual  amount  of  sixteen  millions  of  dollars.  He  carried
on  a  vast  war  without  interiuntion  during  the  \\h()le  of

488  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

his  forty-three  years'  reign  against  the  most  wealthy
and  military  nations  of  Christendom  not  recognizing  his
authority,  and  in  so  doing  he  is  said  to  have  expended  a
sum  total  of  seven  hundred  millions  of  dollais — a  state-
ment which  made  men's  hair  stand  on  their  heads.  Yet
the  American  republic,  during  its  civil  war  to  repress
the  insurrection  of  the  slaveholders,  has  spent  nominally
as  large  a  sum  as  this  every  year ;  and  the  British
Empire  in  time  of  profound  peace,  spends  half  as  much
annually.  And  even  if  we  should  allow  sixteen  millions
to  have  represented  the  value  of  a  hundred  and  sixty
millions — a  purely  arbitrary  supposition — as  compared
with  our  times,  what  are  a  hundred  and  sixty  millions
of  dollars,  or  thirty-three  millions  of  pounds  sterling,  as
the  whole  net  revenue  of  the  greatest  empire  that  had
ever  existed  in  the  world,  when  compared  with  the
accumulated  treasures  over  which  civilized  and  indus-
trious countries  can  now  dispose  ?  Thus  the  power  of
levying  men  and  materials  in  kind  constituted  the  chief
part  of  the  royal  power,  and,  in  truth,  very  little  re-
venue in  money  was  obtained  from  Milan  or  Naples  or
from  any  of  the  outlying  European  possessions  of  the
crown.

Eight  millions  a  year  were  estimated  as  the  I'evenue
from  the  eight  kingdoms  incorporated  under  the  general
name  of  Castile,  while  not  more  than  six  hundred
thousand  came  from  the  three  kingdoms  which  consti-
tuted Arragon.^*  The  chief  sources  of  money  receipts
were  a  tax  of  ten  per  cent,  upon  sales,  paid  by  the
seller,  called  Alcavala,  and  the  Almoxarifalgo  or  tariff
upon  both  imports  and  exports.  Besides  these  imposts
ho  obtained  about  eight  hundred  thousand  dollars  a
year  by  selling  to  his  subjects  the  privilege  of  eating
eggs  upon  fast-days,  acc-'jrding  to  the  permission  granted
him  by  the  pope  in  the  bull  called  the  Cruzada.^*  He
received  another  annual  million  from  the  Sussidio  and
the  Excusado.  The  first  was  a  permission  originally
given  b}'-  the  popes  to  levy  six  hundred  thousand  dollars
a  year  upon  ecclesiastical  property  for  equipment  of  a
hundred  war-galleys  against  the  Saracens,  but  which
had  more  recently  established  itself  as  a  regular  tax
to  pay  for  nayal  hostilities  against  Dutch  and  English

i-*  Soranao.  is  ibid.

INDIRECT  SOURCES  OF  INCOME.  489

heretics — a  still  more  malignant  species  of  unbelievers
in  the  orthodox  eyes  of  the  period.  The  Exciisado  was
the  right  accorded  to  the  king  always  to  select  from  the
Church  possessions  a  single  benefice  and  to  appropriate
its  fruits — a  levy  commuted  generallj^  for  four  hundred
thousand  dollars  a  year.  Besides  these  regular  sources
of  income,  large  hut  irregular  amounts  of  money  were
picked  up  by  his  Majesty  in  small  sums,  through  monks
sent  about  the  country  simply  as  beggars,  under  no
special  license,  to  collect  alms  from  rich  and  poor  for
sustaining  the  war  against  the  infidels  of  England  and
Holland.  A  certain  Jesuit,  father  Sicily  by  name,  had
been  industrious  enough  at  one  period  in  preaching  this
crusade  to  accumulate  more  than  a  million  and  a  half,
so  that  a  facetious  courtier  advised  his  sovereign  to
style  himself  thenceforth  king,  not  of  the  two,  but  of  the
three  Sicilies,  in  honour  of  the  industrious  priest.

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  at  different  periods  during
Philip's  reign,  and  especially  towards  its  close,  the  whole
of  his  regular  revenue  was  pledged  to  pay  the  interest
on  his  debts,  save  only  the  Sussidio  and  the  Crnzada.
Thus  the  master  of  the  greatest  empire  of  the  earth  had
at  times  no  income  at  his  disposal  except  the  alms  he
could  solicit  from  his  poorest  subjects  to  maintain  his
warfare  against  foreign  miscreants,  the  levy  on  the
Church  for  war-galleys,  and  the  proceeds  of  his  per-
mission to  eat  meat  on  Fridays. ^'^  This  sounds  like  an
epigram,  but  it  is  a  plain,  incontestable  fact.

Thus  the  revenues  of  his  foreign  dominions  being
nearly  consumed  by  their  necessary  expenses,  the  mea-
sure of  his  positive  wealth  was  to  be  found  in  the  riches
of  Spain.  But  Spain  at  that  day  was  not  an  opulent
country.  It  was  impossible  that  it  should  be  rich,  for
nearly  every  law,  according  to  which  the  prosperity  of  a
country  becomes  progressive,  was  habitually  violated.
It  is  difficult  to  state  even  by  approximation  the  amount
of  its  population,  but  the  kingdoms  united  under  the
crown  of  Castile  were  estimated  by  contemporaries  to
contain  eight  millions,  while  the  kingdom  of  Portugal,
together  with  those  annexed  to  Arragon  and  the  other
provinces  of  the  realm,  must  have  numbered  half  afe
many. Here  was  a  populous  nation  in  a  favoured  land

>6  Sorartzo. Compare  Rise  of  Dutch  Ui'publir,  vol.  i.  pt.  ii  c.  iii.

490  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV

but  the  foundation  of  all  wealth  was  sapped  hy  a  per-
verted moral  sentiment.

Labour  was  esteemed  dishonourable.  The  Spaniard,
from  highest  to  lowest,  was  proud,  ignorant,  and  lazy.
For  a  people  endowed  by  nature  with  many  noble
qualities — courage,  temperance,  frugality,  endurance,
quickness  of  perception,  a  high  sense  of  honour,  a  rever-
ence for  law — the  course  of  the  national  history  had
proved  as  ingeniously  bad  a  sj'stem  of  general  education
as  coiild  well  be  invented.

The  eternal  contests,  century  after  century,  upon  the
soil  of  Spain  between  the  crescent  and  the  cross,  and
the  remembrance  of  the  ancient  days  in  which  Oriental
valour  and  genius  had  almost  extirpated  Germanic  insti-
tutions and  Christian  faith  from  the  peninsula,  had  in-
sjiired  one  great  portion  of  the  masses  with  a  hatred,
amounting  almost  to  insanity,  towards  every  form  of  reli-
gion except  the  Church  of  Rome,  towards  every  race  of
mankind  except  the  Goths  and  Vandals.  Innate  rever-
ence for  established  authority  had  expanded  into  an  in-
tensity of  religious  emotion  and  into  a  fanaticism  of
loyalty  which  caused  the  anointed  monarch  leading  true
believers  against  infidels  to  be  accepted  as  a  god.  The
highest  industrial  and  scientific  civilization  that  had
been  exhibited  upon  Spanish  territory  was  that  of  Moors
and  Jews.  When  in  the  course  of  time  those  races  had
been  subjugated,  massacred,  or  driven  into  exile,  not
only  was  Spain  deprived  of  its  highest  intellectual  cul-
ture and  its  most  productive  labour,  but  intelligence,
science,  and  industiy  were  accounted  degrading,  because
the  mark  of  inferior  and  detested  peoples.

The  sentiment  of  self-esteem,  always  a  national  charac-
teristic, assumed  an  almost  ludicrous  shape.  Not  a  ragged
Biscayan  muleteer,  not  a  swineherd  of  Estremadura,  that
did  not  imagine  himself  a  nobleman  because  he  was  not
of  African  descent.  Xot  a  half-starved  ignorant  brigand,
gaining  his  living  on  the  highways  and  byways  by  pil-
fering or  assassination,  that  did  not  kneel  on  the  church
pavement  and  listen  to  orisons  in  an  ancient  tongue,  of
which  he  understood  not  a  syllable,  with  a  sentiment  of
Christian  self-complacency  to  which  Godfrey  of  Bouillon
might  have  been  a  stranger.  Especially  those  boi-n
towards the northern frontier, and therefore  farthest

TRAITS  OF  SPANISH  CHARACTER.  401

removed  from  Moorish  contamination,  were  proudest
of  the  purity  of  their  race.  To  be  an  Asturian  or  a
Gallician,  however  bronzed  by  sun  and  wind,  was  to  be
furnished  with  positive  proof  against  suspicion  of  Moorish
blood ;  but  the  sentiment  was  universal  throughout  the
peninsula."

It  followed  as  a  matter  of  course  that  labour  of  any
kind  was  an  impeachment  against  this  gentility  of
descent.  To  work  was  the  province  of  Moors,  Jews,  and
other  heretics  ;  of  the  Marani  or  accursed,  miscreants
and  descendants  of  miscieants  ;  of  the  Sanbeniti  or  in-
famous, wretches  whose  ancestors  had  been  convicted
by  the  Holy  Inquisition  of  listening,  however  secretly,
to  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  expounded  by  other  lips  than
those  of  Roman  priests.  And  it  is  a  remarkable  illustra-
tion of  this  degradation  of  labour  and  of  its  results,  that
in  the  reign  of  Philip  twenty-five  thousand  individuals
of  these  dishonoured  and  comparatively  industiious
classes,  then  computed  at  four  millions  in  number  in
the  Castilian  kingdoms  alone,  had  united  in  a  society
which  made  a  formal  offer  to  the  king  to  pay  him  two
thousand  dollars  a  head  if  the  name  and  privileges  of
hidalgo  could  be  conferred  upon  them.^*  Thus  an  in-
considerable number  of  this  vilest  and  most  abject  of
the  population — oppressed  by  taxation  which  was  levied
exclusively  upon  the  low,  and  from  which  not  only  the
great  nobles  but  mechanics  and  other  hidalgos  were
exempt — had  been  able  to  earn  and  to  lay  by  enough
to  ofi'er  the  monarch  fifty  millions  of  dollars  to  purchase

17  La  gente  bassa  e  minuta  fa  mimero  Signori  e  si  esercitano  le  arti  ed  in  Siviglia

ed e poverissimo essendo tutta priva  per  il  commercio  dell'  Indie Li

d'industria  e  di  questa  si  serve  quando  Biscaylini  si  stiniano  nobill  d'  inconta-

bisogna  per  soldati E  poveri  ancora  nel  minata  discendenza  supra  tutti  li  popoli

loro  grado  chiamar  si  possono  quelli  che  di  Spagna  perche  essendo  di  sito  diretta-

Bono  fra  li  principi  e  gli  arteSci  perche  mente  opposte  all'  Africa  di  dove  entra-

vogliono  vivere  con fasto,  sono  superbi  rono  1  Mori  e  lontani  da  quelle  parti  delle

assai  hanno  poche  entrate  e  non  le  gover-  Spagna  dove  vivono  li  Marani  che  sono  li

nano  stimano  vergogna  11  far  esercizio  piii  in  Portogallo  professano  che  non  siano

die  possa  aver  apparenza di  mercanzia  entrati  nel  loro  paese  mai  qucste  infezioni

onde  essendo  scnza  indiistria  e  senza  roba  e  ne  vanno  altieri  e  gloriosi  assai. Li

e  volendo  spendere e grandeggiare la  regni  di  Granata,  Valonza,  ed  Andalusia,

fanno male assai perche sdegnano li  all'  incontro  sono  tulti  pieni  di  Moreschi,

minori e dalli  maggiori non  vogliono  le  altre  parti  della  Spagna  sono  conta-

essere  superati  pero  si  vede  quasi  tutta  minate  ed  infette  pur  di  questi  Moreschi

la  Spagna  assai  mendicae  piena  di  povera  e  de  Marani  ancorii,"  &c.  &c.— Sorauzo.
gente  fuori  che  dove  abita  la  Corte,  le is  Soranzo.
Metropoli  del  regni  dove  si  riducono  le

492  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

themselves  out  of  semi-slaver}"  into  manhood,  and  jet
found  their  offer  rejected  by  an  almost  insolvent  king.
Nothing  could  exceed  the  idleness  and  the  frivolity  of
the  upper  classes,  as  depicted  by  contemporary  and  not
unfriendly  observers.  The  nobles  were  as  idle  and  as
ignorant  as  their  inferiors.  They  were  not  given  to
toumays  nor  to  the  delights  of  the  chase  and  table,  but
were  fond  of  brillianL  festivities,  dancing,  gambling,
masquerading,  love-making,  and  pompous  exhibitions  of
equipage,  funiiture,  and  dress.  These  diversions —
together  -ndth  tlie  baiting  of  bulls  and  the  burning  of
Protestants — made  up  their  simple  round  of  pleasures.
When  they  went  to  the  wars  they  scorned  all  positions
but  that  of  general,  whether  by  land  or  sea,  and  as  war
is  a  trade  which  requires  an  apprenticeship,  it  is  un-
necessary to  observe  that  these  grandees  were  rarely
able  to  command,  having  never  learned  to  obey.  The
poorer  Spaniards  were  most  honourably  employed  per-
haps— so  far  as  their  own  mental  development  was  con-
cerned— when  they  were  sent  wdth  pike  and  arquebus
to  fight  heretics  in  France  and  Flanders.  They  became
brave  and  indomitable  soldiers  when  exported  to  the  seat
of  war,  and  thus  afforded  pioof — by  strenuously  doing  the
hai'dest  physical  work  that  himian  beings  can  be  called
upon  to  perform,  campaigning  year  after  year  amid  the
ineffable  deprivations,  dangers,  and  sufferings  which  are
the  soldier's  lot — that  it  was  fiom  no  want  of  industiy
or  capacitj^  that  the  lower  masses  of  Spaniards  in  that
age  were  the  idle,  listless,  dice-plajdng,  begging,  filch-
ing vagabonds  into  which  cruel  history  and  horrible  in-
stitutions had  converted  them  at  home.

It  is  only  necessary  to  recall  these  well-known  facts  to
understand  why  one  great  element  of  production — human
labour — was  but  meagrely  supplied.  It  had  been  the
deliberate  policy  of  the  Government  for  ages  to  extirpate
the  industrious  classes,  and  now  that  a  great  portion  of
Moors  and  Jews  were  exiles  and  outcasts,  it  was  im-
possible to  supply  their  place  by  native  workmen.  Even
the  mechanics,  who  condescended  to  work  with  their
hands  in  the  towns,  looked  down  alike  upon  those  who
toiled  in  the  field  and  upon  those  who  attempted  to
grow  rich  by  traffic.  A  locksmith  or  a  wheelwright
who  could  prove  four  descents  of  western  blood  called

EFFECTS  OF  NATIONAL  SELF-ESTEEM.  493

himself  a  son  of  somebody — a  hidalgo  ^° — and  despised
the  farmer  and  the  merchant.  And  those  very  artisaut
were  careful  not  to  injure  themselves  by  excessive  in
dustry,  although  not  reluctant  by  exorbitant  prices  tc
acquire  in  one  or  two  days  what  might  seem  a  fail
remuneration  for  a  week,  and  to  impi-ess  upon  their
customers  that  it  was  rather  by  way  of  favour  that  they
were  willing  to  serve  them  at  all.

Labour  being  thus  deficient,  it  is  obvious  that  there
could  hardly  have  been  a  great  accumulation,  according
to  modern  ideas,  of  capital.  That  other  chief  element
of  national  wealth,  which  is  the  result  of  generations  ol
labour  and  of  abstinence,  was  accordingly  not  abundant.
And  even  those  accretions  of  capital,  which  in  the  course
of  centuries  had  been  inevitable,  were  as  clumsily  and
inadequately  diflused  as  the  most  exquisite  human  per-
verseness  could  desire.  If  the  object  of  civil  and  poli-
tical institutions  had  been  to  produce  the  greatest  ill  to
the  greatest  number,  that  object  had  been  as  nearly
attained  at  last  in  Spain  as  human  imperfection  per-
mits ;  the  efforts  of  government  and  of  custom  coming
powerfully  to  the  aid  of  the  historical  evils  already
indicated.

It  is  superfluous  to  say  that  the  land  belonged  not  to
those  who  lived  Tipon  it — but  subject  to  the  pre-eminent
light  of  the  crown — to  a  small  selection  of  the  human
species.  Moderate  holdings,  small  farms,  peasant  pro-
prietorships, were  unknown.  Anj^  kind  of  terrestrial
possession,  in  short,  was  as  far  beyond  the  reach  of  those
men  who  held  themselves  so  haughtily  and  esteemed
themselves  so  inordinately,  as  were  the  mountains  in
the  moon.

The  great  nobles — and  of  real  grandees  of  Spain  there

'9  "Gli Idalghi sono  per  il piu gli  Marani  a  difforenza  delli  Cri?tiani  nuovi

artefici  che  godono  il  privilegio  di  questo  che  now  haniio  questo  caiidi^r  di  nasci-

titolo,  o  per  grazia  ottenuta  dal  re  ...  .  mento  descendendo  da  persoue  iiilttte  da

ovvero  per  disccndeuza  e  per  natiira,  e  questa  macchia Gli  artefici  sono

questi  sono  persone  nate  di  buon  sangue  e  comodi  e  vivono  tutti  molto  lautamento

di  padri  benemeriti  dalla  coruna  che  s'  trattano  con  gran  sprezzatura,  lavorano

banno  acquistato  questo  titolo  con  alcuna  poco  e  per  poterlo  fare  si  fanno  pagare  le

fazione  in servizio  dil  Re. Di  questo  fatture  quello  che  non  si pub  credere,

nome  d'  Idalgo  per  natura  non  possono  volendo,  con la  fatica  che  essi  possono

godare  se  non  queili,  che  nascono  per  lo  fare  in  un  giorno  vivere  e  godcre  tutta

meno  in  quattro gradi di  padre e  di  una  setlimana."— Soranzo.
mudre  che  non  sicno  sUiti  ne  Morescbi  ne

494  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

were  but  forty-iiine,^°  although  the  number  of  titled
families  was  much  larger — owned  all  the  country,  except
that  vast  portion  of  it  which  had  reposed  for  ages  in  the
dead-hand  of  the  Church.  The  law  of  primogeniture,
strictly  enforced,  tended  with  every  generation  to  narrow
the  basis  of  society.  Nearly  every  great  estate  was  an
entail,  passing  from  eldest  sou  to  eldest  son,  until  these
were  exhausted,  in  which  case  a  daughter  transferred
the  family  possessions  to  a  new  house.  Thus  the  capital
of  the  country — meagre  at  best  in  comparison  with  what
it  might  have  been,  had  industry  been  honoured  instead
of  being  despised,  had  the  most  intelligent  and  most
diligent  classes  been  cherished  rather  than  hunted  to
death  or  into  obscure  dens  like  vermin — was  concen-
trated in  very  few  hands.  Not  only  was  the  accumula-
tion less  than  it  should  have  been,  but  the  slenderness
of  its  diffusion  had  nearly  amounted  to  absolute  stagna-
tion. The  few  possessors  of  capital  wasted  their  revenues
in  unproductive  consumption.  The  millions  of  the  needy
never  dreamed  of  the  possibility  of  deriving  benefit  frc)m
the  capital  of  the  rich,  nor  would  have  condescended  to
employ  it,  nor  known  how  to  employ  it,  had  its  use
in  any  form  been  vouchsafed  to  them.  The  surface  of
Spain,  save  only  around  the  few  royal  residences,  ex-
hibited no  splendour  of  architecture,  whether  in  town
or  country,  no  wonders  of  agricultural  or  horticultural
skill,  no  monuments  of  engineering  and  constructive
genius  in  roads,  bridges,  docks,  warehouses,  and  other
ornamental  and  useful  fabrics,  or  in  any  of  the  thousand
ways  in  which  man  facilitates  intercourse  among  his
kind  and  subdues  nature  to  his  will.^^

Yet  it  can  never  be  too  often  repeated  that  it  is  only
the  Spaniard  of  the  sixteenth  century,  such  as  extraneous
circumstances  had  made  him,  that  is  here  depicted  ;  that
he,  even  like  his  posterity  and  his  ancestors,  had  been
endowed  by  Nature  with  some  of  her  noblest  gifts. Acute-

20  Soranzo  .  per  le  ville,  non  giardini,  non  vigne,  iion

21  "  Le  citta non  riescono  ne  altra  cosa  di  delizia  ne  di  magiiificenza

per  magiiificenza  di  edificii  ne  per  bcllezza  fuori  che  nelle  fabbriche  reali :  non  s'in-

di  strade,  nh  per  grandezza  di  piazza  ne  tendono  di  fortifieazioni  e  quelli  che  non

per  esquisitezza  di  altri  ornamenti  molto  la  vanno a imparare  fuori di  la  non

conspicui  ne  troppo  riguardevoli,"  kc,  &c.  intendono  la  disciplina  niilitare,  percib

"non  si ha  in  Spagna  cogni-  non hanno  nel  paese  ue  ingegneri tie

zione  d'  architettnra,  percib  non  si  veg-  buoni  capitani."— Soranzo.

gouo  belle  fabljiiche,  ne  per  le  terre  ne

ECCLESIASTICAL  HIERAIICHY.  495

ness  of  intellect,  wealth  of  imagination,  heroic  qualities
of  heart,  and  hand,  and  brain,  rarely  surpassed  in  any
race,  and  manifested  on  a  thousand  battle-fields,  and  in
the  triumphs  of  a  magnificent  and  most  original  litera-
ture, had  not  been  able  to  save  a  whole  nation  from  the
disasters  and  the  degradation  which  the  mere  words
Philip  II.  and  the  Holy  Inquisition  suggest  to  every
educated  mind.

Nor  is  it  necessary  for  my  purpose  to  measure  exactly
the  space  which  separated  Spain  from  the  other  leading-
monarchies  of  the  clay.  That  the  standard  of  civilization
was  a  vastly  higher  one  in  England,  Holland,  or  even
France — torn  as  they  all  were  with  perpetual  civil  war —
no  thinker  will  probably  deny  ;  but  as  it  is  rather  my
pxarpose  at  this  moment  to  exhibit  the  evils  which  may
spi'ing  from  a  perfectly  bad  monarchical  system,  as  admi-
nistered by  a  perfectly  bad  king,  I  prefer  not  to  wander
at  present  from  the  country  which  was  ruled  for  almost
half  a  century  by  Philip  II.

Besides  the  concentration  of  a  great  part  of  the  capital
of  the  country  in  a  very  small  number  of  titled  families,
still  another  immense  portion  of  the  national  wealth  be-
longed, as  already  intimated,  to  the  Church.

There  were  eleven  archbishops,  at  the  head  of  whom
stood  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  with  the  enormous
annual  revenue  of  three  hundred  thousand  dollars.  Next
to  him  came  the  Archbishop  of  Seville,  with  one  hundred
and  fifty  thousand  dollais  yearly,  while  the  income  of
the  others  varied  from  fifty  thousand  to  twenty  thousand
dollars  respectively.-'^

There  were  sixty-two  bishops,  with  annual  incomes
ranging  from  fifty  thousand  to  six  thousand  dollars.  The
churches,  also,  of  these  various  episcopates  were  as
richly  endowed  as  the  great  hierarchs  themselves.-^  But
without  fatiguing  the  reader  with  minute  details,  it  is
sufficient  to  say  that  one-third  of  the  whole  annual  in-
come of  Spain  and  Portugal  belonged  to  the  ecclesiastical
body.^*  In  return  for  this  enormous  proportion  of  the
earth's  fruits,  thus  placed  by  the  caprice  of  destiny  at
their  disposal,  these  holy  men  did  very  little  work  in
the  world.  They  fed  their  flocks  neither  with  bread
nor  with  spiritual  food. They  taught  little,  preached

496  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

little,  dispensed  little  in  charity.  Yeiy  few  of  the  swarm-
ing millions  of  naked  and  hungry  throughout  the  land
were  clothed  or  nourished  out  of  these  prodigious
revenues  of  the  Church.  The  constant  and  avowed
care  of  those  prelates  was  to  increase  their  worldly  pos-
sessions, to  build  up  the  fortunes  of  their  respective
families,  to  grow  richer  and  richer  at  the  expense  of  the
people  whom  for  centuries  they  had  fleeced.  Of  gross
crime,  of  public  ostentatious  immorality,  such  as  had
made  the  Roman  priesthood  of  that  and  preceding  ages
loathsome  in  the  sight  of  man  and  God,  the  Spanish
Church-dignitaries  were  innocent.  Avarice,  greediness,
and  laziness  were  their  characteristics.  It  is  almost
superfluous  to  say  that,  while  the  ecclesiastical  princes
were  rolling  in  this  almost  fabulous  wealth,  the  subor-
dinate clergy,  the  mob  of  working  priests,  were  needy,
half-starved  mendicants.^""

From  this  rapid  survey  of  the  condition  of  the  penin-
sula it  will  seem  less  surprising  than  it  might  do  at  first
glance  that  the  revenue  of  the  greatest  monarch  of  the
world  was  rated  at  the  small  amount — even  after  due
allowance  for  the  difference  of  general  values  between
the  sixteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries — of  sixteen  mil-
lions of  dollars.  The  King  of  Spain  was  powerful  and
redoubtable  at  home  and  abroad,  because  accident  had
placed  the  control  of  a  variety  of  separate  realms  in  his
single  hand.  At  the  same  time  Spain  was  poor  and
weak,  because  she  had  lived  for  centuries  in  violation  of
the  principles  on  which  the  wealth  and  strength  of
nations  depend.  Moreover,  every  one  of  those  subject
and  violently  annexed  nations  hated  Spain  with  undying

25  "  Non  si  esercitano  quest'  Prelati  per  par  la  vita  che  menano  e  contentandosi

lo piu  nelle  opere  pie  come  dovrebbero  del  solo  gusto  di  arrichire  tiel  restante

non  sono  niolto  elemosinarij  e  uon  atten-  vivono  con  termine  di  graud'  esempio :

done  a  fare  il  loro  uflBcio  paftorale  con  ed  in  somma  in  quests  eutrate  ccclesi-

quelle  carita  che  sarebbe  forse  lor  debito,  astiehe  che  toccano  al  clero  che  parlerd

poco  insegnauo  poco  riprendono  poco  dis-  pol  di  quolle  che  sono  del  re  si  fa  conto

pensjino  e  poco  pascono  le  luro  pocore  iie  che  sia  comproso  il  terzo  delle  entrate

col  pane  ne  colla  parola  atteudono  all'  di  quui  regni,  ma  oltre  li  prelati  e  li  Bene-

utilita  propria  ed  arrichire  loro  stessi  e  le  ficieti  delle  lor  chiese  11  resto  del  clero  c

lor  famiglie,  ed  accumulare  ed  a  far  bene  mendico  e  bisognoso." — Soranzo.
alle lor  case  di  quello  che  loro  avanza These  are  the  words,  not  of  a  democrat

delle  richezze  del  re,  sebbene  prr  dire  il  or  Protestant, but  ol a  devoted Papist

veto  nel  resto  sono  per  lo  piu  di  buoni  and a most haughty aristocrat— the

costumi  ne  si  sente  occasione  di  scaudalo  Venetian  ambassador.

I

FOREIGN  COMMERCE  OF  SPAIN,  497

fervoiir,^"  while  an  infernal  polic}' — the  leading  charac-
teristics of  which  were  to  sow  dissensions  among  the
nobles,  to  confiscate  their  property  on  all  convenient
occasions,  and  to  bestow  it  upon  Spaniaids  and  other
foreigners ;  to  keep  the  discontented  masses  in  poverty,
but  to  deprive  them  of  the  power  or  disposition  to  unite
with  their  superiors  in  rank  in  demonstrations  against
the  crown — had  sufficed  to  suppress  any  extensive  revolt
in  the  various  Italian  states  united  under  Philip's  sceptre.
Still  more  intense  than  the  hatied  of  the  Italians  was
the  animosity  which  was  glowing  in  every  Portuguese
breast  against  the  Spanish  sway  ;  while  even  the  Arra-
gonese  were  only  held  in  subjection  by  terror,  which,
indeed,  in  one  form  or  another,  was  the  leading  instru-
ment of  PhilijD's  government.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  enlarge  upon  the  regulations
of  Spain's  foreign  commerce ;  for  it  will  be  enough  to
repeat  the  phrase  that  in  her  eyes  the  great  ocean  from
east  to  west  was  a  Spanish  lake,  sacred  to  the  ships  of
the  king's  subjects  alone.  With  such  a  simple  code  of
navigation  coming  in  aid  of  the  other  causes  which
impoverished  the  land,  it  may  be  believed  that  the
maritime  traffic  of  the  country  would  dwindle  into
the  same  exiguous  proportions  which  characterised  her
general  industry.

Moreover,  it  should  never  be  forgotten  that,  although
the  various  kingdoms  of  Spain  weie  politically  conjoined
by  their  personal  union  under  one  despot,  they  were
commercially  distinct.  A  line  of  custom-houses  sepa-
rated each  province  from  the  rest,  and  made  the  various
inhabitants  of  the  peninsula  practically  strangers  to  each
other.  Thus  there  was  less  traffic  between  Castile,
Biscay,  and  Arragon  than  there  was  between  any  one
of  them  and  remote  foreign  nations.  The  Biscayans,  for
example,  could  even  import  and  export  commodities  to
and  from  remote  countries  by  sea,  free  of  duty,  while
their  merchandize  to  and  fiom  Castile  was  crushed  by
imposts.  As  this  ingenious  perversity  of  positive
arrangements  came  to  increase  the  negative  inconveni-

26  This dominion of the barbarians before  Philip  was  bom,  and  certainly  the
Stinks  in  every  one's  nostrils:  "  A  ognuno tyranny  did  not  grow  sweeter  during  his
puzza  questo  barbaro  dominio,"  was  the reign,
energetic  expression  of  jVIacchiavclli,  even

VOL. III.  2 K

498  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXX V-

ences  caused  by  the  almost  total  absence  of  tolerable
roads,  canals,  bridges,  and  other  means  of  intercommuni-
cation, it  may  be  imagined  that  internal  traffic —the  very
life-blood  of  every  prosperous  nation — was  very  nearly
stagnant  in  Spain.  As  an  inevitable  result,  the  most
thriving  branch  of  national  industry  was  that  of  the
professional  smuggler,  who,  in  the  pursuit  of  his  voca-
tion, did  his  best  to  aid  Government  in  sapping  the
wealth  of  the  nation.^

The  whole  accumulated  capital  of  Spain,  together  with
the  land — in  the  general  sense  v/hich  includes  not  only
the  soil  but  the  immovable  property  of  a  country —
being  thus  exclusively  owned  by  the  crown,  the  church,
and  a  very  small  number  of  patrician  families,  while  the
supply  of  labour — owing  to  the  special  causes  which  bad
converted  the  masses  of  the  people  into  paupers  ashamed
to  work  but  not  unwilling  to  beg  or  to  rob — was  in-
credibly small,  it  is  obvious  that,  so  long  as  the  same
causes  continued  in  operation,  the  downfall  of  the
country  was  a  logical  result  from  which  there  was  no
escape.  Nothing  but  a  general  revolution  of  mind  and
hand  against  the  prevalent  system,  nothing  but  some
great  destructive  but  regenerating  catastrophe,  could
redeem  the  people.

And  it  is  the  condition  of  the'  people  which  ought
always  to  be  the  prominent  subject  of  interest  to  those
who  stud}'  the  records  of  the  Past.  It  is  only  by  such
study  that  we  can  derive  instruction  from  history,  and
enable  ourselves,  however  dimly  and  feebly,  to  cast  the
horoscope  of  younger  nations.  Human  history,  so  far
as  it  has  been  written,  is  at  best  a  mere  fragment;  for
the  few  centuries  or  year-thousands  of  which  there  is
definite  record  are  as  nothing  compared  to  the  millions
of  unnumbered  years  during  which  man  has  perhaps
walked  the  earth.  It  may  be  as  practicable  therefore  to
derive  instruction  from  a  minute  examination  in  detail
of  a  very  limited  period  of  time  and  space,  and  thus  to
deduce  general  rules  for  the  infinite  future,  during
which  our  species  may  be  destined  to  inhabit  this
planet,  as  by  a  more  extensive  survey,  which  must  how-
ever be  at  best  a  limited  one.  Men  die,  but  Man  is
immortal,  and  it  would  be  a  sufficiently  forlorn  prospect

^  See  Lafuente,  Ilir-t.  Gen.  de  EspLiiia,  t.  xv.  p.  148.

CONDITION  OF  THE  PEOPLE,  499

For  humanity  if  we  were  not  able  to  discover  causes  in
operation  which  woTild  ultimately  render  the  system  of
Philip  11.  impossible  in  any  part  of  the  globe.  Cer-
tainly, were  it  otherwise,  the  study  of  human  history
would  be  the  most  wearisome  and  unprofitable  of  all
conceivable  occupations.  The  festivities  of  coiiits,  the
magnificence  of  an  aristocracy,  the  sayings  and  doings
of  monarchs  and  their  servants,  the  dynastic  wars,  the
solemn  treaties,  the  Ossa  upon  I'elion  of  diplomatic  and
legislative  rubbish  by  which,  in  the  course  of  centuries,
a  few  individuals  or  combinations  of  individuals  have
been  able  to  obstruct  the  march  of  humanity,  and  have
essayed  to  suspend  the  operation  of  elemental  laws— all
this  contains  but  little  solid  food  for  grown  human
beings.  The  condition  of  the  brave  and  quick-witted
Spanish  people  in  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury gives  more  matter  for  reflection  and  possible
instruction.

That  science  is  the  hope  of  the  world,  that  ignorance
is  the  real  enslaver  of  mankind,  and  therefore  the
natural  ally  of  every  form  of  despotism,  may  be  assumed
as  an  axiom,  and  it  was  certainly  the  ignorance  and
superstition  of  the  people  upon  which  the  I'hilippian
policy  was  founded.

A  vast  mass,  entirely  uneducated,  half  fed,  half
clothed,  unemployed,  and  reposing  upon  a  still  lower
and  denser  stratum — the  millions  namely  of  the
"  Accursed,"  of  the  Africans,  and  last  and  vilest  of  all,
the  "blessed  "  descendants  of  Spanish  protestants  whom
the  Holy  Office  had  branded  with  perpetual  infamy-'*
because  it  had  burned  their  progenitors — this  was  the
People;  and  it  was  these  paupers  and  outcasts,  nearly
the  whole  nation,  that  payed  all  the  imposts  of  which
the  public  revenue  was  composed.  The  great  nobles,
priests,  and  even  the  hidalgos,  were  exempt  from  taxa-
tion,^^  Need  more  be  said  to  indicate  the  inevital>le
ruin  of  both  government  and  people  ?

And  it  was  over  such  a  people,  and  with  institutions
like  these,  that  Philip  II.  was  permitted  to  rule  during
forty-three  years, II is  power  was  absolute.^'* With  this

i»  "Segnati e  notati  di porpetua  in- S9  Soranzo.
famia— vivono  quindi  (iisporati  ed  urrab- ">  "Ha  a.-soluto  impcrio  sopra  \o  vite
biatissimi "  e facolta  delll suddili,  e libcro  )>;>dioN

2  K  2-

600  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

single  phrase  one  might  as  well  dismiss  any  attempt  at
specification.  He  made  war  or  peace  at  will  with
foreign  nations.  He  had  power  of  life  and  death  over
all  his  subjects.  He  had  unlimited  control  of  their
worldly  goods.  As  he  claimed  supreme  jurisdiction
over  their  religious  opinions  also,  he  was  master  of  their
minds,  bodies,  and  estates.  As  a  matter  of  course,  he
nominated  and  removed  at  will  every  executive  func-
tionary, every  judge,  every  magistrate,  every  military
or  civil  officer;  and  moreover,  he  not  only  selected,
according  to  the  license  tacitly  conceded  to  him  by  the
pontiff,  every  archbishop,  bishop,  and  other  Church
dignitary,  but,  through  his  great  influence  at  Eome,  he
named  most  of  the  cardinals,  and  thus  controlled  the
election  of  the  popes.  The  whole  machinery  of  society,
political,  ecclesiastical,  military,  was  in  his  single  hand.
There  was  a  show  of  provincial  privilege  here  and  there
in  different  parts  of  Spain,  but  it  was  but  the  phantom
of  that  ancient  municipal  liberty  which  it  had  been  the
especial  care  of  his  father  and  his  greatgrandfather  to
destroy.  Most  patiently  did  Philip,  by  his  steady  in-
activity, bring  about  the  decay  of  the  last  ruins  of  free
institutions  in  the  peninsula.  The  councils  and  legisla-
tive assemblies  were  convoked  and  then  wearied  out  in
waiting  for  that  royal  assent  to  their  propositions  and
transactions,  which  was  deferred  intentionally,  year  after
year,  and  never  given.  Thus  the  time  of  the  deputies
was  consumed  in  accomplishing  infinite -nothing,  until
the  moment  arrived  when  the  monarch,  without  any
violent  stroke  of  state,  could  feel  safe  in  issuing  decrees
and  pragmatic  edicts  ;  thus  reducing  the  ancient  legisla-
tive and  consultative  bodies  to  nullity,  and  substituting
the  will  of  an  individual  for  a  constitutional  fabric.^^  To
criticise  the  expenses  of  government  or  to  attempt  inter-
ference with  the  increase  of  taxation  became  a  sorry
farce.  The  forms  remained  in  certain  provinces  after
the  life  had  long  since  fled.  Only  in  Arragon  had  the
ancient  privileges  seemed  to  defy  the  absolute  authority

della  pace  e  della  guerra,  ha  plena  potesta  i  General!  degli  eserciti  e  delle  armate,  e

sopra  le  leiigi,  sopra  la  giustizla  e  sopra  le  per  la  grande  autorita  che  tiene  c»n  i

grazi?,  ha  la  nominazione  di  tutti  i  bine-  Pontefici  si  pub  dire  che  faccia  ancora

ficliecclesiasiici,  delle  tre  ordini  di  caval-  i  Cardinal!." — Soranzo.

leria crea  li  President!  1!  Vice-  3i  Lafuente,  xv.  151.

re,  li  Luogotenenti,  Governatori,  Capiuini,

EXTINCTION  OF  LIBERTY  IN  SPAIN.  i)()l

of  the  monarcli ;  and  it  was  reserved  for  Antonio  Perez
to  be  the  cause  of  their  final  extirpation.  The  grinning
skulls  of  the  Chief  Justice  of  that  kingdom  and  of
the  boldest  and  noblest  advocates  and  defenders  of  the
national  liberties,  exposed  for  j'ears  in  the  market-place
with  the  record  of  their  death- sentence  attached,  in-
formed the  Spaniards,  in  language  which  the  most
ignorant  could  read,  that  the  crime  of  defending  a
remnant  of  human  freedom  and  constitutional  law  was
sure  to  draw  down  condign  punishment.^^  It  was  the
last  time  in  that  age  that  even  the  ghost  of  extinct
liberty  was  destined  to  revisit  the  soil  of  Spain.  It
mattered  not  that  the  immediate  cause  for  pursuing
Perez  was  his  successful  amour  with  the  king's  mistress,
nor  that  the  crime  of  which  he  was  formally  accused
was  the  deadly  offence  of  Calvinism,  rather  than  his
intrigue  with  the  Eboli  and  his  assassination  of  Esco-
vedo  ;  for  it  was  in  the  natural  and  simple  sequence  of
events  that  the  last  vestige  of  law  or  freedom  should  be
obliterated  wherever  Philip  could  vindicate  his  sway.
It  must  be  admitted,  too,  that  the  king  seized  this
occasion  to  strike  a  decisive  blow  with  a  promptness
very  different  from  his  usual  artistic  sluggishness.
Earely  has  a  more  terrible  epigram  been  spoken  by  man
than  the  royal  words  which  constituted  the  whole  trial
and  sentence  of  the  Chief  Justice  of  Arragon,  for  the
crime  of  defending  the  law  of  his  country  :  "  You  will
take  John  of  Lanuza,  and  you  will  have  his  head  cut
off."  This  was  the  end  of  the  magistrate  and  of  the  con-
stitution which  he  had  defended.^^

His  power  was  unlimited.  A  man  endowed  with
genius  and  virtue,  and  possessing  the  advantages  of  a
consummate  education,  could  have  perhaps  done  little
more  than  attempt  to  mitigate  the  general  misery,  and
to  remove  some  of  its  causes.  For  it  is  one  of  the  most
pernicious  dogmas  of  the  despotic  system,  and  the  one

32  "  E  sebbene  questa  loro  prerogativa  e  autorita  all'  Ufficio  della  Inquisizioiio  clie

queste  lore  licenze  furono  in  gran  parte  fu  uno  del  maggiori  morsi  per  doinarli

levate  e  per  il  resto  assai  mortificatl  dal  con  che  si  potesse  frenare  la  loro  forocia,'

re  passato  troncando  molte  teste  dei  prin-  &c.  &c. — Soranzo,  Relazione, 1597-1602.

cipali  e  facendole  anco  poner  in  publica  Barozzi  and  Berchet. Relazioni,  &c.,  Ser.

mostra  con  le  iscrizioni  appresso  dei  loro  i.  vol.  i.

delitti  a  perpetuo terrore dei posteri, 33  "  Prenderois  a  don  Juan  de  Lanuza

estirpando  li capi, piantondo  cittadelle,  y  hareisle  luego  cortar  la  cat'Cza." See

introducendo guardie  e  aggrandendo 1'  Lafuente,  xv.  131,  132.

V

.502  THK  UNJTKI)  NKTHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

which  the  candid  student  of  liistory  soonest  discovers  to
be  false,  that  the  masses  of  mankind  are  to  look  to  any
individual,  however  exalted  by  birth  or  intellect,  for
their  redemption.  Woe  to  the  world  if  the  nations  are
never  to  learn  that  their  fate  is  and  oTij^ht  to  be  in  their
own  hands;  tliat  ilieir  institutions,  whether  liberal  or
despotic,  are  the  result  of  the  natif)nal  biograjihy  and  of
the  national  character,  not  the  work  of  a  few  individuals
whose  names  have  been  preserved  by  capricious  Accident
as  heroes  and  legislators.  Yet  there  is  no  doubt  that,
while  comparatively  powerless  for  good,  the  individual
despot  is  capable  of  almost  infinite  mischief.  There
have  been  few  men  known  to  history  who  have  been
able  to  accomplish  by  their  own  exertions  so  vast  an
amount  of  evil  as  the  king  who  hiid  just  died.  If  Philip
possessed  a  single  virtue  it  has  eluded  the  conscientious
research  of  the  writer  of  these  jiages.  If  there  are  vices
— as  possibly  there  are — from  which  he  was  exempt,  it
is  because  it  is  not  permitted  to  human  nature  to  attain
perfecticjn  even  in  evil.  The  only  plausible  explanation
— for  ])alliation  there  is  none — of  his  infamous  career  is
that  the  man  really  believed  himself  not  a  king  but  a
god.  He  was  placed  so  high  above  his  fellow-creatures
as,  in  good  faith  perhaps,  to  believe  himself  incapable  of
doing  wrong  ;  so  that,  whether  indulging  his  passions
or  enforcing  throug'hout  the  world  his  religious  and
l^olitical  dogmas,  he  was  ever  conscious  of  embodying
divine  inspirations  and  elemental  laws.  ^\  hen  provid-
ing for  the  assassination  of  a  nK)narch,  or  commanding
the  massacre  of  a  townful  of  Protestants ;  when  tramp-
ling on  every  oath  by  which  a  human  being  can  bind
himself;  when  hiying  desolate  with  fire  and  sword,
during  more  than  a  geneiatiou,  the  provinces  which  he
had  inherited  as  his  private  property,  or  in  carefully
maintaining  the  flames  of  civil  war  in  foreign  kingdoms
which  he  hoped  to  acquire;  while  maintaining  over  all
Christendom  a  gigantic  system  of  bribery,  corruption,
and  espionage,  keeping  the  noblest  names  of  England
and  Scotland  on  his  pension-lists  of  traitors,  and  im-
poverishing his  exchequer  with  the  wages  of  iniquity
paid  in  France  to  men  of  all  degrees,  from  princes  of
blood  like  Guise  and  Mayenne  down  to  the  obscurest
of  country  squires,  he  ever  felt  that  these  base  or  bloody

THE  HOLY  INQUISITION.  603

deeds  were  not  crimes,  but  the  sinipUi  will  of  the  god-
head of  which  he  wa.s  a  portion,  lie  never  doubted  liiat
the  extraordinary  theological  system  which  he  spent  his
life  in  enforcing  witli  lire  and  sword  was  right,  for  it
was  a  part  of  himself.  The  Holy  Iiupiisitiun,  thoiono"hly
established  as  it  was  in  his  ancestral  Spain,  was  a  ])ortio'n
of  the  regnhir  working  niachineiy  by  which  his  absolute
kingship  and  his  supcrlinman  will  expressed  tliemselves.
A  tribunal  which  performed  its  functions  with  a  celerity,
certainty,  and  invisibility  resembling  the  attributes  of
Omnipotence  ;  which,  like  the  pestilence,  entered  palace
or  hovel  at  will,  and  which  smote  the  wretch  guilty  or
suspected  of  heresy  with  a  precision  against  which
no  human  ingenuity  or  sympathy  could  guard — such  an
institution  could  not  but  be  dear  to  his  heart.  ]t  was
inevitable  that  the  extension  and  perpetuation  of  what
he  deemed  its  blessings  throughout  his  dominions  should
be  his  settled  purpose.  Spain  was  governed  by  an
established  terrorism.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
Philip  was  essentially  beloved  in  his  native  land,  or
that  his  religious  and  political  system  was  heartily
accepted  because  consonant  to  the  national  character.
On  the  contrary,  as  lias  been  shown,  a  very  large  pro-
portion of  the  inhabitants  were  either  secretly  false  to
the  Catholic  faith,  or  descended  at  least  from  those  who
had  expiated  their  hostility  to  it  with  their  lives.  But
the  Grand  Inquisitor  was  almost  as  awful  a  ])ersonage
as  the  king  or  the  pope.  His  familiars  were  in  every
village  and  at  every  ii reside,  and  from  their  fangs  there
was  no  escape.  Millions  of  Spaniards  would  have
rebelled  against  the  crown  or  accepted  the  reformed
religion,  had  they  not  been  perfectly  certain  of  being
burned  or  lumged  at  the  slightest  movement  in  such  a
direction."'' The popular force in the course of the

3*  <•  ivii)  Cdsl  qiK'Sli  come  li  Mariini  e  dento  dalla  MacBta  Sua  e  col  sevprlsslino

U  Morcsclii  tratti  da  quella  diaperazione  rigorR  dellA  giustlzla  e  dell' officio  della

che  suole  anco  nogli  animi  vlU  ed  abbietti  Inqulsizione  clic  fe  come  diro  a  suo  luogo

cccitare  spirit!  di  furore  cd' ardiresariaiio  di  tremcnda  autorlta  in  tutta  la  Spajfiia,

inclinati  ad  ogni  solleva/.ione  c  ribellionc  lasciando  npuiitiue  cosa  per piccola  die

sempre  clio  loro  sc  ne  presentasso  oppor-  Bia  e  I'wnc  i  populi  nou  solo  a  Ireno  nia  in

tuna  occasione ;  ma  tanto  gli  imi  como  pprpetuo  terrore  privl  dl  poler  perulcuna

gU  altri  conveiigono  stare  iiuipti  per  le  via  maccliinare  o  tenlare  novitil  dl  ak-una

ragione  che  ho detto  e  dl  plU perclie  sortc."  ....  "  Per  non  lasciar  Inlettiir  il

avendo  il  re  tulli  1  giaiidi  c  tiilto  il  dcro  paese  di  questo  diabollco  morbo  d'eresie,

ch'  e  poderosisslmo  in  tutto  affetto  dipen-  con  tutto  die  il  pericolo  Bia  stato  semprt

50-i  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

political  combinations  of  centuries  i?eemed  at  last  to  have
been  eliminated.  The  nobles,  exempt  from  taxation,
which  crushed  the  people  to  the  earth,  were  the  enemies
rather  than  the  chieftains  and  champions  of  the  lower
classes  in  any  possible  struggle  with  a  crown  to  which
they  were  united  by  ties  of  interest  as  well  as  of  affection,
while  the  great  churchmen,  too,  were  the  immediate
dependants  and  of  course  the  firm  supporters  of  the  king.
Thiis  the  people,  without  natural  leaders,  without
oiganisation,  and  themselves  divided  into  two  mutually
hostile  sections,  were  opposed  by  every  force  in  the
State.  Crown,  nobility,  and  clergy ;  all  the  wealth  and
all  that  there  was  of  learning,  were  banded  together  to
suppress  the  democratic  principle.^®  But  even  this
would  hardly  have  sufficed  to  extinguish  every  spark  of
liberty,  had  it  not  been  for  the  potent  machinery  of  the
Inquisition  ;  nor  could  that  perfection  of  terrorism  have
become  an  established  institution  but  for  the  extraor-
dinary mixture  of  pride  and  superstition  of  which  the
national  character  had  been,  in  the  course  of  the  national
history,  compounded.  The  Spanish  portion  of  the
people hated  the  nobles, whose petty  exactions and

e  sia  tuttavia  grandissirao  per  la  vicinita  temere  chfe  non  hanno  alcuna  autorita

della  Francia,  per  la  diversita  del  popoli  con  li  popoli  non  fortezze  per  ritirarsi,

della  Spagna,  perciocche  11  Moreschi  e  11  nou geguito non obbedienza de' loro

Marani  abbracciarieno  prontamente  ogni  vassalli,  non  buona  intelligenza  fra  loro,

occasione  die  lor  si  presentasse  di  soUeva-  non  stimati  dalla  plebe,  odiati  dai  proprii

zione,  apririauo  volentieri  1'  adito e si  sudditi,  che  sono  tiranneggiati  da  loro,  in

fariano  facilmente  compagni  a  chi  volesse  nial  concetto  della  gente  minuta  per  la

tentar commozione In quel regni per  durezza  che  usano  nei  pagamenti,  oltre

qualunque  cagione si  volesse,  e  quella  che  quest!  fanno  una  particolar  profes-

della  religione  sarebbe  la  piii  facile. .  .  .  sione  di  sostentare  con  la  loro  fedelta  la

La  facilita  che  tengono  li  Spagnaoli  nel  grandezza  della  corona  e  stimano  questa

credere  cio  che  loro  viene  affermato,  che  esser  propria e particolar  gloria della

nasce  da  ignoranza  aprirebbe  la  strada  a  nazione  Spagnuola  e  di  loro  medesimi

chi volesse seminarvi nuove opinioni  sopra  tutti; perciocche quell'  alterezza

molto  facile La  gran  quantitb,  d'  animo  che  fa  si  che  sdegnarebbero  d'

di  beni  ecclesiastici,  che  vi  sono  alletteria  esser  soggetti  ad  altro  principe  che  al  re

moUi  che  avessero  pensiero  d'  introdurvi  di  Spagna  opera  in  modo  che  umiliandoli

novita  e  sedizioni  a  spessassarne  laChiesa  a  questo,  reputano  che  sia  lor  grandezza

per  impadronirsene in  somma  si  sostenendo  quella  ccjrona  viver  seggetti

pub dire  che  il  rigore cosi  grande  di  al  maggior  re  del  mondo  e  che  altri  che

questo  oflBcio  (Inquisizione)  mantiene  il  un  principe  tale  non  sia  degno  dl  domi-

rito  della vera  religione  in  Spagna  che  narli. Li  popoli  poi  non  hanno  ne  capi

senza  questo  si  pub  grandemente  temere  ne  modo  di  far  machinazione  non  tengono

che  per  tan ti  Moreschi  e  Marani  che  sono  appoggio  di  principi  forestieri  non  vi  e

sparsi  per  11  paese  si  vedriano  per  questo  persona  che  con  giusta  pretensione  potesse

rispetto di religione  del movimenti  e  cccitar  gli  altri,  no  v'  essendo  alcuno  di

dclle  commozioni  importanti."  sangue  regio  che  potesse  ragionevolmente

35  "  Perciocche de'  principi non  piu  pretendere." — Soranzo.

SPANISH  GOVERNMENT  A  TERRORISM.  605

oppressions  were  always  visible ;  but  they  had  a  rever-
ential fear  of  the  unseen  monarch,  as  the  representative
both  of  the  great  unsullied  Christian  nation  to  which
the  meanest  individual  was  proud  to  belong,  and  of  the
God  of  wrath  who  had  decreed  the  extermination  of  all
unbelievers.  The  "accursed"  portion  of  the  people
were  sufficiently  disloyal  at  heart,  but  were  too  much
crushed  by  oppression  and  contempt  to  imagine  them-
selves men.  As  to  the  Netherlanders,  they  did  not  fight
originally  for  independence.  It  was  not  until  after  a
quarter  of  a  century  of  fighting  that  they  ever  thought
of  renouncing  their  allegiance  to  Philip,  They  fought
to  protect  themselves  against  being  taxed  by  the  king
without  the  consent  of  those  constitutional  assemblies
which  he  had  sworn  to  maintain,  and  to  save  themselves
and  their  children  from  being  burned  alive  if  they  dared
to  read  the  Bible.  Independence  followed  after  nearly
a  half-century  of  fighting,  but  it  would  never  have  been
obtained  or  perhaps  demanded,  had  those  grievances  of
the  people  been  redressed.

Of  this  perfect  despotism  Philip  was  thus  the  sole
administrator.  Certainly  he  looked  upon  his  mission
with  seriousness,  and  was  industrious  in  performing  his
royal  functions.  But  this  earnestness  and  seriousness
were,  in  truth,  his  darkest  vices  ;  for  the  most  frivolous
voluptuary  that  ever  wore  a  crown  would  never  have
compassed  a  thousandth  part  of  the  evil  which  was
Philip's  life-work.  It  was  because  he  was  a  believer  in
himself,  and  in  what  he  called  his  religion,  that  he  was
enabled  to  perpetrate  such  a  long  catalogue  of  crimes.
When  an  humble  malefactor  is  brought  before  an
ordinary  court  of  justice,  it  is  not  often,  in  any  age  or
country,  that  he  escapes  the  pillory  or  the  gallows
because,  from  his  own  point  of  view,  his  actions,  instead
of  being  criminal,  have  been  commendable,  and  because
the  multitude  and  continuity  of  his  offences  prove  him
to  have  been  sincere.  And  because  anointed  monarchs
are  amenable  to  no  human  tribunal,  save  to  that
terrible  assize  which  the  People,  bursting  its  chain  from
time  to  time  in  the  course  of  the  ages,  sets  up  for  the
trial  of  its  oj^pressors,  and  which  is  called  Eevolution,
it  is  the  more  important  for  the  great  interests  of
humanity  that  before  the  judgment-seat of  History  a

506  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

crown  should  be  no  protection  to  its  wearer.  There  is
no  plea  to  the  jurisdiction  of  history,  if  history  be  true
to  itself.

As  for  the  royal  criminal  called  Philip  II.,  his  life  is
his  arraignment,  and  these  volumes  will  have  been
written  iu  vain  if  a  specification  is  now  required.

Homicide  such  as  was  hardly  ever  compassed  before
by  one  human  being  was  committed  by  Philip  when  in
the  famous  edict  of  1508  he  sentenced  every  man,  woman,
and  child  in  the  Netherlands  to  death.  That  the  whole
of  this  population,  three  millions  or  more,  were  not
positively  destro^'ed  was  because  no  human  energy  could
suffice  to  execute  the  diabolical  decree.  But  Alva,
toiling  hard,  accomplished  much  of  this  murderous
work.  By  the  aid  of  the  "  Council  of  Blood,"  and  of
the  sheriiis  and  executioners  of  the  Holy  Inquisition,
he  was  able  sometimes  to  put  eight  hundred  human
beings  to  death  in  a  single  week  for  the  crimes  of  Pro-
testantism or  of  opulence,  and  at  the  end  of  half-a-dozen
years  he  could  boast  of  having  strangled,  drowned,
burned,  or  beheaded  somewhat  more  than  eighteen
thousand  of  his  fellow-creatures.  These  were  some  of
the  non-combatant  victims  ;  for  of  the  tens  of  thousands
who  perished  during  his  administration  alone,  in  siege
and  battle,  no  statistical  record  has  been  preserved.

In  face  of  such  wholesale  crimes,  of  these  forty  years
of  bloodshed,  it  is  superfluoiis  to  refer  to  such  isolated
misdeeds  as  his  repeated  attempts  to  procure  the  assassi-
nation of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  crowned  at  last  by  the
success  of  Balthasar  Gerard,  nor  to  his  persistent  efforts
to  poison  the  Queen  of  England  ;  for  the  enunciation  of
all  these  murders  or  attempts  at  murder  would  require
a  repetition  of  the  story  which  it  has  been  one  of  the
main  purposes  of  these  volumes  to  recite.

For  indeed  it  seems  like  mere  railing  to  specify  his
crimes.  Their  very  magnitude  and  unbroken  continuity,
together  with  their  impunity,  give  them  almost  the
appearance  of  inevitable  phenomena.  The  horrible
monotony  of  his  career  stupifies  the  mind  until  it  is
ready  to  accept  the  principle  of  evil  as  the  fundamental
law  of  the  world.

His  robberies,  like  his  murders,  were  colossal.  The
vast  system  of  confiscation  set  up  in  the  Netherlands

PHILIP'S  CHARACTEE.  507

was  sufficient  to  reduce  unmimljercd  innocent  families
to  beggary,  although  powerless  to  break  the  spirit  of
civil  and  religious  liberty  of  to  pay  the  expenses  of  sub-
jugating a  people.  Not  often  in  the  world's  history  have
so  many  thousand  individuals  been  plundered  by  a  fo-
reign tyrant  for  no  crime,  save  that  they  were  rich
enough  to  be  worth  robbing.  For  it  can  never  be  too
often  repeated  that  those  confiscations  and  extortions
were  perpetrated  upon  Catholics  as  well  as  Protestants,
monarchists  as  well  as  rebels ;  the  possession  of  pro-
perty making  proof  of  orthodoxy  or  of  loyalty  well-nigh
impossible.

Falsehood  was  the  great  basis  of  the  king's  character,
which  perhaps  derives  its  chief  importance,  as  a  political
and  psychological  study,  from  this  very  fact.  It  has
been  shown  throughout  the  whole  course  of  this  history,
by  the  evidence  of  his  most  secret  correspondence,  that
he  was  false,  most  of  all,  to  those  to  whom  he  gave  what
he  called  his  heart.  Granvelle,  Alva,  Don  John,  Alex-
ander Fai'nese,  all  those,  in  short,  who  were  deepest  in
his  confidence  experienced  in  succession  his  entire  per-
fidy, while  each  in  turn  was  sacrificed  to  his  master's
sleepless  suspicion.  The  pope  himself  was  often  as  much
the  dupe  of  the  Catholic  monarch's  faithlessness  as  the
vilest  heretic  had  ever  been.  Could  the  great  school-
master of  iniquit}'-  for  the  sovereigns  and  politicians  of
the  south  have  lived  to  witness  the  practice  of  the
monarch  who  had  most  laid  to  heart  the  precepts  of
the  "  Prince,"  he  would  have  felt  that  he  had  not
written  in  vain,  and  that  his  great  paragon  of  successful
falsehood,  Ferdinand  of  Arragon,  had  been  surpassed  by
the  great  grandson.  For  the  ideal  perfection  of  perfidy,
foresliadowed  by  the  philosopher  who  died  in  the  year
of  Philip's  birth,  was  thoroughly  embodied  at  last  by
this  potentate.  Certainly  Nicholas  Macchiavelli  could
have  hoped  for  no  more  docile  pupil.  That  all  men  are
vile,  that  the}"  are  liars,  scoundrels,  poltroons,  and  idiots
alike — ever  ready  to  deceive  and  yet  easily  to  be  duped,
and  that  he  only  is  fit  to  be  king  who  excels  his  kind  in
the  arts  of  deception  j^"  by  this  great  maxim  of  the  Flo-

36  •<  Percbe  degli  uomini  si  pub  dir  cupidi  di  guailagno:  e  raentre  fai  lor  bene
questo  generalmeiite  che  siono  ingrati,  sono  tutti  luoi,  ti  offi  riscono  il  sangue,  la
volubili,  simulatori,  fuggitori  de'  pericoli, loba,  la  vita,  cd  i  figli  come  di  sopra  dissi.

508  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXV.

rentine,  Philip  was  ever  guided.  And  tliose  well-
known  texts  of  hypocrisy,  strewn  by  the  same  hand,
had  srirely  not  fallen  on  stony  ground  when  received
into  Philip's  royal  soul.

"  Often  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  maintain  power,  to
act contrary to faith, contrary to charity, contrary

to  humanity,  contrary  to  religion A  prince

ought  therefore  to  have  great  care  that  from  his  mouth
nothing  should  ever  come  that  is  not  filled  with  those
five  qualities,  and  that  to  see  and  hear  him  he  should
appear  all  piety,  all  faith,  all  integrity,  all  humanity,  all
religion. And  nothing  is  more  necessary  than  to  yeem

to have this last-mentioned quality Every

one  sees  what  you  seem,  few  perceive  what  you  are."^'

Surely  this  hand-book  of  cant  had  been  Philip's  vade
mecum  through  his  life's  pilgrimage.

It  is  at  least  a  consolation  to  reflect  that  a  career  con-
trolled by  such  principles  came  to  an  ignominious  close.
Had  the  mental  capacity  of  this  sovereign  been  equal  to
his  criminal  intent,  even  greater  woe  might  have  befallen
the  world.  But  his  intellect  was  less  than  mediocre.
His  passion  for  the  bureau,  his  slavery  to  routine,  his
puerile  ambition  personally  to  superintend  details  which
could  have  been  a  thousand  times  better  administered
by  subordinates,  proclaimed  every  day  the  narrowness  of
his  mind.  His  diligence  in  reading,  writing,  and  com-
menting upon  despatches  may  excite  admiration  only
where  there  has  been  no  opportunity  of  judging  of  his
labours  by  personal  inspection.  Those  familiar  with  the
dreary  displays  of  his  penmanship  must  admit  that  such
work  could  have  been  at  least  as  well  done  by  a  copying
clerk  of  average  capacity.  His  ministers  were  men  of
respectable  ability,  but  he  imagined  himself,  as  he  ad-
vanced in  life,  far  superior  to  any  counsellor  that  he

quando  il  bene  fe  discosto,  ma  quando  ti  perche  son  tristi  e  non  I'osserverebbono  a

si  appressa  si  revoltano,  e  quel  I'riucipe  1^,  tu  ancora  non  1'  hai  da  osser>'are  a  loro

che  si  e  tutto  fondato  in  su  le  parole  loro, Ma  e  necessario  questa  Datura

trovandosi nudo  d' altri preparanienti  (di  volpe)  saperla  ben  colorire  ed  essere

rovina," "  Non  puo  un  signor  gran  simulatore  e  dissimulatore,  e  sono

prudente  ne  debbe  osservar  la  fede  quando  tan  to  semplici  g'i  uomini  e  tanto  obbedis-

tale  osservanzia gli  torni  contro  e  che  cono  alle  necessita  present!,  che  colui  che

sono  Bpente  le  cagioni  che  la  feciono  pro-  inganna  trovera  sempre chi  si lascera

inettere.  ingannare." — II  Principe,  cap.  xvii.  xviii.

"  E  se  gli  uomini  fussero  tutti  buoni a-  Ji  Principe,  cap  xviii.
questo precetio non saria buono, ma

PHILIP'S  REIGN  A  FAILURE.  509

could  possibly  select,  and  was  accustomed  to  consider
himself  the  first  statesman  in  the  world.

His  reign  was  a  thorough  and  disgraceful  failure.  Its
opening  scene  was  the  treaty  of  Cateau  Cambresis,  by
which  a  triumph  over  France  had  been  achieved  for  him
by  the  able  generals  and  statesmen  of  his  father,  so  hu-
miliating and  complete  as  to  make  every  French  soldier
or  politician  gnash  his  teeth.  Its  conclusion  was  the
treaty  of  Vervins  with  the  same  power,  by  which  the
tables  were  completely  turned,  and  which  was  as
utterly  disgraceful  to  Spain  as  that  of  Cateau  Cambresis
had  been  to  France.  He  had  spent  his  life  in  fighting
with  the  spirit  of  the  age— that  invincible  power  of
which  he  had  not  the  faintest  conception — while  the
utter  want  of  adaptation  of  his  means  to  his  ends  often
bordered,  not  on  the  ludicrous,  but  the  insane.

He  attempted  to  reduce  the  free  Netherlands  to
slavery  and  to  papacy.  Before  his  death  they  had
expanded  into  an  independent  republic,  with  a  policy
founded  upon  religious  toleration  and  the  rights  of  man.
He  had  endeavoured  all  his  life  to  exclude  the  Bearnese
from  his  heritage  and  to  place  himself  or  his  daughter
on  the  vacant  throne :  before  his  death  Henry  IV.  was
the  most  powerful  and  popular  sovereign  that  had  ever
reigned  in  France.  He  had  sought  to  invade  and  to
conquer  England,  and  to  dethrone  and  assassinate  its
queen.  But  the  queen  outwitted,  outgeneralled,  and
outlived  him ;  English  soldiers  and  sailors,  assisted  by
their  Dutch  comrades  in  arms,  accomplisshed  on  the
shores  of  Spain  what  the  Invincible  Armada  had  in
vain  essayed  against  England  and  Holland ;  while  Eng-
land, following  thenceforth  the  opposite  system  to  that
of  absolutism  and  the  Inquisition,  became,  after  centu-
ries of  struggles  towards  the  right,  the  mo«t  powerful,
prosperous,  and  enlightened  kingdom  in  the  world.

His  excheqixer,  so  full  when  he  ascended  the  throne
as  to  excite  the  awe  of  contemporary  financiers,  was
reduced  before  his  death  to  a  net  income  of  some  four
millions  of  dollars.  His  armies,  which  had  been  the
wonder  of  the  age  in  the  eaiiier  period  of  liis  reign  for
discipline,  courage,  and  every  quality  on  which  military
efficiency  depends,  were  in  his  later  years  a  horde  of
starving,  rebellious  brigands,  more  formidable  to  their

510  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  .N:XXV.

commanders  than  to  the  foe.  Mutiny  was  the  on]y
organised  military  institution  that  was  left  in  his  domi-
nions, while  the  Spanish  Tnqnisition,  which  it  was  the
fell  purpose  of  his  life  from  youth  upwards  to  establish
over  the  world,  became  a  loathsome  and  impossible  nui-
sance ever3'where  but  in  its  natal  soil.

If  there  be  such  a  thing  as  historical  evidence,  then
is  Philip  IT.  convicted  before  the  tribunal  of  impartial
posterity  of  every  crime  charged  in  his  indictment.  He
lived  seventy-one  years  and  three  months,  he  reigned
forty-three  years.  He  endured  the  martyrdom  of  his
last  illness  with  the  heroism  of  a  saint,  and  died  in  the
certaint}''  of  immortal  bliss  as  the  reward  of  his  life  of
evil.

COMMERCE  OF  HOLLAND.  511

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Commercial  prospects  of  Holland  —  Travels  of  John  Iluygen  van  Linschoten  —
Their  effect  on  the  trade  and  prosperity  of  the  Netherlands  —  Progress  of
nautical  and  geographical  science  —  Maritime  exploration  —  Fantastic  notions
respecting  the  polar  regions  —  State  of  nautical  science  —  first  arctic  expedition
—  Success  of  the  voyagers  —  Failure  of  tlie  second  expedition  —  Third  attempt
to  discover  the  north-east  passage  —  Discovery  ot  Spitzbergen  — Scientific  results
of  the  voyage  —  Adventures  in  the  frozen  regions  —  Death  of  WilUam  Barendz  —
Return  of  the  voyagers  to  Amsterdam  —  Southern  expedition  against  the  Spanish
power  —  Disasters  attendant  upon  it  —  Extent  of  Dutch  discovery.

During  a  great  poi'tion  of  Philip's  reign  the  Nether-
landers,  despite  their  rebellion,  had  been  permitted  to
trade  with  Spain.  A  spectacle  had  thus  been  presented
of  a  vigorous  traffic  between  two  mighty  belligerents,
who  derived  from  their  intercourse  with  each  other  the
means  of  more  thoroughly  carrying  on  their  mutual  hos-
tilities. The  war  fed  their  commerce,  and  commerce
fed  their  war.  The  great  maritime  discoveries  at  the
close  of  the  fifteenth  century  had  enured  quite  as  much
to  the  benefit  of  the  Flemings  and  Hollanders  as  tc
that  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese,  to  whom  they
were  originally  due.  Antwerp  and  subsequently  Am-
sterdam had  thriven  on  the  great  revolution  of  the
Indian  trade  which  Vasco  de  Gama's  voyyge  around
the  Cape  had  effected.  The  nations  of  the  Baltic  and  of
farthest  Ind  now  exchanged  their  products  on  a  more
extensive  scale  and  with  a  wider  sweep  across  the  earth
than  when  the  mistress  of  the  Adriatic  alone  held  the
keys  of  Asiatic  cuiumerce.  The  haughty  but  intelligent
oligarchy  of  shopkeepers,  which  had  grown  so  rich  and
attained  so  eminent  a  political  position  from  its  magni-
ficent monopoly,  already  saw  the  sources  of  its  giandeur
drying  up  before  its  eyes,  now  that  the  world's  trade
— for  the  first  time  in  human  history — had  become
oceanic.

In  Plolland,  long  since  denuded  of  forests,  weie  great
markets  of  timber,  whither  shipbuilders  and  architects
came  from  all  parts  of  the  world  to  gather  the  uten&ils

51 2  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

for  their  craft.  There,  too,  where  scarcely  a  pebble  had
been  deposited  in  the  course  of  the  geological  trans-
formations of  our  planet,  were  great  artificial  quarries
of  granite,  and  marble,  and  basalt.  Wheat  was  almost  as
rare  a  product  of  the  soil  as  cinnamon,  yet  the  granaries
of  Christendom,  and  the  Oriental  magazines  of  spices  and
drugs,  were  found  chiefly  on  that  barien  spot  of  earth.
There  was  the  great  international  mart  were  the  Oster-
ling,  the  Turk,  the  Hindoo,  the  Atlantic  and  the  Medi-
terranean traders  stored  their  wares  and  negotiated  their
exchanges ;  while  the  curious  and  highly-prized  pro-
ducts of  Netherland  skill — broadcloths,  tapestries,  bro-
cades, laces,  substantial  fustians,  magnificent  damasks,
finest  linens — increased  the  mass  of  visible  wealth  piled
mountains  high  upon  that  extraordinary  soil  which  pro-
duced nothing  and  teemed  with  everything.

After  the  incorporation  of  Portugal  with  Spain,  how-
ever, many  obstacles  were  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  trade
from  the  Netherlands  to  Lisbon  and  the  Spanish  ports.
Loud  and  bitter  were  the  railings  uttered,  as  we  know,
by  the  English  sovereign  and  her  statesmen  against  the
nefarious  traffic  which  the  Dutch  republic  persisted  in
carrying  on  with  the  common  enemy.  But  it  is  very
certain  that  although  the  Spanish  armadas  would  have
found  it  comparatively  difficult  to  equip  themselves  with-
out the  tar  and  the  timber,  the  cordage,  the  stores,  and
the  biscuits  fvirnished  by  the  Hollanders,  the  rebellious
commonwealth,  if  excluded  from  the  world's  commerce,
in  which  it  had  learned  to  play  so  controlling  a  part,
must  have  ceased  to  exist.  For  without  foreign  naviga-
tion the  independent  republic  was  an  inconceivable  idea.
Not  only  would  it  have  been  incapable  of  continuing  the
struggle  with  the  greatest  monarch  in  the  world,  but  it
might  as  well  have  buried  itself  once  and  for  ever  be-
neath the  waves  from  which  it  had  scarcely  emerged.
Commerce  and  Holland  were  simply  synonymous  terms.
Its  morsel  of  territory  was  but  the  wharf  to  which  the
republic  was  occasionally  moored  ;  its  home  was  in  every
ocean  and  over  all  the  world.  Nowhere  had  there  ever
existed  before  so  large  a  proportion  of  population  that
was  essentially  maritime.  They  were  born  sailors —
men  and  women  alike— and  numerous  were  the  children
who  had  never  set  foot  on  the  shore. At  the  period  now

CRISIS  IN  DUTCH  COMMERCE.  513

treated  of  the  repiablic  had  three  times  as  many  ships
and  sailors  as  any  one  nation  in  tlie  world.  Compared
with  modern  times,  and  especially  with  the  gigantic  com-
mercial strides  of  the  two  great  Anglo-Saxon  families,
the  statistics  both  of  populatioii  and  of  maritime  com-
merce in  that  famous  and  most  vigorotis  epoch  would
seem  sufficiently  meagre.  Yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  in
the  relative  estimate  of  forces  then  in  activity  it  would
be  difficult  to  exaggerate  the  naval  power  of  the  3'oung
commonwealth.  \\  hen  therefore,  towards  the  close  of
Philip  II.'s  reign,  it  became  necessary  to  renounce  the
carrying  trade  with  Spain  and  Portugal,  by  which  the
communication  with  India  and  China  was  eifected,  or
else  to  submit  to  the  confiscation  of  Dutch  ships  in
Spanish  ports,  and  the  confinement  of  Dutch  sailors
in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition,  a  more  serious
dilemma  was  presented  to  the  statesmen  of  the  Nether-
lands than  they  had  ever  been  called  upon  to  solve.

For  the  splendid  fiction  of  the  Spanish  lake  was  still
a  formidable  fact.  Not  only  were  the  Portuguese  and
Spaniards  almost  the  only  direct  traders  to  the  distant
East,  but  even  had  no  obstacles  been  interposed  by
Government,  the  exclusive  possession  of  information  as
to  the  course  of  trade,  the  pre-eminent  practical  know-
ledge acquired  by  long  experience  of  that  dangerous
highway  around  the  world  at  a  time  when  oceanic  navi-
gation was  still  in  its  infanc^y,  would  have  given  a
monopoly  of  the  traffic  to  the  descendants  of  the  bold
discoverers  who  first  opened  the  great  path  to  the
world's  commerce.

The  Hollanders  as  a  nation  had  never  been  engaged
in  the  direct  trade  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.
Fortunately  however  at  this  crisis  in  their  commercial
destiny  there  was  a  single  Hollander  who  had  thoroughly
learned  the  lesson  which  it  was  so  necessary  that  all  his
countrymen  should  now  be  taught.  Few  men  of  that
period  deserve  a  more  kindly  and  more  honourable  re-
membrance by  posterity  for  their  contributions  to  science
and  the  progress  of  civilization  than  John  Huygen  van
Linschoten,  son  of  a  plain  burgher  of  West  Friesland.
Having  always  felt  a  strong  impulse  to  study  foreign
history  and  distant  nations  and  customs,  he  rtssolved  at
the  early  age  of  seventeen  "  to  absent  himself  from  his

VOL. III.  2 li

Ol4  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

fatherland,  and  from  the  conversation  of  friends  and
relatives,''  in  order  to  gratify  ihiti  inclination  for  self-
improvement.  After  a  residence  of  two  years  in  Lisbon
he  departed  for  India  in  the  suite  of  the  ArchVjishop  of
Goa,  and  remained  in  the  East  for  nearly  thirteen  years.
Diligently  examining  all  the  strange  phenomena  which
came  under  his  observation  and  patiently  recording  the
results  (jf  his  researches  day  by  day  and  year  by  ^ear,
he  amassed  a  fund  of  information  which  he  modestly
intended  for  the  entertainment  of  his  friends  when  he
should  return  to  his  native  country.  It  was  his  wihh
that  "  without  stirring  from  their  firesides  or  counting-
houses  "  they  might  participate  with  him  in  the  gratifi-
cation and  instruction  to  be  derived  from  looking  upon
a  world  then  so  strange,  and  for  Europeans  still  so  new.
He  described  the  manners  and  customs,  the  laws,  the  re-
ligions, the  social  and  political  institutions,  of  the  ancient
races  who  dwelt  in  either  peninsula  of  India.  He  studied
the  natural  histoiy,  the  botany,  the  geography  of  all  the
regions  which  he  visited.  Especially  the  products  which
formed  the  material  of  a  great  traffic ;  the  system  of  cul-
ture, the  means  of  transportation,  and  the  course  of  com-
merce, were  examined  by  him  with  minuteness,  accuracy,
and  breadth  of  vLsion.  He  was  neither  a  trader  nor  a
sailor,  but  a  man  of  letters,  a  scientific  and  yjrofessional
traveller.  But  it  was  obvious  when  he  returned,  rich
with  the  spoils  of  oriental  study  during  thirteen  years  of
life,  that  the  results  of  his  researches  were  worthy  of  a
wider  circulation  than  that  which  he  had  originally  con-
templated. His  work  was  given  to  the  puVjlic  in  the
year  1.596,  and  was  studied  with  avidity  not  only  by
men  of  science  but  by  merchants  and  seafarers.  He  also
added  to  the  record  of  his  Indian  experiences  a  practical
manual  for  navigators.  He  described  the  course  of  the
voj'age  from  Lisbon  to  the  East,  the  currents,  the  tiade-
winds  and  monsoons,  the  harbours,  the  islands,  the  shoals,
the  sunken  rocks  and  dangerous  quicksands,  and  he  ac-
companie^l  his  work  witb  various  maps  and  charts,  both
geneial  and  special,  of  land  and  water,  rarely  delineated
V>efore  his  day,  as  well  as  by  various  astronomical  and
mathematical  calculations.  Already  a  countr\man  of
his  own,  Wagenaar  of  Zeeland,  had  laid  the  mariners
of  the  world  under  special  obligation  by  a  manual  which

\

VOYAGES  OF  DUTCH  XAVIGATOllS.  6K">

came  into  sncli  universal  iiso  that  for  centuries  after-
wards tlie  sailors  of  P^ngland  and  of  other  countiies
called  their  indispensable  vade-mecum  a  \\  agenaar.  But
in  that  text-book  but  little  information  was  atlbrded  to
eastern  voyagers,  because,  before  the  enterjirise  of  Lin-
schoten,  little  was  knoAvu  of  the  Orient  except  to  the
Portuguese  and  Spaniards,  by  whom  nothing  was  com-
municated.

The  work  of  Linschoten  was  a  source  of  wealth,  both
from  the  scientific  tieasures  which  it  ditfused  among  an
active  and  intelligent  peojile,  and  the  im]nilse  which  it
gave  to  that  direct  trade  between  the  Ketherlands  and
the  East  which  had  been  so  long  deferred,  and  which
now  came  to  relieve  the  commerce  of  the  republic,  and
therefore  the  republic  itself,  from  the  danger  of  positive
annihilation.

It  is  not  necessary  for  my  purpose  to  describe  in  detail
the  series  of  voyages  by  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
which,  beginning  with  the  adventures  of  the  brothers
liontmann  at  this  period,  and  with  the  circumnavigation
of  the  world  by  Olivier  van  Noord,  made  the  Dutch  for
a  long  time  the  leading  Christian  nation  in  those  golden
regions,  and  which  carried  the  United  Ketherlands  to
the  highest  point  of  prosperity  and  power.  The  Sjianish
monopoly  of  the  Indian  and  the  Pacific  Ocean  was  efiect-
ually  disposed  of,  but  the  road  Avas  not  a  new  road,  nor
did  any  striking  discoveries  at  this  immediate  epoch
illustrate  the  enterprise  of  Holland  in  the  East.  In
the  age  just  opening  the  homely  names  most  dear  to  the
young  republic  were  to  be  inscribed  on  capes,  islands,
and  promontories,  seas,  bays,  and  continents.  There
was  soon  to  be  a  '*  Staten  Island  "  both  in  the  frozen
circles  of  the  northern  and  of  the  southern  pole,  as  well
as  in  that  favoured  region  where  now  the  mighty  current
of  a  world-wide  commerce  flows  throxigh  the  gates  of  that
great  metropolis  of  the  western  world,  once  called  New
Amsterdam.  Those  well-beloved  words.  Orange  and
Nassau,  Maurice  and  W  illiam.  intermingled  with  the
names  of  many  an  ancient  town  and  village,  or  with
the  simple  patronymics  of  hardy  navigators  or  honoured
statesmen,  were  to  make  the  vernacular  of  the  new
commonwealth  a  familiar  sound  in  the  remotest  corners
of  the  earth ;  while  a  fifth  continent,  discovered  by  the

2  L  2 '

51 G  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI..

enterprise  of  Hollanders,  was  soon  to  be  fitly  baptized
with  the  name  of  the  fatherland.  Posterity  has  been
neither  just  nor  grateful,  and  those  earl}-  names  which
Dutch  genius  and  enterprise  wrote  upon  so  many  pro-
minent points  of  the  earth's  surface,  then  seen  for  the
first  time  by  European  eyes,  are  no  longer  known.

The  impulse  given  to  the  foreign  trade  of  the  Nether-
lands by  the  publication  of  Linschoten's  work  was
destined  to  be  a  lasting  one.  Meantime  this  most  inde-
fatigable and  enterprising  voj-ager — one  of  those  men
who  had  done  nothing  in  his  own  estimation  so  long  as
aught  remained  to  do — was  deeply  pondering  the  possi-
bility of  a  shorter  road  to  the  opulent  kingdoms  of
Cathay  and  of  China  than  the  one  which  the  genius  of
De  Gama  had  opened  to  his  sovereigns.  Geography  as
a  science  was  manifesting  the  highest  activity  at  that
period,  but  was  still  in  a  rudimentary  state.  To  the
Hollander's  especially  much  of  the  progress  already  made
by  it  was  owing.  The  maps  of  the  world  by  Mercator  of
Leyden,  published  on  a  large  scale,  together  with  many
astronomical  and  geographical  charts,  delineations  of
exploration,  and  other  scientific  works,  at  the  magnifi-
cent printing  establishment  of  William  Blaexiw,  in
Amsterdam,  the  friend  and  pupil  of  Tycho  Brahe,  and
the  first  in  that  line  of  typographers  who  made  the
name  famous,  constituted  an  epoch  in  cosmography.
Another  ardent  student  of  geography  lived  in  Amster-
dam, Peter  Plancius  by  nsime,  a  Calvinist  preacher,  and
one  of  the  most  zealous  and  intolerant  of  his  cloth.  In
an  age  and  a  country  which  had  not  yet  thoroughly
learned  the  lesson  taught  by  hundreds  of  thousands  of
murders  committed  by  an  orthodox  Church,  he  was  one
of  those  who  considered  the  substitution  of  a  new  dogma
and  a  new  hierarchy,  a  new  orthodoxy  and  a  new  church,
in  place  of  the  old  ones,  a  satisfactory  resiilt  for  fifty  years
of  perpetual  bloodshed.  Neither  Torquemada  nor  Peter
Titelmann  could  have  more  thoroughly  abhorred  a  Jew
or  a  Calvinist  than  Peter  Plancius  detested  a  Lutheran,
or  any  other  of  the  unclean  tribe  of  remonstrants.  That
the  intolerance  of  himself  and  his  comrades  was  confined
to  fiery  words,  and  was  not  manifested  in  the  actual
burning  alive  of  the  heterodox,  was  a  mark  of  the
advance  made  by  the  mass  of  mankind  in  despite  of

MARITIME  DISCOVERY.  517

bigotry.  It  was  at  any  late  a  solace  to  tliose  wlio
believed  in  human  progress,  even  in  matters  of  con-
science, that  no  other  ecclesiastical  establishment  was
ever  likely  to  imitate  the  matchless  machinery  for  the
extermination  of  heretical  vermin  which  the  Church  of
Eome  had  found  in  the  Spanish  Inquisition.  The  blasts
of  denunciation  from  the  pulpit  of  Plancius  have  long
since  mingled  with  empty  air  and  been  foi-gotten,  but
his  services  in  the  cause  of  nautical  enterprise  and  geo-
graphical science,  which  formed,  as  it  were,  a  relaxation
to  what  he  deemed  the  more  serious  pursuits  of  the-
ology, will  endear  his  name  for  ever  to  the  lovers  of
civilization.

Plancius  and  Dr.  Francis  Maalzoon — the  enlightened
pensionary  of  Enkhuizen — had  studied  long  and  earnestly
the  history  and  aspects  of  the  oceanic  trade,  which  had
been  unfolding  itself  then  for  a  whole  century,  but  was
still  comparatively  new,  while  Barneveld,  ever  ready  to
assist  in  the  advancement  of  science,  and  to  foster  that
commerce  which  was  the  life  of  the  commonwealth,  was
most  favourably  disposed  towards  projects  of  maritime
exploration.  For  hitherto,  although  the  Hollanders  had
been  among  the  hardiest  and  the  foremost  in  the  art  of
navigation,  they  had  contributed  but  little  to  actual  dis-
covery. A  Genoese  had  led  the  way  to  America,  while
one  Portuguese  mariner  had  been  the  first  to  double  the
southern  cape  of  Africa,  and  another,  at  the  opposite  side
of  the  world,  had  opened  what  was  then  supposed  the
only  passage  through  the  vast  continent  which,  accord-
ing to  ideas  then  prevalent,  extended  from  the  Southern
Pole  to  Greenland,  and  from  Java  to  Patagonia.  But  it
was  easier  to  follow  in  the  wake  of  Columbus,  Gama,  or
Magellan,  than  to  stiike  out  new  pathways  by  the  aid  of
scientific  deduction  and  audacious  enterprise.  At  a  not
distant  day  many  errors,  disseminated  by  the  boldest  of
Portuguese  navigators,  were  to  be  corrected  by  the
splendid  discoveries  of  sailors  sent  forth  by  the  Dutch
republic,  and  a  rich  harvest  in  consequence  was  to  be
reaped  both  by  science  and  commerce.  It  is  true,  too,
that  the  Netherlanders  claimed  to  have  led  the  way  to
the  great  voyages  of  Colurabiis  by  their  discovery  of  the
Azores.  Joshua  van  den  Beig,  a  merchant  of  I>ruges,  it
was  vigorously  maintained,  had  landed  in  that  archi-

518  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

pelago  in  the  year  1 445.  He  had  found  there,  however,
no  vestiges  of  the  human  race,  save  that  upon  the  prin-
cipal island,  in  the  midst  of  the  solitude,  was  seen — sc
ran  the  tale — a  colossal  statue  of  a  man  on  horsehack,
wrapped  in  a  cloak,  holding  the  reins  of  his  steed  in  his
left  hand,  and  solemnly  extending  his  right  arm  to  the
west.  This  gigantic  and  solitary  apparition  on  a  rock
in  the  ocean  was  supposed  to  indicate  the  existence  of  a
new  world,  and  the  direction  in  which  it  was  to  be
sought,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  ship- wrecked  Fleming
was  quite  innocent  of  any  such  magnificent  visions.  The
original  designation  of  the  Flemish  Islands,  derived  from
their  first  colonization  by  Netherlanders,  was  changed  to
Azores  by  Portuguese  mariners,  amazed  at  the  myriads
of  hawks  which  they  found  there.  But  if  the  Nether-
landers had  never  been  able  to  make  higher  claims  af
discoverers  than  the  accidental  and  dubious  landing
upon  an  unknown  shore  of  a  tempest-tost  mariner,  their
position  in  the  records  of  geographical  exploration  would
not  be  so  eminent  as  it  certainly  is.

Meantime  the  eyes  of  Linschoten,  Plancius,  Maalzoon.
Barneveld,  and  of  many  other  ardent  philosophers  and
patriots,  were  turned  anxiously  towards  the  regions  oi
the  North  Pole.  Two  centuries  later — and  still  more
recently  in  our  own  day  and  generation — what  heart  has
not  thrilled  with  sympathy  and  with  pride  at  the  story
of  the  magnificent  exploits,  the  heroism,  the  contempt  of
danger  and  of  suffering  which  have  characterized  the
great  navigators  whose  names  are  so  familiar  to  the
world  ;  especially  the  arctic  explorers  of  England  and  of
our  own  country?  The  true  chivalry  of  an  advanced
epoch — recognising  that  there  can  be  no  sublimer  voca-
tion for  men  of  action  than  to  extend  the  boundary  of
human  knowledge  in  the  face  of  perils  and  obstacles
more  formidable  and  more  mysterious  than  those  encoun-
tered by  the  knights  of  old  in  the  cause  of  the  Lord's  se-
pulchre or  the  holy  grail — they  have  thus  embodied  in  a
form  which  will  ever  awaken  enthusiasm  in  imaginative
natures,  the  loftiest  impulses  of  our  latter  civilization.
To  win  the  favour  of  that  noblest  of  mistresses.  Science  ;
to  take  authoritative  possession,  in  her  name,  of  the
whole  domain  of  humanity ;  to  open  new  pathways  to
commerce ;  to  elevate  and  enlarge  the  human  intellect,

SPECULATIONS  AS  TO  THE  POLAR  REGIONS.  510

and  to  multiply  indefinitely  the  snm  of  Imraan  enjoy-
ments ;  to  bring  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  into  closer
and  more  friendly  communication,  so  that,  after  some  yet
unimagined  inventions  and  discoveries,  and  after  the
lapse  of  many  years,  w^hich  in  the  sight  of  the  Omnipo-
tent are  but  as  one  day,  the  human  race  may  form  one
pacific  family,  instead  of  being  broken  up,  as  are  the
most  enlightened  of  peoples  now,  into  warring  tribes  of
internecine  savages,  prating  of  the  advancement  of  civil-
ization while  coveting  each  other's  possessions,  intriguing
against  each  other's  interests,  and  thoroughly  in  earnest
when  cutting  each  other's  throats  ;  this  is  truly  to  be  the
pioneers  of  a  possible  civilization,  compared  to  which
our  present  culture  may  seem  but  a  poor  barbarism.  If
the  triumphs  and  joys  of  the  battle-field  have  been
esteemed  among  the  noblest  themes  for  poet,  painter,  or
chronicler,  alike  in  the  mists  of  antiquity  and  in  the  full
glare  of  later  days,  surely  a  still  more  encouraging  spec-
tacle for  those  who  believe  in  the  world's  progress  is  the
exhibition  of  almost  infinite  valour,  skill,  and  endurance
in  the  cause  of  science  and  humanity.

It  was  believed  by  the  Dutch  cosmographers  that  some
ten  thousand  miles  of  voyaging  might  be  saved,  could
the  passage  to  what  were  then  called  the  kingdoms  of
Cathay  be  effected  by  way  of  the  north.  It  must  be  re-
membered that  there  were  no  maps  of  the  unknown
regions  lying  beyond  the  northern  headlands  of  Sweden.
Delineations  of  continents,  islands,  straits,  rivers,  and
seas,  over  which  every  modern  schoolboy  pores,  were
not  attempted  even  by  the  hand  of  fancy.  It  was  per-
haps easier  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  than  it
is  now,  to  admit  the  possibility  of  a  practical  path  to
China  and  India  across  the  pole ;  for  delusions  as  to
climate  and  geographical  configuration  then  prevalent
have  long  since  been  dispelled.  "While,  therefore,  at
least  as  much  heroism  was  required  then  as  now  to
launch  into  those  unknown  seas,  in  hope  to  solve  the
dread  mj'stery  of  the  North,  there  was  even  a  firmer
hope  than  can  ever  be  cherished  again  of  deriving  an
immediate  and  tangible  benefit  from  the  eiiter[)rise.
Plancius  and  Maalzoon,  the  States-General  and  i'rince
Maurice,  were  convinced  that  the  true  road  to  Cathay
would be found by sailing north-east. Linschoten,

520  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXVI.

the  man  who  knew  India  and  the  beaten  paths  to  India
better  than  any  other  living  Christian,  was  so  firmly-
convinced  of  the  truth  of  this  theory,  that  he  volunteered
to  take  the  lead  in  the  first  expedition.  Many  were  the
fantastic  dreams  in  which  even  the  wisest  thinkers  of  the
age  indulged  as  to  the  polar  regions.  Four  straits  or
channels,  pierced  by  a  magic  hand,  led,  it  was  thought,
from  the  interior  of  Muscovy  towards  the  arctic  seas.
According  to  some  speculators,  however,  those  seas  en-
closed a  polar  continent  where  perpetual  summer  and
unbroken  daylight  reigned,  and  whose  inhabitants,  hav-
ing attained  a  high  degree  of  culture,  lived  in  the
practice  of  every  virtue  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  every
blessing.  Others  peopled  these  mysterious  regions  with
horrible  savages,  having  hoofs  of  horses  and  heads  of
dogs,  and  with  no  clothing  save  their  own  long  ears
coiled  closely  around  their  limbs  and  bodies ;  while  it
was  deemed  almost  certain  that  a  race  of  headless  men,
with  eyes  in  their  breasts,  were  the  most  enlightened
among  those  distant  tribes.  Instead  of  constant  sun-
shine, it  was  believed  by  such  theorists  that  the  wretched
inhabitants  of  that  accursed  zone  were  immersed  in
almost  incessant  fogs  or  tempests,  that  the  whole  popula-
tion died  every  winter  and  were  only  recalled  to  tern
poraiy  existence  by  the  advent  of  a  tardy  and  evanescent
spring.  No  doubt  was  felt  that  the  voyager  in  ttiose
latitudes  would  have  to  encounter  volcanoes  of  fire  and
mountains  of  ice,  together  with  land  and  sea  monsters
more  ferocious  than  the  eye  of  man  had  ever  beheld  ;
but  it  was  universally  admitted  that  an  opening,  either
by  strait  or  sea,  into  the  desired  Indian  haven  would
leveal  itself  at  last.

The  instruments  of  navigation  too  were  but  rude  and
defective  compared  to  the  beautiful  machiner}'  with
which  modern  art  and  science  now  assist  their  votaries
along  the  dangerous  path  of  discovery.  The  small  yet
unwieldy,  awkward,  and  to  the  modern  mind,  most
grotesque  vessels  in  which  such  audacious  deeds  were
performed  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries
awaken  perpetual  astonishment.  A  ship  of  a  hundred
tons  burden,  built  up  like  a  tower,  both  at  stem  and
stern,  and  presenting  in  its  broad  bulbous  prow,  its
width  of  beam  in  proportion  to  its  length,  its  depression

1594.  SCIENCE  OF  NAVIGATION.  521

amidships,  and  in  other  sins  against  symmetry,  as  much
opposition  to  progress  over  the  waves  as  conld  well  be
imagined,  was  the  vehicle  in  which  those  indomitable
Dutchmen  circumnavigated  the  globe  and  confronted  the
arctic  terrors  of  either  pole.  An  astrolabe — such  as
Martin  Beheim  had  invented  for  the  Portuguese,  a
clumsy  astronomical  ring  of  three  feet  in  circumference —
was  still  the  chief  machine  used  for  ascertaining  the
latitude,  and  on  shipboard  a  most  defective  one.  There
were  no  logarithms,  no  means  of  determining  at  sea  the
variations  of  the  magnetic  needle,  no  system  of  dead
reckoning  by  throwing  the  log  and  chronicling  the
courses  traversed.  The  fii'earms  with  which  the  sailors
were  to  do  battle  with  the  unknown  enemies  that  might
beset  their  path  were  rude  and  clumsy  to  handle.  The
art  of  compressing  and  condensing  provisions  was  un-
known. They  had  no  tea  nor  coflee  to  refresh  the
nervous  system  in  its  terrible  trials  ;  but  there  was  one
deficiency  which  perhaps  supplied  the  place  of  many
positive  luxuries.  Those  Hollanders  drank  no  ardent
spirits.  They  had  beer  and  wine  in  reasonable  quanti-
ties, but  no  mention  is  ever  made  in  the  journals  of  their
famous  voyages  of  any  more  potent  liquor ;  and  to  this
circumstance  doubtless  the  absence  of  mutinous  or  dis-
orderly demonstrations,  under  the  most  trying  circum-
stances, may  in  a  great  degree  be  attributed.

Thus,  these  navigators  were  but  slenderly  provided
with  the  appliances  with  which  hazardous  voyages  have
been  smoothed  by  modern  art ;  but  they  had  iron
hearts,  faith  in  themselves,  in  their  commanders,  in  their
republic,  and  in  the  Omnipotent;  perfect  discipline  and
unbroken  cheerfulness  amid  toil,  suffering,  and  danger.
No  chapter  of  histoiy  utters  a  more  beaiatiful  homily  on
devotion  to  duty  as  the  true  guiding  principle  of  human
conduct  than  the  artless  narratives  which  have  been  pre-
served of  many  of  these  maritime  enteiprises.  It  is  for
these  noble  lessons  that  they  deserve  to  be  kept  in
perpetual  memory.

And  in  no  individual  of  that  day  were  those  excellent
qualities  more  thoroughly  embodied  than  in  William
Barendz.  pilot  and  burgher  of  Amsterdam.  It  was  partly
under  his  charge  that  the  first  little  expedition  set  forth
on  the  5th  of  June 1594,  towards  those  unknown  arctic

522  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

seas  which  no  keel  from  Christendom  had  ever  ploughed,
and  to  those  fabulous  regions  where  the  foot  of  civilized
men  had  never  trod.  Maalzoon,  Plancius,  and  Balthasar
Moucheron,  merchant  of  Middelburg,  were  the  chief
directors  of  the  entei-prise  ;  but  there  was  a  difference  of
opinion  between  them.  The  pensionary  was  firm  in  the
faith  that  the  true  path  to  China  would  be  found  by  steer-
ing through  the  passage  which  was  known  to  exist
between  the  land  of  Nova  Zembla  and  the  northern  coasts
of  Muscovy,  inhabited  by  the  savage  tribes  called  Samoy-
edes.  It  was  believed  that,  after  passing  those  straits,
the  shores  of  the  great  continent  would  be  found  to  trend
in  a  south-easterly  direction,  and  that  along  that  coast  it
would  accordingly  be  easy  to  make  the  desired  voyage
to  the  eastern  ports  of  China.  Plancius,  on  the  contrary,
indicated  as  the  most  promising  passage  the  outside
course,  between  the  northern  coast  of  Nova  Zembla  and
the  pole.  Three  ships  and  a  fishing  yacht  were  pro-
vided by  the  cities  of  Eukhuizen,  Amsterdam,  and  by
the  province  of  Zeelaud  respectively.  Linschoten  was
principal  commissioner  on  board  the  Enkhuizen  vessel.
having  with  him  an  experienced  mariner,  Brandt
Ijsbrantz  by  name,  as  skipper.  Barendz,  with  the  Am-
sterdam ship  and  the  yacht,  soon  parted  company  with
the  others,  and  steoi'ed,  according  to  the  counsels  of
Plancius  and  his  own  convictions,  for  the  open  seas  of
the  north.  And  in  that  memorable  summer,  for  the
first  time  in  the  world's  history,  the  whole  desolate
region  of  Nova  Zembla  was  visited,  investigated,  and
thoroughly  mapped  out.  Barendz  sailed  as  far  as  lati-
tude 77°,  and  to  the  extreme  north-eastern  point  of  the
island.  In  a  tremendous  storm  off  a  cape,  which  he
ironically  christened  Consolation-hook  (Troost-hoek),  his
ship,  drifting  under  bare-poles  amid  ice  and  mist  and
tempest,  was  nearly  dashed  to  pieces  ;  but  he  reached  at
last  the  cluster  of  barren  i.slets  beyond  the  utmost  verge
of  Nova  Zembla,  to  which  he  hastened  to  affix  the
cherished  appellation  of  Orange.  This,  however,  was
the  limit  of  his  voyage.  His  ship  was  ill-provisioned,
and  the  weather  had  been  severe  beyond  expectation.
He  turned  back  on  the  1st  of  August,  resolving  to  re-
peat his  experiment  early  in  the  following  year.

Meantime  Linschoten,  with  the  ships  Swan  and  Mer-

1594.  THK  FIRST  ARCTIC  EXPEDITION.  523

cuiy,  had  entered  the  passage  which  they  called  the
Straits  of  Nassau,  but  which  are  now  known  to  all
the  world  as  the  Waigats.  They  were  informed  by  the
Samo}'edes  of  the  coast  that,  after  penetrating  the  nar-
row channel,  they  would  find  themselves  in  a  broad
and  open  sea.  Subsequent  discoveries  showed  the  cor-
rectness of  the  statement,  but  it  was  not  permitted  to
the  adventurers  on  this  occasion  to  proceed  so  far.  The
strait  was  already  filled  with  ice-drift,  and  their  vessels
were  brought  to  a  standstill,  after  about  a  hundred  and
fifty  English  miles  of  progress  beyond  the  Waigats  ;  for
the  whole  sea  of  Tartary,  converted  into  a  mass  of  ice-
mountains  and  islands,  and  lashed  into  violent  agitation
b}'  a  north-easterly  storm,  seemed  driving  down  upon
the  doomed  voyagers.  It  was  obvious  that  the  sunny
clime  of  Cathay  was  not  thus  to  be  reached,  at  least
upon  that  occasion.  With  difficulty  they  succeeded  in
extricating  themselves  from  the  dangers  surrounding
them,  and  emerged  at  last  from  the  Waigats.

On  the  16th  of  August,  in  latitude  69°  15',  they  met
the  ship  of  Barendz  and  returned  in  company  to  Hol-
land, reaching  Amsterdam  on  the  16th  of  September.
Barendz  had  found  the  seas  and  coasts  visited  by  him
destitute  of  human  inhabitants,  but  swarming  with
polar  bears,  with  seals,  with  a  terrible  kind  of  mon-
sters, then  seen  for  the  first  time,  as  large  as  oxen,  with
almost  human  faces  and  with  two  long  tusks  protruding
from  each  grim  and  grotesque  visage.  These  mighty
beasts,  subsequently  known  as  walrusses  or  sea-horses,
were  found  sometimes  in  swarms  of  two  hundred  at  a
time,  basking  in  the  arctic  sun,  and  seemed  equally  at
home  on  land,  in  the  sea,  and  on  icebergs.  When  aware
of  the  approach  of  their  human  visitors,  they  would  slide
off"  an  iceblock  into  the  watei",  holding  their  cubs  in  their
arms,  and  ducking  up  and  down  in  the  sea  as  if  in  sport.
Then  tossing  the  young  ones  away,  they  would  rush
upon  the  boats  and  endeavour  to  sink  the  strangers,
whom  they  instinctively  recognised  as  their  natural  ene-
mies. Many  were  the  severe  combats  recorded  by  the
diarist  of  that  voyage  of  Barendz  with  the  walrusses
and  the  bears.

The  chief  result  of  this  first  expedition  was  the  geo-
graphical investigation  made,  and,  with  unquestionable

524  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

right,  these  earliest  arctic  pilgrims  bestowed  the  names
of  their  choice  upon  the  regions  iir.st  visited  by  them-
selves. According  to  the  unfailing  and  universal  im-
pulse on  such  occasions,  the  names  dear  to  the  fatherland
were  naturally  selected.  The  straits  were  called  Nassau,
the  island  at  its  mouth  became  States  or  Staten  Island  ;
the  northern  coast  of  Tartary  received  the  familiar  ap-
pellations of  New  Holland,  New  Friesland,  New  Wal-
cheren  ;  while  the  two  rivers,  beyond  which  Linschoten
did  not  advance,  were  designated  Swan  and  Mercury
respectively,  after  his  two  ships.  Barendz,  on  his  part,
had  duly  baptized  every  creek,  bay,  islet,  and  headland
of  Nova  Zerabla,  and  assuredly  Christian  mariner  had
never  taken  the  latitude  of  77°  before.  Yet  the  anti-
quary, who  compares  the  maps  soon  afterwards  published
by  William  Blaeuw  with  the  charts  now  in  familiar  use,
will  observe  with  indignation  the  injustice  with  which
the  early  geographical  records  have  been  defaced,  and
the  names  rightfully  bestowed  upon  those  terrible  de-
serts by  their  earliest  discoverers  rudely  torn  away.
The  islands  of  Orange  can  still  be  recognized,  and  this
is  almost  the  only  vestige  left  of  the  whole  nomencla-
ture. But  where  are  Cape  Nassau,  William's  Island,
Admiralty  Island,  Cape  Flancius,  Black-hook,  Cross-
hook,  Bear's-hook,  Ice-hook,  Consolation-hook,  Cape
Desire,  the  Straits  of  Nassau,  Maurice  Island,  Staten
Island,  Enkhuizen  Island,  and  many  other  similar  appel-
lations ?

The  sanguine  Linschoten,  on  his  return,  gave  so  glow-
ing an  account  of  the  expedition  that  Prince  Maurice
and  Olden-Bameveld,  and  prominent  members  of  the
States-General,  were  infected  with  his  enthusiasm.  He
considered  the  north-east  passage  to  China  discovered
and  the  problem  solved.  It  would  only  be  necessary  to
fit  out  another  expedition  on  a  larger  scale  the  next  year,
provide  it  with  a  cargo  of  merchandize  suitable  for  the
China  market,  and  initiate  the  direct  polar-oriental  trade
without  further  delay.  It  seems  amazing  that  so  incom-
plete an  attempt  to  overcome  such  formidable  obstacles
should  have  been  considered  a  decided  success.  Yet
there  is  no  doubt  of  the  genuineness  of  the  conviction
by  which  Linschoten  was  actuated.  The  calmer  Ba-
rendz, and  his  friend  and  comrade  Gerrit  de  Veer,  were

1595.  SECOND  EXrSDITION.  525

of  opinion  that  tlie  philosopher  had  made  "  rather  a  free
representation  "  of  the  enterprise  of  1594  and  of  the
prospects  for  the  future.

Nevertheless,  the  general  Government,  acting  on  Lin-
schoten's  suggestion,  furnished  a  fleet  of  seven  ships :
two  from  Enkhnizen,  two  from  Zeelaud,  two  from  Ams-
terdam, and  a  yacht  which  was  to  be  despatched  home-
ward with  the  news,  so  soon  as  the  expedition  should
have  passed  through  the  straits  of  Nassau,  forced  its
way-through  the  frozen  gulf  of  Tartary,  doubled  Cape
Tabin,  and  turned  southward  on  its  direct  course  to
China.  The  sublime  credulity  which  accepted  Lin-
schoten's  hasty  solution  of  the  polar  enigma  as  conclu-
sive was  fairly  matched  by  the  sedateuess  with  which
the  authorities  made  the  preparations  for  the  new
voyage.  So  deliberately  were  the  broadcloths,  linens,
tapestries,  and  other  assorted  articles  for  this  first  great
speculation  to  Cathay,  via  the  North  Pole,  stowed  on
board  the  fleet,  that  nearly  half  the  summer  had  passed
before  anchor  was  weighed  in  the  Meuse.  The  pom-
pous expedition  was  thus  predestined  to  an  almost  ridi-
culous failure.  Yet  it  was  in  the  hands  of  great  men,
both  on  shore  and  sea.  Maurice,  Barneveld,  and  Maal-
zoon  had  personally  interested  themselves  in  the  details
of  its  outfitting,  Linschoten  sailed  as  chief  commissioner,
the  calm  and  intrepid  Barendz  was  upper  pilot  of  the
whole  fleet,  and  a  man  who  w^as  afterwards  destined  to
achieve  an  immortal  name  in  the  naval  history  of  his
country,  Jacob  Heemskerk,  was  supercargo  of  the  Ams-
terdam ship.  In  obedience  to  the  plans  of  Linschoten
and  of  Maalzoon,  the  passage  by  way  of  the  ^\'aigats  was
of  course  attempted.  A  landing  was  efiected  on  the
coast  of  Tartary.  Whatever  geographical  information
could  be  obtained  from  such  a  source,  was  imparted  by
the  wandering  Samoyedes.  On  the  2nd  of  September  a
party  went  ashore  on  Staten  Island  and  occupied  them-
selves in  gathering  some  glistening  pebbles  which  the
journalist  of  the  expedition  describes  with  much  gravity
as  a  "  kind  of  diamonds,  veiy  plentiful  upon  tlie  island."
While  two  of  the  men  were  thus  especially  engaged  in
a  deep  hollow,  one  of  them  found  himself  suddenly
Twitched  from  behind.  "  What  are  you  pulling  at  me
for,  mate  ? "  he  said  impatiently  to  his  comrade  as  he

526  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

supposed.  But,  his  companion  was  a  large,  long,  lean
white  bear,  and  in  another  instant  the  head  of  the  un-
fortunate diamond-gatherer  was  oif  and  the  bear  was
sucking  his  blood.  The  other  man  escaped  to  his  friends,
and  together  a  party  of  twenty  charged  upon  the  beast.
Another  of  the  combatants  was  killed  and  half  devoured
by  the  hungry  monster  before  a  fortunate  bullet  struck
him  in  the  head.  But  even  then  the  bear  maintained
his  grip  upon  his  two  victims,  and  it  was  not  until  his
brains  were  fairly  beaten  out  with  the  butt  end  of  a
snaphance  by  the  boldest  of  the  party  that  they  were
enabled  to  secure  the  bodies  of  their  comrades  and  give
them  a  hurried  kind  of  Christian  burial.  They  flayed
the  bear  and  took  away  his  hide  with  them,  and  this,
together  with  an  ample  supplj'  of  the  diamonds  of  Staten
Island,  was  the  only  merchandize  obtained  upon  the
voyage  for  which  such  magnificent  preparations  had
been  made.  For,  by  the  middle  of  September,  it  had
become  obviously  hopeless  to  attempt  the  passage  of  the
frozen  sea  that  season,  and  the  expedition  returned,  hav-
ing accomplished  nothing.  It  reached  Amsterdam  upon
the  18th  of  November,  1595.

The  authorities,  intensely  disappointed  at  this  almost
ridiculous  result,  refused  to  furnish  direct  assistance  to
any  farther  attempts  at  arctic  explorations.  The  States-
General  however  ofi'ered  a  reward  of  twenty-five  thou-
sand florins  to  any  navigators  who  might  succeed  in  dis-
covering the  northern  passage,  with  a  proportionate
sum  to  those  whose  eflbrts  in  that  dii"ection  might
be  deemed  commendable,  even  if  not  crowned  with
success.

Stimulated  by  the  spirit  of  adventure  and  the  love  of
science  far  more  than  by  the  hope  of  gaining  a  pecu-
niary prize,  the  undaunted  Barendz,  who  was  firm  in
the  faith  that  a  pathway  existed  by  the  north  of  Nova
Zembla  and  across  the  pole  to  farthest  Ind,  determined
to  renew  the  attempt  the  following  summer.  The  city
of  Amsterdam  accordingly,  early  in  the  year
1596,  fitted  out  two  ships.  Select  crews  of
entirely  unmarried  men  volunteered  for  the  enterprise.
John  Cornelisz  van  dor  Eyp,  an  experienced  sea-captain,
was  placed  in  charge  of  one  of  the  vessels,  \Villiam  Ba-
rendz was  upper  pilot  of  the  other, and  Heemskerk,

1596. VOYAGE  OF  BARENDZ  AND  VAN  DER  RYP.  527

"the  man  who  ever  steered  his  way  through  ice  or
iron,"^  was  skipper  and  sxipercargo.

The  ships  sailed  from  the  Vlie  on  the  18th  May.  The
opinions  of  Peter  Plancius  prevailed  in  this  expedition
at  last ;  the  main  object  of  both  Eyp  and  Barendz  being
to  avoid  the  fatal,  narrow,  ice-clogged  Waigats.  Al-
though identical  in  this  determination,  their  views  as  to
the  confignration  of  the  land  and  sea,  and  as  to  the  pro-
per course  to  be  steered,  were  conflicting.  They  how-
ever sailed  in  company  mainly  in  a  N.E.  by  N.  direc-
tion, although  Barendz  would  have  steered  much  more
to  the  east.

On  the  oth  June  the  watch  on  deck  saw,  as  they  sup-
posed, immense  flocks  of  white  swans  swimming  towards
the  ships,  and  covering  the  sea  as  far  as  the  eye  could
reach.  All  hands  came  up  to  look  at  the  amazing  spec-
tacle, but  the  more  experienced  soon  perceived  that  the
myriads  of  swans  were  simply  infinite  fields  of  ice,
through  which  however  they  were  able  to  steer  their
course  without  much  impediment,  getting  into  clear  sea
beyond  about  midnight,  at  which  hour  the  sun  was  one
degree  above  the  horizon.

Proceeding  northwards  two  days  more  they  were  again
surrounded  by  ice,  and,  finding  the  "  water  green  as  grass,
they  believed  themselves  to  be  near  Greenland."  On  the
9th  June  they  discovered  an  island  in  latitude,  according
to  their  observation,  74°  30',  which  seemed  about  five
miles  long.  In  this  neighbourhood  they  remained  four
days,  having  on  one  occasion  a  "  great  fight  which  lasted
four  glasses"  with  a  polar  bear,  and  making  a  desperate
attempt  to  capture  him  in  order  to  bring  him  as  a  show
to  Holland.  The  effort  not  being  successful,  they  were
obliged  to  take  his  life  to  save  their  own ;  but  in  what
manner  they  intended,  had  they  secured  him  alive,  to
provide  for  such  a  passenger  in  the  long  voyage  across
the  North  Pole  to  China,  and  thence  back  to  Amster-
dam, did  not  appear.  The  attempt  illustrated  the  calm-
ness, however,  of  those  hardy  navigators.  They  left  the
island  on  the  13tli  June,  having  baptised  it  Bear  Island
in  memoiy  of  their  vanquished  foe,  a  name  which  was
subsequently  exchanged  for  the  insipid  appellation  of
Cherry  Island,  in  honour  of  a  comfortable  London  mer-

1  Inscription  on  his  tombatone.

528  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

chant  who  seven  years  afterwards  sent  a  ship  to  those
arctic  regions.

Six  days  later  they  saw  land  again,  took  the  sun,  and
2iJune,  found  their  latitude  80°  11'.  Certainly  no  men
1596.  }ja(j  ever  been  within  less  than  ten  degrees  of
the  pole  before.  On  the  longest  day  of  the  year  they  ^
landed  on  this  newly  discovei'ed  country,  which  they  at
first  fancied  to  be  a  part  of  Greenland.  They  found  its
surface  covered  with  eternal  snow,  broken  into  mighty
glaciers,  jagged  with  precipitoiTS  ice-peaks ;  and  to  this
land  of  almost  perpetual  winter,  where  the  mercury
freezes  during  ten  months  in  the  year,  and  where  the
sun  remains  four  months  beneath  the  horizon,  they  sub-
sequently gave  the  appropriate  and  vernacular  name  of
Spitzbergen.  Combats  with  the  sole  denizens  of  these
hideous  abodes,  the  polar  bears,  on  the  floating  ice,  on
the  water,  or  on  land,  were  constantly  occurring,  and
were  the  only  events  to  disturb  the  monotony  of  that
perpetual  icy  sunshine,  where  no  night  came  to  relieve
the  almost  maddening  glare.  They  rowed  up  a  wide
inlet  on  the  western  coast,  and  came  upon  great  num-
bers of  wild  geese  sitting  on  their  eggs.  They  proved
to  be  the  same  geese  that  were  in  the  habit  of  visiting
Holland  in  vast  flocks  every  summer,  and  it  had  never
before  been  discovered  where  they  laid  and  hatched  their
eggs.  "  Therefore,"  says  the  diarist  of  the  expedition,
"  some  voyagers  have  not  scrupled  to  state  that  the  eggs
grow  on  trees  in  Scotland,  and  that  such  of  the  fruits
of  thoise  trees  as  fall  into  the  water  become  goslings,
while  those  which  drop  on  the  ground  burst  in  pieces
and  come  to  nothing.  We  now  see  that  quite  the  con-
trary is  the  case,"  continues  De  Veer,  with  perfect  seri-
ousness, "nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  for  nobody  has
ever  been  until  now  where  those  birds  lay  their  eggs.
No  man,  so  far  as  known,  ever  reached  the  latitude
of  eighty  degrees  before.  This  land  was  hitherto  un-
known."

The  scientific  results  of  this  ever-memorable  voyage
might  be  deemed  sufficiently  meagre  were  the  fact  that
the  eggs  of  Avild  geese  did  not  grow  on  trees  its  only
recorded  discovery.  But  the  investigations  made  into
the  dread  mysteries  of  the  north,  ana  the  actual  pro-
blems solved,  were  many,  while  the  simplicity  of  the

1596.  THE  VOYAGERS  PART  COMPANY.  b'29

narrator  marks  the  infantine  character  of  the  epoch  in
regard  to  natural  history.  \\'heu  .so  illustrious  a  mind
as  Grotius  was  inclined  to  believe  in  a  race  of  arctic  men
whose  heads  grew  beneath  their  shoulders,  the  ingenu-
ous mariner  of  Amsterdam  may  be  forgiven  for  his
earnestness  in  combating  the  popular  theoiy  concerning
goslings.

On  the  23rd  June  they  went  ashore  again,  and  occupied
themselves,  as  well  as  the  constant  attacks  of  the  bears
would  permit,  in  obsei-ving  the  variation  of  the  needle,
which  they  ascertained  to  be  sixteen  degrees.  On  the
same  day,  the  ice  closing  around  in  almost  infinite
masses,  they  made  haste  to  extricate  themselves  from  the
land  and  bore  southwards  again,  making  Bear  Island
once  more  on  the  1st  July.  Here  Cornelius  Ryp  parted
company  with  Heemskerk  and  Barendz,  having  an-
nounced his  intention  to  sail  northward  again  beyond
latitude  80°  in  search  of  the  coveted  passage.  Barendz,
retaining  his  opinion  that  the  true  inlet  to  the  circum-
polar  sea,  if  it  existed,  would  be  found  N.E.  of  Nova
Zembla,  steered  in  that  direction.  On  the  13th  Jul}^
they  found  themselves  by  observation  in  latitude  73' ,
and  considered  themselves  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sir
Hugh  Willoughby's  land.  Four  days  later  they  were
in  Lomms'  Bay,  a  harbour  of  Kova  Zembla,  so  called  by
them  from  the  multitude  of  lomms  frequenting  it,  a  bird
to  which  the}''  gave  the  whimsical  name  of  arctic  parrots.
On  the  20th  July  the  ice  obstructed  their  voyage,  cover-
ing the  sea  in  all  directions  with  floating  mountains  and
valleys,  so  that  they  came  to  an  anchor  off  an  islet  where
on  a  former  voyage  the  Hollanders  had  erected  the  pre-
cious emblem  of  Christian  faith,  and  baptised  the  dreary
.solitude  Cross  Island.  Bxtt  these  pilgrims,  as  they  now
approached  the  spot,  found  no  worshippers  there,  while,
as  if  in  horrible  mockery  of  their  piet}-,  two  eno7-nK)Us
white  bears  had  reared  themselves  in  an  erect  posture,  in
order  the  better  to  survey  their  visitt)rs,  directly  at  the
foot  of  the  cross.  The  party  Avhich  had  just  landed  were
unarmed,  and  were  for  making  off  as  fast  as  possible  to
their  boats.  But  Skipper  Heemskerk,  feeling  that  this
would  be  death  to  all  of  them,  said  simply,  "  The  first
man  that  runs  shall  have  this  boat-hook  of  mine  in  his
hide. Let  us  remain  together  and  face  them  oil." It  was

VOL. III.  2 M

530  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

done.  The  party  moved  slowly  towards  their  boats,
Heemskerk  bringing  up  the  rear,  and  fairly  staring  the
polar  moijsters  out  of  countenance,  who  remained  grimly
regarding  them,  and  ramping  about  the  cross.

The  sailors  got  into  their  boat  with  much  deliberation,
and  escaped  to  the  ship,  "  glad  enough,"  said  De  Veer,
"  that  they  were  alive  to  tell  the  story,  and  that  they  had
got  out  of  the  cat-dance  so  fortunately."

Next  day  they  took  the  sun,  and  found  their  latitude

76^  15',  and  the  variation  of  the  needle  twenty-
21  July. . , '  -^

SIX  degrees.

For  seventeen  days  more  they  were  tossing  about  in
mist  and  raging  snow-storms,  and  amidst  tremendous
icebergs,  some  of  them  rising  in  steeples  and  pinnacles
to  a  hundred  feet  above  the  sea,  some  grounded  and
stationary,  others  drifting  fearfully  around  in  all  direc-
tions, threatening  to  crush  them  at  any  moment,  or  to
close  in  about  them  and  imprison  them  for  ever.  They
_  .  made  fast  by  their  bower  anchor  on  the  evening

7  Au'^ust

"  '  of  7th  August  to  a  vast  iceberg  which  was
aground,  but  just  as  they  had  eaten  their  supper  there
was  a  horrible  groaning,  bursting,  and  shrieking  all
around  them,  an  indefinite  succession  of  awful  sounds
which  made  their  hair  stand  on  end,  and  then  the  ice-
berg split  beneath  the  water  into  more  than  four  hundred
pieces  with  a  crash  "  such  as  no  words  could  describe."
They  escaped  any  serious  damage,  and  made  their  way
to  a  vast  steepled  and  towered  block  like  a  floating
cathedral,  where  they  again  came  to  anchor.

On  the  1 5th  August  they  reached  the  isles  of  Orange,
on  the  extreme  north-eastern  verge  of  Nova  Zembla.
Here  a  party  going  ashore  climbed  to  the  top  of  a  rising-
ground,  and  to  their  infinite  delight  beheld  an  open  sea,
entirely  free  from  ice,  stretching  to  the  S.E.  and  E.S.E.
as  far  as  eye  could  reach.  At  last  the  game  was  won  ;
the  passage  to  Cathay  was  discovered.  Full  of  joy.
they  pulled  back  in  their  boat  to  the  ship,  "  not  knowing
how  to  get  there  qi;ick  enough  to  tell  William  Barendz."
Alas  !  they  were  not  aware  of  the  action  of  that  mighty
ocean  river,  the  Gulf-stream,  which  was  sweeping  around
those  regions  with  its  warm  dissolving  current.

Three  days  later  they  returned  baffled  in  their  san-
guine efforts  to  sail  through  the  open  sea. The  ice  had

i

1596.  AMONG  THE  ICEBERGS.  531

retiirnea tipoii them, setting southwardly in obedi-
ence to  the  same  impulse  which  for  a  moment
had  driven  it  away,  and  they  found  themselves "" ^"'^ '
imprisoned  again  near  the  "  Hook  of  Desire."

On  the  25th  August  they  had  given  up  all  the  high
hopes  by  which  they  had  been  so  lately  inspired,
and,  as  the  stream  was  again  driving  the  ice
from  the  land,  they  trusted  to  sail  southward  and  west-
ward back  towards  the  Waigats.  Having  passed  by
Nova  Zembla,  and  found  no  opening  into  the  seas
beyond,  they  were  disposed  in  the  rapidly  waning
summer  to  effect  their  retreat  by  the  south  side  of  the
island,  and  so  through  the  Straits  of  Nassau  home.  In
vain.  The  catastrophe  was  upon  them.  As  they
struggled  slowly  past  the  "  Ice-haven,"  the  floating
mountains  and  glaciers,  impelled  by  the  mighty  current,
once  more  gathered  around  and  forced  them  back  to  that
horrible  harbour.  During  the  remaining  days  of  August
the  ship  struggled,  almost  like  a  living  creature,  with  the
perils  that  beset  her ;  now  rearing  in  the  air,  her  bows
propped  upon  mighty  blocks,  till  she  absolutely  sat  erect
upon  her  stern,  now  lying  prostrate  on  her  side,  and
anon  righting  again  as  the  ice-masses  would  for  a
moment  float  away  and  leave  her  breathing  space  and
room  to  move  in.  A  blinding  snow-storm  was  raging
the  while,  the  ice  was  cracking  and  groaning  in  all
directions,  and  the  ship  was  shrieking,  so  that  the  med-
ley of  awful  sights  and  sounds  was  beyond  the  power  of
language.  "  'Twas  enough  to  make  the  hair  stand  on
end,"  said  Gerrit  de  Veer,  "  to  witness  the  hideous
spectacle."

But  the  agony  was  soon  over.  By  the  1st  September
the  ship  was  hard  and  fast.  The  ice  was  as  i  sept.
immovable  as  the  dry  land,  and  she  would  not  ^^^'*-
move  again  that  year,  even  if  she  ever  floated.  Those
pilgrims  from  the  little  republic  were  to  spend  the
winter  in  their  arctic  harbour.  Kesigning  themselves
without  a  murmur  to  their  inevitable  fate,  they  set
about  their  arrangements  with  perfect  good  humour  and
discipline.  Most  fortunately  a  great  quantity  of  drift
wood,  masses  of  timbei-,  and  great  trees  torn  away  with
their  roots  from  distant  shcjres,  lay  strewn  along  the
coast, swept thither by  the wandering  currents. At

2  M  2

532  THE  u^'^rED  Netherlands, chap,  xxxvi.

once  they  resolved  to  build  a  house  in  which  they  might
shelter  themselves  from  the  wild  beasts,  and  from  their
still  more  cruel  enemy  the  cold.  So,  thanking  God  for
the  providential  and  unexpected  supply  of  building
material  and  fuel,  they  lost  no  time  in  making  sheds,  in
hauling  timber,  and  in  dragging  siapplies  from  the  ship
before  the  dayless  winfer  should  descend  upon  them.

Six  weeks  of  steady  cheerful  labour  succeeded.  Tre-
1  Sept.  to  mendous  snow-storms,  accompanied  by  huri'i-
12  Oct.  canes  of  wind,  often  filled  tlie  atmosphere  to
suffocation,  so  that  no  human  being  could  move  a  ship's
length  without  perishing ;  while,  did  any  of  their  num-
ber venture  forth,  as  the  tempest  subsided,  it  was  often
to  find  himself  almost  in  the  arms  of  a  polar  bear  before
the  dangerous  snow-white  form  could  be  distinguished
moving  sluggishly  thiough  tlie  wliite  chaos.

For  those  hungiy  companions  never  left  them  so  long
as  the  sun  remained  above  the  horizon,  swarming  like
insects  and  birds  in  tropical  lands.  "When  the  sailors
put  their  meat- tubs  for  a  moment  out  upon  the  ice  a
bear's  intnisive  muzzle  would  forthwith  be  inserted  to
inspect  the  contents.  Maddened  by  hunger,  and  their
keen  scent  excited  by  the  salted  provisions  and  by  the
living  flesh  and  blood  of  these  intruders  upon  their
ancient  solitary  domains,  they  would  often  attempt  to
effect  their  entrance  into  the  ship.

On  one  such  occasion,  when  Heemskerk  and  two  com-
panions were  the  whole  garrison,  the  rest  being  at  a
distance  sledding  wood,  the  future  hero  of  Gibraltar  was
near  furnishing  a  meal  to  his  Kova  Zembla  enemies.  It
was  only  b}^  tossing  sticks  and  stones  and  marling-spikes
across  the  ice,  which  the  beai's  would  instantly  turn  and
pursue,  like  dogs  at  play  with  children,  that  the  assault
could  be  diverted  until  a  fortunate  shot  was  made.

Several  were  thus  killed  in  the  course  of  the  winter,
and  one  in  particular  was  disembowelled  and  set  frozen
upon  his  legs  near  their  house,  where  he  remained  month
after  month  with  a  mass  of  snow  and  ice  accumulated
upon  him,  until  he  had  grown  into  a  fantastic  and
gigantic  apparition,  still  wearing  the  semblance  of  their
mortal  foe.

By  the  beginning  of  October  the  weather  became  so
intensely  cold  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to  work.

1596.  LIFE  IN  NOVA  ZEMBLA.  583

The  carpenter  died  before  the  house  was  half  completed.
To  dig  a  grave  was  impossible,  but  they  laid  him  iu  a
cleft  of  the  ice,  and  he  was  soon  covered  with  the  snow.
Meantime  the  sixteen  that  were  Ifeft  went  on  as  they
best  might  with  their  task,  and  on  October  2nd  they  had  a
house-raising.  The  frame- work  was  set  up,  and,  in  order  to
comply  with  the  national  usage  in  such  cases,  they  planted,
instead  of  the  May-pole  with  its  fluttering  streamers,  a
gigantic  icicle  before  their  new  residence.  Ten  days
later  they  moved  into  the  house  and  slept  there
for  the  first  time,  while  a  bear,  profiting  by
their  absence,  passed  the  night  in  the  deserted  ship.

On  the  4th  November  the  sun  rose  no  more,  but  the
moon  at  first  shone  day  and  night,  until  they  were  once
in  great  perplexity  to  know  whether  it  were  midday  or
midnight.  It  proved  to  be  exactly  noon.  The  bears
disappeared  with  the  sun,  but  white  foxes  swarmed  in
their  stead,  and  all  day  and  night  were  heard  scrambling
over  their  roof.  These  were  caught  daily  in  traps  and
furnished  them  food,  besides  furs  for  raiment.  The  cold
became  appalling,  and  they  looked  in  each  other's  faces
sometimes  in  speechless  amazement.  It  was  obvious
that  the  extreme  limit  of  human  endurance  had  been
reached.  Their  clothes  were  frozen  stiff".  Their  shoes
were  like  iron,  so  that  they  were  obliged  to  array  them-
selves from  head  to  foot  in  the  skins  of  the  wild  foxes.
The  clocks  stopped.  The  beer  became  solid.  The
Spanish  wine  froze,  and  had  to  be  melted  in  saucepans.
The  smoke  in  the  house  blinded  them.  Fire  did  not
warm  them,  and  their  garments  were  often  in  a  blaze
while  their  bodies  were  half  frozen.  All  through  the
month  of  December  an  almost  perpetual  snow-deluge  fell
from  the  clouds.  For  days  together  they  were  unable
to  emerge,  and  it  was  then  only  by  most  vigorous  labour
that  they  could  succeed  in  digging  a  passage  out  of  their
buried  house.  On  the  night  of  the  7th  December  sudden
death  had  nearly  put  an  end  to  the  sufferings  of  the
whole  party.  Having  brought  a  quantity  of  seacoal
from  the  ship,  they  had  made  a  great  fire,  and  after  the
smoke  was  exhausted,  they  had  stopped  up  the  chimney
and  every  crevice  of  the  house.  Each  man  then  turned
into  his  bunk  for  the  night,  "  all  rejoicing  much  in  the
warmth and  prattling  a long  time with  each  other."

534  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI

At  last  an  nnacciistomed  giddiness  and  faintness  came
over  them,  of  which  they  could  not  guess  the  cause,  but
fortunately  one  of  the  party  had  the  instinct,  before  he
lost  consciousness,  to  open  the  chimne}',  while  another
forced  open  the  door  and  fell  in  a  swoon  upon  the  snow.
Their  dread  enemy  thus  came  to  their  i-elief,  and  saved
their  lives.

As  the  year  drew  to  a  close,  the  frost  and  the  per-
petual snow-tempest  became,  if  that  were  possible,  still
more  frightful.  Their  Christmas  was  not  a  merry  one,
and  for  the  first  few  days  of  the  new  year,  it  was  im-
possible for  them  to  move  from  the  house.  On  the  25th
January,  the  snow-storms  having  somewhat  abated,  the}
once  more  dug  themselves  as  it  were  out  of  their  living
grave,  and  spent  the  whole  day  in  hauling  wood  from
the  shore.  As  their  hour-glasses  informed  them  that  night
was  approaching,  they  bethought  themselves  that  it  was
Twelfth  Isight,  or  Three  Kings'  Eve.  So  they  all
respectfully  proposed  to  Skipper  Heemskerk,  that,  in  the
midst  of  their  sorrow,  they  might  for  once  have  a  little
diversion.  A  twelfth-night  feast  was  forthwith  ordained.
A  scanty  portion  of  the  wine  yet  remaining  to  them  was
produced.  Two  pounds  weight  of  flour,  which  they
had  brought  to  make  paste  with  for  cartridges,  was  baked
into  pancakes  with  a  little  oil,  and  a  single  hard  biscuit
was  served  out  to  each  man  to  be  sopped  in  his  meagre
allowance  of  wine.  "  We  were  as  happy,"  says  Gerrit
de  Veer,  with  simple  pathos,  "  as  if  we  were  having  a
splendid  banquet  at  home.  We  imagined  ourselves  in
the  fatherland  with  all  our  friends,  so  much  did  we  enjoy
our  repast."

That  nothing  might  be  omitted,  lots  were  drawn  for
king,  and  the  choice  fell  on  the  gunner,  who  was  forth-
with proclaimed  monarch  of  Nova  Zembla.  Certainly
no  men  could  have  exhibited  more  undaunted  cheerful-
ness amid  bears  and  foxes,  icebergs  and  cold — such  as
Christians  had  never  conceived  of  before — than  did
those  early  arctic  pilgrims.  Nor  did  Barendz  neglect
any  opportunity  of  studying  the  heavens.  A  meridian
was  drawn  near  the  house,  on  which  the  compass  was
placed,  and  observations  of  various  stars  were  constantly
made,  despite  the  cold,  with  extraordinary  minuteness.
The  latitude,  from  concurrent  measurement  of  the  Giant,

1597.  SOLAR  PHENOMENON.  635

the  Bull,  Orion,  Aldebaran,  and  other  constellations —
in  the  absence  of  the  sun — was  ascertained  to  be  a  little
above  seventy-six  degrees,  and  the  variations  of  the
needle  were  accurately  noted.

On  the  24th  January  it  was  clear  weather  and  compa-
ratively mild,  so  that  Heemskerk,  with  de  Veer  and
another,  walked  to  the  strand.  To  their  infinite  delight
and  surprise  they  again  saw  the  disk  of  the  sun  on  the
edge  of  the  horizon,  and  they  all  hastened  back  with  the
glad  tidings.  But  Barendz  shook  his  head.  Many  days
niiist  elapse,  he  said,  before  the  declination  of  the  sun
should  be  once  more  14°,  at  which  point  in  the  latitiide
of  76°  they  had  lost  sight  of  the  luminary  on  the  4th
November,  and  at  which  only  it  could  again  be  visible.
This,  according  to  his  calculations,  would  be  on  the  10th
February.  Two  days  of  miiky  and  stormy  atmosphere
succeeded,  and  those  who  had  wagered  in  support  of  the
opinion  of  Barendz  were  inclined  to  triumph  over  those
who  believed  in  the  observation  of  Heemskerk.  On  the
27th  January  there  was,  however,  no  mistake.  The  sky
was  bright,  and  the  whole  disk  of  the  sun  was  most  dis-
tinctly seen  by  all,  although  none  were  able  to  explain
the  phenomenon,  and  Barendz  least  of  all.  They  had
kept  accurate  diaries  ever  since  their  imprisonment,  and
although  the  clocks  sometimes  had  stopped,  the  hour-
glasses had  regularly  noted  the  lapse  of  time.  Moreover,
Barendz  knew  from  the  Ephemerides  for  1589  to  1600,
published  by  Dr.  Joseph  Scala  in  Venice,  a  copy  of
which  work  he  had  brought  with  him,  that  on  the  24th
January,  1597,  the  moon  would  be  seen  at  one  o'clock
A.M.  at  Venice,  in  conjunction  with  Jupitei*.  He  ac-
cordingly took  as  good  an  observation  as  could  be
done  with  the  naked  eye,  and  found  that  conjunction  at
six  o'clock  A.M.  of  the  same  day,  the  two  bodies  appear-
ing in  the  same  vertical  line  in  the  sign  of  Taurus  The
date  was  thus  satisfactorily  established,  and  a  calcula-
tion of  the  longitude  of  the  house  was  deduced  with  an
accuracy  which  in  those  circumstances  was  certainly
commendable.  Nevertheless,  as  the  facts  and  the  theory
of  refraction  were  not  thoroughly  understood,  nor  Tycho
Brahe's  tables  of  refraction  generally  known,  pilot
Barendz  could  not  be  expected  to  be  wiser  than  his
generation.

536  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVl.

The  startling  discovery  that  in  the  latitude  of  76°  the
Sim  re-appeared  on  the  24th  January,  instead  of  the  10th
February,  was  destined  to  awaken  commotion  through-
out the  whole  scientific  world,  and  has  peihaps  hardly
yet  been  completely  explained.

But  the  daylight  brought  no  mitigation  of  their  suffer
ings.  The  merciless  cold  continued  without  abatement,
and  the  sun  seemed  to  mock  their  misery.  The  foxes
disappeared,  and  the  ice-bears  in  their  stead  swarmed
around  the  house,  and  clambered  at  night  over  the  roof.
Again  they  constantly  fought  with  them  for  their  lives.
Dail}'  the  grave  question  was  renewed  whether  the  men
should  feed  on  the  bears  or  the  bears  on  the  men.  On
one  occasion  their  dead  enemy  proved  more  dangerous
to  them  than  in  life,  for  three  of  their  number,  who  had
fed  on  bear's  liver,  were  nearly  poisoned  to  death.  Had
they  perished,  none  of  the  whole  party  would  have  ever
left  Kova  Zembla.  "  It  seemed,"  said  the  diarist,  "  that
the  beasts  had  smelt  out  that  we  meant  to  go  away,  and
had  just  begun  to  have  a  taste  for  us."

And  thus  the  days  wore  on.  The  hour-glass  and  the
almanac  told  them  that  winter  had  given  place  to  spring,
but  nature  still  lay  in  cold  obstruction.  One  of  their
number,  who  had  long  been  ill,  died.  They  hollowed
a  grave  for  him  in  the  frozen  snow,  performing  a
rude  burial  service,  and  singing  a  psalm ;  but  the  cold
had  nearly  made  them  all  corpses  before  the  ceremony
was  done.

At  last,  on  the  17th  April,  some  of  them  climbing
over  the  icebergs  to  the  shore  found  much  open  sea.
They  also  saw  a  small  bird  diving  in  the  water,  and
looked  upon  it  as  a  halcyon  and  harbinger  of  better
fortunes.  The  open  weather  continuing,  they  began  to
hanker  for  the  fatherland.  So  they  brought  the  matter,
"  not  mutinously  but  modestly  and  reasonably,  before
William  Barendz,  that  he  might  suggest  it  to  Heems-
kerk,  for  they  were  all  willing  to  submit  to  his  better
judgment."  It  was  determined  to  wait  through  the
month  of  Ma}'.  Should  they  then  be  obliged  to  abandon
the  ship  they  were  to  make  the  voyage  in  the  two  open
boats,  which  had  been  carefully  stowed  away  beneath
the  snow.  It  was  soon  obvious  that  the  ship  was  hard
and  fast,  and  that  she would  never  float  again,  except

1597.  PREPARATIONS  FOR  RETURNING  HOME.  537

perhaps  as  a  portion  of  the  icebergs  in  which  she  had
so  long  been  imbedded,  when  they  should  be  swept  off
from  the  shore.

As  they  now  set  to  work  repairing  and  making  ready
the  frail  skiffs  which  were  now  their  only  hope,  and
supplying  them  with  provisions  and  even  with  mer-
chandize from  the  ship,  the  ravages  made  by  the  terrible
winter  upon  the  strength  of  the  men  became  painfully
apparent.  But  Pleemskerk  encouraged  them  to  perse-
vere ;  "  for,"  said  he,  "  if  the  boats  are  not  got  soon
under  way  we  must  be  content  to  make  our  graves  here
as  burghers  of  Nova  Zembla."

On  the  14th  June  they  launched  the  boats,  and  "  trast-
ing  themselves  to  God,"  embarked  once  more  upon  the
arctic  sea.  Barendz,  who  was  too  ill  to  walk,  together
with  Claas  Anderson,  also  sick  unto  death,  were  dragged
to  the  strand  in  sleds,  and  tenderly  placed  on  board.

Barendz  had,  however,  despite  his  illness,  drawn  up
a  triple  record  of  their  voyage  ;  one  copy  being  fastened
to  the  chimney  of  their  deserted  house,  and  one  being
placed  in  each  of  the  boats.  Their  voyage  was  full  of
danger  as  they  slowly  retraced  their  way  along  the
track  by  which  they  reached  the  memorable  Ice  Plaven,
once  more  doubling  the  Cape  of  Desire,  and  heading  for
the  Point  of  Consolation — landmarks  on  their  desolate
progress,  whose  nomenclature  suggests  the  immortal
apologue  so  familiar  to  Anglo-Saxon  ears.

Off  the Ice-hook, both boats  came alongside each
other,  and  Skipper Heemskerk  called  out  to jgj^^g
William  Barendz  to  ask  how  it  was  with  him.

"All  right,  mate,"  replied  Barendz,  cheerfully;  "I
hope  to  be  on  my  legs  again  before  we  reach  the  Ward-
huis."  Then  he  begged  De  Veer  to  lift  him  up,  that  he
might  look  upon  the  Ice-hook  once  more.  The  icebergs
crowded  around  them,  drifting  this  way  and  that,  im-
pelled by  mighty  currents  and  tossing  on  an  agitated  sea.
There  was  "a  hideous  groaning  and  bursting  and  driv-
ing of  the  ice,  and  it  seemed  every  moment  as  if  the
boats  were  to  be  dashed  into  a  hundred  pieces."  It  was
plain  that  their  voyage  would  now  be  finished  for  ever,
were  it  not  possible  for  some  one  of  their  number  to  get
upon  the  solid  ice  beyond  and  make  fast  a  Tine.  "  But
who  is  to  bell  the  cat  ? "  said  Genit  de  Veer,  who  soon,

638  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

however,  volunteered  himself,  being  the  lightest  of  all.
Leaping  from  one  floating  block  to  another  at  the  immi-
nent risk  of  being  swept  off  into  space,  he  at  last  reached
a  stationary  island,  and  fastened  his  rope.  Thus  they
warped  themselves  once  more  into  the  open  sea.

On  the 20th  June,  William  Barendz  lay  in  the  boat

20  June, studying carefully  the  charts  which  they  had

1597.  made  of  the  Lmd  and  ocean  discovered  in  their
voyage.  Tossing  about  in  an  open  skiff  upon  a  polar
sea,  too  weak  to  sit  upright,  reduced  by  the  unexampled
sufferings  of  that  horrible  winter  almost  to  a  shadow,  he
still  preserved  his  cheerfulness,  and  maintained  that  he
would  yet,  with  God's  help,  perform  his  destined  task.
In  his  next  attempt  he  would  steer  north-east  from  the
North  Cape,  he  said,  and  so  discover  the  passage

While  he  was  "  thus  prattling,"  the  boatswain  of  the
other  boat  came  on  board,  and  said  that  Claas  Anderson
would  hold  out  but  little  longer.

"Then,"  said  William  Barendz,  "  methinks  I  too  shall
last  but  a  little  while.  Gerrit,  give  me  to  drink."  When
he  had  drunk,  he  turned  his  eyes  on  De  Veer  and  sud-
denly breathed  his  last.

Great  was  the  dismay  of  his  companions,  for  they  had
been  deceived  by  the  dauntless  energ}''  of  the  man,  thus
holding  tenaciously  to  his  great  purpose,  unbaffled  by
danger  and  disappointment,  even  to  the  last  instant  of
life.  He  was  their  chief  pilot  and  guide,  "  in  whom
next  to  God  they  trusted."

And  thus  the  hero,  who  for  vivid  intelligence,  courage,
and  perseverance  amid  every  obstacle,  is  fit  to  be  classed
among  the  noblest  of  maritime  adventurers,  had  ended
his  career.  Nor  was  it  unmeet  that  the  man  who  had
led  those  three  great  although  unsuccessful  enterprises
towards  the  North  Pole,  should  be  laid  at  last  to  rest —
like  the  soldier  dying  in  a  lost  battle — upon  the  field  of
his  glorious  labours.

Nearly  six  weeks  longer  they  struggled  amid  tempes-
tuous seas.  Hugging  the  shore,  ever  in  danger  of  being
dashed  to  atoms  by  the  ice,  pursued  by  their  never
failing enemies  the bears,  and often sailing

28  Julv  ^  .

through  enormous  herds  of  walrusses,  which  at
times  gave  chase  to  the  boats,  they  at  last  reached  the
Schanshoek  on  the  28th  July.

1597  RYP'S  LETTER.  639

Here  they  met  with  some  Russian  fishermen,  who  re-
cognised Heemskerk  and  De  Veer,  having  seen  thera  on
their  previous  voyage.  Most  refreshing  it  was  to  see
other  human  faces  again,  after  thirteen  months'  separa-
tion from  mankind,  while  the  honest  Muscovites  ex-
pressed compassion  for  the  forlorn  and  emaciated
condition  of  their  former  acquaintance.  Furnished  by
them  with  food  and  wine,  the  Hollanders  sailed  in  com-
pany with  the  Russians  as  far  as  the  Waigats.

On  the  18th  August  they  made  Candenoes,  at  the
mouth  of  the  White  Sea,  and  doubling  that  cape  stood
boldly  across  the  gulf  for  Kildin.  Landing  on  the  coast
they  were  informed  by  the  Laps  that  there  were  vessels
from  Holland  at  Kola.

On  the  25th  August  one  of  the  party,  guided  by  a  Lap,
set  forth  on  foot  for  that  place. Four  days
later  the  guide  was seen retiirning without
their  comrade ;  but  their  natural  suspicion  was  at  once
disarmed  as  the  good-humoured  savage  straightway  pro-
duced a  letter  which  he  handed  to  Heemskerk.

Breaking  the  seal,  the  skipper  found  that  his  corre-
spondent expressed  great  surprise  at  the  arrival  of  the
voyagers,  as  he  had  supposed  them  all  to  be  long  since
dead.  Therefore  he  was  the  more  delighted  with  their
coming,  and  promised  to  be  with  them  soon,  bringing
with  him  plenty  of  food  and  drink.

The  letter  was  signed —

"  By  me,  Jan  Corneusz  Ryp."

The  occurrence  was  certainly  dramatic,  but,  as  one
might  think,  sufficiently  void  of  mystery.  Yet,  astound-
ing to  relate,  they  all  fell  to  pondering  who  this  John
Ryp  might  be  who  seemed  so  friendly  and  sympathetic.
It  was  shrewdly  suggested  by  some  that  it  might  per-
haps be  the  sea-captain  who  had  parted  company  with
them  off  Bear  Island  fourteen  months  before  in  order  to
sail  north  by  way  of  Spitzbergen.  As  his  christian
name  and  surname  were  signed  in  full  to  the  letter,  the
conception  did  not  seem  entirely  unnatuial,  yet  it  was
rejected  on  the  ground  that  they  had  for  more  reasons  to
believe  that  he  had  perished  than  he  for  accepting  their
deaths  as  certain.  One  might  imagine  it  to  have  been
an  every  day  occurrence  for  Hollanders  to  receive  letters

540  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXX\'1.

by  a  Lapland  penny  postman  in  those  desolate  regions.
-At  last  Heemskerk  bethought  himself  that  among  his
papers  were  several  letters  from  their  old  comrade,  and,
on  comparison,  the  handwriting  was  found  the  same  as
that  of  the  epistle  just  received.  This  deliberate  avoid-
ance of  any  hasty  jumping  at  conclusions  certainly  in-
spires confidence  in  the  general  accuracy  of  the  adven-
turers, and  we  have  the  better  right  to  believe  that  on
the  24th  January  the  sun's  disk  was  really  seen  by  them
in  the  ice-harbour — a  fact  long  disputed  by  the  learned
world — when  the  careful  weighing  of  evidence  on  the  less
important  matter  of  Ryj^'s  letter  is  taken  into  account.

Meantime  while  they  were  slowly  admitting  the  identity
of  their  friend  and  correspondent,  honest  John  Cornelius
Ryp  himself  arrived — no  fantastic  fly-away  Hollander,
but  in  fall  flesh  and  blood,  laden  with  provisions,  and
greeting  them  heartily.

He  had  not  pursued  his  Spitzbergen  researches  of  the
previous  year,  but  he  was  now  on  a  trading  voyage  in  a
stout  vessel,  and  he  conveyed  them  all  by  way  of  the
Ward-huis,  where  he  took  in  a  cargo,  back  to  the  father-
land.

They  dropped  anchor  in  the  Meuse  on  the  29th
October,  and  on  the  1st  November  arrived  at  Amsterdam.
Here,  attired  in  their  robes  and  caps  of  white  fox-skin
which  they  had  worn  while  citizens  of  Nova  Zembla,
they  were  straightway  brought  before  the  magistrates  to
give  an  account  of  their  adventures.

The}^  had  been  absent  seventeen  months,  they  had
spent  a  whole  autumn,  winter,  and  spring — nearly  ten
months — under  the  latitude  of  76°  in  a  frozen  desert,
where  no  human  beings  had  ever  dwelt  before,  and  they
had  penetrated  beyond  80°  north — a  farther  stride  to-
wards the  pole  than  had  ever  been  hazarded.  They
had  made  accurate  geographical,  astronomical,  and
meteorological  observations  of  the  regions  visited.  They
had  carefully  measured  latitudes  and  longitudes  and
noted  the  variations  of  the  magnet.  They  had  tho-
roughly mapped  out,  described,  and  designated  every
cape,  island,  hook,  and  inlet  of  those  undiscovered
countries,  and  more  than  all,  they  had  given  a  living
example  of  courage,  endurance,  patience  under  hardship,
perfect  discipline,  fidelity  to  duty, and  trust  in God,

EXPEDITION  TO  THE  SOUTH  POLE.  541

sufficient  to  inspire  noble  natures  with  emulation  so
long  as  history  can  read  moral  lessons  to  mankind.

JS'o  farther  attempt  was  made  to  discover  the  north-
easteiu  passage.  The  enthusiasm  of  Barendz  had  died
with  him,  and  it  may  be  said  that  the  stern  negation  by
which  this  supreme  attempt  to  solve  the  mystery  of  the
pole  was  met  was  its  best  practical  result.  Certainly
all  visions  of  a  circumpolar  sea  blessed  with  a  gentle
atmosphere  and  eternal  tranquillity,  and  ofiering  a
smooth  and  easy  passage  for  the  world's  commerce
between  Europe  and  Asia,  had  been  for  ever  dispelled.

The  memorable  enterprise  of  Barendz  and  Heemskerk
has  been  thought  worthy  of  a  minute  description  be-
cause it  was  a  voyage  of  discovery,  and  because,  how-
ever barren  of  immediate  practical  residts  it  may  seem
to  superficial  eyes,  it  forms  a  great  landmark  in  the  his-
tory of  human  progress  and  the  advancement  of  science.

Contemporaneously  with  these  voyages  towards  the
North  Pole,  the  enlightened  magistrates  of  the  Kether-
land  municipalities,  aided  by  eminent  private  citizens,
fitted  out  expeditions  in  the  opposite  direction.  It  was
determined  to  measure  strength  with  the  lord  of  the  land
and  seas,  the  great  potentate  against  whom  these  lepub-
licans  had  been  so  long  in  rebellion,  in  every  known
region  of  the  glnbe.  P3oth  from  the  newly  discovered
western  world,  and  from  the  ancient  abodes  of  oriental
civilization,  Spanish  monopoly  had  long  been  furnishing
the  treasure  to  support  Spanish  tyranny,  and  it  was  the
dearest  object  of  iSetherland  ambition  to  confront  their
enemy  in  both  those  regions,  and  to  clip  both  those
overshadowing  wings  of  his  commerce  at  once.

The  intelligence,  enthusiasm,  and  tenacity  in  wres-
tling against  immense  obstacles  manifested  by  the
young  republic  at  this  great  expanding  era  of  the
world's  history  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  It  was
fitting  that  the  little  commonwealth,  which  was  fore-
most among  the  nations  in  its  hatred  of  tjTanny,  its  love
of  maritime  adventure,  and  its  aptitude  for  foreign  trade,
should  take  the  lead  in  the  great  commercial  movements
which  characterized  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  and  the
commencement  of  the  seventeenth  centuries.

While  Barendz  and  Heemskerk  were  attempting
to  force  the  frozen  gates  which  weie  then  supposed  to

542  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

guard  the  northern  highway  of  commerce,  fleets  were
fitting  out  in  Holland  to  storm  the  Southern  Pole,  or  at
least  to  take  advantage  of  the  pathways  already  opened
by  the  genius  and  enterprise  of  the  earlier  navigators  of
the  century.  Linschoten  had  taught  his  countiymen
the  value  of  the  technical  details  of  the  Indian  trade  as
then  understood.  The  voyages  of  the  brothers  Hout-
mann,  1595-1600,  the  first  Dutch  expeditions  to  reach
the  East  by  doubling  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  were
undertaken  according  to  his  precepts,  and  directed  by
the  practical  knowledge  obtained  by  the  Houtmanns
during  a  residence  in  Fortug;il,  but  were  not  signalized
by  important  discoveries.  The}'  are  chiefly  memorable
as  having  laid  the  foundation  of  the  vast  trade  out  of
which  the  republic  was  to  derive  so  much  material
power,  while  at  the  same  time  they  mark  the  slight
beginnings  of  that  mighty  monopoly,  the  Dutch  East
India  Company,  which  was  to  teach  such  tremendous
lessons  in  C(jmmercial  restriction  to  a  still  more  colossal
English  corporation,  that  mercantile  tyrant  only  in  our
own  days  overthrown.

At  the  same  time  and  at  the  other  side  of  the  world
seven  ships,  fitted  out  from  Holland  by  private  enter-
prise, were  forcing  their  way  to  the  iSouth  Sea  through
the  ten'ible  strait  between  Patagonia  and  Fire  Land,
then  supposed  the  only  path  around  the  globe.  For  the
tortuous  mountain  channel,  filled  with  whirlpools  and
reef:s,  and  the  home  of  perpetual  tempest,  which  had
been  discovered  in  the  early  part  of  the  century  by
Magellan,  was  deemed  the  sole  opening  pierced  by
nature  through  the  mighty  southern  circumpolar  con-
tinent. A  few  years  later  a  daring  Hollander  was  to
demonstrate  the  futility  of  this  theory,  and  to  give  his
own  name  to  a  broader  pathway,  while  the  stormy  head-
land of  South  America,  around  which  the  great  current
of  universal  commerce  was  thencefoi-th  to  sweep,  was
baptized  b}'  the  name  of  the  tranquil  town  in  West
Friesland  where  most  of  his  ship's  company  were  born.

Meantime  the  seven  ships  under  command  of  Jacob
I\Iahu,  Simon  de  Cordes,  and  Sebald  de  Weerdt,  were
contending  with  the  dangeis  of  the  older  route.  The
expedition  sailed  from  Holland  in  June,  1698,  but
already  the  custom  was  forming  itself  of  directing  those

1599.  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  UNNCHAINED  LION.  543

navigators  of  almost  unknown  seas  by  explicit  instruc-
tions from  those  who  remained  on  shore,  and  who  had
never  navigated  the  ocean  at  all.  The  consequence  on
this  occasion  was  that  the  voyagers  towards  the  Straits
of  Magellan  spent  a  whole  summer  on  the  coast  of
Afiica,  amid  pestiferous  heats  and  distracting  calms,
and  reached  the  straits  only  in  April  of  the  fol-  e  April,
lowing  year.  Admiral  Mahu  and  a  large  pro-  ^^^^■
portion  of  the  crew  had  meantime  perished  of  fevers
contracted  by  following  the  couise  marked  out  for  them
by  their  employers,  and  thus  diminished  in  numbers,
half  stripped  of  provisions,  and  enfeebled  by  the  ex-
hausting atmosphere  of  the  tropics,  the  survivors  were
ill  prepared  to  confront  the  antarctic  ordeal  which  thoy
were  approaching.  Five  months  longer  the  fleet,  under
command  of  Admiral  de  Cordes,  who  had  succeeded  to
the  command,  struggled  in  those  straits,  where,  as  if  in
the  home  of  ^olus,  all  the  winds  of  heaven  seemed
holding  revel ;  but  indifference  to  danger,  discipline,
and  devotion  to  duty  marked  the  conduct  of  the  adven-
turers, even  as  those  qualities  had  just  been  distinguish-
ing their  countrymen  at  the  other  pole.  They  gathered
no  gold,  they  conquered  no  kingdoms,  they  made  few
discoveries,  they  destro}'ed  no  fleets,  yet  they  were  the
first  pioneers  on  a  path  on  which  thereafter  were  to  be
many  such  achievements  by  the  republic.

At  least  one  heroic  incident,  which  marked  their  de-
parture from  the  straits,  deserves  to  be  held  in  perpetual
remembrance.  Admiral  de  Cordes  raised  on  the  shore,
at  the  western  mouth  of  the  channel,  a  rude  memorial
with  an  inscription  that  the  Netherlanders  were  the  first
to  effect  this  dangerous  passage  with  a  fleet  of  heavy
ships.  On  the  following  day,  in  commemoration  of  the
event,  he  founded  an  order  of  knighthood.  The  chief
officers  of  the  squadron  were  the  knights-commanders,
and  the  most  deserving  of  the  crew  were  the  knights-
brethren.  The  members  of  the  fraternity  made  solemn
oath  to  De  Cordes,  as  general,  and  to  each  other,  that
"  by  no  danger,  no  necessity,  nor  by  the  fear  of  death,
would  they  ever  be  moved  to  undeitake  anj-thing  prejii-
dicial  to  tlaeir  honour,  to  the  Avclfarc  of  the  fatherland,
or  to  the  sixccess  of  the  enterprise  in  which  the,y  were
engaged ;  pledging  themselves  to  stake  their  lives  in

544  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVI.

order,  consistently  with  honour,  to  inflict  every  possible
damage  on  the  hereditary  enemy,  and  to  plant  tho
banner  of  Holland  in  all  those  territories  whence  the
King  of  Spain  gathered  the  treasures  with  which  he
had  carried  on  this  perpetual  war  against  the  Nether-
lands."

Thus  was  instituted  on  the  desolate  shores  of  Fire
Land  the  order  of  Knights  of  the  Unchained  Lion,  with
such  rude  solemnities  as  were  possible  in  those  soli-
tudes. The  harbour  where  the  fleet  was  anchored  was
called  the  Chevaliers'  Bay,  but  it  would  be  in  vain  to
look  on  modern  maps  for  that  heroic  appellation.  Pata-
gonia and  Tierra  del  Fuego  know  the  honest  knights  of
the  Unchained  Lion  no  more  ;  yet  to  an  unsophisticated
mind  no  stately  brotherhood  of  sovereigns  and  patri-
cians seems  more  thoroughly  inspired  with  the  spirit
of  Christian  chivalry  than  were  those  weather-beaten
adventurers.  The  reefs  and  whirlwinds  of  unknown
seas,  polar  cold,  Patagonian  giants,  Spanish  cruisers,  a
thousand  real  or  fabulous  dangers  environed  them.
Their  provisions  were  already  rinming  near  exhaustion,
and  they  were  feeding  on  raw  seal-flesh,  on  snails  and
mussels,  and  on  whatever  the  barren  rocks  and  niggai'd
seas  would  supply,  to  save  them  from  absolutely  perish-
ing, but  they  held  their  resolve  to  maintain  their  honour
unsullied,  to  be  true  to  each  other  and  to  the  republic,
and  to  circumnavigate  the  globe  to  seek  the  proud
enemy  of  their  fatherland  on  every  sea,  and  to  do  battle
with  him  in  every  corner  of  the  earth.  The  world  had
already  seen,  and  was  still  to  see.  how  nobly  Nether-
landers  could  keep  their  own.  Meantime  disaster  on
disaster  descended  on  this  unfortunate  expedition.  One
ship  after  another  melted  awaj^and  was  seen  no  more.
Of  all  the  seven,  only  one,  that  of  Sebald  de  Weerdt,
3ver  returned  to  the  shores  of  Holland.  Another  reached
Japan,  and  although  the  crew  fell  into  hostile  hands,
the  great  trade  with  that  Oriental  empire  was  begun.
In  a  third — the  Blyde  Boodschaft,  or  Good  News— l3irk
Gerrit  sailed  nearer  the  South  Pole  than  man  had  ever
been  before,  and  discovered,  as  he  believed,  a  portion  of
the  southern  continent,  which  he  called,  with  reason
good,  Gerrit's  Land.  The  name  in  course  of  time  faded
from  maps  and  charts,  the  existence  of  the  country  was

I

1599.

DISCOVEUIES  OF  DUTCH  NAVIGATORS.

545

disputed,  until  more  than  two  centuries  later  the  accuiacy
of  the  Dutch  commander  was  recognised.  The  re-dis-
covered land  however  no  longer  bears  his  name,  but  has
been  baptized  South  Shetland.

Thus  befoi-e  the  sixteenth  century  had  closed,  the  navi-
gators of  Holland  had  reached  almost  the  extreme  verge
of  human  discovery  at  either  pole.-

^  Tlie  chief  authorities  consulted  for
the  account  of  these  early  voyages
are : —

Bor,  HI.  b.  xxxi.  pp.  866-S73,  and  IV.
b.  xxxiv.  pp.  337-344.

Begin  ende  Voortgang  van  de  Vereen.
Nederl.  geoctroyeerde  Oost  Ind.  Com-
paguie  (1646)  1  Deel  (passim)  with  the
Original  Diaries  and  Histories,  especially
1-53.

Grotii  Hist.  lib.  iv.  326,  seqq.  and  v.
383,  seqq.

G. Moll, Verhandeling over eenige

Vroegere  Zeetogten  der  Noderlanders.Ani-
sterdaui,  1825,  pp.  14-119,  et  passim.

Bennet  en  Van  Wijk,  Verhandoliiig
over  de  Nederlandsche  Ontdekkingen,
Utrecht,  1S21,  passim.

Van  Kanipen's  Gesch.  der  Nied.  1. 572,
seqq.  Compare  Gesch.  der  Nederlander.s
buiten  Europa,  Harlem,  1831,  by  the  same
author.

Le  Petit,  La  Grande  Chronique,  ii.  e.M ,
seqq.  and  698,  seqq.

Van  Meteren  also  gives  good  sum-
maries, especially  in  b.  xxiii.

2 N

546  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVII.

CHAPTEE XXXVIL

Military  Operations  in  tlie  Netherlands  —  Designs  of  the  Spanish  Commander  —
—  Siege  of  Orsoy — Advance  upon  Rheinberg  —  ilurder  of  the  Count  of  Broecli
and  his  garrison  —  Capture  of  Rees  and  Emmerich  —  Outrages  of  the  Spanish
soldiers  In  the  peaceful  provinces  —  Inglorious  attempt  to  avenge  the  hostilities  —
State  of  trade  in  the  Provinces  —  Naval  expedition  under  Van  dor  Does  —  Arrival
of  Albert  and  Isabella  at  Brussels  —  Military  operations  of  Prince  Maurice  —
Negotiation  betv^een  London  and  Brussels  —  Henry's  determination  to  enact  the
Council  of  Trent  —  His  projected  marriage  —  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Knvoy  Caron  —
Pe.ice  proposals  of  Spain  to  Elizabeth —  Conferences  at  Gertruydenberg  —  Uncer-
tain state  of  affairs.

The  military  operations  in  the  Netherlands  during  the
whole  }"ear  1598  were  on  a  comparatively  small  scale
and  languidly  conducted.  The  States  were  exhausted
by  the  demands  made  upon  the  treasury,  and  baffled  by
the  disingenuous  policy  of  their  allies.  The  cardinal-
archduke,  on  the  other  hand,  was  occupied  with  the
great  events  of  his  marriage,  of  his  father-in-law's  death,
and  of  his  own  succession  in  conjunction  with  his  wife
to  the  sovereignty  of  the  provinces.

In  the  autumn,  however,  the  Admiral  of  Arragoii,  who,
as  has  been  stated,  was  chief  military  commander  during
the  absence  of  Albert,  collected  an  army  of  twenty-five
thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  cavalry,  crossed  the
Mouse  at  Eoermond,  and  made  his  appearance  before  a
small  town  called  Orsoy,  on  the  Ehine.  It  was  his  in-
tention to  invade  the  duchies  of  Cleves,  Juliers.  and
Berg,  taking  advantage  of  th^  supposed  madness  of  the
duke,  and  of  the  Spanish  inclinations  of  his  chief  coun-
sellors, who  constituted  a  kind  of  regenc}'.  By  obtaining
possessio-n  of  these  important  provinces — wedged  as  they
were  between  the  territory  of  the  republic,  the  obedient
Netherlands,  and  Germany — an  excellent  military  posi-
tion would  be  gained  for  making  war  upon  the  rebellious
districts  from  the  east,  for  crushing  Piotestantism  in  the
duchies,  for  holding  important  passages  of  the  Ehine,  and
for  circumventing  the  designs  of  the  Protestant  sons-in-
law  and  daughters  of  the  old  Duke  of  Cleves. Of  course,

1593. OPERATIONS  OF  THE  ADIVIIRAL  OF  ARRAGON. 547

it  was  the  determination  of  Maurice  and  the  States-
General  to  frustrate  these  operations.  German  and
Dutch  Protestantism  gave  battle  on  this  neutral  ground
to  the  omnipotent  tyranny  of  the  papacy  and  Spain.

Unfortunately,  Maurice  had  but  a  very  slender  force  that
autumn  at  his  command.  Fifteen  hundred  horse  and  six
thousand  infantry  were  all  his  effective  troops,  and  with
these  he  took  the  field  to  defend  the  borders  of  the  re-
public, and  to  out-manoeuvre,  so  far  as  it  might  lie  in  his
power,  the  admiral  with  his  far-reaching  and  entirely
unscrupulous  designs.

"With  six  thousand  Spanish  veterans,  two  thousand
Italians,  and  many  AValloon  and  German  regiments
under  Bucqnoy,  Hachincourt,  I.a  Bouvlotte,  Stanley,  and
Frederic  van  den  Berg,  the  admiral  had  reached  the
frontiers  of  the  mad  duke's  territory.  Orsoy  was  garri-
soned by  a  small  company  of  ''  cocks'  feathers,"  or
country  squires,  and  their  followers.

Presenting  himself  in  person  before  the  walls  of  the
town,  with  a  priest  at  his  right  hand  and  a  hangman
holding  a  bundle  of  halters  at  the  other,  he „
desired  to  be  informed  whether  the  governor
would  prefer  to  surrender  or  to  hang  with  his  whole
garrison. The  cock-feathers  surrendered.^

The  admiral  garrisoned  and  fortified  Oi*soy  as  a  basis
and  advanced  upon  Eheinbei-g,  first  surprising  the  Count
of  Broeck  in  his  castle,  who  was  at  once  murdered  in  cold
blood  with  his  little  garrison.

He  took  Burik  on  the  11th  October,  Eheinberg  on  the
15th  of  the  same  month,  and  compounded  with  Wesel
for  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  florins.  Leaving
garrisons  in  these  and  a  few  other  captured  places,  he
crossed  the  Lippe,  came  to  Borhold,  and  ravaged  the
whole  country  side.  His  troops  being  clamorous  for
pay  were  only  too  eager  to  levy  black-mail  on  this
neutral  territory.  The  submission  of  the  authorities  to
this  treatment  brought  upon  them  a  reproach  of  violation
of  neutrality  by  the  States-General;  the  Governments
of  Munster  and  of  the  duchies  being  informed  that,  if
the}-  aided  and  abetted  the  one  belligerent,  they  must
expect  to  be  treated  as  enemies  by  the  other."

•  Metcron,  399-104.  -  lior,  IV.  4.S2-4!'6. Meteren,  3C9,  404.

2  N  2

548  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVII.

The  admiral  took  Eees  on  the  30th  October,  and  Em-
merich on  the  2nd  Xovember — two  principal  cities  of
Cleves.  On  the  8th  November  he  crossed  into  the  terri-
tory of  the  republic  and  captured  Deutekom,  after  a  very
fshort  siege.  Maurice,  by  precaution,  occupied  Sevenaei
in  Cleves.  The  prince — whose  difficult  task  was  to
follow  up  and  observe  an  enemy  by  whom  he  was  out-
numbered nearly  four  to  one,  to  harass  him  by  skir-
mishes, to  make  forays  on  his  communications,  to  seize
important  points  before  he  could  reach  them,  to  impose
upon  him  by  an  appearance  of  far  greater  force  rhan  the
republican  army  could  actually  boast,  to  protect  the
cities  of  the  frontier  like  Zutphen,  Lochem,  and  Does-
burg,  and  to  prevent  him  from  attempting  an  invasion
of  the  United  Provinces  in  force,  by  crossing  any  of  the
rivers,  either  in  the  autumn  or  after  the  winter's  ice  had
made  them  passable  for  the  Spanish  army — succeeded
admirably  in  all  his  strategy.  The  admiral  never  ven-
tured to  attack  him,  for  fear  of  risking  a  defeat  of  his
whole  army  by  an  antagonist  whom  he  ought  to  have
swallowed  at  a  mouthful,  relinquished  all  designs  upon
the  republic,  passed  into  ]\Iunster,  Cleves,  and  Berg,
and  during  the  whole  horrible  winter  converted  those
peaceful  provinces  into  a  hell.  No  outrage  which  even
H  Spanish  army  could  inflict  was  spared  the  miserable
inhabitants.  Cities  and  villages  were  sacked  and  burned,
the  whole  country  was  placed  under  the  law  of  black-
mail. The  places  of  worship,  mainly  Protestant,  were
all  converted  at  a  blow  of  the  sword  into  Catholic
churches.  Men  were  hanged,  butchered,  tossed  in  sport
from  the  tops  of  steeples,  burnt,  and  buried  alive.
Women  of  every  rank  were  subjected  by  thousands  to
outrage  too  foul  and  too  cruel  for  any  but  fiends  or
Spanish  soldiers  to  imagine.'*

Such  was  the  lot  of  thousands  of  innocent  men  and
women  at  the  hands  of  Philip's  soldiers  in  a  country  at
peace  with  Philip,  at  the  very  moment  when  that  monarch
was  protesting  with  a  seraphic  smile  on  his  expirini;;  lips
that  he  had  never  in  his  whole  life  done  injury  to  a  MUgle
liuman  being.

In  vain  did  the  victims  call  aloud  upon  their  sovereign,
the  Emperor  Eudolph. The  Spaniards  laughed  the  feeble

3  Bor,  Jlf/teren,  uhi  sup.

I

1599,  iMAURlCE  C0I\1PLIMENTED  BY  ELIZABETH.  540

imperial  mandates  to  scorn,  and  spurned  the  word  nen-
tiality.  "  Oil,  poor  Eoman  Empire  !  "  cried  John  Fon-
tanus,  "  how  art  thou  fallen  !  Thy  j^rotector  has  become
thy  despoiler,  and,  although  thy  members  see  this  and
know  it,  they  sleep  through  it  all. One  day  they  may

have  a  terrible  awakening  from  their  slumbers

The  Admiral  of  Arragon  has  entirely  changed  the  charac-
ter of  the  war,  recognizes  no  neutrality,  saying  that  there
must  be  but  one  God,  one  pope,  and  one  king,  and  that
they  who  object  to  this  arrangement  must  be  extirpated
with  fire  and  sword,  let  them  be  where  they  may."  *

The  admiral,  at  least,  thoroughly  respected  the  claims
of  the  dead  Philip  to  universal  monarchy.

Maurice  gained  as  much  credit  by  the  defensive
strategy  through  which  he  saved  the  republic  from  the
horrors  thus  afflicting  its  neighbours,  as  he  had  ever  done
by  his  most  brilliant  victories.  Queen  Elizabeth  was
enchanted  with  the  prowess  of  the  prince,  and  with  the
sagacious  administration  of  those  republican  magistrates
whom  she  never  failed  to  respect,  even  when  most  in-
clined to  quarrel  with  them.  "Never  before  was  it
Avritten  or  heard  of,"  said  the  queen,  "  that  so  great  an
extent  of  country  could  be  defended  with  so  few  ti-oops,
that  an  invasion  of  so  superior  a  hostile  force  coidd  be
prevented,  especially  as  it  appeared  that  all  the  streams
and  rivers  were  frozen."  This,  she  added,  was  owing  to
the  wise  and  far-seeing  counsels  of  the  States-General,
and  to  the  faithful  diligence  of  their  military  commander,
who  now,  as  she  declared,  deserved  the  title  of  the  first
captain  of  all  Christendom.^

A  period  of  languor  and  exhaustion  succeeded.  The
armies  of  the  States  had  dwindled  to  an  effective  force  of
scarcely  four  or  five  thousand  men,  while  the  new  levies
came  in  but  slowly.  The  taxation,  on  the  other  hand,
was  very  severe.  The  quotas  for  the  provinces  had
risen  to  the  amount  of  five  million  eight  hundred
thousand  florins  for  the  year  1599,  against  an  income  of
four  millions  six  hundred  thousand,  and  this  deficit  went
on  increasing,  notwithstanding  a  new  tax  of  one-half
per  cent,  on  the  capital  of  all  estates  above  three
thousand  florins  in  value,  and  another  of  two  and  a  half

*  Groon  v.  Prinsterer,  Archives,  I.  407  (2  »er.)

5  Caron  to  the  States-General. Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  199.

550  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. CnAi-.  XXXVH.

per  cent,  on  all  sales  of  real  property'."  The  finances  of
the  obedient  provinces  were  in  a  still  worse  condition,
and  during  the  absence  of  the  cardinal-archdnke  an
almost  universal  mutiny,  occasioned  by  the  inability  of
the  exchequer  to  provide  payment  for  the  troops,  estab-
lished itself  throughout  Flanders  and  Brabant.  There
was  much  recrimination  on  the  subject  of  the  invasion
of  the  Rhenish  duchies,  and  a  war  of  pamphlets  and
manifestos  between  the  archduke's  Government  and  the
States-General  succeeded  to  those  active  military  opera-
tions by  which  so  much  miser}-  had  been  inflicted  on  the
unfortunate  inhabitants  of  that  border  land.  There  was
a  slight  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Princes  of  Brunswick,
Hesse,  and  Brandenburg  to  counteract  and  to  punish  the
hostilities  of  the  Sj^anish  troops  committed  upon  German
soil.  An  army — very  slowly  organized,  against  the
wishes  of  the  emperor,  the  bishops,  and  the  Catholic
party — took  the  field,  and  made  a  feeble  demonstration
upon  Eheinberg  and  upon  Eees  entirely  without  result,
and  then  disbanded  itself  ingloriously.''

Meantime  the  admiral  had  withdrawn  from  German
territory,  and  was  amusing  himself  with  a  variety  of
blows  aimed  at  vital  points  of  the  republic.  An  excur-
sion into  the  Isle  of  Bommel  was  not  crowned  with  much
success.  The  assault  on  the  city  was  repulsed.  The
fortress  of  Crevecoeur  was,  however,  taken,  and  the  fort
of  St.  Andrew  constructed — in  spite  of  the  attempts  of
the  States  to  frustrate  the  design^at  a  point  commanding
the  course  of  both  the  Waal  and  the  Mouse.  Having
placed  a  consideiable  garrison  in  each  of  those  strong-
holds, the  admiral  discontinued  his  labours  and  went
into  winter-quarters.*

The  States-General  for  political  reasons  were  urgent
that  Prince  Maurice  should  undertake  some  important
enterprise,  but  the  stadholder,  sustained  b}-  the  opinion
of  his  cousin  Lewis  AV^illiam,  resisted  the  pressure.  The
armies  of  the  Commonwealth  were  still  too  slender  in
numbers  and  too  widelj^  scattered  for  active  service  on  a
large  scale,  and  the  season  for  active  campaigning  was
wisely  suffered  to  pass  without  making  any  attempt  of
magnitude  during  the  year.

6  W?.gen,iar,  i.x.  .39. r  Foid.  39-72. Bor,  IV.  522,  SC77.,  591,608. Meteren,  b.  sxi.
8  Wagenaar,  B'jr,  Meterm,  ifti  sup.

i

1599. NAVAL  EXPEDITION  UNDER  VAN  DER  DOES. ool

The  trade  of  the  provinces,  moreover,  was  very  much
hampered,  iind  their  revenues  sadly  diminished  by  the
severe  prohibitions  which  had  succeeded  to  the  remark-
able indulgence  hicherto  accorded  to  foreign  commerce.
Edicts  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Spain  and  of  the  Arch-
dukes Albert  and  Isabella,  forbidding  all  intercourse
between  the  rebellious  provinces  and  the  obedient
Netherlands  or  any  of  the  Spanish  possessions,  were
met  by  countervailing  decrees  of  the  States-General.
Free  trade  with  its  enemies  and  with  all  the  world,  by
means  of  which  the  commonwealth  had  prospered  in
spite  of  perpetual  war,  was  now  for  a  season  destroyed,
and  the  immediate  results  were  at  once  visible  in  its
diminished  resources.  To  employ  a  portion  of  the  mari-
time energies  of  the  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,  thus
temporarily  deprived  of  a  sufficient  field,  a  naval  expedi
tion  of  seventy-five  war  vessels  under  Admiral  van  der
Does  was  fitted  out,  but  met  with  very  trifling  success.
They  attacked  and  plundered  the  settlements  and  foits
of  the  Canary  Islands,  inflicted  much  damage  on  the
inhabitants,  sailed  thence  to  the  Isle  of  St.  Thomas,  near
the  equator,  where  the  towns  and  villages  were  sacked
and  burned,  and  where  a  contagious  sickness  broke  out
in  the  fleet,  sweeping  off  in  a  very  brief  period  a  large
proportion  of  the  crew.  The  admiral  himself  fell  a  victim
to  the  disease  and  was  buried  on  the  island.  The  fleet
put  to  sea  again  under  Admiral  Storm  van  Wena,  b;it  the
sickness  pursued  the  adventui-ers  on  their  voyage  towards
Brazil,  one  thousand  of  them  dying  at  sea  in  fifteen  days.
At  Brazil  they  accomplished  nothing,  and,  on  their  home-
ward voyage,  not  only  the  new  commander  succumbed
to  the  same  contagion,  but  the  mortality  continued  to  so
extraordinary  an  extent  that,  on  the  arrival  of  the  expe-
dition late  in  the  winter  in  Holland,  there  wore  but  two
captains  left  alive,  and,  in  many  of  the  vessels,  not  more
than  six  sound  men  to  each.^  Nothing  could  be  more
wretched  than  this  termination  of  a  gieat  and  expensive
voyage,  which  had  occasioned  such  high  hopes  through-
out the  provinces :  nothing  more  dismal  than  the  political
atmosphere  which  surrounded  the  republic  during  the
months  which  immediately  ensiled.  It  was  obvious  to
Barneveld  and  the  other  leading  personages,  in  whose

9  Bor,  Meteren,  Wagcnaar,  ubi  flip. See  Utters  of  Buzanval  in  Viecdo, pasfim.

552  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS, Chap.  XXXVII.

hands  was  the  administration  of  affairs,  that  a  great
military  success  was  absolutely  indispensable,  if  the
treacherous  cry  of  peace,  wlien  peace  was  really  impos-
sible, should  not  become  universal  and  fatal.

Meantime  aflairs  were  not  much  rflore  cheerful  in  the
obedient  provinces.  Archduke  Albert  arrived  with  his
bride  in  the  early  days  of  Se^^tember,  1599,  at  Brussels,
and  was  received  with  great  pomp  and  enthusiastic
rejoicings.  When  are  pomp  and  enthusiasm  not  to  be
obtained  by  imperial  personages,  at  brief  notice  and  in
vast  quantities,  if  managers  understand  their  business  ?
After  all,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  theatrical
display  was  as  splendid  as  that  which  marked  the  begin-
ning of  the  Ernestian  era.  Schoolmaster  Houwaerts
had  surpassed  himself  on  that  occasion,  and  was  no
longer  capable  of  deifying  the  new  sovereign  as
thoroughly  as  he  had  deified  his  brother.

Much  real  discontent  followed  close  upon  the  fictitious
enthusiasm.  The  obedient  provinces  were  poor  and
forlorn,  and  men  murmured  loudly  at  the  enormous
extravagance  of  their  new  master's  housekeeping.  There
were  one  hundred  and  fifty  mules,  and  as  man}'  horses
in  their  sovereign's  stables,  while  the  expense  of  feeding
the  cooks,  lackeys,  pages,  and  fine  gentlemen  who
swelled  the  retinue  of  the  great  household,  was  esti-
mated, without  wages  or  salaries,  at  two  thousand
florins  a  day.^"  Albert  had  wished  to  be  called  a  king,'^
but  had  been  unable  to  obtain  the  gratification  of  his
wish.  He  had  aspired  to  be  emperor,  and  he  was  at
least  sufficiently  imperial  in  his  ideas  of  expense.^^  The
murmurevs  were  loftily  rebuked  for  their  complaints,
and  reminded  of  the  duty  of  obedient  provinces  to
contribute  at  least  as  much  for  the  defence  of  their
masters  as  the  rebels  did  in  maintenance  of  their  rebel-
lion. The  provincial  estates  were  summoned  accord-
ingly to  pay  roundly  for  the  expenses  of  the  war  as
well  as  of  the  court,  and  to  enable  the  new  sovereigns
to  suppress  the  military  mutiny,  which  amid  the  enthu-
siasm greeting  their  arrival  was  the  one  prominent  and
formidaV)le  fact.

The  archduke  was  now  thirty-nine  years  of  age  the

10  Bor,  IV.  578.  II  Albeit  to  Pliilip,  20  April,  159S. (Arcb.de  Simancas

lis.) Same  to  same,  13  July,  lo98.  (lb;d.)  12  Ibiii.

ICOO.  RECOVERY  OF  CREVECffiUR  BY  MAURICE.  553

Infanta  Isabella  six  years  younger.  She  was  esteemed
majestically  beautiful  by  her  courtiers,  and  Cardinal
Bentivoglio,  himself  a  man  of  splendid  intellect,  pro-
nounced her  a  woman  of  genius,  who  had  grown  to  bo
a  prodigy  of  wisdom,  under  the  tuition  of  her  father,
the  most  sagacious  statesman  of  the  age.^*  In  attach-
ment to  the  Eoman  faith  and  ritual,  in  superhuman
loftiness  of  demeanour,  and  in  hatred  of  heretics,  she
was  at  least  a  worthy  child  of  that  sainted  sovereign.'*
In  a  moral  point  of  view  she  was  his  superior.  The
archdukes — so  Albert  and  Isabella  were  always  desig-
nated— were  a  singularly  attached  couple,  and  their
household,  if  extravagant  and  imperial,  was  harmonious.
They  loved  each  other — so  it  was  believed — as  sincerely
as  they  abhorred  heretics  and  rebels,  but  it  does  not
appear  that  they  had  a  very  warm  atiection  for  their
Flemish  subjects.  Every  characteristic  of  their  court
was  Spanish.  Spanish  costume,  Spanish  manners,  the
Spanish  tongue,  were  almost  exclusively  predominant,
and  although  the  festivals,  dances,  banquets,  and
tourneys,  were  all  very  magnificent,  the  pievailing  ex-
pression of  the  Brabantine  capital  resembled  that  of  a
Spanish  convent,^^  so  severely  correct,  so  stately,  and  so
grim,  was  the  demeanour  of  the  court.

The  earliest  military  operations  of  the  stadholder  in
the  first  3'ear  of  the  new  century  were  suc-
cessful. Partly  by  menace,  but  more  eifectu-
ally  by  judicious  negotiation,  Maurice  recovered  Creve-
coeur,  and  obtained  the  surrender  of  St.  Andrew,  the
fort  which  the  admiral  had  built  the  preceding  year  in
honour  of  Albert's  uncle.  That  ecclesiastic,  with  whom
Mendoza  had  wrangled  most  bitterly  during  the  whole
interval  of  Albert's  absence,  had  already  taken  his  de-
parture for  Eome,  where  he  soon  afterwards  died.^*^  The
garrisons  of  the  forts,  being  mostly  Walloon  soldiers,
forsook  the  Spanish  service  for  that  of  the  States,  and
were  banded  together  in  a  legion  some  twelve  hundred
strong,  which  became  known  as the  "  New  Beggars,"

13  Relazione delle proV. ubb"=. 57,  den  knion  sitzon  dienen,  auch  die  Staten

58.  der  Provincien  welches  ilmcii  gar  ungern

1*  "Die Infantiu aiisz Hispanien,"  thut."— Uroen  v.  Prinstercr,  Arcliives,  Jl.

wrote  Fontanus,  "  weis  nit  dan  von  hiin-  8  (2  Ser.)
gen, brennen, morden und wUtten  zu 15  Bentivofrlio,  iihi  flip.
."-prcchen;  man  niusz  irer  Majestat  auff '^  AVagc naiir,  ix.  61.

554  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVII.

and  were  placed  under  the  nominal  command  of  Frede-
rick Henry  of  Nassau,  youngest  child  of  William  the
Silent.  Tiie  next  military  event  of  the  year  was  a  mad
combat,  itndcrtaken  by  formal  cartel,  between  Bieaute,
a  young  Korman  noble  in  the  service  of  the  repiiblic,
and  twenty  comrades,  with  an  equal  number  of  Flemish
warriors  from  the  obedient  provinces,  under  Grobben-
donck.  About  one  half  of  the  whole  number  were
killed,  including  the  leaders,  but  the  encounter,  although
exciting  much  interest  at  the  time,  had  of  course  no
permanent  importance.^''

There  was  much  negotiation,  informal  and  secret,
between  Brussels  and  London  during  this  and  a  portion
of  the  following  year.  Elizabeth,  naturally  enough,  was
weaiy  of  the  war,  but  she  felt  after  all,  as  did  the
Government  of  France,  that  a  peace  between  the  United
Netherlands  and  Spain  would  have  for  its  result  the
restoration  of  the  authority  of  his  most  Catholic  Majesty
over  all  the  provinces.  The  statesmen  of  Fiance  and
England,  like  most  of  the  politicians  of  Europe,  had  but
slender  belief  in  the  possibility  of  a  popular  government,
and  doubted  therefore  the  continued  existence  of  the
newly-organized  republic.^*  Therefore  they  really  de-
precated the  idea  of  a  peace  which  should  include  the
States,  notwithstanding  that  from  time  to  time  the
queen  or  some  of  her  counsellors  had  so  vehemently
reproached  the  Netherlanders  with  their  unwillingness
to  negotiate.  "At  the  first  recognition  that  these
people  should  make  of  the  mere  shadow  of  a  prince,"
said  Buzanval,  the  keenly  observing  and  experienced
French  envoy  at  the  Hague,  "  they  lose  the  form  they
have. All  the  blood  of  the body  would  flow  to the

17  Wagenaar,  ix.  39-72.  Bor,  IV.  522-  propliesying.  "  Ceux  qui  sondent  et  con
603. Meteren,  book  xxi.  naissent  a  quoy  ce  mene,"  wrote  Aers-

18  "Da  tutte  queste  ragioni  duiique  sens  from  I'.iris,  "dcsirent  changemenl
si  pub  giudicare  cbe  non  sia  per  conser-  en  I'estat  du  gouvernement  populaire  el
varsi  nello  state  presente  questa  nuova  election  dun  souverain.  Combien  peu
republica  ma  che  piu  tosto  sia  per  man-  connaissans  nos  necessites,  nos  desseiiis,
care  in  breve  e  che  fiiialmente  sia  per  ri-  nos  maux  !  En  tel  predicament  somraes
(iuvsi  sotto  il  governo  d' uu  solo." — Benti-  nous  en  cette  cour."  21  Mars,  1600,
voglio,  Relaziune  delle  Provincie  Unite,  Lettres,  in  Valck.  (Archives  of  the
lib.  iii.  cap.  vii.  p.  50.  The  continued  H^jgue  MS.)  Compare  Instructions  ol
existence  of  the  "  new  republic  "  for  two  James  I.  to  Spencer  and  Winwood ;  Win-
centuries  after  these  remarks  were  made  wood's  Memorials,  II.  329-335,  especially
is  an  additional  proof  of  the  danger  of  p.  333.

1600.  DESIGNS  OF  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.  2o5

head,  and  the  game  wnnld  bo  who  should  best  play  the

valet The  hoiise  of  Nassau  would  lose its

credit  within  a  month  in  case  of  peace." "  As  such
statesmen  could  not  imagine  a  republic,  they  ever
dreaded  the  restoration  in  the  United  Provinces  of  the
subverted  authority  of  Spain.

France  and  England  were  jealous  of  each  other,  and
both  were  jealous  of  Spain.  Therefore  even  if  the
republican  element,  the  strength  and  enduiance  of
which  was  so  little  suspected,  liad  been  as  trifling  a
factor  in  the  problem  as  was  supposed,  still  it  would
have  been  difficult  for  any  one  of  these  powers  to  absorb
the  United  Netherlands.  As  fur  France,  she  haidly
coveted  their  possession.  "  v\'e  ought  not  to  flatter
ourselves,"  said  Buzanval,  "  that  these  maritime  peoples
will  cast  themselves  one  day  into  our  nets,  nor  do  I
know  that  it  would  be  advisable  to  pull  in  the  net  if
they  should  throw  themselves  in,"  ^°

Henry  was  full  of  political  schemes  and  dreams  at
this  moment — as  much  as  his  passion  for  Mademoiselle
d'Entraigues,  who  had  so  soon  supplanted  the  image  of
the  dead  Gabrielle  in  his  heart,  would  permit.  He  was
very  well  disposed  to  obtain  possession  of  the  Sj)anish
Netherlands,'"^^  whenever  he  should  see  his  way  to  such
an  acquisition,  and  was  even  indulging  in  visions  of  the
imperial  crown.

He  was  therefore  already,  and  for  the  time  at  least,
the  most  intense  of  papists.^'^ He  was  defej'mined  to

'9  Lettri'S  et  Negociations  de  Buzan-  centre  toiite  autro  force  etr.ingore  ile
val,  par  le  Professeur  Vreede.  Leyde,  quilque  coste  qu'clle  peut  arriver.  M.
1846,  p.  300.  le  P.  Maurice  me  parlant  de  Dunkerqiie
20  Ibid.  le  jour  de  son  partement,  je  luy  tis  de-
"1  Nor  would  it  seem  that  the  project,  mande  s'il  la  pourroit  niaintenir  aprts
although  much  feared  by  the  English  I'avoir  conquise,  il  me  dit  que  malaise-
queen,  was  at  all  distasteful  to  the  ment  sans  y  tenir  toujours  une  armec.
N'etherland  statesmen.  "  M'ayant  sou-  Je  le  pressay  davantago  ct  jusques  la
vent  dit  et  redit  Bernefeld,"  wrote  Buzan-  qu'il  vint  a  me  dire  '  Je  erois  que  les  etats
val,  "que  si  le  roy  vouloit  repetcr  les  feroient  bien  en  un  tel  cas  de  Ui  mettrecn
droits  qu'il  pretend  sur  les  dites  provinces,  mains  du  roy  ; '  je  lui  dis  que  je  ne  pcn-
que  les  Etats  des  Provinces  Unies  luy  sois  pas  que  nous  voulussions  rompre
ayderoient  pour  un  tel  effet  de  toute  leur  notre  Jeu.sne  pour  si  peu  de  chose.  Si
force,  ne  jiretcndant  iceux  etats  puur  tout  faut  il,  dit  il,  ou  que  cette  ville  nous  mange
butin  que  I'assurance  de  cette  coste  de  ou  que  nous  la  niangions  si  nous  la  tenons
mer,  et  certes  si  cela  etoit,  ils  pourront  une  fois,"  &c. — Buzanval  to  Vill-roy,  25
donner  sauvement  et  a  leur  aise  avec  une  June,  1 600.  (MS.  in  Eoj-al  Library  at  the
bonne  et  etroite  alliance  qu'ils  esperoient  Hague.)
faire  avec  la  France  qui  les  maintiendroit "-  "  Aus.sy  sommes  nous  en  temps  icy

556  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVII.

sacrifice  tlie  Huguenot  cliiefs,  and  introduce  the  Council
of  Ti'ent,  in  order,  as  he  told  Duplessis,  that  all  might
be  Christians.  If  he  still  retained  any  remembrance  of
the  ancient  friendship  between  himself  and  the  heretic
republic,  it  was  not  likely  to  exhibit  itself,  notwith-
standing his  promises  and  his  pecuniary  liabilities  to
her,  in  anything  more  solid  than  words.  "  I  repeat  it,"
said  the  Dutch  envoy  at  Paris ;  "  this  court  cares
nothing  for  us,  for  all  its  cabals  tend  to  close  union
with  Rome,  whence  we  can  expect  nothing  but  foul
weather.  The  king  alone  has  any  memory  of  our  past
services."  ^^  But  imperturbable  and  self-confident  as
ever,  Henry  troubled  himself  little  with  fears  in  regard
to  the  papal  supremacy,  even  when  his  Parliament
professed  great  anxiety  in  regard  to  the  consequences  of
the  Council  of  Trent,  if  not  under  him  yet  under  his
siiccessors.  "  I  will  so  bridle  the  popes,"  said  he,
cheerfully,  "  that  they  will  never  pass  my  restrictions.
My  children  will  be  still  more  virtuous  and  valiant  than
I.  If  I  have  none,  then  the  devil  take  the  hindmost.
Nevertheless  I  choose  that  the  council  shall  be  enacted.
I  desire  it  more  ardently  than  I  pressed  the  edict  for
the  Protestants."  ^*  Such  being  the  royal  humour  at  the
moment,  it  may  well  be  believed  that  Duplessis  Mornay
would  find  but  little  sunshine  from  on  high  on  the
occasion  of  his  famous  but  forgotten  conferences  with
Du  Perron,  now  archbishop  of  Evreux,  before  the  king
and  all  the  court  of  Fontainebleau.  It  was  natural
enough  that  to  please  the  king  the  king's  old  Huguenot
friend  should  be  convicted  of  false  citations  from  the
fathers ;  but  it  w^ould  seem  strange,  were  the  motives
unknown,  that  Henry  should  have  been  so  intensely  in-
terested in  this  most  arid  and  dismal  of  theological  con-
troversies. Yet those who  had  known  and observed

que  les  affaires  se  couvent  et  attendent  pour  I'Assemblee  contre  ces  forcees  fon-

leur  forme  par  la  force. La  desunion  de  versions  que  comme  roy  il  doit  desirei

ceux  de  la  religion  est  projetee,  le  Concile  qu'une  religion  en  son  royaume  et  ii  M.

(te  Trente  en  cette  consideration  en  bon  du  Plessis  alleguant  les  inconveniens  du

terme  pour  sa  verification,  le  S''  du  Plessis  Concile  (de  Trent)  sy  faut  il  (fit  il)  qu'en-

sacrifie  au  pape,  les  Jesuites  sur  le  retour,  fin  nous  soions  tous  Chretiens." — Aerssens

I'enipire  promis  au  roy  et  son  mariage  to  Valck,  10  April,  1600. (Hague  Ar-

arrete  pour  le  niois  de  Septenibre." —  chives  MS.)

Aerssens  to  Valck,  19  May,  1600,  MS.  ^^  Aerssens  to  Valclc,  tibi  sup.

"Sa  Majeste  ces  jours  passes  dit  a  bon  24  Same  to  same,  6  May,  160O.  (Hague

escient  a  M.  de  Bouillon  sur  ces  dolcances  Archives  MS.) "  Sauve  qui  pent,"  &c.

160O.  HENRY'S  PROJECTED  MARRIAGE.  557

the  king  closely  for  thirty  years,  declared  that  he  had
never  manifested  so  much  passion,  neither  on  the  eve  of
battles  nor  of  amorous  assignations,  as  he  then  did  for
the  demolition  of  Duplessis  and  his  deductions.  Ho
had  promised  the  Kuncius  that  the  Huguenot  sliould  be
utterly  confounded,  and  with  him  the  whole  fraternity,
"  for,"  said  the  king,  "  he  has  wickedly  and  impudently
written  against  the  pope,  to  whum  I  owe  as  much  as  I
do  td  God."^*

These  were  not  times  in  which  the  Hollanders,  battling
as  stoutly  against  Spain  and  the  pope  as  they  had  dune
during  the  years  when  the  republic  stood  shoulder  to
shoulder  with  Henry  the  Huguenot,  could  hope  for  aid
and  comfort  from  their  ancient  ally.

It  is  very  characteristic  of  that  age  of  dissimulation
and  of  reckless  political  gambling,  that  at  the  very
moment  when  Henry's  marriage  with  Marie  de  Medicis
was  already  arranged,  and  when  that  princess  was  soon
expected  in  Lyons,  a  cabal  at  the  king's  court  was  busy
with  an  absurd  project  to  marry  their  sovereign  to  the
Infanta  of  Spain.  It  is  true  that  the  Infanta  was  already
the  wife  of  the  cardinal-archduke,  but  it  was  thought
possible— for  reasons  divulged  through  the  indiscretions
or  inventions  of  the  father  confessor — to  obtain  the  pope's
dispensation  on  the  gi'ound  of  the  nullity  of  the  marriage.-''
Thus  there  were  politicians  at  the  French  court  seriously
occupied  in  an  attempt  to  deprive  the  archdvike  of  his.
wdfe.  of  his  Netherland  provinces,  and  of  the  crown  of
the  holy  Roman  empire,^''  which  he  still  hoped  to in-

■•'s  Same  to  same,  9  May,  1600.  (Hague  d'honneur  s'etait  plaint  de  rinhabilite  de

Archives  MS.) Compare  De  Thou  (who  I'archiduc  aux  parties  fondamfntalles  du

was  one  of  the  Catholic  umpires  at  the  mariage. Sur  quoy  elle  projfttait  une

conference),  t.  xiii.  pp.  445-449,  L.  123.  dispense  a  Rome,  mediation  par  le  roy,

26  "  Vous  rirez  si  je  vous  dis,"  wrote  durant  le  sejour  de  Bladarae  la  Duchesse

Aerssens,  minister  of  the  IJutch  republic  de  Beaufort  en  cesfe  cour,  qui  no  s'en  est

in  Fiance,  to  Valcke,  '•  que  le  secret  en  espargnee  au  rapport. Ce  que  je  dis  est

est  qu'on  pretend  encor  de  faire  espouser  vrai pour la  caballe, mais  j'ignore  la

I'Infante  d'Espagne  au  roy,  qui  a  cette  verite  du  faict  et  quand  tout  seroit  ainsi

occasion  ne  se  haste  point  vers  Lyon  et  a  on  s'aveugle  trop  au  desir  de  croire  que

rejette  la  venue  de  la  Florentine  jusqu'en  le  Roy  d'Fspagnesouflrist  ceste  alliance,"

Octobre,  I'obligeant  a  la  compagnie  de  sa  &c.— Aerssens  to  Valck, 12  June,  1600.

boeur. Le  plus  vrai  est  que  le  roy  prend  (Hague  Archives  MS.)

ccci  pour  pretext. Car  il  pense  totale-  27  "  Le  Comte  de  Manderscheyd  a  parlc

ment  a  M"«.  d'Anfraigues  a  laquelle  il  a  assez  franchement  a  Monsieur  lo  Prince

donne  seconde  promesse  en  cas  de  niasle.  Maurice,  comme  il  m'a  dit,  des  indisposi-

Cependant  on  a  sceu  de  bonne  part  que  lions  ordinaires  de  la  cervelle  de  I'Km-

rinfante  ayanl confere avec  sa  dame  pereur,  du  peu  de  contenlement  que  Ic!

r>r)8  THi<:  united  Netherlands, chap.  xxxvii.

herit.-^  Yet  the  iuk  -was  scarcely  cliy  with  which
Henry  had  signed  the  treaty  of  amity  with  Madrid  and
Brussels.

The  Queen  of  England,  on  the  other  hand — althougli
often  listening  to  secret  agents  from  Brussels  and  Madrid
who  offered  peace,  and  although  perfectly  aware  that
the  great  object  of  Spain  in  securing  peace  with  England
was  to  he  able  to  swoop  down  at  once  upon  the  republic,
thus  deprived  of  any  allies — '^^  was  be.side  herself  with
rage,  wlienever  she  suspected,  with  or  without  reas(m,
that  Brussels  or  Madrid  had  been  sending  peace  emis-
saries to  the  republic.

"  Before  I  could  get  into  the  room,"  said  Caron,  on
one  such  occasion,  "  she  called  out,  '  Have  you  not
always  told  me  that  the  States  never  could,  would,  or
should  treat  for  peace  with  the  enemy  ?  Yet  now  it  is
plain  enough  that  they  have  proceeded  only  too  far  in
negotiations.'  And  she  then  swore  a  big  oath  that  if
the  States  were  to  deceive  her  slie  meant  to  take  such
vengeance  that  men  should  talk  of  it  for  ever  and  ever."
It  was  a  long  time  before  the  envoy  could  induce  her  to
listen  to  a  single  word,  although  the  perfect  sincerity  of
the  States  in  their  attitude  to  the  queen  and  to  Spain
was  unquestionable,""  and  her  ill-humour  on  the  siibject
continued  long  after  it  had  been  demonstrated  how
much  she  had  been  deceived.

Y'et  it  was  impossible  in  the  nature  of  things  for  the
States  to  play  her  false,  even  if  no  reliance  were  to  be
placed  on  their  sagacity  and  their  honour.  Even  the
lecent  naval  expedition  of  the  republic  against  the  dis-
tant possessions  of  Spain — which  in  its  result  had  caused
so  niiich  disappointment  to  the  States,  and  cost  them  so
many  lives,  including  that  of  the  noble  admiral  whom

princes  soit  catholicques  soit  piotcstsuits  mains." — Vrcedo,  Negociations de  Buzan-

commenccnt  a  avoir  de  luy  et  du  desir  val,  p.  281.

qu'lls  ont  de  se  transferer  Tempire  h,  une  ^  "  Cette  paix  I'Angleterre  vers  laquellc

autre  maison  que  celle  de  Autriclie. . .  ny  I'Espagnc  ny  Bruxelles  ne  daigne-

, . Cela  nous  doit  faire  un  peu  lever  roient  p;is  tourner  les  yeu.\  si  ce  n'cstoit

lea  oreilles  en  nous  rendant  capable  de  pour  I'espcrance  qu'on  lour  donne  quo

grandes  choses,"  &c. — Buzanval  to  Ville-  par  cette  ouvcrture  Us  entreront  dans  ces

roy,  25  June,  1600. (Lettres  de  Buzan-  Provinces  Unies."— Buzanval  toViUeroy,

val  in  the  Royal  Library  of  the  Hagne  14  Nov.  1599. Vreede,  Ncgociations  da

ilS.)  Buzanval,  p.  315.

28  "L'archiduc .... qui  touche  so  Caron  to  the  States,  25  July,  1600.

deja  du  doigt  ii  I'clection  du  Roy  dos  Ho-  (Archives  of  the  Hague  MS.)

1600.  QUEEN  ELIZABETH  AND  ENVOY  CARON.  Tjf.O

every  sailor  in  the  Netherlands  adored^' — had  been  of
immense  advantage  to  England.  The  queen  acknow-
ledged that  the  Dutch  navy  had  averted  the  storm  which
threatened  to  descend  upon  her  kingdom  out  of  Spain,
the  Spanish  ships  destined  for  the  coast  of  Ireland  having
been  dispersed  and  drawn  to  the  other  side  of  the  world
by  these  demonstrations  of  her  ally.  For  this  she
Vowed  that  she  would  be  eternally  grateful,  and  she
said  as  much  in  "  letters  full  of  sugar  and  honey " —
according  to  the  French  envoy — which  she  sent  to  the
States  by  Sir  Francis  Vere,"'  She  protested,  in  short,
that  she  had  been  better  and  more  promptly  served  in
her  necessities  by  the  Netherlands  than  by  her  own
subjects.''''

All  this  sugar  and  honey  however  did  not  make  the
mission  of  Envoy  Edmonds  less  bitter  to  the  States.
They  heard  that  he  was  going  about  through  half  the
cities  of  the  obedient  Netherlands  in  a  sort  of  triimiphal
procession,  and  it  was  the  general  opinion  of  the  politi-
cians and  financiers  of  the  continent  that  peace  between
Spain  and  England  was  as  good  as  made.  Naturally
therefore,  notwithstanding  the  exuberant  expressions
of  gratitude  on  the  part  of  Elizabeth,  the  republican
Government  were  anxious  to  know  what  all  this  par-
leying meant.  They  could  not  believe  that  people
would  make  a  raree-show  of  the  English  envoy  except
for  sufficient  reason.^*  Caron  accordingly  presented  him-
self before  the  queen,  with  respectful  inquiries  2c  Jan.
on  the  subject.  He  fuimd  her  in  appearance  ^''""•
very  angry,  not  with  him,  but  with  Edmonds,  from
whom  she  had  received  no  advices.  "  I  don't  know
what  they  are  doing  with  him,"  said  her  Majesty.  "  I
hear  from  others  that  they  are  ringing  the  church  bells

31  "  Van  der  Does  ....  adore de  tion  et  cliassernos naviresde lamer  ctp;u'
cette  race  de  mat  luU  comme  un  saint." —  uinsi  a  reiiiectre  leur  premier  dessein  pour
Negociations  de  Buzanval,  p.  139.  I'an  piochain. Sur  quoy  il  liit  commando

32  Ibid.,  pp.  331,  332.  .au  dit  Adelantado  de  so  transporter  avtc
M  Ibid. "Ayant  iceiilx  navires  pris le  plus  forte  de  la  flotte  vers  la  grand:-

1'i.sle  de  la  grande  Canaric  avccq  la  villo  Canarie  comme  aussi  sur  la  fin  du  nxiis
et  chasteaux  d'  Mecq.  La  cour d'Espagne  d' Aougst  il  a  cinglC-  vers  la  avecq  environ
en  apprint  la  nouvelle  au  mois  de  Juillet  cinquante  navires  de  guerre,"  &c — States-
avccq  advis  que  les  notres  s'y  fortifioient  General  to  the  Queen,  17  Oct.  1099.  (Ar-
ia quelle  tit  clianger  au  conseil  d'Kspagne  chives  of  the  Hague  MS.)
la  (lite  resolution  et  trouver  bon  de  con-  3'  Aerss-ns  to  Valck,  10  April,  1600.
scTver  le  leur  a  empecher  ladite  fortilica-  (MS.  before  cited.)

560  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVII,

wherever  lie  goes,  and  that  they  have  carried  him
through  a  great  many  more  places  than  was  necessary.
I  suppose  that  they  think  him  a  monster,  and  they  are
carrying  him  about  to  exhibit  him.  All  this  is  done,"
she  continued,  "  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  poor
people,  and  to  put  it  into  their  heads  that  the  Queen
of  England  is  suing  for  peace,  which  is  very  wide  of
the  mark."^^

She  further  observed  that,  as  the  agents  of  the  Spanish
Government  had  been  perpetually  sending  to  her,  she
had  been  inclined  once  for  all  to  learn  what  they  had
to  say.  Thus  she  should  make  manifest  to  all  the
world  that  she  was  not  averse  to  a  treaty  such  as  might
prove  a  secure  peace  for  herself  and  for  Christendom ;
otherwise  not.

It  subsequently  appeared  that  what  they  had  to  say
was  that  if  the  queen  would  give  up  to  the  Spanish
Government  the  cautionary  towns  which  she  held  as  a
pledge  for  her  advances  to  the  republic,  forbid  all  traffic
and  intercourse  between  her  subjects  and  the  Nether-
landers,  and  thenceforth  never  allow  an  Englishman  to
serve  in  or  with  the  armies  of  the  States,  a  peace  might
be  made.^*^

Surely  it  needed  no  great  magnanimity  on  the  queen's
part  to  spurn  such  insulting  proposals,  the  offer  of  which
showed  her  capable,  in  the  opinion  of  Yerreycken,  the
man  who  made  them,  of  sinking  into  the  very  depths  of
dishonour.  And  she  did  spurn  them.  Surely,  for  the
ally,  the  protectress,  the  grateful  friend  of  the  republic,
to  give  its  chief  seaports  to  its  arch-enemy,  to  shut  the

35  "Bevondt  wel  dat  sy  toomig  was  to  States-General,  26  Jan.  1600. (Ar-

dat  sy  van  hem  niet  verstaen  hadde  seg-  chives  of  the  Hague  MS.)
gende  ick  en  weet  niet  wat  zy  daer  met 36  "  Doch  seyde  alsoo  zy  den  voors.

hem  mogen  maken. Ick  verstae  door  an-  Edmonds  gelest  hadde  aldaer  opentlyck

dere  dat  men  de  clockeu  geluydt  heeft  te  vertoonen,  dat  zy  niet  en  meende  haer

daer  by  gepasseert  is  ende  dat  men  hem  Commissarien te senden tenwaere zy

door  meer  plaetsen  gevoert  heeft  dan  daer  ezpresselyck resileerden van de drie

hy passeren  moste. Ick  mcene  seyde  puncten  die  Vereycken  haer  voorgehou-

H.  M.  dat  sy  moenen  dat  het  een  monster  den  hadde. U.  E.  staetende  landenraec-

is  ende  dat  sy  hem willen dragen  te  kende,  te  weeten,  het  geven  van  de  cau-

thoonen,  twelck  al  gedaen  ■svordt  soo  sy  tionnaire  steden,  in  henne  handen, bet

seyde  omme  het  arme  Volck  te  verblin-  verbieden  van  de  trafficque  ende  ncgotia-

den  ende  henlieden  wys  te  maken  dat  de  tie  van  haere  subjecten  met  die  van  U.  E.

Coninginne  van Engelhandt henl. tot  ende  dat  dezelve  niet  souden  mogen  U.  E.

payse  dede  versoncken  't  welck  soo  sy  In  de  oorkigte dienen,"  &c.-Caron  to

Beyde  veiTe  van  huyse  was,"  &c. — Caron  States-General,  12  April,  1600. Ibid.

1600.  PROPOSALS  OF  SPAIN  TO  EI.IZABKTII.  501

narrow  seas  against  its  sliips,  so  that  they  never  more
could  sail  westward,  and  to  abandon  its  whole  popula-
tion to  their  fate,  would  be  a  deed  of  treachery  such  as
history,  full  of  human  baseness  as  it  is,  has  rarely  been
obliged  to  record.

Before  these  propositions  had  been  made  by  Ver-
reycken  Elizabeth  protested  that,  should  he  offer  them,
she  would  send  him  home  with  sucli  an  answer  that
people  should  talk  of  it  for  some  time  to  come.  "  Before
I  consent  to  a  single  one  of  those  points,"  said  the
queen,  "  I  wish  myself  taken  from  this  world.  Until
now  I  have  been  a  princess  of  my  word,  who  would
rather  die  than  so  falsely  deceive  such  good  people  as
the  States."  ^^  And  she  made  those  protestations  with
such  expression  and  attitude  that  the  Dutch  envoy
believed  her  incapable  at  that  moment  of  dissimula-
tion.^*

Nevertheless  her  indignation  did  not  carry  her  so  ftir
as  to  induce  her  to  break  oif  the  negotiations.  The
answer  of  which  mankind  was  to  talk  in  time  to  come
was  simply  that  she  would  not  send  her  commissioners
to  treat  for  peace  unless  the  Spanish  Government  should
recede  from  the  three  points  thus  offered  by  Verreycken.^"
This  certainly  was  not  a  very  blasting  reply,  and  the
Spanish  agents  were  so  far  from  losing  heart  in  conse-
quence that  the  informal  conferences  continued  for  a
long  time,  much  to  the  discomfort  of  the  Netherlanders.

For  more  than  an  hour  and  a  half  on  one  occasion  of
an  uncommonly  hot  afternoon  in  Ap]il  did  Koel  de  Caron
argue  with  her  Majesty  against  these  ill-boding  negotia-
tions, and  ever  and  anon,  oppressed  by  the  heat  of  the
weather  and  the  ai'gument,  did  the  queen  wander  from
one  room  of  the  palace  to  the  other  in  search  of  cool  air,
still  bidding  the  envoy  follow  her  footsteps.  "  We  are
travelling  about  like  pilgrims,"  said  Elizabeth,  "  but
what  is  life  but  a  pilgrimage  ?  "

Yet,  notwithstanding  this  long  promenade  and  these
moral  reflections,  Caron  could  really  not  make  out  at
the  end  of  the  interview  whether  or  no  she  intended  to
send  her  commissioners.  At  last  he  asked  her  the  ques-
tion bluntly.

37  Caron  to  the  States,  22  Feb.  1600. (Archives  of  the  Hague  MS.)  as  ibi.l

39  Same  to  same,  12  April,  16J0.— MS.  before  cited
VOL.  III.  2 o

562  THE  UNITED  XETHERLAND.?. Chap.  XXXVII.

"Hallo!  Hallo!"  she  replied.  "  I  have  only  spoken
to  my  servant  once,  and  I  must  obtain  more  infor-
mation and  think  over  the  matter  before  I  decide.
Be  assured  however  that  I  shall  always  keep  yon
informed  of  the  progress  of  the  negotiations,  and  do
you  inform  the  States  that  they  may  build  upon  me
as  upon  a  rock."  *"

After  the  envo}^  had  taken  his  leave,  the  queen  said  to
him  in  Latin,  "  Modkce  fidei  quare  dubitusti  f  "  *^  (jaron
had  however  so  nearly  got  out  of  the  door  that  he  did
not  hear  this  admonition.

This  the  queen  perceived,  and  calling  him  b}'  name
repeated,  '■  0  Caron  !  modicce  fidei  quare  duhitasti  ?  "  add-
ing the  injunction  that  be  should  remember  this  dictum,
for  he  well  knew  what  she  meant  by  it.*^

Thus  terminated  the  interview,  while  the  negotiations
with  Spain,  not  for  lack  of  good-will  on  her  part,  and
despite  the  positive  assertions  to  the  contrary  of  Buzanval
and  other  foreign  agents,  were  destined  to  come  to
nothing.

At  a  little  later  period,  at  the  time  of  certain  informal
and  secret  conferences  at  Gertruydenberg,  the  queen
threatened  the  envoy  with  her  severest  displeasure,
should  the  States  dare  to  treat  with  Spain  without  her
permission.  "  Her  Majesty  called  out  to  me,"  said
Caron,  "  as  soon  as  I  entered  the  room,  that  I  had  always
assured  her  that  the  States  neither  would  nor  could
make  peace  with  the  enemy.  Yet  it  was  now  looking
very  ditferently,  she  continued,  swearing  with  a  mighty
oath  that  if  the  States  shfiuld  cheat  her  in  that  way  she
meant  to  revenge  herself  in  such  a  fashion  that  men
would  talk  of  it  through  all  eternity. ^^

The  French  Government  was  in  a  similar  state  of
alarm  in  consequence  of  the  Gertruydenberg  confer-
ences."

The  envoy  of  the  archdukes,  Marquis  d'Havre,  re-

«  Caron  to  States-General,  1 2  April,  Staten  dat  zy  op  my  mogen  gronden  als

16  lO. — MS.  before  citrd. "  Maer  zy  ant-  op  een  roc  dien  henlieden  nemmer  en  sal

woorde  my  terstondt  hoW,  hold,  ick  en  failleren."

hebbe  niyuen  dienaer  noch  maer eens  *'  Ibid. *^  Ibid.

gesproken  ende  my  daerop  noch  anders  ^  Cai'on's  Despatch,  in  Van  Deventer,

informeren  ende  beradea,  doch  zyt  verse-  ii.  289.

kert  dat  ick  altyts  in  't  naerder  progres  **  Caron 's  Despatches,  in  Van  Devcn-

sal  doen  verstaen  ende  versekert  oock  de  ttr,  ii.  2s9. Aerescus'  Despatch.

IGOO.  UNCERTAIN  STATE  OF  AFFAIRS.  563

ported  ou  the  other  hand  that  all  attempts  t(j  negotiate
had  proved  fruitless,  that  Olden- Barneveld,  who  spoke
for  all  his  colleagues,  was  swollen  with  pride,  and  made
it  but  too  manifest  that  the  States  had  no  intention  to
submit  to  any  foreign  jurisdiction,  but  were  resolved
to  maintain  themselves  in  the  form  of  a  republic.**

■*3  Caron'8  Despatches,  in  Van  r)cventer,  ii.  2^9. Havre  to  the  Archduke.

ENT)  OF VOL. III.

LOSDOS  : W. CXOWES  AMD  SONS, DUKE  STRUF.T,  STAKFOPD STtliF.T
AND  CHARKG  CROSS.

t

#

«

«

Ill
