JOHAN  VAN  OLDEN-BAKNEVELD

"  Nil  scire  tutissima  fides."

HISTOKY

OF  THE

UNITED  NETHERLANDS;

FROM  THE  DEATH  OF  WILLIAM  THE  SILENT  TO
THE  TWELVE  YEARS'  TIlUCE-1609.

By  JOHN  LOTHEOP  MOTLEY,  D.C.L.,

CORRESrONDlNO  MEMBER  OF  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE,
AUTHOR  OP THB  RISE  OF  THE  DUTCH  RErUBUC.'

IN  FOUK  VOLUMES.— Vol.  IV.
1600-9.

NEW  EDITION,

WITH  PORTRAITS.

LONDON:

JOHN  MUKRAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET.
1869.

TKt  Right  of  Tramlation  is  nservtd.

LONDON :

PRINT-ED  BY  W.  CLOWES  AND  SONS,  STAMFORD  STRK
AND  CHARING  CROSS.

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV.

CHAPTER  XXXVIII.

Military  events  —  Aggressiv^  movement  of  the  Netherlandei"s — State  of
the  Archduke's  provinces — Mutiny  of  the  Spanish  forces  —  Proposed
invasion  of  Flanders  by  the  States-General  —  Disembarkation  of  the
troops  on  the  Spanish  coasts  —  Capture  of  Oudenburg  and  other  places  —
Surprise  of  Nieuport  —  Conduct  of  the  Archduke —  Oudenburg  and  the
other  forts  re-taken  —  Dilemma  of  the  States' army  —  Attack  of  the
Archduke  on  Count  Ernest'»  cavalry  —  Panic  and  total  overthrow  of  the
advance-guard  of  the  Stites'  array  —  Battle  of  Nieuport  —  Details  of
the  action  —  Defeat  of  the  Spanish  army  —  Results  of  the  whole  expedi-
tion  P«'^ge  1

CHAPTER  XXXrX.

Effects  of  the  Nieuport  campaign  —  The  general  and  the  statesman  —  The
Roman  empire  and  the  Turk  —  Disgraceful  proceedings  of  the  njutinous
soldiers  in  HungaiT"  —  The  Dunkirk  pirates — Siege  of  Ostend  by  the
Archduke —  Attack  on  Rheinberg  by  Prince  Maurice  —  Siege  and  capi-
tulation of  Meurs  —  Attempt  on  Bois-le-Duc — Concentration  of  the
war  at  Ostend  —  Account  of  the  belligerents — Details  of  the  siege  —
Feigned  offer  of  Sir  Francis  Vere  to  capitulate — Arrival  of  reinforce-
ments from  the  States —  Attack  and  overthrow  of  the  besiegers  ..  52

CHAPTER  XL.

Protraction  of  the  siege  of  Ostend  —  Spanish,  invasion  of  Ireland  —  Prince
Maurice  again  on  the  march  —  Siege  of  Grave  —  State  of  the  Archduke's
army —  Formidable  mutiny  —  State  of  Europe —  Portuguese  expediticu
to  Java —  Foundation  there  of  the  first  Batavian  trading  settlement  —

a  2

iv

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV.

Exploits  of  Jacob  Heemskei  k  —  Capture  of  a  Lisbon  carrack  —  Progress
of  Dutch  commerce  —  Oriental  and  Germanic  republics  —  Commercial
embassy  fi'om  the  King  of  Atsgen  in  Sumatra  to  the  Netherlands  —
Surrender  of  Grave  —  Privateer  work  of  Frederick  Spinola  —  Destruc-
tion of  Spinola's  fleet  by  English  and  Dutch  cruisers  —  Continuation  of
the  siege  of  Ostend  —  Fearful  hurricane  and  its  effects  —  The  attack  —
Capture  of  external  forts  —  Encounter  between  Spinola  and  a  Dutch
squadron  —  Execution  of  prisoners  by  the  Archduke  —  Philip  Fleming
and  his  diary  — ■  Continuation  of  operations  before  Ostend  —  Spanish
veterans  still  mutinous  —  Their  capital  besieged  by  Van  den  Berg  —
Maurice  marches  to  their  relief — Convention  between  the  prince  and  the
mutineers  —  Great  commercial  progress  of  the  Dutch  —  Opposition  to
international  commerce  —  Organization  of  the  Universal  East  India
Company Page  88

CHAPTER  XLI.

Death  of  Queen  Elizabeth  —  Condition  of  Spain  — •  Legations  to  James  I. —
Union  of  England  and  Scotland  —  Characteristics  of  the  new  monarch  —
The  English  Court  and  Government  —  Piratical  practices  of  the  Eng-
lish—  Audience  of  the  States' envoy  with  King  James  —  Queen  Eliza-
beth's scheme  for  remodelling  Europe  —  Ambassador  extraordinary  from
Henry  IV.  to  James  —  De  Rosny's  strictures  on  the  English  people  —
Private  interview  of  De  Rosny  with  the  States'  envoy  —  De  Rosny's
audience  of  the  king  —  Objects  of  his  mission  —  Insinuations  of  the  Duke
of  Northumberland  —  Invitation  of  the  embassy  to  Greenwich  —  Promise
of  James  to  protect  the  Netherlands  against  Spain  —  Misgivings  of
Barneveld  —  Conference  at  Arundel  House  —  Its  unsatisfactory  termina-
tion —  Contempt  of  De  Rosny  for  the  English  counsellors  —  Political
aspect  of  Europe  —  De  Rosny's  disclosure  to  the  king  of  the  secret  object
of  his  mission  —  Agreement  of  James  to  the  proposals  of  De  Rosny  —
Ratification  of  the  treaty  of  alliance — Return  of  De  Rosny  and  suite  to
France  —  Arrival  of  the  Spanish  ambassador 127

CHAPTER  XLIL

Siege  of  Ostend  —  The  Marquis  Spinola  made  commander-in-chief  of  the
besieging  army  —  Discontent  of  the  troops  —  General  aspect  of  the  opera-
tions—  Gradual  encroachment  of  the  enemy 169

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV.

V

CHAPTER  XLIII.

Policy  of  the  King  of  France  —  Operatfons  of  Prince  Maurice  —  Plam  for
a  Flemish  Campaign  —  Passage  into  Flanders  —  Fort  St.  Catharine  —
Flight  of  its  garrison,  and  occupation  by  Maurice  —  Surrender  of  Ysen-
dyke  and  Aardenburg  —  Skirmish  at  Stamper's  Hook  —  Si*»ge  of  Sluys
by  Prince  Maurice  —  Ineffectual  attempt  of  Spinola  to  relieve  the  town  —
Its  capitulation  and  restoi-ation  to  the  States  —  Death  of  Lewis  Gunther
of  Nassau — Operations  at  Ostend  —  Surrender  of  the  gai'rison  —  Desola-
tion of  the  scene  after  its  evacuation Page  186

CHAPTER  XLIV.

Equation  between  the  contending  Powei-s  —  Treaty  of  peace  between  King
James  and  the  Archdukes  and  the  King  of  Spain —  Position  of  the  Pro-
vinces—  States'  envoy  in  England  to  be  styled  ambassador  —  Protest  of
the  Spanish  ambassador  —  EH'ect  of  James's  peace-treaty  on  the  people
of  England  —  Public  rejoicings  for  the  victory  of  Sluys  —  Spinola
appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  Spanish  forces  —  Preparations  for
a  campaign  against  the  St-^tes — Seizure  of  Dutch  cruisers — Inter-
national discord  —  Destruction  of  Sarmiento's  fleet  by  Admiral  Haultain
—  Projected  enterprise  against  Antwerp  —  Descent  of  Spinola  on  the
Netherland  frontier — Oldenzaal  and  Lingen  taken — Movements  of
Prince  Maurice — Encounter  of  the  two  armies  —  Panic  of  the  Nether-
landei-s  —  Consequent  loss  and  disgrace  —  Wachtendonk  and  Cmcow
taken  by  Spinola  —  Spinola's  reception  in  Sjiaia  —  Effect  of  his  vic-
tories —  Results  of  the  struggle  between  Freedom  and  Absolutism  —
Affairs  in  the  East — Amboyna  taken  by  Van  der  Hagen  —  Contest  for
possession  of  the  Clove  Islands  —  Commercial  treaty  between  the  States
and  the  King  of  .Ternate  —  Hostilities  between  the  Kings  of  Ternate  and
Tydor  —  Expulsion  of  the  Portuguese  from  the  Moluccas —  Du  Terrail's
attempted  assault  on  Bergen-o})-Zoom  —  Attack  on  the  Dunkirk  pirate-
fleet —  Practice  of  executing  prisoners  captured  at  seu .. ..  203

CHAPTER  XLV.

Preparations  for  the  campaign  of  1606  — Diminution  of  Maurice's  popu-
larity—  Quarrel  between  the  pope  and  the  Venetian  republic  —  Sur-
prise of  Sluys  by  Du  Terrail  —  Dilatoriness  of  the  Republic's  operations
—  Moveuionts  of  Spinola  —  Influence  of  the  weather  on  the  military

vi

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV.

transactions  of  the  year  —  Endeavours  of  Spinola  to  obtain  possession
of  the  Waal  and  Yssel  —  Surrender  of  Lochem  to  Spinola  —  Siege  of
Groll  —  Siege  and  loss  of  Rheinberg  —  Mutiny  in  the  Catholic  army  —
Recovery  of  Lochem  by  Maurice  —  Attempted  recovery  of  Groll  —
Sudden  appearance  of  the  enemy  —  Withdrawal  of  the  besieging  army
—  Close  of  the  campaign  —  End  of  the  war  of  independence  —  Motives
of  the  Prince  in  his  actions  before  Groll  —  Cruise  of  Admiral  Haul  tain
to  the  coast  of  Spain  and  Portugal  —  His  encounter  with  the  war-ships
of  Fazardo  —  Courageous  conduct  of  the  vice-admiral  —  Deaths  of  Justus
Lipsius,  Hohenlo,  and  Count  John  of  Nassau Page  236

CHAPTEE  XLVI.

General  desire  for  peace  —  Political  aspect  of  Europe  —  Designs  of  the
kings  of  England,  France  and  Spain  concerning  the  United  Provinces  —
Matrimonial  schemes  of  Spain  —  Conference  between  the  French
ministers  and  the  Dutch  envoy  —  Confidential  revelations  —  Henry's
desire  to  annex  the  Netherlands  to  France  —  Discussion  of  the  subject  —
Artifice  of  Barneveld  —  Impracticability  of  a  compromise  between  the
Provinces  and  Spain  —  Formation  of  a  West  India  Company  —  Secret
mission  from  the  Archdukes  to  the  Hague  —  Reply  of  the  States-General
—  Return  of  the  Archdukes'  envoy  —  Arrangement  of  an  eight  months'
armistice .. ..  257

CHAPTER  XL VII.

A  Dutch  fleet  under  Heemskerk  sent  to  the  coast  of  Spain  and  Portugal  —
Encounter  with  the  Spanish  war-fleet  under  D*Avila — Death  of  both
commanders-in-chief  —  Victory  of  the  Netherlanders  —  Massacre  of  the
Spaniards 295

CHAPTEE  XLYIIL

Internal  condition  of  Spain  —  Character  of  the  people  —  Influence  of  the
Inquisition  —  Population  and  Revenue  —  Incomes  of  Church  and  Govern-
ment —  Degradation  of  Labour  —  Expulsion  of  the  Moors  and  its  con-
sequences—  Venality  the  special  characteristic  of  Spanish  polity  —
Maxims  of  the  foreign  polity  of  Spain  —  The  Spanish  army  and  navy  —
Insolvent  state  of  the  Government  —  The  Duke  of  Lerma  — His  position
in  the  State  —  Origin  of  his  power  —  System  of  bribery  and  trafficking
— Philip  III. — His  character — Domestic  life  of  the  king  and  queen . .  306

CONTENTS  OF  VOL  IV.

vii

CHAPTER  XLIX.

Peace  deliberations  in  Spain  —  Unpopularity  of  the  project  —  Disaffection
of  the  courtiers  —  Complaints  against  Spinola  —  Conference  of  the
Catholic  party — Position  of  Henry  IV.  towards  the  Republic  —  State
of  France  —  Further  peace  negotiations — Desire  of  King  James  of
England  for  the  restoration  of  the  States  to  Spain  —  Arrival  of  the
French  commissioners  —  President  Jeannin  before  the  States-General  —
Dangers  of  a  truce  with  Spain  —  Dutch  legation  to  England — Amval
of  Lewis  Verreyken  at  the  Hague  with  Philip's  ratification  —  Rejection
of  the  Spanish  treaty  —  Withdrawal  of  the  Dutch  fleet  from  the  Penin-
sula —  The  peace  project  denounced  by  the  party  of  Prince  Maurice  —
Opposition  of  Maurice  to  the  plans  of  Barneveld  —  Amended  ratification
presented  to  the  States-General  —  Discussion  of  the  conditions  —  Deter-
mination to  conclude  a  peace  —  Indian  trade — Exploits  of  Admiral
Matelieff  in  the  Malay  peninsula  —  He  lays  siege  to  Malacca  —  Victory
over  the  Spanish  fleet  —  Endeavour  to  open  a  ti-ade  with  China —  Return
of  Matelieff  to  Holland Page  335

CHAPTER  L.

Movements  of  the  Emperor  Rudolph  —  Marquis  Spinola*s  reception  at  the
Hague  —  Meeting  of  Spinola  and  Prince  Maurice  —  Treaty  of  the  Re-
public with  the  French  Government  —  The  Spanish  commissioners
before  the  States-General  —  Beginning  of  negotiations  —  Stormy  dis-
cussions—  Real  object  of  Spain  in  the  n^otiations  —  Question  of  the
India  trade  —  Abandonment  of  the  peace  project  —  Negotiations  for  a
truce  —  Prolongation  of  the  armistice  —  Further  delays  —  Treaty  of  the
States  with  England  —  Proposals  of  the  Spanish  ambassadors  to  Henry
of  Fj  ance  and  to  James  of  England  —  Friar  Neyen  at  the  court  of  Spain
—  S]>anish  procrastination — Decision  of  Philip  on  the  conditions  of
peace  —  Further  conference  at  the  Hague  —  Answer  of  the  States-General
to  the  proposals  of  the  Spanish  Government  —  General  rupture ..  394

CHAPTER  LI.

Designs  of  Heniy  IV.  —  New  marriage  project  between  France  and  Spain  —
Formal  proposition  of  negotiating  for  a  truce  between  the  States  and
Spain  —  Exertions  of  Prince  Maurice  to  counteract  the  designs  of
Barneveld  —  Strife  between  the  two  parties  in  the  republic  —  Animosity
of  the  people  against  Barneveld  —  Return  of  the  Spanish  commissioners

viii

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  lY.

—  Further  trifling  —  Dismissal  of  the  commissioners  —  Close  of  the
negotiations  —  Accidental  discovery  of  the  secret  instructions  of  the  Arch-
dukes to  the  commissioners  —  Opposing  factions  in  the  Republic  —
Oration  of  President  Jeannin  before  the  States-General  —  Comparison
between  the  Dutch  and  Swiss  republics  —  Calumnies  against  the  Advo-
cate—  Ambassador  Lambert  in  France  —  Henry's  letter  to  Prince
Maurice  —  Reconciliation  of  Maurice  and  Barneveld  —  Agreement  of  the
States  to  accept  a  truce Page  430

Vote  of  the  States-General  on  the  groundwork  of  the  treaty  —  Meeting  of
the  plenipotentiaries  for  arrangement  of  the  truce  —  Signing  of  the
twelve  years'  truce  —  Its  purport  —  The  negotiations  concluded  —
Ratification  by  the  States-General,  the  Archdukes,  and  the  King  of
Spain  —  Question  of  toleration  —  Appeal  of  President  Jeannin  on  behalf
of  the  Catholics  —  Religious  liberty  the  fruit  of  the  war  —  Internal
arrangements  of  the  States  under  the  rule  of  peace  —  Death  of  John
Duke  of  Cleves  and  Jacob  Arminius  —  Doctrines  of  Arminius  and
Gomarus  —  Theological  warfare  —  Twenty  years'  trmce  between  the
Turkish  and  Roman  empires  —  Ferdinand  of  Styria  —  Religious  peace  —
Prospects  of  the  future  478

CHAPTER  LII.

CHAPTER  Lin.

Conclusion

502

Index

531

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CHAPTER  XXXVIII.

Military  events  —  Aggressive  movement  of  the  Netberlanders  —  State  of  the
Archduke's  proviuces — Mutiny  of  the  Spanish  forays — Proposed  invasion  of
Flanders  by  the  States-General  —  Disembarkation  of  the  troops  on  the  Spanish
coasts  —  Capture  of  Oudenburg  and  other  places  —  Surprise  of  Nleuport  -  Conduct
of  the  Archduke  —  Oudenburg  and  the  other  forts  re-taken  —  Dilemma  of  the
States' army  —  Attack  of  the  Archduke  on  Count  Ernest's  cavalry  —  Panic  and
total  overthrow  of  the  advance-guard  of  the  States'  army  —  Battle  of  Nieuport  —
Details  of  the  action  —  Defeat  of  the  Spanish  army  —  Results  of  the  whole
expedition.

The  effect  produced  in  the  republic  by  the  defensive  and
uneventful  campaigning  of  the  year  1599  had  naturally
been  depressing.  There  was  murmuring  at  the  va«t
amount  of  taxation,  especially  at  the  new  imposition  of
one-half  per  cent,  upon  all  property,  and  two-and-a-half
per  cent,  on  all  sales,  which  seemed  to  produce  so  few
results.  The  successful  protection  of  the  Isle  of  Bommel
and  the  judicious  purchase  of  the  two  forts  of  Crevecceur
and  St.  Andrew,  early  in  the  following  year,  together
with  their  garrisons,  were  not  military  events  of  the  first
magnitude,  and  were  hardly  enough  to  efface  the  morti-
fication felt  at  the  fact  that  the  enemy  had  been  able  so
lately  to  construct  one  of  those  strongholds  within  the
territory  of  the  commonwealth.

It  was  now  secretly  determined  to  attempt  an  aggres-
sive movement  on  a  considerable  scale,  and  to  carry  the
war  once  for  all  into  the  heart  of  the  obedient  provinces.
It  was  from  Flanders  that  the  {Spanish  aimies  drew  a
great  portion  of  their  supplies.  It  was  by  the  forts
erected  on  the  coast  of  Flanders  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Ostend  that  this  important  possession  of  the  States  was
rendered  nearly  valueless. It  Avas  by  privateers  swarm-

VOL.  IV.  B

2

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHL

ing  from  the  ports  of  Flanders,  especially  from  Nieuport
and  Dunkirk,  that  the  foreign  trade  of  the  republic
was  crippled,  and  its  intercommnmcations  by  river  and
estuary  rendered  unsafe.  Dunkirk  was  simply  a  robbers'
cave,  a  station  from  which  an  annual  tax  was  levied  upon
the  commerce  of  the  Netherlands,  almost  sufficient,  had
it  been  paid  to  the  national  treasury  instead  of  to  the
foreign  freebooters,  to  support  the  expenses  of  a  con-
siderable army.

On  the  other  hand  the  condition  of  the  archdukes
seemed  deplorable.  Never  had  mutiny  existed  before  in
so  well-organised  and  definite  a  form  even  in  the  Spanish
Netherlands.

Besides  those  branches  of  the  "  Italian  republic,"  which
had  been  established  in  the  two  fortresses  of  Crevecoeur
and  St.  Andrew,  and  which  had  already  sold  themselves
to  the  States,  other  organizations  quite  as  formidable
existed  in  various  other  portions  of  the  obedient  pro-
vinces. Especially  at  Diest  and  Thionville  the  rebellious
Spaniards  and  Italians  were  numbered  by  thousands,  all
veterans,  well  armed,  fortified  in  strong  cities,  and  sup-
plying themselves  with  perfect  regularity  by  contribu-
tions levied  upon  the  peasantry,  obeying  their  Eletto  and
other  officers  with  exemplary  promptness,  and  paying
no  more  heed  to  the  edicts  or  the  solicitations  of  the
archduke  than  if  he  had  been  the  Duke  of  Muscovy.

The  opportunity  seemed  tempting  to  strike  a  great
blow.  How  could  Albert  and  Isabella,  with  an  empty
exchequer  and  a  mutinous  army,  hope  either  to  defend
their  soil  from  attack  or  to  aim  a  counter  blow  at  the
republic,  even  if  the  republic  for  a  season  should  be
deprived  of  a  portion  of  its  defenders  ?

The  reasoning  was  plausible,  the  prize  tempting.  The
States-General,  who  habitually  discountenanced  rash-
ness, and  were  wont  to  impose  superfluous  restraints  upon
the  valiant  but  discreet  Lewis  William,  and  upon  the
deeply  pondering  but  energetic  Maurice,  were  now  grown
as  ardent  as  they  had  hitherto  been  hesitating.  In  the
early  days  of  June  it  was  determined  in  secret  session
to  organize  a  great  force  in  Holland  and  Zeeland,  and  to
embark  suddenly  for  Nieuport,  to  carry  that  important
position  by  surprise  or  assault,  and  from  that  basis  to
redeem  Dunkirk. The  possession  of  these  two  cities,

1600.

PROPOSED  INVASION  OF  FLANDERS.

3

besides  that  of  Ostend,  which  had  always  been  retained
by  the  Eepublic,  woukl  ensure  the  complete  snbjn<^ation
of  Flanders.  The  trifling  force  of  two  thousand  men
under  Kivas — all  that  the  archduke  then  had  in  that
province — and  the  sconces  and  earthworks  which  bad
iDeen  constructed  around  Ostend  to  impede  the  move-
ments and  obstruct  the  supplies  of  the  garrison,  would
be  utterly  powerless  to  prevent  the  consummation  of  the
plan.  Flanders  once  subjugated,  it  would  not  be  long
before  the  Spaniards  were  swept  from  the  obedient
Netherlands  as  thoroughly  as  they  had  been  from  the
domains  of  the  commonwealth,  and  all  the  seventeen
provinces,  trampling  out  every  vestige  of  a  hated  foreign
tyrarmy,  would  soon  take  their  natural  place  as  states
of  a  free,  prosperous,  and  powerful  union.

But  Maurice  of  Nassau  did  not  share  the  convictions
of  the  States-General.  The  unwonted  ardour  of  lUi-ne-
veld  did  not  inflame  his  imagination.  lie  urged  that
the  enterprise  was  inexcusably  rash  ;  that  its  execution
would  require  the  whole  anny  of  the  Stiites,  excejit  the
slender  garrisons  absolutely  necessary  to  protect  im-
portant places  from  surprise  ;  that  a  defeat  would  not
he  simply  disaster,  but  annihilation;  that  retreat  with-
out fibsolute  triumph  would  be  impossible,  and  that  amid
such  circumstances  the  archduke,  in  spite  of  his  poverty
and  the  rebellious  condition  of  his  troops,  would  doubt-
less assemble  a  sufficient  force  to  dispute  with  reasonable
prospects  of  victory,  this  invasion  of  his  territory.

Sir  Francis  Vere,  too,  was  most  decidedly  opposed
to  the  plan.  He  pointed  out  with  great  clearness  its
dangerous  and  possibly  fatal  character ;  assuring  the
States  that,  within  a  fortnight  after  the  expedition  had
begun,  the  archduke  would  follow  upon  their  heels  with
an  army  fully  able  to  cope  with  the  best  which  they
could  put  into  the  field.  But  besides  this  experienced
and  able  campaigner,  who  so  thoroughly  shared  the
opinions  of  Prince  Maurice,  every  military  man  in
the  provinces  of  any  consideration  was  opposed  to  the
scheme.  Especially  Lewis  William,  than  whom  no
more  sagacious  military  critic  or  accomplished  strategist
existed  in  Europe,  denounced  it  with  energy  and  even
with  indignation.  It  was,  in  the  opinion  of  the  young
Btadholdcr  of  Fricsland,  to  suspend  the  existence  of  the

B  2

4

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHL

whole  commonwealth  upon  a  silken  thread.  Even  suc-
cess, he  prophesied,  would  bring  no  permanent  fruits,
while  the  consequences  of  an  overthrow  were  fearful  to
contemplate.  The  immediate  adherents  and  most  trusted
counsellors  of  William  Lewis  were  even  more  unmea-
sured in  their  denunciations  than  he  was  himself.  "  'Tis
all  the  work  of  Barneveld  and  the  long-gowns,"  cried
Everard  van  Reyd.  "  We  are  led  into  a  sack  from  which
there  is  no  extrication.  We  are  marching  to  the  Caudine
Forks."

Certainly  it  is  no  small  indication  of  tlie  vast  influence
and  the  indomitable  resolution  of  Barneveld  that  he
never  faltered  in  this  storm  of  indignation.  The  Ad-
vocate had  made  up  his  mind  to  invade  Flanders  and
to  capture  Nieuport,  and  the  decree  accordingly  went
forth,  despite  all  opposition.  The  States-General  were
sovereign,  and  the  Advocate  and  the  States-General
were  one.

It  was  also  entirely  characteristic  of  Maurice  that  he
should  submit  his  judgment  on  this  great  emergency
to  that  of  Olden-Barneveld.  It  was  difficult  for  him  to
resist  the  influence  of  the  great  intellect  to  which  he
had  always  willingly  deferred  in  affairs  of  state,  and
from  which,  even  in  military  matters,  it  was  hardly
possible  for  him  to  escape.  Yet  in  military  matters
Maurice  was  a  consummate  professor,  and  the  Advocate
in  comparison  but  a  school-boy.

The  ascendency  of  Barneveld  was  the  less  wholesome,
therefore,  and  it  might  have  been  better  had  the  st ad-
holder  manifested  more  resolution.  But  Maurice  had  not
a  resolute  character.  Thorough  soldier  as  he  was,  he
was  singularly  vacillating,  at  times  almost  infirm  of  pur-
pose, but  never  before  in  his  career  had  this  want  of
decision  manifested  itself  in  so  striking  a  manner/

Accordingly  the  States -General,  or  in  other  words
John  of  Olden-Barneveld,  proposed  to  invade  Flanders,
and  lay  siege  to  Nieuport.^ The  States-General  were

1  "  Un  gleich  wie  seiner  Exc.  manheit  tremitet  gestellet  als  mit  Fabio  dieselbe

und  gute  ordnung  zu  loben  ist,"  says,  Verachten  wollen  und  das  er  nit  geant-

with  some  bitterness,  that  devoted  adhe-  wort :  malo  prudens  hostis  me  metuat

rent  of  the Nassaus,  Van  Keid,  "so  quam  stulti  cives  laudent. "—Groen  v.

konnen  sie  nit  allerdings  entschuldigt  Prinst.,  Archives  II.  Serie  ii.  15.
warden  das  sie  sich  lieber  uf  importu- 2  « i^e  Prince  Maurice  n'a  pas  manque

nitet  kxiegsonerfarner  leui  in  solche  ex-  de  remontrer  un  plus  asseure  chemin

1600.

PROPOSED  INVASION  OF  FLANDEP.S.

5

sovereign,  and  Maurice  bowed  to  their  authority.  After
the  matter  had  been  entirely  decided  upon  the  state-
council  was  consulted,  and  the  state-council  attempted
no  opposition  to  the  project.  The  preparations  were
made  with  matchless  energy  and  extraordinary  secrecy.
Lewis  William,  who  meanwhile  was  to  defend  the
eastern  frontier  of  the  republic  against  any  possible
attack,  sent  all  the  troops  that  it  was  possible  to  spare,
but  he  sent  them  with  a  heavy  heart.  His  forebodings
were  dismal.  It  seemed  to  him  that  all  was  about  to
be  staked  upon  a  single  cast  of  the  dice.  Moreover  it
was  painful  to  him  while  the  terrible  game  wns  playing
to  be  merely  a  looker-on  and  a  prophet  of  evil  from  a
distance,  forbidden  to  contribute  by  his  personal  skill
and  experience  to  a  fortunate  result,  llohenlo  too  was
appointed  to  protect  the  southern  border,  and  was  ex-
cluded from  all  participation  in  the  gi'eat  expedition.

As  to  the  enemy,  such  rumours  as  might  come  to
them  from  day  to  day  of  mysterious  militaiy  prepara-
tions on  the  part  of  the  rebels  only  served  to  excite  sus-
picion in  other  directions.  The  archduke  was  uneasy  in
regard  to  the  1  thine  and  the  Gueldrian  ([uarter,  but  never
dreamt  of  a  hostile  descent  upon  the  Flemish  coast.

Meantime,  on  the  10th  ,June,  Maurice  of  Nassau  made
his  appearance  at  Castle  Hammekens,  not  far  from  Flush-
ing, at  the  mouth  of  the  Scheld,  to  superintend  the  great
movement.  So  large  a  fleet  as  was  there  assembled  had
never  before  been  seen  or  heard  of  in  Christendom.  Of
wai -ships,  transports,  and  flat-bottomed  bulges  there
were  at  least  thirteen  hundred.  Many  eye-witnesses,
who  counted  however  with  their  imaginations,  declared
that  there  were  in  all  at  least  three  thousand  vessels,
and  the  statement  has  been  reproduced  by  grave  and
trustworthy  chroniclers.  As  the  number  of  troops  to  be
embarked  upon  the  enterprise  certainly  did  not  exceed
fourteen  thousand,  this  would  have  been  an  allowance
of  one  vessel  to  every  five  soldiers,  besides  the  army

pour  Jetter  la  guerre  dans  le  dit  pays  de  ajTuent  mieux  hazarder  ce  coup  de  de,

Fliindres  et  y  prendre  un  pied  qui  les  copendant  ils  se  voyont  de  bell(  s  furcea

pourroit  conduire  pen  h  peu  au  but  tant  en  main  et  celles  de  leur  ennemi  nflfoi-

desire. Mais  ces  Messieurs,  comme  en-  blies,"  &c. — Buzanval  to  VilUroy,  IH

nuyez  de  vivre  en  Veuxt  lnccrt4\in  auquel  June, 1600. (Royal  Library  of  lh«

lis  se  voyent  reduits  par  les  apprehensions  Hague  MS.)
et  d'Angleterre  et  de  notrc  France  mcsmo,

6

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

munitions  and  provisions— a  hardly  reasonable  arrange-
ment.

Twelve  thousand  infantry  and  sixteen  hundred  cavalry,
the  consummate  flower  of  the  States'  army,  all  well-paid,
well-clad,  well-armed,  well-disciplined  veterans,  had  been
collected  in  this  place  of  rendezvous  and  were  ready  to
embark.  It  would  be  unjust  to  compare  the  dimensions
of  this  force  and  the  preparations  for  ensuring  the  success
of  the  enterprise  with  the  vast  expeditions  and  gigantic
armaments  of  later  times,  especially  with  the  tremendous
exhibitions  of  military  and  naval  energy  with  which  our
own  civil  war  has  made  us  familiar.  Maurice  was  an
adept  in  all  that  science  and  art  had  as  yet  bequeathed
to  humanity  for  the  purpose  of  human  destruction,  but
the  number  of  his  troops  was  small  compared  to  the
mighty  hosts  which  the  world  since  those  days  had  seen
embattled.  War,  as  a  trade,  was  then  less  easily  learned.
It  was  a  guild  in  which  apprenticeship  was  difficult,  and
in  which  enrolment  was  usually  for  life.  A  little  re-
public of  scarce  three  million  souls,  which  could  keep
always  on  foot  a  regular  well-appointed  army  of  twenty-
five  thousand  men  and  a  navy  of  one  or  two  hundred
heavily  armed  cruisers,  was  both  a  marvel  and  a  formid-
able element  in  the  general  polity  of  the  world.  The
lesson  to  be  derived  both  in  military  and  political  philo-
sophy from  the  famous  campaign  of  Nieuport  does  not
depend  for  its  value  on  the  numbers  of  the  ships  or
soldiers  engaged  in  the  undertaking.  Otherwise,  and
had  it  been  merely  a  military  expedition  like  a  thousand
others  which  have  been  made  and  forgotten,  it  would
not  now  deserve  more  than  a  momentary  attention.  But
the  circumstances  were  such  as  to  make  the  issue  of  the
impending  battle  one  of  the  most  important  in  human
histor3\  It  was  entirely  possible  that  an  overwhelming
defeat  of  the  republican  forces  on  this  foreign  expedition
would  bring  with  it  an  absolute  destruction  of  the  re-
public, and  place  Spain  once  more  in  possession  of  the
heretic  islands,"  from  which  basis  she  would  menace
the  very  existence  of  England  more  seriously  than  she
had  ever  done  before.  Who  could  measure  thQ  conse-
quences to  Christendom  of  such  a  catastrophe  ?

The  distance  from  the  place  where  the  fleet  and  army
were  assembled  to  Nieuport — the  objective  point  of  the

1600.

ASSEMBLING  OF  THE  FLEET  AND  ARMY.

7

enterprise — was  but  thirty-five  miles  as  the  crow  flies.
And  the  crow  can  scarcely  fly  in  a  straighter  line  than
that  described  by  the  coast  along  which  the  ships  were
to  shape  their  course.  And  here  it  is  again  impossible
not  to  reflect  upon  the  change  which  ph3\sical  science
has  brought  over  the  conduct  of  fiuman  affairs.  We
have  seen  in  a  former  chapter  a  most  important  embassy
sent  forth  from  the  States  for  the  purpose  of  preventing
the  consummation  of  a  peace  between  their  ally  and
their  enemy.  Celerity  was  a  vital  element  in  the  success
of  such  a  mission ;  for  the  secret  negotiations  which  it
was  intended  to  impede  were  supposed  to  be  near  their
termination.  Yet  months  were  consumed  in  a  joui  ney
which  in  our  day  would  have  been  accomplished  in
twenty-four  hours.  And  now  in  this  great  militaiy
expedition  the  essential  and  immediate  purpose  was  to
surprise  a  small  town  almost  within  sight  from  the
station  at  which  the  army  was  ready  to  embark.  Such
a  midsummer  voyage  in  this  epoch  of  steam-tugs  and
transports  would  require  but  a  few  hours.  Yet  two
days  long  the  fleet  lay  at  anchor  while  a  gentle  breeze
blew  persistently  from  the  south-west.  As  there
seemed  but  little  hope  that  the  wind  would  become
more  favourable,  and  as  the  possibility  of  surprise  giew
fainter  with  every  day's  delay,  it  was  decided  to  make  a
landing  upon  the  nearest  point  of  Flemish  coast  ])laced
by  circumstances  within  their  reach.  Count  Einest  of
Nassau,  with  the  advance-guard,  was  accordingly  de-
spatched on  the  21st  June  to  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Sas  of  Ghent,  where  he  seized  a  weakly  guarded
fort,  called  Philippine,  and  made  thorough  preparations
for  the  arrival  of  the  whole  army.  On  the  following
day  the  rest  of  the  troops  made  their  appear-  ^  ^^^^
ance,  and  in  the  course  of  five  hours  were
safely  disembarked.

The  army,  which  consisted  of  Zeelanders,  Frisians,
Hollanders,  Walloons,  Germans,  English,  and  Scotch,
was  divided  into  three  corps.  The  advance  was  under
the  command  of  Count  Ernest,  the  battalia  under  that  of
Count  George  Everard  Solms,  while  the  rear-guard
during  the  march  was  entrusted  to  that  experienced
soldier  Sir  Francis  Vera.  Besides  Prince  Maurice,
there  were  three  other  members  of  the  house  of  Nassau

8

THE  UNITED  NTETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIIL

serving  in  the  expedition — his  half-brother  Frederic
Henry,  then  a  lad  of  sixteen,  and  the  two  brothers  of
the  Frisian  stadholder,  Ernest  and  Lewis  Gunther,
whom  Lewis  William  had  been  so  faithfully  educating
in  the  arts  of  peace  and  war  both  by  precept  and  exam-
ple. Lewis  Gunther,  still  a  mere  youth,  but  who  had
been  the  first  to  scale  the  fort  of  Cadiz,  and  to  plant  on
its  height  the  orange  banner  of  the  murdered  rebel,  and
whose  gallantry  during  the  whole  expedition  had  called
forth  the  special  commendations  of  Queen  Elizabeth —
expressed  in  energetic  and  affectionate  terms  to  his
father — now  commanded  all  the  cavalry.  Certainly  if
the  doctrine  of  primordial  selection  could  ever  be
accepted  among  human  creatures,  the  race  of  Nassau  at
that  day  might  have  seemed  destined  to  be  chiefs  of  the
Netherland  soil.  Old  John  of  Nassau,  ardent  and  ener-
getic as  ever  in  the  cause  of  the  religious  reformation  of
Gei-many  and  the  liberation  of  Holland,  still  watched
from  his  retirement  the  progress  of  the  momentous
event.  Four  of  his  brethren,  including  the  great
founder  of  the  republic,  had  already  laid  down  their
lives  for  the  sacred  cause.  His  son  Philip  had  already
fallen  under  the  banner  in  the  fight  of  Bislich,  and
three  other  sons  were  serving  the  republic  day  and
night,  by  sea  and  land,  with  sword,  and  pen,  and  purse,
energetically,  conscientiously,  and  honourably.  Of  the
stout  hearts  and  quick  intellects  on  which  the  safety
of  the  commonwealth  then  depended,  none  was  more
efficient  or  true  than  the  accomplished  soldier  and
statesman  Lewis  William.  Thoroughly  disapproving  of
the  present  invasion  of  Flanders,  he  was  exerting  him-
self, now  that  it  had  been  decided  upon  by  his  sovereigns
the  States-General,  with  the  same  loyalty  as  that  of
Maurice,  to  bring  it  to  a  favourable  issue,  although  not
personally  engaged  in  the  adventure.

So  soon  as  the  troops  had  been  landed,  the  vessels
were  sent  olf  as  expeditiously  as  possible,  that  none
might  fall  into  the  enemy's  hands ;  the  transports  under
a  strong  convoy  of  war-ships  having  been  directed  to
proceed  as  fast  as  the  wind  would  permit  in  the  direction
of  Nieuport.  The  march  then  began.  On  the  23rd  they
advanced  a  league  and  halted  for  the  night  at  Assenede.
The  next  day  brought  them  three  leagues  further  to

1600. CAPTURE  OF  OUDENBURG  AND  OTHER  PLACES.

9

a  place  called  Eckerloo.  On  the  25th  they  marched  to
Male,  a  distance  of  three  leagues  and  a  half,  passing
close  to  the  walls  of  Bruges,  in  which  they  had  indulged
faint  hopes  of  exciting  an  insurrection,  but  obtained  no-
thing but  a  feeble  cannonade  from  the  fortifications
which  did  no  damage  except  the  killing  of  one  muleteer.
The  next  night  was  passed  at  Jabbeke,  four  leagues
from  Male,  and  on  the  27th,  after  marching  another
league,  they  came  before  the  fort  of  Oudenburg.

This  important  post  on  the  road  which  the  enemy
would  necessarily  traverse  in  coming  from  the  interior
to  the  coast  was  easily  captured  and  then  strongly
garrisoned.  Maurice  with  the  main  army  spent  the  two
following  days  at  the  fortress,  completing  his  arrange-
ments. Solms  was  sent  forward  to  seize  the  sconces
and  redoubts  of  the  enemy  around  Ostend,  at  Breedene,
Snaaskerk,  Plassendaal,  and  other  points,  and  especially
to  occupy  the  imp(jrtant  fort  called  8t.  Albert,  which
was  in  the  downs  at  about  a  league  from  that  city.  All
this  work  was  thoroughly  accomplished ;  little  or  no
resistance  having  been  made  to  the  occupation  of  these
various  places.  Meantime  the  States-General,  who  at
the  special  request  of  Maurice  were  to  accompany  the
expedition  in  order  to  obsei-ve  the  progress  of  events  for
which  they  were  entirely  responsible,  and  to  aid  the
army  when  necessary  by  their  advice  and  co-operation,
had  assembled  to  the  number  of  thirteen  in  Ostend.
Solms  having  strengthened  the  ganison  of  that  place
then  took  up  his  march  along  the  beach  to  Kieuport.
During  the  progress  of  the  army  through  Holland  and
Zeeland  towards  its  place  of  embarkation  there  had  been
nothing  but  dismal  prognostics,  with  expressions  of
muttered  indignation,  wherever  the  soldiers  passed.  It
seemed  to  the  country  people,  and 'to  tlie  inhabitants  of
every  town  and  village,  that  their  defenders  were  going
to  certain  destruction  ;  that  the  existence  of  the  com-
monwealth was  hanging  by  a  thread  soon  to  be  snapped
asunder.  As  the  forces  subsequently  marched  from  the
Sas  of  Ghent  towards  the  Flemish  coast  there  was  no
rising  of  the  people  in  their  favour,  and  although
Maurice  had  issued  distinct  orders  that  the  peasantry
were  to  be  dealt  with  gently  and  justly,  yet  they  found
neither  peasants  nor  villagers  to  deal  with  at  all.  The

10

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

whole  population  on  their  line  of  march  had  betaken
themselves  to  the  woods,  except  the  village  sexton  of
Jabbeke  and  his  wife,  who  were  too  old  to  inn.  Lurk-
ing in  the  thickets  and  marshes,  the  peasants  fell  upon
all  stragglers  from  the  army  and  murdered  them  without
mercy — so  difficult  is  it  in  times  of  civil  war  to  make
human  brains  pervious  to  the  light  of  reason.  The  stad-
holder  and  his  soldiers  came  to  liberate  their  brethren  of
the  same  race,  and  speaking  the  same  language,  from  ab-
ject submission  to  a  foreign  despotism.  The  Flemings  had
but  to  speak  a  word,  to  lift  a  finger,  and  all  the  Nether-
lands, self-governed,  wonld  coalesce  into  one  indepen-
dent confederation  of  States,  strong  enough  to  defy  all
the  despots  of  Europe.  Alas  !  the  benighted  victims  of
superstition  hngged  their  chains,  and  preferred  the
tyranny  under  which  their  kindred  had  been  tortured,
burned,  and  buried  alive  for  half  a  century  long,  to  the
possibility  of  a  single  Calvinistic  conventicle  being
opened  in  any  village  of  obedient  Flanders.  So  these
excellent  children  of  Philip  and  the  pope,  whose  lan-
guage was  as  unintelligible  to  them  as  it  was  to  Peru-
vians or  Iroquois,  lay  in  wait  for  the  men  who  spoke
their  own  mother  tongue,  and  whose  veins  were  filled
with  their  own  blood,  and  murdered  them  as  a  sacred
act  of  duty.  Eetaliation  followed  as  a  matter  of  course,
so  that  the  invasion  of  Flanders,  in  this  early  stage  of  its
progress,  seemed  not  likely  to  call  forth  very  fraternal
feelings  between  the  two  families  of  Netherlanders.

The  army  was  in  the  main  admirably  well  supplied,
but  there  was  a  deficiency  of  drink.  The  water  as  they
advanced  became  brackish  and  intolerably  bad,  and  there
was  a  great  difficulty  in  procuring  any  substitute.  At
Male  three  cows  were  given  for  a  pot  of  beer,  and  more
of  that  refreshment  might  have  been  sold  at  the  same
price,  had  there  been  any  sellers.

On  the  &Oth  June  Maurice  marched  from  Oudenburg,
intending  to  strike  a  point  called  Niewendam — a  fort
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nieuport — and  so  to  march
along  the  walls  of  that  city  and  take  up  his  posi-
tion immediately  in  its  front.  He  found  the  ground,
however,  so  marshy  and  impracticable  as  he  advanced,
that  he  was  obliged  to  countermarch,  and  to  spend  that
night  on  the  downs  between  forts  Isabella  and  St.  Albert.

1600.

ARRIVAL  BEFORE  NIEUPORT.

11

On  the  1st  July  he  resumed  his  inarch,  and  passing  a
bridge  over  a  small  stream  at  a  place  called  ^
Leffingen  laying  down  a  road  as  he  went  with "  ^'
sods  and  sand,  and  throwing  bridges  over  sti'eams  and
swamps,  he  arrived  in  the  forenoon  before  Nieuport.
The  fleet  had  reached  the  roadstead  the  same  morning.

This  was  a  strong,  well-built,  and  well-fortified  little
city,  situate  half-a-league  from  the  sea-coast  on  low,
plashy  gi'ound.  At  high-water  it  was  a  seaport,  for  a
stream  or  creek  of  very  insignificant  dimensions  was
then  sufficiently  filled  by  the  tide  to  admit  ves:sels  of
considerable  burthen.  This  haven  was  immediately
taken  possession  of  by  the  stadholder,  and  two-thirds
of  his  army  were  thrown  across  to  the  western  side  of
the  water,  the  troops  remaining  on  the  Cstend  side
being  by  a  change  of  arrangement  now  under  cc^mmand
of  Count  Ernest.

Thus  the  army  which  had  come  to  surprise  Nieuport
had,  after  accomplishing  a  distance  of  nearly  forty  miles
in  thirteen  days,  at  last  arrived  before  that  place.  Yet
there  was  no  more  expeditious  or  energetic  commander
in  Christendom  than  Maurice,  nor  troops  better  trained
in  marching  and  fighting  than  his  well-disciplined  anny.

It  is  now  necessary  to  ca.st  a  glance  towards  the  inte-
rior of  Flanders,  in  order  to  observe  how  the  archduke  con-
ducted himself  in  this  emergency.  So  soon  as  the  news
of  the  landing  of  the  States'  army  at  the  port  of  Ghent
reached  the  sovereign's  ears,  he  awoke  from  the  delusion
that  danger  was  impending  c)n  his  eastern  border,  and
lost  no  time  in  assembling  such  troops  as  could  be  mus-
tered from  far  and  near  to  protect  the  western  frontier.
Especially  he  despatched  messengers  well  charged  with
promises,  to  confer  with  the  authorities  (»f  the  Italian
Kepublic"  at  Diest  and  Thionville.  He  appealed  to
them  in  behalf  of  the  holy  Catholic  religion,  he  sought
to  arouse  their  loyalty  to  himself  and  the  Infanta  Isabella
— daughter  of  the  great  and  good  Philip  XL,  once  fore-
most of  earthly  potentates,  and  now  eminent  among  the
saints  of  heaven — by  whose  fiat  he  and  his  wife  had
now  become  legitimate  sovereigns  of  all  the  Netherlands.
And  those  mutineers  responded  with  unexpected  do-
cility. Eight  hundred  foot  soldiers  and  six  hundred
cavaliy  men  came  forth  at  the  first  sammons,  making

12

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVUI.

but  two  conditions  in  addition  to  the  stipulated  payment
when  payment  should  be  possible — that  they  should  be
commanded  by  their  own  chosen  officers,  and  that  they
should  be  placed  in  the  first  rank  in  the  impending  con-
flict. The  example  spread.  Other  detachments  of  muti-
neers in  various  strongholds,  scenting  the  battle  from
afar,  came  in  with  offers  to  serve  in  the  campaign  on
similar  terms.  Before  the  last  week  of  June  the  arch-
29  June, duke  had  a  considerable  army  on  foot. On  the

1^00.  29th  of  that  month,  accompanied  by  the  In-
fanta, he  reviewed  a  force  of  ten  thousand  foot  and
nearly  two  thousand  cavalry  in  the  immediate  vicinity
of  Ghent.  He  addressed  them  in  a  few  stirring  words,
reminding  them  of  their  duty  to  the  Church  and  to  him-
self, and  assuring  them — as  commanders  of  every  nation
and  every  age  are  wont  to  assure  their  troops  at  the  eve
of  every  engagement — that  the  cause  in  which  they  were
going  forth  to  battle  was  the  most  sacred  and  inspiring
for  which  human  creatures  could  possibly  lay  down  their
lives.  Isabella,  magnificently  attired,  and  mounted  on  a
white  palfrey,  galloped  aloDg  the  lines,  and  likewise  made
an  harangue.  She  spoke  to  the  soldiers  as  "  her  lions,"
promised  them  boundless  rewards  in  this  world  and  the
next,  as  the  result  of  the  great  victory  which  they  were
now  about  to  gain  over  the  infidels ;  while  as  to  their
wages,  she  vowed  that,  rather  than  they  should  remain
unpaid,  she  would  sacrifice  all  her  personal  effects,  even
to  the  plate  from  which  she  ate  her  daily  bread,  and  to
the  jewels  which  she  wore  in  her  ears.

Thousands  of  hoarse  voices  greeted  the  eloquence  of
the  archdukes  with  rude  acclamations,  while  the  dis-
charge of  arquebus  and  volleys  of  cannon  testified  to
the  martial  ardour  with  which  the  troops  were  in-
spired ;  none  being  more  enthusiastic  than  the  late
mutineers.  The  army  marched  at  once,  under  many
experienced  leaders — Villars,  Zapena,  and  Avalos  among
the  most  conspicuous.  The  command  of  the  artillery
was  entrusted  to  Velasco ;  the  marshal-general  of
the  camp  was  Frederic  van  den  Berg,  in  place  of  the
superannuated  Peter  Ernest;  while  the  Admiral  of
Arragon,  Francisco  de  Mendoza,  "terror  of  Germany
and  of  Christendom,"  a  little  man  with  flowing  locks,
long  hooked  nose,  and  a  sinister  glance  from  his  evil

1600.

OUDENBURG  RE-TAKEN.

13

black  eyes,  was  general  of  the  cavalry.  The  admiral
had  not  displaj^ed  very  extraordinary  genius  in  his  recent
campaigning  in  the  Ithenish  duchies,  but  his  cruelty  had
certainly  been  conspicuous.  Kot  even  Alva  could  have
accomplished  more  murders  and  other  outrages  in  the
same  space  of  time  than  had  been  perpetrated  by
the  Spanish  troops  during  the  infamous  winter  of
1598-9.  The  asi^assi nation  of  Count  Broek  at  his  own
castle  had  made  more  stir  than  a  thousand  other  homi-
cides of  nameless  wretches  at  the  same  period  had  done,
because  the  victim  had  been  a  man  of  rank  and  large
possessions,  but  it  now  remained  to  be  seen  whether
Mendoza  was  to  gain  fresh  laurels  of  any  kind  in  the
battle  which  was  probably  impending.

On  the  1st  of  July  the  archdukes  came  before  Ouden-
burg.  Kot  a  soul  within  that  fortress  nor  in  Ostend
dreamed  of  an  enemy  within  twenty  miles  of  them,  nor
had  it  been  supposed  possible  that  a  Spanish  army  could
take  the  field  for  many  weeks  to  come.  Hie  States-
General  at  Ostend  were  complacently  waiting  fur  the
first  bulletin  from  Maurice  announcing  his  capture  of
Isieuport  and  his  advance  upon  Dunkirk,  according
to  the  program  so  succinctly  drawn  up  for  liim,  and
meantime  were  holding  meetings  and  drawing  up  com-
fortable protocols  with  great  regularity.  Colonel  Piron,
on  his  part,  who  had  been  left  with  several  companies  of
veterans  to  hold  Oudenburg  and  the  other  forts,  and
to  protect  the  rear  of  the  invading  army,  was  accomplit^h-
ing  that  object  by  permitting  a  large  portion  of  his
force  to  be  absent  ()n  foraging  parties  and  general
marauding.  W  hen  the  enemy  came  before  Oudenburg
they  met  with  no  resistance.  The  fort  was  surrendered
at  once,  and  with  it  fell  the  lesser  sconces  of  Breedene,
Snaaskerk,  and  Plassendaal — all  but  the  more  consider-
able foit  St.  Albert.  The  archduke,  not  thinking  it
advisable  to  delay  his  march  by  the  reduction  of  this
position,  and  having  possession  of  all  the  other  fortifica-
tions around  Ostend,  determined  to  push  forward  next
morning  at  daybreak.  lie  had  granted  favouiable  terms
of  surrender  to  the  various  garrisons,  which,  however,
did  not  prevent  them  from  being  nearly  every  man
of  them  immediately  butchered  in  cold  blood.

Thus  were  these  strong  and  w ell-manned  redoubts,  by

14

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHI.

which  Prince  Manrice  had  hoped  to  impede  for  many
days  the  march  of  a  Spanish  army — should  a  Spanish
army  indeed  be  able  to  take  the  field  at  all — already
swept  off  in  an  hour.  Great  was  the  dismay  in  Ostend
when  Colonel  Piron  and  a  few  stragglers  brought  the
heavy  news  of  discomfiture  and  massacre  to  the  high  and
mighty  States-General  in  solemn  meeting  assembled.

Meanwhile,  the  States'  army  before  Nieuport,  not
dreaming  of  any  pending  interruption  to  their  labours,
proceeded  in  a  steady  but  leisurely  manner  to  invest  the
city.  Maurice  occupied  himself  in  tracing  the  lines  of
encampment  and  entrenchment,  and  ordered  a  permanent
bridge  to  be  begun  across  the  narrowest  part  of  the
creek,  in  order  that  the  two  parts  of  his  army  might  not
be  so  dangerously  divided  from  each  other  as  they  now
were,  at  high  water,  by  the  whole  breadth  and  depth  of
the  harbour.  Evening  came  on  before  much  had  been
accomplished  on  this  first  day  of  the  siege.  It  was
scarcely  dusk  when  a  messenger,  much  exhausted  and
terrified,  made  his  appearance  at  Count  Ernest's  tent.
He  was  a  straggler  who  had  made  his  escape  from
Oudenburg,  and  he  brought  the  astounding  intelligence
that  the  archduke  had  already  possession  of  that  position
and  of  all  the  other  forts.  Ernest  instantly  jumped  into
a  boat  and  had  himself  rowed,  together  with  the  mes-
senger, to  the  head-quarters  of  Prince  Maurice  on  the
other  side  of  the  river.  The  news  was  as  unexpected  as
it  was  alarming.  Here  was  the  enemy,  who  was  sup-
posed incapable  of  mischief  for  weeks  to  come,  already
in  the  field,  and  planted  directly  on  their  communica-
tions with  Ostend.  Ketreat,  if  retreat  were  desired,
was  already  impossible,  and  as  to  surprising  the  garrison
of  Nieuport  and  so  obtaining  that  stronghold  as  a  basis
for  further  aggressive  operations,  it  is  very  certain  that
if  any  man  in  Flanders  was  more  surprised  than  another
at  that  moment,  it  was  Prince  Maurice  himself.  He  was
too  good  a  soldier  not  to  see  at  a  glance  that  if  the  news
brought  by  the  straggler  were  true,  the  whole  expedition
was  already  a  failure,  and  that,  instead  of  a  short  siege
and  an  easy  victory,  a  great  battle  was  to  be  fought  upon
the  sands  of  Nieuport,  in  which  defeat  was  destruction
of  the  whole  army  of  the  republic,  and  very  possibly  of
the  republic  itself.

1600.  DILEMMA  OF  THE  STATES'  ARMY.  15

The  stadholder  hesitated.  He  was  prone  in  great
emergencies  to  hesitate  at  first,  but  immovable  when  his
resolution  was  taken.  Vera,  who  was  asleep  in  his  tent,
was  sent  for  and  cunstslted.  Most  of  the  generals  were
inclined  to  believe  that  the  demonstrations  at  Ouden-
burg,  which  had  been  so  successful,  were  merely  a  bravado
of  Kivas,  the  commander  of  the  permanent  troops  in  that
district,  which  were  comparatively  insignificant  in
numbers.  Vere  thought  otherwise.  lie  maintained
that  the  archduke  was  already  in  force  within  a  few
hours'  march  of  them,  as  he  had  always  supposed  would
be  the  case.  His  opinion  was  not  shared  by  the  rest,
and  he  went  back  to  his  truckle-bed,  feeling  that  a
brief  repose  was  necessary  for  the  heavy  work  which
would  soon  be  upon  him.  At  midnight  the  Englishman
was  again  called  from  his  slumbei  s.  Another  messenger,
sent  directly  from  the  States-General  at  Ostend,  had
made  his  way  to  the  stadholder.  This  time  there  was
no  possibility  of  error,  for  Colonel  Tiron  had  sent  the
accord  with  the  garrison  commanders  of  the  forts  which
had  been  so  shamefully  violated,  and  which  bore  the
signature  of  the  archduke.

It  was  now  perfectly  obvious  that  a  pitched  battle  was
to  be  fought  before  another  sunset,  and  most  anxious
were  the  deliberations  in  that  brief  midsummer  s  night.
The  dilemma  was  as  grave  a  one  as  commander-in-chief
had  ever  to  solve  in  a  few  hours.  A  portentous  change
had  come  over  the  prospects  of  the  commonwealth  since
the  arrival  of  these  despatches.  But  a  few  liours  before,
and  never  had  its  destiny  seemed  so  secure,  its  attitude
more  imposing.  The  little  republic,  which  Spain  had
been  endeavouring  forty  years  long  to  subjugate,
had  already  swept  every  S})anish  soldier  out  of  its
territory,  had  repeatedly  carried  fire  and  sword  into
Spain  itself,  and  even  into  its  distant  dependencies,  and
at  that  moment — after  eifecting  in  a  ma.sterly  manner
the  landing  of  a  great  anny  in  the  very  face  of  the  man
who  claimed  to  be  sovereign  of  all  the  Netherlands,  and
after  marching  at  ease  through  the  heart  of  his  territory
— was  preparing  a  movement,  with  every  prospect  of
success,  which  should  render  the  hold  of  that  .sovereign  on
any  portion  of  Netherland  soil  as  uncertain  and  shifting
as  the  sands  on  which  the  States'  army  was  now  encamped.

16

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVUI.

The  son  of  the  proscribed  and  murdered  rebel  stood
at  the  head  of  as  powerful  and  well-disciplined  an  army
as  had  ever  been  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  on  that
blood-stained  soil.  The  daughter  of  the  man  who  had
so  long  oppressed  the  provinces  might  soon  be  a  fugitive
from  the  land  over  which  she  had  so  recently  been
endowed  with  perpetual  sovereignty.  And  now  in  an
instant  these  visions  were  fading  like  a  mirage.

The  archduke,  whom  poverty  and  mutiny  were  to
render  powerless  against  invasion,  was  following  close
up  upon  the  heels  of  the  triumphant  army  of  the  stad-
holder.  A  decision  was  immediately  necessary.  The
siege  of  Nieuport  was  over  before  it  had  begun.  Surprise
had  failed,  assault  for  the  moment  was  impossible,  the
manner  how  best  to  confront  the  advancing  foe  the
only  question.

Vere  advised  that  the  whole  army  should  at  once  be
concentrated  and  led  wdtbout  delay  against  the  archduke
before  he  should  make  further  progress.^  The  advice
involved  an  outrageous  impossibility,  and  it  seems  in-
credible that  it  could  have  been  given  in  good  faith;
still  more  amazing  that  its  rejection  by  Maurice  should
have  been  bitterly  censured.  Two-thirds  of  the  army
lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  harbour,  and  it  was  high
water  at  about  three  o'clock.  \V  hile  they  were  deliberat-
ing, the  sea  was  rising,  and,  so  soon  as  daybreak  should
make  any  evolutions  possible,  they  would  be  utterly
prohibited  during  several  hours  by  the  inexorable  tide.
More  time  would  be  consumed  by  the  attempt  to  con-
struct temporary  bridges  (for  of  course  little  progress
had  been  made  in  the  stone  bridge  hardly  begun)  or  to
make  use  of  boats  than  in  waiting  for  the  falling  of  the
water,  and,  should  the  enemy  make  his  appearance
while  they  were  engaged  in  such  confusing  elforts,  the
army  would  be  hopelessly  lost.

Maurice,  against  the  express  advice  of  Vere,  decided
to  send  his  cousin  Ernest,  with  the  main  portion  of  the
force  established  on  the  right  bank  of  the  harbour,  in
search  of  the  archduke,  for  the  purpose  of  holding  him
in  check  long  enough  to  enable  the  rest  of  the  army  to
cross  the  water  when  the  tide  should  serve.  The  enemy,
it  was  now  clear,  would  advance  by  precisely  the  path

3  See  the  note  on  Sir  Francis  Vere  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.

1600.

CRITICAL  POSITION  OF  COUNT  ERNEST.

17

over  which  the  States'  army  had  marched  that  morning.
Ernest  was  accordingly  instructed  to  move  with  the
greatest  expedition  in  order  to  seize  the  bridge  at
Leffingen  before  the  archduke  should  reach  the  deep,
dangerous,  and  marshy  river,  over  which  it  was  the  sole
passage  to  the  downs.  Two  thousand  infantry,  being
the  Scotch  regiment  of  Edmonds  and  the  Zeelanders  of
Van  der  Koot,  four  squadrons  of  Dutch  cavalry,  and  two
pieces  of  artillery,  composed  the  force  with  which  Ernest
set  forth  at  a  little  before  dawn  on  his  hazardous  but
heroic  enterprise.

With  a  handful  of  troops  he  was  to  make  head  against
an  army,  and  the  youth  accepted  the  task  in  the  cheerful
spirit  of  self-sacrifice  which  characterized  his  house.
Marching  as  rapidly  as  the  difficult  gi'ound  would  per-
mit, he  had  the  disappointment,  on  approaching  the
fatal  point  at  about  eight  o'clock,  to  see  the  bridge  at
Leffingen  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy.  Maurice  had
sent  oif  a  messenger  early  that  morning  with  a  letter
marked  post  haste  (c«7o,  ciio)  to  Ostend,  oidering  up
some  four  hundred  cavalry-men  then  stationed  in  tliat
city  under  l^iron  and  Bruges,  to  move  up  U)  the  support
of  Ernest,  and  to  destroy  the  bridge  and  dams  at
Leffingen  before  the  enemy  should  arrive.  That  letter,
which  might  have  been  so  effective,  was  delivered,  as
it  subsequently  appeared,  exactly  ten  days  after  it  was
written.*  The  States,  of  their  own  authority,  had  en-
deavoured to  send  out  those  riders  towards  the  scene  of
action,  but  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  they  could
be  got  into  the  saddle  at  all,  and  they  positively  refused
to  go  further  than  St.  Albert  fort.  What  course  should
he  now  pursue  ?  lie  had  been  sent  to  cut  the  archduke's
road.  He  had  failed.  Had  he  remained  in  his  original
encampment  his  force  would  have  been  annihilated  by
the  overwhelming  numbers  of  the  enemy  so  soon  as  they
reached  the  right  bank  of  N  ieuport  haven,  while  Maurice
could  have  only  looked  hopelessly  on  from  the  opposite
shore.  At  least  nothing  worse  than  absolute  destruction
could  befal  him  now.  Should  he  accept  a  combat  of  six
or  eight  to  one  the  struggle  would  be  hopeless,  but  the
longer  it  was  protracted  the  better  it  would  be  for  his

VOL.  IV.

♦  Duyck,  ii.  662-

C

18

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

main  army,  engaged  at  that  very  moment  as  lie  knew
in  crossing  the  haven  with  the  ebbing  tide.  Should  he
retreat,  it  might  be  possible  for  him  to  escape  into  Fort
Albert  or  even  Ostend,  but  to  do  so  would  be  to  purchase
his  own  safety  and  that  of  his  command  at  the  probable
sacrifice  of  the  chief  army  of  the  republic.  Ernest
hesitated  but  an  instant.  Coming  within  carbine-shot
of  the  stream,  where  he  met  his  cavalry  which  had  been
sent  forward  at  full  speed,  in  the  vain  hope  of  seizing
or  destroying  the  bridge  before  it  should  be  too  late,  he
took  up  a  position  behind  a  dyke,  upon  which  he  placed
his  two  field-pieces,  and  formed  his  troops  in  line  of
battle  exactly  across  the  enemy's  path.  On  the  right
he  placed  the  regiment  of  Scots.  On  the  left  was  Van
der  Noot's  Zeeland  infantry,  garnished  with  four  com-
panies of  riders  under  Eisoir,  which  stood  near  St.  Mary's
church.  The  passage  from  the  stream  to  the  downs  was
not  more  than  a  hundred  yards  wide,  being  skirted  on
both  sides  by  a  swamp.  Here  Ernest  with  his  two
thousand  men  awaited  the  onset  of  the  archduke's  army.
He  was  perfectly  aware  that  it  was  a  mere  question  of
time,  but  he  was  sure  that  his  preparations  must  inter-
pose a  delay  to  the  advance  of  the  Spaniards,  should
his  troops,  as  he  felt  confident,  behave  themselves  as
they  had  always  done,  and  that  the  delay  would  be
of  inestimable  value  to  his  friends  at  the  haven  of
Nieuport.

The  archduke  paused ;  for  he,  too,  could  not  be  certain,
on  observing  the  resolute  front  thus  presented  to  him,
that  he  was  not  about  to  engage  the  whole  of  the  States'
army.  The  doubt  was  but  of  short  duration,  however,
and  the  onset  was  made.  Ernest's  artillery  fired  four
volleys  into  the  advancing  battalions  with  such  efiect  as
to  stagger  them  for  a  moment,  but  they  soon  afterwards
poured  over  the  dyke  in  overwhelming  numbers,  easily
capturing  the  cannon.  The  attack  began  upon  Ernest's
left,  and  Kisoir's  cavalry,  thinking  that  they  should  be  cut
ofiP  from  all  possibility  of  retreat  into  Fort  St.  Albert,
turned  their  backs  in  the  most  disgraceful  manner,
without  even  waiting  for  the  assault.  Galloping  around
the  infantry  on  the  left  they  infected  the  Zeelanders
with  their  own  cowardice.  Scarcely  a  moment  passed
before  Van  der  Noot's  whole  regiment  was  running

1600.  PANIC  AMONG  ERNEST'S  SOLDIERS.  19

away  as  fast  as  the  troopers,  while  the  Scots  on  the  right
hesitated  not  for  an  instant  to  follow  their  example.
Even  before  the  expected  battle  had  begun,  one  of  those
hideous  and  unaccountable  panics  which  sometimes  break
out  like  a  moral  pestilence  to  destroy  all  the  virtue  of
an  army,  and  to  sweep  away  the  best-considered  schemes
of  a  general,  had  spread  through  Ernest's  entire  force.
So  soon  as  the  demi-cannon  had  discharged  their  fourth
volley,  Scots,  Zeelanders,  Walloons,  pikemen,  musketeers,
and  troopers,  possessed  by  the  demon  of  cowardice,  were
running  like  a  herd  of  swine  to  throw  themselves  into
the  sea.  Had  they  even  kept  the  line  of  the  downs
in  the  direction  of  the  fort  many  of  them  might  have
saved  their  lives,  although  none  could  have  escaped
disgrace.  But  the  Scots,  in  an  ecstasy  of  fear,  throwing
away  their  arms  as  they  fled,  ran  through  the  waters
behind  the  dyke,  skimmed  over  the  sands  at  full  speed,
and  never  paused  till  such  as  survived  the  sabre  and
musket  of  their  swift  pursuers  had  literally  drowned
themselves  in  the  ocean.  Almost  every  man  of  them
was  slain  or  drowned.  All  the  captains — Stuart,  Bar-
clay, Murray,  Kilpatrick,  Michael,  Nesbit — with  the
rest  of  the  company  officers,  doing  their  best  to  rally
the  fugitives,  were  killed.  The  Zeelanders,  more  cau-
tious in  the  midst  of  their  panic,  or  perhaps  knowing
better  the  nature  of  the  countiy,  were  more  successful
in  saving  their  necks.  Not  more  than  a  hundred  and
fifty  of  Van  der  Noot's  regiment  were  killed,  while  such
of  the  cavalry  of  Bruges  and  Piron  as  had  come  to  the
neighbourhood  of  Fort  Albert,  not  caring  to  trust  them-
selves to  the  shelter  of  that  redoubt,  now  fled  as  fast  as
their  horses'  legs  would  carry  them,  and  never  pulled
bridle  till  they  found  themselves  in  Ostend.  And  so
beside  themselves  with  panic  were  these  fugitives,  and
so  virulent  was  its  contagion,  that  it  was  difficult  to
prevent  the  men  who  had  remained  in  the  fort  from
joining  in  the  flight  towards  Ostend.  Many  of  them
indeed  threw  themselves  over  the  walls  and  were  sabred
by  the  enemy  when  they  might  have  been  safe  within
the  fortifications.  Had  these  cavalry  companies  of
Bruges  and  Piron  been  even  tolerably  self-possessed,
had  they  concentrated  themselves  in  the  fort  instead  of
yielding  to  the  delirium  which  prompted  them  to  par-

c  2

20

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

ticipate  in  their  comrades'  flight,  they  would  have  had
it  entirely  in  their  power,  by  making  an  attack,  or  even
the  semblance  of  an  attack,  by  means  of  a  sudden  sally
from  the  fort,  to  have  saved,  not  the  battle  indeed,  but  a
large  number  of  lives.  But  the  panic  was  hopeless  and
universal,  and  countless  fugitives  scrambling  by  the  fort
were  shot  in  a  leisurely  manner  by  a  comparative  few  of
the  enemy  as  easily  as  the  rabbits  which  swarmed  in
those  sands  were  often  knocked  down  in  multitudes  by
half-a-dozen  sportsmen.

And  thus  a  band  of  patriots,  who  were  not  cowards
by  nature,  and  who  had  often  played  the  part  of  men,
had  horribly  disgraced  themselves,  and  were  endan-
gering the  very  existence  of  their  country,  already  by
mistaken  councils  brought  within  the  jaws  of  death.
The  glory  of  Thermopylae  might  have  hung  for  ever
over  that  bridge  of  Leffingen.  It  was  now  a  pass  of
infamy,  perhaps  of  fatal  disaster.  The  sands  were
covered  with  weapons — sabre,  pike,  and  arquebus —
thrown  away  by  almost  every  soldier  as  he  fled  to  save
the  life  which  after  all  was  sacrificed.  The  artillery,  all
the  standards  and  colours,  all  the  baggage  and  ammuni-
tion, everything  was  lost.  No  viler  panic,  no  more
complete  defeat  was  ever  recorded.  Such  at  half-past
eight  in  the  morning  was  that  memorable  Sunda}^  of  the
2nd  July,  1600,  big  with  the  fate  of  the  Dutch  republic
— the  festival  of  the  Visitation  of  the  Virgin  Mary,
always  thought  of  happy  augury  for  Spanish  arms.

Thus  began  the  long-expected  battle  of  Nieuport.  At
least  a  thousand  of  the  choicest  troops  of  the  stadholder
were  slain,  while  the  Spanish  had  hardly  lost  a  man.^

5  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  as  But  Reyd  was  not  on  the  field  nor  near

to  the  rout  of  LefiBngen. There  was  no  it,  and  there  is  not  a  word  in  Ernest's

fight  at  all. The  journal  of  Antony  private  letters  to  conflict  with  the  minute

Duyck  and  the  accounts  of  Meteren,  Bor,  and  unvarnished  statements  of  Duyck.

and  other  chroniclers  entirely  agree  with  See  also  the  excellent  note  of  Captain

the  most  boastful  narratives  of  the  Spa-  Mulder  on  pp.  668,  669,  part  ii.  of  his

niards. Everard  van  Reyd  to  be  sure  admirable  edition  of  Duyck's  journal,

stoutly  maintains  that  the troops  of  The  confessor  of  the  archduke.  Fray

Ernest  fought  to  the  uttermost  ("  zum  In-'s^o  de  Brizuelas,  was  as  enthusiastic  on

euszersten  gefochten"),  and  that  hardly  a  hii!  side  as  the  privy  counsellor  of  Lewis

whole  spear  was  found  in  the  hands  of  William. The  troops  of  the  archduke,  he

any  of  the  dead  on  the  field. Nor  a  says,  attacked  Ernest  and  in  one  moment

broken  one  either,  he  might  have  added,  killed  1800  to  2000  men  without  losing  a

It  is  a  pity  that  the  army  had  not  been  man  themselves— "  EUes  mirent  a  mort

IBS  stanch  as  the  secretary  and  chronicler,  en  un  moment  1800  a  2000  hommes,

1600.

REJOICINGS  OF  THE  SPANIARDS.

21

The  archduke  had  annihilated  his  enemy ,^  had  taken
his  artillery  and  thirty  flags.  In  great  exultation  he
despatched  a  messenger  to  the  Infanta  at  Ghent,  in-
forming her  that  he  had  entirely  defeated  the  advance-
guard  of  the  States'  army,  and  that  his  next  bulletin
would  announce  his  complete  triumph  and  the  utter
overthrow  of  Maurice,  who  had  now  no  means  of  escape.
He  stated  also  that  he  would  very  soon  send  the  rebel
stadholder  himself  to  her  as  a  prisoner.  The  Infanta,
much  pleased  with  the  promise,  observed  to  her  atten-
dants that  she  was  curious  to  see  how  Nassau  would
conduct  himself  when  he  should  be  brought  a  captive
into  her  presence.  As  to  the  Catholic  troops,  they  were
informed  by  the  archduke  that  after  the  complete
victory  which  they  were  that  day  to  achieve,  not  a
man  should  be  left  ^live  save  Maurice  and  his  brother
Prederic  Henry.  These  should  be  spared  to  grace  the
conqueror's  triumph,  but  all  else  should  be  put  to  the
sword. ^

]\Ieantime  artillery  thundered,  bonfires  blazed,  and
bells  rang  their  merriest  peals  in  Ghent,  Bruges,  and
the  other  obedient  cities  as  the  news  of  the  great
victory  spread  through  the  land.

W  hen  the  fight  was  done  the  archduke  called  a
council  of  war.  It  was  a  grave  question  whether  the
army  should  at  once  advance  in  order  to  complete  the
destruction  of  the  enemy  that  day,  or  pause  for  an
interval  that  the  troops  fatigued  with  hard  marching
and  with  the  victorious  combat  in  which  they  had  just
been  engaged,  should  recover  their  full  strength.  That
the  stadholder  was  completely  in  their  power  was
certain.  The  road  to  Ostend  was  barred,  and  Nieuport
would  hold  him  at  bay,  now  that  the  relieving  army
was  close  upon  his  heels.  All  that  was  necessary  in
order  to  annihilate  his  whole  force  was  that  they  should

s'emparlrent  de  deux  pieces  d'artillerie  et  reyes  Austriacos)  appartenant  a  la  Biblio-

de  plusieurs  drapeaux,  sans  avoir  subi  theque  Nati  a  Madrid. MS.  kindly  com-

aucune  pcrte  On  esperait  muniaited  to  me  by  M.  Gachard.

geaeralement  que  ce  jour  mettrait  fin  ^  "  Qui  fut  si  vivement  chargee  qu'elle

aux  gucn  es  de  Flandre."  (!  I)  y  demeura  toute  '*  are  the  words  of  the

Substance  d'une  leitre  ecrite  de  Bruges  archduke  writing?  on  the  4th  July  from

le  13  Juillet,  1600,  par  Fray  J.  de  Brizue-  Ghent  to  his  council  of  state.  (MS.

las  ^  un  seigneur  de  la  cour  a  Madrid  ct  Archives  of  Belgium.)

reposant  en  copie  aux  lol.  4  5-48  du  vol.  7  1^  Petit  on  the  authority  of  prisonen.

U.  49  (Varias  Cousultas  en  tiempo  de  los  De  la  Hseu

22

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHI.

entrench  themselves  for  the  night  on  the  road  which  he
must  cross.  He  would  then  be  obliged  to  assault  their
works  with  troops  inferior  in  number  to  theirs  and
fatigued  by  the  march.  Should  he  remain  where  he
was  he  would  soon  be  starved  into  submission,  and
would  be  obliged  to  surrender  his  whole  army.  On  the
other  hand,  by  advancing  now,  in  the  intolerable  heat  of
a  July  sun  over  the  burning  and  glaring  sands,  the
troops  already  wearied  would  arrive  on  the  field  of
battle  utterly  exhausted,  and  would  be  obliged  to  attack
an  enemy  freshly  and  cheerfully  awaiting  them  on
ground  of  his  own  selection.

JNloreover  it  was  absolutely  certain  that  Fort  Albert
would  not  hold  an  hour  if  resolutely  assaulted  in  the
midst  of  the  panic  of  Ernest's  defeat,  and,  with  its
capture,  the  annihilation  of  Maurice  was  certain.

Meantime  the  three  thousand  men  under  Velasco,  who
had  been  detached  to  protect  the  rear,  would  arrive  to
reinforce  the  archduke's  main  army,  should  he  pause
until  the  next  day.

These  arguments,  which  had  much  logic  in  them,
were  strongly  urged  by  Zapena,  a  veteran  marshal  of
the  camp  who  had  seen  much  service,  and  whose  counsels
were  usually  received  with  deference.  But  on  this
occasion  commanders  and  soldiers  were  hot  for  following
up  their  victory.  They  cared  nothing  for  the  numbers
of  the  enemy,  they  cried,  "  The  more  infidels  the  greater
glory  in  destroying  them."  ^  Delay  might  after  all
cause  the  loss  of  the  prize,  it  was  eagerly  shouted.  The
archduke  ought  to  pray  that  the  sun  might  stand  still
for  him  that  morning,  as  for  Joshua  in  the  vale  of
Ajalon.  The  foe  seeing  himself  entrapped,  with  de-
struction awaiting  him,  was  now  skulking  towards  his
ships,  which  still  offered  him  the  means  of  escape.
Should  they  give  him  time  he  would  profit  by  their
negligence,  and  next  morning  when  they  reached  Nieu-
port  the  birds  would  be  flown.  Especially  the  leaders
of  the  mutineers  of  Diest  and  Thionville  were  hoarse
with  indignation  at  the  proposed  delay.  They  had  not
left  their  brethren,  they  shouted,  nor  rallied  to  the
archduke's  banner  in  order  to  sit  down  and  dig  in  the
sand  like  ploughmen. There  was  triumph  for  the  Holy

8  **  Quaiito  mas  Moros  tanto  mas  ganancias." — De  la  Pise.

1600.

ESCAPE  OF  THE  STATES'  ARMY.

23

Church,  there  was  the  utter  overthrow  of  the  heretic
army,  there  was  rich  booty  to  be  gathered,  all  these
things  were  within  their  reach  if  they  now  advanced
and  smote  the  rebels  while,  confused  aod  panic-stricken,
they  were  endeavouring  to  embark  in  their  ships.

While  these  vehement  debates  were  at  the  hottest,
sails  were  descried  in  the  offing ;  for  the  archduke's
forces  already  stood  upon  the  edge  of  the  downs.  First
one  ship,  then  another  and  another,  moved  steadily
along  the  coast,  returning  from  Nieuport  in  the  direction
of  O.stend.

This  was  more  than  could  be  borne.  It  was  obvious
that  the  rebels  were  already  making  their  escape,  and  it
was  urged  upon  the  cardinal  that  probably  Prince
Maurice  and  the  other  chieftains  were  on  board  one  of
those  very  vessels,  and  were  giving  him  the  slip.  AN'ith
great  expedition  it  would  still  be  possible  to  overtake
them  before  the  main  body  could  embark,  and  the
attack  might  yet  be  made  at  the  most  favourable
moment.  Those  white  sails  gleaming  in  the  distance
were  more  eloquent  than  Zapena  or  any  other  advocate
of  delay,  and  the  order  was  given  to  advance.  And  it
w^as  exactly  at  this  period  that  it  lay  still  within  the
power  of  the  Stiites'  cavalry  at  Ostend  to  partially
redeem  their  character  and  to  render  very  elective
service.  Had  four  or  five  hundred  resolute  troopers
hung  upon  the  rear  of  the  Spanish  army  now,  as  it
moved  towards  Nieuport,  they  might,  by  judiciously  skir-
mishing, advancing  and  retreating  according  to  circum-
stances, have  caused  much  confusion,  and  certainly
have  so  harassed  the  archduke  as  to  Cf)mpel  the  detach-
ment of  a  very  considerable  force  of  his  own  cavalry  to
protect  himself  against  such  assaults.  But  the  terror
was  an  enduring  one.  Those  horsemen  remained  para-
lyzed and  helpless,  and  it  was  impossible  for  the  States,
with  all  their  commands  or  entreaties,  to  induce  them  to
mount  and  ride  even  a  half  mile  beyond  the  city  gates.

While  these  events  had  been  occurring  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Ostend,  Maurice  had  not  been  idle  at
Nieuport.  No  sooner  had  Ernest  been  despatched  on
his  desperate  errand  than  his  brother  Lewis  Gunther
was  ordered  by  the  stadholder  to  get  on  horseback  and
ride  through  the  quarters  of  the  army. On  the  previous

24

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIIL

afternoon  there  had  been  so  little  thought  of  an  enemy
that  large  foraging  parties  had  gone  out  from  camp  in
all  directions,  and  had  not  returned.  Lewis  gave  notice
that  a  great  battle  was  to  be  expected  on  the  morrow,
instead  of  the  tranquil  commencement  of  a  leisurely
siege,  and  that  therefore  no  soul  was  henceforth  to  leave
the  camp,  while  a  troop  of  horse  was  despatched  at  the
first  gleam  of  daylight  to  skir  the  country  in  search  of
all  the  stragglers.  Maurice  had  no  thought  of  retreat-
ing, and  his  first  care  was  to  bring  his  army  across  the
haven.  The  arrangements  were  soon  completed,  but  it
was  necessary  to  wait  until  nearly  low  water.  Soon
after  eight  o'clock  Count  Lewis  began  to  cross  with
eight  squadrons  of  cavalry,  and  partly  swimming,  partly
wading,  effected  the  passage  in  safety.  The  advanced
guard  of  infantry,  under  Sir  Francis  Vere — consisting
of  two  thousand  six  hundred  Englishmen,  and  two
thousand  eight  hundred  Frisians,  with  some  companies
of  horse,  followed  by  the  battalia  under  Solms,  and  the
rearguard  under  Tempel — then  slowly  and  with  diffi-
culty moved  along  the  same  dangerous  path  with  the
water  as  high  as  their  armpits,  and  often  rising  nearly
over  their  heads.  Had  the  archduke  not  been  detained
near  the  bridge  of  Leffingen  by  Ernest's  Scotchmen  and
Zeelanders  during  three  or  four  precious  hours  that
morning ;  had  he  arrived,  as  he  otherwise  might  have
done,  just  as  the  States'  army-— horse,  foot,  and  artillery
— was  floundering  through  that  treacherous  tide,  it
would  have  fared  ill  for  the  stadholder  and  the  republic.
But  the  devotion  of  Ernest  had  at  least  prevented  the
attack  of  the  archduke  until  Maurice  and  his  men  stood
on  dry  land.

Dripping  from  head  to  foot,  but  safe  and  sound,  the
army  had  at  last  reached  the  beach  at  Nieuport.  Yere
had  refused  his  soldiers  permission  to  denude  themselves
in  crossing  of  their  shoes  and  lower  garments.  There
was  no  time  for  that,  he  said,  and  they  would  either
earn  new  clothes  for  themselves  that  day,  or  never  need
doublet  and  hose  again  any  more  in  the  world.  Some
hours  had  elapsed  before  the  tedious  and  difficult  cross-
ing of  infantry,  cavalry,  artillery,  and  munition  trains
had  been  accomplished.

Lewis Gunther,  with  eight  squadrons  of  picked

1600.  HEROIC  DECISION  OF  PRINCE  MAURICE.  25

cavalry,  including  his  own  company,  Maurice's  own,
Frederic  Henry's  own,  with  Batenburg's  arquebus-men,
and  other  veterans,  was  first  to  place  himself  in  battle
order  on  the  beach.  His  squadrons  in  iron  corslet  and
morion,  and  aimed  with  lances,  carbines,  and  sabres,
stretched  across  from  the  water  to  the  downs.  He  had
not  been  long  stationed  there  when  he  observed  that  far
away  in  the  direction  of  Ostend  the  beach  was  growing
black  with  troops.  He  believed  them  at  first  to  be  his
brother  Ernest  and  his  forces  returning  victorious  from
their  hazardous  expedition,  but  he  was  soon  undeceived.
A  couple  of  troopers  from  Ostend  came  spurring  full
gallop  along  the  strand,  and  almost  breathless  with
dismay,  announced  that  it  was  the  whole  army  of  the
archduke  advancing  in  line  of  battle.  They  weie  in-
stantly sent  to  the  rear,  without  being  allowed  to  speak
further,  in  order  th;it  they  might  deliver  their  message
in  private  to  the  commander-in-chief.  And  most  terrible
were  the  tidings  t<»  which  Maurice  now  listened  in  very
secret  audience.  Ernest  was  utterly  defeated,  his  com-
mand cut  to  pieces,  the  triumphant  foe  advancing
rapidly,  and  already  in  full  sight.  The  stadholder
heard  the  tale  without  flinching,  and  having  quietly
ordered  the  messengers  upon  their  lives  not  to  open
their  lips  on  the  subject  to  living  soul,  sent  them
securely  guarded  in  a  boat  on  board  one  of  the  war-
ships in  the  offing.  With  perfect  cheerfulness  he  then
continued  his  preparations,  consulting  with  Vere,  on
whom  he  mainly  relied  for  the  marshalling  of  the  army
in  the  coming  conflict.  Undecided  as  he  had  sometimes
shown  himself,  he  was  resolute  now.  He  called  no
council  of  war,  for  he  knew  not  how  much  might  be
known  or  suspected  of  the  disaster  already  sustained,
and  he  had  fully  made  up  his  mind  as  to  the  course  to
be  pursued.  He  had  indeed  taken  a  supreme  resolution.
Entirely  out  of  his  own  breast,  without  advising  with
any  man,  he  calmly  gave  directions  that  every  war-ship,
transport,  barge,  or  wherry  should  put  to  sea  at  once.
As  the  tide  had  now  been  long  on  the  flood,  the  few
vessels  that  had  been  aground  within  the  harbour  were
got  afloat,  and  the  whole  vast,  almost  innumerable
armada,  was  soon  standing  out  to  sea.  No  more  heroic
decision  was  ever  taken  by  fighting  man.

26

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

Sir  Francis  gave  advice  tliat  entrenclimerits  should
be  thrown  up  on  the  north-east,  and  that  instead  of
advancing  towards  the  enemy  they  should  await  his
coming,  and  refuse  the  battle  that  day  if  possible.  The
Englishmen,  not  aware  of  the  catastrophe  at  Lefifingen,
which  Maurice  had  locked  up  in  his  own  breast,  was
now  informed  by  the  stadholder  that  there  were  to  be
no  entrenchments  that  day  but  those  of  pike  and  arque-
bus, it  was  not  the  fault  of  Maurice  that  the  fate  of
the  commonwealth  had  been  suspended  on  a  silken
thread  that  morning,  but  he  knew  that  but  one  of  two  *
issues  was  possible.  They  must  fight  their  way  through
the  enemy  back  to  Ostend,  or  perish,  every  man  of  them.
The  possibility  of  surrender  did  not  enter  his  mind,
and  he  felt  that  it  was  better  to  hasten  the  action  before
the  news  of  Ernest's  disaster  should  arrive  to  chill  the
ardour  of  the  troops.^

Meantime  Lewis  Gunther  and  his  cavalry  had  been
sitting  motionless  upon  their  horses  on  the  beach.  The
enemy  was  already  in  full  view,  and  the  young  general,
most  desirous  to  engage  in  a  preliminary  skirmish,  sent
repeated  messages  to  the  stadholder  for  permission  to
advance.  Presently  Sir  Francis  Vere  rode  to  the  front,
to  whom  he  eagerly  urged  his  request  that  the  infantry
of  the  vanguard  might  be  brought  up  at  once  to  support
him.^^  On  the  contrary  the  English  general  advised
that  the  cavalry  should  fall  back  to  the  infantry,  in
order  to  avoid  a  premature  movement.  Lewis  strongly
objected  to  this  arrangement,  on  the  ground  that  the
mere  semblance  of  retreat,  thus  upon  the  eve  of  battle,
would  discourage  all  the  troops.  But  he  was  over-ruled,
for  Maurice  had  expressly  enjoined  upon  his  cousin  that
morning  to  defer  in  all  things  to  the  orders  of  Vere.
These  eight  squadrons  of  horse  accordingly  shifted  their
position,  and  were  now  placed  close  to  the  edge  of  the
sea,  on  the  left  flank  of  the  vanguard,  which  Vere  had
drawn  up  across  the  beach  and  in  the  downs.  On  the
edge  of  the  downs,  on  the  narrow  slip  of  hard  sand
above  high- water  mark,  and  on  Vere's  right,  Maurice
had  placed  a  battery  of  six  demi-cannon.

Behind  the  advance  was  the  battalia,  or  centre,  under

9  That  Maurice  concealed  from  Vere  the  news  of  the  defeat  at  LeflBngen  u
expressly  stated  by  Antony  Da/ck.  See  note  on  Vere.

1600.  PREPARATION  FOR  THE  ENCOUNTER.

27

command  of  that  famous  fighter,  George  Everard  Solms,
consisting  of  Germans,  Swiss,  French,  and  \\  alloons.
The  "  New  Beggars,"  as  the  Walloons  were  called,  who
had  so  recently  surrendered  the  forts  of  Crevecoeur  and
St.  Andrew,  and  gone  over  from  the  archduke's  service
to  the  army  of  the  States,  were  included  in  this  division,
and  were  as  eager  to  do  credit  to  their  new  chief  as
were  the  mutineers  in  the  archduke's  army  to  merit  the
approbation  of  their  sovereign.

The  rearguard  under  Tempel  was  made  up,  like  the
other  divisions,  of  the  blended  nationalities  of  German,
Briton,  Hollander,  and  Walloon,  and,  like  the  others,
was  garnished  at  each  flank  with  heavy  cavalry.

The  Spanish  army,  after  coming  nearly  within  can-
non-shot of  their  adversary,  paused.  It  was  plain  that
the  States'  troops  were  not  in  so  great  a  panic  as  the
more  sanguine  advisers  of  the  archduke  had  hoped.
They  were  nor  coweiing  among  the  shipping,  preparing
to  escape.  Still  less  had  any  portion  of  them  already
effected  their  retreat  in  those  vessels,  a  few  of  which
had  so  excited  the  enemy's  ardour  when  they  came  in
sight.  It  was  obvious  that  a  great  struggle,  in  which
the  forces  were  very  evenly  balanced,  was  now  to  be
fought  out  upon  those  sands.  It  was  a  splendid  tourna-
ment,— a  great  duel  for  life  and  death  between  the
champions  of  the  Papacy  and  of  Protestantism,  of  the
liepublic  and  of  absolutism,  that  was  to  be  fought  out
that  midsummer's  day.  The  lists  were  closed.  The
trumpet  signal  for  the  fray  would  soon  be  blovm.

The  archduke,  in  Milanese  armour,  on  a  wonderfully
beautiful  snow-white  Spanish  stallion,  moved  in  the
centre  of  his  army.  He  wore  no  helmet,  that  his  men
might  the  more  readily  recognize  him  as  he  rode  gal-
lantly to  and  fro,  marshalling,  encouraging,  exhorting
the  troops.  Never  before  had  he  manifested  such  de-
cided military  talent,  combined  with  unquestionable
personal  valour,  as  he  had  done  since  this  campaign
began.  Friend  and  foe  agreed  that  day  that  Albert
fought  like  a  lion.  Ho  was  at  first  well  seconded  by
Mendoza,  who  led  the  van,  and  by  Villars,  La  Bourlotte,
Avalos,  Zapena,  and  many  other  officers  of  note.  The
mutinotis  Spanish  and  Italian  cavalry,  combined  with  a
few  choice  squadrons  of  Walloon  and  German  horse,

28  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVUf.

were  placed  in  front  and  on  the  flanks.  They  were
tinder  the  special  supervision  of  the  admiral,  who  mar-
shalled their  squadrons  and  directed  their  charging,
although  mounted  on  a  hackney  himself,  and  not  intend-
ing to  participate  in  the  action.  Then  came  the  battalia
and  rear,  crowding  very  closely  upon  each  other.

Face  to  face  with  them  stood  the  republican  host,
drawn  up  in  great  solid  squares  of  infantry,  their  stan-
dards waving  above  each  closely  planted  clump  of
pikemen,  with  the  musketeers  fringing  their  skirts,
while  the  iron-clad  ponderous  cavalry  of  Count  Lewis
and  Marcellus  Bax,  in  black  casque  and  corslet,  were  in
front,  restlessly  expecting  the  signal  for  the  onset.  The
volunteers  of  high  rank  who  were  then  serving  on  the
staff  of  the  stadholder — the  Duke  of  Holstein,  the  Prince
of  Anhalt,  two  young  Counts  Solms,  and  others — had
been  invited  and  even  urged  to  abandon  the  field  while
there  was  yet  time  for  setting  them  on  board  the  fleet.
Especially  it  was  thought  desirable  that  young  Frederic
Henry,  a  mere  boy,  on  whom  the  hopes  of  the  Orange-
Nassau  house  would  rest  if  Maurice  fell  in  the  conflict,
should  be  spared  the  fate  which  seemed  hanging  over
the  commonwealth  and  her  defenders.  But  the  son  of
William  the  Silent  implored  his  brother  with  clasped
hands  not  to  send  him  from  his  side  at  that  moment,  so
that  Maurice  granted  his  prayer,  and  caused  him  to  be
provided  with  a  complete  suit  of  armour.  Thus  in
company  with  young  Coligny — a  lad  of  his  own  age,
and  like  himself  a  grandson  of  the  great  admiral — the
youth  who  was  one  day  to  play  so  noble  a  part  on  the
stage  of  the  world's  affairs  was  now  to  be  engaged  in
his  first  great  passage  of  arms. .  Xo  one  left  the  field
but  Sir  Eobert  Sidney,  who  had  come  over  from  Ostend,
from  irrepressible  curiosity  to  witness  the  arrangements,
but  who  would  obviously  have  been  guilty  of  unpar-
donable negligence  had  he  been  absent  at  such  a  crisis
from  the  important  post  of  which  he  was  governor  for
the  queen."

11  Duyck,  however,  with  much  in-  hear  many  insulting  observations  on  his
justice,  as  it  would  seem,  accuses  Sidney  flight.  "  De  heere  Philps  (sic)  Sidnei  tsy
(whom  he  calls  "  Philip  Sidney " !)  of  uyt  vrese  ofte  anders  ont  vont  hem  van
cowardice ;  stating  that  he  paid  a  large  daer  ende  geraeckte  met  groote  moeite
sum  to  obtain  a  vessel  in  which  to  make  ende  naer  veel  schampere  woorden  hem
bis  escape,  and  that  he  was  obliged  to  bij  eenigen  gegeven  t'scheepe  selfs  met

1600.

THE  SCENE  OF  ACTION.

29

The  arena  of  the  conflict  seemed  elaborately  pi  epared
by  the  hand  of  nature.  The  hard,  level,  sandy  beach,
swept  clean  and  smooth  by  the  ceaseless  action  of  the
tides,  stretched  out  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  in  one
long,  bokl,  monotonous  line.  Like  the  whole  coast  of
Flanders  and  of  Holland,  it  seemed  drawn  by  a  geo-
metrical rule,  not  a  cape,  cove,  or  estuary  breaking  the
perfect  straightness  of  the  design.  On  the  right,  just
beyond  high- water  mark,  the  downs,  fantastically  heaped
together  like  a  mimic  mountain  chain,  or  like  tempes-
tuous ocean-waves  suddenly  changed  to  sand,  rolled  wild
and  confused,  but  still  in  a  regularly  parallel  course
with  the  line  of  the  beach.  They  seemed  a  barrier
thrown  up  to  protect  the  land  from  being  bitten  quite
away  by  the  ever-restless  and  encroaching  sea.  Beyond
the  downs,  which  were  seven  hundred  yards  in  width,
extended  a  level  tract  of  those  green  fertile  meadows,
artificially  drained,  which  are  so  characteristic  a  feature
of  the  ISetherland  landscapes,  the  stream  which  ran
from  Ostend  towards  the  town  of  Nieuport  flowing
sluggishly  through  lliem.  It  was  a  bright  warm  mid-
sujnmer  day.  The  waves  of  the  German  Ocean  came
lazily  rolling  in  upon  the  crisp  yellow  sand,  the  surf
breaking  with  its  monotonous  music  at  the  very  feet
of  the  armies.  A  gentle  south-west  breeze  was  blowing,
just  filling  the  sails  of  more  than  a  thousand  ships
in  the  offing,  which  moved  languidly  along  the  spark-
ling sea.  It  was  an  atmosphere  better  befitting  a
tranquil  holiday  than  the  scene  of  carnage  which
seemed  approaching.

Maurice  of  Nassau,  in  complete  armour,  rapier  in
hand,  with  the  orange-plumes  waving  from  his  helmet
and  the  orange-scarf  across  his  breast,  rode  through  the
lines,  briefly  addressing  his  soldiers  with  martial  energy.
Pointing  to  the  harbour  of  Nieuport  behind  them,  now
again  impassable  with  the  flood,  to  the  ocean  on  the  left
where  rode  the  fleet,  carrying  with  it  all  hope  of  escape
by  sea,  and  to  the  aiTQy  of  the  archduke  in  front,  almost
within  cannon-range,  he  simply  observed  that  they  had  no
possible  choice  between  victory  and  death.  They  must
either  utterly  overthrow  the  Spanish  army,  he  said,  or

prrsentatie  van  geld  cnde  voer  doen  wcch,  7iiet  da  vende  in  den  slack  Wyven.**—
Journa;il,  ii.  667.

30

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

drink  all  the  waters  of  the  sea.  Either  drowning  or
butchery  was  their  doom  if  they  were  conquered,  for  no
quarter  was  to  be  expected  from  their  unscrupulous
and  insolent  foe.  He  was  there  to  share  their  fate,  to
conquer  or  to  perish  with  them,  and  from  their  tried
valour  and  from  the  God  of  battles  he  hoped  a  more
magnificent  victory  than  had  ever  before  been  achieved
in  this  almost  perpetual  war  for  independence.  The
troops,  perfectly  enthusiastic,  replied  with  a  shout  that
they  were  ready  to  live  or  die  with  their  chieftain,  and
eagerly  demanded  to  be  led  upon  the  foe.  Whether
from  hope  or  from  desperation,  they  were  confident  and
cheerful.  Some  doubt  was  felt  as  to  the  Walloons,  who
had  so  lately  transferred  themselves  from  the  archduke's
army,  but  their  commander,  Marquette,  made  them  all
lift  up  their  hands,  and  swear  solemnly  to  live  or  die
that  day  at  the  feet  of  Prince  Maurice.

Two  hours  long  those  two  armies  had  stood  looking
each  other  in  the  face.  It  was  near  two  o'clock  when
the  archduke  at  last  gave  the  signal  to  advance.  The
tide  was  again  almost  at  the  full.  Maurice  stood  firm,
awaiting  the  assault ;  the  enemy  slowly  coming  nearer,
and  the  rising  tide  as  steadily  lapping  away  all  that  was
left  of  the  hard  beach  which  fringed  the  rugged  downs.
Count  Lewis  chafed  with  impatience  as  it  became  each
moment  more  evident  that  there  would  be  no  beach  left
for  cavalry  fighting,  while  in  the  downs  the  manoeuvring
of  horse  was  entirely  impossible.  Meantime,  by  com-
mand of  Vere,  all  those  sandy  hillocks  and  steeps  had
been  thickly  sown  with  musketeers  and  pikemen.  Ar-
quebus-men and  carabineers  were  planted  in  every  holr
low,  while  on  the  highest  and  most  advantageous  eleva-
tion two  pieces  of  cannon  had  been  placed  by  the  express
direction  of  Maurice.  It  seemed  obvious  that  the  battle
would,  after  all,  be  transferred  to  the  downs.  Not  long
before  the  action  began,  a  private  of  the  enemy's  cavalry
was  taken,  apparently  with  his  own  consent,  in  a  very
trifling  preliminary  skirmish.  He  bragged  loudly  of  the
immense  force  of  the  archduke,  of  the  great  victory
already  gained  over  Ernest,  with  the  utter  annihilation
of  his  forces,  and  of  the  impending  destruction  of  the
whole  States'  army.  Strange  to  say,  this  was  the  first
intimation  received  by  Count  Lewis  of  that  grave  dis-

1600.

CAPTURE  OP  A  PRISONER.

31

aster/^  although  it  had  been  for  some  hours  known  to
Maurice.  The  prisoner  was  at  once  gagged,  that  he
might  spread  his  disheartening  news  no  further,  but  as
he  persisted  by  signs  and  gestures  in  attempting  to  con-
vey the  information  which  he  had  evidently  been  sent
forward  to  impart,  he  was  shot  by  command  of  the  stad-
holder,  and  so  told  no  further  tales.^^

The  enemy  had  now  come  very  close,  and  it  was  the
desire  of  Count  Lewis  that  a  couple  of  companies  of
horse,  in  accordance  with  the  commands  of  Maurice,
should  charge  the  cavalry  in  front,  and  that  after  a  brief
skirmish  they  should  retreat  as  if  panic-stricken  belli nd
the  advance  column,  thus  decoying  the  Spanish  vanguard
in  hot  pursuit  towards  the  battery  upon  the  edge  of  the
downs.^*  The  cannon  were  then  suddenly  to  open  upon
them,  and  during  the  confusion  sure  to  be  created  in
their  ranks,  the  musketeers,  ambushed  among  the  hol-
lows, were  to  attack  them  in  flank,  while  the  cavalry  in
one  mass  should  then  make  a  concentrated  charge  in
front.  It  seemed  certain  that  the  eflect  of  this  move-
ment would  be  to  hurl  the  whole  of  the  enemy's  advance,
horse  and  foot,  back  upon  his  battalia,  and  thus  to  break
up  his  army  in  irretrievable  rout.  The  plan  was  a  sen-
sible one,  but  it  was  not  ingeniously  executed.  Before
the  handful  of  cavalry  had  time  to  make  the  proposed
feint  the  cannoniers,  being  unduly  excited,  and  by
express  command  of  Sir  Francis  Vere,  fired  a  volley  into
the  advancing  columns  of  the  archduke.^^  This  precipi-
tated the  action  ;  almost  in  an  instant  changed  its  whole
character,  and  defeated  the  original  plan  of  the  repub-
lican leader.  The  enemy's  cavalry  broke  at  the  first
discharge  from  the  battery,  and  wheeled  in  considerable
disorder,  but  without  panic,  quite  into  and  across  the
downs.  The  whole  army  of  the  archduke,  which  had
already  been  veering  in  the  same  direction,  as  it  ad-
vanced, both  because  the  tide  was  so  steadily  devouring
the  even  surface  of  the  sands,  and  because  the  ])Osition  of
a  large  portion  of  the  States'  forces  among  the  hillocks
exposed  him  to  an  attack  in  flank,  was  now  rapidly  trans-
ferred to  the  downs. It  was  necessary  for  that  portion  of

'*  Letters  of  I^wls  Gunther  cited  at  Auth.  Stakken.  Compare  Vao  Wyn  op
end  of  the  clmpter.  Wagenaiir,  ix.  37-47.

"  H.  Wyt^  in  Bor,  IV.  Byvoeg,  v. i»  See  note  on  Vere.  w  Ibid.

32

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

Maurice's  army  which  still  stood  on  what  remained  of  the
beach  to  follow  this  movement.  A  rapid  change  of  front
was  then  undertaken,  and — thanks  to  the  careful  system
of  wheeling,  marching,  and  counter-marching  in  which
the  army  had  been  educated  by  William  Lewis  and
Maurice — was  executed  with  less  confusion  than  might
have  been  expected.

But  very  few  companies  of  infantry  now  remained
on  the  strip  of  beach  still  bare  of  the  waves,  and  in  the
immediate  vicinity  of  the  artillery  planted  high  and  dry
beyond  their  reach.

The  scene  was  transformed  as  if  by  magic,  and  the
battle  was  now  to  be  fought  out  in  those  shifting,  uneven
hills  and  hollows,  where  every  soldier  stood  mid-leg  deep
in  the  dry  and  burning  sand.  Fortunately  for  the  States'
army,  the  wind  was  in  its  back,  blowing  both  sand  and
smoke  into  the  faces  of  its  antagonists,  while  the  already
westering  sun  glared  fiercely  in  their  eyes.  Maurice  had
skilfully  made  use  of  the  great  advantage  which  accident
had  given  him  that  day,  and  his  very  refusal  to  advance
and  to  bring  on  a  premature  struggle  thus  stood  him  in
stead  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Lewis  Gunther  was  now
ordered,  with  Marcellus  Bax  and  six  squadrons  of  horse,
to  take  position  within  the  belt  of  pasture-land  on
the  right  of  the  downs.  When  he  arrived  there  the
van  of  the  archduke's  infantry  had  already  charged  the
States'  advance  under  Vere,  while  just  behind  and  on  the
side  of  the  musketeers  and  pikemen  a  large  portion  of
the  enemy's  cavalry  was  standing  stock  still  on  the
green.  Without  waiting  for  instructions,  Lewis  ordered
a  charge.  It  was  brilliantly  successful.  Unheeding  a
warm  salutation  in  flank  from  the  musketeers  as  they
rode  by  them,  and  notwithstanding  that  they  were
obliged  to  take  several  ditches  as  they  charged,  they
routed  the  enemy's  cavalry  at  the  first  onset,  and  drove
them  into  panic  stricken  flight.  Some  fled  for  protection
quite  to  the  rear  of  their  infantry,  others  were  hotly
pursued  across  the  meadows  till  they  took  refuge  under
the  walls  of  Nieuport.  The  very  success  of  the  attack
was  nearly  fatal  however  to  Count  Lewis ;  for,  unable  to
restrain  the  ardour  of  his  troopers  in  the  chase,  he  found
himself  cut  off  from  the  army  with  only  ten  horsemen
to  support  him,  and  completely  enveloped  by  the  enemy.

1600. SUCCESSFUL  ATTACK  OF  COUNT  LEWIS.

33

Fortunately  Prince  Maurice  had  foreseen  the  danger,  and
had  ordered  all  the  cavalry  to  the  meadows  so  soon  as
the  charge  was  made.  Captain  Kloet,  with  a  fresh
company  of  mounted  carabineers,  marked  the  little  sqnad
of  States'  cavalry  careering  about  in  the  midst  of  the
Catholics,  recognized  their  leader  by  the  orange-plumes
on  his  casque,  and  dashed  forward  to  the  rescue.  Lewis
again  found  himself  at  the  head  of  his  cavalry,  but
was  obliged  to  wait  a  long  time  for  the  return  of  the
stragglers.

While  this  brilliant  diversion  had  been  enacting  as  it
were  on  the  fringe  of  the  battle,  its  real  bustle  and  busi-
ness had  been  going  on  in  the  downs.  Just  as  Lewis
made  his  charge  in  the  pastures,  the  infantry  of  the
archduke  and  the  advance-guard  of  the  re})ublicans  met
in  deadly  shock.  More  than  an  hour  long  they  contended
with  varying  success.  Musketeers,  pikemen,  arquebus-
men,  swordmen,  charged,  sabred,  or  shot  each  other
from  the  various  hollows  or  heights  of  vantage,  plunging
knee  deep  in  the  sand,  torn  and  impeded  by  the  prickly
broom  plant  which  grew  profusely  over  the  whole  sur-
face, and  fighting  breast  to  breast  and  hand  to  hand  in
a  vast  series  of  individual  encounters.  Thrice  were  the
Spaniards  repulsed  in  what  for  a  moment  seemed  abso-
lute rout,  thrice  they  rallied  and  drove  their  assailants
at  push  of  pike  far  beyond  their  original  position ;  and
again  the  conquered  republicans  recovered  their  energy
and  smote  their  adversaries  as  if  the  contest  were  just
begun.  The  tide  of  battle  ebbed  and  flowed  like  the
waves  of  the  sea,  but  it  would  be  mere  pedantry  to  afl'ect
any  technical  explanation  of  its  various  changes.  It
was  a  hot  struggle  of  twenty  thousand  men,  pent  up  in
a  narrow  space,  where  the  veiy  nature  of  the  ground
had  made  artistic  evolutions  nearly  impracticable. The

16  "Car  k  laison  de  la  situation  du  aux  mains  que Tadvant-garde  en  la

pays,  la  science  et  dcxterlte  en  laquclle  bataille." — Ernest Casimir  to  William

nous  prosumions  d'exceder  no^tre  enemy  I^wis,  20  July,  1600.  Groen  v.  Priiusterer,

(qui  cstoit  lu  prompte  et  agile  motion  de  Archives,  IL  36.

nos  bataillons)  nous  fu>«t  entieroment  "Car  s'estant  les  deux  armees  fort
rcndue  iufructueuse." — Vere,  La  Bataille  furieusemeiit  attuquees  il  y  a  este  com-
de  Nicuport.  biittu  plus  de  deux  heures  main  a  ni«ln
"  Aussi  est  il  impossible  d'observer  et  pcslc-mesle  doubteusoment  de  la
aucun  ordro,  f^inon  pur  troupjx's,  vu  que  vlctoire,"  &c.  kc—  Letter  of  the  States-
la  bataille  s'cst  doime'e  aux  dunes  oii  il  General  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  3  July,  1600.
faict  si  illegal  iiue  tons  ont  ete  pel  et  (Hague  Archives  MS.)
mesle,  I'aniere-gaide  ast  tste  aussito&t

VOL.  IV.  D

34

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII,

advance,  the  battalia,  even  the  rearguard  on  both  sides
were  mixed  together  pell-mell,  and  the  downs  were
soon  covered  at  every  step  with  the  dead  and  dying —
Briton,  Hollander,  Spaniard,  Italian,  Frisian,  French-
man, Walloon,  fighting  and  falling  together,  and  hotly
contesting  every  inch  of  those  barren  sands.

It  seemed,  said  one  who  fought  there,  as  if  the  last
day  of  the  world  had  come.

Political  and  religious  hatred,  pride  of  race,  remem-
brance of  a  half-century  of  wrongs,  hope,  fury,  and
despair ;  these  were  the  real  elements  contending  with
each  other  that  summer's  day.  It  was  a  mere  trial  of
ferocity  and  endurance,  not  more  scientific  than  a  fight
between  packs  of  wolves  and  of  bloodhounds.

No  doubt  the  brunt  of  the  conflict  fell  upon  Vere
with  his  Englishmen  and  Frisians,  for  this  advance-
guard  made  up  nearly  one-half  of  the  States'  army
actually  engaged.  And  most  nobly,  indefatigably,  did
the  hardy  veteran  discharge  his  duty.  Having  per-
sonally superintended  almost  all  the  arrangements  in
the  morning,  he  fought  all  day  in  the  front,  doing  the
work  both  of  a  field -marshal  and  a  corporal.  He  was
twice  wounded,  shot  each  time  through  the  same  leg,
yet  still  fought  on  as  if  it  were  some  one  else's  blood
and  not  his  own  that  was  flowing  from  "  those  four
holes  in  his  flesh.  "^^  He  complained  that  he  was  not
sufficiently  seconded,  and  that  the  reserves  were  not
brought  up  rapidly  enough  to  his  support.  He  was
manifestly  unjust,  for  although  it  could  not  be  doubted
that  the  English  and  the  Frisians  did  their  best,  it  was
equally  certain  that  every  part  of  the  army  was  as
staunch  as  the  vanguard.  It  may  be  safely  asserted
that  it  would  not  have  benefited  the  cause  of  the  States,
had  every  man  been  thrown  into  the  fight  at  one  and
the  same  moment.

During  this  "  bloody  bit,"  as  Vere  called  it,  between
the  infantry  on  both  sides,  the  little  battery  of  two  field
pieces  planted  on  the  highest  hillock  of  the  downs  had
been  very  eff'ective.  Meantime,  while  the  desperate  and
decisive  struggle  had  been  going  on,  Lewis  Gunther,  in
the  meadow,  had  again  rallied  all  the  cavalry,  which,  at
the  first  stage  of  the  action,  had  been  dispersed  in

i7  His  own  expreseion.

1600  REPULSE  OF  THE  STATES'  CAVALRY.

35

pursuit  of  the  enemy's  horse.  Gathering  them  together
in  a  mass,  he  besought  Prince  IMaurice  to  order  him  to
charge.  The  stadholder  bade  him  pause  yet  a  little
longer.  The  aspect  of  the  infantry  fight  was  not  yet,  in
his  opinion,  sufficiently  favourable.  Again  and  again
Lewis  sent  fresh  entreaties,  and  at  last  received  the
desired  permission.  Placing  three  picked  squadrons  in
front,  the  young  general  made  a  furious  assault  upon  the
Catholic  cavalry,  which  had  again  rallied  and  was  drawn
up  very  close  to  the  musketeers.  Fortune  was  not  so
kind  to  him  as  at  the  earlier  stage  of  the  combat.  I'he
charge  was  received  with  dauntless  front  by  the  Spanish
and  Italian  horse,  while  at  the  same  moment  the  infanti  y
poured  a  severe  fire  into  their  assailants.  The  ad-
vancing squadrons  faltered,  wheeled  back  upon  the  com-
panies following  them,  and  the  whole  mass  of  the
republican  cavalry  broke  into  wild  and  disorderly  retreat.
At  tVie  same  moment  the  archduke,  observing  his  advan-
tage, threw  in  his  last  reserves  of  infantry,  and  again
there  was  a  desperate  charge  upon  Vere's  wearied
troops,  as  decisive  as  the  counter  charge  of  Lewis's
cavalry  had  been  unsuccessful.  The  English  and
Frisians,  sorely  tried  during  those  hours  of  fighting
with  superior  numbers  in  the  intolerable  heat,  broke  at
last  and  turned  their  backs  upon  the  foe.  Some  of  them
fled  panic-stricken  quite  across  the  downs  and  threw
themselves  into  the  sea,  but  the  mass  retreated  in  a
comparatively  orderly  manner,  being  driven  from  one
down  to  another,  and  seeking  a  last  refuge  behind  the
battery  placed  on  the  high-water  line  of  the  beach.  In
the  confusion  and  panic  Sir  Francis  Vere  went  down  at
last.  His  horse,  killed  by  a  stray  shot,  fell  with  and
upon  him,  and  the  heroic  Englishman  would  then  and
there  have  finished  his  career — for  he  would  hardly
have  found  quarter  from  the  Spaniards — had  not  Sir
Kobert  Drury,  riding  by  in  the  tumult,  observed  him  as
he  lay  almost  exhausted  in  the  sand.  By  his  exertion
and  that  of  his  servant  Higham,  Yere  was  rescued  from
his  perilous  situation,  placed  on  the  crupper  of  Sir
Kobert's  horse,  and  so  borne  off  the  field.

The  current  of  the  retreating  and  pursuing  hosts
swept  by  the  spot  where  Maui  ice  sat  on  hoiseback,
watching  and  directing  the  battle. His  bravest  and

D  2

36

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHI.

best  general,  the  veteran  Vere,  had  fallen ;  his  corsin
Lewis  was  now  as  utterly  overthrown  as  his  brother
Ernest  had  been  bnt  a  few  hours  before  at  the  fatal
bridge  of  Lefnngen ;  the  whole  army,  the  only  army,
of  the  States  was  defeated,  broken,  panic-struck;  the
Spanish  shouts  of  victory  rang  on  every  side.  Plainly
the  day  was  lost,  and  with  it  the  republic.  In  the
blackest  hour  that  the  Nether  land  commonwealth  had
ever  known,  the  fortitude  of  the  stadholder  did  not
desert  him.  Immovable  as  a  rock  in  the  torrent  he
stemmed  the  flight  of  his  troops.  Three  squadrons  of
reserved  cavalry,  Balen's  own,  Vere's  own,  and  Cecil's,
were  all  that  was  left  him,  and  at  the  head  of  these  he
essayed  an  advance.  He  seemed  the  only  man  on  the
field  not  fi  ightened ;  and  menacing,  conjuring,  per-
suading the  fugitives  for  the  love  of  fatherland,  of
himself  and  his  house,  of  their  own  honour,  not  to
disgrace  and  destroy  themselves  for  ever ;  urging  that
all  was  not  yet  lost,  and  beseeching  them  at  least  to
take  despair  for  their  master,  and  rather  to  die  like  men
on  the  field  than  to  drown  like  dogs  in  the  sea,  he
succeeded  in  rallying  a  portion  of  those  nearest  him.^^
The  enemy  paused  in  their  mad  pursuit,  impressed  even
more  than  were  the  States'  troops  by  the  dauntless
bearing  of  the  prince.  It  was  one  of  those  supreme
moments  in  battle  and  in  history  which  are  sometimes
permitted  to  influence  the  course  of  events  during  a
long  future.  The  archduke  and  his  generals  committed
a  grave  error  in  pausing  for  an  instant  in  their  career.
Very  soon  it  was  too  late  to  repair  the  fault,  for  the
quick  and  correct  eye  of  the  stadholder  saw  the  point  to
which  the  whole  battle  was  tending,  and  he  threw  his
handful  of  reserved  cavalry,  with  such  of  the  fugi-
tives as  had  rallied,  straight  towards  the  battery  on  the
beach.

It  was  arranged  that  Balen  should  charge  on  the
strand,  Horace  Vere  through  the  upper  downs,  and
Cecil  along  the  margin  of  the  beach.  Balen  rode  slowly
through  the  heavy  sand,  keeping  his  horses  well  in

18  "Je  vous  asseure  que  la  victoire  lerie  fuiojJ.juBqu'k  son  Ex'^  Jequel  estoit

courut  alors  grand  hazard,  car  au  meme  lors  la  seule  occasion  de  la  victoire,"  &c»

instant  toute  nostre  infanterie  se  resteroit  — Letters  of  Lewis  Gunther.
aussi  le  grand  pas  . .  .  nostre  caval-

1600.  THE  TURNING  POINT  OF  THE  BATTLE.

37

wind,  and  at  the  moment  he  touched  the  beach,  rushed
with  fury  upon  tlie  enemy's  foot  near  the  battery.  The
moment  was  most  opportune,  for  the  last  shot  had  been
fired  from  the  guns,  and  they  had  just  been  nearly
abandoned  in  despair.  The  onset  of  Balen  was  success-
ful :  the  Spanish  infantry,  thus  suddenly  attacked,  were
broken,  and  many  were  killed  and  taken.  CecM  and
Yere  were  equally  fortunate,  so  that  the  retreating
English  and  Frisians  began  to  hold  firm  again.  It  was
the  very  crisis  of  the  battle,  which  up  to  that  instant
seemed  wholly  lost  by  the  republic,  so  universal  was
the  overthrow  and  the  flight.  Some  hundred  and  fifty
Frisian  pikemen  now  rallied  from  their  sullen  retreat,
and  drove  the  enemy  off  one  hillock  or  dune.

Foiled  in  their  attempt  to  intercept  the  backward
movement  of  the  States'  army  and  to  seize  this  vital
point  and  the  artilleiy  with  it,  the  Spaniards  hesitated
and  were  somewhat  discouraged.  Some  Zeeland  sailors,
who  had  stuck  like  wax  to  those  demi-cannon  during
the  whole  conflict,  now  promptly  obeyed  orders  to  open
yet  once  more  upon  the  victorious  foe.  At  the  first
volley  the  Spaniards  were  staggered,  and  the  sailors
with  a  lively  shout  of  "  Ian — fall  on,"  inspired  the
defeated  army  with  a  portion  of  their  own  cheerfulness.^*
Others  vehemently  shouted  victory  without  any  reason
whatever.  At  that  instant  Maurice  ordered  a  last
charge  by  those  few  cavalry  squadrons,  while  the  enemy
was  faltering  under  the  play  of  the  artillery.  Jt  was  a
forlorn  hope,  yet  such  was  the  shifting  fortune  of  that
memorable  day  that  the  charge  decided  the  battle.  The
whole  line  of  the  enemy  broke,  the  conquered  became
the  victors,  the  fugitives  quickly  rallying  and  shouting
victory  almost  before  they  had  turned  their  faces  to  the
foe,  became  in  their  turn  the  pursuers.'^  The  Catholic
army  could  no  longer  be  brought  to  a  stand,  but  fled

19  "Bonder  fundament  nochtans." —
Duyck,  ii.  676.

20  "  Et  la  victoire  estait  comma
nostre  et  son  canon  en  nostre  pouvoir
mais  nostre  cavaillerie  estant  charfjee  de
celle  de  dudit  ennemy  8e  vint  sauver  en
notre  arrie re-garde  ce  que  voyant  je  le  fis
retourntT  et  chargerent  Tennemy  assez
prochcment. De  quoy  s'apercevant  re-

tourna  pour  la  eeconde  fois  sur  eulx  quy
derechef  se  vindrent  saulver  en  notre
arrierc-garde  et  ronipre  la  plus  graudo
partie  d'icelle  qui  causa  que  I'infanterie
perdit  courage  de  passer  oultre  et  pour-
suivre  ce  quelle  avait  gagn^  avec  tant
d'honneur  et  lors  cummenya  la  retraitc,'*
&;c.— MS.  Letter  of  Albert  before  cited.

38

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHI.

wildly  in  every  direction,  and  were  shot  and  stabbed
by  the  republicans  as  they  fled.  The  Admiral  of
Arragon  fell  with  his  hackney  in  this  last  charge.  Un-
woTinded,  but  struggling  to  extricate  himself  from  his
horse  that  had  been  killed,  he  was  quickly  surrounded
by  the  enemy.

Two  Spaniards,  Mendo  and  Villalobos  by  name,  who
had  recently  deserted  to  the  States,  came  up  at  the
moment  and  recognised  the  fallen  admiral.  They  had
reason  to  recognise  him,  for  both  had  been  in  his
service,  and  one  of  them,  who  was  once  in  immediate
household  attendance  upon  him,  bore  the  mark  of  a
wound  which  he  had  received  from  his  insolent  master.
"  Admiial,  look  at  this,"  cried  Villalobos,  pointing  to
the  scar  on  his  face.^^  The  admiral  looked  and  knew
his  old  servants,  and  gave  his  scarf  to  the  one  and  the
hanger  of  his  sword-belt  to  the  other,  as  tokens  that  he
was  their  prisoner.  Thus  his  life  was  saved  for  heavy
ransom,  of  which  those  who  had  actually  captured  him
would  receive  a  very  trifling  portion.  The  great
prisoner  was  carried  to  the  rear,  where  he  immediately
asked  for  food  and  drink,  and  fell  to  with  an  appetite,
while  the  pursuit  and  slaughter  went  on  in  all  direc-
tions.^^

The  archduke,  too,  whose  personal  conduct  throughout
the  day  was  admirable,  had  been  slightly  wounded  by  a
halberd  stroke  on  the  ear.  This  was  at  an  earlier  stage
of  the  action,  and  he  had  subsequently  mounted  another
horse,  exchanging  his  splendid  armour  for  a  plain  black
harness,  over  which  he  wore  a  shabby  scarf.  In  the
confusion  of  the  rout  he  was  hard  beset.  "  Surrender,
scoundrel !  "  cried  a  Walloon  pikeman,  seizing  his  horse
by  the  bridle.  But  a  certain  Flemish  Captain  Kabbeljaw
recognising  his  sovereign  and  rushing  to  his  rescue,
slew  his  assailant  and  four  others  with  his  own  hand.^^
He  was  at  last  himself  killed,  but  Albert  escaped,  and,
accompanied  by  the  Duke  of  Aumale,  who  was  also
slightly  wounded,  by  Colonel  La  Bourlotte,  and  half  a
dozen  troopers,  rode  for  his  life  in  the  direction  of
Bruges.  VVhen  they  reached  the  fatal  bridge  of  Lef-
fingen,  over  which  the  archduke  had  marched  so  trium-

21  De  la  Pi8e. Meteren.  22  Meteren,  23  ibid.

1600.

FLIGHT  OF  THE  ARCHDUKE.

39

phantly  but  a  few  hours  before  to  annihilate  Count
Ernest's  division,  he  was  nearly  taken  prisoner.  A  few
soldiers,  collected  from  the  scattered  garrisons,  had
occupied  the  position,  but  knowing  nothing  of  the  result
of  the  action  in  the  downs,  took  to  their  heels  and  fled
as  the  little  party  of  cavaliers  advanced.  Had  the
commander  at  Ostend  or  the  States-General  promptly
sent  out  a  company  or  two  so  soon  as  the  news  of  the
victory  reached  them,  to  seize  this  vital  point  the  doom
of  the  archduke  would  have  been  sealed,  ^'othing  then
could  have  saved  him  from  capture.  Fortunately
escaping  this  danger,  he  now  pushed  on,  and  never
pulled  bridle  till  he  reached  Bruges.  Thence  without
pausing  he  was  conveyed  to  Ghent,  where  he  presented
himself  to  the  Infanta.  He  was  not  accompanied  by  the
captive  Maurice  of  Nassau,  and  the  curiosity  of  the
princess  to  know  how  that  warrior  would  demean  him-
self as  a  prisoner  was  not  destined  on  this  occasion  to  be
gratified.

Isabella  bore  the  disappointment  and  the  bitter  intel-
ligence of  the  defeat  with  a  stoicism  worthy  of  her
departed  father.  She  had  already  had  intimations  that
the  day  was  going  against  her  army,  and  had  succes-
sively received  tidings  that  her  husband  was  killed,  was
dangerously  wounded,  was  a  pi  isoner ;  and  she  was  now
almost  relieved  to  receive  him,  utterly  defeated,  but
still  safe  and  sound.

Meantime  the  mad  chase  continued  along  the  beach
and  througli  the  downs.  Never  was  a  rout  more  abso-
lute than  that  of  Albert's  army.  Never  had  so  brilliant
a  victory  been  achieved  by  Hollander  or  Spaniard
upon  that  great  battle-ground  of  Europe — the  Nether-
lands.2*

*♦  *  Prometo  a  V.  S.*,*"  wrote  the  arch-  grande  valeur,  c'ost  avec  beaucoup  de
duke  to  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  **  que  no  peine  qu'on  I'a  determine  a  se  retirer  du
creo  me  pudiera  consular  j;iraa>  desta  dis-  champ  de  bataille." — I^etter  of  Fray  Inigo
gracia  interesando  tiinto  el  servicio  de  su  de  Brizuelas  before  cited.
Magestad  en  tUa  si  no  me  huviera  cost;\-  "  S.  A.  en  personne  corabattant  comme
do  sangre  pero  asi  como  ha  side  poca  la  ung  lion."— Kxtraits  des  proce»-verbaux
derramara  de  muy  buena  gana  toda  como  des  Etats-Generaux  de  1600.  (MS.  Ar-
lo  hare  y  la  tengo  ofre<.ido  al  servicio  de  chives  of  Belgium.)
8U  Magestiid  siempre  que  sea  menester."  '*  A  quoy  respondant,  le  greflBer  de-
— Letter  to  Duke  of  Lorraine,  Bibl,  Nat.  claira  que  les  hLstats  estoyent  marriz  de
Madrid,  kindly  communicated  to  me  by  ladite  disgrace  mais  tres  wntens  etjoyeux
Mons.  Gachard.  de  connaitre  la  vaillandise  de  leur  prince

"  L'archiduc  a  montre  oe  Jour-la  one  meames  qu'il  n'avoit  espargne  &a  par-

40

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

Maurice,  to  whom  tlie  chief  credit  of  the  victory  was
"unquestionably  due,  had  been  firm  and  impassive  during
the  various  aspects  of  the  battle,  never  losing  his  self-
command  when  affairs  seemed  blackest.  So  soon,  how-
ever as  the  triumph,  after  wavering  so  long,  was  decided
in  his  favour — the  veteran  legions  of  Spain  and  Italy,
the  picked  troops  of  Christendom,  all  flying  at  last
before  his  troops — the  stadholder  was  fairly  melted.
Dismounting  from  his  horse,  he  threw  himself  on  his
knees  in  the  sand,  and  with  streaming  eyes  and  uplifted
hands,  exclaimed, 0  God,  what  are  we  human  creatures
to  whom  Thou  hast  brought  such  honour,  and  to  whom
Thou  hast  vouchsafed  such  a  victory  !  "

The  slaughter  went  on  until  nightfall,  but  the  wearied
conquerors  were  then  obliged  to  desist  from  the  pursuit.
Three  thousand  Spaniards  were  slain  and  about  six
hundred  prisoners  were  taken.^*^  The  loss  of  the  States'
army,  including  the  affair  in  the  morning  at  Leffingen,
was  about  two  thousand  killed.  Maurice  was  censured
for  not  following  up  his  victory  more  closely,  but  the
criticism  seems  unjust.  The  night  which  followed  the
warm  summer's  day  was  singularly  black  and  cloudy,
the  army  was  exhausted,  the  distance  for  the  enemy  to
traverse  before  they  found  themselves  safe  within  their
own  territory  was  not  great.  In  such  circumstances  the
stadholder  might  well  deem  himself  sufficiently  trium-
phant to  have  plucked  a  splendid  victory  out  of  the  very
jaws  of  death.  All  the  artillery  of  the  archduke — seven
pieces  besides  the  two  captured  from  Ernest  in  the
morning — one  hundred  and  twenty  standards,  and  a

Sonne  propre  et  de  mettre  sa  vie  en  Over-winninglie  ghegheven  he'bt.*' — Let-
hazard  pour  la  deffence  de  son  pays  et  terof  ^Jytenbogaert,inP.Flemmg,Belege'
peuple,"  &c. — Ibid.  ringe  van  Oostende. S'  Gravenhage,

The  defeat  was  mainly  attributed  in  1621.
the  obedient  provinces  to  the  bad  conduct 26  Count  Ernest  puts  the  loss  of  the

of  the  lately  mutinous  cavalry.  ("Causee  archduke  at  4000  killed  on  the  battle-

principalement par les chevaucheurs  field  and  1000  on  the  retreat.  Maurice

amutinez,"  said  Nicholas  Dubois,  deputy  estimates  his  enemy's  loss  at  more  than

of  Tournay,  to  his  constituents  in  a  letter  5000. Groen  v.  Prinsterer,  Archives  II.

from  Brussels  of  4th  July. MS.  Archives  s.  ii.  15,  18,  19. Duyck  says  3000  were

of Belgium.) Consolation was also  killed  on  the  field— as  ascertained  by

sought  in  the  ridiculous  assumption  that  counting  —  besides those who  were

the  loss  of  the  States'  army  was  greater  drowned  and  slain  in  the  retreat.  The

than  that  of  the  archduke's  forces.  archduke's confessor says that  1000

25  «'  0  Godt,  wie  zijn  wy  menschen  Spaniards  were  killed.  (MS.  letter  before

dien  ghy  sulcken  eere  ghedaen  ende  cited.)

1600, THE  ADMIRAL  OF  ARRAGON  A  PRISONER.

41

long  list  of  distinguished  prisoners,  including  the
Admiral  Zapena  and  many  other  officers  of  note,  were
the  trophies  of  the  conqueror.  Maurice  pas.sed  the  night
on  the  battle-field;  the  admiral  supping  with  him  in
his  tent.  Next  morning  he  went  to  Ostend,  where  a
great  thanksgiving  was  held,  Uytenbogart  preaching  an
eloquent  sermon  on  the  116th  Psalm.  Afterwards  there
was  a  dinner  at  the  house  of  the  States-General,  in
honour  of  the  stadholder,  to  which  the  Admiral  of
Arragon  was  likewise  bidden.  That  arrogant  but  dis-
comfited personage  was  obliged  to  listen  to  many  a
rough  martial  joke  at  his  disaster  as  they  sat  at  table,
but  he  bore  the  brunt  of  the  encounter  with  much
fortitude.

"  Monsieur  the  Admiral  of  Arragon,"  said  the  stad-
holder in  French,  is  more  fortunate  than  many  of  his
army.  He  has  been  desiring  these  four  years  to  see
Holland.  Kow  he  will  make  his  entrance  there  with-
out stiiking  a  blow."  ^  The  gibe  was  perhaps  deficient
in  delicacy  towards  a  fallen  foe,  but  a  man  who  had
passed  a  whole  winter  in  murdering  his  prisoners  in
cold  blood  might  be  satisfied  if  he  were  stung  only
by  a  sharp  sarcasm  or  two,  when  he  had  himself  be-
come a  captive.

Others  asked  him  demurely  what  he  thought  of  these
awkward  a})prentices  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  who  were
good  enough  at  fighting  behind  dykes  and  ram])arts  of
cities,  but  who  never  ventured  to  face  a  Spanish  army
in  the  open  field.  ]Mendt)za  sustained  himself  with
equanimity  however,  and  found  plenty  of  answers.  He
discussed  the  battle  with  coolness,  blamed  the  archduke
for  throwing  the  whole  of  his  force  prematuiely  into  the
contest,  and  applauded  the  prudence  of  Maurice  in
keeping  his  reserves  in  hand.  He  ascribed  a  great  share
of  the  result  to  the  States'  artillery,  which  had  been
well  placed  upon  wooden  platforms  and  well  served,
while  the  archduke's  cannon,  sinking  in  the  sands,  had
been  of  comparatively  little  use.  Especially  he  ex-
pressed a  warm  admiration  for  the  heroism  of  Maurice

^"Monsieur  I'Adniirante  d'Arrapcon  lande.  maintenant  il  y  cntrcra  sans  coup

a  este  plus  heureux  que  p;is  un  do  son  ferir."— I>cttcr  of  Uytenbogart,  who  sat

arniee,  car  il  a  fort  desire  plus  de  quatre  at  the  table  and  heard  Maurice  make  the

anuees  continuellemcnt  do  voir  la  Hoi-  remajk.

42

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

in  sending  away  his  ships,  and  in  thus  leaving  himself
and  his  soldiers  no  alternative  but  death  or  triumph.

While  they  still  sat  at  table  many  of  the  standards
taken  from  the  enemy  were  brought  in  and  exhibited ;
the  stadholder  and  others  amusing  themselves  with
reading  the  inscriptions  and  devices  emblazoned  upon
them.

And  thus  on  the  2nd  July,  1600,  the  army  of  the
States-General,  led  by  Maurice  of  Nassau,  had  utterly
defeated  Albert  of  Austria.^^  Strange  to  say — on  another
2nd  July,  three  centuries  and  two  years  before,  a
former  Albert  of  Austria  had  overthrown  the  Emperor
Adolphus  of  Nassau,  who  had  then  lost  both  crown
and  life  in  the  memorable  battle  of  Worms.  The  im-
perial shade  of  Maurice's  ancestor  had  been  signally
appeased.

In  Ostend,  as  may  well  be  imagined,  ineffable  joy
had  succeeded  to  the  horrible  gloom  in  which  the  day
had  been  passed,  ever  since  the  tidings  had  been  received
of  Ernest's  overthrow.

Those  very  cavalry  men,  who  had  remained  all  day
cowering  behind  the  walls  of  the  city,  seeing  by  the
clouds  of  dust  which  marked  the  track  of  the  fugitives
that  the  battle  had  been  won  by  the  comrades  whom
they  had  so  basely  deserted  in  the  morning,  had  been
eager  enough  to  join  in  the  pursuit.  It  was  with  diffi-
culty that  the  States,  who  had  been  unable  to  drive  them
out  of  the  town  while  the  fight  was  impending  or  going
on,  could  keep  enough  of  them  within  the  walls  to  guard
the  city  against  possible  accident,  now  that  the  work  was
done.  Even  had  they  taken  the  field  a  few  hours
earlier,  without  participating  in  the  action,  or  risking
their  own  lives,  they  might  have  secured  the  pass  of
Leffingen,  and  made  the  capture  of  the  archduke  or  his
destruction  inevitable.

The  city,  which  had  seemed  deserted,  swarmed  with
the  garrison  and  with  the  lately  trembling  burghers,  for
it  seemed  to  all  as  if  they  had  been  born  again.  Even

28  «'  Enfin  I'affaire  vint  aulx  mains  et  to  his  cousin  Lewis  William  his  victory

fut  combattu  bien  furieusement  de  deux  in  the  most  important  battle  that  had

costes  I'espace  de  deux  heures. Enfin  been  fought  for  half  a  century.  Not

Dieu  par  sa  grace  voulut  que  la  victoire  even  General  Ulysses  Grant  could  be

demeura  de  mon  coste." Such  were  the  more  modest  in  the  hour  of  immense

simple  words  in  w  hich  Maurice  announced  tri  umph.

1600.  REJOICINGS  AND  CONGRATULATIONS.

43

the  soldiers  on  the  battle-field  had  embraced  each  other
like  comrades  who  had  met  in  another  world.  "  Blessed
be  His  holy  name,"  said  the  stadholder's  chaplain,  "for
His  right  hand  has  led  ns  into  hell  and  brought  us  forth
again.  I  know  not,"  he  continued,  if  I  am  awake  or
if  I  dream,  when  I  think  how  God  has  in  one  moment
raised  us  from  the  dead."^^

Lewis  Gunther,  whose  services  had  been  so  conspi-
cuous, was  well  rewarded.  "  I  hope,"  said  that  general,
writing  to  his  brother  Lewis  William,  "that  this  day's
work  will  not  have  been  useless  to  me,  both  for  what  I
have  learned  in  it  and  for  another  thing.  His  Excel-
lency has  done  me  the  honour  to  give  me  the  admiral  for
my  prisoner."  And  equally  cliaracteristic  was  the  reply
of  the  religious  and  thrifty  stadholder  of  Friesland.

"I  thank  God,"  he  said,  for  his  singular  grace  in
that  He  has  been  pleased  to  make  use  of  your  person  as
the  instrument  of  so  renowned  and  signal  a  victory,  for
which,  as  you  have  derived  therefrom  not  mediocre
praise,  and  acquired  a  great  reputation,  it  should  be  now
your  duty  to  humble  yourself  before  God,  and  to  acknow-
ledge that  it  is  He  alone  who  has  thus  honoured  you.
.  .  .  .  You  should  reverence  Him  the  more,  that
while  others  are  admonished  of  their  duty  by  misfor-
tunes and  miseries,  the  good  God  invites  you  to  His  love

by  benefits  and  honours  I  am  very  glad,

too,  that  his  Excellency  has  given  you  the  admiral  for
your  prisoner,  both  because  of  the  benefit  to  you,  and
because  it  is  a  mark  of  your  merit  on  that  day.  Know-
ing the  state  of  our  afiairs,  you  will  now  be  able  to  free
your  patrimony  from  encumbrances,  when  otherwise  you
would  have  been  in  danger  of  remaining  embariassed
and  in  the  power  of  others.  It  will  therefore  be  a  per-
petual honour  to  you  that  you,  the  youngest  of  us  all,
have  been  able  by  your  merits  to  do  more  to  raise  up  our
house  out  of  its  difficulties  than  your  predecessors  or  I
myself  have  been  able  to  do."^^

The  beautiful  white  horse  which  the  aichduke  had
ridden  during  the  battle  fell  into  the  hands  of  Lewis
Gunther,  and  was  presented  by  him  to  Prince  Maurice,

29  Letter  of  Uytenbogart.  Archives,  II.  23.)

*>  I^wis  Gunther  to  Lewis  William,  3i  Lewis  William  to  Lewis  Guniher,
20  July,  16U0. (Groen  v.  Printterer July  1600. Ibid.  42, 43.

44

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVHI.

who  had  expressed  great  admiration  of  the  charger.  It
was  a  Spanish  horse,  for  which  the  archduke  had  lately
paid  eleven  hundred  crowns.^^  A  white  hackney  of  the
Infanta  had  also  been  taken,  and  became  the  property  of
Count  Ernest.^^

The  news  of  the  great  battle  spread  with  unexampled
rapidity,  not  only  through  the  Netherlands  but  to  neigh-
bouring countries.  On  the  night  of  the  7th  July  (n.  s.)
five  days  after  the  event,  Envoy  Caron,  in  England,
received  intimations  of  the  favourable  news  from  the
French  ambassador,  who  had  received  a  letter  from
the  Governor  of  Calais.  Next  morning,  very  early,  he
waited  on  Sir  Robert  Cecil  at  Greenwich,  and  was
admitted  to  his  chamber,  although  the  secretary  was  not
yet  out  of  bed.  He,  too,  had  heard  of  the  battle,  but
Eichardot  had  informed  the  English  ambassador  in
Paris  that  the  victory  had  been  gained,  not  by  the  stad-
holder,  but  by  the  archduke.  While  they  were  talking,
a  despatch-bearer  arrived  with  letters  from  Vere  to
Cecil,  and  from  the  States- General  to  Caron,  dated  on  the
3rd  July.  There  could  no  longer  be  any  doubt  on  the
subject,  and  the  envoy  of  the  republic  had  now  full
details  of  the  glorious  triumph  which  the  Spanish  agent
in  Paris  had  endeavoured  for  a  time  to  distort  into  a
defeat.

W  liile  the  two  were  conversing,  the  queen,  who  had
heard  of  Caron's  presence  in  the  palace,  sent  down  for
the  latest  intelligence.  Cecil  made  notes  of  the  most
important  points  in  the  despatches  to  be  forthwith  con-
veyed to  her  Majesty.  The  queen,  not  satisfied  however,
sent  for  Caron  himself.  That  diplomatist,  who  had  just
ridden  down  from  London  in  foul  weather,  was  accord-
ingly obliged  to  present  himself — booted  and  spurred
and  splashed  with  mud  from  head  to  foot — before  her
Majesty.^*  Elizabeth  received  him  with  such  extraor-
dinary manifestations  of  delight  at  the  tidings  that  he
was  absolutely  amazed,  and  she  insisted  upon  his  read-
ing the  whole  of  the  letter  just  received  from  Olden-
Barneveld,  her  Majesty  listening  very  patiently  as  he
translated  it  out  of  Dutch  into  French. She  then  ex-

32  Letters  last  cited.  33  ibid. gants  vuil  en  beslyckt  door  't  quade

34  "  Hoewel  ick  daertoe  niet  gereet  was,  weder,"  &c.  &c.— Caron  to  the  States-
want  ick  daer  te  peerde  was  gekomen General,  in  De venter,  ii.  290-293.

1600.

THE  INVASION  OF  FLANDERS  A  MISTAKE.

45

pressed  unbounded  admiration  of  the  States-General  and
of  Prince  Maurice.  "The  sagacious  administration  of
the  States*  government  is  so  full  of  good  order  and
policy,"  she  said,  as  to  far  surpass  in  its  wisdom  the
intelligence  of  all  kings  and  potentates."  We  kings,"
she  said,  "  understand  nothing  of  such  affairs  in  compari-
son, but  require,  all  of  us,  to  go  to  school  to  the  States-
General."  She  continued  to  speak  in  terms  of  warm
approbation  of  the  secrecy  and  discretion  with  w^hich  the
invasion  of  Flanders  had  been  conducted,  and  protested
that  she  thanked  God  on  both  knees  for  vouchsafing  such
a  splendid  victory  to  the  United  Provinces.^

Yet  after  all,  her  Majesty,  as  mankind  in  general,  both
wise  and  simple,  are  apt  to  do,  had  judged  only  according
to  the  result,  and  the  immediate  result.  Ko  doubt  John
of  Barneveld  was  second  to  no  living  statesman  in
breadth  of  view  and  adroitness  of  handling,  yet  the
invasion  of  Flanders,  which  was  purely  his  work,  was
unquestionably  a  grave  mistake,  and  might  easily  have
proved  a  fatal  one.  That  the  deadly  peril  was  escaped
was  due,  not  to  his  prudence,  but  to  the  heroism  of
Maurice,  the  gallantry  of  Yere,  Count  Lewis  Gunther,
and  the  forces  under  them,  and  the  noble  self-devotion
of  Finest.  And  even,  despite  the  exertions  of  these
brave  men,  it  seems  certain  that  victory  would  have  been
impossible  had  the  archduke  possessed  that  ti  ue  appre-
ciation of  a  situation  which  marks  the  consummate
general.  Surely  the  Lord  seemed  to  Inive  delivered  the
enemy  into  his  hands  that  morning. Maurice  was  shut

35  Caroii  to  States-General,  Id  De venter,  the  envoy  expressed  himself  in  similar

ii.  29(1-29:}.  terms,  Siiying  that  his  own  despatches

The  French  king,  too,  was  much  pleased  having  accidentiilly  been  delayed,  the

with  the  risult  of  the  battle. So  soon  as  king  almost  gave  him  a  fever  by  conceal-

he  rect-ived  the  news  he  sent  for  the  ing  the  good  m-ws,  and  telling  him  of  tho

States'  envoy,  and  amused  himself  by  reverses  sustaintd  by  the  States'  tr»)ops

reading  him  only  the  earlier  despatches,  at  the  beginning  of  the  day,  and  adding

which  related  the  success  of  the  archduke  that  his  Majesiy,  although  making  a  great

at  the  furts  and  at  Leffiugen. Having  eft'ort,  had  found  it  veiy  diflicult  to  dls-

sufiicicntly  ti';ist^d  him,  he  then  showed  senible  his  delight,  "  car  (ous  ne  prennent

him  the  wlioU'  account. The  satisfaction  cette  victolre  de  meme  biais,  aucuns

manifested  by  Henry  naturally  much  I'e.stimant  prejudiciable,  en  tant  qu'ello

scandalized  the  high  Catholic  party,  with  pent  ayder  a  fonder  solidement  la  re-

whom  the  king  was  most  desirous  of  ligiou,  les  autrt  s  s'en  rejouyssent  comme

beinp  on  gocMi  terms. — Aerssens  to  SUites-  d'un  eschecq  et  alToiblissement  a  I'Es-

General,  13  July,  i600. (Archives  of  the  pagne,"  &c.— MS.  before  cited,  20  July,

Hague  MS.)  1600.

And  in  his  confidential  letters  to  Valck

46

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXVIII.

in  between  Nieuport  on  one  side  and  the  archduke's
army  on  the  other,  planted  as  it  was  on  the  only  road  of
retreat.  Had  Albert  entrenched  himself,  Maurice  must
either  have  attacked  at  great  disadvantage  or  attempted
embarkation  in  the  face  of  his  enemy.  To  stay  indefi-
nitely where  he  was  would  have  proved  an  impossibility,
and  amid  the  confusion  necessary  to  the  shipping  of  his
army,  how  could  he  have  protected  himself  by  six  demi-
cannon  placed  on  the  sea-beach  ?

That  Maurice  was  able  to  extricate  himself  from  the
horrible  dilemma  in  which  he  had  been  placed,  through
no  fault  of  his  own,  and  to  convert  imminent  disaster
into  magnificent  victory,  will  always  redound  to  his
reputation  as  a  great  military  chief.  And  this  was  all
the  fruit  of  the  expedition,  planned,  as  Elizabeth  thought,
with  so  much  secrecy  and  discretion.  Three  days  after
the  battle  the  stadholder  came  again  before  Nieuport,  only
to  find  the  garrison  strengthened  meantime  by  La  Bour-
lotte  to  three  thousand  men.  A  rainy  week  succeeded,
and  Maurice  then  announced  to  the  States-General  the
necessity  of  abandoning  an  enterprise,  a  successful  issue
to  which  was  in  his  opinion  impossible.  The  States-
General,  grown  more  modest  in  military  matters,  testified
their  willingness  to  be  governed  by  his  better  judgment,
and  left  Ostend  for  the  Hague  on  the  ISth  July.
Maurice,  after  a  little  skirmishing  with  some  of  the  forts
around  that  city,  in  one  of  which  the  archduke's  general
La  Bourlotte  was  killed,  decided  to  close  the  campaign,
and  he  returned  with  his  whole  army  on  the  last  day  of
July  into  Holland.^^

36  The  chief  authorities  used  by  me  for
the  campaign  of  Nieuport  are  the  follow-
ing:—Bentivoglio,  P.  III.  lib.  vi.  pp.  496-
504 ;  Carnero,  lib.  xiv.  cap.  vii.  472-481  ;
Meteren,  437-442  ;  Reyd,  B.  xvii.  427-
433;  Bor,  IV.  603-700;  De  la  Pise,  6H1-
687  ;  Sir  Francis  Vere,  La  Bataille  de
Nieupoort,  apud  Bor,  Byvoegsels  van
Authent.  Stukken,  iv. ;  Wagenaar,  ix.
76-88 ;  Van  Wyn  op  Wagen,  ix.  37-47  ;
Grotius,  Histor.  ix.  552-573;  Van  der
Kemp,  ii.  62-82  and  251-286;  Philippe
Fleming;  Belegeringe  van  Oostende
('s  Gravenhage,  1621),  pp.  27-52;  Henry
Haestens,  La  Nouvelle  Troie,  ou  Memor-
able Histoire  du  Siege  d'Ostende.  Ley  den,

Elzevir,  1615,  pp.  1-69 ;  Groen  v.  Prin-
sterer,  Archives,  &c.  II.  14-43  (2nd
series) ;  MS.  Letters  of  States-General,  of
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  of  Envoy  Noel  de
Caron,  in  the  Royal  Archives  of  the
Hague;  De  Thou,  t.  xiii.  lib.  124,  pp.
467-481;  Le  Petit,  'Grande  Chronique,'
vol.  ii.  pp.  762-766  ;  Camden's  '  Elizabeth,'
590-593  ;  MS.  Letters  of  Buzanval  to
Villeroy  in  the  Royal  Library  of  the
Hague,  especially  4  July,  20  July,  5
August,  17  August,  1600 ;  Antony  Duyck,
Journaal,  ii.  661-681.

No  one  censured  more  sharply  the
policy  of  the  expedition,  nor  reduced  iti
results  more  pitilessly,  than  did  the

1600.  RESULTS  OF  THE  WHOLE  EXPEDITION.  47

The  expedition  was  an  absolute  failure,  but  the  stad-
holder  had  gained  a  great  victory.  The  effect  produced
at  home  and  abroad  by  this  triumpliant  measuring  of
the  republican  forces,  horse,  foot,  and  artillery,  in  a
pitched  battle,  and  on  so  conspicuous  an  arena,  with  the
picked  veterans  of  Spain  and  Italy,  was  perhaps  worth
the  cost,  but  no  other  benefit  was  derived  from  the
invasion  of  Flanders.

The  most  healthy  moral  to  be  drawn  from  this  brief
but  memorable  campaign  is  that  the  wisest  statesmen  are
prone  to  blunder  in  affairs  of  war,  success  in  which  seems
to  require  a  special  education  and  a  distinct  genius.
Alternation  between  hope  and  despair,  between  culpable
audacity  and  exaggerated  prudence,  afe  but  too  apt  to
mark  the  warlike  counsels  of  politicians  who  have  not
been  bred  soldiers.  This,  at  least,  had  been  eminently
the  case  with  Barn^veld  and  his  colleagues  of  the  IStates-
General.

French  envoy :  *'  Croyez  que  ces  Mess".,"
said  he,  "  avoient  bicn  Joue  leur  etut  a  un
coup  de  de  et  que  le  P.  Maurice  avoit
fait  paroistre  sa  prudence  avant  de  partir
de  ce  lieu  en  remonstrant  aux  Etata  lea
accidents  de  cette  entreprise  et  sa  suite
infaillible  et  forcee  d'une  tuitaille.  II  a
bicn  montre  sa  resolution  quand  il  a  fallu
boire  la  lie  de  cos  indigcstes  consciLs."
And  again  :— "  La  suite  de  cette  bataille
a  ete  plus  de&ivantageuse  aux  victorieux
qu'aux  vaincus  qui  se  sont  rolevez  avec
plus  de  vigueur  que  lea  autres  n'ont
poursuivl  leur  pointe." — And  once  more :
— "C'cst  un  eclair  qui  a  passe  qui  a  plus
donne  de  lustre  aux  vainquturs  que  fait
du  mal  aux  vaincus.  On  diroit  qu'elle
auroit  tout  epulse  la  vertu  et  vigueur  de
I'un  et  fait  surgir  la  force  de  I'autre.
Mais  k  la  verite  les  foiidenieiis  de  cette
eutreprlse  de  Flandres  etoient  si  mal

jettes  comme  vous  avez  peu  voir  par
celles  que  jo  vous  ai  escrils  lorsqu'elle
fait  resolue  qu'il  se  faut  peu  estonner  si
ils  ont  eu  si  peu  d'issue  et  de  suite.

 car  on  fait  ici  t^eaucoup  plus

de  plain tes  du  peu  de  suite  de  cette
victoire  qu'il  ne  m'en  escritde  Bruxelles,"
&c.  iS:c.  An  to  the  numbers  engaged  in
the  battle,  Duyek  puts  the  archduke's
force  at  10,000  foot  and  1600  horse,
including  the  detachment  of  2000  or  3000
under  Velasco,  which  was  not  in  the
action.  More  than  a  third  of  those  en-
gjiged  were  killeti.  Maurice  had  at  first
198  companies  of  foot  and  25  compjiniei
of  horse,  but,  with  deduction  of  the  de-
tachments to  strengthen  the  forts,  his
force  was  not  more  than  10,000  foot  and
1200  horse  (including  the  troops  of  Erncit
destroyed  before  nine  o'clock).

48

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

NOTE  ON  VEEE.

I  HAVE  endeavoured  in  the  account  of  this  campaign  to  reconcile
discrepancies  where  it  was  possible  to  reconcile  them.  I  have
studied  carefully  the  narratives  given  by  the  most  prominent  actors
in  the  battle ;  but,  in  regard  to  Sir  Francis  Vere,  I  am  bound  to  say
that,  after  much  consideration,  I  have  rejected  his  statements
wherever  they  conflict  with  those  of  Maurice,  Lewis  Gunther,  and
Ernest  of  Nassau.

The  mutual  contradictions  are  often  so  direct  aa  to  make  it  impos-
sible for  both  parties  to  be  partly  riglit  and  partly  incorrect,  and,  as
all  were  prominently  engaged  in  the  transactions,  and  all  men  of
courage  and  distinction,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  at  times  to  decide
between  tliem.

•  The  narrative  of  Vere  was  a  publication ;  a  party  pamphlet  in
an  age  of  pamphleteering.  It  is  marked  throughout  by  spleen,  in-
ordinate personal  and  national  self-esteem,  undisguised  hostility  to
the  Nassaus  and  the  Hollanders,  and  wounded  pride  of  opinion.
It  shows  occasional  looseness  or  recklessness  of  assertion  which
would  have  been  almost  impossible,  had  Maurice  or  his  cousins  been
likely  to  engage  in  a  controversy  concerning  the  Nieuport  expedition.

It  is  not  agreeable  to  come  to  this  conclusion  in  regard  to  a  man
of  unquestionable  talent,  high  character,  and  experience,  who  fought
on  that  memorable  day  with  splendid  valour.  I  shall  therefore  give
a  few  extracts  from  his  narrative,  and  place  them  here  and  there  in
juxtaposition  with  passages  from  the  correspondence  of  the  Nassaus,
in  order  to  justify  my  opinion.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  latter  documents  have  re-
mained in  the  family  archives  of  Orange-Nassau  for  two  centuries
and  a  half,  never  having  seen  the  light  till  they  were  edited  by  the
learned  and  accomplished  Groen  van  Prinsterer.  Tlie  controversy
with  Vere  is  therefore  an  all  unconscious  one  on  the  part  of  those
buried  warriors,  but  the  examination  of  such  samples  of  conflicting
testimony  may  give  the  general  reader  a  conception  of  the  difliculty
besetting  the  path  of  modern  historians  wishing  to  be  conscientious
and  disinterested.

Sir  Francis  says,  without  giving  any  dates,  that  the  army  reached
and  crossed  the  haven  of  Nieuport  on  a  certain  morning,  that  they
encamped  and  occupied  tivo  or  three  days  in  arranging  their  quarters,
and  in  entrenching  themselves  in  the  most  advantageous  places  for
their  own  safety,  and  for  the  siege  of  the  city ;  making  a  bridge  oj
stone  at  the  narrowest  part  of  the  harbour,  to  enable  their  troops  and
trains  to  cross  and  recross  whenever  necessary.

Now  if  there  be  two  dates  perfectly  established  in  history  by  the
concurrent  t<^stimony  of  despatches,  resolutions  of  Assembly,  con-
temporary chronicles, — Dutch,  Spanist,  Italian,  or  French,— and

KOTE  OX  VERE.

49

private  letters  of  the  chief  personages  engaged  in  the  transactions,  it
is  that  Maurice's  army  came  before  Nieuport  on  tlie  morning  of  the
1st  July,  crossing  the  harbour  in  the  course  of  the  same  day,  and
that  the  battle  was  fought  on  the  2ud  July.^

What  could  Vere  mean  then  by  talking  of  two  or  three  days  in
the  trenches  and  of  a  stone  bridge  ?  Yet  these  are  his  words  : — Le
matin  de  bonne  heure  nous  marchames  vers  Nieuport  et  a  la  basse
maree  traversames  la  riviere  du  coste  ou  elle  faist  le  Havre  de  la
ville,  et  ainsy  nous  campasraes  mettans  deux  ou  trois  jours  a  faire  les
quartiers,  et  a  nous  retrancher  es  lieux  les  plus  advantageux  pour
notre  seurete,  et  le  siege  de  ville,  faiscms  un  poiit  de  pierre  au  plus
estroict  du  Havre  pour  y  faire  passer  et  repasser  en  tout  temps  nostra
chariage  et  nos  troupes,  quand  besoin  en  seroit.'*

On  the  intelligence  received  in  the  night  of  the  arrival  of  the
enemy  at  Oudenburg,  Vere  advised  instantly  crossing  the  harbour
and  marching  against  him  with  the  whole  army.  Maurice  decided,
however,  to  send  the  detachment  under  Ernest,  to  the  great  dissatis-
faction of  Sir  Francis.

Vere  then  states  that  the  army  was  ordered  to  cross  the  haven  at
dawn  of  day,  at  the  first  low  tide.

*'  Le  reste  de  I'armee  fut  commande  de  marcher  vers  la  riviere  afin
de  la  passer  h  I'aube  du  jour  a  la  premiere  basse  maree."

Now  it  is  certain  that  on  the  2nd  of  July  it  was  exactly  hifjh  tide
at  3  A.M.  or  about  dawn  of  day.

Count  liCwis  Gunther  st^ltes  expressly  in  his  letter,  often  cited,
that  he  was  first  to  cross  with  the  cavalry,  when  the  tide  was  out,  at
about  8  A.M.  It  is  also  manifest  by  every  account  given  of  the  battle,
that  it  was  high  tide  again  at  or  after  3  p.m.,  which  com})elled  the
transferring  of  the  fight  from  the  submerged  beach  to  the  downs  and
to  the  ])asturcs  beyond.

In  these  statements  Vere  is  so  manifestly  contradicted,  not  only
by  the  accounts  given  by  all  contemporaries  and  eye-witnesses,  but
by  other  passages  in  his  own  narrative,  that  one  has  in  general  a  right
to  prefer  the  assertions  of  other  actors  in  the  battle  to  his,  if  there  is
no  other  way  of  arriving  at  a  clear  understanding  of  the  afiair.

Thus  he  says  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  action  he  wished  the
advanced  cavalry  under  Lewis  Gunther  to  approach  the  enemy,  and
that  "tlie  young  lord"  refused.  The  account  of  the  young  lord  is
the  exact  reverse  of  these  assertions.  I  shall  here  give  in  juxta-
position the  text  of  Vere  and  of  the  })rivate  letter  of  Lewis,  observing
that  this  letter — not  written  for  publication,  and  never  published,  so
far  as  I  know,  till  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  it  was  written
for  the  private  information  of  the  writer's  brother — gives  by  far  the

1  Je  partoy  droit  devers  Nieuport  et
m'y  campoys  le  premier  de  ce  mots  de
juillet  et  dt'vant  bien  estre  encores  canipe
je  fus  adverti  la  meme  nuit  que  IVnnemi
s'estoit  approche  d'Ostende,*'  &c.&c.,  says
Maurice  of  Nassau.  Letter  to  Count
Lewis  William,  written  2nd  July,  even-
ing after  the  battle.  Qroen  van  Prin-
Bterer.  Archives,  11.  16,  17.  Compare
VOL.  IV.

Bor,  Moteren,  Fleming,  Haesttms,  De
Thou,  Bentivoglio,  original  documents  in
Van  der  Kemp,  vol.  ii.  Archives  de  la
Maison  d'Orange-Nassiiu,  pam'm,  et  mult,
al.  "  Et  le  tems  ne  voulant  permettre
que  le  pont  qui  estolt  commence  a  faire
outre  le  dit  havre  s'ascbtn-a,"  &c.  Letter
of  Lewis  Gunther  to  Lewis  William.

E

50

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

most  intelligible  and  succinct  account  of  the  battle  to  be  met  with
anywhere.

Lewis  Gunther.

"J'en  avoy  envoie  advertir  son  Ex*=e
que  je  m'estoy  mis  la  en  ordre  et  que  je
n'eu  bougeroy  sans  son  expres  com-
mandement,  le  supliant  de  haster  le
passage  de  I'infanterie  ....  Monsieur
Veer  vint  aussitot  me  trouver  et  jugeoit
que  je  m'estois  trop  avance,  trouvant
necessaire  qu'on  se  resteroit  plus  pres  de
I'infanterie  dont  I'avant  garde  estoit
presques  passee.  Je  craignois  fort  que
ceste  retraicte  ne  nous  eust  cause  de  con-
fusion, I'ennemy  nous  estant  si  proche,
et  qu'elle  eut  refroidi  le  courage  de  nos
soldats.  Ce  que  me  fit  le  prier  qu'il
avan9ust  plustot  I'infanterie  jusques  der-
riere  ma  troupe  :  ce  que  pourroit  apporter
de  confort  aux  nostres  et  de  I'etonnement
a  I'ennemy  duquel  I'infanterie  n  estoit
encor  arrive  ny  mise  en  ordre.  Je  de-
meuray  encor  a  la  mesme  place  une
heure,  y  aiant  este  desja  bien  davantage
jusques  a  ce  que  son  Ex«e.  y  vint  en  per-
sonne.  II  fut  conclu  que  je  me  retirerois
et  me  planterois  h  I'aisle  gauche  des
Anglois  ....  II  fust  resolu  alors
que  j'envoieroy  deux  companies  seule-
ment  bien  pres  d  eux  pour  leur  faire
prendre  I'envie  de  se  resoudre  a  les  venir
charger  et  que  les  notres  s'enfuians  der-
riere  ma  troupe  domiassent  occasion  aux
ennemis  de  les  poursuivre  la  furie  des-
quels  nostre  cannon  appaisant  un  peu  et
nos  musquetiers  qui  estoient  bien  avances
dans  les  dunes,  a  demy  en  embuscade,
les  frottant  de  coste,  et  apres  nostre  ca-
vallerie  les  chargeant  en  face,  indubit-
ablement  nous  eut  des  alors  este  ouvert
le  chemin  de  la  victoire,  car  on  les  eut
facilement  renversez  dans  leur  infanterie,
la  confusion  de  laquelle  n'eut  S9eu  estre
que  bien  grande :  mais  la  haste  de  nos
canoniers  nous  fit  perdre  les  effects  de
cette  belle  resolution,  a  cause  que  la
voiant  si  belle  donnerent  feu  devant  qu'on
y  eut  envoie  ces  compagnise  et  avec  la
premiere  volee  les  mit-on  en  desordre
qu'ils  quittarent  le  Strang  et  se  cacharent
aux  dunes  pour  n'estre  offensez  du  canon."

Thus  Lewis  says  most  distinctly  that
he  approved  of  the  "  beautiful  resolution"
as  he  calls  it,  which  he  rejected,  accord-
ing to  Vere,  from  jealousy,  and  that  the
cause  why  it  was  not  carried  out  was  the
premature  cannonade,  which  Vere  says
that  he  himself  ordered !

Vere.

"  L'ennemy  approchant  de  plus  en
plus,  et  la  cavaillerie  sortant  a  la  teste
de  leurs  troupes  en  une  distance  compe-
tente  pour  pouvoir  estre  attiree  au  com-
bat, j'avoy  grand  envie  de  voir  la  cavail-
lerie de  I'advantguarde  approcher  d'elle
et  avec  quelques  gens  d'eslite  et  bien
montes  battre  leurs  carbins  et  escarmou-
cheurs  jusques  a  dessus  leur  gros,  en  in-
tention que  s'ils  eussent  este  recharges
de  retirer  en  haste  avec  la  dite  avant-
guarde  de  chevaulx  entre  la  mer  et
I'avantgarde  d'infanterie,  et  apres  les
avoir  tirez  arriere  de  leur  infanterie  soubs
la  mercy  de  nostre  canon,  avoir  engage
le  reste  de  nos  chevaux  a  charger  et
suivre  resolument.  Mais  le  jeusne  sei-
gneur ne  pent  trouver  bon  ced  ad  vis,
n'ayant  pas  eu  agreable  le  pouvoir  que
le  comte  Maurice  m'avoit  donne  par
dessus  sa  charge  et  partant  ne  Vexecuta
pas  choississant  plustot  comme  I'ennemy
advancoit  tout  bcllement  de  reenter  de
mesme  vers  I'infanterie.  Ce  mien  conseil
ne  parvenant  a  autre  meilleur  effect  et
desja  la  cavaillerie  estant  venue  soubs  la
portee  de  nostre  canon,  je  proposai  qu'il
le  falloit  descharger,  qui  fut  trouve  bon
et  si  bien  effectue  qu'il  faisoit  escarier
leurs  troupes  et  fuir  en  desordre  pour  se
sauver  dedans  les  dunes,  chose  qui  sans
doute,  nous  eust  donne  la  victoire  si
notre  cavaillerie  eust  ete  preste  et  volon-
taire  a  se  prevaloir  de  roccasion  offerte."

These  extracts  will  be  sufficient  to  show  the  impossibility  of  maMng
both  accounts  agree  in  regard  to  many  momentous  points.

When  did  two  accounts  of  the  same  battle  ever  resemble  each
other  ?  It  must  be  confessed  that  modesty  was  not  a  leading  cha-
racteristic of  Sir  Francis  Vere. According  to  the  whole  tenor  of  his

NOTE  ON  VERB.

51

narrative  he  was  himself  not  only  a  great  part,  but  the  whole  of  the
events  he  describes;  the  victory  of  Nieuport  was  entirely  due  to  his
arrajigements,  and  to  the  personal  valour  of  himself  and  of  the  1600
English  soldiers ;  Prince  Maurice  filling  hardly  a  subordinate  part  in
superintendence  of  the  battle,  Count  Lewis  Gunther  being  dismissed
with  a  single  sneer,  and  no  other  name  but  Vere  s  own  and  that  of  his
brother  Horace  being  even  mentioned.  He  admits  that  he  did  nut
participate  in  the  final  and  conclusive  charge,  being  then  disabled,
but  obs(?rves  that  having  satisfied  himself  that  his  directions  would
be  carried  out,  and  that  nothing  else  was  left  but  to  pursue  the
enemy,  he  thought  it  time  to  have  his  wounds  dressed.

"  There  was  no  loss  worth  speaking  of,"  he  says,  "  except  that  Oi
the  English,  600  of  whom  were  killed.  I  should  not  venture  to  attri-
bute," he  observes,  "  the  whole  honour  of  tiie  victory  to  the  poor
English  troop  of  1600  men,  but  I  leave  the  judgment  thereof  to  those
who  can  decide  with  less  suspicion  of  partiality.  I  will  merely  attirm
that  the  English  left  nothing  to  do  for  the  rest  of  the  army  but  to
follow  the  chase,  and  that  one  has  never  before  heard  that  with  so
small  a  number  in  an  indifferent  position,  where  the  only  advantage
was  the  choice  and  the  good  use  which  could  be  made  of  it,  without
the  use  of  spiide  or  other  instrument  of  fortification,  an  army  so  large
and  so  victorious  as  that  of  the  archduke  could  have  been  resisted  in
such  a  contiimed  struggle  and  so  thoroughly  defeated."

Certainly  the  defeat  of  an  army  of  10,000  veterans  in  the  open  field
by  1600  men  is  a  phenomenon  rarely  witnessed,  and  one  nmst  be
forgiven  for  not  accepting  as  gospel  truth  the  account  of  the  leader
of  the  1600,  when  it  ia  directly  contradicted  by  every  other  statement
on  record.

In  Vere's  advanced  guard — nearly  half  the  whole  army — there
were  2600  Englishmen  and  2800  Frisians,  besides  several  s(|uadrons
of  cavalry,  according  to  his  own  statement  in  another  part  of  his
narmtive.

How,  therefore,  the  whole  battle  should  have  been  fought  by  a
mere  portion  of  the  P^nglish  contingent  it  is  dilficult  to  comprehend.

Vere  makes  no  allusion  k)  the  combat  of  Leffingen,  which  was  an
essential  part  of  the  battle ;  to  the  heroic  self-sacrifice  of  Ernest  and
his  division,  by  which  alone  the  rest  of  the  army  were  enabled  to  gain
the  victory ;  nor  has  he  a  word  for  the  rejxiated  charges  of  cavalry  by
which  the  infantry  fight  was  protected.

Lewis  Gunther  on  the  contrary,  whose  account  is  as  modest  as  it  is
clear,  gives  full  credit  to  the  splendid  achievements  of  the  infantry
under  Vere,  but  in  describing  the  cavalry  cx^mbats,  he  mentions  the
loss  in  the  six  cavalry  companies  under  his  immediate  connnand  as
171  killed  and  wounded,  while  Ernest's  loss  has  never  been  placed
at  less  than  1000.

e2

52

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

CHAPTER  XXXIX.

Effects  of  the  Nieuport  campaign  —  The  general  and  the  statesman  —  The  Roman
empire  and  the  Turk  —  Disgraceful  proceedings  of  the  mutinous  soldiers  in
Hungary  —  The  Dunkirk  pirates  —  Siege  of  Ostend  by  the  Archduke  —  Attack  on
Rheinberg  by  Prince  Maurice  —  Siege  and  capitulation  of  Meurs  —  Attempt  on
Bois-le-Duc  —  Concentration  of  the  war  at  Ostend  —  Account  of  the  belligerents  —
Details  of  the  siege  —  Feigned  offer  of  Sir  Francis  Vere  to  capitulate  —  Arrival  of
reinfoi  cements  from  the  States  —  Attack  and  overthrow  of  the  besiegers.

The  Nieuport  campaign  had  exhausted  for  the  time  both
belligerents.  The  victor  had  saved  the  republic  from
impending  annihilation,  but  was  incapable  of  further
efforts  during  the  summer.  The  conquered  cardinal-
archduke,  remaining  essentially  in  the  same  position  as
before,  consoled  himself  with  the  agreeable  fiction  that
the  States,  notwithstanding  their  triumph,  had  in  reality-
suffered  the  most  in  the  great  battle.  Meantime  both
parties  did  their  best  to  repair  damages  and  to  recruit
their  armies.

The  States — or  in  other  words  Barneveld,  who  was
the  States — had  learned  a  lesson.  Time  was  to  show
whether  it  would  be  a  profitable  one,  or  whether  Mau-
rice, who  was  the  preceptor  of  Europe  in  the  art  of  war,
would  continue  to  be  a  docile  pupil  of  the  great  Advo-
cate even  in  military  affairs.  It  is  probable  thjat  the
alienation  between  the  statesman  and  the  general,  which
was  to  widen  as  time  advanced,  may  be  dated  from  the
day  of  Nieuport.

Fables  have  even  been  told  which  indicated  the  popu-
lar belief  in  an  intensity  of  resentment  on  the  part  of
the  prince,  which  certainly  did  not  exist  till  long  after-
wards.

"Ah,  scoundrel ! "  the  stadholder  was  said  to  have  ex-
claimed, giving  the  Advocate  a  box  on  the  ear  as  he
came  to  wish  him  joy  of  his  great  victory,  you  sold
us,  but  God  prevented  your  making  the  transfer."^

History  would  disdain  even  an  allusion  to  such  fig-

1  See  Van  der  Kemp.  ii.  88  and  298,  299.  The  learned  historian  of  course  de-
nounces the  tale  as  a  falsehood.

1600.

THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE  AND  THE  GRAND  TURK.

53

ments — quite  as  disgraceful,  certainly,  to  Maurice  as  to
Barneveld — did  they  not  point  the  moral  and  foreshadow-
some  of  the  vast  but  distant  results  of  events  which  had
already  taken  place,  and  had  they  not  been  so  generally
repeated  that  it  is  a  duty  for  the  lover  of  truth  to  put
his, foot  upon  the  calumny,  even  at  the  risk  for  a  passing
moment  of  reviving  it.

The  condition  of  the  war  in  Flanders  had  established
a  temporary  equilibrium  among  the  western  powers —
France  and  England  discussing,  intriguing,  and  com-
bining in  secret  with  each  other,  against  each  other,  and
in  spite  of  each  other,  in  regard  to  the  great  conflict —
while  Spain  and  the  cardinal-archduke  on  the  one  side,
and  the  republic  on  the  other,  prepared  themselves  for
another  encounter  in  the  blood-stained  ai  ena.

Meantime,  on  the  opposite  verge  of  what  was  called
European  civilization,  the  peipetual  war  between  the
Eoman  Empire  and  the  Grand  Turk  had  for  the  moment
been  bronght  into  a  nearly  similar  equation.  Notwith-
standing the  vast  amount  of  gunpowder  exploded  during
so  many  wearisome  years,  the  problem  of  the  Crescent
and  the  Cross  was  not  much  nearer  a  solution  in  the
East  than  w^as  that  of  mass  and  conventicle  in  the  West.
War  w^as  the  normal  and  natural  condition  of  mankind.
This  fact,  at  least,  seemed  to  have  been  acquired  and
added  to  the  mass  of  human  knowledge.

From  the  prolific  womb  of  Germany  came  forth,  to
swell  impartially  the  Protestant  and  Catholic  hosts,  vast
swarms  of  human  creatures.  Sold  by  their  masters  at  as
high  prices  as  could  be  agreed  upon  beforehand,  and
receiving  for  themselves  five  stivers  a  day,  irregularly
paid,  until  the  carrion-crow  rendered  them  the  last  ser-
vice, they  found  at  times  more  demand  for  their  labour
in  the  great  European  market  than  they  could  fully  sup-
ply. There  were  not  Germans  enough  every  year  for
the  consumption  of  the  Turk,  and  the  pope,  and  the
emperor,  and  the  republic,  and  the  Catholic  king,  and
the  Christian  king,  w^ith  both  ends  of  Europe  ablaze  at
once.  So  it  happened  that  the  Duke  of  Mercoeur  and
other  heroes  of*  the  League,  having  effected  their  recon-
ciliation with  the  Bearnese,  and  for  a  handsome  price
paid  down  on  the  nail  having  acknowledged  him  to  be
their  legitimate  and  Catholic  sovereign,  now  turned  their

54

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

temporary  attention  to  the  Turk.  The  sweepings  of
the  League — Frenchmen,  Walloons,  Germans,  Italians,
Spaniards — were  tossed  into  Hungary,  because  for  a  sea-
son the  war  had  become  languid  in  Flanders.  And  the
warriors  grown  grey  in  the  religious  wars  of  France
astonished  the  pagans  on  the  Danube  by  a  variety  of
crimes  and  cruelties  such  as  Christians  only  could  ima-
gine. Thus,  while  the  forces  of  the  Sultan  were  besieg-
ing Buda,  a  detachment  of  these  ancient  Leaguers  lay  in
Pappa,  a  fortified  town  not  far  from  Kaab,  which  Arch-
duke Maximilian  had  taken  by  storm  two  years  before.
Finding  their  existence  monotonous  and  payments  un-
punctual,  they  rose  upon  the  governor,  Michael  Maroti,
and  then  entered  into  a  treaty  with  the  Turkish  com-
mander outside  the  walls.  Bringing  all  the  principal
citizens  of  the  town,  their  wives  and  children,  and  all
their  moveable  property  into  the  market-place,  they
offered  to  sell  the  lot,  including  the  governor,  for  a
hundred  thousand  rix- dollars.  The  bargain  was  struck,
and  the  Turk,  paying  him  all  his  cash  on  hand  and
giving  hostages  for  the  remainder,  carried  off  six  hun-
.dred  of  the  men  and  women,  promising  soon  to  return,
and  complete  the  transaction.^  Meantime  the  imperial
general,  Schwartzenberg,  came  before  the  place,  urging
the  mutineers  with  promises  of  speedy  payment,  and
with  appeals  to  their  sense  of  shame,  to  abstain  from  the
disgraceful  work.  He  might  as  well  have  preached  to
tlie  wild  swine  swarming  in  the  adjacent  forests.  Siege
thereupon  was  laid  to  the  place.  In  a  sortie  the  brave
Schwartzenberg  was  killed,  but  Colonitz  coming  up  in
force  the  mutineers  were  locked  up  in  the  town  which
they  had  seized,  and  the  Turk  never  came  to  their  relief.
Famine  drove  them  at  last  to  choose  between  surrender
and  a  desperate  attempt  to  cut  their  w^ay  out.  They
took  the  bolder  course,  and  were  all  either  killed  or  cap-
tured. And  now — the  mutineers  having  given  the  Turk
this  lesson  in  Christian  honour  towards  captives — their
comrades  and  the  rest  of  the  imperial  forces  showed
them  the  latest  and  most  approved  Christian  method  of
treating  mutineers.  Several  hundred  of  the  prisoners
were  distributed  among  the  different  nationalities  com-
posing the  army  to  be  dealt  with  at  pleasure.  The

2  Meli-ren  fol.  447.

1600.

PIRACY  OF  VAN  DER  WAECKEN.

55

honest  Gennans  were  the  most  straightforT\^g«  d  of  all
towards  their  portion  of  the  prisoners,  for  they  shot
them  down  at  once,  without  an  instant's  hesitation.
But  the  Lorrainers,  the  remainder  of  the  French  troops,
the  Walloons,  and  especially  the  Hungarians — whose
countrymen  and  women  had  been  sold  into  captivity —
all  vied  with  each  other  in  the  invention  of  cruelties  at
which  the  soul  sickens,  and  which  the  pen  almost  refuses
to  depict.^

These  operations  and  diversions  had  no  sensible  efiect
upon  the  progress  of  the  war,  which  crept  on  with  the
same  monotonous  and  sluggish  cruelty  as  ever;  but
the  incidents  narrated  paint  the  course  of  civilization
more  vividly  than  the  detailed  accounts  of  siege  and
battle,  mining  and  countermining,  assaults  and  ambus-
cades can  do,  of  which  the  histoi  y  books  are  full.  The
leaguers  of  Buda  and  of  other  cities  and  fortresses  in
Hungary  went  their  course,  and  it  was  destined  to  re-
main for  a  still  longer  season  doubtful  whether  Cross  or
Crescent  should  ultimately  wave  over  the  whole  terri-
tory of  Eastern  Europe,  and  whether  the  vigorous  Mos-
lem, believing  in  himself,  his  mission,  his  discipline,  and
his  resources,  should  ultimately  absorb  what  was  left  of
the  ancient  Koman  Empire.

Meantime  such  of  the  Walloons,  Lorrainers,  Germans,
and  Frenchmen  as  had  grown  wearied  of  the  fighting  on
the  Danube  and  the  Theiss  might  have  recourse  for
variety  to  the  perpetual  carnage  on  the  Meuse,  the
lihine,  and  the  Scheld.  If  there  was  not  bloodshed
enough  for  all,  it  was  surely  not  the  fault  of  Mahomet,
nor  Clement,  nor  Philip.

During  the  remainder  of  the  year  not  much  was  done
in  the  held  by  the  forces  of  the  stadholder  or  the
cardinal,  but  there  was  immense  damage  done  to  the
Dutch  shipping  by  the  famous  privateersman.  Van  der
Waecken,  with  his  squadron  of  twelve  or  fourteen
armed  cruisers.  In  vain  had  the  States  exerted  themselves
to  destroy  that  robbers'  cave,  Dunkirk.  Shiploads  of
granite  had  been  brought  from  Norway,  and  stone  fleets
had  been  sunk  in  the  channel,  but  the  insatiable  quick-
sands had  swallowed  them  as  fast  as  they  could  be  de-
posited, the  tide  rolled  as  freely  as  before,  and  the  bold

3  Metorcn,  ubi  sup.

56

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXXIX.

pirates  sailed  forth  as  gaily  as  ever  to  prey  upon  the  de-
fenceless trading  vessels  and  herring  -  smacks  of  the
States.  For  it  was  only  upon  non-combatants  that
Admiral  Van  der  Waecken  made  war,  and  the  fisher-
men especially,  who  mainly  belonged  to  the  Memnonite
religion,  with  its  doctrines  of  non-resistance^  —  not  a
very  comfortable  practice  in  that  sanguinary  age — were
his  constant  victims.  And  his  cruelties  might  have  al-
most served  as  a  model  to  the  Christian  warriors  on  the
Turkish  frontier.  After  each  vessel  had  been  rifled  of
everything  worth  possessing,  and  then  scuttled,  the  ad-
miral would  order  the  crews  to  be  thrown  overboard  at
once,  or,  if  he  chanced  to  be  in  a  merry  mood,  would
cause  them  to  be  fastened  to  the  cabin  floor,  or  nailed
crosswise  to  the  deck,  and  would  then  sail  away,  leav-
ing ship  and  sailors  to  sink  at  leisure.^  The  States  gave
chase  as  well  as  they  could  to  the  miscreant — a  Dutch-
man born,  and  with  a  crew  mainly  composed  of  renegade
Netherlanders  and  other  outcasts,  preying  for  base  lucre
on  their  defenceless  countrymen — and  their  cruisers  were
occasionally  fortunate  enough  to  capture  and  bring  in
one  of  the  pirate  ships.  In  such  cases,  short  shrift  was
granted,  and  the  buccaneers  were  hanged  without  mercy,
thirty-eight  having  been  executed  in  one  morning  at  Kot-
terdam.  The  admiral  with  most  of  his  vessels  escaped,
however,  to  the  coast  of  Spain,  where  his  crews  during
the  autumn  mainly  contrived  to  desert,  and  where  he
himself  died  in  the  winter,  whether  of  malady,  remorse,
or  disappointment  at  not  being  rewarded  by  a  high
position  in  the  Sv;mnish  navy,  has  not  been  satisfactorily
decided.^

The  war  was  in  its  old  age.  The  leaf  of  a  new  cen-
tury had  been  turned,  and  men  in  middle  life  had
never  known  what  the  word  Peace  meant.  Perhaps  they
could  hardly  imagine  such  a  condition.  This  is  easily
said,  but  it  is  diflicult  really  to  picture  to  ourselves  the
moral  constitution  of  a  race  of  mankind  which  had  been
born  and  had  grown  up,  marrying  and  giving  in  mar-
riage, dying  and  burying  their  dead,  and  so  passing  on

*  "  Ergo  imbelle  hommum  genus  et  est  fol.  445.
plerisque  piscatorum  ea  religio  quae  nefas s  Meteren,  Grotius,  uhi  sup.
ducit  vim  armis  propellere,"  &c.  &c. — ^  "interiit  morbo  an  quia  Hispania

Grotii  Hist.  ix.  575. Compare  Meteren,  fastiditus,"  says  Grotius,  ubi  swj).

1600.

OSTEND.

67

from  the  cradle  towards  the  grave,  accepting  the  eternal
clang  of  arms,  and  the  constant  participation  by  them-
selves and  those  nearest  to  them  in  the  dangers,  priva-
tions, and  horrors  of  siege  and  battle-field  as  the  common-
places of  life.  At  least,  those  Netherlanders  knew  what
fighting  foi  independence  of  a  foreign  tyrant  meant.
They  must  have  hated  Spain  very  thoroughly,  and  be-
lieved in  the  right  of  man  to  worship  God  according  to
the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  and  to  govern  himself
upon  his  own  soil,  however  meagre,  very  earnestly,  or
they  would  hardly  have  spent  their  blood  and  treasure,
year  after  year,  with  such  mercantile  regularity  when  it
was  always  in  their  power  to  make  peace  by  giving  up
the  object  for  which  they  had  been  fighting.

Yet  the  war,  although  in  its  old  age,  was  not  fallen
into  decrepitude.  The  most  considerable  and  the  most
sanguinary  pitched  battle  of  what  then  were  modem
times  had  just  been  fought,  and  the  combatants  were
preparing  themselves  for  a  fiesh  wrestle,  as  if  the  con-
flict had  only  begun.  And  now — although  the  great
leaguers  of  Harlem,  Leyden,  and  Antwerp,  as  well  as
the  more  recent  masterpieces  of  Prince  Maurice  in
Gelderland  and  Friesland,  were  still  fresh  in  men's
memory — there  was  to  be  a  siege,  which  for  endurance,
pertinacity,  valour,  and  bloodshed  on  both  sides,  had
not  yet  been  fore-shadowed,  far  less  equalled,  upon  the
fatal  Netherland  soil.

That  place  of  fashionable  resort,  where  the  fine  folk
of  Europe  now  bathe,  and  flirt,  and  prattle  politics  or
scandal  so  cheerfully  during  the  summer  solstice — cool
and  comfortable  Ostend — was  throughout  the  sixteenth
century  as  obscure  a  fishing  village  as  could  be  foimd  in
Christendom.  Nothing  had  ever  happened  there,  nobody
had  ever  lived  there,  and  it  was  not  until  a  much  later
period  that  the  famous  oyster,  now  identified  with  its
name,  had  been  brought  to  its  bay  to  be  educated.  It
was  known  for  nothing  except  for  claiming  to  have
invented  the  pickling  of  herrings,  which  was  not  at  all
the  fact.^  Towards  the  latter  part  of  the  century,  how-
ever, the  poor  little  open  village  had  been  fortified  to
such  purpose  as  to  enable  it  to  beat  off  the  gi'eat  Alex-

7  La  Nouvelle  Troie,  ou  Iklomorable  Histoire  du  Siege  d'Osteiide,  par  Henry
Haestens. Leyde,  1615,  pp.  79,  80.

58

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXXIX.

ander  Farnese,  when  lie  had  made  an  impromptn  effort
to  seize  it  in  the  year  1583,  after  his  successful  enter-
prise against  Dunkirk  and  Nieuport,  and  subsequent
preparations  had  fortunately  been  made  against  any
further  attempt.  For  in  the  opening  period  of  the  new
century  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  were  to  come
to  those  yellow  sands,  not  for  a  midsummer  holida}^  but
to  join  hands  in  one  of  the  most  enduring  struggles  that
history  had  yet  recorded,  and  on  which  the  attention  of
Europe  was  for  a  long  time  to  be  steadily  fixed.

Ostend — East-end — was  the  only  possession  of  the
republic  in  Flanders.  Having  been  at  last  thoroughly
fortified  according  to  the  principles  of  the  age,  it  was
a  place  whence  much  damage  was  inflicted  upon  the
enemy,  and  whence  forays  upon  the  obedient  Flemings
could  very  successfully  be  conducted.  13eing  in  the
hands  of  so  enterprising  a  naval  power,  it  controlled
the  coast,  while  the  cardinal-archduke  on  the  other  side
fondly  hoped  that  its  possession  would  give  him  supre-
macy on  the  sea.  The  States  of  Flanders  declared  it  to
be  a  thorn  in  the  Belgic  lion's  foot,  and  called  urgently
upon  their  sovereign  to  remove  the  annoyance.

They  offered  Albert  300,000  florins  a  month  so  long  as
the  siege  should  last,  besides  an  extraordinary  sum  of
300,000,  of  which  one-third  was  to  be  paid  when  the
place  should  be  invested,  one-third  when  the  breach  had
been  made,  and  one-third  after  the  town  had  been  taken.^
It  was  obvious  that,  although  they  thought  the  extrac-
tion of  the  thorn  might  prove  troublesome,  the  process
would  be  accomplished  within  a  reasonable  time.  The
cardinal-archduke,  on  his  part,  was  as  anxious  as  the
"  members  "  of  Flanders.  Asking  how  long  the  Duke
of  Parma  had  been  in  taking  Antwerp,  and  being  told
"  eighteen  months,"  he  replied  that,  if  necessary,  he
was  willing  to  employ  eighteen  years  in  reducing
Ostend.^

The  town  thus  about  to  assume  so  much  importance
in  the  world's  eye  had  about  three  thousand  inhabitants
within  its  lowly,  thatch-roofed  houses.  It  fror^sd  directly

8  Haestens,  99.  Philip  Fleming.
Oostende.  Vermaerde  gheweldige,  lanck-
(luyrighe  ende  Bloedigbe  Belegeringhe,
etc.  bescbreven  door  Philippe  Fleming.

's  Gravenhage,  1621,  p.  62.

9  Angeli  Galluccii  de  Bello  Belgicx),
Roma,  1671. Pars  Altera,  p.  184.

1600.

POSITION  OF  OSTEND.

59

upon  the  sea-coast  and  stretched  backwards  in  a  southerly
direction,  having  the  sandy  downs  on  the  right  and  left,
and  a  swampy,  spongy  soil  on  the  inner  veige,  where  it
communicated  with  the  land.  Its  northern  part,  small
and  scarcely  inhabited,  was  lashed  by  the  ocean,  and
exposed  to  perpetual  danger  from  its  storms  and  flood-
tides,  but  was  partially  protected  from  these  encroach-
ments hy  a  dyke  stretching  along  the  coast  on  the  west.
Here  had  hitherto  been  the  harbour  formed  by  the  month
of  the  river  Iperleda  as  it  mingled  with  the  sea,  but  this
entrance  had  become  so  choked  with  sand  as  to  be  almost
useless  at  low  water.  This  circumstance  would  have
rendered  the  labours  of  the  archduke  comj)aratively
easy,  and  much  discouraged  the  States,  had  there  not
fortunately  been  a  new  harbour  which  liad  formed  itself
on  the  eastern  side  exactly  at  the  period  of  threatened
danger.  The  dwaif  mountain  range  of  dunes  which
encircled  the  town  on  its  eastern  side  had  been  j)ur-
posely  levelled,  lest  the  higher  summits  should  offer
positions  of  vantage  to  a  besieging  foe.  In  consequence
of  this  operation,  the  sea  had  burst  over  the  land  and
swept  completely  around  the  place,  almost  converting  it
into  an  island,  while  at  high  water  there  opened  a  wide
and  profound  gulf  which  with  the  ebb  left  an  excellent
channel  quite  deep  enough  even  for  the  ships  of  war  of
those  days.  The  next  care  of  the  States  authorities  was
to  pierce  their  fortifications  on  this  side  at  a  convenient
point,  thus  creating  a  safe  and  snug  haven  within  the
walls  for  the  fleets  of  transports  which  were  soon  to
arrive  by  open  sea,  laden  with  soldiers  and  muni-
tions.

The  whole  place  was  about  half  an  hour's  walk  in  cir-
cumference. It  was  surrounded  with  a  regiilar  counter-
scarp, bastions,  and  casemates,  while  the  proximity  of
the  ocean  and  the  humid  nature  of  the  soil  ensured  it  a
net-work  of  foss  and  canal  on  ever}^  side.  On  the  left  or
western  side,  where  the  old  harbour  had  once  been,  and
which  was  the  most  vulnerable  by  nature,  was  a  series
of  sti  ong  rayelins,  the  most  conspicuous  of  which  were
called  the  Sand  Hill,  the  Porcupine,  and  Hell's  Mouth.
Beyond  these,  towards  the  south-west,  were  some  de-
tached fortifications,  resting  for  support,  however,  upon
the  place  itself,  called  the  Polder,  the  Square,  and  the

60

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

South  Square.  On  the  east  side,  ;vliich  was  almost  in-
accessible, as  it  would  seem,  by  such  siege  machinery  as
then  existed,  was  a  work  called  the  Spanish  half-moon,
situate  on  the  new  harbour  called  the  Guele  or  Gullet.

Towards  the  west  and  south-west,  externally,  upon
the  territory  of  Flanders — not  an  inch  of  which  belonged
to  the  republic,  save  the  sea-beaten  corner  in  which
nestled  the  little  town — eighteen  fortresses  had  been
constructed  by  the  archduke  as  a  protection  against
hostile  incursions  from  the  place.  Of  these,  the  most
considerable  were  St.  Albert,  often  mentioned  during  the
Nieuport  campaign,  St.  Isabella,  St.  Clara,  and  Great-
Thir^t.^^

On  the  5th  July,  1601,  the  archduke  came  before  the
5  July,  town,  and  formally  began  the  siege.  He  esta-
blished  his  headquarters  in  the  fort  which  bore
the  name  of  his  patron  saint.  Frederick  van  den  Berg
meanwhile  occupied  fort  Bredene  on  the  eastern  side,
with  the  intention,  if  possible,  of  getting  possession  of
the  Gullet,  or  at  least  of  rendering  the  entrance  to
that  harbour  impossible  by  means  of  his  hostile  demon-
strations. Under  Van  den  Berg  was  Count  Bucquoy-
Longueval,  a  Walloon  officer  of  much  energy  and  ex-
perience, now  general-in-chief  of  artillery  in  the  arch-
duke's army.

The  numbers  with  which  Albert  took  the  field  at  first
have  not  been  accurately  stated,  but  it  is  probable  that
his  object  was  to  keep  as  many  as  twenty  thousand  con-
stantly engaged  in  the  siege,  and  that  in  this  regard  he
was  generally  successful.

Within  the  town  were  fifty-nine  companies  of  infantry,
to  which  were  soon  added  twenty-three  more  under  com-
mand of  young  Chatillon,  grandson  of  the  great  Coligny.
It  was  "  an  olla  podrida  of  nationalities,"  according  to  the
diarist  of  the  siege.  English,  Scotch,  Dutch,  Flemings,
Frenchmen,  Germans,  mixed  in  about  equal  proportions.^^
Commander-in-chief  at  the  outset  was  Sir  Francis  Vere,
who  established  himself  by  the  middle  of  July  in  the
place,  sent  thither  by  order  of  the  States-General.  It
had  been  the  desire  of  that  assembly  that  the  stadholder

w  Fleming,  Haestens,  Guicciardini  in n  Meteren,  Bentivogllo,  uhi  sup  Flem*
voce. Bentivoglic),  P.  111.  lib.  vi.  505, ing,  74,  seqq.
506. Meteren,  454,  455.

1601.

SIEGE  OF  RHEINBERG.

61

should  make  another  foray  in  Flanders  for  the  purpose
of  driving  off  the  archduke  before  he  should  have  time
to  complete  his  preliminaiy  operations.  But  for  that
year  at  least  Maurice  was  resolved  not  to  renounce  his
own  schemes  in  deference  to  those  so  much  more  ignorant
than  himself  of  the  art  of  war,  even  if  Barneveld  and  his
subordinates  on  their  part  had  not  learned  a  requisite
lesson  of  modesty.

So  the  prince,  instead  of  risking  another  Kieuport
campaign,  took  the  field  with  a  small  but  well-appointed
force,  about  ten  thousand  men  in  all,  marched  to  the
Ehine,  and,  early  in  June,  laid  siege  to  l\hein-  lo  June,
berg.^^  It  was  his  purpose  to  leave  the  arch-  1601.
duke  for  the  time  to  break  his  teeth  against  the  walls  of
Ostend,  while  he  would  himself  protect  the  eastern
frontier,  over  which  came  regular  reinforcements  and
supplies  for  the  Catholic  armies.  His  works  were  laid
out  with  his  customary  precision  and  neatness.  But,
standing  as  usual,  like  a  professor  at  his  blackboard,
demonstrating  his  proposition  to  the  town,  he  was  dis-
turbed in  his  calculations  by  the  abstraction  from  his
little  army  of  two  thousand  English  troops  ordered  by
the  States-General  to  march  to  the  defence  of  Ostend.
The  most  mathematical  but  most  obedient  of  princes,
annoyed  but  not  disconcerted,  sent  off  the  troops  but
continued  his  demonstration.

**  By  this  specimen,"  cried  the  French  envoy  with
enthusiasm,  judge  of  the  energy  of  this  little  common-
wealth. They  are  besieging  P)eig  with  an  army  of  twelve
thousand  men,  a  place  beyond  the  frontier,  and  five  days*
march  from  the  Hague.  They  are  defending  another
important  place,  besieged  by  the  principal  forces  of  the
archdukes,  and  there  is  good  chance  of  success  at  both
points.  They  are  doing  all  this  too  with  such  a  train  of
equipages  of  artilleiy,  of  munitions,  of  baiks,  of  ships
of  war,  that  I  hardly  know  of  a  monarch  in  the  world
who  would  not  be  troubled  to  furnish  such  a  force  of
warlike  machinery."

By  the  middle  of  July  he  sprang  a  mine  under  the
fortifications,  doing  much  damage  and  send  in  o;

•  .  .  11  iTulv

into  the  air  a  considerable  portion  of  the  garri-  ^'

1*  Moteron,  454.  Grotius,  x.  580-582. Van  der  Komp,  ii.  94,  95,  and  notes.
13  Buzonvul  to  Viileroy,  24  July,  1601,  citc-d  by  Van  Deveuter,  ii  294.

62

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

son.  Two  of  the  soldiers  were  blown  into  liis  own
camp,  and  one  of  them,  strangely  enough,  was  but
slightly  injured.  Coming  as  he  did  through  the  air  at
cannon-ball  speed,  he  was  of  course  able  to  bring  the
freshest  intelligence  from  the  interior  of  the  town.  His
news  as  to  the  condition  of  the  siege  confirmed  the  theory

30  July, of  the  stadholder. He  persisted  in  his  opera-

1^^^-  tions  for  three  weeks  longer,  and  the  place  was
then  surrendered.^*  The  same  terms — moderate  and
honourable — were  given  to  the  garrison  and  the  burghers
as  in  all  Maurice's  victories.  Those  who  liked  to  stay
were  at  liberty  to  do  so,  accepting  the  prohibition  of
public  worship  according  to  the  Eoman  ritual,  but
guaranteed  against  inquisition  into  household  or  con-
science. The  garrison  went  out  with  the  honours  ot
war,  and  thus  the  place,  whose  military  value  caused  it
to  change  hands  almost  as  frequently  as  a  counter  in  a
game,  was  once  more  in  possession  of  the  republic.  In
6  August,  the  course  of  the  following  week  Maurice  laid
1601.  siege  to  the  city  of  Meurs,  a  little  farther  up
the  Ehine,  which  immediately  capitulated.-^^  Thus  the
keys  to  the  debatable  land  of  Cleves  and  Juliers,
the  scene  of  the  Admiral  of  Arragon's  recent  barbarities,
were  now  held  by  the  stadholder.

These  achievements  were  followed  by  an  unsuccessful
attempt  upon  Bois-le-Duc  in  the  course  of  November.
The  place  would  have  fallen  notwithstanding  the  slender-
ness  of  the  besieging  army  had  not  a  sudden  and  severe
frost  caused  the  prudent  prince  to  raise  the  siege.  Feel-
ing that  his  cousin  Frederic  van  den  Berg,  who  had  been
despatched  from  before  Ostend  to  command  the  relieving
force  near  Bois-le-Duc,  might  take  advantage  of  the  pre-
maturely frozen  canals  and  rivers  to  make  an  incursion
November,  into  Holland,  he  left  his  city  just  as  his  works

^^0^-  had  been  sufficiently  advanced  to  ensure  posses-
sion of  the  prize,  and  hastened  to  protect  the  heart  of  the
republic  from  possible  danger.^^

Nothing  further  was  accomplished  by  Maurice  that
year,  but  meantime  something  had  been  doing  within
and  around  Ostend.

For  now  the  siege  of  Ostend  became  the  war,  and  was

14  Meteren,  Grotiils,  Van  der  Kemp,  uhi  svp.  is  pbid.

16  Meteien,  457  ;  Van  der  Kemp,  96,  97,  and  notes.

1601. CONCENTRATION  OF  THE  WAR  AT  OSTEND.

63

likely  to  continue  to  be  the  war  for  a  long  time  to  come ;
all  other  military  operations  being  to  a  certain  degree
suspended,  as  if  by  general  consent  of  both  belligerents,
or  rendered  subsidiary  to  the  main  design.  So  long  as
this  little  place  should  be  beleaguered  it  was  the  pur-
pose of  the  States,  and  of  Maurice,  acting  in  harmony
with  those  authorities,  to  concentrate  their  resources  so
as  to  strengthen  the  grip  with  which  the  only  scrap  of
Flanders  was  held  by  the  republic.  And  as  time  wore
on,  the  supposed  necessities  of  the  wealthy  province,
which,  in  political  importance,  made  up  a  full  half
of  the  archduke's  dominions,  together  with  self-esteem
and  an  exaggerated  ide,a  of  military  honour,  made
that  prelate  more  and  more  determined  to  effect  his
purpose.

So  upon  those  barren  sands  was  opened  a  great
academy  in  which  the  science  and  the  art  of  war  were
to  be  taught  by  the  most  skilful  practitioners  to  all
Europe ;  for  no  general,  corporal,  artillerist,  barber-
surgeon,  or  engineer,  would  be  deemed  to  know  his
trade  if  he  had  not  fought  at  Osteud ;  and  thither  re-
sorted month  after  month  warriors  of  every  rank,  fiom
men  of  royal  or  of  noblest  blood  to  adventurers  of  low-
lier degree,  whose  only  fortune  was  buckled  at  their
sides.  From  every  land,  of  every  religion,  of  every  race,
they  poured  into  the  town  or  into  the  besiegers'  trenches.
Habsburg  and  Holstein ;  Northumberland,  Yere,  and
Westmoreland ;  Fairfax  and  Stuart ;  Bourbon,  Chatillon,
and  Lorraine ;  Bentivoglio,  Farnese,  Spinola,  Grimaldi,
Arragon,  Toledo,  Avila,  Berlaymont,  Bucquoy,  Nassau,
Orange,  Solms — such  were  the  historic  names  of  a  few
only  of  the  pupils  or  professors  in  that  sanguinary  high-
school,  mingled  with  the  plainer  but  well-known  pa-
tronymics of  the  Baxes,  Meetkerkes,  Van  Loons,  Mar-
quettes.  Van  der  Meers,  and  Barendrechts,  whose  bearei  s
were  fighting,  as  they  long  had  fought,  for  all  that  men
most  dearly  prize  on  earth,  and  not  to  win  honour  or  to
take  doctors'  degrees  in  blood.  Papist,  Calvinist,  Lu-
theran, Turk,  Jew,  and  Moor,  European,  Asiatic,  African,
all  came  to  dance  in  that  long  carnival  of  death ;  and
every  incident,  every  detail  throughout  the  weary  siege
could  if  necessary  be  reproduced  ;  for  so  profound  and
general  was  the  attention  excited  throughout  Christen-

64

THE  UNITED  NETILERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

dom  by  these  extensive  operations,  and  so  new  and
astonishing  were  many  of  the  inventions  and  machines
employed — most  of  them  now  as  familiar  as  gunpowder
or  as  antiquated  as  a  catapult — that  contemporaries  have
been  most  bountiful  in  their  records  for  the  benefit  of
posterity,  feeling  sure  of  a  gratitude  which  perhaps  has
not  been  rendered  to  their  shades.

Especially  the  indefatigable  Philip  Fleming — auditor
and  secretary  of  Ostend  before  and  during  the  siege,
bravest,  most  conscientious,  and  most  ingenious  of
clerks — has  chronicled  faithfully  in  his  diary  almost
every  cannon-shot  that  was  fired,  house  that  was  yet  on
fire,  officer  that  was  killed,  and  has  pourtrayed  each  new
machine  that  was  invented  or  imagined  by  native  or
foreign  genius.  For  the  adepts  or  pretenders  who
swarmed  to  town  or  camp  from  every  corner  of  the
earth,  bringing  in  their  hands  or  brains  to  be  disposed
of  by  either  belligerents  infallible  recipes  for  terminat-
ing the  siege  at  a  single  blow,  if  only  their  theories
could  be  understood  and  their  pockets  be  filled,  were  as
prolific  and  as  sanguine  as  in  every  age.'^  But  it  would
be  as  wearisome,  and  in  regard  to  the  history  of  human
culture  as  superfluous,  to  dilate  upon  the  technics  of
Targone  and  Giustiniani,  and  the  other  engineers,
Italian  and  Flemish,  who  amazed  mankind  at  this
period  by  their  successes,  still  more  by  their  failures,
or  to  describe  every  assault,  sortie,  and  repulse,  every
excavation,  explosion,  and  cannonade,  as  to  disinter  the
details  of  the  siege  of  Kineveh  or  of  Troy.  But  there  is
one  kind  of  enginry  which  never  loses  its  value  or  its
interest,  and  which  remains  the  same  in  every  age — the
machinery  by  which  stout  hearts  act  directly  upon
willing  hands — and  vast  were  the  results  now  depend-
ing on  its  employment  around  Ostend.

On  the  outside  and  at  a  distance  the  war  was  superin-
tended of  course  by  the  stadholder  and  commander-in-
chief,  while  his  cousin  William  Lewis,  certainly  inferior
to  no  living  man  in  the  science  of  war,  and  whose
studies  in  military  literature,  both  ancient  and  modern,
during  the  brief  intervals  of  his  active  campaigning,
were  probably  more  profound  than  those  of  any  contem-

17  Bentivoglio,  Meteren,  Fleming,  Haestens.  Gallucci,  Grotius,  loc.  cit.  et  passvm,
et  mult.  cd.

1601.

SIR  FRANCIS  VERE.

65

poraiy,  was  always  alert  and  anxious  to  assist  with  his
counsels  or  to  mount  and  ride  to  the  fmy.

In  the  town  Sir  Francis  Vere  commanded.  Few
shapes  are  more  familiar  to  the  student  of  those  times
than  this  veteran  campaigner,  the  offshoot  of  a  time-
honoured  race.  A  man  of  handsome,  weather-beaten,
battle-bronzed  visage,  with  massive  forehead,  broad
intelligent  eyes,  a  high  straight  nose,  close-clipped  hair,
and  a  great  brown  beard  like  a  spade ;  captious,  irasci-
ble, but  most  resolute,  he  seemed,  in  his  gold  inlaid
Milan  corslet  and  ruff  of  point-lace,  the  very  image  of
a  partizan  chieftain ;  one  of  the  noblest  relics  of  a  race
of  fighters  slowly  passing  off  the  world's  stage.

An  efficient  colonel,  he  was  not  a  general  to  be  relied
upon  in  great  affairs  either  in  council  or  the  field.  lie
hated  the  Nassaus,  and  the  Nassaus  certainly  did  not
admire  him,  while  his  inordinate  self-esteem,  both  per-
sonal and  national,  and  his  want  of  true  sympathy  for
the  cause  in  which  he  fought,  were  the  frequent  source
of  ti  ouble  and  danger  to  the  republic.

Of  the  seven  or  eight  thousand  soldiers  in  the  town
when  the  siege  began,  at  least  two  thousand  were
English.  The  queen,  too  intelligent,  despite  her  shrew-
ishness to  the  States,  not  to  be  faithful  to  the  cause  in
which  her  own  interests  were  quite  as  much  involved  as
theirs,  had  promised  Envoy  Caron  that  although  she  wus
obliged  to  maintain  twenty  thousand  men  in  Ireland  to
keep  down  the  rebels,  directly  leagued  as  they  were
with  Spain  and  the  archdukes,  the  republic  might
depend  upon  five  thousand  soldiers  from  England.*"
Detachment  after  detachment,  the  soldiers  came  as  fast
as  the  London  prisons  could  be  swept  and  the  queen's
press-gang  perform  its  office.  It  may  be  imagined  that
the  native  land  of  those  warriors  was  not  inconsiderably
benefited  by  the  grant  to  the  republic  of  the  right  to
make  and  pay  for  these  levies.  But  they  had  all  red
uniforms,  and  were  as  fit  as  other  men  to  dig  trenches,
to  defend  them,  and  to  fill  them  afterwards,  and  none
could  fight  more  manfully  or  plunder  friend  and  foe
with  greater  cheerfulness  or  impartiality  than  did  those
islanders.'^

M  Wagenaar,  ix.  111.  101. E.  g. Arriveerden  dien  dach

Jfl  Flouiing,  passim,  especially  53,  58,  duyscnt  niewe  Engelscbe  suldaten  die  in
VOL.  IV.  F

66

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

The  problem  whicli  tlie  arcMuke  had  set  himself  to
solve  was  not  an  easy  one.  He  was  to  reduce  a  town,
which  he  conld  invest  and  had  already  succeeded  very
thoroughly  in  investing  on  the  land  side,  but  which
was  open  to  the  whole  world  by  sea ;  while  the  besieged
on  their  part  could  not  only  rely  upon  their  own  Go-
vernment and  people,  who  were  more  at  home  on  the
ocean  than  was  any  nation  in  the  world,  but  upon  their
alliance  with  England,  a  State  hardly  inferior  in  mari-
i  time  resources  to  the  republic  itself.

On  the  western  side,  which  was  the  weakest,  his  pro-
gress was  from  the  beginning  the  more  encouraging,  and
his  batteries  were  soon  able  to  make  some  impression
upon  the  outer  works,  and  even  to  do  considerable
damage  to  the  interior  of  the  town.  In  the  course  of  a
few  months  he  had  fifty  siege-guns  in  position,  and  had
constructed  a  practicable  road  all  around  the  place,  con-
necting his  own  fortifications  on  the  west  and  south
with  those  of  Bucquoy  on  the  east.^*^

Albert's  leading  thought  however  was  to  cut  off  the
supplies.  The  freaks  of  nature,  as  already  observed,
combined  with  his  own  exertions,  had  effectually  dis-
posed of  the  western  harbour  as  a  means  of  ingress.  The
tide  ebbed  and  flowed  through  the  narrow  channel,  but
it  was  clogged  with  sand  and  nearly  dry  at  low  water.
Moreover,  by  an  invention  then  considered  very  remark-
able, a  foundation  was  laid  for  the  besiegers'  forts  and
batteries  by  sinking  large  and  deep  baskets  of  wicker-
work,  twenty  feet  in  length,  and  filled  with  bricks  and
sand,  within  this  abandoned  harbour.  These  clumsy
machines  were  called  sausages,^^  and  were  the  delight  of
tlie  camp  and  of  all  Europe.  The  works  thus  esta-
blished on  the  dry  side  crept  slowly  on  towards  the
walls,  and  some  demi-cannon  were  soon  placed  upon
them,  but  the  besieged,  not  liking  these  encroachments,
took  the  resolution  to  cut  the  sea-dyke  along  the  coast
which  had  originally  protected  the  old  harbour.  Thus
the  sea,  when  the  tides  were  high  and  winds  boisterous,
was  free  to  break  in  upon  the  archduke's  works,  and  would
often  swallow  sausages,  men,  and  cannon,  far  more

Engellandt  ghepvest  waren  ende  uyt  alle  20  Bentivoglio,  P.  HI.  505-509.  Me-
de  ghevanghenisse  ghelicbt,  ghecleet  met  teren,  455,  460.  Grotii  Hist.  lib.  x.
Toode  casaclien,"  &c.  &c.  p.  58.  Fleming, i^assm  for  year  16 Jl. 21  ibid.

1601.

ERECTION  OF  SIEGE  WORKS.

67

rapidly  than  it  was  possible  to  place  them  there.  Yet
still  those  human  ants  toiled  on,  patiently  restoring
what  the  elements  so  easily  destroyed  ;  and  still,  despite
the  sea,  the  cannonade,  and  the  occasional  sorties  of  the
garrison,  the  danger  came  nearer  and  nearer.  Bucquoy
on  the  other  side  was  pursuing  the  same  system,  but  his
task  was  immeasurably  more  difficult.  The  Gullet,  or
new  eastern  entrance,  was  a  whirlpool  at  high  tide,  deep,
broad,  and  swift  as  a  mill-race.  Yet  along  its  outer
verge  he  too  laid  his  sausages,  protecting  his  men  at
their  work  as  well  as  he  could  with  gabicms,  and  essayed
to  build  a  dyke  of  wicker  work  upon  which  he  might
place  a  platfoiTu  for  artillery  to  prevent  the  ingress  of
the  republican  ships.

And  his  soldiers  were  kept  steadily  at  work,  exposed
all  the  time  to  the  guns  of  the  Spanish  half-moon  frc»m
which  the  besieged  never  ceased  to  cannonade  those
industrious  pioneers.  It  was  a  bloody  business.  Night
and  day  the  men  wei  e  knee-deep  in  the  trenches  delving
in  mud  and  sand,  falling  every  instant  into  the  graves
which  they  were  thus  digging  for  themselves,  while
ever  and  anon  the  sea  would  rise  in  its  wrath  and  sweep
them  with  their  works  away.  Yet  the  victims  were  soon
replaced  by  others,  for  had  not  the  cardinal  archduke
sworn  to  extract  the  thorn  from  the  Belgic  lion's  paw
even  if  he  should  be  eighteen  years  about  it,  and  would
military  honour  permit  him  to  break  his  vow?  It  was
a  piteous  sight,  even  for  the  besieged,  to  see  human  life
BO  profusely  squandered.  It  is  a  terrible  reflection,  too,
that  those  Si)aniards,  Walloons,  Italians,  confronted
death  so  eagerly,  not  from  motives  of  lionour,  religion,
discipline,  not  inspired  by  any  kind  of  faith  or  fanaticism,
but  because  t  he  men  who  were  employed  in  this  horrible
sausage-making  and  dyke-building  were  promised  five
stivers  a  day  instead  of  two.'"-^

And  there  wm  always  an  ample  supply  c»f  volun-
teers for  the  service  so  long  as  the  five  stivers  were
paid.

But  despite  all  Bucquoy's  exertions  the  east  harbour
remained  as  free  as  ever.  The  cool,  wary  Dutch  skippers
brought  in  their  cargoes  as  regularly  as  if  there  had

*2  Bentivuglio,  ubi  sup.

63

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

been  no  siege  at  all.  Ostend  was  rapidly  acquiring
greater  commercial  importance,  and  was  more  full  of
bustle  and  business  than  had  ever  been  dreamed  of  in
that  qniet  nook  since  the  days  of  Robert  the  Frisian,
who  had  buiit  the  old  church  of  Ostend,  as  one  of  the
thirty  which  he  erected  in  honour  of  St.  Peter,  five
hundred  years  before.^^

For  the  States  did  not  neglect  their  favourite  little
city.  Fleets  of  transports  arrived  day  after  day,  week
after  week,  laden  with  every  necessary  and  even  luxury
for  the  use  of  the  garrison.  It  was  perhaps  the  cheapest
place  in  all  the  Netherlands,  so  great  was  the  abundance.
Capons,  hares,  partridges,  and  butcher's  meat  were
plentiful  as  blackberries,  and  good  French  claret  was
but  two  stivers  the  quart.^*  Certainly  the  prospect  was
not  promising  of  starving  the  town  into  a  surrender.

But  besides  all  this  digging  and  draining  there  was  an
almost  daily  cannonade.  Her  Eoyal  Highness  the
Infanta  was  perpetually  in  camp  by  the  side  of  her  well-
beloved  Albert,  making  her  appearance  there  in  great
state,  with  eighteen  coaches  full  of  ladies  of  honour,  and
always  manifesting  much  impatience  if  she  did  not  hear
the  guns.^^

She  would  frequently  touch  off  a  forty-pounder  with
her  own  serene  fingers  in  order  to  encourage  the  artil-
lerymen, and  great  was  the  enthusiasm  which  such  con-
descension excited.^^

Assaults,  sorties,  repulses,  ambuscades  were  also  of
daily  occurrence,  and  often  with  very  sanguinary  results;
but  it  would  be  almost  as  idle  now  to  give  the  details  of
every  encounter  that  occurred,  as  to  describe  the  besieg-
ing of  a  snow-fort  by  schoolboys.

It  is  impossible  not  to  reflect  that  a  couple  of  Parrots
and  a  Monitor  or  two  would  have  terminated  the  siege  in
half  an  hour  in  favour  of  either  party,  and  levelled  the
town  or  the  besiegers'  works  as  if  they  had  been  of
pasteboard.

Bucquoy's  dyke  was  within  a  thousand  yards  of  the
harbour's  entrance,  yet  the  guns  on  his  platform  never
sank  a  ship  nor  killed  a  man  on  board,^'^  while  the  arch-
duke's batteries  were  even  nearer  their  mark. Yet  it

2S  Haestens,  81.
Tbid.  455^0,  460

24  Fleming.

25  Meteren,  496.
^7  Fleming.

1601.

MAGNITUDE  OF  THE  SIEGE.

69

was  the  most  prodigious  siege  of  modern  days.  Fifty
great  guns  were  in  position  around  the  place,  and  their
balls  weighed  from  ten  to  forty  pounds  apiece.  It  was
generally  agreed  that  no  such  artillery  practice  had'ever
occurred  before  in  the  world.^^

For  the  first  six  months,  and  generally  throughout  the
siege,  there  were  fired  on  an  average  a  thousand  of  such
shots  a  day,^^  In  the  sieges  of  the  American  civil  war
there  were  sometimes  three  thousand  shots  an  hmr,  and
from  guns  compared  to  which  in  calibre  and  power
those  cannon  and  demi-cannon  were  but  children's
toys.'°

Certainly  the  human  arm  was  of  the  same  length  then
as  now,  a  pike-thrust  was  as  effective  as  the  stab  of  the
most  improved  bayonet,  and  when  it  came,  as  it  was
always  the  purpose  to  do,  to  the  close  embrace  of  foemen,
the  work  was  done  as  thoroughly  as  it  could  be  in  this
second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Kevertheless  it
is  impossible  not  to  hope  that  such  progress  in  science
must  at  last  render  long  wars  impossible.  The  Dutch
war  of  independence  had  already  lasted  nearly  forty
years.  Had  the  civil  war  in  America  upon  the  territory
of  half  a  continent  been  waged  with  the  Ostend
machinery  it  might  have  lasted  two  centuries.  Some-
thing then  may  have  been  gained  for  humanity  by  giving
war  such  preter-human  attributes  as  to  make  its  de-
mands of  gold  and  blood  too  exhaustive  to  become
chronic.

Yet  the  loss  of  human  life  during  that  summer  and
winter  was  sufficiently  wholesale  as  compared  with  the
meagre  results.  Blood  flowed  in  torrents,  for  no  man
could  be  more  free  of  his  soldiers'  lives  than  was  the
cardinal-archduke,  hurling  them  as  he  did  on  the
enemy's  works  before  the  pretence  of  a  practical  breach
had  been  effected,  and  before  a  reasonable  chance  existed
of  purchasing  an  advantage  at  such  a  price.  Five  hun-
dred were  killed  outright  in  half-an-hour's  assault  on  an
impregnable  position  one  autumn  evening,  and  lay  piled
in  heaps  beneath  the  Sand  Hill  fort — many  youthful

28  Mctoren,  465'^o sfl  ibid.  secutive  minutes— at  the  rate  therefore

so  1  have  been  informed  that  at  the  of  forty-eight  hundred  shcts  an  hour —

eiege  of  Fort  Fisher  two  hundred  and  while  at  Ostend  tliere  was  an  average  of

forty  shotii  were  couuttd  in  three  con-  eight  shots  per  hour.

70

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

gallants  from  Spain  and  Ital}^  among  them,  noble  volun-
August,  tears  recognised  by  their  perfumed  gloves  and
1601.  golden  chains,  and  whose  pockets  were  worth
rifling.^^  The  Dutch  surgeons,  too,  sallied  forth  in
strength  after  such  an  encounter,  and  brought  in  great
bags  filled  with  human  fat,^^  esteemed  the  sovereignest
remedy  in  the  world  for  wounds  and  diseabc.

Leaders  were  killed  on  both  sides.  Catrici,  chief  of
the  Italian  artillery,  and  Braccamonte,  commander  of  a
famous  Sicilian  legion,  with  many  less  known  captains,
lost  their  lives  before  the  town.  The  noble  young
Chatillon,  grandson  of  Coligny,  who  had  distinguished
himself  at  IS  ieuport,  fell  in  the  Porcupine  fort,  his  head
carried  oif  by  a  cannon-ball,  which  destroyed  another
officer  at  his  side,  and  just  grazed  the  ear  of  the  distin-
guished Colonel  Uchtenbroek.  Sir  Francis  Yere,  too,
was  wounded  in  the  head  by  a  fragment  of  iron,  and  was
obliged  to  leave  the  town  for  six  weeks  till  his  wound
should  heal.

The  unfortunate  inhabitants — men,  women,  and  chil-
dren— were  of  course  exposed  to  perpetual  danger,  and
very  many  were  killed.  Their  houses  were  often  burned
to  the  ground,  in  which  cases  the  English  auxiliaries
were  indefatigable,  not  in  rendering  assistance,  but  in
taking  possession  of  such  household  goods  as  the  flames
had  spared.  Nor  did  they  always  wait  for  such  oppor-
tunities, but  were  apt,  at  the  death  of  an  eminent
burgher,  to  constitute  themselves  at  once  universal
legatees.  Thus,  while  honest  Bartholomew  Tysen,  a
worthy  citizen  grocer,  was  standing  one  autumn  morning
at  his  own  door,  a  stray  cannon-ball  took  off  his  head,
and  scarcely  had  he  been  put  in  a  coffin  before  his  house
was  sacked  from  garret  to  cellar  and  all  the  costly
spices,  drugs,  and  other  valuable  merchandize  of  his
warehouse — the  chief  magazine  in  the  town — together
with  all  his  household  furniture,  appropriated  by  those
London  warriors.  Bartholomew's  friends  and  relatives
appealed  to  Sir  Francis  Vere  for  justice,  but  were
calmly  informed  by  that  general  that  Ostend  was  like  a
stranded  ship,  on  its  beam-ends  on  a  beach,  and  that  it
was  impossible  not  to  consider  it  at  the  mercy  of  the
wreckers.^^ So  with  this  highly  figurative  view  of  the

»i  Haestens,  147.

32  Ibid.

33  Fleming,  53.

1601.

MORTALITY  IN  THE  TOWN.

71

situation  from  the  lips  of  the  governor  of  the  place  and
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  English  as  well  as  the
Dutch  garrison,  they  were  fain  to  go  home  and  bury
their  dead,  finding  when  they  returned  that  another
cannon-ball  had  carried  away  poor  Bartholomew's  coffin-
lid.^^  Thus  was  never  non-combatant  and  grocer,  alive
or  dead,  more  out  of  suits  with  fortune  than  this  citizen
of  Ostend ;  and  such  were  the  laws  of  war,  as  understood
by  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  English  practitioners  in
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.  It  is  true,
however,  that  Vere  subsequently  hanged  a  soldier  for
stealing  fifty  pounds  of  powder  and  another  for  uttering
counterfeit  money,  but  robberies  upon  the  citizens  were
unavenged.

Nor  did  the  deaths  by  shot  or  sword-stroke  make  up
the  chief  sum  of  mortality.  As  usual,  the  murrain-
like pestilence,  which  swept  off  its  daily  victims  both
within  and  without  the.  town,  was  more  effective  than
any  direct  agency  of  man.  By  the  month  of  December
the  number  of  the  garrison  had  been  reduced  to  less
than  three  thousand,  while  it  is  probable  that  the  arch-
duke had  not  eight  thousand  effective  men  left  in  his
whole  army.

It  was  a  black  and  desolate  scene.  The  wild  waves  of
the  German  ocean,  lashed  by  the  wintry  gales,  would
often  sweep  over  the  painfully-constructed  works  of
besieger  and  besieged  and  destroy  in  an  hour  the  labour
of  many  weeks.  The  Porcupine — a  small  but  vitally-
important  ravelin  l^'ing  out  in  the  counterscarp  between
the  old  town  and  the  new,  guarding  the  sluices  by  which
the  water  for  the  town  moats  and  canals  was  controlled,
and  preventing  the  pioneers  of  the  enemy  from  undermin-
ing the  western  wall — was  so  damaged  by  the  sea  as  to
be  growing  almost  untenable.  Indefatigably  had  the
besieged  attempted  with  wicker-work  and  timber
and  palisades  to  strengthen  this  precious  little  fort,
but  they  had  found,  even  as  Bucquoy  and  the  arch-
duke on  their  part  had  learned,  that  the  North  Sea  in
winter  was  not  to  be  dammed  by  bulrushes.  Moreover,
in  a  bold  and  successful  assault  the  besiegers  had  suc-
ceeded in  setting  fire  to  the  inflammable  materials
heaped  about  the  ravelin  to  such  effect  that  the  fire

w  Flemin'5,53.

72

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

burned  for  da^^s,  notwithstanding  the  flooding  of  the
works  at  each  high  tide.^^  The  men,  working  day  and
night,  scorching  in  the  flames,  yet  freezing  knee  deep  in
the  icy  slush  of  the  trenches  and  perpetually  under  fire
of  the  hostile  batteries,  became  daily  more  and  moi-e
exhausted,  notwiihstanding  their  determination  to  hold
the  place.  Christmas  drew  nigh,  and  a  most  gloomy
festival  it  was  like  to  be ;  for  it  seemed  as  if  the
beleaguered  garrison  had  been  forgotten  by  the  States.
Weeks  had  passed  away  without  a  single  company  being
sent  to  repair  the  hideous  gaps  made  daily  in  the  ranks
of  those  defenders  of  a  forlorn  hope.  It  was  no  longer
possible  to  hold  the  external  works  ;  the  Square,  the
Polder,  and  the  other  forts  on  the  south-west  which
Vere  had  constructed  with  so  much  care  and  where  he
23  Dec.  had  thus  far  kept  his  headquarters.  On  Sun-
day  morning,  23rd  December,  he  reluctantly
gave  orders  that  they  should  be  abandoned  on  the  fol-
lowing day  and  the  whole  garrison  concentrated  within
the  town.^^

The  clouds  were  gathering  darkly  over  the  head  of
the  gallant  Vere  ;  for  no  sooner  had  he  arrived  at  this
determination  than  he  learned  from  a  deserter  that  the
aichduke  had  fixed  upon  that  very  Sunday  evening  for
a  general  assault  upon  the  place.  It  was  hopeless  for
the  garrison  to  attempt  to  hold  these  outer  forts,  for  they
required  a  far  larger  number  of  soldiers  than  could  be
spared  from  the  attenuated  little  army.  Yet  with  those
forts  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  there  would  be  nothing
left  but  to  make  the  best  and  speediest  terms  that  might
be  obtained.  The  situation  was  desperate.  Sir  Francis
called  his  principal  officers  together,  announced  his  re-
solve not  to  submit  to  the  humiliation  of  a  surrender
after  all  their  efforts,  if  there  was  a  possibility  of  escape
from  their  dilemma,  reminded  them  that  reinforcements
might  be  expected  to  arrive  at  any  moment,  and  that
with  even  a  few  hundred  additional  soldiers  the  outer
works  might  still  be  manned  and  the  city  saved.  The
officers,  English,  Dutch,  and  French,  listened  respect-
fully to  his  remarks,  but,  without  any  suggestions  on
their  own  part,  called  on  him -as  their  Alexander  to

35  Meteren,  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  ubi  sup. Fleming,  172.

36  Fleming,  171-188. Meteren,  460.

1601.

STRATAGEM  OF  SIR  FRANCIS  VERE.

73

untie  the  Gordian  knot.^^  Alexander  solved  it,  not  with
the  sword,  but  with  a  trick  which  he  hoped  might  prove
sharper  than  a  sword.  He  announced  his  intention  of
proposing  at  once  to  treat,  and  to  protract  the  negotia-
tions as  long  as  possible,  until  the  wished-for  sails
should  be  discerned  in  the  offing,  when  he  would  at  once
break  faith  with  them,  resume  hostilities,  and  so  make
fools  of  the  besiegers.

This  was  a  device  worthy  of  a  modem  Alexandei
whose  surname  was  Farnese.  Even  in  that  loose  age
such  cynical  trifling  with  the  sacredness  of  trumpets
of  truce  and  offers  of  capitulation  were  deemed  far  from
creditable  among  soldiers  and  statesmen,  yet  the  council
of  war  highly  applauded  the  scheme,  and  importuned
the  general  to  carry  it  at  once  into  effect.

When  it  came,  however,  to  selecting  the  hostages
necessary  for  the  proposed  negotiations,  they  became  less
ardent  and  were  all  disposed  to  recede.  At  last,  after
much  discussion,  the  matter  was  settled,  and  before
nightfall  a  drummer  was  set  upon  the  external  parapet
of  the  Porcupine,  who  forthwith  began  to  beat  vigor-
ously for  a  parley.  The  rattle  was  a  welcome  sound  in
the  ears  of  the  weary  besiegers,  just  drawn  up  in  column
for  a  desperate  assault,  and  the  tidings  were  at  once
communicated  to  the  archduke  in  Fort  St.  Albert.  That
prince  manifested  at  first  some  unwillingness  to  forego
the  glory  of  the  attack,  from  which  he  confidently
expected  a  crowning  victory,  but  yielding  to  the  repre-
sentations of  his  chief  generals  that  it  was  better  to  have
his  town  without  further  bloodshed,  he  consented  to
treat.  Hostages  were  expeditiously  appointed  Sunday,
on  both  sides,  and  Captains  Ogle  and  Fairfax  23  Dec
were  sent  that  same  evening  to  the  headquarters  ^  *
of  the  besieging  army.  It  was  at  once  agreed  as  a
preliminary  that  the  empty  outer  works  of  the  place
should  remain  unmolested.  The  English  officers  were
received  with  much  courtesy. The  archduke  lifted  his

*7  Fleming,  ubi  sup. It  is  expressly  aware  that  it  was  a  trick. See  Metereji

stated  by  Fleming  that  there  was  a  regn-  455-460. Bentivoglio,  P.  III.  505-5U9.

lar  council  of  war  on  this  subject,  so  that  Grot.  Hist.  lib.  x.

Meteren,  Grotius,  and,  after  tiieni,  Wage-  ^8  Fleming,  178.  "Die  van  de  vergadi**

naar  and  others,  are  mistaken  in  saying  ringe  sijne  intentie  ghehoort  heblxnde

th.it  Vere  was  alone  responsible  for  the  wert  by  haer  lieder  boochlich  ghelau

Btrot^em. Beutivoglio  does  not  seem  dcert,"  kc

74

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

hat  as  they  were  presented,  asked  them  of  what  nation
they  were,  and  then  inquiied  whether  they  were
authorized  to  agree  upon  terms  of  capitulation.  They
answered  in  the  negative  ;  adding,  that  the  whole  busi-
ness would  be  in  the  hands  of  commissioners  to  be  imme-
diately sent  by  his  Highness,  as  it  was  supposed,  into
the  town.  Albert  then  expressed  the  hope  that  there
was  no  fraudulent  intention  in  the  proposition  just  made
to  negotiate.  The  officers  professed  themselves  entirely
ignorant  of  any  contemplated  deception;  although
Captain  Ogle  had  been  one  of  the  council,  had  heard
every  syllable  of  Yere's  stratagem,  and  had  heartily
approved  of  the  whole  plot.  The  Englishmen  were  then
committed  to  the  care  of  a  Spanish  nobleman  of  the
archduke's  staff,  and  were  treated  with  perfect  politeness
and  hospitality.^^

Meanwhile  no  time  was  lost  in  despatching  hostages,
who  should  be  at  the  same  time  commissioners,  to  Ostend.
The  quartermaster-general  of  the  army,  Don  Matteo
Antonio,  and  Matteo  Serrano,  governor  of  Sluys,  but
serving  among  the  besiegers,  were  selected  for  this  im-
portant business  as  personages  of  ability,  discretion,  and
distinction.*^

They  reached  the  town,  coming  in  of  course  from  the
western  side,  as  expeditiously  as  possible,  but  after  night-
f; JL  Before  they  arrived  at  headquarters  there  suddenly
arose,  from  some  unknown  cause,  a  great  alarm  and
beating  to  arms  on  the  opposite  or  eastern  side  of  the
city.  They  were  entirely  innocent  of  any  participation
in  this  uproar  and  ignorant  of  its  cause,  but  when  they
reaciied  the  presence  of  Sir  Francis  Vere  they  found
that  warrior  in  a  towering  passion.  There  was  cheating
going  on,  he  exclaimed.  The  Spaniards,  he  cried,  were
taking  advantage,  by  dishonourable  stratagem,  of  these
negotiations,  and  were  about  to  assault  the  town.

Astounded,  indignant,  but  utterly  embarrassed,  the
grave  Spaniards  knew  not  how  to  reply.  They  were
still  more  amazed  when  the  general,  rising  to  a  still
higher  degree  of  exasperation,  absolutely  declined  to
exchange  another  word  with  them,  but  ordered  Captains
Carpentier  and  St.  Hilaire,  by  whom  they  had  been

3^  Meteren,  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  uM  sup. ;  but  Fleming,  170-188,  is  by  far  the  best
authority,  his  diary  recording  every  minute  incident.  40  Fleming.

1601. RETURN  OF  THE  SPANISH  COMMISSIONERS.  75

escorted  to  his  quarters,  to  conduct  them  out  of  the  town
again  by  the  same  road  which  had  brought  them  there.
There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  compl}^  and  to  smother
their  resentment  at  such  extraordinary  treatment  as  best
they  could.^^  A\'hen  they  got  to  the  old  harbour  on  the
western  side  the  tide  had  risen  so  high  that  it  was  im-
possible to  cross.  Nobody  knew  better  than  Yere,  when
he  gave  the  order,  that  this  would  be  the  case ;  so  that
when  the  escorting  officers  returned  to  state  the  fact,  he
simply  ordered  them  to  take  the  Spaniards  buck  by  the
Gullet  or  eastern  side.  The  strangers  were  not  very
young  men,  and  being  much  fatigued  with  wandering
to  and  fro  in  the  darkness  over  the  muddy  roads,  they
begged  permission  to  remain  all  night  in  Ostend,  if  it
were  only  in  a  guardhouse.  But  Yere  was  inexorable,
after  the  duplicity  which  he  affected  to  have  discovered
on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  So  the  quartermaster-general
and  the  governor  of  Sluys,  much  to  the  detriment  of  their
dignity,  were  forced  once  more  to  tramp  through  the
muddy  streets.  And  obeying  their  secret  instructions,
the  escort  led  them  round  and  round  through  the  most
miry  and  forlorn  parts  of  the  town,  so  that,  sinking  knee-
deep  at  every  step  into  sloughs  and  quicksands,  and
plunging  about  through  the  mist  and  sleet  of  a  dreary
December's  night,  they  at  last  reached  the  precincts  of
the  Spanish  half-moon  on  the  Gullet,  be-draggled  from
head  to  foot  and  in  a  most  dismal  and  exhausted  con-
dition.

"  Ah,  the  villainous  town  of  Ostend  1 "  exclaimed  Ser-
rano,'*^ ruefully  contemplating  his  muddy  boots  and
imploring  at  least  a  pipe  of  tobacco.  Ho  was  informed,
however,  that  no  such  medical  drugs  were  kept  in  the
fort,*^  but  that  a  draught  of  good  English  ale  was  much
at  their  sei-vice.*^  The  beer  was  brought  in  four  foaming
flagons,  and,  a  little  refreshed  by  this  hospitality,  the
Spaniards  were  put  in  a  boat  and  rowed  under  the  guns
of  the  fort  across  the  Gullet  and  delivered  to  their  own
sentries  on  the  outposts  of  Bucquoy's  entrenchments.
By  this  time  it  was  midnight,  so  that  it  was  necessary

*i  Fleming.

*2  Ibid.  181.  "Ah  la  mccbante  ville
d'Oostendc,"  &c.

^  Ibid.  *•  Golijck  t'sclfe  quartier  boter
met  bier  dan  met  medicinale  drooghen."

It  is  interesting  to  know  that  two  cen-
turies and  a  half  ago  a  pipe  of  tobacco
was  considered  as  medicine  by  Dutch-
men.
«  Ibid.

76

THE  UNITED  NETHERLAKDS. Chap.  XXXIX,

for  them  to  remain  for  the  night  in  the  eastern  encamp-
ment before  reporting  themselves  at  Fort  St.  Albert.

Thus  far  Vere's  comedy  had  been  eminently  successful,
and  by  taking  advantage  of  the  accidental  alarm  and  so
adroitly  lashing  himself  into  a  fictitious  frenzy,  the  general
had  gained  nearly  twenty-four  additional  hours  of  pre-
cious time  on  which  he  had  not  reckoned.

Next  morning,  after  Seirano  and  Antonio  had  reported
to  the  archduke,  it  was  decided,  notwithstanding  the
very  inhospitable  treatment  which  they  had  received,
that  those  commissioners  should  return  to  their  labours.
Ogle  and  Fairfax  still  remained  as  hostages  in  camp,
and  of  course  professed  entire  ignorance  of  these  extra-
Monday  ordinary  proceedings,  attributing  them  to  some
24  Dec. ' inexplicable  misunderstanding. So  on  Monday,

1601.  24th  December,  the  quartermaster  and  the  go-
vernor again  repaired  to  Ostend  with  orders  to  bring
about  the  capitulation  of  the  place  as  soon  as  possible.
The  same  sergeant-major  was  again  appointed  by  Vere
to  escort  the  strangers,  and  on  asking  by  what  way  he
should  bring  them  in  was  informed  by  Sir  Francis  that
it  would  never  do  to  allow  those  gentlemen,  whose  feet
were  accustomed  to  the  soft  sand  of  the  sea-beach  and
downs,  to  bruise  themselves  upon  the  hard  paving-stones
of  Ostend,  but  that  the  softest  and  muddiest  road  must
be  carefully  selected  for  them.^^  These  reasons  ac-
cordingly were  stated  with  perfect  gravity  to  the  two
Spaniards,  who  in  spite  of  their  solemn  remonstrances,
were  made  to  repeat  a  portion  of  their  experiences  and
to  accept  it  as  an  act  of  special  courtesy  from  the  English
general.*^  Thus  so  much  time  had  been  spent  in  pre-
liminaries and  so  much  more  upon  the  road  that  the
short  winter's  day  was  drawing  to  a  close  before  they
were  again  introduced  to  the  presence  of  Vere.

They  found  that  fiery  personage  on  this  occasion  all
smiles  and  blandishments.  The  Spaniards  w^ere  received
with  most  dignified  courtesy,  to  which  they  gravely
responded ;  and  the  general  then  proceeded  to  make
excuses  for  the  misunderstanding  of  the  preceding  day
with  its  uncomfortable  consequences.  Thereupon  arose
much  animated  discussion  as  to  the  causes  and  the  nature
of  the  alarm  on  the  east  side  which  had  created  such

«  Fleming,  182.

*6  Ibid

1601. ENTERTAINMENT  OF  THE  COMMISSIONERS.  77

excitement.  Much  time  was  ingeniously  consumed  in
this  utterly  superfluous  discussion ;  but  at  last  the  com-
missioners of  the  archduke  insisted  on  making  allusion
to  the  business  which  had  brought  them  to  the  town.
"  What  terms  of  negotiation  do  you  propose?"  they  asked
Sir  Francis.  His  Highness  has  only  to  withdraw  from
before  Ostend,"  coolly  replied  the  general,  "  and  leave
us,  his  poor  neighbours,  in  peace  and  quietness.  This
would  be  the  most  satisfactory  negotiation  possible  and
the  one  most  easily  made."

Serrano  and  Antonio  found  it  difficult  to  see  the  matter
in  that  cheerful  light,  and  assured  Sir  Francis  that  they
had  not  been  commissioned  by  the  archduke  to  treat  for
his  own  withdrawal  but  for  the  surrender  of  the  town.
Hereupon  high  words  and  fierce  discussion  very  naturally
arose,  and  at  last,  when  a  good  deal  of  time  had  been
spent  in  the  sharp  encounter  of  wits,  Yere  proposed  an
adjournment  of  the  discussion  until  after  supper ;  politely
expressing  the  hope  that  the  Spanish  gentlemen  would
be  his  guests.

The  conversation  had  been  from  the  beginning  in
French,  as  Yere,  alth<)Ugh  a  master  of  the  Spanish  lan-
guage, was  desirous  that  the  rcfst  of  the  company  present
should  understand  everything  said  at  the  interview.*^

The  invitation  to  table  was  graciously  accepted,  and
the  Christmas  eve  passed  off  more  merrily  than  the  pre-
ceding night  had  done,  so  far  as  Yere's  two  guests  were
concerned.  Several  distinguished  officers  were  present
at  the  festive  board :  Captain  Montesquieu  de  Coquette,
Sir  Horace  Yere,  Captains  St.  Hilaire,  Meetkerke,  De
Kyck,  and  others  among  theu\/^  As  it  was  strict  fast
for  the  Catholics  that  evening — while  on  the  other  hand
the  English,  still  reckoning  according  to  the  old  style,
would  not  keep  Christmas  until  ten  days  later  —  the
banquet  consisted  mainly  of  eggs  and  fish,  and  the  like
meagre  articles,  in  compliment  to  the  guests.  It  was,
however,  as  well  furnished  as  could  be  expected  in  a
beleaguered  town,  out  of  whose  harbour  a  winter  gale
had  been  for  many  weeks  blowing  and  preventing  all
ingress.  There  was,  at  least,  no  lack  of  excellent  Bor-
deaux wine,  while  the  servants  waiting  upon  the  table  did
not  fail  to  observe  that  Governor  Serrano  was  not  in  all

*7  Fleming,  170-188.

*8  Ibid.

78

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

respects  a  model  of  the  temperance  usually  characteristic
of  his  race.  They  carefully  counted  and  afterwards  re-
lated with  admiration,  not  unmingled  with  horror,  that
the  veteran  Spaniard  drank  fifty-two  goblets  of  claret,
and  was  emptying  his  glass  as  fast  as  filled,  although  by
no  means  neglecting  the  beer,  the  quality  of  which  he
had  tested  the  night  before  at  the  half-moon.^^  Yet  there
seemed  to  be  no  perceptible  effect  produced  upon  him,
save  perhaps  that  he  grew  a  shade  more  grave  and  dig-
nified with  each  succeeding  draught.^^  For  while  the
banquet  proceeded  in  this  very  genial  manner  business
was  by  no  means  neglected ;  the  negotiations  for  the
surrender  of  the  city^^  being  conducted  on  both  sides
with  a  fuddled  solemnity  very  edifying  for  the  attendants
to  contemplate.

Yere  complained  that  the  archduke  was  unreasonable,
for  he  claimed  nothing  less  from  his  antagonists  than
their  all.  The  commissioners  replied  that  all  was  no
more  than  his  own  property.  It  certainly  could  not  be
thought  unjust  of  him  to  demand  his  own,  and  all  Flan-
ders was  his  by  legal  donation  from  his  Majesty  of  Spain.
Vere  replied  that  he  had  never  studied  jurisprudence,
and  was  not  versed  at  all  in  that  science,  but  he  had
always  heard  in  England  that  possession  was  nine  points
of  the  law.  Now  it  so  happened  that  they,  and  not  his
Highness,  were  in  possession  of  Ostend,  and  it  would  be
unreasonable  to  expect  them  to  make  a  present  of  it  to
any  one.  The  besiegers,  he  urged,  had  gained  much
honour  by  their  steady  persistence  amid  so  many  dangers,
difficulties,  and  losses ;  but  winter  had  come,  the  weather
was  very  bad,  not  a  step  of  progress  had  been  made,  and
he  was  bold  enough  to  express  his  opinion  that  it  would
be  far  more  sensible  on  the  part  of  his  Highness,  after
such  deeds  of  valour,  to  withdraw  his  diminished  forces
out  of  the  freezing  and  pestilential  swamps  before  Ostend
and  go  into  comfortable  winter-quarters  at  Ghent  or
Bruges.  Enough  had  been  done  for  glory,  and  it  must
certainly  now  be  manifest  that  he  had  no  chance  of  taking
the  city.

Serrano  retorted  that  it  was  no  secret  to  the  besiegers
that  the  garrison  had  dwindled  to  a  handful;  that  it  was
quite  impossible  for  them  to  defend  their  outer  works

4»  Fleming,  183.  so  ibid.  5i  ibid.

1601.

CHRISTMAS  FETE  AT  OSTEND.

79

any  longer;  that  with  the  loss  of  the  external  boulevard
the  defence  of  the  place  would  be  impossible,  and  that,
on  the  contrary,  it  was  for  the  republicans  to  resign
themselves  to  their  fate.  They,  too,  had  done  enough
for  glory,  and  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  retire  into  the
centre  of  their  ruined  little  nest,  where  they  must  burrow
until  the  enemy  should  have  leisure  to  entirely  unearth
them,  which  would  be  a  piece  of  work  very  easily  and
rapidly  accomplished.^^

This  was  called  negotiation  ;  and  thus  the  winter's
evening  wore  away,  until  the  Spaniaids,  heavy  with
fatigue  and  wine,  were  without  much  difficulty  persuaded
to  seek  the  couches  prepared  for  them.^

Kext  day  the  concourse  of  people  around  the  city  was
wonderful  to  behold.  The  rumour  had  spread  Christmas,
through  the  provinces,  and  was  on  the  wing  to
all  foreign  countries,  that  Ostend  had  capitulated,  and
that  the  commissioners  were  at  that  moment  arranging
tho  details.  The  cardinal-archduke,  in  complete  ^lilanese
armour,  with  a  splendid  feather-bush  waving  fiom  his
casque  and  suri  ounded  by  his  brilliant  body-guard,  gal-
loped to  and  fro  outside  the  entrenchments,  expecting
every  moment  a  deputation  to  come  forth,  bearing  the
keys  of  the  town.  The  Infanta  too,  magnificent  in  rutf
and  farthingale  and  biocaded  petticoat,  and  attended  by
a  cavalcade  of  ladies  of  honour  in  gorgeous  attire,  pranced
impatiently  about,  awaiting  the  dramatic  termination  of
a  leaguer  which  was  becoming  wearisome  to  besieger
and  besieged.^  Not  even  on  tiie  famous  second  of  July
of  the  previous  year,  when  that  princess  was  pleasing
herself  with  imaginatLms  as  to  the  depoiiment  of  Maurice
of  Nassau  as  a  caj)iive,  had  her  soul  been  so  full  of
anticipated  triumph  as  on  this  Christmas  morning.

Such  a  festive  scone  as  was  now  presented  in  tlie
neighbourhood  of  Ostend  had  not  been  exhibited  for
many  a  long  year  in  Flanders.  From  the  whole  coun-
try side  came  the  [>easants  and  burghers,  men,  women,
and  children,  in  holiday  attire.  It  was  like  a  kermiss
or  provincial  fair.^  Three  thousand  people  at  least
were  roaming  about  in  all  directions,  gaping  with
wonder  at  the  fortifications  of  the  besieging  army,  so

52  Fleming.  181,  seqq.  «  ibid.

Ibid,  ubisup. Compare  Bentivoglio,  Metercn,  Orotius,  ubi  sup. "  Fleming.

80

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

soon  to  be  superfluous,  sliding,  skating,  waltzing  on  the
ice,  admiring  jugglers,  dancing  bears,  puppet  shows
and  merry-go-rounds,  singing,  and  carousing  upon
herrings,  sausages,  waffles,  with  mighty  draughts  of
Flemish  ale,  manifesting  their  exuberant  joy  that  the
thorn  was  nearly  extracted  from  the  lion's  paw,  and
awaiting  with  delight  a  blessed  relief  from  that  opera-
tion.^*^ Never  was  a  merrier  Christmas  morning  in
Flanders.  There  should  be  an  end  now  to  the  forays
through  the  country  of  those  red-coated  English  pikemen,
those  hard-riding,  hard-drinking  troopers  of  Germany
and  Holland,  with  the  French  and  Scotch  arquebus  men,
and  terrible  Zeeland  sailors,  who  had  for  years  swept  out
of  Ostend,  at  any  convenient  opportunity,  to  harry  the
whole  province. And  great  was  the  joy  in  Flanders.

Meantime  within  the  city  a  different  scene  was  enact-
ing. Those  dignified  Spaniards — governor  Serrano  and
Don  Matteo  Antonio —having  slept  off  their  carouse,
were  prepared  after  breakfast  next  morning  to  resume
the  interrupted  negotiations.  But  affairs  were  now  to
take  an  unexpected  turn.  In  the  night  the  wind  had
changed,  and  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon  three  Dutch
vessels  of  war  were  descried  in  the  offing,  and  soon
calmly  sailed  into  the  mouth  of  the  Gullet.  The  news
was  at  once  brought  to  Vere's  headquarters.  That
general's  plans  had  been  crowned  with  success  even
sooner  than  he  expected.  There  was  no  further  object
in  continuing  the  comedy  of  negotiation,  for  the  ships
now  arriving  seemed  crowded  with  troops.  Sir  Francis
accordingly  threw  off  the  mask,  and  assuring  his  guests
with  extreme  politeness  that  it  had  given  him  great
pleasure  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  such  distin-
guished personages,  he  thanked  them  cordially  for  their
visit,  but  regretted  that  it  would  be  no  longer  in  his
power  to  entertain  any  propositions  of  a  specific  nature.
The  necessary  reinforcements,  which  he  had  been  so
long  expecting,  had  at  last  reached  him,  and  it  would
not  yet  be  necessary  for  him  to  retire  into  his  ruined
nest.  Military  honour  therefore  would  not  allow  him
to  detain  them  any  longer.  Should  he  ever  be  so  hard
pressed  again  he  felt  sure  that  so  magnanimous  a  prince

56  Fleming.

1601.  ARRIVAL  OF  REINFORCEMENTS.

81

as  his  Highness  would  extend  to  him  all  due  clemency
and  consideration.^^

The  Spaniards,  digesting  as  they  best  could  the  sauce
of  contumely  with  which  the  gross  treachery  of  the
transaction  was  now  seasoned,  solemnly  withdrew,
disdaining  to  express  their  spleen  in  words  of  idle
menace.

They  were  escorted  back  through  the  lines,  and  at
once  made  their  report  at  head-quarters.  The  festival
had  been  dismally  interrupted  before  it  was  well  begun.
The  vessels  were  soon  observed  by  friend  and  foe
making  their  way  triumphantly  up  to  the  town,  where
they  soon  dropped  anchor  at  the  wharf  of  the  inner
Gullet,  having  only  a  couple  of  sailors  wounded,  des-
pite all  the  furious  discharges  of  Bucquoy's  batteries.
The  holiday  makers  dispersed,  much  discomfited,  the
English  hostages  returned  to  the  town,  and  the  archduke
shut  himself  up,  growling  and  furious.  His  generals
and  counsellors,  who  had  recommended  the  abandon-
ment of  his  carefull}^  prepared  assault,  and  acceptance
of  the  perfidious  propositions  to  negotiate,  by  which  so
much  golden  time  had  been  squandered,  were  for  several
days  excluded  from  his  presence.^

Meantime  the  army,  disappointed,  discontented,  half-
starved,  unpaid,  passed  their  days  and  nights  as  before,
in  the  sloppy  trenches,  while  deep  and  earnest  were  the
complaints  and  the  curses  which  succeeded  to  the
momentary  exultation  of  Christmas  eve.  The  soldiers
were  more  than  ever  embittered  against  their  august
commander-in-chief,  for  they  had  just  enjoyed  a  signal
opportunity  of  comparing  the  luxury  and  comfortable
magnificence  of  his  Highness  and  the  Infanta,  and  of
contrasting  it  with  their  own  misery.  Moreover,  it
had  long  been  exciting  much  indignation  in  the  ranks
that  veteran  generals  and  colonels,  in  whom  all  men
had  confidence,  had  been  in  great  numbers  superseded
in  order  to  make  place  for  coui-t  favourites,  utterly
without  experience  or  talent.*^ Thus  the  veterans ;

57  Fleming.

58  Ibid.  Compare  Bentivoglio,  Meteren,
Grotius,  ubi  sup.,  et  mult.  al.

*  Fleming  pives  more  than  one  scurril-
ous letter  found  In  the  pockets  of  dead
VOL.  IV.

Spanish  soldiers,  in  which  very  oppro-
brious terms  are  applied  to  the  sovereign
of  the  obedient  Netherlands.  See  in
particular  p.  164.

O

82

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

murmuring  in  tlie  wet  trenches.  The  archduke
meanwhile,  in  his  sullen  retirement,  brooded  over  a
tragedy  to  follow  the  very  successful  comedy  of  his
antagonist.

It  was  not  long  delayed.  The  assault  which  had
been  postponed  in  the  latter  days  of  December  was  to
be  renewed  before  the  end  of  the  first  week  of  the  new
year.  Vere,  through  scouts  and  deserters,  was  aware
of  the  impending  storm,  and  had  made  his  arrangements
in  accordance  with  the  very  minute  information  which
he  had  thus  received.  The  reinforcements,  so  oppor-
tunely sent  by  the  States,  were  not  numerous — only  six
hundred  in  all — but  they  were  an  earnest  of  fresh  com-
rades to  follow.  Meantime  they  sufficed  to  fill  the  gaps
in  the  ranks,  and  to  enable  Vere  to  keep  possession  of
the  external  line  of  fortifications,  including  the  all-
important  Porcupine.  Moreover,  during  the  fictitious
negotiations,  while  the  general  had  thus  been  holding
— as  he  expressed  it — the  wolf  by  both  ears,  the  labour
of  repairing  damages  in  dyke,  moat,  and  wall  had  not
been  for  an  instant  neglected.

The  morning  of  the  7th  January,  1602,  opened  with
7  Jan.  a  vigorous  cannonade  from  all  the  archduke's
i6j2.  batteries,  east,  west,  and  south.  Auditor
Fleming,  counsellor  and  secretary  of  the  city,  aide-de-
camp and  right  hand  of  the  commander-in-chief,  a  grim,
grizzled,  leathern-faced  man  of  fifty,  steady  under  fire
as  a  veteran  arquebuseer,  ready  with  his  pen  as  a  count-
ing-house clerk,  and  as  fertile  in  resource  as  the  most
experienced  campaigner,  was  ever  at  the  general's  side.
At  his  suggestion  several  houses  had  been  demolished,
to  furnish  materials  in  wood  and  iron  to  stop  the  gaps
as  soon  as  made.  Especially  about  the  Sand  Hill  fort
and  the  Porcupine  a  plentiful  supply  was  collected,  no
time  having  been  lost  in  throwing  up  stockades,  pali-
sades, and  every  other  possible  obstruction  to  the
expected  assailants.  Knowing  perfectly  well  where
the  brunt  of  the  battle  was  to  be,  Vere  had  placed  his
brother  Sir  Horace  at  the  head  of  twelve  picked  com-
panies of  diverse  nations  in  the  Sand  Hill.  Four  of  the
very  best  companies  of  the  garrison  were  stationed  in
the  Porcupine,  and  ten  more  of  the  choicest  in  Fort
Hell's  Mouth,  under  Colonel  Meetkerke. It  must  be

1602.  ATTACK  ON  THE  SAND  HILL  FORT.

recollected  that  the  first  of  these  three  works  was  the
key  to  the  fortifications  of  the  old  or  outer  town.  The
other  two  were  very  near  it,  and  were  the  principal
redoubts  which  defended  the  most  exposed  and  vulner-
able portion  of  the  new  town  on  the  western  side.  The
Sand  Hill,  as  its  name  imported,  was  the  only  existing
relic  within  the  city's  verge  of  the  chain  of  downs  once
encircling  the  whole  place.  It  had  however  been  can-
nonaded so  steadily  during  the  six  months'  siege  as  to
have  become  almost  iron  clad — a  mass  of  metal  gradually
accumulated  from  the  enemy's  gims.  With  the  curtain
extending  from  it  towards  east  and  west  it  protected  the
old  town  quite  up  to  the  little  ancient  brick  church,  one
of  the  only  two  in  Ostend.^^

All  day  long  the  cannon  thundered — a  bombardment
such  as  had  never  before  been  dreamed  of  in  those  days,
two  thousand  shots  having  been  distinctly  counted  by
the  burghers.  There  was  but  languid  response  from
the  besieged,  who  were  reserving  their  strength.  At
last,  to  the  brief  winter's  day  succeeded  a  pitch-dark
evening.  It  was  dead  low  tide  at  seven.  At  that  hour
the  drums  suddenly  beat  alarm  along  the  whole  line
of  fortifications  from  the  Gullet  on  the  east  to  the  old
harbour  on  the  west,  while  through  the  mirky  atmc^
sphere  sounded  the  trumpets  of  the  assault,  the  shouts  of
the  Spanish  and  Italian  commanders,  and  the  fierce
responsive  yells  of  their  troops.  Sir  Francis  having
visited  every  portion  of  the  works,  and  satisfied  himself
that  every  man  in  the  garrison  was  under  arms,  and
that  all  his  arrangements  had  been  fulfilled,  now  sat  on
horseback,  motionless  as  a  statue,  within  the  Sand  Hill.
Among  the  many  serious  and  fictitious  attacks  now
making  he  waited  calmly  for  the  one  great  assault,  even
allowing  some  of  the  enemy  to  scale  the  distant  coun-
terscarp of  the  external  works  towards  the  south,  which
he  had  by  design  left  insufficiently  , guarded.  It  was
but  a  brief  suspense,  for  in  a  few  momenta  two  thousand
men  had  rushed  through  the  bed  of  the  old  harbour,
out  of  which  the  tide  had  ebbed,  and  were  vigorously
assailing  the  Sand  Hill  and  the  whole  length  of  its

60  Fleming's  Diary,  pp.  187-199,  is  by
far  the  best  authority  for  this  assault.
He  gives  many  pluns,  diagrams,  and

pictures.  Compare  Grot  Hist.  lib.  xi.
595-597.  Meteren  460^<>.  Bentivoglio,
610. Wagenaar,  ix.  114,  115.

o  2

84

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XXXIX.

curtain.  The  impenetrable  darkness  made  it  impossible
to  count,  but  the  noise  and  the  surging  fury  of  the
advance  rendered  it  obvious  that  the  critical  moment
had  arrived.  Suddenly  a  vivid  illumination  burst  forth.
Great  pine  torches,  piles  of  tar-barrels,  and  heaps  of
other  inflammable  material,  v^^hich  had  been  carefully
arranged  in  Fort  Porcupine,  v^ere  now  all  at  once  lighted
by  Yere's  command.^^  As  the  lurid  blaze  flashed  far
and  wide  there  started  out  of  the  gloom  not  only  the
long  lines  of  yellow-jerkined  pikemen  and  arquebuseers,
with  their  storm-hoods  and  scaling  ladders,  rushing
swiftly  towards  the  forts,  but  beyond  the  broken  sea-
dyke  the  reserved  masses  supporting  the  attack,  drawn
up  in  solid  clumps  of  spears,  with  their  gay  standards
waving  above  them,  and  with  a  strong  force  of  cavalry
in  iron  corslet  and  morion  stationed  in  the  rear  to
urge  on  the  infantry  and  prevent  their  faltering  in  the
night's  work,  became  visible — phantom-like  but  per-
fectly distinct.

At  least  four  thousand  men  were  engaged  in  this
chief  attack,  and  the  light  now  permitted  the  besieged
to  direct  their  fire  from  cannon,  demi-cannon,  culverin,
and  snaphance,  with  fatal  effect.  The  assailants,
thinned,  straggling,  but  undismayed,  closed  up  their
ranks,  and  still  came  fiercely  on.  Never  had  Spaniards,
Walloons,  or  Italians,  manifested  greater  contempt  of
death  than  on  this  occasion.  They  knew  that  the  arch-
duke and  the  infanta  were  waiting  breathlessly  in  Fort
St.  Albert  for  the  news  of  that  victory  of  which  the
feigned  negotiations  had  defrauded  them  at  Christmas,
and  they  felt  perfectly  confident  of  ending  both  the
siege  and  the  forty  years'  war  this  January  night.  But
they  had  reckoned  without  their  wily  English  host.
As  they  came  nearer — van,  and  at  last  reserve — they
dropped  in  great  heaps  under  the  steady  fire  of  the
musketry — as  Philip  Fleming,  looking  on,  exclaimed —
like  apples  when  the  autumn  wind  blows  through  the
orchard.  And  as  the  foremost  still  pressed  nearer  and
nearer,  striving  to  clamber  up  the  shattered  counter-
scarp and  through  every  practicable  breach,  the  English,
Hollanders,  and  Zeelanders,  met  them  in  the  gap,  not
only  at  push  of  pike,  but  with  their  long  daggers  and

«  Fleming,  uhi  sup.

1602.

THE  ASSAILANTS  REPULSED.

85

with  flaming  pitch-hoops,  and  hurled  them  down  to
instant  death.

And  thus  around  the  Sand  Hill,  the  Porcupine,  and
Hell's  Mouth,  the  battle  raged  nearly  two  hours  long,
without  an  inch  of  ground  being  gained  by  the  assail-
ants. The  dead  and  dying  were  piled  beneath  the
walls,  while  still  the  reserves,  goaded  up  to  the  mark
by  the  cavalry,  mounted  upon  the  bodies  of  their  fallen
comrades,  and  strove  to  plant  their  ladders.^^  But  now
the  tide  was  on  the  flood,  the  harbour  was  filling,  and
cool  Auditor  Fleming,  whom  nothing  escaped,  quietly
asked  the  general's  permission  to  open  the  western
sluice.  It  was  obvious,  he  observed,  that  tlie  fury  of
the  attack  was  over,  and  that  the  enemy  would  soon  be
effecting  a  retreat  before  the  water  should  have  risen
too  high.  He  even  pointed  out  many  stragglers  attempt-
ing to  escape  through  the  already  deepening  shallows.
Vere's  consent  was  at  once  given,  the  flood-gate  was
opened,  and  the  assailants — such  as  still  survived —
panic-struck  in  a  moment,  rushed  wildly  back  through
the  old  harbour  towards  their  camp.  It  was  too  late.
The  waters  were  out,  and  the  contending  currents
whirled  the  fugitives  up  and  down  through  the  sub-
merged land,  and  beyond  the  broken  dyke,  until  great
numbers  of  them  were  miserably  drowned  in  the  haven,
while  others  were  washed  out  to  sea.  Horses  and  riders
were  borne  off  towards  the  Zeeland  coast,  and  several
of  their  corpses  were  picked  up  days  afterwards  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Flujshing.*^^

Meantime  those  who  had  effected  a  lodgment  in  the
Polder,  the  Square,  and  the  other  southern  forts,  found,
after  the  chief  assault  had  failed,  that  they  had  gained
nothing  b}^  their  temporary  triumph  but  the  certainty
of  being  butchered. Ketreat  was  impossible,  and  no

62  Fleming,  ubi  sup.  tot  ghenen  goedeo  cffecte  conde  gebren-

63  The  historians  BiTitivogllo,  Grotlus,  ghen  als  oock  dat  sijn  volck  van  den
and  many  others  give  Vere,  as  a  matter  furieusen  aenval  bt-gosten  den  moot  te
of  course,  the  credit  of  this  feat.  But  verliesen,  haer  lieder  retraicte  woderom
these  are  the  words  of  Auditor  Fleming  door  die  onde  West  haven  sonde  moetea
himself,  a  man  whom  I  should  Judge  nemen  ende  dat  alsdan  die  spoelingbe
lnc:ipable  of  faUehood:— "Hebbe  my  ver-  vant  water  haer  lieder  inde  Zee  soude
vordert  den  Generael  te  bidden  dat  by  drij^en  waer  over  den  voomoemden
my  gheliefde  te  autoriseren  de  West  Generael  my  gheauthoriseert  heeft  die
Sluyse  te  doen  openen  hem  remonstre-  sluysen  te  doen  openeu." — pp.  195,  153.
rende  gelijck  den  Vyand  sijn  voornemen

86

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XXXIX.

quarter  was  given.  Count  Imbec,  a  noble  of  great
wealth,  offered  his  weight  in  gold  for  his  ransom,*^-*  but
was  killed  by  a  private  soldier,  who  preferred  his  blood,
or  doubted  his  solvency.  Durango,  marshal  of  the  camp,
Don  Alvarez  de  Suarez,  and  Don  Matteo  Antonio,
sergeant-major  and  quarter-master  general,  whose  ad-
ventures as  a  hostage  within  the  town  on  Christmas-eve
have  so  recently  been  related,  were  also  slain.

On  the  eastern  side  Bucquoy's  attack  was  an  entire

Jan  7  feili^^^'  His  arrangements  were  too  slowly
made,  and  before  he  could  bring  his  men  to
the  assault  the  water  was  so  high  in  the  Gullet  that  they
refused  to  lay  their  pontoons  and  march  to  certain  death.
Only  at  lowest  ebb,  and  with  most  exquisite  skill  in  ford-
ing, would  it  have  been  possible  to  effect  anything  like
an  earnest  demonstration  or  a  surprise.  Moreover  some
of  the  garrison,  giving  themselves  out  as  deserters,  stole
out  of  the  Spanish  Half-moon,  which  had  been  purposely
almost  denuded  of  its  defenders,  towards  the  enemy's
entrenchments,  and  offered  to  lead  a  body  of  Spaniards
into  that  ravelin.  Bucquoy  fell  into  the  trap,  so  that
the  detachment,  after  a  victory  as  easily  effected  as
that  in  the  southern  forts,  found  themselves  when  the
fight  was  over  not  the  captors  but  the  caught.  A  few
attempted  to  escape  and  were  driven  into  the  sea ;  the
rest  were  massacred.

Fifteen  hundred  of  the  enemy's  dead  were  counted
and  registered  by  Auditor  Fleming.^^  The  whole
number  of  the  slain  and  drowned  was  reckoned  as  high
as  two  thousand,  which  was  at  least  a  quarter  of  the
whole  besieging  army.  And  so  ended  this  winter
night's  assault,  by  which  the  archduke  had  fondly
hoped  to  avenge  himself  for  Yere's  perfidy,  and  to
terminate  the  war  at  a  blow.  Only  sixty  of  the  garri-
son were  killed,  and  Sir  Horace  Vere  was  wounded.

The  winter  now  set  in  with  severe  sleet,  and  snow,
and  rain,  and  furious  tempests  lashing  the  sea  over  the
works  of  besieger  and  besieged,  and  for  weeks  together
paralyzing  all  efforts  of  either  army.  Eight  weary  months
the  siege  had  lasted  ;  the  men  in  town  and  hostile  camp,
exposed  to  the  inclemency  of  the  wintry  trenches,  sink-

64  Haestens,  199.  65  Fleming,  197.

68  Ibid.  187-199.  Compare  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  Meteren,  Wagenaar,  ubi  si^.

1602.

SLOW  PROGRESS  OF  THE  SIEGE.

ing  faster  before  the  pestilence  whicli  now  swept  im-
partially tlirough  all  ranks  than  the  soldiers  of  the  arch-
duke had  fallen  at  Kieuport,  or  in  the  recent  assault  on
the  Sand  Hill.  Of  seven  thousand  hardly  three  thousand
now  remained  in  the  garrison.^"^

Yet  still  the  weary  sausage  making  and  wooden  castle
building  went  on  along  the  Gullet  and  around  the  old
town.  The  Bredene  dyke  crept  on  inch  by  inch,  but
the  steady  ships  of  the  republic  came  and  went  unharmed
by  the  batteries  with  which  Bucquoy  hoped  to  shut  up
the  >ew  Harbour.  The  archduke's  works  were  pushed
up  nearer  on  the  west,  but,  as  yet,  not  one  practical
advantage  had  been  gained,  and  the  siege  had  scarcely
advanced  a  hair's  breadth  since  the  5th  of  July  of  the
preceding  year,  when  the  armies  had  first  sat  down
before  the  place.

The  stormy  month  of  March  had  come,  and  Vere,
being  called  to  service  in  the  field  for  the  coming  season,
transferred  the  command  at  Ostend  to  Frederic  van
Dorp,  a  rucfged,  hard-headed,  ill-favoured,  stout-hearted
Zeeland  colonel,  with  the  face  of  a  bull-dog,  and  with  the
tenacious  grip  of  one.^^

•7  Grotius,  xi.  590.

«•  Fleming,  212,  316.

88

THE  UNITED  XETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

CHAPTEK  XL.

Protraction  of  the  siege  of  Ostend  —  Spanish  invasion  of  Ireland  —  Prince  Maurice
again  on  the  march  —  Siege  of  G-rave  —  State  of  the  archduke's  army  —  Formid-
able mutiny  —  State  of  Europe  —  Portuguese  expedition  to  Java  —  Foundation
there  of  the  first  Batavian  trading  settlement — Exploits  of  Jacob  Heemskerk  —
Capture  of  a  Lisbon  carrack  —  Progress  of  Dutch  commerce  —  Oriental  and  Ger-
manic republics — Commercial  embassy  from  the  King  of  Atsgen  in  Sumatra  to
the  Netherlands  —  Surrender  of  Grave  —  Privateer  work  of  Frederic  Spinola  —
Destruction  of  Spinola's  fleet  by  English  and  Dutch  cruisers  —  Continuation  of
the  siege  of  Ostend  —  Fearful  hurricane  and  its  effects  —  The  attack  —  Capture
of  external  forts  —  Encounter  between  Spinola  and  a  Dutch  squadron — Execu-
tion of  prisoners  by  the  archduke  —  Philip  Fleming  and  his  diary — Continuation
of  operations  before  Ostend — Spanish  Veterans  still  mutinous — Their  capital
besieged  by  Van  den  Berg  —  Maurice  marches  to  their  relief  —  Convention  be-
tween the  prince  and  the  mutineers — Great  commercial  progress  of  the  Dutch —
Opposition  to  international  commerce  —  Organization  of  the  .Universal  East
India  Company.

It  would  be  desirable  to  concentrate  the  chief  events  of
the  siege  of  Ostend  so  that  they  might  be  presented
to  the  reader's  view  in  a  single  mass.  But  this  is  im-
possible. The  siege  was  essentially  the  war — as  already
observed — and  it  was  bidding  fair  to  protract  itself  to
such  an  extent  that  a  respect  for  chronology  requires
the  attention  to  be  directed  for  a  moment  to  other
topics.

The  invasion  of  Ireland  under  Aquila,  so  pompously
heralded  as  almost  to  suggest  another  grand  armada,
had  sailed  in  the  beginning  of  the  winter,  and  an  army
of  six  thousand  men  had  been  landed  at  Kinsale.  Rarely
had  there  been  a  better  opportunity  for  the  Celt  to
strike  for  his  independence.  Shane  Mac  Neil  had  an
army  on  foot  with  which  he  felt  confident  of  extermina-
ting the  Saxon  oppressor,  even  without  the  assistance  of
his  peninsular  allies,  while  the  queen's  army,  severely
drawn  upon  as  it  had  been  for  the  exigencies  of  Vere
and  the  States,  might  be  supposed  unable  to  cope  with
so  formidable  a  combination.  Yet  Montjoy  made  short
work  of  Aquila  and  Tyrone.  The  invaders,  shut  np  in
their  meagre  conquest,  became  the  besieged  instead  of
the  assailants.  Tyrone  made  a  feeble  attempt  to  relieve
his  Spanish  allies,  but  was  soon  driven  into  his  swamps,

1502.

PRINCE  MAURICE  AGAIN  ON  THE  MARCH.

89

the  peasants  would  not  rise,  in  spite  of  proclamations
and  golden  mountains  of  promise,  and  Aquila  was  soon
glad  enough  to  sign  a  capitulation  by  which  he  saved  a
portion  of  his  army.  He  then  returned,  in  January,
transports  provided  by  the  English  general,  a  ^^^2-
much  discomfited  man,  to  Spain,  instead  of  converting
Ireland  into  a  province  of  the  universal  empire.^  He
had  not  rescued  Hibernia,  as  he  stoutly  proclaimed  at
the  outset  his  intention  of  doing,  from  the  jaws  of  the
evil  demon.*

The  kStates,  not  much  wiser  after  the  experience  of
Kieuport,  were  again  desirous  that  Maurice  should
march  into  Flanders,  relieve  Ostend,  and  sweep  the
archduke  into  the  sea.  As  for  Vere,  he  proposed  that  a
great  army  of  cavalry  and  infantry  should  be  sent  into
Ostend,  while  another  force  equally  powerful  should
take  the  field  as  soon  as  the  season  permitted.  Where
the  men  were  to  be  levied,  and  whence  the  funds  for
putting  such  formidable  hosts  in  motion  were  to  be
derived,  it  was  not  easy  to  say.  Tis  astonishing,"
said  Lewis  \\  illiam,  that  the  evils  already  suffei  ed
cannot  open  his  eyes  ;  but  after  all,  'tis  no  marvel.  An
old  and  good  colonel,  as  I  hold  him  to  be,  must  go  to
school  before  he  can  become  a  general,  and  we  must
beware  of  committing  any  second  folly,  govern  ourselves
according  to  our  means  and  the  art  of  war,  and  leave
the  rest  to  God."^

Prince  Maurice,  however,  yielding  as  usual  to  the  per-
suasions or  importunities  of  those  less  sagacious  than
himself,  and  being  also  much  influenced  by  the  advice
of  the  English  queen  and  the  French  king,  after  review-
ing the  most  splendid  army  that  even  he  had  12  June,
ever  equi})ped  and  set  in  the  field,  crossed  the  ^^^^
A\'aal  at  Zymogen,  and  the  Meuse  at  Mook,  and  then,
moving  leisurely  along  Meuse-side  by  way  of  Sambeck,
Blitterswyck,  and  Maasyk,  came  past  St.  Truj'den  to  the
neighbourhood  of  Thienen,  in  Brabant.*  Here  he  stood,
in  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  country,  and  within  a  day's
march  of  Brussels.  The  sanguine  portion  of  his  country-

1  Meteren,  458,  seqq.  •  Grot.  x.  593.  *  Mcteren,  469,  seqq. Van  der  Kemp,

Grotlus,  ubi  sup.  ii.  98,  aa.  and  notes. Bt-ntivoglio,  P.  111.

*  Groen  v.  Trinsterer. Archives,  2ud  517. Wugenaar,  ix.  119,  «C2^.
Series,  ii.  111.

9Q

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

men  and  the  more  easily  alarmed  of  the  enemy  already
thought  it  would  be  an  easy  military  promenade  for  the
stadholder  to  march  through  Brabant  and  Flanders  to
the  coast,  defeat  the  Catholic  forces  before  Ostend,  raise
the  weary  siege  of  that  place,  dictate  peace  to  the  arch-
duke, and  return  in  triumph  to  the  Hague,  before  the
end  of  the  summer.

But  the  experienced  Maurice  too  well  knew  the
emptiness  of  such  dreams.  He  had  a  splendid  army —
eighteen  thousand  foot  and  five  thousand  horse — of
which  Lewis  William  commanded  the  battalia,  Vere  the
right,  and  Count  Ernest  the  left,  with  a  train  of  two
thousand  baggage  wagons,  and  a  considerable  force
of  sutlers  and  camp-followers.  He  moved  so  deliberately,
and  with  such  excellent  discipline,  that  his  two  wings
could  with  ease  be  expanded  for  black-mail  or  forage
over  a  considerable  extent  of  country,  and  again  folded
together  in  case  of  sudden  military  necessity.  But  he
had  no  intention  of  marching  through  Biussels,  Ghent,
and  Bruges,  to  the  Flemish  coast.  His  old  antagonist,
the  Admiral  of  Arragon,  lay  near  Thienen  in  an  en-
trenched camp,  with  a  force  of  at  least  fifteen  thousand
men,  while  the  archduke,  leaving  Eivas  in  command
before  Ostend,  hovered  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Brussels,
with  as  many  troops  as  could  be  spared  from  the  various
Flemish  garrisons,  ready  to  support  the  admiral.^

But  Maurice  tempted  the  admiral  in  vain  with  the
chances  of  a  general  action.  That  warrior,  remembering
perhaps  too  distinctly  his  disasters  at  Nieuport,  or  feel-
ing conscious  that  his  military  genius  was  more  fitly
displayed  in  burning  towns  and  villages  in  neutral  terri-
tory, robbing  the  peasantry,  plundering  gentlemen's
castles  and  murdering  the  proprietors,  than  it  was  like
to  be  in  a  pitched  battle  with  the  first  general  of  the
age,  remained  sullenly  within  his  entrenchments.  His
position  was  too  strong  and  his  force  far  too  numerous
to  warrant  an  attack  by  the  stadholder  upon  his  works.
After  satisfying  himself,  therefore,  that  there  was  no
chance  of  an  encounter  in  Brabant  except  at  immense

18  Jul  ,  disadvantage,  Maurice  rapidly  countermarched
1602.  towards  the  lower  Meuse,  and  on  the  1 8th  July
laid  siege  to  Grave. The  position  and  importance  of

5  Same  authorities  last  cited.

1602.

SIEGE  OF  GRAVE.

91

this  city  have  been  thoroughly  set  before  the  reader  in  a
former  volume.^  It  is  only  necessary,  therefore,  to
recal  the  fact  that,  besides  being  a  vital  possession  for
the  republic,  the  place  was  in  law  the  private  property
of  the  Orange  family,  having  been  a  portion  of  the
estate  of  Count  de  Buren,  afterwards  redeemed  on  pay-
ment of  a  considerable  sum  of  money  by  his  son-in-law,
William  the  Silent,  confirmed  to  him  at  the  pacification
of  Ghent,  and  only  lost  to  his  children  by  the  disgraceful
conduct  of  Captain  Hamart,  which  had  cost  that  officer
his  head.  Maurice  was  determined  at  least  that  tlie  place
should  not  now  slip  through  his  fingers,  and  that  the
present  siege  should  be  a  masterpiece.  His  forts,  of
which  he  had  nearly  fifty,  were  each  regularly  furnished
wilh  moat,  drawbridge,  and  bulwark.  His  counterscarp
and  parapet,  his  galleries,  covered  ways,  and  mines,
were  as  elaboiate,  massive,  and  artistically  finished  as  if
he  were  building  a  city  instead  of  besieging  one.
Buzanval,  the  French  envoy,  amazed  at  the  spectacle,
protested  that  his  w^orks  "  were  rather  worthy  of  the
grand  Emperor  of  the  Turks  than  of  a  little  common-
wealth, which  only  existed  through  the  disorder  of  its
enemies  and  the  assistance  of  its  friends but  he
admitted  the  utility  of  the  stadholder's  proceedings  to
be  very  obvious.'''

While  the  prince  calmly  sat  before  Grave,  awaiting
the  inexorable  hour  for  burghers  and  garrison  to  sur-
render, the  great  Fiancis  Mendoza,  Admiral  of  Arragon,
bad  been  completing  the  arrangements  for  his  exchange.
A  prisoner  after  the  ^sieuport  battle,  he  had  been  assigned
by  Maurice,  as  will  be  recollected,  to  his  cousin,  young
Lewis  Gunther,  w^hose  brilliant  services  as  commander
of  the  cavalry  had  so  much  contributed  to  the  victory.
The  amount  of  ransom  for  so  eminent  a  captive  could
not  fail  to  be  large,  and  accordingly  the  thrifty  Lewis
William  had  congratulated  his  brother  on  being  able,
although  so  young,  thus  to  repair  the  foitunes  of  the
family  by  his  military  industry  to  a  greater  extent  than
had  yet  been  accomplished  by  any  of  the  race.  Subse-
quently, the  admiral  had  been  released  on  parole,  the
sum  of  his  ransom  having  been  fixed  at  nearly  one  hun-
dred thousand  Flemish  crowns. By  an  agreement  now

•  See  vol.  IJ  of  this  work,  chap.  ix. '  Groen  v.  Prinsterer. Archives,  ii.  153.

92

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

made  by  the  States,  with  consent  of  the  Nassau  family,
the  prisoner  was  definitely  released,  on  condition  of
effecting  the  exchange  of  all  prisoners  of  the  republic,
now  held  in  durance  by  Spain  in  any  part  of  the  world.^
This  was  in  lieu  of  the  hundred  thousand  crowns  which
were  to  be  put  into  the  impoverished  coffers  of  Lewis
Gunther.  It  may  be  imagined,  as  the  hapless  prisoners
afterwards  poured  in — not  only  from  the  peninsula,  but
from  more  distant  regions,  whither  they  had  been  sent
by  their  cruel  taskmasters,  some  to  relate  their  sufferings
in  the  horrible  dungeons  of  Spain,  where  they  had  long
been  expiating  the  crime  of  defending  their  fatherland,
others  to  relate  their  experiences  as  chained  galley-
slaves  in  the  naval  service  of  their  bitterest  enemies,
many  with  shorn  heads  and  long  beards  like  Turks,
many  with  crippled  limbs,  worn  out  with  chains  and
blows,  and  the  squalor  of  disease  and  filth  ^ — that  the
hatred  for  Spain  and  Kome  did  not  glow  any  less  fiercely
within  the  republic,  nor  the  hereditary  love  for  the
Nassaus,  to  whose  generosity  these  poor  victims  were
indebted  for  their  deliverance,  become  fainter,  in  conse-
quence of  these  revelations.  It  was  at  first  vehemently
disputed  by  many  that  the  admiral  could  be  exchanged
as  a  prisoner  of  war,  in  respect  to  the  manifold  murders
and  other  crimes  which  would  seem  to  authorize  his
trial  and  chastisement  by  the  tribunals  of  the  republic.
But  it  was  decided  by  the  States  that  the  sacred  aegis  of
military  law  must  be  held  to  protect  even  so  blood-
stained a  criminal  as  he,  and  his  release  was  accordingly
effected.-^^  Not  long  afterwards  he  took  his  departure  for
Spain,  where  his  reception  was  not  enthusiastic.

From  this  epoch  is  to  be  dated  a  considerable  reform
in  the  laws  regulating  the  exchange  of  prisoners  of
war.^^

While  Maurice  was  occupied  with  the  siege  of  Grave,
and  thus  not  only  menacing  an  important  position,  but
spreading  danger  and  dismay  over  all  Brabant  and
Flanders,  it  was  necessary  for  the  archduke  to  detach  so
large  a  portion  of  his  armies  to  observe  his  indefatigable
and  scientific  enemy,  as  to  much  weaken  the  vigour  of

8  MetereD,  449'*'o,  470.  Grotius,  xi.  lo  "  Non  visum  Ordinibus  in -captivum
528,  599.  belli  jure  munitum  judicia  exercere.*' —

^  (jrotius,  uM  sup.  Grotius,  ubi  sup.  n  Ibid.

1602.

MUTINY  IX  THE  ARCHDUKE'S  ARMY.

93

the  operations  before  Ostend.  Moreover,  the  execrable
administration  of  his  finances,  and  the  dismal  delays  and
sufferings  of  that  siege,  had  brought  about  another
mutiny — on  the  whole,  the  most  extensive,  formidable,
and  methodical  of  all  that  had  hitherto  occurred  in  the
Sj)anish  armies.-^^

By  midsummer,  at  least  three  thousand  five  hundred
veterans,  including  a  thousand  of  excellent  cavalr)%  the
very  best  soldiers  in  the  service,  had  seized  the  city  of
Hoogstraaten.  Here  they  established  themselves  securely,
and  strengthened  the  fortifications;  levying  contribu-
tions in  corn,  cattle,  and  every  other  necessary,  besides
wine,  beer,  and  pocket-money,  from  the  whole  country
round  with  exemplary  regularity.  As  usual,  disorder
assumed  the  forms  of  absolute  order.  Anarchy  became
the  best  organized  of  governments,  and  it  would  have
been  difiicult  to  find  in  the  world — outside  the  Dutch
commonwealth — a  single  community  where  justice  ap-
peared to  be  so  promptly  administered  as  in  this  tem-
porary republic,  founded  upon  rebellion  and  theft.

For,  although  a  brotherhood  of  thieves,  it  rigorously
punished  such  of  its  citizens  as  robbed  for  their  own,  not
for  the  public  good.  The  immense  booty  swept  daily
from  the  granges,  castles,  and  villages  of  Flanders  was
divided  with  the  simplicity  of  early  Christians,  while
the  success  and  steadiness  of  the  operations  paralyzed
their  sovereign,  and  was  of  considerable  advantage  to
the  States.

Albert  endeavoured  in  vain  to  negotiate  with  the
rebels.  Kuncius  Frangipani  went  to  them  in  person,
but  was  received  with  calm  derision.  Pious  exhortations
might  turn  the  keys  of  Paradise,  but  gold  alone,  he  was
informed,  would  unlock  the  gates  of  Hoogstraaten.  In
an  evil  hour  the  cardinal-archduke  was  tempted  to  try
the  effect  of  sacerdotal  thunder.  The  ex-archbishop  of
Toledo  could  not  doubt  that  the  terrors  of  the  Church
would  make  those  brown  veterans  tremble  who  could
confront  so  tranquilly  the  spring-tides  of  the  North  Sea,
and  the  batteries  of  Yere  and  NassaTi.  So  he  launched  a
manifesto,  as  highly  spiced  as  a  pamphlet  of  Marnix,  and
as  severe  as  a  sentence  of  Torquemada.  Entirely  against
the  advice  of  the  States-General  of  the  obedient  pro-

i»  Bentivoglio,  iii.  517. Meteren,  470-472.  Grotius,  xi.  604-6^6.

94  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XL.

vinces,  lie  denounced  the  mutineers  as  outlaws  and
accursed.  He  called  on  persons  of  every  degree  to  kill
any  of  them  in  any  way,  at  any  time,  or  in  any  place,
promising  that  the  slayer  of  a  private  soldier  should
receive  a  reward  of  ten  crowns  for  each  head  brought  in,
while  for  a  subaltern  officer's  head  one  hundred  crowns
were  offered,  for  that  of  a  superior  officer  two  hundred,
and  for  that  of  the  Eletto  or  chief  magistrate,  five  hun-
dred crowns.  Should  the  slayer  be  himself  a  member  of
the  mutiny,  his  crime  of  rebellion  was  to  be  forgiven,
and  the  price  of  murder  duly  paid.  All  judges,  magis-
trates, and  provost-marshals  were  ordered  to  make
inventories  of  the  goods,  movable  and  immovable,  of
the  mutineers,  and  of  the  clothing  and  other  articles
belonging  to  their  wives  and  children,  all  which  pro-
perty was  to  be  brought  in  and  deposited  in  the  hands
of  the  proper  functionaries  of  the  archduke's  camp,  in
order  that  it  might  be  duly  incorporated  into  the  domains
of  his  Highness.^^

The  mutineers  were  not  frightened.  The  ban  was
an  anachronism.  If  those  Spaniards  and  Italians  had
learned  nothing  by  their  much  campaigning  in  the  land
of  Calvinism,  they  had  at  least  unlearned  their  faith  in
bell,  book,  and  candle.  It  happened,  too,  that  among
their  numbers  were  to  be  found  pamphleteers  as  ready
and  as  unscrupulous  as  the  scribes  of  the  archduke.

So  there  soon  came  forth  and  was  published  to  the
world,  in  the  name  of  the  Eletto  and  council  of  Hoog-
straaten,  a  formal  answer  to  the  ban.^*

If  scolding  and  cursing  be  payment,"  said  the  magis-
trates of  the  mutiny,  "  then  we  might  give  a  receipt  in
full  for  our  wages.  The  ban  is  sufficient  in  this  respect;
but  as  these  curses  give  no  food  for  our  bellies  nor
clothes  for  our  backs,  not  preventing  us,  therefore,  who
have  been  fighting  so  long  for  the  honour  and  welfare
of  the  archdukes  from  starving  with  cold  and  hunger,  we
think  a  reply  necessary  in  order  to  make  manifest  how
much  reason  these  archdukes  have  for  thundering  forth
all  this  choler  and  fury,  by  which  women  and  children
may  be  frightened,  but  at  which  no  soldier  will  feel
alarm.

13  «  Ora  alle  de  selve  te  doen  incorporeren  aen  onse  Domeynen."— Met,  471.
I*  Meteren  (470-472)  gives  the  text.

1602

MANIFESTO  OF  THE  MUTINEERS.

95

*'  When  it  is  stated,"  continued  the  mutineers,  *'  that
we  have  deserted  our  banners  just  as  an  attempt  was
making  by  the  archduke  to  relieve  Grave,  we  can  only-
reply  that  the  assertion  proves  how  impossible  it  is  to
practise  arithmetic  with  disturbed  brains.  Passion  is
a  bad  schoolmistress  for  the  memory,  but,  as  good  friends,
we  will  recal  to  the  recollection  of  your  Highness  that
it  was  not  your  Highness,  but  the  Admiral  of  Arragon,
that  commanded  the  relieving  force  before  that  city.

"  'Tis  very  true  that  we  summon  your  Highnesses,
and  levy  upon  your  provinces,  in  order  to  obtain  means
of  living ;  for  in  what  other  quarter  should  we  make
application.  Your  Highnesses  give  us  nothing  except
promises ;  but  soldiers  are  not  chameleons,  to  live  on
such  air.  According  to  every  principle  of  law,  creditors
have  a  lien  on  the  property  of  their  debtors.

"As  to  condemning  to  death  as  traitors  and  scoundrels
those  who  don't  desire  to  be  killed,  and  who  have  the
means  of  killing  such  as  attempt  to  execute  the  sentence,
this  is  hardly  in  accordance  with  the  extraordinary
wisdom  which  has  always  characterized  your  High-
nesses.

"As  to  the  confiscation  of  our  goods,  both  movable
and  immovable,  we  would  simply  make  this  observa-
tion : —

"Our  movable  goods  are  our  swords  alone,  and  they
can  only  be  moved  by  ourselves.  They  are  our  im-
movable goods  as  well ;  for  should  any  one  but  ourselves
undertake  to  move  them,  we  assure  your  Highnesses
that  they  will  prove  too  heavy  to  be  handled.

"As  to  the  official  register  and  deposit  ordained  of
the  money,  clothing,  and  other  property  belonging  to
ourselves,  our  wives  and  children,  the  work  may  be  done
without  clerks  of  inventory.  Certainly,  if  the  domains
of  your  Highnesses  have  no  other  sources  of  revenue
than  the  proceeds  of  this  confiscation,  wherewith  to  feed
the  ostrich-like  digestions  of  those  about  you,  'tis  to  be
feared  that  ere  long  they  will  be  in  the  same  condition
as  were  ours,  when  we  were  obliged  to  come  together  in
Hoogstraaten  to  devise  means  to  keep  ourselves,  our
wives,  and  children  alive.  And  at  that  time  we  were
an  unbreeched  people,  like  the  Indians — saving  your
Highnesses'  reverence — and  the  climate  here  is  too  cold

96

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

for  siicli  costume.  Your  Highnesses,  and  your  relatives
the  Emperor  and  King  of  Spain,  will  hardly  make  your
ro^'^al  heads  greasy  with  the  fat  of  such  property  as  we
possess.  'Twill  also  be  a  remarkable  spectacle  after  you
have  stripped  our  wives  and  children  stark  naked  for  the
benefit  of  your  treasury,  to  see  them  sent  in  that  condi-
tion, within  three  days  afterwards,  out  of  the  country,
as  the  ban  ordains.

"  You  order  the  ban  to  be  executed  against  onr  chil-
dren and  our  children's  children,  but  your  Highness
never  learned  this  in  the  Bible,  when  you  were  an  arch-
bishop, and  when  you  expounded,  or  ought  to  have  ex-
pounded, the  Holy  Scriptures  to  your  flock.  What
theology  teaches  your  Highness  to  vent  your  wrath  upon
the  innocent  ?

*'  AVhenever  the  cause  of  discontent  is  taken  away,  the
soldiers  will  become  obedient  and  cheerful.  All  kings
and  princes  may  mirror  themselves  in  the  bad  govern-
ment of  your  Highness,  and  may  see  how  they  fare  who
try  to  carry  on  a  war,  while  with  their  own  hands  they
cut  the  sinews  of  war.  The  great  leaders  of  old — Cyrus,
Alexander,  Scipio,  Cassar — were  accustomed,  not  to
starve,  but  to  enrich  their  soldiers.  What  did  Alexander,
when  in  an  arid  desert  they  brought  him  a  helmet  full
of  water  ?  He  threw  it  on  the  sand,  saying  that  there
was  only  enough  for  him,  but  not  enough  for  his  army.

"  Your  Highnesses  have  set  ten  crowns,  and  one  hun-
dred, and  five  hundred  crowns  upon  our  heads,  but  never
could  find  five  hundred  mites  nor  ten  mites  to  keep  our
souls  and  bodies  together.

"  Yet  you  have  found  means  to  live  yourselves  with
pomp  and  luxury,  far  exceeding  that  of  the  great
Emperor  Charles,  and  much  surpassing  the  magnificence
of  your  Highnesses'  brothers,  the  emperor  and  the
king."^^

Thus,  and  much  more,  the  magistrates  of  the  "  Ita-
lian republic  " — answering  their  master's  denunciations
of  vengeance,  both  in  this  world  and  the  next,  with  a
humorous  scorn  very  refreshing  in  that  age  of  the  world
to  contemplate.  The  expanding  influence  of  the  Dutch
commonwealth  was  already  making  itself  felt  even  in
ihd  ranks  of  its  most  determined  foes.

15  Meteren,  uhi  sup.

1602.

STATE  OF  EUROPE.

97

The  mutineers  had  also  made  an  agreement  with  the
States-General,  by  which  they  had  secured  permission,
in  case  of  need,  to  retire  within  the  territory  of  the
republic.  Maurice  had  written  to  them  from  his  camp
before  Grave,  and  at  first  they  were  disposed  to  treat
him  with  as  little  courtesy  as  they  had  shown  the
Nuncius ;  for  they  put  the  prince's  letter  on  a  staff,
and  fired  at  it  as  a  mark,  assuring  the  trumpeter  who
brought  it  that  they  would  serve  him  in  the  same
manner  should  he  venture  thither  again.^*^  Very  soon
afterwards,  however,  the  Eletto  and  council,  reproving
the  folly  of  their  subordinates,  opened  negotiations
with  the  stadholder,  who,  with  the  consent  of  the  States,
gave  them  preliminary  permission  to  take  refuge  under
the  guns  of  Bergen-op-Zoom,  should  they  by  chance  be
hard  pressed.

Thus  throughout  Europe  a  singular  equilibrium  of
contending  forces  seemed  established.  Before  Ostend,
where  the  chief  struggle  between  imperialism  and  re-
publicanism had  been  proceeding  for  more  than  a  year
with  equal  vigour,  there  seemed  no  possibility  of  a
result.  The  sands  drank  up  the  blood  of  the  combatants
on  both  sides,  month  after  month,  in  summer ;  the
pestilence  in  town  and  camp  mowed  down  Catholic  and
Protestant  with  perfect  impartiality  during  the  winter ;
while  the  remorseless  ocean  swept  over  all  in  its  wrath,
obliterating  in  an  hour  the  patient  toil  of  months.

In  Spain,  in  England,  and  Ireland ;  in  Hungary,  Ger-
many, Sweden,  and  Poland,  men  wrought  industriously
day  by  day  and  year  by  year,  to  destroy  each  other,  and
to  efface  the  products  of  human  industry,  and  yet  no
progress  could  fairly  be  registered.  The  Turk  was  in
Buda,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Danube,  and  the  Christian
in  Pest,  on  the  left,  while  the  crescent,  but  lately  sup-
planted by  the  cross,  again  waved  in  triumph  over
Stuhlweissenberg,  capital  city  of  the  Magyars.  Tht>
great  Marshal  Biron,  foiled  in  his  stupendous  treachery,^*

16  Van  dor  Kemp,  ii.  3S6.  States'  envoy  that  the  king  would  be

1"  Metercn,  Grotius,  Bentivoglio,  w6i  quite  justified  in  resorting  to  arms  to

sup. Van  der  Kemp. Wagenaar,  ix.  punish  the  treason  of  the  Spanish  gover-

12U-122.  nor,  who  having  employed  such  a  servant

IS  Henry  knew  quite  as  well  as  did  the  as  Biron  to  cut  his  master's  throat,  and

most  Catholic  king  the  share  of  Spain  in  stir  up  his  subjects  to  mutiny,  had  more

tins  vile  intrigue.  Villeroy  avowed  to  the  grievously  violated  the  peace  than  if  he
TOL.  IV.  H

^8

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XU

had  laid  down  his  head  upon  the  block  ;  the  catastrophe
following  hard  upon  the  madcap  riot  of  Lord  Essex  in
the  Strand  and  his  tragic  end.  The  troublesome  and
restless  favourites  of  Henry  and  of  Elizabeth  had  closed
their  stormy  career,  but  the  designs  of  the  great  king
and  the  great  queen  were  growing  wider  and  wilder,
more  false  and  more  fantastic  than  ever,  as  the  evening
shadows  of  both  were  lengthening.

But  it  was  not  in  Europe  nor  in  Christendom  alone
during  that  twilight  epoch  of  declining  absolutism,  regal
and  sacerdotal,  and  the  coming  glimmer  of  freedom,
religious  and  commercial,  that  the  contrast  between  the
old  and  new  civilizations  was  exhibiting  itself.

The  same  fishermen  and  fighting  men,  whom  we  have
but  lately  seen  sailing  forth  from  Zeeland  and  Friesland
to  confront  the  dangers  of  either  pole,  were  now  con-
tending in  the  Indian  seas  with  the  Portuguese  mono-
polists of  the  tropics.

A  century  long,  the  generosity  of  the  Koman  pontiff
in  bestowing  upon  others  what  was  not  his  property
had  guaranteed  to  the  nation  of  Vasco  de  Gama  one

had  simply  seized  the  best  province  of  his
kingdom.  Nevertheless,  Aerssens  felt
sure,  even  as  he  had  done  the  year  be-
fore, that  the  king's  rage  against  Spain
and  his  caresses  of  the  republic  were
mere  grimace.  Henry  was  always  hor-
ribly anxious  lest  the  States  should  stop
fighting,  and  at  this  moment  of  emotion
in  France,  he  was  especially  suspicious  of
any  appearance  of  treating  between  the
archduke  and  the  republic.

It  was  to  be  seen,  at  a  little  later  period,
how  great  or  how  trifling  would  be  the
indignation  of  the  British  king  at  a  whole-
sale attempt  of  murder  devised,  as  it  was
suspected,  m  Spain.  It  may  at  least  be
counted  among  the  signs  of  human  pro-
gress that  assassination  is  no  longer  one
of  the  commonplace  means  employed  by
anointed  sovereigns  against  each  other,
and  against  individuals  obnoxious  to
royal  displeasure.

Certainly  it  may  be  doubted  whether
the  practice,  if  now  attempted,  would  be
looked  upon  with  such  lenity  by  the
civilized  world  as  in  the  reigns  of  the
Philips,  Elizabeth,  James,  and  Henry.
Meantime  the  shallow  artifices  by  which

it  was  attempted  at  the  French  court  to
veil  the  share  of  Spain  in  Biron's  plot
were  pitiable.  Excuses  for  Spain  were
made  by  the  French  Government  in
order  to  conceal  its  own  shame.  "  They
don't  consider,"  said  Aerssens,  "that  the
Spaniard  will  never  change  his  designs,
but  will  be  ever  seeking  new  opportuni-
ties. The  sole  result  of  the  discovery  of
this  conspiracy  is  that  the  king  loses  a
good  servant,  and  is  obliged  to  show  too
clearly  that  he  fears  war,  and  therefore  is
seeking  for  peace.  The  pope  pleads  inno-
cence, the  king  believes  him,  and  Villeroy
holds  fast  to  his  old  maxim  that  the
Fi-ench  crown  can  only  prosper  by  keeping
well  with  the  pope,

"  What  fruit  then  shall  we  gather  from
the  evil  of  this  plot  or  the  good  of  its  dis-
covery .?  The  king  says  that  the  King  of
Spain  is  too  good  a  brother,  too  devout,
too  inexperienced  to  hatch  this  perfidy.
'Tis  all  Fuentes  and  other  ministers  in
combination  with  the  Duke  of  Savoy.  I
have  always  ob.>erved  that  princes  never
avow  mishaps,  but  are  very  forward
about  successes."—  Van  Deveuter,  ii.  294,
295,  324,  325.

.1602.

PORTL'GL^ESE  EXPEDITION  TO  JAVA.

99

half  at  least  of  the  valuable  possessions  which  iharitime
genius,  unflinching  valour,  and  boundless  cruelty  had
won  and  kept.^^  But  the  spirit  of  change  was  abroad
in  the  world.  Potentates  and  merchants  under  the
equator  had  been  sedulously  taught  that  there  were  no
other  white  men  on  the  planet  but  the  Portuguese  and
their  conquerors  the  Spaniards,  and  that  the  Dutch — of
whom  they  had  recently  heard,  and  the  portrait  of  whose
great  military  chieftain  they  had  seen  after  the  news  of
the  Nieuport  battle  had  made  the  circuit  of  the  earth —
were  a  mere  mob  of  pirates  and  savages  inhabiting  the
obscurest  of  dens.  They  were  soon,  however,  to  be
enabled  to  judge  for  themselves  as  to  the  power  and  the
merits  of  the  various  competitors  for  their  trade.

Early  in  this  year  Andreas  Hurtado  do  Meiidoza  with
a  stately  fleet  of  galleons  and  smaller  vessels,  more  than
five-and  twenty  in  all,  was  on  his  way  towards  the
island  of  Java  to  inflict  summary  vengeance  upon  those
oriental  rulers  who  had  dared  to  trade  with  men  for-
bidden by  his  Catholic  Majesty  and  the  Pope.

The  city  of  Bantam  was  the  first  spot  marked  out  for
destruction,  and  it  so  happened  that  a  Dutch  skipper
Wolfert  Hermann  by  name,  comnumding  five  trading
vessels,  in  which  were  three  hundred  men,  had  just
ariived  in  those  seas  to  continue  the  illicit  commerce
which  liad  aroused  the  ire  of  the  Portuguese.'^*^  His
whole  force  both  of  men  and  of  guns  was  far  inferior  to
that  of  the  flag-ship  alone  of  Mendoza.  But  he  resolved
to  make  manifest  to  the  Indians  that  the  Batavians  were
not  disposed  to  relinquish  their  promi>ing  commercial
relations  w^ith  them,  nor  to  turn  their  backs  upon  their
newly  found  friends  in  the  hour  of  danger.  To  the  pro-
found astonishment  of  the  Portuguese  admiral  the  Dutch-
man with  his  five  little  trading  ships  made  an  attack  on

1^  Borgia,  Pope  of  Rump,  had  con-  swalUiwed  Faithful  nuijesty,  with  all  bis

scientiously  divided  something  that  was  kingdoms,  he  legally  absorbed  the  East

supposed  to  be  a  new  world  into  two  Inditui  possessions,  and  bc*came  proprietor

halves,  for  his  two  be>t  children,  the  of  the  whole  new  world,  under  the  Borgiaii

nionarclisof  Spain  and  Portugal ;  Catholic  grant.

majesty  to  take  that  portion  lying  west  This  was  public  law,  religion,  high

of  a  line  drawn  from  north  to  south  pole  politics,  and  common  sense  In  those  days,

about  lOOu  miles  beyond  the  Cape  Verde  but  the  unsophisticated  Hollanders  could

Islands ;  Faithful  majesty  the  other  slic*'.  not  be  made  to  under^tand  the  theory,

bubscquently,  when  Catholic  majesty,  20  Grutius,  ix.  68^,  seqq.
towards  the  end  of  the  16th  century,

H  2

100  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XL.

tlie  pompous  armada,  intending  to  avert  chastisement
from  the  king  of  Bantam.  It  was  not  possible  for
Woifert  to  cope  at  close  quarters  with  his  immensely
superior  adversary,  but  his  skill  and  nautical  experience
enabled  him  to  play  at  what  was  then  considered  long
bowls  with  extraordinary  effect.  The  greater  lightness
and  mobility  of  his  vessels  made  them  more  than  a
match,  in  this  kind  of  encounter,  for  the  clumsy,  top-
heavy,  and  sluggish  marine  castles  in  which  Spain  and
Portugal  then  went  forth  to  battle  on  the  ocean.  It
seems  almost  like  the  irony  of  history,  and  yet  it  is  the
literal  fact,  that  the  Dutch  galleot  of  that  day — hardly
changed  in  two  and  a  half  centuries  since — "  the  bull-
browed  galleot  butting  through  the  stream,"  — was  then
the  model  clipper,  conspicuous  among  all  ships  for  its
rapid  sailing  qualities  and  ease  of  handling.  So  much
has  the  world  moved,  on  sea  and  shore,  since  those
simple  but  heroic  days.  And  thus  Wolfert's  swift-going
galleots  circled  round  and  round  the  awkward,  ponderous,
and  much-puzzled  Portuguese  fleet,  until  by  well-directed
shots  and  skilful  manoeuvring  they  had  sunk  several
ships,  taken  two,  run  otheis  into  the  shallows,  and,  at
last,  put  tlie  whole  to  confusion.  After  several  days  of
such  fighting.  Admiral  Mendoza  fairly  turned  his  back
upon  his  insignificant  opponent,  and  abandoned  his
projects  upon  Java.^^  Bearing  away  for  the  Island  of
Amboyna,  with  the  remainder  of  his  fleet,  he  laid  waste
several  of  its  villages  and  odoriferous  spice-fields,  while
AVolfert  and  his  companions  entered  Bantam  in  triiimph,
and  were  hailed  as  deliverers.^^  And  thus  on  the  extreme
western  verge  of  this  magnificent  island  was  founded
the  first  trading  settlement  of  the  Batavian  republic  in
the  archipelago  of  the  equator — the  foundation-stone  of
a  great  commercial  empire  which  was  to  encircle  the
earth.  Not  many  years  later,  at  the  distance  of  a  dozen
leagues  from  Bantam,  a  congenial  swamp  was  fortunately
discovered  in  a  land  whose  volcanic  peaks  rose  two
miles  into  the  air,  and  here  a  town  duly  laid  out  with
canals  and  bridges,  and  trim  gardens  and  stagnant  pools,
was  baptized  by  the  ancient  and  well-beloved  name  of
Good-Meadow  or  Batavia,  which  it  bears  to  this  day.

21  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.

i»  Grotius,  xi.  608,  609. Meteren,  463-465.  Wagenaar,  wW  swjp.  Xbid

1602.

CAPTURE  OF  A  LISBON  CARRACK.

101

Meantime  Wolfert  Hermann  was  not  the  only  Hollander
cruising  in  those  seas  able  to  convince  the  Oriental  mind
that  all  Europeans  save  the  Portuguese  were  not  pirates
and  savages,  and  that  friendly  intercourse  with  other
foreigners  might  be  as  profitable  as  slavery  to  the
Spanish  crow^n.

Captain  Nek  made  treaties  of  amity  and  commerce
with  the  potentates  of  Ternate,  Tydor,  and  other  Mo-
lucca islands.  The  King  of  Candy  on  the  Island  of
Ceylon,  lord  of  the  odoriferous  fields  of  cassia  which
perfume  those  tropical  seas,  was  glad  to  leam  how  to
exchange  the  spices  of  the  equator  for  the  thousand
fabrics  and  products  of  western  civilization  which  found
their  great  emporium  in  Holland.^'*  Jacob  Heemskerk,
too,  who  had  so  lately  astonished  the  world  by  his
exploits  and  discoveries  during  his  famous  winter  in
Nova  Zembla,  was  now  seeking  adventures  and  carrying
the  flag  and  fame  of  the  republic  along  the  Indian  and
Chinese  coasts.  The  King  of  Johor  on  the  Malayan
peninsula  entered  into  friendly  relations  with  hiui,  being
well-pleased,  like  so  many  of  those  petty  rulers,  to
obtain  protection  against  the  Portuguese  whom  he  had
so  long  hated  and  feared.  He  informed  Heemskerk  of
the  arrival  in  the  straits  of  Malacca  of  an  immense
Lisbon  carrack,  laden  with  pearls  and  spices,  brocades
and  precious  stones,  on  its  way  to  Europe,  and  suggested
an  attack.  It  is  true  that  the  roving  Hollander  merely
commanded  a  couple  uf  the  smallest  galleots  with  about
a  hundred  and  thirty  men  in  the  two.  But  when  was
Jacob  Heemskerk  ever  known  to  shrink  fiom  an  en-
counter— whether  from  single-handed  combat  with  a
polar  bear,  or  from  leading  a  forlorn  hope  against
a  Spanish  fort,  or  from  assailing  a  Portuguese  armada.
The  carrack,  more  than  one  thousand  tons  burthen,
carried  seventeen  guns,  and  at  least  eight  times  as
many  men  as  he  commanded."^  Nevertheless,  after  a
combat  of  but  brief  duration  Heemskerk  was  master  of
the  carrack.  He  spared  the  lives  of  his  seven  hundred
prisoners,  and  set  them  on  shore  before  they  should
have  time  to  discover  to  what  a  handful  of  Dutchmen
they  had  surrendered.  Then  dividing  about  a  million
florins*  worth  of  booty  among  his  men,  who  doubtless

Grotivis.  xi.  608-613.

«5  Ibid.

102'

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XU

found  sncli  cruising  among  the  spice  islands  more  at-
tractive than  wintering  at  the  Korth  Pole,  he  sailed  in
the  carrack  for  Macao,  where  he  found  no  difficulty
in  convincing  the  authorities  of  the  celestial  empire
that  the  friendship  of  the  Dutch  republic  was  worth  cul-
tivating.^*^ There  was  soon  to  be  work  in  other  regions
for  the  hardy  Hollander — such  as  was  to  make  the  name
of  Heemskevk  a  word  to  conjure  with  down  to  the  latest
posterity.  Meantime  he  returned  to  his  own  country  to
take  part  in  the  great  industrial  movements  which  were
to  make  this  year  an  epoch  in  commercial  history.

The  conquerors  of  Mendoza  and  deliverers  of  Bantam
had  however  not  paused  in  their  work.  From  Java  they
sailed  to  Banda,  and  on  those  volcanic  islands  of  nut-
megs and  cloves  made,  in  the  name  of  their  common-
wealth, a  treaty  with  its  republican  antipodes.  For
there  was  no  king  to  be  found  in  that  particular  archi-
pelago, and  the  two  reiDublics,  the  Oriental  and  the
Germanic,  dealt  with  each  other  with  direct  and  becom-
ing simplicity .^'^  Their  convention  was  in  accordance
with  the  commercial  ideas  of  the  day,  which  assumed
monopoly  as  the  true  basis  of  national  prosperity.  It  was
agreed  that  none  but  Dutchmen  should  ever  purchase
the  nutmegs  of  Banda,  and  that  neither  nation  should
harbour  refugees  from  the  other.  Other  articles,  however,
showed  how  much  farther  the  practice  of  political  and  re-
ligious liberty  had  advanced  than  had  any  theory  of  com-
mercial freedom.  It  was  settled  that  each  nation  should
judge  its  own  citizens  according  to  its  own  laws,  that
neither  should  interfere  by  force  with  tlie  other  in  regard
to  religious  matters,  but  that  God  should  be  judge  over
them  all.^^  Here  at  least  was  progress  beyond  the  system
according  to  which  the  Holy  Inquisition  furnished  the
only  enginry  of  civilization.  The  guardianship  assumed
by  Holland  over  these  children  of  the  sun  was  at  least
an  improvement  on  the  tyranny  which  roasted  them  alive
if  they  rejected  religious  dogmas  which  they  could  not
comprehend,  and  which  proclaimed  with  fire,  sword,  and
gibbet  that  the  Omnipotent  especially  forbade  the  nutmeg
trade  to  all  but  the  subjects  of  the  most  Catholic  king.

25  Grotius,  Meteren,  uM  sup.  27  Grotius,  xi.  609,

28  Ibid.  "  Religionis  ob  causam  molesti  alii  aliis  ne  essent  sed  Deo  jadici  rem  per*
mitterent.'*

1602. EMBASSY  FROM  SUMATRA  TO  THE  STATES.  103

In  Atsgen  or  Achim,  chief  city  of  Sumatra,  a  treaty
was  likewise  made  with  the  government  of  the  place,
and  it  was  arranged  that  the  king  of  Atsgen  should  send
over  an  embassy  to  the  distant  but  friendly  republic.
Thus  he  might  judge  whether  the  Hollanders  were
enemies  of  all  the  world,  as  had  been  represented  to
him,  or  only  of  Spain ;  whether  their  knowledge  of  the
arts  and  sciences,  and  their  position  among  the  western
nations  entitled  them  to  respect,  and  made  their  friend-
ship desirable  ;  or  whether  they  were  only  worthy  of
the  contempt  which  their  royal  and  aristocratic  enemies
delighted  to  heap  upon  their  heads.^^  The  envoys  sailed
from  Sumatra  on  board  the  same  little  fleet  which,  under
the  command  of  Wolfert  Hermann,  had  already  done
such  signal  service,  and  on  their  way  to  Europe  they  had
an  opportunity  of  seeing  how  these  republican  sailors
conld  deal  with  their  enemies  on  the  ocean.

Oflf  St.  Helena  an  immense  Portuguese  carrack  richly
laden  and  powerfully  armed,  was  met,  attacked,  and
overpowered  by  the  little  merchantmen  with  their  usual
audacity  and  skill.  A  magnificent  booty  was  equitably
divided  among  the  captors,  the  vanquished  crew  were
set  safely  on  shore,  and  the  Hollanders  then  pursued
their  home  voyage  without  further  adventures.^^

The  ambassadors,  with  an  Arab  interpreter,  were  duly
presented  to  Trince  Maurice  in  the  lines  before  the  city
of  Grave.^^  Certainly  no  more  favourable  opportunity
could  have  been  offei'ed  them  for  contrasting  the  reality
of  military  power,  science,  national  vigour,  and  wealth,
which  made  the  republic  eminent  among  the  nations,
with  the  fiction  of  a  horde  of  insignificant  and  blood-
thirsty savages  which  her  enemies  had  made  so  familiar
at  the  antipodes.  Not  only  were  the  intrenchments,
bastions,  galleries,  batteries,  the  discipline  and  equip-
ment of  the  troops,  a  miracle  in  the  eyes  of  these  newly-
arrived  Oriental  ambassadors,  but  they  had  awakened
the  astonishment  of  Europe,  already  accustomed  to  such
spectacles.  Evidently  the  amity  of  the  stadhulder  and
his  commonwealth  was  a  jewel  of  price,  and  the  King
of  Achim  would  have  been  far  more  barbarous  than  he
had  ever  deemed  the  Dutchmen  to  be,  had  he  not  well
heeded  the  lesson  which  he  had  sent  so  far  to  learn.

»  Meteren,  Qrotius,  Wagcuaar,  ubi  sup.

30  Ibid.

31  Ibid.

104

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

The  chief  of  the  legation,  ALdnlzamar,  died  in  Zeeland,
and  was  buried  with  honourable  obsequies  at  Middleburg,
a  monument  being  raised  to  his  memory.  The  other
envoys  returned  to  Sumatra,  fully  determined  to  main-
tain close  relations  with  the  republic.^^

There  had  been  other  vistors  in  Maurice's  lines  before
Grave  at  about  the  same  period.  Among  others,  Gaston
Spinola,  recently  created  by  the  archduke  Count  of
Bruay,  had  obtained  permission  to  make  a  visit  to  a
wounded  relative,  then  a  captive  in  the  republican  camp,
and  was  hospitably  entertained  at  the  stadholder's  table.
Maurice,  with  soldierly  bluntness,  ridiculed  the  floatirig
batteries,  the  castles  on  wheels,  the  sausages,  and  othsr
newly-invented  machines,  employed  before  Ostend,  and
characterized  them  as  rather  fit  to  catch  birds  with
than  to  capture  a. city,  defended  by  mighty  armies  aad
fleets.

"  If  the  archduke  has  set  his  heart  upon  it,  he  had  far
better  try  to  buy  Ostend,"  he  observed.

"  What  is  your  price  ?  "  asked  the  Italian  ;  "  will  ypu
take  200,000  ducats?"

*'  Certainly  not  less  than  a  million  and  a  half,"  was  the
reply ;  so  highly  did  M  aurice  rate  the  position  and  ad-
vantages of  the  city.  He  would  venture  to  prophesy,  he
added,  that  the  siege  of  Ostend  would  last  as  long  as  the
siege  of  Troy.

"Ostend  is  no  Troy,"  said  Spinola  with  a  courtly
flourish,  "although  there  are  certainly  not  wanting  an
Austrian  Agamemnon,  a  Dutch  Hector,  and  an  Italian
Achilles."  The  last  allusion  was  to  the  speaker's  name-
sake and  kinsman,  the  Marquis  Ambrose  Spinola,  of
whom  much  was  to  be  heard  in  the  world  from  that
time  forth.

Meantime,  although  so  little  progress  had  been  made
at  Ostend,  Maurice  Had  thoroughly  done  his  work  before
Grave.  On  the  18th  September  the  place  surrendered,
after  sixty  days'  siege,  upon  the  terms  usually  granted
by  the  stadholder.  The  garrison  was  to  go  out  with  the
honours  of  war.  Those  of  the  inhabitants  who  wished
to  leave  were  to  leave  ;  those  who  preferred  staying
were  to  stay  ;  rendering  due  allegiance  to  the  republic,
and  abstaining  in  public  from  the  rites  of  the  Eoman

Si  Meteren,  Grotius,  Wagena.ar,  uhi  sup.

33  Gallucci,  ii.  109.

1602.  WAR  GALLEYS  AND  GALLEY-SLAVES.

105

Church,  withoTit  being  exposed,  however,  to  any  inquiries
as  to  their  religious  opinions,  or  any  interference  within
their  households.^*

The  work  went  slowly  on  before  Ostend.  Much  effect
had  been  produced,  however,  by  the  operations  of  the
archduke's  little  naval  force.  The  galley  of  that  day,
although  a  child's  toy  as  compared  with  the  wonders  of
naval  architecture  of  our  own  time,  was  an  effective
machine  enough  to  harass  fishing  and  coasting  vessels
in  creeks  and  estuaries,  and  along  the  shores  of  Holland
and  Zeeland  during  tranquil  weather.

The  locomotive  force  of  these  vessels  consisted  of
galley-slaves,  in  which  respect  the  Spaniards  had  an
advantage  over  other  nations ;  for  they  had  no  scruples
in  putting  prisoners  of  war  into  chains  and  upon  the
benches  of  the  rowers.  Humanity — the  law  of  Christian
piety,"  in  the  words  of  the  noble  Grotius — forbade  the
Hollanders  from  reducing  their  captives  to  such  homblo
slavery,^^  and  they  were  obliged  to  content  themselves
with  condemned  criminals,  and  with  the  few  other
wretches  whom  abject  poverty  and  the  impossibility  of
earning  other  wages  could  induce  to  accept  the  service.
And  as  in  the  maritime  warfare  of  our  own  day,  the
machinery — engines,  wheels,  and  boilers — is  the  especial
aim  of  the  enemy's  artillery,  so  the  chain-gang  who  rowed
in  the  waist  of  the  galley,  the  living  enginry,  without
which  the  vess(d  became  a  useless  tub,  was  as  suiel}^
marked  out  for  destruction  wherever  a  sea-fight  took
place.

The  Hollanders  did  not  very  much  favour  this  species
of  war-craft,  both  by  reason  of  the  difiSculties  of  procur-
ing the  gang,  and  because  to  a  true  lover  of  the  ocean
and  of  naval  warfare  the  galley  was  about  as  clumsy  and
amphibious  a  production  as  could  be  hoped  of  human
perverseness.  High  where  it  should  be  low — exposed,
flat,  and  fragile,  where  elevation  and  strength  were  in-
dispensable— encumbered  and  top-heavy  where  it  shtmld
be  level  and  compact,  weak  in  the  waist,  broad  at  stem
and  stern,  awkward  in  manoeuvre,  helpless  in  rough
weather,  sluggish  under  sail,  although  possessing  tlio
single  advantage  of  .being  able  to  crawl  over  a  smooth

Meteren,  470.  Grotius,  xi  604.  Van  dor  Kemp,  ii.  99  and  notes.  Wageniur.
U.  120.  35  Hist.  ix.  575.

106

THE  UMTED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

sea  when  better  and  faster  ships  were  made  stationary  by
absolute  calm,  the  galley  was  no  match  for  the  Dutch
galleot,  either  at  close  quarters  or  in  a  breeze.

Nevertheless  for  a  long  time  there  had  been  a  certain
awe  produced  by  the  possibility  of  some  prodigious  but
unknown  qualities  in  these  outlandish  vessels,  and  al-
ready the  Hollanders  had  tried  their  own  hand  at  con-
structing them.  On  a  late  occasion  a  galley  of  consider-
able size,  built  at  Dort,  had  rowed  past  the  Spanish  forts
on  the  Scheld,  gone  up  to  Antwerp,  and  coolly  cut  out
from  the  very  wharves  of  the  city  a  Spanish  galley  of
the  first  class,  besides  seven  war- vessels  of  lesser  dimen-
sions, at  first  gaining  advantage  by  surprise,  and  then
breaking  down  all  opposition  in  a  brilliant  little  fight.
The  noise  of  the  encounter  summoned  the  citizens  and
garrison  to  the  walls,  only  to  witness  the  triumph
achieved  by  Dutch  audacity,  and  to  see  the  victors
dropping  rapidly  down  the  river,  laden  with  booty  and
followed  by  their  prizes.  Nor  was  the  mortification  of
these  unwilling  spectators  diminished  when  the  clear
notes  of  a  bugle  on  board  the  Dutch  galley  brought  to
their  ears  the  well-known  melody  of  "Wilhelmus  of
Nassau,"  once  so  dear  to  every  patriotic  heart  in  Ant-
werp, and  perhaps  causing  many  a  renegade  cheek  on
this  occasion  to  tingle  with  shame.^^

Frederic  Spinola,  a  volunteer  belonging  to  the  great
and  wealthy  Genoese  family  of  that  name,  had  been  per-
forming a  good  deal  of  privateer  work  with  a  small  force
of  galleys  which  he  kept  under  his  command  at  Sluys.
He  had  succeeded  in  inflicting  so  much  damage  upon
the  smaller  merchantmen  of  the  republic,  and  in  main-
taining so  perpetual  a  panic  in  calm  weather  among  the
seafaring  multitudes  of  those  region^  that  he  was  dis-
posed to  extend  the  scale  of  his  operations.  On  a  visit
to  Spain  he  had  obtained  permission  from  Government
to  employ  in  this  service  eight  great  galleys,  recently
built  on  the  Guadalquivir  for  the  Eoyal  Navy.  He  was
to  man  and  equip  them  at  his  ovm  expense,  and  was  to
be  allowed  the  w^hole  of  the  booty  that  might  result
from  his  enterprise.  Early  in  the  autumn  he  set  forth
with  his  eight  galleys  on  the  voyage  to  Flanders,  but,
off  Cezimbra,  on  the  Portuguese  coast,  unfortunately  fell

36  Hist.  576.

1602. ATTACK  ON  SPINOLA'S  FLEET  OF  PRIVATEERS.  107

in  with  Sir  Eobert  Mansell,  who,  with  a  compact  little
squadron  of  English  frigates,  was  lying  in  wait  for  the
homeward-bound  India  fleet  on  their  entrance  to  Lisbon.
An  engagement  took  place,  in  which  Spinola  lost  two  of
his  galleys.  His  disaster  might  have  been  still  greater,
had  not  an  immense  Indian  carrack,  laden  with  richest
merchandize,  just  then  hove  in  sight,  to  attract  his  con-
querors with  a  hope  of  better  prize-money  than  could
he  expected  from  the  most  complete  victory  over  him
and  his  fleet.^'^

With  the  remainder  of  his  vessels  Spinola  crept  out  of
sight  while  the  English  were  ransacking  the  3  October,
carrack.  On  the  3rd  of  October  he  had  entered  ^^•^2-
the  channel  with  a  force  which,  according  to  the  ideas  of
tlmt  day,  was  still  formidable.  Each  of  his  galleys  was
of  two  hundred  and  fifty  slave-power,  and  carried,  be-
sides the  chain-gang,  fuur  hundred  fighting  men.  His
flag-ship  was  called  the  St.  Lewis ;  the  names  of  the
other  vessels  being  the  St.  Thilip,  the  Morning  Star,  the
St.  John,  the  Hyacinth,  and  the  Padilla.  The  Trinity
and  the  Opportunity  had  been  destroyed  ofi*  Cezimbra.
Now  there  happened  to  bo  cruising  just  then  in  the
channel.  Captain  Peter  Mol,  master  of  the  Dutch  war-
ship Tiger,  and  Captain  Lubbeitson,  commanding  the
Pelican.  These  two  espied  the  Spanish  squadron,  pad-
dling at  about  dusk  towards  the  English  coast,  and
quickly  gave  notice  to  Vice- Admiral  John  Kant,  who,
in  the  States'  ship  Half-moon,  with  three  other  war-
galleots,  was  keeping  watch  in  that  neighbourhood.  It
was  dead  calm  as  the  night  fell,  and  the  galleys  of  Spi-
nola, which  had  crept  close  up  to  the  Dover  cliffs,  were
endeavouring  to  row  their  way  across  in  the  darkness
towards  the  Flemish  coast,  in  the  hope  of  putting  unob-
served into  the  Gut  of  Sluys.^^  All  went  well  with
Spinola  till  the  moon  rose ;  but,  with  the  moon,  sprang
up  a  steady  breeze,  so  that  the  galleys  lost  all  their  ad-
vantage. Nearly  otf  Gravelines  another  States'  ship,  the
Mackerel,  came  in  sight,  which  forthwith  attacked  the
St.  Philip,  pouring  a  broadside  into  her  by  which  fifty
men  were  killed.  Drawing  off"  from  this  assailant,  the
galley  found  herself  close  to  the  Dutch  admiral  in  th^

37  GrotiuR,  xi.  607,  608.  ^  Fleming,  290-294. Bc-ntivogllo,  iiL  6161

Groiius,  ubi  sup. Haestcns,  232,  seqq. Mctereu,  474.

108

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL

Half-moon,  who,  with  all  sail  set,  bore  straight  down
•upon  her,  struck  her  amidships  with  a  mighty  crash,
carrying  off  her  mainmast  and  her  poop,  and  then,  extri-
cating himself  with  difficulty  from  the  wreck,  sent  a
tremendous  volley  of  cannon-shot  and  lesser  missiles
straight  into  the  waist  where  sat  the  chain-gang.  A
howl  of  pain  and  terror  rang  through  the  air,  while  oars
and  benches,  arms,  legs,  and  mutilated  bodies,  chained
inexorably  together,  floated  on  the  moonlit  waves.  An
instant  later,  and  another  galleot  bore  down  to  complete
the  work,  striking  with  her  iron  prow  the  doomed  St.
Philip  so  straightly  and  surely  that  she  went  down  like
a  stone,  carrying  with  her  galley-slaves,  sailors,  and
soldiers,  besides  all  the  treasure  brought  by  Spinola
for  the  use  of  his  fleet.

The  Morning  Star  was  the  next  galley  attacked.  Cap-
tain Sael,  in  a  stout  galleot,  driving  at  her  under  full
sail,  with  the  same  accuracy  and  solidity  of  shock  as  had
been  displayed  in  the  encounter  with  the  St.  Philip  and
with  the  same  result.  The  miserable,  top-heavy  monster
galley  was  struck  between  mainmast  and  stern,  with  a
blow  which  carried  away  the  assailant's  own  bowsprit
and  fore-bulwarks,  but  which  completely  demolished
the  stern  of  the  galle,y,  and  crushed  out  of  existence  the
greater  portion  of  the  live  machinery  sitting  chained
and  rowing  on  the  benches.  And  again,  as  the  first
enemy  hauled  off  from  its  victim.  Admiral  Kant  came
up  once  more  in  the  Half-moon,  steered  straight  at  the
floundering  galley,  and  sent  her  with  one  crash  to  the
bottom.  It  was  not  very  scientific  practice  perhaps.  It
f  was  but  simple  butting,  plain  sailing,  good  steering,  and

the  firing  of  cannon  at  short  pistol-shot.  But  after  all,
the  work  of  those  unsophisticated  Dutch  skippers  was
done  very  thoroughly,  without  flinching,  and,  as  usual
at  great  odds  of  men  and  guns.  Two  more  of  the  Spanish
galleys  were  chased  into  the  shallows  near  Gravel  ines,
where  they  went  to  pieces.  Another  was  wrecked  near
Calais.  The  galley  which  bore  Frederic  Spinola  himself
and  his  fortunes  succeeded  in  reaching  Dunkirk,  whence
he  made  his  way  discomfited,  to  tell  the  tale  of  his  dis-
aster to  the  archduke  at  Brussels.  During  the  fight  the
Dutch  admiral's  boats  had  been  active  in  picking  up  such
of  the  drowning  crews,  whether  galley-slaves  or  soldiers,

1602.

PROGRESS  OF  THE  SIEGE  OF  OSTEND.

109

as  it  was  possible  to  save.  But  not  more  than  two  hun-
dred were  thus  rescued,  while  by  far  the  greater  pro-
portion of  those  on  board,  probably  three  thousand  in
number,  perished,  and  the  whole  fleet,  by  which  so
much  injury  was  to  have  been  inflicted  on  Dutch  com-
merce, was,  save  one  damaged  galley,  destroyed.^^  Yet
scarcely  any  lives  were  lost  by  the  Hollanders,  and  it  is
certain  that  the  whole  force  in  their  fleet  did  not  equal
the  crew  of  a  single  one  of  the  enemy's  ships.  Neither
Spinola  nor  the  archduke  seemed  likely  to  make  much
out  of  the  contract.  Meantime,  the  Genoese  volunteer
kept  quiet  in  Sluys,  brooding  over  schemes  to  repair  his
losses  and  to  renew  his  forays  on  the  indomitable  Zee-
landers.

Another  winter  had  now  closed  in  upon  Ostend,  while
still  the  siege  had  scarcely  advanced  an  inch.  During
the  ten  months  of  Governor  Dorp's  administration,  four
thousand  men  had  died  of  wounds  or  malady  within  the
town,  and  certainly  twice  as  many  in  the  trenches  of
the  besieging  force.  Still  the  patient  Bucquoy  went
on,  day  after  day,  night  after  night,  month  after  month,
planting  his  faggots  and  fascines,  creeping  forward  al-
most imperceptibly  with  his  dyke,  paying  five  florins
each  to  the  soldiers  who  volunteered  to  bring  the  mate-
rials, and  a  double  ducat  to  each  man  employed  in  laying
them.  So  close  were  they  under  the  fire  of  the  town,
that  a  life  was  almost  laid  down  for  every  ducat,  but  the
Gullet,  which  it  was  hoped  to  close,  yawned  as  wide  as
ever,  and  the  problem  how  to  reduce  a  city,  open  by  sea
to  the  whole  world,  remained  without  solution.  On  the
last  day  of  the  year  a  splendid  fleet  of  transports  31  Dec.
arrived  in  the  town,  laden  with  whole  droves  of  ^^^2-
beeves  and  flocks  of  sheep,  besides  wine  and  bread  and
beer  enough  to  supply  a  considerable  city  ;  so  that  market
provisions  in  the  beleaguered  towTi  were  cheaper  than  in
any  part  of  Europe."*^  Thus  skilfully  did  the  States-
General  and  Prince  Maurice  watch  from  the  outside  over
Ostend,  while  the  audacious  but  phlegmatic  sea-captains
brought  their  cargoes  unscathed  through  the  Gullet,
although  Bucquoy' s  batteries  had  now  advanced  to
within  seventy  yards  of  the  shore.

On  the  west  side,  the  besiegers  were  slowly  eatiitg

39  Authorities  last  cited.

*o  FlemiDg,  321.

110

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

their  way  through  the  old  harbour  towards  the  heart
of  the  place.  Subterranean  galleries,  patiently  drained
of  their  water,  were  met  by  counter-galleries  leading
out  from  the  town,  and  many  were  the  desperate
hand-to-hand  encounters,  by  dim  lanterns,  or  in  total
darkness,  beneath  the  ocean  and  beneath  the  earth;
Hollander,  Spaniard^  German,  Englishman,  Walloon,
digging  and  dying  in  the  fatal  trenches,  as  if  there  had
been  no  graves  at  home.  Those  insatiable  sand-banks
seemed  ready  to  absorb  all  the  gold  and  all  the  life  of
Christendom.  But  the  monotony  of  that  misery  it  is
useless  to  chronicle.  Hardly  an  event  o£  these  dreary
da3^s  has  been  left  unrecorded  by  faithful  diarists  and
industrious  soldiers,  but  time  has  swept  us  far  away
from  them,  and  the  world  has  rolled  on  to  fresher  fields
of  carnage  and  ruin.  All  winter  long  those  unwearied,
intelligent,  fierce,  and  cruel  creatures  toiled  and  fought
in  the  stagnant  waters,  and  patientl}^  burrowed  in  the
earth.  It  seemed  that  if  Ostend  were  ever  lost  it  would
be  because  at  last  entirely  bitten  away  and  consumed.
When  there  was  no  Ostend  left,  it  might  be  that  the
archduke  would  triumph.

As  there  was  always  danger  that  the  movements  on
the  east  side  might  be  at  last  successful,  it  was  the  com-
mand of  Maurice  that  the  labours  to  construct  still
another  harbour  should  go  on  in  case  the  Gullet  should
become  useless,  as  the  old  haven  had  been  since  the
beginning  of  the  siege.  And  the  working  upon  that
newest  harbour  was  as  dangerous  to  the  Hollanders  as
Bucquuy's  dyke-building  to  the  Spaniards,  for  the  pio-
neers and  sappers  were  perpetually  under  fire  from  the
batteries  which  the  count  had  at  last  successfully  estab-
lished on  the  extremity  of  his  work.  It  was  a  piteous
sight  to  see  those  patient  delvers  lay  down  their  spades
and  die,  hour  after  hour,  to  be  succeeded  by  their  breth-
ren only  to  share  their  fate.  Yet  still  the  harbour
building  progressed ;  for  the  republic  was  determined
that  the  city  should  be  open  to  the  sea  so  long  as  the
States  had  a  stiver,  or  a  ship,  or  a  spade.

While  this  deadly  industry  went  on,  the  more  strictly
military  operations  were  not  pretermitted  day  nor  night.
The  Catholics  were  unwearied  in  watching  for  a  chance
of  attack,  and  the  Hollanders  stood  on  the  ramparts  and

1603.

DESTRUCTIVE  HURRICANE.

Ill

in  the  trenches,  straining  eyes  and  ears  through  the  per-
petual icy  mists  of  that  black  winter  to  catch  the  sight
and  sound  of  a  coming  foe.  Especially  the  by- watches,
as  they  were  called,  were  enough  to  break  down  consti-
tutions of  iron ;  for,  all  day  and  night,  men  were  sta-
tioned in  the  inundated  regions,  bound  on  pain  of  death
to  stand  in  the  water  and  watch  for  a  possible  movement
of  the  enemy,  until  the  waves  should  rise  so  high  as  to
make  it  necessar}-  to  swim.  Then,  until  the  tide  fell
again,  thei  e  was  brief  repose.'*^

And  so  the  dreary  winter  faded  away  at  last  into  chill
and  blustering  spring.  On  the  13th  of  April,  1(303,  a
hurricane,  such  as  had  not  occurred  since  the  siege
began,  raged  across  the  ocean,  deluging  and  is  April,
shattering  the  devoted  town.^  The  waters
rose  over  dyke  and  parapet,  and  the  wind  swept  from
the  streets  and  ramparts  every  living  thing.  Not  a
soldier  or  sailor  could  keep  his  feet,  the  chief  tower  of
the  church  was  blo\\Ti  into  the  square,  chimneys  and
windows  crashed  on  all  sides,  and  the  elements  had
their  holiday,  as  if  to  prove  how  helpless  a  thing  was
man,  however  fierce  and  determined,  when  the  powers
of  Nature  arose  in  their  strength.  It  was  as  if  no  siege
existed,  as  if  no  hostile  armies  had  been  lying  nearly
two  years  long  close  to  each  other,  and  losing  no  oppor-
tunity to  fly  at  each  others'  throats.  The  strife  of  wind
and  ocean  gave  a  respite  to  human  rage.  It  was  but  a
brief  respite.  At  nightfall  tliere  was  a  lull  in  the  tem-
pest, and  the  garrison  crept  again  to  the  ramparts.
Instantly  the  departing  roar  of  the  winds  and  waters
were  succeeded  by  fainter  but  still  more  threatening
sounds,  and  the  sentinels  on  dut}^  had  scarce  time  to
give  the  alarm,  and  the  drums  and  trumpets  to  rally
the  garrison,  when  the  attack  came.  The  sleepless
Spaniards  were  already  upon  them.  In  the  J^orcupine
fort,  a  blaze  of  wickerwork  and  building  materials  sud-
denly illuminated  the  gathering  gloom  of  night,  and
tlie  loud  cries  of  the  assailants,  who  had  succeeded  in
kindling  this  fire  by  their  missiles,  proclaimed  the
fierceness  of  the  attack.  Governor  Dorp  was  himself
in  the  fort,  straining  every  nerve  to  extinguish  the
flames,  and  to  hold  this  most  important  position.  He

^  Fleming,  35U.

*»  IbiO.  3^.1.

112

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XL.

was  successful.  After  a  brief  but  bloody  encounter  the
Spaniards  were  repulsed  with  heavy  loss.  All  was  quiet
again,  and  the  garrison  in  the  Porcupine  were  congra-
tulating themselves  on  their  victory  when  suddenly
the  ubiquitous  Philip  Fleming  plunged,  with  a  face  of
horror,  into  the  governor's  quarters,  informing  him  that
the  attack  on  the  redoubt  had  been  a  feint,  and  that  the
Spaniards  were  at  that  very  moment  swarming  all  over
the  three  external  forts,  called  the  South  Square,  the
West  Square,  and  the  Polder.^^  These  points,  which
have  been  already  described,  were  most  essential  to  the
protection  of  the  place,  as  without  them  the  whole
counterscarp  was  in  danger.  It  was  to  save  those  ex-
posed but  vital  positions  that  Sir  Francis  Vere  had
resorted  to  the  slippery  device  of  the  last  Christmas
eve  but  one.

Dorp  refused  to  believe  the  intelligence.  The  squares
were  well  guarded,  the  garrison  ever  alert.  Spaniards
were  not  birds  of  prey  to  fly  up  those  perpendicular
heights,  and  for  beings  without  wings  the  thing  was  im-
possible. He  followed  Fleming  through  the  darkness,
and  was  soon  convinced  that  the  impossible  was  true.
The  precious  squares  were  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.
Nimble  as  monkeys,  those  yellow-jerkined  Italians,  Wal-
loons, and  Spaniards — storm-hats  on  their  heads  and
swords  in  their  teeth — had  planted  rope-ladders,  swung
themselves  up  the  walls  by  hundreds  upon  hundreds,
while  the  fight  had  been  going  on  at  the  Porcupine,  and
were  now  rushing  through  the  forts  grinning  defiance,
yelling  and  chattering  with  fierce  triumph,  and  beating
down  all  opposition.  It  was  splendidly  done.  The  dis-
comfited Dorp  met  small  bodies  of  his  men,  panic-struck,
reeling  out  from  their  stronghold,  wounded,  bleeding,
shrieking  for  help  and  for  orders.  It  seemed  as  if  the
Spaniards  had  dropped  from  the  clouds.  The  Dutch
commandant  did  his  best  to  rally  the  fugitives,  and  to
encourage  those  who  had  remained.  All  night  long  the
furious  battle  raged,  every  inch  of  ground  being  con-
tested;  for  both  Catholics  and  Hollanders  knew  full
well  that  this  triumph  was  worth  more  than  all  that
had  been  gained  for  the  archduke  in  eighteen  months
of  siege. Pike  to  pike,  breast  to  breast,  they  fought

*3  Fleming,  351-354.

1603.

CAPTURE  OF  EXTERNAL  FORTS.

113

through  the  dark  April  night ;  the  last  sobs  of  the  hurri-
cane dying  unheard,  the  red  lanterns  flitting  to  and  fro,
the  fireworks  hissing  in  every  direction  of  earth  and  air,
the  great  wicker  piles,  heaped  up  with  pitch  and  rosin,
flaming  over  a  scene  more  like  a  dance  of  goblins  than
a  commonplace  Christian  massacre.  At  least  fifteen
hundred  were  killed — besiegers  and  besieged — during
the  storming  of  the  forts  and  the  determined  but  unsuc-
cessful attempt  of  the  Hollanders  to  retake  them.  And
when  at  last  the  day  had  dawned,  and  the  Spaniards
could  see  the  full  extent  of  their  victory,  they  set  them-
selves with  unusual  alacrity  to  killing  such  of  the
wounded  and  prisoners  as  were  in  their  hands,  while,
at  the  same  time,  they  turned  the  guns  of  their  newly
acquired  works  upon  the  main  counterscai-p  of  the
town.*^

Yet  the  besieged — discomfited  but  undismayed — lost
not  a  moment  in  strengthening  their  inner  works,  and
in  doing  their  best,  day  after  day,  by  sortie,  cannonade,
and  every  possible  device,  to  prevent  the  foe  from  ob-
taining full  advantage  of  his  success.  The  triumph  was
merely  a  local  one,  and  the  patient  Hollanders  soon
proved  to  the  enemy  that  the  town  was  not  gained  by
carrying  the  three  squares,  but  that  every  inch  of  the
place  was  to  be  contested  as  hotly  as  those  little  re-
doubts had  been.  Ostend,  after  standing  nearly  two
years  of  siege,  was  not  to  be  carried  by  storm.  A  goodly
slice  of  it  had  been  pared  off  that  April  night,  and  was
now  in  possession  of  the  archduke,  but  this  was  all.*^
Meantime  the  underground  work  was  resumed  on  both
sides.

Frederic  Spinola,  notwithstanding  the  stunning  de-
feat sustained  by  him  in  the  preceding  October,  had  not
lost  heart  while  losing  all  his  ships.  On  the  25  May,
contrary,  he  had  been  busy  during  the  winter
in  building  other  galleys.  Accordingly,  one  fine  morn-
ing in  May,  Counsellor  Flooswyk,  being  on  board  a  war
vessel  convoying  some  empty  transports  from  Ostend,
observed  signs  of  mischief  brewing  as  he  sailed  past
the  Gut  of  Sluys,  and  forthwith  gave  notice  of  what  ho
had  seen  to  Admiral  Joost  de  Moor,  commanding  the

*♦  Fleming,  361-354.
VOL,  IV.

♦5  Ibid.

I

114

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

blockading  squadron.  The  counsellor  was  right.  Fre-
deric Spinola  meant  mischief.  It  was  just  before
sunrise  of  a  beautiful  summer's  day.  The  waves  were
smooth — not  a  breath  of  wind  stirring — and  De  Moor,
who  had  four  little  war-ships  of  Holland,  and  was  sup-
ported besides  by  a  famous  vessel  called  the  Black
Galley  of  Zeeland,  under  Captain  Jacob  Michelzoon,
soon  observed  a  movement  from  Sluys.*^  Over  the  flat
and  glassy  surface  of  the  sea,  eight  galleys  of  the  largest
>  size  were  seen  crawling  slowly,  like  vast  reptiles
towards  his  position.  Four  lesser  vessels  followed  in
the  wake  of  the  great  galleys.  The  sails  of  the  admiral's
little  fleet  flapped  idly  against  the  mast.  He  could  only
placidly  await  the  onset.  The  Black  Galley,  however,
moved  forward  according  to  her  kind,  and  was  soon
vigorously  attacked  by  two  galleys  of  the  enemy.  With
all  the  force  that  five  hundred  rowers  could  impart,
these  two  huge  vessels  ran  straight  into  the  Zeeland
ship,  and  buried  their  iron  prows  in  her  sides.  Yet  the
Black  Galley  was  made  of  harder  stuff  than  were  those
which  had  gone  down  in  the  channel  the  previous
autumn  under  the  blows  of  J ohn  Kant.  Those  on  board
her,  at  least,  were  made  of  tougher  material  than  were
galley-slaves  and  land- soldiers.  The  ramming  was  cer-
tainly not  like  that  of  a  thousand  horse-power  of  steam,
and  there  was  no  very  great  display  of  science  in  the
encounter ;  yet  Captain  Jacob  Michelzoon,  with  two
enemy's  ships  thus  stuck  to  his  sides,  might  well  have
given  himself  up  for  lost.  The  disproportion  of  ships
and  men  was  monstrous.  Beside  the  chain-gang,  each
of  Spinola's  ships  was  manned  by  two  hundred  soldiers,*''
while  thiity-six  musketeers*^  from  the  Flushing  gar-
rison were  the  only  men-at-arms  in  De  Moor's  whole
squadron.  But  those  amphibious  Zeelanders  and  Hol-
landers, perfectly  at  home  in  the  water,  expert  in
handling  vessels,  and  excellent  cannoneers,  were  more
than  a  match  for  twenty  times  their  number  of  lands-
men. It  was  a  very  simple-minded,  unsophisticated
contest. The  attempt  to  board  the  Black  Galley  was

*5  The  best  authorities  for  this  encounter  are  Groen  van  Prinsterer,  Archives,  II.
194;  Fleming,  382-384;  Meteren,  485,  4C6;  Gallucci,  xv.  96-98;  Grotius,  xii.  625
<i26;  Bentivoglio,  iii.  519.  *7  Fleming^  383.  Grotius,  02-'%

1603.

DEFEAT  AND  DEATH  OF  SPINOLA.

115

met  with  determined  resistance,  but  the  Zee! and  sailors
clambered  like  cats  upon  the  bowsprits  of  the  Spanish
galleys,  fighting  with  cutlass  and  handspike,  while  a
broadside  or  two  was  delivered  with  terrible  effect  into
the  benches  of  the  chained  and  wretched  slaves.  Cap-
tain Michelzoon  was  killed,^^  but  his  successor,  Lieu-
tenant Hart,  although  severely  wounded,  swore  that  he
would  blow  up  his  ship  with  his  own  hands  rather  than
surrender.  The  decks  of  all  the  vessels  ran  with  blood,
but  at  last  the  Black  Galley  succeeded  in  beating  off
her  assailants ;  the  Zeelanders,  by  main  force,  breaking
off  the  enemy's  bowsprits,  so  that  the  two  ships  of
Spinola  were  glad  to  sheer  off,  leaving  their  stings
buried  in  the  enemy's  body.^

Next,  four  galleys  attacked  the  stout  little  galleot  of
Captain  Logier,  and  with  a  very  similar  residt.  Their
prows  stuck  fast  in  the  bulwarks  of  the  ship,  but  the
boarders  soon  found  themselves  the  boarded,  and,  after
a  brief  contest,  again  the  iron  bowsprits  snapped  like
pipe-stems,  and  again  the  floundering  and  inexperienced
Spaniards  shrank  away  from  the  terrible  encounter
which  they  had  provoked.  Soon  afterwards,  Joost  de
Moor  was  assailed  by  three  galleys,  lie  received  them,
however,  with  cannonade  and  musketry  so  warmly  that
they  willingly  obeyed  a  summons  from  Spinola,  and
united  with  the  flag-ship  in  one  more  tremendous  onset
upon  the  Black  Galley  of  Zeeland.  And  it  might  have
gone  hard  with  that  devoted  ship,  already  crippled  in
the  previous  encounter,  had  not  Captain  Logier  fortu-
nately drifted  with  the  current  near  enough  to  give  her
assistance,  while  the  other  sailing  ships  lay  becalmed
and  idle  spectators.  At  last  Spinola,  conspicuous  by
his  armour,  and  by  magnificent  recklessness  of  danger,
fell  upon  the  deck  of  his  galley,  torn  to  pieces  with
twenty-four  wounds  from  a  stone  gun  of  the  Black
Galley,  while  at  nearly  the  same  moment  a  gentle
breeze  began  in  the  distance  to  ruffle  the  surface  of  the
waters.  Slore  than  a  thousand  men  had  fallen  in
Spinola's  fleet,  inclusive  of  the  miserable  slaves,  who
were  tossed  overboard  as  often  as  wounds  made  them
a  cumbrous  part  of  the  machinery,  and  the  galleys,

GaUucci,  97. Fleming,  383.

»o  Authorities  cited.

I  2

116  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XL.

damaged,  discomfited,  laden  with  corpses,  and  dripping
with  blood,  rowed  off  into  Sluys  as  speedily  as  they  could
move,  without  waiting  until  the  coming  wind  should
bring  all  the  sailing  ships  into  the  fight,  together  with
such  other  vessels  under  Haultain  as  might  be  cruising
in  the  distance.  They  succeeded  in  getting  into  the
Gut  of  Sluys,  and  so  up  to  their  harbour  of  refuge.*^
Meantime,  baldheaded,  weather-beaten  Joost  de  Moor —
farther  pursuit  being  impossible — piped  all  hands  on
deck,  where  officers  and  men  fell  on  their  knees,  shout-
ing in  pious  triumph  the  34th  Psalm :  "I  will  bless
the  Lord  at  all  times.  His  praise  shall  continually  be  in

my  mouth  0  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let

us  exalt  His  name  together."  So  rang  forth  the  notes
of  humble  thanksgiving  across  the  placid  sea.  And
assuredl}'  those  hardy  mariners,  having  gained  a  victory
with  their  little  vessels  over  twelve  ships  and  three
thousand  men — a  numerical  force  of  at  least  ten  times
their  number, — such  as  few  but  Dutchmen  could  have
achieved,  had  a  right  to  give  thanks  to  Him  from  whom
all  blessings  flow.

Thus  ended  the  career  of  Frederic  Spinola,  a  wealthy,
gallant,  high-born,  brilliant  youth,  who  might  have
earned  distinction,  and  rendered  infinitely  better  service
to  the  cause  of  Spain  and  the  archdukes,  had  he  not
persuaded  himself  that  he  had  a  talent  for  seamanship.
Certainly,  never  was  a  more  misplaced  ambition,  a  more
unlucky  career.  Not  even  in  that  age  of  rash  adventure,
when  grandees  became  admirals  and  field-marshals
because  they  were  grandees,  had  such  incapacity  been
shown  by  any  restless  patrician.  Frederic  Spinola,  at
the  age  of  thirty-two,  a  landsman  and  a  volunteer,,
thinking  to  measure  himself  on  blue  water  with  such
veterans  as  John  Kant,  Joost  de  Moor,  and  the  other
Dutchmen  and  Zeelanders  whom  it  was  his  fortune  to
meet,  could  hardly  escape  the  doom  which  so  rapidly
befel  him.

On  board  the  Black  Galley  Captain  Michelzoon,
eleven  of  his  officers,  and  fifteen  of  his  men  were  killed  ;
Admiral  de  Moor  was  slightly  wounded,  and  had  five
of  his  men  killed  and  twenty  wounded ;  Captain  Logier

51  I'leming,  Meteren,  Gallucci,  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  ubi  sup. 52  lUeteren,  486.

1603.

EXECUTION  OF  PRISONERS.

117

was  wounded  in  the  foot,  and  lost  fifteen  killed  and
twelve  wounded.^

The  number  of  those  killed  in  Spinola's  fleet  has
been  placed  as  high  as  fourteen  hundred,  including  two
hundred  officers  and  gentlemen  of  quality,  besides  the
crowds  of  galley-slaves  thrown  overboard.^  This  was
perhaps  an  exaggeration.  The  losses  were,  however,
sufficient  to  put  a  complete  stop  to  the  enterprise  out  of
which  the  unfortunate  Spinola  had  conceived  such
extravagant  hopes  of  fame  and  fortune.

The  herring-smacks  and  other  coasters,  besides  the
transports  passing  to  and  from  Ostend,  sailed  thence-
forth unmolested  by  any  galleys  from  Sluys.  One
unfortunate  sloop,  however,  in  moving  out  from  the
beleaguered  city,  ran  upon  some  shoals  before  getting  out
of  the  Gullet  and  thus  fell  a  prize  to  the  besiegers.  She
was  laden  with  nothing  more  precious  than  twelve
wounded  soldiers  on  their  way  to  the  hospitals  at  Flush-
ing. These  prisoners  were  immediately  hanged,  at  the
express  command  of  the  archduke,^  because  they  had
been  taken  on  the  sea  where,  according  to  his  Highness,
there  were  no  laws  of  war.^

The  stadholder,  against  his  will — for  Maurice  was
never  cruel — felt  himself  obliged  to  teach  the  cardinal
better  jurisprudence  and  better  humanity  for  the  future.
In  order  to  show  him  that  there  was  but  one  belligerent
law  on  sea  and  on  land,  he  ordered  two  hundred  Spanish
prisoners  within  his  lines  to  draw  lots  from  an  urn  in
which  twelve  of  the  tickets  were  inscribed  with  the
fatal  word  gibbet.  Eleven  of  the  twelve  thus  marked  by
ill  luck  were  at  once  executed.  The  twelfth,  a  comely
youth,  was  pardoned  at  the  intercession  of  a  young  girl.^^
It  is  not  stated  whether  or  not  she  became  his  wife.  It
is  also  a  fact  worth  mentioning,  as  illustrating  the  reck-
lessness engendered  by  a  soldier's  life,  that  the  man  who
drew  the  first  blank  sold  it  to  one  of  his  comrades  and
plunged  his  hand  again  into  the  fatal  urn.^  Whether
he  succeeded  in  drawing  the  gibbet  at  his  second  trial

*3  Meteren,  486.  "  Grotius,  xli.  630.

*♦  Letter  of  Ernest  Casimir  in  Groen  ^  Ibid. "Scd  aqua  captos  iibi  nulla

V.  Prin.,  Arch.  II.  194. Grotius  says  300  forent  belli  foedera,"

killed  and  many  wounded. Fleming,  p.  57  Ibid.  Meteren,  487.  VanderKemp^

3S4,  says  1000  killed  besides  the  wounded  107.

and  slaves  uncounted.  ^  Grotius,  uhi  sup.

118

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL,

has  not  been  recorded.  When  these  executions  had
taken  place  in  full  view  of  the  enemy's  camp,  Manrice
formally  announced  that  for  every  prisoner  thenceforth
put  to  death  by  the  archduke  two  captives  from  his  own
army  should  be  hanged.^^  These  stern  reprisals,  as
usual,  put  an  end  to  the  foul  system  of  martial  murder.

Throughout  the  year  the  war  continued  to  be  exclu-
sively the  siege  of  Ostend.  Yet  the  fierce  operations,
recently  recorded,  having  been  succeeded  by  a  period
of  comparative  languor.  Governor  Dorp  at  last  obtained
permission  to  depart  to  repair  his  broken  health.  He
was  succeeded  in  command  of  the  forces  within  the  town
by  Charles  Yan  der  Noot,  colonel  of  the  Zeeland  regiment
which  had  suffered  so  much  in  the  first  act  of  the  battle
of  Nieuport.  Previously  to  this  exchange,  however,  a
day  of  solemn  thanksgiving  and  prayer  was  set  apart  on
the  anniversary  of  the  beginning  of  the  siege.^^  Since  the
6th  of  July,  1601,  two  years  had  been  spent  by  the  whole
power  of  the  enemy  in  the  attempt  to  reduce  this  miser-
able village,  and  the  whole  result  thus  far  had  been  the
capture  of  three  little  external  forts.  There  seemed
cause  for  thanksgiving.

Philip  Fleming,  too,  obtained  a  four  weeks'  holiday —
the  first  in  eleven  years — and  went  with  his  family
outside  the  pestiferous  and  beleaguered  town.  He  was
soon  to  return  to  his  multifarious  duties  as  auditor,
secretary,  and  chronicler  of  the  city,  and  unattached
aide-de-camp  to  the  commander-in-chief,  whoever  that
might  be,  and  to  perform  his  duty  with  the  same  patient
courage  and  sagacity  that  had  marked  him  from  the
beginning.  "  An  unlucky  cannon-ball  of  the  enemy,"
as  he  observes,  did  some  damage  at  this  period  to  his
diary,  but  it  happened  at  a  moment  when  comparatively
little  was  doing,  so  that  the  chasm  was  of  less  conse-
quence.^^

"  And  so  I,  Philip  Fleming,  auditor  to  the  Council  of
War,"  he  says  with,  homely  pathos,  "  have  been  so  con-
tinually employed  as  not  to  have  obtained  leave  in  all
these  years  to  refresh,  for  a  few  days  outside  this  town,
my  troubled  spirit  after  such  perpetual  work,  intolerable
cares,  and  slavery,  having  had  no  other  pleasure  allotted
me  than  with  daily  sadness,  weeping  eyes,  and  heavy

59  Grotius,  Meteren,  uhi  sup.  eo  Fleming,  397.  ibid.  399,  seqfi.

1603.

AUDITOR  FLEMING'S  DIARY.

119

yearnings  to  tread  the  ramparts,  and,  like  a  poor  slave
laden  with  fetters,  to  look  at  so  many  others  sailing  out
of  the  harbour  in  order  to  feast  their  souls  in  other
provinces  with  green  fields  and  the  goodly  works  of
God.  And  thus  it  has  been  until  it  has  nearly  gone  out
of  my  memory  how  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  growing  trees,
and  dumb  beasts  appear  to  mortal  eye."

He  then,  with  whimsical  indignation,  alludes  to  a
certain  author  who  pleaded  in  excuse  for  the  short-
comings of  the  history  of  the  siege  the  damage  done  to
his  manuscripts  by  a  cannon-ball.  *'  Where  the  liar
dreamt  of  or  invented  his  cannon-ball,"  he  says,  "  I  can-
not tell,  inasmuch  as  ho  never  saw  the  city  of  Ostend  in
his  life ;  but  the  said  cannon-ball,  to  my  great  sorrow,
did  come  one  afternoon  through  my  office,  shot  from  the
enemy's  great  battery,  which  very  much  damaged  not
his  memoirs  but  mine ;  taking  off  the  legs  and  arms  at
the  same  time  of  three  poor  invalid  soldiers  seated  in  the
sun  before  my  door  and  killing  them  on  the  spot,  and
just  missing  my  wife,  then  great  with  child,  who  stood
by  me  with  faithfulness  through  all  the  sufferings  of
the  bloody  siege  and  presented  me  twice  during  its
continuance,  by  the  help  of  Almighty  God,  with  young
Amazons  or  daughters  of  war."

And  so  honest  Philip  Fleming  went  out  for  a  little
time  to  look  at  the  green  trees  and  the  dumb  creatures
feeding  in  the  Dutch  pastures.  Meantime  the  two  armies
— outside  and  within  Ostend — went  moiling  on  in  their
monotonous  work ;  steadily  returning  at  intervals,  as  if
by  instinct,  to  repair  the  ruin  which  a  superior  power
would  often  inflict  in  a  half-hour  on  the  results  of
laborious  weeks.

In  the  open  field  the  military  operations  were  very
trifling,  the  wager  of  battle  being  by  common  consent
fought  out  on  the  sands  of  Ostend,  and  the  necessities
for  attack  and  defence  absorbing  the  resources  of  each
combatant.  France,  England,  and  Spain  were  holding
a  perjoetual  diplomatic  tournament,  to  which  our  eyes
must  presently  turn,  and  the  Sublime  Eealm  of  the
Ottoman  and  the  Holy  Koman  Empire  were  in  the  cus-
tomary equilibrium  of  their  eternal  strife.

The  mutiny  of  the  veterans  continued  ;  the  Italian

62  Fleming,  399,  seqq.

120

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

republic  "  giving  the  archduke  almost  as  much  trouble,
despite  his  ban  and  edicts  and  outlawry,  as  the  Dutch
commonwealth  itself.  For  more  than  a  twelvemonth
the  best  troops  of  the  Spanish  army  had  been  thus
established  as  a  separate  empire,  levying  black-mail  on
the  obedient  provinces,  hanging  such  of  their  old  officers
as  dared  to  remonstrate,  and  obeying  their  elected  chief
magistrates  with  exemplary  docility.

They  had  become  a  force  of  five  thousand  strong,
cavalry  and  infantry  together,  all  steady,  experienced
veterans— the  best  and  bravest  soldiers  of  Europe.  The
least  of  them  demanded  two  thousand  florins  as  owed
to  him  by  the  King  of  Spain  and  the  archduke.  The
burghers  of  Bois-le-Duc  and  other  neighbouring  towns  in
the  obedient  provinces  kept  watch  and  ward,  not  knowing
how  soon  the  Spaniards  might  be  upon  them  to  reward
them  for  their  obedience.  Not  a  peasant  with  provisions
was  permitted  by  the  mutineers  to  enter  Bois-le-Duc,
while  the  priests  were  summoned  to  pay  one  year's
income  of  all  their  property  on  pain  of  being  burned
alive.  Very  much  amazed  are  the  poor  priests  at  these
proceedings,"  said  Ernest  Nassau,  "  and  there  is  a  terrible
quantity  of  the  vile  race  within  and  around  the  city.
I  hope  one  day  to  have  the  plucking  of  some  of  their
feathers  myself."

The  mutiny  governed  itself  as  a  strict  military  de-
mocracy, and  had  caused  an  official  seal  to  be  engraved,
representing  seven  snakes  entwined  in  one,  each  thrust-
ing forth  a  dangerous  tongue,  with  the  motto — •

"  tutto  in  ore
E  sua  Eccelenza  in  nostro  favore."  ^

*'His  Excellency"  meant  Maurice  of  Nassau,  with
whom  formal  articles  of  compact  had  been  arranged.  It
had  become  necessary  for  the  archduke,  notwithstanding
the  steady  drain  of  the  siege  of  Ostend,  to  detach  a
considerable  army  against  this  republic  and  to  besiege
them  in  their  capital  of  Hoogstraaten.  With  seven
thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  cavalry  Frederic  Van
den  Berg  took  the  field  against  them  in  the  latter  part
of  July.  Maurice,  with  nine  thousand  five  hundred  in-
fantry and  three  thousand  horse,  lay  near  Gertruydenberg.

63  Groen  van  Piinsterer,  Archives,  II.  203.

64  Meteren,  48G.

1603. TREATY  OF  MAURICE  WITH  THE  MUTINEERS.  121

When  united  with  the  rebel  "  squadron,"  two  thousand
five  hundred  strong,  he  would  dispose  of  a  force  of  fifteen
thousand  veterans,  and  he  moved  at  once  to  relieve  the
besieged  mutineers.^^  His  cousin  Frederic,  however,
had  no  desire  to  measure  himself  with  the  stad holder  at
such  odds,  and  stole  away  from  him  in  the  dark  without
beat  of  drum.^^  Maurice  entered  Hoogstraaten,  was
received  with  rapture  by  the  Spanish  and  Italian  vete-
rans,^^  and  excited  the  astonishment  of  all  by  the  coolness
with  which  he  entered  into  the  cage  of  these  dangerous
serpents — as  they  called  themselves — handling  them,
caressing  them,  and  being  fondled  by  them  in  return.
But  the  veterans  knew  a  soldier  when  they  saw  one,
and  their  hearts  warmed  to  the  prince — heretic  though
he  were — more  than  they  had  ever  done  to  the  unfrocked
bishop  who,  after  starving  them  for  years,  had  doomed
them  to  destruction  in  this  world  and  the  next.

The  stadholder  was  feasted  and  honoured  by  the
mutineers  during  his  brief  visit  to  Hoogstraaten,  and
concluded  with  them  a  convention,  according  to  which
that  town  was  to  be  restored  to  him,  while  they  were  to
take  temporary  possession  of  the  city  of  Grave.  They
were  likewise  to  assist,  with  all  their  strength,  in  his
military  operations  until  they  should  make  peace  on
their  own  terms  with  the  archduke.  For  two  weeks
after  such  treaty  they  were  not  to  fight  against  the
States,  and  meantime,  though  fighting  on  the  republican
side,  they  were  to  act  as  an  independent  corps  and  in
no  wise  to  be  merged  in  the  stadholder  s  forces.*^^  So
much  and  no  more  had  resulted  from  the  archduke's
excommunication  of  the  best  part  of  his  army.  He  had
made  a  present  of  those  troops  to  the  enemy.  He
had  also  been  employing  a  considerable  portion  of  his
remaining  forces  in  campaigning  against  their  own  com-
rades. \\  hile  at  Grave,  the  mutineers,  or  the  squadron  '
as  they  were  now  called,  were  to  be  permitted  to  practise
their  own  religious  rites,  without  offering,  however,  any
interference  with  the  regular  Protestant  worship  of  the
place.  When  they  should  give  up  Grave,  Hoogstraaten
was  to  be  restored  to  them,  if  still  in  the  possession  of
the  States,  and  they  were  to  enter  into  no  negotiations

65  Metercn,  486-488.  ««  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  104,  and  notes.

•7  Van  der  Kemp. Metercn,  ubi  sup.  w  ibid.

122

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

with  tlie  archduke  except  with  full  knowledge  of  tlio
stadholder.

There  were  no  further  military  operations  of  moment
during  the  rest  of  the  year.

Much  more  important,  however,  than  siege,  battle,  or
mutiny,  to  human  civilization,  were  the  steady  move-
ments of  the  Dutch  skippers  and  merchants  at  this
period.  The  ears  of  Europe  were  stunned  with  the
clatter  of  destruction  going  on  all  over  Christendom,  and
seeming  the  onl}^  reasonable  occupation  of  Christians  ;
but  the  little  republic,  while  fighting  so  heroically
against  the  concentrated  powers  of  despotism  in  the
VVest,  was  most  industriously  building  up  a  great  empire
in  the  East.  In  the  new  era  just  dawning,  production
was  to  become  almost  as  honourable  and  potent  a
principle  as  destruction.

The  voyages  among  the  spicy  regions  of  the  equator  —
so  recently  wrested  from  their  Catholic  and  Faithful
Majesties  by  Dutch  citizens  who  did  not  believe  in  Borgia
— and  the  little  treaties  made  with  petty  princes  and
commonwealths,  who  for  the  first  time  were  learning
that  there  were  other  white  men  in  the  world  beside
the  Portuguese,  had  already  led  to  considerable  results.
Before  the  close  of  the  previous  year  that  great  commer-
cial corporation  had  been  founded — an  empire  within
an  empire,  a  republic  beneath  a  republic — a  counting-
house  company  which  was  to  organize  armies,  conquer
kingdoms,  build  forts  and  cities,  make  war  and  peace,
disseminate  and  exchange  among  the  nations  of  the
earth  the  various  products  of  civilization,  more  perfectly
than  any  agency  hitherto  known,  and  bring  the  farthest
disjoined  branches  of  the  human  family  into  closer
connection  than  had  ever  existed  before.  That  it  was
a  monopoly,  offensive  to  true  commercial  principles,'
illiberal,  unjust,  tyrannical,  ignorant  of  the  very  rudi-
ments of  mercantile  philosophy,  is  plain  enough.  For
the  sages  of  the  world  were  but  as  clowns,  at  that  period,
in  economic  science.

Was  not  the  great  financier  of  the  age,  Maximilian  de
Bethune,  at  that  very  moment  exhausting  his  intellect  in
devices  for  the  prevention  of  all  international  commerce
even  in  Europe  ?  "  The  kingdom  of  France,"  he  groaned,
"  is  stuffed  full  of  the  manufactures  of  our  neighbours,

1603.  RESTRICTIONS  OX  FRENCH  COMMERCE.  123

and  it  is  incredible  what  a  curse  to  us  are  these  wares.
The  import  of  all  foreign  goods  has  now  been  forbidden
under  very  great  penalties."  As  a  necessary  corollary
to  this  madhouse  legislation  an  edict  was  issued,  pro-
hibiting the  export  of  gold  and  silver  from  France,  on
pain,  not  only  of  confiscation  of  those  precious  metals,
but  of  the  whole  fortune  of  such  as  engaged  in  or  winked
at  the  traffic.  The  king  took  a  public  oath  never  to
exempt  the  culprits  from  the  punishment  thus  imposed,
and,  as  the  thrifty  Sully  had  obtained  from  the  great
king  a  private  grant  of  all  those  confiscations,  and  as  he
judiciously  promised  twenty-five  per  cent,  thereof  to  the
informer,  no  doubt  he  filled  his  own  purse  while  im-
poverishing the  exchequer.^^

The  united  States,  not  enjoying  the  blessings  of  a
paternal  government,  against  which  they  had  been
fighting  almost  half  a  century,  could  not  be  expected  to
rival  the  stupendous  folly  of  such  political  economy,
although  certainly  not  emancipated  from  all  the  delusions
of  the  age.

Nor  are  we  to  forget  how  very  recently,  and  even
dimly,  the  idea  of  freedom  in  commerce  has  dawned
upon  nations,  the  freest  of  all  in  polity  and  religion.
Certainly  the  vices  and  shortcomings  of  the  commercial
system  now  inaugurated  by  the  republic  may  be  justly
charged  in  great  part  to  the  epoch,  w^hile  her  vast  shai  e
in  the  expanding  and  upward  movement  which  civiliza-
tion, under  the  auspices  of  self-government,  self-help,
political  freedom,  free  thought,  and  unshackled  science,
was  then  to  undertake — never  more  perhaps  to  be  per-
manently checked — must  be  justly  ascribed  to  herself.

It  was  considered  accordingly  that  the  existence  of  so
many  private  companies  and  co-partnerships  trading  to
the  East  was  injurious  to  the  interests  of  commerce.
Merchants  arriving  at  the  ditFerent  Indian  ports  would

69  Memoires  de  Sully,  iv,  8-10,  ed.  gold  or  pistolct  of  fifty-eight  sous  was

Londies,  174S. The  great  minister  adds,  put  at  sixty-two  i«ous,  and  so  with  other

with  diverting  himplicity: — "1  founi  a  coins  in  proportion.— Ibid.  p.  184.

remedy,  shorter  and  less  violent  than  Nothing  was  wanting  but  to  declare

chastisements  and  confiscations,  to  pre-  that  the  three-hooped  pot  should  have

vent  the  e.xport  of  specie;  that  was  to  ten  hoops,  that  seven  halfpenny  loaves

raise  the  value  of  it." Accordingly  the  should  be  sold  for  a  penny,  and  to  make

crown  of  si.\ty  sous  was  declared  to  be  it  felony  to  drink  small  beer — acconling  to

worth  sixty-live  sous,  and  the  crown  of  the  system  ofau  earlier  financial  reformer.

124

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL,

often  find  that  their  own  countrymen  had  been  too  quick
for  them,  and  that  other  fleets  had  got  the  wind  out  of
their  sails,  that  the  eastern  markets  had  been  stripped,
and  that  prices  had  gone  up  to  a  ruinous  height,'^*^  while
on  the  other  hand,  in  the  Dutch  cities,  nutmegs  and
cinnamon,  brocades  and  indigo,  were  as  plentiful  as  red
herrings.  It  was  hardly  to  be  expected  at  that  day  to
find  this  very  triumph  of  successful  traffic  considered
otherwise  than  as  a  grave  misfortune,  demanding  inter-
ference on  the  part  of  the  only  free  Government  then
existing  in  the  world.  That  already  free  competition
and  individual  enterprise  had  made  such  progress  in
enriching  the  Hollanders  and  the  J avanese  respectively
with  a  superfluity  of  useful  or  agreeable  things,  brought
from  the  farthest  ends  of  the  earth,  seemed  to  the  eyes
of  that  day  a  condition  of  things  likely  to  end  in  a
general  catastrophe.  With  a  simplicity,  amazing  only
to  those  who  are  inclined  to  be  vain  of  a  superior
wisdom — not  their  own  but  that  of  their  wisest  contem-
poraries— one  of  the  chief  reasons  for  establishing  the
East  India  Company  was  stated  to  be  the  necessity  of
providing  against  low  prices  of  Oriental  productions  in
Europe.

But  national  instinct  is  often  wiser  than  what  is
supposed  to  be  high  national  statesmanship,  and  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  true  foundation  of  the  East
India  Company  was  the  simple  recognition  of  an  iron
necessity.  Every  merchant  in  Holland  knew  full  well
that  the  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  could  never  be
driven  out  of  their  commercial  strongholds  under  the
equator,  except  by  a  concentration  of  the  private
strength  and  wealth  of  the  mercantile  community.  The
Government  had  enough  on  its  hands  in  disputing,  inch
by  inch,  at  so  prodigious  an  expenditure  of  blood  and
treasure,  the  meagre  territory  with  which  nature  had
endowed  the  little  commonwealth.  Private  organiza-
tion, self-help,  union  of  individual  purses  and  individual
brains,  were  to  conquer  an  empire  at  the  antipodes  if  it
were  to  be  won  at  all.  By  so  doing,  the  wealth  of  the
nation  and  its  power  to  maintain  the  great  conflict  with
the  spirit  of  the  past  might  be  indefinitely  increased,
and  the  resources  of  Spanish  despotism  proportionally

70  Wagenaar,  ix.  147-150.

1603.

EAST  INDIA  COMPANY  ORGANIZED.

125

diminislied.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  of  Jacob  HeemS'
kerk,  Wolfert  Hermann,  or  Joris  van  Spilberg,  in-
domitable skippers  though  they  were,  that  each,  acting
on  his  own  responsibility  or  on  that  of  his  supercargo,
would  succeed  every  day  in  conquering  a  whole  Spanish
fleet  and  dividing  a  million  or  two  of  prize-money
among  a  few  dozen  sailors.  Better  things  even  than
this  might  be  done  by  wholesome  and  practical  concen-
tration on  a  more  extended  scale.

So  the  States-General  granted  a  patent  or  charter  to
one  great  company  with  what,  for  the  time,  was  an
enormous  paid-up  capital,  in  order  that  the  India  trade
might  be  made  secure  and  the  Spaniards  steadily  con-
fronted in  what  they  had  considered  their  most  impreg-
nable possessions.  All  former  trading  companies  were
invited  to  merge  themselves  in  the  Universal  East  India
Company,  which,  fur  twenty-one  years,  should  alone
have  the  right  to  trade  to  the  east  of  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  and  to  sail  through  the  Straits  of  Magellan.'^

The  charter  had  been  signed  on  20th  March,  1602,
and  was  mainly  to  the  following  effect.

The  company  was  to  pay  twenty-five  thousand  florins
to  the  States-General  for  its  privilege.  The  March  20,
whole  capital  was  to  be  six  million  six  hundred  ^^^^
thousand  florins.  The  chamber  of  Amsterdam  was  to
have  one  half  of  the  whole  interest,  the  chamber  of
Zeeland  one  fourth ;  the  chambers  of  the  Meuse,
namely.  Delft,  Rotterdam,  and  the  north  quarter,  that
is  to  say,  Hoorn  and  Enkhuizen,  each  a  sixteenth.  All
the  chambers  were  to  be  governed  by  the  directors  then
serving,  who  however  were  to  be  allowed  to  die  out,
down  to  the  number  of  twenty  for  Amsterdam,  twelve
for  Zeeland,  and  seven  for  each  of  the  other  chambers.
To  fill  a  vacancy  occurring  among  the  directors,  the
remaining  members  of  the  board  were  to  nominate  three
candidates,  from  whom  the  estates  of  the  province
should  choose  one.  Each  director  was  obliged  to  have
an  interest  in  the  company  amounting  to  at  least  six
thousand  florins,  except  the  directors  for  Hoorn  and
Enkhuizen,  of  whom  only  three  thousand  should  be
required.  The  general  assembly  of  these  chambers
should  consist  of  seventeen  directors,  eight  for  Amster-

'1  Wagenaar,  ubi  sup. Meteren,  466  and  ^o. Grotius,  xi.  612,  613.

126

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL.

dam,  four  for  Zeeland,  two  for  the  Meuse,  and  two  for
the  north  quarter;  the  seventeenth  being  added  by
turns  from  the  chambers  of  Zeeland,  the  Meuse,  and  the
north  quarter.  This  assembly  was  to  be  held  six  years
at  Amsterdam,  and  then  two  years  in  Zeeland.  The
ships  were  always  to  return  to  the  port  from  which
they  had  sailed.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  provinces
had  the  light,  within  a  certain  time,  to  take  shares  in
the  company.  Any  province  or  city  subscribing  for
forty  thousand  florins  or  upwards  might  appoint  an
agent  to  look  after  its  affairs.

The  Company  might  make  treaties  with  the  Indian
powers,  in  the  name  of  the  States-General  of  the  United
Netherlands  or  of  the  supreme  authorities  of  the  same,
might  build  fortresses,  appoint  generals,  and  levy  troops,
provided  such  troops  took  oaths  of  fidelity  to  the  States,
or  to  the  supreme  authority,  and  to  the  Company.  No
ships,  artillery,  or  other  munitions  of  war  belonging  to
the  Company  were  to  be  used  in  service  of  the  country
without  permission  of  the  Company.  The  admiralty  was
to  have  a  certain  proportion  of  the  prizes  conquered
from  the  enemy.

The  directors  should  not  be  liable  in  property  or
person  for  the  debts  of  the  Company.  The  generals  of
fleets  returning  home  were  to  m.ake  reports  on  the  state
of  India  to  the  States."^^

Notification  of  the  union  of  all  India  Companies  with
this  great  corporation  was  duly  sent  to  the  fleets
cruising  in  those  regions,  where  it  arrived  in  the  course
of  the  year  1603."^'

Meantime  the  first  fleet  of  the  Company,  consisting  of
fourteen  vessels  under  command  of  Admiral  Wybrand
van  Warwyk,  sailed  before  the  end  of  1602,  and  was
followed  towards  the  close  of  1603  by  thirteen  other
ships,  under  Stephen  van  der  Hagen."^*

The  equipment  of  these  two  fleets  cost  two  million
two  hundred  thousand  florins."^^

"  Meteren,  Grotius,  Wagenaar,  ubi  sup. 73  Jbid 74  ibid. 75  Itli.

1503.

DEATH  OF  QUEEN  ELIZABETH.

127

CHAPTEK  XLI.

Deat  h  of  Queen  Elizabeth  —  Condition  of  Spain  —  Legations  to  James  I.  —  Union  ol
England  and  Scotland  —  Characteristics  of  the  new  monarch  —  The  English  Court
and  Government  —  Piratical  practices  of  the  English  —  Audience  of  the  States*
envoy  with  King  James  —  Queen  Elizabeth's  scheme  for  remodelling  Europe  —
Ambassador  extraordinary  from  Henry  IV.  to  James —  De  Rosny's  strictures  on
the  English  people  —  I'rivate  interview  of  De  Rosny  with  the  States'  envoy  —  I)e
Rosny's  audience  of  the  king  —  Objects  of  his  mission  —  Insinuations  of  the  Duke
of  Northumberland  —  Invitation  of  the  embassy  to  Greenwich  —  Promise  of  Jamea
to  protect  the  Netherlands  against  Spain  —  Misgivings  of  Bameveld  —  Conference
at  Arundel  House  —  Its  unsatisfactory  termination  —  Contempt  of  De  Rosny  fo*
the  English  counsellors  —  Political  aspect  of  Europe  —  1^  Rosny's  disclosure  to
the  king  of  the  secret  object  of  his  mission  —  Agreement  of  James  to  the  proposals
of  De  Rosny  —  Riititication  of  the  treaty  of  alliance  —  Return  of  De  Rosny  and
suite  to  France  —  Arrival  of  the  Spanish  ambassador.

On  the  24th  of  March,  1603,  Queen  Elizabeth  died  at
Eichmond,  having  nearly  completed  her  seventieth
year.^  The  two  halves  of  the  little  island  of  Biitain
were  at  last  politically  adjoined  to  each  other  by  the
rsonal  union  of  the  two  crowns.

A  foreigner,  son  of  the  woman  executed  by  Elizabeth,
succeeded  to  Elizabeth's  throne.  It  was  most  natural
that  the  Dutch  republic  and  the  French  king,  the  arch-
dukes and  his  Catholic  Majesty,  should  be  filled  with
anxiety  as  to  the  probable  effect  of  this  change  of  indi-
viduals upon  the  fortunes  of  the  war.

For  this  Dutch  war  of  independence  was  the  one
absorbing  and  controlling  interest  in  Christendom.
Upon  that  vast,  central,  and,  as  men  thought,  baleful
constellation  the  fates  of  humanity  were  dependent.
Around  it  lesser  political  events  were  forced  to  gravitate,
and,  in  accordance  to  their  relation  to  it,  were  bright  or
obscure.  It  was  inevitable  that  those  whose  vocation
it  was  to-  ponder  the  aspects  of  the  political  firmament,
the  sages  and  high-priests  who  assumed  to  direct  human
action  and  to  foretell  human  destiny,  should  now  be
more  than  ever  perplexed.

Spain,  since  the  accession  of  Philip  III.  to  his  father's

1  Metcrcn,  484. Camden,  661.

128  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

throne,  although  rapidly  declining  in  vital  energy,  had
not  yet  disclosed  its  decrepitude  to  the  world.  Its
boundless  ambition  survived  as  a  political  tradition
rather  than  a  real  passion,  v^hile  contemporaries  still
trembled  at  the  vision  of  universal  monarchy  in  which
the  successor  of  Charlemagne  and  of  Charles  V.  was
supposed  to  indulge.

Meantime,  no  feebler  nor  more  insignificant  mortal
existed  on  earth  than  this  dreaded  sovereign.

Scarcely  a  hairdresser  or  lemonade-dealer  in  all  Spain
was  less  cognizant  of  the  political  affairs  of  the  kingdom
than  was  its  monarch,  for  Philip's  first  care  upon
assuming  the  crown  was  virtually  to  abdicate  in  favour
of  the  man  soon  afterwards  known  as  the  Duke  of
Lerma.

It  is  therefore  only  by  courtesy  and  for  convenience
that  history  recognizes  his  existence  at  all,  as  surely  no
human  being  in  the  reign  of  Philip  III.  requires  less
mention  than  Philip  III.  himself.

I  reserve  for  a  subsequent  chapter  such  rapid  glances
at  the  interior  condition  of  that  kingdom  with  which  it
seemed  the  destiny  of  the  Dutch  republic  to  be  per-
petually at  war,  as  may  be  necessary  to  illustrate  the
leading  characteristics  of  the  third  Philip's  reign.

Meantime,  as  the  great  queen  was  no  more,  who  was
always  too  sagacious  to  doubt  that  the  Dutch  cause
was  her  own — however  disposed  she  might  be  to  brow-
beat the  Dutchmen — it  seemed  possible  to  Spain  that
the  republic  might  at  last  be  deprived  of  its  only  re-
maining ally.  Tassis  was  despatched  as  chief  of  a
legation,  precursory  to  a  more  stately  embassy  to  be
confided  to  the  Duke  of  Frias.  The  archdukes  sent  the
prince  of  Arenberg,  while  from  the  united  States  came
young  Henry  of  Nassau,  associated  with  John  of  Olden-
Barneveld,  Talk,  Brederode,  and  other  prominent  states-
men of  the  commonwealth.^  Ministers  from  Denmark
and  Sweden,  from  the  palatinate  and  from  numerous
other  powers,  small  and  great,  were  also  collected  to
greet  the  rising  sun  in  united  Britain,  while  the  awk-
ward Scotchman,  who  was  now  called  upon  to  play  that
prominent  part  in  the  world's  tragi-comedy  which  had

2  Meteren,  ubi  sup.

1603.

ACCESSION  OF  JAMES  I.

129

been  so  long  and  so  majestically  sustained  by  the
"  Virgin  Queen,"  already  began  to  tremble  at  the
plaudits  and  the  bustle  which  announced  how  much  was
expected  of  the  new  performer.

There  was  indeed  a  new  sovereign  upon  the  throne.
That  most  regal  spirit  which  had  well  expressed  so
many  of  the  highest  chaiacteristics  of  the  nation  had
fled.  Mankind  has  long  been  familiar  with  the  dark,
closing  hours  of  the  illustrious  reign.  The  great  queen
moody,  despairing,  dying,  wrapt  in  profoundest  thought,
with  eyes  fixed  upon  the  ground  or  already  gazing  into
infinity,  was  besought  by  the  counsellors  around  her  to
name  the  man  to  whom  she  chose  that  the  crown  should
devolve.

"  Not  to  a  Eough,"  said  Elizabeth,  sententiously  and
grimly.'

W  hen  the  King  of  Franco  was  named,  she  shook  her
head.  When  Thilip  III.  was  suggested,  she  made  a  still
more  significant  sign  of  dissent.  When  the  King  (if
Scots  was  mentioned,  she  nodded  her  approval,  and
again  relapsed  into  silent  meditation."*

She  died,  and  James  was  King  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland.  Cecil  had  become  his  prime  minister  long
before  the  queen's  eyes  were  closed.  The  hard-featured,
rickety,  fidgetty,  shambling,  learned,  most  preposterous
Scotchman  hastened  to  take  possession  of  the  throne.
Never  could  there  have  been  a  more  unfit  place  or  unfit
hour  for  such  a  man.

England,  although  so  small  in  dimensions,  so  meagre
in  population,  so  deficient  compared  to  the  leading
nations  of  Europe,  in  material  and  financial  strength,
had  already  her  great  future  swelling  in  her  heart.
Intellectually  and  morally  she  was  taking  the  lead
among  the  nations. Even  at  that  day  she  had  produced

"  Poiche  avvicinatisi  all'  ultima  ora  se  a  quel  di  Spagna  e  fece  il  mede^imo

de'  suol  giorni  e  ricercata  da  quci  signori  atto,  nominatole  poi  quelle  di  Scozladiede

del  consiglio  che  quasi  tutti  la  assistevano  segno  questo  essere  il  desiderio  suo  e

quale  fos&e  la  volonth  sua  cd  a  chl  rac-  pocbe  ore  dopo  passb  da  questa  vita  con

conjniaudava  il  regno  disse  ella  queste  universal  dispiacere."
solo  parole :  no  ad  un  Hough,  cbc  in  lingua Ibid. Tbe  particulars  of  Elizabeth's

inglese  significa  persona  bassa  e  vile,  ma  deatb  are  narrated  in  Despatch  7  April,

ad  una,  ed  acccnando  con  la  mano  perebe  16(i3,  of  Secretary  Scaraniolli. Senato  iii.

perde  la  parola,  che  portasse  corona. Le  Secreta,  A.  V.  G. See  N.  BarozzI,  ncte,

fu  dimanilato  vse  al  re  di  Francia  od  ella  p.  45,  of  ser.  iv.  vol.  unico.
con  la  testa  mostro  cbe  no,  1u  dimandata

VOL. IV.  K

130

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

much  which  neither  she  herself  nor  any  other  nation
seemed  destined  to  surpass.

Yet  this  most  redoubtable  folk  only  numbered  about
three  millions,  one-tenth  of  them  inhabiting  London.^
With  the  Scots  and  Irish  added  they  amounted  to  less
than  five  millions  of  souls,^  hardly  a  third  as  many  as
the  homogeneous  and  martial  people  of  that  dangerous
neighbour  France.

Ireland  was  always  rebellious ;  a  mere  conquered
province,  hating  her  t3^rant  England's  laws,  religion,
and  people  ;  loving  Spain,  and  believing  herself  closely
allied  by  blood  as  well  as  sympathy  to  that  most  Catholic
land.

Scotland,  on  the  accession  of  James,  hastened  to  take
possession  of  England.  Never  in  history  had  two  races
detested  each  other  more  fervently.^  The  leeches  and
locusts  of  the  north,^  as  they  were  universally  desig-
nated in  England,  would  soon  have  been  swept  forth
fiom  the  country,  or  have  left  it  of  their  own  accord,
had  not  the  king  employed  all  that  he  had  of  royal
authority  or  of  eloquent  persuasion  to  retain  them  on
the  soil.  Of  union,  save  the  personal  union  of  the
sceptre,  there  was  no  thought.  As  in  Ireland  there  was
hatred  to  England  and  adoration  for  Spain :  so  in
Scotland,  France  was  beloved  quite  as  much  as  England
was  abhorred. Who could have foretold,  or  even

5  Niccolo  Molin,  ambassador  from  a  quello  dell'  Inghilterra  solamente  nella
Venice  to  James  I.,  puts  the  population  persona  del  presente  re,  tuttavia  per  la
of  London  in  1607  at  more  than  300,000.  divisione  e  contrarieta  degli  animi  che
Pvclazione  in  Barozzi  and  Berchet,  ser.  iv.  passa  fra  Scozzesi  ed  Inglesi  non  solo
vol.  unico.  viene  giudicato  che  la  potenza  di  quel

6  Antonio  Foscarini,  Venetian  ambas-  regno  non  sia  cresciuta  ma  diminuita
sador  in  England  in  1618  (Relazione  in  piuttosto:  poiche  F  odio  fra  di  loro  e  pas-
Barozzi  and  Berchet,  ser.  iv.  vol.  unico),  sato  tan t' oltre  che  s'insidiano  la  vital' un
estimates  the  whole  population  of  the  1'  altro  con  maniere  molto  stravaganti.
empire  at  5,200,000  souls,  of  which  num-  Onde  molti  Scozzesi  e  de'  piu  principali
bar  3,560,000  are  assigned  to  England,  a  per  salvezza  delle  loro  vite  pensano  di
little  more  than  1,000,000  to  Scotland,  and  ritirarsi  alle  proprie  case  ;  e  se  non  fosse
500,000  to  Ireland.  la  violenza  per  dire  cosi  che  loro  fa  il  re

The  total  revenue  he  states  as  three  per  fermarli  di  gia  tutti  ne  se  sariano

million  scudi  =  '750,000?.  sterling,  almost  andati."— N".  Molin,  Relazione.
entirely  derived  from  England :— "  Perch^ »  "  Li  (gli  Scozzesi)  chiamano  locuste

la  Scozia  con  fatica  da  ottanta  mila  e  sanguisughe  d'  Inghilterra,  affermano

(30,000?.)  scudi  1'  anno,"  and  Ireland  pro-  che  hanno  trovato  in  quel  regno  le  minere

ducing  a  less  sum  than  that,  to  which  d'  oro  che  dicono  aver  altre  volte  perduto

money  had  to  be  added  from  England  for  in  Scozia." — Mnrcantonio  Correr,  Rela

current  expenses.  zione.

'  •*  Efisendosi  il  regno  della  Scozia  unlto

1603.

FINANCIAL  STATE  OF  ENGLAND.

131

hoped,  that  atoms  so  mutually  repulsive  would  ever
have  coalesced  into  a  sympathetic  and  indissoluble
whole  ?

Even  the  virtues  of  James  were  his  worst  enemies.
As  generous  as  the  day,  he  gave  away  with  reckless
profusion  anything  and  everythi-ng  that  he  could  lay
his  hands  upon.  It  was  soon  to  appear  that  the  great
queen's  most  unlovely  characteristic,  her  avarice,  was  a
more  blessed  quality  to  the  nation  she  ruled  than  the
ridiculous  prodigality  of  James.

Two  thousand  gowns,  of  the  most  expensive  material,
adorned  with  gold,  pearls,  and  other  bravery — for  Eliza-
beth was  very  generous  to  herself — were  found  in  the
queen's  wardrobe,  after  death.  These  magnificent  and
costly  robes,  not  one  of  which  had  bhe  vouchsafed  to
bestow  upon  or  to  bequeath  to  any  of  her  ladies  ot
honour,  were  now  presented  by  her  successor  to  a  needy
Scotch  lord,  who  certainly  did  not  intend  to  adorn  his
own  person  therewith.^  "  The  hat  was  ever  held  out,"
said  a  splenetic  observer,  "  and  it  was  filled  in  over-
flowing measure  by  the  new  monarch."

In  a  veiy  short  period  he  had  given  away — mainly  to
Scotchmen — at  least  two  millions  of  crowns,  in  various
articles  of  personal  property.^^  Yet  England  was  very
poor.

The  empire,  if  so  it  could  be  called,  hardly  boasted  a
regular  revenue  of  more  tlian  two  millions  of  dollars
a  year ; less  then  that  of  a  fortunate  individual  or  two,

9  "  £  per  natura .  per  cducazione  e  per
abito  liberalissimo  cd  e  tale  la  sua  libcra-
litii  che  quaiulo  fu  assunto  alia  coruna
d'  Ingliilterra  duno  ud  un  Signor  Scozze^e
tutte  le  vcsti  dclla  retina  EUzabctta
ch'  erano  intorno  due  mille  e  d'  un  valor
inestimabile  esscndo  parte  di  esse  Iregiate
d' oro,  di  perk-  e  tutte  richissimo."— Fran-
cesco Contarini,  Kelazione.

"  Di  una  gran  parte  d<  lle  gioie  della
corona  che  valevano  un  tet^oro  fece  mer-
cede  a  divcrsi  empiendosi  di  esse  le  mani
senz.i  alcun  rigardo  al  valor  loro  e  gettan-
dole  nel  cappoUo  di  qui.sto  e  di  quello,"
&c.  &c. — Ibid.

11  N.  Molin,  Rclazione.  "  Essendo  co-
mune  opinione  che  fra  danari,  gioie  e  boui
stiibili  abbia  donato  il  re  piii  di  due
niilioui  la  maggior  pai-te  a  h'cozzcsi."

12  N.  Molin  Relazione.  The  ambas-
sador puts  the  income  of  the  crown
domains  at  l'25,000f,  sterling,  or  about
500,000  dolLirs  (t^cudi).  Taxes  and  cus-
toms lie  reckons  at  TciQ.OOO  dollars,  and
income  from  miscellaneous  sources  at
100,000.  To  this  total  of  1,300,000  dollai's
ho  adds  an  annual  parliamentary  t-ul>-idy
of  600,000  dollars  (according  to  the  ave-
rage in  Elizabeth's  reign,  although  in
1607  James  had  not  yet  had  one),  and
thus  makes  a  general  budget  of  1,900,000
dcds.,  or  somewhat  less  than  500,000/.
Marcantonio  Correr,  ambassador  in  1611,
gives  nearly  the  same  figures.  1  he  en-
voys of  ten  years  later,  Correr  and  F.
Contarini,  make  ihe  total  revenue
3,000,000  dollars.

132

THE  U:SITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

in  our  own  epoch,  botli  in  Europe  and  America;  and
not  one-fifth  part  of  the  contemporary  income  of  France.
The  hundred  thousand  dollars  of  Scotland's  annual  bud-
get did  not  suffice  to  pay  its  expenses,  and  Ireland  was
a  constant  charge  upon  the  imperial  exchequer.^*

It  is  astounding,  however,  to  reflect  upon  the  pomp,
extravagance,  and  inordinate  pride  which  characterized
the  government  and  the  court.

The  expenses  of  James's  household  were  at  least  five
hundred  thousand  crowns,^^  or  about  one  quarter  of  the
whole  revenue  of  the  empire.  Henry  IV.,  with  all  his
extravagance,  did  not  spend  more  than  one^enth  of  the
public  income  of  France  upon  himself  and  his  court.

Certainly  if  England  were  destined  to  grow  great  it
would  be  in  despite  of  its  new  monarch.  Hating  the
People,  most  intolerant  in  religion,  believing  intensely
in  royal  prerogative,  thoroughly  convinced  of  his  regal
as  well  as  his  personal  infallibility,  loathing  that  induc-
tive method  of  thought  w^hich  was  already  leading  the
English  nation  so  proudly  on  the  road  of  intellectual
advancement,  shrinking  from  the  love  of  free  inquiry,  of
free  action,  of  daring  adventure,  which  was  to  be  the
real  informing  spirit  of  the  great  British  nation  ;  abhor-
ring the  Puritans — that  is  to  say,  one-third  of  his  sub-
ject's^^— in  whose  harsh  but  lofty  nature  he  felt  instinc-
tively that  popular  freedom  was  enfolded — even  as  the
overshadowing  tree  in  the  rigid  husk — and  sending
them  forth  into  the  far  distant  wilderness  to  wrestle
with  wild  beasts  and  with  savages  more  ferocious  than
beasts;  fearing  and  hating  the  Catholics  as  the  sworn

13  N.  Molin.  tiani."— Ibid.

14  "II  regno  poi  d'Irlanda  non  solo  non  i6  "  Tre  sono  le  religioni  clie  universal-
apporta  beneficio  ma  spesa  piuttosto."—  mente  sono  abbracciate  da  quei  popoli;
N.  Molin.  "  Gli  altri  due  regni  di  Scozia  la  cattolica  ed  apostolica  romana,  la  pro-
e  d'  Irlanda  apportano  seco  piu  sp^se  che  testante  e  la  puritana:  qnesta  oltre  il
rendite." — M.  A.  Correr,  Relazione.  danno  e  la  rovina  delle  anime  tt-nde  a

15  N.  Molin,  Relazione.  "E  prima  quella  di  principati  e  di  monarchic  an-
nel  viver  della  sua  casa  si  consuma  un  cora  poiche  e  dirizzata  tutta  alia  liberta
anno  per  1'  altro  500,000  scudi."  "  Ha  un  ed  al  governo  popolare  ;  e  perche  questo
milione  e  mezzo  d'  entrata  (ducats,  tour  nome  di  libertk  e  molto  dolce  e  grato  ad
to  the  pound,  subsidies  not  counted)  .  .  .  ognuno  e  perb  molto  facilmente  abbrac-
la  spesa  della  sua  casa  arriva  a  ducati  ciata ;  onde  si  crede  che  il  terzo  di  quei
500,000  1'  anno," — Francesco  Contarini,  popoli  sieno  puritani  ancorche  il  re  e  li
amb.  app.  Giacomo  I.  Relazioni  in  Ba-  suoi  usino  ogni  arte  per  distruggerla." —
ro:&zi  and  Berchet,  ser. i.  vol.  unico.  M.  A,  Correr,  Relazione,

"  Nelle  spese  della  casa  eccede  senz'  al-  "  Sua  Maestk  odia  questi  puritani  altre

cuna  comparazione  tutti  gli  altri  re  cris-  tan  to  quanto  !eme  de'  cattolici." — Ibid.

1G03.

CHARACTERISTICS  OF  JAMES  I.

133

enemies  of  his  realm,  his  race,  and  himself,  trampling  on
them  as  much  as  he  dared,  forcing  them  into  hypocrisy
to  save  themselves  from  persecution  or  at  least  pecuniary
ruin  if  they  would  worship  God  according  to  their  con-
science ;  at  deadly  feud,  therefore,  on  religious  grounds,
with  much  more  than  half  his  subjects — Puritans  or  Pa-
pists— and  yet  himself  a  Puritan  in  dogma  and  a  Papist
in  Church  government,  if  only  the  king  could  be  pope ;
not  knowing,  indeed,  whether  a  Puritan,  or  a  Jesuit
whom  he  called  a  Papist-Puritan,^^  should  be  deemed
the  more  disgusting  or  dangerous  animal ;  already  pre-
paring for  his  unfortunate  successor  a  path  to  the  scaf-
fold, by  employing  all  the  pedantry,  both  theological
and  philosophical,  at  his  command  to  bring  parliaments
into  contempt,  and  to  place  the  royal  prerogative  on  a
level  with  Divinity  ;  at  the  head  of  a  most  martial,
dauntless,  and  practical  nation,  trembling,  with  unfortu-
nate ph3'sical  timidity,  at  the  sight  of  a  draw^n  sword ;
ever  scribbling  or  haranguing  in  Latin,  Fi  ench,  or  bioud
Scotch, ■^'•^  when  the  world  was  arming,  it  must  always  be
a  special  wonder  that  one  who  might  have  been  a  re-
spectable, even  a  useful,  pedagogue,  should  by  the  caprice
of  destiny,  have  been  permitted,  exactly  at  that  epoch,  to
be  one  of  the  most  contemptible  and  mischievous  of
kings.2°

i7"Dirb  questo  solo  che  un  cattolico  tizia;  intanto  che  11  poveri  cattolici  sono
ricusante  che  s'  intende  qucllo  che  ricusa  costituti  in  una  condi/.ione  Infelici^ima,
di  andare  alle  loro  chiese  e  prtdiche  se  ha  pretendendo  con  qucsta  via  il  re  e  quelli
il  modo  e  obbligato  a  pagare  80  scudi  al  che  governano  di  andar  a  poco  a  poco
mt'se;  se  non  ha  da  pagar  tan  to  perde  costringcndo  e  riducendo  per  dir  cosl  a
due  tei  zi  delli  suoi  beni ;  sicche  uno  che  nienle  la  cattolica  rcligione." — N.  Molln,
averra  6U0  ducati  d'  entrata  ne  perde  400  ;  Relazione.

se  e  pdvcro  od  artifice  clie  non  abbia  beni  "  Aborrlsce  Bopra  tutti  11  padri  Ge-

stabili  o;4ni  mcse  da'  minij<tri  gll  viene  suiti  .  .  .  .  e  compara  appunto  la  loro
visitata  la  casa  e  levato  gli  si  pub  dir  doitrina  dl  macchinar  contro  li  Stati  e
ogni  cosa  poichb  gli  portano  via  sino  il  vlte  dei  principi  con  quelle  dei  puritani
letto;  se  uno  mrk  convinto  di  avere  porcib  li  chiaraa  puritani  paplsti." — M.A,
udito  messe,  di  avere  tenuto  un  prete  o Correr,  Relazione.

gosuita  in  c;isa,  anzi  di  avorjili  solamonto  J9  E  pit-no  di  eloquenzanon  solo  nella
parlato  s'  intende  incort^o  in  delitto  di  lesa  propria  sua  lingua  ma  anco  in  diverse
Maesta  onde  senz'  altro  perde  la  roba  e  la  altre  e  nella  francese  e  latina  particolar-
vita.  Un  cattolico  s'  intcmle  privo  della  mente." — Franc<?sco  Contarini,  Relazione.
protezione  dclle  leggi  in  tanto  che  se  sara  ^  "  Ma  molto  piu  dispiacc  1'  aver  Sua
egli  crcditore  di  alcuno  non  protra  eser-  Maesta  abbandonato  in  tutto  e  per  tutto
citar  la  sua  azione  contro  il  debitore  il  governo  dt  i  suoi  regni,  rimettendo  il
piTche  dalLi  giustizia  non  sar^  abbrac-  tutto  al  suo  consiglio,  non  volcndo  egli  ne
data;  se  il  cattolico  sara  oltragdato  in  trattar  ne  pensar  ad  altro  che  alia  caccia
paj  i>le  o  in  fatti  non  ha  ricorso  alia  gius- ....  Cosi  il  presente  re  rest*  piuttosto

134

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

But  he  had  a  most  eiFective  and  energetic  minister.
Even  as  in  Spain  and  in  France  at  the  same  period,  the
administration  of  government  was  essentially  in  one  pair
of  hands.

Eobert  Cecil,  Earl  of  Salisbury,  ever  since  the  termi-
nation of  the  splendid  duumvirate  of  his  father  and  Wal-
singham,  had  been  in  reality  supreme.^^  The  proud  and
terrible  hunchback,  who  never  forgave,  nor  forgot  to
destroy,  his  enemies,^^  had  now  triumphed  over  the  last
passion  of  the  doting  queen.  Essex  had  gone  to  per-
dition.

Son  of  the  great  minister  who  had  brought  the  mother
of  James  to  the  scaffold,  Salisbury  had  already  extorted
forgiveness  for  that  execution  from  the  feeble  king.
Before  Elizabeth  was  in  her  grave,  he  was  already  as
much  the  favourite  of  her  successor  as  of  herself,  go-
verning Scotland  as  well  as  England,  and  being  Prime
Minister  of  Great  Britain  before  Great  Britain  existed.

Lord  High  Treasurer  and  First  Secretary  of  State,  he
was  now  all  in  all  in  the  council.  The  other  great  lords,
high-born  and  highly  titled  as  they  were  and  served  at
their  banquets  by  hosts  of  lackeys  on  their  knees — ^
Nottinghams,  Northamptons,  Suffolks — were,  after  all,
ciphers  or  at  best,  mere  pensioners  of  Spain.  For  all  the
venality  of  Europe  was  not  confined  to  the  Continent.^^

spregiato  ed  odiato  che  altrimenti ;  es-  della  regina  e  scopertamente  dopo  la

sendo  infine  la  natura  di  S.  M.  piuttosto  morte. Cosi  non  solo  gli  e  riuscito  di

inclinata  a  vivere  retiramente  con  otto  o  cancellar  dalla  sua  memoria  la  morte

dieci  dei  suoi  che  viver  alia  libera,  come  della  madre  della  quale  fu  principal-

e  il  costume  del  paese  ed  il  desiderio  del  mente  autore  il  padre  di  esso  conte  ma  ha

popolo."— Francesco  Contarini,  Relazione.  condotto  la  propria  fortuna  a  quella  tanta

2'  "  L'  autorita  del  quale  e  cosi  assoluta  eminenza  iiella  quale  si  trova  al  presente."

che  con  verita  si  pud  dire  esser  egli  ilre  e  — M.  A.  Correr,  Relazione.

governatore  di  quella  monarchia." — N.  24 Molin,  Relazione.

Molin,  Relazione.  25  «  n  co  :  di  Northampton  custode  del

22  «*E  astuto  e  sagace  e  persecutore privato  sigillo  il  gran  ammi-

acerrimo  dei  suoi  nemici :  il  che  si  vede  raglio  conte  di  Nottingham  ed  il  conte  di

dair  efifetto  perche  ne  ha  avuto  molti  e Suffolk  gran  ciamberlano  tutti

tutti  li  ha  fatti  precipitare  ancorche  che  tre  sono  stati  provisionati  annualmente

fossero  uomini  eminentissimi da  Spagna  con  qualcheduno  altro  del

e  amico  de'  suoi  amici  e  fa  volentieri  ser-  consiglio  regio."— M.  A.  Correr,  Rela-

vizio  ;  ma  pero  e  piu  inclinato  alia  ven-  zione.

detta  che  all'  araore :  e  uomo  superbo  e  26  "  j^^'e  vi  essendo  alcuno  che  o  tardi  o

terribile." — Ibid. Compare  M.  A.  Correr,  per  tempo  non  sia  necessitate  di  ricorrer

Relazione.  al  consiglio  di  qui  h  che  ognuno  procura

23  "  Perche  s'  insiuub  nella  grazia  del  di  acquistarsi  la  grazia  e  la  protezione  di
presente  re  ajutandolo  como  S.  M.  mede-  alcuno  dei  consiglieri  il  che  non  si  pub
sima  mi  ha  detto  e  occultamente  in  vita  fare  in  quel  paese  con  altri  mezzi  ne  con

1603.

INFLUENCE  OF  ROBERT  CECIL.

135

Spain  spent  at  least  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
crowns annually  among  the  leading  courtiers  of  James,
while  his  wife,  Anne  of  Denmark,  a  Papist  at  heart,
wh^se  private  boudoir  was  filled  with  jDrctures  and
images  of  the  Madonna  and  the  saints,  had  already  re-
ceived one  hundred  thousand  dollars  in  solid  cash  from
the  Spanish  court,  besides  much  jewelry,  and  other  valu-
able things.^^  To  negotiate  with  Government  in  England
was  to  bribe,  even  as  at  Paris  or  Madiid.  Gold  was  the
only  pass-key  to  justice,  to  preferment,  or  to  power.

Yet  the  foreign  subsidies  to  the  English  court  were,
after  all,  of  but  little  avail  at  that  epoch.^^  Ko  man  had
influence  but  Cecil,  and  he  was  too  proud,  too  rich,  too
powerful  to  be  bribed. Alone  with,  clean  fingers  among
courtiers  and  ministers,  he  had,  however,  accumulated  a
larger  fortune  than  any.  Ilis  annual  income  was  esti-
mated at  two  hundred  thousand  crowns,  and  he  had  a
vast  floating  capital,  always  well  employed.  Among
other  investments,  he  had  placed  half  a  million  on  in-
terest in  Holland,^^  and  it  was  to  be  expected,  therefore,

altre  vie  che  con  presenti  e  donativi;  li
quail  sono  cosi  ordinarij  in  quci  paesi  die
cbi  pill  riceve  h  piii  stimato  ed  onorato
ricevcndo  non  solo  da  sudditi  ma  da
stianieri  e  da  ministri  di  priucipi  ancora
eiccome  si  e  veduto  in  diverse  occasioni."
— N.  Molin,  Relazlone  d'  Ingliilterra.

"  Kimettcre  il  tutto  ai  suoi  ministri  li
quali  sono  ?i  fattamente  intcressati  che
senza  li  modi  che  ordinariamente  sogliono
usar  li  Spagnoli  non  se  ne  pub  ricevere
quel  beneCcio  che  si  desldera." — Ibid.
"  Avendo  molti  di  essi  (ministri)  pensioni
da  Spagna,  altri  son  ben  aflfetti  verso  la
Francia  e  forse  il  minor  numero  e  quello
che  mira  al  solo  ben  e  servizio  del  regno
e  di  S.  M." — Francesco  Contarini,  Rela-
zione.  "  La  Spagna  ....  usando  alcuna
■volta  con  la  MaestH  sua  1'  esca  de'  matri-
monii con  li  ministri  quella  delle  pen-
sioni e  donativi." — M.  A.  Correr,  Rela-
zione.

27  «'A11*  ambasciatore  dl  Spagna  resi-
dente  alia  cortc  d'  Inghilterra  sono  man-
dati  ogni  anno  15(),()()0  sciuli,  non  per  sua
provizione  ma  per  altrl  finl,  e  pero  im-
petra  gran  cose."— Fran.  Contarini,  Rela-
zione.

28  N.  Molin.  Relazione,  &c.  M.  A.
Correr,  Relaziono. "  Vatmo  nutrendo  le

spcranze  di  poter  un  glomo  metier  mano
in  quel  regno  (d'  Inghilterra)  e  percib  col
solito  titolo  di  avaniagglare  la  fede  catlo-
llca  mantengono  divcrsi  coUegi  d'  Inglesi
per  spargere  con  loro  benoficio  i  soggetf
che  esconoda  quelli  e  dopo  la  pace  hanno
dispensati  fra  quella  nazioiie  molti  denari
tra  (luali  la  regina  ha  avuto  In  contanti
pill  di  cento  mille  scudl  ultre  diverse  gioio
e  altre  cose  di  molto  valsente." — F.  Pri-
uli,  Relazione  di  Spagna,  1(304-1608.  N.
Molin.

"Pare  che  il  Spagnuoll  si  sieno
astenuti  questi  due  ultimi  anni  per  il
poco  frutto  che  ne  cavano."— M.  A.
Correr,  Relaziono.

31  "  Nb  ha  mai  voluto  accottar  pen-
sioni."—M.  A.  Correr,  Relazione.

31  "  Delia  sua  richezza  non  voglio  par-
lare  perocche  e  cosa  che  cccede  il  creder
d'  oguuno;  ma  quasi  tutto  ha  in  contanti
in  diverse  piazze  di  Kuropa,  ma  sotto
diversi  nomi ;  e  mi  e  stato  affermato  cr>e
in  Olanda  solaniente  abbia  cinque  cento
mille  scudi  li  quali  pli  rendono  utili  tali
che  se  ne  puo  contanfare.'*— ibid.  "  Ks-
sendo  opinione  che  depli  uffici  della  corona
abbi  cavato  meglio  di  200,000  scudi  all'
anno,  onde  ha  comprato  molta  quantita
di  terreni  e  gira  denari  in  diverse  piazz?

136

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

that  he  should  favour  the  cause  of  the  republic,  rebellious
and  upstart  though  it  were.

The  pigmy,  as  the  late  queen  had  been  fond  of  nick-
naming him,  was  the  only  giant  in  the  Government.
Those  crooked  shoulders  held  up,  without  flinching,  the
whole  burden  of  the  State.  Pale,  handsome,  anxious,
suffering,  and  intellectual  of  visage,  with  his  indomit-
able spirit,  ready  eloquence,  and  nervous  energy,  he
easily  asserted  supremacy  over  all  the  intriguers,  foreign
and  domestic,  the  stipendiaries,  the  generals,  the  admi-
rals, the  politicians,  at  court,  as  well  as  over  the  Scotch
Solomon  who  sat  on  the  throne.

But  most  certainly  it  was  for  the  public  good  of  Bri-
tain that  Europe  should  be  pacified.  It  is  very  true
that  the  piratical  interest  would  suffer,  and  this  was  a
very  considerable  and  infl.uential  branch  of  business.  So
long  as  war  existed  anywhere,  the  corsairs  of  England
sailed  with  the  utmost  effrontery  from  English  ports,  to
prey  upon  the  commerce  of  friend  and  foe  alike.  After
a  career  of  successful  plunder,  it  was  not  difficult  for  the
rovers  to  return  to  their  native  land,  and,  with  the  pro-
ceeds of  their  industry,  to  buy  themselves  positions  of
importance,  both  social  and  political.  It  was  not  the
custom  to  consider  too  curiously  the  source  of  the  wealth.
If  it  was  sufficient  to  dazzle  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar,  it
was  pretty  certain  to  prove  the  respectability  of  the

specialmente  gran  somma  in  Olanda  che  esuli  e  privi  della  patria  per  qualche

profittano  piu  che  mediocremente,  cosa  spazio  di  tempo  e  con  qualche  donativo

che  lo  tiene  affezionato  ed  obbligato  agli  unico  remedio  in  quel  paese  per  superar

interessi  di  quelle  provincie." — Ibid.  tutte  le  difficolta  di  poter  ripatriare  e

32  «  Per  assicurar  questi  mari  dai  ber-  godersi  la  guadagnata  preda." — N.  Molin.

toniinglesi  che  hanno  apportato  e  tuttora  Relazione,

apportano  tanto  danno  alle  navi  e  sudditi  "  Perche  con  la  pace  viene  loro  levato
di  Vostra  Serenita  che  trafficano  in  il  modo  di  andar  in  corso  con  che  moiti  si
levante :  perche  non  e  dubbio  per  la  infor-  sono  arrichiti  perche  sotto  pretesto  di
mazione  che  ne  ho  avuto  che  molti  vas-  andar  con tro  i  nemici  depredavano  anco  le
celli  partono  d'  Inghilterra  sotto  il  nome  navi  degli  aniici  come  e  pur  troppo  mani-
di  mercanti  con  qualche  poco  di  carico  festo  a  V.  S."— Ibid,
per  il  vlaggio  di  levante  ma  il  loro  fine  e  "  Sono  gli  Inglesi  sopra  tutti  gli  uomini
prim  ipalmente  di  far  qualche  preda  se  dediti  al  corseggiare,  ne  facevano  parti-
la  occasione  si  pvesenta;  onde  partendo  colar  professione  in  tempo  della  regina
con  questo  nome  di  mercanti  viene  levata  Elizabetta  la  quale  la  permetteva  contro
I'occasione  ai  rappresentanti  di  Vostra  gli  Spagnuoli  ed  animava  li  suoi  sudditi

Serenita  di  opporsi  alia  loro  uscita ;  ma ad  applicarvisi  di  qua  sono

in  effetto  secondo  I'occasione  esercitano  procedute  ricchezze  grand!  nelli  partico*

r  ufficio  di  corsari  e  quando  loro  riesce  di  lari,  accrescimenti  delii  dazii  pubblici  e

far  qualche  preda  si  contentauo  di  restare  sperienza  e  gloria  nelU  citcadini  ed  augtt-

1603.

ENGLISH  PIRACY.

137

It  was  in  vain  that  the  envoys  of  the  Dutch  and  Vene-
tian republics  sought  redress  for  the  enormous  damage
inflicted  on  their  commerce  by  English  pirates,  and  in-
voked the  protection  of  public  law.  It  was  always  easy
for  learned  jurisconsults  to  prove  such  depredations  to
be  consistent  with  international  usage  and  with  sound
morality.  Even  at  that  period,  although  England  was
in  population  and  in  wealth  so  insignificant,  it  possessed
a  lofty,  insular  contempt  for  the  opinions  and  the  doc-
trines of  other  nations,  and  expected,  with  perfect  calm-
ness, that  her  own  principles  should  be  not  only  admitted,
but  spontaneously  adored.^^

Yet  the  piratical  interest  was  no  longer  the  controlling
one.  That  city  on  the  Thames,  which  already  numbereil
more  than  three  hundred  thousand  inhabitants,"^*  had
discovered  that  more  wealth  was  to  be  accumulated  by
her  bustling  shopkeepers  in  the  paths  of  legitimate  in-
dustry than  by  a  horde  of  rovers  over  the  seas,  however
adventurous  and  however'protected  by  Government.

As  for  France,  she  was  already  defending  lierself
against  piracy  by  what  at  the  pei  iod  seemed  a  master-
piece of  internal  improvement.  The  Seine,  the  Loire,
and  the  Ehone  v/ere  soon  to  be  united  in  one  chain  of
communication.  Thus  merchandise  might  be  water-
borne  from  the  channel  to  the  Mediterranean,  without
risking  the  five  or  six  months'  voyage  by  sea  then
required  from  Havre  to  Marseilles,  and  exposure  along
the  whole  coast  to  attack  from  the  corsairs  of  England,
Spain,  and  Barbary.^^

mento  di  forze  considerabilissime  a  tutto
il  regno.  Ora  queste  depredazionl  che
viotate  dalla  pace  contro  Spagimoli  8i
sono  indlflfercntemente  voltate  sopra  tutti
vengono  piii  d'  ogni  tristizia  odiatc  dal  re

 non  di  mono  come  non  si

trova  officio  di  Umta  santitii  e  giustizia
che  r  avarizia  dogli  uomini  non  la  soglia
guastar  c  corronipcr ;  cosi  e  opinions  ilie
quelli  medesimi  che  hanno  principal
carico  di  perseguitare  quosti  scellcrati  li
abbino  spesse  volte  favoriti  e  proletti." —
Marc  Antonio  Correr,  Ambasc.  apprrsso
Giaconio  I.  1611,  in  Barozzi  and  Berchet.
S.  iv.  vol.  unico,

33  "  Essondo  1'  Inglose  per  natura  sii-
perbo  credo  che  dgnuno  por  natura  sia
obbligato  di  accarezziuio  uon  solo  ma  di

adorarlo." — Ibid. N.  Molin,  Rclazione.
s*  Molin.

35  Angt'lo  Badoer,  Ambasc.  in  Francia,
Rclazione  in  Barozzi  and  Ik  rchct,  eer,  ii,
vol.  i.  "  Ma  finito  quosto  taplio  che  si
lavora  per  far  entrarc  Li  l^ira  nella
S<  nnu  come  ho  detio  s'  e  risolto  di  farne
un  altro  per  far  entrare  il  Rodano  che
passa  Lione  nella  Loira  essendo  pih  il
disegno  fatto  con  che  s'  andrebbe  da  un
mare  all'  altro  sempre  per  i  fiumi  senza
aver  mai  a  smontivre  in  terra  e  quando
questo  resti  eflFettuato,  come  ponendovisi
le  mani  egli  resterebbe  in  non  lunghi  anni
mentre  continui  la  pace  nella  Francia  con
pin  brevita  con  piii  sicurczza  e  con  grand'
utile  a  quel  regno  si  manderebbero  le  mc  rci
dal  Mediterraneo  sempre  per  acqua  sino

138  THE  UxMTED  NErHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

The  envoys  of  the  States-General  had  a  brief  audience
of  the  new  sovereign,  in  which  little  more  than  phrases  of
compliment  were  pronounced.

"  We  are  here,"  said  Barneveld,  between  grief  and
joy.  We  have  lost  her  whose  benefits  to  us  we  can
never  describe  in  words,  but  we  have  found  a  successor
who  is  heir  not  only  to  her  kingdom  but  to  all  her
virtues."  And  with  this  exordium  the  great  Advocate
plunged  at  once  into  the  depths  of  his  subject,  so  far  as
was  possible  in  an  address  of  ceremony.  He  besought
the  king  not  to  permit  Spain,  standing  on  the  neck
of  the  provinces,  to  grasp  from  that  elevation  at  other
empires.  He  reminded  James  of  his  duty  to  save  those
of  his  own  religion  from  the  clutch  of  a  sanguinary
superstition,  to  drive  away  those  lurking  satellites  of
the  Eoman  pontiff  who  considered  Britain  their  lawful
prey.  He  implored  him  to  complete  the  work  so  worthily
loegun  by  Elizabeth.  If  all  those  bound  by  one  interest
should  now,  he  urged,  unite  their  efforts,  the  Spaniard,
deprived  not  only  of  the  Netherlands,  but,  if  he  were
not  wise  in  time,  banished  from  the  ocean  and  stripped
of  all  his  transmarine  possessions,  would  be  obliged  to
consent  to  a  peace  founded  on  the  only  secure  basis,
equality  of  strength.  The  envoy  concluded  by  beseech-
ing the  king  for  assistance  to  Ostend,  now  besieged  for
two  years  long.^^

But  James  manifested  small  disposition  to  melt  in
the  fervour  of  the  Advocate's  eloquence.  He  answered
with  a  few  cold  commonpla  ces.  Benignant  but  extremely
cautious,  he  professed  goodwill  enough  to  the  States
but  quite  as  much  for  Spain,  a  power  with  which,  he  ob-
served, he  had  never  quarrelled,  and  from  which  he  had
received  the  most  friendly  offices.  The  archdukes,  too,
he  asserted,  had  never  been  hostile  to  the  realm,  but  only
to  the  Queen  of  England.  In  brief,  he  was  new  to  English
affairs,  required  time  to  look  about  him,  but  would  not
disguise  that  his  genius  was  literary,  studious,  and  tran-
quil, and  much  more  inclined  to  peace  than  to  war.^'''

nell'  Oceano  senza  averle  a  mandare  per  cinque  o  sei  mesi  che  alle  volte  consu*

tanto  mare  come  si  fa  ora  che  le  navi  mano  nel  vlaggio."

hanno  a  circondare  tutta  la  Spagna  per 35a  Grotius,  xii.  619,  Meteren,  uln  8Kp.

arrivare  in  quelle  parti  con  tanto  rischio  ibid.

di  venti  e  di  corsari  oltre  il  tempo  di ^7  ibid.

1603. RELATIVE  POSITION  OF  FRANCE  AND  SPAIN.

139

In  truth,  James  had  cause  to  look  very  sharply  about
him.  It  required  an  acute  brain  and  steady  nerves  to
understand  and  to  control  the  whirl  of  parties  and  the
conflict  of  interests  and  intrigues,  the  chameleon  shiftings
of  character  and  colour,  at  this  memorable  eiDoch  of  tran-
sition in  the  realm  which  he  had  just  inherited.  There
was  a  Scotch  party,  favourable  on  the  whole  to  France  ;
there  was  a  Spanish  party,  there  was  an  English  party,
and,  more  busy  than  all,  there  was  a  party — not  Scotch,
nor  French,  nor  English,  nor  Spanish — that  undying
party  in  all  commonwealths  or  kingdoms  which  ever
fights  for  itself  and  for  the  spoils.

France  and  Spain  had  made  peace  with  each  other  at
Vervins  five  years  before,  and  had  been  at  war  ever
since.

Nothing  could  be  plainer  nor  more  cynical  than  the
language  exchanged  between  the  French  monarch  and
the  representative  of  Spain.  That  Philip  III. — as  the
Spanish  Government  by  a  convenient  fiction  was  always
called — was  the  head  and  front  of  the  great  Savoy-Biron
conspiracy  to  take  Henry's  life  and  dismember  his
kingdom,  was  hardly  a  stage  secret.  Yet  diplomatic
relations  were  still  preserved  between  the  two  countnes,
and  wonderful  diplomatic  interviews  had  certainly  been
taking  place  in  Paris.

Ambassador  Tassis  had  walked  with  lofty  port  into
Henry's  cabinet,  disdaining  to  salute  any  of  the  princes  of
the  blood  or  high  functionaries  of  state  in  the  apartments
through  which  ho  passed,  and  with  insolent  defiance  had
called  Henry  to  account  for  his  dealing  with  the  Dutch
rebels.

"  Sire,  the  king  my  master  finds  it  very  strange,"  he
said,  "that  you  still  continue  to  assist  his  rebels  in
Holland,  and  that  you  shoot  at  his  troops  on  their  way
to  the  Netherlands.  If  you  don't  abstain  from  such
infractions  of  his  rights  he  prefers  open  war  to  being
cheated  by  such  a  pretended  peace.  Hereupon  I  demand
your  reply."

*'  Mr.  Ambassador,"  replied  the  king,  '*  I  find  it  still
more  strange  that  your  master  is  so  impudent  as  to  dare
to  make  such  complaints — he  who  is  dail}'  making  at-
tempts upon  my  life  and  upon  this  State.  Even  if  I  do
assist  the  Hollanders,  what  wrong  is  that  to  him?  It

140

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

is  an  organized  commonwealth,  powerful,  neighbourly,
acknowledging  no  subjection  to  him.  But  your  master
is  stirring  up  rebellion  in  my  own  kingdom,  addressing
himself  to  the  princes  of  my  blood  and  my  most  notable
officers,  so  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  cut  off  the  head
of  one  of  the  most  beloved  of  them  all.  By  these
unchristian  proceedings  he  has  obliged  me  to  take  sides
with  the  Hollanders,  whom  I  know  to  be  devoted  to  me;
nor  have  I  done  anything  for  them  except  to  pay  the
debts  I  owed  them.  I  know  perfectly  well  that  the  king
your  master  is  the  head  of  this  conspiracy,  and  that  the
troops  of  Naples  were  meditating  an  attack  upon  my  king-
dom. I  have  two  letters  written  by  the  hand  of  your
master  to  Marshal  Biron,  telling  him  to  trust  Fuentes  as
if  it  were  himself,  and  it  is  notorious  that  Fuentes  has
projected  and  managed  all  the  attempts  to  assassinate
me.  Do  you  think  you  have  a  child  to  deal  with?
The  late  King  of  Spain  knew  me  pretty  well.  If
this  one  thinks  himself  wiser  I  shall  let  him  see  who
I  am.  Do  you  want  peace  or  war?  I  am.  ready  for
either."

The  ambassador,  whose  head  had  thus  been  so  vigor-
ously washed — as  Henry  expressed  it  in  recounting  the
interview  afterwards  to  the  Dutch  envoy,  Dr.  Aerssens —
stammered  some  unintelligible  excuses,  and  humbly
begged  his  Majesty  not  to  be  offended.  He  then  retired
quite  crest-fallen,  and  took  leave  most  politely  of  every-
body as  he  went,  down  even  to  the  very  grooms  of  the
shambers.

"  You  must  show  your  teeth  to  the  Spaniard,"  said
Henry  to  Aerssens,  "  if  you  wish  for  a  quiet  life."

Here  was  unsophisticated  diplomacy  ;  for  the  politi  5
Henry,  who  could  forgive  assassins  and  conspirators,
crowned  or  otherwise,  when  it  suited  his  purpose  to  be
lenient,  knew  that  it  was  on  this  occasion  very  prudent
to  use  the  gift  of  language,  not  in  order  to  conceal,  but  to
sxpress  his  thoughts.

"  I  left  the  king  as  red  as  a  turkey-cock,"  said  Tassis,
as  soon  as  he  got  home  that  morning,  and  I  was  an-
other turkey-cock.  We  have  been  talking  a  little  bit  of
truth  to  each  other."

33  "  Ik.  weet  doeii  Taxis  t'huys  quam  als  eeii  callichoen  gelacten  ende  ik  ben
iat  hy  seyde,  ik  hebbe  den  Coninck  root  een  ander. Wy  hebbcm  malcanderea  wat

1603. ELIZABETH'S  INTERVIEW  WITH  DE  BETHUNE.  141

In  truth,  it  was  impossible,  as  the  world  was  then
constituted,  that  France  and  Spain,  in  spite  of  many
secret  sympathies,  should  not  be  enemies ;  that  France,
England,  and  the  Dutch  commonwealth,  although  cor-
dially disliking  each  other,  should  not  be  allies.

Even  before  the  death  of  Elizabeth  a  very  remarkable
interview  had  taken  place  at  Dover,  in  which  the  queen
had  secretly  disclosed  the  great  thoughts  with  which
that  most  imperial  brain  was  filled  just  before  its
boundless  activity  was  to  cease  for  ever.

She  had  wished  for  a  personal  interview  with  the
French  king,  whose  wit  and  valour  she  had  always
heartily  admired.  Henry,  on  his  part,  while  unmerci-
fully ridiculing  that  preter-human  vanity  which  he  fed
with  fantastic  adulation,  never  failed  to  do  justice  to  her
genius,  and  had  been  for  a  moment  disposed  to  cross
the  channel,  or  even  to  hold  counsel  with  her  on  board
ship  midway  between  the  two  countries.^^  It  w^as  how-
ever found  impracticable  to  arrange  any  such  meeting,
and  the  gossips  of  the  day  hinted  that  the  great  Henry,
whose  delight  was  in  battle,  and  who  had  never  been
known  to  shrink  from  danger  on  dry  land,  was  appalled
at  the  idea  of  sea  sickness,  and  even  dreaded  the  chance
of  being  kidnapped  by  the  English  iDirates."*^

The  corsairs  who  drove  so  profitable  a  business  at
that  period  by  plundering  the  merchantmen  of  their
enemy,  of  their  Dutch  and  French  allies,  and  of  their
own  nation,  would  assuredly  have  been  pleased  with
such  a  prize.

The  queen  had  confided  to  De  Bethune  that  she  had
something  to  say  to  the  king  which  she  could  never
reveal  to  other  ears  than  his,  but  when  the  proposed
visit  of  Henry  was  abandoned,  it  was  decided  that  his
confidential  minister  should  slip  across  the  channel
before  Elizabeth  returned  to  her  palace  at  Greenwich.

De  Bethune  accordingly  came  incognito  from  Calais
to  Dover,  in  which  port  he  had  a  long  and  most  confi-

waerheyt  goseyt,"  &c. — Aerssens  to  the  the  Fransche  Depechen,  A®.  1602-1607,

Statos-General,  4  Oct.  1602. Hague  Ar-  Royal  Archives  at  the  Hague  MS,  See

chives  MS.  espicially  Aerssens  to  the  States-General,

Henry  recounted  these  conversations  4  and  18  October,  1602.

with  his  own  lips  to  Dr.  Aerssens,  who  39  Memoires  de  Sully,  iv.  34-16,  anno

communicated  them  to  the  Stiites-Gencral  1601.

in  his  secret  letters. I  have  read  them  In  *o  Ibid.

142  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XU.

dential  interview  with  the  queen.  Then  and  there  the
woman,  nearly  seventy  years  of  age,  who  governed  des-
potically the  half  of  a  small  island,  while  the  other  half
was  in  the  possession  of  a  man  whose  mother  she  had
slain,  and  of  a  people  who  hated  the  English  more  than
they  hated  the  Spaniards  or  the  French — a  queen  with
some  three  millions  of  loyal  but  most  turbulent  subjects
in  one  island,  and  with  about  half-a-million  ferocious
rebels  in  another  requiring  usually  an  army  of  twenty
thousand  disciplined  soldiers  to  keep  them  in  a  kind  of
subjugation,  with  a  revenue  fluctuating  between  eight
hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling,  and  the  half  of  that
sum,  and  with  a  navy  of  a  hundred  privateersmen —
disclosed  to  the  French  envoy  a  vast  plan  for  regulating
the  polity  and  the  religion  of  the  civilized  world,  and
for  remodelling  the  map  of  Europe.*^

There  should  be  three  religions,  said  Elizabeth — not
counting  the  dispensation  from  Mecca,  about  which
Turk  and  Hun  might  be  permitted  to  continue  their
struggle  on  the  crepuscular  limits  of  civilization.
Everywhere  else  there  should  be  toleration  only  for
the  churches  of  Peter,  of  Luther,  and  of  Calvin.  The
house  of  Austria  was  to  be  humbled — the  one  branch
driven  back  to  Spain  and  kept  there,  the  other  branch
to  be  deprived  of  the  imperial  crown,  which  was  to  be
disposed  of  as  in  times  past  by  the  votes  of  the  princely
electors.  There  should  be  two  republics — the  Swiss
and  the  Dutch — each  of  those  commonwealths  to  be
protected  by  France  and  England,  and  each  to  receive
considerable  parings  out  of  the  possessions  of  Spain  and
the  empire.

Finally,  all  Christendom  was  to  be  divided  ofi*  into  a
certain  number  of  powers,  almost  exactly  equal  to  each
other;  the  weighing,  measuring,  and  counting,  neces-
sary to  obtain  this  international  equilibrium,  being  of
course  the  duty  of  the  king  and  queen  when  they  should
sit  some  day  together  at  table.

Thus  there  were  five  points ;  sovereigns  and  politicians
having  alwa^^s  a  fondness  for  a  neat  summary  in  five  or
six  points.  Number  one,  to  remodel  the  electoral  system
of  the  holy  Koman  empire. Number  two,  to  establish

41  Memoires  de  Sully,  iv.  34-36,  anno  1601.

1603.  ELIZABETH'S  ORGANIZATION  SCHEME.  143

the  republic  of  the  United  Provinces.  Number  three,
to  do  as  much  for  Switzerland.  Number  four,  to  par-
tition Europe.  Number  five,  to  reduce  all  religions  t-o
three.*  Nothing  could  be  more  majestic,  no  plan  fuller
fraught  with  tranquillity  for  the  rulers  of  mankind  and
their  subjects.  Thrice  happy  the  people,  having  thus
a  couple  of  heads  with  crowns  upon  them  and  brains
within  them  to  prescribe  what  was  to  be  done  in  this
world  and  believed  as  to  the  next !

The  illustrious  successor  of  that  gi'eat  queen  now
stretches  her  benignant  sceptre  over  two  hundred
millions  of  subjects,  and  the  political  revenues  of  her
empire  are  more  than  a  hundredfold  those  of  Elizabeth ;
yet  it  would  hardly  now  be  thought  great  statesmanship
or  sound  imperial  policy  for  a  Britij^h  sovereign  even  to
imagine  the  possibility  of  the  five  points  which  filled
the  royal  English  mind  at  Dover.

But  Heniy  was  as  much  convinced  as  Elizabeth  of
the  necessity  and  the  possibility  of  establishing  the
five  points,  and  De  Bethune  had  been  astonished  at  the
exact  similarity  of  the  conclusion  w^hich  those  two.
sovereign  intellects  had  reached,  even  before  they  had
been  placed  in  communion  with  each  other.  The  death
of  the  queen  had  not  caused  any  change  in  the  far-
reaching  designs  of  which  the  king  now  remained  the
sole  executor,  and  his  first  thought,  on  the  accession  of
James,  was  accordingly  to  despatch  De  Bethune,  now
created  IMarquis  de  Kosny,  as  ambassador  extraordinary
to  England,  in  order  that  the  new  sovereign  might  be
secretly  but  thoroughly  instructed  as  to  the  scheme  for
remodelling  Christendom."*^

As  Eosny  was  also  charged  with  the  dut}^  of  formally
congratulating  King  James,  he  proceeded  upon  his
journey  with  remarkable  pomp.  He  was  accompanied
by  two  hundred  gentlemen  of  quality,  specially  attached
to  his  embassy — young  city  fops,  as  he  himself  described
them,  who  were  out  of  their  element  whenever  they
left  the  pavement  of  Paris — and  by  an  equal  number  of
valets,  glooms,  and  cooks.^^  Such  a  retinue  was  in-
dispensable to  enable  an  ambassador  to  transact  the
public  business  and  to  maintain  the  public  dignity  in

**  Mcmoirea  de  Sully,  iv.  34-36,  anno  1601.

«  Ibid.  268;  v.  21.

«  Ibid.  26ti,  uqq.

144

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CiiAP.  XLI.

those  days ;  unproductive  consumption  being  accounted
most  sagacious  and  noble.

Before  reaching  the  Englisb  shore  the  marquis  was
involved  in  trouble.  Accepting  the  offer  of  the  Eng-
lish vice-admiral  lying  off  Calais,  he  embarked  with  his
suite  in  two  English  vessels,  much  to  the  dissatisfaction
of  De  Vic,  vice-admiral  of  France,  who  was  anxious  to
convey  the  French  ambassador  in  the  war-ships  of  his
country.  There  had  been  suspicion  afloat  as  to  the
good  understanding  between  England  and  Spain,  caused
by  the  great  courtesy  recently  shown  to  the  Count  of
Arenberg,  and  there  was  intense  irritation  among  all
the  seafaring  people  of  France  on  account  of  the  ex-
ploits of  the  English  corsairs  upon  their  coast.^^  Eosny
thought  it  best  to  begin  his  embassy  b}^  an  act  of  con-
ciliation, but  soon  had  cause  to  repent  his  decision.

In  mid-channel  they  were  met  by  De  Vic's  vessels
with  the  French  banner  displayed,  at  which  sight  the
English  commander  was  so  wroth  that  he  forthwith
ordered  a  broadside  to  be  poured  into  the  audacious
foreigner ;  swearing  with  mighty  oaths  that  none  but
the  English  flag  should  be  shown  in  those  waters.  And
thus,  while  conveying  a  French  ambassador  and  three
hundred  Frenchmen  on  a  sacred  mission  to  the  British
sovereign,  this  redoubtable  mariner  of  England  pre-
pared to  do  battle  with  the  ships  of  France.  It  was
with  much  difficulty  and  some  prevarication  that  Rosny
appeased  the  strife,  representing  that  the  French  flag
had  only  been  raised  in  order  that  it  might  be  dipped,
in  honour  of  the  French  ambassador,  as  the  ships  passed
15  June,  each  other.  The  full-shotted  broadside  was
1603.  ^Yed  from  fifty  guns,  but  the  English  com-
mander consented,  at  De  Eosny's  representations,  that
it  should  be  discharged  wide  of  the  mark.^^  A  few  shots,
however,  struck  the  side  of  one  of  the  French  vessels,
and  at  the  same  time,  as  Cardinal  Richelieu  afterwards
remarked,  pierced  the  heart  of  every  patriotic  French-
man.'^'^

The  ambassador  made  a  sign,  which  De  Vic  under-
stood, to  lower  his  flag  and  to  refrain  from  answering
the  fire.*^ Thus  a  battle  between  the  allies,  amid  the

45  Memoires  de  Sully,  iv.  27?,
*7  Ibid.  273  6,  and  notes.

*6  Ibid.  273-6.
^  Ibid.

1603.

FRENCH  EMBASSY  TO  ENGLAND.

145

most  amazing  circumstances,  was  avoided,  but  it  may-
well  be  imagined  how  long  and  how  deeply  the  poison
of  the  insult  festered.

Such  an  incident  could  hardly  predispose  the  am-
bassador in  favour  of  the  nation  he  was  about  to  visit,
or  strengthen  his  hope  of  laying,  not  only  the  founda-
tion of  a  perpetual  friendship  between  the  two  crowns,
but  of  effecting  the  palingenesis  of  Europe.  Yet  no
doubt  Sully — as  the  world  has  so  long  learned  to  call
him— was  actuated  by  lofty  sentiments  in  many  respects
in  advance  of  his  age.  Although  a  brilliant  and  success-
ful campaigner  in  his  youth,  he  detested  war,  and  looked
down  with  contempt  at  political  systems  which  had
not  yet  invented  anything  better  than  gunpowder  for
the  arbitrament  of  international  disputes.  Instead  of
war  being  an  occasional  method  of  obtaining  peace,  it
pained  him  to  think  that  peace  seemed  only  a  process
for  arriving  at  war.  Surely  it  was  no  epigram  in  those
days,  but  the  simplest  statement  of  commonplace  fact,
that  war  was  the  normal  condition  of  Christians.  Alas  !
will  it  be  maintained  that  in  the  two  and  a  half  cen-
turies which  have  since  elapsed  the  worJd  has  made
much  progress  in  a  higher  direction?  Is  there  yet  any
appeal  among  the  most  civilized  nations  except  to  the
logic  of  the  largest  battalions  and  the  eloquence  of  the
biggest  guns  ?

De  Kosny  came  to  be  the  harbinger  of  a  political  mil-
lennium, and  he  heartily  despised  war.  The  schemes
nevertheless,  which  were  as  much  his  own  as  his  mas-
ter's, and  which  he  was  instructed  to  lay  before  the
English  monarch  as  exclusively  his  own,  would  have
required  thirty  years  of  successful  and  tremendous  war-
fare before  they  could  have  a  beginning  of  development.

It  is  not  surprising  that  so  philosophical  a  mind  as
his,  while  still  inclining  to  pacific  designs,  should  have
been  led  by  what  met  his  eyes  and  ears  to  some  rather
severe  generalizations.

"  It  is  certain  that  the  English  hate  us,"  he  said,
*'  and  with  a  hatred  so  strong  and  so  general  that  one
is  tempted  to  place  it  among  the  natural  dispositions  of
this  people.  Yet  it  is  rather  the  effect  of  their  pride
and  their  presumption ;  since  there  is  no  nation  in
Europe  more  haughty,  more  disdainful,  more  besotted

VOL.  IV.  L

146

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

with,  tlie  idea  of  its  own  excellence.  If  you  were  to
take  their  word  for  it,  mind  and  reason  are  only  fonnd
with  them ;  they  adore  all  their  opinions  and  despise
those  of  all  other  nations ;  and  it  never  occurs  to  them
to  listen  to  others,  or  to  doubt  themselves  Ex-
amine what  are  called  with  them  maxims  of  state  ;  you
will  find  nothing  but  the  laws  of  pride  itself,  adopted
through  arrogance  or  through  indolence."*^

".Placed  by  nature  amidst  the  tempestuous  and  vari-
able ocean,"  he  wrote  to  his  sovereign,  "  they  are  as  shift-
ing, as  impetuous,  as  changeable  as  its  waves.  So  self-
contradictory  and  so  inconsistent  are  their  actions  almost
in  the  same  instant  as  to  make  it  impossible  that  they
should  proceed  from  the  same  persons  and  the  same
mind.  Agitated  and  ui'ged  by  their  pride  and  arrogance
alone,  they  take  all  their  imaginations  and  extrava-
gances for  truths  and  realities ;  the  objects  of  their  de-
sires and  affections  for  inevitable  events  ;  not  balancing
and  measuring  those  desires  with  the  actual  condition  of
things,  nor  with  the  character  of  the  people  with  whom
they  have  to  deal."''

\A  hen  the  ambassador  arrived  in  London  he  was  lodged
at  Arundel  palace.  He  at  once  became  the  cynosure  of
all  indigenous  parties  and  of  adventurous  politicians  from
every  part  of  Europe ;  few  knowing  how  to  shape  their
course  since  the  great  familiar  lustre  had  disappeaied
from  the  English  sky.

Eosny  found  the  Scotch  lords  sufficiently  favourable
to  France ;  the  English  Catholic  grandees,  with  all  the
Howards  and  the  lord  high  admiral  at  their  head,  exces-
sively inclined  to  Spain,  and  a  great  English  party  detest-
ing both  Spain  and  France  with  equal  fervour  and  well
enough  disposed  to  the  United  Provinces,  not  as  hating
that  commonwealth  less  but  the  two  great  powers  more.

The  ambassador  had  arrived  with  the  five  points,  not
in  his  portfolio  but  in  his  heart,  and  they  might  after  all
be  concentrated  in  one  phrase — Down  with  Austria,  up
with  the  Dutch  republic.  On  his  first  interview  with
Cecil,  who  came  to  arrange  for  his  audience  with  the
king,  he  found  the  secretary  much  disposed  to  conciliate

'•^  Memoires,  iv.  291,  292.  Compare  the  ambassador's  letters  in  Vittorio,  Siri,
*oL  i.

Llcj&ny  to  the  King,  13  June,  1603,  in  Vittorio  Siri. Memorie  Eccondite,  i.  226.

1603.

INTERVIEW  WITH  CECIL.

147

both  Spain  and  the  empire,  and  to  leave  the  provinces  to
shift  for  themselves.  He  spoke  of  Ostend  as  of  a  town
not  worth  the  pains  taken  to  preserve  it,  and  of  the
India  trade  as  an  advantage  of  which  a  true  policy  re-
quired that  the  United  Provinces  should  be  deprived.^*
Already  the  fine  commercial  instinct  of  England  had
scented  a  most  formidable  rival  on  the  ocean.

As  for  the  king,  he  had  as  yet  declared  himself  for  no
party,  while  all  parties  were  disputing  among  each  other
for  mastery  over  him.  James  found  himself,  in  truth,  as
much  astray  in  English  politics  as  he  was  a  foreigner
upon  English  earth.  Suspecting  every  one,  afraid  of
every  one,  he  was  in  mortal  awe,  most  of  all,  of  his
wife,  who  being  the  daughter  of  one  protestant  sovereign
and  wife  of  another,  and  queen  of  a  united  realm  de-
pendent for  its  very  existence  on  antagonism  to  Spain
and  Home,  was  naturally  inclined  to  Spanish  politics
and  the  Catholic  faith.

The  turbulent  and  intriguing  Anne  of  Denmark  was
not  at  the  moment  in  Loudon,  but  James  was  daily
expecting  and  De  Bethune  dreading  her  arrival.

The  ambassador  knew  veiy  well  that,  although  the
king  talked  big  in  her  absence  about  the  forms  which
he  intended  to  prescribe  for  her  conduct,  ho  would  take
orders  from  her  as  soon  as  she  arrived,  refuse  her  no-
thing, conceal  nothing  from  her,  and  tremble  before  her
as  usual.

'J'he  king  was  not  specially  prejudiced  in  favour  of
the  French  monarch  or  his  ambassador,  for  he  had  been
told  that  Henry  had  occasionally  spoken  of  him  as  cap-
tain of  arts  and  doctor  of  arms,  and  that  both  the  j\Iar-
quis  de  Kosny  and  his  brother  were  known  to  have  used
highly  disrespectful  language  concerning  him.

Before  his  audience,  De  Kosny  received  a  private  visit
from  Barneveld,  and  the  deputies  of  the  States-General,
and  was  informed  that  since  his  arrival  they  had  been
treated  with  more  civility  by  the  king.  Previously  he
had  refused  to  see  them  after  the  first  official  reception,
had  not  been  willing  to  grant  Count  Henry  of  Nassau  a
private  audience,  and  had  spoken  publicly  of  the  States
as  seditious  rebels.

5»  Letter  last  cited,  307.

52  De^patcbes  of  Rosny,  in  Siri,  i.  231.

L  2

148

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI

On  the  21st  June  Barneveld  had  a  long  private  inter*
21  June,  view  with  the  ambassador  at  Arundel  palace,
1603.  when  he  exerted  all  his  eloquence  to  prove  the
absolute  necessity  of  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance
between  France  and  the  United  Provinces  if  the  inde-
pendence of  the  republic  were  ever  to  be  achieved.  Un-
less a  French  army  took  the  field  at  once,  Ostend  would
certainly  fall,  he  urged,  and  resistance  to  the  Spaniards
would  soon  afterwards  cease.^^

It  is  not  probable  that  the  Advocate  felt  in  his  heart
ao  much  despair  as  his  words  indicated,  but  he  was  most
anxious  that  Henry  should  openly  declare  himself  the
protector  of  the  j^oung  commonwealth,  and  not  indis-
posed perhaps  to  exaggerate  the  dangers,  grave  as  they
were  without  doubt,  by  which  its  existence  was  menaced.

The  ambassador  however  begged  the  Hollander  to
renounce  any  such  hopes,  assuring  him  that  the  king
had  no  intention  of  publicly  and  singly  taking  upon
his  shoulders  the  whole  burden  of  war  with  Spain,  the
fruits  of  which  would  not  be  his  to  gather.  Certainly
before  there  had  been  time  thoroughly  to  study  the  cha-
racter and  inclinations  of  the  British  monarch  it  would
be  impossible  for  De  Kosny  to  hold  out  any  encourage-
ment in  this  regard.  He  then  asked  Barneveld  what  he
had  been  able  to  discover  during  his  residence  in  London
as  to  the  personal  sentiments  of  James.

The  Advocate  replied  that  at  first  the  king,  yielding
to  his  own  natural  tendencies  and  to  the  advice  of  his
counsellors,  had  refused  the  Dutch  deputies  every  hope,
but  that  subsequently  reflecting,  as  it  would  seem,  that
peace  would  cost  England  very  dear  if  English  inaction
should  cause  the  Hollanders  to  fall  again  under  the  do-
minion of  the  Catholic  king,  or  to  find  their  only  deli-
verance in  the  protection  of  France,  and  beginning  to
feel  more  acutely  how  much  England  had  herself  to  fear
from  a  power  like  Spain,  he  had  seemed  to  awake  out  of
a  profound  sleep,  and  promised  to  take  these  important
alikirs  into  consideration.

Subsequently  he  had  fallen  into  a  dreary  abyss  of  inde-
cision, where  he  still  remained.^*  It  was  certain  however
that  he  would  form  no  resolution  without  the  concurrence

53  Despatches  of  Eosny,  in  Siri,  309,  310.  Compare  Rosiiy's  letter  to  the  King,  in
Grroen  v.  Prinsterer,  Archives,  II.  206-210.  ^  Letter  of  Rosny,  uln  sup.

1603.

DE  ROSNY  AND  BARNEVELD.

149

of  the  King  of  France,  whose  ambassador  he  had  been  so
impatiently  expecting,  and  whose  proposition  to  him  of
a  double  marriage  between  their  respective  children  had
given  him  much  satisfaction.

De  Kosny  felt  sure  that  the  Dutch  statesmen  were
far  too  adroit  to  put  entire  confidence  in  anything  said
by  James,  whether  favourable  or  detrimental  to  their
cause.  He  conjured  Barneveld  therefore,  by  the  wel-
fare of  his  country,  to  conceal  nothing  from  him  in  regard
to  the  most  secret  resolutions  that  might  have  been  taken
by  the  States  in  the  event  of  their  being  abandoned  by
England,  or  in  case  of  their  being  embarrassed  by  a
sudden  demand  on  the  part  of  that  power  for  the  cau-
tionary towns  offered  to  Elizabeth,^

Barneveld,  thus  pressed,  and  considering  the  ambas-
sador as  the  confidential  counsellor  of  a  sovereign  who
was  the  republic's  only  friend,  no  longer  hesitated.
Making  a  merit  to  himself  of  imparting  an  important
secret,  he  said  that  the  state-council  of  the  common
wealth  had  resolved  to  elude  at  any  cost  the  restoration
of  the  cautionary  towns.^^

The  interview  was  then  abruptly  terminated  by  the
arrival  of  the  Venetian  envoy.

The  22nd  of  June  arrived. The  marquis  had  ordered
mourning  suits  for  his  whole  embassy  and  reti-  22  June,
nue,  by  particular  command  of  his  sovereign,  i^"^-
who  wished  to  pay  this  public  tribute  to  the  memory  of
the  great  queen.

To  his  surprise  and  somewhat  to  his  indignation,  he
was  however  informed  that  no  one,  stranger  or  native,
Scotchman  or  Englishman,  had  been  permitted  to  pre-
sent himself  to  the  king  in  black,  that  his  appearance
there  in  mourning  would  be  considered  almost  an  affront,
and  that  it  was  a  strictly  enforced  rule  at  court  to  ab-
stain from  any  mention  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  to  aflFect
an  entire  oblivion  of  her  reign.^^

At  the  last  moment,  and  only  because  convinced  that
he  might  otherwise  cause  the  impending  negotiations
utterly  to  fail,  the  ambassador  consented  to  attire  him-
self, the  hundred  and  twenty  gentlemen  selected  from
his  diplomatic  family  to  accompany  him  on  this  occa-
sion, and  all  his  servants,  in  gala  costume. The  royai

Letter  of  Rosnj',  313.  se  ibid.  "  ibid.  320,  321.

150  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

guards,  with  the  Earl  of  Derby  at  their  head,  came  early
in  the  afternoon  to  Arundel  House  to  escort  him  to  the
Thames,  and  were  drawn  up  on  ihe  quay  as  the  marquis
and  his  followers  embarked  in  the  splendid  royal  barges
provided  to  convey  them  to  Greenwich.

On  arriving  at  their  destination  they  were  met  at  the
landing  by  the  Earl  of  Northumberland,  and  escorted
with  great  pomp  and  through  an  infinite  multitude  of
spectators  to  the  palace.  Such  was  the  crowd,  without
and  within,  of  courtiers  and  common  people,  that  it  was
a  long  time  before  the  marquis,  preceded  by  his  hundred
and  twenty  gentlemen,  reached  the  hall  of  audience.

At  last  he  arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  when
James  arose  and  descended  eagerly  two  steps  of  the  dais
in  order  to  greet  the  ambassador.  He  would  have
descended  them  all  had  not  one  of  the  counsellors
plucked  him  by  the  sleeve,  whispering  that  be  had  gone
quite  far  enough.

"  And  if  I  honour  this  ambassador,"  cried  James,  in  a
loud  voice,  "  more  than  is  usual,  I  don't  intend  that  it
shall  serve  as  a  precedent  for  others.  I  esteem  and  love
him  particularly,  because  of  the  affection  which  I  know
he  cherishes  for  me,  of  his  firmness  in  our  religion,  and
of  his  fidelity  to  his  master."

Much  more  that  was  personally  flattering  to  the  mar-
quis was  said  thus  emphatically  by  James.  To  all  this
the  ambassador  replied,  not  by  a  set  discourse,  but  only
by  a  few  words  of  compliment,  expressing  his  sovereign's
regrets  at  the  death  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  his  joy  at
the  accession  of  the  new  sovereign.  He  then  delivered
his  letters  of  credence,  and  the  complimentary  conversa-
tion continued ;  the  king  declaring  that  he  had  not  left
behind  him  in  Scotland  his  passion  for  the  monarch  of
France,  and  that  even  had  he  found  England  at  war
with  that  country  on  his  accession  he  would  have
instantly  concluded  a  peace  with  a  prince  whom  he  so
much  venerated.

Thus  talking,  the  king  caused  his  guest  to  ascend  with
him  to  the  uppermost  steps  of  the  dais,  babbling  on  very
rapidly  and  skipping  abruptly  from  one  subject  to  another.
De  Kosny  took  occasion  to  express  his  personal  esteem
and  devotion,  and  was  assured  by  the  king  in  reply  that

58 Letter  of  Rosny,  323,  seqq.

59  Ibid. Siri,  vol.  i.  324.

1603. DE  ROSNY'S  INTRRVIEW  WITH  KING  JAMES.  151

the  slanders  in  regard  to  him  which  had  reached  the
royal  ears  had  utterly  failed  of  their  effect.  It  was
obvious  that  they  were  the  invention  of  Spanish  in-
triguers who  wished  to  help  that  nation  to  universal
monarchy.  Then  he  launched  forth  into  general  and
cordial  abuse  of  Spain,  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  Count
Henry  of  Nassau,  who  stood  near  enough  to  hear  a  good
deal  of  the  conversation,  and  of  the  other  Dutch  deputies
who  were  moving  about,  quite  unknown,  in  the  crowd.
He  denounced  very  vigorously  the  malignity  of  the
Spaniards  in  lighting  fires  everywhere  in  their  neigh-
bours' possessions,  protested  that  he  would  always  oppose
their  wicked  designs,  but  spoke  contemptuously  of  their
present  king  as  too  feeble  of  mind  and  body  ever  to  coiti-
prehend  or  to  carry  out  the  projects  of  his  predecessors.

Among  other  gossip,  James  asked  the  envoy  if  he  went
to  hear  the  Protestant  pieacliing  in  London.  Being
answered  in  the  affirmative,  he  expressed  surprise,  having
been  told,  he  said,  that  it  was  Eosny's  intention  to  repu-
diate his  religion  as  Do  Sancy  had  done,  in  order  to
secure  his  fortunes.  The  marquis  protested  that  such  a
thought  had  never  entered  liis  head,  but  intimated  that
the  reports  might  come  from  his  familiar  intercourse
with  the  papal  nuncius,  and  many  French  ecclesiastics.
The  king  asked  if,  when  speaking  with  the  nuncius,  he
called  the  pope  his  Holiness,  as  hy  so  doing  he  would
greatly  offend  God,  in  whom  alone  was  holiness.  Kosny
replied  that  he  commonly  used  the  style  prevalent  at
court,  governing  himself  according  to  the  rules  adopted
in  regaid  to  pretenders  to  crowns  and  kingdoms  which
they  thought  belonged  to  them,  but  the  possession  of
which  was  in  other  hands,  conceding  to  them,  in  order
not  to  offend  them,  the  titles  which  they  claimed.'^'^

James  shook  his  head  portentously,  and  changed  the
subject.

The  general  tone  of  the  royal  conversation  was  agree-
able enough  to  the  ambassador,  who  eagerly  alluded  to
the  perfidious  conduct  of  a  Goverament,  which  ever
since  concluding  the  peace  of  A^ervins  with  Henry,  had
been  doing  its  best  to  promote  sedition  and  territorial
dismembeiment  in  his  kingdom,  and  to  assist  all  hia
open  and  his  secret  enemies.

«>  Despatches  of  Rosii}',  in  Vitt.  Siri,  i  231.

152  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI,

James  assented  very  emphatically,  and  the  marquis  felt
convinced  that  a  resentment  against  Spain,  expressed
so  publicl}^  and  so  violently  by  James,  could  hardly
fail  to  be  sincere.  He  began  seriously  to  hope  that  his
negotiations  would  be  successful,  and  was  for  soaring  at
once  into  the  regions  of  high  politics,  when  the  king
suddenly  began  to  talk  of  hunting.

"  And  so  you  sent  half  the  stag  I  sent  you  to  Count
Arenberg,"  said  James ;  "  but  he  is  very  angry  about  it,
thinking  that  you  did  so  to  show  how  much  more  I
make  of  you  than  I  do  of  him.  And  so  I  do  ;  for  I  know
the  difference  between  your  king,  my  brother,  and  his
masters  wlio  have  sent  me  an  ambassador  who  can  neither
walk  nor  talk,  and  who  asked  me  to  give  him  audience
in  a  garden  because  he  cannot  go  upstairs."

The  king  then  alluded  to  Tassis,  chief  courier  of  his
Catholic  Majesty  and  special  envoy  from  Spain,  asking
whether  the  marquis  had  seen  him  on  his  passage  through
France.

"  Spain  sends  me  a  postillion-ambassador,"  said  he,
"  that  he  may  travel  the  faster  and  attend  to  business
by  post."

It  was  obvious  that  James  took  a  sincere  satisfaction
in  abusing  everything  relating  to  that  country  from  its
sovereign  and  the  Duke  of  Lerma  downwards ;  but  he
knew  very  well  that  Velasco,  constable  of  Castile,  had
been  already  designated  as  ambassador,  and  would-  soon
be  on  his  way  to  England.

De  Eosny  on  the  termination  of  his  audience  was
escorted  in  great  state  by  the  Earl  of  Northumberland
to  the  barges.

A  few  days  later,  the  ambassador  had  another  private

22  June  which  the  king  expressed  himself

with  apparent  candoar  concerning  the  balance
of  power. Christendom,  in  his  opinion,  should  belong
in  three  equal  shares  to  the  families  of  Stuart,  Bourbon,
and  Habsburg ;  but  personal  ambition  and  the  force  of
events  had  given  to  the  house  of  Austria  more  than  its
fair  third. Sound  policy  therefore  required  a  combina-

fi'  Sully,  Memoires,  iv.  331,  seqq. De-  ambassador  to  the  king  in  the  month  ol

Bpatches  of  Rosny,  in  Vitt.  Siri,  i.  Jnly,  in  Vittorio  Siri,  Mem.  Eec.  i,

62  Memoires,  uM  sup.  ^  Memoires,  355,  seqq^

63  See  especially  the  despatches  of  the

1603.

SECOND  PRIVATE  AUDIENCE.

153

tion  between  France  and  England,  in  order  to  reduce
their  copartner  within  proper  limits.  This  was  satisfac-
tory as  far  as  it  went,  and  the  ambassador  complimented
the  king  on  his  wide  views  of  policy  and  his  lofty  senti-
ments in  regard  to  human  rights.

Warming  with  the  subject,  James  held  language  very
similar  to  that  which  l)e  Kosny  and  his  master  had
used  in  their  secret  conferences,  and  took  the  ground
unequivocally  that  the  secret  war  levied  by  Spain
against  France  and  England,  as  exemplified  in  the  Biron
conspiracy,  the  assault  on  Geneva,  the  aid  of  the  Duke  of
Savoy,  and  in  the  perpetual  fostering  of  Jesuit  intrigues,
plots  of  assassination,  and  other  conspiracies  in  the
British  islands,  justified  a  secret  war  on  the  part  of
Henry  and  himself  against  Philip.

The  ambassador  would  have  been  more  deeply  im-
pressed with  the  royal  language  had  ho  felt  more
confidence  in  the  royal  character.

Highly  applauding  the  sentiments  expressed,  and  de-
siring to  excite  still  further  the  resentment  of  James
against  Spain,  he  painted  a  vivid  picture  of  the  progress
of  that  aggressive  power  in  the  past  century.  She  had
devoured  Flanders,  Buigundy,  Granada,  Navarre,  Portu-
gal, the  German  Empire,  Milan,  Naples,  and  all  the
Indies.  If  she  had  not  swallowed  likewise  both  France
and  England  those  two  crowns  were  indebted  for  their
preservation,  after  the  firmness  of  Elizabeth  and  Henry,
to  the  fortunate  incident  of  the  revolt  of  the  Netherlands."^

Do  Eosny  then  proceeded  to  expound  the  necessity
under  which  James  would  soon  find  himself  of  carrying
on  open  war  with  Spain,  and  of  the  expediency  of  making
preparations  for  the  great  struggle  without  loss  of  time.

He  therefore  begged  the  king  to  concert  with  him
some  satisfactory  measure  for  the  preservation  of  the
United  Provinces.

65  ]\Iemoires,  339. And  in  thus  speak-  bridle  could  her  insolence  ])e  checked  ?

ing  he  expressed  the  firm  conviction  of  The  kingdoms  of  France  and  England

the  whole  French  court. "  Provided  the  being  filled  w  ith  discords  in  regard  lo

States  remain  at  war,"  said  Villeroy,  religion  as  they  are,  how  can  they  resii^t

"and  the  Spaniards  have  this  bone  to  Spanish  power  and  Spanish  corruption?

gnaw,  it  will  always  be  in  the  power  of  Even  now  they  can  hardly  do  it,  occupied,

the  English  to  change  their  minds. If  diverted,  and  wearied  as  are  the  Spaniards

Spain  could  get  this  thorn  out  of  her  foot  with  their  war  against  the  Netherlands^."

which  God  has  put  there,  and  thus  far  has  Groen  v.  Prinsterer,  Archives,  11.  231,

kipt  thtro  bo  miiaciilously,  with  what  '232.

154

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

"  But,"  said  James,  what  better  assistance  could  we
give  the  Netherlanders  than  to  divide  their  territory
between  the  States  and  Spain ;  agreeing  at  the  same
time  to  drive  the  Spaniard  out  altogether,  if  he  violates
the  conditions  which  we  should  guarantee  ?"

This  conclusion  was  not  very  satisfactory  to  De  Eosny
who  saw  in  the  bold  language  of  the  king — followed
thus  by  the  indication  of  a  policy  that  might  last  to  the
Greek  Kalends,  and  permit  Ostend,  Dutch  Flanders,
and  even  the  republic  to  fall — nothing  but  that  mixture
of  timidity,  conceit,  and  procrastination  which  marked
the  royal  character.  He  pointed  out  to  him  accordingly
that  Spanish  statesmanship  could  beat  the  world  in  the
art  of  delay,  and  of  plucking  the  fruits  of  delay,  and  that
when  the  United  Provinces  had  been  (Hice  subjugated,
the  turn  of  England  would  come.  It  would  be  then  too
late  for  him  to  hope  to  preserve  himself  by  such  measures
as,  taken  now,  would  be  most  salutar}^^^

A  few  days  later  the  king  invited  De  Eosny  and
the  two  hundred  members  of  his  embassy  to  dine  at
Greenwich,  and  the  excursion  down  the  Thames  took
place  with  the  usual  pomp.

The  two  hundred  dined  with  the  gentlemen  of  the

29  June  '  while  at  the  king's  table,  on  an  elevated

platform  in  the  same  hall,  were  no  guests  but
De  Eosny,  and  the  special,  envoy  of  France,  Count
Beaumont.

The  furniture  and  decorations  of  the  table  were
sumptuous,  and  the  attendants,  to  the  surprise  of  the
Frenchmen,  went  on  their  knees  whenever  they  offered
wine  or  dishes  to  the  king.  The  conversation  at  first
was  on  general  topics,  such  as  the  heat  of  the  weather,
which  happened  to  be  remarkable,  the  pleasures  of  the
chase,  and  the  merits  of  the  sermon  which,  as  it  was

66  Memoires,  iv.  404,  seggf.  Bin,  uM  sup.

67  Memoires,  ubi  sup.  363.  "  Jn  truth,"
wrote  the  ambassador  to  his  sovereign,
"Spain  wishes  to  honey  you  both  (the
kings  of  France  and  England)  in  order  to
accomplish  more  easily  the  complete  con-
quest of  the  Netherlands.  When  these
are  joined  to  her  great  and  almost  infinite
power,  she  hopes  to  give  the  law  to  Christ-
endom, to  make  herself  formidable  to  all

other  princes,  and  to  establish  a  universal
monarchy.  That  is  the  bottom  of  their
intentions.  It  is  the  regular  covetousness
and  ambition  of  Spain,  continued  by  the
successors  of  Charles  V.  The  two  houses
of  Austria  and  of  Spain  being  united,  she
has  reached  such  an  increase  of  power  in
less  than  one  hundred  years  that  the  very
imagination  of  it  is  terrific."— Sully  to  the
King,  in  Groen  v.  Prinsterer,  li,  204,  205.

1603.

DINNER  AT  GREENWICH.

155

Sunday,  De  Rosny  had  been  invited  to  hear  before
dinner  in  the  royal  chapel.

Soon  afterwards,  however,  some  allusion  being  made
to  the  late  queen,  James  spoke  of  her  with  contempt.
He  went  so  far  as  to  say  that,  for  a  long  time  before
her  death,  he  had  governed  the  councils  of  England  ;
all  her  ministers  obeying  and  serving  him  much  better
than  they  did  herself. He  then  called  for  wine,  and,
stretching  out  his  glass  towards  his  two  guests,  drank
to  the  health  of  the  king  and  queen  and  royal  family  of
France.

De  Eosny  replied  by  proposing  the  health  of  his
august  host,  not  forgetting  the  queen  and  their  chil-
dren, upon  which  the  king,  putting  his  lips  close
to  the  ambassador's  ear,  remarked  that  his  next  toast
should  be  in  honour  of  the  matrimonial  union  which
was  proposed  between  the  families  of  Britain  and
France.'^^

This  was  the  first  allusion  made  by  James  to  the
alliance,  and  the  occasion  did  not  strike  the  marquis  as
particularly  appropriate  to  such  a  topic.  He  however
replied  in  a  whisper  that  he  was  rejoiced  to  hear  this
language  from  the  king,  having  always  believed  that
there  would  be  no  hesitation  on  his  part  between  King
Henry  and  the  monarch  of  Spain,  who  as  he  was  aware,
had  made  a  similar  proposition.  James,  expressing  sur-
prise that  his  guest  was  so  well  informed,  avowed  that
he  had  in  fact  received  the  same  ofler  of  the  Infanta  for
his  son  as  had  been  made  to  his  Christian  Majesty  for  the
Dauphin.  \\  hat  more  convenient  counters  in  the  great
game  of  state  than  an  infant  prince  and  princess  in  each
of  the  three  royal  families  to  which  Europe  belonged !
To  how  many  grave  political  combinations  were  these
unfortunate  infants  to  give  rise,  and  how  disUint  the
period  when  great  nations  might  no  longer  be  tied  to
the  pinafores  of  children  in  the  nurser}- !

After  this  little  confidential  interlude,  James  expressed
in  a  loud  voice,  so  that  all  might  hear,  his  determination
never  to  permit  the  subjugation  of  the  Netherlands  by
Spain.  Measures  should  be  taken  the  very  next  day,  ne
promised,  in  concert  with  the  amba^ssador,  as  to  the  aid
to  be  given  to  the  States. Upon  the  faith  of  this  decla-

«  Memolres,  iv.  378.

69  Ibid.

156

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XLI.

ration  De  Eosny  took  from  his  pocket  the  plan  of  a
treaty,  and  forthwith,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  ministers,
placed  it  in  the  hands  of  the  kiDg,  who  meantime  had
risen  from  table.  The  ambassador  also  took  this  occasion
to  speak  publicly  of  the  English  piracies  upon  French
commerce  while  the  two  nations  were  at  peace.  The
king,  in  reply,  expressed  his  dissatisfaction  at  these
depredations  and  at  the  English  admiral  who  attempted
to  defend  what  had  been  done.

He  then  took  leave  of  his  guests,  and  went  off  to  bed,
where  it  was  his  custom  to  pass  his  afternoons."^^

It  was  certain  that  the  Constable  of  Castile  was  now
to  arrive  very  soon,  and  the  marquis  had,  meantime,
obtained  information  on  which  he  relied,  that  this  am-
bassador would  come  charged  with  very  advantageous
offers  to  the  English  court.  Accounts  had  been  got
ready  in  council,  of  all  the  moneys  due  to  England  by
France  and  by  the  States,  and  it  was  thought  that  these
sums,  payment  of  which  was  to  be  at  once  insisted  upon,
together  with  the  Spanish  dollars  set  afloat  in  London,
would  prove  sufficient  to  buy  up  all  resistance  to  the
Spanish  alliance."^^

Such  being  the  nature  of  the  information  furnished  to
De  Eosny,  he  did  not  look  forward  with  very  high
hopes  to  the  issue  of  the  conference  indicated  by  King
James  at  the  Greenwich  dinner.  As,  after  all,  he
would  have  to  deal  once  more  with  Cecil,  the  master-
spirit of  the  Spanish  party,  it  did  not  seem  very  pro-
bable that  the  king's  whispered  professions  of  affection
for  France,  his  very  loud  denunciations  of  Spanish
ambition,  and  his  promises  of  support  to  the  struggling
provinces,  would  be  brought  into  any  substantial  form
for  human  nourishment.  Whispers  and  big  words,
touching  of  glasses  at  splendid  banquets,  and  proposing
of  royal  toasts,  would  not  go  far  to  help  those  soldiers  in
Ostend,  a  few  miles  away,  fighting  two  years  long
already  for  a  square  half-mile  of  barren  sand,  in  which
seemed  centred  the  world's  hopes  of  freedom.

Barneveld  was  inclined  to  take  an  even  more  gloomy
view  than  that  entertained  by  the  French  ambassador.
He  had,  in  truth,  no  reason  to  be  sanguine.  The  honest
republican  envoys  had  brought  no  babies  to  offer  in

70  Memoires.  iv.  380.  7i  Ibid  375,  376. Despatches  of  Rosny,  in  Siri.

1603. CONFERENCE  OF  DE  ROSNY  AND  BARNEVELD.  167

marriage.  Their  little  commonwealtli  had  only  the
merit  of  exchanging  buffets  forty  years  long  with  a
power  which,  after  subjugating  the  Netherlands,  would
have  liked  to  annihilate  France  and  England  too,  and
which,  during  that  period,  had  done  its  best  to  destroy
and  dismember  both.  It  had  only  struggled  as  no
nation  in  the  world's  history  had  ever  done,  for  the
great  principle  upon  which  the  power  and  happiness  of
England  were  ever  to  depend.  It  was  therefore  not  to
be  expected  that  its  representatives  should  be  received
with  the  distinction  conferred  upon  royal  envoys.
Earneveld  and  his  colleagues  accordingly  were  not
invited,  with  two  hundred  noble  hangers-on,  to  come
down  the  Thames  in  gorgeous  array,  and  dine  at  Green-
wich palace ;  but  they  were  permitted  to  mix  in  the
gaping  crowd  of  spectators,  to  see  the  fine  folk,  and  to
hear  a  few  words  at  a  distance  which  fell  from  august
lips."^^  This  was  not  very  satisfactory,  as  Barneveld
could  rarely  gain  admittance  to  James  or  his  ministers.
I)e  Eosny,  however,  was  ahvays  glad  to  confer  with
him,  and  was  certainly  capable  of  rendering  justice  both
to  his  genius  and  to  the  sacredness  of  his  cause.  The
Advocate,  in  a  long  conference  with  the  ambassador,
thought  it  politic  to  paint  the  situation  of  the  republic
in  even  more  sombre  colours  than  seemed  to  De  Kosny
justifiable.  He  was,  indeed,  the  more  struck  with
Barneveld's  present  despondency,  because,  at  a  previous
conference,  a  few  days  before,  he  had  spoken  almost
with  contempt  of  the  Spaniards,  expressing  the  opinion
that  the  mutinous  and  disorganised  condition  of  the
archduke's  army  rendered  the  conquest  of  Ostend  im-
probable, and  hinted  at  a  plan,  of  which  the  world  as
3'et  knew  nothing,  which  would  save  that  place,  or  at
any  rate  would  secure  such  an  advantage  for  the  States
as  to  more  than  counterbalance  its  possible  loss.'^  This
very  sanguine  demeanour  had  rather  puzzled  those  who
had  conferred  with  the  Advocate,  although  they  >vere
ere  long  destined  to  understand  his  allusions,  and  it  was
certainly  a  contrast  to  his  present  gloom.  He  assured
De  Eosny  that  the  Hollanders  were  becoming  desperate,
and  that  they  were  capable  of  abandoning  their  country
in  mass,  and  seeking  an  asylum  bej^ond  the  seas.*^*  The

73  Memoires,  iv.  32"?.

73  Ibid.  344,  345.

74  Ibid.  3S1.

158

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

menace  was  borrowed  from  the  famous  project  conceived
by  William  the  Silent  in  darker  days,  and  seemed  to  the
ambassador  a  present  anachronism.  Obviously  it  was
thought  desirable  to  force  the  French  policy  to  extreme
lengths,  and  Barueveld  accordingly  proposed  that  Henry
should  take  the  burthen  upon  his  shoulders  of  an  open
war  with  Spain,  in  the  almost  certain  event  that  Eng-
land would  make  peace  with  that  power.  De  Eosny
calmly  intimated  to  the  Advocate  that  this  was  asking
something  entirely  beyond  his  power  to  grant,  as  the
special  object  of  his  mission  was  to  form  a  plan  of
concerted  action  with  England."^^

The  cautionary  towns  being  next  mentioned,  Barne-
veld  stated  that  a  demand  had  been  made  upon  Envoy
Caron  by  Cecil  for  the  delivery  of  those  places  to  the
English  Government,  as  England  had  resolved  to  make
peace  with  Spain.  The  Advocate  confided,  however,  to
De  Eosny  that  the  States  would  interpose  many  difficul-
ties, and  that  it  would  be  long  before  the  towns  were
delivered.  This  important  information  was  given  under
the  seal  of  strictest  secrecy,  and  was  coupled  with  an
inference  that  a  war  between  the  republic  and  Britain
would  be  the  probable  result,  in  which  case  the  States
relied  upon  the  alliance  with  France.  The  ambassador
replied  that  in  this  untoward  event  the  republic  would
have  the  sympathy  of  his  royal  master,  but  that  it  would
be  out  of  the  question  for  him  to  go  to  war  with  Spain
and  England  at  the  same  time.'^*^

On  the  same  afternoon  there  was  a  conference  at
Arundel  House  between  the  Dutch  deputies,  the  Eng-
lish counsellors,  and  De  Eosny,  when  Barneveld  drew  a

75  The  great  object  of  Henry  was  to  the  reconciliation  of  the  provinces,  both

prevent  a  treaty  between  the  kings  of  on  account  of  my  reputation  and  because

Spain  and  Britain,  and  above  all  to  ex-  any  demonstration  that  I  might  make

elude  the  United  Provinces  from  any  such  would  rather  increase  than  diminish  the

arrangement. "  You  know  how  much  desire  of  the  two  kings  to  come  to  an

interest  I  have  in  this,"  he  said  to  his  understanding."  —  (Groen  v,  Prinsterer,

ambassador;  "it  is  the  most  important  Archives,  II.  224-226). These  being  the

affair  of  my  reign. You  must  never  for-  secret  intentions  of  the  monarch,  candidly

get  what  my  interest  requires,  that  these  expi^essed,  it  was  obviously  a  delicate

two  kings  shall  never  come  to  an  agree-  matter  for  De  Rosny,  who  knew  that  his

ment. 1  don't  wish  the  States  to  enter  master  meant  to  remain  at  peace  and  yet

into  the  treaty  or  to  lay  down  their  ai-ms  reap  the  advantage  of  a  successful  war  at

on  any  pretext. Nevertheless,  1  ought  the  expense  of  his  friends  and  enemies

not  to  appear  to  have  any  wish  to  prevent  alike,  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  all

a  peace  between  the  two  kingdoms,  nor  parties.  '^^  Memoires,  iv.  3S3.

1603.

CONFERENCE  AT  ARUNDEL  HOUSE.

169

most  dismal  picture  of  the  situation ;  taking  the  ground
that  now  or  never  was  the  time  for  driving  the  Spaniards
entirely  out  of  the  Netherlands.  Cecil  said  in.  a  general
way  that  his  Majesty  felt  a  deep  interest  in  the  cause  of
the  provinces,  and  the  French  ambassador  STimmoned
the  Advocate,  now  that  he  was  assured  of  the  symjoathy
of  two  great  kings,  to  furnish  some  plan  by  which  that
sympathy  might  be  turned  to  account.  Barneveld,  think-
ing ligures  more  eloquent  than  rhetoric,  replied  that  the
States,  besides  garrisons,  had  fifteen  thousand  infantry
and  three  thousand  cavalry  in  the  field,  and  fifty  war
ships  in  commission,  with  artillery  and  munitions  in
proportion,  and  that  it  would  be  advisable  for  France
and  England  to  furnish  an  equal  force,  military  and
naval,  to  the  common  cause.

De  liosny  smiled  at  the  extravagance  of  the  propo-
sition. Cecil,  again  taking  refuge  in  commonplaces,
observed  that  his  master  was  disposed  to  keep  the  peace
with  all  his  neighbours,  but  that,  having  due  regard  to
the  circumstances,  he  was  willing  to  draw  a  line  be-
tween the  wishes  of  the  States  and  his  own,  and  would
grant  them  a  certain  amount  of  succour  underhand.

Thereupon  the  Dutch  deputies  withdrew  to  confer.  De
Rosny,  who  had  no  faith  in  Cecil's  sincerity — the  sug-
gestion being  essentially  the  one  which  he  had  himself
desired — went  meantime  a  little  deeper  into  the  sub-
ject, and  soon  found  that  England,  according  to  the
Secretary  of  State,  had  no  idea  of  mining  herself  for
the  sake  of  the  provinces,  or  of  entering  into  any  posi-
tive engagements  in  their  behalf.  In  case  Spain  should
make  a  direct  attack  upon  the  two  kings  who  were  to
constitute  themselves  protectors  of  Dutch  liberty,  it
might  be  necessary  to  take  up  arms.  The  admission
was  on  the  whole  superfluous,  it  not  being  probable  that
Britain,  even  under  a  Stuart,  would  be  converted  to  the
doctrine  of  non-resistance.  Yet  in  this  case  it  was  sug-
gested by  Cecil  that  the  chief  reliance  of  his  Govern-
ment would  be  on  the  debts  owed  by  the  Dutch  and
French  respectively,  which  would  then  be  forthwith
collected.

De  liosny  was  now  convinced  that  Cecil  was  trifling
with  him,  and  evidently  intending  to  break  oft'  all  prac-

ilemoires,  iv.  3S3-395.

160

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIJ,

Heal  negotiations.  He  concealed  his  annoyance,  how-
ever, as  well  as  he  could,  and  simply  intimated  that  the
first  business  of  importance  was  to  arrange  for  the  relief
of  Ostend  ;  that  eventualities,  such  as  the  possible  at-
tack by  Spain  upon  France  and  England,  might  for  the
moment  be  deferred,  but  that  if  England  thought  it  a
safe  policy  to  ruin  Henry  by  throwing  on  his  shoulders
the  whole  burthen  of  a  war  with  the  common  enemy,
she  would  discover  and  deeply  regret  her  fatal  mistake.
The  time  was  a  very  ill-chosen  one  to  summon  France
to  pay  old  debts,  and  his  Christian  Majesty  had  given
his  ambassador  no  instructions  contemplating  such  a
liquidation.  It  was  the  intention  to  discharge  the  sum
annually,  little  by  little,  but  if  England  desired  to  ex-
haust the  king  by  these  peremptory  demands,  it  was  an
odious  conduct,  and  very  different  from  any  that  France
had  ever  pursued.

The  English  counsellors  were  not  abashed  by  this
rebuke,  but  became,  on  the  contrary,  very  indignant,
avowing  that  if  anything  more  was  demanded  of  them,
England  would  entirely  abandon  the  United  Provinces.
"  Cecil  made  himself  known  to  me  in  this  conference,"
said  He  Eosny,  for  exactly  what  he  was.  He  made
use  only  of  double  meanings  and  vague  propositions,
feeling  that  reason  was  not  on  his  side.  He  was  forced
to  blush  at  his  own  self-contradictions,  when,  with  a
single  word,  I  made  him  feel  the  absurdity  of  his  lan-
guage. Now,  endeavouring  to  intimidate  me,  he  exag-
gerated the  strength  of  England,  and  again  he  enlarged
upon  the  pretended  offers  made  by  Spain  to  that
nation. "  '^^

The  secretary,  desirous  to  sow  discord  between  the
Dutch  deputies  and  the  ambassador,  then  observed  that
France  ought  to  pay  to  England  £50,000  upon  the
nail,  which  sum  would  be  at  once  appropriated  to
the  necessities  of  the  States.  "  But  what  most  enraged
me,"  said  De  Kosny,  "  was  to  see  these  ministers,  who
had  come  to  me  to  state  the  intentions  of  their  king,
thus  impudently  substitute  their  own ;  for  I  knew  that
he  had  commanded  them  to  do  the  very  contrary  to
that  which  they  did."^^

The  conference  ended  with  a  suggestion  by  Cecil,  that

78  Memoires,  iv.  391.

79  Ibid  392,  393.

1603.

INSINCERl'l  Y  OF  THE  COUNSELLORS.

161

as  France  would  only  undertake  a  war  in  conjunction
with  England,  and  as  England  would  only  consent  to
this  if  paid  by  France  and  the  States,  the  best  thing  for
the  two  kings  to  do  would  be  to  do  nothing,  but  to  con-
tinue to  live  in  friendship  together,  without  troubling
themselves  about  foreign  complications.

This  was  the  purpose  towards  which  the  English
counsellors  had  been  steadily  tending,  and  these  last
words  of  Cecil  seemed  to  the  ambassador  the  only  sincere
ones  spoken  by  him  in  the  whole  conference.

"  If  1  kept  silence,"  said  the  ambassador,  "  it  was  not
because  I  acquiesced  in  their  reasoning.  On  the  con-
trary, the  manner  in  which  they  had  just  revealed  them-
selves, and  avowed  themselves  in  a  certain  sort  liars  and
impostors,  had  given  me  the  most  profound  contempt  for
them.  I  thought,  however,  that  by  heating  myself  and
contending  with  them — so  far  from  causing  them  to
abandon  a  resolution  which  they  had  taken  in  concert —
I  might  even  bring  about  a  total  rupture.  On  the  other
hand,  matters  remaining  as  they  were,  and  a  friendship
existing  between  the  two  kings,  which  might  perhaps
be  cemented  by  a  double  marriage,  a  more  favourable
occasion  might  present  itself  for  negotiation.  I  did  not
yet  despair  of  the  success  of  my  mission,  because  I  be-
lieved that  the  king  had  no  part  in  the  designs  which
his  counsellors  wished  to  carry  out."^^

That  the  counsellors,  then  struggling  for  dominion
over  the  new  king  and  his  kingdom,  understood  the  cha-
racter of  their  sovereign  better  than  did  the  ambassador,
future  events  were  likely  enough  to  prove.  That  they
])referred  peace  to  war,  and  the  friendship  of  Spain  to
an  alliance,  offensive  and  defensive,  with  France  in
favour  of  a  republic  which  they  detested,  is  certain.
It  is  difficult,  however,  to  understand  why  they  were
"  liars  and  impostors"  because,  in  a  conference  with  the
representative  of  France,  they  endeavoured  to  make
their  own  opinions  of  public  policy  valid  rather  than
content  themselves  simply  with  being  the  errand-bearers
of  the  new  king,  whom  they  believed  incapable  of  being
stirred  to  an  honourable  action.

The  whole  political  atmosphere  of  Europe  was  me-

VOL.  IV.

w  Memoircs,  394,  395.

M

162

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

phitic  with  falsehood,  and  certainly  the  gales  which
blew  from  the  English  court  at  the  accession  of  James
were  not  fragrant,  but  De  Rosny  had  himself  come  over
from  France  under  false  pretences.  He  had  been  charged
by  his  master  to  represent  Henry's  childish  scheme,
which  he  thought  so  gigantic,  for  the  regeneration  of
Europe,  as  a  project  of  his  own,  which  he  was  deter-
mined to  bring  to  execution,  even  at  the  risk  of  infi-
delity to  his  sovereign,  and  the  first  element  in  that
whole  policy  was  to  carry  on  war  underhand  against  a
power  with  which  his  master  had  just  sworn  to  preserve
peace.  In  that  age  at  least  it  was  not  safe  for  politicians
to  call  each  other  hard  names.

The  very  next  day  De  Eosny  had  a  long  private  inter-
view with  James  at  Greenwich.  Being  urged  to  speak
without  reserve,  the  ambassador  depicted  the  privy  coun-
sellors to  the  king  as  false  to  his  instructions,  traitors  to
the  best  interests  of  their  country,  the  humble  servants
of  Spain,  and  most  desirous  to  make  their  royal  master
the  slave  of  that  power  under  the  name  of  its  ally.  He
expressed  the  opinion,  accordingly,  that  James  would  do
better  in  obeying  only  the  promptings  of  his  own  supe-
rior wisdom,  rather  than  the  suggestions  of  the  intriguers
about  him.  The  adroit  De  Eosny  thus  softly  insinuated
to  the  flattered  monarch  that  the  designs  of  France  were
the  fresh  emanations  of  his  own  royal  intellect.  It  was
the  whim  of  James  to  imagine  himself  extremely  like
Henry  of  Bourbon  in  character,  and  he  affected  to  take
the  wittiest,  bravest,  most  adventurous,  and  most  adroit
knight-errant  that  ever  won  and  wore  a  crown  as  his
perpetual  model.

It  was  delightful,  therefore,  to  find  himself  in  com-
pany with  his  royal  brother,  making  and  unmaking
kings,  destroying  empires,  altering  the  whole  face  of
Christendom,  and,  better  than  all,  settling  then  and  for
ever  the  theology  of  the  whole  world,  without  the  trouble
of  moving  from  his  easy  chair,  or  of  incurring  any  per-
sonal danger.

He  entered  at  once,  with  the  natural  tendency  to  sus-
picion of  a  timid  man,  into  the  views  presented  by  De
Eosny  as  to  the  perfidy  of  his  counsellors.  He  changed
colour,  and  was  visibly  moved,  as  the  ambassador  gave
his  version  of  the  recent  conference  with  Cecil  and  the

1603.  HENRY'S  GREAT  POLITICAL  SCHEME.

163

other  ministers,  and  being  thns  artfully  stimulated,  he
was  prepared  to  receive  with  much  eagerness  the  por-
tentous communications  now  to  be  made.

The  ambassador,  however,  caused  him  to  season  his
admiration  until  he  had  taken  a  most  solemn  oath,  by
the  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  never  to  reveal  a  syl-
lable of  what  he  was  about  to  hear.  This  done,  and  the
royal  curiosity  excited  almost  beyond  endurance,  De
Eosny  began  to  unfold  the  stupendous  schemes  which
had  been  concerted  between  Elizabeth  and  Henry  at
Dover,  and  which  formed  the  secret  object  of  his  pre-
sent embassy.  Feeling  that  the  king  was  most  malleable
in  the  theological  part  of  his  structure,  the  wily  envoy
struck  his  first  blows  in  that  direction,  telling  him  that
his  own  interest  in  the  religious  condition  of  Europe,
and  especially  in  the  firm  establishment  of  the  Protes-
taut  faith,  far  surpassed  in  his  mind  all  considerations  of
fortune,  country,  or  even  of  fidelity  to  his  sovereign.^^
Thus  far,  political  considerations  had  kept  Henry  from
joining  in  the  great  Catholic  League,  but  it  was  possible
that  a  change  might  occur  in  his  system,  and  the  Pro-
testant form  of  worship,  abandoned  by  its  ancient  protec-
tor, might  disappear  entirely  from  ranee  and  from  Eu-
rope. De  Kosny  had,  therefore,  felt  the  necessity  of  a
new  patron  for  the  reformed  religion  in  this  great  emer-
gency, and  had  naturally  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  puissant
and  sagacious  prince  who  now  occupied  the  British
throne.  Kow  was  the  time,  he  urged,  for  James  to
immortalize  his  name  by  becoming  the  arbiter  of  the
destiny  of  Europe.  It  would  always  seem  his  own
design,  although  Henry  was  equally  interested  in  it
with  himself.  The  plan  was  vast  but  simple,  and  per-
fectly easy  of  execution.  There  would  be  no  difficulty
in  constructing  an  all-powerful  league  of  sovereigns  for
the  destruction  of  the  house  of  Austria,  the  foundation-
stones  of  which  would  of  course  be  France,  Great  Bri-
tain, and  the  United  Provinces.  The  double  marriage
between  the  Bourbon  and  Stuart  families  would  in-
dissolubly  unite  the  two  kingdoms,  while  interest  and
gratitude,  a  common  hatred  and  a  common  love,  would
bind  the  republic  as  firmly  to  the  union. Denmark  and.

81  Memoires,  iv.  402.

164

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

Sweden  were  certainly  to  be  relied  upon,  as  well  as  all
other  Protestant  princes.  The  ambitions  and  restless
Duke  of  Savoy  would  be  gained  by  the  offer  of  Lom-
bardy  and  a  kingly  crown,  notwithstanding  his  matri-
monial connection  with  Spain.  As  for  the  German
princes,  they  would  come  greedily  into  the  arrangement,
as  the  league,  rich  in  the  spoils  of  the  Austrian  house,
would  have  Hungary,  Bohemia,  Silesia,  Moravia,  the
archduchies,  and  other  splendid  provinces  to  divide
among  them.

The  pope  would  be  bought  up  by  a  present,  in  fee-
simple,  of  Naples,  and  other  comfortable  bits  of  property,
of  which  he  was  now  only  feudal  lord.  Sicily  would  be
an  excellent  sop  for  the  haughty  republic  of  Venice.
The  Tranche  Comte,  Alsace,  Tirol,  were  naturally  to  be
annexed  to  Switzerland ;  Liege  and  the  heritage  of  the
Duke  of  Cleves  and  Juliers  to  the  Dutch  common-
wealth.^'^

The  King  of  France,  who,  according  to  De  Eosny's
solemn  assertions,  was  entirely  ignorant  of  the  whole
scheme, would,  however,  be  sure  to  embrace  it  very
heartily  when  James  should  propose  it  to  him,  and
would  be  far  too  disinterested  to  wish  to  keep  any
of  the  booty  for  himself.  A  similar  self-denial  was,  of
course,  expected  of  James,  the  two  great  kings  satisfy-
ing themselves  with  the  proud  consciousness  of  having
saved  society,  rescued  the  world  from  the  sceptre  of  an
Austrian  universal  monarchy,  and  regenerated  European
civilization  for  all  future  time.^*

The  monarch  listened  with  ravished  ears,  interposed
here  and  there  a  question  or  a  doubt,  but  devoured
every  detail  of  the  scheme,  as  the  ambassador  slowly
placed  it  before  him,

De  Eosny  showed  that  the  Spanish  faction  was  not  in
reality  so  powerful  as  the  league  which  would  be  con-
structed for  its  overthrow.  It  was  not  so  much  a  reli-
gious as  a  political  frontier  which  separated  the  nations.
He  undertook  to  prove  this,  but,  after  all,  was  obliged
to  demonstrate  that  the  defection  of  Heniy  from  the
Protestant  cause  had  deprived  him  of  his  natural  allies,
and  given  him  no  true  friends  in  exchange  for  the  old
ones.

^'2  Memoires,  iv.  204,

83  Ibid.

84  Ibid.  404,  seqq.

i603.  JAMES'S  APPROVAL  OF  THE  PROJECT.

165

Essentially  the  Catholics  were  ranged  upon  one  side,
and  the  Protestants  on  the  other,  but  both  religions
were  necessary  to  Henry  the  Huguenot.  The  bold  free-
thinker adroitly  balanced  himself  upon  each  creed.  In
making  use  of  a  stern  and  conscientious  Calvinist,  like
Maximilian  de  Bethune,  in  his  first  assault  upon  the
theological  professor  who  now  stood  in  Elizabeth's  place,
be  showed  the  exquisite  tact  which  never  failed  him.
Toleration  for  the  two  religions  which  had  political
power,  perfect  intolerance  for  all  others ;  despotic  forms
of  polity,  except  for  two  little  republics  which  were  to
be  smothered  with  protection  and  never  left  out  of  lead-
ing strings,  a  thorough  re-casting  of  governments  and
races,  a  palingenesis  of  Europe,  a  nominal  partition  of
its  hegemony  between  France  and  England,  which  was
to  be  in  reality  absorbed  by  France,  and  the  annihila-
tion of  Austrian  power  east  and  west,  these  were  the
vast  ideas  with  which  that  teeming  Bourbon  brain  was
filled.  It  is  the  instinct  both  of  poetic  and  of  servile
minds  to  associate  a  sentiment  of  grandeur  with  such
fantastic  dreams,  but  usually  on  condition  that  the
dreamer  wears  a  crown.  \\'hen  the  regenerator  of
society  appears  with  a  wisp  of  straw  upon  his  head,  un-
appreciative  society  is  apt  to  send  him  back  to  his  cell.
There,  at  least,  his  capacity  for  mischief  is  limited.

If  to  do  be  as  grand  as  to  imagine  what  it  were  good
to  do,  then  the  Dutchmen  in  Hell's  Mouth  and  the
Porcupine  fighting  Universal  Monarchy  inch  by  inch
and  pike  to  pike,  or  trying  conclusions  with  the  ice-
bears  of  Nova  Zembla,  or  capturing  whole  Portuguese
fleets  in  the  Moluccas,  were  effecting  as  great  changes
in  the  world,  and  doing  perhaps  as  much  for  the  ad-
vancement of  civilization,  as  James  of  the  two  Britains
and  Henry  of  France  and  Navarre  in  those  his  less
heroic  days,  were  likely  to  accomplish.  History  has
long  known  the  results.

The  ambassador  did  his  work  admirably.  The  king
embraced  him  in  a  transport  of  enthusiasm,  vowed  by
all  that  was  most  sacred  to  accept  the  project  in  all  its
details,  and  exacted  from  the  ambassador  in  his  turn  an
oath  on  the  Eucharist  never  to  reveal,  except  to  his
master,  the  mighty  secrets  of  their  conference.*''*

«  Mcmoires,  iv.  417,  e<  seqi- Despatches  in  Stri,  voL  L

166

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CiLiP.  XLI.

The  interview  had  lasted  four  hours.  When  it  was
concluded,  James  summoned  Cecil,  and  in  presence  of
the  ambassador  and  of  some  of  the  counsellors,  lectured
him  soundly  on  his  presumption  in  disobeying  the  royal
commands  in  his  recent  negotiations  with  De  Rosnj^.
He  then  announced  his  decision  to  ally  himself  strictly
with  France  against  Spain  in  consequence  of  the  reve-
lations just  made  to  him,  and  of  course  to  espouse  the
cause  of  the  United  Provinces.  Telling  the  crest-fallen
Secretary  of  State  to  make  the  proper  official  communi-
cations on  the  subject  to  the  ambassadors  of  my  lords
the  States-General,^^ — thus  giving  the  envoys  from  the
republic  for  the  first  time  that  pompous  designation, —
the  king  turned  once  more  to  the  marquis  with  the
exclamation, — "  Well,  Mr.  Ambassador,  this  time  I  hope
that  you  are  satisfied  with  me  ?  "

In  the  few  days  following  De  Kosny  busied  himself
in  drawing  up  a  plan  of  a  treaty  embodying  all  that
had  been  agreed  upon  between  Henry  and  himself,
and  which  he  had  just  so  faithfully  rehearsed  to  James.
He  felt  now  some  inconvenience  from  his  own  artful-
ness, and  was  in  a  measure  caught  in  his  own  trap.
Had  he  brought  over  a  treaty  in  his  pocket,  James
would  have  signed  it  on  the  spot,  so  eager  was  he  for
the  regeneration  of  Europe.  It  was  necessary,  however,
to  continue  the  comedy  a  little  longer,  and  the  ambas-
sador, having  thought  it  necessary  to  express  many
doubts  whether  his  master  could  be  induced  to  join  in
the  plot,  and  to  approve  what  was  really  his  own  most
cherished  plan,  could  now  do  no  more  than  promise  to
use  all  his  powers  of  persuasion  unto  that  end.

The  project  of  a  convention,  which  James  swore
most  solemnly  to  sign,  whether  it  were  sent  to  him  in
six  weeks  or  six  months,  was  accordingly  rapidly  re-
duced to  writing,  and  approved.  It  embodied,  of
course,  most  of  the  provisions  discussed  in  the  last
secret  interview  at  Greenwich.  The  most  *  practical
portion  of  it  undoubtedly  related  to  the  United  Pro-
vinces, and  to  the  nature  of  assistance  to  be  at  once
afforded  to  that  commonwealth,  the  only  ally  of  the
two  kingdoms  expressly  mentioned  in  the  treaty.  Eng-
land was  to  furnish  troops,  the  number  of  which  was

86  Memoires,  iv.  420.

87  Ibid.

1603.

DIFFICULTY  OF  ITS  ACHIEVEMENT.

167

not  .specified,  and  France  was  to  pay  for  them,  partly
out  of  her  own  funds,  partly  out  of  the  amount  due  by
her  to  England.  It  was,  however,  understood,  that
this  secret  assistance  should  not  be  considered  to  in-
fiinge  the  treaty  of  peace  which  already  existed  between
Henry  and  the  Catholic  king.  Due  and  detailed  arrange-
ments were  made  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  allies
were  to  assist  each  other,  in  case  Spain,  not  relishing
this  kind  of  neutrality,  should  think  proper  openly  to
attack  either  Great  Britain  or  France,  or  both.*^

Unquestionably  the  Dutch  republic  was  the  only  por-
tion of  Europe  likely  to  be  substantially  affected  by
these  secret  arrangements ;  for,  after  all,  it  had  not  been
fc>und  very  easy  to  embody  the  splendid  visions  of
Henry,  which  had  so  dazzled  the  imagination  of  James,
in  the  dry  clauses  of  a  protocol.

It  was  also  characteristic  enough  of  the  crowned
conspirators,  that  the  clause  relating  to  the  United
Provinces  provided  that  the  allies  would  either  assist
them  in  the  attainment  of  their  independence,  or^^ — if
it  should  be  considered  expedient  to  restore  them  to
the  domination  of  Spain  or  the  empire — would  take  such
precautions  and  lay  down  such  conditions  as  would
procure  perfect  tranquillity  for  them,  and  remove  from
the  two  allied  kings  the  fear  of  a  too  absolute  govern-
ment by  the  house  of  Austria  in  those  provinces.

It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  a  more  impotent
conclusion.  Those  Dutch  rebels  had  not  been  fighting
for  tranquillity.  The  tranquillity  of  the  rock  amid
raging  waves — according  to  the  device  of  the  father
of  the  republic — they  had  indeed  maintained  ;  but  to
exchange  their  turbulent  and  tragic  existence,  ever
illumined  by  the  great  hope  of  freedom,  for  repose
under  one  despot  guaranteed  to  them  by  two  others,
was  certainly  not  their  aim.  They  lacked  the  breadth
of  vision  enjoyed  by  the  regenerators  who  sat  upon
mountain-tops.

They  were  fain  to  toil  on  in  their  own  way.  Perhaps,
however,  the  future  might  show  as  large  results  from
their  work  as  from  the  schemes  of  those  who  were  to
begin  the  humiliation  of  the  Austrian  house  by  con-
verting its  ancient  rebels  into  tranquil  subjects.

Sully,  Memolres,  v.  1-12.

®  Ibid.  7.  8.

168

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLI.

The  Marquis  of  Eosny,  having  distributed  60,000
crowns  among  the  leading  politicians  and  distinguished
personages  at  the  English  court,  with  ample  promises
of  future  largess  if  they  remained  true  to  his  master,^^
took  an  affectionate  farewell  of  King  James,  and  re-
turned with  his  noble  two  hundred  to  recount  his
triumphs  to  the  impatient  Henry.  The  treaty  was  soon
afterwards  duly  signed  and  ratified  by  the  high  con-
tracting parties.  It  was,  however,  for  future  history  to
register  its  results  on  the  fate  of  pope,  emperor,  kings,
potentates,  and  commonwealths,  and  to  show  the  changes
it  would  work  in  the  geography,  religion,  and  polity  of
the  world.^^

The  deputies  from  the  States -General,  satisfied  with
the  practical  assistance  promised  them,  soon  afterwards
took  their  departure  with  comparative  cheerfulness,
having  previously  obtained  the  royal  consent  to  raise
recruits  in  Scotland.  Meantime  the  great  Constable  of
Castile,  ambassador  from  his  Catholic  Majesty,  had
arrived  in  London,  and  was  wroth  at  all  that  ibe  saw
and  all  that  he  suspected.  He,  too,  began  to  scatter
golden  arguments  with  a  lavish  hand  among  the  great
lords  and  statesmen  of  Britain,^^  but  found  that  the
financier  of  France  had,  on  the  whole,  got  before  him
in  the  business,  and  was  skilfully  maintaining  his  pre-
cedence from  the  other  side  of  the  channel.

But  the  end  of  these  great  diplomatic  manoeuvres  had
not  yet  come.

90  Sully,  Memoires,  v.  20, 35, 40.  "  L'ob-  ordinaires  h  tons  ceux  dont  il  crut  avoir
jet  du  roy  en  faisant  tant  de  riches  pre-  besoin,"  &c.  &c.— Ibid.  35.

sens,  dont  meme  une  bonne  partie  fut  con-  ^"^  "  Et  pour  user  de  toutes  sortes  de
tinuee  aux  seigneurs  Anglais  en  forme  de  contre-batteries  contre  les  Espagnols  qui
pension,  etoit  de  les  retenir  et  de  les  at-  faisoient  des  presens  a  toutes  mains,  on
tacher  de  plus  en  plus  k  son  parti.  Je  en  fit  aussi  et  meme  des  pensions  a  tout
les  fis  sur  ma  propre  connaissance  et  sur  ce  quil  y  avoit  d'Anglois  distingues  h,  la

les  recommandations  de  Beaumont,  et  ma  cour  du  Roi  Jacques  c'est

principale  attention  fut  de  les  distribuer  ainsi  que  I'Espagne  se  vit  frustr^e  des
de  maniere  qu'ils  ne  tissent  naitreaucune  brillantes  esperances  qu'elle  avoit  con-
jalousie  entre  ces  seigneurs  Anglois  et  que  9ues  contre  nous  de  I'avenement  du  Roy
le  roy  lui  meme  n'en  prit  aucun  soup9on,"  d'Ecosse  a  la  couronne  d'Angleterre  et
&c.  &c.  qui  etoit  peut-etre  le  motif  des  armamena

91  II  multiplia  le  nombre  de  ses  crea-  immenses  qu'elle  fit  cette  annee." — Ibid,
turcs  parcequ'il  fit  des  liberalites  extra-  40.

1603.

SIEGE  OF  OSTENDc

160

CHAPTEK  XLII.

Siege  of  Ostsnd  —  The  Marquis  Spinola  made  commander-in-chief  of  the  besieging
army — Discontent  of  the  troops  —  General  aspect  of  the  operations  —  Graduad
encroachment  of  the  enemy.

The  scene  again  shifts  to  Ostend.  The  Spanish  cabinet,
wearied  of  the  slow  progress  of  the  siege,  and  not  en-
tirely satisfied  with  the  geneials,  now  concluded  almost
without  consent  of  the  archdukes,  one  of  the  most
extraordinary  jobs  ever  made,  even  in  those  jobbing
days.  The  Marquis  Spinola,  elder  brother  of  the  ill-
fated  Frederic,  and  head  of  the  illustrious  Genoese
family  of  that  name,  undertook  to  furnish  a  large  sum
of  money  which  the  wealth  of  his  house  and  its  connec-
tion with  the  great  money-lenders  of  Genoa  enabled
him  to  raise,  on  condition  that  he  should  have  supreme
command  of  the  operations  against  Ostend  and  of  the
foreign  armies  in  the  Netherlands.^  He  was  not  a
soldier  but  he  entered  into  a  contract,  by  his  own  per-
sonal exertions  both  on  the  excliange  and  in  the  fiekl,
to  reduce  the  city  which  had  now  resisted  all  the  efforts
of  the  archduke  for  more  than  two  years.  Certainly
this  was  an  experiment  not  often  hazarded  in  warfare.
The  defence  of  Ostend  was  in  the  hands  of  the  best  and
most  seasoned  fighting-men  in  Europe.  The  operations
were  under  the  constant  supervision  of  the  foremost
captain  of  the  age  ;  for  Maurice,  in  consultation  with
the  States-General,  received  almost  daily  reports  from
the  garrison,  and  regularly  furnished  advice  and  in-
structions as  to  their  proceedings.  He  was  moreover
ever  ready  to  take  the  field  for  a  relieving  campaign.
Nothing  was  known  of  Spinola  save  that  he  was  a  high-
born and  very  wealthy  patrician  who  had  reached  his
thirty-fourth  year  without  achieving  personal  distinc-
tion of  any  kind,  and  who,  during  the  previous  summer,
like  so  many  other  nobles  from  all  parts  of  Europe,  had

'  Gallucci,  II.  lib.  xvi.  109-137,  13S.  Bentivoglio,  iii.  519.  Grotius,  xii.  633,  634.
Wftgcnuur,  ix.  162,  163.

170

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLH.

thonght  it  worth  his  while  to  drawl  through  a  campaign
or  two  in  the  Low  Countries.  It  was  the  mode  to  do
this,  and  it  was  rather  a  stigma  upon  any  young  man  of
family  not  to  have  been  an  occasional  looker-on  at  that
perpetual  military  game.  His  brother  Frederic,  as
already  narrated,  had  tried  his  chance  for  fame  and
fortune  in  the  naval  service,  and  had  lost  his  life  in
the  adventure  without  achieving  the  one  or  the  other.
This  was  not  a  happy  augury  for  the  head  of  the  family.
Frederic  had  made  an  indifferent  speculation.  What
could  the  brother  hope  by  taking  the  field  against
Maurice  of  Nassau  and  Lewis  William  and  the  Baxes
and  Meetkerkes?  Nevertheless  the  archduke  eagerly
accepted  his  services,  while  the  Infanta,  fully  confident
of  his  success  before  he  had  ordered  a  gun  to  be  fired,
protested  that  if  Spinola  did  not  take  Ostend  nobody
would  ever  take  it.^  There  was  also,  strangely  enough,
a  general  feeling  through  the  republican  ranks  that  the
Lmg-expected  man  had  come.

Thus  a  raw  volunteer,  a  man  who  had  never  drilled
a  hundred  men,  who  had  never  keld'  an  officer's  com-
mission in  any  army  in  the  world,  became,  as  by  the
waving  of  a  w^and,  a  field-marshal  and  commander-in-
chief  at  a  most  critical  moment  in  history,  in  the  most
conspicuous  position  in  Christendom,  and  in  a  great  war,
now  narrowed  down  to  a  single  spot  of  earth,  on  which
the  eyes  of  the  world  were  fixed,  and  the  daily  accounts
from  w^hich  were  longed  for  with  palpitating  anxiety.
What  but  failure  and  disaster  could  be  expected  from
such  astounding  policy?  Every  soldier  in  the  Catholic
forces — from  grizzled  veterans  of  half  a  century  who
had  commanded  armies  and  achieved  victories  when
this  dainty  young  Italian  was  in  his  cradle,  down  to
the  simple  musketeer  or  rider  who  had  been  campaign-
ing for  his  daily  bread  ever  since  he  could  carry  a  piece
or  mount  a  horse — was  furious  with  discontent  or  out-
raged pride.

Very  naturally  too,  it  was  said  that  the  position  of  the
archdukes  had  become  preposterous.  It  was  obvious,
notwithstanding  the  pilgrimages  of  the  Infanta  to  Our
Lady  of  Hall,^  to  implore  not  only  the  fall  of  Ostend,
but  the  birth  of  a  successor  to  their  sovereignty,  that

2  GaUucci,  uM  sup.

3  Meteren,  493^o.

1603.

THE  NEW  COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.

171

her  marriage  would  for  ever  remain  barren.  Spain  was
already  acting  upon  this  theory,  it  was  said,  for  the
contract  with  Spinola  was  made,  not  at  Brussels,  but  at
Madrid,  and  a  foreign  army  of  Spaniards  and  Italians,
under  the  supreme  command  of  a  Genoese  adventurer,
was  now  to  occupy  indefinitely  that  Flanders  which
had  been  proclaimed  an  independent  nation,  and  duly
bequeathed  by  its  deceased  proprietor  to  his  daughter.

Ambrose  Spinola,  son  of  Philip,  Marquis  of  A  enafri,
and  his  wife,  Polyxena  Grimaldi,*  was  not  appalled  by
the  murmurs  of  hardly  suppressed  anger  or  public
criticism.  A  handsome,  aristocratic  personage,  with  an
intellectual,  sad,  but  sympathetic  face,  fair  hair  and
beard,  and  imposing  but  attractive  presence — the  young
volunteer,  at  the  beginning  of  October,  made  his  first
visit  of  inspection  in  the  lines  before  Ostend.  After
studying  the  situation  of  afiairs  very  thoroughly,  he
decided  that  the  operations  on  the  Gullet  or  eastern
side,  including  Bucquoy's  dyke,  with  Pompey  Targone's
perambulatory  castles  and  floating  batteries,  were  of
secondary  importance.  He  doubted  the  probability  of
closing  up  a  harbour,  now  open  to  the  whole  world  and
protected  by  the  fleets  of  the  first  naval  power  of
Europe,  with  wickerwork,  sausages,  and  bridges  upon
barrels.  His  attention  was  at  once  concentrated  on  the
western  side,  and  he  was  satisfied  that  only  by  hard
fighting  and  steady  delving  could  he  hope  to  master  the
place.  To  gain  Ostend  he  would  be  obliged  to  devour
it  piecemeal  as  he  went  on.

\V  hat  ever  else  might  be  said  of  the  new  commander-
in-chief,  it  was  soon  apparent  that,  although  a  volun-
teer and  a  patrician,  he  was  no  milksop.  If  he  had
been  accustomed  all  his  life  to  beds  of  down,  he  was  as
ready  now  to  lie  in  the  trenches,  with  a  cannon  for  his
pillow,  as  the  most  ironclad  veteran  in  the  ranks.  He
seemed  to  require  neither  sleep  nor  food,  and  his  reck-
less habit  of  exposing  himself  to  unnecessary  danger
was  the  subject  of  frequent  animadversion  on  the  part
both  of  the  archdukes  and  of  the  Spanish  Government.^

It  was  however  in  his  case  a  wise  temerity.  The
veterans  whom  he  commanded  needed  no  encourage-
ment to  daring  deeds,  but  they  required  conviction  as

*  Qalucci,  ubi  sup.

•  Ibid.

172

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CHAr.  XLIL

to  the  valour  and  zeal  of  their  new  commander,  and  this
was  afforded  them  in  overflowing  measure.

It  is  difficult  to  decide,  after  such  a  lapse  of  years,  as
to  how  much  of  the  long  series  of  daily  details  out  of
which  this  famous  siege  was  compounded  deserves  to
be  recorded.  It  is  not  probable  that  for  military  history
many  of  the  incidents  have  retained  vital  importance.
The  world  rang,  at  the  beginning  of  the  operations,
with  the  skill  and  inventive  talent  of  Targone,  Giusti-
niani,  and  other  Italian  engineers,  artificers,  and  pyro-
technists, and  there  were  great  expectations  conceived
of  the  effects  to  be  produced  by  their  audacious  and
original  devices.  But  time  wore  on.  Pompey's  famous
floating  battery  would  not  float,  his  moving  monster
battery  would  not  move.  With  the  one,  the  subtle
Italian  had  intended  to  close  up  the  Gullet  to  the
States'  fleets.  It  was  to  rest  on  the  bottom  at  low  water
at  the  harbour's  mouth,  to  rise  majestically  with  the
flood,  and  to  be  ever  ready  with  a  formidable  broad-
side of  fifty  pounders  against  all  comers.  But  the  wild
waves  and  tempests  of  the  North  Sea  soon  swept  the
ponderous  toy  into  space  before  it  had  fired  a  gun.  The
gigantic  chariot,  on  which  a  moveable  fort  was  con-
structed, was  still  more  portentous  upon  paper  than  the
battery.  It  was  directed  against  that  republican  work,
defending  the  Gullet,  which  was  called  in  derision  the
Spanish  Half-moon.  It  was  to  be  drawn  by  forty
horses,  and  armed  with  no  man  knew  how  many  great
guns,  with  a  mast  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  high  in  the
centre  of  the  fort,  up  and  down  which  played  pulleys
raising  and  lowering  a  drawbridge  long  enough  to  span
the  Gullet.

It  was  further  provided  with  anchors,  which  were  to
be  tossed  over  the  parapet  of  the  doomed  redoubt,
while  'the  assailants,  thus  grappled  to  the  enemy's
work,  were  to  dash  over  the  bridge  after  having  silenced
the  opposing  fire  by  means  of  their  own  peripatetic
battery.

Unfortunately  for  the  fame  of  Pompey,  one  of  his
many  wheels  was  crushed  on  the  first  attempt  to  drag
the  chariot  to  the  scene  of  anticipated  triumph,  the
whole  structure  remained  embedded  in  the  sand,  very
much  askew;  nor  did  all  the  mules  and  horses  that

1603.

PROGRESS  OF  THE  OPERATIONS.

173

could  be  harnessed  to  it  ever  succeed  in  removing
it  an  inch  out  of  a  position,  which  was  anything  but
triumphant.^

It  seemed  probable  enough  therefore  that,  so  far  as
depended  on  the  operations  from  the  eastern  side,  the
siege  of  Ostend,  which  had  now  lasted  two  years  and
three  months,  might  be  protracted  for  two  years  and
three  months  longer.  Indeed,  Spinola  at  once  per-
ceived that  if  the  archduke  was  ever  to  be  put  in  posses-
sion of  the  place  for  which  he  had  professed  himself
ready  to  wait  eighteen  years,  it  would  be  well  to  leave
Bucquoy  and  Targone  to  build  dykes  and  chariots  and
bury  them  on  the  east  at  their  leisure,  while  more
energy  was  brought  to  bear  upon  the  line  of  fortifica-
tions of  the  west  than  had  hitherto  been  employed.
There  had  been  shooting  enough,  bloodshed  enough,
suffering  enough,  but  it  was  amazing  to  see  the  slight
progress  made.  The  occupation  of  what  were  called
the  external  Squares  has  been  described.  This  con-
stituted the  whole  result  of  the  twenty-seven  months'
work.

The  town  itself — the  small  and  very  insignificant
kernel  which  lay  enclosed  in  such  a  complicated  series
of  wrappings  and  layers  of  defences — seemed  as  far  olf
.as  if  it  were  suspended  in  the  sky.  The  old  haven  or
canal,  no  longer  navigable  for  ships,  still  served  as  an
admirable  moat  which  the  assailants  had  not  yet  suc-
ceeded in  laying  entirely  dry.  It  protected  the  coun-
terscarp, and  was  itself  protected  by  an  exterior  series
of  works,  while  behind  the  counterscarp  was  still
another  ditch,  not  so  broad  nor  deep  as  the  canal,  but  a
formidable  obstacle  even  after  the  counterscarp  should
be  gained.  There  were  nearly  fifty  forts  and  redoubts
in  these  lines,  of  sufficient  importance  to  have  names
which  in  those  days  became  household  words,  not  only
in  the  ^ietherlands,  but  in  Europe  ;  the  siege  of  Ostend
being  the  one  military  event  of  Christendom,  so  long  as
it  lasted.  These  names  are  of  course  as  much  forgotten
now  as  those  of  the  bastions  before  Nineveh.  A  very
few  of  them  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  general  aspect  of
the  operations. On  the  extreme  south-west  of  Ostend

«  Mctorcn,  496,  497.  GalliiQci,  lib.  xvi.  xvii.  xviii.  B^  ntivoglio,  iii.  520-524.
Fleming,  432,  433,  et  passim. Grotius,  lib.  xii.  xiii.

174

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLH.

had  been  in  peaceful  times  a  polder — the  general  term
to  designate  a  pasture  out  of  which  the  sea -water  had
been  pumped — and  the  forts  in  that  quarter  were  accord-
ingly called  by  that  name,  as  Polder  Half-moon,  Polder
Eavelin,  or  great  and  little  Polder  Bulwark,  as  the  case
might  be.  Farther  on  towards  the  west,  the  north-west,
and  the  north,  and  therefore  towards  the  beach,  were
the  West  Eavelin,  West  Bulwark,  Moses's  Table,  the
Porcupine,  the  Hell's  Mouth,  the  old  church,  and  last
and  most  important  of  all,  the  Sand  Hill.  This  last-
named  work  was  protected  by  the  Porcupine  and  Hell's
Mouth,  was  the  key  to  the  whole  series  of  fortifications,
and  was  connected  by  a  curtain  with  the  old  church,
which  was  in  the  heart  of  the  old  town."^

Spinola  had  assumed  command  in  October,  but  the
winter  was  already  closing  in  with  its  usual  tempests
and  floods  before  there  had  been  time  for  him  to  produce
much  effect.  It  seemed  plain  enough  to  the  besieged
that  the  object  of  the  enemy  would  be  to  work  his  way
through  the  Polder,  and  so  gradually  round  to  the
Porcupine  and  the  Sand  Hill.  Precisely  in  what
direction  his  subterraneous  passages  might  be  tending,
in  what  particular  spot  of  the  thin  crust  upon  which
they  all  stood  an  explosion  might  at  any  moment  be
expected,  it  was  of  course  impossible  to  know.  They
were  sure  that  the  process  of  mining  was  steadily
progressing,  and  Maurice  sent  orders  to  countermine
under  every  bulwark,  and  to  secretly  isolate  every
bastion,  so  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  Spinola  to
make  his  way,  fort  by  fort,  and  inch  by  inch.^

Thus  they  struggled  drearily  about  under  ground,
friend  and  foe,  often  as  much  bewildered  as  wanderers
in  the  catacombs.  To  a  dismal  winter  succeeded  a
ferocious  spring.  Both  in  February  and  March  were
westerly  storms,  such  as  had  not  been  recorded  even  on
that  tempest-swept  coast  for  twenty  years,  and  so  much
damage  was  inflicted  on  the  precious  Sand  Hill  and  its
curtain  that,  had  the  enemy  been  aware  of  its  plight,  it
is  probable  that  one  determined  assault  might  have  put
him  in  possession  of  the  place.  But  Ostend  was  in
charge  of  a  most  watchful  governor,  Peter  van  Gieselles,
who  had  succeeded  Charles  van  der  Noot  at  the  close  of

7  Fleming,  Meteren,  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  uM  sm.

8  Fleming,

1604.

STOPtMING  OF  THE  POLDER  BULWARK.

175

the  year  1603.^  A  plain,  lantern-jawed  Dutch  colonel,
with  close-cropped  hair,  a  long  peaked  beard,  and  an
eye  that  looked  as  if  it  had  never  been  shut ;  always
dressed  in  a  shabby  old  jerkin,  with  tarnished  flowers
upon  it,  he  took  command  with  a  stout  but  heavy  heart,
saying  that  the  place  should  never  be  surrendered  by
him,  but  that  he  should  never  live  to  see  the  close  of  the
siege. He  lost  no  time  in  repairing  the  damages  of
the  tempest,  being  ready  to  fight  the  west  wind,  the
North  Sea,  and  Spinola  at  any  moment,  singly  or  con-
joined. He  rebuilt  the  curtain  of  the  Sand  ilill,  added
fresh  batteries  to  the  Porcupine  and  Hell's  Mouth,  and
amused  and  distracted  the  enemy  with  almost  daily
sorties  and  feints.  His  soldiers  passed  their  days  and
nights  up  to  the  knees  in  mud  and  sludge  and  sea-
water,  but  they  saw  that  their  commander  never  spared
himself,  and  having  a  superfluity  of  food  and  drink,
owing  to  the  watchful  care  of  the  States-General,  who
sent  in  fleets  laden  with  provisions  faster  than  they
could  be  consumed,  they  were  cheerful  and  content.

On  the  12th  March  there  was  a  determined  eflbrt  to
carry  the  lesser  Polder  Bulwark. After  a  12  March,
fierce  and  bloody  action,  the  place  was  taken
by  storm,  and  the  first  success  in  the  game  was  regis-
tered for  Spinola. The  little  fort  was  crammed  full  of
dead,  but  such  of  the  defenders  as  survived  were  at  last
driven  out  of  it,  and  forced  to  take  refuge  in  the  next
work.^^ Day  after  day  the  same  bloody  business  was
renewed,  a  mere  monotony  of  assaults,  repulses,  sallies,
in  which  hardly  an  inch  of  ground  was  gained  on  either
side,  except  at  the  cost  of  a  great  pile  of  corpses.  Men
will  never  know,  nor  can  mortal  pen  ever  describe,"
said  one  who  saw  it  all,  "the  ferocity  and  the  perti-
nacity of  both  besiegers  and  besieged." On  jg^j^j.^^^
the  15th  of  March,  Colonel  Catrice,  an  accom-
plished Walloon  officer  of  engineers,  commanding  the
approaches  against  the  Polder,  was  killed. On  ^^^h
the  21st  March,  as  Peter  Gieselles  was  taking
his  scrambling  dinner  in  company  with  Philip  Fleming,
there  was  a  report  that  the  enemy  was  out  again  in
force. A  good  deal  of  progress  had  been  made  during

9  Fleming,  418.

12  Ibid.

»o  Ibid.

11  Ibid.  470,  471.
i»  Ibid,  473.

176

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLII.

the  previous  weeks  on  the  south-west  and  west,  and
more  was  suspected  than  was  actually  known.  It  was
felt  that  the  foe  was  steadily  nibbling  his  way  up  to
the  counterscarp.  Moreover,  such  was  the  emulation
among  the  Germans,  Walloons,  Italians,  and  Spaniards
for  precedence  in  working  across  the  canal,^*  that  a
general  assault  and  universal  explosion  were  considered
at  any  instant  possible.  The  governor  sent  Fleming  to
see  if  all  was  right  in  the  Porcupine,  while  he  himself
went  to  see  if  a  new  battery,  which  he  had  just  esta-
blished to  check  the  approaches  of  the  enemy  towards  the
Polder  Half-moon  and  Eavelin  in  a  point  very  near
the  counterscarp,  was  doing  its  duty.  Being,  as  usual,
anxious  to  reconnoitre  with  his  own  eyes,  he  jumped
upon  the  rampart.  But  there  were  sharp-shooters  in  the
enemy's  trenches,  and  they  were  familiar  with  the
governor's  rusty  old  doublet  and  haggard  old  face.^^
Hardly  had  he  climbed  upon  the  breastwork  when  a
ball  pierced  his  heart,  and  he  fell  dead  without  a  groan.-^^
There  was  a  shout  of  triumph  from  the  outside,  while
the  tidings  soon  spread  sadness  through  the  garrison,
for  all  loved  and  venerated  the  man.-^"^  Philip  Fleming,
so  soon  as  he  learned  the  heavy  news,  lost  no  time  in
unavailing  regrets,  but  instantly  sent  a  courier  to  Prince
Maurice ;  meantime  summoning  a  council  of  superior
officers,  by  whom  Colonel  John  van  Loon  was  provision-
ally appointed  commandant.-^^

A  stately,  handsome  man,  a  good  officer,  but  without
extensive  experience,  he  felt  himself  hardly  equal  to
the  immense  responsibility  of  the  post,  but  yielding  to
the  persuasions  of  his  comrades,  proceeded  to  do  his
best.  His  first  care  was  to  secure  the  all-important
Porcupine,  towards  which  the  enemy  had  been  slowly
crawling  with  his  galleries  and  trenches. Four  days

25  March,  after  hc  had  accepted  the  command  he  was
anxiously  surveying  that  fortification,  and  en-
deavouring to  obtain  a  view  of  the  enemy's  works,  when
a  cannon-ball  struck  him  on  the  right  leg,  so  that  he
died  the  next  day.^^  Plainly  the  post  of  commandant  of
Ostend  was  no  sinecure.  He  was  temporarily  succeeded
by  Sergeant-Major  Jacques  deBievry,  but  the  tumults  and

1*  Bentivoglio,  ubi  siijp.  i3  Fleming,  479,  480.  Ibid.

17  Ibid.  18  Ibid.  19  Ibid.  487.  492.

1B04.

FALL  OF  THE  P0LD1::R  RAVELIN.

17?

confusion  incident  upon  this  perpetual  change  of  head
were  becoming  alarming.  The  enemy  gave  the  gar-
rison no  rest  night  nor  day,  and  it  had  long  become
evident  that  the  young  volunteer,  whose  name  was  so
potent  on  the  Genoa  Exchange,  was  not  a  man  of  straw
nor  a  dawdler,  however  the  superseded  veterans  might
grumble.  At  any  rate  the  troops  on  either  side  were
like  to  have  their  fill  of  work.

On  the  2nd  April  the  Polder  Kavelin  was  carried  by
storm.  It  was  a  most  bloody  action.  Never
were  a  few  square  feet  of  earth  more  recklef^sly  ^
assailed,  more  resolutely  maintained.  The  garrison  did
not  surrender  the  place,  but  they  all  laid  down  their
lives  in  its  defence.  Scarcely  an  individual  of  them
all  escaped,  and  the  foe,  who  paid  dearly  with  heaps  of
dead  and  wounded  for  his  prize,  confessed  that  such
serious  work  as  this  had  scarce  been  known  before  in
any  part  of  that  great  slaughter-house,  Flanders."^

A  few  days  later.  Colonel  Bievry,  provisional  com-
mandant, was  desperately  wounded  in  a  sortie,  and  was
carried  off  to  Zeeland.'"^^  The  States-General  now  ap-
pointed Jacques  van  der  Meer,  Baron  of  Berendrecht,  to
the  post  of  honour  and  of  danger.^"^  A  noble  of  Flanders,
always  devoted  to  the  republican  cause  ;  an  experienced
middle-aged  officer,  vigilant,  energetic,  nervous  ;  a  slight
wiry  man,  with  a  wizened  little  face,  large  bright  eyes,
a  meagre  yellow  beard,  and  thin  sandy  hair  flowing
down  upon  his  well-starched  ruff,  the  new  governor
soon  showed  himself  inferior  to  none  of  his  predecessors
in  audacity  and  alertness.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a
more  irritating  position  in  many  respects  than  that  of
commander  in  such  an  extraordinary  leaguer.  It  was
not  a  formal  siege.  Famine,  which  ever  impends  over
an  invested  place,  and  sickens  the  soul  with  its  nameless
horrors,  was  not  the  great  enemy  to  contend  against
here.  Nor  was  there  the  hideous  alternative  between
starving  through  obstinate  resistance  or  massacre  on
submission,  which  had  been  the  lot  of  so  many  Dutch
garrisons  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  war.  Ketreat  by
sea  was  ever  open  to  the  Ostend  garrison,  and  there  was
always  an  ample  supply  of  the  best  provisions  and  of  all
munitions  of  war. But  they  had  been  unceasingly  ex-

20  Floming,  501,  502.  21  Ibid.  505.  22  ibid.  510.

VOL.  IV.  K

178

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CHAP.  XLII

posed  to  two  tremendous  enemies.  During  each  wintei
and  spring  the  ocean  often  smote  their  bastions  and  bul
warks  in  an  hour  of  wrath  till  they  fell  together  like
children's  toys,  and  it  was  always  at  woik,  night  and
day,  steadily  lapping  at  the  fragile  foundations  on  which
all  their  structures  stood.  Nor  was  it  easy  to  give  the
requisite  attention  to  the  devouring  sea,  because  all  the
materials  that  could  be  accumulated  seemed  necessary
to  repair  the  hourly  damages  inflicted  by  their  other
restless  foe.

Thus  the  day  seemed  to  draw  gradually  but  inexor-
ably nearer  when  the  place  would  be,  not  captured,  but
consumed.  There  was  nothing  for  it  so  long  as  the
States  were  determined  to  hold  the  spot,  but  to  meet
the  besieger  at  every  point,  above  or  below  the  earth,
and  sell  every  inch  of  that  little  morsel  of  space  at  the
highest  price  that  brave  men  could  impose.

kSo  Berendrecht,  as  vigilant  and  devoted  as  even  Peter
Gieselles  had  ever  been,  now  succeeded  to  the  care  of
the  Polders  and  the  Porcupines,  and  the  Hell's  Mouths,
and  all  the  other  forts,  whose  quaint  designations  had
served,  as  usually  is  the  case  among  soldiers,  to  amuse
the  honest  patriots  in  the  midst  of  their  toils  and
18  April,  danger.  On  the  18th  April  the  enemy  assailed
the  gi  eat  western  Eavelin,  and  after  a  sanguin-
ary hand-to-hand  action,  in  which  great  numbers  of
officers  and  soldiers  were  lost  on  both  sides,  he  carried
the  fort;  the  Spaniards,  Italians,  Germans,  and  Walloons
vieing  with  each  other  in  deeds  of  extraordinary  daring,
and  overcoming  at  last  the  resistance  of  the  garrison.^^

This  was  an  important  success.  The  foe  had  now
worked  his  way  with  galleries  and  ditches  along  the
whole  length  of  the  counterscarp  till  he  w^as  nearly  up
with  the  Porcupine,  and  it  was  obvious  that  in  a  few
days  he  would  be  master  of  the  counterscarp  itself.

A  less  resolute  commander,  at  the  head  of  less  de-
voted troops,  might  have  felt  that  when  that  inevitable
event  should  arrive  all  that  honour  demanded  would
have  been  done,  and  that  Spinola  was  entitled  to  his
city.  Berendrecht  simply  decided  that  if  the  ^Id  coun-
terscarp could  no  longer  be  held  it  was  time  to  build
a  new  counterscarp. This,  too,  had  been  for  some  time

23  Fleming,  515,  516.

604.

BUILDING  A  NEW  COUNTERSCARP.

179

the  intention  of  Prince  Maurice.  A  plan  for  this  work
had  already  been  sent  into  the  place,  and  a  distin-
guished English  engineer,  Ralph  Dexter  by  name,
arrived  with  some  able  assistants  to  carry  it  into  exe-
cution.^^ It  having  been  estimated  that  the  labour
would  take  three  weeks  of  time,  without  more  ado  the
inner  line  was  carefully  drawn,  cutting  off  with  great
nicety  and  precision  about  one  half  the  whole  place.
Within  this  narrowed  circle  the  same  obstinate  resist-
ance was  to  be  offered  as  before,  and  the  bastions  and
redoubts  of  the  new  entrenchment  were  to  be  baptized
with  the  same  uncouth  names  which  two  long  years  of
terrible  struggle  had  made  so  precious.  The  work  was
very  laborious  ;  for  the  line  was  drawn  straight  through
the  town,  and  whole  streets  had  to  be  demolished  and
the  houses  to  their  very  foundations  shovelled  away.
Moreover  the  men  were  forced  to  toil  with  spade  in  one
hand  and  matchlock  in  the  other,  ever  ready  to  ascend
from  the  ancient  dilapidated  cellars  in  order  to  mount
the  deadly  breach  at  any  point  in  the  whole  circum-
ference of  the  place.^^

It  became  absolutely  necessary  therefore  to  send  a
sufficient  force  of  common  workmen  into  the  town  to
lighten  the  labours  of  the  soldiers.  Moreover  the
thought,  although  whistled  to  the  wind,  would  repeatedly
recur,  that,  after  all,  there  must  be  a  limit  to  these
operations,  and  that  at  last  there  would  remain  no
longer  any  earth  in  which  to  find  a  refuge.

The  work  of  the  new  entrenchment  went  slowly  on,
but  it  was  steadily  done.  Meantime  they  were  com-
forted by  hearing  tliat  the  stadholder  had  taken  the
field  in  Flanders,  at  the  head  of  a  considerable  force,
and  they  lived  in  daily  expectation  of  relief.  It  will  be
necessary,  at  the  proper  moment,  to  indicate  the  nature
of  Prince  Maurice's  operations.  For  the  present,  it  is
better  that  the  reader  should  confine  his  attention
within  the  walls  of  Ostend.

By  the  11th  May,  the  enemy  had  effected  a  lodgment
in  a  corner  of  the  Porcupine,  and  already  from n  ^vray,
that  point  might  threaten  the  new  counter-
scarp  before  it  should  be  completed. At  the  same  timy

24  Fleming,  516-522.

25  Ibid.

N  2

180

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLII.

lie  had  gnawed  through  to  the  West  Bulwark,  and  was
busily  mining  under  the  Porcupine  itself.  In  this  fort
friend  and  foe  now  lay  together,  packed  like  herrings,
and  profited  by  their  proximity  to  each  other  to  vary
the  monotony  of  pike  and  snaphance  with  an  occasional
encounter  of  epistolary  wit.

Thus  Spanish  letters,  tied  to  sticks,  and  tossed  over
into  the  next  intrenchment,  were  replied  to  by  others,
composed  in  four  languages  by  the  literary  man  of
Ostend,  Auditor  Fleming,  and  shot  into  the  enemy's
trenches  on  cross-bow  bolts.^^

On  the  29th  May,  a  long-prepared  mine  was  sprung
29  May  ^^^^^^^  "^^^  Porcupine.  It  did  its  work  effec-
tively, aud  the  assailants  did  theirs  no  less  ad-
mirably, crowding  into  the  breach  with  headlong
ferocity,  and  after  a  long  and  sauguinary  struggle  with
immense  loss  on  both  sides,  carrying  the  precious  and
long-coveted  work  by  storm.^^  Inch  by  inch  the  de-
fenders were  thus  slowly  forced  back  toward  their  new
intrenchment.  On  the  same  day,  however,  they  in-
flicted a  most  bloody  defeat  upon  the  enemy  in  an
attempt  to  carry  the  great  Polder.  He  withdrew,  leav-
ing heaps  of  slain,  so  that  the  account  current  for  the
da}'  would  have  balanced  itself,  but  that  the  Porcupine,
ha^  ing  changed  hands,  now  bristled  most  formidably
against  its  ancient  masters.^^  The  daily  slaughter  had
become  sickening  to  behold.  There  were  three  thou-
sand effective  men  in  the  garrison.  More  could  have
been  sent  in  to  supply  the  steady  depletion  in  the  ranks,
but  there  was  no  room  for  more.  There  was  scarce
space  enough  for  the  living  to  stand  to  their  work,  or
for  the  dead  to  lie  in  their  graves.  And  this  was  an
advantage  which  could  not  fail  to  tell.  Of  necessity  the
besiegers  would  always  very  far  outnumber  the  gar-
rison, so  that  the  final  success  of  their  repeated  assaults
became  daily  more  and  more  possible.

Yet  on  the  2nd  June  the  enemy  met  not  only  with
2  June ^i^<^ther  signal  defeat,  but  also  with  a  most
bitter  surprise. On  that  day  the  mine  which
he  had  been  so  long  and  so  laboriously  constructing  be-
neath the great  Polder  Bulwark  was sprung  with
magnificent  effect.  A  breach,  forty  feet  wide,  was  made

26  Fleming,  528,  seqq,  27  Ibid.  538.  28  ibid.

1604.  SPRINGING  OF  THE  POLDER  BULWARK.  181

in  this  last  stronghold  of  the  old  defences,  and  the
soldiers  leaped  into  the  crater  almost  before  it  had
ceased  to  blaze,  expecting  by  one  decisive  storm  to
make  themselves  masters  at  last  of  all  the  fortifications,
and  therefore  of  the  town  itself.  But  as,  emerging  from
the  mine,  they  sprang  exulting  upon  the  shattered  bul-
wark, a  transformation  more  like  a  sudden  change  in
some  holiday  pantomime  than  a  new  fact  in  this  three
years'  most  tragic  siege  presented  itself  to  their  as-
tonished eyes.  They  had  carried  the  last  defence  of  the
old  counterscarp,  and  behold — a  new  one,  which  they
had  never  dreamed  of,  bristling  before  their  eyes,  with
a  flanking  battery  turned  directly  upon  them.^"*^  The
musketeers  and  pikemen,  protected  by  their  new  works,
now  thronged  towards  the  assailants ;  giving  them  so
hearty  a  welcome  that  they  reeled  back,  discomfited,
after  a  brief  but  severe  struggle,  from  the  spot  of  their
anticipated  triumph,  leaving  their  dead  and  dying  in  the
breach.^

Four  days  later,  Berendrecht,  with  a  picked  party  of
English  troops,  stole  out  for  a  reconnaissance, ^  j^^^
not  wishing  to  trust  other  eyes  than  his  own
in  the  imminent  peril  of  the  place.

The  expedition  was  successful.  A  few  prisoners  were
taken,  and  valuable  information  was  obtained,  but
these  advantages  were  counterbalanced  by  a  severe
disaster.  The  vigilant  and  devoted  little  governor,  be-
fore effecting  his  entrance  into  the  sally  port,  was  picked
off  by  a  sharpshooter,  and  died  the  next  day.^^  This
seemed  the  necessary  fate  of  the  commandants  of  Ostend,
where  the  operations  seemed  more  like  a  pitched  battle
lasting  three  years  than  an  ordinary  siege.  Gieselles,
Van  Loon,  Bievry,  and  now  Berendrecht,  had  succes-
sively fallen  at  the  post  of  duty  since  the  beginning  of
the  year.  Not  one  of  them  was  more  sincerely  deplored
than  Berendrecht.  His  place  was  supplied  by  Colonel
Uytenhoove,  a  stalwart,  hirsute,  hard-fighting  Dutch-
man, the  descendant  of  an  ancient  race,  and  seasoned  in
many  a  hard  campaign.

The  enemy  now  being  occupied  in  escarping  and
furnishing  with  batteries  the  positions  he  had  gaiiied,

29  Fleming,  543.

•»  ibid.

3'  Ibid.  54 «.

182

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLH.

with  the  obvious  intention  of  attacking  the  new  counter-
scarp, it  was  resolved  to  prepare  for  the  possible  loss
of  this  line  of  fortifications  by  establishing  another  and
still  narrower  one  within  it.

Half  the  little  place  had  been  shorn  away  by  the  first
change.  Of  the  half  which  was  still  in  possession  of
the  besieged  about  one-third  was  now  set  off,  and  in
this  little  corner  of  earth,  close  against  the  new  har-
bour, was  set  up  their  last  refuge.  They  called  the  new
»  citadel  Little  Troy,  and  announced,  with  pardonable

bombast,  that  they  would  hold  out  there  as  long  as  the
ancient  Trojans  had  defended  llium.^^  With  perfect
serenity  the  engineers  set  about  their  task  with  line,
rule,  and  level,  measuring  out  the  bulwarks  and  bas-
tions, the  miniature  salients,  half-moons,  and  ditches,  as
neatly  and  methodically  as  if  there  were  no  ceaseless
cannonade  in  their  ears,  and  as  if  the  workmen  were
not  at  every  moment  summoned  to  repel  assaults  upon
the  outward  wall.  They  sent  careful  drawings  of  Little
Troy  to  Maurice  and  the  States,  and  received  every
encouragement  to  persevere,  -together  with  promises  of
ultimate  relief.^^

But  there  was  one  serious  impediment  to  the  contem-
plated construction  of  the  new  earth- works.  They  had
no  earth.  Nearly  everything  solid  had  been  already
scooped  away  in  the  perpetual  delving.  The  sea-dykes
had  been  robbed  of  their  material,  so  that  the  coming
winter  might  find  besiegers  and  besieged  all  washed
together  into  the  German  Ocean,  and  it  was  hard  digging
and  grubbing  among  the  scanty  cellerages  of  the  dilapi-
dated houses.  But  there  were  plenty  of  graves,  filled
with  the  result  of  three  years'  hard  fighting.  And  now,
not  only  were  all  the  cemeteries  within  the  precincts
shovelled  and  carted  in  mass  to  the  inner  fortifications,
but  rewards  being  offered  of  ten  stivers  for  each  dead
body,  great  heaps  of  disinterred  soldiers  were  piled  into
the  new  ramparts.^*  Thus  these  warriors,  after  laying
down  their  lives  for  the  cause  of  freedom,  were  made  to  do
duty  after  death.  Whether  it  were  just  or  no  thus  to  dis-
turb the  repose — if  repose  it  could  be  called — of  the  dead
that  they  might  once  more  protect  the  living,  it  can

32  Haestens,  272. Grotius,  xiii.  645.  33  Fleming,  551,  seqq.

31  Haestens,  272.

1604.

FALL  OF  THE  FIFTH  COMMANDANT.

183

scarcely  be  doubted  that  they  took  ample  revenge  on  the
already  sufficiently  polluted  atmosphere.

On  the  17th  June  the  foe  sprang  a  mine  under  the
western  bulwark,  close  to  a  countermine  ex-  n  june,
ploded  by  the  garrison  the  day  before.  The
assailants  thronged  as  merrily  as  usual  to  the  breach,
and  were  met  with  customary  resolution  by  the  besieged ;
Governor  Uytenhoove,  clad  in  complete  armour,  leading
his  troops.  The  enemy,  after  an  hour's  combat,  was  re-
pulsed with  heavy  loss,  but  the  governor  fell  in  the  midst
of  tlie  fight.^^  Instantly  he  was  seized  by  the  legs  by  a
party  of  his  own  men,  some  English  desperadoes  among
the  number,  who,  shouting  that  the  colonel  was  dead,
were  about  to  render  him  the  last  offices  by  plundering
his  body.  The  ubiquitous  Fleming,  obsennng  the  scene,
flew  to  the  rescue  and,  with  the  assistance  of  a  few
officers,  drove  ofi'  these  energetic  friends,  and  taking  off
the  governor's  casque,  discovered  that  he  still  breatlied.^^
That  he  would  soon  have  ceased  to  do  so,  had  he  been
dragged  much  farther  in  his  harness  over  that  jagged
and  precipitous  pile  of  rubbish,  was  certain.^"  He  was
desperately  wounded,  and  of  course  incapacitated  for  his
post.  Thus,  in  that  3'ear,  before  the  summer  solstice,  a
fiftli  commandant  had  fallen.

On  the  same  day,  simultaneously  with  this  repulse
in  the  West  Bulwark,  the  enemy  made  himself  at  last
completely  master  of  the  Polder.  Here,  too,  was  a  savage
hand-to-hand  combat  with  broadswords  and  pikes,  and
when  the  pikes  were  broken,  with  great  clubs  and  stakes
pulled  from  the  fascines ;  '^^  but  the  besiegers  were  vic-
torious, and  the  defenders  sullenly  withdrew  with  their
wounded  to  the  inner  intrenchments.

On  the  27th  June,  Daniel  de  Hartaing,  Lord  of  Mar-
quette, was  sent  by  the  States-General  to  take  june
coramand  in  Ostend.^^  The  colonel  of  the
Walloon  regiment  which  had  rendered  such  good  service
on  the  famous  field  of  Nieuport,  the  new  governor,  with
his  broad,  brown,  cheerful  face,  and  his  Milan  armour,
was  a  familiar  figure  enough  to  the  campaigners  on  both
sides  in  Flanders  or  Germany.

The  stoutest  heart  might  have  sunk  at  the  spectacle
which  the  condition  of  the  town  presented  at  his  first

35  Fleming,  555.  Ibid. s;  ibid. 38  ibid.  556. 39  ibid.  560.

184

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLH.

inspection.  The  States-General  were  resolved  to  hold
the  place,  at  all  hazards,  and  Marquette  had  come  to  do
their  bidding,  but  it  was  difficult  to  find  anything  that
could  be  called  a  town.  The  great  heaps  of  rubldsh,
which  had  once  been  the  outer  walls,  were  almost
entirely  in  the  possession  of  the  foe,  who  had  lodged
himself  in  all  that  remained  of  the  defiant  Porcupine,
the  Hell's  Mouth,  and  other  redoubts,  and  now  pointed
from  them  at  least  fifty  great  guns  against  their  inner
walls.  The  old  town,  with  its  fortifications,  was  com-
pletely honeycombed,  riddled,  knocked  to  pieces,  and,
although  the  Sand  Hill  still  held  out,  it  was  plain
enough  that  its  days  were  numbered  unless  help  should
soon  arrive.  In  truth,  it  required  a  clear  head  and  a
practised  eye  to  discover  among  those  confused  masses
of  prostrate  masonry,  piles  of  brick,  upturned  graves,
and  mounds  of  sand  and  rubbish,  anything  like  order  and
regularity.  Yet  amid  the  chaos  there  was  really  f3rm
and  meaning  to  those  who  could  read  aright,  and  Mar-
quette saw,  as  well  in  the  engineers'  lines  as  in  the
indomitable  spirit  that  looked  out  of  the  grim  faces  of
the  garrison,  that  Ostend,  so  long  as  anything  of  it
existed  in  nature,  could  be  held  for  the  republic.  Tkeir
brethren  had  not  been  firmer,  when  keeping  their  merry
Christmas,  seven  years  before,  under  the  North  Pole,
upon  a  pudding  made  of  the  gunner's  cartridge  paste,
or  the  Knights  of  the  Invincible  Lion  in  the  horiid
solitudes  of  Tierra  del  Fuego,  than  were  the  defenders
of  this  sandbank.

Whether  the  place  were  worth  the  cost  or  not,  it
was  for  my  lords  the  States-General  to  decide,  not  for
Governor  Marquette.  And  the  decision  of  those  "  high
and  mighty "  magistrates,  to  whom  even  Maurice  of
Nassau  bowed  without  a  murmur,  although  often  against
his  judgment,  had  been  plainly  enough  announced.

And  so  shiploads  of  deals  and  joists,  bricks,  nails,  and
fascines,  with  all  other  requisite  building  materials,  were
sent  daily  in  from  Zeeland,*^  in  order  that  little  Troy
might  be  completed;  and,  with  God's  help,  said  the
garrison,  the  republic  shall  hold  its  own.

And  now  there  were  two  months  more  of  mining  and
countermining,  of  assaults  and  repulses,  of  cannonading

40  Fleming.

1604.  ENCROACHMENT  OF  THE  ENEMY.  185

and  hand-to-hand  fights  with  pikes  and  clubs.  Nearer  and
nearer,  day  by  day,  and  inch  by  inch,  the  foe  had  crawled
up  to  the  verge  of  their  last  refuge,  and  the  walls  of
Little  Troy,  founded  upon  fi  esh  earth  and  dead  men's
bones,  and  shifting  sands,  were  beginning  to  quake
under  the  guns  of  the  inexorable  volunteer  from  Genoa.
Yet  on  the  27th  August  there  was  great  rejoicing  27  August,
in  the  beleaguered  town.  Cannon  thundered
salutes,  bonfires  blazed,  trumpets  rang  jubilant  blasts,
and,  if  the  church-bells  sounded  no  merry  peals,  it  was
because  the  only  church  in  the  place  had  been  cut  off
in  the  last  slicing  away  by  the  engineers.  Hymns  of
thanksgiving  ascended  to  heaven,  and  the  whole  garrison
fell  on  their  knees,  praying  fervently  to  Almighty  God,
with  devout  and  grateful  hearts.^^  It  was  not  an  ignoble
spectacle  to  see  those  veterans  kneeling  where  there  was
scarce  room  to  kneel,  amid  ruin  and  desolation,  to  praise
the  Lord  for  his  mercies.  But  to  explain  this  genernl
thanksgiving  it  is  now  necessary  fur  a  moment  to  go
back.

*i  Fler-iing,  572.

186

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIII.

CHAPTER  XLIII.

Policy  of  the  King  of  France  —  Operations  of  Prince  Maurice  —  Plans  for  a  Flemish
Campaign  —  Passage  into  Flanders  —  Fort  St.  Catharine  —  Flight  of  its  garrison,
and  occupation  by  Maurice  —  Surrender  of  Ysendyke  and  Aardenburg  —  Skirmish
at  Stamper's  Hook  —  Siege  of  Sluys  by  Prince  Maurice  —  Ineffectual  attempt  of
Spinola  to  relieve  the  town  —  Its  capitulation  and  restoration  to  the  States  —
Death  of  Lewis  Gunther  of  Nassau  —  Operations  at  Ostend  —  Surrender  of  the
garrison  —  Desolation  of  the  scene  after  its  evacuation.

The  States-General  had  begun  to  forget  the  severe  lesson
taught  them  in  the  Nieuport  campaign.  Being  deter-
mined to  hold  Ostend,  they  became  very  impatient,  in
the  early  part  of  the  present  year,  that  Maurice  should
once  more  invade  Flanders,  at  the  head  of  a  relieving
arm}^  and  drive  the  archdukes  from  before  the  town.

They  were  much  influenced  in  this  policy  by  the
persistent  advice  of  the  French  king.  To  the  importu-
nities of  their  envoy  at  Paris,  Henry  had,  during  the
past  eighteen  months,  replied  by  urging  the  States  to
invade  Flanders  and  seize  its  ports.  When  they  had
thus  something  to  place  as  pledges  in  his  hands,  he  might
accede  to  their  clamour  and  declare  war  against  Spain.
But  he  scarcely  concealed  his  intention,  in  such  case,  to
annex  both  the  obedient  and  the  United  Netherlands
to  his  own  dominions.  Meantime,  before  getting  into  the
saddle,  he  chose  to  be  guaranteed  against  loss.  "  Assure
my  lords  the  States  that  I  love  them,"  he  said,  "and
shall  always  do  my  best  for  them."^  His  affection  for
the  territory  of  my  lords  was  even  warmer  than  the
sentiments  he  entertained  for  themselves.  Moreover,
he  grudged  the  preliminary  oxp^^nses  which  would  be
necessary  even  should  he  ultimattly  make  himself
sovereign  of  the  whole  country.  Eosny  assured  the
envoy  that  he  was  mistaken  in  expecting  a  declaration
of  war  against  Spain.  "  Not  that  he  does  not  think  it
useful  and  necessary,"  said  the  minister,  but  he  wishes
to  have  war  and  peace  both  at  once — peace  because  he

1  Aerssens  to  Olden- Barne veld,  in  Van  Deventer,  ii.  333-335.

1604.

POLICY  OF  THE  KING  OF  FRANCE.

187

wishes  to  make  no  retrenchments  in  his  pleasures  of
women,  dogs,  and  buildings,  and  so  war  would  be  very-
inopportune.  In  three  months  he  would  be  obliged  to
turn  tail  for  want  of  means  (to  use  his  own  words),
although  1  would  furnish  him  funds  enough,  if  he  would
make  the  use  of  them  that  he  ought."  ^

The  Queen  of  England,  who,  with  all  her  parsimony
and  false  pretences,  never  doubted  in  her  heart  that
perpetual  hostility  to  Spain  was  the  chief  bulwark  of  her
throne,  and  that  the  republic  was  fighting  her  battles  as
well  as  its  own,  had  been  ready  to  make  such  a  lively
war  in  conjunction  with  France  as  would  drive  the
Spaniard  out  of  all  the  Netherlands.  But  Henry  was
not  to  be  moved.  "  I  know  that  if  I  should  take  her  at
her  word,"  said  he,  she  would  at  once  begin  to  screw
me  for  money.  She  has  one  object,  I  another."  Villeroy
had  said  plainly  to  Aerssens,  in  regard  to  the  prevalent
system  of  Englishmen,  Spaniards,  and  Frenchmen  being
at  war  with  each  other,  while  the  Governments  might
be  nominally  at  peace,  Let  us  take  off  our  masks.  If
the  Spaniard  has  designs  against  our  State,  has  he  not
cause  ?  He  knows  the  aid  we  are  giving  you,  and  resents
it.  If  we  should  abstain,  he  would  leave  us  in  peace.
If  the  Queen  of  England  expects  to  draw  us  into  a
league,  she  is  mistaken.  Look  to  yourselves  and  be  on
your  guard.  Kichardot  is  intriguing  with  Cecil.  You
give  the  queen  securities,  fortresses,  seats  in  your
council.  The  king  asks  nothing  but  communication  of
your  projects."^

In  short,  all  the  comfort  that  Aerssens  had  been  able
to  derive  from  his  experiences  at  the  French  court  in
the  autumn  of  1602,  was  that  the  republic  could  not
be  too  suspicious  both  of  England  and  France.  Kosny
especially  he  considered  the  most  dangerous  of  all  the
politicians  in  France.  His  daughter  was  married  to
the  Prince  of  Espinoy,  whose  50,000  livres  a  year  would
be  safer  the  more  the  archduke  was  strengthened.  But
for  this  he  would  be  stitier,"  said  Aerssens."*  Neverthe-
less there  were  strong  motives  at  work,  pressing  Franco
towards  the  support  of  the  States.  There  were  strong
political  reasons,  therefore,  why  they  should  carry  the

2  Aerssens  to  Olden-Barnevcl  ^  in  Van  Deventer,  ii.  333-335.
3  Ibid.  *  ibid.

188

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLHI.

war  into  Flanders,  in  conformity  with  the  wishes  of
the  king.

The  stadholder,  after  much  argument,  yielded  as
usual  to  the  authority  of  the  magistrates,  without
being  convinced  as  to  the  sagacity  of  their  plans.  It
was  arranged  that  an  army  should  make  a  descent
upon  the  Flemish  coast  in  the  early  spring,  and  make
a  demonstration  upon  Sluys.  The  effect  of  this  move-
ment, it  was  thought,  would  be  to  draw  the  enemy  out
of  his  intrenchments,  in  which  case  it  would  be  in  the
power  of  Maurice  to  put  an  end  at  once  to  the  siege.
It  is  unquestionable  that  the  better  alternative,  in  the
judgment  of  the  prince,  was  to  take  possession,  if  possi-
ble, of  Sluys  itself.  His  preparations  were,  liowever,
made  with  a  view  to  either  event,  and  by  the  middle
of  April  he  had  collected  at  Willemstad  a  force  of  fif-
teen thousand  foot  and  three  thousand  horse.  As  on
the  former  memorable  expedition,  he  now  again  insisted
that  a  considerable  deputation  of  the  States  and  of  the
States'  council  should  accompany  the  army.^  His
brother  Henry,  and  his  cousins  Lewis  William,  Lewis
Gunther,  and  Ernest  Casimir,  were  likewise  with  him,
as  well  as  the  Prince  of  Anhalt  and  other  distinguished
personages.

On  the  25th  April  the  army,  having  crossed  the
25  April ^^^^^  West  Schcld,  from  Zeeland,  in

numberless  vessels  of  all  sizes  and  degrees,
effected  their  debarkation  on  the  island  of  Cadzand.^

In  the  course  of  two  days  they  had  taken  possession
of  the  little  town,  and  all  the  forts  of  that  island,
having  made  their  entrance  through  what  was  called
the  Black  Channel.  Had  they  steered  boldly  through
the  Swint  or  Sluys  channel  at  once,  it  is  probable  that
they  might  have  proceeded  straight  up  to  Sluys,  and
taken  the  place  by  surprise.  Maurice's  habitual
caution  was,  perhaps,  on  this  occasion,  a  disadvantage
to  him,  but  he  would  have  violated  the  rules  of  war,
and  what  seemed  the  dictates  of  common  sense,  had  he
not  secured  a  basis  of  operations,  and  a  possibility  of
retreat,  before  plunging  with  his  army  into  the  heart
of  a  hostile  country. The  republic  still  shuddered  at

5  V.  d.  Kemp,  ii,  109.  seqq.,  and  notes.  6  Bentivoglio,  iii.  525-529.  Meteren,

494,  495. Grotius,  xiii.  639-644. Fleming.  Haestens.

1604.  OPERATIONS  OF  PRINCE  MAURICE.  189

the  possible  catastrophe  of  four  years  before,  when  (dr-
cumstances  had  forced  him  to  take  the  heroic  but  dan-
gerous resolution  of  sending  off  his  ships  from  Nieuport.
Before  he  had  completed  his  arrangements  for  supplies
on  the  island  of  Cadzand,  he  learned  from  scouts  and
reconnoitring  parties  that  Spinola  had  sent  a  thousand
infantry,  besides  five  hundred  cavalry,  under  Trivulzio,
to  guard  the  passage  across  the  Swint.  Maurice  was  thus
on  the  wrong  side  of  the  great  channel  by  which  Sluys
communicated  with  the  sea.^

The  Town  of  Sluys  and  its  situation  have  been  described
in  a  former  chapter.®  As  a  port,  it  was  in  those  days
considered  a  commodious  and  important  one,  capable  of
holding  five  hundred  ships.  As  a  town,  it  was  not  so
insignificant  as  geographical  and  historical  changes
have  since  made  it,  and  was  certainly  fiir  superior  to
Ostend,  even  if  Ostend  had  not  been  almost  battered
out  of  existence.  It  had  spacious  streets  and  squares,
and  excellent  fortifications  in  perfectly  good  condi-
tion. It  was  situate  in  a  watery  labyrinth,  many  slender
streams  from  the  interior  and  several  saltwater  creeks
being  complicated  around  it,  and  then  flowing  leisurely,
in  one  deep  sluggish  channel,  to  the  sea.  The  wrath  of
Leicester,  when  all  his  efforts  to  relieve  the  place  had
been  bafiled  by  the  superior  skill  of  Alexander  Famese,
has  been  depicted,  and  during  the  seventeen  yeai>>  wliich
had  elapsed  since  its  capture,  the  republic  had  not
ceased  to  deplore  that  disaster.  Obviously  if  the  present
expedition  could  end  in  the  restoration  of  Sluys  to  its
rightful  owners,  it  would  be  a  remarkable  success,  even
if  Ostend  should  fall.  Sluys  and  its  adjacent  domains
formed  a  natural  portion  of  the  Zeeland  archipelago,  the
geographical  counterpart  of  Flushing.  With  both
braaches  of  the  stately  Scheld  in  its  control,  the  republic
would  command  the  coast,  and  might  even  dispense  with
Ostend,  which,  in  the  judgment  of  Maurice,  was  an
isolated  and  therefore  not  a  desirable  military  possession.
The  Stiites-General  were  of  a  different  opinion.  They
much  desired  to  obtain  Sluys,  but  they  would  not  listen
to  the  abandonment  of  Ostend.  It  was  expected  of  the
stadholder,  therefore,  that  he  should  seize  the  one  and
protect  the  other. The  task  was  a  difficult  one. A  less

7  Fleming,  584-587.

8  Vol  U.  chap.  x\i.

190

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIII.

matliematical  Lrain  than  that  of  Maurice  of  Nassau
would  have  reeled  at  the  problem  to  be  solved.  To
master  such  a  plexus  of  canals,  estuaries,  and  dykes,  of
passages  through  swamps,  of  fords  at  low  water  which
were  obliterated  by  flood-tide ;  to  take  possession  of  a
series  of  redoubts  built  on  the  only  firm  points  of  land,
with  nothing  but  quaking  morass  over  which  to  ma-
noeuvre troops  or  plant  batteries  against  them,  would  be
a  difficult  study,  even  upon  paper.  To  accomplish  it
the  presence  of  a  vigilant  and  anxious  foe  seemed
bewildering  enough.

At  first  it  was  the  intention  of  the  stadholder,  dis-
appointed at  learning  the  occupation  of  the  Swint,  to
content  himself  with  fortifying  Cadzand,  in  view  of
future  operations  at  some  more  favourable  moment.^  So
meagre  a  result  would  certainly  not  have  given  great
satisfaction  to  the  States,  nor  added  much  to  the  military
reputation  of  Maurice.  While  he  hesitated  between
plunging  without  a  clue  into  the  watery  maze  around
him,  and  returning  discomfited  from  the  expedition  on
which  such  high  hopes  had  been  built,  a  Flemish  boor
presented  himself.  He  offered  to  guide  the  army  around
the  east  and  south  of  Sluys,  and  to  point  out  passages
where  it  would  be  possible  to  cross  the  waters,  which,
through  the  care  of  Spinola,  now  seemed  to  forbid  access
to  the  place.^^ Maurice  lingered  no  longer. On  the

28  April  ^^^^  April,  led  by  the  friendly  boor,  he  ad-
vanced towards  Oostburg.  Next  morning  a
small  force  of  the  enemy's  infantry  and  cavalry  was  seen,
showing  that  there  must  be  foothold  in  that  direction.
He  sent  out  a  few  companies  to  skirmish  with  those
troops,  who  fled  after  a  very  brief  action,  and,  in  flying,
showed  their  pursuers  the  road.  Maurice  marched  in
force,  straight  through  the  waters,  on  the  track  of  the
retreating  foe.  They  endeavoured  to  rally  at  the  fort  of
Coxie,  which  stood  upon  and  commanded  a  dyke,  but

30  April  republicans  were  too  quick  for  them,  and

drove  them  out  of  the  place. The  stadholder,
thus  obtaining  an  unexpected  passage  into  Flanders,
conceived  strong  hopes  of  success,  despite  the  broken
nature  of  the  ground.  Continuing  to  feel  his  way
cautiously  through  the  wilderness  of  quagmire,  he  soon

9  Fleming,  585.  Ibid. Grotius,  uU  sup.  n  Grotius,  uhi  sup.

1604.

FORT  ST.  CATHARINE.

191

came  upon  a  very  formidable  obstacle.  The  well-built
and  well-equipped  redoubt  of  St.  Catharine  rose  frowning
before  him,  overshadowing  his  path,  and  completelj  pro-
hibiting all  further  progress.  Plainly  it  would  ^  ^^^^
be  necessary  to  reduce  this  work  at  once,  unless
he  were  willing  to  abandon  his  enterprise.  He  sent
back  to  Cadzand  for  artillery,  but  it  was  flood-tide,  the
waters  were  out,  and  it  was  not  till  late  in  the  afternoon
that  nine  pieces  arrived.  The  stadholder  ordered  a  can-
nonade, less  with  the  hope  of  producing  an  impression
by  such  inadequate  means  on  so  strong  a  work,  than
with  the  intention  of  showing  the  enemy  that  he  had
brought  field-guns  with  him,  and  was  not  merely  on  an
accidental  foray.  At  the  same  time,  having  learned
that  the  garrison,  which  was  commanded  by  Trivulzio,
was  composed  of  only  a  few  regular  troops,  and  a  large
force  of  guerillas,  he  gave  notice  that  such  combatants
were  not  entitled  to  quarter,  and  that  if  captured  they
would  be  all  put  to  the  sword.  The  reply  to  this  threat
was  not  evacuation  but  defiance.  Especially  a  volunteer
ensign  mounted  upon  a  rampart,  and  danced  about,  wav-
ing his  flag  gaily  in  the  face  of  the  assailants.  Maurice
bitterly  remarked  to  his  staff  that  such  a  man  alone  was
enough  to  hold  the  fort.^'^  As  it  was  obvious  that  the
place  would  require  a  siege  in  form,  and  that  it  would
be  almost  impossible  to  establish  batteries  upon  that
quaking  soil,  where  there  was  no  dry  land  for  cavalry  or
artillery  to  move,  Maurice  ordered  the  nine  guns  to  be
canied  back  to  Cadzand  that  night,  betaking  himself,
much  disappointed,  in  the  same  direction.'^  Yet  it  so
happened  that  the  cannoneers,  floundering  through  the
bogs,  made  such  an  outcry — especially  when  one  of  their
guns  became  so  bemircd  that  it,  was  difficult  for  them  to
escape  the  disgrace  of  losing  it — that  the  garrison,  hear-
ing a  great  tumult,  which  they  could  not  understand,  fell
into  one  of  those  panics  to  which  raw  and  irregular
troops  are  liable.^*  Nothing  would  convince  them  that
fresh  artillery  had  not  arrived,  that  the  terrible  stad-
holder with  an  immense  force  was  not  creating  invincible
batteries,  and  that  they  should  be  all  butchered  in  cold
blood,  according  to  proclamation,  before  the  dawn  of  day.
They  therefore  evacuated  the  place  under  cover  of  the

1*  Fleming,  586.

13  Ibid.  587.

1*  Ibid.

192

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIII.

niglit,  so  that  this  absurd  accident  absolutely  placed

^  Maurice  in  possession  of  the  very  fort — without

striking  a  blow — which  he  was  about  to  aban-
don in  despair,  and  which  formed  the  first  great  obstacle
to  his  advance.^^

Having  occupied  St.  Catharine's,  he  moved  forward
to  Ysendyke,  a  strongly  fortified  place  three  leagues  to

6  May  eastward  of  Sluys,  and  invested  it  in  form.

Meantime  a  great  danger  was  impending  over
him.  A  force  of  well-disciplined  troops,  to  the  number
of  two  thousand,  dropped  down  in  boats  from  Sluys  to
Cadzand,  for  the  purpose  of  surprising  the  force  left  to
guard  that  important  place.  The  expedition  was  par-
tially successful.  Six  hundred  landed  beating  down  all
opposition.  But  a  few  Scotch  companies  held  firm,  and
by  hard  fighting  were  able  at  last  to  drive  the  invaders
back  to  their  sloops,  many  of  which  were  sunk  in  the
affray,  with  all  on  board.  The  rest  ignominiously  re-
treated.-^^ PTad  the  enterprise  been  as  well  executed  as
it  was  safely  planned,  it  would  have  gone  hard  with  the
stadholder  and  his  army.  It  is  difficult  to  see  in  what
way  he  could  have  extricated  himself  from  such  a
dilemma,  being  thus  cut  off  from  his  supplies  and  his
fleet,  and  therefore  from  all  possibility  of  carrying  out
his  design  or  effecting  his  escape  to  Zeeland,  Certainly
thus  far,  fortune  had  favoured  his  bold  adventure.

He  now  sent  his  own  trumpeter,  Master  Hans,  to  sum-
mon Ysendyke  to  a  surrender.  The  answer  was  a  bullet
which  went  through  the  head  of  unfortunate  Master
Hans. Maurice,  enraged  at  this  barbarous  violation  of

10  May  laws  of  War,  drew  his  lines  closer.  Next

day  the  garrison,  numbering  six  hundred,  mostly
Italians,  capitulated,  and  gave  up  the  musketeer  who
had  murdered  the  tvimpeter.-^^

Two  days  later  the  army  appeared  before  Aardenburg,
a  well-fortified  town  four  miles  south  of  Sluys. It  sur-

19  May  disgracefully,  without  striking  a  blow.

The  place  was  a  most  important  position  for
the  investment  of  Sluys.  Four  or  five  miles  further
towards  the  west,  two  nearly  parallel  streams,  both
navigable,  called  the  Sweet  and  the  Salt,  ran  from  Dam
to  Sluys. It  was  a  necessary  but  most  delicate  operation,

^5  Fleming,  Ibid.  588. Grotms,  uhi  sup. i7  Grotius,  m&i  5mj:.

1604.

SIEGE  OB'  t^LVtb,

193

to  tie  up  these  two  important  arteries. An  expedition
despatched  in  this  direction  came  upon  Tiivulzio  with  a
strong  force  of  cavalry,  posted  at  a  pass  called  Stamper's
Hook,  which  controlled  the  first  of  these  streams.  The
narrowness  of  the  pathway  gave  the  advantage  to  the
Italian  commander. A  warm  action  took  place,
in  which  the  republican  cavalry  were  worsted,
and  Paul  Bax  severely  wounded. Maurice  coming  up
with  the  infantry  at  a  moment  when  the  prospect  was
very  black,  turned  defeat  into  victory  and  completely
routed  the  enemy,  who  fled  from  the  precious  position
with  a  loss  of  five  hundred  killed  and  three  hundred
prisoners,  eleven  officers  among  them.^® The  Sweet  was
now  in  the  stadholder's  possession. Next  day  ^^^^
he  marched  against  the  Salt,  at  a  pass  where
fourteen  hundred  Spaniards  were  stationed.  Making
very  ostentatious  preparations  for  an  attack  upon  this
position,  he  suddenly  fell  backwards  down  the  stream  to
a  point  which  he  had  discovered  to  be  fordable  at  low
water,  and  marched  his  whole  army  through  the  stream
while  the  skirmishing  was  going  on  a  few  miles  farther
up. The  Spaniards,  discovering  their  error,  and  fearing
to  be  cut  off,  scampered  hastily  away  to  Dam.  Both
streams  were  now  in  the  control  of  the  republican  army,
while  the  single  fort  of  St.  Joris  was  all  that  was  now
interposed between Maurice and the  much-coveted
Swint. This  redoubt,  armed  with  nine  guns,  ^3
and  provided  with  a  competent  garrison,  was
surrendered  on  the  23rd  May.^^

The  Swint,  or  great  sea-channel  of  Sluys,  being  now
completely  in  the  possession  of  the  stadholder,  he  deli-
beratel}''  proceeded  to  lay  out  his  lines,  to  make  his
entrenched  camp,  and  to  invest  his  city  with  the
beautiful  neatness  which  ever  characterized  his  sieges.
A  groan  came  from  the  learned  Lipsius,  as  he  looked
from  the  orthodox  shades  of  Louvain  upon  the  progress
of  the  heretic  prince.

"  Would  that  I  were  happier,"  he  cried,  "but  things  are
not  going  on  in  Flanders  as  I  could  wish.  How  easy  it
would  have  been  to  save  Sluys,  which  we  are  now  trying
80  hard  to  do,  had  we  turned  our  attention  thither  in

AS  Grotius,  xiii.  591,  572. Bentivoglio,  iii.  527,  528. Meteren,  494,  495.
'»  Fleming,  Boiitivo.,  Met.,  ubi  sup. Van  der  Kemp,  iL  110,  111,  and  notes.
VOL.  IV.  O

194

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIII.

time !  But  now  we  have  permitted  the  enemy  to
intrench  and  fortify  himself,  and  we  are  the  less  excus-
able because  we  know  to  our  cost  how  felicitously  he
fights  with  the  spade,  and  that  he  builds  works  like  an

ancient  Koman  Should  we  lose  Sluys,  which

God  forbid,  how  much  strength  and  encouragement  will
be  acquired  by  the  foe,  and  by  all  who  secretly  or  openly
favour  him  !  Our  neighbours  are  all  straining  their  eyes,
as  from  a  watch-tower,  eager  to  see  the  result  of  all  these
doings.  But  what  if  they  too  should  begin  to  move  ?
"Where  should  we  be  ?  1  pray  God  to  have  mercy  on
the  Netherlanders,  whom  He  has  been  so  many  years
chastising  with  heavy  whips."

It  was  very  true.  The  man  with  the  spade  had  been
allowed  to  work  too  long  at  his  felicitous  vocation.  There
had  been  a  successful  elfort  made  to  introduce  reinforce-
ments to  the  garrison.  Troops,  to  the  number  of  fifteen
hundred,  had  been  added  to  those  already  shut  up  there,
but  the  attempts  to  send  in  supplies  were  not  so  for-
tunate. Maurice  had  completely  invested  the  town
before  the  end  of  May,  having  undisputed  possession  of
the  harbour  and  of  all  the  neighbouring  country.  He
was  himself  encamped  on  the  west  side  of  the  Swint ;
Charles  van  der  Koot  lying  on  the  south.  The  sub-
merged meadows,  stretching  all  around  in  the  vicinity
of  the  haven,  he  had  planted  thickly  with  gunboats.
Scarcely  a  bird  or  a  fish  could  go  into  or  out  of  the  place.
Thus  the  stadholder  exhibited  to  the  Spaniards  who,
fifteen  miles  off  towards  the  west,  had  been  pounding
and  burrowing  three  years  long  before  Ostend  without
success,  what  he  understood  by  a  siege.

On  the  22nd  of  May  a  day  of  solemn  prayer  and
fasting  was,  by  command  of  Maurice,  celebrated

22  May.  ^jjpoughout  the  besieging  camp.  In  order  that
the  day  should  be  strictly  kept  in  penance,  mortification,
and  thanksgiving,  it  was  ordered,  on  severe  penalties,
that  neither  the  commissaries  nor  sutlers  should  dispense
any  food  whatever,  throughout  the  twenty-four  hours.^^
Thus  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  republic  prepared
his  troops  for  the  work  before  them.

In  the  very  last  days  of  May  the  experiment  was  once

20  Letter  to  Heer  de  Vertering,  in  Haestens,  285,  and  Fleming,  289,  290.
21  Fleming,  593,

1604

SIEGE  OF  SLUYS.

195

more  vigorously  tried  to  send  in  supplies.  A  thousand
galley-slaves,  the  remnant  of  Frederic  Spinola's  29, 30  May,
unlucky  naval  forces,  whose  services  were  not
likely  very  soon  to  be  required  at  sea,  were  sent  out  into
the  drowned  land,  accompanied  by  five  hundred  infantry.
Simultaneously  Count  Berlaymont,  at  the  head  of  four
thousand  men,  conveying  a  large  supply  of  provisions
and  munitions,  started  from  Dam.  Maurice,  apprised  of
the  adventure,  sallied  forth  with  two  thousand  troops
to  meet  them.  Near  Stamper's  Hook  he  came  upon  a
detachment  of  Berlaymont's  force,  routed  them,  and  took
a  couple  of  hundred  prisoners.  Learning  from  them
that  Berlaymont  himself,  with  the  principal  part  of  his
force,  had  passed  farther  on,  he  started  ofi'  in  pursuit ;
but,  unfortunately  taking  a  different  path  through  the
watery  wilderness  from  the  one  selected  by  the  flying
foe,  he  was  not  able  to  prevent  his  retreat  by  a  circuitous
route  to  Uam.  From  the  prisoners,  especially  from  the
galley-slaves,  who  had  no  reason  for  disguising  the  con-
dition of  the  place,  he  now  learned  that  there  were
plenty  of  troops  in  Sluys,  but  that  there  was  already  a
great  lack  of  provisions.  They  had  lost  rather  than
gained  by  their  success  in  introducing  reinforcements
without  supplies.^^  Upon  this  information  Maurice  now
resulyed  to  sit  quietly  down  and  starve  out  the  garrison.
If  Spinola,  in  consequence,  should  raise  the  siege  of
Ostend,  in  order  to  relieve  a  better  town,  he  was  pre-
pared to  give  him  battle.  If  the  marquis  held  fast  to
his  special  work,  Sluys  was  sure  to  surrender.  This
being  the  position  of  affairs,  the  deputies  of  the  States-
General  took  their  leave  of  the  stadholder,  and  returned
to  the  Hague.^

Two  months  passed.  It  was  midsummer,  and  the
famine  in  tlie  beleaguered  town  had  become  horrible.
The  same  hideous  spectacle  was  exhibited  as  on  all
occasions  where  thousands  of  human  beings  are  penned
together  without  food.  They  ate  dogs,  cats,  and  rats,  the
weeds  from  the  churchyards,  old  saddles,  and  old  shoec^,
and,  when  all  was  gone,  they  began  to  eat  each  other.
The  small  children  diminished  rapidly  in  numbers,'^
while  beacons  and  signals  of  distress  were  fired  day  and

Fleming,  592. Motcren,  Bentivoglio,  ubi  sup.

2»  GaUiicci,  ii,  176.

23  Fleming,  592.

o  2

196

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS Chap.  XLIII

ni^ht,  that  tlie  obdurate  Spinola,  only  a  few  miles  off,
might  at  last  move  to  their  relief.

The  archdukes  too  were  beginning  to  doubt  whether
the  bargain  were  a  good  one.  To  give  a  strong,  new,
well-fortified  city,  with  the  best  of  harbours,  in  exchange
for  a  heap  of  rubbish  which  had  once  been  Ostend,
seemed  unthrifty  enough.  Moreover,  they  had  not  got
Ostend,  while  sure  to  lose  Sluys.  At  least  the  car-
dinal could  no  longer  afford  to  dispense  with  the  service
of  his  best  corps  of  veterans  who  had  demanded  their
wages  so  insolently,  and  who  had  laughed  at  his  offer  of
excommunication  by  way  of  pa^^ment  so  heartily.  Fling-
ing away  his  pride,  he  accordingly  made  a  treaty  with
the  mutinous  ''squadron"  at  Grave,  granting  an  entire
pardon  for  all  their  offences,  and  promising  full  payment
of  their  arrears.  Until  funds  should  be  collected  suffi-
cient for  this  purpose,  they  were  to  receive  twelve
stivers  a  day  each  foot-soldier,  and  twenty-four  stivers
each  cavalryman,  and  were  to  have  the  city  of  Eoermond
in  pledge.  The  treaty  was  negotiated  by  Guerrera,
commandant  of  Ghent  citadel,  and  by  the  Archbishop
of  Eoermond,  while  three  distinguished  hostages  were
placed  in  the  keeping  of  the  mutineers  until  the  con-
tract should  be  faithfully  executed  :  Guerrera  himself,
Count  Fontenoy,  son  of  Marquis  d'Havre,  and  Avalos,
commander  of  a  Spanish  legion.^^  Thus,  after  making  a
present  of  the  services  of  these  veterans  for  a  twelve-
month to  the  stadholder,  and  after  employing  a  very
important  portion  of  his  remaining  forces  in  a  vain
attempt  to  reduce  their  revolt,  the  archduke  had  now
been  fain  to  purchase  their  submission  by  conceding  all
their  demands.  It  would  have  been  better  economy
perhaps  to  come  to  this  conclusion  at  an  earlier  day.

It  would  likewise  have  been  more  judicious,  according
to  the  lamentations  of  Justus  Lipsius,  had  the  necessity
of  saving  Sluys  been  thought  of  in  time.  Now  that  it
was  thoroughly  enclosed,  so  that  a  mouse  could  scarce
ci  eep  through  the  lines,  the  archduke  was  feverish  to
send  in  a  thousand  wagon  loads  of  provisions.  Spinola,
although  in  reality  commander-in-chief  of  a  Spanish
army,  and  not  strictly  subject  to  the  orders  of  the
Flemish  sovereigns,  obeyed  the  appeal  of  the  archduke,

25  Meteren,  495,  496.

1604.  ATTEMPTED  RELIEF  BY  SPINOLA.  197

but  he  obeyed  most  reluctantly.  Two-thirds  of  Ostend
had  been  effaced,  and  it  was  hard  to  turn  even  for  a
moment  from  the  spot  until  all  should  have  been  de-
stroyed.

Leaving  Eivas  and  Bucquoy  to  guard  the  entrench-  •
ments,  and  to  keep  steadily  to  the  work,  Spinola  took
the  field  with  a  large  force  of  all  arms,  including  the
late  mutineers  and  the  troops  of  Count  Trivulzio.  On
the  8th  August  he  appeared  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
Salt  and  Sweet  streams,  and  exchanged  a  few  cannon-
shots  with  the  republicans.  Next  day  he  made  a
desperate  assault  with  three  thousand  men  and  some
companies  of  cavalry,  upon  Lewis  William's  quarters,
where  he  had  reason  to  believe  the  lines  were  weakest.
He  received  from  that  most  vigilant  commander  a  hearty
welcome,  however,  and  after  a  long  skirmish  was  obliged
to  withdraw,  carrying  off  his  dead  and  wounded,  together
with  a  few  cart-horses  which  had  been  found  grazing
outside  the  trenches.  Not  satisfied  with  these  trophies  or
such  results,  he  remained  several  days  inactive,
and  then  suddenly  whirled  around  Aardenburg
with  his  whole  army,  directly  southward  of  Sluys,  seized
the  forts  of  St.  Catharine  and  St.  Philip,  which  had  been
left  with  veiy  small  garrisons,  and  then  made  a  furious
attempt  to  break  the  lines  at  Oostburg,  hoping  to  cross
the  fords  at  that  place,  and  thus  push  his  way  into  the
isle  of  Cadzand.  The  resistance  to  his  progress  was
obstinate,  the  result  for  a  time  doubtful.  After  severe
fighting,  however,  ho  crossed  the  waters  of  Oostburg  in
the  face  of  the  enemy.^^  Maurice  meantime  had  collected
all  his  strength  at  the  vital  position  of  Cadzand,  hoping
to  deal,  or  at  least  to  parry,  a  moi'tal  blow.

On  the  17th,  on  Cadzand  dyke,  between  two  redoubts,
Spinola  again  met  Lewis  William,  who  had  been  ^j^^
transferred  to  that  important  position.  A  severe
struggle  ensued.  The  Spaniards  were  in  superior  force,
and  Lewis  William,  commanding  the  advance  only  of
the  States'  troops,  was  hard  pressed.  Moving  always
in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  he  would  probably  have  that
day  laid  down  his  life,  as  so  many  of  his  race  had  done
before,  in  the  cause  of  the  republic,  had  not  Colonel  van
Dorp  come  to  his  rescue,  and  so  laid  about  him  with  a

2«  Fleming,  593,  59  J. Btntivoglio,  uhi  tup. Mctercn,  495. Grotius,  xii.  6;0,  641.

198

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLHI.

great  broad  sword,  that  the  dyke  was  kept  until  Maurice
arrived  with  E3^tzinga's  Frisian  regiment  and  other
reserves.  Yan  Dorp  then  fell  covered  with  wounds.
Here  was  the  decisive  combat.  The  two  commanders-
in-chief  met  face  to  face  for  the  first  time,  and  could
Spinola  have  gained  the  position  of  Cadzand  the  fate  of
Maurice  must  have  been  sealed.  But  all  his  efforts
were  vain.  The  stadholder,  by  coolness  and  promptness,
saved  the  day,  and  inflicted  a  bloody  repulse  upon  the
Catholics.  Spinola  had  displayed  excellent  generalship,
but  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  young  volunteer  should
have  failed  upon  his  first  great  field  day  to  defeat
Maurice  of  Nassau  and  his  cousin  Lewis  William.  He
withdrew  discomfited  at  last,  leaving  several  hundred
dead  upon  the  field,  definitely  renouncing  all  hope  of
relieving  Sluys,  and  retiring  by  way  of  Dam  to  his  camp
18  Aug  ^^^^^^  Ostend.^^  Next  day  the  town  capitu-
lated.^^ The  garrison  were  allowed  to  depart
with  the  honours  of  war,  and  the  same  terms  were
accorded  to  the  inhabitants,  both  in  secular  and  religious
matters,  as  were  usual  when  Maurice  re-occupied  any
portion  of  the  republic.  Between  three  and  four
thousand  creatures,  looking  rather  like  ghosts  from  the
churchyards  than  living  soldiers,  marched  out,  with
drums  beating,  colours  displayed,  matches  lighted,  and
bullet  in  mouth.  Sixty  of  them  fell  dead^^  before  the
dismal  procession  had  passed  out  of  the  gates.  Besides
these  troops  were  nearly  fifteen  hundred  galley-slaves,
even  more  like  shadows  than  the  rest,  as  they  had  been
regularly  sent  forth  during  the  latter  days  of  the  siege
to  browse  upon  soutenelle  in  the  submerged  meadows,
or  to  drown  or  starve  if  unable  to  find  a  sufficient  supply
of  that  weed.  These  unfortunate  victims  of  Mahometan
and  Christian  tyranny  were  nearly  all  Turks,  and  by  the
care  of  the  Dutch  Government  were  sent  back  by  sea  to
their  homes.^^  A  few  of  them  entered  the  service  of  the
States.

The  evacuation  of  Sluys  by  Governor  Serrano  and  his
garrison  was  upon  the  20th  August.  Next  day  the  stad-
holder took  possession,  bestowing  the  nominal  govern-
ment of  the  place  upon  his  brother  Frederic  Henry.

'^7  Fleming,  594,  595.  Bentivoglio,  Meteren,  Grotius,  ubi  sup,
28  Jt>id.  29  Bentivoglio.  so  Meteren,  495.

1604.

CAPITULAriON  OF  THE  TOWN.

199

The  atmosphere,  naturally  enough,  was  pestiferous,  and
young  Count  Lewis  Gunther  of  Nassau,  who  had  so
brilliantly  led  the  cavalry  on  the  famous  day  of  Nieuport,
died  of  fever  soon  after  entering  the  town,^^  infinitely
regretted  by  every  one  who  wished  well  to  the  re-
public.

Thus  an  important  portion  of  Zeeland  was  restored  to
its  natural  owners.  A  seaport  which  in  those  days  was
an  excellent  one,  and  more  than  a  compensation  for  the
isolated  fishing  village  already  beleaguered  for  upwards
of  three  years,  had  been  captured  in  three  months.  The
States- General  congratulated  their  stadholder  on  such
prompt  and  efficient  work,  while  the  garrison  of  Ostend,
first  learning  the  authentic  news  seven  days  afterwards,
although  at  a  distance  of  only  fourteen  miles,  27  Aug.
had  cause  to  go  upon  their  knees  and  sing
praises  to  the  Most  High.

The  question  now  arose  as  to  the  relief  of  Ostend.
Maurice  was  decidedl}^  opposed  to  any  such  scheme.^^
He  had  got  a  better  Ostend  in  Sluys,  and  he  saw  no
motive  for  spending  money  and  blood  in  any  further
attempt  to  gain  possession  of  a  ruin  which,  even  if  con-
quered, could  only  with  extreme  difficulty  be  held.
The  States  were  of  a  diametrically  opposite  opinion.
They  insisted  that  the  stadholder,  so  soon  as  he  could
complete  his  preparations,  should  march  straight  upon
Spinola's  works  and  break  up  the  siege,  even  at  the
risk  of  a  general  action.^^  They  were  willing  once
more  to  take  the  terrible  chance  of  a  defeat  in  Flanders.
Maurice,  with  a  heavy  heart,  bowed  to  their  decision,
showing  by  his  conduct  the  very  spirit  of  a  republican
soldier,  obeying  the  civil  magistrate,  even  when  that
obedience  was  like  to  bring  disaster  upon  the  common-
wealth. But  much  was  to  be  done  befoie  he  could
undertake  this  new  adventure.

Meantime  the  garrison  in  Ostend  were  at  their  last
gasp.  On  being  asked  by  the  States-General  whether
it  was  possible  to  hold  out  for  twenty  days  longer,  Mar-
quette called  a  council  of  officers,  who  decided  that  they
would  do  their  best,  but  that  it  was  impos.sible  to  fix  a
day  or  hour  when  resistance  must  cease.  Obviously,

Metcrcn,  495. Fleming,  597.  32  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  and  Dotes.

83  Ibid.

200

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIII.

however,  the  siege  was  in  its  extreme  old  age.  The
inevitable  end  was  approaching.

Before  the  middle  of  September  the enemy  was

13  Se  t  t^Loronghly  established  in  possession  of  the
new  Hell's  Mouth,  the  new  Porcupine,  and  all
the  other  bastions  of  the  new  intrenchment.  On  the
13th  of  that  month  the  last  supreme  effort  was  made,
and  the  Sand  Hill,  that  all-important  redoubt,  which
during  these  three  dismal  years  had  triumphantly  re-
sisted every  assault,  was  at  last  carried  by  storm.^*  The
enemy  had  now  gained  possession  of  the  whole  town
except  Little  Troy.  The  new  harbour  would  be  theirs
in  a  few  hours,  and  as  for  Troy  itself,  those  hastily  and
flimsily  constructed  ramparts  were  not  likely  to  justify
the  vaunts  uttered  when  they  were  thrown  up  nor  to
hold  out  many  minutes  before  the  whole  artillery  of
Spinola.  Plainly  on  this  last  morsel  of  the  fatal  sand-
bank the  word  surrender  must  be  spoken,  unless  the
advancing  trumpets  of  Maurice  should  now  be  heard.
But  there  was  no  such  welcome  sound  in  the  air.  The
weather  was  so  persistently  rainy  and  stormy  that  the
roads  became  impassable,  and  Maurice,  although  ready
and  intending  to  march  towards  Spinola  to  offer  him
battle,  was  unable  for  some  days  to  move.^  Meantime
a  council,  summoned  by  Marquette,  of  all  the  officers,
decided  that  Ostend  must  be  abandonee?  now  that
Ostend  had  ceased  to  exist.

On  the  20th  September  the  Accord  was  signed  with
Spinola.  The  garrison  were  to  march  out  with  their
arms.  They  were  to  carry  off  four  cannon  but  no
powder.  All  clerical  persons  were  to  leave  the  place,
with  their  goods  and  chattels.  All  prisoners  taken  on
both  sides  during  the  siege  were  to  be  released.  Bur-
ghers, sutlers,  and  others,  to  go  whither  they  would,

2^  ^  undisturbed.^*^  And  thus  the  archdukes,  after
three  years  and  seventy-seven  days  of  siege,
obtained  their  prize.  Three  thousand  men,  in  good
health,  marched  out  of  Little  Troy  with  the  honours  of
war.  The  officers  were  entertained  by  Spinola  and  his
comrades  at  a  magnificent  banquet,  in  recognition  of

34  Fleming,  574. Bentivoglio,  iii.  530. Meteren,  497^^  498.

35  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  461,  note.

36  Accord,  in  Fleming,  Haestens,  Meteren,  Bentivoglio,  ubi  saj^.

1604.

ABANDONMENT  OF  OSTEND.

201

the  unexampled  heroism  with  which  the  town  had  been
defended.^'^  Subsequently  the  whole  force  marched  to
the  headquarters  of  the  States'  army  in  and  about  Sluys.
They  were  received  by  Prince  Maurice,  who  stood  bare-
headed and  surrounded  by  his  most  distinguished
officers,  to  greet  them  and  to  shake  them  warmly  by  the
hand.^^  Surely  no  defeated  garrison  ever  deserved  more
respect  from  friend  or  foe.

The  Archduke  Albert  and  the  Infanta  Isabella  entered
the  place  in  triumph,  if  triumph  it  could  be  called.  It
would  be  difficult  to  imagine  a  more  desolate  scene.
The  artillery  of  the  first  years  of  the  seventeenth
century  was  not  the  terrible  enginry  of  destruction  that
it  has  become  in  the  last  third  of  the  nineteenth,  but  a
cannonade,  continued  so  steadily  and  so  long,  had  done
its  work.  There  were  no  churches,  no  houses,  no  re-
doubts, no  bastions,  no  walls,  nothing  but  a  vague  and
confused  mass  of  ruin.  Spinola  conducted  his  imperial
guests  along  the  edge  of  extinct  volcanoes,  amid  up-
turned cemeteries,  through  quagmires  which  once  were
moats,  over  huge  mounds  of  sand,  and  vast  shapeless
masses  of  bricks  and  masonry,  which  had  been  forts.
He  endeavoured  to  point  out  places  where  mines  had
been  exploded,  where  ravelins  had  been  stormed,  where
the  assailants  had  been  successful,  and  where  they  had
been  bloodily  repulsed.  But  it  was  all  loathsome,
hideous  rubbish.  There  were  no  human  habitations,  no
hovels,  no  casemates.  The  inhabitants  had  burrowed  at
last  in  the  earth,  like  the  dumb  creatures  of  the  swamps
and  forests.  In  every  direction  the  dykes  had  burst,
and  the  sullen  wash  of  the  liberated  waves,  bearing
hither  and  thither  the  floating  wreck  of  fascines  and
machinery,  of  planks  and  building  materials,  sounded
far  and  wide  over  what  should  have  been  dry  land.  The
great  ship  channel,  with  the  unconquered  llalf-moon
upon  one  side  and  the  incomplete  batteries  and  plat-
forms of  Bucquoy  on  the  other,  still  defiantly  opened  its
passage  to  the  sea,  and  the  retiring  fleets  of  the  garrison
were  white  in  the  offing.  All  around  was  the  grey
expanse  of  stormy  ocean,  without  a  cape  or  a  headland
to  break  its  monotony,  as  the  surges  rolled  mournfully
in  upon  a  desolation  more  dreaiy  than  their  own.  The

37  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  111. Mctcrcn,  ubi  sup.

3'  Metcren,  ubi  sup.

202

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLHI.

atmosphere  was  mnrky  and  surcharged  with  rain,  for
the  wild  equinoctial  storm  which  had  held  Maurice
spell-bound  had  been  raging  over  land  and  sea  for  many
days.  At  every  step  the  unburied  skulls  of  brave
soldiers  who  had  died  in  the  cause  of  freedom  grinned
their  welcome  to  the  conquerors.  Isabella  wept  at  the
sight.^^  She  had  cause  to  weep.  Upon,  that  miserable
sandbank  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  men  had  laid
down  their  lives  ^  by  her  decree,  in  order  that  she  and
her  husband  might  at  last  take  possession  of  a  most
barren  prize.  This  insignificant  fragment  of  a  sove-
reignty which  her  wicked  old  father  had  presented  to
her  on  his  deathbed — a  sovereignty  which  he  had  no
more  moral  right  or  actual  power  to  confer  than  if  it
had  been  in  the  planet  Saturn — had  at  last  been  appro-
priated at  the  cost  of  all  this  misery.  It  was  of  no
great  value,  although  its  acquisition  had  caused  the  ex-
penditure of  at  least  eight  millions  of  florins,  divided  in
nearly  equal  proportions  between  the  two  belligerents.
It  was  in  vain  that  great  immunities  were  offered  to
those  who  would  remain,  or  who  would  consent  to  settle
in  the  foul  Golgotha.  The  original  population  left  the
place  in  mass.  No  human  creatures  were  left  save  the
wife  of  a  freebooter  and  her  paramour,  a  journeyman
blacksmith.^^  This  unsavoury  couple,  to  whom  entrance
into  the  purer  atmosphere  of  Zeeland  was  denied,
thenceforth  shared  with  the  carrion  crows  the  amenities
of  Ostend.

39  Gallucci,  ii.  185.  and  the  amount  was  72,124.  Another

*o  The  numbers  of  those  who  were  Spanish  authority,  Juan  Ballono,  puts  the
killed  or  who  died  of  disease  in  both  armies  number  of  the  besiegers  who  perished  in
during  this  memorable  siege,  have  been  the  last  year  of  the  siege  at  sixty  thousand
placed  as  high  as  one  hundred  and  forty  —of  course  a  ridiculous  exaggeration,
thousand.  (Gallucci,  uU  sup.)  Meteren,  Such  preposterous  statistics  show  the
498,  says  that  on  the  body  of  a  Spanish  impossibility  of  making  anything  like  a
officer,  who  fell  in  one  of  the  innumerable  correct  estimate.  Of  the  besieged  the  los8
assaults,  was  found  a  list  of  aU  the  officers  is  supposed  to  have  been  as  heavy  as  that
and  privates  killed  in  the  Catholic  army  of  their  antagonists,  but  no  registers  have
up  to  that  date  (which  he  does  not  give), been  preserved. 4i  Fleming,  580.

1604,  EQUATION  BETWEEN  THE  CONTENDING  POWERS.  203

CHAPTER  XLIV.

Equation  between  the  contending  powers — Treaty  of  peace  between  King  James
and  the  archdukes  and  the  King  of  Spain — Position  of  the  Provinces  —  States'
envoy  in  England  to  be  styled  ambassador —  Protest  of  the  Spanish  ambassador  —
Effect  of  James's  peace-treaty  on  the  people  of  England —  Public  rejoicings  for  the
victory  of  Sluys  —  Spinola  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  Spanish  forces  —
Preparations  for  a  campaign  against  the  States — Seizure  of  Dutch  cruisers  —
International  discord — Destiniction  of  Sarmiento's  fleet  by  Admiral  Haultain  —
Projected  enterprise  against  Antwerp — Descent  of  Spinola  on  the  Netherland
frontier  —  Oldenzaal  and  l,ingen  taken  —  Movements  of  Prince  Maurice — En-
counter of  the  two  armies — I'anic  of  the  Netherlanders  —  Consequt-nt  loss  and
disgrace  —  Wachtendonk  and  Cracow  taken  by  Spinola  —  Spinola's  reception  in
Spain  —  Effect  of  his  victories  —  Results  of  the  struggle  between  Freedom  and
Absolutism  —  Affairs  in  the  East —  Amboyna  taken  by  Van  der  Hagen  —  Contest
for  posse:?8ion  of  the  Clove  Islands  —  Commercial  treaty  between  the  States  and
the  King  of  Ternate — Hostilities  between  the  Kings  of  Ternate  and  Tydor  —
Expulsion  of  the  Portuguese  from  ihe  Moluccas  — Du  Terrail's  attempt<.'d  assault
on  Bergen-op-Zoom  —  Attack  on  the  Dunkirk  pirate  fleet  —  l*ractice  of  executing
prisoners  captured  at  sea.

I. HAVE  invited  the  reader's  attention  to  the  details  of
this  famous  siege  because  it  was  not  an  episode,  but
almost  the  sum  total,  of  the  great  war  during  the  period
occupied  by  its  events.  The  equation  between  the  con-
tending forces  indicated  the  necessity  of  peace.  That
equation  seemed  for  the  time  to  have  establislied  itself
over  all  Europe.  France  had  long  since  withdrawn
from  the  actual  strife,  and  kept  its  idle  thunders  in  a
concealed  although  ever  threatening  hand.  In  the  East
the  I'acha  of  Buda  had  become  Pacha  of  Pest.^  Even
Gran  was  soon  to  fall  before  the  Turk,  whose  advancing
horse-tails  might  thus  almost  be  descried  from  the  walls
of  Vienna."^  Stephen  Botschkay  meanwhile  had  made
himself  master  of  Transylvania,  concluded  peace  with
Ahmet,  and  laughed  at  the  Emperor  Kudolph  for  de-
nouncing him  as  a  rebel.^

Between  Spain  and  England  a  far  different  result  had
been  reached  than  the  one  foreshadowed  in  the  porten-
tous colloquies  between  King  James  and  Maximilian  de
Bethiine. Those conferences  hav6 been  purposely

A  Meteren,  502^».

»  Ibid.

s  Ibid.

204

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIV.

described  with  some  minuteness,  in  order  that  the
difference  often  existing  between  vast  projects  and
diametrically  opposed  and  very  insignificant  conclu-
sions might  once  more  be  exhibited.

In  the  summer  of  1603  it  had  been  firmly  but  mys-
teriously arranged  between  the  monarchs  of  France  and
Great  Britain  that  the  House  of  Austria  should  be
crushed,  its  territories  parcelled  out  at  the  discretion
of  those  two  potentates,  the  imperial  crown  taken  from
the  Habsburgs,  the  Spaniards  driven  out  of  the  Nether-
lands, an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive  made  with  the
Dutch  republic,  while  the  East  and  West  Indies  were
to  be  wrested  by  main  force  of  the  allies,  from  Spain,
whose  subjects  were  thenceforth  to  be  for  ever  excluded
from  those  lucrative  regions.  As  for  the  Jesuits,  who
were  to  James  as  loathsome  as  were  the  Puritans  to
Elizabeth,  the  British  sovereign  had  implored  the
ambassador  of  his  royal  brother,  almost  with  tears,  never
to  allow  that  pestilential  brood  to  regain  an  entrance
into  his  dominions.*

In  the  summer  of  1604  King  James  made  a  treaty  of
peace  and  amity  with  the  archdukes  and  with  the
monarch  of  Spain,  thus  extending  his  friendly  relations
with  the  doomed  house  of  Austria.  The  republic  of
the  Netherlands  was  left  to  fight  her  battles  alone  ;  her
imaginary  allies  looking  down  upon  the  struggle  with
benevolent  indifference.  As  for  the  Indies,  not  a
syllable  of  allusion  in  the  treaty  was  permitted  by
Spain  to  that  sacred  subject ;  the  ambassador  informing
the  British  Government  that  he  gave  them  access  to
twelve  kingdoms  and  two  seas,  while  Spain  acquired
by  the  treaty  access  only  to  two  kingdoms  and  one
sea.^  The  new  world,  however,  east  or  west,  from  the
Antilles  to  the  Moluccas,  was  the  private  and  indefea-
sible property  of  his  Catholic  Majesty.  On  religious
matters,  it  was  agreed  that  English  residents  in  Spain
should  not  be  compelled  to  go  to  mass,  but  that  they
should  kneel  in  the  street  to  the  Host  unless  they  could
get  out  of  the  way.^  In  regard  to  the  Netherlands,  it
was  agreed  by  the  two  contracting  powers  that  one
should  never  assist  the  rebels  or  enemies  of  the  other.

4  Sully,  V.  18.  5  Meteren,  500.

6  Treaty  in  Meteren,  uhi  sup.  Compare  Grotius,  xiii.  647,  648.

1604.

KING  JAMES'S  TREATY  WITH  SPAIK

205

With  regard  to  the  cities  and  fortresses  of  Brill,  Flush-
ing, Rammekens,  and  other  cautionary  places,  where
English  garrisons  were  maintained,  and  which  King
James  was  bound  according  to  the  contracts  of  Queen
Elizabeth  never  to  restore  except  to  those  who  had
pledged  them  to  the  English  crown — the  king  would
uphold  those  contracts.  He  would,  however,  endeavour
to  make  an  arrangement  with  the  States  by  which  tbey
should  agree  within  a  certain  period  to  make  their
peace  with  Spain.  Should  they  refuse  or  fail,  he  would
then  consider  himself  liberated  from  these  previous
engagements  and  free  to  act  concerning  those  cities  in
an  honourable  and  reasonable  manner,  as  became  a
friendly  king.''  Meantime  the  garrisons  should  not  in
any  way  assist  the  Hollanders  in  their  hostilities  with
Spain.^  English  subjects  were  forbidden  to  carry  into
Spain  or  the  obedient  Netherlands  any  property  or
merchandize  belonging  to  the  Hollanders,^  or  to  make
use  of  Dutch  vessels  in  their  trade  with  Spain. Both
parties  agreed  to  do  their  best  to  bring  about  a  pacifica-
tion in  the  Netherlands.

No  irony  certainly  could  be  more  exquisite  than  this
last-named  article.  This  was  the  end  of  that  magnifi-
cent conception,  the  great  Anglo-French  I.eague  against
the  house  of  Austria.  King  James  would  combine  his
efforts  with  King  Philip  to  pacify  the  Netherlands.
The  wolf  and  the  watch-dog  would  unite  to  bring  back
the  erring  flock  to  the  fold.  Meantime  James  would
keep  the  cautionary  towns  in  his  clutches,  not  permit-
ting their  garrisons  or  an}^  of  his  subjects  to  assist  the
rebels  on  sea  or  shore.  As  for  the  Jesuits,  their  trium-
phant re-appearance  in  France,  and  the  demolition  of
the  pyramid  raised  to  their  dishonour  on  the  site  of  the
house  where  John  Castel,  who  had  stabbed  Henry  IV.,
had  resided,  were  events  about  to  mark  the  opening
year.^^  Plainly  enough  Secretary  Cecil  had  out-gene-
ralled  the  French  party.

The  secret  treaty  of  Hampton  Court,  the  result  of  the
efforts  of  Rosny  and  Olden-Barneveld  in  July  of  the
previous  year,  was  not  likely  to  be  of  much  service  in
protecting  the  republic. James  meant  to  let  the  dead

"  Article  vii.  of  Treaty.

*o  Article  xviii.

»  Article  viii.  »  Article  xii-

11  Meteren,  502.

206

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

treaties  bury  their  dead,  to  live  in  peace  with  all  the
world,  and  to  marry  his  sons  and  daughters  to  Spanish
Infantes  and  Infantas.  Meantime,  although  he  had
sheathed  the  sword  which  Elizabeth  had  drawn  against
the  common  enemy,  and  had  no  idea  of  fighting  or
spending  money  for  the  States,  he  was  willing  that
their  diplomatic  agent  should  be  called  ambassador.
The  faithful  and  much  experienced  Noel  de  Caron
coveted  that  distinction,  and  moved  thereby  the  spleen
of  Henry's  envoy  at  the  Hague,  Buzanval,  who  probably
would  not  have  objected  to  the  title  himself.  'Twill
be  a  folly,"  he  said,  "  for  him  to  present  himself  on  the
pavement  as  a  prancing  steed,  and  then  be  treated  like
a  poor  hack.  He  has  been  too  long  employed  to  put
himself  in  such  a  plight.  But  there  are  lunatics  every-
where and  of  all  ages."

Never  had  the  Advocate  seemed  so  much  discouraged.
Ostend  had  fallen,  and  the  defection  of  the  British
sovereign  was  an  off-set  for  the  conquest  of  Sluys.  He
was  more  urgent  with  the  French  Government  for
assistance  than  he  had  ever  been  before.  "A  million
florins  a  year  from  France,"  he  said,  "joined  to  two
millions  raised  in  the  provinces,  would  enable  them  to
carry  on  the  war.  The  ship  was  in  good  condition,"  he
added,  "  and  fit  for  a  long  navigation  without  danger  of
shipwreck  if  there  were  only  biscuit  enough  on  board.-^^
Otherwise  she  was  lost.  Before  that  time  came  he
should  quit  the  helm  which  he  had  been  holding  the
more  resolutely  since  the  peace  of  Yervins  because  the
king  had  told  him,  when  concluding  it,  that  if  three
years'  respite  should  be  given  him  he  would  enter  into
the  game  afresh,  and  take  again  upon  his  shoulders  the
burthen  which  inevitable  necessity  had  made  him  throw
down.  But,"  added  Olden-Barneveld,  bitterly,  "  there
is  little  hope  of  it  now,  after  his  neglect  of  the  many
admirable  occasions  during  the  siege  of  Ostend."

So  soon  as  the  Spanish  ambassador  learned  that  Caron
was  to  be  accepted  into  the  same  diplomatic  rank  as  his
own,  he  made  an  infinite  disturbance,  protested  most

12  Buzanval  to  Villeroy,  in  Deventer,
iii.  1-9.  At  the  same  epoch  the  French
king  asked  Aerssens  if  he  too  was  to
have  the  rank  of  ambassador.  That

diplomatist  replied  that  he  hoped  not,
unless  his  salary  was  to  be  raised  at  the
same  time.— Ibid.  p.  24.
13  Ibid.  14  Meteren,  502.

1604.  STATES'  ENVOY  STYLED  AMBASSADOR.  207

loudly  and  passionately  to  the  king  at  the  indignity
done  to  his  master  by  this  concession  to  the  representa-
tive of  a  crew  of  traitors  and  rebels,  and  demanded  in
the  name  of  the  treaty  just  concluded  that  Caron
should  be  excluded  in  such  capacity  from  all  access  to
court.^^

As  James  was  nearly  forty  years  of  age,  as  the  Hol-
landers had  been  rebels  ever  since  he  was  born,  and  as
the  King  of  Spain  had  exercised  no  sovereignty  over
them  within  his  memory,  this  was  naturally  asking  too
much  of  him  in  the  name  of  his  new-born  alliance  with
Spain.  So  he  assumed  a  position  of  great  dignity,  not-
withstanding the  Constable's  clamour,  and  declared  his
purpose  to  give  audience  to  the  agents  of  the  States  by
whatever  title  they  presented  themselves  before  him.
In  so  doing  he  followed  the  example,  he  said,  of  others
who  (a  strange  admission  on  his  part)  were  as  wise  as
himself.  It  was  not  for  him  to  censiue  the  crimes  and
faults  of  the  States,  if  such  they  had  committed.  He
had  not  been  the  cause  of  their  revolt  from  Spanish
authority,  and  it  was  quite  sufficient  that  he  had  stipu-
lated to  maintain  neutrality  between  the  two  belli-
gerents.^^ And  with  this  the  ambassador  of  his  Catholic
Majesty,  having  obtained  the  substance  of  a  very  advan-
tageous treaty,  was  fain  to  abandon  opposition  to  the
shadowy  title  by  which  James  sought  to  indemnify  the
republic  for  his  perfidy."

15  Meteren  501.  i*  Ibid.

17  At  the  same  time  the  n^publican
agent,  although  recognised  as  ambassador,
received  but  slender  encouragement  in  his
interviews  with  the  British  sovereign.
"  AVhen  I  tell  those  on  the  other  side,"
said  James,  "  that  you  are  not  ready  to
treat  with  them,  they  will  say  that  all
w  ars  must  sooner  or  later  come  to  tm  end.
What  reply  shall  1  make  to  that  ?  "

"  Say  that  the  king  has  long  ago  for-
feited all  right  to  these  provinces,"  an-
swered Caron;  "that  the  sovereignty
according  to  law  has  fallen  into  the
bosom  of  my  lords  the  States ;  that  the
Spaniard,  having  usurped  so  many  other
countries  in  the  world,  might  leave  us  this
little  bit  for  the  sake  of  living  in  peace."

James  replied  that  kings  never  wil-
ingly  gave  up  their  provinces. "  And

the  Netherlands  are  no  longer  the  king's
to  give  up,"  returned  the  ambassador.
His  majesty  expressed  his  intention,  how-
ever, to  do  nothing  more  in  the  matter.
He  should  maintain  strict  neutrality.  At
the  same  time,  with  amusing  inconsist-
ency, he  warmly  recognised  the  identity
of  the  Dutch  cause  with  his  own.  "  Jn
your  preservation,  lies  my  own  interesf
Your  ruin  would  be  my  great  loss,
llather  than  it  should  go  so  far  1  will
venture  my  own  person  and  all  that  God
has  given  me  in  this  world,  but  1  trust
that  God  will  never  let  it  come  so  far  as
this.  As  to  the  iissistance  you  ask  of  me,
God  is  my  witness  if  it  be  not  my  wish
that  1  were  able  to  grant  it,  but  1  have
told  you  many  times  that  1  was  princi-
pally moved  to  make  peace  by  my  neces-
sities." This

208

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIV.

The  treaty  of  peace  with  Spain  gave  no  pleasure  to
the  English  public.  There  was  immense  enthusiasm  in
London  at  the  almost  simultaneous  fall  of  Sluys,  but  it
\vas  impossible  for  the  court  to  bring  about  a  popular
demonstration  of  sympathy  with  the  abandonment  of
the  old  ally  and  the  new-born  affection  for  the  ancient
enemy.  I  can  assure  your  mightinesses,"  wrote
Caron;  "  that  no  promulgation  was  ever  received  in
London  with  more  coolness,  yes — with  more  sadness.
No  mortal  has  shown  the  least  satisfaction  in  words
or  deeds,  but,  on  the  contrary,  people  have  cried  out
openly,  '  God  save  our  good  neighbours  the  States  of
Holland  and  Zeeland,  and  grant  them  victory ! '  On
Sunday,  almost  all  the  preachers  gave  thanks  from  their
pulpits  for  the  victory  which  their  good  neighbours
had  gained  at  Sluys,  but  would  not  say  a  word  about
the  peace.  The  people  were  admonished  to  make
bonfires,  but  you  may  be  very  sure  not  a  bonfire  was
to  be  seen.  But,  in  honour  of  the  victory,  all  the
vessels  in  St.  Catharine's  Docks  fired  salutes  at  which
the  Spaniards  were  like  to  burst  with  spite.  The  Eng-
lish clap  their  hands  and  throw  their  caps  in  the  air
when  they  hear  anything  published  favourable  to  us,
but,  it  must  be  confessed,  they  are  now  taking  very
dismal  views  of  afiairs. Voxpopuli  vox  DeiJ'

This  statement  of  the  king's  financial  have  broKen  witli  him.  Not  only  I  shonld

plight  might  be  true  enough.  It  is  certain  have  done  my  best  to  help  you,  but  I

that  in  order  to  obtain  the  means  to  make  should  have  plunged  into  the  fight  at  the

decent  provision  for  the  household  at  his  risk  of  life  and  property."

accession  it  had  been  necessary  to  send  These  were  brave  words. The  very

jewelry  and  other  valuable  effects  to  near  future  was,  however,  to  show  whe-

Amsterdam  as  a  pledge  for  a  secret  loan  ther  the  British  king  would  feel  the  out-

of  25,000i. But  there  were  graver  and  rages  of  Spain  against  himself  as  deeply

far  more  dangerous  causes  at  work  in  the  as  he  now  resented  the  injuries  of  the

English  court  to  affect  a  pacification  and  same  power  to  his  brother  Henry.  It  was

even  an  alliance  with  Spain,  than  a  tem-  soon  obvious  enough  that  the  most  to  be

I)orary  financial  embarrassment.  hoped  of  England  was  that  she  would  not

It  could  also  scarcely  console  the  States'  interfere  to  prevent  such  assistance  as

envoy  to  be  told  that  in  case  of  uttermost  France  might  be  willing  to  grant  to  the

need  the  king  meant  to  lay  down  his  life  republic,  James  becoming  more  and  more

for  the  republic. The  spectacle  of  James  besotted  with  the  idea  of  an  alliance  with

leading  a  forlorn  hope  against  Spain  was  Spain. A  few  months  later  Eosny  told

not  an  inspiring  one,  especially  as  the  Aerssens  that  flie  King  of  Spain  found

martial  sovereign  of  France  had  turned  quite  as  much  favour  at  the  English  court

his  face  away  from  his  old  friends.  "  Had  as  he  did  with  the  Duke  of  Savoy.  See

the  Spaniard  given  me  as  much  cause  of  Deventer,  iii.  10-14,  15,  4C.

quarrel  as  he  has  to  the  most  Christian  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  457.
king,"  said  James,  "1  should  certainly

1604.

ItEJOICINGS  FOR  THE  VICTORY  AT  SLUYS.

209

The  rejoicing  in  Paris  was  scarcely  less  enthusiastic
or  apparently  less  sincere  than  in  London.  "  The  news
of  the  surrender  of  Sluys,"  wrote  Aerssens,  "  is  received
with  so  much  joy  by  small  and  great  that  one  would
have  said  it  was  their  own  exploit.  His  Majesty  has
made  such  demonstrations  in  his  actions  and  discourse
that  he  has  not  only  been  advised  by  his  council  to
dissemble  in  the  matter,  but  has  undergone  reproaches
from  the  pope's  nuncius  of  having  made  a  league  with
your  Mightinesses  to  the  prejudice  of  the  King  of  Spain.
His  Majesty  wishes  your  Mightinesses  prosperity  with
all  his  heart,  yea  so  that  he  would  rather  lose  his  right
arm  than  see  your  Mightinesses  in  danger.  Be  assured
that  he  means  roundly,  and  we  should  pray  God  for
his  long  life ;  for  I  don't  see  that  we  can  expect  any-
thing from  these  regions  after  his  death."

It  was  ere  long  to  be  seen,  however,  roundly  as  the
king  meant  it,  that  the  republic  was  to  come  into  grave
peril  without  causing  him  to  lose  his  right  arm,  or
even  to  wag  his  finger,  save  in  reproach  of  their
Mightinesses.

The  republic,  being  thus  left  to  fight  its  battles  alone,
girded  its  loins  anew  for  the*  ccmflict.  During  the
remainder  of  the  year  1604,  however,  there  were  no
military  operations  of  consequence.  Both  belligerents
needed  a  brief  repose.  The  siege  of  Ostend  had  not
been  a  siege.  It  was  a  long  pitched  battle  between
the  new  system  and  the  old,  between  absolutism  and
the  spirit  of  religious,  political,  and  mercantile  freedom.
Absolutism  had  gained  the  lists  on  which  the  long  duel
had  been  fought,  but  the  republic  had  meantime  ex-
changed that  war-blasted  spot  for  a  valuable  and
commodious  position.  It  was  certainly  an  advantage,
as  hostilities  were  necessarily  to  have  continued  some-
where during  all  that  period,  that  all  the  bloodshed
and  desolation  had  been  concentrated  upon  one  insigni-
ficant locality,  and  one  more  contiguous  to  the  enemy's
possessions  than  to  those  of  the  united  States.  Jt  was
very  doubtful,  however,  whether  all  that  money  and
blood  might  not  have  been  expended  in  some  other
oianner  more  beneficial  to  the  cause  of  the  archdukes.

VOL.  IV.

i»  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  453.

P

210

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

At  least  it  could  liardly  be  maintained  that  they  took
anything  by  the  capitulation  of  Ostend  but  the  most
barren  and  worthless  of  trophies.  Eleven  old  guns,
partly  broken,  and  a  small  quantity  of  ammunition,
were  all  the  spoils  of  war  found  in  the  city  after  its
surrender.

The  Marquis  Spinola  went  to  Spain.  On  passing
through  Paris  he  was  received  with  immense  enthu-
siasm by  Henry  IV.,  whose  friendship  for  the  States,
and  whose  desperate  designs  against  the  house  of
Austria,  did  not  prevent  him  from  warmly  congratulat-
ing the  great  Spanish  general  on  his  victory.  It  was  a
victory,  said  Henry,  which  he  could  himself  have  never
achieved,  and,  in  recognition  of  so  great  a  triumph,  he
presented  Spinola  with  a  beautiful  Thracian  horse,
valued  at  twelve  hundred  ducats.^*^  Arriving  in  Spain,
the  conqueror  found  himself  at  once  the  object  of  the
open  applause  and  the  scarcely  concealed  hati  ed  of  the
courtiers  and  politicians.  He  ardently  desired  to  re-
ceive as  his  guerdon  the  rank  of  grandee  of  Spain.  He
met  with  a  refusal.^^  To  keep  his  hat  on  his  head  in
presence  of  the  sovereign  was  the  highest  possible  re-
ward. Should  that  be  bestowed  upon  him  now,  ui  ged
Lerma,  what  possible  recompense  could  be  imagined  for
the  great  services  which  all  felt  confident  that  he  was
about  to  render  in  the  future  ?  He  must  continue  to  re-
move his  hat  in  the  monarch's  company.  Meantime,  if
he  wished  the  title  of  prince,  with  considerable  revenues
attached  to  his  principality,  this  was  at  his  disposal.^^
It  must  be  confessed  that  in  a  monarchy  where  the  sen-
timent of  honour  was  supposed  to  be  the  foundation  of
the  whole  structure,  there  is  something  chivalrous  and
stimulating  to  the  imagination  in  this  preference  by  the
great  general  of  a  shadowy  but  rare  distinction  to  more
substantial  acquisitions.  Nevertheless,  as  the  grandee-
ship  was  refused,  it  is  not  recorded  that  he  was  dis-
pleased with  the  principality.  Meantime  there  was  a
very  busy  intrigue  to  deprive  him  of  the  command-in-
chief  of  the  Catholic  forces  in  Flanders,  and  one  so
nearly  successful  that  Mexia,  governor  of  Antwerp
citadel,  was  actually  appointed  in  Spinola's  stead.  It
was  only  after  long  and  anxious  conferences  at  Yalla-

20  Gallucci,  ii.  194.  21  Jbjd  200  22  Gallucci,  ii.  194-202.

1605. SPINOLA'S  PREPARATIONS  FOR  A  CAMPAIGN.  211

dolid  with  the  king  and  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  and  after
repeated  statements  in  letters  from  the  archdukes  that
all  their  hopes  of  victory  depended  on  retaining  the
Genoese  commander-in-chief,  that  the  matter  was  finally
arranged.  Mexia  received  an  annual  pension  of  eight
thousand  ducats,  and  to  Spinola  was  assigned  five  hun-
dred ducats  monthly,  as  commander-in-chief  under  the
archduke,  with  an  equal  salary  as  agent  for  the  king's
affairs  in  Flanders .^^

Early  in  the  spring  he  returned  to  Brussels,  having
made  fresh  preparations  for  the  new  campaign  in  which
he  was  to  measure  himself  before  the  world  against
Maurice  of  Nassau.

Spinola  had  removed  the  thorn  from  the  Belgic  lion's
foot:  Ostendae  erasit  fatalis  Spinola  spinam."^*  And
although  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  relief  was  as
thorough  as  had  been  hoped,  3^et  a  freedom  of  movement
had  unquestionably  been  gained.  There  was  now  at
least  what  for  a  long  time  had  not  existed,  a  possibility
for  imagining  some  new  and  perha})s  more  effect ive
course  of  campaigning.  The  young  Genoese  commander-
in-chief  retunied  from  Spain  early  in  May,  with  the
Golden  Fleece  around  his  neck,  and  with  full  powers
from  the  Catholic  king  to  lay  out  his  work,  subject  only
to  the  approbation  of  the  archduke.  It  was  not  probable
that  Albert,  who  now  thoroughly  admii-ed  and  leaned
upon  the  man  of  whom  he  had  for  a  time  been  disposed
to  be  jealous,  would  interfere  with  his  liberty  of  action.
There  had  also  been — thanks  to  Spinola's  influence  with
the  cabinet  at  Madrid  and  the  merchants  of  Genoa —
much  more  energy  in  recruiting  and  in  providing  the
necessary  sinews  of  war.  Moreover  it  had  been  resolved
to  make  the  experiment  of  sending  some  of  the  new
levies  by  sea,  instead  of  subjecting  them  all  to  the  long
and  painful  overland  march  through  Spain,  Italy,  and
Germany.'^^  A  terzo  of  infantiy  was  on  its  way  from
Naples,  and  two  more  were  expected  from  Milan,  but  it
was  decided  that  the  Spanish  troops  should  be  embarked
on  board  a  fleet  of  transports,  mainly  German  and  Eng-
lish, and  thus  carried  to  the  shores  of  the  obedient
Netherlands.'^'^

M  Gallucci,  ii.  194-202. 24  ibid.  182. 25  Grotius,  xiv.  658,  659. Moteren,  516^».
«6  Ibid.

P  2

212

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIV.

The  States-General  got  wind  of  these  intentions,  and
set  Yice-Admiral  Haultain  upon  the  watch  to  defeat  the
scheme.  That  well-seasoned  mariner  accordingly,  with
a  snfiicient  fleet  of  war-galleots,  cruised  thenceforth
with  great  assiduity  in  the  chops  of  the  channel.  Al-
ready the  late  treaty  between  Spain  and  England  had
borne  fruits  of  bitterness  to  the  republic.  The  Spanish
policy  had  for  the  time  completely  triumphed  in  the
council  of  James.  It  was  not  surprising  therefore  that
the  partisans  of  that  policy  should  occasionally  indulge
in  manifestations  of  malevolence  towards  the  upstart
little  commonwealth  which  had  presumed  to  enter  into
commercial  rivalry  with  the  British  realm,  and  to  as-
sert a  place  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  An  order
had  just  been  issued  by  the  English  Government  that
n(jne  of  its  subjects  should  engage  in  the  naval  service
of  any  foreign  power.  This  decree  was  a  kind  of  corol-
lary to  the  Spanish  treaty,  was  levelled  directly  against
the  Hollanders,  and  became  the  pretext  of  intolerable
arrogance,  both  towards  their  merchantmen  and  their
lesser  war-vessels.  Admiral  Monson,  an  especial  parti-
san of  Spain,  was  indefatigable  in  exercising  the  right
he  claimed  of  visiting  foreign  vessels  off  the  English
coast,  in  search  of  English  sailors  violating  the  procla-
mation of  neutrality.  On  repeated  occasions  prizes
taken  by  Dutch  cruisers  from  the  Spaniards,  and  making
their  way  with  small  prize  crews  to  the  ports  of  the
republic,  were  overhauled,  visited,  and  seized  by  the
English  admiral,  who  brought  the  vessels  into  the  har-
bours of  his  own  country,  liberated  the  crews,  and
handed  ships  and  cargoes  over  to  the  Spanish  ambas-
sador.^^ Thus  prizes  fairly  gained  by  nautical  skill  and
hard  fighting,  off  Spain,  Portugal,  Brazil,  or  even  more
distant  parts  of  the  world,  were  confiscated  almost  in
sight  of  port,  in  utter  disregaid  of  public  law  or  inter-
national decency.  The  States-General  remonstrated
with  bitterness.  Their  remonstrances  were  answered
by  copious  arguments,  proving,  of  course,  to  the  entire
sat  isfaction  of  the  party  who  had  done  the  wrong,  that  no
practice  could  be  more  completely  in  harmony  with
reason  and  justice.  Meantime  the  Spanish  ambassador
sold  the  prizes,  and  appropriated  the  proceeds  towards

27  Grotius,  xiv.  658,  659. Meteren,  518^o,

1605.

INTERNATIONAL  DISCORD.

213

carrying  on  the  war  against  the  republic  ;  the  Dutch
sailors,  thus  set  ashore  against  their  will  and  against
law  on  the  neutral  coast  of  England,  being  left  to  get
home  as  they  could,  or  to  starve  if  they  could  do  no
better.  As  for  the  States,  they  had  the  legal  arguments
of  their  late  ally  to  console  them  for  the  loss  of  their
ships.

Simultaneously  with  these  events  considerable  levies
of  troops  were  made  in  England  by  the  archduke,  in
spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  Dutch  ambassador  to  pre-
vent this  one-sided  neutrality while  at  the  other  ends
of  the  world  mercantile  jealousy  in  both  the  Indies  was
fast  combining  with  other  causes  already  rife  to  increase
the  international  discord.  Out  of  all  this  fuel  it  was
fated  that  a  blaze  of  hatred  between  the  two  leading
powers  of  the  new  era,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
United  Republic,  should  one  day  burst  forth,  which
was  to  be  fanned  by  passion,  prejudice,  and  a  mistaken
sentiment  of  patriotism  and  self-interest  on  both  sides,
and  which  not  all  the  bloodshed  of  more  than  one  fierce
war  tjould  quench.  The  traces  of  this  savage  sentiment
are  burnt  deeply  into  the  literature,  language,  and  tra-
ditions of  both  countries,  and  it  is  strange  enough  that
the  epoch  at  which  chronic  wrangling  and  international
coolness  changed  into  furious  antipathy  between  the
two  great  Protestant  powers  of  Europe — for  great  they
already  both  were,  despite  the  paucity  of  their  popula-
tion and  resources,  as  compared  with  nations  which
were  less  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  the  age  or  had  less
aptness  in  obeying  its  impulse — should  be  dated  from
the  famous  year  of  Guy  Fawkes.

jVIeantime  the  Spanish  troops,  embarked  in  eight
merchant  ships  and  a  few  pinnaces,  were  slowly  ap-
proaching their  destination.  They  had  been  instructed,
in  case  they  found  it  impracticable  to  enter  a  Flemish
port,  to  make  for  the  hospitable  shores  of  England,  the
Spanish  ambassador  and  those  whom  he  had  bribed  at
the  court  of  James  having  already  provided  for  their
protection.'"^^ Ofi'  Dover  Admiral  llaultain  got  sight  of

28  Meteren,  518.  lias  litore  Britannite  oram  adiret  tutum

29  "  Quorum  omnium  curam  Petrus  ibi  hospitiura  ope  legati  Hfcspanici  et  quos
Cubiara  ace;  perat  hoc  inter  ca-tera  man-  ille  Britannonmi  donis  emerat  habiturufl."
fia*/»  ut  si  Flandria  negaretur  vitato  Gal-  — Grot.  xiv.  65-<.

214

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

Sarmiento's  little  fleet.  He  mafle  short  work  with  it.
Faithfully  carrying  out  the  strenuous  orders  of  the
States-General,  he  captured  some  of  the  ships,  burned
one,  and  ran  others  aground  after  a  very  brief  resistance.
Some  of  the  soldiers  and  crews  were  picked  up  by
English  vessels  cruising  in  the  neighbourhood  and
narrowly  watching  the  conflict.  A  few  stragglers  es-
caped by  swimming,  but  by  far  the  greater  proportion
of  the  newly-arrived  troops  were  taken  prisoners,  tied
together  two  and  two,  and  then,  at  a  given  signal  from
the  admiral's  ship,  tossed  into  the  sea.^^

Not  Peter  Titelmann,  nor  Julian  Komero,  nor  the
Duke  of  Alva  himself,  ever  manifested  greater  alacrity
in  wholesale  murder  than  was  shown  by  this  admiral
of  the  young  republic  in  fulfilling  the  savage  decrees  of
the  States-General.^^

Thus  at  least  one-half  of  the  legion  perished.  The
pursuit  of  the  ships  was  continued  within  English
waters,  when  the  guns  of  Dover  Castle  opened  vigor-
ously upon  the  recent  allies  of  England,  in  order  to  pro-
tect her  newly-found  friends  in  their  sore  distress.
Doubtless  in  the  fervour  of  the  work  the  Dutch  admiral
had  violated  the  neutral  coast  of  England,  so  that  the
cannonade  from  the  castle  was  technically  justified.  It
was  however  a  biting  satire  upon  the  proposed  Protes-
tant league  against  Spain  and  universal  monarchy  in
behalf  of  the  Dutch  republic,  that  England  was  already
doing  her  best  to  save  a  Spanish  legion  and  to  sink  a
Dutch  fleet.  The  infraction  of  English  sovereignty  was
unquestionable  if  judged  by  the  more  scrupulous  theory
of  modern  days,  but  it  was  well  remarked  by  the  States-
General,  in  answer  to  the  remonstrances  of  James's
Government,  that  the  Dutch  admiral,  knowing  that  the
pirates  of  Dunkirk  roamed  at  will  through  English
waters  in  search  of  their  prey,  might  have  hoped  for

30  Grotius,  xiv.  658.  Meteren,  uhi  sup.  and  captured  not  in  war-vessels  but  in
Wagenaar,  ix.  186.  mercantile  and  neutral  transports,  was  a

31  Certainly  it  must  be  admitted  that  barbarity  which  seems  incredible  to  us,
the  world  makes  some  little  progress  in  but  which,  in  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
civilization.  To  exterminate  unorganized  teenth  century,  was  not  rebuked  by  the
and  irresponsible  bands  of  brigands  dis-  most  gentle  and  enlightened  spirits  of
gracing  the  name  of  soldiers,  may  still  be  the  age.

inevitable  in  the  interest  of  humanity.  This  whole  story  is  minutely  related  by

but  that  regular  troops  should  be  de-  the  illustrious  Hugo  Grotius,  without  a

&troyed  in  sold  blood,  because  embarked  syllable  of  censure. Hist.  xiv.  657,  65S.

1605.

GROWTH  OF  DUTCH  COMMERCE.

215

some  indulgence  of  a  similar  character  to  the  ships  of
the  republic.^^

Thus  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Spanish  legion  perished.
The  soldiers  who  escaped  to  the  English  coast  passed
the  winter  miserabl}'  in  huts,  which  they  were  allowed
to  construct  on  the  sands,  but  nearly  all,  including  the
lieutenant-colonel  commanding,  Pedro  Cubiera,  died  of
famine  or  of  wounds.  A  few  small  vessels  of  the  expe-
dition succeeded  in  reaching  the  Flemish  coast,  and
landing  a  slight  portion  of  the  terzo.^^

The  campaign  of  1605  opened  but  languidly.  The
strain  upon  the  resources  of  the  Netherlands,  thus  un-
aided, was  becoming  severe,  although  there  is  no  doubt
that,  as  the  India  traffic  slowly  developed  itself,  the  pro-
ductive force  of  the  commonwealth  visibly  increased,
while  the  thrifty  habits  of  its  citizens,  and  their  com-
parative abstinence  from  unproductive  consumption,
still  enabled  it  to  bear  the  tremendous  burthen  of  the
war.  A  new  branch  of  domestic  industry  had  grown
out  of  the  India  tiade,  great  quantities  of  raw  silk
being  now  annually  imported  from  the  East  into  Hol-
land, to  be  wrought  into  brocades,  tapestries,  damasks,
velvets,  satins,  and  other  luxurious  fabrics  for  European
consumption.^^  It  is  a  curious  phenomenon  in  the  his-
tory of  industry  that  while  at  this  epoch  Holland  was
the  chief  seat  of  silk  manufactures,  the  great  financier  of
Henry  IV.  was  congratulating  his  sovereign  and  himself
that  natural  causes  had  for  ever  prevented  the  culture  or
manufacture  of  silk  in  France.^  If  such  an  industry
were  possible,  he  was  sure  that  the  decline  of  martial
spirit  in  France  and  an  eternal  dearth  of  good  French
soldiers  would  be  inevitable,  and  he  even  urged  that
the  importation  of  such  luxurious  fabrics  should  bo
sternly  prohibited,  in  order  to  preserve  the  moral  health
of  the  people. The  practical  Hollanders  were  more  in-
clined to  leave  silk  farthingales  and  brocaded  petticoats
to  be  dealt  with  by  thunderers  from  the  pulpit  or  indig-
nant fathers  of  families.  Meantime  the  States-General
felt  instinctively  that  the  little  commonwealth  grew

3^  Grotius,  xvi.  659.  more  than  one  hundred  men  in  the  Dutch

3S  Grotius,  Meteren,  abi  sup. Wage-  fleet  were  killed  by  the  Dover  cannorv

naar,  ix.  184-187. Winwood,  ii.  82;  who 34  Meteren,  536.

was  informed  by  Lord  Salisbury  that »5  Sully,  v.  77-79,  ttqq. »  Jbid.

216

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap  XLIV.

richer,  the  more  useful  or  agreeable  things  its  burghers
could  call  into  existence  out  of  nothingness,  to  be  ex-
changed for  the  powder  and  bullets,  timber  and  cordage,
requisite  for  its  eternal  fight  with  universal  monarchy,
and  that  the  richer  the  burghers  grew  the  more  capable
they  were  of  paying  their  taxes.  It  was  not  the  fault  of
the  States  that  the  insane  ambition  of  Spain  and  the
archdukes  compelled  them  to  exhaust  themselves  annu-
ally by  the  most  unproductive  consumption  that  man  is
ever  likely  to  devise,  that  of  scientifically  slaughtering
his  brethren,  because  to  practise  economy  in  that  regard
would  be  to  cease  to  exist,  or  to  accept  the  most  intoler-
able form  of  slavery.

The  forces  put  into  the  field  in  the  spring  of  1605  were
but  meagre.  There  was  also,  as  usual,  much  difference
of  opinion  between  Maurice  and  Barneveld  as  to  the
most  judicious  manner  of  employing  them,  and  as  usual
the  docile  stadholder  submitted  his  better  judgment
to  the  States.^^  It  can  hardly  be  too  much  insisted
upon  that  the  high-born  Maurice  always  deported  him-
self in  fact,  and  as  it  were  unconsciously,  as  the  citizen
soldier  of  a  little  republic,  even  while  personally  in-
vested with  many  of  the  attributes  of  exalted  rank,  and
even  while  regarded  by  many  of  his  leading  fellow-
citizens  as  the  legitimate  and  predestined  sovereign  of
the  newly-born  state.

Early  in  the  spring  a  great  enterprise  against  Antwerp
was  projected.  It  failed  utterly,  Maurice,  at  Bergen-
op-Zoom,  despatched  seven  thousand  troops  up  the
Scheld,  under  command  of  Ernest  Casimir.  The  flo-
tilla was  a  long  time  getting  under  weigh,  and  instead
of  effecting  a  surprise,  the  army,  on  reaching  the  walls  of
Antwerp,  found  the  burghers  and  garrison  not  in  the
least  astonished,  but  on  the  contrary  entirely  prepared.
Ernest  returned  after  a  few  insignificant  skirmishes,
having  accomplished  nothing.^^

Maurice  next  spent  a  few  days  in  reducing  the  castle
of  Wouda,  not  far  from  Bergen,  and  then,  transporting
his  army  once  more  to  the  isle  of  Cadzand,  he  established
his  headquarters  at  Watervliet,  near  Ysendyke.  Spinola
followed  him,  having  thrown  a  bridge  across  the  Scheld.

37  Van  der  Kemp,  il  113. 38  ibid.  113,  114. Grotius,  xiv.  656,  657. Meteren,  6X8.

1605.

MOVEMENTS  OF  SPIXOLA.

217

Maurice  was  disposed  to  reduce  a  fort,  well  called  Pa-
tience,^^  lyi^g  over  against  the  isle  of  ^\  alcheren.  Spi-
nola  took  up  a  position  by  which  he  defended  the  place
as  with  an  impenetrable  buckler.  A  game  of  skill  now
began  between  these  two  adepts  in  the  art  of  war,  for
already  the  volunteer  had  taken  rank  among  the  highest
professors  of  the  new  school.  It  was  the  object  of  Mau-
rice, who  knew  himself  on  the  whole  outnumbered,  to
divine  his  adversary's  intentions.  Spinola  was  sup-
posed to  be  aiming  at  Sluys,  at  Grave,  at  Bergen- op-
Zoom,  possibly  even  at  some  more  remote  city,  like
Eheinberg,  while  rumours  as  to  his  designs,  flying  di-
rectly from  his  camp,  were  as  thick  as  birds  in  the  air.
They  were  let  loose  on  purpose  by  the  artful  Genoese,
who  all  the  time  had  a  distinct  and  definite  plan  which
was  not  yet  suspected.  The  dilatoriness  of  the  cam-
paign was  exasperating.  It  might  be  thought  that  the
war  was  to  last  another  half  centuiy,  from  the  exces-
sive inertness  of  both  parties.  The  armies  had  all  gone
into  winter  quarters  in  the  previous  November,  Spinola
had  spent  nearly  six  months  in  Spain,  Midsummer  had
come  and  gone,  and  still  Maurice  was  at  \\'atervliet,
guessing  at  his  adversary's  first  move.  On  the  whole,
he  had  inclined  to  suspect  a  design  upon  Kheinberg,
and  had  accordingly  sent  his  brother  Henry  with  a  de-
tachment to  strengthen  the  garrison  of  that  place.  On
the  1st  of  August  however  he  learned  that  Spinola  had
crossed  the  Meuse  and  the  Khine,  with  ten  thousand
foot  and  three  thousand  horse,  and  that  leaving  Count
Bucquoy  with  six  thousand  foot  and  one  thousand  five
hundred  horse  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Khine,  to
guard  a  couple  of  redoubts  which  had  been  constructed
for  a  basis  at  Kaiserswerth,  he  was  marching  with  all
possible  despatch  towards  Friesland  and  Groningen.^

The  Catholic  general  had  concealed  his  design  in  a
masterly  manner.  He  had  detained  ]\Iaurice  in
the  isle  of  Cadzand,  the  States  still  dreaming  of
a  victorious  invasion  on  their  part  of  obedient  Flanders,
and  the  stadholder  hesitating  to  quit  his  position  of
inactive  observation,  lest  the  moment  his  back  was
turned  the  rapid  Spinola  might  whirl  down  upon  Sluys,

Grotius,  swp.  •*<>  Bentivoglio.  iii.  533,  534.  Meteren,  521,  522.  Grotiua
xiv.  660,  661. Von  dcr  Kemp,  ii.  114,  115,  and  notes.

218

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIV.

that  most  precious  and  skilfully  acquired  possession  of
the  republic,  when  lo !  his  formidable  antagonist  was
marching  in  force  upon  what  the  prince  well  knew  to
be  her  most  important  and  least  guarded  frontier.

On  the  8th  August  the  Catholic  general  was  before
8  Aug  Oldenzaal,  which  he  took  in  three  days,  and
then  advanced  to  Lingen.  Should  that  place
fall — and  the  city  was  known  to  be  most  inadequately
garrisoned  and  supplied — it  would  be  easy  for  the  foe  to
reduce  Coeworden,  and  so  seize  the  famous  pass  over
the  Bourtanger  Morass,  march  straight  to  Embden — then
in  a  state  of  municipal  revolution  on  account  of  the
chronic  feuds  between  its  counts  and  the  population,
and  therefore  an  easy  prey — after  which  all  Friesland
and  Groningen  would  be  at  his  mercy,  and  his  road  open
to  Holland  and  Utrecht ;  in  short,  into  the  very  bowels
of  the  republic.

On  the  4th  August  Maurice  broke  up  his  camp  in
Flanders,  and  leaving  five  thousand  men  under  Colonel
van  der  Noot,  to  guard  the  positions  there,  advanced
rapidly  to  Dev enter,  with  the  intention  of  saving  Lin-
gen. It  was  too  late.  That  very  important  place  had
been  culpably  neglected.  The  garrison  consisted  of  but
one  cannoneer,  and  he  had  but  one  arm.^^  A  burgher
guard,  numbering  about  three  hundred,  made  such  re-
sistance as  they  could,  and  the  one-armed  warrior  fired  a
shot  or  two  from  a  rusty  old  demi-cannon.  Such  oppo-
sition to  the  accomplished  Italian  was  naturally  not
very  effective.  On  the  18th  August  the  place  capitu-
lated.^^ Maurice,  arriving  at  Deventer,  and  being  now
18  Au  strengthened  by  his  cousin  Lewis  William
with  such  garrison  troops  as  could  be  col-
lected, learned  the  mortifying  news  with  sentiments
almost  akin  to  despair.  It  was  now  to  be  a  race  for
Coeworden,  and  the  fleet-footed  Spinola  was  a  day's
march  at  least  in  advance  of  his  competitor.  The  key
to  the  fatal  morass  would  soon  be  in  his  hands.  To  the
inexpressible  joy  of  the  stadholder,  the  Genoese  seemed
suddenly  struck  with  blindness.  The  prize  was  almost
in  his  hands  and  he  threw  away  all  his  advantages.
Instead  of  darting  at  once  upon  Coeworden  he  paused

*i  Meteren,  ubi  sup.  *2  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  Meteren,  Van  der  Kemp,  ubi  sup.

1605. MAURICE  ATTACKS  THE  SPANISH  ARMY.  219

for  nearly  a  month,  during  which  period  he  seemed
intoxicated  with  a  success  so  rapidly  achieved,  ^^g^p^
and  especially  with  his  adroitness  in  outwitting
the  great  stadholder.*^  On  the  14th  September  he  made
a  retrograde  movement  towards  the  Khine,  leaving  two
thousand  five  hundred  men  in  Lingen.  Maurice,  giv-
ing profound  thanks  to  God  for  his  enemy's  infatua-
tion, passed  by  Lingen,  and  having  now,  with  his
cousin's  reinforcements,  a  force  of  nine  thousand  foot
and  three  thousand  horse,  threw  himself  into  Coewor-
den,  strengthened  and  garrisoned  that  vital  fortress
which  Spinola  would  perhaps  have  taken  as  easily  as
he  had  doue  Lingen,  made  all  the  neighbour-  ^4  sept
ing  positions  secure,  and  then  fell  back  towards
Wesel  on  the  Khine,  in  order  to  watch  his  antagonist.*^
Spinola  had  established  his  headquarters  at  Euhrort,  a
place  where  the  river  Kuhr  empties  into  the  Rhine.  He
had  yielded  to  the  remonstrances  of  the  Archbishop  of
Cologne,  to  whom  Kaiserswerth  belonged,  and  had  aban-
doned the  forts  which  Bucquoy,  under  his  directions,
had  constructed  at  that  place.*^

The  two  armies  now  gazed  at  each  other,  at  a  respect-
ful distance,  for  a  fortnight  longer,  neither  commander
apparently  having  any  very  definite  purpose.  At  last,
Maurice  having  well  reconnoitred  his  enemy,  perceived
a  weak  point  in  his  extended  lines.  A  considerable
force  of  Italian  cavalry,  with  some  infantry,  was  sta-
tioned at  the  village  of  Mulheim,  on  the  Ruhr,  and
apparently  out  of  convenient  supporting  distance  from
Spinola's  main  army.  The  stadholder  determined  to
deliver  a  sudden  blow  upon  this  tender  spot,  break
through  the  lines,  and  bring  on  a  general  action  by
surprise.  Assembling  his  well-seasoned  and  veteran
troopers  in  force,  he  divided  them  into  two  formid-
able bands,  one  under  the  charge  of  his  young  brother
Frederic  Henry,  the  other  under  that  most  brilliant  of
cavalry  officers,  I\Iarcellus  Bax,  hero  of  Turnhout  and
many  another  well-fought  field.

The  river  Ruhr  was  a  wide  but  desultory  stream,
easily  fordable  in  many  places.  On  the  opposite  bank
to  Mulheim  was  the  Castle  of  Broek,  and  some  hills  of
considerable  elevation. Bax  was  ordered  to  cross  the

*3  Meteren. Van  der  Kemp. ♦*  Authorities  cited. *^  Bentivoglio,  iii.  536.

220

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

river  and  seize  the  castle  and  the  heights,  Count  Henry
to  attack  the  enemy's  camp  in  front,  while  Maurice  him-
self, following  rapidly  with  the  advance  of  infantry  and
wagons,  was  to  sustain  the  assault.

Marcellus  Bax,  rapid  and  dashing  as  usual,  crossed
g^^^  the  Euhr,  captured  Broek  Castle  with  ea.se,
and  stood  ready  to  prevent  the  retreat  of  the
Spaniards.  Taken  by  surprise  in  front,  they  would
naturally  seek  refuge  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.
That  stream  was  not  difficult  for  infautry,  but  as  the
banks  were  steep,  cavalry  could  not  easily  extricate
themselves  from  the  water,  except  at  certain  prepared
landings.  Bax  waited  however  for  some  time  in  vain
for  the  flying  Spaniards.  It  was  not  destined  that  the
stadholder  should  effect  many  surprises  that  year.  The
troopers  under  Frederic  Henry  had  made  their  ap-
proaches through  an  intricate  path,  often  missing  their
way,  and  in  far  more  leisurely  fashion  than  was  in-
tended, so  that  outlying  scouts  had  brought  in  informa-
tion of  the  coming  attack.  As  Count  Henry  approached
the  village,  Trivulzio's  cavalry  was  found  drawn  up  in
battle  array,  formidable  in  numbers,  and  most  fully
prepared  for  their  visitors  from  Wesel.  The  party  most
astonished  was  that  which  came  to  surprise.  In  an
instant  one  of  those  uncontrollable  panics  broke  out  to
which  even  veterans  are  as  subject  as  to  d3^sentery  or
scurvy.  The  best  cavalry  of  Maurice's  army  turned
their  backs  at  the  very  sight  of  the  foe,  and  galloped  off
much  faster  than  they  had  come.

Meantime,  Marcellus  Bax  was  assaulted,  not  only  by
his  late  handful  of  antagonists,  who  had  now  rallied,
but  by  troops  from  Mulheim,  who  began  to  wade  across
the  stream.  At  that  moment  he  was  cheered  by  the
sight  of  Count  Henry  coming  on  with  a  very  few  of
his  troopers  who  had  stood  to  their  colours.  A  simul-
taneous charge  from  both  banks  at  the  enemy  flounder-
ing in  the  river  was  attempted.  It  might  have  been
brilliantly  successful,  but  the  panic  had  crossed  the
river  faster  than  the  Spaniards  could  do,  and  that  whole
splendid  picked  cavalry  force  of  the  republic,  com-
manded by  the  youngest  son  of  William  the  Silent,  and
by  the  favourite  cavalry  commander  of  her  armies,  was,
after  a  hot  but  brief  action,  in  disgraceful  and  unreason-

1605

PANIC  OF  THE  NETHERLANDERS.

221

able  flight.  The  stadholder  reached  the  bank  of  that  fatal
stream  only  to  witness  this  maddening  spectacle,  instead
of  the  swift  and  brilliant  triumph  which  he  was  justified
in  expecting.  He  did  his  best  to  stem  the  retreating  tide.
He  called  upon  the  veterans,  by  the  memory  of  Turn-
hout  and  Nieuport,  and  so  many  other  victories,  to  pause
and  redeem  their  name  before  it  was  too  late.  He
taunted  them  with  their  frequent  demands  to  be  led
to  battle,  and  their  expressed  impatience  at  enforced
idleness.  He  denounced  them  as  valiant  only  for  plun-
dering defenceless  peasants,  and  as  cowards  against
armed  men  ;  as  trusting  more  to  their  horses'  heels
than  to  their  own  right  hands.  He  invoked  curses
upon  them  for  deserting  his  young  brother,  who,  con-
spicuous among  them  by  his  gilded  armour,  the  orange-
plumes  upon  his  casque,  and  the  bright  orange-scarf
across  his  shoulders,  was  now  sorely  pressed  in  the
struggling  throng."*^

It  was  all  in  vain.  Could  Maurice  have  thrown  him-
self into  the  field,  he  might,  as  in  the  crisis  of  the
republic's  fate  at  Nieuport,  have  once  more  converted
ruin  into  victory  by  the  magic  of  his  presence.  But
the  river  was  between  him  and  the  battle,  and  he  was
an  enforced  spectator  of  his  country's  disgrace.

For  a  few  brief  moments  his  demeanour,  his  taunts,
and  his  supplications  had  checked  the  flight  of  his
troops.

A  stand  was  made  by  a  portion  of  the  cavalry  and  a
few  detached  but  fierce  combats  took  place.
Count  Frederic  Henry  was  in  imminent  danger.
Leading  a  mere  handful  of  his  immediate  retainers,  he
threw  himself  into  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  with  the
characteristic  audacity  of  his  house.  A  Spanish  trooper
aimed  his  carbine  full  at  his  face.  It  missed  fire,  and
Henry,  having  emptied  his  own  pistol,  was  seized  by  the
floating  scarf  upon  his  breast  by  more  than  one  enemy.
There  was  a  brief  struggle,  and  death  or  capture  seemed
certain ;  when  an  unknown  hand  laid  his  nearest  anta-
gonist low,  and  enabled  him  to  escape  from  over-
powering numbers.*^  The  soldier,  whose  devotion  thus
saved  the  cai'eer  of  the  youngest  Orange-Nassau,  destined

Graius,  XIV.  671.

Ibid. Meteren,  523^<>.

222

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

to  be  so  long  and  so  brilliant,  from  being  cut  off  so
prematurely,  was  never  again  beard  of,^^  and  doubtless
perished  in  the  fray.

Meantime  the  brief  sparkle  of  valour  on  the  part  of
the  States'  troops  had  already  vanished.  The  adroit
Spinola,  hurrying  personally  to  the  front,  had  caused
such  a  clangor  from  all  the  drums  and  trumpets  in
Broek  and  its  neighbourhood  to  be  made  as  to  persuade
the  restive  cavalry  that  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy
was  already  upon  them.  The  day  was  obviously  lost,
and  Maurice,  with  a  heavy  heart,  now  himself  gave  the
signal  to  retreat.  Drawing  up  the  greater  part  of  his
infantry  in  solid  mass  upon  the  banks  to  protect  the
passage,  he  sent  a  force  to  the  opposite  side,  Plorace
Vere  being  the  first  to  wade  the  stream.  All  that  was
then  possible  to  do  was  accomplished,  and  the  panic
flight  converted  into  orderly  retreat,  but  it  was  a  day  of
disaster  and  disgrace  for  the  republic.^^

About  five  hundred  of  the  best  States'  cavalry  were
left  dead  on  the  field,  but  the  stain  upon  his  almost
unsullied  flag  was  more  cutting  to  the  stadholder's  heart
than  the  death  of  his  veterans.  The  material  results
were  in  truth  almost  even.  The  famous  cavalry  general,
Count  Trivulzio,  with  at  least  three  hundred  Spaniards,
fell  in  the  combat,^^  but  the  glory  of  having  defeated
the  best  cavalry  of  Europe  in  a  stricken  field  and  under
the  very  eyes  of  the  stadholder  would  have  been  suffi-
cient compensation  to  Spinola  for  much  greater  losses.

Maurice  withdrew  towards  Wesel,  sullen  but  not
desponding.  His  forces  were  meagre,  and  although  he
had  been  out-generalled,  out-marched,  and  defeated  in
the  open  field,  at  least  the  Genoese  had  not  planted  the
blow  which  he  had  meditated  in  the  very  heart  of
the  republic.

Autumn  was  now  far  advanced,  and  dripping  with
rain.  The  roads  and  fields  were  fast  becoming  impas-
sable sloughs,  and  no  further  large  operations  could  be
expected  in  this  campaign.  Yet  the  stadholder's  cup
was  not  full,  and  he  was  destined  to  witness  two  more
triumphs  of  his  rival,  now  fast  becoming  famous,  before

♦8  Grotius,  ubi  sup.

49  Ibid.  xiv.  669-672.  Meteren,  523  and  ^o.  Bentivoglio,  iii.  537.  Van  der
Kemp,  ii.  116,  510,  511.  »  ibid.

1605.

RESULTS  OF  THE  CAMPAIGN.

223

this  year  of  disasters  should  close. On  the  2  7th  October,
Spinola  took  the  city  of  Wachtendonk,  after
ten  days'  siege,  and  on  the  5th  of  Xovember 5  xov.
the  strong  place  of  Cracow.^^

Maurice  was  forced  to  see  these  positions  captured
almost  under  his  eyes,  being  now  quite  powerless  to
afford  relief.  His  troops  had  dwindled  by  sickness  and
necessary  detachments  for  garrison-work  to  a  compara-
tively insignificant  force,  and  very  soon  afterwards  both
armies  went  into  winter  quarters.^^

The  States  were  excessively  disappointed  at  the
results  of  the  year's  work,  and  deep  if  not  loud  were
the  reproaches  cast  upon  the  stadholder.  Certainly  his
military  reputation  had  not  been  augmented  by  this
campaign.  He  had  lost  many  places,  and  had  not
gained  an  inch  of  ground  anywhere.  Already  the
lustre  of  Sluys,  of  Nieuport,  and  Turnhout  were  growing
dim,  for  Maurice  had  so  accustomed  the  republic  to
victories  that  his  own  past  triumphs  seemed  now  his
greatest  enemies.  Moreover  he  had  founded  a  school
out  of  which  apt  pupils  had  already  graduated,  and  it
would  seem  that  the  Genoese  volunteer  had  rapidly
profited  by  his  teachings  as  onl}'  a  man  endowed  with
exquisite  militaiy  genius  could  have  done.

Yet,  after  all,  it  seems  certain  that,  with  the  stad-
holder's  limited  means,  and  with  the  awful  conse-
quences to  the  countiy  of  a  total  defeat  in  the  open
field,  the  Fabian  tactics,  which  he  had  now  deliberately
adopted,  were  the  most  reasonable.  The  invader  of  foreign
domains,  the  suppressor  of  great  revolts,  can  indulge  in
the  expensive  luxury  of  procrastination  only  at  immi-
nent peril.  For  the  defence,  it  is  always  possible  to
conquer  by  delay,  and  it  was  perfectly  undei*stood  be-
tween Spinola  and  his  ablest  advisers  at  the  Spanish
court ^  that  the  blows  must  be  struck  thick  and  fast,  and
at  the  most  vulnerable  places,  or  that  the  victory  would
be  lost.

Time  was  the  ally  not  of  the  Spanish  invaders,  who
came  from  afiir,  but  of  the  Dutch  burghers,  who  re-
mained at  home.  "  Jam  aut  Nunquam,"  ^  was  the
motto  upon  the  Italian's  banners.

y  M  teren,  523'o. Bentivoglio,  iii.  536. Gn-t.  xiv.  673. \  an  der  Kemp.  ii.  117
i»  Ibid.  M  Grot.  xiv.  b6j.  **  Ibidl

224

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIV.

In  proportion  to  the  depression  in  the  republic  at  the
results  of  this  year's  campaigning  was  the  elation  at  the
Spanish  court.  Bad  news  and  false  news  had  preceded
the  authentic  intelligence  of  Spinola's  victories.  The
English  envoy  had  received  unquestionable  information
that  the  Catholic  general  had  sustained  an  over-
whelming defeat  at  the  close  of  the  campaign,  with  a
loss  of  three  thousand  five  hundred  men.^^  The  tale
was  implicitly  believed  by  king  and  cabinet,  so  that
when,  very  soon  afterwards,  the  couriers  arrived  bringing
official  accounts  of  the  victory  gained  over  the  veteran
cavalry  of  the  States  in  the  very  presence  of  the  stad-
holder,  followed  by  the  crowning  triumph  of  Wachten-
donk,  the  demonstrations  of  joy  were  all  the  more
vivacious  in  consequence  of  the  previous  gloom.^^
Spinola  himself  followed  hard  upon  the  latest  mes-
sengers, and  was  received  with  ovations.^^  Never,  since
the  days  of  Alexander  Farnese,  had  a  general  at  the
Spanish  court  been  more  cordially  caressed  or  hated.
Had  Philip  the  Prudent  been  still  upon  the  throne,  he
would  have  felt  it  his  duty  to  make  immediate  arrange-
ments for  poisoning  him.  Certainly  his  plans  and  his
popularity  would  have  been  undermined  in  the  most
artistic  manner.

But  Philip  III.,  more  dangerous  to  rabbits  than  to
generals,  left  the  Genoese  to  settle  the  plans  of  his  next
campaign  with  Lerma  and  his  parasites.

The  subtle  Spinola,  having,  in  his  despatches,  ascribed
the  chief  merit  of  the  victories  to  Louis  Velasco,  a
Spaniard,  while  his  own  original  conception  of  trans-
ferring the  war  to  Friesland  was  attributed  by  him  with
magnificent  effrontery  to  Lerma  and  to  the  king  — who
were  probably  quite  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  that
remote  province — succeeded  in  maintaining  his  favour-
able position  at  court,  and  was  allowed,  by  what  was
called  the  war-council,  to  manage  matters  nearly  at  his
pleasure.

It  is  difficult  however  to  understand  how  so  much
clamour  should  have  been  made  over  such  paltry
triumphs.  All  Europe  rang  with  a  cavalry  fight  in
which  less  than  a  thousand  saddles  on  both  sides  had
been  emptied,  leading  to  no  result,  and  with  the  capture

55  Gallucci,  ii,  253,  seqq.  56  ibid,  s?  Ibid.  58  Jbid.

1605.

TRIUxMPHS  OF  SPINOLA.

225

of  a  couple  of  insignificant  towns,  of  which  not  one  man
in  a  thousand  had  ever  heard.

Spinola  had  doubtless  shown  genius  of  a  subtle  and
inventive  order,  and  his  fortunateauda  city  in  measur-
ing himself,  while  a  mere  apprentice,  against  the  first
military  leader  living  had  been  crowned  with  wonderful
success.  He  had  nailed  the  stadholder  fast  to  the
island  of  Cadzand,  while  he  was  perfecting  his  arrange-
ments and  building  boats  on  the  Khine ;  he  had  ])ro-
pounded  riddles  which  Maurice  had  spent  three  of  the
best  campaigning  months  in  idle  efforts  to  guess,  and
when  he  at  last  moved,  he  had  swept  to  his  mark  with
the  swiftness  and  precision  of  a  bird  of  prey.  Yet  the
greatest  of  all  qualities  in  a  military  commander,  that  of
deriving  substantial  fruits  from  victory  instead  of
barren  trophies,  he  had  not  manifested.  If  it  had  been
a  great  stroke  of  art  to  seize  Lingen  before  Maurice
could  reach  Deventer,  it  was  an  enormous  blunder,
worthy  of  a  journeyman  soldier,  to  fail  to  seize  the
Bourtange  marshes,  and  drive  his  sword  into  the  very
vitals  of  the  republic,  thus  placed  at  his  mercy.

Meantime,  while  there  had  been  all  these  rejoicings
and  tribulations  at  the  great  doings  on  the  Rhine  and
the  shortcomings  in  Friesland,  the  real  operations  of  the
war  had  been  at  the  antipodes.

It  is  not  a  very  unusual  phenomenon  in  histor}-  that
the  events,  upon  whose  daily  development  the  contem-
porary world  hangs  with  most  palpitating  interest,  are
far  inferior  in  permanent  influence  upon  the  general
movement  of  humanity  to  a  series  of  distant  and  appa-
rently commonplace  transactions.

Empires  are  built  up  or  undermined  by  the  ceaseless
industry  of  obscure  multitudes,  often  slightly  observed,
or  but  dimly  comprehended.

Battles  and  sieges,  dreadful  marches,  eloquent  debates,
intricate  diplomacy — from  time  to  time  but  only  perhaps
at  rare  intervals — have  decided  or  modified  the  destiny
of  nations,  while  very  often  the  clash  of  arms,  the  din
of  rhetoric,  the  whiz  of  political  spindles,  produce  no-
thing valuable  for  human  consumption,  and  make  the
world  no  richer.

If  the  age  of  heroic  and  religious  passion  was  rapidly
fading  away  before  the  gradual  uprising  of  a  politico-

voL.  IV.  •  g

226

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

mercantile  civilization — as  it  certainly  was — the  most
vital  events,  those  in  which  the  fate  of  coming  genera-
tions was  most  deeply  involved,  were  those  inspired  by
the  spirit  of  commercial  enterprise.

Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  there  is  often  a  genial  and
poetic  essence  even  among  things  practical  or  of  almost
vulgar  exterior.  In  those  early  expeditions  of  the
Hollanders  to  the  flaming  lands  of  the  equator  there  is
a  rhythm  and  romance  of  historical  movement  not  less
significant  than  in  their  unexampled  defence  of  father-
land and  of  the  world's  liberty  against  the  great  des-
potism of  the  age.

Universal  monarchy  was  bafiSed  by  the  little  republic,
not  within  its  own  populous  cities  only,  or  upon  its
own  barren  sands.  The  long  combat  between  Freedom
and  Absolutism  had  now  become  as  wide  as  the  world.
The  greatest  European  states  had  been  dragged  by  the
iron  chain  of  necessity  into  a  conflict  from  which  they
often  struggled  to  escape,  and  on  every  ocean,  and  on
almost  every  foot  of  soil,  where  the  footsteps  of  mankind
Lad  as  yet  been  imprinted,  the  fierce  encounters  were
every  day  renewed.  In  the  east  and  the  west,  through-
out that  great  vague  new  world,  of  which  geographers
had  hardly  yet  made  a  sketch,  which  comprised  both
the  Americas  and  something  called  the  East  Indies,
and  which  Spain  claimed  as  her  private  property,  those
humbly  born  and  energetic  adventurers  were  rapidly
creating  a  symmetrical  system  out  of  most  dismal  chaos.

The  King  of  Spain  warned  all  nations  from  trespassing
upon  those  outlying  possessions.

His  edicts  had  not  however  prevented  the  English
in  moderate  numbers,  and  the  Hollanders  in  steadily
increasing  swarms,  from  enlarging  and  making  profitable
use  of  these  new  domains  of  the  world's  commerce.

The  days  were  coming  when  the  People  was  to  have
more  to  say  than  the  pope  in  regard  to  the  disposition
and  arrangements  of  certain  large  districts  of  this  planet.
While  the  world-empire,  which  still  excited  so  much
dismay,  was  yielding  to  constant  corrosion, another  empire
was  steadily  rising  out  of  the  depths.  It  has  often  been
created  by  well-directed  toil  and  unflinching  courage,
thought  amazing  that  the  little  republic  should  so  long
and  so  triumphantly  withstand  the  enormous  forces

1605.

AFFAIRS  IN  THE  EAST.

227

brought  forward  for  her  destruction.  It  was  not,  how-
ever, so  very  surprising.  Foremost  among  nations,  and  in
advance  of  the  age,  the  republic  had  found  the  strength
which  comes  from  the  spirit  of  association.  On  a  wider
scale  than  ever  before  known,  large  masses  of  men,  with
their  pecuniary  means,  had  been  intelligently  banded
together  to  advance  material  interests.  When  it  is
remembered  that,  in  addition  to  this  force,  the  whole
commonwealth  was  inspired  by  the  divine  influence
of  liberty,  her  power  will  no  longer  seem  so  won-
derful.

A  sinister  event  in  the  Isle  of  Ceylon  had  opened  the
series  of  transactions  in  the  East,  and  had  cast  a  gloom  over
the  public  sentiment  at  home.  The  enterprising  voyager,
Sebald  de  Weerdt,  one  of  the  famous  brotherhood  of  the
Invincible  Lion  w^hich  had  wintered  in  the  straits  of
Magellan, had  been  murdered  through  the  treachery
of  the  King  of  Candy.  His  countrymen  had  not  taken
vengeance  on  his  assassins.  They  were  perhaps  too
fearful  of  losing  their  growing  trade  in  those  lucrative
regions  to  take  a  becoming  stand  in  that  emergency.
They  were  also  not  as  yet  sufficiently  powerful  there.*^^

The  East  India  Company  had  sent  out  in  May  of  this
year  its  third  fleet  of  eleven  large  ships,  besides  some
smaller  vessels,  under  the  general  superintendence  of
Matelieff  de  Jonghe,  one  of  the  directors.  The  invest-
ments for  tbe  voyage  amounted  to  more  than  nineteen
hundred  thousand  florins.^^

Meantime  the  preceding  adventurers  under  Stephen
van  der  Hagen,  who  had  mailed  at  the  end  of  1()03,  had
been  doing  much  thorough  work.  A  firm  league
had  been  made  with  one  of  the  chief  potentates  of  Mala-
bar, enabling  them  to  build  forts  and  establish  colonies
in  perpetual  menace  of  Goa,  the  great  oriental  capital  of
the  Portuguese.  The  -return  of  the  ambassadors  sent  out
from  Astgen  to  Holland  had  filled  not  only  the  island  of
Sumatra  but  the  Moluccas,  and  all  the  adjacent  regions,
with  praises  of  the  power,  wealth,  and  high  civilization
of  that  distant  republic  so  long  depicted  by  rivals  as  a
nest  of  uncouth  and  sanguinary  savages.^^ The  fleet

w  Vol.  iii.  page  543  of  this  History.  6i  Wagenaar,  Moteren,  loc.  cit.

c«  Wagf?4iaar,  ix.  197. Meteieu,  books ^-  Wagenaar,  ix.  19S.
xxvi.  xxviii.  m  ibid. Grotius,  xv.  700,  se//q.

y  2

228

THE  UxNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLir.

now  proceeded  to  Amboyna,  a  stronghold  of  the  Spanish-
Portuguese,  and  the  seat  of  a  most  lucrative  trade.

On  the  arrival  of  those  foreign  well-armed  ships  under
the  guns  of  the  fortress,  the  governor  sent  to  demand,
with  Castilian  arrogance,  who  the  intruders  w^ere,  and
by  whose  authority  and  with  what  intent  they  presumed
to  show  themselves  in  those  waters.  The  reply  was  that
they  came  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  their  High
Mightinesses  the  States- General,  and  their  stadholder  the
Prince  of  Orange  :  that  they  were  sworn  enemies  of  the
King  of  Spain  and  all  his  subjects,  and  that  as  to  their
intent,  this  would  soon  be  made  apparent.^*  Whereupon,
without  much  more  ado,  they  began  a  bombardment  of
the  fort,  which  mounted  thirty -six  guns.  The  governor,
as  often  happened  in  those  regions,  being  less  valiant
against  determined  European  foes  than  towards  the
feebler  oriental  races  on  which  he  had  been  accustomed
to  trample,  succumbed  with  hardly  an  effort  at  resist-
ance.^^ The  castle  and  town  and  whole  island  were
surrendered  to  the  fleet,  and  thenceforth  became  virtually
a  colony  of  the  republic  with  which,  nominally,  treaties
of  alliance  and  defence  were  negotiated.  Thence  the
fleet,  after  due  possession  had  been  taken  of  these  new
domains,  sailed  partly  to  Banda  and  partly  to  two  small
but  most  important  islands  of  the  Moluccas.^^

In  that  multitude  of  islands  which  make  up  the
Eastern  Archipelago  there  were  but  five  at  that  period
where  grew  the  clove — Ternate,  Tydor,  Motiel,  Makian,
and  Bacia.^^

Pepper  and  ginger,  even  nutmegs,  cassia,  and  mace,
were  but  vulgar  drugs,  precious  as  they  were  already  to
the  world  and  the  world's  commerce,  compared  with  this
most  magnificent  spice.

It  is  wonderful  to  reflect  upon  the  strange  composition
of  man.  The  world  had  lived  in  former  ages  very  com-
fortably without  cloves.  But  by  the  beginning  of  .  the
seventeenth  century  that  odoriferous  pistil  had  been
the  cause  of  so  many  pitched  battles  and  obstinate  wars,
of  so  much  vituperation,  negotiation,  and  intriguing,  that
the  world's  destiny  seemed  to  have  almost  become  de-
pendent upon  the  growth  of  a  particular  gillyflower.

6i  Grotius,  XV.  702.
66  Ibid. Meteren,  537.

65  Ibid.  Wagpnaar,  ix.  197,  198,
67  Grotius,  ubi  sujj.

1G05.

CONTEST  FOR  THE  CLOVE  ISLANDS.

229

Out  of  its  sweetness  had  grown  such  bitterness  among
great  nations  as  not  torrents  of  blood  could  wash  away.
A  commonplace  condiment  enough  it  seems  to  us  now,
easily  to  be  dispensed  with  and  not  worth  purchasing
at  a  thousand  human  lives  or  so  the  cargo,  but  it  was
once  the  great  prize  to  be  struggled  for  by  civilized
nations.  From  that  fervid  earth,  warmed  from  within  by
volcanic  heat,  and  basking  ever  beneath  the  equatorial
sun,  arose  vapours  as  deadly  to  human  life  as  the  fruits
were  exciting  and  delicious  to  human  senses.  Yet  the
atmosphere  of  pestiferous  fragrance  had  attracted  rather
than  repelled.  The  poisonous  delights  of  the  climate,
added  to  the  perpetual  and  various  warfare  for  its  pro-
ductions, spread  a  strange  fascination  around  those  fatal
isles.

Especially  Ternate  and  Tydor  were  objects  of  unending
strife.  Chinese,  Malays,  Persians,  Arabs,  had  struggled
centuries  long  for  their  possession ;  those  races  suc-
cessively or  simultaneously  ruling  these  and  adjacent
portions  of  the  Archipelago.  The  great  geographical
discoveries  at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century  had
however  changed  the  aspect  of  India  and  of  the  world.
The  Portuguese  adventurers  found  two  rival  kings  in  the
two  precious  islands,  and  by  ingeniously  protecting  one
of  these  potentates  and  poisoning  the  other,  soon  made
themselves  masters  of  the  field.  The  clove  trade  was
now  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  strangers  from  the
antipodes.  Goa  became  the  great  mart  of  the  lucrative
traffic,  and  thither  came  Chinese.  Arabs,  Moors,  and
other  oriental  traders,  to  be  supplied  from  the  Portuguese
monopoly.  Two-thirds  of  the  spices  however  found  their
way  directly  to  Europe.

Naturally  enough,  the  Spaniards  soon  penetrated  into
these  seas,  and  claimed  their  portion  of  the  spice  trade.
They  insisted  that  the  coveted  islands  were  included  in
their  portion  of  the  great  Borgian  grant.  As  there  had
hardly  yet  been  time  to  make  a  trigonometrical  survey
of  an  unknown  world,  so  generously  divided  by  the
pope,  there  was  no  way  of  settling  disputed  boundary
questions  save  by  apostolic  blows.  These  were  ex-
changed with  much  earnestness,  year  after  year,  between
Spaniards,  Portuguese,  and  all  who  came  in  their  way.
Especially  the  unfortunate  natives,  and  their  kiiigs  most

230

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

of  all,  came  in  for  a  full  share.  At  last  Charles  V.
sold  out  his  share  of  the  spice  islands  to  his  Portuguese
rival  and  co-proprietor,  for  three  hundred  and  fifty
thousand  ducats.^^  The  emperor's  very  active  pursuits
caused  him  to  require  ready  money  more  than  cloves.
Yet  John  III.  had  made  an  excellent  bargain,  and
the  monopoly  thenceforth  brought  him  in  at  least  two
hundred  thousand  ducats  annually.  Goa  became  more
flourishing,  the  natives  more  wretched,  the  Portuguese
more  detested  than  ever.  Occasionally  one  of  the  royal
line  of  victims  would  consent  to  put  a  diadem  upon  his
head,  but  the  coronation  was  usually  the  prelude  to  a
dungeon  or  death.  The  treaties  of  alliance,  which  these
unlucky  potentates  had  formed  with  their  powerful  in-
vaders, were,  as  so  often  is  the  case,  mere  deeds  to  convey
themselves  and  their  subjects  into  slavery.

Spain  and  Portugal  becoming  one,  the  slender  weapon
of  defence  which  these  weak  but  subtle  Orientals  some-
times employed  with  success — the  international  and
commercial  jealousy  between  their  two  oppressors — was
t-aken  away.  It  was  therefore  with  joy  that  Zaida,  who
sat  on  the  throne  of  Ternate  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth
century,  saw  the  sails  of  a  Dutch  fleet  arriving  in  his
harbours.^^  Very  soon  negotiations  were  opened,  and
the  distant  republic  undertook  to  protect  the  Mahometan
king  against  his  Catholic  master.  The  new  friendship
was  founded  upon  trade  monopoly,  of  course,  but  at  that
period  at  least  the  islanders  were  treated  with  justice
and  humanity  by  their  republican  allies.  The  Dutch
•undertook  to  liberate  their  friends  from  bondage,  while
the  King  of  Ternate,  panting  under  Portuguese  oppres-
sion, swore  to  have  no  traffic,  no  dealings  of  any  kind,
with  any  other  nation  than  Holland ;  not  even  with  the
English.  The  Dutch,  they  declared,  were  the  liberators
of  themselves,  of  their  friends,  and  of  the  seas."^^

The  international  hatred,  already  germinating  between
England  and  Holland,  shot  forth  in  these  flaming  regions
like  a  tropical  plant.  It  was  carefully  nurtured  and
tended  by  both  peoples.  Freedom  of  commerce,  freedom
of  the  seas,  meant  that  none  but  the  Dutch  East  India
Company — so  soon  as  the  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  were

63  Grotins,  xv.  704.  ^  Ibid.  706.

70 Batavos  vere  socios  ac  suos  marisque  liberatores  vocaiiSw" — Ibid.

1605. RIVALRY  BETWEEN  DUTCH  AND  ENGLISH.  231

driven  out — should  trade  in  cloves  and  nutmegs.  De-
crees to  that  effect  were  soon  issued,  under  very  heavy
penalties,  by  the  States- General  to  the  citizens  of  the
republic  and  to  the  world  at  large."^^  It  was  natural
therefore  that  the  English  traders  should  hail  the  ap-
pearance of  the  Dutch  fleets  with  much  less  enthusiasm
than  was  shown  by  the  King  of  Ternate.

On  the  other  hand,  the  King  of  Tydor,  persisting  in
his  oriental  hatred  towards  the  rival  potentate  in  the
other  island,  allowed  the  Portuguese  to  build  additional
citadels,  and  generally  to  strengthen  their  positions
within  his  dominions.  Thus  when  Cornelius  Sebastian,
with  his  division  of  Ver  Hagen's  fleet,  arrived  in  the
Moluccas  in  the  summer  of  1605,  he  found  plenty  of
work  prepared  for  him.  The  peace  recently  concluded
by  James  with  Philip  and  the  archdukes  placed  England
in  a  position  of  neutrality  in  the  war  now  waging  in  the
clove  islands  between  Spain  and  the  republic's  East
India  Company.  The  English  in  those  regions  were
not  slow  to  avail  themselves  of  the  advantage.  The
Portuguese  of  Tydor  received  from  neutral  sympathy  a
copious  supply  of  powder  and  of  pamphlets.  The  one
explosive  material  enabled  them  to  make  a  more  effective
defence  of  their  citadel  against  the  Dutch  fleet ;  the  other
revealed  to  the  Portuguese  and  their  Mussulman  allies
that  "the  Netherlanders  could  not  exist  without  English
protection,  that  they  were  the  scum  of  nations,  and  that
if  they  should  get  possession  of  this  clove  monopoly
their  insolence  would  become  intolerable."'^  Samples  of
polite  literature  such  as  these,  printed  but  not  published,
flew  about  in  volleys.  It  was  an  age  of  pamphleteering,
and  neither  the  English  nor  the  Dutch  were  behind  their
contemporaries  in  the  science  of  attack  and  self-defence.
Nevertheless  Cornelius  Sebastian  was  not  deterred  by
paper  pellets,  nor  by  the  guns  of  the  citadel,  from
carrying  out  his  purpose,  it  was  arranged  with  King
Zaida  that  the  islanders  of  Ternate  should  make  a
demonstration  against  Tydor,  being  set  across  the  strait

71  Grotius,  XV.  706.  schuyra  van  Natien  die  welckc  soodiesen

72  "  Schrijvende  seer  verachtol'jk  ende  handel  allocn  hand<  l  hadden  haer  ver-
schimpelijk  yi\r\&^  Noderlandors  als  ofte  motelheitsoudcn  onlyddljk  wrson,"  &c. —
sy  sender  tuier  niet  konden  bcstaen  cnde  Deix)6\*ions  made  by  the  Netherlanders.
diergelijcke  meer, die noemeude het  Meteren,  535^o.

232

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIV.

in  Dutch  vessels.  Sebastian,  however,  having  little
faith  in  oriental  tenacity,  entrusted  the  real  work  of
storming  the  fortress  to  his  own  soldiers  and  sailors.
On  a  fine  morning  in  May  the  assault  was  delivered  in
magnificent  style.  The  resistance  was  obstinate  ;  many
of  the  assailants  fell,  and  Captain  Mol,"^^  whom  we  have
once  before  seen  as  master  of  the  Tiger,  sinking  the
galleys  of  Frederic  Spinola  off  the  Gut  of  Sluys,  found
himself  at  the  head  of  only  seven  men  within  the  in-
terior defences  of  the  citadel.  A  Spanish  soldier,  Torre
by  name,  rushed  upon  him  with  a  spear.  Avoiding  the
blow,  Mol  grappled  with  his  antagonist,  and  both  rolled
to  the  ground.  A  fortunate  carbine-shot  from  one  of  the
Dutch  captain's  comrades  went  through  the  Spaniard's
head.'^*  Meantime  the  little  band,  so  insignificant  in
numbers,  was  driven  out  of  the  citadel.  Mol  fell  to  the
ground  with  a  shattered  leg,  and  reproached  his  com-
panions, who  sought  to  remove  him,  for  neglecting  their
work  in  order  to  save  his  life.  Let  them  take  the  fort,
he  implored  them,  and  when  that  was  done  they  might
find  leisure  to  pick  him  up  if  they  chose."^^  While  he
was  speaking  the  principal  tower  of  the  fortress  blew
up,  and  sixty  of  the  garrison  were  launched  into  the
air."^^  A  well  directed  shot  had  set  fire  to  the  magazine.
The  assault  was  renewed  with  fresh  numbers,  and  the
Dutch  were  soon  masters  of  the  place.  Never  was
a  stronghold  more  audaciously  or  more  successfully
stormed.  The  garrison  surrendered.  The  women  and
children,  fearing  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  those  who  had
been  depicted  to  them  as  cannibals,  had  already  made
their  escape,  and  were  scrambling  like  squirrels  among
the  volcanic  cliffs.  Famine  soon  compelled  them  to
come  down,  however,  when  they  experienced  sufficiently
kind  treatment,  but  were  all  deported  in  Dutch  vessels
to  the  Philippine  islands.*^^  The  conquerors  not  only
spared  the  life  of  the  King  of  Tydor,  but  permitted  him
to  retain  his  crown.  At  his  request  the  citadel  was
ra^ed  to  the  ground.  It  would  have  been  better  perhaps
to  let  it  stand,  and  it  was  possible  that  in  the  heart  of
the  vanquished  potentate  some  vengeance  was  lurking

I  suppose  at  least  this  Captain  Mol  to  have  been  identical  with  the  gallant  sea-
man who  commanded  tbe  Tiger  in  that  action.
74  Grotius,  XV,  706,  707  .  75  ibid.  76  ibid.  77  Ibid.

1605.

ATTACK  ON  liEKGKN-OP-ZOOM.

233

which  might  bear  evil  fiuit  at  a  later  day.  Meantime
the  Portuguese  were  driven  entirely  out  of  the  Moluccas,
save  the  island  of  Timos,  where  they  still  retained  a  nut
very  important  citadel/^

The  East  India  Company  was  now  in  possession  of  the
whole  field.  The  Moluccas  and  the  clove  trade  were  its
own,  and  the  Dutch  republic  had  made  manifest  to  the
world  that  more  potent  instruments  had  now  been
devised  for  parcelling  out  the  new  world  than  papal
decrees,  although  signed  by  the  immaculate  hand  of  a
Borgia.

During  the  main  operations  already  sketched  in  the
Netherlands,  and  during  those  vastly  more  important
oriental  movements  to  which  the  reader's  attention  has
just  been  called,  a  detached  event  or  two  deserves
notice.

Twice  during  the  summer  campaign  of  this  year  Du
Terrail,  an  enterprising  French  refugee  in  the  service  of
the  archdukes,  had  attempted  to  surprise  the
'important  city  of  Bergen-op-Zoom.  On  the
21st  August  the  intended  assault  had  been  discovered  in
time  to  prevent  any  very  serious  conflict  on  jose  t.
either  side.  On  the  20th  September  the  experi-
ment was  renewed  at  an  hour  after  midnight.  Du  Terrail,
having  arranged  the  attack  at  three  dififerent  points,  had
succeeded  in  forcing  his  way  across  the  moat  and  through
one  of  the  gates.  The  trumpets  of  the  foremost  Spaniards
already  sounded  in  the  streets.  It  was  pouring  with
rain  ;  the  town  was  pitch  daik.  But  the  energetic  Paul
Bax  was  governor  of  the  place,  a  man  who  was  awake  at
any  hour  of  the  twenty-four,  and  who  could  see  in  the
darkest  night.  He  liad  already  informed  himself  of  the
enemy's  project,  and  had  strengthened  his  garrison  by
a  large  intermixture  of  the  most  trustworthy  burgher
guards,  so  that  the  advance  of  Du  Terrail  at  the  southern
gate  was  already  confronted  by  a  determined  band.  A
fierce  battle  began  in  the  darkness.  Meantime  Paul
Bax,  galloping  through  the  city,  had  aroused  the  whole
population  for  the  defence.  At  the  Steinberg  gate,
where  the  chief  assault  had  been  prepared,  Bax  had
caused  great  fires  of  straw  and  pitch  barrels  to  be  lighted,

^  Gn-tius,  XV.  TOO-YOS.  Compare  Metcreii,  535-537.  Wagenaar,  ix.  196-198.
Van  der  Hugon  Ileise,  92.  9J.  95

234

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIV.

SO  that  the  invaders,  instead  of  finding,  as  they  expected,
a  profound  gloom  through  the  streets,  saw  themselves
approaching  a  brilliantly  illuminated  city,  fully  prepared
to  give  their  uninvited  guests  a  warm  reception.  The
garrison,  the  townspeople,  even  the  women,  thronged  to
the  ramparts,  saluting  the  Spaniards  with  a  rain  of
bullets,  paving- stones,  and  pitch  hoops,  and  with  a  storm
of  gibes  and  taunts.  They  were  asked  why  they  allowed
their  cardinal  thus  to  send  them  to  the  cattle  market,
and  whether  Our  Lady  of  Hall,  to  whom  Isabella  was  so
fond  of  making  pilgrimages,  did  not  live  rather  too  far
off  to  be  of  much  use  just  then  to  her  or  to  them.'^^
Catholics  and  Prc^testants  all  stood  shoulder  to  shoulder
that  night  to  defend  their  firesides  against  the  foreign
foe,  while  mothers  laid  their  sleeping  children  on  tke
ground  that  they  might  fill  their  cradles  with  powder
and  ball,  which  they  industriously  brought  to  the
soldiers.  The  less  energetic  women  fell  upon  their
knees  in  the  street,  and  prayed  aloud  through  the
anxious  night.  The  attack  was  splendidly  repulsed.
As  morning  dawn-ed  the  enemy  withdrew,  leaving  one
hundred  dead  outside  the  walls  or  in  the  town,  and
carrying  off  thirty-eight  wagon  loads  of  wounded.^
Du  Terrail  made  no  further  attempts  that  summer,
although  the  list  of  his  surprises  was  not  yet  full.  He
was  a  good  engineer,  and  a  daring  partisan  officer.  He
was  also  inspired  by  an  especial  animosity  to  the  States-
General,  who  had  refused  the  offer  of  his  services  before
he  made  application  to  the  archdukes.

At  sea  there  was  no  very  important  movement  in
European  waters,  save  that  Lambert  Heinrichzoon,  com-
monly called  Pretty  Lambert, a  Eotterdam  skipper,
whom  we  have  seen  doing  good  service  in  the  sea-fights
with  Frederic  Spinola,  captured  the  admiral  of  the
Dunkirk  pirate  fleet,  Adrian  Dirkzoon.  It  was  a
desperate  fight.  Pretty  Lambert,  sustained  at  a  distance
by  Eear- Admiral  Gerbrantzon,  laid  himself  yard-arm  to
yard-arm  alongside  the  pirate  vessel,  boarded  her,  and
after  beating  down  all  resistance  made  prisoners  such
of  the  crew  as  remained  alive,  and  carried  them  into
Kotterdam. Next  day  they  were  hanged  to  the  number

79  Grotius,  XV.  667,  669.  Meteren,  522,  523. Wagenaar,  ix.  191,  192.

8*  Jbid.  81  Grotius,  ubi  sup.  82  «'Mooi  Lambert." — Wagenaar,  ix.  196,

1605.

THE  PIRATES  OF  DUNKIRK.

234

of  sixty.  A  small  number  were  pardoned  on  account  of
their  youth,  and  a  few  individuals  who  effected  their
escape  when  led  to  the  gallows,  were  not  pursued  .^^  The
fact  that  the  townspeople  almost  connived  at  the  escape
of  these  desperadoes  showed  that  there  had  been  a  surfeit
of  hangings  in  Rotterdam.  It  is  moreover  not  easy  to
distinguish  with  exactness  the  lines  which  in  those  days
separated  regular  sea  belligerents,  privateers,  and  pirates
from  each  other.  It  had  been  laid  down  by  the  arch-
dukes that  there  was  no  military  law  at  sea,  and  that
sick  soldiers  captured  on  the  water  should  be  hanged.
Accordingly  they  were  hanged.^^  Admiral  Fazardo,  of
the  Spanish  royal  navy,  not  only  captured  all  the  enemy's
merchant  vessels  which  came  in  his  way,  but  hanged,
drowned,  and  burned  alive  every  man  found  on  board. ^
Admiral  Ilaultain,  of  the  republican  navy,  had  just  been
.occupied  in  drowning  a  whole  regiment  of  Spanish
soldiers,  captured  in  English  and  Genuan  transports.
The  complaints  brought  against  the  Engli.sh  cruisers  by
the  Hollanders  for  capturing  and  confiscating  their
vessels,  and  hanging,  maiming,  and  torturing  their  crews
— not  only  when  England  was  neutral,  but  even  when
she  was  the  ally  of  the  republic — had  been  a  standing
topic  for  diplomatic  discussion,  and  almost  a  standing
joke.  Why,  therefore,  these  Dunkirk  sea-rovers  should
not  on  the  same  principle  be  allowed  to  rush  forth  from
their  very  convenient  den  to  plunder  friend  and  foe,
burn  ships,  and  butcher  the  sailors  at  pleasure,  seems  diffi-
cult to  understand.  To  expect  from  the  inhabitants  of
this  robbers'  cave— this  "church  on  the  downs" — a  code
of  maritime  law  so  much  purer  and  sterner  than  the
system  adopted  by  the  English,  the  Spaniards,  and  the
Dutch,  was  hardly  reasonable.  Certainly  the  Dunkirkers,
who  were  mainly  Netherlanders — rebels  to  the  republic
and  partisans  of  the  Spanish  crown — did  their  best  to
destroy  the  herring  fishery  and  to  cut  the  throats  of  the
fishermen,  but  perhaps  they  received  the  halter  more
often  than  other  mariners  who  had  quite  as  thoroughly
deserved  it.  And  this  at  last  appeared  the  prevailing
opinion  in  Rotterdam.

83  Wagenaar,  wbi  swp.  Meteren,  52 l^o.  ^  Vide  supra,  p.  117.

*a  "  (^uarum  nautaj  mersi,  suspensi,  exusti."— Grotius,  xv.  6»5.

236

rHE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLV,

CHAPTEE  XLV.

Preparations  for  the  campaign  of  1606  —  Diminution  of  Maurice's  popularity  —
Quarrel  between  the  pope  and  the  Venetian  republic  —  Surprise  of  Sluys  by
Du  Terrail  —  Dilatoriness  of  the  republic's  operations  —  Movements  of  Spinola  —
Influence  of  the  weather  on  the  military  transactions  of  the  year  —  Endeavours  of
Spinola  to  obtain  possession  of  the  Waal  and  Yssel  —  Surrender  of  Lochem  to
Spinola  —  Siege  of  Groll  —  Siege  and  loss  of  Rheinberg —  Mutiny  in  the  Catholic
army  —  Recovery  of  Lochem  by  Maurice  —  Attempted  recovery  of  Groll  —  Sudden
appearance  of  the  enemy  —  Withdrawal  of  the  besieging  army  —  Close  of  the
campaign  —  End  of  the  war  of  independence  —  Motives  of  the  Prince  in  his
actions  before  Groll  —  Cruise  of  Admiral  Haultain  to  the  coast  of  Spain  and  Por-
tugal—  His  encounter  with  the  war-ships  of  Fazardo  —  Courageous  conduct  of
the  vice-admiral  —  Deaths  of  Justus  Lipsius,  Hohenlo,  and  Count  John  of  Nassau.

After  the  close  of  tlie  campaign  of  1605  Spinola  had
gone  once  more  to  Spain.  On  his  passage  through  Paris
he  had  again  been  received  with  distinguished  favour  by
that  warm  ally  of  the  Dutch  republic,  Henry  IV.,  and
on  being  questioned  by  that  monarch  as  to  his  plans  for
the  next  campaign  had  replied  that  he  intended  once
more  to  cross  the  Rhine,  and  invade  Friesland.  Henry,
convinced  that  the  Genoese  would  of  course  not  tell  him
the  truth  on  such  an  occasion,  wrote  accordingly  to  the
States -General  that  they  might  feel  safe  as  to  their
eastern  frontier.  Whatever  else  might  happen.  Fries-
land  and  the  regions  adjacent  would  be  safe  next  year
from  attack.^  The  immediate  future  was  to  show
whether  the  subtle  Italian  had  not  compassed  as  neat  a
deception  by  telling  the  truth  as  coarser  politicians  could
do  by  falsehood.

Spinola  found  the  royal  finances  in  most  dismal  condi-
tion. Three  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  month  ^  were
the  least  estimate  of  the  necessary  expenses  for  carrying
on  the  Netherland  war,  a  sum  which  could  not  possibly
be  spared  by  Lerma,  Uceda,  the  Marquis  of  the  Seven
Churches,  and  other  financiers  then  industriously  occu-
pied in  draining  dry  the  exchequer  for  their  own  uses.
Once  more  the  general  aided  his  sovereign  with  purse
and  credit,  as  well  as  with  his  sword. Once  more  the

1  Gallucci,  256,  257.

2  Bentivoglio,  538. Grotiua,  xv.  714.

1605.  PREPARATIONS  FOR  A  NEW  CAMPAIGN.  237

exchange  at  Genoa  was  glutted  with  the  acceptances  of
Marquis  Spinola.^  Here  at  least  was  a  man  of  a  nature
not  quite  so  depraved  as  that  of  the  parasites  bred  out  of
the  corruption  of  a  noble  but  dying  commonwealth,  and
doubtless  it  was  with  gentle  contempt  that  the  gi'eat
favourite  and  his  friends  looked  at  the  military  and
financial  enthujsiasm  of  the  volunteer.  It  was  so  much
more  sagacious  to  make  a  princely  fortune,  than  to
sacrifice  one  already  inherited,  in  the  sei-vice  of  one's
country.

Spinola  being  thus  ready  not  only  to  fight  but  to  help
to  pay  for  the  fighting,  found  his  plans  of  campaigns
received  with  great  benignity  by  the  king  and  his
ministers.  Meantime  there  was  much  delay.  The
enormous  labours  thus  devolved  upon  one  pair  of
shoulders  by  the  do-nothing  king  and  a  mayor  of  the
^palace  whose  soul  was  absorbed  by  his  own  private
robberies,  were  almost  too  much  for  human  strength.  On
his  return  to  the  Netherlands  Spinola  fell  dangerously  ill
in  Genoa.*

Meantime,  during  his  absence  and  the  enforced  idle-
ness of  the  Catholic  armies,  tliere  was  an  opportunity
for  the  republicans  to  act  with  promptness  and  vigour.
They  displayed  neither  quality.  Never  had  there  been
so  much  sluggishness  as  in  the  preparations  for  the  cam-
paign of  1606.  The  States'  exchequer  was  lower  than
it  had  been  for  years.  The  republic  was  without  friends.
Jjeft  to  fight  their  battle  for  national  existence  alone,
the  Hollanders  found  themselves  perpetually  subjected
to  hostile  censure  from  their  late  allies,  and  to  friendly
advice  still  more  intolerable.  There  were  many  brave
Englishmen  and  Frenchmen  sharing  in  the  fatigues  of
the  Dutch  war  of  independence,  but  the  governments  of
Henry  and  of  James  were  as  protective,  as  severely  vir-
tuous, as  offensive,  and,  in  their  secret  intrigues  with  the
other  belligerent,  as  mischievous  as  it  was  possible  for
the  best-intentioned  neutrals  to  be.

The  fame  and  the  popularity  of  the  stadholder  had
been  dimini.shed  by  the  results  of  the  past  campaign.
The  States-General  were  disappointed,  dissatisfied,  and
inclined  to  censure  very  unreasonably  the  public  servant
who  had  always  obeyed  their  decrees  with  docility.

Grot.  XV.  680.  Compare  Gallucci,  lib.  xviii.-xx. *  Gallucci,  ii.  251,  seqq.

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLV.

While  Henry  lY.  was  rapidly  transferring  his  admira-
tion from  Maurice  to  Spinola,  the  disagreements  at  home
between  the  Advocate  and  the  Stadholder  were  becoming
portentous.

There  was  a  want  of  means  and  of  soldiers  for  the  new
campaign.  Certain  causes  were  operating  in  Europe  to
the  disadvantage  of  both  belligerents.  In  the  south,
Venice  had  almost  drawn  her  sword  against  the  pope  in
her  settled  resolution  to  put  down  the  Jesuits  and  to  clip
the  wings  of  the  church  party,  before,  with  bequests  and
donations,  votive  churches  and  magnificent  monasteries,
four-fifths  of  the  domains  of  the  republic  should  fall  into
mortmain,  as  was  already  the  case  in  Brabant.^

Naturally  there  was  a  contest  between  the  ex-Hu-
guenot, now  eldest  son  of  the  Church,  and  the  most
Catholic  king,  as  to  who  should  soonest  defend  the  pope.
Henry  offered  thorough  protection  to  his  Holiness,  but
only  under  condition  that  he  should  have  a  monopoly  of
that  protection.^  He  lifted  his  sword,  but  meantime  it
was  doubtful  whether  the  blow  was  to  descend  upon
Venice  or  upon  Spain.  The  Spanish  levies,  on  their
way  to  the  Netherlands,  were  detained  in  Italy  by  this
new  exigency.  The  States-General  offered  the  sister
republic  their  maritime  assistance,  and  notwithstanding
their  own  immense  difficulties,  stood  ready  to  send  a
fleet  to  the  Mediterranean.  The  offer  was  gratefully
declined,  and  the  quarrel  with  the  pope  arranged,  but
the  incident  laid  the  foundation  of  a  lasting  friendship
between  the  only  two  important  republics  then  existing.''
The  issue  of  the  Gunpowder  Plot,  at  the  close  of  the
preceding  year,  had  confirmed  James  in  his  distaste  for
Jesuits,  and  had  effected  that  which  all  the  eloquence  of
the  States- General  and  their  ambassador  had  failed  to
accomplish,  the  prohibition  of  Spanish  enlistments  in  his
kingdom.  Guido  Fawkes  had  served  under  the  arch-
duke in  Flanders.

Here  then  were  delays  additional  to  that  caused  by

5  Meteren,  536.  nationis  avidum  sibi  assumeret  baud

6  "  Nee  dissimulabat  Hiapanus  Pontifici  immerito  suspectum  id  sibi  vel  coactum
se  auxilio  futurum,  quo  Gallus  coniperto  contrariis  in  partibus  fore." — Grotius,  xv.
siguificavit.  l^omam,  ita  meritos  majores  713. Compare  Meteren,  546'*'c^

6U0S  ut  ecclesiai  pericula  non  alias  magis 7  Grotius,  xv.  6b4.  Wagenaar,  ix.  205.
quam  Francicas  raanus  respiceredeberent: Meteren,  536.
sin  Pontifex  Hispanum  prolutaudaj  domi-

1606.

SURPRISE  OF  SLUYS.

239

Spinola's  *  illness.  On  the  other  hand,  the  levies  of  the
republic  were  for  a  season  paralysed  by  the  altercation,
soon  afterwards  adjusted,  between  Henry  IV.  and  the
Duke  of  Bouillon,  brother-in-law  of  the  stadholder  and  of
the  Palatine,  and  by  the  petty  war  between  the  Duke
and  Hanseatic  city  of  Brunswick,  in  which  Ernest  of
Nassau  was  for  a  time  employed.^

During  this  period  of  almost  suspended  animation  the
war  gave  no  signs  of  life,  except  in  a  few  spasmodic
efforts  on  the  part  of  the  irrepressible  Du  Ten  ail.  Early
in  the  spring,  not  satisfied  with  his  double  and  disastrous
repulse  before  Bergen-op-Zoom,  that  partisan  now  deter-
mined to  surprise  Sluys.  That  an  attack  was  impending
became  known  to  the  governor  of  that  city,  the  experi-
enced Colonel  Van  der  Noot.  Kot  dreaming,  however,
that  any  mortal — even  the  most  audacious  of  Frenchmen
and  adventurers — would  ever  think  of  carrying  a  city
like  Sluys  by  surprise,  defended  as  it  was  by  a  splendid
citadel  and  by  a  whole  chain  of  forts  and  water-batteries,
and  capable  of  withstanding  three  months  long,  as  it
had  so  recently  done,  a  siege  in  form  by  the  acknow-
ledged master  of  the  beleaguering  science,  the  methodical
governor  went  calmly  to  bed  one  fine  night  in  June.
His  slumbers  were  disturbed  before  morning  by  the
sound  of  trumpets  sounding  Spanish  melodies  in  the
streets,  and  by  a  great  uproar  and  shouting.  Springing
out  of  bed,  he  rushed  half-dressed  to  the  rescue.  Less
vigilant  than  Taul  Bax  had  been  the  3^ear  before  in
Bergen,  he  found  that  Du  Terrail  had  really  effected  a
surprise.  At  the  head  of  twelve  hundred  Walloons  and
Irishmen,  that  enterprising  officer  had  waded  through
the  drowned  land  of  Cadzand,  with  the  promised  support
of  a  body  of  infantry  under  Frederic  Van  den  Berg,
from  Damm,  had  stolen  noiselessly  by  the  foi  ts  of  that
island  unchallenged  and  unseen,  had  effected  with
petards  a  small  breach  through  the  western  gate  of  the
city,  and  with  a  large  number  of  his  followers,  creeping
two  and  two  through  the  gap,  had  found  himself  for  a
time  master  of  Sluys.

The  profound  silence  of  the  place  had  however  some-
what discouraged  the  intruders. The  whole  population

P  Metercn,  526.  ■  Wagf^naar,  ix.  199-203.

*  Grotius,  XV.  687,  seqq. Wagenaar,  xi.  2U7,  seqq.

240

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLV.

were  as  sound  asleep  as  the  excellent  commandant,  but
the  stillness  in  the  deserted  streets  suggested  an  ambush,
and  they  moved  stealthily  forward,  feeling  their  way
with  caution  towards  the  centre  of  the  town.

It  so  happened,  moreover,  that  the  sacristan  had
forgotten  to  wind  up  the  great  town  clock.  The  agree-
ment with  the  party  first  entering  and  making  their  way
to  the  opposite  end  of  the  city,  had  been  that  at  the
striking  of  a  certain  hour  after  midnight  they  should
attack  simultaneously  and  with  a  great  outcry  all  the
guardhouses,  so  that  the  garrison  might  be  simultaneously
butchered.  The  clock  never  struck,  the  signal  was  never
given,  and  Du  Terrail  and  his  immediate  comrades  re-
mained near  the  western  gate,  suspicious  and  much
perplexed.  The  delay  was  fatal.  The  guard,  the  whole
garrison,  and  the  townspeople  flew  to  arms,  and  half-
naked,  but  equipped  with  pike  and  musket,  and  led  on
by  Van  der  Noot  in  person,  fell  upon  the  intruders.  A
panic  took  the  place  of  previous  audacity  in  the  breasts
of  Du  Terrail's  followers.  Thinking  only  of  escape,  they
found  the  gap  by  which  they  had  crept  into  the  town
much  less  convenient  as  a  means  of  egress  in  the  face  of
an  infuriated  multitude.  Five  hundred  of  them  were
put  to  death  in  a  very  few  minutes.  Almost  as  many
were  drowned  or  suffocajted  in  the  marshes,  as  they
June  1606  ^^^^^P^®^  return  by  the  road  over  which
*  they  had  come.  A  few  stragglers  of  the  fifteen
hundred  were  all  that  were  left  to  tell  the  tale."

It  would  seem  scarcely  worth  while  to  chronicle  such
trivial  incidents  in  this  great  war — the  all-absorbing
drama  of  Christendom — were  it  not  that  they  were  for
the  moment  the  whole  war.  It  might  be  thought  that
hostilities  were  approaching  their  natural  termination,
and  that  the  war  was  dying  of  extreme  old  age,  when
the  Quixotic  pranks  of  a  Du  Terrail  occupied  so  large  a
part  of  European  attention.  The  winter  had  passed,
another  spring  had  come  and  gone,  and  Maurice  had
in  vain  attempted  to  obtain  sufficient  means  from  the
States  to  take  the  field  in  force.  Henry,  looking  on
from  the  outside,  was  becoming  more  and  more  exasper-
ated with  the  dilatoriness  which  prevented  the  republic
from  profiting  by  the  golden  moments  of  Spinola's

11  Wagenaar,  ix.  207,  seqq.

12  Van  der  Kemp  ii  lit,  520.

1606.

MOVEMENTS  OF  SPINOLA.

241

enforced  absence.^^  Yet  the  best  that  could  be  done
seemed  to  be  to  take  measures  for  defensive  opera-
tions.

Spinola  never  reached  Brussels  until  the  beginning
of  June,  yet,  during  all  the  good  campaigning  weather
which  had  been  fleeting  away,  not  a  blow  had  been
struck,  nor  a  wholesome  counsel  taken  by  the  stadholder
or  the  States.  It  was  midsummer  before  the  armies  were
in  the  field.  The  plans  of  the  Catholic  general  however
then  rapidly  developed  themselves.  Having  assembled
as  large  a  force  as  had  ever  been  under  his  command,  he
now  divided  it  into  two  nearly  equal  portions.  Bucquoy,
with  ten  thousand  foot,  twelve  bundled  cavalry,  and
twelve  guns,  arrived  on  the  18th  July  at  ^look,  on  the
Meuse.  Spinola,  with  eleven  thousand  infantry,  two
thousand  horse,  and  eight  guns,  crossed  the  l^hine  at
the  old  redoubts  of  Kuhrort,  and  on  the  same  18th  July
took  possession  at  Goor,  in  Overyssel.^^  The  first  plan
of  the  commander-in-chief  was  to  retrace  exactly  his
campaign  of  the  previous  year,  even  as  he  had  with  so
much  frankness  stated  to  Henry.  But  the  republic,
although  deserted  by  her  former  friends,  and  looked
upon  askance  by  the  monarch  of  Britain,  and  by  the
most  Christian  king,  had  this  year  a  most  efficient  ally
in  the  weather.  Jupiter  Pluvius  had  descended  from
on  high  to  the  rescue  of  the  struggling  connnon wealth,
and  his  decrees  were  omnipotent  as  to  the  course  of  the
campaign.  The  seasons  that  year  seemed  all  fused  into
one.  It  was  difficult  to  tell  on  midsummer  day  whether
it  were  midwinter,  spring,  or  autumn. The  rain  came
down  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  as  if  the  con-
tending armies  and  the  very  country  which  was  to  be
invaded  and  defended  were  to  be  all  washed  out  of
existence  together.^^  Friesland  resolved  itself  into  a
vast  quagmire  ;  the  roads  became  fluid,  the  rivers  lakes.
Spinola  turned  his  face  from  the  east,  and  proceeded  to
carry  out  a  second  plan  which  he  had  long  meditated,
and  even  a  more  eff'ectivo  one,  in  the  west.

The  Waal  and  the  Yssel  formed  two  sides  of  a  great

12  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  117,  520.

13  For  the  campaign  of  16U€  compare  (Irotius,  xv.  6S9-609.  Meteren,  537-543.
Bentivoglio,  539-546. Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  117-120,  and  notes. Wagenaar.ix.  209-220.

1*  Bentivoglio,  t<bi  sup.  Bcntivogliu,  Grotius,  Meteren,  vbi  sup,

VOL.  IV.  K

242

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLV

quadrilateral,  and  furnished  for  the  natural  fortress,  thus
enclosed,  two  vast  and  admirable  moats.  W  ithin  lay
Good-meadow  and  Foul-meadow — Bet-uwe  and  Vel-uwe
— one,  the  ancient  Batavian  island  which  from  time
immemorial  had  given  its  name  to  the  commonwealth,
the  other,  the  once  dismal  swamp  which  toil  and  intelli-
gence had  in  the  course  of  centuries  transformed  into
the  wealthy  and  flowery  land  of  Gueldres.

Beyond,  but  in  immediate  proximity,  lay  the  ancient
episcopal  city  and  province  of  Utrecht,  over  which  lay
the  road  to  the  adjacent  Holland  and  Zeeland.  The  very
heart  of  the  republic  would  be  laid  bare  to  the  con-
queror's sword  if  he  could  once  force  the  passage,  and
obtain  the  control  of  these  two  protecting  streams.  With
Utrecht  as  his  base,  and  all  Brabant  and  Flanders —
obedient  provinces — at  his  back,  Spinola  might  accom-
plish more  in  one  season  than  Alva,  Don  John,  and
Alexander  Fainese  had  compassed  in  forty  years,  and
destroy  at  a  blow  what  was  still  called  the  Netherland
rebellion.  The  passage  of  the  rivers  once  effected,  the
two  enveloping  wings  would  fold  themselves  together,
and  the  conquest  would  be  made.

Thus  reasoned  the  brilliant  3'Oung  general,  and  his
projects,  although  far-reaching,  did  not  seem  wild.  The
first  steps  were,  however,  the  most  ii^iportant  as  well  as
the  most  difficult,  and  he  had  to  reckon  with  a  wary  and
experien  antagonist.  Maurice  had  at  last  collected
and  reviewed  at  Arnhem  an  army  of  nearly  fifteen
thousand  men,  and  was  now  watching  closely  from
Doesburg  and  Deventer  every  movement  of  the  foe.

Having  been  forced  to  a  defensive  campaign,  in  which
he  was  not  likely  at  best  to  gain  many  additional  laurels,
he  was  the  more  determined  to  lay  down  his  own  life,
and  sacrifice  every  man  he  could  bring  into  the  field,
before  Spinola  should  march  into  the  cherished  domains
of  Utrecht  and  Holland.  Meantime  the  rain,  which  had
already  exerted  so  much  influence  on  the  military  move-
ments of  the  year,  still  maintained  the  supremacy  over
human  plans.  The  Yssel  and  the  Waal,  always  deep,
broad,  sluggish,  but  dangerous  rivers — the  Rhine  in  its
old  age — were  swollen  into  enormous  proportions,  their
currents  flowing  for  the  time  with  the  vigour  of  their  far
aw'ay  youth.

1606.

OPERATIONS  ON  THE  WAAL  AND  YSSEL.

243

Maurice  had  confided  the  defence  of  the  Waal  to
Warner  D\\  Bois,  under  whose  orders  he  placed  a  force
of  about  seven  thousand  men,  and  whose  business  it  was
to  prevent  Bucquoy's  passage.  His  own  task  was  Uj
baffle  Spinola.^^

Bucquoy's  ambition  was  to  cross  the  Waal  at  a  point
as  near  as  possible  to  the  fork  of  that  stream  with  the
true  Ehine,  seize  the  important  city  of  Nymegen,  and
then  give  the  hand  to  Spinola,  so  soon  as  he  should  be
on  the  other  side  of  the  Yssel.  At  the  village  of  Spar-
dorp  or  Kekerdom,  he  employed  Pompeio  Giustiniani  to
make  a  desperate  effort,  having  secured  a  large  number
of  barges  in  which  he  embarked  his  troops.  As  the
boatmen  neared  the  opposite  bank,  however,  they  per-
ceived that  Warner  Du  Bois  had  made  effective  prepara-
tions for  their  reception.  They  lost  heart,  and  on  pre-
tence that  the  current  of  the  river  was  too  rapid  to  allow
them  to  reach  the  point  proposed  for  their  landing,
gradually  dropped  down  the  stream,  and,  in  spite  of  the
remonstrances  of  the  commanders,  pushed  their  way  back
to  the  shore  which  they  had  left.  From  that  time  forth,
the  States'  troops,  in  efficient  numbers,  fringed  the  inner
side  of  the  Waal,  along  the  whole  length  of  the  Batavian
island,  while  armed  vessels  of  the  republic  patrolled  the
stream  itself.  In  vain  Count  Bucquoy  watched  an
opportunity,  either  by  surprise  or  by  main  strength,  to
effect  a  crossing.  The  Waal  remained  as  impassable  as
if  it  were  a  dividing  ocean."

On  the  other  side  of  the  quadrilateral,  ^Mau rice's  dis-
positions were  as  effective  as  those  of  his  lieutenant  on
the  Waal.  The  left  shore  of  the  Yssel,  along  its  whole
length,  from  Arnhera  and  Doesburg  quite  up  to  ZwoU
and  Campen,  where  the  river  empties  itself  into  the
Zuyder  Zee,  was  now  sprinkled  thickly  with  forts,  hastily
thrown  up,  but  strong  enough  to  serve  the  temporary
purpose  of  the  stadholder.  In  vain  the  fleet-footed  and
audacious  Spinola  moved  stealthily  or  fiercely  to  and  fro,
from  one  point  to  another,  seeking  an  opening  through
which  to  creep,  or  a  wxak  spot  where  he  might  dash
himself  against  the  chain.  The  whole  line  was  securely
j^uarded. The  swollen  river,  the  redoubts,  and  the

^  Meteren,  Bentivoglio,  Grotius,  Wagcnaar,  Van  der  Kemp,  uhi  sup.  Ibid

11  2

241

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLV.

musketeers  of  Maurice,  protected  the  heart  of  the  repub-
lic from  the  impending  danger.

Wearied  of  this  fruitless  pacing  up  and  down,  Spinola,
while  apparently  intending  an  assault  upon  Deventer,
and  thus  attracting  his  adversary's  attention  to  that
important  city,  suddenly  swerved  to  the  right,  and  came

23  Jul  ^own  upon  Lochem.  The  little  town,  with  its
very  slender  garrison,  surrendered  at  once.  It
was  not  a  great  conquest,  but  it  might  possibly  be  of  use
in  the  campaign.  It  was  taken  before  the  stadholder
could  move  a  step  to  its  assistance,  even  had  he  deemed
it  prudent  to  leave  Yssel-side  for  an  hour.  The  summer
was  passing  away,  the  rain  was  still  descending,  and  it  was
the  1st  of  August  before  Spinola  left  Lochem.  He  then
made  a  rapid  movement  to  the  north,  between  Zwoll  and
Hasselt,  endeavouring  to  cross  the  Blackwater,  and  seize
Geelmuyden,  on  the  Zuyder  Zee.  Had  he  succeeded,  he
might  have  turned  Maurice's  position.  But  the  works
in  that  direction  had  been  entrusted  to  an  experienced
campaigner,  Warmelo,  sheriff  of  Zalant,  who  received
the  impetuous  Spinola  and  his  lieutenant.  Count  Solre,

2  Auc' warmly,  that  they  reeled  backwards  at  last,

after  repeated  assaults  and  great  loss  of  men,
and  never  more  attempted  to  cross  the  Yssel.^^

Obviously,  the  campaign  had  failed.  Utrecht  and
Holland  were  as  far  out  of  the  Catholic  general's  reach
as  the  stars  in  the  sky,  but  at  least,  with  his  large
armies,  he  could  earn  a  few  trophies  barren  or  pro-
ductive, as  it  might  prove,  before  winter,  uniting  with
the  deluge,  should  drive  him  from  the  field.

On  the  3rd  August,  he  laid  siege  to  Groll  (or  Groenlo),

3  14  An ^  fortified  town  of  secondary  importance  in  the

county  of  Zutphen,  and,  squandering  his  men
with  much  recklessness,  in  his  determination  not  to  be
baffled,  reduced  the  place  in  eleven  days.  Here  he
paused  for  a  breathing  spell,  and  then,  renouncing  all

22  Au  "^^^  schemes  upon  the  inner  defences  of  the  re-
public, withdrew  once  more  to  the  Ehine  and
laid  siege  to  Rheinberg.^^

This  frontier  place  had  been  tossed  to  and  fro  so  often
between  the  contending  parties  in  the  perpetual  warfare,
that  its  inhabitants  must  have  learned  to  consider  them-

18  Authorities  last  cited.  i9  Ibid.

1606.

FALL  OF  RHEINBEPwG.

245

selves  rather  as  a  convenient  circulating  medium  for
military  operations  than  as  burghers  who  had  any  part
in  the  ordinary  business  of  life.  It  had  old-fashioned
defences  of  stone,  which,  during  the  recent  occupation
by  the  States,  had  been  much  improved,  and  had  been
strengthened  with  earthworks.  Before  it  was  besieged,
Maurice  sent  his  brother  Frederic  Henry,  with  some
picked  companies  into  the  place,  so  that  the  garrison
amounted  to  three  thousand  effective  men.

The  Prince  de  Soubise,  brother  of  the  Due  de  Rohan,
and  other  French  volunteers  of  quality,  also  threw
themselves  into  the  place,  in  order  to  take  lessons  in  the
latest  methods  of  attack  and  defence.^^  It  was  now
admitted  that  no  more  accomplished  pupil  of  the  stad-
holder  in  the  beleaguering  art  had  appeared  in  Europe
than  his  present  formidable  adversary.  On  this  occasion,
however,  there  was  no  great  display  of  science.  Maurice
obstinately  refused  to  move  to  the  relief  of  the  place,
despite  all  the  efforts  of  a  deputation  of  the  ^
States-General  who  visited  his  camp  in  Sep-
tember, urging  him  strenuously  to  take  the  chances  of  a
stricken  field.

Nothing  could  induce  the  stadholder,  who  held  an
observing  position  at  Wesel,  with  his  back  against  the
precious  watery  quadrilateral,  to  risk  the  defence  of
those  most  vital  lines  of  the  Yssel  and  the  Waal.  While
attempting  to  save  Rheinberg,  he  felt  it  possible  that  he
might  lose  Nymegen,  or  even  Utrecht.  The  swift  but
wily  Genoese  was  not  to  be  trifled  with  or  lost  sight  of
an  instant.  The  road  to  Holland  might  still  be  opened,
and  the  destiny  of  the  republic  might  hang  on  the  con-
sequences of  a  single  false  move.  That  destiny,  under
God,  was  in  his  hands  alone,  and  no  chance  of  winning
laurels,  even  from  his  greatest  rival's  head,  could  induce
him  to  shrink  from  the  path  of  duty,  however  obscure  it
might  seem.  There  were  a  few  brilliant  assaults  and
sorties,  as  in  all  sieges,  the  French  volunteers  ^  oct
especially  distinguishing  themselves  ;  but  the
place  fell  at  the  end  of  forty  days.  The  garrison
marched  out  with  the  honours  of  war.  In  the  modern
practice,  armies  were  rarely  captured  in  strongholds,

20  Wagenaar,  ix.  214,  215.

21  Van  dcr  Kemp,  il.  120.

246

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLV.

nor  were  the  defenders,  together  with  the  population,
butchered.

The  loss,  after  a  six  weeks'  siege,  of  Eheinberg,  which
six  years  before,  with  far  inferior  fortifications,  had  held
out  a  much  longer  time  against  the  States,  was  felt  as  a
bitter  disappointment  throughout  the  republic,  Frederic
Henry,  on  leaving  the  place,  made  a  feeble  and  unsuc-
cessful demonstration  against  Venlo,  by  which  the
general  dissatisfaction  was  not  diminished.  Soon  after-
wards, the  war  became  more  languid  than  ever.  News
arrived  of  a  great  crisis  on  the  Genoa  exchange.  A
multitude  of  merchants,  involved  in  pecuniary  transac-
tions with  Spinola,  fell  with  one  tremendous  crash.  The
funds  of  the  Catholic  commander-in-chief  were  already
exhausted.  His  acceptances  could  no  longer  be  nego-
tiated.^^ His  credit  was  becoming  almost  as  bad  as  the
king's  own.  The  inevitable  consequence  of  the  want
of  cash  and  credit  followed.  Mutiny,  for  the  first  time
in  Spinola's  administration,  raised  its  head  once  more,
and  stalked  about  defiant.  Six  hundred  veterans
marched  to  Breda,  and  ofi'ered  their  services  to  Justinus
of  Nassau.  The  proposal  was  accepted.^^  Other  bands
established  their  quarters  in  different  places,  chose  their
Elettos  and  lesser  officers,  and  enacted  the  scenes  which
have  been  so  often  depicted  in  these  pages.  The  splendid
army  of  Spinola  melted  like  April  snow.  By  the  last
week  of  October  there  hardly  seemed  a  Catholic  army  in
the  field.  The  commander-in-chief  had  scattered  such
companies  as  could  still  be  relied  upon  in  the  villages  of
the  friendly  archiepiscopate  of  Cologne,  and  had  ob-
tained, not  by  murders  and  blackmail — according  to  the
recent  practice  of  the  Admiral  of  Arragon,  at  whose
grim  name  the  whole  country-side  still  shuddered — but
from  the  friendship  of  the  leading  inhabitants  and  by
honest  loans,  a  sufiicient  sum  to  put  bread'  into  the
mouths  of  the  troops  still  remaining  faithful  to  him.^^

The  opportunity  had  at  last  arrived  for  the  stadholder
to  strike  a  blow  before  the  season  closed.  Bankruptcy

24  Oct  mutiny  had  reduced  his  enemy  to  impo-

tence in  the  very  season  of  his  greatest  pro-
bable success.  On  the  24th  October  Maurice  came  before

22  Grotius,  XV.  696,  697.

23  Grotius,  Bentivoglio,  Meteren,  Wagenaar,  uM  sup.

24  Ibid.

1(506.

ATTEMPTED  RECOVERY  OF  GROLL.

247

Lochem,  which  he  recaptured  in  five  days.  Next  in  the
order  of  SpinoLi's  victories  was  Groll,  which  the  stad-
holder  at  once  besieged.  He  had  almost  fifteen  thousand
infantry-  and  three  thousand  horse.^^  A  career  of  brief
triumph  before  winter  should  close  in  upon  those  drop-
ping fields,  seemed  now  assured.  But  the  rain,  which
during  nearly  the  whole  campaign  had  been  his  potent
ally,  had  of  late  been  playing  him  false.  The  swollen
Yssel,  during  a  biief  period  of  dry  weather,  had  sunk
so  low  in  certain  shallows  as  not  to  be  navigable  for  his
transports,-''  and  after  his  trains  of  artillery  and  muni-
tions had  been  dragged  wearily  overland  as  far  as  Groll,
the  deluge  had  returned  in  such  force,  that  physical
necessity  as  w^ell  as  considerations  of  humanity  com-
pelled him  to  defer  his  intrenching  operations  until  the
weather  should  moderate.  As  there  seemed  no  further
danger  to  be  apprehended  from  the  broken  mutinous,
and  dispersed  forces  of  the  enemy,  the  siege  operations
were  conducted  in  a  leisurely  manner.  What  was  the
astonishment,  therefore,  among  the  soldiers,  when  a
riunour  flew  about  the  camp  in  the  early  days  of
November,  that  the  indomitable  Spinola  was  again  ad-
vancing upon  them  !  ^  It  was  perfectly  true.  AVith
extraordinary  perseverance  he  had  gathered  up  six  or
seven  thousand  infantry  and  twelve  companies  of  horse
— all  the  remnants  of  the  splendid  armies  with  which
he  had  taken  the  field  at  midsummer — and  was  now
marching  to  the  relief  of  Gioll,  besieged  as  it  was  by  a
force  at  least  doubly  as  numerous  as  his  own.  It  was
represented  to  the  stadholder,  however,  that  an  impass-
able morass  lay  between  him  and  the  enemy and  that
there  would  therefore  be  time  enough  to  complete  his
intrenchments  before  S})inola  could  put  his  foolhardy
attempt  into  execution.  But  the  Catholic  general,  march-
ing faster  than  rumour  itself,  had  crossed  the  impractic-
able swamp  almost  before  a  spadeful  of  earth  had  been
tinned  in  the  republican  camp.  His  advance  was  in
sight  even  while  the  incredulous  w^eie  sneering  at  the
absurdity  of  his  supposed  project.  Informed  by  scouts
of  the  weakest  point  in  the  stadholder's  extended  lines,
^^pinola  was  directing  himself  thither  with  beautiful

2*  G^C'ttu^,  xv.  69S.  J*  Letter  of  Prince  Maurice,  in  Van  der  Kenip,  ii.  545.

-•  Authorities  cited.  Vaii  der  Ktmp,  ii.  21.

248

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLV*

precisioii.^^  Maurice  hastily  contracted  both  his  wings,
and  concentrated  himself  in  the  village  of  Lebel.  At
last  the  moment  had  come  for  a  decisive  struggle.  There
could  be  little  doubt  of  the  result.  All  the  advantage
v^as  with  the  republican  army.  The  Catholics  had  ar-
rived in  front  of  the  enemy  fatigued  by  forced  marches
through  quagmires,  in  horrible  weather,  over  roads
deemed  impassable.  The  States'  troops  were  fresh,
posted  on  ground  of  their  own  choosing,  and  partially
intrenched.  To  the  astonishment,  even  to  the  horror
of  the  most  eager  portion  of  the  army,  the  stadholder
deliberately,  and  despite  the  groans  of  his  soldiers,  re-
fused the  combat,  and  gave  immediate  orders  for  raising
the  siege  and  abandoning  the  field.^^

On  the  12th  of  November  he  broke  up  his  camp  and

12  Nov  '^vithdrew  to  a  village  called  Zelem.  On  the
same  day  the  marquis,  having  relieved  the  city,
without  paying  the  expected  price,  retired  in  another
direction,  and  established  what  was  left  of  his  army  in
the  province  of  Munster.  The  campaign  was  closed.^^
And  thus  the  great  war,  which  had  run  its  stormy
course  for  nearly  forty  years,  dribbled  out  of  existence,
sinking  away  that  rainy  November  in  the  dismal  fens  of
Zutphen.  The  long  struggle  for  independence  had  come,
almost  unperceived,  to  an  end.

Peace  had  not  arrived,  but  the  work  of  the  armies  was
over  for  many  a  long  year.  Freedom  and  independence
were  secured.  A  deed  or  two,  never  to  be  forgotten  by
Netherland  hearts,  was  yet  to  be  done  on  the  ocean,  be-
fore the  long  and  intricate  negotiations  for  peace  should
begin,  and  the  weary  people  permit  themselves  to  re-
joice;  but  the  prize  was  already  won.

Meantime,  the  conduct  of  Prince  Maurice  in  these
last  days  of  the  campaign  was  the  subject  of  biting
censure  by  friend  and  foe.  The  military  fame  of  Spinola
throughout  Europe  grew  apace,  and  the  fame  of  his
great  rival  seemed  to  shrink  in  the  same  proportion.

Henry  of  France  was  especially  indignant  at  what  he
considered  the  shortcomings  of  the  republic  and  of  its
chief.  Already,  before  the  close  of  the  summer,  the
agent  Aerssens  had  written  from  Paris  that  his  Majesty
was  very  much  displeased  with  Spinola's  prosperity,

2?  Grotius,  XV.  699.  so  Authorities  cited.  3i  ibid

1606.

CONDUCT  OF  THE  STADHOLDER.

249

ascribing  it  to  the  want  of  good  councils  on  the  part  of
the  States'  Government  that  so  fine  an  army  should  lie
idle  so  long,  without  making  an  attempt  to  relieve  the
beleaguered  places,  so  that  Spinola  felt  assured  of  taking
anything  as  soon  as  he  made  his  appearance.  "  Your
Mightinesses  cannot  believe,"  continued  the  agent,
"  what  a  trophy  is  made  by  thr;  Spanish  ministers  out  of
these  little  exploits,  and  they  have  so  much  address  at
this  court,  that  if  such  things  continue  they  may  pro-
duce still  greater  results."

In  December  he  wrote  that  the  king  was  so  malcon-
tent concerning  the  siege  of  Groll  as  to  make  ^
it  impossible  to  answer  him  with  arguments,
that  he  openly  expressed  regret  at  not  having  em-
ployed the  money  lent  to  the  States  upon  strengthening
his  own  frontiers,  so  distrustful  was  he  of  their  capacity
for  managing  affairs,  and  that  he  mentioned  with  dis-
gust statements  received  from  hi.s  ambassador  at  Brussels
and  from  the  Due  de  Rohan,  ^o  the  effect  that  Spinola
had  between  five  and  six  thousand  men  only  at  the  re-
lief of  Groll,  against  twelve  thousand  in  the  stadholder's
army.^^

The  motives  of  the  deeds  and  the  omissions  of  the
prince  at  this  supreme  moment  must  be  pondered  with
great  caution.  The  States-General  had  doubtless  been
inclined  for  vigorous  movements,  and  Olden-Bameveld,
with  some  of  his  colleagues,  had  visited  the  camp  late  in
September  to  urge  the  relief  of  Eheinberg.  Maurice
was  in  daily  correspondence  with  the  Goveinment,  and
regularly  demanded  their  advice,  by  which,  on  many
former  occasions,  he  had  bound  himself,  even  when  it
was  in  conflict  with  his  own  better  judgment.

But  throughout  this  campaign,  the  responsibility  was
entirely,  almost  ostentatiously,  thrown  by  the  States-
General  upon  their  commander-in-chief,  and,  as  already
indicated,  their  preparations  in  the  spring  and  early
summer  had  been  entirely  inadequate.  Should  he  lose
the  army  with  which  he  had  so  quietly  but  completely
checked  Spinola  in  all  his  really  important  moves
during  the  summer  and  autumn,  he  might  despair  of
putting  another  very  soon  into  flie  field.  That  his
force  in  that  November  week  before  Groll  was  nume-

32  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  5-49.

M  Ibid.  050.

250

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLV.

rically  far  superior  to  the  enemy  is  certain,  but  he  had
lost  confidence  in  his  cavalry  since  their  bad  behaviour
at  Mulheim  the  previous  year,  and  a  very  large  propor-
tion of  his  infantry  vs^as  on  the  sick-list  at  the  moment
of  Spinola's  approach.  "  Lest  the  continual  bad  weather
should  entirely  consume  the  army,"  he  said,  we  are
resolved,  within  a  day  or  two  after  we  have  removed
the  sick  who  are  here  in  great  numbers,  to  break  np,
unless  the  enemy  should  give  us  occasion  to  make  some
attempt  upon  him."

Maurice  was  the  servant  of  a  small  republic,  contend-
ing single-handed  against  an  empire  still  considered  the
most  formidable  power  in  the  world.  His  cue  was  not
necessarily  to  fight  on  all  occasions ;  for  delay  often
fights  better  than  an  army  against  a  foreign  invader.
When  a  battle  and  a  victory  were  absolutely  necessary
we  have  seen  the  magnificent  calmness  which  at  Nieu-
port  secured  triumph  under  the  shadow  of  death.  Had
he  accepted  Spinola's  challenge  in  November,  he  would
probably  have  defeated  him  and  have  taken  Groll.  He
might  not,  however,  have  annihilated  his  adversary,
who,  even  when  worsted,  would  perhaps  have  efi'ected
his  escape.  The  city  was  of  small  value  to  the  republic.
The  principal  advantage  of  a  victory  would  have  been
increased  military  renown  for  himself.  Viewed  in  this
light,  there  is  something  almost  sublime  in  the  phleg-
matic and  perfectly  republican  composure  with  which
he  disdained  laurels,  easily  enough,  as  it  would  seem,
to  have  been  acquired,  and  denied  his  soldiers  the
bloodshed  and  the  sufi'ering  for  which  they  were
clamouring.

And  yet,  after  thoroughly  weighing  and  measuring
all  these  circumstances,  it  is  natural  to  regret  that  he  did
not  on  that  occasion  rise  upon  Spinola  and  smite  him
to  the  earth.  The  Lord  had  delivered  him  into  his
hands.  The  chances  of  his  own  defeat  were  small,  its
probable  consequences,  should  it  occur,  insignificant.
It  is  hardly  conceivable  that  he  could  have  been  so
completely  overthrown  as  to  allow  the  Catholic  com-
mander to  do  in  November  what  he  had  tried  all  summer
in  vain  to  accompli'sh — cross  the  Yssel  and  the  Waal,
with  the  dregs  of  his  army,  and  invade  Holland  and

3*  Letter  of  9  November,  1606,  in  Van  der  Kemp,  ii  536.

1606,

CRUISE  OF  ADMIRAL  HAULTAIN.

251

Zeeland  in  midwinter,  over  the  prostrate  bodies  of
Maurice  and  all  his  forces.  On  the  other  hand,  that
the  stadholder  would  have  sent  the  enemy  reeling  back
to  his  bogs,  with  hardly  the  semblance  of  an  army  at
his  heels,  was  almost  certain.  The  effect  of  such  a
blow  upon  impending  negotiations,  and  especially  upon
the  impressible  imagination  of  Henry  and  the  pedantic
shrewdness  of  James,  would  have  been  very  valuable.
It  was  not  surprising  that  the  successful  soldier  who
sat  on  the  French  throne,  and  who  had  been  ever  ready
to  wager  life  and  crown  on  the  results  of  a  stricken
field,  should  be  loud  in  his  ex-pressions  of  disapproba-
tion and  disgust.  Yet  no  man  knew  better  than  the
sagacious  Gascon  that  fighting  to  win  a  crown,  and  to
save  a  republic,  were  two  essentially  different  things.

In  the  early  summer  of  this  year  Admiral  Ilaultain,
whom  we  lately  saw  occupied  with  tossing  Sarmiento  s
Spanish  legion  into  the  sea  off  the  harbour  of  Dover,
had  been  despatched  to  the  Spanish  coast  on  a  still
more  important  errand.  The  outward  boimd  Portu-
guese merchantmen  and  the  home  returning  fleets
ffom  America,  which  had  been  ab.sent  nearly  two  years,
might  be  fallen  in  with  at  any  moment,  in  the  latitude
of  36^-38°.  The  admiral,  having  received  orders,  there-
fore, to  cruise  carefully  in  those  regions,  sailed  for  the
shores  of  Portugal  with  a  squadron  of  twenty-four  war-
ships. His  expedition  was  not  very  successful.  He
picked  up  a  prize  or  two  here  and  there,  and  his  pre-
sence on  the  coast  prevented  the  merchant-fleet  from
sailing  out  of  Lisbon  for  the  East  Indies,  the  merchan-
dise already  on  board  being  disembarked  and  the
"voyage  postponed  to  a  more  favourable  opportunity.
He  saw  nothing,  however,  of  the  long-expected  ships
from  the  golden  West  Indies — as  Mexico,  Peni,  and
Brazil  were  then  indiscriminately  called — and,  after
parting  company  with  six  of  his  own  ships,  which  were
dispersed  and  damaged  in  a  gale,  and  himself  suffering
from  a  dearth  of  provisions,  he  was  forced  to  return
without  much  gain  or  glory .^^

In  the  month  of  September  he  was  once  more  des-
patched on  the  same  service.  He  had  nineteen  war-
galleots  of  the  first  class,  and  two  yachts,  well  equipped

35  Grotius.  XV.  685. Wagenaar,  221,  seqq.

252  . THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLV.

and  manned.^^  Vice-admiral  of  the  fleet  was  Eegnier
Klaaszoon  (or  Nicholson),  of  Amsterdam,  a  name  which
should  always  be  held  fresh  in  remembrance,  not  only
by  mariners  and  Netherlanders,  but  by  all  men  whose
pulses  can  beat  in  sympathy  with  practical  heroism.

The  admiral  coasted  deliberately  along  the  shores  of
Spain  and  Portugal.  It  seemed  impossible  that  the
golden  fleets,  which,  as  it  was  ascertained,  had  not  yet
arrived,  could  now  escape  the  vigilance  of  the  Dutch
cruisers.  An  occasional  merchant- ship  or  small  war-
galley  was  met  from  time  to  time  and  chased  into  the
harbours.  A  landing  was  here  and  there  effected  and
a  few  villages  burned. But  these  were  not  the  prizes

19  Se  t  trophies  sought. On  the  19th  Septem-

ber a  storm  off  the  Portuguese  coast  scattered
the  fleet ;  six  of  the  best  and  largest  ships  being  per-
manently lost  sight  of  and  separated  from  the  rest.
With  the  other  thirteen  Haultain  now  cruised  off  Cape
St.  Vincent  directly  across  the  ordinary  path  of  the
homeward-bound  treasure-ships.

On  the  6th  October  many  sails  were  descried  in  the

gQ^^  distance,  and  the  longing  eyes  of  the  Hollan-
ders were  at  last  gratified  with  what  was
supposed  to  be  the  great  West  India  commercial  squad-
rons. The  delusion  was  brief.  Instead  of  innocent
and  richly- freighted  merchantmen,  the  new  comers  soon
proved  to  be  the  war-ships  of  Admiral  Don  Luis  de
Fazardo,  eighteen  great  galleons  and  eight  galleys  strong,
besides  lesser  vessels — the  most  formidable  fleet  that  for
years  had  floated  in  those  waters.  There  had  been  time
for  Admiral  Haultain  to  hold  but  a  very  brief  consulta-
tion with  his  chief  officers.  As  it  was  manifest  that
the  Hollanders  were  enormously  over-matched,  it  was
decided  to  manoeuvre  as  well  as  possible  for  the
weather-gage,  and  then  to  fight  or  to  effect  an  escape,
as  might  seem  most  expedient  after  fairly  testing  the
strength  of  the  enemy.  It  was  blowing  a  fresh  gale,
and  the  Netherland  fleet  had  as  much  as  they  could
stagger  with  under  close-reefed  topsails. ^'^  The  war-
galleys,  fit  only  for  fair  weather,  were  soon  forced  to
take  refuge  under  the  lee  of  the  land,  but  the  eighteen

Meteren,  541.  Grotius,  xv.  699,  700.  Wagenaar,  ix.  220-224. 37  Meteren,  uhi  mjpr

1606.

ENCOUNTER  WITH  SPANISH  WAR  SHIPS.

253

galleons,  the  most  powerful  vessels  then  known  to  naval
architecture,  were  bearing  directly  down,  full  before  the
wind,  upon  the  Dutch  fleet.^^

It  must  be  admitted  that  Admiral  Hanltain  hardly
displayed  as  much  energy  now  as  he  had  done  in  the
Straits  of  Dover  against  the  unarmed  transports  the
year  before.  His  ships  were  soon  scattered,  right  and
left,  and  the  manoeuvres  for  the  weather-gage  resolved
themselves  into  a  general  scramble  for  escape.^^  Vice-
Admiral  Klaaszoon  alone  held  firm,  and  met  the  onset  of
the  first  comers  of  the  Spanish  fleet.  A  fierce  combat,
yard-arm  to  yard-arm,  endued.  Klaaszoon 's  mainmast
went  by  the  board,  but  Haultain,  with  five  ships,  all
that  could  be  rallied,  coming  to  the  rescue,  the  assailants
for  a  moment  withdrew.  Five  Dutch  vessels  of  mode-
rate strength  were  now  in  action  against  the  eighteen
great  galleons  of  Fazardo.  Certainly  it  was  not  an  even
game,  but  it  might  have  been  played  with  more  heart
and  better  skill.  There  was  but  a  half-hour  of  daylight
left  when  Klaaszoon's  crippled  ship  was  again  attacked/^
This  time  there  was  no  attempt  to  offer  him  assist-
ance ;  the  rest  of  the  Dutch  fleet  crowding  all  the
sails  their  masts  would  bear,  and  using  all  the  devices
of  their  superior  seamanship,  not  to  harass  the  enemy,
but  to  steal  as  swiftly  as  possible  out  of  his  way.
Honestly  confessing  that  they  dared  not  come  into  the
fight,  they  bore  away  for  dear  life  in  every  direct  ion.
Night  came  on,  and  the  last  that  the  fugitives  knew  of
the  events  off"  Cape  St.  Vincent  w^as  that  stout  Eegnier
Klaaszoon  had  been  seen  at  sunset  in  the  midst  of  the
Spanish  fleet;  the  sound  of  his  broadsides  saluting  their
ears  as  they  escaped.

Left  to  himself,  alone  in  a  dismasted  ship,  the  vice-
admiral  never  thought  of  yielding  to  the  eighteen
Spanish  galleons.  To  the  repeated  summons  of  Don
Luis  Fazardo  that  he  should  surrender  he  remained
obstinately  deaf.  Knowing  that  it  was  impossible  for
him  to  escape,  and  fearing  that  he  might  blow  up  his

^  Meteren,  ubi  sup.  It  is  true  that  two  **  Ende  daernade  bleef  dfn  vice-

or  three  carracks  of  large  size, and  adroirael  van  d'een  ende  van  d'ander  ver-

mounting  twenty-two  guns,  were  scat-  late»  d'eon  hem  excuseerende  of  d'ander

tered  among  the  galleons.  raaer  nicest  dutse  de  Spaonsche  schepen

^  Ibid. *o  Ibid.  nict  dorsten  acndocn."— Mcteren,  5-11.

254

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLV.

vessel  rather  than  surrender,  the  enemy  made  no  attempt
to  board.  Spanish  chivalry  was  hardly  more  conspi-
cuous on  this  occasion  than  Dutch  valour,  as  illustrated
b}^  Admiral  Haultain.  Two  whole  days  and  nights
Klaaszoon  drifted  about  in  his  crippled  ship,  exchanging
broadsides  with  his  antagonists,  and  with  his  colours
flying  on  the  stump  of  his  mast.  The  fact  would  seem
incredible,  were  it  not  attested  by  perfectly  trustworthy
contem23orary  accounts.  At  last  his  hour  seemed  to
have  come.  His  ship  was  sinking ;  a  final  demand  for
surrender,*^  with  promise  of  quarter,  was  made.  Out  of
his  whole  crew  but  sixty  remained  alive ;  many  of  them
badly  wounded.

He  quietly  announced  to  his  officers  and  men  his  de-
cision never  to  surrender,  in  which  all  concurred.  They
knelt  together  upon  the  deck,  and  the  admiral  made  a
prayer  in  which  all  fervently  joined.  With  his  own
hand  Klaaszoon  then  lighted  the  powder  magazine,  and
the  ship  was  blown  into  the  air.  Two  sailors,  all  that
were  left  alive,  were  picked  out  of  the  sea  by  the
Spaniards  and  brought  on  board  one  of  the  vessels  of
the  fleet.  Desperately  mutilated,  those  grim  Dutchmen
lived  a  few  minutes  to  tell  the  tale,  and  then  died
defiant  on  the  enemy's  deck.*^

Yet  it  was  thought  that  a  republic,  which  could
produce  men  like  Eegnier  Klaaszoon  and  his  comrades,
could  be  subjected  again  to  despotism,  after  a  war  for
independence  of  forty  years,  and  that  such  sailors  could
be  forbidden  to  sail  the  eastern  and  western  seas.  No
epigrammatic  phrase  has  been  preserved  of  this  simple
Eegnier,  the  son  of  Nicholas.  He  only  did  what  is
sometimes  talked  about  in  phraseology  more  or  less
melo-dramatic,  and  did  it  in  a  very  plain  way.

Such  extreme  deeds  may  have  become  so  much  less
necessary  in  the  world,  that  to  threaten  them  is  apt  to
seem  fantastic.  Exactly  at  that  crisis  of  history,  how-
ever, and  especially  in  view  of  the  Dutch  admiral  com-
manding having  refused  a  combat  of  one  to  three,  the
speechless  self  devotion  of  the  vice-admiral  was  better

42  Meteren,  ubi  sup. Ibid. Grot.  xv.  700. Wagenaar,  ix.  223.

43  "  Duo  semiusti  paulum  provixe^  ab  Hispanio  excepti  cum  miraculo  spectanti-
bus  horridos  vultus  vocesque  in  ipsa  moite  contumaciam."  —  Grot,  ubi  sup
Meteren.  Wagenaar.

1606.

DEATH  OF  JUSTUS  LIPSIUS.

255

than  three  years  of  eloquent  arguments  and  a  ship-load
of  diplomatic  correspondence,  such  as  were  already
impending  over  the  world.

Admiral  Haultain  returned  with  all  his  ships  unin-
jured— the  six  missing  vessels  having  found  their  way
at  last  safely  back  to  the  squadron — but  with  a  very
great  crack  to  his  reputation.  It  was  urged  very  justl}',
both  by  the  States-General  and  the  public,  that  if  one
ship  under  a  determined  commander  could  figVit  the
whole  Spanish  fleet  two  days  and  nights,  and  sink
unconquered  at  last,  ten  ships  more  might  have  put  the
enemy  to  flight,  or  at  lea.'st  have  saved  the  vice-admiral
from  destruction/^

But  very  few  days  after  the  incidents  just  described,
the  merchant  fleet  which,  instead  of  Don  Luis  Fazardo's
war  galleons.  Admiral  Haultain  had  so  longed  to  en-
counter, arrived  safely  at  San  Lucar.  It  was  the  most
splendid  treasure  fleet  that  had  ever  entered  a  Spanish
port,  and  the  Dutch  admiral's  heart  might  well  have
danced  for  joy,  had  he  chanced  to  come  a  little  later  on
the  track.  There  Avere  fifty  ships,  under  charge  of
General  Alonzo  de  Ochares  Galindo  and  General  Gane-
vaye.  They  had  on  board,  according  to  the  registeis,
1,914,176  dollars  worth  of  bullion  for  the  king,  and
6,08(),()17  dollars  for  merchants,  or  8,000,000  dollars  in
all,  besides  rich  cargoes  of  silk,  cochineal,  sarsaparilla,
indigo.  Brazil-wood,  and  hides ;  the  result  of  two  years
of  pressure  upon  l^eruvians,  Mexicans,  and  Brazilians.
Never  had  Spanish  finances  been  at  so  low  an  ebb.
Kever  was  so  splendid  an  income  more  desirable.  The
king's  share  of  the  cargo  was  enough  to  pay  half  the
arrearages  due  to  his  mutinous  troops  ;  and  for  such
housekeeping  this  was  to  be  in  funds/^

There  were  no  further  exploits  on  land  or  sea  that
year.  There  were,  however,  deaths  of  three  personages
often  mentioned  in  this  histoiy.  The  learned  Justus
Lipsius  died  in  Louvain,  a  good  editor  and  scholar,  and
as  sincere  a  Catholic  at  last  as  he  had  been  alternately  a
bigoted  Calvinist  and  an  earnest  Lutheran.  His  reputa-
tion was  thought  to  have  suffered  by  his  later  pub-
lications,'*^ but  the  world  at  large  was  occupied  with

♦*  Metercn.  Waf^enaur,  ubi  ^up. «  McUr.n,  5Jr». ^  Grotiua,  xv.  709.

256

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLV,

sterner  stuff  than  those  classic  productions,  and  left  the
final  decision  to  posterity.

A  man  of  a  diiferent  mould,  the  turbulent,  high-born,
hard-fighting,  hard-drinking  Hohenlo,  died  also  this
year,  brother-in-law  and  military  guardian,  subsequently
rival  and  political  and  personal  antagonist,  of  Prince
Maurice.  His  daring  deeds  and  his  troublesome  and
mischievous  adventures  have  been  recounted  in  these
pages.  His  name  will  be  always  prominent  in  the
history  of  the  republic,  to  which  he  often  rendered
splendid  service,  but  he  died,  as  he  had  lived,  a  glutton
and  a  melancholy  sot.*^

The  third  remarkable  personage  who  passed  away  was
one  whose  name  will  be  remembered  as  long  as  the
Netherlands  have  a  histor3%  old  Count  John  of  Nassau,
only  surviving  brother  of  William  the  Silent. He  had
been  ever  prominent  and  deeply  interested  in  the  great
religious  and  political  movements  of  upper  and  lower
Germany,  and  his  services  in  the  foundation  of  the
Dutch  commonwealth  were  signal,  and  ever  generously
acknowledged.  At  one  period,  as  will  be  recollected,
he  was  stadholder  of  Gelderland,  and  he  was  ever  ready
with  sword,  purse,  and  counsel  to  aid  in  the  great
struggle  for  independence.

«7  Grotius,  XV.  708.

<6  ibklL

1606

GENERAL  DESIRE  FOR  PEACE.

257

CHAPTEK  XLVI.

General  desire  for  peace  —  Political  aspect  of  Europe  —  Designs  of  the  kings  of
England,  France,  and  Spain  concerning  the  United  P^rovinces — Matrimonial
schemes  of  Spain  —  Conference  between  the  French  ministers  and  the  Dutch
envoy — Confidential  revelations  —  Henry's  desire  to  annex  the  Netherlands  to
France  —  Discussion  of  the  subject — Artifice  of  Bameveld  —  Impracticability  of  a
compromise  between  the  Provinces  and  Spain  —  Formation  of  a  West  India
Company — Secret  mission  from  the  archdukes  to  the  Hague  —  Reply  of  the

'States-General  —  Return  of  the  archdukes'  envoy  —  Arrangement  of  an  eight
months'  armistice.

The  general  tendency  towards  a  pacification  in  Europe
at  the  close  of  the  year  could  hardly  be  mistaken.  The
languor  of  fatigue,  rather  than  any  sincere  desire  for
peace  seemed  to  make  negotiations  possible.  It  was
not  likely  that  great  truths  would  yet  be  admitted,  or
that  ruling  individuals  or  classes  would  recognize  ihe
rise  of  a  new  system  out  of  the  rapidly  dissolving  ele-
ments of  the  one  which  had  done  its  work.  War  was
becoming  more  and  more  expensive,  while  commerce,  as
the  world  slowly  expanded  itself,  and  manifested  its
unsuspected  resources,  was  becoming  more  and  more
lucrative.  It  was  not,  perhaps,  that  men  hated  each
other  less,  but  that  they  had  for  a  time  exhausted  their
power  and  their  love  for  slaughter.  Meanwhile  new
devices  for  injuring  humanity  and  retarding  its  civiliza-
tion were  revealing  themselves  out  of  that  very  intellec-
tual progress  which  ennobled  the  new  era.  Although
war  might  still  be  regarded  as  the  normal  condition  of
the  civilized  world,  it  was  possible  for  the  chosen  ones
to  whom  the  earth  and  its  fulness  belonged,  to  inflict
general  damage  otherwise  than  by  perpetual  battles.

In  the  east,  west,  north,  and  south  of  Europe  peace
was  thrusting  itself  as  it  were  uncalled  for  and  unex-
pected upon  the  general  attention.  Charles  and  his
nephew  Sigismund,  and  the  false  Demetrius,  and  the
intrigues  of  the  Jesuits,  had  provided  too  much  work
for  Sweden,  Poland,  and  Kussia  to  leave  those  countries
much  leisure  for  mingling  in  the  more  important  busi-

VOL.  IV  s

258

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XL VI,

ness  of  Europe  at  this  epoch,  nor  have  their  affairs
much  direct  connection  with  this  history.  Venice,  in
its  quarrels  with  the  Jesuits,  had  brought  Spain,  France,
and  all  Italy  into  a  dead  lock,  out  of  which  a  compro-
mise had  been  made  not  more  satisfactory  to  the  various
parties  than  compromises  are  apt  to  prove.  The  Dutch
republic  still  maintained  the  position  which  it  had
assumed,  a  quarter  of  a  century  before,  of  actual  and
legal  independence ;  while  Spain,  on  the  other  hand,
,  still  striving  after  universal  monarchy,  had  not,  of
course,  abated  one  jot  of  its  pretensions  to  absolute
dominion  over  its  rebellious  subjects  in  the  Netherlands.

The  holy  Eoman  and  the  sublime  Ottoman  empires  had
also  drifted  into  temporary  peace  ;  the  exploits  of  the
Persians  and  other  Asiatic  movements  having  given
Ahmed  more  work  than  was  convenient  on  his  eastern
frontier,  while  Stephen  Botshkay  had  so  completely  got
the  better  of  Kudolph  in  Transylvania  as  to  make  re-
pose desirable.  So  there  was  a  treaty  between  the  great
Turk  and  the  great  Christian  on  the  basis  of  what  each
possessed ;  Stephen  Botshkay  was  recognized  as  prince
of  Transylvania  with  part  of  Hungary,  and,  when  taken
off  soon  afterwards  by  family  poison,  he  recommended
on  his  death-bed  the  closest  union  between  Hungary
and  Transylvania,  as  well  as  peace  with  the  emperor,  so
long  as  it  might  be  compatible  with  the  rights  of  the
Magyars.^

France  and  England,  while  suspecting  each  other,
dreading  each  other,  and  very  sincerely  hating  each
other,  were  drawn  into  intimate  relations  by  their  com-
mon detestation  of  Spain,  with  which  power  both  had
now  formal  treaties  of  alliance  and  friendship.  This
was  the  result  of  their  mighty  projects  for  humbling
the  house  of  Austria  and  annihilating  its  power.  Eng-
land hated  the  Netherlands  because  of  the  injuries  she
had  done  them,  the  many  benefits  she  had  conferred
upon  them,  and  more  than  all  on  account  of  the  daily
iTicreasing  commercial  rivalry  between  the  two  most
progressive  states  in  Christendom,  the  two  powers  which,
comparatively  weak  as  they  were  in  territory,  capital,
and  population,  were  most  in  harmony  with  the  spirit
of  the  age.

J  Grotius,  XV.  712,  713. Meteren^  543.

1606.

POLITICAL  ASPECT  OF  EUROPE.

259

The  Government  of  England  was  more  hostile  than
its  people  to  the  United  Provinces.  James  never  spoke
of  the  Netherlanders  but  as  upstarts  and  rebels,  whose
success  ought  to  be  looked  upon  with  horror  by  the
Lord's  anointed  everywhere.  He  could  not  shut  his
eyes  to  the  fact  that,  with  the  republic  destroyed,  and
a  Spanish  sacerdotal  despotism  established  in  Htjlland
and  Zeeland,  with  Jesuit  seminaries  in  full  bloom  in
Amsterdam  and  the  Hague,  his  own  rebels  in  Ireland
might  prove  more  troublesome  than  ever,  and  gun-
powder plots  in  London  become  common  occurrences.
The  Earl  of  Tyrone  at  that  very  moment  was  receiv-
ing enthusiastic  hospitality  at  the  archduke's  court,
much  to  the  disgust  of  the  Presbyterian  sovereign  of
the  United  Kingdom,  who  nevertheless,  despite  his
cherished  theology,  was  possessed  with  an  unconquer-
able craving  for  a  close  family  alliance  with  the  most
Catholic  king.  Plis  ministers  were  inclined  to  Spain,
and  the  British  Government  was  at  heart  favourable  to
some  kind  of  arrangement  by  which  the  Netherlands
might  be  reduced  to  the  authority  of  their  former
master,  in  case  no  scheme  could  be  carried  into  effect
for  acquiring  a  virtual  sovereignty  over  those  provinces
by  the  British  crown.  Moreover,  and  most  of  all,  the
King  of  France  being  supposed  to  contemplate  the
annexation  of  the  Ketherlands  to  his  own  dominions,
the  jealousy  excited  by  such  ambition  made  it  even
possible  for  James's  Government  to  tolerate  the  idea  of
Dutch  independence.  Thus  the  court  and  cabinet  of
England  were  as  full  of  contradictory  hopes  and  projects
as  a  madman's  brain.

The  rivalry  between  the  courts  of  England  and
France  for  the  Spanish  marriages,  and  by  means  of
them  to  obtain  ultimately  the  sovereignty  of  all  the
Netherlands,  was  the  key  to  most  of  the  diplomacy  and
interpalatial  intrigue  of  the  several  first  years  of  the
century.  The  negotiations  of  Cornwallis  at  Madrid
were  almost  simultaneous  with  the  schemes  of  Villeroy
and  Rosny  at  l^iris.

A  portion  of  the  English  Government,  so  soon  as  its
treaty  with  Spain  had  been  signed,  seemed  secretly
determined  to  do  as  much  injury  to  the  republic  as
might  lie  in  its  power. \\  hile  at  heart  convinced  that

s  2

260

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XL VI.

the  preservation  of  the  Netherlands  was  necessary  for
England's  safety,  it  was  difficult  for  James  and  the
greater  part  of  his  advisers  to  overcome  their  repug-
nance to  the  republic,  and  their  jealousy  of  the  great
commercial  successes  which  the  republic  had  achieved.^
It  was  perfectly  plain  that  a  continuance  of  the  war
by  England  and  the  Netherlands  united  would  have
very  soon  ended  in  the  entire  humiliation  of  Spain.^
Now  that  peace  had  been  made,  however,  it  was  thought
possible  that  England  might  make  a  bargain  with  her
late  enemy  for  destroying  the  existence  and  dividing
the  territory  of  her  late  ally.  Accordingly  the  Spanish
cabinet  lost  no  time  in  propounding,  under  seal  of
secrecy,  and  with  even  more  mystery  than  was  usually
employed  by  the  most  Catholic  court,  a  scheme  for  the
marriage  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  with  the  Infanta ;  the
bridal  pair,  when  arrived  at  proper  age,  to  be  endowed
with  all  the  Netherlands,  both  obedient  and  republican,
in  full  sovereignty.  One  thing  was  necessary  to  the
carrying  out  of  this  excellent  plot, — the  reduction  of

-  *^  "  For  my  own  particular,"  wrote
Cornwallis,  "  though  1  hold  the  preserva-
tion of  the  Low  Countries  most  wholesome
and  necessary  for  the  kingdom  of  Great
Britain,  yet  dare  I  not  wish  their  strength
and  wealth  much  increased;  it  being
better  to  endure  an  advantage  in  a
monarchy  than  in  a  people  of  their  con-
dition."—Memorials  of  afTairs  of  State,
from  the  Papers  of  Sir  Ralph  Winwood.
London,  1725. Vol.  ii.  p.  76.

"Though  we  must  respect  the  Hol-
landers," wrote  the  Earl  of  Northampton,
"  (for  such  reasons  as  need  no  dilatation
to  a  man  of  your  capacity),  yet  we  resolve
to  mark  our  favours  that  they  be  without
exception  to  Spain." — Ibid.  pp.  92,  93.

^  "  The  King  "  (of  Spain)  wrote  Corn-
wallis, "being  now  freed  from  the  dis-
tractions he  was  wont  to  find  by  the
encounters  of  the  English,  proceeds  against
the  Hollanders  with  more  life  and  hope.
If  this  peace  had  not  been  concluded,  in
mine  own  understanding  1  see  not  how  it
had  been  possible  for  him  to  have  borne
out  the  infinite  weight  of  charges  and
business  laid  upon  him."  And  again,
"  England  never  lost  such  an  opportunity
of  winning  honour  and  wealth  as  by  re-
lin(iuishing  the  war  with  Spain.  The

king  and  kingdom  were  reduced  to  such
estate  as  they  could  not  in  all  likelihood
have  endured  the  space  of  two  years
more ;  his  own  treasury  was  exhausted,
his  rents  and  customs  susigned  for  the
most  part  for  money  borrowed,  his  nobi-
lity poor  and  much  indebted,  his  mer-
chants wasted,  his  people  of  the  country .
in  all  extremity  of  necessity,  his  devices
of  gaining  by  the  increase  of  the  valuation
of  money  and  other  such  of  that  nature
all  played  over;  his  credit  in  borrowing
by  means  of  the  incertainty  of  his  estate
during  the  war  with  England,  much  de-
cayed ;  the  subjects  of  his  many  distracted
dominions  held  in  obedience  by  force  and
fear,  not  by  love  and  duty.  Himself  very
young,  and  in  that  regard  with  this
people  in  no  great  veneration,  and  the
less  for  suffering  himself  to  be  wholly
governed  by  a  man  (viz.  Duke  of  Lerma)
generally  hated  of  his  own  country.  If
this  state,  standing  on  such  feeble  founda-
tions, had  made  but  one  such  stumble  as
his  father  did  in  the  time  of  the  late
queen,  hardly  could  he  have  recovered
without  a  fall ;  his  nearest  and  last-gained
kingdoms  more  hurting  this  nation  than
any  other,  desiring  nothing  more  than  tha
ruin  of  it."— Ibid.  12,  75,  76.

1606.  MATRIMONIAL  SCHEMES  OF  SPAIN.  261

the  republic  into  her  ancient  subjection  to  Spain  before
her  territory  could  be  transferred  to  the  future  Princess
of  Wales/

It  was  proposed  by  the  Spanish  Government  that
England  should  undertake  this  part  of  the  job,  and
that  King  James  for  such  service  should  receive  an
annual  pension  of  one  million  ducats  a  year.  It  was
also  stipulated  that  certain  cities  in  the  republican  do-
minions should  be  pledged  to  him  as  security  for  the
regular  payment  of  that  stipend.^  Sir  Charles  Corn-
wallis,  English  ambassador  in  Spain,  lent  a  most  favour-
able ear  to  these  proposals,  and  James  eagerly  sanctioned
them  so  soon  as  they  were  secretly  imparted  to  that
monarch.  '*  The  king  here,"  said  Cornwallis,  "  hath
need  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain's  arm.  Our  king  .  .  .
hath  good  occasion  to  use  the  help  of  the  King  of  Spain's
purse.  The  assistance  of  England  to  help  this  nation
out  of  that  quicksand  of  the  Low  countries,  where  so
long  they  have  struggled  to  tread  themselves  out,  and
by  proof  find  that  they  sink  deeper  in,  will  be  a  sove-
reign medicine  to  the  malady  of  this  estate.  The  ad-
dition of  a  million  of  ducats  to  the  revenue  of  our
sovereign  will  be  a  good  help  to  his  estate."^

The  Spanish  Government  had  even  the  effrontery  to
offer  the  English  envoy  a  reward  of  two  hundred  thou-
sand crowns  if  the  negotiations  should  prove  successful.*^
Care  was  to  be  taken  however  that  Great  Britain,  by
this  accession  of  power,  both  present  and  in  prospect,
should  not  grow  too  great,  Spain  reserving  to  herself
certain  strongholds  and  maritime  positions  in  the  Nether-
lands, for  the  proper  security  of  her  European  and  Indian
commerce.^

It  was  thought  high  time  for  the  bloodshed  to  cease
in  the  provinces ;  and  as  England,  by  making  a  treaty
of  peace  with  Spain  when  Spain  was  at  the  last  gasp,
had  come  to  the  rescue  of  that  power,  it  was  logical  that

*  The  important  facts  connected  with 6  ibid.  111.

this  intrigue — except  such  as,  being  too  7  Ibid  215. Cornwallis  repelled  with

delicate  to  be  committed  to  paper,  were  indignation  the  attempts  to  bribe  him.

entrusted  to  confidential  agents— may  be  "Would  they  give  me  fur  every  crown

found  in  Winwood's  Memorials,  vol.  ii.  pp.  a  million,  I  would  not  think  upon  so  un-

160-177. Compare  Van  Deventer,  iii.  74.  faithful  a  work,"  he  said.

*  See  in  particular  Winwood.ii.  160, 161.  ?  Jhid.  160.

262

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVI.

she  sliould  complete  the  friendly  work  by  compelling
the  rebellions  provinces  to  awake  from  their  dream  of
independence.  If  the  statesmen  of  Holland  believed  in
the  possibility  of  that  independence,  the  statesmen  of
England  knew  better.  If  the  turbulent  little  republic
was  not  at  last  convinced  that  it  had  no  right  to  create
so  much  turmoil  and  inconvenience  for  its  neighbours
and  for  Christendom  in  general  in  order  to  maintain  its
existence,  it  should  be  taught  its  duty  by  the  sovereigns
of  Spain  and  Britain.^

It  was  observed,  however,  that  the  more  greedily  James
listened  day  after  day  to  the  marriage  propositions,  the
colder  became  the  Spanish  cabinet  in  regard  to  that  point,
the  more  disposed  to  postpone  those  nuptials  to  God's
providence  and  future  event."

The  high  hopes  founded  on  these  secret  stratagems
were  suddenly  dashed  to  the  earth  before  the  end  of  the
year ;  the  explosion  of  the  Gunpowder  Plot  blowing  the
castles  in  Spain  into  the  air.

Of  course  the  Spanish  politicians  vied  with  each  other
in  expressions  of  horror  and  indignation  at  the  Plot,  and
the  wicked  contrivers  thereof,  and  suggested  to  Corn-
w^allis  that  the  King  of  France  was  probably  at  the
bottom  of  it.^^

They  declined  to  give  up  Owen  and  Baldwin,  however,
and  meantime  the  negotiations  for  the  marriage  of  the
Prince  of  Wales  and  the  Infanta,  the  million  ducats  of
yearly  pension  for  the  needy  James,  and  the  reduction
of  the  Dutch  republic  to  its  ancient  slavery  to  Spain
*'  under  the  eye  and  arm  of  Britain,"  faded  indefinitely
away.  Salisbury  indeed  was  always  too  wise  to  believe
in  the  possibility  of  the  schemes  with  which  James
and  some  of  his  other  counsellors  had  been  so  much
infatuated.

It  was  almost  dramatic  that  these  plottings  between
James  and  the  Catholic  king  against  the  life  of  the

5  "  Never  can  those  other  people  (viz.  the  infesting  of  all  Christendom  so  as  a

of  the  United  Provinces)  take  a  better  op-  few  particulars  may  continue  the  means

portunity  to  compound  so  great  a  differ-  of  their  authority,  and  enrich  thems'  lves,

ence,  neither  can  they  require  more,  with  they  will  by  his  Majesty  be  unmasked." —

any  proportion  of  reason  and  justice,  than  Sir  Charles  Cornwallis  to  Earl  of  Salia-

will  be  yielded  unto  them. If  their  pur-  bury.  Win  wood,  ii.  174.
pose  be  to  maintain  a  popular  liberty  with  Ibid.  1 66.

the  yearly  effusion  of  so  much  blood,  and ibid.  173.

1606.

MATRIMONIAL  SCHEMES  OF  SPAIN.

263

republic  should  have  been  signally  and  almost  simul-
taneously avenged  by  the  conspiracy  of  Guido  Favvkes.

On  the  other  hand,  Eosny  had  imparted  to  the  Dutch
envoy  the  schemes  of  Henry  and  his  ministers  in  regard
to  the  same  object,  early  in  1605.  *' Spain  is  more  tired
of  the  war,"  said  he  to  Aerssens,  under  seal  of  absolute
secrecy,  *'than  you  are  yourselves.  She  is  nosv  negotiat-
ing for  a  marriage  between  the  Dauphin  and  the  Infanta,
and  means  to  give  her  the  United  Provinces,  as  at
present  constituted,  for  a  marriage  portion.  Villeroy
and  Sillery  believe  the  plan  feasible,  but  demand  all  the
Netherlands  togetlier.  As  for  me',  I  shall  have  faith  in
it  if  they  send  their  Infanta  hither  at  once,  or  make  a
regular  cession  of  the  territory.  Do  you  believe  that
my  lords  the  States  will  agree  to  the  proposition?  "^^

It  would  be  cei  tainly  difficult  to  match  in  history  the
effrontery  of  such  a  question.  The  republican  envoy
was  asked  point  blank  whether  his  country  would  resign
her  dearly  gained  liberty  and  give  herself  as  a  dowry
for  Philip  the  Second's  three-yeai*s-old  grand-daughter.
Aerssens  replied  cautiously  that  he  had  never  heard  the
matter  discussed  in  the  provinces.  It  had  always  been
thought  that  the  French  king  had  no  pretensions  to  their
territory,  but  had  ever  advocated  their  independence.
He  hinted  that  such  a  proposition  was  a  mere  apple  of
discord  thrown  between  two  good  allies  by  Spain.
Eosny  admitted  the  envoy's  arguments,  and  said  that
his  Majesty  would  do  nothing  without  the  consent  of
the  Dutch  Government,  and  that  he  should  probably  be
himself  sent  ere  long  to  the  Hague  to  see  if  he  could
not  obtain  some  little  recognition  from  the  States.

Thus  it  was  confidentially  revealed  to  the  agent  of
the  republic  that  her  candid  adviser  and  ally  was  hard
at  work,  in  conjunction  with  her  ancient  enemy,  to
destroy  her  independence,  annex  her  territory,  and
appropriate  to  himself  all  the  fruits  of  her  great  war,
her  commercial  achievements,  and  her  vast  sacrifices ;
while,  as  we  have  just  seen,  English  politicians  at  the
same  moment  were  attempting  to  accomplish  the  same
feat  for  England's  supposed  advantage.  All  that  was
wished  by  Henry  to  begin  with  was  a  little,  a  very
little,  recognition  of  his  sovereignty. You  will  do

^  Deventer,  41.

»  Ibid.  42.

284

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLVI.

well  to  reflect  on  this  delicate  matter  in  time,"  wrote
"Aerssens  to  the  Advocate ;  "  I  know  that  the  King  of
Spain  is  inclined  to  make  this  offer,  and  that  they  are
mad  enough  in  this  place  to  believe  the  thing  feasible.
For  me,  I  reject  all  such  talk  until  they  have  got  the
Infanta — that  is  to  say,  until  the  Greek  Kalends.  I  am
ashamed  that  they  should  believe  it  here,  and  fearfal
that  there  is  still  more  evil  concealed  than  I  know  of."^"*
Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1606  the  French
Government  became  still  more  eager  to  carry  out  their
plans  of  alliance  and  absorption.  Aerssens,  who  loved
a  political  intrigue  better  than  became  a  republican
envoy,  was  perfectly  aware  of  Henry's  schemes.  He
was  disposed  to  humour  them,  in  order  to  make  sure  of
his  military  assistance,  but  with  the  secret  intention
of  seeing  them  frustrated  by  the  determined  opposition
of  the  States.

The  French  ministers,  by  command  of  their  sovereign,
were  disposed  to  deal  very  plainl3^  They  informed  the
Dutch  diplomatist,  with  very  little  circumlocution,  that
if  the  republic  wished  assistance  from  France  she  was
to  pay  a  heavy  price  for  it.  Not  a  pound  of  flesh  only,
but  the  whole  body  corporate,  was  to  be  surrendered  if
its  destruction  was  to  be  averted  by  French  arms.

"  You  know,"  said  Sillery,  "that  princes  in  all  their
actions  consider  their  interests,  and  his  Majesty  has  not
so  much  affection  for  your  conservation  as  to  induce  him
to  resign  his  peaceful  position.  Tell  me,  I  pray  you,
what  would  you  do  for  his  Majesty  in  case  anything
should  be  done  for  you  ?  You  were  lately  in  Holland.
Do  you  think  that  they  would  give  themselves  to  the  king
if  he  assisted  them  ?  Do  you  not  believe  that  Prince
Maurice  has  designs  on  the  sovereignty,  and  would  pre-
vent the  fulfilment  of  the  king's  hopes  ?  What  will  you
do  for  us  in  return  for  our  assistance  ? "

Aerssens  was  somewhat  perplexed,  but  he  was  cunning
at  fence.  "  We  will  do  all  we  can,"  said  he,  "for  any
change  is  more  supportable  than  the  yoke  of  Spain."

"What  can  you  do  then?"  persisted  Sillery.  "  Give
us  your  opinion  in  plain  French,  I  beg  of  you,  and  lay
aside  all  passion ;  for  we  have  both  the  same  object —

^4  Deventer,  43.

i5»  Aerssens  to  Olden-Barneveld,  1  Oct,  1606,  in  Deventer,  iii,  87-93.

1606.

THE.  DUTCH  ENVOY  AND  SILLERY.

265

your  preservation.  Besides  interest,  his  Majesty  has
affection  for  you.  Let  him  only  see  some  advantage
for  himself  to  induce  him  to  assist  you  more  powerfully.
Suppose  you  should  give  us  what  you  have  and  what
you  may  acquire  in  Flanders,  with  the  promise  to  treat
secretly  with  us  when  the  time  comes.  Could  you  do
that?"^«

The  envoy  replied  that  this  would  be  tearing  the
commonwealth  in  pieces.  If  places  were  given  away,
the  jealousy  of  the  English  would  be  excited.  Certainly
it  would  be  no  light  matter  to  surrender  Sluys,  the  fruit
of  Maurice's  skill  and  energy,  the  splendidly  earned
equivalent  for  the  loss  of  Ostend.  As  to  Sluys  and
other  places  in  Flanders,"  said  Aerssens,  "  I  don't  know
if  towns  comprised  in  our  Union  could  be  transferred  or
pledged  without  their  own  consent  and  that  of  the  States.
Should  such  a  thing  get  wind  we  might  be  ruined.
Nevertheless  I  will  write  to  learn  what  his  Majesty  may
hope."

The  people,"  returned  Sillery,  "need  know  nothing
of  this  transfer  ;  f  )r  it  might  be  made  secretly  by  Prince
Maurice,  who  could  put  the  French  quietly  into  Sluys
and  other  Flemish  places.  Meantime  you  had  best  make
a  journey  to  Holland  to  arrange  matters  so  that  the
deputies,  coming  hither,  may  be  amply  instructed  in
regard  to  Sluys,  and  no  time  be  lost.  His  Majesty
is  determined  to  help  you  if  you  know  how  to  help
yourselves."

The  two  then  separated,  Sillery  enjoining  it  upon  the
envoy  to  see  the  king  next  morning,  "  in  order  to  ex-
plain to  his  Majesty,  as  he  had  just  been  doing  to  himself,
that  this  sovereignty  could  not  be  transferred,  without
the  consent  of  the  whole  people,  nor  the  people  be  con-
sulted in  secret."

"  It  is  necessary  therefore  to  be  armed,"  continued
Henry*s  minister  very  significantly,  "  before  aspiring  to
the  sovereignty.  "^^

Thus  there  was  a  faint  glimmer  of  appreciation  at  the
French  court  of  the  meaning  of  popular  sovereignty.  It
did  not  occur  to  the  minister  that  the  right  of  giving
consent  was  to  be  respected.  The  little  obstacle  was  to
be  overcome  by  stratagem  and  by  force, l^iince  Maurice

w  Aerssens  to  Olden- Barnevc Id,  ubi  sup.  17  ibid  is  ibid.

266

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XT. VI.

was  to  put  Frencli  garrisons  stealthily  into  Sluys  and  other
towns  conquered  by  the  republic  in  Flanders.  Then  the
magnanimous  ally  was  to  rise  at  the  right  moment  and
overcome  all  resistance  by  force  of  arms.  The  plot  was
a  good  one.  It  is  passing  strange,  however,  that  the
character  of  the  Nassaus  and  of  the  Dutch  nation  should
after  the  last  fifty  years  have  been  still  so  misunderstood.
It  seemed  in  France  possible  that  Maurice  would  thus
defile  his  honour  and  the  Netherlanders  barter  their
liberty,  by  accepting  a  new  tyrant  in  place  of  the  one
so  long  ago  deposed.

"  This  is  the  marrow  of  our  conference,"  said  Aerssens
to  Barneveld,  reporting  the  interview,  "  and  you  may
thus  perceive  whither  are  tending  the  designs  of  his
Majesty.  It  seems  that  they  are  aspiring  here  to  the
sovereignty,  and  all  my  letters  have  asserted  the  contrary.
]f  you  will  examine  a  little  more  closely,  however,  you
will  find  that  there  is  no  contradiction.  This  acquisition
would  be  desirable  for  France  if  it  could  be  made  peace-
fully. As  it  can  only  be  effected  by  war  you  may  make
sure  that  it  will  not  be  attempted ;  for  the  great  maxim
and  basis  of  this  kingdom  is  to  preserve  repose,  and  at  the
same  time  give  such  occupation  to  the  King  of  Spain
that  his  means  shall  be  consumed,  and  his  designs  frus-
trated. All  this  will  cease  if  we  make  peace.

"  Thus  in  treating  with  the  king  we  must  observe  two
rules.  The  first  is  that  we  can  maintain  ourselves  no
longer  unless  powerfully  assisted,  and  that,  the  people  in-
clining to  peace,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  obey  the  people.
Secondly,  we  must  let  no  difficulty  appear  as  to  the  desire
expressed  by  his  Majesty  to  have  the  sovereignty  of
these  provinces.  We  ought  to  let  him  hope  for  it,  but
to  make  him  understand  that  by  ordinary  and  legitimate
means  he  cannot  aspire  to  it.  We  will  make  him  think
that  we  have  an  equal  desire  with  himself,  and  we
shall  thus  take  from  those  evil-disposed  counsellors  the
power  to  injure  us  who  are  always  persuading  him  that
he  is  only  making  us  great  for  ourselves,  and  thus  giving
lis  the  power  to  injure  him.  In  short,  the  king  can
hope  nothing  from  us  overtly,  and  certainly  nothing
covertly.  By  explaining  to.  him  that  we  require  the
authorization  of  the  people,  and  by  showing  ourselves
prompt  to  grant  his  request,  he  will  be  the  very  first

1606.

ARTIFICE  OF  BARNEVELD.

267

to  prevent  us  from  taking  any  steps,  in  order  that  his
repose  may  not  be  disturbed.  I.  know  that  France  does
not  wish  to  go  to  war  with  Spain.  Let  ns  then  pre-
tend that  we  wish  to  be  under  the  dominion  of  France,
and  that  we  will  lead  our  people  to  that  point  if  the
king  desires  it,  but  that  it  cannot  be  done  secretly.
Believe  me,  he  will  not  wish  it  on  such  conditions,
while  we  shall  gain  much  by  this  course.  AVould  to
God  that  we  could  engage  France  in  war  with  Spain.
All  the  utility  would  be  ours,  and  the  accidents  of  arms
would  so  press  them  to  Spain,  Italy,  and  other  places,
that  they  would  have  little  leisure  to  think  of  us.
Consider  all  this  and  conceal  it  from  Buzanval."^^

Buzanval,  it  is  well  known,  was  the  French  envoy
at  the  Hague,  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  these
schemes  and  paltry  falsehoods  on  the  part  of  the  Dutch
agent  were  as  contemptible  as  any  of  the  plots  contrived
every  day  in  Paris  or  Madrid.  Such  base  coin  as  this
was  still  circulating  in  diplomacy  as  if  fresh  from  tlie
Machiavellian  mint ;  but  the  republican  agent  ought  to
have  known  that  his  Government  had  long  ago  refused
to  pass  it  current.

Soon  afterwards  this  grave  matter  was  discussed  at
the  Hague  between  Henry's  envoy  and  Barneveld.  It
was  a  very  delicate  negotiation.  The  Advocate  wished
to  secure  the  assistance  of  a  powerful  but  most  unscru-
pulous ally,  and  at  the  same  time  to  conceal  his  real
intention  to  frustrate  the  French  design  upon  the  inde-
pendence of  the  republic.

Disingenuous  and  artful  as  his  conduct  unquestionably
was,  it  may  at  least  be  questioned  whether  in  that  age
of  deceit  any  other  great  statesman  would  have  been
more  frank.  If  the  comparatively  weak  commcmwealth,
by  openly  and  scornfully  refusing  all  the  insidious  and
selfish  propositions  of  the  French  king,  had  incurred  that
monarch's  wrath,  it  would  have  taken  a  noble  position
no  doubt,  but  it  would  have  perhaps  been  utterly  de-
stroyed. The  Advocate  considered  himself  justified  in
using  the  artifices  of  war  against  a  subtle  and  dangerous
enemy  who  wore  the  mask  of  a  friend.  When  the  price
demanded  for  military  protection  was  the  voluntary
abandonment  of  national  independence  in  favour  of  the

19  Acrssens  to  Olden-Baraevelil,  ubi  sup-

268

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVI.

protector,  the  man  who  guided  the  affairs  of  the  Nether-
lands did  not  hesitate  to  humour  and  to  outwit  the  king
who  strove  to  subjugate  the  republic.  At  the  same
time — however  one  may  be  disposed  to  censure  the
dissimulation  from  the  standing-ground  of  a  lofty  mo-
rality— it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  Barneveld  never
hinted  at  any  possible  connivance  on  his  part  with  an
infraction  of  the  laws.  Whatever  might  be  the  result
of  time,  of  persuasion,  of  policy,  he  never  led  Henry  or
his  ministers  to  believe  that  the  people  of  the  Nether-
lands could  be  deprived  of  their  liberty  by  force  or
fraud.  He  was  willing  to  play  a  political  game,  in
which  he  felt  himself  inferior  to  no  man,  trusting  to  his
own  skill  and  coolness  for  success.  If  the  tyrant  were
defeated,  and  at  the  same  time  made  to  serve  the  cause
of  the  free  commonwealth,  the  Advocate  believed  this  to
be  fair  play.

Knowing  himself  surrounded  by  gamblers  and  trick-
sters, he  probably  did  not  consider  himself  to  be  cheating
because  he  did  not  play  his  cards  upon  the  table.

So  when  Buzanval  informed  him  early  in  October  that
the  possession  of  Sluys  and  other  Flemish  towns  would
not  be  sufficient  for  the  king,  but  that  they  must  offer
the  sovereignty  on  even  more  favourable  conditions  than
had  once  been  proposed  to  Henry  III.,  the  Advocate  told
him  roundly  that  my  lords  the  States  were  not  likely  to
give  the  provinces  to  any  man,  but  meant  to  maintain
their  freedom  and  their  rights.^*^  The  envoy  replied  that
his  Majesty  would  be  able  to  gain  more  favour  perhaps
with  the  common  people  of  the  country.

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  States  had  offered  the
sovereignty  of  the  provinces  to  Henry  III.,  abjectly  and
as  it  were  without  any  conditions  at  all,^^  the  effrontery
of  Henry  lY.  may  be  measured,  who  claimed  the  same
sovereignty,  after  twenty  years  of  republican  indepen-
dence, upon  even  more  favourable  terms  than  those
which  his  predecessor  had  rejected.

Barneveld,  in  order  to  mitigate  the  effect  of  his  plump
refusal  of  the  royal  overtures,  explained  to  Buzanval,
what  Buzanval  very  well  knew,  that  the  times  had  now
changed ;  that  in  those  days,  immediately  after  the

2<>  Memorandum  of  an  interview  with  Buzanval  by  Olden -Barneveld,  October,
16.6. Deventer,  iii.  94,  95.  21  v^ol.  i.  of  this  work,  chaps,  ii.  and  iv.

1606.

BARNEVELD  AND  BUZANVAL.

269

death  of  William  the  Silent,  despair  and  disorder  had
reigned  in  the  provinces,  "  while  that  dainty  delicacy
— liberty — had  not  so  long  been  sweetly  tickling  the
appetites  of  the  people ;  that  the  English  had  not  then
acquired  their  present  footing  in  the  country,  nor  the
house  of  Nassau  the  age,  the  credit,  and  authority  to
which  it  had  subsequently  attained."

He  then  intimated — and  here  began  the  deception,
which  certainly  did  not  deceive  Buzanval — that  if  things
were  handled  in  the  right  way,  there  was  little  doubt
as  to  the  king's  reaching  the  end  proposed,  but  that  all
depended  on  good  management.  It  was  an  error,  he
said,  to  suppose  that  in  one,  two,  or  three  months,  eight
provinces  and  their  principal  members,  to  wit,  forty
good  cities  all  enjoying  liberty  and  equality,  could  be
induced  to  accept  a  foreign  sovereign.

Such  language  was  very  like  irony,  and  probably  not
too  subtle  to  escape  the  fine  perception  of  the  French
envoy.

The  first  thing  to  be  done,  continued  the  Advocate,  is
to  persuade  the  provinces  to  aid  the  king  with  all  their
means  to  conquer  the  disunited  provinces — to  dispose
of  the  archdukes,  in  sliort,  and  to  drive  the  Spaniards
from  the  soil — and  then,  little  by  little,  to  make  it  clear
that  there  could  be  no  safety  for  the  States  except
in  reducing  the  whole  body  of  the  Netherlands  under
the  authority  of  the  king.  Let  his  Majesty  begin  by
conquering  and  annexing  to  his  crown  the  provinces
nearest  him,  and  he  would  then  be  able  to  persuade  the
others  to  a  reasonable  arrangement.

Whether  the  Advocate's  general  reply  was  really  con-
sidered by  Buzanval  as  a  grave  sarcasm,  politely  veiled,
may  be  a  question.  That  envoy,  however,  spoke  to  his
Government  of  the  matter  as  surrounded  with  difiiculties,
but  not  wholly  desperate.  Barneveld  was,  he  said,  in-
clined to  doubt  whether  the  archdukes  would  be  able,
before  any  negotiations  were  begun,  to  comply  with  the
demand  which  he  had  made  upon  them  to  have  a  de-
claration in  writing  that  the  United  Provinces  were  to
be  regarded  as  a  free  people  over  whom  they  pretended
to  no  authority.  If  so,  the  French  king  would  at  once
be  informed  of  the  fact. Meantime  the  envoy  expressed

2*  Buzanval  in  Dcventcr,  iii.  95,  96.

270

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLVI.

the  safe  opinion  that,  if  Prince  Maurice  and  the  Advocate
together  should  take  the  matter  of  Henry's  sovereignty
in  hand  with  zeal,  they  might  conduct  the  bark  to  the
desired  haven.  Surely  this  was  an  'if  with  much  virtue
in  it.  And  notwithstanding  that  he  chose  to  represent
Barneveld  as  rich,  tired,  at  the  end  of  his  Latin,  and
willing  enough  to  drop  his  anchor  in  a  snug  harbour,
in  order  to  make  his  fortune  secure,  it  was  obvious
enough  that  Buzanval  had  small  hope  at  heart  of  seeing
his  master's  purpose  accomplished.^^

As  to  Prince  Maurice,  the  envoy  did  not  even  affect
to  believe  him  capable  of  being  made  use  of,  strenuous
as  the  efforts  of  the  French  Government  in  that  direction
had  been.  "  He  has  no  private  designs  that  I  can  find
out,"  said  Buzanval,  doing  full  justice  to  the  straight-
forward and  sincere  character  of  the  prince.  '*  He  asks
no  change  for  himself  or  for  his  country."  The  envoy
added,  as  a  matter  of  private  opinion  however,  that  if
an  alteration  were  to  be  made  in  the  constitution  of  the
provinces,  Maurice  would  prefer  that  it  should  be  made
in  favour  of  France  than  of  any  other  Government.

He  lost  no  opportunity,  moreover,  of  impressing  it
upon  his  Government  that  if  the  sovereignty  were  to  be
secured  for  France  at  all,  it  could  only  be  done  by
observing  great  caution,  and  by  concealing  their  desire
to  swallow  the  republic  of  which  they  were  professing
themselves  the  friends.  The  jealousy  of  England  was
sure  to  be  awakened  if  France  appeared  too  greedy  at
the  beginning.  On  the  other  hand,  that  power  "  might
be  the  more  easily  rocked  into  a  profound  sleep  if  France
did  not  show  its  appetite  at  the  very  beginning  of  the
banquet."^*  That  the  policy  of  France  should  be
steadily  but  stealthily  directed  towards  getting  posses-
sion of  as  many  strong  places  as  possible  in  the  Nether-
lands had  long  been  his  opinion.  Since  we  don't
mean  to  go  to  war,"  said  he  a  year  before  to  Villeroy,
"  let  us  at  least  follow  the  example  of  the  English,  who
have  known  how  to  draw  a  profit  out  of  the  necessities
of  this  state. Why  should  we  not  demand,  or  help  our-

23  Buzanval,  in  Devcnter,  iii.  95,  96.  in  the  certainty  that  she  will  find  it  im-

See  also  the  letter  of  Aerssens  to  Olden-  possible  to  accept  it. Also  the  Memoir  of

Barneveld,  14  November,  1606,  in  which  Aerssens  of  6  January,  1606.  Ibid.  99-103.

he  again  urges  the  propriety  of  pretend-  Groen  v.  Prin.-terer,  Archives,  ii.  370-374.

ing  to  bestow  the  sovereignty  on  France  24  Authorities  last  cited.

1606.

DIFFICULTIES  OF  SPAIN.

271

selves  to,  a  few  good  cities  ?  Sluys,  for  example,  would
be  a  security  for  us,  and  of  great  advantage."

Suspicion  was  rife  on  this  subject  at  the  court  of
Spain.  Certainly  it  would  be  less  humiliating  to  the
Catholic  crown  to  permit  the  independence  of  its
rebellious  subjects  than  to  see  them  incorporated  into
the  realms  of  either  France  or  England.  It  is  not  a
very  striking  indication  of  the  capacity  of  great  rulers
to  look  far  into  the  future  that  both  France  and  England
should  now  be  hankering  after  the  sovereignty  of  those
very  provinces,  the  solemn  offer  of  which  by  the  pro-
vinces themselves  both  Fiance  and  England  had
peremptorily  and  almost  contemptuously  refused.

In  Spain  itself  the  war  was  growing  very  wearisome.
Three  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  month  could  no  longer
be  relied  upon  from  the  royal  exchequer,  or  from  the
American  voyages,  or  from  the  kite-flying  operations  of
the  merchant  princes  on  the  Genoa  exchange.

A  great  fleet,  to  be  sure,  had  recently  arrived,  splen-
didly laden,  from  the  West  Indies,  as  already  stated.
Pagan  slaves,  scourged  to  their  dreadful  work,  continued
to  supply  to  their  Christian  taskmasters  the  hidden
treasures  of  the  New  World  in  exchange  for  the  bles-
sings of  the  Evangel  as  thus  revealed ;  but  these
treasures  could  never  fill  the  perpetual  sieve  of  the
Netherland  war,  rapidly  and  conscientiously  as  they
were  poured  into  it,  year  after  year.

The  want  of  funds  in  the  royal  exchequer  left  the
soldiers  in  Flanders  unpaid,  and  as  an  inevitable  result
mutiny  admirably  organized  and  calmly  defiant  was
again  established  thioiighout  the  obedient  provinces.
This  happened  regularly  once  a  year,  so  that  it  seemed
almost  as  business-like  a  proceeding  for  an  Eletto  to
proclaim  mutiny  as  for  a  sovereign  to  declare  martial
law.  Should  the  whole  army  mutiny  at  once  what
might  become  of  the  kingdom  of  Spain  ?

Moreover,  a  very  uneasy  feeling  was  prevalent  that,
as  formerly,  the  Turks  had  crossed  the  liellespont  into
Europe  by  means  of  a  Genoese  alliance  and  Genoese
galleys,  so  now  the  M()ors  were  contemplating  the  recon-
quest  of  Granada,  and  of  tlieir  other  ancient  possessions

2*  Dc venter,  III.  xiv.

272

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CiiAP.  XLVI.

in  Spain,  with  the  aid  of  the  Dutch  republic  and  her
powerful  fleets.^^

The  Dutch  cruisers  watched  so  carefully  on  the  track
of  the  homeward-bound  argosies,  that  the  traffic  was
becoming  more  dangerous  than  lucrative,  particularly
since  the  public  law  established  by  Admiral  Fazardo,
that  it  was  competent  for  naval  commanders  to  hang,
drown,  or  burn  the  crews  of  the  enemy's  merchantmen.

The  Portuguese  were  still  more  malcontent  than  the
Spaniards.  They  had  gained  little  by  the  absorption  of
their  kingdom  by  Spain,  save  participation  in  the  war
against  the  republic,  the  result  of  which  had  been  to
strip  them  almost  entirely  of  the  conquests  of  Vasco  de
Gama  and  his  successors,  and  to  close  to  them  the  ports
of  the  Old  World  and  the  New.

In  the  republic  there  was  a  party  for  peace,  no  doubt,
but  peace  only  with  independence.  As  for  a  return  to
their  original  subjection  to  Spain  they  were  unanimously
ready  to  accept  forty  years  more  of  warfare  rather  than
to  dream  of  such  a  proposition.  There  were  many  who
deliberately  preferred  war  to  peace.  Bitter  experience
had  impressed  very  deeply  on  the  Netherlanders  the
great  precept  that  faith  would  never  be  kept  with
heretics.^''  The  present  generation  had  therefore  been
taught  from  their  cradles  to  believe  that  the  word  peace
in  Spanish  mouths  simply  meant  the  Holy  Inquisition.
It  was  not  unnatural,  too,  perhaps,  that  a  people  who
had  never  known  what  it  was  to  be  at  peace  might  feel,
in  regard  to  that  blessing,  much  as  the  blind  or  the
deaf  towards  colour  or  music ;  as  something  useful  and
agreeable,  no  doubt,  but  with  which  they  might  the  more
cheerfully  dispense,  as  peculiar  circumstances  had  always
kept  them  in  positive  ignorance  of  its  nature.  The
instinct  of  commercial  greediness  made  the  merchants  of
Holland  and  Zeeland,  and  especially  those  of  Amsterdam,
dread  the  revival  of  Antwerp  in  case  of  peace,  to  the
imagined  detriment  of  the  great  trading  centres  of
the  republic.  It  was  felt  also  to  be  certain  that  Spain,  in
case  of  negotiations,  would  lay  down  as  an  indispensable

26  Grotius,  XV.  Y15.  mory  of  which  is  engraved  in  the  marble

^  "  The  Spaniard — who  hath  been  ac-  hearts  of  this  people  to  all  posterity." —

customed  to  serve  himself  of  all  the  ad-  Winwood  to  Lord  Cranbome,  12  Sept.

vantages  without  mercy  and  sometimes  1604. Memorials,  ii.  30.

to  fail  of  treaties  and  contracts,  the  we-

1606.

THE  QUESTION  OF*  PEACE.

273

preliminary  the  abstinence  on  the  part  of  the  Nether-
landers  from  all  intercourse  with  the  Indies,  East  or
West;  and  although  such  a  prohibition  would  be  re-
ceived by  those  republicans  with  perfect  contempt,  yet
the  mere  discussion  of  the  subject  moved  their  spleen.
They  had  already  driven  the  Portnguese  out  of  a  large
portion  of  the  field  in  the  east,  and  they  were  now
preparing  by  means  of  the  same  machinery  to  dispute
the  monopoly  of  the  Spaniards  in  the  west.  To  talk
of  excluding  such  a  people  as  this  from  intercourse
with  any  portion  of  the  Old  World  or  the  New  was
the  mumbling  of  dotage;  yet  nothing  could  be  more
certain  than  tliat  such  would  be  the  pretensions  of
Spain.

As  for  the  stadholder,  his  vocation  was  war,  his  great-
ness had  been  derived  from  war,  his  genius  had  never
turned  itself  to  pacific  pursuits.  Should  a  peace  be
negotiated,  not  only  would  his  occupation  be  gone,  but
he  might  even  find  himself  hampered  for  means.  It
was  probable  that  his  large  salaries,  as  captain  and
admiral-general  of  the  forces  of  the  republic,  would  be
seriously  curtailed,  in  case  his  services  in  the  field  were
no  longer  demanded,  while  such  secret  hopes  as  he
might  entertain  of  acquiring  that  sovereign  power  which
Barneveld  had  been  inclined  to  favour,  were  more  likely
to  be  fulfilled  if  the  war  should  be  continued.  At  the
same  time,  if  sovereignty  were  to  be  his  at  all,  he  was
distinctly  opposed  to  such  limitations  of  his  authority
as  were  to  have  been  proposed  by  the  States  to  his
father,  leather  than  reign  on  those  conditions,  he  avowed
that  he  would  throw  himself  head  foremost  from  the
great  tower  of  Hague  Castle.

Moreover,  the  prince  was  smarting  under  the  con-
sciousness of  having  lost  military  reputation,  however
undeservedly,  in  the  latter  campaigns,  and  might  reason-
ably hope  to  gain  new  glory  in  the  immediate  future.
Thus,  while  his  great  rival.  Marquis  Spinola,  whose
fame  had  grown  to  so  luxuriant  a  height  in  so  brief  a
period,  had  many  reasons  to  dread  the  results  of  future
campaigning,  Maurice  seemed  to  have  personally  much
to  lose  and  nothing  to  hope  for  in  peace.  Spinola
was  over  head  and  ears  in  debt.  In  the  past  two
}  (ars  he  had  spent  millions  of  florins  out  of  his  own

VOL.  IV.  T

274

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVI.

pocket.^^  His  magnificent  fortune  and  boundless  credit
were  seriously  compromised.  He  had  found  it  an  easier
task  to  take  Ostend  and  relieve  Grol  than  to  bolster  up
the  finances  of  Spain.  His  acceptances  were  becoming
as  much  a  drug  upon  the  exchanges  of  Antwerp,  Genoa,
or  Augsburg,  as  those  of  the  most  Catholic  king  or  their
Highnesses  the  archdukes.  Euin  stared  him  in  the  face,
notwithstanding  the  deeds  with  which  he  had  startled
the  world,  and  he  was  therefore  sincerely  desirous  of
peace,  provided,  of  course,  that  all  those  advantages  for
which  the  war  had  been  waged  in  vain  could  now  be
secured  by  negotiation.

There  had  been,  since  the  arrival  of  the  Duke  of  Alva
in  the  Netherlands,  just  forty  years  of  fighting.  Maurice
and  the  war  had  been  born  in  the  same  year,  and  it
would  be  difficult  for  him  to  comprehend  that  his  whole
life's  work  had  been  a  superfluous  task,  to  be  rubbed
away  now  with  a  sponge.  Yet  that  Spain,  on  the
entrance  to  negotiations,  would  demand  of  the  provinces
submission  to  her  authority,  re-establi.shment  of  the
Catholic  religion,  abstinence  from  Oriental  or  American
commerce,  and  the  toleration  of  Spanish  soldiers  over
all  the  Netherlands,  seemed  indubitable.

It  was  equally  uncpiestionable  that  the  seven  provinces
would  demand  recognition  of  their  national  independence
by  Spain,  would  refuse  public  practice  of  the  Eoman
religion  within  their  domains,  and  would  laugh  to  scorn
any  proposed  limitations  to  their  participation  in  the
world's  traffic.  As  to  the  presence  of  Spanish  troops
on  their  soil,  that  was,  of  course,  an  inconceivable
idea.

Where,  then,  could  even  a  loophole  be  found  through
which  the  possibility  of  a  compromise  could  be  espied  ?
The  ideas  of  the  contending  parties  were  as  much
opposed  to  each  other  as  fire  and  snow.  Nevertheless,
the  great  forces  of  the  world  seemed  to  have  gradually
settled  into  such  an  equilibrium  as  to  make  the  continu-
ance of  the  war  for  the  present  impossible.

Accordingly^  the  peace-party  in  Brussels  had  cau-
tiously put  forth  its  tentacles  late  in  1606,  and  again  in

»  Hoofds  Brieven,  N.  3,  bl.  3,  cited  by  Wicj^^naar.  ix.  234.  The  pr'^ix)stpr.)n»
sk^tement  is  there  made  that  he  hiid  spent  fourteen  milUont  of  his  own  money

1607.

NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE.

275

the  early  days  of  the  new  year.  Walrave  van  Witten-
horst  and  Doctor  Gevaerts  had  been  allowed  to  come  to
the  Hague,  ostensibly  on  private  business,  but  with
secret  commission  from  the  archdukes  to  feel  and  report
concerning  the  political  atmosphere.  They  found  that
it  was  a  penal  offence  in  the  republic  to  talk  of  peace  or
of  truce.  They  nevertheless  suspected  that  there  might
be  a  more  sympathetic  layer  beneath  the  very  chill  sur-
face which  they  everywhere  encountered.  Having  inti-
mated in  the  proper  quarters  that  the  archdukes  would
be  ready  to  receive  or  to  appoint  commissioners  for
peace  or  armistice,  if  becoming  propositions  should  be
made,  they  were  allowed  on  the  10th  of  January,  lo  Jan.
1607,  to  make  a  communication  to  the  States-
General.^^  They  indulged  in  Ihe  usual  cheap  common-
places on  the  effusion  of  blood,  the  calamities  of  war,  and
the  blessings  of  peace,  and  assm-ed  the  States  of  the
very  benignant  disposition  of  their  Highnesses  at
Brussels.

The  States-General,  in  their  reply,  seventeen  days
afterwards,  remarking  that  the  archdukes  per-
sisted in  their  unfounded  pretensions  of  autho-  "  ^"
rity  over  them,  took  occasion  to  assure  their  Highnesses
that  they  had  no*  chance  to  obtain  such  authority  except
by  the  sword. Whether  they  were  like  to  accomplish
much  in  that  way  the  history  of  the  past  might  suffi-
ciently indicate,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  States
would  always  claim  the  right,  and  never  renounce  the
hope,  of  recovering  those  provinces  which  had  belonged
to  their  free  commonwealth  since  the  union  of  Utrecht,
and  which  force  and  fraud  had  torn  away.

During  twenty-live  years  that  union  had  been  con-
firmed as  a  free  state  by  solemn  decrees,  and  many
public  acts  and  dealings  with  the  mightiest  potentates
of  Europe,  nor  could  any  other  answer  now  be  made  to
the  archdukes  than  the  one  always  given  to  his  holy,
Koman  Imperial  Majesty,  and  other  princes,  to  wit,  that
no  negotiations  could  be  had  with  powers  making  any
pretensions  in  c(mflict  with  the  solemn  decrees  and  well-
maintained  rights  of  the  I'nited  Netherlands.*^

It  was  in  this  year  that  two  words  became  more

«  Gallucci,  XX.  313.  Meteren,  545;and^o. Grotius,  xv.  717.
w  Meteren,  ubi  sup.  3i  ibid.

T  2

276

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLVI.

frequent  in  the  mouths  of  men  than  they  had  ever  been
before ;  two  words  which  as  the  ages  rolled  on  were
destined  to  exercise  a  wider  influence  over  the  affairs  of
this  planet  than  was  yet  dreamed  of  by  any  thinker  in
Christendom.  Those  words  were  America  and  Virginia.
Certainly  both  words  were  known  before,  although  India
was  the  more  general  term  for  these  auriferous  regions
of  the  west,  which,  more  than  a  century  long,  had  been
open  to  European  adventure,  while  the  land,  baptized  in
honour  of  the  throned  Vestal,  had  been  already  made
familiar  to  European  ears  by  the  exploits  of  Raleigh.
But  it  was  not  till  1607  that  Jamestown  was  founded,
that  Captain  John  Smith's  adventures  with  Powhattan,
"  emperor  of  Virginia,"  and  his  daughter  the  Princess
Pocahontas,  became  fashionable  topics  in  England,  that
the  English  attempts  to  sail  up  the  Chickahominy  to  the
Pacific  Ocean — as  abortive  as  those  of  the  N  etherlanders
to  sail  across  the  North  Pole  to  Cathay — were  creating
scientific  discussion  in  Europe,  and  that  the  first  cargo  of
imaginary  gold  dust  was  exported  from  the  James  River.^^

With  the  adventurous  minds  of  England  all  aflame
with  enthusiasm  for  those  golden  regions,  with  the
thick-coming  fancies  for  digging,  washing,  refining
the  precious  sands  of  Virginia  rivers,  it  was  certain  that
a  great  rent  was  now  to  be  made  in  the  Borgian  grant.
It  was  inevitable  that  the  rivalry  of  the  Netherlanders
should  be  excited  by  the  achievements  and  the  marvellous
tales  of  Englishmen  beyond  the  Atlantic,  and  that  they
too  should  claim  their  share  of  traffic  with  that  golden
and  magnificent  Unknown  which  was  called  America.
The  rivalry  between  England  and  Holland,  already
so  conspicuous  in  the  spicy  Archipelagos  of  the  east,
was  now  to  be  extended  over  the  silvery  regions  of  the
west.  The  two  leading  commercial  powers  of  the  Old
World  were  now  to  begin  their  great  struggle  for  supre-
macy in  the  western  hemisphere.

A  charter  for  what  was  called  a  West  India  Company
was  accordingly  granted  by  the  States-General.  West
India  was  understood  to  extend  from  the  French  settle-
ments in  Newfoundland  or  Acadia,  along  the  American
coast  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  and  so  around  to  the
South  Sea,  including  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,

M  Hildreth's  History  of  the  United  States,  1.  105.

1607. FORMATION  OF  A  WEST  INDIA  COMPANY.  277

besides  all  of  Africa  lying  between  the  tropic  of  Cancer
and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  At  least,  within  those
limits  the  West  India  Company  was  to  have  monopoly
of  trade,  all  other  Netherlanders  being  warned  off  the
precincts.  Nothing  could  be  more  magnificent,  nor
more  vague.^^

The  charter  was  for  thirty-six  years.  The  company
was  to  maintain  armies  and  fleets,  to  build  forts  and
cities,  to  carry  on  war,  to  make  treaties  of  peace  and  of  com-,
merce.  It  was  a  small  peripatetic  republic  of  merchants
and  mariners,  evolved  out  of  the  mother  republic — which
had  at  last  established  its  position  among  the  powers  of
Christendom— and  it  was  to  begin  its  career  full  grown
and  in  full  armour.

The  States-General  were  to  furnish  the  company  at
starting  with  one  million  of  florins  and  with  twenty  ships
of  war.  The  company  was  to  add  twenty  other  ships.
The  Government  was  to  consist  of  four  chambers  of
directors.  One-half  the  capital  was  to  be  contributed  by
the  chamber  of  Amsterdam,  one-quarter  by  that  of  Zee-
land,  one-eighth  respectively  by  the  chambers  of  the
Mouse  and  of  North  Holland.  The  chambers  of  Amster-
dam, of  Zeeland,  of  the  Mouse,  and  of  North  Holland  were
to  have  respectively  thirty,  eighteen,  fifteen,  and  fifteen
directors.  Of  these  seventy-eight,  one-third  were  to  bo
replaced  every  sixth  year  by  others,  while  from  the  whole
number  seventeen  persons  were  to  be  elected  as  a  per-
manent board  of  managers.  Dividends  were  to  be  made
as  soon  as  the  earnings  amounted  to  ten  per  cent,  on  the
capital.  Maritime  judges  were  to  decide  upon  prizes,  the
proceeds  of  which  were  not  to  be  divided  for  six  years,
in  order  that  war  might  be  self-sustaining.  Afterwards,
the  treasury  of  the  United  Provinces  should  receive  one-
tenth,  Prince  Maurice  one-thirtieth,  and  the  merchant
stockholders  the  remainder.  Governors  and  generals
were  to  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  States- General.
The  merchandize  of  the  company  was  to  be  perpetually
free  of  taxation,  so  far  as  regarded  old  duties,  and  exempt
from  war-taxes  for  the  first  twenty  years.^*

Very  violent  and  conflicting  were  the  opinions  ex-
pressed throughout  the  republic  in  regard  to  this  project.

33  Grotius,  xvi.  V21-V25. Meteren,  545,  546. Wagenaar,  Lx.  22fr230.

Authorities  la-t  cited.

278

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XI VI.

It  was  urged  by  those  most  in  favour  of  it  that  the  chief
sources  of  the  greatness  of  Spain  would  be  thus  trans-
ferred to  the  States-General ;  for  there  could  be  no  doubt
that  the  Hollanders,  unconquerable  at  sea,  familiar  with
every  ocean-path,  and  whose  hardy  constitutions  defied
danger  and  privation  and  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,
would  easily  supplant  the  more  delicately  organized
adventurers  from  Southern  Europe,  already  enervated
by  the  exhausting  climate  of  America.  Moreover,  it  was
idle  for  Spain  to  attempt  the  defence  of  so  vast  a  portion
of  the  world.  Every  tribe  over  which  she  had  exercised
sway  would  furnish  as  many  allies  for  the  Dutch  company
as  it  numbered  men ;  for  to  obey  and  to  hate  the  tyran-
nical Spaniard  were  one.  The  republic  would  acquire,
in  reality,  the  grandeur  which  with  Spain  was  but  an
empty  boast,  would  have  the  glory  of  transferring  the
great  war  beyond  the  limits  of  home  into  those  far
distant  possessions,  where  the  enemy  deemed  himself
most  secure,  and  would  teach  the  true  religion  to  savages
sunk  in  their  own  superstitions,  and  still  further  de-
praved by  the  imported  idolatiies  of  Eome.  Commerce
was  now  world-wide,  and  the  time  had  come  for  the
Netherlanders,  to  whom  the  ocean  belonged,  to  tear  out
from  the  pompous  list  of  the  Catholic  king's  titles  his
appellation  of  Lord  of  the  Seas.

There  were  others,  however,  whose  language  was  not
so  sanguine.  They  spoke  with  a  shiver  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  America,  who  hated  all  men,  simply  because
they  were  men,  or  who  had  never  manifested  any  love
for  their  species  except  as  an  article  of  food.  To  convert
such  cannibals  to  Christianity  and  Calvinism  would  be
a  hopeless  endeavour,  and  meanwhile  the  Spaniards
were  masters  of  the  country.  The  attempt  to  blockade
half  the  globe  with  forty  galleots  was  insane ;  for,
although  the  enemy  had  not  occupied  the  whole  territory,
he  commanded  every  harbour  and  position  of  vantage.
Men,  scarcely  able  to  defend  inch  by  inch  the  meagre
little  sandbanks  of  their  fatherland,  who  should  now  go
forth  in  hopes  to  conquer  the  world,  were  but  walking
in  their  sleep.  They  would  awake  to  the  consciousness
of  ruin.

Thus  men  in  the  United  Provinces  spake  of  America.
Especially  Berneveld  had  been  supposed  to  be  prominent

1607.  SECRl::!  MISSION  TO  THE  HAGUE.  279

among  the  opponents  of  the  new  Company,  on  the  ground
that  the  more  violently  commercial  ambition  excited
itself  towards  wider  and  wilder  fields  of  adventure,  the
fainter  grew  inclinations  for  peace.  The  Advocate,
who  was  all  but  omnipotent  in  Holland  and  Zeeland,
subsequently  denied  the  imputation  of  hostility  to
the  new  corporation,  but  the  establishment  of  the
West  India  Company,  although  chartered,  was  post-
poned.^^

The  archdukes  had  not  been  discouraged  by  the  result
of  their  first  attempts  at  negotiation,  for  Wittenhorst
had  reported  a  disposition  towards  peace  as  prevalent
in  the  rebellious  provinces,  so  far  as  he  had  contrived,
during  his  brief  mission,  to  feel  the  public  pulse.

On  the  oth  February,  1 607,  Werner  Cruwel,  an  insol-
vent tradesman  of  Brussels,  and  a  relative  of  Eecorder
Aersscns,  father  of  the  envoy  at  Paris,  made  his  appear-
ance very  unexpectedly  at  the  house  of  his  kinsman  at
the  Hague.  Sitting  at  the  dinner-table,  but  neither
eating  nor  drinking,  he  was  asked  by  his  host  what
troubled  him.  He  replied  that  he  had  a  load  on  his
breast.  Aer.ssens  begged  him,  if  it  was  his  recent  bank-
ruptcy that  oppressed  him,  to  use  philosophy  and
patience.  The  merchant  answered  that  he  who  confessed
well  was  absolved  well.  He  then  took  fi  om  his  pocket-
book  a  letter  from  President  Richardot,  and  said  he
would  reveal  what  he  had  to  say  after  dinner.  The  cloth
being  removed,  and  the  wife  and  chihlren  of  Aerssens
having  left  the  room,  Cruwel  disclosed  that  he  had  been
pent  by  Richardot  and  Father  Neyen  on  a  secret  mission.
The  recorder,  much  amazed  and  troubled,  refused  to  utter
a  word,  save  to  ask  if  Cruwel  would  object  to  confer
with  the  Advocate.  The  merchant  expiessing  himself
as  ready  for  such  an  interview,  the  recorder,  although
it  was  late,  imuiediately  sent  a  message  to  the  great
statesman.  Barneveld  was  in  bed  and  asleep,  but  was
aroused  to  receive  the  communication  of  Aerssens.  "  A\'e
live  in  such  a  calumnious  time,"  said  the  recorder,  "  that
many  people  believe  that  you  and  I  know  more  of  the
recent  mission  of  Wittenhorst  than  we  admit.  You  had
best  interrogate  Cruwel  in  the  presence  of  witnesses.  I
know  not  the  man's  humour,  but  it  seems  to  me  since

»5  Wagenaiir,  ix.  230.

-280

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL VI.

his  failure,  that,  in  spite  of  his  shy  and  lumpish  manner,
he  is  false  and  cunning."

The  result  was  a  secret  interview,  on  the  8th  February,
between  Prince  Maurice,  Barneveld,  and  the  recorder,
in  which  Cruwel  was  permitted  to  state  the  object  of
his  mission.  He  then  produced  a  short  memorandum,
signed  by  Spinola  and  by  Father  Neyen,  to  the  effect
that  the  archdukes  were  willing  to  treat  for  a  truce  of
ten  or  twelve  years,  on  the  sole  condition  that  the  States
should  abstain  from  the  India  navigation.  He  exhibited
also  another  paper,  signed  only  by  Neyen,  in  which  that
friar  proposed  to  come  secretly  to  the  Hague,  no  one  in
Brussels  to  know  of  the  visit  save  the  archdukes  and
Spinola ;  and  all  in  the  United  Provinces  to  be  equally
ignorant  except  the  prince,  the  Advocate,  and  the  recorder.
Cruwel  was  then  informed  that  if  Neyen  expected  to
discuss  such  grave  matters  with  the  prince,  he  must
first  send  in  a  written  proposal  that  could  go  on  all  fours
and  deserve  attention.  A  week  afterwards  Cruwel  came
back  with  a  paper  in  which  Neyen  declared  himself
authorized  by  the  archdukes  to  treat  with  the  States  on
the  basis  of  their  liberty  and  independence,  and  to  a^k
what  they  would  give  in  return  for  so  great  a  concession
as  this  renunciation  of  all  right  to  "the  so-called  United
Provinces."  ^'^

This  being  a  step  in  advance,  it  was  decided  to  permit
the  visit  of  Neyen.  It  was,  however,  the  recorded
opinion  of  the  distinguished  personages  to  whom  the
proposal  was  made  that  it  was  a  trick  and  a  deception.
The  archdukes  would,  no  doubt,  it  was  said,  nominally
recognise  the  provinces  as  a  free  State,  but  without
really  meaning  it.  Meantime,  they  would  do  their  best
to  corrupt  the  Government  and  to  renew  the  war  after
the  republic  had  by  this  means  been  separated  from  its
friends.^^

John  Neyen,  father  commissary  of  the  Franciscans,
who  had  thus  invited  himself  to  a  momentous  conference,
was  a  very  smooth  Flemish  friar,  who  seemed  admirably
adapted,  for  various  reasons,  to  glide  into  the  rebel
country  and  into  the  hearts  of  the  rebels.  He  was  a
Netherlander,  born  at  Antwerp,  when  Antwerp  was
a  portion  of  the  united  commonwealth,  of  a  father  who

36  Original  documents  in  Deventer,  iii.  104-109.  37  xbid.  ^  Ibid.

1607.  PROPOSALS  FOR  A  TREATY  OF  PEACE.  281

had  been  in  the  confidential  service  of  William  the  Silent.
He  was  eloquent  in  ilie  Dutch  language,  and  knew  the
character  of  the  Dutch  people.  He  had  lived  much  at
court,  both  in  Madrid  and  Brussels,  and  was  familiar
with  the  ways  of  kings  and  courtiers.  He  was  a  holy
man,  incapable  of  a  thought  of  worldly  advancement  for
himself,  but  he  was  a  master  of  the  logic  often  thought
most  conclusive  in  those  days ;  no  man  insinuating
golden  arguments  more  adroitly  than  he  into  half-
leluctant  palms.  Blessed  with  a  visage  of  more  than
Flemish  frankness,  he  had  in  reality  a  most  wily  and  un-
scrupulous disposition.  Insensible  to  contumely,  and
incapable  of  accepting  a  rebuff,  he  could  wind  back  to
his  purpose  when  less  supple  negotiators  would  have
been  crushed.^^

He  was  described  by  his  admirers  as  uniting  the
wisdom  of  the  serpent  with  the  guilelessness  of  the  dove."^
Who  better  than  he  then,  in  this  double  capacity,  to  coil
himself  around  the  rebellion,  and  to  carry  the  olive-
branch  in  his  mouth  ?

On  the  25th  February  the  monk,  disguised  in  the  dress
of  a  burgher,  arrived  at  Ryswick,  a  village  a  25  Fob.
mile  and  a  half  from  the  Hague.  He  was  ac-
companied  on  the  journey  by  Cruwel,  and  they  gave
themselves  out  as  travelling  tradesmen."*^  After  nightfall
a  carriage  having  been  sent  to  the  hostelry,  according
to  secret  agreement,  by  Recorder  Aerssens,  John  Neyen
was  brought  to  the  Hague.  The  friar,  as  he  was  driven
on  through  these  hostile  regions,  was  somewhat  startled,
on  looking  out,  to  find  himself  accompanied  by  two
mounted  musketeers  on  each  side  of  the  carriage,  but
they  proved  to  have  been  intended  as  a  protective  escort.
He  was  brought  to  the  recorder's  house,  whence,  after
some  delay,  he  was  conveyed  to  the  palace.  Here  he
was  received  by  an  unknow^n  and  silent  attendant,  who
took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him  through  entirely
deserted  corridors  and  halls.  Not  a  human  being  wa^
seen  nor  a  sound  heard  until  his  conductor  at  last
reached  the  door  of  an  inner  apartment  through  which  he
ushered  him,  without  speaking  a  syllable.''^  The  monk
then  found  himj-elf  in  the  presence  of  two  personages,

35  Grotius,  xvi.  728.

*o  GalluccI,  XX.  316,  317.

♦I  Wagenaar,  ix.  272.
♦»  Gallucci  ubi  sup.

282

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XL VI.

seated  at  a  table  covered  with  books  and  papers.  One
was  in  military  undress,  witb  an  air  about  him  of
habitual  command,  a  fair-complexioned  man  of  middle
age,  inclining  to  baldness,  rather  stout,  with  a  large
blue  eye,  regular  features,  and  a  mouse-coloured  beard.
The  other  was  in  the  velvet  cloak  and  grave  habiliments
of  a  civil  functionary,  apparently  sixty  years  of  age,
with  a  massive  forehead,  heavy  features,  and  a  shaggy
beard.  The  soldier  was  Maurice  of  Nassau,  the  states-
man was  John  of  Olden-Barneveld.

Both  rose  as  the  friar  entered,  and  greeted  him  with
cordiality.

*'But,"  said  the  prince,  "how  did  you  dare  to  enter
the  Hague,  relying  only  on  the  word  of  a  Beggar?'*

Who  would  not  confide,"  replied  Neyen,  "in  the
word  of  so  exalted,  so  respectable  a  Beggar  as  you,  O
most  excellent  prince  ?"

With  these  facetious  words  began  the  negotiations
through  which  an  earnest  attempt  was  at  last  to  be
made  for  terminating  a  seemingly  immortal  war.  The
conversation,  thus  begun,  rolled  amicably  and  informally
along.  The  monk  pioduced  letters  from  the  archdukes,
in  which,  as  he  stated,  the  truly  royal  soul  of  the  writers
shone  conspicuously  forth.  Without  a  thought  for  their
own  advantage,  he  observed,  and  moved  only  by  a  con-
templation of  the  tears  shed  by  so  many  thousands  of
human  beings  reduced  to  extreme  misery,  their  High-
nesses, although  they  were  such  exalted  princes,  cared
nothing  for  what  would  be  said  by  the  kings  of  Europe
and  all  the  potentates  of  the  universe  about  their  exces-
sive indulgence.^

"  What  indulgence  do  you  speak  of?"  asked  the  stad-
holder.

''Does  that  seem  a  trifling  indulgence,"  replied  John
Neyen,  "  that  they  are  willing  to  abandon  the  right  which
they  inherited  from  their  ancestors  over  these  provinces,
to  allow  it  so  easily  to  slip  from  their  fingers,  to  declare
these  people  to  be  free,  over  whom,  as  their  subjects
refusing  the  yoke,  they  have  carried  on  war  so  long  ?  "

"  It  is  our  right  hands  that  have  gained  this  liberty,"
said  Maurice,  "  not  the  archdukes  that  have  granted  it.
It  iias  been  acquired  by  our  treasure,  poured  forth  how

*3  Gallucci,  317.

«  Ibid.

1607.

PRELIMINARY  NEGOTIATIONS.

283

freely  !  by  the  price  of  our  blood,  by  so  many  thousands
of  souls  sent  to  their  account.  Alas,  how  dear  a  price
have  we  paid  for  it !  All  the  potentates  of  Christendom,
save  the  King  of  Spain  alone,  with  his  relatives  the
archdukes,  have  assented  to  our  independence.  In
treating  for  peace  we  ask  no  gift  of  freedom  from  the
archdukes.  We  claim  to  be  regarded  by  them  as  what
we  are — free  men.  If  they  are  unwilling  to  consider  us
as  such,  let  them  subject  us  to  their  dominion  if  they
can.  And  as  we  have  hitherto  done,  we  shall  contend
more  fiercely  for  liberty  than  for  life."

With  this,  the  tired  monk  was  dismissed  to  sleep  off
the  effects  of  his  journey  and  of  the  protracted  discussion,
being  warmly  recommended  to  the  captain  of  the  citadel,
by  whom  he  was  treated  with  every  possible  consi-
deration.

Several  days  of  private  discussion  ensued  between
Neyen  and  the  leading  personages  of  the  republic.  The
emissary  was  looked  upon  with  great  distrust.  All
schemes  of  substantial  negotiation  were  regarded  by
the  public  as  visions,  while  the  monk  on  his  part  felt  the
need  of  all  his  tact  and  temper  to  wind  his  way  out  of
the  labyrinth  into  which  he  felt  that  he  had  perhaps  too
heedlessly  entered.  A  false  movement  on  his  part
would  involve  himself  and  his  masters  in  a  hopeless
maze  of  suspicion,  and  make  a  pacific  result  impossible.

At  length,  it  having  been  agreed  to  refer  the  matter
to  the  States-General,  Eecorder  Aerssens  waited  upon
Neyen  to  demand  his  credentials  for  negotiation.  He
replied  that  he  had  been  forbidden  to  deliver  his  papers,
but  that  he  was  willing  to  exhibit  them  to  the  States-
General.

He  came  accordingly  to  that  assembly,  and  was  re-
spectfully received.  All  the  deputies  rose,  and  he  was
placed  in  a  seat  near  the  presiding  officer.  Olden-
Barneveld  then  in  a  few  words  told  him  why  he  had
been  summoned.  The  monk  begged  that  a  want  of
courtesy  might  not  be  imputed  to  him,  as  he  had  been
sent  to  negotiate  with  three  individuals,  not  with  a  great
assembly.

Thus  already  the  troublesome  effect  of  publicity  upon

♦*  Gallucci,  317,  et  seqq.,  who  wrote  from  the  original  letters  and  journals  of
Noyen,  Spinola,  and  many  othL-rs.

284

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVI*

diplomacy  was  manifesting  itself.  The  many- beaded,
many-tongued  republic  was  a  difficult  creature  to
manage,  adroit  as  tbe  negotiator  had  proA^ed  himself
to  be  in  gliding  through  the  cabinets  and  council-
chambers  of  princes  and  dealing  with  the  important
personages  found  there.

The  power  was,  however,  produced,  and  handed  around
the  assembly,  the  signature  and  seals  being  duly  in-
spected by  the  members.  Neyen  was  then  asked  if  be
had  anything  to  say  in  public.  He  replied  in  the
negative,  adding  only  a  few  vague  commonplaces  about
the  effusion  of  blood  and  the  desire  of  the  archdukes
for  the  good  of  mankind. He  was  then  dismissed.

A  few  days  afterwards  a  committee  of  five  from  the
States-General,  of  which  Barneveld  was  chairman,  con-
ferred with  Neyen.  He  was  informed  that  the  paper
exhibited  by  him  was  in  many  respects  objectionable,
and  that  they  had  therefore  drawn  up  a  form  which  he
was  requested  to  lay  before  the  archdukes  for  their
guidance  in  making  out  a  new  power.  He  was  asked
also  whether  the  King  of  Spain  was  a  party  to  these
proposals  for  negotiation.  The  monk  answered  that  he
was  not  informed  of  the  fact,  but  that  he  considered  it
highly  probable.*^

John  Neyen  then  departed  for  Brussels  with  the  form
prescribed  by  the  States-General  in  his  pocket.  Nothing
could  exceed  the  indignation  with  which,  the  royalists
and  Catholics  at  the  court  of  the  archdukes  were  inspired
by  the  extreme  arrogance  and  obstinacy  thus  mani-
fested by  the  rebellious  heretics.  That  the  offer  on  the
part  of  their  master  to  negotiate  should  be  received  by
them  with  cavils,  and  almost  with  contempt,  was  as  great
an  offence  as  their  original  revolt.  That  the  sei*vant
should  dare  to  prescribe  a  form  for  the  sovereign  to  copy
seemed  to  prove  that  the  world  was  coming  to  an  end.
But  it  was  ever  thus  with  the  vulgar,  said  the  courtiers
and  church  dignitaries,  debating  these  matters.  The
insanity  of  plebeians  was  always  enormous,  and  never
more  so  than  when  fortune  for  a  moment  smiled.*^  Full

■♦6  Galluc-oi,  uM  sup.  ganza  e  di  temerita  nelle  cose  proprie,

47 Sempre  son  grandi  le  insanie  del  tutto  abjettione  e  vilta  all'  incontro  poi

volgo  ma  piu  gillora  che  gli  arride  V  aura  nelle avverse."  Bentivoglio,  P.  iii

festigiante  della  fortuna. Pienc  d'arro-  554.

1607.

NEYEN'S  RETURN  TO  BRUSSELS.

286

of  arrogance  and  temerity  when  affairs  were  prosperous,
plunged  in  abject  cowardice  when  dangers  and  reverses
came — such  was  the  People — such  it  must  ever  be.

Thus  blustered  the  priests  and  the  parasites  surround-
ing the  archduke,  nor  need  their  sentiments  amaze  us.
Could  those  honest  priests  and  parasites  have  ever
dreamed,  before  the  birth  of  this  upstart  republic,  that
merchants,  manufacturers,  and  farmers,  mechanics  and
advocates — the  People  in  short — should  presume  to
meddle  with  affairs  of  state  ?  Their  vocation  had  been
long  ago  prescribed — to  dig  and  to  draw,  to  brew  and  to
bake,  to  bear  burdens  in  peace  and  to  fill  bloody  graves
in  war — what  better  lot  could  the}^  desire  ?  Meantime
their  superiors,  especially  endowed  with  wisdom  by  the
Omnipotent,  would  direct  trade  and  commerce,  conduct
war  and  diplomacy,  make  treaties,  impose  taxes,  fill  their
own  pockets,  and  govern  the  universe.  Was  not  this
reasonable  and  according  to  the  elemental  laws  ?  If  the
beasts  of  the  field  had  been  suddenly  gifted  with  speech,
and  had  constituted  themselves  into  a  free  common-
wealth for  the  management  of  public  affairs,  the}'  would
hardly  have  caused  more  profound  astonishment  at
Brussels  and  Madrid  than  had  been  excited  by  the
proceedings  of  the  rebellious  Dutchmen.

Yet  it  surely  might  have  been  suggested,  when  the
lament  of  the  courtiers  over  the  abjectness  of  the  People
in  adversity  was  so  emphatic,  that  Dorp  and  Van  Loon,
Berendrecht  and  Gieselles,  with  the  men  under  their
command,  who  had  disputed  every  inch  of  Little  Troy
for  three  years  and  three  months,  and  had  covered  those
fatal  sands  with  a  hundred  thousand  corpses,  had  not  been
giving  of  late  such  evidence  of  the  People's  cowardice
in  reverses  as  theory  required.  The  siege  of  Ostend  had
been  finished  only  three  years  before,  and  it  is  strange
that  its  lessons  should  so  soon  have  been  forgotten.

It  was  thought  best,  however,  to  dissemble.  Diplo-
macy in  those  days — certainly  the  diplomacy  of  Spain
and  Rome — meant  simpl}^  dissimulation.  IMoreover,  that
solid  apothegm,  hcereticis  non  servanda  fides,  the  most
serviceable  anchor  ever  forged  for  true  believers,  was
always  ready  to  be  thrown  out,  should  storm  or  quick-
sand threaten,  during  the  intricate  voyage  to  be  now
undertaken.

286

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLYl

John  Neyen  soon  returned  to  the  Hague,  having  per-
suaded his  masters  that  it  was  best  to  atfect  compliance
with  the  preliminary  demand  of  the  States.  During  the
discussions  in  regard  to  peace,  it  would  not  be  dangerous
to  treat  with  the  rebel  provinces  as  with  free  states,
over  which  the  archdukes  pretended  to  no  authority,
because — so  it  was  secretly  argued — this  was  to  be  un-
derstood with  a  sense  of  similitude.  We  will  negotiate
with  them  as  if  tJiey  were  free,^'  said  the  grey-friar  to  the
archduke  and  his  counsellors,  "  but  not  with  the  signifi-
cation of  true  and  legitimate  liberty.  They  have  laid
down  in  their  formula  that  we  are  to  pretend  to  no
authority  over  them.  Very  well.  For  the  time  being
we  will  pretend  that  we  do  not  pretend  to  any  such
authority.  To  negotiate  with  them  as  if  they  were  free
will  not  make  them  free.  It  is  no  recognition  by  us  that
they  are  free.  Their  liberty  could  never  be  acquired
by  their  rebellion.^^  This  is  so  manifest  that  neither  the
king  nor  the  archdukes  can  lose  any  of  their  rights
over  the  United  Provinces,  even  should  they  make  this
declaration."

Thus  the  hair-splitters  at  Brussels — spinning  a  web
that  should  be  stout  enough  to  entrap  the  noisy,  blun-
dering republicans  at  the  Hague,  yet  so  delicate  as  to  go
through  the  finest  dialectical  needle.  Time  was  to  show
whether  subtilty  or  bluntness  was  the  best  diplomatic
material.

The  monk  brought  with  him  three  separate  instru-
ments or  powers,  to  be  used  according  to  his  discretion.
Admitted  to  the  assembly  of  the  States-General,  he  pro-
duced number  one.  It  was  instantly  rejected.  He  then
oH'ered  number  two,  with  the  same  result.  He  now
declared  himself  offended,  not  on  his  own  account,  but
for  the  sake  of  his  masters,  and  asked  leave  to  retire
from  the  assembly,  leaving  with  them  the  papers  which
had  been  so  benignantly  drawn  up,  and  which  deserved
to  be  more  carefully  studied.^*^

The  States,  on  their  parts,  were  sincerely  and  vehe-
mently indignant. What  did  all  this  mean,  it  was

4«  "  Gib sarebbe  dovuto  sempre  in-  Bentivoglio,  HI.  552.

teiidere  con  senso  di  similitudine  cib  e  Ibid.

come  se  fossero  libere  e  non  con  signi-  so  Gallucci,  31 8-325,  frc  m  Neycn'a  Let>

ficazione  di  vera  e  legitima  liberta." —  ters  and  J ouma  s.

1607.

SPANISH  DISSIMULATION.

287

demanded,  this  producing  one  set  of  propositions  after
another?  Why  did  the  archdukes  not  declare  their
intentions  openly  and  at  once?  Let  the  States  depart
each  to  the  several  provinces,  and  let  John  Neyen  be
instantly  sent  out  of  the  country.  Was  it  thought  to
bait  a  trap  for  the  ingenuous  Netherlanders,  and  catch
them  little  by  little,  like  so  many  wild  animals  ?  This
was  not  the  way  the  States  dealt  with  the  archdukes.
What  they  meant  they  put  in  front — first,  last,  and
always.  Now  and  in  the  future  they  said  and  they
would  say  exactly  what  they  wished,  candidly  and
seiiously.  Those  who  pursued  another  course  would
never  come  into  negotiation  with  them.^^

The  monk  felt  that  he  had  excited  a  wrath  which  it
would  be  difficult  to  assuage.  Ho  already  perceived
the  difference  between  a  real  and  an  affected  indignation,
and  tried  to  devise  some  soothing  remedy.  Early  next
morning  he  sent  a  petition  in  writing  to  the  States  for
leave  to  make  an  explanation  to  the  assembly.  Barneveld
and  Eecorder  Aerssens,  in  consequence,  came  to  him
immediately  and  heaped  invectives  upon  his  head  for
his  duplicity.^^

Evidently  it  was  a  different  matter  dealing  with  this
many-headed  roaring  beast,  calling  itself  a  republic,
from  managing  the  supple  politicians  with  whom  he
was  more  familiar.  The  noise  and  publicity  of  these
transactions  were  already  somewhat  appalling  to  the
smooth  friar  who  was  accustomed  to  negotiate  in  com-
fortable secrecy.  He  now  vehemently  ])rotested  that
never  man  was  more  sincere  than  he,  and  implored  for
time  to  send  to  Brussels  for  another  power.  It  is  true
that  number  three  was  still  in  his  portfolio,  but  he  had
seen  so  much  indignation  on  the  production  of  number
two  as  to  feel  sure  that  the  fury  of  the  States  would
know  no  bounds  should  he  now  confess  that  he  had
come  provided  with  a  third.

It  was  agi'eed  accordingly  to  wait  eight  days,  in  which
period  he  might  send  for  and  receive  the  new  power
already  in  his  possession.  These  little  tricks  were  con-
sidered masterly  diplomacy  in  those  days,  and  by  this
kind  of  negotiators ;  and  such  was  the  way  in  which  it

^1  Gallucci,  318-325,  rrom  N(  yen's  Letters  and  Journals. "  J  bid.

288

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XL VI.

was  proposed  to  terminate  a  half  century  of  warfare.^^
The  friar  wrote  to  his  masters,  not  of  course  to  ask  for
a  new  power,  but  to  dilate  on  the  difficulties  to  be
anticipated  in  procuring  that  which  the  losing  party  is
always  most  bent  upon  in  circumstances  like  these,  and
which  was  most  ardently  desired  by  the  archdukes — an
armistice.  He  described  Prince  Maurice  as  sternly
opposed  to  such  a  measure,  believing  that  temporary
cessation  of  hostilities  was  apt  to  be  attended  with
mischievous  familiarity  between  the  opposing  camps,
with  relaxation  of  discipline,  desertion,  and  various
kinds  of  treachery,  and  that  there  was  no  better  path
to  peace  than  that  which  was  trampled  by  contending
hosts.

Seven  days  passed,  and  then  Neyen  informed  the
States  that  he  had  at  last  received  a  power  which  he
hoped  would  prove  satisfactory.  Being  admitted  ac-
cordingly to  the  assembly,  he  delivered  an  eloquent
eulogy  upon  the  sincerity  of  the  archdukes,  who,  with
perhaps  too  little  regard  for  their  own  dignity  and
authority,  had  thus,  for  the  sake  of  the  public  good,  so
benignantly  conceded  what  the  States  had  demanded.

Barneveld,  on  receiving  the  new  power,  handed  to
Neyen  a  draught  of  an  agreement  which  he  was  to  study
at  his  leisure,  and  in  which  he  might  suggest  alterations.
At  the  same  time  it  was  demanded  that  within  three
months  the  written  consent  of  the  King  of  Spain  to  the
proposed  negotiations  should  be  produced.  The  Fran-
ciscan objected  that  it  did  not  comport  with  the  dignity
of  the  archdukes  to  suppose  the  consent  of  any  other
sovei'eign  needful  to  confirm  their  acts.  Barneveld  in-
sisted with  much  vehemence  on  the  necessity  of  this
condition.  It  was  perfectly  notorious,  he  said,  that  the
armies  commanded  by  the  archdukes  were  subject  to
the  King  of  Spain,  and  were  called  royal  armies.  Prince
Maurice  observed  that  all  prisoners  taken  by  him  had
uniformly  called  themselves  soldiers  of  the  Crown,  not
of  the  archdukes,  nor  of  Marquis  Spinola.^*

Barneveld  added  that  the  royal  power  over  the  armies
in  the  Netherlands  and  over  the  obedient  provinces  was
proved  by  the  fact  that  all  commanders  of  regiments,  all

53  The  narrative  is  the  monk's  owd,  as  preserved  by  his  admirer  the  Jesuit
Gallucci  (ubi  &up,)  ^  Gallucci,  ubi  $v^.

i607.

CONSENT  OF  PHILIP  NECESSARY.

289

governors  of  fortresses,  especially  of  Antwerp,  Ghent,
Cambray,  and  the  like,  were  appointed  by  the  King  of
Spain.  These  were  royal  citadels,  with  royal  garrisons.
That  without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  King  of
Spain  it  w^ould  be  impossible  to  declare  the  people  of  the
United  Provinces  free,  was  obvious ;  for  in  the  cession
by  Philip  II.  of  all  the  Netherlands  it  was  provided
that,  without  the  consent  of  the  king,  no  part  of  that
territory  could  be  ceded,  and  this  on  pain  of  forfeiting
all  the  sovereignty.  To  treat  without  the  king  was  there-
fore impossible.

The  Franciscan  denied  that  because  the  sovereigns  of
Spain  sent  funds  and  auxiliary  troops  to  Flanders,  and
appointed  military  commanders  there  of  various  degrees,
the  authority  of  the  archdukes  was  any  the  less  supreme.
Philip  II.  had  sen^  funds  and  troops  to  sustain  the
League,  but  he  was  not  King  of  France.

Barneveld  probably  thought  it  not  worth  his  while  to
reply  that  Philip,  with  those  funds  and  those  troops,  had
done  his  best  to  become  King  of  France,  and  that  his
failure  proved  nothing  for  the  argument  either  way.

Neyen  then  returned  once  more  to  Brussels,  observing
as  he  took  leave  that  the  decision  of  the  archdukes  as  to
the  king's  consent  was  very  doubtful,  although  he  was
sure  that  the  best  thing  for  all  parties  would  be  to  agree
to  an  armistice  out  of  hand.

This,  how^ever,  was  far  from  being  the  opinion  of  the
States  or  the  stadholdcr.

After  ccmferring  with  his  masters,  the  monk  came  down
by  agreement  from  Antwerp  to  the  Dutch  ships  which  lay
in  the  Scheld  before  Fort  Lillo.  On  board  one  of  these.
Dirk  van  der  Does  had  been  stationed  with,  a  special
commission  from  the  States  to  compare  documents.  It
was  expressly  ordered  that  in  these  preliminary  negotia-
tions neither  party  was  to  go  on  shore.^  On  a  comparison
of  the  agreement  brought  by  Neyen  from  Brussels  with
the  draught  furnished  by  Barneveld,  of  which  Van  der
Does  had  a  copy,  so  many  discrepancies  appeared  that
the  document  of  the  archdukes  was  at  once  rejected.
But  of  course  the  monk  had  a  number  two,  and  this,
after  some  trouble,  was  made  to  agree  with  the  pre-
scribed form. Brother  John  then,  acting  upon  what  be

55  Gallucci,  322.

VOL.  IV.  U

290

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVI.

considered  the  soundest  of  principles — that  no  job  was
so  difficult  as  not  to  be  accomplished  with  the  help  of
the  precious  metals — offered  his  fellow  negotiator  a
valuable  gold  chain  ap  a  present  from  the  archdukes.^*^
Dirk  van  der  Does  accepted  the  chain,  but  gave  notice
of  the  fact  to  his  Government.

The  monk  now  became  urgent  to  accompany  his
friend  to  the  Hague,  but  this  had  been  expressly  for-
bidden by  the  States,  Neyen  felt  sure,  he  said,  of  being
able  by  arguments,  which  he  could  present  by  word  of
mouth,  to  overcome  the  opposition  to  the  armistice  were
he  once  more  to  be  admitted  to  the  assembly.  Van  der
Does  had  already  much  overstaid  his  appointed  time,
bound  to  the  spot,  as  it  were,  by  the  golden  chain
thrown  around  him  by  the  excellent  friar, and  he  now,
in  violation  of  orders,  wrote  to  the  Hague  for  leave  to
comply  with  this  request.  Pending  the  answer,  the  per-
suasive Neyen  convinced  him,  much  against  his  will,
that  they  might  both  go  together  as  far  as  Delft.  To
Delft  they  accordingly  went ;  but,  within  half  a  league
of  that  place,  met  a  courier  with  strict  orders  that  the
monk  was  at  once  to  return  to  Brussels.  Brother  John
was  in  great  agitation.  Should  he  go  back,  the  whole
negotiation  might  come  to  nought ;  should  he  go  on,  he
might  be  clapped  into  prison  as  a  spy.  Being  conscious,
however,  that  his  services  as  a  spy  were  intended  to  be
the  most  valuable  part  of  his  mission,  he  resolved  to
proceed  in  that  capacity.^^  So  he  persuaded  his  friend
Dirk  to  hide  him  in  the  hold  of  a  canal-boat.  Van  der
Does  was  in  great  trepidation  himself,  but  on  reaching
the  Hague  and  giving  up  his  gold  chain  to  Barneveld,
he  made  his  peace,  and  obtained  leave  for  the  trembling
but  audacious  friar  to  come  out  of  his  hiding-place.

Appearing  once  more  before  the  States-General  on  the
afternoon  of  7th  May,^^  Neyen  urged  with  much  eloquence
the  propriety  of  an  immediate  armistice  both  by  sea  and
land,  insisting  that  it  would  be  a  sanguinary  farce  to
establish  a  cessation  of  hostilities  upon  one  element

56  "Optime  quippe  norant  negotium  53  "Op  dat  liyden  staatder  vereinigden
nullum  esse  tarn  arduum  quod  auri  ope  Landen  van  naby  doorsnuffelen  zou  en
noil  conficiatur."— Gallucci,  322.  Com-  heimelyk  arbeiden  tot  bevoidering  van
pare  Wagenaar,  ix.  249.  den  handel." — Wagenaar,  ix.  249.  Cf.

57  "  Quasi  valde  tenaciter  aurea  ilia  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  12,
catena  Neyo  devinctuB." — Gallucci,  323.  59  v«a  der  Kemp,  iii.  lift.

1607.

NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  AN  ARMISTICE.

291

while  blood  and  treasure  were  profusely  flowing  on  the
ocean.^  There  were  potent  reasons  for  this  earnestness
on  the  part  of  the  monk  to  procure  a  truce  to  maritime
operations,  as  very  soon  was  to  be  made  evident  to  the
world.  Meantime,  on  this  renewed  visit,  the  negotiator
expressed  himself  as  no  longer  doubtful  in  regard  to  the
propriety  of  requesting  the  Spanish  king's  consent  to
the  proposed  negotiations.  That  consent,  however,  would
in  his  opinion  depend  upon  the  earnestness  now  to  be
manifested  by  the  States  in  establishing  the  armistice
by  sea  and  land,  and  upon  their  promptness  in  recalling
the  fleets  now  infesting  the  coast  of  Spain.  No  imme-
diate answer  was  given  to  these  representations,  but
Neyen  was  requested  to  draw  up  his  argument  in
writing,  in  order  that  it  might  be  duly  pondered  by  the
States  of  the  separate  provinces.

The  radical  defect  of  the  Dutch  constitution — the  inde-
pendent sovereignty  claimed  by  each  one  of  the  provin-
ces composing  the  confederation,  each  of  those  provinces
on  its  part  being  composed  of  cities,  each  again  claiming
something  very  like  sovereignty  for  itself — could  not
fail  to  be  manifested  whenever  great  negotiations  with
foreign  powers  were  to  be  undertaken.  To  obtain  the
unanimous  consent  of  seven  independent  little  republics
was  a  work  of  difficulty,  requiring  immense  expenditure
of  time  in  comparatively  unimportant  contingencies.
How  intolerable  might  become  the  obstructions,  the  dis-
sensions, and  the  delays,  now  that  a  series  of  momentous
and  world-wide  transactions  was  beginning,  on  the  issue
of  which  the  admission  of  a  new  commonwealth  into  the
family  of  nations,  the  international  connections  of  all
the  great  powers  of  Christendom,  the  commerce  of  the
world,  and  the  peace  of  Europe  depended.

Yet  there  was  no  help  for  it  but  to  make  the  bes^
present  use  of  the  institutions  which  time  and  great
events  had  bestowed  upon  the  young  republic,  leaving
to  a  more  convenient  season  the  task  of  remodelling  the
law.  Meanwhile,  with  men  who  knew  their  own  minds,
who  meant  to  speak  the  truth,  and  who  were  resolved
to  gather  in  at  last  the  harvest  honestly  and  bravely
gained  by  nearly  a  half-century  of  hard  fighting,  it  would
be  hard  for  a  legion  of  friars,  with,  their  heads  full  of

*  Galucci,  324. Van  dcr  Kemp,  iii  li8. Grotius,  xvi.  74  5.

u  2

292

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. . Chap.  XLVI.

quirks  and  their  wallets  full  of  bills  of  exchange,  to
carry  the  day  for  despotism.

Barneveld  was  sincerely  desirous  of  peace.  He  was
well  aware  that  his  province  of  Holland,  where  he
was  an  intellectual  autocrat,  was  staggering  under  the
burthen  of  one  half  the  expenses  of  the  whole  republic.
He  knew  that  Holland  in  the  course  of  the  last  nine
years,  notwithstanding  tie  constantly  heightened  rate  of
impost  on  all  objects  of  ordinary  consumption,  was
twenty-six  millions  of  florins  behindhand,  and  that  she
had  reason  therefore  to  wish  for  peace.*^^  'ilie  great
Advocate,  than  whom  no  statesman  in  Europe  could
more  accurately  scan  the  world's  horizon,  was  convinced
that  the  propitious  moment  for  honourable  straight-
forward negotiations  to  secure  peace,  independence,  and
free  commerce,  free  religion,  and  free  government,  had
come,  and  he  had  succeeded  in  winning  the  reluctant
Maurice  into  a  partial  adoption,  at  least  of  his  opinions.^^

The  Franciscan  remained  at  Delft,  waiting,  by  direction
of  the  States,  for  an  answer  to  his  propositions,  and
doing  his  best  according  to  the  instructions  of  his  own
Government  to  espy  the  condition  and  sentiments  of  the
enemy.  Becoming  anxious  after  the  lapse  of  a  fortnight,
he  wrote  to  Barneveld.  In  reply  the  Advocate  twice
sent  a  secret  messenger,  .urging  him  to  be  patient,
assuring  him  that  the  affair  was  working  well ;  that  the
opposition  to  peace  came  chiefly  from  Zeeland  and  from
certain  parties  in  Amsterdam  vehemently  opposed  to
peace  or  truce;  but  that  the  rest  of  Holland  was  de-
cidedly in  favour  of  the  negotiations.^^

A  few  days  passed,  and  Neyen  was  again  summoned
before  the  assembly.  Barneveld  now  informed  him  that
the  Dutch  fleet  would  be  recalled  from  the  coast  of
Spain  so  soon  as  the  consent  of  his  Catholic  Majesty  to
the  negotiations  arrived,  but  that  it  would  be  necessary
to  confine  the  cessation  of  naval  warfare  within  certain
local  limits.  Both  these  conditions  were  strenuously
opposed  by  the  Franciscan,  who  urged  that  the  consent  oi
the  Spanish  King  was  certain,  but  that  this  new  proposi-
tion to  localize  the  maritime  armistice  would  prove  to  be

61  Remonstr.  van  Olden-Barneveld  in  Leven  van  Oldftn-Barneveld,  bL  157.—
Wagenaar,  ix.  241.

62  Wagenaar,  ix  241. Grotius,  ?  viii.  68  Gallucci,  326,  327.

1607.

COMPLETION  OF  AN  ARMISTICE.

293

franglit  with  endless  difficulties  and  dangers.  Barneveld
and  the  States  remaining  firm,  however,  and  giving  him
a  formal  communication  of  their  decision  in  writing,
Neyen  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  wend  his  way  back
rather  malcontent  to  Brussels.

It  needed  but  a  brief  deliberation  at  the  court  of
the  archdukes  to  bring  about  the  desii'ed  arrangement.
The  desire  for  an  armistice,  especially  for  a  cessation  of
hostilities  by  sea,  had  been  marvellously  stimulated  by
an  event  to  be  narrated  in  the  next  chapter.  Meantime,
more  than  the  first  three  months  of  the  year  had  been
passed  in  these  secret  preliminary  transactions,  and  so
softly  had  the  stealthy  friar  sped  to  and  fro  between
Brussels  and  the  Hagne,  that  when  atdast  the  armistice
was  announced  it  broke  forth  like  a  sudden  flash  of  fine
weather  in  the  midst  of  a  raging  storm.  No  one  at  the
archduke's  court  knew  of  the  mysterious  negotiations  save
the  monk  himself,  Spinola,  l\ichardot,  Verrcycken,  the
chief  auditor,  and  one  or  two  others.^^  The  great  l>elgian
nobles,  from  whom  everything  had  been  concealed,  were
very  wroth,  but  the  Belgian  public  was  as  much  delighted
as  amazed  at  the  prospects  of  peace.  In  the  I  nited
Provinces  opinions  were  conflicting,  but  doubtless  joy
and  confidence  were  the  prevailing  emotions.

Towards  the  middle  of  April  the  armistice  was  pub-
licly announced.  It  was  to  last  for  eight  months  from
the  4th  of  May.  During  this  period  no  citadels  were  to
be  besieged,  no  camps  brought  near  a  city,  no  new
fortifications  built,  and  all  troops  were  to  be  kept  care-
fully within  walls.  Meantime  commissioners  were  to  be
appointed  by  the  archdukes  to  confer  with  an  equal
number  of  deputies  of  the  United  Provinces  for  peace  or
for  a  truce  of  ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  years,  on  the  expi  ess
ground  that  the  archdukes  regarded  the  United  Provinces
as  free  countries,  over  which  their  Highnesses  pretended
to  no  authority.''^

The  armistice  on  land  was  absolute.  On  sea,  hostilities
were  to  cease  in  the  German  ocean  and  in  the  channel
between  England  and  France,  while  it  was  also  provided
that  the  Netherland  fleet  should,  within  a  certain  period,
be  recalled  from  the  Spanish  coast.

G«  Meteren,  55 po. Gallucci,  325.

65  Meteren,  651.  Gallucci,  326. Grotius,  xvi.  738. Wagenaar,  ix.  250,  et  seqq.

294

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVI.

A  day  of  public  fast,  humiliation,  thanksgiving,  and
prayer  was  ordered  throughont  the  republic  for  the  9th
of  May,  in  order  to  propitiate  the  favour  of  Heaven  on
the  great  work  to  be  undertaken ;  and  as  a  further  pre-
caution, Prince  Maurice  ordered  all  garrisons  in  the
strong  places  to  be  doubled,  lest  the  slippery  enemy
should  take  advantage  of  too  much  confidence  reposed
in  his  good  faith.  The  preachers  throughout  the  common-
wealth, each  according  to  his  individual  bias,  improved
the  occasion  by  denouncing  the  Spaniard  from  their
pulpits  and  inflaming  the  popular  hatred  against  the
ancient  enemy,  or  by  dilating  on  the  blessings  of  peace
and  the  horrors  of  war.^^  The  peace  party  and  the  war
party,  the  believers  in  Barneveld  and  the  especial  ad-
herents of  Prince  Maurice,  seemed  to  divide  the  land  in
nearly  equal  portions.

While  the  Netherlands,  both  rebellious  and  obedient,
were  filled  with  these  various  emotions,  the  other  coun-
tries of  Europe  were  profoundly  amazed  at  the  sudden
revelation.  It  was  on  the  whole  regarded  as  a  confession
of  impotence  on  the  part  of  Spain  that  the  archdukes
should  now  prepare  to  send  envoys  to  the  revolted  pro-
vinces as  to  a  free  and  independent  people.  Universal
monarchy,  brought  to  such  a  pass  as  this,  was  hardly
what  had  been  expected  after  the  tremendous  designs
and  the  grandiloquent  language  on  which  the  world  had
so  long  been  feeding  as  its  daily  bread.  The  spectacle
of  anointed  monarchs  thus  far  humbling  themselves  to
the  people — of  rebellion  dictating  terms,  instead  of
writhing  in  dust  at  the  foot  of  the  throne — was  some-
thing new  in  history.  The  heavens  and  earth  might
soon  be  expected  to  pass  away,  now  that  such  a  cata-
strophe was  occurring.

The  King  of  France  had  also  been  kept  in  ignorance
of  these  events.  It  was  impossible,  however,  that  the
negotiations  could  go  forward  without  his  consent  and
formal  participation.  Accordingly  on  receiving  the
news  he  appointed  an  especial  mission  to  the  Hague —
President  Jeannin  and  Do  Eussy,  besides  his  regular
resident  ambassador  Buzanval.  Meantime,  startling  news
reached  the  republic  in  the  early  days  of  May.

Wagenaar,  ix  251.

JACOB  VAN  HEEMSKERK.

295

CHAPTER  XLVII.

A  JL)utch  fleet  under  Heemskerk  sent  to  the  coast  of  Spain  and  Portugal  —  Encounter
with  the  Spanish  war-fleet  under  D'Avila — Death  of  both  commanders-in-chief —
Victory  of  the  Netherlanders —  Massacre  of  the  Spaniards.

The  States-General  had  not  been  inclined  to  be  tranquil
under  the  check  which  Admiral  Ilaultain  had  received
upon  the  coast  of  Spain  in  the  autumn  of  1606,  The
deed  of  terrible  self-devotion  by  which  Klaaszoon' and
his  comrades  had  in  that  crisis  saved  the  reputation  of
the  republic,  had  proved  that  her  fleets  needed  only
skilful  handling  and  determined  leaders  to  conquer  their
enemy  in  the  Western  seas  as  certainly  as  they  had
done  in  the  archipelagos  of  the  East.  And  there  was
one  pre-eminent  naval  commander,  still  in  the  very
prime  of  life,  but  seasoned  by  an  experience  at  the  poles
and  in  the  tropics  such  as  few  mariners  in  that  early
but  expanding  maritime  epoch  could  boast.  Jacob  van
Heemskerk,  unlike  many  of  the  navigators  and  ocean
warriors  who  had  made  and  were  destined  to  make  the
Orange  flag  of  the  United  Provinces  illustrious  over
the  world,  was  not  of  humble  parentage.  Sprung  of  an
ancient,  knightly  race,  which  had  frequently  distin-
guished itself  in  his  native  province  of  Holland,  he  had
followed  the  seas  almost  from  his  cradle.  By  turns  a
commercial  voyager,  an  explorer,  a  privateer's-man,  or
an  admiral  of  war-fleets,  in  days  when  sharp  distinctions
between  the  merchant  service  and  the  public  service,
corsairs'  work  and  cruisers'  work  did  not  exist,  he  had
ever  proved  himself  equal  to  any  emergency — a  man
incapable  of  fatigue,  of  perplexity,  or  of  fear.  We  have
followed  his  career  duriuLi;  that  awful  winter  in  Nova
Zembla,  where,  with  such  unflinching  cheerfnl  heroism,
he  sustained  the  courage  of  his  comrades — the  first  band
of  scientific  martyrs  that  had  ever  braved  the  dangers
and  demanded  the  secrets  of  those  arctic  regions.  His
glorious  name — as  those  of  so  many  of  his  comrades  and

296

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVH,

countrymen — has  been  rudely  torn  from  cape,  promon-
tory, island,  and  continent,  once  illustrated  by  courage
and  suffering,  but  the  noble  record  will  ever  remain.^

Subsequently  he  had  much  navigated  the  Indian  ocean ;
his  latest  achievement  having  been,  with  two  hundred
men,  in  a  couple  of  yachts,  to  capture  an  immense
Portuguese  carrack,  mounting  thirty  guns,  and  manned
with  eight  hundred  sailors,  and  to  bring  back  a  prodi-
gious booty  for  the  exchequer  of  the  republic.  A  man
with  delicate  features,  large  brown  eyes,  a  thin  high
nose,  fair  hair  and  beard,  and  a  soft,  gentle  expression,
he  concealed,  under  a  quiet  exterior,  and  on  ordinary
occasions  a  very  plain  and  pacific  costume,  a  most
daring  nature,  and  an  indomitable  ambition  for  military
and  naval  distinction.

He  was  the  man  of  all  others  in  the  commonwealth  to
lead  any  new  enterprise  that  audacity  could  conceive
against  the  hereditary  enemy.

The  public  and  the  States-General  were  anxious  to
retrace  the  track  of  Haultain,  and  to  efface  the  memory
of  his  inglorious  return  from  the  Spanish  coast.  The
sailors  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  were  indignant  that
the  richly  freighted  fleets  of  the  two  Indies  had  been
allowed  to  slip  so  easily  through  their  fingers.  The
great  East  India  Corporation  was  importunate  with
Government  that  such  blunders  should  not  be  repeated,
and  that  the  armaments  known  to  be  preparing  in  the
Portuguese  ports,  the  homeward-bound  fleets  that  might
be  looked  for  at  any  moment  off  the  peninsular  coast,
and  the  Spanish  cruisers  which  were  again  preparing  to
molest  the  merchant  fleets  of  the  Company,  should  be
dealt  with  effectively  and  in  season.

Twenty-six  vessels  of  small  size  but  of  good  sailing
qualities,  according  to  the  idea  of  the  epoch,  were  pro-
vided, together  with  four  tenders.  Of  this  fleet  the
command  was  offered  to  Jacob  van  Heemskerk.  He
accepted  with  alacrity,  expressing  with  his  usual  quiet
self-confidence  the  hope  that,  living  or  dead,  his  father-
land would  have  cause  to  thank  him.  Inspired  only  by
the  love  of  glory,  he  asked  for  no  remuneration  for  his

1  For  a  full  and  learned  dissertation  on  the  causes  of  the  oblivion  into  which  the
early  Dutch  voyages  have  fallen,  see  in  particular  Bennet  and  Van  Wyk,  111;
Hoofdstuk,  156,  ei  seqq.

1607. NAVAL  EXPEDITION  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL.  297

services  save  thirteen  per  cent,  of  the  booty,  after  half
a  million  florins  should  ha\  e  been  paid  into  the  public
treasury.  It  was  hardly  probable  that  this  would  prove
a  large  share  of  prize  money,*  while  considerable  vic-
tories alone  could  entitle  him  to  receive  a  stiver.

The  expedition  sailed  in  the  early  days  of  April  for
the  coast  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  the  admiral  having  full
discretion  to  do  anything  that  might  in  his  judgment
redound  to  the  advantage  of  the  republic.  Next  in  com-
mand was  the  vice-admiral  of  2^eland,  Laurenz  Alt  eras.
Another  famous  seaman  in  the  fleet  was  Captain  Henry
Janszoon  of  Amsterdam,  commonly  called  Long  Harry,
while  the  weather-beaten  and  well-beloved  Admiral
Lambert,  familiarly  styled  by  his  countrymen  Pretty
Lambert,"  some  of  whose  achievements  have  already
been  recorded  in  these  pages,  was  the  comrade  of  all
others  upon  whom  Heemskerk  most  depended.^  After
the  10th  April  the  admiral,  lying  off  and  on  near  tlio
mouth  of  the  Tagus,  sent  a  lugger  in  trading  disguise  to
reconnoitre  that  river.  Ho  ascertained  by  his  spies,
sent  in  this  and  subsequently  in  other  directions,  as  well
as  by  occasional  merchantmen  spoken  with  at  sea,  that
the  Portuguese  fleet  for  India  would  not  be  ready  to  sail
for  many  weeks ;  that  no  valuable  argosies  were  yet  to
be  looked  for  from  America,  but  that  a  great  war-fleet,
comprising  many  galleons  of  the  largest  size,  was  at
that  very  moment  cruising  in  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar.
Such  of  the  Ketherland  traders  as  were  returning  from
the  Levant,  as  well  as  those  designing  to  enter  the
Mediterranean,  were  likely  to  fall  prizes  to  this  formid-
able enemy.  The  heart  of  Joseph  Heemskerk  danced  for
joy.  He  had  come  forth  for  glory,  not  for  booty,  and
here  was  what  he  had  scarcely  dared  to  hope  for — a
powerful  antagonist  instead  of  peaceful,  scarcely  resisting,
but  richly-laden  merchantmen.  The  accounts  received
were  so  accurate  as  to  assure  him  that  the  Gibraltar  fleet
was  far  superior  to  his  own  in  size  of  vessels,  weight  of
metal,  and  number  of  combatants.  The  circumstances
only  increased  his  eagerness.  The  more  he  was  over-
matched, the  greater  would  be  the  honour  of  victory,
and  he  steered  for  the  straits,  tacking  to  and  fro  in  the
teeth  of  a  strong  head- wind.

2  Wage  loar,  ix.  252.

298

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVII.

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  of  April  he  was  in  the
narrowest  part  of  the  mountain- channel,  and

2o  April.  ^Yio  whole  Spanish  fleet  w^as  in  the

Ba}^  of  Gibraltar.  The  marble  pillar  of  Hercules  rose
before  him.  Heemskerk  was  of  a  poetic  temperament,
and  his  imagination  was  inflamed  by  the  spectacle  which
met  his  eyes.  Geographical  position,  splendour  of
natural  scenery,  immortal  fable,  and  romantic  history,
had  combined  to  throw  a  spell  over  that  region.  It
seemed  marked  out  for  perpetual  illustration  by  human
valour.  The  deeds  by  which,  many  generations  later,
those  localities  were  to  become  identified  with  the  fame
of  a  splendid  empire — then  only  the  most  energetic  rival
of  the  y<mng  republic,  but  destined  under  infinitely
better  geographical  conditions  to  follow  on  her  track  of
empire,  and  with  far  more  prodigious  results — were  still
in  the  womb  of  futurity.  But  St.  Vincent,  Trafalgar,
Gibraltar — words  which  were  one  day  to  stir  the  English
heart,  and  to  conjure  heroic  English  shapes  from  the
depths  so  long  as  history  endures — were  capes  and
promontories  already  familiar  to  legend  and  romance.

Those  Netherlanders  had  come  forth  from  their  slender
little  fatherland  to  offer  battle  at  last  within  his  own
harbours  and  under  his  own  fortresses  to  the  despot  who
aspired  to  universal  monarchy,  and  who  claimed  the
lordship  of  the  seas.  Ilie  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders
had  gained  victories  on  the  German  Ocean,  in  the
Channel,  throughout  the  Indies,  but  now  they  were  to
measure  strength  with  the  ancient  enemy  in  this  most
conspicuous  theatre,  and  before  the  eyes  of  Christendom.
It  was  on  this  famous  spot  that  the  ancient  demigod
had  torn  asunder  by  main  strength  the  continents  of
Europe  and  Africa.  There  stood  the  opposite  fragments
of  the  riven  mountain  chain,  Calpe  and  Abyla,  gazing
at  each  other,  in  eternal  separation,  across  the  guljf,
emblems  of  those  two  antagonistic  races  which  the
terrible  hand  of  Destiny  has  so  ominously  disjoined.
Nine  centuries  before,  the  African  king,  Moses  son  of
Kuzir,  and  his  lieutenant,  Tarik  son  of  Abdallah,  had
crossed  that  strait  and  burned  the  ships  which  brought
them.  Black  Africa  had  conquered  a  portion  of  whiter
Europe,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the  deadly  mutual
repugnance  which  nine  hundred  years  of  bloodshed  had

1607.

HEEMSKERK'S  HARANGUE.

299

heightened  into  insanity  of  hatred.  Tarik  had  taken
the  town  and  mountain,  Carteia  and  Calpe,  and  given  to
both  his  own  name.  Gib-al-Tarik,  the  clifi'  of  Tarik,
they  are  called  to  this  day.

Within  the  two  horns  of  that  beautiful  bay,  and  pro-
tected by  the  fortress  on  the  precipitous  rock,  lay  the
Spanish  fleet  at  anchor.  There  were  ten  galleons  of
the  largest  size,  besides  lesser  war -vessels  and  carracks,
in  all  twenty-one  sail.  The  admiral  commanding  was
Don  Juan  Alvarez  d'Avila,  a  veteran  who  had  fought  at
Lepanto  under  Don  John  of  Austria.  His  son  was
captain  of  his  flag-ship,  the  St.  Angustine.  The  vice-
admiral's  galleon  was  called  *  Our  Lady  of  La  Yega,'
the  rear-admiral's  was  the  '  Mother  of  God,'  and  all
the  other  ships  were  baptized  by  the  holy  names
deemed  most  appropriate,  in  the  Spanish  service,  to
deeds  of  carnage.

On  the  other  hand,  the  nomenclature  of  the  Dutch
ships  suggested  a  menagerie.  There  was  the  Tiger,  the
Sea  Dog,  the  Griflin,  the  Ked  Lion,  the  Golden  Lion,
the  Black  Bear,  the  White  Bear.  These,  with  the
iEolus  and  the  Morning  Star,  were  the  leading  vessels
of  the  little  fleet.

On  first  attaining  a  distant  view  of  the  enemy,
Heemskerk  summoned  all  the  caj)tains  on  board  his
flag-ship,  the  zEolus,  and  addressed  them  in  a  few
stirring  words.

"It  is  difficult,"  he  said,  " for  Ketherlanders  not  to
conquer  on  salt  water.^  Our  fathers  have  gained  many
a  victory  in  distant  seas,  but  it  is  for  us  to  tear  from
the  enemy's  list  of  titles  his  arrogant  appellation  of
]\Ionarch  of  the  Ocean.  Here,  on  the  veige  of  two
continents,  Europe  is  watching  our  deeds,  while  the
Moors  of  Africa  are  to  learn  for  the  first  time  in  what
estimation  they  are  to  hold  the  Batavian  republic.  liC-
member  that  you  have  no  choice  between  triumph  and
destruction.  I  have  led  you  into  a  position  whence
escape  is  impossible — and  I  ask  of  none  of  you  more
than  I  am  prepared  to  do  myself — whither  1  am  sure
that  you  will follow. The  enemy's ships are  far

3  Grotius,  Mcteren,  and  Wagonaar  all  g"ve  cssontially  the  same  report  of  tbii
Bp>>ech,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  therelore  (Jiat  something  very  like  it  was  really
spoken.

300

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XL VII.

STiperiot  to  ours  in  bulk ;  but  remember  that  tlieir  ex-
cessive size  makes  them  difficult  to  handle  and  easier  to
hit,  while  our  own  vessels  are  entirely  within  control.
Their  decks  are  swarming  with  men,  and  thus  there
will  be  more  certainty  that  our  shot  will  take  effect.
Eemember,  too,  that  we  are  all  sailors,  accustomed  from
our  cradles  to  the  ocean ;  while  yonder  Spaniards  are
mainly  soldiers  and  landsmen,  quahnish  at  the  smell  of
bilge-water,  and  sickening  at  the  roll  of  the  waves.*
This  day  begins  a  long  list  of  naval  victories,  which
will  make  our  fatherland  for  ever  illustiious,  or  lay  the
foundation  of  an  honourable  peace,  by  placing,  through
our  triumph,  in  the  hands  of  the  States-General,  the
power  of  dictating  its  terms."

His  comrades  long  remembered  the  enthusiasm  which
flashed  from  the  man,  usually  so  gentle  and  composed
in  demeanour,  so  simple  in  attire.  Clad  in  complete
armour,  with  the  oi'ange  plumes  waving  from  his  casque
and  the  orange  scarf  across  his  breast,  he  stood  there  in
front  of  the  mainmast  of  the  ^olus,  the  very  embodi-
ment of  an  ancient  Yiking.

He  then  briefly  announced  his  plan  of  attack.  It  was
of  antique  simplicity.  He  would  lay  his  own  ship
alongside  that  of  the  Spanish  admiral.  Pretty  Lambert
in  the  Tiger  was  to  grapple  with  her  on  the  other  side.
Vice-admiral  Alteras  and  Captain  Bras  were  to  attack
the  enemy's  vice-admiral  in  the  same  way.  Thus,  two
by  two,  the  little  Netherland  ships  were  to  come  into
closest  quarters  with  each  one  of  the  great  galleons.
Heemskerk  would  himself  lead  the  way,  and  all  were  to
follow,  as  closely  as  possible,  in  his  wake.  The  oath  to
stand  by  each  other  was  then  solemnly  renewed,  and  a
parting  health  was  drunk.  The  captains  then  returned
to  their  ships.

As  the  Lepanto  warrior,  Don  Juan  d'Avila,  saw  the
little  vessels  slowly  moving  towards  him,  he  summoned  a
Hollander  whom  he  had  on  board,  one  Skipper  Gevaerts
of  a  captured  Dutch  trading  bark,  and  asked  him  whether
those  ships  in  the  distance  were  Netherlanders.
Not  a  doubt  of  it,"  replied  the  skipper.

*  "  lllud  vero  vel  preecipuum  quod
apud  nos  nautse  pugnant,  apud  illos
milites  quos  ego  mihi  videre  videor  ut

sunt  delicati  sentinas  odore  ac  jactatione
fluctuum  prope  exanimes  in  vertiginem
dari."— Grrotius,  734.

1607. HEEMSKERK  ATTACKS  THE  SPANISH  FLEET.

301

The  admiral  then  asked  him  what  their  purpose  could
possibly  be,  in  venturing  so  near  Gibraltar.

"  Either  I  am  entirely  mistaken  in  my  countrymen,"
answered  Gevaerts,  '*or  they  are  coming  for  the  express
purpose  of  oifering  you  battle."  ^

The  Spaniard  laughed  loud  and  long.  The  idea  that
those  puny  vessels  could  be  bent  on  such  a  purpose
seemed  to  him  irresistibly  comic,  and  he  promised  his
prisoner,  with  much  condescension,  that  the  St.  Augus-
tine alone  should  sink  the  whole  fleet.

Gevaerts,  having  his  own  ideas  on  the  subject,  but
not  being  called  upon  to  express  them,  thrmked  the
admiral  for  his  urbanity,  and  respectfully  withdiew.

At  least  four  thousand  soldiers  were  in  D'Avila's
ships,  besides  seamen.  There  were  seven  hundred  in
the  St.  Augustine,  four  hundred  and  fifty  in  Our  Lady
of  Vega,  and  so  on  in  proportion.  There  were  also  one
or  two  hundred  noble  volunteers  who  came  thronging  on
board,  scenting  the  battle  from  afar,  and  desirous
of  having  a  hand  in  the  destruction  of  the  insolent
Dutchmen.

It  was  about  one  in  the  afternoon.  There  was  not
much  wind,  but  the  Hollanders,  slowly  drifting  ^5  ^p^ji
on  the  eternal  river  that  pours  from  the
Atlantic  into  the  Mediterranean,  were  now  very  near.
All  hands  had  been  piped  on  board  every  one  of  the
ships,  all  had  gone  down  on  their  knees  in  humble
prayer,  and  the  loving  cup  had  then  been  passed
around.^

Heemskerk,  leading  the  way  towards  the  Spanish
admiral,  ordered  the  gunners  of  the  -^olus  not  to  fire
until  the  vessels  struck  each  other.  "  Wait  till  you
hear  it  crack,"  he  said,  adding  a  promise  of  a  hundred
florins  to  the  man  who  should  pull  down  the  admiral's
flag.  Avila,  notwithstanding  his  previous  merriment,
thought  it  best,  for  the  moment,  to  avoid  the  coming
collision.  Leaving  to  other  galleons,  which  he  inter-
posed between  himself  and  the  enemy,  the  task  of
summarily  sinking  the  Dutch  fleet,  he  cut  the  cable
of  the  St.  Augustine,  and  drifted  farther  into  the  bay.
Heemskerk,  not  allowing  himself  to  be  foiled  in  his

5  Meteren,  547.  ^  Mctoren,  Waponaar,  Grotius.

'  "En  dat  sy  het  hoorden  kraakcu." — MeUTcn,  547^®

302

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVU.

purpose,  steered  past  two  or  three  galleons,  and  came
crashing  against  the  admiral.  Almost  simultaneously,
Pretty  Lambert  laid  himself  along  her  quarter  on  the
other  side.  The  St.  Augustine  fired  into  the  iEolus  as
she  approached,  but  without  doing  much  damage.  The
Dutch  admiral,  as  he  was  coming  in  contact,  discharged
his  forward  guns,  and  poured  an  effective  volley  of  mus-
ketry into  his  antagonist.

The  St.  Augustine  fired  again,  straight  across  the
centre  of  the  iEolus,  at  a  few  yards'  distance.  A  cannon
ball  took  oft"  the  head  of  a  sailor,  standing  near  Heems-
kerk,  and  carried  away  the  admiral's  leg  close  to  the
body.  He  fell  on  the  deck,  and,  knowing  himself  to  be
mortally  wounded,  implored  the  next  in  command
on  board,  Captain  Yerhoef,  to  fight  his  ship  to  the  last,
and  to  conceal  his  death  from  the  rest  of  the  fleet.  Then
prophesying  a  glorious  victory  for  the  republic,  and
piously  commending  his  soul  to  his  maker,  he  soon
breathed  his  last.  A  cloak  was  thrown  over  him,  and
the  battle  raged.  The  few  who  were  aware  that  the
noble  Heemskerk  was  gone,  burned  to  avenge  his  death,
and  to  obey  the  dying  commands  of  their  beloved  chief.
The  rest  of  the  Hollanders  believed  themselves  under
his  directing  influence,  and  fought  as  if  his  eyes  were
upon  them.  Thus  the  spirit  of  the  departed  hero  still
watched  over  and  guided  the  battle.

The  ^olus  now  fired  a  broadside  into  her  antagonist,
making  fearful  havoc,  and  killing  Admiral  d'Avila.
The  commanders-in-chief  of  both  contending  fleets  h  id
thus  fallen  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  battle.  While
the  St.  Augustine  was  engaged  in  deadly  encounter,
yard-arm  and  yard-arm,  with  the  iEolus  and  the  Tiger,
Vice-admiral  Alteras  had,  however,  not  carried  out  his
part  of  the  plan.  Before  he  could  succeed  in  laying
himself  alongside  of  the  Spanish  vice-admiral,  he  had
been  attacked  by  two  galleons.  Three  other  Dutch
ships,  however,  attacked  the  vice-admiral,  and,  after  an
obstinate  combat,  silenced  all  her  batteries  and  set  her
on  fire.  Her  conquerors  were  then  obliged  to  draw  oif
rather  hastily,  and  to  occupy  themselves  for  a  time  in
extinguishing  their  own  burning  sails,  which  had  taken
fire  from  the  close  contact  with  their  enemy.  Our  Lady
of  Vega,  all  ablaze  from  top-gallant-mast  to  quarter-

1607.

VICTORY  OF  THE  DUTCH.

308

deck,  floated  helplessly  about,  a  spectre  of  flame,  her
guns  going  off  wildly,  and  her  crew  dashing  themselves
into  the  sea,  in  order  to  escape  by  drowning  from  a  fiery
death. She  was  consumed  to  the  water's  edge.

Meantime,  Vice-admiral  Alteras  had  successively  de-
feated both  his  antagonists  ;  drifting  in  with  them  until
almost  under  the  guns  of  the  forti  ess,  but  never  leaving
them  until,  by  his  superior  gunnery  and  seamanship,
he  had  sunk  one  of  them,  and  dri  ven  the  other  a  help-
less wreck  on  shore.

Long  Harry,  while  Alteras  had  been  thus  employed,
had  engaged  another  great  galleon,  and  set  her  on  fii  e.
She,  too,  was  thoroughly  burned  to  her  hulk,  but  Ad-
miral Harry  was  killed.

By  this  time,  although  it  was  early  of  an  April  after-
noon, the  heavy  clouds  of  smoke,  enveloping  the  com-
batants pent  together  in  so  small  a  S})ace,  seemed  to
make  an  atmosphere  of  midnight,  as  the  flumes  of  the
burning  galleons  died  away.  There  was  a  difliciilty,
too,  in  bringing  all  the  Ketherland  ships  into  action —
several  of  the  smaller  ones  having  been  purposely
stationed  by  Heemskerk  on  the  edge  of  the  bay  to
prevent  the  possible  escape  of  any  of  the  Spaniards.
While  some  of  these  distant  ships  were  crowding  sail,
in  order  to  come  to  closer  quarters,  now  that  the  day
seemed  going  against  the  Spaniards,  a  tremendous  ex-
plosion suddenly  shook  the  aii*.  One  of  the  largest
galleons,  engaged  in  combat  with  a  couple  of  Dutch
vessels,  had  received  a  hot  shot  full  in  her  powder
magazine,  and  blew  up  with  all  on  board.  The  blazing
fragments  drifted  about  among  the  other  ships,  and  two
more  were  soon  on  fire,  their  guns  going  off  and  their
magazines  exploding.  The  rock  of  Gibraltar  seemed  to
reel.  To  the  nmrky  darkness  succeeded  the  intoleiable
glare  of  a  new  and  vast  conflagration.  The  scene  in
that  narrow  roadstead  wa.s  now  almost  infernal.  Jt
seemed,  said  an  eye-witness,  as  if  heaven  and  earth
were  passing  away.  A  hopeless  panic  seized  the
Spaniards.  The  battle  was  over.  The  St.  Augustine
still  lay  in  the  deadly  embrace  of  her  antagonists,  but
all  the  other  galleons  were  sunk  or  burned.  Several  of
the  lesser  war-ships  had  aLso  been  destroyed.  It  was
nearly  sunset. The  St.  Augustine  at  last  ran  up  a

304

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVII.

white  flag,  but  it  was  not  observed  in  the  fierceness  of
the  last  moments  of  combat :  the  men  from  the  ^olus
and  the  Tiger  making  a  simultaneous  rush  on  board  the
vanquislied  foe.

The  fight  was  done,  but  the  massacre  was  at  its
beginning.  The  trumpeter  of  Captain  Kleinsorg  clam-
bered like  a  monkey  up  the  mast  of  the  St.  Augustine,
hauled  down  the  admiral's  flag,  the  last  which  was  still
waving,  and  gained  the  hundred  florins.  The  ship  was
full  of  dead  and  dying  ;  but  a  brutal,  infamous  butchery
now  took  place.  Some  Netherland  prisoners  were  found
in  the  hold,  who  related  that  two  messengers  had  been
successively  despatched  to  take  their  lives,  as  they  lay
there  in  chains,  and  that  each  had  been  shot,  as  he
made  his  way  towards  the  execution  of  the  orders.
This  information  did  not  chill  the  ardour  of  their  victo-
rious coma  try  men.  No  quarter  was  given.  Such  of  the
victims  as  succeeded  in  throwing  themselves  over-
board, out  of  the  St.  Augustine,  or  any  of  the  burning
or  sinking  ships,  were  pursued  by  the  Netherlanders,
who  rowed  about  among  them  in  boats,  shooting,  stab-
bing, and  drowning  their  victims  by  hundreds.  It  was
a  sickening  spectacle.  The  bay,  said  those  who  were
there,  seemed  sown  with  corpses.  Probably  two  or
three  thousand  were  thus  put  to  death,  or  had  met  their
fate  before.  Had  the  chivalrous  Heemskerk  lived,  it  is
possible  that  he  might  have  stopped  the  massacre.  But
the  thought  of  the  grief  which  would  fill  the  common-
wealth when  the  news  should  arrive  of  his  death — thus
turning  .the  joy  of  the  great  triumph  into  lamentations
— increased  the  animosity  of  his  comrades.  Moreover,
in  ransacking  the  Spanish  admiral's  ship,  all  his  papers
had  been  found,  among  them  many  secret  instructions
from  Government  signed  "  I,  the  King  ; "  ordering  most
inhuman  persecutions,  not  only  of  the  Netherlanders,
but  of  all  who  should  in  any  way  assist  them,  at  sea  or
ashore.  Eecent  examples  of  the  thorough  manner  in
which  the  royal  admirals  could  carry  out  these  bloody
instructions  had  been  furnished  by  the  hangings,  burn-
ings, and  drownings  of  Fazardo.  But  the  barbarous
ferocity  of  the  Dutch  on  this  occasion  might  have  taught
a  lesson  even  to  the  comrades  of  Alva.

The  fleet  of  Avila  was  entirely  destroyed. The  hulk

1607.

FUNERAL  OF  HEEMSKERK.

305

of  the  St.  Augustine  drifted  ashore,  having  been  aban-
doned by  the  victors,  and  was  set  on  fire  by  a  few
Spaniards  who  had  concealed  themselves  on  board,  lest
she  might  fall  again  into  the  enemy's  hands.

The  battle  had  lasted  from  half-past  three  until  sunset.
The  Dutch  vessels  remained  all  the  next  day  on  the
scene  of  their  triumph.  The  townspeople  were  dis-
cerned, packing  up  their  goods,  and  speeding  panic-
struck  into  the  interior.  Had  Heemskerk  survived  he
would  doubtless  have  taken  Gibraltar — fortress  and
town — and  perhaps  Cadiz,  such  was  the  consternation
along  the  whole  coast.

But  his  gallant  spirit  no  longer  directed  the  fleet.
Bent  rather  upon  plunder  than  glory,  the  ships  now
dispersed  in  search  of  prizes  towards  the  Azoies,  the
Canaries,  or  along  the  Portuguese  coast;  having  first
made  a  brief  visit  to  Tetuan,  where  they  were  raptur-
ously received  by  the  Bey.

The  Hollanders  lost  no  ships,  and  but  one  hundred
seamen  were  killed.  Two  vessels  were  despatched
homeward  directly,  one  with  sixty  wounded  sailors,
the  other  with  the  embalmed  body  of  the  fallen  Heems-
kerk. The  hero  was  honoured  with  a  magnificent
funeral  in  Amsterdam  at  the  public  expense — the  first
instance  in  the  history  of  the  republic — and  his  name
was  enrolled  on  the  most  precious  page  of  her  records.*

8  The  chief  authorities  for  this  remarkable  battle  are  Metercn,  547,  548.  Grotiua,
rvi.  731-738. Wagenaar,  ix.  251-258.

VOL.  tV.

306

THE  UNITKD  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIIl.

CHAPTEK  XLVIIL

Internal  condition  of  Spain  —  Character  of  the  people  —  Influence  of  the  Inquisition
—  Population  and  Revenue  —  Incomes  of  Church  and  Government — Degradation
of  Labour  —  Expulsion  of  the  Moors  and  its  consequences  —  Venality  the  special
characteristic  of  Spanish  polity  —  Maxims  of  the  foreign  polity  of  Spain  —  The
Spanish  army  and  navy  —  Insolvent  state  of  the  Government — The  Duke  of
Lerma  —  His  position  in  the  State  —  Origin  of  his  power  —  System  of  bribery  and
trafficking  —  Philip  III.  —  His  character  —  Domestic  life  of  the  king  and  queen.

A  GLANCE  at  the  interior  condition  of  Spain,  now  that
there  had  been  more  than  nine  years  of  a  new  reign,
should  no  longer  be  deferred.

Spain  was  still  superstitiously  regarded  as  the  lead-
ing power  of  the  world,  although  foiled  in  all  its  fan-
tastic and  gigantic  schemes.  It  was  still  supposed,
according  to  current  dogma,  to  share  with  the  Otto-
man empire  the  dominion  of  the  earth.^  A  series  of
fortunate  marriages  having  united  many  of  the  richest
and  fairest  portions  of  Europe  under  a  single  sceptre,
it  was  popularly  believed  in  a  period  when  men  were
not  much  given  as  yet  to  examine  very  deeply  the  prin-
ciples of  human  governments  or  the  causes  of  national
greatness,  that  an  aggregation  of  powers  which  had  re-
sulted from  preposterous  laws  of  succession  really  con-
stituted a  mighty  empire,  founded  by  genius  and  valour.

The  Spanish  people,  endowed  with  an  acute  and  ex-
uberant genius,  which  had  exhibited  itself  in  many
paths  of  literature,  science,  and  art ;  with  a  singular
aptitude  for  military  adventure,  organization,  and
achievement ;  with  a  great  variety,  in  short,  of  splendid
and  ennobling  qualities ;  had  been,  for  a  long  succes-
sion of  years,  accursed  with  almost  the  very  worst  poli-
tical institutions  known  to  history.  The  depth  of  their
misery  and  of  their  degradation  was  hardly  yet  known
to  themselves,  and  this  was  perhaps  the  most  hideous
proof  of  the  tyranny  of  which  they  had  been  the  victims.
To  the  outward  world,  the  hollow  fabric,  out  of  which
the  whole  pith  and  strength  had  been  slowly  gnawed

1  Giro.  Soranzo,  Pwelazione.

160/.

THE  SPANISH  POPULATION.

307

away,  was  imposing  and  majestic  still.  But  the  priest,
the  soldier,  and  the  courtier  had  been  busy  too  long,
and  had  done  their  work  too  thoroughly,  to  leave  much
hope  of  arresting  the  universal  decay.

Nor  did  there  seem  any  probability  that  the  attempt
would  be  made.

It  is  always  difficult  to  reform  wide-spread  abuses,  even
when  they  are  acknowledged  to  exist,  but  when  gigantic
vices  are  proudly  pointed  to  as  the  noblest  of  institutions
and  as  the  very  foundations  of  the  state,  there  seems
nothing  for  the  patriot  to  long  for  but  the  deluge.

It  was  acknowledged  that  the  Spanish  population —
having  a  very  large  admixture  of  those  races  which,  be-
cause not  Catholic  at  heart,  were  stigmatized  as  mis-
creants, heretics,  pagans,  and,  generally,  as  accursed —
was  by  nature  singularly  prone  to  religious  innova-
tion.'^ Had  it  not  been  for  the  Holy  Inquisition,  it
was  the  opinion  of  acute  and  thoughtful  obseivers  in
the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  that  the  in-
famous heresies  of  Luther,  Calvin,  and  the  rest,  would
have  long  before  taken  possession  of  the  land.^  'J'o
that  most  blessed  establishment  it  was  owing  that  Spain
had  not  polluted  itself  in  the  filth  and  ordure  of  the
Keformation,  and  had  been  spared  the  horrible  fate
which  had  befallen  large  portions  of  Germany,  France,
Britain,  and  other  barbarous  northern  nations.  It  was
conscientiously  and  thankfully  believed  in  Spain,  two
centuries  ago,  that  the  state  had  been  saved  from  political
and  moral  ruin  by  that  admirable  machine  which  de-
tected heretics  with  unerring  accuracy,  burned  them  when
detected,  and  consigned  their  descendants  to  political
incapacity  and  social  infamy  to  the  remotest  generation."*

As  the  awful  consequences  of  religious  freedom,  men

2  "  Li  popoli  per  la  gran  mescolanza
che  hanno  avuto  coi  Mori  e  Giudei  sono
moito  facili  a  divertire  dal  diretto  scntlero
Aella  fede."  —  Giro.  Soranzo,  Kelazloiie.

Tremando  gli  Spagnuoli  percbe  iucom-
inciarono  a  colpirii  1'  eresia  nei  tempi  di
Filippo  11.  non  solo  ncl  volgo  ma  anche
nella  alta  nobilta." — S.  Contariiii,  Rela-
zione.

3  "  jfc  rispettato  1'  inquisitore  mnggiore
come  se  io^se  un  papa,  ha  il  triliunal  d..l
6U0  officio  per  tutte  le  terre. In  souima

si  pub  dire  che  11  ngore  di  questo  oflBcio
mantiene  il  rito  della  vera  religione  in
Spagna  che  senza  que.^to  si  puo  grande-
mente  temere  che  per  li  tanti  Moreschi  e
Marani  che  sono  sparsi  i>ct  il  paese  si
vederiaiio  per  questo  rispotto  di  rtliglone
dei  movimenti  e  delle  commozioni  ini^  or-
tauti.'— Soranzo.

♦  "Con  timta  vergogna  cd  ignominia
che  in  etemo  retta  macchiatii  quella  dia»
cenden7A  di  infamia  ne  sono  Ciipaci  '
I)08teri  di  diguita  ue  dionore  alcuiio  on(i<3

308

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIII.

pointed  with,  a  shudder  to  the  condition  of  nations
already  speeding  on  the  road  to  ruin,  from  which  the  two
peninsulas  at  least  have  been  saved.  Yet  the  British  em-
pire, with  the  American  republic  still  an  embryo  in  its
bosom,  France,  North  Germany,  and  other  great  powers,
had  hardly  then  begun  their  headlong  career.  Whether
the  road  of  religious  liberty  was  leading  exactly  to  poli-
tical ruin,  the  coming  centuries  were  to  judge.

Enough  has  been  said  in  former  chapters  for  the
characterization  of  Philip  II.  and  his  polity.  But  there
had  now  been  nearly  ten  years  of  another  reign.  The
system  inaugurated  by  Charles  and  perfected  by  his
son,  had  reached  its  last  expression  under  Philip  III.

The  evil  done  by  father  and  son  lived  and  bore  plenti-
ful fruit  in  the  epoch  of  the  grandson.  And  this  is
inevitable  in  history.  No  generation  is  long-lived
enough  to  reap  the  harvest,  whether  of  good  or  evil,
which  it  sows.

Philip  II.  had  been  indefatigable  in  evil,  a  thorough
believer  in  his  supernatural  mission  as  despot,  not  en-
tirely without  capacity  for  affairs,  personally  absorbed
by  the  routine  of  his  bureau.

He  was  a  king,  as  he  understood  the  meaning  of  the
kingly  office.  His  policy  was  continued  after  his  death ;
but  there  was  no  longer  a  king.  That  important  regu-
lator to  the  goverrmiental  machinery  was  wanting.  How
its  place  was  supplied  will  soon  appear.

Meantime  the  organic  functions  were  performed  very
much  in  the  old  way.  There  was  at  least,  no  lack  of
priests  or  courtiers.

Spain  at  this  epoch  had  probably  less  than  twelve
millions  of  inhabitants,  although  the  statistics  of  those
days  cannot  be  relied  upon  with  accuracy.^  The  whole
revenue  of  the  state  was  nominally  sixteen  or  seven-
teen millions  of  dollars,  but  the  greater  portion  of  that
income  was  pledged  for  many  coming  years  to  the  mer-
chants of  Genoa.^ All  the  little  royal  devices  for  in-

tutti  procurano  di  vivere  in  maniera  da  dents,  at  thirteen  millions (F.  Priuli,

non  imbrattarsi  in  tanta  lordura  man-  Relazione). But  Agostino  de  Blas,in  his

tenere  la  Spagna  libera  dall'  infezione  work  on  the  population  of  Spain  from

deir  eresia,  peste  che  ha  infettato  e  rovi-  official  records,  cited  by  N.  Barozzi  (Notes,

nato  gran  parte  del  mondo,"  &c.,  &c. —  s.  1,  vol.  i.  p.  353)  allows  but  9,680,191

Giro.  Soranzo,  Relazione.  inhabitants  for  the  whole  peninsula.

i>  Priuli  (1604-1608)  puts  the  popula- 6  "  Sono  1' entrate  di  S.  M.  come  dicono

tion  of  Spain,  inclusive  of  foreign  resi-  da  16  milioni  in  circa  quasi  tutte  impeg-

1607.

THE  STATE  REVENUE  OF  SPAIN.

30P

creasing  the  budget  by  debasing  the  coin  of  the  realm,
by  issuing  millions  of  copper  tokens,  by  lowering  the
promised,  rate  of  interest  on  Government  loans,  by
formally  repudiating  both  interest  and  principal,  had
been  tried,  both  in  this  and  the  preceding  reign,  with
the  usual  success.  An  inconvertible  paper  currency,
stimulating  industry  and  improving  morals  by  convert-
ing beneficent  commerce  into  baleful  gambling  —  that
fatal  invention  did  not  then  exist.  Meantime,  the  legi-
timate trader  and  innocent  citizen  were  harassed,  and
the  general  public  endangered,  as  much  as  the  limited
machinery  of  the  epoch  permitted.

The  available,  unpledged  revenue  of  the  kingdom
hardly  amounted  to  five  millions  of  dollars  a-year.  The
regular  annual  income  of  the  chui-ch  was  at  least  six
millions.'^  The  whole  personal  property  of  the  nation
was  estimated — in  a  very  clumsy  and  unsatisfactory
way,  no  doubt — at  sixty  millions  of  dollars.^  Thus  the
income  of  the  priesthood  was  ten  per  cent,  of  the  whole
funded  estate  of  the  country,  and  at  least  a  million
a-year  more  than  the  income  of  the  Government.  Could
a  more  biting  epigram  be  made  u])on  tlie  condition  to
which  the  nation  had  been  reduced  ?

Labour  was  more  degraded  than  ever.  The  indus-
trious classes,  if  such  could  be  said  to  exist,  were  es-
teemed every  day  more  and  more  infamous.  jMerchants,
shopkeepers,  mechanics,  were  reptiles,  as  vilely  esteemed
as  Jews,  Moors,  Protestants,  or  Pagans.  Acquiring
wealth  by  any  kind  of  production  was  dishonourable.
A  grandee  who  should  permit  himself  to  sell  the  wool
from  his  boundless  sheep-walks  disgraced  his  caste,
and  was  accounted  as  low  as  a  merchant.^  To  create
was  the  business  of  slaves  and  miscreants :  to  destroy
was  the  distinguishing  attribute  of  Christians  and
nobles.  To  cheat,  to  pick,  and  to  steal,  on  the  most
minute  and  the  most  gigantic  scale — these  were  also
among  the  dearest  privileges  of  the  exalted  classes.  No

nate  e  non  solo  impognate  ma  si  pub  dire  *  "  Eppure  la  Spagna  e  povera  non

annullate  perche  soiioobbli^ateaniaggior  trovandosone  in  e^sa  pili  di  sessanta

prezzo  che  vagliauo,"  &c.  &c.— Ott*^.  Bon,  uiilioni  fra  capital!  e  robe  di  servizio." —

Kelazione. Compare  Gir°.  Soranzo,  who  Fran,  Priuli,  Ambas.  i£  Filippo  111.  1604-

puts  the  nominal  whole  at  sevent«M'n  mil-  ]6(i8.

lions,  but  "  impegnate  ed  annihilate  af-  ^  Ibid. Compare  notes  of  Barozzi  (s.  1,

£atto." 7  F.  Priuli,  Kelazione.  vol,  i.  p,  351).

310

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVUI.

mercliandize  was  polluting  save  the  produce  of  lionest
industry.  To  sell  places  in  church  and  state,  the  aimy,
the  navy,  and  the  sacred  tribunals  of  law;  to  take
\)ribes  from  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low,  in  sums  in-
nnitesimal  or  enormous,  to  pillage  the  exchequer  in  every
imaginable  form,  to  dispose  of  titles  of  honour,  orders
of  chivalry,  posts  in  municipal  council,^^  at  auction ;  to
barter  iDfluence,  audiences,  official  interviews  against
money  cynically  paid  down  in  rascal  counters — all  this
was  esteemed  consistent  with  patrician  dignity.

The  ministers,  ecclesiastics,  and  those  about  court,
obtaining  a  monopoly  of  such  trade,  left  the  business  of
production  and  circulation  to  their  inferiors,  while,  as
has  already  been  sufficiently  indicated,  religious  fana-
ticism and  a  pride  of  race,  which  nearly  amounted  to
idiocy,  had  generated  a  scorn  for  labour  even  among
the  lowest  orders.  As  a  natural  consequence,  com-
merce and  the  mechanical  arts  fell  almost  exclusively
into  the  hands  of  foreigners  —  Italians,  English,  and
French— who  resorted  in  yearly  increasing  numbers  to
Spain  for  the  purpose  of  enriching  themselves  by  the
industry  which  the  natives  despised.-^^

The  capital  thus  acquired  was  at  regular  intervals
removed  from  the  country  to  other  lands,  where  wealth
resulting  from  traffic  or  manufactures  was  not  accounted
infamous.

Moreover,  as  the  soil  of  the  country  was  held  by  a
few  great  proprietors — an  immense  portion  in  the  dead-
hand  of  an  insatiate  and  ever-grasping  church,  and
much  of  the  remainder  in  vast  entailed  estates — it  was
nearly  impossible  for  the  masses  of  the  people  to  be-
come owners  of  any  portion  of  the  land.  To  be  an
agricultural  day-labourer  at  less  than  a  beggar's  wage
could  hai^ly  be  a  tempting  pursuit  for  a  proud  and
indolent  race.  It  was  no  wonder  therefore  that  the
business  of  the  brigand,  the  smuggler,  the  professional
mendicant  became  from  year  to  year  more  attractive
and  more  overdone ;  while  an  ever-thickening  swarm
of  priests,  friars,  and  nuns  of  every  order,  engendered

"  Quelli  che  governano  nelle  citta  i  Inoghi  dove  vanno  sogliono  esser  venduti

Bono  cbiamati  Regidores  e  sono  nelle  citt^  per  4  o  6  mille  ducati  cib  che  porta  al

grandi  in  numero  di  40  e  forse  piu  e  popolo  gran  danno,"  &c.  &c. — S.  Con-

nelle  piccole  in  n]in(n'  numero ;  questi  tarini.
impieghi  il  re  vende  per  denari  e  secondo n  Giro.  Soranzo.

1607.

DEGRADATION  OF  LABOUR.

311

out  of  a  corrupt  and  decaying  society,  increasing  the
general  indolence,  immorality,  and  unproductive  con-
sumption, and  frightfully  diminishing  the  productive
force  of  the  country,  fed  like  locusts  upon  what  was
left  in  the  unhappy  land.  "  To  shirk  labour,  infinite
numbers  become  priests  and  friars,"  said  a  good  Catholic,
in  the  year  1608.''

Before  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Philip  III.,  the  penin-
sula, which  might  have  been  the  granary  of  the  world,
did  not  produce  food  enough  for  its  own  population.
Corn  became  a  regular  article  of  import  into  Spain,
and  would  have  come  in  larger  quantities  than  it  did
had  the  industry  of  the  country  furnished  sufficient
material  to  exchange  for  necessary  food.

And  as  if  it  had  been  an  object  of  ambition  with  the
priests  and  courtiers  who  then  ruled  a  noble  country,  to
make  at  exactly  this  epoch  the  mo-st  startling  manifest-
ation of  human  fatuity  that  the  world  had  ever  seen,  it
was  now  resolved  by  government  to  expel  by  armed
force  nearly  the  whole  stock  of  intelligent  and  expe-
rienced labour,  agricultural  and  mechanical,  from  the
country.  It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  long  upon  an  event
which,  if  it  were  not  so  familiarly  kn(jwn  to  mankind,
would  seem  almost  incredible.  But  the  expulsion  of  the
Moors  is,  alas !  no  exaggerated  and  imaginary  satire,
but  a  monument  of  wickedness  and  insanity  such  as  is
not  often  seen  in  human  history.

Already,  in  the  very  first  years  of  the  century,  John
Kibera,  archbishop  of  Valencia,  bad  recommended  and
urged  the  scheme.

It  was  too  gigantic  a  project  to  be  carried  into  execu-
tion at  once,  but  it  was  slowly  matured  by  the  aid  of
other  ecclesiastics.  At  last  there  were  indications,  both
human  and  divine,  that  the  expulsion  of  these  miscreants
could  no  longer  be  deferred.  It  was  rumoured  and  be-
lieved that  a  general  conspiracy  existed  among  the
Moors  to  rise  upon  the  Government,  to  institute  a
general  massacre,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  their  allies
and  relatives  on  the  Barbary  coast,  to  re-establish  the
empire  of  the  infidels.'^

A  convoy  of  eighty  ass-loads  of  oil  on  the  way  to

12  "Per  schiv;ir  il  travaglio  od  infiniti  si  fiinno  preti  e  frati." — Gir®.  Soranio
Aiubiis.  a  Filippo  111.  16U8-1611.  13  Gir^.  Soranzo.

312

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIU.

Madrid  had  halted  at  a  wayside  inn.  A  few  flasks  were
stolen,  and  those  who  consumed  it  were  made  sick.
Some  of  the  thieves  even  died,  or  were  said  to  have  died,
in  consequence.^^  Instantly  the  rumour  flew  from  mouth
to  mouth,  from  town  to  town,  that  the  royal  family,
the  court,  the  whole  capital,  all  Spain,  were  to  be
poisoned  with  that  oil.  If  such  were  the  scheme  it  was
certainly  a  less  ingenious  one  than  the  famous  plot  by
which  the  Spanish  Government  was  suspected  but  a  few
years  before  to  have  so  nearly  succeeded  in  blowing  the
king,  peers,  and  commons  of  England  into  the  air.

The  proof  of  Moorish  guilt  was  deemed  all-sufficient,
especially  as  it  was  supported  by  supernatural  evidence
of  the  most  portentous  and  convincing  kind.  For  several
days  together  a  dark  cloud,  tinged  with  blood-red,  had
been  seen  to  hang  over  Valencia.^^

In  the  neghbourhood  of  Daroca,  a  din  of  drums  and
trumpets  and  the  clang  of  arms  had  been  heard  in  the
sky,  just  as  a  procession  went  out  of  a  monastery.^^

At  Valencia  the  image  of  the  Virgin  had  shed  tears.
In  another  place  her  statue  had  been  discovered  in  a
state  of  profuse  perspiration."

What  more  conclusive  indications  could  be  required  as
to  the  guilt  of  the  Moors?  What  other  means  devised
for  saving  crown,  church,  and  kingdom  from  destruction
but  to  expel  the  whole  mass  of  unbelievers  from  the  soil
which  they  had  too  long  profaned  ?

Archbishop  Eibera  was  fully  sustained  by  the  Arch-
bishop of  Toledo,  and  the  whole  ecclesiastical  body
received  energetic  support  from  Government.

Kibera  had  solemnly  announced  that  the  Moors  were
so  greedy  of  money,  so  determined  to  keep  it,  and  so
occupied  with  pursuits  most  apt  for  acquiring  it,  that
they  had  come  to  be  the  sponge  of  Spanish  wealth.  The
best  proof  of  this,  continued  the  reverend  sage,  was  that,
inhabiting  in  general  poor  little  villages  and  sterile
ti'acts  of  country,  paying  to  the  lords  of  the  manor  one
third  of  the  crops,  and  being  overladen  with  special
taxes  imposed  only  upon  them,  they  nevertheless  became
rich,  while  the  Christians,  cultivating  the  most  fertile
land,  were  in  abject  poverty.

14  Giro.  Soranzo. is  ibid,  and  notes  of  N.  Barozzi. i6  Ibid. i7  Ibid.
18  Escriba,  Vida  de  Don  Juan  de  Ribera,  papel  segundo,  quoted  by  Lafuente,
XV.  370-390.

1607,

EXPULSION  OF  THE  MOORS.

313

It  seems  almost  incredible  that  this  should  not  be
satire.  Certainly  the  most  delicate  irony  could  not  por-
tray the  vicious  institutions  under  which  the  magnificent
territory  and  noble  people  of  Spain  were  thus  doomed
to  ruin  more  subtly  and  forcibly  than  was  done  by  the
honest  brutality  of  this  churchman.  The  careful  tillage,
the  beautiful  system  of  irrigation  by  aqueduct  and
canal,  the  scientific  processes  by  which  these  "accursed"
had  caused  the  wilderness  to  bloom  with  cotton,  sugar,
and  every  kind  of  fruit  and  grain:  the  untiring  industry,
exquisite  ingenuity,  and  cultivated  taste  by  which  the
merchants,  manufacturers,  and  mechanics,  guilty  of  a
darker  complexion  than  that  of  the  peninsular  Goths,
had  enriched  their  native  land  with  splendid  fabncs  in
clorh,  paper,  leather,  silk,  tapestry,  and  by  so  doing  had
acquired  fortunes  for  themselves,  despite  iniquitous
taxation,  religious  persecution,  and  social  contumely —
all  these  were  crimes  against  a  race  of  idlers,  steeped  to
the  lips  in  sloth  which  imagined  itself  to  be  pride.

The  industrious,  the  intelligent,  the  wealthy,  were
denounced  as  criminals,  and  hunted  to  death  or  into
exile  as  vermin,  while  the  Lermas,  the  Ucedas,  and  the
rest  of  the  brood  of  cormorants,  settled  more  thickly
than  ever  aroimd  their  prey.

Meantime,  Government  declared  that  the  piece  of  four
maravedis  should  be  Avorth  eight  maravedis  ;  the  piece  of
two  maravedis  being  fixed  at  four.^'**  Thus  the  specie
of  the  kingdom  was  to  be  doubled,  and  by  means  of  this
enlightened  legislation,  Spain,  after  destroying  agricul-
ture, commerce,  and  manufacture,  was  to  maintain  great
armies  and  navies,  and  establish  universal  monarchy.

This  measure,  which  a  wiser  churchman  than  liibera.
Cardinal  liichelieu,  afterwards  declared  the  most  auda-
cious and  barbarous  ever  recorded  by  history,  was  carried
out  with  great  regularity  of  organization."^  It  was
ordained  that  the  Moors  should  be  collected  at  three
indicated  points,  whence  they  were  not  to  move  on  pain
of  death,  until  duly  escorted  by  troops  to  the  ports  of
embarkation.  The  children  under  the  age  of  four  years
were  retained,  of  course  without  their  parents,  from
whom  they  were  for  ever  separated. With  admirable

1*  Lafuente,  Hist.  (Jen.  do  Espafta,  xv.  295.

20  Mem.  lie  Richelieu,  x.  231,  cited  by  Lafuente,  ubi  sup.

314

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIII.

forethoTiglit,  too,  the  priests  took  measures,  as  they
supposed,  that  the  arts  of  refining  sugar,  irrigating  the
rice-fields,  constructing  canals  and  aqueducts,  besides
many  other  useful  branches  of  agricultural  and  mecha-
nical business,  should  not  die  out  with  the  intellectual,
accomplished,  and  industrious  race,  alone  competent  to
practise  them,  which  was  now  sent  forth  to  die.  A  very
small  number,  not  more  than  six  in  each  hundred,  were
accordingly  reserved  to  instruct  other  inhabitants  of
Spain  in  those  useful  arts  which  they  were  now  more
than  ever  encouraged  to  despise.

Five  hundred  thousand  full-grown  human  beings,  as
energetic,  ingenious,  accomplished,  as  any  then  existing
in  the  world,  were  thus  thrust  forth  into  the  deserts
beyond  sea,  as  if  Spain  had  been  overstocked  with  skilled
labour,  and  as  if  its  native  production  had  already  out-
grown the  world's  power  of  consumption.

Had  an  equal  number  of  mendicant  monks,  with  the
two  archbishops  who  had  contrived  this  deed  at  their
head,  been  exported  instead  of  the  Moors,  the  future  of
Spain  might  have  been  a  more  fortunate  one  than  it
was  likely  to  prove.  The  event  was  in  itself  perhaps
of  temporary  advantage  to  the  Dutch  republic,  as  the
poverty  and  general  misery,  aggravated  by  this  disas-
trous policy,  rendered  the  acknowledgment  of  the  States'
independence  by  Spain  almost  a  matter  of  necessity .^^

It  is  superfluous  to  enter  into  any  farther  disquisition
as  to  the  various  branches  of  the  royal  revenue.  They
remained  essentially  the  same  as  during  the  preceding
reign,  and  have  been  elaborately  set  forth  in  a  previous
chapter.  The  gradual  drying  up  of  resources  in  all
the  wide-spread  and  heterogeneous  territories  subject
to  the  Spanish  sceptre  is  the  striking  phenomenon  of  the
present  epoch.  The  distribution  of  such  wealth  as  was
still  created  followed  the  same  laws  which  had  long
prevailed,  while  the  decay  and  national  paralysis,  of
which  the  prognostics  could  hardly  be  mistaken,  were
a  natural  result  of  the  system.

The  six  archbishops  had  now  grown  to  eleven,^^  and
still  received  gigantic  revenues ;  the  income  of  the

21  Giro.  Soranzo,  Eelazione.  The  ambassador  expressly  states  it  as  a  fact.
Ciompare  especially  Lafuente's  admiiuble  history  of  Spain,  vol.  xv.  294,  295,  seqq.,
370-394.  «  Ibid.

1607.

VENALITY  OF  THE  SPANISH  POLITY.

315

Arclibishop  of  Toledo,  including  the  fund  of  one  hundred
thousand  destined  for  repairing  the  cathedral,  being
estimated  at  three  hundred  thousand  dollars  a  year,
that  of  the  Archbishop  of  Seville  and  the  others  varj'ing
from  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars  to  fifty
thousand.^^  The  sixty-three  bishops  perhaps  averaged
fifty  thousand  a  year  each,^^  and  there  were  eight  more
in  Italy.''

The  commanderies  of  chivalry,  two  hundred  at  least
in  number,  were  likewise  enormously  profitable.  Some
of  them  were  worth  thirty  thousand  a  vear ;  the  aggre-
gate annual  value  being  from  one-and-a-half  to  two
millions,  and  all  in  Lerma's  gift,  upon  his  own  terms.^

Chivalry,  that  noblest  of  ideals,  without  which,  in
some  shape  or  another,  the  world  w^onld  be  a  desert  and
a  sty;  which  included  within  itself  many  of  the  noblest
viilues  which  can  adorn  mankind — generosity,  self-denial,
chastity,  fiugality,  patience,  protection  to  the  feeble,  the
down-trodden,  and  the  oppressed ;  the  love  of  daring
adventure,  devotion  to  a  pure  religion  and  a  lofty  pur-
pose, most  admirably  pathetic,  even  when  in  the  eyes  of
the  vulgar  most  fantastic — had  been  the  proudest  and
most  poetical  of  Spanish  characteristics,  never  to  be
entirely  uprooted  from  the  national  heart.

Alas !  what  was  there  in  the  commanderies  of  Calatrava,
Alcantara,  Santiago,  and  all  the  rest  of  those  knightly
orders,  as  then  existing,  to  respond  to  the  noble  senti-
ments on  which  all  were  supposed  to  be  founded  ?
Institutions  for  making  money,  for  pillaging  the  poor
of  their  hard-earned  pittance,  trafficked  in  by  greedy
ministers  and  needy  courtiers  with  a  shamelessness
which  had  long  ceased  to  blush  at  vices  however  gross,
at  venality  however  mean.

Venality  was  in  truth  the  prominent  characteristic  of
the  Spanish  polity  at  this  epoch.  Everything  political
or  ecclesiastical,  from  highest  to  lowest,  was  matter  of
merchandize.

It  was  the  autocrat,  governing  king  and  kingdom,  who
disposed  of  episcopal  mitres,  cardinals' hats,  commandeis'
crosses,  the  offices  of  regidores  or  municipal  magistrates

23  s.  Contarini,  Relazione. Fran.  Priuli.  «  Ibid.  «  Ibid.

26  Ibid-.  Giro.  Soranzo.  "Es^endo  capaci  li  maritati  e  ogni  altra  condizione  di
persoue  uon  eccettuate  le  doniie."

316

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIIl.

in  all  the  cities,  farmings  of  revenues,  collectorships  of
taxes,  at  prices  fixed  by  himself.

It  was  never  known  that  the  pope  refused  to  confirm
the  ecclesiastical  nominations  which  were  made  by  the
Spanish  court.

The  nuncius  had  the  privilege  of  dispensing  the  small
cures  from  thirty  dollars  a  year  downwards,^^  of  which
the  number  was  enormous.  Many  of  these  were  capable,
in  careful  hands,  of  becoming  ten  times  as  valuable  as
their  nominal  estimate,^^  and  the  business  in  them  became
in  consequence  very  extensive  and  lucrative.  They  were
often  disposed  of  for  the  benefit  of  servants  and  the
hangers-on  of  noble  families,  to  laymen,  to  women,
children,  to  babes  unborn.

When  such  was  the  most  thriving  industry  in  the
land,  was  it  wonderful  that  the  poor  of  high  and  low
degree  were  anxious  in  ever-increasing  swarms  to  effect
their  entrance  into  convent,  monastery,  and  church,  and
that  trade,  agriculture,  and  manufactures  languished  ?

The  foreign  polity  of  the  court  remained  as  it  had
been  established  by  Philip  II.

Its  maxims  were  very  simple.  To  do  unto  your  neigh-
bour all  possible  harm,  and  to  foster  the  greatness  of
Spain  by  sowing  discord  and  maintaining  civil  war  in
all  other  nations,  was  the  fundamental  precept.  To  bribe
and  corrupt  the  servants  of  other  potentates,  to  maintain
a  regular  paid  body  of  adherents  in  foreign  lands,  ever
ready  to  engage  in  schemes  of  assassination,  conspiracy,
sedition,  and  rebellion  against  the  legitimate  authority,
to  make  mankind  miserable,  so  far  as  it  was  in  the  power
of  human  force  or  craft  to  produce  wretchedness,  were
objects  still  faithfully  pursued.^^  They  had  not  yet  led  to
the  entire  destruction  of  other  realms  and  their  submission

^  F.  Soranzo.  28  .  .  .  .  e  vedendo  che  qiiesto  imperio  non
29  "  In  Francia  medesimamente  pro-  e  appoggiato  alle  richezze  de'  grandi  chi
curava  col  tener  le  provincie  disunite,  pochissimi  sono  che  non  siano  in  qualche
divise  le  forze,  separati  gli  animi,  difR-  via  consumati,  non  alle  speranze  dei
denti  1  pensieri,  ribellati  i  principi,  solle-  popoli  perche  questi  con  le  molte  gravezze
vati  i  popoli  e  tirando  per  questa  via  le  sono  oppresse,  non  alle  armi  poiche  pro-
cose  al  lungo  di  stancare  e  si  fosse  potuto  pria  milizia  che  sia  disciplinata  non  tiene
di  ridurre  in  niente  le  forze  di  quella  la  Spagna  ....  si  pub  affinnare  che
corona  ....  la  prima  giova  alia  Spagna  resti  il  principale  fondamento  di  questo
per  conservarsi,  procurando  di  tener  Ion-  imperio  coUocato  negli  travagli  nella  de-
tane  le  sedizioni  nei  proprii  regni  e  di  bolezza  e  division e  degli  altri  potentati,"
nutrire  le  discordie  negli  altri  potentati  &c.  &c. — F.  Soranzo.

1607.

FOREIGN  POLITY  OF  SPAIN.

317

to  the  single  sceptre  of  Spain,  nor  had  they  developed
the  resources,  material  or  moral,  of  a  mighty  empire  so
thoroughly  as  might  have  been  done  perhaps  by  a  less
insidious  policy,  but  they  had  never  been  abandoned.

It  was  a  steady  object  of  policy  to  keep  such  ]iotentates
of  Italy  as  were  not  already  under  the  dominion  of  the
Spanish  crown  in  a  state  of  internecine  feud  with  each
other  and  of  virtual  dependence  on  the  powerful  kingdom.
The  same  policy  pursued  in  France,  of  fomenting  civil
war  by  subsidy,  force,  and  chicane,  during  a  long  suc-
cession of  years  in  order  to  reduce  that  magnificent  realm
under  the  sceptre  of  Philip,  has  been  described  in  detail.
The  chronic  rebellion  of  Ireland  against  the  English
crown  had  been  assisted  and  inflamed  in  every  possible
mode,  the  system  being  considered  as  entirely  justified
by  the  aid  and  comfort  afforded  by  the  queen  to  the
Dutch  rebels.

It  was  a  natural  result  of  the  system  according  to  which
kingdoms  and  provinces  with  the  populations  dwelling
therein  were  transferable  like  real  estate  by  means  of
marriage-settlements,  entails,  and  testaments,  that  the
proprietoi  ship  of  most  of  the  great  realms  in  Christendom
was  matter  of  fierce  legal  dispute.  Lawsuits,  which  in
chancery  could  last  for  centuries  before  a  settlement
of  the  various  claims  was  made,  might  have  infinitely
enriched  the  gentlemen  of  the  long  robe  and  reduced
all  the  parties  to  beggary,  had  there  been  any  tribunal
but  the  battle-field  to  decide  among  the  august  litigant^s.
Thus  the  King  of  Great  Biitain  claimed  the  legal  pro-
prietorship and  sovereignty  of  Brittany,  Kormandy,
Anjou,  Gascony,  Calais,  and  Boulogne  in  France,  besides
the  whole  kingdom  by  right  of  conquest.^^  The  French
king  claimed  to  be  rightful  heir  of  Castile,  Biscay,
Guipuscoa,  Arragon,  >savarre,  nearly  all  the  Spanish
peninsula  in  short,  including  the  whole  of  Portugal  and
the  Balearic  Islands  to  boot.^^  The  King  of  Spain  claimed,
as  we  have  seen  often  enough,  not  only  Brittany  but  all
France  as  his  law^ful  inheritance.  Such  was  the  virtue  of
the  prevalent  doctrine  of  proprietorship.  Every  poten-
tate was  defrauded  of  his  rights,  and  every  potentate  was
a  criminal  usuiper. As  for  the  people,  it  w^ould  have

3f>  Niccolo  Molin,  Ambasc.  appvesso  Giacomo  I.  1607,  in  Barozzi  and  Berchet,  Sit.
IV.  vol.  i. J'ietro  Piiuli,  Ambasc.  in  Francia,  16u8. Ibid. 3i  p.  pnuH,  w^i  ji/p.

318

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIIL

excited  a  smile  of  superior  wisdom  on  regal,  legal,
or  sacerdotal  lips,  had  it  been  suggested  that  by  any
possibility  the  governed  could  have  a  voice  or  a  thought
in  regard  to  the  rulers  whom  God  in  His  grace  had
raised  up  to  be  their  proprietors  and  masters.

The  army  of  Spain  was  sunk  far  below  the  standard
at  which  it  had  been  kept  when  it  seemed  fit  to  conquer
and  govern  the  world.  Neither  by  Spain  nor  Italy
could  those  audacious,  disciplined,  and  obedient  legions
be  furnished, at  which  the  enemies  of  the  mighty  despot
trembled  from  one  extremity  of  earth  to  the  other.
Peculation,  bankruptcy,  and  mutiny  had  done  their  work
at  last.  W e  have  recently  had  occasion  to  observe  the
conduct  of  the  veterans  in  Flanders  at  critical  epochs.
At  this  moment,  seventy  thousand  soldiers  were  on  the
muster  and  pay  roll  of  the  army  serving  in  those
provinces,  while  not  thirty  thousand  men  existed  in  the
flesh.

The  navy  was  sunk  to  fifteen  or  twenty  old  galleys,
battered,  dismantled,  unseaworthy,  and  a  few  armed
ships  for  convoying  the  East  and  W est  Indiamen  to  and
from  their  destinations.^^

The  general  poverty  was  so  great  that  it  was  often
absolutely  impossible  to  purchase  food  for  the  royal
household.^* "  If  you  ask  me,"  said  a  cool  observer,

how  this  great  show  of  empire  is  maintained,  when  the
funds  are  so  small,  I  answer  that  it  is  done  by  not  paying
at  all."  The  Government  was  shamelessly,  hopelessly
bankrupt.  The  noble  band  of  courtiers  were  growing
enormously  rich.  The  State  was  a  carcase  which,  unclean
vultures  were  picking  to  the  bones.

The  foremost  man  in  the  land — the  autocrat,  the
absolute  master  in  State  and  Church — was  the  Duke  of
Lerma.^^

Very  rarely  in  human  history  has  an  individual

32  S.  Contarini,  Relazione. "Perchela  ciatore  stra^.  a  Filippo  III.  nel  1602,  Re-

Spagna  si  trova  spopolata  " ^3  ibid.  lazione. Ibid. Ser.  I.  vol.  i.  pp.  215-275.

3^  Ibid. "  Momenti  nei  quali  le  mense  S.  Contarini,  Ambasc.  a  Filippo  III.  1602-

reali  mancavano  del nec^ssario pnde  1604. Ibid. Ser.  I.  vol.  i.  pp.  277-337.

cibarsi."  35  ibid.  F.  Priuli^  Ambasc.  a  Filippo  III.  1604-

36  Francesco Soranzo, Relazione di  1608. Ibid. Ser.  I.  vol.  i.  pp.  339-402.

Spagna  Ambasciatore  dall'  anno  1597-  Giro.  Soranzo,  Ambasc.  a  Filippo  III.

1602,  in  Barozzi  and  Berchct,  Serie  I  1608-1611. Ibid. Ser.  I.  vol.  i.  pp.  431-

voL  i.  pp.  1-214. otto.  Bon,  Ambas-  492.

1607.

THE  DUKE  OF  LERMA.

319

attained  to  such  unlimited  power  under  a  monarcliy,
without  actually  placing  the  crown  upon  his  own  head.
Mayors  of  the  palace,  in  the  days  of  the  do-nothing
kings,  wielded  nothing  like  the  imperial  control  which
was  firmly  held  by  this  great  favourite.  Yet  he  was  a
man  of  very  moderate  capacity  and  limited  acquire-
ments, neither  soldier,  lawyer,  nor  priest.

The  duke  was  past  sixty  years  of  age,  a  tall,  stately,
handsome  man,  of  noble  presence  and  urbane  manner.
Born  of  the  patrician  house  of  Sandoval,  he  possessed,  on
the  accession  of  Philip,  an  inherited  income  of  ten  or
twelve  thousand  dollars.  He  had  now,  including  what
he  had  bestowed  on  his  son,  a  funded  revenue  of  seven
hundred  thousand  a  year.^'^  He  had  besides,  in  cash,
jewels,  and  furniture,  an  estimated  capital  of  six  mil-
lions.^^  All  this  he  had  accumulated  in  ten  years  of
service,  as  prime  minister,  chief  equerry,  and  first  valet
of  the  chamber  to  the  king.

The  tenure  of  his  authority  was  the  ascendancy  of  a
firm  character  over  a  very  weak  one.  At  this  moment  he
was  doubtless  the  most  absolute  ruler  in  Christendom,  and
Philip  III.  the  most  submissive  and  uncom2)laining  of
his  subjects.^^

37  Gir«.  Soraiizo.  38  n^ij^  potere  fino  dal  prinii  anni  della  sua  gio-

39  Ed  in  questo  Duca  si  puo  dire  che  ventU.  11  potere  di  lui  si  conserva  in-
sia  ridotta  la  somma  di  tutto  il  governo,  tienunente  nella  persona  del  Duca  di
la  dispensa  delle  grazie  c  tutto  il  bene  ed  Lerma."— S.  Contarini,  Helazione.
il  male  di  cbi  protende  alcuna  cosa  a  "  Questo  re  viene  rttto  da  un  solo  servi-
quelle  corte,  pcrche  e  veramente  seuza  tore.  In  questo  regno  il  padrone  non  ba
esempio  1'  autorita  e  la  grazia  cbe  egli  parte  di  niente." — F.  Priuli.
pussiede  appresso  il  re;  anzi  cbe  per  "II  Duca  di  Lerma,  emlnentissimo  ed
ottenere  quello  cbe  si  prctende  importa  assoluto  signore  di  quel  governo  ....
pill  r  aver  lavorevole  il  Duca  di  Lerma  si  ba  impossessato  df  lla  volonta  di  S.  M.
che  quasi  il  re  medesimo,"  &c.  &c. — F.  cbe  ne  e  oggidi  talniente  signore  cbe
Soranzo.  domina  e  regge  il  tutto  ai  suoi  cenni.

"  E  cbe  finalniente  tutte  le  cose  si  Assoluto  maestro  e  dispi  nsiitore  delle
riducono  alia  volontii  ed  all'  autorita  del  grazie  regie,  egli  assegna  luiti  i  viscovati
duca  e  gli  altri  consiglieri  attendono  non  e  commeude,  egli  fa  i  cardinali  cbe  sono
meno  al  insinuarsi  nelle  grazie  di  S.  E.  cbe  nominati  dal  re  di  Spagna  ed  e  libero
alii  loro  proprii  interessi  in  modo  cbe  si  signore  e  padrone  di  tutta  la  corona  reale."
pub  dire  cbe  questo  re  sia  assolutamente  — Gir®.  Soranzo,  Relazione.
g.'vernato  e  cbe  la  maggiore  parte  dolli  "  Essendo  il  Duca  cosi  accorto  ed
ministri  piu  principaM,  per  non  dire  tutti,  avendo  cos"!  ben  disposto  a  suo  gusto  il
attendino  fuori  dell'  ordinario  al  proprio  governo  del  palazzo  e  circondato  il  sem-
bene." — Olt".  Bon,  Relazione.  plice  re  da  suoi  dependent!  cb'  oltre  U

"  Dal  die  nasce  il  potere  cbe  tiene  sopra  non  esser  pos^iblle  cbe  alcuno  gli  parli
di  lui  il  privato  cbe  lo  governa.  Sara  senza  sua  saputa  quando  anco  gli  fosse
difficile  d'  ottonere  la  volonta  di  questo  parlato  da  cbi  si  voglia  sa  tutto  quello
principe  perche  il  privato  lo  tieue  in  suo cbe  gli  vieue  dctio  da  cbe  segue  ( be  non

320

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLVHI.

The  origin  of  his  power  was  well  known.  During  the
reign  of  Philip  II.,  the  prince,  treated  with  great  severity
by  his  father,  was  looked  upon  with  contempt  by  every
one  about  court.  He  was  allowed  to  take  no  part  in
affairs,  and,  having  heard  of  the  awful  tragedy  of  his
eldest  half-brother,  enacted  ten  years  before  his  own
birth,  he  had  no  inclination  to  confront  the  wrath  of  that
terrible  parent  and  sovereign  before  whom  all  Spain
trembled.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  humble,  more
effaced,  more  obscure,  than  his  existence  as  prince."^^
The  Marquis  of  Denia,  his  chamberlain,  alone  was  kind
to  him,  furnished  him  with  small  sums  of  money,  and
accompanied  him  on  the  shooting  excursions  in  which
his  father  occasionally  permitted  him  to  indulge.*^  But
even  these  little  attentions  were  looked  upon  with
jealousy  by  the  king ;  so  that  the  marquis  was  sent  into
honourable  exile  from  court  as  governor  of  Valencia.*^
It  was  hoped  that  absence  would  wean  the  prince  of  his
affection  for  the  kind  chamberlain.  The  calculation  was
erroneous.  No  sooner  were  the  eyes  of  Philip  II.  closed
in  death  than  the  new  king  made  haste  to  send  for
Denia,  who  was  at  once  created  Duke  of  Lerma,  declared
of  the  privy  council,  and  appointed  master  of  the  horse
and  first  gentleman  of  the  bed-chamber.  From  that
moment  the  favourite  became  supreme.  He  was  entirely
without  education,  possessed  little  experience  in  affairs
of  state,  and  had  led  the  life  of  a  commonplace  idler  and
voluptuary  until  past  the  age  of  fifty.  Nevertheless  he
had  a  shrewd  mother-wit,  tact  in  dealing  with  men,
aptitude  to  take  advantage  of  events.  He  had  directness
of  purpose,  firmness  of  will,  and  always  knew  his  own
mind.  From  the  beginning  of  his  political  career  unto
its  end,  he  conscientiously  and  without  swerving  pur-
sued a  single  aim.  This  was  to  rob  the  exchequer  by
every  possible  mode  and  at  every  instant  of  his  life.
Never  was  a  more  masterly  financier  in  this  respect.
With  a  single  eye  to  his  own  interests,  he  preserved  a
magnificent  unity  in  all  his  actions.  The  result  had
been  to  make  him  in  ten  years  the  richest  subject  in  the
world,  as  well  as  the  most  absolute  ruler.

b  persona  per  grande  per  importante  che la  sua  rovina  la  pena  del  suo  ardire.**

si  a  che  avesse  tant'  animo  di  svegliare  il — Ott^.  Bon,  Relazione.

re  che  non  temesse  di  pagare  subito  con F.  Soranzo.  I  ted. ^  IWd.

1607.  POWER  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  LERMA.  321

He  enriched  his  family,  as  a  matter  of  course.  His
eon  was  already  made  Duke  of  Uceda,  possessed  enor-
mous wealth,  and  was  supposed  by  those  who  had  vision
in  the  affairs  of  court  to  be  the  only  individual  ever
likely  to  endanger  the  power  of  the  father.  Others
thought  that  the  young  duke's  natural  dulness  would
make  it  impossible  for  him  to  supphmt  the  omnipotent
favourite.'^^  The  end  was  not  yet,  and  time  was  to  show
which  class  of  speculators  was  in  the  right.  Meantime
the  whole  family  was  united  and  happy.  The  sons  and
daughters  had  intermarried  with  the  Infantados,  and
other  most  powerful  and  wealthy  families  of  grandees.'"
The  uncle,  Sandoval,  had  been  created  by  Lerma  a
cardinal  and  archbishop  of  Toledo ;  the  king's  own
schoolmaster  being  removed  from  that  dignity,  and  dis-
graced and  banished  from  court  for  having  spoken
disrespectfully  of  the  favourite."*^  The  duke  had  reserved
for  himself  twenty  thousand  a  year  from  the  revenues  of
the  archbishopric,*'  as  a  moderate  price  for  thus  con-
ducting himself  as  became  a  dutiful  nephew.  He  had
ejected  Eodrigo  de  Vasquez  from  liis  post  as  president  of
the  council.*^  As  a  more  conclusive  proof  of  his  un-
limited sway  than  any  other  of  his  acts  had  been,  he
had  actually  unseated  and  banished  the  inquisitor-
general,  Don  Pietro  Porto  Carrero,*^  and  supplanted  him
in  that  dread  office,  before  which  even  anointed  sove-
reigns trembled,  by  one  of  his  own  creatures.

In  the  discharge  of  his  various  functions,  the  duke  and
all  his  family  were  domesticated  in  the  royal  palace,  so
that  he  was  at  no  charges  for  housekeeping.  His  apart-
ments there  were  more  sumptuous  than  those  of  the
king  and  queen.^  He  had  removed  from  court  the
Duchess  of  Candia,*^  sister  of  the  great  Constable  of
Castile,  who  had  been  for  a  time  in  attendance  on  the
queen,  and  whose  possible  influence  he  chose  to  destroy
in  the  bud.  Her  place  as  mistress  of  the  robes  was
supplied  by  his  sister,  the  Countess  of  Lemos  ;  while
his  wife,  the  terrible  Duchess  of  Lerma,  was  constantly
with  the  queen,  who  trembled  at  her  frown. Thus  the

*3  "  Ma  1'  ottusita  sua  non  lo  renderii "«  F.  St-ranzo.  *»  Ibid,

mai  atto  a  un  tanto  carico." — F.  Priuli. so  ott^.  Bon,  Kelazione. "Tanto  sun-

Otto.  Bon.  *5  F.  Soranzo.  tuosi  da  abbagliare  quellidel  re  stesso." —

4<  S.  Contarini. F.  Soranzo.  S.  Contarini.
*7  F.  Priuli,  Kelazione.  n  F.  Soranzo.

VOL.  IV.  y

322

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIIL

royal  pair  were  completely  beleaguered,  snriminded,  and
isolated  from  all  except  the  Lermas.^^  When  the  duke
conferred  with  the  king,  the  doors  were  always  double
locked.^^

In  his  capacity  as  first  valet it  was  the  duke's  duty
to  bring  the  king's  shirt  in  the  morning,  to  see  to  his
wardrobe  and  his  bed,  and  to  supply  him  with  ideas  for
the  day.  The  king  depended  upon  him  entirely  and
abjectly,  was  miserable  when  separated  from  him  four-
and-twenty  hours,  thought  with  the  duko's  thoughts  and
saw  with  the  duke's  eyes.  He  was  permitted  to  know
nothing  of  state  affairs,  save  such  portions  as  were  com-
municated to  him  by  Lerma.  The  people  thought
their  monarch  bewitched,  so  much  did  he  tremble  before
the  favourite,  and  so  unscrupulously  did  the  duke  ap-
propriate for  his  own  benefit  and  that  of  his  creatures
everything  that  he  could  lay  his  hands  upon.  It  would
have  needed  little  to  bring  about  a  revolution,  such  was
the  universal  hatred  felt  for  the  minister,  and  the
contempt  openly  expressed  for  the  king.''^

The  duke  never  went  to  the  council.  All  papers  and
documents  relating  to  business  were  sent  to  his  apart-
ments. Such  matters  as  he  chose  to  pass  upon,  such
decrees  as  he  thought  proper  to  issue,  were  then  taken  by

52  F.  Soranzo.  "  Vi  saria  anco  la  regina  somiglier  del  corpo  consiste  nell'  aver  cura
che  potria  e  sapria  svegliarlo  per  la  como-  dei  vestiti  del  re  e  del  suo  letto." — S.
dita  ma  h  lei  aiicora  tenuta  oppressa  dalla  Contarini,

Duchessa  e  dal  medesimo  Duca  suo  ma-  « i\  volgo  si  esprime  dicendo  che  il

v\to  che  non  pud  ne  parlare  ne  respirare  re  fu  stregato,  altii  che  trema  del  su

8  poi  conoscendo  il  re  di  tanta  semplicita  favorito  .  .  .  .  vi  vorrebbe  poco  per  far

como  e  veramente  e  vedendolo  esser  cosi  nascere  una  revoluzione  .  .  .  .  il  duca

innamorato  del  Duca  si  crede  che  temi  di  Lerma  prende  per  se  e  per  i  suoi  quello

prima  di  non  fare  frutto  e  poi  di  esser  che  piii  gli.pare  e  piace,  1'  odio  del  popolo

scoperta  da  S.  M.  al  medesimo  Duca  da  e  tanto  grande  verso  il  duca  per  il  mal

che  ne  potesse  seguire  mala  disposizione  uso  del  suo  potere  come  verso  il  re  a

tra  loro  tanta  e  in  particolare  la  Duchessa  cagione  della  sua  debolezza."— S.  Con-

terribile  e  formidabile  il  favore  del  Duca.  tarini.

In  tanto  che  il  povero  Re  per  esser  di  "  Hat  diese  wenige  Jahre  fiir  ihn  und

natura  poco  atto  al  governare  e  circon-  die  Seinigen  das  Gras  wol  geschnitten

dato,  sta  e  stara  scmpre  cosi  dormendo  se  und  so  vil  dasz  ich  mirs  nicht  trauwe  zu

non  e  svegliato  di  qualche  gran  rovina  schreiben,  denn  es  mehr  ein  Gedicht  als

che  estraordinariamente  io  punga  €  che  der  Wahrheit  gleich  sieht  und  doch  in-rtf

insieme  necessiti  ima  buona  mano  de  ipsa  ist."— Khevenhiiller,  Ann.  Ferd.  vi.

soggetti  grandi  a  sollevarlo  ed  a  liberare  3041.

tutto  il  governo  da  cosi  violenta  oppres-  "  Parlano  del  re  in  guisa  che  non  oso

sione,"  &c.  &c*— Ott^.  Bon,  Relazione.  riferirlo  perche  lo  tengono  in  assai  poca

53  S.  Contarini,  R»lazlone.  considera2ione  e  perche  fa  tutto  quello

54  *'  Somiglier  del  corpo. L'  Uffizio  del  che  vuole  il  duca  di  Lerma." — ibid.

1607.

SYSTEMATIC  BRIBERY.

323

liim  to  the  king,  who  signed  them  with  perfect  docility.^
As  time  went  on,  this  amount  of  business  grew  too  oner-
ous for  the  royal  hand,  or  this  amount  of  participation
by  the  king  in  affairs  of  state  came  to  be  esteemed  super-
fluous and  inconvenient  by  the  duke,  and  his  own  si<2,na-
ture  was  accordingly  declared  to  be  equivalent  to  that
of  the  sovereign's  sign-manual.  It  is  doubtful  whether
such  a  degradation  of  the  royal  prerogative  had  ever
been  heard  of  before  in  a  Christian  monarcliy.^^

It  may  be  imagined  that  this  system  of  government
was  not  of  a  nature  to  expedite  business,  however  swiftly
it  might  fill  the  duke's  coffers.  High  officers  of  state,
foreign  ambassadors,  all  men  in  short  charged  with
important  afi'airs,  were  obliged  to  dance  attendance  for
weeks  and  months  on  the  one  man  whose  hands  giasped
all  the  business  of  the  kingdom,  while  many  departed  in
despair  without  being  able  to  secure  a  single  audience.
It  was  entiiely  a  matter  of  trade.  It  was  necessary  to
bribe  in  succession  all  the  creatures  of  the  duke  before
getting  near  enough  to  headquarters  to  bribe  the  duke
himself.^^  Never  were  such  itching  palms.  To  do  busi-
ness at  court  required  the  })urse  of  Fortunatus.  There
was  no  deception  in  the  matter.  Everything  was  frank
and  above  board  in  that  age  of  chivalry.  Ambajssadors,

^  Ottaviano  Bon,  Relazione. G\r°.  che  le  vien  detto  e  porUito  da  esso  duca)

Soranzo. S.  Contarini,  Rrlazione. F.  in  8Uo  potere  sta  V  esjKxiire  qiiello  che

Priuli.  "  Rimettendoli  quasi  tutti  al  duca  coniporta  il  suo  iiiteresise." — J  bid.

senza  vederli."  '*  Ogni  principe o  cavaliere  avendo

57  "  La  sep^atura  del  duca  di  Lerma  fu  qualsivoglia  interesse  coUa  corona  con-
dal  re  pariticata  alia  propria,  esempio  corre  con  richissimi  prtsenti  e  doni  ....
unii;o  ncUa  stx)ria  delle  monarchie,"  says  e  non  vi  e  ministro  o  rappresentate  regio
N.  Barozzi,  citing  Ilebitione  della  vita  del  che  non  profundi  per  mantenere  lo  ben
re  Filippo  ill.  e  delli  suoi  favorlti. — MS.  affetto  e  per  gvder  V  autorita  della  sua
della  liibliotcca  rcale  di  Berlino.  (Barozzi  iutorcessione." — G.  Soranzo.

and  Berchet,  S.  I.  vi.  p.  288.) See  also  "Ottiene  dal  re  cib  che  vuole;  haavuto

Lafuente,  xv.  294,  s.  99.  finora  beni,  commende,  entrate  d»)nativl

"  Dasz  er  absolutus  Dominus  kann  per  la  casa  e  per  la  persona  sua  pel  valore

genannt  werden." — KheveuhuUer,  Anual.  di  piii  di  due  milioni  d'  oro  e  ne  averd

Ferdiu,  vi.  3041.  quanti  vorra,  equante  ne  porterk  1'  occar-

58  "E  che  per  fargli  capitar  polizze  o  sione;  perciocche  oltre  quelle  mercedi  che
d'  udlenzia  o  di  negozio  bisogna  durar  le  sono  fatte  dal  re  che  sono  grandissime,
fatica  di  settimane  entiore  cd  andar  a  la  liberta  ch'  ha  di  accettar  present!  lo
diverse  mani  con  favori  straordinaril  e  farh  opulentissimo,  perche  non  e  chi  pre-
per  aver  la  riisposta  poi  bisognaalle  volte  tenda  in  corte  cosa  di  momento  che  pas-
star  a  quella  discrezione  che  mai  viene,"  sando  necessariamente  per  nmno  del  duca
&c.  &c. — Otto,  gjjij^  Relazione.  non  lo  presenta  hirgamente,  come  si  f&

"  in  modo  che  per  la  suprema  autorit^  anco  con  gran  parte  di  quesii  ministrl
che  lui  tiene  appresso  S.  M.  (la  qual  ncn  novelli,  che  tutti  pero  si  vanno  facendo
vede  ni  ricerca  ue  fa  mai  di  piii  di  quello  r  ichibsimi." — F.  Soranzo.

Y  2

324

THF  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XL VIII.

wrote  to  their  sovereigns  that  there  was  no  hope  of
making  treaties  or  of  accompliishing  any  negotiation
except  by  purchasing  the  favour  of  the  autocrat  and
Lerma's  price  was  always  high.  At  one  period  the
republic  of  Venice  wished  to  put  a  stop  to  the  depreda-
tions by  Spanish  pirates  upon  Venetian  commerce,  but
the  subject  could  not  even  be  approached  by  the  envoy
until  he  had  expended  far  more  than  could  be  afforded
out  of  his  meagre  salary  in  buying  an  interview.^*^

When  it  is  remembered  that  with  this  foremost  power
in  the  world  affairs  of  greater  or  less  importance  were
perpetually  to  be  transacted  by  the  representatives  of
other  nations  as  well  as  by  native  subjects  of  every
degree  ;  that  all  these  affairs  were  to  pass  through  the
hands  of  Lerma,  and  that  those  hands  had  ever  to  be
filled  with  coin,  the  stupendous  opulence  of  the  one  man
can  be  easily  understood.  Whether  the  foremost  power
of  the  world,  thus  governed,  were  likely  to  continue  the
foremost  power,  could  hardly  seem  doubtful  to  those
accustomed  to  use  their  reason  in  judging  of  the  things
of  this  world.^^

59  F.  Soranzo. Ott^.  Bon,  Relazione.

60  otto.  Bon,  Relazione.  The  small
amount  of  salary  paid  by  the  Venetian
republic  to  its  envoys,  who  had  the  rank
of  ambassador  at  all  the  principal  courts,
and  were  e.Npected  to  live  in  a<  splendid
style  as  did  the  better  paid  ministers  of
other  powers,  was  a  perpetual  subject  oi
complaint.  Some  of  the  royal  ambas-
sadors had  five  hundred  dollars  a  month,
a  few  had  a  thousand  dollars  a  month,
while  the  dipl(/matic  agent  (who  was  not
ambassador)  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Flo-
rence in  France  had  a  larger  salary  than
that  of  the  Venetian  ambassador  at  the
same  court.  "  We  are  equal  to  royal
ambassadors  in  dignity,"  said  Badoer;
"  we  are  obliged  to  approximate  to  them
in  expense ;  one  of  three  things  must
theref(^re  happen :  our  salary  must  be  in-
creased over  the  sum  fixed  sixty  years
ago,  which  averages  only  one  hundred  and
seventy  miserable  dollars  a  month,  or  the
richest  citizens  of  the  republic  must
always  be  selected  to  fill  all  the  embassies,
or  persons  must  be  made  use  of  for  the
posts  who  will  prejudice  the  esteem  and
service  of  this  most  serene  republic.  The
esteem,  becauBO  they  must  suffer  the

thousand  indignities  which  are  caused
by  contempt;  the  service,  because  they
will  not  be  able  to  make  their  way
towards  matters  of  business  and  informa-
tion which  now-a-days  can  only  be  done
all  over  the  world  with  money." — A.
Badoer,  Relazione  di  Francia  in  Barozzi
and  Berchet,  Serie  II.  vol.  i.  p.  168.

61  "  Questi  sono  tutti  quelli  che  gover-
nano  que.sta  gran  macchina,  la  maggiore
parte  de  quali  si  lascia  vincere  e  domi-
nare  dall'  avarizia  e  per  cib  sono  appli'
cati  a  ricever  volontieri  presenti  e  come
president!  dei  consigli  liberamente  ven
dono  la  maggior  parte  delle  vacanze  e  le
volonta  loi  o  istesse  e  con  V  esempio  di
questi,  gl'  inferiori  che  sono  ad  essi  subor-
dinati  s'  accomodano  all'  istesso  e  in
questo  tutto  sono  talmente  domesticati  ed
accordati  che  sapendolo  il  re  e  non  lo
proibendo  anzi  approvandolo  con  il  dare
licenza  a  quello  che  glielo  domandano  di
pi  >ter  ricever  da  qualche  soggetto  cospicuo
gran  somma  nelli  negozii  non  si  cammina
d'  altra  maniera  ne  par  altra  via  s'  ottiene
oggidi  giustizia  e  favori  a  quelLi  corte  e
non  mancano  li  mezzi  a  quest'  affetto
ordinati  e  cono.-ciuti  da  tutti." — Otto.  Bon,
Relazione. Compare  S.  Contarinl,  Rela-

1607.

REMOVAL  OF  THE  COURT  FROM  MADRID.

325

Meantime  the  duke  continued  to  transact  business ;  to
sell  his  interviews  and  his  interest;  to  traffic  in  car-
dinals' hats,  bishops'  mitres,  judges'  ermine,  civic  and
magisterial  votes  in  all  offices,  high  or  humble,  of
church,  army,  or  state.

He  possessed  the  art  of  remembering,  or  appearing  to
remember,  the  matters  of  business  which  had  hmm  com-
municated to  him.  When  a  negotiator,  of  whatever
degree,  had  the  good  fortune  to  reach  the  presence,  he
found  the  duke  to  all  appearance  mindful  of  the  parti-
cular affair  which  led  to  the  interview,  and  fully  absorbed
by  its  importance.^^  There  were  men  who,  trusting  to
the  affability  shown  by  the  great  favourite,  and  to  the
handsome  price  paid  down  in  cash  for  that  urbanity,
had  been  known  to  go  away  from  their  interview  believ-
ing that  their  business  was  likely  to  be  accomplished,
until  the  lapse  of  time  revealed  to  them  the  wildness  of
their  dream.

The  duke  perhaps  never  manifested  his  omnipotence
on  a  more  striking  scale  than  when  by  his  own  fiat
he  removed  the  court  and  the  seat  of  government  to
Valladolid,  and  kept  it  there  six  years  long.^^  This
was  declared  hy  disinterested  observers  to  be  not  only
C(nitrary  to  common  sense,  but  even  beyond  tlie  bounds
of  possibility.*^^  At  Madrid  the  king  liad  splendid
palaces,  and  in  its  neighbourhood  beautiful  country  resi-
dences, a  pure  atmosphere,  and  the  facility  of  changing
the  air  at  will.  At  Valladolid  there  were  no  con-
veniences of  any  kind,  no  sufficient  palace,  no  summer
villa,  no  park,  nothing  but  an  unwholesome  climate.^
But  most  of  the  duke's  estates  were  in  that  vicinity,  and
and  it  was  desirable  for  him  to  overlook  them  in  pei  son,^

zi(ine. "Non  e  difficile  regalare  il  duca  la  corte  in  Valladolid  tenendove  la  vicino

di  I-ienna.  Egli  fa,  sciogle  ed  ordina  tutto  a  sci  anni  contra  11  senso  commune  e  quasi

quello  che  vuole,"  &c.  "They  toss  causes  contro  al  possibile  per  1'  mcapacita  del

from  one  to  another  like  ti*nnis-balls,"  luogo."

wrote  Coriiwallis  from  Madrid.  "  A  man  6*  F.  Priuli. «  "p.  Soranzo.

may  lawfully  say  here,  n/m  estqui  facit  66  jbid, "I  fear  some  evil  event  to

bonum,  non  usque  ad  unum. God  Al-  that  duke,"  wrote  Cornwallis,  "whose

mighty  deliver  me  from  amongst  them."  immoderate  desires  of  his  own  particular

W^inwood.  ii.  312.  interests  draw  him  to  procipitato  himself

^  F.  Soranzo.  into  the  gulf  of  envy  and  malwliction  of

63  Ibid. F.  Priuli, "El<«endo  asceso  the  people,  by  leading  a  king  in  such  an

tanto  il  crcdito  appresso  S.  M.  che  teme  unfitting  sort  after  him,  with  manifest

di  contradirgli  e  porcib  guidato  da'  suoi  neglect  of  the  Important  affairs  of  his

InterfiKsi  si  lascio  persuadere  a  condurre  kingdom,  and  disregard  of  what  beloagl

326

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIII.

Moreover,  "he  wished  to  get  rid  of  the  possible  influence
over  the  king  of  the  Empress  Dowager  Maria,  widow  of
Maximilian  II.  and  aimt  and  grandmother  of  Philip  III.^^
The  minister  could  hardly  drive  this  exalted  personage
from  court,  so  easily  as  he  had  banished  the  ex-Arch-
bishop of  Toledo,  the  Inquisitor-General,  the  Duchess  of
Candia,  besides  a  multitude  of  lesser  note.  So  he  did
the  next  best  thing,  and  banished  the  court  from  the
empress,  who  was  not  likely  to  put  up  with  the  incon-
veniences of  Valladolid  for  the  sake  of  outriv ailing  the
duke.  This  Babylonian  captivity  lasted  until  Madrid
was  nearly  ruined,  until  the  desolation  of  the  capital,
the  moans  of  the  tradespeople,  the  curses  of  the  poor,
and  the  grumblings  of  the  courtiers,  finally  produced
an  effect  even  upon  the  arbitrary  Lerma.^^  He  then
accordingly  re-emigrated,  with  king  and  Government,  to
Madrid,  and  caused  it  to  be  published  that  he  had  at  last
overcome  the  sovereign's  repugnance  to  the  old  capital,
a-nd  had  persuaded  him  to  abandon  Valladolid.*^^

There  was  but  one  man  who  might  perhaps  from  his
position  have  competed  with  the  influence  of  Lerma.
This  was  the  king's  father-confessor,  whom  Philip
wished — although  of  course  his  wish  was  not  gratified
— to  make  a  member  of  the  council  of  state. The
monarch,  while  submitting  in  everything  secular  to  the
duke's  decrees,  had  a  feeble  determination  to  consult  and
to  be  guided  by  his  confessor  in  all  matters  of  conscience.
As  it  was  easy  to  suggest  that  high  affairs  of  state,  the
duties  of  government,  the  interests  of  a  great  people,  were
matters  not  entirely  foreign  to  the  conscience  of  anointed
kings,  an  opening  to  power  might  have  seemed  easy  to
an  astute  and  ambitious  churchman.  But  the  Dominican
who  kept  Philip's  conscience,  Gasparo  de  Cordova  by
name,'^^  was,  fortunately  for  the  favourite,  of  a  very
tender  paste,  easily  moulded  to  the  duke's  purpose.  Dull
and  ignorant  enough,  he  was  not  so  stupid  as  to  doubt
that,  should  he  whisper  any  suggestions  or  criticisms  in
legard  to  the  minister's  proceedings,  the  king  would
betray  him  and  he  would  lose  his  ofifice.'^^ The  cautious

to  his  kingly  ofRce.  The  wisest  say  here,  fourth  wife,  and  mother  of  Philip  III.

according  to  our  English  proverb,  that  68  priuli. F.  Soranzo.  Ibid,

hell  is  broken  loose." Winwood,  ii.  395.  F.  Soranzo.  Ibid.

67  Ibid. She  was  sister  of  Philip  II.  72  «< il  confessore,  che  e  quello  che

Her  daughter  Anna  was  Philip  II.'s  parlando  al  re  di  secreto  potria  avvertirlo,

1607

GOVERNMENT  OF  PHILIP  III.

327

friar  accordingly  held  his  peace  and  his  place,  and  there
was  none  to  dispute  the  sway  of  the  autocrat.

AV'hat  need  to  dilate  further  upon  such  a  minister  and
upon  such  a  system  of  government  ?  To  bribe  and  to
be  bribed,  to  maintain  stipendiaries  in  every  foreign
Government,  to  place  the  greatness  of  the  empire  upon
the  weakness,  distraction,  and  misery  of  other  nations,  to
stimulate  civil  war,  revolts  of  nobles  and  citizens  against
authority  ;  separation  of  provinces,  religious  discontents
in  every  land  of  Christendom — such  were  the  simple
rules  ever  faithfully  enforced.

The  other  members  of  what  was  called  the  council
were  insignificant.

Philip  III.,  on  arriving  at  the  throne,  had  been  heard
to  observe  that  the  day  of  simple  esquires  and  persons  of
low  condition  was  past,  and  that  the  turn  of  great  nobles
had  come.*^^  It  had  been  his  father's  policy  to  hold  the
grandees  in  subjection,  and  to  govern  by  means  of  minis-
ters who  were  little  more  than  clerks,  generally  of  humble
origin ;  keeping  the  reins  in  his  own  hands.  Such  great
personages  as  he  did  employ,  like  Alva,  Don  John  of
Austria,  and  Farnese,  were  sure  at  last  to  excite  his  jea-
lousy and  to  incur  his  hatred.  Forty-three  years  of  this
kind  of  work  had  brought  Spain  to  the  condition  in  which
the  third  Philip  found  it.  The  new  king  thought  to  have
found  a  remedy  in  discarding  the  clerks,  and  calling  in
the  aid  of  dukes.  Philip  II.  was  at  least  a  king.  The
very  first  act  of  Philip  III.  at  his  father's  death  was  to
abdicate.

It  was,  however,  found  necessary  to  retain  some  mem-
bers of  the  former  Government.  Fuentes,  the  best  soldier
and  accounted  the  most  dangerous  man  in  the  empire,
was  indeed  kept  in  retirement  as  governor  of  Milan,
while  Cristoval  di  Mora,  who  had  enjoyed  much  of  the
late  king's  confidence,  was  removed  to  Portugal  as  vice-
roy. But  Don  John  of  Idiaquez,  who  had  really  been
the  most  efficient  of  the  old  administration,  still  re-
mained in  the  council.  ^Vithout  the  subordinate  aid
of  his  experience  in  the  routine  of  business,  it  would

e  rti  pasta  cosi  tenera,  di  cosi  poco  intendl-  dal  che  non  sepuisse  la  sua  total  depres-

menio,  del  tutto  ignaro  del  governo  dl  sione."— Ott**.  Bon,  ReLiziune.

suvto  ed  incapace  dl  tutto  le  cose  grandi  ^  F.  Sorauzo,  Relazione.  "Scudier^

che  non  sapria  farlo  e  forse  per  il  timore  certa  bassa  taglia  d'  uomini."

che  U  re  stesso  non  lo  palesasse  a  S.  E.

328

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIII.

have  been  difficult  for  the  favourite  to  manage  the  great
machine  with  his  single  hand.  But  there  was  no  dispo-
sition on  the  part  of  the  ancient  minister  to  oppose  the
new  order  of  things.  A  cautious,  caustic,  dry  old  func-
tionary, talking  more  with  his  shoulders  than  with  his
tongue,^*  determined  never  to  commit  himself,  or  to  risk
shipwreck  by  venturing  again  into  deeper  waters  than
those  of  the  harbour  in  which  he  now  hoped  for  repose,
Idiaqnez  knew  that  his  day  of  action  was  past.  Content
to  be  confidential  clerk  to  the  despot  duke,  as  he  had
been  faithful  secretary'  to  the  despot  king,  he  was  the
despair  of  courtiers  and  envoys  who  came  to  pump,  after
having  endeavoured  to  fill  an  inexhaustible  cistern.  Thus
he  proved,  on  the  whole,  a  useful  and  comfortable  man,
not  to  the  country,  but  to  its  autocrat.

Of  the  Count  of  Chinchon,  who  at  one  time  was  sup-
posed to  have  court  influence  because  a  dabbler  in  archi-
tecture, much  consulted  during  the  building  of  the
Escorial  by  Philip  II.  until  the  auditing  of  his  accounts
brought  him  into  temporary  disgiace,^^  and  the  Mar-
quises of  Velada,  Villalonga,  and  other  ministers,  it  is
not  necessary  to  speak.  There  was  one  man  in  the
council,  however,  who  was  of  great  importance,  wield-
in  a  mighty  authority  in  subordination  to  the  duke.
This  was  Don  Pietro  de  Franqueza."^^  An  emancipated
slave,  as  his  name  indicated,  and  subsequently  the  body-
servant  of  Lerma,  he  had  been  created  by  that  minister
secretary  of  the  privy  council.  He  possessed  some  of
the  virtues  of  the  slave,  such  as  docility  and  attachment
to  the  hand  that  had  fed  and  scourged  him,  and  many
vices  of  both  slave  and  freedman.  He  did  much  of  the
work  which  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  the  duke  to
accomplish  in  person,  received  his  fees,  sold  and  dis-
pensed his  interviews,  distributed  his  bribes.  In  so
doing,  as  might  be  supposed,  he  did  not  neglect  his  own
interest.  It  was  a  matter  of  notoiiety,  no  man  knowing
it  better  than  the  king,  that  no  business,  foreign  or
domestic,  could  be  conducted  or  even  begun  at  court
without  large  preliminary  fees  to  the  secretary  of  the

74  « In  modo  che  e  conoscinto  da  tutti  alle  volte  piu  mi  rispondeva  con  le  spalle

per  testa  secca  e  che  poco  possa  ad  altri  che  con  la  bocca." — Ott^.  Bon,  Relazioue.

che  al  re  solo  giovare  ....  1'  ho  pro-  75  f.  Soranzo,  Relazione.

vato  tanto  cauto  avido  e  riservato  che  76  ott^.  Bon,  Relazione.

1607.

CHARACTER  OF  THE  KING.

329

council,  his  wife,  and  his  children.  He  had,  in  conse-
quence, already  accumulated  an  enormous  fortune.  His
annual  income,  when  it  was  stated,  excited  amazement.
He  was  insolent  and  overbearing  to  all  comers  until  his
dues  had  been  paid,  when  he  became  at  once  obliging,
supple,  and  comparatively  efficient.  Through  him  alone
lay  the  path  to  the  duke's  sanctuary."^'

The  nominal  sovereign,  Philip  III.,  was  thirty  years
of  age.  A  very  little  man,  with  pink  cheeks,  flaxen
hair,  and  yellow  beard,  with  a  melancholy  expression  of
eye,  and  protruding  under  lip  and  jaw,  he  was  now  com-
paratively alert  and  vigorous  in  constitution,  although
for  the  fii'st  seven  years  of  his  life  it  had  been  doubtful
whether  he  would  live  from  week  to  week.'^  He  had
been  afflicted  during  that  period  with  a  chronic  itch  or
leprosy,  which  had  undermined  his  stiength,  but  which
had  almost  entirely  disappeared  as  he  advanced  in  life."^^

He  was  below  mediocrity  in  mind,*^  and  had  received
scarcely  any  education,  lie  had  been  taught  to  utter  a
few  phrases,  more  or  less  intelligible,  in  French,  Ittilian,
and  Flemish,  but  was  quite  incapable  of  sustaining  a
conversation  in  either  of  those  languages.^^  AVhen  a
child,  he  had  learned  an#I  subsequently  forgotten  the
rudiments  of  the  Ijatin  grammar.®^

These  acquirements,  together  with  the  catechism  and
the  offices  of  the  Church,  made  up  his  whole  stock  of
erudition.  That  he  was  devout  as  a  monk  of  the  middle
ages,  conforming  daily  and  hourly  to  icligious  ceremo-
nies, need  scarcely  be  stated.  It  was  not  probable  that
the  son  of  Philip  II.  w^ould  be  a  delinquent  to  church
observances,  lie  was  not  deficient  in  courage,  rode
well,  was  fond  of  hunting,  kept  close  to  the  staghounds,
and  confronted,  spear  in  hand,  the  wild-boar  with  cool-
ness and  success.** He  was  fond  of  tennis,  but  his  espe-

77  Otto.  Bon,  Rclaztone.  "Di  bassissima  ^  S.  Contarini. "I^a  sua  intelligenza

condizione,  nuto  d'  uno  schiavo  fatto  meno  che  mediocre." — F.  PriuU.

libero  cbe  ha  conscrvutoe  portatoil  nome  si  S.  Contarini. "  I 'aria  alcune  llngue

di  Franqueza,"  &c.  &c.  ma  corrottamente  solo  (  he  basti  p<T  farsi

'8  " il  re  tli  buona  complessione,  agile  int«  ndere  ....  ed  ha  avuto  qualche

della  vita,  piccolo  della  perMjiia  ma  ben  principio  di  lingua  I-atina  qnando  era

lormato,  di  pelo  rosso  e  biondo,  di  car-  giovinissimo."  Ibid,

nagione  bianca  e  colorita,  col  labbro  del  "  Corre  diotro  ai  canl  velocissiiniente,

mento  sollevato  all'  Austriaca. Ha  la  affronta  i  porchi  cinghiali  con  grande

guardatura  un  poco  malinconica,  &c.  &c.  ardire,  tira  d'  archibugio  in  eccelenza

— F.  Sorauzo. tv  ibid.  bene,"  &c. — F.  Soranzo.

830

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIII.

cial  passion  and  chief  accomplishment  was  dancing.  He
liked  to  be  praised  for  his  proficiency  in  this  art,  and
was  never  happier  than  when  gravely  leading  out  the
queen  or  his  daughter,  then  four  or  five  years  of  age —
for  he  never  danced  with  any  one  else — to  perform  a
stately  bolero.^*

He  never  drank  wine,  but  on  the  other  hand,  was  an
enormous  eater :  so  that,  like  his  father  in  youth,  he  was
perpetually  suffering  from  stomach-ache  as  the  effect  of
his  gluttony.^^  He  was  devotedly  attached  to  his  queen,
and  had  never  known,  nor  hardly  looked  at,  any  other
woman .^^  He  had  no  vice  but  gambling,  in  which  he
indulged  to  a  great  extent,  very  often  sitting  up  all
night  at  cards.^^  This  passion  of  the  king's  was  much
encouraged  by  Lerma,  for  obvious  reasons.  Philip  had
been  known  to  lose  thirty  thousand  dollars  at  a  sitting,
and  always  to  some  one  of  the  family  or  dependents  of
the  duke,  who  of  course  divided  with  them  the  spoils.
At  one  time  the  Count  of  Pelbes,  nephew  of  Lerma,  had
won  two  hundred  thousand  dollars  in  a  very  few  nights
from  his  sovereign.^^

For  the  rest,  Philip  had  few  peculiarities  or  foibles.
He  was  not  revengeful,  nor  arrogant,  nor  malignant.  He
was  kind  and  affectionate  to  his  wife  and  children,  and
did  his  best  to  be  obedient  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma.  Oc-
casionally he  liked  to  grant  audiences,  but  there  were
few  to  request  them. It  was  ridiculous  and  pathetic  at

8*  "Non  beve  vino  e  mangia  assai,  si  con  il  sotto  scrivere  pare  che  dalla  S.  M.

diletta  della  caccia  e  percib  esce  spesso  esca  il  tutto  ma  realmente  sebbene  vi

in  campagna  e  fa  volentieri  viaggi  impie-  sono  li  consigli  il  Duca  fa  e  risolve  tutte

gando  il  resto  del  tempo  in  giuocare  alia  le  cose  a  suo  beneplacito." — Ottaviano

pillotta  ed  in  danzare ;  e  soggetto  di  Bon,  Relazione.

debole  ingegno,  nimicissimo  del  negozio  e  "  Balla  molto  bene  ed  e  la  cosa  che

di  governare  non  pensando  ne  a  guerra  gusta  di  piii  piacendogli  d'  esser  lodato  in

ne  a  pace  come  se  non  fosse  re  ne  avesse  queste  divertimento  ....  quando  balla

stati,  non  inclinanJo  al  governo  ne  per  balla  sempre  con  sua  iSglia  o  con  la

natura  ne  per  educazione  anzi  per  propria  regina,"  &c. — S.  Contarini,  Relazione.

volonta  si  e  allontanato  del  tutto;  e  per  S.  Contarini. "Sottoposto  al  dolor

sua  natura  liberale  sebbene  alii  negozii  di  di  stomaco  per  il  soverchio  mangiare.

grazia  e  di  giustizia  ancora  non  fa  ne  piti  Nondimeno  mangia  carne  del  continue  e

ne  menodiquello  che  vuole  il  D.  di  Lerma  con  essa  si  nutrisce  quattro  volte  il

e  in  continuo  bisogno  di  denaro,  ha  qualche  giorno." — F.  Priuli,  Relazione.

notizia  degli  travagli  che  gli  occorrono  di  Otta^o.  Bon. F.  Soranzo.

Fiandra.d'  Inghil terra  ed'  altri  luoghi  ma  87  S.  Contarini. F.  Priuli.

come  quello  che  non  ha  gusto  ne  si  pub  S.  Contarini,  Relazione. "  Si  intra-

dire  parte  nel  governo  ....  ma  non  tiene  la  t^era  dopo  la  cena  nel  giuoco  con

vedendo  ne  considerando  1'  esp^dizioni  e  il  quale  ha  arrichito  molti  cavalieri  che

credo  io  non  essendo  capace  di  cose  grandl  lo  servono." — Girolamo  Soranzo.

1607.

CHARACTER  OF  THE  KING.

331

the  same  time  to  see  the  poor  king,  as  was  very  fre-
quently the  case,  standing  at  a  solemn  green  table  till
his  little  legs  were  tired,  waiting  to  transact  business
with  applicants  who  never  came ;  while  ushers,  cham-
berlains, and  valets  were  rushing  up  and  down  the  cor-
ridors, bawling  for  all  persons  so  disposed  to  come  and
have  an  audience  of  their  monarch.  Meantime,  the
doors  of  the  great  duke's  apartments  in  the  same  palace
would  be  beleaguered  by  an  army  of  courtiers,  envo^^s,
and  contractors,  who  had  paid  solid  gold  for  admis-
sion, and  who  were  often  sent  away  grumbling  and
despairing  without  entering  the  sacred  precincts.**-*

As  time  wore  on,  the  king,  too  much  rebuked  for  at-
tempting to  meddle  in  state  affairs,  became  solitary  and
almost  morose,  moping  about  in  the  woods  by  himself,^
losing  satisfaction  in  his  little  dancing  and  ball-playing
diversions,  but  never  forgetting  his  affection  for  the
queen  nor  the  hours  for  his  four  daily  substantial  re-
pasts of  meats  and  pastry.  It  would  be  unnecessary
and  almost  cruel  to  dwell  so  long  upon  a  ])icture  of
what  was  after  all  not  much  better  than  human  imbe-
cility, were  it  not  that  humanity  is  a  more  sacred  thing
than  royalty.  A  satire  upon  such  an  embodiment  of
kingship  is  impossible,  the  simple  and  truthful  charac-
teristics being  more  effective  than  fiction  or  exaggera-
tion. It  would  be  unjust  to  exhume  a  private  character
after  the  lapse  of  two  centuries  merely  to  excite  deri-
sion, but  if  history  be  not  powerless  to  instruct,  it  cer-
tainly cannot  bo  unprofitable  to  ponder  the  merits  of  a
system  which,  after  bestowing  upon  the  world  forty-
three  years  of  Philip  the  tyrant,  had  now  followed  them
up  with  a  decade  of  Philip  the  simpleton.

In  one  respect  the  reigning  sovereign  was  in  advance

89  "  Kd  e  cosa  ridicula  il  vedcre  che
quando  il  re  vuole  dar  udienza  il  che
segue  pih  giorni  alia  settimana  non  si
ritrova  alcuno  che  la  voglia  e  per  non
lasciarlo  con  qucsta  indigiiitJi,  li  valletti
di  camera  salgono  sine  nelli  con  iduri  del
palazzo  gridiiudo  ed  inviuindo  le  persone
a  entrare  all'  udienza  di  sua  Mae^ta;
neppure  poi  questo  giova  in  modo  che  ben
Bi-esso  le  occorre  levarsi  dalla  tavola  dove
appoggiato  suole  stare  aspettando  senza
che  olcuQO  o  pochi  le  abbino  parlato,  ed

air  incontro  alle  stjinze  del  duca  di
Lerma  e  t;inta  frequenza  d*  cgni  sorte  di
persone  che  vorrebbcro  udienza  che  e
cosi\  non  meno  di  stupore  che  di  com-
passione  il  vederlo."  —  Ottaviano  Bon,
Rolazioni.

^  "E  dope  di  aversi  entieramente dato
al  duca  di  Ijcrma  il  suo  carattcre  e  dive-
nuto  t^olitario  ed  aniante  di  vagar  nei
bosclii  tanto  che  si  dice  che  que^ti  boschi
ed  il  duca  di  Lerma  siano  il  re." — S.  Con-
tarini.

332

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVHI.

of  his  age.  In  his  devotion  to  the  Madonna  he  claimed
the  same  miraculous  origin  for  her  mother  as  for  herself.
When  the  prayer  0  Sancta  Maria  sine  lobe  originali
concepta''  was  chanted,  he  would  exclaim  with  emotion
that  the  words  embodied  his  devoutest  aspirations.  He
had  frequent  interviews  with  doctors  of  divinity  on  the
subject,  and  instructed  many  bishops  to  urge  upon
the  pope  the  necessity  of  proclaiming  the  virginity
of  the  V^irgin's  mother.  Could  he  secure  this  darling
object  of  his  ambition,  he  professed  himself  ready  to
make  a  pilgrimage  on  foot  to  Eome.^^  The  pilgrimage
was  never  made,  for  it  may  well  be  imagined  that  Lerma
would  forbid  any  such  adventurous  scheme.  Meantime,
the  duke  continued  to  govern  the  empire  and  to  fill  his
coffers,  and  the  king  to  shoot  rabbits.

The  queen  was  a  few  years  younger  than  her  hus-
band, and  far  from  beautiful.  Indeed,  the  lower  portion
of  her  face  was  almost  deformed.  She  was  graceful,
however,  in  her  movements,  and  pleasing  and  gentle  in
manner.^^  She  adored  the  king,  looking  up  to  him  with
reverence  as  the  greatest  and  wisest  of  beings.  To
please  him  she  had  upon  her  marriage  given  up  drink-
ing wine,  which,  for  a  German,  was  considered  a  great
sacrifice. Slie  recompensed  herself,  as  the  king  did,
by  eating  to  an  extent  which,  according  to  con  tempo-
rary accounts,  excited  amazement.^*  Thus  there  was
perfect  sympathy  between  the  two  in  the  important
article  of  diet.  She  had  also  learned  to  play  at  cards,
in  order  to  take  a  hand  with  him  at  any  moment,  feebly
hoping  that  an  occasional  game  for  love  might  rescue
the  king  from  that  frantic  passion  by  which  his  health
was  shattered  and  so  many  courtiers  were  enriched .^^

Not  being  deficient  in  perception,  the  queen  was  quite
aware  of  the  greediness  of  all  who  surrounded  the  palace.

91  S.  Contarini,  Relazione. Giro.  So- 93  F.  Soranzo. Otto  Bon,  Relazione.
ranzo. Notes  of  N.  Barozzi  (p.  2«9  Ser  I. 94  «  Le  hanno  levato  il  vino  per  rit;petto
vol.  i.) Poreno,  Diclios  y  Hechos  de  della  conversazione  col  re  che  gli  riesce
Felipe  ill.  ch,  xii.,  cited  by  Barozzi.  molesto  ma  si  rita  col  mangiare  taiito

92  "  Non  si  pub  dire  brutta  ma  non  e  che  e  cosa  di  maraviglia." — Ott^.  Bon,
man  CO  bella  per  avere  la  faccia  deformata  Relazione.

assai  dalla  bocca  a  basso,  tuttavia  la 95  « ]sfe  mostra  di  gustare  d'  altro  tratte-

vaghezza  del  colore  e  1'  agilita  del  corpo  nimento  cbe  del  giuoco  per  conformarsi

la  fa  riuscire  grata  ad  ognimo  e  dalmarito  col  re  pretendendo  per  tal  via  di  deviarlo

e  grandemente  amata." — F.  Priuli,  Rela-  dal  giuocar  con  altri  che  lo  fa  cadere  neUe

zione.  sopradette  perdite."— F.  Priuli.

1607. DOMESTIC  LIFE  OF  THE  KING  AND  QUEEN.  333

She  had  spirit  erioiigh  too  to  feel  the  galling  tyranny  to
which  the  king  was  subjected.  That  the  people  hated
the  omnipotent  favourite,  and  believed  the  king  to  be
under  the  influence  of  sorcery,  she  was  well  aware.  She
had  even  a  dim  notion  that  the  administration  of  the
empire  was  not  the  wisest  nor  the  noblest  that  could  be
devised  for  the  first  power  in  Christendom.  But  con-
siderations of  high  politics  scarcely  troubled  her  mind.
Of  a  People  she  had  perhaps  never  heard,  but  she  felt
that  the  king  w^as  oppressed.  She  knew  that  he  was
helpless,  and  that  she  was  herself  his  only  friend.  But
of  what  avail  were  her  timid  little  flutterings  of  indig-
nation and  resistance?  So  pure  and  fragile  a  creature
could  accomplish  little  good  for  king  or  people.  Per-
petually guarded  and  surrounded  by  the  Countess  of
Lemos  and  the  Duchess  of  Lernia,  she  lived  in  mortal
awe  of  both.^^  As  to  the  Duke  himself,  she  trembled  at
his  very  name.  On  her  first  attempts  to  speak  with
Philip  on  political  matters — to  hint  at  the  unscrupulous
character  of  his  government,  to  arouse  him  to  the  neces-
sity of  striking  for  a  little  more  liberty  and  for  at  least
a  trifling  influence  in  the  state — the  poor  little  king  in-
stantly betrayed  her  to  the  favourite  and  she  wavS  severely
punished.  The  duke  took  the  monarch  off  at  once  on  a
long  journey,  leaving  her  alone  for  weeks  long  with  the
terrible  duchess  and  countess.  Never  before  had  she
been  separated  for  a  day  from  her  hnsband,  it  having
been  the  king's  uniform  custom  to  take  her  with  him
in  all  his  ex])editions.  Her  ambition  to  interfere  was
thus  effectually  cured."  The  duke  forbade  her  thence-
forth ever  to  speak  of  politics  to  her  husband  in  public
or  in  private — not  even  in  bed — and  the  king  was  closely
questioned  whether  these  orders  had  been  obeyed.^^  She

96  F.  Priuli. F.  Soranzo.

97  «•  Voleva  alcuni  anni  sono  estendersi
nel  maneggio  dei  negozii  ma  il  duca  di
Lenna  che  lo  scntiva  nuilissimo  per
levarla  da  questi  pensieri  la  mortifico
conducendo  alcuiie  volte  i I  re  in  canipapna
senza  di  lei  e  tenendo  plirlo  separato  le
Beitiniane  entlere.  Senti  Unto  la  rogina
quest'  assenza  regia  e  conobbe  1'  origine
di  questo  disgusto  che  da  se  si  astenne
affiitio  d'  ingerirsi  piii  nei  negozii  ed  in
qu<  >ta  maniera  si  pacificb  cul  duca." —
Oir*  Soranzo.

^  F.  ContarinI,  "  Nemmeno  trovandosi
a  lotto."— N.  Barozzi  (S^-r.  1.  vol.  i.  p.  325)
citing  Relazione  delta  Vita,  kc.  &c.  MS.
of  Berlin.

"  Jhr  seyen  alle  Handtgebunden.  Wasz
man  ilir  zu  wider  thun  kan.  das  thue  man,
wann  sie  was  Heimlich  redt  so  halt  man
sie  in  Argwohn,  es  sey  wider  die  Hertz-
ogen  Lerma  und  Uzeda  oder  die  ihrigen
angesehen.  Ihren  Gemahl  exaininierten
sie  ivas  sie  mit  ihm  im  Bedt  redt  cm  ■
habfn  ihr  xti  boien  bei/  deni  Konig  un
kein  Sachen  zu  intercediren  nock  im  Bed:

334

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLVIII.

submitted  without  a  struggle.  She  saw  how  completely
her  happiness  was  at  Lenna's  mercy.  She  had  no  one  to
consult  with,  having  none  but  Spanish  people  about  her,
except  her  German  father-confessor,  whom,  as  a  great
favour,  and  after  a  seve]"e  struggle,  she  had  been  allowed
to  retain,  as  otherwise  her  ignorance  of  the  national  lan-
guage w^ould  have  made  it  impossible  for  her  to  confess
her  little  sins.^^  Moreover  her  brothers,  the  archdukes
at  Gratz,  were  in  receipt  of  considerable  annual  stipends
from  the  Spanish  exchequer,  and  the  duke  threatened  to
stop  those  pensions  at  once  should  the  queen  prove  re-
fractory.It  is  painful  to  dwell  any  longer  on  the  abject
servitude  in  which  the  king  and  queen  were  kept.^°^
The  two  were  at  least  happy  in  each  other's  society,
and  were  blessed  with  mutual  affection,  with  pretty  and
engaging  children,  and  with  a  similarity  of  tastes.  It
is  impossible  to  imagine  anything  more  stately,  more
devout,  more  regular,  more  innocent,  more  utterly
dismal  and  insipid,  than  the  lives  of  this  wedded  pair.

This  interior  view  of  the  court  and  council  of  Spain,
will  suffice  to  explain  why,  despite  the  languor  and  hesi-
tations with  which  the  transactions  were  managed,  the
inevitable  tendency  was  towards  a  peace.  The  inevitable
slowness,  secrecy,  and  tergiversations  were  due  to  the
dignity  of  the  Spanish  court,  and  in  harmony  with  its
most  sacred  traditions.  But  what  profit  could  the  Duke
of  Lerma  exjDCct  by  the  continuance  of  the  Dutch  war,
and  who  in  Spain  was  to  be  consulted  except  the  Duke
of  Lerma  ?

Oder  allein  mit  ihm  Negocio  zu  tractiren.
Was  sie  nach  Deutschland  schreibt  will
man  wissen,"  etc.  etc. — Khevenhiiller,
Annates  Ferdinandei,  torn.  vi.  3038.
Surely  never  was  a  more  dismal  picture
painted  of  tyranny  exercised  by  subject
over  his  sovereigns.  It  was  no  wonder
that  the  unfortunate  queen  protested  to
Count  Khevenhiiller  that  she  "would
rather  go  into  a  convent  at  Gratz  than  be
Queen  of  Spain." — Khevenhiiller  Annales
Ferdinandei,  torn.  vi.  3038.

99  Otto.  Bon,  Kelazione.  "  Confessore
della  medesima  nazione  da  lei  tenuto  a
viva  forza." — F.  Priuli,  Relazione.

100  Giro.  Soranzo,  Relazione.  Five  thou-
sand crowns  a  month  to  the  Archduke
Ferdinand,  and  much  help  besides  to  the

others.  "  L'  arciduca  Ferdinando  al  quale
ha  assegnato  5000  scudi  di  provisione  al
mese,  e  lui  ed  i  fratelli  cavano  del  con-
tinuo  grosbi  ajuti  di  corte,  e  la  regina  nou
cessa  mai  di  procurar  loro  alcuna  cosa ;  e
questa  e  una  delle  cause  principali  che
tiene  la  regina  in  necessita  di  stare  unita
e  si  pub  dire  dipendente  dal  duca  di
Lerma;  poiche  procurando  lei  sempre
alcun  sussidio  per  i  fratelli  e  convenendo
valersi  dell'  autorita  del  duca,  non  pub
per  questo  importante  rispetto  dargli
fdcun  disgusto  ne  intromettersi  in  quello
♦/he  nun  e  di  sua  soddisfazione."

101  "  Nel  resto  vive  in  continua  servitU
e  con  tanto  rispetto  che  maegiore  non  si
pud  dire." — Ott".  Bon,  Rela/ione.

1807.

PEACE  DELIBERATIONS  IN  SPAIN.

83S

CHAPTEE  XLIX.

Peace  deliberations  in  Spain  —  Unpopularity  of  the  project  —  Disaffection  of  the
courtiers — Complaints  against  Spinola  —  Conference  of  the  Catholic  party  —
Position  of  Henry  IV.  towards  the  republic  —  State  of  France  —  Further  peace
negotiations  —  Desire  of  King  James  of  England  for  the  rest<>r  .tion  of  the  States
to  Spain  —  Arrival  of  the  French  commissionors — President  Jeannin  before  the
Stiatcs-General — Dangers  of  a  truce  with  Spain — !)utcli  legation  to  England  —
Arrival  of  Lewis  Yerreykcn  at  the  Hague  with  Philip's  ratification  —  Rejection  of
the  Spanish  treaty  —  AVithdrawal  of  the  Dutch  fleet  from  the  P<  ninsula  -  The
peace  project  denounced  by  the  party  of  Prince  Maurice  —  Opposition  of  Maurice
to  the  plans  of  Barncvcld  —  Amended  ratification  pn  sented  to  the  Slates-General  —
Discussion  of  the  conditions  —  Detennination  to  conclude  a  peao — Indian  trade  —
Exploits  of  Admiral  Matelieff  in  the  Malay  p(  nin>ula —  He  lays  siege  to  Malacca  —
Victory  over  the  Spanish  fleet — Endeavour  to  open  a  trade  with  China  —  EeiurD
of  Matelieff  to  Holland.

The  Marqnis  Spinola  had  informed  the  Spanish  Govern-
ment that  if  300,000  dollars  a  month  could  be  furnished,
the  war  might  be  continued,  but  that  otherwise  it  would
be  better  to  treat  upon  the  basis  of  uti  possidetis^  and
according  to  the  terms  proposed  by  the  States  General,
lie  had  further  intimated  his  opinion  that,  instead  of
waiting  for  the  king's  consent,  it  more  comported  with
the  king's  dignity  for  the  archdukes  to  enter  into  nego-
tiations, to  make  a  preliminary  and  brief  aimi.stice  with
the  enemy,  and  then  to  solicit  the  royal  approval  of
what  had  been  done.

In  reply,  the  king  —  that  is  to  say  the  man  who
thought,  wrote,  and  signed  in  behalf  of  the  king — had
plaintively  observed  that  among  evils  the  vulgar  rule
was  to  submit  to  the  least.^  Although,  therefore,  to
grant  to  the  Netherland  rebels  not  only  peace  and
liberty,  but  to  concede  to  them  whatever  they  had  ob-
tained by  violence  and  the  most  abuminable  outrages,
was  the  worst  possible  example  to  all  princes;  yet  as
the  enormous  sum  necessary  for  carrying  on  the  war
was  not  to  be  had,  even  by  attempting  to  scrape  it  to-
gether from  every  corner  of  the  earth,  he  agreed  with
the  opinion  of  the  archdukes  that  it  was  better  to  put

1  The  King  to  Spinola,  28  February,  l607,  in  Gailucci,  328.

336

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

an  end  to  this  eternal  and  exhausting  war  by  peace  or
truce,  even  under  severe  conditions.  That  the  business
had  thus  far  proceeded  ^vithout  consulting  him,  was
publicly  known,  and  he  expressed  approval  of  the  pre-
sent movements  towards  a  peace  or  a  long  truce,  assur-
ing Spinola  that  such  a  result  would  be  as  grateful  to
him  as  if  the  war  had  been  brought  to  a  successful
issue.

When  the  Marquis  sent  formal  notice  of  the  armistice
to  Spain  there  were  many  complaints  at  court.  Men
said  that  the  measure  was  beneath  the  king's  dignity,
and  contrary  to  his  interests.  It  was  a  cessation  of
arms  under  iniquitous  conditions,  accorded  to  a  people
formerly  subject  and  now  rebellious.  Such  a  truce  was
more  fatal  than  any  conflict,  than  any  amount  of
slaughter.  During  this  long  and  dreadful  war,  the  king
had  suffered  no  disaster  so  terrible  as  this,  and  the  coui-
tiers  now  declared  openly  that  the  archduke  was  the
cause  of  the  royal  and  national  humiliation.  Having  no
children,  nor  hope  of  any,  he  desired  only  to  live  in
tranquillity  and  selfish  indulgence,  like  the  indolent
priest  that  he  was,  not  caring  what  detriment  or  dis-
honour might  accrue  to  the  crown  after  his  life  was  over.

Thus  murmured  the  paiasites  and  the  plunderers
within  the  dominions  of  the  do-nothing  Philip,  denounc-
ing the  first  serious  effort  to  put  an  end  to  a  war  which
the  laws  of  nature  had  proved  to  be  hopeless  on  the  part
of  Spain.

Spinola  too,  who  had  spent  millions  of  his  own  money,
who  had  plunged  himself  into  debt  and  discredit,  while
attempting  to  sustain  the  financial  reputation  of  the
king,  who  had  by  his  brilliant  services  in  the  field  re-
A'ived  the  ancient  glory  of  the  Spanish  arms,  and  who
now  saw  himself  exposed  with  empty  coffers  to  a  vast
mutiny,  which  was  likely  to  make  his  future  movements
as  paralytic  as  those  of  his  immediate  predecessors —
Spinola,  already  hated  because  he  was  an  Italian,  be-
cause he  was  of  a  mercantile  family,  and  because  he  had
been  successful,  was  now  as  much  the  object  of  con-
tumely with  the  courtiers  as  was  the  archduke  himself.

The  splendid  victory  of  Heemskerk  had  struck  the
government  with  dismay  and  diffused  a  panic  along  the
coast. The  mercantile  fleets,  destined  for  either  India,

1607.  DISAFFECTION  TOWARDS  SPINOLA.  337

dared  not  venture  forth  so  long  as  the  terrible  Dutch
cruisers,  which  had  just  annihilated  a  splendid  Spanish
fleet,  commanded  by  a  veteran  of  Lepanto,  and  under
the  very  guns  of  Gibraltar,  were  supposed  to  be  hover-
ing off  the  Peninsula.^  Very  naturally,  therefore,  there
was  discontent  in  Spain  that  the  cessation  of  hostilities
had  not  originally  been  arranged  for  sea  as  well  as  land,
and  men  said  openly  at  court  that  Spinola  ought  to
have  his  head  cut  off  for  agreeing  to  such  an  armistice.^
Quite  as  reasonably,  however,  it  was  now  felt  to  be  neces-
sary to  effect  as  soon  as  possible  the  recall  of  this  very
inconvenient  Dutch  fleet  from  the  coast  of  Spain.

The  complaints  were  so  incessant  against  Spinola  that
it  was  determined  to  send  Don  Diego  d'Ybarra  to
Brussels,  charged  with  a  general  superintendence  of  the
royal  interests  in  the  present  confused  condition  of
affairs.  He  was  especially  instructed  to  convey  to
Spinola  the  most  vehement  reproaches  in  regard  to  the
terms  of  the  armistice,  and  to  insist  upon  the  cessation
of  naval  hostilities,  and  the  withdrawal  of  the  cruisers.

Spinola,  on  his  part,  was  exceedingly  irritated  that
the  arrangements  which  he  had  so  carefully  made  with
the  archduke  at  Brussels  should  be  so  contumaciously
assailed,  and  even  disavowed,  at  Madiid.  He  was  es-
pecially irritated  that  Ybarra  should  now  be  sent  as
his  censor  and  overseer,  and  that  Fuentes  should  have
received  orders  to  levy  seven  thousand  troops  in  the
Milanese  for  Flanders,  the  arrival  of  which  reinforce-
ments would  excite  suspicion,  and  probably  break  off
negotiations.'*

He  accordingly  sent  his  private  secretary  Biraga,  post-
haste to  Spain  with  two  letters.  In  number  one  he
implored  his  Majesty  that  Ybarra  might  not  be  sent  to
Bi-ussels.  If  this  request  were  granted,  number  two
was  to  be  burned.  Otherwise,  number  two  was  to  be
delivered,  and  it  contained  a  request  to  be  relieved  fioni
all  further  employment  in  the  king's  service.  The
marquis  was  already  feeling  the  same  effects  of  success
as  had  been  experienced  by  Alexander  Farnese,  Don
John  of  Austria,  and  other  strenuous  maintainors  of  the
royal  authority  in  Flanders. He  was  railed  against.

*  letter  of  Henry  IV.,  13  June,  1607,  in  Jeannin,  i.  146.
s  Letters  of  F.  Aerssens.  iu  Van  der  Kemp,  iil.  123.  ♦  Gallucci,  321>.

VOL.  IV.  Z

338

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

suspected,  spied  upon,  put  under  guardianship,  accord-
ing to  the  good  old  traditions  of  the  Spanish  court.
Public  disgrace  or  secret  poison  might  well  be  expected
by  him,  as  the  natural  guerdons  of  his  eminent  deeds.

Biraga  also  took  with  him  the  draught  of  the  form
in  which  the  king's  consent  to  the  armistice  and  pend-
ing negotiations  was  desired,  and  he  was  particularly-
directed  to  urge  that  not  one  letter  or  comma  should  be
altered,  in  order  that  no  pretext  might  be  afforded  to
the  suspicious  Netherlanders  for  a  rupture.

In  private  lettei's  to  his  own  superintendent  Strata,
to  Don  John  of  Idiaquez,  to  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  and
to  Stephen  Ybarra,  Spinola  enlarged  upon  the  indignity
about  to  be  offered  him,  remonstrated  vehemently
against  the  wrong  and  stupidity  of  the  proposed  policy,
and  expressed  his  reliance  upon  the  efforts  of  these
friends  of  his  to  prevent  its  consummation.  He  inti-
mated to  Idiaquez  that  a  new  deliberation  would  be
necessary  to  effect  the  withdrawal  of  the  Dutch  fleet
— a  condition  not  inserted  in  the  original  armistice —
but  that  within  the  three  months  allowed  for  the  royal
ratification  there  would,  be  time  enough  to  procure  the
consent  of  the  States  to  that  measure.^  If  the  king
really  desired  to  continue  the  war,  he  had  but  to  alter
a  single  comma  in  the  draught,  and,  out  of  that  comma,
the  stadholder's  party  would  be  certain  to  manufacture
for  him  as  long  a  war  as  he  could  possibly  wish,^

In  a  subsequent  letter  to  the  king,  Spinola  observed
that  he  was  well  aware  of  the  indignation  created  in
Spain  by  the  cessation  of  land  hostilities  without  the
recall  of  the  fleet,  but  that  nevertheless  John  Neyen  had
confidentially  represented  to  the  archdukes  the  royal
assent  as  almost  certain.  As  to  the  mission  of  Ybarra,
the  marquis  reminded  his  master  that  the  respousibi-
lity  and  general  superintendence  of  the  negotiations
had  been  almost  forced  upon  him.  Certainly  he  had
not  solicited  them.  If  another  agent  were  now  inter-
posed, it  was  an  advertisement  to  the  world  that  the
business  had  been  badly  managed.  If  the  king  wished
a  rupture,  he  had  but  to  lift  his  finger  or  his  pen ;  but
to  appoint  another  commissioner  was  an  unfit  reward
for  his  faithful  service. He  was  in  the  king's  hands.

5  Gallucci,  329,  331.

6  Ibid.

1607.

MISSION  OF  YBARRA  TO  BRUSSELS.

339

If  his  reputation  were  now  to  be  destroyed,  it  was  all
over  with  him  and  his  aftairs.  The  man,  whom  mortals
had  once  believed  incapable,  would  be  esteemed  incap-
able until  the  end  of  his  days.

It  was  too  late  to  prevent  the  mission  of  Ybarra,
who,  immediately  after  his  arrival  in  Brussels,  began  to
urge  in  the  king's  name  that  the  words  in  which  the
provinces  had  been  declared  free  by  the  archdukes
might  be  expunged.  W  hat  could  be  more  childish  than
such  diplomacy  ?  What  greater  proof  could  be  given
of  the  incapacity  of  the  Spanish  court  to  learn  the  lesson
which  forty  years  had  been  teaching  ?  Spinola  again
wrote  a  most  earnest  remonstrance  to  the  king,  assuring
him  that  this  was  simply  to  break  off  the  negotiation.
It  was  ridiculous  to  suppose,  he  said,  that  concessions
already  made  by  the  archdukes,  ratification  of  which  on
the  part  of  the  king  had  been  guaranteed,  (;ould  now  be
annulled.  Those  acquainted  with  Netherland  obstinacy
knew  better.  The  very  possibility  of  the  king's  refusal
excited  the  scorn  of  the  States-General.^

Ybarra  went  about,  too,  prating  to  the  archdukes  and
to  others  of  supplies  to  be  sent  from  Spain  sufficient  to
carry  on  the  war  for  many  years,  and  of  fresh  troops  to
be  forwarded  immediately  by  Fuentes.  As  four  millions
of  crowns  a-year  were  known  to  be  required  for  any
tolerable  campaigning,  such  empty  vaunts  as  these  were
preposterous.  The  king  knew  full  well,  said  Spinola,
and  had  admitted  the  fact  in  his  letters,  that  this  enor-
mous sum  could  not  be  furnished.*^  Moreover,  the  war  cost
the  Netherlanders  far  less  in  proportion.  They  had
river  transj^ortation,  by  which  they  elfected  as  much  in
two  days  as  the  Catholic  army  could  do  in  a  fortnight,
so  that  every  siege  was  managed  with  far  greater  ra-
pidity and  less  cost  by  the  rebels  than  by  their  op-
ponents. As  to  sending  troops  from  Milan,  he  had
already  stated  that  their  arrival  would  have  a  fatal
effect.  The  minds  of  the  people  were  full  of  suspicion.
Every  passing  rumour  excited  a  prodigious  sensation,
and  the  war  party  was  already  gaining  the  upper  hand.
Spinola  warned  the  king,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,
that  if  the  golden  opportunity  were  now  neglected,  the
war  would  be  eternal. This,  he  said,  was  more  certain

7  Letter  to  the  king,  25  June,  1607,  in  Gallucci,  332.  s  ibid.

z  2

340

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

than  certain.  For  himself,  he  had  strained  every  nerve,
and  would  continue  to  do  his  best  in  the  interest  of
peace.  If  calamity  must  come,  he  at  least  would  be
held  blameless.^

Such  vehement  remonstrances  from  so  eminent  a
source  produced  the  needful  effect.  Eoyal  letters  were
immediately  sent,  placing  full  powers  of  treating  in  the
hands  of  the  marquis,  and  sending  him  a  ratification  of
the  archduke's  agreement.  Government  moreover  ex-
pressed boundless  confidence  in  Spinola,  and  deprecated
the  idea  that  Ybarra's  mission  was  in  derogation  of  his
authority.  He  had  been  sent,  it  was  stated,  only  to  pro-
cure that  indispensable  preliminary  to  negotiations,  the
withdrawal  of  the  Dutch  fleet,  but  as  this  had  now  been
granted,  Ybarra  was  already  recalled.

Spinola  now  determined  to  send  the  swift  and  sure-
footed friar,  who  had  made  himself  so  useful  in  opening
the  path  to  discussion,  on  a  secret  mission  to  Spain.
Ybarra  objected ;  especially  because  it  would  be  neces-
sary for  him  to  go  through  France,  where  he  would  be
closely  questioned  by  the  king.  It  would  be  equally
dangerous,  he  said,  for  the  Franciscan  in  that  case  to  tell
the  truth  or  to  conceal  it.  But  Spinola  replied  that  a
poor  monk  like  him  could  steal  through  France  undis-
covered. Moreover,  he  should  be  disguised  as  a  footman,
travelling  in  the  service  of  Aurelio  Spinola,  a  relative  of
the  marquis,  then  proceeding  to  Madrid.  Even  should
Henry  hear  of  his  presence  and  send  for  him,  was  it  to
be  supposed  that  so  practised  a  hand  would  not  easily
parry  the  strokes  of  the  French  king  —  accomplished
fencer  as  he  undoubtedly  was  ?  After  stealing  into  and
out  of  Holland  as  he  had  so  recently  done,  there  was
nothing  that  might  not  be  expected  of  him.  So  the  wily
friar  put  on  the  Spinola  livery,  and,  without  impediment,
accompanied  Don  Aurelio  to  Madrid.^^

Meantime,  the  French  commissioners — Pierre  Jeannin,
Buzanval,  regular  resident  at  the  Hague,  and  De  Kussy,
who  was  destined  to  succeed  that  diplomatist — had  ar-
rived in  Holland.

The  great  drama  of  negotiation,  which  was  now  to
follow  the  forty  years'  tragedy,  involved  the  interests
and absorbed  the attention  of the great  Christian

9  Letter  last  cited.

10  Gallucci,  335.

1607.

EFFORTS  TO  REPRESS  THE  REPUBLIC.

341

powers.  Although  serious  ecough  in  its  substance  and
its  probable  consequences,  its  aspect  was  that  of  solemn
comedy.  There  was  a  secret  disposition  on  the  part  of
each  leading  personage — with  a  few  exceptions — 'to
make  dupes  of  all  the  rest.  Perhaps  this  was  a  neces-
sary result  of  statesmanship,  as  it  had  usually  been
taught  at  that  epoch.

Paul  Y.,  who  had  succeeded  Clement  VIII.  in  1605,
with  the  brief  interlude  of  the  twenty-six  days  of  Leo
XL's  pontificate,  was  zealous,  as  might  be  supposed,  to
check  the  dangerous  growth  of  the  pestilential  little  re-
public of  the  north.  His  diplomatic  agents,  Millino  at
Madrid,  Barberini  at  Paris,  and  the  accomplished  P>enti-
voglio,  who  had  just  been  appointed  to  the  nunciatura
at  Brussels,  were  indefatigable  in  their  eftbrts  to  sup-
press the  heresy  and  the  insolent  liberty  of  which  the
upstart  commonwealth  was  the  embodiment.

Especially  Barberini  exerted  all  the  powers  at  his
command  to  bring  about  a  good  understanding  between
the  kings  of  France  and  Spain.  He  pictured  to  Henry,
in  darkest  colours,  the  blight  that  would  come  over
religion  and  civilization  if  the  progress  of  the  rebellious
Netherlands  could  not  be  arrested.  The  United  Provinces
were  becoming  dangerous,  if  they  remained  free,  not
only  to  the  French  kingdom,  but  to  the  very  existence
of  monarchy  throughout  the  world.^^

No  potentate  was  ever  more  interested,  so  it  was  urged,
than  Henry  IV.  to  bring  down  the  pride  of  the  Dutch
rebels.  There  was  always  sympathy  of  thought  and
action  between  the  Huguenots  of  France  and  their  co-
religionists in  Holland.  They  were  all  believers  aliko
in  Calvinism — a  sect  inimical  not  less  to  temporal
monarchies  than  to  the  sovereign  primacy  of  the  Church^^
— and  the  tendency  and  purposes  of  the  French  rebels
were  already  sufficiently  manifest  in  their  eftbrts,  by
means  of  the  so-called  cities  of  security,  to  erect  a  state
within  a  state ;  to  introduce,  in  short,  a  Dutch  republic
into  France.^*

A  sovereign  remedy  for  the  disease  of  liberty,  now
threatening  to  become  epidemic  in  Europe,  would  be

11  Bentivoglio,  548,  549.  12  Ibid,

13  "  Sotte  inimica  non  meno  alle  monarchic  temporali  che  al  sovrano  primato  eccle-
*iastico." — Ibid. 1*  "  E  di  voler  introdurre  nn  govenio  di  Olanda  in  Francia." — Ibid.

342

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

foTJiid  in  a  marriage  between  ihe  second  son  of  the  King
of  Spain  and  a  daughter  of  France.  As  the  archdukes
were  childless,  it  might  be  easily  arranged  that  this
youthful  couple  should  succeed  them — the  result  of  which
would  of  course  be  the  reduction  of  all  the  ]S' etherlands
to  their  ancient  obedience.

It  has  already  been  seen,  and  will  become  still  farther
apparent,  that  nostrums  like  this  were  to  be  recommended
in  other  directions.  Meantime,  Jeannin  and  his  colleagues
made  their  appearance  at  the  Hague.

If  there  were  a  living  politician  in  Europe  capable  of
dealing  with  Barneveld  on  even  terms,  it  was  no  doubt
Pi-esident  Jeannin.  An  ancient  Leaguer,  an  especial
adherent  of  the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  he  had  been  deep  in
all  the  various  plots  and  counter-plots  of  the  Guises,
and  often  employed  by  the  extinct  confederacy  in  various
important  intrigues.  Being  secretly  sent  to  Spain  to
solicit  help  for  the  League  after  the  disasters  of  Ivry
and  Arques,  he  found  Philip  II.  so  sincerely  imbued
with  the  notion  that  France  was  a  mere  province  of
Spain,  and  so  entirely  bent  upon  securing  the  heritage
of  the  Infanta  to  that  large  property,  as  to  convince
him  that  the  maintenance  of  the  Eoman  religion  w^as
with  that  monarch  only  a  secondary  condition.  Aid  and
assistance  for  the  confederacy  were  difficult  of  attainment,
unless  coupled  with  the  guarantee  of  the  Infanta's  rights
to  reign  in  France.

The  Guise  faction  being  inspired  solely  by  religious
motives  of  the  loftiest  kind,  were  naturally  dissatisified
with  the  lukew^armness  of  his  most  Catholic  Majesty.
When  therefore  the  discomfited  Mayenne  subsequently
concluded  his  bargain  with  the  conqueror  of  Ivry,  it  was
a  matter  of  course  that  Jeannin  should  also  make  his
peace  with  the  successful  Huguenot,  now  become  eldest
son  of  the  Church.  He  was  very  soon  taken  into  especial
favour  by  Henry,  who  recognised  his  sagacity,  and  who
knew  his  hands  to  be  far  cleaner  than  those  of  the  more
exalted  Leaguers  with  w^hom  he  had  dealt.  The  "  good
old  fellow,"  as  Henry  familiarly  called  him,  had  not
filled  his  pockets  either  in  serving  or  when  deserting
the  League.  Placed  in  control  of  the  exchequer  at  a
later  period,  he  was  never  accused  of  robbery  or  pecu-
lation. He  was  a  hard-working,  not  overpaid,  very

1607.

VIEWS  OF  THE  FRENCH  KING.

343

intelligent  public  functionary.  He  was  made  president
of  the  parliament,  or  supreme  tribunal  of  Burgundy,  and
minister  of  state,  and  was  recognised  as  one  of  the  ablest
jurists  and  most  skilful  politicians  in  the  kingdom.  An
elderly  man,  with  a  tall,  serene  forehead,  a  large  dark
eye  and  a  long  grey  beard,  he  presented  an  image  of
vast  wisdom  and  reverend  probity.  He  possessed — an
especial  treasure  for  a  statesman  in  that  plotting  age —
a  singularly  honest  visage.  Never  was  that  face  more
guileless,  never  was  his  heart  more  completely  worn
upon  his  sleeve,  than  when  he  was  harbouring  the
deepest  or  most  dangerous  designs.^^  Such  was  the  "  good
fellow,"  whom  that  skilful  reader  of  men,  Henry  of
France,  had  sent  to  represent  his  interests  and  his
opinions  at  the  approaching  conferences.

What  were  those  opinions?  l*aul  V.  and  his  legates
Barberini,  Millino,  and  the  rest,  were  well  enough  aware
of  the  secret  strings  of  the  king's  policy,  and  knew  how
to  touch  them  with  skill.  Of  all  things  past,  Henry
perhaps  most  regretted  that  not  he,  but  the  last  and
most  wretched  of  the  Yalois  line,  was  sovereign  of
France  when  the  States-General  came  to  Paris  with  that
offer  of  sovereignty  which  had  been  so  contumaciously
refused.

If  the  object  were  attainable,  the  ex-chief  of  the
Huguenots  still  meant  to  be  king  of  the  Netherlands  as
sincerely  as  Philip  II.  had  ever  intended  to  be  monarch
of  France.^^  But  Henry  was  too  accurate  a  calculator  of
chances,  and  had  bustled  too  much  in  the  world  of  reali-
ties, to  exhaust  his  stiength  in  sti  iving,  year  after  year,
for  a  manifest  impossibility.  The  enthusiast,  who  had
passed  away  at  last  from  the  dreams  of  the  Escorial  into
the  land  of  shadows,  had  spent  a  lifetime,  and  melted  the
wealth  of  an  empire  ;  but  universal  monarchy  had  never
come  forth  from  his  crucible.  The  French  king,  although
possessed  likewise  of  an  almost  boundless  faculty  for
ambitious  visions,  was  capable  of  distinguishing  cloud-
land  from  substantial  empire.  Jeannin,  as  his  envoy,
would  at  any  rate  not  reveal  his  master's  secret  aspira-

Grotius,  xvi.  740.  "  Vultus  autcm  scrmonisque  adeo  potcns  ut  cum  maxime
abderet  songus  apertissimus  viderctur."

16  Soe  especially  Seconde  Instruction  pour  le  S'.  Jeannin.  Negotiations  do  M.  le
President  Jeannin,  ed.  Petitot,  1659,  i.  40-43,  and  62,  63.

344

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLTX.

tions  to  those  with  whom  he  came  to  deal,  as  openly  as
Philip  had  once  unveiled  himself  to  Jeannin.

There  could  be  no  doubt  that  peace  at  this  epoch  was
the  real  interest  of  France.  That  kingdom  was  beginning
to  flourish  again,  owing  to  the  very  considerable  admi-
nistrative genius  of  Bethune,  an  accomplished  financier
according  to  the  lights  of  the  age,  and  still  more  by
reason  of  the  general  impoverishment  of  the  great  feudal
houses  and  of  the  clergy.  The  result  of  the  almost
interminable  series  of  civil  and  religious  wars  had  been
to  cause  a  general  redistribution  of  property.  Capital
was  mainly  in  the  hands  of  the  middle  and  lower  classes,
and  the  consequence  of  this  general  circulation  of  wealth
through  all  the  channels  of  society  was  precisely  what
might  have  been  expected,  an  increase  of  enterprise  and
of  productive  industry  in  various  branches.^''  Although
the  financial  wisdom  of  the  age  was  doing  its  best  to
impede  commerce,  to  prevent  the  influx  of  foreign  wares,
to  prohibit  the  outflow  of  specie— in  obedience  to  the
universal  superstition,  which  was  destined  to  survive  so
many  centuries,  that  gold  and  silver  alone  constituted
wealth — while,  at  the  same  time,  in  deference  to  the
idiotic  principle  of  sumptuary  legislation,  it  was  vigor-
ously opposing  mulberry  culture,  silk  manufactures,  and
other  creations  of  luxury,  which,  in  spite  of  the  hostility
of  governmental  sages,  were  destined  from  that  time
forward  to  become  better  mines  of  wealth  for  the  king-
dom than  the  Indies  had  been  for  Spain,  yet  on  the  whole
the  arts  of  peace  were  in  the  ascendant  in  France.

The  king,  although  an  unscrupulous,  self-seeking
despot  and  the  coarsest  of  voluptuaries,  was  at  least  a
man  of  genius.  He  had  also  too  much  shrewd  mother-
wit  to  pursue  such  schemes  as  experience  had  shown  to
possess  no  reality.  The  talisman  "  Espoir,"  emblazoned
on  his  shield,  had  led  him  to  so  much  that  it  was  natural
for  him  at  times  to  think  all  things  possible.

17  "  Anche  per  richezza  avanza  la  citta  bliche  perche  si  vendono  tutte  queste

di  Parigi  tutte  le  altre  perche  essendo  la  cariche  a  denari  contanti  pero  si  puo

nobilta  rovinata  per  le  guerre  passate  ed  imaginare  ognuno  quanto  se  le  facciano

il  clero  medesimamente  per  ristessa  causa,  fruttare  per  tarsi  padroni  di  centinaja  di

cominciando  questo  da  poco  in  qua  a  migliaja  di  scudi  e  vi  sono  raolti  di  questi

ristorarsi,  resta  il  solo  popolo  con  denari  tali  in  H  rancia  ma  nella  citta  di  Parigi

nel  qual  numero  sono  quelli  li  quali  piu  che  in  ogni  altra." — A.  Badoer,  Ke-

fanno  la  facolta  con  le  liti,  con  li  giudizii  lazione,
e  con  r  amministrazione  della  entrate  pub-

1607.

STATE  OF  FRANCE.

345

But  he  knew  how  to  renounce  as  well  as  how  to  dare.
He  had  abandoned  his  hope  to  be  declared  Prince  of
Wales  and  successor  to  the  English  crown,  which  he  had
cherished  for  a  brief  period,  at  the  epoch  of  the  Essex
conspiracy ;  he  had  forgotten  his  magnificent  dream  of
placing  the  crown  of  the  holy  German  empire  upon  his
head,^^and  if  he  still  secretly  resolved  to  annex  the  Nether-
lands to  his  realms,  and  to  destroy  his  excellent  ally,
the  usurping,  rebellious,  and  heretic  Dutch  republic,  he
had  craft  enough  to  work  towards  his  aim  in  the  dark,  and
the  common  sense  to  know  that  by  now  throwing  down
the  mask  he  would  be  for  ever  baffled  of  his  purpose.

The  history  of  France,  during  the  last  three-quarters
of  a  century,  had  made  almost  every  Frenchman,  old
enough  to  bear  arms,  an  accomplished  soldier.  Henry
boasted  that  the  kingdom  could  put  three  hundred
thousand  veterans  into  the  field — a  high  figure,  when  it
is  recollected  that  its  population  certainly  did  not  exceed
fifteen  millions.'^^  No  man  however  was  better  aware
than  he,  that  in  spite  of  the  apparent  pacification  of
parties,  the  three  hundred  thousand  would  not  be  all  on
one  side,  even  in  case  of  a  foreign  war.  There  were  at
least  four  thousand  great  feudal  lords,'^^  as  faithful  to  the
Huguenot  faith  and  cause  as  he  had  been  false  to  both ;
many  of  them  still  wealthy,  notwithstanding  the  general
ruin  which  had  swept  over  the  high  nobility,  and  all  of
them  with  vast  influence  and  a  splendid  following,  both
among  the  lesser  gentry  and  the  men  of  lower  rank.

Although  he  kept  a  Jesuit  priest  ever  at  his  elbow,^

1*  "  I  quali  sono  che  cgli  pretonde  di  siero  ma  avendo  scoperto  d'  altra  incliDa-

essere  dichiarato  principe  di  Galles  e  sue-  zione  non  se  n'  e  niolto  occupato.'' — P.

cessore  del  regno  e  spera  in  quosta  con-  Priuli,  Relazione.

giuntura  di  poter  ottencre  quello  che  per  20  «  Coniputandosi  che  in  tutto  11  regno

11  passato  no  gli  e  riuscito." — Despatch  of  vi  possono  essere  quindici  milioni  d'  ani-

Cavalli,  Venetian  ambassiidor  in  England,  rae." — Angelo  Badoer,  Re  lazione,  1603.

16  April,  1601. Barozzi,  Ser.  II.  vol.  i.  Barozzi  and  Berchet,  Ser.  J 1 ,  vol.  i.

p.  38.  The  population  of  Paris  was  estimated

19  "Era  stata  sua  Maesta  gih  tempo  by  the  same  ambsissador  at  400,000.

desiderosa  di  farsi  eleggore  re  de'  Romani  Pietro  Priuli  (Relazione  Francia,  1608)

ed  allora  si  tratteneva  piii  amorevolmente  was  often  told  by  tlie  king  that  he  bad

con  quel  principi  ma  scuoprendo  poi  300,000  veterans  in  France,

d'  aver  debole  fondamento  per  tale  pre-  A.  Badoer,  Relazione. P.  Priuli.

tensione  se  la  h  levata  del  tutto  dall'  22  «  Xon  aveodo  li  religiosi  in  Francia

animo." — A.  Badoer,  Relazione, Ibid.  maggior  protettore  di  lui  tenendo  sempre

"  Ebbe  anco  opinione  di  procurarsi  la  a  canto  a  si  un  gesuita  suo  favoritissimo

elezione  a  re  dei  Romani  dubitando  che  il  che  mai  lo  abbandona."— Ibid-
re  di  Spagna  avesse  questo  medesimo  pen-

346

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

and  did  his  best  to  persuade  the  world  and  perhaps  him-
self that  he  had  become  a  devout  Catholic,  in  consequence
of  those  memorable  five  hours'  instruction  from  the
Bishop  of  Bourges,  and  that  there  was  no  hope  for  France
save  in  its  return  to  the  bosom  of  the  Church,  he  was
yet  too  politic  and  too  farseeing  to  doubt  that  for  him  to
oppress  the  Protestants  would  be  not  only  suicidal,  but,
what  was  worse  in  his  eyes,  ridiculous.

He  knew,  too,  that  with  thirty  or  forty  thousand
fighting-men^^  in  the  field,  with  seven  hundred  and  forty
churches  in  the  various  provinces^*  for  their  places
of  worship,  with  all  the  best  fortresses  in  France  in
their  possession,  with  leaders  like  Eohan,  Lesdiguieres,
Bouillon,  and  many  others,  and  with  the  most  virtuous,
self-denying.  Christian  government,  established  and
maintained  by  themselves,  it  would  be  madness  fur  him
and  his  dynasty  to  deny  the  Protestants  their  political  and
religious  liberty,  or  to  attempt  a  crusade  against  their
brethren  in  the  Netherlands.

France  was  far  more  powerful  than  Spain,  although
the  world  had  not  yet  recognised  the  fact.  Yet  it  would
have  been  difficult  for  both  united  to  crush  the  new
commonwealth,  however  paradoxical  such  a  proposition
seemed  to  contemporaries.

Sully  was  conscientiously  in  favour  of  peace,  and  Sully
was  the  one  great  minister  of  France.  Not  a  Lerma,
certainly  ;  for  France  was  not  Spain,  nor  was  Henry  lY.
a  Philip  III.  The  Huguenot  duke  was  an  inferior
financier  to  his  Spanish  contemporary ,  if  it  were  the
height  of  financial  skill  for  a  minister  to  exhaust  the
resources  of  a  great  kingdom  in  order  to  fill  his  own
pocket.  Sully  certainly  did  not  neglect  his  own  interests,
for  he  had  accumulated  a  fortune  of  at  least  seventy
thousand  dollars  a  year,  besides  a  cash  capital  estimated
at  a  million  and  a  half.^^  But  while  enriching  himself,
he  had  wonderfully  improved  the  condition  of  the  royal

23  Badoer  estimates  the  force  at  only  attender  al  solo  publico,  proprieta  con-

25,000.  ^  P.  Priuli,  Relazione.  traria  alia  natura  Francese  se  non  vo-

2&  "  II  governo  politico  degli  eretici,"  gliano  dire  che  1'  interesse  pubblico  serva

said  one  who  cordially  hated  heretics,  "  e  per  conservazione  del  particolare." — A.

cosi  dili  gen  te  ed  accurato  quanto  ogni  altro  Badoer.

che  sia  al  mondo  ed  in  questo  avanzano "  Le  pin  importanti  fortezze  del  regno

veramente  loro  medesimi  perche  tras-  sono  da  essi  tenute,"  &c. — P.  Priuli.
curano  affatto  V  interesse  particolare  per 26  p.  Priuli,  Relazione.

1607.

STATE  OF  FRANCE.

347

treasury.  He  had  reformed  many  abuses  and  opened
many  new  sources  of  income.  He  had,  of  course,  not
accomplished  the  whole  Augean  task  of  purification.
He  was  a  vigorous  Huguenot,  but  no  Hercules,  and
demigods  might  have  shrunk  appalled  at  the  filthy  mass
of  corruption  which  great  European  kingdoms  every-
where presented  to  the  reformer's  eye.  Compared  to  the
Spanish  Government,  that  of  France  might  almost  have
been  considered  virtuous,  yet  even  there  everything
was  venal.

To  negotiate  was  to  bribe,  right  and  left,  and  at  every
step.  All  the  ministers  and  great  functionaries  received
presents,  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  it  was  necessary  to
pave  the  pathway  even  to  their  ante-chambers  with
gold.

The  king  was  fully  aware  of  the  practice,  but  winked
at  it,  because  his  servants,  thus  paid  enormous  sums  by
the  public  and  by  foreign  Goveinments,  were  less  im-
portunate for  rewards  and  salaries  from  himself.

One  man  in  the  kingdom  was  said  to  have  clean  hands,
the  venerable  and  sagacious  chancellor  rom})onne  de
Bellievre.  His  wife,  however,  was  less  scrupulous,  and
readily  disposed  of  influence  and  court- favour  for  a
price,  without  the  knowledge,  so  it  was  thought,  of  the
great  judge.^^

Jeannin,  too,  was  esteemed  a  man  of  personal  inte-
grity, ancient  Leaguer  and  tricky  politician  though  he
were.

Highest  offices  of  magistracy  and  judicature.  Church
and  State,  were  objects  of  a  traffic  almost  as  shameless
as  in  Spain.^'*^ The  ermine  was  sold  at  auction,  mitres

27  «« Con  tutti  li  ministri  indifferente-
raente  1'  uomo  si  fa  btruda  in  Francia  con
quel  mezzi  che  ormai  mi  pare  che  usino
per  tutto  11  mondo  ....  11  re  medeMimo
lo  sa  e  lo  permette  forse  perclie  proiit-
tando  li  ministri  lascino  dl  molestare  la
S.  M.  per  altre  ricompense  del  servizio  che
prestano  ed  essi  per  questa  via  pretendono
ripoitare  le  giuste  mercedi  delle  loro
fatiche  mentre  veggono  poter  diflBcil-
mtiue  sperarne  altre  dal  re." — P.  Priuli,
Relazione.

"11  signore  cancelllere  solo  si  man-
tiene  in  concetto  dl  molto  ingegrio  ma  ha
ona  muglie  che  supplisce  al  suo  manca-

mento,  bon  si  crede  senza  sua  saputa,
poichfe  ne  anco  la  moglie  basta  a  fargli
fare  quello  che  non  conviene." — Ibid.  The
ambassador  adds,  on  the  general  subject
of  corruption  and  bribery  at  the  French
court,  "Queste  cose  sono  tiinto  pubbliche
nella  corte  che  nun  pretendo  far  torto  ad
alcuno  a  riferirle  in  questo  sacrarlo  dovj
sono  uondimeno  sicuro  che  saranno  custo-
dite  con  le  alire  cose  dette  e  da  darsi
sotto  quel  sigillo  di  segretezza  che  con-
viene al  servizio  ed  alia  riputacione  di
questo  stimatissinio  consiglio."

29  "Di  qua  nasce  che  oltre  alle  altre
inveuzioui  s'  e  introdutto  vendere  non  solo

348

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX

were  objeots  of  public  barter,  Church  preferments  were
bestowed  upon  female  children  in  their  cradles.  Yet
there  was  hope  in  France,  notwithstanding  that  the
Pragmatic  Sanction  of  St.  Louis,  the  foundation  of  the
liberties  of  the  Gallican  Church,  had  been  annulled  by
Francis,  who  had  divided  the  seamless  garment  of  Church
patronage  with  Leo.

Those  four  thousand  great  Huguenot  lords,  those
thirty  thousand  hard-fighting  weavers,  and  blacksmiths,
and  other  plebeians,  those  seven  hundred  and  forty
churches,  those  very  substantial  fortresses  in  every  pro-
vince of  the  kingdom,  were  better  facts  than  the  Holy
Inquisition  to  preserve  a  great  nation  from  sinking  into
the  slough  of  political  extinction.

Henry  was  most  anxious  that  Sully  should  convert
himself  to  the  ancient  Church,  and  the  gossips  of  the
day  told  each  other  that  the  duke  had  named  his  price
for  his  conversion.  To  be  made  high  constable  of
France,  it  was  said  would  melt  the  resolve  of  the  stiff
Huguenot.^^  To  any  other  inducement  or  blandishment
he  was  adamant.  Whatever  truth  may  have  been  in
such  chatter,  it  is  certain  that  the  duke  never  gratified
his  master's  darling  desire.

Yet  it  was  for  no  lack  of  attempts  and  intrigues  on
the  part  of  the  king,  although  it  is  not  probable  that  he
would  have  ever  consented  to  bestow  that  august  and
coveted  dignity  upon  a  Bethune.

The  king  did  his  best  by  intrigue,  by  calumny,  by
tale-bearing,  by  inventions,  to  set  the  Huguenots  against
each  other,  and  to  excite  the  mutual  jealousy  of  all  his
most  trusted  adherents,  whether  Protestant  or  Catholic.
The  most  good-humoured,  the  least  vindictive,  the  most
ungrateful,  the  falsest  of  mankind,  he  made  it  his  policy,

tutti  li  ufficii  e  le  cariche  anco  di  giustizia  getto  all'  affezione  verso  le  persone  che

ma  di  piu  gli  stessi  servizii  della  casa  del  per  esso  patiscono  nell'  interesse  come

re  di  maestri  di  casa  dei  gentiluomini  faceva  il  re  passato  che per  troppa

della  camera,  dei  v<illetti,  ed  in  sino  li  amorevolezza  dona va  piu  che  non  aveva."

capitanati  delle  guardie  della  propria  per-  — A  Badoer,  Relazione.
sona  del  re  che  non  si  pub  dire  piu ;  11  che p.  Priuli,  Relazione. "Procura  (il

rende  molto  mal  sodisfatto  la  nobilta  re)  che  egli  (Sully)  si  faccia  cattolico

alia  quale  erano  in  altri  tempi  riservat!  ....  seppure  avesse  a  venire  a  tal  riso-

per  premii  de'  loro  servizii  questi  luoghi  luzione  si  e  lasciato  intendere  con  i  suoi

che  ora  vendendosi  convengono  cadere  in  confident!  che  non  lo  farebbe  per  altro

mano  a  chi  ha  piii  denari  senza  alcuna  che  con  essere  dichiarato  Contestabile  di

distinzione  de'  meriti. E  siccome  il  re  Francia,  dignita  si  sublime  che  tieiisi

non  h  sotto  posto  all'  odio  manco  e  sog-  fermo  che  il  re  non  gliela  conferirebbe."

1607. HENRY'S  INTRIGUES  AGAINST  PROTESTANTISM.  349

as  well  as  his  pastime,  to  repeat,  with  any  amount  of
embroidery  that  his  most  florid  fancy  could  devise,  every
idle  story  or  calumny  that  could  possibly  create  bitter
feeling  and  make  mischief  among  those  who  surrounded
him.  Being  aware  that  this  propensity  was  thoroughly
understood,  he  only  multiplied  fictions,  so  cunningly
mingled  with  truths,  as  to  leave  his  hearers  quite  unable
to  know  what  to  believe  and  what  to  doubt.  By  such
arts,  force  being  impossible,  he  hoped  one  day  to  sever
the  band  which  held  the  conventicles  together,  and  to
reduce  Protestantism  to  insignificance.  He  would  have
cut  off  the  head  of  D'Aubigne  or  Duplessis  Mornay  to
gain  an  object,  and  have  not  only  pardoned  but  caressed
and  rewarded  Biron  when  reeking  from  the  conspiracy
against  his  own  life  and  crown,  had  he  been  willing  to
confess  and  ask  pardon  for  his  stupendous  crime.  He
hated  vindictive  men  almost  as  much  as  he  despised
those  who  were  grateful.*'^

He  was  therefore  far  from  preferring  Sully  to  Villeroy
or  Jeannin,  but  he  was  perfectly  aware  that,  in  financial
matters  at  least,  the  duke  was  his  best  friend  and  an
important  pillar  of  the  state.

'1  "  Non  vi  e  delitto  per  grande  che  cbe  qualche  unione  di  particolari  pereone

pensassero  commettere  del  quale  non  possa  apportare  prcgiudizioal  scrviziosuo

sieno  sicuri  d'  ottener  il  perdono  dalla  procura  disunirle  con  porlo  al  punto  1'  uno

Maest^  sua  e  di  siffatta  manicra  che  da  contra  I'altra  non  lasciando  di  ridire  tutto

queir  ora  in  poi  usi  rii  il  re  con  essi  gli  quelle  che  gli  fosse  stato  referito  anco

stessi  termini  di  confidenza  che  usa  con  i  con  obbligo  di  segretez/a  montre  cib

pill  antichl  e  fedeli  servitori  che  abbia,  il  possa  giovare  al  suo  discgno  ed  orna  la

che  non  si  scuopre  solo  nel  trattiire  appa-  rclazione  con  quel  fregi  d'  inv(  nzione  che

rente,  accarezzando  tutti  ad  uno  modo  ma  vengono  felicemente  composli  dal  mo

neir  esistcnte  ancora  perche  quandu  il  re  florido  ingcgno,  quando  conosca  potere

ha  bisogno  dell'  opera  di  qualchcduno  con  essi  generare  e  nutrire  gelosia  fra

conosciuto  che  possa  valere  in  quel  ser-  quelli  amici,  per  disunirli  e  farli  anco

vizio  non  distingue  antica  da  nuova,  sin-  venire  alle  mani  come  molte  volte  accade.

cera  da  iiiteressata  servitu  nh  in  somma  Con  questo  arriva  S.  M.  al  fine  che  desi-

fedeltk  da  inft'dclta  ma  chiama  S.  M.  quel  dera,  di  disBolver  le  cx)nv(  ntic()le  delle

tale  gli  comunica  il  tutto  e  1'  incarica  quKli  vive  gelosissimo  ma  ne  conviene

di  negoziare  come  ad  un  piU  vecchio  piu  provare  anco  danno  notabile,  perche  con-

sincero  e  piu  fedcle  servitore  suo. In  osciuto  ormai  la  sua  natura  non  vi  e  chi

fine  e  proprio  del  re  non  solo  perdouare  si  fidi  di  dirgli  molte  cose  che  saria  suo

indifferentementeadognunoqualsivoglia  servizio  il  saperle. Conosce  il  re  mede-

colpa  mentre  la  confessi  e  gli  dimandi  il  simo  questa  sua  facilita  di  ridire  ma

perdono  ma  quando  conosce  un  uomo  che  cssendogli  impossibile  il  mutare  natura

sia  di  natura  vondicativa  1'  odia  piii  che  per  rimcdiarvi  in  quanto  pub  fra  le  cose

per  qualsivuglia  altro  vizio. Usa  S.  M.  vere  mischia  con  arte  dell'  invenzione  per

un  altro  termine  con  li  suoi  servitori  ridurre  1' uomo  a  non  saper  che  si  credere.**

credendo  convenirgli  viver  geloso  dell'  — A.  Badoer,  Rclazione.
azionc  di  ciascheduuo  che  quando  stima

350

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CiiAi\  XLIX.

The  minister  had  succeeded  in  raising  the  a,nnual
revenue  of  France  to  nearly  eleven  millions  of  dollars,
and  in  reducing  the  annual  expenditures  to  a  little
more  than  ten  millions.^^  To  have  a  balance  on  the
right  side  of  the  public  ledger  v^as  a  feat  less  easily  ac-
complished in  those  days  even  than  in  our  own.  Could
the  duke  have  restrained  his  sovereign's  reckless  ex-
travagance in  buildings,  parks,  hunting  establishments,
and  harems,  he  might  have  accomplished  even  greater
miracles.  He  lectured  the  king  roundly,  as  a  parent
might  remonstrate  with  a  prodigal  son,  but  it  was  im-
possible even  for  a  Sully  to  rescue  that  hoary-headed
and  most  indomitable  youth  from  wantonness  and  riot-
ous living.  The  civil-list  of  the  king  amounted  to  more
than  one-tenth  of  the  whole  revenue.^^

On  the  whole,  however,  it  was  clear,  as  France  was
then  constituted  and  administered,  that  a  general  peace
would  be,  for  the  time  at  least,  most  conducive  to  its
interests,  and  Henry  and  his  great  minister  were  sin-
cerely desirous  of  bringing  about  that  result.

Preliminaries  for  a  negotiation  which  should  termin-
ate this  mighty  war  were  now  accordingly  to  be  laid
down  at  the  Hague.  Yet  it  would  seem  rather  difficult
to  effect  a  compromise.  Besides  the  powers  less  in-
terested, but  which  nevertheless  sent  representatives  to
watch  the  proceedings —such  as  Sweden,  Denmark,
Brandenburg,  the  Elector  Palatine — there  were  Spain,
France,  England,  the  republic,  and  the  archdukes.

Spain  knew  very  well  that  she  could  not  continue
the  war ;  but  she  hoped  by  some  quibbling  recognition
of  an  impossible  independence  to  recover  that  authority
over  her  ancient  vassals  which  the  sword  had  for  a  time
struck  down.  Distraction  in  councils,  personal  rivalries,
the  well-known  incapacity  of  a  people  to  govern  itself,
commercial  gieediness,  provincial  hatreds,  envies,  and
jealousies,  would  soon  reduce  that  jumble  of  cities  and
villages,  which  aped  the  airs  of  sovereignty,  into  insig-
nificance and  confusion.  Adroit  management  would
easily  re-assert  afterwards  the  sovereignty  of  the  Lord's

33  Badoer  says  12,000,000  of  scudi  (four  10,727,90t  dollars,  and  the  expenses  at

to  the  pound  sterling),  of  which  however  10,333,114.

6,000,000  were  pledged. P.  Priuli  puts  33  To  1,233,632  dollars,  according  to  P.

the  whole  receipts  of  the  exchequer  at  I»riuli.

1607.

PRELIMINARIES  OF  PEACE.

351

anointed.  That  a  republic  of  freemen,  a  federation  of
independent  states,  could  take  its  place  among  the
nations  did  not  deserve  a  serious  thought.

Spain  in  heart  preferred  therefore  to  treat.  It  was
however  indispensable  that  the  Netherlands  should
re-establish  the  Catholic  religion  throughout  the  land,
should  abstain  then  and  for  ever  from  all  insolent  pre-
tences to  trade  v^ith  India  or  America,  and  should
punish  such  of  their  citizens  as  attempted  to  make  voy-
ages to  the  one  or  the  other.  With  these  trifling  ex-
ceptions, the  court  of  Madrid  would  look  with  favour  on
propositions  made  in  behalf  of  the  rebels.

France,  as  we  have  seen,  secretly  aspired  to  the  sove-
reignt}^  of  all  the  Netherlands,  if  it  could  be  had.  She
was  also  extremely  in  favour  of  excluding  the  Hol-
landers from  the  Indies,  East  and  West.  The  king,
flred  with  the  achievements  of  the  republic  at  sea,  and
admiring  their  great  schemes  for  founding  empires  at
the  antipodes  by  means  of  commercial  corporations,  was
very  desirous  of  appropriating  to  his  own  benefit  th(5
experience,  the  audacity,  the  perseverance,  the  skill  and
the  capital  of  their  merchants  and  mariners.  He  secretly
instructed  his  commissioners,  therefore,  and  repeatedly
urged  it  upon  them,  to  do  their  best  to  procure  the  re-
nunciation, on  the  part  of  the  republic,  of  the  Indian
trade,  and  to  contrive  the  transplantation  into  France  of
the  mighty  trading  companies,  so  successfully  established
in  Holland  and  Zeeland.^^

The  plot  thus  to  deprive  the  provinces  of  their  India
trade  was  supposed  by  the  Statesmen  of  the  republic  to
have  been  formed  in  connivance  with  Spain.  That
power,  finding  itself  half  pushed  from  its  seat  of  power
in  the  East  by  the  grand  and  infallible  society  created
by  the  United  Provinces,"  would  be  but  too  happy  to
make  use  of  this  French  intrigue  in  order  to  force  the
intruding  Dutch  navy  from  its  conquests.

Olden-Barneveld,  too  politic  to  oHend  the  powerful
and  treacherous  ally  by  a  flat  refusal,  said  that  the  king's
friendship  was  more  precious  than  the  India  trade.  At

8*  Negotiations  de  Joannin,  1,  71,  153,  26-31. Correspondence  between  Henry

1H3  (especially  196,  219). Compare  Gal-  IV.  and Olden- Bar  no  veld, pp.  46-50.

lucci,  345,  346,  and  see  especially  the  J  bid.

tnemoir  of  F.  Aerssens,  in  Devcntcr,  iii. ^  Memoir  of  Aerss>ens,  ubi  sup.

352

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

the  same  time  he  warned  the  French  Government  that,
if  they  mined  the  Dutch  East  India  Company,  "  neither
France  nor  any  other  nation  would  ever  put  its  nose  I
into  India  again."

James  of  England,  too,  flattered  himself  that  he  could
win  for  England  that  sovereignty  of  the  Netherlands  which
England  as  well  as  France  had  so  decidedly  refused.
The  marriage  of  Prince  Henry  with  the  Spanish  Infanta
was  the  bait,  steadily  dangled  before  him  by  the  politi-
cians of  the  Spanish  court,  and  he  deluded  himself  with
the  thought  that  the  Catholic  king,  on  the  death  of  the
childless  archdukes,  wonld  make  his  son  and  daughter-
in-law  a  present  of  the  obedient  Netherlands.  He  al-
ready had  some  of  the  most  important  places  in  the
United  Netherlands — the  famous  cautionary  towns —
in  liis  grasp,  and  it  should  go  hard  but  he  would  twist
that  possession  into  a  sovereignty  over  the  whole  land.
As  for  recognising  the  rebel  provinces  as  an  independent
sovereignty,  that  was  most  abhorrent  to  him.  Such  a
tampering  with  the  great  principles  of  Government  was
an  offence  against  all  crowned  heads,  a  crime  in  which
he  was  unwilling  to  participate.

His  instinct  against  rebellion  seemed  like  second
sight.  The  king  might  almost  be  imagined  to  have
foreseen  in  the  dim  future  those  memorable  months  in
which  the  proudest  triumph  of  the  Dutch  commonwealth
was  to  be  registered  before  the  forum  of  Christendom  at
the  congress  of  Westphalia,  and  in  which  the  solemn
trial  and  execution  of  his  own  son  and  successor,  with
the  transformation  of  the  monarchy  of  the  Tudors  and
Stuarts  into  a  British  republic,  were  simultaneously  to
startle  the  world.  But  it  hardly  needed  the  gift  of
prophecy  to  inspire  James  with  a  fear  of  revolutions.

He  was  secretly  desirous  therefore,  sustained  by  Salis-
bury and  his  other  advisers,  of  effecting  the  restoration
of  the  provinces  to  the  dominion  of  his  most  Catholic
Majesty .^^  It  was  of  course  the  interest  of  England
that  the  Netherland  rebels  should  renounce  the  India
trade.  So  would  James  be  spared  the  expense  and
trouble  of  war ;  so  would  the  great  doctrines  of  divine
right  be  upheld ;  so  would  the  way  be  paved  towards

36  Deventer,  iii.  50.

37  Negotiations  de  Jeannin,  i.  128,  129,  152,  184, 199,  217,  240,  524,  et  passim.

1607.

VIEWS  OF  KING  JAMES.

353

the  ultimate  absorption  of  the  Netherlands  by  England.
Whether  his  theological  expositions  would  find  as  atten-
tive pupils  when  the  pope's  authority  had  been  re-estab-
lished over  all  his  neighbours;  whether  the  Catholic
rebels  in  Ireland  would  become  more  tranquil  by  the  sub-
jugation of  the  Protestant  rebels  in  Holland  ;  whether
the  principles  of  Guy  Fawkes  might  not  find  more
effective  application,  with  no  bulwark  beyond  the  seas
against  the  incursion  of  such  practitioners — all  this  he
did  not  perhaps  sufficiently  ponder.

Thus  far  had  the  discursive  mind  of  James  wandered
from  the  position  which  it  occupied  at  the  epoch  of
Maximilian  de  Bethune's  memorable  embassy  to  Eng-
lajid.

The  archdukes  were  disposed  to  quiet.  On  them  fell
the  burthen  of  the  war.  Their  little  sovereignty,  where
— if  they  could  only  be  allowed  to  expend  the  money
squeezed  from  the  obedient  provinces  in  court  diversions,
stately  architecture,  splendid  encouragement  of  the  fine
arts,  and  luxurious  living,  surrounded  by  a  train  of  great
nobles,  fit  to  command  regiments  in  the  field  or  assist
in  the  counsels  of  state,  but  chiefly  occupied  in  putting
dishes  on  the  court  table,  handing  ewers  and  napkins
to  their  Highnesses,  or  in  still  more  menial  offices — so
much  enjoyment  might  be  had,  was  reduced  to  a  mere
parade  ground  for  Spanish  soldiery .^^  It  was  ridiculous,
said  the  politicians  of  Madrid,  to  suppose  that  a  great
empire  like  Spain  would  not  be  continually  at  war  in
one  direction  or  another,  and  would  not  perpetually  re-
quire the  use  of  large  armies.  A\  here  then  could  there
be  a  better  mustering  place  for  their  forces  than  those
very  provinces,  so  easy  of  access,  so  opulent,  so  conve-
niently situate  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Spain's  most
insolent  enemies  ?^'"^  It  was  all  vei-y  fine  for  the  ai  ch-
duke,  who  knew  nothing  of  war,  they  declared,  who  had
no  hope  of  children,  who  longed  only  for  a  life  of  in-

38  «'  II  se  fait  servir  par  Ics  plus  grands
et  mdme  par  ses  confreres  et  compagiions
d'ordre  jusques  aux  choses  indignes  d'etre
r\()mniees  ....

"  L'on  voit  chacun  jour  grand  nombre
do  noblesse,  qui  pourroit  bien  s'employer
ji  la  tete  d'une  conipagnie  de  cavalerie  ou
d'un  regiment,  ne  s'exercer  qu'u  porter
VOL.  IV.

des  plats  8ur  une  table,  et  d'autres  encore
k  d'autres  choses  moins  necessaires." —
Letter  from  Brussels  in  P.  de  I'Kstoile.
Supplement  au  Journal  du  Ilegne  de
Henri  IV.,  1599-16(t6,  tom.  lii.  pp.  460,
461.  Jn  Petitor,  vol.  xlvii.
S9  Bentivt.glio,  564.

2  A

354

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

glorious  ease,  such  as  lie  could  have  had  as  archbishop,
to  prate  of  peace  and  thus  to  compromise  the  dignity  of
the  realm.  On  the  contrary,  by  making  proper  use  of
the  Netherlands,  the  repose  and  grandeur  of  the  mon-
archy would  be  secured,  even  should  the  war  become
eternal.^^

This  prospect,  not  agreeable  certainly  for  the  arch-
dukes or  their  subjects,  was  but  little  admired  outside
the  Spanish  court.

Such  then  were  the  sentiments  of  the  archdukes,  and
such  the  schemes  and  visions  of  Spain,  France,  and
England.  On  two  or  three  points,  those  great  powers
were  mainly,  if  unconsciously,  agreed.  The  Netherlands
should  not  be  sovereign  ;  they  should  renounce  the  India
navigation;  they  should  consent  to  the  re-establishment
of  the  Catholic  religion.

On  the  other  hand,  the  States-General  knew  their  own
minds,  and  made  not  the  slightest  secret  of  their  inten-
tions. They  would  be  sovereign,  they  would  not  re-
nounce the  India  trade,  they  would  not  agree  to  the
re-establishment  of  the  Catholic  religion.

Could  the  issue  of  the  proposed  negotiations  be
thought  hopeful,  or  was  another  half  ceutury  of  war-
fare impending  ?

On  the  28th  May  the  French  commissioners  came
before  the  States-General.^^

There  had  been  many  wild  rumours  flying  through
the  provinces  in  regard  to  the  king's  secret  designs
upon  the  lepublic,  especially  since  the  visit  made  to
the  Hague  a  twelvemonth  before  by  Francis  Aerssens,
States'  resident  at  the  French  court.^^  That  diploma-
tist, as  we  know,  had  been  secretly  commissioned  by
Henry  to  feel  the  public  pulse  in  regard  to  the  sove-
reignty, so  far  as  that  could  be  done  by  very  private
and  delicate  fingering.  Although  only  two  or  three
personages  had  been  dealt  with — the  suggestions  being
made  as  the  private  views  of  the  ambassadors  only —
there  had  been  much  gossip  on  the  subject,  not  only  in
the  Netherlands,  but  at  the  English  and  Spanish  courts.
1'liroughout  the  commonwealth  there  was  a  belief  that
Henry  wished  to  make  himself  king  of  the  country.

*o  Bentivoglio,  564.  4i  Meteren,  551. Jeunn;n.  1. 109.

42  Wagenaar,  ix,  261,  se(2q.

1607. JEANNIN  BEFORE  THE  STATES-GENERAL.  355

As  this  happened  to  be  the  fact,  it  was  natural  that
the  President,  according  to  the  statecraft  of  his  school,
should  deny  it  at  once,  and  with  an  air  of  gentle  melan-
choly.

W  earing  therefore  his  most  ingenuous  expression,
Jeannin  addressed  the  assembly.

He  assured  the  States  that  the  king  had  never  for-
gotten how  much  assistance  he  had  received  from  them
when  he  w^as  struggling  to  conquer  the  kingdom  legally
belonging  to  him,  and  at  a  time  when  they  too  were
fighting  in  their  own  country  for  their  very  existence.*^

The  king  thought  that  he  had  given  so  many  pi'oofs
of  his  sincere  friendship  as  to  make  doubt  impossible ;
but  he  had  found  the  contrary,  for  the  States  had  ac-
corded an  armistice,  and  listened  to  overtures  of  peace,
without  deigning  to  consult  him  on  the  subject.  They
had  proved,  by  beginning  and  concluding  so  important
a  transaction  without  his  knowledge,  that  they  regarded
him  with  suspicion,  and  had  no  respect  for  his  name.
Whence  came  the  causes  of  that  suspicion  it  was  diffi-
cult to  imagine,  unless  from  certain  false  rumours  of
propositions  said  to  have  been  put  forward  in  his  be-
half, although  he  had  never  authorised  any  one  to  make
them,  by  which  men  had  been  induced  to  believe  that
he  aspired  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  provinces.

"  This  falsehood,"  continued  the  candid  President,
"  has  cut  our  king  to  the  heart,  wounding  him  more
deeply  than  anything  else  could  have  done.  To  make
the  armistice  without  his  knowledge  showed  merely
your  contempt  for  him,  and  your  want  of  faith  in  him.
But  he  blamed  not  the  action  in  itself,  since  you  deemed
it  for  your  good,  and  God  grant  that  you  may  not  have
been  deceived.  But  to  pretend  that  his  Majesty  wished
to  grow  great  at  your  expense,  this  was  to  do  a  wrong
to  his  reputation,  to  his  good  faith,  and  to  the  desire
which  he  has  always  shown  to  secure  the  prosperity  of
your  state."  ^

Much  more  spoke  Jeannin  in  this  vein,  assuring  the
assembly  that  those  abominable  falsehoods  proceeded
from  the  enemies  of  the  king,  and  were  designed  ex-
pressly to  sow  discord  and  suspicion  in  the  })rovinc(5S.

Jeannin,  i.  109.

Ibid.  110.

2  A  2

356

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

The  reader,  already  aware  of  the  minute  and  detailed
arrangements  made  by  Henry  and  his  ministers  for  ob-
taining the  sovereignty  of  the  United  Provinces  and
dest]-oying  their  liberties,  will  know  how  to  appreciate
the  eloquence  of  the  ingenuous  President.

After  the  usual  commonplaces  concerning  the  royal
desire  to  protect  his  allies  against  wrung  and  oppres-
sion, and  to  advance  their  interests,  the  President  sug-
gested that  the  States  should  forthwith  communicate
the  pending  deliberations  to  all  the  kings  and  princes
who  had  favoured  their  cause,  and  especially  to  the
King  of  England,  who  had  so  thoroughly  proved  his
desire  to  promote  their  welfare.^^

As  Jeannin  had  been  secretly  directed  to  pave  the
way  by  all  possible  means  for  the  king's  sovereignty
over  the  provinces ;  as  he  was  not  long  afterwards  to
receive  explicit  instructions  to  expend  as  much  money
as  might  be  necessary  in  bribing  Prince  Maurice,  Count
Lewis  William,  Barneveld  and  his  son,  together  with
such  others  as  might  seem  worth  purchasing,  in  order
to  assist  Henry  in  becoming  monarch  of  their  country  ;
and  as  the  English  king  was  at  that  moment  repre-
sented in  Henry's  private  letters  to  the  commissioners
as  actually  loathing  the  liberty,  power,  and  prosperity
of  the  provinces,*^  it  must  be  conceded  that  the  Presi-
dent had  acquitted  himself  very  handsomely  in  his  first
oration.

Such  was  the  virtue  of  his  honest  face.

Barneveld  answered  with  generalities  and  common-
places. No  man  knew  better  than  the  Advocate  the
exact  position  of  affairs  ;  no  man  had  more  profoundly
fathomed  the  present  purposes  of  the  French  king  ;  no
man  had  more  acutely  scanned  his  character.  But  he
knew  the  critical  position  of  the  commonwealth.  He
knew  that,  although  the  public  revenue  might  be  raised
by  extraordinary  and  spasmodic  exertion  to  nearly a
million  sterling,  a  larger  income  than  had  ever  been  at
the  disposition  of  the  great  Queen  of  England,  the  an-
nual deficit  might  be  six  millions  of  florins — more  than
half  the  revenue  —if  the  war  continued,*^  and  that  there
was  necessity  of  peace,  could  the  substantial  objects  o?

*5  Jeannin,  i.  113.  46  ibid.  43,  62,  63,  69,  70,  71.  Ibid.  157.

Wagenaar,  ix.  274,  275.  49  ibid.  277.

1607,

BARNEVELD'S  REPLY.

357

the  war  be  now  obtained.  He  was  well  aware  too  of
the  subtle  and  scheming  brain  which  lay  hid  beneath
that  reverend  brow  of  the  President,  although  he  felt
capable  of  coping  with  him  in  debate  or  intrig-ue.
Doubtless  he  was  inspired  with  as  much  ardour  for  the
intellectual  conflict  as  Henry  might  have  experienced
on  some  great  field-day  with  Alexander  Farnese.

On  this  occasion,  however,  Barneveld  preferred  to
glide  gently  over  the  rumours  concerning  Henry's
schemes.  Those  reports  had  doubtless  emanated,  he
said,  from  the  enemies  of  Netherland  prosperity.  The
private  conclusion  of  the  aiTaistice  lie  defended  on  the
ground  of  necessity,  and  of  temporary  financial  embar-
rassment, and  he  promised  that  deputies  should  at  once
be  appointed  to  confer  with  the  royal  commissioners  in
regard  to  the  whole  subject.

In  private,  he  assured  Jeannin  that  the  communica-
tions of  Aerssens  had  only  been  discussed  in  secret,
and  had  not  been  confided  to  more  than  three  or  four
persons.^

The  Advocate,  although  the  leader  of  the  peace  party,
was  by  no  means  over  anxious  for  peace.

The  object  of  much  insane  obloquy,  because  disposed
to  secure  that  blessing  for  bis  country  on  the  basis  of
freedom  and  independence,  he  was  not  disposed  to  trust
in  the  sincerity  of  the  archdukes,  or  the  Spanish  court,
or  the  French  king.  "  Timeo  Danaos  etinm  dona  ferentes^'*
he  had  lately  said  to  Aerssens.^^  Knowing  that  the  re-
sistance of  the  Netherlands  had  been  forty  years  long
the  bulwark  of  Europe  against  the  designs  of  the
Spaniaid  for  universal  empire,  he  believed  the  republic
justified  in  expecting  the  support  of  the  leading  powers
in  the  negotiations  now  proposed.  "  Had  it  not  been
for  the  opposition  of  these  provinces,"  he  said,  "he
might,  in  the  opinion  of  the  wisest,  have  long  ago  been
monarch  of  all  Europe,  with  small  expense  of  men,
money,  or  credit."  ^~  He  was  far  from  believing  there-
fore that  Spain,  which  had  sacrificed,  according  to  his
estimate,  three  hundred  thousand  soldiers  and  two  hun-
dred million  ducats  in  vain  endeavours  to  destroy  the

«o  ResoL  HolL  146,  14Y. Wagenaar,  ix.  270.

51  Olden  Barneveld  to  Aerssens,  2  June,  1607,  in  Deventer,  iii.  135.

52  Memoire  van  Old'.n-Bamevclt,  in  Deventer,  iii.  cxcix,  137-147.

358

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

resistance  of  the  United  Provinces,  was  now  ready  to
lay  aside  her  vengeance  and  .submit  to  a  sincere  peace.
Kather  he  thought  to  see  the  lambkins,  now  frisking  so
innocently  about  the  commonwealth,  suddenly  trans-
form themselves  into  lions  and  wolves."^  It  would
be  a  f^ital  error,  he  said,  to  precipitate  the  dear  father-
land into  the  net  of  a  simulated  negotiation,  from  unwise
impatience  for  peace.  The  Netherlanders  were  a  simple,
truthful  people  and  could  hope  for  no  advantage  in  deal-
ing with  Spanish  friars,  nor  discover  all  the  danger  and
deceit  lurking  beneath  their  fair  words.  Thus  the  man,
whom  his  enemies  perpetually  accused  of  being  bought
by  the  enemy,  of  wishing  peace  at  any  price,  of  wishing
to  bring  back  the  Catholic  party  and  ecclesiastical  in-
fluence to  the  Netherlands,  was  vigorously  denouncing  a
precipitate  peace,  and  warning  his  countrymen  of  the
danger  of  premature  negotiations.

''As  one  can  hardly  know  the  purity  and  value  of
gold,"  he  said,  "  without  testing  it,  so  it  is  much  more
difficult  to  distinguish  a  false  peace  from  a  genuine  one ;
for  one  can  never  touch  it  nor  taste  it,  and  one  learns
the  difference  when  one  is  cheated  and  lost.  Ignorant
people  think  peace  negotiations  as  simple  as  a  private
lawsuit.  Many  sensible  persons  even  think  that,  the
enemy  once  recognizing  us  for  a  free,  sovereign  state,
we  shall  be  in  the  same  position  as  England  and  France,
which  powers  have  lately  made  peace  with  the  arch-
dukes and  with  Spain.  But  we  shall  find  a  mighty
difference.  Moreover,  in  those  kingdoms  the  Spanish
king  has  since  the  peace  been  ever  busy  corrupting  their
officers  of  state  and  their  subjects,  and  exciting  rebellion
and  murder  within  their  realms,  as  all  the  world  must
confess.  And  the  English  merchants  complain  that
they  have  suffered  more  injustice,  violence,  and  wrong
from  the  Spaniards  since  the  peace  than  they  did  during
the  war."

The  Advocate  also  reminded  his  countrymen  that  the
archduke,  being  a  vassal  of  Spain,,  could  not  bind  that
power  by  his  own  signature,  and  that  there  was  no
proof  that  the  king  would  renounce  his  pretended  rights
to  the  provinces. If  he  affected  to  do  so,  it  would  only

w  Memoire  van  Oldcin-Barnevelt,  in  De venter,  iii.  cxcix.  137-147.  ibid.

1607.

DANGERS  OF  A  TRUCE  WITH  SPAIN.

359

he  to  put  the  republic  to  sleep.  He  referred,  with  much
significance,  to  the  late  proceedings  of  the  Admiral  of
Arragon  at  Emmerich,  who  refused  to  release  that  city
according  to  his  plighted  word,  saying  roundly  that
whatever  he  might  sign  and  seal  one  day  he  would  not
hesitate  absolutely  to  violate  on  the  next  if  the  king's
service  was  thereby  to  be  benefited.^^  With  such  people,
who  had  always  learned  law-doctors  and  ghostly  con-
fessors to  strengthen  and  to  absolve  them,  they  could
never  expect  anything  but  broken  faith  and  contempt
for  treaties  however  solemnly  ratified.

Should  an  armistice  be  agreed  upon  and  negotiations
begun,  the  Advocate  uiged  that  the  work  of  corruption
and  bribery  would  not  be  a  moment  delayed,  and  al-
though the  Netherlanders  were  above  all  nations  a  true
and  faithful  race,  it  could  hardly  be  hoped  that  no  indi-
viduals would  be  gained  over  by  the  enemy

*'For  the  whole  country,"  said  Barneveld,  '*  would
fiwaim  with  Jesuits,  priests,  and  monks,  with  calumnies
and  corruptions — the  machinery  by  which  the  enemy
is  wont  to  produce  discoid,  relying  for  success  upon  the
well-known  maxim  of  Thilip  of  Macedon,  who  con-
sidered no  city  impregnable  into  which  he  could  send
an  ass  laden  with  gold."^"^

The  Advocate  was  charged  too  with  being  unfriendly
to  the  India  trade,  especially  to  the  West  India  Com-
pany.

He  took  the  opportunity,  however,  to  enlarge  with
emphasis  and  eloquence  upon  lhat  traffic  as  constituting
the  very  life-blood  of  the  countiy.

"  The  commerce  with  the  East  Indies  is  going  on  so
prosperously,"  he  said,  "  that  not  only  our  own  inhabit-
ants but  all  strangers  are  amazed.  The  West  Juilia
Company  is  sufficiently  prepared,  and  will  cost  the  com-
monwealth so  little,  that  the  investment  will  l>e  incon-
siderable in  com])arison  with  the  profits.  And  all  our
dangers  and  difficulties  have  nearly  vanished  since  the
magnificent  victory  of  Gibraltar,  by  which  the  enemy's
ships,  artillery,  and  sailors  have  been  annihilated,  and
pi  oof  afforded  that  the  Spanish  galleys  are  not  so  ter-
rible as  they  pretend  to  be. By  means  of  this  trade

*5  Mcnioiro  van  Olden-Barnevelt,  in  Deventer,  iii,  cxcix.  137-147. ^6  jbid.  ^7

360

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIK.

to  both  the  Indies,  matters  will  soon  be  brought  into
sii-ch  condition  that  the  Spaniards  will  be  driven  out  of
all  those  regions  and  deprived  of  their  traffic.  Thus
will  the  great  wolf's  teeth  be  pulled  out,  and  we  need
have  no  farther  fear  of  his  biting  again.  Then  we  may
hope  fur  a  firm  and  assured  peace,  and  may  keep  the
Indies,  with  the  whole  navigation  thereon  depending,
for  ourselves,  sharing  it  freely  and  in  common  with  our
allies."

Certainly  no  statesman  could  more  strongly  depict
the  dangers  of  a  pusillanimous  treaty,  and  the  splendid
future  of  the  republic,  if  she  held  fast  to  her  resolve  for
political  independence,  free  religion,  and  free  trade,  than
did  the  great  Advocate  at  this  momentous  epoch  of
European  history.

Had  he  really  dreamed  of  surrendering  the  republic
to  Spain,  that  republic  whose  resistance  ever  since  the
middle  of  the  previous  century  had  been  all  that  had
saved  Europe,  in  the  opinion  of  learned  and  experienced
thinkers,  from  the  universal  empire  of  Spain — had  the
calumnies,  or  even  a  thousandth  part  of  the  calumnies,
against  him  been  true — how  different  might  have  been
the  history  of  human  liberty !

Soon  afterwards,  in  accordance  with  the  suggestions
of  the  French  king  and  with  their  own  previous  inten-
tions, a  special  legation  was  despatched  by  the  States
to  England,  in  order  to  notify  the  approaching  confer-
ences to  the  sovereign  of  that  country,  and  to  invite  his
participation  in  the  proceedings.

The  States'  envoys  were  graciously  received  by  James,
who  soon  appointed  Eichard  Spencer  and  Ealph  Win-
wood  as  commissioners  to  the  Hague,  duly  instructed
to  assist  at  the  deliberations,  and  especially  to  keep  a
sharp  watch  upon  French  intrigues.  There  were  also
missions  and  invitations  to  Denmark  and  to  the  Electors
Palatine  and  of  Brandenburg,  the  two  latter  potentates
having,  during  the  past  three  years,  assisted  the  States
with  a  hundred  thousand  florins  annually.^^

The  news  of  the  great  victory  at  Gibraltar  had  reached
the  Netherlands  almost  simultaneously  with  the  arrival
of  the  French  commissioners.  It  was  thought  probable
that  John  Neyen  had  received  the  weighty  intelligence

58  Memoire  van  Olden -Barnevelt  in  Deventer,  iii.  cxcix.  137-147.  ^  Wagenaar,  ix.  274.

1607.

DOINGS  OF  FRIAR  NEYEX.

361

some  days  earlier,  and  the  intense  eagerness  of  the  arch-
dukes and  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  procure  the
recall  of  the  Dutch  fleet  was  thus  satisfactorily  explained.
Very  naturally  this  magnificent  success,  clouded  though
it  was  by  the  death  of  the  hero  to  whom  it  was  due,
increased  the  confidence  of  the  States  in  the  justice  of
their  cause  and  the  strength  of  their  position.

Once  more,  it  is  not  entirely  idle  to  consider  the  effect
of  scientific  progress  on  the  march  of  human  affairs,  as
so  often  exemplified  in  history.  Whether  that  half-
century  of  continuous  war  would  have  been  possible
with  the  artillery,  means  of  locomotion,  and  other  ma-
chinery of  destruction  and  communication  now  so  ter-
ribly familiar  to  the  woiid,  can  hardly  be  a  question.
The  preterhuman  prolixity  of  negotiation  which  appals
us  in  the  days  when  steam  and  electricity  had  not  yet
annihilated  time  and  space,  ought  also  to  be  obsolete.
At  a  period  when  the  news  of  a  gieat  victory  was  thirty
days  on  its  travels  from  Gibraltar  to  Flushing,  aged
counsellors  justified  themselves  in  a  solemn  consump-
tion of  time  such  as  might  have  exasperated  Jared  or
Methuselah  in  his  boyhood.  Men  fought  as  if  war  was
the  normal  condition  of  humanity,  and  negotiated  as
if  they  were  all  immortal.  But  has  the  art  political
kept  pace  with  the  advancement  of  physical  science?
If  history  be  valuable  for  the  examples  it  furnishes  both
for  imitation  and  avoidance,  then  the  process  by  which
these  peace  conferences  were  initiated  and  conducted
may  be  wholesome  food  for  reflection.

John  Keyen,  who,  since  his  secret  transactions  already
described  at  the  Hague  and  Fort  Lillo,  had  been  speed-
ing back  and  forth  between  Brussels,  London,  and
Madrid,  had  once  more  returned  to  the  Netherlands,  and
had  been  peimitted  to  reside  privately  at  Delft  until
the  king's  ratification  should  arrive  from  Spain.^^

While  thus  established,  the  industrious  friar  had  oc-
cupied his  leisure  in  studying  the  situation  of  aflairs.
Especially  he  had  felt  inclined  to  renew  some  of  those
little  commercial  speculations  which  had  recently  proved
so  comfortable  in  the  case  of  Dirk  van  der  Does.  Ke-
corder  Cornelius  Aerssens  came  frequently  to  visit  him,
with  the  private  consent  of  the  Government,  and  it  at

«  iMetercn,  553.

362

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

once  struck  the  friar  that  Cornelius  would  be  a  judicious
investment.  So  he  informed  the  recorder  that  the  arch-
dukes had  been  much  touched  with  his  adroitness  and
zeal  in  facilitating  the  entrance  of  their  secret  agent
into  the  presence  of  the  Prince  and  the  Advocate.
Cruwel,  in  whose  company  the  disguised  Neyen  had
made  his  first  journey  to  the  Hague,  was  a  near  relative
of  Aerssens.  The  honest  monk  accordingly,  in  recogni-
tion of  past  and  expected  services,  begged  one  day  the
recorder's  acceptance  of  a  bill,  drawn  by  Marquis  Spinola
on  Henry  Beckman,  merchant  of  Amsterdam,  for  eighty
thousand  ducats.  He  also  produced  a  diamond  ring,
valued  at  ten  thousand  florins,  which  he  ventured  to
think  worthy  the  acceptance  of  Madame  Aerssens.  Fur-
thermore, he  declared  himself  ready  to  pay  fifteen  thou-
sand crowns  in  cash,  on  account  of  the  bill,  whenever  it
might  be  desired,  and  observed  that  the  archdukes  had
ordered  the  house  which  the  recorder  had  formerly  oc-
cupied in  Brussels  to  be  reconveyed  to  him.^^  Other
good  things  were  in  store,  it  was  delicately  hinted,  as
soon  as  they  had  been  earned.

Aerssens  expressed  his  thanks  for  the  house,  which,
he  said,  legall}^  belonged  to  him  according  to  the  terms
of  the  surrender  of  Brussels.  He  hesitated  in  regard  to
the  rest,  but  decided  finally  to  accept  the  bill  of  ex-
change and  the  diamond,  apprising  Prince  Maurice  and
Olden-Barneveld  of  the  fact,  however,  on  his  return  to
the  Hague.^^  Being  subsequently  summoned  by  Neyen
to  accept  the  fifteen  thousand  crowns,  he  felt  embarrassed
at  the  compromising  position  in  which  he  had  placed
himself.  He  decided  accordingly  to  make  a  public
statement  of  the  afiair  to  the  States-General.  This  was
done,  and  the  States  placed  the  ring  and  the  bill  in  the
hands  of  their  treasurer,  Joris  de  Bie.

The  recorder  never  got  the  eighty  thousand  ducats,
nor  his  wife  the  diamond  ;  but  although  there  had  been
no  duplicity  on  his  part,  he  got  plenty  of  slander.  His
evil  genius  had  prompted  him,  not  to  listen  seriously  to
the  temptings  of  the  monk,  but  to  deal  with  him  on  his
own  terms.  He  was  obliged  to  justif}^  himself  against
public  suspicion  with  explanations  and  pamphlets,  but
some  taint  of  the  calumny  stuck  by  him  to  the  last.

61  Wagenaar,  ix.  271,  et  seqq. Grotius,  xvi.  741,  742.  62  ibid.

1607.

ARRIVAL  OF  PHILIP'S  RATIFICATION.

363

Meantime,  the  three  months  allotted  for  the  reception
of  Philip's  ratification  had  nearly  expired.  In  March,
the  royal  Government  had  expressly  consented  that  the
archdukes  should  treat  with  the  rebels  on  the  ground
of  their  independence.  In  June  that  royal  permission
had  been  withdrawn,  exactly  because  the  independence
could  never  be  acknowledged.  Albert,  naturally  enough
indignant  at  such  double  dealing,  wrote  to  the  king  that
his  disapprobation  was  incomprehensible,  as  the  con-
cession of  independence  had  been  made  by  direct  com-
mand of  Philip.  "I  am  much  amazed,"  he  said,  "that,
having  treated  with  the  islanders  on  condition  of  leaving
them  free,  by  express  order  of  your  Majesty  (which  you
must  doubtless  very  well  remember),  your  Majesty  now
reproves  my  conduct,  and  declares  your  dissatisfaction."  ^
At  last,  on  the  23)  d  July,  Spinola  requested  a  safe  con-
duct for  Louis  Verreyken,  auditor  of  the  council  at
Brussels,  to  come  to  the  Hague.^

On  the  23rd  of  July  that  functionary  accordingly
ariived.  He  came  before  Prince  Maurice  and  fifty  de-
puties of  the  States-General  and  exhibited  the  document.
At  the  same  time  he  urged  them,  now  that  the  long-
desired  ratification  had  been  produced,  to  fulfil  at  once
iheir  promise,  and  to  recall  their  fleet  from  the  coast  of
.  Spain.*^^

A^'erreyken  was  requested  to  withdraw  while  the
instrument  was  examined.  \Vhen  recalled,  he  was
informed  that  the  States  had  the  most  straightforward
intention  to  negotiate,  but  that  the  royal  document
did  not  at  all  answer  their  expectation.  As  few  of
the  delegates  could  read  Spanish,  it  would  first  of  all  be
necessary  to  cause  it  to  be  translated.  A\  hen  that  was
done  they  would  be  able  to  express  their  o])inion  con-
cerning it  and  come  to  a  decision  in  regaid  to  the
recall  of  the  fleet.  This  ended  the  proceedings  on  that
occasion.

Next  day  Prince  Maurice  invited  Verreyken  and
others  to  dine.  After  dinner  the  stadliolder  informed
him  that  the  answer  of  the  States  might  soon  be  ex-
pected ;  at  the  same  time  expressing  his  regret  that  the
kirg  should  have  sent  such  an  instrument. It  was  very

63  Extiuct  from  MS.  Letter  cited  by  Deventer,  Ui.  xxvi. ^  Wagenaar,  ix.  278.
65  Mt  tcren,  552,  553. Gallucci,  336. Wagenaar,  278,  seqq.

364

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

necessary,  said  the  prince,  to  have  plain  speaking,  and
he,  for  one,  had  never  believed  that  the  king  would  send
a  proper  ratification.  The  one  exhibited  was  not  at  all  to
the  purpose.  The  king  was  expected  to  express  himself
as  clearly  as  the  archdukes  had  done  in  their  instrument.
He  must  agree  to  treat  with  the  States-General  as  with
people  entirely  free,  over  w^hom  he  claimed  no  authority.
If  the  king  should  refuse  to  make  this  public  declaration,
the  iStates  would  at  once  break  olf  all  negotiation.^^

Thiee  days  afterwards,  seven  deputies  conferred  with
Verreyken.  Barneveld,  as  spokesman,  declared  that,  so
far  as  the  provinces  were  concerned,  the  path  was  plain
and  open  to  an  honest,  ingenuous,  lasting  peace,  but  that
the  manner  of  dealing  on  the  other  side  was  artificial
and  provocative  of  suspicion.*^^  A  most  important  line,
which  had  been  placed  by  the  States  at  the  very  begin-
ning of  the  form  suggested  by  them,  was  wanting  in  the
ratification  now  received.  This  hardly  seemed  an  acci-
dental omission.  The  whole  document  was  constrained
and  defective.  It  was  necessary  to  deal  with  Nether-
landers  in  clear  and  simple  language.  The  basis  of  any
possible  negotiation  was  that  the  provinces  were  to  be
treated  with  as  and  called  entirely  free.  Unless  this  was
done  negotiations  were  impossible.  The  States-General
were  not  so  unskilled  in  affairs  as  to  be  ignorant  that
the  king  and  the  archdukes  were  quite  capable,  at  a
future  day,  of  declaring  themselves  untrammelled  by
any  conditions.  They  would  boast  that  conventions
with  rebels  and  pledges  to  heretics  were  alike  invalid.
If  Verreyken  had  brought  no  better  document  than  the
one  presented,  he  had  better  go  at  once.  His  stay  in  the
provinces  was  superfluous.^^

At  a  subsequent  interview  Barneveld  informed  Ver-
reyken that  the  king's  confirmation  had  been  unani-
mously rejected  by  the  States-General  as  deficient  both
in  form  and  substance.  He  added  that  the  people  of  the
provinces  were  growing  very  lukewarm  in  regard  to
peace,  that  Prince  Maurice  opposed  it,  that  many  persons
regretted  the  length  to  which  the  negotiations  had
already  gone.  Difficult  as  it  seemed  to  be  to  recede,  the
archdukes  might  be  certain  that  a  complete  rupture  was
imminent.

66  Galluc(n,  ubi  sup.

67  Ibid.

63  Ibid,  337,  338.

1607.

REJECTION  OF  THE  RATIFICATIOX.

365

All  these  private  conversations  of  Barneveld,  who  was
known  to  be  the  chief  of  the  peace  party,  were  duly
reported  by  Verreyken  in  .secret  notes  to  the  archduke
and  to  Spinola.  Of  course  they  produced  their  effect.
It  surely  might  have  been  seen  that  the  tricks  and  shifts
of  an  antiquated  diplomacy  were  entirely  out  of  place  if
any  wholesome  result  were  desired.  But  the  habit  of
dissimulation  was  inveterate.  That  the  man  who  cannot
dissemble  is  unfit  to  reign,  was  perhaps  the  only  one
of  his  father's  golden  rules  which  I'hilip  III.  could
thoroughly  comprehend,  even  if  it  be  assumed  that  the
monarch  was  at  all  consulted  in  regard  to  this  most
important  transaction  of  his  life.  Verreyken  and  the
friar  knew  very  well  when  tbey  brought  the  document
that  it  would  be  spurned  by  the  States,  and  yet  they
were  also  thoroughly  aware  that  it  was  the  king's
interest  to  begin  the  negotiations  as  soon  as  possible.
When  thus  privately  and  solemnly  assured  by  the  Advo-
0 '  e  that  they  were  really  wasting  their  time  by  being
the  bearers  of  these  royal  evasions,  they  learned  there-
fore nothing  positively  new,  but  were  able  to  assure  their
employers  that  to  thoioughly  disgust  the  peace  pai'ty
was  not  precisely  the  mode  of  terminirting  the  war.

Verreyken  now  received  public  and  formal  notification
that  a  new  instrument  must  be  procured  from  the  king.
In  the  ratification  which  had  been  sent,  that  monarch
spoke  of  the  archdukes  as  princes  and  sovereign  pio-
prietors  of  all  the  Netherlands.  The  clause  by  which,
according  to  the  form  prescribed  b}^  the  States,  and
already  adopted  by  the  archdukes,  the  United  Provinces
were  described  as  free  countries  over  which  no  authority
was  claimed  had  been  calmly  omitted,  as  if,  by  such  a
subterfuge,  the  independence  of  the  republic  could  be
winked  out  of  existence.  Furthermore,  it  was  objected
that  the  document  was  in  Spanish,  that  it  was  upon
paper  instead  of  parchment,  that  it  was  not  sealed  with
the  great,  but  with  the  little  seal,  and  that  it  was  sub-
scribed "  I  the  King."  This  signature  might  be  very
appropriate  for  decrees  issued  by  a  monarch  to  his
vassals,  but  could  not  be  rightly  appended,  it  was  urged,
to  an  instrument  addressed  to  a  foreign  power.  Poten-
tates, treating  with  the  States-General  of  the  United
Provinces,  were  expected  to  sign  their  names.

366

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  technical  require-
ments in  regard  to  the  parchment,  the  signature,  and  the
seal,  it  would  be  difficult  to  characterize  too  strongly  the
polity  of  the  Spanish  Government  in  the  most  essential
point.  To  seek  relief  from  the  necessity  of  recognising —
at  least  in  the  sense  of  similitude,  according  to  the  subtlety
of  Bentivoglio — the  freedom  of  the  provinces,  simply  by
running  the  pen  through  the  most  important  line  of  a
most  important  document,  was  diplomacy  in  its  dotage.
Had  not  Marquis  Spinola,  a  man  who  could  use  his  brains
and  his  pen  as  well  as  his  sword,  expressly  implored  the
politicians  of  Madrid  not  to  change  even  a  comma  in  the
form  of  ratification  which  he  sent  to  Spain  ?

Verreyken,  placed  face  to  face  with  plain-spoken,
straightforward,  strong-minded  men,  felt  the  dreary
absurdity  of  the  position.  He  could  only  stammer  a
ridiculous  excuse  about  the  clause,  having  been  acciden-
tally left  out  by  a  copying  secretary .^^  To  represent  so
important  an  omission  as  a  clerical  error  was  almost  as
great  an  absurdity  as  the  original  device ;  but  it  was
necessary  for  Verreyken  to  say  something.  He  pro-
mised, however,  that  the  form  prescribed  by  the  States
should  be  again  transmitted  to  Madrid,  and  expressed
confidence  that  the  ratification  would  now  be  sent  as
desired.  Meantime  he  trusted  that  the  fleet  would  be  at
once  recalled.

This  at  once  created  a  stormy  debate  which  lasted
many  days,  both  within  the  walls  of  the  House  of
Assembly  and  out  of  doors.  Prince  Maurice  bitterly
denounced  the  proposition,  and  asserted  the  necessity
rather  of  sending  out  more  ships  than  of  permitting
their  cruisers  to  return.  It  was  well  known  that  the
Spanish  Government,  since  the  destruction  of  Avila's
fleet,  had  been  straining  every  nerve  to  procure  and
equip  other  war- vessels,  and  that  even  the  Duke  of
Lerma  had  offered  a  small  portion  of  his  immense
plunderings  to  the  crown  in  aid  of  naval  armaments."^^

On  the  other  hand,  Barneveld  urged  that  the  States,
in  the  preliminary  armistice,  had  already  agreed  to  send
no  munitions  nor  reinforcements  to  the  fleet  already
cruising  on  the  coasts  of  the  peninsula. It  would  be

«  r.rotius,  xvi.  744, 745.  Metcreii,  352.  Wagenaar,  ix.  279. 70  Wagenaar,  ix.  280, 281.

1607.

RECALL  OF  THE  DUTCH  FLEET.

367

better,  therefore,  to  recall  those  ships  than  to  leave  them
where  they  could  not  be  victualled  nor  strengthened
without  a  violation  of  good  faith.

These  opinions  prevailed,  and  on  the  9th  August,
Verieyken  was  suramoned  before  the  Assembly,
and  informed  by  Barneveld  that  the  States  had  ^
decided  to  withdraw  the  fleet,  and  to  declare  invalid  all
prizes  made  six  weeks  after  that  date.  This  was  done,
it  was  said,  out  of  respect  to  the  archdukes,  to  whom  no
blame  was  imputed  for  the  negligence  displayed  in
regard  to  the  ratification.  Furthermore,  the  auditor  was
requested  to  inform  his  masters  that  the  documents
brought  from  Spain  were  not  satisfactory,  and  he  was  fur-
nished with  a  draught,  made  both  in  Latin  and  French.
With  this  form,  it  was  added,  the  king  was  to  comply
within  six  weeks,  if  he  desired  to  proceed  further  in
negotiations  with  the  States.''^

Verreyken  thanked  the  States-General,  made  the  best
of  promises,  and  courteously  withdrew.

isext  day,  however,  just  as  his  prei)arations  for  depar-
ture had  been  made,  he  was  once  moi  e  summoned  before
the  Assembly  to  meet  with  a  somewhat  disagreeable
surprise.  Barneveld,  speaking  as  usnal  in  behalf  of  the
States-General,  publicly  produced  Spinola's  bill  of  ex-
change for  eighty -thousand  ducats,  the  diamond  ring
intended  for  Madame  Aerssens,  and  the  gold  chain  given
to  Dirk  van  der  Does,  and  expressed  the  feelings  of  the
republican  Government  in  regard  to  those  barefaced
attempts  of  Friar  John  at  bribery  and  coi  ruption,  in  vei  y
scornful  language.'^^  Netherlanders  were  not  to  be  bought
— so  the  agent  of  Spain  and  of  the  archdukes  was  in-
formed— and,  even  if  the  citizens  were  venal,  it  would
be  necessary  in  a  popular  Government  to  buy  up  the
whole  nation.  "It  is  not  in  our  commonwealth  as  in
despotisms,*'  said  the  Advocate,  where  affairs  of  state
are  directed  by  the  nod  of  two  or  three  individuals,
while  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  are  a  mob  of  slaves.
By  turns,  we  all  govern  and  are  governed.  This  great
council,  this  senate — should  it  seem  not  suflBciently
fortified  against  your  presents — could  easily  be  enlarged..
Here  is  your  chain,  your  ring,  your  banker's  draught

71  Meteren,  352. Wagenaar,  ix.  23 1.

7>  Mt'tcren,  553^o. Grotius,  xvi.  745. Wagenaar,  ix.  283.

308

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

Take  them  all  back  to  your  masters.  Such  gifts  are  not
necessary  to  ensure  a  just  peace,  while  to  accept  them
would  be  a  crime  against  liberty,  which  we  are  incapable
of  committing."

Verreyken,  astonished  and  abashed,  could  answer  little
save  to  mutter  a  few  words  about  the  greediness  of
monks,  who,  judging  every  one  else  by  themselves,
thought  no  one  inaccessible  to  a  bribe."^*  He  protested
the  innocence  of  the  archdukes  in  the  matter,  who  had
given  no  directions  to  bribe,  and  who  were  quite  ignorant
that'  the  attempt  had  been  made.

He  did  not  explain  by  whose  authority  the  chain,  the
ring,  and  the  draught  upon  Beckman  had  been  furnished
to  the  friar.

Meantime  that  ecclesiastic  w^as  cheerfully  wending  his
way  to  Spain  in  search  of  the  new  ratification,  leaving
his  colleague  vicariously  to  bide  the  pelting  of  the
republican  storm,  and  to  return  somewhat  weather-
beaten  to  Brussels.

During  the  suspension,  thus  ridiculously  and  gratuit-
ously caused,  of  preliminaries  which  had  already  lasted
the  better  portion  of  a  year,  party-spirit  was  rising  day
by  day  higher,  and  spreading  more  widely  throughout
the  provinces.  Opinions  and  sentiments  were  now
sharply  defined  and  loudly  announced.  The  clergy,
from  a  thousand  pulpits,  thundered  against  the  peace,
exposing  the  insidious  practices,  the  faithless  promises,
the  monkish  corruptions,  by  which  the  attempt  was
making  to  reduce  the  free  republic  once  more  into  vassal-
age to  Spain.  The  people  everywhere  listened  eagerly
and  applauded.  Especially  the  mariners,  cordwainers,
smiths,  ship-chandlers,  boatmen,  the  tapestry  weavers,
lace  manufacturers,  shopkeepers,  and,  above  all,  the
India  merchants  and  stockholders  in  the  great  commer-
cial companies  for  the  East  and  West,  lifted  up  their
voices  for  war.  This  was  the  party  of  Prince  Maurice,
who  made  no  secret  of  his  sentiments,  and  opposed,  pub-
licly and  privately,  the  resumption  of  negotiations.
Doubtless  his  adherents  were  the  most  numerous  portion
of  the  poi)ulation.

73  Meteren,  553^0. Grotius,  xvi.  745. Wagenaar,  ix.  283.

"  Nec  mirum  si  moriachi  avarum  imprimis  hominum  genus  alios  ex  se  sestima*
rent." — Grotius,  ubi  sup.

1607.

OPPOSITION  OF  MAURICE  TO  THE  TREATY.

369

Bameveld,  however,  was  omnipotent  with  the  muni-
cipal governments,  and  although  many  individuals  in
those  bodies  were  deeply  interested  in  the  India  naviga-
tion and  the  great  corporations,  the  Advocate  turned
them  as  usual  around  his  finger.

Ever  since  the  memorable  day  of  Nieuport  there  had
been  no  love  lost  between  the  stadholder  and  the  Advo-
cate. They  had  been  nominally  reconciled  to  each  other,
and  had,  until  lately,  acted  with  tolerable  harmony,
but  each  was  thoroughly  conscious  of  the  divergence
of  their  respective  aims.

Exactly  at  this  period  the  long- smothered  resentment
of  Maurice  against  his  old  preceptor,  counsellor,  and,  as
he  believed,  betrayer,  flamed  forth  anew.  He  was
indignant  that  a  man,  so  infinitely  beneath  him  in
degree,  should  thus  dare  to  cross  his  plans,  to  hazard,  as
he  believed,  the  best  interests  of  the  state,  and  to  inter-
fere with  the  course  of  his  legitimate  ambition.'^  There
was  more  glory  for  a  great  soldier  to  earn  in  future
battle-fields,  a  higher  position  before  the  world  to  be
won.  He  had  a  right  by  birth,  by  personal  and  family
service,  to  claim  admittance  among  tlie  monarchs  of
Europe.  The  pistol  of  Balthasar  Gerard  had  alone  pre-
vented the  elevation  of  his  father  to  the  sovereignty  of
the  provinces.  The  patents,  wanting  only  a  few  for-
malities, were  still  in  possession  of  the  son.  As  the  war
went  on  —  and  nothing  but  blind  belief  in  Spanish
treachery  could  cause  the  acceptance  of  a  peace  which
would  be  found  to  mean  slavery — there  was  no  height
to  which  he  might  not  climb.  W  ith  the  return  of  peace
and  submission,  his  occupation  would  be  gone,  obscurity
and  poverty  the  sole  recompense  for  his  life-long  services
and  the  sacrifices  of  his  family.  The  memory  of  the
secret  movements  twice  made  but  a  few  years  before  to
elevate  him  to  the  sovereignty,  and  which  he  jn  1602
believed  to  have  been  baffled  by  the  Advocate,  ^^^3.
doubtless  rankled  in  his  breast.  He  did  not  forget  that
when  the  subject  had  been  discussed  by  the  favourers  of
the  scheme  in  Barneveld's  own  house,  Bameveld  himself
had  prophesied  that  one  day  or  another  the  rights
would  burst  out  which  his  Excellency  had  to  becom©

VOL.  IV.

75  Wagenaar,  ix.  283-285.

370

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

prince  of  the  provinces,  on  strength  of  the  signed  and
sealed  documents  addressed  to  the  late  Prince  of  Orange ;
that  he  had  further  alluded  to  the  efforts  then  on  foot  to
make  him  Duke  of  Gelderland ;  adding  with  a  sneer,
that  Zeeland  was  all  agog  on  the  subject,  while  in  that
province  there  were  individuals  very  desirous  of  be-
coming children  of  Zebedee."'^*^

Barneveld,  on  his  part,  although  accustomed  to  speak
in  public  of  his  Excellency  Prince  Maurice  in  terms  of
profoundest  respect,  did  not  fail  to  communicate  in
influential  quarters  his  fears  that  the  prince  was  inspired
by  excessive  ambition,  and  that  he  desired  to  protract
the  war,  not  for  the  good  of  the  commonwealth,  but  for
the  attainment  of  greater  power  in  the  state.  The  envoys
of  France,  expressly  instructed  on  that  subject  by  the
king,  whose  purposes  would  be  frustrated  if  the  ill-blood
between  these  eminent  personages  could  not  be  healed,
did  their  best  to  bring  about  a  better  understanding,  but
with  hardly  more  than  an  apparent  success.

Once  more  there  were  stories  flying  about  that  the
stadholder  had  called  the  Advocate  liar,  and  that  he
had  struck  him  or  offered  to  strike  him  —  tales  as  void
of  truth,  doubtless,  as  those  so  rife  after  the  battle  of
Nieuport,  but  which  indicated  the  exasperation  which
existed.

When  the  news  of  the  rejection  of  the  king's  ratifi-
cation reached  Madrid,  the  indignation  of  the  royal
conscience-keepers  was  vehement.'^^

That  the  potentate  of  so  large  a  portion  of  the  universe
should  be  treated  by  those  lately  his  subjects  with  less
respect  than  that  due  from  equals  to  equals,  seemed
intolerable.  So  thoroughly  inspired,  however,  was  the
king  by  the  love  of  religion  and  the  public  good — as  he
informed  Marquis  Spinola  by  letter — and  so  intense  was
his  desire  for  the  termination  of  that  disastrous  war,
that  he  did  not  hesitate  indulgently  to  grant  what  had
been  so  obstinately  demanded.  Little  was  to  be  ex-
pected, he  said,  from  the  stubbornness  of  the  provinces,
and  from  their  extraordinary  manner  of  transacting
business,  but  looking,  nevertheless,  only  to  divine  duty,
and  preferring  its  dictates  to  a  selfish  regard  for  his  own

76  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  100-103,  396-400,  i.e.  zealous  disciples  of  their  master,  as
Van  der  Kemp  explains.  Wagenaar,  ix.  285.  Gallucci,  338.

16G7.

NEYEN'S  REPORT  OF  HIS  MISSION.

371

interests,  he  had  resolved  to  concede  that  liberty  to  the
provinces  which  had  been  so  importunately  claimed.  He
however  imposed  the  condition  that  the  States  should
permit  free  and  public  exercise  of  the  Catholic  religion
throughout  their  territories,  and  that  so  long  as  such
worship  was  unobstructed,  so  long  and  no  longer  should
the  liberty  now  conceded  to  the  provinces  endure.'^^

"  Thus  did  this  excellent  prince,"  says  an  eloquent
Jesuit,  "  prefer  obedience  to  the  Church  before  subjec-
tion to  himself,  and  insist  that  those,  whom  he  eman-
cipated from  his  own  dominions,  should  still  be  loyal  to
the  sovereignty  of  the  Pope."^^

Friar  John,  who  had  brought  the  last  intelligence  from
the  Netherlands,  might  have  found  it  difficult,  if  con-
sulted, to  inform  the  king  how  many  bills  of  exchange
would  be  necessary  to  force  this  wonderful  condition  on
the  Government  of  the  provinces.  That  the  republic
should  accept  that  liberty  as  a  boon  which  she  had  won
with  the  red  right  hand,  and  should  establish  within  her  *
domains  as  many  agents  for  Spanish  reaction  as  there
were  Roman  priests,  monks,  and  Jesuits  to  bo  found,
was  not  very  probable.  It  was  not  thus  nor  then  that
the  great  lesson  of  religious  equality  and  liberty  for  all
men — the  inevitable  result  of  the  Dutch  revolt — was  to
be  expounded.  The  insertion  of  such  a  condition  in  the
preamble  to  a  treaty  with  a  foreign  power  would  have
been  a  desertion  on  the  part  of  the  Netherlands  of  the
very  principle  of  religious  or  civil  freedom.

The  monk,  however,  had  convinced  the  Spanish
Government  that  in  six  months  after  peace  had  been
made  the  States  would  gladly  accept  the  dominion  of
Spain  once  more,  or,  at  the  very  least,  would  annex
themselves  to  the  obedient  Netherlands  under  the  sceptre
of  the  archdukes.

Secondly,  he  assured  the  duke  that  they  would  publicly
and  totally  renounce  all  connection  with  France.

Thirdly,  he  pledged  himself  that  the  exercise  of  the
Catholic  religion  would  be  as  free  as  that  of  any  other
creed.^^

And  the  duke  of  Lerma  believed  it  all :  such  and  no
greater  was  his  capacity  for  understanding  the  course

^  The  King  to  Spinola,  ajnid  Galliicri,  uhi  sup.  Gallucci,  ubi  sup,

81  Negotiations  de  Jeannin,  i.  360.

2  B  2

372

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

of  events  wliicli  he  imagined  himself  to  be  directing.
Certainly  Friar  John  did  not  believe  what  he  said.

"  Master  Monk  is  not  quite  so  sure  of  his  stick  as  he
pretends  to  be,"  said  Secretary-of-State  Yilleroy.^^  Of
course,  no  one  knew  better  the  absurdity  of  those  assur-
ances than  Master  Monk  himself.

"  It  may  be  that  he  has  held  such  language,"  said
Jeannin,  "  in  order  to  accomplish  his  object  in  Spain.
But  'tis  all  dreaming  and  moonshine,  which  one  should
laugh  at  rather  than  treat  seriously.  These  people  here
mean  to  be  sovereign  for  ever  and  will  make  no  peace
except  on  that  condition.  This  grandeur  and  vanity
have  entered  so  deeply  into  their  brains  that  they  will
be  torn  into  little  pieces  rather  than  give  it  up."

Spinola,  as  acute  a  politician  as  he  was  a  brilliant
commander,  at  once  demonstrated  to  his  Government  the
impotence  of  such  senile  attempts.  No  definite  agree-
ments could  be  made,  he  wrote,  except  by  a  general
convention.  Before  a  treaty  of  peace,  no  permission
would  be  given  by  the  States  to  the  public  exercise  of
the  Catholic  religion,  for  fear  of  giving  offence  to  what
w^ere  called  the  Protestant  powers.  Unless  they  saw  the
pioper  ratification  they  would  enter  into  no  negotiations
at  all.  When  the  negotiations  had  produced  a  treaty,
the  Catholic  wwship  might  be  demanded.  Thus  peace
might  be  made,  and  the  desired  conditions  secured,  or
all  parties  would  remain  as  they  had  been.^*

The  Spanish  Government  replied  by  sending  a  double
form  of  ratification.^^  It  would  not  have  been  the  Spanish
Government,  had  one  simple,  straightforward  document
been  sent.  Plenty  of  letters  came  at  the  same  time,
triumphantly  refuting  the  objections  and  arguments  of
the  States-General.  To  sign  "  Yo  el  Rey  "  had  been  the
custom  of  the  king's  ancestors  in  dealing  with  foreign
powers.  Thus  had  Philip  II.  signed  the  treaty  of  Ver-
vins.  Thus  had  the  reigning  king  confirmed  the  treaty
of  Vervins.  Thus  had  he  signed  the  recent  treaty  with
England  as  well  as  other  conventions  with  other  poten-
tates. If  the  French  envoys  at  the  Hague  said  the  con-
trary they  erred  from  ignorance  or  from  baser  reasons.
The  provinces  could  not  be  declared  free  until  Catholic

82  Kegotiations  de  Jeannin,  i.  360. Letter  of  19th  Sept.  ]607.

83  Ibid.  i.  394. Letter  of  6th  Oct.  1607. 84  Gallucci,  338. w  ix^i^  340.

1607.

REPLY  OF  THE  SPANISH  GOVERNMENT.

373

worship  was  conceded.  The  donations  must  be  mutual
and  simultaneous  and  the  States  would  gain  a  much
more  stable  and  diuturnal  liberty,  founded  not  upon  a
simple  declaration,  but  lawfully  granted  them  as  a  com-
pensation for  a  just  and  pious  work  performed.  To  this
end  the  king  sent  ratification  numt)er  one  in  which
his  sentiments  were  fully  expressed.  If,  however,  the
provinces  were  resolved  not  to  defer  the  declaration  so
ardently  desired  and  to  refuse  all  negotiation  until  they
had  received  it,  then  ratification  number  two,  therewith
sent  and  drawn  up  in  the  required  form,  might  be  used.
It  was,  however,  to  be  exhibited  but  not  delivered.  The
provinces  would  then  see  the  clemency  with  which  they
were  treated  by  the  king,  and  all  the  world  might  know
that  it  was  not  his  fault  if  peace  were  not  made.^^

Thus  the  politicians  of  Madrid  ;  speaking  in  the  name
of  their  august  sovereign  and  signing  "  Yo  el  Rey  "  for
him  without  troubling  him  even  to  look  at  the  docu-
ments.

When  these  letters  arrived,  the  time  fixed  by  the
States  for  accepting  the  ratification  had  run  out,  and
their  patience  was  well-nigh  exhausted.  The  archduke
held  council  with  Spinola,  Verreyken,  Richardot,  and
others,  and  it  was  agreed  that  ratification  number  two,  in
which  the  Catholic  worship  was  not  mentioned,  should
be  forthwith  sent  to  the  States.  Certainly  no  other
conclusion  could  have  been  reached,  and  it  was  fortunate
that  a  lucid  interval  in  the  deliberations  of  the  lunatics  at
Madrid  had  furnished  the  archduke  with  an  alternative.
Had  it  been  otherwise  and  had  number  one  been  pre-
sented, with  all  the  accompanying  illustrations,  the  same
dismal  comedy  might  have  gone  on  indefinitely  until  the
Dutchmen  hissed  it  away  and  returned  to  their  tragic
business  once  more.

On  the  25th  October,  Friar  John  and  Verreyken  came
before  the  States-General,  more  than  a  hundred 25  Oct.
members  being  present,  besides  Prince  Maurice  i^^-^-
and  Count  Lewis  William."

The  monk  stated  that  he  had  faithfully  represented
to  his  Majesty  at  Madrid  the  sincere,  straightforward,
and  undissembling  proceedings  of  their  lordships  in  these
negotiations.^* He  had  also  explained  the  constitution  of

•«  Gallucci,  340.  87  Wagenaar,  ix.  295.  ^  Jeaunin,  i.423.

374

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

their  Government  and  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  from
his  royal  Majesty  the  desired  ratification,  after  due  de-
liberation with  the  council.  This  would  now  give  the
assurance  of  a  firm  and  durable  peace,  continued  Neyen,
even  if  his  Majesty  should  come  one  day  to  die — being
mortal.  Otherwise,  there  might  be  inconveniences  to
fear.  Now,  however,  the  document  was  complete  in  all
its  parts,  so  far  as  regarded  what  was  principal  and
essential,  and  in  conformity  with  the  form  transmitted
by  the  States- General.  "  God  the  Omnipotent  knows,"
proceeded  the  friar,  "  how  sincere  is  my  intention  in  this
treaty  of  peace  as  a  means  of  delivering  the  Netherlands
from  the  miseries  of  war,  as  your  lordships  will  perceive
by  the  ^brm  of  the  agreement,  explaining  itself  and
making  manifest  its  pure  and  undissembling  intentions,
promising  nothing  and  engaging  to  nothing  which  will
not  be  effectually  performed.  This  would  not  be  the  case
if  his  Majesty  were  proceeding  by  finesse  or  deception.
The  ratification  might  be  nakedly  produced  as  demanded,
without  any  other  explanation.  But  his  Majesty,  acting
in  good  faith,  has  now  declared  his  last  determination  in
order  to  avoid  anything  that  might  be  disputed  at  some
future  day,  as  your  lordships  will  see  more  amply  when
the  auditor  has  exhibited  the  document."

When  the  friar  had  finished  Verreyken  spoke.

He  reminded  them  of  the  proofs  already  given  by  the
archdukes  of  their  sincere  desire  to  change  the  long  and
sanguinary  war  into  a  good  and  assured  peace.  Their
lordships  the  States  had  seen  how  liberally,  sincerely,
and  roundly  their  Highnesses  had  agreed  to  all  demands
and  had  procured  the  ratification  of  his  Majesty,  even
although  nothing  had  been  proposed  in  that  regard  at
the  beginning  of  the  negotiations.

He  then  produced  the  original  document,  together
with  two  copies,  one  in  French  the  other  in  Flemish,  to
be  carefully  collated  by  the  States.®^

"  It  is  true,"  said  the  auditor,  "that  the  original  is  not
made  out  in  Latin  nor  in  French  as  your  lordships  de-
manded, but  in  Spanish,  and  in  the  same  form  and  style
as  used  by  his  Majesty  in  treating  with  all  the  kings,
potentates,  and  republics  of  Christendom.  To  tell  you
the  truth,  it  has  seemed  strange  that  there  should  be  a

89  Jeannin,  i.  422,  423.

»o  Ibid.  423,  424.

1607.

PHILIP'S  RATIFICATION  EXHIBITED.

375

wish  to  make  so  great  and  puissant  a  king  change  his
style,  such  demand  being  contrary  to  all  reason  and
equity,  the  more  so  as  his  Majesty  is  content  with  the
style  which  your  lordships  have  been  pleased  to  adopt."

The  ratification  was  then  exhibited.

It  set  forth  that  Don  Philip,  by  grace  of  God  King
of  Castile,  Leon,  Arragon,  the  Two  Sicilies,  Portugal,
Navarre,  and  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  other  European  realms
duly  enumerated;  King  of  the  Eastern  and  Western
Indies  and  of  the  continent  on  terra  firma  adjacent.  King
of  Jerusalem,  Archduke  of  Antioch,  Duke  of  Burgundy,
and  King  of  the  Ocean,  having  seen  that  the  archdukes
were  content  to  treat  with  the  States-General  of  the
United  Provinces  in  quality  of,  and  as  holding  them  for,
countries,  provinces,  and  free  states  over  which  they
pretended  to  no  authority  ;  either  by  way  of  a  perpetual
peace  or  for  a  truce  or  suspension  of  arms  for  twelve,
fifteen  or  twenty  years,  at  the  choice  of  the  said  States,
and  knoliving  that  the  said  most  serene  archdukes  had
promised  to  deliver  the  king's  ratification ;  had,  after
ripe  deliberation  with  his  council,  and  out  of  his  certain
wisdom  and  absolute  royal  power,  made  the  present
declarations,  similar  to  the  one  made  by  the  archdukes,
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  said  promise  so  far  as  it
concerned  him :

And  we  principally  declare,"  continued  the  King  of
Spain,  Jerusalem,  America,  India,  and  the  Ocean,  that
we  are  content  that  in  our  name,  and  on  our  part,  shall
be  treated  with  the  said  States  in  the  quality  of,  and  as
held  by  us  for,  free  countries,  provinces,  and  states,  over
which  we  make  no  pretensions.  Thus  we  approve  and
ratify  eveiy  point  of  the  said  agreement,  promising  on
faith  and  word  of  a  king  to  guard  and  accomplish  it  as
entirely  as  if  we  had  consented  to  it  from  the  beginning."

But  we  declare,"  said  the  king,  in  conclusion,  that
if  the  treaty  for  a  peace  or  a  truce  of  many  years,  by
which  the  pretensions  of  both  parties  are  to  be  arranged
— as  well  in  the  matter  of  religion  as  all  the  surplus —
shall  not  be  concluded,  then  this  ratification  shall  be  of
no  effect  and  as  if  it  never  had  been  made  and,  in  virtue
of  it,  we  are  not  to  lose  a  single  point  of  our  right,  nor
the  United  Provinces  to  acquire  one,  but  things  are  to
remain,  so  far  as  regards  the  rights  of  the  two  parties,

376

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

exactly  as  tliey  are  at  present ;  each  to  do  what  to  each
shall  seem  best."

Such  were  the  substantial  parts  of  the  document —
with  much  superfluous  verbiage  lopped  away — which
had  been  signed  '*1  the  King"  at  Madrid  on  the  18th
September,  and  the  two  copies  which  were  presented  to
the  States-General  on  the  25th  October,  the  commis-
sioners retaining  the  original.

The  papers  were  accepted,  with  a  few  general  common-
places by  Barneveld  meaning  nothing,  and  an  answer
was  promised  after  a  brief  delay.^^

A  committee  of  seven,  headed  by  the  Advocate  as
chairman  and  spokesman,  held  a  conference  with  the
ambassadors  of  France  and  England,  at  four  o'clock  in
the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  and  another  at  ten  o'clock
next  morning.^^

The  States  were  not  very  well  pleased  with  the  ratifi-
cation. What  especially  moved  their  discontent  was  the
concluding  clause,  according  to  which  it  was  intimated
that  if  the  pretensions  of  Spain  in  regard  to  religion
were  not  fulfilled  in  the  final  treaty,  the  ratification  was
waste-paper  and  the  king  would  continue  to  claim  all  his
rights.

How  much  more  loudly  would  they  have  vociferated,
could  they  have  looked  into  Friar  John's  wallet  and
have  seen  ratification  number  one !  Then  they  would  have
learned  that,  after  nearly  a  year  of  what  was  called  ne-
gotiation, the  king  had  still  meant  to  demand  the  resto-
ration of  the  Catholic  worship  before  he  would  even
begin  to  entertain  the  little  fiction  that  the  provinces
were  free.

As  to  the  signature,  the  paper,  and  the  Spanish  lan-
guage, those  were  minor  matters.  Indeed,  it  is  difficult
to  say  why  the  King  of  Spain  should  not  issue  a  formal
document  in  Spanish.  It  is  doubtful  whether,  had  he
taken  a  fancy  to  read  it,  he  could  have  understood  it
in  any  other  tongue.  Moreover,  Spanish  would  seem
the  natural  language  for  Spanish  state-papers.  Had  he,
as  King  of  Jerusalem,  America,  or  India,  chosen  the
Hebrew,  Aztec,  or  Sanscrit,  in  his  negotiations  with
the  United  Provinces,  there  might  have  been  more  cause
for  dissatisfaction.

91  Jeannin,  i.  425-429.

92  Ibid.  433.

03  Ibid.  432-438.

1607.

ADVICE  OF  JEANNIN.

377

Jeannin,  who  was  of  course  the  leading  spirit  among
the  foreign  members  of  the  conference,  advised  the  ac-
ceptance of  the  ratification.  Notwithstanding  the  tech-
nical objections  to  its  form,  he  urged  that  in  substance
it  was  in  sufficient  conformity  to  the  draught  furnished
by  the  States.  Nothing  could  be  worse,  in  his  opinion,
for  the  provinces  than  to  remain  any  longer  suspended
between  peace  and  war.  They  would  do  well,  therefore,
to  enter  upon  negotiations  so  soon  as  they  had  agreed
among  themselves  upon  three  points.

They  must  fix  the  great  indispensable  terms  which
they  meant  to  hold,  and  from  which  no  arguments  would
ever  induce  them  to  recede.  Thus  they  would  save
valuable  time  and  be  spared  much  frivolous  discourse.

Next,  they  ought  to  establish  a  good  interior  govern-
ment.

Thirdly,  they  should  at  once  arrange  their  alliances
and  treaties  with  foreign  powers,  in  order  to  render  the
peace  to  be  negotiated  a  durable  one.'-'^

As  to  the  first  and  second  of  these  points,  the  Nether-
landers  needed  no  prompter.  They  had  long  ago  settled
the  conditions  without  which  they  would  make  no  treaty
at  all,  and  certainly  it  was  not  the  States-General  that
had  thus  far  been  frivolously  consuming  time.

As  to  the  form  of  government,  defective  though  it
was,  the  leaders  of  the  republic  knew  very  well  in  whose
interests  such  sly  allusions  to  their  domestic  afiairs  were
repeatedly  ventured  by  the  French  envoys.  In  regard
to  treaties  with  foreign  powers  it  was,  of  course,  most
desirable  for  the  republic  to  obtain  the  formal  alliance  of
France  and  England.  Jeannin  and  his  colleagues  were
ready  to  sign  such  a  treaty,  offensive  and  defensive,  at
once,  but  they  found  it  impossible  to  induce  the  English
ambassadors,  with  whom  there  was  a  conference  on  the
26th  October,  to  come  into  any  written  engagement  on
the  subject.  They  expressed  approbation  of  the  plan
individually  and  in  words,  but  deemed  it  best  to  avoid
any  protocol,  by  which  their  sovereign  could  be  impli-
cated in  a  promise.  Should  the  negotiations  for  peace
be  broken  off,  it  would  be  time  enough  to  make  a  treaty
to  protect  the  provinces.  Meantime,  they  ought  to  con-
tent themselves  with  the  general  assurance,  already

w  Jeannin,  i.  432-437.

378

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

given  them,  that  in  case  of  war  the  monarch s  of  France
and  England  wonld  not  abandon  them,  but  would  pro-
vide for  their  safety,  either  by  succour  or  in  some  other
way,  so  that  they  would  be  placed  out  of  danger.^^

Such  promises  were  vague  without  being  magnificent,
and,  as  James  had  never  yet  lifted  his  finger  to  assist
the  provinces,  while  indulging  them  frequently  with
oracular  advice,  it  could  hardly  be  expected  that  either
the  French  envoys  or  the  States-General  would  reckon
very  confidently  on  assistance  from  Great  Britain,  should
war  be  renewed  with  Spain.

On  the  whole,  it  was  agreed  to  draw  up  a  paper  briefly
stating  the  opinion  of  the  French  and  English  plenipo-
tentiaries that  the  provinces  would  do  well  to  accept  the
ratification.^^

The  committee  of  the  States,  with  Barneveld  as  chair-
man, expressed  acquiescence,  but  urged  that  they  could
not  approve  the  clause  in  that  document  concerning
religion.  It  looked  as  if  the  King  of  Spain  wished  to
force  them  to  consent  by  treaty  that  the  Catholic  religion
should  be  re-established  in  their  country.  As  they  were
free  and  sovereign,  however,  and  so  recognized  by  him-
self, it  was  not  for  him  to  meddle  with  such  matters.
They  foresaw  that  this  clause  would  create  difficulties
when  the  whole  matter  should  be  referred  to  the  separate
provinces,  and  that  it  would,  perhaps,  cause  the  entire
rejection  of  the  ratification.

The  envoys,  through  the  voice  of  Jeannin,  remonstrated
against  such  a  course.  After  all,  the  objectionable  clause,
it  was  urged,  should  be  considered  only  as  a  demand,
which  the  king  was  competent  to  make  and  it  was  not
reasonable,  they  said,  for  the  States  to  shut  his  mouth
and  prevent  him  from  proposing  what  he  thought  good
to  propose.

On  the  other  hand,  they  were  not  obliged  to  acquiesce
in  the  proposition.  In  truth,  it  would  be  more  expe-
dient that  the  States  themselves  should  grant  this  grace
to  the  Catholics,  thus  earning  their  gratitude,  rather
than  that  it  should  be  inserted  in  the  treaty.^^

A  day  or  two  later  there  was  an  interview  between
the  French  envoys  and  Count  Lewis  William,  for  whose
sage,  dispassionate,  and  upright  character  they  had  all  a

95  Jeannin,  i.  434.  96  Jbid.  429.  S7  ibid.  j.  435.

1607. FORMAL  ANSWER  OF  THE  STATES-GENERAL.  379

great  respect.^^  It  was  their  object — in  obedience  to  the
repeated  instiTictions  of  the  French  king — to  make  use
of  his  great  influence  over  Prince  Maurice  in  favour  of
peace.  It  would  be  better,  they  urged,  that  the  stad-
holder  ^ould  act  more  in  harmony  with  the  States  than
he  had  done  of  late,  and  should  reflect  that,  the  ratifica-
tion being  good,  there  was  really  no  means  of  preventing
a  peace,  except  in  case  the  King  of  Spain  should  refuse
the  conditions  necessary  for  securing  it.  The  prince
would  have  more  power  by  joining  with  the  States  than
in  opposing  them.  Count  Lewis  expressed  sympathy
with  these  views,  but  feared  that  Maurice  would  prefer
that  the  ratification  should  not  be  accepted  until  the
states  of  the  separate  provinces  had  been  heard  ;  feel-
ing convinced  that  several  of  those  bodies  would  reject
that  instrument  on  account  of  the  clause  relating  to
religion.

Jeannin  replied  that  such  a  course  would  introduce
great  discord  into  the  provinces,  to  the  profit  of  the
enemy,  and  that  the  King  of  France  himself — so  far  from
being  likely  to  wish  the  ratification  rejected  because  of  the
clause — would  never  favour  the  rupture  of  negotiations
if  it  came  on  account  of  religion.  He  had  always  in-
structed them  to  use  their  efforts  to  prevent  any  division
among  the  States,  as  sure  to  lead  to  their  ruin.  He
would  certainly  desire  the  same  stipulation  as  the  one
made  by  the  King  of  Spain,  and  would  support  rather
than  oppose  the  demand  thus  made,  in  order  to  content
the  Catholics.  To  be  sure,  he  would  prefer  that  the
States  should  wisely  make  this  provision  of  their  own
accord  rather  than  on  the  requisition  of  Spain,  but  a
rupture  of  the  pending  negotiations  from  the  cause  siig-
gested  would  be  painful  to  him  and  very  damaging  to
his  character  at  liome.^^

On  the  2nd  November  the  States-General  gave  their
formal  answer  to  the  commissioners,  in  regard
to  the  ratification.  2  .  ov.

That  instrument,  the}^  observed,  not  only  did  not  agree
with  the  form  as  promised  by  the  archdukes  in  language
and  style,  but  also  in  regard  to  the  seal,  and  to  the  inser-
tion and  omission  of  several  words.  On  this  account,
and  especially  by  reason  of  the  concluding  clause,  there

*  Jeannin,  i.  437.

»  Ibid.  432-437.

380

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

might  be  inferred  the  annulment  of  the  solemn  promise
made  in  the  body  of  the  instrument.  The  said  king  and
archdukes  knew  very  well  that  these  States-General  of
free  countries  and  provinces,  over  which  the  king  and
archdukes  pretended  to  no  authority,  were  competent
to  maintain  order  in  all  things  regarding  the  good  con-
stitution and  government  of  their  land  and  its  inhabi-
tants. On  this  subject,  nothing  could  be  pretended  or
proposed  on  the  part  of  the  king  and  archdukes  without
violation  of  formal  and  solemn  promises.^^^

*'  Nevertheless,"  continued  the  States  -  General,  "  in
order  not  to  retard  a  good  work,  already  begun,  for  the
purpose  of  bringing  the  United  Provinces  out  of  a  long
and  bloody  war  into  a  Christian  and  assured  peace,  the
letters  of  ratification  will  be  received  in  respect  that
they  contain  the  declaration,  on  part  of  both  the  king
and  the  archdukes,  that  they  will  treat  for  a  peace  or  a
truce  of  many  years  with  the  States-General  of  the
United  Provinces,  in  quality  of,  and  as  holding  them
to  be,  free  countries,  provinces,  and  states,  over  which
they  make  no  pretensions."

It  was  further  intimated,  however,  that  the  ratifica-
tion was  only  received  for  reference  to  the  estates  of
each  of  the  provinces,  and  it  was  promised  that,  within
six  weeks  the  commissioners  should  be  informed  whe-
ther the  provinces  would  consent  or  refuse  to  treat.  It
was  moreover  declared  that,  neither  at  that  moment  nor
at  any  future  time,  could  any  point  in  the  letters  of  rati-
fication be  accepted  which,  directly  or  indirectly,  might
be  interpreted  as  against  that  essential  declaration  and
promise  in  regard  to  the  freedom  of  the  provinces.  In
case  the  decision  should  be  taken  to  enter  into  negotia-
tion upon  the  basis  of  that  ratification,  or  any  other  that
might  meantime  arrive  from  Spain,  then  firm  confidence
was  expressed  by  the  States  that,  neither  on  the  part  of
the  king  nor  that  of  the  archdukes  would  there  be  pro-
posed or  pretended,  in  contravention  of  that  promise,
any  point  touching  the  good  constitution,  welfare,  state,
or  government  of  the  United  Provinces,  and  of  the  in-
habitants. The  hope  was  furthermore  expressed  that,
within  ten  days  after  the  reception  of  the  consent  of  the
States  to  treat,  commissioners  would  be  sent  by  the  arch-

i«>  Jeannin,  i,  432-437.  V.  d.  Kemp,  iii.  30.  Wagen^ar,  ix.  287, 288. loi  Jeannin,  i.  430

1607. THE  DOCUMENT  REFUSED  BY  THE  STATES.

381

dukes  to  the  Hague,  fully  authorised  and  instructed  to
declare  roundly  their  intentions,  in  order  to  make  short
work  of  the  whole  business.  In  that  case,  the  States
would  duly  authorize  and  instruct  commissioners  to  act
in  their  behalf.

Thus  in  the  answer  especial  warning  was  given
against  any  possible  attempt  to  interfere  with  the  reli-
gious question.  The  phraseology  could  not  be  mistaken.

At  this  stage  of  the  proceedings,  the  States  demanded
that  the  original  instrument  of  ratification  should  be  de-
posited with  them.  The  two  commissioners  declared
that  they  were  without  power  to  consent  to  this.  Here-
upon the  Assembly  became  violent,  and  many  members
denounced  the  refusal  as  equivalent  to  breaking  off  the
negotiations.  Everything  indicated,  so  it  was  urged,  a
desire  on  the  Spanish  side  to  spin  delays  out  of  delays,
and,  meantime,  to  invent  daily  some  new  trap  for  de-
ception. Such  was  the  vehemence  upon  tins  point  that
the  industrious  Franciscan  posted  back  to  Brussels,  and
returned  with  the  archduke's  permission  to  deliver  the
document.^^'^  Three  conditions,  however,  were  laid  down.
The  States  must  give  a  receipt  for  the  ratification.  They
must  say  in  that  receipt  that  the  archdukes,  in  obtaining
the  paper  fiom  Spain,  had  fulfilled  their  original  pro-
mise. If  peace  should  not  be  made,  they  were  to  return
the  document.

When  these  conditions  were  announced,  the  indig-
nation of  the  republican  Government  at  the  trifling
of  their  opponents  was  fiercer  than  ever.  The  dis-
crepancies between  the  form  prescribed  and  the  rati-
fication obtained  had  always  been  veiy  difficult  of
digestion,  but,  although  willing  to  pass  them  by,  the
States  stoutly  refused  to  accept  the  document  on  theso
conditions.

Tooth  and  naiP^^  Verreyken  and  Neyen  fought  out  the
contest  and  were  worsted.  Once  more  the  nimble  friar
sped  back  and  forth  between  the  Hague  and  his  em-
ployer's palace,  and  at  last,  after  tremendous  discussions
in  cabinet  council,  the  conditions  were  abandoned.

*'  Nobody  can  decide,"  says  the  Jesuit  historian,
"  which  was  greater — the  obstinacy  of  the  federal  Go-
vernment in  screwing  out  of  the  opposite  party  every-

102 Gallucci,  342.

103 Mordicus." J  bid.

382

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLTX.

thing  it  deemed  necessary,  or  the  indulgence  of  the
archdukes  in  making  every  possible  concession."

Had  these  solemn  tricksters  of  an  antiquated  school
perceived  that,  in  dealing  with  men  who  meant  what
they  said  and  said  what  they  meant,  all  these  little  dila-
tory devices  were  superfluous,  perhaps  the  wholesome
result  might  have  sooner  been  reached.  In  a  contest  of
diplomacy  against  time  it  generally  happens  that  time  is
the  winner,  and  on  this  occasion,  time  and  the  republic
were  fighting  on  the  same  side.

On  the  13th  December  the  States-General  re-assembled
at  the  Hague,  the  separate  provinces  having  in  the  inter-
val given  fresh  instructions  to  their  representatives.  It
was  now  decided  that  no  treaty  should  be  made,  unless
the  freedom  of  the  commonwealth  was  recognized  in
phraseology  which,  after  consultation  with  the  foreign
ambassadors,  should  be  deemed  satisfactory.  Farther  it
was  agreed  that,  neither  in  ecclesiastical  nor  secular
matters,  should  any  conditions  be  accepted  which  could
be  detrimental  to  freedom.  In  case  the  enemy  should
strive  for  the  contrary,  the  world  would  be  convinced
that  he  alone  was  responsible  for  the  failure  of  the
peace  negotiations.  Then,  with  the  support  of  other
powers  friendly  to  the  republic,  hostilities  could  be  re-
sumed in  such  a  manner  as  to  ensure  a  favourable  issue
for  an  upright  cause.

The  armistice,  begun  on  the  4th  of  May,  was  running
to  an  end,  and  it  was  now  renewed  at  the  instance  9f
the  States.  That  Government,  moreover,  on  the  23rd
December  formally  notified  to  the  archdukes  that,  trust-
ing to  their  declarations,  and  to  the  statements  of  Neyen
and  Verreyken,  it  was  willing  to  hold  conferences  for
peace.^^^  Their  Highnesses  were  accordingly  invited  to
appoint  seven  or  eight  commissioners  at  once,  on  the
same  terms  as  formally  indicated.

The  original  understanding  had  been  that  no  envoys
but  N etherlanders  should  come  from  Brussels  for  these
negotiations/^^

Barneveld  and  the  peace  party,  however,  were  de-
sirous that  Spinola,  who  was  known  to  be  friendly  to  a
pacific  result,  should  be  permitted  to  form  part  of  the

Gallucci,  342.  »05  Resol.  HoU.  4  Dec.  160Y.  Wagenaar,  ix.  290,  291.

106  Wagenaar,  ix.  247,  293.

1607.

VICTORY  OF  THE  PEACE  PARTY.

383

mission.  Accordingly  the  letters,  publicly  drawn  up  in
the  Assembly,  adhered  to  the  original  arrangement,  but
Barneveld,  with  the  privity  of  other  leading  personages,
although  without  the  knowledge  of  Maurice,  Lewis
William,  and  the  State-Council,  secretly  enclosed  a
little  note  in  the  principal  despatch  to  Neyen  and
Verreyken.-^^^  In  this  billet  it  was  intimated  that,  not-
withstanding the  prohibition  in  regard  to  foreigners,  the
States  were  willing — it  having  been  proposed  that  one
or  two  who  were  not  Netherlanders  should  be  sent —
that  a  single  Spaniard,  provided  he  were  not  one  of  the
principal  military  commanders,  should  make  part  of  the
embassy.^^^

The  phraseology  had  a  double  meaning.  Spinola  was
certainly  the  chief  military  commander,  but  he  was  not
a  Spaniard.  This  eminent  personage  might  be  supposed
to  have  thus  received  permission  to  come  to  the  Nether-
lands, despite  all  that  had  been  urged  by  the  war-party
against  the  danger  incurred,  in  case  of  a  renewal  of  hos-
tilities, by  admitting  so  clear-sighted  an  enemy  into  the
heart  of  the  republic.  Moreover,  the  terms  of  the  secret
note  would  authorize  the  appointment  of  another  foreigner
—  even  a  Spaniard — while  the  crafty  president  Kichardot
might  creep  into  the  commission,  on  the  ground  that,
being  a  Burgundian,  he  might  fairly  call  himself  a
Netherlander.

And  all  this  happened.

Thus,  after  a  whole  year  of  parley,  in  which  the  States-
General  had  held  firmly  to  their  original  position,  while
the  Spanish  Government  had  crept  up  inch  by  inch,
and  through  countless  windings  and  subterfuges,  to  the
point  on  which  they  might  have  all  stood  together  at
first,  and  thus  have  saved  a  twelvemonth,  it  was  finally
settled  that  peace  conferences  should  begin.

Barneveld  had  carried  the  day.  Maurice  and  his
cousin  Lewis  William  had  uniformly,  deliberately,  but
not  factiously,  used  all  their  influence  against  any  nego-
tiations. The  prince  had  all  along  loudly  expressed  his
conviction  that  neither  the  archdukes  nor  Spain  would
ever  be  brought  to  an  honourable  peace.  The  most  to
be  expected  of  them  was  a  truce  of  twelve  or  fifteen

107  lieaol.  HoU.  4  Dec. Wiigonaar,  ix.  293-295. Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  31,  134,  136.
108  AutUoritios  Uu»t  cited.

384

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

years,  to  whicli  his  consent  at  least  should  never  be
given,  and  during  which  cessation  of  hostilities,  should
it  be  accorded,  every  imaginable  effort  would  be  made
to  regain  by  intrigue  what  the  king  had  lost  by  the
sword/^^  As  for  the  King  of  England  and  his  counsel-
lors, Maurice  always  denounced  them  as  more  Spanish
than  Spaniards,  as  doing  their  best  to  put  themselves
on  the  most  intimate  terms  with  his  Catholic  Majesty,
and  as  secretly  desirous — insane  policy  as  it  seemed —
of  forcing  the  Netherlands  back  again  under  the  sceptre
of  that  monarch.

He  had  at  first  been  supported  in  his  position  by  the
French  ambassadors,  who  had  felt  or  affected  disinclina-
tion for  peace,  but  who  had  subsequently  thrown  the
whole  of  their  own  and  their  master's  influence  on
the  side  of  Barneveld.  They  had  done  their  best — and
from  time  to  time  they  had  been  successful — to  effect  at
least  a  superficial  reconciliation  between  those  two  in-
fluential personages.  They  had  employed  all  the  argu-
ments at  their  disposal  to  bring  the  prince  over  to  the
peace  party.  Especially  they  had  made  use  of  the  argu-
mentum  ad  crumeiiam,  which  that  veteran  broker  in  poli-
tics, Jeannin,  had  found  so  effective  in  times  past  with
the  great  lords  of  the  League.  But  Maurice  showed
himself  so  proof  against  the  golden  inducements  sug-
gested by  the  President  that  he  and  his  king  both
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  there  were  secret  motives
at  work,  and  that  Maurice  was  not  dazzled  by  the  bril-
liant prospects  held  out  to  him  by  Henry,  only  because
his  eyes  were  stedfastly  fixed  upon  some  unknown  but
splendid  advantage,  to  be  gained  through  other  combi-
nations. It  was  naturally  difficult  for  Henry  to  imagine
the  possibility  of  a  man,  playing  a  first  part  in  the
world's  theatre,  being  influenced  by  so  weak  a  motive
as  conviction.

Lewis  William  too — that  "  grave  and  wise  young
man,"  as  Lord  Leicester  used  to  call  him  twenty  years
before  —  remained  steadily  on  the  side  of  the  prince.
Both  in  private  conversation  and  in  long  speeches  to
the  States  -  General,  he  maintained  that  the  Spanish
court  was  incapable  of  sincere  negotiations  with  the  com-
monwealth, that  to  break  faith  with  heretics  and  rebels

109  Vander  Kemp,  iii..l6.

1607. THE  DECISION  RECEIVED  WITH  SATISFACTION.  385

would  always  prove  the  foundation  of  its  whole  policy,
and  that  to  deceive  them  by  pretences  of  a  truce  or  a
treaty,  and  to  triumph  afterwards  over  the  results  of  its
fraud,  was  to  be  expected  as  a  matter  of  course.  Sooner
would  the  face  of  nature  be  changed  than  the  cardinal
maxim  of  Catholic  statesmanship  be  abandoned.

But  the  influence  of  the  Nassaus,  of  the  province  of
Zeeland,  of  the  clergy,  and  of  the  war- party  in  general,
had  been  overbalanced  by  Barneveld  and  the  city  cor-
porations, aided  by  the  strenuous  exertions  of  the  French
ambassadors.

The  decision  of  the  States-General  was  received  with
sincere  joy  at  Brussels.  The  archdukes  had  something
to  hope  from  peace,  and  little  but  disaster  and  ruin  to
themselves  from  a  continuance  of  the  war.  Spinola  too
was  unaffectedly  in  favour  of  negotiations.  lie  took  the
ground  that  the  foreign  enemies  of  Spain,  as  well  as  her
pretended  friends,  agreed  in  wishing  her  to  go  on  with
the  war,  and  that  this  ouglit  to  open  her  eyes  as  to  the  ex-
pediency of  peace.  While  there  was  a  general  satisfaction
in  Europe  that  the  steady  exhaustion  of  her  strength  in
this  eternal  contest  made  her  daily  less  and  less  formid-
able to  other  nations,  there  were  on  the  other  hand
puerile  complaints  at  court  that  the  conditions  pre-
scribed by  impious  and  insolent  rebels  to  their  sovereign
were  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  monarchy."^  The
spectacle  of  Spain  sending  ambassadors  to  the  Hague  to
treat  for  peace,  on  the  basis  of  Netherland  independence,
would  be  a  humiliation  such  as  had  never  been  ex-
hibited before.  That  the  haughty  confederation  should
be  allowed  thus  to  accomplish  its  ends,  to  trample  down
all  resistance  to  its  dictation,  and  to  defy  the  whole
world  by  its  insults  to  the  Church  and  to  the  sacred
principle  of  monarchy,  was  most  galling  to  Spanish
pride.  Spinola,  as  a  son  of  Italy,  and  not  inspired  by
the  fervent  hatred  to  Protestantism  which  was  indige-
nous to  the  other  peninsula,  steadily  resisted  these  argu-
ments. None  knew  better  than  he  the  sternness  of  the
stuff  out  of  which  that  republic  was  made,  and  he  felt
that  now  or  never  was  the  time  to  treat,  even  as,  five
years  before,  jam  aut  nunquam  had  been  inscribed  on  his

"0  See  especially  Resol.  Stat. -Gen.  30  Oct.  1607,  iti  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  126-130.

Spinola's  letters,  apud  Gallucci,  347,  sc^q.  Bentivoplio.
VOL.  IV.  2  c

386

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

banner  outside  Ostend.  But  he  protested  that  his  friends
gave  him  even  harder  work  than  his  enemies  had  eve"^
done,  and  he  stoutly  maintained  that  a  peace  against
which  all  the  rivals  of  Spain  seemed  to  have  conspired
from  fear  of  seeing  her  tranquil  and  disembarrassed,
must  be  advantageous  to  Spain.  The  genial  and  quick-
witted Genoese  could  not  see  and  hear  all  the  secret
letters  and  private  conversations  of  Henry  and  James
and  their  ambassadors,  and  he  may  be  pardoned  for  sup-
posing that,  notwithstanding  all  the  crooked  and  incom-
prehensible politics  of  Greenwich  and  Paris,  the  serious
object  of  both  France  and  England  was  to  prolong  the
war.  In  his  most  private  correspondence  he  expressed
great  doubts  as  to  a  favourable  issue  to  the  pending  con-
ferences, but  avowed  his  determination  that  if  they
should  fail  it  would  be  from  no  want  of  earnest  effort  on
his  part  to  make  them  succeed.  It  should  never  be  said
that  he  preferred  his  own  private  advantage  to  the  duty
of  serving  the  best  interests  of  the  crown.^^^

Meantime  the  India  trade,  which  was  to  form  the
great  bone  of  contention  in  the  impending  conferences,
had  not  been  practically  neglected  of  late  by  the  enter-
prising Hollanders.  Peter  Verhoeff,  fresh  from  the
victory  of  Gibraltar,  towards  which  he  had  personally
so  much  contributed  by  the  splendid  manner  in  w^hicK
he  had  handled  the  ^olus  after  the  death  of  Admiral
Haemskerk,  was  placed  in  command  of  a  fleet  to  the
East  Indies,  which  was  to  sail  early  in  the  spring.^^^

Admiral  Matelieff,  who  had  been  cruising  in  those  seas
during  the  three  years  past,  was  now  on  his
way  home.  His  exploits  had  been  worthy  the
growing  fame  of  the  republican  navy.  In  the  summer  of
1606  he  had  laid  siege  to  the  town  and  fortress  of  Malacca,
constructed  by  the  Portuguese  at  the  southmost  extremity
of  the  Malay  peninsula.  Andreas  Hurtado  de  Mendoza
commanded  the  position,  with  a  force  of  three  thousand
men,  among  whom  were  many  Indians.  The  King  or
Sultan  of  J  chore,  at  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  the
peninsula,  remained  faithful  to  his  Dutch  allies,  and  ac-
cepted the  proposition  of  Matelieff  to  take  part  in  the
hostilities  now  begun.  The  admiral's  fleet  consisted  of
eleven  small  ships,  with  fourteen  hundred  men. It  was

112  Gallucci,  349,  350.

ii3  W  agenaar,  i.x.  301.

1607.  MATELIEFF  LAYS  SIEGE  TO  MALACCA.

387

not  exactly  a  military  expedition.  To  the  sailors  of  each
ship  were  assigned  certain  shares  of  the  general  profits,
and  as  it  was  obvious  that  moie  money  was  likely  to  be
gained  by  trade  with  the  natives,  or  by  the  capture  of
such  stray  carracks  and  other  merchantmen  of  the  enemy
as  were  frequently  to  be  met  in  these  regions,  the  men
were  not  particularly  eager  to  take  part  in  sieges  of
towns  or  battles  with  cruisers.  Matelielf,  however,  had
sufficient  influence  over  his  comrades  to*  inflame  their
zeal  on  this  occasion  for  the  fame  of  the  republic,  and  to
induce  them  to  give  the  Indian  princes  and  the  native
soldiery  a  lesson  in  Batavian  warfare.

A  landing  was  effected  on  the  peninsula,  the  sailors
and  guns  were  disembarked,  and  an  imposing  auxiliary
force,  sent,  according  to  promise,  after  much  delay,  by
the  Sultan  of  Johore,  proceeded  to  invest  Malacca.  The
ground  proved  wet,  swamp}'',  and  impracticable  for
trenches,  galleries,  covered  ways,  and  all  the  other
machinery  of  a  regular  siege.  Matelieff  was  not  a  soldier
nor  a  naval  commander  by  profession,  but  a  merchant-
skipper,  like  so  many  other  heroes  whoso  achievements
were  to  be  the  permanent  glory  of  thuir  fatheiland.  He
would  not,  however,  have  been  a  Netherlander  had  he
not  learned  something  of  the  science  which  Prince
Maurice  had  so  long  been  teaching,  not  only  to  his  own
countrymen,  but  to  the  whole  world.  So  moveable
turrets,  constructed  of  the  spice-trees  which  grew  in  rank
luxuriance  all  around,  were  filled  with  earth  and  stones,
and  advanced  towards  the  fort.  Had  the  natives  been
as  docile  to  leai-n  as  the  Hollanders  were  eager  to  teach  a
few  easy  lessons  in  the  military  art,  the  doom  of  Andreas
Hurtado  de  Mendoza  would  have  been  sealed.  But  the
great  truths  which  those  youthful  pedants,  Maurice  and
Lewis  William,  had  extracted  twenty  years  before  from
the  works  of  the  Emperor  Leo  and  earlier  pagans,  amid
the  jeers  of  veterans,  were  not  easy  to  transplant  to  the
Malayan  peninsula.

It  soon  proved  that  those  white-turbaned,  loose  gar-
mented, supple-jointed,  highly  picturesque  troops  of  the
sultan  were  not  likely  to  distinguish  themselves  for  any-
thing but  wonderful  rapidity  in  retreat.  Not  only  did
they  shrink  from  any  advance  towards  the  distant  forts,
but  they  were  incapable  of  abiding  an  attack  within  or

2  c  2

388

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XLIX.

behind  tlieir  towers,  and,  at  every  random  shot  from  the
enemy's  works,  they  threw  down  their  arms  and  fled
from  their  stations  in  dismay.  It  was  obvious  enough
that  the  conquest  and  subjugation  of  such  feeble  warriors
by  the  Portuguese  and  Spaniards  were  hardly  to  be  con-
sidered brilliant  national  trophies.  They  had  fallen  an
easy  prey  to  the  first  European  invader.  They  had  no
discipline,  no  obedience,  no  courage  ;  and  Matelieff  soon
found  that  to  attempt  a  scientific  siege  with  such
auxiliaries  against  a  well-constructed  stone  fortress,  gar-
risoned with  three  thousand  troops,  under  an  experienced
Spanish  soldier,  was  but  midsummer  madness.

Fevers  and  horrible  malaria,  bred  by  the  blazing  sun
of  the  equator  out  of  those  pestilential  jungles,  poisoned
the  atmosphere.  His  handful  of  troops,  amounting  to
not  much  more  than  a  hundred  men  to  each  of  his  ships,
might  melt  away  before  his  eyes.  Nevertheless,  although
it  was  impossible  for  him  to  carry  the  place  by  regular
approach,  he  would  not  abandon  the  hope  of  reducing  it
by  famine.  During  four  months  long,  accordingly,  he
kept  every  avenue  by  land  or  sea  securely  invested.  In
August,  however,  the  Spanish  viceroy  of  India,  Don
Alphonso  de  Castro,  made  his  appearance  on  the  scene.
Coming  from  Goa  with  a  splendid  fleet,  numbering  four-
teen great  galleons,  four  galleys,  and  sixteen  smaller
vessels,  manned  by  three  thousand  seven  hundred  Portu-
guese and  other  Europeans,  and  an  equal  number  of
native  troops,  he  had  at  first  directed  his  course  towaids
Atchen,  on  the  north  west  point  of  Sumatra.  Here,
with  the  magnificent  arrogance  which  Spanish  and  Por-
tuguese viceroys  were  accustomed  to  manifest  towards
the  natives  of  either  India,  he  summoned  the  king  to
surrender  his  strongholds,  to  assist  in  constructing  a
fortress  for  the  use  of  his  conquerors,  to  deliver  up  all
the  Xetherlanders  within  his  domains,  and  to  pay  the
expenses  of  the  expedition  which  had  thus  been  sent  to
chastise  him.  But  the  King  of  Atchen  had  not  sent
ambassadors  into  the  camp  of  Prince  Maurice  before  the
city  of  Grave  in  vain.  He  had  learned  that  there  were
other  white  skins  besides  the  Spaniards  at  the  antipodes,
and  that  the  republic  whose  achievements  in  arts  and
arms  were  conspicuous  trophies  of  Western  civilization,
was  not,  as  it  had  been  represented  to  him,  a  raere  nest'

1607. ENCOUNTER  WITH  THE  SPANISH  FLEET.  389

of  pirates.  He  had  learned  to  prefer  an  alliance  with
Holland  to  slavery  under  Spain.  Moreover,  he  had
Dutch  engineers  and  architects  in  his  service,  and  a
well -constructed  system  of  Dutch  fortifications  around
his  capital.  To  the  summons  to  surrender  himself  and
his  allies  he  returned  a  defiant  answer.  The  viceroy
ordered  an  attack  upon  the  city.  One  fort  was  taken.
From  before  the  next  he  was  repulsed  with  great  loss.
The  Sumatrans  had  derived  more  profit  from  intercourse
with  Europeans  than  the  inhabitants  of  Johore  or  the
Moluccas  had  done.  De  Castro  abandoned  the  siege.  He
had  received  intelligence  of  the  dangerous  situation  of
Malacca,  and  moved  down  upon  the  place  with  his  whole
fleet.  Admiral  Matelieff,  apprised  by  scouts  of  his
approach  behaved  with  the  readiness  and  coolness  of  a
veteran  campaigner.  Before  De  Castro  could  arrive  in
the  roadstead  of  Malacca,  he  had  withdrawn  all  his
troops  from  their  positions,  got  all  his  artillery  reshipped,
and  was  standing  out  in  the  straits,  awaiting  the  enemy.

On  the  17th  August,  the  two  fleets,  so  vastly  dis-
proportionate in  number,  size,  equipment,  and  17  Aug.
military  force — eighteen  galleons  and  galleys,  i^ce.
with  four  or  five  thousand  fighting  men,  against  eleven
small  vessels  and  twelve  or  fourteen  hundred  sailors —
met  in  that  narrow  sea.  The  action  lasted  all  day.  It
was  neither  spirited  nor  sanguinary.  It  ought  to  have
been  within  the  power  of  the  Spaniard  to  crush  his  dimi-
nutive adversary.  It  might  have  seemed  a  sufficient
triumph  for  Matelieff  to  manoeuvre  himself  out  of  barm's
way.  No  vessel  on  either  side  was  boarded,  not  one  sur-
rendered, but  two  on  each  side  were  set  on  fire  and
destroyed.  Eight  of  the  Dutchmen  were  killed — not  a
very  sanguinary  result  after  a  day's  encounter  with  so
imposing  an  armada.  De  Castro's  losses  were  much
greater,  but  still  the  battle  was  an  insignificant  one,  and
neither  fleet  gained  a  victory.  Night  put  an  end  to  the
cannonading,  and  the  Spaniards  withdrew  to  Malacca,
while  Matelieff  bore  away  to  Johore.  The  siege  of
Malacca  was  relieved,  and  the  Netherlanders  now  occu-
pied themselves  with  the  defence  of  the  feeble  sovereign
at  the  other  point  of  the  peninsula.

Matelieff  lay  at  Johore  a  month,  repairing  damages
and  laying  in  supplies. While  still  at  the  place,  he

390

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  XLIX.

received  information  that  a  large  part  of  the  Spanish
armada  had  sailed  from  Malacca.  Several  of  his  own
crew,  w^ho  had  lost  their  shares  in  the  adventure  by  the
burning  of  the  ships  to  which  they  belonged  in  the  action
of  17th  August,  were  reluctant  and  almost  mutinous
when  their  admiral  now  proposed  to  them  a  sudden
assault  on  the  portion  of  the  Spanish  fleet  still  remaining
within  reach.  They  had  not  come  forth  for  barren
glory,  many  protested,  but  in  search  of  fortune ;  they
were  not  elated  by  the  meagre  result  of  the  expedition.
Matelieif  succeeded,  however,  at  last  in  inspiring  all  the
men  of  his  command  with  an  enthusiasm  superior  to
sordid  appeals,  and  made  a  few  malcontents.  On  the
21st  September,  he  sailed  to  Malacca,  and  late  in  the
afternoon  again  attacked  the  Spaniards.  Their  fleet
consisted  of  seven  great  galleons  and  three  galleys  lying
in  a  circle  before  the  town.  The  outermost  ship,  called
the  St.  Nicholas,  was  boarded  by  men  from  three  of  the
Dutch  galleots  with  sudden  and  irresistible  fury.  There
w^as  a  brief  but  most  terrible  action,  the  Netherlanders
seeming  endowed  with  superhuman  vigour.  So  great  was
the  panic  that  there  was  hardly  an  eflort  at  defence,  and
within  less  than  an  hour  nearly  every  Spaniard  on  board
the  St.  Nicholas  had  been  put  to  the  sword.  The  rest  of
the  armada  engaged  the  Dutch  fleet  with  spirit,  but  one
of  the  great  galleons  was  soon  set  on  fire  and  burned  to
the  water's  edge.  Another,  dismasted  and  crippled,
struck  her  flag,  and  all  that  remained  would  probably
have  been  surrendered  or  destroyed  had  not  the  sudden
darkness  of  a  tropical  nightfall  put  an  end  to  the  combat
at  set  of  sun.  Next  morning  another  galleon,  in  a  shat-
tered and  sinking  condition,  was  taken  possession  of  and
found  filled  with  dead  and  dying.  The  rest  of  the
Spanish  ships  made  their  escape  into  the  harbour  of
Malacca.  Matelieff  stood  off  and  on  in  the  straits  for  a
day  or  two,  hesitating  for  fear  of  shallows  to  follow  into
the  roadstead.  Before  he  could  take  a  decision,  he  had
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  enemy,  panic  struck,  save
him  any  further  trouble.  Not  waiting  for  another
attack,  the  Spaniards  set  fire  to  every  one  of  their  ships,
and  retired  into  their  fortress,  while  Matelieff  and  his
men  enjoyed  the  great  conflagration  as  idle  spectators.
Thus  the  enterprising  Dutch  admiral  had  destroyed  ten

1607.  FURTHER  OPERATIONS  OF  MATELIEFF.  391

great  war-ships  of  the  enemy,  and,  strange  to  relate,  had
scarcely  lost  one  man  of  his  whole  squadron.  Rarely
had  a  more  complete  triumph  been  achieved  on  the
water  than  in  this  battle  in  the  straits  of  Malacca.  Mate-
lieff  had  gained  much  glory  but  very  little  booty.  He
was  also  encumbered  with  a*great  number  of  prisoners.
These  he  sent  to  Don  Alfonso,  exchanging  them  for  a
very  few  Ketherlanders  then  in  Spanish  hands,  at  the
rate  of  two  hundred  Spaniards  for  ten  Dutchmen — thus
showing  that  he  held  either  the  enemy  very  cheap,  or
his  own  countrymen  very  dear.  The  captured  •  ships
he  burned  as  useless  to  him,  but  retained  twenty -four
pieces  of  artillery.

It  was  known  to  Matelieff  that  the  Si)anish  viceroy
had  received  instructions  to  inflict  chastisement  on  all
the  oriental  potentates  and  their  subjects  who  had  pre-
sumed of  late  to  trade  and  to  form  alliances  with  the
Netherlanders.  Johore,  Achem,  Taham,  Tatane,  Am-
boyna,  and  Bantam,  were  the  most  probable  points  of
attack.  Johore  had  now  been  elTectually  defended,
Achem  had  protected  itself.  The  Dutch  fleet  proceeded
at  first  to  Bantam  for  refreshment,  and  from  this  point
Matelieff  sent  three  of  his  ships  back  to  Holland.  With
the  six  remaining  to  him,  he  sailed  for  the  Moluccas,
having  heard  of  various  changes  which  had  taken  place
in  that  important  archipelago.  Pausing  at  the  great
emporium  of  nutmegs  and  all-spice,  Amboyna,  he  took
measures  for  strengthening  the  fortifications  of  the  place,
w^hich  was  well  governed  by  Frederick  Houtman,  and
then  proceeded  to  Temate  and  Tidor.

During  the  absence  of  the  Netherlanders,  after  the
events  on  those  islands  recorded  in  a  previous  chapter,
the  Spaniards  had  swept  down  upon  them  from  the
Philippines  with  a  fleet  of  thirty- seven  ships,  and  had
taken  captive  the  Sultan  of  Ternate  ;  while  the  potentate
of  Tidor,  who  had  been  left  by  Stephen  van  der  Hagen
in  possession  of  his  territories  on  condition  of  fidelity  to
the  Dutch,  was  easily  induced  to  throw  aside  the  mask,
and  to  renew  his  servitude  to  Spain.  Thus  both  the
coveted  clove-islands  had  relapsed  into  the  control  of
the  enemy.  Matelieff  found  it  dangerous,  on  account
of  quicksands  and  shallows,  to  land  on  Tydore,  but  he
took  very  energetic  measurer  to  recover  possession  oi

392

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. i^hap.  XLIX.

Ternate.  On  the  ^onthern  side  of  the  island,  the
Spaniards  had  built  a  fort  and  a  town.  The  Dutch
admiral  disembarked  upon  the  northern  side,  and,  with
assistan(3e  of  the  natives,  succeeded  in  throwing  up  sub-
stantial fortifications  at  a  village  called  Malaya.  The
son  of  the  former  sultan,  who  was  a  Spanish  prisoner  at
the  Philippines,  was  now  formally  inducted  into  his
father's  sovereignty,  and  Matelieff  established  at  Malaya
for  his  protection  a  garrison  of  forty-five  Hollanders
and  a  navy  of  four  small  yachts.  Such  were  the  slender
mean^  with  which  Oriental  empires  were  founded  in
those  days  by  the  stout-hearted  adventurers  of  the  little
Batavian  republic.

With  this  miniature  army  and  navy,  and  by  means  of
his  alliance  with  the  distant  commonwealth,  of  whose
power  this  handful  of  men  was  a  symbol,  the  King  of
Ternate  was  thenceforth  to  hold  his  own  against  the
rival  potentate  on  the  other  island,  supported  by
the  Spanish  King.  The  same  convention  of  commerce
and  amity  was  made  with  the  Ternatians  as  the  one
which  Stephen  van  der  Hagen  had  formerly  concluded
with  the  Bandians,  and  it  was  agreed  that  the  potentate
should  be  included  in  any  treaty  of  peace  that  might  be
made  between  the  republic  and  Spain.

Matelieff,  with  three  ships  and  a  cutter,  now  sailed  for
China,  but  lost  his  time  in  endeavouring  to  open  trade
with  the  Celestial  empire.  The  dilatory  mandarins  drove
him  at  last  out  of  all  patience,  and,  on  turning  his  prows
once  more  southward,  he  had  nearly  brought  his  long
expedition  to  a  disastrous  termination.  Six  well-armed,
well-equipped  Portuguese  galleons  sailed  out  of  Macao
to  assail  him.  It  was  not  Matelieff's  instinct  to  turn  his
back  on  a  foe,  however  formidable,  but  on  this  occasion
discretion  conquered  instinct.  His  three  ships  were  out
of  repair;  he  had  a  deficiency  of  powder;  he  was  in
every  respect  unprepared  for  a  combat ;  and  he  reflected
upon  the  unfavourable  impiession  which  would  be  made
on  the  Chinese  mind  should  the  Hollanders,  upon  their
first  appearance  in  the  flowery  regions,  be  vanquished
by  the  Portuguese.  He  avoided  an  encounter,  tlierefore,
and,  by  skilful  seamanship,  eluded  all  attempts  of  the
foe  at  pursuit.  Eeturning  to  Ternate,  he  had  the  satis-
faction to  find  that  during  his  absence  the  doughty  little

1607.

MATELIEFFS  RETURN  TO  HOLLAND.

393

garrison  of  Malaya  had  triumphantly  defeated  the
{Spaniards  in  an  assault  on  the  fortifications  of  the  little
town.  On  the  other  hand,  the  King  of  Johore,  panic-
struck  on  the  departure  of  his  Dutch  protectors,  had
burned  his  own  capital,  and  had  betaken  himself  with  all
his  court  into  the  jungle.

Commending  the  one  and  rebuking  the  other  potentate,
the  admiral  provided  assistance  for  both,  some  Dutch
trading-vessels  having  meantime  an-ived  in  the  archi-
pelago. Matelieff  now  set  sail  for  Holland,  taking  with
him  some  ambassadors  from  the  King  of  Siam  and  five
ships  well  laden  with  spice.  On  his  return  he  read  a
report  of  his  adventures  to  the  States- General,  and
received  the  warm  commendations  of  their  High  Mighti-
nesses.^^* Before  his  departure  from  the  tropics,  Paul  van
Kaarden,  with  eight  war-ships,  had  reached  Bantam.
On  his  arrival  in  Holland  the  fleet  of  Teter  ver  Hoef
was  busily  fitting  out  for  another  great  expedition  to
the  East.^^^  This  was  the  nation  which  Spanish  courtiers
thought  to  exclude  for  ever  from  commerce  with  India
and  America,  because  the  Pope  a  century  before  had
divided  half  the  globe  between  Ferdinand  the  Catholic
and  Emmanuel  the  Fortunate.

it  may  be  supposed  that  the  results  of  Matelieff'a
voyage  were  likely  to  influence  the  pending  negotiations
for  peace.

11*  The  authorities  for  MateliefF's  voj-ages  are  Grotius,  xvii,  792- HOO;  ^^leteren,
9  )2,  5(53 ;  and  esp>ecially  the  original  journals  and  records  in  "  Bigiu  uud  Vortgang.'*
115  Authoritie-j  last  cited.

394

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  I»

CHAPTEE  L.

Movements  of  the  Emperor  Rudolph —  Marquis  Spinola's  reception  at  the  Hague  —
Meeting  of  Spinola  and  Prince  Maurice  —  Treaty  of  the  Republic  with  the  French
Government  —  The  Spanish  commissioners  before  the  States-General  —  Beginning
of  negotiations  —  Stormy  discussions — Real  object  of  Spain  in  the  negotiations  —
Question  of  the  India  trade  —  Abandonment  of  the  peace  project  —  Negotiations
for  a  truce  —  Prolongation  of  the  armistice  —  Further  delays  —  Treaty  of  the
States  with  England  —  Proposals  of  the  Spanish  ambassadors  to  Henry  of  France
and  to  James  of  England  —  Friar  Neyen  at  the  court  of  Spain  —  Spanish  pro-
crastination —  Decision  of  Philip  on  the  conditions  of  peace  —  Further  conference
at  the  Hague  —  Answer  of  the  States-General  to  the  proposals  of  the  Spanish
Government  —  General  rupture.

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1607  a  very  feeble  demon-
stration was  made  in  the  direction  of  the  Dutch  republic
by  the  very  feeble  Emperor  of  Germany.  Rudolph,
awaking  as  it  might  be  from  a  trance,  or  descending  for
a  moment  from  his  star-gazing  tower  and  his  astrological
pursuits  to  observe  the  movements  of  political  spheres,
suddenly  discovered  that  the  Netherlands  were  no  longer
revolving  in  their  pre-ordained  orbit.  Those  provinces
had  been  supposed  to  form  part  of  one  great  system,  deriv-
ing light  and  heat  from  the  central  imperial  sun.  It  was
time  therefore  to  put  an  end  to  these  perturbations.  The
emperor  accordingly,  as  if  he  had  not  enough  on  his
hands  at  that  precise  moment  with  the  Hungarians,
Transylvanians,  Bohemian  protestants,  his  brother
Matthias  and  the  Grand  Turk,  addressed  a  letter  to  the
States  of  Holland,  Zeeland,  and  the  provinces  confede-
rated with  them.^

Reminding  them  of  the  care  ever  taken  by  himself
and  his  father  to  hear  all  their  petitions,  and  to  obtain
for  them  a  good  peace,  he  observed  that  he  had  just
heard  of  their  contemplated  negotiations  with  King
Philip  and  Archduke  Albert,  and  of  their  desire  to  be
declared  free  states  and  peoples.  He  was  amazed,  he
said,  that  they  should  not  have  given  him  notice  of
so  important  an  affair,  inasmuch  as  all  the  United  Pro-
vinces belonged  to  and  were  fiefs  of  the  holy  Roman

1  Meteren,  553,  et  seqq. Wagenaar,  ix.  295-299. Grotius,  xvi.  751.  752.

1608. THE  EMPEROR  RUDOLPH  AND  THE  STATES.  39o

Empire. They  were  warned,  therefore,  to  undertake
nothing  that  might  be  opposed  to  the  feudal 9  oct.
law  except  with  his  full  knowledge.  This
letter  was  dated  the  9th  of  October. The  States  took
time  to  deliberate,  and  returned  no  answer  until  after
the  new  year.^

On  the  2nd  of  January,  1608,  they  informed  the
emperor  that  they  could  never  have  guessed  of  his
requiring  notification  as  to  the  approaching  ^^^^
conferences.  They  had  not  imagined  that  the
archduke  would  keep  them  a  secret  from  his  brother,  or
the  king  fiom  his  uncle-cousin.  Otherwise,  the  States
would  have  sent  due  notice  to  his  Majesty.  They  well
remembered,  they  said,  the  appeals  made  by  the  pro-
vinces to  the  emperor  from  time  to  time,  at  the  imperial
diets,  for  help  against  the  tyranny  of  the  Spaniards.
They  well  remembered,  too,  that  no  help  was  ever  given
them  in  response  to  those  appeals.  They  liad  not  for-
gotten either  the  famous  Cologne  negotiations  for  peace
in  presence  of  the  imperial  envoys,  in  consequence  of
which  the  enemy  had  carried  on  war  against  them  with
greater  ferocity  than  before.  At  that  epoch  they  had
made  use  of  an  extreme  remedy  for  an  intolerable  evil,
and  had  solemnly  renounced  allegiance  to  the  king.
Since  that  epoch  a  whole  generation  of  mar.kind  had
passed  away,  and  many  kings  and  potentates  had  re-
cognised their  freedom,  obtained  for  just  cause  and
maintained  by  the  armed  hand.  After  a  long  and  bloody
war,  Albert  and  Pliilip  had  at  last  been  brought  to
acknowledge  the  provinces  as  free  countries  over  which
they  pretended  to  no  right,  as  might  be  seen  by  the  letters
of  both,  copies  of  which  were  forwarded  to  the  emperor.
Full  confidence  was  now  expressed,  therefore,  that  the
emperor  and  all  Gennany  would  look  with  favour  on
such  a  God-fearing  transaction,  by  which  an  end  would
be  put  to  so  terrible  a  war.^  Thus  the  States-General ;
replying  with  gentle  scorn  to  the  antiquated  claim  of
sovereignty  on  the  part  of  imperial  majesty.  Duly
authenticated  by  citations  of  investitures,  indulgences,
and  concordates,  engrossed  on  yellowest  parchment,
sealed  with  reddest  sealing-wax,  and  reposing  in  a
thousand  pigeon-holes  in  mustiest  archives,  no  claim

*  Authorities  last  cited.

3  Moterai,  Wogcnaar,  ubi  mjp.

396

THE  I3NITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  U

coull  be  more  solemn  or  stately.  Unfortunately,  how-
ever, rebel  pikes  and  matclilocks,  during  the  past  forty
years,  had  made  too  many  rents  in  those  sacred  parch-
ments to  leave  much  hope  of  their  ever  being  pieced
handsomely  together  again.  As  to  the  historical  theory
of  imperial  enfeoffment,  the  States  thought  it  more  deli-
cate to  glide  smoothly  and  silently  over  the  whole
matter.  It  would  have  been  base  to  acknowledge  and
impolite  to  refute  the  claim.*

It  is  as  well  to  imitate  this  reserve.  It  is  enough
simply  to  remind  the  reader  that  although  so  late  as  the
time  of  Charles  V.,  the  provinces  had  been  declared  con-
stituent parts  of  the  empire,  liable  to  its  burthens,  and
entitled  to  its  protection ;  the  Netherlanders  being
practical  people,  and  deeming  burthens  and  protection
correlative,  had  declined  the  burthen  because  always
deprived  of  the  protection.

And  now,  after  a  year  spent  in  clearing  away  the
mountains  of  dust  which  impeded  the  pathway  to  peace,
and  which  one  honest  vigorous  human  breath  might  at
once  have  blown  into  space,  the  envoys  of  the  archduke
set  forth  towards  the  Hague.

Marquis  Spinola*,  Don  Juan  de  Maucicidor,  private
secretary  to  the  King  of  Spain,  President  Eichardot,
Auditor  Verreyken,  and  Brother  JohnNeyen — a  Genoese,
a  Spaniard,  a  Burgundian,  a  Fleming,  and  a  Franciscan
friar — travelling  in  great  state,  with  a  long  train  of  car-
riages, horses,  lackeys,  cooks,  and  secretaries,  by  way  of

31  Jan. Breda,  Bergen-op-Zoom,  Dort,  Kotterdam,  and

1608.  Delft,  and  being  received  in  each  town  and
village  through  which  they  passed  with  great  demonstra-
tions of  respect  and  cordial  welcome,  arrived  at  last  within
a  mile  of  the  Hague.^

It  was  the  dead  of  winter,  and  of  the  severest  winter
that  had  occurred  for  many  years.  Every  river,  estuary,
canal  was  frozen  hard.  All  Holland  was  one  broad  level
sheet  of  ice,  over  which  the  journey  had  been  made  in
sledges.  On  the  last  day  of  January  Prince  Maurice,
accompanied  by  Lewis  William,  and  by  eight  state
coaches  filled  with  distinguished  personages,  left  the
Hague  and  halted  at  the  Hoorn  bridge,  about  midway

*  "De  feudo  silebatur  quia  et  refellere  odiosum  et  fateri  inglorium."— Grotius
xvi.  162,  5  Meteren,  563.

1608.  SPINOLA'S  RECEPTION  AT  THE  HAGUE.  397

between  Eyswyk  and  the  capital.  The  Prince  had
3eplied  to  the  first  request  of  the  States  that  he  should
go  forward  to  meet  Spinola,  by  saying  that  he  would  do
so  willingly  if  it  were  to  give  him  battle ;  otherwise
not.  Olden-Barneveld  urged  upon  him  however  that,
as  servant  of  the  republic,  he  was  bound  to  do  what  the
States  commanded,  as  a  matter  involving  the  dignity
of  the  naticm.  In  consequence  of  this  remonstrance
Maurice  consented  to  go,  but  he  went  un willingly. ^  The
advancing  procession  of  the  Spanish  ambassadors  was
already  in  sight.  Far  and  wide  in  whatever  direction
the  eye  could  sweep,  the  white  surface  of  the  landscape
was  blackened  with  human  beings.  It  seemed  as  if  the
whole  population  of  the  Netherlands  had  assembled,  in
mass  meeting,  to  witness  the  pacific  interview  between
those  two  great  chieftains  who  had  never  before  stood
face  to  face,  except  upon  the  battle-field.

In  carriages,  in  donkey  carts,  upon  horseback,  in
sledges,  on  skates,  upon  foot — men,  women,  and  children,
gentle  and  simple,  Protestants,  Catholics,  Gomarites,
Arminians,  Anabaptists,  countiy  squires  in  buft'  and
bandaleer,  city  magistrates  and  merchants  in  furs  and
velvet,  artisans,  boatmen,  and  peasants,  with  their
wives  and  daughters  in  well-starched  rutf  and  tremen-
dous head-gear — they  came  thronging  in  countless  multi-
tudes, those  honest  Hollanders,  cheeiing  and  throwing
up  their  caps  in  honour  of  the  chieftain  whose  military
genius  had  caused  so  much  disaster  to  their  country.
This  uproarious  demonstiation  of  welcome  on  the  part
of  the  multitude  moved  the  spleen  of  many  who  were
old  enough  to  remember  the  horrors  of  Spanish  warfare
within  their  borders.  *'  Thus  unreflecting,  gaping,
boorish,  are  nearly  all  the  common  people  of  these  pro-
vinces,"^ said  a  contemporary,  describing  the  scene,  and
forgetting  that  both  high  and  low,  according  to  his  own
account,  made  up  the  mass  of  spectators  on  that  winter^s
day.  Moreover,  it  seems  difficult  to  understand  why
the  Hollanders  should  not  have  indulged  a  legitimate
curiosity,  ajid  made  a  holiday  on  this  memorable  occa-
sion. Spinola  was  not  entering  their  capital  in  triumph,
a  Spanish  army  was  not  maiching — as  it  might  have
done  had  the  course  of  events  been  ditierent — over  the

6  Letter  of  Aerssens,  in  Devent^r,  iii.  168.

7  Meteren,  563.

S98  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  U

protective  rivers  and  marslies  of  the  fatherland,  now
changed  by  the  exceptional  cold  into  solid  highways  for
invasion.  On  the  contrary,  the  arrival  of  the  great
enemy  within  their  gates,  with  the  olive-branch  instead
of  the  sword  in  his  hand,  was  a  victory  not  for  Spain
but  for  the  republic.  It  was  known  throughout  the
land  that  he  was  commissioned  by  the  king  and
the  archdukes  to  treat  for  peace  with  the  States- General
of  the  United  Provinces  as  with  the  representatives  of  a
free  and  independent  nation,  utterly  beyond  any  foreign
control.

Was  not  this  opening  of  a  cheerful  and  pacific  pros-
pect, after  a  half  century's  fight  for  liberty,  a  fair  cause
for  rejoicing  ?

The  Spanish  commissioners  arrived  at  the  Hoorn
bridge,  Spinola  alighted  from  his  coach.  Prince  Maurice
stepped  forward  into  the  road  to  greet  him.  Then  the
two  eminent  soldiers,  whose  names  had  of  late  been  so
familiar  in  the  mouths  of  men,  shook  hands  and  embraced
with  heroic  cordiality,  while  a  mighty  shout  went  up
from  the  multitude  around.  It  was  a  stately  and
dramatic  spectacle,  that  peaceful  meeting  of  the  rival
leaders  in  a  war  which  had  begun  before  either  of  them
was  born.  The  bystanders  observed,  or  thought  that
they  observed,  signs  of  great  emotion  on  the  faces  of
both.  It  has  also  been  recorded  that  each  addressed  the
other  in  epigrammatic  sentences  of  compliment.  God
is  my  witness,"  Maurice  was  supposed  to  have  said,
"  that  the  arrival  of  these  honourable  negotiators  is
most  grateful  to  me.  Time,  whose  daughter  is  truth,
will  show  the  faith  to  be  given  to  my  words."  ^

This  fortunate  day,"  replied  Spinola,  "  has  filled
full  the  measure  of  my  hopes  and  wishes,  and  taken
from  me  the  faculty  of  ever  wishing  for  anything  again.
I  trust  in  divine  clemency  that  an  opportunity  may  be
given  to  show  my  gratitude,  and  to  make  a  fit  return
for  the  humanity  thus  shown  me  by  the  most  excellent
prince  that  the  sun  shines  upon."  ^

With  this  both  got  into  the  stadholder's  carriage,
Spinola  being  placed  on  Maurice's  right  hand.  Their
conversation,  during  their  brief  drive  to  the  capital,
followed  by  their  long  retinue,  and  by  the  enthusiastic

8  Gallucci,  352.

9  Ibid.

1G08.

SPINOLA'S  EXTRAVAGANT  LIVING.

399

and  vociferating  crowd,  "has  not  been  chronicled.  It  is
also  highly  probable  that  the  second-rate  theatrical
dialogue  which  the  Jesuit  historian,  writing  from
Spinola's  private  papers,  has  preserved  for  posterity,
was  rather  what  seemed  to  his  imagination  appropriate
for  the  occasion  than  a  faithful  shorthand  report  of
anything  really  uttered.  A  few  commonplace  phrases
of  welcome,  with  a  remark  or  two  perhaps  on  the  unex-
ampled severity  of  the  frost,  seem  more  likely  to  have
formed  the  substance  of  that  brief  conversation.

A  couple  of  trumpeters  of  Spinola  went  braying
through  the  streets  of  the  village  capital,  heralding
their  master's  approach  with  superfluous  noise,  and  ex-
citing the  disgust  of  the  quieter  portion  of  the  burghers.^°
At  last  however  the  envoys  and  their  train  were  all
comfortably  housed.  The  Marquis,  President  liichardot,
and  Secretaiy  Mancicidor,  were  established  at  a  new
mansion  on  the  Yyverberg,  belonging  to  Goswyn  Men-
skens.  I'he  rest  of  the  legation  were  lodged  at  the
house  of  Wassenaer.^^

It  soon  became  plain  that  the  ways  of  life  and  the
style  of  housekeeping  habitual  to  great  officers  of
the  Spanish  crown  were  very  different  from  the  thrifty
manners  and  customs  of  Dutch  republicans.  It  was  so
long  since  anything  like  royal  pomp  and  circumstance
had  been  seen  in  their  borders  that  the  exhibition,  now
made,  excited  astonishment.  It  was  a  land  where  every
child  went  to  school,  where  almost  every  individual
inhabitant  could  read  and  write,  wjiere  even  the  middle
classes  were  proficients  in  mathematics  and  the  classics,
and  could  speak  two  or  more  modern  languages ;  where
the  whole  nation,  with  but  few  exceptions,  were  pro-
ducers of  material  or  intellectual  wealth,  and  where
comparatively  little  of  unproductive  consumption  pre-
vailed. Those  self-governing  and  self-sustaining  muni-
cipalities had  almost  forgotten  the  existence  of  the
magnificent  nothings  so  dear  to  the  hearts  of  kings.

Spinola's  house  was  open  day  and  night.  The  gor-
geous plate,  gigantic  candelabra,  mighty  ewers,  shields
and  lavers  of  silver  and  gold,  which  decorated  his  tables
and  sideboards,  amazed  the  gaping  crowd.  He  dined  and
supped  in  state  every  day,  and  the  public  were  ad

1^  Metereu.  nbi  si'})-

11  Ib^d.

400

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  L.

mitted  to  gaze  Tipon  his  banquets,  as  if  he  had  been  a
monarch.  It  seemed,  said  those  homely  republicans,  as
if  a  silver  christening  were  going  on  every  day  in  his
house."

There  were  even  grave  remonstrances  made  to  the
magistracy  and  to  the  States-General  against  the  effect
of  such  ostentations  and  immoral  proceedings  upon  the
popular  mind,  and  suggestions  that  at  least  the  doors
should  be  shut,  so  that  the  scandal  might  be  confined  to
Spinola's  own  household.  But  the  republican  authorities
deciding,  not  without  wisdom,  that  the  spectacle  ought
to  serve  rather  as  a  wholesome  warning  than  as  a
contaminating  example,  declined  any  inquisitorial  inter-
ference with  the  housekeeping  of  the  Spanish  ambas-
sadors.^^

Before  the  negotiations  began,  a  treaty  had  been
made  between  the  republic  and  the  French  Govern-
ment, by  which  it  was  stipulated  that  every  effort
should  be  made  by  both  contracting  parties  to  bring
about  an  honourable  and  assured  peace  between  the
United  Provinces,  Spain,  and  the  archdukes.  In  case
of  the  continuance  of  the  war,  however,  it  w^as  agreed
that  France  should  assist  the  States  with  ten  thousand
men,  while  in  case  at  any  time,  during  the  continuance
of  the  league,  France  should  be  attacked  by  a  foreign
enemy,  she  should  receive  from  her  ally  five  thousand
auxiliary  troops,  or  their  equivalent  in  maritime  assist-
ance. This  convention  was  thought  by  other  powers  to
be  so  profitable  to  the  Netherlands  as  to  excite  general
uneasiness  and  suspicion.

The  States  would  have  gladly  signed  a  similar  agree-
ment with  England,  but  nothing  was  to  be  done  with
that  Government  until  an  old-standing  dispute  in  regard
to  the  cloth  trade  had  been  arranged.  Middelburg  had
the  exclusive  right  of  deposit  for  the  cloths  imported
from  England.  Tins  monopoly  for  Zeeland  being  natu-
rally not  very  palatable  to  Amsterdam  and  other  cities
of  Holland,  the  States-General  had  at  last  authorized
the  merchant-adventurers  engaged  in  this  traffic  to
deposit  their  goods  in  any  city  of  the  United  Provinces.^^
The  course  of  trade  had  been  to  import  the  raw  cloth
from  England,  to  dress  and  dye  it  in  the  Netherlands,

12  Meteren,  564.  ibid.  Wagenaar,  ix  317,  318.

1608.

CLOTH-TRADE  DISPUTE.

401

and  then  to  re-export  it  to  England.  Latterly,  how-
ever, some  dyers  and  clothiers  emigrating  from  the
provinces  to  that  country,  had  obtained  a  monopoly
from  James  for  practising  their  art  in  his  dominions.
In  consequence  of  this  arrangement  the  exportation  of
undyed  cloths  had  been  forbidden.  This  prohibition
had  caused  irritation  both  in  the  kingdom  and  the  re-
public, had  necessarily  deranged  the  natural  course  of
trade  and  manufactuie,  and  had  now  prevented  for  the
time  any  conclusion  of  an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive
between  the  countries,  even  if  political  sentiment  had
made  such  a  league  possible.  The  States-General
had  recourse  to  the  usual  expedient  by  which  bad  legis-
lation on  one  side  was  countervailed  by  equally  bad
legislation  on  the  other.  The  exportation  of  undyed
English  cloths  being  forbidden  by  England,  the  im-
portation of  dyed  English  cloths  was  now  prohibited  by
the  Netherlands.  The  international  cloth  trade  stopped.
This  embargo  became  at  last  so  detestable  to  all  parties
that  concession  was  made  by  the  crown  for  a  limited
export  of  raw  cloths.  The  concession  was  soon  widened
by  custom  into  a  general  exportation,  the  royal  govern-
ment looking  through  its  fingers  at  the  open  infraction
of  its  own  laws,  while  the  natural  laws  of  trade  before
long  re-established  the  old  equilibrium.  Meantime  the
ill-feeling  produced  by  this  dissension  delayed  any
cordial  political  arrangement  between  the  countries.

On  the  5th  of  February  the  Spanish  commissioners
came  for  the  first  time  before  the  States-General,  assem-
bled to  the  number  of  a  hundred  and  thirty,  in  their
palace  at  the  Hague.^*

The  first  meeting  was  merely  one  of  mutual  com-
pliment. President  liichardot,  on  behalf  of  his  colleagues,
expressing  gratitude  for  the  cordial  welcome  which  had
been  manifested  to  the  envoys  on  their  journey  through
so  many  towns  of  the  United  Provinces.  They  had
been  received,  he  said,  not  as  enemies  with  whom  an
almost  perpetual  war  had  been  waged,  but  as  friends,
confederates,  and  allies.  A  warmer  reception  they
could  never  have  hoped  for  nor  desired.

Two  special  commissioners  were  now  appointed  by

15  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  137,  et  segq. Miteren,  564,  565.
VOL.  IV.  2  I>

402

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L.

the  States-General  to  negotiate  with  the  envoys.  These
were  Count  Lewis  William  and  Brederode.  With  these
delegates  at  large  were  associated  seven  others,  one
from  each  province.  Barneveld  of  course  represented
Holland ;  Maldere,  Zeeland ;  Berk,  Utrecht ;  Hillama,
Friesland ;  Sloat,  Overyssel ;  Koender  van  Helpen,
Groningen  ;  Cornelius  van  Gend,  Gelderland.-^^

The  negotiations  began  at  once.  The  archdukes  had
empowered  the  five  envoys  to  deal  in  their  name  and  in
that  of  the  King  of  Spain.  Philip  had  authorized  the
archdukes  to  take  this  course  by  an  instrument  dated
10  th  January.  In  this  paper  he  called  the  archdukes
hereditary  sovereigns  of  the  Netherlands.

It  was  agreed  that  the  various  points  of  negotiation
should  be  taken  up  in  regular  order ;  but  the  first
question  of  all  that  presented  itself  was  whether  the
conferences  should  be  for  a  truce  or  a  peace.

The  secret  object  of  Spain  was  for  a  truce  of  years.
Thus  she  thought  to  save  her  dignity,  to  reserve  her
rights  of  re-conquest,  to  replenish  her  treasury^  and  to
repair  her  military  strength.  Barneveld  and  his  party,
comprising  a  large  majority  of  the  States-General,  were
for  peace.  Prince  Maurice,  having  done  his  utmost  to
oppose  negotiations  for  peace,  was,  for  still  stronger
reasons,  determined  to  avoid  falling  into  what  he  con-
sidered the  ambush  of  a  truce.  The  French  ambassadors
were  also  for  peace.  The  Spanish  envoys  accordingly
concealed  their  real  designs,  and  all  parties  began
discussions  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a  permanent
peace.

This  preliminary  being  settled,  Barneveld  asked  the
Spaniards  if  they  had  full  powers  to  treat  with  the
States  as  with  a  free  nation,  and  if  they  recognised  them
as  such.

"  The  most  ample  power,"  was  the  reply ;  "  and  we
are  content  to  treat  with  you  even  if  you  should  choose
to  call  yourself  a  kingdom."

"  By  what  right  then  are  the  archdukes  called  by  the
king  hereditary  sovereigns  of  the  Netherlands,  and  why
do  they  append  the  seals  of  the  seven  United  Provinces
to  this  document  ?  "  asked  the  Advocate,  taking  up  from

i6  Wagenaar,  ix.  322,  323. Gallucci,  352-355.  Ibid. Meteron,  564,  565.

1608.

PEACE  NEGOTIATIONS.

403

the  table  the  full  power  of  Albert  and  Isabella  and
putting  his  finger  on  the  seals.^^

"By  the  same  right,"  replied  President  Eichardot,
*'  that  the  King  of  France  calls  himself  King  of  Navarre,
that  the  King  of  Great  Britain  calls  himself  King  of
France,  that  the  King  of  Spain  calls  himself  King
of  "Jerusalem."

Nothing  could  be  more  logical,  nothing  more  his-
torically accurate.  But  those  plain-spoken  republicans
saw  no  advantage  in  beginning  a  negotiation  for  peace
on  the  basis  of  their  independence  by  permitting  the
archduke  to  call  himself  their  sovereign,  and  to  seal
solemn  state  papers  with  their  signet.  It  might  seem
picturesque  to  genealogical  minds,  it  might  be  soothing
to  royal  vanity,  that  paste  counterfeits  should  be  sub-
stituted for  vanished  jewels.  It  would  be  cruelty  to
destroy  the  mock  glitter  without  cause.  But  there  was
cause.  On  this  occasion  the  sham  was  dangerous.
James  Stuart  might  call  himself  King  of  France.  He
was  not  more  likely  to  take  practical  possession  of  that
kingdom  than  of  the  mountains  in  the  moon.  Henry  of
Bourbon  was  not  at  present  contem])lating  an  invasion
of  the  hereditary  possessions  of  the  house  of  Albret.  It
was  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  Netherlands  whether
Philip  III.  were  crowned  in  Jerusalem  that  very  day,
or  the  week  afterwards,  or  never.  It  was  very  im-
portant, however,  that  the  United  Provinces  should
have  it  thoroughly  recognised  that  they  were  a  free
and  independent  republic,  nor  could  that  recognition
be  complete  so  long  as  any  human  being  in  the  whole
world  called  himself  their  master,  and  signed  with  their
seals  of  state.  " 'Tis  absurd,"  said  the  Hollanders,  *' to
use  the  names  and  anns  of  our  provinces.  We  have  as
yet  no  precedent  to  prove  that  you  consider  the  United
Provinces  as  lost,  and  name  and  arms  to  be  but  wind."
Barneveld  reminded  them  that  they  had  all  expressed
the  most  straightforward  intentions,  and  that  the  father
commissary  especially  had  pledged  his  very  soul  for  the

18  Negotiations  de  Jcannin,  i.  538,  539.  admirably-edited  collection  of  Van  De-

Gallucci,  Meteren,  Wagenaar,  ubi  sup.  venter. "  Vcrhaal  der  Onderbandelingen

Compare  also,  for  the  whole  course  of  te 's  Hage  tusschen  de  Nederlandscbe  en

these  negotiations,  the  Minutes  of  Olden-  Spaansche  gevolmagtigden,"  &c.,  1  Feb-

Barneveld  during  the  conferences,  now  ruarij,  1608-4  MiUirr,  1609.  -  Deventer,  iiu

first  published  in  the  invaluable  and  No.  ccviii.  pp.  169-239. /)a.«.tim.

2  D  2

404  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  L.

sincerity  of  the  king  and  the  archdukes.  "  We  onrselYes
never  wished  and  never  could  deceive  any  one,"  con-
tinued the  Advocate,  *'and  it  is  also  very  difficult  for
others  to  deceive  us."

This  being  the  universal  sentiment  of  the  Nether-
landers,  it  was  thought  proper  to  express  it  in  respectful
but  vigorous  language.  This  was  done  and  the  session
was  terminated.  The  Spanish  envoys,  knowing  very
well  that  neither  the  king  nor  the  archduke  regarded
the  retention  of  the  titles  and  seals  of  all  the  seventeen
Netherlands  as  an  empty  show,  but  that  a  secret  and
solid  claim  lurked  beneath  that  usurpation,  were  very
indignant.  They  however  dissembled  their  wrath  from
the  States'  commissioners.  They  were  unwilling  that  the
negotiations  should  be  broken  up  at  the  very  first  session,
and  they  felt  that  neither  Prince  Maurice  nor  Barneveld
was  to  be  trifled  with  upon  this  point.^^  But  they  were
loud  and  magnificent  in  their  demonstrations  when  they
came  to  talk  the  matter  over  with  the  ambassadors  of
France  and  England.^^  It  was  most  portentous,  they
thought,  to  the  cause  of  monarchy  and  good  government
all  over  the  world,  that  these  republicans,  not  content  to
deal  with  kings  and  princes  on  a  footing  of  equality,
should  presume  to  dictate  to  them  as  to  inferiors.  Having
passed  through  rebellion  to  liberty,  they  were  now  pro-
ceeding to  trample  upon  the  most  hallowed  customs  and
rites.  What  would  become  of  royalty,  if  in  the  same
breath  it  should  not  only  renounce  the  substance,  but
even  put  away  the  symbols  of  authority.  This  insolence
of  the  people  was  not  more  dangerous  to  the  king  and
the  archdukes  than  it  was  to  every  potentate  in  the
universe.  It  was  a  sacred  duty  to  resist  such  insults.^^
Sage  Jeannin  did  his  best  to  pacify  the  vehemence  of
the  commissioners.  He  represented  to  them  that  foreign
titles  borne  by  anointed  kings  were  only  ensigns  of
historical  possessions  which  they  had  for  ever  re-
nounced ;  but  that  it  might  become  one  day  the  pleasure
of  Spain,  or  lie  in  the  power  of  Spain,  to  vindicate  her
ancient  rights  to  the  provinces.

Hsnce  the  anxiety  of  the  States  was  but  natural.  The

19  Minutes  of  Olden-Barneveld.
20  Gallucci,  355,  356. Grotius,  xvii.  764,  765. Wagenaar,  ix.  324-326.  Meteren,
564VO. Bentivoglio,  564.  21  ibid.  22  Gallucci,  Bentivoglio,  ubi  sup.

1608.

STORMY  DISCUSSIONS.

405

old  Leaguer  and  political  campaigner  knew  very  well,
moreover,  that  at  least  one  half  of  Eichardot's  noble
wrath  was  feigned.^^  The  commissioners  would  pro-
bably renounce  the  title  and  the  seven  seals,  but  in  so
doing  would  drive  a  hard  bargain.  For  an  empty  phrase
and  a  pennyworth  of  wax  they  would  extort  a  heavy
price.  And  this  was  what  occurred.  The  commissioners
agreed  to  write  for  fresh  instructions  to  Brussels.  A
reply  came  in  due  time  from  the  archdukes,  in  which
they  signified  their  willingness  to  abandon  the  title  of
sovereigns  over  all  the  Netherlands,  and  to  abstain  from
using  their  signet.  In  exchange  for  this  concession
they  merely  demanded  from  the  States-General  a  formal
abandonment  of  the  navigation  to  both  the  Indies.  This
was  all.  The  archdukes  granted  libei-ty  to  the  republic.
The  republic  would  renounce  its  commerce  with  more
than  half  the  world.

The  scorn  of  the  States'  commissioners  at  this  proposi-
tion can  be  imagined,  and  it  became  difficult  indeed  for
them  to  speak  on  the  subject  in  decorous  language.
Because  the  archdukes  were  willing  to  give  up  some-
thing which  was  not  their  property,  the  republic  was
voluntarily  to  open  its  veins  and  drain  its  very  life-
blood  at  the  bidding  of  a  foreign  potentate.  She  was  to
fling  away  all  the  trophies  of  Ileemskerk  and  Sebalt  de
Weerd,  of  Balthasar  de  Cordes,  Van  der  Ilagen,  Matelieff,
and  Verhoeff ;  she  was  to  abdicate  the  position  which  she
had  already  acquired  of  mistress  of  the  seas,  and  she  was
to  deprive  herself  for  ever  of  that  daily  increasing  ocean
commerce  which  was  rapidly  converting  a  cluster  of
puny,  half-submerged  provinces  into  a  mighty  empire.
Of  a  certainty  the  Spanish  court  at  this  new  epoch  was
an  astounding  anachronism.  In  its  view  Pope  Alexander
VI.  still  lived  and  reigned.

Liberty  was  not  a  boon  conferred  upon  the  Nether-
landers  by  their  defeated  enemy.  It  had  been  gained
by  their  own  right  hands  ;  by  the  blood,  and  the  gold,
and  the  sweat  of  two  generations.  If  it  were  the  king's
to  give,  let  him  try  once  more  if  he  could  take  it  away.
Such  were  the  opinions  and  emotions  of  the  Dutchmen,
expressed  in  as  courteous  language  as  they  could  find.

"It  would  be  a  political  heresy,"  said  Barneveld  to  the

«  Galluccl,  356.

406

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L.

Spanish  commissioners  at  this  session,  "  if  my  lords  the
States  should  by  contract  banish  their  citizens  out  of
two-thirds  of  the  world,  both  land  and  sea."

*''Tis  strange,"  replied  the  Spaniards,  "that  you  wish
to  have  more  than  other  powers — kings  or  republics —
who  never  make  any  such  pretensions.  The  Indies,
East  and  West,  are  our  house,  privately  possessed  by  us
for  more  than  a  hundred  years,  and  no  one  has  a  right
to  come  into  it  without  our  permission.  This  is  not
banishment,  but  a  custom  to  which  all  other  nations
submit.  We  give  you  your  sovereignty  before  all  the
world,  quitting  all  claims  upon  it.  We  know  very  well
that  you  deny  receiving  it  from  us  ;  but  to  give  you  a  quit
claim,  and  to  permit  free  trade  besides,  would  be  a  little
more  than  you  have  a  right  to  expect."^*

Was  it  not  well  for  the  cause  of  liberty,  commercial
intercourse,  and  advancement  of  the  human  intellect,
that  there  was  this  obstinate  little  republic  in  the  world,
refusing  to  tolerate  that  to  which  all  other  great  powers
of  the  earth  submitted ;  that  there  was  one  nation  deter-
mined not  to  acknowledge  three-quarters  of  the  world,
including  America  and  India,  as  the  private  mansion  of
the  King  of  Spain,  to  be  locked  against  the  rest  of  the
human  race  ?

The  next  session  of  the  negotiators  after  the  arrival
of  this  communication  from  the  archdukes  was  a  stormy
one.  The  India  trade  was  the  sole  subject  of  discussion.
As  the  States  were  firmly  resolved  never  to  relinquish
that  navigation  which  in  truth  was  one  of  their  most
practical  and  valuable  possessions,  and  as  the  royal  com-
missioners were  as  solemnly  determined  that  it  should
never  be  conceded,  it  may  be  imagined  how  much  breath,
how  much  foolscap  paper,  was  wasted.

In  truth,  the  negotiation  for  peace  had  been  a  vile
mockery  from  the  beginning.  Spain  had  no  real  inten-
tion of  abdicating  her  claim  to  the  United  Provinces.

At  the  very  moment  when  the  commissioners  were
categorically  making  that  concession  in  Brussels,  and
claiming  such  a  price  for  it,  Hoboken,  the  archduke's

2^  Minutes  of  Olden  -  Barneveld,  uM  komen. Datter  geen  bannissement  was

supj* Dattet  hunl.  Huys  was  over  hun-  maer  een  gebruyck  als  de  andere  Conin-

dert  jaren  privatim  beseten  en  dat  men  gen  en  Republiquen  deden,"  &c.
daer  jegens  hun  danck  niet  behoorde  te

1608.

t

REAL  OBJECT  OF  SPAIN.

407

diplomatic  representative  in  London,  was  earnes?tly  assur-
ing King  James  that  neither  his  master  nor  Philip  had
the  remotest  notion  of  renouncing  their  sovereignty  over
all  the  Netherlands.  What  had  been  said  and  written  to
'that  effect  was  merely  a  device,  he  asserted,  to  bring  about
a  temporary  truce.  During  the  interval  of  imaginary
freedom  it  was  certain  that  the  provinces  would  fall  into
such  dire  confusion  that  it  would  be  easier  for  Spain  to
effect  their  re-conquest,  after  a  brief  delay  for  repairing
her  own  strength,  than  it  would  be  by  continuing  the
present  war  without  any  cessation.^^

The  Spanish  ambassador  at  Vienna  too  on  his  part
assured  the  Emperor  Rudolph  that  his  master  was
resolved  never  to  abdicate  the  sovereignty  of  the  pro-
vinces. The  negotiations  then  going  on,  he  said,  were
simply  intended  to  extort  from  the  States  a  renunciation
of  the  India  trade  and  their  consent  to  the  re-introduc-
tion of  the  Catholic  religion  throughout  their  territories.

Something  of  all  this  was  known  and  much  more  sus-
pected at  the  Hague  ;  the  conviction  therefore  that  no
faith  would  be  kept  with  rebels  and  heretics,  whatever
might  be  said  or  written,  gained  strength  every  day.
That  these  delusive  negotiations  with  the  Hollanders
were  not  likely  to  be  so  successful  as  the  comedy
enacted  twenty  years  before  at  Bourbourg,  for  the
amusement  of  Queen  Elizabeth  and  her  diplomatists
while  the  tragedy  of  the  Armada  was  preparing,  might
be  safely  prophesied.  Richardot  was  as  effective  as
ever  in  the  part  which  he  had  so  often  played,  but
Spinola  laboured  under  the  disadvantage  of  being  a  far
honester  man  than  Alexander  Famese.  Far  from  equal
to  that  famous  chieftain  in  the  management  of  a  great
military  campaign,  it  is  certain  that  he  was  infinitely
inferior  to  him  in  genteel  comedy.  ^\  hether  Maurice
and  Lewis  \\  illiam,  Barneveld  and  Brederode,  were  to
do  better  in  the  parts  formerly  assigned  to  John  Rogers
Valentine  Dale,  Comptroller  Croft,  and  their  colleagues,
remained  to  be  seen

On  the  15th  of  Februarj^  at  the  fifth  conference  of
the  commissioners,  the  first  pitched  battle  on  15
the  India  trade  was  fought. Thereafter  the  ^^os.
combat  was  almost  every  day  renewed. Exactly,  as  a

85  Meteren,  565.

403

4

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L

year  before,  the  news  of  Heemskerk's  victory  at  Gibral-
tar had  made  the  king  and  the  archdukes  eager  to  obtain
an  armistice  with  the  rebels  both  by  land  and  sea,  so
now  the  report  of  Matelieff's  recent  achievements  in  the
Indian  Ocean  was  increasing  their  anxiety  to  exclude
the  Netherlanders  from  the  regions  which  they  were
rapidly  making  their  own.

As  we  look  back  upon  the  negotiations,  after  the  lapse
of  two  centuries  and  a  half,  it  becomes  difficult  to  sup-
press our  amazement  at  those  scenes  of  solemn  trickery
and  superhuman  pride.  It  is  not  necessary  to  follow,
step  by  step,  the  proceedings  at  each  daily  conference,
but  it  is  impossible  for  me  not  to  detain  the  reader  for
yet  a  season  longer  with  those  transactions,  and  espe-
cially to  invite  him  to  ponder  the  valuable  lesson  which
in  their  entirety  they  convey.

No  higher  themes  could  possibly  be  laid  before  states-
men to  discuss.  Questions  of  political  self-government,
religious  liberty,  national  independence,  divine  Eight,
rebellious  Power,  freedom  of  commerce,  supremacy  of
the  seas,  omnipotence  claimed  by  the  old  world  over
the  destiny  of  what  was  called  the  new,  were  importun-
ately demanding  solution.  All  that  most  influenced
human  passion,  or  stirred  human  reason  to  its  depths —
at  that  memorable  point  of  time  when  two  great  epochs
seemed  to  be  sweeping  against  each  other  in  elemental
conflict — was  to  be  dealt  with.  The  emancipated  cur-
rents of  human  thought,  the  steady  tide  of  ancient
dogma,  were  mingling  in  wrath.  There  are  times  of
paroxysm  in  which  Nature  seems  to  efiect  more  in  a
moment,  whether  intellectually  or  materially,  than  at
other  periods  during  a  lapse  of  years.  The  shock  of
forces,  long  preparing  and  long  delayed,  is  apt  at  last  to
make  itself  sensible  to  those  neglectful  of  gradual  but
vital  changes.  Yet  there  are  always  ears  that  remain
deaf  to  the  most  portentous  din.

Thus,  after  that  half  century  of  war,  the  policy  of
Spain  was  still  serenely  planting  itself  on  thfe  position
occupied  before  the  outbreak  of  the  revolt.  The  com-
monwealth, solidly  established  by  a  free  people,  already
one  of  the  most  energetic  and  thriving  among  govern-
ments, a  recognised  member  of  the  great  international
family,  was  now  gravely  expected  to  purchase  from  its

1608.

QUESTION  OF  THE  INDIA  TRADE.

409

ancient  tyrant  the  independence  which  it  had  long  pos-
sessed, while  the  price  demanded  for  the  free  papers
was  not  only  extravagant,  but  would  be  disgraceful  to
an  emancipated  slave.  Holland  was  not  likely  at  that
turning  point  in  her  history,  and  in  the  world's  history,
to  be  false  to  herself  and  to  the  great  principles  of  pub-
lic law.  It  was  good  for  the  cause  of  humanity  that  the
republic  should  reappear  at  that  epoch.  It  was  whole-
some for  Europe  that  there  should  be  just  then  a  plain
self-governing  people,  able  to  speak  homely  and  import-
ant truths.  It  was  healthy  for  the  moral  and  political
atmosphere — in  those  days  and  in  the  time  to  come —
that  a  fresh  breeze  from  that  little  sea-born  common-
wealth should  sweep  away  some  of  the  ancient  fog
through  wliich  a  few  very  feeble  and  very  crooked
\aortals  had  so  long  loomed  forth  like  giants  and  gods.

To  vindicate  the  laws  of  nations  and  of  nature  ;  to
make  a  noble  effort  fur  reducing  to  a  sy.stem — conform-
ing, at  least  approximately,  to  divine  reason — the  chaotic
elements  of  war  and  peace ;  to  recall  the  great  facts  that
earth,  sea,  and  sky  ought  to  belong  to  mankind,  and  not
to  an  accidental  and  very  limited  selection  of  the  species,
was  not  an  unworthy  task  for  a  people  which  had  made
such  unexampled  sacrifices  for  liberty  and  right.

Accordingly,  at  the  conference  on  the  15th  February,
the  Spanish  commissioners  categorically  summoned  the
States  to  desist  entirely  from  the  trade  to  either  India,  ex-
actly as  before  the  war.  To  enforce  this  prohibition,  they
said,  was  the  principal  reason  why  Philip  desired  peace.
To  obtain  their  freedom  was  surely  well  worth  renun-
ciation of  this  traffic ;  the  more  so,  because  their  trade
with  Spain,  which  was  so  much  shorter  and  safer,  was
now  to  be  re-opened.  If  they  had  been  able  to  keep
that  commerce,  it  was  suggested,  they  would  have  never
talked  about  the  Indies.  The  commissioners  added,
that  this  boon  had  not  been  conceded  to  France  nor
England,  by  the  treaties  of  Vervins  and  London,  and
that  the  States  therefore  could  not  find  it  strange  that
it  should  be  refused  to  them.^'^

The  States'  commissioners  stoutly  replied  that  com-
merce was  open  to  all  the  world,  that  trade  was  free  by

2«  Wagenaar,  ix.  327,  seqq.  Mctercu,  565,  567-593.  Grotius,  xvii  763-781.  Gal
lucci,  356-358.

410

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.

the  great  law  of  nature,  and  that  neither  France,  Eng-
land, nor  the  United  Provinces,  were  to  receive  edicts
on  this  great  subject  from  Spain  and  Portugal.  It  was
absurd  to  circumscribe  commercial  intercourse  at  the
very  moment  of  exchanging  war  for  peace.  To  recog-
nise the  liberty  of  the  States  upon  paper,  and  to  attempt
the  imposition  of  servitude  in  reality,  was  a  manifest
contradiction.  The  ocean  was  free  to  all  nations.  It
had  not  been  enclosed  by  Spain  with  a  rail-fence.

The  debate  grew  more  stormy  every  hour.  Spinola
expressed  great  indignation  that  the  Netherlanders
should  be  so  obstinate  upon  this  point.  The  tall,  spare
President  arose  in  wrath  from  his  seat  at  the  council-
board,  loudly  protesting  that  the  king  of  Spain  would
never  renounce  his  sovereignty  over  the  provinces  until
they  had  foresworn  the  India  trade ;  and  with  this
menace  stalked  out  of  the  room.^^

The  States'  commissioners  were  not  frightened.  Bar-
neveld  was  at  least  a  match  for  Kichardot,  and  it  was
better,  after  all,  that  the  cards  should  be  played  upon
the  table.  Subsequent  meetings  were  quite  as  violent
as  the  first,  the  country  was  agitated  far  and  wide,  the
prospects  of  pacification  dwindled  to  a  speck  in  the  re-
mote horizon.  Arguments  at  the  Board  of  Conference,
debates  in  the  States-General,  pamphlets  by  merchants
and  advocates — especially  several  emanating  from  the
East  India  Company — handled  the  great  topic  from
every  point  of  view,  and  it  became  more  and  more  evi-
dent that  Spain  could  not  be  more  resolute  to  prohibit
than  the  republic  to  claim  the  trade.^^

It  was  an  absolute  necessity,  so  it  was  urged,  for  the
Hollanders  to  resist  the  tyrannical  dominion  of  the
Spaniards.  But  this  would  be  impossible  for  them,
should  they  rely  on  the  slender  natural  resources  of
their  own  land. Kot  a  sixth  part  of  the  population

27  «<  Oceanum  quippe  nulUs  clausum  If  we  can't  think  with  yon,  John,

cancellis  cuiictis  nationibus  patere." —
Gallucci,  357.  It  is  impossible  in  this
connection  not  to  recall  the  quaint  words
of  a  great  poet  of  our  own  country  in  a
famous  idyl  written  two-and-a-half  cen-
turies later  than  these  transactions: —

It's  just  your  own  back-yard.

Old  uncle  S.,  says  he,  I  guess
If  that's  his  game,  says  he,

The  fencing  stuff  will  cost  enough
To  bust  up  friend  J.  B.
As  well  as  you  and  me."

J.  B.  LoweU.

*•  We  o\rn  the  ocean,  too,  John,
You  must'nt  think  it  hard

28  Meteren,  Grotius,  Gallucci,  Wage*

naar,  ubi  su;p. 29  jbid.

1608.

IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  INDIA  TRADE.

411

could  be  nourished  from  the  soil.  The  ocean  was  their
inheritance,  their  birthright,  their  empire.  It  was  ne-
cessary that  Spain  should  understand  this  first,  last,
and  always.  She  ought  to  comprehend,  too,  that  her  re-
cognition of  Dutch  independence  was  not  a  gift,  but  the
acknowledgment  of  a  fact.  Without  that  acknowledg-
ment peace  was  impossible.  If  peace  were  to  be  estab-
lished, it  was  not  to  be  bought  by  either  party.  Each
gave  and  each  received,  and  certainly  Spain  was  in  no
condition  to  dictate  the  terms  of  a  sale.  Peace,  without
freedom  of  commerce,  would  be  merely  war  without
killing,  and  therefore  without  result.  The  Nether-
landers,  who  in  the  middle  of  the  previous  century  had
risen  against  unjust  taxation  and  arbitrary  laws,  had
not  grown  so  vile  as  to  accept  from  a  vanquished  foe
what  they  had  spurned  from  their  prince.  To  be  exiled
from  the  ocean  was  an  unimaginable  position  for  the
republic.  Moreover,  to  retire  from  the  Indies  would
be  to  abandon  her  Oriental  allies,  and  would  be  a  dis-
honour as  well  as  a  disaster.  Her  good  faith,  never  yet
contaminated,  would  be  stained,  were  she  now  to  desert
the  distant  peoples  and  potentates  with  whom  she  had
formed  treaties  of  friendship  and  commerce,  and  hand
them  over  to  the  vengeance  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portu-
guese.^'^

And  what  a  trade  it  was  which  the  United  Provinces
were  thus  called  upon  to  renounce !  The  foreign  com-
merce of  no  other  nation  could  be  compared  in  magni-
tude to  that  of  their  commonwealth.  Twenty  ships
traded  regularly  to  Guinea,  eighty  to  the  Cape  de  Verd
Islands,  twenty  to  America,  and  forty  to  the  East  Indies.
Ten  thousand  sailors,  who  gained  their  living  in  this
traffic,  would  be  thrown  out  of  employment,  if  the
States  should  now  listen  to  the  Spanish  propositions.^^

It  was  well  known  too  that  the  profits  of  the  East  India
Company  had  vastly  increased  of  late,  and  were  aug-
menting with  every  year.  The  trade  with  Cambay,
Malabar,  Ceylon,  Kororaandel,  and  Queda,  had  scarcely
begun,  yet  was  already  most  promising.  Should  the
Hollanders  only  obtain  a  footing  in  China,  they  felt
confident  of  making  their  way  through  the  South  Seas

^  Authorities  last  cited.

31  jMcI

412

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L.

and  across  tlie  pole  to  India.  Thus  the  search  for  a
great  commercial  highway  between  Cathay,  Europe,  and
the  New  World,  which  had  been  baffled  in  the  arctic
regions,  should  be  crowned  with  success  at  the  antartic,
while  it  was  deemed  certain  that  there  were  many  lands,
lighted  by  the  Stjuthern  Cross,  awaiting  the  footsteps
of  the  fortunate  European  discoverer.  What  was  a  coast-
ing trade  with  Spain  compared  with  this  boundless
career  of  adventure  ?  Now  that  the  world's  commerce,
since  the  discovery  of  America  and  the  passage  around
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  had  become  oceanic  and  uni-
versal, was  the  nation  which  took  the  lead  on  blue
water  to  go  back  to  the  creeping  land-locked  naviga-
tion of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Phoenicians  ?  If  the  East
India  Company,  in  whose  womb  was  empire,  were  now
destroyed,  it  would  perish  with  its  offspring  for  ever.
There  would  be  no  regeneration  at  a  future  day.  The
Company's  ships  too  were  a  navy  in  themselves,  as  apt
for  war  as  for  trade.  This  the  Spaniards  and  Portu-
guese had  already  learned  to  their  cost.  The  merchant-
traders  to  Spain  would  be  always  in  the  power  of  Spain,
and  at  any  favourable  moment  might  be  seized  by  Spain.
The  Spanish  monopoly  in  the  East  and  West  was  the
great  source  of  Spanish  power,  the  chief  cause  of  the  con-
tempt with  which  the  Spanish  monarchy  looked  down
upon  other  nations.  Let  those  widely  expanded  wings
be  clipped,  and  Spain  would  fall  from  her  dizzy  height
To  know  what  the  States  ought  to  refuse  the  enemy,  it
was  only  necessary  to  observe  what  he  strenuously  de-
manded, to  ponder  the  avowed  reason  why  he  desired
peace.  The  enemy  was  doing  his  best  to  damage  the
commonwealth ;  the  States  were  merely  anxious  to  pre-
vent injury  to  themselves  and  to  all  the  world ;  to  vin-
dicate for  themselves,  and  for  all  men,  the  common  use
of  ocean,  land,  and  sky.

A  nation  which  strove  to  shut  up  the  seas,  and  to
acquire  a  monopoly  of  the  world's  trade,  was  a  pirate,  an
enemy  of  mankind.  She  was  as  deserving  of  censure  as
those  who  created  universal  misery  in  time  of  famine,
by  buying  up  all  the  corn  in  order  to  enrich  themselves.
According  to  the  principles  of  the  ancients,  it  was  legi-
timate to  make  war  upon  such  States  as  closed  their
own  ports  to  foreign  intercourse. Still  more  just  was

1608.  FIRMNESS  OF  THE  STATES-GENERAL.

413

it,  therefore,  to  carry  arms  against  a  nation  whicli  closed
the  ports  of  other  people.^^

The  dispute  about  the  India  navigation  could  be
settled  in  a  moment,  if  Spain  would  but  keep  her  word.
She  had  acknowledged  the  great  fact  of  independence,
which  could  not  be  gainsaid.  Let  each  party  to  the
negotiation,  therefore,  keep  that  which  it  already  pos-
sessed. Let  neither  attempt  to  prescribe  to  the  other — •
both  being  free  and  independent  States — any  regula-
tions about  interior  or  foreign  trade.^^

Thus  reasoned  the  States- General,  the  East  India  di-
rectors, the  great  majority  of  the  population  of  the
provinces,  upon  one  great  topic  of  discussion.  A  small
minority  only  attempted  to  defend  the  policy  of  renounc-
ing the  India  trade  as  a  branch  of  industry,  in  which  a
certain  class,  and  that  only  in  the  maritime  provinces,
was  interested.  It  is  certainly  no  slight  indication  of
the  liberty  of  thought,  of  speech,  and  of  the  press,  en-
joyed at  that  epoch  in  the  Netherlands — and  nowhere
else  to  anything  like  the  same  extent — that  such  opin-
ions, on  a  subject  deemed  vital  to  the  very  existence  of
the  republic,  were  freely  published  and  listentnl  to  with
toleration,  if  not  with  respect.  Even  the  enlightened
mind  of  Grotius  was  troubled  with  terrors  as  to  the
effect  on  the  public  mind  at  this  crisis  of  anonymous
pamphlets  concerning  political  affairs.^  But  in  this  re-
gard it  must  be  admitted  that  Grotius  was  not  in  advance
of  his  age,  although  fully  conceding  that  press-laws  were
inconsistent  with  human  liberty,

Maurice  and  Barneveld  were  equally  strenuous  in
maintaining  the  India  trade ;  the  prince,  because  he
hoped  that  resistance  to  Spain  upon  this  point  would
cause  tlie  negotiations  to  be  broken  off,  the  Advocate  in
the  belief  tliat  firmness  on  the  part  of  the  States  would
induce  the  royal  commissioners  to  ^  ield.

The  States-General  were  not  likely  to  be  deficient  in
firmness.  They  felt  that  the  republic  was  exactly  on  the
point  of  wresting  the  control  of  the  East  from  the  hands
of  the  Portuguese,  and  they  were  not  inclined  to  throw

S3  Autlioritips  last  cited. 33  jbid.  sa-po  et  tunc  novo  odicto  nec  rcprossam

3-^  "  Non  minimum  ego  istius  rcipub-  tiimen,  dum  aeris  indago  ot  pravos  pcenaa

lica>  malum  arbitror  tuiiti\m  in  plche  rqnuiiantur ut libertati  coutraria."—

libellis  concitanda  protorviam  vetitam  Grotius,  xvii.  776.

414  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  L.

away  the  harvest  of  their  previous  labours  just  as  it  was
ripening.  Ten  thousand  persons  at  least,  besides  the
sailors  employed,  were  directly  interested  in  the  traffic,
most  of  whom  possessed  great  influence  in  the  com-
monwealth, and  would  cause  great  domestic  dissension
should  they  be  now  sacrificed  to  Spain.  To  keep  the
India  trade  was  the  best  guarantee  for  the  future  posses-
sion of  the  traffic  to  Spain;  for  the  Spanish  Government
would  never  venture  an  embai  go  upon  the  direct  inter-
course between  the  provinces  and  its  own  dominions,  for
fear  of  vengeance  in  the  East.  On  the  other  hand,  by
denouncing  oceanic  commerce,  they  would  soon  find
themselves  without  a  navy  at  all,  and  their  peaceful
coasting-ships  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  Spain  or  of  any
power  possessing  that  maritime  energy  which  would
have  been  killed  in  the  republic.  By  abandoning  the
ocean,  the  young  commonwealth  would  sink  into  sloth,
and  become  the  just  object  of  contempt  to  the  world.
It  would  cease  to  be  an  independent  power,  and  deserve
to  fall  a  prey  to  any  enterprising  neighbour.^^

Even  Villeroy  admitted  the  common  belief  to  be,  that
if  the  India  trade  were  abandoned  ''the  States  would
melt  away  like  snow  in  the  sun."  He  would  not,  on
that  account,  however,  counsel  to  the  States  obstinacy
upon  the  subject,  if  Spain  refused  peace  or  truce  except
on  condition  of  their  exclusion  from  the  traffic. Jean-
nin,  Villeroy,  and  their  master ;  Isaac  le  Maire  and
Peter  Plancius,  could  have  told  the  reason  why  if  they
had  chosen.

Early  in  March  a  triple  proposition  was  made  by  the
States'  commissioners.  Spain  might  take  her  choice
to  make  peace  on  the  basis  of  free  trade;  to  make
peace,  leaving  everything  beyond  the  Tropic  of  Cancer
to  the  chance  of  war ;  or  to  make  peace  in  regard  to  all
other  than  the  tropical  regions,  concluding  for  those
only  a  truce  during  a  definite  number  of  years .^^

The  Spaniards  rejected  decidedly  two  of  these  sug-
gestions. Of  course  they  would  not  concede  freedom
of  the  sea.  They  considered  the  mixture  of  peace  and
war  a  monstrous  conception.  They  were,  however,  wil-
ling to  favour  peace  for  Europe  and  truce  in  the  tropics,

35  Wagenaar,  ix.  332,  334. 36  Jeannin,  i.  62  5.  37  ibid.

38  Wagenaar,  ix.  334. Gallucci,  358,  359. Bentivoglio,  565.

1608. ABRUPT  TERMINATION  OF  THE  CONTEKENCE.  415

provided  fhe  States  bound  themselves,  on  the  expiration
of  the  limited  period,  to  abandon  the  Indian  and  Ameri-
can trade  for  ever.  And  to  this  proposition  the  States
of  course  were  deaf.  And  thus  they  went  on  spinning
around,  day  after  day,  in  the  same  vicious  circle,  with-
out more  hope  of  progress  than  squirrels  in  a  cage.

Barn e veld,  always  overbearing  with  friend  or  foe,  and
often  violent,  was  not  disposed  to  make  preposterous
concessions,  notwithstanding  his  eager  desire  for  peace.
"  The  might  of  the  States-General,"  said  he,  "  is  so  great,
thank  God,  that  they  need  not  yield  so  much  to  the
King  of  Spain  as  seems  to  be  expected,  nor  cover  them
selves  with  dishonour."

*'  i\nd  do  you  think  yourselves  more  mighty  than  the
Kings  of  England  and  France  ?  "  cried  liichardot  in  a
great  rage,  "  for  they  never  dared  to  make  any  attempt
upon  the  Indies,  East  or  West."

We  are  willing  to  leave  the  king  in  his  own
quarters,"  was  the  reply,  and  we  expect  him  to  leave
us  in  ours."

You  had  better  take  a  sheet  of  paper  at  once,"  said
Richardot,  "  write  down  exactly  what  you  wish,  and  order
us  to  agree  to  it  all  without  discussion."

"  We  demand  nothing  that  is  unreasonable  in  these
negotiations,"  was  the  firm  rejoinder,  and  expect  that
nothing  unjust  will  be  required  of  us."*^

It  was  now  suggested  by  the  States'  commissioners
that  a  peace,  with  free  navigation,  might  be  concluded
for  Europe,  and  a  truce  for  other  parts  of  the  world,
without  any  stipulations  as  to  what  should  take  place  on
its  termination.

This  was  hardly  anything  new,  but  it  served  as
a  theme  for  more  intellectual  buffeting.  Hard  words
were  freely  exchanged  during  several  hours,  and  all
parties  lost  their  temper.  At  last  the  Spaniards  left
the  conference-chamber  in  a  rage.  Just  as  they  were
going,  Barneveld  asked  them  whether  he  should  make  a
protocol  of  the  session  for  the  States-General,  and
whether  it  was  desirable  in  future  to  resume  the  dis-
cussion.

"  Let  every  one  do  exactly  as  he  likes,"  replied
Spinola,  wrathfully,  as  he  moved  to  the  door.

39  Minutes  of  Olden-BarncTeld,  191,  and  note  from  ^Icmolre  van  Staet. *  Ibid.

416

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap,  L.

Friar  Jolin,  always  plausible,  whispered  a  few  sooth-
ing words  in  the  ear  of  the  marquis,  adding  aloud,
so  that  the  commissioners  might  hear,  Night  brings
counsel."  These  words  he  spoke  in  Latin.

He  who  wishes  to  get  everything  is  apt  to  lose
everything,"  cried  out  Maldere,  the  Zeeland  deputy,  in
Spanish,  to  the  departing  commissioners.

"  Take  that  to  yourselves,"  rejoined  Eichardot,  very
fiercely  ;  "  you  may  be  sure  that  it  will  be  your  case."^^

So  ended  that  interview.

Directly  afterwards  there  was  a  conference  between
the  States'  commissioners  and  the  French  envoys.

Jeannin  employed  all  his  powers  of  argument  and
persuasion  to  influence  the  Netherlanders  against  a
rupture  of  the  negotiations  because  of  the  India  trade.
It  would  be  better  to  abandon  that  commerce,  so  he
urged,  than  to  give  up  the  hope  of  peace.  The  commis-
sioners failed  to  see  the  logic  or  to  melt  at  the  eloquence
of  his  discourse.  They  would  have  been  still  less  in-
clined, if  that  were  possible,  to  move  from  their  position,
had  they  known  of  the  secret  conferences  which
Jeannin  had  just  been  holding  with  Isaac  le  Maire  of
Amsterdam,  and  other  merchants  practically  familiar
with  the  India  trade.  Carrying  out  the  French  king's
plan  to  ]:ob  the  republic  of  that  lucrative  traffic,  and  to
transplant  it,  by  means  of  experienced  Hollanders,  into
France,  the  president,  while  openly  siding  with  the
States,  as  their  most  disinterested  friend,  was  secretly
doing  all  in  his  power  to  destroy  the  very  foundation  of
their  commonwealth.*^

Isaac  le  Maire  came  over  from  Amsterdam  in  a
mysterious  manner,  almost  in  disguise.  Had  his  noc-
turnal dealings  with  the  French  minister  been  known,
he  would  have  been  rudely  dealt  with  by  the  East  India
Company.  He  was  a  native  of  Tournay,  not  a  sincere
republican  therefore,  was  very  strongly  aii'ected  to
France,  and  declared  that  all  his  former  fellow-towns-
men, and  many  more,  had  the  fleur-de-lys  stamped  on
their  hearts.  If  peace  should  be  made  without  stipulation
in  favour  of  the  East  India  Company,  he,  with  his  three
brothers,  would  do  what  they  could  to  transfer  that
corporation  to  France.  All  the  details  of  such  a  pro-

*i  Jeannin,  i.  595.

42  Ibid.  603-606.

1608.

PROLONGED  DEBATE.

417

spective  arrangement  were  thoroughly  discussed,  and  it
was  intimated  that  the  king  would  be  expected  to  take
shares  in  the  enterprise.  Jeannin  had  also  repeated
conferences  on  the  same  subject  with  the  great  cosmo-
grapher  Plancius.  It  may  be  well  understood,  therefore,
that  the  minister  of  Henry  IV.  was  not  very  ardent  to
encourage  the  States  in  their  resolve  to  oppose  peace  or
truce,  except  with  concession  of  the  India  trade.^^

The  States  preferred  that  the  negotiations  should  come
to  nought  on  the  religious  ground  rather  than  on  account
of  the  India  trade.  The  provinces  were  nearly  unani-
mous as  to  the  prohibition  of  the  Catholic  worship,  not
from  bigotry  for  their  own  or  hatred  of  other  creeds,
but  from  larger  views  of  what  was  then  called  tolerance,
and  from  practical  regard  for  the  necessities  of  the  State,
To  permit  the  old  worship,  not  from  a  sense  of  justice
but  as  an  article  of  bargain  with  a  foreign  power,  was
not  only  to  abase  the  government  of  the  States  but  to
convert  every  sincere  Catholic  throughout  the  republic
into  a  grateful  adherent  of  Philip  and  the  archdukes.
It  was  deliberately  to  place  a  lever,  to  be  used  in  all
future  time,  for  the  overthrow  of  their  political  structure.

In  this  the  whole  population  was  interested,  while  the
India  navigation,  although  vital  to  the  well-being  of
the  nation,  was  not  yet  universally  recognised  as  so
supremely  important,  and  was  declared  by  a  narrow-
minded  minority  to  concern  the  jDrovinces  of  Holland
and  Zeeland  alone.

All  were  silently  agreed,  therefore,  to  defer  the  reli-
gious question  to  the  last.

Especially,  commercial  greed  induced  the  States  to
keep  a  firm  clutch  on  the  great  river  on  which  the  onco
splendid  city  of  Antwerp  stood.  Ever  since  that  com-
mercial metropolis  had  succumbed  to  Farnese,  the
republic  had  maintained  the  lower  forts,  by  means  of
which  and  of  Flushing  at  the  river's  mouth,  Antwerp
was  kept  in  a  state  of  suspended  animation.  To  open
the  navigation  of  the  Scheld,  to  permit  free  approach
to  Antwerp,  would,  according  to  the  narrow  notions
of  the  Amsterdam  merchants,  be  destructive  to  their  own
flourishing  trade.

In  vain  did  Richardot,  in  one  well-fought  conference,

VOL.  IV.

*3  Jcaunin,  i.  6U3-6C6.

418

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L.

do  his  best  to  obtain  concessions  on  this  important  point.
The  States'  commissioners  were  as  deaf  as  the  Spaniards
had  been  on  the  India  question.  Eichardot,  no  longer
loud  and  furious,  began  to  cry.  With  tears  running
down  his  cheeks,^  he  besought  the  Netherlanders  not  to
insist  so  strenuously  upon  all  their  points,  and  to  re-
member that  concessions  were  mutually  necessary,  if  an
amicable  arrangement  were  to  be  framed.  The  chances
for  peace  were  promising.  "  Let  not  a  blight  be  thrown
over  all  our  hopes,"  he  exclaimed,  "  by  too  great  per-
tinacity on  either  side.  Above  all,  let  not  the  States
dictate  terms  as  to  a  captive  or  conquered  king,  but
propose  such  conditions  as  a  benevolent  but  powerful
sovereign  could  accept."

These  adjurations  might  be  considered  admirable,  if  it
had  been  possible  for  the  royal  commissioners  to  point
to  a  single  mustard-seed  of  concession  ever  vouchsafed
by  them  to  the  republic.

Meantime  the  month  of  March  had  passed.  Nothing
had  been  accomplished,  but  it  was  agreed  to  prolong  the
armistice  through  April  and  May.

The  negotiations  having  feebly  dribbled  off  into
almost  absolute  extinction,  Friar  John  was  once  more
set  in  motion,  and  despatched  to  Madrid.  He  w^as  sent
to  get  fresh  instructions  from  Philip,  and  he  promised,
on  departing,  to  return  in  forty  days.  He  hoped  as  his
reward,  he  said,  to  be  made  bishop  of  Utrecht.  "  That
will  be  a  little  above  your  calibre,"  replied  Barneveld.^
Forty  days  was  easily  said,  and  the  States  consented  to
the  additional  delay.

During  his  absence  there  was  much  tedious  discussion
of  minor  matters,  such  as  staple  rights  of  wine  and
cloths,  regulations  of  boundaries,  removal  of  restrictions
on  trade  and  navigation,  passports,  sequestered  estates,
and  the  like ;  all  of  which  were  subordinate  to  the  all-
important  subjects  of  India  and  Keligion,  those  two  most
tender  topics  growing  so  much  more  tender  the  more
they  were  handled  as  to  cause  at  last  a  shiver  whenever
they  were  approached.  Nevertheless  both  were  to  be
dealt  with,  or  the  negotiations  would  fall  to  the  ground.*^

^  Grotius,  xvii.  769.  *5  Minutes  of  Olden-Barneveld,  205.

46  Grotius,  xvii.  Wagenaar,  ix.  343,  seqq.  Meteren,  B.  xxix.  Van  der  Kemp,
36,  37,  154-157.

1608.

THE  ANGLO-DUTCH  TREATS.

419

The  States  felt  convinced  that  they  would  fall  to  the
ground,  that  they  had  fallen  to  the  ground,  and  they  at
least  would  not  stoop  to  pick  them  up  again.

The  forty  days  passed  away,  but  the  friar  never
returned.  April  and  May  came  and  went,  and  again  the
armistice  expired  by  its  own  limitation.  The  war  party
was  disgusted  with  the  solemn  trifling,  Maurice  was
exasperated  beyond  endurance,  Bameveld  and  the  peace
men  began  to  find  immense  difficulty  in  confronting  the
gathering  storm.

The  prince,  with  difficulty,  consented  to  a  prolongation
of  the  armistice  for  two  months  longer;  resolute  to
resume  hostilities  should  no  accord  be  made  before  the
end  of  July.  The  Advocate,  with  much  earnestness,
and  with  more  violence  than  was  habitual  with  him,
insisted  on  protracting  the  temporary  truce  until  the  end
of  the  year.  The  debates  in  the  States-General  and  the
state-council  were  vehement ;  passion  rose  to  fever-heat,
but  the  stadholder,  although  often  half  beside  himself
with  rage,  ended  by  submitting  once  more  to  the  will  of
Barneveld.

This  was  the  easier,  as  the  Advocate  at  last  proposed
an  agreement  which  seemed  to  Maurice  and  Lewis
William  even  better  than  their  own  original  suggestion.
It  was  arranged  that  the  armistice  should  be  prolonged
until  the  end  of  the  year,  but  it  was  at  the  same  time
stipulated  that  unless  the  negotiations  had  reached  a
definite  result  before  the  1st  of  August,  they  sliould  bo
forthwith  broken  ofi".

Thus  a  period  of  enforced  calm — a  kind  of  vacation,
as  if  these  great  soldiers  and  grey-beards  had  been  a
troop  of  idle  school-boys — was  now  established,  without
the  slightest  reason.

President  Jeannin  took  occasion  to  make  a  journc}^  to
Paris,  leaving  the  Hague  on  the  20th  June.

During  his  absence  a  treaty  of  the  States  with  England,
similar  in  its  terms  to  the  one  recently  concluded
between  the  republic  and  France,  but  only  providing
for  halt*  the  number  of  auxiliary  troops  arranged  for  in
the  Fiench  convention,  was  signed  at  the  Hague.
The  English  plenipotentaries,  Winwood  and  26  Juno,
Spencer,  wished  to  delay  the  exchange  of  signa-  i608. '
luru.^  until  the  pending  negotiations  with  Spain  and  the

2  E  2

420

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L.

arclidukes  were  brouglit  to  a  close,  as  King  James  was
most  desirous  at  that  epoch  to  keep  on  good  terms  with
his  Catholic  Majesty.  The  States  were  so  urgent,  how-
ever, to  bring  at  least  this  matter  to  a  termination,  and
the  English  so  anxious  lest  France  should  gain  still
greater  influence  than  she  now  enjo^^ed  in  the  provinces,
that  they  at  last  gave  way.  It  was  further  stipulated  in
the  convention  that  the  debt  of  the  States  to  England,
then  amounting  to  818,408Z.  sterling,  should  be  settled
by  annual  payments  of  60,000?. ;  to  begin  with  the
expected  peace.^^

Besides  this  debt  to  the  English  Government,  the
States-General  owed  nine  millions  of  florins  (900,000?.),
and  the  separate  provinces  altogether  eighteen  millions
(1,800,000/.)  In  short,  there  would  be  a  deficiency  of
at  least  three  hundred  thousand  florins  a  month  if  the
war  went  on,  although  every  imaginable  device  had
already  been  employed  for  increasing  the  revenue  from
taxation.  It  must  be  admitted,  therefore,  that  the
Barneveld  party  were  not  to  be  severely  censured  for
their  desire  to  bring  about  an  honourable  peace.

That  Jeannin  was  well  aware  of  the  disposition  prevail-
ing throughout  a  great  part  of  the  commonwealth  is
certain.  It  is  equally  certain  that  he  represented  to  his
sovereign,  while  at  Paris,  that  the  demand  upon  his  ex-
chequer by  the  States,  in  case  of  the  resumption  of  hos-
tilities, would  be  more  considerable  than  ever.  Immense
was  the  pressure  put  upon  Henry  by  the  Spanish  court,
during  the  summer,  to  induce  him  to  abandon  his  allies.
Very  complicated  were  the  nets  thrown  out  to  entangle
the  wary  old  politician  in  "  the  grey  jacket  and  with
the  heart  of  gold,"  as  he  was  fond  of  designating  himself,
into  an  alliance  with  Philip  and  the  archdukes.

Don  Pedro  de  Toledo,  at  the  head  of  a  magnificent
embassy,  arrived  in  Paris  with  projects  of  arranging
single,  double,  or  triple  marriages  between  the  respec-
tive nurseries  of  France  and  Spain.  The  Infanta  might
marry  with  a  French  prince,  and  have  all  the  Nether-
lands for  her  dower,  so  soon  as  the  childless  archdukes
should  have  departed  this  life.  Or  an  Infante  might
espouse  a  daughter  of  France  with  the  same  heritage
assigned  to  the  young  couple.

Wagenaar,  ix.  344

48  Ibid.  377. Compare  Grotia'^,  xvii.  777.

1608.

MATRIMONIAL  PROJECTS.

421

Such  proposals,  duly  set  forth  in  sonorous  Spanish
by  the  Constable  of  Castile,  failed  to  produce  a  very
soothing  effect  on  Henry's  delicate  ear.  He  had  seen
and  heard  enough  of  gaining  thrones  by  Spanish  mar-
riages. Had  not  the  very  crown  on  his  own  head,
which  he  had  won  with  foot  in  stirrup  and  lance  in  rest,
been  hawked  about  for  years,  appended  to  the  wedding
ring  of  the  Spanish  Infanta?  It  might  become  conve-
nient to  him,  at  some  later  da}^  to  form  a  family  alliance
wdth  the  house  of  Austria,  although  he  would  not  excite
suspicion  in  the  United  Provinces  by  openly  accepting
it  then.  But  to  wait  for  the  shoes  of  Albert  and  Isabella,
and  until  the  Dutch  republic  had  been  absorbed  into  the
obedient  Netherlands  by  his  assistance,  was  not  a  very
flattering  prospect  for  a  son  or  daughter  of  France.
The  ex-Huguenot  and  indomitable  campaigner  in  the
field  or  in  politics,  was  for  more  drastic  measures.
Should  the  right  moment  come,  he  knew  well  enough
how  to  strike,  and  could  appropriate  the  provinces,
obedient  or  disobedient,  without  assistance  from  the
Spanish  babies.*^

Don  Pedro  took  little  by  his  propositions.  The  king
stoutly  declared  that  the  Netlierlands  were  very  near  to
his  heart,  and  that  he  would  never  abandon  them  on
any  consideration.  So  near,  indeed,  that  he  meant  to
bring  them  still  nearer,  but  this  was  not  then  suspected
by  the  Spanish  court;  Henry,  the  while,  repelling  as  a
personal  insult  to  himself  the  request  that  he  should
secretly  labour  to  reduce  the  United  Provinces  under
subjection  to  the  archdukes.  It  had  even  been  proposed
that  he  should  sign  a  secret  convention  to  that  effect,
and  there  were  those  about  the  court  who  were  not  ill-
disposed  for  such  a  combination.  The  king  was,  how-
ever, far  too  adroit  to  be  caught  in  any  such  trap.  The
marriage  proposals  in  themselves  he  did  not  dislike,
but  Jeannin  and  he  were  both  of  a  mind  that  they
should  be  kept  entirely  secret.

Don  Pedro,  on  the  contrary,  for  obvious  reasons,  was
for  making  the  transactions  ostentatiously  public,  and,
as  a  guarantee  of  his  master's  good  faith  in  regard  to
the  heritage  of  the  Netherlands,  he  proposed  that  every
liortion  of  the  republic,  thenceforth  to  be  con(][ucred  by

*9  Wagcnaar,  ix.  350-357. Grotius,  xvii.  774.  Jcanniu.

422

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  L.

the  allies,  should  be  confided  to  hands  in  which  Henry
and  the  archdukes  would  have  equal  confidence.

But  these  artifices  were  too  trivial  to  produce  much
effect.  Henry  remained  true,  in  his  way,  to  the  States-
General,  and  Don  Pedro  was  much  laughed  at  in  Paris,
although  the  public  scarcely  knew  wherefore.

These  intrigues  had  not  been  conducted  so  mj^ste-
riously  but  that  Barneveld  was  aware  of  what  was  going
on.  Both  before  Jeannin's  departure  from  the  Hague
in  June,  and  on  his  return  in  the  middle  of  August,  he
catechised  him  very  closely  on  the  subject.  The  old
Leaguer  was  too  deep,  however,  to  be  thoroughly
pumped,  even  by  so  practised  a  hand  as  the  Advocate's,
so  that  more  was  suspected  than  at  the  time  was  accu-
rately known.

As,  at  the  memorable  epoch  of  the  accession  of  the
King  of  Scots  to  the  throne  of  Elizabeth,  Maximilian  de
Bethune  had  flattered  the  new  monarch  with  the  prospect
of  a  double  marriage,  so  now  Don  Fernando  Girono  had
been  sent  on  solemn  mission  to  England,  in  order  to
offer  the  same  infants  to  James  which  Don  Pedro  was
placing  at  the  disposition  of  Henry.

The  British  sovereign,  as  secretly  fascinated  by  the
idea  of  a  Spanish  family  alliance  as  he  had  ever  been  by
the  proposals  of  the  Marquis  de  Eosny  for  the  French
marriages,  listened  with  eagerness.  Money  was  scat-
tered as  profusely  among  the  English  courtiers  by  Don
Fernando  as  had  been  done  by  De  Bethune  four  years
before.^*^  The  bribes  were  accepted,  and  often  by  the
very  personages  who  knew  the  colour  of  Bourbon  money,
but  the  ducats  were  scarcely  earned.  Girono,  thus
urging  on  the  English  Government  the  necessity  of
deserting  the  republic  and  cementing  a  cordial,  personal,
and  political  understanding  between  James  and  Philip,
effected  but  little.  It  soon  became  thoroughly  under-
stood in  England  that  the  same  bargaining  was  going
on  simultaneously  in  France.  As  it  was  evident  that
the  Spanish  children  could  not  be  disposed  of  in  both
markets  at  the  same  time,  it  was  plain  to  the  dullest
comprehension  that  either  the  brokerage  of  Toledo  or  of
Girono  was  a  sham,  and  that  a  policy  erected  upnn  such
flimsy  foundations  would  soon  be  washed  away.

50  Wagenaar,  ix.  355,  356.  Jeannin.

1608.

PROGRESS  or  NEYEN  AT  MADRID.

423

It  is  certain,  however,  that  James,  while  affecting
friendship  for  the  States,  and  signing  with  them  the
league  of  mutual  assistance,  was  secretly  longing  to
nibble  the  bait  dangled  before  him  by  Girono,  and  was
especially  determined  to  prevent,  if  possible,  the  plans
of  Toledo.

Meantime,  brother  John  Neyen  was  dealing  with
Philip  and  the  Duke  of  Lerma  in  Spain.

The  friar  strenuously  urged  upon  the  favourite  and
the  rest  of  the  royal  advisers  the  necessity  of  prompt
action  with  the  States.  This  needed  not  interfere  with
an  unlimited  amount  of  deception.  It  was  necessary  to
bring  the  negotiations  to  a  definite  agreement.  It
would  be  by  no  means  requisite,  however,  to  hold  to
that  agreement  whenever  a  convenient  opportunity  for
breaking  it  should  present  itself.  The  first  object  of
Spanish  j)olicy,  argued  honest  John,  should  be  to  get
the  weapons  out  of  the  rebels'  hands.  The  Nether-
landers  ought  to  be  encouraged  to  return  to  their  usual
pursuits  of  commerce  and  manufactures,  whence  they
derived  their  support,  and  to  disband  their  military  and
naval  forces.  Their  sailors  and  traders  should  be
treated  kindly  in  Spain,  instead  of  being  indulged  as
heretofore  with  no  hospitality  save  that  of  the  Holy
Inquisition  and  its  dungeons.  Let  their  minds  be  dis-
ai-med  of  all  suspicion.  Now  the  whole  population  of
the  provinces  had  been  convinced  that  Spain,  in  affecting
to  treat,  was  secretly  devising  means  to  re-imposo  her
ancient  yoke  upon  their  necks.^^

Time  went  by  in  Aranjuez  and  Madrid.  The  forty
days,  promised  as  the  period  of  Neyen's  absence,  were
soon  gone  ;  but  what  were  forty  days,  or  forty  times
forty,  at  the  Spanish  court  ?  The  friar,  who,  whatever
his  faults,  was  anything  but  an  idler,  chafed  at  a  pro-
crastination which  seemed  the  more  stupendous  to  him,
coming  fresh  as  he  did  from  a  busy  people  who  knew
the  value  of  time.  In  the  anguish  of  his  soul  he  went  to
Kodrigo  Calderon,  of  the  privy  council,  and  implored
his  influence  with  Government  to  procure  leave  for  him
to  depart.  Calderon,  in  urbane  but  decisive  terms,
assured  him  that  this  would  be  impossible  before  the
king  should  return  to  IMadrid. The  monk  then  went  to

51  Gallucci,  361,  363.

424:

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L,

Jdiaquez,  who  was  in  favour  of  his  proceeding  at  once
to  the  Netherlands,  but  who  on  being  informed  that
Calderon  was  of  a  different  opinion,  gave  np  the  point.
More  distressed  than  ever,  ISIeyen  implored  Prada's
assistance,  but  Prada  plunged  him  into  still  deeper  de-
spair. His  Majesty,  said  that  counsellor,  with  matchless
effrontery,  was  studying  the  propositions  of  the  States-
General,  and  all  the  papers  in  the  negotiation,  line  by
line,  comma  by  comma.  There  were  many  animadver-
sions to  make,  many  counter  suggestions  to  offer.  The
king  was  pondering  the  whole  subject  most  diligently.
When  those  lucubrations  were  finished,  the  royal  de-
cision, aided  by  the  wisdom  of  the  privy  council,  would
be  duly  communicated  to  the  archdukes.^^

To  wait  for  an  answer  to  the  propositions  of  the
suspicious  States-General  until  Philip  III.  had  mastered
the  subject  in  detail,  was  a  prospect  too  dreary  even  for
the  equable  soul  of  Brother  John.  Dismayed  at  the
position  in  which  he  found  himself,  he  did  his  best  to
ferret  out  the  reasons  for  the  preposterous  delay ;  not
being  willing  to  be  paid  off  in  allusions  to  the  royeA
investigations.  He  was  still  further  appalled  at  last  by
discovering  that  the  delay  was  absolutely  for  the  delay's
sake.  It  was  considered  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  of
the  Government  not  to  delay.  The  court  and  cabinet  had
quite  made  up  their  minds  as  to  the  answer  to  be  made
to  the  last  propositions  of  the  rebels,  but  to  make  it
known  at  once  was  entirely  out  of  the  question.  In  the
previous  year  His  Majesty's  administration,  so  it  was
now  confessed  with  shame,  had  acted  with  almost  in-
decent haste.  That  everything  had  been  conceded  to
the  confederated  provinces  was  the  common  talk  of
Europe.  Let  the  time-honoured,  inveterate  custom
of  Spain  in  grave  affairs  to  proceed  slowly,  and  there-
fore surely,  be  in  future  observed.  A  proper  self-respect
required  the  king  to  keep  the  universe  in  suspense  for  a
still  longer  period  upon  the  royal  will  and  the  decision
of  the  royal  council.^^

Were  the  affairs  of  the  mighty  Spanish  empire  so  sub-
ordinate to  the  convenience  of  that  portion  of  it  called

52  Gallucci,  361,  363.

^  Ad  existimatioriem  quoque  rei  facere  lit  diutius  in  expectatione  regiai  volun*
tatis  regiique  senatus-consulti  suspensus  esset  orbis  terrarum." — Gallucci,  ubi  sup.

1608.

SPANISH  DILATORINESS.

425

the  Netherlands  that  no  time  was  to  be  lost  before
settling  their  affairs  ?  ^

Such  dismal  frivolity,  such  palsied  pride,  seems
scarcely  credible ;  but  more  than  all  this  has  been  care-
fully recorded  in  the  letters  of  the  friar.

If  it  were  precipitation  to  spend  the  whole  year  1607
in  forming  a  single  phrase  ;  to  wit,  that  the  archdukes
and  the  king  would  treat  with  the  United  Provinces  as
with  countries  to  which  they  made  no  pretensions  ;  and
to  spend  the  best  part  of  another  year  in  futile  efforts  to
recall  that  phrase ;  if  all  this  had  been  recklessness  and
haste,  then,  surely,  the  most  sluggish  canal  in  Holland
was  a  raging  cataract,  and  the  march  of  a  glacier  electric
speed.

Midsummer  had  arrived.  The  period  in  which  peace
was  to  be  made  or  abandoned  altogether  had  past.
Jeannin  had  retumed  from  his  visit  to  Paris ;  the
Danish  envoys,  sent  to  watch  the  negotiations,  had  left
the  Hague,  utterly  disgusted  with  u  puppet-show,  all
the  strings  of  which,  they  protested,  were  pulled  from
the  Louvre.  Brother  John,  exasperated  by  the  super-
human delays,  fell  sick  of  a  fever  at  Burgos,  and  was
sent,  on  his  recoveiy,  to  the  court  at  Valladolid  to  be
made  ill  again  by  the  same  cause,  and  still  there  came
no  sound  from  the  Government  of  Spain.^^

At  last  the  silence  was  broken.  {Something  that  was
called  the  voice  of  the  king  reached  the  eai  s  of  the  arch-
duke. Long  had  he  wrestled  in  prayer  on  this  great
subject,  said  Philip  III.,  fervently  had  he  besought  the
Omnipotent  f  )r  light.  He  had  now  persuaded  himself
that  he  should  not  fulfil  his  duty  to  God,  nor  satisfy  his
own  strong  desire  for  maintaining  the  Catholic  faith,  nor
preserve  his  self-respect,  if  he  now  conceded  his  supreme
right  to  the  Confederated  Provinces  at  any  other  price
than  the  uncontrolled  exercise,  within  their  borders,  of
the  Catholic  religion.  He  wished,  therefore,  as  obedient
son  of  the  Church  and  Defender  of  the  Faith,  to  fulfil
this  primary  duty,  untrammelled  b}^  any  human  con-
sideration, by  any  profit  that  might  induce  him  towards
a  contrary  course.  That  which  he  had  on  other  occa-
sions more  than  once  signified  he  now  confirmed.  His

5*  Noyon's  letters  to  Splnob,  23  May,  1608,  in  Gallucci,  362,  363.
"  Neyon  to  Spinula,  20  Aug.  16u^,  iu  Gallucci,  369.

426

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L,

mind  was  fixed  ;  this  was  his  last  and  immutable  deter-
mination, that  if  the  confederates  should  permit  the  free
and  public  exercise  of  the  Catholic,  Koman,  Apostolic
religion  to  all  such  as  wished  to  live  and  die  in  it,  for
this  cause  so  grateful  to  God,  and  for  no  other  reason,
he  also  would  permit  to  them  that  supreme  right  over
the  provinces,  and  that  authority  which  now  belonged
to  himself.  Natives  and  residents  of  those  countries
should  enjoy  liberty,  just  so  long  as  the  exercise  of  the
Catholic  religion  flourished  there,  and  not  one  day  nor
hour  longer.

Philip  then  proceeded  flatly  to  refuse  the  India  navi-
gation, giving  reasons  very  satisfactory  to  himself  why
the  provinces  ought  cheerfully  to  abstain  from  that
traffic.  If  the  confederates,  in  consequence  of  the  con-
ditions thus  definitely  announced,  moved  by  their  innate
pride  and  obstinacy,  and  relying  on  the  assistance  of
their  allies,  should  break  off  the  negotiations,  then  it
would  be  desirable  to  adopt  the  plan  proposed  by
Jeannin  to  Eichardot,  and  conclude  a  truce  for  five  or
six  years.  The  king  expressed  his  own  decided  pre-
ference for  a  truce  rather  than  a  peace,  and  his  con-
viction that  Jeannin  had  made  the  suggestion  by
command  of  his  sovereign.^^

The  negotiators  stood  exactly  where  they  did  when
Friar  John,  disguised  as  a  merchant,  first  made  his  bow
to  the  Prince  and  Barneveld  in  the  palace  at  the  Hague.

The  archduke,  on  receiving  at  last  this  peremptory
letter  from  the  king,  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  issue

20  Aug. instructions  accordingly  to  the  plenipotentiaries

^608.  at  the  Hague.  A  decisive  conference  between
those  diplomatists  and  the  States'  commissioners  took
place  immediately  afterwards.

It  was  on  the  20th  August.

Although  it  had  been  agreed  on  the  1st  May  to  break
off  negotiations  on  the  ensuing  1st  of  August,  should  no
result  be  reached,  yet  three  weeks  beyond  that  period
had  been  suffered  to  elapse,  under  a  tacit  agreement  to
wait  a  little  longer  for  the  return  of  the  friar.  President
Jeannin,  too,  had  gone  to  Paris  on  the  20th  June,  to
receive  new  and  important  instructions,  verbal  and
written,  from  his  sovereign,  and  during  his  absence  it

J>6  King  to  the  Archdukes,  in  Gallucci,  365,  367.

1608. PHILIP'S  DECISION  ON  CONDITIONS  OF  PEACE.  427

had  not  been  thought  expedient  to  transact  much  busi-
ness. Jeannin  returned  to  the  Hague  on  the  15th  of
August,  and,  as  definite  instructions  from  king  and  arch-
duke had  now  arrived,  there  seemed  no  possibility  of
avoiding  an  explanation.

The  Spanish  envoys  accordingly,  v^ith  much  gravity,
and  as  if  they  had  been  propounding  some  cheerful
novelty,  announced  to  the  assembled  commissioners  that
all  reports  hitherto  flying  about  as  to  the  Spanish  king's
intentions  were  false.

His  Majesty  had  no  intention  of  refusing  to  give  up
the  sovereignty  of  the  provinces.  On  the  contrary,  they
were  instructed  to  concede  that  sovereignty  freely  and
frankly  to  my  lords  the  States-General — a  pearl  and  a
precious  jewel,  the  like  of  which  no  prince  had  ever  given
away  before.  Yet  the  king  desired  neither  gold  nor
silver,  neither  cities  nor  anything  else  of  value  in  ex-
change. He  asked  only  for  that  which  was  indispensable
to  the  tranquillity  of  his  conscience  before  God,  to  wit,
the  re-establishment  in  those  countries  of  the  Catholic
Apostolic  Koman  religion.^^  This  there  could  surely  be
no  reasons  for  refusing.  They  owed  it  as  a  return  for
the  generosity  of  the  king,  they  owed  it  to  their  own
relatives,  they  owed  it  to  the  memory  of  their  ancestors,
not  to  show  greater  animosity  to  the  ancient  religion  than
to  the  new  and  pernicious  sect  of  Anabaptists,  bom  into
the  world  for  the  express  purpose  of  destroying  empires  ;
they  owed  it  to  their  many  fellow-citizens,  who  would
otherwise  be  driven  into  exile,  because  deprived  of  that
which  is  dearest  to  humanity.'*

In  regard  to  the  East  India  navigation,  inasmuch  as
the  provinces  had  no  right  whatever  to  it,  and  as  no
other  prince  but  the  sovereign  of  Spain  had  any  preten-
sions to  it,  his  Majesty  expected  that  the  States  would  at
once  desist  from  it.'^^

This  was  the  magnificent  result  of  twenty  months  of
diplomacy.  As  the  king's  father  had  long  ago  flung  away
the  pearl  and  precious  jewel  which  the  son  now  made  a
merit  of  selling  to  its  proprietors  at  the  price  of  their
life's  blood — the  world's  commerce — it  is  difficult  to
imagine  that  Kichardot,  while  communicating  this  pre-

57  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  156-160,  from  Sec.  Res.  Stat.-Gen.  Grotius,  xvii.  115.  Wage*
naar.  w  Grotius,  ubi  sup.  59  Van  der  Kciup,  ubi  sup.

428

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  L.

posterons  ultimatum,  could  have  kept  his  countenance.
But  there  were  case-hardened  politicians  on  both  sides.
The  proposition  was  made  and  received  with  becoming
seriousness,  and  it  was  decided  by  the  States'  commis-
sioners to  make  no  answer  at  all  on  that  occasion.  They
simply  promised  to  render  their  report  to  the  States-
General,  who  doubtless  would  make  short  work  with  the
matter.

They  made  their  report  and  it  occasioned  a  tumult.
Every  member  present  joined  in  a  general  chorus  of
wrathful  denunciation.  The  Spanish  commissioners  were
infamous  swindlers,  it  was  loudly  asserted.  There  should
be  no  more  dealings  with  them  at  all.  Spain  was  a
power  only  to  be  treated  with  on  the  battle-field.  In  the
tempest  of  general  rage  no  one  would  listen  to  argument,
no  one  asked  which  would  be  the  weaker,  which  the
stronger  party,  what  resources  for  the  renewed  warfare
could  be  found,  or  who  would  be  the  allies  of  the  repub-
lic. Hatred,  warlike  fury  and  scorn  at  the  duplicity  with
which  they  had  been  treated,  washed  every  more  politic
sentiment  away,  and  metamorphosed  that  body  of  burghers
as  in  an  instant.  The  negotiations  should  be  broken  off,
not  on  one  point,  but  on  all  points,  and  nothing  was  left
but  to  prepare  instantly  for  war.^^

Three  days  later,  after  the  French  and  English  ambas-
23  Aug.  sadors,  as  well  as  Prince  Maurice  and  Count
1608.  Lewis  William,  had  been  duly  consulted,  com-
parative calm  was  restored  and  a  decisive  answer  was
unanimously  voted  by  the  States-General.  The  proposi-
tion of  the  commissioners  was  simply  declared  to  be  in
direct  violation  of  the  sovereignty  and  freedom  of  the
country,  and  it  was  announced  that,  if  it  should  be  per-
sisted in,  the  whole  negotiation  might  be  considered  as
broken  off.  A  formal  answer  to  the  royal  propositions
would  be  communicated  likewise  to  the  envoys  of  foreign
powers,  in  order  that  the  royal  commissioners  might  be
placed  completely  in  the  wrong.^^

On  the  25th  August  an  elaborate  response  was  accord-
25  Aug. iiigly  delivered  in  writing  by  the  States'  com-
1608. missioners  to  those  of  the  archdukes  and  king,
it  being  at  the  same  time  declared  by  Barneveld  and  his
colleagues  that  their  functions  were  ended,  and  that  this

Jeannin,  i.  819.  Van  der  Kemp,  ubi  sup.  Wagenaar,  ix.  357,  358.

1608

GENERAL  RUPTURE,

429

document,  emanating  from  the  States- General,  was  a
sovereign  resolution,  not  a  diplomatic  note.^^

The  contents  of  this  paper  may  be  inferred  from  all
that  has  been  previously  narrated.  The  republic  knew
its  own  mind,  and  had  always  expressed  itself  with  dis-
tinctness. The  Spanish  Government  having  at  last  been
brought  to  disclose  its  intentions,  there  was  an  end  to
the  negotiations  for  peace.  The  rupture  was  formally
announced.

See  the  paper  in  Meteren,  605,  eu«.

430

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap,  LI,

CHAPTEE  LI.

Designs  of  Henry  IV.  —  New  marriage  project  between  France  and  Spain  —  Formal
proposition  of  negotiating  for  a  truce  between  the  States  and  Spain  —  Exertions  of
Prince  Maurice  to  counteract  the  designs  of  Barneveld  —  Strife  between  the  two
parties  in  the  republic  —  Animosity  of  the  people  against  Barneveld  —  Return  of
the  Spanish  commissioners  —  Further  trifling  —  Dismissal  of  the  commissioners  —
Close  of  the  negotiations  —  Accidental  discovery  of  the  secret  instructions  of  the
archdukes  to  the  commissioners  —  Opposing  factions  in  the  republic — Oration  of
President  Jeannin  before  the  States-General — Comparison  between  the  Dutch  and
Swiss  republics  —  Calumnies  against  the  Advocate — Ambassador  Lambert  in
France  —  Henry's  letter  to  Prince  Maurice — Reconciliation  of  Maurice  and
Barneveld  —  Agreement  of  the  States  to  accept  a  truce.

President  Jeannin  had  long  been  prepared  for  this
result.  It  was  also  by  no  means  distasteful  to  him.  A
peace  would  not  have  accorded  with  the  ulterior  and
secretly  cherished  schemes  of  his  sovereign,  and  during
his  visit  to  Paris,  he  had  succeeded  in  persuading  Henry
that  a  truce  would  be  far  the  most  advantageous  solution
of  the  question,  so  far  as  his  interests  were  concerned.

For  it  had  been  precisely  during  that  midsummer  vaca-
tion of  the  President  at  Paris  that  Henry  had  completed
his  plot  against  the  liberty  of  the  republic,  of  which  he
professed  himself  the  only  friend.  Another  phase  of
Spanish  marriage-making  had  excited  his  ever-scheming
and  insidious  brain.  It  had  been  proposed  that  the
second  son  of  the  Spanish  king  should  espouse  one  of
Henry's  daughters.

The  papal  Nuncius  asked  what  benefit  the  King  of
Spain  would  receive  for  his  share,  in  case  of  the  marriage.
The  French  king  replied  by  plainly  declaring  to  the
Nuncius  that  the  united  States  should  abstain  from  and
renounce  all  navigation  to  and  commerce  with  the  Indies,
and  should  permit  public  exercise  of  the  Catholic  re-
ligion. If  they  refused,  he  would  incontinently  abandon
them  to  their  fate.  More  than  this,  he  said,  could  not
honestly  be  expected  of  him.^

Surely  this  was  enough. Honestly,  or  dishonestly,

•  "  Le  nonce  avait  demande  au  roy  quel  pour  parler  plus  clair  le  roy  declara  au
benefice  recevrait  de  sa  part  le  Roy  nonce  que  les  Etats  se  deporteront  de
d'Espagne  en  respect  des  mariages. Et  toute  navigation  et  commerce  aux  Indea,

1608.

DESIGNS  OF  HENRY  IV.

431

what  more  could  Spain  expect  of  the  republic's  best
ally,  than  that  he  should  use  all  his  efforts  to  bring  her
back  into  Spanish  subjection,  should  deprive  her  of  com-
merce with  three-quarters  of  the  world,  and  compel  her
to  re-establish  the  religion  which  she  believed,  at  that
period,  to  be  incompatible  with  her  constitutional  liber-
ties? It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  more  profligate  or
heartless  course  than  the  one  pursued  at  this  juncture  by
Henry.  Secretly,  he  was  intriguing,  upon  the  very  soil
of  the  Netherlands,  to  filch  from  them  that  splendid
commerce  which  was  the  wonder  of  the  age,  which  had
been  invented  and  created  by  Dutch  navigators  and
men  of  science,  which  was  the  very  foundation  of  their
State,  and  without  which  they  could  not  exist,  in  order
that  he  might  appropriate  it  to  himself,  and  transfer  the
East  India  Company  to  France ;  while  at  Paris  he  was
solemnly  engaging  himself  in  a  partnership  with  their
ancient  and  deadly  enemy  to  rob  them  of  their  precious
and  nobly  gained  liberty.  Was  better  proof  ever  afforded
that  God  alone  can  protect  us  against  those  whom  we
trust  ?  Who  was  most  dangerous  to  the  United  Provinces
during  those  memorable  peace  negotiations,  Spain  the
avowed  enemy,  or  France  the  friend  ?

The  little  republic  had  but  her  own  sword,  her  own
brain,  and  her  own  purse  to  rely  upon.  Elizabeth  was
dead,  and  James  loved  Spain  better  than  he  did  the
Netherlands,  and  quiet  better  than  Spain.  "  I  have  told
you  often,"  said  Caron,  "  and  I  say  it  once  more,  the
Spaniard  is  lucky  that  he  has  such  a  peaceable  king  as
this  to  deal  with  in  England."  ^

The  details  of  the  new  marriage  project  were  arranged
at  Paris  between  the  Nuncius,  the  Spanish  ambassador,
Don  Pedro  de  Toledo,  the  diplomatic  agent  of  the  arch-
dukes, and  Henry's  ministers,  precisely  as  if  there  had
been  no  negotiations  going  on  between  the  States  and
Spain.  Yet  the  French  king  was  supposed  to  be  the
nearest  friend  of  the  States,  and  was  cousulted  by  them
on  every  occasion,  while  his  most  intimate  and  trusted
counsellor,  the  ingenuous  Jeannin,  whose  open  brow  was

et  permpttront  quelque  exercise  public  de  tout  ce  que  I'on  peut  honnetonient  pre-

Iti  foy  Catholiquces  Provinces  Unies.ou^  tendre  dc  luy  pour  le  present." — Exlruct

faute  de  ce  il  les  delaissera  etabandonnera  of  I^etter  of  Peckius,  cited  in  Deventer,

incontinent,  en  quoy  il  dit  Cbtre  cotnpris  iii.  250.  2  Deventer,  iii.  253.

432

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

stamped  with  sincerity,  was  privy  to  all  their  most  secret
deliberations.

But  the  statesman  thus  dealing  with  the  Hollanders
under  such  a  mask  of  friendly  candour,  knew  perfectly
well  the  reason  why  his  Government  preferred  a  truce  to
a  peace.  During  a  prolonged  truce,  the  two  royal  chil-
dren would  grow  old  enough  for  the  consummation  of
marriage,  and  the  States — so  it  was  hoped — would  be
corrupted  and  cajoled  into  renouncing  their  liberty.  All
the  Netherlands  would  be  then  formed  into  a  secundo-
geniture  for  Spain,  and  the  first  sovereign  would  be  the
husband  of  a  French  princess.^  Even  as  an  object  of
ambition,  the  prize  to  be  secured  by  so  much  procrastina-
tion and  so  much  treachery  was  paltry.

When  the  Spanish  commissioners  came  to  the  French
and  English  ambassadors  accordingly,  complaining  of
the  abrupt  and  peremptory  tone  of  the  States'  reply^  the
suggestion  of  conferences  for  truce,  in  place  of  fruitless
peace  negotiations,  was  made  at  once,  and  of  course
favourably  received.  It  was  soon  afterwards  laid  before
the  States-General.  To  this  end,  in  truth,  Eichardot
and  his  colleagues  had  long  been  secretly  tending.
Moreover,  the  subject  had  been  thoroughly  but  secretly
discussed  long;  before  between  Jeannin  and  Barneveld.

3  "  Et  le  point  auquel  nous  travaillons  a  pouvoir  d'accorder  en  tel  cas  le  dit

maintenant  est  de  penetrer  "h  quoy  le  Roy  mariage  avecq  I'investiture  des  Pais-Bas

de  France  se  resouldra  advenant  faulte  de  et  aultres  conditions  plus  fortes  pour

paix ;  et  tactions  de  faire  trouver  bon  a  asseurer  le  roy  qu'iceulx  pays  demeuront

ses  dits  ministres  qu'en  ce  cas  il  aban-  separe?.  de  la  couronne  d'Espaigne.  Mais

donne  les  dits  Etats  et  empoigne  le  party  il  semble  a  aulcuns  des  ministres  qu'^

du  mariage  du  second  fils  d'Espaigne  faulte  de  paix  le  plus  expedient  sera  de

avecq  I'une  de  ses  filles  aux  conditions  ja  faire  une  longue  treve  avecq  les  dits

proposees;  pour  a  quoy  les  induire  sert  Estats  et  Dependant  arrester  le  dit  mariage

de  beaucoup  de  les  avoir  mene  jusques  1^  et  attendre  le  temps  de  consommation

qu'ils  confessent  y  avoir  de  la  raison,  d'icelluy  et  de  la  lignee  qui  en  pourra

equite  et  justice  es  conditions  concernans  proceder.  Auquel  cas  le  roy  tres  Chretien

la  religion  et  la  navigation  aux  Indes,  ne  seroit  seulement  content  d'abandonner

soubs  lesquelles  Ton  est  content  de  quitter  les  dits  Etats,  mais  encore  de  tenir  la  main

la  souverainete  des  dites  provinces ;  ce  k  les  faire  rejoindre  aux  aultres  provinces

qu'aussi  le  roy  mesme  advoua  assez  clere-  de  I'obeyssance de  s  otre altesse."  —

ment  en  ma  derniere  audience. Et  sur  Peckius  to  the  Archduke,  18  Aug.  1608,

ce  a  resparti  qu'estans  les  dites  conditions  in  Deventer,  iii.  250-252.

telles,  il  auroit  juste  occasion  de  s'oiTenser  Two  months  before  Peckius  had  written

et  retirer  des  dits  Estats  s'il  ne  s'y  acco-  that  the  Due  de  Sully  had  been  feeling  his

modaient,  il  me  dit  qu'ii  s'entendoit  pulse  in  regard  to  a  truce  in  the  Nether-

comme  cela  .... Et  se  resolvant  le  lands  with  reference  to  these  marriage

roy  a  cest  abandon  et  delaissement  des  projects. — Ibid,
dits  Estats.  le  dit  Don  Pedro  m'a  dit  qu'il

1608.

OPENING  OF  TRUCE  NEGOTIATIONS.

433

The  French  and  English  ambassadors,  accordingly,  on
the  27th  August,  came  before  the  States-General,  and
made  a  formal  proposition  for  the  opening  of  negotia-
tions for  a  truce.  They  advised  the  adoption  of  this
course  in  the  strongest  manner.  "  Let  the  truce  be
made  with  you,"  they  said,  "as  with  free  States,  over
which  the  king  and  the  archdukes  have  no  pretensions,
with  the  understanding  that,  during  the  time  of  the  truce
you  are  to  have  free  commerce  as  well  to  the  Indies  as
to  Spain  and  the  obedient  Ketherlands,  and  to  every
part  of  the  Spanish  dominions ;  that  you  are  to  retain
all  that  you  possess  at  present,  and  that  such  other  con-
ditions are  to  be  added  as  you  may  find  it  reasonable  to
impose.  During  this  period  of  leisure  you  will  have
time  to  put  your  affairs  in  order,  to  pay  your  debts,  and
to  reform  your  Government,  and  if  you  remain  united,
the  truce  will  change  into  an  absolute  peace." ^

Maurice  was  more  indignant  when  the  new  scheme
was  brought  to  his  notice  than  he  had  ever  been  before,
and  used  more  violent  language  in  opposing  a  truce  than
he  had  been  used  to  employ  when  striving  against  a
peace.  To  be  treated  with,  as  with  a  free  State,  and  to
receive  permission  to  trade  with  the  outside  world  until
the  truce  should  expire,  seemed  to  him  a  sorry  result  for
the  republic  to  accept.

The  state-council  declared,  by  way  of  answer  to  the
foreign  ambassadors,  that  the  principal  points
and  conditions  which  had  been  solemnly  fixed,
before  the  States  had  consented  to  begin  the  negotia-
tions, had  been  disputed  with  infinite  eft'rontery  and
shamelessness  by  the  enemy .'^  The  pure  and  perfect
sovereignty  notoriously  included  religion  and  naviga-
tion to  any  part  of  the  world ;  and  the  re])ublic  would
never  consent  to  any  discussion  of  tnice  unless  these
points  were  confirmed  beforehand  with  the  Spanish
king's  signature  and  seal.

This  resolution  of  the  council — a  body  which  stood
much  under  the  influence  of  the  >^  assaus — was  ad()})ted
next  day  by  the  States-General,  and  duly  communicated
to  the  friendly  ambassadors.^

The  foreign  commissioners,  when  apprised  of  this

*  Jeannin,  i.  827.  s  •«  Vcrmeetelyk  rn  onbcscliaemd,"

«  Vander  Kemp,  iii.  160,  162.
VOL.  IV.  2  F

434

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,

Chap.  LI.

decision,  begged  for  six  weeks'  time,  in  order  to  be  able
to  hear  from  Madrid.

Even  the  peace  party  was  disgusted  with  this  imper-
tinence. Maurice  boiled  over  with  wrath.  The  am-
bassadors recommended  compliance  with  the  proposal.
Their  advice  was  discussed  in  the  States-General,  eighty
members  being  present,  besides  Maurice  and  Lewis  Wil-
liam. The  stadholder  made  a  violent  and  indignant
speech.'^

He  was  justified  in  his  vehemence.  Nothing  could
exceed  the  perfidy  of  their  great  ally.

''I  know  that  the  king  of  France  calculates  thus" —
wrote  Aerssens  at  that  moment  from  Paris — '  If  the
truce  lasts  seven  years,  my  son  will  be  old  enough  to
accomplish  the  proposed  marriage,  and  they  will  be
obliged  to  fulfil  their  present  offers.  Otherwise,  I
would  break  the  truce  in  the  Netherlands,  and  my  own
peace  with  them,  in  order  to  take  from  the  Spaniard  by
force  what  he  led  me  to  hope  from  alliance.'  Thus  it
is,"  continued  the  States'  envoy,  "  that  his  Majesty  con-
descends to  propose  to  us  a  truce,  which  may  have  a
double  interpretation,  according  to  the  disposition  of
the  strongest,  and  thus  our  commonwealth  will  be  kept
in  perpetual  disquiet,  without  knowing  whether  it  is
sovereign  or  not.  Nor  will  it  be  sovereign  unless  it
shall  so  please  our  neighbour,  who  by  this  means  will
always  keep  his  foot  upon  our  throat."^

"  To  treat  with  the  States  as  if  they  were  free,"  said
Henry  to  the  Nuncius  soon  afterwards,  is  not  to  make
them  free.  This  clause  does  no  prejudice  to  the  rights  of
the  King  of  Spain,  except  for  the  time  of  the  truce."
Aerssens  taxed  the  king  with  having  said  this.  His
Majesty  flatly  denied  it.  The  republican  envoy  bluntly
adduced  the  testimony  of  the  ambassadors  of  Venice  and
of  Wirtemberg.  The  king  flew  into  a  rage  on  seeing
that  his  secrets  had  been  divulged,  and  burst  out  with
these  words : — "  What  you  demand  is  not  reasonable.
You  wish  -the  King  of  Spain  to  renounce  his  rights  in
order  to  arrive  at  a  truce.  You  wish  to  dictate  the  law
to  him.  If  you  had  just  gained  four  battles  over  him,
you  could  not  demand  more.  I  have  always  held  }  ou
for  sovereigns,  because  I  am  your  friend,  but  if  you  would

7  Van  der  Kemp»  iii.  40.

8  Correspondence  in  Deventer,  iii.  262-267.

1608.

DEBATE  AT  THE  HAGUE.

435

judge  by  equity  and  justice,  you  are  not  sovereigns.  It
is  not  reasonable  that  the  King  of  Spain  should  quit  the
sovereignty  for  alivays,  and  you  ought  to  be  satisfied
with  having  it  so  long  as  the  treaty  shall  last."^

Here  was  playing  at  sovereignty  with  a  vengeance.
Sovereignty  was  a  rattle  for  the  States  to  amuse  them-
selves with,  until  the  royal  infants,  French  and  Spanish,
should  be  grown  old  enough  to  take  the  sovereignty  for
good.  Truly  this  was  indeed  keeping  the  republic  under
the  king's  heel  to  be  crushed  at  his  pleasure,  as  Aerssens,
with  just  bitterness,  exclaimed.

Two  days  were  passed  at  the  Hague  in  vehement  de-
bate. The  deputies  of  Zeeland  withdrew.  The  deputies
from  Holland  were  divided,  but,  on  the  whole,  it  was
agreed  to  listen  to  propositions  of  truce,  provided  the
freedom  of  the  United  Provinces — not  under  conditions
nor  during  a  certain  period,  but  simply  and  for  all  time
— should  be  recognised  beforehand.

It  was  further  decided  on  the  14th  September  to  wait
until  the  end  of  the  month  for  the  answer  from

o •  14  Sept

Spam.  ^

After  the  1st  of  October  it  was  distinctly  intimated  to
the  Spanish  commissioners  that  they  must  at  once  leave
the  country  unless  the  king  had  then  acknowledged  the
absolute  independence  of  tlie  provinces.^^

A  suggestion  which  had  been  made  by  these  diplo-
matists to  prolong  the  actually  existing  armistice  into  a
tnice  of  seven  years,  a  step  which  they  professed  them-
selves willing  to  take  upon  their  own  responsibility,
had  been  scornfully  rejected  by  the  States.  It  was  al-
ready carrying  them  far  enough  away,  they  said,  to  take
them  from  a  peace  to  a  truce,  which  was  something  far
less  secure  than  a  peace,  but  the  continuance  of  this
floating,  uncertain  armistice  would  be  the  most  dangerous
insecurity  of  all.  This  would  be  going  from  firm  land
to  slippery  ice,  and  from  slippery  ice  into  the  water.
By  such  a  process,  they  would  have  neither  war  nor
peace — neither  liberty  of  government  nor  freedom  of
commerce — and  they  unanimously  refused  to  listen  to
any  such  schemes.

During  the  fortnight  which  followed  this  provisional

9  Correspondence  In  Deventer,  iii.  262-267.  Wagenaar,  ix.  378-380.

11  Van  del-  Kemp.  iii.  41,  i«  Meteren,  606,  607.

2  F  2

436

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

lionsent  of  the  States,  the  prince  redoubled  his  efforts  to
counteract  the  Barneveld  party.

He  was  determined,  so  far  as  in  him  lay,  that  the
United  Netherlands  should  never  fall  back  under  the  do-
minion of  Spain.  He  had  long  maintained  the  impossi-
bility of  effecting  their  thorough  independence  except
by  continuing  the  war,  and  had  only  with  reluctance
acquiesced  in  the  arguments  of  the  French  ambassadors
in  favour  of  peace  negotiations.  As  to  the  truce,  he
vehemently  assured  those  envoys  that  it  was  but  a  trap.
How  could  the  Netherlanders  know  who  their  friends
might  be  when  the  truce  should  have  expired,  and  under
what  unfavourable  auspices  they  might  not  be  compelled
to  resume  hostilities  ?

As  if  he  had  been  actually  present  at  the  council
boards  in  Madrid  and  Valladolid,  or  had  been  reading
the  secret  letters  of  Friar  John  to  Spinola,  he  affirmed
that  the  only  object  of  Spain  was  to  recruit  her  strength
and  improve  her  finances,  now  entirely  exhausted.  He
believed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  people  of  the  pro-
vinces, after  they  should  have  once  become  accustomed
to  repose,  would  shrink  from  exchanging  their  lucra-
tive pursuits  for  war,  and  would  prefer  to  fall  back  under
the  yoke  of  Spain.  During  the  truce  they  would  object
to  the  furnishing  of  necessary  contributions  for  garrison
expenses,  and  the  result  would  be  that  the  most  impor-
tant cities  and  strongholds,  especially  those  on  the  fron-
tier, which  were  mainly  inhabited  by  Catholics,  would
become  insecure.  Being  hostile  to  a  Government  which
only  conti'olled  them  by  force,  they  would  with  diffi-
culty be  kept  in  check  by  diminished  garrisons,  unless
they  should  obtain  liberty  of  Catholic  worship.^*

It  is  a  dismal  proof  of  the  inability  of  a  leading  mind,
after  half  a  century's  war,  to  comprehend  the  true  lesson
of  the  war — that  toleration  of  the  Eoman  religion  seemed
to  Maurice  an  entirely  inadmissible  idea.  The  prince
could  not  rise  to  the  height  on  which  his  illustrious
father  had  stood ;  and  those  about  him,  who  encouraged
him  in  his  hostility  to  Catholicism,  denounced  Barne-
veld and  Arminius  as  no  better  than  traitors  and  athe-
ists. In  the  eyes  of  the  extreme  party,  the  mighty  war
had  been  waged,  not  to  liberate  human  thought,  but  to

13  Jeannin,  i.  889,  seqq.

1*  Ibid.

1G08.

OPPOSITION  OF  PRINCE  MAURICE.

437

enforce  predestination ;  and  heretics  to  Calvinism  were
as  offensive  in  their  eyes  as  Jews  and  Saracens  had  ever
been  to  Torqnemada.

The  reasons  were  unanswerable  for  the  refusal  of  the
States  to  bind  themselves  to  a  foreign  sovereign  in  regard
to  the  interior  administration  of  their  commonwealth ;
but  that  diversity  of  religious  worship  should  be  con-
sidered incompatible  with  the  health  of  the  young  re-
public— that  the  men  who  had  so  bravely  fought  the
Spanish  inquisition  should  now  claim  their  own  right
of  inquisition  into  the  human  conscience  —  this  was
almost  enough  to  create  despair  as  to  the  possibility
of  the  world's  progress.  The  seed  of  intellectual  ad-
vancement is  slow  in  ripening,  and  it  is  almost  invari-
ably the  case  that  the  generation  which  plants — often
but  half  conscious  of  the  mightiness  of  its  work — is  not
the  generation  which  reaps  the  harvest.  But  all  man-
kind at  last  inherits  what  is  sown  in  the  blood  and  tears
of  a  few.  That  Government,  whether  regal  or  demo-
cratic, should  dare  to  thrust  itself  between  man  and  his
Maker — that  the  State,  not  satihfied  with  interfering  in
a  thousand  superfluous  ways  with  the  fieedom  of  indi-
vidual human  action  in  the  business  of  life,  should  com-
bine with  the  Church  to  reduce  human  thowght  to
slavery  in  regard  to  the  sacred  interests  of  eternity,
was  one  day  to  be  esteemed  a  blasphemous  prcMmiption
in  lands  wliich  deserved  to  call  themselves  free.  But
that  hour  had  not  yet  come.

"  If  the  garrisons  should  be  weakened,"  said  the  prince,
nothing  could  be  expected  from  the  political  fidelity  of
the  town  populations  in  question,  unless  they  should  be
allowed  the  exercise  of  their  own  religion.  But  the
States  could  hardly  be  disposed  to  grant  this  volun-
tarily, for  fear  of  injuring  the  general  security  and
violating  the  laws  of  the  commonwealth,  built  as  it  is
upon  a  foundation  which  cannot  suffer  this  diversity  in
the  public  exercise  of  religion.  Already,"  continued
]\iaurice,  **  there  arc  the  seeds  of  dissension  in  the  pro-
vinces and  in  the  cities,  sure  to  ripen  in  the  idleness
and  repose  of  peace  to  an  open  division.  'J'his  would
give  the  enemy  a  means  of  intriguing  with  and  cor-
rupting those  who  are  already  wickedly  inclined."

15  Jeannin,  i.  889,  sciq.

438

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

Thus,  in  the  year  1608,  the  head  of  the  Dutch  re-
public, the  son  of  William  the  Silent,  seemed  to  express
himself  in  favour  of  continuing  a  horrible  war,  not  to
maintain  the  political  independence  of  his  country,  but
to  prevent  Catholics  from  acquiring  the  right  of  pub-
licly worshipping  God  according  to  the  dictates  of  their
conscience.

Yet  it  would  be  unjust  to  the  prince,  whose  patriotism
was  as  pure  and  unsullied  as  his  sword,  to  confound  his
motives  with  his  end.  He  was  firmly  convinced  that
liberty  of  religious  worship,  to  be  acquired  during  the
truce,  would  inevitably  cause  the  United  Provinces  to
fall  once  more  under  the  Spanish  yoke.  The  French
ambassador,  with  whom  he  conferred  every  day,  never
doubted  his  sincerity.  Gelderland,  Friesland,  Overyssel,
Groningen,  and  Utrecht,  five  provinces  out  of  the  united
seven,  the  prince  declared  to  be  chiefly  inhabited  by
Catholics.  They  had  only  entered  the  union,  he  said,
because  compelled  by  force.  They  could  only  be  kept
in  the  union  by  force,  unless  allowed  freedom  of  reli-
gion. His  inference  from  such  a  lamentable  state  of
affairs  was,  not  that  the  experiment  of  religious  worship
should  be  tried,  but  that  the  garrisons  throughout  the
five  provinces  ought  to  be  redoubled,  and  the  war  with
Spain  indefinitely  waged.  The  President  was  likewise
of  opinion  that  "  a  revolt  of  these  five  provinces  against
the  union  might  be  at  any  moment  expected,  ill  dis-
posed as  they  were  to  recognise  a  sovereignty  which
abolished  their  religion."  Being  himself  a  Catholic,
however,  it  was  not  unnatural  that  he  should  make  a
different  deduction  from  that  of  the  prince,  and  warmly
recommend,  not  more  garrisons,  but  more  liberty  of
worship.-^^

Thus  the  very  men  who  were  ready  to  dare  all  and  to
sacrifice  all  in  behalf  of  their  country  really  believed
themselves  providing  for  the  imperishable  security  of
the  commonwealth  by  placing  it  on  the  narrow  basis
of  religious  intolerance.

Maurice,  not  satisfied  with  making  these  vehement
arguments  against  the  truce  in  his  conferences  with  the

16  Thus  Jeannin  (i.  891,  892)  reported  in  his  letters  to  Villeroy  the  prince's  con-
versation, yet  certainly  the  prince  was  erroneously  or  falsely  quoted.— Compare  Van
der  Kemp,  iii.  43.

1608.

PRINCE  MAURICE'S  ADDRESS.

439

envoys  of  the  French  and  British  soverei^s,  employed
the  brief  interval  yet  to  elapse  before  definitely  break-
ing off  or  resuming  the  conferences  with  the  Spanish
commissioners  in  making  vigorous  appeals  to  the
country.

"  The  weal  or  woe  of  the  United  Provinces  for  all
time,"  he  said,  '*is  depending  on  the  present  transac-
tions.^^ Weigh  well  the  reasons  we  urge,  and  make  use
of  those  which  seem  to  you  convincing.  You  know  that
the  foe,  according  to  his  old  deceitful  manner,  laid  down
very  specious  conditions  at  the  beginning,  in  order  to
induce  my  lords  the  States-General  to  treat.

"  If  the  king  and  the  archdukes  sincerely  mean  to
relinquish  absolutely  their  pretensions  to  these  pro-
vinces, they  can  certainly  have  no  difficulty  in  finding
honest  and  convenient  words  to  express  their  intention.
As  they  are  seeking  other  phrases  than  the  usual  and
straightforward  ones,  they  give  certain  proof  that  they
mean  to  keep  back  from  us  the  substance.  They  aie
trying  to  cheat  us  with  dark,  dubious,  loosely-screwed
terms,^^  which  secure  nothing  and  bind  to  nothing.  If
it  be  wise  to  trust  the  welfare  of  our  State  to  ambiguous
words,  3^ou  can  judge  according  to  your  own  discretion.

"  liecognition  of  our  sovereignty  is  the  foundation-
stone  of  these  negotiations.

"  Let  every  man  be  assured  that,  with  such  mighty
enemies,  we  can  do  nothing  by  halves.  AVo  cannot
afford  to  retract,  mutilate,  or  moderate  our  original
determination.  He  who  swerves  from  the  straight  road
at  the  beginning  is  lost ;  he  who  stumbles  at  the  first
step  is  apt  to  fall  down  the  whole  staircase.  If,  on
account  of  imaginary  necessity,  we  postpone  that  most
vital  point,  the  assurance  of  our  freedom,  we  shall  very
easily  allow  less  important  points  to  pass  muster,^^  and
at  last  come  tamely  into  the  path  of  reconciliation.
That  was  exactly  the  danger  which  our  ancestors  in
similar  negotiations  always  feared,  and  against  which
we  too  have  always  done  our  best  to  guard  ourselves.
Wherefore,  if  the  preservation  of  our  beloved  father-

ly The  letter,  dated  21  Sept.  1608,  is  is  "Qp  schroeven  gestelde  woorden  en

publishfd  In  full  by  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  termen."

166-174. It  is  less  accurately  given  by  i'^  "  Geringe  re  punk  ten  ook  wel  door  de

liletcren,  606-608.  monstering  passeren."

440

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

land  is  dear  to  you,  I  exhort  you  to  maintain  that  great
fundamental  resolution,  at  all  times  and  against  all  men,
even  if  this  should  cause  the  departure  of  the  enemy's
commissioners.  What  can  you  expect  from  them  but
evil  fruit?"

He  then  advised  all  the  estates  and  magistracies
which  he  was  addressing  to  instruct  their  deputies,  at
the  approaching  session  of  the  States-General,  to  hold  on
to  the  first  article  of  the  often -cited  preliminary  resolu-
tion without  allowing  one  syllable  to  be  altered.  Other-
wise nothing  could  save  the  commonwealth  from  dire
and  notorious  confusion.  Above  all,  he  entreated  them
to  act  in  entire  harmony  and  confidence  with  himself
and  his  cousin,  even  as  they  had  ever  done  with  his
illustrious  father.

Certainly  the  prince  fully  deserved  the  confidence  of
the  States,  as  well  for  his  own  signal  services  and  chi-
valrous self-devotion,  as  for  the  unexampled  sacrifices
and  achievements  of  William  the  Silent.  His  words
had  the  true  patriotic  ring  of  his  father's  frequent  and
eloquent  appeals ;  and  1  have  not  hesitated  to  give
these  extracts  from  his  discourse,  because  comparatively
few  of  such  utterances  of  Maurice  have  been  preserved,
and  because  it  gives  a  vivid  impression  of  the  condition
of  the  republic  and  the  state  of  parties  at  that  momen-
tous epoch.  It  was  not  merely  the  fate  of  the  United
Netherlands  and  the  question  of  peace  or  war  between
the  little  republic  and  its  hereditary  enemy  that  were
upon  the  issue.  The  peace  of  all  Christendom,  the  most
considerable  material  interests  of  civilization,  and  the
highest  political  and  moral  principles  that  can  influence
human  action,  were  involved  in  those  negotiations.

There  were  not  wanting  many  to  impeach  the  purity
of  the  stadholder's  motives.  As  admiral  or  captain-
general,  he  received  high  salaries,  besides  a  tenth  part
of  all  prize-money  gained  at  sea  by  the  fleets,  or  of
ransom  and  blackmail  on  land  by  the  armies  of  the  re-
public. His  profession,  his  ambition,  his  delights,  were
those  of  a  soldier.  As  a  soldier  in  a  great  war,  he  was
more  necessary  to  his  countrymen  than  he  could  expect
to  be  as  a  statesman  in  time  of  peace.  But  nothing  ever
appeared,  in  public  or  in  private,  which  threw  a  reason-
able suspicion  upon  his  lofty  patriotism. Peace  he  had

1608.

AMBITION  OF  PRINCE  MAURICE.

441

always  believed  to  be  difficult  of  attainment.  It  had  now
been  proved  impossible.  A  truce  he  honestly  considered
a  pitfall  of  destruction,  and  he  denounced  it,  as  we  have
seen,  in  the  language  of  energetic  conviction.  He  never
alluded  to  his  pecuniary  losses  in  case  peace  should  be
Qiade.  His  disinterested  patriotism  was  the  fiequent
subject  of  comment  in  the  most  secret  letters  of  the
French  ambassadors  to  the  king.  He  had  repeatedly
refused  enormous  offers  if  he  would  forsake  the  cause
of  the  republic.  The  King  of  Franco  was  ever  ready
to  tempt  him  with  bribes,  such  as  had  proved  most  effi-
cacious with  men  as  highly  born  and  as  highly  placed
as  a  cadet  of  the  house  of  Orange-Nassau.  But  there  is
no  record  that  Jeannin  assailed  him  at  this  crisis  ^vith.
such  temptations,  although  it  has  not  been  pretended
that  the  prince  was  obdurate  to  the  influence  of  Mam-
mon when  that  deity  could  bo  openly  approached.

That  Maurice  loved  power,  pelf,  and  war,  can  hardly
be  denied.  That  he  had  a  mounting  ambition ;  that
he  thought  a  monarchy  founded  upon  the  historical  in-
stitutions and  charters  of  the  provinces  might  be  better
than  the  burgher-aristocracy  which,  under  the  lead  of
Barneveld,  was  establishing  itself  in  the  country ;  that
he  knew  no  candidate  so  eligible  for  such  a  throne  as
his  father's  son  ;  all  this  is  highly  probable  and  scarcely
surprising.  But  that  such  sentiments  or  aspirations
caused  him  to  swerve  the  ninth  part  of  a  hair  from
what  he  considered  the  direct  path  of  duty ;  that  he
determined  to  fight  out  the  great  fight  with  Spain  and
Eome  until  the  States  were  free  in  form,  in  name,  and
in  fact,  only  that  he  might  then  usurp  a  sovereignty
w^iich  would  otherwise  revert  to  Philip  of  Spain  or  bo
snatched  by  Henry  of  Navane — of  all  this  there  is  no
proof  whatever.

The  language  of  Lewis  William  to  the  provinces
under  his  government  was  quite  as  vigorous  as  the  ap-
peals of  Maurice.^^

During  the  brief  interval  remaining  before  the  com-
missioners should  comply  with  the  demands  of  the
States  or  take  their  departure,  the  press  throughout  the
Netherlands  was  most  active.  Pamphlets  full  thick  as
hail. The  peace  party  and  the  war  party  contendeu

*>  His  letter  is  published  by  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  174-17$.

442

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

with  each  other,  over  all  the  territory  of  the  provinces,
as  vigorously  as  the  troops  of  Fuentes  or  Bucqnoy  had
ever  battled  with  the  columns  of  Bax  and  Meetkerke.
The  types  of  Blaauw  and  Plantin  were  as  effective
during  the  brief  armistice,  as  pike  and  arquebus  in  the
field,  but  unfortunately  they  were  used  by  Nether-
landers  against  each  other.  As  a  matter  of  course,  each
party  impeached  the  motives  as  well  as  the  actions  of  its
antagonist.  The  adherents  of  the  Advocate  accused  the
stadholder  of  desiring  the  continuance  of  the  war  for
personal  aims.  They  averred  that  six  thousand  men  for
guarding  the  rivers  would  be  necessary,  in  addition  to
the  forty-five  thousand  men,  now  kept  constantly  on  foot.
They  placed  the  requisite  monthly  expenses,  if  hostilities
were  resumed,  at  800,000  florins,  while  they  pointed  to
the  27,000,000  of  debt  over  and  above  the  8,000,000  due  to
the  British  crown,  as  a  burthen  under  which  the  republic
could  scarcely  stagger  much  longer. Such  figures  seem
modest  enough,  as  the  price  of  a  war  of  independence.

Familiar  with  the  gigantic  budgets  of  our  own  day,  we
listen  with  something  like  wonder,  now  that  two  cen-
turies and  a  half  have  passed,  to  the  fierce  denunciations
by  the  war  party  of  these  figures  as  wilful  fictions.
Science  has  made  in  that  interval  such  gigantic  strides.
The  awful  intellect  of  man  may  at  last  make  war  impos-
sible for  his  physical  strength.  He  can  forge  but  cannot
wield  the  hammer  of  Thor;  nor  has  Science  yet  dis-
covered the  philosopher's  stone.  Without  it,  what  ex-
chequer can  accept  chronic  warfare  and  escape  bank-
ruptcy ?  After  what  has  been  witnessed  in  these  latest
days,  the  sieges  and  battles  of  that  distant  epoch  seem
like  the  fights  of  pigmies  and  cranes.  Already  an  eighty
years'  war,  such  as  once  was  waged,  has  become  incon-
ceivable. Let  two  more  centuries  pass  away,  and  per-
haps a  three  weeks'  campaign  may  exhaust  an  empire.^^

Meantime  the  war  of  words  continued.  A  proclama-
tion with  penalties  was  issued  by  the  States  against  the
epidemic  plague  of  pamphlets  or  "  blue-books,"  as  those
publications  were  called  in  Holland  but  with  little
result.^* It  was  not  deemed  consistent  with  liberty  by

21  Wagenaar,  ix.  311.  22  This  was  written  in  March,  1866.

23  "  Blaauw  boekje."  Was  the  phrase  derived  from  the  name  of  the  great  printer
Blaauw?  24  Groot  Plakaat  Bock,  i.  D.  kol.  437. Wagenaar,  ix.  373.

1608.

CALUMNIES  AGAINST  THE  ADVOCATE.

443

those  republicans  to  put  chains  on  the  prcv^s  because  its
utterances  might  occasionally  be  distasteful  to  magis-
trates.^^ The  writers,  printers,  and  sellers  of  the  *'  blue-
books  "  remained  unpunished  and  snapped  their  fingers
at  the  placard.

We  have  seen  the  strenuous  exertions  of  the  Nassaua
and  their  adherents  by  public  appeals  and  private  conver-
sation to  defeat  all  schemes  of  truce.  The  people  were
stirred  by  the  eloquence  of  the  two  stadholders.  They
were  stung  to  fury  against  Spain  and  against  Bameveld
by  the  waspish  effusions  of  the  daily  press.  The  magis-
trates remained  calm,  and  took  part  by  considerable
majorities  with  Barneveld.  That  statesman,  while  exer-
cising almost  autocratic  influence  in  the  estates,  became
more  and  more  odious  to  the  humbler  classes,  to  the
Kassaus,  and  especially  to  the  Calvinist  clergy.  He  was
denounced  as  a  papist,  an  atheist,  a  traitor,  because  striv-
ing for  an  honourable  peace  with  the  foe,  and  because
admitting  the  possibility  of  more  than  one  road  to  the
kingdom  of  Heaven.  To  doubt  the  infallibility  of  Calvin
was  as  heinous  a  crime,  in  the  eyes  of  his  accusers,  as
to  kneel  to  the  host.  Peter  Titelmann,  half  a  century
earlier,  dripping  with  the  blood  of  a  thousand  martyrs,
seemed  hardly  a  more  loathsome  object  to  all  Nether-
landers  than  the  Advocate  now  appeared  to  his  political
enemies,  thus  daring  to  preach  religious  toleration,  and
boasting  of  humble  ignorance  as  the  safest  creed.'-^^  Alas  !
we  must  always  have  something  to  persecute,  and  indi-
vidual man  is  never  so  convinced  of  his  own  wisdom  as
when  dealing  with  subjects  beyond  human  comprehen-
sion. «

Unfortunately,  however,  while  the  gi'eat  Advocate  was
clear  in  his  conscience  he  had  scarcely  clean  hands.  He
had  very  recently  accepted  a  present  of  twenty  thousand
florins  from  the  King  of  France.  That  this  was  a  bi  ibe
by  which  his  services  were  to  be  purchased  for  a  cause
not  in  harmony  with  his  own  convictions  it  would  be
unjust  to  say.  We  of  a  later  generation,  who  have  had
the  advantage  of  looking  through  the  portfolio  of  Presi-

25  "  Alzo  het  streng  ondcrzockcn  naar  26  ««  xil  scire  tutissima  fides." — Device

Bchryvers  en  verspreiden  voor  strydig  of  the  Oidon-Barneveld  family,  vide  vol,

met  de  vryhoid  aangezien  en  duerom  i.  of  this  work,  page  299.
gcmyd  werdt." — \N'agenaar,  ix.  373.

444

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

ClTAP.  LI.

dent  Jeannin,  and  of  learning  the  secret  intentions  of
that  diplomatist  and  of  his  master,  can  fully  understand
however  that  there  was  more  than  sufficient  cause  at  the
time  for  suspecting  the  purity  of  the  great  Advocate's
conduct.  We  are  perfectly  aware  that  the  secret  instruc-
tions of  Henry  gave  his  plenipotentiaries  almost  un-
limited power  to  buy  up  as  many  influential  personages
in  the  Netherlands  as  could  be  purchased.  So  they
would  assist  in  making  the  king  master  of  the  United
Provinces  at  the  proper  moment  there  was  scarcely  any
price  that  he  was  not  willing  to  pay.

Especially  Prince  Maurice,  his  cousin,  and  the  Advo
cate  of  Holland,  were  to  be  secured  by  life  pensions,
property,  offices,  and  dignities,  all  which  Jeannin  might
otFer  to  an  almost  unlimited  amount,  if  by  such  means
those  great  personages  could  possibly  be  induced  to  pei  -
form  the  king's  work.

There  is  no  record  that  the  president  ever  held  out
such  baits  at  this  epoch  to  the  prince.  There  could
never  be  a  doubt  however  in  any  one's  mind  that  if  the
political  chief  of  the  Orange-Nassau  house  ever  wished
to  make  himself  the  instrument  by  which  France  should
supplant  Spain  in  the  tyranny  of  the  Netherlands,  he
might  always  name  his  own  price.  Jeannin  never  in-
sulted him  with  any  such  trading  propositions.  As  for
Barneveld,  he  avowed  long  years  afterwards  that  he  had
accepted  the  twenty  thousand  florins,  and  that  the  king
had  expressly  exacted  secrecy  in  regard  to  the  transac-
tion. He  declared  however  that  the  money  was  a  reward
for  public  services  rendered  by  him  to  the  French
Government  ten  years  before,  in  the  course  of  his  mission
to  France  at  the  time  of  the  peace  of  Vervins.  The
reward  had  been  promised  in  1598,  and  the  pledge  was
fulfilled  in  1608.  In  accepting  wages  fairly  earned,  how-
ever, he  protested  that  he  had  bound  himself  to  no  dis-
honourable service,  and  that  he  had  never  exchanged  a
word  with  Jeannin  or  with  any  man  in  regard  to  secur-
ing for  Henry  the  sovereignty  of  the  Netherlands.^'^

His  friends  moreover  maintained  in  his  defence  that
there  were  no  laws  in  the  Netherlands  forbidding  citizens
to  accept  presents  or  pensions  from  foreign  powers.

27  See  for  this  whole  story  of  the  twenty  thousand  florins  paid  to  the  Advocate,  Van
der  Kemp,  iii.  43,  165,  166. Brandt,  Regtspleging,  87,  88. Wagenaar,  ix.  367-370.

1608.

ACCUSATIONS  AGAINST  THE  ADVOCATE.

445

Such  an  excuse  was  as  bad  as  the  accusation.  Woe  to
the  republic  whose  citizens  require  laws  to  prevent  them
from  becoming  stipendiaries  of  foreign  potentates !  If
public  virtue,  the  only  foundation  of  republican  institu-
tions, be  so  far  washed  away  that  laws  in  thLs  regard  are
necessary  to  save  it  from  complete  destruction,  then
already  the  republic  is  impossible.  Many  who  bore
illustrious  names,  and  occupied  the  highest  social  posi-
tions at  that  day  in  France,  England,  and  the  obedient
provinces,  were  as  venal  as  cattle  at  a  fair.  Philip  and
Henry  had  bought  them  over  and  over  again,  whenever
either  was  rich  enough  to  pui  chase  and  strong  enough  to
enforce  the  terms  of  safle.  Bribes  were  taken  with  both
hands  in  overflowing  measure ;  the  difficulty  was  only  in
obtaining  the  work  for  the  wage.

But  it  would  have  been  humiliating  beyond  expression
had  the  new  commonwealth,  after  passing  thiough  the
fiery  furnace  of  its  great  war,  proved  no  purer  than  lead-
ing monarchies  at  a  most  corrupt  epoch.  It  was  no
wonder  therefore  that  men  sought  to  wipe  off  the  stain
from  the  reputation  of  Barneveld,  and  it  is  at  least  a
solace  that  tliei'e  was  no  proof  of  his  ever  rendering,  or
ever  having  agreed  to  render,  services  inconsistent  with
his  convictions  as  to  the  best  interests  of  tlie  common-
wealth. It  is  sufficiently  grave  that  he  knew  the  colour
of  the  king's  money,  and  that  in  a  momentous  crisis  of
history  he  accepted  a  reward  for  former  pr(>fessional
services,  and  that  the  broker  in  the  transaction,  Presi-
dent Jeannin,  seriously  charged  him  by  Henry's  oiders
to  keep  the  matter  secret.  It  would  be  still  more  dismal
if  Jeannin,  in  his  private  letters,  had  ever  intimated  to
Villeroy  or  Jiis  master  that  he  considered  it  a  mercantile
transaction,  or  if  any  eflort  had  ever  been  made  by  tlie
Advocate  to  help  Henry  to  the  Batavian  throne.  This
however  is  not  the  case.

^n  truth,  neither  IMaurico  nor  Banieveld  was  likely  to
assist  the  French  king  in  his  intrigues  against  the  inde-
pendence of  their  fatherland.  Both  had  higher  objects
of  ambition  than  to  become  the  humble  and  well-paid
servants  of  a  foreign  potentate.  The  stadholder  doubt-
less dreamed  of  a  crown  which  might  have  been  his
father's,  and  which  his  own  illustrious  services  might
be  supposed  to  have  earned  for  himself. If  that  tempt-

ii6

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap  LL

ing  prize  were  more  likely  to  be  gained  by  a  continuance
of  the  war,  it  is  none  the  less  certain  that  he  considered
peace,  and  still  more  truce,  as  fatal  to  the  independence
of  the  provinces.

The  Advocate,  on  the  other  hand,  loved  his  country
well.  Perhaps  he  loved  power  even  better.  To  govern
the  city  magistracies  of  Holland,  through  them  the
provincial  estates,  and  through  them  again  the  States-
General  of  the  whole  commonwealth ;  as  first  citizen  of
a  republic  to  wield  the  powers  of  a  king  ;  as  statesman,
diplomatist,  and  financier,  to  create  a  mighty  empire  out
of  those  slender  and  but  recently  emancipated  provinces
of  Spain,  was  a  more  flattering  prospect  for  a  man  of
large  intellect,  iron  will,  and  infinite  resources,  than  to
sink  into  the  contemptible  position  of  stipendiary  to  a
foreign  master.  He  foresaw  change,  growth,  trans-
formation in  the  existing  condition  of  things.  Those
great  corporations  the  East  and  West  India  Companies
were  already  producing  a  new  organism  out  of  the
political  and  commercial  chaos  which  had  been  so  lotig
brooding  over  civilization.  Visions  of  an  imperial  zone
extending  from  the  little  Batavian  island  around  the
earth,  a  chain  of  forts  and  factories  dotting  the  newly-
discovered  and  yet  undiscovered  points  of  vantage,  ou
island  or  promontory,  in  every  sea ;  a  watery,  nebulous,
yet  most  substantial  empire — not  fantastic,  but  practical
— not  picturesque  and  mediaeval,  but  modern  and  lucra-
tive— a  world-wide  commonwealth  with  a  half-sub-
merged metropolis,  which  should  rule  the  ocean  with
its  own  fleets  and,  like  Venice  and  Florence,  job  its
land  wars  with  mercenary  armies — all  these  dreams
were  not  the  cloudy  pageant  of  a  poet  but  the  practical
schemes  of  a  great  creative  mind.  They  were  destined
to  become  reality.  Had  the  geographical  conditions
been  originally  more  favourable  than  they  were,  had
jN^ature  been  less  a  stepmother  to  the  metropolis  of  the
rising  Batavian  realm,  the  creation  might  have  been
more  durable.  Barneveld,  and  the  men  who  acted  with
him,  comprehended  their  age,  and  with  slender  materials
were  prepared  to  do  great  things.  They  did  not  look
very  far  perhaps  into  futurity,  but  they  saw  the  vast
changes  already  taking  place,  and  felt  the  throb  of
forces  actually  at  work.

1608.

BARNEVELD'S  AMBITION.

447

The  days  were  gone  when  the  iron-clad  man  on  horse-
back conquered  a  kingdom  with  his  single  hand.  Doubt-
less there  is  more  of  poetry  and  romance  in  his  deeds
than  in  the  achievements  of  the  counting-house  aristo-
cracy, the  hierarchy  of  joint-stock  corporations  that  was
taking  the  lead  in  the  world's  affairs.  Enlarged  views
of  the  social  compact  and  of  human  liberty,  as  compared
with  those  which  later  generations  ought  to  take,
standing  upon  the  graves,  heaped  up  mountains  high,
of  their  predecessors,  could  hardly  be  expected  of  them.
But  they  knew  how  to  do  the  work  before  them.  They
had  been  able  to  smite  a  foreign  and  sacerdotal  tyranny
into  the  dust  at  the  expense  of  more  blood  and  more
treasure,  and  with  sacrifices  continued  through  a  longer
cycle  of  years,  than  had  ever  been  recorded  by  history.

Thus  the  Advocate  believed  that  the  chief  fruits  of
the  war — political  independence,  religious  liberty,  com
mercial  expansion — could  be  now  secured  by  diplomacy,
and  that  a  truce  could  be  so  handled  as  to  become
equivalent  to  a  peace.  He  required  no  bribes  therefore
to  labour  for  that  which  he  believed  to  be  for  his  own
interests  and  for  those  of  the  country.

First  citizen  of  Holland,  perpetual  chairman  of  a
board  of  ambitious  shopkeepers  who  purposed  to  dictate
laws  to  the  world  from  their  counting-house  table,  with
an  unerring  eye  for  the  interests  of  the  commonwealth
and  his  own,  with  much  vision,  extraordinary  eloquence,
and  a  magnificent  will,  he  is  as  good  a  sample  of  a  great
burgher — an  imposing  not  a  heroic  figure — as  the  times
had  seen.

A  vast  stride  had  been  taken  in  the  world's  progress.
Even  monopoly  was  freedom  compared  to  the  sloth  and
ignorance  of  an  earlier  epoch  and  of  other  lands,  and
although  the  days  were  still  far  distant  when  the  earth
was  to  belong  to  mankind,  yet  the  modern  republic  was
leading,  half  unconsciously,  to  a  period  of  wider  liberty
of  government,  commerce,  and  above  all  of  thought.

Meantime,  the  period  assigned  for  the  departure  of
the  Spanish  commissioners,  unless  they  brought  a
satisfactory  communication  from  the  king,  was  rapidly
approaching.

On  the  24th  September  Verreyken  returned  from
Brussels,  but  it  was  soon  known  that  he  came  empty

448

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

handed.  He  informed  the  French  and  English  ambas-
sadors that  the  archdukes,  on  their  own  respon-

24  Sept.  g^]^j[i  j^y^  suggested  the  conclusion  of  a  truce
of  seven  years  for  Europe  only.  This  was  to  be  nego-
tiated with  the  States-General  as  with  free  people,  over
whom  no  pretensions  of  authority  were  made,  and  the
hope  was  expressed  that  the  king  would  give  his  consent
to  this  arrangement.

The  ambassadors  naturally  refused  to  carry  the
message  to  the  States.  To  make  themselves  the  mouth-
pieces of  such  childish  suggestions  was  to  bring  them-
selves and  their  masters  into  contempt.  There  had
been  trifling  enough,  and  even  Jeannin  saw  that  the
storm  of  indignation  about  to  burst  forth  would  bo
irresistible.  There  was  no  need  of  any  attempt  on  the
part  of  the  commissioners  to  prolong  their  stay  if  this
was  the  result  of  the  fifteen  days'  grace  which  had  so
reluctantly  been  conceded  to  them.  To  express  a  hope
that  the  king  might  perhaps  give  his  future  approval  to
a  proceeding  for  which  his  signed  and  sealed  consent
had  been  exacted  as  an  indispensable  preliminary,  was
carrying  effrontery  further  than  had  yet  been  attempted
in  these  amazing  negotiations.

Prince  Maurice  once  more  addressed  the  cities  of
Holland,  giving  vent  to  his  wrath  in  language

26  Sept.  ^^^-j^  which  there  was  now  more  sympathy
than  there  had  been  before.  "  Verreyken  has  come
back,"  he  said,  "  not  with  a  signature,  but  with  a  hope.
The  longer  the  enemy  remains  in  the  country  the  more
he  goes  back  from  what  he  had  originally  promised.
He  is  seeking  for  nothing  more  than,  in  this  cheating
way  and  in  this  pretence  of  waiting  for  the  king's
consent — which  we  have  been  expecting  now  for  more
than  eighteen  months — to  continue  the  ruinous  armis-
tice. Thus  he  keeps  the  country  in  a  perpetual  un-
certainty, the  only  possible  consequence  of  which  is  our
complete  destruction.  We  adjure  you  therefore  to  send
a  resolution  in  conformity  with  our  late  address,  in  order
that  through  these  tricks  and  snares  the  fatherland  may
not  fall  into  the  clutch  of  the  enemy,  and  thus  into
eternal  and  intolerable  slavery.  God  save  us  all  from
such  a  fate!  "^^

28  Document  given  in  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  177,  178,

1G08.  EICHAKDOT'S  FAREWELL  SPEECH.

449

Neither  Bameveld  nor  Jeannin  attempted  to  struggle
against  the  ahnost  general  indignation.  The  deputies
of  Zeeland  withdrew  from  the  assembly  of  the  States-
General,  protesting  that  they  would  never  appear  there
again  so  long  as  the  Spanish  commissioners  remained  in
the  country.  The  door  was  opened  wide,  and  it  was
plain  that  those  functionaries  must  take  their  departure.
Pride  would  not  allow  them  to  ask  permission  of  the
States  to  remain,  although  they  intimated  to  the  ambas-
sadors their  intense  desire  to  linger  for  ten  or  twelve
days  longer.  This  was  obviously  inadmissible,  and  on
the  30th  September  they  appeared  before  the  Assembly
to  take  leave.^^

There  were  but  three  of  them,  the  Genoese,  the
Spaniard,  and  the  Burgundian — Spinola,  Mancicidor,
and  Richardot.  Of  the  two  Netherlanders,  Brother  John
was  still  in  Spain,  and  Verreyken  found  it  convenient
that  day  to  have  a  lame  leg.

President  Kichai  dot,  standing  majestically  before  the
States-General,  with  his  robes  wrapped  around
his  tall,  spaix)  form,  made  a  solemn  farewell  ^'^^p**
speech  of  mingled  sorrow,  pity,  and  the  resentment  of
injured  innocence.  They  had  come  to  the  Hague,  he
said,  sent  by  the  King  of  Spain  and  the  archdukes,  to
treat  for  a  good  and  substantial  peace,  according  to  the
honest  intention  of  his  Majesty  and  their  Highnesses.
To  this  end  they  had  sincerely  and  faithfully  dealt  with
the  gentlemen  deputed  for  that  purpose  by  their  High
Mightinesses  the  States,  doing  everything  they  could
think  of  to  further  the  cause  of  peace.  1'hey  lamented
that  the  issue  had  not  been  such  as  they  had  hoped,  not-
withstanding that  the  king  and  archdukes  had  so  fiir
derogated  from  their  reputation  as  to  send  their  commis-
sioners into  the  United  Netherlands,  it  having  been  easy
enough  to  arrange  for  negotiations  on  other  soil.  It  had
been  their  wish  thus  to  prove  to  the  world  how  straight-
forward were  their  intentions  by  not  requiring  the
States  to  send  deputies  to  them.  They  had  accorded
the  first  point  in  the  negotiations,  touching  the  free
state  of  the  country.  Their  High  Mightinesses  bad
taken  offence  upon  the  second,  regarding  the  restoration

»  Mctoren,  eoa.  Grotius,  xvii.  780,  781.  Wageuaar,  ix.  335-3S8.  Van  der  Kemp,
iii.  17^-183.

VOL.  IV.  2  G

450

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LI.

of  religion  in  the  United  Provinces.  Thereupon  the
father  commissary  had  gone  to  Spain,  and  had  remained
longer  than  was  agreeable.  Nevertheless,  they  had
meantime  treated  of  other  points.  Coining  back  at  last
to  the  point  of  religion,  the  States-General  had  taken  a
resolution,  and  had  given  them  their  dismissal,  without
being  willing  to  hear  a  word  more,  or  to  make  a  single
proposition  of  moderation  or  accommodation.

He  could  not  refrain  from  saying  that  the  commis-
sioners had  been  treated  roughly.  Their  High  Mighti-
nesses had  fixed  the  time  for  their  dismissal  more
precisely  than  one  would  do  with  a  servant  who  was
discharged  for  misconduct ;  for  the  lackey,  if  he  asked
for  it,  would  be  allowed  at  least  a  day  longer  to  pack
his  trunk  for  the  journey.  They  protested  before  God
and  the  assembly  of  the  States  that  the  king  and  princes
had  meant  most  sincerely,  and  had  dealt  with  all  round-
ness and  sincerity.  They  at  least  remained  innocent  of
all  the  disasters  and  calamities  to  come  from  the  war.

"  As  for  myself,"  said  Kichardot,  "  I  am  no  prophet,
nor  the  son  of  a  prophet ;  yet  I  will  venture  the  pie-
diction  to  you,  my  lords  the  States-General,  that  you
will  bitterly  rue  it  that  you  did  not  embrace  the  peace
thus  presented,  and  which  you  might  have  had.  The
blood  which  is  destined  to  flow,  now  that  you  have
♦scorned  our  plan  of  reconciliation,  will  be  not  on  our
heads  but  your  own."^^

Barneveld  replied  by  temperately  but  firmly  repelling
the  charges  brought  against  the  States  in  this  artful
oration  of  the  president.  They  had  proceeded  in  the
most  straightforward  manner,  never  permitting  them-
selves to  enter  into  negotiations  except  on  the  pre-
liminary condition  that  their  freedom  should  be  once
for  all  conceded  and  recognized.  "  You  and  you  only,"
he  continued,  are  to  bear  the  blame  that  peace  has  not
been  concluded  ;  you  who  have  not  been  willing  or  not
been  able  to  keep  your  promises.  One  might,  with
better  reason,  hold  you  guilty  of  all  the  bloodshed  ;  you
whose  edicts,  bloodier  and  more  savage  than  war  itself,
long  ago  forced  these  provinces  into  the  inevitable
necessity  of  waging  war  ;  you  whose  cruelty,  but  yester-
day exercised  on  the  crews  of  defenceless  and  innocent

30  Authorities  last  cited

1608.

END  OF  THE  NEGOTIATIONS.

451

merchantmen  and  fishing-vessels,  has  been  fully  ex-
hibited to  the  world."

Spinola's  countenance  betrayed  much  emotion  as  he
listened  to  the  exchange  of  bitter  recriminations  which
took  place  on  this  farewell  colloquy.  It  was  obvious
that  the  brave  and  accomplished  soldier  honestly
lamented  the  failure  of  the  attempt  to  end  the  war.

But  the  rupture  was  absolute.  The  piarquis  and  the
president  dined  that  day  with  Prince  Maurice,  by  whom
they  were  afterwards  courteously  accompanied  a  part  of
the  way  on  their  journey  to  Brussels.

Thus  ended  the  comedy  which  had  lasted  nearly  two
years.  The  dismal  leave-taking,  as  the  curtain  fell,  was
not  as  entertaining  to  the  public  outside  as  the  dramatic
meeting  between  Maurice  and  Spinola  had  been  at  the
opening  scene  near  Kyswyk.  There  was  no  populace  to
throw  up  their  hats  for  the  departing  guests.  From  the
winter's  night  in  which  the  subtle  Franciscan  had  first
stolen  into  the  prince's  cabinet  down  to  this  autumn
evening,  not  a  step  of  real  progress  could  be  recorded  as
the  result  of  the  intolerable  quantity  of  speech-making
and  quill  driving.  There  were  boat-loads  of  documents,
protocols,  and  notes,  drowsy  and  stagnant  as  the  canals
on  which  they  were  floated  off  towards  their  tombs  in
the  various  archives.  Peace  to  the  dust  which  wo  have
not  wantonly  disturbed,  believing  it  to  be  wholesome
for  the  cause  of  human  progress  that  the  art  of  ruling
the  world  by  doing  nothing,  as  practised  some  centuries
since,  should  once  and  again  be  exhibited.

Not  in  vain  do  we  listen  to  those  long-bearded,  vener-
able, very  tedious  old  presidents,  advocates,  and  friars  of
orders  gray,  in  their  high  ruffs,  taffety  robes  or  gowns
of  frieze,  as  they  squeak  and  gibber,  for  a  fleeting
moment,  to  a  world  which  knew  them  not.  It  is  some-
thing to  loam  that  grave  stiitesmen,  kings,  generals,  and
presidents,  could  negotiate  for  two  years  long,  and  that
the  only  result  should  be  the  distinction  between  a
conjunction,  a  preposition,  and  an  adverb.  That  the
provinces  should  be  held  as  free  States,  not  for  free
States — that  they  should  be  free  in  similitude,  not  in
substance — thus  much  and  no  more  had  been  accom-
plished.

SI  Authoriiics  Uist  cited,

2  G  2

452

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LL

And  now  to  all  appearance  every  chance  of  negotia-
tion was  gone.  The  half-centnry  war,  after  this  brief
breathing  space,  was  to  be  renewed  for  another  century
or  so,  and  more  furiously  than  ever.  So  thought  the
public.  So  meant  Prince  Maurice.-  Kichardot  and
Jeannin  knew  better.

The  departure  of  the  commissioners  was  recorded
upon  the  register  of  the  resolutions  of  Holland,  with  the
ominous  note :  God  grant  that  they  may  not  have
sown  evil  seed  here ;  the  effects  of  which  will  one  day
be  visible  in  the  ruin  of  this  commonwealth."

Hardly  were  the  backs  of  the  commissioners  turned
before  the  indefatigable  Jeannin  was  ready  with  his
scheme  for  repatching  the  rupture.  He  was  at  first
anxious  that  the  deputies  of  Zeeland  should  be  sum-
moned again,  now  that  the  countrj^  was  rid  of  the
Spaniards.  Prince  Maurice,  however,  was  wrathful
when  the  president  began  to  talk  once  more  of  truce.
The  proposition,  he  said,  was  simply  the  expression  of  a
wish  to  destroy  the  State.  Holland  and  Zeeland  would
never  agree  to  any  such  measure,  and  they  would  find
means  to  compel  the  other  provinces  to  follow  their
example.  If  there  were  but  three  or  four  cities  in  the
whole  country  to  reject  the  truce,  he  would,  with  their
assistance  alone,  defend  the  freedom  of  the  lepublic,  or
at  least  die  an  honourable  death  in  its  defence.  This
at  least  would  be  better  than  after  a  few  months  to
become  slaves  of  Spain.  Such  a  result  was  the  object  of
those  who  began  this  work,  but  he  would  resist  it  at  the
peril  of  his  life.^^

A  singular  incident  now  seemed  to  justify  the  wrath
of  the  stadholder,  and  to  be  likely  to  strengthen  his
party.

Young  Count  John  of  Nassau  happened  to  take  posses-
sion of  the  apartments  in  Goswyn  Meursken's  hostelry
at  the  Hague,  just  vacated  by  Kichardot.  In  the
drawer  of  a  writing-table  was  found  a  document,
evidently  left  there  by  the  president.  This  paper  w^as
handed  by  Count  John  to  his  cousin,  Frederic  Henry,
who  at  once  delivered  it  to  his  brother  Maurice.  The
prince  produced  it  in  the  assembly  of  the  States-General,

32  Resol.  Holl.  30  Sept.  1608,  bl.  223. Wagenaar,  ix.  388.
33  Wagenaar,  ix.  389-390.  Jeannin.

1608.

RICHARDOrS  SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS.

453

members  from  each  province  were  furnished  with  a
copy  of  it  within  two  or  three  hours,  and  it  was  soon
afterwards  printed  and  published.  The  document,
being  nothing  less  than  the  original  secret  instructions
of  the  archdukes  to  their  commissioners,  was  naturally
read  with  intense  interest  by  the  States-General,  by  th€^
foreign  envoys,  and  by  the  general  public.^^

It  appeared,  from  an  inspection  of  the  paper,^^  that  the
commissioners  had  been  told  that,  if  they  should  find
the  French,  English,  and  Danish  ambassadors  desirous
of  being  present  at  the  negotiations  for  the  treaty,  they
were  to  exclude  them  from  all  direct  participation  in  the
proceedings.  They  were  to  do  this,  however,  so  sweetly
and  courteously  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  those
diplomatists  to  take  offence,  or  to  imagine  themselves
distrusted.  On  the  contrary,  the  States-General  were  to
be  informed  that  their  communication  in  private  on  the
general  subject  with  the  ambassadors  was  approved  by
the  archdukes,  because  they  believed  the  sovereigns  of
France,  England,  and  Denmark,  their  sincere  and  affec-
tionate friends.  The  commissioners  were  instructed
to  domesticate  themselves  as  much  as  possible  with
President  Jeannin  and  to  manifest  the  utmost  confidence
in  his  good  intentions.  They  were  to  take  the  same
course  with  the  English  envoys,  but  in  more  general
terms,  and  were  very  discreetly  to  communicate  to  them
whatever  they  already  knew,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
carefully  to  conceal  from  them  all  that  was  still  a
Recret.

They  were  distinctly  told  to  make  the  point  of  the
Catholic  religion  first  and  foremost  in  the  negotiations ;
the  arguments  showing  the  indispensable  necessity  of
securing  its  public  exercise  in  the  United  Provinces
being  drawn  up  with  considerable  detail.  They  were
to  insist  that  the  republic  should  absolutely  renounce
the  trade  with  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  should
pledge  itself  to  chastise  such  of  its  citizens  as  might
dare  to  undertake  those  voyages,  as  disturbers  of  the
peace  and  enemies  of  the  public  repose,  whether  they
went  to  the  Indies  in  person  or  associated  themselves
with  raen  of  other  nations  for  that  purpose,  under  any
pretext  whatever. When  these  points,  together  with

Jcannio,  i.  925,  et  scq.  33  See  the  document  Itself  in  Jeannin,  i.  51-5^<.

454  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LI

many  matters  of  detail  less  difficult  of  adjustment,  had
been  satisfactorily  settled,  the  commissioners  were  to
suggest  measures  of  union  for  the  common  defence  be-
tween the  united  and  the  obedient  provinces.  This
matter  was  to  be  broached  very  gently.  In  the  sweetest
terms  possible,"  it  was  to  be  hinted  that  the  whole  body
of  the  Netherlanders  could  protect  itself  against  every
enemy,  but  if  dismembered,  as  it  was  about  to  be,  neither
the  one  portion  nor  the  other  would  be  safe.  The  com-
missioners were  therefore  to  request  the  offer  of  some
proposition  from  the  States-General  for  the  common
defence.  In  case  they  remained  silent,  however,  then
the  commissioners  were  to  declare  that  the  archdukes
had  no  wish  to  speak  of  sovereignty  over  the  United
Provinces,  however  limited.  "  Having  once  given  them
that  morsel  to  swallow,"  said  their  Highnesses,  "w^e
have  nothing  of  the  kind  in  our  thoughts.  But  if  they
reflect,  it  is  possible  that  they  may  see  fit  to  take  us  for
protectors."

This  scheme  was  to  be  managed  withgi^eat  discreetness
and  delicacy,  and  accomplished  by  hook  or  by  crook,  if
the  means  could  be  found.  You  need  not  be  scrupulous
as  to  the  form  or  law  of  protection,  provided  the  name  of
protector  can  be  obtained,"  continued  the  archdukes.

At  least  the  greatest  pains  were  to  be  taken  that  the
two  sections  of  the  Netherlands  might  remain  friends.
"  We  are  in  great  danger  unless  we  rely  upon  each
other,"  it  was  urged.  "But  touch  this  chord  very  gently,
lest  the  French  and  English  hearing  of  it  suspect  some
design  to  injure  them.  At  least  we  may  each  mutually
agree  to  chastise  such  of  our  respective  subjects  as  may
venture  to  make  any  alliance  with  the  enemies  of  the
other."

It  was  much  disputed  whether  these  instructions  had
been  left  purposely  or  by  accident  in  the  table-drawer.
Jeannin  could  not  make  up  his  mind  whether  it  was  a
trick  or  not,  and  the  vociferous  lamentations  of  Eichardot
upon  his  misfortunes  made  little  impression  upon  his
mind.  He  had  small  confidence  in  any  austerity  of
principle  on  the  part  of  his  former  fellow-leaguer  that
would  prevent  him  from  leaving  the  document  by  stealth,
and  then  protesting  that  he  had  been  foully  wronged  by
its  coming  to  light. On  the  whole,  he  was  inclined  to

1608.

THEIR  PUBLICATION  BY  THE  STATES.

455

think,  however,  that  the  paper  had  been  stolen  from

Barneveld,  after  much  inquiry,  was  convinced  that  it
had  been  left  in  the  drawer  by  accident.^'

Richardot  himself  manifested  rage  and  dismay  when
he  found  that  a  paper,  left  by  chance  in  his  lodgings,
had  been  published  by  the  States.  Such  a  proceeding
was  a  violation,  he  exclaimed,  of  the  laws  of  hospitality.
With  equal  justice,  he  declared  it  to  be  an  offence  against
the  religious  respect  due  to  ambassadors,  whose  persons
and  property  were  sacred  in  foreign  countries.  Decency
required  the  States,"  he  said,  "  to  send  the  document
back  to  him,  instead  of  showing  it  as  a  trophy,  and  he
was  ready  to  die  of  shame  and  vexation  at  the  unlucky
incident.''

Few  honourable  men  will  disagree  with  him  in  these
complaints,  although  many  contemporaries  obstinately
refused  to  believe  that  the  crafty  and  experienced  di-
plomatist could  have  so  carelessly  left  about  his  most
important  archives.  He  was  generally  thought  by  those
who  had  most  dealt  with  him,  to  prefer,  on  principle,  a
crooked  path  to  a  straight  one.  "  'Tis  a  mischievous  old
monkey,"  said  Villeroy,  on  another  occasion,  "  that  likes
always  to  turn  its  tail  instead  of  going  directly  to  the
purpose." The  ai  chduke,  however,  was  very  indulgent
to  his  plenipotentiary.  My  good  master,"  said  the
president,  "so  soon  as  he  learned  the  loss  of  that  accursed
paper,  benignantly  consoled,  instead  of  chastising  me;
and,  after  having  looked  over  the  draught,  was  glad  that
the  accident  had  happened ;  for  thus  his  sincerity  had
been  pioved,  and  those  who  sought  profit  by  the  trick
had  been  confounded."  On  the  other  hand,  what  good
could  it  do  to  the  cause  of  peace,  that  these  wonderful
instructions  should  be  published  throughout  the  republic.
They  might  almost  seem  a  fiction,  invented  by  the  war
party  to  inspire  a  general  disgust  for  any  further  nego-
tiation. Every  loyal  Netherlander  would  necessarily  bo
(jualmish  at  the  word  peace,  now  that  the  whole  design
of  the  Spanish  party  was  disclosed.

The  public  exercise  of  the  Koman  religion  was  now
known  to  be  the  indispensable  condition — first,  last,  and

5€  JcHiinin,  i.  914,  919.  925.

ibid.  ii.  120.

3"  Ibid.  919.  Ibid.  921.

<o  Ibid.  21.

456

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

always — to  any  possible  peace.  Every  citizen  of  the
republic  was  to  be  whipped  out  of  the  East  and  West
Indies,  should  he  dare  to  show  his  face  in  those  regions.
The  States-General,  while  swallowing  the  crumb  of
sovereignty  vouchsafed  by  the  archdukes,  were  to  accept
them  as  protectors,  in  order  not  to  fall  a  prey  to  the
enemies  whom  they  imagined  to  be  their  friends.

What  could  be  more  hopeless  than  such  negotiations  ?
What  more  dreary  than  the  perpetual  efforts  of  two
lines  to  approach  each  other  which  were  mathematically
incapable  of  meeting?  That  the  young  republic,  con-
scious of  her  daily  growing  strength,  should  now  seek
refuge  from  her  nobly  won  independence  in  the  protec-
torate of  Albert,  who  was  himself  the  vassal  of  Philip,
was  an  idea  almost  inconceivable  to  the  Dutch  mind.
Yet  so  impossible  was  it  for  the  archdukes  to  put  them-
selves into  human  relations  with  this  new  and  popular
Government,  that  in  the  inmost  recesses  of  their  breasts
they  actually  believed  themselves,  when  making  the
ofter,  to  be  performing  a  noble  act  of  Christian  charity.

The  efforts  of  Jeannin  and  of  the  English  ambassador
were  now  unremitting,  and  thoroughly  seconded  by
Barneveld.  Maurice  was  almost  at  daggers  drawn,  not
only  with  the  Advocate,  but  with  the  foreign  envoys.
Sir  Ealph  Winwood,  who  had,  in  virtue  of  the  old  treaty
arrangements  with  England,  a  seat  in  the  state-council
at  the  Hague,  and  who  was  a  man  of.a  somewhat  rough
and  insolent  deportment,  took  occasion  at  a  session  ot
that  body,  when  the  prince  was  present,  to  urge  the
necessity  of  at  once  resuming  the  ruptured  negotiations.
The  King  of  Great  Britain,  he  said,  only  recommended
a  course  which  he  was  himself  always  ready  to  pursue.
Hostilities  which  were  necessary,  and  no  others,  were
just.  Such,  and  such  only,  could  be  favoured  by  God
or  by  pious  kings.  But  wars  were  not  necessary  which
could  be  honourably  avoided.  A  truce  was  not  to  be
despised,  by  which  religious  liberty  and  commerce  were
secured,  and  it  was  not  the  part  of  wisdom  to  plunge
into  all  the  horrors  of  immediate  war  in  order  to  escape
distant  and  problematical  dangers,  that  might  arise  when
the  truce  should  come  to  an  end.  If  a  truce  were  now
made,  the  kings  of  both  France  and  England  would  be
guarantees  for  its  faithful  observance. They  would  take

1608.  MAURICE  DENOUNCING  KING  JAMES.

457

care  that  no  wrong  or  affront  was  offered  to  the  States-
General.'^^

Maurice  replied,  with  a  sneer,  to  these  sententious
commonplaces  derived  at  second-hand  from  King  James
that  great  kings  were  often  very  indifferent  to  injuries  sus-
tained by  their  friends.  Moreover,  there  was  an  eminent
sovereign,  he  continued,  who  was  even  very  patient
under  affronts  directly  offered  to  himself.  It  was  not
very  long  since  a  horrible  plot  had  been  di8(;overed  to
murder  the  King  of  England,  with  his  wife,  his  children,
and  all  the  great  personages  of  the  realm.  That  this
great  crime  had  been  attempted  under  the  immediate
instigation  of  the  King  of  Spain  was  notorious  to  the
whole  world,  and  certainly  no  secret  to  King  James.
Yet  his  Britannic  Majesty  had  made  haste  to  exonerate
the  great  criminal  from  all  complicity  in  the  crime ;  and
had  ever  since  been  fawning  upon  the  Catholic  king,
and  hankering  for  a  family  alliance  with  him.  Conduct
like  this  the  prince  denounced  in  plain  terms  as  cringing
and  cowardly,  and  expressed  the  opinion  that  guarantees
of  Dutch  independence  from  such  a  monarch  could  hardly
be  thought  very  valuable.

These  were  terrible  words  for  the  representative  of
James  to  have  hurled  in  his  face  in  full  council  by  the
foremost  personage  of  the  republic.  Winwood  fell  into
a  furious  passion,  and  of  course  there  was  a  vie)leTit  scene,
with  much  subsequent  protesting  and  protocolling.

The  British  king  insisted  that  the  prince  should  make
public  amends  for  the  insult,  and  Maurice  firmly  refused
to  do  anything  of  the  kind.  The  matter  w;is  subse-
quently arranged  by  some  amicable  concessions  made
by  the  prince  in  a  private  letter  to  James,  but  there
remained  for  the  time  a  state  of  alienation  between
England  and  the  republic,  at  which  the  French  sin-
cerely rejoiced.  The  incident,  however,  sufficiently
shows  the  point  of  exasperation  which  the  prince  had
reached,  foi*,  although  choleric,  he  was  a  reasonable
man,  and  it  was  only  because  the  whole  course  of  the
negotiations  had  offended  his  sense  of  honour  and  of
right  that  he  had  at  last  been  driven  quite  beyond  tho
bounds  of  self-control.^^

*i  Wagpnaar,  ix.  40a,  409. Grotins,  xvM.  785. Van  dor  Kemp,  iii.  4S.  Jeannin,
Jeannin,  ii.  303,  304,  and  authorities  last  cited. \Vinwood,  ii.  353,  354.

458

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap  LI.

On  the  loth  of  October,  the  envoys  of  France,  England,

13  Oct  I^^^i^^^k,  and  of  the  Elector  Palatine,  the  Elec-
^  *  tor  of  Brandenburg,  and  other  German  princes,
came  before  the  States-General.

Jeannin  in  the  name  of  all  these  foreign  ministers,
made  a  speech  warmly  recommending  the  truce.*^

He  repelled  the  insinuation  that  the  measure  proposed
had  been  brought  about  by  the  artifices  of  the  enemy,
and  was  therefore  odious.  On  the  contrarj^  it  was
originated  by  himself  and  the  other  good  friends  of  the
republic.

In  his  opinion,  the  terms  of  the  suggested  truce  con-
tained sufficient  guarantees  for  the  liberty  of  the  provinces,
not  only  during  the  truce,  but  for  ever.

No  stronger  recognition  of  their  independence  could
be  expected  than  the  one  given.  It  was  entirely  w^ithout
example,  argued  the  president,  that  in  similar  changes
brought  about  by  force  of  arms,  sovereigns  after  having
been  despoiled  of  their  states  have  been  compelled  to
abandon  their  rights  shamefully  by  a  public  confession,
unless  they  had  absolutely  fallen  into  the  hands  of  their
enemies  and  were  completely  at  their  mercy.  "  Yet  the
princes  who  make  this  great  concession,"  continued
Jeannin,  are  not  lying  vanquished  at  your  feet,  nor
reduced  by  dire  necessity  to  yield  what  they  have
yielded."

He  reminded  the  assembly  that  the  Swiss  enjoyed  at
that  moment  their  liberty  in  virtue  of  a  simple  tmce,
without  ever  having  obtained  from  their  former  sovereign
a  declaration  such  as  was  now  offered  to  the  United
Provinces.

The  president  argued,  moreover,  with  much  force  and
acuteness,  that  it  was  beneath  the  dignity  of  the  States,
and  inconsistent  with  their  consciousness  of  strength,  to
lay  so  much  stress  on  the  phraseology  by  which  their
liberty  was  recognised.  That  freedom  had  been  won  by
the  sword,  and  would  be  maintained  against  all  the  world
by  the  sword.

In  truth,"  said  the  orator,  "  you  do  wrong  to  your
liberty  by  calling  it  so  often  in  doubt,  and  in  claiming
with  so  much  contentious  anxiety  from  your  enemies  a
title-deed  for  your  independence. You  hold  it  by  your

*3  See  the  text  in  Jeannin,  ii.  3-8.

608.

DISCUSSION  OF  CONDITIONS  FOR  A  TRUCE.

459

t-wn  public  decree.  In  virtue  of  that  decree,  confirmed
Dy  the  success  of  your  arms,  you  have  enjoyed  it  long.
Nor  would  anything  obtained  from  your  enemies  be  of
use  to  you  if  those  same  arms  with  w^hich  you  gained
your  liberty  could  not  still  preserve  it  for  you."

Therefore,  in  the  opinion  of  the  president,  this  per-
sistence in  demanding  a  more  explicit  and  unlimited
recognition  of  independence  was  only  a  pretext  for  con-
tinuing the  war,  ingeniously  used  by  those  who  hated
peace.

Addressing  himself  more  particularly  to  the  celebrated
circular  letter  of  Prince  Maurice  against  the  truce,  the
president  maintained  that  the  liberty  of  the  republic
was  as  much  acknowledged  in  the  proposed  articles
as  if  the  words  "  for  ever  "  had  been  added.  To  ac-
knowledge liberty  is  an  act  which,  by  its  very  nature,
admits  of  no  conditions,"  he  observed  with  considerable
force.^^

The  president  proceeded  to  say  that  in  the  original
negotiations  the  qualifications  obtained  had  seemed  to
him  enough.  As  there  was  an  ardent  desire,  however,
on  the  part  of  many  for  a  more  explicit  phraseology,  as
something  necessary  to  the  public  safety,  he  had  thought
it  worth  attempting.

We  all  rejoiced  when  you  obtained  it,"  continued
Jeannin,  "  but  not  when  tln^y  agreed  to  renounce  the
names,  titles,  and  arms  of  the  United  Provinces ;  for
that  seemed  to  us  shameful  for  them  beyond  all  example.
That  princes  should  make  concessions  so  entirely  un-
wortliy  of  their  grandeur,  excited  at  once  our  suspicion,
for  we  could  not  imagine  the  cause  of  an  offer  so  specious.
We  have  since  found  out  the  reason.

The  archdukes  being  unable,  accordingly,  to  obtain
for  the  truce  those  specious  conditions  which  Spain  had
originally  pretended  to  yield,  it  was  the  opinion  of  the
old  diplomatist  that  the  king  should  be  permitted  to  wear
the  paste  substitutes  about  which  so  many  idle  words
had  been  wasted.

It  would  be  better,  he  thought,  for  the  States  to  be
contented  with  what  was  precious  and  substantial,  and
not  to  lose  the  occasion  of  making  a  good  treaty  of  truce,

Ecrit  fait  par  Monsieur  Jeannin,  13  Oct.  1608. Text  in  Jeannin,  il  8-19.
*5  Jcauniu,  ii.  8-19.

460

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

which  was  sure  to  be  converted  with  time  into  an  abso-
lute peace.

"  It  is  certain,"  he  said,  that  the  princes  with  whom
you  are  treating  will  never  go  to  law  with  you  to  get  an
exposition  of  the  article  in  question.  After  the  truce
has  expired,  they  will  go  to  war  with  you  if  you  like,
but  they  will  not  trouble  themselves  to  declare  whether
they  are  fighting  you  as  rebels  or  as  enemies,  nor  will  ifc
very  much  signify.  If  their  arms  are  successful,  they
will  give  you  no  explanations.  If  you  are  the  conquerors,
they  will  receive  none.  The  fortune  of  war  will  be  the
supreme  judge  to  decide  the  dispute,  not  the  words  of  a
treaty.  Those  words  are  always  interpreted  to  the  dis-
advantage of  the  weak  and  the  vanquished,  although  they
may  be  so  perfectly  clear  that  no  man  could  doubt  them ;
never  to  the  prejudice  of  those  who  have  proved  the
validity  of  their  rights  by  the  strength  of  their  arms."  ^

This  honest,  straightforward  cynicism,  coming  from
the  lips  of  one  of  the  most  experienced  diplomatists  of
Europe,  was  difficult  to  gainsay.  Speaking  as  one  having
authority,  the  president  told  the  States- General  in  full
assembly,  that  there  was  no  law  in  Christendom,  as  be-
tween nations,  but  the  good  old  fist-law,  the  code  of
brute  force.

Two  centuries  and  a  half  have  rolled  by  since  that
oration  was  pronounced,  and  the  world  has  made
immense  progress  in  science  during  that  period.  But
there  is  still  room  for  improvement  in  this  regard  in  the
law  of  nations.  Certainly  there  is  now  a  little  more
reluctance  to  come  so  nakedly  before  the  world.  But
has  the  cause  of  modesty  or  humanity  gained  very  much
by  the  decorous  fig-leaves  of  modern  diplomacy  ?

The  president  alluded  also  to  the  ungrounded  fears
that  bribery  and  corruption  would  be  able  to  effect
much,  during  the  truce,  towards  the  reduction  of  the
provinces  under  their  repudiated  sovereign.  After  all,
it  was  difiScult  to  buy  up  a  whole  people.  In  a  common-
wealth, where  the  People  was  sovereign,  and  the  persons
of  the  magistrates  ever  changing,  those  little  comfortable
commercial  operations,  could  not  be  managed  so  easily
as  in  civilized  realms  like  France  and  England.  The  old
Leaguer  thought  with  pensive  regret,  no  doubt,  of  the

*6  Jeannin,  ii.  8-19.

1608.

SPEECH  OF  PRESIDENT  JEANNIN.

461

hard  but  still  profitable  bargains  by  which  the  Guises
and  Mayennes  and  Mercoeurs,  and  a  few  hundred  of
their  noble  adherents,  had  been  brought  over  to  the
cause  of  the  king.  He  sighed  at  the  more  recent
memories  of  the  Marquis  deKosny's  embassy  in  England,
and  his  largess  scattered  broadcast  among  the  great
English  lords.  It  would  be  of  little  use,  he  foresaw —
although  the  instructions  of  Henry  were  in  his  portfolio,
giving  him  almost  unlimited  powers  to  buy  up  every-
body in  the  Netherlands  that  could  be  bought — to
attempt  that  kind  of  traffic  on  a  large  scale  in  the
Netherlands.

Those  republicans  were  greedy  enough  about  the
navigation  to  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  were  very
litigious  about  the  claim  of  Spain  to  put  up  railings
around  the  ocean  as  her  private  lake,  but  they  were  less
keen  than  were  their  more  polished  contemporaries  for
the  trade  in  human  souls.

"  When  we  consider,"  said  Jeannin,  "  the  constitution
of  your  State,  and  that  to  corrupt  a  few  people  among
you  does  no  good  at  all,  because  the  f j  equent  change  of
magistracies  takes  away  the  means  of  gaining  over  many
of  them  at  the  same  time,  capable  by  a  long  duration  of
their  power  to  conduct  an  intrigue  against  the  common-
wealth, this  fear  must  appear  wholly  vain."*^

And  then  the  old  Leaguer,  who  had  always  refused
bribes  himself,  although  he  had  negotiated  much  bribery
of  others,  warmed  into  sincere  eloquence  as  he  spoke  of
the  simple  virtues  on  which  the  little  republic,  as  should
be  the  case  with  all  republics,  was  founded.  He  did
homage  to  the  Dutch  love  of  liberty.

**Kemember,"  he  said,  the  love  of  liberty  which  is
engraved  in  the  hearts  of  all  your  inhabitants,  and  that
there  are  few  persons  now  living  who  were  born  in  the
days  of  the  ancient  subjection,  or  who  have  not  been
nourished  and  brought  up  for  so  long  a  time  in  liberty
that  they  have  a  horror  for  the  very  name  of  servitude.
You  will  then  feel  that  there  is  not  one  man  in  your
commonwealth  who  would  wish  or  dare  to  open  his
mouth  to  bring  you  back  to  subjection,  without  being
in  danger  of  instant  punishment  as  a  traitor  to  his
country."*^

*'  Jeannin,  ii.  8-19.  ^  Ibi^

462

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

He  again  reminded  his  hearers  that  the  Swiss  had
concluded  a  long  and  perilous  war  with  their  ancient
masters  by  a  simple  truce,  daring  which  they  had  estab-
lished so  good  a  government  that  they  were  never  more
attacked.  Honest  republican  principles,  and  readiness
at  any  moment  to  defend  dearly  won  liberties,  had  com-
bined with  geographical  advantages  to  secure  the
national  independence  of  Switzerland.^^

Jeannin  paid  full  tribute  to  the  maritime  supremacy
of  the  republic.

"  You  may  have  as  much  good  fortune,"  he  said,  "  as
the  Swiss,  if  you  are  wise.  You  have  the  ocean  at  your
side,  great  navigable  rivers  enclosing  you  in  every  direc-
tion, a  multitude  of  ships,  with  sailors,  pilots,  and  sea-
faring men  of  every  description,  who  are  the  very  best
soldiers  in  battles  at  sea  to  be  found  in  Christendom.
With  these  you  will  preserve  your  military  vigour  and
your  habits  of  navigation,  the  long  voyages  to  which  you
are  accustomed  continuing  as  usual.  And  such  is  the
kind  of  soldiers  you  require.  As  for  auxiliaries,  should
you  need  them  you  know  where  to  find  them."^^

The  president  implored  the  States -General  accordingly
to  pay  no  attention  to  the  writings  which  were  circulated
among  the  people  to  prejudice  them  against  the  truce.

This  was  aimed  directly  at  the  stad holder,  who  had
been  making  so  many  direct  personal  appeals  to  the
people,  and  who  was  now  the  more  incensed,  recognis-
ing the  taunt  of  the  president  as  an  arrow  taken  from
Barneveld's  quiver.  There  had  long  ceased  to  be  any
communication  between  the  Prince  and  the  Advocate,
and  Maurice  made  no  secret  of  his  bitter  animosity  both
to  Barneveld  and  to  Jeannin.

He  hesitated  on  no  occasion  to  denounce  the  Advocate
as  travelling  straight  on  the  road  to  Spain,  and  although
he  was  not  aware  of  the  twenty  thousand  florins  recently
presented  by  the  French  king,  he  had  accustomed  him-
self, with  the  enormous  exaggeration  of  party  spirit,  to
look  upon  the  first  statesman  of  his  country  and  of
Europe  as  a  traitor  to  the  republic  and  a  tool  of  the
archdukes.  As  we  look  back  upon  those  passionate  days,
we  cannot  but  be  appalled  at  the  depths  to  which  theo-
logical hatred  could  descend.

•»9  Jeannin,  ii.  S-19.

50  Ibid.

1608.  ANIMOSITY  BETWEEN  MAURICE  AND  BARNEVELD.  463

On  ihe  very  morning  after  the  session  of  the  assembly
in  which  Jeannin  had  been  makinor  l^is  great

•  14  Oct.

speech,  and  denouncing  the  practice  of  secret
and  incendiary  publication,  three  remarkable  letters
were  found  on  the  doorstep  of  a  house  in  the  Hague.
One  was  addressed  to  the  States-General,  another  to  the
States  of  Holland,  and  a  third  to  the  burgomaster  of
Amsterdam.  In  all  these  documents,  the  Advocate  was
denounced  as  an  infamous  traitor,  who  was  secretly  in-
triguing to  bring  about  a  tnice  for  the  purpose  of
handing  over  the  commonwealth  to  the  enemy.  A
shameful  death,  it  was  added,  would  be  his  fitting
re  ward.

These  letters  were  read  in  the  Assembly  of  the  States-
Ge  eral,  and  created  great  wrath  among  the  friends  of
Bameveld.  Even  Maurice  expressed  indignation,  and
favoured  a  search  for  the  anonymous  author,  in  order
that  he  might  be  severel}»  punished.

It  seems  strange  enough  that  anonymous  letters
picked  up  in  the  street  should  have  been  deemed  a
worthy  theme  of  discussion  before  their  High  Mighti-
nesses the  States-General.  Moreover,  it  was  raining
pamphlets  and  libels  against  Barneveld  and  his  sup-
porters eveiy  day,  and  the  stories  which  grave  burghers
and  pious  elders  went  about  telling  to  each  other,  and
to  everybody  who  would  listen  to  them,  about  the  Advo-
cate's depravity,  were  wonderful  to  hear.

At  the  end  of  September,  just  before  the  Spanish
commissioners  left  the  Hague,  a  sledge  of  the  kind  used
in  the  Dutch  cities  as  drays  stopped  before  Baraeveld's
front-door  one  fine  morning,  and  deposited  several  large
baskets,  filled  with  money,  sent  by  the  envoys  for
defraying  certain  expenses  of  forage,  hire  of  servants,
and  the  like,  incurred  by  them  during  their  sojourn  at
the  Hague,  and  disbursed  by  the  States.  The  sledge,
with  its  contents,  was  at  once  sent  by  order  of  ihe
Advocate,  under  guidance  of  Commissar}' John  Spronsen,
to  the  Keceiver-General  of  the  republic.^^

Yet  men  wagged  their  beards  dismally  as  they
whispered  this  fresh  proof  of  Bameveld's  venality.
As  if  Spinola  and  his  colleagues  were  such  blunderers

*i  Wagenaar,  1x.  411,  412. Van  der  Kemp.  iil.  51,  52.
52  Van  dcr  Kt-mp,  iii.  54,  230.

464

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,

Chap.  LI.

in  bribing  as  to  send  bushel  baskets  full  of  Spanish
dollars  on  a  sledge,  in  broad  daylight,  to  the  house  of  a
great  statesman  whom  they  meant  to  purchase,  expect-
ing doubtless  a  receipt  in  full  to  be  brought  back  by  the
drayman !  Well  might  the  Advocate  say  at  a  later
moment,  in  the  bitterness  of  his  spirit,  that  his  enemies,
not  satisfied  with  piercing  his  heart  with  their  false,
injurious,  and  honour-filching  libels  and  stories,  were
determined  to  break  it.  "He  begged  God  Almighty,"
he  said,  "to  be  merciful  to  him,  and  to  judge  righteously
between  him  and  them."^^

Party  spirit  has  rarely  run  higher  in  any  common-
wealth than  in  Holland  during  these  memorable  debates
concerning  a  truce.  Yet  the  leaders  both  of  the  war
party  and  the  truce  party  were  doubtless  pure,  deter-
mined patriots,  seeking  their  country's  good  with  all
their  souls  and  strength.

Maurice  answered  the  discourse  of  Jeannin  by  a
second  and  very  elaborate  letter.  In  this  cir-
cular,  addressed  to  the  magistracies  of  Holland,
he  urged  his  countrymen  once  more  with  arguments
already  employed  by  him,  and  in  more  strenuous  lan-
guage than  ever,  to  beware  of  a  truce  even  more  than  of
a  peace,  and  warned  them  not  to  swerve  by  a  hair's
breadth  from  the  formula  in  regard  to  the  sovereignty
agreed  upon  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  negotiations.^
To  this  document  was  appended  a  paper  of  considera-
tions, drawn  up  by  Maurice  and  Lewis  William,  in  refu-
tation, point  by  point,  of  all  the  arguments  of  President
Jeannin  in  his  late  discourse.

It  is  not  necessary  to  do  more  than  allude  to  these
documents,  which  were  marked  by  the  close  reasoning
and  fiery  spirit  which  characterized  all  the  appeals  of
the  prince  and  his  cousin  at  this  period,  because  the
time  had  now  come  which  comes  to  all  controversies
when  argument  is  exhausted  and  either  action  or  com-
promise begins.

Meantime  Barneveld,  stung  almost  to  madness  by  the
poisonous  though  ephemeral  libels  which  buzzed  so  per-
petually about  him,  had  at  last  resolved  to  retire  from  the
public  service.  He  had  been  so  steadily  denounced  as
being  burthensome  to  his  superiors  in  birth  by  the  power

53  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  229.  54  Jeannin,  ii.  25-33,  gives  the  text.

1(508.

RESIGNATION  OF  BARNEVELD.

465

which  he  had  acquired,  and  to  have  shot  up  so  far
above  the  heads  of  his  equals,  that  he  felt  disposed  to
withdraw  from  a  field  where  his  presence  was  becoming
odious.

His  enemies,  of  course,  considered  this  determination
a  trick  by  which  he  merely  wished  to  prove  to  the
country  how  indispensable  he  was,  and  to  gain  a  fresh
lease  of  his  almost  unlimited  power  by  the  alarm  which
his  proposed  abdication  would  produce.  Certainly,  how-
ever, if  it  were  a  trick,  and  he  were  not  indispensable,  it
was  easy  enough  to  prove  it  and  to  punish  him  by  taking
him  at  his  word.

On  the  morning  after  the  anonymous  letters  had  been
found  in  the  street  he  came  into  the  House  of  Assembly
and  made  a  short  speech.  He  spoke  simply  of  his  thirty-
one  years  of  service,  during  which  ho  believed  himself
to  have  done  his  best  for  the  good  of  the  fatherland  and
for  the  welfare  of  the  house  of  Nassau.  He  had  been
ready  thus  to  go  on  to  the  end,  but  he  saw  himself
environed  by  enemies,  and  felt  that  his  usefulness  had
been  destroyed.  He  wished,  therefore,  in  the  interest  of
the  country,  not  from  any  fear  for  himself,  to  withdraw
from  the  storm,  and  for  a  time  at  least  to  remain  in
retirement.  The  displeasure  and  hatred  of  the  great
were  nothing  new  to  him,  he  said.  He  had  never  shi*unk
from  peril  when  ho  could  serve  his  fatherland ;  for
against  all  calumnies  and  all  accidents  he  had  worn  the
armour  of  a  quiet  conscience.  But  ho  now  saw  that
the  truce,  in  itself  an  unpleasant  alfair,  was  made  still
more  odious  by  the  hatred  felt  towards  him.  He
begged  the  provinces,  therefore,  to  select  another  ser-
vant less  hated  than  himself  to  provide  for  the  public
welfare.'^

Having  said  these  few  words  with  the  dignity  which
was  natural  to  him,  he  calmly  walked  out  of  the  Assembly
House.^

The  personal  frieads  ofBarneveld  and  the  whole  truce
party  were  in  consternation.  Even  the  enemies  of  the
Advocate  shrank  appalled  at  the  prospect  of  losing
the  services  of  the  foremost  statesman  of  the  common-
wealth at  this  critical  juncture.  There  was  a  brief  and

"  Wagenaar,  Lx.  411,  413.  Van  der  Kemp,  iiL  51,  52.
VOL.  IV.

«  Ibid.
2  H

466

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

animated  discussion  as  soon  as  his  back  was  tunied.  Its
result  was  the  appointment  of  a  committee  of  live  to
wait  upon  Barneveld  and  solemnly  to  request  him  to
reconsider  his  decision.  Their  efforts  were  successful.
After  a  satisfactory  interview  with  the  committee  he
resumed  his  functions  with  greater  authority  than
ever.^'  Of  course  there  were  not  wanting  many  to
whisper  that  the  whole  proceeding  had  been  a  comedy,
and  that  Barneveld  would  have  been  more  embarrassed
'  than  he  had  ever  been  in  his  life  had  his  resignation
been  seriously  accepted.  But  this  is  easy  to  say,  and  is
always  said,  whenever  a  statesman  who  feels  himself
aggrieved,  yet  knows  himself  useful,  lays  down  his
office.  The  Advocate  had  been  the  mark  of  unceasing
and  infamous  calumnies.  He  had  incurred  the  deadly
hatred  of  the  highest  placed,  the  most  powerful,  and  the
most  popular  man  in  the  commonwealth.  He  had  more
than  once  been  obliged  to  listen  to  opprobrious  language
from  the  prince,  and  it  was  even  whispered  that  he  had
been  threatened  with  personal  violence.  That  Maurice
was  perpetually  denouncing  him  in  public  and  private,
as  a  traitor,  a  papist,  a  Spanish  partisan,  was  notorious.
He  had  just  been  held  up  to  the  States  of  the  union  and
of  his  own  province  by  unknown  voices  as  a  criminal
worthy  of  death.  Was  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  a  man
of  sixty,  who  had  passed  his  youth,  manhood,  and  old  age
in  the  service  of  the  republic,  and  was  recognised  by  all
as  the  ablest,  the  most  experienced,  the  most  indefatigable
of  her  statesmen,  should  be  seriously  desirous  of  abandon-
ing an  office  which  might  well  seem  to  him  rather  a
pillory  than  a  post  of  honour  ?

"As  for  neighbour  Barneveld,"  said  recorder  Aers-
sens,^^  little  dreaming  of  the  foul  witness  he  was  to  bear
against  that  neighbour  at  a  terrible  moment  to  come,
**  I  do  what  I  can  and  wish  to  help  him  with  my  blood.
He  is  more  courageous  than  I.  I  should  have  sunk  long
ago,  had  I  been  obliged  to  stand  against  such  tempests.
The  Lord  God  will,  I  hope,  help  him  and  direct  his
understanding  for  the  good  of  all  Christendom,  and  for
his  own  honour.  If  he  can  steer  this  ship  into  a  safe

57  Wagenaar,  ix.  411,  412. Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  51,  52.

^  Aerssens  and  the  Advocate  were  next  door  neighbours  in  the  Spui  straat  at  the
Hague. De  venter,  iii.  271.

1608.  THE  ADVOCATE  RETURNS  TO  OFFICE.  467

harbour  we  ought  to  raise  a  golden  statue  of  him.  I
should  like  to  contribute  my  mite  to  it.  He  deserves
twice  as  much  honour,  despite  all  his  enemies,  of  whom
he  has  many  rather  from  envy  than  from  reason.  May
the  Lord  keep  him  in  health,  or  it  will  go  hardly  wdth
us  all."^^

Thus  spoke  some  of  his  grateful  countrymen  when  the
Advocate  was  contending  at  a  momentous  crisis  with
storms  threatening  to  overwhelm  the  republic.  Alas !
where  is  the  golden  statue  ?

He  believed  that  the  truce  was  the  most  advantageous
measure  that  the  country  could  adopt.  He  believed  this
with  quite  as  much  sincerity  as  Maurice  held  to  his  con-
viction that  war  was  the  only  policy.  In  the  secret  letter
of  the  French  ambassador  there  is  not  a  trace  of  sus-
picion as  to  his  fidelity  to  the  commonwealth,  not  the
shadow  of  proof  of  the  ridiculous  accusation  that  he
wished  to  reduce  the  provinces  to  the  dominion  of  Spain.
Jeannin,  who  had  no  motive  for  concealment  in  his
confidential  correspondence  with  his  sovereign,  always
rendered  unequivocal  homage  to  the  purity  and  patri-
otism of  the  Advocate  and  the  Prince.

He  returned  to  the  States-General  and  to  the  dis-
charge of  his  functions  as  Advocate-General  of  Holland.
His  policy  for  the  time  was  destined  to  be  triumphant,
his  influence  more  extensive  than  ever.  But  the  end
of  these  calumnies  and  anonymous  charges  was  not  yet.

Meantime  the  opposition  to  the  truce  was  confined  to
the  States  of  Zeeland  and  two  cities  of  Holland. Those
cities  were  very  important  ones,  Amsterdam  and  Delft,
but  they  were  already  wavering  in  their  opposition.
Zeeland  stoutly  maintained  that  the  treaty  of  Utrecht
forbade  a  decision  of  the  question  of  peace  and  war
except  by  a  unanimous  A^ote  of  the  whole  confederacy.
The  other  five  provinces  and  the  friends  of  the  truce
began  with  great  vehemence  to  declare  that  the  question
at  issue  was  now  changed.  It  was  no  longer  to  be
decided  whether  there  should  be  truce  or  war  with
Spain,  but  whether  a  single  member  of  the  confederacy
could  dictate  its  law  to  the  other  six  States.  Zeeland,
on  her  part,  talked  loudly  of  seceding  from  the  union,

®  Aerssens  to  Van  der  Veecken,  1  Nov.  1608. In  Devcnter,  iii.  272.
•0  Wagenaar,  ix.  414.

2  H  2

468

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

aiid  setting  up  for  an  independent,  sovereign,  common-
wealth.^^ She  would  hardly  have  heen  a  very  powerful
one,  with  her  half-dozen  cities,  one  prelate,  one  noble-
man, her  hundred  thousand  burghers  at  most,  bustling
and  warlike  as  they  were,  and  her  few  thousand  mariners,
although  the  most  terrible  fighting  men  that  had  ever
sailed  on  blue  water.  She  was  destined  ere  long  to
abandon  her  doughty  resolution  of  leaving  her  sister
provinces  to  their  fate.

Maurice  had  not  slackened  in  his  opposition  to  the
truce,  despite  the  renewed  vigour  with  which  Barneveld
pressed  the  measure  since  his  return  to  the  public  coun-
cils. The  prince  was  firmly  convinced  that  the  kings  of
France  and  England  would  assist  the  republic  in  the
war  with  Spain  so  soon  as  it  should  be  renewed.  His
policy  had  been  therefore  to  force  the  hand  of  those
sovereigns,  especially  that  of  Henry,  and  to  induce  him
to  send  more  stringent  instructions  to  Jeannin  than  those
with  which  he  believed  him  to  be  furnished.  He  had
accordingly  despatched  a  secret  emissary  to  the  French
king,  supplied  with  confidential  and  explicit  instructions.
This  agent  was  a  Captain  Lambert.  Whether  it  was
"  Pretty  Lambert,"  "  Dandy  Lambert  " — the  vice-admiral
who  had  so  much  distinguished  himself  at  the  great  vic-
tory of  Gibraltar — does  not  distinctly  appear.  If  it  were
so,  that  hard-hitting  mariner  would  seem  to  have  gone
into  action  with  the  French  Government  as  energetically
as  he  had  done  eighteen  months  before,  when,  as  master
of  the  Tiger,  he  laid  himself  aboard  the  Spanish  admiral
and  helped  send  the  St.  Augustine  to  the  bottom.  He
seemed  indisposed  to  mince  matters  in  diplomacy.  He
intimated  to  the  king  and  his  ministers  that  Jeannin
and  his  colleagues  were  pushing  the  truce  at  the  Hague
much  further  and  faster  than  his  Majesty  could  possibly
approve,  and  that  they  were  obviously  exceeding  their
instructions.  Jeannin,  who  was  formerly  so  much  hon-
oured and  cherished  throughout  the  republic,  was  now
looked  npon  askance  because  of  his  intimacy  with  Barne-
veld and  his  partisans.^^  He  assured  the  king  that
nearly  all  the  cities  of  Holland,  and  the  whole  of  Zee-
land,  were  entirely  agreed  with  Maurice,  who  would

61  Wagenaar,  ix.  416.  "Zo  ver  liep  de  twist  dat  de  Zeeuwen  spraaken  van  zich
te  willen  af  zonderen  van  de  overigen."  62  Jeannin,  i.  932.

1608.

LAMBERT'S  MISSION  TO  HENI:Y.

4G9

rather  die  than  consent  to  the  proposed  truce.^^  The
other  provinces,  added  Lambert,  would  be  obliged,  will
ye  nill  ye,  to  receive  the  law  from  Holland  and  Zeeland.
Maurice,  without  assistance  from  France  or  any  other
power,  would  give  Spain  and  the  archdukes  as  much
exercise  as  they  could  take  for  the  next  fifty  years  before
he  would  give  up,  and  had  declared  that  he  would  rather
die  sword  in  hand  than  basely  betray  his  countiy  by
consenting  to  such  a  truce. As  for  Barneveld,  he  was
already  discovering  the  blunders  which  he  had  made,
and  was  trying  to  curry  favour  with  Maurice.^^  Barne-
veld and  both  the  Aerssens  were  traitors  to  the  State,
had  become  the  objects  of  general  hatred  and  contempt,
and  were  in  great  danger  of  losing  their  lives,  or  at  least
of  being  expelled  from  office.^^

Here  was  altogether  too  much  zeal  on  the  part  of
Pretty  Lambert ;  a  quality  which,  not  for  the  first  time,
was  thus  proved  to  be  less  useful  in  diplomatic  confer-
ences than  in  a  sea-fight.  Maurice  was  obliged  to  disavow
his  envoy,  and  to  declare  that  his  secret  instructions  had
never  authorized  him  to  hold  such  language.  But  the
mischief  was  done.  The  combustion  in  the  French
cabinet  was  terrible.  The  Dutch  admiral  had  thrown
hot  shot  into  the  powder-magazine  of  his  friends,  and  had
done  no  more  good  by  such  tactics  than  might  be  sup-
posed. Such  diplomacy  was  denounced  as  a  mere  mix-
ture of  "indiscretion  and  impudence." Henry  was
very  wroth,  and  forthwith  indited  an  imperious  letter  to
his  cousin  Maurice.^®

Lambert's  talk  to  me  by  your  orders,"  said  the  king,

has  not  less  astonished  than  scandalized  me. 23  ot
I  now  learn  the  new  resolution  which  you  have
taken,  and  I  observe  that  you  have  begun  to  entertain
suspicions  as  to  my  will  and  my  counsels  on  account  of
the  proposition  of  truce."

^  Jeannin,  i.  932, 933,  and  ii.  49,  to  the  pretended  vaunt  of  Maurice,  that

64  Ibid. 65  Ibid.  he  could  carry  on  the  war  fifty  years  if

66  Ibid.  Compare  for  this  mission  ci  Fiance  would  only  remain  neutral,  the
Lambert,  Wagcnaar,  ix.  384,  385  ;  Van  president  said  that  he  had  been  expre>sly
der  Kemp,  iii.  57,  232.  informed  by  the  prince  that  wiihouu  the

67  Jeannin,  i.  932.  Every  one  of  these  as>istaiice  of  France  the  republic  was  lost
amazing  assertions  of  "  the  gentle  ambas-  for  ever.— Jeannin,  ii.  45-5 1.

•ador  Lambert"  were  denounced by ®  The  letter  is  given  in  Jeannin,  ii
Jeannin  in  his  letters  to  Villeroy  as  ini-  "58-6 1,
pudent  falsehoods. Especially  in  regard

470

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

Henry's  standing  orders  to  Jeannin,  as  we  know,  were
to  offer  Manrice  a  pension  of  almost  unlimited  amonnt,
together  with  ample  rewards  to  all  such  of  his  adherents
as  could  be  purchased,  provided  they  would  bring  about
the  incorporation  of  the  United  Provinces  into  France.^^
He  was  therefore  full  of  indignation  that  the  purity  of
his  intentions  and  the  sincerity  of  bis  wish  for  the  inde-
pendence of  the  republic  could  be  called  in  question.

People  have  dared  to  maliciously  invent,"  he  con-
tinued, "  that  I  am  the  enemy  of  the  repose  and  the
liberty  of  the  United  Provinces,  and  that  I  was  afraid
lest  they  should  acquire  the  freedom  which  had  been
offered  them  by  their  enemies,  because  I  derived  a  profit
from  their  war,  and  intended  in  time  to  deprive  them  of
their  liberty.  Yet  these  falsehoods  and  jealpusies  have
not  been  contradicted  by  you  nor  by  anyone  else,  although
you  know  that  the  proofs  of  my  sincerity  and  good  faith
have  been  entirely  without  reproach  or  example.  You
knew  what  was  said,  written,  and  published  everywhere,
and  I  confess  that  when  I  knew  this  malice,  and  that
you  had  not  taken  offence  at  it,  I  was  much  amazed  and
very  malcontent."

Queen  Elizabeth,  in  her  most  waspish  moods,  had  not
often  lectured  the  States-General  more  roundly  than
Henry  now  lectured  his  cousin  Maurice.

The  king  once  more  alluded  to  the  secret  emissary's
violent  talk,  which  had  so  much  excited  his  indignation.

"  If  by  weakness  and  want  of  means,"  he  said,  ''you
are  forced  to  abandon  to  your  enemies  one  portion  of
your  country  in  order  to  defend  the  other — as  Lambert
tells  me  you  are  resolved  to  do,  rather  than  agree  to  the
truce  without  recognition  of  your  .sovereignty  for  ever — I
pray  you  to  consider  how  many  accidents  and  reproaches
may  befal  you.  Do  you  suppose  that  any  ally  of  the
States,  or  of  your  family,  would  risk  his  reputation  and
his  realms  in  such  a  game,  which  would  seem  to  be
rather  begun  in  passion  and  despair  than  required  by
reason  or  necessity  ?  "

Here  certainly  was  plain  speaking  enough,  and  Maurice
conld  no  longer  expect  the  king  for  his  partner,  should
he  decide  to  risk  once  more  the  bloody  hazard  of  the
die.

«f  Jeannin.  i.  43,  62,  63,  69,  70,  71

1608.

HENRY'S  LETTER  TO  MAURICE.

471

But  Henry  was  determined  to  leave  no  shade  of  doubt
on  the  subject.

"  Lambert  tells  me,"  he  said,  "that  you  would  rather
perish  with  arms  in  your  hands  than  fall  shamefully  into
inevitable  ruin  by  accepting  truce.  I  have  been  and  am
of  a  contrary  opinion.  Perhaps  I  am  mistaken,  not
knowing  as  well  as  you  do  the  constitution  of  your
country  and  the  wishes  of  your  people.  But  I  know  the
general  affairs  of  Christendom  better  than  you  do,  and  I
can  therefore  judge  more  soundly  on  the  whole  matter
than  you  can,  and  I  know  that  the  truce,  established  and
guaranteed  as  proposed,  will  bring  you  more  happiness
than  you  can  derive  from  war."

Thus  the  king,  in  the  sweeping  slashing  way  with
which  he  could  handle  an  argument  as  well  as  a  sword,
strode  forward  in  conscious  strength,  cutting  down  right
and  left  all  opposition  to  his  will.  lie  was  determined,
once  for  all,  to  show  the  stadholder  and  his  adherents
that  the  friendship  of  a  great  king  was  not  to  be  had  by
a  little  republic  on  easy  terms,  nor  every  day.  Above  all,
the  Prince  of  Nassau  was  not  to  send  a  loud-talking,  free
and  easy  Dutch  sea-captain  to  dictate  terms  to  the  King
of  France  and  Navarre.  "  Lambert  tolls  me " — and
Maurice  might  well  wish  that  Pretty  Lambert  had  been
sunk  in  the  bay  of  Gibraltar,  Tiger  and  all,  before  he
had  been  sent  on  this  diplomatic  errand — "  Lambert  tells
me,"  continued  his  Majesty,  *•  that  you  and  the  States-
General  would  rather  that  I  should  remain  neutral,  and
let  you  make  war  in  your  own  fashion,  than  that  I  should
do  anything  more  to  push  on  this  truce.  My  cousin,  it
would  be  very  easy  for  me,  and  perhaps  more  advan-
tageous for  me  and  my  kingdom  than  you  think,  if  I
could  give  you  this  satisfaction,  whatever  might  be  the
result.  If  1  chose  to  follow  this  counsel,  I  am,  tlianks
be  to  God,  in  such  condition,  that  I  have  no  neighbour
who  is  not  as  much  in  need  of  me  as  1  can  be  of  him,  and
who  is  not  glad  to  seek  for  and  to  preserve  my  friendship.
If  they  should  all  conspire  against  me,  moreover,  I  can
by  myself,  and  with  no  assistance  but  heaven's,  which
never  failed  me  yet,  wrestle  with  them  altogether,  and
fling  them  all,  as  some  of  my  royal  predecessors  have
done.  Know  then,  that  I  do  not  favour  war  nor  truce  for
the  United  Provinces  because  of  any  need  I  may  have  of

472

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

one  or  tlie  other  for  tlie  defence  of  my  own  sceptre.  The
counsels  and  the  succours,  which  you  have  so  largely
received  from  me,  were  given  because  of  my  considera-
tion for  the  good  of  the  States,  and  of  yourself  in  par-
ticular, whom  I  have  always  favoured  and  cherished,  as
I  have  done  others  of  your  house  on  many  occasions."

The  king  concluded  his  lecture  by  saying,  that  after
his  ambassadors  had  fulfilled  their  promise,  and  had
spoken  the  last  word  of  their  master  at  the  Hague,  he
should  leave  Maurice  and  the  States  to  do  as  they  liked.

But  I  desire,"  he  said,  "  that  you  and  the  States
should  not  do  that  wrong  to  yourselves  or  to  me  as  to
doubt  the  integrity  of  my  counsels  nor  the  actions  of  my
ambassadors.  1  am  an  honest  man  and  a  prince  of  my
word,  and  not  ignorant  of  the  things  of  this  world.
Keither  the  States  nor  you,  with  your  adherents,  can
permit  my  honour  to  be  compromised  without  tarnishing
your  own,  and  without  being  branded  for  ingratitude.
I  say  not  this  in  order  to  reproach  you  for  the  past  nor
to  make  you  despair  of  the  future,  but  to  defend  the
truth.  I  expect,  therefore,  that  yon  will  not  fall  into
this  fault,  knowing  yon  as  I  do.  I  pay  more  heed  to
what  yon  said  in  your  letter  than  in  all  Lambert's  fine
talk,  and  you  will  find  out  that  nobody  wishes  your
prosperity  and  that  of  the  States  more  sincerely  than  I
do,  or  can  be  more  useful  to  you  than  I  can."'^^

There  conld  be  but  little  doubt  in  the  mind  of  Prince
Maurice,  after  this  letter  had  been  well  pondered,  that
Barneveld  had  won  the  game,  and  that  the  peace  party
had  triumphed.

To  resume  the  war,  with  the  French  king  not  merely
neutral  but  angry  and  covertly  hostile,  and  with  the
sovereign  of  Great  Britain  an  almost  open  enemy  in  the
garb  of  an  ally,  might  well  seem  a  desperate  course.

And  Maurice,  although  strongly  opposed  to  the  truce,
and  confident  in  his  opinions  at  this  crisis,  was  not  a
desperado.

He  saw  at  once  the  necessity  of  dismounting  from  the
high  horse  upon  which,  it  must  be  confessed,  he  had
been  inclined  for  more  rough-riding  of  late  than  the
situation  warranted. Peace  was  unattainable,  war  was

70  1  have  abbreviated  this  remarkable  letter,  but  of  course  the  text  of  the  passages
cited  is  literally  given.

1608. JEANNIN  BEFORE  THE  STATES-GENERAL.  473

impossible,  truce  was  inevitable  ;  Bameveld  was  master
of  the  field.

The  prince  acquiesced  in  the  result  which  the  letter
from  the  French  king  so  plainly  indicated.  He  was,
however,  more  incensed  than  ever  against  Bameveld  ;
for  he  felt  himself  not  only  checkmated  but  humiliated
by  the  Advocate,  and  believed  him  a  traitor,  who  was
selling  the  republic  to  Spain.  It  was  long  since  the
two  had  exchanged  a  word.

Maurice  now  declared,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  that
it  was  useless  for  him  any  longer  to  attempt  opposition
to  the  policy  of  truce.  The  States  must  travel  on  the
road  which  they  had  chosen,  but  it  should  not  be  under
his  guidance,  and  he  renounced  all  responsibility  for  the
issue.

Dreading  disunion,  however,  more  than  aught  else  that
could  befal  the  republic,  he  now  did  his  best  to  bring
about  the  return  of  Zeeland  to  the  federal  councils.  He
was  succcssful.'^^  The  deputies  from  that  province  reap-
peared in  the  States-General  on  the  11th  November.
They  were  still  earnest,  however,  in  their  opposition  to
the  truce,  and  warmly  maintained,  in  obedience  to  instruc-
tions, that  the  Union  of  Utrecht  forbade  the  conclusion
of  a  treaty  ex"(  pt  by  unanimous  consent  of  the  Seven
Provinces.  They  were  very  fierce  in  their  remonstrances,
and  again  talked  loudly  of  secession.  After  consultation
with  Barneveld,  the  French  envoys  now  thought  it  their
duty  to  take  the  recalcitrant  Zeelanders  in  hand  ;  Maurice
having,  as  it  were,  withdrawn  from  the  contest.

On  the  18th  November,  accordingly,  Jeannin  once
more  came  very  solemnly  before  the  States-
General,  accompanied  by  his  diplomatic  col-  ^
leagues.'^^

He  showed  the  impossibility  of  any  arrangement,
except  by  the  submission  of  Zeeland  to  a  vote  of  the
majority.  "  It  is  certain,"  he  said,  that  six  provinces
will  never  be  willing  to  be  conquered  by  a  single  one',
nor  permit  her  to  assei  t  that,  according  to  a  fundamental
law  of  the  commonwealth,  her  dissent  can  prevent  the
others  from  forming  a  definite  conclusion."

**  It  is  not  for  us,"  continued  the  president,  **  who  are

"1  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  58.  Jeannin.
in  full  in  his  "  Noj^otiutions." — Jcaniiin,  ii.

72  The  speech  of  the  president  is  given
106-112.

474

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LI.

strangers  in  your  republic,  to  interpret  your  laws,  but
common  sense  teaches  us  that,  if  such  a  law  exist,  it  could
only  have  been  made  in  order  to  forbid  a  surrender.

"  If  any  one  wishes  to  expound  it  otherwise,  to  him  we
would  reply,  in  the  words  of  an  ancient  Eoman,  who  said
of  a  law  which  seemed  to  him  pernicious,  that  at  least
the  tablet  upon  which  it  was  inscribed,  if  it  could  not  be
'destroyed,  should  be  hidden  out  of  sight.  Thus  at  least
the  citizens  might  escape  observing  it,  when  it  was  plain
that  it  would  cause  detriment  to  the  republic,  and  they
might  then  put  in  its  place  the  most  ancient  of  all  laws,
salus  populi  suprema  leoc"

The  president,  having  suggested  this  ingenious  expe-
dient of  the  antique  Eoman  for  getting  rid  of  a  constitu-
tional provision  by  hiding  the  statute-book,  proceeded  to
give  very  practical  reasons  for  setting  up  the  supreme
law  of  the  people's  safety  on  this  occasion.  And,  cer-
tainly, that  magnificent  common-place,  which  has  saved
and  ruined  so  many  States,  the  most  effective  weapon  in
the  political  arsenal,  whether  wielded  by  tyrants  or
champions  of  freedom,  was  not  unreasonably  recom-
mended at  this  crisis  to  the  States  in  their  contest  with
the  refractory  Zeelanders.  It  was  easy  to  talk  big,  but
after  all  it  would  be  difficult  for  that  doughty  little  sand-
bank, notwithstanding  the  indomitable  energy  which  it
had  so  often  shown  by  land  and  sea,  to  do  battle  by  itself
with  the  whole  Spanish  empire.  Nor  was  it  quite  con-
sistent with  republican  principles  that  the  other  six
provinces  should  be  plunged  once  more  into  war,  when
they  had  agreed  to  accept  peace  and  independence  in-
stead, only  that  Zeeland  should  have  its  way.

The  orator  went  on  to  show  the  absurdity  in  his
opinion,  of  permitting  one  province  to  continue  the  war,
when  all  seven  united  had  not  the  means  to  do  it  with-
out the  assistance  of  their  allies.  He  pointed  out,  too,
the  immense  blunders  that  would  be  made,  should  it  be
thought  that  the  Kings  of  France  and  England  were  so
much  interested  in  saving  the  provinces  from  perdition
as  to  feel  obliged  in  any  event  to  render  them  assistance.

"  Beware  of  committing  an  irreparable  fault,"  he  said,
*'  on  so  insecure  a  foundation.  You  are  deceiving  your-
selves. And,  in  order  that  there  may  be  no  doubt  on  the
subject,  we  declare  to  you  by  express  command  that  if

1608.

HARANGUE  OF  PRESIDENT  JEANNIN.

475

your  adversaries  refuse  the  truce,  according  to  the  articles
presented  to  you  by  us,  it  is  the  intention  of  our  kings  to
assist  you  with  armies  and  subsidies,  not  only  as  during
the  past,  but  more  powerfully  than  before.  If,  on  the
contrary,  the  rupture  comes  from  your  side,  and  you  de-
spise the  advice  they  are  giving  you,  you  have  no  succour
to  expect  from  them.  The  refusal  of  conditions  so  hon-
ourable and  advantageous  to  your  commonwealth  will
render  the  war  a  useless  one,  and  they  are  determined  to
do  nothing  to  bring  the  reproach  upon  themselves."

The  president  then  intimated,  not  without  adroitness,
that  the  republic  was  placing  herself  in  a  proud  position
by  accepting  the  truce,  and  that  Spain  was  abasing  her-
self by  giving  her  consent  to  it.  The  world  was  sur-
prised that  the  States  should  hesitate  at  all."^^

There  was  much  more  of  scholastic  dissertation  in  the
president's  address,  but  enough  has  been  given  to  show
its  very  peremptory  character.

If  the  war  was  to  go  on  it  was  to  be  waged  mainly  by
Zeeland  alone.  This  was  now  plain  beyond  all  perad-
venture.  The  other  provinces  had  resolved  to  accept
the  proposed  treaty.  The  cities  of  Delft  and  Amsterdam,
which  had  stood  out  so  long  among  the  estates  of  Hol-
land, soon  renounced  their  opposition.  Prince  Maurice,
with  praiseworthy  patriotism,  reconciled  himself  with
the  inevitable,  and  row  that  the  great  majority  had
spoken,  began  to  use  his  influence  with  the  factious
minority.

On  the  day  after  Jeannin's  speech  ho  made  a  visit  to
the  French  ambassadors.  After  there  had  been  some
little  discussion  among  them,  Barneveld  made  his  ap-
pearance. His  visit  seemed  an  accidental  one,  but  it
had  been  previously  arranged  with  the  envoys.'*

The  general  conversation  went  on  a  little  longer,
when  the  Advocate,  frankly  turning  to  the  Prince,
spoke  of  the  pain  which  he  felt  at  the  schism  between
them.  He  defended  himself  with  honest  warmth  against
the  rumours  circulated,  in  which  he  was  accused  of  be-
ing a  Spanish  partisan.  His  whole  life  had  been  spent
in  fighting  Spain,  and  he  was  now  more  determined
than  ever  in  his  hostility  to  that  monarchy.  He  sin-
cerely believed  that  by  the  truce  now  proposed  all  the

w  Jcannin,  uH  sup. Vow  der  Kemp,  ili.  59,  60.  Compare  Wagenaar,  ix.  422,  423.

475*

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

(JHAP.  LI.

solid  advantages  of  the  war  would  be  secured,  and  that
euch  a  result  was  a  triumphant  one  for  the  republic.
He  was  also  most  desirous  of  being  restored  to  the
friendship  and  good  opinion  of  the  house  of  Nassau;
having  proved  during  his  whole  life  his  sincere  attach-
ment to  their  interests — a  sentiment  never  more  lively
in  his  breast  than  at  that  moment/^

This  advance  was  graciously  met  by  the  stadholder,
and  the  two  distinguished  personages  were,  for  the  time
at  least,  reconciledJ^

It  was  further  debated  as  to  the  number  of  troops
that  it  would  be  advisable  for  the  States  to  maintain
during  the  truce,  and  Barneveld  expressed  his  decided
opinion  that  thirty  thousand  men,  at  least,  would  be  re-
quired. This  opinion  gave  the  prince  at  least  as  much
pleasure  as  did  the  personal  devotion  expressed  by  the
Advocate,  and  he  now  stated  his  intention  of  working
with  the  peace  party.

The  great  result  was  now  certain.  Delft  and  Amster-
dam withdrew  from  their  opposition  to  the  treaty,  so
that  Holland  was  unanimous  before  the  year  closed;
Zeeland,  yielding  to  the  influence  of  Maurice,  likewise
gave  in  her  adhesion  to  the  truce.

The  details  of  the  mode  in  which  the  final  arrange-
ment was  made  are  not  especially  interesting.  The
discussion  was  fairly  at  an  end.  The  subject  had  been
picked  to  the  bones.  It  was  agreed  that  the  French
ambassadors  should  go  over  the  frontier,  and  hold  a  pre-
liminary interview  with  the  Spanish  commissioners  at
Antwerp.

The  armistice  was  to  be  continued  by  brief  and  re-
peated renewals,  until  it  should  be  superseded  by  the
truce  of  3^ears.

Meantime,  Archduke  Albert  sent  his  father  confessor,
Inigo  Brizuela,  to  Spain  in  order  to  make  the  treaty
proposed  by  Jeannin  palatable  to  the  king.'^^

The  priest  was  to  set  forth  to  Philip,  as  only  a  ghostly
confessor  could  do  with  full  effect,  that  he  need  not
trouble  himself  about  the  recognition  by  the  proposed
treaty  of  the  independence  of  the  United  Provinces.
Ambiguous  words  had  been  purposely  made  use  of  in

75  Van  der  Kemp. Wagenaar,  ubi  sup.  76  ibid.

77  AVugenaar,  ix.  425,  426.  Jeannin.

1608.

CLOSE  OF  THE  DISCUSSION.

477

this  regard,  he  was  to  -explain,  so  that  not  only  the
foreign  ambassadors  were  of  opinion  that  the  rights  of
Spain  were  not  curtailed,  but  the  emptiness  of  the  ima-
ginary recognition  of  Dutch  freedom  had  been  proved
by  the  sharp  criticism  of  the  States.

It  is  true  that  Eichardot,  in  the  name  of  the  archduke,
had  three  months  before  promised  the  consent  of  the
king,  as  having  already  been  obtained.  But  Eichardot
knew  very  well  when  he  made  the  statement  that  it  was
false.  The  archduke,  in  subsequent  correspondence
with  the  ambassadors  in  December,  repeated  the  pledge.
Yet,  not  only  had  the  king  not  given  that  consent,  but
he  had  expressly  refused  it  by  a  courier  sent  in  Novem-
ber.^«

Philip,  now  convinced  by  Brother  Inigo  that  while
agreeing  to  treat  with  the  States-General  as  with  a  free
commonwealth,  over  which  he  pretended  to  no  autho-
rity, he  really  meant  that  he  was  dealing  with  vassals
over  whom  his  authority  was  to  be  resumed  when  it
suited  his  convenience,  at  last  gave  his  consent  to  the
proposed  treaty.  The  royal  decision  was,  however,  kept
for  a  time  concealed,  in  order  that  the  States  might
become  more  malleable.'^^

Pocuments  in  Devonter,  iii.  273.  des  dix  ans  reservcr  au  roy  de  nous  d&.

'9  AVagcnaar,  ix.  4*25,  426. Jeannin.  clarer  libres  ou  non  selon  que  le  Hoy

Tho  reasoning  w  as  quite  in  accordance  d'Espagne  luy  tiendra  parole  sur  les  raa-

with  the  views  of  the  French  court,  riages." — Deventer,  iii.  275. *'  If  a  peace

"  Muinlenant  la  caption  est  tout  cluire,"  it  prove,"  wrote  Coniwallis  from  Madrid,

wrote  Aerssens,  "en  ce  qu'ils  refusent  "such  are  the  diflRcultics  as  for  mine  own

d'oter  le  mot  comme. Et  ajoutent  nos  part  I  should  think  it  like  the  peace  of

amis,  que  cette  clause  a  este  con9ue  ainsi  God  whicl  passeth  all  understanding."—

douteusement  par  M.  Janin,  pour  au  bout  Winwood,  ii.  387.

478

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LIl,

CHAPTER  LII.

Vote  of  the  States-General  on  the  groundwork  of  the  treaty  —  Meeting  of  the  pleni-
potentiaries for  arrangement  of  the  truce  —  Signing  of  the  twelve  years'  truce  —
Its  purport  —  The  negotiations  concluded  —  Ratification  by  the  States-General,  the
Archdukes,  and  the  King  of  Spain  —  Question  of  toleration  —  Appeal  of  President
Jeannin  on  behalf  of  the  Catholics  —  Religious  liberty  the  fruit  of  the  war  —
Internal  arrangements  of  the  States  under  the  rule  of  peace  —  Deaths  of  John
Duke  of  Cleves  and  Jacob  Arminius  —  Doctrines  of  Arminius  and  Gomarus  —
Theological  warfare  —  Twenty  years'  truce  between  the  Turkish  and  Roman
empires  —  Ferdinand  of  Styria —  Religious  peace —  Prospects  of  the  future.

On  the  11th  January,  1609,  the  States-General  decided
by  unanimous  vote  that  the  first  point  in  the  treaty
should  be  not  otherwise  fixed  than  thus  : —

"  That  the  archdukes — to  superfluity — declare,  as  well
in  their  own  name  as  in  that  of  the  King  of  Spain,  their
willingness  to  treat  with  the  lords  States  of  the  United
Provinces  in  the  capacity  of,  and  as  holding  them  for,
free  countries,  provinces,  and  states,  over  which  they
have  no  claim,  and  that  they  are  making  a  treaty  with
them  in  those  said  names  and  qualities."^

It  was  also  resolved  not  to  permit  that  any  ecclesi-
astical or  secular  matters,  conflicting  with  the  above-
mentioned  freedom,  should  be  proposed;  nor  that  any
delay  should  be  sought  for,  by  reason  of  the  India  navi-
gation or  any  other  point.

In  case  anything  to  the  contrary  should  be  attempted
by  the  king  or  the  archdukes,  and  the  deliberations  pro-
tracted in  consequence  more  than  eight  days,  it  was
further  decided  by  unanimous  vote  that  the  negotia-
tions should  at  once  be  broken  off,  and  the  war  forth-
with renewed,  with  the  help,  if  possible,  of  the  kings,
princes,  and  states,  friends  of  the  good  cause.^

This  vigorous  vote  was  entirely  the  work  of  Barne-
veld,  the  man  whom  his  enemies  dared  to  denounce  as
the  partisan  of  Spain,  and  to  hold  up  as  a  traitor  deserv-
ing of  death.  It  was  entirely  within  his  knowledge  that
a  considerable  party  in  the  provinces  had  grown  so  weary

1  Wagenaar,  ix.  429,  430.

2  Ibid.

1609.

VOTE  OF  THE  STATES-GENERAL.

479

of  the  war,  and  so  much  alarmed  at  the  prosj»ect  of  the
negotiations  for  truce  coming  to  nought,  as  to  be  ready
to  go  into  a  treaty  without  a  recognition  of  the  indepen-
dence of  the  States.  This  base  faction  was  thought  to
be  instigated  by  the  English  Government,  intriguing
secretly  with  President  Kichardot.  The  Advocate,  act-
ing in  full  sympathy  with  Jeannin,  frustrated  the  effects
of  the  manoeuvre  by  obtaining  all  the  votes  of  Holland
and  Zeeland  for  this  supreme  resolution.  The  other
five  provinces  dared  to  make  no  further  effort  in  that
direction  against  the  two  controlling  states  of  the  re-
public.

It  was  now  agreed  that  the  French  and  English  am-
bassadors should  delay  going  to  Antwerp  until  informed
of  the  arrival  in  that  city  of  Spinola  and  his  colleagues ;
and  that  they  should  then  proceed  thither,  taking  with
them  the  main  points  of  the  treaty,  as  laid  down  by
themselves,  and  accepted  with  slight  alterations  by  the
States.^

When  the  Spanish  commissioners  had  signed  these
points  the  plenipotentiaries  were  to  come  to  Antwei-p  in
order  to  settle  other  matters  of  less  vital  import.  Mean-
time, the  States-General  were  to  bo  summoned  to  as-
semble in  Bergen-op-Zoom,  that  they  might  be  ready  to
deal  with  difficulties,  should  any  arise.*

The  first  meeting  took  place  on  the  10th  February,
1609.  The  first  objection  to  the  draught  was
made  by  the  Spaniards.  It  was  about  words  ^
and  wind.  They  liked  not  the  title  of  high  and  puissant
lords  ^  which  was  given  to  the  States-General,  and  they
proposed  to  turn  the  difficulty  by  abstaining  from  giving
any  qualifications  whatever,  either  to  the  archdukes  or
the  republican  authorities.  The  States  refused  to  lower
these  ensigns  of  their  new-born  power.  It  was,  how-
ever, at  last  agreed  that,  instead  of  high  and  mighty,
they  should  be  called  illustrious  and  serene.^

This  point  being  comfortably  adjusted,  the  next  and
most  impoi'tant  one  was  accepted  by  the  Spaniards.
The  independence  of  the  States  was  recognised  accord-
ing to  the  prescribed  form. Then  came  the  great  bono

8  Wagenaar,  ix.  431. Jeannin.  *  Ibid. Jeannin. Groti  is,  x\'iii.

*  Wagenaar,  ix.  432. "  Hoogmogende  herren," Hauls  et  puissaiits  seigneurs."
«  Wagenaar,  ix.  432.

480

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LII.

of  contention,  over  which  there  had  been  such  persistent
wrangling — the  India  trade.

The  Spanish  Government  had  almost  registered  a  vow
in  heaven  that  the  word  India  should  not  be  mentioned
in  the  treaty.  It  was  no  less  certain  that  India  was
stamped  upon  the  very  heart  of  the  republic,  and  could
not  be  torn  from  it  while  life  remained.  The  subtle
diplomatists  now  invented  a  phrase  in  which  the  word
should  not  appear,  while  the  thing  itself  should  be
granted.  The  Spaniards,  after  much  altercation,  at  last
consented.'''

By  the  end  of  February,  most  of  the  plenipotentiaries
thought  it  safe  to  request  the  appearance  of  the  States-
General  at  Bergen-op-Zoom.^

Jeannin,  not  altogether  satisfied,  however,  with  the
language  of  the  Spaniards  in  regard  to  India,  raised
doubts  as  to  the  propriety  of  issuing  the  summons.
Putting  on  his  most  reverend  and  artless  expression
of  countenance,  he  assured  Kichardot  that  he  had  just
received  a  despatch  from  the  Hague,  to  the  eifect  that
the  India  point  would,  in  all  probability,  cause  the
States  at  that  very  moment  to  break  off  the  negotia-
tions.^ It  was  surely  premature,  therefore,  to  invite
them  to  Bergen.  The  despatch  from  the  Hague  was  a
neat  fiction  on  the  part  of  the  president,  but  it  worked
admirably.  The  other  president,  himself  quite  as  ready
at  inventions  as  Jeannin  could  possibly  be,  was  never-
theless taken  in;  the  two  ex-leaguers  being,  on  the
whole,  fully  a  match  for  each  other  in  the  art  of  in-
trigue. Kichardot,  somewhat  alarmed,  insisted  that  the
States  should  send  their  plenipotentiaries  to  Antwerp  as
soon  as  possible.  He  would  answer  for  it  that  they  would
not  go  away  again  without  settling  upon  the  treaty.^^
The  commissioners  were  forbidden,  by  express  order  from
Spain,  to  name  the  Indies  in  writing,  but  they  would
solemnly  declare,  by  word  of  mouth,  that  the  States
should  have  full  liberty  to  trade  to  those  countries;
the  King  of  Spain  having  no  intention  of  interfering
with  such  traffic  during  the  period  of  the  truce.^^

7  "  Huic  addilamento  Hispanici  valde  ^  Wagenaar,  ix.  432, 433,  434.  Jeannin,

reluctabantur  turn quod Indiam  non  vol.  ii. Resol.  HoU.  4  March,  1609.

miims  quam  si  nominaretur  Claris  indiciis  ^  Jeanriin,  ii.  383. w  Ibid,

exprimeret,"  &c, — Grotius,  xviii.  808, 809.  n  Winwood,  ii.  489.

ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  TKL'CE.  481

The  commissioners  came  to  Antwerp.  The  States-
General  assembled  at  Bergen.  On  the  9th  April,  1609,
the  truce  for  twelve  years  was  signed.  This  was  its
purport : —

The  preamble  recited  that  the  most  serene  princes
and  archdukes,  Albert  and  Isabella  Clara  Eugenia,  had
made,  on  the  24th  April,  1607,  a  truce  and  cessation  of
aims  for  eight  months  with  the  illustrious  lords  the
States-General  of  the  United  Provinces  of  the  Nether-
lands, in  quality  of,  and  as  holding  them  for,  states,  pro-
vinces, and  free  countries,  over  which  they  pretended  to
nothing ;  which  truce  was  ratified  by  his  Catholic  Ma-
jesty, as  to  that  which  concerned  him,  by  letters  patent
of  18th  September,  1607 ;  and  that,  moreover,  a  special
power  had  been  given  to  the  archdukes  on  the  10th
January,  1608,  to  enable  them  in  the  king's  name  as
well  as  their  own  to  do  everything  that  they  might
think  proper  to  bring  about  a  peace  or  a  truce  of  many
years.

It  then  briefly  recited  the  rupture  of  the  negotiations
for  peace,  and  the  subsequent  proposition,  originated  by
the  foreign  ambassadors,  to  renew  the  conference  for  the
purpose  of  concluding  a  truce.  The  articles  of  the  treaty
thus  agreed  upon  were  : —

That  the  archdukes  declared,  as  well  in  their  own
name  as  that  of  the  king,  that  they  were  content  to  treat
with  the  lords  the  States-(jleneral  of  the  United  Pro-
vinces in  quality  of,  and  as  holding  them  for,  countries,
provinces,  and  free  states,  over  which  they  pretended
to  nothing,  and  to  make  with  them  a  truce  on  certain
following  conditions — to  wit : —

That  the  truce  should  be  good,  firm,  loyal,  inviolable,
and  for  the  term  of  twelve  years,  during  which  time
there  was  to  be  cessation  of  all  acts  of  hostility  between
the  king,  archdukes,  and  States-General,  as  well  by  sea
and  other  waters  as  by  land,  in  all  their  kingdoms,  coun-
tries, lands,  and  lordships,  and  for  all  their  subjects  and
inhabitants  of  whatever  quality  and  condition,  without
exception  of  places  or  of  persons ;

That  each  party  should  remain  seized  of  their  respec-
tive possessions,  and  be  not  troubled  therein  by  the
other  party  during  the  truce  ;

That  the  subjects  and  inhabitants  of  the  respective

VOL.  IV.  2  I

482

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LII.

countries  should  preserve  amity  and  good  correspon-
dence during  the  truce,  without  referring  to  past  of-
fences, and  should  freely  and  secure^  entertain  communi-
cation and  traffic  with  each  other  by  land  and  sea.  This
provision,  however,  was  to  be  expressly  understood  as
limited  by  the  king  to  the  kingdoms  and  countries
possessed  by  him  in  Europe,  and  in  other  places  and
seas  where  the  subjects  of  other  kings  and  princes,  his
friends  and  allies,  have  amicable  traffic.  In  regard,
however,  to  places,  cities,  ports,  and  harbours  which  he
possessed  outside  of  those  limits,  the  States  and  their
subjects  were  to  exercise  no  traffic,  without  express  per-
mission of  the  king.  They  could,  however,  if  they
chose,  trade  with  the  countries  of  all  other  princes,
potentates,  and  peoples  who  were  willing  to  permit  it,
even  outside  those  limits,  without  any  hindrance  by  the
king;

That  the  truce  should  begin  in  regard  to  those  distant
countries  after  a  year  from  date,  unless  actual  notification
could  be  sooner  served  there  on  those  concerned ;

That  the  subjects  of  the  United  Provinces  should
have  the  same  liberty  and  privilege  within  the  States
of  the  king  and  archdukes  as  had  been  accorded  to  the
subjects  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  according  to
the  last  treaty  made  with  that  sovereign ;

That  letters  of  marque  and  reprisal  should  not  be
granted  during  the  truce,  except  for  special  cause,  and
in  cases  permitted  by  the  laws  and  imperial  constitu-
tions, and  according  to  the  rules  therein  prescribed  ;

That  those  who  had  retired  into  neutral  territory
during  the  war  were  also  to  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the
truce,  and  could  reside  wherever  they  liked  without
being  deprived  of  their  property ;

That  the  treaty  should  be  ratified  by  the  archdukes
and  the  States-General  within  four  days.  As  to  the
ratification  of  the  king,  the  archdukes  were  bound  to
deliver  it  in  good  and  due  form  within  three  months,
in  order  that  the  lords  the  States-General,  their  subjects
and  inhabitants,  might  enjoy  effectively  the  fruits  of  the
treaty ;

That  the  treaty  should  be  published  everywhere
immediately  after  the  ratification  of  the  archdukes  and
States-General.

1609.

ARTICLES  OF  THE  TREATY.

483

This  document  was  signed  by  the  ambassadors  of  the
Kings  of  France  and  Great  Britain,  as  mediators,  and
then  by  the  deputies  of  the  archdukes,  and  afterwards
by  those  of  the  lords  the  States-General.^^

There  were  thirty-eight  articles  in  all,  but  the  chief
provisions  have  been  indicated.  The  other  clauses,
relating  to  boundaries,  confiscations,  regulations  of
duties,  frontier  fortifications,  the  estates  of  the  Nassau
family,  and  other  sequestrated  property,  have  no  abiding
interest.

There  was  also  a  secret  and  special  treaty  which  was
demanded  of  the  King  of  Spain  by  the  States-General,
and  by  him  accorded.

This  secret  treaty  consisted  of  a  single  clause.  That
clause  was  made  up  of  a  brief  preamble  and  of  a  promise.
The  preamble  recited  textually  article  fourth  of  the
public  treaty  relative  to  the  India  trade,  'i'he  promise
was  to  this  efi*ect.^^  For  the  period  of  the  truce  the
Spanish  commissioners  pledged  the  faith  of  the  king
and  of  his  successors  that  his  Majesty  would  cause  no
impediment,  whether  by  sea  or  land,  to  the  States  nor
their  subjects,  in  the  traffic  that  thereafter  might  be
made  in  the  countries  of  all  princes,  potentates,  and
peoples  who  might  permit  the  same,  in  whatever  place
it  might  be,  even  without  the  limits  designated,  and
everywhere  else,  nor  similarly  to  those  carrying  on
such  traffic  with  them,  and  that  the  king  and  his  succes-
sors would  faithfully  carry  into  effect  everything  thus
laid  down,  so  that  the  said  traffic  t^hould  be  free  and
secure,  consenting  even,  in  order  that  the  clause  might
be  the  more  authentic,  that  it  should  be  considered  as
inserted  in  the  principal  treaty,  and  as  making  part
thereof.^*

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  first  article  of  all,  and
the  last  or  secret  article,  contained  the  whole  marrow  of
the  treaty.  It  may  be  well  understood,  therefore,  with
what  wry  faces  the  Spanish  plenipotentiaries  ultimately
signed  the  document.

After  two  3'ears  and  a  quarter  of  dreary  negotiation,
the  republic  had  carried  all  its  points,  without  swerving
a  hair's  breadth  from  the  principles  laid  down  in  the

i»  See  the  treaty  in  full  in  Jeaniiin,  ii.  446-457. Compare  Metoren,  613.
1*  The  text  of  the  secret  treaty  is  gi  /en  in  Jtanuin,  ii.  457,  458. i*  Ibid.

2  I  2

484

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LII.

beginning.  Tlie  only  concession  made  was  that  tlie  treaty
was  for  a  truce  of  twelve  years,  and  not  for  peace.  But
as  after  all,  in  those  days,  an  interval  of  twelve  years
might  be  almost  considered  an  eternity  of  peace,  and  as
calling  a  peace  perpetual  can  never  make  it  so,  the
difference  was  rather  one  of  phraseology  than  of  fact.

On  the  other  hand  the  States  had  extorted  from  their
former  sovereign  a  recognition  of  their  independence.

They  had  secured  the  India  trade.

They  had  not  conceded  Catholic  worship.

Mankind  were  amazed  at  this  result — an  event  hitherto
unknown  in  history.  When  before  had  a  sovereign
acknowledged  the  independence  of  his  rebellious  sub-
jects, and  signed  a  treaty  with  them  as  with  equals?
When  before  had  Spain,  expressly  or  by  implication,
admitted  that  the  East  and  West  Indies  were  not  her
private  property,  and  that  navigators  to  those  regions
from  other  countries  than  her  own,  were  not  to  be
chastised  as  trespassers  and  freebooters  ?

Yet  the  liberty  of  the  Netherlands  was  acknowledged
in  terms  which  convinced  the  world  that  it  was  thence-
forth an  established  fact.  And  India  was  as  plainly
expressed  by  the  omission  of  the  word,  as  if  it  had  been
engrossed  in  large  capitals  in  Article  IV.^^

The  King's  Government  might  seek  solace  in  syntax.
They  might  triumph  in  Cardinal  Bentivoglio's  subtle-
ties, and  persuade  themselves  that  to  treat  with  the
republic  as  a  free  nation  was  not  to  hold  it  for  a  free
nation  then  and  for  ever.  But  the  whole  world  knew
that  the  republic  really  was  free,  and  that  it  had  treated,
face  to  face  with  its  former  sovereign,  exactly  as  the
Kings  of  France  or  Great  Britain,  or  the  Grand  Turk,
might  treat  with  him.  The  new  commonwealth  had
taken  its  place  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Other
princes  and  potentates  made  not  the  slightest  difficulty
in  recognising  it  for  an  independent  power,  and  entering

* 5  The  words  tx)o  of  the  certificate  sign pd  deputes  des  dits  sieurs  ont  declare  plu-
t>y  the  ambassadorg  of  Fraace  and  Eog-  sieurs  fois  en  notre  presence  et  des  de-
land  Tvere  very  explicit : — '*  Certifions  putes  des  archiducs,  si  on  entreprend  sur
aussi  les  deputes  des  archiducs  avoir  con-  leurs  amis  et  allies  es  dits  pays  qu'ils
senty  et  accorde  tout,  ainsi  que  les  sieurs  entendent  les  secourir  et  assister  sans
estats  et  leurs  sujets  ne  pourront  trafiquer  qu'on  puisse  pr^tendre  la  trefve  estre
aux  ports,  lieux  et  places  que  tiennent  les  "enfreinte  et  violee  a  cette  occasion." —
dits  sieurs  estats  es  dites  Indes  si  ce  n'est  Anvers,  9  Avril,  16C9.  Negotiations  de
avec  leur  permission.  Et  outre  ce  que  les  Jeannin,  ii.  458,  459.

1609.

RECOGNITION  OF  DUTCH  FREEDOM.

485

into  treaties  and  alliances  with  it  as  with  any  other
realm.

To  the  republic  the  substantial  blessing  of  liberty :  to
his  Catholic  Majesty  the  grammatical  quirk.  When  the
twelve  years  should  expire,  Spain  might  reconquer
the  United  Provinces  if  she  could;  relying  upon  the
great  truth  that  an  adverb  was  not  a  preposition.  And
France  or  Great  Britain  might  attempt  the  same  thing
if  either  felt  strong  enough  for  the  purpose.  Did  as
plausible  a  pretext  as  that  ever  fail  to  a  state  ambitious
of  absorbing  its  neighbours  ?

Jeannin  was  right  enough  in  nrging  that  thih  famous
clause  of  recognition  ought  to  satisfy  both  parties.  If
the  United  Provinces,  he  said,  happened  not  to  have  the
best  muskets  and  cannons  on  their  side,  when  it  should
once  more  come  to  blows,  small  help  would  they  derive
from  verbal  bulwarks  and  advantages  in  the  text  of
treat  ies.^*^

Kichardot  consoled  himself  with  his  quibbles;  for
quibbles  were  his  daily  bread.  Thank  God  our  truce
is  made,"  said  he,  *'  and  we  have  only  lost  the  sovereignty
for  twelve  years,  if  after  that  we  have  the  means  or  the
will  to  resume  the  wai' — whatever  Don  Pedro  do  Toledo
may  say."  ^'^

Barneveld,  on  his  part,  was  devoutly  and  soberly
pleased  with  the  result.  "To-day  we  have  concluded
our  negotiations  for  the  truce,"  he  wrote  to  Aerssens.

We  must  pray  to  the  Lord  God,  and  we  must  do  our
highest  duty  that  our  work  may  redound  to  His  honour
and  glory,  and  to  the  nation's  welfare.  It  is  certain
that  men  will  make  their  criticisms  upon  it  according  to
their  humours.  But  those  who  love  their  country,  and
all  honest  people  who  know  the  condition  of  the  land,
will  say  that  it  is  well  done."

Thus  modestly,  religiously,  and  sincerely  spoke  a
statesman,  who  felt  that  he  had  accomplished  a  great
work,  and  that  he  had  indeed  brought  the  common-
wealth through  the  tempest  at  last.

The  republic  had  secured  the  India  trade.  On  this
point  the  negotiators  had  taken  refuge  in  that  most
useful  figure  of  speech  for  hard-pressed  diplomatists  and
law-makers — the  ellipsis. They  had  left  out  the  word

"  Bentivoglio,  576.  i"  Deventor,  iii.  308.  is  ibid.  309.

486

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LIL

India,  and  his  Catholic  Majesty  might  persuade  himself
that  by  such  omission  a  hemisphere  had  actually  been
taken  away  from  the  Dutch  merchants  and  navigators.
But  the  whole  world  saw  that  Article  IV.  really  con-
tained both  the  East  and  West  Indies.  It  hardly
needed  the  secret  clause  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure.

President  Eichardot  was  facetiously  wont  to  observe
that  this  point  in  the  treaty  was  so  obscure  that  he  did
not  understand  it  himself.^^  But  he  knew  better.  He
understood  it  very  well.  The  world  understood  it  very
well.  The  United  Provinces  had  throughout  the  nego-
tiations ridiculed  the  idea  of  being  excluded  from  any
part  of  the  old  world  or  the  new  by  reason  of  the
Borgian  grant.  All  the  commissioners  knew  that  the
war  would  be  renewed  if  any  attempt  were  to  be
seriously  made  to  put  up  those  famous  railings  around
the  ocean,  of  which  the  Dutch  diplomatists  spoke  in
such  bitter  scorn.  The  Spanish  plenipotentiaries,  there-
fore, had  insisted  that  the  word  itself  should  be  left  out,
and  that  the  republic  should  be  forbidden  access  to  terri-
tories subject  to  the  crown  of  Spain.

So  the  Hollanders  were  thenceforth  to  deal  directly
with  the  kings  of  Sumatra  and  the  Moluccas,  and  the
republics  of  Banda,  and  all  the  rich  commonwealths  and
principalities  of  nutmegs,  cloves,  and  indigo,  unless,  as
grew  every  day  more  improbable,  the  Spaniards  and
Portuguese  could  exclude  them  from  that  traffic  by  main
force.  And  the  Orange  flag  of  the  republic  was  to  float
with  equal  facility  over  all  America,  from  the  Isle  of
Manhattan  to  the  shores  of  Brazil  and  the  Straits  of
Magellan,  provided  Philip  had  not  ships  and  soldiers  to
vindicate  with  the  sword  that  sovereignty  which  Spanish
swords  and  Spanish  genius  had  once  acquired.

As  for  the  Catholic  worship,  the  future  was  to  prove
that  liberty  for  the  old  religion  and  for  all  forms  of
religion  was  a  blessing  more  surely  to  flow  from  the
enlightened  public  sentiment  of  a  free  people  emerging
out  of  the  most  tremendous  war  for  liberty  ever  waged,
than  from  the  stipulations  of  a  treaty  with  a  foreign
power.

It  was  characteristic  enough  of  the  parties  engaged  in
the  great  political  drama  that  the  republic  now  re-

19  Benti  /oglio,  576.

1609.

RATIFICATION  OF  THE  TREATS.

487

quested  from  France  and  Great  Britain  a  written  recog-
nition of  its  independence,  and  that  both  France  and
England  refused.^^

It  was  strange  that  the  new  commonwealth,  in  the
very  moment  of  extorting  her  freedom  from  the  ancient
tyranny,  should  be  so  unconscious  of  her  strength  as  to
think  free  papers  from  neutral  powers  a  boon.  As  if
the  sign-manual  of  James  and  Henry  were  a  better
guarantee  than  the  trophies  of  the  Nassaus,  of  Heems-
kerk,  of  Matelieff,  and  of  Olden-Barneveld  I

It  was  not  strange  that  the  two  sovereigns  should
decline  the  proposition ;  for  we  well  know  the  secret
aspirations  of  each,  and  it  was  natural  that  they  should
be  unwilling  to  sign  a  formal  quit-claim,  however  im-
probable it  might  be  that  those  dreams  should  ever
become  a  reality.

Both  powers,  however,  united  in  a  guarantee  of  the
truce.  This  was  signed  on  the  17th  June,  and  n  june,
stipulated  that,  without  their  knowledge  and  i609.
consent,  the  States  should  make  no  treaty  during  the
period  of  truce  with  the  King  of  Spain  or  the  arch-
dukes. On  the  other  hand,  in  case  of  an  infraction  of
the  truce  by  the  enemy,  the  two  kings  agreed  to  lend
assistance  to  the  States  in  the  manner  provided  by
the  treaties  concluded  with  the  republic  previously  to
the  negotiation  of  the  truce.'^^

The  treaty  had  been  at  once  ratified  by  the  States-
General,  assembled  for  the  purpose  with  an  extraor-
dinary number  of  deputies  at  Bergen-op-Zoom.  It  was
also  ratified  without  delay  by  tlie  archdukes.  The
delivery  of  the  confirmation  by  his  Catholic  Majesty
had  been  promised  within  three  months  after  the  signa-
tures of  the  plenipotentiaries.

It  would  however  have  been  altogether  inconsistent
with  the  dignity  and  the  traditions  of  the  Spanish  court
to  fulfil  this  stipulation. It  was  not  to  be  expected  that

I  the  King'*  could  be  written  either  by  the  monarch
himself,  or  by  his  alter  ego  the  Duke  of  Lerma,  in  so  short
a  time  as  a  quarter  of  a  year.

Several  weeks  accordingly  went  by  after  the  expiration
of  the  stated  period. The  ratification  did  not  come.

20  WaRPiiiuir,  ix.  -145. Jeannin,  voL  ii.

*i  Jeuniiin,  ii.  536,  538. Wagenaa?  ix.  446.

488

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LII.

and  the  Netherlanders  began  to  be  once  more  indignant.
Before  the  storm  had  risen  very  high,  however,  the  des-
patches arrived.  The  king's  signature  was  ante-dated
7th  April,  being  thus  brought  within  the  term  of  three
months,  and  was  a  thorough  confirmation  of  what  had
been  done  by  his  plenipotentiaries.  His  Majesty,  how-
ever, expressed  a  hope  that  during  the  truce  the  States
would  treat  their  Catholic  subjects  with  kindness.^^

Certainl}^  no  exception  could  be  taken  to  so  reasonable
an  intimation  as  this.  President  Jeannin  too,  just  before
his  departure,  handed  in  to  the  States-General  an  eloquent
appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Catholics  of  the  Netherlands  ;
a  paper  which  was  not  immediately  made  public.^^

"  Consider  the  great  number  of  Catholics,"  he  said,

in  your  territory,  both  in  the  cities  and  the  country.
Eemember  that  they  have  worked  with  you,  spent  their
property,  have  been  exposed  to  the  same  dangers,  and
have  always  kept  their  fidelity  to  the  commonwealth
inviolate  as  long  as  the  war  endured,  never  complaining
that  they  did  not  enjoy  liberty  of  religious  worship,
believing  that  you  had  thus  ordained  because  the  public
safety  required  such  guaranty.  Bui  they  always  pro-
mised themselves,  should  the  end  of  the  war  be  happy,
and  should  you  be  placed  in  the  enjoyment  of  entiie
freedom,  that  they  too  would  have  some  part  in  this
good  fortune,  even  as  they  had  been  sharers  in  the  in-
conveniences, the  expenses,  and  the  perils  of  the  war.

"  But  those  cannot  be  said  to  share  in  any  enjoyment
from  whom  has  been  taken  the  power  of  serving  God
according  to  the  religion  in  which  they  were  brought
up.  On  the  contrary,  no  slavery  is  more  intolerable  nor
more  exasperates  the  mind  than  such  restraint.  You
know  this  well,  my  lords  States ;  you  know  too  that  it
was  the  principal,  the  most  puissant  cause  that  made  you
fly  to  arms  and  scorn  all  dangers,  in  order  to  effect  your
deliverance  from  this  servitude.  You  know  that  it  has
excited  similar  movements  in  various  parts  of  Christen-
dom, and  even  in  the  kingdom  of  France,  with  such
fortunate  success  ever}^ where  as  to  make  it  appear  that
God  had  so  willed  it,  in  order  to  prove  that  religion
ought  to  be  taught  and  inspired  by  the  movements

22  Meteren,  xxx.  579'^o. Wageiiaar,  ix.  467.

23  Jeaanin,  ii.  589-597,  gives  the  whole  text  of  his  address  on  this  ocoasjOQ,

1609. APPEAL  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  CATHOLICS.  489

which  come  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  not  by  the  force
of  man.  Thus  kings  and  princes  should  be  induced  by
the  evils  and  ruin  which  they  and  their  subjects  have
suffered  from  this  cause,  as  by  a  sentiment  of  their  own
interest,  to  take  more  care  than  has  hitherto  been  taken
to  practise  in  good  earnest  those  remedies  which  were
wont  to  be  used  at  a  time  when  the  church  was  in  its
greatest  piety,  in  order  to  correct  the  abuses  and  errors
which  the  corruption  of  mankind  had  tried  to  introduce
as  being  the  true  and  sole  means  of  uniting  all  Christians
in  one  and  the  same  creed."

Surely  the  world  had  made  progress  in  these  forty
years  of  war.  Was  it  not  something  gained  for  huma-
nity, for  intellectual  advancement,  for  liberty  of  thought,
for  the  true  interests  of  religion,  that  a  lioman  Catholic,
an  ex-leaguer,  a  trusted  representative  of  the  immediate
successor  of  Charles  IX.  and  Henry  111.,  could  stand  up
on  the  blood-stained  soil  of  the  Netherlands  and  plead
for  liberty  of  conscience  for  all  mankind?

Those  cannot  be  said  to  share  in  any  enjoyment
fiom  whom  has  been  taken  the  power  of  serving  God
according  to  the  religion  in  which  they  have  been  brought
up.  No  slavery  is  more  intolerable  nor  more  exasperating
to  the  mind  than  such  lestraint."

Most  true,  O  excellent  president!  No  axiom  in  ma-
thematics is  more  certain  than  this  simple  statement.  To
prove  its  truth  William  the  Silent  had  lived  and  died.
To  prove  it  a  falsehood,  emperors,  and  kings,  and  priests,
had  issued  bans,  and  curses,  and  damnable  decrees.  To
root  it  out  they  had  butchered,  drowned,  shot,  strangled,
poisoned,  tortured,  roasted  alive,  buried  alive,  starved,
and  driven  mad,  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of
their  fellow  creatures.  And  behold  there  had  been
almost  a  century  of  this  work,  and  yet  the  great  truth
was  not  rooted  out  after  all ;  and  the  devil-worshippers,
who  had  sought  at  the  outset  of  the  great  war  to  establish
the  Holy  Inquisition  in  the  Netherlands  u}X)n  the  ruins
of  religious  and  political  liberty,  were  overthrown  at
last  and  driven  back  into  the  pit.  It  was  progress;  it
was  worth  all  the  blood  and  treasure  which  had  been
spilled,  that  instead  of  the  Holy  Inquisition,  there  was
now  holy  liberty  of  thought.

That  there  should  have  been  a  party,  that  there

490

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LIT.

should  have  been  an  individual  here  and  there,  after  the
gi;eat  victory  was  won,  to  oppose  the  doctrine  which  the
Catholic  president  now  so  nobly  advocated,  would  be
enough  to  cause  every  believer  in  progress  to  hide  his  face
in  the  dust,  did  we  not  know  that  the  march  of  events
was  destined  to  trample  such  opposition  out  of  existence,
and  had  not  history  proved  to  us  that  the  great  lesson
of  the  war  was  not  to  be  rendered  nought  by  the  efforts
of  a  few  fanatics.  Eeligious  liberty  was  the  ripened  and
consummate  fruit,  and  it  could  not  but  be  gathered.

"  Conjsider  too,"  continued  the  president,  "  how  much
injury  your  refusal,  if  you  give  it,  will  cause  to  those  of
your  religion  in  the  places  where  they  are  the  weakest,
and  where  they  are  every  day  imploring  with  tears  and
lamentations  the  grace  of  those  Catholic  sovereigns  to
whom  they  are  subject,  to  enable  them  to  enjoy  the  same
religious  liberty  which  our  king  is  now  demanding  in
favour  of  the  Catholics  among  you.  Do  not  cause  it  to
come  again  into  the  minds  of  those  sovereigns  and  their
peoples,  whom  an  inconsiderate  zeal  has  often  driven
into  violence  and  ferocity  against  protestants,  that  a  war
to  compel  the  weakest  to  follow  the  religion  of  the
strongest  is  just  and  lawful."

Had  not  something  been  gained  for  the  world  when
this  language  was  held  by  a  Catholic  on  the  very  spot
where  less  than  a  half  century  before  the  whole  popula-
tion of  the  Netherlands,  men,  women,  and  children,
had  been  condemned  to  death  by  a  foreign  tyrant,  for
the  simple  reason  that  it  was  just,  legal,  and  a  Christian
duty  to  punish  the  weak  for  refusing  to  follow  the  re-
ligion of  the  strong  ?

"As  for  the  perils  which  some  affect  to  fear,"  said
Jeannin,  further,  "  if  this  liberty  of  worship  is  accorded,
experience  teaches  us  every  day  that  diversity  of  religion
is  not  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  states,  and  that  a  govern-
ment does  not  cease  to  be  good,  nor  its  subjects  to  live
in  peace  and  fi  iendship  with  one  another,  rendering  due
obedience  to  the  laws  and  to  their  rulers  as  well  as  if
they  had  all  been  of  the  same  religion,  without  having
another  thought,  save  for  the  preservation  of  the  dignity
and  grandeur  of  the  state  in  which  God  had  caused  them
to  be  born.  The  danger  is  not  in  the  permission,  but  in
the  prohibition  of  religious  liberty."

1609. THE  QUESTION  OF  RELIGIOUS  TOLERATION.  491

All  this  beems  commonplace  enough  to  ns  on  the
western  side  of  the  Atlantic,  in  the  middle  of  the  nine-
teenth century,  but  it  would  have  been  lank  blasphemy
in  New  England  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth,  many
years  after  Jeannin  spoke.  It  was  a  horrible  sound,  too,
in  the  ears  of  some  of  his  audience.

To  the  pretence  so  often  urged  by  the  Catholic  perse-
cutors, and  now  set  up  by  their  Calvinistic  imitators,
that  those  who  still  clung  to  the  old  religion  were  at
liberty  to  depart  from  the  land,  the  president  replied
with  dignified  scorn.

With  what  justice,"  he  asked,  "can  you  drive  into
exile  people  who  have  committed  no  offence,  and  who
have  helped  to  conquer  the  very  country  from  which
you  would  now  banish  them?  If  you  do  drive  them
away,  you  will  make  solitudes  in  your  commonwealth^
which  will  be  the  cause  of  evils  such  as  I  pi  efer  that  you
should  reflect  upon  without  my  declaring  them  now.
Although  these  reasons,"  he  continued,  "  would  seem
sufficient  to  induce  you  to  accord  the  free  and  public
exercise  of  the  Catholic  religion,  the  king,  not  hoping  as
much  as  that,  because  aware  that  you  are  not  disposed
to  go  so  far,  is  content  to  request  only  this  grace  in  bc'half
of  the  Catholics,  that  you  will  tolerate  them,  and  suffer
them  to  have  some  exercise  of  their  religion  within  their
own  households,  without  interference  or  inquiry  on  that
account,  and  without  execution  of  the  rigorous  decrees
heretofore  enforced  against  them."

Certainly  if  such  wholesome,  moderate,  and  modest
counsels  as  these  had  been  re  jected,  it  would  have  been
sound  doctrine  to  proclaim  that  the  world  did  not  move.
And  there  were  individuals  enough,  even  an  influential
party,  prepared  to  oppose  them  for  both  technical  and
practical  reasons.  And  the  cause  of  intolerance  derived
much  warmth  and  comfort  at  this  juncture  from  that
great  luminary  of  theology  and  political  philoso])hy,  the
King  of  Great  Britain.  Direful  and  solemn  Avere
the  warnings  uttered  by  James  to  the  republic  against
permitting  the  old  religion,  or  any  religion  save  his
own  religion,  to  obtain  the  slightest  foothold  within  her
borders.

Let  the  religion  be  taught  and  preached  in  its
purity  throughout  your  provinces  without  the  least

492

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LIL

mixture,"  said  Sir  Ealph  Winwood,  in  tlie  name  of  his
sovereign.

"  On  this  foundation  the  justice  of  your  cause  is  built.
There  is  but  one  verity.  Those  who  are  willing  to
tolerate  any  religion,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  try
to  make  you  believe  that  liberty  for  both  is  necessary
in  your  commonwealth,  are  paving  the  way  towards
atheism."^*

Such  were  the  counsels  of  King  James  to  the  united
States  of  the  ^Netherlands  against  harbouring  Catholics.
A  few  years  later  he  was  casting  forth  Calvinists  from
his  own  dominions  as  if  they  had  been  lepers  ;  and  they
went  forth  on  their  weary  pilgrimage  to  the  howling
wilderness  of  North  America,  those  exiled  Calvinists,
to  build  a  greater  republic  than  had  ever  been  dreamed
of  before  on  this  planet ;  and  they  went  forth,  not  to
preach,  but  in  their  turn  to  denounce  toleration  and
to  hang  heretics.  He  who  would  tolerate  another  re-
ligion that  his  own  may  be  tolerated,  would  if  need  be,
hang  God's  bible  at  the  devil's  girdle."  So  spoke  an
early  Massachusetts  pilgrim,  in  the  very  spirit,  almost
the  very  words  of  the  royal  persecutor,  who  had  driven
him  ,into  outer  darkness  beyond  the  seas.  He  had  not
learned  the  lesson  of  the  mighty  movement  in  which
he  was  a  pioneer,  any  more  than  Gomarus  or  Uyten-
bogaart  had  comprehended  why  the  Dutch  republic  had
risen.

Yet  the  founders  of  the  two  commonwealths,  the
United  States  of  the  seventeenth  and  of  the  nineteenth
centuries,  although  many  of  them  fiercely  intolerant,
through  a  natural  instinct  of  resistance,  not  only  to  the
oppressor  but  to  the  creed  of  the  oppressor,  had  been
breaking  out  the  way,  not  to  atheism,  as  King  James
believed,  but  to  the  only  garden  in  which  Christianity
can  perennially  flourish — religious  liberty.

Those  most  ardent  and  zealous  path-finders  may  be
forgiven,  in  view  of  the  inestimable  benefits  conferred
by  them  upon  humanity,  that  they  did  not  travel  on
their  own  road.  It  should  be  sufficient  for  us,  if  we  make
due  use  of  their  great  imperishable  work  ourselves  ;  and
if  we  never  cease  rendering  thanks  to  the  Omnipotent,
that  there  is  at  least  one  great  nation  on  the  globe

24  Cited  in  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  264.

1609. RELIGIOUS  LIBERTY  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  WAR.  493

where  the  words  toleration  and  dissenter  have  no  mean-
ing whatever.

For  the  Dutch  fanatics  of  the  reformed  church,  at  the
moment  of  the  truce,  to  attempt  to  reverse  the  course  of
events,  and  to  shut  off  the  mighty  movement  of  the  great
revolt  from  its  destined  expanse,  was  as  hopeless  a  dream
as  to  drive  back  the  Ehine,  as  it  reached  the  ocean,  into
the  narrow  channel  of  the  Kheinwald  glacier  whence  it
sprang.

The  republic  became  the  refuge  for  the  oppressed  of
all  nations,  where  Jews  and  Gentiles,  Catholics,
Calvinists,  and  Anabaptists  prayed  after  their  own
manner  to  the  same  God  and  Father.  It  was  too  much,
however,  to  hope  that  passions  which  had  been  so
fiercely  bubbling  during  fifty  years  would  subside  at
once,  and  that  the  most  intense  religious  hatreds  that
ever  existed  would  exhale  with  the  proclamation  of
truce.  The  march  of  humanity  is  rarely  rapid  enough  to
keep  pace  with  the  leaders  in  its  most  sublime  move-
ments, and  it  often  happens  that  its  chieftains  are
dwarfed  in  the  estimation  of  the  contemporaneous
vulgar,  by  the  very  distance  at  which  they  precede
their  unconscious  followers.  But  even  if  the  progress
of  the  human  mind  towards  the  truth  is  fated  to  be  a
spiral  one,  as  if  to  remind  us  that  mankind  is  of  the
earth,  earthy — a  worm  in  the  dust  while  inhabiting
this  lower  sphere — it  is  at  least  a  consolation  to  reflect
upon  the  gradual  advancement  of  the  intellect  from  age
to  age.

The  spirit  of  Torquemada,  of  Charles,  of  Philip,  of
Titelmann,  is  even  now  not  extinct  on  this  globe,  but
there  are  counter  forces  at  work,  which  must  ultimately
blast  it  into  insignificance.  At  the  moment  of  the
great  truce,  that  evil  spirit  was  not  exorcised  from  the
human  breast,  but  the  number  of  its  victims  and  the
intensity  of  its  influence  had  already  miraculously
diminished.

The  tmce  was  made  and  announced  all  over  the
Netherlands  by  the  ringing  of  bells,  the  happy  dis-
charge of  innocent  artillery,  by  illuminations,  by  Te
Deums  in  all  the  churches.  Papist  and  Presbyterian  fell
on  their  knees  in  every  grand  cathedral  or  humblest
village  church,  to  thank  God  that  what  had  seemed  the

494

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  L\l

eternal  butchery  was  over.  The  inhabitants  of  the  united
and  of  the  obedient  Netherlands  rushed  across  the
frontiers  into  a  fraternal  embrace,  like  the  meeting  of
many  waters  when  the  flood-gates  are  lifted.  It  was
pity  that  the  foreign  sovereignty,  established  at  Brussels,
could  not  then  and  there  have  been  for  ever  swept  away,
and  self-government  and  beneficent  union  extended
over  all  the  seventeen  Netherlands,  Walloon  and  Flemish,
Catholic  and  reformed.  But  it  hardly  needs  a  word  to
show  that  the  course  of  events  had  created  a  deeper
chasm  between  the  two  sections  than  the  gravest
physical  catastrophe  could  have  produced.  The  op-
posing cliffs  which  religious  hatred  had  rent  asunder,
and  between  which  it  seemed  destined  to  flow  for  ever,
seemed  very  close,  and  yet  eternally  separated.

The  great  war  had  established  the  republic,  and
apparently  doomed  the  obedient  Netherlands  to  per-
petual servitude.

There  were  many  details  of  minor  importance  to  be
settled  between  the  various  governments  involved  in
these  great  transactions ;  but  this  history  draws  to  its
predestined  close,  and  it  is  necessary  to  glide  rapidly
over  matters  which  rather  belong  to  a  later  epoch  than
the  one  now  under  consideration.

The  treaty  between  the  republic  and  the  government
of  Great  Britain,  according  to  which  each  was  to  assist
the  other  in  case  of  war  with  four  thousand  troops  and
twenty  ships  of  war,  was  confirmed  in  the  treaty  of  truce.
The  debt  of  the  United  Provinces  to  the  Crown  of
England  was  definitely  reckoned  at  8,184,080  florins,
and  it  was  settled  by  the  truce  that  200,000  florins  should
be  paid  semi-annually,  to  begin  with  the  year  1611,  until
the  whole  debt  should  be  discharged.^^

The  army  establishment  of  the  republic  was  fixed
during  the  truce  at  thirty  thousand  infantry  and  three
thousand  horse.  This  was  a  reduction  from  the  war
footing  of  fifteen  thousand  men.  Of  the  force  retained,
four  thousand  were  a  French  legion  maintained  by  the
king,  two  thousand  other  French  at  the  expense  of
the  States,  and  distributed  among  other  troops,  two
thousand  Scotch,  three  thousand  English,  three  thousand

«5  Meteren,  614^^'.

1609. FINANCIAL  CONDITION  OF  IHE  REPUBLIC.  495

Germans.  The  rest  were  native  Netherlanders,  among
whom,  however,  were  very  few  Hollanders  and  Zee-
landers,  from  which  races  the  navy,  both  public  and
mercantile,  was  almost  wholly  supplied.

The  revenue  of  the  United  Provinces  was  estimated
at  between  seven  and  eight  millions  of  florins.

It  is  superfluous  to  call  attention  again  to  the  wonder-
ful smallness  of  the  means,  the  minuteness  of  the  physical
enginry,  as  compared  with  more  modern  manifestations,
especially  in  our  own  land  and  epoch,  by  which  so
stupendous  a  result  had  been  reached.  In  the  midst
of  an  age  in  which  regal  and  sacerdotal  despotism  had
seemed  as  omnipotent  and  irreversible  as  the  elemental
laws  of  the  universe,  the  republic  had  been  reproduced.
A  commonwealth  of  sand-banks,  lagoons,  and  meadtjws,
less  than  fourteen  thousand  square  miles  in  extent,  had
done  battle,  for  nearly  half  a  century,  with  the  greatest
of  existing  powers,  a  realm  whose  territory  was  nearly
a  third  of  the  globe,  and  which  claimed  univeisal
monarchy.  And  this  had  been  done  witli  an  army
averaging  forty-six  thousand  men,  half  of  them
foreigneis  hired  by  the  job,  and  b}^  a  sea-faring  popu-
lation, volunteering  into  ships  of  every  class  and  deno-
mination, from  a  fly-boat  to  a  galleot  of  war.

And  when  the  republic  had  won  its  independence,
after  this  almost  eternal  warfare,  it  owed  four  or  five
millions  of  dollars,  and  had  sometimes  an  annual  revenue
of  nearly  that  amount.

It  was  estimated  by  Barneveld,  at  the  conclusion  of
the  truce,  that  the  interest  on  the  public  debt  of  Spain
was  about  thrice  the  amount  of  the  yearly  income  of  the
republic,  and  it  was  characteristic  of  the  financial  ideas
of  the  period,  that  fears  were  entertained  lest  a  total  re-
pudiation of  that  burthen  by  the  Spanish  Government
would  enable  it  to  resume  the  war  against  the  provinces
with  redoubled  energy .'^^

The  annual  salary  of  Prince  Maurice,  who  was  to  see
his  chief  occupation  gone  by  the  cessation  of  the  war,
was  fixed  by  the  States  at  120,000  florins.^  It  was
agreed,  that  in  case  of  his  marriage  he  should  receive  a
further  yearly  sum  of  25,000  florins,  and  this  addition

26  Van  der  Kemp,  iii.  223.

«7  Van  der  Kemp  (from  the  Sec.  Res.  Stat-Gen.),  lii.  200,  251.

496

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LII.

was  soon  afterwards  voted  to  him  outright,^^  it  being
obvious  that  the  prince  would  remain  all  his  days  a
bachelor.

Count  Frederic  Henry  likewise  received  a  military
salary  of  25,000  florins,^^  while  the  emoluments  of  Lewis
AVilliam  were  placed  at  36,000  florins,  a  year.^*^

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  republic  was  grateful.
70,000  dollars  a  year,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  not
only  for  life,  but  to  be  inherited  afterwards  by  his
younger  brother,  Frederic  Henry,  was  surely  a  munifi-
cent sum  to  be  accorded  from  the  puny  exchequer
of  the  States-General  to  the  chief  magistrate  of  the
nation.

The  mighty  transatlantic  republic,  with  its  population
of  thirty  or  forty  millions,  and  its  revenue  of  five
hundred  millions  of  dollars,  pays  25,000  dollars  annually
to  its  president  during  his  four  years  of  office,  and  this
in  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when  a
dollar  is  worth  scarcely  one-fifth  of  its  value  two  hundred
and  fifty  years  ago.

Surely  here  is  improvement,  both  in  the  capacity  to
produce  and  in  the  power  to  save.

In  the  year  1609,  died  John,  the  last  sovereign  of
Cleves  and  Juliers,  and  Jacob  Arminius,  Doctor  of  Di-
vinit}^  at  Ley  den.  It  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  two
more  entirely  dissimilar  individuals  of  the  human  family
than  this  lunatic  duke  and  that  theological  professor.
And  yet  perhaps,  the  two  names,  more  concisely  than
those  of  any  other  mortals,  might  serve  as  an  index  to
the  ghastly  chronicle  over  which  a  coming  generation
was  to  shudder.  The  death  of  the  duke  was  at  first
thought  likely  to  break  off  the  negotiations  for  truce.
The  States-General  at  once  declared  that  they  would
permit  no  movements  on  the  part  of  the  Spanish  party
to  seize  the  inheritance  in  behalf  of  the  Catholic
claimants.  Prince  Maurice,  nothiiig  loth  to  make  use  of
so  well-timed  an  event  in  order  to  cut  for  ever  the
tangled  skein  at  the  Hague,  was  for  marching  forthwith
into  the  duchies.

But  the  archdukes  gave  such  unequivocal  assurances

Van  der  Kemp  (from  the  Sec.  Res.  Spencer  and  Winwood,  "  than  the  craving
6tat.-Gen.),  iii.  251,  252.  "No  one  thing  humour  of  Count  Maurice." — Winwood'a
kath  been  of  gi-eater  trouble  to  us,"  wrote Memorials, iiii.  1. 2. 29  xbid.  255.  ibij.

1609.

THEOLOGICAL  CONTENTION.

497

of  abstaining  from  interference,  and  the  desire  of  peace
was  so  strong  both  in  the  obedient  and  in  the  United
Provinces,  that  the  question  of  the  duchies  was  post-
poned. It  was  to  serve  as  both  torch  and  fuel  for  one  of
the  longest  and  most  hideous  tragedies  that  had  ever
disgraced  humanity.  A  thirty  years'  w^ar  of  demons  was,
after  a  brief  interval,  to  succeed  the  forty  years'  stniggle
between  slaves  and  masters,  which  had  just  ended  in  the
recognition  of  Dutch  independence.

The  gentle  Arminius  was  in  his  grave,  but  a  bloody
harvest  was  fast  ripening  from  the  seeds  which  he  had
sown.  That  evil  story  must  find  its  place  in  the  melan-
choly chapter  where  the  fortunes  of  the  Dutch  republic
are  blended  with  the  grim  chronicle  of  the  thirty  years'
war.  Until  the  time  arrives  for  retracing  the  course  of
those  united  transactions  to  their  final  termination  in
the  peace  of  Westphalia,  it  is  premature  to  characterize
an  epoch  which,  at  the  moment  with  which  we  are  now-
occupied,  had  not  fairly  begun.

The  Gomarites  accused  the  Arniinians  of  being  more
lax  than  Papists,  and  of  filling  the  soul  of  man  with
vilest  arrogance  and  confidence  in  good  works ;  while
the  Arminians  complained  that  the  God  of  the  Gomarites
was  an  unjust  God,  himself  the  origin  of  sin.^^

The  disputes  on  these  themes  had  been  perpetual  in
the  provinces  ever  since  the  early  days  of  the  Keforma-
tion.  Of  late,  however,  the  acrimony  of  theological
conflict  had  been  growing  day  by  day  more  intense.  It
was  the  eternal  struggle  of  religious  dogma  to  get  pos-
session of  the  State,  and  to  make  use  of  political  forces  in
order  to  put  fetters  on  the  human  soul ;  to  condemn  it  to
slavery  where  most  it  requires  freedom.  The  conflict
between  Gomarus  and  Arminius  proceeded  with  such
ferocity  in  Leyden,  that  since  the  days  of  the  memorable
siege,  to  which  the  university  owed  its  origin,  men's
minds  had  never  been  roused  to  such  feverish  anxiety.
The  theological  cannonades,  which  thundered  daily  fiom
the  college  buildings  and  caused  all  Holland  to  quake,
seemed  more  appalling  to  the  burghers  than  the  enginry
of  Yaldez  and  Boisot  had  ever  seemed  to  their  fathers.

The  Gomarite  doctrine  gained  most  favour  with  the

VOL.  IV.

Grutius,  xvii.  790-792.

498

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LH.

clergy,  the  Arminian  creed  with  the  municipal  magis-
tracies. The  magistrates  claimed  that  decisions  concern-
ing religious  matters  belonged  to  the  supreme  authority.
The  Gomarites  contended  that  sacred  matters  should  be
referred  to  synods  of  the  clergy. Here  was  the  germ
of  a  conflict  which  might  one  day  shake  the  republic  to
its  foundations.

Barneveld,  the  great  leader  of  the  municipal  party,
who  loved  political  power  quite  as  well  as  he  loved  his
country,  was  naturally  a  chieftain  of  the  Arminians  ;  for
church  matters  were  no  more  separated  from  political
matters  in  the  commonwealth  at  that  moment  than  they
were  in  the  cabinets  of  Henry,  James,  or  Philip.

It  was  inevitable  therefore  that  the  war  party  should
pour  upon  his  head  more  than  seven  vials  of  theological
wrath.  The  religious  doctrines  which  he  espoused  were
odious  not  only  because  they  were  deemed  vile  in  them-
selves, but  because  he  believed  in  them.

Arminianism  was  regarded  as  a  new  and  horrible  epi-
demic, daily  gaining  ground,  and  threatening  to  destroy
the  whole  population.  Men  deliberated  concerning  the
best  means  to  cut  off  communication  with  the  infected
regions,  and  to  extirpate  the  plague  even  by  desperate
and  heroic  remedies,  as  men  in  later  days  take  measures
against  the  cholera  or  the  rinderpest.

Theological  hatred  was  surely  not  extinct  in  the
Netherlands.  It  was  a  consolation,  however,  that  its
influence  was  rendered  less  noxious  by  the  vastly  in-
creased strength  of  principles  long  dormant  in  the  atmo-
sphere. Anna  van  der  Hoven,  buried  alive  in  Brussels,
simply  because  her  Calvinistic  creed  was  a  crime  in  the
eyes  of  the  monks  who  murdered  her,  was  the  last
victim  to  purely  religious  persecution.  If  there  were
one  day  to  be  still  a  tragedy  or  two  in  the  Netherlands  it
was  inevitable  that  theological  hatred  would  be  obliged
to  combine  with  political  party  spirit  in  its  most  con-
densed form  before  any  deadly  effect  could  be  produced.

Thus  the  year  1609  is  a  memorable  one  in  the  world's
history.  It  forms  a  great  landmark  in  human  progress.
It  witnessed  the  recognition  of  a  republic,  powerful  in
itself,  and  whose  example  was  destined  to  be  most  influ-
ential upon  the  career  of  two  mighty  commonwealths  of

32  Grotius,  xvii,  791.

1609.

COMMENCEMENT  OF  A  NEW  EPOCH.

499

the  future.  The  British  empire,  just  expanding  for
wider  flight  than  it  had  hitherto  essayed,  and  about  to
pass  through  a  series  of  vast  revolutions,  gathering
strength  of  wing  as  it  emerged  from  ch)ud  after  cloud  ;
and  the  American  republic,  whose  frail  and  obscure
beginnings  at  that  very  instant  of  time  scarcely  attracted
a  passing  attention  from  the  contemporaneous  world —
both  these  political  organisms,  to  which  so  much  of  man-
kind's future  liberties  had  been  entrusted,  were  deeply
indebted  to  the  earlier  self-governing  commonwealth.

The  Dutch  republic  was  the  first  free  nation  to  put
a  girdle  of  empire  around  the  earth.  It  had  courage,
enterprise,  intelligence,  perseverance,  faith  in  itself,  the
instinct  of  self-government  and  self-help,  hatred  of
tyranny,  the  disposition  to  domineer,  aggressiveness,
greediness,  inquisitiveness,  insolence,  the  love  of  science,
of  liberty,  and  of  money — all  this  in  unlimited  extent.
It  had  one  great  defect, — it  had  no  country.  Upon  that
meagre  standing  ground  its  hand  had  moved  the  world
with  an  impulse  to  be  felt  through  all  the  ages,  but  there
was  not  soil  enough  in  those  fourteen  thousand  square
miles  to  form  the  metropolis  of  the  magnificent  empire
which  the  genius  of  liberty  had  created  beyond  the  seas.

That  the  political  institutions  bequeathed  by  the
United  States  of  the  seventeenth  century  have  been
vastly  improved,  both  in  theory  and  practice,  by  the
United  States  of  the  nineteenth,  no  American  is  likely
to  gainsay.  That  the  elder  Republic  showed  us  also
what  to  avoid,  and  was  a  living  example  of  the  perils
besetting  a  Confederacy  which  dared  not  become  a
Union,  is  a  lesson  which  we  might  take  closely  to  heart.
But  the  year  1609  was  not  only  memorable  as  marking
an  epoch  in  Dutch  history.  It  was  the  beginning  of  a
great  and  universal  pause.  The  world  had  need  of  rest.
Disintegration  had  been  going  on  too  rapidly,  and  it  was
absolutely  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  new  birth,  if
civilization  were  not  to  vanish.

A  twenty  years  truce  between  the  Turkish  and  Holy
Roman  empires  was  nearl}^  simultaneous  with  the  twelve
years'  truce  between  Spain  and  the  United  Brovinces.
The  Emperor  Rudolph  having  refused  to  ratify  the
treaty  wliich  his  brother  Matthias  had  made,  was  in  con-
sequence partially  discrowned. The  same  archduke

2  K  2

500

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LH.

who,  thirty  years  before,  had  slipped  away  from  Vienna
in  his  nightgown,  with  his  face  blackened,  to  outwit  and
outgeneral  William  the  Silent  at  Brussels,  was  now  more
successful  in  his  manoeuvres  against  his  imperial  brother.
Standing  at  the  head  of  his  army  in  battle  array,  in  the
open  fields  before  the  walls  of  Prague,  he  received  from
the  unfortunate  Eudolph  the  crown  and  regalia  of  Hun-
gary, and  was  by  solemn  treaty  declared  sovereign  of  that
ancient  and  chivalrous  kingdom.^^

His  triumphal  entrance  into  Vienna  succeeded,  where,
14  July, surrounded  by  great  nobles  and  burghers,  with
1608. his  brother  Maximilian  at  his  side,  with  im-
mense pomp  and  with  flowers  strewn  before  his  feet,  he
ratified  that  truce  with  Ahmed  which  Eudolph  had
19  Oct. rejected. Three  months  later  he  was  crowned

1608.  at  Pressburg,  having  first  accepted  the  condi-
tions proposed  by  the  estates  of  Hungary.  Foremost
among  these  was  the  provision  that  the  exercise  of  the
reformed  religion  should  be  free  in  all  the  cities  and
villages  beneath  his  sceptre,  and  that  every  man  in  the
kingdom  was  to  worship  God  according  to  his  conscience.

In  the  following  March,  at  the  very  moment  accord-
12  March,  ^^g^J  wheu  the  conclusive  negotiations  were

1609.  fast  ripening  at  Antwerp,  Matthias  granted
religious  peace  for  Austria  likewise.  Great  was  the
indignation  of  his  nephew  Leopold,  the  nuncius,  and  the
Spanish  ambassador  in  consequence,  by  each  and  all
of  whom  the  revolutionary  mischief-maker,  with  his
brother's  crown  on  his  head,  w^as  threatened  with  excom-
munication.^^

As  for  Ferdinand  of  Styria,  his  wrath  may  well  be
imagined.  He  refused  religious  peace  in  his  dominions
with  scorn  ineffable.  Not  Gomarus  in  Ley  den  could
have  shrunk  from  Arminianism  with  more  intense  horror
than  that  with  which  the  aichduke  at  Gratz  recoiled
from  any  form  of  Protestantism.  He  wrote  to  his  brother-
in-law  the  King  of  Spain  and  to  other  potentates — as  if
the  very  soul  of  Philip  11.  were  alive  within  him — that
he  would  rather  have  a  country  without  inhabitants  than
with  a  single  protestant  on  its  soil.^^  He  strongly  urged
upon  his  Catholic  Majesty — as  if  such  urging  were  neces-

33  Meteren,  600,  601.  34  ibid.  35  ibid.

1609.

FUTURE  PROSPECTS.

501

sary  at  the  Spanish  court — the  necessity  of  extirpating
heresy,  root  and  branch.

Heie  was  one  man  at  least  who  knew  what  he  meant,
and  on  whom  the  dread  lessons  of  fifty  years  of  bloodshed
had  been  lost.  Magnificent  was  the  contempt  which  this
pupil  of  the  Jesuits  felt  for  any  little  progress  made  by
the  world  since  the  days  of  Torquemada.  In  Ferdinand's
view  Alva  was  a  Christian  hero,  scarcely  second  to  God-
frey of  Bouillon,  Philip  II.  a  sainted  martyr,  while  the
Dutch  republic  had  never  been  bom.

And  Ferdinand  was  one  day  to  sit  on  the  throne  of
the  holy  Koman  Empire.  Might  not  a  shudder  come
over  the  souls  of  men  as  coming  events  vaguely  shaped
themselves  to  prophetic  eyes  ?

Meantime  there  was  religious  peace  in  Hungar}^  in
Austria,  in  Bohemia,  in  France,  in  Great  Britain,  5  juiy,
in  the  Netherlands.  The  hangman's  hands  were  ^«09.
for  a  period  at  rest,  so  far  as  theology  had  need  of  them.
Butchery  in  the  name  of  Christ  was  suspended  through-
out Christendom.  The  Cross  and  the  Crescent,  Santiago
and  the  Orange  banner,  were  for  a  season  in  repose.

There  was  a  vast  lull  between  two  mighty  storms.
The  forty  years'  war  was  in  the  past,  the  thirty  years*
war  in  the  not  far  distant  future.

602

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LIIl.

CHAPTEE  LIIL

CONCLUSION.

Forty-three  years  had  passed  since  the  memorable
April  morning  in  which  the  great  nobles  of  the  Nether-
lands presented  their  "  Eeqnest "  to  the  liegent  Margaret
at  Brussels.

They  had  requested  that  the  holy  Spanish  Inquisition
might  not  be  established  on  their  soil  to  the  suppression
of  all  their  political  and  religious  institutions.

The  war  which  those  high-born  "  beggars  "  had  then
kindled,  little  knowing  what  they  were  doing,  had  now
come  to  a  close,  and  the  successor  of  Philip  II.,  instead
of  planting  the  Inquisition  in  the  provinces,  had  recog-
nised them  as  an  independent,  sovereign,  protestant
republic.

In  the  ratification  which  he  had  just  signed  of  the
treaty  of  truce  the  most  Catholic  king  had  in  his  turn
made  a  Request.  He  had  asked  the  States-General  to
deal  kindly  with  their  Catholic  subjects.

That  request  was  not  answered  with  the  axe  and
faggot ;  with  the  avenging  sword  of  mercenary  legions.
On  the  contrary,  it  was  destined  to  be  granted.  The
world  had  gained  something  in  forty-three  years.  It  had
at  least  begun  to  learn  that  the  hangman  is  not  the  most
appropriate  teacher  of  religion.

During  the  period  of  apparent  chaos  with  which  this
history  of  the  great  revolt  has  been  occupied,  there  had
in  truth  been  a  great  re-organization,  a  perfected  new
birth.  The  republic  had  once  more  appeared  in  the
world.

Its  main  characteristics  have  been  indicated  in  the
course  of  the  nanative,  for  it  was  a  polity  which
gradually  unfolded  itself  out  of  the  decay  and  change  of
previous  organisms.

It  was,  as  it  were,  in  their  own  despite  and  unwit-'

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSIOxV.

503

tingly  that  the  United  Provinces  became  a  republic
at  all.

In  vain,  after  originally  declaring  their  independence
of  the  ancient  tyrant,  had  they  attempted  to  annex  them-
selves to  France  and  to  England.  The  sovereignty  had
been  spurned.  1  he  magnificent  prize  which  France  for
centuries  since  has  so  persistently  coveted,  and  the
attainment  of  which  has  been  a  cardinal  point  of  her
perpetual  policy — the  Low  Countries  and  the  banks  of
the  Khine — was  deliberately  laid  at  her  feet,  and  as
deliberately  refused.

It  was  the  secret  hope  of  the  present  monarch  to  repair
the  loss  which  the  kingdom  had  suffered  through  the
imbecility  of  his  two  immediate  predecessors.  But  a
great  nation  cannot  with  impunity  permit  itself  to  be
despotically  governed  for  thirty  years  by  lunatics.  It
was  not  for  the  Bearnese,  with  all  his  valour,  his  wit,  and
his  duplicity,  to  obtain  the  prize  which  Charles  IX.  and
Henry  III.  had  thrown  away.  Yet  to  make  himself
sovereign  of  the  Netherlands  was  his  guiding  but  most
secret  thought  during  all  the  wearisome  and  tortuous
negotiations  which  preceded  the  truce ;  nor  did  he
abandon  the  great  hope  with  the  signature  of  the  treaty
of  1009.

Maurice  of  Nassau  too  was  a  formidable  rival  to  Henry,
The  stadholder  prince  was  no  republican.  He  was  a
good  patriot,  a  noble  soldier,  an  honest  man.  But  his
father  had  been  offered  the  sovereignty  of  Holland  and
Zeeland,  and  the  pistol  of  Balthasar  Gerard  had  alone,  in
all  human  probability,  prevented  the  great  prince  from
becoming  constitutional  monarch  of  all  the  Netherlands,
Batavian  and  Belgic.

Maurice  himself  asserted  that  not  only  had  he  been
offered  a  million  of  dollars,  and  large  estates  besides  in
Germany,  if  he  would  leave  the  provinces  to  their  fate,
but  that  the  archdukes  had  offered,  would  he  join  his
fortunes  with  theirs,  to  place  him  in  a  higher  position
over  all  the  Netherlands  than  he  had  ever  enjoyed  in  the
United  Provinces,  and  that  they  had  even  unequivocally
offered  him  the  sovereignty  over  the  whole  land.^

Maurice  was  a  man  of  truth,  and  we  have  no  right  to .
dispute  the  accuracy  of  the  extraordinary  statement.  He

1  Jeannin,  i.  174, 175.

504

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LIII.

must  however  have  reflected  upon  the  olBfer  once  made  by
the  Prince  of  Darkness  from  the  mountain  top,  and  have
asked  himself  by  what  machinery  the  archdukes  proposed
to  place  him  in  possession  of  such  a  kingdom.

There  had,  however,  been  serious  question  among
leading  Dutch  statesmen  of  making  him  constitutional,
hereditary  monarch  of  the  United  Netherlands.  As  late
as  1602  a  secret  conference  was  held  at  the  house  of
Olden-Barneveld,  in  which  the  Advocate  had  himself
urged  the  claims  of  the  prince  to  the  sovereignty,  and
reminded  his  guests  that  the  signed  and  sealed  docu-
ments— with  the  concurrence  of  the  Amsterdam  munici-
pality alone  lacking — by  which  William  the  Silent  had
been  invited  to  assume  the  crown  were  still  in  the  posses-
sion of  his  son.^

Nothing  came  of  these  deliberations.  It  was  agreed
that  to  stir  in  the  matter  at  that  moment  would  be  pre-
mature, and  that  the  pursuit  by  Maurice  of  the  monarchy
in  the  circumstances  then  existing  would  not  only  over-
burthen  him  with  expense,  but  make  him  a  more  con-
spicuous mark  than  ever  for  the  assassin.  It  is  certain
that  the  prince  manifested  no  undue  anxiety  at  any
period  in  regard  to  those  transactions.

Subsequently,  as  Olden-Barneveld's  personal  power
increased,  and  as  the  negotiations  for  peace  became  more
and  more  likely  to  prove  successful,  the  Advocate  lost  all
relish  for  placing  his  great  rival  on  a  throne.  The  whole
projc^ct,  with  the  documents  and  secret  schemes  there-
with connected,  became  mere  alms  for  oblivion.  Barne-
veld  himself,  although  of  comparatively  humble  birth
and  station,  was  likely  with  time  to  exercise  more  real
power  in  the  State  than  either  Henry  or  Maurice ;  and
thus  while  there  were  three  individuals  who  in  different
ways  aspired  to  supreme  power,  the  republic,  notwith-
standing, asserted  and  established  itself.

Freedom  of  government  and  freedom  of  religion  were,
on  the  whole,  assisted  by  this  triple  antagonism.  The
prince,  so  soon  as  war  was  over,  hated  the  Advocate  and
his  daily  increasing  power  more  and  more.  He  allied
himself  more  closely  than  ever  with  the  Gomarites  and
the  clerical  party  in  general,  and  did  his  best  to  inflame

2  Van  der  Kemp,  ii.  100-102,  and  390-395.  Leven  van  Olden-Barneveld,  156.
Wagei'.aar,  ix.  454.

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

505

the  persecuting  spirit,  already  existing  in  the  provinces,
against  the  Catholics  and  the  later  sects  of  Protestants.

Jeannin  warned  him  that  "  by  thus  howling  with  the
priests "  he  would  be  suspected  of  more  desperately
ambitious  designs  than  he  perhaps  really  cherished.^

On  the  other  hand,  Barneveld  was  accused  of  a
willingness  to  wink  at  the  introduction,  privately  and
quietly,  of  the  Roman  Catholic  worship.  That  this  was
the  deadliest  of  sins,  there  was  no  doubt  whatever  in  the
minds  of  his  revilers.  When  it  was  added  that  he  was
suspected  of  the  Arminian  leprosy,  and  that  he  could
tolerate  the  thought  that  a  virtuous  man  or  woman,  not
predestined  from  all  time  for  salvation,  could  possibly
find  the  wa}^  to  heaven,  language  becomes  powerless  to
stigmatize  his  depravity.  Whatever  the  punishment
impending  over  his  head  in  this  world  or  the  next,  it  is
certain  that  the  cause  of  human  freedom  was  not  des-
tined on  the  whole  to  lose  ground  through  the  life-work
of  Barneveld.

A  champion  of  liberties  rather  than  of  liberty,  he  de-
fended his  fatherland  with  heart  and  soul  against  the
stranger ;  yet  the  government  of  that  fatherland  was,  in
his  judgment,  to  be  transferred  from  the  hand  of  the
foreigner,  not  to  the  self-governing  people,  but  to
the  provincial  corporations.  For  the  People  he  had  no
respect,  and  perhaps  little  affection.  He  often  spoke
of  popular  rights  with  contempt.  Of  popular  sovereignty
he  had  no  conception.  His  patriotism,  like  his  ambition,
was  provincial.  Yet  bis  perceptions  as  to  eternal  neces-
sity in  all  healthy  governments  taught  him  that  compre-
hensible relations  between  the  state  and  the  population
were  needful  to  the  very  existence  of  a  free  common-
wealth. The  United  Provinces,  he  maintained,  were  not
a  republic,  but  a  league  of  seven  provinces  very  loosely
hung  together,  a  mere  provisional  organization  for  which
it  was  not  then  possible  to  substitute  anything  better.
He  expressed  this  opinion  with  deep  regret,  just  as  the
war  of  independence  was  closing,  and  added  his  convic-
tion that,  without  some  well-ordered  government,  no
republic  could  stand.

Yet,  as  time  wore  on,  the  Advocate  was  destined  to
acquiesce  more  and  more  in  this  defective  constitution.

•  Van  der  Kemp,  ili.  7  2.  Jeannin.

506  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LHI.

A  settled  theory  there  was  none,  and  it  would  have  been
difficult  legally  and  historically  to  establish  the  central
sovereignty  of  the  States-General  as  matter  of  right.

Thus  Barneveld,  who  was  anything  but  a  democrat,
became,  almost  unwittingly,  the  champion  of  the  least
venerable  or  imposing  of  all  foims  of  aristocracy — an
oligarchy  of  traders  who  imagined  themselves  patri-
cians. Corporate  rights,  not  popular  liberty,  seemed,
in  his  view,  the  precious  gains  made  by  such  a  prodi-
gious expenditure  of  time,  money,  and  blood.  Although
such  acquisitions  were  practically  a  vast  addition  to  the
stock  of  human  freedom  then  existing  in  the  world,  yet
torrents  of  blood  and  millions  of  treasure  were  to  be
wasted  in  the  coming  centuries  before  mankind  was  to
convince  itself  that  a  republic  is  only  to  be  made  pow-
erful and  perpetual  by  placing  itself  upon  the  basis  of
popular  right  rather  than  on  that  of  municipal  privilege.

The  singular  docility  of  the  Dutch  people,  combined
with  the  simplicity,  honesty,  and  practical  sagacity  of
the  earlier  burgher  patricians,  made  the  defects  of  the
system  tolerable  for  a  longer  period  than  might  have
been  expected ;  nor  was  it  until  theological  dissensions
had  gathered  to  such  intensity  as  to  set  the  whole  com-
monwealth aflame  that  the  grave  defects  in  the  political
structure  could  be  fairly  estimated.

It  would  be  anticipating  a  dark  chapter  in  the  history
of  the  United  Provinces  were  the  reader's  attention  now
to  be  called  to  those  fearful  convulsions.  The  greatest
reserve  is  therefore  necessary  at  present  in  alluding  to
the  subject.

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  an  imperious,  energetic
but  somewhat  limited  nature  like  that  of  Barneveld
should  at  that  epoch  thoroughly  comprehend  the  mean-
ing of  religious  freedom.  William  the  Silent  alone
seems  to  have  risen  to  that  height.  A  conscientious
Calvinist  himself,  the  father  of  his  country  would  have
been  glad  to  see  Protestant  and  Papist,  Lutheran,  Pres-
byterian, and  Anabaptist  living  together  in  harmony
and  political  equality.  This  was  not  to  be.  The  soul
of  the  immortal  prince  could  not  inspire  the  hearts  of
his  contemporaries.  That  Barneveld  was  disposed  to  a
breadth  of  religious  sympathy  unusual  in  those  days,
seems  certain. It  was  inevitable,  too,  that  the  mild

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

507

doctrines  of  Arminius  should  be  more  in  harmony  with
such  a  character  than  were  the  fierce  dogmas  of  Calvin.
But  the  struggle,  either  to  force  Arminianism  upon  the
Church  which  considered  itself  the  established  one  in
the  Netherlands,  or  to  expel  the  Calvinists  from  it,  had
not  yet  begun ;  although  the  seeds  of  religicjus  persecu-
tion of  Protestants  by  Protestants  had  already  been  sown
broadcast.

The  day  was  not  far  distant  when  the  very  Calvinists,
to  whom,  more  than  to  any  other  class  of  men,  the  poli-
tical liberties  of  Holland,  England,  and  America  are
due,  were  to  be  hunted  out  of  churches  into  farm-
houses, suburban  hovels,  and  canal-boats,  by  the  arm  of
provincial  sovereignty  and  in  the  name  of  state-rights,
as  pitilessly  as  the  early  reformers  had  been  driven  out
of  cathedrals  in  the  name  of  emperor  and  pnpe ;  and
when  even  those  refuges  for  conscientious  worship  were
to  be  denied  by  the  dominant  sect.  And  the  day  was  to
come,  too,  when  the  Calvinists,  regaining  ascendency  in
their  turn,  were  to  hunt  the  heterodox  as  they  had  them-
selves been  hunted ;  and  this,  at  the  very  moment  when
their  fellow  Calvinists  of  England  were  driven  by  the
Church  of  that  kingdom  into  the  American  wilderness.

Toleration — that  intolerable  term  of  insult  to  all  who
love  liberty — had  not  yet  been  discovered.  it  had
scarcely  occurred  to  Arminian  or  Presbyterian  that  civil
authority  and  ecclesiastical  doctrine  could  be  divorced
from  each  other.  As  the  individual  sovereignty  of  the
seven  states  established  itself  more  and  more  securely,
the  right  of  provincial  power  to  dictate  religious  dogmas,
and  to  superintend  the  popular  conscience,  was  exercised
with  a  placid  arrogance  which  papal  infallibility  could
scarcely  exceed.  The  alternation  was  only  between  the
sects,  each  in  its  turn  becoming  orthodox,  and  there-
fore persecuting.  The  lessened  intensity  of  persecution
however,  which  priesthood  and  authoiity  were  now
allowed  to  exercise,  marked  the  gains  secured.

Yet  while  we  censure — as  we  have  a  right  to  do  from
the  point  of  view  which  we  have  gained  after  centu-
ries— the  crimes  committed  by  bigotry  against  liberty,
we  should  be  false  to  our  faith  in  human  pi  ogress  did  we
not  acknowledge  our  debt  of  gratitude  to  the  hot  gospel-
lers of  Holland  and  England.

508

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  LHI.

The  doctrine  of  predestination,  the  consciousness  of
being  chosen  soldiers  of  Christ,  inspired  those  puritans,
who  founded  the  commonwealths  of  England,  of  Hol-
land, and  of  America,  with  a  contempt  of  toil,  danger,
and  death  which  enabled  them  to  accomplish  things
almost  supernatural.

No  uncouthness  of  phraseology,  no  unlovely  austerity
of  deportment,  could,  except  to  vulgar  minds,  make  that
sublime  enthusiasm  ridiculous,  which  on  either  side  the
ocean  ever  confronted  tyranny  with  dauntless  front,  and
welcomed  death  on  battle-field,  scaffold,  or  rack  with
perfect  composure.

The  early  puritan  at  least  believed.  The  very  inten-
sity of  his  belief  made  him — all  unconsciously  to  him-
self, and  narrowed  as  was  his  view  of  his  position — ^the
great  instrument  by  which  the  widest  human  liberty
was  to  be  gained  for  all  mankind.

Hie  elected  favourite  of  the  King  of  kings  feared  the
power  of  no  earthly  king.  Accepting  in  rapture  the  de-
crees of  a  supernatural  tyranny,  he  rose  on  mighty  wings
above  the  reach  of  human  wrath.  Prostrating  himself
before  a  God  of  vengeance,  of  jealousy,  and  of  injustice,
he  naturally  imitated  the  attributes  which  he  believed
to  be  divine.  It  was  inevitable,  therefore,  that  Barne-
veld,  and  those  who  thought  with  him,  when  they
should  attempt  to  force  the  children  of  Belial  into  the
company  of  the  elect  and  to  drive  the  faithful  out  of
their  own  churches,  should  be  detested  as  bitterly  as
papists  had  ever  been.

Had  Barneveld's  intellect  been  broad  enough  to  ima-
gine in  a  great  republic  the  separation  of  Church  and
State,  he  would  deserve  a  tenderer  sympathy,  but  he
would  have  been  far  in  advance  of  his  age.  It  is  not
cheerful  to  see  so  powerful  an  intellect  and  so  patriotic  a
character  daring  to  entrust  the  relations  between  man  and
his  Maker  to  the  decree  of  a  trading  corporation.  But
alas !  the  world  was  to  wait  for  centuries  until  it  should
learn  that  the  State  can  best  defend  religion  by  letting  it
alone,  and  that  the  political  arm  is  apt  to  wither  with
palsy  when  it  attempts  to  control  the  human  conscience.

It  is  not  entirely  the  commonwealth  of  the  United
Netherlands  that  is  of  importance  in  the  epoch  which  I
have  endeavoured  to  illustrate.  History  can  have  neither

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

509

value  nor  charm  for  those  who  are  not  impressed  with  a
conviction  of  its  continuity.

More  than  ever  during  the  period  which  we  call
modern  history  has  this  idea  of  the  continuousness  of
our  race,  and  especially  of  the  inhabitants  of  Europe
and  America,  become  almost  oppressive  to  the  imagina-
tion. There  is  a  sentsc  of  immortality  even  upon  earth
when  we  see  the  succession  of  heritages  in  the  domains
of  science,  of  intellectual  and  material  wealth  by  which
mankind,  generation  after  generation,  is  enriching  itself.

If  this  progress  be  a  di  eam,  if  mankind  be  describing
a  limited  circle  instead  of  advancing  towards  the  infi-
nite, then  no  study  can  be  more  contemptible  than  the
study  of  history.

Few  strides  more  gigantic  have  been  taken  in  the
march  of  humanity  than  those  by  which  a  parcel  of
outlying  provinces  in  the  north  of  Europe  exchanged
slavery  to  a  foreign  despotism  and  to  the  Holy  Inquisi-
tion for  the  position  of  a  self-governing  commonwealth,
in  the  front  rank  of  contemporary  poweis,  and  in  many
respects  tlie  foremost  of  the  world.  It  is  impossible  to
calculate  the  amount  of  benefit  rendered  to  civilization
by  the  example  of  the  Dutch  republic.  It  has  been  a
model  which  has  been  imitated,  in  many  respects,  by
great  nations.  It  has  even  been  valuable  in  its  very
defects ;  indicating  to  the  patient  obsei'ver  many  errors
most  important  to  avoid.

Therefore,  had  the  little  republic  sunk  for  ever  in  the
sea  so  soon  as  the  treaty  of  peace  had  been  signed  at
Antwerp,  its  career  would  have  been  prolific  of  good  for
all  succeeding  time.

Exactly  at  the  moment  when  a  splendid  but  decaying
despotism,  founded  upon  wrong — upon  oppression  of  the
human  body  and  the  immortal  soul,  upon  slavery,  in
short,  of  the  worst  kind — was  awaking  from  its  insane
dream  of  universal  empire  to  a  consciousness  of  its  own
decay,  the  new  republic  was  recognised  among  the
nations.

It  would  hardly  be  incorrect  to  describe  the  Holland
of  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  as  the  exact
reverse  of  S])aiu.  In  the  commonwealth  labour  was
most  honourable  ;  in  the  kingdom  it  was  vile.  In  the
north  to  be  idle  was  accounted  and  punished  as  a  crime.

610

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  LHI.

In  the  southern  peninsula,  to  be  contaminated  with
mechanical,  mercantile,  commercial,  manufacturing  pur-
suits, was  to  be  accursed.  Labour  was  for  slaves,  and  at
last  the  mere  spectacle  of  labour  became  so  offensive
that  even  the  slaves  were  expelled  from  the  land.  To
work  was  as  degrading  in  the  south  as  to  beg  or  to  steal
was  esteemed  unworthy  of  humanity  in  the  north.  To
think  a  man's  thought  upon  high  matters  of  religion
and  government,  and  through  a  thousand  errors  to  pur-
sue the  truth,  with  the  aid  of  the  Most  High  and  with
the  best  use  of  human  reason,  was  a  privilege  secured
by  the  commonwealth,  at  the  expense  of  two  generations
of  continuous  bloodshed.  To  lie  fettered,  soul  and  body,
at  the  feet  of  authority  wielded  by  a  priesthood  in  its
last  stage  of  corruption,  and  monarchy  almost  reduced
to  imbecility,  was  the  lot  of  the  chivalrous,  genial,  but
much  oppressed  Spaniard.

The  pictures  painted  of  the  republic  by  shrewd  and
caustic  observers,  not  inclined  by  nature  or  craft  to
portray  freedom  in  too  engaging  colours,  seem,  when
contrasted  with  those  revealed  of  Spain,  almost  like
enthusiastic  fantasies  of  an  ideal  commonwealth.

During  the  last  twenty  years  of  the  great  war  the
material  prosperit}^  of  the  Netherlands  had  wonderfully
increased.  They  had  become  the  first  commercial  nation
in  the  world.  They  had  acquired  the  supremacy  of  the
seas.  The  population  of  Amsterdam  had  in  twenty
years  increased  from  seventy  thousand  to  a  hundred  and
thirty  thousand,  and  was  destined  to  be  again  more  than
doubled  in  the  coming  decade.*  The  population  of  Ant-
werp had  sunk  almost  as  rapidly  as  that  of  its  rival  had
increased  ;  having  lessened  by  fifty  thousand  during  the
same  period.^  The  commercial  capital  of  the  obedient
provinces,  having  already  lost  much  of  its  famous  traffic
by  the  gi  eat  changes  in  the  commercial  current  of  the
w^orld,  was  unable  to  compete  with  the  cities  of  the
United  Provinces  in  the  vast  trade  which  the  geographi-
cal discoveries  of  the  preceding  century  had  opened  to

*  Tomaso  Contarini  ritornato  Amb*"®  prime." The  streets  and  public  places

dalli  Signori  Stati  di  Fiandra(anno  1610).  were  so  thronged  and  bustling  that  "the

— (MS.  Archives  of  Venice.) Antonio  scene  looked  to  him  like  a  fair  to  end  in

Donato  in  1618  puts  the  number  of  in-  one  day." — Relazione,  MS.

habit-ants  at  300,000,  and  describes  the  s  ibid.  Antwerp  had  sunk  from  150,000

city  as  "  the  very  image  of  Venice  in  its  to  80,000.

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

511

civilization.  Freedom  of  thought  and  action  were  denied,
and  without  such  liberty  it  was  impossible  for  oceanic
commerce  to  thrive.  Moreover,  the  possession  by  the
Hollanders  of  the  Scheld  forts  below  Antwerp,  and  of
Flushing  at  the  river's  mouth,  suffocated  the  ancicDt  city,
and  would  of  itself  have  been  sufficient  to  paralyze  all  its
efforts.

In  Antwerp  the  exchange,  where  once  thousands  of
the  great  merchants  of  the  earth  held  their  daily  financial
parliament,  now  echoed  to  the  solitary  footfall  of  the
passing  stranger.  Ships  lay  rotting  at  the  quays ;  bram-
bles grew  in  the  commercial  streets.  In  Amsterdam  the
city  had  been  enlarged  by  two-thirds,  and  those  who
swarmed  thither  to  seek  their  fortunes  could  not  wait
for  the  streets  to  be  laid  out  and  houses  to  be  built,  but
established  themselves  in  the  environs,  building  them-
selves hovels  and  temporary  residences,  although  certain
to  find  their  encampments  swept  away  with  the  steady
expanse  of  the  city.*^  As  much  land  as  could  be  covered
by  a  man's  foot  was  worth  a  ducat  in  gold."'

In  every  branch  of  liuman  industry  these  republicans
took  the  lead.  On  that  scrap  of  solid  ground,  rescued  by
human  energy  from  the  ocean,  were  the  most  fertile
pastures  in  the  world.  On  those  pastures  grazed  the
most  famous  cattle  in  the  world.  An  ox  often  weighed
more  than  two  thousand  pounds.^  The  cows  produced
two  and  three  calves  at  a  time,  the  sheep  fuur  and  five
lambs.^  In  a  single  village  four  tlio\isand  kine  were
counted.^^  Butter  and  cheese  were  exported'  to  the
annual  value  of  a  million,  salted  provisions  to  an  incredi-
ble extent.  The  farmers  were  industrious,  thriving,  and
independent.  It  is  an  amusing  illustration  of  the  agricul-
tural thrift  and  republican  simplicity  of  this  people  that
on  one  occasion  a  farmer  proposed  to  Prince  Maurice
that  he  should  marry  his  daughter,  promising  with  her
a  dowry  of  a  hundred  thousand  florins.^^

6  Contarini,  Rclazione.  MS.  in  breve  tanto  stimano  il  potcr  comin

7  Ibid.  "  All'  habitationi  di  quosta  ciare  a  metier  il  loro  nido  alnicjio  vicino
cittli  concorrono  i  popoli  con  tanto  ardore  se  non  dentro  a  quclLi  citta  nelle  qu;Ite
che  non  oetante  la  proibitione  di  allog-  per  il  scmplice  fondo  si  pa^ia  un  ducato
giarsi  per  certo  spatio  all'  incontro  si  d' oro  tanto  ttTeno  quanto  pub  copri re  un
fabbrice  non  di  mono  ogni  anno  con  huomo  con  U  nianta  del  piede."
allegro  anirao  ogni  giorno  cus '  di  legni »  Contarini.  Vlelazione,  MS.

ben  che  sia  certo  di  vederse  le  distruggere »  Ibid.  Ibid.  IbiiL

512

TPIE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS. Chap.  LIII.

The  mechanical  ingenuity  of  the  Netherlanders,
already  celebrated  by  Julius  Caesar  and  by  Tacitus,  had
lost  nothing  of  its  ancient  fame.  The  contemporary
world  confessed  that  in  many  fabrics  the  Hollanders
were  at  the  head  of  mankind.  Dutch  linen,  manufac-
tured of  the  flax  grown  on  their  own  fields  or  imported
from  the  obedient  provinces,  was  esteemed  a  fitting
present  for  kings  to  make  and  to  receive.  The  name  of
the  country  had  passed  into  the  literature  of  England  as
synonymous  with  the  delicate  fabric  itself.  The  Vene-
tians confessed  themselves  equalled,  if  not  outdone,  by
the  crystal  workers  and  sugar  refiners  of  the  northern
republic.^^  'The  tapestries  of  Arras — the  name  of  which
Walloon  city  had  become  a  household  word  of  luxury  in
all  modern  languages — were  now  transplanted  to  the  soil
of  freedom,  more  congenial  to  the  advancement  of  art.
Brocades  of  the  precious  metals  ;  splendid  satins  and
velvets  ;  serges  and  homely  fustians  ;  laces  of  thread  and
silk  ;  the  finer  and  coarser  manufactures  of  clay  and
porcelain ;  iron,  steel,  and  all  useful  fabrics  for  the
building  and  outfitting  of  ships  ;  substantial  broadcloths
manufactured  of  wool  imported  from  Scotland — all  this
was  but  a  portion  of  the  industrial  production  of  the
provinces.

They  supplied  the  deficiency  of  coal,  not  then  an
article  readily  obtained  by  commerce,  with  other  remains
of  antediluvian  forests  long  since  buried  in  the  sea,  and
now  recovered  from  its  depths  and  made  useful  and
portable  by  untiring  industry.  Peat  was  not  only  the
fuel  for  the  fireside,  but  for  the  extensive  fabrics  of  the
country,  and  its  advantages  so  much  excited  the  admira-
tion of  the  Venetian  envoys  that  they  sent  home  samples
of  it,  in  the  hope  that  the  lagunes  of  Venice  might  prove
as  prolific  of  this  indispensable  article  as  the  polders  of
Hollaud.^^

But  the  foundation  of  the  national  wealth,  the  source
of  the  apparently  fabulous  power  by  which  the  re-
public had  at  last  overthrown  her  gigantic  antagonist.

12  Contarini,  Relazione,  MS.

13  Ibid.  "  E  perche  pare  quasi  questa
cosa  incredibile  ho  fatto  mettere  qualche
pezzi  di  queste  turbe  con  le  mie  robbe
che  vengono  per  mare  accio  si  piaccf-se  al
bignore  Die  che  in  questi  con  tor  ni  si

trovasse  terreno  simile  potesse  il  pub-
blico  ricevere  due  gran  benefitii;  uno
di  cavare  il  terreno  che  riempe  le  lagune ;
r  altro  di  abondar  la  citta  di  materia  per
abbrucciare."

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

513

was  the  ocean.  The  republic  was  sea-bom  and  sea-
sustained.

She  had  nearly  one  hundred  thousand  sailors,  and
three  thousand  ships.^*  The  sailors  were  the  boldest,
the  best  disciplined,  and  the  most  experienced  in  the
world,  whether  for  peaceable  seafaring  or  ocean  warfare.
The  ships  were  capable  of  furnishing  from  out  of  their
number  in  time  of  need  the  most  numerous  and  the  best
appointed  navy  then  known  to  mankind.

The  republic  had  the  carrying  trade  for  all  nations.
Feeling  its  very  existence  dependent  upon  commerce,  it
had  strode  centuries  in  advance  of  the  contemporary
world  in  the  liberation  of  trade.  But  two  or  three  per
cent,  ad  valorem  was  levied  upon  imports  ;  foreign  goods
however,  being  subject,  as  well  as  internal  products,  to
heavy  imposts  in  the  way  of  both  direct  and  indirect
taxation.

Every  article  of  necessity  or  luxury  known  was  to  be
purchased  in  piofusion  and  at  reasonable  prices  in  the
warehouses  of  Holland.

A  swarm  of  river  vessels  and  fly-boats  were  coming
daily  through  the  rivers  of  Germany,  France,  and  the
Netherlands,  laden  with  the  agiicultural  products  and
the  choice  manufactures  of  central  and  western  Europe.
Wine  and  oil,  and  delicate  fabrics  in  thread  and  wool,
came  from  France,  but  no  silks,  velvets,  nor  satins ;  for
the  great  Sully  had  succeeded  in  persuading  his  master
that  the  white  mulberry  would  not  grow  in  his  kingdom,
and  that  isilk  manufactures  were  an  impossible  dream  for
France.  Nearly  a  thousand  ships  were  constantly  em-
ployed in  the  Baltic  trade.^^  The  forests  of  Holland  were
almost  as  extensive  as  those  which  grew  on  Norwegian
hills,  but  they  were  submerged.  The  foundation  of  a
single  mansion  required  a  grove,  and  wood  was  exten-
sively used  in  the  superstructure.  The  houses,  built  of
a  framework  of  substantial  timber,  and  filled  in  with
brick  or  rubble,  were  raised  almost  as  rajiidl}-  as  tents,
during  the  prodigious  expansion  of  industry  towards  the
end  of  the  war.^'^  From  the  realms  of  the  Osterlings,
or  shores  of  the  Baltic,  came  daily  fleets  laden  with
wheat  and  other  grains,  so  that  even  in  time  of  famine  the

1*  Contarini.  Relazione.  MS.  is  Jbid.  i6  Ibid,

VOL.  IV.  2  L

514

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LHI.

granaries  of  the  republic  were  overflowing,  and  ready  to
dispense  the  material  of  life  to  the  outer  world.

Eight  hundred  vessels  of  lesser  size  but  compact  build
were  perpetually  fishing  for  herrings  on  the  northern
coasts.  These  hardy  mariners,  the  militia  of  the  sea,
who  had  learned  in  their  life  of  hardship  and  daring  the
art  of  destroying  Spanish  and  Portuguese  armadas,  and
confronting  the  dangers  of  either  pole,  passed  a  long
season  on  the  deep.  Commercial  voyagers  as  well  as  fisher-
men, they  salted  their  fish  as  soon  as  taken  from  the  sea,
and  transported  them  to  the  various  ports  of  Europe,  thus
reducing  their  herrings  into  specie  before  their  return,
and  proving  that  a  fishery  in  such  hands  was  worth
more  than  the  mines  of  Mexico  and  Peru.

It  is  customary  to  speak  of  the  natural  resources  of  a
country  as  furnishing  a  guarantee  of  material  prosperity.
But  here  was  a  republic  almost  without  natural  resources,
which  had  yet  supplied  by  human  intelligence  and  thrift
what  a  niggard  nature  had  denied.  Spain  was  over-
flowing with  unlimited  treasure,  and  had  possessed  half
the  world  in  fee ;  and  Spain  was  bankrupt,  decaying,
sinking  into  universal  pauperism.  Holland,  with  free-
dom of  thought,  of  commerce,  of  speech,  of  action,
placed  itself,  by  intellectual  power  alone,  in  the  front
rank  of  civilization.

From  Cathay,  from  the  tropical  coasts  of  Africa,  and
from  farthest  Ind,  came  every  drug,  spice,  or  plant,  every
valuable  jewel,  every  costly  fabric,  that  human  ingenuity
had  discovered  or  created.  The  Spaniards,  maintaining
a  frail  tenure  upon  a  portion  of  those  prolific  regions,
gathered  their  spice  harvests  at  the  point  of  the  sword,^^
and  were  frequently  unable  to  prevent  their  northern
rivals  from  ravaging  such  fields  as  they  had  not  yet  been
able  to  appropriate.^^

Certainly  this  conduct  of  the  Hollanders  was  bar-
barism and  supreme  selfishness,  if  judged  by  the  sounder
political  economy  of  our  time.  Yet  it  should  never  be
forgotten  that  the  contest  between  Spain  and  Holland  in
those  distant  regions,  as  everywhere  else,  was  war  to  the
knife  between  superstition  and  freedom,  between  the

17  "  Tengono  quk  Hollandesi  la  maggior  parte  di  detta  Isola  (Ternat)  rimanendo
ia  minore  a  Spagnuoli  che  raccolgono  i  loro  pochi  garofani  con  la  punta  della
spada,"  &c.  &c.  &c.- Contarini,  MS.  is  Ibid.

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

515

spirits  of  progress  and  of  dogma.  Hard  blows  and  foul
blows  were  struck  in  such  a  fight,  and  humanity,
although  gaining  at  last  immense  results,  had  much  to
suffer  and  much  to  learn  ere  the  day  was  won.

But  Spain  was  nearly  beaten  out  of  those  eastern
regions,  and  the  very  fact  that  the  naval  supremacy  of
the  republic  placed  her  ancient  tyrant  at  her  mercy  was
the  main  reason  for  Spain  to  conclude  the  treaty  of
truce.  Lest  she  should  lose  the  India  trade  entirely,
Spain  consented  to  the  treaty  article  by  which,  without
mentioning  the  word,  she  conceded  the  thing.  It  was
almost  pathetic  to  witness,  as  we  have  witnessed,  this
despotism  in  its  dotage,  mumbling  so  long  over  the
formal  concession  to  her  conqueror  of  a  portion  of  that
India  trade  which  would  have  been  entirely  wrested
from  herself  had  the  war  continued.  And  of  this  Spain
was  at  heart  entirely  convinced.  Thus  the  Portuguese,
once  the  lords  and  masters,  as  they  had  been  the  Euro-
pean discoverers,  of  those  prolific  regions  and  of  the
ocean  highways  which  led  to  them,  now  came  with
docility  to  the  republic  which  they  had  once  affected  to
despise,  and  purchased  the  cloves  and  the  allspice,  the
nutmegs  and  the  cinnamon,  of  which  they  had  held  the
monopoly;  or  waited  with  patience  until  the  untiring
Hollanders  should  bring  the  precious  wares  to  the  penin-
sula ports.^^

A  Dutch  Tndiaman  would  make  her  voyage  to  the
antipodes  and  her  return  in  less  time  than  was  spent  by
a  Portuguese  or  a  Spaniard  in  the  outward  voyage.^^  To
accomplish  such  an  enterprise  in  two  years  was  accounted
a  wonder  of  rapidity,  and  when  it  is  remembered  that  in-
land navigation  through  France  by  canal  and  river  from
the  North  Sea  to  the  Mediterranean  was  considered  both
speedier  and  safer,  because  the  sea  voyage  between  the
same  points  might  last  four  or  five  months,  it  must  be
admitted  that  two  years  occupied  in  passing  from  one  end
of  the  earth  to  the  other  and  back  again  might  well  seem
a  miracle.

The  republic  was  among  the  wealthiest  and  the  most
powerful  of  organized  States.  Her  population  might  be
estimated  at  three  millions  and  a  half,  about  equal  to

19  Contarini,  Relazione,  MS.

2»  Ibid.

2  L  2

516

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LIU.

that  .of  England  at  the  same  period.  But  she  was  richer
than  England.  Nowhere  in  the  world  was  so  large  a
production  in  proportion  to  the  numbers  of  a  people.
Nowhere  were  so  few  unproductive  consumers.  Every
one  was  at  work.  Vagabonds,  idlers,  and  do-nothings,
such  as  must  be  in  every  community,  were  caught  up  by
the  authorities,  and  made  to  earn  their  bread.^^  The
devil's  pillow,  idleness,  was  smoothed  for  no  portion  of
the  population.

There  were  no  beggars,  few  paupers,  no  insolently
luxurious  and  ostentatiously  idle  class.  The  modesty,
thrift,  and  simple  elegance  of  the  housekeeping,  even
among  the  wealthy,  was  noted  by  travellers  with  sur-
prised^ It  will  be  remembered  with  how  much  amused
wonder,  followed  by  something  like  contempt,  the
magnificent  household  of  Spinola,  during  his  embassy  at
the  Hague,  was  surveyed  by  the  honest  burghers  of
Holland.  The  authorities  showed  their  wisdom  in  per-
mitting the  absurd  exhibition,  as  an  example  of  what
should  be  shunned,  in  spite  of  grave  remonstrances  from
many  of  the  citizens.  Drunken  Helotism  is  not  the
only  form  of  erring  humanity  capable  of  reading  lessons
to  a  republic.

There  had  been  monasteries,  convents,  ecclesiastical
establishments  of  all  kinds  in  the  country,  before  the
great  war  between  Holland  and  the  Inquisition.  These

21  Contarini.

22  "In  somma  sono  quei  popoli  cosi
inchinati  all'  industria  et  al  negotio  che
niuna  cosa  e  tanto  difficile  che  non  ardis-

cono  di  superarla  Sopra  tutte

le  cose  invigliarano  a  questo  di  mantenere
11  negotio  et  favorirlo  in  modo  libero  da
soverchie  grave  zze  che  cessi  ogni  occa-
sione  di  divertirlo  e  secarlo.  Abbondano
di  richezze  e  di  commodi  con  tal  misura  che
non  si  vede  nei  piu  ricchi  lusso  o  pompe
estraordinarie  servando  tutti  et  in  casa  et
luori  nell'  habito  e  nel  rimanente  la  vera
mediocrita  di  una  modesta  fortuna  senza
che  si  vedano  ne  additamenti  ne  argen-
terie  ne  fornimenti  ne  cadreghe  de  sete
come  apunto  non  si  vedevano  ne  anco  in
questa  citta  (Venezia)  nei  tempi  de  Vostri
Antecessori.  Nei  poveri  von  si  conosce
mancamento  di  alcuna  delle  cose  neces-
tarie  anzi  nelle  loro  piccioli  ed  humili

abitationi  non  meno  che  nelle  case  de*
grandi  risplende  una  politia  singolare
onde  riducono  da  tutte  le  parti  et  sono
tutti  cosi  inimici  del  mal  governo  et
deir  otio  che  si  sono  luoghi  particolari
nelle  citta  fabbricata  di  ordine  pubblico
ove  quei  del  governo  fanno  serrar  le  genti
vagabonde  et  otiosi  o  che  non  governano
bene  le  cose  loro  bastando  che  o  le  moglie
o  altre  dei  lor  congionti  se  ne  querelino
al  magistrato  et  in  quei  luoghi  sono
costretti  di  lavorare  et  guadagnarsi  le
spese  ancorche  non  vogliano." — Contarini,
Relazione,  MS.

"  Li  popoli  di  questo  paese  sono  nati  al
travaglio  ed  al  stentare  e  tutti  travagliano,

chi  per  una  via,  chi  per  1'  altra

Non  s'  usa  servitori,  non  si  veste  di  seta,
non  si  tapezza  le  case,  tutto  e  menaggio
molto  sotlile  e  limitato." — Ant^.  Donat.,
Relazione,  MS.

Chap.  LIIl.

CONCLUSION.

517

had,  as  a  matter  of  course,  been  confiscated  as  the  strife
went  on.  The  buildings,  farms,  and  funds,  once  the
property  of  the  Church,  had  not,  however,  been  seized
upon,  as  in  other  Protestant  lands,  by  rapacious  monarchs
and  distributed  among  great  nobles  according  to  royal
caprice.  Monarchs  might  give  the  revenue  of  a  sup-
pressed convent  to  a  cook,  as  reward  for  a  successful
pudding;  the  surface  of  Britain  and  the  continent  might
be  covered  witli  abbeys  and  monasteries  now  converted
into  lordly  palaces — passing  thus  from  the  dead  hand  of
the  Church  into  the  idle  and  unproductive  palm  of  the
noble;  but  the  ancient  ecclesiastical  establishments  of
the  free  Netherlands  were  changed  into  eleemosynary
institutions,  admirably  organized  and  administered  with
wisdom  and  economy,  where  oqihansof  the  poor,  widows
of  those  slain  in  the  battles  for  freedom  by  land  and  sea,
and  the  aged  and  the  infirm,  who  had  deserved  well  of
the  republic  in  the  days  of  their  strength,  were  educated
or  cherished  at  the  expense  of  the  public,  thus  endowed
from  the  spoils  of  the  Church.^

In  Spain,  monasteries  upon  monasteries  were  rising
day  by  day,  as  if  there  were  not  yet  receptacles  enough
for  monks  and  priests,  while  thousands  upon  thousands
of  Spaniards  were  pressing  into  the  ranks  of  the  priest-
hood, and  almost  forcing  themselves  into  monasteries,
that  they  might  be  privileged  to  beg,  because  ashamed  to
work.  In  the  United  Netherlands  the  confiscated  con-
vents, with*  their  revenues,  were  appropriated  for  the
good  of  those  who  were  too  young  or  too  old  to  labour,
and  too  poor  to  maintain  themselves  without  work.
Need  men  look  farther  than  to  this  simple  fiict  to
learn  why  Spain  was  decaying  while  the  republic  was
rising?

The  ordinary  budget  of  the  United  Provinces  was

23  "Si  vedono  in  quelle  citUi  chiese  quali  nutriscono  allevano  et  mantengono

antiohe  bellissime  parte  distrutte  et  parte  i  vecchl  impotenti,  i  figli  orfani  ed  altri

senza  imaglni  ridottl  per  i  loro  esercltii  de'  benemeritl  dello  SUito  che  hanno  hpesi

che  noil  consiKtono  in  altro  cbe  all'  i  migliorl  anui  o  porso  le  vite  nei  loro

ascoltiir  Ic  domcniche  e  pochi  altri  giorni  servitii. Kt  a  qucsti  hosoltali  si  appli-

le  i>r<'diche  da'  loro  predicatttri. Dell'  cberanno  ancora  1'  entnite  di  quei  pochl

entrate  di  qucste  chiese  ch'  erano  gia  dei  monasterii  et.  collegi  Teut<jnici  die  si

prelati,  dei  monasteri,  e  dei  sacerdoti  rimangono,  morti  che  siano  quelli  che  le

niantengono  un  buon  nuraero  de  hospitali  godono  al  presente."  —  Conttirini,  MS.

nelle  principalc  citta  del  paese  fabbrichati  Antonio  Donato,  too,  speaks  of  these  hi)s-

•on  niolto  fejiese,  povernati  con  bellissirai  pitals  afl  model  institutions. — lielazione,

ordim  et  custoditi  con  gran  polllia  ne  .MS.

518

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LIIL

about  equal  to  that  of  England,  varying  not  much  from
four  millions  of  florins,  or  four  hundred  thousand  pounds.
But  the  extraordinary  revenue  was  comparatively  with-
out limits,  and  there  had  been  years,  during  the  war,
when  the  citizens  had  taxed  themselves  as  highly  as  fifty
per  cent,  on  each  individual  income,  and  doubled  the
receipts  of  the  exchequer.^*  The  budget  was  proposed
once  a  year,  by  the  council  of  state,  and  voted  by  the
States-General,  who  assigned  the  quota  of  each  province;
that  of  Holland  being  always  one-half  of  the  whole,  that
of  Zeeland  sixteen  per  cent.,  and  that  of  the  other  five  of
course  in  lesser  proportions.  The  revenue  was  collected
in  the  separate  provinces,  one-third  of  the  whole  being
retained  for  provincial  expenses,  and  the  balance  paid
into  the  general  treasury .^^  There  was  a  public  debt,
the  annual  interest  of  which  amounted  to  200,000  florins.
During  the  war,  money  had  been  borrowed  at  as  high
a  rate  as  thirty-six  per  cent.,  but  at  the  conclusion  of
hostilities  the  States  could  borrow  at  six  per  cent.,  and
the  whole  debt  was  funded  on  that  basis.  Taxation
was  enormously  heavy,  but  patriotism  caused  it  to  be
borne  with  cheerfulness,  and  productive  industry  made
it  comparatively  light.  Kents  were  charged  twenty-five
per  cent.  A  hundred  per  cent,  was  levied  upon  beer,
wine,  meat,  salt,  spirits.  Other  articles  of  necessity  and
luxury  were  almost  as  severely  taxed.^^  It  is  not  easy
to  enumerate  the  tax-list,  scarcely  anything  foreign  or
domestic  being  exempted,  while  the  grave  error  was
often  committed  of  taxing  the  same  article,  in  diflerent
forms,  four,  five,  and  six  times.

The  people  virtually  taxed  themselves,  although  the
superstition  concerning  the  State,  as  something  distinct
from  and  superior  to  the  people,  was  to  linger  long  and
work  infinite  mischief  among  those  seven  republics
which  were  never  destined  to  be  welded  theoretically
and  legally  into  a  union.  The  sacrednessof  corporations
had  succeeded,  in  a  measure,  to  the  divinity  which
hedges  kings.  Nevertheless,  those  corporations  were  so
numerous  as  to  be  efiectively  open  to 'a  far  larger  pro-
portion of  the  population  than,  in  those  days,  had  ever
dreamed  before  of  participating  in  the  Government.  The

2-1  Contarini,  MS.

25  Ibid.

«e  Ibid.

CiiAP.  LIII.

COXCLUSIOX.

519

magistracies  were  in  general  unpaid  and  little  coveted,
being  regarded  as  a  burthen  and  a  responsibility  rather
than  an  object  of  ambition.  The  jurisconsults,  called
pensionaries,  who  assisted  the  municipal  authorities,
received,  however,  a  modest  salary,  never  exceeding
1 500  florins  a  year.

These  numerous  bodies,  provincial  and  municipal,
elected  themselves  by  supplying  their  own  vacancies.
The  magistrates  were  appointed  by  the  stadholder,  on  a
double  or  triple  nomination  from  the  municipal  board.
This  was  not  impartial  suffrage  nor  manhood  suffrage.
The  germ  of  a  hateful  burgher- oligarchy  was  in  the
system,  but,  as  compared  with  Spain,  where  municipal
magistracies  were  sold  by  the  crown  at  public  auction  ;
or  with  France,  where  every  office  in  church,  law,
magistratuie,  or  court  was  an  object  of  merchandise
disposed  of  in  open  market,  the  system  was  purity  it-
self, and  marked  a  great  advance  in  the  science  of
government.

It  should  never  be  forgotten,  moreover,  that  while  the
presidents  and  judges  of  the  highest  courts  of  judicature
in  other  civilized  lands  were  at  the  mercy  of  an  irre-
sponsible sovereign,  and  held  office — even  although  it  had
been  paid  for  in  solid  s]iecie — at  his  pleasure,  the  su-
))reme  justices  of  the  high  courts  of  ap])eal  at  the  Hague
were  nominated  by  a  senate,  and  confirmed  by  a  stad-
holder, and  that  they  exer(;ised  their  functions  for  life,''^
or  so  long  as  they  conducted  themselves  virtuously  in
their  high  office  — quarncHu  se  bene  gesserinf.

If  one  of  the  great  objects  of  a  civilized  community  is
to  secure  to  all  men  their  own — uf  sua  fenerent — surely  it
must  be  admitted  that  the  republic  was  in  advance  of
all  C(mtemporary  States  in  the  laying  down  of  this  vital
princi])le,  the  independence  of  judges.

As  to  the  army  and  navy  of  the  United  Provinces,
enough  has  been  said,  in  earlier  chapters  of  these  volumes,
to  indicate  the  improvements  introduced  by  Prince  i\Iau-
lice,  and  now  carried  to  the  highest  point  of  perfection
ever  attained  in  that  period.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever,
that  for  discipline,  experience,  eqTii]nnent,  effectiveness
of  movement,  and  general  organization,  the  army  of  the

S7  Contarini,  MS.

520  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chaf.  LHI,

republic  was  the  model  army  of  Europe. It  amounted
to  but  thirty  thousand  infantry  and  two  thousand  five
hundred  cavalry,  but  this  number  was  a  large  one  for
a  standing  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth
century.  It  was  composed  of  a  variety  of  materials,
Hollanders,  Walloons,  Flemings,  Scotch,  English,  Irish,
Germans,  but  all  welded  together  into  a  machine  of
perfect  regularity.  The  private  foot-soldier  received
twelve  florins  for  a  so-called  month  of  forty-two  days,  the
drummer  and  corporal  eighteen,  the  lieutenant  fifty-two,
and  the  captain  one  hundred  and  fifty  florins.^^  Prompt
payment  was  made  every  week.^^  Obedience  was  implicit ;
mutiny,  such  as  was  of  peiiodical  recurrence  in  the  arch-
duke's army,  entirely  unknown.  The  slightest  theft
was  punished  with  the  gallows,^^  and  there  was  therefore
no  thieving.

The  most  accurate  and  critical  observers  confessed,
almost  against  their  will,  that  no  army  in  Europe  could
compare  with  the  troops  of  the  States.  As  to  the  famous
regiments  of  Sicily,  and  the  ancient  legions  of  Naples
and  Milan,  a  distinguished  Venetian  envoy,  who  had
seen  all  the  camps  and  courts  of  Christendom,  and  was
certainly  not  disposed  to  overrate  the  Hollanders  at  tho
expense  of  the  Italians,  if  any  rivalry  between  them  had
been  possible,  declared  that  every  private  soldier  in  the
republic  was  fit  to  be  a  captain  in  any  Italian  army ;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  scarcely  an  Italian
captain  who  would  be  accepted  as  a  private  in  any  com-
pany of  the  States.^^  So  low  had  the  once-famous  soldiery
of  Alva,  Don  John,  and  Alexander  Farnese  descended.

28  "Ma  tutta  gente  esquisita  per  la  militar  disciplina  che  ci  bisogna  impa-
propria  conditione  per  1'  habito  gia  fermo  rarla  dalle  nationi  straniere  che  pur  1'  ap-
al  patire  et  al  combattere  per  tanti  anni  priessero  da  quelle  di  questa  provincia.
di  guerra  et  per  la  slngolare  obbedienza  Et  a  tale  sono  arrivati  i  gradi  delta  mi-
accompagnata  da  tutti  gli  ordini  della  litia  che  moltl  presso  di  noi  capitani  diffi-
vera  militare  disciplina  essendo  tenuti  in  cilmente  presso  di  loro  sarebbono  admessi
rontinua  esercitatione  de'  capitani  e  sog-  per  buoni  soldati." — Cont^rini,  MS.
getti  di  gran  qualita." — Contarini,  MS.  "  Le  qualita  delle  militie  terrestri  che

29  Ibid.  30  Ibid.  servono  in  questi  Stati  sono  senza  dubbio
31  Ibid.  "  Ogni  minimo  furto  si  castiga  le  migliori  di  Europa  e  del  Mondo,"  says

3on  la  forca."  Antonio  Donato,  adding  that  among  them

'*  JPosso  aflBrmar  a  Vostra  Serenity  "  the  first  place  is  held  by  the  English

zhe  qual  si  voglia  fante  private  fra  quelle  infantry,  best  beloved  by  the  natives,

militie  si  stimarebbe  qui  buono  per  coman-  brave,  patient  veterans,  whose  habits  and

dare  una  compagnia  tanto  e  declinato  in  charact<^r  are  in  conformity  with  the

Itaha  e  1'  uso  et  I'antico  splendore  della  country."— Relazione,  MS.

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

521

The  cavalry  of  the  republic  was  even  more  perfectly
organized  than  was  the  infantry.  I  want  words  to
describe  its  perfection,"  said  Cuntarini.^^  Hie  pay  was
very  high,  and  very  prompt.  A  captain  received  four
hundred  florins  a  month  (of  forty  two  days),  a  lieutenant
one  bundled  and  eighty  florins,  and  other  officers  and
privates  in  proportion.^^  These  rates  would  be  very
high  in  our  own  day.  When  allowance  is  made  for  the
difference  in  the  value  of  money  at  the  respective  epocbs,
the  salaries  are  prodigious ;  but  the  thrifty  republic
found  its  account  in  paying  well  and  paying  regularly
the  champions  on  whom  so  much  depended,  and  by
whom  such  splendid  services  had  been  rendered.^

While  the  soldiers  in  the  pay  of  Queen  Elizabeth  were
crawling  to  her  palace  gates  to  die  of  starvation  before
her  eyes ;  while  the  veterans  of  Spain  and  of  Italy  had
organized  themselves  into  a  permanent  military,  mutin-
ous republic,  on  the  soil  of  the  so-called  obedient  Aether-
land,  because  they  were  left  by  their  masteis  without
clothing  or  food  ;  the  cavalry  and  infantry  of  the  Dutch
commonwealth,  thanks  to  the  organizing  s})irit,  and  the
wholesome  thrift  of  the  burgher  authorities,  were  con-
tented, obedient,  well  fed,  well  clothed,  and  well  paid;
devoted  to  their  Government,  and  ever  ready  to  die  in
its  defence.

Nor  was  it  only  on  the  regular  army  that  reliance  was
placed.  On  the  contrary,  every  able-bodied  man  in  the
country  was  liable  to  be  called  upon  to  serve,  at  any
moment,  in  the  militia.  All  were  trained  to  arms,  and
provided  with  arms,  and  there  had  been  years  during
this  perpetual  war  in  which  one  man  out  of  three  of  the
whole  male  population  was  ready  to  be  mustered  at  any
moment  into  the  field.^*^

Even  more  could  be  said  in  praise  of  the  navy  than
has  been  stated  of  the  aiinies  of  the  republic;  for  the
contempoi'ary  a(;counts  of  foreigners,  and  of  foreigners
who  were  apt  to  be  satirical,  rather  than  enthusiastic,

33  Contarini,  MS. "  D«  lla  Cavalle-  miino  che  si  piacesse  a'  Sereni^lmi  Stati

ria  debbo  dire  poco  poicho  poco  si  pub  di  ricerciire  il  terzo  uomo  da  tuito  il  paese

dire  che  arrivi  ad  esprimere  la  sua  per-  oflFerinuio  est^i  che  pochi  si  siarebbono  i

fezione."  quail  non  deslderassero  che  a  loro  ne

3*  Ibid. 35  Ibid.  toccasse  la  sorte  Uinto  si  rcnde  piacevole

36  "  Si  dimostrano  tutti  quel  popoli  cosi  all'  orecchie  di  quelle  geiiti  il  nome  delU

techiiuiti  alia  militia  per  la  difosu  com-  gucrra." — Ibid.

522

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LHI.

when  describing  the  institutions,  leading  personages,
and  customs  of  other  countries,  seemed  ever  to  speak
of  the  United  Provinces  in  terms  of  eulog3^  In  com-
merce, as  in  war,  the  naval  supremacy  of  the  republic
was  indisputable.  It  was  easy  for  the  States  to  place
two  thousand  vessels  of  war  in  commission,  if  necessary,
of  tonnage  varying  from  four  hundred  to  twelve  hundred
tons,  to  man  them  with  the  hardiest  and  boldest  sailors
in  the  world,  and  to  despatch  them  with  promptness  to
any  quarter  of  the  globe.^'^

It  was  recognised  as  nearly  impossible  to  compel  a
war- vessel  of  the  republic  to  surrender.^^  Hardly  an
instance  was  on  her  naval  record  of  submission,  even
to  far  superior  force,  while  it  was  filled  with  the  tragic
but  heroic  histories  of  commanders  who  had  blown  their
ships,  with  every  man  on  board,  into  the  air,  rather
than  strike  their  flag.  Such  was  the  character,  and  such
the  capacity  of  the  sea-born  republic.

That  republic  had  serious  and  radical  defects,  but  the
design  remained  to  be  imitated  and  improved  upon,  cen-
turies afterwards.  The  history  of  the  rise  and  progress
of  the  Dutch  republic  is  a  leading  chapter  in  the  history
of  human  liberty.

The  great  misfortune  of  the  commonwealth  of  the
United  Provinces,  next  to  the  slenderness  of  its  geogra-
phical proportions,  was  the  fact  that  it  was  without  a
centre  and  without  a  head,  and  therefore  not  a  nation
capable  of  unlimited  vitality. There  were  seven  states.

37  Contarini,  MS. "  Le  forze  del  mare  prontezza  et  delle  genti  e  dei  vascelli

dei  Serenissimi  Stati  sono  veraraente  sti-  medesimi  sempie  apparrechiate  in  mano

mate  le  maggiori  che  posse  havere  altro  de  particolari." ' Antonio  Donato  puts

Principe  per  la  copia  dei  vascelli  et  per  il  the  number  of  Dutch  vessels  of  all  classes

numero  di  marinari  et  per  la  qualita  at  nearly  6000. Kelazione,  MS.  "This

degli  uomini  di  comando, Tenendosi  per  fury  for  dominion  upon  the  sea,"  he  says,

cosa  certa  che  possan  essere  in  quelle  "  increases  every  day,  and  is  sustained  by

Provincie  settanta  mille  marinari  buoni  such  assiduity,  intelligence,  and  interest

et  intelligenti  non  solo  per  1'  uso  delle  as  to  show  that  it  is  the  business  of  all,

navigationi  ma  insieme  ancora  per  le  and  the  whole  business,  strength,  and

battaglie  navali  nelle  quali  si  adoperano  security  of  the  States."

per  soldati  et  ognuno  di  essi  per  la  singo-  38  «  Mentre  sono  certi  che  gli  Hol-

lare  attitudine  et  ordinaria  assuefattione  landesi  piu  tosto  che  lasciarsi  vincere

e  solito  di  far  piii  che  molti  soldati  in-  darebbero  fuoco  al  proprio  vascello  per

sieme. Et  ogni  volta  che  volessero  fare  abbruciare  co  nse  medesimi  V  inimico  in-

un  sforzo  per  qualunque  occasione  poireb-  sieme.  Onde  con  questi  due  termini  della

bono  metter  insieme  il  numero  di  due  clemenza  (agli  inimici)  e  de?  somrno  W^we

mille  vascelli  sufficient!  per  ogni  fattione  sono  fatti padroni  del  ?)iar."— Contarini,

Benza  far  in  essi  spese  di  momento  per  la  MS.

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

523

Each  claimed  to  be  sovereign.  The  pretension  cn  the
part  of  several  of  them  was  ridiculous.  Overyssel,  for
example,  contributed  two  and  three-quarters  per  cent,
of  the  general  budget.  It  was  a  swamp  of  twelve
hundred  square  miles  in  extent,  with  some  heath-spots
interspersed,  and  it  numbered  perhaps  a  hundred  thou-
sand inhabitants.  The  doughty  Count  of  Embden  alone
,  could  have  swallowed  up  such  sovereignty,  have  an-
,  nexed  all  the  buckwheat  patches  and  cranberry  mai>hes
of  Overyssel  to  his  own  meagre  territories,  and  nobody
the  wiser.

Zeeland,  as  we  have  seen,  was  disposed  at  a  critical
moment  to  set  up  its  independent  sovereignty.  Zeeland,
far  more  important  than  Overyssel,  had  a  revenue  of
perhaps  five  hundred  thousand  dollars, — rather  a  slender
budget  for  an  independent  republic,  wedged  in  as  it  was
by  the  most  powerful  empires  of  the  earth,  and  lialf
drowned  by  the  ocean,  from  which  it  had  scarcel}^
emerged.

There  was  therefore  no  popular  reprci^entation,  and
on  the  other  hand  no  executive  head.  As  sovereignty
must  be  exercised  in  some  way,  however,  in  all  living
commonwealths,  and  as  a  low  degi*eo  of  vitality  was  cer-
tainly not  the  defect  of  those  bustling  provinces,  the
supreme  functions  had  now  fallen  irito  the  hands  of
Holland.

While  William  the  Silent  lived,  the  management  of
war,  foreign  affairs,  and  finance,  for  the  revolted  pro-
vinces, was  in  his  control.  He  was  aided  by  two  council
boards,  but  the  circumstiinces  of  history  and  the  cha-
racter of  the  man  had  invested  him  with  an  inevitable
dictatorship.

After  his  death,  at  least  after  Leicester's  time,  the
powers  of  the  state-council,  the  head  of  which,  Prince
Maurice,  was  almost  always  absent  at  the  wars,  fell  into
comparative  disuse.  The  great  functions  of  the  con-
federacy passed  into  the  possession  of  the  States-General.
That  body  now  came  to  sit  permanently  at  the  Hague.
The  number  of  its  members,  dejjuties  from  the  seven
provinces — envoys  from  tho>e  seven  immortiil  and  soul-
less sovereigns — was  not  large.  The  extraordinary  as-
sembly held  at  Bergen-op-Zoom  for  confiimation  of  the
truce  was  estimated  by  Bentivoglio  at  eight  bundled.

524

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LHI.

Bentivoglio,  who  was  on  the  spot,  being  then  nunciiis  at
Brussels,  ought  to  have  been  able  to  count  them,  yet  it  is
Tery  certain  that  the  number  was  grossly  exaggerated.

At  any  rate  the  usual  assembly  at  the  Hague  rarely
amounted  to  one  hundred  members.  The  presidency
was  changed  once  a  week,  the  envoy  of  each  province
taking  his  turn  as  chairman.

Olden-Barneveld,  as  member  for  Holland,  was  always
present  in  the  diet.  As  Advocate-General  of  the  leading
province,  and  keeper  of  its  great  seal,  more  especially  as
possessor  of  the  governing  intellect  of  the  whole  com-
monwealth, he  led  the  administration  of  Holland,  and
as  the  estates  of  Holland  contributed  more  than  half  of
the  whole  budget  of  the  confederacy,^^  it  was  a  natural
consequence  of  the  actual  supremacy  of  that  province,
and  of  the  vast  legal  and  political  experience  of  the  Ad-
vocate, that  Holland  should  govern  the  confederacy,  and
that  Barneveld  should  govern  Holland.

The  States-General  remained  virtually  supreme,  re-
ceiving envoys  from  all  the  great  powers,  sending  abroad
their  diplomatic  representatives,  to  whom  the  title  and
rank  of  ambassador  was  freely  accorded,  and  dealing  in
a  decorous  and  dignified  way  with  all  European  affairs.
The  ability  of  the  republican  statesmen  was  as  fully  re-
cognised all  over  the  earth,  as  was  the  genius  of  their
generals  and  great  naval  commanders.

The  People  did  not  exist;  but  this  was  merely  be-
cause, in  theory,  the  People  had  not  been  invented.  It
was  exactly  because  there  was  a  People — an  ener-
getic and  intelligent  People — that  the  republic  was
possible.

No  scheme  had  yet  been  devised  for  laying  down  in
primary  assemblies  a  fundamental  national  law,  for  dis-
tributing the  various  functions  of  governmental  power
among  selected  servants,  for  appointing  representatives
according  to  population  or  property,  and  for  holding  all

39  Gelderland  contributed  4^  per  cent.

Utrecht  „  5i

Friesland  „  11^  „

Overyssel  „  2|  „

Groningen  „  6i  „

Zeeland  „  13^-  „

Holland  „  55^  „

100

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

o25

trustees  responsible  at  reasonable  intervals  to  the  nation
itself.

Thus  government  was  involved,  fold  within  fold,  in
successive  and  concentric  municipal  layers.  The  States-
General  were  the  outer  husk,  of  which  the  separate
town -council  was  the  kernel  or  bulb.  Yet  the  number
of  these  executive  and  legislative  boards  was  so  large,
and  the  whole  population  comparatively  so  slender,  as
to  cause  the  oi  iginal  inconveniences  from  so  incomplete
a  system  to  be  rather  theoretic  than  practical.  In  point
of  fact,  almost  as  large  a  variety  of  individuals  served
the  State  as  would  perhaps  have  been  the  case  under  a
more  philosophically  arranged  democracy.  The  diffi-
culty was  rather  in  obtaining  a  candidate  for  the  post
than  in  distributing  the  posts  among  candidates.

Men  were  occupied  with  their  own  affairs.  In  pro-
portion to  their  numbers  they  were  more  productive  of
wealth  than  any  other  nation  then  existing.  An  excel-
lent reason  why  the  people  were  so  well  governed,  so
productive,  and  so  enterprising,  was  the  simple  fact  that
they  were  an  educated  people.  There  was  hardly  a
Netherlander — man,  woman,  and  child — that  could  not
read  and  write.  The^^chool  was  the  common  property  of
the  people,  paid  for  among  the  municipal  expenses.  In
the  cities,  as  well  as  in  the  rural  districts,  there  were
not  only  common  schools  but  classical  schools.  In  the
burgher  families  it  was  rare  to  find  boys  who  had  not
been  taught  Latin,  or  girls  unacquainted  with  French.
Capacity  to  write  and  sjieak  several  modern  languages
was  very  common,  and  there  were  many  individuals  in
every  city,  neither  professors  nor  pedants,  who  had  made
remarkable  progress  in  science  and  classical  literature.^
The  position,  too,  of  women  in  the  commonwealth  pi  oved
a  high  degree  of  civilization.  They  are  described  as
virtuous,  well-educated,  energetic,  sovereigns  in  their
households,  and  accustomed  to  direct  all  the  business
of  home.  **It  would  be  ridiculous,"  said  Donate,  "to
see  a  man  occupying  himself  with  domestic  house-keep-
ing. The  women  do  it  all,  and  command  absolutely."
The  Hollanders,  so  rebellious  against  Church  and  King,
accepted  with  meekness  the  despotism  of  woman.

*o  Antonio  I>onato,  Relazlone,  MS.  Grot  ParalelL  Rer.  pubL  ed.  Meerman,  lii.
61. Van  Kiuupen,  i.  608,  609.

526

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  LHI.

The  great  movement  of  emancipation  from  political
and  ecclesiastical  tyranny  had  brought  with  it  a  general
advancement  of  the  human  intellect.  The  foundation
of  the  Leyden  university  in  memory  of  the  heroism
displayed  by  the  burghers  during  the  siege  was  as  noble
a  monument  as  had  ever  been  raised  by  a  free  people
jealous  of  its  fame.  And  the  scientific  lustre  of  the
university  well  sustained  the  nobility  of  its  origin.  The
proudest  nation  on  earth  might  be  more  proud  of  a  seat
of  learning,  founded  thus  amidst  carnage  and  tears,
whence  so  much  of  profound  learning  and  bi  illiant  lite-
rature had  already  been  diffused.  The  classical  labours
of  Joseph  Scaliger,  Heinsius — father  and  son — the  elder
Dousa,  almost  as  famous  with  his  pen  in  Latin  poetry  as
his  sword  had  made  him  in  the  vernacular  chronicle ;
of  Dousa  the  son,  whom  Grotius  called  "  the  crown  and
flower  of  all  good  learning,  too  soon  snatched  away  by
envious  death,  than  whom  no  man  more  skilled  in  poetry,
more  consummate  in  acquaintance  with  ancient  science
and  literature,  had  ever  lived  of  Hugo  Grotius  himself,
who  at  the  age  of  fifteen  had  taken  his  doctor's  degree
at  Leyden,  who  as  a  member  of  Olden-Barneveld's
important  legation  to  France  and  England  very  soon
afterwards  had  excited,  the  astonishment  of  Henry  IV.
and  Elizabeth,  who  had  already  distinguished  himself
by  editions  of  classic  poets,  and  by  original  poems  and
dramas  in  Latin,  and  was  already,  although  but  twenty-six
years  of  age,  laying  the  foimdation  of  that  magnificent
reputation  as  a  jurist,  a  philosopher,  a  historian,  and  a
statesman,  which  was  to  be  one  of  the  enduring  glories
of  humanity, — all  these  were  the  precious  possessions  of
the  high  school  of  Leyden.

The  still  more  modern  university  of  Franeker,  founded
amid  the  din  of  perpetual  warfare  in  Friesland,  could
at  least  boast  the  name  of  Arminius,  whose  theological
writings  and  whose  expansive  views  were  destined  to
exert  such  influence  over  his  contemporaries  and  pos-
terity.

The  great  history  of  Hoofd,  in  which  the  splendid
pictures  and  the  impassioned  drama  of  the  great  war  of
independence  were  to  be  preserved  for  his  countrymen
through  all  time,  was  not  yet  written. It  was  soon

*i  Van  Kampen,  i.  608.  Grot.  Paralell.  Rer.  pub.  iii.  49,

Chap.  LIII.

CONCLUSION.

527

afterwards,  however,  to  form  not  only  a  chief  source  of
accurate  information  as  to  the  great  events  themselves,
but  a  model  of  style  never  since  surpassed  by  any  prose
writer  in  either  branch  of  the  German  tongue.

Had  Hoofd  written  for  a  wider  audience,  it  would  be
difficult  to  name  a  contemporary  author  of  any  nation
whose  work  would  have  been  more  profoundly  studied
or  more  generally  admired.

But  the  great  war  had  not  waited  to  be  chronicled  by
the  classic  and  impassioned  Hoofd.  Ali  eady  theie  were
thorough  and  exhaustive  narrators  of  what  was  instinc-
tively felt  to  be  one  of  the  most  pregnant  episodes  of
human  history.  Bor  of  Utrecht,  a  miracle  of  industry,
of  learning,  of  unwearied  perseverance,  was  already
engaged  in  the  production  of  those  vast  folios  in  which
nearly  all  the  great  transactions  of  the  forty  years'  war
were  conscientiously  portrayed,  with  a  comprehensive-
ness of  material  and  an  impartiality  of  statement,  such
as  might  seem  almost  impossible  for  a  contemporary
writer.  Immersed  in  attentive  study  and  piofound
contemplation,  he  seemed  to  lift  his  tranquil  head  from
time  to  time  over  the  wild  ocean  of  those  troublous  times,
and  to  survey  with  accuracy  without  being  swayed  or
appalled  by  the  tempest.  There  was  something  almost
sublime  in  his  steady,  unimpassioned  gaze.

Emanuel  van  Meteren,  too,  a  plain  Protestant  mer-
chant of  Antwerp  and  Amsterdam,  wTote  an  admirable
history  of  the  war  and  of  his  own  times,  full  of  precious
details,  especially  rich  in  statistics — a  branch  of  science
which  he  almost  invented — which  still  remains  as  one
of  the  leading  authorities,  not  only  for  scholars,  but  for
the  general  reader.

Keyd  and  Burgundius,  the  one  the  Calvinist  private
secretary  of  Lewis  William,  the  other  a  warm  Catholic
partisan,  both  made  invaluable  contemporaneous  contri-
butions to  the  history  of  the  war.

The  trophies  already  secured  by  the  Netherlanders  in
every  department  of  the  fine  arts,  as  well  as  the  splendour
which  was  to  enrich  the  coming  epoch,  are  too  familiar
to  the  world  to  need  more  than  a  passing  allusion.

But  it  was  especially  in  physical  science  that  the
republic  was  taking  a  leading  part  in  the  great  intellec-
tual march  of  the  nations.

628

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LIH

The  very  necessities  of  its  geographical  position  had
forced  it  to  pre-eminence  in  hydraulics  and  hydrostatics.
It  had  learned  to  transform  water  into  dry  land  with  a
perfection  attained  by  no  nation  before  or  since.  The
wonders  of  its  submarine  horticulture  were  the  despair
of  all  gardeners  in  the  world.

And  as  in  this  gentlest  of  arts,  so  also  in  the  dread
science  of  war,  the  republic  had  been  the  instructor  of
mankind.  The  youthful  Maurice  and  his  cousin  Lewis
William  had  so  restored  and  improved  the  decayed
intelligence  of  antique  strategy,  that  the  greybeards
of  Europe  became  docile  pupils  in  their  school.  The
mathematical  teacher  of  Prince  Maurice  amazed  the  con-
temporary world  with  his  combinations  and  mechanical
inventions ;  the  flying  chariots  of  Simon  Stevinus  seeming
products  of  magical  art.

Yet  the  character  of  the  Dutch  intellect  was  averse
to  sorcery.  The  small  but  mighty  nation  which  had
emancipated  itself  from  the  tyranny  of  Philip  and  of  the
Holy  Inquisition,  was  foremost  to  shake  off  the  fetters
of  superstition.  Out  of  Holland  came  the  first  voice  to
rebuke  one  of  the  hideous  delusions  of  the  age.  While
grave  magistrates  and  sages  of  other  lands  were  exor-
cising the  devil  by  murdering  his  supposed  victims,
John  Wier,  a  physician  of  Grave,  boldly  denounced  the
deaion  which  had  taken  possession,  not  of  the  wizards,
but  of  the  judges.

The  age  was  lunatic  and  sick,  and  it  was  fitting  that
the  race  which  had  done  so  much  for  the  physical  and
intellectual  emancipation  of  the  world,  should  have  been
the  first  to  apply  a  remedy  for  this  monstrous  madness.
Englishmen  and  their  descendants  were  drowning  and
hanging  witches  in  New  England,  long  after  John  Wier
had  rebuked  and  denounced  the  belief  in  witchcraft.

It  was  a  Zeelander,  too,  who  placed  the  instrument
in  the  hand  of  Galileo  by  which  that  daring  genius
traced  the  movements  of  the  univeise,  and  who,  by
another  wondrous  invention,  enabled  future  discoverers
to  study  the  infinite  life  which  lies  all  around  us,  hidden
not  by  its  remoteness  but  its  minuteness.  Zacharias
Jansens  of  Middelburg,  in  1590,  invented  both  the  teles-
cope and  the  microscope.

Tlie  wonder-man  of  Alkmaar,  Cornelius  Drebbel,  who

Chap.  LIIl.

CON'CLUSION.

529

performed  such  astoimdiiig  feats  for  the  amusement  of
Rudolph  of  Germany  and  James  of  Britain,  is  also
supposed  to  have  invented  the  thermometer  and  the
barometer.  But  this  claim  has  been  disputed.  The  in-
ventions of  Jansens  are  proved.

Willebrod  Snellius,  mathematical  professor  of  Leyden,
introduced  the  true  method  of  measuring  the  degrees  of
longitude  and  latitude,  and  Huygens,  who  had  seen  his
manuscripts,  asserted  that  Snellius  had  invented,  before
Descartes,  the  doctrine  of  refraction.

But  it  was  especially  to  that  noble  band  of  heroes  and
martyrs,  the  great  navigators  and  geographical  disco-
verers of  the  republic,  that  science  is  above  all  indebted.

Nothing  is  more  sublime  in  human  story  than  the
endurance  and  audacity  with  which  those  pioneers  of
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  confrontt-d  the
nameless  horrors  of  either  pole,  in  the  interests  of  com-
merce, and  foi*  the  direct  purpose  of  enlarging  the  bounds
of  the  human  intellect.

The  achievements,  the  sufferings,  and  the  triumphs  of
Barendz  and  Cordes,  Ileemskerk,  Van  der  Ilagen,  and
many  others,  have  been  slightly  indicated  in  these  pages.
The  contributions  to  botany,  mineralogy,  geometiy,  geo-
graphy, and  zoology,  of  Linschoten,  l^lancius,  Wagenaar,
and  Iloutmann,  and  so  many  other  explorers  of  pule  and
tropic,  can  hardly  be  overrated.

The  Netherlanders  had  wiaing  their  original  father-
land out  of  the  grasp  of  the  ocean.  They  had  coni'ronted
for  centuries  the  wrath  of  that  ancient  tyrant,  ever  ready
to  seize  the  prey  of  which  he  had  been  defrauded.

^i'hey  had  waged  fiercer  and  more  pei'})etual  battle
with  a  tyranny  more  cruel  than  the  tempest,  with  an
ancient  superstition  more  hungry  than  the  sea.  It  was
inevitable  that  a  race,  thus  invigorated  by  the  ocean,
cradled  to  freedom  by  their  conflicts  with  its  power,  and
hardened  almost  to  invincibility  by  their  struggle  against
human  despotism,  should  be  foremost  among  the  nations
in  the  development  of  political,  religious,  and  coumier-
cial  freedom.

The  writer  now  takes  an  affectionate  farewell  of  those
who  have  followed  him  with  an  indulgent  sympathy

VOL.  IV.  2  M

530  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  LHI.

as  lie  has  attempted  to  trace  the  origin  and  the  eventful
course  of  the  Dutch  commonwealth.  If  by  his  labours
a  generous  love  has  been  fostered  for  that  blessing,
without  which  everything  that  this  earth  can  offer  is
worthless — freedom  of  thought,  of  speech,  and  of  life —
his  hisihest  wish  has  been  fulfilled .

INDEX.

The  Boman  numerals  indicate  the  volumes,  the  Arabic  numerals  the  pages.
Names  having  the  prefix  of  De,  or  Van,  are  generally,  but  not  invariably,
placed  under  their  prefix.

AARDENBURG.

Aardenburg,  disgraceful  surrender  of,  iv,  |
192.

Abdulzamar,  chief  of  the  Sumatran  lega-
tion, his  death,  iv,  104.

ACHfM,  Atchoii,  Astgon  or  A tsgon,  Sumatra,
einba>sy  .sent  to  Holland  from,  iv,  103.  j
227. iMofitiiig  by  its  Dutch  experiences
and  repulsing  the  Spaniards,  388,  3«9,  |
39 1 .  I

Acvs,  Bishop  of,  counselling  his  king  In  I
vain,  i,  118.  I

Aei:ssens,  Cornelius,  States'  liccorder,  his  i
conferences  with  the  Arcluluk.  s'  enus-  )
saries  on  negotiations  lor  juac"-,  iv,  279-  |
2S1.  2?s7.  Oifers  of  gifts  to  him,  and  i
troubles  he  got  into  thereabout,  361-362.  |
^Vhat  beciune  of  the  gilts,  367.  His
aspiration  for  his  friend  Harneveldt,  466.
I)<-nounted  as  a  traitor,  469.

Aeksskns,  Francis,  on  Klizabeth's  intentions
towards  the  States,  iii,  4r.6,  457.  On  a
rumour  relative  to  the  marriage  of  Henry
IV,  f)57  vote.  His  fears  turned  into  re-
joicings, iv,  45  note.  On  Henry's  insin-
cerity towards  the  StaUs.  97,  98,  notes.
An  aphorism  from  Henry's  lips,  140  and
note.  Kt'sult  of  his  experiences  at  the
French  Court,  187.  His  reply  to  a  query
of  Henry's,  2ii6  note.  On  Henry  s  re-
joicings at  till'  capture  of  Sluys,  209.  On
Henry's  indignation  at  the  "  shortcom-
ings "  of  the  republic,  248.  Conlerring
and  reporting  on  the  Knglish  and  French
schemes  for  annexing  the  Stales,  263-267.
On  Henry's  secret  views  a**  to  a  truce,
434.  Taxing  Henry  with  the  same,  434.
Denounced  as  a  traitor,  469.  Barneveldl's
congratulations  to  him,  485.  Hee  iii,  471
ni  te.  iv,  3r»4,  355.  }

AnMi:i>,  or  Ahmet,  Sultan,  iv,  203.  258.  500.

AisMA,  or  Aiizma,  Frisian  councillor,  i,  297.
384.

Ai.AccoN,  Don  Martin,  with  his  monks  in

the  Armada,  ii,  443.
Alukht,  Cardinal  Archduke,  Viceroy  of
I'ortugal,  subs<quenily  called  in  con-
'  Junction  with  his  wifi-  "  the  Archdukes,"
I  ><  signaled  to  succeed  Farnese  as  governor
I  the  Netherliinds,  iii,  2(i9. His  }>roct  s-
Moual  entry  upon  his  oflice,  332,  333.  His

ALBERT.

birth,  personal  nppearance,  manners,  &c.
337-338.  His  invesiment  of  Hulst,  and
alleged  sacritice  of  his  soldiers  there,  371-
373.  A  throne  thought  of  for  him,  390.
Objections  to  the  scheme,  391,  392.  His
present  lo  Henry  IV,  394.  J'hilip's  quix-
otic r»  quest  lo  liim,  396.  Attack  on  and
defeat  of  his  forces  at  Turnhout,  397-406.
His  reply  to  Maurice's  letter  as  to  giviug
quarter,  406  note.  Cfjnsequences  to  him
of  his  king's  repudiation  of  his  del»ts,414.
416.,  His  recijte  for  Anlwerp's  417.
Jk'aten  out  of  Amiens:  disiq)i)ointed  In
his  intendt  d  relic-n.bbrry,  424-426.  Wife
and  sovereignty  provide<l  for  him,  444.
4  71  and  nott.  His  marriage,  4  72.  Re-
ception of  the  pair  in  Brusseb^ :  his  ex-
travagant housekeeping ;  character  of  his
court,  552-553.  Project  for  di.sj<»lvinK  his
marriage,  5r)7.  His  dominions  threateintl,
iv,  2.  4.  Gathering  and  haranguini?  his
forces,  II.  12.  Acting  on  the  offensive:
his  succe>si»8,  13.  1h,  His  promi-e  of
glory  to  himself,  humiliation  and  annihi-
luti^'U  to  his  foe,  21.  impatience  of  his
trooj)6,  22,  23.  His  conspicuous  equip-
ment and  bearing  on  the  eve  of  the  Nieu-
j)ort  battle,  27.  His  imminent  danger,
di>comtiture,  and  e.scap<*,  3h,  39,  42.  II is
and  his  wife's  chargers  clianging  masters,
43,  44.  His  consolation  in  defeat,  52.
'J  emptations  offered  to  him  to  b«  siege
Oetend,  58.  .Beginning  the  siege:  his
lora'S,  60.  Problem  he  had  to  8<^ilve :
his  "  sausiiges,"  66.  His  men  s  chief  in-
ducements, 67.  His  small  n  gard  tor  their
lives,  69.  Jn  holiday  trim  and  high
anticipation  once  more,  79.  Growling
and  lurious,  81.  Waiting  for  victoiy,
and  di!>ap|)ointed,  83.  Takinji  the  wrong
course  with  his  muilnou-^  soldiers,  93.
Their  Siircastic  ri  ply  to  his  threats,  94-
96.  Reprisals  caus' d  by  his  killing  hia
prisoners,  117,  llH.  Result  of  his  excom-
munication of  the  mutineers,  120,  121.
Jn  doubt  about  hi>  bjirgain :  comi>elled  to
make  terms  with  his  veterans,  196.  Os-
tend  given  up  to  him;  condition  and
cost  (in  human  life)  of  his  prize,  200-202.
In  treaty  with  King  James,  204,  Levy-

2  M  2

532  ALDEGONDE.

INDEX.

ANTWERP.

ing  troops  in  England,  213.  Guy  Faux
one  of  his  old  soldiers,  238.  Sending
peace  negotiators  to  the  Slates,  275.  Con-
ferences, blunders,  travellings  to  and  Iro,
and  ultimate  result,  279-294.  Desirps  of
himself  and  his  wife,  353,  354.  Their
povverlessness  to  treat  with  the  States,
358.  Scolding  Philip  III,  363.  Direction
taken  by  his  hopes,  385.  Objections  of
the  States  to  the  titles  claimed  for  him
and  his  wife,  402,  403.  His  demand  in
return  for  giving  up  the  titles,  405,  406.
His  hypocrisy,  406,  407.  Discovery  and
publication  of  his  secret  instructions,  452-
455.  Object  of  his  confessor's  mission  to
Spain,  476,  477.  Terms  of  truce  ag-eed
on  with  the  States,  478.  480.  His  tempt-
ing offers  to  Maurice,  503.  See  ii,  -439,
442.  526.  iii,  276.  341.  392.  397.  429.  432.
iv,  373.  379.  385.  427.  44-.  496.  See  also
Austria,  House  of.

ALi)E(jONDE,  see  Sainte  Aldegonde.

Alen'von,  Duke  of,  a  reminiscence  of,  iii,
326,  327.

Alkxander  of  Macedon  and  Alexander  of
Parma,  i,  2^6.

Allan,  or  Allen,  Dr,  his  pamphlet  or
"  Admonition  "  against  Elizabeth,  ii,  379,
380.  383-386.  459.  A  disappointed  can-
didate for  the  paj)acy,  iii,  84.

Altkkas,  liaurenz,  vice-admiral  of  Zee-
land,  iv,  297.  300. His  exploit,  303.

Alva,  regular  accompaniments  of  the  vic-
tories of,  i,  239.  Parma's  conduct  con-
trasted with  his,  24 1 .  Number  of  religious
murders  boasted  of  by  him,  ii,  277.  See
ii,361,  362.  iii,  41.  159.  268.  334.  420.  iv,
13.  214.

Amazon  defenders  of  Sluys,  ii,  250.

AMnofSE,  Renee  of;  condition  of  her  mar-
riage with  Balagtiy,  iii,  327.  Her  heroism
at  the  siege  of  Cambriiy  and  resolute
death,  329,  330.

Amboyna  captured  by  the  Dutch,  iv,  228.

Amp:rica,  popular  belief  as  to  the  habits  of
the  natives  of,  iv,  278.  Artillery  opera-
tions in  the  recent  civil  war,  69.

Amfkns  captured  by  a  Spanish  artifice,  iii,
409-410.  Measures  resolved  on  to  regain
it,  411.  413.  Besieged  and  recaptured,
424-426. See  432.

Amstkkdam,  festival  in  honour  of  Lei ce.ster
at,  ii,  14.  Plot  of  his  partisans  to  sieze
the  city,  315.  Prospering,  iii,  22-,  23.
Sharing  in  an  arctic  voyage,  526.  Trade
monopolies,  iv,  40^!-tl7.  Wavering  in
its  opposition  to  a  truce,  467.  Accepting
it,  475.  Rapid  extension  of  the  city,  510.
See  iii,  165  note.

Amukath,  Sultan  of  Turkey,  German
dread  of:  his  presents  to  Philip  II,  i,  29
His  liking  for  Henry  IV,  iii,  46.  His
magnificent  letter  to  Henry,  46  note.
Knocking  at  the  imperial  gates,  297.  His
d'-ath  :  terrible  doings  of  his  successor,
310.

ANABArirsTS,  how  treated  by  Elizabeth  and
William  the  SiLnt,  i,  24,  25.

Ancel,  mission  confided  by  Henry  IV  to,

iii,  387.  390.  392.
Anderson,  Claas,  Dutch  Arctic  navigator,

iii,  537,  538.
Andrada,  the  famous  Portuguese  poisoner,

iii,  278.

Angiers,  reception  of  the  Dutch  envoys  at,
iii,  450.

Anhalt,  Prince  of,  iv,  28.  188.

Anjou,  Duke  of,  his  treachery,  i,  8.  9.  58.
88.  His  death,  10.  His  wife-huntings,
28.  53.  Change  of  policy  brought  about
by  his  death,  35.  Step  taken  by  the
States-General  on  his  death,  52.  Catherine
de  Medici's  claim  under  his  will,  131.
Tearing  down  of  his  arms  at  Antwerp,
240.  Queen  Elizabeth's  aspiration  for  his
soul,  303.  Sidney's  protest  against  the
queen's  marriage  with  him,  340.  Tour-
nam  'ntal  honours  rendered  to  him  by
Sidney,  341.  Lesson  taught  to  Holland
by  his  conduct,  ii,  112,  113.

Anne  of  Denmark,  queen  of  James  I,  a
bribed  partizan  of  Spain,  iv,  135.  Her
husband's  subservience  to  her,  147.

Antonio,  Don,  pretender  of  Portugal;  price
set  on  his  head ;  his  escape,  privations,
and  ambition,  i,  64.  Renewed  efforts  of
Philip  to  kidnap  him,  64.  Makes  him-
self of  use  to  England,  65.  Resolve  of  the
English  court  as  t<>  how  he  "might  be
induced  to  offend  "  the  king  of  Spain,  80.
At  Leicester's  banquet  at  Utrecht,  ii,  15.
Abortive  .Anglo- Dutch  expedition  in  hi*
behalf,  525-527.

Antonio,  Don  Matteo,  see.Serrano.

Antweri^  siege  and  fall  of,  i,  22,  107.
Com  paired  with  other  l-.uropean  cities,  50.
Feelings  towards  France  and  England,
71  note.  Occasion  of  the  proverb  "  If  we
get  to  Antwerp  :  "  Farnese  preparing
for  its  siege,  13  2.  Illustrations  military
and  political  afforded  by  the  siege,  134.
Scientific  and  mechanical  appliances  re-
sort(!d  to  by  besiegers  and  besieged,  134.
Situation  of  the  city :  capacity  of  its
harbour,  135.  Plan  of  defence  urged  by
William  the  Silent,  and  results  of  its
non-observance,  135-137.  Consequences
of  the  absence  of  a  governing  he  d  :  anar-
chical results  of  a  conflict  of  authorities,
138,  139.  Rejection  of  William's  plans:
the  butchers  in  the  ascendant,  145-147.
Unwise  abandonment  of  Heienthals:  the
loss  of  Liefkenshoek,  147-148.  R  pulse
of  the  Spaniards  at  Lillo,  150.  Suicidal
results  of  regul  itions  imposed  upon  the
brit)gers-in  of  corn,  152,  153.  Scene  pro-
duced by  the  opening  of  the  Saftingen
sluices  153.  Too  late  percepti'»n  by  its
opponents  of  the  value  of  Orange's  plan,
154.  The  key  to  its  fate,  165.  Incredu-
lity as  to  the  possibility  of  Parma  bridging
the  Scheldt,  156.  Reply  of  its  authoriti»8
to  Parma's  attempts  to  subdue  them  by
arguments  and  j)romises,  160-163.  Com-
Jiercial  panic:  flight  of  its  wealthy  citi-
zens, 163.  Opportunity  lost  by  the  lailure

AQUILA.

INDEX.

AUSTRIA.

533

at  Bois-le-Duc,  170,  171.  Consternation
at  the  completion  of  Parma's  bridge :
"demons"  fancied  and  real,  174.  Treat-
ment of  their  spy  by  I'arnja,  176.  Mes-
sage brought  home  by  him,  176.  Preparing
for  action:  Liefkeiibhoek  reg.iined,  178,
179.  (iianibelli's  plan  lor  destroying
Parma's  bridge,  bow  carried  out,  and  its
results,  181-189.  Advantiigc  l(jst  through
Jacobzoon's  neglect  or  incompf  tency,  1.^9.
191.  Fears  engendered  in  the  enemy  by
the  fireships,  193.  The  destructive  skill
of  its  citizens  how  cliaracterised  by
Parma,  194,  195.  Their  tactics  while
preparing  to  attack  the  Kowenstyn  Dyke,
195.  Incidents  of  their  capture  of  it  and
of  its  reaipture  by  the  Spainards,  196-
213.  Folly  of  their  leaders  in  not  re-
maining to  make  victory  sure,  204.  Cele-
brating an  uns 'cured  conquest:  reaction
thereon,  214-216.  Effect  of  the  Kowen-
styn failure  upon  the  ultimate  fate  of  the
city,  217.  Construction  and  fate  of  a
new  nnrine  monster,  "the  war's  end:  "
only  mischief  done  lo  the  eiitmy  by  it,
217,218.  Thwarting  effects  of  municipal
shortsightedness  u[)on  the  burgonuister's
efforts,  218,  219.  Encouraging  }l^surances
sent  by  Queen  Klizalx  th  :  increasing  de-
spair of  the  citizens:  IjO.  Noue's  opinion,
22(»,  221.  Last  hope  gone:  tumults  and
insults  to  the  burgomaster,  222,  223.  224.
226,  227.  230.  2.{2.  Negotiation's  for  and
ultimate  acceptance  of  lern)s  of  capit-
ulation :  extremes  in  the  conduct  of
the  populace,  23U-24I.  Conditions  in-
sisted on  by  the  victors,  241.  Trium-
phal entry  of  l*arma:  pageantry  and
feastings  thereupon.  245-247.  Ke-erection
of  the  citadel  :  consequt  nci  s  of  "  ilie
heretics  havmg  all  lefi  "  the  city,  248.
A  curl)  more  efficacious  than  the  citadel,
249.  Sense  in  which  "  religious  affairs"
improved,  250.  -163.  i>rying  up  of  tlie
source  of  the  city's  vitality,  251.  255.  iv,
417.  510.  ConxHiUfiices  of  Cilpin's  ill-
timed  message  to  England,  i,  282,  283.
Desperate  state  of  the  i»lace,  and  hard
conditions  imposed  on  the  burghers,  i,
462,  A6  \.  476.  iii,  22.  S|mni.sh  memories
of  the  sack  of  the  city,  ii,  4  61.  Jesuit  '
rcc\pe  for  its  revival,  iii.  22.  Auto  da  fe
consummatod  In  the  city,  417-419.  Re-
liellion  in  the  citadel,  430.  Abortive
eiaterprise  ot  the  States  against  it,  iv,  216.
.vee  i,  306.  308.  314.  316.  ii,  121.  351.  iii,
109.  270.  271.  .394.  iv,  li,6.  4l7.  479.
Aguii.A,  iHm  Juan  d',  marching  to  the
re.'^ue  of  the  Kowenstyn,  I,  2o7.  His
dispute  with  Gipizucca  for  the  post  of  I
danger,  207,  208  In  the  thick  of  the  |
fight  together.  209.  210.  Connnended  by
I'arma  to  Philip,  213.  214.  216.  At
Parma's  attack  on  Crave,  ii,  11.  See  iii,  I
116.  Ilis  invasion  of  Ireland  and  its  j
result,  iv.  8s.  89.

Akcudlkes,"  tl'f.  see  Albert,  and  Clara
Isabella.  I

Arctic  voyages  of  the  Dutch  navigators
and  their  results  narrated,  iii,  521-541.

Ardres,  surrender  of,  iii,  371.  Restored,
470.

Aremberg,  gunpowder  accident  to,  i,  218.
>ee  245.

Arenberg,  Count,  iii,  264.  303.  His  cha-
racter and  disposition,  34  0.  On  speiial
mission  to  Er)gland,  iv,  128.  144.  Jamea's
opinion  of  him,  152.

Akmada  ol  Spain,  li,  97.  106.  299.  306.  In-
credulity of  English  and  French  states-
men regarding  it,  412-414.  J)utch  pre-
parations against  it,  422.  Howard's
impatience  and  complaints,  4  25-427.  434.
Ceremonies  on  setting  sail:  number  and
armament  ot  the  vessels,  daily  expense,
plan  of  ojjerations,  &lc,  442-444.  A
necessity  unprovided  for:  effects  of  a
tempest,  445-447.  Ihtvid  Gwynn's  suc-
cessful exploit,  447-449.  Off  the  English
coast,  449.  Preliminary  engiigementa
and  their  result,  4;)0-457.  lioth  fleits  off
Calais:  English  tire-ship  project.  4.=>8-
467.  lioarding  of  a  great  galeasse,  467-
4  70.  General  engagement  of  both  fl«»etj>:
flight  of  ihf  Spaniards:  Howard's  "brag
count<'nance,"  471-4  77.  1  >is|»ersiil  of  the
Spanish  fleet :  summing-up  of  it>  disas-
ters, 480,  481.  Joint  sharers  in  the
honours,  485.  600.  l*remature  rejoicings
in  J'aris.  501,  502.  ^Vee  ii,  488.  489.  491.
494.  496.  5(M.508.

Armintus,  Jacob,  death  of,  iv,  496.  Conse-
quences due  to  the  spread  of  his  doc-
trines, 497,  498.  507.  508.  526.

Arragon,  Admiral  of,  see  Mendoza,  Francis.

Arrago.v,  revenue  of  Philip  Jl  from,  iii,

4S8.

Arras  tapestries,  iv,  512.

ARisi'uoT,  Duke  of,  and  hJs  battlings  for

place,  iii,  261.  303,  304. His  end,  304,

305. His  Son,  see  Chimay,  Prince  of.
Artois,  iii,  251.  274.  295.
Arundel  llouse,  De  Rosny's  residence  and

conferences  at,  iv,  146.  U8.  150.  158,
AscoLi,  Prince  of,  sent  on  a  vain  mission,

Iii.  66.

Anm)slevii.le,  counsellor,  setting  an  assas-
sin 10  work,  iii.  282,  28.1.

Atchex,  or  Atsgen,  st  e  Achim.

Atve,  I^icester's  private  seiretary.  ii,  104.
Strange  story  told  to  and  by  him,  223.
233.

AuDLEV,  ii,  45.

AuGL  sTi  s,  Duke  of  Saxony,  sees  "  into  the
s»'Ct  of  the  Jesuits,"  i,  30.

AuMALE,  Henry  of  Navarre's  dangerous
skirmish  at,  iii,  132-135.

AUMAi.E.  Duke  of,  iii,  52.  60.  132.  333.  iv,38.

Austria,  house  of,  to  l)e  humbled,  iv,  142.
146,  167.  Extending  its  relation  with
King  James,  204.  Result  ot  the  "  huni-
bling "  project,  258,  Re  ligious  peace,
500.  See  Albert,  Archduke.  Matthias.
Rudolph,

Austria,  Don  John  of,  "Soldier  of  Le-
panto,  1,  338.  339,  ii.  512.

534

ATALOS.

INDEX.

BODMAN,

AvALOS,  hostage  with  the  Spanish  mu-
tineers, iv,  196.

Axel,  surprised  and  captured  by  the  Dutch
and  English,  ii,  32-33.

AzoKES,  claim  of  the  Netherlanders  rela-
tive to  the  discovery  of  the,  iii,  517.

Babington  conspiracy,  ii,  98.  179.

Bacon,  Francis  Lord,  on  the  policy  of  the
Cecils  towards  able  men,  i,  333.

Balafr^,  Le,  see  Guise.

Balagny,  Seigneur  de,  petty  sovereignty
established  by,  i,  8.  96.  His  "most  ex-
cellent milch-cow,"  131.  Submits  to  the
king's  authority :  his  recompense,  iii,  295.
His  despicable  character,  326,  327.  His
city  captured  by  the  Spaniards,  328-330.
His  after-career,  331.  His  heroic  wife,
see  Araboise.

Balen's  own  at  Nieuport,  iv,  36.  His
successful  onset,  37.

Balfour,  Scottish  volunteer,  fighting  at  the
Kowenstyn,  i,  212.

Ballono,  Juan,  his  estimate  of  the  killed
at  Ostend,  iv,  202  note.

Baltic  trade,  number  of  ships  in  the,  iv,  513.

Balvexa,  Spanish  envoy,  conferring  on
peace  with  Henry  IV,  iii,  392-394.  431.
432.

Ban  DA,  nutmeg  monopoly  ratified  at,  iv,
102.

Bantam,  repulse  of  the  Spanish  squadron

at,  iv,  99,  100.
Barberini,  papal  envoy,  trying  his  per-

sua-^ive  powers  on  Henry  IV,  iv,  341.
Bardesius,  unwelcome  task  imposed  on,  ii,

310.

Barenz,  ^Villiam,  his  first  arctic  voyage,

iii,  521-523.  His  second  attempt,  525,
526.  His  third  venture,  526-529.  His
astronomical  experiments,  534,  535.  His
quiet  heroism  and  death,  536  -  538.
Results  of  his  enterprise,  540,  541.

Barneveldt,  see  Olden- Barneveldt.

Baskervillk,  J^^nglish  captait),  his  bravery
at  Sluys,  ii,  250.  Parma  s  compliment  to
him,  260,  261.  At  Bergen-op-Zoom,  510.
Knighted,  515.  532.

Basti,  George,  Affcanian  chief,  iii,  133.
His  death  blow,  137.

Batavia,  Betuwe,  "Good  Meadow,"  island
of,  ii,  17.  21.  iii,  105.  106.  Its  oriental
namesake,  iv,  100,

Bauer  :  primary  and  secondary  meaning  of
the  word,  iii,  162,  163  note.

Bax,  Paul  and  Marcellus,  iii,  318,  319.
Narrow  escape  of  Marcellus,  320.  A
suggestion  of  his  and  its  brilliant  re-
sults, 398-407. Marcellus  at  Nieuport,

iv,  28.  32.  Paul  wounded  at  Sluys,  193.
At  Mulheim,  219,  220.  His  prompt
action  at  Bergen-op-Zoom,  233,  234.

Bkalk,  Mr,  Leicester's  curt  eulogium  on,
ii,  311.

Beaufort,  Duchess  of,  see  Gabrielle.
Belin,  Count,  threats  of  Sega  against,  iii,

1j9. Wounded  and  captured,  313.  His

surrender  of  Ardres,  370,  37 i.

Bellievre,  Pomponne  de;  purport  of  his
"  long  oration "  to  the  Dutch  env*Dys,  i
275.  Greed  of  his  wife,  iv,  347.  See  ii,
290.  iii,  119.  221.

Benites,  his  command  at  the  Kowenstyn,
i,  197.

Bentivoglto,  Cardinal,  point  whereon  he
was  in  error,  ii,  54  vote.  On  taxation
in  the  Netherlands,  iii,  354.  On  the
Infanta's  character,  553.  See  iv,  341.
366.  484,  524.

Bentivoglto,  nephew  of  the  above,  at  the
rescue  of  the  Kowenstyn,  i,  209.
Wounded,  iii,  J  40.

Berendrecht,  Jacques  van  der  Meer,
Baron  of,  commandant  of  Ostend,  the
man  for  his  post,  iv,  177.  Foiling  the
enemy,  178. Killed,  181.

Bergen-op-Zoom,  Leicester's  halt  at,  ii,
32.  Situation  of  the  city,  509.  Result
of  Parma's  attempt  to  carry  it  by  siege,
510.  513-515.  Du  Terrail's  double  attack
upon  it,  iv,  233.  Prompt  course  of
Governor  Bax  and  heroism  of  the  women,
233,  234.  Peace  conferences  with  Spain
carried  on  here,  479,  480.  487.  Extraor-
dinary assembly,  523.

Berlaymont,  bishop  of  Cambray,  iii,  315.

Berlaymont,  Count,  nickname  given  to
the  patriots  by,  i,  168.  Hiring  an  as-
sassin to  kill  Maurice,  iii,  281,  282  and
note.  Maurice  in  pursuit  of  him,  iv,
195.

Berlot,  Claude,  command  assigned  to,  11,

43.

Bevilacqua,  at  the  rescue  of  the  Kowen-
styn, i,  209.

BrEVRY,  Captain  Jacques  de,  hazardous
exploit  shared  by,  iii,  248.  Appointed
commandant  at  Ostend,  iv,  176.  Wounded
and  hors  de  combat,  177.  Fellow  suf-
ferers, 181.

Billy,  see  Robles.

BiRON,  Armand,  French  marshal,  at  the
battle  of  Iv  ry,  iii,  49.  51,  52.  Rescued
by  his  king,  85. See  55.  63.

BiRON,  Charles,  Baron,  son  of  the  above,  iii,
115.  itescued  by  his  king,  324.  His
stupendous  treachery,  and  its  result,  iv.
97,  98.  His  object,  97,  98  note.  140.  See
iii,  132.  135.  iv,  139.  153.  349.

Blaeuw,  or  Blaauw,  William,  the  Amster-
dam printer,  his  geographical  pul:»lica-
tions,  iii,  516.  524.  Party  use  made  of
his  types,  iv,  442.  An  etymological
query,  't42  note.

Blount,  Christopher,  and  his  brother,  spy-
ing upon  Leicester,  i.  353,

Blount,  Thomas,  reporting  result  of  in-
quest on  Amy  Rob.-^art,  i,  348.

Bobadil,  Spanish  officer,  ii,  12.

Bodley,  Sir  Thomas,  iii,  30.  Defects  in
his  character  and  their  results,  32.  See
163.  172.

EodjMan,  William,  volunteer  diplomatist
b  'tween  Parma  and  kli/abcth,  i,  453.
46+.  Reporting  progress,  466.  Condol-
ing with  Grafigny,  483. In  secret  con-

BOIS-LE-DLO.

INDEX.

BUCQUOI.

535

clave  with  English  statesmen,  484-488.
A'ee  472.  481.  482.  490.  492.  495.
Bois-LE-Duc,  Brabant,  its  importance  to
the  Spaniards,  i,  166.  Attacked  by  the
States'  troops  :  Their  subsequent  repulse,
167-169.  A  blow  from  a  dead  man's
hand,  169.  Hair-breadth  esaipes  of  some
of  the  leaders,  169,  ]7o.  What  succe.-^s
would  have  produced,  170.  Effect  of  a
Irost  upon  a  renewed  attempt  to  besiege
it,  iv,  62.  Embargo  laid  on  the  town  by
the  Spanish  mutineers,  120.  See  iii,  97,
98.

Bone-flock  bread  and  its  effects  during
Paris  famine,  iii,  61,  62.

Bonn  captured  by  Schenk,  ii,  330.  400.
Retaken  by  the  Spaniards,  520.

BoR  of  Utrecht ;  character  of  his  history  of
his  own  times,  iv,  527.

Borgia,  Pope  of  Rome,  bis  paternal  alloca-
tion of  the  new  world,  iv,  99  note.
Re^pect  paid  by  the  Dutch  tliereto,  122.

BORY,  Antwerp  clockmaker,  a>sociai(  d  with
Gianibelli  in  his  project  again^t  i'arma's
bridge,  i,  182.

Botschkay,  Stephen,  position  achieved  by,
iv,  203.  Poisoned :  his  death-bed  re-
commendation, 258.

Bouchkr,  father,  the  one-eyed,  iii,  60.

Bouillon,  Duke  of,  see  Turenne.

BouRuoN,  Cbarles,  cardinal,  railed  also
Charles  X,  put  forward  by  the  Guises  as
heir  U)  the  Crown  ;  his  character,  &c,  i,
108,  109.  Discarding  his  ecclesiastical
costume:  his  sanity  doubu-d,  112.  Mai'i-
festo  of  the  Iveaj;ue  issued  under  his
name,  114,  115.  Mourning  the  death  of
Joyeuse,  ii,  323.  Thrown  into  i)nson,
529.  A  puppet-king,  531.  Iii,  1.  44.
Dead,  65.

BoLRiJouRG,  that  "  miserable  littk  hole,*'  ii,

373.  iv,  407.
BouRGK.s,  archbishop  of,  repudiates  the

pope  and  the  League,  iii,  221,  222.
Bol  rt.a.ngi:r  Morass,  lamous  pai«s  over  the,

iv,  2 I  S. Spinola'8  blunder,  225.
Brabant,  unfaithful  to  its  allies,  i,  18.

Condition  of  its  cities  after  their  sulyu-

gation  by  Spain,  256.  462.  ii,  121.  Its

circle  of  protection,  ir,  9. See  iii,  407.  iv,

92.

Brandenrueo,  Elector  of,  iv,  360.  458.
Brand'^hatzung,  nature  of  the  irregular

im|>ost  so  called,  i,  31.  ii,  4.
BREAL'Tfi,mad  combat  shared  in  by,  iii.  554.
Breda,  saved  by  Schenk,  ii,  7.  Stratjigem

whereby  the  States  regained  it,  iii,  6-14.
Brkderode,  Dutch  councillor,  i,  3i<4.  ii,  133.

iv,  12X.  402.
Brevoort  stormed  and  burnt,  iii,  429.
Brigands,  Maurice's  plan  for  the  cjttirpa-

tiun  of,  iii,  317.
Brlssac,  Count  de,  iii,  64. Opens  Paris

gates  to  Henry  IV,  231.
Bri.n-on,  president  of  Parliamrnt,  wound-

iiiK  the  pride  of  a  legate,  iii,  45.  His

chjiraeter,  simple  request,  and  fatal  end,

119.  120.  123.

BRrrTANY,  claimed  by  Philip,  iii,  44.
Beginning  of  -  war:  soldier-chroniclers
there,  iii,  116-118.  Need  lor  driving  out
the  Spaniards,  128.  Fortunes  of  the
French  trwps,  143-145.  Engli.><h  aid
sent,  155.  171.  The  province  how  dis-
posed of  by  Philip,  191. See  199.

Brizuela,  iiiigo,  his  mission  to  Spain,  iv,
476. Convincing  the  king,  477.

Beoeck,  C<-)unt  of,  and  his  garrison  mur-
dered, iii,  547.  Effect  pr(xiuced  by  the
act,  iv,  13.

Bruges,  the  Netherland  States  deserted  by,
i,  18.  Its  desperate  condition,  462.  476.
Dante's  simile,  ii,  247.

Brulart,  secretary  to  Henry  III,  and  th  ?
Dutch  envoys,  i,  53,  54.  92.

Brunswick,  Eric  of,  at  Ivry,  iii,  51.
Wounded,  52. His  escape,  54.

Brussels,  i,  22.  131.  Privations  under
which  it  held  out  against  Farnese,  133.
Forced  to  capitulate,  177.  Jts  pageant  in
honour  of  a  new  governor,  iii,  270-273.
In  a  fright  al)Out  the  Spanish  mutineers,
275.  Another  governor  and  another
pageant:  the  lost  returned,  333-337.  A
rebuke  to  its  burghers  373.  One  more
pageant,  552. See  iv,  274.  2^6.  385.

BucKJlUR^T,  iliomaij  Siickville  Ix>rd,  after-
wards Earl  of  Dorset  and  Lord  Trea-
surer, i,  466.  iVrms  of  peace  with  Spain
suggested  by  him,  471.  In  Leicester's
black  books,  ii,  141.  142.  Mission  to  the
Hague  confided  to  him,  202,  203.  His
antecedents,  personal  bearing,  &c,  2(»5.
His  landing:  interceding  for  the  troops,
206,  207.  First  conference  with  the
States -General,-  207,  208.  iJefending
Leicester  :  his  reception  at  Utrecht,  209.
Views  forced  upon  him  by  actual  cir-
cuniistances,  218.  Eflorts  made  to  turn
his  vLslt  to  ill  account.  221.  I^irport  of
a  lett<r  in  cipher  from  the  quecn  to
him ;  his  resolve  thereon,  223,  224.  Ilia
Bolenm  api^  al  to  her  for  money  for  h»  r
tioof«s  226,  221.  Iteariiig  of  the  qupen
and  L<  ice«ter  towards  him  ;  angry  letter
from  the  latter,  23i)-23t.  Piace  instruc-
tions he  was  ordered  to  carry  out,  234,
235  vote.  His  remonstrances  wlih  the
queen  thereon :  perplexing  effect  of  her
rejoinder,  235-237.  Deceitful  course  ol
Leicester  towards  him :  his  counsel  to
the  queen  at  this  juncture,  243-245.
His  reward  for  doing  his  duty  ;  ultimate
recognition  of  his  services,  264.J66.  His
peace  views  and  discu6.si(in  with  liarne-
veldt  thereon,  iii,  461.  462.  -165.  Set  ii,
214.  219.  -^24,  225.  238-242.  276  note.30H.
334.  iii,  456.

Buc(,>uov,  Ci>unt,  iii,  582.  His  work  at
0.>tend,  iv,  67.  Fuiility  of  his  efforts,
67,  6s.  86.  Falling  into  a  trap,  86.
Lavishing  money  and  lives,  109.  Mis-
chief dene  from  his  biitieries.  110.  With
his  troops  at  Mi>ok,  241.  Result  of  his
efforts  to  cr.  s>  the  >N'aal,  243.  Sec  iv.
173.  197.  217.  219.

536

BUD  A.

INDKX.

CANDY.

BUDA,  iv,  54.  55.  97.  203.

Burgh,  Lord,  his  insubordination  at  Does-
burg,  ii,  40.

BuRGHLEY,  William  Cfcil,  Lord,  pamphlet
sent  over  l^Jurope  by;  eifect  produced  by
it,  i,  30.  Character  of  his  statesmanship,
76,  78.  His  language  in  council,  and
summing-up  relative  to  the  Dutch  Pro-
vinces and  England's  course  with  regard
to  them,  78.  80.  His  cunctative  policy
and  over-cautiousness:  his  puzzling  in-
structions Lo  Davison,  82,  83,  84.  in
conference  with  the  Dutch  envoys,  279.
282.  K '  ason  for  his  cautious  pohcy,
287.  His  pliysiognomy  and  personal
appearance,  3U0.  Communicates  his
queen's  ultimatum  to  the  Dutch  envoys,
304.  307.  Comforting  Leicester,  333.
Policy  of  his  family  towards  able  men,
338.  On  Amy  Kobsart's  death,  34  8.
On  the  need  for  standing  by  Holland,
361)  vote.  Hinting  the  queen's  anger  to
Leicester,  390.  Talting  refuge  in  bed
from  her  curses,  395.  432.  "  Wishing  to
wash  his  hands  of  shame  and  peril,"  431.
Comforting  Leicester,  432.  Compli-
mented on  his  share  in  bringing  the
queen  to  reason,  440.  Point  on  which
he  and  the  queen  were  best  informed,
442.  Direction  in  which  he  was  not
true,  4  64.  Parleying  with  a  Spanish
agent,  468.  478.  Issue  involved  in  the
course  he  was  taking,  468.  His  attitude
towards  Leicester,  480.  490.  Bringing
the  Spani^h  agents  to  book,  and  step
taken  thereon,  483-489.  On  the  intent
of  the  Babington  conspirators,  ii,  99,  100.
Why  "weary  of  his  miserable  lite,"  182.
Parleying  with  the  Dutch  envoys  from
his  bed,  192-194.  Out  of  favour  with
the  quf'en,  200.  His  sagacity  at  fault,
2S5-287.  304.  3o6.  Deceiving  the  Pope,
438".  His  discussions  with  Noel  de
Caron,  iii,  168.  170.  173,  174.  Conferring
with  envoys  from  Henry  IV  sent  to  ask
for  aid,  375-379.  381.  Taunting  Caron
relative  to  the  Hollanders  trading  with
their  own  foes,  43o.  See  i,  113.  297.  334.
392.  396.  4  04,  405.  419.  456.  4  66.  473.
480.  490.  491.  492.  ii,  73.  281.  382.  426.
iii,  456.  4  63.

Burg  HAVE,  Daniel  de,  ii,  64.  His  antece-
dents, services  to  Leicester,  &c,  65.  101.

BuRGUNDius,  Dutch  historian,  iv,  527.

Burgundy,  iii,  199.  324.  471.

BusBECQ,  German  ambassador  in  Paris,  on
the  attitude  of  Spain  and  Turkey,  i,  30.
His  estimate  of  Mendoza,  the  Spanish  am-
bassador, 83.  On  the  progress  of  the
League  and  the  vagaries  of  the  Due
d'Epergnon,  112.

Butts,  Paul,  advocate  of  Holland,  strenuous
in  his  efforts  towards  an  alliance  with
England,  i,  68.  71.  295.  Plan  of  military
aid  indicated  by  him,  72,  73.  Character
given  by  him  to  De  Griyse,  73.  274.  i
Throws  down  bis  office  in  disgTist,  77.  H:s
successor  as  advocate,  201. Sidney 'spun  I

on  him,  377  note,  ii,  35.  Offer  from  Lei-
cester spurned  by  him,  ii,  67.  Change  in
the  latter 's  attitude  towards  him,  71,  72.
Why  so  much  abused  and  threatened  by
Leicester,  72-76.  His  alleged  intriguing
with  Denmark,  76,  77  note.  Thrown
into  prison,  78.  Released,  134.  "Bolsterer
of  papists,  atheist,  devil,"  120.  What  he
and  his  friends  saw  no  wrong  in,  524.  See
i,  379.  3^4.  ii,  79,  80.  102.  159.  172.  212.
332.  387.  388.  389.  392.  395.
BuzANVAL,  Paul  Chouart  Seigneur  de,  his
speech  to  the  States-General  as  envoy  from
Henry  of  Navarre,  iii,  124-127.  Rebukes
and  counter-rebukes,  295.  433.  His  con-
ferences  v/ith  the  Dutch  statesmen  and
report  thereon  to  his  king,  iv,  206.  267-
270. See  iii,  448.  451.  554.  555  note.

Cadiz  in  1584,  i,  7.  Attack  of  Drake's
squadron,  ii,  268,  269.  New  Anglo-Dutch
expedition ;  destruction  of  tbe  Spanish
fleet  and  sack  of  the  city,  iii,  362-366.
Results  of  the  expedition :  possible  a-
chievements  unwisely  neglected,  368.

Cadzand,  see  Kadzand.

Calais,  iii,  344,  surrendered  to  the  Spaniards,
346.  Responses  of  Maurice  and  Elizabeth
to  Henry's  appeal  for  help,  347.  Result
of  efforts  to  turn  the  fortune  of  the  day,
351-353.  Apprehended  consequences  of
the  fall  of  the  city,  369.  Negotiations  and
conferences  about  its  possession,  374,  375.
432.  469,  470.

Caldkron,  Rodrigo,  iv,  423.

Calvaert,  Netherlands  envoy,  his  mission
to  Henry  of  Navarre  and  subsequent  con-
ference with  Henry  111,  i,  104-106  On
the  secret  negotiations  of  Henry  IV  with
Philip  II,  iii,  289-290.  292  note.  His
sudden  journey  to  England  on  Henry's
importunity,  374,  375.  3-52.  His  reproach
to  France  and  the  king's  reply,  431,  432.
His  warnings  to  the  States  and  deaih,434.
See  iii,  351.

Calvinists,  i,  24,  25.  ii,  29.  61.  Their  pa-
triotism and  intolerance,  ii,  114,  115.
Their  efforts  for  supremacj''  at  Leyden,
and  result  thereof,  316-321.  Their  hatred
of  Barneveldt,  iv,  443.  Debt  due  to
Calvinism,  iii,  361.  Its  tyranny  when
in  the  ascendant,  iv,  492.  See  iv,  491.
507.

Camjjray,  actors  in  and  objects  of  the  truce
of,  i,  8.  96,  97.  Ground  of  Catherine  de
Medici's  claim  to  it,  131.  Fuentes  at  its
walls,  iii,  315.  Its  aspect :  heroic  conduct
of  the  prnicess  Renee:  fall  of  the  city,
326  330.

Camden,  William,  English  historian,  facts
suppressed  by,  iii,  368  note.

Camiciatas,  or  shirt  attacks,  iii,  159.

Campagnolo,  governor  of  Boulogne,  iii,  351.

Candia,  Duchess  of,  banished  from  the
Spanish  Court,  iv,  321.  326.

Candy,  King  of,  entering  into  trade  rela-
tions with  the  Dutch,  iv,  101.  Murder
through  his  treachtry,  227.

CANXIBALISM.

INDEX.

CHALONS.

537

Cannibalism  practised  during  the  Paris  fa-
mine and  justified  on  theological  grounds,
iii,  61.

Capizucca,  Bias,  ii,  433.

Capizucca,  Camillo,  his  heroic  proposal,  i,
205.  Contending  for  the  post  of  danger,
207  An  active  participant  in  the  rescue
of  the  Kowenstyn,  2U7.  209.  210.  211.
Parma's  gratetul  recognition  of  his  ser-
vices, and  commendation  thereof  to  l^hilip,
213.  214.  216.

Cakdona  at  the  rescue  of  the  Kowenstyn,  i,
207.

Carkt,  Edmund,  refuses  to  Join  in  Stanley's
trea.son,  ii,  164.

CAKf)N,  Noel  de,  Seigneur  de  Schoneval,
agent  of  the  States-General,  i,  52.  Why
Stafford  was  annoyed  with  him,  65.  His
conferences  and  complaints  on  the  plundor
of  Dutch  vessels  by  English  pirates,  iii,
16S-175.  And  also  on  alleged  s<>crot  iio-
gotiations  of  France  and  England  w  ith
Spain,  356,  357.  436-439.  55K-562.  Called
over  the  coals  by  Hnrghley,  435,  436.
Coveting  and  obtaining  the  title  of  am-
bassador, iv,  2'  6.  Anger  of  the  Spanish
ambit>sador  thereat,  207.  His  colloquy
with  King  James  on  the  sovereignty  of
the  States,  2o7  note.  On  the  English  dis-
like of  peace  with  Spain,  208.  See  ii,  118.
iii,  456.  466.

Castkl,  see  Ch&stel.

Castilk,  Pliilip's  revenue  from,  iii.  488.
Ca.tillo,  commander  of  Hulst,  beheaded,

iii,  los,  109.
Catkau  Cambre-sis,  treaty  of,  its  provisions

and  character,  iii,  470.  509.
Catklkt,  \a.\  siege  and  reduction  of,  iii,  305,

306.  308.

Catmkuink  de  Medici,  queen  mother,  of
France,  i,  18.  Her  systematic  demorali-
zati(»n  of  her  children  and  Machiavellian
plottiiifis,  42.  Tactics  of  Guise  towards
her,  43.  Her  son-murder  proptK^yil,  46.
Her  treatment  of  the  envoys  from  the
States-General,  53  55.  Mis^\pprel^en8ion
of  her  character  by  the  Provinces  and
England,  6;{.  Project  of  marriage  between
her  and  Philip  11.  66.  Her  sine  t/iui  von
relative  to  tlie  Provinces,  67.  How  her
diplomacy  might  have  been  neutralized,
76.  Prcs  'ntaiion  of  tlie  Dutch  <'nvoys  lo
her,  92.  Her  tearful  parting  with  them,
93.  Rebuking  the  Spanisli  ambasSiidor:
her  real  object  in  cocpieiting  with  the
envoys,  95,  96.  loo,  loi.  Hit  pretensions
to  the  crown  of  Portugal,  and  own  account
of  her  tilk  with  Mendoza  thereon,  96-100.
What  Philip  thought  of  her  ])roi)osed  in-
vasion of  Etigl.i?id,  102.  Ground  of  her
claim  ujton  Cam  bray,  131.  Siibjeit  fur
her  bitter  lament,  ii,  323.  Consulting  her
talisman  her  peri>le.\itj%  405.  Opi)osite
CJiusee  of  her  reproaches  to  her  son,  40s.
629. Her  end.  529. See  i,  113.  118.  125.

CATHKKtXK  of  Navarre,  her  cook,  i'i,  288.
Gift  sent  to  her  by  the  States,  453.

Catholics,  see  Kumun  Catholics.

Cathulle,  T^ewis  van  der,  silencing  a  vain*

glorious  challenger,  iii,  102.
Catkici,  or  Catrice,  Italian  colonel,  killed,

iv,  70.  175.

Caudebkc,  iii,  129.  B.sieged  and  capture*!
by  Parma,  139-141.

Cau.x,  the  land  of,  iii,  141.

Cavendi.sh,  Richard,  on  the  wealth  and
naval  strength  of  Holland,  i,  367.  On  the
pitiable  state  of  the  English  troops  there,
372  note.  His  estimate  of  Leicester's  ser-
vices in  the  States,  4  27.  Exultinu  over
the  reconciliation  of  Elizabeth  and  Leices-
ter, 440.  His  congratulatory  letter  to
Burghley,  441  vote.  On  the  effect  of  the
Anglo-Spanish  intrigues,  493  vole.  His
opinions  as  to  the  queen's  assumption  of
the  sovereignty  of  the  States,  ii,  59  vote.
H4.  What  he  regarded  as  the  enemy's
sheet  anchor.  62  vote.  On  the  need  for
financial  reform  in  the  States,  67  note.
On  Eliziib  th  s  popularity  there,  69  note.
84.  His  suspicion  of  Buys,  72  note.  >ee
i,493.

Cecii>,  Mward,  contributing  to  the  decisive
action  at  \ieu|X)rt,  iv,  36.  37.

Cixii,.  Sir  Rol>'rt.  afte  rwards  earl  of  J^lis-
bury,  his  ])ersc»nal  aj^pearance,  &c. :  Eliza-
beth's  nieknamefor  him,  ii,341.  Replying
diplomatically  to  a  diplomatist;  what  he
prayed  for,  342,  343.  His  report  of  the
state  of  0>u  nd,  344.  Amenities  of  his
journey  to  Ghent,  3«6-348.  Attributes  of
which  he  ileemed  peace  to  be  the  mother,
349.  On  to  Antwerp:  refreshing  slght^i
by  the  way,  351.  What  he  heard  at  his
Antwerj)  host  s  table,  353.  His  reception
at  liergen-ojvZtHun  and  Brielle ;  his  im-
pressions of  I*rince  Maurice,  353,  354.
On  the  exchange  of  civilities  Ixuween
Panna  and  the  English  commissioner.^
366.  On  the  French  king's  neglect  of
Rouen,  iii,  129  note.  Prime  mini>ter  of
England,  iv,  129.  His  supremacy  in  the
government,  134.  Unbribeabie:  bis
wealth  and  influence,  135.  His  views
relative  to  Spain  and  tJie  States,  i46,  147.
Ma.»ter-splrit  of  the  Spanish  party,  156.
His  conferences  with  Barneveldt  and  De
Rosny,  15.H-161.  I^rtured  by  his  king,
166.  See  iii,  173.  450.  452.  454.  466.  iv,
44.  158.  162.  187.  205.  262.

Cecil,  Sir  Thomas  Dutch  govemor!«hipcon-
ferretl  on,  i,  33t.  Jnlerence  drawn  from
his  deiuirture  »)n  sick  leave,  434.  Volun-
teer at  Doesburg,  ii,  40.  Not  in  favour
with  Leia.stt'r,  s2. Ste  ii,  353.

Cecii..s,  the,  their  jH>iicy  towards  able  men,
i,  33S.

Ckkbalbo,  Marquis  of,  sent  to  supersede
Parma,  iii,  2o7-2o9.  Superseded  himself,
210.

Ci.Tix)x,  Dutch  relations  with,  iv,  101.  227.
Chaligny,  Count,  at  (he  siege  of  Rouen;  iii,

131.  132. Beaten.  Giptured,  and  freed  by

the  king's  fool,  136.
CiULONs  piirliament  decreeft,  burnings  of
I and  by,  iii,  218.

538

CHAMPAGNY.

INDEX.

conwat.

Champagnt,  avenging  himself  upon  the  pa-
triots :  his  oiiaracter,  i,  20.  More  active
than  ever,  21.  His  reward,  21.  Ap-
pointed governor  of  Antwerp,  248.  Result
of  his  "  rhetoric  and  clever  management,"
248.  Giving  out  mysterious  and  mischie-
vous hints,  424.  425.  427.  Characterizing
the  English  court.  446.  Intrigue  directed
by  him,  46  i.  How  Madame  de  Bours
jilted  him,  ii,  ITO.  Making  merry  there-
after, 284.  "Chopping  in"  at  the  con-
ference with  the  English  envoys,  3Y1. 376.
His  recipe  for  resuscitating  Antwerp,  iii,
21.  On  the  "consummate  wisdom'  oS
the  "  rebels,"  and  the  peculiar  province  of
heresy,  23.  24.  Afraid  of  his  head ;  used
as  a  tool  of  Farnese,  211.  His  calumnies
against  Farnese,  214  note.  See  i,  453.
468.  478.  488.  ii,  282.  290.  340.  342.  377.

Champernoun,  Captain,  reporting  on  the  re-
sult of  Leicester's  resignation,  ii,  390.  391.

Charlemagne,  his  scheme  of  universal  em-
pire why  a  failure,  iii,  360,  361.

Charles  of  Sweden,  iv,  257.

Charles  V.  of  Spain,  ii,  214. His  sale  of  i
the  Spice  islands,  iv,  230.

Charles  IX.  of  France,  i,  40.  Arguments
by  which  he  made  Henry  of  Navarre  a
cathohc,  45. See  i,  339.

Charles  X,  see  Bourbon.

Chart KES,  ceremony  over  the  holy  bottle  at,
iii,  230.

ChAstkl,  or  Castel,  John,  his  attempt  on
the  hfe  of  Henry  IV,  iii,  299.  Demolition
of  the  memorial  of  his  infamy,  iv,  205.

Chatillox,  grandson  of  Coligny,  at  Nieu-
port,  iv,  28.  His  command  at  Ostend,  60.
Killed,  70.

Chicot,  king's  jester,  taking  a  noble  pri-
soner: his  death  of  his  wounds,  iii,  136.

Chimay,  Prince  of,  afterwards  duke  of  Ar-
schot,  event  due  to  his  adroitness,  i,  20.
Sent  to  retake  Bonn,  ii,  400.  His  success,
520.  Accommodates  himself  to  a  new
state  of  things,  iii,  305.  Evil  elements  in
his  character,  340. See  i,  245.  iii,  333.

Chimay,  Princess,  revenging  herself  upon
an  indiscreet  scandal-monger,  ii,  135-137.

Chinchox,  Count  of,  cause  of  his  disgrace,  iv,
328.

Chivalry  in  Spain,  iv,  315.

Christian  III  of  Denmark,  s^te  Denmark.

Clara  Isabella,  infanta  of  Spain,  daughtei
of  Philip  II,  called  in  conjunction  with
her  husband  "  the  archduk'z's."  Marriage
proposals  and  collateral  projects  relating
to  her,  iii,  121.  182.  188.  191.  221.  224.
262.  287,  288.  290.  294,  392.444.  Alleged
desire  of  her  father  to  marry  her  himself,
183.  Her  claims  to  the  thrones  of  France
and  England,  182.  185.  188.  461.  Married
to  the  cardinal  archduke  Albert,  471-472.
Her  father's  dying  injunctions  regarding
her,  and  gilt  to  and  parting  with  her,  4  76,
477.  479.  Her  personal  appearance,  cha-
racter, endowments,  &c,  553.  Absurd
rumour.  557.  At  Nieuport,  iv,  11.  Her  i
harangue  to  the  troops,  12. Triumpi  |

promised  to  her,  21.  The  picture  reversed,
39.  At  Ostend:  her  artillery  labours,  68.
Again  indulging  in  anticipations  of  vic-
tory, 79.  Protestations  and  pilgrimages,
170.  The  triumph  achieved,  201.  Her
emotions  thereat,  202.  A  fling  at  her
from  the  mutineers,  234.  See  iv,  403.  481.
Claude  Mathieu  the  Jesuit,  iii,  121.  123.
Clement  VIII,  Pope,  his  dread  of  Philip  of
Spain  :  threats  of  the  latter  against  him,
iii,  185,  186.  218.  Refusing  to  grant  and
ultimately  granting  absolution  to  Henry
IV,  228,  229.  325,  326.  A  tempting  pros-
pect, 430,  431.  His  assurances  to  Henry,
433.  Arranging  terms  of  peace  be-
tween Spain  and  France,  469,  470.  Com-
forting the  dying  Philip  with  relics,  475.
See  iv,  55.

Clement,  Jacques,  Henry  of  Valois  mur-
dered by,  ii,  530.  Pohtical  results  of  the
crime,  iii,  1.  184.
Clerk,  Dr  Bartholomew,  punned  on  by  Sid-
ney and  summed  up  by  Leicester,  i,  377
Measuring  himself  with  the  "  big  fellows,"
389.  Praying  to  be  recalled,  ii,  84.  Con-
fiding a  secret  to  the  wrong  man,  223.  233.
See  i,A22.

Cleves,  the  mad  Duke  of,  Spanish  designs
relative  to  his  territories,  iii,  427.  5-16.  iv,
164.  Supposed  foul  death  of  his  duchess,
iii,  427.

Clifford,  Sir  Conyers,  reinforcements  pro-
mised by,  iii,  252.
Cloth  trade  disputes  between  England  and

Holland,  iv,  400,  401.
Clo\  e  islands,  the  only  five,  iv,  228.  San-
guinary fights  for  their  possession,  228,
229.

CoHHAM,  Lord,  parleying  on  behalf  of  the
queen  with  Spanish  agents,  i,  465.  467.
4  78.  483,  484. On  the  embassy  to  Far-
nese, ii,  340-343. See  i,  486.  488.  489.
492.  495.  ii,  284.  iii,  376.
CoEWORDEN,  or  Kocwordcn,  iii,  5. Its  im-
portance in  a  military  point  of  view,  phy-
sical features,  &c.,  1 53.  Besieged  by  Mau-
rice :  confidence  of  the  Spaniards,  154, 155.
Progress  of  the  work  and  triumph  of  the
Dutchmen,  155. 158, 159.  Abortive  efforts
of  the  Spaniards  to  retake  it,  252.  254.  iv,
218,  219.
Coligny,  Louisa  de,  see  Louisa.
Cologne,  effects  of  party-warfare  in  the

electorate  of,  i,  30.  ii,  2. See  iv,  395.
Cologne,  arclibishops  of,  see  Ernest  of  Ba-
varia; Truchsess,  Gebhard.
CoLOMA,  Don  Carlos,  soldier  and  historian,
iii,  140,  141. On  the  loss  of  life  at  the
siege  of  Steenwyck,  150  note.  152  note.
Sent  to  seize  de  Gomeron,  306. His  ser-
vices at  Dour  lens,  313.
Contarini  on  the  habits  of  English  nobles
temp.  James  I,  iii,  162  note. On  the  ca-
valry of  the  Dutch  republic,  iv,  521.
Conti,  Prince,  iii,  143.
CoNTREKAS,  Settling  a  dispute  impartially,
I iii,  313.

I  Conway,  Sir  John,  on  the  prosperous  condi-

A^>i  BEIL.

INDEX.

DE  GOMERON.  539

tion  of  H(;lbmd,  i,  364.  On  the  condition
of  the  English  troops  there,  3Y0.  Per-
turbed by  a  visit  from  Parma's  secretary,
ii,  343. Insulted  by  Crolt,  3(57,

CoKHKiL  cai)tured  by  Farnrse,  lii,  81,  82.
Retaken  by  the  French,  85,  «6.

CouDi.s,  Admiral  Simon  Balthasar  de,  his
voyage  of  discovery,  iii,  542,  543.  Order
of  Icnighihood  founded  by  him,  543.  JSee
iv,  405.

Cordova,  Gasparo  de,  adopting  a  course
best  suilfd  to  iiis  illtere^ts,  iv,  326.

CouswALLLs,  Sir  Cliarles,  Engli>li  ambassa-
dor in  Sp!iin,  iv,  259.  His  report  on  the
8tate  ot  Spain,  260  note.  On  ih"  need
ot  the  two  kings  for  each  other's  help,  261.
Spani>h  bribe  ollen  d  to  him,  261.  His
indignation,  ibid  note  7.  Hinting  liow  the
States  should  be  dealt  with.  262  note  9.
On  the  iniquities  of  the  Spani>h  coma,  325
notes.  His  jeu-de-mot  on  the  proposed
peace,  477  nute.

CoiisK,  Alplionse,  deed  of  blood  voluntoered
by,  ii,  406.  529.  Warning  Henry  IV  of
his  danger,  iii,  S5,  86.

CoRi  NA  sacked  by  the  English  and  Dutch,
ii,  525,  526.

Court  RAY,  mutiny  of  Spanish  troops  at,  iii,
66.  6s.

CoDTRAS,  victory  of  Henry  of  Navarre  at,

ii,  300.  323,  324.
Cox,  English  correspondent,  on  the  relations

between  Denmark  and  Holland,  li,  77  note.
Cracow  captun  d  by  Spinola,  iv.  223.
Craon,  Brittany,  lost  to  Henry  IV  ;  conduct

of  the  English  troops,  iii.  143,  144.
Crkscia,  George,  Epirote  chief,  ii,  44  TWte,

47. Unhorsed  by  WiUoughl)y.  48.
Crkvec(edr  reatvered  by  Maurice,  iii,  553,

iv,  1.

Croft,  Sir  James,  comptroller,  a  go-between
in  certain  underhand  negotiations,  i,  453,
464.  No  match  tor  the  opp-is  te  side,  4  so.
Confronied  with  one  of  l^arma's  agents,
486-48S.  JMischiet  done  by  liis  inter-
meddlings,  491.  492.  His  in>pin'r  tlit  re-
in,  ii,  273.  Taking  farce  for  realiiy,  284.
His  facility  for  getting  into  trouble:  de-
precating his  queen's  anger,  366,  367.
Completely  hoodwinkrdby  the  Spaniards,
377.  378. 3^6.  Moved  almost  to  ti-ai-s,  383.
>e«  i,  -106.  471.  472.  473.  495.  ii,  341.  343.

Ci!u.M^,  one  of  the  sixteen  tyrants  of  Paris,

iii,  120.  121.
Cruwkl,  Werner,  introducing  a  secret  ne-
gotiator to  the  Dutch  state^men.  iv,  279-
281.

CuBiiiRA,  Pedro,  his  miserable  end,iv,  215.

Dale,  Robert,  ii,  134. Sec  Otheman.

Dale,  I)r  Valentine,  English  conimis.sionor,
ii,  310.  His  schuUi>tic  acquirements  341.
J*arma's  estimate  ol  him,  3r)4.  :J61.  In
conference  with  the  Spanish  commis-
sioners, 370-372.  374.  377,  Exihanging
"quintnplications  "  with  them,  376.  Re-
conuuendiiig  a  rhetoric  of  another  stylo
than  his  own,  377. Where  more  and  (

where  less  than  a  match  for  the  enemy,
378.  On  a  bootless  journey :  "  pangs
of  cholic"  and  "verses  out  of  Virgil,"
38l-3«2.  Catechising  I'arma  cona-rning
Allen's  book  against  the  queen,  383-386.
6'ee  ii,  344.  3.'il.  3:)6.  391.  418.429.
D'Alla\ni-:s,  French  general,  i,  156,
Daxvilliers  Castle,  Mondragon's  singular

escape  at,  iii,  322.
D'AuHK.Nfi.  Agrijipa,  Huguenot  oflBcer  of
Henry  IV,  di.seomtiting  of  an  intriguer,  i,
4  6,  4  7.  66.  Occasion  of  Henry's  design
against  his  lile,  49.  .sVe  iv,  349.
D'AviLA,  I)on  .Juan  Alvarez,  admiral  of  the
Spanish  fleet  at  GibralUir,  iv,  299.  Hold-
ing his  assjiilants  too  cheaply,  300,  AOl.
In  action  with  ihem,  3nl,  302.  Kilh  d,  3o2.
Davison,  William,  sent  on  an  embassy  to
the  State.-^-Gt  nt'ral.  i.  81.  Adoption  of  a
cours*'  suggested  by  him,  82.  I  difficulties
put  upon  him  by  liurghh-y's  instru«;iions,
83,  81,  s5.  On  the  fetlii.g  of  the  pro-
vinces relative  to  the  French  king's  oflers,
86,  h7.  Encouraging  instructions  sent  to
him  by  the  qu<'en,  .^i?.  On  Tnslong's
misconduct  and  imprisonment,  144.  On
Hohrnlo's  seir-rei)roacli«*s  at  his  failure
at  IJiil.-^-le-Due,  171.  Hvs  r<i)oits  con-
cerning, and  bearing  t4^»wards,  Sainte
Aldeponde,  2.*7.  258-260.  261.  Words  of
Elizalx'th  Ciirried  b.tck  to  the  SLatrs  by
him,  316.  Amuiyances  exi)erienceil  by
him;  value  of  his  atlvia*,  318,  319.
I'rince  Maurice's  eulogium  u\)ou  him,
323.  His  service.s,  {>e«  uniaiy  sacrifices,
and  p'Tsonal  vexations,  325-327. 334.  His
complaints  against  the  .\ orrises,  334,  335.
Value  of  his  co-operation  to  L<.'icebter,
378.  His  part  in  the  conferences  on  the
offer  ol  th«*Sti»tes  governor>hip  to  Ixices-
t<'r,  3mm.3>3.  i'icklish  mi^-^ion  confided  lo
him  by  Ix-lcester  :  weather  hindrances  to
his  progress,  387,  3sm.  393  394.  396.  Ar-
rives in  I'.ngland:  his  preliminary  call  on
Walsingliain,  4oo.  Braving  the  qu«  en'8
wrath  in  defence  of  l^'ia-sUr,  4U0-4U4.
RejMjrting  progress  to  Ivcierster,  4(i5.  4U7,
4U8.  I  urned  upon  by  Ix'icest'T :  in.sinua-
ti<-us  of  the  latt<'r  against  him,  415-418.
Hiscomments thereon,  41  s  notes.  1  aking
the  earl's  dislav  our  gilevou.sly,  433.  Re-
sult of  his  faithful  obedience  to  r-j-al
orders,  ii,  185.  193.  194.  :>ee  i,  320.  464.
De  Hkthlnk,  sie  Sully.
I)E  Ca.stro,  Don  Alphonso,  his  attack  on
and  repulse  at  Atchen,  Sumatra,  iv,  38?<,
3x0.  Destruction  of  his  fleet  by  ihe
1  )utch,  3.S9.39 1 .
De  CAsTfiO,  Gonzales,  at  the  rescue  of  the

Kowenstyn.  i.  207.
De I)ii:u.  l>anit'l,  Netherlands  commis-
sioner, in  conft  rence  with  the  queen,  il,
417.  418. lieport  of  their  convt•r^alion,
419-421.

Dekst,  Koelke  van,  Netherlanda officer;  his

disfiguring  wo  ind.s,  i,  213.
Dk  G  )MEKo.N,his  treachery  and  fate,  lii,  305-
1  30'«.

540  DE  GORDAN.

INDEX.

DIGGES.

De  (jrORDAN,  or  Gourdon,  ii,  463.  See
Gourdon.

De  Griyse,  or  de  Gryze,  Jacques,  Dutch
envoy  in  England,  how  characterized  by
Paul  Buys,  i,  73.  274.  Mission  on  which
he  accompanied  Ortel  to  England,  and
transactions  in  which  he  took  part,  274.
277-280.  Letters  carried  home  by  him,
280.

De  la  Noue,  see  La  None.

De  la  Riviere,  physician  to  Henry  IV,  his
main  occupation,  iii,  278.

Delft,  another  London  almost,"  i,  352.
Its  attitude  on  the  question  of  a  truce
with  Spain,  iv,  467.  475.

Delfzyl,  iii,  94.  Capiured  by  Maurice,  104.

Del  Monte,  Camillo  Bourbon,  fort  on  the
Kowenstyn  commanded  by,  i,  197.  in
action  against  the  patriots.  202.  208.

De  Loo,  Andrea,  secret  agent  in  England
for  Spain,  i,  464.  466.  Example  of  his
regard  for  conscientiousness,  4  68.  Re-
porting the  results  of  his  intrigues,  470-
472.  ii,  275.  278  note.  280,  28 1.  Much
depressed:  in  spirits  again,  ii,  281.  Cre-
dulous himself,  and  inoculating  English
statesmen  with  his  credulity,  283.  286.
See  i,  487.  490.  492.  493.

De  Maisse,  Hurault,  envoy  from  Henry  IV
to  Elizabeth,  iii,  439.  His  conference
with  her,  440-442.  Difference  between
his  report  and  hers,  452.

De  Masieres,  governor  of  Gertruydenberg,
killed,  iii,  248.

De  Mexia,  Ardres  besieged  and  captured
by,  iii,  371.

Democracy,  tendency  of  mankind  towards,
iii,  482.

De  Morlans,  envoy  from  Henry  IV,  iii,
240. Results  of  his  eloquence,  292-294.

Dendermonde,  treachery  of  the  governor
of,  1,  20. Capitulated,  133. See  131.

Denjiark,  sovereignty  of  Holland  offered
to  the  king  of,  ii,  76.  78.  Surmised  effect
of  Indian  gold,  236.  His  offer  of  media-
tion to  Philip,  and  advice  of  Parma
thereon,  288,  289.  Sending  envoys  to  the
States,  iv,  360.  425.  453.  458.  See  iii,
420.  470.  iv,  128.

Derby,  Henry  Stanley,  Earl  of,  taking  farce
for  reality,  ii,  284.  One  in  an  embassy  to
Parma,  340.  No  match  for  the  latter  and
his  agents,  341.  His  spirited  reply  to  a
threat  of  invasion,  375.  See  ii,  366.  373.
429.  iv,  150.

De  Ronsoy,  Count,  slain,  iii,  315.

De  Rosnes,  see  Rosnes.

De  Rosxy,  see  Sully.

De  Russy,  French  envoy  at  the  Hague,  iv,
340.

De  Sancy,  French  minister,  on  the  shilly-
shallying of  England,  iii,  296,  297  and
note.  His  arrival  i»  England,  351.  374.
His  interviews  with  Elizabeth  and  Burgh-
ley,  and  dignified  rebuke  to  the  latter,  375,
376.

Des  Pruneaux,  French  envoy  to  the  States-
General,  i,  53. His  extravagant  profes-

sions relative  to  the  cavalier  treatment  of
the  Dutch  agents,  55.  His  character,  55.
Result  of  his  eloquence  upon  the  delibera-
tions of  the  States-General,  57,  58.  6U,  61.
Complimentary  gift  to  him,  61.  Rebuking
both  his  own  court  and  the  States-General
for  neglected  promises,  90,  His  pronun-
ciation on  the  articles  of  annexation,  92.
His  emotions  and  proverb  utterances  on
parting  with  the  Dutch  envoys,  93.
D  ■  Varknne,  sent  by  Henry  IV  to  Spain:
alleged  object  of  his  mission,  iii,  287.  His
real  name  and  degrading  antecedt-nts,
288  and  note.  Opposite  views  as  to  his
errand:  Calvaert's  report, 289,  290.  Men-
doza's  reply  to  a  request  of  his,  291.  His
own  rep(jrt  of  his  Spanish  mission,  and
•subsequent  mission  to  Elizabeth,  291
7mte.

De  Veer,  Gerrit,  diarist  of  the.  Arctic  ex-
pedition, on  the  egg-tree  tradition,  iii,  528.
On  the  vicissitudes  of  the  voyage,  530.
531.  534.  538.  539.

De  Vega,  Parma's  life  saved  by,  i,  186.

De  venter,  Leicester's  protege,  see  Pro-
ninck.

De\- enter,  the  historian,  value  of  a  work
of,  iii,  289  note.

Deventer.  city  of,  its  importance :  seized
by  the  English,  ii,  145, 146.  Consequences
of  Stanley's  appointment  to  its  governor-
ship, 147-152,  Treacherous  surrender  of
the  city  to  the  Spaniards,  160-163.  Con-
ditions imposed  on  the  citizens,  163.  Fate
of  the  chief  traitors,  167,  168.  Results  of
the  treason,  I7l.  176.  195.  199.  Invested
by  Maurice,  and  recaptured  for  the
States,  iii,  99-104.  Again  taken  by  the
Spaniards,  iv,  218.  See  iii,  69.  97.  iv,  225.
242.

De  ViCfT,  a  good  soldier,  but  only  half  a

m.an,  iii,  32  S,  329.
De  Vidosan,  responsible  post  inherited  by,

iii,  346.  Evidences  of  his  incompetency,
346,347.  His  fatal  mistake,  352.  Killed,
352.

De  Villars,  admiral  of  France,  boasting  of
his  successes  at  Rouen,  iii,  135.  Beseech-
ing help,  138.  Goes  over  to  Henry  IV,
312.  Terms  of  the  bargain,  ibid  note.
His  equipment  and  fate  at  the  siege  of
Dourlens,  312,  313.  Short-sightedness  of
his  murderer:  censure  passed  on  him,
313,314.  ^ee22I.

Dexter,  Ralph,  English  engineer  at  Ostcnd,

iv,  179.

D'HuMiERES,  killed  at  Ham,  iii,  306.  Grief
of  the  king,  307.

DiALTN,  Paul,  Polish  envoy,  his  oration  to
and  reception  by  the  States-General,  iii,
421,422.  Thence  to  England:  how  set
down  by  Elizabeth,  423.

Diego  de  Yepes,  Philip's  confessor,  an-
nounces his  master's  approaching  end  and
receives  his  confession,  iii,  474.  478,  479.

Dieppe,  gallant  victory  of  the  English  at,
iii,  116  note. See  128.  139.  140.  141.  448.

DiGGES,  muster-master  of  the  English  forces

DIGIUERE8.

INDEX.

EDMONDES.

541

in  Holland,  on  the  state  of  his  men,  i,

371.  ii,  6i  7Lote.
DiGiUEKEtj,  Marshal  des,  iii,  115.
Dijon,  siege  and  surrender  of.  iii,  324.
DiNANT,  Count  de,  slain,  iii,  315.
D'Inchv,  Ga\  re,  surrender  of  Cambray  by,

iii,  326. h^xhumation  and  treatment  of

his  r.mains,  331.
Diplomacy  ot  the  Elizabethan  epoch,  its

character,  i,  271.
DiKKZooN,  Adrian,  admiral  of  the  Dunkirk

pirate  fleet,  captured,  iv,  234.
Di£5TKL>T  the  only  citadel  against  tyrants,

ii,  2rt6.

Dons,  ie€  Van  der  Docs.

DoKsuLKG,  aitiicked  by  Leicester,  ii,  21.

Captured  and  partly  sacked,  39-41.
DoMBEs,  Prince  of,  iii,  115. Raises  the

sieges  of  Laniballe  and  Craon,  11«.  143.
DoNATO,  Antonio,  on  the  excellence  of  the

English inlantry,  iv,  520  note.  On

woman's  position  in  Holland,  525.
DoRiA,  John  Andrew,  his  bcbeme  against

Marseilles,  iii,  345.
DoKiA,  Prince,  his  threat  against  Moreo,

iii,  196.

DoRi",  Colonel,  "  would  sing  his  song  whose
bread  he  has  eaten,"  ii,  3S9.  His  tiiness
for  his  post  at  Oatend,  iv,  ^7.  At  a
burning  lort,  111.  Finding  the  impos-
sible true,  112.  Broken  in  health,  llJS.
Laying  about  with  his  broad  svsurd,  197.
Wounded  to  the  de^ith,  198. Set  Iv,  109.

D'Onvii.LK,  liis  share  in  the  iraflickings  for
surrende  ring  Ham  and  result  thereof,  iii.
305-307.

D'OssAT  and  Terron,  their  successful  mission
to  Uome,  iii,  325.

DoLRhENs,  its  site  and  surroundings,  iii,
305.  liisieged  by  Euenies,  30s.  In-
cidents during,  and  bloody  end  to  the
siege,  311-315.

DousAs,  the,  father  and  son,  their  eminence
ni  learning,  iv,  526.

Dover,  interview  between  Elizabeth  and
de  liethune  at.  iv,  141-143.

Drake,  Sir  Francis,  i,  342.  Pa'vclation
begun  by  his  famous  expedition,  306.
Inaugurating  his  caner  ol  victory,  467.
Eflict  of  his  succ'sses;  "a  feartul  man
to  Spain,"  474,  475.  Complexion  put
upon  his  exploits  at  home,  4  79.  .'jlflrct
of  home  intrigues  upon  the  ixlat  then  of,
492.  A  description  of  him ;  his  parental
mansion,  ii,  95.  Golden  n>sulls  of  his
"furrow  round  the  earth,"  96.  i'wo-
faced  policy  of  the  Queen  towards  him;
issue  ol  his  next  voyage,  97.  His  visit
to  the  Netherlands  and  its  upshot,  97.
Sailing  for  Spain  :  scattering  and  captur-
ing ships  and  trcasun-,  267-270.  Hepu-
diatcd  l*y  his  queen,  270,  271  notes.  294.
His  ccpiipmeiit  at  and  pariicipalion  in
the  tight  with  the  Armad.i,  432.  450.
His  ship  "the  Kevmge"  and  her  equip-
ment, 432.  Surrender  of  a  Spanish
admiral  to  him,  452,  453.  His  delight  at
the  flight  of  the  Armadii,  4 7 e,  479.  482.

Foul-mouthed  accusations  of  Frobisher
against  him,  497,  49s  and  note.  His
part  in  the  Anglo-Duich  expedition  to
Spain,  525,  526.  Dead,  iii,  309.  .vtf  i,
424.  430.  ii,  17.  135.  2.s0.  427.  450.  455.
456.  459,  460.  462.  471.  476.  477.  493.

Drayton,  Alice,  an  alleged  victim  of
Jjcicebter's,  i,  348.

Dreuhel,  Cornelius,  the  wonder-man  of
Alkmaar,  iv,  52-5.

Dreux,  abandonment  of  the  siege  of,  iii,  48.
its  succesalul  renewal,  222.

Drlry,  Sir  Robert,  savhig  Sir  Francis
Vere,  iv,  35.

I)u  Ban,  Captain,  put  to  dciith,  ii,  23.

Du  Boiij,  ^Varner,  defending  tue  Waal,  iv,
243.

Dudley,  John,  his  service  to  one  king  and

reward  from  another,  i,  346.
Dudley,  Thomas,  contradicting  a  report

prejudicial  to  Leicest<*r,  i,  396.  ibid  note.
Du  Folk,  Pierre,  hin  d  assa^bin,  tricked  by

religiuus  mummeries;  his  fate,  iii,  2»'i,

2»3.

Dui\  ERKWOORD,  Admiral,  iii,  367.  Set

Warmoiid.

Du  AIalrier,  Chevalier,  anecdote  related
by,  iii,  162  note

Dunkirk,  a  nebt  of  pirates,  iii,  352,  353.
Ite-sult  of  their  doings  on  the  commerce
of  the  Netherlantls,  iv,  2.  Ke^olve  of
the  Slate's  with  regard  to  the  place,  2.
Ke.Hult  of  their  eltorta,  55,  56.  A  ques-
tion as  to  the  legality  ot  the  pirates'
proceedings,  233. i>et  iv,  214.

Dui  UuSMs-MuRNAY,  ou  the  holy  league,  i,
4.  Manifesto  against  it  draun  up  by
him,  117.  His  e^t]mate  of  and  bearing
towards  Suinte  Aldegonde,  26^,  269.
Mournuig  over  his  country,  ii,  324,  325.
On  the  conduct  of  EliZiiUth  to  Hnll.ind,
3s8.  His  wail  over  Henry  the  Fourth's
Conversion  to  liomanism,  iii,  23?*  note
On  Henrys  proposal  lor  the  Intauta'i
hand,  2tf7.  Set  iii,  43.  177.  230.  2»7.  556.
557.

DuRANGO,  marshal  of  the  arcbduke's  camp,
slain,  IV,  b6.

I'UTcii  Ea.st  India  Company,  iii,  542.  Oc-
casion of  its  foundation  and  tem»s  of  its
charier,  iv,  124-126.  Its  lliird  fleet,  227,
English  opposition  to  its  monorolies,
230,  231.  Kesult  of  its  victory  at  Tydor,
232,  233. !Stt  iv,  352.  410,  411.

DuTXH  West  India  Ct»mpany'8  charter,  itB
condition.s,  *:c,  iv,  276  27s.  359.

Du  Terr,vil,  his  attack  on  and  repulse  at
Bergen-op-Zoom,  iv,  233.  23 ».  Cause  of
his  animo.-ity  to  tbe  Siat«-8,  234.  Kesult
ol  his  atU.  mpt  upon  Sluys,  239,  240.

East  India  Companies,  iii,  542. Stt  Dutch

l-^ist  India  Comjumy.
Edicts;  of  Jsemours,  i,  125, Of  Nantes,

iii,  470.

Edmondes,  English  envoy,  iii,  228  note
On  La  Varenne's  mission  to  Spain,  291
! note. What  the  States  thought  and  the

542

EGMONT.

INDEX.

ELIZABFTH.

queen  said  on  his  reception  in  the
Netherlands,  559,  560.
Egmont,  Lamoral  Count,  cruelty  of  his
execution,  i,  336.  An  ungrateful  agent
in  the  crime,  ii,  64.  See  iii,  27.  67.  193.
341.

Egmont,  Count  Philip,  sun  of  the  above,
sacrificing  dignity  fur  the  sake  of  liberty,
i,  221.  A  foremost  man  in  the  Spanish
army,  iii,  27.  Boasting  at  Ivry,  50.
His  successful  first  and  fatal  second
charge,  51,  52. See  i,  245.

Elizabeth,  Queen:  Frustration  of  her
intended  assassination,  i,  2.  Warnings
sent  to  her  from  the  continent,  3.  Her
advice  to  the  provinces  relative  to
Anjou,  10.  2S.  Her  harsh  treatment  of
sectaries,  and  comparative  tolerance  to-
wards papists,  24,  25.  Her  alleged
ground  for  putting  papists  to  death,  26.
Her  refusal  to  recognize  Mary  Stuart  as
her  successor,  27.  Huw  regarded  by  the
prince  of  Orange :  her  conduct  towards
the  Dutch  provinces,  28,  29.  French
caricatures  upon  her,  40.  Causes  of
timidity  in  her  councils  relative  to  Spain
and  the  Netherlands:  course  favoured
by  her,  62.  63.  Device  to  set  France  and
Spain  by  the  ears  alleged  against  her,  67.
Hi  r  position  in  the  esteem  of  Dutch
statesmen,  69,  70.  Idea  to  which  she
still  clung,  77.  82,  Her  tantalizing
course  towards  the  Provinces,  78.  De-
liberations and  ultimate  resolve  of  her
council,  78,  79.  Her  perplexities  relative
to  the  nature  of  the  Frencii  king's  offers
to  the  provinces,  82.  Real  object  con-
templated by  her  gos^ernmentas  between
the  Provinces  and  the  French  king,  83.
Over-subtlety  of  her  lord-treasurer,  83,
84.  Walsingham's  comment  on  the
impolicy  of  her  proceedings,  85.  In-
structing Davison  to  encourage  the
Dutch  people  to  rely  upon  her,  87.
Their  appeal  through  him  to  her,  88.
Her  true  intentions  towards  the  Nether-
landers,  102. 103.  Eloquence  of  a  Spanish
ambassador  upon  her  "abominations,"
118.  Her  persecution  of  her  catholic
subjects,  its  causes  and  its  consequences,
122,  123.  Compliment  paid  to  her  by
Sixtus  V,  128.  Result  ot  her  intercession
for  Treslong,  144.  Her  encouraging
assurances  lo  the  Antwerpers,  220.
Mutual  distrust  between  herself  and
Sainte  Aldegonde,  251.  252.  253.  257.
Anxiety  of  the  latter  to  set  himself  right
with  her,  265,  266.  Shape  determined  to
be  given  by  her  to  her  alliance  with  the
Hollanders:  her  diplomatic  coquettings,
271-273.  Conferences  of  her  ministers
and  herself  with  the  Dutch  envoys,  275-
279.  281.  Ill  effects  of  her  holding  her
hand  at  a  critical  moment,  283.  ChaflTer-
ing  attitude  taken  up  both  by  herself
and  the  Dutch  States:  the  bone  of  con-
tention, 283-285.  Financial  reasons  for
caution  on  the  part  of  her  advisers,  287.

What  she  wanted  from  Holland,  238.
Affection  of  the  Pope  and  Philip  of  Spain
towards  her,  289.  What  in  her  appre-
hensions Mary  Stuart  embo(iied,  2rf9.
Her  personal  appearance,  costume,  and
linguistic  acquirements,  300,  301.  Her
conferences  with  and  replies  to  a  new
Dutch  deputation :  ultimatum  insisted
on  by  her,  303,  304.  305.  308.  309-311.
311-314.  Her  attitude  on  learning  of  the
fall  of  Antwerp,  314.  Her  encouraging
letters  to  the  States,  315.  316.  Still  in  a
chaffering  humour,  317.  Motive  from
which  her  parsimony  sprang,  318.  A
truth  thoroughly  comprehended  by  her,
320.  Becoming  furious:  upbraiding  the
Dutch  envoys :  terms  at  length  agreed
on,  320-322.  Frank  submission  of  Prince
Maurice  to  the  conditions  required  by
her,  323-324.  Perplexing  effect  of  her
caprices,  326.  333.  Her  conduct  towards
Leicester  in  money  matters,  327-332.
Her  manifesto  on  espousing  the  Dutch
cause,  and  charg<  s  against  Spain  therein,
335-337.  Her  animus  towards  Sir  Philip
Sidney,  339.  340.  Appointment  she
ultimately  gave  him,  342.  Her  un-
wavering affection  for  Leicester,  349.
Why  she  made  common  cause  with
Holland,  354.  "Protectress"  or  pro-
tected ?  363.  Affection  of  the  Hollanders
for  her,  368.  Condition  of  her  troops  in
Holland :  their  composition  and  antece-
dents, 369-372.  417.  424  note.  Her
weakness  and  her  strength,  386.  Her
emotions  on  learning  Leicester's  aggran-
dist>ment  by  the  Hollanders,  390.  394.
Incitements  to  her  jealousy,  395.  Her
angry  manifestoes  to  the  earl  and  to  the
States,  396-399.  Her  receptit)n  of  Davi-
son's pleadings  on  behalf  of  the  earl,
401-405.  Her  dialogues  with  Shirley  on
same  subject,  409-412.  Effect  of  her
penny- wise  economy:  her  reprimand
read  to  the  States'  council,  421, 422.  Sus-
pected of  plotting  for  peace:  Champagny's
hints,  423,  424.  Vavasour's  advice  to  her
as  to  the  best  road  to  that  end,  430.  Still
parsimonious:  disgusting  her  lord  trea-
surer, 431.  Magic  effect  of  a  letter  from
Leicester,  432,  433.  Her  comforting  let-
ters to  him  and  to  the  States,  434-437.
Substance  of  same  and  of  her  instructions
to  Heneage  thereon,  435-438  notes.  Un-
happy results  of  her  conduct  in  reference
to  the  earl,  438.  Again  in  a  fury,  441.
Her  duplicity  towards  Walsingham  and
injustice  to  Heneage,  442-445.  Again
gracious  to  Leicester,  451.  454.  Sends  a
"  paper- plaister  "  to  Heneage,  452.  "  Con-
tented with  him  and  his  mission,"  457.
Explaining  her  "  mistake  "  to  the  States,
456  note.  Juncture  brought  about  by
her  tergiversation  and  wayward  cours?,
459.  Her  indifference  to  the  condition  of
her  troops  in  Holland,  461.  Trap  into
which  she  fell :  her  bearing  towards
Walsingham,  463-464. Lord  Cobham's

ELIZABETH.

INDEX.

ELIZABETH.

543

promise  on  her  behalf,  465.  Her  "both
hard  and  soft"  condition,  4Y0.  Suspi-
cions of  her  intentions  in  the  French
quarter,  470.  Conditions  of  peace  with
Spain  proposed  by  her :  their  character,
471.  Her  views  as  represented  by  tlie
Spanish  agent,  472.  Her  robes  not  quite
unsullied,  473.  Her  secret  letter  to
Parma,  481,  4^2.  Another,  in  an  altered
tone,  4«9.  Consequences  of  her  listening
to  Pliilip's  agents,  492,  493.  What,  ac-
cordin^;  to  Parma,  the  Lord  intended  for
her,  498.

A  supplicant  to  her  for  alms,  ii,  3.  Still
ungracious  towards  Sidney,  36,  37.  Con-
siderations touching  her  refusal  of  the
Sovereignty  of  the  States,  58-61.  84-85.
127.  134.  A  strange  mistake  of  hers,  62
nott.  Her  letter  lo  Leicester  commend-
ing Homo  of  her  veterans  to  him,  86,  87.
Her  double- facedness  in  regard  to  Drake's
expedition,  97.  Sum  of  her  policy  in
1587,  127.  267.  Still  deaf  to  the  needs  of
her  troops  in  Holland,  173,  174.  175.  179.
227.  Consequences  of  her  persecution  of
the  Cath(jlics,  180.  Orders  the  execution
of  Mary  Stuart.  181.  Effect  of  her  self-
willed  course  ujwn  her  counc  illors  182.
184.  185.  200.  Her  reception  of  and
Btormy  conferences  with  an  embassy
from  the  Netherlands,  1M5-1s9.  199.  Her
contiinied  parsimony  towards  L<'icestrr,
201  and  vole.  Contingent  n^iuinHl  of
her  by  the  Suites,  2n8.  Her  order  for  the
seizure  of  llohenlo,  223-225.  314.  Occision
of  ber  anger  with  him,  228.  Hefnsing
money  to  the  StJiU'sand  rating  Burkhur>l,
225-228.  230, 231. 236,  237.  Amends  made
by  her  to  liuckhurst  after  Leicester's
death,  266.  At  odds  with  her  people  on
the  Si>«inish  quarrel,  267.  ll<'pudiating
Drake's  di-alings  with  the  Spaniards,  270.
294.  Her  secnt  treating  with  Spain:
effects  on  the  States  of  their  knowledge
of  it,  272-275.  H»'r  tyraimy  in  r<  ligious
matters:  radical  difference  between  her
persecutions  and  those  of  Philip,  276,  277.
Her  contention  for  ^lleration  to  the
Dutch,  277,  278.  Sincere  toward-^,  and  a
believer  in  the  sincerity  of  Parma,  279.
285-287.  295.  296.  313.  329.  3tH.  365.
Negotiations  of  her  agent  with  Parma,
280-284.  Parma  at  fault  in  his  views  of
her  policy,  290-292.  KflTect  of  fieic<'>ter's
flatteries  and  solicitations:  relations  of
the  two,  308.  309.  328.  331,332  334.  Her
scolding  letter  to  the  Stites  on  recalling
Leicester,  325-327.  Condition  of  her  home-
returneti  troops,  32^.  Her  siily  suggestion
relativ(>  to  Osiend,  330.  Sending  her  I'eace
Commissioners  to  I'arma:  theirnaniesand
characters,  340-312  Their  int»'rviews  with
him  and  his  agents,  34.s-3.")0.  354-362  367-
372.  374-377.  Finding  fault  with  envoy
Rogers,  364.  Mi>led  by  Spanish  dissimu-
lations, 373.  The  Pojx''8  bull  and  Allen's
pamphlet  against  her.  379,  3S0.  383-386.
Envoy  Dale  comforting  her  with  Virgil,

381,  382.  Scolding  Prince  Maurice,  and
getting  a  reply  and  acting  on  it,  396-398.
Noble  l>earingof  her  ambassador  in  Paris.
410.  Warned  of  the  real  intention  of
Spain :  her  statesmen  sharers  in  her  de-
lusions, 411,  412.  414.  Cutting  short  an
oration,  418.  Her  interview  with  the
Dutch  envoys, 418-421.  Awake  toSpanish
falsehoods,  423.  Her  visit  to  Tilbury
fort:  enthusiasm  on  the  occasion,  430.
485.  486.  496.  Her  economic  grief  at
Leicester's  death,  533.
Her  representatives  ni  the  Stixtes'  councils
and  their  bickerings,  iii,  30-32.  Dealings,
exchanges  of  courtesies,  counsels,  &c,
between  her  and  Henry  IV,  45.  47.  83.
125.  127-129.  341-344.  351.  383.  393.  Her
emotions  and  letter  to  him,  on  his  con-
version to  K(»manism,  239,240.  Congratu-
lating Maurice  on  a  victory,  110.  Her
admiration  for  him,  54;>.  Her  insulter
challenged  by  Uniton,  134  vote.  Com-
municating a  Dutch  vict4jry  to  a  Dutch
envoy,  138.  Her  mistaken  estimate  of
the  aipture  of  Co<'Worden,  160.  Homage
accorded  to  her  by  her  statPsm-D,  162.
Puileigh's  flatteries  to  her  in  her  sixtieth
ye^r,  ibul  vote.  Occa.xional  value  of  her
high-handed  method  of  treating  subjects,
167.  Her  an.swers  to  the  States'  com-
plaints  of  withdrawal  of  her  troops  and
piracy  by  her  subjects.  171-173.  Her
characteristic  letter  to  "  Neil"  Norri.s,  253.
Her  estimate  of  Fuentes,  266  vote.  3n2.
Attempt  of  I»pez  to  poison  her,  27s,  279.
2'<6.  Her  conduct  in  reference  to  Henr3''8
solicitation  of  aid  for  def.  nee  of  Calais,
347-350.  374.  Her  explanation,  375.  See
432.  443,  444.  Her  prot«-staiion.-i  n  la  live
to  her  ailege<l  renewal  of  negotiations
with  Spain,  356,  357.  Thanking  the
J)utch  Admiral  Warmond,  359.  Text  of
her  lettt'r  t»»  him.  367.  Conferences  of  her
statesmen  and  herself  with  the  French
envoys,  and  alliance  cons"quent  thereon,
375-381.  I'lie  sham  and  the  real  c<intract,
3^3.  Religious  ceremony  on  the  ratifica-
tion, 3S3.  .{Ml.  Her  reception  of,  and
summary  dealing  with,  a  Polish  envoy,
423,  424.  llefusing  to  aid  in  the  reduc-
tion of  Amiens,  432,  4.33  In  an  ill  hu-
mour with  the  States,  435.  }U'T  views  «tn
the  [R'aw  question,  and  discusMcms  wlih
the  Dutch  and  Frencli  envoys  thereon,
436-443.  456-463.  46J-4b6.  554.  55^.559-
562.

Her  manifestations  at  the  victory  of  the
Stat<'s  at  Nieuport,  iv,  44,  45.  46.  Stand-
ing troops  to  Ostend,  6r».  Her  la>t  hours
ainf  death,  127-129.  Her  p;u-simony  con-
tnisU-d  with  her  sticces>4»r's  prodigality,
131.  Her  wardroix'.  Hail.  H.  r  anxiety
for  a  pers4)nal  confj-rence  with  the  French
king,  141.  Iler  interview  with  his  am-
bassjulor  and  .schenje  propounded  by  her,
141-143.  Her  name  and  memory  banished
from  Court,  149.  Her  recognition  of  the
chief  bulwark  to  her  throne,  la 7.

544

ELMONT.

INDEX.

ESSEX.

See  i,  113.  295.  ii,  II.  13.  52.  105.  lOY.  131
136.  191.  262.  iii,  93.  116.  117  note.  294.
296.  iv,  155.  205.  521.

Elmont,  Governor  of  Bois-le-Duc,  Iflying  to
its  rescue,  i,  168.  Pursuing  the  plun-
derers, 169.

Emilia  of  Nassau  and  Emmanuel  of  Portu-
gal, their  loves  and  their  marriage,  iii,  427.

England,  her  position  among  the  vStates  of
Europe  in  Elizabeth's  days,  i,  27,  2S.  51.
Dilatory  policy  towards  the  Dutch  pro-
vinces, 76.  War  against  her  proposed  by
the  French  kiug  to  Philip  II,  102.  A
game  at  which  she  was  sure  to  be  bea+en
by  Spain  and  France,  103.  Feeling  ot
the  nation  relative  to  Sainte  Aldegonde,
256,  257.  Awaking  to  the  need  of  help-
ing the  Netherlands,  270.  Consequence
of  refusing  help  to  Antwerp  at  a  critical
moment,  283.  Difficulty  of  forming  an
idea  of  the  England  of  Elizabeth's  days,
288,  289.  Descriptions  of  the  people  by
foreign  sojourners,  290-293.  Importance
of  Holland  to  P^ngland,  354.  Spanish  in-
vasion preparing,  356.  Who  shall  reign
after  Philip  has  conquered.?  35S-359.
Constitutional  safeguards  against  ty-
ranny: mercantile  spirit  of  the  age  and
its  tendencies,  360-362.  'I'rue  nature  of
the  impending  conte>t  with  Spain,  362.
ii,  267.  What  might  have  resulted  from
a  union  with  Holland,  ii,  58,  59.  The
nation  losing  its  character  with  the  Hol-
landers, 171.  Miserable  plight  of  its
troops  in  Holland,  173.  Invasion  of  the
country  proposed  by  the  Pope  to  Philip,

296.  Philip's  plan  and  anticipations,  296.

297.  299.  301.  3o3.  305.  One  English
statesman  awake  to  the  plot,  306,  307.
National  enthusiasm  on  the  expectation
of  the  Armada,  424.  Naval  preparations
for  its  reception,  424-427.  440.  Military
preparations,  in  figures  and  in  fact,  428,
429.  486-4«9.  The  fight  with  the  Ar-
mada, [see  Armada.]  Chief  elements  in
the  saving  of  the  nation,  500.  Result  of
the  triumph  upon  our  relations  with
Holland,  515.  Occasion  of  new  misun-
derstandings, 516-518.  524.  Interdepend-
ence between  this  kingdom  and  the
States,  iii,  161.  268.  465,  4  66.  Cross-
complaints  between  them  as  to  piracy,
trading  with  the  enemy,  and  the  like,
163-166.  172-175.^35.  New  Spanish  pro-
ject for  invading  the  country,  276.  The
experiment  made,  and  its  result,  394-396.
Direction  in  which  this  kingdom  was
taking  the  lead  among  the  nations,  iv.
129.  Its  scant  revenue;  relations  of  its
people  with  their  new  king,  J 31-133.
Recipients  among  its  nobles  of  Spanish
gold,  134,  135.  One  exception,  135.  Its
contempt  for  complaints  of  the  depreda-
tions of  its  corsairs,  136,  137.  235.  The
French  king's  personal  fear  of  them,  141.
Odd  collision  between  its  ships  and  those
of  France,  144.  Character  given  by
Sully  to  its  people,  145, 146.  Restrictions

relative  to  the  Netherlands  laiil  upon  itf
subjects,  205.  Popular  feeling  on  the
Spanish  treaty  and  the  fall  of  Sluys,  208.
212.  Cannonading  a  Dutch  squadron,
214.  Commercial  and  State  animosity
towards,  and  schemes  against  the  Nether-
lands, 230,  231.  259-261.  400.  Eulogium
on  the  nation's  soldiery  by  a  foreign
writer,  520  note.

Entraicues,  Mdlle,  Henry  the  Fourth's  new-
mistress,  iii,  555.

Epernon,  Duke  of,  chief  minion  of  Henry
ill  of  France,  his  lucky  escape,  i,  38.
Learning  manners,  112.  A  common  jest
regarding  him,  112.  His  accusation
against  Villeroy,  ii,  322  note.  Se6  ii,  402.
404.  529.

Ernest  of  Bavaria,  catholic  elector,  arch-
bishop of  Liege  and  Cologne,  i,  31.  ii,  2.
In  difficulties:  his  visit  in  disguise  to
Parma,  4,  24,  25.  His  revengeful  de-
mand, 28. See  iv,  219.

Ernest,  Archduke,  a  possible  husband  for
the  Infanta,  iii,  184.  221.  His  estimate  of
and  relations  towards  Mayenne,  235,  236
and  note.  His  disappointed  ambition,
poverty,  &c,  263,  264.  Pestered  by  office-
seekers,  264,  265.  His  prejudice  against
the  Spaniards:  apropos  anecdote,  265.
His  capacity  for  weeping,  and  incapacity
for  business,  267.  Pageant  on  his  entry
upon  the  Netherlands  governorship,  269-
273.  His  compromise  with  the  Spanish
mutineers,  276.  His  alleged  complicity
in  plots  to  poison  Maurice,  281.  283.  His
peace  propositions  to  the  States,  284.  286.
His  death,  government,  personal  peculia-
rities, 301,  302.

Ernest  of  Nassau,  or  Ernest  Casimir,  at  the
relief  of  Grol,  iii,  318.  Taken  prisoner,
320.  Ransomed,  321.  His  command  at
Nieuport,  iv,  7.  Receiving  unwelcome
news,  14.  Course  taken  by  him,  17,  18.
Panic  and  havoc  among  his  troops,  19,20.
Result  of  his  devotion  to  his  work,  24.  45.
The  Infanta's  horse  given  to  him,  44.  Race
whose  feathers  he  hoped  to  pluck,  120.
His  abortive  attempt  on  Antwerp,  216.

EspiNOY,  Prince  of,  patriotic  Netherlander,
i,  91  note. His  estates  confiscated,  191.

EspiNOY,  Count  de  Eigne,  Prince  of,  his
wealth,  character,  iii,  340,  341.  Sully's
position  with  regard  to  him,  iv,  187.

Essex,  Robert  Devereux,  Earl  of,  banquet-
ing and  tilting  at  Utrecht,  ii,  14, 15.  Hia
Command  under  Leicester,  38.  41.  45.  63.
Joining  surreptitiously  the  Anglo-Dutch
expedition  to  Spain,  525,  526.  Rebuked
for  his  hu^adlong  gallantry,  iii,  144.  In-
dignant at  rumours  of  peace  with  Spain,
356.  Commander  of  the  land  forces  in
the  Cadiz  expedition,  359.  361-366.  His
subsequent  Spanish  venture  and  its  result,
426.  See  ii,  22.  268.  iii,  347.  350.  384.  463,
iv,  98.  315.

Essex,  Walter  Devereux,  Earl  of,  and  Lady
accusations  against  Leicester  concerninft
i,  346.  347.  348.

FAIRFAX.

INDKX.

FROBISHEK.

545

Fairfax,  Captain,  delivered  as  a  hostage  to
the  Spaniards,  iv.  73.  1&.

Falck,  envoy  from  Zceland,  characterised
by  Lord  Leicester,  i,  295.  His  feehng
towards  England,  295,  296.  Line  of  ar-
gument to  which  he  was  open,  296.  See
377.  3S4.  iv,  128.

Famars,  governor  of  Mechlin,  why  put
under  arrest,  i,  252. Killed,  lii,  154.

Farnrsk,  .<-ee  Parma.

Fawkks,  Guido,  iv,  213.  23S.  263.  353.

Fazaudo,  l)on  Luis, Spani.sh  Admiral,  bang-
in^;-  and  drowning  his  prisoners,  iv,  235.
272. Action  between  his  fleet  and  a  few  I
Dutch  ships,  252-254.

Fkkdinand  of  Styria,  his  intense  hatred  of
protestantism,  iv,  500,  501.

Fj'Ria,  iJuke  of,  secretly  at  work  for  Philip,

iii,  192,  219.  220.  221.  224.  Taking  him-
self off,  233.  No  stranger  to  Mayenne's
character,  236.  His  intercepted  letter,
and  quanel  with  Mayenne,  2:56.

Fkrraha  de  Gama,  accomplice  in  a  poison-
plot  against  Klizjibcth,  iii,  279.  280.

Fessekus,  of  Oppenheim,  and  "  forty  other
rascals"  murdered  by  I'amia,  ii,  29.

Flandeijs,  acceptance  of  terms  from  Spain
by  the  cities  of,  and  result  of  same,  i,  18-
22.  Cause  of  the  defection  of  its  nobles
from  the  National  cause,  82.  Condition
of  its  cities  after  their  .subjupation.  255,
256.  462. Value  of  the  province  to  Spain,

iv,  1,  2.  Its  invasion  resolved  on  by  the
States,  4,  5.  Effect  of  the  war  on  the
western  powers,  53. See  iii,  194,  195.

Flemfng,  Philip,  auditor  of  Ostend,  his  cha-
racter and  his  diary,  iv,  61.  81  vote.
Opening  the  sluice  on  the  enemy,  85.  His
regi>try  of  the  dead,  86.  Communirating
unwelcome  news,  112.  Rareness  of  his
holidays:  an  intrusive  cannon-ball,  118,
119.  His  polyglot  letters,  18(».  Saving
tlie  governor,  183. See  176.

FLTsniNo.  why  a  bone  of  contention  in  the
legotiatinn  between  England  and  the
N(  tlM  rlands,  i,  2m5,  2s6.  Surrendere<l  to
1  ngland  as  a  guaranty,  323.  Illustrious
Englishman  ap))ointed  to  its  governor-
ship. :{2;{.  331.  33.S.  Military  and  com-
mercial importance  of  the  place,  343.  Its
galTi^on,  3H,  Ell(  ct  of  it.s  being  held  by
England.  (62.  Need  for  strongly  garri-
soning it,  iii,  156  note.  252.  Ste  ii,  1.  iii,
23.

Fontanus,  .John,  his  apostrophe  on  the  bru-
talities of  the  Spaniards  iu  Germany,  iii,
549.

Fokcade,  Jacques,  burning  of  the  daughters
of.  ii,  409.

France,  her  policy  towards  the  Dutch  Re-
public, i,  24.  How  regarded  by  the  Prince
of  Orange.  27.  2^.  34.  Effect  of  the  mis-
nile  and  profligacies  of  Henry  III  and  his
court.  35-39.  Treatment  of.  and  conditions
reqiiired  Iroiu,  envoys  sent  by  the  St\fes-
General  on  Anjou's  death,  53-56.  58.  He-
suits  of  ne^'otiation,  59-61.  Suspicions
entertained  by  England  and  the  provinc<  s  i

VOL.  IV.

j  as  to  the  king's  bona  fides,  86-89.  Recep>»
tion  of  a  new  embassy  from  ihe  SUites-
General,  and  its  results,  91-93.  Bloody  in-
tentions of  Philip  of  Spain  towards  the
nation,  357.  477.  Protesting  against  an
Anglo-Dutch  alliance :  reception  of  the
king's  agent  at  the  Hague,  385.  Results
of  the  king's  irresolution,  and  of  the  ma-
chinations of  Philip  and  the  Guises,  ii,
28S.  302.  322.  324.  336.  400,  401.  528.
Misery  due  to  Spanish  tyranny,  iii,  37.
Terrible  state  of  the  kingdom,  42.  Ma-
chinations of  the  League  :  dismembering
I  designsof  ambitious  nobles, 43,  44.  Battle
of  Ivry,  48-54.  Siege  of  Paris,  55-57.  59-
65.  119-121.  Contest  for  the  throne,  and
character  of  the  claimants,  179-182,  184-
191.198.  Hatred  of  the  peojde  for  Philip,
199,200.  State  of  affairs,  202.  Jesuiti-
cal counsels,  215-217.  Arrangement*  for
electing  a  king;  assembly  of  the  esraies
of  the  realm,  Philip's  order,  218-224.
Scene  on  Henry's  conversion  to  Roman-
ism, 226-228.  His  entry  into  Paris,  231-
2.13.  Philip's  would-be  king.  262.  300.
Suggested  alliana-  with  England,  341.
Aitiick  on  Calais,  346.  Propo.s«tl  dismem-
berment of  the  kingdom,  and  reply  of  the
king,  369-370.  Treaty  of  Alliance  agreed
on  with  F>ngland  and  the  Suites,  374-385.
438.  Negotiating  with  .^pain,  468-470.
Mutual  jealousies  of  Erance  and  England,
655.  Sully's  stab  at  his  country's  trade,
iv,  123.  Project  against  piracy,  137.  Sin-
gular collision  with  English  ships,  144.
Jts  capabiUties  for  silk  manufacture  de-
nied, 215.  513.  Ojnmion  b<»nd  'tf  union
with  England.  25H.  Proj)ort  ion  of  lighting
men  in  its  population  :  strength  of  the
Huguenots:  corruption  in  church,  law,
and  state,  344-349.  Treaty  with  the  Ke.
j)ublic.  400.  See  Amiens.  CaUus.  Catha-
rine de'  Medici.  Henry  111.  Henry  IV.
Jeannin.  Paris.  Rouen.
Ficxneker  University  founded:  its  liberal

c»rdinances.  ii,  9.  iv,  526.
Fi:an«;ii'an'i's  futile  misblon  to  the  muti-
neers, iv,  93.
Fkankfokt,  financial  panic  at.  iii,  416.
Fraxvueza.  Don  Pi><lro  de.  his  origin  and

influence  in  the  Spanish  Court,  iv,  32h.
Fredekk  k  Henry  of  Nassau,  his  christen-
ing, i,  135.  Asstussination  plot  against
him,  iii.  282.  First  appearance  as  a  st)l-
dier,  428.  450.  554.  Pruyinn  for  leave- to
fight,  iv,  28.  Made  govern(»r  of  Sluys,
198.  At  Mulheim :  panic  among,  and
flight  of  his  troops.  219-220.  His  own
danger  and  rescue,  221.  At  i:h<'inbetg,
2  J5.  AtVenlo,246.  His  military  sabry,
496.

FitiEsi-ANi>,  iii.  66.  6^.  97.  iv,  217.  218.  2.16.
402  43M.  Its  contribution  to  the  StaUs'
budget,  521  vote.
Fhohisiikr.  Sir  Martin,  ii.  267.  3«7.  His
ship  the  Triumph,  431.  His  attack  upon
the  Spanish  galleons.  456.  4.^)7.  Knipht<  d,
458. Censures  upon  Drake,  497,  4t>8.

2  N

546

FRUIN.

INDEX.

GIRONO.

Account  of  a  witness,  498  note. See  ii,
451,  452.  456.  457.  458.  471.  477.  478.
493.  iii,  164  note.  165.
Fruin's  exposition  of  the  Netherland  polity,
iii,  33  note.

FuENTES,  Count,  threatening  to  hang  a  trum-
peter, ii,  527.  Sent  to  supersede  Parma,
iii,  210.  On  the  intrigues  of  the  French
dukes,  219.  Regent  of  the  Netherlands,
244.  His  squabbles  with  the  Mansfelds  :
sick  of  his  life,  245.  251.  262.  265.  His
influence  over  Ernest,  266.  EUzabeth's
estimateof  him,  266  7ioie.  302.  His  poison-
plots  and  poisoners,  278-280.  283.  Declared
govt- rnor-general :  his  personal  appear-
ance, valour,  love  of  money,  302.  303.
Besieges  Le  Catelet :  his  revenge  on  behig
outwitted  in  a  treacherous  bargain,  305-
307.  Besieges  Dourlens,  308.  311,  312.
Courtesies  to  the  dead,  314.  Profiting  by
his  relationship  to  Alva,  315.  His  at-
tack on  Cambray,  326.  328-330.  Kept  in
retirement,  iv,  327.  Ordered  to  levy
troops,  337. See  iii,  303.  304.  337.

Gabrielle  d'Estrees,  afterwards  Duchess
of  Beaufort,  mistress  of  Henry  IV,  iii,
228.  331.  An  English  ambassador's  re-
port of  her,  343.  A  present  from  the
States,  453.  A  lying-in  visit  to  her,  456.
Dead :  her  successor  in  the  king's  affec-
tions, 555.

Gaetano,  legate  from  Sixtus  V,  his  cha-
racter, iii,  45.  Doing  his  work,  58.  See
64.  474.

Galeasses  in  the  Armada,  their  construc-
tion, armament,  &c,  ii,  443.

Galindo,  Generals  Alonzo  de,  and  Gane-
vaye,  their  treasure-fleet,  iv.  255.

Gama,  Ferrara  de,  iii,  279,  280.

Gama,  Vasco  de,  iv,  98,  272.

Gamboa,  Captain,  fort  on  the  Kowenstyn
commanded  by,  i,  197. Wounded,  203.

Garnier,  secretary  to  Parma,  taking  ad-
vantage of  a  visit  to  Ostend,  ii,  342.  His
engineer-valet,  342.  343.  Tour  urged  by
him  on  Robert  Cecil,  342.  343,  344.  See

ii,  345.  346.  373.

Gaucier,  Captain,  his  slaughterous  boast,

iii,  254.

Gelderland,  iv,  402.  438.  Percentage  of
the  general  States'  fund  contributed  by
it,  524  note.

Gelders  betrayed  into  Parma's  hands,  ii,
169-170.

Gend,  Cornelius  van,  delegate  for  Gelder-
land  at  the  peace  conference  with  Spain,

iv,  402.

Gerard,  Balthazar,  murderer  of  William
the  Silent,  i,  2.  Value  to  Farnese  of  his
successful  commission  of  the  crime,  133.
Philip's  proposal  to  levy  a  pension  for
his  heirs  on  his  victim's  son,  iii,  335.  See
iv,  369.

Gerbrantzon,  Rear-admiral,  at  the  fight
with  the  Dunkirk  pirates,  iv,  234.

Germany,  its  dread  of  Spain  and  I'urkey,  i,
28,  30. Apaihy  of  its  I'rotestant  princes

and  people,  31.  p]nmity  between  its
Lutherans  and  the  Dutch  Calvinists,  33.
English  notions  on  the  subject,  32  note^
Indignation  of  the  Netherlanders :  La
Noue's  denunciation,  33,  34.  A  Nether-
lander's  prophecy  verified  by  the  Thirty
Years'  VVar,  140.  Habit  of  its  petty
sovereigns  to  hire  out  their  subjects,  ii,
400.  Occupations  of  its  grandees  in  a
time  of  danger,  iii,  297,  298.  3:^7.  Its
fighting  men  hired  out  by  their  rulers,
iv,  53.  Wholesale  consumption  of  their
lives,  53,  54.
Gertruydenbkrg,  a  quarrelsome  supper
party  at,  ii,  87-92.  Mutiny  in  the
garrison,  340.  389.  516.  Attacked  by
Maurice  and  surrendered  to  Parma,
516,  517.  Authors  of  the  disaster,  517.
Maurice  determined  to  regain  it,  iii,

97.  His  preliminary  demonstrations,

98.  111.  Its  aspect,  site,  importance,
&c,  241,  242.  Incidents  of  the  siege:
surrender  of  tlie  place,  242-249.
Effects  of  the  surrender,  250,  251.  See
562.

Gevaerts,  Doctor,  feeling  the  Dutch  pulse

as  to  a  desire  for  peace,  iv,  275.
Gevaerts,  Skipper,  laughed  at  for  hinting

the  truth,  iv,  301.
Ghent,  its  surrender  to  Spain,  i,  18,  19.

Terms  guaranteed  to  its  citizens,  21.

Disastrous  results  of  its  submission,  22.

The  surrender  how  brought  about,  133.

Rights  secured  by  the  "  pacification,"

11,  234.  The  garrison  in  revolt,  iii,
430. See  i,  462.  ii,  345-347.  351.  iy,  11,

12.  9L

Ghent,  Viscount  of,  see  Richebourg.

Ghost  of  a  dead  commander  leading  his
troops  to  victory,  i,  211.

Gfanibelli,  provident  measure  suggested
to  the  Antwerpers  by,  i,  180.  His  en-
gineering and  chemical  skill,  and
threat  against  the  Spaniards,  181.  Mis
plan  for  destroying  Parma's  bridge :
details  thereof,  181-183.  Same  put  Into
action:  its  nmrderous  effects,  184-188.
His  wrath  at  Jacobzoon's  neglect  of
orders,  189.  At  military  engineering  in
London,  ii,  461.  His  devil-ships  not  for-
gotten by  the  Spaniards,  466.  See  ii,
257.

Gibraltar,  the  Dutch  fleet  lying  in  wait
for  the  Spanish  galleons  at,  iv,  297,  298.
Origin  of  its  name,  299.  The  fight:
commanders  on  both  sides  killed,  299-
305.  p]ffect  produced  by  the  victory  of
the  Dutch,  336.  359.  360.  386.  408.

GiK.SEiLLES,  Peter  van,  indomitable  governor
of  Ostend,  iv,  174.  Killed  at  his  post,
176. Fate  of  his  successors,  181.

Gilpin,  English  agent  in  Zei-land;  his
superfluous  advice  to  the  queen,  i,  272.
On  the  character  of  the  Zoclanders,  273.
I'ernicious  efi'ect  of  a  despatch  of  his  at  a
critical  moment,  282,  2«3. See  381,

Girono,  Don  Fernando,  object  of  his  mission
to  King  James,  iv,  422,  423.

GIUSTINIANI.

INDEX.

HAM.

547

GiusTiNiANi,  Pompeio,  Italian  engineer,  his
floating  battery  that  would  not  float,  iv,
172. ^ee  243.

GivRY,  officer  of  Henry  IV,  wounded
in  rescuing  the  king,  iii,  133.

GoA,  capital  of  the  Portuguese  East  Indies,
iv,  227.  Its  importance  as  a  mart:
hatred  of  the  natives  for  their  European
masters,  229,  230.

GoDESBERG,  defeat  of  Truchsess  at,  ii,  3.

GoMARiTEs  and  Arminians,  their  theologi-
cal animosities,  iv,  4^7,  498.

GoNDY,  Cardinal,  iii,  62.  Henry  the  Fourth's
retort  to  him,  63.

GoxzAGA,  Hannibal,  Spanish  captain  at
Zutphen,  ii,  44.  47.  Mortally  wounded,  49.

GouRDON  or  Gordan,  M.  de,  governor  of
Calais,  his  warning  to  Medina  Sidoniii,
ii,  463.  Depriving  English  siamen  of
their  prize,  469,  470.  His  incapable
legatee,  iii,  346. See  De  Vidosan.

Grafigny,  Agostino,  i,  453.  His  debut  as
a  volunteer  diplomatist,  464.  Message
confided  to  him  by  Parma;  his  interview
with  lx)rd  Cobhani,  465.  Reporting
"lx)th  hard  and  soft,"  470.  Imparling
pleasant  iiitelligence  to  I'arma,  47>t.
In  low  spirits,  4h3.  Cause  of  his  dis-
comforts, 483.  In  secret  conclave  wiili
the  queen's  ministers,  4 85.  En"ect  of  his
babbling  ;  his  present  to  Leicester,  493-
495. Set'  i,  453.  489.  490.  492.  495.  ii.  62.

Granvelle,  Cardinal,  i,  20.  464.  470.  ii,  64.
65.  69.  435.

Grave,  its  reduction  determined  on  by
Parma,  ii,  9.  March  of  forces  to  protect
it,  10.  Fierce  fighting :  repulse  of  the
Spaniards,  11-13.  Their  renewed  attack
and  repulse,  18-19.  Treachery  of  the
governor  and  fate  of  himself  and  his  Ciip-
tains,  19,  21-23.  Maurice's  preparation
for  besieging  it,  iv,  90.  Visitors  at  the
camj),  Orietital  and  European,  103,  104.
Kesult  of  the  siege,  104.  Ci ranted  to  the
Spanish  mutineers,  121.  196.

Gray,  I>ord,  why  not  the  best  man  to  send
to  the  Netherlands,  i,  317,  318.

Greenwich,  diplomatic  conferences  at  the
royal  palace  at,  i,  294.  300.  iii,  376.  383.

Gregory.  XI U,  Pope,  opposed  to  the
League,  i,  126.

Gregoky  XIV  (Sfondrato),  evidences  of
his  earnestness  against  heresy,  iii,  84.
Dead,  137.  185.

Greville,  Fulke,  on  Sidney's  quarrel  with
Oxford,  i,  341.  On  the  outward  bearing
of  William  the  Silent,  350.

Qrimstone,  LieuUMiant,  his  darUig  trick
upon  Parma,  ii,  513,  514.

Gboenevelt,  Arnold  do,  commandant  of
Sluys,  his  scanty  forces,  ii,  249.  Plan
vainly  urged  by  him  on  Le  icester,  255,
256. See  2^1.

Qboexix)  or  (irol,  besieged  by  Maurice,  iii,
316.  Ambush  and  counter-ambush  and
their  slaughtiTous  results,  318-321.
Spinola's  march  to  its  relief,  iv,  24  7.
Ketircment  o»  Maurice,  24«.

Groningen,  Schenk's  service  to  Philip  at,
ii,  6.  Besieged  by  Maiu-ice,  iii,  104-106.
Wealth,  site,  and  historical  associations  of
the  city,  254,  255.  Perlectness  of  its
fortifications,  257.  Mad  pranks  and
hair-breadth  escapes,  257,  258.  Result
of  the  siege  and  of  the  victor's  clemency,
259-261.  See  iii,  259  note,  iv,  217,  218.
402.  438.  524,  note.

Grotils,  Hugo,  a  youthful  attache,  iii,  451.
A  strange  belief  of  his,  529.  Characteriz-
ing Dousa,  Iv,  526.  Laying  the  founda-
tion of  his  future  eminence,  526.  See  iv,
214  note.

Guerrera,  negotiating  with  the  mutineers,
iv,  196.

Guoiiccioxi,  Cesar,  his  exploit  at  Neuszand
reward,  ii,  26,  27.

Guise,  Henry  of  Lorraine,  Duke  of  ("  Le
Balafre,"  "Mucio"),  i,  35.  His  i)hy-
siognomy :  causes  of  his  popularity,  39,
40.  Outdone  in  craft  by  Henry  of
Navarre :  his  designs,  41.  Spy  and  agent
of  Philip  of  Spain,  42.  His  relations
with  the  queen-mother  and  tactics  to-
wards her,  42,  43.  Becoming  daily  more
dangerous,  64  An  underuking  in  which
he  failed,  6-1,  65.  Warned  by  Philip,  lo2.
His  movements  and  their  instigator  truly
indicated  by  Henry  of  Navarre,  104.  106.
Threalii  of  Henry  III  against  him  :  sub-
sldizi-d  by  Philip:  how  he  employeti
Philip's  dollars,  106,  107.  Holy  League
concluded  betwc-en  his  faction  and
Philip,  108, 109  [set'  Holy  I>eagueJ.  Indii*-
creet :  talking  and  not  doing :  ailmonishod
by  Philip,  111,  112.  Spiriting  away
Parma's  supplies,  477.  591.  Still  dunning
for  money ;  need  for  his  being  supplied
therewith,  ii,  291-292.  300.  302.  Pursu-
ing Henry  HI  to  the  death,  323.  His
victories:  enthusiasm  for  him  in  Paris,
324.  403.  Emblematic  gift  to  him  by
the  Pope,  401.  His  entry  incognito  into
Paris:  how  discovered:  his  triumphal
jirogreas,  404-408.  Nametl  Generalissimo
of  France,  40^.  The  English  amlxuisador's
retort  on  his  offers  of  protection,  410.
His  end,  529.  Sir  Henry  Umton's  chal-
lenge to  him,  iii,  134  note  Stc  ii,  292.
322.  401.  iv,  342.

Guise,  Duke  of,  successor  to  the  above,  U€
Joinville,  prince  of.

GuNi  owDER  Plot,  iv,  262. Sit  Fawkes.

Guzman,  Henriquez  de,  false  proclamation
by,  il,  527.

GwYNN,  David,  his  heroic  exploit  in  the

Armada,  ii,  447-449.
Gy-sant,  Capt:un,  governor  of  Gcrtruyden-

berg,  killed,  iii,  248.

Haen,  Qiptain,  bold  feat  of,  iii,  248.

Hague,  the,  its  a^jxtt  and  environ.s.  i,  S^s.
Its  old  i^alace  and  ban*|Ueting  hall,  vdui.
Set  II».lland.  Nether  I  amis.

Hakkius,  Dutch  preacher,  his  brutal  con-
duct, i,  15.

Ham,  treacherous  surrender  of,  and  fate  ol

2  N  2

548

HAMART.

INDEX.

HENRY  III.

the  traitor,  iii,  305-307.  Spanish  memory
of  the  event,  315.
Hamakt,  the  traitor  at  Grave,  iv,  91.  Set
Hemart.

Hans,  Maurice's  trumpeter,  killed,  iv,  192.

His  murder  avenged,  ibid.
Haklem,  iii,  97.

Hart,  Captain,  his  swimming  feats  at
Sluys,  ii,  251.  256.

Hart,  Lieutenant,  his  bravery,  iv,  115.

Hatton,  Sir  Christopher,  Elizabeth's  vice-
chamberlain  ;  value  of  his  leg  to  him,  i,
350.  His  sound  advice  to  Leicester,  395.
His  volunteer  son,  ii,  32.  Consequence
of  his  dealing  "plainly  and  dutifully"
with  the  queen,  200.

Haultain,  Admiral,  governor  of  Wal-
cheren,  his  untoward  fate,  i,  200.  213.

Haujltain,  Vice- Admiral,  iv,  116.  On  the
watch  for  Spanish  troops  afloat,  212.
His  attack  on  the  ships  and  dealings
with  their  living  cargoes,  213,  214.  235.
His  affair  with  Fazardo's  squadron,  251-
253.  Returning  with  a  crack  in  his
reputation,  255. See  254.  295.

Haultepenne,  Seigneur  de,  his  opportune
aid  at  the  rescue  of  Bois-le-Duc,  i,  168-170.
Commended  by  Parma  to  Philip's  grateful
notice,  170.  Governorship  conferred  on
him  to  Schenk's  disgust,  ii,  7.  Opposed  to
and  beaten  by  Sch^nk  at  Werll,  8.  Re-
c  died  from  Neusz,  17.  24.  Gelder  betrayed
to  him,  170. His  end,  254. See  ii,  29.

Havre,  Marquis  of,  hungry  for  office,  iii,
264.  His  hatred  of  Fuentes,  303.  Evil
elements  in  his  character,  340.  Charac-
terising Elizabeth  and  Olden-Barneveldt,
436.  562,  563.

Hawkins,  Sir  John,  the  navigator,  ii,  95.
267.  Impatient  to  be  at  the  Spaniards,
•424,  425.  His  ship  the  Victory  in  action
with  the  Armada,  452.  455.  457.  459.
460.  462.  471.  477.  Angry  with  Drake,
452.  497.  Knighted,  458.  Dead,  iii,  359.
See  ii,  451.  467.  493.

Heemskerk,  Jacob,  Dutch  arctic  navigator,

iii,  526.  529.  Manoeuvring  with  the
bears,  529.  532.  Unexpected  meeting
with  friends,  539,  540.  His  oriental
adventures :  capture  of  a  rich  carrack,  iv,
101,  102.  His  origin,  various  ventures,
personal  appearance,  manners,  295,  296.
Fleet  put  under  his  command,  296.
His  preparations  and  anticipations,  297,
298.  His  harangue  to  his  comrades,  and
plan  of  operations,  299,  300.  Alongside
the  Spanish  admiral :  mortally  wounded ;
his  last  moments,  301,  302.  Honour
paid  to  his  remains,  305.  Eifect  of  his
victory,  336,  337. See  iii,  534-536.  541.

iv,  125.  299  note.  303.  305.

Heinrichzoon,  Lambert,  see  Lambert.

Held,  Matthew,  joining  in  a  perilous  ad-
venture, iii,  7.  His  tell-tale  catarrh,  9.
Among  the  faithless  faithful  only  he,
372.

HKLMiCHros  and  Queen  Elizabeth,  ii,  420,
421.

Helpen,  Koender  van,  Groningen  delegate,
iv,  402.

Hemart,  or  Hamart,  Baron,  surrenders
Grave  to  Parma,  ii,  19.  22.  Interest
made  to  save  him :  his  end,  22,  23.  See
iv,  91.

Henchman,  Captain,  his  replies  to  a  rene-
gade's traitorous  proposals,  ii,  164,  165,

Heneage,  Sir  Thomas,  instructed  by  the
queen  to  reprimand  and  supersede  Lei-
cester, i,  396-398.  400.  His  embarrass-
ments, 406.  Information  furnished  by
Davison  to  him,  406,  407  notes.  Off  on
his  mission,  407.  Delivers  the  queen's
message  to  the  States,  419.  Doing  as
much  hurt  with  honesty  as  others  with
naughtiness,  421.  His  oration  to  the
council,  422.  Text  of  the  queen's  in-
structions on  her  relenting  towards  Lei-
cester and  the  States,  435,  436,  437  notes.
Relieved  and  perplexed  at  once :  his
remonstratory  comments  on  the  queen's
conduct,  439,  440.  The  queen's  new
accusation  against  him,  443.  444.  445.
Distressing  effect  of  her  "  so  contvarious
directions "  upon  him,  445-448.  A
"  paper  plaister  "  for  him :  his  aspiration
thereon,  452.  In  England:  effect  of  his
original  mission,  457.  458,  459.  See  416.
417.  419.  421.  422.  441.  442.451.  454.  464.
472.  480.  497.

Henry  III,  of  France  (Valois)  i,  27,  28.
Offer  of  the  Netherlands  sovereignty  to
him,  35.  53.  61.  His  character,  unmas-
culine  vagaries,  hatred  of  the  Huguenots,
35,  36.  Extravagances  of  his  minions ;
an  Englishman's  picture  of  their  doings,
37,  38.  His  fratricidal  proposal  to
Henry  of  Navarre,  46.  Result  of  his
attempt  to  seduce  the  latter  back  to
Paris  and  popery,  46,  47.  A  flattering
estimate  of  him,  56,  57.  Another  side  to
the  picture,  58.  Return  from  Lyons:
"  in  a  great  dump,"  66.  Plot  for  setting
him  and  Philip  II  by  the  ears,  ascribed
to  queen  Elizabeth,  67.  His  longings,
and  tempting  offers  to  William  of  Orange
for  the  Netherlands  sea-board,  67,  68.
"  Seeking  to  blear  the  eyes  of  the  world,"
87.  His  reception  of  the  envoys  from
the  States-General  and  sentimental  part-
ing with  them,  91,  93.  Prize  rejected
by  him  on  the  occasion,  94.  Taken  to
task  by  the  Spanish  ambassador,  95.
His  true  object  in  entertaining  the
Netherlands  embassy,  96,  97.  100.  102.
103.  His  own  account  of  what  passed
between  himself  and  Mendoza,  97,  98.
Understanding  between  himself  and
Parma  relative  to  the  provinces,  101.
Proposes  war  against  F^ngland  to  Philip
II,  102.  Forbids  Henry  of  Navarre  to
aid  the  provinces,  105.  Muttering  ven-
geance against  the  Guises:  in  the  dark
as  to  the  real  author  of  his  own  troubles,
106.  His  position  in  regard  to  the
parties  to  the  Holy  League,  109  110
Contempt  of  Guise  for  him,  111.  Hia

HENBY  IV.

INDEX.

HENRY  rv.

549

governor,  112.  Denounced  in  the
League's  manifesto,  115.  Effect  of  those
denunciations  upon  him,  1 1 5, 1 1 6.  Help-
less in  the  hands  of  his  mother  and
prime  minister:  extirpatory  decree  de-
manded of  him  by  the  League,  118.
Choosing  between  league  and  counter-
league:  his  choice,  124,  125.  Action
taken  by  Kngland  on  his  refusal  to  aid
the  Dutch,  274.  His  duplii  ity  beyond
the  ken  of  the  English  queen,  284.
Affronted  by  Elizabeth,  ii,  183.  Atti-
tude of  Philip  and  Guise  towards  him;
his  helpless  position,  301.  302.  322-324.

402.  404.  Anathematized  in  the  pulpits,
401. Plot  of  the  League  against  him,

403.  Sparing  when  he  should  have
struck,  404-406.  Rated  by  his  mother:
his  flight  from  Paris,  408.  Formally
reconciled  to  Guise ;  virtually  deposed,
409,  410.  Deadly  requirements  for  his
future  tranquillity;  results  of  the  murder
of  the  Guises,  52m,  529.  His  own  end,
530. See  i,  159.  296.  ii,  438.  446.  iii,  1.

125.  176.

Henry  IV  of  France  and  Navarre,  (the
liearnese  Huguenot ")  i,  27.  35.  As-
sailed from  the  pulpit,  40.  Too  clever
for  Henry  of  Guise,  41.  His  personal
appearance;  prominence  in  history,  43.
Incidents  of  his  birth :  his  early  train-
ing, 44,  45.  His  marriage,  and  forced
espousal  and  subsequent  abjuration  of  the
popish  faith,  45.  46.  His  profligacies,
his  wife  and  her  maids  of  honour,  46.
Result  of  Se'gur's  attempts  to  win  him
back  to  popery,  46,  47.  66.  Temptations
offered  by  Philip  11,  47.  Next  to  tlie
throne :  his  Huguenots :  his  virtues,
vices,  peculiarities  of  character,  4  7-49.
His  heroism,  and  aipacity  for  king-craft,
49.  Resolve  of  the  English  couit  as  to
how  ho  "might  be  induced  to  offend  the
king  of  Spiuii,"  80.  Secret  mission  sent
by  the  States  to  him,  104.  His  advice
and  generous  offer :  prohibition  put
upon  the  latter,  104,  105.  A  well-
founded  suspicion  of  his,  106.  His  right
of  succession  to  the  crown,  how  dispos*  d
of  by  I'hilip  and  the  Guises,  108.  Glanc-
ing into  the  future,  113.  His  manifesto
in  reply  to  that  of  the  League,  and  chal-
lenge to  Guise,  116-117.  Effect  of  the
promulgation  of  the  edict  of  Nemours
upon  his  moustachio,  126.  E.xcommu-
niaited  by  Si.xtus  V:  his  sjitirical  retort,

126,  127.  His  victory  at  Coutras,  ii,
323.  Rewarding  a  lx>l«l  Welshman,  449.
His  protection  sought  by  Henry  HI,

530.  Proclaimed  king  as  Henry  IV,

531.  Stiind  tiiken  by  him  in  regard  to
reUgious  matters,  531,  532.  iii,  42.  44,
45.  Paradoxical  eleuients  in  his  cha-
racter :  seeming  doubtfulness  of  his
chances,  46.  47.  His  battle  with  and
victory  over  the  League  at  Ivry,  4s-
65.  His  possible  motives  for  not  march-
ing lustanter  on  I'aris,  55,  56.  Re-

ceiving and  answering  a  League  de-
putation, 62-64.  Meeting  Parma  face
to  face :  differences  between  the  mili-
tary tactics  of  the  two,  72.  86.  134.
Advancing  on  Paris;  composition  of  his
forces,  73,  74.  Out-generalled  by  Parma,
his  troops  disbanded,  77-80.  His  at-
tempted escalade,  and  blameable  bold-
ness, 80,  81.  His  real  road  to  Paris:  an
attitude  unsuspected  by  the  protectant
leaders,  83,  84.  Rescuing  his  old  marshal
(Biron):  on  Farnese's  flank,  85.  His
envoy's  mission  to  the  Hague  and  its
result,  124-127.  Invests  Rouen:  Eliza-
beth's advice  to  him,  127-129.  Divided
counsels,  132.  Rushing  into  peril:  lives
self-siicrificed  to  save  him,  132-134.  His
wound  on  the  occasion,  134  note.  135.
Combat  between  his  jester  and  a  scion  of
Lorraine,  136.  Cautious  for  once,  139.
Again  outgeneralled :  tjiking  counsel
with  the  English  ambassador,  143-145.
Policy  involved  in  his  anticipated  recog-
nition by  the  Pope:  efforts  of  his  foes  to
prevent  it,  and  exclude  him  from  his
throne,  184-190.  199,  200.  2o3.  219.  Atti-
tude of  Pope  Clement  VI 11  towards  him
185.  218.  228,  229.  The  cardinal -legate's
manifesto  against  him,  220.  Rt-plying
to  his  "  political  "  friends'  importunities:
conference  between  them  and  the  Lea-
guers, 221,  222.  I*reserving  his  atti-
tude :  his  assembly  for  "  instruction,"
conversion  to  Romanism  and  consecra-
tion, 222-223,  226,  227.  229,  230.  An
"aside"  to  his  mistress,  228.  His  entry
into  Paris,  231.  Principle  represented
by  him :  ep(K:h  marked  by  his  so-called
conversion.  232.  370.  His  Ixirgain  with
and  comical  revenge  upon  a  corpulent
conspirator,  236,  237,  Effect  of  his  con-
version on  his  I  >utch  and  English  friends :
Elizabeth's  letter  to  him,  239-240.  Poison
and  other  plots  against  his  life,  278.  299.
His  secret  mission  to  Spain:  apprehen-
sions excited  by  it:  his  proposal  for  the
Infanta's  hand, '287-290.  His  mission  to
England  and  the  States-General,  and
plan  of  milit^iry  operations  against  Spain,
292-295.  Warming  more  towards  the
Stiites  and  cooling  towards  England.  296,
297.  His  declaration  of  war  again  Spain,
and  confess«d  error  of  style  therein,  299,
300.  Again  rescuing  Hiron,  324.  Cap-
tures Dijon,  324.  His  mission  to  Rome
for  absolution  and  its  results,  325.  His
visit  to  Ciimbray:  loss  of  the  city,  327-
330.  His  triple  jest.  338.  Flattering
Elizab'  th  and  striving  to  cijole  her  am-
bassiulor,  342-344.  Success  of  his  cham-
pions at  Marseilles,  345.  His  perils  at
Calais:  military  and  diplomatic  trans-
actions concerning  it,  and  their  results,
345-:'53.  [>'«<' Calais.]  His  reply  to  pro-
posals for  dismembering  his  kingdom,
369,  370.  His  treaty  of  alliance  with
England  and  Hollund  :  fraud  practised
on  the  latter,  374-3S5.  430.  433,  *434,  In

550  HENRY.  INDEX.  HOHENLO.

a  false  position,  386.  Mission  confided  by
him  to  Ancel,  387.  390.  392.  Intriguing
with  a  Spanish  agent:  the  archduke's
gift  to  him,  392-394.  431,  432.  His  con-
sternation at  the  loss  of  Amiens,  411.
His  measures  for  retaking  it,  and  their
result,  413,  414.  424,  425.  Rosny's  plan
for  recruiting  his  finances  :  its  morality,
412-414.  Communicates  his  peace  nego-
tiations with  Spain  to  Elizabeth  :  his  du-
plicity, 439-441.  Call  upon  him  by  the
States :  his  complaint  against  Elizabeth,
446.  His  reception  of  and  conferences
with  the  Dutch  envoys  on  the  peace
question,  450-456.  Signs  a  treaty  of
peace  with  Spain  :  its  terms,  46S-470.
His  payments  to  the  nobles  of  France  as
the  price  of  their  allegiance,  470,  471.
His  political  schemes  and  his  new  mis-
tress :  turns  his  back  on  the  Huguenots,
555,  556.  His  marriage  projects  probable
and  improbable,  557.  His  disposal  of  the
Biron  plot  against  him  and  mock  indig-
nation on  the  occasion,  iv,  97  note.  Head
of  the  conspiracy,  139.  His  rebuke  to
ambassador  Tassis  relative  thereto,  139,

•  140.  Inglorious  obstacles  to  his  crossing
the  Channel  to  visit  Elizabeth,  141.  His
epigrammatic  estimate  of  James  I,  147.
His  tactics  relative  to  Spain,  Eng-
land, and  the  Provinces,  158  note.  His
great  political  scheme :  effect  of  his  am-
bassador's flatteries  on  James,  160-166.
His  advice  to  the  Dutch  States,  and  its
effects,  186.  His  receptions  of,  and  com-
phmentary  gift  to,  Spinola,  210.  237.  238.
Quarrel  with  De  Bouillon,  239.  Exas-
perated with  the  Dutch  in  regard  to  tlieir
attitude  towards  Spinola.  240.  248.251.
His  designs  upon  the  Republic,  259.  263-
26S.  343.  345.  351.  His  special  mission  to
the  Hague,  294. 340.  Arguments  urged  on  i
him  by  Barberini,  341.  His  estimate  and
selection  for  his  purposes  of  Jeannin,  342,
343.  Alive  to  the  circumstances  of  his
times,  343-345.  His  boast  as  to  the  mili-
tary strength  of  his  kingdom  :  qualifying
influences  of  the  Huguenot  element,  345,
346.  348.  State  of  things  at  which  he
winked,  347.  His  intrigues  against  Pro-
testantism, 348.  Deaf  to  his  finance
minister's  lectures:  result  desired  by
both,  350.  Conferences  of  his  envoys
with  the  Dutch  statesmen,  354-360.  378.
384.  473-475.  His  new  Spanish  marriage
plot,  and  duplicity  towards  the  States,
430-432.  434.  Detected  in  his  double
game :  his  bullying  reply  to  his  accuser,
434.  His  attempts  upon  the  fidelity  of
iMaurice  and  Barneveld  and  their  results,
441.  44  3-446.  470.  Offence  given  to  him
by  Maurice's  secret  emissary,  468,  469.
His  scolding  letter  to  Maurice  thereon,
469-472.

Henry  of  Lorraine,  see  Guise.

Hlnky  of  Nassau,  Breda  fortified  by,  iii,  5.
On  a  diplomatic  mission,  iv,  128.  147.
151. In  Flanders.  188.

Henry  VIII  of  England,  character  of  bifl
religious  persecutions,  i,  24.

Henry,  Prince  of  Wales,  marriage  project
regarding,  iv,  260.  262.  352.

Hentzxer,  Paul,  on  the  manners  of  the
English,  temp.  Eliz.  i,  292.

Heracjgiere,  Captain  Charles  de,  at  the
Kowenstyn  fight,  i,  211.  Heading  a
perilous  venture:  its  result,  iii,  6-12.
His  successful  stroke  at  Huy,  300.  Pre-
tending to  be  accessible  to  corrupt  offers,
336.  337. See  ii,  249.  317.

Heretics,  treaty  for  the  extermination  of,
i,  109.  111.  Philip  of  Spain's  rooted  de-
termination against  them,  243-245.  Value
of  heresy  to  navigators,  iii,  24.  Execu-
tions by  La  Motte,  309,  310.  Last  and
worst  murder  for  heresy,  419.

Herle,  Wilham,  warning  Queen  Elizabeth
of  dangers  threatening  her,  i,  3  note.  On
the  death  of  William  the  Silent,  and  its
effect  on  his  countrymen,  12  note.  On
Maurice  of  Holland,  14  note.  His  visit
to  William's  widow,  16  note.  On  the
effect  produced  by  Burghley's  pamplilet,
31).  On  Philip's  attempt  to  win  ov(^r
Henry  of  Navarre,  47  note.  On  the
longings  of  the  French  king  for  a  foot-
ing on  Dutch  ground,  68.  Text  of  his
letter  to  Queen  Elizabeth  thereon,  ibid
note  2.  On  the  zeal  of  the  Dutch  princes
and  people  in  favour  of  an  English  alli-
ance, 70.  71.  72.

Hermann,  Wolfert,  his  gallant  defeat  of
the  Portuguese  fleet,  iv,  99,  100.  Carry-
ing the  Achim  envoys  to  Holland,  103.

HrsT(jRY,  point  of  view  from  which  man  is
judged  by,  i,  5.  Facilities  of  obtaining
information  according  to  modern  his-
torians, 52.  Historical  chemistry  how
rendered  possible,  329.  Historical  events
as  modified  by  material  agencies,  iii,  447.
See  iii,  19.  482.

HoBOKEN,  representative  of  the  archduke
in  London,  avowing  his  master's  dupli-
city, iv,'406,  407.

HOHENLO,  Count  ("Count  d'Oloc,"  "Hol-
lach,"  and  "Hollock,")  general-in-chief
under  Prince  Maurice ;  i.  13.  "  Wholly
French,"  69.  Would  obey  Queen  Eliza-
beth "more  than  any  earthly  prince,"
70.  Dangerous  elements  in  his  charac-
ter, 145.  156.  His  ill-managed  attack
upon  and  repulse  from  Bois-le-Duc,  167-
170.  His  remorse  upon  the  occasion,  171.
Retrieves  his  reputation  at  Liefkenshoek,
179.  Command  assigned  to  him  at  the
Kowenstyn,  198.  199.  200.  201.  His  fatal
blunder,  premature  feastings,  and  dis-
grace, 204.  214,  215.  219.  Remonstrance
addressed  to  him  by  Sainte  Aldegonde,
256.  His  threat  against  Villiers  and
position  in  Leicester's  esteem,  374,  375.
His  daring  bravery  at  Grave,  ii,  10-13.
Pleading  for  a  traitor,  22.  In  bad  odour
with  his  English  comrades,  35.  Hii
self-denying  conduct  when  dangerously
wounded,  53. Out  of  favour  with  Lei-

HOLLAND.

INDEX.

INDIA.

551

cestor,  75.  Carouse  at  his  quarWs :  his
assault  upon  Kdward  Norris  and  its  con-
sequences, 87-93.  138-143.  His  throat
against  the  p]nfrlish  cavalry,  173.  His
charge  against  Leicester :  orders  of  the
queen  thereon,  222-225. 228, 229.  Charges
of  the  T.eicestrians  against  him,  252.  261.
His  foray  into  Brabant,  253.  His
report  on  the  capture  of  Breda,  iii,
14.  Knuckling  under  to  his  old  pupil,  j
246,  247.  His  marriage  and  its  accompa-
niments, 301.  Hunting  brigands,  317.
Quarrelling  with  IMaurice  :  King  Philip's
attempt  upon  his  fidelity,  336.  At  the
siege  of  Turnhout,  401.  403.  Affair  from
which  he  was  excluded,  iv,  5.  His  death  :
Bunmiing  up  of  his  character,  256.  See
i,  191.  401.  491.  ii,  37.  74.  75.  81.  86.  130.
149.  178.  204,  205.  231.  244.  309.  310.  332.
337.  392.  iii,  7.

Holland,  its  physical  features,  population,
&c,  i,  7.  Medal  emblematic  of  its  forlorn
condition,  17.  Charge  against  it  and  Zee-
land  of  indifference  to  the  fate  of  Ant-
werp, 163.  Their  bearing  in  reference  to
a  reconciliation  with  Spain,  254,  255.  In-
fluence on  their  prosperity  of  the  subju-
gation of  the  Belgian  cities,  256.  England's
stake  in  the  safety  of  the  Islands,  354-356.
360,  361.  Era  inauguratetl  by  England
and  Holland,  362.  State  of  the  Islands
after  twenty  years'  war  :  pictures  drawn
by  Leicester  and  his  suite,  362-365.  Naval
strength,  and  contempt  for  I'hilip's  in-
tended armada,  365-367.  Its  complaint
as  to  its  share  in  the  State  Council,  iii,  32.
Ever  ready  to  bear  its  quota  of  taxation,
354.  Its  dealing  with  th(>  users  of  sUirch
In  a  time  of  scarcity,  355.  Its  progress
In  silk  manufacture,  iv,  215.  Omnipo-
tence of  Advocate  Barnevrldt,  279.  Cities
opposed  to  a  truce,  467,  46S.  Their  sub-
mission, 4  76.  its  per  centage  of  contri-
bution to  the  general  fund,  518.  524  note.
See  Netherlands.  ZceUind.

Holy  League,  scheme  contemplated  by  the,
i,  4.  '  Madam  League,'  40.  Its  chief,
43.  Conclusion  of  the  treaty  whereon  It
was  based :  its  parties  and  objects,  108,
109.  Its  progress.  111,  112.  Position  of
European  rulers  and  peoples  at  its  advent,
112,  113.  Its  manifesto  issued:  scope
thereof,  114,  115.  Henry  of  Valois  its
plaything,  ii,  324.  Its  intents  with  regard
to  Enghind,  329.  Its  head,  and  its  chief
commander,  379.  Pursuing  its  objecti?  in
Paris:  Guise's  triumphs:  its  first  victims
at  the  stake,  401-409.  More  papist  than  j
Pope  Sixtus,  iii,  43.  57.  Bent  on  di.smem-
bering  France,  43.  Defeat  of  its  forces  at
Ivry,  49-55.  Its  envoj's  in  conference
with  Henry  IV"  and  his  representatives,
62-64.  220-224.  Triumphant  in  Paris,  79,
80.  84.  119-121.  Burnt  in  effigy.  229.
()ut-peneralled  by  Henry,  232.  I)epar-
ture  of  its  garrison,  233.  Costly  and  use-  j
less  to  I'hilip,  273.  288.  297.  Dead  and  ;
buried,  385. See  iii,  132-137.  140.  iv,  53.  j

Hoofd's  great  history  of  the  War  of  Inde-
pendence, iv,  526.
HoOGSTRAATEN,  Seized  and  fortified  by  the
Spanish  mutineers,  iv,  93,  94.  95.  Their
reception  of  Maurice  there  and  delivery
of  the  town  to  him,  121.
HouTjfANx  brothers,  pioneer  Dutch  navi-
gators, iii,  54  2.
HouTMANN,  Frederick,  governor  of  Am-
i boyna,  iv,  391.
HouwAERTs,  John  Riptist,  description  of
his  pageant,  vision,  &c,  in  honour  of  Arch-
duke Ernest,  iii,  269-273.
Howard  of  Kffingham,  Charles  Lord,  Lord
Admiral,  ii,  193.  387.  422. A  trinity  he
trusted  never  to  be  saved  by,  425.  His
defiant  bearing  and  his  complaints,  426-
428. Complement  of  his  fleet:  his  chief
officers,  431,  -132.  His  prayer  to  the  queen,
434. His  fleet  at  sea:  the  figlrt  with  the
Armada,  450.  454-479. Neglect  of,  and
ravages  of  sickness  among  his  sailors  aft<  r-
wards:  his  griels  thereat,  497.  Heading
a  new  attack  on  Spain,  iii,  361.  P^esult
of  his  over-cautiousness,  366.
Huguenots,  characteristic  utterances  of  an
old  leader  of  the,  i,  34. Hatred  of  Henry
of  Valois  towards  them,  36. Their  con-
duct before  battle :  their  royal  chieftain,
48. Their  views  as  to  the  results  of  an
alliance  between  France  and  the  States-
General,  56, 57.  I^omulgation  of  the  edict
of  Nemours  against  them,  125.  Fighting
at  Ivry,  iii,  52. Hanging  their  heads  in
despair,  232.  238.  Their  leaders  denoimaxi
by  Henry  IV,  556,  557. Their  numlx^rs,
strength,  and  influence  in  France,  iv,  345,
346.  348. Efforts  of  Henry  to  set  them
against  each  other,  34 «.
Hi  i>T,  iii,  95. Captured  by  Maurice,  108.
Subsequent  surrender  to  the  Spaniards :
alleged  slaughter  on  the  occasion,  371  373.
Human  fat,  why  esteemed  by  the  Dutch

surgeon.s  iv,  70.
Hungary,  iv,  97.

Hunsdon,  Henry  Lord,  ii,  193. His  army  a
fiction,  428.  488. Grumbled  at  by  Lei-
cester, 493.
Hut,  captured  and  recaptured,  iii,  301.

Idiaquez,  Don  Juan  de,  secretary  of  state
to  Philip  II,  ii,  293.  435.  A  tickli.sh  mo-
ment, 507.  Need  of  Philip  III  for  his
services,  iv,  327,  328.  His  submission  to
the  new  state  of  things,  328.  Giving  up
a  point,  424.  See  iii,  67.  478.
Imbec,  County  killed  by  his  captor,  iv,  86.
Imbize,  or  hnbyze,  John  van,  governor
of  Dendermonde,  beheaded,  i,  20.  ii,
148.

India  and  the  Dutch  navigators,  iii,  513-516.
iv,  98.  296.  Admiral  Matelieffs  exploits,
3^6-393.  Exclusive  claims  of  Spain,  204.
351.  406.  426.  427.  Efforts  to  deprive  the
provinces  of  their  trade  with  India,  361.
j  332.  405.  Conferences  thereon,  409-417.
Result  of  same,  480.  484-486.  Su  Dutch
East  Indi  i  Comi^ony.

552

INFANTA.

INDEX.

JOrNVILLE.

Infanta  of  Spain,  daughter  of  Philip  If,

see  Clara  Is  ibella.
INFANT  A,  daughter  of  Philip  III,  marriage

projects  regarding  her.  iv,  260.  262.  264.

352.

Innocent  IX,  Pops,  cause  of  his  death,  iii,
185.

In  ,!UisrrroN,  cause  of  the  fight  of  the  Dutch
provinces  against  the,  i,  9.  hlstablished
in  France  by  the  League,  ii,  401.  409.
Warred  against  by  the  States,  iii,  37,
Pliilip's  efforts  to  establish  its  supremacy,
115.  121.  177.  Paramount  in  Spain,  503,
504.  510.  iv,  307. See  ii,  276.  iv,  439.

Ireland  in  relation  to  England  and  Spain,
i,  28.  289.  336.  ii,  288.  329.  444.  Stanley's
threatened  game,  ii,  164.  166, 167.  Spanish
fleet  destined  for  its  coast,  iii,  37.  395.
The  invasion  and  its  result,  iv,  88,  89.
Always  rebellious,  130.  317.  353.

Irish  kernes  in  Holland,  their  costumes  and
customs,  ii,  36.  147.  151.  156.  161.

Isle  of  Wight,  Spanish  intentions  against
the,  ii,  444.  456.

IvRT,  preliminaries  to  the  battle  of,  iii,  48-50.
The  battle,  51-54.

Jacobzoon,  Jacob  ("Koppen  Loppen,"
"  Run-away  Jacob ")  his  cowardice  and
its  consequences,  i,  155.  New  enterprise
entrusted  to  him,  183.  How  he  followed
out  his  instructions,  183, 184. 188.  Irrepar-
able results  of  his  neglect,  189.  191.  At  the
attack  on  the  Kowenstyn,  201.  All  his
blunders  expiated,  213  and  note.

James  I  of  England  and  VI  of  Scotland,
a  presumed  tool  in  Spanish  hands,  ii,  236.
288.  329.  425.  Fears  on  Spain's  part,  414.
A  confirmed  heretic,  444.  iii,  41.  Ground
of  Philip's  hope  of  help  from  him,  395.
His  accession  to  the  English  throne,  and
irruption  thereon  of  his  countrymen  into
England,  iv,  129.  130.  His  reckless  pro-
digality, 131.  Expenses  of  his  household,
132.  His  religious  intolerance,  love  of
prerogative,  pedantic  habits,  &c,  132, 133.
His  reply  to  the  complimentary  harangue
of  the  Dutch  envoy,  138.  His  dread  of
his  queen :  Henry  IV's  joke  upon  him,
147.  His  prohibition  of  the  usual  marks
of  respect  to  the  late  queen  Elizabeth,  149.
His  conferences  with  and  hospitalities
towards  the  French  embassy,  150-156.
162-164.  Effect  of  De  Rosny's  eloquence
upon  him,  165-16S.  His  anti-Spanish,
an ti- Austrian  arrangement  with  France,
and  contemporaneous  treaty  with  Spain,
204,  205.  231.  Conceding  a  point  to  the
Dutch  envoy  and  silencing  the  Spaniard,
2(16,  207.  His  colloquy  with  and  efforts
to  reassure  the  Dutch  ambassador,  207
note.  Triumph  of  Spanish  policy  in  his
councils,  212.  Effect  of  the  Guy  I'awkes
discovery  upon  his  marriage  schemes  and
plottings  with  Spain,  238.  259-263.  His
epithets  for  the  Netherlanders,  259.  His
designs  upon  their  country,  352,  353.
Sending  special  envoys  to  them,  360.  Su-

premest  object  of  his  love,  431.  Plain
truths  spokon  against  him  by  Maurice,
456,  457.  His  religious  counsels  to  the
States,  491,  492.  See  iv.  384.  407.  422.
423.  482.  483.  See  also  Scotland.

James,  Captain  Thcmas,  fighting  at,  and
writing  home  about,  the  attack  on  the
Kowenstyn,  i,  201  note.  204.  212,  213  note.

Jansens,  Zacharias,  inventor  of  the  telescope
and  microscope,  iv,  528.

Janszoon,  Captain,  "  Long  Harry,"  at  the
attack  on  Gibraltar,  iv,  297. Killed,  303.

Java,  iv,  99.

Jeannin,  Pierre,  president  of  the  parliament
of  Burgundy,  his  mission  from  Mayenne
to  Philip  II,  iii,  122.  On  a  mission  from
Henry  IV  to  the  States,  iv,  340.  His
league  antecedents ;  occasion  of  his  taking
service  under  Henry  ;  his  character,  342,
343.  347.  His  address  to  the  States,  355-
356.  On  the  determination  of  the  States
to  be  their  own  masters,  372.  His  advice
to  them,  377.  378.  404.  416.  His  sinister
purposes,  416,  417.  Catechised  by  Barne-
veldt,  422. Result  he  was  prepared  for,

430.  His  relations  and  conferences  with
Maurice,  438.  441.  444.  452.  And  with
Barneveldt,  445.  His  estimate  of  both,
467.  Foreseeing  a  storm,  448.  His  ar-
guments in  favour  of  a  truce,  458-462.
473-475.  Denouncing  Lambert's  false-
hoods, 469  note.  Tricking  president  Ri-
chardot,  480.  Point  rightly  urged  by  him,
485.  His  appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Catho-
lics, 488-491.  Warning  Maurice,  505.  See
iii,  221.  iv,  384.  414.  419.  425.  426.  427.

431.  449.  453.  464.  468.  470.  475.  476.
Jesuits,  work  proposed  for  the,  iii,  21,  22.

Work  done  by  them,  417-419.  King
James's  horror  of  them,  iv,  204.  238.  259.
Their  reappearance  and  doings  in  France,
205.  Animosity  against  them  in  Venice,
238.  258.

John  Casimir,  duke  Casimir,  Elector  Pala-
tine, complement  of  troops  promised  to
the  States  by,  i,  73.  Diversion  he  was  to  be
solicited  to  make,  80. See  ii,  51.

John  of  Cleves  and  Juliers,  his  death,  iv,
496. See  Cleves.

John  of  Nassau's  denunciation  of  German
apathy  in  the  Protestant  cause,  i,  33.  Sole
survivor  of  the  five  Nassau  brethren,  37(5.
His  far-seeing  estimate  of  the  value  of
common  schools,  iii,  112, 113  note.  Louder
than  ever  in  his  jeremiads,  387.  Still
ardent  in  the  cause,  iv,  8. His  end,  256.

John  of  Nassau,  the  young  count,  secret
state  paper  found  by,  iv,  452.

Johore,  Sultan  of,  faithful  to  and  co-ope-
rating with  his  Dutch  allies,  iv,  386.  Di-
rection in  which  his  troops  distinguished
themselves,  387.  His  panic-struck  pro-
ceedings on  the  depai  ture  of  his  protectors,
392,  393.

JoIN^■ILLE,  secret  treaty  of,  1,  108.  See

Holy  League.
Joinville,  Prince  of,  afterwards  duke  of

Guise,  successor  to  Le  Balafre,  ii,  529.

JONGHE.

INDEX.

LA  NOUE.

553

Suggested  as  a  husband  for  the  Infanta,
iii,  121.  182.  184.  221.  Leader  of  the
vanguard  at  Rouen,  131.  How  he
escaped  Irom  prison,  181.  Order  respect-
ing himself  and  the  Infanta  sent  by  Philip
to  the  leaguers,  226.  Makes  terms  with
Henry  IV,  237.  His  service  to  the  latter
at  Marseilles,  345.

Jong  HE,  Mutelieff  de,  see  Matelieff.

JovEusE,  Due  de,  news  brought  home  by,
relative  to  the  duke  of  Savoy,  i,  53.  His
broken  wrist,  65.  Killed  at  Coutras,  ii,
323.

Julius  Cfesar's  Rhine  bridge  compared  with
Parma's  Scheldt  bridge,  i,  173,  174.

Junius,  I^icesier's  secretary,  ii,  133.  242.
Put  in  prison,  273.

JusTiNus  ae  Xassiiu,  natural  son  of  William
the  Silent,  office  conferred  on,  i,  144.  His
narrow  escape  at  Bois-le-Duc,  169.  Re-
liieveo  his  reputation  at  Liefkenshoek,
1V9.  At  the  attacks  on  the  Kowenstyn,
199.  200.  201.  Another  narrow  escape,
213.  Representation  sent  to  him  by  th(i
Zeeland  naval  officers,  222.  "  Very  wise,
subtle,  and  cunning,"  ii,  .^01.  Joined
with  Barncvel<it,  in  missions  to  France
and  England,  iii,  446.  Narrative  of  same,
448-467.  ^ee  ii,  252.  257-259.  423.  iv,
246.

Kaardex,  Paul  van,  Dutch  navigator,  iv,
393.

Kaubki.jaw,  Captain,  killed  in  saving  his
sovereign,  iv,  38.

Kadzand,  or  Cjulzand  Island,  in  Dante's
infernu,  its  situ.ition,  &c,  ii,  247.  Garri-
soned by  Parma,  24U.  Occupied  by
Maurice,  iv,  188-191.  Fight  for  Its  pos-
session, 197,  198.  Further  manoeuvres,
216.  217.  225.

Kallcxj,  change  effected  by  Parma's  opera-
tions at,  i,  15(1,  151.

Kant,  John,  Dutch  vice-admiral,  making
short  work  with  the  Spanish  galleys,  iv,
107,  108.

Kant,  Renier,  advocate  of  Holland,  i,  201.
Kkmp,  Jacob,  one  of  Maurice's  engineers,
iii,  152.

Kevestk,  battle  between  the  Turks  and
Germans  at,  and  its  singular  sequel,  iii,
389.

KHEVENHtrr.LEu,  Count,  confession  of  the
Queen  of  Spain  to,  iv,  333,  334  vote.

KiLLiGUEw,  Sir  Henry,  Leicester's  "little
Hal,"  i,  377.  422.  ii,  84.  31 1.  398.

Kinsale,  landing  and  defeat  of  Spanish
troops  at,  iv,  88.

KiN-sKi,  Count,  mortAlly  wounded,  iii,  320.

Ki.aas/oon,  Regiiier,  vice-admiral,  iv.  252.
His  resolute  battle  with  the  Spaniards  and
heroic  self-sacrifice,  253,  254.

Klreruagen,  Captain,  his  night  entry  into
R)is-le-I)ue,  i,  167.  Wronnly  suspected,
169. His  narrow  escape,  169,  170.

Kloet,  Herman,  commaniler  at  Neusz,  ii,
24.  His  reply  to  an  invitatii)n  to  capitu-
late, 25. His  convenient  sleep,  26.  His

wounds  and  bravery,  27.  False  and  true
account  of  his  death  at  the  hands  of  his
captors,  28,  29.

Knodsenuurg  Fort,  iii,  106.  Parma  re-
pulsed, 106. See  109.

Koeboekum,  traitor,  put  to  death,  ii,  23.

Koeworden,  iii,  5. See  Coeworden.

Kowenstyn  and  Blawgaren  Dykes,  how
proposed  to  be  dealt  with  by  William  the
Silent,  i,  136,  137.  Successful  opposition
of  the  Antwerpers  to  his  plans,  145,  146.
Their  too-late  repentance,  154.  The
Kowenstyn  taken  by  the  Spaniards :  forts
erected  by  them  upon  it,  154,155,  De-
termination of  the  patriots  to  attempt
to  recain  it;  their  tactics  while  pre-
paring for  the  assault,  195.  Its  ex-
tent :  labour  expended  by  Parma  in  for-
tifying it,  196,  197.  incidents  of  the  first
a' tack,  198,  199.  The  like  of  the  second
atuick,  199  203.  Expulsion  of  the  Spa-
niards and  piercing  of  the  Dj'ke,  2U3.  2o4.
VoWy  of  the  patriot  leaders  in  iheir  hour
of  triumph,  204.  Heroism  and  final  vic-
tory of  the  Spaniards,  205-214.  Blunder
upon  blunder.  283.

KowEN.-«TYN,  Seigneur  de,  why  he  went
over  to  the  Spaniards,  i,  154.

La  Bourlotte.  Colonel,  ill,  547.  iv,  33.

Killed  at  Nieuport,  46.
La  Fere,  town  of,  held  in  pledge  by  Far-

nese,  iii,  131.  345. See  369.  370.  371.
La  Fertk,  iii,  300,  besieged  and  relieved,

307.

Lagnv,  iii,  73.  77.  Captured  by  Parma  and
the  garrison  butchered,  77,  78.  Retaken
by  Henry  IV,  85.

La.mballe,  Brittany,  fatal  accident  to  La
None  at,  iii,  117.

Lambert  Heinrlchzoon,  "  pretty  Ijambert,"
c;ipturing  a  Dunkirk  pirate  vess"!,  iv,
234.  Comrade  v.iih  Hecniskerk  at  the
attack  on  the  Sjianish  fleet,  300-302.
Playir)g  the  ambassador  In  a  way  to  give
offence,  46M-47 1.

La  Motte.  Valentin  Pardiou  de.  Count  of
Everbeck,  his  attenipt  upon  Ost^  nd :  suc-
cess converte'l  into  failure,  1,  178,  179.
His  fort  on  the  Kowenstyn,  197.  His  cue
in  his  conference  with  Elizabeth's  repre-
sentiitive,  467.  His  assurance  to  I*arma  :
Fort  captured  by  him,  ii,  249.  Out-
stripp<d  by  the  Dutchmen,  474.  His
command  at  the  relief  of  I'aris,  iii,  71.  77.
In  a  mural  airiaiture,  211.  implicated
in  a  poison-plot,  2^3.  Recaptures  Huy,
301.  Occiusion  of  his  death;  his  career,
brutiilities,  kc,  30S.310. .SVe  ii,  33.

Lanfkanchi,  Antwerp  merchant,  on  the
I effect  of  Spanish  doinitiatlon,  ii,  351.

La  Noue,  "  lron-arme<l,"  French  Huguenot
officer,  on  the  apathy  of  the  German
princes,  i,  34.  Terms  of  his  release  from
c;iptivity:  his  views  on  the  chances  of
Antwerp,  221.  His  estimate  of  Sainte
Aldeponde.  268.  His  advice  to  Henry  IV,
iii,  55. His  harangue  to  the  starving

554

LANUZA.

INDEX.

LEICESTER.

Parisians,  64,  65.  Wounded,  81.  His
work  while  in  captivity :  occasion  of  his
death,  117,  118. See  Teligny.

Lanuza,  John  of,  why  put  to  death,  iii,  501.

LANZAVECCHfA,  Edward,  governor  of  Breda
and  Gertruydenberg,  iii,  6.  On  the
wrong  scent,  10. Cashiered,  14.

Larchek,  Paris  magistrate,  put  to  death:
his  crime,  iii,  120.

Lavardin,  French  general,  wounded
W'hile  rescuing  his  king,  iii,  133.

League,  see  Holy  League.

Leffinoen,  its  position,  &c,  iv,  11:  taken
by  Maurice,  11.  Panic  and  rout  of  the
Dutch,  1 7-20.  Dutch  and  Spanish  writers
on  the  affair,  20  note. See  38.

Leicester,  Robert  Dudley  Earl  of,  ("the
gipsy ")  his  apprehensions  concerning
Sainte  Aldegonde,  and  change  of  opinions
thereon,  i,  253.  261.  265.  FiUip  given  to
his  ambition  by  the  refusal  of  France
to  aid  the  Netherlands,  274.  His  encou-
raging assurances  to  the  Dutch  envoys,
278.  Characterising  some  of  them,  295.
296.  Desire  of  the  States  for  his  leader-
ship, 317.  Elizabeth's  regard  for  him,
321.  Tender  of  service  to  him  from
Prince  Maurice,  323,  324.  Nominated  to
the  post  he  coveted,  327.  His  troubles
at  the  outset ;  character  of  his  courtship
of  the  queen,  327.  Financial  squabbles
between  them :  his  complaints  and  her
avarice,  328-332.  Kendering  thanks
where  thanks  were  due,  332.  His  entry
into  Flushing,  345.  His  immediate  an-
cestors and  their  fate :  lavish  bounty  of
the  Queen  towards  him,  346.  Romance
of  his  character :  his  Jesuit  accuser,  347.
Monstrous  crimes  imputed  to  him,  347,
348.  His  animus  against  the  Queen  of
Scots,  349.  His  Queen's  firm  affection  :
why  called  the  "gipsy":  his  magnifi-
cent attire,  349,  350.  His  progress
through  Holland,  banquetings,  pa-
geants, &c,  351,  352.  Indiscretions  of
speech:  spies  and  libellers  about  him,
353,  354.  Vehement  in  his  advocacy
of  the  alliance  with  Holland,  360  note.
363,  364.  On  the  naval  strength  of  the
Hollanders  and  their  enthusiasm  for  Eli-
zabeth, 365.  367,  368.  On  Drake's  expedi-
tion and  Philip's  dread  of  it,  366.  Nature
of  his  authority  in  Holland:  his  queen's
instructions:  advice  of  the  Netherland
envoys,  368-370.  377,  Purport  of  his
"  pithy  and  honourable  "  oration  to  his
ragged  regiments,  370.  Spending  his  own
substance  on  them,  371.  372.  414.  429.
494  note.  Denouncing  Villiers :  in  love
with  and  hoping  to  reform  Hohenlo,
374,  375.  On  Count  Maurice's  character
and  inclinations,  375,  376.  Summing
up  some  of  the  notabilities  around  him,
377,  378.  His  estimate  of  Davison,  378.
His  conference  with  the  States'  magnates
and  acceptance  of  their  governorship
380-384.  Powers  conferred  on  him,  384,'
SaS. Communicating  the  event  to  the

Queen  386,  387.  His  installation  and  its
attendant  ceremonies,  388,  389.  Mutter-
ings  of  a  coming  storm :  his  mistaken
way  of  deprecating  the  Queen's  anger,
389-393.  Hints  and  counsel  from  hia
friends,  395.  Wrathful  missives  from
the  Queen  against  and  to  him,  396-398.
His  brother's  warning  :  "  false  boys "
about  him,  408,  409.  Shirley  pleading
with  the  Queen  for  him,  409-412.  Neu-
tralization of  the  good  effected  by  him,
414.  Point  up  to  which  he  had  main-
tained his  dignity,  415.  Makes  Davison
his  scapegoat:  his  insinuations  against
him,  415,  416.  Royal  prohibition  con-
cealed by  him  from  Davison:  his
unmanly  letter  to  him,  417,  418.  His
justificatory  letter  to  Burghley,  419-421.
Mitigatmg  the  mischief  of  the  Queen's
message  to  the  States,  422.  On  the  con-
sequences of  a  breach  of  faith  with  the
States  :  suspecting  the  "  false  boys,"  424,
425.  His  earnestness  in  his  work,  effect
of  the  Queen's  censures  on  rumours
against  himself,  426.  428.  The  most
cruel  blow  of  all :  evils  staved  off  by  his
money,  429, 430.  Magic  effect  of  a  letter
under  his  own  hand  to  the  Queen,  432.
Congratulations  from  friends,  432  vote.
433-435.  Comfort  from  the  Queen's
pen,  434,  435.  His  complaints  of  the
effects  produced  meanwhile  by  her  con-
duct, 437-439.  New  humiliations  in
store  for  him,  448,  449.  His  propitiatory
letters  to  the  Queen,  449-452.  Tone  of
his  letters  to  his  friends,  454.  Receiving
and  answering  gracious  missives  from  his
mistress,  454,  455.  457.  Cooling  of  the
States'  enthusiasm  towards  him :  begin-
ning to  quarrel,  458,  459.  Duty  of  his
country  insisted  on  by  him,  4C1.  Disin-
genuousness  of  the  Queen  and  her  coun-
sellors, 464.  479.  Use  made  by  Spanish
partisans  of  the  Queen's  pique  against
him,  466.  What  Parma  thought  his
rivals  meant,  473.  480.  489,  490.  Effect
of  home  intrigues  upon  his  chances  of
success,  479,  480.  492,  493.  Acknow-
ledging a  gift  of  a  dish  of  plums,  494.
His  views  as  to  the  best  way  to  a  peace,
496,  497.

Imploring  aid  for  Truchsess,  ii,  3.  75.  His
estimate  of  him,  3  note.  Commending
Schenk,  8.  His  elation  on  the  transient
success  at  Grave,  13.  His  extravagant
banquet  at  Utrecht,  14-16.  His  rage  at
the  surrender  of  Grave,  and  vengeance  (^n
the  traitors,  19.  22-23.  Causes  of  hia
inability  to  preserve  Neusz  from  the
Spaniards,  30,  31.  His  accusation  against
Treasurer  Norris,  36,  Takes  the  field  in
person:  reduces  Doesburg,  37-41.  His
generosity  to  Pelham,  38  note.  Result  of
his  attack  on  Zutphen:  his  grief  over
Sidney,  41-57.  Effect  of  the  Queen's
conduct  on  his  position,  61-63.  His
quarrels  with  the  States :  his  three  ccun-
sellors  and  result  of  their  counsels,  63-

LEICESTER.

INDEX.

LEWIS.

555

To.  His  changed  estimate  of  Paul  Buys,
and  throats  and  charges  against  him,  71-
7C.  Throws  him  into  prison,  78.  His
persecutions  of  the  papists  in  the  States,
79.  His  bickerings  with  and  accusations
against  the  Norrises,  80-82.  Good  and
111  points  in  his  character,  83.  Good
counsel  to  him  from  the  Queen,  86.
His  view  relative  to  Mary  Stuart,  99.
181.  Resolves  to  visit  England;  his
parting  words  with  the  States,  lOU-104,
"Singular  jewel"  given  to  him  at  the
parting,  104  vote,  i'rinciples  advocated
by  his  party  in  the  States,  110.  Their
head  quarters,  112.  Their  notions  of
religious  liberty,  114,  115.  His  own
notions  thereon,  115.  Money  of  his
own  spent  in  the  Netherlands,  131.  A
necessary  gift  of  which  he  was  deficient :
his  capacity  for  hatred,  131.  His  main-
stays during  his  absence,  133.  His  secre-
tary's gossip  and  its  mischievous  effects,
135-138.  His  shmo,  in  the  Norris  and
Hohenlo  squabble,  and  increased  ani-
mosity towards  the  Norrlses,  138-143.
His  own  account,  143,  144  notes.  His
ill-judged  appointment  of  a  papist  gover-
nor for  Deventer  and  its  consequences,
147-167.  His  unprovoked  vindictiveness
towards  Wilkes,  176.  240  nole.  264.  His
arrival  in  England  imd  reception  by  the
Queen,  179.  Accusiit^ry  lctt<'r  to  him
from  the  States,  195-1  9m.  His  letter  upon
Klizalx'th's  hard  terms  in  reft  n  nco  to
money  matters,  201  note.  Arguments  of
Wilke«  with  the  States  in  his  Ix-half,
209-213.  insidious  counsels  of  Devenier,
219,  220.  Charge  brought  against  him  by
Hohenlo :  effect  j)roduced  by  it,  222-230.
His  attack  upon  and  angry  letter  to
Buckhurst,  and  wrath  relative  to  Ho-
henlo's  charges,  231-233.  Returning  to
Holland :  his  letter  to  his  secretary  and
the  Queen's  instructions  to  himself,  inter-
cepted by  the  States,  239-245.  273.  His
own  explanation  of  his  intentions,  and
complaints  relative  to  the  interception  of
his  letters,  246  note.  273,  274  noteii.  Men
and  money  carrinl  by  him  to  Holland,
254.  His  fireship  ex])eriment  at  Sluys  :
result  of  his  effort  to  raise  the  siege,  257-
259.  261,  262.  Defending  his  proceed-
ings, 262  note.  His  treacherous  intentions
towards  the  StiiU-s,  275.  Text  thereof,
ibid  notes.  Difference  between  the  con-
duct of  himself  and  Buckhurst  to  the
Queen,  308.  His  dishonesty  towards  the
.*>tat(>s,  309,  310.  S<'es  and  lells  the  truth
at  last,  310,  312,  312  note.  Misalleged
scheme  for  kidnapping  Maurice  and
Banieveld,  313.  His  plot  for  seizing  the
Dutch  cities,  314,  315.  Result  of  his
attempt  upon  Leyden  and  fate  of  his
chief  instruments,  316-321.  His  game
played  out:  recalled  by  the  Queen:
nudals  struck  ujwn  the  event,  325-327.  '
In  the  sunshine  again,  327.  Results  of  j
biii  adminlBtrution,  331-334. Conduct  of  {

his  partizan,  Sonoy,  at  Medenblik,  337.
340.  388.  398.  Vexation  of  his  Dutch
adherents  at  his  resignation,  390.  395.
Commander-in-chief  of  the  land  forces
against  the  Armada,  428.  His  sanguine
assurances  to  the  Queen,  430.  His
forces:  his  liking  for  the  generals  under
him,  486,  487.  Commissariat  deficien-
cies, 489,  490.  Quarrelling  with  Norris
and  \N  illiams,  490.  Unsatisfactory  con-
dition of  his  troops,  491,  492.  Greedy  of
all  the  honours,  493.  His  counsels  to  the
Queen  on  her  military  needs,  and  as  to
putting  herself  at  the  head  of  her  troops,
494-496.  496  note.  His  death:  KWza-
beth's  cojiduct  thereon,  533.  Effects  ot
his  intrigues  on  the  1  Hitch  States'
council,  iii,  29.  88.  See  i,  322.  325.  342.
441.  447.

Le  Maire,  Isaac,  iv,  414. His  plot  against

the  Dutch  India  trade,  416.
Le  Marchand,  fortress  sold  to  Panna  bv,

ii,  168.  170.
Lemos,  Countess  of,  mistress  of  the  robes  to
the  queen  of  Spain,  iv,  321. Mistress  of
the  queen  herself,  333.
LENyox,  Lady,  an  alleged  victim  of  Leiccs-
U  r,  i,  348.

Leoninls,  Dutch  envoy,  haranguing  before
Henry  Hi  and  Catherine  de  Medici,  i,
92.  Characterised  by  Leicester,  377.  :<ee
i,  379.  380.  3X4.  390.  457.  ii,  239.
Le  I'etit,  historian  sent  on  a  stfcret  mis-
sion for  help  to  Antwerp,  i,  219.
Lerma,  Duchess  of,  held  in  awe  by  her

mistrcRs  iv,  321.  333.
Lerma,  Duke  of,  formerly  Marquis  of
Denia,  iv,  128.  152.  224.  236.  "Gene-
rally hated  of  his  own  country,"  260
n^ite  3.  His  personal  aspect,  accumu-
lated wealth,  &c,  318,  319.  Origin  of  bis
influence  with  Philip  Hi,  320.  His
steady  pursuit  of  bis  own  interests,
family  aggrandisements,  &c,  320,  321.
1 'roofs  of  his  unlimited  sway  in  the
State,  and  eniir(>  maAtery  over  his  kuig,
321-326.  330.  332.  How  and  why  ho
punished  the  quc^n,  333,  334.  See  366.
371.  423.  487.
Le  Sieur,  his  sneer  at  Morgan's  regiment,
i,  73.

LEwiy  Gi  NTHER  of  Nassau,  his  first  ai)pear-
ance  in  battle,  and  narrow  CM-ape,  ili,
318-320.  At  the  storming  of  Cadiz,  362.
His  exploit,  363.  Knighied,  363.  Com-
mander of  the  cavaliy  at  NieuiK)rt,  iv,  8,
His  preparations  for  action,  23-25,  26.
Chafing  with  impatience,  30.  I'lan  de-
vised, 31,  32.  His  two  charges  and  their
results,  32.  34,  35.  Prisoner  a>8igned  to
him,  43.  His  gift  to  Maurice,  ibid.  His
account  of  the  action  contrasted  with  that
of  Vere,  48-51.  His  self-sacrifice  relative
to  his  prisoner,  91,  92.  His  death,  199.
See  iv,  45.  188.
'  Lewis  William,  or  William  Lewis  of  Xas-
I  sau.  Stadholder  of  Friesland,  i,  13.  32.
I Opposing  the  Spaniards  in  Frie&land,  156.

556  LEYDE5T.  INDEX.  MANSFELD.

fiis  peculiar  physiognomy:  Leicester's
estimate  of  him,  376.  His  conduct  rela-
tive to  alleged  assassination  plots  against
himself,  ii,  230.  His  proficiency  and  in-
novations in  military  science,  iii,  4,  92.
111.  On  the  turf-boat  experiment  at
Breda,  13  note.  Convincing  his  cousin,
103.  Confession  of  two  assassins,  110,
[s^e  ii,  230.]  Made  governor  of  (Troningen,
111.  His  active  care  for  the  education
of  his  younger  brothers,  112  note.  At
the  siege  of  Steenwyck,  151.  At  Coe-
worden,  154.  Hi?  wound  and  his  for-
titude under  it,  159,  160.  His  letter  to
Maurice  on  the  surrender  of  Gertruy-
denberg,  249  note.  A  fortunate  pre-
caution, 254.  His  new  municipal
office,  259.  On  the  defeat  at  Dourlens,
313  note.  In  pursuit  of  Mondragon,
322,  Movement  resolved  on  contrary
to  his  advice,  iv,  3.  5.  Lifting  up  a
warning  voice,  89.  In  peril:  fate  of
his  rescuer,  197,  198.  Part  ttiken,  and
opinions  held  by  him  relative  to  the
negotiations  for  peace,  379.  383,  384.  396.
402.  419.  428.  434.  441.  464.  Emolu-
ments secured  to  him,  496.  His  fame  as
authority  in  military  matters,  528.  See
ii,  42.  iii,  98.  106.  178.  261.  428.  550.  iv,
2.  8.  90.  188.  218.  373.  383.

Leyden,  reward  to  the  heroic  burghers  of,
ii,  9.  Religious  toleration :  efforts  of
the  Calvinists  for  supremucy  and  result
thereof,  316-321.  Course  of  study  esta-
blished by  Maurice  at  the  University,  iii,
92.  See  97.  282.  Religious  controversies,
iv,  497. Fame  of  the  university,  526.

Leyva,  Antonio  and  Alonzo  de,  Spanish
commanders  in  the  Armada,  ii,  442.  453,
454.  457.

Leyva,  Sancho  de,  ii,  513.

LiBERTAS,  Petrus,  of  Marseilles,  his  patriotic
conduct,  iii,  345.

LiEFKENSHOEK,  captured  by  the  Spaniards  :
slaughter  of  the  garrison,  i,  148.  Re-
taken by  the  Antwerpers,  1 79.

LiGNE,  Count  de,  Prince  of  Espinoy,  how  to
be  kept  in  the  right  track,  iii,  340,  341.

LiLLO,  defence  of :  repulse  of  the  Spaniards,
i,  149,  150.

LiNGEN  captured  by  Maurice,  iii,  429.
Surprised  by  the  Spaniards,  iv,  218.
Garrisoned  by  them,  219.

LiNSCHOTEN,  John  Huygen  van,  his  Indian
travels  and  their  result  upon  foreign
traffic,  iii,  513-516.  His  convictions  re-
garding a  north-east  passage,  519,520.  His
expedition  and  its  results,  522-525.

LiPPE  river,  iii,  317.  318.  428.

LiPsnjs,  Justus,  bewailing  Maurice's  suc-
cesses, iv,  193. 196.  His  changes  of  creed
and  death,  255.

Lisbon,  fate  of  an  anti-Spanish  merchant
of,  ii,  481.  Result  of  an  English-Dutch
expedition  thither,  525-527.

Little  Troy,  iv,  182.  185.  200.

LocHEM,  iv,  244.  Recaptured  by  Maurice,
247.

Logier,  Captain,  havoc  committed  among
the  Spanish  galleys  by,  iv,  115.  His
wound,  116,  117.

London  in  Elizabeth's  days  as  compared
M'ith  some  continental  cities,  i,  50.  290,
Its  site,  aspect,  chief  edifices,  294,  its
doubled  contribution  of  ships  and  men  to
fight  the  Armada,  ii,  431.  Leicester's
contempt  for  its  military  men,  491.

Longlee's  beliefs  as  to  the  destination  of
the  Armada,  ii,  414.

Loon,  Colonel  John  van,  commandant  of
Ostend,  his  fate,  iv,  176.  181.

Lopez,  Dr,  the  poisoner,  his  schemes  and
his  end,  iii,  278-280.

Lorraine  princes,  iii,  120.  131.  192.  See
Guise.

Louisa  de  Coligny,  widow  of  William  the
Silent,  her  several  bereavements,  priva-
tions, &c,  i,  14.  15.  Regard  of  the
Hollanders  for  her,  16. William  Herle's

.  visit  to  her,  16  note.  Her  alleged  feelings
towards  the  French  king  and  the  English
queen,  69,  Thirsting  for  vengeance  on
her  husband's  murderers :  poverty  of  her
family,  373.  Conferring  with  the  Dutch
envoys  to  France,  iii,  450.  453.  See,  i,
324,

Loyasa,  Garcia  de,  Archbishop  of  Toledo,
iii,  476. His  last  duty  to  Philip,  477.

Lyly,  William,  on  the  Battle  ot  Ivry,  iii,
52.  53,  notes.

Lyons,  Archbishop  of,  iii,  62.  72.  221.

Maalzoon,  Francis,  Dutch  envoy  and
councillor,  i,  297,  384,  His  studies  and
theories  relative  to  the  Arctic  route  to
India,  iii,  517,  519-522.

Maas,  Jacob,  commissioner  for  Parma,  ii,
340.  342.  354.

Mac  Neil,  Shane,  Irish  rebel,  iv,  88.

Madrid,  Lerma's  arbitrary  removal  of  the
Spanish  court  from,  iv,  325.  Return  of
the  court,  326.

Mahomet  HI,  the  "Grand  Turk,"  ridding
himself  of  his  nineteen  brothers,  iii,  310.
His  campaign  of  1596,  its  tragic  and  its
comic  sides,  387-390,  His  bargain  with
the  mutineers  in  Fappa,  iv,  54,  55.

Mahu,  Admiral  Jacob,  Dutch  navigator,
his  fate,  iii,  542.

Malabar,  iv,  227.

Malacca,  exploits  of  the  Dutch  at,  iv,  386.

387,  389,  390.
Maldere,  delegate  from  Zeeland,  iv,  402.

Bandying  proverbs  with  Richardot,  416.
Malpierre,  French  envoy  in  Brussels,  on

the  reticence  of  the  parties  to  the  League,

i,  110.

Mancicidor,  Don  Juan  de,  peace  commis-
sioner from  Spain  to  the  States,  iv,  396.
399.  449.

Manriquez  at  the  Kowenstyn  fight,  i,  209,

His  legion  in  mutiny,  iii,  66.
Mansell,  Sir  Robert,  his  attack  on  the

Spanish  galleys,  iv,  107,
Mansfeld,  Agnes,  i,  30,  ii,  3.  353.
Mansfeld,  Count  Charles,  message  scut

?\rANSFELD.

INDEX.

MAURICE.

557

by  his  father  to,  and  urged  on  hira  by
Parma,  i,  206.  208.  Why  he  resigned
his  poet,  iii,  71.  His  hatred  of  I'arma,
205.  His  penchant  for  caricaturing,  211.
His  attempt  to  help  the  League,  215.
In  the  wrong  place,  244,  245.  His
tyranny  over  his  father,  262.  "  A  dia-
bolical genius,"  262.  Off  to  the  Turkish
wars,  310.  His  reception  at  Vienna,  311.
His  last  hours,  ibid.

Mansfeld,  Count  Peter  Ernest,  station
and  command  assigned  to,  i,  150.  His
prompt  action  at  the  attack  on  the
Kowenstyn,  205.  His  characteristic
message  to  his  son,  206.  208.  Honour
asked  by  I'arma  for  him,  216.  Effect
of  a  gunpowder  accident,  218.  Ikying
Biege  to  Grave,  ii,  10.  11.  Captures  Ger-
truydenberg,  517.  His  post  in  Parma's
abs"nce.  iii,  71.  154.207.  His  animosity
to  Parma,  205.  210.  Getting  the  worst
of  it  at  Gertruydenberg,  244-245.  249.
An  api  retort,  245.  In  his  dotage :  his
quarrels  with  his  son,  262.  Struggling
fur  place,  264.  Superfluous  in  the
Netherlands,  311.  See  i,  245.  ii,  517.  iii,
251.  257.  339.

Mansfield,  Captain,  pirate  as  well  as
patriot,  iii,  165. In  snfe  keeping.  169.

I^Iargaret,  Archduchess  of  Austria,  mar-
ried to  the  Infante  (I'hilip  ill),  iii,  472.
Her  fear  of  her  attendants  and  devotion
to  her  husb  ind,  Iv,  321.  332.  Indignities
put  upon  her,  333,  334.  Her  small
pleasures,  334.

Margaret  of  Valois,  wife  of  Henty  of
N.ivarre,  i,  45.  Her  infidelities  and  pro-
fligacy, 4  6.

RIaria,  Kmprcss  Dowager,  Lerma'a  tiictics
towards,  iv,  326.  Her  relaliouship  to
l*hilip  J I  and  III,  ibid  note.

il  vRiE  de  Medicis,  iii,  557.

Marmoutier,  miraculous  balsam  at,  iii,
2.S0.

Marxix,  Philip  de,  see  Sainte  Aldegonde.
Maroti,  Michael,  mutiny  of  his  men,  iv,
54.

Marquette,  Daniel  de  Hartaing,  I^ord  of,
swearin)?  his  men  to  fidelity,  iv,  30.
Poing  his  work  as  Commandant  of
Ost^  nd,  183,  1S4.  Result  of  CQuncils
summoned  by  him,  200,

Mar.se I LLi:s  wrested  f  rom  the  bands  of  the
League,  iii,  344,  345.

Martini,  recorder  of  Antwerp,  i,  135.
Why  put  under  arrest,  252.  Purport  of
his  confession,  257.

Mary  Stuart,  Queen  of  Scots,  "daughter
of  debat.',"  cause  identitied  with:  Kliza-
beth's  asseveration  n-hitive  to  her,  i,  27.
Interests  at  home  and  abroaii  typifie«l  by
her  name,  28.  2^9.  Cause  of  Leicester's
animosity  towards  her,  349.  Her  spies
alK)ut  Leicester,  353.  Husband  piopased
for  her  by  I'hilip,  358.  359.  Her  tragedy
approaching  its  catastrophe,  ii,  99.  179.
180.  I'he  (  ud,  181-183.  I  )esignat»  d  suc-
eessor  to  her  thrune,  iii,  41. See  iii,  395.

Massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew,  complicity
of  Philip  II  in  the,  i,  15.  Its  originator
and  chief,  40. 250.  3t0.

Matelieff  de  Jonghe,  Dutch  admiral,  iv,
227.  His  attack  upon  Malacca,  3^6-388.
His  battle  with  a  Spanish  fleet,  389-391.
His  recovery  of  Temate.  391,  392.  Elud-
ing a  Portuguese  squadron,  392.  Hifl
reception  on  his  return  home,  393.

Matthews,  Joost,  his  engineering  services
to  Maurice,  iii,  152.

Matthias,  Archiluke,  declared  king  of
Hungary,  iv,  499,  500.  Feelings  of  the
patriots  on  his  establishment  of  religious
freedom,  500.

Maulde,  Nicholas  de,  ii,  249.  Conspiracy
joined  in  by  him,  317.  Hinht,  arrest,
confession,  and  senlenoe,  318-320.  An-
citnt  custom  revived  In  his  case,  320,
321.

Maurice  of  Nassau,  prince  of  Orange,  his
character :  motto  assumed  by  him,  i,  1.4,
Placed  at  the  head  of  the  State  council :
watchfulness  of  the  estates  over  his
youth,  16.  His  appeal  and  warning,
pending  negotiation  with  France,  59.
Feelings  towards  the  French  king  and
English  queen  ascribed  to  him,  68.  69.
70.  Example  set  him  by  his  lieutenant,
145.  Serving  bis  apprenticeship,  156.
His  debut  as  a  soldier,  201.  Warning
sent  by  bim  to  Aldegonde,  256.  An
English  correspondent's  report  of  him,
259  notf.  His  chief  territorial  pos>ession,
285.  Influence  of  Villiers  over  him,  315.
374.  His  submission  to  the  conditions
demanded  by  Elizabeth,  3J3-325.  Will-
ing to  subordinate  himself  to  Leicester,
373.  His  character  developing  itself:
Leicester's  estimate  of  him,  375.  376.

His  earliest  military  achievement,  ii.  32-
33.  Apprehensions  and  schemes  of  Ij«  i-
cester  respecting  him,  74.  103.  Chief
of  the  opposition  to  I^*ic(Ster,  76.
His  personal  asp«'ct  and  studies:  mis-
taken e>tlmates  of  him  at  this  epoch,
129.  130.  354.  392-394.  Titles  and
authorities  conferred  on  him,  177,  178.
204.  2(16.  222.  238,239.  3:{6.  388.  Alleged
plot  to  kidnap  him,  313.  Manhing
against  Sonoy :  English  soldiers  opiKtsed
to  him,  3HH.  396.  l"Jid  of  the  aflair.  399.
I\eproach"d  by  Elizalx  th :  his  manly
reply,  396-398.  At  B'Tgen-op-Zoom,  510.
At  (iertruydenborg.  516.  519.  Honouring
Schenk's  remains,  524.  Pn  paring  for  his
pan  in  the  coming  struggles,  :  33.

Realising  his  chosen  device,  iii,  2.  Devoted
to  mathematicji :  his  coadjutjtr  in  his
military  studies,  3.  4.  The  Hreda  htratjv-
gem  matured  by  him.  6,  7.  It.s  succ«  88,
12.  14.  Kffects  due  to  the  condition  of
his  army,  66.  86.  Its  organization  and
e<iuipnient.  .^7-92.  Improvements  intro-
duced hy  him:  his  sy>t«m  of  discipline,
amenability  to  d  mger,  kc,  92  96.  Cha-
racteristics of  his  genius:  work  for  his
couDtry  before  him,  96,  97.  Stratagem

558  MAURICE,

INDEX.

MAYENNE.

by  which  he  gained  Zutphen,  98,  99.  His
attack  on  and  capture  of  Deventer,  99-
103.  Besieging  Groningen,  104.  Inter-
mediate successes,  106-112.  Resumption
of  the  siege,  254-257.  His  narrow  escape,
258.  His  clemency  to  the  vanquished,
260,  261.  His  assault  on  Steenwyck;
results  of  his  engineering,  148-152.  The
like  at  Coeworden,  153-160.  His  subse-
quent relief  of  the  place,  254.  His  ope-
rations at  Gertruydenberg,  241-244.
Teaching  his  old  instructor,  246.  Victo-
rious without  knowing  it,  248,  249.
Housing  the  Spanish  mutineers,  275.
Poison-plots  against  him,  281-283.  His
attempt  at  Grol:  out-manoeuvred  by  a
nonagenarian,  316-322.  His  subsequent
capture  of  the  place,  428.  His  effort  to
relieve  Henry  IV"  at  Calais,  347.  Grati-
tude of  the  king,  351.  His  victory  at
Hulst  reversed,  371,  372.  His  march
upon  Turnhout  and  rout  of  the  Spa-
niards, 39  7  -4  0  5 .  T  r oph  i  es  captured,  406.
Letters  between  himself  and  the  arch-
duke on  a  "no  quarter"  rumour,  ibid
note.  Moral  effect  of  this  achievement,
407,  408.  P'amily  troubles,  427.  His
military  successes  in  1597 :  results  of  his
clement  policy,  428-429.  Inducements  to
submit  to  Spain  offered  to  him,  444.  On
the  question  of  an  arctic  route  to  India,
519.  On  the  defensive  against  the  ad-
miral of  Arragon,  547.  Elizabeth's  eulo-
gium  on  him,  549.  His  recovery  of
Crevecoeur,  553.

His  opinions  touching  the  States'  project
for  invading  Flanders,  iv,  3.  Weak  ele-
ment in  his  character,  4.  Bowing  to
authority,  5.  His  armament  for  and
embarkation  on  the  expedition,  5-7.
March  on  and  arrival  before  Nieuport,
8-11.  His  heroic  decision  on  learning  of
Ernest's  failure,  25.  His  address  to  his
troops,  29,  30.  His  outburst  of  gratitude
on  his  success:  thanksgivings  on  the
occasion,  40,  41.  His  sarcasm  to  a  great
prisoner,  41.  Result  due  to  his  heroism,
45-47.  Conflicting  statements  of  his  kins-
men and  Vere,  48-51.  A  fable  and  its
corollary,  52,  53.  His  siege  and  capture
of  Rheinberg,  61,  62.  His  humane  way
of  dealing  with  vanquished  foes,  62.  104.

198.  Again  on  his  march  into  Flanders  :
his  army  and  his  course,  89,  90.  Besieg-
ing Grave :  his  elaborate  engineering
works,  90-93.  Effect  produced  by  them
on  his  visitors,  oriental  and  occidental,
103,  104.  Surrender  of  the  place,  104.
His  dealings  with  the  archduke's  muti-
neers, 97.  120,  121.  His  proceedings  at
Ostend,  109,  110.  169.174.  179.  Reprisals
forced  upon  him  by  the  enemy's  bar-
barities, 117,  118.  Progress  of  his  Fle-
mish campaign;  debarkation  on  and
preparations  at  Cadzand,  188,  189.  At
issue  with  the  States-General :  expecta-
tions and  commands  of  the  latter,  189.

199.  How  fort  St.  Catharine  fell  into

his  hands,  191, 192.  Escaping  a  dilemma,
ibid.  Avenging  the  murder  of  hia
'trumpeter,  192.  Clearing  the  way  to
Sluys,  192,  193.  His  solemn  fast,  194.
Sitting  down  to  the  siege,  195.  Surren-
der of  the  place  to  him,  198.  His  habit
of  obedience  to  the  States-General,  199.
216.  Receiving  his  troops  after  their
abandonment  of  Ostend,  201.  Waking
up  from  a  dream  of  victory,  217,  218.
His  encounters  with  Spinola  and  their
untoward  results,  218-223.  Grumblings
of  the  States :  Policy  of  his  Fabian  tac-
tics, 223.  Points  of  contrast  between
himself  and  Spinola,  225.  Growing  dis-
agreements between  himself  and  Advo-
cate Barneveldt,  238.  368-370.  462.  466.
472.  504.  Watching  his  foe  :  disposition
of  his  troops  on  the  Waal,  242-245.  Loss
of  Rheinberg :  recapture  of  Lochem,  246,
247.  Censure  passed  on  him  for  his  aban-
donment of  Groll,  247-250.  Considera-
tions on  his  conduct,  250,  251.  French
designs  upon  his  loyalty  to  the  States,
264.  266.  Justice  done  to  him  by  the
French  envoy,  270.  His  aversion  to
peace  negotiations,  273,  274.  288.  383.
402.  Popular  feelings  in  unison  there-
with, 368.  Taking  part  in  secret  inter-
views and  other  conferences  preparatory
to  a  peace,  280-282.  373.  396.  419.  Sup-
plementing a  work  prayed  and  fasted  for,
294.  Speaking  plainly  to  a  negotiator,
363,  364.  Proof  against  golden  induce-
ments, 384.  444.  Scene  on  the  occasion
of  his  meeting  with  Spinola,  398,  399.  451.
Reasonably  indignant,  433.  Boiling  over
with  wrath,  434.  His  arguments  against
negotiating  a  peace  with  Spain,  436.  448-
452.  Short-«ighted  notions  of  toleration,
436-440.  Suspicions  as  to  his  motives;
possible  objects  of  his  ambition,  440,  441.
445.  His  home-thrusts  against  king
James,  457.  Amends  made  for  same,
457.  His  reply  to  Jeannin's  discourse,
464.  Offensive  conduct  of  his  secret
envoy  to  Henry  iV,  and  scolding  ad-
ministered by  the  latter,  468-472.  Per-
ceiving and  reconciling  himself  with  the
inevitable,  and  acting  accordingly,  472.
476.  Yearly  allowance  granted  to  him
on  the  conclusion  of  the  truce,  495.  His
"  craving  humour,'*  496  note.  What  he
was  and  was  not;  sovereignties  likely
and  unlikely,  503,  504.  Religious  party
with  which  he  allied  himself,  505.  A
bride  and  a  dowry  offered  to  him,  511.
His  military  improvements,  519-528.  See
i,  345.  389.  401.  455.  ii,  34.  64.  86. 1 73.  253.
261.  318.  320.  329.  422.  iii,  26.  32. 178.  295.
323.  454.  550.  iv,  379.  383.  404.  413.  428.
456.  463.  467.  496.  523.
Maximilian,  Archduke,  his  flight  from  the
battle  of  Keveste,  iii,  389.  See  iv,  54.
500.

Mayenne,  Duke  of,  lieutenant-general  for
the  League,  vice  "Mucio"  deceased,  ii,
531.533.  iii,  2.  Commanding  the  League

MECIILIN.

INDEX.

3IILF0RD.

559

army  at  Ivry,  4Y-49. His  defeat  and  i
flight,  53,  54. His  brag,  55.  Hinting  his  !
desires,  65. Paris  intriguers  against  him,
119.  121. His  own  capacity  for  intrigue,
121,  122.  His  bargainings  with  and  rela-
tions towards  Philip  11,  123. 130. 187.  192,
193.  197.  19><,  199.  201.  202.  204.  206.  217.
220.  234. Turning  the  tables  on  the
Sixteen.  123,  124.  At  the  siege  of  Rouen :
bis  advice  to  Parma,  131.  135. His  du-
plicity towards  the  hitter,  140.  His  triple  j
game :  chief  elements  in  his  character,  i
179,  180. Keeping  his  own  counsel,  182,  I
202. Object  of  his  assembly  of  the
estates  of  France,  218-222. Offer  of  Ne-
mours to  him,  223.  Dictating  his  terms ;
avoiding  the  Spanish  trap,  224-226.  His
dissimulation  understood  and  denounced
by  the  Spanis-h  agents,  234-236.  266.  His
terms  with,  and  game  played  upon  him
by.  Henry  IV,  236,  237. Sum  paid  him,

471.  See  iii,  63.  70.  72.  73.  75.  140.  184.
235  note.  237  note,  iv,  342.

jMkchlin,  i,  131,  133.

Mkdkxblik  held  by  mutinous  Leicestrians,
ii,  337.  340.  388. Surrendered,  399.  516.

Mkdina  Sidonia,  Duke  of,  captjtiii-general  of
the  Armada,  ii.  441.  His  plan  of  opera-
tions, &c,  441-446.  In  action.  451.  455.
458,  466.  471.  His  alternative  for  dis-
obedient captains,  454.  Amenities  of
the  Calais  governor,  463.  Doubts  and
suspicions,  465.  A  baffled  intention,  471,

472.  Flying  before  the  enemy,  475.  His
return  to  Spain,  481.  Visions  dispelled
thereby,  507.  Burning  his  fleet  to  pre-
vent Its  capture,  iil,  364.  See  ii,  484. 4S5.

Mkduaix),  IX)n  Diego  de;  squadron  under  1
command  of,  ii,  442.  447.

M:;in'KKRK,  Adolph,  president  of  Handers,
his  character  and  experience,  i,  74.  Tres-
long  at  enmity  with  him,  143.  Joins  in
the  Leyden  conspiracy,  ii,  317,  318.
Valour  and  fate  of  his  four  sons,  ii,  249.
257.  iii,  101.  101,  102  nutts.  363  and
note. See  i.  384.  iv,  82.

Mkndoza,  Andreas  Hurtado  de,  Portnguese
admiral,  and  his  fleet,  put  to  flight  by
Skipper  Hermann,  iv,  99,  100.  in  com-
mand at  Malacca,  386.  3s7.

Mkndoza,  lK>n  Bernardino  de,  Spanish  am-
bassador in  Paris,  his  character  jukI  capa-
city, i,  63. His  attempt  to  prevent  the
reception  of  the  Dutch  envoys  and  its
resiilt,  95. His  conlVnncts  with  the
French  king  and  his  mother  thereon,  and
on  her  cUiim  to  Portugal,  97-99.  100.  His
.subsequent  conference  with  Guise,  114.
Eloquent  upon  the  queen  of  England's  I
"abominations,"  118.  In  conference  with  |
Villeroy  on  his  proposed  joint  invasion  |
of  England,  118-121. Reporting  to  his  ,
master  and  indicating  course  to  be  pur-  \
sued,  122-123. On  the  persecution  of  ]
catholics  in  England,  123. C^ueen  Elizii-  |
beth's  complaint  against  him  :  chief  in  a  ;
plot  against  her,  336. Frightening  the  j
French  king,  ii,  402,  403. His  bootless  |

boast,  501,  502.  Jokes  at  bis  expense,
503.  Spreading  news  he  wished  to  be
true,  iii,  55.  Famine  food  recommended
by  him,  61.  Reinstiited  in  his  master's
favour,  287,  288.  His  dealings  with  the
French  secret  envoy,  289-291.  292  note.
See  i,  113.  ii,  290.  291.  409.  413.  446.

]M£NDOZA,  Francisco,  admiral  of  Arragon,
canvassing  Germany  on  behalf  of  Philip
IJ,  iii,  390-392.  Commander,  pro  tern,  in
the  Netherlands,  472.  His  expedition  to
the  Rhine,  546.  His  brutality  and  bigotry,
547-549.  Result  of  his  operations  at  Bom-
mel  and  Crevecteur,  550.  Commander  of
the  rivalry  at  Nieuport :  his  homicidal
fame,  iv,  12,  13.  Lemiing  the  van,  27.
Prisoner :  an  ugly  reminder  from  one  of
his  captors,  38.  Dining  with  the  States-
General,  41.  Rough  jokes  at  his  expense,
41.  A.ssigned  to  Lewis  Gunther,  43.  En-
amiped  at  Thienen  :  strength  of  his  po>i-
tion,  90.  Magnanimity  of  the  Nassaus
in  relation  to  his  lilxration,  91-92.  His
violation  of  his  plight- d  word,  359.

;Menlx,  Joos  de,  pensionary  of  Dort.  charac-
terised by  Lord  I^icestt  r,  i,  295.  Hie
addresses  to  Elizabeth  on  offering  her  the
Sovereignty  of  the  Dutch  States,  301-303.
305.  308,  309.  312.  313.  His  orati(»n  at
Leicester's  insUillation.  3s9.  Taking  a
leading  part  in  a  new  mission  to  England,
ii,  1x6.  192.  194.  Attempting  a  service
for  Leice.-.t<T,  310. See  i.  377.  384.

Mercceur,  Duke  of,  routing  the  French
forces  in  Brittany,  iii,  143,  144.  His  ser-
vice to  and  promistxi  reward  from  Philip,
191,  192. Betrothal  of  his  daughU  r,  451.

Mesa,  Alphonso  de,  his  heroism  and  its
reward,  ii,  26,  27.

Meteren,  Emanuel  van,  i,  290  note.  His
linmiugs  of  the  Eaglish  people,  temp.
Kliz.  290.  291.  His  mistak.-  relative  to
the  realitj'  of  Elizabeth's  iing<  r  with  I^el-
cest<^r,  426  note.  On  York's  traitorous
leanings,  ii,  46  rrnte.  On  th»'  number  of
catholics  killed  at  Osti  iid.  iv,  202  nott.
Value  of  the  history  written  by  him,  527.

Melks  or  Mceurs,  Count  de,  his  service  at
Deventer,  ii,  2.  His  bargain  with  Schenk,
7.  Town  captured  by  him,  24.  An  exe-
cutioner's job  desired  by  him,  136.  Cause
of  his  hostility  to  I>eicester  and  his  pariy,.
138.  178.  205.  Exciting  astonishment  by
his  sobriety,  209.  Occision  of  his  death,
524. See  i,40l.  455.  ii,  54.  135.

Melks,  city  of,aiplured  by  Maurice,  iv,  62.

Mexia,  governor  of  Antwerp  citadel,  iv,
210.

MiCHEU'.o»)N',  Jacob,  and  his  '  Black  Galley,"
iv,  114.  His  engaijf'ment  with  Spanish
vessi%,  114,  115 Killed,  IIG.

MinDLEHCRGH,  tliC  first  incor|»rated  city  of
Holland,  ii,  216.  Ravages  of  English
pirates  upon  its  merchants,  iii,  16*  uott.
Trade  monopoly  enjoyed  by  its  citizens,
iv,  400.

MiLFOKD  Haven,  Philip  of  Spain's  design
on  iii,  395.

500

MrLITAPvY.

INDEX.

NETHERLANDS.

Military  engineering  brought  to  bear  at

the  siege  of  Antwerp,  i,  134.
Military  science,  fenip.  1590:  Maurice's

innovations  and  improvements,  iii,  90-96.

See  iv,6.  63.  519-521.  528.
Milling,  papal  agent  at  Madrid,  iv,  341.  343.
Miranda's  request,  and  Maurice's  remark

on  granting  it,  iii,  428.
MfEUES,  see  Meurs.

MoL,  Peter,  Dutch  captain,  helping  to  sink
the  Spanish  galleys,  iv,  107.  His  heroic
assault  on  Tydor,  232.

Molucca  Isles,  establishment  by  the  Dutch
of  relations  with  the,  101.  Strife  with
the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese:  successes
of  the  Dutch.  227-233.  390-392.

MoNCADA,  Don  Hugo  de,  ii,  442.  Disaster
to  his  ship:  his  light  with  the  English-
men and  heroic  death,  467-469.

Mondejar,  Marquis  of,  set  free  on  condi-
tion, iii,  476,

Mondragon,  Christopher,  rejoicing  over
the  death  of  Orange,  i,  147.  His  failure
and  great  loss  of  men  at  Lillo,  149,  150.
Kowenstyn  in  his  iron  grip,  155.  176.
Fort  upon  it  commanded  by  him,  196.
Vowing  revenge  upon  Maurice,  iii,  109.
Keeping  house  in  Antwerp  castle,  244.
311.  Preparing  for  action,  316.  Ambush
prepared  by  Maurice  for  him,  317,  318.
His  counter-ambush  and  its  result,  319-
322.  Character  and  end  of  his  ninety-
two  years'  career,  322,  323.  Relic  of  him
at  Vienna,  323  note. See  ii,  10,  11.

MONGYN,  Captain,  killed,  iii,  248.

Monj.e\et's  colloquy  with  Balveha,  iii,
393.  394.

Montemarctano,  Duke  of,  with  his  Swiss
at  Rouen,  iii,  130.  132.  DiSiippearing
with  them,  137.

Mont  JOY,  Lord,  making  short  work  with
Spanish  invaders  in  Ireland,  iv,  88.

MoNTPENSiER,  Duchess  of,  failure  of  her
plot,  ii,  404.  Her  food  for  the  famine-
stricken,  iii,  61.

MoNTPENsiER,  Duke  of,  set  down  by  Henry
IV,  iii,  369,  370.

Moor,  Joost  de,  vice-admiral  of  Zeeland,  ii,
423.  His  brilliant,  affair  with  the  Spanish
galleys,  iv,  113-116.

Moors,  uneasy  feeling  in  Spain  regarding
the,  iv,  271.  Story  of  their  expulsion,
311-314.

Mora,  Cristoval  di,  see  Moura.

MoREO,  Commander,  iii,  188.  His  calumnies
against  I'arma,  193-197.  206.

MoiiGAN,  Papist  correspondent  and  in-
triguer, i,  353.  ii,  413.

Morgan,  Colonel,  English  volunteer  in  the
Netherlands;  Le  Sieur's  contemptuous
remark  on  his  troops,  i,  73.  How  he  re-
stored discipline,  139.  Takes  part  in  the
defence  of  Lillo,  149.  The  last  to  aban-
don his  position  at  the  Kowenstyn  fight,
212.  His  ri^port  of  a  conversation  be-
tween himself  and  Sainte  Aldegonde,
262-265.  in  command  at  Bergen-op-
Zoom,  ii,  510

Moura,  or  Mora,  Don  Cristoval  di,  Philip's
chief  favourite  and  tinance  minister,  ii,
435. -436.  Breaks  the  news  of  the  de-
feat of  the  Armada  to  the  king,  507.
Watching  the  Archduke  Ernest,  iii,  266.
Receiving  his  master's  dying  injunctions,
478-480.  Made  viceroy  of  Portugal,  iv,
327.

Mucio,  see  Guise.

MuLBi.RRY  culture  opposed  in  France,  iv,
215.  513.

Mulder,  Captain,  his  valuable  work  on
Netherlands'  history,  iii,  89  note.

Mutinies  of  the  States'  troops,  ii,  340.  389.
516.  Of  the  Spanish  troops,  iv,  2.  93-97.
196.

Naarden,  rebellious  demonstrations  in,  ii,
3rf9,  391. Reduced  to  obedience,  516.

Nantes,  edict  of,  drawn  up,  iii,  470.

Nassau  and  Orange  Nassau  family:  see
Emilia.  Ern<  st  of  Nassau.  Frederick
Henry.  Henry  of  Nassau.  John  of  Nas-
sau. Justinus.  Lewis  Gunther.  Lewis
William.  Maurice.  Philip,  Count.  Philip
William. William  the  Silent.

Naunton,  Sir  Robert,  on  Leicester's  pro-
ficiency as  a  poisoner,  i,  3-18.

Nek,  Captain,  making  treaties  with  the
Orientals,  iv,  101.

Nemours,  edict  of,  its  conditions  and  object,
i,  125.

Nemours,  Duchess  of,  iii,  57.  Her  rebuke
to  a  famine-stricken  mother,  61.

Nemours,  Duke  of,  in  flight  from  Ivry,  iii,
54.  Earnest  in  an  unholy  cause,  57.  60.
80. His  offer  to  Mayenne,  223.

Netherlands,  the;  issues  involved  in  their
revolt  against  Spain,  i,  5.  Provinces  in
Spanish  possession  as  distinguished  from
the  "  United  Provinces,"  8.  Origin  and
object  of  the  war  with  Spain  and  the  In-
quisition, 8,  9.  Sovereignty  and  consti-
tution of  the  United  Provinces  collec-
tively and  individually,  10-11.  Measures
adopted  by  the  "  Estates"  after  the  mur-
der of  William  the  Silent,  12,  13.  Their
conduct  towards  and  regard  for  bis  widow,
15,  16.  Constitution  and  powers  of  their
council,  16,  17.  Medal  and  motto  em-
blematic of  the  country's  condition,  17.
Result  of  the  Prince  of  Parma's  attempt
to  win  their  allegiance  to  Spain,  18.  'Irea-
cherous  conduct  of  the  Flemish  cities,
and  result  of  same,  18-22.  Result  of  the
deaths  of  Anjou  and  Orange  (William  the
Silent),  23.  Why  a  French  policy  was
favoured  by  Orange  :  religion  of  the  Re-
public, 24.  Indignation  at  the  apathy  of
Germany,  33.  Determination  to  seek
French  alliance,  34.  Value  of  such  alli-
ance, 50,  51.  Step  taken  on  Anjou's  death,
52,  53.  Indignities  put  upon  the  agents
sent  to  negotiate  with  France,  53,  54.  In*
formation  gathered  in  a  secret  visit  to
Paris:  stipulation  of  Henry  HI,  55,  56.
Reception  of  his  envoy  by  the  States,  58.
Reasons  for  hesitation :  Prince  Maurice's

NETHERLANDS.  INDEX.  NETHERLANDS.  561

appeal,  58,  59.  Effect  of  the  French  en-  |
voy's  eloquence:  sovereignty  offered  to  |
his  king,  60,  61.  Policy  of  Eng;lund  to-
wards the  provinces,  62.  Apprehensions
of  foreign  ambassadors  in  Paris,  63,  64.
The  English  envoy's  anxieties,  65,  66.
Longings  of  the  French  king,  67.  Partisan
reports  as  to  the  feeUngs  of  the  Dutch  no-
tabilities towards  France  and  England,
68-71.  Enthusiasm  in  favour  of  an  Eng-
lish alliance,  71,  72  notes.  Temporising
and  tantalising  attitude  of  England's
coui-t  and  queen,  77,  78.  AiTival  of  an
English  envoy:  his  audience  with  the
States-General,  81.  Subsidence  of  enthu-
siasm towards  France  and  affection  for
England,  86-88.  Despatch  of  a  new
legation  to  France:  entertainment  ac-
corded to  them,  91.  Their  reception  at
the  Louvre:  its  puppet-show  character
and  profitless  result,  91,  92.  Return  home
of  the  envoys,  93.  Real  object  of  the
French  king  and  his  mother  in  enter-
taining them,  98-101.  102,  103.  Secret
mission  sent  to  Henry  of  Navarre;  l)is
advice  and  generous  offer,  104,  105.  Step
next  tiikeu  after  failure  of  the  embassy
to  France,  129.  Provinces  re-annexed  to
Spain:  provinces  In  whose  fate  was  in-
volved the  fate  of  protesUntism,  130-132.
Cause  for  distrust  of  Sainte  Aldegonde,
256,  257.  Shape  in  which  Elizabeth's
help  was  desired,  271.  Substance  of
their  envoy's  conferences  wiih  Elizal)eth
and  her  ministers,  274-280.  'I'heir  reply
to  her  proposals,  281.  Ill  effects  of  a
despatch  at  a  critical  monuMit,  2H2,  283.
Hitch  1-rought  alxjut  by  the  question  of
guarantees  to  England,  2n3-2«5.  Basis
of  future  negotiaiion  agreed  upon,  2x1.
Religious  con.>>ideration>;  character  of
the  n*  gotiations,  287,  2hm.  Further
efforts  towards  securing  lOnglish  aid :
despatch  of  a  new  deputition  to  London,
294.  it>  chief  members,  295-300.  Their
conferences  and  discussions  with  the
queen  and  her  state^men,  301-314.  Try-
ing to  obi*iin  a  litHe  more  from  tiie
queen :  En^U>h  connnander  desired  by
the  States,  317.  Their  shie  qua  non,
319.  An  uniHTformed  promise,  32u.
Terms  at  length  agreed  on,  322.  Unjust
taunts  of  the  Kngli.-.h  again^t  tlie  Siaies,
3;}5.  Unanimity  of  view  in  England  as
to  necessity  of  standuig  by  them,  360
vote.  The  like  of  English  viMtors
among  them,  367.  What  was  meant  by
alliance  with  England,  36S.  Governor-
ship offered  to  and  iiccejited  by  Leicester,
3M0-3S5.  His  instillation,  3^8.  3=<9.
Wrathful  letter  from  i-li/abeth  on  the
occasion,  399.  Voluntarily  increasing
their  contributions  in  support  of  soldiers,
414.  Elucidatory  observation,  ibid  note.  '
Fonnal  delivery  of  the  queen's  repri-  j
niand,  422.  i*ainlul  suspicions  relative  I
to  Ik  I  hand  faics,  423.  I  heir  expedition  j
to  waylay  the  Spanlth  treasure  fleet,  ,
VOL.  IV.

424.  Their  exculpatory  reply  to  the
queen's  message,  425,  426.  Explanatory
comment,  426  note.  Their  suspicions
against  Leicester,  428.  Conciliatory  des-
patch from  Elizabeth,  434.  435.  Textual
extracts  from  same,  437.  438  Tio^e.  Sus-
pecting the  queen  of  double  dealing,  446.
449.  rheir  lurther  letters  to  her  on
Leicester's  appointment,  453  note.  Turn
given  by  her  to  her  complaints  againjt
them,  455,  456  and  note.  Cooling  to-
wards and  quarrelling  with  Leicester,
458-460.  Regard  had  for  them  in  the
secret  negotiation  for  peace,  472.  Pecu-
niary proof  of  their  appreciation  of
Leicester's  position,  494  note.
River  boundaries  of  their  territory,  ii.  1,
2.  Their  regard  for  education  in  their
struggles  for  freedom,  9.  Political  and
financial  considerations  as  to  union  with
England,  58.  59.  Consequences  of  Elix.a-
beth's  parsimony  and  caprices,  61.  15^9,
190.  206.  225,  2J6.  227.  Aggravation  of
the  quarrels  with  I^eicester,  64.  65.  70-74.
Opposition  to  bis  finance  chamber,  67.
Suicidal  restrictions  upon  conmierce,  67-
69.  Conferences  with  Leicester  on  his
projected  visit  to  England,  luO-104.  Gift
to  him  on  the  occasion,  104  note.  Con-
sequences of  Leicester's  retirtment,  105.
2(»4.  227.  Need  for  a  union  with  Eng-
land, 108.  Contention  on  the  question
of  sovereignty  between  the  Leicehtrians
and  the  Stat<'  party,  109-112.  210-312.
213,  214.  Ixssons  on  this  question  taught
by  Anjou's  conduct,  112.  Views  and
claims  of  the  dominant  religious  bodies;
antagonism  of  the  <  hurch  and  the  States,
114-120.  212.  214,215.  Contrast  belwetn
the  condition  of  the  Spanish  provinces
and  the  Republic,  121-127.  Dignities
conferred  ui>on  Count  Maurice,  and  why,
177,  17m.  Envoys  sent  to  Elizabeth:
their  conferences  with  her  and  her  coun-
cillors, 185-Ib9.  192-194.  199.  Result  of
their  mission,  206.  loiters  sent  to  Lei-
cester and  the  queen  upon  the  Deventer
and  Zutphen  trea.'-ons,  195-199.  Recep-
tion of,  and  conterenc«s  with,  I^ord
liuckhurst.  207-209.  Claim  of  antiquity
for  the  States'  constitution:  its  true
history,  215-217.  State  cituncil  resolves:
effect  of  Leicester's  sudden  ntum,  23-',
239.  Action  taken  upon  an  intercepied
letter  from  him  to  his  secreUiry,  242-246.
Siege  and  aipture,  by  Parma,  of  Sluys.
247-262.  [.'sV'-  Sluys.]  Excitement  con-
seqm  nt  on  Elisuilx'ih's  peace  negotiations
with  Sp;iin,  272-276.  30s.  Misrepn  stn-
tations  of  the  conduct  of  the  States  by
Leicester,  311.  His  plot  against  Maurice
and  lianieveldt,  and  attempt  upon  .some
of  the  cities,  313-315.  I  he  Leyden  plot,
anO  fate  of  its  chiefs,  316-321'.  L<'iter»
fntm  the  queen  and  Leicester  on  the
latt<r's  recall,  325-327.  Result  of  his
administration,  331-334.  Cotisequpncc s
of  big  second  departure.  336,  337.  387.

2  0

562  NETHERLANDS.  INDEX.  NETHERLANDS.

Discordant  elements  at  work:  efforts  of*
the  Leicestrians  to  foment  mutiny,  3S8-
391.  395.  Result  of  Maurice's  letters  to
England,  396-399.  Expostulating  with
the  queen,  411.  Dutch  church  delegates
sent  to  her,  411.  415.  Their  notions  of
toleration,  415.  Their  conferences  with
her  and  her  councillors,  416-421.  Pre-
paring for  the  coming  struggle,  422,  423.
Defiance  of  Parma  by  the  native  mariners,
483.  497.  Siege  of  Bergen-op-Zoom  :  its
result,  509,  510.  513-515.  Result  of  the
defeat  of  the  Armada  upon  the  relations
with  Elngland,  515.  Betrayal  of  Ger-
truydenberg  to  Parma;  feelings  engen-
dered thereby.  516-519.  524.  Aid  sent  to
Henry  of  Navarre,  532.
The  statesman  and  the  soldier  suited  to
the  States'  need  at  the  opportune  moment,
iii,  2.  Appliances  against  physical  en-
croachments, 3.  True  creators  of  the
States'  army:  disciplinary  and  other
reforms  introduced  by  them,  3-5.  88-96.
Territory  in  the  provinces  still  held  by
the  Spaniards,  5.  Successful  stratagem
at  Breda,  5-14.  [_See  Breda.]  Nature  of
the  war  in  which  the  provinces  were
engaged,  16.  Unselfish  character  of  their
achievements  :  progress  of  the  Republic,
17-20.  22-26.  State  of  the  "obedient"
provinces;  ghostly  panacea  proposed  for
their  relief,  20-22.  Navy  of  the  States,
25,  26.  Inherent  vice  of  the  Netherland
polity:  depository  of  supreme  power,
26-28.  Patriotic  conduct  of  magistrates
and  people,  28.  Merger  of  the  State
council  in  the  States-General:  effect,  of
Leicester's  inlriguings,  28,  29.  88.  Ex-
travagant claims  of  the  English  members
of  the  State  council :  request  refused  to
them,  30,  31.  Nature  of  the  responsi-
bilities and  functions  of  the  States-
General,  32.  Privileges  arrogated  by
thpm,  33.  Great  principle  the  Nether-
landers  were  fighting  for,  35.  Their
reply  to  complaints  of  neutral  neighbours,
and  catalogue  of  charges  a^rainst  Spain,
36-38.  Military  movements  and  suc-
cesses under  Maurice,  98-112.  148-160.
Dangers  threatening  tiie  national  exist-
ence, 114,  115.  Address  of  the  French
envoy  to  the  States-General :  their  prac-
tical reply,  124-127.  Dislikes  produced
by  lik-^s  between  England  and  the  States,
161.  Republican  plainness  and  mcmar-
chical  courtliness,  162,  163.  Cross  com-
plaints of  the  neighbour  nations,  163-167.
Conferences  of  the  States'  envoy  with
Elizabeth  and  her  councillors  thereon,
167-175.  Siege  and  capitulation  to  the
States  of  Gertruydenberg  ami  Groningen,
241-250.  254-261.  Imbecility  of  the
course  pursued  in  the  "  ob-dient "  pro-
vinces, 266.  Their  pageant  in  honour
of  Archduke  Ernest,  269-272.  Solid
achievements  of  the  repubhcans,  267,
268.  Peace  mission  from  the  "obedient"
provinces,  and reply  of  the  States-

General,  284-286.  Course  taken  on  &
renewed  application  from  Henry  IV,  for
aid,  and  fame  won  by  it  for  the  States,
292-294.  Tightening  of  the  allianc3
with  Henry  IV,  296.  Scarcity  of  provi-
sions: need  of  increased  levies  for  war
purposes,  353,  354.  Conjoint  attack  with
England  on  the  Spanish  fleet,  and  its
result,  362-368.  Triple  alliance  with
France  and  England  against  Spain :
duplicity  of  the  latter  powers,  381,  382.
385.  Point  gained  by  the  Republic,  387.
The  march  to  Turnhout  and  signal
victory  over  the  Spaniards,  397-406.
Important  character  of  the  achievement,
407.  Reception  of  and  reply  to  a  Pohsh
envoy,  421-423.  Victories  at  Rheinberg,
Grol,  Brevoort  and  Enschede;  a  year
well  begun,  well  ended,  428-430.  Taxing
the  French  king  with  his  breach  of  good
faith,  431,  432.  Duped  both  by  France
and  England,  433,  434.  English  com-
plaints of  the  traffic  of  the  Republic
with  Spain,  435,  436.  Offer  of  further
help  to  France,  443.  Dealing  with  a
crafty  sugg- stion  from  Franco,  and  an
affectionate  letter  from  Brussels,  443-445.
Special  missions  to  France  and  England :
their  object,  446.  Weather  obstacles  of
those  days,  447,  448.  Progress  of  the
envoys:  their  reception  by  the  French
king,  448-451.  His  make-believe  conduct
and  impossible  propositions  :  a  child-bed
finale,  451-456.  Recepti(m  of  the  envoi's
in  England,  456.  Their  efforts  to  over-
come the  peace  inclinations  of  the  queen
and  her  ministers,  458-463.  Financial
difficulties:  her  peremptory  demands,
464.  Renewed  conferences  and  final
agreement,  465-467.  Foiinal  transfer
of  the  provinces  by  Philip  11.  to  his
daughter,  471.  A  consideration  ignored
by  him,  472.  Attitude  of  the  "  obedient "
and  republican  NetherLuiders  on  the
occasion,  472.  Original  object  of  the
rising  against  Philip,  504,  505.  Effect  of
liis  confiscations,  506,  507.  Simultane-
ously fighting  and  trading  with  Spain:
rapid  expansion  of  the  Republic's  com-
merce, 511-513.  Progress  of  naval  enter-
prise and  maritime  discovery ;  pioneers  In
the  work,  513-518.  North  Pole  explora-
tions, 518-541.  South  Pole  expedition,
542-545.  Military  operations  in  1598  :
effect  of  disingenuous  policy  on  the  part
of  allies,  546.  Dwindling  away  of  the
army;  financial  deficit,  549.  Loss  and.
subsequent  recovery  of  Crevecceur,  550.
553.  Result  of  prohibitions  on  foreien
trade,  551.  More  talk  with  Queen  Eliza-
beth, 558,  559.  "Sugar  and  Honey"
from  her,  559.  Her  Latin  and  her  threats
to  the  States'  envoy,  562.  Manifest
intent  of  the  Republic,  563.
Discontent  with  heavy  taxation  and  inade-
quate results,  iv,  1.  Determination  to
invade  Flanders  ;  opinions  of  the  military
leaders  on  the  project,  1-4.  Preparations

NETHERLANDS.

INDEX.

NETHERLANDS.

503

for  and  particulars  of  the  attack  upon  >
Nieuporr,  5-47. [Ses  Nieuport.] Effect  '
of  the  Nieuport  campaign :  lesson  taught  !
to  the  States  thereby,  52. Ravages  and  j
brutalities  of  the  pirate  Van  der  Waec-  !
ken,  55,  56. The  Republic's  only  posses-  |
sion  in  Flanders  (Ostend)  besieged  by  the  I
Spaniards,  58. Details  of  the  affair,  58-  |
61.  62-87.  109-113.  118,  119. 169-185.  199-  |
202. Principles  typified  in  the  struggle,  I
2(J9. [.s'ee  Ostend.J  Another  march  into
Flanders;  siege  and  surrender  of  Grave,
89-91.  104. Discomfiture  of  the  Portu-
guese fleet  off  Bantam,  99,  100.  Exten-
sion of  commercial  and  political  relations
■with  the  East:  Embassy  from  Sumatra,
101-103. A  naval  experiment  on  the
Spanish  principle,  106. Destruction  of
privateer  squadrons  under  Frederic  Spi-
nola,  106-109.  113-117.  Estiblishment,
powers,  and  privileges  of  the  Dutch
East  India  Company,  124-126. Results  i
of  its  expeditions,  227-233. Envoys  sent  i
to  the  new  king  of  England,  128.  Their
first  interview  with  James,  13S. Tlieir  |
conferenci'S  with  De  Rosny,  and  with  tho  I
English  councillors, 147-149. 156-159.  I
What  Cecil  thought  the  provinces  should  '
be  deprived  of,  146,  147. Secre  t  projects  i
of  France  and  England  relative  to  the
United  Provinces,  159,  160.  163.166.  167.
The  States-General  permitted  to  raise
recruits  in  Scothmd,  168. A  third —
F'rcnch  incited  —  project  for  invading
F'lanclers;  modest  intent  of  the  French
king in connection therewith,  1«6.
Plan  of  the  campaign,  188. Siege  and
cajtture  of  Slnys,  and  operations  pre-
liminary thereto,  188-199.  20><.  [See
Sluys.J Disposal  of  the  provinces  in
James's  treaty  with Spain, 204,  205.
Spanish  i)rotcst  against  the  Dutch  envoy
in  England  being  styled  "  anib.issador,"
206,  207. A  colloquy  between  the  "  am-
bassador "  and  tho  king,  207  7Viie.  The
Republic  left  to  fight  its  battles  alone,
209. 237. Irritating results of  the
Anglo-Spanish  treaty;  fruit  born  there-
of in  later  times,  212-214.  Manufacture
due  to  tho  development  of  tho  traffic
with  India,  215. Abortive  enterprist'
against  Antwerp,  216. Profitless  cam-
paign against  Spinola,  216-221.  Repulse
of  the  Spaniards  at  Ik'rgon-<)])-Zoom,
233,  234. Dealings  with  the  Dunkirk
pirates,  234,  235. Impoveri>hed  exche-
quer: military  inaction,  237-239.  Re-
newal of operations : captures  and
recaptures:  an  inglorious  cloS(\  241-2 ts.
Censures  piussed  on  the  Republic  and  its
diit  f,  249-251.  Further  naval  operations :
Klaaszoon's  heroic  self-immolation,  251-
254. Heemskerk's  victorious  enterprise
and death,  295-305. Deaths  of  8t»mo
repress  ntii five men, 2.")5,  256. King  i
James's  epithets  for  the  Xetherlanders,  j
2.')9. Dp>igns  of  the  English,  Spanish,  !
and  French kings  (especially  of  the

last)  on  the  States,  2.^9.  260,  261.  262-
271.  343.  430.  503.  Grant  of  a  charter
for  a  West  India  company ;  its  terms ;
conflicting  opinions  on  the  subject,  276-
279.  Trading  and  fighting  exploits  in
India,  386-393.  Desire  for  peace,  272.
Secret  missions  from  the  archdukes  and
Spain,  275.  279-286.  Negotiat'ons  for
and  completion  of  an  armistice,  292-
294.  Meetings  of  envoys  for  discussion
of  preliminaries  to  a  negotiation  for
peace,  350-359.  Organization  of  confer-
ences, 360.  Offers  of  bribes  to  republican
statesmen,  362.  367.  Arrival  and  rejec-
tion of  Philip's  ratification,  363-367.
Popular  denunciations  of  peace,  368.
Protracted  discussions,  373-380.  Formal
answer  of  the  States  to  the  conimissioners,
379,  380.  .Vine  qua,  non  agreed  on  by
the  Stiitos,  3x2,  The  peace  party  and
their  oppcments,  384.  A  new  claimant  to
a  share  in  the  conferent.es,  394.  Re-
newal of  the  discussions,  401-407.  Ob-
stinate fights  over  the  India  question,
407-415.  416,  417.  'JYeaty  concluded
with  England,  419.  A  present  end  to
peace  negotiations  with  Spain,  429.  Ne-
gotiations for  a  truce  HUggestt-d,  432.
Angry  discussions :  d<'cLsion  arrive*!  at,
434,  435.  The  tolerat  ion  question  :  argu-
ments of  Maurice,  436-441.  Party  strife
and  pamphleteering,  441-443.  Accusa-
tions against  liirrn  vt'ldt ;  liis  views  anc^.
ol)j'  Cts,  444-447.  Calumnies  against  him  :
liis  re.«<ignaiion  and  ncall,  463-467.
Modified  i»ropo8ition  of  the  Spanish
commissioners:  its  rejection  and  their
farewell,  44S-451.  Jeannin's  sche  me  for
healing  the  rupture;  discovery  and
pubUcation  of  Richardots  s«'cret  instruc-
tions: their  purport,  452-456.  Sugges-
tions for  n-newal  of  negotiations:  Mau-
rice's quarrel  with  King  Jiunes'.s  agent,
450,  457.  I)i.>icussit»ii  re-opened:  argu-
ments of  Jeannln,  French  envoy,  for  a
truce,  45S-462.  473,  474.  Clo^e  of  the
discussion,  4  76,  4  77.  Maurice's  indis-
creet mission  to  Henry  IV,  and  lecture
provoked  by  it,  468-472.  Coming  to  the
vote:  first  point  insisted  on,  47s.479.
Arrangement  of  the  truce  and  articles  of
the  treaty,  481-483.  S<.)lid  advantiges
secured  by  the  States,  484-4s6.  Request
made  to  and  refusetl  by  France  and
England  ;  ratification  of  the  treaty,  487.
Appeal  of  Jeannin  for  religious  tolera-
tion, 488-491.  Proclamation  of  the
truce,  and  rejoicings  thereon.  493,  494.
Debt  to  England :  army  establishment :
revenue:  salaries  to  the  Nassaus,  494-
496.  Arminians  and  Gomarites:  Iheo-
logiGil  contention,  497,  498.  Concluding
observations:  the  provinces  a  republic
in  spite  of  ihem.selves  :  chances  of  sove-
reignty over  them  spurned  and  subse-
quently coveted.  502-504.  Dominance
striven  f«)r  by  religious  sects,  vitality  of
the  persecuting  instinct.  5n4-50}>.  Rapid

2  0  2

NEUSZ.

INDEX.

NTNEZ.

growth  of  commercial  prosperity  ;  Am-
sterdam and  Antwerp  contrasted,  510,
511.  Results  of  agricultural  industry
and  mechanical  ingenuity,  511,  512.  Sea
supremacy  of  the  Hollanders :  the
world's  ocean  carriers :  Indian  enterprise,
513-515.  521.  Their  wealth,  power,
population,  and  exemplary  habits,  515,
516.  Suppressed  monkish  establish-
ments, how  disposed  of,  516,  517.
Amount  and  sources  of  revenue :  cheer-
ful submission  to  taxation,  518.  Legis-
lators, magistrates,  judges,  independence
of  the  last,  519.  Army  and  navy,  519-
522.  Weak  element  in  the  common-
wealth, 522,  523.  Supremacy  of  the
province  of  Holland,  524.  Per  centage
of  contribution  by  each  province,  ibid
note.  The  States-General  and  their
functions,  524.  Universality  of  educa-
tion :  position  of  woman,  525.  Eminent
literary  and  scientific  men,  526-529.  See
Holland,  Maurice,  Olden  Barneveldt,
William  the  Silent.

Neusz  besieged  by  Parma,  li,  24.  Leices-
ter's sarcasm  :  Parma's  danger,  25.  Hor-
rors and  bravery :  fate  of  the  commander
and  his  garrison  and  city,  26-30.  A  fact
and  a  fiction,  31.

Nevers,  Duke  of,  his  paper  against  the
league,  iii,  120.  At  Aumale,  133,  134.
His  mission  to  Rome  and  anger  at  his
rece^.tion,  228,  229.  Honouring  the  dead,
314.

NicwELL,  Mr,  "  the  late  Latiner,"  i,  15.

Nkyex,  John,  Flemish  friar,  sendhig  his
avant  courier  to  the  States  on  a  secret
I)eaco  mission  on  behalf  of  the  archdukes
iv,  279,  2>i0.  His  own  fitness  for  such
work,  280,  281.  His  secret  entry  into
tlie  Hague,  and  several  interviews  with
the  Dutch  statesmen,  281-284. .  286-291.
292.  373,  374.  3S1.  396,  416.  His  interim
wanderings  on  the  same  object,  361.  His
tempting  offi^rs  to  Recorder  Aerssens,
362.  367.  Wending  his  w^ay  to  Spain,
368.  Feasting  the  credulity  of  the
Spanish  government,  371,  372.  Reward
he  desired,  418.  Chafing  at  Spanish
delays,  423,  424.  449. See  338-340^  360.

NiKUPORT,  iii,  92.  Determination  of  the
States  to  besiege  it,  iv,  2,  3,  5.  Perils
involved  in  the  act,  3,  4.  Preparations,
march  to  and  arrival  before  the  place,  5-
11.  Harangue  of  the  archdukes  to  their
troops,  11,  12.  Their  first  victory,  13.
Its  effect  on  the  besiegers,  14,  15.  Dilem-
ma of  the  States'  army,  16.  Count
Ernest's  movement ;  his  critical  position ;
panic  among  his  troops  and  its  results,
16-20.  Prematuiie  rejoicings  of  the
archdukes,  21.  Their  council  of  war,
21-23.  Consequences  of  hesitation  on
b  >th  sides,  23,  24.  Closing  in  of  the
opposing  forces,  decisive  battle,  successes
of  the  Dutch,  and  abandonment  of  the
siege,  25-47.  Note  on  the  conflicting
accounts  of  Vera  and  the  Nassaus,  48-51.

Effect  of  the  campaign  on  the  belli-

gerents,  52. See  Albert.  Maurice.
NieuW' ENAAR,  Couut,  ofifice  vacated  by  the

death  of,  iii,  88.
NooRP,  Oliver  van,  Dutch  circumnavigator,

iii,  515.

NoERis,  army  treasurer  in  Holland,  not  at
his  post  at  a  critical  moment,  i,  334.
Charges  of  peculation  against  him,  ii,  31.
36.  82.

N ORRIS,  Croft's  servant,  a  papist  spy,  i,  466,
467.  How  he  followed  out  his  instruc-
tions, 486,  487.

NoRRis,  Sir  Edward,  i,  316.  Consequence
of  his  hot-headedness,  334.  Leicester's
estimate  of  him,  ii,  81.  87.  Set  made
against  him  at  Hohenlo's,  87-90.  Ho-
henlo's  assault  upon  him  and  its  results,
91-93.  138-141.  His  mishap  at  Burgos,
526.  Sending  news  to  the  queen,  iii,  252.
Her  letter  to  him,  253.  His  report  to
Burghley,  ibid  riote. See  ii,  82.  413.  525.

NoRRis,  Hetn-y,  ii,  525.

NoRRis,  Sir  John,  on  Sainte  Aldegonde's
movements,  i,  251.  Busy  in  enlisting
troops  to  serve  in  Holland,  306.  His  pa-
rentage; old-lime  services  of  his  mother
to  the  queen,  315,  316.  Character  given
to  liim  by  the  queen,  316.  Position
which  he  found  "  not  so  flexible  as  he  had
hoped,"'  334.  Sent  to  reinforce  Grave:
his  successes  and  his  wounds,  ii,  10-13.
Knighted,  16.  Alleged  reason  of  his  plea
for  mercy  to  Hcmart,  22.  At  the  attack
on  Doesburg,  38.  Animosities  between
himself  and  Leicester  and  others,  40,  41.
81-83.  92.  141.  232.  261.  487.  His  position
at  the  siege  of  Zutphen,  42,  43.  His
ambuscade,  45-48.  Characterised  by  Wal-
singham :  hi.s  untractable  nature,  80.
Threats  of  Leicester  against  him,  81.
Commended  to  Leicester  by  the  queen,
86.  How  esteemed  by  Wilkes,  150.  176.
His  relations  with  Sir  W.  Stanley,  150,
151.  In  the  queen's  displeasure,  264.
Post  assigned  to  him  in  anticipation  of
the  Spanish  invasion,  487.  490.  Purport
of  his  mission  to  the  States,  515,  515.
Joined  with  Drake  in  the  foray  into  Spain,
525,  526.  Returning  bravado  for  bra-
vado, .527.  Again  at  his  death-dealing
work,  iii,  116.

North,  Lord,  i,  345. His  enthusiasm  with

.  regard  to  Holland,  365.  A  weather  si-
mile for  "  the  Spaniard,"  ii,  14.  Admiring
the  enemy,  18.  On  Hemart's  treason  at
Grave,  19  vote.  Commending  Kloet,  27.
On  Kloet's  death  tortures,  28.  His  bra**
very  under  difficulties,  48.  On  the  lov€
of  the  States  for  the  queen,  84.

Northampton,  Lord,  his  views  relative  to
Holland,  iv,  260  note.

North  Pole,  Dutch  voyages  to  the,  Iii,  518-
540.

Northumberland,  John  Dudley,  Duke  of,

his  rise  and  fate,  i,  346.
NoYON,  useless  capture  of,  iii,  244.  251.
Nunez,  Sully's  suspicion  of,  iii,  288.

NYIIEGEN.

INDEX,

aSTEND.

565

Ntmegen,  taken  for  the  royalists  bySchenk,
ii,  2.  Threatened  by  Leicester,  17.
Schenk's  attempt  t-)  regain  it  for  the
States,  521-524,  Parma's  assurance  to  its
inhabitants,  iii,  108.  111.  Recaptured  by
Maurice,  110.  See.  iii,  97.  104.  108.  110.
iv,  243.  245.

Ogle,  Captain,  sent  to  the  archduke's  camp
as  a  hostage,  iv,  73.  76.

Oldkn-Barnh;veldt,  John  van ;  his  French
inclinations,  i,  74.  At  the  attack  on  the
Kowenstyn,  201.  Doubt  hereon,  ibid
note.  Condition  on  which  he  took  office,
26-^.  His  descent:  scandals  told  of  his
family  connection;  297-299.  His  views
on  theology  and  religious  toleration,
military  adventures,  and  personal  appear-
ance, 29'-300.  Principle  of  sovereignty
urged  by  him,  305.  Pronouncing;  again>t
the  English,  11,  172.  His  States'  letter  to
Leicester,  177.  195-198.  Asserting  the
States'  independence,  213,  214.  239.  His
course  on  olitaining  I^^'icester's  int<-rcepted
letter.  2^2.  244.  304.  314.  Project  to  kid-
nap him,  314.  A  B  *elzebub  in  Willough-
by  s  eyes,  3i)4,  395.  415.  519.  Almost  a
dictiitor,  518.  I'aramount  in  the  SUites'
councils,  iii,  2.  Class  of  which  he  was  the
type,  28.  Kxcluded  from  the  Stite  coun-
cil, 32.  What  he  was  not,  178.  His
exertions  to  preserve  the  protestiint
league,  442,  443.  His  mission  to  France
for  the  same  object,  446-456.  A  parting
kiss  to  a  king's  nii>trrss,  456.  On  to
England,  ibid.  His  conferences  with
Elizabeth,  45^-463.  His  second  mission
to  England  and  its  result,  464-467.  A
Freneh  envoy's  report  of  him.  563.  Ruling
spirit  in  the  proposed  invjision  of  Flan-
ders, iv,  4. -15.  Probable  starting-point  of
the  alienation  between  him  aiKl  .Maurice,
52,  53.  Their  various  differences  and
alleged  quarrels,  216.  238.  370.  462.  466.
472.  Their  reconciliation,  476.  Renewed
hatred  on  the  part  of  Maurice,  504.  S^-nt
to  Enj,'land  on  James's  accession,  128.
His  sih'ech  to  the  king,  138.  Interviews
•with  IX'  Rosny:  counsels  and  question-
ings of  the  latter,  147-149.  156-159.  Des-
pondinu',  206.  Trying  his  hand  in  the
art  of  diplomatic  deception,  267-269.
Region  in  which  he  was  onmipi)tent,  279.
Called  out  of  bed  to  an  Interview  with  a
Spanish  emiss;iry,  279.  Part  taken  by
bim  in  proceedings  and  conferences  thence
arising,  and  generally  in  regard  to  peace
negotiations,  2>^2-2><4.  287-2?<9.  292.  293.
356-360.  36  ^.  366-370.  376.  378.  382-3S5.
397.  402-405.  406  note.  410.  413-415.
418.  419.  428.  449.  450.  456.  467.  Master
of  the  field,  473.  The  populace  inflamed
against  him.  443.  Money-pift  sent  to
him  by  France:  his  justitication  of  his
acceptance  of  it.  443.  444.  Direction
tiiken  by  his  ambition:  his  aspirations
and  beliefs.  445-447.  Anonymous  ca-
lumnica  against  him,  463. Their  effect;

his  resignation  of,  and  recall  to  his  office,
464-467.  A  vigorous  vote  entirely  duo
to  him,  478.  His  gratitude  for  the  result
arrived  at,  485.  Theological  odium  in-
curred by  him,  498,  505.  508.  Change  in
his  views  relative  to  sovereij^nty,  504.
Form  of  government  advocatea  by  him,
505.  506.  508.  Practical  ruler  of  the  Re-
public, 524.  See  i,  288.  ii,  120.  130.  132.
133.  134.  159.  204.  212.  310.  318.  332.  .331.
337.  387-3^9.  392.  524.  iii,  2.  14.  163.  436.
iv,  47.  205.  249.  342.  351.  362.  422.  436.
455.  495.

Oldenzaal,  captured  by  Spinola,  Iv,  218.
OosTBUK<;,  Maurice's  advance  towards,  iv,

190.  Spinola's  successful  movement,  197.
Oksoy-,  surrender  of  the  "  Cockfeathers  "  at,

iii,  547.

Ortkl,  Joachim,  Dutch  envoy  in  England,
his  qualifications  lor  his  nji.-siou,  i,  274.
His  conferences  with  the  English  minis-
ters and  their  queen,  274-2><0.  2m1.  282.

286.  296.  His  question  and  her  answer,
2s4. Sound  advice  bent  home  by  bim,

287.  Set  to  watch  in  London :  no  fa-
vourite of  I>eice>ter  s,  11,  70,  71.  Set  i,  423
note,  ii,  71  note  1.  244.

OsTKND,  enthusiasm  for  an  Engli.<h  alli-
ance at,  i,  71  note.  Surprised  by  the
Spaniards,  178.  Their  defeat.  178.  Re-
commendation suggested  by  Elizabeth's
fears,  ii,  330.  Parma  and  his  spy  in-
specting th«  fortltications,  342.  313.  368,
369.  Why  an  imporUmt  position,  344.
English  anxieties  al>mt  the  place,  413
iii,  252.  Sale  at  present,  253.  Con>UU  r-
ations  and  movements  apropos  of  an  in-
vasion of  Flanders,  iv,  3.  9.  Assembly
of  the  States-General  here,  9.  13.  Dis-
maying intelligence,  14.  15.  Fugitive*
from  Nleuport.  19.  Thanksgiving  after
the  XieujKJit  victory,  41.  43.  l)ep;irture
of  the  States-General,  46.  Aspect  of  the
place  in  the  sixteenth  century,  57,  58.
its  population  ami  defence's,  natural  and
artificial,  5>s.  60.  Formal  commencement
of  the  famous  siege,  60.  Number  and
nationalities  of  the  defending  forces,  6i».
interest  e.xcited:  congregation  of  adven-
tr.rers,  62,  63.  Character  of  Vere,  the
States'  commander,  65.  ComjKJsitlon  of
the  English  contingent,  65.  Plans  and
appliances  of  the  besieger:  his  "cau-
S{»ges,"  66,  67.  Plentifulness  in  the  com-
missariat of  the  besieged,  68.  109.  A
princess  cannoneer,  68.  Weight  of,  and
work  done  by  the  ordnance,  69.  Slaugh-
ter of  noUibilitles  and  nobodies  by  war,
69,  70.  85.  108,  109.  Deaths  by  p^-sti-
lence,  71.  Fire  and  water  at  the  I'orcu-
pine  fort,  71,  72.  Vere's  questionable
btratagem  pending  the  arrival  of  rein-
forcements, 72-si.  AssiUilt  and  repulse
of  the  enemy,  82-87.  Forts  carried  by
the  Spaniards,  111-113.  Comparative  rest
after  two  years'  siege :  Auditor  Flemlnii'a
diary,  Uh,  119.  Appeals  for  help  to  thr»
English  king  and  the  French  ambassador,

506

OTHEMAN.

INDEX.

PARMA.

133.  148.  Cecil's  estimate  of  the  place,
146,  147.  The  enemy's  new  commander-
in-chief;  his  antecedents  and  qualifica-
tions, 169-172.  Monster  devices  harm-
less of  result,  172, 173.  Fate  of  successive
governors  of  the  city.  176.  181.  183.  Ope-
rations of  the  enemy :  a  surprise  for
them,  178-181.  The  citadel  of  Little
Troy,  182-185.  Impediment  to  the  con-
struction of  new  earthworks,  182.  Gra-
dual encroachments  of  the  enemy,  184.
Thanksgivings  of  the  besieged,  185.  199.
A  substitute  for  Ostend,  189.  196.  199.
The  enemy  in  i)ossession:  departure  of
the  besieged,  200-202.  Barrenness  of  the
trophies  left  behind,  210.  See  17.  18.  21.
23.  26.  157.  160.  186.  197.

Otheman  (Robert  Dale),  Leicester's  eaves-
dropper-in-chief and  secretary,  reporting
Dutch  gossip  to  his  master,  il,  129.  131.
133.  Who  was  he  133,  134.  A  bit  of
scandal  set  afloat  by  him  and  its  conse-
quences, 135-138.  178.

OuDKNBURG  fort,  captured  by  the  States'
troops,  iv,  9,  10.  Attacked  and  carried
by  the  Spaniards,  13-15.

OvERiNG,  Hugh,  foiled  in  his  purpose,  ii,  159.

OvERSTEiN,  ii,  35.  134.

OvERYSsEL,  one  of  the  seven  United  Pro-
vinces, hostile  forces  in,  iv,  241.  Its
representative  at  the  peace  negotiations,
402.  Creed  of  most  of  its  people,  438.
Its  contribution  to  the  States'  revenue,
extent,  and  population,  523.

Oxford,  Lord,  his  quarrel  with  Sidney,  i,
340,  341.

Pacceit,  Don  Pedro  (killed  at  Dendermonde),
s:-nds  his  ghost  to  head  his  old  regiment,
i,  211.

Paget,  Charles,  on  Leicester's  animosity
towards  ]Mary  Stuart,  i,  349.

Pallavicini's  attempt  upon  Parma's  loy-
alty, ii,  511,  512.  Philip's  suggestion,  512.

Papal  bulls,  a  royal  trader  in,  iii,  201.

Papists,  see  Roman  Catholics.

Paris,  its  population  and  importance,  circa
1580,  i,  51.  its  condition  under  the
influence  of  the  League,  ii,  401.  403-409.
501,  502.  529.  530,  531.  iii,  44.  229.  Com-
mencement of  the  siege,  iii.  56.  Famine
and  its  horrors,  57-62.  League  deputa-
tion to  Henry  IV,  62-65.  Philip's  orders
to  Farnese,  and  steps  of  the  latter  to
relieve  the  city,  69-74.  Effect  of  the
seizure  of  Lagny,  77,  78.  Henry's  at-
tempted escalade,  80,  81  note.  The  city
again  in  danger,  86.  Acts  of  the  sixteen
tyrants,  119-121.  Entry  of  Henry  :  rap-
ture of  the  citizens,  231-233.  Rejoicing  at
the  surrender  of  Sluys,  iv,  209.  Population
(1607),  345  note. See  iii,  82.  83.  iv,  135.

Parker's  error  at  Turnhout,  iii,  405.

Parma,  Alexander  Farnese,  prince  of,  his
offers  to  the  Netherland  States  after  the
murder  of  William  the  Silent,  i,  17,  18.
His  military  forces;  policy  pursued  l)y
him,  19. His  successes  in  Flanders,  20.

His  design  upon  Antwerp,  22.  Perplexed
by  his  master's  parsimony  and  hesitation,
85.  His  real  share  in  the  truce  of  Cam-
bray,  and  trouble  connected  with  it,  96.
Sufferings  and  desertions  of  his  troops
through  want  of  supplies,  107.  165.
Giving  his  friends  a  lesson  in  dissimula-
tion, 109.  His  feelings  on  learning  of
the  forniation  of  the  League :  how  he
kept  the  secret,  110,  111.  His  genius  for
military  work,  130.  Preparing  for  the
siege  of  Antwerp  :  difficuliies  in  his  way,

132.  Personal  description  of  him,  132,

133.  His  scheme  for  the  reduction  of
Flanders  and  Brabant,  133.  Progress
made :  stain  from  which  his  fame  is  free,
133,  134.  Effect  of  his  tamperings  with
Treslong,  143.  Working  whilst  his  an-
tagonists wrangled,  147.  His  reproof  to
Richebourg  for  killing  Pettin,  148,  149.
Ti-ansformation  effected  by  him  upon  the
site  chosen  for  his  headquarters:  perma-
nently useful  piece  of  work  left  by  him,
150,  151.  Mutilations  practised  by  his
troops  upon  the  crews  of  captured
"blockade  runners,"  152.  Acceleration
of  his  schemes  by  the  folly  of  the  Ant-
werpers,  152,  153.  155.  At  work  upon
his  bridge,  154.  Incredulity  of  the  Ant-
werpers  as  to  its  practicability,  156.  In
doubt  as  to  results,  and  in  the  dark  as.to
his  master's  schemes,  159.  His  devotion
to  his  church,  159,  160.  Result  of  his
attempts  to  subdue  the  Antwerpers  by
arguments  and  promises,  160-163.  Ad-
mirable elements  in  his  character,  163.
Reporting  progress  to  his  master,  164, 165.
His  repeated  appeals  relative  to  his  im-
minent needs  and  the  destitution  of  his
troops,  164.  166.  172.  174.  175.  Obstacles
to  his  bridge-building :  completion  of  the
great  work,  171,  172.  Its  plan,  construc-
tion, protecting  outworks,  &c. ;  Julius
Caisar  outdone,  172-175.  His  treatment
of  an  Antwerp  spy  sent  to  pry  into  his
work,  176.  His  attempt  upon  Ostend
and  summary  disposal  of  the  chief  cause
of  its  failure,  178.  Loses  Liefkenshoek :
his  prompt  action  thereon,  179,  180.  An
infernal  machine  sent  against  his  bridge  :
its  destructive  effects,  182-188.  His  own
marvellous  escape,  187.  190.  Again  at
work  to  repair  the  damage :  deploring  the
loss  of  his  officers,  190-191.  Modestly
touching  on  his  own  perils,  192.  Fears
excited  in  his  men  by  the  "  demon  fire-
ships  "  :  exhausting  nature  of  their  toils,
193.  197.  His  labours  in  fortifying  the
Kowenstyn,  196,  197.  His  report  of
the  result  of  the  first  attempt  to  wrest
the  Kowenstyn  from  him,  199.  Defeat
of  his  troops  on  the  second  attack:  his
eulogium  on  the  daring  of  his  opponents,
200-204.  Resolution  taken  by  his  officers
to  regain  the  dyke :  effect  of  his  oppor-
tune appearance  among  them,  205-209.
Exulting  in  his  triumph,  212,  213.  Ho-
nour paid by  him to  the  wounded

PAKMA.

INDEX.

PARMA.

567

Toralva:  his  reports  and  recommenda-
tions to  his  king,  213,  214.  216.  La
Koue's  counsel  to  him,  221.  Exchange
of  amenities  between  himself  and  the
Antwerpers,  223.  Proposes  a  secret
interview  with  Sainte  Aldegonde:  cor-
respondence thereon,  225-229.  Inter-
views had  :  impression  made  by  each  on
the  other,  230-238.  His  private  views  as
to  the  necessity  lor  capitulating  with  the
Antwerpers,  239.  His  declaration  on
finding  the  real  state  of  things  in  the  city,
240.  Fact  redounding  to  his  honour,  241.
Extravagant  demonstrations  on  his  tri-
umphal entry  into  Antwerp:  sylvan
fete  uix»n  his  Scheldt  bridge,  245-247.
Work  on  which  he  now  set  himself,  247,
24«.  Tenor  of  his  master's  thanks  to
him,  249.  On  the  attitude  of  Holland
towards  Sainte  Aldegonde,  252-254.  I'he
one  suspicions  allusion  to  the  latter  in
his  letters,  269  note.  Frightening  Sir
John  Noiris,  334.  How  re;:arded  by
Queen  Elizabeth  :  plot  against  him  repu-
diated by  her,  337.  Corresp<inding  with
his  king  on  the  invasion  of  England,  356.
357.  A  queen  and  a  crown  set  apart  for
him,  358.  359.  SUUe  of  things  to  put  him
"  in  great  jollity,"  414.  His  bold  remon-
strances with  Pliilip  on  the  state  of  bis
troops,  461,  462.  Sinnilating  negotiations
for  pciice :  his  agents  and  tools,  4  63-46S.
Jieporting  progress  to  his  miuiter :  his
duplicity,  469.  472-4  74.  490.  Effect  of
Drake's  victories  on  him :  in  doubt  alx^ut
France;  his  troops  still  in  Siid  plight,
475-477.  491.  Encouraging  reportii  to
him  from  his  agent  in  England,  47f<-4H0.
Secret  letter  from  Eliza]x?th  to  him :  bis
instructions  to  hisagentand  reply  to  her,
4  x1,  4S2.  His  work  done  for  him  by  Eng-
lisli  statesmen,  491.  Heads  of  his  plan  for
a  successful  invjxsion  of  England,  49H-503.
Netherlands  territory  in  his  hands,  ii,  1,  2.
His  treatment  of  Ernest  of  Bavaria,  4.
His  estimate  of  Schenk.  5,  6.  His  att^lck
upon  (Jrave,  repulse,  and  subseciuent  vic-
tory, 9-14.  16-21.  Attack  on.  capture
and  sack  of  Neusz,  24-30.  What  he
paiiml  by  it,  31.  Determines  to  relieve
Zutphen  :  Bridging  over  the  Rhine:  his
plans,  42-44.  Kesult  of  his  enterprise,  51.
His  dealings  with  Leicester's  German
levies,  54,  55.  His  shee  t  anchor.  62.  His
understanding  with  Howland  York,  157.
Successes  due  to  the  disloyalty  of  his
foes,  16s.  Gelder  lx?trayed  into  his  hands,
169,  170.  On  the  execution  of  Queen  of
Scots,  1S3.  His  demonstration  against
Sluys,  247-250.  Step  forced  upon  him
by  the  enemy,  253.  Once  more  a  bridge-
builder,  257.  Terms  granted  by  him  on
Ciipitulation,  260.  His  compliments  to
two  English  captains,  260.  Attitude  of
Elizabeth  towards  him,  270.  279.  His
a.- su ranees  to  her  and  dally ings  with  her
g.  -l>'tween,  279-2s4.  286.  Effect  of  Eng-
ii;  b  reliance  on  his  bond  fides,  2b5,  286.

2S7.  329.  3S6.  Convinced  that  Elizabeth
was  as  false  as  himself,  279.  290.  291.  His
plottings  against  England  and  France :
hoodwinking  Denmark :  secret  corre-
spondence with  his  king,  &c,  288.  297.
What  his  master  expected  him  to
achieve,  298-303.  His  difficulties  and
uncourtly  language  to  Philip:  what  he
was  actually  doing.  304-306.  One  Eng-
lishman awake  to  his  sciiemes:  English
coirespondents  reporting  thereon,  306,
307.  307  vote.  Effect  of  a  ^uccessful  en-
terprise of  Schenk  upon  his  equanimity,
330.  400.  Visited  by  the  English  envov.
Dr.  Dale,  348,  349.  370,  371.  372.  His
estimate  of  Dale,  354.  His  professions  of
loyalty  to  Elizabeth.  349,  350.  Real
object  of  his  negotiations,  355.  Achiev-
ing it  in  his  interviews  with  Dr.  Rogers
the  envoj',  356-365.  Playing  the  spy  at
Ostend,  368,  369.  His  falsehoods  in  re-
ference to  Allen's  pamphlet  and  the
JVpe's  bull  against  Elizabeth.  383-386.
Apprehensive  ab<tut  France,  401.  Direc-
tions in  which  his  intentions  were  thought
to  lie,  413.  Extent  of  his  preparations  for
invading  England,  432.  His  army,  its
complement  and  cost,  433.  Plan  of  co-
operation between  himself  and  the  Ar-
mada: a  strange  omi.s.siun  and  trouble-
some doubts,  444-446.  459.463.  Su.'ipiciuns
and  apprehensions  Ixgot  of  susipense,
465.  473.  Like  "a  bear  roblxxl  of  her
whelps,"  482.  His  arrangements  brought
to  nonght :  effect  of  his  master's  dulness,
4H3-485.  Advancing  ujwn  Bergen-op-
Z<K»m,  509.  510.  (Jrimstones  successful
trick  upon  Llm,  513,  514.  In  ignomi-
nious liight,  515.  I'allavicini's  attempt
to  seduce  him:  its  effect  upon  him,  511-
513.  Ciertruydenlxrg  lx'traye<l  to  him,
516-518.  Pi»  cruiting  his  he.ilth  at  Siw :
pre|^ring  for  a  tussle  ^ith  Henry  of
Navarre,  519.  533.
Concentrating  his  forces  on  the  French
frontier,  ili,  1,  2.  5.  47.  At  his  wits*
end:  his  appeals  and  complaints  to
Philip.  41.  64.  68,  69.  129.  Garrotting
and  hanging  his  veterans,  67.  69.  His
caliminiators  and  their  stories,  67.  193-
195.  214  note.  His  complaints  against
tliem,  196,  197.  aian  hing  to  the  relief
of  Paris,  70,  71.  Comparison  between
him  and  Henry  IV.  73.  Their  opposite
qualities,  134.  Advancing  to  action  :  his
capture  of  Lagny  and  n  llef  of  Pari.-*,
76-78.  Occasions  when  he  and  Henry
were  on  each  other's  skirts,  73.  81.  o6.
133,  134.  His  reception  at  Paris,  82.
His  return  to  the  Netherlands:  speedy
reversal  of  his  late  French  conquests,
84-86.  His  move  into  Gelderland  and
abortive  attack  on  Fort  Knodsenburg,
105-107.  His  adroit  retreat  and  comfort-
ing words  to  the  Nymegeners,  107,  108.
His  treatment  of  his  defeated  captain  at
Hulst.  109.  To  the  rescue  of"K<iuen.
130-132.136.  Yielding  against  his  better

568

PARRY.

INDEX.

rHiLip.

judgment,  136.  JMeltiiig  away  of  his
army,  137.  Succeeds  in  relieving  Rouen  :
severely  wounded,  138.  139.  In  a  dan-
gerous position:  his  skilful  escape  from
it,  141-143.  Results  of  his  movements
to  Philip  and  the  League,  145.  His  pro-
bable reflections,  145,  14  6.  His  reports
to  Philip  of  the  intrigues  of  the  League
chiefs  and  the  condition  of  France,  199-
204.  Sends  some  saintly  relics  to  his
master,  205.  Plot  of  Philip  for  his
destruction,  206-209.  His  end  approach-
ing, 21 0-21 2.  His  death,  2 1 2,  2 1 3.  See
ii,  37.  38.  63.  171.  190.  270.  330.  348.412.
428.  439.  440.  501.  504.  iii,  94.  97.  98.

Parry,  William,  the  would-be  assassin  of
Queen  Elizabeth,  his  timely  discovery
against  himself,  i,  2.

Parsons,  the  "green-coated  Jesuit,"  his
monstrous  accusations  against  Leicester,

i,  347.

Patton,  Aristotle,  ii,  88.  Gratifying  his
hate,  his  greed  and  his  love  all  at  once,
169-171.  Flying  from  his  old  enemy,  521.

Paul  V,  Pope,  doing  his  worst  against  the
Republic,  iv,  341.  343.  His  agent  at  the
French  court,  st  e  Barberini.

Peace  from  an  upholstering  point  of  view,

ii,  349.

Pelbes,  Count  of,  his  large  winnings  from
Philip  Hi,  iv,  330.

Pelham,  Sir  William,  recommended  for
military  command  by  Leicester,  i,  415.
417.  Out  of  favour  with  the  queen:
Leicester's  generosity  towards  him,  ii,
38  note.  His  narrow  escape  at  Doesburg,
39.  Effect  of  his  example  on  Sidney :  his
declaration  at  Sidney's  death,  48.  50.
His  insulting  behaviour  to  Edward  Nor-
ris  at  a  supper  party,  87-90.  Bringing  the
Deventer  magistrates  to  book,  145,  146.

Perez,  Antonio,  his  offence  against  Philip
and  its  expiation,  iii,  476,  477.  501.

Pesoarengfs,  Cosmo  de,  Leicestrian  con-
spirator at  Leyden :  his  confession,  ii,
317-319. His  fate,  321.

Pettin,  Colonel  John,  and  his  troops  sur-
prised at  Liefkenshoek:  wholesale  slaugh-
ter of  the  latter,  i,  148.  Killed  in  cold
blood  by  his  captor,  14s,  149.

PiiiLFP  II,  of  Spain.  His  personal  appear-
ance, habits,  &c,  i,  2.  His  system ;  his
reniark  on  the  murder  of  William  the
Silent,  3.  Effect  of  increasing  years  on
his  ambition  ;  his  possessions,  actual  and
contemplated,  4.  His  epoch  and  its
celebrities :  light  in  which  he  is  to  be
judged,  5,  6.  Point  on  which  he  never
wavered,  9-18.  Accomplice  in  the  St.
Bartholomew  massacre,  15.  Presents
sent  to  him  from  Turkey,  29.  His  spy
and  confederate  in  France,  42.  His
tempting  offers  to  Henry  of  Navarre,  47.
Failure  of  his  efforts  to  seize  Don  An-
tonio, 64.  Project  of  marriage  between
him  and  the  dowager  of  France :  Sir  E.
Stattbrd's  aspirations  thereon,  66.  A
glutton  of  time  ;  his  motto  in  that  re-

gard. 85.  Why  he  authorised  the  truce
of  Cambray,  96.  His  conquest  of  Portu-
gal :  his  ambassador's  conferences  on
Catherine  de  Medici's  claim  to  its  crown,
96-101.  A  complication  of  villany  wor-
thy of  his  admiration :  his  view  of  the
French  king's  proposed  invasion  of  Eng-
land, 102.  Fomenting  civil  war  in
France  :  subsidizing  the  Guises,  106,  107.
Concludes  a  secret  treaty  (Holy  League)
with  them,  108.  His  material  pledge
towards  its  fulhlment  and  industry  in
the  business,  109.  Confides  the  scheme
to  Pai  ma ;  dissimulation  of  the  latter  on
his  behalf,  110.  His  advice  and  admoni-
tions to  the  Guises,  111,  112.  His  am-
bassador's conference  and  report  to  him
on  a  proposed  joint  invasion  of  England,
118-123.  Again  urgently  appealed  to  by
Parma  for  supplies,  164,  165.  Implored
to  do  what  he  was  good  at  doing,  195.
Inability  of  Sainte  Aldegonde  to  fathom
the  depths  of  his  character,  233.  245.
Elevation  of  his  escutcheon  in  Antwerp,
241.  His  suspicions  of  Sainte  Aldegonde,
243.  Treatment  towards  heretics  insisted
on  by  him:  mission  to  which  he  deemed
himself  born,  243-245.  His  emotion  on
receiving  news  of  the  fall  of  Antwerp,
249,  250.  Commissioning  Parma  to  bid
for  Sainte  Aldegonde's  services,  253.  His
designs  against  Elizabeth's  life,  289.  His
stipendiaries  and  his  master,  ibid.  Eliza-
beth's expressions  regarding  him,  and
virtual  declaration  of  u  ar  against  him,
310-312.  335-338.  Maturing  "his  schemes
for  invading  England;  his  subsequent
projects  if  successful,  356-359.  365.  His
intended  armada  how  regarded  by  the
Hollanders;  an  English  expedition  not
to  his  liking,  366.  A  source  of  joy  to
him,  463.  His  reason  for  diverting  part
of  his  remittances  to  Parma,  477.  Pecu-
liarities of  his  character,  477, 478.  Insist-
ing on  impossible  conditions  :  his  injunc-
tion to  Parma,  490.  Sole  p  urpose  of  his
secret  intrigues,  492.  497.  His  fixed
purpose  relative  to  England  and  EUza-
beth,  ii,  60.  J  28.  A  peep  into  bis  secret
cabinet :  in  the  centre  of  his  web,  287,
288.  Corresponding  and  taking  counsel
with  Parma,  289-291.  293-298.  Calcu-
lating and  anticipating :  his  extravagant
self-deceptions,  299-302.  440.  Rated  and
his  schemes  denounced  by  Parma,  304-
305.  441.  Office  assigned  to  him  by  the
pope's  bull,  379,  383.  Progress  of  his
schemes  in  France,  401,  402.  409.  His
midnight  council :  his  puerile  conceits,
435-438.  Incredulity  of  statesmen  and
the  Pope  as  to  the  reality  of  his  invasion
scheme,  438,  439.  His  armada  at  sea  :  its
vicissitudes  and  its  fate,  440-481.  [See
Armada.]  Clinging  to  false, hopes:  how
he  received  the  news  of  his  discomfiture,
504-508.  Setting  the  bishops  to  work,
508.  Looking  after  French  affairs,  531,
His  pretensions  and  designs  relative  to

PHILIP.

INDEX.

PORTrGAL.

5G9

France  and  its  crown:  iii.  1.  64.  65.  66.
121-123.  17!),  ISO.  162,  183.  186-192.  198-
201.  202.  234.  iv,  317.  342.  34.-!.  His
attempts  to  re-open  peace  negotiations
with  the  Netherlands:  obstacles  in  the
way,  iii,  34-36.  Gi  ound  of  his  claims  to
France,  England,  and  Scotland,  41.  No
friendship  between  him  and  Pope  Sixtus,  i
57,  58.  82.  Listening  to  calumnies  and
plotting  against  Parma,  67.  193-196.  206-
210.  212.  213  note.  Parma's  appeals  and
complaints  to  him,  6-^,  69,  70.  195-197.
A  scheme  he  was  anxious  to  circumvent,
82.  Stiitistics  of  the  army  provided  by
bim  for  France,  131  note.  A  piece  of  his
system  for  conquering  the  world,  151.
Drift  of  his  policy  for  twenty-two  years,
177.  His  alleged  wish  to  marry  his  own
daughter,  183.  His  other  intentions  re-
lative to  the  bestowal  of  her  hand,  184.
[See  Clara  Isabella.]  His  threat  against
Clement  VllI,  186.  Sources  of  wealth
to  him :  his  profit  on  the  sale  of  papal
bulls,  201,  202.  Jesuit  Odo's  counsel  to
him  for  tiie  conque.st  of  France,  216,  217.
His  notable  plans  for  invading  England,
276,  277.  396.  His  assassination  depart-
ment, and  agents  therein  and  their  fate,
278-2'=i4.  War  declared  against  him  by
Henry:  shai)e  taken  by  his  spite  against
the  latter,  299,  300.  Arrangement  of
terms  of  peace  between  them.  46H-471.
Hi8  treatment  of.  and  infamous  proposal
to,  Philip  William  of  Nassau,  334,  335.
Destruction  of  his  fleet  at.  and  s.u  k  of,
Cadiz,  362-365.  His  schemes  relative  to
Germany,  390-392.  His  new  Armada
against  England,  and  its  fate,  394,  395.
His  public  repudiation  of  his  debts,  and
disasters  jn-oduced  thereby,  4)4-416.  429.
Text  of  his  proclamation,  414,  415  note.
His  last  ilhieiss,  funeral  preparations,
confession,  and  deatii,  473-480.  Ileview
of  his  reign,  481-510.  An  apt  exponent
of  his  own  idea  of  kingcraft,  iv,  308.  One
of  his  golden  rules,  365.  See  ii,  4.  15.
»7.  107.  235.  351.  309.  372.  414.  512.  iii,
47.  2S«s-291.  548.  iv,  320.  327.  328.372.
See  also  Parma.  Spain.
Philii',  Inlante,  afterwards  Philip  III,  king
of  Spain,  iii,  471.  His  marriage,  472.
His  instiurtions  from,  and  Iiust  interview
with,  his  dying  father,  476-480.  A  cipher
in  his  own  court,  iv,  128.  308.  Head  and
front  of  the  rons])iracy  against  France  and
its  king,  139.  More  dangtTous  to  rabbits
than  to  generals,  224.  Peace  concluded  by
King  James  with  him,  231.  Its  effect,  260,
note  3.  Origin  and  extent  of  Leraia's
power  over  him,  320-326.  His  declara-
tion on  l)ocoming  king,  327.  His  appear-
ance, personal  characteristics,  amu^e-
ments,  &c,  329,  330.  Himself  a  satire
on  kingship,  331.  A  special  dogma  in  Ids
religious  creed,  332.  His  domestic  life,
332-334.  One  of  his  fathers  golden
niles  comprehended  by  him.  365.  Ka-
tificatioQ  uf  peace  in  his  name,  375.

His  ultimatum  with  the  Republic  in
regard  to  religion  and  the  Indies,  425-
427.  'i55,  456.  Representations  under
which  his  consent  to  the  treaty  was
obtained,  476,  477.  Secret  and  special
treaty  with  the  Republic  exacted  from
him,  483.  502. See  Lerma.  Spain.

Philip,  Count  of  Nassau,  iii,  140.  153.
Desperate  fighter,  mighty  drinker,  247.
His  after-dinner  adventures,  247.  257,
258.  His  command  on  the  French
frontier,  296.  300.  His  last  deed  of
daring  and  death,  319-321.  iv,  8.

Philip  William,  Prince  of  Orange,  eldest
son  of  William  the  Silent,  kidnapped
and  HispanioUzed,  i,  14.  iii.  2>i2.  His
signal  revenge  upon  a  slanderer  of  hus
father,  i,  14.  iii,  335.  His  brother's
reque^t  to  England  regarding  him,  i,  324.
His  return  to  the  Netherlands:  effect  of
his  Spanish  training,  iii,  334,  335.  Philip
of  Spain's  hop«  8  regarding  him,  335,  336.
His  intellectual  cilibre,  340.  Narrow
escape:  in  the  wrong  place,  352.  See
i,  2^5.

Pici'OLOMWi,  active  at  the  rescue  of  tlie
Kowenstyn,  i,  206.

PicKiH>c'KKTy  making  free  with  a  leamcil
foreigner,  i.  293.

PiMKXTKL,  |)on  Diego,  captiin  in  the  Ar-
mada, li.  443.  472. Fate  of  his  ship.  47a

PiUAciKS  of  English  mariners  on  the  Dutch,
Iii,  164-167  notes.  168.  172-175.  iv,  136.
137.  Dunkirk  pirates,  iii,  352,  353.  iv,  2,
55,  56.  214.  234.  235.

PiKON,  Colonel,  lax  in  his  discipline  at  a
critical  moment,  iv,  13.  A  l>fartr  of  bad
news,  14. Flight  of  his  cavalry,  19.

Pi.AcUE  ravjiges  in  I^indon.  i.  290.

Plancils.  Peter,  his  Calvinistic  intoleranco
and  services  in  the  Giuse  of  nautical
enterprise,  iii.  516.  His  theory  relative
to  an  arctic  pjissage  to  India,  518.  522.
527. ^V^  iv,  414.  417.

PLVMorTH  a  contributor  of  aid  against  the
Armada,  ii,  431.

PoisONKics  and  poison  plots  of  the  Eliza-
bethan era,  iii.  27S-284.  Victims,  real  of
BUpiX)Sed,  ii,  16"<.  iii,  m2.  185.  307.

Poland,  see  Dialyn.  Sigismuud.

PoLEY  the  spy,  I,  353.

Pope,  domiuions  assigned  to  Philip  II,  by
the,  i,  4.

PoPFis.  See  Clement.  Gregory.  Innocent.
Paul. Sixtus.  Urlxin.

PouTO  Carrero,  Captain,  killed  by  the
Sp;inish  mutin*  ers,  iii,  275.

Porto  Carrero,  Captain  Hernnn  Tello  de,
his  stratjigem  at  Ami>  ns.  iii.  409,  410.
KilK-d  at  the  und'-ing  of  his  work,  425.

PoKTO  Carrero,  Don  Pietro,  inquisitor-
general,  cashiered,  iv,  321.

Portugal,  pretenders  to  the  throne  of,  1,
64.  96.  [See  Antonio.  Catherine  de
Medici.]  Its  monopoly  at  the  tropics
contested  by  the  Dutch,  iv,  98.  122.  227.
Damage  done  to  Its  fleet  there,  99,  loO.
Mode  whereby  its  adventurers  obtained

670

POT.

INDEX.

RICHEBOURG.

and  kept  their  footing,  229-231.  Their
fulniinations  against,  and  expulsion  Irom
the  Moluccas  by,  the  Dutch,  231-233.
See  iv,  251.  388.

Pot  de  Rhodes,  Henry  the  Fourth's  banner-
man,  killed,  iii,  52.

PouLAiN,  Nicholas,  his  bold  offer  to  Henry
of  Valois,  ii,  404.

PowHATTAN,  "  emperor  of  Virginia,"  and
bis  daughter  Pocahontas,  iv,  276.

Prada's  reply  to  Friar  Neyen,  iv,  424.

Pkedestinatiox,  effect  of  the  doctrine  of,
iv,  508.

Prinsterer,  Groen  van,  service  rendered  to
Xetht-rlands  history  by,  iv,  48.

Proninck,  Gerard,  called  De  venter,  his
character  and  antecedents,  ii,  65.  Muni-
cipal office  conferred  on  him  by  Leicester,
65.  66.  112.  His  pernicious  counsels  to
Leicester  and  their  results,  113,  114  note.
130.  219-221,  225.

Prophecies,  a  hundred  years  before,  for
the  year  1588,  ii,  335.

Protestantism  and  Protestants,  under
Elizabeth,  ii,  276.  278.  Slaughters  by
Alva,  277.  Anxieties  and  suspicions  in
France  and  Germany  relative  to  Henry
the  Fourth's  movements,  iii,  287,  454.
Determination  of  the  party  in  France,
289.  Their  impenoing  tate  at  the  hands
of  the  League,  385.  Catholic  charges
against  them,  391.  Admiral  Mendoza's
d'^sign  against  them,  546.  Intrigues  of
Henry  iV  against  them,  iv,  348,  349.
See  iv,  165.  506. 507.  See,  also,  Calvinists.
Huguenots.

Pkuys,  Captain,  his  obstinacy  and  fate,  iii,
323.

PrRiTANS,  hatred  of  James  I  for  the,  iv,
132.  Contempt  for  human  ills  inspired
by  their  belief,  508.

QUINTUPLICAT'ONS,  ii,  376.
QuiROGA,  Cardinal  of  Toledo,  ii,  436.

Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  his  conduct  on  Lei-

.  cester's  reinstatement  in  Elizabeth's
favour,  i,  433,  434.  Sample  of  his  style
in  writing  of  her,  iii,  162  note.  Helping
to  organize  the  expedition  against  Spain,
359,  360.  Spanish  way  of  spelling  his
name,  359  note.  393  note.

Raxuccio,  Prince,  son  of  Parma,  iii,  108.
109.  131.  At  the  relief  of  Rouen,  140.
142,  143. Ste  209.

Ratisbok,  chief  work  of  the  Diet  at,  iii,
297. Its  cost,  298.

Recalde,  Juan  Martinez  de,  Spanish  ad-
miral, ii,  442.

Reformation,  how  kept  out  of  Spain,  iv,
307.

Reingault,  Jacques,  one  of  Leicester's
three  counsellors,  his  antecedents,  ii,  64.
His  finance  chamber :  Placed  over  Paul
Buys,  67.  His  mischief-making,  70.
J)efended  by  Leicester,  101.  Result  of
efforts  made  to  save  him :  his  alter  life,
101,  102  noU.

Religious  enthusiasm,  miseries  caused  by,
iii,  42.

Renaud,  popular  Paris  advocate,  hanged,
iii,  60.

Reniohon,  priest  and  schoolmt^ster,  hired
to  kill  Maurice,  his  plan  and  his  fate,  iii,
281-282.  Envoy  Gilpin's  report  of  him,
282  note.

Renneberg,  Count,  the  betrayer  of  Gron-
ingen,  iii,  197.  255.  His  attempt  upon
Steenwyck,  149.

Renty,  Marquis  of,  his  command  at  the
relief  of  Paris,  iii,  71.  76.  Too  strong
for  Henry  IV,  78.

Reyd,  Everard,  secretary  to  Lewis  William
of  Nassau,  iv,  4.  527.

Rheims  and  its  Holy  Bottle,  iii,  229.

Rheinberg  city,  ii,  4.  Parma's  dealings
with  it,  31.  43.  Schenk  taking  it  in
hand,  169.  520.  Invested  by  and  surren-
dered to  Maurice,  iii,  428.  Recaptured
by  the  Spaniards.  547.  Again  besieged
and  taken  by  Maurice,  iv,  61,  62.  Once
more  a  bone  of  contention,  244.  Taken
by  the  Spaniards,  246.

Rhetelois,  Prince,  a  commander  at  Cam-
bray,  iii,  328.  Sarcastic  allusion  to  him
and  his  troops,  329.

Rhine,  the,  ii,  2.  Bridged  over  by  Parma,
43. Opened  by  Maurice,  iii,  429.

RiBERA,  John,  archbishop  of  Valencias,
head  of  the  scheme  for  driving  the
Moors  from  Spain,  iv,  311.  His  charge
against  them,  312.

RiCHARDOT,  president  of  Artois,  proposing
a  secret  interview  between  Parma  and
Sainte  Aldegunde :  correspondence  there-
on, i,  225-229. Giving  La  Motte  his  cue,

467.  Condition  he  styled  "  both  hard
and  soft,"  470.  Can't  see  how  England
can  be  odiastized,  470.  Commissioner  to
meet  the  envoys  sent  from  England,  ii,
340.  341.  346.  349.  354.  365.  370.  At-
tempts to  browbeat  them,  371.  Ex-
changing quintuplications  with  them,
376.  Elizabeth's  distrust  of  him,  iii,  441.
His  return  of  the  compliment,  445.
Fencings  between  himself  and  Villeroy,

468,  469.  Intriguing  with  Cecil,  iv,  187.
His  secret  emissary  to  the  States,  27.9.
Envoy  for  Spain  in  the  negotiations  for
peace,  383.  396.  399.  Passing  a  compli-
ment, 401.  Answering  a  question,  403.
Protesting  against  republican  plain  speak
ing,  404.  Effective  in  his  part,  407.
Losing  his  temper,  415.  Beginning  to
cry,  418.  End  desired  by  himself  and
colleagues,  432.  A  farewell  speech  and  a
prediction,  449,  450.  A  truth  known  to
himself  and  Jeannin,  452.  Discovery
and  publication  of  his  secret  instructions:
effect  produced  thereby,  452-455.  Trick
put  upon  him  by  Jeannin,  480.  Con-
soling himself  with  quibbles;  pretending
ignorance,  485,  486.  See  ii,  372.  377.  iv,
477.  479.

Richebourg  and  Roubaix,  Robert  de  INIelun,
Marquis  of  (formerly  Viscount  of  Ghent),

RICHELIEU.

INDEX.

SAIXTE.

571

his  successful  assault  on  Lief  kenshoek,  i,  |
14;^. Base  murder  committed  by  him,  ;
and  its  baser  motives,  148,  149.  Im-
IKjitant  work  delegated  to  liim;  his  fitness  !
tor  it,  157,  158. Kille-d  by  an  infernal
machine,  186. Excellences  and  defects
in  his  cliaracter:  his  value  to  Parma,
191.  192.

RiCHELiKU,  Cardinal,  his  remark  on  an
untoward  incident,  iv,  144.  His  verdict
on  tlie  expulsion  of  the  Moors  from
Spain,  313.

RiGAUT,  commandant  at  Corbeil,  killed,  iii,
82.

Rr"\'A.s,  Spanish  general  at  Nieuport,  iv,  3.
15. Before  Ostend,  90.  197.

ROBLES,  Seigneur  de  Billy,  Portuguese
officer  in  Parma's  army,  i,  184.  Killed
by  an  infernal  machine,  187.  Parma
dc'pl(»ring  his  death,  191.

Roa-^ART,  Amy,  i,  346.  Result  of  the  in-
vestigation into  the  cause  of  her  death,
348.  349.

RcwjEKs,  l)r  John,  English  envoy  to  treat
with  Parma,  ii,  340.  His  character,  356.
Jlis  own  opinion  of  the  effect  of  his
oratory  ui)on  Parma,  356.  Exchanges  of
magniloquence  b-tween  them,  357-363.
Rebuked  by  Elizabeth,  364.

Rohan,  Due  de,  iv,  249.

RoLLo  the  Dane,  hib  dream  and  its  conse-
quences, i,  343.

Roman  Catholics.  Number  of  their  priests
in  England  who  acknowledged  ElizalK?th
us  head  of  the  church,  i,  25.  Grounds
Avhereon  she  put  them  to  death,  26.
Causes  and  conse(|uences  of  her  persecu-
tion of  them,  122, 123.  ii,  276-278.  Animus
of  the  States  against  them :  reconciliation
imiKtssible,  i,  287,  288.  Their  machina-
tions against  Ix-ic'  ster,  354.  425.  Their

rosition under  James  1,  iv,  132,  133.
)ifficulties  regarding  them  in  the  nego-
tiations for  peace,  274.  284.  351.  371.  372.
37M.  417.  425,  426.  427.  436.  438.  453.455.
Point  gained  by  the  Republic,  4^4.  The
true  source  of  liberty  for  them,  4>6.
Jeannin's  appeal  for  them,  488-490.  505.
See  Inquisition.  Jesuits.
Rome, Philip's threat  against, iii,  218.
Merry-nuiking  over  Henry  the  Fourth's
absolution,  325.
RoNSOV,  Count  de,  slain,  iii,  315.
RooRDA,  Dutch  statesman,  ii,  212.
Ro.sNEs,  Savigny,  I\Iarshal  de,  iii,  313.  Base-
less accusation  again.st,  and  merit  due
to  him,  314. His  treachery  to  Henry,
and  peculiar  usefulness  to  the  Spaniards,
339. His prompt action  at  Calais,
346. Retaliating  for  a  breach  of  faith,
352.  Castles  seized  by  him,  370.  Killed,
372.

Ro.-;nv,  see  Sully.

lUtTTEunAM,  execution  of  pirates  at,  iv,  56.
234. A  prevailing  opinion,  235.

Rouen,  its  preservation  urged  on  Elizabeth,
iii,  116  note.  Be^ieged  by  Henry  IV^,
127-129. Parma  to  the  rescue,  130.  135,  |

I 136.  138. Success  of  his  mt»vement,  and
; relief  of  the  city,  139.  145.
j  Rudolph  J  I,  Emperor  of  Germany,  his
; hatred  of  Philip  II  of  Spain,  and  dread
of  the  Turk,  i,  29. Why  Sidney  Wiis
sent  to  his  court,  340. Value  set  by  him
on  Flushing,  343. Keply  of  the  States-
General  to  his  peace  suggestions,  iii,  34.
420. His  attitude  relative  to  Philip's
projects.  263,  264. His  empire  tottering,
298. His  dog-in-the-manger  tone  rela-
tive to  the  Infanta,  390.  Discrowning
scheme  of Philip against him,  392.
Laughed  at,  iv,  2(i3. Pausing  from  his
star-gazings  to  lecture  the  Statt-s :  their
reply,  394,  395. A  Spani>h  asj^urance,
407. Partially  discrowned  ;  humiliated,
499.  500.
Rue  besieged  by  Parma,  iii,  136.
RuHRORT,  Spinola's  head-quarters,  iv,  219.
Russell,  Sir  William,  ii,  45.  Laying  about
with  his  curtel-a\e,  4h. Weeping  over
Sidney,  60. Sending  reinforcem.  nts  to
Sluys,  249. On  Parma's  preparations,
307  note. See  206.  334.  421.
Ryp,  or  van  der  l{yj),  John  Comelisz,  Dutch
Arctic  navigator,  iii,  526. Parting  com-
pany with  his  colleagues,  529.  Surpri>ing
and  befriending  them,  539,  540.

SArNTE  Aldec.oxde.  Philip  de  Mamix,
Lord  of,  policy  favoured  by,  i,  71  note.
In  council  with  William  the  Silent  on
plans  for  defence  of  Antwerp,  135-137.
Accepts  the  burgoniiu^tership :  his  large
responsibilities  and  small  powers,  138,
His  theological  training,  intellectual  ver-
satility, soldierly  qualities,  and  i>ersonal
asp»  ct.  139-141.  Element  probably  want-
ing in  his  character,  142.  i^ignity  refu.-^
by  him :  result  of  his  efforts  to  carry  out
the  late  prince's  plans,  145-147.  His  hair
standing  on  end,  154.  ()cca.sion  of  his
failure  to  aipture  Panna's  fleet ;  his  '  Fly-
ing D.'vil.'  155.  Disiistrous  result  of  ono
of  his  schemes,  15f<,  159.  Direction  taken
by  his  fears  for  Antwerp,  163.  Waiting
the  result  of  Gianiljelli's  enterprise,  169.
His  rape  at  Jacobz<»t»n's  neglect  of  orders,
189.  His  jx)st  in  the  first  attack  on  the
Kowenstyn,  198.  His  dashing  conduct
in  the  8«'Cond  attack,  201.  His  grave
error,  and  its  fatal  consequences,  204,  205.
214,  215.  Thwarting  effect  of  municipal
jealousies  and  short->ighteUne.><s  ;  in.sults
and  discouragementji:  anxious  for  a
capitulition,  21s,  219.  222.  223,  224.
Panna's  propos;il  for  a  secret  interview ;
corrc-fMrnding  witlj  Parma's  agent,  225-
229.  His  good  faith  suspected  by  both
sides;  a  target  for  calinnny,  230.  232.
His  inability  to  fathom  I'hilip's  charac-
ter, 233.  243.  245.  His  interviews  with
Parma  and  reports  thereon :  impression
made  by  each  on  the  other,  230-239.
Change  in  his  attitude;  a  partisan  of. yet
susp<'Cted  by  Philip,  242,  243.  Hitherto
unpublishti  details  relative  to  him,  251.

572

SAINT.

INDEX.

SIDNEY.

His  detestation  of  an  alliance  with  Eng-
land, 252.  His  inacessibility  to  bribes,
253.  Two  antagonistic  influences  he  was
bent  on  overcoming,  253.  Catastrophe
he  hop^  d  to  ave  rt  by  his  subserviency  to
Parma,  2.36,  257.  His  efforts  to  clear  his
character,  256.  258.  Tributes  of  English-
men to  his  worthiness,  259  note.  A  pri-
soner in  his  own  house,  259.  Truth  of
which  he  at  last  b^>came  conscious,  260.
Cautious  bearing  of  the  English  envoy
towards  him,  260-262.  His  sclt'-jui^tifica-
tory  dialogue  w  ith  Col.  Morgan,  262-265.
Lord  Leicester's  intercession  in  his  be-
behalf,  265,  266.  Worlt  to  which  he
devoted  the  rest  of  his  days,  267.  La
Noue's  testimony  to  his  wortb,  268.  Task
at  which  death  found  him,  269.  Blunders
which  grew  out  of  his  blunder  at  the  Ko-
wenstyn,  283.  His  visit  to  Lord  Buck-
hurst,  ii,  206.  Suspected  by  both  parties
in  Holland,  265  note.  See  i,  315.  iii,  278.
A  INT  Bartholomew,  see  Massacre.
<A!NT  Martin's  miraculous  cure,  iii,  230.

^AiNT  Paul's  cathedral,  London,  i,  294.

Saint  Quirinus,  burning  of  the  remains  of,
and  revenge  therefor,  ii,  26.  29.

Paints'  rehcs  sent  to  Philip  il,  iii,  205.  425.
His  comforting  use  of  them,  475.

Salander,  Tobias,  and  the  London  pick-
pockets, i,  293.

San  Clemente,  Spanish  ambassador  at
Vienna,  iii,  34.  On  the  archduke's  pecu-
niary straits,  263.  On  the  costly  feastings
at  Ratisbon,  298.

Sandoval,  archbishop  of  Toledo,  an  abettor
in  the  expulsion  of  the  Moors,  iv,  312.
His  income,  315. His  patron,  321.

Sanseval  at  Dourlens,  in,  312.  Killed,
honour  paid  to  his  remains,  313,  314.

Santa  Cruz,  Marquis  of,  captain-general  of
the  Armada,  his  ship  burnt  in  Cadiz  har-
bour, ii,  269.  Work  shaped  out  for  him,
298,  299.  305.  Snubbed  by  royal  order,
439.  His  end,  and  accelerating  causes
thereof,  441.

Saravia,  Dr,  participator  in  the  Leyden
conspiracy,  ii,  317. Escapes,  318.

Sarmiento's  fleet  destroyed,  iv,  214.
Sausages,"  war  engines  so  called,  iv,  66.
104.

Savoy,  Duke  of.  invited  to  the  French
court ;  why  obliged  to  decline,  i,  53.  65.
Accomplice  in  the  conspiracy  against
Henry  L\\  iv,  98  note.  139.  153.  Bait  to
be  offered  to  him,  164.

Saxonv,  Augustus  Duke  of,  i,  30.

Scheldt  river  bridged  by  Parma,  i,  172.
Character  of  the  stream,  237.  Sylvan
fete  on  the  bridge,  246,  247.

ScHENK,  Sir  Martin,  German  free-lance,  his
exploits,  powers  of  endurance,  odd  treat-
ment of  his  troops,  &c,  ii,  2.  5-7.  Occa-
sion of  his  last  change  of  masters  and
services  to  them,  7,  8.  18.  Knighted,  15,
16.  His  doings  at,  and  results  to  himself
of,  the  siege  of  Grave,  20,  21,  Famous
fort  built  by  him,  21.  520.  Defending

Rheinberg,  37.  169.  Patton's  revenge
upon  him  at  Gelder,  170.  His  capture
of  Bonn,  330.  Deaf  to  Earnese's  tempt-
ings,  400.  Effect  of  his  name  :  his  com-
plaint to  Elizabeth,  520.  His  attack  on
Nyniegen,  heroism,  defeat  and  end,  521-
524.  Ultimate  disposal  of  his  remains,
iii.  111.

ScHOMBERG,  Gaspar  de,  iii,  220.

Scotch  lords  in  Spanish  pay,  ii,  291.  313.
Favourable  to  France,  iv,  146.

Scotland  in  relation  to  England,  temp.
Eliz.  i,  28.  289.  Resolution  of  the
English  court  to  "  procure  a  good  peace
with  the  king  of  Scots,"  79,  81.  Claimed
by  Philip  II,  iii,  41.  Taking  possession
of  England,  iv,  130.  Its  love  for  France,
130.  The  States-General  permitted  to
raise  recruits,  168.  See  ii,  288.  329.  425.
444.

Sebastian,  Cornelius,  and  his  ships  storm-
ing Tydor,  iv,  231,  232.

Sectaki:<:s,  how  dealt  with  by  Queen  Eliza^
beth.  i,  24-26.

Sega,  bishop  of  Piacenza  and  legate,  object
of  his  mission  to  Paris,  iii,  119.  215.

Segur,  M.  de,  how  nonplussed  in  his  at-
tempt to  convert  his  master,  i,  46.  66.

Seine,  the,  in  the  control  of  Henry  IV,  iii,
129.  139.  Parma's  successful  passage
across  it,  142,  143.

Serrano,  Matteo,  and  Don  Matteo  Antonio,
sent  as  hostages  to  the  Dutch  camp,
Ostend,  iv.  74.  Story  of  the  trick  prac-
tised on  them  by  Vere,  74-81. Don  M.

■  Antonio  slain,  86.  Evacuation  of  Sluys
by  Serrano,  198.

Sessa,  Duke  of,  Philip's  orders  to,  on  the
death  of  Farnese,  iii,  213  note.  Threaten-
ing the  pcpe,  218.

Se\  ille,  Archbishop  of,  his  revenue,  iii,
495.  iv,  315.

SEYMOUii,  Lord  Henry,  timely  movement
of,  ii,  375.  Squadron  commanded  by  him
in  the  Armada-fight,  432.  458.  Angry
with  Howard,  497.  His  compliment  to
Walsingham  ;  will  be  kin  to  the  bear  "
500  note. See  ii,  422.  423.  462.  493.  501.

Sfouza  at  the  rescue  of  the  Kowenstyn,  1,
209.

Sheffield,  Lord  and  Lady,  charges  against
Leicester  respecting,  i,  346.  348.

Shirley,  Sir  Thomas,  on  the  identity  of  the
English  and  Dutch  interests,  i,  363.  His
endeavours  to  move  the  queen  in  Leices-
ter's b3l)alf,  409-412.  Reporting  the  re-
sult to  Leicester,  413. Ste  433.  436  note.

SnrRT  attacks,  their  meaning  and  object,
iii,  159.

SiAM,  iv,  393.

Sidney,  Sir  Henry,  on  the  character  of  his
son.  Sir  Philip,  i,  339,  Result  of  his  in-
quiry into  the  death  of  Lord  Essex,  348.

Sidney,  Sir  Philip,  on  Sainte  Aldegonde's
way  of  life  while  under  restraiu^t,  i,  265.
Appointed  English  governor  of  Flushing,
323  334.  f^-aternal  feehng  of  Prince
Maurice  towards  him,  324.  His  departure

SIDNEY.

INDEX.

SPAIN.

573

for  Flushing,  338.  His  character  and
capabilities:  animus  of  the  queen  to-
wards him,  338,  339.  Why  sent  to
Vienna,  3 JO.  His  protest  against  Kliza-
beth's  marriage-projfct  and  quarrel  with
Oxford,  340,  341.  His  tournamt^nt-trim
in  honour  of  Anjou,  341.  Adventurous
intention  frustrated  by  the  appointment
conffrrcd  on  liim,  34  2.  Arrives  at  his
po<t:  his  reo  ption,  342.  343,  344.  His
punning  propensities,  377.  ibid  note.
On  Davison's  devotion  to  his  duties,  378,
Threat'nt  d  by  the  queen,  400.  Charac-
terising Henfeige's  doings,  and  warning
the  government,  4  2],  422.  Successful
attack  by  himself  and  Maurice  upon
Axel,  ii,  32,  33.  Jealousy  excited  by  his
promotion,  3i.  His  complaints  relative
to,  and  sacrifices  to  alleviate  the  condi-
tion of,  the  troops,  35,  36.  Character  in
which  he  joined  Leia-ster's  forces  at
Zutphon,  46.  A  chivalrous  extravagance,
4«.  lit  coives  a  fatal  wound  ;  his  conduct
in  his  last  moments,  49,  50.  50  mAe.  52-
54.  See  i,  2-52.  325.  345.  ii,  1.  40.  42.  45.
87,  88.

Sidney,  Sir  Robert,  volunteer  at  Dof'sburg,

ii,  4  0.  A  false  foar  regarding  him,  171.
His  imi)res6ion  relative  to  tin- destination
of  the  Armada,  286.  On  the  weakening
of  his  country's  hoUl  on  the  affi  ctions  of
the  Dutcli,  piraciis  of  Kiiglisli  mariners,
&c,  iii,  16»-167  vot'S.  252.  Acquitting
himself  of  a  di^tasteful  mission,  348
351.  At  Nieuport,  iv,  29.  Chargi-d  with
cowardice,  ihid  note. >e^.  i,  345.

SiGLsMi  Ni),  of  Poland,  his  efforts  at  media-
tion between  Spain  and  the  Netherlands,
anomalous  jxteition,  &c,  iii,  421.  Kcccn-
tricities  of  his  envoy,  421-423.  Ute  iv,
257.

Silk  manufactures  flourishing  in  Holland,
and  discouraged  in  France,  iv,  215.  344.
513.

Slllkky  demanding  the  Netherlands  for  his

master,  iv,  263.  26 1.  265.
SiXTEKN  tyrants  of  Paris  and  their  doings,

iii,  119-121.  Retribution  inllicU'd  on
them,  124.

SiXTUs  V,  Pope,  his  origin  and  character,
i,  126.  Kxcommunicatos  Henry  of  Na-
varre: his  complim''nt  to  him  and  to
Queen  Elizabeth.  127,  128.  Outwitted  by
rhilip,  ii.  296.  4  i3.  438.  His  bull  again.>t
Eliziibeth,  379-3MI.  A  denial  regarding
it,  384.  His  excLimation  on  Guise's
arrival  in  Paris,  406.  A  suspicion
against  him,  439.  Refu>ing  a  million  to
Philip,  4^1.  Denounced  by  the  League,
iii,  43.  His  love  of  art  and  schemes  of
family  aggrandi^^'ment,  57,  58.  HLs
death  and  its  alleged  cause,  82.  84.
Philip's  unholy  request  to  him,  183,
184.

Sloat,  delegate  from  Ovcryssel,  iv,
402.

Sli  vs  besieged  by  Parma,  ii,  238.  247.
Situation  of  the  tow  n,  248. Heroism  of

besiegers  and  besieged,  249-253.  Eff.'ct
of  jealousies  between  Leicester  and  the
States,  253-255.  Schemes  to  relieve  the
place  :  Parma's  bridge,  255-259.  Leices-
ter's fircships;  capitulation  of  the  town,
259-261.  298.  Parma's  chat  with  De
Loo,  280-2S2.  Attempt  to  blockade  Par-
ma, 501.  Defeat  of  Spinola's  galleys,  iv,
114-116.  Maurice  advancing  towards  it,
188,  Its  strategic  importance,  189,  Fall
of  intermediate  fortitied  places,  190-193.
Investment  of  the  town,  194.  Progress
of  the  siege:  famine  and  i)estilence,  194,
195.  Spinola's  attempt  to  relieve  it,  197,
198.  Victory  of  the  besiegers,  198.
English  and  French  rejoicings,  208,  209.
Du  Terrail's  aitemjit,  239-240,  Long-
ings of  the  French  for  it,  265,  266.  268.
271,

Smith,  Captain  John,  the  Virginian  adven-
turer, iv,  276.

Smith,  Sir  John,  his  opinion  of  Leicester's
,  recruits:  Leicester's  opinion  of  him,  ii,
i  492.

Snei.lil-8,  Willebrod,  important  scientific
labours  of,  iv,  529.
I  SOLi.<,  Captain  de,  his  fatal  disobedience,
I ii,  18,

SoLMs,  Count  Ernest,  wounded  and  cap-
I tured,  Iii,  320, His  death.  321.  323,
.  SoLMS,  Count  George  Everard,  nominated
j to  Sidney's  regiment,  II,  206.  Defending
! Tholen.  510. indignation  at  his  surren-
der of  Hulst,  iii,  371.  372.  Commander
of  the  Nieuport  battalia,  iv,  7.  Work
given  him  to  do  there,  9.  27. See  ii,  35.
iil,24.s.  257.  301.  398.  401.
SoNuv,  J)ledrich,  Leicster's  adherent,  il,
2(»5. Defying  the  States,  315,  337.  Hi»
English encouragers, 3hh. a96.  397.
^laurice's  charges  again>t  him.  o97,  :i98.
I Oiden-d  to  surrender,  3U9.  His  protitl<-ha
I English  exiK-riment,  and  List  days,  399,
:  400.

I  SoRHONNE,  tlif,  its  attitude  in  regard  to
I Hi  nry  IV,  iii,  45.  47.  233.
I  Soriii.»E,  Prince  de,  learning  from  an  apt
' ttMcher,  iv,  245.

!  South  I'ole,  Dutch  voyagers  to  the,  iii,

I  542.

i  Sovs>ONs. fat  militia  captain,"  his  disclo-

I sure  to  Willoi'ghby,  ii,  389.

i  Si'ADE,  the,  vindicating  its  dignity  as  a

I military  weai>on,  iii,  149

j  Spain  in  the  sixteenth  century,  its  extent,

I natural  advantag<-s,  cities,  dependencies,

I &c,  i,  6,  7. Its  Nctherland  provinces,  8.

I  Held  in  awe  by  Germany,  29,  30.  Whero
open  to  attack,  76.  I*iinciples  p«  rsoni-
fied  by  the  nation.  362.  The  overshadow-
ing power  of  its  day,  iii,  41.  lieceiving
supplies from its enemy, 165,  511.

I  Its  troops  in  mutiny.  274,  275.  Calun>-
nies  of  its emis.»Airi(8  against  Eliza-

! beth. 356. Anglo-Dutch  expedition

j  against  it,  358-3611.  Result  of  same,  362-
368,  Projected  alliance  again.st  it  374.
Peace  with  France  agreed  on,  46H-i70.

574

SPENCER.

INDEX.

STAFFORD,

Position  of  the  nation  under  Philip  II,
485.  Sources  of  its  revenue,  488,  489.
Why  not  a  rich  country  ?  national  pride
and  indolence,  489-491.  Popular  diver-
sions, 492. The  landholding  class,  493,

494.  Its  hierarchy  and  their  revenues,

495,  496.  Its  commerce,  condition  of  its
people,  power  of  its  king,  &c.  49Y-50Y.
The  like  particulars  regarding  the  nation
under  Philip  III,  iv,  306-311 .  Redeeming
the  Admiral  of  Arragon  with  Dutch  pri-
soners, iv,  92.  Its  share  in  the  plot
against  the  French  king's  life,  97,  98
notes.  Its  condition  under  Philip  III,
127,  128.  Its  gifts  to  the  courtiers  and
queen  of  James  I,  135.  Its  relations
with  James  and  with  Henry  IV",  138-
140.  150-153.  187.  259-264.  Treaty
agreed  on  with  James,  204,  205.  Fruit
borne  thereby :  Spanish  enlistments  in
England,  212,  213.  Destruction  of  the
troop  -  laden  ships  and  their  human
cargoes,  213,  214.  Spaniards  and  Portu-
guese among  the  Spice  islands,  229,  230.
Expelled  therefrom  by  the  Dutch,  231-
233.  The  nation  weary  of  war :  mone-
tary troubles  and  mutinous  troops,  271.
True  meaning  of  its  diplomacy,  285.
Armistice  concluded  with  the  States,
290-294.  Renewal  of  same,  382.  Naval
battle  with,  and  victory  of  the  Dutch  in
Gibraltar  Bay:  massacre  of  the  van-
quished, 297-305.  Effect  of  the  victory,
336,  337.  Superstitious  notion  as  to  the
extent  of  the  nation's  power,  306.  Ex-
pulsion of  the  Moors:  wickedness  and
folly  of  the  act,  311-314.  Increase  of
archbishops  and  their  incomes,  314,  315.
Degradation  of  the  orders  of  cnivalry
prominent  charactei  istic  of  the  national
polity,  315.  Trade  in  church  cures,  316.
Maxims  and  principles  of  its  foreign
polity,  316,  317.  Cross-claims  of  and  on
foreign  potentates,  317.  Decay  of  army
and  navy :  general  poverty  of  the  nation,
318.  Foremost  man  in  the  land,  318
[see  Lerma,  Duke  of  J.  Difficulties  in  the
•way  of  continuing  the  war :  Spinola's
protests,  and  secret  emissary  to  the
king,  335-340.  Hope  in  quibbles,  350.
Progress  of  peace  negotiations :  Ratifica-
tions rejected  by  the  States,  363-366.
Indignation  at  Madrid,  370.  Monkish
reassurances  and  ducal  credulity,  371.
New  ratifications  and  discussions  there-
on, 372-381.  Again  worsted  in  a  naval
battle  with  the  Dutch,  388-393.  Renewed
peace  discussions,  402-406.  The  Indian
difficulty,  407-415.  426.  427.  485.  Truce
negotiations  opened,  433.  End  of  same,
451.  Discussion  reopened,  458.  Closed,
477.  Terms  of  truce  at  last  agreed  on,
478-485.  See  Lerma,  Duke  of.  Parma.
Philip  II.  Philip  111.  Spinola,  Am-
brose.

Spencer.  Richard,  co-envoy  to  the  States

with  Winwood,  iv,  360.  419.  496  note.
Spilbeeg,  Joris  van,  iv,  125.

Spinola,  Ambrose,  Marquis,  iv,  104.  Con
dition  of  his  assumption  of  command  at
Ostend,  169,  170.  His  antecedents  and
personal  characteristics,  171.  Noting
what  was  needed,  173.  His  first  success,
175.  Posted  near  Sluys,  189.  190.  196.
His  operations  towards  relieving  the
place,  196,  197.  His  repulse  and  re-
turn to  Ostend,  198.  Same  surrendered
to  him,  200.  His  hospitalities  to  the
defeated,  ibid.  His  reception  in  Paris :
coveted  honour  refused  to  him  in  Spain,

210.  Intrigues  against  him,  210.  Rais-
ing recruits  and  sending  them  by  sea,

211.  Attack  on  his  ships  and  massacre
of  his  troops  by  the  Dutch  admiral,  213,
214.  Measuring  himself  with  Prince
Maurice,  217.  His  manoeuvres:  their
effect  upon  his  opponent,  217.  Captures
Oldenburg  and  Lingen,  218.  Throwing
away  his  advantages,  218.  His  victory
over  Maurice  and  capture  of  Wachten-
donk,  222,  223.  His  adroit  disclaimer  of
the  merit  of  his  own  successes,  224.  One
military  quality  wanting  in  him,  225.
Repairing  the  finances  of  Spain,  236, 237.
His  illness,  237.  239.  At  work  again :
resultless  operations,  241-244.  Captures
GroU  and  Rheinberg,  244.  246.  Mutiny
among  his  veterans,  246.  Rushing  to
the  rescue  of  Groll:  conduct  of  his  op-
ponent, 247-251.  Bankrupt:  fighting
easier,  than  financing,  273,274.  Initiating
negotiations  for  peace,  279.  Advising
thereon  :  falling  into  discredit,  335-337.
His  remonstrances  and  their  result,  338-
340.  372.  His  views  as  to  the  value  of
peace  for  Spain,  385, 3-!6.  Proceeding  on
his  mission  :  his  reception  at  the  Hague,
396-399.  His  magnificent  housekefping,
399.  Disadvantage  he  laboured  under,
407.  See-  249.  363.  366.  367.  382.  383.
410.  415.  449.  451.  479.

Spinola,  Aurelio,  iv,  340.

Spinola,  Ferranto,  mortally  wounded,  and
exhibited  as  a  trophy,  i,  201.  214.

Spinola,  Frederic,  his  privateering  exploits,
iv,  106.  His  skirmish  with  Sir  Robert
Mansell,  107.  Destruction  of  his  slfips
by  the  Dutchmen,  107,  108.  His  last
engagement  with  them,  defeat  and
death,  113-116.  170.

Spinola,  Gaston,  Count  of  Bruay,  his  col-
loquy with  Maurice,  iv,  104.

Stafford,  Sir  Edward,  English  envoy  in
Paris,  warning  Queen  Elizabeth  of
threatened  dangers,  i,  3.  On  the  vagaries
of  Henry  of  Valois  and  his  minions,
36-38.  On  Don  Antonio's  straits  and
devices,  64.  His  embarrassments  rela-
tive to  France  and  the  Provinces,  and
reports  thereon,  64,  65.  66,  67.  A  certain
"handy- work  of  God"  prayed  for  by
him,  66.  On  the  probable  result  of  the
negotiations  between  France  and  the
Provinces,  88.  On  the  rebuff  given  by
j  the  French  king  to  the  Spanish  ambassa-
dor, 95. On  desirtions  from  Parma's

STA>-LEY.

INDFA'.

TERRAIL.

575

army  and  the  transmission  of  supplies  •
in  English  bottoms  to  the  Spaniards,  165.  ;
The  French  king's  importunities  to  him,  !

ii,  402,  403.  His  reply  to  Guise's  proffer
of  protection,  410.  His  doubts  about  the  |
destination  of  the  Armada,  414.  Speak-  {
ing  the  truth  as  far  as  he  knew  it :  his  I
pamphlet,  502,  503.  On  Henry  the
Fourth's  bearing  on  the  battle-field,  and  I
on  the  unwise  disbanding  of  his  troops,  j

iii,  74,  75.  79.  See  also  73,  79  vot",.
With  Henry  in  the  trenches,  81.  On
Henry's  attitude  towards  the  Catholics,
83.  His  death,  13t  vote.  On  a  contem-
plated enormity  by  I^hilip,  1«3,  184.

Stan  LEV,  Sir  Edward,  his  daring  act  at
Zutphen,  and  prompt  recognition  of  it
by  his  commander,  ii,  56.  Mission  en-
trusted to  him,  15"<.  Reporting  on  the
unprepared  stite  of  his  soldiers,  42'J.  [

Stanli:y,  Sir  William,  his  in>ulxjrdinate  '
conduct  at  Doesburg,  ii,  41.  His  reply  to  |
Norris's  adjuration,  47. Leicester's  as-  :
severation  regarding  him,  49. Office  in-
judiciously conferred  UjKjn  him;  feelings
thereby  engendered,  147-150. His  high-
handed conduct  and  reply  to  remon-  I
strances  addressed  to  him,  151-155.  Sus-  !
picions  as  to  his  fidelity,  156.  158. His  j
hoodwinking  banquet  to  the  Deventer  [
magistrates, 160. His  treach^'ry  and
surrender  of  the  city  to  the  Spaniards,
160-163. His  reward:  replies  of  officers
he  att«mpteil  to  seduce,  163-165.  His
defence  of  his  conduct  and  ^ub^equent  ■
fate,  165-167. See  iii,  97.  lol.  |

Stai;(  h,  excessive  use  in  Holland  of,  Iii,  '
354,  355. Fisc.il  Dieasureb  and  pulpit
fulniinations,  355.  '

Statk  secrets  of  old  time,  modern  facilities  j
for  their  unravelment,  i,  52.  j

STATE!>-General,  see  Netherlands.  i

Statistics,  a  great  writer  on,  iv,  527.  |

Steknwyck  ;  Maurice  at  its  gat<  s  and  away  ,
again,  iii,  105,  106.  His  return:  imix)rt-  j
ance  of  the  place :  extent  and  result  of  I
Llaurice's  burrowings  and  diggings,  14m-  I
152. Li'S.son  tiiught  by  them,  242.  i

Ste\  ixus,  Simon,  mathematical  tutor  to  j
Maurice,  iii,  3. His  mechanical  marvels

iv,  528.  i
Stirl  m,  Jan  van,  his  reply  to  a  demand  to  I

surrender,  iii,  316.  Dining  with  his  con-  :
queror,  428.  1

Stuapa'-s  account  of  Pamvi's  escape  fnim  •
an  infernal  machine,  i,  189,  190.  His
report  of  Mamix's  oration  to  Parma,  237  .
note.  1

Stratagems,  notable :  Grimstone's,  at  Ber-
g.  n-op-Zoom,  ii,  513.  514. Breila,  iii,  j
5-14.  Zutplien,  98.  Amiens,  409.  Vere's,  i
at  Ostend,  iv,  74-81.  '

Si  AREZ.  Don  Alvaro  de,  killed  at  Ostend,
iv,  sg.

8li,i.y,  MaxiniHian  de  Bethune,  ]\Iarquis  '
de  Kosny  and  l>uke  of,  his  wounds,  and
report  of  the  tight,  at  Ivry.  iii,  r»2  ni4.e.
HlB  precautiona  on  ad>uitling  a  Spanish

agent  to  his  master,  2-<8.  His  presence
of  mind  at  a  critical  moment.  410,  411.
His  .-^cheme  for  rai'-ing  money,  412.
Disposing  of  an  offerer  of  a  bribe,  412.
Helping  to  settle  accounts  with  pur-
chased patriots,  470,  471.  His  opposi-
tion to  international  commerce  and  per-
sonal gain  thereby,  iv,  122,  123.  His
naive  confession,  123  note.  Scheme  con-
fided to  him  by  Klizab-  th,  141-143.  Sent
to  congratulate  Janus  on  his  accession,

143.  Ill  eff«'Cts  of  a  well-intended  act,

144,  145.  His  desires  for  peace :  his
impressions  of  England,  145,  146.  His
arrival  in  London  and  first  interview
with  Cecil,  146.  His  suspicions  of  and
dislike  for  Ct-cil,  159-161.  His  inter-
views in  England  with  Rirneveldt,  147-
149.  157-159.  Change  of  a>stume  forced
on  himself  and  suite,  149.  His  reception
by  King  James,  150.  Their  first  gossip
and  subsequent  conffrences,  151-156.
162.  Imposing  an  oath  on  and  unfolding
a  scheme  to  the  king,  163-165.  Drawiitg
a  treaty,  distributing  largesse,  and  taking
his  leave,  166- 16s.  His  notions  and
apprehensions  relative  to  the  silk  niiinu-
facture,  215.  513.  Result  of  his  finan-
ciering. 344.  346,  347.  349.  Stt  iv,  2o3.
206.  263.  422.

Su-ssEx,  Ixjrd,  an  allegtni  victim  of  I^ices-
ter's,  i,  34S.  Hrs  warning  against  the
•'Gip.sy,"  350.

Sweden,  iv,  164.  257.

Swir/.EKLANDand  the  Swis.s,  iv,  142.  143.
164. Results  of  a  truce,  462.

Tardif,  Paris  magistrate,  put  to  death:  bis
crime,  iii,  120.

Tabgone,  I'onipey,  his  unwieldy  and  use-
less war  machines,  iv,  171-173.

Takik,  enduring  memento  of  a  conquest
by,  iv,  29S,  299.

Ta.ssls,  John  Baptist,  ex-ambassador  from
Spain  to  France,  i,  03.  108.  Deven-
ter .«;urrenderc'd  U*  him.  ii,  !62,  163,
His  d'*splcable  office  al-out  Parma,  lil,
195.  His  counU  r-poison  to  the  conver-
sion of  the  IVarnese.  226.  Ix'ft  out
at  a  great  dinner.  304.  I>eploring
the  progress  of  h"re^y  and  republi-
canism in  the  States,  326.  B'arding
Henry  IV  and  getting  a  "  head-washing. '
iv,  139,  140.  Set  ii,  43,  44.  156.  iii,  193.
223.

Telh;nv,  son  of  Noue,  i,  91.  Result  of
his  sortie  at  Lille.  150.  Hazardous  ser-
vice undertaken  by  him,  158.  Cons -
quences  of  itt»  failure,  15-^.  159.  Rel";u«ed
from  prison:  at  his  father's  death,  iii
llH.

Ternate,  iv,  22-^,  229.  E-tal)lishment  of
relations  with  Holland,  23o.  Th-  ir  joint
attack  on  Tydor.  231.  232.  Taken  by
thi-  Spiniardsand  retaken  by  the  Dutch.
391.  392  .Spanish  assiiult  repelled  by  its
garrison.  392.

Tk&ilvil,  Du,  set  Du  TcrraiL

576

THIONVILLE.

INDEX.

UTRECHT.

Thtonville,  rendezvous  of  the  Spanish

mutineers  at,  iv,  2.
Thirty  Years"  War,  the,  a  verification  of  a

Netherlander's  prophecy,  1,  140.
Thou,  Jacques  Auguste  de,  historian,  iii,

220,  221.

Thhogmorton,  Sir  Nicholas,  an  alleged

victim  of  Leicester's,  i,  348.
Tiel,  the  heath  of,  its  peculiar  nature,  iii,

401,  402.  Great  victory  of  Maurice  upon

it,  402-405.

Tilbury,  ii,  431.  Elizabeth's  review  of  her
troops,  485. See  490.

TiMMERMAN,  Antwerp  mechanician,  asso-
ciated with  Gianibelli  in  his  infernal-
machine  project,  i,  182.

TiNOCO,  accomplice  in  the  poison  plots
against  Elizabeth,  arrested  and  executed,
iii,  279,  2S0.

ToLEbO,  archbishopric,  its  revenues,  iii,  332.
495. See  Sandoval.

Toledo,  Don  Pedro  de,  head  of  a  Spanish
marriage  embcissy,  iv,  420.  His  pro-
ceedings, 421,  422.  431. See  485.

TOMSON,  Richard,  on  Parma  and  Sainte
Aldegonde,  i,  252.

ToRAL^  A  at  the  rescue  of  the  Kowenstyn,
i,  207.  Desperately  wounded,  211.  Ho-
nourtible  treatment  accorded  to  him  by
Parma,  213.

Tours,  Robin  de,  balked  of  his  bargain  by
De  Bethune,iii,  412,  413.

Trent,  Council  of,  iii,  121.  233.  325.  556.

Treslong,  AViiliam  de  Blois  Lord  of,  ad-
miral of  Holland,  governor  of  O&tend,
alliance  favoured  by,  i,  71  note.  His
refractory  nature  and  obstinate  courses,
143.  Cashiered  and  imprisoned:  result
of  Queen  P^Uzabeth's  intercession:  his
end,  144.

Trivulzio,  Count,  Spanish  general,  with
his  cavalry  at  Sluys,  iv,  189.  His  troops
frightened  out  of  their  garrison,  191.
His  victory  turned  to  defeat,  193.
Frightening  away  his  foes,  220.  Killed,
222.

Truchsess,  Ferdinand,  killed,  i,  170.

Truchsess,  Gebhard,  ex-archbishop  and
ex-elector  of  Cologne,  translates  and
disperses  Lord  Burghley's  pamphlet,  i,
30.  Disasters  resulting  from  his  love  for
Agnes  Mansfeld,  30,  31.  Venting  his
complaints  in  a  string  of  proverbs,  32.
Feelings  towards  the  French  king  and
English  qneen  variously  ascribed  to  him,
69.  70.  To  be  assisted  by  English  money
to  make  head  against  his  rival,  SO.
Monej'  asked  lor  him  from  Elizabeth,  ii,
3.  Esteem  of  ICnglish  noblemen  for  him,
3,  notes.  Playuig  the  spy,  75.  76.  See  i,
401.  ii,  520.

Turenne,  Due  de  Bouillon,  and  his  "  like-
liest footmen,"  iii,  75.  Not  dropping
away  like  others,  79,  On  Maurice's
capture  of  Deventer,  104  note.  His
marriage,  132.  Campaign  he  was  to
undertake,  295.  What  he  was  and  was
not  provided  with,  296. Result  of  his

winter  movements,  300,  301.  Surrender
of  Ham  to  him,  306,  307.  Relieves  La
Ferte,  307.  His  effort  to  relieve  Dour-
lens:  accusation  and  counter-accusation,
311-314.  Heads  a  mission  to  Elizabeth,
374.  His  conterences  wiih  her  and  her
councillors,  and  departure,  376-382.  His
return  to  England  with  the  ratified
treaty :  psalm-singing  and  feasting  ou
the  occasion,  383,  384.  See  iii,  124.  125,
127.  289.  454.  iv,  239.

Turkey,  or  the  Ottoman  empire,  i,  29  iii,
419.  iv,  119.  Making  peace  with  the
Holy  Roman  Empire,  iv,  258.  See
Amurath,  Mahomet.

"Turkish  ambassadors,"  iii,  242.

Turks,  captives,  sent  home  by  Maurice,  iv,
198.

Turnhout,  skirmish  between  the  Dutch
and  the  Spaniards  at,  iii,  245,  Maurice's
great  victory,  397-406.  Magnitude  and
moral  effect  of  the  achievement,  407,  408.
422,  423.  430.

Tydor,  iv,  229.  Its  king  conquered  and
spared  by  the  Dutch,  231,  232.  His
relapse  to  Spanish  servitude  and  punish-
ment for  it,  391,  392.

Tyrakts,  the  only  citadel  against,  ii,  286»
The  Sixteen  of  Paris,  see  Sixteen.

Tyrone,  Lord,  prevented  from  aiding  hia
Spanish  allies,  iv,  88.  Partaking  of  the
archduke's  hospitality,  259.

Tysen,  Bartholomew,  killed,  and  his  coffin-
lid  shattered,  iv,  70,  71.

UcEDA,  Duke  of,  Lerma's  son,  his  wealth
and  expectations,  iv,  321.

Uchtenkroek,  Colonel,  his  narrow  escape
at  Ostend,  iv,  70.

Umpton,  or  Umton,  Sir  Henry,  English
ambassador  in  Paris,  ii,  532.  On  the
king's  wound  at  Aumale,  iii,  134  not^
Challenging  an  insulter  of  his  queen,
ibid.  His  counsel  to  Henry  IV  after  his
repulse  at  Rouen,  144,  145.  Presenting
letters  from  Elizabeth  ;  his  opinion  of  the
fair  Gabrielle,  342-343.  A  bit  of  farce
over  ElizalK^th's  portrait,  343, 344.  Dead,
349  note. See  380.

Unchained  Lion,  order  of  the,  iii,  543,  544^

United  Provinces,  their  limit  as  distin-
guished from  the  Spanish  or  "  obedient  '*
provinces,  i,  8.  Their  sovereignty  and
constitution  collectedly  and  individually,
10-12.  Their  names  and  respective  con-
tributions to  the  general  fund,  iv,  524.
See  Holland.  Nethtrlands.

Urban  VI 1,  a  thirteen  days  Pope,  iii,  84.
185.

Utrecht,  one  of  the  seven  united  pro-
vinces, i,  302.  384.  A  St.  George's  day
banquet,  ii,  14-16.  Wilkes's  account  of
the  quarrels,  117  iwle.  Buckhurst's
reception,  209.  A  non-contributor  to  ilie
general  fund,  225.  242.  Threatened  by
Spinola,  iii,  242-244.  Religion  of  most  of
its  inhabitants,  438.  Its  percentage  of
contribution  to  the  general  fund,  524

TTTTENHOOVE.

INDEX.

VEBDUGO.

577

noU. See  ii,  121.  178.  204.  205.  315.  395.

iv,  275.  402.
Uytenhoove,  Colonel,  made  governor  of
Ostend,  his  fitness,  iv, 181.  Deemed
dead,  and  set  upon  by  plunderers :  how-
saved,  183.

Valdez,  Diego  Floras  de,  captain  in  the
Armada,  ii,  442.

Valdez,  Pedro  de,  squadron  commanded
by,  ii.  442.  His  ship  disab^f^d,  452.  Sur-
renders to  Drake,  453.

Valladoliu,  arbitrary  removal,  by  Lerma,
of  the  Spanii^h  Court  to,  iv,  325.

Van  den  Berg,  Count  Frederick,  com-
mander of  Coeworden  garrison,  iii,  153.  I
His  defiant  reply  to  a  call  to  surrender,
154,  Forced  to  capitulate,  159,  160.
His  indecent  taunt  to  his  cousin,  321.
Marshal-General  of  the  archduke's  camp
at  Nieuport,  iv,  12.  His  post  at  Ostend,  60.
Stealing  away  in  the  dark,  121.  Aiding
Da  Terrail's  movement  upon  Sluys,  239.
Se*i  iii,  251.  266.  341.

Van  den  Berg,  Count  Herman,  effect  of  a
sarcastic  remark  on,  iii,  100.  Valiant
and  bibulous;  wounded,  101.  His  sur-
render and  colloquy  w  ith  his  conqueror,
103. See  341.

Van  den  Berg,  Count  Lewis,  commanding  i
in  the  field  at  18  years  old,  ill,  149.
Killed,  152.

Van  den  Berg,  Joshua,  his  alleged  dis-
covery in  the  Azores,  iii,  517,  518.

Van  den  Hove,  Anna,  buried  alive  by  the
Jesuits,  iii,  417-419.

Van  den  Ttmpel  put  under  arrest,  i,  252.

Van  der  Berg,  Adrian,  his  daring  sugges-
tion, iii,  6.  How  and  by  whom  it  was
carried  out,  7-15. See  Breda.

Van  der  Delf,  Captain,  Turnhout  surren-
dered by,  iii,  406.

Van  der  Does,  poct-soldier  and  heroic
defender  of  ly-ydon,  i,  296.  ii,  318.  423.  ,
460.  His  tough  fight  with  a  Spanish  j
ship,  473.  His  expedition  to  tke  Canaries  I
and  death,  iii,  551.  "Adore  comme  uu  '
saint,"  559  note.

Van  der  Does,  Dirk,  duty  laid  by  the
States  on,  iv,  289.  Going  a  little  wide
of  his  mark,  290.  The  monk's  gold
chain,  290.  361.  367.

Van  der  Hag  en.  Captain  Stephen,  sailing
of  a  Dutch  East  India  fleet  under,  iv,
126.  His  league  with  a  Malabar  chief
and  capture  of  Amboyna  from  the
Spaniards,  227,  228. .s'e«  391.

Van  der  Kemp,  a  phrase  explained  by,  iv,
370  7wte.

Van  der  Meer,  Jacques,  see  Berendrecht.  ;

Van  der  Meulen,  Antwerp  merchant,  j
trying  his  hand  at  negotiation,  iii,  444.  I
lloportiiig  what  he  heard.  445.  |

Van  der  Noot,  Colonel  Charles,  with  bis  '
Zeelanders  at  Nieuport,  iv,  17,  18.  Their  [
prmic  and  flight.  18.  Made  governor  of  t
Ostend,  118.  His  successor,  174.  At  '
Sluys,  194. Left  on  guard,  218.  Sur-

VOL.  IV.

prised  by,  and  repelling  an  iuvad*  r,  239,
240.

Van  der  Waecken,  the  Dunkirk  priva-
teer>man.  his  piracies  and  butcheries,  iv,
55,  56. His  escape  and  death,  56.

Van  der  Werff,  Adrian,  shocking  the  in-
tolerants,  ii,  316. See  318.

Van  der  Werken,  pensionary  of  Leyden,
iii,  423.

Van  I^n,  Colonel  John,  kilW,  iv,  176.

Van  Wena,  Admiral  Storm,  his  ill-starred
expedition  to  Brazil,  iii,  551.

Van  Werne,  his  gossiping  imprudence  and
its  consequences,  i,  227,  228.

Varamijon.  Marquis  of,  iii,  305.  His
family  pride,  339.

Varax,  Count,  8ucces.sor  to  La  Motte,  iii,
309.  339.  397.  Giving  his  enemies  the
slip,  400.  Position  of  his  forces,  400.
402.  403.  Killed,  404.  liespect  paid  to
his  remains,  406.

Va-sjuez,  Pkoderigo  de,  deprived  of  his  post
by  Ixrma  iv,  321.

Vasto,  Marquis  del,  Spanish  commander
at  VVarnsfeld,  ii,  44.  47.  Escaping  an
English  battle-axf,  49

Vavasour's  advice  as  to  the  readiest  way
to  a  peace,  i,  430.

Vei.a.'<o,  Juan  Buys  do,  dying  orders  of
Philip  III  to,  iii,  475.  477.*478.

Velasco,  Ix)uis,  commander  of  the  Arch-
duke's artillery  at  Nieuport,  iv,  12-22.
Spinola's  compliment  to  him.  224.

Velasoo.  Ferdinando  de.  Constable  of  Cas-
tile, not  shining  as  a  soldier,  iii.  324.
Designated  ambassador  to  I'Jigland,  iv,
152.  156.  His  emotions  and  acts  on  his
arrival,  16S.  His  protest  and  King
Jam  es's  reply  to  it,  206.  207.  His  deal-
ing with  Dutch  prizes  handed  to  him  by
England.  212.

Venice,  Mistress  of  the  Adriatic,  losing
her  oceanic  supremacy,  iii.  511.  A  pro-
posed sop  for  her,  iv,  16 ».  Consequences
of  her  quarrels  with  the  Jesuits,  238.
258.  Embargo  laid  by  I>erma  on  diplo-
matic communication.  321,

Venlo  besiegt-d  by  Parma :  Schenk's  in-
terest in  the  place,  ii,  20.  Frederick
H'Miry's  unsuccessful  d  'monstration,  iv,
246.

Verduco.  Francis,  Spanish  governor  of
FriesUnd.  i,  156.  perpetual  cry

172.  ]Slurder-project  charged  upon  him,
ii,  230.  Howling  for  money  and  hanging
his  men.  iii,  66.  His  humble  origin :
his  complaints  to  Farnese.  97,  98.  His
letters  interc''pted.  105.  His  chivalrous
estimate  of  Maurice,  110.  Result  of  his
attenijit  to  reinforce  Steenwyck,  150.
H's  efforts  at  Coeworden,  153-155.  157.
His  shirt  atti;ck  on  the  besiegers,  158,
159.  His  attempts  to  retake  Coeworden,
252.  254.  Beaten  at  Groningen,  259.
His  last  feat  and  death,  307.  His  cha-
racter and  career;  puns  on  his  name,
308,  See  ii,  43.  44.  61.  iii,  103.  108.  110.
210.  266.

2  p

578

VEEE.

INDEX.

WALSINGHAM.

Vf.RE,  Sir  Francis,  ii,  250.  334.  Knighted,
515.  Wounded  at  Steenwyck,  iii,  150.
Off  to  Brittany,  155.  A  narrow  escape,
258.  His  capture  of  Weerd  Castle,  323,
Joining  in  the  naval  expeditions  to  Spain,
358.  362.  365.  426.  At  the  siege  of  Turn-
hout,  398.  401.  403.  Opposed  to  the
Nieuport  project,  iv,  3.  Commander  of
the  rear-guard  on  the  march,  1.  His
broken  slumbers  and  unaccepted  opinion,
15.  Advising  an  impossibility,  16.  Wad-
ing at  the  head  of  his  men ;  giving  them
cold  comfort,  24.  His  advice  and  Mau-
rice's reply,  26.  Placing  his  men,  26.  30.
A  well-timed  volley,  31.  Bearing  the
brunt  of  the  conflict :  his  wounds  and  his
complaint,  34.  His  horse  killed :  his  lucky
rescue,  35.  Note  on  his  published  ac-
counts of  the  Nieuport  affair,  48-51.
Commander-in  chief  at  the  defence  of
Ostend,  60.  65.  His  personal  aspect:
mutual  hatred  between  himself  and  the
Nassaus,  65.  Driven  from  his  post  by
wounds,  70.  His  dealings  with  suffering
citizens  and  dishonest  soldiers.  70,  71.
Orders  reluctantly  given,  72.  His  cun-
ning trick  upon  the  enemy,  72-81.  112.
His  defensive  operations  and  repulse  of
the  assailants,  82-87.  His  intenable  pro-
position, 89.  With  the  States'  army  on
march  into  Flanders,  90.  See  ii,  519.  532.

iii,  107.  559.

Verb,  Sir  Horace,  brother  of  Sir  Francis,  at
Nieuport,  iv,  36.  At  Ostend,  82.  Wounded,
86. In  the  water,  222.

Vere,  Robert,  brother  of  Sir  Francis,  iii,
318. Murdered,  320.

Verhoef,  Captain,  succeeding  his  slam  ad-
miral, iv,  302.  In  command  of  an  East
India  fleet,  386.  393.

Verkeycken,  Louis,  Spanish  envoy,  his
conferences  with  Elizabeth,  iii,  560,  561.
Sent  to  the  Hague  on  the  peace  business,

iv,  363.  His  conferences  there,  364-367.
Taking  back  gifts  offered  to  the  Dutch
statesmen,  367.  Further  conferences,  373,
374.  381.  383. 396. 447, 448.  Conveniently
lame,  449.

Vervins,  Franco-Spanish  treaty  of  peaci>
at,  iii,  468-470.  Equivocal  observance  of
the  treaty,  iv,  139.  151.  206.  372.  409.

Vic,  see  De  Vic.

ViLLALOBOs's  unwelcome  reminder  to  the
Admiral  of  Arragon,  iv,  33.

ViLLERor,  prime  minister  to  Henry  III,
and  subsequently  to  Henry  IV,  sacrific-
ing his  master,  i,  118.  Proposes  to  invade
England :  his  conference  with  the  Spa-
nish envoy,  118-122.  "  Un  petit  coquin,"
ii,  322  note.  Conferring  with  the  States'
envoys,  iii,  431.  451-453.  The  States'  gitt
to  him,  453.  What  he  was  sure  to  do,
457.  Terms  exacted  by  him  from  the
Spanish  envoy,  468,  469.  On  the  thorn
planted  by  the  States  in  the  Spanish  foot,
iv,  153  note.  On  the  attitude  of  Spain
towards  France,  187.  On  the  need  to
the  States  of  their  India  traffic,  414.  His

comic  characterization  of  Kichardot,  455.
See  iv,  259.  263.  372.

ViLLiERs,  i,  251.  257.  His  influence  over
Prince  Maurice  and  animus  towards
England,  315.  Denounced  by  Leicester :
Hohenlo's  threat  against  him,  374.

Virginia,  iv,  276.

VOLMAR,  Jacques,  a  leader  in  the  Leyden
conspiracy,  ii,  316.  His  conduct,  trial,
and  fate,  317-321.

Waal,  need  for  protecting  the  line  of  the,

iii,  97.  105.  Parma's  adroit  movement,
107,  108. Maurice's  bridge,  109.  See

iv,  241-243.

Wachtendonk  city,  ii,  20.  Captured  by
Mansfeld,  520.  Captured  by  Spinola,  iv,
223.

Wagenaar  on  the  powers  grafited  by  the
Dutch  States  to  Leicester,  i,  426  note.

Wagenaar  of  Zeeland,  obligation  of  ma-
riners to,  iii,  514.

Walcheren,  coveted  by  the  French  king,
i,  68.

Walloon  Provinces,  "  reconciliation  "  of
the,  i.  8.  Falling  away  from  their  Fle-
mish sisters,  iii,  326.

Walsingham,  Sir  Francis,  i,  3  note.  On
the  resolution  of  the  Dutch  after  their
prince's  murder,  12  note.  On  the  condi-
tion of  Protestant  Germany,  32,  33  note.
His  habit  of  reserving  foreign  state-
secrets  for  the  queen's  own  eye,  52.  Ser-
vices of  Roger  Williams  to  him,  74.
Probable  results  had  his  policy  been  fol-
lowed out,  76.  His  insight  into  the  future,
77.  His  impatience  at,  and  denunciations
of,  the  puerilities  of  his  own  government,
84,  85.  Overruled  in  the  council,  86.
On  the  queen's  dislike  for  Sainte  Alde-
gonde,  253.  His  own  estimate  of  the
man,  258  note.  266.  His  instruction  to
Davison  concerning  him,  261.  Confer-
ences between  himself  and  the  Dutch
envoys  on  the  question  of  aiding  Hol-
land, 275-277.  His  two-fold  nature  :  his
politic  letter  to  Davison  on  the  subject  of
the  conferences,  280.  Laid  up  at  Bam
Elms :  visited  there  by  Ortel,  282.  Policy
towards  the  Netherlands  enjoined  upon
him,  284.  Moralizing  thereon,  285.  His
timely  counsel  to  the  Dutch  envoy,  286.
His  physiognomy,  300.  Wherein  the
queen  offended  him :  condoling  with  Da-
vison, 326,  327.  Utterly  discouraged,  333.
His  encomiums  on  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  339.
340.  342.  Spies  upon  his  spying,  355.
Straightforward  in  his  advocacy  of  aid
for  Holland,  360  note.  His  estimate  of
Sir  John  Norris,  370.  Sticking  to  his
post,  395.  His  comforting  assurance  to
Lv?icester,  432  note.  Piercing  through
the  queen's  attempt  to  deceive  him,  442.
460.  Exposing  her  double-dealing,  443
note.  Not  to  be  browbeaten,  444.  Ex-
plaining the  queen's  meaning  and  yet
puzzled  thereby,  447.  Discovering  his
antagonist's  devices:  amenities  betweeD

WARaiELO.

INDEX.

WILLIAMS.

579

nimself  and  the  queen,  464.  Seeing  after
sunset:  bringing  the  secret  negotiators
to  book,  485-488.  Forcing  his  adversii-
ries'  hands,  495.  On  the  caprices  and
wilfulness  of  the  queen,  il,  37.  73.  85.  99.
180.  182.  183.  185.  200.  201  note.  312,313.
Never  deceived  :  a  lesson  learnt  by  him,
2M6.  500  note.  In  possession  of  the  Spa-
nish plot,  306,  307.  313.  387.  His  beliefs
about  the  Armada,  412.  414.  450.  His
conferences  with  the  Netherland  church
deputies,  416,  417.  421.  His  death,  HI,
32.  See  i,  113.  317.  318.  319.  389.  393.
396.  400.  405.  413.  426.  430,  431.  432.  433.
434.  441.  443.  445.  446.  456.  473.  480.  497.
U,  97.  204.  224.  225.

Waemelo,  Sheriff  of  Zalant,  Spinola  re-
pulsed by,  iv,  244.

Warmond,  John  of  Duvenwoord,  Seigneur
of,  i,  13.  Admiral  of  the  Dutch  contin-
gents against  the  Spaniards,  ii,  423.  ill,

358.  Elizabeth's  estimate  of  his  servla-s,

359.  His  ships  oflF  Cadiz,  362.  Knighted,
363.  Siding  with  Kssex  In  an  overruled
project,  365.  Elizabeth's  letter  of  thanks
to  him,  367.  His  due  withheld  from  him
by  an  English  historian,  368  note.

Warnsfeld,  battle  of,  U,  44-51.
Warwick,  Ambrose  Dudley,  Earl  of,  bis

gloomy  warnings  to  his  brother,  l,  408.
Warwyk,  Admiral  Wybrand  van,  com-
mander of  the  first  fleet  of  the  Dutch

East  India  Company,  Iv,  126.
Watervliet,  Maurice  at,  Iv,  216,  217.
Wauw,  traitorous  surrender  of,  ii,  168, 169.
Weeri)  castle  captured :  hard  lines  for  lus

garrison,  iil,  323.
Weekdt,  Scbald  de,  Dutch  navigator.  III,

542. His  ship  the  sole  survivor  of  the

fleet,  544. Murdered,  Iv.  227.
Webll,  Schenk's  sucassful  stratagem  at,

II,  7,  8.

West  India,  set  Dutch  West  India  Com-
pany.

WiEK,  John,  Dutch  writer  against  belief  In
witchcraft.  Iv.  528.

WiLFORD.  Thomas,  on  England's  stake  In
the  safety  of  Holland,  I,  355.  356.  Ten-
dencies of  his  countiymen  denounced  by
him,  361.  On  the  luxurious  tastes  of  the
Hollanders,  363.

Wilkes,  Thomas,  on  the  characters  of
Prince  Maurlo^",  and  Salnte  Aldegonde.  I,
258,  259  vote.  Sent  to  the  Netherlands:
his  competency.  11,  84,  85.  "Fraught
full "  of  the  Queen's  "  conceipts,"  f<6.
His  views  on  Drake's  Netherhuids  visit,
98  vote.  Saves  Keingault's  life,  101  note.
His  reports  of  the  Utrecht  controversy,
117  note.  134  note.  Leicester's  animosity
towards  him,  132.  Winote.  233.  240  note.
265.  SettinK  himself  rifiht  with  Burgh-
ley,  132  note.  Sympathizing  with  Sir
John  Norris,  150.  His  conduct  in  refer-
ence to  Stanley  and  York's  doings  at
Deventer,  151-156.  "  Tawnlng  his  own
carcase"  to  relieve  the  troops,  174.  His
letter  on  their  condition,  ibid  note.  His

truthfulness  to  Leicester  and  Us  conse-
quences, 175-177. His  democratic  theo-
ries: and  di>pute  with  Barneveldt,  2u9-
214.  216,  217. Receives  a  dangerous
order  :  his  action  thereon,  223-225.  Con-
scious of Leicester's maligtilty,  233.
Taking  his  leave  in  time,  239.  263.  His
j reward  for  his  fidelity,  264.  Buckhurst's
I eulogium  on  him,  265  note.  Denouncing
! Denmark,  289. See  ii,  100.  241.  245.  334.
'  WiLLEBROD  the  Frisian  martyr,  11,  14.

William  the  Silent,  Prince  of  Orange.
1 His  assassination,  rare  qualities,  &c,  I,  1.

Philip's  remark  on  hearing  of  his  death,  3.
I  His  disregard  of  warning^,  3  note.  Change
i  produced  i>y  his  death;  his  counsel  on
Anjou's  treachery,  9,  10.  Title  accepted
'  by  him,  10.  Result  of  his  murder  upon
the  resolutions  of  his  countrymen.  12.
Effect  of  his  patriotism  upon  his  pro-
perty: character  of  his  sons,  13.  14.  [.s'tc
Ixjulsa  de  Collgny.]  Value  set  by  nlm
on  Ghent,  20.  Policy  favoured  by  him,
24.  Spirit  of  his  conduct  towards  rell-
I  gious  opponents,  25.  ii,  115.  His  anxiety
to  keep  Holland  and  Zeeland  free  from
foreign  domination,  i,  59.  A  Portuguese
!  candidate  anxious  to  succeed  him,  64.
Efforts  of  the  French  king  to  buy
Walcheren  from  him,  68.  Huw  he
regard*^!  same,  ibid.  Conduct  of  Flemish
nobles  ascriljed  to  their  jealousy  of  him,
82.  lnip<  ius  given  by  his  murder  to
Parma's  operations,  133.  His  far-seeing
plan  lor  keeping  the  eiK  my  out  of  Ant-
werp, 1.J5-138.  H(»w  he  s»K;ured  Sainte
Aldegonde's  life,  141.  His  unt<  achable
j  gift,  142.  Why  an  enemy  rejoiced  at  his
I  death,  147.  Loss  to  the  patriots  on  the
I  very  day,  148.  179.  Parma's  ehiirges
against  him,  160.  His  culoRium  on
Sidney.  339.  His  homely  attire  :  Kulke
Greville'8  portraiture  of  him,  350.  Hi,
268.  269.  Condition  of  his  family  in  con-
sequence of  his  patriotic  s;icrltice.s,  I,  373.
A  lesson  with  which  he  made  the  world
familiar,  U,  Ix^.  "  Father  William,"  332.
As  to  the  offer  of  sovereignty  to  him,
Iv,  504.  Alive  to  the  meaning  of  reli-
gious freedom,  506.
Williams,  Roger,  his  soldier-servic^-s  to
the  States,  and  inaccessibility  to  SpiinL^h
bribes,  i,  74.  Siigacity  of  his  views:
shews  the  true  way  to  cripple  Spain,  75,
76.  His  counsel  after  the  fall  of  Ant-
werp, 315.  318.  His  exploit  at  Grave,
ii,  20.  Baulked  in  a  proj-  ct,  31,  32.  His
complaint  relative  to  Hoht  iilo,  35.  Mak-
ing a  mark  of  himself,  39.  His  wise
words  and  brave  acta  at  Sluys,  251,  252.
255-2 j7.  His  reply  to  Farina  s  attempt
to  enlist  him,  260.  His  mission  home,
261.  Epistolatcjry  commendations  on
him,  261,  '262  notes.  Master  of  the  hors«-:
Leicester's  grudge,  487,  488.  Playing
the  ho^t  and  ^p.^aking  his  mind  to  the
League  deputies,  iii,  64.  Fighting  and
writing,  116,  117.  His  brilliant  action

580  WILLOUGHBY.

INDEX.

ZUTPHEN.

before  Dieppe,  116  note.  His  wholesome
counsel  to  his  Queen,  116,  117  note.  His
exploit  at  Rue,  137.  Dead:  history  left
behind  him,  359.  See  ii,  63.  250.  281. 334.
338.  490.  525.

WiLLOUGHBT,  Lord,  on  the  supineness  of
the  G-erman  princes,  i,  31.  Hero  of  a
ballad,  ii,  45.  Unhorsing  a  Spanish
general,  48.  Taking  command  in  Hol-
land, vice  Leicester,  337.  Excellences
and  defects  in  his  character:  his  own
consciousness  of  the  latter,  337-339.
Getting  into  hot  water  with  the  States,
388,  389,  390  note.  392-396.  Why  dis-
satisfied with  his  position,  391.  His
share  in  the  stratagem  at  Bergen-op-
Zoom,  514,  Ceremony  performed  by
him  at  the  end  of  the  fight,  515.  His
conduct  in  reference  to  the  Gertruyden-
berg  disaster,  516-519.  See  i,  333.  342.
ii,  63.  334.  398.

WiNGFiELD,  Sir  John,  commander  of  Ger-
truydenberg,  ii,  3S9.  An  alleged  accom-
plice in  the  betrayal  of  the  garrison,  516-
519.  iii,  197.  His  fatal  fool-hardiness,
364.

Winter,  Sir  William,  English  admiral,  ii,
337.  Longing  for  the  Armada,  426.
His  fire-ship  suggestion  to  Howard,  461,
462. Wounded,  477. See  475.  476.  493.

VViNwooD,  Ralph,  sent  to  assist  in  the
peace  deliberations  at  the  Hague,  iv,
36 ).  419.  His  quarrel  with  Maurice,
456,  457.  His  counsel  on  religious
matters,  492.

WiTTENHORST,  Walrave  van,  sent  to  test
the  feelings  of  the  States  on  the  peace
question,  iv,  275.  Purport  of  his  report,
279.

Y,  the  form  given  by  Maurice  to  his  sub-
terranean workings,  iii,  246.  257.  The
letter  doing  its  work,  258.

Ybarra,  Stephen,  Philip's  envoy  to  the
League,  iii,  122.  Miscalculating  the
effect  of  some  murders,  124.  Spectacle
of  which  he  was  an  involuntary  witness,
231.  Indicating  its  effect  in  three  words,
ibid.  Characterising  the  younger  Mans-
feld,  262.  Watching  an  archduke  and
denouncing  a  duke,  266,  267.  His  sum-
ming up  of  the  former,  267.  His  deal-
ings with  another  duke,  304.  Mission
proposed  for  him  relative  to  Spinola,  iv,
337.  Protest  and  steps  of  Spinola  there-

on, 337,  338.  His  puerilities  and  boast-
ing, 339.  Recalled,  340.
YoRKE.  Sir  Rowland,  English  volunteer  in
Parma's  camp,  i,  184.  Desperate  expedi-
tion headed  by  him,  185.  His  character
and  antecedents;  as  mitrustworthy  as
daring,  ii,  148.  Post  unwisely  conferred
upon  him,  148-150.  His  traitorous  con-
duct, 155-159.  Price  put  upon  his  head:
his  later  career  and  end,  167,  168.  Ven-
geance wreaked  on  his  exhumed  remains,
iii,  104.

YsENDTKE,  invested  by  Maurice,  iv,  192.

Its  surrender,  ibid.
YssEL  river,  its  mihtary  importance,  iii,

97. Bridged  by  Maurice,  100. See  iv,

241-244.

YssELSTEiN,  Colonel,  co-leader  in  the  attack

upon  the  Kowenstyn,  i,  198.
YvETOT,  iii,  140.

Zaida,  kmg  of  Ternate,  his  treaty  with  the
Dutch,  iv,  230. See  Ternate.

Zapena,  Spanish  admiral  and  marshal,  his
counsel  at  Nieuport,  iv,  22.  An  argu-
ment more  potent,  23.  Prisoner  to  the
Dutch,  41.

Zeeland,  one  of  the  Seven  United  Pro-
vinces :  views  of  its  navy  officers  on  the
proposed  relief  of  Antwerp,  i,  222.
Character  given  to  its  people  by  Gilpin,
273.  Its  extent,  cost  of  its  dykes,  &c,  iii,
24.  Its  delegate  at  the  peace  negotiation
congress,  iv,  402.  416.  Withdrawal  of
its  deputies  from  the  States  Assembly,
435.  449. 452.  Their  return,  473.  Standing
out  and  talking  of  setting  up  for  itself,
467,  468.  469.  473.  474.  475.  Submitting
to  the  truce,  476.  Its  revenue,  523.  Its
percentage  of  contribution  to  the  general
fund,  524  n-jte.  See  Holland.  Nether-
lands.

ZuTPHEN,  i,  55.  156.  Its  siege  determined
on:  Leicester's  plans  and  preliminary
operations,  ii,  3a-42.  Parma's  forces
and  position,  42-45.  Warnsfeld  fight:
Sidney's  death  wound,  46-50.  Results  of
the  encounter,  51-57.  Mistaken  choice
of  a  commander  for  the  fort,  148,  149.
Traitorous  admittance  of  the  Spaniards,
167,  168.  Starvation  in  its  garrison,  iii,
69.  Stratagem  by  which  Maurice  gained
the  fort,  93.  Investment  and  surrender
of  the  city,  99.  See  ii,  147.  171.  195.  iv.
244.

THE  END.

LONDON  :  PRINTED  BY  W.  CLOWES  AND  SONS,  STAMFORD  STREET,
AND  CHARING  CROSS.

Albemarle  Street,  London,
February,  1ST3.

ME.  MUREAT'S

GENERAL LIST  OF  WORKS.

ALBERT  (The)  ME:\rORTAL.  The  Xatioaal  Monument  erected

to  the  PRINCE  CONSOirr  at  Kensinfjton.  Illustrated  by  Engravings
of  its  Architecture,  Decorations;  Sculptured  Groups,  Statues,  Mosaics,
Metalwork,  &c.  With  Descriptive  Text.  With  24  Plates.  Folio.  12M2^.
Large  Paper. \bl.  lbs. Published  by  Authority.

A  Popular  Handbook  to  the  above  Monument.  "Woodcuts.
16ino.  \8.

 (Prtnck)  speeches  AND  ADDRESSES  ON  PUBLIC

Occasions;  with  an  Introduction,  giving  some  outline  of  his  Character.
With  Portrait. 8vo. 10«.  6t^.  ;  ot  Pupidar  Ediliun,  fc^Y^.^vo.  Is.

ABBOTT'S  (Rev.  J.)  Memoirs  of  a  Church  of  England  Missionary

in  the  North  American  Colonies.  Post  8vo.  2s.
ABERCROMBIE'S  (John)  Enquiries  concerning  the  Intellectual

Powers  and  the  Investigation  of  Truth.  19^//  Ldition.  Fcap.  8vo.  3s.  f^d.

  Philosophy  of  the  Moral  Feelings.  I4(h

Edition. Fcap. Bvo. 2s.  6d.

ACLAND'S  (Rev.  Charles)  Popular  Account  of  the  Manners  and

Customs  of  India. Post  Bvo.  2*.

^SOP'S  FABLES.  A  New  Version.  With  Historical  Preface.
By  Rev.  Thomas  James.  AVith  100  Woodcuts,  by  Tknxiel  and  Wolf.
6Ath  Thousand. Post  8vo. 2s.  6d.

AGRICULTURAL  (Royal)  JOURNAL.  8vo.  6s.  {Half  yearly.)
AIDS  TO  FAITH :  a  Series  of  Theological  Essays. 8vo.  95.

CONTENTS.

Jllracles  Dean  Mansel.

Evidences  of  Christianity . . . IJisuuP  of  Killaloe.
Prophecy  &  Mosaic  Ilt  cord  of  Creadon  . Rev.  Dr  McCaul.
Zlfolngy  and  Subscription , . . Cation  Cook.

The  PentatfMck  Canon  Rawi.inson.

Inspiration  Hishop  of  Ely*.

D^ath  of  Christ . . .  . Archbishop  of  York.

Scripture  and  its  Interpretation . . lijsuop  ov  Gloucester  and

Ukistol.

AMBER-WITCH  (The).  A  most  interesting  Trial  for  Witch-
craft. Translated  by  Lady  Duff  Gordon.  Post  Bvo.  2s.

ARMY  LIST  (The). Published  Monthly  by  Authority.  18mo.  2s,

ARTHUR'S  (Little)  History  of  England. By  Lady  Callcott.

Neio  Edition,  continued  to  1872. Woodcuts. Fcap.  8v(^. 25.  %d.

AUSTIN'S  (John)  Lectures  on  General  Jurisprudence  ;  or,  the
Philosophy  of  Positive  Law.  bth  Edition.  Edited  liy  Robert  Camp-
tell. 2  Vols. 8vo.  32*.

  (Sarah) Fragments  from  German Prose  Writers.

With  Biographical  Notes.  Post  Bvo.  10*.

B

2

LIST  OF  WORKS

ADMIRALTY  PUBLICATIONS ;  Issued  by  direction  of  the  Lords
Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty: —

A  MANUAL  OF  SCIENTIFIC  ENQUIRY,  for  the  Use  of  Travellers.
Edited  by  Sir  John  F.  Hebschel  and  Robert  Main,  M.A.  Fourth
Editien, Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  3s.  Qd.

AIRY'S  ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS  made  at  Greenwich.
1836  to  1847. Royal  4to. 50s.  each.

  MAGNETICAL  and  METEOROLOGICAL  OBSERVA-
TIONS.  1840  to  1847. Royal  4to.  50s.  each.

  ASTRONOMICAL,  MAGNETICAL,  AND  METEOROLO-
GICAL OBSERVATIONS,  1848  to  1870. Royal  4to. 50s.  each.

  APPENDICES TO  THE ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVA-
TIONS.

1836.  — I.  Bessel's  Refraction  Tables.  1

II.  Tables  for  converting  Errors  of  R.A.  and  N.P.D.  V8s.
into  Errors  of  Longitude  and  Ecliptic  P.D.  J

1837.  — I.  Logarithms  of  Sines  and  Cosines  to  every  Ten  J

Seconds  of  Time.  J-8/»
II.  Table  for  converting  Sidereal  into  Mean  Solar  Time,  j
1842.— Catalogue  of  1439  Stars.  8s.
1845. — Longitude  of  Valentia.  8s.
1847.— Description  of  Altazimuth. {Eeprint.)  5s.

1851.  — Maskelyne's  Ledger  of  Stars.  6s.

1852.  — I. Description  of  the  Transit  Circle. (Eeprint.)  5s.

11.  Regulations  of  the  Royal  Observatory.  2s.

1853.  — Bessel's  Refraction  Tables.  3s.

1854.  — I. Description  of  the  Zenith  Tube.  3*.

II.  Six  Years' Catalogue  of  Stars.  10s.
1856. — Description  of  the  Galvanic  Apparatus  at  Greenwich  Ob-
servatory. 8s.
1862.— I. Seven  Years'  Catalogue  of  Stars.  10s.

II.  Plan  of  the  Building  and  Ground  of  the  Royal  Ob-)

servatory,  Greenwich.  >  3s.

III.  Longitude  of  Valentia.  J
1864. — I. Moon's  Semidiameter.

II.  Planetary  Observations,  1831  to  1835.

1868. — I. Corrections  of  Bouvard's  Elements  of  Jupiter  and
Saturn.  4s.

II.  Seven  Years'  Catalogue  of  2760  Stars  for  1864.  10s.

III.  Description  of  the  Great  Equatoreal.  5s.
  ASTRONOMICAL  RESULTS. 1848  to  1870. 4to.  8s.

  MAGNETICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL  RESULTS.

1848  to  1870. 4to.  8s.  each,

  REDUCTION  OF  THE  OBSERVATIONS  OF  PLANETS.

1750  to  1830.  Royal  4to.  50s.

 LUNAR  OBSERVATIONS.  1750

to  1830. 2  Vols.  Royal  4to.  50s.  each.
  1831  to  1851. 4to.  20s.

BERNOULLI'S  SEXCENTENARY  TABLE. Lo7idon,1779. 4to.  5s.

BESSEL'S  AUXILIARY  TABLES  FOR  HIS  METHOD  OF  CLEAR-
ING  LUNAR  DISTANCES.  8vo.  2s.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

3

Admiralty  'P\]bucxtio:^s— continued.

COOK,  KING,  AKD  BAYLY'S  ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS.
London,  1782. 4to.  21s.

ENCKE'S  BERLINER  JAHRBUCH,  for  1830. Berlin,  1828. 8vo  9s,
HANSEN'S  TABLES  DE  LA  LUNE. 4to.  20*.
HARRISON'S  PRINCIPLES  OF HIS TIME-KEEPER.  Plates.
1797. 4to.  5s.

LAX'S  TABLES  FOR  FINDING  THE  LATITUDE  AND  LONGI-
TUDE. 1821. 8vo.  10s.

LUNAR  OBSERVATIONS  at  GREENWICH.  1783  to  1819.  Compared

with  the  Tables,  1821. 4to. 7s.  6d.
MACLEAR  ON  LACAILLE'S  ARC  OF  MERIDIAN. 2  Vols.  2C«.
MASKELYNE'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  GOING  OF  HARRISON'S

WATCH. 1767. 4to. 2s.  6d.
MAYER'S DISTANCES of the MOON'S CENTRE from  the

PLANETS.  1822,  3«.;  1823,  4s.  6</. 1824  to  1&35. 8vo.  4s.  each.

  TABULiE  MOTUUM  SOLIS  ET  LUN^.. 1770.  5*.

  ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS MADE  AT  GOT-

TINGEN,  from  1756  to  1761. 1826. Folio. 7t.  6d.
NAUTICAL  ALMANACS,  from  1767  to  187t;. 8vo. 2s.  6d.  each.

 SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  ADDITIONS

up  to  1812. Svo. 5s. 1834-54. 8vo.  5s.
 SUPPLEMENTS,  1828  to  1833,  1837  and  1838.

Svo.  2«.  each.

  TABLE  requisite  to  be  used  with  the  N.A.

1781.  Svo.  5s.

POND'S  ASTRONO>IICAL  OBSERVATIONS.  1811  to  1835.  4to.  21s.
each.

SABINE'S  PENDULUM  EXPERIMENTS  to  Detebmink  the  Fioube
OK  THE  Earth. 1825.  4to.  40s.

SHEPHERD'S  TABLES  for  Corbectino  Lunab  Distances.  1772.
Royal  4to.  21s.

  TABLES,  GENERAL,  of  the  MOON'S  DISTANCE

from  the  SUN,  and  10  STARS.  1787.  Folio.  5s.  6d.
TAYLOR'S  SEXAGESIMAL  TABLE.  1780.  4to.  15s.
 TABLES  OF  LOGARITHMS. 4to.  SI.

TIARK'S  ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS  for  the  Lonoitude

of  Madeira. 1822. 4to.  5s.
  CHRONOMETRICAL  OBSERVATIONS  for  Dipfebexces

of  Longitude  between  Doveb,  Portsmouth,  and  Falmouth.  1823.

4to.  5s.

VENUS  and  JUPITER:  Obsebvations  of,  compared  with  the  Tables.

Lotulon,  1822. 4to.  2s.
WALES' AND BAYLY'S ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS.

1777. 4to.  21s.

WALES'  REDUCTION  OF  ASTRONOMICAL  OBSERVATIONS
MADE  IN  THE  SouTHEBN  Hemisphebe.  1764—1771.  1788.  4to
10s.  6d.

BARBAULD'S  (Mrs.)  Hymna  in  Prose  for  Children. With  112

Illustrations. Small  4to. 5s. ;  or  Fine  Paper,  7s.  6d.

BARROW'S  (Sir  John)  Autobiographical  Memoir,  from  Early-
Life  to  Advanced  Age. Portrait.  Svo.  16s.

  (John)  Life,  Exploits,  and  Voyages  of  Sir  Francis

Drake.  Post  Svo.  2s.

B  2

4

LIST  OF  WORKS

BARRY'S  (Sir  Charles)  Life  and  Works. By  Canon  Barry,  D.D.

Second  Edition. With  Portrait  and  Illustrations. Medium  8vo.  15)-.

BATES*  (H.  W.)  Records  of  a  Naturalist  on  the  River  Amazon
during  eleven  years  of  Adventure  and  Travel.  Third  Edition,  Illus-
trations. Post  8vo.

BEAUCLERK'S  (Lady  Diana)  Summer  and  Winter  in  Norway.

Third  Edition. With  Illustrations. Small  8vo.  6*.

BEES  AND  FLOWERS.  Two  Essays.  By  Rev.  Thomas  James.
Reprinted  from  the  "  Quarterly  Review." Fcap.  8vo. Is.  each.

BELCHER'S  (Lady)  Account  of  the  Mutineers  of  the  'Bounty/

and  their  Descendants;  with  their  Settlements  in  Pitcairn  and  Norfolk
Islands. With  Illustrations. Post  8vo.  12s.

BELL'S  (Sir  Chas.)  Familiar  Letters.  Portrait.  Post  8vo.  12s.
BERTRAM'S  (Jas.  G.)  Harvest  of  the  Sea :  a  Contribution  to  the

Natural  and  Economic  History  of  British  Food  Fishes.  Second  Edition.
With  50  Illustrations.  8vo.  12s.

BIBLE  COMMENTARY.  Explanatory  and  Critical.  With
a  Revision  of  the  Translation.  Ev  BISHOPS  and  CLERGY  of  the
ANGLICAN  CHURCH.  Edited  hy  F.  C.  Cook,  M.A.,  Canon  of  Exeter.
Medium  8vo. Vol.  I. 30s. Vol.  II.  20*.

(  Genesis Bishop  of  Ely.

I  Exodus  Canon  Cook  &  Rev.  Sam.  Clark.

Vol  I  ^  I^EViTicus Rev.  Samuel  Clark.

^ '  I  Numbers Canon  Espin  &  Rev.  J.  F.

Thrupp.

'  Deuteronomy Canon  Espin.

f  Joshua Capon  Espin.

Vol.  11.^  .Judges,  Ruth,  Samuel.  Bishop  of  Bath. and  Wells.
(I.  Kings Canon  Rawlinson.

BICKMORE'S  (A.  S.)  Travels  in  the  Eastern  Archipelago,
1865-6;  a  Popular  Description  of  the  Islands,  with  their  Natural  His-
tory, Geography,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  People,  &c.  With  Maps
and  Illustrations. 8vo.  21s.

BIRCH'S  (Samuel)  History  of  Ancient  Pottery  and  Porcelain:

Egyptian,  Assyrian,  Greek,  Roman,  and  Etruscan.  Second  Edition,
With  200  Illustrations. Medium  8vo.  42s.

BISSET'S  (Andrew)  History  of  the  Commonwealth  of  England,

from  the  Death  of  Charles  I.  to  the  Expulsion  of  the  Long  Parliament
by  Cromwell.  Chiefly  from  the  MSS.  in  the  State  Paper  Office.  2  vols.
8vo.  30s.

BLTJNT'S  (Rev.  J.  J.)  Undesigned  Coincidences  in  the  Writings  of
the  Old  and  NewTestament,  an  Argument  of  their  Veracity  :  containing
the  Books  of  Moses,  Historical  and  Prophetical  Scriptures,  and  the
Gospels  and  Acts. Eleventh  Edition. Post  8vo.  6s.

  History  of  the  Church  in  the  First  Three  Centuries.

Fifth  Edition. Post  8vo.  6s.

 Parish  Priest;  His  Duties,  Acquirements  and  Obliga-
tions.  Fifth  Edition. Post  8vo.  6s.

 Lectures  on  the  Right  Use  of  the  Early  Fathers.

Third  Edition.  8vo.  9s.

  Plain Sermons  Preached  to  a  Country  Congregation.

Sixth  Edition. 2  Vols. Post  8vo.  12s.

  Essays  on  various  subjects. 8vo.  125.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

5

BLOMFIELD'S  (Bishop)  Memoir,  with  Selections  from  his  Corre-
spondence. By  bis  Son. Secaad  Edition. Portrait,  post  8vo.  12s.

BOSWELL'S  (James)  Life  of  Samuel  Johnson,  LL.D.  Includ-
ing the  Tour  to  the  Hebrides.  Edited  by  Mr.  Cbokeb.  Portraits.  Royal
8vo.  105.

BRACE'S  (C.  L.)  Manual  of  Ethnology ;  or  the  Races  of  the  Old

World. Post  8vo.  65.

BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER. Illustrated  with  Coloured

Borders,  Initial  Letters,  and  Woodcuts. Svo.  18?.

BORROWS  (George)  Bible  in  Spain;  or  the  Journeys,  Adventures,

and  Imprisonments  of  an  Englishman  in  an  Attempt  to  circulate  the
Scriptures  in  the  Peninsula. Post  Svo. 3s.  6J.

 Zincali,  or  the  Gipsies  of  Spain ;  their  Manners,

Customs,  Religion,  and  Language. Post  Svo.  3.?.  6J.

 Lavengro  ;  The  Scholar — The  Gipsy — and  the  Priest.

Post  Svo.  55.

 : Romany  Rye — a  Sequel  to  *'  Lavengro.''  Post  Svo.  5^.

■ Wild  Wales  :  its  People,  Language,  and  Scenery.

PostSvo.-  5a.

BRAY'S  (Mrs.)  Life  of  Thomas  Stothard,  R.A. With  Portrait

and  60  Woodcuts. 4to.  21s.

  Revolt  of  the  Protestants  in  the  Cevennes.  With  some

Account  of  the  Huguenots  in  the  Seventeenth  Century.  Post  Svo.  10s. Qd.

BRITISH  ASSOCIATION  REPORTS.  Svo.

York  and  Oxford,  ia31-32,  Us.  6J.  Belfast,  1S52, 15s.

Cambridge,  1833,  12s.  Hull,  1853,  10s.  SJ.

Edinburgh,  1834, 15s.  Liverpool,  1854,  18s

Dublin,  1835,  13s.  6d.
Bristol,  1836,  12s.
Liverpool,  1837,  16s.  Sd.
Newcastle,  1838, 15s.
Birmingham,  1839,  13s.  6J
Glasgow,  1840,  15s.

Glasgow,  1855.  15».
Cheltenham,  1856,  18s.
Dublin,  1857,  15s.
Leeds.  1853,  20s.
Aberdeen,  1859, 15s.
Oxford,  1860,  25s.

Plymouth,  1841,  13s.  6J.  ' Manchester,  1861,  15s.

Manchester,  1842,  10s.  6d.  Cambridge,  18G2,  20s.

Cork,  1843,  12s.
York,  1&44,  20s.
Cambridge,  1845,  12s.
Southampton,  1846, 15s.
Oxford,  1847. 18s.
Swansea,  1848, 9s.
Birmingham,  1849,10s.
Edinburgh,  1850, 15s.
Ipswich,  1851,  16s.  6d.

Newcastle,  1863,  25$.
Bath,  1864,  lti<f.
Birmingham,  1865,  2Ss
Nottingham.  1866,  24s.
Dundee.  18<)7,  2fi.<t.
Norwich,  1868,  25.<.
Exeter,  1869,  22s.
Liverpool,  1870,  18s.
Edinburgh,  1871,  16s.

BROUGHTON'S  (Lord) Journey  through  Albania,  Turkey  in
Europe  and  Asia,  to  Constantinople. Illustrations. 2  Vols.  8vo.  30s.

  Visits  to  Italy. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  ISs.

BROWNLOW'S (Lady) Reminiscences of  a  Septuagenarian.

From  the  year  1802  to  1815. Third  Edition. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

BUBBLES  FROM  THE  BRUNNEN  OP  NASSAU. By  Sir

Francis  B.  Head,  Bart. 7  th  Edition.  Illustrations. PostSvo.  7s.  6t;.

BUNYAN  (John)  and  Oliver  Cromwell. By  Robert  Southey.

Post  Svo.  2s.

BURGON'S  (Rev.  J.  W.) Christian  Gentleman  ;  or,  Memoir  of

Patrick  Eraser  Tytler. Second  Edition. Post  Svo.  9s.

Letters  from  Rome. Post  Svo.  12s.

6

LIST  OF  WORKS

BURN'S  (Col.)  Dictionary  of  Naval  and  Military  Technical
Terms,  English  and  French— French  and  English.  Fourth  Edition.
Crown  8vo.  155.

BURROW'S  (Montagu)  Constitutional  Progress.  A  Series  of
Lectures  delivered  before  the  University  of  Oxford.  2nd  Edition.
Tost  8vo.  5s.

BUXTON'S  (Charles)  Memoirs  of  Sir  Thomas  Fowell  Buxton,
Bart.  With  Selections  from  his  Correspondence.  Portrait.  8vo.  16s,
Popular  Edition, Fcap.  8vo.  5f.

 Notes  of  Thought. With  Biographical  Sketch.

By  Rev.  Llewelltn  Davies. With  Portrait. Crown  Svo. 10s.  6d.

 Ideas  of  the  Day  on  Policy. Zrd  Edition. Svo.  Qs.

BURCKHARDT'S  (Dr.  Jacob)  Cicerone ;  or  Art  Guide  to  Paint-
ing in  Italy.  Edited  by  Rev.  Dr.  A.  Von  Zahn,  and  Translated  from
the  German  by  Mus.  A.  Clough. Post  8vo.

BYRON'S  (Lord)  Letters  and  Journals. By  Thomas  Moore.

Cabinet  Edition. Plates. 6  Vols. Fcap.  8vo.  185.

 Popular  Edition. Portraits. Royal  Svo.

. Poetical  Works. Library  Edition. Portrait. 6  Vols.

Demy  Svo.  45s.

 —  Cabinet  Edition, Plates. 10  Yols.

Fcap.  8vo.  30s.

 . Pocket  Edition.  8  Yols. 24mo.  2\s,

Bound,  and  in  a  Case.

  Popidar  Edition.  Plates. Royal  Svo.

•  Pearl  Edition. Crown  Svo.  2s.  Qd,

"  Childe  Harold. With  SO  Engravings.  Svo.  125.

 16mo. 25.  ^d,

  Vignettes. 16mo.  \s,

 Portrait. 16mo.  M,

  Tales  and  Poems. 24mo. 25.  6d

  Miscellaneous. 2  Vols. 24mo.  55.

  Dramas  and  Plays. 2  Vols. 24mo.  55.

  Don  Juan  and  Beppo. 2  Vols.  24mo.  55.

  Beauties. Portrait. Fcap.  Svo. 35. 6c?.

BURR'S  (G.  D.)  Instructions  in  Practical  Surveying,  Topogra-
phical Plan  Drawing,  and  on  sketching  ground  without  Instruments.
Fourth  Edition. Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  6s.

BUTTMAN'S  LEXILOGUS ;  a  Critical  Examination  of  the

Meaning  of  numerous  Greek  Words,  chiefly  in  Homer  and  Hesiod.
Translated  by  Rev.  J.  R.  Fishlake. Fifth  Edition. Svo.  125.

 CATALOGUE  OP  IRREGULAR  GREEK  VERBS.

With  all  the  Tenses  extant— their  Formation,  Meaning,  and  Usage,

accompanied  by  an  Index. Translated,  with  Notes,  by  Rev.  J.  R.

Fishlake.  Fifth  Edition.  Revised  by  Rev.  E.  Venables.  Post8vo.  6s.
CALLCOTT'S (Lady) Little Arthur's History of  England.

New  Edition,  brought  down  to  1^12.  With  Woodcuts. Fcap.  Svo.  2s.  6c?.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

7

CAMPBELL'S  (Lord)  Lives  of  the  Lord  Chancellors  and  Keepers
of  the  Great  Seal  of  England.  From  the  Earliest  Times  to  the  Death  of
Lord  Eldon  in  1838. Fourth  Edition. 10  Vols. Crown  8vo. 6*.  each.

 —  Lords  Lyndhurst  and  Brougham. 8vo.  16s.

 Chief  Justices  of  England. From  the  Norman

Conquest  to  the  Death  of  Lord  Tenterden.  Second  Edition.  3  Vols.
Svo.  42«.

  Shakspeare's  Legal  Acquirements. Svo. bs.  6d.

 Life  of  Lord  Bacon. Fcap.  Svo. 2«.  6o?.

  (Sir  Neil)  Account  of  "Napoleonjat  Fontainebleau

and  Elba.  Being  a  Journal  of  Occurrences  and  Noies  of  his  Conver-
sations, &c. i'ortrait. Svo.  15s.

  (George)  ^lodern  India. A  Sketch  of  the  System

of  Civil  Government.  With  some  Account  of  the  Natives  and  Native
Institutions. Second  Edition. Svo.  165.

  (Thos.)  Ebsay  on  English  Poetry. With  Short

Lives  of  the  British  Poets. Post  Svo. 3*.  Sd.

CARNARVON'S (Lord) Portugal, Gallicia,  and  the  Basque

Provinces. Third  Edition. Tost  Svo. 3*.  6d.

 Peminiscences  of  Athens  and  the  ]^Iorea.  With

Map. Crown  Svo. 75.  6d,

 Recollections  of  the  Druses  of  Lebanon.  With

Notes  on  their  KeliKion. Third  Edition. Post  Svo. 5s.  6d.

CASTLEREAGH  (The)  DESPATCHES,  from  the  commencement
of  the  official  career  of  Viscount  Castlereagh  to  the  close  of  his  life.
12  Vols.  Svo. lis.  each.

CATHCART'S  (Sir  George)  Commentaries  on  the  War  in  Russia

and  Germany,  1812-13. Plans.  Svo.  14*.
CAVALCASELLE and  CROWE'S History of Painting  in

Italy,  from  the  2ud  to  the  16th  Century. With  IllustraUons.  6  Vols.

Svo.  '21.S.  each.

 Early  Flemish  Painters,  their  Lives  and

Works. Illustrations. Post  Svo. 10*.  6d. ;  or  Large  Paper,  Svo.  15*.
CHILD  (G.  Chaplin,  M.D.)  Benedicite  ;  or,  the  Song  of  the  Three

Children ;  being  Illustrations  of  the  Power,  Ueneficence,  and  Design
manifested  by  the  Creator  in  his  works, loth  Thousand. Post  Svo.  Us.

CHURTON'S  (Archdeacon)  Gongora.  An  Historioal  Essay  on  the
Age  of  Philip  III.  and  IV.  of  Spain.  With  Translations.  Portrait.
2  Vols. Small  Svo.  12s.

 New  Testament. Edited  with  a  Plain  Practical

Commentary  for  the  use  of  Families  and  General  Ueaders.  With  100
Panoramic  and  other  Views,  from  Sketches  and  Photographs  made  on
the  Spot. 2  vols. Svo.  21*.

CICERO'S  LIFE  AND  TIMES. His  Character  as  a  Statesman,

Orator,  and  Friend,  with  a  Selection  from  his  Correspondence  and  Ora-
tions. «y  William  FoRsYTU,  LL.D.  Third  Edition.  With  Illustra-
tions.  Svo. 10*.  6d,

CLARK'S  (Sir  James)  Memoir  of  Dr.  John  Conolly.  Comprising

a  Sketch  of  the  Treatment  of  the  Insane  in  Europe  and  America.  With
Portrait. Post  Svo. lOi-.  6<i.

8

LIST  OP  WORKS

CHURCH  (The)  &  THE  AGE. Essays  on  the  Principles  and'
Present  Position  of  the  Anglican  Church.  8vo. 145. Conten  s: —  ^

Anglican  Principles. — Dean  Hook.
Modern  Religions  Thought. — Bishop  of

Gloucester  and  Bristol.
State,  Church,  and  Synods. — Rev.  Dr.

Irons.

Religious  Use  of  Taste.— Rev.  R.  St.

John  Tyrwhitt.
Place  of  the  Laity.— Professor  Burrows.
Parish  Priest. — Rev.  Walsham  How.

Divines  of  16th  and  17th'  Centuries.

—Rev.  A.  W.  Haddan.
Liturgies  and  Ritual,  Rev.  M.  F.
Sadler.

Church  &  Education.— Canon  Barry.
Indian  Missions.—  Sir  Bartle  Fiere.
Church  and  the  People.— Rev.  W.  D.

Maclagan.
Conciliation and Comprehension. —
Rev.  Dr.  Weir.

SECOND  SERIES. 8vo.  125.  Contents:—

Church  and  Pauperism. — Earl  Nelson.
American  Church. — Bishop  of  Western

New  York.
Church and  Science.  —  Prebendary

Clark.

Ecclesiastical  Law. — IsambardBrunel.
Church & National Education. —

Canon  Norris.
Church  and  Universities.— John  G.

Talbot.

Toleration. — Dean  Cowie.

Eastern  Church  and  Anglican  Com-
munion.— Rev.  Geo.  Williams.

A  Disestablished  Church. — Dean  of
Cashel.

Christian  Tradition. — Rev.  Dr.  Irons.
Dogma. — Rev.  Dr.  Weir.
Parochial Councils.  —  Archdeacon
Chapman.

CLIYE'S  (Lord)  Life. By  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig. Post  8vo. ds.  6d.

CLODE'S  (C.  M.)  Military  Forces  of  the  Crown ;  their  Administra-
tion and  Government. 2  Vols. Svo. 2 Is.  each.

 Administration  of  Justice  under  Military  and  Martial

Law. Svo.  125.

COLCHESTER  (The)  PAPERS.  The  Diary  and  Correspondence
of  Charles  Abbott,  Lord  Colchester,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,
1802-1817. Portrait. 3  Vols. 8vo.  425.

COLERIDGE'S  (Samuel  Taylor)  Table-Talk.  Sixth  Edition.
Portrait. Fcap.  Svo. 35. 6c?.

COLLINGWOOD'S  (Cuthbert)  Rambles  of  a  Naturalist  on  the

Shores  and  Waters  of  the  China  Sea.  Being  Observations  in  Natural.
History  during  a  Voyage  to  China,  &c.  With  Illustrations.  Svo.  165.

COLONIAL  LIBRARY. [See  Home  and  Colonial  Library.]
COOK'S (Canon)  Sermons  Preached  at  Lincoln's  Inn  Chapel^

and  on  Special  Occasions. Svo.  05.

COOKERY  (Modern  Domestic).  Founded  on  Principles  of  Economy
and  Practical  Knowledge,  and  adapted  for  Private  Families.  By  a
Lady. New  Edition.  Woodcuts. Fcap.  Svo.  5s.

COOPER'S  (T.  T.)  Travels  of  a  Pioneer  of  Commerce  on  an

Overland  Jq.urney  from  China  towards  India,  Illustrations.  Svo.  165.

CORNWALLIS  (The)  Papers  and  Correspondence  during  the
American  War, — Administrations  in  India,— Union  with  Ireland,  and
Peace  of  Amiens. Second  Edition. 3  Vols. Svo.  635.

COWPER'S  (Countess) Diary  while  Lady  of  the  Bedchamber

to  Caroline  Princess  of  Wales,  1714—20.  Edited  by  Hon.  Spencer
CowPER. Second  Edition.  Portrait. Svo.  105. 6d.

CEABBE'S  (Rev.  George)  Life  and  Poetical  Works,
trations. Koyal  Svo.  7s.

With  Illus-

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

9

CROKER'S (J.  W.) Progressive Geography for  Children.

Fifth  Edition. 18mo.  U.Qd.

  Stories  for  Children,  Selected  from  the  History  of

England. Fifteenth  Edition. Woodcuts. 16rao. 25. 6d.

 Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson. Including  the  Tour  to

the  Hebrides. Portraits. Royal  8vo.  IO5.

  Essays  on  the  Early  Period  of  the  French  Revolution.

8vo.  15s.

  Historical  Essay  on  the  Guillotine. Fcap.  8vo.  1-9.

CROMWELL  (Oliver) and  JOHN BUNYAX. Essays.  By

KODKRT  SOUTHEV. Post  8vO.  2s.

CUMMING'S  (K.  Gordon)  Five  Years  of  a  Hunter's  Life  in  the

Far  Interior  of  South  Africa;  with  Auecdotps  of  the  Chace,  and  Notices
of  the  Native  Tribes. Sixth  Ediiioji. Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  6.9.

CROWE'S  AND  CAVALCASELLE'S  Lives  of  the  Early  Flemish
Painters. Woodcuts. Post  Bvo,  10s.  G-i. ;  or  Larije  Paper,  Svo,  155.

  History  of Painting  in  Italy,  from 2nd  to  IGth

Century. Derived  from  Historical  Re-icarches  as  well  as  Inspect'on  of
the  Works  of  Art  in  that  Country. With  more  than  100  lllustratioas.
5  Vols. Svo. 21a.  each.
CUNYNGIIAME'S  (Sir  Arthur)  Travels  in  the  Eistern  Caucasus,

on  ihe  Caspian,  and  lilMck  Seas,  in  Daghebtan  and  the  Frontiers  of
Persia  and  Turkey. With  Map  and  Illustrations. Svo.  IS5.

CURTIUS'  (Professor)  Student's  Greek  Grammar,  for  the  Upper

Forms. Edited  by  Dr.  Wm.  Smitu. Hard  Edition, Post  8vo.  6*.

 Elucidations  of  the  above  Grammar, Translated  by

EvKLYN  AitnoT. Post  Svo. 7s.  Gd.

 Smaller  Greek  Grammar  for  the  Middle  and  Lower

FormH.  Abridged  from  the  above. 12mo.  3s.  6tZ.

 Accidence  of  the  Greek  Lauguage. Extracted  from

the  above  work. 12rao. 2.<t.  6./.

 Principles  of  Greek  Etymology. Trantlated  by  A.  S.

WiLKiNS,  M.A.,  and  E.  11.  England,  B.A. Post  Svo.

CURZON'S  (Hon.  Robert)  Armenia  and  Erzeroum. A  Year  on

the  Frontiers  of  Russia,  Turkey,  and  Persia.  Third  Edition.  Wood-
cuts. Post  Svo.  75.  6d.

-T Visits  to  the  Monasteries  of  the  Levant. Fi/Ui  Edition.

Illustrations. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.
GUST'S  (General)  Lives  of  the  Warriors  of  the  ITt  h  Century— The
Tliirty  Years'  War. 2  Vols. 16s. Civil  Wars  of France  Hiid
Enjjiand. 2  Vols. 16s. Commanders  of  Fleets  and  Armies  before  the
Enemy. 2  Vols.  18s.

  Annals  of  the  Wars— ISth  &  19th  Century,  1700— 1815.

Compiled  from  the  most  Authentic  Sources.  With  Maps.  U  Vols.  Post
Svo.  5s.  each.

DAVIS'S  (Nathan)  Visit  to  the  Ruined  Cities  of  Numidia  and

Carthaginia. Illustrations. Svo.  16s.

DAVY'S  (Sir  Humphry)  Consolations  in  Travel;  or,  Last  Days

of  a  Philosopher. Severith  Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap.  Svo. 3a  fit/.

  Salmonia;  or.  Days  of  Fly  Eishing. Fifth  Edition.

Woodcuts. Fcap.  Svo. '3s.  6d.

DE  BEAUVGIR'S  (Marquis)  Voyage  Round  the  World  :  touching
at  Australia,  Java,  Siam,  Canton,  Pekiu,  Jeddo,  and  San  Francisco.
3  vols. Post  bvo.

10

LIST  OF  WORKS

l)ARWIN'S  (Charles)  Journal  of  Eesearches  into  the  Natural

History  of  the  Countries  visited  during  the  Voyage  of  H.M.S.  "  Beagle"
round  the  World. Eleventh  Thousand. Post  8vo.  95.

  Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of  Natural  Selection  ;

or,  the  Preservation  of  Favoured  Races  in  the  Struggle  for  Life.  Sixth
Edition. Post  8vo. Is.  6d.

— . Variation  of  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication.

With  Ilhistrations.  2  Vols.  8vo.  28s.

  Descent  of  Man,  and  on  Selection  in  Relation  to  Sex.

With  Illustrations. 2  Vols. Crown  8vo.  24s.

 Expressions  of  the  Emotions  in  Man  and  Animals.

Witli  Illustrations. Crown  8vo.  12.-?.

  Fertilization  of  Orchids  through  Insect  Agency,  and

as  to  the  good  of  Intercrossing.  Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  9s.
  Fact  and  Argument  for  Darwin. By  Fritz  Muller.

With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Additions  hy  the  Author.  Translated
from  the  German  by  W.  S.  Dallas. Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  6s.

DELEPIERRE'S  (Octave)  History  of  Flemish  Literature.  8vo.  95.

 Historical Difficulties  and  Contested  Events.

Being  Notes  on  some  Doubtful  Points  of  History. Post  Svo.  6s.

DENISON'S  (E.  B.)  Life  of  Bishop  Lonsdale. With  Selections

from  his  Writings. With  Portrait. Crown  8vo. lOs.  6d.

DERBY'S  (Earl  op)  Iliad  of  Homer  rendered  into  English

Blank  Verse. 7th  Edition. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  10s.

DE  ROS'S  (Lord)  Memorials  of  the  Tower  of  London.  Second

Edition. With  Illustrations. Crown  870.  12s.

 Young  Officer's  Companion;  or, Essays  on  Military

Duties  and  Qualities  :  with  Examples  and  Illustrations  from  History.
Post  8vo.  95.

DOG-BREAKING ;  th? Most  Expeditious,  Certain,  and  Easy

Method,  whether  great  excellence  or  only  mediocrity  be  required.  With
a  Few  Hints  for  those  who  Love  the  Dog  and  the  Gun.  By  Lieut.-
Gen.  Hutchinson.  Fifth  Edition.  With  40  Woodcuts.  Crown  8vo.  9s.

DOMESTIC  MODERN  COOKERY.  Founded  on  Principles  of
Economy  and  Practical  Knowledge,  and  adapted  for  Private  Families.
New  Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap.  8vo,  55.

DOUGLAS'S  (Sir  Howard)  Life  and  Adventures.  Portrait.  Svo.  155.

  Theory  and  Practice  of  Gunnery.  Fifth  Edition,  Plates.

8vo.  21s.

  Constructions  of  Bridges  and  the  Passage  of  Rivers,

in  Military  Operations. Third  Edition. Plates. Svo.  21s.

DRAKE'S  (Sir  Francis)  Life,  Voyages,  and  Exploits,  by  Sea  and
Land. By  Jo^n  Barrow. Third  Edition. Post  Svo.  2s.

DRINKWATER'S  (John)  History  of  the  Siege  of  Gibraltar,
1779-1783.  With  a  Description  and  Account  of  that  Garrison  from  the
Earliest  Periods. Post  8vo.  2s.

DUCANGE'S  MEDIEVAL  LATIN-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY.
Translated  by  Rev.  E.  A.  Dayman,  M.A. Small  4:to.

(In  preparation.)

DU  CHAILLU'S  (Paul  B.)  EQUATORIAL  AFRICA,  with
Accounts  of  the  Gorilla,  the  Nest-building  Ape,  Chimpanzee,  Croco-
dile, &c. IlUistratiens. Svo.  21s.

  Journey  to  Ashango  Land;  and  Further  Pene-
tration into  Equatorial  Africa. Illustrations.  Svo.  2l5,

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

11

D  UFFERIN'S  (Lord)  Letters  from  High  Latitudes ;  an  Account
of  a  Yacht  Voyage  to  Iceland,  Jan  Mayen,  and  Spitzbergen.  Fifth,
Edition. Woodcuts. Post  8vo. Is.  6d.

DUNCAN'S  (Captain)  History  of  the  Rojal  Artillery.  Com-
piled from  the  Original  Records.  Vol.  1  to  the  Peace  of  17S3.  With
Portrait. 8vo.  155.

DYER'S  (Thos.  H.)  History  of  Modern  Europe,  from  the  taking

of  Constantinople  by  the  Turks  to  the  close  of  the  War  in  the
Crimea. With  Index. 4  Vols. 8vo.  42s.

EASTLAKE'S  (Sir  Charles)  Italian  Schools  of  Painting.  From
the  German  of  Kugler.  Edited,  with  Notes.  Third  Edition.  Illus-
trated from  the  Old  Masters. 2  Vols. Post  8vo.  303.

 Contributions  to  the  Literature  of  the  Fine  Arts.

With  Memoir  of  the  Author,  and  Selections  from  his  Correspondence.
13y  Lady  Easti.ake. 2  Vols. 8vo.  24«.

EDWARDS'  (W.  H.)  Voyage  up  the  River  Amazon,  including  a

Visit  to  Para. Post  Svo.  2*.

ELDON'S  (Lord)  Public  and  Private  Life,  with  Selections  from
his  Correspondence  and  Diaries.  By  Uokacb  Twisa.  Third  Edition.
Portrait. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  21«.

ELGIN'S  (Lord)  Letters  and  Journal^. Edited  by  Theodore

Walroxd. Second  Edition. 8vo.  145.

ELLESMERE'S  (Lord) Two  Sieges  of  Vienna  by  the  Turks,

Translated  from  the  German. Post  8vo.  2s.

ELLIS'S  (W.)  Madagascar,  including  a  Journey  to  the  Capital,

with  notices  of  Natural  History  and  the  People.  Woodcuts.  8vo.  I65.

  ReviBited.  Setting  forth  the  Perse-
cutions and  Ileroic  Sufferings  of  the  Native  Christians.  Illustrations.
Svo.  I65.

ELPHINSTONE'S  (Hon.  Mountstuart)  History  of  India— the

Hindoo  and  Mahomedan  Periods. Fifth  Edition. Map. Svo.  ISs.

 \y ^  Patterns  for  Turning;  Comprising

Elliptical  and  other  Figures  cut  on  the  Lathe  without  the  use  of  any
Ornamental  Chuck. With  70  Illustrations. t>mall  4to.  15s.

ENGEL'S  (Carl)  Music  of  the  Most  Ancient  Nations;  particularly

of  the  Assyrians,  Egyptians,  and  Hebrews;  with  Special  Kererenw^  to
the  Discoveries  iu  Western  Asia  and  in  Egypt.  Sccmd  EdUion.  With
100  Illustrations. Svo. 10s.  e>d.

ENGLAND  (History  of)  See  Callcott,  Crokkr,  Hume,  Markham,

S.MiTii,  and  Stanhope.

ENGLISHWOMAN  IN  AMERICA. Post  8vo. lOs,  6(1,
ESSAYS  ON  CATHEDRALS. With  an  Introduction.  By

Deak  IlowsoN'. Svo.  125.

C0XTENT8.

Recollections  of  a  Dean.— Bishop  of Catliedral  Churches  of  tlie  Old  Foun-

Carlisle.  ^ dntion. — Edward  A.  Feeman.

Cathedral  Canons  and  their  Work.— ,  Welsh  Cathedrals. — Canon  Perowne.

Canon  Norris

Cathedrals  in  Ireland,  Past  and  Fu-
ture.— Dean  of  Cashel.

Cathedrals  in  their  Missionary  Aspect.
A.  J.  B.  Beresford  Hope.

Cathedral  Foundations  in  Relation  to
Religious  Thought —Canoa  West-
cott.

Education  of  Choristers. — Sir  F.  Gore
Ouseley.

Cathedral  Sdiools. — Canon  Durham.
Cathedral  Itefonu. — Ctiancellor  Mas-
singberd.

Relation  of  the  Chapter  to  the  Bishop.

Chancellor  Benson.
Arcliitecture of the  Cathedral

Churches. — Canon  Veuables.

12

LIST  OF  WORKS

ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY'S  TRANSACTIONS.  Yols.  L  to
VL  8vo.

ELZE'S  (Karl)  Life  of  Lord  Byron. Witli  U  Critical  Essay  on

his  Place  in  Literature.  Translated  from  the  German,  and  Edited  wiib
Notes. With  Original  Portrait  and  Facsimile. Svo.  16s.

FAMILY  RECEIPT-BOOK.  A  Collection  of  a  Thousand  Valuable
and  Useful  Receipts. Fcap.  8vo. 5s.  6d,

*FARRAR'S (A.  S.) Critical History  of  Free Thought  in
reference  to  the  Christian  Religion. Svo.  16s.

  (P.  W.) Origin  of  Language,  based on  Modern

Researches. Fcap.  Svo.  55.

FERGUSSON'S (James)  History  of  Architecture  in  all  Countries

from  the  Earliest  Times.  Vols.  1.  and  II.  With  1200  Illustrations.
Svo. 425.  each,

 Rude  Stone  Monuments  in  all  Countries;  their  Age

and  Uses. With  230  lUastrations. Medium  Svo.  2is.

— Holy  Sepulchre  and  ^tbe  Temple  at  Jerusalem ;

being  the  Substance  of  Two  Lectures  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institu-
tion, 1862  and  '65. Woodcuts. Svo. 7s.  6d.

FLEMING'S  (Prof.)  Manual  of  Moral  Philosophy.  Post  Svo.  75.  6tl
FLOWER  GARDEN  (The).  By  Rev.  Thos.  James.  Fcap.  8vo.  Is.
FONNEREAU'S  (T.  G.)  Diary  of  a  Dutiful  Son. Fcap.  Svo.

4.9.  6d.

FORSTER'S  (John)  Arrest  of  the  Five  Members  by  Charles  the
First.^  A  Chapter  of  English  History  re-written. Post  Svo.

  Grand  Remonstrance,  1641. With  an  Essay  on

English  freedom  under  the  Plantagenet  and  Tudor  Sovereigns.  Second
Edition. Post  Svo.  12s.

 Oliver  Cromwell,  Daniel  De  Foe,  Sir  Richard  Steele,.

Charles  Churchill,  Samuel  Foote. Third  Edition. Post  Svo.  125.

FORD'S  (Richard)  Gatherings  from  Spain. Post  Svo. ds.  6d.
FORSYTH'S  (William)  Life  and  Times  of  Cicero.  With  Selections

from  his  Correspondence  and  Orations.  Third  Edition.  Illustrations.  Svo.
10s.  6d.

 History  of  Ancient  Manuscripts.  Post  Svo. 2s.  6d.

FORTUNE'S  (Robert)  Narrative  of  Two  Visits  to  the  Tea
Countries  of  China,  1843-52.  Third  Edition.  Woodcuts.  2  Vols.  Post
Svo.  ISs.

FOSS'  (Edward)  Judges  of  England. With  Sketches  of  their

Lives,  and  Notices  of  the  Courts  at  Westminster,  from  the  Conquest  to
the  Present  Time. 9  Vols. Svo.  1265.

 Biographia  Juridica,  or  Biographical  Dictionary

of  the  Judges  of  England,  from  the  Conquest  to  the  Present  Time,
1066-1870. (800  pp.) Medium  8vo.  21s.

 Tabulae  Curiales ;  or,  Tables  of  the  Superior  Courts

of  Westminster  Hall.  Showing  the  Judges  who  sat  in  them  from  1066
to  1S64. Svo. 10s.  6c?.

FRANCE  (History  of). See  Markham,  Smith,  Students.
FRENCH  (The)  in  Algiers ;  The  Soldier  of  the  Foreign  Legion—

and  the  Prisoners  of  Abd-el-Kadir, Translated  hy  Lady  Duff  Gobdon*

Post  Svo.  2s.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

13

FRERE'S  (Sir  Bartle)  Results  of  Indian  Missions.  Small  Svo.
28.  6d.

 (M.)  Ol(f  Deccan  Days ;  or  Fairy  Legends  Current  in

Southern  India.  Collected  from  Oral  Tradition.  With  Notes,  by  Sir
Bartle  Frere. Second  Edition. With  Illustrations. Fcap.  8vo.  6s.

GALTON'S  (Francis)  Art  of  Travel ;  or.  Hints  on  the  Shifts  and

Contrivances  available  in  Wild  Countries.  Fifth  Edition.  Wood-
cuts. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

GEOGRAPHY. See  Student's  Manual.

GEOGRAPHICAL  SOCIETY  (Journal  of).  Svo.  2Qs.  {Yearhj.)
GERMANY  (History  op). See  Markiiam.

GIBBON'S  (Edward)  History  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the

Koman  Empire.  Edited  by  Milmax  and  Guizot.  A  New  Edition.
Preceded  by  his  Autobiography.  And  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Dr.  Wm.
Smith. Maps. 8  Vols. Svo.  60s.

 (The  Student's  Gibbon)  ;  Being  an  Epitome  of  the

above  work,  incorporating  the  Kesearcliesof  RecenfCommentators.  By
Dr.  Wm.  Smith. Woodcuts. Post  Svo. Is.  6d.

GIFFARD'S  (Edward)  Deeds  of  Naval  Daring;  or,  Anecdotes  of

the  British  Navy. Fcap.  Svo. 3s.  6d.
GLADSTONE'S  (\V.  E.)  Financial  Statements  of  1853,  60,  63-65,

and  with  Speeches  on  Tax- Bills  and  Charities. Svo.  12*.

GLEIG'S  (G.  R.)  Campaigns  of  the  British  Army  at  Washington
and  New  Orleans. Post  Svo.  2s.

 Story  of  the  Battle  of  Waterloo. Post  Svo.  3«.  6(1.

 Narrative  of  Sale's  Brigade  in  Affghanistan.  Post  Svo.  28,

  Life  of  Robert  Lord  Clive. Post  Svo. Ss.  6d.

 Sir  Thomas  Munro. Post  Svo.  Zs.  6d.

GOLDSMITH'S  (Oliver)  Works.  A  New  Edition.  Edited  with
Notes  by  Peter  Cunningham. Vignettes. 4  Vols. Svo.  30s.

GORDON'S  (Sir  Alex.)  Sketches  of  German  Life,  and  Scenes

from  the  War  of  Liberation. Post  Svo. 3s.  6d.

  (Lady Duff)  Amber- Witch :  A  Trial  for  Witch-

craft. Post  Svo.  2s.

  French  in  Algiers. 1.  The  Soldier  of  the  Foreign

Legion.'  2.  The  Prisoners  of  Abd-el-Kadir. Post  Svo.  2s.
GRAMMARS  (English,  Latin,  and  Greek).  See  Cdrtius;  Hutton  ;

Matthi.k;  Smith;  Kino  Edward,  <S:c.

GREECE  (History  of). See  Grote— Smith— Student.

GREY'S  (Earl)  Correspondence  with  King  William  IVth  and

Sir  Herbert  Taylor,  from  1830  to  1S32. 2  Vols. Svo.  305.

 Parliamentary  Government  and  Reform;  with

Suggestions  for  the  Iraproveiueut  of  our  Kepresentative  System.
SrcoTtd  Edition. Svo.  ^s.

GRUNER'S  (Lewis)  Terra-Cotta  Architecture  of  North  Italy,
from  careful  Drawings  and  Restorations.  With  Illustrations,  engraved
and  printed  in  Colours. Small  folio. 51.  5s.

GUIZOT'S  (M.)  Meditations  on  Christianity,  and  on  the  Religious

Questions  of  the  Day.  Part  I.  The  Essence.  Part  II.  Present  State.
Part  III.  Relation  to  Socitty  and  Opinion. 3  Vols. Post  Svo.  30.9.

14

LIST  OF  WORKS

GEOTE'S  (George)  History  of  Greece. From  the  Earliest  Times

to  the  close  of  the  generation  contemporary  with  the  death  of  Alexander
the  Great.  Fourth  Edition.  Portrait,  Maps,  an(d  Plans.  10  Vols.  8vo.
1205.  Or,  Popular  Edition.  Portrait  and  Plans.  12  Vols.  Post  8vo.
65.  each.

 ■  Plato,  and  the  other  Companions  of  Socrates.  Second

Edition. 3  Vols. 8vo.  455.

  Aristotle. Edited  by  Alexander  Bain  and  G.  Groom

Robertson. 2  Vols. 8vo.  325.

  (Mrs.)  Personal  Life  of  George  Grote. Illustrated  by

numerous  Letters. Portrait.  Svo.

 Memoir  of  Ary  Scheflfer.  Second  Edition.  With

Portrait. Svo,  85.  Qd.
HALLAM'S  (Henry)  Constitutional  History  of  England,  from  the

Accession  of  Henry  the  Seventh  to  the  Death  of  George  the  Second.

Seventh  Edition. 3  Vols.  Svo. 305.,  or  3  Vols.  Post  8vo.  12,s.;

 Student's  Constitutional  History  of  England.  Edited

by  Wm.  Smith,  D.C.L. Post  Svo. 75.  Qd.

  History  of  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages.  Tenth

Edition. 3  Vols. Svo. 305.,  or  3  Vols.  Post  Svo.  125.

  Student's History  of the Middle Ages.  With

Anthor's  Supplemental  Notes.  Edited  by  Wm.  Smith,  D.C.L.  Post  Svo.
75.  e>d.

 Literary  History  of  Europe,  during  the  15th,  16  th  and

17th  Centuries.  Fourth  Edition.  3  Vols.  Svo.  36s.,  or  4  Vols.  Post
Svo.  I65.

  (Arthur)  Kemains;  in  Yerse  and  Prose.  Portrait.

Fcap.  Svo. 3s.  6tZ.

HANNAH'S  (Eev.  Dr.)  Divine  and  Human  Elements  in  Holy
Scripture. Svo. IO5.  Qd.

HAKT'S  AEMY  LIST. {Quarterly  and  Annually.)  Svo.

HAY'S  (Sir  J.  H.  Drummond)  Western  Barbary,  its  Wild  Tribes

and  Savage  Animals. Post  Svo.  25.
HEAD'S  (Sir  Francis)  Eoyal  Engineer. Illustrations.  Svo.  125.

 Life  of  Sir  John  Burgoyne.  Post  8vo.  Is.

  Rapid  Journeys  across  the  Pampas. Post  Svo.  2s,

  Bubbles  from  the  Brunnen  of  Nassau. Seventh  Edition,

Illustrations. Post  Svo. 7^.  Qd.

 Emigrant. Fcap.  Svo. 2s.  Qd.

  Stokers  and  Pokers  ;  or,  the  London  and  North  Western

Railway. Post  Svo.  25.

  (Sir  Edmund)  Shall  and  Will; or.  Future  Auxiliary

Verbs. Fcap.  Svo.  4s.

HEBER'S  (Bishop)  Journey  through  India  from  Calcutta  to  Bom-
bay, Madras,  &c. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  75.

  Poetical  Works. Portrait. Fcap.  Svo. 3.5.  M,

 Hymns  adapted  to  the  Church  Service. 16mo. Is.  6d,

HERODOTUS.  A  New  English  Yersion.  Edited,  with  Notes
and  Essays,  historical,  ethnographical,  and  geographical,  by  Rev.  G.
Rawlinson,  assisted  by  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  and  Sir  J.  G.  Wil-
kinson. Second  Edition, Maps  and  Woodcuts.  4  Vols.  Svo.  485.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

15

FOREIGN  HANDBOOKS.

HAND-BOOK— TRAYEL-TALK.  English,  French,  German,  and
Italian. 18mo.  3s.  6d.

 NORTH  GERMANY,— Holland,  Belgium,  Prus-
sia, and  the  Rhine  from  Holland  to  Switzerland.  Map. Post  8vo.  123.

 SOUTH  GERMANY,  Bavaria,  Austria,  Styria,

Salzburg,  the  Austrian  and  Bavarian  Alps,  the  Tyrol,  Hungary,  and  the
Danube,  from  Ulm  to  the  Black  Sea. Map. PostSvo.  12s.

  KNAPSACK  GUIDE  TO  THE  TYROL.  16mo.

65.

  PAINTING.  German,  Flemish,  and  Dutch  Schools.

Illustrations.  2  Vols.  Post  8vo.  245.

  LIVES  OF  EARLY  FLEMISH  PAINTERS.  By

Cbowe  and  ^avalcaselle. llhistrations. Post  bvo. 10s.  6d.

  SWITZERLAND,  Alps  of  Savoy,  and  Piedmont.

Maps. Post  Bvo. 10s.  (on  thin  paper).

 KNAPSACK  GUIDE  TO  SWITZERLAND.  IGmo,

5s.

  FRANCE,  Normandy,  Brittany,  the  French  Alps,

the  Rivers  Loire,  Seine,  Rhone,  and  Garonne,  Dauphind,  Provence,  and
the  Pyrenees. Maps. Post  Svo.

  CORSICA  and  SARDINIA. Maps. Post  Svo.  As,

  PARIS,  and  its  Environs. Map  and  Plans.  16mo.

3s.  6d.

*»*  Murray's  Plan  op  Paris,  mounted  on  canvas.  3s.  6d.
 SPAIN,  Madrid,  The  Castiles,  The  Basque  Provinces,

Leon, The  Asturias,  Galicia,  Estreniadura,  Andalusia,  Honda,  GranadH,
Murcia,  Valencia,  Catalonia,  Arragon,  Navarre,  The  Balearic  Islands,
&c.  &c. Maps. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  21s.

  PORTUGAL,  Lisbon,  Porto,  Cintra,  Mafra,  &c.

Map. Post  Svo.  9s.
 NORTH ITALY,  Piedmont, Li^ria,  Yenetia.

Lombardy,  Parma,  Modena,  and  Romagna. Map.  Post  8vo. 12s,  (on

thin  paper).

  CENTRAL  ITALY,  Lucca,  Tuscany,  Florence,  The

Marches, Umbria, and  the  Patrimony  of  St.  Peter's.  Map.  Post  Svo.  10».

  ROME  AND  ITS  Environs. Map. Post  Svo.  l(t>\

  SOUTH  ITALY,  Two  Sicilies,  Naples,  Pompeii,

Herculaneum,  and  Vesuvius. Map. Post  Svo.  10s.

 KNAPSACK  GUIDE  TO  ITALY. 16mo.  68,

  SICILY,  Palermo,  Messina,  Catania,  Syracuse,  Etna,

and  the  Ruins  of  the  Greek  Temples. Map. Post  bvo.  12s.

  PAINTING. The  Italian  Schools. Edited  by  Sir

Chablks  Eastlake,  R.A. Illustrations. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  30s.

 LIVES  OF  ITALIAN  PAINTERS,  from  Cimabue

to  Bassaxo. By  Mrs.  Jameson. Portraits. Post  Svo.  12s.

— . RUSSIA,  St.  Petersburoh,  Moscow,  Poland,  and

Finland. Maps.  Post  Svo.  15s.

16

LIST  OF  WORKS

HAND-BOOK— DENMARK,  Sweden,  and  Norway.  Maps.  Post

8vo.  15s.

 KNAPSACK GUIDE TO NORWAY.  Map.

12mo.  65.

 GREECE,  the  Ionian  Islands,  Continental  Greece,

Athens,  the  Peloponnesus,  the  Islands  of  the  yEgean  Sea,  Albania,
Thessaly,  and  Macedonia, Maps. Post  8vo.  15s.

  TUKKEY IN  ASIA— Constantinople,  the  Bos-

phorus,  Dardanelles,  P>rousa,  Plain  of  Troy,  Crete,  Cyprus,  Smyrna,
Ephesus,  the  Seven  Churches,  Coasts  of  the  Black  Sea,  Armenia,
Mesopotamia,  &c. Maps. Post  8vo.  15s.

 —  EGYPT,  including  Descriptions  of  the  Course  of

the  Nile  through  Egypt  and  Nubia,  Alexandria,  Cairo,  and  Thebes,  the
Suez  Canal,  the  Pyramids,  the  Peninsula  of  Siuai,  the  Oases,  the
Fyoom,  &c. Map.  Post  Svo.  15s.

  HOLY  LAND — Syria  and  Palestine,  Peninsula

of  Sinai,  Edom,  and  Syrian  Desert. Maps. 2  Vo^. Post  Svo.  245.

  INDIA  —  Bombay  and  Madras. Map. 2  Vols.

Post  Svo. 12s.  each.

ENGLISH  HANDBOOKS.

HAND-BOOK— MODERN  LONDON.  Map. 16mo. 85. 6d.
  ESSEX,  CAMBRIDGE,  SUFFOLK,  AND  NOR-

FOLK,  Chelmsford,  Colchester,  Maldon,  Cambridge,  Ely,  Newmarket,
Bury,  Ipswich,  Woodbridge,  Felixstowe,  Lowestoft,  Norwich,  Yarmouth,
Cromer,  &c. Map  and  Plans. Post  Svo.  12s.

  CATHEDRALS  of  Oxford,  Peterborough,  Norwich,

Ely,  and  Lincoln. With  90  Illustrations, Crown  Svo.  18s.

  KENT  AND  SUSSEX,  Canterbury,  Dover,  Rams-
gate,  Sheerness,  Rochester,  Chatham,  Woolwich,  Brighton,  Chichester,
Worthing,  Hastings,  Lewes,  Arundel,  &c. Map. Post  Svo.  10«.

  SURREY  AND  HANTS,  Kingston,  Croydon,  Rei-

gate,  Guildford,  Dorking,  Boxhill,  Winchester,  Southampton,  New
Forest,  Portsmouth,  and  Isle  of  Wight.  Maps. Post  Svo.  10*.

  BERKS,  BUCKS,  AND  OXON,  Windsor,  Eton,

Reading,  Aylesbury,  Uxbridge,  Wycombe,  Henley,  the  City  and  Uni-
versity of  Oxford,  Blenheim,  and  the  Descent  of  the  Thames.  Map.
Post  Svo. 75.  6d.

  WILTS,  DORSET,  AND  SOMERSET,  Salisbury,

Chippenham,  AVeymouth,  Sherborne,  Wells,  Bath,  Bristol,  Taunton,
&c. Map. Post  Svo.  10s.

  DEVON  AND  CORNWALL,  Exeter,  Ilfracombe,

Linton,  Sidmouth,  Dawlish,  Teigumouth,  Plymouth,  Devonport,  Tor-
quay, Launceston,  Truro,  Penzance,  Falmouth,  the  Lizard,  Land's  End,
&c. Maps. Post  Svo.  12s.

 —CATHEDRALS  of  Winchester,  Salisbury,  Exeter,

Wells,  Chichester,  Rochester,  Canterbury.  With  110  Illustrations.
2  Vols.  Crown  Svo.  2is.

  GLOUCESTER,  HEREFORD,  and  WORCESTER,

»  Cirencester,  Cheltenham,  Stroud,  Tewkesbury,  Leominster,  Ross,  Mal-

vern, Kidderminster,  Dudley,  Bromsgrove,  Evesham.  Map. Post  Svo.

95.

 '-  CATHEDRALS  of  Bristol,  Gloucester,  Hereford,

Worcester,  and  Lichfield.  With  50  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  16«.

  NORTH  WALES,  Bangor,  Carnarvon,  Beaumaris,

Snowdon,  Llanberis,  Dolgelly,  Cader  Idris,  Conway,  &c.  Map.  Post
Svo. 65.  6d.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

17

HAND-BOOK— SOUTH  WALES,  Monmouth,  Llandafr,  Merthyr,

Vale  of  Neath.  Pembroke,  Carmarthen,  Tenby,  Swansea,  and  The  Wye,
&c. Map. Post  8vo.  7s.

 ■  CATHEDRALS OF BANGOR, ST.  ASAPH,

LlandafiF,  and  St.  Davids. With  Illnstrations. Post  8vo.  1.55.

- DERBY, NOTTS, LEICESTER,  STAFFORD,

Matlock,  Bakewell,  Chatsworth,  The  Peak,  Buxton,  Harriwick,  Dove
Dale,  Ashborne.  Southwell,  Mansfield,  Retford,  Burton,  Belvoir,  Milton
Mowbray,  Wolverhampton,  Lichfield,  Walsall,  Tamworth.  Map,
Post  8vo. 7.f .  6d.

  SHROPSHIRE,  CHESHIRE  and  LANCASHIRE

— Shrewsbury,  Lndlow,  Eridfi^orth,  Oswestry,  Chester,  Crewe,  Alderley,
Stockport,  Birkenhead,  Warrington,  Bury,  Manchester,  Liverpool,
Burnley,  Clitheroe,  Bolton,  Blackburn,  Wigan,  Preston,  Rochdale,
Lancaster,  Southport,  Blackpool,  &c. Map. Post  Svo.  10s.

  YORKSHIRE,  Doncaster,  Hall,  Selby,  Beverley,

Scarborough,  Whitby,  Harrogate,  Ripon,  Leedj^,  Wakefinld,  Bradford,
Halifax,  Hnddersfield,  Sheffield. Map  and  Plans. Post  Svo.  12*.

 CATHEDRALS  of  York,  Ripon,  Durham,  Carlisle,

Chester,  and  Manchester.  With  60  Illustrations.  2  Vols. Crown  Svo.

218.

  DURHAM  AND  NORTHUMBERLAND,  New-
castle, Darlington,  Gateshead,  Bishop  Auckland,  Stockton,  Hartlepool,
Sunderland,  ShieMs,  Berwick-on-Tweed,  Morpeth,  Tynemouth,  Cold-
stream, Alnwick,  &c. Map. Post  Svo.

 WESTMORLAND and CUMBERLAND— Lan-

Mister,  Fnmess  Abbey,  Ambleside,  Kendal.  Windernipre,  Coniston,
Keswick,  Grasmere,  Ulswater,  Carlisle, Cockermouth,  Penrith,  Appleby,
Map. Post  8vo.  65.
*»•  Murray's  Map  of  the  Lake  District,  on  canvas. 35.  6<2.
  SCOTLAND,  Edinburgh,  Melroee,  Kelso,  Glasgow,

Dumfries,  Ayr,  Stirling,  Arran,  The  Clyde,  Oban.  Inverary,  Loch
Lomond,  Loch  Katrine  and  Trossachs,  Caledonian  Canal,  Inverness,
Perth,  Dundee,  Aberdeen,  Braemar,  Skye,  Caithness,  Koss,  Suther-
land, &c. Maps  and  Plans. Post  Svo.

 IRELAND, Dulilin, Belfast,  Donegal,  Galway,

Wexford,  Cork,  Limerick,  Waterford,  Killarney,  Munster,  tc.  Maps.
Post  Svo.  125.

HAND-BOOK  OP  FAMILL\R  QUOTATIONS. From  EngUsh

Authors. Third  Edition. Fcap.  Svo.  5*.

HATHERLEY  (Lord)  On  the  Continuity  of  Scripture.  A?  declared

by  the  Testimony  of  our  Lord  and  of  the  Evangelists  and  Apo-itles.
Fourth  Edition. Svo. 6v. Or  Popular  Edition. Post  Svo. 2s.  6i.

HESSE Y  (Rev.  Dr.).  Sunday— ltd  Origin,  History,  and  Present
Obligations. Post  Svo.  9s,

HICKMAN'S  (Wm.)  Treatise  oh  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Naval

Courta-Martial. Svo. IO5. 6<i.

HOLLWAY'S  (J.  G.)  Month  in  Norway. Fcap.  Svo.  28.
HONEY  BEE  (The). An  Essay. By  Rev.  Thomas  Jamw.

Reprinted  from  the  "  Quarterly  Review." Fcap.  Svo.  Is.
HOOK'S  (Dean)  Church  Dictionary. Tenth  Edition. Svo.  16«.
 (Theodore  )Life.  By  J.  G.  Lockhart. Fcap.  Svo.  Is.

HOPE'S  ARCHITECTURE  OF  AHMED ABAD,  with  His-
torical Sketch  and  Architectural  Notes  by  T.  C.  Hopk,  and  James
Fkbousson,  F.R.S.  With  2  Maps,  120  Photographs  and  22  Woodcuts.
4to. 51.  ba.

0

18

LIST  OF  WORKS

HOME  AND  COLONIAL  LIBRARY.  A  Series  of  Works
adapted  for  all  circles  and  classes  of  Readers,  having  been  selected
for  their  acknowledged  interest,  and  ability  of  the  Authors.  Post  8vo.
Published  at  2*.  and  3s.  6d.  each,  and  arranged  under  two  distinctive
heads  as  follows  : —

CLASS  A.

HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,

1.  SIEGE  OF  GIBRALTAR.  By

John  Drinkwater.  25.

2.  THE  AMBER-WITCH.  By

Lady  Duff  Gordon.  2s.

3.  CROMWELL  AND  BUNYAN.

By  Robert  Southey.  2s.

1  LIFE  of  Sir  FRANCIS  DRAKE.
By  John  Barrow,  2s.

5.  CAMPAIGNS  AT  WASHING-

TON. By  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig.  2s.

6.  THE  FRENCH  IN  ALGIERS.

By  Lady  Duff  Gordon.  2s.

7.  THE  FALL  OF  THE  JESUITS.

2s.

8.  LIVONIAN  TALES.  2s.

9.  LIFE  OF  CONDE.  By  Lord  Ma-

HON. 3s.  6d.

10.  SALE'S  BRIGADE. By  Rev.
G.R.  Gleig.  2s.

AND HISTORIC  TALES.

11.  THE SIEGES OF  VIENNA.

By  Lord  Ellesmere.  2s.

12.  THE  WAYSIDE  CROSS.  By

Capt.  Milman.  2s.

13.  SKETCHES  OF  GERMAN  LIFE.

By  Sir  A.  Gordon. 3s.  6d.

14.  THE  BATTLE  OF  WATERLOO.

By  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig.  3s.6d.

15.  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  STEF-

FENS.  2.<?.

16.  THE BRITISH POETS.  By

Thomas  Campbell.  3s.  6i.

17.  HISTORICAL ESSAYS.  By

Lord  Mahon.  3s.  6d.

18.  LIFE  OF  LORD  CLIVE.  By

Rev.  G.  R.  Gleig. 3s.  6d.

19.  NORTH  -  WESTERN  RAIL-

WAY. By  Sir  F.  B.  Head.  2^.

20.  LIFE  OF  MUNRO. By  Rev.  G.

R.  Gleig. 3s.  6c?.

CLASS  B.
TRAVELS,  AND

By  George

VOYAGES,

1.  BIBLE  IN  SPAIN.

Borrow. 3s.  6d.

2.  GIPSIES  OF  SPAIN.  By  George

Borrow. 3s.  6c?.
3&4.  JOURNALS  IN  INDIA.  By
Bishop  Heber. 2  Vols.  7s.

5.  TRAVELS  in  the  HOLY  LAND.

By  Irby  and  Mangles,  2s.

6.  MOROCCO  AND  THE  MOORS.

By  J.  Drummond  Hay.  2s.

7.  LETTERS  FROM  the  BALTIC.

By  a  Lady.  2s.

8.  NEW  SOUTH  WALES.  By  Mrs.

Meredith.  2s.
9c  THE  WEST  INDIES.  By  M.  G.

Lewis.  2s.
10.  SKETCHES  OF  PERSIA.  By

Sir  John  Malcolm.  3s.  6d.
IL  MEMOIRS  OF  FATHER  RIPA.

28.

12.  13.  TYPEE  AND  OMOO.  By
Hermann  Melville.  2  Vols.  7s.

14.  MISSIONARY  LIFE  IN  CAN-
ADA.  By  Rev.  J.  Abbott.  2s.

ADVENTURES.

15.  LETTERS  FROM  MADRAS.  By
a  Lady.  2s.

16.  HIGHLAND SPORTS.  By

Charles  St.  John. 3s.  6d.

17.

PAMPAS  JOURNEYS.
F.  B.  Head.  2s.

By  Sib

18.  GATHERINGS  FROM  SPAIN.

By  Richard  Ford. 3s.  6d.

19.  THE  RIVER  AMAZON.  By

W.  H.  Edwards.  2s.

20.  MANNERS  &  CUSTOMS  OF

INDIA.  ByREV.C.AcLAND.  2s.

21.  ADVENTURES IN  MEXICO.

By  G,  F.  Ruxton. 3s.  6d.

22.  PORTUGAL  AND  GALLICIA.

By  Lord  Carnarvon. 3s.  6d.

23.  BUSH  LIFE  IN  AUSTRALIA.

By  Rev.  H.  W.  Haygarth.  2s.

24.  THE  LIBYAN  DESERT.  By

Bayle  St.  John,  2s.

25.  SIERRA  LEONE. By  Lady.

3s.  6d.

\*  Each  work  may  be  had  separately.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

*19

HORACE ;  a  New  Edition  of  the  Text. Edited  by  Dban  Milman.

With  100  Woodcuts. Crown  8vo. 75.  6d.

 Life  of. By  Dean  Milman. Illustrations. 8vo.  9*.

HOUGHTON'S  (Lord)  Monographs,  Personal  and  Social  With

Portraits. Crown  8vo.

HUME'S History  of  England,  from the Invasion  of  Julius

Caesar  to  the  Revolution  of  1688.  Corrected  and  continued  to  1868.
Abridged  for  Students.  Edited  by  Dk.  Wm.  Smith.  Woodcuts.  Post
8vo. 7s.  6d.

HUTCHINSON  (Gen.),  on  the  most  expeditious,  certain,  and

easy  Method  of  Dog-Breaking.  Fijth  Edition.  With  40  Illustrations.
Crown  8vo.  9*.

BUTTON'S  (H.E.)  Principia  Grseca;  an  Introduction  to  the  Study
of  Greek.  Comprehending  Grammar,  Delectus,  and  Exercise-book,
with  Vocabularies. Sixth  Edition. 12mo. 3a.  6cZ.

IRBY  AND  MANGLES'  Travels  in  Egypt,  Nubia,  Syria,  and

the  Holy  Land. Post  8vo.  2a.

JAMES'  (Rev.  Thomas)  Fables  of  ^Esop.  A  New  Translation,  with
Historical  Preface.  With  100  Woodcuta  by  Tknmel  and  Wolf.
Sixty-fourtlt  Thousand. Post  Svo. 2«.  6d.

JAMESON'S  (Mrs.) Lives of the Early Italian  Painters—

and  the  Progress  of  Painting  in  Italy— Cimabue  to  Bassano.  Seiu
Edition. With  50  Portraits. Post  Svo.  V2s.

JENNINGS'  (L.  J.)  Eighty  Years  of  Republican  Government  in

the  United  States. Post  8vo. 10s.  6d.

JESSE'S  (Edward) Gleanings  in  Natural  History.  Eleventh

Edition. Fcp.  Svo. 3;*.  M.

JOHNS'  (Rev.  B.  G.)  Blind  People;  their  Works  and AVays.  With

Sketclies  of  the  Lives  of  some  famous  Blind  Men.  With  Illustrations.
Post  8vo. 7s.  Qd.

JOHNSON'S  (Dr.  Samuel)  Life.  By  James  Boswell.  Including
the  Tour  to  the  Hebrides.  Edited  by  Mb.  Cbokeb.  Portraits.
Koyal  Svo.  10s.

  Lives  of  the  most  eminent  English  Poets.  Edited

with  Notes  by  Peter  Cunningham. 3  vols. Svo. 22s.  %d.

JUNIUS'  Handwriting  Professionally  investigated.  By  Mr.  Chabot.

Expert.  With  Preface  and  Collateral  Kvidt- nee,  by  the  lion.  Edwabj
TwisLETON. With  Facsimiles,  Woodcuts,  ttc. 4t). JL'3  3«.

KEN'S  (Bishop)  Life.  By  a  Layman.  Portrait.  2  Vols.  Svo.  18.<;.

 Exposition  of  the  Apostles'  Creed. IGmo. 1^.  Qd.

KERirS  (Kobert)  GENTLEMAN'S  HOUSE;  or,  How  to  Plan

Encjlisii  Kksidknces,  fhom  thk  Parsonaok  to  the  Palace.  Third
Edition. With  Views  and  Plans.  Svo.  24*.

 Ancient  Lights ;  a  Book  for  Architects,  Surveyors,

Lawyers,  and  Landlords.  Svo. bs.  Qd.

  (R.  Malcolm)  Student's  Blackstone. A  Systematic

Abridgment  of  the  entire  Commentaries,  adapted  to  the  present  state
of  the  law. Post  Svo. 7s.  6ci.

KING  EDWARD  VIth's  Latin  Grammar;  or,  an  Introduction
to  the  Latin  Tongue.  Seventeenth  Edition.  12mo. Ss.  6d.

 First  Latin  Book ;  or,  the  Accidence,

Syntax,  and  Prosody,  with  an  English  Translation.  Fifth  Edition.  12mo.
29. 6d.

C  2

20

LIST  OF  WORKS

KING  GEOKGE  THE  THIRD'S  CORRESPdSTDElSrCE  WITH
LORD  NORTH,  1769-82.  Edifed,  with  Notes  and  Introduction,  by
W.  BoDHAM  DoNNK. 2  vols. 8vo,  32s.

KIRK'S  (J.  Foster)  History  of  Charles  the  Bold,  Duke  of  Bur-
gundy. Portrait. 3  Vols.  8vo.  455.

KIRKES'  Handbook  of  Physiology.  Edited  by  W.  Morrant
Baker,  F.R.C.S.  EigJith  Edition.  With  240  Illustrations.  Post  8vo.
12s.  6d.

KUGLER'S  Italian  Schools  of  Painting; Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Sir

Charles  Eastlakb.  Third  Edition.  Woodcuts.  2  Vols.  Post  8vo.  305.
  German,  Dutch,  and  Flemish  Schools  of  Painting.

Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Da.  Waagen. Second  Edition. Woodcuts.  2

Vols. Post  8vo.  245.
LANE'S  (E.  W.)  Account  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  the

Modern  Egyptians. New  Edition. With Illustrations. 2  Vols.

Post  8vo.  12s.

LA  YARD'S  (A.  H.)  Nineveh  and  its  Remains.  Being  a  Nar-
rative of  Researches  and  Discoveries  amidst  the  Ruins  of  Assyria.
With  an  Account  of  the  Chaldean  Christians  of  Kurdistan ;  the  Yezedis,
or  Devil-worshippers ;  and  an  Enquiry  into  the  Manners  and  Arts  of
the  Ancient  Assyrians.  Sixth  Edition.  Plates  and  Woodcuts.  2  Vols.
8vo.  36s.

A  Popular  Edition  of  the  above  work. With  Illustrations,
Post  8vo. 7s.  6d.

  Nineveh  and  Babylon ;  being  the  Narrative  of  Dis-
coveries in  the  Ruins,  with  Travels  in  Armenia,  Kurdistan  and  the
Desert,  during  a  Second  Expedition  to  Assyria.  With  Map  and
Plates. Svo.  21s.

A  Popular  Edition  of  the  above  work. With  Illustrations.
Post  8vo. 7s.  ed.

LEATHES' (Stanley) Practical  Hebrew  Grammar. With  an

Appendix,  containing  the  Hebrew  Text  of  Genesis  i. — vi.,  and  Psalms
1. — vi. Grammatical  Analysis  and  Vocabulary. Post  8vo. 7s.  6d.

LENNEP'S  (Rev.  H.  J.  Yan)  Missionary  Travels  in  Asia  Minor.
With  Illustrations  of  Biblical  History  and  Arcbseology.  With  Map
and  Woodcuts.  2  Vols. Post  8vo.  24s.

LESLIE'S  (C.  R.)  Handbook  for  Young  Painters. Second  Edition.

With  Illustrations. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.
'  —  Life  and  Works  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  Portraits

and  Illustrations. 2  Vols. Svo.  42s.
LETTERS  From  the  Baltic. By  a  Lady. Post  Svo.  2s.

  Madras. By  a  Lady. Post  Svo.  25.

  Sierra  Leone.  By  a  Lady. Post  Svo.  35.  6c?.

LEVI'S  (Leone)  Wages  and  Earnings  of  the  Working  Classes.

With  some  Facts  lUustrative  of  their  Economic  Condition. 8vo.  6s.
  History  of  British  Commerce;  and  of  the  Economic

Progress  of  the  Nation,  from  1763  to  1870. 8vo.  16s.

LEWIS'S  (M.  G.)  Journal  of  a  Residence  among  the  Negroes  in  the

West  Indies. Post  Svo.  2s.
LIDDELL'S  (Dean)  Student's  History  of  Rome,  from  the  earliest

Times  to  the  establishment  of  the  Empire.  With  Woodcats.  Post  Svo.

7s.  Qd.

LINDSAY'S  (Lord)  Lives  of  the  Lindsays ;  or,  a  Memoir  of  the
Houses  of  Crawfurd  and  Balcarres.  With  Extracts  from  Official  Papers
and  Personal  Narratives. Second  Edition.  3  Vols. Svo.  24s.

  Etruscan  Inscriptions. Analj^sed,  Translated,  and

Commented  upon. Svo.  12s.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

21

LLOYD'S  (VV.  Watkiss)  History  of  Sicily  to  the  Athenian  War ;
with  Elucidations  of  the  Sicilian  Odes  of  Pindar.  With  a  Map.  8vo.
14*.

LISPINGS  from  LOW  LATITUDES;  or,  the  Journal  of  the  Hon.

ImpulsiaGushington.  Edited bv  Lord Dufferin.  With24  Plate8.4to.2l5.

LITTLE  ARTHUR'S  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  By  Lady
Callcott.  New  Edition,  continued  to  1871.  With  Woodcuts.
Fcap.  Svo. 25.  &d.

LIVINGSTONE'S  (Dr.) Missionary  Travels  in  South  Africa.

Illustrations. Post  8vo.  6s.
 Expedition  to  the  Zambeziand  its  Tributaries;  and

the  Lakes  Shirwaand  Nyassa. Map  and  Illustrations.  Svo.  2l5.

LIYONIAN  tales. By  the  Author  of  "  Letters  from  the

Baltic." Post  Svo.  2*.

LOCH'S  (H.  B.)  Personal  Narrative of  Events  during  Lord

Elgin's  Second  Embassy  to  China.  Second  Edition.  With  Illustrations.
Post  Svo.  95.

LOCKHART'S  (J.  G.)  Ancient  Spanish  Ballads. Historical  and

Romantic.  Translated,  with  Notes.  Kew  Edition.  With  Portrait  and
Illustrations. Crown  Svo.  5*.

 Life  of  Theodore  Hook. Fcap.  Svo.  \s.

LONSDALE'S  (Bishop)  Life. With  Selections  from  his  Writings.

By  E.  B.  Denison. With  Portrait. Crown  Svo. IO5.  6ti.
LOUDON'S  (Mrs.) Gardening  for Ladies. With  Directions
and  Calendar  of  Operations  for  Every  Month.  Eighth  Edition.  Wood-
cuts.  Fcap.  Svo. 35.  Qd.

LUCKNOW :  a  Lady's  Diary  of  the  Siege. Fcap.  Svo. 4^.  6(/.
LYELL'S  (Sir  Charles)  Principles  of  Geology;  or,  the  Modem

Changes  of  the  Earth  and  its  Inhal.itnnts  considered  as  illustrative  of
Geoloj^y, Tenth  Edition. With  Illustrations. 2  Vols. Svo.  32.<.

 Student's  Elements  of  Geology.  With  600  Illustrations.

Post  Svo.  95.

 Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of  Man.

Fourth  Edition.  Illustrations. Svo.  (//»  Preparation.)

(K.M.)  Geographical  Handbook  of  Ferns. With  Tables

to  show  their  Distribution. Post  Svo. Is.  Qd,

LYTTELTON'S  (Lord)  Ephemera. Ut  cfr  2nd  Senes, Post  Svo.

105.  each.

LYTTON'S  (Lord)  Poems. Post  Svo. 105.  6d.

 Lost  Tales  of  Miletus. Post  Svo. 7^.  6d.

  !Memoir  of  Julian  Fane. Secoiid  Edition,  With

Portrait. Post  Svo.  bs.
McCLINTOCK'S  (Sir  L.)  Narrative  of  the  Discovery  of  the

Fate  of  Sir  John  Franklin  and  his  Companions  in  the  Arctic  Seas.
Third  Edition. With  Illustrations. Post  Svo. 7/.  6d.

MaoDOUGALL'S  (Col.)  Mbdern  Warfare  as  Influenced  by  Modern

Artillery. With  Plans. Post  Svo.  V2$.

MACGREGOR  (J.),  Rob  Roy  on  the  Jordan,  Nile,  Red  Sea,  Gen-

nesareth,  &c.  A  Canoe  Cruise  in  Palestine  and  Egypt  and  the  Waters
of  Damascus. With  Map,  and  70  Illustrations. Crown  Svo.  125.

MACPHERSON'S  (Major)  Services  in  India,  while  Political
Agent  at  Gwalior  during  the  Mutiny. Illustrations. Svo.  12*.

22

LIST  OF  WORKS

MAETZNER'S  COPIOUS  ENGLISH  GRAMMAR.  A  Methodical,

Analytical,  and  Historical  Treatise  on  the  Orthography,  Prosody,  Inflec-
tions, and  Syntax  of  the  English  Tongue.  3  Vols.  8vo.  {In  preparation,)

MAHON  (Lord),  see  Stanhope.

MAINE'S  (Sir  H.  Sumner)  Ancient  Law:  its  Connection  with  the
Early  History  of  Society,  and  its  Relation  to  Modern  Ideas.  Fourth
Edition. 8vo.  12s.

  VILLAGE  COMMUNITIES  IN  THE  EAST  AND

WEST. 2nd  Edition. 8vo.  95.

MALCOLM'S  (Sir  John)  Sketches  of  Persia. Post  8vo. Zs.  6d.
M ANSEL'S (Dean)1  Limits  of  Religious  Thought  Examined.

Fifth  Edition.  Post  Svo. 85.  6c?.

 Letters,  Lectures,  and  Papers.  Svo.

MANTELL'S  (Gideon  A.)  Thoughts  on  Animalcules;  or,  the

Invisible  World,  as  revealed  by  the  Microscope. Plates. 16mo.  6s.
MANUAL OP SCIENTIFIC ENQUIRY. For  the  Use  of

Travellers.  Edited  by  Sir  J.  F.  Herschel  &  Rev.  R.  Main.;  Post  Svo.

35.  6d, ( Published  by  order  of  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty.)

MARCO  POLO'S  TRA.VELS.  A  New  English  Version.  With
Copious  Illustrativei  Notes.  By  Col.  Henry  Yule.  With  Maps  and
Illustrations. 2  Vols. Medium  Svo.  42s.

MARKHAM'S  (Mrs.)  History  of  England.  From  the  First  Inva-
sion by  the  Romans.  New  Edition,  continued  down  to  1867.  Woodcuts.
12mo. 3s.  6d.

  History  of  France. From the  Conquest  by  the

Gauls. New  Edition,  continued  to  1867. Woodcuts. 12mo. 3s.  6d.

  History  of  Germany. From  the  Invasion  by  Marius.

Neiu  Edition,  coniinued  to  1867. Woodcuts.  12mo.

 (Clements  R.)  Travels  in  Peru  and  India.  Maps

and  Illustrations. 8vo.  16s.

MARRYAT'S  (Joseph)  History  of  Modem  and  Mediaeval  Pottery

and  Porcelain.  With  a  Description  of  the  Manufacture.  Third
Edition. Plates  and  Woodcuts. 8vo.  42s.

MARSH'S  (G.  P.)  Manual  of  the  English  Language. Edited  by

Dr.  Wm.  Smith. Post  8vo. 7s.  Qd.

MATTHLE'S  SHORTER  GREEK  GRAMMAR. Abridged  by

Bishop  Blomfield.  A  New  Edition,  revised  a7id  enlarged  hyE.  S.  Crooke.
12mu.  4s.

MAUREL,  on  the  Character,  Actions,  and  Writings  of  Wellington.

Fcap.  8vo. Is.  6c?.

MAYNE'S  (Capt.)  Four  Years  in  British  Columbia  and  Van-
couver Island. Illustrations. 8vo.  16s.

MEADE'S  (Hon.  Herbert)  Ride  through  the  Disturbed  Districts  of

New  Zealand  to  Lake  Taupo,  at  the  Time  of  the  Rebellion;  with  a  Cruise
among  the  South  Sea  Islands.  With  Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.  14s.

MELVILLE'S (Hermann)  Adventures  amongst  the  Marquesas

and  South  Sea  Islands. 2  Vols.  Post  Svo.  78.
MEREDITH'S  (Mrs.  Charles)  Notes  and  Sketches  of  New  South

Wales Post  Svo  2s.
MESSIAH  (THE):  A  Narrative  of  the  Life,  Travels,  Death,

Resurrection,  and  Ascension  of  our  Blessed  Lord. By  A  Layman.

Map. Svo.  18s.

MILLS*  (Rev.  John)  Three  Months'  Residence  at  Nablus,  with

an  Account  of  the  Modern  Samaritans.  Illustrations.  Post  Svo.  10s.  6d.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

3

MILMAN'S  (Dean)  History  of  the  Jews,  from  the  earliest  Period

down  to  Modern  Times. 3  Vols. Post  8vo.  18s.

  History  of  Early  Christianity, from  the  Birth  of

Christ  to  the  Abolition  of  Paganism  in  tlie  Roman  Empire.  Fourth
Edition. 3  Vols. Post  8vo.  18*.

  History  of  Latin  Christianity,  including  that  of  the

T*opes  to  the  Pontificate  of  Nicholas  V.  Fourth  Edition.  9  Vols.  Post
8vo.  54«.

-  Annals  of  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  from  the  time  of  the

llomans  to  the  funeral  (of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  Second  Edition.
Portrait  and  Illustrations. Svo.  18*.

  Character  and  Conduct  of  the  Apostles  considered

as  an  Evidence  of  Christianity.  Svo.  10s.  6d'.

  Qainti  Horatii  Flacci  Opera. New  Edition,  With

100  Woodcuts. Small  Svo. 7s.  6d.

—  Life  of  Quintus  Horatius  Flaccus. Second  Edition.
With  Illustrations. Svo.  9s.

  Poetical  Works. The  Fall  of  Jerusalem — Martyr  of

Antioch— Balshazzar— Taraor — Anne  Boleyn — Fazio,  <S:c.  With  Por-
traits and  Illustrations. 3  Vols. Fcap. bvo.  18s.

  Fall  of  Jerusalem. Fcap.  Svo.  Is.

  (Capt.  E.  a.)  Wayside  Cross. Post  Svo.  2.5.

MICHIE'S  (Alexander)  Siberian  Overland  Route  from  Peking

to  Petersburg. Maps  and  Illustrations. Svo.  16*.

MODERN  DOMESTIC  COOKERY, Founded  on  Principles  of

Economy  and  Practical  Knowledge.  New  Edition.  Woodcuts.  Fcap.  Svo.  bs.
MONGREDIEN'S (Augustus) Trees  and Shrubs  for  English

Plantation.  A  Selection  and  Description  of  th«  most  Ornamental
which  will  fliHirish  in  the  open  air  in  our  climate.  With  Classified
Lists. With  30  Illustrations. Svo.  IG*.

MOORE  k  JaCKMAN  on  the  Clematis  as  a  Garden  Flower.

De-criptions  of  the  Hardy  Species  and  Varieties,  with  Directions  for
their  Cultivation,  and  purposes  for  which  they  are  adapted  in  Modern
Gardening. Plates. Svo.  10t.6d.

MOORE'S  (Thomas)  Life  and  Letters  of  Lord  Byron.  Cabinet

Edition.  With  Plates.  6  Vols.  Fcap.  Svo.  18*. ;  or  I'opnlir  Edition,
with  Portraits. Royal  Svo.  9s.

MOTLEY'S  (J.  L.)  History  of  the  United  Netherlands:  from  the

Death  of  William  the  Silent  to  the  Twelve  Years'  Truce,  1609.  Library
Edition.  Portraits.  4  Vols.  Svo.  608.  Or  Cabinet  Edition,  4  Vols.  Post
Svo. 65.  each.

MOUHOT'S  (Henri)  Siam,  Cambojia,  and  Lao;  a  Narrative  of

Travels  and  Discoveries. Illustrations. 2  vols.  Svo.

MOZLEY'S  (Canon)  Treatise  on  Predestination. Svo.  lis.

  Primitive  Doctrine  of  Baptismal  Regeneration.  Svo.  7«.6(/.

MUNDY'S  (General) Pen and Pencil  Sketches in  India.

Third  Edition. Plates. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

MUNRO'S  (General)  Life  and  Letters. By  Rev.  G.  R.  Glbtq.

Post  Svo. 35.  6d.

MURCHISON'S  (Sir  Roderick)  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  Ural
Mountains. With  Coloured  Maps,  &c. 2  Vols. 4to. 6^.  55.
  Siluria  ;  or,  a  History  of  the  Oldest  Rocks  con-
taining; Organic  Kenmins. Fifth  Edition. Map  and  Plates. Svo.  iSi.

24

LIST  OF  WORKS

MURRAY'S  RAILWAY  READING.  Containing:—

WBLiiinoTON.  By  Lord  Ellbsm^bb.  6d.

I>^IMBOJ>  ON  THE  ChaSE,  1«.

mubic  and  d&bbs.  1«.
Milman's  Fall  of  Jerusalem.  1*.

MaHON's  "FoKTY-FlVB."  3«.

LiPB  OF  Theodorb  Hook.  Is.
Dbbds  of  Naval  DarinG:, 'da.  Cid.
Thb  Honet  Bbb.  1«.
James' iEsop's  Fables.  2*.6d.

NiMBOD  ON THE  TURP. U.  6d.

Abt  OF  DiNine.  ls.6d.

Mahon's  Joan  of  Arc.  la.
Head's  Emigrant. 2«.  6<i.

NiMROD  ON  THE  RoAD.  1«.

Crokeb  on  thb  Guillotine.  U.

Hollwat's  Norwat.  2«,
Maubsl's  Wellington. Is.  6rf.
Campbell's  Life  of  Bacon.  2«.  6ci ,
The  Flower  Garden.  Is.
Tailor's  Notks  from  Lifb.  2#.
Rejected  Addrbbsbs.  Is.
Pbnn's  Hints  on  Angling.  Is.

MUSTERS'  (Capt.)  At  Home  with  the  Patagonians ;  a  Year's

Wanderings  over  Untrodden  Ground  from  the  Straits  of  Magellan  to
the  Rio  Negro. 2nd  Editim. Illustrations. Post  8vo.

NAPIER'S  (Sir  Chas.)  Life,  Journals,  and  Letters. By  Sir  W.

Napteb. Second  Edition. Portraits.  4  Vols. Post  8vo.  485.
 (Sir  Wm.)  Life  and  Letters. Edited  by  Rt.  Hon.  H.

A.  Bruce. Portraits. 2  Vols. Crown  8vo.  28s.
—  English  Battles  and  Sieges  of  the  Peninsular  War.

Fourth  Edition. Portrait. Post  8vo.  95.

NAPOLEON  AT  FONTAINEBLEAU  AND  ELBA. A  Journal

of  Occurrences  and  Notes  of  Conversations.  By  Sir  Neil  Campbell,
C.B.,  British  Commissioner.  With  a  Memoir  of  that  Officer  By
Key.  A.  N.  C.  Maclachlan,  M.A. Portrait. 8vo.  155.

NAUTICAL  (The)  ALMANAC. Royal  8vo. 2^.  6d  (By

Authority.)

NAVY  LIST.  Monthly,  Is,  Qd.  and  Quarterly,  35. Post  8vo.  {Bij

Authority,)

NEW  TESTAMENT. With  Short  Explanatory  Commentary.

By  Archdeacon  Churton,  M.A.,  and  Archdeacon  Basil  Jones,  M.A.
With  110  authentic  Views,  &c. 2  Vols. Crown  8vo. 21s.  hound.

NICHOLLS*  (Sir  George)  History  of  the  English,  Irish  and
Scotch  Poor  Laws. 4  Vols.  8vo.

NICOLAS'  (Sir  Harris)  Historic  Peerage  of  England.  Exhi-
biting the  Origin,  Descent,  and  Present  State  of  every  Title  of  Peer-
age which  has  existed  in  this  Country  since  the  Conquest.  By
William  Courthope. 8vo.  30s.

NIMROD,  On  the  Chace— Turf—and  Road.  With  Portrait  by
Macliseand  Plates  by  Aiken.  Crown  8vo.  5s.  Or  with  Coloured  Plates,
7s.  Qd.

OLD  LONDON  ;  Papers  read  at  the  Archaeological  Institute.

By  various  Authors. 8vo.  12s.

ORMATHWAITE'S  (Lord)  Astronomy  and  Geology— Darwin  and

Buckle— Progress  and  Civilisation. Crown  8vo.  6s.
OWEN'S  (Lieut.-Col.)  Principles  and  Practice  of  Modern  Artillery,

including  Artillery  Material,  Gunnery,  and  Organisation  and  Use  of
Artillery  in  Warfare. Second  Edition.  With  Illustrations. 8vo.  15s.

OXENHAM'S  (Rev.  W.)  English  Notes  for  Latin  Elegiacs  ;  designed
for  early  Proficietfts  in  the  Art  of  Latin  Versification,  with  Prefatory
Rules  of  Composition  in  Elegiac  Metre. Fourth  Edition. 12mo.  3s.  6c?.

PALGRAVE'S  (R.  H.  J.)  Local  Taxation  of  Great  Britain  and

Ireland. 8vo.  5s.

PALLISER'S  (Mrs.) Brittany  and  its  Byeways,  its  Inhabitants,

and  Antiquities. With  Illustrations. Post  8vo.  12s.

 —  Mottoes  for  Monuments,  or  Epitaphs  selected  for

General  Use  and  Study. With  Illustrations. Crown  8vo. 7s.  Qd,

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

25

PARIS'  (Dr.)  Philosophy  in  Sport  made  Science  in  Earnest ;
or,  the  First  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy  inculcated  by  aid  of  the
Toys  and  Sports  of  Youth.  Ninth  Edition.  Woodcuts.  Post  8vo.  7s. 6d.

PARKMAN'S  (Francis)  Discovery  of  the  Great  West;  or,  the

Valleys  of  the  Mississippi  and  the  Lakes  of  North  America.  An
Historical  Nariative. Map. 8vo. 10s.  6d.

PARKYNS*  (Mansfield)  Three  Years'  Residence  in  Abyssinia :
with  Travels  in  that  Country.  Second  Edition,  with  Illustrations.  Post
8vo.  75.  6d,

PEEL'S  (Sir  Robert)  Memoirs. Edited  by  Earl  Stanhopk

and  Mr.  Card  well. 2  Vols.  Post  8vo. 73.  Sd.  each.

PENN'S  (Richard)  Maxims  and  Hints  for  an  Angler  and  Chess-
player.  Woodcuts.  Fcap.  8vo.  Is.

PERCY'S  (John,  M.D.) Metallurgy. Vol.  I. Fuel,  Coal,  Fire-

Clays,  Copper,  Zinc,  Brass,  &c.  Neio  Edition.  Wiih  Illustrations.
Bvo.  {Xairlif  readj.)

 Vol.  II. Iron  and  Steel. New  Edition. With  Illus-
trations.  Svo.  (/n  preparation.)
 —  -  Vol.  III. Lead,  including  Dcsilverization  and  Cupel-

lation. With  Illustratinns. Svo.  oOs.

  Metallurgy. Vols.  IV.  and  V. Gold,  Silver,  and

Mercury,  Platinum,  Tin,  Nickel,  Cobalt.  Antimony,  Bismuth,  Arsenic,
and  otlier  Metals. With  Illustrations.  Svo.  (/n  Depuration.}

PHILLIPS'  (John)  Memoirs  of  William  Smith.  Svo.  78.6d.

— Geology  of Yorkshire,  The  Coast,  and  Limestone

District.  Plates.  4to.  Part  I.,  205.— Part  II.,  30a.
■  —  Rivers, Mountains,  and  Sea  Coast of  Yorkshire.

With Essays  on  the  Climate,  Scenery,  and  Ancient  luhabitanta.

Second  Edition^  Plates.  Svo.  155.

PHILPOTTS'  (Bishop)  Letters  to  the  late  Charles  Butler,  on  his

Book  of  the  Konian  Catholic  Church." Srw  Etiition. I'o.st  bvo.  6s.

PICK'S  (Dr.)  Popular  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  French
Language.  Svo. 7s.  Gd.

POPE'S  (Alexander)  Works. With  Introduction**  and  Notes,

by  Kkv.  WuiTWKLL  Elwix.  Vols.  I.,  II.,  VI.,  VII.,  VIII.  With  Por-
traits. Svo. IOa-.  6d.  each,

PORTER'S  (Rev.  J.  L.)  DamascuP,  Palmyra  and  Lebanon.  With
Travels  among  the  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan  and  tie  Ilauran.  New  Edition,
Map  and  Woodcuts. Post  Svo. 7s.  (id.

PRAYER-BOOK  (Illustrated),  with  Borders,  Initials,  Vig-
nettes, &c.  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  Rkv.  Thus.  Jamks.  Medium
Svo. 18*.  cloth  ;  3ls.  6  d.  calf ;  36«.  morocco.

PUSS  IN  BOOTS. With  12  Illustrations. By  Otto  Sfeckter.

16mo. l5.  6<i. Or  coloured,  '2a.  6d.

PRINCIPLES  AT  STAKE. Essays  on  Church  Questions  of  the

Day. Svo. 12*. Contents  :  —

Ritualism  and  Uniformity.— Benjaniin
Shaw.

The  Episcopate.— Bishop  of  Bath  and
Wells.

The  Priesthood. — Dean  of  Canterbury.
National  Education. — Rev.  Alexander
K.  Grant.

Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist.— Rev.  G.
H.  Sumner.

Scripture  and  Ritual. — Canon  Bernard.
Church  in South Africa.  —  Arthur
Mills.

Schisniatical  Tendency  of  Ritualism,

—  Rev.  Dr.  Salmon.
Revisions  ot  the  Liturgy. — Rev.  W.  G.

Humphry.
Parties  and  Party  Spirit.— Dean  of

Chester.

26

LIST  OF  WORKS

QUARTERLY  REVIEW  (The). 8vo.  65.

RAMBLES  in  the  Syrian  Deserts. Post  8vo.  10^^

RANKE'S  (Leopold)  History  of  the  Popes  of  Rome  during  the

16th  and  17th  Centuries.  Translated  from  the  German  by  Sarah
Austin. Third  Edition, 3  Vols. 8vo.  30s.

R ASSAM'S  (Hormuzd)  Narrative  of  the  British  Mission  to  Abys-
sinia. With  Notices  of  the  Countries  Traversed  from  Massowah  to
Magdala. Illustrations. 2  Vols. 8vo.  285.

RAWLINSON'S  (Rev.  George)  Herodotus.  A  New  'English
Version.  Edited  with  Notes  and  Essays.  Second  Edition.  Maps  and
Woodcut. 4  Vols. 8vo.  „  48s.

  Five  Great  Monarchies  of  Chaldsea,  Assyria,

Media,  Babylonia,  and  Persia.  Second  Edition.  With  Maps  and  Illus-
trations. 3  Vols. 8vo.  42s.

REED'S  (E.  J.)  Shipbuilding  in  Iron  and  Steel;  a  Practical

Treatise,  giving  full  details  of  Construction,  Processes  of  Manufacture,
and  Building  Arrangements.  With  5  Plans  and  250  Woodcuts.  8vo.  30s.

  Iron  -  Clad  Ships ;  their  Qualities, Performances,  and

Cost.  With  Chapters  on  Turret  Ships,  Iron-Clad  Rams,  &c.  With
Illustrations. 8vo.  12s.

REJECTED  ADDRESSES  (The). By  James  and  Horace  Smith.

New  Edition.  Woodcuts.  Post  Svo.  3s.  Qtl. ;  or  Cheap  Edition,  Fcap.
8vo.  Is.

RENNIE'S  (D.  F.)  British  Arms  in  Peking,  1860.  Post  Svo.  125.

 Narrative  of  the  British  Embassy  in  China.  Illus-
trations. 2  Vols. Post  8vo.  24s.
 Story  of  Bhotan  and  the  Dooar  War. Map  and

Woodcut. Post  8vo.  12s.

RESIDENCE  IN  BULGARIA  ;  or,  Notes  on  the  Resources  and
Administration  of  Turkey,  &c.  By  S.  G.  B.  St. Clair  and  Charles  A,
Brophy.  Svo.  12s.

REYNOLDS'  (Sir  Joshua)  Life  and  Times.  By  C.  R.  Leslie,
K.A.  and  Tom  Taylor. Portraits. 2  Vols.  8vo.

RICARDO'S  (David) Political  Works. With  a  Notice  of  his

Life  and  Writings.  By  J.  R.  M'Culloch.  New  Edition. Svo.  16s.

RIPA'S  (Father)  Thirteen  Years'  Residence  at  the  Court  of  Peking.

Post  Svo.  2s.

ROBERTSON'S  (Canon)  History  of  the  Christian  Church,  from
the  Apostolic  Age  to  the  end  of  the  Fifth  Council  of  the  Lateran,  1517.
4  Vols.  Svo.

The  Work  raay  he  hod  sepat'atelj.
Vol.  1.— A.D.  64-590. Svo.  I85.
Vol.  2.— A.D.  590-1122. 8vo.  205.
Yol.  3.— A.D.  1122-1303. Svo.  I85.
YoL  4.— A.D.  1303-1517.  Svo.
 How  shall  we  Conform  to  the  Liturgy  of  the

Churcli  of  England  ? Tliird  Edition. Post  Svo.  9s.

ROME. See  Liddell  and  Smith.

ROWLAND'S  (David) Manual of  the  English  Constitution

Its  Rise,  Growth,  and  Present  State. Post  Svo. 10s.  M.

  Laws  of  Nature  the  Foundation  of  Morals.  Post

8vo.  6s.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

27

RUNDELL'S  (Mrs.)  Modem  Domestic  Cookery.  Woodcuts.
Fcap.  8vo.  55.

RUXTON'S  (George  F.)  Travels  in  Mexico;  with  Adventures
among  the  Wild  Tribes  and  Animals  of  the  Prairies  and  Rocky  Moun-
tains.  PostSvo.  3s.  6d.

ROBINSON'S  (Rev.  Dr.)  Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine  and  the

Adjacent  Regions,  1838— 52. Third  Edition. Maps. 3  Vols. 8  vo.

  Physical  Geography  of  the  Holy  Land. Post  8vo.

lOs.  Sd.

  (Wm.)  Alpine  Flowers  for  English  Gardens.  With

70  Illustrations. Crown  8vo.  I2s.

 Wild  Garden ;  or,  our  Groves  and  Shrubberies

made  beautiful  by  the  Naturalization  of  Hardy  Exotic  Plants.  With
Frontispiece. Small  8vo.  G*.

 —  Sub-Tropical  Garden  ;  or,  Beauty  of  Form  in  the

Flower  Garden. With  Uhistrations. Small  8vo. la.  6d.

SALE'S  (Sir  Robert)  Brigade  in  Atfghanistan.  With  an  Account  of
the  Defence  of  Jellalabad. By  Rev.  G.  R.  Gleio. Post  8vo.  25.

SALLESBURY'S  (Edward)  "Children  of  the  Lake." A  Poem.

Fcap.  8vo. 4s.  6d.

SCOTT'S  (Sir  G.  G.)  Secular  and  Domestic  Architecture,  Present

and  Future.  8vo.  9*.
  Rise and Development of  Mediaeval  Architecture.

8vo.  {Nearly  Jieculy.)

 (Dean)  University  Sermons.  Post  8vo.  Ss.  6d.

SCROPE'S  (G.  P.)  Geolog)'  and  Extinct  Volcanoes  of  Central

France. Illustrations. Medium  8vo.  30s.

SHAW'S  (T.  B.)  Manual  of  English  Literature. Edited,  with

Notes  and  Illustrations. Post  8vo. 7*.  6d.

  Specimens  of  English  Literature. Selected  from  the

Chief  Writers. Post  8vo. 7s.  6J.

 (Robert)  Visit  to  High  Tartary,  Yarkand,  and  Kashgar

(formerly  Chinese  Tartary),  and  Return  Journey  over  the  Karakorum
Pass, With  Map  and  Illiistraiions. 8vo.  16^.

SMILES'  (Samuel)  Lives  of  British  Engineers ;  from  the  Earliest

Period.  With  9  Portraits  and  400  Illustrations.  4  Vols.  8vo.  'Jls.  each.

 Lives  of  George  and  Robert  Stephenson. AVith  Portraits

and  Illustrations.  Medium  8vo.  2l5.  Or  Popular  Edition,  with  Wood-
cuts. Post  8vo.  64.

  Lives  of  Boulton  and  Watt. With  Portraits  and  Illus-
trations.  Medium  8vo.  2l5.
 Self-Help. With  Illustrations  of  Conduct  and  Persever-
ance.  Post  8vo.  6s Or  in  French.  55.
 Character. A  Companion  Volume  to  "  SEir-HELP.'*

Post  8vo.  6a.

 Industrial  Biography :  Iron- Workers  and  Tool  Makers.

Post  8vo.  6s.

  Lives  of  Brindlcy  and  the  Early  Engineers.  With  Portrait

and  50  Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  6.?.

 Life  of  Thomas  Telford. With  a  History  of  Roads  and

Travelling  in  England. Woodcuts. Post  8vo.  6.?.
 Huguenots  in  England  and  Ireland  :  their  Settlements,

Churches  and  Ind»istries. Third  Edition. Post  8vo,  6.v.

  ]5oy's  A^oyage  round  the  World;  incluHing  a  Re&idence

i'l  Victoria,  anil  a  .Tournev  by  Rail  across  Morih  America.  With
Illustrations.  PostSvo.  6*.

28

LIST  OF  WORKS

SHIRLEY  (Evelyn  P.)  on  Deer  and  Deer  Parks,  or  some  Account
of  English  Parks,  with  Notes  on  the  Management  of  Deer.  Illus-
trations.  4to.  21s.

SIERRA  LEONE  ;  Described  in  Letters  to  Friends  at  Home.  By

A  Lady. Post  8vo. 3s.  Gd.
SIMMONS  (Capt.  T.  F.)  on  the  Constitution  and  Practice  of

Courts- Martial ;  with  a  Summary  of  the  Law  of  Evidence,  and  some
Notice  of  the  Criminal  Law  of  England  with  reference  to  the  Trial  of
Civil  Offences. Sixth  Edition.  8vo.

STANLEY'S  (Dean)  Sinai  and  Palestine. Map. 8vo.  lis.
 Bible  in  the  Holy  Land ;  Extracted  from  the  above

Work. By  a  Lady. Woodcuts. Fcap.  8vo. 2s.  6d.

  St.  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  With  Disser-
tations and  Notes. Svo.  18s.

  History  of  the  Eastern  Church. Plans. Svo.  12s.

  Jewish Church. Third  Edition,  2

Vols. Svo.  24s.

 —  Church  of  Scotland. Svo. 7s.  6d.

 Historical  Memorials  of  Canterbury  Cathe-
dral.  Fifth  Edition. Woodcuts. Post  Svo.  Is.M.
 Westminster  Abbey.

Third  Edition. With  Illustrations. 8vo.  21s.

  Sermons  in  the  East,  during  a  Tour  with  the  Prince  of

Wales.  8vo.  9s.

  on  Evangelical  and  Apostolical  Teaching.

Post  8vo. 7s.  Qd.

  Addresses  and  Charges  op  Bishop  Stanley.  With

Memoir.  Svo.  10s.  M.

SMITH'S  (Dr.  Wm.)  Dictionary  of  the  Bible;  its  Antiquities,

Biography,  Geography,  and  Natural  History.  Illustrations.  3  Vols.
8vo.  105s.

  Concise  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.  With  300  Illustrations.

Medium  8vo.  21?.

  Smaller  Dictionary  of  the  Bible. With  Illustrations.

Post  8vo. Is.  61.

 Historical  Atlas  of  Ancient  Geography — Biblical  and

Classical. (5  Parts.) Parts  I.  and  II. Folio. 2l6\  each.

 Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities. With  500  Illustrations.

Medium  8vo.  28s.

 Biography  [and Mythology  With

600  Illustrations. 3  Vols. Medium  8vo. 4/.  4s

 Geography. 2  Vols. With  500

Illustrations. Medium  8vo.  56s.

  Classical  Dictionary  of  Mythology, Biography,  and

Geography. 1  Vol. With  750  Woodcuts.  Svo.  18s.

  Smaller  Classical  Dictionary. With  200  Woodcuts.

Crown  8vo. 7s.  6d.

 Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities.  With  200  Wood-
cuts.  Crown  8vo. 7s.  6c?.
  Latin  English  Dictionary. With  Tables  of  the  Roman

Calendar,  Measures,  Weights,  and  Money. Medium  Svo.  21s.

  Smaller  Latin-English  Dictionary. l2mo. 75.  6d.

  Euglish-Latin  Dictionary. Medium  Svo,  2ls.

 Smaller  English-Latin  Dictionary. 12m'o.  7s.  6d.

29

SMITH'S  (Dr.  Wm.)  School  Manual  of  English  Grammar,  with

Copious  Exercises. Post  8vo. '6s.  Hd.

Primary  English  Grammar.  I  16mo.

  History  of  Britain.  12mo.  25.  6cZ.

 Principia  Latina — Part  I.  A  Grammar,  Delectus,  and

Exercise  Book,  with  Vocabularies. With  the  Accidence  arranged  for

the  '*  Public  School  Primer." 12mo. 35.  6c?.

 Part  II.  A  Heading-book  of  Mytho-
logy, Geography,  Romau  Antiquities,  aud  History.  With  Notes  and
Dictionary. 12iiio.  35. 6d.

 Part  III. A  Latin  Poetry  Book.

Hexameters  and  Pentameters;  Eclog.  Ovidiana?;  Latin  Prosody.
12mo. 35.  6i.

  Part  IV. Latin  Prose  Composition.

Rules  of  Syntax,  with  Examples,  Explanations  of  Synonyms,  and
Exercises  on  the  Syntax. 12mo. 3s.  6d.
 Part  V. Short  Tales  and  Anecdotes

for  Translation  into  Latin. l2mo.  3s.

 •  Latin-English  Vocabulary  and  First  Latin-English  Dic-
tionary for  Phy'lrus,  Cornelius  Nepos,  and  Caesar. 12mo.  3s.  6d.

  Student's  Latin  Grammar. Post  8vo.  6s.

  Smaller  Latin  Grammar. 12  mo. 3 v.  6d,

 ■  Initia  Graeca,  Part  I. An  Introduction to Greek  ;

comprehending  Grammar,  Delectus,  and  Exercise-book.  With  Vocabu-
laries. 12mo. 3s.  6i.

 Initia  Graeca,  Part  II. A  Reading  Book.  Containing

Short  Tales,  Anecdotes,  Fables,  Mythology,  and  Grecian  History.
12mo. 3s.  6d.

•  •  Initia  Graeca,  Part  III.  Greek  Prose  Composition.  'Con-
taining the  Rules  of  Syntax,  with  copious  Examples  and  Exercises.
12mo. 3*.  6d.

  Student's  Greek  Grammar. By  Professor  Curtius.

Post  8vo.  65.

. Smaller  Greek  Grammar. 12 mo. 3?.  6(1.

 Greek  Accidence, extracted  from  the  above  work.

12mo. 25.  6d.

 ^  Smaller  History  of  England. Woodcuts. 16mo.  Zs,  6(L

 History  of  Greece. Woodcuts. 16mo. 3*.  6d.

 History  of  Rome. Woodcuts. 16mo. ^s.  6d.

 Classical  Mythology. With  Translations  from

the  Poets. Woodcuts. 16mo. 3s.  6J.

 History  of  English  Literature.  16mo. 3.<?.  6d.

 —  Specimens  of  English  Literature.  16mo.  3.s.  6d.

 Scripture  History. Woodcuts. IGino. 3s.  6d.

 Ancient  History  of  the  East.  Woodcuts.  16mo.

35.  6d.

  — Geography. Woodcuts. 16mo.  3s.  6d,

  (Philip) History  of  the  Ancient  World,  from  the

Creation  to  the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  a  d.  455. Fourth  Edition.

3  Vols. 8vo. 31*.  6d.

 (Rev.  a.  C.)  Attractions  of  the  Nile  and  its  Banks.

Woodcuts. 2  Vols. Post  8vo.  18s.

30

LIST  OF  WORKS

STUDENT'S  HUME. A  History  of  England  from  the  Invasion
of  Julius  Csesar. By  David  Hume. Continued  to  1863.  Woodcuts.
Post  8vo. 75.  6d.
*«*  Questions  on  the  above  Work,  12mo.  2s.

  HISTORY  OF  FRANCE  ;  from  the  Earliest  Times

to  the  Establishment  of  the  Second  Empire,  1852.  By  Rev.  H.  W.
Jervis. Woodcuts. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

. HISTORY  OF  ROME ;  from  the  Earliest  Times

to  the  Establishment  of  the  Empire.  By  Dean  Liddell.  Woodcuts.
Crown  Svo.  75.  6d.

 GIBBON  ;  an  Epitome  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the

Roman  Empire. Woodcuts. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

  HISTORY OF GREECE; from the  Earliest

Times  to  the  Roman  Conquest.  By  Wm.  Smith,  D.C.L.  Woodcuts.
Crown  8vo. 7s.  6d.

***  Questions  on  the  above  Work,  12mo.  2s.

 ANCIENT  HISTORY  OF  THE  EAST;  Egypt,

Assyria,  Babylonia,  Media,  Persia.  Asia  Minor,  and  Phoenicia.  By
Philip  Smith. Woodcuts.  Post  Svo. 7s.  Gd.

 OLD  TESTAMENT  HISTORY ;  from  the  Creation

to  the  Return  of  the  Jews  from  Captivity. Maps  and  Woodcuts.  Post

 ~  'new  testament  history. With  an  Intro«

duction  connecting  the  History  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  Maps
and  Woodcuts. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

 ANCIENT  GEOGRAPHY. By  Rev.  W.  L.  Bevan.

Woodcuts. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

. MODERN  GEOGRAPHY  ; Mathematical,  Physi-

cal, and  Descriptive.  By  Rev.  W.  L.  Bevan.  Woodcuts.  Post  Svo.  7s.  6d.
■  ENGLISH LANGUAGE. By  Geo. P.  Marsh.

Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

 - LITERATURE. By  T.  B.  Shaw,  M.A.

Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

  SPECIMENS  of  English  Literature  from  the  Chief

Writers. By  T.  B.  Sbaw,  Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

 MORAL PHILOSOPHY. By  William  Fleming,

D.D. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

  BLACKSTONE. By R.  Malcolm  Kerr,  LL.D.

Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

SPALDING'S  (Captain)  Tale  of  Frithiof. Translated  from  the

Swedish  of  Esias  Tegner. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

STEPHEN'S  (Rev.  AY.  R.)  Life  and  Times  of  St.  Chrysostom.

With  Portrait. Svo.  I5s.

ST.  CLAIR  and  BROPHY'S  RESIDENCE  IN  BULGARIA;  or,

Notes  on  the  Resources  and  Administration  of  Turkey. Svo.  12s.

ST.  JOHN'S  (Charles)  Wild  Sports  and  Natural  History  of  the

Highlands. Post  Svo.  3s.  6d.
 (Batle)  Adventures  in  the  Libyan  Desert.  Post  Svo.  25.

STORIES  FOR  DARLINGS. With  Illustrations.  Sq.  16mo.  5s,

STOTHARD'S (Thos.)  Life. With  Personal  Reminiscences.

By  Mrs.  Bray. With  Portrait  and  60  Woodcuts. 4to.  21s.
STREET'S  (G.  E.)  Gothic  Architecture  in  Spain. Second  Edition.

With  Illustrations,  Medium  Svo.  30s.

PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.  31

STANHOPE'S  (Earl)  Reign  of^ Queen  Anne  until  the  Peace  of

Utrecht.  1701 — 13.  Lihrary  Editton.  8vo.  16i-.  Cabinet  Edition.  With
Portrait, 2  Vols. Post  8vo.  10s.

  History  of  England,  from  the  Peace  of  Utrecht

to  the  Peace  of  Versailles,  1713-83.  Lihrary  Edition,  7  vol?.  8vo.  935.
Or,  Cabinet  Edition,!  Y0\s, Post  8vo. 5s.  each.

 British  India,  from  its  Origin  to  1783.  P.  8vo.  S^.  ijd.

 History  of Forty-Five."  Post  8vo.  35.

 Spain  under  Charles  the  Second.  Post  8vo.  65.  Qd.

 Historical  and  Critical  Essay's. Post  8vo. 3s.  Qd.

  Life  of  Belisarius. Post  8vo. 10s.  Qd.

 Conde. Post  8vo. 3s.  Qd.

  AVilliamPitt.  Portraits.  4  Vols.  P.Svo.  2l<.

 ~  Miscellanies.  2  Vols. Post  8vo.  13s.

 Story  of  Joan  of  Arc. Fcap.  8vo.  Is.

STYFFE  (Knutt)  On  the  Strength  of  Iron  and  Steel.  Translated
by  C.  P.  Sandberg.  With  Preface  by  Dr.  Pkrcy.  With  Plates.  8vo.  12a.

SOMERVILLE'S  (Mart)  Physical  Geography.  Sixth  Editioiu
Revited. By  W.  11.  Hates. Portrait. Post  8vo.  9.t.

 Connexion of  the  Physical  Sciences.  NinOi

Edition. Woodcuts Post  8vo.  9s.

 Molecular  and  Microscopic  Science.  Illustra-
tions.  2  Vols. Post  8vo.  2l5.

 ; Pers9nal  Recollections  from  Early  Life  to  Ad-
vanced Age. Crown  Svo. (//<  Pifparadon.)

SOUTH'S  (John  F.)  Household  Surgery ;  or,  Hints  on  Emergen-
cies. Woodcuts. Fcp.  Svo. 4«.  6d.

SOUTHEY'S  (Robert)  Book  of  the  Church. Post  Svo. 7s.  6d.

  Lives  of  Bunyan  and  Cromwell. Post  Svo.  2/t,

SYBEL'S  (Von)  History  of  Europe  during  the  French  Revolution,

1780-170.7. 4  Vols. Svo.  4«^.

SYMONDS'  (Kev.  W.)  Records  of  the  Rocks;  or  Notes  on  the

Geoloj^y,  Natural  History,  and  Antiquities  of  North  and  South  Wales,
Siluria,  Devon,  and  Cornwall. With  Illustrations.  Crown  Svo.  12s.

TAYLOR'S  (Sir  Henry)  Notes  from  Life. Fcap.  Svo.  2^.
THOMS'  (W.  J.)  Longevity  of  Man ;  its  Facts  and  its  Fiction.

Including  Observatiuns  on  the  more  Remarkable  Instances. Post  Svo.
THOMSON'S  (Archbishop)  Lincoln's  Inn  Sermons.  Svo.  10s.  6d,

 Life  in  the  Light  of  God's  Word. Post  Svo.  5s.

TOCQUE  VILLE'S  (M.  dk)  State  of  France  before  the  Revolution,

1789. Translated  by  IIkxky  Rkevk. 2nd  Edition.  8vo.

TOZER'S  (H.  F.)  Highlands  of  Turkey,  with  Visits  to  Mounts
Ida,  Athos,  Olympus,  and  Pelion.  Illustrations.  2  Vols.  Crown  Svo.
245.

TRISTRAM'S  (Canon)  Great  Sahara.  Illustrations.  Post  Svo.  15.y.

Land  of  Moab  ;  Travels  on  the  East  side  of  the
Dead  Sea  and  the  Jordan. Illustrations. Crown  Svo.

TWISS'  (Horace)  Life  of  Lord  Eldon. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  21.9.
TYLOR'S  (E.  B.)  Early  History  of  Mankind,  and  the  Develop-

ment  of  Civilization. S'-cond  Edition. Svo.  l'2s.

  Primitive  Culture ;  the  Development  of  Mythology,

Philosophy,  Religion,  Art,  and  Custom. 2  Vols.  Svo.  24*.

32 LIST  OF  WORKS  PUBLISHED  BY  MR.  MURRAY.

YAMBERY'S  (Arminius)  Travels  from  Teheran  across  the  Turko-
man Desert  on  the  Eastern  Shore  of  the  Caspian.  Illustrations.  8vo.  21s.

YA'N  LENNEP'S  (Henry  J.)  Travels  in  Asia  Minor.  With

Ilhistrations  of  Biblical  Literature,  and  Archaeology.  With  Woodcuts,
2  Vols.  Post  8vo.  24s.

WELLINGTON'S  Despatches;  during  his  Campaigns  in  India,

Denmark,  Portugal,  Spain,  the  Low  Countries,  and  France.  Com-
piled by  Colonel  Gurwood,  C.B. 8  Vols. 8vo. 205.  each.

 Supplementary  Despatches,  relating  to  India,

Ireland,  Denmark,  Spanish  America,  Spain,  Portugal,  France,  Con-
gress of  Vienna,  Waterloo  and  Paris.  Edited  hy  his  Son.  14  Vols.
Svo. 20*.  each.

  An  Index  to  the  Despatches. Svo.  205.

  Civil  and  Political  Correspondence. Edited  by

his  Son. Vols.  1.  to  IV. Svo. 20?.  each.

  Selections  from  Despatches. Svo.  185.

 Speeches  in  Parliament. 2  Yols. Svo.  425.

WHEELER'S  (G.)  Choice  of  a  Dwelling ;  a  Practical  Handbook  of

Useful  Iiiformation  on  all  Points  connected  with  Hiring,  Buying,  or
Building  a  House. Third  Edition. Plans. Post  8vo. 7s.  6d.

WHITE'S  (Henry) Massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew. Based  on
Documents  in  the  Archives  of  France. 8vo.  16s.

WHYMPER'S  (Edward)  Scrambles  among  the  Alps. With  the

First  Ascent  of  the  Matterhorn,  and  Notes  on  Glacial  Phenomena.
Second  Edition. With  100  Illustrations. Svo.  21s.

 (Frederick)  Travels  and  Adventures  in  Alaska  and

on  the  River  Yukon. With  Illustrations. 8vo.  16s.

WILBERFORCE'S  (William)  Life. By  his  Son,  the  Bishop  op
Winchester. Portrait. Post  Svo.  6s.

WILKINSON'S  (Sir  J.  G.)  Popular  Account  of  the  Ancient
Egyptians. With  500  Woodcuts. 2  Vols. Post  Svo.  12s.

WOOD'S  (Captain)  Journey  to  the  Source  of  the  Oxus.  J^ew

Edition.  With  an  Essay  on  the  Geography  of  the  Valley  of  the  Oxus.
By  Colonel  Henry  Yule,  C.C. With  Map. Svo.  12s.

WORDSWORTH'S  (Bishop  op  Lincoln)  Athens  and  Attica.  Fourth
Edition. Plates. Post  Svo.  5s.

  Pictorial,  Descriptive,  and  Historical  Account

of  Greece. New  Edition. With  600  Woodcuts. Royal  Svo.  21s.

YULE'S  (Colonel)  Book  of  Marco  Polo,  concerning  the  Kingdoms

and  Marvels  of  the  East.  A  new  English  Version.  Illustrated  by  the
Light  of  Oriental  Writers  and  Modern  Travels.  With  Maps  and  80
Plates. 2  Vols. Medium  Svo.  42s.

ZINCKE'S  (Rev.  F.  B.)  Winter  in  the  United  States. Post  Svo.

lOs.  6d.

BRADBWHy,  AGNE-W,  &  CO.,  riUNTERP,  WnlTEmTARS.

GETTY  RESEARCH  INSTITUTE

3  3125  01450  7541
