History of the United Netherlands, Vol. 1 (John Lothrop Motley, 1860)
==========================================================
Continues Motley's Dutch epic: the republic's golden age against Spain. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bwb_P9-CSX-957_1).

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


httos://archive.org/details/owb_P9-CSX-957_1 


Netherlands Cdition 
THE WORKS OF 
JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY 


IN SEVENTEEN VOLUMES 
VOLUME VI 


be (Dotley 


Lretherlands Gbdition 


Tparper and Brothers 
Dework and London 


SPetherlands Carition 


HISTORY OF THE 
UNITED NETHERLANDS 


FROM THE DEATH OF WILLIAM THE SILENT 
TO THE TWELVE YEARS’ TRUCE, 1609 


BY 


JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY 
D.C.L., LL.D. 


CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANOE, ETO. 


NO Leet 
1584-1585 


NEW YORK AND LONDON 
HARPER AND BROTHERS PUBLISHERS 
1900 


———_ 


THWELL® 


Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 
one thousand eight hundred and sixty, by 


JOHN LoTHRoP Moruey, 


in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the 
District of Massachusetts 


Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-seven, by 


JOHN LOTHROP MOorTr.Ley, 


in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the 
District of Massachusetts, 


Copyright, 1888, 1900, by ELIZABETH CaBOT VERNON HARCOURT 
Mary Lorxrop SHERIDAN, SUSAN MARGARET 
STACKPOLE MILDMAY. 


THE DE VINNE PREss. 


CONTENTS 


“PAGE 
CuapTerR I.—Murder of Orange—Extension of Protestantism 


—Vast power of Spain—Religious origin of the revolt—Dis- 
posal of the sovereignty—Courage of the estates of Holland 
—Children of William the Silent—Provisional council of 
state—Firm attitude of Holland and Zealand— Weakness of 
Flanders—Fall of Ghent—Adroitness of Alexander Farnese. 1 


Cuaprer Il.—Relations of the Republic to France—The 
queen’s severity toward Catholics and Calvinists—Relative 
positions of England and France—Timidity of Germany— 
Apathy of Protestant Germany—Indignation of the Nether- 
landers—Henry III. of France—The king and his minions— 
Henry of Guise—Henry of Navarre—Power of France— 
Embassy of the states to France—Ignominious position of 
the envoys—Views of the French Huguenots—Efforts to 
procure annexation—Success of Des Pruneaux. . . - - 32 


CHAPTER III.—Policy of England—Schemes of the Pretender 
of Portugal—Hesitation of the French court—Seeret wishes 
of France—Contradictory views as to the opinions of Neth- 
erlanders—Their love for England and Elizabeth—Promi- 
nent statesmen of the provinces—Roger Williams the 
Welshman—Views of Walsingham, Burghley, and the queen 
—An embassy to Holland decided upon—Davison at The 
Hague—Cautious and secret measures of Burghley—Conse- 
quent dissatisfaction of Walsingham—English and Dutch 
suspicion of France—Increasing affection of Holland for 
ee eee er een TaN nave Go tad ie 88 
ix 


x CONTENTS 


PAGE 
CHAPTER IV.—Reception of the Dutch envoys at the Louvre 


—Ignominious result of the embassy—Secret influences at 
work—Bargaining between the French and Spanish courts— 
Claims of Catherine de’ Medici upon Portugal—Letters of 
Henry and Catherine—Secret proposal by France to invade 
England—States’ mission to Henry of Nayarre—Subsidies 
of Philip to Guise—Treaty of Joinville—Philip’s share in 
the League denied by Parma—Philip in reality its chief— 
Manifesto of the League—Attitude of Henry III. and of 
Navarre—The League demands a royal decree— Designs 
of France and Spain against England—Secret interview of 
Mendoza and Villeroy—Complaints of English persecution 
—KEdict of Nemours—Excommuniecation of Navarre and his 
TOPLy Lah Swern (a) ee calpre es mace AMES cape eee a 


CHAPTER V.—Position and character of Farnese—Prepara- 
tions for Antwerp siege—Its characteristies—Foresight of 
William the Silent—Sainte-Aldegonde, the burgomaster— 
Anarchy in Antwerp—Character of Sainte-Aldegonde—Ad- 
miral Treslong—Justinus de N: assau— Hohenlo—Opposition 
to the plan of Orange—Liefkenshoek—Headquarters of 
Parma at Kalloo—Difficulty of supplying the city—Results 
of not piercing the dikes— Preliminaries of the siege—Suc- 
cesses of the Spaniards—Energy of Farnese with sword and 
pen—His correspondence with the Antwerpers— Progress of 
the bridge—Impoverished condition of Parma— Patriots at- 
tempt Bois-le-Due—Their misconduct—Failure of the enter- 
prise—The Schelde bridge completed—Description of the 
structure—Position of Alexander and his army—La Motte 
attempts in vain Ostend—Patriots gain Liefkenshoek—Pro- 
jects of Gianibelli—Alarm on the bridge—The fire-ships— 
The explosion—Its results—Death of the Viscount of Ghent 
—Perpetual anxiety of Farnese—Impoverished state of the 
Spaniards—Intended attack of the Kowenstyn—Second at- 
tack of the Kowenstyn—A landing effected—A sharp com- 
bat—The dike pierced—Rally of the Spaniards— Parma 
comes to the reseue—Fierce struggle on the dike—The 
Spaniards successful—Premature triumph at Antwerp—De- 
feat of the patriots—The ship War’s End—Despair of the 
citizens—Sainte-Aldegonde discouraged—His critical posi- 


CONTENTS xi 


PAGE 
tion—His negotiations with the enemy—Correspondence 


with Richardot—Commotion in the city—Interview of Mar- 
nix with Parma—Suspicious conduct of Marnix—Deputation 
to the prinee—Oration of Marnix—Private views of Parma 
—Capitulation of Antwerp—Mistakes of Marnix—Philip 
on the religious question—Triumphal entrance of Alexander 
—Rebuilding of the citadel—Gratification of aoe Note 
on Sainte-Aldegonde. ...... . - > MEE 


CHAPTER VI.—Policy of England—Diplomatie coquetry— 
Dutch envoys in England—Conference of Ortel and Wal- 
singham—Interview with Leicester—Private audience of 
the queen—Letters of the States-General—I11 effects of Gil- 
pin’s despatch—Close bargaining of the queen and states 
—Guaranties required by England—England’s comparative 
weakness—The English characterized— Paul Hentzner—The 
envoys in London—Their characters—Olden-Barneveldt 
described—Reception at Greenwich—Speech of Menin— 
Reply of the queen—Memorial of the envoys—Discussions 
with the ministers—Second speech of the queen—Third 
speech of the queen—Sir John Norris sent to Holland— 
Parsimony of Elizabeth—Energy of Davison—Protracted 
negotiations—Friendly sentiments of Count Maurice—Let- 
ters from him and Louisa de Coligny—Davison vexed by the 
queen’s caprice—Dissatisfaction of Leicester—His vehement 
complaints—The queen’s avarice—Perplexity of Davison 
—Manifesto of Elizabeth—Sir ees 2S a ee arrival at 
ilies , 5 8 9 GB & 8 Oo 4 5 Oo oe ee Bo a Sy Oe 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


ASSASSINATION OF PETTIN BY RICHEBOURG . . Frontispiece 


BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF THE SIEGE OF ANTWERP Facing page xx 


PENG VeeUUK OF GUISE 2 6 sims 2 oS 
Jeloneee 1O0L, Ci INI & Bg «4 6 6 Bp 
Henry IV. oF FRANCE AND NAVARRE .. “ 
SAINTE-ALDEGONDE, PHinip oF MARNIX. . “ 


MOUIA Din COLIGNY w . . « —s 


xiii 


(73 


94 


PREFACE 
TO THE ORIGINAL EDITION 


THE indulgence with which the “ History of the Rise of 
the Dutch Republic” was received has encouraged me to 
prosecute my task with renewed industry. 

A single word seems necessary to explain the some- 
what increased proportions which the present work has 
assumed over the original design. The intimate con- 
nection which was formed between the Kingdom of 
England and the Republic of Holland, immediately after 
the death of William the Silent, rendered the history 
and the fate of the two commonwealths for a season 
almost identical. The years of anxiety and suspense 
during which the great Spanish project for subjugating 
England and reconquering the Netherlands, by the same 
invasion, was slowly matured, were of deepest import 
for the future destiny of those two countries and for the 
cause of national liberty. The deep-laid conspiracy of 
Spain and Rome against human rights deserves to be 
patiently examined, for it is one of the great lessons of 
history. The crisis was long and doubtful, and the 
health—perhaps the existence—of England and Hol- 


xv 


xvi PREFACE 


land, and, with them, of a great part of Christendom, 
was on the issue. 

History has few so fruitful examples of the dangers 
which come from superstition and despotism, and the 
blessings which flow from the maintenance of religious 
and political freedom, as those afforded by the struggle 
between England and Holland on the one side, and 
Spain and Rome on the other, during the epoch which I 
have attempted to describe. It is for this reason that I 
have thought it necessary to reveal, as minutely as 
possible, the secret details of this conspiracy of king 
and priest against the people, and to show how it was 
baffled at last by the strong, self-helping energy of two 
free nations combined. 

The period occupied by these two volumes is therefore 
a short one, when counted by years, for it begins in 1584 
and ends with the commencement of 1590. When esti- 
mated by the significance of events and their results for 
future ages, it will perhaps be deemed worthy of the 
close examination which it has received. With the year 
1588 the crisis was past; England was safe, and the new 
Dutch commonwealth was thoroughly organized. It is 
my design, in two additional volumes, which, with the 
two now published, will complete the present work, to 
carry the history of the Republic down to the Synod of 
Dort. After this epoch the Thirty Years’ War broke 
out in Germany; and it is my wish, at a future day, to 
retrace the history of that eventful struggle, and to 


PREFACE XVii 


combine with it the civil and military events in Hol- 
land, down to the epoch when the Thirty Years’ War and 
the Highty Years’ War of the Netherlands were both 
brought to a close by the peace of Westphalia. 

The materials for the volumes now offered to the 
public were so abundant that it was almost impossible 
to condense them into smaller compass without doing 
injustice to the subject. It was desirable to throw full 
light on these prominent points of the history, while 
the law of historical perspective will allow long stretches 
of shadow in the succeeding portions, in which less 
important objects may be more slightly indicated. 
That I may not be thought capable of abusing the 
reader’s confidence by inventing conversations, speeches, 
or letters, I would take this opportunity of stating— 
although I have repeated the remark in the foot-notes— 
that no personage in these pages is made to write or 
speak any words save those which, on the best historical 
evidence, he is known to have written or spoken. 

A brief allusion to my sources of information will not 
seem superfluous. I have carefully studied all the lead- 
ing contemporary chronicles and pamphlets of Holland, 
Flanders, Spain, France, Germany, and England; but, 
as the authorities are always indicated in the notes, it 
is unnecessary to give a list of them here. But by far 
my most valuable materials are entirely unpublished 
ones. 

The Archives of England are especially rich for the 


Xvill PREFACE 


history of the sixteenth century; and it will be seen, in 
the course of the narrative, how largely I have drawn 
from those mines of historical wealth, the State-Paper 
Office and the MS. department of the British Museum. 
Although both these great national depositories are in 
admirable order, it is to be regretted that they are not 
all embraced in one collection, as much trouble might 
then be spared to the historical student, who is now 
obliged to pass frequently from the one place to the 
other in order to find different portions of the same 
correspondence. 

From the Royal Archives of Holland I have obtained 
many most important, entirely unpublished documents, 
by the aid of which I have endeavored to verify, to illus- 
trate, or sometimes to correct the recitals of the elder 
national chroniclers; and I have derived the greatest 
profit from the invaluable series of Archives and Corre- 
spondence of the Orange-Nassau Family, given to the 
world by M. Groen van Prinsterer. I desire to renew 
to that distinguished gentleman, and to that eminent 
scholar M. Bakhuyzen van den Brink, the expression of 
my gratitude for their constant kindness and advice 
during my residence at The Hague. N othing can ex- 
ceed the courtesy which has been extended to me in Hol- 
land, and I am deeply grateful for the indulgence with 
which my efforts to illustrate the history of the country 
have been received where that history is best known. 

I have also been much aided by the study of a portion 


PREFACE xix 


of the Archives of Simancas, the originals of which are 
in the Archives de /Empire in Paris, and which were 
most liberally laid before me through the kindness of 
M. le Comte de Laborde. 

I have, further, enjoyed an inestimable advantage in 
the perusal of the whole correspondence between Philip 
II., his ministers and governors, relating to the affairs 
of the Netherlands from the epoch at which this work 
commences down to that monarch’s death. Copies of 
this correspondence have been carefully made from the 
originals at Simaneas by order of the Belgian govern- 
ment, under the superintendence of the eminent archivist 
M. Gachard, who has already published a synopsis or 
abridgment of a portion of it in a French translation. 
The translation and abridgment of so large a mass of 
papers, however, must necessarily occupy many years, 
and it may be long, therefore, before the whole of the 
correspondence, and particularly that portion of it re- 
lating to the epoch occupied by these volumes, sees the 
light. It was, therefore, of the greatest importance for 
me to see the documents themselves unabridged and 
untranslated. This privilege has been accorded me, 
and I desire to express my thanks to his Excellency M. 
van de Weyer, the distinguished representative of Bel- 
gium at the English court, to whose friendly offices I 
am mainly indebted for the satisfaction of my wishes in 
this respect. A letter from him to his Excellency M. 
Rogier, Minister of the Interior in Belgium,—who like- 


xx PREFACE 


wise took the most courteous interest in promoting my 
views,—obtained for me the permission thoroughly to 
study this correspondence; and I passed several months 
in Brussels, occupied with reading the whole of it from 
the year 1584 to the end of the reign of Philip IT. 

I was thus saved a long visit to the Archives of Si- 
maneas, for it would be impossible conscientiously to 
write the history of the epoch without a thorough ex- 
amination of the correspondence of the king and his 
ministers. I venture to hope, therefore, whatever 
judgment may be passed upon my own labors, that this 
work may be thought to possess an intrinsic value; for 
the various materials of which it is composed are ori- 
ginal, and, so far as I am aware, have not been made 
use of by any historical writer. 

I would take this opportunity to repeat my thanks to 
M. Gachard, archivist of the kingdom of Belgium, for 
the uniform courtesy and kindness which I have received 
at his hands, and to bear my testimony to the skill and 
critical accuracy with which he has illustrated so many 
passages of Belgian and Spanish history. 

31 HERTFORD STREET, MAYFAIR, 

November 11, 1860. 


RRR ores Slag 


ST wat a ys Ries 


= asener| 


poe O_O 
= ANTWERP 


E bj; “a a 
i ty ne ot 
FE 4 


2windrecht Cec 
We 


RSPR 


Bs Wak 
apes 
= prt 
HNN Ae UPR ©: fe 


THE UNITED NETHERLANDS 


CHAPTER I 


Murder of Orange—Extension of Protestantism—Vast power of 
Spain—Religious origin of the revolt—Disposal of the sovereignty 
—Courage of the estates of Holland—Children of William the 
Silent—Provisional council of state—Firm attitude of Holland 
and Zealand—Weakness of Flanders—Fall of Ghent—Adroit- 
ness of Alexander Farnese. 


ILLIAM THE SILENT, Prince of Orange, had 
been murdered on the 10th of July, 1584. It is 
difficult to imagine a more universal disaster than the 
one thus brought about by the hand of a single obscure 
fanatic. For nearly twenty years the character of the 
prince had been expanding steadily as the difficulties 
of his situation increased.. Habit, necessity, and the 
natural gifts of the man had combined to invest him 
at last with an authority which seemed more than 
human. There was such general confidence in his 
sagacity, courage, and purity that the nation had 
come to think with his brain and to act with his hand. 
It was natural that, for an instant, there should be a 
feeling as of absolute and helpless paralysis. 
Whatever his technical attributes in the polity of the 


VOL. IL.—1 il 


2 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Netherlands,—and it would be difficult to define them 
with perfect accuracy,—there is no doubt that he stood 
there, the head of a commonwealth, in an attitude such 
as had been maintained by but few of the kings or 
chiefs or high priests of history. Assassination, a 
regular and almost indispensable portion of the work- 
ing machinery of Philip’s government, had produced, 
in this instance, after repeated disappointments, the 
result at last which had been so anxiously desired. 
The ban of the pope and the offered gold of the king 
had accomplished a victory greater than any yet 
achieved by the armies of Spain, brilliant as had been 
their triumphs on the blood-stained soil of the Nether- 
lands. 

Had that “exceeding proud, neat, and spruce”! 
doctor of laws, William Parry, who had been busy- 
ing himself at about the same time with his memorable 
project against the Queen of England, proved as suc- 
cessful as Balthazar Gérard, the fate of Christendom 
would have been still darker. Fortunately, that mem- 
ber of Parliament had made the discovery in time—not 
for himself, but for Elizabeth—that the “Lord was 
better pleased with adverbs than nouns”;2 the well- 
known result being that the traitor was hanged and 
the sovereign saved. 

Yet such was the condition of Europe at that day. A 
small, dull, elderly, imperfectly educated, patient, plod- 
ding invalid, with white hair and protrudin g¢ under-jaw 
and dreary visage, was sitting day after day, seldom 
speaking, never smiling, seven or eight hours out of 
every twenty-four, at a writing-table covered with 


1 Camden’s Elizabeth, ed. 1688, p. 305, 
2 Ibid., p. 307. 


1584] PHILIP’S SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT 3 


heaps of interminable despatches, in a cabinet far away 
beyond the seas and mountains, in the very heart of 
Spain. A clerk or two, noiselessly opening and shut- 
ting the door from time to time, fetching fresh bundles 
of letters and taking away others, all written and 
composed by secretaries or high functionaries, and all 
to be scrawled over in the margin by the diligent old 
man in a big school-boy’s hand and style, if ever 
school-boy, even in the sixteenth century, could write 
so illegibly or express himself so awkwardly ; | couriers 
in the courtyard arriving from or departing for the 
uttermost parts of earth—Asia, Africa, America, Europe 
—to fetch and carry these interminable epistles which 
contained the irresponsible commands of this one individ- 
ual, and were freighted with the doom and destiny of 
countless millions of the world’s inhabitants—such was 
the system of government against which the Netherlands 
had protested and revolted. It was a system under which 
their fields had been made desolate, their cities burned 
and pillaged, their men hanged, burned, drowned, or 
hacked to pieces, their women subjected to every out- 
rage; and to put an end to which they had been devoting 
their treasure and their blood for nearly the length of one 
generation. It was a system, too, which, among other 
results, had just brought about the death of the fore- 
most statesman of Europe, and had nearly effected 
simultaneously the murder of the most eminent sover- 
eign in the world. The industrious Philip, safe and 
tranquil in the depths of the Escorial, saying his prayers 
three times a day with exemplary regularity, had just 
sent three bullets through the body of William the 
Silent at his dining-room door in Delft. “Had it only 


1 See vol. iii. of this work for instances. 


4 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


been done two years earlier,” observed the patient old 
man, “much trouble might have been spared me; but 
’t is better late than never.” Sir Edward Stafford, 
English envoy in Paris, wrote to his government, so 
soon as the news of the murder reached him, that, ac- 
cording to his information out of the Spanish minister’s 
own house, “the same practice that had been executed 
upon the Prince of Orange, there were practisers more 
than two or three about to execute upon her Majesty, 
and that within two months.” Without vouching for 
the absolute accuracy of this intelligence, he implored 
the queen to be more upon her guard than ever. “For 
there is no doubt,” said the envoy, “that she is a chief 
mark to shoot at; and seeing that there were men cun- 
ning enough to inchant a man and to encourage him to 
kill the Prince of Orange, in the midst of Holland, and 
that there was a knave found desperate enough to do it, 
we must think hereafter that anything may be done. 
Therefore God preserve her Majesty.” 1 

Invisible as the Grand Lama of Tibet, clothed with 
power as extensive and absolute as had ever been 
wielded by the most imperial Cxsar, Philip the Prudent, 

1 Murdin’s State Papers, 412-415. 

William Herle, too, wrote from Holland, immediately after the 
murder, warning the queen to be more than ever on her guard. 
The seminary at Dieppe, placed “ upon the brim of England,” was 
constantly sending Seotch and English assassins into their own 
country. “’T is known to me,” he said, “that there are entered 
above sevenscore lurking Jesuits into the realm of late, and they 
do secretly repair more and more to sow infection and rebellion 
among your subjects, and to conspire against your royal person, 
whom God alway, for his mercy’s sake, preserve” (Herle to the 
queen, 22d July, 1584, State-Paper Office MS.). Moreover, another 
secret agent of Walsingham, Stephen Le Sieur, wrote shortly after- 
ward from Antwerp that the Prince of Orange had been warned by 


1584] HIS AMBITION 5 


as he grew older and feebler in mind and body, seemed 
to become more gluttonous of work,! more ambitious to 
extend his scepter over lands which he had never seen 
or dreamed of seeing, more fixed in his determination 
to annihilate that monster Protestantism, which it had 
been the business of his life to combat, more eager to 
put to death every human creature, whether anointed 
monarch or humble artisan, that defended heresy or 
opposed his progress to universal empire. 

If this enormous power, this fabulous labor, had been 
wielded or performed with a beneficent intention ; if the 
man who seriously regarded himself as the owner of a 
third of the globe, with the inhabitants thereof, had 
attempted to deal with these extensive estates inherited 
from his ancestors with the honest intention of a thrifty 
landlord, an intelligent slave-owner, it would have yet 
been possible for a little longer to smile at the delusion 
and endure the practice. 

But there was another old man, who lived in another 
palace in another remote land, who, in his capacity of 
representative of St. Peter, claimed to dispose of all the 
kingdoms of the earth—and had been willing to bestow 
them upon the man who would go down and worship 
him. Philip stood enfeoffed, by divine decree, of all 
America, the East Indies, the whole Spanish peninsula, 


persons resident in Cologne of the attempt about to be made upon 
his life, but had unfortunately not heeded the admonition. The 
same persons who had furnished that information now wrote to 
apprise Le Sieur that there was a similar plot on foot against the 
queen (Le Sieur to Walsingham, 7th September, 1584, State- 
Paper Office MS.). 

1 Longlée au Roi de France, apud Groen van Prinsterer, Ar- 
chives et Correspondance de la Maison d’Orange-Nassau, deuxiéme 
série, tom. i. p. 29. 


6 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the better portion of Italy, the seventeen Netherlands, 
and many other possessions far and near; and he con- 
templated annexing to this extensive property the king- 
doms of France, of England and Ireland. The Holy 
League, maintained by the sword of Guise, the pope’s 
ban, Spanish ducats, Italian condottieri, and German 
mercenaries, was to exterminate heresy and establish 
the Spanish dominion in France. The same machinery, 
aided by the pistol or poniard of the assassin, was to 
substitute for English Protestantism and England’s 
queen the Roman Catholic religion and a foreign sover- 
eign. “The Holy League,” said Duplessis-Mornay, 
one of the noblest characters of the age, “has destined 
us all to the same sacrifice. The ambition of the Span- 
iard, which has overleaped so many lands and seas, 
thinks nothing inaccessible.” 1 

The Netherland revolt had therefore assumed world- 
wide proportions. Had it been merely the rebellion of 
provinces against a sovereign, the importance of the 
struggle would have been more local and temporary. 
But the period was one in which the geographical land- 
marks of countries were almost removed. The divid- 
ing-line ran through every state, city, and almost every 
family. There was a country which believed in the 
absolute power of the Church to dictate the relations 
between man and his Maker, and to utterly extermi- 
nate all who disputed that position. There was an- 
other country which protested against that doctrine, and 
claimed, theoretically or practically, a liberty of con- 
science. The territory of these countries was mapped 
out by no visible lines, but the inhabitants of each, 


1 Mémoires et Correspondance de Duplessis-Mornay (Paris, 
1824), iii. 27. 


1584] EXTENSION OF PROTESTANTISM 7 


whether resident in France, Germany, England, or 
Flanders, recognized a relationship which took its root 
in deeper differences than those of race or language. 
It was not entirely a question of doctrine or dogma. <A 
large portion of the world had become tired of the 
antiquated delusion of a papal supremacy over every 
land, and had recorded its determination, once for all, 
to have done with it. The transition to freedom of 
conscience became a necessary step, sooner or later to 
be taken. To establish the principle of toleration for 
all religions was an inevitable consequence of the Dutch 
revolt, although thus far perhaps only one conspicuous 
man in advance of his age had boldly announced that 
doctrine and had died in its defense. But a great true 
thought never dies, though long buried in the earth, 
and the day was to come, after long years, when the seed 
was to ripen into a harvest of civil and religious eman- 
cipation, and when the very word toleration was to sound 
like an insult and an absurdity. 

A vast responsibility rested upon the head of a mon- 
arch placed, as Philip II. found himself, at this great 
dividing-point in modern history. To judge him, or 
any man in such a position, simply from his own point 
of view, is weak and illogical. History judges the man 
according to its point of view. It condemns or applauds 
the point of view itself. The point of view of a male- 
factor is not to excuse robbery and murder. Nor is the 
spirit of the age to be pleaded in defense of the evil-doer 
at a time when mortals were divided into almost equal 
troops. The age of Philip II. was also the age of Wil- 
liam of Orange and his four brethren, of Sainte-Alde- 
gonde, of Olden-Barneveldt, of Duplessis-Mornay, La 
Noue, Coligny, of Luther, Melanchthon, and Calvin, 


8 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Walsingham, Sydney, Raleigh, Queen Elizabeth, of 
Michel Montaigne and William Shakspere. It was 
not an age of blindness, but of glorious ight. If the 
man whom the Maker of the universe had permitted to 
be born to such boundless functions chose to put out 
his own eyes that he might grope along his great path- 
way of duty in perpetual darkness, by his deeds he 
must be judged. The king perhaps firmly believed 
that the heretics of the Netherlands, of France, or of 
England could escape eternal perdition only by being 
extirpated from the earth by fire and sword, and there- 
fore, perhaps, felt it his duty to devote his life to their 
extermination. But he believed still more firmly that 
his own political authority throughout his dominions, 
and his road to almost universal empire, lay over the 
bodies of those heretics. Three centuries have nearly 
passed since this memorable epoch, and the world knows 
the fate of the states which accepted the dogma which 
it was Philip’s life-work to enforce, and of those who 
protested against the system. The Spanish and Ital- 
ian peninsulas have had a different history from that 
which records the career of France, Prussia, the Dutch 
commonwealth, the British empire, the transatlantic Re- 
publie. 

Yet the contest between those seven meager provinces 
upon the sand-banks of the North Sea and the great 
Spanish empire seemed at the moment with which we 
are now occupied a sufficiently desperate one. Throwa 
glance upon the map of Europe. Look at the broad, 
magnificent Spanish peninsula, stretching across eight 
degrees of latitude and ten of longitude, commanding 
the Atlantic and the Mediterranean, with a genial cli- 
mate, warmed in winter by the vast furnace of Africa, 


1584] EXTENSIVE POWER OF SPAIN 9 


and protected from the scorching heats of summer by 
shady mountain and forest, and temperate breezes 
from either ocean. A generous southern territory, 
flowing with wine and oil and all the richest gifts 
of a bountiful nature; splendid cities—the new and 
daily expanding Madrid, rich in the trophies of the 
most artistic period of the modern world; Cadiz, as 
populous at that day as London, seated by the straits 
where the ancient and modern systems of traffic were 
blending like the mingling of the two oceans; Granada 
the ancient wealthy seat of the fallen Moors; Toledo, 
Valladolid, and Lisbon, chief city of the recently con- 
quered kingdom of Portugal, counting, with its suburbs, 
a larger population than any city, excepting Paris, in 
Europe, the mother of distant colonies, and the capital 
of the rapidly developing traffie with both the Indies— 
these were some of the treasures of Spain herselft But 
she possessed Sicily also, the better portion of Italy, and 
important dependencies in Africa, while the famous 
maritime discoveries of the age had all inured to her 
agerandizement. The world seemed suddenly to have 
expanded its wings from east to west, only to bear the 
fortunate Spanish empire to the most dizzy heights of 
wealth and power. The most accomplished generals, 
the most disciplined and daring infantry the world has 
ever known, the best-equipped and most extensive navy, 
royal and mercantile, of the age, were at the absolute 
command of the sovereign. Such was Spain. 

Turn now to the northwestern corner of Europe. A 
morsel of territory attached by a slight sand-hook to 
the continent, and half submerged by the stormy waters 


1 Compare Guicciardini, Belgicee Descript. (Amst. 1660), p. 210 
seq. 


10 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


of the German Ocean—this was Holland. A rude 
climate, with long, dark, rigorous winters and brief 
summers, a territory the mere wash of three great 
rivers, which had fertilized happier portions of Europe 
only to desolate and overwhelm this less-favored land, 
a soil so ungrateful that if the whole of its four hundred 
thousand acres of arable land had been sowed with grain 1 
it could not feed the laborers alone, and a population 
largely estimated at one million of souls—these were 
the characteristics of the province which already had 
begun to give its name to the new commonwealth. The 
isles of Zealand—entangled in the coils of deep, slow- 
moving rivers, or combating the ocean without—and 
the ancient episcopate of Utrecht formed the only 
other provinces that had quite shaken off the foreign 
yoke. In Friesland, the important city of Groningen 
was still held for the king, while Bois-le-Duc, Zutphen, 
besides other places in Gelderland and North Brabant, 
also in possession of the royalists, made the position of 
those provinces precarious. 

The limit of the Spanish or “obedient” provinces on 
the one hand, and of the United Provinces on the other, 
cannot, therefore, be briefly and distinctly stated. The 
memorable treason—or, as it was called, the “reconcil- 
iation ”—of the Walloon provinces in the year 1583-84 
had placed the provinces of Hainault, Artois, Douai, 
with the flourishing cities Arras, Valenciennes, Lille, 
Tournay, and others,—all Celtic Flanders, in short,—in 
the grasp of Spain. Cambray was still held by the 
French governor, Seigneur de Balagny, who had taken 
advantage of the Duke of Anjou’s treachery to the 
states to establish himself in an unrecognized but 


1 Mémoires de Jean de Wit (La Haye, 1709-18-19). 


1584] RELIGIOUS ORIGIN OF THE REVOLT 11 


practical petty sovereignty, in defiance both of France 
and Spain; while East Flanders and South Brabant 
still remained a disputed territory, and the immediate 
field of contest. With these limitations, it may be as- 
sumed, for general purposes, that the territory of the 
United States was that of the modern kingdom of the 
Netherlands, while the obedient provinces occupied what 
is now the territory of Belgium. 

Such, then, were the combatants in the great Eighty 
Years’ War for civil and religious liberty, sixteen of 
which had now passed away. On the one side, one of 
the most powerful and populous world-empires of his- 
tory, then in the zenith of its prosperity; on the other 
hand, a slender group of cities, governed by merchants 
and artisans, and planted precariously upon a meager, 
unstable soil. A million and a half of souls against the 
autocrat of a third part of the known world. The con- 
test seemed as desperate as the cause was certainly 
sacred; but it had ceased to be a local contest. For 
the history which is to occupy us in these volumes is 
not exclusively the history of Holland. It is the story 
of the great combat between despotism, sacerdotal and 
regal, and the spirit of rational human liberty. The 
tragedy opened in the Netherlands, and its main scenes 
were long enacted there; but as the ambition of Spain 
expanded, and as the resistance to the principle which 
she represented became more general, other nations 
were of necessity involved in the struggle. There came 
to be one country, the citizens of which were the 
Leaguers; and another country, whose inhabitants 
were Protestants. And in this lay the distinction be- 
tween freedom and absolutism. The religious question 
swallowed all the others. There was never a period in 


ae; THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the early history of the Dutch revolt when the provinces 
would not have returned to their obedience could they 
have been assured of enjoying liberty of conscience or 
religious peace; nor was there ever a single moment in 
Philip II.’s life in which he wavered in his fixed deter- 
mination never to listen to such a claim. The quarrel 
was in its nature irreconcilable and eternal as the war- 
fare between wrong and right; and the establishment 
of a comparative civil liberty in Europe and America 
was the result of the religious war of the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries. The struggle lasted eighty years, 
but the prize was worth the contest. 

The object of the war between the Netherlands and 
Spain was not, therefore, primarily a rebellion against 
established authority for the maintenance of civil rights. 
To preserve these rights was secondary. The first cause 
was religion. The provinces had been fighting for years 
against the Inquisition. Had they not taken arms, the 
Inquisition would have been established in the Nether- 
lands, and very probably in England, and England 
might have become in its turn a province of the Span- 
ish empire. 

The death of William the Silent produced a sudden 
change in the political arrangements of the liberated 
Netherlands. During the year 1583, the United Prov- 
inces had elected Francis, Duke of Anjou, to be Duke 
of Brabant and sovereign of the whole country, under 
certain constitutional provisions enumerated in articles 
of solemn compact. That compact had been grossly 
violated. The duke had made a treacherous attempt to 
possess himself of absolute power and to seize several 
important cities. He had been signally defeated in 
Antwerp, and obliged to leave the country, covered with 


1584] DISPOSAL OF THE SOVEREIGNTY 13 


ignominy. The states had then consulted William of 
Orange as to the course to be taken in the emergency. 
The prince had told them that their choice was triple. 
They might reconcile themselves with Spain, and 
abandon the contest for religious liberty which they 
had so long been waging; they might reconcile them- 
selves with Anjou, notwithstanding that he had so ut- 
terly forfeited all claims to their consideration; or they 
might fight the matter out with Spain single-handed. 
The last course was, in his opinion, the most eligible 
one, and he was ready to sacrifice his life to its further- 
ance. It was, however, indispensable, should that policy 
be adopted, that much larger supplies should be voted 
than had hitherto been raised, and, in general, that a 
much more extensive and elevated spirit of patriotism 
should manifest itself than had hitherto been displayed. 

It was, on the whole, decided to make a second ar- 
rangement with the Duke of Anjou, Queen Elizabeth 
warmly urging that course. At the same time, however, 
that articles of agreement were drawn up for the installa- 
tion of Anjou as sovereign of the United Provinces, the 
prince had himself consented to accept the title of 
Count of Holland, under an ample constitutional 
charter, dictated by his own lips. Neither Anjou nor 
Orange lived to be inaugurated into the offices thus 
bestowed upon them. The duke died at Chateau- 
Thierry on the 10th June, and the prince was assas- 
sinated a month later at Delft. 

What now was the political position of the United 
Provinces at this juncture? The sovereignty which 
had been held by the estates, ready to be conferred re- 
spectively upon Anjou and Orange, remained in the 
hands of the estates. There was no opposition to this 


14 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


theory. No more enlarged view of the social compact 
had yet been taken. The people, as such, claimed no 
sovereignty. Had any champion claimed it for them, 
they would hardly have understood him. The nation 
dealt with facts. After abjuring Philip in 1581—an act 
which had been accomplished by the estates—the same 
estates in general assembly had exercised sovereign 
power, and had twice disposed of that sovereign power 
by electing a hereditary ruler. Their right and their 
power to do this had been disputed by none, save 
by the deposed monarch in Spain. Having the sover- 
eignty to dispose of, it seemed logical that the estates 
might keep it, if so inclined. They did keep it, but only 
in trust. While Orange lived, he might often have 
been elected sovereign of all the provinces, could he 
have been induced to consent. After his death the 
estates retained, ex necessitate, the sovereignty; and it 
will‘soon be related what they intended to do with it. 
One thing is very certain, that neither Orange, while he 
lived, nor the estates, after his death, were actuated in 
their policy by personal ambition. It will be seen that 
the first object of the estates was to dispossess them- 
selves of the sovereignty which had again fallen into 
their hands. 

What were the estates? Without, at the present 
moment, any further inquiries into that constitutional 
system which had been long consolidating itself, and 
was destined to exist upon a firmer basis for centuries 
longer, it will be sufficient to observe that the great 
characteristic of the Netherland government was the 
municipality. Hach province contained a large number 
of cities, which were governed by a board of magis- 
trates, varying in number from twenty to forty. This 


1584] CONSTITUTION OF THE ESTATES 15 


college, called the vroedschap (“assembly of sages”), 
consisted of the most notable citizens, and was a self- 
electing body, a close corporation, the members being 
appointed for life, from the citizens at large. Whenever 
vacancies occurred from death or loss of citizenship, the 
college chose new members—sometimes immediately, 
sometimes by means of a double or triple selection of 
names, the choice of one from among which was offered 
to the stadholder of the province. This functionary 
was appointed by the count, as he was called, whether 
Duke of Bavaria or of Burgundy, emperor or king. 
After the abjuration of Philip the governors were ap- 
pointed by the estates of each province. 

The sage-men chose annually a board of senators, or 
schepens, whose functions were mainly judicial; and 
there were generally two, and sometimes three, burgo- 
masters, appointed in the same way.! This was the 
popular branch of the estates. But besides this body 
of representatives were the nobles, men of ancient line- 
age and large possessions, who had exercised, according 
to the general feudal law of Europe, high, low, and in- 
termediate jurisdiction upon their estates, and had long 
been recognized as an integral part of the body politic, 
having the right to appear, through delegates of their 
order, in the provincial and in the general assemblies. 

Regarded as a machine for bringing the most decided 
political capacities into the administration of public 
affairs, and for organizing the most practical opposition 
to the system of religious tyranny, the Netherland con- 
stitution was a healthy and, for the age, an enlightened 
one. The office-holders, it is obvious, were not greedy 
for the spoils of office; for it was, unfortunately, often 


1 Meteren, loc. cit. 


16 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the case that their necessary expenses in the service of 
the state were not defrayed. The people raised enor- 
mous contributions for carrying on the war, but they 
could not afford to be extremely generous to their 
faithful servants. 

Thus constituted was the commonwealth upon the 
death of William the Silent. The gloom produced by 
that event was tragical. Never in human history was a 
more poignant and universal sorrow for the death of 
any individual. The despair was, for a brief season, 
absolute, but it was soon succeeded by more lofty senti- 
ments. It seemed, after they had laid their hero in the 
tomb, as though his spirit still hovered above the nation 
which he had loved so well, and was inspiring it with a 
portion of his own energy and wisdom. 

Even on the very day of the murder, the estates of 
Holland, then sitting at Delft, passed a resolution “to 
maintain the good cause, with God’s help, to the utter- 
most, without sparing gold or blood.” This decree was 
communicated to Admiral de Warmont, to Count 
Hohenlo, to William Louis of Nassau, and to other 


1 “The people of that country,” wrote Walsingham, ten days 
after the death of Orange, to Davison, “have hitherto showed 
themselves but little amazed with the accident. Rather, the 
wickedness of the deed hath hardened their stomachs to hold out 
as long as they shall have any means of defense.”—July 12 (22), 
1584, S. P. Office MS. 

William Herle, also, a secret and most capable emissary of the 
English government, was visiting the cities of Holland and Zealand 
at the time of the tragic occurrence. He described in vivid colors 
the courageous attitude maintained by all persons in the midst of 
the general gloom. “The recent death of the Prince of Orange,” 
he wrote to Queen Elizabeth, ‘“‘has created no astonishment [dis- 
may] at all, either of the people or magistrates, by fear or division, 


1584] COURAGE OF THE ESTATES OF HOLLAND i 


commanders by land and sea. At the same time, the 
sixteen members—for no greater number happened to 
be present at the session—addressed letters to their 
absent colleagues, informing them of the calamity which 
had befallen them, summoning them at once to confer- 
ence, and urging an immediate convocation of the 
estates of all the provinces in general assembly. They 
also addressed strong letters of encouragement, mingled 
with manly condolence upon the common affliction, to 
prominent military and naval commanders and civil 
functionaries, begging them to “bear themselves man- 
fully and valiantly, without faltering in the least on 
account of the great misfortune which had occurred, or 
allowing themselves to be seduced by any one from the 
union of the states.”1_ Among these sixteen were Van 
Zuylen, Van Nyvelt, the Seigneur de Warmont, the 
advocate of Holland, Paul Buys, Joost de Menin, and 
Jan van Olden-Barneveldt. A noble example was thus 
set at once to their fellow-citizens by these their repre- 


but rather generally animated them with a great resolution of 
courage and hatred engraved in them to revenge the foulness of the 
fact committed on the person of the prince by the tyrant of Spain, 
and to defend their liberties advisedly against him and his 
adherents by all means that God has given them, to the uttermost 
portion of their substance and the last drop of their blood.”—July 
22 (August 1), 1584, 8. P. Office MS. 

In the city of Dort he was waited upon by the aaginireton: and 
received by them with singular respect, as the known, although 
secret, representative of the queen. “They repaired to me imme- 
diately,” he wrote, “not as men condoling their estate, or craving 
courage to be instilled into them,—though wanting now a head,— 
but irritated above measure to be revenged, and to defend all 
their heads, so apparently sought for by the King of Spain, in mur- 
dering their head, the Prince of Orange.” —Ibid. 

1 Van Wyn et al., Aanmerkingen op Wagenaer, viii. 1-5. 

VOL. 1.—2 


18 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


sentatives—a manful step taken forward in the path 
where Orange had so long been leading. 

The next movement after the last solemn obsequies 
had been rendered to the prince was to provide for the 
immediate wants of his family. For the man who had 
gone into the revolt with almost royal revenues left his 
estate so embarrassed that his carpets, tapestries, house- 
hold linen, nay, even his silver spoons and the very 
clothes of his wardrobe, were disposed of at auction for 
the benefit of his creditors! He left twelve children—a 
sonand daughter by the first wife, a son and two daughters 
by Anna of Saxony, six daughters by Charlotte of Bour- 
bon, and an infant, Frederick Henry, born six months 
before his death. The eldest son, Philip William, had 
been a captive in Spain for seventeen years, having been 
kidnapped from school, in Leyden, in the year 1567. 
He had already become so thoroughly Hispaniolized 
under the masterly treatment of the king and the Jesuits 
that even his face had lost all resemblance to the type 
of his heroic family, and had acquired a sinister, gloomy, 
forbidding expression most painful to contemplate. All 
of good that he had retained was a reverence for his 
father’s name—a sentiment which he had manifested to 
an extravagant extent on a memorable occasion in 
Madrid, by throwing out of window, and killing on the 
spot, a Spanish officer who had dared to mention the 
great prince with insult. 

The next son was Maurice, then seventeen years of 
age, a handsome youth, with dark-blue eyes, well-chiseled 
features, and full red lips, who had already manifested 

1 His extensive estates were all deeply mortgaged, and he left 


absolutely no ready money. ‘Both Buis and Meetkerk told me,” 
wrote Herle to Queen Elizabeth, “that the prince had not in ready 


1584] CHILDREN OF THE PRINCE OF ORANGE 19 


a courage and concentration of character beyond his 
years. The son of William the Silent, the grandson of 
Maurice of Saxony, whom he resembled in visage and 
character, he was summoned by every drop of blood in 
his veins to do lifelong battle with the spirit of Spanish 
absolutism, and he was already girding himself for his 
life’s work. He assumed at once for his device a fallen 
oak, with a young sapling springing from its root. His 
motto, “Tandem fit surculus arbor.” (‘The twig shall 
yet become atree”), was to be nobly justified by his career.! 

The remaining son, then a six months’ child, was 
also destined to high fortunes, and to win an enduring 
name in his country’s history. For the present he re- 
mained with his mother, the noble Louisa de Coligny, 
who had thus seen, at long intervals, her father and two 
husbands fall victims to the Spanish policy; for it is as 
certain that Philip knew beforehand, and testified his 
approbation of, the massacre of St. Bartholomew as 
that he was the murderer of Orange. 

The estates of Holland implored the widowed princess 
to remain in their territory, settling a liberal allowance 
upon herself and her child, and she fixed her residence 
at Leyden.? 
money at his death one hundred guilders, which was a note of his 
popularity.” —July 22 (August 1), 1584, S. P. Office MS. Compare 
Wagenaer, vill. 12-15. 

1 “The Count Maurice, with whom I was, most gracious Sover- 
eign,” said Herle, “is a gentleman of the age of seventeen years, 
one of great towardness, good presence, and courage, flaxen-haired, 
endued with a singular wit, and no less learned for his time. He 


somewhat resembles the countenance and spirit of his grandfather 
of the mother’s side.”—Herle to the queen, MS. just cited. Com- 


pare Meteren, xii. 214. 
2 Wagenaer, Vaderlandsche Historie, viii. 8 seq. Van Wyn op 


Wagenaer, viii. 5 seq., 16 seq. 


20 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


But her position was most melancholy. Married in 
youth to the Seigneur de Teligny, a young noble of dis- 
tinguished qualities, she had soon become both a widow 
and an orphan in the dread night of St. Bartholomew. 
She had made her own escape to Switzerland, and ten 
years afterward she had united herself in marriage with 
the Prince of Orange. At the age of thirty-two she now 
found herself desolate and wretched in a foreign land, 
where she had never felt thoroughly at home. The 
widow and children of William the Silent were almost 
without the necessaries of life. “I hardly know,” wrote 
the princess to her brother-in-law, Count John, “how 
the children and I are to maintain ourselves according 
to the honor of the house. May God provide for us in 
his bounty, and certainly we have much need of it.”1 
Accustomed to the more luxurious civilization of France, 
she had been amused rather than annoyed when, on her 
first arrival in Holland for her nuptials, she found her- 
self making the journey from Rotterdam to Delft in an 
open cart without springs, instead of the well-balanced 
coaches to which she had been used, arriving, as might 
have been expected, “much bruised and shaken.” Such 
had become the primitive simplicity of William the 
Silent’s household.2 But on his death, in embarrassed 
circumstances, it was still more straitened. She had 
no cause either to love Leyden, for, after the assassina- 
tion of her husband, a brutal preacher, Hakkius by 
name, had seized that opportunity for denouncing the 
French marriage, and the sumptuous christening of the 
infant in January, as the deeds which had provoked 
the wrath of God and righteous chastisement. To re- 


1 Groen vy. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., 28., i. 98. 
2 Du Maurier, Mémoires, 182. 
3 Van Wyn op Wagenaer, viii. 19. 


1584] LOUISA DE COLIGNY 21 


main there in her widowhood, with that six months’ child, 
‘sole pledge of her dead lord, her consolation and only 
pleasure,” ! as she pathetically expressed herself, was suf- 
ficiently painful, and she had been inclined to fix her res- 
idence in Flushing, in the edifice which had belonged to 
her husband, as Marquis of Vere. She had been persua- 
ded, however, to remain in Holland, although “ complain- 
ing, at first, somewhat of the unkindness of the people.” 2 

A small, well-formed woman, with delicate features, 
exquisite complexion, and very beautiful dark eyes, that 
seemed in after years, as they looked from beneath her 
coif, to be dim with unshed tears; with remarkable 
powers of mind, angelic sweetness of disposition, a win- 
ning manner, and a gentle voice, Louisa de Coligny be- 
came soon dear to the rough Hollanders, and was ever 
a disinterested and valuable monitress both to her own 
child and to his elder brother Maurice? 

Very soon afterward the States-General established a 
state council, as a provisional executive board, for the 
term of three months, for the provinces of Holland, 
Zealand, Utrecht, Friesland, and such parts of Flanders 
and Brabant as still remained in the union. At the 


1 Groen vy. Prinsterer, ubi sup. 

2 MS. letter of Herle. 

3 “JT visited the Princess of Orange by her own request,” said 
Herle, a few days after the death of the prince, “and found her 
in a most dark, melancholic little chamber. ’T was a twice-sor- 
rowful sight to behold her heaviness and apparel augmented by the 
woefulness of the place; and truly the perplexity was great that I 
found her in, not only for the consideration of things past, but for 
that which might follow hereafter, her afflictions having been great. 
She was accompanied by the Princess Chimay, who was newly 
come to Delft, and no less dolorous in another degree than she, 
but truly a virtuous and wise lady, whatsoever, under correction, 
hath been otherwise interpreted of her.”—Ibid. 


22, THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


head of this body was placed young Maurice, who ac- 
cepted the responsible position after three days’ delib- 
eration. The young man had been completing his 
education, with a liberal allowance from Holland and 
Zealand, at the University of Leyden; and such had 
been their tender care for the child of so many hopes 
that the estates had given particular and solemn warn- 
ing, by resolution, to his governor during the previous 
summer, on no account to allow him to approach the sea- 
shore, lest he should be kidnapped by the Prince of Parma, 
who had then some war-vessels cruising on the coast. 

The salary of Maurice was now fixed at thirty thou- 
sand florins a year, while each of the councilors was 
allowed fifteen hundred annually, out of which stipend 
he was to support at least one servant, without making 
any claim for traveling or other incidental expenses.? 

The council consisted of three members from Brabant, 
two from Flanders, four from Holland, three from Zea- 
land, two from Utrecht, one from Mechlin, and three 
from Friesland—eighteen in all. They were empowered 
and enjoined to levy troops by land and sea, and to ap- 
point naval and military officers ; to establish courts of 
admiralty, to expend the moneys voted by the states, to 
maintain the ancient privileges of the country, and to 
see that all troops in service of the provinces made oath 
of fidelity to the union. Diplomatic relations, questions 
of peace and war, the treaty-making power, were not 
intrusted to the council without the knowledge and 
consent of the States-General, which body was to be 
convoked twice a year by the state council,3 


1 Resol. Holl., 11th August, 1584, bl. 294. Wagenaer, viii. 6. 
2 Wagenaer, viii. 8. Van Wyn op Wagenaer, viii. 12. 
3 Thid. 


1584] FIRM ATTITUDE OF HOLLAND 93 


Thus the provinces in the hour of danger and dark- 
ness were true to themselves, and were far from giving 
way to a despondency which under the circumstances 
would not have been unnatural. 

For the waves of bitterness were rolling far and wide 
around them. A medal struck in Holland at this period 
represented a dismasted hulk reeling through the tem- 
pest. The motto, “Incertum quo fata ferent” (“Who 
knows whither fate is sweeping her?”) expressed most 
vividly the shipwrecked condition of the country. Alex- 
ander of Parma, the most accomplished general and one 
of the most adroit statesmen of the age, was swift to take 
advantage of the calamity which had now befallen the 
rebellious provinees. Had he been better provided with 
men and money, the cause of the states might have 
seemed hopeless. He addressed many letters to the 
States-General, to the magistracies of various cities, and 
to individuals, affecting to consider that with the death 
of Orange had died all authority, as well as all motive 
for continuing the contest with Spain. He offered easy 
terms of reconciliation with the discarded monarch— 
always reserving, however, as a matter of course, the 
religious question, for it was as well known to the 
states as to Parma that there was no hope of Philip 
making concessions upon that important point. 

In Holland and Zealand the prince’s blandishments 
were of no avail. His letters received in various towns 
of those provinces offered, said one who saw them, 
“almost everything they would have or demand, even 
till they should repent.”1 But the bait was not taken. 
Individuals and municipalities were alike stanch, re- 
membering well that faith was not to be kept with 


1 Herle to the queen, MS. before cited. 


24 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


heretics. The example was followed by the estates of 
other provinces, and all sent in to the general assembly, 
soon in session at Delft, “their absolute and irrevocable 
authority to their deputies to stand to that which they, 
the said States-General, should dispose of as to their 
persons, goods, and country—a resolution and agreement 
which never concurred before among them, to this day, 
in what age or government soever.” 1 

It was decreed that no motion of agreement “with 
the tyrant of Spain” should be entertained either pub- 
licly or privately, “under pain to be reputed ill patriots.” 
It was also enacted in the city of Dort that any man 
that brought letter or message from the enemy to any 
private person “should be forthwith hanged.” This 
was expeditious and businesslike. The same city like- 
wise took the lead in recording its determination by 
public act, and proclaiming it by sound of trumpet, “to 
live and die in the cause now undertaken.” 2 

In Flanders and Brabant the spirit was less noble. 
Those provinces were nearly lost already. Bruges 
seconded Parma’s efforts to induce its sister city Ghent 
to imitate its own baseness in surrendering without a 
struggle ; and that powerful, turbulent, but most anarchi- 
cal little commonwealth was but too ready to listen to 
the voice of the tempter. “The ducats of Spain, Madame, 
are trotting about in such fashion,” wrote Envoy des 
Pruneaux to Catherine de’ Medici, “that they have 
vanquished a great quantity of courages. Your Maj- 
esties, too, must employ money if you wish to advance 
one step.”* No man knew better than Parma how to 
employ such golden rhetoric to win back a wavering 


1 Herle to the queen, MS. before cited, 2 Thid. 
3 Groen y. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., 4 


1584] CONDITION OF THE ARMIES 25 


rebel to his loyalty, but he was not always provided 
with a sufficient store of those practical arguments. 

He was, moreover, not strong in the field, although 
he was far superior to the states at this contingency. 
He had, besides his garrisons, something above eighteen 
thousand men. The provinces had hardly three thou- 
sand foot and two thousand five hundred horse, and 
these were mostly lying in the neighborhood of Zut- 
phen! Alexander was threatening at the same time 
Ghent, Dendermonde, Mechlin, Brussels, and Antwerp. 
These five powerful cities lie in a narrow circle, at dis- 
tances varying from six miles to thirty, and are, as it 
were, strung together upon the Schelde, by which river, 
or its tributary, the Senne, they are all threaded. It 
would have been impossible for Parma, with one hundred 
thousand men at his back, to undertake a regular and 
simultaneous siege of these important places. His pur- 
pose was to isolate them from each other and from the 
rest of the country, by obtaining the control of the great 
river, and so to reduce them by famine. The scheme 
was a masterly one, but even the consummate ability of 
Farnese would have proved inadequate to the under- 
taking, had not the preliminary assassination of Orange 
made the task comparatively easy. Treason, faint- 
heartedness, jealousy, were the fatal allies that the 
governor-general had reckoned upon, and with reason, in 
the council-rooms of these cities. The terms he offered 
were liberal. Pardon, permission for soldiers to retreat 
with technical honor, liberty to choose between apostasy 
to the Reformed religion or exile, with a period of two 
years granted to the conscientious for the winding up 
of their affairs—these were the conditions, which seemed 


1 Wagenaer, viii. 13. 


26 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


flattering, now that the well-known voice which had so 
often silenced the Flemish palterers and intriguers was 
forever hushed. 

Upon the 17th August Dendermonde surrendered, and 
no lives were taken save those of two preachers, one of 
whom was hanged, while the other was drowned. Upon 
the 7th September Vilvorde capitulated, by which event 
the water communication between Brussels and Ant- 
werp was cut off. Ghent, now thoroughly disheartened, 
treated with Parma likewise, and upon the 17th Septem- 
ber made its reconciliation with the king. The sur- 
render of so strong and important a place was as 
disastrous to the cause of the patriots as it was dis- 
graceful to the citizens themselves. It was, however, 
the result of an intrigue which had been long spinning, 
although the thread had been abruptly and, as it was 
hoped, conclusively severed several months before. 
During the early part of the year, after the reconcilia- 
tion of Bruges with the king,—an event brought about 
by the duplicity and adroitness of Prince Chimay,—the 
same machinery had been diligently and almost success- 
fully employed to produce a like result in Ghent. 
Champagny, brother of the famous Cardinal Granvelle, 
had been under arrest for six years in that city. His 
imprisonment was not a strict one, however, and he 
avenged himself for what he considered very unjust 
treatment at the hands of the patriots by completely 
abandoning a cause which he had once begun to favor. 
A man of singular ability, courage, and energy, distin- 
guished both for military and diplomatic services, he 
was a formidable enemy to the party from which he 
was now forever estranged. As early as April of this 


3 Meteren, xii. 216, 217, 


1584] WEAKNESS OF FLANDERS yy 


year, secret emissaries of Parma, dealing with Cham- 
pagny in his nominal prison, and with the disaffected 
burghers at large, had been on the point of effecting an 
arrangement with the royal governor. The negotiation 
had been suddenly brought to a close by the discovery 
of a flagrant attempt by Imbize, one of the secret ad- 
herents of the king, to sell the city of Dendermonde, of 
which he was governor, to Parma.! For this crime he 
had been brought to Ghent for trial, and then publicly 
beheaded. The incident came in aid of the eloquence 
of Orange, who, up to the latest moment of his life, had 
been most urgent in his appeals to the patriotic hearts 
of Ghent not to abandon the great cause of the union 
and of liberty. Wiliam the Silent knew full well that 
after the withdrawal of the great keystone city of 
Ghent the chasm between the Celtic Catholic and the 
Flemish Calvinist Netherlands could hardly be bridged 
again. Orange was now dead. The negotiations with 
France, too, on which those of the Ghenters who still 
held true to the national cause had fastened their hopes, 
had previously been brought to a standstill by the death 
of Anjou; and Champagny, notwithstanding the dis- 
aster to Imbize, became more active than ever. A 
private agent, whom the municipal government had 
despatched to the French court for assistance, was not 
more successful than his character and course of con- 
duct would have seemed to warrant, for during his 
residence in Paris he had been always drunk and 
generally abusive. This was not good diplomacy, 
particularly on the part of an agent from a weak 

1 See Rise of the Dutch Republic, vol. v. part vi. chap. vi., and 


the authorities there cited; Everhard van Reyd, Historie der Ned- 
erlandscher Oorlogen (ed. 1650), iii. 47. 


28 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


municipality to a haughty and most undecided govern- 
ment. 

“They found at this court,” wrote Stafford to Walsing- 
ham, “great fault with his manner of dealing that was 
sent from Gaunt. He was scarce sober from one end 
of the week to the other, and stood so much on his tip- 
toes to have present answer within three days, or else 
that they of Gaunt could tell where to bestow them- 
selves. They sent him away after keeping him three 
weeks, and he went off in great dudgeon, swearing by 
yea and nay that he will make report thereafter.” 1 

Accordingly, they of Ghent did bestow themselves 
very soon thereafter upon the King of Spain. The 
terms were considered liberal, but there was, of course, 
no thought of conceding the great object for which the 
patriots were contending—religious liberty. The muni- 
cipal privileges—such as they might prove to be worth 
under the interpretation of a royal governor and be- 
neath the guns of a citadel filled with Spanish troops— 
were to be guaranteed; those of the inhabitants who 
did not choose to go to mass were allowed two years to 
wind up their affairs before going into perpetual exile, 
provided they behaved themselves “without scandal” ; 
while, on the other hand, the king’s authority as Count 
of Flanders was to be fully recognized, and all the dis- 
possessed monks and abbots to be restored to their 
property. ? 

Accordingly, Champagny was rewarded for his exer- 
tions by being released from prison and receiving the 
appointment of governor of the city; and, after a very 

1 Stafford to Walsingham, 27th July, 1584, in Murdin, ii. 412-415, 


2 Meteren, xii. 217 ; V. Reyd, iii. 47; Le Petit, Grande Chronique 
de Hollande (ed. 1601), xiv. 409, 500. 


1584] FALL OF GHENT 29 


brief interval, about one half of the population, the 
most enterprising of its merchants and manufacturers, 
the most industrious of its artisans, emigrated to Hol- 
land and Zealand! The noble city of Ghent—then as 
large as Paris, thoroughly surrounded with moats, and 
fortified with bulwarks, ravelins, and counterscarps, 
constructed of earth, during the previous two years, at 
great expense, and provided with bread and meat, 
powder and shot, enough to last a year—was ignomini- 
ously surrendered. The population, already a very re- 
duced and slender one for the great extent of the place 
and its former importance, had been estimated at seventy 
thousand.? The number of houses was thirty-five thou- 
sand, so that, as the inhabitants were soon further re- 
duced to one half, there remained but one individual to 
each house. On the other hand, the twenty-five monas- 
teries and convents in the town were repeopled—with 
how much advantage as a set-off to the thousands of 
spinners and weavers who had wandered away, and 
who in the flourishing days of Ghent had sent gangs of 
workmen through the streets, “whose tramp was like 
that of an army,” may be sufficiently estimated by the 
result. 

The fall of Brussels was deferred till March, and 
that of Mechlin (19th July, 1585) and of Antwerp (19th 
August, 1585) till midsummer of the following year; 
but the surrender of Ghent foreshadowed the fate of 
Flanders and Brabant. Ostend and Sluis, however, 
were still in the hands of the patriots, and with them 
the control of the whole Flemish coast. The command 
of the sea was destined to remain for centuries with the 
new Republic. 


1 Meteren, ubi sup. 2 Guieciardini, p. 207. 


30 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


The Prince of Parma, thus encouraged by the great 
success of his intrigues, was determined to achieve still 
greater triumphs with his arms, and steadily proceeded 
with his large design of closing the Schelde and bringing 
about the fall of Antwerp. The details of that siege— 
one of the most brilliant military operations of the age, 
and one of the most memorable in its results—will be 
given, as a connected whole, in a subsequent series of 
chapters. For the present, it will be better for the 
reader who wishes a clear view of European polities at 
this epoch, and of the position of the N etherlands, to 
give his attention to the web of diplomatic negotiation 
and court intrigue which had been slowly spreading 
over the leading states of Christendom, and in which 
the fate of the world was involved. If diplomatic 
adroitness consists mainly in the power to deceive, 
never were more adroit diplomatists than those of the 
sixteenth century. It would, however, be absurd to 
deny them a various range of abilities; and the history 
of no other age can show more subtle, comprehensive, 
indefatigable—but, it must also be added, often un- 
scrupulous—intellects engaged in the great game of 
polities, in which the highest interests of millions were 
the stakes, than were those of several leading minds of 
England, France, Germany, and Spain. With such 
statesmen the burgher-diplomatists of the new-born com- 
monwealth had to measure themselves; and the result 
was to show whether or not they could hold their own 
in the cabinet as on the field. 

For the present, however, the new state was uncon- 
scious of its latent importance. The new-risen Republic 
remained for a season nebulous, and ready to unsphere 
itself so soon as the relative attraction of other great 


1584] THE NEW REPUBLIC 31 


powers should determine its absorption. By the death 
of Anjou and of Orange the United Netherlands had 
become a sovereign state, an independent republic; but 
they stood with that sovereignty in their hands, offer- 
ing it alternately, not to the highest bidder, but to the 
power that would be willing to accept their allegiance, 
on the sole condition of assisting them in the mainte- 
nance of their religious freedom. 


CHAPTER II 


Relations of the Republic to France—The queen’s severity toward 
Catholics and Calvinists—Relative positions of England and 
France—Timidity of Germany—Apathy of Protestant Germany— 
Indignation of the Netherlanders—Henry III. of France—The 
king and his minions—Henry of Guise—Henry of Navarre— 
Power of France—Embassy of the states to Franece—Ignominious 
position of the envoys—Views of the French Huguenots—Efforts 
to procure annexation—Suecess of Des Pruneaux. 


THE Prince of Orange had always favored a French 
policy. He had ever felt a stronger reliance upon the 
support of France than upon that of any other power. 
This was not unreasonable, and so long as he lived the 
tendency of the Netherlands had been in that direction. 
It had never been the wish of England to acquire the 
sovereignty of the provinces. In France, on the con- 
trary, the queen dowager, Catherine de’ Medici, had 
always coveted that sovereignty for her darling, Francis 
of Alengon; and the design had been favored, so far as 
any policy could be favored, by the impotent monarch 
who occupied the French throne. 

The religion of the United Netherlands was Calvin- 
istic. There were also many Anabaptists in the country. 
The Queen of England hated Anabaptists, Calvinists, 
and other sectarians, and banished them from her realms 
on pain of imprisonment and confiscation of property.t 


1 Camden, i. 48, 
32 


1584] ELIZABETH’S INTOLERANCE 33 


As firmly opposed as was her father to the supremacy 
of the Bishop of Rome, she felt much of the paternal 
reluctance to accept the spirit of the Reformation. 
Henry Tudor hanged the men who believed in the 
pope, and burned alive those who disbelieved in tran- 
substantiation, auricular confession, and the other Six 
Articles. His daughter, whatever her secret religious 
convictions, was stanch in her resistance to Rome, and 
too enlightened a monarch not to see wherein the great- 
ness and glory of England were to be found; but she 
had no thought of tolerating liberty of conscience. Al 
opposed to the Church of England, whether papists or 
Puritans, were denounced as heretics, and as such im- 
prisoned or banished. “To allow churches with con- 
trary rites and ceremonies,” said Elizabeth, “were 
nothing else but to sow religion out of religion, to 
distract good men’s minds, to cherish factious men’s 
humors, to disturb religion and commonwealth, and 
mingle divine and human things; which were a thing 
in deed evil, in example worst of all; to our own sub- 
jects hurtful, and to themselves to whom it is granted 
neither greatly commodious, nor yet at all safe”? The 
words were addressed, it is true, to papists, but there 
is very little doubt that Anabaptists or any other heretics 
would have received a similar reply, had they, too, ven- 
tured to demand the right of public worship. It may 
even be said that the Romanists in the earlier days of 
Elizabeth’s reign fared better than the Calvinists. The 
queen neither banished nor imprisoned the Catholics. 
She did not enter their houses to disturb their private 
religious ceremonies, or to inquire into their consciences. 
This was milder treatment than the burning alive, bury- 


1 Camden, i. 32. 
VOL. 1.—3 


34. THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


ing alive, hanging, and drowning which had been dealt 
out to the English and the Netherland heretics by Philip 
and by Mary, but it was not the spirit which William 
the Silent had been wont to manifest in his measures 
toward Anabaptists and papists alike. Moreover, the 
prince could hardly forget that, of the nine thousand 
four hundred Catholic ecclesiastics who held benefices at 
the death of Queen Mary, all had renounced the pope 
on the accession of Queen Elizabeth, and acknowledged 
her as the head of the Church, saving only one hundred 
and eighty-nine individuals In the hearts of the nine 
thousand two hundred and eleven others it might be 
thought perhaps that some tenderness for the religion 
from which they had so suddenly been converted might 
linger, while it could hardly be hoped that they would 
seek to inculeate in the minds of their flocks or of 
their sovereign any connivance with the doctrines of 
Geneva. 

When, at a later period, the plotting of Catholies, 
suborned by the pope and Philip, against the throne 
and person of the queen made more rigorous measures 
necessary ; when it was thought indispensable to execute 
as traitors those Roman seedlings—seminary priests and 
their disciples—who went about preaching to the queen’s 
subjects the duty of carrying out the bull by which the 
Bishop of Rome had deposed and excommunicated their 
sovereign, and that “it was a meritorious act to kill 
such princes as were excommunicate,” 2 even then the 
men who preached and practised treason and murder 
experienced no severer treatment than that which other 
“heretics” had met with at the queen’s hands. Jesuits 
and popish priests were, by act of Parliament, ordered 


1 Camden, i. 28, 2 Thid., iii. 336. 


1584] SEVERITY TOWARD SECTARIES 35 


to depart the realm within forty days.1 Those who 
should afterward return to the kingdom were to be held 
guilty of high treason. Students in the foreign semi- 
naries were commanded to return within six months 
and recant, or be held guilty of high treason. Parents 
and guardians supplying money to such students abroad 
wece to incur the penalty of a premunire—perpetual 
exile, namely, with loss of all their goods.” 

Many seminary priests and others were annually exe- 
euted in England under these laws throughout the 
queen’s reign, but nominally, at least, they were hanged, 
not as papists, but as traitors; not because they taught 
transubstantiation, ecclesiastical celibacy, auricular con- 
fession, or even papal supremacy, but because they 
taught treason and murder—because they preached the 
necessity of killing the queen. It was not so easy, how- 
ever, to defend or even comprehend the banishment and 
imprisonment of those who, without conspiring against 
the queen’s life or throne, desired to see the Church of 
England reformed according to the Church of Geneva. 
Yet there is no doubt that many sectaries experienced 
much inhuman treatment for such delinquency, both in 
the early and the later years of Elizabeth’s reign.? 

There was another consideration which had its due 
weight in this balance, and that was the respective suc- 
cession to the throne in the two kingdoms of France 
and England. Mary Stuart, the Catholic, the niece of 
the Guises, emblem and exponent of all that was most 
Roman in Europe, the sworn friend of Philip, the mortal 
foe to all heresy, was the legitimate successor to Hliza- 
beth. Although that sovereign had ever refused to 
recognize that claim, holding that to confirm Mary in 


1 Camden, iii. 309. 2 Thid. 3 Thid.,iii. 107, 469. 


36 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the succession was to “lay her own winding-sheet before 
her eyes, yea, to make her own grave, while she liveth 
and looketh on”; 1! and although the unfortunate claim- 
ant of two thrones was a prisoner in her enemy’s hands, 
yet, so long as she lived, there was little security for 
Protestantism, even in Elizabeth’s lifetime, and less still 
in case of her sudden death. On the other hand, not 
only were the various politico-religious forces of France 
kept in equilibrium by their action upon each other,—so 
that it was reasonable to believe that the house of 
Valois, however Catholic itself, would be always com- 
pelled, by the fast-expanding strength of French Calvin- 
ism, to observe faithfully a compact to tolerate the 
Netherland churches,—but upon the death of Henry 
III. the crown would be legitimately placed upon the 
head of the great champion and chief of the Huguenots, 
Henry of Navarre. 

It was not unnatural, therefore, that the Prince of 
Orange, a Calvinist himself, should expect more sym- 
pathy with the Netherland reformers in France than in 
England. A large proportion of the population of that 
kingdom, including an influential part of the nobility, 
was of the Huguenot persuasion, and the religious 
peace, established by royal edict, had endured so long 
that the reformers of France and the Netherlands had 
begun to believe in the royal clemency and to confide 
in the royal word. Orange did not live to see the actual 
formation of the Holy League, and could only guess at 
its secrets. 

Moreover, it should be remembered that France at 
that day was a more formidable state than England, a 
more dangerous enemy, and, as it was believed, a more 


1 Camden, i. 54. 


1584] POSITIONS OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE 37 


efficient protector. The England of the period, glorious 
as it was for its own and all future ages, was not the 
great British empire of to-day. On the contrary, it was 
what would now be considered, statistically speaking, a 
rather petty power. The England of Elizabeth, Wal- 
singham, Burghley, Drake, and Raleigh, of Spenser and 
Shakspere, hardly numbered a larger population than 
now dwells in its capital and immediate suburbs. It 
had neither standing army nor considerable royal navy. 
Tt was full of conspirators, daring and unscrupulous, 
loyal to none save to Mary of Scotland, Philip of Spain, 
and the Pope of Rome, and untiring in their efforts to 
bring about a general rebellion. With Ireland at its 
side, nominally a subject province, but in a state of 
chronic insurrection, a perpetual hotbed for Spanish 
conspiracy and stratagem; with Scotland at its back, a 
foreign country, with half its population exasperated 
enemies of England, and the rest but doubtful friends ; 
and with the legitimate sovereign of that country, “the 
daughter of debate, who discord still did sow,”?! a pris- 
oner in Elizabeth’s hands, the central point around which 
treason was constantly erystallizing itself, it was not 
strange that, with the known views of the queen on the 
subject of the Reformed Dutch religion, England should 
seem less desirable as a protector for the Netherlands 
than the neighboring kingdom of France. 

Elizabeth was a great sovereign, whose genius Orange 
always appreciated, in a comparatively feeble realm. 
Henry of Valois was the contemptible monarch of a 
powerful state, and might be led by others to produce 
incalculable mischief or considerable good. Notwith- 
standing the massacre of St. Bartholomew, therefore, 


1 Sonnet by Queen Elizabeth. 


38 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


and the more recent French Fury of Antwerp, Orange 
had been willing to countenance fresh negotiations with 
France. 

Elizabeth, too, it should never be forgotten, was, if 
not over-generous, at least consistent and loyal in her 
policy toward the provinces. She was not precisely 
jealous of France, as has been unjustly intimated on 
distinguished authority,1 for she strongly advocated the 
renewed offer of the sovereignty to Anjou, after his 
memorable expulsion from the provinces.2 At that 
period, moreover, not only her own love-coquetries with 
Anjou were over, but he was endeavoring with all his 
might, though in secret, to make a match with the 
younger Infanta of Spain.? Elizabeth furthered the 
negotiations with France, both publicly and privately. 
It will soon be narrated how those negotiations prospered. 

If, then, England were out of the question, where, 
except in France, should the N etherlanders, not deem- 
ing themselves capable of standing alone, seek for pro- 
tection and support ? 

We have seen the extensive and almost ubiquitous 
power of Spain. Where she did not command as sov- 
ereign, she was almost equally formidable as an ally. 
The Emperor of Germany was the nephew and the 
brother-in-law of Philip, and a strict Catholic besides. 
Little aid was to be expected from him or the lands 


1H. Grotii Annalium, v. 126 (ed. 1658, Amst.). 

? Rise of the Dutch Republie, vol. v. part vi. chap. vi., and MS. 
letter of Queen Elizabeth, cited in note. 

3 Collection de Lettres relatives aux Negotiations sur le Project 
de Mariage du Due @ Anjou avee une des Infantes d’Espagne, et 
aux Affaires traictées de part et dautre pour les Pays-Bas, Cam- 
bray, la Succession de Portugal, ete., Bib. Imp. de France, Brienne 
MS. 


1584] TIMIDITY OF GERMANY 39 


under his control for the cause of the Netherland revolt. 
Rudolph hated his brother-in-law, but lived in mortal 
fear of him. He was also in perpetual dread of the 
Grand Turk. That formidable potentate, not then the 
“sick man” whose precarious condition and territorial 
inheritance cause so much anxiety in modern days, was, 
it is true, sufficiently occupied for the moment in Persia, 
and had been sustaining there a series of sanguinary 
defeats. He was all the more anxious to remain upon 
good terms with Philip, and had recently sent him a 
complimentary embassy,! together with some rather 
choice presents, among which were “four lions, twelve 
unicorns, and two horses colored white, black, and 
blue.”2 Notwithstanding these pacific manifestations 
toward the West, however, and in spite of the truce with 
the German Empire which the Turk had just renewed 
for nine years, Rudolph and his servants still trembled 
at every report from the East. 

“He is much deceived,” wrote Busbecq, Rudolph’s 
ambassador in Paris, “who doubts that the Turk has 
sought anything by this long Persian war but to pro- 
tect his back, and prepare the way, after subduing that 
enemy, to the extermination of all Christendom, and 
that he will then, with all his might, wage an unequal 
warfare with us, in which the existence of the empire 
will be at stake.” 3 

The envoy expressed, at the same period, however, 
still greater awe of Spain. “It is to no one,” he wrote, 
“endowed with good judgment in the least obscure 


1 De Thou, Hist. Univ., ix. 209 seq. 

2 Meteren, xiii. 233. Le Petit, xiv. 515. 

3 Busbequii Epistole ad Rudolphum II. (Brux. 1631), pp. 152, 
153. 


40 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


that the Spanish nation, greedy of empire, will never 
be quiet, even with their great power, but will seek for 
the dominion of the rest of Christendom. How much 
remains beyond what they have already acquired? 
Afterward there will soon be no liberty, no dignity, 
for other princes and republics. That single nation 
will be arbiter of all things, than which nothing can be 
more miserable, nothing more degrading. It cannot 
be doubted that all kings, princes, and states whose 
safety or dignity is dear to them would willingly asso- 
ciate in arms to extinguish the common conflagration. 
The death of the Catholic king would seem the great 
opportunity miscendis rebus.” 1 

Unfortunately, neither Busbeeq’s master nor any 
other king or prince manifested any of this commen- 
dable alacrity to “take up arms against the conflagra- 
tion.” Germany was in a shiver at every breeze from 
Kast or West—trembling alike before Philip and Amu- 
rath. The papists were making rapid progress, the 
land being undermined by the steady and stealthy en- 
croachments of the Jesuits. Lord Burghley sent many 
copies of his pamphlet, in Latin, French, and Italian, 
against the seminaries, to Gerard Truchses; and the 
deposed archbishop made himself busy in translating 
that wholesome production into German, and in dispers- 
ing it “all Germany over.” The work, setting duly 
forth “that the executions of priests in England were 
not for religion, but for treason,” was “marvelously 
liked” in the Netherlands. “In uttering the truth,” 
said Herle, “’t is likely to do great good 7. and he 
added that Duke Augustus of Saxony “did now see so 


1 Busbequii Epistole ad Rudolphum IT. (Brux. 1631), pp. 124- 
126, 


1584] THE RIVAL ARCHBISHOPS 41 


far into the sect of Jesuits, and to their inward mis- 
chiefs, as to become their open enemy, and to make 
friends against them in the empire.” ! 

The love of Truchses for Agnes Mansfeld had created 
disaster not only for himself, but for Germany. The 
whole electorate of Cologne had become the constant 
seat of partizan warfare, and the resort of organized 
bands of brigands. Villages were burned and rifled, 
highways infested, cities threatened, and the whole 
country subjected to perpetual blackmail (brandschatz- 
ung)—fire-insurance levied by the incendiaries in person 
—)by the supporters of the rival bishops. Truchses 
had fied to Delft, where he had been countenanced and 
supported by Orange. Two cities still held for him, 
Rheinberg and Neuss. On the other hand, his rival, 
Ernest of Bavaria, supported by Philip I/., and the oc- 
casional guest of Alexander of Parma, had not yet suc- 
ceeded in establishing a strong foothold in the territory. 
Two pauper archbishops, without men or means of their 
own, were thus pushed forward and back, like puppets, 
by the contending highwaymen on either side; while 
robbery and murder, under the name of Protestantism 
or Catholicism, were for a time the only motive or re- 
sult of the contest. 

Thus along the Rhine, as well as the Maas and the 
Schelde, the fires of civil war were ever burning. 
Deeper within the heart of Germany there was more 
tranquillity, but it was the tranquillity rather of paralysis 
than of health. A fearful account was slowly accumu- 
lating, which was evidently to be settled only by one 
of the most horrible wars which history has ever re- 
corded. Meantime there was apathy where there should 


1 Herle to Queen Elizabeth, 22d July, 1584, MS. before cited. 


42 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


have been enthusiasm ; parsimony and cowardice where 
generous and combined effort was more necessary than 
ever; sloth without security. The Protestant princes, 
growing fat and contented on the spoils of the Church, 
lent but a deaf ear to the moans of Truchses, forget- 
ting that their neighbor’s blazing roof was likely soon 
to fire their own. “They understand better proximus 
sum egomet mihi,” wrote Lord Willoughby from Kronen- 
berg, “than they have learned humani nihil a me alienum 
puto. These German princes continue still in their leth- 
argy, careless of the state of others, and dreaming of 
their ubiquity, and some of them, it is thought, inclining 
to be Spanish or popish more of late than heretofore.” 1 

The beggared archbishop, more forlorn than ever 
since the death of his great patron, cried woe from his 
resting-place in Delft upon Protestant Germany. His 
tones seemed almost prophetic of the thirty years’ wrath 
to blaze forth in the next generation. “Courage is 
wanting to the people throughout Germany,” he wrote 
to William Louis of Nassau. “We are becomimg the 
laughing-stock of the nations. Make sheep of your- 
selves, and the wolf will eat you. We shall find our 
destruction in our immoderate desire for peace. Spain 
is making a papistical league in Germany. Therefore 
is Assonleville despatched thither, and that’s the reason 
why our trash of priests are so insolent in the empire. 
’T is astonishing how they are triumphing on all sides. 
God will smite them. Thou dear God! What are our 
evangelists about in Germany? Asleep on both ears— 
dormiunt in utramque aurem. I doubt they will be 
suddenly enough awakened one day, and the ery will 


1 Willoughby to Burghley, in Wright’s Queen Elizabeth and her 
Times, vol. ii. 275. 


1584] APATHY OF PROTESTANT GERMANY 43 


be: ‘Who ’d have thought it?’ Then they will be for 
getting oil for the lamp, for shutting the stable door 
when the steed is stolen,”! and so on, with a string of 
homely proverbs worthy of Sancho Panza or Landgrave 
William of Hesse.? 

In truth, one of the most painful features in the gen- 
eral aspect of affairs was the coldness of the German 
Protestants toward the Netherlands. The enmity be- 
tween Lutherans and Calvinists was almost as fatal 
as that between Protestants and papists. There was 
even a talk, at a little later period, of excluding those 
of the Reformed Church from the benefits of the peace 
of Passau. The princes had got the Augsburg Confes- 
sion and the abbey-lands into the bargain; the peasants 
had got the Augsburg Confession without the abbey- 
lands, and were to believe exactly what their masters 
believed. This was the German Lutheran sixteenth- 


1 Groen vy. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 9. 

2 The statesmen of England were too sagacious not to see the 
importance to Protestant Germany of sustaining the ex-elector, if 
to sustain ‘him were possible. But to this end it was necessary 
that the German princes, whom it most nearly concerned, should 
unite in his support. Queen Elizabeth had authorized a subsidy 
to enable Truchses to carry on the war; but his Bavarian com- 
petitor was backed by the power of Spain, and was himself of 
higher rank and larger resources. 

“No man,” wrote Walsingham to Davison, “wishes better suc- 
cess than myself to the elector, knowing how greatly it importeth 
the common cause of religion that he should be upholden, and the 
penefit that those distressed countries, where you now are, may 
receive by way of diversion through his employment; for that 
Spain, and his minister the Prince of Parma, must not see the 
Bishop of Liége quail. Yet when I consider, upon view of the 
report of the conference between you and the said elector, how 
little appearance is of any great assistance that we shall have, and 
that the prince electors whom the cause doth touch, especially Sax- 


44 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


century idea of religious freedom. Neither prince nor 
peasant stirred in behalf of the struggling Christians 
in the United Provinces, battling, year after year, knee- 
deep in blood, amid blazing cities and inundated fields, 
breast to breast with the yellow-jerkined pikemen of 
Spain and Italy, with the ax and the fagot and the 
rack of the Holy Inquisition distinctly visible behind 
them. Such were the realities which occupied the 
Netherlanders in those days; not watery beams of 
theological moonshine, fantastical catechism-making, 
intermingled with scenes of riot and wantonness, which 
drove old John of Nassau half frantic; “with banquet- 
ing and guzzling, drinking and devouring, with un- 
christian flaunting and wastefulness of apparel, with 
extravagant and wanton dancing, and other lewd 


ony and Brandenburg, have as yet no disposition to deal therein, 
as though the conservation of the liberty of Germany did in no respect 
touch them, I see no great reason to hope that this enterprise will 
be accompanied with that good success that both I wish and is 
also looked for here.”—30th December, 1584, 8. P. Office MS. 

It was therefore necessary, in the opinion of the English goy- 
ernment, to move warily in the matter. For remote allies to ex- 
pend their strength in sustaining the sinking elector, while the 
Protestants nearest him looked upon his struggles with folded 
arms, seemed superfluous and unreasonable. “For it is hard,” 
said Walsingham, “for men of judgment to think that he, having 
no great likelihood of support than yet appeareth he hath, shall 
be able to prevail against a bishop of Liége, by birth more noble 
than himself, already possessed of the most part of the bishopric, 
who will not lack any assistance that the Catholic princes can 
yield him. As for the supports promised by the kings of Denmark 
and of Navarre, being in respect of the others but weak and far 
distant in place, ’t is very doubtful, before the elector can take 
any profit thereof, that his cause may miscarry, unless it shall be 
through God’s goodness upholden.”—Ibid. 

But, in truth, the Protestant princes of Germany were most 


1584] INDIGNATION OF THE NETHERLANDERS 45 


abominations” 1—all which, the firm old reformer 
prophesied, would lead to the destruction of Germany. 

For the mass, slow-moving but apparently irresistible, 
of Spanish and papistical absolutism was gradually 
closing over Christendom. The Netherlands were the 
wedge by which alone the solid bulk could be riven 
asunder. It was the cause of German, of French, of 
English liberty, for which the provinces were contend- 
ing. It was not surprising that they were bitter, getting 
nothing in their hour of distress from the land of 
Luther but dogmas and Augsburg catechisms instead 
of money and gunpowder, and seeing German reiters 
galloping daily to reinforce the army of Parma in ex- 
change for Spanish ducats. 

Brave old La Noue with the Iron Arm, noblest of 
Frenchmen and Huguenots,—who had just spent five 
years in Spanish bondage, writing military discourses 
in a reeking dungeon, filled with toads and vermin, 


lukewarm in the matter, and the complaints of poor Truchses 
were founded upon very accurate knowledge as to the sentiments 
of his compatriots. “By letters received from Germany, as well 
from Casimir [Elector Palatine] as others,” continued Walsingham, 
“J do not find any other forwardness in those that are thought the 
pest affected toward him there, than to wish well unto him. But 
because that help which consists in well-wishing groweth fruitless, 
unless it be accompanied by effects, which the dullness of the 
Almain nature easily yieldeth not until the disease grow desper- 
ate, I cannot but advise you, for the queen’s honor, to induce him 
to make it very probable unto you that the support now yielded 
by her Majesty is like to work that effect which he pretendeth.”— 
30th December, 1584, S. P. Office MS. 

Otherwise it was cautiously suggested by the secretary that the 
envoy would ‘‘do well to forbear to be over-forward in delivering 
of the money.” 

1 Groen v. Prinsterer, Archives, etc., i. 227. 


46 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


after fighting the battle of liberty for a lifetime and 
with his brave son already in the Netherlands emulating 
his father’s valor on the same field,—denounced at a 
little later day the lukewarmness of Protestant Ger- 
many with whimsical vehemence. “I am astounded,” 
he cried, “that these princes are not ashamed of them- 
selves, doing nothing while they see the oppressed cut 
to pieces at their gates. When will God grant me grace 
to place me among those who are doing their duty, and 
afar from those who do nothing, and who ought to know 
that the cause is a common one? If I am ever caught 
dancing the German cotillion, or playing the German 
flute, or eating pike with German sauce, I hope it may 
be flung in my teeth.” ? 

The great League of the pope and Philip was steadily 
consolidating itself, and there were but gloomy pros- 
pects for the counter-league in Germany. There was 
no hope but in England and France. For the reasons 
already indicated, the Prince of Orange, taking counsel 
with the estates, had resolved to try the French policy 
once more. The balance of power in Europe, which no 
man in Christendom so well understood as he, was to 
be established by maintaining (he thought) the equilib- 
rium between France and Spain. In the antagonism 
of those two great realms lay the only hope for Dutch 
or European liberty. Notwithstanding the treason of 
Anjou, therefore, it had been decided to renew negotia- 
tions with that prince. On the death of the duke, the 
envoys of the states were accordingly instructed to 
make the offer to King Henry III. which had been in- 
tended for his brother. That proposition was the 
sovereignty of all the Netherlands save Holland and 


1 Groen v. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 85. 


1584] HENRY Il. OF FRANCE 47 


Zealand, under a constitution maintaining the Reformed 
religion and the ancient laws and privileges of the re- 
spective provinces. 

But the death of Francis of Anjou had brought about 
a considerable change in French policy. It was now 
more sharply defined than ever, a right-angled triangle 
of almost mathematical precision. The three Henrys 
and their partizans divided the realm into three hostile 
camps—threatening each other in simulated peace since 
the treaty of Fleix (1580), which had put an end to the 
“‘lovers’ war” of the preceding year—Henry of Valois, 
Henry of Guise, and Henry of Navarre. 

Henry III., last of the Valois line, was now thirty- 
three years of age. Less than king, less even than 
man, he was one of those unfortunate personages who 
seem as if born to make the idea of royalty ridiculous, 
and to test the capacity of mankind to eat and drink 
humiliation as if it were wholesome food. It proved how 
deeply engraved in men’s minds of that century was the 
necessity of kingship, when the hardy Netherlanders, who 
had abjured one tyrant, and had been fighting a genera- 
tion long rather than return to him, were now willing 
to accept the sovereignty of a king like Henry of Valois. 

He had not been born without natural gifts such as 
Heaven rarely denies to prince or peasant; but the 
courage which he once possessed had been exhausted 
on the field of Moncontour, his manhood had been left 
behind him at Venice, and such wit as Heaven had en- 
dowed him withal was now expended in darting viperous 
epigrams at court ladies whom he was only capable of 
dishonoring by calumny, and whose charms he burned 
to outrival in the estimation of his minions. For the 
monarch of France was not unfrequently pleased to 


48 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


attire himself like a woman and a harlot. With silken 
flounces, jeweled stomacher, and painted face, with 
pearls of great price adorning his bared neck and 
breast, and satin-slippered feet, of whose delicate shape 
and size he was justly vain, it was his delight to pass 
his days and nights in a ceaseless round of gorgeous 
festivals, tourneys, processions, masquerades, banquets, 
and balls, the cost of which glittering frivolities caused 
the popular burden and the popular execration to grow, 
from day to day, more intolerable and more audible. 
Surrounded by a gang of “minions,” the most de- 
bauched and the most desperate of France, whose be- 
dizened dresses exhaled perfumes throughout Paris, 
and whose sanguinary encounters dyed every street 
in blood, Henry lived a life of what he called pleasure, 
careless of what might come after, for he was the last 
of his race. The fortunes of his minions rose higher 
and higher, as their crimes rendered them more and 
more estimable in the eyes of a king who took a 
Wwoman’s pride in the valor of such champions to his 
weakness, and more odious to a people whose miser- 
able homes were made even more miserable that the 
coffers of a few court favorites might be filled, Now 
sauntering, full-dressed, in the public promenades, with 
ghastly little death’s-heads strung upon his sumptuous 
garments, and fragments of human bones dangling 
among his orders of knighthood, playing at cup and ball 
as he walked, and followed by a few select courtiers 
who gravely pursued the same exciting occupation ; 
now presiding like a queen of beauty at a tourna- 
ment to assign the prize of valor; and now, by the 
advice of his mother, going about the streets in robes 
of penitence, telling his beads as he went, that the 


1584] THE KING AND HIS MINIONS 49 


populace might be edified by his piety, and solemnly 
offering up prayers in the churches that the blessing of 
an heir might be vouchsafed to him—Henry of Valois 
seemed straining every nerve in order to bring himself 
and his great office into contempt. 

As orthodox as he was profligate, he hated the Hugue- 
nots, who sought his protection, and who could have 
saved his throne, as cordially as he loved the Jesuits, 
who passed their lives in secret plottings against his 
authority and his person, or in fierce denunciations 
from the Paris pulpits against his manifold crimes. 
Next to an exquisite and sanguinary fop he dearly loved 
a monk. The presence of a friar, he said, exerted as 
agreeable an effect upon his mind as the most delicate 
and gentle tickling could produce upon his body; 1! and 
he was destined to have a fuller dose of that charming 
presence than he coveted. 

His party—for he was but the nominal chief of a fac- 
tion, tanquam unus ex nobis—was the party in possession 
—the office-holders’ party ; the spoilsmen whose purpose 
was to rob the exchequer and to enrich themselves. His 
minions—for the favorites were called by no other name 
—were even more hated, because less despised, than the 
king. Attired in cloth of gold,—for silk and satin were 
grown too coarse a material for them,—with their little 
velvet porringer-caps stuck on the sides of their heads, 
with their long hair stiff with pomatum, and their heads 
set inside a well-starched ruff a foot wide, “like St. 
John’s head in a charger,” as a splenetic contemporary 
observed,? with a nimbus of musk and violet-powder 


1 De Thon, x. 667. 
2 L’Estoile, Registre Journal de Henri III. (ed. Michaud et 
Poujoulat), p. 72 seq. 
VOL, I—4 


50 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


enveloping them as they passed before vulgar mortals, 
these rapacious and insolent courtiers were the imper- 
sonation of extortion and oppression to the Parisian 
populace. They were supposed, not unjustly, to pass 
their lives in dancing, blasphemy, dueling, dicing, and 
intrigue, in following the king about like hounds, fawn- 
ing at his feet, and showing their teeth to all besides : 
and for virtues such as these they were rewarded by the 
highest offices in church, camp, and state, while new 
taxes and imposts were invented almost daily to feed 
their avarice and supply their extravagance. France, 
doomed to feel the beak and talons of these harpies in 
its entrails, impoverished by a government that robbed 
her at home while it humiliated her abroad, struggled 
vainly in its misery, and was now on the verge of 
another series of internecine combats—civil war seem- 
ing the only alternative to a voluptuous and licentious 
peace. 

“We all stood here at gaze,” wrote Ambassador Staf- 


1 “Quant a leur habit il excede 
Tout leur bien et tout leur tresor, 
Car le mignon qui tout consomme, 
Ne se vest plus en gentilhomme, 
Mais comme un prince de drap dor; 
Et pour meiux contenter 
Leur jeu, leur pompe, leur bobance, 
Et leur trop prodigue dépense, 
Tl faut tous les jours inventer 
Nouveaux impéts, nouvelles tailles, 
Quw’il faut du profond des entrailles 
Des pauvres sujets arracher, 
Qui trainent leurs chetives vies 
Sous la griffe de ces harpies, 
Qui avalent tout sans macher,” ete. 

L’Estoile, ubi sup. 


1584] UNHAPPY CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE il 


ford to Walsingham, “looking for some great matter to 
come of this sudden journey to Lyons; but, as far as 
men can find, parturiunt montes, for there hath been 
nothing but dancing and banqueting from one house 
to another, bravery in apparel, glittering like the sun.” ! 
He mentioned that the Duke of Epernon’s horse, taking 
fright at a red cloak, had backed over a precipice, 
breaking his own neck, while his master’s shoulder 
merely was put out of joint. At the same time the 
Duke of Joyeuse, coming over Mont Cenis, on his 
return from Savoy, had broken his wrist. The people, 
he said, would rather they had both broken their necks 
“than any other joint, the king having racked the nation 
for their sakes, as he hath done.’’? Stafford expressed 
much compassion for the French in the plight in which 
they found themselves. ‘“ Unhappy people!” he cried, 
“to have such a king, who seeketh nothing but to im- 
poverish them to enrich a couple, and who careth not 
what cometh after his death, so that he may rove 
on while he liveth, and careth neither for doing his 
own estate good nor his neighbor’s state harm.” Sir 
Edward added, however, in a philosophizing vein 
worthy of Corporal Nym, that, “seeing we cannot be 
so happy as to have a king to concur with us to do 
us any good, yet we are happy to have one that his 
humor serveth him not to concur with others to do 
us harm; and ’t is a wisdom for us to follow these 
humors, that we may keep him still in that humor, and 
from harkening to others that may egg him on to 
worse.” 3 


1 Stafford to Walsingham, 24th August, 1584, in Murdin, ii. 


415-419. 
2 Thid. 3 Ibid. 


52 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


It was a dark hour for France, and rarely has a great 
nation been reduced to a lower level by a feeble and 
abandoned government than she was at that moment 
under the distaff of Henry III. Society was corrupted 
to its core. “There is no more truth, no more justice, 
no more mercy,” moaned President L’Etoile. “To 
slander, to lie, to rob, to wench, to steal—all things are 
permitted save to do right and to speak the truth.” 
Impiety the most cynical, debauchery the most unveiled, 
public and unpunished homicides, private murders by 
what was called magic, by poison, by hired assassins, 
crimes natural, unnatural, and preternatural, were the 
common characteristics of the time. All posts and 
charges were venal. Great offices of justice were sold 
to the highest bidder, and that which was thus purchased 
by wholesale was retailed in the same fashion. Unhappy 
the pauper client who dreamed of justice at the hands 
of law. The great ecclesiastical benefices were equally 
matter of merchandise, and married men, women, un- 
born children, enjoyed revenues as dignitaries of the 
Church. Infants came into the world, it was said, like 
the miter-fish, stamped with the emblems of place.? 

‘°T was impossible,” said L’Etoile, “to find a crab so 
tortuous and backsliding as the government.” 3 

This was the aspect of the first of the three factions 
in France. Such was the Henry at its head, the repre- 
sentative of royalty. 

Henry with the Scar, Duke of Guise, the well-known 
chief of the house of Lorraine, was the chief of the ex- 
treme papistical party. He was now thirty-four years 

1 L’Estoile, 97, 98. Perefixe, Histoire du Roi Henri le Grand 
(ed. 1816), p. 29. 

? Perefixe, L’Estoile, wbi sup. 3 L’Estoile, ubi sup. 


1584] HENRY OF GUISE 53 


of age, tall, stately, with a dark, martial face and 
dangerous eyes, which Antonio Moro loved to paint—a 
physiognomy made still more expressive by the harque- 
bus-shot which had damaged his left cheek at the fight 
near Chateau-Thierry and gained him his name of Bala- 
fré. Although one of the most turbulent and restless 
plotters of that plotting age, he was yet thought more 
slow and heavy in character than subtle, Teutonic rather 
than Italian. He was the idol of the Parisian burghers. 
The grocers, the marketmen, the members of the 
harquebus and crossbow clubs, all doted on him. The 
fishwomen worshiped him as a god. He was the de- 
fender of the good old religion under which Paris and 
the other cities of France had thriven, the uncompro- 
mising opponent of the newfangled doctrines which 
western clothiers and dyers and tapestry-workers had 
adopted, and which the nobles of the mountain country, 
the penniless chevaliers of Béarn and Gascony and Gui- 
enne, were ceaselessly taking the field and plunging 
France into misery and bloodshed to support. But for 
the Balafré and Madame League—as the great Spanish 
Cathole conspiracy against the liberties of France and 
of England and of all Europe was affectionately termed 
by the Paris populace—honest Catholics would fare no 
better in France than they did in England, where, as it 
was well known, they were every day subjected to 
fearful tortures. The shop-windows were filled with 
colored engravings representing, in exaggerated fashion, 
the sufferings of the English Catholics under bloody 
Elizabeth, or Jezebel, as she was called; and as the 
gaping burghers stopped to ponder over these works of 
art, there were ever present, as if by accident, some per- 
sons of superior information who would condescendingly 


5A THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


explain the various pictures, pointing out with a long 
stick the phenomena most worthy of notice. These 
caricatures proving highly successful, and being sup- 
pressed by order of government, they were repeated 
upon canvas on a larger scale, in still more conspicuous 
situations, as if in contempt of the royal authority, 
which sullied itself by compromise with Calvinism.2 
The pulpits, meanwhile, thundered denunciations on 
the one hand against the weak and wicked king, who 
worshiped idols, and who sacrificed the dearly earned 
pittance of his subjects to feed the insolent pomp of his 
pampered favorites; and on the other upon the arch- 
heretic, the arch-apostate, the Béarnese Huguenot, who, 
after the death of the reigning monarch, would have the 
effrontery to claim his throne, and to introduce into 
France the persecutions and the horrors under which 
unhappy England was already groaning. 

The scarce-concealed instigator of these assaults upon 
the royal and upon the Huguenot faction was, of course, 
the Duke of Guise—the man whose most signal achieve- 
ment had been the massacre of St. Bartholomew, all 
the preliminary details of that transaction having been 
arranged by his skill. So long as Charles IX. was living, 
the Balafré had created the confusion which was his 
element, by entertaining and fomenting the perpetual 
intrigues of Anjou and Alengon against their brother, 
while the altercations between them and the queen 
mother and the furious madman who then sat upon the 
throne had been the cause of sufficient disorder and 
calamity for France. On the death of Charles IX., Guise 
had sought the intimacy of Henry of N avarre, that by 
his means he might frustrate the hopes of Alencon for 


' De Thou, ix. 269, 270, seq. 2 Thid. 


1584] HIS SCHEMES BS 


the succession. During the early period of the Béarn- 
ese’s residence at the French court the two had been 
inseparable, living together, going to the same festivals, 
tournaments, and masquerades, and even sleeping in 
the same bed. ‘My master,” was ever Guise’s address 
to Henry; “my gossip,” the young King of Navarre’s 
reply. But the crafty Béarnese had made use of the 
intimacy only to read the secrets of the Balafré’s heart ; 
and on Navarre’s flight from the court and his return 
to Huguenotism, Guise knew that he had been played 
upon by a subtler spirit than his own. The simulated 
affection was now changed into undisguised hatred. 
Moreover, by the death of Alengon, Navarre now stood 
next the throne, and Guise’s plots became still more 
extensive and more open as his own ambition to usurp 
the crown on the death of the childless Henry III. be- 
came more fervid.' 

Thus, by artfully inflaming the populace of Paris, 
and—through his organized bands of confederates— 
that of all the large towns of France, against the Hugue- 
nots and their chief, by appeals to the religious senti- 
ment, and at the same time by stimulating the disgust 
and indignation of the taxpayers everywhere at the 
imposts and heavy burdens which the boundless extrav- 
agance of the court engendered, Guise paved the way 
for the advancement of the great League which he rep- 
resented. The other two political divisions were in- 
geniously represented as mere insolent factions, while his 
own was the true national and patriotic party, by which 
alone the ancient religion and the cherished institutions 
of France could be preserved.” 

And the great chief of this national patriotic party 


1 Perefixe, 28 seq. 2 De Thou, Perefixe, ubi sup. 


56 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


was not Henry of Guise, but the industrious old man 
who sat writing despatches in the depths of the Escorial. 
Spanish counsels, Spanish promises, Spanish ducats— 
these were the real machinery by which the plots of 
Guise against the peace of France and of Europe were 
supported. Madame League was simply Philip II. 
Nothing was written, officially or unofficially, to the 
French government by the Spanish court that was not 
at the same time communicated to “‘Mucio,”—as the 
Duke of Guise was denominated in the secret correspon- 
dence of Philip,—and Mucio was in Philip’s pay, his 
confidential agent, spy, and confederate, long before 
the actual existence of the League was generally sus- 
pected. 

The queen mother, Catherine de’ Medici, played into 
the duke’s hands. Throughout the whole period of her 
widowhood, having been accustomed to govern her sons, 
she had, in a certain sense, been used to govern the 
kingdom. By sowing dissensions among her own chil- 
dren, by inflaming party against party, by watching 
with care the oscillations of France, so that none of the 
great divisions should obtain preponderance, by alter- 
nately caressing and massacring the Huguenots, by 
cajoling or confronting Philip, by keeping, as she 
boasted, a spy in every family that possessed the an- 
nual income of two thousand livres, by making herself 
the head of an organized system of harlotry, by which 
the soldiers and politicians of France were inveigled, 
their secrets faithfully revealed to her by her well-dis- 
ciplined maids of honor, by surrounding her unfortu- 
nate sons with temptation from earliest youth, and 
plunging them by cold calculation into deepest de- 
bauchery, that their enervated faculties might be ever 


1584] INFLUENCE OF THE QUEEN MOTHER ot 


forced to rely in political affairs on the maternal 
counsel, and to abandon the administration to the 
maternal will: such were the arts by which Catherine 
had maintained her influence and a great country had 
been governed for a generation—Machiavellian state- 
craft blended with the more simple wiles of a procuress. 

Now that Alengon was dead, and Henry III. hopeless 
of issue, it was her determination that the children of 
her daughter, the Duchess of Lorraine, should succeed 
to the throne. The matter was discussed as if the 
throne were already vacant, and Guise and the queen 
mother, if they agreed in nothing else, were both cor- 
dial in their detestation of Henry of Navarre. The duke 
affected to support the schemes in favor of his relatives, 
the princes of Lorraine, while he secretly informed the 
Spanish court that this policy was only a pretense. He 
was not likely, he said, to advance the interests of the 
younger branch of a house of which he was himself the 
chief, nor were their backs equal to the burden. It was 
necessary to amuse the old queen, but he was profoundly 
of opinion that the only sovereign for France, upon the 
death of Henry, was Philip II. himself. This was the 
duke’s plan of arriving, by means of Spanish assistance, 
at the throne of France; and such was Henry le Balafré, 
chief of the League.t 

And the other Henry, the Huguenot, the Béarnese, 
Henry of Bourbon, Henry of Navarre, the chieftain of 
the Gascon chivalry, the king errant, the hope and the 
darling of the oppressed Protestants in every land—of 
him it is scarce needful to say a single word. At his 
very name a figure seems to leap forth from the mist of 
three centuries, instinct with ruddy, vigorous life. Such 


1 De Thou, ix. 267. 


58 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


was the intense vitality of the Béarnese prince that even 
now he seems more thoroughly alive and recognizable 
than half the actual personages who are fretting their 
hour upon the stage. 

We see, at once, a man of moderate stature, light, 
sinewy, and strong; a face browned with continual ex- 
posure; small, mirthful, yet commanding blue eyes, 
glittering from beneath ‘an arching ‘brow, and prom- 
inent cheek-bones; a long hawk’s nose, almost resting 
upon a salient chin, a pendent mustache, and a thick, 
brown, curly beard, prematurely grizzled ; we see the 
mien of frank authority and magnificent good humor, 
we hear the ready sallies of the shrewd Gascon mother- 
wit, we feel the electricity which flashes out of him, and 
sets all hearts around him on fire, when the trumpet 
sounds to battle. The headlong desperate charge, the 
snow-white plume waving where the fire is hottest, the 
large capacity for enjoyment of the man, rioting without 
affectation in the certaminis gaudia, the insane gallop, 
after the combat, to lay its trophies at the feet of the 
Cynthia of the minute, and thus to forfeit its fruits—all 
are as familiar to us as if the seven distinct wars, the 
hundred pitched battles, the two hundred sieges, in 
which the Béarnese was personally present, had been 
occurrences of our own day. 

He, at least, was both king and man, if the monarch 
who occupied the throne was neither. He was the man 
to prove, too, for the instruction of the patient letter- 
writer of the Escorial, that the crown of France was to 
be won with foot in stirrup and carbine in hand, rather 
than to be caught by the Weaving and casting of the 
most intricate nets of diplomatic intrigue, though thor- 
oughly weighted with Mexican gold. 


1584] HENRY OF NAVARRE 59 


The King of Navarre was now thirty-one years old, 
for the three Henrys were nearly of the same age. 
The first indications of his existence had been recognized 
amid the cannon and trumpets of a camp in Picardy, 
aad his mother had sung a gay Béarnese song as he was 
coming into the world at Pau. “Thus,” said his grand- 
father, Henry of Navarre, “thou shalt not bear to us a 
morose and sulky child.” The good king, without a 
kingdom, taking the child, as soon as born, in the 
lapel of his dressing-gown, had brushed his infant lips 
with a clove of garlic, and moistened them with a drop 
of generous Gascon wine. “ Thus,” said the grandfather 
again, “shall the boy be both merry and bold.” There 
was something mythologically prophetic in the incidents 
of his birth. ; 

The best part of Navarre had been long since appro- 
priated by Ferdinand of Aragon. In France there 
reigned a young and warlike sovereign with four 
healthy boys. But the new-born infant had inherited 
the lilies of France from St. Louis, and a later ancestor 
had added to the escutcheon the motto, “Espoir.” His 
grandfather believed that the boy was born to revenge 
upon Spain the wrongs of the house of Albret, and 
Henry’s nature seemed ever pervaded with Robert of 
Clermont’s device. 

The same sensible grandfather, having different views 
on the subject of education from those manifested by 
Catherine de’ Medici toward her children, had the boy 
taught to run about bareheaded and barefooted, like a 
peasant, among the mountains and rocks of Béarn, till 
he became as rugged as a young bear, and as nimble as 
a kid. Black bread and beef and garlic were his 
simple fare; and he was taught by his mother and his 


60 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


grandfather to hate lies and liars, and to read the 
Bible. 

When he was fifteen, the third religious war broke 
out. Both his father and grandfather were dead. His 
mother, who had openly professed the Reformed faith 
since the death of her husband, who hated it, brought 
her boy to the camp at Rochelle, where he was received 
as the chief of the Huguenots. His culture was not 
extensive. He had learned to speak the truth, to ride, 
to shoot, to do with little sleep and less food. He could 
also construe a little Latin, and had read a few military 
treatises ; but the mighty hours of an eventful life were 
now to take him by the hand, and to teach him much 
good and much evil, as they bore him onward. He now 
saw military treatises expounded practically by pro- 
fessors like his uncle Condé and Admiral Coligny and 
Louis Nassau, in such lecture-rooms as Laudun and 
Jarnac and Moncontour, and never was apter scholar. 

The peace of Arnay-le-Due succeeded, and then the 
fatal Bartholomew marriage with the Messalina of 
Valois. The faith taught in the mountains of Béarn 
was no buckler against the demand of “the mass or 
death,” thundered at his breast by the lunatic Charles, 
as he pointed to thousands of massacred Huguenots. 
Henry yielded to such conclusive arguments, and became 
a Catholic. Four years of court imprisonment sue- 
ceeded, and the young King of Navarre, though proof 
to the artifices of his gossip Guise, was not adamant to 
the temptations spread for him by Catherine de’ Medici. 
In the harem entertained for him in the Louvre many 
pitfalls entrapped him ; and he became a stock performer 
in the state comedies and tragedies of that plotting age, 

A silken web of palace polities, palace diplomacy, 


1584] HENRY OF NAVARRE 61 


palace revolutions, enveloped him. Schemes and 
counter-schemes, stratagems and conspiracies, assas- 
sinations and poisonings, all the state machinery which 
worked so exquisitely in fair ladies’ chambers to spread 
havoe and desolation over a kingdom, were displayed 
before his eyes. Now campaigning with one royal 
brother against Huguenots, now fighting with another 
on their side, now solicited by the queen mother to at- 
tempt the life of her son,! now implored by Henry ITI. 
to assassinate his brother,? the Béarnese, as fresh an- 
tagonisms, affinities, combinations, were developed, de- 
tected, neutralized almost daily, became rapidly an adept 
in Medicean state chemistry. Charles IX. in his grave, 
Henry III. on the throne, Alengon in the Huguenot camp, 
Henry at last made his escape. The brief war and 
peace of Monsieur succeeded, and the King of Navarre 
formally abjured the Catholic creed. The parties were 
now sharply defined. Guise mounted upon the League, 
Henry astride upon the Reformation, were prepared to 
do battle to the death. The temporary “war of the 
amorous” was followed by the peace of Fleix. 

Four years of peace again; four fat years of wanton- 
ness and riot preceding fourteen hungry, famine- 
stricken years of bloodiest civil war. The voluptuous- 
ness and infamy of the Louvre were almost paralleled in 
vice, if not in splendor, by the miniature court at Pau. 
Henry’s Spartan grandfather would scarce have ap- 
proved the courses of the youth whose education he 
had commenced on so simple a scale. For Margaret of 
Valois, hating her husband, and living in most undis- 
guised and promiscuous infidelity to him, had profited by 
her mother’s lessons. A seraglio of maids of honor 


1 Perefixe, 28. 2 Thid., 38, 39. 


62 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


ministered to Henry’s pleasures, and were carefully 
instructed that the peace and war of the kingdom were 
playthings in their hands. While at Paris royalty was 
hopelessly sinking in a poisonous marsh, there was 
danger that even the hardy nature of the Béarnese 
would be mortally enervated by the atmosphere in 
which he lived. 

The unhappy Henry III, baited by the Guises, worried 
by Alengon and his mother, implored the King of Na- 
varre to return to Paris and the Catholic faith. M. de 
Ségur, chief of Navarre’s council, who had been won 
over during a visit to the capital, where he had made 
the discovery that “Henry III. was an angel, and his 
ministers devils,” came back to Pau, urging his master’s 
acceptance of the royal invitation.2 Henry wavered. 
Bold D’Aubigné, stanchest of Huguenots and of his 
friends, next day privately showed Ségur a palace win- 
dow opening on a very steep precipice over the Baise, 
and cheerfully assured him that he should be flung from 
it did he not instantly reverse his proceedings and give 
his master different advice. “If I am not able to do the 
deed myself,” said D’Aubigné, “here are a dozen more to 
help me.” The chief of the council east a glance behind 
him, saw a number of grim Puritan soldiers, with their 
hats plucked down upon their brows, looking very se- 
rious; so made his bow, and quite changed his line of 
conduct. 

At about the same time Philip II. confidentially offered 
Henry of Navarre four hundred thousand crowns in 
hand, and twelve hundred thousand yearly, if he would 

1 Mémoires @’Agrippa d’Aubigné (ed. 1854), Appendix, xvii. 

. 237. 
2 Ibid., pp. 67, 68. 3 Thid. 


1584] HENRY OF NAVARRE 63 


consent to make war upon Henry III.! Mucio, or the 
Duke of Guise, being still in Philip’s pay, the combina- 
tion of Leaguers and Huguenots against the unfortunate 
Valois would, it was thought, be a good triangular 
contest. 

But Henry, no longer the unsophisticated youth who 
had been used to run barefoot among the cliffs of Coar- 
raze, was grown too crafty a politician to be entangled 
by Spanish or Medicean wiles. The Duke of Anjou was 
now dead. Of all the princes who had stood between 
him and the throne, there was none remaining save the 
helpless, childless, superannuated youth who was its 
present occupant. The King of Navarre was legitimate 
heir to the crown of France. “Hspoir” was now in 
letters of light upon his shield, but he knew that his 
path to greatness led through manifold dangers, and 
that it was only at the head of his Huguenot chivalry 
that he could cut his way. He was the leader of the 
nobles of Gascony and Dauphiny and Guienne in their 
mountain fastnesses, of the weavers, cutlers, and arti- 
sans in their thriving manufacturing and trading 
towns. It was not Spanish gold, but carbines and 
cutlasses, bows and bills, which could bring him to the 
throne of his ancestors. 


1 “The Archbishop of Colein told me that the Prince of Orange 
had acquainted him with a practice of the King of Spain’s, which 
was an offer made to the King of Navarre of 400,000 A* in ready 
money, and a 100,000 A* monthly, if he would make wars with 
the French king; whereunto I answered that I thought it done 
with a Spanish mind and cunning to draw the King of Navarre, 
as Sebastian of Portugal was, to his ruin and loss of life and king- 
dom, and by this means to destroy also the religion and churches 
in France,” etc.—Herle to Queen Elizabeth, 22d July, 1584, S. P. 
Office MS. 


64 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


And thus he stood the chieftain of that great austere 
party of Huguenots, the men who went on their knees 
before the battle, beating their breasts with their iron 
gauntlets, and singing in full chorus a psalm of David 
before smiting the Philistines hip and thigh. 

Their chieftain, —scarcely their representative,—fit to 
lead his Puritans on the battle-field, was hardly a model 
for them elsewhere. Yet, though profligate in one re- 
spect, he was temperate in every other. In food, wine, 
and sleep he was always moderate. Subtle and crafty 
in self-defense, he retained something of his old love of 
truth, of his hatred for liars. Hardly generous, per- 
haps, he was a friend of justice, while economy in a 
wandering king like himself was a necessary virtue, of 
which France one day was to feel the beneficent action. 
Reckless and headlong in appearance, he was in truth 
the most careful of men. On the religious question 
most cautious of all, he always left the door open behind 
him, disclaimed all bigotry of opinion, and earnestly im- 
plored the papists to seek, not his destruction, but his 
instruction. Yet prudent as he was by nature in every 
other regard, he was all his life the slave of one woman 
or another, and it was by good luck rather than by 
sagacity that he did not repeatedly forfeit the fruits of 
his courage and conduct in obedience to his master 
passion. 

Always open to conviction on the subject of his faith, 
he repudiated the appellation of heretic. A creed, he 
said, was not to be changed like a shirt, but only on due 
deliberation and under special advice. In his secret 
heart he probably regarded the two religions as his 
chargers, and was ready to mount alternately the one 
or the other, as each seemed the more likely to bear him 


1534] HENRY OF NAVARRE 65 


safely in the battle. The Béarnese was no Puritan, but 
he was most true to himself and to his own advance- 
ment. His highest principle of action was to reach his 
goal, and to that principle he was ever loyal. Feeling, 
too, that it was the interest of France that he should 
succeed, he was even inspired—compared with others 
on the stage—by an almost lofty patriotism. 

Amiable by nature and by habit, he had preserved the 
most unimpaired good humor throughout the horrible 
years which succeeded St. Bartholomew, during which 
he carried his life in his hand, and learned not to wear 
his heart upon his sleeve. Without gratitude, without 
resentment, without fear, without remorse; entirely 
arbitrary, yet with the capacity to use all men’s judg- 
ments; without convictions, save in regard to his 
dynastic interests, he possessed all the qualities neces- 
sary to success. He knew how to use his enemies. He 
knew how to use his friends, to abuse them, and to 
throw them away. He refused to assassinate Francis 
Alencon at the bidding of Henry III., but he attempted 
to procure the murder of the truest of his own friends, 
one of the noblest characters of the age,— whose breast 
showed twelve scars received in his service,—Agrippa 
@Aubigné, because the honest soldier had refused to 
become his pimp—a service the king had implored upon 
his knees.1 

Beneath the mask of perpetual careless good humor 
lurked the keenest eye, a subtle, restless, widely com- 
bining brain, and an iron will. Native sagacity had 
been tempered into consummate elasticity by the fiery 
atmosphere in which feebler natures had been dissolved. 
His wit was as flashing and as quickly unsheathed as 


1 D’Aubigné, Mémoires, pp. 38-44. 
VOL. I.—5 


66 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


his sword. Desperate, apparently reckless temerity on 
the battle-field was deliberately indulged in that the 
world might be brought to recognize a hero and chief- 
tain in a king. The donothings of the Merovingian 
line had been succeeded by the Pepins; to the effete 
Carlovingians had come a Capet; to the impotent Valois 
should come a worthier descendant of St. Louis. This 
was shrewd Gascon calculation, aided by constitutional 
fearlessness. When despatch-writing, invisible Philips, 
star-gazing Rudolphs, and petticoated Henrys sat upon 
the thrones of Europe, it was wholesome to show the 
world that there was a king left who could move about 
in the bustle and business of the age, and could charge 
as well as most soldiers at the head of his cavalry ; that 
there was one more sovereign fit to reign over men, 
besides the glorious Virgin who governed England. 

Thus courageous, crafty, far-seeing, consistent, untir- 
ing, imperturbable, he was born to command, and had a 
right to reign. He had need of the throne, and the 
throne had still more need of him. 

This, then, was the third Henry, representative of the 
third side of the triangle, the reformers of the kingdom. 

And before this bubbling caldron of France, where 
intrigues, foreign and domestic, conflicting ambitions, 
stratagems, and hopes were whirling in never-ceasing 
tumult, was it strange if the plain Netherland envoys 
should stand somewhat aghast ? 

Yet it was necessary that they should ponder well the 
aspect of affairs, for all their hopes, the very existence 
of themselves and of their religion, depended upon the 
organization which should come of this chaos. 

It must be remembered, however, that those statesmen 
—even the wisest or the best informed of them—could 


1584] POWER OF FRANCE 67 


not take so correct a view of France and its politics as 
it is possible for us, after the lapse of three centuries, 
to do. The interior leagues, subterranean schemes, con- 
flicting factions, could only be guessed at; nor could the 
immediate future be predicted, even by such far-seeing 
politicians as William of Orange, at a distance, or Henry 
of Navarre, upon the spot. 

It was obvious to the Netherlanders that France, 
although torn by faction, was a great and powerful 
realm. There had now been, with the brief exception 
of the lovers’ war in 1580, a religious peace of eight 
years’ duration. The Huguenots had enjoyed tranquil 
exercise of their worship during that period, and they 
expressed perfect confidence in the good faith of the 
king. That the cities were inordinately taxed to supply 
the luxury of the court could hardly be unknown to the 
Netherlanders. Nevertheless, they knew that the king- 
dom was the richest and most populous of Christendom, 
after that of Spain. Its capital, already called by con- 
temporaries the “compendium of the world,” was de- 
seribed by travelers as ‘stupendous in extent and 
miraculous for its numbers.” It was even said to con- 
tain eight hundred thousand souls, and although its 
actual population did not probably exceed three hun- 
dred and twenty thousand, yet this was more than 
double the number of London’s inhabitants, and thrice 
as many as Antwerp could then boast, now that a great 
proportion of its foreign denizens had been scared 
away. Paris was at least by one hundred thousand 
more populous than any city of Europe, except perhaps 
the remote and barbarous Moscow, while the secondary 
cities of France, Rouen in the north, Lyons in the center, 
and Marseilles in the south, almost equaled in size, 


68 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


business, wealth, and numbers the capitals of other 
countries. In the whole kingdom were probably ten 
or twelve millions of inhabitants, nearly as many as in 
Spain, without her colonies, and perhaps three times the 
number that dwelt in England. 

In a military point of view, too, the alliance of France 
was most valuable to the contiguous Netherlands. A few 
regiments of French troops, under the command of one 
of their experienced marshals, could block up the Span- 
iards in the Walloon provinces, effectually stop their 
operations against Ghent, Antwerp, and the other great 
cities of Flanders and Brabant, and, with the combined 
action of the United Provinces on the north, so surround 
and cripple the forces of Parma as to reduce the power 
of Philip, after a few vigorous and well-concerted blows, 
to an absolute nullity in the Low Countries. As this 
result was of as vital importance to the real interests 
of France and of Europe, whether Protestant or Catho- 
lic, as it was to the provinces, and as the French gov- 
ernment had privately manifested a strong desire to 
oppose the progress of Spain toward universal empire, 
it was not surprising that the States-General, not feelin g 
capable of standing alone, should make their applica- 
tion to France. This they had done with the knowledge 
and concurrence of the English government. What lay 
upon the surface the Netherland statesmen saw and 
pondered well. What lurked beneath they surmised as 
shrewdly as they could, but it was impossible, with 
plummet and fathom-line ever in hand, to sound the 
way with perfect accuracy, where the quicksands were 
ever shifting, and the depth or shallowness of the course 
perpetually varying. It was not easy to discover the 
intentions of a government which did not know its own 


1584] MYSTERIES REVEALED 69 


intentions, and whose changing policy was controlled by 
so many hidden currents. 

Moreover, as already indicated, the envoys, and those 
whom they represented, had not the same means of ar- 
riving at a result as are granted to us. Thanks to the 
liberality of many modern governments of Europe, the 
archives where the state secrets of the buried centuries 
have so long moldered are now open to the student of 
history. To him who has patience and industry many 
mysteries are thus revealed which no political sagacity 
or critical acumen could have divined. He leans over 
the shoulder of Philip II. at his writing-table, as the king 
spells patiently out, with cipher-key in hand, the most 
concealed hieroglyphies of Parma or Guise or Mendoza; 
he reads the secret thoughts of “ Fabius,” 1 as that cunc- 
tative Roman scrawls his marginal apostils on each de- 
spatch; he pries into all the stratagems of Camillus, 
Hortensius, Mucius, Julius, Tullius, and the rest of 
those ancient heroes who lent their names to the diplo- 
matic masqueraders of the sixteenth century; he enters 
the cabinet of the deeply pondering Burghley, and takes 
from the most private drawer the memoranda which re- 
cord that minister’s unutterable doubtings; he pulls 
from the dressing-gown folds of the stealthy, softly glid- 
ing Walsingham the last secret which he has picked from 
the emperor’s pigeonholes or the pope’s pocket, and 
which not Hatton, nor Buckhurst, nor Leicester, nor 
the lord treasurer is to see—nobody but Elizabeth her- 
self; he sits invisible at the most secret councils of the 
Nassaus and Barneveldt and Buys, or pores with Farnese 
over coming victories and vast schemes of universal 


The name usually assigned to Philip himself in the Paris- 
Simaneas Correspondence. 


70 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


conquest; he reads the latest bit of scandal, the minut- 
est characteristic of king or minister, chronicled by the 
gossiping Venetians for the edification of the Forty; 
and, after all this prying and eavesdropping, having 
seen the cross-purposes, the bribings, the windings, the 
fencings in the dark, he is not surprised if those who 
were systematically deceived did not always arrive at 
correct conclusions. 

Noél de Caron, Seigneur de Schoneval, had been agent 
of the states at the French court at the time of the death 
of the Duke of Anjou. Upon the occurrence of that 
event La Mouillerie and Asseliers were deputed by the 
provinces to King Henry III., in order to offer him the 
sovereignty which they had intended to confer upon his 
brother.1 Meantime that brother, just before his death, 
and with the privity of Henry, had been negotiating 
for a marriage with the younger daughter of Philip IL., 
an arrangement somewhat incompatible with his con- 
temporaneous scheme to assume the sovereignty of 
Philip’s revolted provinces. An attempt had been made 
at the same time to conciliate the Duke of Savoy and 
invite him to the French court; but the Due de J oyeuse, 
then on his return from Turin, was bringing the news 
not only that the match with Anjou was not favored, — 
which, as Anjou was dead, was of no great consequence, 
—but that the Duke of Savoy was himself to espouse 
the Infanta, and was therefore compelled to decline the 
invitation to Paris, for fear of offending his father-in- 


1 “Verhael van ’t gene de heeren de la Mouillerie ende van 
Asseliers habben gedaan ende gebesoigneert, midtsgaders verstaen 
in henluyden reise naer Vrankryek aen den Coninck raeckende 
den last hen gegeven op mijne heeren de Generale Staten,” 
Royal Archives at The Hague MS. 


1584] EMBASSY OF THE STATES TO FRANCE Rell 


law.! Other matters were in progress, to be afterward 
indicated, very much interfering with the negotiations 
of the Netherland envoys. 

When La Mouillerie and Asseliers arrived at Rouen, 
on their road from Dieppe to Paris, they received a 
peremptory order from the queen mother to proceed no 
farther. This prohibition was brought by an unofficial 
personage, and was delivered, not to them, but to Des 
Pruneaux, French envoy to the States-General, who had 
accompanied the envoys to France.? 

After three weeks’ time, during which they “kept 
themselves continually concealed in Rouen,” there ar- 
rived in that city a young nephew of Secretary Brulart, 
who brought letters empowering him to hear what they 
had in charge for the king. The envoys, not much flat- 
tered by such cavalier treatment on the part of him to 
whom they were offering a crown, determined to digest 
the affront as they best might, and, to save time, opened 
the whole business to this subordinate stripling. He re- 
ceived from them accordingly an ample memoir to be laid 
before his Majesty, and departed by the post the same 
night. Then they waited ten days longer, concealed as if 
they had been thieves or spies, rather than the represen- 
tativesof a friendly power on a more than friendly errand. 

At last, on the 24th July, after the deputies had been 
thus shut up a whole month, Secretary Brulart himself 
arrived from Fontainebleau.* 

1 Stafford to Walsingham, 29th August, 1584, in Murdin, ii. 419, 
420. 

2 Lettre des Deputés en France au Prince d’Oranges du 16 
Juillet, 1584 (Hague Archives MS.). This letter to William the 
Silent was written six days after his death. 

3 MS. letter in Hague Archives, before cited. 

4 “Rapport faict par Noél de Caron, aiant esté deputé de la 


72 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


He stated that the king sent his royal thanks to the 
states for the offer which they had made him, and to the 
deputies in particular for taking the trouble of so long 
a journey, but that he did not find his realm ‘in condi- 
tion to undertake a foreign war so inopportunely. In 
every other regard his Majesty offered the states “all 
possible favors and pleasures.” 1 

Certainly, after having been thus kept in prison for a 
month, the ambassadors had small cause to be contented 
with this very cold communication. To be forbidden 
the royal presence, and to be turned out of the country 
without even an official and accredited answer to a com- 
munication in which they had offered the sovereignty 
of their fatherland, was not flattering to their dignity. 
“We little thought,” said they to Brulart, after a brief 
consultation among themselves, “to receive such a reply 
as this. It displeases us infinitely that his Majesty will 
not do us the honor to grant us an audience. We must 
take the liberty of saying that ’t is treating the states, 
our masters, with too much contempt. Who ever heard 
before of refusing audience to public personages? 
Kings often grant audience to mere letter-carriers. 
Even the King of Spain never refused a hearing to the 
deputies from the Netherlands when they came to Spain 
to complain of his own government. The States-Gen- 
eral have sent envoys to many other kings and princes, 
and they have instantly granted audience in every case. 
His Majesty, too, has been very ill informed of the con- 
tracts which we formerly made with the Duke of Anjou, 


part de Messeigneurs les Etats-generaux vers la Majesté du Roy de 
France, en V’assemblée des dicts Estats 4 Delft, le 5 Aotst, 1584,” 
Hague Archives MS, 

1 Report of Noél de Caron, MS. before cited. 


1584] IGNOMINIOUS POSITION OF THE ENVOYS 73 


and therefore a personal interview is the more neces- 
sary.”1 As the envoys were obstinate on the point of 
Paris, Brulart said “that the king, although he should 
himself be at Lyons, would not prevent any one from 
going to the capital on his own private affairs, but 
would unquestionably take it very ill if they should visit 
that city in a public manner and as deputies.” ” 

Des Pruneaux professed himself “very grievous at 
this result, and desirous of a hundred deaths in conse- 
quence.” 8 

They stated that they should be ready within a month 
to bring an army of three thousand horse and thirteen 
thousand foot into the field for the relief of Ghent, 
besides their military operations against Zutphen, and 
that the enemy had recently been ignominiously defeated 
in his attack upon Fort Lillo, and had lost two thousand 
of his best soldiers.* 

Here were encouraging facts; and it certainly was 
worth the while of the French sovereign to pause a 
moment before rejecting, without a hearing, the offer 
of such powerful and conveniently situated provinces. 

Des Pruneaux, a man of probity and earnestness, but 
perhaps of insufficient ability to deal with such grave 
matters as now fell almost entirely upon his shoulders,? 
soon afterward obtained audience of the king. Being 
most sincerely in favor of the annexation of the Nether- 
lands to France, and feeling that now or never was the 


1 Report of Noél de Caron, MS. before cited. 

2 Thid. 

3 “Dont le dict Sr. des Epruneaux estoit en son particulier fort 
dolent, et se soubhaita cent fois estre mort,” ete.—Ibid. 

4 MS. letter to the States-General before cited. 

5 De Tho ix. 261. 


74 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


opportunity of bringing it about, he persuaded the king 
to send him back to the provinces, in order to continue 
the negotiation directly with the States-General. The 
timidity and procrastination of the court could be over- 
come no further. 

The two Dutch envoys, who had stolen secretly to 
Paris, were indulged in a most barren and unmeaning 
interview with the queen mother. Before their depar- 
ture from France, however, they had the advantage of 
much conversation with leading members of the royal 
council, of the parliaments of Paris and Rouen, and also 
with various persons professing the Reformed religion. 
They endeavored thus to inform themselves as well as 
they could why the king made so much difficulty in 
accepting their propositions, and whether and by what 
means his Majesty could be induced to make war in 
their behalf upon the King of Spain.1 

They were informed that should Holland and Zealand 
unite with the rest of the Netherlands, the king “ without 
any doubt would undertake the cause most earnestly.” 
His councilors also—even those who had been most 
active in dissuading his Majesty from such a policy— 
would then be unanimous in supporting the annexation 
of the provinces and the war with Spain. In such a 
contingency, with the potent assistance of Holland and 
Zealand, the king would have little difficulty, within a 
very short time, in chasing every single Spaniard out of 
the Netherlands. To further this end many leading per- 
sonages in France avowed to the envoys their determi- 
nation “to venture their lives and their fortunes, and 
to use all the influence which they possessed at court.” 

The same persons expressed their conviction that the 


1 MS. Verhael before cited. 


1584] VIEWS OF THE FRENCH HUGUENOTS 15 


king, once satisfied by the provinces as to conditions 
and reasons, would cheerfully go into the war, without 
being deterred by any apprehension as to the power of 
Spain. It was, however, fitting that each province 
should chaffer as little as possible about details, but 
should give his Majesty every reasonable advantage. 
They should remember that they were dealing with “a 
great, powerful monarch, who was putting his realm in 
jeopardy, and not with a Duke of Anjou, who had every- 
thing to gain and nothing to lose.” ! 

All the Huguenots with whom the envoys conversed 
were excessively sanguine. Could the king be once: 
brought, they said, to promise the Netherlands his pro- 
tection, there was not the least fear but that he would 
keep his word. He would use all the means within his 
power; ‘yea, he would take the crown from his head” 
rather than turn back. Although reluctant to com- 
mence a war with so powerful a sovereign, having once 
promised his help, he would keep his pledge to the ut- 
most, “for he was a king of his word,” and had never 
broken and would never break his faith with those of 
the Reformed religion.” 

Thus spoke the leading Huguenots of France, in con- 
fidential communication with the Netherland envoys, not 
many months before the famous edict of extermination 
published at Nemours. 


1 Mouillerie and Asseliers, MS. before cited. 

2 “Dus Verclarende oick bezunder die van de Religie, die wy 
gesproken hebben, dat zoo verre wy consten den Coninck zoo verre 
bringen dat hy ons beloofde te beschermen, wy niet en dorfden 
vreesen oft hy en zoudt ons houden ende zoude gebruycken alle 
zyne middelen, jae die crone van zynen hoofde, seggende dat hoe 
wel hy zeer qualycken es, om totter oirlooge te brengen-nict 
zonder oirzaecke, mids het es tegen eenen alzulcken machtigen 


76 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


At that moment the reformers were full of confidence, 
not foreseeing the long procession of battles and sieges 
which was soon to sweep through the land. Notwith- 
standing the urgency of the papists for their extirpa- 
tion, they extolled loudly the liberty of religious worship 
which Calvinists, as well as Catholics, were enjoying in 
France, and pointed to the fact that the adherents of 
both religions were well received at court, and that they 
shared equally in offices of trust and dignity throughout 
the kingdom.! ‘ 

The Netherland envoys themselves bore testimony to 
the undisturbed tranquillity and harmony in which the 
professors of both religions were living and worshiping 
side by side “without reproach or quarrel” in all the 
great cities which they had visited. They expressed the 
conviction that the same toleration would be extended 
to all the provinces when under French dominion; and 
so far as their ancient constitutions and privileges were 
concerned, they were assured that the King of France 
would respect and maintain them with as much fidelity 
as the states could possibly desire. 

Des Pruneaux, accompanied by the two states’ envoys, 
departed forthwith for the Netherlands. On the 24th 
August, 1584, he delivered a discourse before the States- 
General, in which he disclosed in very general terms the 
expectations of Henry III., and intimated very clearly 
that the different provinces were to lose no time in 
Prince, dat hebbende belooft ons te helpen, dat hy nyet laten en 
zoude tzelfde int neerste te houden, want hy es (zoo ZY ONS ver- 
claerden) eenen Coninek van zynen woorde zyn beloofte houdende, 
ende zelver die van der religie seyden ons, dat hy hen nemmermeer 
en hadde gefailleert van tgene hy hen belooft hadde.”—Mouillerie 


and Asseliers, Verhael, ete., MS. before cited. 
1 Thid. 2 Thid. 


1584] EFFORTS TO PROCURE ANNEXATION WG 


making an unconditional offer to that monarch. With 
regard to Holland and Zealand, he observed that he was 
provided with a special commission to those estates. 

It was not long before one province after the other 
came to the conclusion to offer the sovereignty to the 
king without written conditions, but with a general 
understanding that their religious freedom and their 
ancient constitutions were to be sacredly respected. 
Meantime Des Pruneaux made his appearance in Hol 
land and Zealand, and declared the king’s intentions 
of espousing the cause of the states, and of accepting 
the sovereignty of all the provinces. He distinctly ob- 
served, however, that it was as sovereign, not as pro- 
tector, that his Majesty must be recognized in Holland 
and Zealand as well as in the rest of the country. 

Upon this grave question there was much debate and 
much difference of opinion. Holland and Zealand had 
never contemplated the possibility of accepting any 
foreign sovereignty, and the opponents of the present 
scheme were loud and angry, but very reasonable in 
their remarks.? 

The French, they said, were no respecters of privileges 
nor of persons. The Duke of Anjou had deceived Wil- 
liam of Orange and betrayed the provinces. Could they 
hope to see further than that wisest and most experi- 
enced prince? Had not the stout hearts of the Antwerp 
burghers proved a stronger defense to Brabant liberties 
than the “joyous entry” on the dread day of the 
French Fury, it would have fared ill then and for- 
ever with the cause of freedom and religion in the 
Netherlands. The King of France was a papist, a 
Jesuit. He was incapable of keeping his pledges. 


1 Wagenaer, viii. 31 seq. 2 Wagenaer. Bor, xix. 462. 


78 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Should they make the arrangement now proposed and 
confer the sovereignty upon him, he would forthwith 
make peace with Spain, and transfer the provinces back 
to that crown in exchange for the duchy of Milan, which 
France had ever coveted. The Netherlands, after a 
quarter of a century of fighting in defense of their 
hearths and altars, would find themselves handed over 
again, bound and fettered, to the tender mercies of the 
Spanish Inquisition.1 

The kings of France and of Spain always acted in 
concert, for religion was the most potent of bonds. 
Witness the sacrifice of thousands of French soldiers to 
Alva by their own sovereign at Mons, witness the fate 
of Genlis, witness the bloody night of St. Bartholomew, 
witness the Antwerp Fury. Men cited and relied upon 
the advice of William of Orange as to this negotiation 
with France. But Orange never dreamed of going so 
far as now proposed. He was ever careful to keep the 
provinces of Holland and Zealand safe from every for- 
eign master. That spot was to be holy ground: not 
out of personal ambition,—God forbid that they should 
accuse his memory of any such impurity,—but because 
he wished one safe refuge for the spirit of freedom. 

Many years long they had held out by land and sea 
against the Spaniards, and should they now, because 
this Des Pruneaux shrugged his shoulders, be so alarmed 
as to open the door to the same Spaniard wearing the 
disguise of a Frenchman ?2 


1 Vertoog van Gouda tegen den handel met Frankryk, apud Bor, 
ii. 489 seq. Wagenaer, viii. 41 seq. 

2 “En zou ons nu’t gerugt van zyne aankomst, en dat Pruneaux 
de schouders optrok, dermaate verbaazen, dat wy hem zely’ als 
een Franschman vermond, gingen inhaalen?”—Ibid. 


1584] ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST 79 


Prince Maurice also made a brief representation to 
the states’ assembly of Holland, in which, without dis- 
tinetly opposing the negotiation with France, he warned 
them not to proceed too hastily with so grave a matter. 
He reminded them how far they had gone in the pres- 
entation of the sovereignty to his late father, and re- 
quested them, in their dealings with France, not to 
forget his interests and those of his family. He re- 
minded them of the position of that family, overladen 
with debt contracted in their service alone. He con- 
cluded by offering most affectionately his service in any 
way in which he, young and inexperienced as he knew 
himself to be, might be thought useful, as he was long 
since resolved to devote his life to the welfare of his 
country.t 

These passionate appeals were answered with equal 
vehemence by those who had made up their minds to 
try the chances of the French sovereignty. Des Pru- 
neaux meanwhile was traveling from province to prov- 
ince and from city to city, using the arguments which 
have already been sufficiently indicated, and urging a 
speedy compliance with the French king’s propositions. 
At the same time, in accordance with his instructions, 
he was very cautious to confine himself to generalities, 
and to avoid hampering his royal master with the re- 
strictions which had proved so irksome to the Duke of 
Anjou. 

“The States-General demanded a copy of my speech,” 
he wrote the day after that harangue had been de- 
livered, “but I only gave them a brief outline, extend- 
ing myself as little as I possibly could, according to the 
intention and command of your Majesty. When I got 


1 Bor, ii. (xix.) 488 seq. Wagenaer, viii. 39, 40. 


80 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


here I found them without hope of our assistance, and 
terribly agitated by the partizans of Spain. There was 
some danger of their going over in a panic to the enemy. 
They are now much changed again, and the Spanish 
partizans are beginning to lose their tongues. I invite 
them, if they intend to address your Majesty, to proceed 
as they ought toward a veritably grand monarch, with- 
out hunting up any of their old quibbles, or reservations 
of provinces, or anything else which could inspire sus- 
picion. I have sent into Gelderland and Friesland, for 
I find I must stay here in Holland and Zealand myself. 
These two provinces are the gates and ramparts through 
which we must enter. ’T is, in my opinion, what could 
be called superb, to command all the sea, thus subject 
to the crown of France. And France, too, with assis- 
tance of this country, will command the land as well. 
They are much astonished here, however, that I com- 
municate nothing of the intention of your Majesty. 
They say that if your Majesty does not accept this offer 
of their country, your Majesty puts the rope around 
their necks.” 1 

The French envoy was more and more struck with 
the brilliancy of the prize offered to his master. “If 
the king gets these provinces,” said he to Catherine, 
‘“t will be the most splendid inheritance which prince 
has ever conquered.” 2 

In a very few weeks the assiduity of the envoy and of 
the French party was successful. All the other prov- 
inces had very soon repeated the offer which they had 
previously made through Asseliers and La Mouillerie. 
By the beginning of October the opposition of Holland 
was vanquished. The estates of that province—three 


Groen v. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i, 1-3. a Tbid\y is 4 


1584] SUCCESS OF DES PRUNEAUX 81 


cities excepted, however—determined “to request Eng- 
land and France to assume a joint protectorate over the 
Netherlands. In case the King of France should refuse 
this proposition, they were then ready to receive him 
as prince and master, with knowledge and consent of 
the Queen of England, and on such conditions as the 
United States should approve.” + 

Immediately afterward the general assembly of all 
the states determined to offer the sovereignty to King 
Henry “on conditions to be afterward settled.” * 

Des Pruneaux, thus triumphant, received a gold chain 
of the value of two thousand florins, and departed be- 
fore the end of October for France .? 

The departure of the solemn embassy to that country 
for the purpose of offering the sovereignty to the king 
was delayed till the beginning of January. Meantime 
it is necessary to cast a glance at the position of Eng- 
land in relation to these important transactions. 

1 Wagenaer, viii. 49. 

2Tpid. Bor, ii. 495. Hoofd, xxi. 945. 

3 Wagenaer, viii. 51. Resol. Holl., 24th October, 1584, bl. 651. 


VOL. I.—6 


CHAPTER III 


Policy of England—Schemes of the Pretender of Portugal—Hesi- 
tation of the French court—Secret wishes of France—Contradic- 
tory views as to the opinions of Netherlanders—Their love for 
England and Elizabeth— Prominent statesmen of the provinces— 
Roger Williams the Welshman— Views of Walsingham, Burghley, 
and the queen—An embassy to Holland decided upon— Davison 
at The Hague—Cautious and secret measures of Burghley—Con- 
sequent dissatisfaction of Walsingham—English and Dutch sus- 
picion of France—Increasing affection of Holland for England. 


THE policy of England toward the provinces had been 
somewhat hesitating, but it had not been disloyal. It 
was almost inevitable that there should be timidity in 
the councils of Elizabeth, when so grave a question as 
that of confronting the vast power of Spain was forcing 
itself day by day more distinctly upon the consideration 
of herself and her statesmen. It was very clear, now 
that Orange was dead, that some new and decided step 
would be taken. Elizabeth was in favor of combined 
action by the French and English governments in be- 
half of the Netherlands—a joint protectorate of the 
provinces until such time as adequate concessions on the 
religious question could be obtained from Spain. She 
was unwilling to plunge into the peril and expense of a 
war with the strongest power in the world. She disliked 
the necessity under which she should be placed of mak- 


ing repeated applications to her Parliament, and of thus 
82 


1584] POLICY OF ENGLAND 83 


fostering the political importance of the Commons; she 
was reluctant to encourage rebellious subjects in another 
land, however just the cause of their revolt. She felt 
herself vulnerable in Ireland and on the Scottish border. 
Nevertheless, the Spanish power was becoming so pre- 
ponderant that if the Netherlands were conquered she 
could never feel a moment’s security within her own 
territory. If the provinces were annexed to France, on 
the other hand, she could not contemplate with compla- 
cency the increased power thus placed in the hands of 
the treacherous and jesuitical house of Valois. 

The path of the queen was thickly strewed with peril; 
her advisers were shrewd, far-seeing, patriotic, but some 
of them were perhaps over-cautious. The time had, 
however, arrived when the danger was to be faced, if 
the whole balance of power in Europe were not to come 
to an end, and weak states, like England and the Neth- 
erlands, to submit to the tyranny of an overwhelming 
absolutism. The instinct of the English sovereign, of 
English statesmen, of the English nation, taught them 
that the cause of the Netherlands was their own. 
Nevertheless, they were inclined to look on yet a little 
longer, although the part of spectator had become an 
impossible one. The policy of the English government 
was not treacherous, although it was timid. That of 
the French court was both the one and the other, and 
it would have been better both for England and the 
provinces had they more justly appreciated the char- 
acter of Catherine de’ Medici and her son. 

The first covert negotiations between Henry and the 
states had caused much anxiety among the foreign 
envoys in France. Don Bernardino de Mendoza, who 
had recently returned from Spain after his compulsory 


84 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


retreat from his post of English ambassador, was now 
established in Paris as representative of Philip. He 
succeeded Tassis,—a Netherlander by birth, and one of 
the ablest diplomatists in the Spanish service,—and his 
house soon became the focus of intrigue against the 
government to which he was accredited—the very head- 
quarters of the League. His salary was large, his way 
of living magnificent, his insolence intolerable. 

“Tassis is gone to the Netherlands,” wrote Envoy 
Busbecq to the emperor, “and thence is to proceed to 
Spain. Don Bernardino has arrived in his place. If 
it be the duty of a good ambassador to expend largely, 
it would be difficult to find a better one than he, for 
they say ’t is his intention to spend sixteen thousand 
dollars yearly in his embassy. I would that all things 
were in correspondence, and that he were not in other 
respects so inferior to Tassis.” 1 

It is, however, very certain that Mendoza was not 
only a brave soldier, but a man of very considerable 
capacity in civil affairs, although his inordinate ar- 
rogance interfered most seriously with his skill as a 
negotiator. He was, of course, watching with much 
fierceness the progress of these underhand proceedings 
between the French court and the rebellious subjects of 
his master, and using threats and expostulations in 
great profusion. Mucio, too, the great stipendiary 
of Philip, was becoming daily more dangerous, and the 
adherents of the League were multiplying with great 
celerity. 

The Pretender of Portugal, Don Antonio, prior of 
Crato, was also in Paris, and it was the policy of both 
the French and the English governments to protect his 


1 Busbequii Epist. ad Rud., ii. p. 132. 


1584] THE PRETENDER OF PORTUGAL 85 


person, and to make use of him as a rod over the head 
of Philip. Having escaped, after the most severe suffer- 
ings in the mountains of Spain, where he had been 
tracked like a wild beast, with a price of thirty thou- 
sand crowns placed upon his head, he was now most 
anxious to stir the governments of Europe into espous- 
ing his cause, and into attacking Spain through the 
recently acquired kingdom of Portugal. Meantime he 
was very desirous of some active employment to keep 
himself from starving, and conceived the notion that it 
would be an excellent thing for the Netherlands and 
himself were he to make good to them the loss of Wil- 
liam the Silent. 

“Don Antonio,” wrote Stafford, ““made a motion to 
me yesterday to move her Majesty, that now upon the 
Prince of Orange’s death, as it is a necessary thing for 
them to have a governor and head, and him to be at 
her Majesty’s devotion, if her Majesty would be at the 
means to work it for him, she should be assured nobody 
should be more faithfully tied in devotion to her than he. 
Truly you would pity the poor man’s case, who is almost 
next door to starving in effect.” + 

A starving condition being, however, not the only 
requisite in a governor and head to replace the Prince of 
Orange, nothing came of this motion. Don Antonio 
remained in Paris in a pitiable plight, and very much 
environed by dangers, for the Duke of Guise and his 
brother had undertaken to deliver him into the hands 
of Philip II., or those of his ministers, before the feast 
of St. John of the coming year. Fifty thousand dollars 
were to be the reward of this piece of work, combined 
with other services; “and the sooner they set about it 


1 Stafford to Walsingham, Murdin, ii. 412-415. 


86 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the better,” said Philip, writing a few months later, “for 
the longer they delay it the less easy will they find it.”1 

The money was never earned, however, and mean- 
time Don Antonio made himself as useful as he could in 
picking up information for Sir Edward Stafford and 
the other opponents of Spanish policy in Paris. 

The English envoy was much embarrassed by the 
position of affairs. He felt sure that the French 
monarch would never dare to enter the lists against 
the King of Spain, yet he was accurately informed of 
the secret negotiations with the Netherlands, while 
in the dark as to the ultimate intentions of his own 
government. 

“Twas never set to school so much,” he wrote to 
Walsingham (27th July, 1584), “as I have been to 
decipher the cause of the deputies of the Low Countries 
coming hither, the offers that they made the king here, 
and the king’s manner of dealing with them.” 2 

He expressed great jealousy at the mystery which en- 
veloped the whole transaction, and much annoyance with 
Noél de Caron, who “kept very secret, and was angry 
at the motion,” when he endeavored to discover the 
business in which they were engaged. Yet he had the 
magnanimity to request Walsingham not to mention 
the fact to the queen, lest she should be thereby pre- 
judiced against the states. 

“For my part,” said he, “I would be glad in anything 
to further them rather than to hinder them, though 
they do not deserve it, yet for the good the helping 
them at this time may bring ourselves.” 3 


1 Philip II. to J. B. Tassis, 15th and 28th March, 1585, Archivo- 
general de Simaneas, Negociado de Estado Flandes, MS, 
2 Murdin, ubi supra. 3 Thid. 


1584] HESITATION OF THE FRENCH COURT 87 


Meantime the deputies went away from France and 
the king went to Lyons, where he had hoped to meet 
both the Duke of Savoy and the King of Navarre. But 
Joyeuse, who had been received at Chambéry with 
“oreat triumphs and tourneys,” brought back only a 
broken wrist, without bringing the Duke of Savoy, that 
potentate sending word that the “King of Spain had 
done him the honor to give him his daughter, and that 
it was not fit for him to do anything that might bring 
jealousy.” 1 

Henry of Navarre also, as we have seen, declined the 
invitation sent him, M. de Ségur not feeling disposed 
for the sudden flight out of window suggested by 
Agrippa @’Aubigné, so that, on the whole, the king and 
his mother, with all the court, returned from Lyons in 
marvelous ill humor. 

“The king storms greatly,” said Stafford, “and is in 
a great dump.”?2 It was less practicable than ever to 
discover the intentions of the government, for although 
it was now very certain that active exertions were mak- 
ing by Des Pruneaux in the provinces, it was not be- 
lieved by the most sagacious that a serious resolution 
against Spain had been taken in France. There was 
even a talk of a double matrimonial alliance at that very 
moment between the two courts. 

“Jt is for certain here said,” wrote Stafford, “that 
the King of Spain doth presently marry the dowager of 
France, and ’t is thought that if the King of Spain 
marry he will not live a year. Whensoever the mar- 
riage be,’ added the envoy, “I would to God the effect 
were true, for if it be not by some such handiwork of God, 
Lam afraid things will not go so well as I could wish.” * 


1 Murdin, ii. 419, 420. 2 Thid. 3 Thid. 


88 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


There was a lull on the surface of affairs, and it was 
not easy to sound the depths of unseen combinations 
and intrigues. There was also considerable delay in the 
appointment and the arrival of the new deputies from 
the Netherlands, and Stafford was as doubtful as ever 
as to the intentions of his own government. 

“They look daily here for the states,” he wrote to 
Walsingham (29th December, 1584), “and I pray that I 
may hear from you as soon as you may what course I 
shall take when they be here, either hot or cold or luke- 
warm in the matter, and in what sort I shall behave my- 
self. Some badly affected have gone about to put into 
the king’s head that they never meant to offer the 
sovereignty, which, though the king be not thoroughly 
persuaded of, yet so much is won by this means that 
the king harkeneth to see the end, and then to believe 
as he seeth cause, andin the meantime to speak no more 
of any such matter than if it had never been moved.” 1 

While his Majesty was thus harkening in order to 
see more, according to Sir Edward’s somewhat Hibernian 
mode of expressing himself, and keeping silent that he 
might see the better, it was more difficult than ever for 
the envoy to know what course to pursue. Some 
persons went so far as to suggest that the whole negotia- 
tion was a mere phantasmagoria devised by Queen 
Elizabeth, her purpose being to breed a quarrel between 
Henry and Philip for her own benefit; and “then see- 
ing them together by the ears, as her accustomed 
manner was, to let them go alone, and sit still to look 
on.” 2 

The king did not appear to be much affected by these 
insinuations against Elizabeth, but the doubt and the 


1 Murdin, ii. 431. 2 Tid. 


1584] SECRET WISHES OF FRANCE 89 


delay were very harassing. ‘I would to God,” wrote 
the English envoy, “that if the states mean to do any- 
thing here with the king, and if her Majesty and the 
council think it fit, they would delay no time, but go 
roundly either to an agreement or to a breach with the 
king. Otherwise, as the matter now sleepeth, so it will 
die, for the king must be taken in his humor when he 
begins to nibble at any bait, for else he will come away, 
and never bite a full bite while he liveth.”? 

There is no doubt that the bait at which Henry 
nibbled with much avidity was the maritime part of the 
Netherlands. Holland and Zealand in the possession 
of either England or Spain was a perpetual inconvenience 
to France. The king, or rather the queen mother and 
her advisers,—for Henry himself hardly indulged in any 
profound reflections on state affairs,—desired, and had 
made a sine qua non of, those provinces. It had been the 
French policy from the beginning to delay matters, in 
order to make the states feel the peril of their position 
to the full. 

“The king, differing and temporizing,” wrote Herle 
to the queen, “would have them fall into that necessity 
and danger, as that they should offer unto him simply 
the possession of all their estates. Otherwise they were 
to see, as in a glass, their evident and hasty ruin.” ? 

Even before the death of Orange, Henry had been 
determined, if possible, to obtain possession of the 
island of Walcheren, which controlled the whole country. 
“To give him that,” said Herle, “ would be to turn the 
hot end of the poker toward themselves, and put the 
cold part in the king’s hand.”* He had accordingly 


1 Murdin, ii. 431. 
2 Herle to Queen Elizabeth, MS. before cited. 3 Thid. 


90 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


made a secret offer to William of Orange, through the 
princess, of two millions of livres in ready money, or, 
if he preferred it, one hundred thousand livres yearly 
of perpetual inheritance, if he would secure to him the 
island of Walcheren. In that case he promised to declare 
war upon the King of Spain, to confirm to the states their 
privileges, and to guarantee to the prince the earldoms 
of Holland and Zealand, with all his other lands and 
titles.t 

It is superfluous to say that such offers were only 
regarded by the prince as an affront. It was, however, 
SO necessary, in his opinion, to maintain the cause of 
the Reformed churches in France, and to keep up the 
antagonism between that country and Spain, that the 
French policy was not abandoned, although the court 
was always held in suspicion. 

But on the death of William there was a strong 
reaction against France and in favor of England. Paul 
Buys, one of the ablest statesmen of the Netherlands, 
advocate of Holland, and a confidential friend of 
William the Silent up to the time of his death, now 


1 “The French king’s inward intention being discovered in 
some manner to them, and his faith holden suspected, Paul Buys 
at Delft to this effect willed me under secrecy and assurance to 
say unto your Majesty from him that the said French king had 
two months since sounded the Prince of Orange by the princess 
his wife, that in case he could be content to put into his hands 
the island of Walcheren, the said king would ‘immediately declare 
Spain his enemy, confirm to the states their privileges, and unto 
the Prince of Orange the earldoms of Holland and Zealand, with 
all his other lands and titles, and give him over and above 100,000 
A* yearly of perpetual inheritance, well assured to him and his, 
where he would choose the same; or, if he thought better, he 
should stow in ready money 2,000,000A* to behave at his pleasure. 

“But, saith Buys (his Scope being once seen), he shall never be 


1584] ATTITUDE OF LEADING NETHERLANDERS 91 


became the leader of the English party, and employed 
his most strenuous efforts against the French treaty, 
having “seen the scope of that court.” 4 

With regard to the other leading personages, there 
was a strong inclination in favor of Queen Elizabeth, 
whose commanding character inspired great respect. 
At the same time warmer sentiments of adhesion seem to 
have been expressed toward the French court, by the 
same individuals, than the mere language of compliment 
justified. 

Thus the widowed Princess of Orange was described 
by Des Pruneaux to his sovereign as “very desolate, 
but nevertheless doing all in her power to advance his 
interests; the Count Maurice of gentle hopes, as also 
most desirous of remaining his Majesty’s humble ser- 
vant; while Elector Truchses was said to be employing 
himself in the same cause with very great affection.” ? 

A French statesman resident in the provinces, whose 
name has not been preserved, but who was evidently on 
intimate terms with many eminent Netherlanders, de- 
clared that Maurice, “who had a mind entirely French, 
deplored infinitely the misfortunes of France, and 
regretted that all the provinces could not be annexed to 
so fair a kingdom. I do assure you,” he added, “that 
he is in no wise English.” 
trusted by us, what hazard and extremity soever we run into; yet 
he excused the prince that he was not French in mind, but for 
necessity and connivency, to conserve the churches in France, 
and to breed jealousy and pique between those great kings, 


whereof the defense and relief of those countries and religion 
might ensue and be continued.”—Herle to Queen Elizabeth, MS. 
ubi sup. 

1 Wagenaer, viii. 50. 

2 Groen vy. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 2, 3. 3 Tbid., i. 15 


92 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Of Count Hohenlo, general-in-chief of the states’ 
army under Prince Maurice, and afterward his brother- 
in-law, the same gentleman spoke with even greater 
confidence. “Count d’Oloc,” said he (for by that 
ridiculous transformation of his name the German 
general was known to French and English), “with 
whom I have passed three weeks on board the fleet of 
the states, is now wholly French, and does not love the 
English at all. The very first time I saw him he pro- 
tested twice or thrice, in presence of members of the 
States-General and of the state council, that if he had 
no Frenchmen he could never carry on the war. He 
made more account,” he said, “of two thousand French 
than of six thousand others, English or Germans.” 1 

Yet all these distinguished persons—the widowed 
Princess of Orange, Count Maurice, ex-Elector Truchses, 
Count Hohenlo—were described to Queen Elizabeth by 
her confidential agent, then employed in the provinces, 
as entirely at that sovereign’s devotion. 

“Count Maurice holds nothing of the French, nor 
esteems them,” said Herle, “but humbly desired me to 
signify unto your Majesty that he had in his mind and 
determination faithfully vowed his service to your 
Majesty, which should be continued in his actions with 
all duty, and sealed with his blood; for he knew how 
much his father and the cause were beholden ever to 
your Highness’s goodness.” 2 

The princess, together with her sister-in-law, Countess 
Schwarzenburg, and the young daughters of the late 
prince, were described on the same occasion as “recom. 
mending their service unto her Majesty with a most 


1 Groen v. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 15. 
® Letter of Herle before cited. 


1584] THEIR DEVOTION TO ELIZABETH 93 


tender affection, as toa lady of allladies.” “Especially,” 
said Herle, ‘did the two princesses, in most humble and 
wise sort, express a certain fervent devotion toward 
your Majesty.” 1! 

Elector Truchses was spoken of as “a prince well 
qualified and greatly devoted to her Majesty, who, after 
many grave and sincere words had of her Majesty’s 
virtue, calling her la fille unique de Diew and le bien 
heureuse princesse, desired of God that he might do her 
service as she merited.” ? 

And finally, Count Hollock, who seemed to “be 
reformed in sundry things, if it hold” (a delicate allusion 
to the count’s propensity for strong potations), was said 
“to desire humbly to be known for one that would obey 
the commandment of her Majesty more than of any 
earthly prince living besides.” ? 

There can be no doubt that there was a strong party 
in favor of an appeal to England rather than to France. 
The Netherlanders were too shrewd a people not to 
recognize the difference between the king of a great 
realm, who painted his face and wore satin petticoats, 
and the woman who entertained ambassadors, each in 
his own language, on gravest affairs of state, who 
matched in her wit and wisdom the deepest or the most 
sparkling intellects of her council, who made extempora- 
neous Latin orations to her universities, and who rode 
on horseback among her generals along the lines of her 
troops in battle array, and yet was only the unmarried 
queen of a petty and turbulent state. 

“The reverend respect that is borne to your Majesty 
throughout these countries is great,” said William Herle. 
They would have thrown themselves into her arms, 


1 Letter of Herle before cited. 2 Thid. 3 Thid. 


94 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


heart and soul, had they been cordially extended at that 
moment of their distress; but she was coy, hesitating, 
and, for reasons already sufficiently indicated, although 
not so conclusive as they seemed, disposed to temporize 
and to await the issue of the negotiations between the 
provinces and France. 

In Holland and Zealand especially there was an enthu- 
siastic feeling in favor of the English alliance. “ They 
recommend themselves,” said Herle, “throughout the 
country in their consultations and assemblies, as also in 
their common and private speeches, to the Queen of 
England’s only favor and goodness, whom they call 
their savior, and the princess of greatest perfection in 
wisdom and sincerity that ever governed. Notwith- 
standing their treaty now on foot by their deputies with 
France, they are not more disposed to be governed by 
the French than to be tyrannized over by the Spaniard, 
concluding it to be alike, and even commutare non sortem 
sed servitutem.” 1 

Paul Buys was indefatigable in his exertions against 
the treaty with France, and in stimulating the enthusiasm 
for England and Elizabeth. He expressed sincere and 

1 Letter of Herle before cited. 

Sainte-Aldegonde and Villiers favored the French policy. Sainte- 
Aldegonde was burgomaster of Antwerp, but even in that city, 
although so many influential persons looked to France, the people 
generally had more confidence in England. ‘The accepting of the 
French king as prince of these countries,” wrote Le Sieur to Wal- 
singham, “is much sought by some that govern this day here; but 
in the ears of the common people it soundeth but evil, though the 
report be here that Holland and Zealand have almost accepted 
him. If it would please her Majesty to give ear unto it, she could 
have the country cheap enough. Je juge que Sa Majesté auroit 


bon marché de ce pays.”—Le Sieur to Walsingham, 7th Septem- 
ber, 1584, S. P, Office MS, 


1584] EXERTIONS OF PAUL BUYS 95 


unaffected devotion to the queen on all occasions, and 
promised that no negotiations should take place, how- 
ever secret and confidential, that were not laid before her 
Majesty. “He has the chief administration among the 
states,” said Herle, “and to his credit and dexterity they 
attribute the despatch of most things. He showed unto 
me the state of the enemy throughout the provinces, 
and of the negotiation in France, whereof he had no 
opinion at all of success, nor any will of his own part 
but to please the Prince of Orange in his lifetime.” 2 

It will be seen in the sequel whether or not the views 
of this experienced and able statesman were lucid and 
comprehensive. It will also be seen whether his strenu- 
ous exertions in favor of the English alliance were re- 
warded as bountifully as they deserved by those most 
indebted to him. 

Meantime he was busily employed in making the 


1 Treslong, too, admiral of Holland and Zealand, and governor 
of Ostend, made no secret of his preference for England. He 
avowed himself publicly her Majesty’s faithful servant. Enter- 
taining hospitably, at his table in Ostend, Captain Richards and 
other English officers who had come with troops from Flushing, he 
pledged a bumper to the queen’s health, and another to that of 
Walsingham, praying that Elizabeth might yet be his sovereign. 

“Nevertheless,” said he, “I have letters from Zealand, by which 
it appears that that province is about to deliver itself to the queen 
mother of France.” 

“And begging your pardon,” said Richards, “what towns will 
you give them for garrison?” 

“No towns at all,” answered the admiral; ‘‘let them lie on the 
dikes!” After dinner he conducted the English officers over the 
town, showing them the fortifications and renewing his protes- 
tations of devotion to her Majesty (Richards to Walsingham, 9th 
Septomber, 1584, S. P. Office MS.). 

2 Letter of Herle before cited. 


96 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


English government acquainted with the capacity, 
disposition, and general plans of the Netherlanders. 

“They have certain other things in consultation 
amongst the states to determine of,” wrote Herle, 
“which they were sworn not to reveal to any; but Buys 
protested that nothing should pass but to your liking and 
surety, and the same to be altered and disposed as should 
seem good to your Highness’s own authority, affirming 
to me sincerely that Holland and Zealand, with the rest 
of the provinces, for the estimation they had of your 
high virtue and temperancy, would yield themselves 
absolutely to your Majesty and crown forever, or to 
none other (their liberties only reserved), whereof you 
should have immediate possession, without reservation 
ot place or privilege.” 1 

The important point of the capability of the provinces 
to defend themselves, about which Elizabeth was most 
anxious to be informed, was also fully elucidated by the 
advocate. ‘The means should be such, proceeding from 
the provinces,” said he, ‘as your Majesty might defend 
your interest therein with facility against the whole 
world.” He then indicated a plan which had been 
proposed by the states of Brabant to the States-General, 
according to which they were to keep on foot an army 
of fifteen thousand foot and five thousand horse, with 
which they should be able “to expulse the enemy and to 
reconquer their towns and country lost within three 
months.” Of this army they hoped to induce the queen 
to furnish five thousand English footmen and five 
hundred horse, to be paid monthly by a treasurer of her 
own, and for the assistance thus to be furnished they 
proposed to give Ostend and Sluis as pledge of pay- 


1 Letter of Herle before cited. 


1584] TROOPS SENT FROM ENGLAND 97 


ment. According to this scheme, the Elector Palatine, 
John Casimir, had promised to furnish, equip, and pay 
two thousand cavalry, taking the town of Maestricht 
and the country of Limburg, when freed from the 
enemy, in pawn for his disbursements, while Antwerp 
and Brabant had agreed to supply three hundred thou- 
sand crowns in ready money for immediate use. Many 
powerful politicians opposed this policy, however, and 
urged reliance upon France, “so that this course seemed 
to be lame in many parts.” 1 

Agents had already been sent both to England and 
France to procure, if possible, a levy of troops for 
immediate necessity. The attempt was unsuccessful in 
France, but the Dutch community of the Reformed 
religion in London subscribed nine thousand and five 
florins.2 This sum, with other contributions, proved 
sufficient to set Morgan’s regiment on foot, which soon 
after began to arrive in the Netherlands by companies. 
“But if it were all here at once,” said Stephen Le Sieur, 
“*¢ would be but a breakfast for the enemy.” 3 

The agent for the matter in England was De Griyse, 
formerly bailiff of Bruges, and although tolerably 
successful in his mission, he was not thought competent 
for so important a post, nor officially authorized for the 
undertaking. While procuring this assistance in Eng- 
lish troops, he had been very urgent with the queen to 
further the negotiations between the states and France,* 
and Paul Buys was offended with him as a mischief- 
maker and an intriguer. He complained of him as 


1 Letter of Herle before cited. 2 Meteren, xii. 217. 
3 Le Sieur to Walsingham, 7th September, 1584, 8. P. Office 
MS. 
£ Meteren, xii. 217. 
VOL. 1.—7 


98 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


having “thrust himself in to deal and intermeddle in 
the affairs of the Low Countries unavowed,” and desired 
that he might be closely looked after.t 

After the advocate the next most important statesman 
in the provinces was perhaps Meetkerken, president of 
the high court of Flanders, a man of much learning, sin- 
cerity, and earnestness of character, having had great ex- 
perience in the diplomatic service of the country on many 
important occasions. “He stands second in reputation 
here,” said Herle, “and both Buys and he have one 
special care in all practices that are discovered, to ex- 
amine how near anything may concern your person or 
kingdom, whereof they will advertise as matter shall 
fall out in importance.” ? 

Jan van Olden-Barneveldt, afterward so conspicuous 
in the history of the country, was rather inclined at 
this period to favor the French party, a policy which 
was strenuously furthered by Villiers and by Sainte- 
Aldegonde. 

Besides the information furnished to the English 
government as to the state of feeling and resources of 
the Netherlands by Buys, Meetkerken, and William 
Herle, Walsingham relied much upon the experienced 
eye and the keen, bitmg humor of Roger Williams. 

A frank, open-hearted Welshman, with no fortune 
but his sword, but as true as its steel, he had done the 
states much important service in the hard-fighting days 
of Grand Commander Requesens and of Don John of 
Austria. With a shrewd Welsh head under his iron 
morion, and a stout Welsh heart under his tawny 
doublet, he had gained little but hard knocks and a 
dozen wounds in his campaigning, and had but recently 


1 Letter of Herle, MS, 2 Thid. 


1584] ROGER WILLIAMS 99 


been ransomed, rather grudgingly, by his government, 
from a Spanish prison in Brabant. He wassuffering in 
health from its effects, but was still more distressed in 
mind from his sagacious reading of the signs of the 
times. Fearing that England was growing lukewarm 
and the provinces desperate, he was beginning to find 
himself out of work, and was already casting about him 
for other employment. Poor, honest, and proud, he 
had repeatedly declined to enter the Spanish service. 
Bribes, such as at a little later period were sufficient to 
sully conspicuous reputations and noble names among his 
countrymen in better circumstances than his own, had 
been freely, but unsuccessfully, offered him. To serve 
under any but the English or states’ flag in the provinces 
he scorned, and he thought the opportunity fast slipping 
away there for taking the papistical party in Europe 
handsomely by the beard. He had done much manful 
work in the Netherlands, and was destined to do much 
more; but he was now discontented, and thought him- 
self slighted. In more remote regions of the world the 
thrifty soldier thought that there might be as good 
harvesting for his sword as in the thrice-trampled 
stubble of Flanders. 

“‘T would refuse no hazard that is possible to be done 
in the queen’s service,” he said to Walsingham, “but I 
do persuade myself she makes no account of me. Had it 
not been for the duty that nature bound me toward her 
and my country, I needed not to have been in that case 
that I am in. Perhaps I could have fingered more 
pistoles than Mr. Newell, the late Latiner, and had better 
usage and pension of the Spaniards than he. Some can 
tell that I refused large offers, in the misery of Alost, of 
the Prince of Parma. Last of all, Verdugo offered me 


100 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


very fair, being in Loccum, to quit the states’ service, 
and accept theirs without treachery or betraying of place 
or man.” 1 

Not feeling inclined to teach Latin in Spain, like the 
late Mr. Newell, or to violate oaths and surrender for- 
tresses, like brave soldiers of fortune whose deeds will 
be afterward chronicled, he was disposed to cultivate the 
“acquaintance of divers Pollacks,” from which he had 
received invitations. “Find I nothing there,” said he, 
“Duke Matthias has promised me courtesy if I would 
serve in Hungary. If not, I will offer service to one of 
the Turk’s pashas against the Persians.” 2 

Fortunately, work was found for the trusty Welshman 
in the old fields. His brave, honest face often reap- 
peared; his sharp, sensible tongue uttered much sage 
counsel; and his ready sword did various solid service 
in leaguer, battle-field, and martial debate, in Flanders, 
Holland, Spain, and France, 

For the present he was casting his keen glances upon 
the negotiations in progress, and caviling at the general 
policy which seemed predominant. 

He believed that the object of the French was to trifle 
with the states, to protract interminably their negotia- 
tions, to prevent the English government from getting 
any hold upon the provinces, and then to leave them to 
their fate. 

He advised Walsingham to advance men and money 
upon the security of Sluis and Ostend. 

“T dare venture my life,” said he, with much energy, 
“that were Norris, Bingham, Yorke, or Carlisle in those 
ports, he would keep them during the Spanish king’s life.”8 


1 Roger Williams to Sir F. Walsingham, September, 1584, 
8. P. Office MS. 2 Tbid. 3 Thid. 


1584] HIS COUNSEL 101 


But the true way to attack Spain—a method soon 
afterward to be carried into such brilliant effect by the 
naval heroes of England and the Netherlands—the long- 
sighted Welshman now indicated, a combined attack, 
namely, by sea, upon the colonial possessions of Philip. 

“TI dare be bound,” said he, “if you join with 
Treslong, the states’ admiral, and send off both three- 
score sail into his Indies, we will force him to retire from 
conquering further, and to be contented to let other 
princes live as well as he.” 1 

In particular, Wiliams urged rapid action, and there 
is little doubt that had the counsels of prompt, quick- 
witted, ready-handed soldiers like himself, and those 
who thought with him, been taken, had the stealthy 
but quick-darting policy of Walsingham prevailed over 
the solemn and stately, but somewhat ponderous, pro- 
ceedings of Burghley, both Ghent and Antwerp might 
have been saved, the trifling and treacherous diplomacy 
of Catherine de’ Medici neutralized, and an altogether 
more fortunate aspect given at once to the state of 
Protestant affairs. 

“Tf you mean to do anything,” said he, “it is more 
than time now. If you will send some man of credit 
about it, will it please your honor, I will go with him, 
because I know the humor of the people, and am 
acquainted with a number of the best. I shall be able 
to show him a number of their dealings, as well with the 
French as in other affairs, and perhaps will find means 
to send messengers to Ghent, and to other places, better 
than the states, for the message of one soldier is better 
than twenty boors.” ? 

1 Roger Williams to Sir F. Walsingham, September, 1534, 
8. P. Office MS. 2 Thid. 


102 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


It was ultimately decided, as will soon be related, to 
send a man of credit to the provinces. Meantime the 
policy of England continued to be expectant and 
dilatory, and Advocate Buys, after having in vain 
attempted to conquer the French influence and bring 
about the annexation of the provinces to England, threw 
down his office in disgust, and retired for a time from the 
contest. He even contemplated for a moment taking 
service in Denmark, but renounced the notion of 
abandoning his country, and he will accordingly be 
found, at a later period, conspicuous in public affairs.? 

The deliberations in the English councils were grave 
and anxious, for it became daily more obvious that the 
Netherland question was the hinge upon which the 
whole fate of Christendom was slowly turning. To 
allow the provinces to fall back again into the grasp of 
Philip was to offer England herself as a last sacrifice to 
the Spanish Inquisition. This was felt by all the 
statesmen in the land; but some of them, more than 
the rest, had a vivid perception of the danger, and of 
the necessity of dealing with it at once. 

To the prophetic eye of Walsingham the mists of the 
future at times were lifted, and the countless sails of the 
Invincible Armada, wafting defiance and destruction to 
England, became dimly visible. He felt that the great 
Netherland bulwark of Protestantism and liberty was to 
be defended at all hazards, and that the death-grapple 
could not long be deferred. 

Burghley, deeply pondering, but less determined, was 
still disposed to look on and to temporize. 

The queen, far-seeing and anxious, but somewhat 
hesitating, still clung to the idea of a joint protectorate. 


1 Wagenaer, viii. 50. 


1584] WALSINGHAM, BURGHLEY, AND THE QUEEN 103 


She knew that the reéstablishment of Spanish authority 
in the Low Countries would be fatal to England, but 
she was not yet prepared to throw down the gauntlet to 
Philip. She felt that the proposed annexation of the 
provinces to France would be almost as formidable, yet 
she could not resolve, frankly and fearlessly, to assume 
the burden of their protection. Under the inspiration 
of Burghley, she was therefore willing to encourage the 
Netherlanders underhand; preventing them at every 
hazard from slackening in their determined hostility to 
Spain ; discountenancing, without absolutely forbidding, 
their proposed absorption by France; intimating, with- 
out promising, an ultimate and effectual assistance 
from herself. Meantime, with something of feline 
and feminine duplicity, by which the sex of the great 
sovereign would so often manifest itself in the most 
momentous affairs, she would watch and wait, teasing 
the provinces, dallying with the danger, not quite pre- 
pared as yet to abandon the prize to Henry or Philip, or 
to seize it herself. 

The situation was rapidly tending to become an 
impossible one. 

Late in October a grave conference was held in the 
English council “ upon the question whether her Majesty 
should presently relieve the states of the Low 
Countries.” 

It was shown upon one side that the “perils to the 
queen and to the realm were great if the King of Spain 
should recover Holland and Zealand, as he had the 
other countries, for lack of succor in seasonable time, 
either by the French king or the queen’s Majesty.” 

On the other side, the great difficulties in the way of 
effectual assistance by England were “fully remembered.” 


104 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


“But in the end, and upon comparison made,” said 
Lord Burghley, summing up, “ betwixt the perils on the 
one part and the difficulties on the other,” it was 
concluded that the queen would be obliged to succumb 
to the power of Spain, and the liberties of England be 
hopelessly lost, if Philip were then allowed to carry out 
his designs, and if the provinces should be left without 
succor at his merey.t 

A “wise person” was accordingly to be sent into 
Holland, first to ascertain whether the provinces had 
come to an actual agreement with the King of France, 
and if such should prove to be the case, to inquire whether 
that sovereign had pledged himself to declare war upon 
Philip. In this event the wise person was to express 
her Majesty’s satisfaction that the provinces were thus 
to be “relieved from the tyranny of the King of 
Spain.” 

On the other hand, if it should appear that no such 
conclusive arrangements had been made, and that the 
provinces were likely to fall again victims to the 
“Spanish tyranny,” her Majesty would then “strain 


1 The report of the conference is in the State-Paper Office, 
written in Burghley’s own hand. A brief extract will give a char- 
acteristic specimen of the lord treasurer’s style: “But in the 
end, and upon comparison made betwixt the perils on the one part 
and the difficulties on the other, it was concluded to advise her 
Majesty rather to seek the avoiding and directing of the great 
perils than, in respect of any difficulties, to suffer the King of 
Spain to grow to the full height of his designs and conquests, 
whereby the perils were to follow so evident, as, if presently he 
were not by succoring of the Hollanders and their party impeached, 
the Queen’s Majesty should not hereafter be anywise able to 
withstand the same. And therefore it was thought good that her 
Majesty should send presently some wise person into Holland,” 
ete. —Holland Correspondence, 8. P. Office, October 10, 1584, MS, 


1584] AN ENGLISH EMBASSY DECIDED UPON 105 


herself as far as, with preservation of her own estate, 
she might to succor them at this time.” ! 

The agent was then to ascertain “ what conditions the 
provinces would require” upon the matter of succor, and 
if the terms seemed reasonable, he would assure them 
that “they should not be left to the cruelties of the 
Spaniards.” 

And further, the wise person, “being pressed to 
answer, might by conference of speeches and persuasions 
provoke them to offer to the queen the ports of Flushing 
and Middelburg and the Brill, wherein she meant not to 
claim any property, but to hold them as gages for her 
expenses, and for performances of their covenants.” 

He was also to make minute inquiries as to the 
pecuniary resources of the provinces, the monthly sums 
which they would be able to contribute, the number of 
troops and of ships of war that they would pledge them- 
selves to maintain. These investigations were very 
important, because the queen, although very well 
disposed to succor them, ‘so nevertheless she was to 
consider how her power might be extended without ruin 
or manifest peril to her own estate.” 

It was also resolved, in the same conference, that a 
preliminary step of great urgency was to “procure a 
good peace with the King of Scots.” Whatever the ex- 
pense of bringing about such a pacification might be, it 
was certain that a “ great deal more would be expended 
in defending the realm against Scotland,” while Eng- 
land was engaged in hostilities with Spain. Otherwise 
it was argued that her Majesty would be “so impeached 
by Scotland in favor of the King of Spain that her 
action against that king would be greatly weakened.” 


1 Holland Correspondence, 8. P. Office, October 10, 1584, MS. 


106 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Other measures necessary to be taken in view of the 
Spanish war were also discussed. The ex-Elector of 
Cologne, “a man of great account in Germany,” was to 
be assisted with money to make head against his rival 
supported by the troops of Philip. 

Duke Casimir of the Palatinate was to be solicited to 
make a diversion in Gelderland. 

The King of France was to be reminded of his treaty 
with England for mutual assistance in case of the 
invasion by a foreign power of either realm, and to be 
informed “not only of the intentions of the Spaniards 
to invade England upon their conquest of the Nether- 
lands, but of their actual invasion of Ireland.” 

It was “to be devised how the King of Navarre and 
Don Antonio of Portugal, for their respective titles, 
might be induced to offend and occupy the King of 
Spain, whereby to diminish his forces bent upon the 
Low Countries.” 

It was also decided that Parliament should be im- 
mediately summoned, in which, besides the request of 
a subsidy, many other necessary provisions should be 
made for her Majesty’s safety. 

“The conclusion of the whole,” said Lord Burghley, 
with much earnestness, “was this. Although her 
Majesty should hereby enter into a war presently, yet 
were she better to do it now, while she may make the 
same out of her realm, having the help of the people of 
Holland, and before the King of Spain shall have 
consummated his conquests in those countries, whereby 
he shall be so provoked with pride, solicited by the pope, 
and tempted by the queen’s own subjects, and shall be 
so strong by sea, and so free from all other actions and 
quarrels, yea, shall be so formidable to all the rest of 


1584] DAVISON SENT TO THE HAGUE 107 


Christendom as that her Majesty shall nowise be able, 
with her own power, nor with aid of any other, neither 
by sea nor land, to withstand his attempts, but shall be 
forced to give place to his insatiable malice, which is 
most terrible to be thought of, but miserable to 
suffer.” 1 

Thus did the lord treasurer wisely, eloquently, and 
well describe the danger by which England was 
environed. Through the shield of Holland the spear 
was aimed full at the heart of England. But was it a 
moment to linger? Was that buckler to be suffered to 
fall to the ground, or to be raised only upon the arm of 
a doubtful and treacherous friend? Was it an hour 
when the protection of Protestantism and of European 
liberty against Spain was to be intrusted to the hand of 
a feeble and priest-ridden Valois? Was it wise to 
indulge any longer in doubtings and dreamings, and in 
yet a little more folding of the arms to sleep, while that 
insatiable malice, so terrible to be thought of, so mis- 
erable to feel, was growing hourly more formidable, and 
approaching nearer and nearer? 

Early in December William Davison, gentleman in 
ordinary of her Majesty’s household, arrived at The 
Hague, a man painstaking, earnest, and zealous, but 
who was fated, on more than one great occasion, to be 
made a scapegoat for the delinquencies of greater 
personages than himself. 

He had audience of the States-General on the 8th 
December. He then informed that body that the queen 
had heard with sorrowful heart of the great misfortunes 
which the United Provinces had sustained since the 
death of the Prince of Orange, the many cities which 


1 MS. report of Burghley before cited. 


108 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


they had lost, and the disastrous aspect of the common 
cause. Moved by the affection which she had always 
borne the country, and anxious for its preservation, she 
had ordered her ambassador Stafford to request the 
King of France to undertake, jointly with herself, the 
defense of the provinces against the King of Spain. 
Not till very lately, however, had that envoy succeeded 
in obtaining an audience, and he had then received “a 
very cold answer.” It being obvious to her Majesty, 
therefore, that the French government intended to pro- 
tract these matters indefinitely, Davison informed the 
states that she had commissioned him to offer them “all 
possible assistance, to inquire into the state of the 
country, and to investigate the proper means of making 
that assistance most useful.” He accordingly requested 
the appointment of a committee to confer with him 
upon the subject, and declared that the queen did not 
desire to make herself mistress of the provinces, but 
only to be informed how she best could aid their 
cause.! 

A committee was accordingly appointed, and a long 
series of somewhat concealed negotiations was com- 
menced. As the deputies were upon the eve of their 
departure for France, to offer the sovereignty of the 
provinces to Henry, these proceedings were necessarily 
confused, dilatory, and at times contradictory. 

After the arrival of the deputies in France the eune- 
tative policy inspired by the lord treasurer was contin- 
ued by England. The delusion of a joint protectorate 
was still clung to by the queen, although the conduct of 
France was becoming very ambiguous, and suspicion 


1 Register van de Resolution der Staten-General, 8th December, 
1584, Hague Archives MS. 


1585] ELIZABETH’S ANXIETY 109 


growing darker as to the ultimate and secret purport of 
the negotiations in progress.! 

The anxiety and jealousy of Elizabeth were becoming 
keener than ever. If the offers to the king were unlim- 
ited, he would accept them, and would thus become as 
dangerous as Philip. If they were unsatisfactory, he 
would turn his back upon the provinces, and leave them 
a prey to Philip? Still she would not yet renounce the 
hope of bringing the French king over to an ingenuous 
course of action. It was thought, too, that something 
might be done with the great Malcontent nobles of 
Flanders, whose defection from the national cause had 
been so disastrous, but who had been much influenced 
in their course, it was thought, by their jealousy of Wil- 
liam the Silent. 

Now that the prince was dead, it was thought probable 
that the Aerschots and Havrés, Chimays and Lalains, 
might arouse themselves to more patriotic views than they 
had manifested when they espoused the cause of Spain. 

It would be desirable to excite their jealousy of 
French influence, and at the same time to inspire 
throughout the popular mind the fear of another tyr- 
anny almost as absolute as that of Spain. “ And if it 
be objected,” said Burghley, “that except they shall 
admit the French king to the absolute dominion, he will 
not aid them, and they, for lack of succor, be forced to 
yield to the Spaniard, it may be answered that rather 
than they should be wholly subjected to the French 
or overcome by the Spaniard, her Majesty would yield 
unto them as much as, with preservation of her estate 
and defense of her own country, might be demanded.” 


1 Queen to W. Davison, 14th January, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 
2 Thid. 3 MS. ubi sup. 


110 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


The real object kept in view by the queen’s govern- 
ment was, in short, to obtain for the provinces, and 
for the general cause of liberty, the greatest possible 
amount of assistance from Henry, and to allow him to 
acquire in return the least possible amount of power. 
The end proposed was a reasonable one, but the means 
employed savored too much of intrigue. 

“It may be easily made probable to the states,” said 
the lord treasurer, “that the government of the French 
is likely to prove as cumbersome and perilous as that of 
the Spaniards, and likewise it may probably be doubted 
how the French will keep touch and covenants with 
them, when any opportunity shall be offered to break 
them; so that her Majesty thinketh no good can be 
looked for to those countries by yielding this large au- 
thority to the French. If they shall continue their title 
by this grant to be absolute lords, there is no end, for 
a long time, to be expected of this war ; and, contrari- 
wise, if they break off, there is an end of any good 
composition with the King of Spain.” ! 

Shivering and shrinking, but still wading in deeper 
and deeper, inch by inch, the cautious minister was fast 
finding himself too far advanced to retreat. He was 
rarely decided, however, and never lucid, and least of 
all in emergencies, when decision and lucidity would 
have been more valuable than any other qualities. 

Deeply doubting, painfully balancing, he at times 
drove the unfortunate Davison almost distraught. 
Puzzled himself, and still more puzzling to others, he 
rarely permitted the Netherlanders, or even his own 
agents, to perceive his drift. It was fair enough, per- 
haps, to circumvent the French government by its own 


1 MS. ubi sup. 


1585] CAUTIOUS MEASURES OF BURGHLEY 111 


arts, but the Netherlanders meanwhile were in danger of 
sinking into despair. 

“Thus,” wrote the lord treasurer to the envoy, “I 
have discoursed to you of these uncertainties and diffi- 
culties, things not unknown to yourself, but now 
being imparted to you by her Majesty’s commandment. 
You are, by your wisdom, to consider with whom to 
deal for the stay of this French course, and yet so to 
use it (as near as you may) that they of the French fac- 
tion there be not able to charge you therewith, by ad- 
vertising into France. For it hath already appeared, by 
some speeches passed between our ambassador there and 
Des Pruneaux, that you are had in some jealousy as a 
hinderer of this French course, and at work for her 
Majesty to have some entrance and partage in that 
country. Nevertheless, our ambassador, by his answer, 
hath satisfied them to think the contrary.”? 

They must have been easily satisfied if they knew as 
much of the dealings of her Majesty’s government as 
the reader already knows. To inspire doubt of the 
French, to insinuate the probability of their not “keep- 
ing touch and covenant,” to represent their rule as 
“eumbersome and perilous,” was wholesome conduct 
enough toward the Netherlanders,—and still more so 
had it been accompanied with frank offers of assistance, 
—but it was certainly somewhat to “hinder the courses 
of the French.” 

But in truth all parties were engaged for a season in 
a round game of deception in which nobody was de- 
ceived. Walsingham was impatient, almost indignant, 
at this puerility. ‘Your doings, no doubt of it,” he 
wrote to Davison, “are observed by the French faction, 


1 MS. last cited. 


112 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and therefore you cannot proceed so closely buv wt will be 
espied. Howsoever it be, seeing direction groweth from 
hence, we cannot but blame ourselves if the effects thereof 
do not fall out to our liking.” 1 

That sagacious statesman was too well informed, and 
too much accustomed to penetrate the designs of his 
antagonists, to expect anything from the present in- 
trigues. 

To loiter thus when mortal blows should be struck 
was to give the Spanish government exactly that of 
which it was always most gluttonous—time; and the 
Netherlanders had none of it to spare. “ With time and 
myself there are two of us,” was Philip II.’s favorite ob- 
servation, and the Prince of Parma was at this moment 
sorely perplexed by the parsimony and the hesitations 
of his own government, by which his large, swift, and 
most creative genius was so often hampered. 

Thus the Spanish soldiers, deep in the trenches, went 
with bare legs and empty stomachs in J anuary; and the 
Dutchmen, among their broken dikes, were up to their 
ears in mud and water; and German mercenaries in the 
obedient provinces were burning the peasants’ houses 
in order to sell the iron to buy food withal; 2 while 
grave-visaged statesmen, in comfortable cabinets, 
wagged their long white beards at each other from a 
distance, and exchanged grimaces and protocols which 
nobody heeded. 

Walsingham was weary of this solemn trifling. “I 
conclude,” said he to Davison, “that her Majesty—with 
reverence be it spoken—is ill advised to direct youina 


1 Walsingham to Davison, 14th January, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 
2 Richards to Walsingham, 9th September, 1584, S. P. Office 
MS. 


1585] DISSATISFACTION OF WALSINGHAM 113 


course that is like to work so great peril. I know 
you will do your best endeavor to keep all things up- 
right, and yet it is hard—the disease being now come to 
this state, or, as the physicians term it, crisis—to carry 
yourself in such sort but that it will, I fear, breed a 
dangerous alteration in the cause.” + 

He denounced with impatience, almost with indigna- 
tion, the insincerity and injustice of these intolerable 
hesitations. ‘Sorry am I,” said he, “to see the course 
that is taken in this weighty cause, for we will neither 
help those poor countries ourselves, nor yet suffer others to 
do it. I am not ignorant that in time to come the 
annexing of these countries to the crown of France 
may prove prejudicial to England; but if France refuse 
to deal with them, and the rather for that we shall min- 
ister some cause of impediment by a kind of dealing under- 
hand, then shall they be forced to return into the hands 
of Spain, which is like to breed such a present peril 
toward her Majesty’s self as never a wise man that seeth 
it, and loveth her, but lamenteth it from the bottom of his 
heart.” ? 

Walsingham had made up his mind that it was Eng- 
land, not France, that should take up the cause of the 
provinces and defend them at every hazard. He had 
been overruled, and the queen’s government had decided 
to watch the course of the French negotiation, doing 
what it could, underhand, to prevent that negotiation 
from being successful. The secretary did not approve of 
this disingenuous course. At the same time he had no 
faith in the good intentions of the French court. 

“JT could wish,” said he, “that the French king were 
carried with that honorable mind into the defense of 


1 Walsingham to Davison, MS. before cited. 2 Thid. 
VOL. I.—8 


114 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


these countries that her Majesty is, but France has not 
been used to do things for God’s sake; neither do they 
mean to use our advice or assistance in making of the 
bargain. For they still hold a jealous conceit that 
when Spain and they are together by the ears, we will 
seek underhand to work our own peace.”! Walsing- 
ham, therefore, earnestly deprecated the attitude provi- 
sionally maintained by England. 

Meantime, early in January, the deputation from the 
provinces had arrived in France. The progress of their 
negotiation will soon be related, but before its result 
was known a general dissatisfaction had already mani- 
fested itself in the Netherlands. The factitious enthusi- 
asm which had been created in favor of France, as well 
as the prejudice against England, began to die out. It 
became probable, in the opinion of those most accus- 
tomed to read the signs of the times, that the French 
court was acting in connivance with Philip, and that 
the negotiation was only intended to amuse the Nether- 
landers, to cireumvent the English, and to gain time 
both for France and Spain. It was not believed that 
the character of Henry or the policy of his mother was 
likely to be the source of any substantial aid to the cause 
of civil liberty or Protestant principles. 

“They look for no better fruit from the commission 
to France,” wrote Davison, who surveyed the general 
State of affairs with much keenness and breadth of 
vision, “than a dallying entertainment of the time, 
neither leaving them utterly hopeless, nor at full lib- 
erty to seek for relief elsewhere, especially in England, 
—or else some pleasing motion of peace, wherein the 
French king will offer his mediation with Spain. Mean- 


1 Walsingham to Davison, MS. before cited. 


1585] ENGLISH AND DUTCH SUSPICION 115 


time the people, wearied with the troubles, charges, and 
hazard of the war, shall be rocked asleep, the provision 
for their defense neglected, some provinces nearest the 
danger seduced, the rest by their defection astonished, 
and the enemy by their decay and confusions strength- 
ened. This is the scope whereto the doings of the 
French king, not without intelligence with the Spanish 
sovereign, doth aim, whatever is pretended.” ? 

There was a wide conviction that the French king 
was dealing falsely with the provinces. It seemed cer- 
tain that he must be inspired by intense jealousy of 
England, and that he was unlikely, for the sake of those 
whose “religion, popular liberty, and rebellion against 
their sovereign” he could not but disapprove, to allow 
Queen Elizabeth to steal a march upon him, and “make 
her own market with Spain to his cost and disad- 
vantage.” 2 

In short, it was suspected—whether justly or not will 
be presently shown—that Henry III. “was seeking to 
blear the eyes of the world, as his brother Charles did 
before the massacre of St. Bartholomew.”? As the let- 
ters received from the Dutch envoys in France became 
less and less encouraging, and as the queen was informed 
by her ambassador in Paris of the tergiversations in 
Paris, she became the more anxious lest the states should 
be driven to despair. She therefore wrote to Davison 
instructing him “to nourish in them underhand some 
hope—as a thing proceeding from himself—that though 
France should reject them, yet she would not abandon 
them.” 4 

1 Davison to Walsingham, 12th February, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


2 Thid. 3 Tpid. 
4 Queen to Davison, 18th February, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 


116 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


He was directed to find out by circuitous means 
what towns they would offer to her as security for 
any advances she might be induced to make, and to 
ascertain the amount of monthly contributions toward 
the support of the war that they were still capable of 
furnishing. She was beginning to look with dismay at 
the expatriation of wealthy merchants and manufac- 
turers, going so rapidly forward now that Ghent had 
fallen and Brussels and Antwerp were in such imminent 
peril. She feared that while so much valuable time had 
been thrown away the provinces had become too much 
impoverished to do their own part in their own defense, 
and she was seriously alarmed at rumors which had be- 
come prevalent of a popular disposition toward treating 
for a peace at any price with Spain. It soon became 
evident that these rumors were utterly without founda- 
tion, but the other reasons for Elizabeth’s anxiety were 
sufficiently valid. 

On the whole, the feeling in favor of England was 
rapidly gaining ground. In Holland especially there 
was general indignation against the French party. The 
letters of the deputies occasioned “murmur and mis- 
like” of most persons, who noted them to contain “ more 
ample report of ceremonies and compliments than solid 
argument of comfort.” 1 

Sir Edward Stafford, who looked with great penetra- 
tion into the heart of the mysterious proceedings at 
Paris, assured his government that no better result was 
to be looked for, “after long dalliance and entertain. 
ment, than either a flat refusal or such a masked em- 
bracing of their cause as would rather tend to the 


! Davison to Lord Burghley and Sir F, Walsingham, 28th Feb- 
ruary, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


1585] AFFECTION OF HOLLAND FOR ENGLAND | 117 


increasing of their miseries and confusion than relief 
for their declining estate.” While “reposing upon a 
broken reed,” they were, he thought, “neglecting other 
means more expedient for their necessities.” 1 

This was already the universal opinion in Holland. 
Men now remembered with bitterness the treachery of 
the Duke of Anjou, which they had been striving so 
hard to forget, but which less than two years ago had 
nearly proved fatal to the cause of liberty in the prov- 
inces. A committee of the states had an interview with 
the queen’s envoy at The Hague; implored her Majesty 
through him not to abandon their cause; expressed un- 
limited regret for the course which had been pursued ; 
and avowed a determination “to pluck their heads out 
of the collar” so soon as the opportunity should offer. ? 

They stated, moreover, that they had been directed by 
the assembly to lay before him the instructions for the 
envoys to France, and the articles proposed for the ac- 
ceptance of the king. The envoy knew his business 
better than not to have secretly provided himself with 
copies of these documents, which he had already laid 
before his own government. 

He affected, however, to feel hurt that he had been 
thus kept in ignorance of papers which he really knew 
by heart. “After some pretended quarrel,” said he, 
“for their not acquainting me therewith sooner, I did 
accept them, as if I had before neither seen nor heard 
of them.” ? 

This, then, was the aspect of affairs in the provinces 
during the absence of the deputies in France. It is 
now necessary to shift the scene to that country. 


1 Davison to Burghley and Walsingham, ubi sup. 
2 Thid. 3 Thid. 


CHAPTER IV 


Reception of the Dutch envoys at the Louvre—Ignominious 
result of the embassy—Secret influences at work—Bargaining 
between the French and Spanish courts—Claims of Catherine 
de’ Medici upon Portugal—Letters of Henry and Catherine— 
Secret proposal by France to invade England—States’ mission to 
Henry of Navarre—Subsidies of Philip to Guise—Treaty of Join- 
ville—Philip’s share in the League denied by Parma—Philip in 
reality its chief—Manifesto of the League—Attitude of Henry 
III. and of Navarre—The League demands a royal decree— Designs 
of France and Spain against England—Secret interview of Men- 
doza and Villeroy—Complaints of English persecution—Edict of 
Nemours—Excommunication of Navarre and his reply. 


THE king, notwithstanding his apparent reluctance, had, 
in Sir Edward Stafford’s language, “nibbled at the bait.” 
He had, however, not been secured at the first attempt, 
and now a second effort was to be made, under what 
were supposed to be most favorable circumstances. In 
accordance with his own instructions, his envoy, Des 
Pruneaux, had been busily employed in the states, ar- 
ranging the terms of a treaty which should be entirely 
satisfactory. It had been laid down as an indispensable 
condition that Holland and Zealand should unite in the 
offer of sovereignty, and after the expenditure of much 
eloquence, diplomacy, and money, Holland and Zealand 
had given their consent. The court had been for some 
time anxious and impatient for the arrival of the depu- 
118 


1585] DES PRUNEAUX’S INSOLENCE 119 


ties. Early in December Des Pruneaux wrote from 
Paris to Count Maurice, urging with some asperity the 
necessity of immediate action. 

“When I left you,” he said, “I thought that perform- 
ance would follow promises. I have been a little 
ashamed, as the time passed by, to hear nothing of the 
deputies, nor of any excuse on the subject. It would 
seem as though God had bandaged the eyes of those who 
have so much cause to know their own adversity.”?! 

To the states his language was still more insolent. 
“Excuse me, gentlemen,” he said, “if I tell you that I 
blush at hearing nothing from you. I shall have the 
shame and youthe damage. Iregret much the capture 
of De Teligny, and other losses which are occasioned by 
your delays and want of resolution.” 

Thus did the French court, which a few months before 
had imprisoned and then almost ignominiously dis- 
missed the envoys who came to offer the sovereignty of 
the provinces, now rebuke the governments which had 
ever since been strenuously engaged in removing all 
obstacles to the entire fulfilment of the king’s demands. 
The states were just despatching a solemn embassy to 
renew that offer with hardly any limitation as to 
terms. * 

The envoys arrived on January 3, 1585, at Boulogne, 


1 Groen y. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 7. 

2 The deputies were appointed from each of the United Prov- 
inces: Merode, Hinkaert, Stralen, and Cornelius Aertsens repre- 
sented Brabant ; Chancellor Leoninus, John van Ghent, and Gerard 
Voet were appointed from Gelderland; Noél de Caron was deputy 
for Flanders, Arend van Dorp for Holland, John Valeke for Zea- 
land, Rengers and Amelis van Amstel for Utrecht, Teitsma and 
Aisma for Friesland, La Mouillerie and La Pré for Mechlin. The 
Prince of Espinoy, brother of the Marquis of Richebourg, but a 


120 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


after a stormy voyage from Brielle. Yet it seems in- 
credible to relate that, after all the ignominy heaped 
upon the last, there was nothing but solemn trifling in 
reserve for the present legation, although the object of 
both embassies was to offer a crown. The deputies 
were, however, not kept in prison upon this occasion, 
nor treated like thieves or spies. They were admira- 
bly lodged, with plenty of cooks and lackeys to min- 
ister to them; they fared sumptuously every day, at 
Henry’s expense; and after they had been six weeks in 
the kingdom, they at last succeeded in obtaining their 
first audience. 

On the 13th February the king sent five “very splen- 
did, richly gilded court-eoach-wagons” to bring the 
envoys to the palace. At one o’clock they arrived at 
the Louvre, and were ushered through four magnificent 
antechambers into the royal cabinet. The apartments 
through which they passed swarmed with the foremost 
nobles, court functionaries, and ladies of France, in 
blazing gala costume, who all greeted the envoys with 
demonstrations of extreme respect. The halls and cor- 
ridors were lined with archers, halberdiers, Swiss guards, 
and grooms “besmeared with gold,” and it was thought 
that all this rustle of fine feathers would be somewhat 
startling to the barbarous republicans fresh from the 
fens of Holland. 

Henry received them in his cabinet, where he was ac- 
companied only by the Duke of J oyeuse,—his foremost 


patriotic Netherlander himself, was also commissioned to be of 
the legation, and he served at his own expense (Wagenaer, viii. 
55, 56. Des Pruneaux aux Etats-generaux, 3d December, 1584, 
Hague Archives MS. Brief van de Gedeputeerden in Frankryck 
aan de Staten-Gen., 19th J. anuary, 1585, Hague Archives MS8.), 


1585] RECEPTION OF ENVOYS AT THE LOUVRE 121 


and bravest minion,—by the Count of Bouscaige, M. de 
Valette, and the Count of Chateau Vieux. 1 

The Most Christian King was neatly dressed in white 
satin doublet and hose and well-starched ruff, with a 
short cloak on his shoulders, a little velvet cap on the 
side of his head, his long locks duly perfumed and 
curled, his sword at his side, and a little basket, full of 
puppies, suspended from his neck by a broad ribbon. 
He held himself stiff and motionless, although his face 
smiled a good-humored welcome to the ambassadors, and 
he moved neither foot, hand, nor head as they advanced. 

Chancellor Leoninus, the most experienced, eloquent, 
and tedious of men, now made an interminable oration, 
fertile in rhetoric and barren in facts, and the king 
made a short and benignant reply, according to the hal- 
lowed formula in such cases provided. And then there 
was a presentation to the queen and to the queen 
mother, when Leoninus was more prolix than before, 
and Catherine even more affectionate than her son; and 
there were consultations with Chiverny and Villeroy 
and Brulart and Pruneaux, and great banquets at the 
royal expense, and bales of protocols, and drafts of arti- 
cles, and conditions and programs and apostils by the 
hundredweight, and at last articles of annexation were 
presented by the envoys, and Pruneaux looked at and 
pronounced them “too raw and imperative,” and the 
envoys took them home again, and dressed them and 
cooked them till there was no substance left in them; 
for whereas the envoys originally offered the crown of 
their country to France, on condition that no religion 
but the Reformed religion should be tolerated there, no 
appointments made but by the states, and no security 


1 MS. letter of the envoys before cited. 


122 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


offered for advances to be made by the Christian King 
save the hearts and oaths of his new subjects, so they 
now ended by proposing the sovereignty uncondition- 
ally, almost abjectly ; and after the expiration of nearly 
three months even these terms were absolutely refused, 
and the deputies were graciously permitted to go home 
as they came. The annexation and sovereignty were 
definitely declined. Henry regretted and sighed, Cathe- 
rine de’ Medici wept,—for tears were ever at her com- 
mand,—Chancellor Chiverny and Secretary Brulart wept 
likewise, and Pruneaux was overcome with emotion at 
the parting interview of the ambassadors with the court, 
in which they were allowed a last opportunity for ex- 
pressing what was called their gratitude. 

And then, on the 16th March, M. d’Oignon came to 
them, and presented, on the part of the king, to each of 
the envoys a gold chain weighing twenty-one ounces 
and two grains.1 

Des Pruneaux, too—Des Pruneaux, who had spent the 
previous summer in the Netherlands; who had traveled 
from province to province, from city to city, at the king’s 
command, offering boundless assistance if they would 
unanimously offer their sovereignty; who had van- 
quished by his importunity the resistance of the stern 
Hollanders, the last of all the Netherlanders to yield to 
the royal blandishments—Des Pruneaux, who had 
‘blushed ”— Des Pruneaux, who had wept—now thought 
proper to assume an airy tone, half encouragement, half 
condolence. 

‘Man proposes, gentlemen,” said he,? “but God dis- 

1 MS. report of the envoys. 


ot : . 4 : 
*-“Messieurs, les hommes proposent, et Dieu est le maitre qui 
dispose. Nous voyons toutes choses avoir différentz temps et 


1585] IGNOMINIOUS RESULT OF THE EMBASSY 1923 


poses. We are frequently called on to observe that 
things have a great variety of times and terms. Many 
a man is refused by a woman twice, who succeeds the 
third time,” and so on, with which wholesome apothegms 
Des Pruneaux faded away then and forever from the 
page of Netherland history. 

A few days afterward the envoys took shipping at 
Dieppe, and arrived early in April at The Hague.! 

And thus terminated the negotiation of the states 
with France. 

It had been a scene of elaborate trifling on the king’s 
part from beginning to end. Yet the few grains of 
wheat which have thus been extracted from the moun- 
tains of diplomatic chaff so long moldering in national 
storehouses contain, however dry and tasteless, still 
something for human nourishment. It is something to 
comprehend the ineffable meanness of the hands which 
then could hold the destiny of mighty empires. Here 
had been offered a magnificent prize to France: a great 
extent of frontier in the quarter where expansion was 
most desirable; a protective network of towns and for- 
tresses on the side most vulnerable ; flourishing cities on 
the sea-coast where the marine traffic was most lucra- 
tive; the sovereignty of a large population, the most 
bustling, enterprising, and hardy in Europe, a nation 
destined in a few short years to become the first naval 
and commercial power in the world—all this was laid at 
the feet of Henry Valois and Catherine de’ Medici, and 
rejected. 


termes; Prou sont refusés d’une femme deux fois quy l’emportent 
la troisieme,” ete.—Des Pruneaux aux Etats-generaux, 14th March, 
1585, Brienne MS. 

2 MS. report, Wagenaer, Vili. 66. 


124 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


The envoys, with their predecessors, had wasted eight 
months of most precious time; they had heard and 
made orations, they had read and written protocols, they 
had witnessed banquets, masquerades, and revels of 
stupendous frivolity, in honor of the English Garter, 
brought solemnly to the Valois by Lord Derby, accom- 
panied by one hundred gentlemen “marvelously, sump- 
tuously, and richly accoutred,” during that dreadful 
winter when the inhabitants of Brussels, Antwerp, 
Mechlin—to save which splendid cities and to annex 
them to France was a main object of the solemn em- 
bassy from the Netherlands—were eating rats and cats 
and dogs, and the weeds from the pavements, and the 
grass from the churchyards, and were finding them- 
selves more closely pressed than ever by the relentless 
genius of Farnese; and in exchange for all these losses 
and all this humiliation, the ambassadors now returned 
to their constituents, bringing an account of Chiverny’s 
magnificent banquets and long orations, of the smiles 
of Henry II1., the tears of Catherine de’ Medici, the re- 
grets of M. des Pruneaux, besides sixteen gold chains, 
each weighing twenty-one ounces and two grains.1 

1 Brieven van de Gedeputeerden uyt Paris, 22d February, 1585. 
Rapport van de Handeling gehouden by de Gezanten, ete. Brief 
van de Gezanten uyt Paris, 11 Maart, 1585, Hague Archives MS. 
Compare De Thou, ix. 275 seq. ; Strada, ii, 292 seq. ; Meteren, xii. 
221 seq.; Le Petit, ii. xiv. 508 seq.; Wagenaer, viii. 58; Bor, ii. 
Xix. 528 seq. 

It is remarkable that in all the conferences between the depu- 
ties and the ministers of Henry, and in all the expressions used by 
the king and his mother, as recorded by the envoys in their de- 
spatehes and reports, no allusion was ever made to the civil war 
then brewing in France, nor to the machinations of the Guises, the 


name of which family was never mentioned. The court excused itself, 
as well as it could, for its elaborate trifling with the Netherlands, 


1585] SECRET INFLUENCES AT WORK 125 


It is worth while to go for a moment behind the 
scenes. We have seen the actors, with mask and 
cothurn and tinsel crown, playing their well-conned 
parts upon the stage. Let us hear them threaten and 
whimper and chaffer among themselves. 

So soon as it was intimated that Henry III. was about 
to grant the Netherland envoys an audience, the wrath 
of Ambassador Mendoza was kindled. That magnilo- 
quent Spaniard instantly claimed an interview with the 
king, before whom, according to the statement of his 
colleagues, doing their best to pry into these secrets, he 
blustered and bounced, and was more fantastical in his 
insolence than even Spanish envoy had ever been before. 

“He went presently to court,” so Walsingham was in- 
formed by Stafford, “and dealt very passionately with 
the king and queen mother to deny them audience, who 
being greatly offended with his presumptuous and mala- 


at so momentous an epoch, by general reflections upon the condi- 
tion of France, and the inconvenience to the government, at that 
moment, of engaging in the enterprise which it had itself solicited. 
All the contemporaneous historians, whether Protestant or Catho- 
lic, French, Flemish, or Spanish, give a very brief, imperfect, 
conventional, and generally mistaken view of these negotiations. 

Le Petit, instead of the meager farewell address of the king 
(which we have given in the text from the report of the envoys to 
their constituents), does not scruple to invent a very epigrammatic 
little speech for Henry, in which that monarch is made to complain 
bitterly of the “‘violence done to him by the King of Spain, the 
Guise family, and the Leaguers,” to regret that he is thereby pre- 
vented from assisting the provinces, on the ground that ‘‘his shirt 
is nearer to him than his doublet,” and to hope that they will sus- 
tain themselves until he shall have got his kingdom quiet, after 
which the states may depend upon hisassistance. It is superfluous 
to say that this and similar harangues recorded by various histo- 
rians are purely imaginary. 


126 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


pert manner of proceeding, the king did in choler and 
with some sharp speeches let him plainly understand 
that he was an absolute king, bound to yield account of 
his doings to no man, and that it was lawful for him to 
give access to any man within his own realm. The 
queen mother answered him likewise very roundly, 
whereupon he departed for the time very much discon- 
tented.” } 

Brave words on both sides, if they had ever been 
spoken, or if there had been any action corresponding 
to their spirit. 

But in truth, from the beginning, Henry and his 
mother saw in the Netherland embassy only the means 
of turning a dishonest penny. Since the disastrous re- 
treat of Anjou from the provinces the city of Cambray 
had remained in the hands of the Seigneur de Balagny, 
placed there by the duke. The citadel, garrisoned by 
French troops, it was not the intention of Catherine de’ 
Medici to restore to Philip, and a truce on the subject 
had been arranged provisionally for ayear. Philip, tak- 
ing Parma’s advice to prevent the French court, if pos- 
sible, from “fomenting the Netherland rebellion,” had 
authorized the prince to conclude that truce, as if done on 
his own responsibility, and not by royal order.2 Mean- 
time Balagny was gradually swelling into a petty poten- 


1 Walsingham to Davison, January 14 (24), 1585, S. P. Office MS. 
Compare De Thou, ix. 275 seq.; Strada, De Bello Belgico (1658) ii. 
592 seq. ; Meteren, xii. 221 seq. ; Le Petit, ii. xiv. 508 seq. ; Busbe- 
quius, Epist., passim. 

2 Philip II. to Prince of Parma, 2d September, 1584, and 15th 
January, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS.: “Sera bien que la 
concluyais & trueque de conseguir esto con que no parezea orden 
mia sino que lo haceis como de vuestro,” ete. Compare Strada, 
ii. 295, 


1585] FRENCH AND SPANISH COURTS 127 


tate on his own account, making himself very trouble- 
some to the Prince of Parma, and requiring a great deal 
of watching. Cambray was, however, apparently ac- 
quired for France. 

But besides this acquisition there was another way of 
earning something solid, by turning this Netherland 
matter handsomely to account. Philip II. had recently 
conquered Portugal. Among the many pretensions to 
that crown those of Catherine de’ Medici had been put 
forward, but had been little heeded. The claim went 
back more than three hundred years, and to establish its 
validity would have been to convert the peaceable pos- 
session of a long line of sovereigns into usurpation. 
To ascend to Alfonso III. was like fetching, as it was 
said, a claim from Evander’s grandmother. Neverthe- 
less, ever since Philip had been upon the Portuguese 
throne Catherine had been watching the opportunity, 
not of unseating that sovereign, but of converting her 
claim into money. 

The Netherland embassy seemed to offer the coveted 
opportunity. There was, therefore, quite as much 
warmth at the outset, on the part of Mendoza, in that 
first interview after the arrival of the deputies, as had 
been represented. There was, however, less dignity and 
more cunning on the part of Henry and Catherine than 
was at all suspected. Even before that conference the 
king had been impatiently expecting overtures from the 
Spanish envoy, and had been disappointed. “He told 
me,” said Henry, “that he would make proposals so 
soon as Tassis should be gone, but he has done nothing 
yet. He said to Gondi that all he meant was to get the 
truce of Cambray accomplished. I hope, however, that 
my brother, the King of Spain, will do what is right in 


128 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


regard to Madame my mother’s pretensions. ’T is likely 
that he will now be incited thereto, seeing that the depu- 
ties of all the Netherland provinces are at present in 
my kingdom, to offer me carte blanche. I shall hear 
what they have to say, and do exactly what the good of 
my own affairs shall seem to require. The Queen of 
England, too, has been very pressing and urgent with 
me for several months on this subject. I shall hear, 
too, what she has to say, and I presume if the King of 
Spain will now disclose himself, and do promptly what 
he ought, that we may set Christendom at rest.” 1 

Henry then instructed his ambassador in Spain to 
keep his eyes wide open in order to penetrate the 
schemes of Philip, and to this end ordered him an in- 
crease of salary by a third that he might follow that 
monarch on his journey to Aragon. 

Meanwhile Mendoza had audience of his Majesty. 
“He made a very pressing remonstrance,” said the king, 
“concerning the arrival of these deputies, urging me to 
send them back at once, denouncing them as disobedi- 
ent rebels and heretics. I replied that my kingdom was 
free, and that I should hear from them all that they had 
to say, because I could not abandon Madame my mother in 
her pretensions, not only for the filial obedience which I owe 
her, but because I am her only heir. Mendoza replied 
that he should go and make the same remonstrance to 
the queen mother, which he accordingly did, and she 
will herself write you what passed between them. If 
they do not act up to their duty down there, I know how 
to take my revenge upon them.” 2 

This is the king’s own statement, his veriest words, 


1 Henri II. & Longlée, 11th January, 1585, Brienne MS. 
2 Thid. 


1585] MENDOZA’S REMONSTRANCES 129 


and he was surely best aware of what occurred between 
himself and Mendoza, under their four eyes only. The 
ambassador is not represented as extremely insolent, 
but only pressing, and certainly there is little left of the 
fine periods on Henry’s part, about listening to the ery 
of the oppressed, or preventing the rays of his ancestors’ 
diadem from growing pale, with which contemporary 
chronicles are filled. 

There was not one word of the advancement and 
glory of the French nation; not a hint of the fame to 
be acquired by a magnificent expansion of territory ; 
still less of the duty to deal generously, or even hon- 
estly, with an oppressed people, who in good faith were 
seeking an asylum in exchange for offered sovereignty ; 
not a syllable upon liberty of conscience, of religious or 
civil rights; nothing but a petty and exclusive care for 
the interests of his mother’s pocket, and of his own as 
his mother’s heir. This farthing candle was alone to 
guide the steps of “the high and mighty king,” whose 
reputation was perpetually represented as so precious to 
him in all the conferences between his ministers and 
the Netherland deputies. Was it possible for those en- 
voys to imagine the almost invisible meanness of such 
childish tricks ? 

The queen mother was still more explicit and unblush- 
ing throughout the whole affair. 

“The ambassador of Spain,” she said, “has made the 
most beautiful remonstrances he could think of about 
these deputies from the Netherlands. All his talk, 
however, cannot persuade me to anything else save to 
increase my desire to have reparation for the wrong that 
has been done me in regard to my claims upon Portugal, 
which I am determined to pursue by every means within 

VOL. I.—9 


130 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


my power. Nevertheless, I have told Don Bernardino 
that I should always be ready to embrace any course 
likely to bring about a peaceful conclusion. He then 
entered into a discussion of my rights, which, he said, 
were not thought in Spain to be founded in justice. 
But when I explained to him the principal points (of 
which I possess all the pieces of evidence and justifica- 
tion), he hardly knew what to say, save that he was 
astounded that I had remained so long without speaking 
of my claims. In reply I told him ingenuously the 
truth.” 1 

The truth which the ingenuous Catherine thus re- 
vealed was, in brief, that all her predecessors had been 
minors, women, and persons in situations not to make 
their rights valid. Finding herself more highly placed, 
she had advanced her claims, which had been so fully 
recognized in Portugal that she had been received as 
Infanta of the kingdom. All pretensions to the throne 
being now through women only, hers were the best of 
any. At all this Don Bernardino expressed profound 
astonishment, and promised to send a full account to his 
master of “the infinite words” which had passed be- 
tween them at this interview.? 

“T desire,” said Catherine, “that the Lord King of 
Spain should open his mind frankly and promptly upon 
the recompense which he is willing to make me for 


1 Lettre de la Reine & Longlée, 16th January, 1585, Brienne 
MS.: “Tl ne m’a sceu que dire aultre chose, sinon qu’il s’ebahis- 
soit comme j’avois si long temps demouré sans parler de mes dictz 
droits, a quoi je luy ay respondu ingenument la verité, qui est,” 
ete. 

* Ibid.: “Et eroy qu’il n’y obmaetra rien @infinies parolles 


que se sont passees de la substance dessus dicte en la dicte audi- 
ance,” ete. 


1585] CLAIMS OF CATHERINE UPON PORTUGAL 181 


Portugal, in order that things may pass rather with 
gentleness than otherwise.” 1 

It was expecting a. great deal to look for frankness 
and promptness from the Lord King of Spain, but the 
queen mother considered that the Netherland envoys 
had put a whip into her hand. She was also determined 
to bring Philip up to the point without showing her 
own game. “J will never say,” said Catherine, ingenu- 
ous no longer—“T will never say how much I ask, but, 
on the contrary, I shall wait for him to make the offer. 
I expect it to be reasonable, because he has seen fit 
to seize and occupy that which I declare to be my 
property.” 2 

This is the explanation of all the languor and trifling 
of the French court in the Netherland negotiation. <A 
deep, constant, unseen current was running counter to 
all the movement which appeared upon the surface. The 
tergiversations of the Spanish cabinet in the Portugal 
matter were the cause of the shufflings of the French 
ministers on the subject of the provinces. 

“T know well,” said Henry, a few days later, “that 
the people down there, and their ambassador here, are 
leading us on with words as far as they can, with re- 
gard to the recompense of Madame my mother for her 
claims upon Portugal. But they had better remember 
(and I think they will) that out of the offers which 


1 Lettre de la Reine Mére 4 Longlée, 16th January, 1585, 
Brienne MS.: “Je desirerois bien que le dict seigneur roi d’Es- 
pagne s’ouvrit franchement et promptement de la recompense 
qu’il me venet et doict faire pour le dict Portugal, affin que les 
choses passassent plustot par 14 doulcement qu’aultrement.” 

2 Tbid.: ‘‘Je ne diray jamais ce que je demande, au contraire, 
attendrai ses offres quil fault qui soient raisonnables, puis quw’il 
est saisy et occupateur de ce que je pretendz m’appartenir,” ete. 


132 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


these sixteen deputies of the Netherlands are bringing 
me—and I believe it to be carte blanche—I shall be able 
to pay myself. ’T will be better to come promptly to a 
good bargain and a brief conclusion than to spin the 
matter out longer.” 1 

“ Don Bernardino,” said the queen mother on the same 
day, “‘has been keeping us up to this hour in hopes of 
a good offer, but ’t is to be feared, for the good of Chris- 
tendom, that ’t will be too late. The deputies are come, 
bringing carte blanche. Nevertheless, if the King of 
Spain is willing to be reasonable, and that instantly, it 
will be well, and it would seem as if God had been 
pleased to place this means in our hands.” 2 

After the conferences had been fairly got under way 
between the French government and the envoys, the 
demands upon Philip for a good bargain and a hand- 
some offer became still more pressing. 

“T have given audience to the deputies from the prov- 
inces,” wrote Henry, “and the queen mother has done 
the same. Chancellor Chiverny, Villequier, Bellidvre, 
and Brulart will now confer with them from day to 
day. I now tell you that it will be well, before things go 
any further, for the King of Spain to come to reason 
about the pretensions of Madame my mother. This will 
be a means of establishing the repose of Christendom. 
I shall be very willing to concur in such an arrangement 


1 Henri IIT. & Longlée, 13th January, 1585, Brienne MS. : ‘Mais 
il doibvent bien considerer—que sur les offres que me viennent 
faire seize principaulx deputez des pays bas (les quelz m’apportent, 
& ce que jentendz la carte blanche), j’y auray consideration, et 
vauldroit beaucoup mieulx venir promptement & une bonne nego- 
tiation et brielve conclusion Wicelle, que de tenir ainsy les choses 
& la longue,” ete. 

2 La Reine Mére & Longlée, 13th J anuary, 1585, Brienne MS. 


1585] FRIENDLY INTERCOURSE WITH PARMA 133 


if I saw any approximation to it on the part of the king 
or his ministers. But I fear they will delay too long, 
and so you had better tell them. Push them to the 
point as much as possible, without letting them suspect 
that I have been writing about it, for that would make 
them rather draw back than come forward.” 1 

At the same time, during this alternate threatening 
and coaxing between the French and the Spanish court, 
and in the midst of all the solemn and tedious protocol- 
ling of the ministry and the Dutch envoys, there was a 
most sincere and affectionate intercourse maintained 
between Henry III. and the Prince of Parma. The 
Spanish governor-general was assured that nothing but 
the warmest regard was entertained for him and his 
master on tho part of the French court. Parma had 
replied, however, that so many French troops had in 
times past crossed the frontier to assist the rebels that 
he hardly knew what to think. He expressed the hope, 
now that the Duke of Anjou was dead, that his Chris- 
tian Majesty would not countenance the rebellion, but 
manifest his good will. 

“How can your Highness doubt it?” said Malpierre, 
Henry’s envoy. “ Forhis Majesty has given proofenough 
of his good will, having prevented all enterprises in this 
regard, and preferred to have his own subjects cut into 
pieces rather than that they should carry out their de- 
signs. Had his Majesty been willing merely to connive 

1 Henri III. 4 Longlée, 21st February, 1585: “T1 seroit trés a 
propos, avant que les choses allassent plus avant que le Roy d’Es- 
pagne regardasse 4 se mectre a la raison pour les pretentions de la 
royne madame et mére,” ete. “Les incitant le plus qw’il vous sera 
possible, sans toutefois qu’ils puissent cognoistre que vous en 
ayant escript, car cela pourroit estre plustot cause de les en faire 
reculler qwaultrement,” etc. Brienne MS. 


134 he THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


at these undertakings, ’t is probable that the affairs of 
your Highness would not have succeeded so well as they 
have done.” ! 

With regard to England also, the conduct of Henry 
and his mother in these negotiations was marked by 
the same unfathomable duplicity. There was an ap- 
pearance of cordiality on the surface; but there was 
deep plotting and bargaining, and even deadly hostility, 
lurking below. We have seen the efforts which Eliza- 
beth’s government had been making to counteract the 
policy which offered the sovereignty of the provinces to 
the French monarch. At the same time there was at 
least a loyal disposition upon the queen’s part to assist 
the Netherlands, in concurrence with Henry. The de- 
meanor of Burghley and his colleagues was frankness 
itself compared with the secret schemings of the Valois, 
for at least peace and good will between the “ triumvi- 
rate” of France, England, and the Netherlands was in- 
tended, as the true means of resisting the predominant 
influence of Spain. 

Yet very soon after the solemn reception by Henry 
of the garter brought by Lord Derby, and in the midst 
of the negotiations between the French court and the 
United Provinces, the French king was not only at- 
tempting to barter the sovereignty offered him by the 
Netherlanders against a handsome recompense for the 
Portugal claim, but he was actually proposing to the 
King of Spain to join with him in an invasion of Eng- 
land! Even Philip himself must have admired and re- 
spected such a complication of villainy on the part of 
his most Christian brother. He was, however, not dis- 
posed to put any confidence in his schemes. 


1 Malpierre & Henri III., 16th February, 1585, Brienne MS. 


1585] PROPOSAL TO INVADE ENGLAND 1385 


“With regard to the attempt against England,” wrote 
Philip to Mendoza, “you must keep your eyes open; 
you must look at the danger of letting them, before 
they have got rid of their rivals and reduced their her- 
etics, go out of their own house and kingdom, and thus 
of being made fools of when they think of coming back 
again. Let them first exterminate the heretics of 
France, and then we will look after those of England, 
because ’t is more important to finish those who are 
near than those afar off. Perhaps the queen mother 
proposes this invasion in order to proceed more feebly 
with matters in her own kingdom; and thus Mucio 
[Duke of Guise] and his friends will not have so safe a 
game, and must take heed lest they be deceived.” } 

Thus it is obvious that Henry and Catherine intended, 
on the whole, to deceive the English and the Nether- 
landers, and to get as good a bargain and as safe a 
friendship from Philip as could be manufactured out of 
the materials placed in the French king’s hands by the 
United Provinces. Elizabeth honestly wished well to 
the states, but allowed Burghley, and those who acted 
with him, to flatter themselves with the chimera that 

1 Philip II. to Bernardino de Mendoza, 17th August, 1585, Ar- 
chivo de Simaneas; A. 56, No. 28, MS. in the Archives de l’Em- 
pire at Paris: “En lo de la impresa de Inglaterra, le yd abriendo 
los ojos para que eche de ver el peligro en que se pone, si antes de 
deshazer sus emulos y reducir a los hereges o echerlos, se dexa 
sacar fuera de su casa y del Reyno y quan burlado se podria hallar 
quando pensasse bolver. Que acaben prim? los hereses de francia, 
y despues demos tras de Inglaterra, por que mas importa a todos 
acabar los de cerca que los de lejos, y quiga la Reyna madre pro- 
pone la nueva impresa (de Inglaterra) por hazer afloxar con los 
hereges de dentro de su Reyno, y assi pues Mucio y los suyos no 
ternan cosa segura mientras estos estuvieren aqui, miren bien no 
se dexen engafar.” 


136 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Henry could be induced to protect the Netherlands 
without assuming the sovereignty of that common- 
wealth. The provinces were fighting for their existence, 
unconscious of their latent strength, and willing to 
trust to France or to England if they could only save 
themselves from being swallowed by Spain. As for 
Spain itself, that country was more practised in dupli- 
city even than the government of the Medici-Valois, and 
was of course more than a match at the game of decep- 
tion for the franker politicians of England and Holland. 

The King of Navarre had meanwhile been looking on 
at a distance. Too keen an observer, too subtle a rea- 
soner, to doubt the secret source of the movements then 
agitating France to its center, he was yet unable to fore- 
see the turn that all these intrigues were about to take. 
He could hardly doubt that Spain was playing a dark 
and desperate game with the unfortunate Henry IIL., 
for, as we have seen, he had himself not long before re- 
ceived a secret and liberal offer from Philip IL. if he 
would agree to make war upon the king But the 
Béarnese was not the man to play into the hands of 
Spain, nor could he imagine the possibility of the Valois, 
or even of his mother, taking so suicidal a course. 

After the N cherlaad deputies had received their final 
dismissal from the king, they sent Calvart, who had 
been secretary to their embassy, on a secret mission to 
Henry of Navarre, then resident at Chartres. 

The envoy Anais to the Huguenot chief the 
meager result of the long negotiation with the French 
court. Henry bade him be of good cheer, and assured 
him of his best wishes for their cause. He expressed 


1 Herle to Queen Elizabeth, 22d July, 1584, 8. P. Office MS. 
Vide ante, p. 63. 


1585] MISSION TO HENRY OF NAVARRE 137 


the opinion that the King of France would now either 
attempt to overcome the Guise faction by gentle means, 
or at once make war upon them. The Bishop of Acqs 
had strongly recommended the French monarch to send 
the King of Navarre, with a strong force, to the assis- 
tance of the Netherlands, urging the point with much 
fervid eloquence and solid argument. Henry for a 
moment had seemed impressed, but such a vigorous 
proceeding was of course entirely beyond his strength, 
and he had sunk back into his effeminate languor so soon 
as the bold bishop’s back was turned. 

The Béarnese had naturally conceived but little hope 
that such a scheme would be carried into effect; but he 
assured Calvart that nothing could give him greater 
delight than to mount and ride in such a cause.? 

“ Notwithstanding,” said the Béarnese, “that the vil- 
lainous intentions of the Guises are becoming plainer 
and plainer, and that they are obviously supplied with 
Spanish dollars, I shall send a special envoy to the Most 
Christian King, and, although ’t is somewhat late, im- 
plore him to throw his weight into the scale in order to 
redeem your country from its misery. Meantime be of 
good heart, and defend as you have done your hearths, 
your liberty, and the honor of God.”? 

He advised the states unhesitatingly to continue their 
confidence in the French king, and to keep him informed 
of their plans and movements, expressing the opinion 
that these very intrigues of the Guise party would soon 


1 De Thou, ix. 298 seq. 

2 Rapport fait par le Sieur Calvart, aiant esté envoie vers le roy 
de Navarre de la part des deputez des Etats-generaux chez le roy 
tres Chretien, 11 Juin, 1585, Hague Archives MS. 

3 Thid. 


138 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


justify, or even force, Henry III. openly to assist the 
Netherlands. 

So far, at that very moment, was so sharp a politi- 
cian as the Béarnese from suspecting the secret schemes 
of Henry of Valois. Calvart urged the King of Navarre 
to assist the states at that moment with some slight 
subsidy. Antwerp was in such imminent danger as to 
fill the hearts of all true patriots with dismay, and a 
timely succor, even if a slender one, might be of ines- 
timable value. 

Henry expressed profound regret that his own means 
were so limited and his own position so dangerous as to 
make it difficult for him to manifest in broad daylight 
the full affection which he bore the provinces. 

“To my sorrow,” said he, “‘ your proposition is made 
in the midst of such dark and stormy weather that those 
who have clearest sight are unable to see to what issue 
these troubles of France are tending.” ! 

Nevertheless, with much generosity and manliness he 
promised Calvart to send two thousand soldiers, at his 
own charges, to the provinces without delay, and au- 
thorized that envoy to consult with his agent at the 
court of the French king, in order to obtain the royal 
permission for the troops to cross the frontier.” 

The crownless and almost houseless king had thus, at 
a single interview, and in exchange for nothing but good 
wishes, granted what the most Christian monarch of 
France had refused, after months of negotiation, and 
with sovereignty as the purchase-money. The envoy, 
well pleased, sped as swiftly as possible to Paris; but, 
as may easily be imagined, Henry of Valois forbade the 
movement contemplated by Henry of Navarre. 


' MS. report of Calvart before cited. 2 Thid. 


1585] NAVARRE’S INTENTIONS FRUSTRATED 1389 


“His Majesty,” said Villeroy, secretary of state, “sees 
no occasion, in so weighty a business, thus suddenly to 
change his mind; the less so, because he hopes to be able 
ere long to smooth over these troubles which have 
begun in France. Should the king either openly or 
secretly assist the Netherlands, or allow them to be as- 
sisted, ’t would be a reason for all the Catholics now 
sustaining his Majesty’s party to go over to the Guise 
faction. The provinces must remain firm, and make no 
pacification with the enemy. Meantime the Queen of 
England is the only one to whom God has given means 
to afford you succor. One of these days, when the 
proper time comes, his Majesty will assist her in afford- 
ing you relief.’ 1 

Calvart, after this conference with the King of 
Navarre, and subsequently with the government, enter- 
tained a lingering hope that the French king meant to 
assist the provinces. “I know well who is the author 
of these troubles,” said the unhappy monarch, who never 
once mentioned the name of Guise in all those confer- 
ences, “but, if God grant me life, I will give him as 
good as he sends, and make him rue his conduct.” 2 

They were not aware after how many strange vacilla- 
tions Henry was one day to wreak this threatened 
vengeance. As for Navarre, he remained upon the 
watch, good-humored as ever, more merry and hopeful 
as the tempest grew blacker, manifesting the most frank 


1 Tt will be observed that the envoys here speak of Villeroy as 
mentioning the Guises by name. 

2 “Wiert oock verwittigt dat Z. M. luttel dagen voer myn ver- 
treck, wesende onder zyne familieren seyde—je scay bien qui est 
Vautheur de ces troubles, mais si Dieu me donne vie, je luy rendrai 
pareille et en ferai repentir.”—MS. report of Calvart. 


140 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and friendly sentiments toward the provinces, and writ- 
ing to Queen Elizabeth, in the chivalrous style so dear 
to the heart of that sovereign, that he desired nothing 
better than to be her “servant and captain-general 
against the common enemy.” 

But indeed the French king was not so well informed 
as he imagined himself to be of the authorship of these 
troubles. Mucio, upon whose head he thus threatened 
vengeance, was but the instrument. The concealed 
hand that was directing all these odious intrigues, and 
lighting these flames of civil war, which were so long 
to make France a scene of desolation, was that of the 
industrious letter-writer in the Escorial. That which 
Henry of Navarre shrewdly suspected when he talked 
of the Spanish dollars in the Balafré’s pocket, that which 
was dimly visible to the Bishop of Acqs when he told 
Henry III. that “the Tagus had emptied itself into the 
Seine and Loire,” and that “the gold of Mexico was 
flowing into the royal cabinet,” 1 was much more certain 
than they supposed. 

Philip, in truth, was neglecting his own most pressing 
interests that he might direct all his energies toward 
entertaining civil war in France. That France should 
remain internally at peace was contrary to all his plans. 
He had therefore long kept Guise and his brother the 
Cardinal de Lorraine in his pay, and he had been 
spending large sums of money to bribe many of the 
most considerable functionaries in the kingdom. 

The most important enterprises in the Netherlands 
were allowed to languish, that these subterranean 
operations of the “prudent” monarch of Spain should 
be pushed forward. The most brilliant and original 


1 De Thou, ubi sup, 


1585] PHILIP’S DESIGNS TOWARD FRANCE 141 


genius that Philip had the good fortune to have at his 
disposal, the genius of Alexander Farnese, was cramped 
and irritated almost to madness by the fetters imposed 
upon it by the sluggish yet obstinate nature of him it 
was bound to obey. Farnese was at that moment en- 
gaged in a most arduous military undertaking, that fa- 
mous siege of Antwerp, the details of which will be 
related in future chapters, yet he was never furnished 
with men or money enough to insure success to a much 
more ordinary operation. His complaints, subdued but 
intense, fell almost unheeded on his master’s ear. He 
had not “ten dollars at his command,” his cavalry 
horses were all dead of hunger, or had been eaten by 
their riders, who were starving to death themselves, his 
army had dwindled to a “handful,” yet he still held on 
to his purpose, in spite of famine, the desperate efforts 
of indefatigable enemies, and all the perils and priva- 
tions of a deadly winter. He, too, was kept for a long 
time in profound ignorance of Philip’s designs. 
Meantime, while the Spanish soldiers were starving in 
Flanders, Philip’s dollars were employed by Mucio and 
his adherents in enlisting troops in Switzerland and 
Germany, in order to carry on the civil war in France. 
The French king was held systematically up to ridicule 
or detestation in every village pulpit in his own king- 
dom, while the sister of Mucio, the Duchess of Mont- 
pensier, carried the scissors at her girdle, with which 
she threatened to provide Henry with a third crown, in 
addition to those of France and Poland, which he had 
disgraced—the coronal tonsure of a monk. The con- 
vent should be, it was intimated, the eventual fate of 
the modern Childeric, but meantime it was more impor- 
tant than ever to supersede the ultimate pretensions of 


142 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Henry of Navarre. To prevent that heretic of heretics, 
who was not to be bought with Spanish gold, from ever 
reigning, was the first object of Philip and Mucio. 

Accordingly, on the last day of the year 1584, a secret 
treaty had been signed at Joinville between Henry of 
Guise and his brother the Due de Mayenne, holding the 
proxies of their brother the cardinal, and those of their 
uncles, Aumale and Elbeuf, on the one part, and John 
Baptist Tassis and Commander Moreo on the other, as 
representatives of Philip.1 This transaction—suffi- 
ciently well known now to the most superficial student 
of history—was a profound mystery then, so far as re- 
garded the action of the Spanish king. It was not a 
secret, however, that the papistical party did not intend 
that the Béarnese prince should ever come to the throne, 
and the matter of the succession was discussed precisely 
as if the throne had been vacant. 

It was decided that Charles, paternal uncle to Henry 
of Navarre, commonly ealled the Cardinal Bourbon, 
should be considered successor to the crown in place of 
Henry, whose claim was forfeited by heresy. More- 
over, a great deal of superfluous money and learning 
was expended in ordering some elaborate legal argu- 
ments to be prepared by venal jurisconsults, proving not 
only that the uncle ought to sueceed before the nephew, 
but that neither the one nor the other had any claim to 
succeed at all. The pen having thus been employed to 
do the work which the sword alone could accomplish, 
the poor old cardinal was now formally established by 
the Guise faction as presumptive heir to the crown. 

A man of straw, a superannuated court dangler, a 
eredulous trifler, but an earnest papist as his brother 


1 Perefixe, 58, 59. De Thou, ix. 272. 2 De Thou, ix. 262 seq. 


1585] TREATY OF JOINVILLE 143 


Antony had been, sixty-six years old, and feeble beyond 
his years, who, his life long, had never achieved one 
manly action, and had now one foot in the grave—this 
was the puppet placed in the saddle to run a tilt 
against the Béarnese, the man with foot ever in the 
stirrup, with sword rarely in its sheath. 

The contracting parties at Joinville agreed that the 
cardinal should succeed on the death of the reigning 
king, and that no heretic should ever ascend the throne, 
or hold the meanest office in the kingdom. They agreed 
further that all heretics should be “ exterminated” with- 
out distinction throughout France and the Netherlands. 
In order to procure the necessary reforms among the 
clergy, the Council of Trent was to be fully carried into 
effect. Philip pledged himself to furnish at least fifty 
thousand crowns monthly for the advancement of this 
Holy League, as it was denominated, and as much more 
as should prove necessary. The sums advanced were 
to be repaid by the cardinal on his succeeding to the 
throne. All the great officers of the crown, lords and 
gentlemen, cities, chapters, and universities, all Catho- 
lics, in short, in the kingdom, were deemed to be in- 
eluded in the League. If any foreign Catholic prince 
desired to enter the union, he should be admitted with 
the consent of both parties. Neither his Catholic Maj- 
esty nor the confederated princes should treat with the 
Most Christian King, either directly or indirectly. The 
compact was to remain strictly secret, one copy of it 
being sent to Philip, while the other was to be retained 
by Cardinal Bourbon and his fellow-Leaguers.' 

And now, in accordance with this program, Philip 


1 Perefixe, De Thou, ubisup. Meteren, xii. 221 seq. Le Petit, 
xiv. 508 seq. 


144 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


proceeded stealthily and industriously to further the 
schemcs of Mucio, to the exclusion of more urgent busi- 
ness. Noiseless and secret himself, and delighting in 
nothing so much as to glide, as it were, throughout 
Europe, wrapped in the mantle of invisibility, he was 
perpetually provoked by the noise, the bombast, and the 
bustle, which his less prudent confederates permitted 
themselves. While Philip for a long time hesitated to 
confide the secret of the League to Parma, whom it most 
imported to understand these schemes of his master, the 
confederates were openly boasting of the assistance 
which they were to derive from Parma’s codperation. 
Even when the prince had at last been informed as to 
the state of affairs, he stoutly denied the facts of which 
the Leaguers made their vaunt, thus giving to Mucio and 
his friends a lesson in dissimulation.1 

“Things have now arrived at a point,” wrote Philip 
to Tassis, 15th March, 1585, “that this matter of the 
League cannot and ought not to be concealed from those 
who have a right to knuw it. Therefore you must 
speak clearly to the Prince of Parma, informing him of 
the whole scheme, and enjoining the utmost secrecy. 
You must concert with him as to the best means of 
rendering aid to this cause, after having apprised him 
of the points which regarded him, and also that of the 
security of Cardinal de Bourbon, in case of necessity.” 2 


1 Malpierre & Henri III., 27th April, 1585, Brienne MS. : ‘Et luy 
[Prince de Parme] donne & entendre que les seigneurs de la dicte 
ligue se faisoient fortz @’avoir secours de degaé—a quoi il m’a re- 
spondu que jamais le d’Seign. Roy Catholique ne le feroit, et 
s’ils en faisoient courir le bruit, ce estoit pour donner plus @appuy 
& leurs affaires,” ete. 

2 Philip II. to J. B. Tassis, 15th March, 1585, Archivo de Siman- 
eas MS. 


1585] PARMA’S SECRECY 145 


The prince was anything but pleased, in the midst of 
his anxiety and his almost superhuman labor in the 
Antwerp siege, to be distracted, impoverished, and 
weakened in order to carry out these schemes against 
France; but he kept the secret manfully. 

To Malpierre, the French envoy in Brussels,—for there 
was the closest diplomatic communication between 
Henry II. and Philip, while each was tampering with 
the rebellious subjects of the other,—to Malpierre, 
Parma flatly contradicted all complicity on the part of 
the Spanish king or himself with the Holy League, of 
which he knew Philip to be the originator and the chief. 

“Tf I complain to the Prince of Parma,” said the 
envoy, “of the companies going from Flanders to assist 
the League, he will make me no other reply than that 
which the president has done—that there is nothing at 
all in it—until they are fairly arrived in France. The 
president [Richardot] said that if the Catholic king be- 
longed to the League, as they insinuate, his Majesty 
would declare the fact openly.” } 

And a few days later the prince himself averred, as 
Malpierre had anticipated, that “as to any intention on 
the part of himself or his Catholic Majesty to send 
succor to the League, according to the boast of these 
gentlemen, he had never thought of such a thing, nor 
had received any order on the subject from his master. 
If the king intended to do anything of the kind, he 
would do it openly. He protested that he had never 
seen anything or known anything of the League.” 2 

Here was a man who knew how to keep a secret, and 
who had no scruples in the matter of dissimulation, 

Malpierre 4 De Crosne, 27th April, 1585, Brienne MS. 
2 Malpierre & Henri III., 28th May, 1585, Brienne MS. 
VOL. I.—10 


146 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


however enraged he might be at seeing men and money 
diverted from his own masterly combinations in order 
to carry out these schemes of his master. 

Mucio, on the contrary, was imprudent and inclined 
to boast. His contempt for Henry III. made him blind 
to the dangers to be apprehended from Henry of Na- 
varre. He did little, but talked a great deal. 

Philip was very anxious that the work should be done 
both secretly and thoroughly. ‘Let the business be 
finished before St. John’s day,” said he to Tassis, when 
sending fifty thousand dollars for the use of the brothers 
Guise. “Tell Iniquez to warn them not to be sluggish. 
Let them not begin in a lukewarm manner, but promise 
them plenty of assistance from me, if they conduct 
themselves properly. Let them beware of wavering, or 
of falling into plans of conciliation. If they do their 
duty, I will do mine.”+ 

But the Guise faction moved slowly despite of Philip’s 
secret promptings. The truth is that the means pro- 
posed by the Spanish monarch were ludicrously inade- 
quate to his plans, and it was idle to suppose that the 
world was to be turned upside down for his benefit, at 
the very low price which he was prepared to pay. 

Nothing less than to exterminate all the heretics in 
Christendom, to place himself on the thrones of 
France and of England, and to extinguish the last 
spark of rebellion in the Netherlands, was his secret 
thought, and yet it was very difficult to get fifty thou- 
sand dollars from him from month to month. Procras- 
tinating and indolent himself, he was forever rebuking 
the torpid movements of the Guises. 

“Let Mucio set his game well at the outset,” said he; 


1 Philip IZ. to Tassis, MS. before cited. 


1585] RECRIMINATION AMONG THE LEAGUERS 147 


“let him lay the ax to the root of the tree, for to be 
wasting time fruitlessly is sharpening the knife for 
himself.” 1 

This was almost prophetic. When, after so much 
talking and tampering, there began to be recrimination 
among the Leaguers, Philip was very angry with his 
subordinate. 

“Here is Mucio,” said he, “trying to throw the blame 
of all the difficulties which have arisen upon us. Not 
hastening, not keeping his secret, letting the execution 
of the enterprise grow cold, and lending an ear to 
suggestions about peace, without being sure of its con- 
clusion, he has turned his followers into cowards, dis- 
credited his cause, and given the King of France 
opportunity to strengthen his force and improve his 
party. These are all very palpable things. I am will- 
ing to continue my friendship for them, but not if, 
while they accept it, they permit themselves to com- 
plain, instead of manifesting gratitude.” ? 

On the whole, however, the affairs of the League 


1 “<T,o que sobre todo conviene acordar y encargar a Mucio es 
que procure poner bien su juego 4 los principios, con acudir 4 la 
raiz porque lo contrario y dejarse consamir del tiempo debalde, 
podra ser su cuchillo.”—Philip II. to Tassis, MS. before cited. 

2 “Miucio nos quiere hazer aca cargo de todas las dificultades en 
que alla se han metido, al principio par apresurarse y no guardar 
bien su segreto, y despues por haver se resfriado la execucion de 
la empresa, y dado oydos a la paz, que tras no les poder ser segura 
la conclusion della, solo el trato ha acobardado los animos de los 
que le siguieran, desacreditando su causa y dando lugar a que el 
Rey de Francia pudiesse recoger sus fuerzas y mejorar su partido, 
que son todas tan palpables—mas no les acceptando que estan 
quexosos en lugar de obligados.””— Philip II. to Mendoza, 9th July, 
1585, Archivo de Simancas MS.; in the Archives de l’Empire at 
Paris, A. 56, No. 30. 


148 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


seemed prosperous. There was doubtless too much 
display among the confederates, but there was a grow- 
ing uneasiness among the royalists. Cardinal Bourbon, 
discarding his ecclesiastical robes and scarlet stockings, 
paraded himself daily in public, clothed in military cos- 
tume, with all the airs of royalty. Many persons 
thought him mad. On the other hand, Epergnon, the 
haughty minion-in-chief, who governed Henry III. and 
insulted all the world, was becoming almost polite. 

“The progress of the League,” said Busbecq, “is 
teaching the Due d’Epergnon manners. ’T is a youth 
of such insolence that without uncovering he would 
talk with men of royal descent, while they were bare- 
headed. ’T is a common jest now that he has found 
out where his hat is.” 

Thus for a long time a network of secret political 
combinations had been stretching itself over Christen- 
dom. There were great movements of troops through- 
out Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, slowly 
concentrating themselves upon France; yet, on the 
whole, the great mass of the populations, the men and 
women who were to pay, to fight, to starve, to be tram- 
pled upon, to be outraged, to be plundered, to be burned 
out of houses and home, to bleed, and to die, were 
merely ignorant, gaping spectators. That there was 
something very grave in prospect was obvious, but ex- 
actly what was impending they knew no more than the 
generation yet unborn. Very noiselessly had the pa- 
tient manager who sat in the Escorial been making 
preparations for that European tragedy, in which most 
of the actors had such fatal parts assigned them, and of 
which few of the spectators of its opening scenes were 


1! Busbequii Epist. ad Rud., 25th April, 1585, p. 154. 


1585] THE EUROPEAN TRAGEDY 149 


doomed to witness the conclusion. A shifting and 
glancing of lights, a vision of vanishing feet, a tram- 
pling and bustling of unseen crowds, movements of con- 
cealed machinery, a few incoherent words, much noise 
and confusion vague and incomprehensible, till at last 
the tinkling of a small bell, and a glimpse of the modest 
manager stealing away as the curtain was rising—such 
was the spectacle presented at midsummer, 1585. 

And in truth the opening picture was effective: six- 
teen black-robed, long-bearded Netherland envoys stalk- 
ing away, discomfited and indignant, upon one side; 
Catherine de’ Medici on the other, regarding them with 
a sneer, painfully contorted into a pathetic smile ; Henry 
the king, robed in a sack of penitence, trembling and 
hesitating, leaning on the arm of Epergnon, but quail- 
ing even under the protection of that mighty swords- 
man; Mucio, careering, truncheon in hand, in full 
panoply, upon his war-horse, waving forward a mingled 
mass of German landsknechts, Swiss musketeers, and 
Lorraine pikemen; the redoubtable Don Bernardino de 
Mendoza, in front, frowning and ferocious, with his 
drawn sword in his hand; Elizabeth of England, in the 
background, with the white-bearded Burghley and the 
monastic Walsingham, all surveying the scene with eyes 
of deepest meaning; and, somewhat aside, but in full 
view, silent, calm, and imperturbably good-humored, the 
bold Béarnese, standing with a mischievous but pro- 
phetic smile glittering through his blue eyes and curly 
beard. Thus grouped were the personages of the drama 
in the introductory scenes. 

The course of public events which succeeded the de- 
parture of the Netherland deputies is sufficiently well 
known. The secret negotiations and intrigues, however, 


150 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


by which those external facts were preceded or accom- 
panied rest mainly in dusty archives, and it was there- 
fore necessary to dwell somewhat at length upon them 
in the preceding pages. 

The treaty of Joinville was signed on the last day of 
the year 1584. 

We have seen the real nature of the interview of Am- 
bassador Mendoza with Henry III. and his mother, 
which took place early in January, 1585. Immediately 
after that conference Don Bernardino betook himself to 
the Duke of Guise, and lost no time in stimulating his 
confederate to prompt but secret action. 

The Netherland envoys had their last audience on the 
18th March, and their departure and disappointment was 
the signal for the general exhibition and explosion. 
The great civil war began, and the man who refused to 
annex the Netherlands to the French kingdom soon 
ceased to be regarded as a king. 

On the 31st March the heir presumptive, just manu- 
factured by the Guises, sent forth his manifesto. Car- 
dinal Bourbon, by this document, declared that for 
twenty-four years past no proper measures had been 
taken to extirpate the heresy by which France was in- 
fested. There was no natural heir to the king. Those 
who claimed to succeed at his death had deprived them- 
selves, by heresy, of their rights. Should they gain 
their ends the ancient religion would be abolished 
throughout the kingdom, as it had been in England, 
and Catholics be hed to the same frightful tortures 
which they were experiencing there. New men, ad- 
mitted to the confidence of the crown, clothed sali the 
highest honors, and laden with enormous emoluments, 
had excluded ahs ancient and honored functionaries of 


1585] MANIFESTO OF THE LEAGUE 151 


the state, who had been obliged to sell out their offices 
to these upstart successors. These new favorites had 
seized the finances of the kingdom, all of which were 
now collected into the private coffers of the king, and 
shared by him with his courtiers. The people were 
groaning under new taxes invented every day, yet they 
knew nothing of the distribution of the public treasure, 
while the king himself was so impoverished as to be 
unable to discharge his daily debts. Meantime these 
new advisers of the crown had renewed to the Protes- 
tants of the kingdom the religious privileges of which 
they had so justly been deprived, yet the religious peace 
which had followed had not brought with it the prom- 
ised diminution of the popular burdens. Never had 
the nation been so heavily taxed or reduced to such 
profound misery. For these reasons he, Cardinal 
Bourbon, with other princes of the blood, peers, gentle- 
men, cities, and universities, had solemnly bound them- 
selves by oath to extirpate heresy down to the last root, 
and to save the people from the dreadful load under 
which they were languishing. It was for this that they 
had taken up arms, and till that purpose was accom- 
plished they would never lay them down. 

The paper concluded with the hope that his Majesty 
would not take these warlike demonstrations amiss, and 
a copy of the document was placed in the royal hands.’ 

It was very obvious to the most superficial observer 
that the manifesto was directed almost as much against 
the reigning sovereign as against Henry of Navarre. 
The adherents of the Guise faction, and especially cer- 
tain theologians in their employ, had taken very bold 
grounds upon the relations between king and subjects, 


1 De Thou, ix. 284 seq. 


152 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and had made the public very familiar with their doe- 
trines. It was a duty, they said, “to depose a prince 
who did not discharge his duty. Authority ill regulated 
was robbery, and it was as absurd to call him a king 
who knew not how to govern, as it was to take a blind 
man for a guide, or to believe that a statue could influ- 
ence the movements of living men.” 1 

Yet to the faction inspired by such rebellious senti- 
ments, and which was thundering in his face such 
tremendous denunciations, the unhappy Henry could 
not find a single royal or manly word of reply. He 
threw himself on his knees when, if ever, he should 
have assumed an attitude of command. He answered 
the insolence of the men who were parading their con- 
tempt for his authority by humble excuses and suppli- 
cations for pardon. He threw his crown in the dust 
before their feet, as if such humility would induce them 
to place it again upon his head. He abandoned the 
minions who had been his pride, his joy, and his de- 
fense, and deprecated with an abject whimper all re- 
sponsibility for the unmeasured ambition and the 
insatiable rapacity of a few private individuals. He 
conjured the party leaders, who had hurled defiance in 
his face, to lay down their arms, and promised that they 
should find in his wisdom and bounty more than all the 
advantages which they were seeking to obtain by war.? 

Henry of Navarre answered in a different strain. 
The gauntlet had at last been thrown down to him, and 
he came forward to take it up, not insolently nor care- 
lessly, but with the cold courtesy of a Christian knight 
and valiant gentleman. He denied the charge of heresy. 
He avowed detestation of all doctrines contrary to the 


1 Perefixe, 58. 2 De Thou, ix. 288. 


1585] ATTITUDE OF NAVARRE 153 


Word of God, to the decrees of the fathers of the Church, 
or condemned by the councils. The errors and abuses 
which had from time to time crept into the Church had 
long demanded, in the opinion of all pious persons, 
some measures of reform. After many bloody wars no 
better remedy had been discovered to arrest the cause of 
these dire religious troubles, whether in France or Ger- 
many, than to permit all men to obey the dictates of 
their own conscience. The Protestants had thus ob- 
tained in France many edicts by which the peace of the 
kingdom had been secured. He could not himself be 
denounced as a heretic, for he had always held himself 
ready to receive instruction, and to be set right where 
he had erred. To call him “relapsed” was an outrage. 
Were it true, he were indeed unworthy of the crown; 
but the world knew that his change at the massacre of 
St. Bartholomew had been made under duress, and that 
he had returned to the Reformed faith when he had re- 
covered his liberty. Religious toleration had been the 
object of his life. In what the tyranny of the popes 
and the violence of the Spaniards had left him of his 
kingdom of Navarre, Catholics and Protestants enjoyed 
a perfect religious liberty. No man had the right, 
therefore, to denounce him as an enemy of the Church, 
or a disturber of the public repose, for he had ever been 
willing to accept all propositions of peace which left the 
rights of conscience protected. 

He was a Frenchman, a prince of France, a living 
member of the kingdom, feeling with its pains and 
bleeding with its wounds. They who denounced him 
were alien to France, factitious portions of her body, 
feeling no suffering, even should she be consuming with 
living fire. The Leaguers were the friends and the 


154 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


servants of the Spaniards, while he had been born the 
enemy, and with too good reason, of the whole Spanish 
race. 

“Let the name of papist and of Huguenot,” he said, 
“be heard no more among us. Those terms were buried 
in the edict of peace. Let us speak only of Frenchmen 
and of Spaniards. It is the counter-league which we 
must all unite to form, the natural union of the head 
with all its members.” 

Finally, to save the shedding of so much innocent 
blood, to spare all the countless miseries of civil war, he 
implored the royal permission to terminate this quarrel 
in person, by single combat with the Duke of Guise, one 
to one, two to two, or in as large a number as might be 
desired, and upon any spot within or without the king- 
dom that should be assigned. “The Duke of Guise,” 
said Henry of Navarre, “cannot but accept my chal- 
lenge as an honor, coming as it does from a prince in- 
finitely his superior in rank, and thus may God defend 
the right.” 

This paper, drawn up by the illustrious Duplessis- 
Mornay, who was to have been the second of the King 
of Navarre in the proposed duel, was signed 10th June, 
1585.1 

The unfertunate Henry III., not so dull as to doubt 
that the true object of the Guise party was to reduce him 
to insignificance and to open their own way to the throne, 
was too impotent of purpose to follow the dictates which 
his wisest counselors urged and his own reason ap- 
proved. His choice had lain between open hostility 

' Declaration du Roy de Navarre contre les calomnies de la 


Ligue, in Duplessis-Mornay, Mémoires et Correspondance (ed. 
1824), vol. iii. 94 seq. De Thou, ix. 320 seq. 


1585] THE LEAGUE DEMANDS A ROYAL DECREE 155 


with his Spanish enemy and amore terrible combat with 
that implacable foe wearing the mask of friendship. 
He had refused to annex to his crown the rich and 
powerful Netherlands, from dread of a foreign war, and 
he was now about to accept for himself and kingdom 
all the horrors of a civil contest, in which his avowed 
antagonist was the first captain of the age, and his 
nominal allies the stipendiaries of Philip II. 

Villeroy, his prime minister, and Catherine de’ Medici, 
his mother, had both devoted him to disgrace and ruin. 
The deputies from the Netherlands had been dismissed, 
and now, notwithstanding the festivities and exuberant 
demonstrations of friendship with which the Earl of 
Derby’s splendid embassy had been greeted, it became 
necessary to bind Henry hand and foot to the conspira- 
tors, who had sworn the destruction of that queen, as 
well as his own, and the extirpation of heresy and her- 
etics in every realm of Christendom. 

On the 9th June the League demanded a royal decree 
forbidding the practice of all religion but the Roman 
Catholic on pain of death. In vain had the clear-sighted 
Bishop of Acqs uttered his eloquent warnings. Despite 
such timely counsels, which he was capable at once of 
appreciating and of neglecting, Henry followed slavishly 
the advice of those whom he knew in his heart to be his 
foes, and authorized the great conspiracy against Eliza- 
beth, against Protestantism, and against himself. 

On the 5th June Villeroy had expressed a wish for a 
very secret interview with Mendoza on the subject of 
the invasion of England. 

“Tt needed not this overture,” said that magniloquent 
Spaniard, “to engender in a person of my talents, and 
with the heart of a Mendoza, venom enough for ven- 


156 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


geance. I could not more desire than I did already to 
assist in so holy a work, nor could I aspire to greater 
honor than would be gained in uniting those crowns [of 
France and Spain] in strict friendship, for the purpose 
of extirpating heresy throughout Europe, and of chastis- 
ing the Queen of England,—whose abominations I am 
never likely to forget, having had them so long before 
my eyes,—and of satisfying my just resentment for the 
injuries she has inflicted on myself. It was on this 
subject,” continued the ambassador, “that M. de Vil- 
leroy wished a secret interview with me, pledging him- 
self, if your Majesty would deign to unite yourself with 
this king and to aid him with your forces, to a suc- 
cessful result.” 1 

Mendoza accordingly expressed a willingness to meet 
the ingenuous secretary of state, who had so recently 
been assisting at the banquets and rejoicings with Lord 
Derby and his companions, which had so much enliv- 
ened the French capital, and assured him that his Most 
Catholic Majesty would be only too glad to draw closer 
the bonds of friendship with the Most Christian King, 
for the service of God and the glory of his Church. 

The next day the envoy and the secretary of state 


1 “La abertura que estos reyes me havian hecho... no 
havia de engendrar en una persona de mis prendas y coragon de 
un Mendoza veneno para procurar vengangas, y no antes desseo de 
ayudar obra tan santa, pues que me podria redundar mayor honra 
que de otra ninguna, siendo instrumento para unir estas coronas 
con firme amistad, debaxo de lo qual pudiesse extirpar las heregias 
de Europa, dando privilegio a esto, con castigar a la reyna de 
Ingaltierra, cuyas abominaciones creya que yo no tendria olvidadas, 
como persona que las havia tenido tantos anos adelante los ojos, y 
causa de justo resentimiento por lo que havia hecho a la propria 
mia. Sobre esta materia dessara el Senor Villeroy vene secreta- 


1585] INTERVIEW OF MENDOZA AND VILLEROY 157 


met, very secretly, in the house of the Signor Gondi. 
Villeroy commenced his harangue by an allusion to the 
current opinion that Mendoza had arrived in France 
with a torch in his hand, to light the fires of civil war 
in that kingdom, as he had recently done in England.t 

“T do not believe,” replied Mendoza, “that discreet 
and prudent persons in France attribute my actions to 
any such motives. As for the ignorant people of the 
kingdom, they do not appal me, although they evidently 
imagine that I have imbibed, during my residence in 
England, something of the spirit of the enchanter Mer- 
lin, that by signs and cabalistic words alone I am 
thought capable of producing such commotions.” 2 

After this preliminary flourish the envoy proceeded to 
complain bitterly of the Most Christian King and his 
mother, who, after the propositions which they had 
made him, when on his way to Spain, had, since his re- 
turn, become so very cold and dry toward him.? And 
on this theme he enlarged for some time. 

Villeroy replied by complaining, in his turn, about 
the dealings of the Most Catholic King with the Leaguers 
and the rebels of France, and Mendoza rejoined by an 
mente conmigo, y entender suyo, me asegurara, si V. M? holgaria 
de ayudar con sus fuer¢as y juntarse con este rey, para el efeto.” 
—Don Bern‘ine de Mendoza a Su Cai R. Mag? (de cifrada), Paris, 
7th June, 1585, Archivo de Simancas; in the Archives de Empire 
at Paris, B. 56, Nos. 220, 223, MS. 

1 “Con el acha en la mano para emprender fuego de guerra 
civil, como havia hecho en Ingaltierra.”—MS. just cited, 7th June, 

5. 

“ “<Y que los ignorantes de francia no me espantarian, imaginan- 
dose haverse me pegado del tiempo que estuve en Ingaltierra algo 
del spiritu de Merlin, para hager, con signos y palabras, semejan- 
tes commociones.”—Ibid. 

3 “Havellos hallado tan frios y secos.”—Ibid. 


158 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


intimation that harping upon past grievances and sus- 
picions was hardly the way to bring about harmony in 
present matters. 

Struck with the justice of this remark, the French 
secretary of state entered at once upon business. He 
made a very long speech! upon the tyranny which 
“that Englishwoman” was anew inflicting upon the 
Catholics in her kingdom, upon the offenses which she 
had committed against the King of Spain, and against 
the King of France and his brothers, and upon the ali- 
ment which she had been yielding to the civil war in 
the Netherlands and in France for so many years. He 
then said that if Mendoza would declare with sincerity, 
and “without any of the duplicity of a minister,” that 
Philip would league himself with Henry for the purpose 
of invading England, in order to reduce the three king- 
doms to the Catholic faith, and to place their crowns on 
the head of the Queen of Scotland, to whom they of 
right belonged; then that the king, his master, was 
most ready to join in so holy an enterprise. He begged 
Mendoza to say with what number of troops the inva- 
sion could be made; whether Philip could send any 
from Flanders or from Spain; how many it would be 
well to send from France, and under what chieftain ; in 
what manner it would be best to communicate with his 


1 “Respondio me que era bien proponiendo me con grande 
arenga, la tirannia con que procedia contra los catolicos agora de 
nuevo la de Ingaltierra, offensas que havia hecho a V. M4, y el 
mismo a este rey y hermanos, alimentando la guerra en los payses 
baxos, y en francia, por lungos afios, que le dixesse, con llaneza y 
sin doblez de ministro, si V. Ma holgaria de juntarse y ligarse con 
este rey, para hazer aquella impresa, reduziendo los tres reynos a 
la fee Cate? Rom™, y poniendo la corona a la de la reyna de Esco- 
zia, que era a la que de derecho le tocava, y lo que el rey su amo 


1585] DESIGNS OF FRANCE AND SPAIN 159 


Most Catholic Majesty ; whether it were desirable to de- 
spatch a secret envoy to him, and of what quality such 
agent ought to be. He also observed that the Most 
Christian King could not himself speak to Mendoza on 
the subject before having communicated the matter to 
the queen mother, but expressed a wish that a special 
carrier might be forthwith despatched to Spain, for he 
might be sure that on an affair of such weight he 
would not have permitted himself to reveal the secret 
wishes of his master, except by his commands. 
Mendoza replied by enlarging with much enthusiasm 
on the facility with which England could be conquered 
by the combined power of France and Spain. If it 
were not a very difficult matter before, even with the 
jealousy between the two crowns, how much less so now 
that they could join their fieets and armies; now that 
the arming by the one prince would not inspire the 
other with suspicion; now that they would be certain 
of finding safe harbor in each other’s kingdoms, in case 
of unfavorable weather and head winds, and that they 
could arrange from what ports to sail, in what direction, 
and under what commanders. He disapproved, how- 
ever, of sending a special messenger to Spain, on the 
ground of wishing to keep the matter entirely secret, 
but in reality, as he informed Philip, because he chose 
to keep the management in his own hands; because he 
could always let slip Mucio upon them, in case they 


solo pretendia, que quedasse a quel reyno en la neutralidad, que 
hasta aqui, que por ser empresa tan santa, se prometia que V. M¢ 
no refusaria el assistir con sus fuerzas a ella, que de animo de su 
amo me asegurava de estar aparejedissimo para ello,”—MS. just 
cited, 7th June, 1585. 

1 Thid. 


160 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


should play him false; because he feared that the leak- 
ing out of the secret might discourage the Leaguers; 
and because he felt that the bolder and more lively were 
the Cardinal of Bourbon and his confederates, the 
stronger was the party of the king, his master, and the 
more intimidated and dispirited would be the mind and 
the forces of the Most Christian King. ‘And this is 
precisely the point,” said the diplomatist, “at which a 
minister of your Majesty should aim at this season.” ! 

Thus the civil war in France—an indispensable part 
of Philip’s policy—was to be maintained at all hazards, 
and although the ambassador was of opinion that the 
Most Christian King was sincere in his proposition to 
invade England, it would never do to allow any interval 
of tranquillity to the wretched subjects of that Christian 
king. 

“T cannot doubt,” said Mendoza, “that the making of 
this proposal to me with so much warmth was the espe- 
cial persuasion of God, who, hearing the groans of the 
Catholics of England, so eruelly afflicted, wished to 
force the French king and his minister to feel, in the 
necessity which surrounds them, that the offending him, 
by impeding the grandeur of your Majesty, would be 
their total ruin, and that their only salvation is to unite 
in sincerity and truth with your Majesty for the de- 
struction of the heretics.” 2 

Therefore, although, judging from the nature of the 
French, he might imagine that they were attempting to 
put him to sleep, Mendoza on the whole expressed a con- 
viction that the king was in earnest, having arrived at 

1 “Que es, en lo que en esta sazon el ministro de V. Md ha de 


traer puesta la mira.”—MS. just cited, 7th June, 1585. 
2 Thid. 


1585] MENDOZA’S VIEWS 161 


the conclusion that he could only get rid of the Guise 
faction by sending them over to England. “Seeing 
that he cannot possibly eradicate the war from his king- 
dom,” said the envoy, “because of the boldness with 
which the Leaguers maintain it, with the strong assis- 
tance of your Majesty, he has determined to embrace 
with much fervor, and without any deception at all, the 
enterprise against England as the only remedy to quiet 
his own dominions. The subjugation of those three 
kingdoms, in order to restore them to their rightful 
owner, is a purpose so holy, just, and worthy of your 
Majesty, and one which you have had so constantly in 
view, that it is superfluous for me to enlarge upon the 
subject. Your Majesty knows that its effects will be 
the tranquillity and preservation of all your realms. 
The reasons for making the attempt, even without the 
aid of France, become demonstrations now that she is 
unanimously in favor of the scheme. The Most Chris- 
tian King is resolutely bent—so far as I can comprehend 
the intrigues of Villeroy—to carry out this project on 
the foundation of a treaty with the Guise party. It will 
not take much time, therefore, to put down the heretics 
here, nor will it consume much more to conquer Eng- 
land with the armies of two such powerful princes.t 
The power of that island is of little moment, there being 
no disciplined forces to oppose us, even if they were all 


1 “T,os de Guisa, teniendo las armas en la mano, combaten a los 
hereges de aqui, que no puede ser mucho tiempo, y assi mismo, el 
que se consumira en reduzir a Ingaltierra con fuergas de tan podero- 
sissimos principes, y la de laisla no de momento, pare podellos 
contrastor gente no exercitada, si bien estuviessen todos unanimos 
para defendarse, quanto mas, haviendo tantas Cateos que han de 
acudir a los estrangeros, viendo los tan poderosos.”—MS. just cited, 
7th June, 1585. ; 

VOL. I.—11 


162 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


unanimous in its defense; how much less, then, with so 
many Catholics to assist the invaders, seeing them so 
powerful! If your Majesty, on account of your Nether- 
lands, is not afraid of putting arms into the hands of 
the Guise family in France, there need be less objection 
to sending one of that house into England, particularly 
as you will send forces of your own into that kingdom, 
by the reduction of which the affairs of Flanders will be 
secured. To effect the pacification of the Netherlands 
the sooner, it would be desirable to conquer England as 
early as October.” } 

Having thus sufficiently enlarged upon the sincerity 
of the French king and his prime minister in their dark 
projects against a friendly power, and upon the ease 
with which that friendly power could be subjected, the 
ambassador begged for a reply from his royal master 
without delay. He would be careful meantime to keep 
the civil war alive in France,—thus verifying the poetical 
portrait of himself, the truth of which he had just been 
so indignantly and rhetorically denying,—but it was de- 
sirable that the French should believe that this civil war 
was not Philip’s sole object. He concluded by drawing 
his master’s attention to the sufferings of the English 
Catholics. “T cannot refrain,” he said, “from placing 
before your eyes the terrible persecutions which the 
Catholics are suffering in England; the blood of the mar- 
tyrs flowing in so many kinds of torments; the groans 
of the prisoners, of the widows and orphans; the 
general oppression and servitude, which is the greatest 
ever endured by a people of God, under any tyrant 
whatever. Your Majesty, into whose hands God is now 
pleased to place the means, so long desired, of extirpat- 


1 MS. just cited, 7th June, 1585. 


1585] ELIZABETH’S ENEMIES 163 


ing and totally destroying the heresies of our time, can 
alone liberate them from their bondage.” } 

The picture of these kings, prime ministers, and am- 
bassadors, thus plotting treason, stratagem, and mas- 
sacre, is a dark and dreary one. The description of 
English sufferings for conscience’ sake, under the Prot- 
estant Elizabeth, is even more painful, for it had, un- 
fortunately, too much of truth, although as wilfully 
darkened and exaggerated as could be done by religious 
hatred and Spanish bombast. The queen was sur- 
rounded by legions of deadly enemies. Spain, the pope, 
the League, were united in one perpetual conspiracy 
against her, and they relied on the codperation of those 
subjects of hers whom her own cruelty was converting 
into traitors. 

We read with a shudder these gloomy secrets of con- 
spiracy and wholesale murder, which make up the diplo- 
matic history of the sixteenth century, and we cease to 
wonder that a woman feeling herself so continually the 
mark at which all the tyrants and assassins of Europe 
were aiming—although not possessing, perhaps, the evi- 
dences of her peril so completely as they have been re- 
vealed to us—should come to consider every English 
papist as a traitor and an assassin. It was unfortunate 


1 “Ante cuyos ojos no puedo dexar de anteponer en esta la 
terible persecucion que ‘passan los Cats en Ingalt®, con mucha 
sangre de martires derremada con diversos generos de tormentos, 
los gemidos de los prisonieros, de los viudas y huerfanos, y opres- 
sion general y servidumbre que es la mayor que ha parescido jamas 
pueblo de Dios, debaxo de ningun tirano, de euya mano espera solo 
ser libertados por las de V. M‘a quien Dios es servido de poner 
en las proprias la ocasion que tantos dias ha procurado para la 
extirpacion y total destruycion de les heregias de nro tiempo, el 
sea servido de remediallos.”—MS. just cited, 7th June, 1585. 


164 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


that she was not able to rise beyond the vile instincts of 
the age, and by a magnanimous and sublime toleration 
to convert her secret enemies into loyal subjects. 

And now Henry of Valois was to choose between 
League and counter-league, between Henry of Guise and 
Henry of Navarre, between France and Spain. The 
whole chivalry of Gascony and Guienne, the vast swarm 
of industrious and hardy Huguenot artisans, the Nether- 
land rebels, the great English queen, stood ready to 
support the cause of French nationality, and of all na- 
tionalities, against a threatening world-empire, of reli- 
gious liberty against sacerdotal absolutism, and the crown 
of a king, whose only merit had hitherto been to ac- 
quiesce in a religious toleration dictated to him by 
others, against those who derided his authority and in- 
sulted his person. The bold knight errant of Christen- 
dom, the champion to the utterance against Spain, stood 
there with lance in rest, and the king scarcely hesitated. 

The League, gliding so long unheeded, now reared its 
crest in the very palace of France, and full in the mon- 
arch’s face. With a single shudder the victim fell into 
its coils. 

The choice was made. On the 18th of July the edict 
of Nemours was published, revoking all previous edicts 
by which religious peace had been secured. Death and 
confiscation of property were now proclaimed as the 
penalty of practising any religious rites save those of 
the Roman Catholie Church. Six months were allowed 
to the nonconformists to put their affairs in order, after 
which they were to make public profession of the Catho- 
lic religion, with regular attendance upon its ceremonies, 
or else go va perpetual exile. To remain in Ewes 
without abjuring heresy was thenceforth a mortal crime, 


1585] THE EDICT OF NEMOURS 165 


to be expiated upon the gallows. As a matter of course, 
all Huguenots were instantaneously incapacitated from 
public office, the mixed chambers of justice were abol- 
ished, and the cautionary towns were to be restored. 
On the other hand, the Guise faction were to receive 
certain cities into their possession, as pledges that this 
sanguinary edict should be fulfilled. 

Thus did Henry III. abjectly kiss the hand which 
smote him. His mother, having since the death of 
Anjou no further interest in affecting to favor the 
Huguenots, had arranged the basis of this treaty with 
the Spanish party. And now the unfortunate king had 
gone solemnly down to the Parliament of Paris, to be 
present at the registration of the edict. The counselors 
and presidents were all assembled, and as they sat there 
in their crimson robes, they seemed, to the excited ima- 
gination of those who loved their country, like embodi- 
ments of the impending and most sanguinary tragedy. 
As the monarch left the parliament-house a faint ery of 
“God save the king” was heard in the street. Henry 
hung his head, for it was long since that cry had met his 
ears, and he knew that it was a false and languid demon- 
stration which had been paid for by the Leaguers. 

And thus was the compact signed—an unequal com- 
pact. Madame League was on horseback, armed in 
proof, said a contemporary; the king was on foot, and 
dressed in a shirt of penitence? The alliance was not 
an auspicious one. Not peace, but a firebrand,—facem, 
non pacem,—had the king held forth to his subjects.* 


1 De Thou, ix. 328 seq. 2 L’Estoile, 186. 
3 «Guisiadis factum dum puto dicere pacem, 


Pacem non possum dicere, dico facem.” 
Thid., 137. 


166 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


When the news came to Henry of Navarre that the 
king had really promulgated this fatal edict, he re- 
mained for a time, with amazement and sorrow, lean- 
ing heavily upon a table, with his face in his right 
hand. When he raised his head again—so he after- 
ward asserted—one side of his mustachio had turned 
white.t 

Meantime Gregory XIII., who had always refused to 
sanction the League, was dead, and Cardinal Peretti, 
under the name of Sixtus V., now reigned in his place. 
Born of an illustrious house, as he said,—for it was a 
house without a roof,?—this monk of humble origin was 
of inordinate ambition. Feigning a humility which 
was but the cloak to his pride, he was in reality as 
grasping, self-seeking, and revengeful as he seemed 
gentle and devout. It was inevitable that a pontiff of 
this character should seize the opportunity offered him 
to mimic Hildebrand, and to brandish on high the 
thunderbolts of the Church. 

With a flaming prelude concerning the omnipotence 
delegated by Almighty God to St. Peter and his 
successors, —an authority infinitely superior to all earthly 
powers,—the decrees of which were irresistible alike by 
the highest and the meanest, and which hurled misguided 
princes from their thrones into the abyss, like children 
of Beelzebub, the pope proceeded to fulminate his sen- 
tence of excommunication against those children of 
wrath, Henry of Navarre and Henry of Condé. They 
were denounced as heretics, relapsed, and enemies of 
God. The king was declared dispossessed of his 
principality of Béarn, and of what remained to him of 
Navarre. He was stripped of all dignities, privileges, 


1 Mathieu, anno 1585. 2 De Thou, ix. 368 seq. 


1585] NAVARRE’S SQUIB AGAINST THE POPE 167 


and property, and especially proclaimed incapable of 
ever ascending the throne of France.! 

The Béarnese replied by a clever political squib. A 
terse and spirited paper found its way to Rome, and 
was soon affixed to the statues of Pasquin and Marforio, 
and in other public places of that city, and even to the 
gates of the papal palace. Without going beyond his 
own doors, his Holiness had the opportunity of reading, 
to his profound amazement, that Mr. Sixtus, calling 
himself pope, had foully and maliciously lied in calling 
the King of Navarre a heretic. This Henry offered to 
prove before any free council legitimately chosen. If 
the pope refused to submit to such decision, he was 
himself no better than excommunicate and Antichrist, 
and the King of Navarre thereby declared mortal and 
perpetual war upon him. The ancient kings of France 
had known how to chastise the insolence of former 
popes, and he hoped when he ascended the throne to 
take vengeance on Mr. Sixtus for the insult thus offered 
to all the kings of Christendom, and so on, in a vein 
which showed the Béarnese to be a man rather amused 
than blasted by these papal fireworks.” 

Sixtus V., though imperious, was far from being dull. 
He knew how to appreciate a man when he found one, 
and he rather admired the cheerful attitude maintained 


1 De Thou, ix. 369. L’Estoile, 190. 

2 De Thou, ix. 376-378. Perefixe, 62,63. L’Estoile, 190. The 
last-named writer declares himself the author of this famous an- 
swer to the bull of Sixtus: 

“Au susdit ecrit, fait par Vauteur des presens memoires, on a 
fait faire du palais de Paris un voyage & Rome, ou Pon V’a mis, 
signifié, et affiché, et ’a t/on inseré aux recueils de ce tems, im- 
primes A la Rochelle, tant la vanité et curiosité de ce tems estoit 
grande.” 


168 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


by Navarre as he tossed back the thunderbolts. He 
often spoke afterward of Henry with genuine admira- 
tion, and declared that in all the world he knew but two 
persons fit to wear a crown—Henry of Navarre and 
Elizabeth of England. “’T was pity,” he said, “that 
both should be heretics.” 1 

And thus the fires of civil war had been lighted 
throughout Christendom, and the monarch of France 
had thrown himself head foremost into the flames. 


1 De Thou, Perefixe, ubi sup. 


CHAPTER V 


Position and character of Farnese—Preparations for Antwerp 
siege—Its characteristics—Foresight of William the Silent— 
Sainte-Aldegonde, the burgomaster— Anarchy in Antwerp—Char- 
acter of Sainte-Aldegonde— Admiral Treslong—Justinus de Nas- 
sau—Hohenlo— Opposition to the plan of Orange—Liefkenshoek 
—Headquarters of Parma at Kalloo—Difficulty of supplying the 
city—Results of not piercing the dikes— Preliminaries of the siege 
—Successes of the Spaniards—Energy of Farnese with sword and 
pen—His correspondence with the Antwerpers—Progress of the 
bridge—Impoverished condition of Parma— Patriots attempt Bois- 
le-Due—Their misconduct—Failure of the enterprise— The 
Schelde bridge completed—Description of the structure— Position 
of Alexander and his army—La Motte attempts in vain Ostend— 
Patriots gain Liefkenshoek—Projects of Gianibelli— Alarm on the 
bridge—The fire-ships—The explosion—Its results— Death of the 
Viscount of Ghent—Perpetual anxiety of Farnese—Impoverished 
state of the Spaniards—Intended attack of the Kowenstyn—Sec- 
ond attack of the Kowenstyn—A landing effected—A sharp com- 
bat—The dike pierced—Rally of the Spaniards—Parma comes to 
the rescue—Fierce struggle on the dike—The Spaniards success- 
ful—Premature triumph at Antwerp—Defeat of the patriots—The 
ship War’s End—Despair of the citizens—Sainte-Aldegonde dis- 
couraged—His critical position— His negotiations with the enemy 
— Correspondence with Richardot—Commotion in the city—Inter- 
view of Marnix with Parma—Suspicious conduct of Marnix— 
Deputation to the prince—Oration of Marnix—Private views of 
Parma—Capitulation of Antwerp—Mistakes of Marnix—Philip 
on the religious question—Triumphal entrance of Alexander—Re- 
building of the citadel—Gratification of Philip—Note on Sainte- 


Aldegonde. 
169 


170 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


THE negotiations between France and the Netherlands 
have been massed in order to present a connected and 
distinct view of the relative attitude of the different 
countries of Europe. The conferences and diplomatic 
protocolling had resulted in nothing positive; but it is 
very necessary for the reader to understand the negative 
effects of all this dissimulation and palace polities upon 
the destiny of the new commonwealth, and upon Christen- 
dom at large. The League had now achieved a great 
triumph; the King of France had virtually abdicated, 
and it was now requisite for the King of Navarre, the 
Netherlands, and Queen Elizabeth to draw more closely 
together than before, if the last hope of forming a 
counter-league were not to be abandoned. The next 
step in political combination was therefore a solemn 
embassy of the States-General to England. Before de- 
tailing those negotiations, however, it is proper to direct 
attention to the external public events which had been 
unrolling themselves in the provinces, contemporane- 
ously with the secret history which has been detailed in 
the preceding chapters. 

By presenting in their natural groupings various 
distinct occurrences, rather than by detailing them in 
strict chronological order, a clearer view of the whole 
picture will be furnished than could be done by inter- 
mingling personages, transactions, and scenery accord- 
ing to the arbitrary command of time alone. 

The Netherlands, by the death of Orange, had been 
left without a head. On the other hand, the Spanish 
party had never been so fortunate in their chief at any 
period since the destiny of the two nations had been 
blended with each other. Alexander Farnese, Prince 
of Parma, was a general and a politician, whose char- 


1585] POSITION AND CHARACTER OF FARNESE 171 


acter had been steadily ripening since he came into 
the command of the country. He was now thirty-seven 
years of age, with the experience of a sexagenarian. 
No longer the impetuous, arbitrary, hot-headed youth, 
whose intelligence and courage hardly atoned for his 
insolent manner and stormy career, he had become pen- 
sive, modest, almost gentle. His genius was rapid in 
conception, patient in combination, fertile in expedients, 
adamantine in the endurance of suffering, for never did 
a heroic general and a noble army of veterans manifest 
more military virtue in the support of an infamous cause 
than did Parma and his handful of Italians and Span- 
iards. That which they considered to be their duty they 
performed. The work before them they did with all 
their might. 

Alexander had vanquished the rebellion in the Celtic 
provinces by the masterly diplomacy and liberal bribery 
which have been related in a former work. Artois, 
Hainault, Douai, Orchies, with the rich cities of Lille, 
Tournay, Valenciennes, Arras, and other important 
places, were now the property of Philip. These un- 
happy and misguided lands, however, were already 
reaping the reward of their treason. Beggared, tram- 
pled upon, plundered, despised, they were at once the 
prey of the Spaniards, and the cause that their sister 
states, which still held out, were placed in more desper- 
ate condition than ever. They were also, even in their 
abject plight, made still more forlorn by the forays of 
Balagny, who continued in command of Cambray. 
Catherine de’ Medici claimed that city as her property, 
by will of the Duke of Anjou A strange title,— 
founded upon the treason and cowardice of her favorite 


1 Strada, ii, 295. 


re THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


son,—but one which, for a time, was made good.by 
the possession maintained by Balagny. That usurper 
meantime, with a shrewd eye to his own interests, 
pronounced the truce of Cambray, which was soon after- 
ward arranged, from year to year, by permission of 
Philip, as a “most excellent milch-cow,”? and he contin- 
ued to fill his pails at the expense of the “reconciled” 
provinces till they were thoroughly exhausted. 

This large southwestern section of the Netherlands 
being thus permanently reannexed to the Spanish crown, 
while Holland, Zealand, and the other provinces, already 
constituting the new Dutch Republic, were more obsti- 
nate in their hatred of Philip than ever, there remained 
the rich and fertile territory of Flanders and Brabant 
as the great debatable land. Here were the royal and 
political capital, Brussels, the commercial capital, Ant- 
werp, with Mechlin, Dendermonde, Vilvorde, and other 
places of inferior importance, all to be struggled for to 
the death. With the subjection of this district, the last 
bulwark between the new commonwealth and the old 
empire would be overthrown, and Spain and Holland 
would then meet face to face. 

If there had ever been a time when every nerve in 
Protestant Christendom should be strained to weld all 
those provinces together into one great commonwealth, 
as a bulwark for European lberty, rather than to allow 
them to be broken into stepping-stones over which ab- 
solutism could stride across France and Holland into 
England, that moment had arrived. Every sacrifice 
should have been cheerfully made by all Netherlanders, 
the uttermost possible subsidies and auxiliaries should 
have been furnished by all the friends of civil and reli- 


1 Le Petit, ii. 499. 


1585] PREPARATIONS FOR ANTWERP SIEGE 173 


gious liberty in every land, to save Flanders and Brabant 
from their impending fate. 

No man felt more keenly the importance of the busi- 
ness in which he was engaged than Parma. He knew 
his work exactly, and he meant to execute it thoroughly. 
Antwerp was the hinge on which the fate of the whole 
country, perhaps of all Christendom, was to turn. “If 
we get Antwerp,” said the Spanish soldiers, so fre- 
quently that the expression passed into a proverb, 
‘you shall all go to mass with us; if you save Antwerp, 
we will all go to conventicle with you.” 

Alexander rose with the difficulty and responsibility of 
his situation. His vivid, almost poetic intellect formed 
its schemes with perfect distinctness. Every episode in 
his great and, as he himself termed it, his “heroic en- 
terprise” was traced out beforehand: with the tranquil 
vision of creative genius, and he was prepared to con- 
vert his conceptions into reality, with the aid of an iron 
nature that never knew fatigue or fear. 

But the obstacles were many. Alexander’s master 
sat in his cabinet with his head full of Mucio, Don An- 
tonio, and Queen Elizabeth, while Alexander himself 
was left neglected, almost forgotten. His army was 
shrinking to a nullity. The demands upon him were 
enormous, his finances delusive, almost exhausted. To 
drain an ocean dry he had nothing but a sieve. What 
was his position? He could bring into the field perhaps 
eight or ten thousand men over and above the neces- 
sary garrisons. He had before him Brussels, Antwerp, 
Mechlin, Ghent, Dendermonde, and other powerful 
places which he was to subjugate. Here was a problem 
not easy of solution: Given an army of eight thousand, 
more or less, to reduce therewith in the least possible 


174 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


time half a dozen cities, each containing fifteen or 
twenty thousand men able to bear arms. To besiege 
these places in form was obviously a mere chimera. 
Assault, battery, and surprises—these were all out of 
the question. 

Yet Alexander was never more truly heroic than in 
this position of vast entanglement. Untiring, uncom- 
plaining, thoughtful of others, prodigal of himself, gen- 
erous, modest, brave, with so much intellect and so 
much devotion to what he considered his duty, he de- 
served to be a patriot and a champion of the right, 
rather than an instrument of despotism. 

And thus he paused for a moment, with much work 
already accomplished, but his hardest life-task before 
him; still in the noon of manhood, a fine martial figure, 
standing, spear in hand, full in the sunlight, though all 
the scene around him was wrapped in gloom—a noble, 
commanding shape, entitled to the admiration which 
the energetic display of great powers, however unscru- 
pulous, must always command. A dark, meridional 
physiognomy ; a quick, alert, imposing head; jet-black, 
close-clipped hair; a bold eagle’s face, with full, bright, 
restless eye; aman rarely reposing, always ready, never 
alarmed ; living in the saddle, with harness on his back: 
such was the Prince of Parma, matured and mellowed, 
but still unharmed, by time. 

The cities of Flanders and Brabant he determined to 
reduce by gaining command of the Schelde. The five 
principal ones—Ghent, Dendermonde, Mechlin, Brus- 
sels, Antwerp—le in a narrow circle, at distances from 
each other varying from five miles to thirty, and are all 
strung together by the great Netherland river or its 
tributaries. His plan was immensely furthered by the 


1585] ITS CHARACTERISTICS 175 


success of Balthazar Gérard, an ally whom Alexander 
had despised and distrusted, even while he employed 
him. The assassination of Orange was better to Parma 
than forty thousand men. <A crowd of allies instantly 
started up for him in the shape of treason, faint-hearted- 
ness, envy, jealousy, insubordination, within the walls 
of every beleaguered city. Alexander knew well how to 
deal with those auxiliaries. Letters, artfully concocted, 
full of conciliation and of promise, were circulated in 
every council-room, in almost every house. 

The surrender of Ghent, brought about by the gov- 
ernor’s eloquence, aided by the golden arguments which 
he knew so well how to advance, had by the middle of 
September put him in possession of West Flanders, 
with the important exception of the coast. Dender- 
monde capitulated at a still earlier day, while the fall 
of Brussels, which held out till many persons had been 
starved to death, was deferred till the 10th March of 
the following year, and that of Mechlin till midsummer.! 

The details of the military or political operations by 
which the reduction of most of these places was effected 
possess but little interest. The siege of Antwerp, how- 
ever, was one of the most striking events of the age, 
and although the change in military tactics and the 
progress of science may have rendered this leaguer of 
less technical importance than it possessed in the six- 
teenth century, yet the illustration that it affords of the 
splendid abilities of Parma, of the most cultivated mode 
of warfare in use at that period, and of the internal polli- 
tics by which the country was then regulated, makes it 
necessary to dwell upon the details of an episode which 
must ever possess enduring interest. 


1 Meteren, xii. 217 seq. 


176 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


It is agreeable to reflect, too, that the fame of the 
general is not polluted with the wholesale butchery 
which has stained the reputation of other Spanish com- 
manders so indelibly. There was no killing for the 
mere love of slaughter. With but few exceptions, there 
was no murder in cold blood, and the many lives that 
were laid down upon those watery dikes were sacrificed 
at least in bold, open combat, in a contest the ruling 
spirits of which were patriotism, or at least honor. 

It is instructive, too, to observe the diligence and ac- 
curacy with which the best lights of the age were 
brought to bear upon the great problem which Parma 
had undertaken to solve. All the science then at com- 
mand was applied both by the prince and by his bur- 
gher antagonists to the advancement of their ends. 
Hydrostatics, hydraulics, engineering, navigation, gun- 
nery, pyrotechnics, mining, geometry, were summoned 
as broadly, vigorously, and intelligently to the destrue- 
tion or preservation of a trembling city as they have 
ever been, in more commercial days, to advance a finan- 
cial or manufacturing purpose. Land converted into 
water, and water into land; castles built upon the breast 
of rapid streams; rivers turned from their beds and 
taught new courses; the distant ocean driven across 
ancient bulwarks, mines dug below the sea, and canals 
made to percolate obscene morasses, which the red 
hand of war, by the very act, converted into blooming 
gardens; a mighty stream bridged and mastered in the 
very teeth of winter; floating icebergs, ocean tides, and 
an alert and desperate foe, ever ready with fleets and 
armies and batteries—such were the materials of which 
the great spectacle was composed, a spectacle which 
enchained the attention of Europe for seven months, 


1584] POSITION OF ANTWERP aaa 


and on the result of which, it was thought, depended 
the fate of all the Netherlands, and perhaps of all 
Christendom. 

Antwerp, then the commercial center of the Nether- 
lands and of Europe, stands upon the Schelde. The 
river, flowing straight, broad, and full along the verge 
of the city, subtends the are into which the place ar- 
ranges itself as it falls back from the shore. Two thou- 
sand ships of the largest capacity then known might 
easily find room in its ample harbors. The stream, 
nearly half a mile in width and sixty feet in depth, with 
a tidal rise and fall of eleven feet, moves for a few 
miles in a broad and steady current between the prov- 
inces of Brabant and Flanders. Then, dividing itself 
into many ample estuaries, and gathering up the level 
isles of Zealand into its bosom, it seems to sweep out 
with them into the Northern Ocean. Here, at the junc- 
tion of the river and the sea, lay the perpetual hope of 
Antwerp; for in all these creeks and currents swarmed 
the fleets of the Zealanders, that hardy and amphibious 
race, with which few soldiers or mariners could success- 
fully contend on land or water. 

Even from the beginning of the year 1584 Parma had 
been from time to time threatening Antwerp. The vic- 
tim instinctively felt that its enemy was poising and 
hovering overhead, although he still delayed to strike. 
Early in the summer Sainte-Aldegonde, Recorder Mar- 
tini, and other official personages were at Delft, upon 
the oceasion of the christening ceremonies of Frederick 
Henry, youngest child of Orange. The prince at that 
moment was aware of the plans of Parma, and held a 
long conversation with his friends upon the measures 
which he desired to see immediately undertaken. Un- 

VOL. I.—12 


178 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


mindful of his usual hospitality, he insisted that these 
gentlemen should immediately leave for Antwerp. AI- 
exander Farnese, he assured them, had taken the firm 
determination to possess himself of that place without 
further delay. He had privately signified his purpose 
of laying the ax at once to the root of the tree, believing 
that with the fall of the commercial capital the infant 
confederacy of the United States would fall likewise. 
In order to accomplish this object, he would forthwith 
attempt to make himself master of the banks of the 
Schelde, and would even throw a bridge across the 
stream if his plans were not instantly circumvented.1 

William of Orange then briefly indicated his plan, 
adding that he had no fears for the result, and assuring 
his friends, who expressed much anxiety on the subject, 
that if Parma really did attempt the siege of Antwerp it 
should be his ruin. The plan was perfectly simple. 
The city stood upon a river. It was practicable, al- 
though extremely hazardous, for the enemy to bridge 
that river, and by so doing ultimately to reduce the 
place. But the ocean could not be bridged, and it was 
quite possible to convert Antwerp, for a season, into an 
ocean port. Standing alone upon an island, with the 
sea flowing around it, and with full and free marine 
communication with Zealand and Holland, it might 
safely bid defiance to the land forces even of so great a 
commander as Parma. To the furtherance of this great 
measure of defense it was necessary to destroy certain 
bulwarks, the chief of which was called the Blauw-garen 
dike, and Sainte-Aldegonde was therefore requested to 
return to the city, in order to cause this task to be ex- 
ecuted without delay.2 


1 Bor, ii. xix. 466. 2 Ibid. Meteren, xii. 216-218. 


1584] FORESIGHT OF WILLIAM THE SILENT 179 


Nothing could be more judicious than this advice. 
The low lands along the Schelde were protected against 
marine encroachments, and the river itself was confined 
to its bed, by a magnificent system of dikes, which ex- 
tended along its edge toward the ocean in parallel lines. 
Other barriers of a similar nature ran in oblique direc- 
tions through the wide, open pasture-lands, which they 
maintained in green fertility against the ever-threatening 
sea. The Blauw-garen, to which the prince mainly al- 
luded, was connected with the great dike upon the right 
bank of the Schelde. Between this and the city another 
bulwark, called the Kowenstyn dike, crossed the country 
at right angles to the river, and joined the other two at 
a point not very far from Lillo, where the states had a 
strong fortress. 

The country in this neighborhood was low, spongy, 
full of creeks, small meres, and the old bed of the 
Schelde. Orange, therefore, made it very clear that, by 
piercing the great dike just described, such a vast body 
of water would be made to pour over the land as to 
submerge the Kowenstyn also, the only other obstacle 
in the passage of fleets from Zealand to Antwerp. The 
city would then be connected with the sea and its isl- 
ands by so vast an expanse of navigable water that any 
attempt on Parma’s part to cut off supplies and succor 
would be hopeless. Antwerp would laugh the idea of 
famine to scorn, and although this immunity would be 
purehased by the sacrifice of a large amount of agri- 
cultural territory, the price so paid was but a slender 
one when the existence of the capital, and with it per- 
haps of the whole confederacy, was at stake.? 


1 Bor, Meteren, ubi sup. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 4 seq. 
2 Thid. 


180 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Sainte-Aldegonde and Martini suggested that, as there 
would be some opposition to the measure proposed, it 
might be as well to make a similar attempt on the Flem- 
ish side in preference, by breaking through the dikes in 
the neighborhood of Saftingen. Orange replied by de- 
monstrating that the land in the region which he had 
indicated was of a character to insure success, while in 
the other direction there were certain very unfavor- 
able circumstances which rendered the issue doubtful.t 
The result was destined to prove the sagacity of the 
prince, for it will be shown in the sequel that the 
Saftingen plan, afterward really carried out, was rather 
advantageous than detrimental to the enemy’s projects. 

Sainte-Aldegonde, accordingly, yielded to the argu- 
ments and entreaties of his friend, and repaired without 
delay to Antwerp. 

The advice of William the Silent—as will soon be re- 
lated—was not acted upon, and within a few weeks 
after it had been given he was in his grave. Nowhere 
was his loss more severely felt than in Antwerp. It 
seemed, said a contemporary, that with his death had 
died all authority.2 The prince was the only head which 
the many-membered body of that very democratic city 
ever spontaneously obeyed. Antwerp was a small repub- 
lic,—in time of peace intelligently and successfully ad- 
ministered,—which in the season of a great foreign war, 
amid plagues, tumults, famine, and internal rebellion, 
required the firm hand and the clear brain of a single 
chief. That brain and hand had been possessed by 
Orange alone. 

Before his death he had desired that Sainte-Aldegonde 


1 Bor, Meteren, ubi sup. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 4 seq. 
2 Reyd, iv. 59. 


1584] SAINTE-ALDEGONDE, BURGOMASTER 181 


should accept the office of burgomaster of the city. 
Nominally the position was not so elevated as were 
many of the posts which that distinguished patriot had 
filled. In reality it was as responsible and arduous a 
place as could be offered to any man’s acceptance 
throughout the country. Sainte-Aldegonde consented, 
not without some reluctance. He felt that there was 
odium to be incurred; he knew that much would be ex- 
pected of him, and that his means would be limited. 
His powers would be liable to a constant and various 
restraint. His measures were sure to be the subject of 
perpetual cavil. If the city were besieged, there were 
nearly one hundred thousand mouths to feed, and nearly 
one hundred thousand tongues to dispute about furnish- 
ing the food. 

For the government of Antwerp had been degenerating 
from a well-organized municipal republicanism into an- 
archy. The clashing of the various bodies exercising 
power had become incessant and intolerable The 
burgomaster was charged with the chief executive au- 
thority both for peace and war. Nevertheless, he had 
but a single vote in the board of magistrates, where a 
majority decided. Moreover, he could not always attend 
the sessions, because he was also member of the council 
of Brabant. Important measures might therefore be 
decided by the magistracy, not only against his judg- 
ment, but without his knowledge. Then there was a 
variety of boards or colleges, all arrogating concurrent 
—which in truth was conflicting—authority. There 
was the board of militia colonels, which claimed great 
powers. Here, too, the burgomaster was nominally the 
chief, but he might be voted down by a majority, and 


1 Meteren, xii. 218. Guicciardini, in voce. 


182 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


of course was often absent. Then there were sixteen 
captains who came into the colonels’ sessions whenever 
they liked, and had their word to say upon all subjects 
broached. If they were refused a hearing, they were 
backed by eighty other captains, who were ready at any 
moment to carry every disputed point before the “ broad 
council.” 

There were a college of ward-masters, a college of 
selectmen, a college of deacons, a college of ammuni- 
tion, of fortification, of ship-building, all claiming equal 
authority and all wrangling among themselves, and 
there was a college of “peacemakers,” who wrangled 
more than all the rest together. 

Once a week there was a session of the board, or gen- 
eral council. Dire were the hissing and confusion as the 
hydra heads of the multitudinous government were laid 
together. Heads of colleges, presidents of chambers, 
militia chieftains, magistrates, ward-masters, deans of 
fishmongers, of tailors, gardeners, butchers, all met to- 
gether pell-mell, and there was no predominant authority. 
This was not a convenient working machinery for a city 
threatened with a siege by the first captain of the age. 
Moreover, there was a deficiency of regular troops. 
The burgher militia were well trained and courageous, 
but not distinguished for their docility. There was also 
a regiment of English under Colonel Morgan, a soldier 
of great experience, and much respected; but, as Ste- 
phen Le Sieur said, “this foree, unless seconded with 
more, was but a breakfast for the enemy.” Unfortu- 
nately, too, the insubordination which was so ripe in the 
city seemed to affect these auxiliaries. A mutiny broke 
out among the English troops. Many deserted to 
Parma, some escaped to England, and it was not until 


1584] HIS GREAT LEARNING 183 


Morgan had beheaded Captain Lee and Captain Powell! 
that discipline could be restored. 

And into this scene of wild and deafening confusion 
came Philip de Marnix, Lord of Sainte-Aldegonde. 

There were few more brilliant characters than he in 
all Christendom. He was a man of a most rare and 
versatile genius. Educated in Geneva, at the very feet 
of Calvin, he had drunk like mother’s milk the strong 
and bitter waters of the stern reformer’s creed; but he 
had in after life attempted, although hardly with suc- 
cess, to lift himself to the height of a general religious 
toleration. He had also been trained in the severe and 
thorough literary culture which characterized that rigid 
school. He was a scholar ripe and rare, no holiday 
trifler in the gardens of learning. He spoke and wrote 
Latin like his native tongue. He could compose poign- 
ant Greek epigrams. He was so familiar with Hebrew 
that he had rendered the Psalms of David out of the 
original into flowing Flemish verse for the use of the 
Reformed churches. That he possessed the modern 
tongues of civilized Europe, Spanish, Italian, French, 
and German, was a matter of course. He was a pro- 
found jurisconsult, capable of holding debate against 
all competitors upon any point of theory or practice of 
law, civil, municipal, international. He was a learned 
theologian, and had often proved himself a match for 
the doctors, bishops, or rabbis of Europe, in highest 
argument of dogma, creed, or tradition. He was a prac- 
tised diplomatist, constantly employed in delicate and 
difficult negotiations by William the Silent, who ever 
admired his genius, cherished his friendship, and relied 
upon his character. He was an eloquent orator, whose 


1 Meteren, xii. 218. 


184 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


memorable harangue, beyond all his other efforts, at the 
Diet of Worms, had made the German princes hang their 
heads with shame when, taking a broad and philosophi- 
cal view of the Netherland matter, he had shown that 
it was the great question of Europe; that Nether Ger- 
many was all Germany; that Protestantism could not 
be unraveled into shreds; that there was but one cause 
in Christendom—that of absolutism against national 
liberty, papacy against the reform; and that the seven- 
teen provinces were to be assisted in building themselves 
into an eternal barrier against Spain, or that the “burn- 
ing mark of shame would be branded upon the forehead 
of Germany”; that the war, in short, was to be met by 
her on the threshold, or else that it would come to seek 
her at home—a prophecy which the horrible Thirty 
Years’ War was in after time most signally to verify. 

He was a poet of vigor and originality, for he had ac- 
complished what has been achieved by few: he had com- 
posed a national hymn, whose strophes, as soon as 
heard, struck a chord in every Netherland heart, and 
for three centuries long have rung like a clarion wher- 
ever the Netherland tongue is spoken. “Wilhelmus 
van Nassouwen,” regarded simply as a literary composi- 
tion, has many of the qualities which an ode demands, — 
an electrical touch upon the sentiments, a throb of pa- 
triotism, sympathetic tenderness, a dash of indignation, 
with rhythmical harmony and graceful expression,—and 
thus it has rung from millions of lips from generation 
to generation. 

He was a soldier, courageous, untiring, prompt in 
action, useful in council, and had distinguished himself 
on many a hard-fought field. Taken prisoner in the 
sanguinary skirmish at Maaslandsluis, he had been con- 


1584] HIS INTERESTING PERSONALITY 185 


fined a year, and for more than three months had never 
laid his head, as he declared, upon the pillow with- 
out commending his soul, as for the last time, to his 
Maker, expecting daily the order for his immediate exe- 
eution, and escaping his doom only because William 
the Silent proclaimed that the proudest head among the 
Spanish prisoners should fall to avenge his death, so 
that he was ultimately exchanged against the veteran 
Mondragon. 

From the incipient stages of the revolt he had been 
foremost among the patriots. He was supposed to be 
the author of the famous Compromise of the nobles, that 
earliest and most conspicuous of the state papers of the 
Republic, and of many other important political docu- 
ments, and he had contributed to general literature 
many works of European celebrity, of which “The Ro- 
man Beehive” was the most universally known. 

Scholar, theologian, diplomatist, swordsman, orator, 
poet, pamphleteer, he had genius for all things, and was 
eminent in all. He was even famous for his dancing, 
and had composed an intelligent and philosophical 
treatise upon the value of that amusement as an agent 
of civilization, and as a counteracter of the grosser 
pleasures of the table, to which Upper and Nether Ger- 
mans were too much addicted. 

Of ancient Savoyard extraction, and something of a 
southern nature, he had been born in Brussels, and was 
national to the heart’s core. 

A man of interesting, sympathetic presence; of a 
physiognomy where many of the attaching and attrac- 
tive qualities of his nature revealed themselves; with 
erisp, curling hair surmounting a tall, expansive fore- 
head, full of benevolence, idealism, and quick percep- 


186 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


tions; broad, brown, melancholy eyes, overflowing with 
tenderness; a lean and haggard cheek, a rugged Flemish 
nose, a thin, flexible mouth, a slender mustache, and a 
peaked and meager beard: so appeared Sainte-Aldegonde 
in the forty-seventh year of his age, when he came to 
command in Antwerp. 

Yet, after all, many-sided, accomplished, courageous, 
energetic as he was, it may be doubted whether he was 
the man for the hour or the post. He was too impres- 
sionable; he had too much of the temperament of 
genius. Without being fickle, he had, besides his versa- 
tility of intellect, a character which had much facility 
in turning, not, indeed, in the breeze of self-interest, 
but because he seemed placed in so high and clear an 
atmosphere of thought that he was often acted upon 
and swayed by subtle and invisible influences. At any 
rate, his conduct was sometimes inexplicable. He had 
been strangely fascinated by the ignoble Duke of Anjou, 
and in the sequel it will be found that he was destined 
to experience other magnetic or magical impulses, which 
were once thought suspicious, and have remained mys- 
terious even to the present day. 

He was imaginative. He was capable of broad and 
boundless hopes. He was sometimes prone to deep de- 
spair. His nature was exquisitely tempered, too fine 
and polished a blade to be wielded among those hydra 
heads by which he was now surrounded, and for which 
the stunning sledge-hammer of arbitrary force was 
sometimes necessary. 

He was perhaps deficient in that gift, which no train- 
ing and no culture can bestow, and which comes from 
above alone by birthright divine—that which men will- 
ingly call master, authority; the effluence which came 


1584] ADMIRAL TRESLONG 187 


so naturally from the tranquil eyes of William the Si- 
lent. 

Nevertheless, Sainte-Aldegonde was prepared to do 
his best, and all his best was to be tasked to the utmost. 
His position was rendered still more difficult by the un- 
ruly nature of some of his codrdinates. 

“From the first day to the last,” said one who lived 
in Antwerp during the siege, “the mistakes committed 
in the city were incredible.”! It had long been obvious 
that a siege was contemplated by Parma. A liberal sum 
of money had been voted by the States-General, of which 
Holland and Zealand contributed a very large propor- 
tion (two hundred thousand florins) ; the city itself voted 
another large subsidy, and an order was issued to pur- 
chase at once and import into the city at least a year’s 
supply of every kind of provisions of life and munitions 
of war.” 

William de Blois, Lord of Treslong, Admiral of Hol- 
land and Zealand, was requested to carry out this order 
and superintend the victualing of Antwerp. But Tres- 
long at once became troublesome. He was one of the 
old “beggars of the sea,” a leader in the wild band who 
had taken possession of the Brill in the teeth of Alva, 
and so laid the foundation of the Republic. An impetu- 
ous noble, of wealthy family, high connections, and re- 
fractory temper, a daring sailor, ever ready for any rash 
adventure, but possessed of a very moderate share of 
prudence or administrative ability, he fell into loose and 
lawless courses on the death of Orange, whose firm hand 
was needed to control him. The French negotiation 
had excited his profound disgust, and knowing Sainte- 
Aldegonde to be heart and soul in favor of that alliance, 


1 Le Petit, ii. 516. 2 Thid., ii. 500. 


188 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


he was in no haste whatever to carry out his orders with 
regard to Antwerp.1 He had also an insignificant 
quarrel with President Meetkerken. The Prince of 
Parma, ever on the watch for such opportunities, was 
soon informed of the admiral’s discontent, and had long 
been acquainted with his turbulent character. Alexan- 
der at once began to inflame his jealousy and soothe his 
vanity by letters and messengers, urging upon him the 
propriety of reconciling himself with the king, and 
promising him large rewards and magnificent employ- 
ments in the royal service. Even the splendid insignia 
of the Golden Fleece were dangled before his eyes. It 
is certain that the bold Hollander was not seduced by 
these visions, but there is no doubt that he listened to 
the voice of the tempter. He unquestionably neglected 
his duty. Week after week he remained at Ostend, 
sneering at the French and quaffing huge draughts in 
honor of Queen Elizabeth. At last, after much time 
had elapsed, he agreed to victual Antwerp if he could 
be furnished with thirty kromstevens—a peculiar kind 
of vessel not to be found in Zealand. The kromstevens 
were sent to him from Holland. Then, hearing that his 
negligence had been censured by the States-General, he 
became more obstinate than ever, and went up and down 
proclaiming that if people made themselves disagreeable 
to him he would do that which should make all the 
women and children in the Netherlands shriek and 
tremble. What this nameless horror was to be he never 
divulged, but meantime he went down to Middelburg 
and swore that not a boat-load of corn should go up to 
Antwerp until two members of the magistracy, whom he 
considered unpleasant, had been dismissed from their 


1 Strada, ii, 332 seq. 


1584] HIS IMPRISONMENT 189 


office. Wearied with all this bluster, and imbued with 
grave suspicion as to his motives, the states at last rose 
upon their high admiral and threw him into prison. 
He was accused of many high crimes and misdemeanors, 
and, it was thought, would be tried for his life. He was 
suspected and even openly accused of having been tam- 
pered with by Spain; but there was, at any rate, a de- 
ficiency of proof. 

“'Treslong is apprehended,” wrote Davison to Burgh- 
ley, “and is charged to have been the cause that the 
fleet passed not up to Antwerp. He is suspected to 
have otherwise forgotten himself, but whether justly or 
not will appear by his trial. Meantime he is kept in 
the common prison of Middelburg, a treatment which it 
is thought they would not offer him if they had not 
somewhat of importance against him.” 4 

He was subsequently released at the intercession of 
Queen Elizabeth, and passed some time in England. 
He was afterward put upon trial, but no accuser appear- 
ing to sustain the charges against him, he was eventually 
released. He never received a command in the navy 
again, but the very rich sinecures of grand falconer 
and chief forester of Holland were bestowed upon him, 
and he appearsto have ended his daysin peace and plenty.” 

He was succeeded in the post of admiral of Holland 
and Zealand by Justinus de Nassau, natural son of Wil- 
liam the Silent, a young man of much promise, but of 
little experience. 


1 Davison to Burghley and Walsingham, February 28, 1585, Sh 1 
Office MS. 

2 Strada, ii. 332 seq. Reyd, iv. 59. Bor, ii. xx. 570-594, Wage- 
naer, viii. 84-87. Meteren, xii. 218. 

3 Thid. 


190 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


General Count Hohenlo, too, lieutenant for young 
Maurice, and virtual commander-in-chief of the states’ 
forces, was apt to give much trouble. A German noble, 
of ancient descent and princely rank, brave to temerity, 
making a jest of danger, and riding into a foray as if to 
a merrymaking, often furiously intoxicated, and always 
turbulent and uncertain ; a handsome, dissipated cavalier, 
with long curls floating over his shoulders, an imposing, 
aristocratic face, and a graceful, athletic figure, he needed 
some cool brain and steady hand to guide him, valuable 
as he was to fulfil any daring project, but was hardly 
willing to accept the authority of a burgomaster. While 
the young Maurice yet needed tutelage, while “the sap- 
ling was growing into the tree,” Hohenlo was a danger- 
ous chieftain and a most disorderly lieutenant. 

With such municipal machinery and such coadjutors 
had Sainte-Aldegonde to deal, while meantime the de- 
lusive French negotiation was dragging its slow length 
along, and while Parma was noiselessly and patiently 
proceeding with his preparations. 

The burgomaster—for Sainte-Aldegonde, in whom 
vulgar ambition was not a foible, had refused the dig- 
nity and title of Margrave of Antwerp, which had been 
tendered him—had neglected no effort toward carrying 
into effect the advice of Orange, given almost with his 
latest breath. The manner in which that advice was 
received furnished a striking illustration of the defec- 
tive machinery which has been portrayed. 

Upon his return from Delft Sainte-Aldegonde had 
summoned a meeting of the magistracy of Antwerp. 
He laid before the board the information communicated 
by Orange as to Parma’s intentions. He also explained 
the scheme proposed for their frustration, and urged 


1584] OPPOSITION TO PLAN OF ORANGE 191 


the measures indicated with so much earnestness that 
his fellow-magistrates were convinced. The order was 
passed for piercing the Blauw-garen dike, and Sainte- 
Aldegonde, with some engineers, was requested to view 
the locality, and to take order for the immediate fulfil- 
ment of the plan.! 

Unfortunately, there were many other boards in ses- 
sion besides that of the schepens, many other motives 
at work besides those of patriotism. The gild of 
butchers held a meeting so soon as the plan suggested 
was known, and resolved with all their strength to op- 
pose its execution. 

The butchers were indeed furious. Twelve thousand 
oxen grazed annually upon the pastures which were 
about to be submerged, and it was represented as un- 
reasonable that all this good flesh and blood should be 
sacrificed. At a meeting of the magistrates on the fol- 
lowing day sixteen butchers, delegates from their gild, 
made their appearance, hoarse with indignation. They 
represented the vast damage which would be inflicted 
upon the estates of many private individuals by the 
proposed inundation, by this sudden conversion of teem- 
ing meadows, fertile farms, thriving homesteads, prolific 
orchards, into sandy desolation. Above all, they de- 
picted in glowing colors, and with natural pathos, the 
vast destruction of beef which was imminent, and they 
urged—with some show of reason—that if Parma were 
really about to reduce Antwerp by famine, his scheme 
certainly would not be obstructed by the premature an- 
nihilation of these wholesome supplies.? 

1 Bor, ii. 467. 

2 Tbid., ii. 467 seq. Meteren, xii. 216-218 seq. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 
4 seq. 


192 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


That the Schelde could be closed in any manner was, 
however, they said, a preposterous conception. That it 
could be bridged was the dream of a lunatic. Even if 
it were possible to construct a bridge, and probable that 
the Zealanders and Antwerpers would look on with 
folded arms while the work proceeded, the fabric, when 
completed, would be at the mercy of the ice-floods of the 
winter and the enormous power of the ocean tides. The 
Prince of Orange himself, on a former occasion, when 
Antwerp was Spanish, had attempted to close the river 
with rafts, sunken piles, and other obstructions, but the 
whole had been swept away, like a dam of bulrushes, by 
the first descent of the ice-blocks of winter. It was wit- 
less to believe that Parma contemplated any such mea- 
sure, and utterly monstrous to believe in its success.1 

Thus far the butchers. Soon afterward came sixteen 
colonels of militia as representatives of their branch of 
the multiform government. These personages, attended 
by many officers of inferior degree, sustained the posi- 
tion of the butchers with many voluble and vehement 
arguments. Not the least convincing of their conclu- 
sions was the assurance that it would be idle for the au- 
thorities to attempt the destruction of the dike, seeing 
that the municipal soldiery itself would prevent the 
measure by main force, at all hazards, and without re- 
gard to their own or others’ lives. 

The violence of this opposition, and the fear of a seri- 
ous internecine conflict at so critical a juncture, proved 
fatal to the project. Much precious time was lost, and 
when at last the inhabitants of the city awoke from 
their delusion, it was to find that repentance, as usual, 
had come many hours too late.2 


1 Bor, Meteren, Hoofd, ubi sup. Le Petit, ii. 500 seq. 2 Thid. 


1584] PARMA’S OPERATIONS 193 


For Parma had been acting while his antagonists had 
been wrangling. He was hampered in his means, but 
he was assisted by what now seems the incredible supine- 
ness of the Netherlanders. Even Sainte-Aldegonde did 
not. believe in the possibility of erectin g the bridge; not 
a man in Antwerp seemed to believe it. “The prepara- 
tions,” said one who lived in the city, “went on before 
our very noses, and every one was ridiculing the Spanish 
commander’s folly.” } 

A very great error was, moreover, committed in 
abandoning Herenthals to the enemy. The city of Ant- 
werp governed Brabant, and it would have been far bet- 
ter for the authorities of the commercial capital to 
succor this small but important city, and, by so doing, 
to protract for a long time their own defense. Mon- 
dragon saw and rejoiced over the mistake. “Now ’t is 
easy to see that the Prince of Orange is dead,” said the 
veteran, as he took possession, in the king’s name, of the 
forsaken Herenthals.? 

Early in the summer Parma’s operations had been, of 
necessity, desultory. He had sprinkled forts up and 
down the Schelde, and had gradually been gaining con- 
trol of the navigation upon that river. Thus Ghent 
and Dendermonde, Vilvorde, Brussels, and Antwerp, 
had each been isolated, and all prevented from render- 
ing mutual assistance. Below Antwerp, however, was 
to be the scene of a great struggle. Here, within nine 
miles of the city, were two forts belonging to the states, 
on opposite sides of the stream, Lillo and Liefkenshoek. 
It was important for the Spanish commander to gain 
possession of both before commencing his contemplated 
bridge. 

1 Le Petit, ii. 498, 499. 2 Reyd, iv. 59. 
VOL. I.—13 


194 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Unfortunately for the states, the fortifications of 
Liefkenshoek, on the Flemish side of the river, had not 
been entirely completed. Hight hundred men lay within 
it, under Colonel John Pettin of Arras, an old patriotic 
officer of much experience. Parma, after reconnoitering 
the place in person, despatched the famous Viscount of 
Ghent—now called Marquis of Roubaix and Richebourg 
—to carry it by assault. The marquis sent one hundred 
men from his Walloon legion, under two officers in 
whom he had confidence, to attempt a surprise, with 
orders, if not successful, to return without delay. They 
were successful. The one hundred gained entrance into 
the fort at a point where the defenses had not been 
put into sufficient repair. 

They were immediately followed by Richebourg at the 
head of his regiment. The day was a fatal one. It 
was the 10th July, and William of Orange was falling 
at Delft by the hand of Balthazar Gérard. Liefkens- 
hoek was carried at a blow. Of the eight hundred 
patriots in the place scarcely a man escaped. Four 
hundred were put to the sword; the others were hunted 
into the river, when nearly all were drowned. Of the 
royalists a single man was killed and two or three more 
were wounded. ‘Our Lord was pleased,” wrote Parma 
piously to Philip, “that we should cut the throats of 
four hundred of them in a single instant, and that a 
great many more should be killed upon the dikes, so 
that I believe very few to have escaped with life. We 
lost one man, besides two or three wounded.”! A few 


1 «Y fue nuestro Sefior servido que entrassen con sola perdida 
de un muerto y 20 3 heridos, y que se degollasen hasta 400 hom- 
bres en el mismo instante, y que se matassen en los diques muchos 
—de manera que creo que han quedado pocos con vida.”—Parma 


1584] MURDER OF PETTIN 195 


were taken prisoners, and among them was the com- 
mander, John Pettin. He was at once brought before 
Richebourg, who was standing in the presence of the 
Prince of Parma. The marquis drew his sword, walked 
calmly up to the captured colonel, and ran him through 
the body. Pettin fell dead upon the spot. The prince 
was displeased. “Too much choler, marquis, too much 
choler,” said he, reprovingly. “Troppa colera, Signor 
Marchese, é questa.”1 But Richebourg knew better. 
He had, while still Viscount of Ghent, carried on a year 
previously a parallel intrigue with the royalists and the 
patriots. The Prince of Parma had bid highest for his 
services, and had, accordingly, found him a most effec- 
tual instrument in completing the reduction of the Wal- 
loon provinces. The prince was not aware, however, 
that his brave but venal ally had, at the very same mo- 
ment, been secretly treating with William of Orange; 
and as it so happened that Colonel Pettin had been the 
agent in the unsuccessful negotiation, it was possible 
that his duplicity would now be exposed.2, The marquis 
had, therefore, been prompt to place his old confederate 
in the condition wherein men tell no tales, and if con- 
temporary chronicles did not belie him, it was not the 
first time that he had been guilty of such cold-blooded 
murder. The choler had not been superfluous. 

The fortress of Lillo was garrisoned by the Antwerp 
volunteers, called the “ Young Bachelors.” ‘Teligny, the 
brave son of the illustrious “Iron-armed” La Noue, 
commanded in chief, and he had, besides the militia, a 
company of French under Captain Gascoigne, and four 
to Philip II., 15th July, 1584, Archivo de Simancas MS. Com- 


pare Bor, ii. 469 seq.; Meteren, xii. 218v°; Strada, ii. 304 seq. 
1 Meteren, xii. 218. 2 Thid. 


196 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


hundred Secotchmen under Colonel Morgan—perhaps 
two thousand men in all. 

Mondragon, hero of the famous submarine expeditions 
of Philipsland and Zierikzee, was ordered by Parma to 
take the place at every hazard. With five thousand 
men—a large proportion of the Spanish effective force 
at that moment—the veteran placed himself before the 
fort, taking possession of the beautiful country house 
and farm of Lillo, where he planted his batteries and 
commenced a regular cannonade. The place was 
stronger than Liefkenshoek, however, and Teligny thor- 
oughly comprehended the importance of maintaining it 
for the states. Mondragon dug mines and Teligny 
countermined. The Spanish daily cannonade was cheer- 
fully responded to by the besieged, and by the time 
Mondragon had shot away fifty thousand pounds of 
powder he found that he had made no impression upon 
the fortress, while the number of his troops had been 
diminishing with great rapidity. Mondragon was not 
so impetuous as he had been on many former occasions. 
He never ventured an assault. At last Teligny made a 
sortie at the head of a considerable force. A warm ac- 
tion succeeded, at the conclusion of which, without a 
decided advantage on either side, the sluice-gate in the 
fortress was opened, and the torrent of the Schelde, 
swollen by a high tide, was suddenly poured upon the 
Spaniards. Assailed at once by the fire from the Lillo 
batteries and by the waters of the river, they were 
forced to a rapid retreat. This they effected with great 
loss, but with signal courage, struggling breast-high in 
the waves, and bearing off their field-pieces in their arms 
in the very face of the enemy.1 


' Hoofd, Vervolgh, 7, 8. Strada, ii. 304 seq. Bor, ii. 469 seq. 
Meteren, xii. 218, 


1584] PARMA’S HEADQUARTERS AT KALLOO 197 


Three weeks long Mondragon had been before Fort 
Lillo, and two thousand of his soldiers had been slain 
in the trenches. The attempt was now abandoned. 
Parma directed permanent batteries to be established at 
Lillo house, at Oordam, and at other places along the 
river, and proceeded quietly with his carefully matured 
plan for closing the river.! 

His own camp was in the neighborhood of the villages 
of Beveren, Kalloo, and Borght. Of the ten thousand 
foot and seventeen hundred horse which composed at 
the moment his whole army, about one half lay with 
him, while the remainder were with Count Peter Ernest 
Mansfeld in the neighborhood of Stabroek. Thus the 
prince occupied a position on the left bank of the 
Schelde, nearly opposite Antwerp, while Mansfeld was 
stationed upon the right bank, and ten miles farther 
down the river. From a point in the neighborhood of 
Kalloo Alexander intended to throw a fortified bridge 
to the opposite shore. When completed all traffic up 
the river from Zealand would be cut off, and as the 
country on the land side about Antwerp had been now 
reduced, the city would be effectually isolated. If the 
prince could hold his bridge until famine should break 
the resistance of the burghers, Antwerp would fall into 
his hands. 

His headquarters were at Kalloo, and this obscure 
spot soon underwent a strange transformation. A 
drowsy, placid little village—with a modest parish spire 
peeping above a clump of poplars, and with half a dozen 
cottages, with storks’ nests on their roofs, sprinkled 
here and there among pastures and orchards—suddenly 
saw itself changed, as it were, into a thriving, bustling 
town; for, saving the white tents which dotted the green 

1 Meteren, xii. 218. 


198 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


turf in every direction, the aspect of the scene was, for 
a time, almost pacific. It was as if some great manu- 
facturing enterprise had been set on foot, and the world 
had suddenly awoke to the hidden capabilities of the 
situation. 

A great dockyard and arsenal suddenly revealed them- 
selves, —rising like an exhalation,—where ship-builders, 
armorers, blacksmiths, joiners, carpenters, calkers, 
gravers, were hard at work all day long. The din and 
hum of what seemed a peaceful industry were unceasing. 
From Kalloo Parma dug a canal twelve miles long to a 
place called Steeken, hundreds of pioneers being kept 
constantly at work with pick and spade till it was com- 
pleted. Through this artificial channel, so soon as 
Ghent and Dendermonde had fallen, came floats of 
timber, fieets of boats laden with provisions of life and 
munitions of death, building-materials, and every other 
requisite for the great undertaking, all to be disem- 
barked at Kalloo. The object was a temporary and de- 
structive one, but it remains a monument of the great 
general’s energy and a useful public improvement. The 
amelioration of the fenny and barren soil, called the 
Waesland, is dated from that epoch, and the spot in 
Kurope which is the most prolific, and which nourishes 
the largest proportion of inhabitants to the square mile, 
is precisely the long, dreary swamp which the prince 
thus drained for military purposes and converted into a 
garden. Drusus and Corbulo, in the days of the Roman 
Empire, had done the same good service for their bar- 
barian foes. 

At Kalloo itself all the shipwrights, cutlers, masons, 
brass-founders, rope-makers, anchor-forgers, sailors, 
boatmen, of Flanders and Brabant, with a herd of 


1584] DIFFICULTY OF SUPPLYING ANTWERP 199 


bakers, brewers, and butchers, were congregated by ex- 
press order of Parma. In the little church itself the 
main workshop was established, and all day long, 
week after week, month after month, the sound of 
saw and hammer, adz and plane, the rattle of machi- 
nery, the ery of sentinels, the cheers of mariners, re- 
sounded, where but lately had been heard nothing save 
the drowsy homily and the devout hymn of rustic 
worship.! 

Nevertheless, the summer and autumn wore on, and 
still the bridge was hardly commenced. The navigation 
of the river, although impeded and rendered dangerous 
by the forts which Parma held along the banks, was 
still open, and so long as the price of corn in Antwerp 
remained three or four times as high as the sum for 
which it could be purchased in Holland and Zealand, 
there were plenty of dare-devil skippers ready to bring 
cargoes. Fleets of flyboats, convoyed by armed vessels, 
were perpetually running the gantlet. Sharp actions 
on shore between the forts of the patriots and those 
of Parma, which were all intermingled promiscuously 
along the banks, and amphibious and most bloody en- 
counters on shipboard, dike, and in the stream itself, 
between the wild Zealanders and the fierce pikemen of 
Italy and Spain, were of repeated occurrence. Many a 
lagging craft fell into the enemy’s hands, when, as a 
matter of course, the men, women, and children on 
board were horribly mutilated by the Spaniards, and 
were then sent drifting in their boat with the tide— 
their arms, legs, and ears lopped off—up to the city, in 

1 Hoofd, Bor, Meteren, ubi sup. Le Petit, ii. 509 seq. Reyd, 


iv. 58, 59. Strada, ii. 321 seq. V.d. Kampen, i. 482, Bentivo- 
glio, Guerra di Fiandra, p. ii. 1, iii, 


200 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


order that the dangerous nature of this provision trade 
might be fully illustrated.1 

Yet that traffic still went on. It would have continued 
until Antwerp had been victualed for more than a year, 
had not the city authorities, in the plenitude of their 
wisdom, thought proper to issue orders for its regula- 
tion. On the 25th October a census was taken, when 
the number of persons inside the walls was found to be 
ninety thousand. For this population it was estimated 
that three hundred thousand veertels, or about nine 
hundred thousand bushels, of corn would be required 
annually. The grain was coming in very fast, notwith- 
standing the perilous nature of the trade, for wheat 
could be bought in Holland for fifty florins the last, or 
about fifteenpence sterling the bushel, while it was 
worth five or six florins the veertel, or about four shil- 
lings the bushel, in Antwerp. 

The magistrates now committed a folly more stupen- 
dous than it seemed possible for human creatures, under 
such circumstances, to compass. They established a 
maximum upon corn.t The skippers who had run their 
cargoes through the gantlet all the way from Flushing 
to Antwerp found on their arrival that, instead of being 
rewarded according to the natural laws of demand and 
supply, they were required to exchange their wheat, rye, 
butter, and beef against the exact sum which the board 
of schepens thought proper to consider a reasonable re- 

1 “Bien est vray qu’il en arrivait Journellement aucunes qui 
amenoient des hommes et des femmes, les uns tuez, les autres sans 
bras, ny jambes, mais tout cela nempeschoit point le passage 
pourtant,” ete.—Le Petit, iv. 500. The historian was in Antwerp 
during the siege. 

2 Bor, ii. 500. 3 Meteren, Bor, ubi sup. 

* Reyd, iv. 59. Bor, Meteren, ubi sup. 


1584] THE COUNTRY SUBMERGED 201 


muneration. Moreover, in order to prevent the accumu- 
lation of provisions in private magazines, it was enacted 
that all consumers of grain should be compelled to make 
their purchases directly from the ships! These two 
measures were almost as fatal as the preservation of the 
Blauw-garen dike in the interest of the butchers. Win- 
ter and famine were staring the city in the face, and 
the maximum now stood sentinel against the gate to 
prevent the admission of food. The traffic ceased with- 
out a struggle. Parma himself could not have better 
arranged the blockade. 

Meantime a vast and almost general inundation had 
taken place. The aspect of the country for many miles 
around was strange and desolate. The sluices had been 
opened in the neighborhood of Saftingen, on the Flem- 
ish side, so that all the way from Hulst the waters were 
out, and flowed nearly to the gates of Antwerp. A wide 
and shallow sea rolled over the fertile plains, while 
church steeples, the tops of lofty trees, and here and 
there the turrets of a castle, scarcely lifted themselves 
above the black waters, the peasants’ houses, the 
granges, whole rural villages, having entirely disap- 
peared. The high grounds of Doel, of Kalloo, and 
Beveren, where Alexander was established, remained 
out of reach of the flood. Far below, on the opposite 
side of the river, other sluices had been opened, and the 
sea had burst over the wide, level plain. The villages 
of Wilmerdonk, Orderen, Ekeren, were changed to isl- 
ands in the ocean, while all the other hamlets for miles 
around were utterly submerged.? 

Still, however, the Blauw-garen dike and its compan- 


1 Reyd, Bor, Meteren. 
2 Bor, Meteren, Hoofd, Le Petit, Reyd, ubi sup. 


202 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


ion, the Kowenstyn, remained obstinately above the 
waters, forming a present and more fatal obstruction to 
the communication between Antwerp and Zealand than 
would be furnished even by the threatened and secretly 
advancing bridge across the Schelde. Had Orange’s 
prudent advice been taken, the city had been safe. Over 
the prostrate dikes, whose destruction he had so warmly 
urged, the ocean would have rolled quite to the gates of 
Antwerp, and it would have been as easy to bridge the 
North Sea as to control the free navigation of the pa- 
triots over so wide a surface. 

When it was too late the butchers and colonels and 
captains became penitent enough. An order was passed 
by acclamation in November to do what Orange had 
recommended in June. It was decreed that the Blauw- 
garen and the Kowenstyn should be pierced.t Alas! 
the hour had long gone by. Alexander of Parma was 
not the man to undertake the construction of a bridge 
across the river, at a vast expense, and at the same time 
to permit the destruction of the already existing barrier. 
There had been a time for such a deed. The Seigneur 
de Kowenstyn, who had a castle and manor on and near 
the dike which bore his name, had repeatedly urged 
upon the Antwerp magistracy the propriety of pier- 
cing this bulwark, even after their refusal to destroy 
the outer barrier. Sainte-Aldegonde, who vehemently 
urged the measure, protested that his hair had stood on 
end when he found, after repeated entreaty, that the 
project was rejected2 The Seigneur de Kowenstyn, 
disgusted and indignant, forswore his patriotism and 

1 Bor, ii. 500. 

2 Mertens en Torp, Geschiedenis van Antwerpen, v. 206. 
Papebrochii, Annales Antwerpienses, iv. 100 seq. 


1584] RESULTS OF NOT PIERCING DIKES 203 


went over to Parma.! The dike fell into the hands of 
the enemy. And now from Stabroek, where old Mans- 
feld lay with his army, all the way across the flooded 
country, ran the great bulwark, strengthened with new 
palisade-work and blockhouses, bristling with Spanish 
cannon, pike, and harquebus, even to the bank of the 
Schelde, in the immediate vicinity of Fort Lillo. At the 
angle of its junction with the main dike of the river’s 
bank, a strong fortress called Holy Cross (Santa Cruz) 
had been constructed. That fortress and the whole line 
of the Kowenstyn were held in the iron grip of Mon- 
dragon. To wrench it from him would be no child’s 
play. Five new, strong redouts upon the dike, and 
five or six thousand Spaniards established there, made 
the enterprise more formidable than it would have been 
in June. It had been better to sacrifice the twelve thou- 
sand oxen. Twelve thousand Hollanders might now be 
slaughtered, and still the dike remain above the waves. 

Here was the key to the fate of Antwerp. 

On the other hand, the opening of the Saftingen sluice 
had done Parma’s work for him. Even there, too, 
Orange had been prophetic. Kalloo was high and dry, 
but Alexander had experienced some difficulty in bring- 
ing a fleet of thirty vessels, laden with cannon and other 
valuable materials, from Ghent, along the Schelde, into 
his encampment, because it was necessary for them, be- 
fore reaching their destination, to pass in front of Ant- 
werp. The inundation, together with a rupture in the 
dike of Borght, furnished him with a watery road, over 
which his fleet completely avoided the city, and came in 
triumph to Kalloo.? 


1 Bor, Meteren, Mertens en Torp, ubi sup. 
2 Meteren, xii. 218. Bor, ii. 501. 


204 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Sainte-Aldegonde, much provoked by this masterly 
movement on the part of Parma, had followed the little 
squadron closely with some armed vessels from the city. 
A sharp action had succeeded, in which the burgomaster, 
not being properly sustained by the Zealand ships, on 
which he relied, had been defeated. Admiral Jacob 
Jacobzoon behaved with so little spirit on the occasion 
that he acquired with the Antwerp populace the name 
of “Runaway Jacob,” “Koppen gaet loppen,” and 
Sainte-Aldegonde declared that but for his cowardice 
the fleet of Parma would have fallen into their hands. 
The burgomaster himself narrowly escaped becoming a 
prisoner, and owed his safety only to the swiftness of 
his barge, which was called the Flying Devil.1 

The patriots, in order to counteract similar enterprises 
in future, now erected a sconce, which they called Fort 
Teligny, upon the ruptured dike of Borght, directly 
in front of the Borght blockhouse, belonging to the 
Spaniards, and just opposite Fort Hoboken. Here, in 
this narrow passage, close under the walls of Ant- 
werp, where friends and foes were brought closely face 
to face, was the scene of many a sanguinary skir- 
mish from the commencement of the siege until its 
close.? 

Still the bridge was believed to be a mere fable, a 
chimera. Parma, men said, had become a lunatic from 
pride. It was as easy to make the Netherlands submit 
to the yoke of the Inquisition as to put a bridle on the 
Schelde. Its depth, breadth, the ice-floods of a northern 
winter, the neighborhood of the Zealand fleets, the ac- 


1 Haraei, Ann. Tum. Belg., iii. 369. Bor, ii. 501. Meteren, 
xii. 218 seq. 
2 Thid. 


1584] HESITATION OF THE STATES 905 


tivity of the Antwerp authorities, all were pledges that 
the attempt would be signally frustrated. 

And they should have been pledges—more than 
enough. Unfortunately, however, there was dissension 
within, and no chieftain in the field, no sage in the coun- 
cil, of sufficient authority to sustain the whole burden 
of the war and to direct all the energies of the com- 
monwealth. Orange was dead. His son, one day to 
become the most illustrious military commander in 
Europe, was a boy of seventeen, nominally captain-gen- 
eral, but in reality but a youthful apprentice to his art. 
Hohenlo was wild, wilful, and obstinate. Young Wil- 
liam Louis Nassau, already a soldier of marked abilities, 
was fully occupied in Friesland, where he was stad- 
holder, and where he had quite enough to do in making 
head against the Spanish governor and general, the vet- 
eran Verdugo. Military operations against Zutphen 
distracted the attention of the states, which should have 
been fixed upon Antwerp. Admiral Treslong, as we 
have seen, was refractory, the cause of great delin- 
quency on the part of the fleets, and of infinite disaster 
to the commonwealth. More than all, the French 
negotiation was betraying the states into indolence 
and hesitation, and creating a schism between the 
leading politicians of the country. Several thousand 
French troops, under M. d’Allaynes, were daily ex- 
pected, but never arrived; and thus, while English 
and French partizans were plotting and counterplot- 
ting, while a delusive diplomacy was usurping the 
place of lansquenets and gunboats,—the only possi- 
ble agents at that moment to preserve Antwerp,— 
the bridge of Parma was slowly advancing. Before 


1 Strada, ii. 312, 313. Reyd, iv. 58, 59. 


206 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the winter had closed in the preparatory palisades had 
been finished. 

Between Kalloo and Oordam, upon the opposite side, 
a sand-bar had been discovered in the river’s bed, which 
diminished the depth of the stream, and rendered the 
pile-driving comparatively easy. The breadth of the 
Schelde at this passage was twenty-four hundred feet; 
its depth sixty feet. Upon the Flemish side, near Kal- 
loo, a strong fort was erected, called St. Mary, in honor 
of the Blessed Virgin, to whom the whole siege of Ant- 
werp had been dedicated from the beginning. On the 
opposite bank was a similar fort, named Philip, for the 
king. From each of these two points, thus fortified, a 
framework of heavy timber, supported upon huge piles, 
had been carried so far into the stream on either side 
that the distance between the ends had at last been re- 
duced to thirteen hundred feet. The breadth of the 
roadway—formed of strong sleepers firmly bound to- 
gether—was twelve feet, along which blockhouses of 
great thickness were placed to defend the whole against 
assault.t 

Thus far the work had been comparatively easy. To 
bridge the remaining open portion of the river, how- 
ever, where its current was deepest and strongest, and 
where the action of tide, tempest, and icebergs would 
be most formidable, seemed a desperate undertaking, 
for, as the enterprise advanced, this narrow, Open space 
became the scene of daily amphibious encounters be- 
tween the soldiers and sailors of Parma and the forces 
of the states. Unfortunately for the patriots, it was 
only skirmishing. Had a strong, concerted attack, in 


1 Bor, ii. 501 seq. Meteren, xii. 218 seq. Strada, ii, 313 seq. 
Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii, 288 seq. 


1584] PRELIMINARIES OF THE SIEGE 207 


large force, from Holland and Zealand below, and from 
the city above, been agreed upon, there was hardly a 
period, until very late in the winter, when it might not 
have had the best chances of success. With a vigorous 
commander against him, Parma, weak in men, and at 
his wit’s end for money, might in a few hours have seen 
the labor of several months hopelessly annihilated. On 
the other hand, the prince was ably seconded by his 
lieutenant, Marquis Richebourg, to whom had been dele- 
gated the immediate superintendence of the bridge- 
building in its minutest details. He was never idle. 
Audacious, indefatigable, ubiquitous, he at least atoned 
by energy and brilliant courage for his famous treason 
of the preceding year, while his striking and now rap- 
idly approaching doom, upon the very scene of his pres- 
ent labors, made him appear to have been building a 
magnificent though fleeting monument to his own 
memory. 

Sainte-Aldegonde, shut up in Antwerp, and hampered 
by dissension within and obstinate jealousy without the 
walls, did all in his power to frustrate the enemy’s en- 
terprise and animate the patriots. Through the whole 
of the autumn and early winter he had urged the states 
of Holland and Zealand to make use of the long winter 
nights, when moonless and stormy, to attempt the de- 
struction of Parma’s undertaking; but the fatal infiu- 
ences already indicated were more efficient against 
Antwerp than even the genius of Farnese, and nothing 
came of the burgomaster’s entreaties save desultory 
skirmishing and unsuccessful enterprises. An especial 
misfortune happened in one of these midnight under- 
takings. Teligny ventured forth in a row-barge, with 


1 Bentivoglio, Strada, ubi sup. 


208 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


scarcely any companions, to notify the Zealanders of a 
contemplated movement in which their codperation was 
desired. It was proposed that the Antwerp troops 
should make a fictitious demonstration upon Fort Oor- 
dam, while at the same moment the states’ troops from 
Fort Lillo should make an assault upon the forts on 
Kowenstyn dike, and in this important enterprise the 
Zealand vessels were requested to assist. But the brave 
Teligny nearly forfeited his life by his rashness, and his 
services were, for a long time, lost to the cause of liberty. 
It had been better to send a less valuable officer upon 
such hazardous yet subordinate service. The dip of 
his oars was heard in the darkness. He was pursued 
by a number of armed barges, attacked, wounded se- 
verely in the shoulder, and captured. He threw his let- 
ters overboard, but they were fished out of the water, 
earried to Parma, and deciphered, so that the projected 
attack upon the Kowenstyn was discovered, and of ne- 
cessity deferred. As for Teligny, he was taken as a 
most valuable prize into the enemy’s camp, and was 
soon afterward thrust into prison at Tournay, where he 
remained six years—one year longer than the period 
which his illustrious father had been obliged to consume 
in the infamous dungeon at Mons. Few disasters could 
have been more keenly felt by the states than the loss of 
this brilliant and devoted French chieftain, who, young 
as he was, had already become very dear to the Re- 
public; and Sainte-Aldegonde was severely blamed for 
sending so eminent a personage on that dangerous ex- 
pedition, and for sending him, too; with an insufficient 
convoy.! 

Still Alexander felt uncertain as to the result. He 


1 Bor, ii, 507, 508, Meteren, xii, 218. Strada, ii. 319, 320. 


1584] PARMA’S UNCERTAINTY 909 


was determined to secure Antwerp, but he yet thought 
it possible to secure it by negotiation. The enigmatical 
policy maintained by France perplexed him, for it did 
not seem possible that so much apparent solemnity and 
earnestness were destined to lead to an impotent and 
infamous conclusion. He was left, too, for a long time 
in ignorance of his own master’s secret schemes; he 
was at liberty to guess, and to guess only, as to the pro- 
jects of the League; he was without adequate means to 
carry out toa certain triumph his magnificent enter- 
prise; and he was in constant alarm lest he should be 
suddenly assailed by an overwhelming French force. 
Had a man sat upon the throne of Henry III. at that 
moment, Parma’s bridge-making and dike-fortifying, 
skilful as they were, would have been all in vain. 
Meantime, in uncertainty as to the great issue, but re- 
solved to hold firmly to his purpose, he made repeated 
conciliatory offers to the states with one hand, while he 
steadily prosecuted his aggressive schemes with the other. 

Parma had become really gentle, almost affectionate, 
toward the Netherlanders. He had not the disposition 
of an Alva to smite and to blast, to exterminate the 
rebels and heretics with fire and sword, with the ax, the 
rack, and the gallows. Provided they would renounce 
the great object of the contest, he seemed really desir- 
ous that they should escape further chastisement; but 
to admit the worship of God according to the Reformed 
creed was with him an inconceivable idea. To do so 
was both unrighteous and impolitic. He had been 
brought up to believe that mankind could be saved from 
eternal perdition only by believing in the infallibility of 
the Bishop of Rome; that the only keys to eternal para- 
dise were in the hands of St. Peter’s representative. 

VOL. I.—14 


210 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


Moreover, he instinctively felt that within this religious 
liberty which the Netherlanders claimed was hidden the 
germ of civil liberty, and though no bigger than a grain 
of mustard-seed, it was necessary to destroy it at once, 
for of course the idea of civil liberty could not enter the 
brain of the brilliant general of Philip II. 

On the 13th of November he addressed a letter to the 
magistracy and broad council of Antwerp. He asserted 
that the instigators of the rebellion were not seeking to 
further the commonweal, but their own private ends. 
Especially had this been the ruling motive with the 
Prince of Orange and the Duke of Anjou, both of whom 
God had removed from the world in order to manifest 
to the states their own weakness and the omnipotence 
of Philip, whose prosperity the Lord was constantly in- 
creasing. It was now more than time for the authorities 
of the country to have regard for themselves, and for 
the miseries of the poor people. The affection which he 
had always felt for the provinces,—from which he had 
himself sprung,—and the favors which he had received 
from them in his youth, had often moved him to pro- 
pose measures which, before God and his conscience, he 
believed adequate to the restoration of peace. But his 
letters had been concealed or falsely interpreted by the 
late Prince of Orange, who had sought nothing but to 
spread desolation over the land and to shed the blood 
of the innocent. He now wrote once more, and for the 
last time, in all fervor and earnestness, to implore them 
to take compassion on their own wives and children and 
forlorn fatherland, to turn their eyes backward on the 
peace and prosperity which they had formerly enjoyed 
when obedient to his Majesty, and to cast a glance 
around them upon the miseries which were so universal 


1584] CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE ANTWERPERS 92]] 


since the rebellion. He exhorted them to close their 
ears to the insidious tongues of those who were leading 
them into delusion as to the benevolence and paternal 
sweetness of their natural lord and master, which were 
even now so boundless that he did not hesitate once 
more to offer them his entire forgiveness. If they chose 
to negotiate, they would find everything granted that 
with right and reason could be proposed. The prince 
concluded by declaring that he made these advances, not 
from any doubt as to the successful issue of the military 
operations in which he was engaged, but simply out of 
paternal anxiety for the happiness of the provinces. 
Did they remain obstinate, their ultimate condition 
would be rendered still more severe, and themselves, not 
he, would be responsible for the misery and the blood- 
shed to ensue.t 

Ten days afterward the magistrates thus addressed, 
after communication with the broad council, answered 
Parma’s letter manfully, copiously, and with the cus- 
tomary but superfluous historical sketch. They begged 
leave to entertain a doubt as to the paternal sweetness 
of a king who had dealt so long in racks and gibbets. 
With Parma’s own mother, as they told the prince, the 
Netherlanders had once made a treaty, by which the 
right to worship God according to their consciences had 
been secured; yet for maintaining that treaty they had 
been devoted to indiscriminate destruction, and their 
land made desolate with fire and sword. Men had been 
massacred by thousands who had never been heard in 
their own defense, and who had never been accused of 
any crime, “save that they had assembled together in 

1 See the letters in Meteren, xii. 219; Bor, ii. 502, 503; Hoofd, 
Vervolgh, 60. 


212 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


the name of God, to pray to him through their only 
Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ, according to his 
command.” 4 

The axis of the revolt was the religious question, and 
it was impossible to hope anything from a monarch who 
was himself a slave of the Inquisition, and who had less 
independence of action than that enjoyed by Jews and 
Turks, according to the express permission of the pope. 
Therefore they informed Parma that they had done 
with Philip forever, and that, in consequence of the 
extraordinary wisdom, justice, and moderation of the 
French king, they had offered him the sovereignty of 
their land, and had implored his protection. 

They paid a tribute to the character of Farnese, who, 
after gaining infinite glory in arms, had manifested so 
much gentleness and disposition to conciliate. They 
doubted not that he would, if he possessed the power, 
have guided the royal counsels to better and more gen- 
erous results, and protested that they would not have 
delayed to throw themselves into his arms had they 
been assured that he was authorized to admit that which 
alone could form the basis of a successful negotiation— 
religious freedom. They would in such ease have been 
willing to close with him, without talking about other con- 
ditions than such as his Highness in his discretion and 
sweetness might think reasonable. 

Moreover, as they observed in conclusion, they were 
precluded by their present relations with France from 
entering into any other negotiation, nor could they lis- 
ten to any such proposals without deserving to be stig- 
matized as the most lewd, blasphemous, and thankless 
mortals that ever cumbered the earth. 


1 Letters in Bor, Meteren, Hoofd, ubi sup. 


1584] A MORALIZING LETTER 2138 


Being under equal obligations both to the Union and 
to France, they announced that Parma’s overtures would 
be laid before the French government and the assembly 
of the States-General.! 

A day was to come, perhaps, when it would hardly 
seem lewdness and blasphemy for the Netherlanders to 
doubt the extraordinary justice and wisdom of the 
French king. Meantime it cannot be denied that they 
were at least loyal to their own engagements, and long- 
suffering where they had trusted and given their hearts. 

Parma replied by another letter, dated December 38. 
He assured the citizens that Henry III. was far too dis- 
creet, and much too good a friend to Philip IL., to coun- 
tenance this rebellion. If he were to take up their 
quarrel, however, the King of Spain had a thousand 
means of foiling all his attempts. As to the religious 
question, which they affirmed to be the sole cause of the 
war, he was not inclined to waste words upon that 
subject; nevertheless, so far as he in his simplicity 
could understand the true nature of a Christian, he 
could not believe that it comported with the doctrines 
of Jesus, whom they called their only Mediator, nor with 
the dictates of conscience, to take up arms against their 
lawful king, nor to burn, rob, plunder, pierce dikes, 
overwhelm their fatherland, and reduce all things to 
misery and chaos, in the name of religion.” 

Thus moralizing and dogmatizing, the prince con- 
eluded his letter, and so the correspondence terminated. 
This last despatch was communicated at once both to the 
States-General and to the French government, and re- 
mained unanswered. Soon afterward the Netherlands 
and England, France and Spain, were engaged in that 


1 Letters in Bor, Meteren, Hoofd, ubi sup. 2 Thid. 


214 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1584 


vast game of delusion which has been described in the 
preceding chapters. Meantime both Antwerp and 
Parma remained among the deluded, and were left to 
fight out their battle on their own resources. 

Having found it impossible to subdue Antwerp by his 
rhetoric, Alexander proceeded with his bridge. It is 
impossible not to admire the steadiness and ingenuity 
with which the prince persisted in his plans, the courage 
with which he bore up against the parsimony and neg- 
lect of his sovereign, the compassionate tenderness which 
he manifested for his patient little army. So much 
intellectual energy commands enthusiasm, while the 
supineness on the other side sometimes excites indigna- 
tion. There is even a danger of being entrapped into 
sympathy with tyranny, when the cause of tyranny is 
maintained by genius, and of being surprised into in- 
difference for human liberty, when the sacred interests 
of liberty are endangered by self-interest, perverseness, 
and folly. 

Even Sainte-Aldegonde did not believe that the bridge 
could be completed. His fears were that the city would 
be ruined rather by the cessation of its commerce than 
by want of daily food. Already, after the capture of 
Liefkenshoek and the death of Orange, the panic among 
commercial people had been so intense that seventy or 
eighty merchants, representing the most wealthy mer- 
cantile firms in Antwerp, made their escape from the 
place as if it had been smitten with pestilence or were 
already in the hands of Parma.! All such refugees were 
ordered to return, on peril of forfeiting their property. 
Few came back, however, for they had found means of 
converting and transferring their funds to other more 


1 Baudartii Polemographia, ii. 24. 


1585] ANTWERP’S COMMERCIAL LOSS 915 


secure places, despite the threatened confiscation. It 
was insinuated that Holland and Zealand were indiffer- 
ent to the fate of Antwerp, because in the sequel the 
commercial cities of those provinces succeeded to the 
vast traffic and the boundless wealth which had been 
forfeited by the Brabantine capital. The charge was an 
unjust one. At the very commencement of the siege 
the states of Holland voted two hundred thousand florins 
for its relief; and, moreover, these wealthy refugees 
were positively denied admittance into the territory of 
the United States, and were thus forced to settle in 
Germany or England.!' This cessation of traffic was 
that which principally excited the anxiety of Aldegonde. 
He could not bring himself to believe in the possibility 
of a blockade by an army of eight or ten thousand men 
of a great and wealthy city, where at least twenty thou- 
sand citizens were capable of bearing arms. Had he 
thoroughly understood the deprivations under which 
Alexander was laboring, perhaps he would have been 
even more confident as to the result. . 

“With regard to the affair of the river Schelde,” 
wrote Parma to Philip, “I should like to send your 
Majesty a drawing of the whole scheme, for the work is 
too vast to be explained by letters. The more I examine 
it the more astonished I am that it should have been 
conducted to this point, so many forts, dikes, canals, 
new inventions, machinery, and engines have been ne- 
cessarily required.” 2 

He then proceeded to enlighten the king—as he never 
failed to do in all his letters—as to his own impover- 

1 Baudartii Polemographia, ii. 24. 

2 Prince of Parma to Philip IL, 15th January, 1585, Archivo 
de Simancas MS. 


216 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ished, almost helpless condition. Money, money, men! 
This was his constant cry. All would be in vain, he 
said, if he were thus neglected. ‘“’T is necessary,” said 
he, “for your Majesty fully to comprehend that hence- 
forth the enterprise is yourown. I have done my work 
faithfully thus far; it is now for your Majesty to take 
it thoroughly to heart, and embrace it with the warmth 
with which an affair involving so much of your own in- 
terests deserves to be embraced.” 1 

He avowed that without full confidence in his sover- 
eign’s sympathy he would never have conceived the 
project. “TI confess that the enterprise is great,” he 
said, “and that by many it will be considered rash. 
Certainly I should not have undertaken it had I not felt 
certain of your Majesty’s full support.” 2 

But he was already in danger of being forced to 
abandon the whole scheme—although so nearly carried 
into effect—for want of funds. “The million prom- 
ised,” he wrote, “has arrived in bits and morsels, and 
with so many ceremonies that I have n’t ten crowns at 
my disposal. How I am to maintain even this handful 
of soldiers—for the army is diminished to such a mere 
handful that it would astonish your Majesty—I am un- 
able to imagine. It would move you to witness their 
condition. They have suffered as much as is humanly 
possible.” 8 

Many of the troops, indeed, were deserting and mak- 
ing their escape, beggared and desperate, into France, 
where, with natural injustice, they denounced their gen- 
eral, whose whole heart was occupied with their miseries, 

Prince of Parma to Philip IL, 15th January, 1585, Archivo 


de Simaneas M8. 
2’ Thid. 3 Ibid. 


1585] IMPOVERISHED CONDITION OF PARMA PAli7¢ 


for the delinquency of his master, whose mind was full 
of other schemes. 

“There passed this way many Spanish soldiers,” wrote 
Stafford from Paris, “‘so poor and naked as I ever saw 
any. There have been within this fortnight two hun- 
dred at a time in this town, who report the extremity 
of want of victuals in their camp, and that they have 
been twenty-four months without pay. They exclaim 
greatly upon the Prince of Parma. Mendoza seeks to 
convey them away, and to get money for them by all 
means he can.”} 

Stafford urged upon his government the propriety of 
being at least as negligent as Philip had showed himself 
to be of the Spaniards. By prohibiting supplies to the 
besieging army England might contribute, negatively 
if not otherwise, to the relief of Antwerp. “There is 
no place,” he wrote to Walsingham, ‘whence the Span- 
iards are so thoroughly victualed as from us. English 
boats go by sixteen and seventeen into Dunkirk well 
laden with provisions.” 

This was certainly not in accordance with the in- 
terests nor the benevolent professions of the English 
ministers. 

These supplies were not to be regularly depended 
upon, however. They were likewise not to be had with- 
out paying a heavy price for them, and the prince had 
no money in his coffer. He lived from hand to mouth, 
and was obliged to borrow from every private individual 
who had anything to lend. Merchants, nobles, official 
personages, were all obliged to assist in eking out the 
scanty pittance allowed by the sovereign. 


1 Stafford to Walsingham, December 29, 1584 (January 8, 1585), 
in Murdin, ii. 434. 


218 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


“The million is all gone,” wrote Parma to his master: 
“some to Verdugo in Friesland; some to repay the ad- 
vances of Marquis Richebourg and other gentlemen. 
There is not afarthing for the garrisons. I can’t go on 
a month longer, and if not supplied I shall be obliged 
to abandon the work. I have not money enough to pay 
my sailors, joiners, carpenters, and other mechanics 
from week to week, and they will all leave me in the 
lurch if I leave them unpaid. I have no resource but 
to rely on your Majesty. Otherwise the enterprise must 
wholly fail.” 1 

In ease it did fail the prince wiped his hands of the 
responsibility. He certainly had the right to do so. 

One of the main sources of supply was the city of 
Hertogenbosch, or Bois-le-Duc. It was one of the four 
chief cities of Brabant, and still held for the king, al- 
though many towns in its immediate neighborhood had 
espoused the cause of the Republic. The states had long 
been anxious to effect a diversion for the relief of Ant- 
werp by making an attack on Bois-le-Due. Could they 
carry the place, Parma would be almost inevitably com- 
pelled to abandon the siege in which he was at present 
engaged, and he could, moreover, spare no troops for its 
defense. Bois-le-Due was a populous, wealthy, thriving 
town, situate on the Deeze, two leagues above its confiu- 
ence with the Meuse, and about twelve leagues from 
Antwerp. It derived its name of “Duke’s Wood” from 
a magnificent park and forest, once the favorite resort 
and residence of the old dukes of Brabant, of which 
some beautiful vestiges still remained. It was a hand- 
some, well-built city, with two thousand houses of the 
better class, besides more humble tenements. Its citi- 


1 MS. letter of Parma before cited. 


1585] PATRIOTS ATTEMPT BOIS-LE-DUC 219 


zens were celebrated for their courage and belligerent 
skill, both on foot and on horseback. They were said 
to retain more of the antique Belgic ferocity which 
Ceesar had celebrated than that which had descended to 
most of their kinsmen. The place was, moreover, the 
seat of many prosperous manufactures. Its clothiers 
sent the products of their looms over all Christendom, 
and its linen and cutlery were equally renowned. 

It would be a most fortunate blow in the cause of 
freedom to secure so thriving and conspicuous a town, 
situated thus in the heart of what seemed the natural 
territory of the United States, and by so doing to render 
nugatory the mighty preparations of Parma against 
Antwerp. Moreover, it was known that there was no 
Spanish or other garrison within its walls, so that there 
was no opposition to be feared except from the warlike 
nature of the citizens. 

Count Hohenlo was intrusted, early in January, with 
this important enterprise. He accordingly collected a 
force of four thousand infantry, together with two hun- 
dred mounted lancers, having previously reconnoitered 
the ground. He relied very much for the success of the 
undertaking on Captain Kleerhagen, a Brussels noble- 
man, whose wife was a native of Bois-le-Duc, and who 
was thoroughly familiar with the locality. One dark 
winter’s night Kleerhagen, with fifty picked soldiers, 
advanced to the Antwerp Gate of Bois-le-Duc, while 
Hohenlo, with his whole foree, lay in ambuscade as near 
as possible to the city. 

Between the drawbridge and the porteullis were two 
small guard-houses, which, very carelessly, had been left 
empty. Kleerhagen, with his fifty followers, success- 


1 Guicciardini, iti voce. 


220 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


fully climbed into these lurking-places, where they 
quietly ensconced themselves for the night. At eight 
o’clock of the following morning (20th January) the 
guards of the gate drew up the portcullis and recon- 
noitered. At the same instant the ambushed fifty sprang 
from their concealment, put them to the sword, and 
made themselves masters of the gate. None of the 
night-watch escaped with life, save one poor old inva- 
lided citizen, whose business had been to draw up the 
porteullis, and who was severely wounded and left for 
dead. The fifty immediately summoned all of Hohenlo’s 
ambuscade that were within hearing, and then, without 
waiting for them, entered the town pell-mell in the best 
of spirits, and shouting “ Victory, victory ! ” till they were 
hoarse. <A single corporal, with two men, was left to 
guard the entrance. Meantime the old wounded gate- 
opener, bleeding and crippled, crept into a dark corner 
and laid himself down, unnoticed, to die. 

Soon afterward Hohenlo galloped into the town, clad 
in complete armor, his long curls floating in the wind, 
with about two hundred troopers clattering behind him, 
closely followed by five hundred pikemen on foot. 

Very brutally, foolishly, and characteristically, he had 
promised his followers the sacking of the city so soon as 
it should be taken. They accordingly set about the 
sacking before it was taken. Hardly had the five or six 
hundred effected their entrance than, throwing off all 
control, they dispersed through the principal streets, 
and began bursting open the doors of the most epulent 
pon The cries of “Victory!” “Gained city!” 

“Down with the Spaniards!” resounded on all sides. 
Many of the citizens, panic-strieken, fled from their homes, 
which they thus abandoned to piliyee while meaner 


1585] UNEXPECTED RESISTANCE 221 


the loud shouts of the assailants reached the ears of the 
sergeant and his two companions who had been left in 
charge of the gate. Fearing that they should be cheated 
of their rightful share in the plunder, they at once 
abandoned their post, and set forth after their comrades 
as fast as their legs could carry them. 

Now, it so chanced—although there was no garrison 
in the town—that forty Burgundian and Italian lancers, 
with about thirty foot-soldiers, had come in the day be- 
fore to escort a train of merchandise. The Seigneur de 
Haultepenne, governor of Breda, a famous royalist com- 
mander, son of old Count Berlaymont, who first gave 
the name of “beggars” to the patriots, had accom- 
panied them in the expedition. The little troop were 
already about to mount their horses to depart when 
they became aware of the sudden tumult. Elmont, 
governor of the city, had also flown to the rescue, and 
had endeavored to rally the burghers. Not unmindful 
of their ancient warlike fame, they had obeyed his en- 
treaties. Elmont, with a strong party of armed citizens, 
joined himself to Haultepenne’s little band of lancers. 
They fired a few shots at straggling parties of plunder- 
ers, and pursued others up some narrow streets. They 
were but a handful in comparison with the number of 
the patriots who had gained entrance to the city. They 
were, however, compact, united, and resolute. The as- 
sailants were scattered, disorderly, and bent only upon 
plunder. When attacked by an armed and regular band 
they were amazed. They had been told that there was 
no garrison, and behold a choice phalanx of Spanish 
lancers, led on by one of the most famous of Philip’s 
Netherland chieftains. They thought themselves be- 
trayed by Kleerhagen, entrapped into a deliberately 


222 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


arranged ambush. There was a panic. The soldiers, 
dispersed and doubtful, could not be rallied. Hohenlo, 
seeing that nothing was to be done with his five hun- 
dred, galloped furiously out of the gate to bring in the 
rest of his troops, who had remained outside the walls. 
The prize of the wealthy city of Bois-le-Duc was too 
tempting to be lightly abandoned; but he had much bet- 
ter have thought of making himself master of it himself 
before he should present it as a prey to his followers. 
During his absence the panic spread. The states’ 
troops, bewildered, astonished, vigorously assaulted, 
turned their backs upon their enemies and fied helter- 
skelter toward the gate through which they had first 
gained admittance. But, unfortunately for them, so 
soon as the corporal had left his position, the wounded 
old gate-opener, in a dying condition, had crawled forth 
on his hands and knees from a dark hole in the tower, 
cut with a pocket-knife the ropes of the porteullis, and 
then given up the ghost. Most effective was that blow 
struck by a dead man’s hand. Down came the port- 
cullis. The flying plunderers were entrapped. Close 
behind them came the excited burghers, their antique 
Belgie ferocity now fully aroused, firing away with 
earbine and matchlock, dealing about them with bludg- 
eon and cutlass, and led merrily on by Haultepenne 
and Elmont, armed in proof, at the head of their squad- 
ron of lancers. The unfortunate patriots had risen very 
early in the morning only to shear the wolf. Some were 
cut to pieces in the streets; others climbed the walls 
and threw themselves head foremost into the moat. 
Many were drowned, and but a very few effected their 
escape. Justinus de Nassau sprang over the parapet, 
and succeeded in swimming the ditch, Kleerhagen, 


1585] FAILURE OF THE ENTERPRISE 999 


hod 


driven into the Holy Cross tower, ascended to its roof, 
leaped, all accoutred as he was, into the river, and, with 
the assistance of a Scotch soldier, came safe to land. 
Ferdinand Truchses, brother of the ex-Elector of Co- 
logne, was killed. Four or five hundred of the assail- 
ants—nearly all who had entered the city—were slain, 
and about fifty of the burghers. 

Hohenlo soon came back, with Colonel Ysselstein and 
two thousand fresh troops. But their noses, says a con- 
temporary, grew a hundred feet long with surprise when 
they saw the gate shut in their faces.1 It might have 
occurred to the count, when he rushed out of the town 
for reinforcements, that it would be as well to replace the 
guard which, as he must have seen, had abandoned 
their post. 

Cursing his folly, he returned, marvelously discomfited 
and deservedly censured, to Gertruydenberg. And thus 
had a most important enterprise, which had nearly been 
splendidly successful, ended in disaster and disgrace. 
To the recklessness of the general, to the cupidity which 
he had himself awakened in his followers, was the fail- 
ure alone to be attributed. Had he taken possession of 
the city with a firm grasp at the head of his four thou- 
sand men, nothing could have resisted him. Haulte- 
penne and his insignificant force would have been dead 
or his prisoners ; the basis of Parma’s magnificent opera- 
tions would have been withdrawn; Antwerp would have 
been saved.? 


1 Le Petit, ii. 506. 

2 For the enterprise against Bois-le-Due, see Le Petit, ii. 505, 
506; Baudartii Polemog. ii. 39; Meteren, xii. 222; Strada, ii. 326, 
327 (who by a singular lapse of the pen represents Justinus de 
Nassau as having been killed: ‘‘Reperti inter eos, qui desiderati 


224 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


“Infinite gratitude,” wrote Parma to Philip, “should 
be rendered to the Lord. Great thanks are also due to 
Haultepenne. Had the rebels succeeded in their enterprise 
against Bolduc, I should have been compelled to abandon 
the siege of Antwerp. The town, by its strength and situ- 
ation, is of infinite importance for the reduction both of 
that place and of Brussels, and the rebels in possession 
of Boldue would have cut off my supplies.” 1 

The prince recommended Haultepenne most warmly 
to the king as deserving of a rich merced. The true 
hero of the day, however,—at least the chief agent in 
the victory,—was the poor, crushed, nameless victim 
who had cut the ropes of the portcullis at the Antwerp 
Gate. 

Hohenlo was deeply stung by the disgrace which he 
had incurred. For a time he sought oblivion in hard 
drinking, but, brave and energetic, though reckless, he 
soon became desirous of retrieving his reputation by 
more successful enterprises. There was no lack of work, 
and assuredly his hands were rarely idle. 

“Holach [Hohenlo] is gone from hence on Friday 
last,” wrote Davison to Walsingham; “he will do what 
he may to recover his reputation lost in the attempt of 
Bois-le-Due, which, for the grief and trouble he hath con- 
ceived thereof, hath for the time greatly altered him.” 2 

Meantime the turbulent Schelde, lashed by the storms 
of winter, was becoming a more formidable enemy to 
Parma’s great enterprise than the military demonstra- 


sunt, Ferd. Truchsesius, et nothus Orangii filius,” ete., 327) ; Bor, ii. 
558; Van Wyn op Wagenaer, viii. 34 seq.; letter of Parma to the 
king, 12th February, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 

1 MS. letter of Parma just cited. 

2 Davison to Walsingham, February 12, 1585, 8S. P. Office MS. 


1585] PARMA’S APPEAL FOR MEN AND MONEY 225 


tions of his enemies, or the famine which was making 
such havoe with his little army. The ocean tides were 
rolling huge ice-blocks up and down, which beat against 
his palisade with the noise of thunder, and seemed to 
threaten its immediate destruction. But the work stood 
firm. The piles supporting the piers, which had been 
thrust out from each bank into the stream, had been 
driven fifty feet into the river’s bed, and did their duty 
well. But in the space between, twelve hundred and 
forty feet in width, the current was too deep for pile- 
driving, and a permanent bridge was to be established 
upon boats. And that bridge was to be laid across the 
icy and tempestuous flood in the depth of winter, in the 
teeth of a watchful enemy, with the probability of an 
immediate invasion from France,—where the rebel en- 
voys were known to be negotiating on express invitation 
of the king,—by half-naked, half-starving soldiers and 
sailors, unpaid for years, and for the sake of a master 
who seemed to have forgotten their existence. 

“Thank God,” wrote Alexander, “the palisade stands 
firm in spite of the ice. Now, with the favor of the 
Lord, we shall soon get the fruit we have been hoping, 
if your Majesty is not wanting in that to which your 
grandeur, your great Christianity, your own interests, 
oblige you. In truth ’t is a great and heroic work, 
worthy the great power of your Majesty.” “For my 
own part,” he continued, “I have done what depended 
upon me. From your own royal hand must emanate 
the rest—men, namely, sufficient to maintain the posts, 
and money enough to support them there.” 4 

He expressed himself in the strongest language con- 
cerning the danger to the royal cause from the weak 


1 MS. letter of Parma before cited. 
VOL. I.—165 


296 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and gradually sinking condition of the army. Even 
without the French intrigues with the rebels, concerning 
which, in his ignorance of the exact state of affairs, he 
expressed much anxiety, it would be impossible, he said, 
to save the royal cause without men and money. 

“T have spared myself,” said the prince, “neither day 
nor night. Let not your Majesty impute the blame to 
me if we fail. Verdugo also is uttering a perpetual ery 
out of Friesland for men—men and money.” ! 

Yet, notwithstanding all these obstacles, the bridge 
was finished at last. On the 25th of February, the day 
sacred to St. Matthew, and of fortunate augury to the 
Emperor Charles, father of Philip and grandfather of 
Alexander, the Schelde was closed.? 

As already stated, from Fort St. Mary, on the Kalloo 
side, and from Fort Philip, not far from Oordam, on the 
Brabant shore of the Schelde, strong structures, supported 
upon piers, had been projected, reaching respectively 
five hundred feet into the stream. These two opposite 
ends were now connected by a permanent bridge of 
boats. There were thirty-two of these barges, each of 
them sixty-two feet in length and twelve in breadth, the 
spaces between each couple being twenty-two feet wide, 
and all being bound together, stem, stern, and amidships, 
by quadruple hawsers and chains. Each boat was an- 
chored at stem and stern with loose cables. Strong tim- 
bers, with cross-rafters, were placed upon the boats, upon 
which heavy framework the planked pathway was laid 
down. <A thick parapet of closely fitting beams was 
erected along both the outer edges of the whole fabric. 


1 MS. letter of Parma before cited. 


2 Parma to Philip, 27th February, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 


1585] THE SCHELDE BRIDGE COMPLETED Dit 


Thus a continuous and well-fortified bridge, two thou- 
sand four hundred feet in length, was stretched at last 
from shore to shore. Hach of the thirty-two boats on 
which the central portion of the structure reposed was 
a small fortress provided with two heavy pieces of artil- 
lery, pointing the one up, the other down the stream, 
and manned by thirty-two soldiers and four sailors, de- 
fended by a breastwork formed of gabions of great 
thickness. 

The forts of St. Philip and St. Mary, at either end of 
the bridge, had each ten great guns, and both were filled 
with soldiers. In front of each fort, moreover, was sta- 
tioned a fleet of twenty armed vessels, carrying heavy 
pieces of artillery—ten anchored at the angle toward 
Antwerp, and as many looking down the river. One 
hundred and seventy great guns, including the arma- 
ments of the boats under the bridge of the armada and 
the forts, protected the whole structure, pointing up 
and down the stream. 

But besides these batteries an additional precaution 
had been taken. On each side, above and below the 
bridge, at a moderate distance,—a bow-shot,—was an- 
chored a heavy raft floating upon empty barrels. Each 
raft was composed of heavy timbers bound together in 
bunches of three, the spaces between being connected by 
ships’ masts and lighter spar-work, and with a tooth-like 
projection along the whole outer edge, formed of strong 
rafters, pointed and armed with sharp prongs and hooks 
of iron. Thus a serried phalanx, as it were, of spears 
stood ever on guard to protect the precious inner struc- 
ture. Vessels coming from Zealand or Antwerp, and 
the floating ice-masses, which were almost as formidable, 
were obliged to make their first attack upon these dan- 


228 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


gerous outer defenses. Each raft, floating in the middle 
of the stream, extended twelve hundred and fifty-two 
feet across, thus protecting the whole of the bridge of 
boats and a portion of that resting upon piles.t 

Such was the famous bridge of Parma. The magnifi- 
cent undertaking has been advantageously compared 
with the celebrated Rhine bridge of Julius Cesar. 
When it is remembered, however, that the Roman work 
was performed in summer, across a river only half as 
broad as the Schelde, free from the disturbing action of 
the tides, and flowing through an unresisting country, 
while the whole character of the structure, intended 
only to serve for the single passage of an army, was 
far inferior to the massive solidity of Parma’s bridge, 
it seems not unreasonable to assign the superiority to 
the general who had surmounted all the obstacles of a 
northern winter, vehement ebb and flow from the sea, 
and enterprising and desperate enemies at every point. 

When the citizens at last looked upon the completed 
fabric, converted from the “dream” which they had 
pronounced it to be into a terrible reality; when they 
saw the shining array of Spanish and Italian legions 
marching and countermarching upon their new road, 
and trampling, as it were, the turbulent river beneath 
their feet; when they witnessed the solemn military 
spectacle with which the governor-general celebrated 
his success, amid peals of cannon and shouts of triumph 
from his army, they bitterly bewailed their own folly. 
Yet even then they could hardly believe that the work 


1 MS. letter of Parma before cited. Compare Strada, ii. 312 
seq. ; Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii. 988-990 ; Meteren, xii. 218 seq.; Bor, 
ii. 1, xx. 590 seq. (with admirable plans, etchings, and maps); Bau- 
dartii Polemog., ii. 22 seq. (with very good engravings). 


1585] PARMA’S PRIDE IN THE ACHIEVEMENT 229 


had been accomplished by human agency, but they 
loudly protested that invisible demons had been sum- 
moned to plan and perfect this fatal and preterhuman 
work. They were wrong. There had been but one 
demon—one clear, lofty intelligence, inspiring a steady 
and untiring hand. The demon was the intellect of 
Alexander Farnese; but it had been assisted in its labor 
by the hundred devils of envy, covetousness, jealousy, 
selfishness, distrust, and discord, that had housed, not 
in his camp, but in the ranks of those who were con- 
tending for their hearths and altars. 

And thus had the prince arrived at success in spite of 
every obstacle. He took a just pride in the achievement, 
yet he knew by how many dangers he was still sur- 
rounded, and he felt hurt at his sovereign’s neglect. 
“The enterprise at Antwerp,” he wrote to Philip on the 
day the bridge was completed, “is so great and heroic 
that to celebrate it would require me to speak more at 
large than I like to do, for fear of being tedious to your 
Majesty. What I will say is that the labors and diffi- 
culties have been every day so great that if your Majesty 
knew them, you would estimate what we have done 
more highly than you do, and not forget us so utterly, 
leaving us to die of hunger.” } 

He considered the fabric in itself almost impregnable, 
provided he were furnished with the means to maintain 
what he had so painfully constructed. 

“The whole is in such condition,” said he, “that in 
opinion of all competent military judges it would stand 
though all Holland and Zealand should come to destroy 

1 “Y no nos tenia tan olvidados, ni permitiria dexarnos en 


tanta necessidad que no habemos de morir de hambre,” ete.—MS. 
letter of Parma to Philip, 27th February, 1585. 


230 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


our palisades. Their attacks must be made at immense 
danger and disadvantage, so severely can we play upon 
them with our artillery and musketry. Every boat is 
garnished with the most dainty captains and soldiers, 
so that if the enemy should attempt to assail us now 
they would come back with broken heads.” ? 

Yet in the midst of his apparent triumph he had, at 
times, almost despair in his heart. He felt really at the 
last gasp. His troops had dwindled to the mere shadow 
of an army, and they were forced to live almost upon 
air. The cavalry had nearly vanished. The garrisons 
in the different cities were starving. The burghers had 
no food for the soldiers nor for themselves. “As for 
the rest of the troops,” said Alexander, “they are sta- 
tioned where they have nothing to subsist upon save 
salt water and the dikes, and if the Lord does not grant 
a miracle, succor, even if sent by your Majesty, will ar- 
rive too late.”? He assured his master that he could 
not go on more than five or six days longer; that he had 
been feeding his soldiers for a long time from hand to 
mouth, and that it would soon be impossible for him to 
keep his troops together. If he did not disband them 
they would run away.® 

His pictures were most dismal, his supplications for 
money very moving, but he never alluded to himself. 
All his anxiety, all his tenderness, were for his soldiers. 
“They must have food,” he said. “’T is impossible to 
sustain them any longer by driblets, as I have done for a 
long time. Yet how can I do it without money? And 


1 Parma to Philip I., 28th February, 1585, Archivo de Si- 
manecas MS. 

* Same to same, 27th February, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 3 Thid. 


1585) POSITION OF ALEXANDER’S ARMY 231 


I have none at all, nor do I see where to get a single 
florin.” 

But these revelations were made only to his master’s 
most secret ear. His letters, deciphered after three cen- 
turies, alone make manifest the almost desperate condi- 
tion in which the apparently triumphant general was 
placed, and the facility with which his antagonists, had 
they been well guided and faithful to themselves, might 
have driven him into the sea. 

But to those adversaries he maintained an attitude of 
serene and smiling triumph. A spy, sent from the city 
to obtain intelligence for the anxious burghers, had 
gained admission into his lines, was captured and 
brought before the prince. He expected, of course, to 
be immediately hanged. On the contrary, Alexander 
gave orders that he should be conducted over every 
part of the encampment. The forts, the palisades, the 
bridge, were all to be carefully exhibited and explained 
to him, as if he had been a friendly visitor entitled to 
every information. He was requested to count the pieces 
of artillery in the forts, on the bridge, in the armada. 
After thoroughly studying the scene he was then dis- 
missed with a safe-conduct to the city. 

“Go back to those who sent you,” said the prince. 
“Convey to them the information in quest of which you 
came. Apprise them of everything which you have in- 
spected, counted, heard explained. Tell them further 
that the siege will never be abandoned, and that this 
bridge will be my sepulcher or my pathway into Ant- 
woerp.” 1 

And now the aspect of the scene was indeed porten- 
tous. The chimera had become a very visible, bristling 


1 Strada, ii. 325, 326. 


232 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


reality. There stood the bridge which the citizens had 
ridiculed while it was growing before their faces. There 
scowled the Kowenstyn,—black with cannon, covered all 
over with fortresses,—which the butchers had so sedu- 
lously preserved. From Parma’s camp at Beveren and 
Kalloo a great fortified road led across the river and 
along the fatal dike all the way to the intrenchments at 
Stabroek, where Mansfeld’s army lay. Grim Mon- 
dragon held the Holy Cross and the whole Kowenstyn 
in his owniron grasp. A chain of forts, built and occu- 
pied by the contending hosts of the patriots and the 
Spaniards, were closely packed together along both 
banks of the Schelde, nine miles long from Antwerp to 
Lillo, and interchanged perpetual cannonades. The 
country all around, once fertile as a garden, had been 
changed into a wild and wintry sea, where swarms of 
gunboats and other armed vessels manceuvered and con- 
tended with each other over submerged villages and 
orchards, and among half-drowned turrets and steeples. 
Yet there rose the great bulwark—whose early destruc- 
tion would have made all this desolation a blessng— 
unbroken and obstinate, a perpetual obstacle to commu- 
nication between Antwerp and Zealand. The very spirit 
of the murdered Prince of Orange seemed to rise sadly 
and reproachfully out of the waste of waters, as if to 
rebuke the men who had been so deaf to his solemn 
warnings. 

Brussels, too, wearied and worn, its heart sick with 
hope deferred, now fell into despair as the futile result 
of the French negotiation became apparent. The stately 
and opulent city had long been in a most abject condi- 
tion. Many of its inhabitants attempted to escape from 
the horrors of starving by flying from its walls. Of the 


1585] CAPITULATION OF BRUSSELS 233 


fugitives, the men were either scourged back by the 
Spaniards into the city, or hanged up along the road- 
side. The women were treated leniently, even play- 
fully, for it was thought an excellent jest to cut off the 
petticoats of the unfortunate starving creatures up to 
their knees, and then command them to go back and 
starve at home with their friends and fellow-citizens. 
A great many persons literally died of hunger. Matrons 
with large families poisoned their children and them- 
selves to avoid the more terrible death by starving! 
At last, when Vilvorde was taken, when the baseness 
of the French king was thoroughly understood, when 
Parma’s bridge was completed and the Schelde bridled, 
Brussels capitulated on as favorable terms as could well 
have been expected.” 

Notwithstanding these triumphs, Parma was much in- 
convenienced by not possessing the sea-coast of Flan- 
ders. Ostend was a perpetual stumbling-block to him. 
He therefore assented with pleasure to a proposition 
made by La Motte, one of the most experienced and 
courageous of the Walloon royalist commanders, to at- 
tempt the place by surprise. And La Motte at the first 
blow was more than half successful. On the night of 
the 29th March, with two thousand foot and twelve hun- 
dred cavalry, he carried the whole of the old port of 
Ostend. Leaving a Walloon officer, in whom he had 
confidence, to guard the position already gained, he 

1 Strada, ii. 329, 330. 

2 Ibid. Meteren, xii. 223%°. Le Petit, ii, 511. The burghers 
were allowed two years during which they were to decide between 
the papacy and perpetual exile. The municipal liberties were to 
depend upon the pleasure of the king. The houses of Cardinal 
Granvelle and of Count Mansfeld were to be rebuilt and refur- 
nished. 


234 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


went back in person for reinforcements. During his 
absence the same ill luck attended his enterprise which 
had blasted Hohenlo’s achievement at Bois-le-Duc. The 
soldiers he left behind him deserted their posts for the 
sake of rifling the town. The officer in command, in- 
stead of keeping them to their duty, jomed in the chase. 
The citizens roused themselves, attacked their invaders, 
killed many of them, and put the rest to flight. When 
La Motte returned he found the panic general. His 
whole force, including the fresh soldiers just brought to 
the rescue, were beside themselves with fear. He killed 
several with his own hand, but the troops were not to 
be rallied. His quick triumph was changed into an ab- 
solute defeat. 

Parma, furious at the ignominious result of a plan 
from which so much had been expected, ordered the 
Walloon captain, from whose delinquency so much dis- 
aster had resulted, to be forthwith hanged. “Such vil- 
lainy,” said he, “must never go unpunished.” } 

It was impossible for the prince to send a second 
expedition to attempt the reduction of Ostend, for the 
patriots were at last arousing themselves to the necessity 
of exertion. It was very obvious, now that the bridge 
had been built and the Kowenstyn fortified, that one or 
the other was to be destroyed, or Antwerp abandoned 
to its fate. 

The patriots had been sleeping, as it were, all the 


1 Parma to Philip II., 10th April, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 
Compare Strada, ii. 332, who says that three of the officers were 
condemned to be executed, but that all were subsequently par- 
doned on account of the previous good conduct of one of them. 
Alexander in his letter informs the king that he had ordered one 
to be executed forthwith, as an example to the others. 


1585] PATRIOTS GAIN LIEFKENSHOEK 235 


winter, hugging the delusive dream of French gover- 
eignty and French assistance. No language can exag- 
gerate the deadly effects from the slow poison of that 
negotiation. At any rate, the negotiation was now con- 
cluded. The dream was dispelled. Antwerp must now 
fall, or a decisive blow must be struck by the patriots 
themselves, and a telling blow had been secretly and 
maturely meditated. Certain preparatory steps were, 
however, necessary. 

The fort of Liefkenshoek (“Darling’s Corner”) was a 
most important post. The patriots had never ceased to 
regret that precious possession, lost, aswe have seen, 
in so tragical a manner on the very day of Orange’s 
death. Fort Lillo, exactly opposite, on the Brabant 
shore of the Schelde, had always been securely held 
by them, and was their strongest position. Were both 
places in their power, the navigation of the river, at 
least as far as the bridge, would be comparatively 
secure. 

A sudden dash was made upon Liefkenshoek. A 
number of armed vessels sailed up from Zealand, under 
command of Justinus de Nassau. They were assisted 
from Fort Lillo by a detachment headed by Count 
Hohenlo. These two officers were desirous of retrieving 
the reputation which they had lost at Bois-le-Due. They 
were successful, and the “Darling” fort was carried at 
a blow. After a brief cannonade the patriots made a 
breach, effected a landing, and sprang over the ramparts. 
The Walloons and Spaniards fied in dismay; many of 
them were killed in the fort and along the dikes; others 
were hurled into the Schelde. The victors followed up 
their success by reducing with equal impetuosity the 
fort of St. Anthony, situate in the neighborhood farther 


236 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


down the river. They thus gained entire command of 
all the high ground which remained in that quarter 
above the inundation, and was called the Doel. 

The dike on which Liefkenshoek stood led up the 
river toward Kalloo, distant less than a league. There 
were Parma’s headquarters and the famous bridge. But 
at Fort St. Mary, where the Flemish head of that bridge 
rested, the dike was broken. Upon that broken end 
the commanders of the expedition against Liefkenshoek 
were ordered to throw up an intrenchment without loss 
of a moment, so soon as they should have gained the 
fortresses, which they were ordered first to assault. 
Sainte-Aldegonde had given urgent written directions 
to this effect. From a redout situated thus in the 
very face of St. Mary’s, that position, the palisade-work, 
the whole bridge, might be battered with all the artillery 
that could be brought from Zealand. 

But Parma was beforehand with them. Notwith- 
standing his rage and mortification that Spanish sol- 
diers should have ignominiously lost the important 
fortress which Richebourg had conquered so brilliantly 
nine months before, he was not the man to spend time 
in unavailing regrets. His quick eye instantly detected 
the flaw which might soon be fatal. In the very same 
night of the loss of Liefkenshoek he sent as strong a 
party as could be spared, with plenty of sappers and 
miners, in flat-bottomed boats across from Kalloo. As 
the morning dawned, an improvised fortress, with the 
Spanish flag waving above its bulwarks, stood on the 
broken end of the dike. That done, he ordered one of 
the two captains who had commanded in Liefkenshoek 
and St. Anthony to be beheaded on the same dike. 


1 Le Petit, ii. 511. Strada, ii. 333. 


1585] GIANIBELLYS PROJECTS 237 


The other was dismissed with ignominy! Ostend 
was, of course, given up; “but it was not a small 
matter,” said Parma, “to fortify ourselves that very 
night upon the ruptured place, and so prevent the rebels 
from doing it, which would have been very malapropos.”2 

Nevertheless, the rebels had achieved a considerable 
success, and now or never the telling blow, long medi- 
tated, was to be struck. 

There lived in Antwerp a subtle Mantuan, Gianibelli 
by name, who had married and been long settled in the 
city. He had made himself busy with various schemes 
for victualing the place. He had especially urged upon 
the authorities, at an early period of the siege, the pro- 
priety of making large purchases of corn and storing it 
in magazines at a time when the famine price had by 
no means been reached. But the leading men had 
then their heads full of a great ship, or floating castle, 
which they were building, and which they had pom- 
pously named the War's End—“ Fin de la Guerre.” We 
shall hear something of this phenomenon at a later 
period. Meanwhile Gianibelli, who knew something of 
ship-building, as he did of most other useful matters, 
ridiculed the design, which was likely to cost, in itself, 
before completion, as much money as would keep the 
city in bread for a third of a year. 

Gianibelli was no patriot. He was purely a man of 
science and of great acquirements, who was looked upon 

1 Strada, ii. 333. Bor (ii. 596) and Bentivoglio (p. ii. 1. iii. 
p.291) say that both the commandants were beheaded. The prince 
himself (MS. letter to Philip, 10th April, 1585) relates the loss of 
the forts, but says nothing of the punishment inflicted upon the 


culprits. 
2 MS. letter of Parma just cited. 
2 Bor, ii. 500. 


938 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


on! 


by the ignorant populace alternately as a dreamer and 
a wizard. He was as indifferent to the cause of freedom 
as of despotism, but he had a great love for chemistry. 
He was also a profound mechanician, second to no man 
of his age in theoretic and practical engineering. 

He had gone from Italy to Spain that he might offer 
his services to Philip and give him the benefit of many 
original and ingenious inventions. Forced to dance 
attendance, day after day, among sneering courtiers and 
insolent placemen, and to submit to the criticism of 
practical sages and philosophers of routine, while he 
was constantly denied an opportunity of explaining his 
“projects, the quick-tempered Italian had gone away at 
last indignant. He had then vowed revenge upon the 
dullness by which his genius had been slighted, and had 
sworn that the next time the Spaniards heard the name 
of the man whom they had dared to deride they should 
hear it with tears. 

He now laid before the senate of Antwerp a plan for 
some vessels lhkely to prove more effective than the 
gigantic War’s End, which he had prophesied would 
prove a failure. With these he pledged himself to de- 
stroy the bridge. He demanded three ships, which he 
had selected from the city fleet,—the Orange, the Post, 
and the Golden Lion,—measuring respectively one hun- 
dred and fifty, three hundred and fifty, and five hundred 
tons. Besides these he wished sixty flat-bottomed scows, 
which he proposed to send down the river, partially 
submerged, disposed in the shape of a half-moon, with 
innumerable anchors and grapnels thrusting themselves 
out of the water at every point. This machine was in- 
tended to operate against the rafts. 


1 Strada, ii, 334, 335. 


1585] MARINE VOLCANOES 239 


Ignorance and incredulity did their work as usual, 
and Gianibelli’s request was refused. As a quarter- 
measure, nevertheless, he was allowed to take two smaller 
vessels of seventy and eighty tons. The Italian was 
disgusted with this parsimony upon so momentous an 
occasion, but he at the same time determined, even 
with these slender materials, to give an exhibition of his 
power.! 

Not all his the glory, however, of the ingenious pro- 
ject. Associated with him were two skilful artisans of 
Antwerp, a clock-maker named Bory, and a mechanician 
named Timmerman ;? but Gianibelli was the chief and 
superintendent of the whole daring enterprise. 

He gave to his two ships the cheerful names of the 
Fortune and the Hope, and set himself energetically to 
justify their titles by their efficiency. They were to be 
floating marine volcanoes, which, drifting down the river 
with the ebb-tide, were to deal destruction where the 
Spaniards deemed themselves most secure.® 

In the hold of each vessel, along the whole length, was 
laid down a solid flooring of brick and mortar, one foot 
thick and five feet wide. Upon this was built a chamber 
of marble mason-work, forty feet long, three and a half 
feet broad, as many high, and with side walks five feet 
in thickness. This was the crater. It was filled with 
seven thousand pounds of gunpowder, of a kind superior 


1 Bor, ii. 596, 597. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 91. 

2 Ibid. Ibid. Strada, ii. 344 seq. Meteren, xii. 2237. Bau- 
dartii Polemog., ii. 24-27 (with very curious illustrative plates). 
Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii. 291, 292. Reyd, iv. 60. Letter of Parma 
to Philip, 10th April, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 

3 Hondius, Korte Beschrijving en de Afbeelding van de generale 
Regelen der Fortificatie (’S Gravenhage, 1624, fol.), cited in Mer- 
tens en Torp’s Gesch. v. Antwerpen, v. 223 seq. 


240 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


to anything known, and prepared by Gianibelli himself. 
It was covered with a roof, six feet in thickness, formed 
of blue tombstones placed edgewise. Over this crater 
rose a hollow cone, or pyramid, made of heavy marble 
slabs, and filled with millstones, cannon-balls, blocks of 
marble, chain-shot, iron hooks, plow-colters, and every 
dangerous missile that could be imagined. The spaces 
between the mine and the sides of each ship were like- 
wise filled with paving-stones, iron-bound stakes, har- 
poons, and other projectiles. The whole fabric was then 
covered by a smooth, light flooring of planks and brick- 
work, upon which was a pile of wood. This was to be 
lighted at the proper time, in order that the two vessels 
might present the appearance of simple fire-ships, in- 
tended only to excite a conflagration of the bridge. On 
the Fortune a slow match, very carefully prepared, com- 
municated with the submerged mine, which was to 
explode at a nicely calculated moment. The eruption 
of the other floating volcano was to be regulated by an 
ingenious piece of clockwork, by which, at the ap- 
pointed time, fire, struck from a flint, was to inflame the 
hidden mass of gunpowder below. 

In addition to these two infernal machines, or “hell- 
burners,” as they were called, a fleet of thirty-two 
smaller vessels was prepared. Covered with tar, turpen- 
tine, rosin, and filled with inflammable and combustible 
materials, these barks were to be sent from Antwerp 
down the river in detachments of eight every half-hour 
with the ebb-tide. The object was to clear the way, if 
possible, of the raft, and to occupy the attention of the 
Spaniards until the Fortune and the Hope should come 
down upon the bridge. 

The 5th April, being the day following that on which 


1585] ALARM ON THE BRIDGE 241 


the successful assault upon Liefkenshoek and St. An- 
thony had taken place, was fixed for the descent of the 
fire-ships. So soon as it should be dark the thirty-two 
lesser burning vessels, under the direction of Admiral 
Jacob Jacobzoon, were to be sent forth from the neigh- 
borhood of the “ Boors’ Sconce,”—a fort close to the city 
walls,—in accordance with the Italian’s plan. “Run- 
away Jacob,” however, or “ Koppen Loppen,” had earned 
no new laurels which could throw into the shade that 
opprobrious appellation. He was not one of Holland’s 
naval heroes, but, on the whole, a very incompetent 
officer, exactly the man to damage the best-concerted 
scheme which the genius of others could invent. Ac- 
cordingly, Koppen Loppen began with a grave mistake. 
Instead of allowing the precursory fire-ships to drift 
down the stream at the regular intervals agreed upon, 
he despatched them all rapidly and helter-skelter, one 
after another, as fast as they could be set forth on their 
career. Not long afterward he sent the two hell-burners, 
the Fortune and the Hope, directly in their wake. Thus 
the whole fiery fleet had set forth, almost at once, upon 
its fatal voyage. 

It was known to Parma that preparations for an 
attack were making at Antwerp, but as to the nature of 
the danger he was necessarily in the dark. He was 
anticipating an invasion by a fleet from the city in 
combination with a squadron of Zealanders coming up 
from below. So soon as the first vessels, therefore, with 
their trains not yet lighted, were discovered bearing 
down from the city, he was confirmed in his conjecture. 
His drums and trumpets instantly called to arms, and 
the whole body of his troops was mustered upon the 
bridge, the palisades, and in the nearest forts. Thus 

VOL. I.—16 


242 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


the preparations to avoid or to contend with the danger 
were leading the Spaniards into the very jaws of de- 
struction. Alexander, after crossing and recrossing the 
river, giving minute directions for repelling the expected 
assault, finally stationed himself in the blockhouse at 
the point of junction on the Flemish side, between the 
palisade and the bridge of boats. He was surrounded 
by a group of superior officers, among whom Riche- 
bourg, Billy, Gaetano, Cessis, and the Englishman, Sir 
Rowland Yorke, were conspicuous. 

It was a dark, mild evening of early spring. As the 
fleet of vessels dropped slowly down the river they sud- 
denly became luminous, each ship flaming out of the 
darkness a phantom of living fire. The very waves of 
the Schelde seemed glowing with the conflagration, 
while its banks were lighted up with a preternatural 
glare. It was a wild, pompous, theatrical spectacle. 
The array of soldiers on both sides the river, along the 
dikes and upon the bridge, with banners waving and 
spear and cuirass glancing in the lurid light ; the demon 
fleet, guided by no human hand, wrapped in flames, and 
flitting through the darkness, with irregular movement 
but portentous aspect, at the caprice of wind and tide; 
the death-like silence of expectation which had succeeded 
the sound of trumpet and the shouts of the soldiers ; and 
the weird glow which had supplanted the darkness—all 
combined with the sense of imminent and mysterious 
danger to excite and oppress the imagination. 

Presently the Spaniards, as they gazed from the 
bridge, began to take heart again. One after another 
many of the lesser vessels drifted blindly against the raft, 
where they entangled themselves among the hooks and 
gigantic spear-heads, and burned slowly out without 


1585) THE FIRE-SHIPS 243 


causing any extensive conflagration. Others grounded 
on the banks of the river before reaching their destina- 
tion. Some sank in the stream. 

Last of all came the two infernal ships, swaying un- 
steadily with the current, the pilots, of course, as they 
neared the bridge, having noiselessly effected their 
escape in the skiffs. The slight fire upon the deck 
scarcely illuminated the dark, phantom-like hulls. Both 
were carried by the current clear of the raft, which, 
by a great error of judgment, as it now appeared, on 
the part of the builders, had only been made to protect 
the floating portion of the bridge. The Fortune came 
first, staggering inside the raft, and then lurching clum- 
sily against the dike, and grounding near Kalloo with- 
out touching the bridge. There was a moment’s pause 
of expectation. At last the slow match upon the deck 
burned out, and there was a faint and partial explosion, 
by which little or no damage was produced. 

Parma instantly called for volunteers to board the 
mysterious vessel. The desperate expedition was headed 
by the bold Rowland Yorke,'! a Londoner, of whom one 
day there was more to be heard in Netherland history. 
The party sprang into the deserted and now harmless 
voleano, extinguishing the slight fires that were smolder- 
ing on the deck, and thrusting spears and long poles 
into the hidden recesses of the hold. There was, how- 
ever, little time to pursue these perilous investigations, 
and the party soon made their escape to the bridge. 

The troops of Parma, crowding on the palisade and 
looking over the parapets, now began to greet the exhibi- 
tion with peals of derisive laughter. It was but child’s 
play, they thought, to threaten a Spanish army and a 


Stow, Chronicle of England (ed. 1631), p. 700. 


944. THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


nd 


general like Alexander Farnese with such paltry fire- 
works as these. Nevertheless, all eyes were anxiously 
fixed upon the remaining fire-ship, or hell-burner, the 
Hope, which had now drifted very near the place of its 
destination. Tearing her way between the raft and the 
shore, she struck heavily against the bridge on the Kal- 
loo side, close to the blockhouse at the commencement 
of the floating portion of the bridge. A thin wreath of 
smoke was seen curling over a slight and smoldering 
fire upon her deck. 

Marquis Richebourg, standing on the bridge, laughed 
loudly at the apparently impotent conclusion of the 
whole adventure. It was his last laugh on earth. A 
number of soldiers, at Parma’s summons, instantly 
sprang on board this second mysterious vessel, and oc- 
cupied themselves, as the party on board the Fortune had 
done, in extinguishing the flames, and in endeavoring 
to ascertain the nature of the machine. Richebourg 
boldly directed from the bridge their hazardous experi- 
ments. 

At the same moment a certain ensign, De Vega, who 
stood near the Prince of Parma, close to the blockhouse, 
approached him with vehement entreaties that he should 
retire. Alexander refused to stir from the spot, being 
anxious to learn the result of these investigations. 
Vega, moved by some instinctive and irresistible appre- 
hension, fell upon his knees, and plucking the general 
earnestly by the cloak, implored him with such passion- 
ate words and gestures to leave the place that the prince 
reluctantly yielded. 

It was not a moment too soon. The clockwork in 
the Hope had been better adjusted than the slow match 
in the Fortune. Searcely had Alexander reached the 


1585] THE EXPLOSION 245 


entrance of St. Mary’s Fort, at the end of the bridge, 
when a horrible explosion was heard. The Hope disap- 
peared, together with the men who had boarded her, 
and the blockhouse against which she had struck, with 
all its garrison, while a large portion of the bridge, with 
all the troops stationed upon it, had vanished into air. 
It was the work of a single instant. The Schelde yawned 
to its lowest depth, and then cast its waters across the 
dikes, deep into the forts, and far over the land. The 
earth shook as with the throb of a volcano. <A wild 
glare lighted up the scene for one moment, and was 
then succeeded by pitechy darkness. Houses were top- 
pled down miles away, and not a living thing, even in 
remote places, could keep its feet. The air was filled 
with a rain of plowshares, gravestones, and marble 
balls, intermixed with the heads, limbs, and bodies of 
what had been human beings. Slabs of granite, vomited 
by the flaming ship, were found afterward at a league’s 
distance, and buried deep in the earth. A thousand 
soldiers were destroyed in a second of time, many of 
them being torn to shreds beyond even the semblance 
of humanity. 

Richebourg disappeared, and was not found until 
several days later, when his body was discovered doubled 
around an iron chain which hung from one of the 
bridge-boats in the center of the river. The veteran 
Robles, Seigneur de Billy, a Portuguese officer of emi- 
nent service and high military rank, was also destroyed. 
Months afterward his body was discovered adhering to 
the timber-work of the bridge, upon the ultimate removal 
of that structure, and was only recognized by a peculiar 
gold chain which he habitually wore. Parma himself 
was thrown to the ground, stunned by a blow on the 


246 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


shoulder from a flying stake. The page, who was be- 
hind him carrying his helmet, fell dead without a 
wound, killed by the concussion of the air. 

Several strange and less tragical incidents occurred. 
The Vicomte de Bruxelles was blown out of a boat on 
the Flemish side, and descended safe and sound into 
another in the center of the stream. Captain Tucci, 
clad in complete armor, was whirled out of a fort, shot 
perpendicularly into the air, and then fell back into the 
river. Being of a cool temperament, a good swimmer, 
and very pious, he skilfully divested himself of cuirass 
and helmet, recommended himself to the Blessed Virgin, 
and swam safely ashore. Another young officer of 
Parma’s body-guard, Frangois de Liege by name, stand- 
ing on the Kalloo end of the bridge, rose like a feather 
into the clouds, and flying quite across the river, alighted 
on the opposite bank, with no further harm than a con- 
tused shoulder. He imagined himself, he said after- 
ward, to have been changed into a cannon-ball, as he 
rushed through the pitechy atmosphere, propelled by a 
blast of irresistible fury. 

It had been agreed that Admiral Jacobzoon should, 
immediately after the explosion of the fire-ships, send an 
eight-oared barge to ascertain the amount of damage. 


1 The chief authorities used in the foregoing account of this 
famous enterprise are those already cited ona previous page, viz. : 
the MS. letters of the Prince of Parma in the Archives of Simaneas ; 
Bor, ii. 596, 597; Strada, ii. 334 seq. ; Meteren, xii. 223%°; Hoofd, 
Vervolgh, 91; Baudartii Polemographia, ii, 24-27; Bentivoglio, 
p. ii, 1. iii, 291, 292; Reyd, iv. 60; Mertens en Torp, Gesch. v. 
Antw., v. 223 seq. ; Papebrochii Ann. Anty., iv. 100 seq., etal. I 
have not thought it necessary to cite them step by step, for all 
the accounts, with some inevitable and unimportant discrepancies, 


agree with each other. The most copious details are to be found 
in Strada and in Bor, 


1585] ITS RESULTS 247 


If a breach had been effected, and a passage up to the 
city opened, he was to fire a rocket. At this signal the 
fleet stationed at Lillo, carrying a heavy armament, 
laden with provisions enough to relieve Antwerp from 
all anxiety, and ready to sail on the instant, was at once 
to force its way up the river. 

The deed was done. A breach, two hundred feet in 
width, was made. Had the most skilful pilot in Zealand 
held the helm of the Hope, with a choice crew obedient 
to his orders, he could not have guided her more care- 
fully than she had been directed by wind and tide. 
Avoiding the raft which lay in her way, she had, as it 
were, with the intelligence of a living creature, fulfilled 
the wishes of the daring genius that had created her, 
and laid herself alongside the bridge exactly at the most 
telling point. She had then destroyed herself precisely 
at the right moment. All the effects, and more than 
all, that had been predicted by the Mantuan wizard had 
come to pass. The famous bridge was cleft through and 
through, and a thousand picked men—Parma’s very 
“‘daintiest”—were blown out of existence. The gov- 
ernor-general himself was lying stark and stiff upon 
the bridge, which he said should be his triumphal mon- 
ument or his tomb. His most distinguished officers 
were dead, and all the survivors were dumb and blind 
with astonishment at the unheard-of convulsion. The 
passage was open for the fleet, and the fleet lay below 
with sails spread and oars in the rowlocks, only wait- 
ing for the signal to bear up at once to the scene of ac- 
tion, to smite out of existence all that remained of the 
splendid structure, and to carry relief and triumph into 
Antwerp. 

Not a soul slept in the city. The explosion had shaken 
its walls, and thousands of people thronged the streets, 


248 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


their hearts beating high with expectation. It was a 
moment of exquisite triumph. The Hope, word of happy 
augury, had not been relied upon in vain, and Parma’s 
seven months of patient labor had been annihilated in 
a moment. Sainte-Aldegonde and Gianibelli stood in 
the Boors’ Sconce, on the edge of the river. They had 
felt and heard the explosion, and they were now strain- 
ing their eyes through the darkness to mark the flight 
of the welcome rocket. 

That rocket never rose. And it is enough, even after 
thelapse of three centuries, to cause a pang in every heart 
that beats for human liberty to think of the bitter dis- 
appointment which crushed these great and legitimate 
hopes. The cause lay in the incompetency and cow- 
ardice of the man who had been so unfortunately in- 
trusted with a share in a noble enterprise. 

Admiral Jacobzoon, paralyzed by the explosion which 
announced his own triumph, sent off the barge, but did 
not wait for its return. The boatmen, too, appalled by 
the sights and sounds which they had witnessed, and 
by the murky darkness which encompassed them, did 
not venture near the scene of action, but, after rowing 
for a short interval hither and thither, came back with the 
lying report that nothing had been accomplished, and 
that the bridge remained unbroken. Sainte-Aldegonde 
and Gianibelli were beside themselves with rage, as they 
surmised the imbecility of the admiral, and devoted him 
in their hearts to the gallows, which he certainly de- 
served. The wrath of the keen Italian may be con- 
ceived now that his ingenious and entirely successful 
scheme was thus rendered fruitless by the blunders of 
the incompetent Fleming.1 


1 Bor, Hoofd, Meteren, ubi supra. 


1585] PARMA’S COURAGE 249 


On the other side there was a man whom no danger 
could appal. Alexander had been thought dead, and 
the dismay among his followers was universal. He 
was known to have been standing an instant before the 
explosion on the very blockhouse where the Hope had 
struck. After the first terrible moments had passed, his 
soldiers found their general lying, as if in a trance, on 
the threshold of St. Mary’s Fort, his drawn sword in his 
hand, with Cessis embracing his knees, and Gaetano 
extended at his side, stunned with a blow upon the head.1 

Recovering from his swoon, Parma was the first to 
spring to his feet. Sword in hand, he rushed at once upon 
the bridge to mark the extent of the disaster. The admi- 
rable structure, the result of so much patient and intel- 
ligent energy, was fearfully shattered; the bridge, the 
river, and the shore strewed with the mangled bodies of 
his soldiers. He expected, as a matter of certainty, that 
the fleet from below would instantly force its passage, 
destroy the remainder of his troops,—stunned as they 
were with the sudden catastrophe,—complete the demo- 
lition of the bridge, and then make its way to Antwerp, 
with ample reinforcements and supplies. And Alex- 
ander saw that the expedition would be successful. 
Momently expecting the attack, he maintained his 
courage and semblance of cheerfulness, with despair in 
his heart. 

His winter’s work seemed annihilated, and it was 

1 Such is the picture minutely painted by Strada (ii. 342); and 
although the prince, in his own letters, written from the scene of 
action, and preserved in the Simanecas Archives, omits the inci- 
dent, yet I am inclined to rely upon the very ample materials pos- 
sessed by the genial Jesuit, in the shape of private contemporary 
letters from Spanish officers engaged in the war—letters, alas! 
which have probably forever disappeared. 


250 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


probable that he should be obliged to raise the siege. 
Nevertheless, he passed in person from rank to rank, 
from post to post, seeing that the wounded were pro- 
vided for, encouraging those that remained unhurt, and 
endeavoring to infuse a portion of his own courage into 
the survivors of his panic-stricken army. 

Nor was he entirely unsuccessful as the night wore 
on and the expected assault was still delayed. Without 
further loss of time he employed his men to collect the 
drifting boats, timber, and spar-work, and to make a 
hasty and temporary restoration—in semblance at least 
—of the ruined portion of his bridge. And thus he em- 
ployed himself steadily all the night, although expecting 
every instant to hear the first broadside of the Zealand 
cannon. When morning broke, and it became obvious 
that the patriots were unable or unwilling to follow up 
their own success, the governor-general felt as secure as 
ever. He at once set about the thorough repair of his 
great work, and before he could be again molested had 
made good the damage which it had sustained.t 

It was not till three days afterward that the truth 
was known in Antwerp. Hohenlo then sent down a 
messenger, who swam under the bridge, ascertained the 
exact state of affairs, and returned when it was too late 
with the first intelligence of the triumph which had been 
won and lost. The disappointment and mortification 
were almost intolerable. And thus had Runaway J acob, 
Koppen Loppen, blasted the hopes of so many wiser and 
braver spirits than his own. 

The loss to Parma and to the royalist cause in Mar- 
quis Richebourg was very great. The death of De Billy, 


1 Bor, Strada, Meteren, Hoofd, Bentivoglio, Reyd, Mertens en 
Torp, Papebrochii Ann. , MS. letters of Parma, ubi supra. 


1585] DEATH OF THE VISCOUNT OF GHENT 95] 


who was a faithful, experienced, and courageous general, 
was also much lamented. “The misfortune from their 
death,” said Parma, “is not to be exaggerated. Hach 
was ever ready to do his duty in your Majesty’s service, 
and to save me much fatigue in all my various affairs. 
Nevertheless,” continued the prince, with great piety, 
“we give the Lord thanks for all, and take as a favor 
everything which comes from his hand.” ! 

Alexander had indeed reason to deplore the loss of 
Robert de Melun, Viscount of Ghent, Marquis of Rou- 
baix and Richebourg. He was a most valuable officer. 
His wealth was great. It had been recently largely in- 
creased by the confiscation of his elder brother’s estates 
for his benefit, a measure which, at Parma’s intercession, 
had been accorded by the king. That brother was the 
patriotic Prince of Espinoy, whom we have recently 
seen heading the legation of the states to France. And 
Richebourg was grateful to Alexander, for, besides these 
fraternal spoils, he had received two marquisates through 
his great patron, in addition to the highest military 
offices. Insolent, overbearing, truculent to all the world, 
to Parma he was ever docile, affectionate, watchful, 
obsequious. A man who knew not fatigue, nor fear, 
nor remorse, nor natural affection, who could patiently 
superintend all the details of a great military work, or 
manage a vast political intrigue by alternations of brow- 
beating and bribery, or lead a forlorn hope, or murder 
a prisoner in cold blood, or leap into the blazing crater 
of what seemed a marine voleano, the Marquis of Riche- 
bourg had ever made himself most actively and un- 
scrupulously useful to his master. Especially had he 
rendered invaluable services in the reduction of the 


1 MS. letter, 10th April, 1585, already cited. 


252 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Walloon provinces and in the bridging of the Schelde, 
the two crowning triumphs of Alexander’s life. He had 
now passed from the scene where he had played so 
energetic and dazzling a part, and lay doubled round an 
iron cable beneath the current of the restless river. 

And in this eventful night Parma, as always, had 
been true to himself and to his sovereign. “We ex- 
pected,” said he, “that the rebels would instantly attack 
us on all sides after the explosion; but all remained so 
astonished by the unheard-of accident that very few 
understood what was going on. It seemed better that 
I, notwithstanding the risk of letting myself be seen, 
should encourage the people not to run away. I did so, 
and remedied matters a little, but not so much as that, 
if the enemy had then attacked us, we should not have 
been in the very greatest risk and peril. I did not fail to 
do what I am obliged to do and always hope to do; but 
I say no more of what passed or what was done by 
myself, because it does not become me to speak of these 
things.” 1 

Notwithstanding this discomfiture, the patriots kept 
up heart, and were incessantly making demonstrations 
against Parma’s works. Their proceedings against the 
bridge, although energetic enough to keep the Spanish 
commander in a state of perpetual anxiety, were never 
so efficient, however, as on the memorable occasion 
when the Mantuan engineer and the Dutch watch-maker 
had exhausted all their ingenuity. Nevertheless, the 
rebel barks swarmed all over the submerged territory, 
now threatening this post and now that, and effecting 
their retreat at pleasure, for nearly the whole of Parma’s 

1 tt 


+ + + yno dijo mas aqui de lo que entonces paso, y yo hice 
por no estarme bien tratar dello.”—MS. letter before cited. 


1585] PERPETUAL ANXIETY 253 


little armada was stationed at the two extremities of his 
bridge. Many fire-ships were sent down from time to 
time, but Alexander had organized a systematic patrol 
of a few sentry-boats, armed with scythes and hooks, 
which rowed up and down in front of the rafts, and 
protected them against invasion. 

Some little effect was occasionally produced, but there 
was, on the whole, more anxiety excited than damage 
actually inflicted. The perturbation of spirit among the 
Spaniards when any of these “demon fire-ships,” as they 
called them, appeared bearing down upon their bridge, 
was excessive. It could not be forgotten that the Hope 
had sent into space a thousand of the best soldiers of the 
little army within one moment of time. Such rapid 
proceedings had naturally left an uneasy impression on 
the minds of the survivors. The fatigue of watching 
was enormous. Hardly an officer or soldier among the 
besieging forces knew what it was to sleep. There was 
a perpetual exchanging of signals and beacon-fires and 
rockets among the patriots; not a day or night when 
a concerted attack by the Antwerpers from above and 
the Hollanders from below, with gunboats and fire- 
ships and floating mines and other devil’s enginery, was 
not expected. 

“We are always upon the alert,” wrote Parma, “ with 
arms in our hands. Every one must mount guard, 
myself as well as the rest, almost every night and the 
better part of every day.” ! 

He was quite aware that something was ever in prep- 
aration, and the nameless, almost sickening apprehen- 
sion which existed among his stout-hearted veterans 
was a proof that the Mantuan’s genius, notwithstanding 


1 Parma to Philip, 6th May, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


254 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


the disappointment as to the great result, had not been 
exercised entirely in vain. The image of the Antwerp 
devil-ships imprinted itself indelibly upon the Spanish 
mind as of something preternatural, with which human 
valor could only contend at a disadvantage; and a day 
was not very far distant—one of the memorable days of 
the world’s history, big with the fate of England, Spain, 
Holland, and all Christendom—when the sight of a half- 
dozen blazing vessels, and the ery of “ The Antwerp fire- 
ships!” was to decide the issue of a most momentous 
enterprise. The blow struck by the obscure Italian 
against Antwerp bridge, although ineffective then, was 
to be most sensibly felt, after a few years had passed, 
upon a wider field. 

Meantime the uneasiness and the watchfulness in the 
besieging army were very exhausting. “They are never 
idle in the city,” wrote Parma. ‘They are perpetually 
proving their obstinacy and pertinacity by their indus- 
trious genius and the machines which they devise. 
Every day we are expecting some new invention. On 
our side we endeavor to counteract their efforts by every 
human means in our power. Nevertheless, I confess that 
our merely human intellect is not competent to penetrate 
the designs of their diabolical genius. Certainly most 
wonderful and extraordinary things have been exhibited, 
such as the oldest soldiers here have never before wit- 
nessed.” 1 

Moreover, Alexander saw himself growing weaker 


1“, ,, aunque confieso que nuestros ingenios no aleanzan ni 
penetran lo que los suyos diabolicos hazen, porque cierto se veen 
cosas estranas y nuevas alo que aseguran cuantos soldados viejos 
aqui hay.”—Parma to Philip, 25th May, 1585, Archivo de 
Simaneas MS, 


1585] IMPOVERISHED STATE OF THE SPANIARDS 255 


and weaker. His force had dwindled to a mere phan- 
tom of an army. His soldiers, ill fed, half clothed, un- 
paid, were fearfully overworked. He was obliged to 
concentrate all the troops at his disposal around Ant- 
werp. Diversions against Ostend, operations in Fries- 
land and Gelderland, although most desirable, had thus 
been rendered quite impossible. 

“T have recalled my cavalry and infantry from Os- 
tend,” he wrote, “and Don Juan de Manrique has, for- 
tunately, arrived in Stabroek with a thousand good 
German folk. The commissary-general of the cavalry 
has come in, too, with a good lot of the troops that had 
been encamped in the open country. Nevertheless, we 
remain wretchedly weak—quite insufficient to attempt 
what ought to be done. If the enemy were more in 
force, or if the French wished to make trouble, your 
Majesty would see how important it had been to provide 
in time against such contingencies; and although our 
neighbors, crestfallen, and rushing upon their own 
destruction, leave us in quiet, we are not without plenty 
of work. It would be of inestimable advantage to make 
diversions in Gelderland and Friesland, because in that 
ease the Hollanders, seeing the enemy so near their own 
borders, would be obliged to withdraw their assistance 
from Antwerp. ’T is pity to see how few Spaniards 
your Majesty has left, and how diminished is our army. 
Now also is the time to expect sickness, and this affair 
of Antwerp is obviously stretching out into large pro- 
portions. Unless soon reinforced, we must inevitably 
go to destruction. I implore your Majesty to ponder 
the matter well, and not to defer the remedy.” } 

His Majesty was sure to ponder the matter well, if 


1 MS. letter, 10th April, 1585, before cited. 


256 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


that had been all,—Philip was good at pondering,—but 
it was equally certain that the remedy would be de- 
ferred. Meantime Alexander and his starving but 
heroic little army were left to fight their battles as 
they could. 

His complaints were incessant, most reasonable, but 
unavailing. With all the forces he could muster, by 
withdrawing from the neighborhood of Ghent, Brussels, 
Vilvorde, and from all the garrisons, every man that 
could be spared, he had not strength enough to guard 
his own posts. To attempt to win back the important 
forts recently captured by the rebels on the Doel was 
quite out of the question. The pictures he painted of 
his army were, indeed, most dismal. The Spaniards 
were so reduced by sickness that it was pitiful to see 
them. The Italians were not in much better condition, 
nor the Germans. “As for the Walloons,” said he, 
“they are deserting, as they always do. In truth, one 
of my principal dangers is that the French civil wars 
are now tempting my soldiers across the frontier, the 
country there is so much richer, and offers so much 
more for the plundering.” + 

During the few weeks which immediately followed 
the famous descent of the Hope and the Fortune, there 
had accordingly been made a variety of less elaborate, 
but apparently mischievous, efforts against the bridge. 
On the whole, however, the object was rather to deceive 
and amuse the royalists, by keeping their attention fixed 
in that quarter, while a great attack was, in reality, pre- 
paring against the Kowenstyn. That strong barrier, as 
repeatedly stated, was even a more formidable obstacle 
than the bridge to the communication between the be- 


1 MS. letter, Parma to Philip, 6th May, 1585. 


1585] THE GREAT DIKE 257 


leaguered city and their allies upon the outside. Its eap- 
ture and demolition, even at this late period, would open 
tke navigation to all the fleets of Zealand. 

In the undertaking of the 5th of April all had been ac- 
complished that human ingenuity could devise; yet the 
triumph had been snatched away even at the very mo- 
ment when it was complete. A determined and vigorous 
effort was soor. to be made upon te Kowenstyn, in the 
very face of Parma, for it now seemed obvious that the 
true crisis was to come upon that fatal dike. The great — 
bulwark was three miles long. It reached from Sta- 
broek, in Brabant, near which village Mansfeld’s troops 
were encamped, across the inundated country, up to the 
line of the Schelde. Thence along the river dike and 
across the bridge to Kalloo and Beveren, where Parma’s 
forces lay, was a continuous fortified road some three 
leagues in length, so that the two divisions of the be- 
sleging army, lying four leagues apart, were all con- 
nected by this important line. 

Could the Kowenstyn be pierced, the water, now di- 
vided by that great bulwark into two vast lakes, would 
flow together in one continuous sea. Moreover, the 
Schelde, it was thought, would in that case return to its 
own channel through Brabant, deserting its present bed, 
and thus leaving the famous bridge high and dry. A 
wide sheet of navigable water would then roll between 
Antwerp and the Zealand coasts, and Parma’s bridge, 
the result of seven months’ labor, would become as use- 
less as a child’s broken toy. 

Alexander had thoroughly comprehended the necessity 
of maintaining the Kowenstyn. All that it was possible 
to do with the meager forces at his disposal he had 
done. He had fringed both its margins along its whole 

VOL. I.—17 


258 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


length with a breastwork of closely driven stakes. He 
had strengthened the whole body of the dike with 
timber-work and piles. Upon its river end, just at the 
junction with the great Schelde dike, a strong fortress, 
called the Holy Cross, had been constructed, which was 
under the special command of Mondragon.! Besides 
this three other forts had been built at intervals of 
about a mile upon the dike. The one nearest to Mon- 
dragon was placed at the Kowenstyn manor-house, and 
was called St. James. This was intrusted to Camillo 
Bourbon del Monte, an Italian officer, who boasted the 
blood royal of France in his veins, and was disposed on 
all occasions to vindicate that proud pedigree by his 
deeds.2 The next fort was St. George’s, sometimes 
called the Black Sconce. It had been built by La Motte, 
but it was now in command of the Spanish officer 
Benites. The third was entitled the Fort of the Pali- 
sade, because it had been necessary to support it by a 
stockade-work in the water, there being absolutely not 
earth enough to hold the structure. It was placed in 
the charge of Captain Gamboa. These little castles had 
been created, as it were, out of water and upon water, 
and under a hot fire from the enemy’s forts and fleets, 
which gave the pioneers no repose.’ 

“oP was very hard work,” said Parma, “our soldiers 
are so exposed during their labor, the rebels playing 
upon them perpetually from their musket-proof vessels. 
They fill the submerged land with their boats, skimming 
everywhere as they like, while we have none at all. We 
have been obliged to build these three forts with neither 

1 Strada, ii, 345, 346, 
2 De Thou, viii. 428, 
3 Strada, ii. 345, 846. Bor, ii. 597, 598. 


1585] ATTACK ON THE KOWENSTYN 259 


material nor space, making land enough for the founda- 
tion by bringing thither bundles of hurdles and of earth. 
The fatigue and anxiety are incredible. Not aman can 
sleep at night; not an officer nor soldier but is perpetu- 
ally mounting guard. But they are animated to their 
hard work by seeing that I share in it like one of them- 
selves. We have now got the dike into good order, so 
far as to be able to give them a warm reception when- 
ever they choose to come.’ ! 

Quite at the farther or land end of the Kowenstyn 
was another fort, called the Stabroek, which commanded 
and raked the whole dike, and was in the neighborhood 
of Mansfeld’s headquarters. 

Placed, as were these little citadels, upon a slender 
and—at a brief distance—invisible thread of land, with 
the dark waters rolling around them far and near, they 
presented an unsubstantial, dream-like aspect, seeming 
rather like castles floating between air and ocean than 
actual fortifications—a deceptive mirage rather than 
reality. There was nothing imaginary, however, in the 
work which they were to perform. 

A series of attacks, some serious, others fictitious, had 
been made from time to time upon both bridge and 
dike; but Alexander was unable to inspire his soldiers 
with his own watchfulness. Upon the 7th of May a 
more determined attempt was made upon the Kowenstyn 
by the fleet from Lillo. Hohenlo and Colonel Ysselstein 
conducted the enterprise. The sentinels at the point 
selected, having recently been so often threatened by an 
enemy, who most frequently made a rapid retreat, as to 
have grown weary and indifferent, were surprised at 
dawn of day, and put to the sword. “If the truth must 


1 Parma to Philip, 6th May, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


260 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


be told,” said Parma, “the sentries were sound asleep.” 1 
Five hundred Zealanders, with a strong party of sappers 
and miners, fairly established themselves upon the dike 
between St. George’s and Fort Palisade. The attack, 
although spirited at its commencement, was doomed to 
be unsuccessful. A codperation, agreed upon by the 
fleet from Antwerp, failed through a misunderstanding. 
Sainte-Aldegonde had stationed certain members of the 
munition chamber in the cathedral tower, with orders 
to discharge three rockets when they should perceive a 
beacon-fire which he should light in Fort Tholouse. 
The watchmen mistook an accidental camp-fire in the 
neighborhood for the preconcerted signal, and sent up 
the rockets. Hohenlo, understanding, accordingly, that 
the expedition was on the point of starting from Ant- 
werp, hastened to perform his portion of the work, and 
sailed up from Lillo. He did his duty faithfully and 
well, and established himself upon the dike, but found 
himself alone and without sufficient force to maintain his 
position. The Antwerp fleet never sailed. It was even 
whispered that the delinquency was rather intended 
than accidental, the Antwerpers being supposed desir- 
ous to ascertain the result of Hohenlo’s attempt before 
coming forth to share his fate. Such was the opinion 
expressed by Farnese in his letters to Philip, but it 
seems probable that he was mistaken. Whatever the 
cause, however, the fact of the Zealanders’ discomfiture 
was certain. The St. George battery and that of the 
Palisade were opened at once upon them, the balls came 
plunging among the sappers and miners heroes they had 
time to throw up many spadefuls of earth, and the 
whole party were soon dead or driven from the dike. 


1 In Strada, ii. 349. 


1585] SECOND ATTACK ON THE KOWENSTYN 261 


The survivors effected their retreat as they best could, 
leaving four of their ships behind them, and three or 
four hundred men. 

“Forty rebels lay dead on the dike,” said Parma, 
“and one hundred and fifty more, at least, were 
drowned. The enemy confess a much larger loss than 
the number I state, but I am not a friend of giving de- 
tails larger than my ascertained facts, nor do I know 
how many were killed in the boats.” 

This enterprise was but a prelude, however, to the 
great undertaking which had now been thoroughly 
matured. Upon the 26th May another and most deter- 
mined attack was to be made upon the Kowenstyn by 
the Antwerpers and Hollanders acting in concert. This 
time, it was to be hoped, there would be no misconcep- 
tion of signals. “It was a determination,” said Parma, 
‘““so daring and desperate that there was no substantial 
reason why we should believe they would carry it out; 
but they were at last solemnly resolved to die or to 
effect their purpose.” 2 

Two hundred ships in all had been got ready, part of 
them, under Hohenlo and Justinus de Nassau, to sail up 
from Zealand, the others to advance from Antwerp 
under Sainte-Aldegonde. Their destination was the 
Kowenstyn dike. Some of the vessels were laden with 
provisions, others with gabions, hurdles, branches, sacks 
of sand and of wool, and with other materials for the 
rapid throwing up of fortifications. 


1 Parma to Philip II., 25th May, 1585, Archivo de Simanecas MS. 
Compare Bor, ii. 598, 599; Strada, 348, 349; Le Petit, ii. 512; 
Meteren, xii. 224; Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii. 294. 

2 Parma to Philip II., 26th May, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 


262 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


It was two o’clock, half an hour before the chill dawn 
of a May morning, Sunday, the 26th of the month. The 
pale light of a waning moon was faintly perceptible in 
the sky. Suddenly the sentinels upon the Kowenstyn 
—this time not asleep—descried, as they looked toward 
Lillo, four fiery apparitions gliding toward them across 
the waves. The alarm was given, and soon afterward 
the Spaniards began to muster, somewhat reluctantly, 
upon the dike, filled as they always were with the mys- 
terious dread which those demon-vessels never failed to 
inspire. 

The fire-ships floated slowly nearer, and at last struck 
heavily against the stockade-work. There, covered with 
tar, pitch, rosin, and gunpowder, they flamed, flared, and 
exploded, during a brief period, with much vigor, and 
then burned harmlessly out. One of the objects for 
which they had been sent—to set fire to the Palisade— 
was not accomplished. The other was gained, for the 
enemy, expecting another voleanic shower of tombstones 
and plow-colters, and remembering the recent fate of 
their comrades on the bridge, had retired shuddering 
into the forts. Meantime, in the glare of these vast 
torches, a great swarm of gunboats and other vessels, 
skimming across the leaden-colored waters, was seen 
gradually approaching the dike. It was the fleet of 
Hohenlo and Justinus de Nassau, who had been sailing 
and rowing since ten o’clock of the preceding night. 
The burning ships lighted them on their way, while 
they had scared the Spaniards from their posts. 

The boats ran ashore in the mile-long space between 
Fort St. George and the Palisade, and a party of Zea- 
landers, Admiral Haultain, governor of Walcheren, at 
their head, sprang upon the dike. Meantime, however, 


1585] A LANDING EFFECTED 263 


the royalists, finding that the fire-ships had come to so 
innocent an end, had rallied and emerged from their 
forts. Haultain and his Zealanders, by the time they 
had fairly mounted the dike, found themselves in the 
iron embrace of several hundred Spaniards. After a 
brief, fierce struggle face to face and at push of pike, 
the patriots reeled backward down the bank and took 
refuge in their boats. Admiral Haultain slipped as he 
left the shore, missed a rope’s end which was thrown to 
him, fell into the water, and, borne down by the weight 
of his armor, was drowned. The enemy, pursuing them, 
sprang to the waist in the ooze on the edge of the dike, 
and continued the contest. The boats opened a hot fire, 
and there was a severe skirmish for many minutes, with 
no certain result. It was, however, beginning to go hard 
with the Zealanders, when, just at the critical moment, a 
cheer from the other side of the dike was heard, and the 
Antwerp fleet was seen coming swiftly to the rescue. The 
Spaniards, taken between the two bands of assailants, 
were at a disadvantage, and it was impossible to prevent 
the landing of these fresh antagonists. The Antwerpers 
sprang ashore. Among the foremost was Sainte-Alde- 
gonde,!—poet, orator, hymn-book maker, burgomaster, 
lawyer, polemical divine,—now armed to the teeth and 
cheering on his men, in the very thickest of the fight. 
The diversion was successful, and Sainte-Aldegonde 
gallantly drove the Spaniards quite off the field. The 
whole combined force from Antwerp and Zealand now 


1 “MM. Sainte-Aldegonde being one of the first.”—Letter of 
Captain Thomas James to Walsingham, May 16 (26), 1585, S. P. 
Office MS. The English soldier had no remarkable talent for de- 
seription, but he had been fighting all day on the dike, and sent 
off a rough account of the business, the same night, to England. 


264 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


effected their landing. Three thousand men occupied 
all the space between Fort St. George and the Pali- 
sade. 

With Sainte-Aldegonde came the unlucky Koppen 
Loppen, and all that could be spared of the English and 
Scotch troops in Antwerp, under Balfour and Morgan. 
With Hohenlo and Justinus de Nassau came Reinier 
Kant, who had just sueceeded Paul Buys as advocate 
of Holland. Besides these came two other men, side by 
side, perhaps in the same boat, of whom the world was 
like to hear much from that time forward, and whose 
names are to be most solemnly lnked together so long 
as Netherland history shall endure: one a fair-faced, 
flaxen-haired boy of eighteen, the other a square-vis- 
aged, heavy-browed man of forty—Prince Maurice! and 
John of Olden-Barneveldt. The statesman had been 
foremost to urge the claim of William the Silent’s son 
upon the stadholderate of Holland and Zealand, and 
had been, as it were, the youth’s political guardian. He 
had himself borne arms more than once before, having 
shouldered his matchlock under Batenburg, and marched 
on that officer’s spirited but disastrous expedition for 
the relief of Haarlem. But this was the life of those 


1 “The Count Maurice, with divers of the states, was here,” 
says Captain James, in the letter just cited. 

There is a doubt as to Olden-Barneveldt’s presence. My au- 
thority in stating the fact rested on a contemporaneous MS., but 
the note has unluckily been lost. 'The common biographers of the 
great advocate, and the contemporary historians, are silent as to 
the fact, if it be one. It is certain, however, that many members 
of the States-General came up in Hohenlo’s fleet, and it was not 
likely that Barneveldt would stay behind. His presence is dis- 
tinetly stated by some one, but the reader is at liberty to be in- 
credulous if he choose. 


1585] HUMAN BEAVERS 265 


Dutch rebels. Quill-driving, law-expounding, speech- 
making, diplomatic missions, were intermingled with 
very practical business in besieged towns or open fields, 
with Italian musketeers and Spanish pikemen. And 
here, too, young Maurice was taking his first solid 
lesson in the art of which he was one day to be so dis- 
tinguished a professor. It was a sharp beginning. 
Upon this riband of earth, scarce six paces in breadth, 
with miles of deep water on both sides,—a position re- 
cently fortified by the first general of the age, and held 
by the famous infantry of Spain and Italy,—there was 
likely to be no prentice work. 

To assault such a position was, in truth, as Alexander 
had declared it to be, a most daring and desperate reso- 
lution on the part of the states. ‘Soldiers, citizens, and 
all,” said Parma—‘“ they are obstinate as dogs to try their 
fortune.” + 

With wool-sacks, sand-bags, hurdles, planks, and other 
materials brought with them, the patriots now rapidly 
intrenched themselves in the position so brilliantly 
gained, while, without deferring for an instant the great 
purpose which they had come to effect, the sappers and 
miners fastened upon the iron-bound soil of the dike, 
tearing it with pick, mattock, and shovel, digging, delv- 
ing, and throwing up the earth around them, busy as 
human beavers, instinctively engaged in a most con- 
genial task. 

But the beavers did not toil unmolested. The large 
and determined force of Antwerpers and English, Hol- 
landers and Zealanders, guarded the fortifications as they 
were rapidly rising, and the pioneers as they were so 
manfully delving; but the enemy was not idle. From 


1 Parma to Philip II., 6th June, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


266 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Fort St. James, next beyond St. George, Camillo del 
Monte led a strong party to the rescue. There was a 
tremendous action, foot to foot, breast to breast, with 
pike and pistol, sword and dagger. Never since the 
beginning of the war had there been harder fighting 
than now upon that narrow isthmus. “’T was an affair 
of most brave obstinacy on both sides,” said Parma, who 
rarely used strong language. ‘Soldiers, citizens, and 
all—they were like mad bulldogs.”? MHollanders, Ital- 
ians, Scotchmen, Spaniards, Englishmen, fell thick and 
fast. The contest was about the intrenchments before 
they were completed, and especially around the sappers 
and miners, in whose picks and shovels lay the whole 
fate of Antwerp. Many of the dike-breakers were dig- 
ging their own graves, and rolled, one after another, into 
the breach which they were so obstinately creating. 
Upon that slender thread of land the hopes of many 
thousands were hanging. To tear it asunder, to roll the 
ocean waves up to Antwerp, and thus to snatch the 
great city triumphantly from the grasp of Philip—to 
accomplish this the three thousand had come forth that 
May morning. To prevent it, to hold firmly that great 
treasure intrusted to them, was the determination of the 
Spaniards. And so, closely pent and packed, discharg- 
ing their carbines into each other's faces, rolling, coiled 
together, down the slimy sides of the dike into the black 
waters, struggling to and fro, while the cannon from 
the rebel fleet and from the royal forts mingled their 
roar with the sharp crack of the musketry, Catholies 
and patriots contended for an hour, while still through 
all the confusion and uproar the miners dug and 
delved. 


1 Parma to Philip IL, 26th May, 1585, MS. 


1585] THE DIKE PIERCED 267 


At last the patriots were victorious. They made 
good their intrenchments, drove the Spaniards, after 
much slaughter, back to the Fort of St. George on the 
one side and of the Palisade on the other, and cleared 
the whole space between the two points. The center of 
the dike was theirs; the great Kowenstyn, the only key 
by which the gates of Antwerp could be unlocked, was 
in the deliverers’ hands. They pursued their victory and 
attacked the Palisade Fort. Gamboa, its commandant, 
was severely wounded, many other officers dead or 
dying; the outworks were in the hands of the Hol- 
landers; the slender piles on which the fortress rested 
in the water were rudely shaken ; the victory was almost 
complete. 

And now there was a tremendous cheer of triumph. 
The beavers had done their work, the barrier was bitten 
through and through, the salt water rushed like a river 
through the ruptured dike. A few moments later and 
a Zealand barge, freighted with provisions, floated 
triumphantly into the waters beyond, now no longer an 
inland sea. The deed was done, the victory achieved. 
Nothing more was necessary than to secure it, to tear 
the fatal barrier to fragments, to bury it, for its whole 
length, beneath the waves. Then, after the isthmus had 
been utterly submerged, when the Schelde was rolled 
back into its ancient bed, when Parma’s famous bridge 
had become useless, when the maritime communication 
between Antwerp and Holland had been thoroughly 
established, the Spaniards would have nothing left for 
it but to drown like rats in their intrenchments, or to 
abandon the siege in despair. All this was in the hands 
of the patriots. The Kowenstyn was theirs. The Span- 
iards were driven from the field, the batteries of their 


268 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


forts silenced. For a long period the rebels were un- 
molested, and felt themselves secure. 

“We remained thus some three hours,” says Captain 
James, an English officer who fought in the action, and 
described it in rough, soldierly fashion to Walsingham 
the same day, “thinking all things to be secure.”? Yet 
in the very supreme moment of victory the leaders, both 
of the Hollanders and of the Antwerpers, proved them- 
selves Incompetent to their position. With deep regret 
it must be admitted that not only the reckless Hohenlo, 
but the all-accomplished Sainte-Aldegonde, committed 
the gravest error. In the hour of danger both had com- 
ported themselves with perfect courage and conduct. 
In the instant of triumph they gave way to puerile ex- 
ultation. With a celerity as censurable as it seems 
incredible, both these commanders sprang into the first 
barge which had thus floated across the dike, in order 
that they might in person carry the news of the victory 
to Antwerp, and set all the bells ringing and the bonfires 
blazing. They took with them Ferrante Spinola, a 
mortally wounded Italian officer of rank, as a trophy of 
their battle, and a boat-load of beef and flour as an 
earnest of the approaching relief.® 

While the conquerors were thus gone to enjoy their 
triumph, the conquered, though perplexed and silenced, 

1 Meteren, xii. 224. Bor, ii. 599, 600. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 97-99 
seq. (\Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii, 297 seq. Strada, ii. 354-367. 
Baudartii Polemographia, ii. 27-30. Le Petit, ii. 514. Captain 
T. James to Walsingham, May 16 (26), 1585, S. P. Office MS. 


Gilpin to Walsingham, May 17 (27), 1585, 8. P. Office MS. Parma 


to Philip II., 26th May and 6th June, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 


2 MS. letter before cited. 
3 Meteren, Bor, Hoofd, Strada, ubi sup. 


1585] A COUNCIL OF WAR 269 


were not yet disposed to accept their defeat. They were 
even ignorant that they were conquered. They had 
been forced to abandon the field, and the patriots had 
intrenched themselves upon the dike, but neither Fort 
St. George nor the Palisade had been carried, although 
the latter was in imminent danger. 

Old Count Peter Ernest Mansfeld, a grizzled veteran 
who had passed his childhood, youth, manhood, and old 
age under fire, commanded at the land end of the dike, 
in the fortress of Stabroek, in which neighborhood his 
whole division was stationed. Seeing how the day was 
going, he called a council of war. The patriots had 
gained a large section of the dike. So much was cer- 
tain. Could they succeed in utterly demolishing that 
bulwark in the course of the day? If so, how were they 
to be dislodged before their work was perfected? It 
was difficult to assault their position. Three thousand 
Hollanders, Antwerpers, Englishmen,—‘“ mad bulldogs 
all,” as Parma called them,—showing their teeth very 
mischievously, with one hundred and sixty Zealand 
vessels throwing in their broadsides from both margins 
of the dike, were a formidable company to face. 

“Oh for one half-hour of Alexander in the field!” - 
sighed one of the Spanish officers in council. But Alex- 
ander was more than four leagues away, and it was 
doubtful whether he even knew of the fatal occurrence. 
Yet how to send him a messenger? Who could reach 
him through that valley of death? Would it not be 
better to wait till nightfall? Under the cover of dark- 
ness something might be attempted which in the day- 
light would be hopeless. There was much anxiety, and 
much difference of opinion had been expressed, when 
Camillo Capizucea, colonel of the Italian legion, ob- 


270 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


tained a hearing. A man bold in words as in deeds, he 
vehemently denounced the pusillanimity which would 
wait either for Parma or for nightfall. ‘ What differ- 
ence will it make,” he asked, “whether we defer our 
action until either darkness or the general arrives? In 
each case we give the enemy time enough to destroy the 
dike and thoroughly to relieve the city. That done, 
what good can be accomplished by our arms? Then 
our disheartened soldiers will either shrink from a fruit- 
less combat or march to certain death.” Having thus, 
very warmly but very sagaciously, defined the position 
in which all were placed, he proceeded to declare that 
he claimed neither for himself nor for his legion any 
superiority over the rest of the army. He knew not 
that the Italians were more to be relied upon than 
others in the time of danger, but this he did know, that 
no man in the world was so devoted as he was to the 
Prince of Parma. To show that devotion by waiting 
with folded arms behind a wall until the prince should 
arrive to extricate his followers was not in his constitu- 
tion. He claimed the right to lead his Italians against 
the enemy at once, in the front rank, if others chose to 
follow; alone if the rest preferred to wait till a better 
leader should arrive. 

The words of the Italian colonel sent a thrill through 
all who heard him. Next in command under Capizuecca 
was his camp-marshal, an officer who bore the illustrious 
name of Piccolomini, father of the Duke Ottavio, of 
whom so much was to be heard at a later day through- 
out the fell scenes of that portion of the eighty years’ 
tragedy now enacting, which was to be called the Thirty 
Years’ War of Germany. The camp-marshal warmly 


1 Strada, ii. 357, 358, seq. 


1585] RALLY OF THE SPANIARDS Dial 


seconded the proposition of his colonel. Mansfeld, 
pleased with such enthusiasm among his officers, yielded 
to their wishes, which were, in truth, his own. Six com- 
panies of the Italian legion were in his encampment, 
while the remainder were stationed far away upon the 
bridge, under command of his son, Count Charles. 
Karly in the morning, before the passage across the 
dike had been closed, the veteran condottiere, pricking 
his ears as he snuffed the battle from afar, had contrived 
to send a message to his son. 

“Charles, my boy,” were his words, “ to-day we must 
either beat them or burst.” 1 

Old Peter Ernest felt that the long-expected, long- 
deferred assault was to be made that morning in full 
force, and that it was necessary for the royalists, on 
both bridge and dike, to hold their own. Piccolomini 
now drew up three hundred of his Italians, picked 
veterans all, and led them in marching order to Mans- 
feld. That general, at the same moment, received an- 
other small but unexpected reinforcement. <A portion 
of the Spanish legion, which had long been that of 
Pedro Pacchi, lay at the extreme verge of the Stabroek 
encampment, several miles away. Aroused by the dis- 
tant cannonading, and suspecting what had occurred, 
Don Juan d’Aquila, the colonel in command, marched 
without a moment’s delay to Mansfeld’s headquarters, 
at the head of all the force he could muster—about two 
hundred strong. With him came Cardona, Gonsalez de © 
Castro, Toralva, and other distinguished officers. As 
they arrived Capizucca was just setting forth for the field. 
There arose a dispute for precedence between the Italians 


1 “Charles, mon fils, il te faut vainere ou crever.”—Le Petit, ii. 
514, 


272 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and the Spaniards. Capizucca had first demanded the 
privilege of leading what seemed a forlorn hope, and was 
unwilling to yield his claim to the newcomer. On the 
other hand, the Spaniards were not disposed to follow 
where they felt entitled to lead. The quarrel was grow- 
ing warm, when Aquila, seizing his Italian rival by the 
hand, protested that it was not a moment for friends to 
wrangle for precedence. 

“Shoulder to shoulder,” said he, “let us go into this 
business, and let our blows rather fall on our enemies’ 
heads than upon each other’s.” This terminated the 
altercation. The Italians and Spaniards, in battle ar- 
ray as they were, all dropped on their knees, offered a 
brief prayer to the Holy Virgin, and then in the best 
possible spirits set forth along the dike. Next to Fort 
Stabroek, whence they issued, was the Palisade Fort, 
nearly a mile removed, which the patriots had nearly 
carried, and between which and St. George, another 
mile farther on, their whole force was established 

The troops under Capizucea and Aquila soon reached 
the Palisade and attacked the besiegers, while the gar- 
rison, cheered by the unexpected relief, made a vigorous 
sortie. There was a brief, sharp contest, in which many 
were killed on both sides; but at last the patriots fell 
back upon their own intrenchments, and the fort was 
saved. Its name was instantly changed to Fort Victory, 
and the royalists then prepared to charge the fortified 
camp of the rebels, in the center of which the dike- 
cutting operations were still in progress. At the same 
moment, from the opposite end of the bulwark, a ery 
was heard along the whole line of the dike. From Fort 
Holy Cross, at the Schelde end, the welcome intelligence 


1 Strada, ubi sup. 


1585] PARMA COMES TO THE RESCUE 273 


was suddenly communicated, as if by a magnetic impulse, 
that Alexander was in the field} 

It was true. Having been up half the night, as usual, 
keeping watch along his bridge, where he was ever ex- 
pecting a fatal attack, he had retired for a few hours’ 
rest in his camp at Beveren. Aroused at daybreak by 
the roar of the cannon, he had hastily thrown on his 
armor, mounted his horse, and, at the head of two hun- 
dred pikemen, set forth for the scene of action. De- 
tained on the bridge by a detachment of the Antwerp 
fleet, which had been ordered to make a diversion in 
that quarter, he had, after beating off their vessels with 
his boat artillery, and charging Count Charles Mansfeld 
to heed well the brief injunction of old Peter Ernest, 
made all the haste he could to the Kowenstyn. Arriv- 
ing at Fort Holy Cross, he learned from Mondragon how 
the day was going. Three thousand rebels, he learned, 
were established on the dike, Fort Palisade was totter- 
ing, a fleet from both sides was cannonading the Span- 
ish intrenchments, the salt water was flowing across the 
breach already made. His seven months’ work, it 
seemed, had come to naught. The navigation was 
already open from the sea to Antwerp; the Kowenstyn 
was in the rebels’ hands. But Alexander was not prone 
to premature despair. “I arrived,” said he to Philip, 
in a letter written on the same evening, “at the very 
nick of time.”2 A less hopeful person might have 
thought that he had arrived several hours too late. 
Having brought with him every man that could be 
spared from Beveren and from the bridge, he now 


1 Strada, ubi sup. 
2 MS. letter before cited: ‘‘Llegue a la mayor conjuntura del 
mundo que fue quando se habia comenzado el fuego.” 
VOU 1. —13 


274 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ordered Camillo del Monte to transport some additional 
pieces of artillery from Holy Cross and from St. James 
to Fort St. George. At the same time a sharp cannon- 
ade was to be maintained upon the rebel fleet from all 
the forts. 

Mondragon, with a hundred musketeers and pikemen, 
was sent forward likewise as expeditiously as possible 
to St. George. No one could be more alert. The bat- 
tered veteran, hero of some of the most remarkable 
military adventures that history has ever recorded,? 
fought his way on foot, in the midst of the fray, like a 
young ensign who had his first laurels to win. And, in 
truth, the day was not one for cunning manceuvers 
directed at a distance by a skilful tactician. It was a 
brisk, close contest, hand to hand and eye to eye, a 
Homeric encounter, in which the chieftains were to 
prove a right to command by their personal prowess. 
Alexander, descending suddenly,—dramatically, as it 
were,—when the battle seemed lost, like a deity from 
the clouds, was to justify, by the strength of his arm, 
the enthusiasm which his name always awakened. Hay- 
ing at a glance taken in the whole situation, he made 
his brief arrangements, going from rank to rank, and 
disposing his troops in the most effective manner. He 
said but few words, but his voice had always a telling 
effect. 

“The man who refuses this day to follow me,” he said, 
‘has never had regard to his own honor, nor has God’s 
cause or the king’s ever been dear to his heart.” 3 


1 Strada, ubi sup. 

2 See Rise of the Dutch Republic, vol. iii, part iii, chap. iii., 
and vol. iv. part iv. chap. i. 

3 Strada, ii. 360. 


1585] THE MARCH ALONG THE DIKE 275 


His disheartened Spaniards and Italians, roused as by 
a magic trumpet, eagerly demanded to be led against 
the rebels. And now from each end of the dike the 
royalists were advancing toward the central position 
oceupied by the patriots. While Capizucea and Aquila 
were occupied at Fort Victory, Parma was steadily cut- 
ting his way from Holy Cross to St. George. On foot, 
armed with sword and shield, and in coat of mail, and 
marching at the head of his men along the dike, sur- 
rounded by Bevilacqua, Bentivoglio, Manriquez, Sforza, 
and other officers of historic name and distinguished 
courage, now upon the summit of the causeway, now 
on its shelving banks, now breast-high in the waters, 
through which lay the perilous path, contending at 
every inch with the scattered bands of the patriots, who 
slowly retired to their intrenched camp, and with the 
Antwerp and Zealand vessels, whose balls tore through 
the royalist ranks, the general at last reached St. George. 
On the preservation of that post depended the whole 
fortune of the day, for Parma had already received the 
welcome intelligence that the Palisade—now Fort Vic- 
tory—had been regained. He instantly ordered an 
outer breastwork of wool-sacks and sand-bags to be 
thrown up in front of St. George, and planted a battery 
to play point-blank at the enemy’s intrenchments. Here 
the final issue was to be made. 

The patriots and Spaniards were thus all inclosed in 
the mile-long space between St. George and the Palisade. 
Upon that narrow strip of earth, scarce six paces in 
width, more than five thousand men met in mortal 
combat—a narrow arena for so many gladiators, hemmed 
in on both sides by the sea. The patriots had, with 
solemn ceremony, before starting upon their enterprise, 


276 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


vowed to destroy the dike and relieve Antwerp, or to 
perish in the attempt. They were true to their vow. 
Not the ancient Batavians or Nervii had ever manifested 
more tenacity against the Roman legions than did their 
descendants against the far-famed Spanish infantry 
upon this fatal day. The fight on the Kowenstyn was 
to be long remembered in the military annals of Spain 
and Holland. Never since the curtain first rose upon the 
great Netherland tragedy had there been a fiercer en- 
counter.'. Flinching was impossible. There was scant 
room for the play of pike and dagger, and, close-packed 
as were the combatants, the dead could hardly fall to 
the ground. It was a mile-long series of separate mortal 
duels, and the oozy dike was soon slippery with blood. 
From both sides, under Capizucca and Aquila on the 
one hand, and under Alexander on the other, the in- 
trenchments of the patriots were at last assaulted, and 
as the royalists fell thick and fast beneath the breast- 
work which they were storming, their comrades clam- 
bered upon their bodies, and attempted from such 
vantage-ground to effect an entrance. Three times the 
invaders were beaten back with heavy loss, and after 
each repulse the attack was renewed with fresh vigor, 
while within the intrenchments the pioneers still plied the 
pick and shovel, undismayed by the uproar around them. 
A fourth assault, vigorously made, was cheerfully re- 
pelled by the Antwerpers and Hollanders, clustering 
behind their breastworks, and looking steadily into 
their enemies’ eyes. Captain Heraugiere, of whom 


1 “Mihi tanto accuratius dicendum,” says Strada, “quanto rard 
alias in Belgio, audaciore loco, aut fallacioris alternatione vic- 
toriw, aut nobilioribus audentium exemplis, aut prasentiore 
ewlitum ope, dimicatum est,” ete. (ii. 349), 


1585] FIERCE STRUGGLE ON THE DIKE Dae 


more was to be heard one day, had led two hundred 
men into action, and now found himself at the head of 
only thirteen. The loss had been as severe among many 
other patriot companies, as well as in the Spanish ranks, 
and again the pikemen of Spain and Italy faltered 
before the iron visages and cordial blows of the Hol- 
landers. 

This work had lasted a good hour and a half, when at 
last, on the fifth assault, a wild and mysterious appari- 
tion renewed the enthusiasm of the Spaniards. The 
figure of the dead commander of the old Spanish legion, 
Don Pedro Pacchi, who had fallen a few months before 
at the siege of Dendermonde, was seen charging in front 
of his regiment, clad in his well-known armor, and using 
the gestures which had been habitual with him in life.’ 
No satisfactory explanation was ever made of this sin- 
gular delusion, but it was general throughout the ranks, 
and in that superstitious age was as effective as truth. 
The wavering Spaniards rallied once more under the 
guidance of their phantom leader, and again charged 
the breastwork of the patriots. Toralva, mounting 
upon the back of one of his soldiers, was first to vault 
into the intrenchments. At the next instant he lay des- 
perately wounded on the ground, but was close fol- 
lowed by Capizucca, sustained by a determined band. 
The intrenchment was carried, but the furious conflict 
still continued. At nearly the same moment, however, 
several of the patriot vessels were observed to cast off 
their moorings, and to be drifting away from the dike. 
A large number of the rest had been disabled by the 
hot fire which, by Alexander’s judicious orders, had been 
directed upon the fleet. The ebbing tide left no choice 


1 Meteren, ubi sup. 2 Strada, ii. 364. 


278 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


to the commanders of the others but to retreat or to re- 
main and fall into the enemy’s hands should he gain 
the day. Had they risked the dangerous alternative it 
might have insured the triumph of the whole enterprise, 
while their actual decision proved most disastrous in 
the end. 

“We have conquered,” cried Alexander, stretching his 
arm toward the receding waters. “The sea deserts the 
impious heretics. Strike from them now their last hope, 
and cut off their retreat to the departing ships.”! The 
Spaniards were not slow to perceive their advantage, 
while the courage of the patriots at last began to ebb 
with the tide. The day was lost. In the hour of transi- 
tory triumph the leaders of the expedition had turned 
their backs on their followers, and now, after so much 
heroism had been exhibited, Fortune, too, had averted her 
face. The grim resistance changed to desperate panic, 
and a mad chase began along the blood-stained dike. 
Some were slain with spear and bullet, others were 
hunted into the sea, many were smothered in the ooze 
along the edge of the embankment. The fugitives, 
making their way to the retreating vessels, were pur- 
sued by the Spaniards, who swam after them with their 
swords in their teeth, and engaged them in mortal com- 
bat in the midst of the waves. 

‘And so we cut all their. throats,” said Parma, “the 
rebels on every side remaining at our mercy, and I hay- 
ing no doubt that my soldiers would avenge the loss of 
their friends.” 2 


1 Strada, ii. 365. 

2 “Y' asi los degollaron a todos, quedando por una parte y otra 
a nuestra misericordia, y yo fiador que vengaron la perdida de los 
amigos.”—Parma to Philip II, May 26, 1585, MS. 


1585) THE SPANIARDS SUCCESSFUL 979 


The English and the Scotch, under Balfour and 
Morgan, were the very last to abandon the position 
which they had held so manfully seven hours long. 
Honest Captain James, who fought to the last, and 
described the action the same night in the fewest pos- 
sible words, was of opinion that the fleet had moved 
away only to obtain a better position. “ They put off 
to have more room to play on the enemy,” said he; 
“but the Hollanders and Zealanders, seeing the enemy 
come on so hotly, and thinking our galleys would leave 
them, abandoned their string. The Scots, seeing them 
to retire, left their string. The enemy pursued very 
hotly; the Englishmen stood to repulse and were put 
most to the sword. In this shameful retreat there were 
slain or drowned to the number of two thousand.”! The 
blunt Englishman was justly indignant that an enter- 
prise so nearly successful had been ruined by the deser- 
tion of its chiefs. “We had eut the dike in three 
places,” said he, “ but left it most shamefully for want of 
commandment.” 2 

Poor Koppen Loppen, whose blunders on former oc- 
casions had caused so much disaster, was now fortunate 
enough to expiate them by a soldier’s death. Admiral 
Haultain had, as we have seen, been drowned at the 
commencement of the action.2 Justinus de Nassau, at 
its close, was more successful in his retreat to the ships. 
He, too, sprang into the water when the overthrow was 
absolute, but, alighting in some shallows, was able to 
conceal himself among weeds and water-lilies till he 


1 James to Walsingham, MS. before cited. 2 Thid. 

3 This appears from the letter of Captain James. The other 
accounts describe the death of the admiral as occurring in the 
general rout at the close of the battle. 


280 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


had divested himself of his armor, when he made his 
escape by swimming to a boat, which conveyed him to 
Lillo. Roelke van Deest, an officer of some note, was 
so horribly wounded in the face that he was obliged to 
wear a mask for the remainder of his life 

Parma, overjoyed at his victory, embraced Capizucca 
before the whole army, with warm expressions of ad- 
miration for his conduct. Both the Italian colonel and 
his Spanish rival Aquila were earnestly recommended 
to Philip for reward and promotion. The wounded 
Toralva was carried to Alexander’s own quarters and 
placed in Alexander’s own bed, where he remained till 
his recovery, and was then presented—a distinction 
which he much valued—with the armor which the 
prince had worn on the day of the battle? Parma him- 
self, so soon as the action was concluded, went with his 
chief officers straight from the field to the little village 
church of Stabroek, where he fell upon his knees and 
offered up fervent thanks for his victory. He next set 
about repairing the ruptured dike, damaged in many 
places, but not hopelessly ruined, and for this purpose 
the bodies of the rebels, among other materials, were 
east by hundreds into the ditches which their own hands 
had dug.’ 

Thus ended the eight hours’ fight on the Kowenstyn. 
“The feast lasted from seven to eight hours,” said 
Parma, “with the most brave obstinacy on both sides 
that has been seen for many a long day.”4 A thousand 


1 Van Wyn op Wagenaer, viii. 40. 

2 Strada, ii. 364. Se bidveleasGus 

* “Y habiendo durado esta fiesta, obra de 7 0 8 hore, con la mas 
brava obstinacion de entrambas partes que se ha visto hartos dias 
ha.”—Parma to Philip II., MS. before cited. 


1585] DEFEAT OF THE PATRIOTS 281 


royalists were killed and twice as many patriots, and the 
issue of the conflict was most uncertain up to the very 
last. 

“Our loss is greater than I wish it was,” wrote Alex- 
ander to Philip; “it was a very close thing, and I have 
never been more anxious in my life as to the result for 
your Majesty’s service. The whole fate of the battle 
was hanging all the time by a thread.”! More than 
ever were reinforcements necessary, and it was only by 
a miracle that the victory had at last been gained with 
such slender resourees. “’T is a large, long, laborious, 
expensive, and most perilous war,” said Parma, when 
urging the claims of Capizucca and Aquila, “for we 
have to fight every minute, and there are no castles and 
other rewards, so that if soldiers are not to have promo- 
tion, they will lose their spirit.”? Thirty-two of the 
rebel vessels grounded and fell into the hands of the 
Spaniards, who took from them many excellent pieces 
of artillery. The result was most conclusive and most 
disheartening for the patriots. 

Meantime, as we have seen, Hohenlo and Sainte- 
Aldegonde had reached Antwerp in breathless haste to 
announce their triumph. They had been met on the 
quay by groups of excited citizens, who eagerly ques- 
tioned the two generals arriving thus covered with 
laurels from the field of battle, and drank with delight 


1 “De los nuestros tambien han quedado mas de los que yo 
quisiera—ha sido pendencia tan refida—que hartas veces ha 
puesto harto mas cuidado el ver termino en que estaba el servicio 
de V. M. Todo esto ha estado colgado de un hilo.”—Parma to 
Philip II., MS. before cited. 

2 “Guerra larga, trabajosa, costosa, y muy peligrosa, pues 
sempre se trata de pelear, y que no se hay eastillos ni otros pre- 
mios,” ete. —Ibid. 


282 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


all the details of the victory. The poor dying Spinola 
was exhibited in triumph, the boat-load of breadstuffs 
received with satisfaction, and vast preparations were 
made to receive, on wharves and in storehouses, the 
plentiful supplies about to arrive. Beacons and bon- 
fires were lighted, the bells from all the steeples rang their 
merriest peals, cannon thundered in triumph, not only in 
Antwerp itself, but subsequently at Amsterdam and 
other more distant cities. In due time a magnificent 
banquet was spread in the town house to greet the con- 
quering Hohenlo. Immense gratification was expressed 
by those of the Reformed religion; dire threats were 
uttered against the Catholics. Some were for hanging 
them all out of hand; others for throwing them into 
the Schelde. The most moderate proposed packing them 
all out of town so soon as the siege should be raised— 
an event which could not now be delayed many days 
longer. 

Hohenlo, placed on high at the head of the banquet- 
table, assumed the very god of war. Beside and near 
him sat the loveliest dames of Antwerp, rewarding his 
bravery with their brightest smiles. The count drained 
huge goblets to their health, to the success of the patri- 
ots, and to the confusion of the royalists, while, as he 
still drank and feasted, the trumpet, kettledrum, and 
eymbal, and merry peal of bell without, did honor to his 
triumph. So gay and gallant was the victor that he 
announced another banquet on the following day, still 
further to celebrate the happy release of Antwerp, and in- 
vited the fair ladies around him again to grace the board. 
It is recorded that the gentlewoman next him responded, 
with a sigh, that if her presentiments were just, the 


1585] PREMATURE TRIUMPH AT ANTWERP 283 


morrow would scarcely be so joyful as the present day 
had been, and that she doubted whether the triumph 
were not premature. 

Hardly had she spoken when sinister sounds were 
heard in the streets. The first few stragglers, survivors 
of the deadly fight, had arrived with the fatal news that 
all was lost, the dike regained, the Spaniards victorious, 
the whole band of patriots cut to pieces. A few fright- 
fully wounded and dying sufferers were brought into 
the banqueting-hall. Hohenlo sprang from the feast, 
interrupted in so ghastly a manner, pursued by shouts 
and hisses. Howls of execration saluted him in the 
streets, and he was obliged to conceal himself for a time 
to escape the fury of the populace. 

On the other hand, Parma was, not unnaturally, over- 
joyed at the successful issue to the combat, and ex- 
pressed himself on the subject in language of (for him) 
unusual exultation. “To-day, Sunday, 26th of May,” 
said he, in a letter to Philip, despatched by special 
courier on the very same night, “the Lord has been 
pleased to grant to your Majesty a great and most 
signal victory. In this conjuncture of so great impor- 
tance it may be easily conceived that the best results 
that can be desired will be obtained if your Majesty is 
now ready to do what is needful. I congratulate your 
Majesty very many times on this occasion, and I desire 
to render infinite thanks to Divine Providence.” * 

He afterward proceeded in a rapid and hurried 


1 Mertens en Torp, v. 242. 

2 Ibid. Compare Bor, Meteren, Hoofd, et al., ubi sup. 

3 “Doy a V. M. muy muches vezes la enora buena y infinitas 
gracias a la Divina,” ete.—MS. letter before cited. 


284 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


manner to give his Majesty the outlines of the battle, 
mentioning with great encomium Capizucca and Aquila, 
Mondragon and Vasto, with many other officers, and 
recommending them for reward and promotion—prais- 
ing, in short, heartily and earnestly, all who had con- 
tributed to the victory, except himself, to whose personal 
exertions it was chiefly due. “As for good old Mans- 
feld,” said he, “he bore himself like the man he is, and 
he deserves that your Majesty should send him a par- 
ticular mark of your royal approbation, writing to him 
yourself pleasantly in Spanish, which is that which will 
be most highly esteemed by him.”! Alexander hinted 
also that Philip would do well to bestow upon Mansfeld 
the countship of Biart, as a reward for his long years of 
faithful service.? 

This action on the Kowenstyn terminated the effective 
resistance of Antwerp. A few days before, the monster 
vessel, in the construction of which so much time and 
money had been consumed, had at last been set afloat. 
She had been called the War's End, and, so far as Ant- 


1 “Hil buen viejo del conde de Mansfeld anduvo como quien es, 
y merece que V. M. se le mande en particular agradecer, eseribi- 
endole en Espanol regaladamente que es lo que mas estimaria,” 
ete.—MS. letter before cited. 

2 Ibid. The account of this remarkable action has been mainly 
gathered from the manuscript letters of Parma to Philip, written 
from the scene itself, of some Englishmen, also eye-witnesses, and 
from a careful comparison of contemporary historians. Vide Bor, 
ii, 599, 600; Meteren, xii. 224; Hoofd, Vervolgh, 97-99 seq.; 
Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii. 297 seq. (whose brother, the Marchese 
Hippolito Bentivoglio, distinguished himself in the action, and 
was promoted, in consequence, to a company of lancers by Parma) ; 
Strada, ii, 354-367; Baudartii Polemographia, ii. 27-30; Le 
Petit, ii. 514; Wagenaer, viii. 80; Van Wyn op Wagenaer, viii. 
39, 40, et al. 


1585] THE SHIP “WAR'S END” 985 


werp was concerned, the fates that presided over her 
birth seemed to have been paltering in a double sense 
when the ominous name was conferred. She was larger 
than anything previously known in naval architecture ; 
she had four masts and three helms. Her bulwarks were 
ten feet thick; her tops were musket-proof. She had 
twenty guns of largest size, besides many other pieces 
of artillery of lesser caliber, the lower tier of which was 
almost at the water’s level. She was to carry one thou- 
sand men, and she was so supported on corks and barrels 
as to be sure to float under any circumstances. Thus 
she was a great swimming fortress which could not be 
sunk and was impervious to shot. Unluckily, however, 
in spite of her four masts and three helms, she would 
neither sail nor steer, and she proved but a great, un- 
manageable, and very ridiculous tub, fully justifying 
all the sarcasms that had been launched upon her dur- 
ing the period of her construction, which had been al- 
most as long as the siege itself 

The Spaniards called her the Bugaboo, a monster to 
seare children withal.2 The patriots christened her the 
Elephant, the Antwerp Folly, the Lost Penny, with many 
similar appellations.? A small army might have been 
maintained for a month, they said, on the money she 
had cost, or the whole city kept in bread for three 
months. At last, late in May, a few days before the 
battle of the Kowenstyn, she set forth from Antwerp 
across the submerged land, upon her expedition to sweep 


1 Strada, ii. 353. Le Petit, ii. 512. Baudartii Polemog., ii. 30 
(with an admirable engraving). Meteren, Bor, Hoofd, et al., ubi 
sup. 

2 “Caranjamaula.”—Strada, ubi sup. 

$ Baudartius, Le Petit, Strada, ubi sup. 


286 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


all the Spanish forts out of existence, and to bring the 
war to its end. She came to her own end very briefly, 
for, after drifting helplessly about for an hour, she stuck 
fast in the sand in the neighborhood of Oordam, while 
the crew and soldiers made their escape, and came back 
to the city to share in the ridicule which, from first to 
last, had attached itself to the monster ship.* 

Two days after the Kowenstyn affair Alexander sent 
an expedition under Count Charles Mansfeld to take 
possession of the great Bugaboo. The boat in which 
were Count Charles, Count Aremberg, his brother De 
Barbangon, and other noble volunteers, met with an 
accident, a keg of gunpowder accidentally exploding, 
blowing Aremberg into the water, whence he escaped 
unharmed by swimming, and frightfully damaging 
Mansfeld in the face.2 This indirect mischief—the 
only injury ever inflicted by the War’s End upon the 
enemy—did not prevent the rest of the party in the 
boats from taking possession of the ship and bringing 
her in triumph to the Prince of Parma. After being 
thoroughly examined and heartily langhed at by the 
Spaniards, she was broken up, her cannon, munitions, 
and other valuable materials being taken from her, 
and then there was an end of the War’s End. 

This useless expenditure, against the judgment and 
entreaties of many leading personages, was but a type 
of the difficulties with which Sainte-Aldegonde had 
been obliged to contend from the first day of the siege 
to the last. Every one in the city had felt himself called 
on to express an opinion as to the proper measures for 
defense. Diversity of humors, popular license, anarchy, 


1 Baudartius, Le Petit, Strada, ubi sup. 
2 Strada, ii. 368. 3 Thid. 


1585] ALDEGONDE’S DIFFICULTIES 287 


did not constitute the best government for a city be- 
leaguered by Alexander Farnese. We have seen the 
deadly injury inflicted upon the cause at the outset by 
the brutality of the butchers, and the manful struggle 
which Sainte-Aldegonde had maintained against their 
cupidity and that of their friends. He had dealt with 
the thousand difficulties which rose up around him from 
day to day, but his best intentions were perpetually mis- 
construed, his most strenuous exertions steadily foiled. 
It was a city where there was much love of money, and 
where commerce—always timid by nature, particularly 
when controlled by alien residents—was often the cause 
of almost abject cowardice. 

From time to time there had been threatening demon- 
strations made against the burgomaster, who, by pro- 
tracting the resistance of Antwerp, was bringing about 
the absolute destruction of a world-wide trade, and the 
downfall of the most opulent capital in Christendom. 
There were also many popular riots—very easily inflamed 
by the Catholic portion of the inhabitants—for bread. 
“Bread, bread, or peace!” was hoarsely shouted by ill- 
looking, mischievous crowds, that dogged the steps and 
besieged the doors of Sainte-Aldegonde; but the burgo- 
master had done his best by eloquence of tongue and 
personal courage, both against mobs and against the 
enemy, to inspire the mass of his fellow-citizens with his 
own generous spirit. He had relied for a long time on 
the negotiation with France, and it would be difficult 
to exaggerate the disastrous effects produced by the 
treachery of the Valois court. The historian Le Petit, 
a resident of Antwerp at the time of the siege, had been 
despatched on secret mission to Paris, and had com- 
municated to the states’ deputies Sainte-Aldegonde’s 


288 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS ; [1585 


earnest adjurations that they should obtain, if possible, 
before it should be too late, an auxiliary force and a 
pecuniary subsidy. An immediate assistance, even if 
slight, might be sufficient to prevent Antwerp and its 
sister cities from falling into the hands of the enemy. 
On that messengers return the burgomaster, much 
encouraged by his report, had made many eloquent 
speeches in the senate, and for a long time sustained 
the sinking spirits of the citizens. 

The irritating termination to the triumph actually 
achieved against the bridge, and the tragical result of 
the great enterprise against the Kowenstyn, had now 
thoroughly broken the heart of Antwerp. For the last 
catastrophe Sainte-Aldegonde himself was highly cen- 
surable, although the chief portion of the blame rested 
on the head of Hohenlo. Nevertheless, the states of 
Holland were yet true to the cause of the Union and of 
liberty. Notwithstanding their heavy expenditures and 
their own loss of men, they urged warmly and earnestly 
the continuance of the resistance, and promised within 
at latest three months’ time to raise an army of twelve 
thousand foot and seven thousand horse, with which 
they pledged themselves to relieve the city or to perish 
in the endeavor.? At the same time the legation which 
had been sent to England to offer the sovereignty to 
Queen Elizabeth sent encouraging despatches to Ant- 
werp, assuring the authorities that arrangements for an 
auxiliary force had been effected, while Elizabeth herself 
wrote earnestly upon the subject with her own hand? 

“T am informed,” said that princess, “that through 
the closing of the Schelde you are likely to enter into a 
treaty with the Prince of Parma, the issue of which is 


1 Le Petit, ii. 505. 2 Meteren, xii. 225. 3 Bor, ii. 607-609. 


1585] DESPAIR OF THE CITIZENS 289 


very much to be doubted, so far as the maintenance of 
your privileges is concerned. Remembering the warm 
friendship which has ever existed between this crown 
and the house of Burgundy, in the realms of which you 
are an important member, and considering that my 
subjects engaged in commerce have always met with 
more privilege and comity in the Netherlands than in 
any other country, I have resolved to send you at once 
assistance, comfort, and aid. The details of the plan 
will be stated by your envoys, but be assured that by 
me you will never be forsaken or neglected.” 1 

The negotiations with Queen Elizabeth—most im- 
portant for the Netherlands, for England, and for the 
destinies of Hurope—which succeeded the futile diplo- 
matic transactions with France will be laid before the 
reader in a subsequent chapter. It is proper that they 
should be massed by themselves, so that the eye can 
comprehend at a single glance their whole progress and 
aspect, as revealed both by public and official, and by 
secret and hitherto unpublished records. Meantime, so 
far as regards Antwerp, those negotiations had been 
too deliberately conducted for the hasty and impatient 
temper of the citizens. 

The spirit of the commercial metropolis, long flag- 
ging, seemed at last broken. Despair was taking pos- 
session of all hearts. The common people did nothing 
but complain, the magistrates did nothing but wrangle. 
In the broad council the debates and dissensions were 
discouraging and endless. Six of the eight militia 
colonels were for holding out at all hazards, while a 
majority of the eighty captains were for capitulation. 
The populace was tumultuous and threatening, demand- 


1 See the letter in Bor, ii. 608. 
VOL. I.—19 


290 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ing peace and bread at any price. Holland sent prom- 
ises in abundance, and Holland was sincere; but there 
had been much disappointment, and there was now 
infinite bitterness. It seemed obvious that a crisis was 
fast approaching, and, unless immediate aid should come 
from Holland or from England, that a surrender was 
inevitable La Noue, after five years’ imprisonment, 
had at last been exchanged against Count Philip Eg- 
mont. That noble, chief of an ancient house, cousin of 
the Queen of France, was mortified at being ransomed 
against a simple Huguenot gentleman, even though that 
gentleman was the illustrious “TIron-armed” La Noue, 
but he preferred to sacrifice his dignity for the sake of 
his liberty. He was still more annoyed that one hun- 
dred thousand crowns as security were exacted from La 
Noue—for which the King of Navarre became bonds- 
man—that he would never again bear arms in the 
Netherlands except in obedience to the French mon- 
arch, while no such pledges were required of himself. 
La Noue visited the Prince of Parma at Antwerp to 
take leave, and was received with the courtesy due to 
his high character and great distinction. Alexander 
took pleasure in showing him all his fortifications and 
explaining to him the whole system of the siege, and La 
Noue was filled with honest amazement. He declared 
afterward that the works were superb and impregnable, 
and that if he had been on the outside at the head of 
twelve thousand troops he should have felt obliged to 
renounce the idea of relieving the city.2 “Antwerp. 
cannot escape you,” confessed the veteran Huguenot, 
“but must soon fall into your hands. And when you 


1 Le Petit, ii. 518. Bor, ii. 610-613 seq. 
? Groen vy. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 77-80. 


1585] LA NOUE’S OPINION 291 


enter I would counsel you to hang up your sword at 
its gate, and let its capture be the crowning trophy in 
your list of victories.” 

“You are right,” answered Parma, “and many of my 
friends have given me the same advice; but how am I 
to retire, engaged as I am for life in the service of my 
king ?”1 

Such was the opinion of La Noue, a man whose love 
for the Reformed religion and for civil liberty can be as 
little doubted as his competency to form an opinion 
upon great military subjects. As little could he be sus- 
pected—just coming, as he did, from an infamous 
prison, whence he had been at one time invited by 
Philip II. to emerge on condition of allowing his eyes 
to be put out?—of any partiality for that monarch or 
his representative. 

Moreover, although the states of Holland and the 
English government were earnestly desirous of relieving 
the city, and were encouraging the patriots with well- 
founded promises, the Zealand authorities were luke- 
warm. The officers of the Zealand navy, from which 
so much was expected, were at last discouraged. They 
drew up, signed, and delivered to Admiral Justinus de 
Nassau, a formal opinion to the effect that the Schelde 
had now so many dry and dangerous places, and that 
the tranquil summer nights—so different from those 
long, stormy ones of winter—were so short, as to allow 
of no attempt by water likely to be successful to relieve 
the city.? 


1 Le Petit, ii. 518. 

2 Amirault, Vie de La Noué, 280, 281-298. Rise of the Dutch 
Republie, vol. v. pp. 196, 197. 

3 Meteren, xii. 225°. 


292 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Here, certainly, was much to discourage, and Sainte- 
Aldegonde was at length discouraged. He felt that the 
last hope of saving Antwerp was gone, and with it all 
possibility of maintaining the existence of a United 
Netherland commonwealth. The Walloon provinces 
were lost already; Ghent, Brussels, Mechlin, had also 
capitulated, and, with the fall of Antwerp, Flanders and 
Brabant must fall. There would be no barrier left even 
to save Holland itself. Despair entered the heart of the 
burgomaster, and he listened too soon to its treacherous 
voice. Yet while he thought a free national state no 
longer a possibility, he imagined it practicable to secure 
religious liberty by negotiation with Philip Il. He 
abandoned with a sigh one of the two great objects for 
which he had struggled side by side with Orange for 
twenty years, but he thought it possible to secure the 
other. His purpose was now to obtain a favorable ea- 
pitulation for Antwerp, and at the same time to bring 
about the submission of Holland, Zealand, and the other 
United Provinces to the King of Spain. Here, certainly, 
was a great change of face on the part of one so conspic- 
uous, and hitherto so consistent, in the ranks of Nether- 
land patriots, and it is therefore necessary, in order 
thoroughly to estimate both the man and the crisis, to 
follow carefully his steps through the secret path of 
negotiation into which he now entered, and in which the 
Antwerp drama was to find its conclusion. In these 
transactions the chief actors are, on the one side, the 
Prince of Parma, as representative of absolutism and 
the papacy; on the other, Sainte-Aldegonde, who had 
passed his life as the champion of the Reformation. 

No doubt the pressure upon the burgomaster was 
very great. Tumults were of daily occurrence. Crowds 


1585] SAINTE-ALDEGONDE’S CRITICAL POSITION 9293 


of rioters beset his door with cries of denunciation and 
demands for bread. A large and turbulent mob upon 
one occasion took possession of the Horse Market, and 
treated him with personal indignity and violence when 
he undertook to disperse them. On the other hand, 
Parma had been holding out hopes of pardon with more 
reasonable conditions than could well be expected, and 
had, with a good deal of art, taken advantage of several 
trivial circumstances to inspire the burghers with confi- 
dence in his good will. Thus, an infirm old lady in the 
city happened to imagine herself so dependent upon 
asses’ milk as to have sent her purveyor out of the city, 
at the peril of his life, to procure a supply from the 
neighborhood. The young man was captured, brought 
to Alexander, from whose hands he very naturally ex- 
pected the punishment of a spy. The prince, however, 
presented him not only with his liberty, but with a she- 
ass, and loaded the animal with partridges and capons 
as a present for the invalid. The magistrates, hearing 
of the incident, and not choosing to be outdone in 
courtesy, sent back a wagon-load of old wine and re- 
markable confectionery as an offering to Alexander, and 
with this interchange of dainties led the way to the 
amenities of diplomacy.” 

Sainte-Aldegonde’s position had become a painful one. 
The net had been drawn closely about the city. The 
bridge seemed impregnable, the great Kowenstyn was 
irrecoverably in the hands of the enemy, and now all 
the lesser forts in the immediate vicinity of Antwerp 
—Borght, Hoboken, Cantecroix, Straalen, Berghen, and 
the rest—had likewise fallen into his grasp. An ac- 


1 Bor, ii. 605, 606. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 108. 
2 Strada, ii. 372. 


294 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


count of grain, taken on the Ist of June, gave an aver- 
age of a pound a head for a month long, or half a 
pound for two months.1 This was not the famine point, 
according to the standard which had once been estab- 
lished in Leyden; but the courage of the burghers had 
been rapidly oozing away under the pressure of their 
recent disappointments. It seemed obvious to the burgo- 
master that the time for yielding had arrived. 

“T had maintained the city,”’? he said, “for a long 
period, without any excessive tumult or great effusion 
of blood—a city where there was such a multitude of 
inhabitants, mostly merchants or artisans, deprived of 
all their traffic, stripped of their manufactures, destitute 
of all commodities and means of living. I had done this 
in the midst of a great diversity of humors and opinions, 
a vast popular license, a confused anarchy, among a great 
number of commanders, most of them inexperienced in 
war, with very little authority of my own, with slender 
forces of ships, soldiers, and sailors, with slight appear- 
ance of support from king or prince without, or of mili- 
tary garrison within; and under all these circumstances 
I exerted myself to do my uttermost duty in preserving 
the city, both in regard to its internal government and 
by force of arms by land and sea, without sparing my- 
self in any labor or peril. 

“T know very well that there are many persons who, 
finding themselves quite at their ease, and far away 


1 Meteren, xii. 224 seq. 

2 Marnix de Sainte-Aldegonde, Commentaire sur les Affaires 
d@Anvers, 1585. Vide Notices Historique et Bibliographique sur 
Philippe de Marnix, par Albert La Croix et Frangois van Meenen 
(Bruxelles, 1858, Giuyres de Philippe de Marnix, précédées d’une 
Introduction par Edgar Quinet). 


1585] HIS CHARACTER 295 


from the hard blows that are passing, are pleased to 
exhibit their wisdom by sitting in judgment upon others, 
founding their decision only upon the results. But 1 
demand to be judged by equity and reason, when passion 
has been set aside. I claim that my honor shall be pro- 
tected against my calumniators, for all should remember 
that I am not the first man, nor shall I be the last, that 
has been blamed unjustly. All persons employed in 
public affairs are subject to such hazards, but I submit 
myself to Him who knows all hearts, and who governs 
all. I take him to witness that in the affair of Antwerp, 
as in all my other actions since my earliest youth, I 
have most sincerely sought his glory and the welfare of 
his poor people, without regard to my own private 
interests.” 1 

For it is not alone the fate of Antwerp that is here to 
be recorded. The fame of Sainte-Aldegonde was now 
seriously compromised. The character of a great man 
must always be closely scanned and scrutinized, pro- 
tected, if needful, against calumny, but always unflinch- 
ingly held up to the light. Names illustrious by genius 
and virtue are History’s most precious treasures, faith- 
fully to be guarded by her, jealously to be watched; but 
it is always a misfortune when her eyes are deceived by 
a glitter which is not genuine. 

Sainte-Aldegonde was a man of unquestionable genius. 
His character had ever been beyond the reproach of self- 
seeking orignobleambition. He had multiplied himself 
into a thousand forms to serve the cause of the United 
Netherland States, and the services so rendered had been 
brilliant and frequent. A great change in his conduct 
and policy was now approaching, and it is therefore the 


1 Works just cited. 


296 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


more necessary to examine closely at this epoch his atti- 
tude and his character. 

Early in June Richardot, president of the council of 
Artois, addressed a letter to Sainte-Aldegonde, by com- 
mand of Alexander of Parma, suggesting a secret inter- 
view between the burgomaster and the prince. 

On the 8th of June Sainte-Aldegonde replied in favor- 
able terms as to the interview, but observed that, as he 
was an official personage, it was necessary for him to com- 
municate the project to the magistracy of the city. He 
expressed likewise the hope that Parma would embrace 
the present opportunity for making a general treaty 
with all the provinces. A special accord with Antwerp, 
leaving out Holland and Zealand, would, he said, lead 
to the utter desolation of that city, and to the destruc- 
tion of its commerce and manufactures, while the occa- 
sion now presented itself to the prince of “winning 
praise and immortal glory by bringing back all the 
country to a voluntary and prompt obedience to his 
Majesty.” He proposed that, instead of his coming 
alone, there should be a number of deputies sent from 
Antwerp to confer with Alexander.1 

On the 11th June Richardot replied by expressing his 
own regrets, and those of the prince, that the interview 
could not have been with the burgomaster alone, but 
acknowledging the weight of his reasons, and acquies- 
cing in the proposition to send a larger deputation. 
Three days afterward Sainte-Aldegonde, on private 
consultation with some confidential personages, changed 
his ground, announced his preference for a private inter- 
view, under four eyes, with Parma, and requested that 


! Correspondance de Richardot avec Marnix de Sainte-Alde- 
gonde, Archivo de Simaneas MS. 


1585] HIS NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE ENEMY 297 


a passport might be sent. The passport was accord- 
ingly forwarded the same day, with an expression of 
Alexander’s gratification, and with the offer, on the part 
of Richardot, to come himself to Antwerp as hostage 
during the absence of the burgomaster in Parma’s camp 
at Beveren.! 

Sainte-Aldegonde was accordingly about to start on 
the following day (16th of June), but meantime the affair 
had got wind. <A secret interview, thus projected, was 
regarded by the citizens as extremely suspicious. There 
was much bitter insinuation against the burgomaster, 
many violent demonstrations. ‘“ Aldegonde, they say, 
is going to see Parma,” said one of the burghers, ‘ which 
gives much dissatisfaction, because ’t is feared that he 
will make a treaty according to the appetite and plea- 
sure of his Highness, having been gained over to the 
royal cause by money. He says that it would be a mis- 
fortune to send a large number of burghers. Last Sun- 
day (16th June) there was a meeting of the broad council. 
The preachers came into the assembly, and so animated 
the citizens by demonstrations of their religion that all 
rushed from the council-house, crying with loud voices 
that they did not desire peace, but war.” 2 

This desire was a healthy and a reasonable one, but, 


1 Richardot to Marnix, 11th June, 1585, MS. 

2 “ Aldegonde dit qu’il veult aller, ce que plusieurs des bourgeois 
ne veuillent, 4 cause quils craindent qu'il feroit Vaccord selon 
Vappetit et volonté de son Alteze, estant gaigné par force d’argent. 
Disant etre malheur qu'il y aillent douze bourgeois. Les predicans 
ont entré au conseil le dimanche passé, et ont tellement animés 
les bourgeois par démontrances de leur religion, que les bourgeois, 
sortant du conseil, crioient a haulte voix qu’ils ne desiroient paix 
mais bien la guerre.”—MS. letter, without date or signature, in 
the Archives Royales de Belgique, 1585. 


298 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


unfortunately, the Antwerpers had not always been so 
vigorous or so united in their resistance to Parma. At 
present, however, they were very furious so soon as the 
secret purpose of Sainte-Aldegonde became generally 
known. The proposed capitulation, which great mobs 
had been for weeks long savagely demanding at the 
hands of the burgomaster, was now ascribed to the 
burgomaster’s unblushing corruption. He had obvi- 
ously, they thought, been purchased by Spanish ducats 
to do what he had hitherto been so steadily refusing. 
A certain Van Werne had gone from Antwerp into 
Holland afew days before upon his own private affairs, 
with a safe-conduct from Parma. Sainte-Aldegonde 
had not communicated to him the project then on foot, 
but he had permitted him to seek a secret interview with 
Count Mansfeld. If that were granted, Van Werne was 
to hint that in case the provinces could promise them- 
selves a religious peace it would be possible, in the 
opinion of Sainte-Aldegonde, to induce Holland and 
Zealand, and all the rest of the United Provinces, to 
return to their obedience. Van Werne, on his return 
to Antwerp, divulged these secret negotiations, and so 
put a stop to Sainte-Aldegonde’s scheme of going alone 
to Parma. “This has given a bad suspicion to the 
people,” wrote the burgomaster to Richardot, “so much 
so that I fear to have trouble. The broad council has 
been in session, but I don’t know what has taken place 
there, and I do not dare to ask.” ! 

Sainte-Aldegonde’s motive, as avowed by himself, for 
seeking a private interview, was because he had received 

1 Marnix to Richardot, 16th June, 1585, Archivo de Simaneas 


MS.: ‘De ce que s’y est passé, je Vignore, sans loser demander,” 
ete. 


1585] CORRESPONDENCE WITH RICHARDOT 999 


no answer to the main point in his first letter, as to the 
proposition for a general accord. In order, therefore, 
to make the deliberations more rapid, he had been dis- 
posed to discuss that preliminary question in secret. 
“But now,” said he to Richardot, “as the affair had 
been too much divulged, as well by diverse reports and 
writings sown about, very inopportunely, as by the ar- 
rival of M. van Werne, I have not found it practicable 
to set out upon my road without communication with 
the members of the government. This has been done, 
however, not in the way of consultation, but as the an- 
nouncement of a thing already resolved upon.” 

He proceeded to state that great difficulties had arisen, 
exactly as he had foreseen. The magistrates would not 
hear of a general accord, and it was therefore necessary 
that a delay should be interposed before it would be 
possible for him to come. He begged Richardot to per- 
suade Alexander that he was not triflmg with him. “It 
is not,” said he, “from lightness or any other passion 
that I am retarding this affair. I will do all in my 
power to obtain leave to make a journey to the camp of 
his Highness at whatever price it may cost, and I hope 
before long to arrive at my object. If I fail, it must be 
ascribed to the humors of the people, for my anxiety to 
restore all the provinces to obedience to his Majesty is 
extreme.” ? 

Richardot, in reply, the next day expressed regret, 

1 ‘Mais comme Vaffaire a este par trop divulguee, tant par 
divers rapports et ecrits semés mal 4 propos, comme par la venue 
de St Van Werne, je n’ay trouvé faisable de me mettre en chemin, 
sans le communiquer aux membres, non pas toutefois en forme de 
deliberation, mais comme une chose que nous avions resolue.” — 
Marnix to Richardot, MS. ubi sup. 

2 Thid. 


300 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


without astonishment, on the part of Alexander and 
himself, at the intelligence thus received. People had 
such difference of humor, he said, and all men were not 
equally capable of reason. Nevertheless, the citizens 
were warned not to misconstrue Parma’s gentleness, 
because he was determined to die, with his whole army, 
rather than not take Antwerp. “As for the king,” said 
Richardot, “he will lay down all his crowns sooner than 
abandon this enterprise.” Van Werne was represented 
as free from blame, and sincerely desirous of peace. 
Richardot had only stated to him, in general terms, that 
letters had been received from Sainte-Aldegonde express- 
ing an opinion in favor of peace. As for the royalists, 
they were quite innocent of the reports and writings 
that had so inopportunely been circulated in the city. 
It was desirable, however, that the negotiation should 
not too long be deferred, for otherwise Antwerp might 
perish before a general accord with Holland and Zealand 
could be made. He begged Sainte-Aldegonde to banish 
all anxiety as to Parma’s sentiments toward himself or 
the community. “ Put yourself, sir, quite at your ease,” 
said he. ‘His Highness is in no respects dissatisfied 
with you, nor prone to conceive any indignation against 
this poor people.”2 He assured the burgomaster that 
he was not suspected of lightness, nor of a wish to delay 
matters, but he expressed solicitude with regard to the 
threatening demonstrations which had been made against 
him in Antwerp. “For,” said he, “popular governments 


1 Richardot to Marnix, 17th June, 1585, MS.: ‘“Mettra toutes 
ses couronnes plutot qu’abandonner cette entreprise,” ete. 

2 «“Bref, Monsieur, mettez vous a repos. Car son Altesse n’est 
en rien mal satisfaite de vous, ni facile a congevoir quelque indig- 
nation contre ce pauyre peuple.”—MS. ubi sup. 


1585] COMMOTION IN THE CITY 301 


are full of a thousand hazards, and it would be infinitely 
painful to me if you should come to harm.” 4 

Thus it would appear that it was Sainte-Aldegonde 
who was chiefly anxious to effect the reconciliation of 
Holland and Zealand with the king. The initiative of 
this project to include all the United Provinces in one 
scheme with the reduction of Antwerp came originally 
from him, and was opposed at the outset by the magis- 
trates of that city, by the Prince of Parma and his 
councilors, and by the states of Holland and Zealand. 
The demonstrations on the part of the preachers, the 
municipal authorities, and the burghers against Sainte- 
Aldegonde and his plan for a secret interview, so soon 
as it was divulged, made it impossible to carry that pro- 
ject into effect. 

“ Aldegonde, who governs Antwerp,” wrote Parma to 
Philip, “ was endeavoring eight days ago to bring about 
some kind of negotiation for an accord. He manifested 
a desire to come hither for the sake of a personal inter- 
view with me, which I permitted. It was to have taken 
place last Sunday, 16th of this month, but by reason of 
a certain popular tumult, which arose out of these cir- 
cumstances, it has been necessary to defer the meeting.” 2 

There was much disappointment felt by the royalists 
at this unsatisfactory result. ‘These bravados and 


1 “Car les gouvernemens populaires sont plains de mil hazards, 
et ilme desplairait infiniment que vous eussiez mal.”—MS. ubi sup. 

2 “De ocho dias ha procurado Aldegonda, qui goberna Anveres, 
travar alguna platica de acuerdo con aquella villa, mostrando 
desseo de querer venir el mismo a verse conmigo, loquel le per- 
mité. Havia de haverlo hecho este ultimo domingo 16 del pre- 
sente, pero con la escusa de cierto tumulto popular, que sobre el 
caso havia sucedido la ha tenido para differirlo.”— Parma to Philip 
II., 20th June, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


302 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


impertinent demonstrations on the part of some of your 
people,” wrote Richardot ten days later, “will be the 
destruction of the whole country, and will convert the 
prince’s gentleness into anger. ’T is these good and 
zealous patriots, trusting to a little favorable breeze that 
blew for a few days past, who have been the cause of all 
this disturbance, and who are ruining their miserable 
country—miserable, I say, for having produced such 
abortions as themselves.” ! 

Notwithstanding what had passed, however, Richardot 
intimated that Alexander was still ready to negotiate. 
“And if you, sir,” he concluded in his letter to Alde- 
gonde, “concerning whom many of our friends have at 
present a sinister opinion,—as if your object was to cir- 
cumvent us,—are willing to proceed roundly and frankly, 
as I myself firmly believe that you will do, we may yet 
hope for a favorable issue.” 2 

Thus the burgomaster was already the object of sus- 
picion to both parties. The Antwerpers denounced him 
as having been purchased by Spanish gold; the royalists 
accused him of intending to overreach the king. It was 
not probable, therefore, that all were correct in their 
conjectures. 

At last it was arranged that deputies should be ap- 
pointed by the broad council to commence a negotiation 
with Parma. Sainte-Aldegonde informed Richardot 
that he would accompany them if his affairs should per- 
mit. He protested his sincerity and frankness through- 
out the whole affair. “They try to calumniate me,” he 


1 Richardot to Marnix, 30th June, 1585: “Ce sont ces bons et 
zeleux patriotes qui ruynent leur miserable patrie, miserable, dis 
Je, @avoir produit tels avortons” (Archivo de Simancas MS.). 

2 Thid. 


1585] INTERVIEW OF MARNIX WITH PARMA 303 


said, “as much on one side as on the other, but I will 
overcome by my innocence all the malice of my slan- 
derers. If his Highness should be pleased to grant us 
some liberty for our religion, I dare to promise such 
faithful service as will give very great satisfaction.” 1 

Four days later Sainte-Aldegonde himself, together 
with M. de Duffel, M. de Schoonhoven, and Adrian 
Hesselt, came to Parma’s camp at Beveren, as deputies 
on the part of the Antwerp authorities. They were 
courteously received by the prince, and remained three 
days as his guests. During the period of this visit the 
terms of a capitulation were thoroughly discussed be- 
tween Alexander and his councilors upon one part, and 
the four deputies on the other. The envoys endeavored, 
with all the arguments at their command, to obtain the 
consent of the prince to three preliminary points, which 
they laid down as indispensable. Religious liberty must 
be granted, the citadel must not be reconstructed, a 
foreign garrison must not be admitted, they said. As 
it was the firm intention of the king, however, not to 
make the slightest concession on any one of these points, 
the discussion was not a very profitable one. Besides 
the public interviews, at which all the negotiators were 
present, there was a private conference between Parma 
and Sainte-Aldegonde, which lasted more than three 
hours, in which each did his best to enforce his opinions 
upon the other. The burgomaster endeavored to per- 
suade the prince, with all the eloquence for which he was 
so renowned, that the hearts, not of the Antwerpers 
only, but of the Hollanders and Zealanders, were easily 
to be won at that moment. Give them religious liberty, 

1 Marnix to Richardot, 5th July, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 


304 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and attempt to govern them by gentleness rather than 
by Spanish garrisons, and the road was plain to a 
complete reconciliation of all the provinces with his 
Majesty. 

Alexander, who knew his master to be inexorable upon 
these three points, was courteous but peremptory in his 
statements. He recommended that the rebels should 
take into consideration their own declining strength, the 
inexhaustible resources of the king, the impossibility of 
obtaining succor from France, and the perplexing dila- 
toriness of England, rather than waste their time in idle 
expectations of a change in the Spanish policy. He 
also intimated obliquely, but very plainly, to Sainte- 
Aldegonde that his own fortune would be made, and 
that he had everything to hope from his Majesty’s 
bounty, if he were now willing to make himself useful 
in carrying into effect the royal plans. 

The prince urged these views with so much eloquence 
that he seemed, in his own words, to have been directly 
inspired by the Lord for this special oceasion.2 Sainte- 
Aldegonde, too, was signally impressed by Alexander's 
language, and thoroughly fascinated—magnetized, as it 
were—by his character. He subsequently declared that 
he had often conversed familiarly with many eloquent 
personages, but that he had never known a man more 
powerful or persuasive than the Prince of Parma? He 
could honestly say of him, as Hasdrubal had said of 
Scipio, that Farnese was even more admirable when seen 
face to face than he had seemed when one only heard 
of his glorious achievements.‘ 

“The burgomaster and three deputies,” wrote Parma 


1 Strada, ii. 379. Compare Bor, ii. 606; Hoofd, Vervolgh, 109, 
2 Strada, ubi sup. 3 Tbid. € Thid. 


1585] ALDEGONDE DENOUNCED AS TRAITOR 305 


to Philip, “ were here until the 12th July. We discussed 
the points and form of a capitulation, and they have 
gone back thoroughly satisfied. Sainte-Aldegonde espe- 
cially was much pleased with the long interview which 
he had with me alone, and which lasted more than three 
hours. I told him, as well as my weakness and suffering 
from the tertian fever permitted, all that God inspired 
me to say on our behalf.” ! 

Nevertheless, if Sainte-Aldegonde and his colleagues 
went away thoroughly satisfied, they had reason, soon 
after their return, to become thoroughly dejected. The 
magistrates and burghers would not listen to a proposi- 
tion to abandon the three points, however strongly 
urged to do so by arguments drawn from the necessity 
of the situation, and by representations of Parma’s 
benignity. As for the burgomaster, he became the 
target for calumny so soon as his three hours’ private 
interview became known, and the citizens loudly de- 
clared that his head ought to be cut off and sent in a 
bag as a present to Philip, in order that the traitor 
might meet the sovereign, with whom he sought a recon- 
ciliation, face to face as soon as possible.? 

The deputies, immediately after their return, made 
their report to the magistrates, as likewise to the 
colonels and captains, and to the deans of gilds. 
Next day, although it was Sunday, there was a session 
of the broad council, and Sainte-Aldegonde made a long 

1 “Se dieron los puntos y forma del acuerdo, con que tomaron 
a yr muy satisfechos, y el Aldeg® en particular de la larga platica 
que a solas con el mas de 3 horas tuve, diziendole lo que Dios ms 
inspiro a n° proposito, y mejor me permitidé la flaqueza y travajo 
de la terciana.”—Parma to Philip II., 30th July, 1585, Archivo de 
Simancas MS. 

2 Bor, ii. 606. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 109. 

VOL. I.—20 


306 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


address, in which, as he stated in a letter to Richardot, 
he related everything that had passed in his private 
conversation with Alexander. An answer was promised 
to Parma on the following Tuesday, but the burgomaster 
spoke very discouragingly as to the probability of an 
accord. 

“The joy with which our return was greeted,” he said, 
“was followed by a general disappointment and sadness 
so soon as the result was known. The want of a reli- 
gious toleration, as well as the refusal to concede on the 
other two points, has not a little altered the hearts of 
all, even of the Catholics. A citadel and a garrison are 
considered ruin and desolation to a great commercial 
city. Ihave done what I can to urge the acceptance of 
such conditions as the prince is willing to give, and have 
spoken in general terms of his benign intentions. The 
citizens still desire peace. Had his Highness been will- 
ing to take both religions under his protection, he might 
have won all hearts, and very soon all the other prov- 
inces would have returned to their obedience, while the 
clemency and magnanimity of his Majesty would thus 
have been rendered admirable throughout the world.” 2 

The power to form an accurate conception as to the 
nature of Philip, and of other personages with whom he 
was dealing, and as to the general signs of his times, 
seems to have been wanting in the character of the 
gifted Aldegonde. He had been dazzled by the personal 
presence of Parma, and he now spoke of Philip II. as if 
his tyranny over the Netherlands—which for twenty 
years had been one horrible and uniform whole—were 
the accidental result of circumstances, not the necessary 


1 Marnix to Richardot, 15th July, 1585, MS. 
2 Thid. 


1585] SUSPICIOUS CONDUCT OF MARNIX 307 


expression of his individual character, and might be 
easily changed at will—as if Nero, at a moment’s warn- 
ing, might transform himself into Trajan. It is true 
that the innermost soul of the Spanish king could by 
no possibility be displayed to any contemporary as it 
reveals itself, after three centuries, to those who study 
the record of his most secret thoughts; but at any rate 
it would seem that his career had been sufficiently con- 
sistent to manifest the amount of “clemency and mag- 
nanimity” which he might be expected to exercise. 

“Had his Majesty,” wrote Sainte-Aldegonde, “been 
willing, since the year ’66, to pursue a course of tolera- 
tion, the memory of his reign would have been sacred 
to all posterity, with an immortal praise of sapience, 
benignity, and sovereign felicity.” 1 

This might be true, but nevertheless a tolerating 
Philip in the year 1585 ought to have seemed to Sainte- 
Aldegonde an impossible idea. 

“The emperors,” continued the burgomaster, “who 
immediately succeeded Tiberius were the cause of the 
wisdom which displayed itself in the good Trajan, also 
a Spaniard, and in Antoninus, Verus, and the rest If 
you think that this city, by the banishment of a certain 
number of persons, will be content to abandon the pro- 
fession of the Reformed faith, you are much mistaken. 
You will see, with time, that the exile of this religion will 
be accompanied by a depopulation and a sorrowful ruin 
and desolation of this flourishing city. But this will be 
as it pleases God. Meantime I shall not fail to make 


1 Marnix to Richardot, just cited. 

2 “Tes premiers empereurs apres Tybere rendirent sages et ad- 
visez premierement le bon Trajan, aussi Espagnol, et puis Antonin, 
Verus,” ete.—Ibid. 


308 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


all possible exertions to induce the citizens to consent to 
a reconciliation with his Majesty. The broad council 
will soon give their answer, and then we shall send a 
deputation. We shall invite Holland and Zealand to 
join with us, but there is little hope of their consent.” 1 

Certainly there was little hope of their consent. 
Sainte-Aldegonde was now occupied in bringing about 
the capitulation of Antwerp, without any provision for 
religious liberty,—a concession which Parma had most 
distinctly refused, —and it was not probable that Holland 
and Zealand, after twenty years of hard fighting, and 
with an immediate prospect of assistance from England, 
could now be induced to resign the great object of the 
contest without further struggle. 

It was not until a month had elapsed that the au- 
thorities of Antwerp sent their propositions to the 
Prince of Parma. On the 12th August, however, Sainte- 
Aldegonde, accompanied by the same three gentlemen 
who had been employed on the first mission, and by 
seventeen others besides, proceeded with safe-conduct 
to the camp at Beveren. Here they were received with 
great urbanity, and hospitably entertained by Alexander, 
who received their formal draft of articles for a capitu- 
lation, and referred it to be reported upon to Richardot, 
Pamel, and Van den Berg. Meantime there were many 
long speeches and several conferences: sometimes be- 
tween all the twenty-one envoys and the prince together ; 
on other occasions, more secret ones, at which only Al- 
degonde and one or two of his colleagues were present. 
It had been obvious, from the date of the first interview, 
in the preceding month, that the negotiation would be 
of no avail until the government of Antwerp was pre- 


1 Marnix to Richardot, just cited. 


1585] DEPUTATION TO THE PRINCE 309 


pared to abandon all the conditions which they had 
originally announced as indispensable. Alexander had 
not much disposition and no authority whatever to make 
concessions. 

“So far as I can understand,’ Parma had written on 
the 30th July, “they are very far from a conclusion. 
They have most exorbitant ideas, talking of some kind 
of liberty of conscience, besides refusing on any account 
to accept of garrisons, and having many reasons to al- 
lege on such subjects.” ! 

The discussions, therefore, after the deputies had 
at last arrived, though courteously conducted, could 
scarcely be satisfactory to both parties. ‘The articles 
were thoroughly deliberated upon,” wrote Alexander, 
“by all the deputies, nor did I fail to have private con- 
ferences with Aldegonde, that most skilful and practised 
lawyer and politician,? as well as with two or three of 
the others. I did all in my power to bring them to a 
thorough recognition of their errors, and to produce a 
confidence in his Majesty’s clemency, in order that they 
might concede what was needful for the interests of the 
Catholic religion and the security of the city. They 
heard all I had to say without exasperating themselves, 
and without interposing any strong objections, except in 
the matter of religion, and still more in the matter of 
the citadel and the garrison. Aldegonde took much 
pains to persuade me that it would be ruinous for a 


1 “Hasta agora bien lejos de concluyr, segun las exhorvitancias 
que presentan de querer alguna forma de libertad de consciencia, 
y en ninguna manera, guarnicion, alegando muchas cosas in su 
favor.”—MS. letter, 30th July, 1585. 

2 “Tan platico letrado y politico.”—Parma to Philip II., 25th 
August, 1585, MS. 


310 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


great, opulent, commercial city to submit to a foreign 
military force. Even if compelled by necessity to sub- 
mit now, the inhabitants would soon be compelled by the 
same necessity to abandon the place entirely, and to 
leave in ruins one of the most splendid and powerful cities 
in the world, and in this opinion Catholics and heretics 
unanimously concurred. The deputies protested with one 
accord that so pernicious and abominable a thing as a 
citadel and garrison could not even be proposed to their 
constituents. I answered that so long as the rebellion 
of Holland and Zealand lasted it would be necessary for 
your Majesty to make sure of Antwerp by one or the 
other of those means, but promised that the city should 
be relieved of the encumbrance so soon as those islands 
should be reduced. 

‘‘Sainte-Aldegonde was not discouraged by this state- 
ment, but in the hope of convincing others, or with the 
wish of showing that he had tried his best, desired that I 
would hear him before the council of state. I granted 
the request, and Sainte-Aldegonde then made another 
long and very elegant oration, intended to divert me 
from my resolution.” 1 

It must be confessed, if the reports which have come 
down to us of that long and elegant oration be correct, 
that the enthusiasm of the burgomaster for Alexander 
was rapidly degenerating into idolatry. 

“We are not here, O invincible Prince,” he said, “that 
we may excuse, by an anxious legation, the long defense 
which we have made of our homes. Who could have 
feared any danger to the most powerful city in the 
Netherlands from so moderate a besieging force? You 


1 “Otra larga y muy elegante oracion directiva a desviar me de 
mi propuesto,” etc.—Parma to Philip II., MS. just cited. 


1585} ORATION OF MARNIX 311 


would yourself have rather wished for, than approved 
of, a greater facility on our part, for the brave cannot 
love the timid. We knew the number of your troops, we 
had discovered the famine in your camp, we were aware 
of the paucity of your ships, we had heard of the quar- 
rels in your army, we were expecting daily to hear of a 
general mutiny among your soldiers. Were we to believe 
that with ten or eleven thousand men you would be able 
to block up the city by land and water, to reduce the 
open country of Brabant, to cut off all aid as well from 
the neighboring towns as from the powerful provinces 
of Holland and Zealand, to oppose without a navy the 
whole strength of our fleets directed against the dike? 
Truly, if you had been at the head of fifty thousand sol- 
diers, and every soldier had possessed one hundred 
hands, it would have seemed impossible for you to meet 
so many emergencies in so many places, and under so 
many distractions. What you have done we now be- 
lieve possible to do only because we see that it has been 
done. You have subjugated the Schelde, and forced it 
to bear its bridge, notwithstanding the strength of its 
current, the fury of the ocean tides, the tremendous 
power of the icebergs, the perpetual conflicts with our 
fleets. We destroyed your bridge with great slaughter 
of your troops. Rendered more courageous by that 
slaughter, you restored that mighty work. We as- 
saulted the great dike, pierced it through and through, 
and opened a path for our ships. You drove us off 
when victors, repaired the ruined bulwark, and again 
closed to us the avenue of relief. What machine was 
there that we did not employ? What miracles of fire 
did we not invent? What fleets and floating citadels 
did we not put in motion? All that genius, audacity, 


312 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


and art could teach us we have executed, calling to our 
assistance water, earth, heaven, and hell itself. Yet 
with all these efforts, with all this enginery, we have not 
only failed to drive you from our walls, but we have 
seen you gaining victories over other cities at the same 
time. You have done a thing, O Prince, than which 
there is nothing greater either in ancient or modern 
story. It has often occurred while a general was be- 
Sieging one city that he lost another situate farther 
off. But you, while besieging Antwerp, have reduced 
simultaneously Dendermonde, Ghent, Nimwegen, Brus- 
sels, and Mechlin.”1 

All this, and much more, with florid rhetoric, the 
burgomaster pronounced in honor of Farnese, and the 
eulogy was entirely deserved. It was hardly becoming, 
however, for such lips, at such a moment, to sound the 
praise of him whose victory had just decided the down- 
fall of religious liberty and of the national independence 
of the Netherlands. His colleagues certainly must have 
winced as they listened to commendations so lavishly 
bestowed upon the representative of Philip, and it is not 
surprising that Sainte-Aldegonde’s growing unpopularity 
should, from that hour, have rapidly increased. To 
abandon the whole object of the siege when resistance 


1 The oration is reported by Strada (ii. 374-376), who had access 
to more of Farnese’s papers than will probably ever be in the pos- 
session of any other writer. It is possible that the harangue is in- 
debted for some of its declamatory exuberance to the imagination 
of the historian; but I have found the J esuit, in general, very ac- 
curate in transcribing and translating the diplomatic documents 
relating to his hero. A circumstantial account of this particular 
interview between the prince and Marnix, with a full report of this 
oration by the latter, is not among the Simancas MSS., and I have 
therefore relied upon Strada. 


1585] THE THREE POINTS OF DISPUTE 313 


seemed hopeless was perhaps pardonable, but to offer 
such lip-homage to the conqueror was surely transgress- 
ing the bounds of decorum. 

His conclusion, too, might to Alexander seem as inso- 
lent as the whole tenor of his address had been humble, 
for after pronouncing this solemn eulogy upon the con- 
queror, he calmly proposed that the prize of the contest 
should be transferred to the conquered. 

“So long as liberty of religion and immunity from 
citadel and garrison can be relied upon,” he said, “so 
long will Antwerp remain the most splendid and flour- 
ishing city in Christendom; but desolation will ensue if 
the contrary policy is to prevail.” 1 

But it was very certain that liberty of religion, as 
well as immunity from citadel and garrison, was quite 
out of the question. Philip and Parma had long been 
inexorably resolved upon all the three points. 

“ After the burgomaster had finished his oration,” 
wrote Alexander to his sovereign, “I discussed the 
matter with him in private very distinctly and mi- 
nutely.” 2 

The religious point was soon given up, Sainte-Alde- 
gonde finding it waste of breath to say anything more 
about freedom of conscience. A suggestion was, how- 
ever, made on the subject of the garrison, which the 
prince accepted, because it contained a condition which 
it would be easy to evade. 

“ Aldegonde proposed,” said Parma, “that a garrison 
might be admissible if I made my entrance into the city 
merely with infantry and cavalry of nations which were 
acceptable,—Walloons, namely, and Germans,—and in 


1 Strada, ii. 374-376. 
2 MS. letter of 25th August, 1585, befcre cited. 


314 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


no greater numbers than sufficient for a body-guard. I 
accepted because, in substance, this would amount to a 
garrison, and because, also, after the magistrates shall 
have been changed, I shall have no difficulty in making 
myself master of the people, continuing the garrison 
and rebuilding the citadel.” 1 

The prince proceeded to give his reasons why he was 
willing to accept the capitulation on what he considered 
so favorable terms to the besieged. Autumn was ap- 
proaching. Already the fury of the storms had driven 
vessels clean over the dikes; the rebels in Holland and 
Zealand were preparing their fleets—augmented by 
many new ships of war and fire-machines—for another 
desperate attack upon the palisades, in which there was 
great possibility of their succeeding; an auxiliary force 
from England was soon expected: so that, in view of all 
these circumstances, he had resolved to throw himself 
at his Majesty’s feet and implore his clemency. “If this 
people of Antwerp, as the head, is gained,” said he, 
“there will be tranquillity in all the members.” 2 

These reasons were certainly conclusive; nor is it 
easy to believe that, under the circumstances thus sue- 
einctly stated by Alexander, it would have been impos- 
sible for the patriots to hold out until the promised 
succor from Holland and from England should arrive. 
In point of fact, the bridge could not have stood the 
winter which actually ensued, for it was the repeatedly 
expressed opinion of the Spanish officers in Antwerp 
that the icebergs which then filled the Schelde must 


1 MS. letter of 25th August, 1585, before cited. 
2 “Y pues de la que se usasse con este pueblo, como cabeza, 


ha de resultar bien y tranquilidad a los miembros que restan,” 
ete. —Ibid. 


1585] ARTICLES OF CAPITULATION DISCUSSED 315 


inevitably have shattered twenty bridges to fragments, 
had there been so many.! It certainly was superfluous 
for the prince to make excuses to Philip for accepting 
the proposed capitulation. All the prizes of victory had 
been thoroughly secured, unless pillage, massacre, and 
rape, which had been the regular accompaniments of 
Alva’s victories, were to be reckoned among the indis- 
pensable trophies of a Spanish triumph. 

Nevertheless, the dearth in the city had been well con- 
cealed from the enemy, for three days after the surrender 
not a loaf of bread was to be had for any money in all 
Antwerp, and Alexander declared that he would never 
have granted such easy conditions had he been aware of 
the real condition of affairs.? 

The articles of capitulation agreed upon between 
Parma and the deputies were brought before the broad 
council on the 9th August. There was much opposition 
to them, as many magistrates and other influential per- 
sonages entertained sanguine expectations from the 
English negotiation, and were beginning to rely with 
confidence upon the promises of Queen Elizabeth. The 
debate was waxing warm, when some of the councilors, 
looking out of window of the great hall, perceived that a 
violent mob had collected in the streets.? Furious cries 
for bread were uttered, and some meager-looking indi- 
viduals were thrust forward to indicate the famine 
which was prevailing, and the necessity of concluding 
the treaty without further delay. Thus the municipal 
government was perpetually exposed to democratic 
violence, excited by diametrically opposite influences. 
Sometimes the burgomaster was denounced for having 


1 Le Petit, ii. 502. 2 Meteren, xii. 225. 
3 Le Petit, ii, 518. 


316 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


sold himself and his country to the Spaniards, and was 
assailed with execrations for being willing to conclude 
a sudden and disgraceful peace.t At other moments he 
was accused of forging letters containing promises of 
succor from the Queen of England and from the au- 
thorities of Holland in order to protract the lingering 
tortures of the war.? Upon this occasion the peace mob 
earried its point. The councilors, looking out of win- 
dow, rushed into the hall with direful accounts of the 
popular ferocity ; the magistrates and colonels who had 
been warmest in opposition suddenly changed their 
tone, and the whole body of the broad council accepted 
the articles of capitulation by a unanimous vote.? 

The window was instantly thrown open and the deci- 
sion publicly announced. The populace, wild with de- 
light, rushed through the streets, tearing down the arms 
of the Duke of Anjou, which had remained above the 
public edifices since the period of that personage’s tem- 
porary residence in the Netherlands, and substituting 
with wonderful celerity the escutcheon of Philip II.4 
Thus suddenly could an Antwerp mob pass from demo- 
eratic insolence to intense loyalty. 

The articles, on the whole, were as liberal as could 
have been expected. The only hope for Antwerp and 
for a great commonwealth of all the Netherlands was in 
holding out, even to the last gasp, until England and 
Holland, now united, had time to relieve the city. This 
was unquestionably possible. Had Antwerp possessed 
the spirit of Leyden, had William of Orange been alive, 
that Spanish escutcheon, now raised with such indecent 
haste, might have never been seen again on the outside 

1 Bor, ii. 609. 2 Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. ili, 292. 

3 Le Petit, ubi sup. * Ibid. 


1585] THE TREATY SIGNED 317 


wall of any Netherland edifice. Belgium would have 
become at once a constituent portion of a great inde- 
pendent national realm, instead of languishing until 
our own century, the dependency of a distant and a 
foreign metropolis. Nevertheless, as the Antwerpers 
were not disposed to make themselves martyrs, it was 
something that they escaped the nameless horrors which 
had often alighted upon cities subjected to an enraged 
soldiery. It redounds to the eternal honor of Alexander 
Farnese—when the fate of Naarden and Haarlem and 
Maestricht, in the days of Alva, and of Antwerp itself, 
in the horrible Spanish Fury, is remembered— that 
there were no scenes of violence and outrage in the 
populous and wealthy city, which was at length at his 
mercy after having defied him so long. 

Civil and religious liberty were trampled in the dust, 
commerce and manufactures were destroyed, the most 
valuable portion of the citizens sent into hopeless exile, 
but the remaining inhabitants were not butchered in 
cold blood. 

The treaty was signed on the 17th August. Antwerp 
was to return to its obedience. There was to be an 
entire amnesty and oblivion for the past, without a 
single exception. Royalist absentees were to be rein- 
stated in their possessions. Monasteries, churches, 
and the king’s domains were to be restored to their 
former proprietors. The inhabitants of the city were 
to practise nothing but the Catholic religion. Those 
who refused to conform were allowed to remain two 
years for the purpose of winding up their affairs and 
selling out their property, provided that during that 
period they lived “without scandal toward the ancient 
religion”—a very vague and unsatisfactory condition. 


318 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


All prisoners were to be released excepting Teligny. 
Four hundred thousand florins were to be paid by the 
authorities as a fine. The patriot garrison was to leave 
the city with arms and baggage and all the honors of 
war.! 

This capitulation gave more satisfaction to the hungry 
portion of the Antwerpers than to the patriot party 
of the Netherlands. Sainte-Aldegonde was vehemently 
and unsparingly denounced as a venal traitor. It is 
certain, whatever his motives, that his attitude had com- 
pletely changed. For it was not Antwerp alone that he 
had reconciled, or was endeavoring to reconcile, with 
the King of Spain, but Holland and Zealand as well, 
and all the other independent provinces. The ancient 
champion of the patriot army, the earliest signer of the 
“Compromise,” the bosom friend of William the Silent, 
the author of the “Wilhelmus” national song, now 
avowed his conviction, in a published defense of his con- 
duct against the calumnious attacks upon it, “that it 
was impossible, with a clear conscience, for subjects, 
under any circumstances, to take up arms against Philip, 
their king.”? Certainly if he had always entertained 
that opinion he must have suffered many pangs of re- 
morse during his twenty years of active and illustrious 
rebellion. He now made himself secretly active in pro- 
moting the schemes of Parma and in counteracting the 
negotiation with England. He flattered himself, with an 

1 Bor, ii. 610-613. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 111-116. Strada, ii. 378- 
383. Compare, for the history of the siege, which he calls “the 
most memorable in the world,” Herrera, Hist. Gen. del Mundo, 
p- ii, 1. xiv. cap. 13-16, and 1. xv. e. 1-4, §§ 28, 29. See also De 
Thou, ix. 1. Ixxx, and lxxxi. ; Bentivoglio, p. ii. 1. iii.; and the au- 


thorities previously cited. 
2 Strada, ii. 379. 


1585] PHILIP’S GRATIFICATION 319 


infatuation which it is difficult to comprehend, that it 
would be possible to obtain religious liberty for the 
revolting provinces, although he had consented to its 
sacrifice in Antwerp. It is true that he had not the 
privilege of reading Philip’s secret letters to Parma, 
but what was there in the character of the king, what 
intimation had ever been given by the governor-general, 
to induce a belief in even the possibility of such a 
concession ? 

Whatever Sainte-Aldegonde’s opinions, it is certain 
that Philip had no intention of changing his own policy. 
He at first suspected the burgomaster of a wish to pro- 
tract the negotiations for a perfidious purpose. 

“ Necessity has forced Antwerp,” he wrote on the 17th 
of August,—the very day on which the capitulation was 
actually signed,—‘“‘to enter into negotiation. I under- 
stand the artifice of Aldegonde in seeking to prolong 
and make difficult the whole affair, under pretext of 
treating for the reduction of Holland and Zealand at 
the same time. It was therefore very adroit in you to 
defeat this joint scheme at once, and urge the Antwerp 
matter by itself, at the same time not shutting the door 
on the others. With the prudence and dexterity with 
which this business has thus far been managed I am 
thoroughly satisfied.” } 

The king also expressed his gratification at hearing 

1 <‘Bien se vé que necessidad ha forzado Amberes a las platicas 
de concierto que andan, y el artificio de Aldegonde en haber ten- 
tado dilatar el negocio, so color de tratar la reducion de Holanda 
y Zelanda juntamente, y asi fué muy acertado desbaratarle este 
intento, y apretarle en lo que de Amberes, de casi no cerrando la 
puerta a lo demas, y de la cordura y destreza con que todo esto se 
ha guiado, quedo muy enterado y satisfecho.”— Philip I. to Parma, 
17th August, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


820 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


from Parma that the demand for religious liberty in the 
Netherlands would soon be abandoned. 

“In spite of the vehemence,” he said, “which they 
manifest in the religious matter, desiring some kind of 
liberty, they will in the end, as you say they will, content 
themselves with what the other cities which have re- 
turned to obedience have obtained. This must be done 
m all cases without flinching, and without permitting 
any modification.” 4 

What “had been obtained” by Brussels, Mechlin, 
Ghent, was well known. The heretics had obtained the 
choice of renouncing their religion or of going into per- 
petual exile, and this was to be the case “ without flinch- 
ing” in Holland and Zealand, if those provinces chose 
to return to obedience. Yet Sainte-Aldegonde deluded 
himself with the thought of a religious peace. 

In another and very important letter of the same date 
Philip laid down his policy very distinctly. The Prince 
of Parma, by no means such a bigot as his master, had 
hinted at the possibility of tolerating the Reformed reli- 
gion in the places recovered from the rebels, sub silentio, 
for a period not defined, and long enough for the hereties 
to awake from their errors. 

“You have got an expression of opinion, I see,” wrote 
the king to Alexander, “of some grave men of wisdom 
and conscience, that the limitation of time during which 
the heretics may live without scandal may be left unde- 


1 “Que por mas dureza que muestran en lo de la religion, de- 
seando alguna libertad, al cabo se reduciran 4 contentarse en esta 
parte con lo que las otras villas que han venido a la obediencia, 
porque esto se ha de hacer asi en todo caso, sin aflojar, ni permitir 
otra cosa en ninguna manera.”—Philip to Parma, 17th August, 
MS. just cited. 


1585] PHILIP ON THE RELIGIOUS QUESTION 321 


fined, but I feel very keenly the danger of such a propo- 
sition. With regard to Holland and Zealand, or any 
other provinces or towns, the first step must be for them 
to receive and maintain alone the exercise of the Catholic 
religion, and to subject themselves to the Roman Church, 
without tolerating the exercise of any other religion in 
city, village, farm-house, or building thereto destined in 
the fields, or in any place whatsoever; and in this 
regulation there is to be no flaw, no change, no conces- 
sion by convention or otherwise of a religious peace, or 
anything of the sort. They are all to embrace the 
Roman Catholic religion, and the exercise of that is alone 
to be permitted.” + 

This certainly was distinct enough, and nothing had 
been ever said in public to induce a belief in any 
modification of the principles on which Philip had 
uniformly acted. That monarch considered himself 
born to suppress heresy, and he had certainly been 
carrying out this work during his whole lifetime. 

The king was willing, however, as Alexander had in- 
timated in his negotiations with Antwerp, and previously 
in the capitulation of Brussels, Ghent, and other places, 
that there should be an absence of investigation into 
the private chambers of the heretics during the period 


1 “Con todo sentiera yo mucho ver esta tolerancia sin limite. 
Ha de ser el primo paso recebir y tener solamente el egercicio 
catolico, y subjetarse 4 la obediencia de la Yglesia Romana, sin 
tolerar ni consentir por via de capitulacion otro ningun egercicio 
en ninguna Villa, ni granja, ni parte destinada para el en el campo 
ni dentro en los lugares .. . y quanto 4 esto no ha de haber 
quiebra ni mudanza ni concederles por concierto ninguna libertad 
de consciencias, ni religions-fried, ni otra cosa semejante, sino que 
abracen la Cat®® Rom™ con solo el egercicio della,” ete. —Philip I. 
to Parma, 17th August, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 

VOL. I.—21 


322 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


allotted them for choosing between the papacy and 
exile. 

“It may be permitted,” said Philip, “to abstain from 
inquiring as to what the heretics are doing within their 
own doors in a private way, without scandal or any 
public exhibition of their rites, during a fixed time. But 
this connivance, and the abstaining from executing the 
heretics or from chastising them, even although they 
may be living very cireumspectly, is to be expressed in 
very vague terms.” 1 

Being most anxious to provide against a second crop 
of heretics to succeed the first, which he was determined 
to uproot, he took pains to enjoin with his own hand 
upon Parma the necessity of putting Catholie school 
masters and mistresses, to the exclusion of Reformed 
teachers, into all the seminaries of the recovered proy- 
inces, in order that all the boys and girls might grow 
up in thorough orthodoxy. 

Yet this was the man from whom Sainte-Aldegonde 
imagined the possibility of obtaining a religious peace. 

Ten days after the capitulation Parma made his 
triumphal entrance into Antwer , but, according to his 
agreement, he spared the citizens the presence of the 
Spanish and Italian soldiers, the military procession 
being composed of the Germans and Walloons. Es- 
corted by his body-guard, and surrounded by a knot of 

1 “Mas bien se podra debaxo desto no inquirir lo que los hereges 
hicieron dentro de sus casas y los unos en las de los otros enforma 
privada y sin esecandalo, ni muestra de egercicio publico de sus 
sectas y herrores durante el dicho tiempo, porque esta dissimula- 
cion, y no los egecutar ni castigar aunque en lo del mal egemplo 


vive menos recatados que debrian ha de ser en forma bien larga.” 


— Philip II. to Parma, 17th August, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS, 
2 Thid. 


1585] TRIUMPHAL ENTRANCE OF PARMA 323 


magnates and veterans, among whom the Duke of 
Aerschot, the Prince of Chimay, the Counts Mansfeld, 
Egmont, and Aremberg, were conspicuous, Alexander 
proceeded toward the captured city. He was met at 
the Kaiser Gate by a triumphal chariot of gorgeous 
workmanship, in which sat the fair nymph Antwerpia, 
magnificently bedizened, and accompanied by a group 
of beautiful maidens. Antwerpia welcomed the con- 
queror with a kiss, recited a poem in his honor, and 
bestowed upon him the keys of the city, one of which 
was in gold. This the prince immediately fastened to 
the chain around his neck, from which was suspended 
the lamb of the Golden Fleece, with which order he had 
just been, amid great pomp and ceremony, invested. 

On the public square called the Mere, the Genoese 
merchants had erected two rostral columns, each 
surmounted by a colossal image, representing respec- 
tively Alexander of Macedon and Alexander of Parma. 
’ Before the house of Portugal was an enormous phenix 
expanding her wings quite across the street, while in 
other parts of the town the procession was met by ships 
of war, elephants, dromedaries, whales, dragons, and 
other triumphal phenomena. In the market-place 
were seven statues in copper, personifying the seven 
planets, together with an eighth representing Bacchus ; 
and perhaps there were good mythological reasons why 
the god of wine, together with so large a portion of our 
solar system, should be done in copper by Jacob Jonge- 
ling to honor the triumph of Alexander, although the key 
to the enigma has been lost.t 

The cathedral had been thoroughly fumigated with 

1 Bor, ii. 622. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 117. Strada, ii. 383 seq. 
Meteren, xii. 225. Mertens en Torp, v. 258. 


324 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


frankincense and besprinkled with holy water, to purify 
the sacred precincts from their recent pollution by the 
Reformed rites, and the Protestant pulpits which had 
been placed there had been soundly beaten with rods 
and then burned to ashes.! The procession entered 
within its walls, where a magnificent Te Deum was 
performed, and then, after much cannon-firing, bell- 
ringing, torch-light exhibition, and other pyrotechnics, 
the prince made his way at last to the palace pro- 
vided for him. The glittering display by which the 
royalists celebrated their triumph lasted three days 
long, the city being thronged from all the country 
round with eager and frivolous spectators, who were 
never wearied with examining the wonders of the 
bridge and the forts, and with gazing at the tragic 
memorials which still remained of the fight on the 
Kowenstyn. 

During this interval, the Spanish and Italian soldiery, 
not willing to be outdone in demonstrations of respect 
to their chief, nor defrauded of their rightful claim to a 
holiday, amused themselves with preparing a demonstra- 
tion of a novel character. The bridge, which, as it 
was well known, was to be destroyed within a very few 
days, was adorned with triumphal arches, and decked 
with trees and flowering plants ; its roadway was strewed 
with branches; and the palisades, parapets, and forts 
were garnished with wreaths, emblems, and poetical in- 
scriptions in honor of the prince. The soldiers them- 
selves, attired in verdurous garments of foliage and 
flower-work, their swart faces adorned with roses and 
lilies, paraded the bridge and the dike in fantastic pro- 
cession, with clash of cymbal and flourish of trumpet, 


1 Le Petit, ii. 519. 


1585] BANQUET ON THE BRIDGE 325 


dancing, singing, and discharging their carbines, in all 
the delirium of triumph. Nor was a suitable termina- 
tion to the festival wanting, for Alexander, pleased with 
the genial character of these demonstrations, repaired 
himself to the bridge, where he was received with shouts 
of rapture by his army, thus whimsically converted into 
a horde of fauns and satyrs. Afterward a magnificent 
banquet was served to the soldiers upon the bridge. 
The whole extent of its surface, from the Flemish to the 
Brabant shore,—the scene so lately of deadly combat, 
and of the midnight havoc caused by infernal enginery, 
—was changed, as if by the stroke of a wand, into a 
picture of sylvan and Arcadian merrymaking, and 
spread with tables laden with delicate viands. Here sat 
that host of war-bronzed figures, banqueting at their 
ease, their heads crowned with flowers, while the highest 
magnates of the army, humoring them in their 
masquerade, served them with dainties, and filled their 
goblets with wine.! 

After these festivities had been concluded, Parma set 
himself to practical business. There had been a great 
opposition, during the discussion of the articles of ca- 
pitulation, to the reconstruction of the famous citadel. 
That fortress had been always considered, not as a 
defense of the place against a foreign enemy, but as an 
instrument to curb the burghers themselves beneath a 
hostile power. The city magistrates, however, as well 
as the dean and chief officers in all the gilds and 
fraternities, were at once changed by Parma, Catholics 
being uniformly substituted for heretics.2 In con- 


1 Strada, ii. 387. 
2 Parma to Philip II., 30th September, 1585, Archivo de Siman- 
cas MS. Same to same, 11th November, 1585, ibid. 


326 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


sequence, it was not difficult to bring about a change of 
opinion in the broad council. It is true that neither 
papists nor Calvinists regarded with much satisfaction 
the prospect of military violence being substituted for 
civic rule, but in the first effusion of loyalty, and in the 
triumph of the ancient religion, they forgot the absolute 
ruin to which their own action was now condemning 
their city. Champagny, who had once covered himself 
with glory by his heroic though unsuccessful efforts to 
save Antwerp from the dreadful Spanish Fury, which 
had descended from that very citadel, was now appointed 
governor of the town, and devoted himself to the recon- 
struction of the hated fortress. “Champagny has par 
ticularly aided me,” wrote Parma, “with his rhetoric 
and clever management, and has brought the broad 
council itself to propose that the citadel should be 
rebuilt. It will therefore be done as by the burghers 
themselves, without your Majesty or myself appearing 
to desire it.” 1 

This was, in truth, a triumph of “rhetoric and clever 
management,” nor could a city well abase itself more 
completely, kneeling thus cheerfully at its conqueror’s 
feet, and requesting permission to put the yoke upon its 
own neck. “The erection of the castle has thus been 
determined upon,” said Parma, “and I am supposed to 
know nothing of the resolution.” 2 

A little later he observed that they were “working 
away most furiously at the citadel, and that within a 
month it would be stronger than it ever had been before.”3 


1 MS. letter of 11th November, 1585, before cited: ‘‘Rhetorica 
y buena mafia,” ete. 

2 MS. letter, 30th September, 1585, before cited. 

3 Letter of 11th November, 1585. 


1585] BUILDING OF THE CITADEL 8327 


The building went on, indeed, with astonishing 
celerity, the fortress rising out of its ruins almost as 
rapidly, under the hands of the royalists, as it had been 
demolished, but a few years before, by the patriots. 
The old foundations still remained, and blocks of houses, 
which had been constructed out of its ruins, were 
thrown down that the materials might be again em- 
ployed in its restoration.t 

The citizens, impoverished and wretched, humbly 
demanded that the expense of building the citadel might 
be in part defrayed by the four hundred thousand 
florins in which they had been mulected by the capitula- 
tion. “I don’t marvel at this,” said Parma, “for 
certainly the poor city is most forlorn and poverty-stricken, 
the heretics having all left it.”2 It was not long before it 
was very satisfactorily established that the presence of 
those same heretics, and liberty of conscience for all 
men, were indispensable conditions for the prosperity 
of the great capital. Its downfall was instantaneous. 
The merchants and industrious artisans all wandered 
away from the place which had been the seat of a world- 
wide traffic. Civilization and commerce departed, and 
in their stead were the citadel and the Jesuits. By 
express command of Philip, that order, banished so 
recently, was reinstated in Antwerp, as well as through- 
out the obedient provinces; and all the schools and 
colleges were placed under its especial care. No children 
could be thenceforth instructed except by the lips of 
those fathers. Here was a curb more efficacious even 


1 Strada, ii. 394. 

2 «Pyeg eg cierto esta la pobre villa pobrissima y aleanzadis- 
sima, habiendola dejado los hereges,” ete.—MS§, letter last cited. 

3 Strada, ii. 389. 


328 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


than the citadel. That fortress was at first garrisoned 
with Walloons and Germans. “I have not yet induced 
the citizens,” said Parma, “to accept a Spanish garrison, 
nor am I surprised, so many of them remembering past 
events” (alluding to the Spanish Fury, but not mention- 
ing it by name), “and observing the frequent mutinies 
at the present time. Before long I expect, however, to 
make the Spaniards as acceptable and agreeable as the 
inhabitants of the country themselves.” ! 

It may easily be supposed that Philip was pleased 
with the triumphs that had thus been achieved. He 
was even grateful, or affected to be grateful, to him who 
had achieved them. He awarded great praise to Alex- 
ander for his exertions on the memorable occasions of 
the attack upon the bridge and the battle of the Kowen- 
styn, but censured him affectionately for so rashly ex- 
posing his life. “TI have no words,” he said, “to render 
the thanks which are merited for all that you have been 
doing. I recommend you earnestly, however, to have a 
care for the security of your person, for that is of more 
consequence than all the rest.” 2 

After the news of the reduction of the city, he again 
expressed gratification, but in rather cold language. 
“From such obstinate people,” said he, “not more could 
be extracted than has been extracted; therefore the 
capitulation is satisfactory.” What more he wished to 

1 MS. letter, 11th November, 1585. 

2 “Va yo no sé palabras con que daros las gracias que merece 
todo lo que ahi haceis, y asi no dire sino que os encomiendo mucho 
que mireis por la seguridad de yuestra persona, pues en esta va 


mas que en todo.”—Philip II. to Parma, 5th July, 1585, Archivo 
de Simaneas MS. 


3 “Sacar mas que lo que se ha sacado,” ete.—Philip to Parma, 
Sth September, 1585, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


1585] PHILIP’S JOY OVER THE CAPITULATION 829 


extract it would be difficult to say, for certainly the mar- 
row had been extracted from the bones, and the dead city 
was thenceforth left to molder under the blight of a 
foreign garrison and an army of Jesuits. ‘“ Perhaps 
religious affairs will improve before long,”! said Philip. 
They did improve very soon, as he understood the mean- 
ing of improvement. A solitude of religion soon 
brought with it a solitude in every other regard, and 
Antwerp became a desert, as Sainte-Aldegonde had fore- 
told would be the case. 

The king had been by no means so calm, however, 
when the intelligence of the capitulation first reached 
him at Madrid. On the contrary, his oldest courtiers 
had never seen him exhibit such marks of hilarity. 

When he first heard of the glorious victory at Le- 
panto, his countenance had remained impassive, and he 
had continued in the chapel at the devotional exercises 
which the messenger from Don John had interrupted. 
Only when the news of the massacre of St. Bartholomew 
first reached him had he displayed an amount of 
cheerfulness equal to that which he manifested at the 
fall of Antwerp. “Never,” said Granvelle, “had the 
king been so radiant with joy as when he held in his 
hand the despatches which announced the capitulation.” ? 
The letters were brought to him after he had retired to 
rest, but his delight was so great that he could not re- 
main in his bed. Rushing from his chamber, so soon as 
he had read them, to that of his dearly beloved daughter, 
Clara Isabella, he knocked loudly at the door, and scream- 
ing through the keyhole the three words, “ Antwerp is 
ours,” returned precipitately again to his own apartment. 


1 Philip to Parma, 5th September, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 2 Strada, ii. 388, 389. 3 Thid. 


330 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


It was the general opinion in Spain that the capture 
of this city had terminated the resistance of the Nether- 
lands. Holland and Zealand would, it was thought, 
accept with very little hesitation the terms which Parma 
had been offering through the agency of Sainte-Alde- 
gonde, and with the reduction of those two provinces 
the Spanish dominion over the whole country would of 
course become absolute. Secretary Idiaquez observed, 
on drawing up instructions for Carlo Coloma, a Spanish 
financier then departing on special mission for the 
provinces, that he would soon come back to Spain, for 
the Prince of Parma was just putting an end to the 
whole Belgie war. 

Time was to show whether Holland and Zealand were 
as malleable as Antwerp, and whether there would not 
be a battle or two more to fight before that Belgie war 
would come to itsend. Meantime Antwerp was securely 
fettered, while the spirit of commerce—to which its un- 
exampled prosperity had been due—now took its flight 
to the lands where civil and religious liberty had found 
a home. 


NOTE ON MARNIX DE SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 


AS every illustration of the career and character of this 
eminent personage excites constant interest in the Netherlands, 
I have here thrown together, in the form of an oro 
many important and entirely unpublished details, drawn 
mainly from the Archives of Simancas and from the State- 
Paper Office and British Museum in London. 


The ex-burgomaster seemed determined to counteract the 
policy of those Netherlanders who wished to offer the sover- 
eignty of the provinces to the English queen. He had been 


1 Strada, ii. 389. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 331 


earnestly in favor of annexation to France, for his sympathies 
and feelings were eminently French. He had never been a 
friend to England, and he was soon aware that a strong feel- 
ing of indignation—whether just or unjust—existed against 
him, both in that country and in the Netherlands, on account 
of the surrender of Antwerp. 

“T have had large conference with Villiers,” wrote Sir John 
Norris to Walsingham; “he condemneth Sainte-Aldegonde’s 
doings, but will impute it to fear, and not to malice. Sainte- 
Aldegonde, notwithstanding that he was forbidden to come to 
Holland, and laid for at the fleet, yet stole secretly to Dort, 
where they say he is stayed; but I doubt he will be heard speak, 
and then assuredly he will do great hurt.” ! 

It was most certainly Sainte-Aldegonde’s determination, so 
soon as the capitulation of Antwerp had been resolved upon, 
to do his utmost to restore all the independent provinces to 
their ancient allegiance. Rather Spanish than English was his 
settled resolution. Liberty of religion, if possible—that was 
his cherished wish; but still more ardently, perhaps, did he 
desire to prevent the country from falling into the hands of 
Elizabeth. 

“The Prince of Parma hath conceived such an assured hope 
of the fidelity of Aldegonde,” wrote one of Walsingham’s 
agents, Richard Tomson, “in reducing the provinces, yet 
enemies, into a perfect subjection, that the Spaniards are so 
well persuaded of the man as if he had never been against 
them. They say, about the middle of this month, he departed 
for Zealand and Holland to prosecute the effect of his promises, 
and I am the more induced to believe that he is become 
altogether Spanish, for that the common bruit goeth that he 
hastened the surrendering of the town of Antwerp after he 
had intelligence of the coming of the English succors.”? 


1 Sir John Norreys to Walsingham, August 24 (O. S.), 1585, 
S. P. Office MS. 

2 Richard Tomson to Sir F. Walsingham, August 29 (O. 8.), 
1585, S. P. Office MS. 


332 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


There was naturally much indignation felt in the inde- 
pendent provinces against all who had been thought instru- 
mental in bringing about the reduction of the great cities 
of Flanders. Famars, governor of Mechlin, Van der Tympel, 
governor of Brussels, Martini, who had been active in effecting 
the capitulation of Antwerp, were all arrested in Holland. 
“From all that I can hear,” said Parma, “it is likely that they 
will be very severely handled, which is the reason why Sainte- 
Aldegonde, although he sent his wife and children to Holland, 
has not ventured thither himself. It appears that they threaten 
him there, but he means now to go, under pretext of demand- 
ing to justify himself from the imputations against him. 
Although he tells me freely that, without some amplification of 
the concessions hitherto made on the point of religion, he hopes 
for no good result, yet I trust that he will do good offices in 
the meantime, in spite of the difficulties which obstruct his 
efforts. On my part, every exertion will be made, and not 
without hope of some fruit, if not before, at least after, these 
people have become as tired of the English as they were of the 
French.” ! 

Of this mutual ill feeling between the English and the 
burgomaster there can be no doubt whatever. The queen’s 
government was fully aware of his efforts to counteract its 
negotiation with the Netherlands and to bring about their 
reconciliation with Spain. When the Earl of Leicester—as 
will soon be related—arrived in the provinces, he was not long 
in comprehending his attitude and his influence. 

“T wrote somewhat of Sainte-Aldegonde in putting his ease,” 
wrote Leicester, “but this is certain: I have the copy of his very 
letters sent hither to practise the peace not two days before 
I came, and this day one hath told me, that loves him well, that 
he hates our countrymen unrecoverably. I am sorry for it.” 2 


1 Parma to Philip II., Archivo de Simanecas MS. 

* Correspondence of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leycester, in the 
years 1585 and 1586, edited by John Bruce (printed for the 
Camden Society, 1844), pp. 27, 28, December 15 (25), 1585, 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 333 


On the other hand, the queen was very indignant with the 
man whom she looked upon as the paid agent of Spain. She 
considered him a renegade, the more dangerous because his 
previous services had been so illustrious. “Her Majesty’s 
mislike toward Sainte-Aldegonde continueth,” wrote Wal- 
singham to Leicester, “and she taketh offense that he was not 
restrained of his liberty by your lordship’s order.”1 It is 
unquestionable that the ex-burgomaster intended to do his best 
toward effecting the reconciliation of all the provinces with 
Spain; and it is equally certain that the king had offered to 
pay him well if he proved successful in his endeavors. There 
is no proof, however, and no probability that Sainte-Aldegonde 
ever accepted or ever intended to accept the proffered bribe. 
On the contrary, his whole recorded career ought to disprove 
the supposition. Yet it is painful to find him, at this crisis, 
assiduous in his attempts to undo the great work of his own 
life, and still more distressing to find that great rewards were 
distinctly offered to him for such service. Immense promises 
had been frequently made, no doubt, to William the Silent; nor 
could any public man, in such times, be so pure that an at- 
tempt to tamper with him might not be made; but when the 
personage thus solicited was evidently acting in the interests 
of the tempters, it is not surprising that he should become the 
object of grave suspicion. 

“Tt does not seem to me bad,” wrote Philip to Parma, “this 
negotiation which you have commenced with Sainte-Aldegonde, 
in order to gain him, and thus to employ his services in bring- 
ing about a reduction of the islands [Holland and Zealand]. In 
exchange for this work, anything which you think proper to 
offer to him as a reward will be capital well invested; but it 
must not be given until the job is done.” 2 


1 Leycester’s Correspondence, by Bruce, p. 36, December, 1585. 

2, . , que a trueque dello sera bien empleado lo que vieredes 
que combendra ofrecelle para darselo despues de hecho el efecto.” 
—Philip Il. to Parma, 5th September, 1585, Archivo de Simancas 
MS. 


334 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


But the job was hard to do, and Sainte-Aldegonde cared no- 
thing for the offered bribe. He was, however, most strangely 
confident of being able to overcome, on the one hand, the oppo- 
sition of Holland and Zealand to the hated authority of Spain, 
and, on the other, the intense abhorrence entertained by Philip 
to liberty of conscience. 

Soon after the capitulation he applied for a passport to visit 
those two provinces. Permission to come was refused him. 
Honest men from Antwerp, he was informed, would be always 
welcome, but there was no room for him.t There was, how- 
ever,—or Parma persuaded himself that there was,—a con- 
siderable party in those countries in favor of reconciliation 
with Spain. If the ex-burgomaster could gain a hearing, it 
was thought probable that his eloquence would prove very 
effective. 

““We have been making efforts to bring about negotiations 
with Holland and Zealand,” wrote Alexander to Philip. 
“Gelderland and Overyssel likewise show signs of good disposi- 
tion, but I have not soldiers enough to animate the good and 
terrify the bad. As for Holland and Zealand, there is a strong 
inclination on the part of the people to a reconciliation, if some 
concession could be made on the religious question; but the 
governors oppose it, because they are perverse, and are relying 
on assistance from England. Could this religious concession 
be made, an arrangement could, without doubt, be accom- 
plished, and more quickly than people think. Nevertheless, 
in such a delicate matter, I am obliged to await your Majesty’s 
exact instructions and ultimatum.” 2 

He then proceeded to define exactly the position and in- 
tentions of the burgomaster. 

“The government of Holland and Zealand,” he said, “have 
refused a passport to Sainte-Aldegonde, and express dissatisfac- 
tion with him for having surrendered Antwerp so soon. They 


1 Bor, ii. 614-620. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 116. 


2 Parma to Philip II., 30th September, 1585, Archivo de Siman- 
eas MS. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 335 


know that he has much credit with the people and with the 
ministers of the sects, and they are in much fear of him be- 
cause he is inclined for peace, which is against their interests. 
They are, therefore, endeavoring to counteract my negotiations 
with him. These have been, thus far, only in general terms. 
I have sought to induce him to perform the offices required, 
without giving him reason to expect any concession as to the 
exercise of religion. He persuades himself that, in the end, there 
will be some satisfaction obtained upon this point, and, under this 
impression, he considers the peace as good as concluded, there 
remaining no doubt as to other matters. He has sent his wife 
to Zealand, and is himself going to Germany, where, as he 
says, he will do all the good service that he can. He hopes 
that very shortly the provinces will not only invite but implore 
him to come to them, in which case he promises me to per- 
form miracles.” 1 

Alexander then proceeded to pay a distinct tribute to Sainte- 
Aldegonde’s motives; and when it is remembered that the 
statement thus made is contained in a secret despatch, in 
cipher, to the king, it may be assumed to convey the sincere 
opinion of the man most qualified to judge correctly as to this 
calumniated person’s character. 

“ Sainte-Aldegonde offers me wonders,” he said, “and I have 
promised him that he shall be recompensed very largely; yet, 
although he is poor, I do not find him influenced by mercenary 
or selfish considerations, but only very set in opinions regard- 
ing his religion.” 2 

The prince had, however, no doubt of Sainte-Aldegonde’s 
sincerity, for sincerity was a leading characteristic of the man. 
His word, once given, was sacred, and he had given his word 
to do his best toward effecting a reconciliation of the provinces 


1 Parma to Philip IL., 30th September, MS. just cited. 

2“. | . enel cual caso ofrece maravillas, como le he ofrecido yo 
de que ser4 recompensado muy largamente, aunque si bien es 
pobre no le veo interesado, mas tan solamente puesto en la opinion 
de su religion.” —Ibid. 


336 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


with Spain, and frustrating the efforts of England. “Through 
the agency of Sainte-Aldegonde and that of others,” wrote 
Parma, “I shall watch, day and night, to bring about a reduc- 
tion of Holland and Zealand, if humanly possible. Iam quite 
persuaded that they will soon be sick of the English, who are 
now arriving, broken down, without arms or money, and 
obviously incapable of holding out very long. Doubtless, 
however, this English alliance, and the determination of the 
queen to do her utmost against us, complicates matters, and 
assists the government of Holland and Zealand in opposing the 
inclinations of their people.” } 

Nothing ever came of these intended negotiations. The 
miracles were never wrought, and even had Sainte-Aldegonde 
been as venal as he was suspected of being,—which we have 
thus proof positive that he was not,—he never could have 
obtained the recompense, which, according to Philip’s thrifty 
policy, was not to be paid until it had been earned. Sainte- 
Aldegonde’s hands were clean. It is pity that we cannot 
render the same tribute to his political consistency of character. 
It is also certain that he remained, not without reason, for a 
long time under a cloud. He became the object of unbounded 
and reckless calumny. Antwerp had fallen, and the necessary 
consequence of its reduction was the complete and permanent 
prostration of its commerce and manufactures. These were 
transferred to the new, free, national, independent, and pros- 
perous commonwealth that had risen in the “islands” which 
Parma and Sainte-Aldegonde had vainly hoped to restore to 
their ancient servitude. Ina very few years after the subjuga- 
tion of Antwerp, it appeared by statistical documents that 
nearly all the manufactures of linen, coarse and fine cloths, 
serges, fustians, tapestry, gold embroidery, arras-work, silks, 
and velvets, had been transplanted to the towns of Holland 
and Zealand, which were flourishing and thriving, while the 
Flemish and Brabantine cities had become mere dens of thieves 
and beggars. It was in the mistaken hope of averting this 


1 Parma to Philip II., 30th September, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE Sih 


catastrophe,—as melancholy as it was inevitable,—and in 
despair of seeing all the Netherlands united, unless united in 
slavery, and in deep-rooted distrust of the designs and policy 
of England, that this statesman, once so distinguished, had 
hstened to the insidious tongue of Parma. He had sought to 
effect a general reconciliation with Spain, and the only result 
of his efforts was a blight upon his own illustrious name. 

He published a defense of his conduct, and a detailed account 
of the famous siege. His apology, at the time, was not con- 
sidered conclusive, but his narrative remains one of the clearest 
and most trustworthy sources for the history of these important 
transactions. He was never brought to trial, but he discovered, 
with bitterness, that he had committed a fatal error, and that 
his political influence had passed away. He addressed numer- 
ous private epistles to eminent persons, indignantly denying 
the imputations against his character, and demanding an in- 
vestigation. Among other letters he observed in one to Count 
Hohenlo that he was astonished and grieved to find that all 
his faithful labors and sufferings in the cause of his fatherland 
had been forgotten in an hour. In place of praise and 
gratitude, he had reaped nothing but censure and calumny, 
because men ever judged, not by the merits, but by the issue. 
That common people should be so unjust, he said, was not to 
be wondered at, but of men like Hohenlo he had hoped better 
things. He asserted that he had saved Antwerp from another 
Spanish Fury, and from impending destruction—a city in 
which there was not a single regular soldier, and in which his 
personal authority was so slight that he was unable to count 
the number of his masters. If a man had ever performed a 
service to his country, he claimed to have done so in this ca- 
pitulation. Nevertheless, he declared that he was the same 
Philip Marnix, earnestly devoted to the service of God, the 
true religion, and the fatherland, although he avowed himself 
weary of the war and of this perpetual offering of the Nether- 
land sovereignty to foreign potentates. He was now going, he 
said, to his states in Zealand, there to turn farmer again; 

VOL. I.—22 


338 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


renouncing public affairs, in the administration of which he 
had experienced so much ingratitude from his countrymen.}! 
Count Maurice and the states of Holland and Zealand wrote cto 
him, however, in very plain language, describing the public 
indignation as so strong as to make it unsafe for him to visit 
the country.” 

The Netherlands and England, so soon as they were united 
in policy, were, not without reason, indignant with the man 
who had made such strenuous efforts to prevent that union. 
The English were, in truth, deeply offended. He had syste- 
matically opposed their schemes, and to his prejudice against 
their country, and distrust of their intentions, they attributed 
the fall of Antwerp. Envoy Davison, after his return to Hol- 
land on the conclusion of the English treaty, at once expressed 
his suspicions of the ex-burgomaster, and the great dangers to 
be apprehended from his presence in the free states. “Here 
is some working underhand,” said he to Walsingham, “to draw 
hither Sainte-Aldegonde, under a pretext of his justification, 
which, as it has hitherto been denied him, so is the sequel 
suspected, if he should obtain it before they were well settled 
here, betwixt her Majesty and them, considering the manifold 
presumptions that the subject of his journey should be little 
profitable or advantageous to the state of these poor countries, 
as tending, at the best, to the propounding of some general 
reconcilement.”? It was certainly not without substantial 
grounds that the English and Hollanders, after concluding 
their articles of alliance, felt uneasy at the possibility of find- 
ing their plans reversed by the intrigues of a man whom they 
knew to be a mediator between Spain and her revolted proy- 
inces, and whom they suspected of being a venal agent of the 
Catholic king. It was given out that Philip had been induced 
to promise liberty of religion in ease of reconciliation. We 
have seen that Parma was at heart in favor of such a course, 


1 Bor, ii, 614. 2 Ibid. 


3 Davison to Walsingham, September 4 (14), 1585, S. P. Office 
MS. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 339 


and that he was very desirous of inducing Marnix to believe in 
the possibility of obtaining such a boon, however certain the 
prince had been made by the king’s secret letters that such a 
belief was a delusion. “Martini hath been examined,” wrote 
Davison, “who confesseth, both for himself and others, to be 
come hither by direction of the Prince of Parma and in- 
telligence of Sainte-Aldegonde, from whom he was first 
addressed to Villiers and afterward to others for advice and 
assistance. That the scope of this direction was to induce 
them here to harken to a peace, wherein the Prince of Parma 
promiseth them toleration of religion, although he confesseth 
yet to have no absolute power in that behalf, but hath written 
thereof to the king expressly, and holdeth himself assured 
thereof by the first post, as I have likewise been advertised from 
Rowland Yorke, which if it had been propounded openly here 
before things had been concluded with her Majesty, and order 
taken for her assurance, your Honor can judge what confusion 
it must of necessity have brought forth.” ! 

At last, when Marnix had become convinced that the tolera- 
tion would not arrive “by the very next mail from Spain,” and 
that, in truth, such a blessing was not to be expected through 
the post-office at all, he felt an inward consciousness of the 
mistake which he had committed. Too credulously had he in- 
clined his ear to the voice of Parma, too obstinately had he 
steeled his heart against Elizabeth, and he was now the more 
anxious to clear himself at least from the charges of corruption 
so clamorously made against him by Holland and by England. 
Conscious of no fault more censurable than credulity and 
prejudice, feeling that his long fidelity to the Reformed religion 
ought to be a defense for him against his calumniators, he was 
desirous both to clear his own honor and to do at least a 
tardy justice to England. He felt confident that loyal natures, 
like those of Davison and his colleagues at home, would 
recognize his own loyalty. He trusted, not without cause, to 
English honor, and coming to his manor-house of Zoubourg, 


1 Dayison to Walsingham, September, 1585. 


340 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


near Flushing, he addressed a letter to the ambassador of 
Elizabeth, in which the strong desire to vindicate his aspersed 
integrity is quite manifest. 

“T am very joyous,” said he, “that coming hither in order 
to justify myself against the false and malignant imputations 
with which they charge me, I have learned your arrival here 
on the part of her Majesty, as well as the soon-expected 
coming of the Earl of Leicester. I see, in truth, that the Lord 
God is just and never abandons his own. I have never spared 
myself in the service of my country, and I would have 
sacrificed my life a thousand times, had it been possible, in her 
cause. Now I am receiving for all this a guerdon of blame 
and calumny, which is cast upon me in order to cover up faults 
which have been committed by others in past days. I hope, 
however, to come soon to give you welcome, and to speak 
more particularly to you of all these things. Meantime, 
demanding my justification before these gentlemen, who ought 
to have known me better than to have added faith to such 
villamous imputations, I will entreat you that my definite 
justification, or condemnation,—if I have merited it,—may be 
reserved till the arrival of Lord Leicester.” 1 


1 Sainte-Aldegonde to Davison, October 30 (November 9), 1585, 
S. P. Office MS. (The letter is in French.) 

Walsingham always entertained a high opinion of Sainte-Alde- 
gonde’s integrity. ‘‘Je pourrois & bon droit estre taxé,” wrote 
Marnix, in answer to a letter from Sir Francis, ‘‘ou de stupidité, 
ou dingratitude—@autant plus qu’en une commune opinion, 
mesmes de ceux qui estoyent plus proches tesmoigns de mes 
actions, et avoyent plus de commodité d’en pouvoir juger A la 
verité, si ils en eussent prendre la peine il vous a pleu, en estant 
beaucoup plus esloigné, et plus environné de prejugés, maintenir 
constamment l’impression qu’aviez une fois conceue de mon in- 
tegreté. . . . Et pleut 4 Dieu que j’eusse peu avoir gens de qualité 
et de jugement tels qu’est V. S. ou spectateurs, ou juges de mes 
conseils et procédures. Je m’asseure quwen lieu de blame, que, 
ou les ignorans ou les malicieux m’ont mis sus, j’en eusse rapporté 
louange et gloire. Tant y a que rends graces encore pour ce jour 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 341 


This certainly was not the language of a culprit. Never- 
theless, his words did not immediately make a deep impression 
on the hearts of those who heard him. He had come secretly 
to his house at Zoubourg, having previously published his 
memorable apology; and in accordance with the wishes of the 
English government, he was immediately confined to his own 
house. Confidence in the intention of a statesman who had 
at least committed such grave errors of judgment, and who 
had been so deeply suspected of darker faults, was not likely 
very soon to revive. So far from shrinking from an investiga- 
tion which would have been dangerous even to his life had 
the charges against his honor been founded in fact, he boldly 
demanded to be confronted with his accusers, in order that he 
might explain his conduct before all the world. “Sir, yester- 
night, at the shutting of the gates,” wrote Davison to 
Walsingham, transmitting the little note from Marnix which 
has just been cited, “I was advertised that Sainte-Aldegonde 


d’huy 4 mon Dieu, de ce qu’en ces grandes extremités, environnés 
de tant de difficultés, il ne m’a oneques si avant privé de son 
esprit, que je n’aye toujours eu mon seul but et la gloire de son 
nom et la conservation de ses eglises. Ce que je vous prie de croire, 
et vous asseure qu’en cette resolution je desire vivre et mourir.”— 
Marnix de Sainte-Aldegonde to Walsingham, May 6 (16), 1586, from 
Zoubourg, S. P. Office MS. 

“The Count Maurice,” wrote Envoy and Counselor Wilkes, a 
year later, from Utrecht, ‘‘is loved and respected here of the peo- 
ple, for the merits of his late father, and is (so far as I can judge) 
like to succeed him in wisdom and sufficiency. I cannot discern 
that there is any doubt to be had of him that he should be led 
away by any persuasion to seek his advancement but by her Maj- 
esty ; and Sainte-Aldegonde, contrary to the opinion conceived of him 
by her Majesty, is noted here of all men to be a good patriot, and 
worthy to be employed in the services here, in respect of his ability 
and wisdom, howbeit I perceive (to take away the offense that may be 
mustered to her Majesty) they are contented to forbear the use of his 
services.” — Wilkes to the Lords of Council, 20th August, 1586, 
S. P. Office MS. 


342 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


was not an hour before secretly landed at the head on the 
other side the Rammekens, and come to his house at Zou- 
bourg, having prepared his way by an apology, newly pub- 
lished in his defense, whereof I have as yet recovered one only 
copy, which herewith I send your Honor. This day, whilst 
I was at dinner, he sent his son unto me, with a few lines, 
whereof I send you the copy, advertising me of his arrival 
(which he knew I understood before), together with the desire 
he had to see me and speak with me, if the states, before 
whom he was to come to purge himself of the crimes where- 
with he stood, as he saith, unjustly charged, would vouchsafe 
him so much liberty. The same morning, the council of Zea- 
land, taking knowledge of his arrival, sent unto him the 
pensioner of Middelburg and this town, to sound the causes 
of his coming, and to will him, in their behalf, to keep his 
house, and to forbear all meddling, by word or writing, with 
any whatsoever, till they should further advise and determine 
in his cause. In defense thereof, he fell into large and 
particular discourse with the deputies, accusing his enemies of 
malice and untruth, offering himself to any trial, and to abide 
what punishment the laws should lay upon him, if he were 
found guilty of the crimes imputed to him. Touching the 
cause of his coming, he pretended and protested that he had 
no other end than his simple justification, preferring any 
hazard he might incur thereby to his honor and good fame.” 1 
As to the great question at issue, Marnix had at last become 
conscious that he had been a victim to Spanish dissimulation, 
and that Alexander Farnese was in reality quite powerless to 
make that concession of religious liberty without which a 
reconciliation between Holland and Philip was impossible. 
“Whereas,” said Davison, “it was supposed that Sainte- 
Aldegonde had commission from the Prince of Parma to 
make some offer of peace, he assured them of the contrary as 
a thing which neither the prince had any power to yield unto 


} Davison to Walsingham, November 1 (11), 1585, 8. P. Office 
MS. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 343 


with the surety of religion, or himself would, in conscience, 
persuade without it, with a number of other particularities in 
his excuse; amongst the rest, allowing and commending in his 
speech the course they had taken with her Majesty, as the 
only safe way of deliverance for these afflicted countries, 
letting them understand how much the news thereof, specially 
since the entry of our garrison into this place (which before 
they would in no sort believe) hath troubled the enemy, who 
doth what he may to suppress the bruit thereof, and yet com- 
forteth himself with the hope that between the factions and 
partialities nourished by his industry, and musters among the 
towns, especially in Holland and Zealand (where he is persuaded 
to find some pliable to a reconcilement), and the disorders and 
misgovernment of our people, there will be yet occasion offered 
him to make his profit and advantage. I find that the gentle- 
man hath here many friends indifferently persuaded of his 
innocency, notwithstanding the closing up of his apology doth 
make but little for him. Howsoever it be, it falleth out the 
better that the treaty with her Majesty is finished, and the 
cautionary towns assured before his coming, which, if he be ill 
affected, will, I hope, either reform his judgment or restrain his 
will. I will not forget to do the best I can to sift and decipher 
him yet more narrowly and particularly.” + 

Thus, while the scales had at length fallen from the eyes of 
Marnix, it was not strange that the confidence which he now 
began to entertain in the policy of England should not be 
met, at the outset, with a corresponding sentiment on the part 
of the statesman by whom that policy was regulated. “How- 
soever Sainte-Aldegonde would seem to purge himself,” said 
Davison, “it is suspected that his end is dangerous. I have 
done what I may to restrain him, so nevertheless as it may not seem 
to come from me.” And again: “ Sainte-Aldegonde,” he wrote, 
“eontinueth still our neighbor at his house between this and 
Middelburg, yet unmolested. He findeth many favorers, and, 
1 fear, doth no good offices. He desireth to be reserved till 


1 Davison to Walsingham, MS. just cited. 2 Thid. 


344 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


the coming of my Lord of Leicester, before whom he pretends 
a desired trial.” 1 

This covert demeanor on the part of the ambassador was 
in accordance with the wishes of his government. It was 
thought necessary that Sainte-Aldegonde should be kept under 
arrest until the arrival of the earl, but deemed preferable that 
the restraint should proceed from the action of the states rather 
than from the order of the queen. Davison was fulfilling 
orders in attempting by underhand means to deprive Marnix, 
for a time, of his liberty. “Let him, I pray you, remain in 
good safety in any wise,”? wrote Leicester, who was uneasy 
at the thought of so influential and, as he thought, so ill 
affected a person being at large, but at the same time disposed 
to look dispassionately upon his past conduct, and to do justice 
according to the results of an investigation. “It is thought 
meet,” wrote Walsingham to Davison, “that you should do 
your best endeavor to procure that Sainte-Aldegonde may be 
restrained, which in mine opinion were fit to be handled in such 
sort as the restraint might rather proceed from themselves 
than by your solicitation. And yet rather than he should 
remain at liberty to practise underhand, whereof you seem to 
stand in great doubt, it is thought meet that you should make 
yourself a partizan, to seek by all the means that you may to 
have him restrained under the guard of some well-affected 
patriot until the earl’s coming, at what time his cause may re- 
ceive examination.” 3 

This was, however, a result somewhat difficult to accomplish ; 
for twenty years of noble service in the cause of liberty had 
not been utterly in vain, and there were many magnanimous 
spirits to sympathize with a great man struggling thus in the 
meshes of calumny. That the man who challenged rather than 
shunned investigation should be thrown into prison, as if he 


1 Davison to ——, November 11 (21), 1585, S. P. Office MS. 

2 Leicester to Davison, November 10 (20), 1585, S. P. Office MS. 

3 Minute of Walsingham, November 19 (29), 1585, S. P. Office 
MS. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 345 


were a detected felon upon the point of absconding, seemed a 
heartless and superfluous precaution. Yet Davison oad others 
still feared the man whom they felt obliged to regard as a 
baffled intriguer. “Touching the restraint of Sainte- 
Aldegonde,” wrote Davison to Lord Burghley, “which I had 
order from Mr. Secretary to procure underhand, I find the 
difficulty will be great in regard to his many Friends and 
favorers, preoccupied with some opinion of his innocence, 
although I have travailed with divers of them underhand, ert 
am promised that some order shall be taken in that behalf, 
which I think will be harder to execute as long as oun: 
Maurice is here. For Sainte-Aldegonde’s affection, I find 
continual matter to suspect it inclined to a peace, and that, as 
one notably prejudging our scope and proceeding in this 
cause, doth lie in wait for an occasion to set it forward, being, 
as it os fed with a hope of ‘telle quelle liberté de con- 
science,’ which the Prince of Parma and others of his council 
have, as he confesseth, earnestly solicited at the king’s hands. 
This appeareth, in truth, the only apt and easy way for them 
to prevail both against religion and the liberty of these poor 
countries, having thereby once recovered the authority, which 
must necessarily follow a peace, to renew and alter the 
magistrates of the particular towns, which, being at their 
devotion, may turn, as we say, all upside down, and so in an 
instant being under their servitude, if not wholly, at the least 
in a great part of the country, leaving so much the less to do 
about the rest, a thing confessed and looked for of all men 
of any judgment here, if the drift of our peacemakers may 
take effect.” 1 

Sainte-Aldegonde had been cured of his suspicions of Eng- 
land, and at last the purity of his own character shone through 
the mists. 

One winter’s morning, two days after Christmas, 1585, 
Colonel Morgan, an ingenuous Welshman, whom we have seen. 


1 Davison to Burghley, November 29 (December 9), 1585, S. P. 
Office MS. 


346 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


doing much hard fighting on Kowenstyn dike and at other 
places, and who now commanded the garrison at Flushing, was 
taking a walk outside the gates, and inhaling the salt breezes 
from the ocean. While thus engaged he met a gentleman 
coming along, staff in hand, at a brisk pace toward the town, 
who soon proved to be no other than the distinguished and 
deeply suspected Sainte-Aldegonde. The two got at once into 
conversation. “He began,” said Morgan, “by cunning in- 
sinuations, to wade into matters of state, and at the last fell to 
touching the principal points, to wit, her Majesty’s entrance 
into the cause now in hand, which, quoth he, was an action of 
high importance, considering how much it behooved her to go 
through the same, as well in regard of the hope that thereby 
was given to the distressed people of these parts, as also In 
consideration of that worthy personage whom she hath 
here placed, whose estate and eredit may not be suffered to 
quail, but must be upholden as becometh the heutenant of such 
a princess as her Majesty.” ! 

“The opportunity thus offered,” continued honest Morgan, 
“and the way opened by himself, I thought good to discourse 
with him to the full, partly to see the end and drift of his 
induced talk, and consequently to touch his quick in the 
suspected cause of Antwerp.”? And thus, word for word, 
taken down faithfully the same day, proceeded the dialogue 
that wintry morning, near three centuries ago. From that 
simple record—moldering unseen and unthought of for ages, 
beneath piles of official dust—the forms of the illustrious 
Fleming and the bold Welsh colonel seem to start, for a brief 
moment, out of the three hundred years of sleep which have 
succeeded their energetic existence upon earth. And so, with 
the bleak winds of December whistling over the breakers of 
the North Sea, the two discoursed together, as they paced along 
the coast. 

Morean: “I charge you with your want of confidence in 


1 Sir Thomas Morgan to Sir F. Walsingham, January 1 (11), 
1585, S. P. Office MS. 2 Thid. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTEH-ALDEGONDE 347 


her Majesty’s promised aid. ’T was a thing of no small 
moment had it been embraced when it was first most graciously 
offered.” 

SAINTE-ALDEGONDE: “TY left not her prince-like purpose 
unknown to the states, who too coldly and earelessly passed 
over the benefit thereof, until it was too late to put the same 
in practice. For my own part, I acknowledge that indeed I 
thought some further advice would either alter or at least 
detract from the accomplishment of her determination. I 
thought this the rather because she had so long been wedded 
to peace, and I supposed it impossible to divorce her from so 
sweet a spouse. But, set it down that she were resolute, yet 
the sickness of Antwerp was so dangerous as it was to be 
doubted the patient would be dead before the physician could 
come. I protest that the state of the town was much worse 
than was known to any but myself and some few private 
persons. The want of victuals was far greater than they durst 
bewray, fearing lest the common people, perceiving the plague 
of famine to be at hand, would rather grow desperate than 
patiently expect some happy event. For as they were many 
in number, so were they wonderfully divided: some being 
Martinists, some papists, some neither the one nor the other, but 
generally given to be factious, so that the horror at home was 
equal to the hazard abroad.” 

Moraan: “But you forget the motion made by the martial 
men for putting out of the town such as were simple artificers, 
with women and children—mouths that consumed meat, but 
stood in no stead for defense.” 

SamnrTE-ALDEGONDE: “Alas, alas! would you have had me 
guilty of the slaughter of so many innocents, whose lives were 
committed to my charge, as well as the best? Or might [ 
have answered my God, when those massacred creatures should 
have stood up against me, that the hope of Antwerp’s 
deliverance was purchased with the blood of so many simple 
souls? No, no. I should have found my conscience such a 
hell and continual worm as the gnawing thereof would have 


348 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


been more painful and bitter than the possession of the whole 
world would have been pleasant.” 

Morgan continued to press the various points which had 
created suspicion as to the character and motives of Marnix, 
and point by point Marnix answered his antagonist, impressing 
him, armed as he had been in distrust, with an irresistible 
conviction as to the loftiness of the nature which had been so 
much calumniated. 

SAINTE-ALDEGONDE (with vehemence): “I do assure you, in 
conclusion, that I have solemnly vowed service and duty to 
her Majesty, which I am ready to perform where and when it 
may best like her to use the same. I will add, moreover, that 
I have oftentimes determined to pass into England to make my 
own purgation; yet fearing lest her Highness would mislike so 
bold a resolution, I have checked that purpose with a resolution 
to tarry the Lord’s leisure, until some better opportunity might 
answer my desire. For since I know not how I stand in her 
grace, unwilling I am to attempt her presence without permis- 
sion; but might it please her to command my attendance, I 
should not only most joyfully accomplish the same, but also 
satisfy her of and in all such matters as I stand charged with, 
and afterward spend life, land, and goods to witness my duty 
toward her Highness.” 

Morean: “I tell you plainly that if you are in heart the 
same man that you seem outwardly to be, I doubt not but her 
Majesty might easily be persuaded to conceive a gracious 
opinion of you. For mine own part, I will surely advertise 
Sir Francis Walsingham of as much matter as this present 
conference hath ministered.” 

“ Hereof,” said the colonel, when, according to his promise, 
faithfully recording the conversation in all its details for Mr. 
Secretary’s benefit, “he seemed not only content, but most 
glad. Therefore I beseech your Honor to vouchsafe some 
few lines herein, that I may return him some part of your 
mind. I have already written thereof to Sir Philip Sydney, 
lord governor of Flushing, with request that his Excellency 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 849 


the Earl of Leicester may presently be made acquainted with 
the cause.” 

Indeed, the brave Welshman was thoroughly converted from 
his suspicions by the earnest language and sympathetic pres- 
ence of the fallen statesman. This result of the conference 
was creditable to the ingenuous character of both personages. 

“Thus did he,” wrote Morgan to Sir Francis, “from pomt to 
point answer all objections from the first to the last, and that 
in such sound and substantial manner, with a strong show of 
truth, as I think his very enemies, having heard his tale, would 
be satisfied. And truly, sir, as heretofore I have thought 
hardly of him, being led by a superficial judgment of things as 
they stood in outward appearance, so now, having pierced 
deep and weighed causes by a sounder and more deliberate 
consideration, I find myself somewhat changed in conceit, not 
so much carried away by the sweetness of his speech as 
confirmed by the force of his religious profession, wherein he 
remaineth constant, without wavering—an argument of great 
strength to set him free from treacherous attempts; but as I 
am herein least able and most unworthy to yield any censure, 
much less to give advice, so I leave the man and the matter to 
your Honor’s opinion. Only (your graver judgment reserved) 
thus I think, that it were good either to employ him as a 
friend, or as an enemy to remove him farther from us, being 
a man of such action as the world knoweth he is. And to 
conclude,” added Morgan, “ this was the upshot between 
us.” at 

Nevertheless, he remained in this obscurity for a long 
period? When, toward the close of the year 1585, the Eng- 
lish government was established in Holland, he was the object 
of constant suspicion. 

“Here is Aldegonde,” wrote Sir Philip Sydney to Lord 
Leicester from Flushing, “a man greatly suspected, but by no 


1 Thomas Morgan to Sir F. Walsingham, MS. just cited. 
2 Bor, ii. 610-614. Hoofd, Vervolgh, 116,117. Wagenaer, viii. 
83, 84. 


350 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


man charged. He lives restrained to his own house, and, for 
aught I can find, deals with nothing, only desiring to have his 
cause wholly referred to your Lordship, and therefore, with 
the best heed I can to his proceedings, I will leave him to his 
clearing or condemning, when your Lordship shall hear 
him.” ne 

In another letter Sir Philip again spoke of Sainte- 
Aldegonde as “one of whom he kept a good opinion, and yet 
a suspicious eye.” 2 

Leicester himself was excessively anxious on the subject, 
deeply fearing the designs of a man whom he deemed so 
mischievous, and being earnestly desirous that he should not 
elude the chastisement which he seemed to deserve. 

“Touching Sainte-Aldegonde,” he wrote to Davison, “I 
grieve that he is at his house without good guard. I do 
earnestly pray you to move such as have power presently to 
commit a guard about him, for I know he is a dangerous and 
a bold man, and presumes yet to carry all, for he hath made 
many promises to the Prince of Parma. I would he were in 
Fort Rammekens, or else that Mr. Russell had charge of him, 
with a recommendation from me to Russell to look well to him 
till I shall arrive. You must have been so commanded in this 
from her Majesty, for she thinks he is in close and safe guard. 
If he is not, look for a turn of all things, for he hath friends, 
I know.”’3 

But very soon after his arrival, the earl, on examining into 
the matter, saw fit to change his opinions and his language. 
Persuaded, in spite of his previous convictions, even as the 
honest Welsh colonel had been, of the upright character of the 
man, and feeling sure that a change had come over the feel- 
ings of Marnix himself in regard to the English alliance, 


1 Sir P. Sydney to Earl of Leicester, Brit. Mus., Galba, ¢. viii. 
213, MS, 


2 Sir P. Sydney to Earl of Leicester, 19th February, 1586, Brit. 
Mus., Galba, ¢. ix. 93. 


3 Leicester to Davison, November 18 (28), 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


1585] - NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 351 


Leicester at once interested himself in removing the preju- 
dices entertained toward him by the queen. 

“Now a few words for Sainte-Aldegonde,” said he in his 
earliest despatches from Holland; “I will beseech her Majesty 
to stay her judgment till I write next. If the man be as he 
now seemeth, it were pity to lose him, for he is indeed 
marvelously friended. Her Majesty will think, I know, that 
IT am easily pacified or led in such a matter, but I trust so to 
deal as she shall give me thanks. Once if he do offer service 
it is sure enough, for he is esteemed that way above all the men in 
this country for his word, if he give it. His worst enemies here pro- 
cure me to win him, for, sure, just matter for his life there is none. 
He would fain come into England, so far is he come already, and 
doth extol her Majesty for this work of hers to heaven, and 
confesseth till now an angel could not make him believe it.’’! 

Here certainly was a noble tribute paid unconsciously, as it 
were, to the character of the maligned statesman: “ Above all 
the men in this country for his word, if he give it.” What 
wonder that Orange had leaned upon him, that Alexander had 
sought to gain him, and how much does it add to our bitter 
regret that his prejudices against England should not have 
been removed until too late for Antwerp and for his own use-_ 
fulness! Had his good angel really been present to make him 
believe in that “work of her Majesty,” when his ear was open 
to the seductions of Parma, the destiny of Belgium and his own 
subsequent career might have been more fortunate than they 
became. 

The queen was slow to return from her prejudices. She be- 
lieved, not without reason, that the opposition of Sainte- 
Aldegonde to her policy had been disastrous to the cause both 
of England and the Netherlands, and it had been her desire 
that he should be imprisoned and tried for his life. Her 
councilors came gradually to take a more favorable view of the 
case, and to be moved by the pathetic attitude of the man who 
had once been so conspicuous. 


1 Bruce, Leycest. Corresp., pp. 33, 34. 


352 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


“TI did acquaint Sir Christopher Hatton,” wrote Walsingham 
to Leicester, “with the letter which Sainte-Aldegonde wrote to 
your Lordship, which, carrying a true picture of an afflicted 
mind, cannot but move an honest heart, weighing the rare 
parts the gentleman is endowed withal, to pity his distressed 
estate, and to procure him relief and comfort, which Mr. Vice- 
Chamberlain [Hatton] hath promised on his part to perform. 
I thought good to send Sainte-Aldegonde’s letter unto the 
lord treasurer [Burghley], who heretofore has carried a hard 
conceit of the gentleman, hoping that the view of his letter 
will breed some remorse toward him. I have also prayed his 
Lordship, if he see cause, to acquaint her Majesty with the 
said letter.” 1 

But his high public career was closed. He lived down 
calumny and put his enemies to shame, but the fatal error 
which he had committed, in taking the side of Spain rather 
than of England at so momentous a crisis, could never be 
repaired. He regained the good opinion of the most virtuous 
and eminent personages in Europe, but in the noon of life he 
voluntarily withdrew from public affairs. The circumstances 
just detailed had made him impossible as a political leader, and 
it was equally impossible for him to play a secondary part. 
He occasionally consented to be employed in special diplomatic 
missions, but the serious avocations of his life now became 
theological and literary. He sought, in his own words, to 
penetrate himself still more deeply than ever with the spirit of 
the Reformation, and to imbue the minds of the young with 
that deep love for the Reformed religion which had been the 
guiding thought of his own eareer. He often spoke with a 
sigh of his compulsory exile from the field where he had been 
so conspicuous all his lifetime; he bitterly lamented the 
vanished dream of the great national union between Belgium 
and Holland, which had flattered his youth and his manhood; 
and he sometimes alluded with bitterness to the calumny which 
had crippled him of his usefulness. He might have played a 


1 Bruce, Leyeest. Corresp., pp. 31, 34. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 353 


distinguished part in that powerful commonwealth which was 
so steadily and splendidly arising out of the lagunes of Zealand 
and Holland, but destiny and calumny and his own error had 
decided otherwise. 

“From the depth of my exile,” he said,—“for I am resolved 
to retire, I know not where, into Germany, perhaps into 
Sarmatia,—I shall look from afar upon the calamities of my 
country. That which to me is most mournful is no longer 
to be able to assist my fatherland by my counsels and my 
actions.” ! He did not go into exile, but remained chiefly at 
his mansion of Zoubourg, oceupied with agriculture and with 
profound study. Many noble works conspicuous in the 
literature of the epoch were the results of his learned leisure, 
and the name of Marnix of Sainte-Aldegonde will be always as 
dear to the lovers of science and letters as to the believers in 
civil and religious liberty. At the request of the states of 
Holland he undertook, in 1593, a translation of the Scriptures 
from the original, and he was at the same time deeply en- 
gaged with a history of Christianity, which he intended for 
his literary masterpiece. The man whose sword had done 
knightly service on many a battle-field for freedom, whose 
tongue had controlled mobs and senates, courts and councils, 
whose subtle spirit had metamorphosed itself into a thousand 
shapes to do battle with the genius of tyranny, now quenched 
the feverish agitation of his youth and manhood in Hebrew 
and classical lore. A grand and noble figure always, most 
pathetic when thus redeeming by vigorous but solitary and 
melancholy hard labor the political error which had con- 
demned him to retirement. To work, ever to work, was the 
primary law of his nature. Repose in the other world, “ Repos 
ailleurs,” was the device which he assumed in earliest youth, 
and to which he was faithful all his days. 

A great and good man, whose life had been brimful of noble 
deeds, and who had been led astray from the path, not of 
virtue, but of sound policy, by his own prejudices and by the 


1 Commentaire sur les Affaires d’Anvers. 
VOL. I.—23 


354 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


fascination of an intellect even more brilliant than his own, he 
at least enjoyed in his retirement whatever good may come 
from hearty and genuine labor, and from the high regard 
entertained for him by the noblest spirits among his con- 
temporaries. 

“They tell me,” said La Noue, “that the Seigneur de Sainte- 
Aldegonde has been suspected by the Hollanders and the Eng- 
lish, I am deeply grieved, for ’t is a personage worthy to be 
employed. I have always known him to be a zealous friend 
of his religion and his country, and I will bear him this 
testimony, that his hands and his heart are clean. Had it been 
otherwise, I must have known it. His example has made me 
regret the less the promise I was obliged to make, never to 
bear arms again in the Netherlands. For I have thought that 
since this man, who has so much credit and authority among 
your people, after having done his duty well, has not failed to 
be calumniated and ejected from service, what would they 
have done with me, who am a stranger, had I continued in 
their employment? The consul Terentius Varro lost, by his 
fault, the battle of Cann; nevertheless, when he returned to 
Rome, offering the remainder of his life in the cause of his 
republic, reduced to extremity, he was not rejected, but well 
received, because he hoped well for the country. It is not to 
be imputed as blame to Sainte-Aldegonde that he lost Antwerp, 
for he surrendered when it could not be saved. What I now 
say is drawn from me by the compassion I feel when persons 
of merit suffer without cause at the hands of their fellow- 
citizens. In these terrible tempests, as it is a duty rigorously 
to punish the betrayers of their country, even so it is an obliga- 
tion upon us to honor good patriots, and to support them in 
venial errors, that we may all encourage each other to do the 
right.” 1 

Strange, too, as it may now seem to us, a reconciliation of 
the Netherlands with Philip was not thought an impossibility 
by other experienced and sagacious patriots besides Marnix, 


1 Groen y. Prinsterer, Archives, ete., i. 79, 80. 


1585] NOTE ON SAINTE-ALDEGONDE 355 


Even Olden-Barneveldt, on taking office as Holland’s advocate 
at this period, made it a condition that his service was to last 
only until the reunion of the provinces with Spain. 

There was another illustrious personage in a foreign land 
who ever rendered homage to the character of the retired 
Netherland statesman. Amid the desolation of France, Du- 
plessis-Mornay often solaced himself by distant communion 
with that kindred and sympathizing spirit. 

“Plunged in public annoyances,” he wrote to Sainte- 
Aldegonde, “I find no consolation except in conference with 
the good, and among the good I hold you for one of the best. 
With such men I had rather sigh profoundly than laugh 
heartily with others. In particular, sir, do me the honor to 
love me, and believe that I honor you singularly. Impart to 
me something from your solitude, for I consider your deserts 
to be more fruitful and fertile than our most cultivated 
habitations. As for me, think of me as of a man drowning in 
the anxieties of the time, but desirous, if possible, of swimming 
to solitude.” ? 

Thus solitary, yet thus befriended, remote from public 
employment, yet ever employed, doing his daily work with all 
his soul and strength, Marnix passed the fifteen years yet 
remaining to him. Death surprised him at last, at Leyden, in 
the year 1598, while steadily laboring upon his Flemish trans- 
lation of the Old Testament, and upon the great political, 
theological, controversial, and satirical work on the differences 
of religion, which remains the most stately, though unfinished, 
monument of his literary genius. At the age of sixty he went 
at last to the repose which he had denied to himself on earth. 
“ Repos ailleurs.” * 


1 Willems, Mengelingen, p. 389. 

2 Mémoires et Corresp. de Duplessis-Mornay, vi. 35. 

3 I am bound to state that there is a single passage in one of 
Parma’s letters to Philip which contains a somewhat suspicious 
allusion to Marnix. Were it not for the distinct assertion of 
Farnese, already cited, to the disinterested character of the burgo- 


356 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


master, and to his elevation above mercenary considerations, the 
observation now alluded to would be still more painful. 

Six months after the fall of Antwerp, the prince informed his 
sovereign that Sainte-Aldegonde had not yet gone to Germany, 
but was still in Zealand, where they were treating him with great 
attention, but conferring no authority upon him. “Those in 
power,” added Farnese, “distrust him, because they see him in- 
clined to that party to which, when he can, —unless I deceive my- 
self, —he will give his support. If he had not found the English 
already introduced, I think they would have made less of him, and 
that he would have accomplished some valuable piece of service. 
Ido not fail to send compliments, a8 well to him, as to others who 
may prove useful agents, and to do all I ean to keep them in their 
good dispositions, and in this course I shall ever persist, keeping 
awake by day and night.” 

“Desconfiando per verle inclinado a la parte a la cual cuando 
puede, sino me engafio, creo ajudard, y sino hallard introducidos 
los Ingleses, creo hecharen menos de el, y que hiciera algun buen 
efeto. Yo asi a el, como a los demas medios que me parecen ser 
a proposito, no dejo de embiar recaudos,* ni de procurar tenerlos 
€n su buen proposito, y en la dicha conformidad lo hire, haciendo 
siempre, desvelandome de dia y de noche,” ete.—Parma to Philip 
IL, 28th February, 1586, Archivo de Simancas MS. 


* The word recaudo, or recado, means a complimentary message, which might 
or might not be accompanied with more solid arguments. 

It has been seen that Philip authorized Farnese to offer large rewards to 
Marnix, with the stipulation that they were not to be conferred until the service 
required had been rendered. On the other hand, the prince privately assured 
the king that the man whom they so much wished to gain was not to be won by 
abribe. After scrupulously examining the evidence, I cannot resist a conclu- 
sion favorable to the purity of Marnix. 


CHAPTER VI 


Policy of England—Diplomatie ecoquetry—Dutch envoys in Eng- 
land—Conference of Ortel and Walsingham—Interview with 
Leicester—Private audience of the queen—Letters of the States- 
General—lIIl effects of Gilpin’s despatech—Close bargaining of the 
queen and states—Guaranties required by England—England’s 
comparative weakness—The English characterized— Paul Hentz- 
ner—The envoys in London—Their characters— Olden-Barneveldt 
described—Reception at Greenwich—Speech of Menin—Reply of 
the queen—Memorial of the envoys—Discussions with the minis- 
ters—Second speech of the queen—Third speech of the queen— 
Sir John Norris sent to Holland—Parsimony of Elizabeth— Energy 
of Davison—Protracted negotiations—Friendly sentiments of 
Count Maurice—Letters from him and Louisa de Coligny—Davi- 
son vexed by the queen’s caprice—Dissatisfaction of Leicester— 
Hisvehement complaints—The queen’s ayarice—Perplexity of 
Davison—Manifesto of Elizabeth—Sir Philip Sydney—His arrival 
at Flushing. 


ENGLAND, as we have seen, had carefully watched 
the negotiations between France and the Netherlands. 
Although she had, upon the whole, for that intriguing 
age, been loyal in her bearing toward both parties, she 
was perhaps not entirely displeased with the result. As 
her cherished triumvirate was out of the question, it 
was quite obvious that now or never she must come 
forward to prevent the provinces from falling back into 
the hands of Spain. The future was plainly enough 


foreshadowed, and it was already probable, in case of a 
307 


358 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


prolonged resistance on the part of Holland, that Philip 
would undertake the reduction of his rebellious subjects 
by a preliminary conquest of England. It was therefore 
quite certain that the expense and danger of assisting 
the Netherlands must devolve upon herself, but, at the 
same time, it was a consolation that her powerful next- 
door neighbor was not to be made still more powerful 
by the annexation to his own dominion of those impor- 
tant territories. 

Accordingly, so soon as the deputies in France had 
received their definite and somewhat ignominious re- 
pulse from Henry III. and his mother, the English 
government lost no time in intimating to the states 
that they were not to be left without an ally. Queen 
Elizabeth was, however, resolutely averse from assum- 
ing that sovereignty which she was not unwilling to see 
offered for her acceptance; and her accredited envoy at 
The Hague, besides other more secret agents, was as 
busily employed in the spring of 1585 as Des Pruneaux 
had been the previous winter, on the part of France, to 
bring about an application, by solemn embassy, for her 
assistance. 

There was, however, a difference of view, from the 
outset, between the leading politicians of the Nether- 
lands and the English queen. The Hollanders were 
extremely desirous of becoming her subjects; for the 
United States, although they had already formed them- 
selves into an independent republic, were quite ignorant 
of their latent powers. The leading personages of the 
country—those who were soon to become the foremost 
statesmen of the new commonwealth—were already 
shrinking from the anarchy which was deemed insepa- 
rable from a non-regal form of government, and were 


1585] DIPLOMATIC COQUETRY 309 


seeking protection for and against the people under a 
foreign scepter. On the other hand, they were indis- 
posed to mortgage large and important fortified towns, 
such as Flushing, Brill, and others, for the repayment 
of the subsidies which Elizabeth might be induced to 
advance. They preferred to pay in sovereignty rather 
than in money. The queen, on the contrary, preferred 
money to sovereignty, and was not at all inclined to 
sacrifice economy to ambition. Intending to drive a hard 
bargain with the states, whose cause was her own, and 
whose demands for aid she had secretly prompted, she 
meant to grant a certain number of soldiers for as brief 
a period as possible, serving at her expense, and to take 
for such outlay a most ample security in the shape of 
cautionary towns. 

Too intelligent a politician not to feel the absolute 
necessity of at last coming into the field to help the 
Netherlanders to fight her own battle, she was still will- 
ing, for a season longer, to wear the mask of coyness 
and coquetry, which she thought most adapted to irri- 
tate the Netherlanders into a full compliance with her 
wishes. Her advisers in the provinces were inclined to 
take the same view. It seemed obvious, after the failure 
in France, that those countries must now become either 
English or Spanish ; yet Elizabeth, knowing the risk of 
their falling back, from desperation, into the arms of her 
rival, allowed them to remain for a season on the edge 
of destruction,—which would probably have been her 
ruin also,—in the hope of bringing them to her feet on 
her own terms. There was something of feminine art 
in this policy, and it was not without the success which 
often attends such insincere manceuvers. At the same 
time, as the statesmen of the Republic knew that it was 


360 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


the queen’s affair when so near a neighbor’s roof was 
blazing, they entertained little doubt of ultimately ob- 
taining her alliance. It was pity, in so grave an emer- 
gency, that a little frankness could not have been 
substituted for a good deal of superfluous diplomacy. 

Gilpin, a highly intelligent agent of the English gov- 
ernment in Zealand, kept Sir Francis Walsingham thor- 
oughly informed of the sentiments entertained by the 
people of that province toward England. Mixing habit- 
ually with the most influential politicians, he was able 
to render material assistance to the English council in 
the diplomatic game which had been commenced, and 
on which a no less important stake than the crown of 
England was to be hazarded. 

“In conference,” he said, “with particular persons 
that bear any rule or credit, I find a great inclination 
toward her Majesty, joined, notwithstanding, with a 
kind of coldness. They allege that matters of such im- 
portance are to be maturely and thoroughly pondered, 
while some of them harp upon the old string, as if her 
Majesty, for the security of her own estate, was to have 
the more care of theirs here.” 1 

He was also very careful to insinuate the expediency 
of diplomatic coquetry into the mind of a princess who 
needed no such prompting. “The less by outward ap- 
pearance,” said he, “this people shall perceive that her 
Majesty can be contented to take the protection of them 
upon her, the forwarder they will be to seek and send 
unto her, and the larger conditions in treaty may be 
required. For if they see it to come from herself, then 
do they persuade themselves that it is for the greater 
security of our own country and her Highness to fear 


1 Gilpin to Walsingham, March 6 (16), 1585, S. P. Office MS, 


1585] GILPIN’S VIEWS 361 


the King of Spain’s greatness. But if they become 
seekers unto her Majesty, and if they may, by outward 
show, deem that she accounteth not of the said king’s 
might, but able and sufficient to defend her own realms, 
then verily I think they may be brought to whatsoever 
points her Majesty may desire.” 4 

Certainly it was an age of intrigue, in which nothing 
seemed worth getting at all unless it could be got by 
underhand means, and in which it was thought impossi- 
ble for two parties to a bargain to meet together except 
as antagonists, who believed that one could not derive a 
profit from the transaction unless the other had been 
overreached. This was neither good morality nor sound 
diplomacy, and the result of such trifling was much loss 
of time and great disaster. In accordance with this 
crafty system, the agent expressed the opinion that it 
would “be good and requisite for the English govern- 
ment somewhat to temporize,” and to dally for a season 
longer, in order to see what measures the states would 
take to defend themselves, and how much ability and 
resources they would show for belligerent purposes. If 
the queen were too eager, the provinces would become 
jealous, ‘yielding, as it were, their power, and yet keep- 
ing the rudder in their own hands.” 

At the same time Gilpin was favorably impressed with 
the character both of the country and the nation, soon 
to be placed in such important relations with England. 
“This people,” he said, ‘is such as by fair means they 
will be won to yield and grant any reasonable motion 
or demand. What these islands of Zealand are her 
Majesty and all my lords of her council do know. Yet 
for their government thus much I must write, that dur- 


1 Gilpin to Walsingham, MS. just cited. 


362 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ing these troubles it never was better than now. They 
draw, in a manner, one line long and carefully in their 
resolution; but the same once taken and promises 
made, they would perform them to the uttermost.” ? 
Such, then, was the character of the people, for no 
man was better enabled to form an opinion on the sub- 
ject than was Gilpin. Had it not been as well, then, for 
Englishmen—who were themselves in that age, as in 
every other, apt to “perform to the uttermost promises 
once taken and made,” and to respect those endowed 
with the same wholesome characteristic—to strike hands 
at once in a cause which was so vital to both nations? 
So soon as the definite refusal of Henry III. was 
known in England, Leicester and Walsingham wrote at 
once to the Netherlands. The earl already saw shining 
through the distance a brilliant prize for his own ambi- 
tion, although he was too haughty, perhaps too mag- 
nanimous, but certainly far too crafty, to suffer such 
sentiments as yet to pierce to the surface. “ Mr. Davi- 
son,” he wrote, “you shall perceive by Mr. Secretary’s 
letters how the French have dealt with these people. 
They are well enough served; but yet I think, if they will 
heartily and earnestly seek it, the Lord hath appointed 
them a far better defense. But you must so use the 
matter as that they must seek their own good, although we 
shall be partakers thereof also. They may now, if they 
will effectually and liberally deal, bring themselves to a 
better end than ever France would have brought them.” 2 
At that moment there were two diplomatic agents 
from the states resident in England—Jacques de Gryze, 
whom Paul Buys had formerly described as having 
1 Gilpin to Walsingham, MS. just cited. 
® Leicester to Davison, March 8 (18), 1585, S. P. Office MS. 


1585] DUTCH ENVOYS IN ENGLAND 363 


thrust himself head and shoulders into the matter with- 
out proper authority, and Joachim Ortel, a most experi- 
enced and intelligent man, speaking and writing English 
like a native, and thoroughly conversant with English 
habits and character. So soon as the despatches from 
France arrived, Walsingham, 18th March, 1585, sent for 
Ortel, and the two held a long conference. 
WaLsincHAm: “We have just received letters from 
Lord Derby and Sir Edward Stafford, dated the 13th 
March. They inform us that your deputies, contrary to 
all expectation and to the great hopes that had been 
held out to them, have received, last Sunday, their defi- 
nite answer from the King of France. He tells them 
that, considering the present condition of his kingdom, 


1 Memorie van Ortel en de Gryze, 24th March, 1585, Hague Ar- 
chives MS. 

It is necessary, once for all, to state that no personage is ever 
made, in the text, to say or to write anything except what, upon 
the best evidence of eye- and ear-witnesses, he is known to have 
said or written. It is no longer permitted to historians—as was 
formerly the case, from the times of Livy to those of Cardinal 
Bentivoglio—to invent harangues, letters, and conferences. Where 
my narrative, for the convenience of the reader, is thrown into a 
dramatic form, the words—not the substance merely, but the 
ipsissima verba—have been gathered from authentic documents. 
Letters, speeches, and the like are often translated into the text 
from various languages, —Latin, French, Flemish, Spanish, Italian, 
German,—and where the sources are English, the spelling and, 
in a very slight measure, the diction have been put into modern 
garb. But the reader may be sure that he is never made to be 
present at imaginary conversations, which, however agreeable and 
instructive in works intentionally fictitious, are quite out of place 
in those which claim to be historical. 

In this instance the account of the conference is derived from 
the report made by Envoy Ortel to the States-General, preserved 
in the Royal Archives at The Hague. 


364 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


he is unable to undertake the protection of the Nether- 
lands, but says that, if they like, and if the Queen of 
England be willing to second his motion, he is disposed 
to send a mission of mediation to Spain for the purpose 
of begging the king to take the condition of the prov- 
inces to heart, and bringing about some honorable com- 
position, and so forth, and so forth. 

“Moreover, the King of France has sent M. de Bel- 
lievre to Lord Derby and Mr. Stafford, and Bellievre 
has made those envoys a long oration. He explained to 
them all about the original treaty between the states 
and Monsieur, the king’s brother, and what had taken 
place from that day to this, concluding, after many alle- 
gations and divers reasons, that the king could not 
trouble himself with the provinces at present, but hoped 
her Majesty would make the best of it, and not be 
offended with him. 

“The ambassadors say further that they have had an 
interview with your deputies, who are excessively pro- 
voked at this most unexpected answer from the king, 
and are making loud complaints, being all determined 
to take themselves off as fast as possible. The ambas- 
sadors have recommended that some of the number 
should come home by the way of England.” 

ORTEL: “Tt seems necessary to take active measures 
at once, and to leave no duty undone in this matter. It 
will be advisable to confer so soon as may be with 
some of the principal counselors of her Majesty, and 
recommend to them most earnestly the present condition 
of the provinces. They know the affectionate confidence 
which the states entertain toward England, and must 
now, remembering the sentiments of good will which 
they have expressed toward the Netherlands, be willing 


1585] CONFERENCE OF ORTEL AND WALSINGHAM 365 


to employ their efforts with her Majesty in this emer- 
gency.” 

WALSINGHAM (with much show of vexation): “This 
conduct on the part of the French court has been most 
pernicious. Your envoys have been delayed, fed with 
idle hopes, and then disgracefully sent away, so that the 
best part of the year has been consumed, and it will be 
most difficult now, in a great hurry, to get together a 
sufficient force of horse and foot folk, with other neces- 
saries in abundance. On the contrary, the enemy, who 
knew from the first what result was to be expected in France, 
has been doing his best to be beforehand with you in 
the field; add, moreover, that this French negotiation 
has given other princes a bad taste in their mouths. 
This is the case with her Majesty. The queen is, not 
without reason, annoyed that the states have not only 
despised her friendly and good-hearted offers, but have 
all along been endeavoring to embark her in this war 
for the defense of the provinces, which would have cost 
her several millions, without offering to her the slightest 
security. On the contrary, others, enemies of the reli- 
gion, who are not to be depended upon, who had 
never deserved well of the states or assisted them in 
their need, as she has done, have received this large offer 
of sovereignty without any reserve whatever.” 

ORTEL (not suffering himself to be disconcerted at this 
unjust and somewhat insidious attack): “That which 
has been transacted with France was not done except 
with the express approbation and full foreknowledge of 
her Majesty, so far back as the lifetime of his Excellency 
[William of Orange], of high and laudable memory. 
Things had already gone so far, and the provinces had 
agreed so entirely together, as to make it inexpedient 


366 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


to bring about a separation in policy. It was our duty 
to hold together, and, once for all, thoroughly to under- 
stand what the King of France, after such manifold 
presentations through M. des Pruneaux and others, 
and in various letters of his own, finally intended 
to do. At the same time, notwithstanding these nego- 
tiations, we had always an especial eye upon her Maj- 
esty. We felt a hopeful confidence that she would 
never desert us, leaving us without aid or counsel, but 
would consider that these affairs do not concern the 
provinces alone or even especially, but are just as deeply 
important to her and to all other princes of the religion.” 

After this dialogue, with much more conversation of 
a similar character, the secretary and the envoy set 
themselves frankly and manfully to work. It was 
agreed between them that every effort should be made 
with the leading members of the council to induce the 
queen, ‘in this terrible conjuncture, not to forsake the 
provinces, but to extend good counsel and prompt as- 
sistance to them in their present embarrassments.” 

There was, however, so much business in Parliament 
just then that it was impossible to obtain immediately 
the desired interviews. 

On the 20th Ortel and De Gryze had another inter- 
view with Walsingham at the palace of Greenwich. 
The secretary expressed the warmest and most sincere 
affection for the provinces, and advised that one of the 
two envoys should set forth at once for home in order 
to declare to the states, without loss of time, her Maj- 
esty’s good inclination to assume the protection of the 
land, together with the maintenance of the Reformed 
religion and the ancient privileges. Not that she was 
seeking her own profit, or wished to obtain that sover- 


1585] INTERVIEW WITH LEICESTER 367 


eignty which had just been offered to another of the 
contrary religion, but in order to make manifest her 
affectionate solicitude to preserve the Protestant faith 
and to support her old allies and neighbors. Neverthe- 
less, as she could not assume this protectorate without 
embarking in a dangerous war with the King of Spain, 
in which she would not only be obliged to spend the 
blood of her subjects, but also at least two millions of 
gold, there was the more reason that the states should 
give her certain cities as security. Those cities would 
be held by certain of her gentlemen, nominated thereto, 
of quality, credit, and religion, at the head of good, true, 
and well-paid garrisons, who should make oath never to 
surrender them to the King of Spain or to any one else 
without consent of the states. The provinces were also 
reciprocally to bind themselves by oath to make no 
treaty with the king without the advice and approval 
of her Majesty. It was likewise thoroughly to be 
understood that such cautionary towns should be re- 
stored to the states so soon as payment should be made 
of all moneys advanced during the war. 

Next day the envoys had an interview with the Harl 
of Leicester, whom they found as amicably disposed 
toward their cause as Secretary Walsingham had been. 
“Her Majesty,” said the earl, ‘is excessively indignant 
with the King of France that he should so long have 
abused the provinces, and at last have dismissed their 
deputies so contemptuously. Nevertheless,” he con- 
tinued, “’t is all your own fault to have placed your 
hopes so entirely upon him as to entirely forget other 
princes, and more especially her Majesty. Notwith- 
standing all that has passed, however, I find her fully 
determined to maintain the cause of the provinces. 


368 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


For my own part, I am ready to stake my life, estates, 
and reputation upon this issue, and to stand side by 
side with other gentlemen in persuading her Majesty to 
do her utmost for the assistance of your country.” 

He intimated, however, as Walsingham had done, 
that the matter of cautionary towns would prove an 
indispensable condition, and recommended that one of 
the two envoys should proceed homeward at once, in 
order to procure, as speedily as possible, the appoint- 
ment of an embassy for that purpose to her Majesty. 
“They must bring full powers,” said the earl, “to give 
her the necessary guaranties and make a formal de- 
mand for protection; for it would be unbecoming, and 
against her reputation, to be obliged to present herself 
unsought by the other party.” 

In conclusion, after many strong expressions of good 
will, Leicester promised to meet them next day at 
court, where he would address the queen personally on 
the subject, and see that they spoke with her as well. 
Meantime he sent one of his principal gentlemen to 
keep company with the envoys and make himself useful 
to them. This personage, being “of good quality and 
a member of Parliament,” gave them much useful in- 
formation, assuring them that there was a strong feeling 
in England in favor of the Netherlands, and that the 
matter had been very vigorously taken up in the na- 
tional legislature. That assembly had been strongly 
encouraging her Majesty boldly to assume the protec- 
torate, and had manifested a willingness to assist her 
with the needful. “And if,” said he, “one subsidy 
should not be enough, she shall have three, four, five, 
or Six, or as much as may be necessary.” 

The same day the envoys had an interview with Lord 


1585] PRIVATE AUDIENCE OF THE QUEEN 369 


Treasurer Burghley, who held the same language as 
Walsingham and Leicester had done. “The queen, to 
-his knowledge,” he said, “was quite ready to assume the 
protectorate; but it was necessary that it should be 
formally offered, with the necessary guaranties, and 
that without further loss of time.” 

On the 22d March, according to agreement, Ortel and 
De Gryze went to the court at Greenwich. While wait- 
ing there for the queen, who had ridden out into the 
country, they had more conversation with Walsingham, 
whom they found even more energetically disposed in 
their favor than ever, and who assured them that her 
Majesty was quite ready to assume the protectorate so 
soon as offered. ‘Within a month,” he said, “after the 
signing of a treaty, the troops would be on the spot, 
under command of such a personage of quality and reli- 
gion as would be highly satisfactory.” While they 
were talking, the queen rode into the courtyard, accom- 
panied by the Earl of Leicester and other gentlemen. 
Very soon afterward the envoys were summoned to her 
presence, and allowed to recommend the affairs of the 
provinces to her consideration. She lamented the situ- 
ation of their country, and in a few words expressed her 
inclination to render assistance, provided the states 
would manifest full confidence in her. They replied by 
offering to take instant measures to gratify all her de- 
mands, so soon as those demands should be made 
known; and the queen, finding herself surrounded by 
so many gentlemen and by a crowd of people, appointed 
them accordingly to come to her private apartments the 
same afternoon. 

At that interview none were present save Walsingham 
and Lord Chamberlain Howard. The queen showed 


VOL. I.— 24 


370 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


herself “ extraordinarily resolute” to take up the affairs 
of the provinces. ‘She had always been sure,” she said, 
“that the French negotiation would have no other issue, 
than the one which they had just seen. She was fully 
aware what a powerful enemy she was about to make— 
one who could easily create mischief for her in Scotland 
and Ireland; but she was, nevertheless, resolved, if the 
states chose to deal with her frankly and generously, to 
take them under her protection. She assured the en- 
voys that if a deputation with full powers and reason- 
able conditions should be immediately sent to her, she 
would not delay and dally with them, as had been the 
ease in France, but would despatch them back again at 
the speediest, and would make her good inclination 
manifest by deeds as wellas words. As she was hazard- 
ing her treasure together with the blood and repose of 
her subjects, she was not at liberty to do this except on 
receipt of proper securities.” ! 

Accordingly, De Gryze went to the provinces, provided 
with complimentary and affectionate letters from the 
queen, while Ortel remained in England. So far all 
was plain and aboveboard; and Walsingham, who from 
the first had been warmly in favor of taking up the 
Netherland cause, was relieved by being able to write in 
straightforward language. Stealthy and subtle where 
the object was to get within the guard of an enemy who 
menaced a mortal blow, he was, both by nature and 
policy, disposed to deal frankly with those he called his 
friends. 

‘““M. de Gryze repaireth presently,” he wrote to Davi- 
son, “to try if he can induce the states to send their 
deputies hither, furnished with more ample instruc- 


1 Memorie van Ortel en de Gryze, MS. before cited. 


1585] LETTER OF THE STATES-GENERAL 371 


tions than they had to treat with the French king, con- 
sidering that her Majesty carrieth another manner of 
princely disposition than that sovereign. Meanwhile, for 
that she doubteth lest, in this hard estate of their affairs, 
and the distrust they have conceived to be relieved from 
hence, they should from despair throw themselves into 
the course of Spain, her pleasure therefore is—though 
by Burnham I sent you directions to put them in com- 
fort of relief, only as of yourself—that you shall now, as it 
were in her name, if you see cause sufficient, assure some 
of the aptest instruments that you shall make choice of 
for that purpose, that her Majesty, rather than that they 
should perish, will be content to take them under her 
protection.” 

He added that it was indispensable for the states, 
upon their part, to offer “such sufficient cautions and 
assurances as she might in reason demand.” ! 

Matters were so well managed that by the 22d April 
the States-General addressed a letter to the queen, in 
which they notified her that the desired deputation was 
on the point of setting forth. “ Recognizing,” they said, 
“that there is no prince or potentate to whom they are 
more obliged than they are to your Majesty, we are 
about to request you very humbly to accept the sover- 
eignty of these provinces, and the people of the same 
for your very humble vassals and subjects.” They 
added that, as the necessity of the case was great, they 
hoped the queen would send, so soon as might be, a force 
of four or five thousand men for the purpose of reliev- 
ing the siege of Antwerp.’ 

1 Walsingham to Davison, March 13 (23), 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


2 Lettre des Etats-generaux des Provinces Unies & la Serenissime 
Reyne d’Angleterre, 21st April, 1585, Hague Archives MS. 


372 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


A similar letter was despatched by the same courier 
to the Earl of Leicester.t 

On the 1st of May Ortel had audience of the queen, 
to deliver the letters from the States-General. He found 
that despatches, very encouraging and agreeable in their 
tenor, had also just arrived from Davison. The queen 
was in good humor. She took the letter from Ortel, 
read it attentively, and paused a good while. Then she 
assured him that her good affection toward the provinces 
was not in the least changed, and that she thanked the 
states for the confidence in her that they were manifest- 
ing. “It is unnecessary,” said the queen, “for me to 
repeat over and over again sentiments which I have so 
plainly declared. You are to assure the states that they 
shall never be disappointed in the trust that they have 
reposed in my good intentions. Let them deal with me 
sincerely, and without holding open any back door. 
Not that I am seeking the sovereignty of the provinces, 
for I wish only to maintain their privileges and ancient 
liberties, and to defend them in this regard against all 
the world. Let them ripely consider, then, with what 
fidelity I am espousing their cause, and how, without 
fear of any one, Iam arousing most powerful enemies.” 2 

Ortel had afterward an interview with Leicester, in 
which the earl assured him that her Majesty had not in 
the least changed in her sentiments toward the prov- 
inces. “For myself,” said he, “I am ready, if her Maj- 
esty choose to make use of me, to go over there in 
person, and to place life, property, and all the assistance 


1 Lettre des Etats au Comte de Leicester, 21st April, 1585, Hague 
Archives MS. 

» Brief van Ortel aan de Staten-Generaal, 8th May, 1585, 
Hague Archives MS. 


1585] GILPIN’S LETTER 373 


I can gain from my friends, upon the issue—yea, with 
so good a heart that I pray the Lord may be good to 
me only so far as I serve faithfully in this cause.” He 
added a warning that the deputies to be appointed 
should come with absolute powers, in order that her 
Majesty’s bountiful intentions might not be retarded by 
their own fault. 

Ortel then visited Walsingham at his house, Barn- 
Elms, where he was confined by illness. Sir Francis as- 
sured the envoy that he would use every effort, by letter 
to her Majesty and by verbal instructions to his son-in- 
law, Sir Philip Sydney, to further the success of the 
negotiation, and that he deeply regretted his enforced 
absence from the court on so important an occasion. 

Matters were proceeding most favorably, and the all- 
important point of sending an auxiliary force of Eng- 
lishmen to the relief of Antwerp—before it should be too 
late, and in advance of the final conclusion of the treaty 
between the countries—had been nearly conceded. Just 
at that moment, however, “as ill luck would have it,” 
said Ortel, “came a letter from Gilpin. I don’t think 
he meant it in malice, but the effect was most perni- 
cious.2 He sent the information that a new attack was 
to be made by the 10th May upon the Kowenstyn, 
that it was sure to be successful, and that the siege of 
Antwerp was as good as raised. So Lord Burghley 
informed me, in presence of Lord Leicester, that her 


1 Brief van Ortel aan de Staten-Generaal, 8th May, 1585, Hague 
Archives MS. 

2 <“‘Nu zynde in al desen geoccupeert, voert het ongeluck zeker 
missive van den Secretaris Gilpin, uyt Middelbourg, daertoe, 
hoewel ick nyet en dencke tzelye uyt eenich malitie by hem 
geschiet te zyn,” ete. —Ibid. 


374 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Majesty was determined to await the issue of this enter- 
prise. It was quite too late to get troops in readiness 
to codperate with the states’ army so soon as the 10th 
May, and as Antwerp was so sure to be reiieved, there 
was no pressing necessity for haste. I uttered most 
bitter complaints to these lords and to other counselors 
of the queen that she should thus draw back on ac- 
count of a letter from a single individual, without paying 
sufficient heed to the despatches from the States-Gen- 
eral, who certainly knew their own affairs and their own 
necessities better than any one else could do; but her 
Majesty sticks firm to her resolution.” 1 

Here were immense mistakes committed on all sides. 
The premature shooting up of those three rockets from 
the cathedral tower, on the unlucky 10th May, had 
thus not only ruined the first assault against the Kowen- 
styn, but also the second and the more promising ad- 
venture. Had the four thousand bold Englishmen then 
enlisted, and who could have reached the provinces in 
time to codperate in that great enterprise, stood side by 
side with the Hollanders, the Zealanders, and the Ant- 
werpers upon that fatal dike, it is almost a certainty 
that Antwerp would have been relieved, and the whole 
of Flanders and Brabant permanently annexed to the 
independent commonwealth, which would have thus as- 
sumed at once most imposing proportions. 

It was a great blunder of Sainte-Aldegonde to station 
in the cathedral, on so important an occasion, watchmen 
on whose judgment he could not thoroughly rely. It 
was a blunder in Gilpin, intelligent as he generally 
showed himself, to write in such sanguine style before 


1 Brief van Ortel aan de Staten-Generaal, 8th May, 1585, 
Hague Archives MS, 


1585] A CHAPTER OF BLUNDERS 379 


the event. But it was the greatest blunder of all for 
Queen Elizabeth to suspend her codperation at the very 
instant when, as the result showed, it was likely to prove 
most successful. It was a chapter of blunders from 
first to last, but the most fatal of all the errors was the 
one thus prompted by the great queen’s most traitorous 
characteristic, her obstinate parsimony. 

And now began a series of sharp chafferings on both 
sides, not very much to the credit of either party. The 
kingdom of England and the rebellious provinces of 
Spain were drawn to each other by an irresistible law 
of political attraction. Their absorption into each other 
seemed natural and almost inevitable; and the weight of 
the strong Protestant organism, had it been thus com- 
pleted, might have balanced the great Catholic League 
which was clustering about Spain. It was unfortunate 
that the two governments of England and the Nether- 
lands should now assume the attitude of traders driv- 
ing a hard bargain with each other, rather than that of 
two important commonwealths, upon whose action, at 
that momentous epoch, the weal and woe of Christendom 
were hanging. It is quite true that the danger to Eng- 
land was great, but that danger in any event was to be 
confronted. Philip was to be defied, and, by assuming 
the cause of the provinces to be her own, which it unques- 
tionably was, Elizabeth was taking the diadem from her 
head—as the King of Sweden well observed—and ad- 
venturing it upon the doubtful chance of war. Would 
it not have been better, then, her mind being once 
made up, promptly to accept all the benefits, as well as 
all the hazards, of the bold game to which she was of 
necessity a party? But she could not yet believe in the 


1 Camden, 321. 


376 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ineredible meanness of Henry II. “I asked her Maj- 
esty” (3d May, 1585), said Ortel, “whether, in view of 
these vast preparations in France, it did not behoove 
her to be most cireumspect and upon her guard. For, 
in the opinion of many men, everything showed one 
great scheme already laid down—a general conspiracy 
throughout Christendom against the Reformed religion. 
She answered me that ‘thus far she could not perceive 
this to be the case; nor could she believe,’ she said, 
‘that the King of France could be so faint-hearted as 
to submit to such injuries from the Guises.’” 1 

Time was very soon to show the nature of that un- 
happy monarch with regard to injuries, and to prove to 
Elizabeth the error she had committed in doubting his 
faint-heartedness. Meanwhile time was passing, and 
the Netherlands were shivering in the storm. They 
needed the open sunshine which her caution kept too 
long behind the clouds. For it was now enjoined upon 
Walsingham to manifest a coldness upon the part of the 
English government toward the states. Davison was 
to be allowed to return; “but,” said Sir Francis, “her 
Majesty would not have you accompany the commis- 
sioners who are coming from the Low Countries, but to 
come over either before them or after them, lest it be 
thought they come over by her Majesty’s procurement.” 2 

As if they were not coming over by her Majesty’s 
most especial procurement, and as if it would matter to 
Philip—the union once made between England and 
Holland—whether the invitation to that union came 
first from the one party or the other! 

“T am retired for my health from the court to mine 


1 MS. letter of Ortel, 8th May, 1585, before cited. 
2 Walsingham to Davison, 22d April, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 


1585] CLOSE BARGAINING Bi 


own house,” said Walsingham, “but I find those in 
whose judgment her Majesty reposeth greatest trust so 
coldly affected unto the cause as I have no great hope 
of the matter; and yet, for that the hearts of princes 
are in the hands of God, who both can will and dispose 
them at his pleasure, I would be loath to hinder the 
repair of the commissioners.” 4 

Here certainly had the sun gone most suddenly into 
a cloud. Sir Francis would be loath to advise the com- 
missioners to stay at home, but he obviously thought 
them coming on as bootless an errand as that which had 
taken their colleagues so recently into France. 

The cause of the trouble was Flushing. Hence the 
tears and the coldness and the scoldings on the part 
of the imperious and the economical queen. Flushing 
was the patrimony—a large portion of that which was 
left to him—of Count Maurice. It was deeply mort- 
gaged for the payment of the debts of William the Silent, 
but his son Maurice, so long as the elder brother Philip 
William remained a captive in Spain, wrote himself Mar- 
quis of Flushing and Kampveer, and derived both 
revenue and importance from his rights in that impor- 
tant town. The states of Zealand, while desirous of a 
political fusion of the two countries, were averse from 
the prospect of converting, by exception, their com- 
mercial capital into an English city, the remainder of 
the provinces remaining meanwhile upon their ancient 
footing. The negotiations on the subject caused a most 
ill-timed delay. The states, finding the English govern- 
ment cooling, affected to grow tepid themselves. This 
was the true mercantile system, perhaps, for managing 
a transaction most thriftily, but frankness and prompt- 


1 Walsingham to Davison, MS. just cited. 


378 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ness would have been more statesmanlike at such a 
juncture. 

“T am sorry to understand,” wrote Walsingham, “that 
the states are not yet grown to a full resolution for the 
delivering of the town of Flushing into her Majesty’s 
hands. The queen, finding the people of that island so 
wavering and inconstant, besides that they can hardly, 
after the so long enjoying a popular liberty, bear a 
regal authority, would be loath to embark herself into 
so dangerous a war without some sufficient caution re- 
ceived from them. It is also greatly to be doubted 
that if, by practice and corruption, that town might be 
recovered by the Spaniards, it would put all the rest of 
the country in peril. I find her Majesty, in case that 
town may be gotten, fully resolved to receive them into 
her protection, so as it may also be made probable unto 
her that the promised three hundred thousand guilders 
the month will be duly paid.” ? 

A day or two after writing this letter, Walsingham 
sent one afternoon, in a great hurry, for Ortel, and in- 
formed him very secretly that, according to information 
just received, the deputies from the states were coming 
without sufficient authority in regard to this very 
matter. Thus all the good intentions of the English 
government were likely to be frustrated, and the prov- 
inces to be reduced to direful extremity. 

“What can we possibly advise her Majesty to do,” 
asked Walsingham, “since you are not willing to put 
confidence in her intentions? You are trying to bring 
her into a public war, in which she is to risk her trea- 
sure and the blood of her subjects against the greatest 
potentates of the world, and you hesitate meantime at 


1 Minute to Gilpin, May 7 (17), 1585, S. P. Office MS. 


1585] GUARANTIES REQUIRED BY ENGLAND 379 


giving her such security as is required for the very de- 
fense of the provinces themselves. The deputies are 
coming hither to offer the sovereignty to her Majesty, 
as was recently done in France, or, if that should not 
prove acceptable, they are to ask assistance in men and 
money upon a mere taliter qualiter guaranty. That’s 
not the way. And there are plenty of ill-disposed per- 
sons here to take advantage of this position of affairs to 
ruin the interest of the provinces, now placed on so good. 
a footing. Moreover, in this perpetual sending of de- 
spatches back and forth, much precious time is consumed, 
and this is exactly what our enemies most desire.” ! 

In accordance with Walsingham’s urgent suggestions, 
Ortel wrote at once to his constituents, imploring them 
to remedy this matter. “Do not allow,” he said, “any 
more time to be wasted. Let us not painfully build a 
wall only to knock our own heads against it, to the dis- 
may of our friends and the gratification of our enemies.” ? 

It was at last arranged that an important blank should 
be left in the articles to be brought by the deputies, upon 
which vacant place the names of certain cautionary 
towns, afterward to be agreed upon, were to be inscribed 
by common consent. Meantime the English ministers 
were busy in preparing to receive the commissioners, 
and to bring the Netherland matter handsomely before 
the legislature. 

The integrity, the caution, the thrift, the hesitation, 
which characterized Elizabeth’s government, were well 
portrayed in the habitual language of the lord treasurer, 
chief minister of a third-rate kingdom now called on to 
play a first-rate part, thoroughly acquainted with the 

1 Brief van Ortel aan de Staten-Generaal, 13th May, 1585, 
Hague Archives MS. 2 Thid. 


380 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


moral and intellectual power of the nation whose policy 
he directed, and prophetically conscious of the great 
destinies which were opening upon her horizon. Lord 
Burghley could hardly be censured—least of all ridi- 
culed—for the patient and somewhat timid attributes of 
his nature. The ineffable ponderings, which might now 
be ludicrous on the part of a minister of the British 
empire, with two hundred millions of subjects and near 
a hundred millions of revenue, were almost inevitable in 
aman guiding a realm of four millions of people, with 
half a million of income. 

It was, on the whole, a strange negotiation, this be- 
tween England and Holland. A commonwealth had 
arisen, but was unconscious of the strength which it 
was to find in the principle of states’ union and of re- 
ligious equality. It sought, on the contrary, to exchange 
its federal sovereignty for provincial dependence, and 
to imitate, to a certain extent, the very intolerance by 
which it had been driven into revolt. It was not un- 
natural that the Netherlanders should hate the Roman 
Catholic religion, in the name of which they had en- 
dured such infinite tortures, but it is, nevertheless, pain- 
ful to observe that they requested Queen Elizabeth, whom 
they styled defender, not of “the faith,” but of the “Re- 
formed religion,” to exclude from the provinces, in case 
she accepted the sovereignty, the exercise of all religious 
rites except those belonging to the Reformed church. 
They, however, expressly provided against inquisition 
into conscience.!_ Private houses were to be sacred, the 


1 Points et Articles concus et arrestes par les Etats-generaulx 
de Pay Bas pour traicter avez la Serenissime Reyne d’Angleterre 
sur la souveraineté, Hague Archives MS. 

Art. I. : “Sans qu’icelle pourra estre changé ou aultre Religion 


1585] A STRANGE NEGOTIATION 881 


papists free within their own walls, but the churches 
were to be closed to those of the ancient faith. This 
was not so bad as to hang, burn, drown, and bury alive 
nonconformists, as had been done by Philip and the 
Holy Inquisition in the name of the Church of Rome; nor 
is it very surprising that the horrible past should have 
caused that church to be regarded with sentiments of 
such deep-rooted hostility as to make the Hollanders 
shudder at the idea of its reéstabliishment. Yet no 
doubt it was idle for either Holland or England, at that 
day, to talk of a reconciliation with Rome. A step had 
separated them, but it was a step from a precipice. No 
human power could bridge the chasm. The steep con- 
trast between the League and the counter-league, between 
the system of Philip and Mucio and that of Elizabeth 
and Olden-Barneveldt, ran through the whole world of 
thought, action, and life. 

But still the negotiation between Holland and Eng- 
land was a strange one. Holland wished to give herself 
entirely, and England feared to accept. Elizabeth, in 
place of sovereignty, wanted mortgages, while Holland 
was afraid to give a part, although offering the whole. 
There was no great inequality between the two coun- 
tries. Both were instinctively conscious, perhaps, of 
standing on the edge of a vast expansion. Both felt 
that they were about to stretch their wings suddenly for 
a flight over the whole earth. Yet each was a very in- 
ferior power in comparison with the great empires of 
the past or those which then existed. 

It is difficult, without a strong effort of the imagina- 
tion, to reduce the English empire to the slender propor- 
es dicts pays exercée. Pourveu toutefois que personne ne sera 
recherché en sa conscience.” 


382 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


tions which belonged to her in the days of Elizabeth. 
That epoch was full of light and life. The constella- 
tions which have for centuries been shining in the Eng- 
lish firmament were then human creatures walking 
English earth. The captains, statesmen, corsairs, mer- 
chant adventurers, poets, dramatists, the great queen 
herself, the Cecils, Raleigh, Walsingham, Drake, Haw- 
kins, Gilbert, Howard, Willoughby, the Norrises, Essex, 
Leicester, Sydney, Spenser, Shakspere, and the lesser 
but brilliant lights which surrounded him—such were 
the men who lifted England upon an elevation to which 
she was not yet entitled by her material grandeur. At 
last she had done with Rome, and her expansion dated 
from that moment. Holland and England, by the very 
condition of their existence, were sworn foes to Philip. 
Elizabeth stood excommunicated of the pope. There 
was hardly a month in which intelligence was not sent 
by English agents out of the Netherlands and France 
that assassins, hired by Philip, were making their way 
to England to attempt the life of the queen. The 
Netherlanders were rebels to the Spanish monarch, and 
they stood, one and all, under death-sentence by Rome. 
The alliance was inevitable and wholesome. Elizabeth 
was, however, consistently opposed to the acceptance of 
a new sovereignty. England was a weak power. Ire- 
land was at her side in a state of chronic rebellion—a 
stepping-stone for Spain in its already foreshadowed 
invasion. Scotland was at her back with a strong party 
of Catholics, stipendiaries of Philip, encouraged by the 
Guises and periodically inflamed to enthusiasm by the 
hope of rescuing Mary Stuart from her imprisonment, 
bringing her rival’s head to the block, and elevating the 
long-suffering martyr upon the throne of all the British 


1585] ENGLAND’S COMPARATIVE WEAKNESS 383 


Islands. And in the midst of England itself conspiracies 
were weaving every day. The mortal duel between the 
two queens was slowly approaching its termination. In 
the fatal form of Mary was embodied everything most 
perilous to England’s glory and to England’s queen. 
Mary Stuart meant absolutism at home, subjection to 
Rome and Spain abroad. The uncle Guises were stipen- 
diaries of Philip, Philip was the slave of the pope. 
Mucio had frightened the unlucky Henry III. into sub- 
mission, and there was no health nor hope in France. 
For England, Mary Stuart embodied the possible relapse 
into sloth, dependence, barbarism. For Elizabeth, Mary 
Stuart embodied sedition, conspiracy, rebellion, batile, 
murder, and sudden death. 

It was not to be wondered at that the queen, thus sit- 
uated, should be cautious when about throwing down 
the gauntlet to the greatest powers of the earth. Yet 
the commissioners from the United States were now on 
their way to England to propose the throwing of that 
gauntlet. What now was that England? 

Its population was perhaps not greater than the 
numbers which dwell to-day within its capital and im- 
mediate suburbs. Its revenue was perhaps equal to the 
sixtieth part of the annual interest on the present na- 
tional debt. Single, highly favored individuals, not 
only in England, but in other countries cis- and trans- 
atlantic, enjoy incomes equal to more than half the 
amount of Elizabeth’s annual budget. London, then 
containing perhaps one hundred and fifty thousand in- 
habitants, was hardly so imposing a town as Antwerp, 
and was inferior in most material respects to Paris and 
Lisbon. Forty-two hundred children were born every 
year within its precincts, and the deaths were nearly as 


384 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


many.1 In plague years, which were only too frequent, 
as many as twenty and even thirty thousand people had 
been annually swept away.? At the present epoch there 
are seventeen hundred births every week, and about one 
thousand deaths. 

It is instructive to throw a glance at the character of 
the English people as it appeared to intelligent for- 
eigners at that day; for the various parts of the world 
were not then so closely blended, nor did national colors 
and characteristics flow so liquidly into each other, as 
is the case in these days of intimate juxtaposition. 

“The English are a very clever, handsome, and well- 
made people,” says a learned Antwerp historian and 
merchant, who had resided a long time in London, “ but, 
like all islanders, by nature weak and tender. They are 
generally fair, particularly the women, who all—even to 
the peasant women—protect their complexions from the 
sun with fans and veils, as only the stately gentlewomen 
do in Germany and the Netherlands. As a people they 
are stout-hearted, vehement, eager, cruel in war, zealous 
in attack, little fearing death ; not revengeful, but fickle, 
presumptuous, rash, boastful, deceitful, very suspicious, 
especially of strangers, whom they despise. They are 
full of courteous and hypocritical gestures and words, 
which they consider to imply good manners, civility, and 
wisdom. They are well spoken and very hospitable. 
They feed well, eating much meat, which, owing to the 
rainy climate and the ranker character of the grass, is 
not so firm and succulent as the meat of France and the 
Netherlands. The people are not so laborious as the 
French and Hollanders, preferring to lead an indolent 


1 Meteren, xiii. 243, The historian was, for a long period, resi- 
dent in London at this epoch. 2 Ibid. 


1585] THE ENGLISH CHARACTERIZED 385 


life, like the Spaniards. The most difficult and ingenious 
of the handicrafts are in the hands of foreigners, as is 
the case with the lazy inhabitants of Spain. They feed 
many sheep, with fine wool, from which, two hundred 
years ago, they learned to make cloth. They keep many 
idle servants, and many wild animals for their pleasure, 
instead of cultivating the soil. They have many ships, 
but they do not even catch fish enough for their own 
consumption, but purchase of their neighbors. They 
dress very elegantly. Their costume is light and costly, 
but they are very changeable and capricious, altering 
their fashions every year, both the men and the women. 
When they go away from home, riding or traveling, 
they always wear their best clothes, contrary to the 
habit of other nations. The English language is broken 
Dutch, mixed with French and British terms and words, 
but with a lighter pronunciation. They do not speak 
from the chest, like the Germans, but prattle only with 
the tongue.” ? 

Here are few statistical facts, but certainly it is 
curious to see how many national traits thus photo- 
graphed by a contemporary have quite vanished, and 
have been exchanged for their very opposites. Certainly 
the last physiological criticism of all would indicate as 
great a national metamorphosis, during the last three 
centuries, as is offered by many other of the writer’s 
observations. 

“With regard to the women,” continues the same 
authority, ‘‘they are entirely in the power of the men, 
except in matters of life and death, yet they are not kept 
so closely and strictly as in Spain and elsewhere. They 
are not locked up, but have free management of their 


1 Emanuel van Meteren, Nederlandsche Historien, xiii. 243. 
VOL. I.—25 


386 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


household, like the Netherlanders and their other neigh- 
bors. They are gay in their clothing, taking well their 
ease, leaving housework to the servant-maids, and are 
fond of sitting, finely dressed, before their doors to see 
the passers-by and to be seen of them. In all banquets 
and dinner-parties they have the most honor, sitting at 
the upper end of the board, and being served first. 
Their time is spent in riding, lounging, card-playing, 
and making merry with their gossips at child-bearings, 
christenings, churchings, and buryings; and all this 
conduct the men wink at, because such are the customs 
of the land. They much commend, however, the indus- 
try and careful habits of the German and Netherland 
women, who do the work which in England devolves 
upon the men. Hence England is called the paradise 
of married women, for the unmarried girls are kept 
much more strictly than upon the Continent. The 
women are handsome, white, dressy, modest, although 
they go freely about the streets without bonnet, hood, or 
veil; but the noble dames have lately learned to cover 
their faces with a silken mask or vizard with a plumage 
of feathers, for they change their fashions every year, 
to the astonishment of many.” } 

Paul Hentzner, a tourist from Germany at precisely 
the same epoch, touches with equal minuteness on Eng- 
lish characteristics. It may be observed that, with 
some discrepancies, there is also much similarity in the 
views of the two critics. 

“The English,” says the whimsical Paul, “are serious 
like the Germans, lovers of show, liking to be followed, 
wherever they go, by troops of servants, who wear their 
master’s arms, in silver, fastened to their left sleeves, and 


1 Emanuel van Meteren, just cited. 


1585] PAUL HENTZNER’S REMARKS 8387 


are justly ridiculed for wearing tails hanging down their 
backs. They excel in dancing and music, for they are 
active and lively, although they are of thicker build 
than the Germans. They cut their hair close on the 
forehead, letting it hang down on either side. They 
are good sailors and better pirates, cunning, treacherous, 
thievish. Three hundred and upward are hanged an- 
nually in London. Hawking is the favorite sport of the 
nobility. The English are more polite in eating than 
the French, devouring less bread, but more meat, which 
they roast in perfection. They put a great deal of 
sugar in their drink. Their beds are covered with tapes- 
try, even those of farmers. They are powerful in the 
field, successful against their enemies, impatient of any- 
thing like slavery, vastly fond of great ear-filling noises, 
such as cannon-firing, drum-beating, and bell-ringing ; so 
that it is very common for a number of them, when they 
have got a cup too much in their heads, to go up to 
some belfry and ring the bells for an hour together, for 
the sake of the amusement. If they see a foreigner very 
well made or particularly handsome, they will say, ‘’T is 
pity he is not an Englishman. ”? 

It is also somewhat amusing, at the present day, to 
find a German elaborately explaining to his countrymen 
the mysteries of tobacco-smoking, as they appeared to 
his unsophisticated eyes in England. “At the theaters 
and everywhere else,” says the traveler, “the English 
are constantly smoking tobacco in the following manner : 
They have pipes, made on purpose, of clay. At the 
farther end of these is a bowl. Into the bowl they put 
the herb, and then setting fire to it, they draw the smoke 

1 Paulus Hentznerus, Itinerarium Germaniew, Gallie, Angliv, 
Italie, (Bresle, 1617). 


388 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


into their mouths, which they puff out again through 
their nostrils, like funnels,” and so on—conscientious 
explanations which a German tourist of our own times 
might think it superfluous to offer to his compatriots. 

It is also instructive to read that the light-fingered 
gentry of the metropolis were nearly as adroit in their 
calling as they are at present, after three additional 
centuries of development for their delicate craft ; for the 
learned Tobias Salander, the traveling companion of 
Paul Hentzner, finding himself at a lord mayor’s show, 
was eased of his purse, containing nine crowns, as skil- 
fully as the feat could have been done by the best pick- 
pocket of the nineteenth century, much to that learned 
person’s discomfiture.? 

Into such an England and among such English the 
Netherland envoys had now been despatched on their 
most important errand. 

After twice putting back, through stress of weather, 
the commissioners, early in July, arrived at London, and 
were “lodged and very worshipfully appointed at charges 
of her Majesty in the Cloth-workers’ Hall in Pynchon 
Lane, near Tower Street.”? About the Tower and its 
faubourgs the buildings were stated to be as elegant as 
they were in the city itself, although this was hardly 
very extravagant commendation. From this district a 
single street led along the river’s strand to Westminster, 
where were the old and new palaces, the famous hall 
and abbey, the Parliament chambers, and the bridge to 
Southwark, built of stone, with twenty arches, sixty feet 
high, and with rows of shops and dwelling-houses on 
both its sides. Thence, along the broad and beautiful 

1 Paulus Hentznerus, just cited. 
2 Thid. 3 Stow’s Chronicle, p. 708. 


1585] THE ENVOYS IN LONDON 389 


river, were dotted here and there many stately mansions 
and villas, residences of bishops and nobles, extending 
farther and farther west as the city melted rapidly into 
the country. London itself was a town lying high upon 
a hill,—the hill of Lud,—and consisted of a coil of nar- 
row, tortuous, unseemly streets, each with a black, noi- 
some rivulet running through its center, and with rows 
of three-storied, leaden-roofed houses, built of timber- 
work filled in with lime, with many gables, and with 
the upper stories overhanging and darkening the base- 
ments. There were one hundred and twenty-one 
churches, small and large, the most conspicuous of 
which was the cathedral. Old St. Paul’s was not a 
very magnificent edifice, but it was an extremely large 
one, for it was seven hundred and twenty feet long, one 
hundred and thirty broad, and had a massive quadran- 
gular tower, two hundred and sixty feet high. Upon this 
tower had stood a timber steeple, rising to a height of 
five hundred and thirty-four feet from the ground, but 
it had been struck by lightning in the year 1561, and 
consumed to the stonework.1 

The queen’s favorite residence was Greenwich Palace, 
the place of her birth, and to this mansion, on the 9th 
of July, the Netherland envoys were conveyed, in royal 
barges, from the neighborhood of Pynchon Lane, for 
their first audience. 

The deputation was a strong one. There was Falck of 
Zealand, a man of consummate adroitness, perhaps not 
of as satisfactory integrity—“a shrewd fellow and a 
fine,” as Lord Leicester soon afterward characterized 
him. There was Menin, pensionary of Dort, an eloquent 
and accomplished orator, and employed on this occasion 


1 Meteren, xiii. 243, Camden, 57. 


390 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


as chief spokesman of the legation—“a deeper man, 
and, I think, an honester,” said the same personage, 
adding, with an eye to business, “and he is but Dour: 
which you must consider, but with great secrecy. a 

There was Paul Buys, whom we have met with before— 
keen, subtle, somewhat loose of life, very passionate, a 
most energetic and valuable friend to England, a deter- 
mined foe to France, who had resigned the important 
post of Holland’s neeeate when the mission offering 
sovereignty to Henry III. had been resolved upon, 
and who had since that period been most influential in 
procuring the present triumph of the English policy. 
Through his exertions the province of Holland had been 
induced at an early moment to furnish the most ample 
instructions to the commissioners for the satisfaction 
of Queen Elizabeth in the great matter of the mortgages. 
“Judge if this Paul Buys has done his work well,” said 
a French agent in the Netherlands, who, despite the 
infamous conduct of his government toward the proy- 
inces, was doing his best to frustrate the subsequent 
negotiation with England, “and whether or no he has 
Holland under his thumb.”? The same individual had 
conceived hopes from Falck of Zealand. That province, 
in which lay the great bone of contention between the 
queen and the states,—the important town of Flushing, 
—was much slower than Holland to agree to the English 
policy. It is to be feared that Falck was not the most 
ingenuous and disinterested politician that could be 
found even in an age not distinguished for frankness or 
purity ; for even while setting forth upon the mission to 
Elizabeth, he was still clinging, or affecting to cling, to 


1 Bruce’s Leycest. Corresp., 409, September 4 (14), 1586. 
2 Groen v. Prinsterer, Archives, etc., 1. 14. 


1585] FALCK’S DUPLICITY 391 


the wretched delusion of French assistance. “I regret 
infinitely,” said Falck to the French agent just men- 
tioned, “that I am employed in this affair, and that it is 
necessary in our present straits to have recourse to 
England. There is, so to speak, not a person in our 
province that is inclined that way, all recognizing very 
well that France is much more salutary for us, besides 
that we all bear her a certain affection. Indeed, if I 
were assured that the king still felt any good will to- 
ward us, I would so manage matters that neither the 
Queen of England nor any other prince whatever, ex- 
cept his Most Christian Majesty, should take a bite at 
this country, at least at this province ; and with that view, 
while waiting for news from France, I will keep things 
in suspense, and spin them out as long as it is possible 
to do.” 1 

The news from France happened soon to be very con- 
elusive, and it then became difficult even for Falck to 
believe— after intelligence received of the accord between 
Henry III. and the Guises—that his Christian Majesty 
would be inclined for a bite at the Netherlands. This 
duplicity on the part of so leading a personage furnishes 
a key to much of the apparent dilatoriness on the part 
of the English government. It has been seen that 
Elizabeth, up to the last moment, could not fairly com- 
prehend the ineffable meanness of the French monarch. 
She told Ortel that she saw no reason to believe in 
that great Catholic conspiracy against herself and 
against all Protestantism which was so soon to be 
made public by the king’s edict of July, promulgated at 
the very instant of the arrival in England of the Nether- 
land envoys. When that dread fiat had gone forth, the 


1 Groen v. Prinsterer, Archives, etc., i. 14. 


392 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


most determined favorer of the French alliance could 
no longer admit its possibility, and Falck became the 
more open to that peculiar line of argument which 
Leicester had suggested with regard to one of the other 
deputies. ‘I will do my best,” wrote Walsingham, “to 
procure that Paul Buys and Falck shall receive under- 
hand some reward.” } 

Besides Menin, Falck, and Buys, were Noél de Caron, 
an experienced diplomatist; the poet-soldier Van der 
Does, heroic defender of Leyden; De Gryze, Hersolte, 
Francis Maalzoon, and three legal Frisians of pith and 
substance, Feitsma, Aisma, and Jongema*—a dozen 
Dutchmen together, as muscular champions as ever 
little republic sent forth to wrestle with all comers in 
the slippery ring of diplomacy. For it was instinctively 
felt that here were conclusions to be tried with a nation 
of deep, solid thinkers, who were aware that a great 
crisis in the world’s history had occurred, and would 
put forth their most substantial men to deal with it. 
Burghley and Walsingham, the great queen herself, 
were no feather-weights like the frivolous Henry III. 
and his minions. It was pity, however, that the discus- 
sions about to ensue presented from the outset rather 
the aspect of a hard-hitting encounter of antagonists 
than that of a frank and friendly congress between two 
great parties whose interests were identical. 

Since the death of William the Silent there was no 
one individual in the Netherlands to impersonate the 
great struggle of the provinces with Spain and Rome, 
and to concentrate upon his own head a poetical, dra- 

1 Walsingham to Davison, October 23 (November 2), 1585, 


8. P. Office MS. 
2 Wagenaer, viii. 90. 


1585] OLDEN-BARNEVELDT 393 


matic, and yet most legitimate interest. The great 
purpose of the present history must be found in its illus- 
tration of the creative power of civil and religious free- 
dom. Here was a little republic, just born into the 
world, suddenly bereft of its tutelary saint, left to its 
own resources, yet already instinct with healthy, vigor- 
ous life, and playing its difficult part among friends and 
enemies with audacity, self-reliance, and success. To a 
certain extent its achievements were anonymous, but a 
great principle manifested itself through a series of 
noble deeds. Statesmen, soldiers, patriots, came for- 
ward on all sides to do the work which was to be done, 
and those who were brought into closest contact with 
the commonwealth acknowledged in strongest language 
the signal ability with which, self-guided, she steered 
her course. Nevertheless, there was at this moment one 
Netherlander, the chief of the present mission to Eng- 
land, already the foremost statesman of his country, 
whose name will not soon be effaced from the record of 
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. That man was 
John of Olden-Barneveldt. 

He was now in his thirty-eighth year, having been 
born at Amersfoort on the 14th of September, 1547.1. He 
bore an imposing name, for the Olden-Barneveldts of 
Gelderland were a race of unquestionable and antique 
nobility. His enemies, however, questioned his right to 
the descent which he claimed. They did not dispute 
that the great-grandfather, Claas van Olden-Barneveldt, 
was of distinguished lineage and allied to many illus- 
trious houses, but they denied that Claas was really the 


1 Naeranus, Historie van het Leven en Sterven van J ohans van 
Olden-Barnevelt (1648), p. 3. Levensbeschrijving Nederslandscher 
Mannen en Vrouwen, ii. 247. 


394 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ereat-grandfather of John. John’s father, Gerritt, they 
said, was a nameless outcast, a felon, a murderer, who 
had escaped the punishment due to his crimes, but had 
dragged out a miserable existence in the downs, bur- 
rowing like a rabbit in the sand. They had also much 
to say in disparagement of all John’s connections. Not 
only was his father a murderer, but his wife, whom he 
had married for money, was the child of a most hor- 
rible incest, his sisters were prostitutes, his sons and 
brothers were debauchees and drunkards, and, in short, 
* never had a distinguished man a more uncomfortable 
and discreditable family circle than that which sur- 
rounded Barneveldt, if the report of his enemies was to 
be believed! Yet it is agreeable to reflect that, with all 
the venom which they had such power of secreting, 
these malignant tongues had been unable to destroy the 
reputation of the man himself. John’s character was 
honorable and upright, his intellectual power not dis- 
puted even by those who at a later period hated him the 
most bitterly. He had been a profound and indefati- 
gable student from his earliest youth. He had read law 
at Leyden, in France, at Heidelberg. Here, in the head- 
quarters of German Calvinism, his youthful mind had 
long pondered the dread themes of foreknowledge, judg- 
ment absolute, free will, and predestination. To believe 
it worth the while of a rational and intelligent Deity to 
create annually several millions of thinking beings, who 
were to struggle for a brief period on earth, and to con- 
sume in perpetual brimstone afterward, while others 
were predestined to endless enjoyment, seemed to him 
an indifferent exchange for a faith in the purgatory and 
paradise of Rome. Perplexed in the extreme, the youth- 


1 Gulden Legende van den Nieuwen St. Jan (1618). 


1585] A LIBERAL CHRISTIAN 395 


ful John bethought himself of an inscription over the 
gateway of his famous but questionable great-grand- 
father’s house at Amersfoort: “ Nil scire tutissima fides.”! 
He resolved thenceforth to adopt a system of igno- 
rance upon matters beyond the flaming walls of the 
world; to do the work before him manfully and faith- 
fully while he walked the earth, and to trust that a 
benevolent Creator would devote neither him nor any 
other man to eternal hell-fire. For this most offensive 
doctrine he was howled at by the strictly pious, while 
he earned still deeper opprobrium by daring to advocate 
religious toleration. In face of the endless horrors in- 
flicted by the Spanish Inquisition upon his native land, 
he had the hardihood, although a determined Protestant 
himself, to claim for Roman Catholics the right to ex- 
ercise their religion in the free states on equal terms 
with those of the Reformed faith. “Any one,” said his 
enemies, “could smell what that meant who had not a 
wooden nose.”? In brief, he was a liberal Christian, 
both in theory and practice, and he nobly confronted in, 
consequence the wrath of bigots on both sides. At a, 
later period the most zealous Calvinists called him 
“Pope John,” and the opinions to which he was to owe 
such appellations had already been formed in his mind. 

After completing his very thorough legal studies, he 
had practised as an advocate in Holland and Zealand. 
An early defender of civil and religious freedom, he had 
been brought at an early day into contact with William 
the Silent, who recognized his ability. He had borne 
a snaphance on his shoulder as a volunteer in the 


1 Naeranus, p. 5. 
2 “Waertoe dit alles soude strecken, konnen sy wel ruycken 
die geen houte neusen hebben.”—Gulden Legende, p. 33. 


396 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


memorable attempt to relieve Haarlem, and was one of 
the few survivors of that bloody night. He had stood 
outside the walls of Leyden, in company of the Prince 
of Orange, when that magnificent destruction of the 
dikes had taken place by which the city had been saved 
from the fate impending over it. At a still more recent 
period we have seen him landing from the gunboats 
upon the Kowenstyn, on the fatal 26th May. These 
military adventures were, however, but brief and acci- 
dental episodes in his career, which was that of a states- 
man and diplomatist. As pensionary of Rotterdam, he 
was constantly a member of the general assembly, and 
had already begun to guide the policy of the new com- 
monwealth. His experience was considerable, and he 
was now in the high noon of his vigor and his use- 
fulness.t 

He was a man of noble and imposing presence, with 
thick hair pushed from a broad forehead rising dome- 
like above a square and massive face; a strong, deeply 
colored physiognomy, with shaggy brow, a chill blue 
eye, not winning, but commanding, high cheek-bones, a 
solid, somewhat scornful nose, a firm mouth and chin, 
enveloped in a copious brown beard; the whole head 
not unfitly framed in the stiff, formal ruff of the period, 
and the tall, stately figure well draped in magisterial 
robes of velvet and sable—such was John of Olden- 
Barneveldt. 

The commissioners thus described arrived at Green- 
wich Stairs, and were at once ushered into the palace, a 
residence which had been much enlarged and decorated 
by Henry VIII. They were received with stately cere- 
mony. The presence-chamber was hung with Gobelin 


1 Naeranus, 1-14. Levensbeschrijving, ete., ii. 246-251. 


1585] RECEPTION AT GREENWICH 397 


tapestry, its floor strewn with rushes. Fifty gentlemen 
pensioners, with gilt battle-axes, and a throng of buf- 
fetiers, or beef-eaters, in that quaint old-world garb 
which has survived so many centuries, were in atten- 
dance, while the counselors of the queen, in their robes 
of state, waited round the throne. 

There, in close skulleap and dark flowing gown, was 
the subtle, monastic-looking Walsingham, with long, 
grave, melancholy face and Spanish eyes. There, too, 
white staff in hand, was Lord High Treasurer Burghley, 
then sixty-five years of age, with serene blue eye, large, 
smooth, pale, scarce wrinkled face and forehead; seem- 
ing, with his placid, symmetrical features and great vel- 
vet bonnet, under which such silver hairs as remained 
were soberly tucked away, and with his long, dark robes 
which swept the ground, more like a dignified gentle- 
woman than a statesman, but for the wintry beard 
which lay like a snow-drift on his ancient breast. 

The queen was then in the fifty-third year of her age, 
and considered herself in the full bloom of her beauty. 
Her garments were of satin and velvet, with fringes of 
pearls as big as beans. A small gold crown was upon 
her head, and her red hair, throughout its multiplicity 
of curls, blazed with diamonds and emeralds. Her fore- 
head was tall, her face long, her complexion fair, her 
eyes small, dark, and glittering, her nose high and 
hooked, her lips thin, her teeth black, her bosom white 
and liberally exposed. As she passed through the ante- 
chamber to the presence-hall, supplicants presented peti- 
tions upon their knees. Wherever she glanced, all 
prostrated themselves on the ground. The ery of 
“Long live Queen Elizabeth!” was spontaneous and 
perpetual; the reply, “I thank you, my good people,” 


398 THE UX JED NETHERLANDS [1585 


was constant and cordial. She spoke to various for- 
eigners in their respective languages, being mistress, 
besides the Latin and Greek, of French, Spanish, Italian, 
and German. As the commissioners were presented to 
her by Lord Buckhurst, it was observed that she was 
perpetually gloving and ungloving, as if to attract at- 
tention to her hand, which was esteemed a wonder of 
beauty. She spoke French with purity and elegance, 
but with a drawling, somewhat affected accent, saying, 
“Paar maa foi,” “ Paar le Dieeu vivaant,” and so forth, 
in a style which was ridiculed by Parisians, as she some- 
times, to her extreme annoyance, discovered.! 

Joos de Menin, pensionary of Dort, in the name of 
all the envoys, made an elaborate address. He expressed 
the gratitude which the states entertained for her past 
kindness, and particularly for the good offices rendered 
by Ambassador Davison after the death of the Prince 
of Orange, and for the deep regret expressed by her 
Majesty for their disappointment in the hopes they had 
founded upon France. 

“Since the death of the Prince of Orange,” he said, 
‘the states have lost many important cities, and now, 
for the preservation of their existence, they have need 
of a prince and sovereign lord to defend them against 
the tyranny and iniquitous oppression of the Spaniards 
and their adherents, who are more and more determined 
utterly to destroy their country, and reduce the poor 
people to a perpetual slavery worse than that of Indians, 
under the insupportable and detestable yoke of the 
Spanish Inquisition. We have felt a confidence that 
your Majesty will not choose to see us perish at the 
hands of the enemy against whom we have been obliged 


1 Du Maurier, Mémoires, 257. 


1585] SPEECH OF > NIN 399 


to sustain this long and cruel war. That war we have 
undertaken in order to preserve for the poor people 
their liberty, laws, and franchises, together with the 
exercise of the true Christian religion, of which your 
Majesty bears rightfully the title of defender, and 
against which the enemy and his allies have made so 
many leagues and devised so many ambushes and 
stratagems, besides organizing every day so many plots 
against the life of your Majesty and the safety of your 
realms—schemes which thus far the good God has 
averted for the good of Christianity and the mainte- 
nance of his churches. For these reasons, Madam, the 
states have taken a firm resolution to have recourse to 
your Majesty, seeing that it is an ordinary thing for all 
oppressed nations to apply in their calamity to neigh- 
boring princes, and especially to such as are endowed 
with piety, justice, magnanimity, and other kingly vir- 
tues. or this reason we have been deputed to offer to 
your Majesty the sovereignty over these provinces, 
under certain good and equitable conditions, having 
reference chiefly to the maintenance of the Reformed 
religion and of our ancient liberties and customs. And 
although, in the course of these long and continued 
wars, the enemy has obtained possession of many cities 
and strong places within our country, nevertheless the 
provinces of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, and Friesland 
are, thank God, still entire. And in those lands are 
many large and stately cities, beautiful and deep rivers, 
admirable seaports, from which your Majesty and your 
successors can derive much good fruit and commodity, 
of which it is scarcely necessary to make a long recital. 
This point, however, beyond the rest, merits a special 
consideration, namely, that the conjunction of those 


400 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


provinces of Holland, Zealand, Utrecht, and Friesland, 
together with the cities of Sluis and Ostend, with the 
kingdoms of your Majesty, carries with it the absolute 
empire of the great ocean, and consequently an assurance 
of perpetual felicity for your subjects. We therefore 
humbly entreat you to agree to our conditions, to accept 
the sovereign seigniory of these provinces, and conse- 
quently to receive the people of the same as your very 
humble and obedient subjects, under the perpetual safe- 
guard of your crown—a people certainly as faithful and 
loving toward their princes and sovereign lords, to 
speak without boasting, as any in all Christendom. 

“So doing, Madam, you will preserve many beautiful 
churches which it has pleased God to raise up in these 
lands, now much afflicted and shaken, and you will 
deliver this country and people—before the iniquitous 
invasion of the Spaniards so rich and flourishing by the 
great commodity of the sea, their ports and rivers, their 
commerce and manufactures, for all which they have 
such natural advantages—from ruin and perpetual 
slavery of body and soul. This will be a truly excel- 
lent work, agreeable to God, profitable to Christianity, 
worthy of immortal praise, and comporting with the 
heroic virtues of your Majesty, and insuring the pros- 
perity of your country and people. With this we pre- 
sent to your Majesty our articles and conditions, and 
pray that the King of kings may preserve you from all 
your enemies and ever have you in his holy keeping.” 1 

The queen listened intently and very courteously to 
the delivery of this address, and then made answer in 

1 Vertoog door de Gedeputeerden by monde van der Heere 


Menin den ixéen Juli, 1585, voor de Koningin gedaan, Hague Ar- 
chives MS. 


1585] REPLY OF THE QUEEN 401 


French to this effect: “GmnrLEMEN: Had I a thou- 
sand tongues I should not be able to express my obliga- 
tion to you for the great and handsome offers which you 
have just made. I firmly believe that this proceeds 
from the true zeal, devotion, and affection which you 
have always borne me, and I am certain that you have 
ever preferred me to all the princes and potentates in 
the world. Even when you selected the late Duke of 
Anjou, who was so dear to me, and to whose soul I hope 
that God has been merciful, I know that you would 
sooner have offered your country to me if I had desired 
that you should do so. Certainly I esteem it a great 
thing that you wish to be governed by me, and I feel 
so much obliged to you in consequence that I will never 
abandon you, but, on the contrary, assist you till the 
last sigh of my life. I know very well that your princes 
have treated you ill, and that the Spaniards are endea- 
voring to ruin you entirely ; but I will come to your aid, 
and I will consider what I can do, consistently with my 
honor, in regard to the articles which you have brought 
me. They shall be examined by the members of my 
council, and I promise that I will not keep you three or 
four months, for I know very well that your affairs re- 
quire haste, and that they will become ruinous if you 
are not assisted. It is not my custom to procrastinate, 
and upon this occasion I shall not dally, as others have 
done, but let you have my answer very soon.” 
Certainly, if the provinces needed a king, which they 
had most unequivocally declared to be the ease, they 
might have wandered the whole earth over, and, had it 
been possible, searched through the whole range of his- 


1 Vertoog, ete., MS. before cited. Compare Bor, ii. 635 seq. ; 
Hoofd, Vervolgh, 118. 
VOL. I.— 26 


402 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


tory, before finding a monarch with a more kingly spirit 
than the great queen to whom they had at last had 
recourse. 

Unfortunately, she was resolute in her refusal to ac- 
cept the offered sovereignty. The first interview ter- 
minated with this exchange of addresses, and the 
deputies departed in their barges for their lodgings in 
Pynchon Lane. 

The next two days were passed in perpetual confer- 
ences, generally at Lord Burghley’s house, between the 
envoys and the lords of the council, in which the accep- 
tance of the sovereignty was vehemently urged on the 
part of the Netherlanders, and steadily declined in the 
name of her Majesty. 

“Her Highness,” said Burghley, “cannot be induced, 
by any writing or harangue that you can make, to ac- 
cept the principality or proprietorship as sovereign, and 
it will, therefore, be labor lost for you to exhibit any 
writing for the purpose of changing her intention. It 
will be better to content yourselves with her Majesty’s 
consent to assist you and to take you under her pro- 
tection.” 1 

Nevertheless, two days afterward a writing was ex- 
hibited, drawn up by Menin, in which another elaborate 
effort was made to alter the queen’s determination. 
This anxiety, on the part of men already the princi- 
pal personages in a republic, to merge the independent 
existence of their commonwealth in another and a 
foreign political organism, proved, at any rate, that 
they were influenced by patriotic motives alone. It is 
also instructive to observe the intense language with 
which the necessity of a central paramount sovereignty 


1 MS. report of the envoys. Compare Bor, Hoofd, ubi sup. 


1585] MEMORIAL OF THE ENVOYS 403 


for all the provinces, and the inconveniences of the sep- 
arate states’-right principle, were urged by a deputation 
at the head of which stood Olden-Barneveldt. “ Although 
it is not becoming in us,” said they, “to inquire into 
your Majesty’s motives for refusing the sovereignty of 
our country, nevertheless we cannot help observing that 
your consent would be most profitable, as well to your 
Majesty and your successors as to the provinces them- 
selves. By your acceptance of the sovereignty the two 
peoples would be, as it were, united in one body. This 
‘would cause a fraternal benevolence between them, and 
a single reverence, love, and obedience to your Majesty. 
The two peoples being thus under the government of the 
same sovereign prince, the intrigues and practices which 
the enemy could attempt with persons under a sepa- 
rate subjection would of necessity surcease. Moreover, 
those provinces are all distinct duchies, counties, sei- 
eniories, governed by their own magistrates, laws, and 
ordinances, each by itself, without any authority or 
command to be exercised by one province over another. 
To this end they have need of a supreme power and of 
one sovereign prince or seignior, who may command all 
equally, having a constant regard to the public weal— 
considered as a generality, and not with regard to the 
profit of the one or the other individual province—and 
causing promptly and universally to be executed such 
ordinances as may be made in the matter of war or 
police, according to various emergencies. Hach prov- 
ince, on the contrary, retaining its sovereignty over its 
own inhabitants, obedience will not be so promptly and 
completely rendered to the commands of the lieutenant- 
general of your Majesty, and many a good enterprise 
and opportunity will be lost. Where there is not a 


404 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


single authority it is always found that one party en- 
deavors to usurp power over another, or to escape doing 
his duty so thoroughly as the others. And this has 
notoriously been the case in the matter of contributions, 
imposts, and similar matters.” + 

Thus much, and more of similar argument, logically 
urged, made it sufficiently evident that twenty years of 
revolt and of hard fighting against one king had not 
destroyed in the minds of the leading Netherlanders 
their conviction of the necessity of kingship. If the 
new commonwealth was likely to remain a republic, it 
was, at that moment at any rate, because they could not 
find a king. Certainly they did their best to annex 
themselves to England and to become loyal subjects of 
England’s Elizabeth. But the queen, besides other 
objections to the course proposed by the provinces, 
thought that she could do a better thing in the way 
of mortgages. In this, perhaps, there was something 
of the penny-wise policy, which sprang from one great 
defect in her character. At any rate, much mischief was 
done by the mercantile spirit which dictated the hard 
chaffering on both sides the Channel at this impor- 
tant juncture; for during this tedious flint-paring, Ant- 
werp, which might have been saved, was falling into the 
hands of Philip. It should never be forgotten, however, 
that the queen had no standing army and but a small 
revenue. The men to be sent from England to the 

1 Remonstrantie der Gedeputeerden aan H. M., in the MS. 
report before cited. Compare Bor, ubi sup., who, as an historian 
of the states’ right and republican party, seems to have been un- 
willing to give currency to the strong monarchical and centripetal 
tendencies thus expressed by men subsequently the representa- 


tives of very different doctrines, and so omits these passages 
altogether from his abstract of the report. 


1585] DISCUSSIONS WITH THE MINISTERS 405 


Netherland wars were first to be levied wherever it was 
possible to find them. In truth, many were pressed in 
the various wards of London, furnished with red coats 
and matchlocks at the expense of the citizens, and so 
despatched, helter-skelter, in small squads as opportunity 
offered.1 General Sir John Norris was already superin- 
tending these operations, by command of the queen, 
before the present formal negotiation with the states 
had begun. 

Subsequently to the 11th July, on which day the 
second address had been made to Elizabeth, the envoys 
had many conferences with Leicester, Burghley, Wal- 
singham, and other councilors, without making much 
progress. There was perpetual wrangling about figures 
and securities. 

“What terms will you pledge for the repayment of 
the moneys to be advanced?” asked Burghley and Wal- 
singham. 

“ But if her Majesty takes the sovereignty,” answered 
the deputies, “there will be no question of guaranties. 
The queen will possess our whole land, and there will 
be no need of any repayment.” 

“ And we have told you over and over again,” said 
the lord treasurer, “that her Majesty will never think 
of accepting the sovereignty. She will assist you in 
money and men, and must be repaid to the last farthing 
when the war is over, and, until that period, must have 
solid pledges in the shape of a town in each province.” ? 

Then came interrogatories as to the amount of troops 
and funds to be raised respectively by the queen and the 
states for the common cause. The provinces wished her 
Majesty to pay one third of the whole expense, while 


1 Stow, Chronicle, 708, 709. 2 MS. report. 


406 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


her Majesty was reluctant to pay one quarter. The 
states wished a permanent force to be kept on foot in 
the Netherlands of thirteen thousand infantry and two 
thousand cavalry for the field, and twenty-three thou- 
sand for garrisons. The councilors thought the last 
item too much. Then there were queries as to the ex- 
pense of maintaining a force in the provinces. The 
envoys reckoned one pound sterling, or ten florins, a 
month for the pay of each foot-soldier, including officers, 
and for the cavalry three times as much. This seemed 
reasonable, and the answers to the inquiries touching 
the expense of the war-vessels and sailors were equally 
satisfactory. Nevertheless, it was difficult to bring the 
queen up to the line to which the envoys had been lim- 
ited by their instructions. Five thousand foot and one 
thousand horse serving at the queen’s expense till the 
war should be concluded, over and above the garrisons 
for such cautionary towns as should be agreed upon— 
this was considered, by the states, the minimum. The 
queen held out for giving only four thousand foot and 
four hundred horse, and for deducting the garrisons 
even from this slender force. As guaranty for the 
expense thus to be incurred, she required that Flushing 
and Brill should be placed in her hands. Moreover, the 
position of Antwerp complicated the negotiation. Eliza- 
beth, fully sensible of the importance of preserving that 
great capital, offered four thousand soldiers to serve 
until that city should be relieved, requiring repayment 
within three months after the object should have been 
accomplished. As special guaranty for such repayment 
she required Sluis and Ostend This was sharp bar- 
gaining, but, at any rate, the envoys knew that the 


1 MS. report. 


1585] MENIN’S SECOND ADDRESS 407 


queen, though caviling to the ninth part of a hair, was 
no trifler, and that she meant to perform whatever she 
should promise. 

There was another exchange of speeches at the palace 
of Nonesuch on the 5th August, and the position of 
affairs and the respective attitudes of the queen and 
envoys were plainly characterized by the language then 
employed. 

After an exordium about the cruelty of the Spanish 
tyranny and the enormous expense entailed by the war 
upon the Netherlands, Menin, who, as usual, was the 
spokesman, alluded to the difficulty which the states at 
last felt in maintaining themselves. 

“< Five thousand foot and one thousand horse,” he said, 
“over and above the maintenance of garrisons in the 
towns to be pledged as security to your Majesty, 
seemed the very least amount of succor that would be 
probably obtained from your royal bounty. Considering 
the great demonstrations of affection and promises of 
support, made as well by your Majesty’s own letters as 
by the mouth of your ambassador Davison, and by our 
envoys De Gryze and Ortel, who have all declared pub- 
licly that your Majesty would never forsake us, the 
states sent us their deputies to this country in full con- 
fidence that such reasonable demands as we had been 
authorized to make would be satisfied.” 

The speaker then proceeded to declare that the offer 
made by the royal councilors of four thousand foot and 
four hundred horse, to serve during the war, together 
with a special force of four thousand for the relief of 
Antwerp, to be paid for within three months after the 
siege should be raised, against a concession of the cities 
of Flushing, Brill, Sluis, and Ostend, did not come 


408 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


within the limitations of the States-General. They 
therefore begged the queen to enlarge her offer to the 
number of five thousand foot and one thousand horse, 
or at least to allow the envoys to conclude the treaty 
provisionally, and subject to approval of their constit- 
uents.1 

So soon as Menin had concluded his address, her 
Majesty instantly replied, with much earnestness and 
fluency of language.? 

“Gentlemen,” she said, “I will answer you upon the 
first point, because it touches my honor. You say that 
I promised you, both by letters and through my agent 
Davison, and also by my own lips, to assist you and 
never to abandon you, and that this had moved you to 
come to me at present. Very well, masters; do you not 
think I am assisting you when I am sending you four 
thousand foot and four hundred horse to serve during 
the war? Certainly, I think yes; and I say frankly that 
I have never been wanting to my word. No man shall 
ever say with truth that the Queen of England had at 
any time and ever so slightly failed in her promises, 
whether to the mightiest monarch, to republics, to 
gentlemen, or even to private persons of the humblest 
condition. Am I, then, in your opinion, forsaking you 
when I send you English blood, which I love, and which 
is my own blood, and which I am bound to defend? It 
seems to me, no. For my part, I tell you again that I 
will never forsake you. 


1 Discours du S' Menin au nom des deputés des Provinees unies 
prononeé devant S. M. & Nonesuch le 5 @Aotit, 1585, Hague Ar- 
chives MS. 

2 Réponse de la Reine au Discours précédent, Hague Archives 
MS. 


1585] SECOND SPEECH OF THE QUEEN 409 


‘Sed de modo? That is matter for agreement. You 
are aware, gentlemen, that I have storms to fear from 
many quarters—from France, Scotland, Ireland, and 
within my own kingdom. What would be said if I 
looked only on one side, and if on that side I employed 
all my resources? No, I will give my subjects no cause 
for murmuring. I know that my councilors desire to 
manage matters with prudence; sed wtatem habeo, and 
you are to believe that, of my own motion, I have re- 
solved not to extend my offer of assistance, at present, 
beyond the amount already stated. But I don’t say 
that at another time I may not be able to do more for 
you. For my intention is never to abandon your cause, 
always to assist you, and nevermore to suffer any 
foreign nation to have dominion over you. 

“Tt is true that you present me with two places in 
each of your provinces. I thank you for them infinitely, 
and certainly it is a great offer. But it will be said 
instantly, the Queen of England wishes to embrace and 
devour everything, while, on the contrary, I only wish 
to render you assistance! I believe, in truth, that if 
other monarchs should have this offer, they would not 
allow such an opportunity to escape. Ido not let it slip 
because of fears that I entertain for any prince what- 
ever. For to think that I am not aware—doing what I 
am doing—that I am embarking in a war against the 
King of Spain, is a great mistake. I know very well 
that the succor which I am affording you will offend 
him as much as if I should do a great deal more. But 


1“, | . mais on diroit incontinent que la Royne d’Angleterre 
vouldroit embrasser et gourmander tout, et moy je ne veulx que 
vous assister et ayder,” ete.—Discours de la Royne, etc., MS. ubi 


supra. 


410 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


what care 121 Let him begin, I will answer him. For 
my part, I say again that never did fear enter my heart. 
We must all die once. I know very well that many 
princes are my enemies and are seeking my ruin, and 
that where malice is joined with force, malice often 
arrives at its ends. But I am not so feeble a princess 
that I have not the means and the will to defend myself 
against them all. They are seeking to take my life, but 
it troubles me not. He who is on high has defended me 
until this hour, and will keep me still, for in him do I 
trust. 

“ Ag to the other point, you say that your powers are 
not extensive enough to allow your acceptance of the 
offer I make you. Nevertheless, if I am not mistaken, 
I have remarked in passing—for princes look very close 
to words—that you would be content if I would give 
you money in place of men, and that your powers speak 
only of demanding a certain proportion of infantry and 
another of cavalry. I believe this would be, as you say, 
an equivalent, secundum quod. But I say this only be- 
cause you govern yourselves so precisely by the measure 
of your instructions. Nevertheless, I don’t wish to con- 
test these points with you. For very often dwm Rome 
disputatur Saguntum perit. Nevertheless, it would be 
well for you to decide; and, in any event, I do not 
think it good that you should all take your departure, 
but that, on the contrary, you should leave some of your 
number here. Otherwise it would at once be said that 
all was broken off, and that I had chosen to do nothing 
for you; and with this the bad would comfort them- 
selves, and the good would be much discouraged. 

“Touching the last point of your demand, according 


1“, . , mais il ne m’en chault.” 


1585] TREATY FOR THE RELIEF OF ANTWERP 411 


to which you desire a personage of quality, I know, 
gentlemen, that you do not always agree very well 
among yourselves, and that it would be good for you 
to have some one to effect such agreement. For this 
reason I have always intended, so soon as we should 
have made our treaty, to send a lord of name and author- 
ity to reside with you, to assist you in governing, and 
to aid with his advice in the better direction of your 
affairs. 

“Would to God that Antwerp were relieved! Cer- 
tainly I should be very glad, and very well content to 
lose all that I am now expending, if that city could be 
saved. I hope, nevertheless, if it can hold out six weeks 
longer, that we shall see something good. Already the 
two thousand men of General Norris have crossed, or 
are crossing every day by companies. I will hasten 
the rest as much as possible; and I assure you, gentle- 
men, that I will spare no diligence. Nevertheless, you 
may, if you choose, retire with my council, and see if 
together you can come to some good conclusion.” + 

Thus spoke Elizabeth, like the wise, courageous, and 
very parsimonious princess that she was. Alas! it was 
too true that Saguntum was perishing while the hig- 
gling went on at Rome. Had those two thousand under 
Sir John Norris and the rest of the four thousand but 
gone a few weeks earlier, how much happier might have 
been the result ! 

Nevertheless, it was thought in England that Antwerp 
would still hold out, and meantime a treaty for its 
relief, in combination with another for permanent as- 
sistance to the provinces, was agreed upon between 
the envoys and the lords of council. 


1 Discours de la Royne, ete., Hague Archives MS. 


412 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS {1585 


On the 12th August Menin presented himself at 
Nonesuch at the head of his colleagues, and, in a formal 
speech, announced the arrangement which had thus 
been entered into, subject to the approval of the states.t 
Again Elizabeth, whose “tongue,” in the homely phrase 
of the Netherlanders, “was wonderfully well hung,” 
replied with energy and ready eloquence. 

“You see, gentlemen,” she said, “that I have opened 
the door; that I am embarking once for all with you in 
a war against the King of Spain. Very well; I am not 
anxious about the matter. I hope that God will aid us, 
and that we shall strike a good blow in your cause. 
Nevertheless, I pray you, with all my heart, and by the 
affection you bear me, to treat my soldiers well; for they 
are my own Englishmen, whom I love as I do myself. 
Certainly it would be a great cruelty if you should treat 
them ill, since they are about to hazard their lives so 
freely in your defense, and I am sure that my request 
in this regard will be received by you as it deserves. 

“Tn the next place, as you know that I am sending, 
as commander of these English troops, an honest gentle- 
man, who deserves most highly for his experience in 
arms, so I am also informed that you have on your side 
a gentleman of great valor. I pray you, therefore, that 
good care be taken lest there be misunderstanding be- 
tween these two, which might prevent them from agree- 
ing well together when great exploits of war are to be 
taken in hand. For if that should happen—which God 
forbid—my succor would be rendered quite useless to 
you. Iname Count Hohenlo, because him alone have I 
heard mentioned. But I pray you to make the same 


1 Discours du S™ Menin, Hague Archives MS. 
2 Hoofd, Vervolgh, 119. 


1585] THIRD SPEECH OF THE QUEEN 413 


recommendation to all the colonels and gentlemen in 
your army; for I should be infinitely sad if misadven- 
tures should arise from such a cause, for your interest 
and my honor are both at stake. 

“Tn the third place, I beg you, at your return, to make 
a favorable report of me, and to thank the states, in my 
behalf, for their great offers, which I esteem so highly 
as to be unable to express my thanks. Tell them that 
I shall remember them forever. I consider it a great 
honor that from the commencement you have ever been 
so faithful to me, and that with such great constancy 
you have preferred me to all other princes, and have 
chosen me for your queen. And chiefly do I thank the 
gentlemen of Holland and Zealand, who, as I have been 
informed, were the first who so singularly loved me. 
And so on my own part I will have a special care of 
them, and will do my best to uphold them by every pos- 
sible means, as I will do all the rest who have put their 
trust in me. But I name Holland and Zealand more 
especially, because they have been so constant and faith- 
ful in their efforts to assist the rest in shaking off the 
yoke of the enemy. 

“Finally, gentlemen, I beg you to assure the states 
that I do not decline the sovereignty of your country 
from any dread of the King of Spain. For I take God 
to witness that I fear him not; and I hope, with the 
blessing of God, to make such demonstrations against 
him that men shall say the Queen of England does not 
fear the Spaniards.” ? 


1 Réponse de Sa Majesté, Hague Archives MS.: ‘‘Car je jure 
Dieu que je ne le crains pas, et espere avecq l’ayde de Dieu faire 
telle preuve contre luy, qu’on dira que la Royne d’Angleterre ne 
eraint pas les Espagnols.” 


414 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Elizabeth then smote herself upon the breast, and cried 
with great energy: “Illa que virgo viri; and is it not 
quite the same to you, even if I do not assume the sov- 
ereignty, since I intend to protect you, and since, there- 
fore, the effects will be the same? It is true that the 
sovereignty would serve to enhance my grandeur, but I 
am content to do without it, if you, upon your own part, 
will only do your duty. For myself, I promise you, in 
truth, that so long as I live, and even to my last sigh, I 
will never forsake you. Go home and tell this boldly to 
the states which sent you hither.” ! 

Menin then replied with fresh expressions of thanks 
and compliments, and requested, in conclusion, that her 
Majesty would be pleased to send, as soon as possible, a 
personage of quality to the Netherlands. 

“Gentlemen,” replied Elizabeth, “I intend to do this 
so soon as our treaty shall be ratified, for, in contrary 
case, the King of Spain, seeing your government con- 
tinue on its present footing, would do nothing but laugh 
at us. Certainly I do not mean this year to provide him 
with so fine a banquet.” 2 


1 Réponse de Sa Majesté, Hague Archives MS. 

“Et frappant sur sa poitrine dict: Illa que virgo viri. Ne vous 
est ce pas tout ung, encoires que je ne prenne pas la souverainete, 
puisque je vous veulx protecter, et que par la vous aurez les 
mesmes affectz. Il est vray que la souverainete serviroit a moy 
pour grandeur. Mais je suis bien contente de ne Vayoir pas, et 
que seulement vous faictes le debvoir requis de votre part. Car 
de ma part je vous prometz en verité, que si long temps que 
vivray, et jusques a mon dernier souspir, que je ne vous deslais- 
seray pas. Ce que pouvez hardiment asseurer et rapporter & 
Messrs. les Estatz.” 

2 “Mest ce que j’entens aussy de faire aussy tost que serons 
@accord, Car certes aultrement le Roy d@Espaigne, voiant la 


1585] NEWS OF THE FALL OF ANTWERP 415 


The envoys were then dismissed, and soon afterward 
a portion of the deputation took their departure for the 
Netherlands with the proposed treaty. It was, however, 
as we know, quite too late for Saguntum. Two days 
after the signing of the treaty, the remaining envoys 
were at the palace of Nonesuch, in conference with the 
Earl of Leicester, when a gentleman rushed suddenly 
into the apartment, exclaiming with great manifesta- 
tions of anger : 

“Antwerp has fallen! <A treaty has been signed 
with the Prince of Parma. Aldegonde is the author of 
it all; he is the culprit who has betrayed us,” with 
many more expressions of vehement denunciation.? 

The queen was disappointed, but stood firm. She had 
been slow in taking her resolution, but she was unflinch- 
ing when her mind was made up. Instead of retreating 
from her position, now that it became doubly dangerous, 
she advanced several steps nearer toward her allies. 
For it was obvious, if more precious time should be lost, 
that Holland and Zealand would share the fate of Ant- 
werp. Already the belief that, with the loss of that 
city, all had been lost, was spreading both in the prov- 


continuation de vostre gouvernement, il ne ferat que rire de nous. 
Et je ne lui veulx donner pour ceste annee si bon banequet.”—MS. 
report, Hague Archives. 

1 |. ig corts daernaar by zyne Exe uyte camer van haere 
Mat door eenen edelman den gedeputeerden doen bootschappen 
vant verlies ende overgaen der stadt van Antwerpen aen den vyand 
op zeker verdrach ofte tractaet metten Prince yan Parma 
gemaeckt. Daeraff principal autheur ende culpabel werde ge- 
houden den Heere van Sainte-Aldegonde, als de voorn. edelmann 
opentlyck ende haestich verelaerde, seggende dat de vyoorn. Al- 
degonde ons allen verraden hadde,” ete.—MS. report of the en- 
voys, Hague Archives. 


416 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


inces and in England, and Elizabeth felt that the time 
had indeed come to confront the danger. 

Meantime the intrigues of the enemy in the indepen- 
dent provinces were rife. Blunt Roger Williams wrote 
in very plain language to Walsingham, a very few days 
after the capitulation of Antwerp. 

“Tf her Majesty means to have Holland and Zealand,” 
said he, ‘she must resolve presently. Aldegonde hath 
promised the enemy to bring them to compound. Here 
arrived already his ministers which knew all his dealings 
about Antwerp from first to last. Count Maurice is 
governed altogether by Villiers, and Villiers was never 
worse for the English than at this hour. To be short, 
the people say, in general, they will accept a peace, un- 
less her Majesty do sovereign them presently. All the 
men of war will be at her Highness’s devotion, if they 
be in credit in time. What you do, it must be done 
presently, for I do assure your Honor there is large 
offers presented unto them by the enemies. If her 
Majesty deals not roundly and resolutely with them 
now, it will be too late two months hence.” 1 

Her Majesty meant to deal roundly and resolutely. 
Her troops had already gone in considerable numbers. 
She wrote encouraging letters with her own hand to the 
states, imploring them not to falter now, even though 
the great city had fallen. She had long since promised 
never to desert them, and she was, if possible, more 
determined than ever to redeem her pledge. She espe- 
cially recommended to their consideration General Nor- 
ris, commander of the forces that had been despatched 
to the relief of Antwerp. 


1 Captain Roger Williams to Walsingham, August 13 (23), 1585, 
8. P. Office MS. 


1585] SIR JOHN NORRIS 417 


A most accomplished officer, sprung of a house re- 
nowned for its romantic valor, Sir John was the second 
of the six sons of Lord Norris of Rycot, all soldiers of 
high reputation, “chickens of Mars,” as an old writer 
expressed himself. ‘Such a bunch of brethren for emi- 
nent achievement,” said he, “was never seen. So great 
their states and stomachs that they often jostled with 
others.”1 Elizabeth called their mother her “own 
crow,” ? and the darkness of her hair and visage was 
thought not unbecoming to her martial issue, by whom 
it had been inherited. Daughter of Lord Williams of 
Tame, who had been keeper of the Tower in the time of 
Elizabeth’s imprisonment, she had been affectionate and 
serviceable to the princess in the hour of her distress, 
and had been rewarded with her favor in the days of 
her grandeur. We shall often meet this crow-black 
Norris, and his younger brother, Sir Edward,—the most 
daring soldiers of their time, posters of sea and land,— 
wherever the buffeting was closest, or adventure the 
wildest on shipboard or shore, for they were men who 
combined much of the knight-errantry of a vanishing 
age with the more practical and expansive spirit of 
adventure that characterized the new epoch. 

Nor was he a stranger in the Netherlands. “The 
gentleman to whom we have committed the government 
of the forces going to the relief of Antwerp,” said Hliza- 
beth, ‘has already given you such proofs of his affection 
by the good services he has rendered you that, without 
recommendation on our part, he should stand already 
recommended. Nevertheless, in respect for his quality, 
the house from which he is descended, and the valor 

1 “Martis pulli.”—Fuller’s Worthies (ed. 1811), ii. 227-229. 

2 Thid. 

VOL. 1.—27 


418 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


which he has manifested in your own country, we desire 
to tell you that we hold him dear, and that he deserves 
also to be dear to you.” + 

When the fall of Antwerp was certain, the queen sent 
Davison, who had been for a brief period in England, 
back again to his post. ‘We have learned,” she said in 
the letter which she sent by that envoy, “ with very great 
regret of the surrender of Antwerp. Fearing lest some 
apprehension should take possession of the people’s mind 
in consequence, and that some dangerous change might 
ensue, we send you our faithful and well-beloved Davi- 
son to represent to you how much we have your affairs 
at heart, and to say that we are determined to forget 
nothing that may be necessary to your preservation. 
Assure yourselves that we shall never fail to accomplish 
all that he may promise you in our behalf.” 2 

Yet, notwithstanding the gravity of the situation, the 
thorough discussion that had taken place of the whole 
matter, and the enormous loss which had resulted from 
the money-saving insanity upon both sides, even then 
the busy devil of petty economy was not quite exorcised. 
Several precious weeks were wasted in renewed chaffer- 
ings. The queen was willing that the permanent force 
should now be raised to five thousand foot and one thou- 
sand horse, the additional sixteen hundred men being 
taken from the Antwerp relieving force, but she insisted 
that the garrisons for the cautionary towns should be 
squeezed out of this general contingent. The states, on 
the contrary, were determined to screw these garrisons 


1 Lettre de la Royne aux Etats-generaulx, August 13 (23), 1585, 
Hague Archives MS. 

* Lettre de S. M. contenante credence pour le Sieur Davison, 
August 25 (September 4), 1585, Hague Archives MS. 


1585] PARSIMONY OF ELIZABETH 419 


out of her grip as an additional subsidy. Each party 
complained with reason of the other’s closeness. No 
doubt the states were shrewd bargainers, but it would 
have been difficult for the sharpest Hollander that ever 
sent a cargo of herrings to Cadiz to force open Eliza- 
beth’s beautiful hand when she chose to shut it close. 
Walsingham and Leicester were alternately driven to 
despair by the covetousness of the one party or the 
other. 

It was still uncertain what “personage of quality” 
was to go to the Netherlands in the queen’s name to 
help govern the country. Leicester had professed his 
readiness to risk his life, estates, and reputation in the 
cause, and the states particularly desired his appoint- 
ment. “The name of your Excellency is so very agree- 
able to this people,” said they in a letter to the earl, “as 
to give promise of a brief and happy end to this grievous 
and almost immortal war.”! The queen was, or affected 
to be, still undecided as to the appointment. While 
waiting week after week for the ratifications of the 
treaty from Holland, affairs were looking gloomy at 
home, and her Majesty was growing very uncertain in 
her temper. 

“T see not her Majesty disposed to use the service of 
the Earl of Leicester,” wrote Walsingham. “TI suppose 
the lot of government will light on Lord Gray. I 
would to God the ability of his purse were answerable 
to his sufficiency otherwise.”? This was certainly a 


1 Lettre des Etats-generaux au Comte de Leicester, afin quwil 
pleust a son Ex® accepter le commandement de 8. M. pour venir 
pardega au gouvernement du pays, Hague Archives MS, 

2 Walsingham to Davison, September 5 (15), 1585, S. P. Office 
MS. 


420 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


most essential deficiency on the part of Lord Gray, and 
it will soon be seen that the personage of quality to be 
selected as chief in the arduous and honorable enterprise 
now on foot would be obliged to rely quite as much on 
that same ability of purse as upon the sufficiency of his 
brain or arm. The queen did not mean to send her 
favorite forth to purchase anything but honor in the 
Netherlands, and it was not the provinces only that were 
likely to struggle against her parsimony. Yet that 
parsimony sprang from a nobler motive than the mere 
love of pelf. Dangers encompassed her on every side, 
and while husbanding her own exchequer she was sav- 
ing her subjects’ resources. “Here we are but book- 
worms,” said Walsingham, “yet from sundry quarters 
we hear of great practices against this poor crown. The 
revolt in Scotland is greatly feared, and that out of 
hand.” 1 

Scotland, France, Spain, these were dangerous enemies 
and neighbors to a maiden queen who had a rebellious 
Ireland to deal with on one side the Channel, and 
Alexander of Parma on the other. 

Davison experienced great inconvenience and annoy- 
ance before the definite arrangements could be made. 
There is no doubt that the Spanish party had made 
great progress since the fall of Antwerp. Roger Wil 
liams was right in advising the queen to deal “ roundly 
and resolutely” with the states, and to “sovereign them 
presently.” 

They had need of being sovereigned, for it must be 
confessed that the self-government which prevailed at 
that moment was very like no government. The death 


1 Walsingham to Davison, September 5 (15), 1585, 8. P. Office 
MS. 


1585] ENERGY OF DAVISON 421 


of Orange, the treachery of Henry IIL., the triumphs of 
Parma, disastrous facts, treading rapidly upon each 
other, had produced a not very unnatural effect. The 
peace-at-any-price party was struggling hard for the 
ascendancy, and the Spanish partizans were doing their 
best to hold up to suspicion the sharp practice of the 
English queen. She was even accused of underhand 
dealing with Spain, to the disadvantage of the prov- 
inces, so much had slander, anarchy, and despair been 
able to effect. The states were reluctant to sign those 
articles with Elizabeth which were absolutely necessary 
to their salvation. 

“Tn how doubtful and uncertain terms I found things 
at my coming hither,” wrote Davison to Burghley, “how 
thwarted and delayed since for a resolution, and with 
what conditions and for what reasons I have been finally 
drawn to conclude with them as I have done, your Lord- 
ship may perceive by that I have written to Mr. Secre- 
tary. The chief difficulty has rested upon the point of 
entertaining the garrisons within the towns of assurance, 
over and besides the five thousand footmen and one 
thousand horse.” ? 

This, as Davison proceeded to observe, was considered 
a sine gua non by the states, so that, under the perilous 
circumstances in which both countries were placed, he 
had felt it his duty to go forward as far as possible to 
meet their demands. Davison always did his work 
veraciously, thoroughly, and resolutely; and it was 
seldom that his advice, in all matters pertaining to 
Netherland matters, did not prove the very best that 
could be offered. No man knew better than he the 
interests and the temper of both countries. 


1 Davison to Burghley, 24th September, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


422, THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


The imperious Elizabeth was not fond of being 
thwarted, least of all by anything savoring of the demo- 
cratic principle, and already there was much friction 
between the Tudor spirit of absolutism and the rough 
“mechanical” nature with which it was to ally itself in 
the Netherlands. The economical Elizabeth was not 
pleased at being overreached in a bargain; and, at a 
moment when she thought herself doing a magnanimous 
act, she was vexed at the caviling with which her gen- 
erosity was received. “’T is a manner of proceeding,” 
said Walsingham, “not to be allowed of, and may very 
well be termed mechanical, considering that her Majesty 
seeketh no interest in that country,—as Monsieur and 
the French king did,—but only their good and benefit, 
without regard had of the expenses of her treasure and 
the hazard of her subjects’ lives, besides throwing her. 
self into a present war for their sakes with the greatest 
prince and potentate in Europe. But seeing the gov 
ernment of those countries resteth in the hands of mer- 
chants and advocates,—the one regarding profit, the 
other standing upon vantage of quirks,—there is no 
better fruit to be looked to from them.” ! 

Yet it was, after all, no quirk in those merchants and 
advocates to urge that the queen was not going to war 
with the great potentate for their sakes alone. To 
Hlizabeth’s honor, she did thoroughly comprehend that 
the war of the Netherlands was the war of England, of 
Protestantism, and of European liberty, and that she 
could no longer, without courting her own destruction, 
defer taking a part in active military operations. It 
was no quirk, then, but solid reasoning, for the states 
to regard the subject in the same light. Holland and 


1 Walsingham to Davison, 23d October, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


1585] PROTRACTED NEGOTIATIONS 423 


England were embarked in one boat, and were to sink 
or swim together. It was waste of time to wrangle so 
fiercely over pounds and shillings, but the fault was not 
to be exclusively imputed to the one side or the other. 
There were bitter recriminations, particularly on the 
part of Elizabeth, for it was not safe to touch too closely 
either the pride or the pocket of that frugal and despotic 
heroine. “The two thousand pounds promised by the 
states to Norris upon the muster of the two thousand 
volunteers,” said Walsingham, “were not paid. Her 
Majesty is not a little offended therewith, seeing how 
little care they have to yield her satisfaction, which she 
imputeth to proceed rather from contempt than from 
necessity. If it should fall out, however, to be such as 
by them is pretended, then doth she conceive her bar- 
gain to be very ill made, to join her fortune with so 
weak and broken an estate.”1 Already there were in- 
dications that the innocent might be made to suffer for 
the shortcomings of the real culprits; nor would it be 
the first time, or by any means the last, for Davison to 
appear in the character of a scapegoat. 

“Surely, sir,” continued Mr. Secretary, “it is a thing 
greatly to be feared that the contributions they will 
yield will fall not more true in paper than in payment; 
which if it should so happen, it would turn some to 
blame, whereof you among others are to bear your 
part.” ? 

And thus the months of September and of October 
wore away, and the ratifications of the treaty had not 
arrived from the Netherlands. Elizabeth became furi- 
ous, and those of the Netherland deputation who had re- 


1 Walsingham to Davison, 23d October, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 
2 Thid. 


424 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


mained in England were at their wit’s end to appease 
her choler. No news arrived for many weeks. Those 
were not the days of steam and magnetic telegraphs,— 
inventions by which the nature of man and the aspect 
of history seem altered,—and the queen had nothing for 
it but to fret, and the envoys to concert with her minis- 
ters expedients to mitigate her spleen. Toward the end 
of the month the commissioners chartered a vessel 
which they despatched for news to Holland. On his 
way across the sea the captain was hailed on the 28th 
October by a boat, in which one Hans Wyghans was 
leisurely proceeding to England with Netherland de- 
spatches dated on the 5th of the same month. This was 
the freshest intelligence that had yet been received. 

So soon as the envoys were put in possession of 
the documents, they obtained an audience of the queen. 
This was the last day of October. Elizabeth read her 
letters, and listened to the apologies made by the depu- 
ties for the delay with anything but a benignant coun- 
tenance. Then, with much vehemence of language and 
manifestations of ill temper, she expressed her displea- 
sure at the dilatoriness of the states. Having sent so 
many troops, and so many gentlemen of quality, she 
had considered the whole affair concluded. 

“T have been unhandsomely treated,” she said, “and 
not as comports with a prince of my quality. My ineli- 
nation for your support—because you show yourselves 
unworthy of so great benefits—will be entirely destroyed, 
unless you deal with me and mine more worthily for the 
future than you have done in the past. Through my 
great and especial affection for your welfare, I had 
ordered the Earl of Leicester to proceed to the Nether- 
lands and conduct your affairs—a man of such quality 


1585] ELIZABETH’S WRATH 495 


as all the world knows, and one whom I love as if he 
were my own brother. He was getting himself ready 
in all diligence, putting himself in many perils through 
the practices of the enemy, and if I should have reason 
to believe that he would not be respected there accord- 
ing to his due, I should be indeed offended. He and 
many others are not going thither to advance their own 
affairs, to make themselves rich, or because they have 
not means enough to live magnificently at home. They 
proceed to the Netherlands from pure affection for your 
cause. This is the case, too, with many other of my 
subjects, all dear to me, and of much worth. For I 
have sent a fine heap of folk thither—in all, with those 
his Excellency is taking with him, not under ten thou- 
sand soldiers of the English nation. This is no small 
succor, and no little unbaring of this realm of mine, 
threatened as it is with war from many quarters. Yet 
I am seeking no sovereignty, nor anything else prejudi- 
cial to the freedom of your country. I wish only, in 
your utmost need, to help you out of this lamentable 
war, to maintain for you liberty of conscience, and to 
see that law and justice are preserved.” + 

All this, and more, with great eagerness of expression 
and gesture, was urged by the queen, much to the dis- 
comfiture of the envoys. In vain they attempted to 
modify and to explain. Their faltermg excuses were 
swept rapidly away upon the current of royal wrath, 
until at last Elizabeth stormed herself into exhaustion 
and comparative tranquillity. She then dismissed them 
with an assurance that her good will toward the states 
was not diminished, as would be found to be the case 

1 Brief der Gedeputeerden in England aan de Staten-Generaal, 
1st November, 1585, Hague Archives MS. 


426 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


did they not continue to prove themselves unworthy 
of her favor.t 

It was not long, however, before the whole matter 
was arranged to the satisfaction of all parties. It was 
agreed that a permanent force of five thousand foot and 
one thousand horse should serve in the provinces at the 
queen’s expense, and that the cities of Flushing and 
Brill should be placed in her Majesty’s hands until the 
entire reimbursement of the debt thus incurred by the 
states. Elizabeth also, at last overcoming her reluc- 
tance, agreed that the force necessary to garrison these 
towns should form an additional contingent, instead of 
being deducted from the general auxiliary force.” 

Count Maurice of Nassau had been confirmed by the 
states of Holland and Zealand as permanent stadholder 
of those provinces. This measure excited some suspi- 
cion on the part of Leicester, who, as it was now under- 
stood, was the “personage of quality” to be sent to the 
Netherlands as representative of the queen’s authority. 
“Touching the election of Count Maurice,” said the 
earl, “I hope it will be no impairing of the authority 
heretofore allotted to me, for if it will be, I shall tarry 
but awhile.” ® 

Nothing, however, could be more frank or chivalrously 
devoted than the language of Maurice to the queen. 

“Madam, if I have ever had occasion,” he wrote, “to 
thank God for his benefits, I confess that it was when, 
receiving in all humility the letters with which it pleased 


1 Brief der Gedeputeerden in England aan de Staten-Generaal, 
Ist November, 1585, Hague Archives MS. 

2 Report of the envoys, MS. Articles of treaty, ete., MS., 
Hague Archives. Compare Bor, ii. 664; Hoofd, Vervolgh, 123. 

3 Leicester to Davison, November 18, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 


Fay | 


{ 
i 
' 4 


1585] FRIENDLY SENTIMENTS OF MAURICE 427 


your Majesty to honor me, I learned that the great dis- 
aster of my lord and father’s death had not diminished 
the debonair affection and favor which it has always 
pleased your Majesty to manifest to my father’s house. 
It has been likewise grateful to me to learn that your 
Majesty, surrounded by so many great and important 
affairs, had been pleased to approve the command which 
the States-General have conferred upon me. I am in- 
deed grieved that my actions cannot correspond with 
the ardent desire which I feel to serve your Majesty and 
these provinces, for which I hope that my extreme youth 
will be accepted as anexeuse. And although I find my- 
self feeble enough for the charge thus imposed upon me, 
yet God will assist my efforts to supply by diligence and 
sincere intention the defect of the other qualities requi- 
site for my thorough discharge of my duty to the content- 
ment of your Majesty. To fulfil these obligations, which 
are growing greater day by day,I trust to prove by my 
actions that I will never spare either my labor or life.”1 

When it was found that the important town of Flush- 
ing was required as part of the guaranty to the queen, 
Maurice, as hereditary seignior and proprietor of the 
place during the captivity of his elder brother in Spain, 
signified his concurrence in the transfer, together with 
the most friendly feelings toward the Earl of Leicester, 
and to Sir Philip Sydney, appointed English governor 
of the town. He wrote to Davison, whom he called 
“one of the best and most certain friends that the house 
of Nassau possessed in England,” begging that he would 
recommend the interests of the family to the queen, 
“whose favor could do more than anything else in the 

1 Count Maurice to the queen, October 10 (20), 1585, S. P. 
Office MS. The letter is in French. 


428 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


world toward maintaining what remained of the dignity 
of their house.”! After solemn deliberation with his 
stepmother, Louisa de Coligny, and the other members 
of his family, he made a formal announcement of adhe- 
sion on the part of the house of Nassau to the arrange- 
ments concluded with the English government, and 
asked the benediction of God upon the treaty. While 
renouncing, for the moment, any compensation for his 
consent to the pledging of Flushing,—“ his patrimonial 
property, and a place of such great importance,”—he 
expressed a confidence that the long services of his 
father, as well as those which he himself hoped to 
render, would meet in time with “condign recognition.” 
He requested the Earl of Leicester to consider the 
friendship which had existed between himself and the 
late Prince of Orange as an hereditary affection to be 
continued to the children, and he entreated the earl to 
do him the honor in future to hold him as a son, and 
to extend to him counsel and authority; declaring, on 
his part, that he should ever deem it an honor to be 
allowed to call him father. And in order still more 
strongly to confirm his friendship, he begged Sir Philip 
Sydney to consider him as his brother and as his com- 
panion in arms, promising upon his own part the most 
faithful friendship. In the name of Louisa de Coligny 
and of his whole family, he also particularly recom- 
mended to the queen the interests of the eldest brother 
of the house, Philip William, “who had been so long 
and so iniquitously detained captive in Spain,” and 
begged that, in case prisoners of war of high rank 

1 Maurice de Nassau to Davison, 12th October, 1585, Brit. Mus., 


Galba, ¢. viii. 176%, MS. Same to pee, 25th October, 1585, Galba, 
¢. viii. 189>, MS. 


1585] AN APPEAL FOR THE HOUSE OF NASSAU 429 


should fall into the hands of the English commanders, 
they might be employed as a means of effecting the 
liberation of that much-injured prince. He likewise 
desired the friendly offices of the queen to protect the 
principality of Orange against the possible designs of the 
French monarch, and intimated that occasions might arise 
in which the confiscated estates of the family in Burgundy 
might be recovered through the influence of the Swiss 
cantons, particularly those of the Grisons and of Bern. 

And, in conclusion, in ease the queen should please— 
as both Count Maurice and the Princess of Orange de- 
sired with all their hearts—to assume the sovereignty of 
these provinces, she was especially entreated graciously 
to observe those suggestions regarding the interests of 
the house of Nassau which had been made in the ar- 
ticles of the treaty. 

Thus the path had been smoothed, mainly through the 
indefatigable energy of Davison. Yet that envoy was 
not able to give satisfaction to his imperious and some- 
what whimsical mistress, whose zeal seemed to cool in 
proportion to the readiness with which the obstacles to 
her wishes were removed. Davison was, with reason, 
discontented. He had done more than any other man, 
either in England or the provinces, to bring about a 
hearty codperation in the common cause, and to allay 
‘mutual heartburnings and suspicions. He had also, 
owing to the negligence of the English treasurer for the 
Netherlands, and the niggardliness of Elizabeth, been 
placed in a position of great financial embarrassment. 
His situation was very irksome. 

“T mused at the sentence you sent me,” he wrote, “for 


1 Louisa de Coligny and Maurice de Nassau to Earl of Leicester, 
19th October, 1585, Brit. Mus., Galba, ¢. viii. 180, MS. 


4380 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


I know no cause her Majesty hath to shrink at her 
charges hitherto. The treasure she hath yet disbursed 
here is not above five or six thousand pounds, besides 
that which I have been obliged to take up for the saving 
of her honor and necessity of her service, in danger 
otherwise of some notable disgrace. I will not, for 
shame, say how I have been left here to myself.” 1 
The delay in the formal appointment of Leicester, 

and, more particularly, of the governors for the cau- 
tionary towns, was the cause of great confusion and 
anarchy in the transitional condition of the country. 
“The burden I am driven to sustain,” said Davison, 
“doth utterly weary me. If Sir Philip Sydney were here, 
and if my Lord of Leicester follow not all the sooner, 
I would use her Majesty’s liberty to return home. If 
her Majesty think me worthy the reputation of a poor, 
honest, and loyal servant, I have that contents me. For 
the rest, I wish 

Vivere sine invidia, mollesque inglorius annos 

Exigere, amicitias et mihi jungere pares.” 
There was something almost prophetic in the tone | 
which this faithful public servant—to whom, on more 
than one occasion, such hard measure was to be dealt— 
habitually adopted in his private letters and conversa- 
tion. He did his work, but he had not his reward; and 
he was already weary of place without power, and in- 
dustry without recognition. 

“For mine own particular,” he said, “I will say with 

the poet, 

Crede mihi, bene qui latwit bene vinit, 

Et intra fortunam debet quisque manere suam.” 2 


1 Davison to ——, 11th November, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 
2 Toid. 


1585] DAVISON VEXED BY QUEEN’S CAPRICE 431 


For, notwithstanding the avidity with which Hliza- 
beth had sought the cautionary towns, and the fierce- 
ness with which she had censured the tardiness of the 
states, she seemed now half inclined to drop the prize 
which she had so much coveted, and to imitate the very 
languor which she had so lately rebuked. “She hath 
what she desired,” said Davison, “and might yet have 
more, if this content her not. Howsoever you value the 
places at home, they are esteemed here, by such as know 
them best, no little increase to her Majesty’s honor, 
surety, and greatness, if she be as careful to keep them 
as happy in getting them. Of this our cold beginning 
doth already make me jealous.” 1 

Sagacious and resolute princess as she was, she showed 
something of feminine caprice upon this grave occasion. 
Not Davison alone, but her most confidential ministers 
and favorites at home, were perplexed and provoked by 
her misplaced political coquetries. But while the alter- 
nation of her hot and cold fits drove her most devoted 
courtiers out of patience, there was one symptom that 
_ remained invariable throughout all her paroxysms, the 
rigidity with which her hand was locked. Walsingham, 
stealthy enough when an advantage was to be gained by 
subtlety, was manful and determined in his dealings 
with his friends, and he had more than once been 
offended with Elizabeth’s want of frankness in these 
transactions. 

“T find you grieved, and not without cause,” he wrote 
to Davison, “in respect to the overthwart proceedings 
as well there as here. The disorders in those countries 
would be easily redressed if we could take a thoroughly 
resolute course here—a matter that men may rather pray 


1 Davison to ——, 11th November, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


432 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ad 


for than hope for. It is very doubtful whether the ac- 
tion now in hand will be accompanied by very hard 
success, unless they of the country there may be drawn 
to bear the greatest part of the burden of the wars.” 

And now the great favorite of all had received the 
appointment which he coveted. The Earl of Leicester 
was to be commander-in-chief of her Majesty’s forces 
in the Netherlands, and representative of her authority 
in those countries, whatever that office might prove to 
be. The nature of his post was anomalous from the 
beginning. It was environed with difficulties, not the 
least irritating of which proceeded from the captious 
spirit of the queen. The earl was to proceed in great 
pomp to Holland, but the pomp was to be prepared 
mainly at his own expense. Besides the auxiliary forces 
that had been shipped during the latter period of the 
year, Leicester was raising a force of lancers, from four 
to eight hundred in number; but to pay for that levy 
he was forced to mortgage his own property, while the 
queen not only refused to advance ready money, but 
declined indorsing his bills. 

It must be confessed that the earl’s courtship of 
Elizabeth was anything at that moment but a gentle 
dalliance. In those thorny regions of finance were no 
beds of asphodel or amaranthine bowers. There was 
no talk but of troopers, saltpeter, and sulphur, of books 
of assurance and bills of exchange; and the aspect of 
Elizabeth when the budget was under discussion must 
effectually have neutralized for the time any very ten- 
der sentiment. The sharpness with which she clipped 
Leicester’s authority, when authority was indispensable 
to his dignity, and the heavy demands upon his resources 


1 Minute to Davison, 19th November, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


1585] DISSATISFACTION OF LEICESTER 433 


that were the result of her avarice, were obstacles more 
than enough to the calm fruition of his triumphs. He 
had succeeded, in appearance at least, in the great ob- 
ject of his ambition, this appointment to the Nether- 
lands; but the appointment was no sinecure, and least 
of all a promising pecuniary speculation. Elizabeth 
had told the envoys, with reason, that she was not send- 
ing forth that man whom she loved as a brother in 
order that he might make himself rich. On the contrary, 
the earl seemed likely to make himself comparatively 
poor before he got to the provinces, while his political 
power, at the moment, did not seem of more hopeful 
growth. 

Leicester had been determined and consistent in this 
great enterprise from the beginning. He felt intensely 
the importance of the crisis. He saw that the time had 
come for swift and uncompromising action, and the 
impatience with which he bore the fetters imposed upon 
him may be easily conceived. 

“The cause is such,” he wrote to Walsingham, “that 
Thad as lief be dead as be in the ease I shall be in if this 
restraint hold for taking the oath there, or if some more 
authority be not granted than I see her Majesty would 
I should have. I trust you all will hold hard for this, 
or else banish me England withal. I have sent you the 
books to be signed by her Majesty. I beseech you re- 
turn them with all haste, for I get no money till they 
be under seal.” 1 

But her Majesty would not put them under her seal, 
much to the favorite’s discomfiture. 

“Your letter yieldeth but cold answer,” he wrote two 


1 Leicester to Walsingham, 3d December, 1585, S. P. Office 


MS. 
VOL. I.—28 


434 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


days afterward. ‘“‘ Above all things yet that her Majesty 
doth stick at, I marvel most at her refusal to sign my 
book of assurance; for there passeth nothing in the 
earth against her profit by that act, nor any good to me 
but to satisfy the creditors, who were more scrupulous 
than needs. I did complain to her of those who did 
refuse to lend me money, and she was greatly offended 
with them. But if her Majesty were to stay this, if I 
were half-seas-over, I must of necessity come back 
again, for I may not go without money. I beseech, if 
the matter be refused by her, bestow a post on me to 
Harwich. I lie this night at Sir John Peters’s, and but 
for this doubt I had been to-morrow at Harwich. I 
pray God make you all that be counselors plain and 
direct to the furtherance of all good service for her 
Majesty and the realm; and if it be the will of God to 
plague us that go, and you that tarry, for our sins, yet 
let us not be negligent to seek to please the Lord.” 4 
The earl was not negligent, at any rate, in seeking to 
please the queen, but she was singularly hard to please. 
She had never been so uncertain in her humors as at 
this important crisis. She knew, and had publicly stated 
as much, that she was “embarking in a war with the 
greatest potentate in Europe”; yet now that the voyage 
had fairly commenced, and the waves were rolling 
around her, she seemed anxious to put back to the shore. 
For there was even a whisper of peace negotiations, 
than which nothing could have been more ill-timed. “I 
perceive by your message,” said Leicester to Walsing- 
ham, “that your peace with Spain will go fast on, but 
this is not the way.”2 Unquestionably it was not the 


1 Leicester to Walsingham, 5th December, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 
2 Same to same, 3d December, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


1585] SECRET CORRESPONDENCE REVEALED 435 


way, and the whisper was, for the moment at least, sup- 
pressed. Meanwhile Leicester had reached Harwich, 
but the post “bestowed on him” contained, as usual, but 
cold comfort. He was resolved, however, to go manfully 
forward and do the work before him, until the enter- 
prise should prove wholly impracticable. It is by the 
light afforded by the secret, never-published correspon- 
dence of the period with which we are now occupied 
that the true characteristics of Elizabeth, the Karl of 
Leicester, and other prominent personages must be 
scanned ; and the study is most important, for it was by 
those characteristics, in combination with other human 
elements embodied in distant parts of Christendom, that 
the destiny of the world was determined. In that age, 
more than in our own, perhaps, the influence of the indi- 
vidual was widely and intensely felt. Historical chem- 
istry is only rendered possible by a detection of the 
subtle emanations which it was supposed would forever 
elude analysis, but which survive in those secret, fre- 
quently ciphered intereommunications. Philip II., Wil- 
liam of Orange, Queen Elizabeth, Alexander Farnese, 
Robert Dudley, never dreamed, when disclosing their 
inmost thoughts to their trusted friends at momentous 
epochs, that the day would come on earth when those 
secrets would be no longer hid from the patient inquirer 
after truth. Well for those whose reputations before 
the judgment-seat of history appear even comparatively 
pure after impartial comparison of their motives with 
their deeds. 

“For mine own part, Mr. Secretary,” wrote Leicester, 
“IT am resolved to do that which shall be fit for a poor 
man’s honor, and honestly to obey her Majesty’s com- 
mandment. Let the rest fall out to others, it shall not 


436 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


concern me. I mean to assemble myself to the camp, 
where my authority must wholly lie, and will there do 
that which in good reason and duty I shall be bound to 
do. JI am sorry that her Majesty doth deal in this sort 
and is content to overthrow so willingly her own cause. If 
there can be means to salve this sore, I will. If not—I 
tell you what shall become of me, as truly as God 
lives.” 

Yet it is remarkable that, in spite of this dark inti- 
mation, the earl, after all, did not state what was to 
become of him if the sore was not salved. He was, 
however, explicit enough as to the causes of his grief, 
and very vehement in its manifestations. “Another 
matter which shall concern me deeply,” he said, “and 
all the subjects there, is now by you to be carefully con- 
sidered, which is—money. I find that the money is 
already gone, and this now given to the treasurer will 
do no more than pay to the end of the month. I beseech 
you look to it, for, by the Lord! I will bear no more so 
miserable burdens; for if I have no money to pay them, 
let them come home, or what else. I will not starve 
them, nor stay them. There was never gentleman nor 
general so sent out as I am; and if neither queen nor 
council care to help it, but leave men desperate, as I see 
men shall be, that inconvenience will follow which I 
trust in the Lord I shall be free of.” 2 

He then used language about himself singularly re- 
sembling the phraseology employed by Elizabeth con- 
cerning him when she was scolding the Netherland 
commissioners for the dilatoriness and parsimony of 
the states. 


1 Leicester to Walsingham, 5th December, 1585, S. P. Office MS. 
2 Thid. 


1585] LEICESTER’S VEHEMENT COMPLAINTS 437 


‘For mine own part,” he said, “I have taken upon 
me this voyage, not as a desperate nor forlorn man, but 
as one as well contented with his place and calling at 
home as any subject was ever. My cause was not, nor 
is, any other than the Lord’s and the queen’s. If the 
queen fail, yet must I trust in the Lord, and on him, I 
see, I am wholly to depend. I can say no more, but pray 
to God that her Majesty never send general again as I 
am sent. And yet I will do what I can for her and my 
country.” 1 

The earl had raised a choice body of lancers to accom- 
pany him to the Netherlands, but the expense of the 
levy had come mainly upon his own purse. The queen 
had advanced five thousand pounds, which was much 
less than the requisite amount, while for the balance 
required, as well as for other necessary expenses, she 
obstinately declined to furnish Leicester with funds, 
even refusing him, at last, a temporary loan. She 
violently accused him of cheating her, reclaimed money 
which he had wrung from her on good security, and 
when he had repaid the sum, objected to give him a 
discharge. As for receiving anything by way of salary, 
that was quite out of the question. At that moment he 
would have been only too happy to be reimbursed for 
what he was already out of pocket. Whether Elizabeth 
loved Leicester as a brother, or better than a brother, 
may be a historical question, but it is no question at all 
that she loved money better than she did Leicester. 
Unhappy the man, whether foe or favorite, who had 
pecuniary transactions with her Highness. 

“T am sorry,” said the earl, “that her Majesty hath 
so hard a conceit of me that I should go about to cozen 


1 Leicester to Walsingham, 5th December, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


438 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


her, as though I had got a fee simple from her, and had it 
not before, or that I had not had her full release for pay- 
ment of the money I borrowed. I pray God any that 
did put such seruple in her have not deceived her more 
than Ihave done. I thank God I have a clear conscience 
for deceiving her, and for money matters. I think 
I may justly say I have been the only cause of more 
gain to her coffers than all her checkermen have been. 
But so is the hap of some, that all they do is nothing, 
and others that do nothing do all, and have all the 
thanks. But I would this were all the grief I carry 
with me; but God is my comfort, and on him I 
cast all, for there is no surety in this world besides. 
What hope of help can I have, finding her Majesty so 
strait with myself as she is? I did trust that, the 
cause being hers and this realm’s, if I could have gotten 
no money of her merchants, she would not have refused 
to have lent money on so easy-prized land as mine, to 
have been gainer and no loser by it. Her Majesty, I 
see, will make trial of me how I love her, and what will 
discourage me from her service. But resolved am I 
that no worldly respect shall draw me back from my 
faithful discharge of my duty toward her, though she 
shall show to hate me, as it goeth very near, for I find 
no love or favor at all. And I pray you to remember 
that I have not had one penny of her Majesty toward 
all these charges of mine,—not one penny,—and, by all 
truth, I have already laid out above five thousand 
pounds. Her Majesty appointed eight thousand pounds 
for the levy, which was after the rate of four hun- 
dred horse, and, upon my fidelity, there is shipped 
of horse of service eight hundred, so that there ought 
eight thousand more to have been paid me. No general 


1585] THE QUEEN’S AVARICE 439 


that ever went that was not paid to the uttermost of 
these things before he went, but had cash for his pro- 
vision, which her Majesty would not allow me—not one 
groat. Well, let all this go; it is like I shall be the last 
shall bear this, and some must suffer for the people. 
Good, Mr. Secretary, let her Majesty know this, for I 
deserve God-a-mercy at the least.” 4 

Leicester, to do him justice, was thoroughly alive to 
the importance of the crisis. On political principle, at 
any rate, he was a firm supporter of Protestantism, and 
even of Puritanism, a form of religion which Elizabeth 
detested, and in which, with keen instinct, she detected 
a mutinous element against the divine right of kings. 
The earl was quite convinced of the absolute necessity 
that England should take up the Netherland matter 
most vigorously, on pain of being herself destroyed. 
All the most sagacious counselors of Elizabeth were day 
by day more and more confirmed in this opinion, and 
were inclined heartily to support the new lieutenant- 
general. As for Leicester himself, while fully conscious 
of his own merits, and of his firm intent to do his duty, 
he was also grateful to those who were willing to be- 
friend him in his arduous enterprise. 

“J have received a letter from my Lord Willoughby,” 
he said, ‘to my seeming as wise a letter as I have read 
a great while, and not unfit for her Majesty’s sight. I 
pray God open her eyes, that they may behold her 
present estate indeed, and the wonderful means that God 
doth offer unto her. If she lose these opportunities, who can 
look for other but dishonor and destruction ? My lord 
treasurer hath also written me a most hearty and com- 
fortable letter touching this voyage, not only in show- 


1 Leicester to Walsingham, 7th December, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


440 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


ing the importance of it, both for her Majesty’s own 
safety and the realm’s, but that the whole state of religion 
doth depend thereon, and therefore doth faithfully promise 
his whole and best assistance for the supply of all wants. 
I was not a little glad to receive such a letter from him 
at this time.” 1 

And from on board the Amity, ready to set sail, he 
expressed his thanks to Burghley at finding him so 
“earnestly bent for the good supply and maintenance 
of us poor men sent in her Majesty’s service and our 
country’s.” 2 

As for Walsingham, earnestly a defender of the 
Netherland cause from the beginning, he was wearied 
and disgusted with fighting against the queen’s parsimony 
and caprice. “He is utterly discouraged,” said Leicester 
to Burghley, “to deal any more in these causes. I pray 
God your Lordship grow not so too; for then all will to 
the ground, on my poor side especially.” 3 

And to Sir Francis himself he wrote, even as his 
vessel was casting off her moorings. “I am sorry, Mr. 
Secretary,” he said, “to find you so discouraged, and 
that her Majesty doth deem you so partial. And yet 
my suits to her Majesty have not of late been so many 
nor great, while the greatest, I am sure, are for her 
Majesty’s own service. For my part, I will discharge my 
duty as far as my poor ability and capacity shall serve, 
and if I shall not have her gracious and princely sup- 
port and supply, the lack will be to us for the present, 
but the shame and dishonor will be hers,” 4 


! Leicester to Walsingham, 7th December, 1585, 8. P. Office MS, 
2 Leicester to Burghley, 9th December, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 
3 Thid. 

* Leicester to Walsingham, 9th December, 1585, 8. P. Office MS. 


1585] PERPLEXITY OF DAVISON 441 


And with these parting words the earl committed him- 
self to the December seas. 

Davison had been meantime doing his best to prepare 
the way in the Netherlands for the reception of the Eng- 
lish administration. What man could do, without 
money and without authority, he had done. The 
governors for Flushing and Brill, Sir Philip Sydney 
and Sir Thomas Cecil, eldest son of Lord Burghley, had 
been appointed, but had not arrived. Their coming was 
anxiously looked for, as during the interval the con- 
dition of the garrisons was deplorable. The English 
treasurer, by some unaccountable and unpardonable 
negligence, for which it is to be feared the queen was 
herself to blame, was not upon the spot, and Davison 
was driven out of his wits to devise expedients to save 
the soldiers from starving. 

“Your Lordship has seen by my former letters,” wrote 
the ambassador to Burghley from Flushing, “what shift 
I have been driven to for the relief of this garrison 
here, left @ ?abandon, without which mean they had all 
fallen into wild and shameful disorder, to her Majesty’s 
great disgrace and overthrow of her service. I am 
compelled, unless I would see the poor men famish and 
her Majesty dishonored, to try my poor credit for 
them.” 1 

General Sir John Norris was in the Betuwe, threaten- 
ing Nimwegen, a town which he found “not so flexible 
as he had hoped,’? and as he had but two thousand 
men, while Alexander Farnese was thought to be 
marching upon him with ten thousand, his position 
caused great anxiety. Meantime his brother, Sir 

1 Davison to Burghley, 11th November, 1585, Brit. Mus., Galba, 
¢. viii. p. 217, MS. 2 Thid. 


442 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Edward, a hot-headed and somewhat wilful young man, 
who “thought that all was too little for him,” was 
giving the sober Davison a good deal of trouble. He 
had got himself into a quarrel both with that envoy 
and with Roger Williams by claiming the right to con- 
trol military matters in Flushing until the arrival of 
Sydney. “If Sir Thomas and Sir Philip,” said Davison, 
“do not make choice of more discreet, staid, and expert 
commanders than those thrust into these places by Mr. 
Norris, they will do themselves a great deal of worry 
and her Majesty a great deal of hurt.” 2 

As might naturally be expected, the lamentable con- 
dition of the English soldiers, unpaid and starving,— 
according to the report of the queen’s envoy himself,— 
exercised anything but a salutary influence upon the 
minds of the Netherlanders, and perpetually fed the 
hopes of the Spanish partizans that a composition with 
Philip and Parma would yet take place. On the other 
hand, the states had been far more liberal in raising 
funds than the queen had shown herself to be, and were 
somewhat indignant at being perpetually taunted with 
parsimony by her agents. Davison was offended by the 
injustice of Norris in this regard. “The complaints 
which the general hath made of the states to her 
Majesty,” said he, “are without eause, and I think, 
when your Lordship shall examine it well, you will find 
it no little sum they have already disbursed unto him 
for their part. Wherein, nevertheless, if they had been 
looked into, they were somewhat the more excusable, 
considering how ‘ill our people at her Majesty’s en- 

1 Davison to Burghley, 11th November, 1585, Brit. Mus., Galba, 
c. viii. p. 217, MS. 

2 Davison to Burghley, MS. last cited. 


1585] MANIFESTO OF ELIZABETH 443 


tertainment were satisfied hitherto—a thing that doth 
much prejudice her reputation and hurt her service.” 1 

At last, however, the die had been cast. The queen, 
although rejecting the proposed sovereignty of the 
Netherlands, had espoused their cause by solemn treaty 
of alliance, and thereby had thrown down the gauntlet 
to Spain. She deemed it necessary, therefore, out of 
respect for the opinions of mankind, to issue a manifesto 
of her motives to the world. The document was pub- 
lished simultaneously in Dutch, French, English, and 
Italian.? 

In this solemn state paper she spoke of the respon- 
sibility of princes to the Almighty, of the ancient 
friendship between England and the Netherlands, of 
the cruelty and tyranny of the Spaniards, of their viola- 
tion of the liberties of the provinces, of their hanging, 
beheading, banishing, without law and against justice, in 
the space of a few months, so many of the highest nobles 
in the land. Although in the beginning of the eruel 
persecution the pretext had been the maintenance of 
the Catholic religion, yet it was affirmed they had not 
failed to exercise their barbarity upon Catholics also, 
and even upon ecclesiastics. Of the principal persons 
put to death, no one, it was asserted, had been more 
devoted to the ancient Church than was the brave Count 
Egmont, who for his famous victories in the service of 
Spain could never be forgotten in veracious history any 
more than could be the cruelty of his execution. 

The land had been made desolate, continued the 
queen, with fire, sword, famine, and murder. These 
misfortunes had ever been bitterly deplored by friendly 


1 Davison to Burghley, MS. last cited. 
2 The Declaration is given in Bor, ii. 667-671. 


444 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


nations, and none could more truly regret such suffer- 
ings than did the English, the oldest allies and familiar 
neighbors of the provinces, who had been as close to 
them in the olden time, by community of connection and 
language, as man and wife. She declared that she had 
frequently, by amicable embassies, warned her brother 
of Spain—speaking to him lke a good, dear sister and 
neighbor—that unless he restrained the cruelty of his 
governors and their soldiers, he was sure to force his 
provinces into allegiance to some other power. She ex- 
pressed the danger in which she should be placed if the 
Spaniards succeeded in establishing their absolute 
government in the Netherlands, from which position 
their attacks upon England would be incessant. She 
spoke of the enterprise favored and set on foot by the 
pope and by Spain against the kingdom of Ireland. 
She alluded to the dismissal of the Spanish envoy, Don 
Bernardino de Mendoza, who had been treated by her 
with great regard for a long time, but who had been 
afterward discovered in league with certain ill-disposed 
and seditious subjects of hers, and with publicly con- 
demned traitors. That envoy had arranged a plot 
according to which, as appeared by his secret despatches, 
an invasion of England by a force of men coming partly 
from Spain and partly from the Netherlands might be 
successfully managed, and he had even noted down the 
necessary number of ships and men, with various other 
details. Some of the conspirators had fled, she ob- 
served, and were now consorting with Mendoza, who, 
after his expulsion from England, had been appointed 
ambassador in Paris, while some had been arrested and 
had confessed the plot. So soon as this envoy had been 
discovered to be the chief of a rebellion and projected 


1585] MANIFESTO OF ELIZABETH 445 


invasion, the queen had requested him, she said, to 
leave the kingdom within a reasonable time, as one who 
was the object of deadly hatred to the English people. 
She had then sent an agent to Spain in order to explain 
the whole transaction. That agent had not been allowed 
even to deliver despatches to the king. 

When the French had sought, at a previous period, 
to establish their authority in Scotland, even as the 
Spaniards had attempted to do in the Netherlands, and 
through the enormous ambition of the house of Guise 
to undertake the invasion of her kingdom, she had 
frustrated their plots, even as she meant to suppress 
these Spanish conspiracies. She spoke of the Prince of 
Parma as more disposed by nature to mercy and 
humanity than preceding governors had been, but as 
unable to restrain the bloodthirstiness of Spaniards, 
increased by long indulgence. She avowed, in assum- 
ing the protection of the Netherlands, and in sending 
her troops to those countries, but three objects: peace, 
founded upon the recognition of religious freedom in 
the provinces; restoration of their ancient political 
liberties; and security for England. Never could there 
be tranquillity for her own realm until these neighbor- 
ing countries were tranquil. These were her ends and 
aims, despite all that slanderous tongues might invent. 
The world, she observed, was overflowing with blasphe- 
mous libels, calumnies, scandalous pamphlets, for never 
had the devil been so busy in supplying evil tongues 
with venom against the professors of the Christian 
religion. 

She added that in a pamphlet, ascribed to the Arch- 
bishop of Milan, just published, she had been aceused 
of ingratitude to the King of Spain, and of plots to 


446 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


take the life of Alexander Farnese. In answer to the 
first charge, she willingly acknowledged her obligations 
to the King of Spain during the reign of her sister. 
She pronounced it, however, an absolute falsehood that 
he had ever saved her life, as if she had ever been con- 
demned to death. She likewise denied earnestly the 
charge regarding the Prince of Parma. She protested 
herself incapable of such a crime, besides declaring that 
he had never given her offense. On the contrary, he 
was a man whom she had ever honored for the rare 
qualities that she had noted in him, and for which he 
had deservedly acquired a high reputation.! 

Such, in brief analysis, was the memorable Declara- 
tion of Elizabeth in favor of the Netherlands, a docu- 
ment which was a hardly disguised proclamation of 
war against Philip. In no age of the world could an 
unequivocal agreement to assist rebellious subjects with 
men and money against their sovereign be considered 
otherwise than as a hostile demonstration. The King 
of Spain so regarded the movement, and forthwith 
issued a decree ordering the seizure of all English, as 
well as all Netherland, vessels within his ports, together 
with the arrest of persons and confiscation of property. 

Subsequently to the publication of the queen’s 
memorial, and before the departure of the Earl of 
Leicester, Sir Philip Sydney, having received his 
appointment, together with the rank of general of 
cavalry, arrived in the isle of Walcheren as governor 
of Flushing, at the head of a portion of the English 
contingent. 

It is impossible not to contemplate with affection so 
radiant a figure, shining through the cold mists of that 


1 Declaration, ubi sup. 


15851 SIR PHILIP SYDNEY 447 


Zealand winter, and that distant and disastrous epoch. 
There is hardly a character in history upon which the 
imagination can dwell with more unalloyed delight. 
Not in romantic fiction was there ever created a more 
attractive incarnation of martial valor, poetic genius, 
and purity of heart. If the mocking spirit of the 
soldier of Lepanto could “smile chivalry away,” the 
name alone of his English contemporary is potent 
enough to conjure it back again so long as humanity is 
alive to the nobler impulses. 

“T cannot pass him over in silence,” says a dusty 
chronicler, “that glorious star, that lively pattern of 
virtue, and the lovely joy of all the learned sort. It 
was God’s will that he should be born into the world, 
even to show unto our age a sample of ancient virtue.” 
The descendant of an ancient Norman race, and allied 
to many of the proudest nobles in England, Sydney him- 
self was but a commoner, a private individual, a soldier 
of fortune. He was now in his thirty-second year, and 
should have been foremost among the statesmen of 
Elizabeth, had it not been, according to Lord Bacon, 
a maxim of the Cecils that “able men should be by 
design and of purpose suppressed.” Whatever of truth 
there may have been in the bitter remark, it is certainly 
strange that a man so gifted as Sydney—of whom his 
father-in-law Walsingham had declared that, “although 
he had influence in all countries, and a hand upon all 
affairs, his Philip did far overshoot him with his own 
bow”1—should have passed so much of his life in 
retirement, or in comparatively insignificant employ- 
ments. The queen, as he himself observed, was most 
apt to interpret everything to his disadvantage. Among 


1 Camden’s Britannia (1637), p. 329. 


448 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


those who knew him well there seems never to have 
been a dissenting voice. His father, Sir Henry Sydney, 
lord deputy of Ireland and president of Wales, a states- 
man of accomplishments and experience, called him 
“lumen familize sue,’ and said of him, with pardon- 
able pride, “that he had the most virtues which he had 
ever found in any man; that he was the very formula 
that all well-disposed young gentlemen do form their 
manners and life by.” The learned Hubert Languet, 
companion of Melanchthon, tried friend of William the 
Silent, was his fervent admirer and correspondent. The 
great Prince of Orange held him in high esteem, and 
sent word to Queen Elizabeth that, having himself been 
an actor in the most important affairs of Europe, and 
acquainted with her foremost men, he could “pledge 
his credit that her Majesty had one of the ripest and 
greatest councilors of state in Sir Philip Sydney that 
lived in Europe.” ? 

The incidents of his brief and brillant life, up to his 
arrival upon the fatal soil of the Netherlands, are too 
well known to need recalling. Adorned with the best 
culture that in a learned age could be obtained in the 
best seminaries of his native country, where during 
childhood and youth he had been distinguished for a 
“lovely and familiar gravity beyond his years,” ® he rap- 
idly acquired the admiration of his comrades and the 
esteem of all his teachers. 

Traveling for three years, he made the acquaintance 
and gained the personal regard of such opposite 


1 Life of Sydney, by Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke, edited by Sir 
EK. Brydges, p. 23. 

2 Sydney Papers, edited by Collins, i. 246. 

3 Brooke, p. 16 seq. 


1585] SIR PHILIP SYDNEY 449 


characters as Charles IX. of France, Henry of Navarre, 
Don John of Austria, and William of Orange, and 
perfected his accomplishments by residence and study, 
alternately in courts, camps, and learned universities. 
He was in Paris during the memorable days of August, 
1572, and narrowly escaped perishing in the St. 
Bartholomew massacre. On his return he was for a 
brief period the idol of the English court, which, it was 
said, “was maimed without his company.”! At the 
age of twenty-one he was appointed special envoy to 
Vienna, ostensibly for the purpose of congratulating 
the Emperor Rudolph upon his accession, but in reality 
that he might take the opportunity of sounding the 
secret purposes of the Protestant princes of Germany in 
regard to the great contest of the age. In this mission, 
young as he was, he acquitted himself not only to the 
satisfaction but to the admiration of Walsingham, 
certainly a master himself in that occult science, the 
diplomacy of the sixteenth century. “There hath not 
been,” said he, “any gentleman, I am sure, that hath 
gone through so honorable a charge with as great com- 
mendations as he.” ? 

When the memorable marriage project of Queen 
Elizabeth with Anjou seemed about to take effect, he 
denounced the scheme in a most spirited and candid 
letter addressed to her Majesty; nor is it recorded that 
the queen was offended with his frankness. Indeed, we 
are informed that “although he found a sweet stream 
of sovereign humors in that well-tempered lady to run 
against him, yet found he safety in herself against that 
selfness which appeared to threaten him in her.”? 

1 Fuller’s Worthies, i. 499 (ed. 1811). 

2 Naunton, Regalia, p. 63. 3 Brooke, p. 51. 

VOL. I.—29 


450 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


Whatever this might mean, translated out of euphuism 
into English, it is certain that his conduct was regarded 
with small favor by the court grandees, by whom 
“worth, duty, and justice were looked upon with no 
other eyes than Lamia’s.” + 

The difficulty of swimming against that sweet stream 
of sovereign humors in the well-tempered Elizabeth 
was aggravated by his quarrel, at this period, with the 
magnificent Oxford. A dispute at a tennis-court, where 
many courtiers and foreigners were looking on, pro- 
ceeded rapidly from one extremity to another. The 
earl commanded Sir Philip to leave the place. Sir 
Philip responded that if he were of a mind that he 
should go, he himself was of a mind that he should 
remain, adding that if he had entreated where he had 
no right to command, he might have done more than 
“with the scourge of fury.” “This answer,” says Fulke 
Greville, in a style worthy of Don Adriano de Armado, 
“did, like a bellows blowing up the sparks of excess 
already kindled, make my lord scornfully call Sir Philip 
by the name of puppy, in which progress of heat, as 
the tempest grew more and more vehement within, so 
did their hearts breathe out their perturbations in a 
more loud and shrill accent”; 2 and so on; but the im- 
pending duel was the next day forbidden by express 
command of her Majesty. Sydney, not feeling the full 
force of the royal homily upon the necessity of great 
deference from gentlemen to their superiors in rank, in 
order to protect all orders from the insults of plebeians, 
soon afterward retired from the court. To his sylvan 
seclusion the world owes the pastoral and chivalrous 
romance of the “ Arcadia,” and to the pompous earl, in 


1 Brooke, p. 51. 2 Thid., p. 53. 


1585] SIR PHILIP SYDNEY 451 


consequence, an emotion of gratitude. Nevertheless, it 
was in him to do, rather than to write, and humanity 
seems defrauded when forced to accept the “ Arcadia,” 
the “Defence of Poesie,” and the “Astrophel and 
Stella,” in discharge of its claims upon so great and 
pure a soul. 

Notwithstanding this disagreeable affair, and despite 
the memorable letter against Anjou, Sir Philip suddenly 
flashes upon us again as one of the four challengers in 
a tournament to honor the duke’s presence in England. 
A vision of him in blue gilded armor, with horses 
caparisoned in cloth of gold, pearl-embroidered, attended 
by pages in cloth of silver, Venetian hose, laced hats, 
and by gentlemen, yeomen, and trumpeters, in yellow 
velvet cassocks, buskins, and feathers, as one of “the 
four fostered children of virtuous desire” (to wit, 
Anjou) storming “the castle of perfect Beauty”? (to 
wit, Queen Elizabeth, wtatis 47), rises out of the cloud- 
dusts of ancient chronicle for a moment, and then 
vanishes into air again. 

Having that day his hand, his horse, his lance, 
Guided so well that they attained;the prize 


Both in the judgment of our English eyes, 
But of some sent by that sweet enemy, France, 


as he chivalrously sings, he soon afterward felt in- 
clined for wider fields of honorable adventure. It was 
impossible that knight errant so true should not feel 
keenest sympathy with an oppressed people struggling 
against such odds, as the Netherlanders were doing in 
their contest with Spain. So soon as the treaty with 
England was arranged, it was his ambition to take part 


1 Stow’s Continuation of Holinshed, iv. 436 seq. 


452 THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


in the dark and dangerous enterprise, and being son-in- 
law to Walsingham and nephew to Leicester, he had a 
right to believe that his talents and character would, on 
this occasion, be recognized. But like his “very friend” 
Lord Willoughby, he was “not of the genus Reptilia, 
and could neither creep nor crouch,”! and he failed, as 
usual, to win his way to the queen’s favor. The 
governorship of Flushing was denied him, and stung to 
the heart by such neglect, he determined to seek his 
fortune beyond the seas. 

“Sir Philip hath taken a very hard resolution,” 
wrote Walsingham to Davison, “to accompany Sir 
Francis Drake in this voyage, moved thereto for that 
he saw her Majesty disposed to commit the charge of 
Flushing unto some other, which he reputed would fall 
out greatly to his disgrace to see another preferred be- 
fore him, both for birth and judgment inferior unto him. 
The despair thereof and the disgrace that he doubted 
he should receive have carried him into a different 
course.” 2 

The queen, however, relenting at last, interfered to 
frustrate his design. Having thus balked his ambition 
in the Indian seas, she felt pledged to offer him the 
employment which he had originally solicited, and she 
accordingly conferred upon him the governorship of 
Flushing, with the rank of general of horse under the 
Earl of Leicester. In the latter part of November he 
east anchor, in the midst of a violent storm, at Ram- 
mekens, and thence came to the city of his government. 
Young, and looking even younger than his years; “not 
only of an excellent wit, but extremely beautiful of 

1 Naunton, Regalia, p. 66. 

2 Walsingham to Davison, 13th September, 1585, 8. P. Office MS, 


1585] SIR PHILIP SYDNEY 453 


face,” 1 with delicately chiseled Anglo-Norman features, 
smooth, fair cheek, a faint mustache, blue eyes, and a 
mass of amber- elo hair—such was the author of 
“ Arcadia” and the governor of Flushing. 

And thus an Anglo-Norman representative of ancient 
race had come back to the home of his ancestors. 
Scholar, poet, knight errant, finished gentleman, he 
aptly typified the result of seven centuries of civilization 
upon the wild Danish pirate. For among those very 
quicksands of storm-beaten Walachria that wondrous 
Normandy first came into existence whose wings were 
to sweep over all the high places of Christendom. Out 
of these creeks, lagunes, and almost inaccessible sand- 
banks, those bold freebooters sailed forth on their 
forays against England, France, and other adjacent 
countries, and here they brought and buried the booty 
of many a wild adventure. Here, at a later day, Rollo 
the Dane had that memorable dream of leprosy,? the eure 
of which was the conversion of North Gaul into Nor- 
mandy, of pagans into Christians, and the subsequent 
conquest of every throne in Christendom from Ultima 
Thule to Byzantium. And now the descendant of those 
early freebooters had come back to the spot at a mo- 
ment when a wider and even more imperial swoop 
was to be made by their modern representatives. For 
the sea-kings of the sixteenth century,—the Drakes, 
Hawkinses, Frobishers, Raleighs, Cavendishes, the De 
Moors, Heemskerks, Barentzs,—all sprung of the old 
pirate lineage, whether called Englanders or Holland- 
ers, and instinct with the same hereditary love of adven- 
ture, were about to wrestle with ancient tyrannies, to 


1 Expression of Aubrey, cited by Gray, Life of Sydney, 61. 
2 Guicciardini, Description de tous les Pays-Bas, p. 354. 


ABA THE UNITED NETHERLANDS [1585 


explore the most inaccessible regions, and to establish 
new commonwealths in worlds undreamed of by their 
ancestors—to accomplish, in short, more wondrous feats 
than had been attempted by the Knuts and Rollos, 
Ruriks, Rogers, and Tanereds, of an earlier age. 

The place which Sydney was appointed to govern was 
one of great military and commercial importance. 
Flushing was the key to the navigation of the North 
Sea ever since the disastrous storm of a century be- 
fore, in which a great trading city on the outermost 
verge of the island had been swallowed bodily by the 
ocean.! The emperor had so thoroughly recognized its 
value as to make special mention of the necessity for its 
preservation in his private instructions to Philip, and 
now the Queen of England had confided it to one who 
was competent to appreciate and to defend the prize. 
“Wow great a jewel this place [Flushing] is to the 
crown of England,” wrote Sydney to his uncle Leicester, 
‘and to the queen’s safety, I need not now write it to 
your Lordship, who knows it so well. Yet I must needs 
say, the better I know it, the more I find the preciousness 
Obeiiae 

He did not enter into his government, however, with 
much pomp and circumstance, but came afoot into 
Flushing in the midst of winter and foul weather. 
“Driven to land at Rammekens,” said he, ‘because the 
wind began to rise in such sort as our mariners durst 
not enter the town, I came from thence with as dirty a 
walk as ever poor governor entered his charge withal.”® 


1 Guicciardini, in voce. 

2 Sir P. Sydney to Earl of Leicester, 22d November, 1585, Brit. 
Mus., Galba, ¢. viii. p. 213, MS. 

3 Thid. 


1585] SIR PHILIP’S ARRIVAL AT FLUSHING 455 


But he was cordially welcomed, nor did he arrive by any 
means too soon. 

“T find the people very glad of our coming,” he said, 
“and promise myself as much surety in keeping this 
town as popular good will, gotten by light hopes, and 
by as slight conceits, may breed; for indeed the garri- 
son is far too weak to command by authority, which is 
pity... . I think, truly, that if my coming had been 
longer delayed, some alteration would have followed; 
for the truth is, this people is weary of war, and if they 
do not see such a course taken as may be likely to de- 
fend them, they will in a sudden give over the cause. 

. All will be lost if government be not presently 
used.” ? 

He expressed much anxiety for the arrival of his uncle, 
with which sentiments he assured the earl that the 
Netherlanders fully sympathized. “Your Lordship’s 
coming,” he said, “is as much longed for as Messias is 
of the Jews. It is indeed most necessary that your 
Lordship make great speed to reform both the Dutch 
and English abuses.” 2 

1 Sir P. Sydney to Earl of Leicester, 22d November, 1585, Brit. 


Mus., Galba, ¢. viii. p. 213, MS. 
2 Thid. 


