//

LIBRARY

lluoloiiical  m i n a x y ,

PRINCETON,  N.  J.

The  Stephen  Collins  Donation.

No.  Case ,

No.  Shelf,  c  Z

No.  Book ,

2 -GO- rO  n

.

1

.

'

.

\

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2018  with  funding  from
Princeton  Theological  Seminary  Library

https://archive.org/details/historyofunitedn02motl_1

THE  EARL  OF  LEICESTER.

Frontispiece,  VoL  II

HISTORY

OF  THE

UNITED

FROM  THE  DEATH  OF  WILLIAM  THE  SILENT  TO
THE  SYNOD  OF  DORT.

WITH

A  FULL  VIEW  OF  THE  ENGLISII-DUTCH  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  SPAIN,
AND  OF  THE  ORIGIN  AND  DESTRUCTION  OF
THE  SPANISH  ARMADA.

By  JOHN  LOTHROP  MOTLEY,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,

O  OP.  RESPONDING  MEMBER  OF  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE,
AUTHOR  OF  “THE  RISE  OF  THE  DUTCH  REPUBLIC.”

VOLUME  II.

NEW  YORK:

HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  PUBLISHERS,

321  to  335  PEARL  STREET.

18  6  1.

I

Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  one  thousand  eight  hundred

and  sixty,  by

John  Lothrop  Motley,

in  the  Clerk’s  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  District  of  Massachusetts.

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.

CHAPTER  IX.

PAG3

Military  Plans  in  the  Netherlands — The  Elector  and  Electorate  of  Cologne —
Martin  Schenk — His  Career  before  serving  the  States — Franeker  Univer¬
sity  founded — Parma  attempts  Grave — Battle  on  the  Meuse — Success  and
Vainglory  of  Leicester — St.  George’s  Day  triumphantly  kept  at  Utrecht —
Parma  not  so  much  appalled  as  it  was  thought — He  besieges  and  reduces
Grave — And  is  Master  of  the  Meuse — Leicester’s  Rage  at  the  Surrender  of
Grave — His  Revenge — Parma  on  the  Rhine — He  besieges  and  assaults
Neusz — Horrible  Fate  of  the  Garrison  and  City — Which  Leicester  was  un¬
able  to  relieve — Axel  surprised  by  Maurice  and  Sidney — The  Zeeland
Regiment  given  to  Sidney — Condition  of  the  Irish  and  English  Troops
— Leicester  takes  the  Field — He  reduces  Doesburg — He  lays  siege  to
Zutphen — Which  Parma  prepares  to  relieve — The  English  intercept
the  Convoy — Battle  of  Warnsfeld — Sir  Philip  Sidney  wounded — Results
of  the  Encounter — Death  of  Sidney  at  Arnlieim — Gallantry  of  Edward
Stanley .  1

CHAPTER  X.'

Should  Elizabeth  accept  the  Sovereignty? — The  Effects  of  her  Anger —
Quarrels  between  the  Earl  and  States — the  Earl’s  three  Counsellors —
Leicester’s  Finance- Chamber — Discontent  of  the  Mercantile  Classes — Paul
Buys  and  the  Opposition — Keen  Insight  of  Paul  Buys — Truchsess  becomes
a  Spy  upon  him — Intrigues  of  Buys  with  Denmark — His  Imprisonment —

The  Earl’s  Unpopularity — His  Quarrels  with  the  States — And  with  the
Norrises — His  Counsellors  Wilkes  and  Clerk — Letter  from  the  Queen  to
Leicester — A  Supper-Party  at  Hohenlo’s — A  drunken  Quarrel — Hohenlo’s
Assault  upon  Edward  Norris — Ill  Effects  of  the  Riot .  61

CHAPTER  XI.

#

Drake  in  the  Netherlands — Good  Results  of  his  Visit — The  Babington  Con¬
spiracy — Leicester  decides  to  visit  England — Exchange  of  parting  Com¬
pliments .  .  100

IV

CONTENTS  OF  YOL.  II.

CHAPTER  XII.

PAGE

Ill-timed  Interregnum  in  the  Provinces — Firmness  of  the  English  and  Dutch
People — Factions  during  Leicester’s  G-overnment — Democratic  Theories  of
the  Leicestrians — Suspicions  as  to  the  Earl’s  Designs — Extreme  Views  of
the  Calvinists — Political  Ambition  of  the  Church — Antagonism  of  the
Church  and  States — The  States  inclined  to  Tolerance — Desolation  of  the
Obedient  Provinces — Pauperism  and  Famine — Prosperity  of  the  Republic
— The  Year  of  Expectation .  Ill

CHAPTER  XIII.

Barneveld’s  Influence  in  the  Provinces — Unpopularity  of  Leicester — Intrigues
of  his  Servants — Gossip  of  his  Secretary — Its  mischievous  Effects — The
Quarrel  of  Norris  and  Hollock — The  Earl’s  Participation  in  the  Affair —

His  increased  Animosity  to  Norris — Seizure  of  Deventer — Stanley  appointed
its  Governor — York  and  Stanley — Leicester’s  secret  Instructions — Wilkes
remonstrates  with  Stanley — Stanley’s  Insolence  and  Equivocation — Painful
Rumours  as  to  him  and  York — Duplicity  of  York — Stanley’s  Banquet  at
Deventer — He  surrenders  the  City  to  Tassis — Terms  of  the  Bargain — Feeble
Defence  of  Stanley’s  Conduct — Subsequent  Fate  of  Stanley  and  York —
Betrayal  of  Gelder  to  Parma — These  Treasons  cast  Odium  on  the  English
— Miserable  Plight  of  the  English  Troops — Honesty  and  Energy  of  Wilkes
— Indignant  Discussion  in  the  Assembly .  136

i

CHAPTER  XIY.

Leicester  in  England — Trial  of  the  Queen  of  Scots — Fearful  Perplexity  at  the
English  Court — Infatuation  and  Obstinacy  of  the  Queen — Netherland  En¬
voys  in  England — Queen’s  bitter  Invective  against  them — Amazement
of  the  Envoys — They  consult  with  her  chief  Councillors — Remarks  of
Burghley  and  Davison — Fourth  of  February  Letter  from  the  States — Its
severe  Language  towards  Leicester — Painful  position  of  the  Envoys  at
Court— Queen’s  Parsimony  towards  Leicester .  189

CHAPTER  XY.

Buckhurst  sent  to  the  Netherlands — Alarming  state  of  Affairs  on  his  Arrival
— His  Efforts  to  conciliate — Democratic  Theories  of  Wilkes — Sophistry  of
the  Argument — Dispute  between  Wilkes  and  Barneveld — Religious  Toler¬
ance  by  the  States — Their  Constitutional  Theory — Deventer’s  bad  Counsels

CONTENTS  OF  YOL.  II.

v

PAGES

to  Leicester — Their  pernicious  Effect — Real  and  supposed  Plots  against
Hohenlo — Mutual  Suspicion  and  Distrust — Buckhurst  seeks  to  restore  good
Feeling — The  Queen  angry  and  vindictive — She  censures  Buckhurst’s
Course — Leicester’s  Wrath  at  Hohenlo’s  Charges  of  a  Plot  by  the  Earl  to
murder  him — Buckhurst’s  Eloquent  Appeals  to  the  Queen — Her  perplexing
and  contradictory  Orders — Despair  of  Wilkes — Leicester  announces  his
Return — His  Instructions — Letter  to  Junius — Bameveld  denounces  him
in  the  States . . .  215

CHAPTER  XVI.

Situation  of  Sluys— Its  Dutch  and  English  Garrison — Williams  writes  from
Sluys  to  the  Queen — Jealousy  between  the  Earl  and  States — Schemes  to
relieve  Sluys — Which  are  feeble  and  unsuccessful — The  Town  Capitulates
— Parma  enters — Leicester  enraged — The  Queen  angry  with  the  Anti-
Leicestrians — Norris,  Wilkes,  and  Buckhurst  punished — Drake  sails  for
Spain — His  Exploits  at  Cadiz  and  Lisbon — He  is  rebuked  by  Elizabeth. . .  260

CHAPTER  XVII.

Secret  Treaty  between  Queen  and  Parma — Excitement  and  Alarm  in  the
States — Religious  Persecution  in  England — Queen’s  Sincerity  toward
Spain — Language  and  Letters  of  Parma — Negotiations  of  De  Loo — En¬
glish  Commissioners  appointed — Parma’s  affectionate  Letter  to  the  Queen
— Philip  at  his  Writing-Table — His  Plots  with  Parma  against  England —
Parma’s  secret  Letters  to  the  King — Philip’s  Letters  to  Parma — Wonderful
Duplicity  of  Philip — His  sanguine  Yiews  as  to  England — He  is  reluctant  to
hear  of  the  Obstacles — and  imagines  Parma  in  England — But  Alexander’s
Difficulties  are  great — He  denounces  Philip’s  wild  Schemes — Walsingham
aware  of  the  Spanish  Plot — which  the  States  well  understand — Leicester’s
great  Unpopularity — The  Queen  warned  against  Treating — Leicester’s
Schemes  against  Barneveld — Leicestrian  Conspiracy  at  Leyden — The  Plot
to  seize  the  City  discovered — Three  Ringleaders  sentenced  to  Death — Civil
War  in  France — Yictory  gained  by  Navarre,  and  one  by  Guise — Queen  re¬
calls  Leicester — Who  retires  on  ill  Terms  with  the  States — Queen  warned
as  to  Spanish  designs — Results  of  Leicester’s  Administration .  286

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Prophecies  as  to  the  Year  1588 — Distracted  Condition  of  the  Dutch  Republic
— Willoughby  reluctantly  takes  Command — English  Commissioners  come
to  Ostend — Secretary  Gamier  and  Robert  Cecil — Cecil  accompanies  Dale  to

VI

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.

PAGE

Ghent — And  finds  the  Desolation  complete — Interview  of  Dale  and  Cecil
with  Parma — His  fervent  Expressions  in  favor  of  Peace — Cecil  makes  a
Tour  in  Flanders — And  sees  much  that  is  remarkable — Interviews  of  Dr.
Rogers  with  Parma — Wonderful  Harangues  of  the  Envoy — Extraordinary
Amenity  of  Alexander — With  which  Rogers  is  much  touched — The  Queen
not  pleased  with  her  Envoy — Credulity  of  the  English  Commissioners —
Ceremonious  Meeting  of  all  the  Envoys — Consummate  Art  in  wasting
Time — Long  Disputes  about  Commissions — The  Spanish  Commissions
meant  to  deceive — Disputes  about  Cessation  of  Arms — Spanish  Duplicity
and  Procrastination — Pedantry  and  Credulity  of  Dr.  Dale — The  Papal  Bull
and  Dr.  Allen’s  Pamphlet — Dale  sent  to  ask  Explanations — Parma  denies
all  Knowledge  of  either — Croft  believes  to  the  last  in  Alexander —
Dangerous  Discord  in  North  Holland — Leicester’s  Resignation  arrives —
Enmity  of  Willoughby  and  Maurice — Willoughby’s  dark  Picture  of  Affairs
— Hatred  between  States  and  Leicestrians — Maurice’s  Answer  to  the
Queen’s  Charges — End  of  Sonoy’s  Rebellion — Philip  foments  the  Civil
War  in  France — League’s  Threats  and  Plots  against  Henry — Mucio  arrives
in  Paris — He  is  received  with  Enthusiasm — The  King  flies,  and  Spain
triumphs  in  Paris — States  expostulate  with  the  Queen — English  Statesmen
still  deceived — Deputies  from  Netherland  Churches — hold  Conference  with
the  Queen — and  present  long  Memorials — More  Conversations  with  the
Queen — National  Spirit  of  England  and  Holland — Dissatisfaction  with
Queen’s  Course — Bitter  Complaints  of  Lord  Howard — Want  of  Preparation
in  Army  and  Navy — Sanguine  Statements  of  Leicester — Activity  of  Parma
— The  Painful  Suspense  continues . . .  353

CHAPTER  XIX.

Philip  Second  in  his  Cabinet — His  System  of  Work  and  Deception — His  vast
but  vague  Schemes  of  Conquest — The  Armada  sails — Description  of  the
Fleet — The  Junction  with  Parma  unprovided  for — The  Gale  off  Finisterre
— Exploits  of  David  Gwynn — First  Engagement  in  the  English  Channel —
Considerable  Losses  of  the  Spaniards — General  Engagement  near  Portland
— Superior  Seamanship  of  the  English — Both  Fleets  off  Calais — A  Night
of  Anxiety — Project  of  Howard  and  Winter — Impatience  of  the  Spaniards
— Fire-Ships  sent  against  the  Armada — A  great  Galeasse  disabled — At¬
tacked  and  captured  by  English  Boats — General  Engagement  of  both
Fleets — Loss  of  several  Spanish  Ships — Armada  flies,  followed  by  the  Eng¬
lish — English  insufficiently  provided — are  obliged  to  relinquish  the  Chase
— A  great  Storm  disperses  the  Armada — Great  Energy  of  Parma — made
fruitless  by  Philip’s  Dulness — England  readier  at  Sea  than  on  Shore — The
Lieutenant-General’s  Complaints — His  Quarrels  with  Norris  and  Williams
— Harsh  Statements  as  to  the  English  Troops — Want  of  Organization  in
England — Royal  Parsimony  and  Delay — Quarrels  of  English  Admirals —

CONTENTS  OF  YOL.  II.

Yll

PAGE

England’s  narrow  Escape  from  great  Peril — Various  Rumours  as  to  the
Armada’s  Fate — Philip  for  a  long  time  in  Doubt — He  believes  himself
victorious — is  tranquil  when  undeceived .  453

CHAPTER  XX.

Alexander  besieges  Bergen-op-Zoom — Pallavincini’s  Attempt  to  seduce  Parma
— Alexander’s  Fury — He  is  forced  to  raise  the  Siege  of  Bergen — Gertruy-
denberg  betrayed  to  Parma — Indignation  of  the  States — Exploits  of  Schenk
— His  Attack  on  Nymegen — He  is  defeated  and  drowned — English-Dutch
Expedition  to  Spain — Its  meagre  Results — Death  of  Guise  and  of  the
Queen-Mother — Combinations  after  the  Murder  of  Henry  III. — Tandem  fit
Surculus  Arbor .  537

.

V

1

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

CHAPTER  IX.

Military  Plans  in  the  Netherlands  —  The  Elector  and  Electorate  of  Cologne
—  Martin  Schenk  —  His  Career  before  serving  the  States  —  Praneker  Uni¬
versity  founded  —  Parma  attempts  Grave  —  Battle  on  the  Meuse  —  Suc¬
cess  and  Vainglory  of  Leicester — St.  George’s  Day  triumphantly  kept
at  Utrecht  —  Parma  not  so  much  appalled  as  it  was  thought  —  He  besieges
and  reduces  Grave  —  And  is  Master  of  the  Meuse  —  Leicester’s  Page  at  the
Surrender  of  Grave  —  His  Revenge  —  Parma  on  the  Rhine  —  He  besieges
and  assaults  Neusz  —  Horrible  Fate  of  the  Garrison  and  City  —  Which
Leicester  was  unable  to  relieve  —  Axel  surprised  by  Maurice  and  Sidney
—  The  Zeeland  Regiment  given  to  Sidney  —  Condition  of  the  Irish  and
English  Troops  —  Leicester  takes  the  Field  —  He  reduces  Doesburg  —
He  lays  siege  to  Zutphen  —  Which  Parma  prepares  to  relieve  —  The
English  intercept  the  Convoy  —  Battle  of  Warnsfeld  —  Sir  Philip  Sidney
wounded  —  Results  of  the  Encounter  —  Death  of  Sidney  at  Arnheim —
Gallantry  of  Edward  Stanley.

Five  great  rivers  hold  the  Netherland  territory  in  their  coils.
Three  are  hut  slightly  separated — the  Yssel,  Waal,  and
ancient  Rhine,  while  the  Scheldt  and  Meuse  are  spread  more
widely  asunder.  Along  each  of  these  streams  were  various
fortified  cities,  the  possession  of  which,  in  those  days,  when
modern  fortification  was  in  its  infancy,  implied  the  control
of  the  surrounding  country.  The  lower  part  of  all  the
rivers,  where  they  mingled  with  the  sea  and  became  wide
estuaries,  belonged  to  the  Republic,  for  the  coasts  and  the
ocean  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Hollanders  and  English.
Above,  the  various  strong  places  were  alternately  in  the  hands
of  the  Spaniards  and  of  the  patriots.

Thus  Antwerp,  with  the  other  Scheldt  cities,  had  fallen  into
Parma's  power,  but  Flushing,  which  controlled  them  all,  was

VOL.  it. — B

2

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

held  by  Philip  Sidney  for  the  Queen  and  States.  On  the  Meuse,
Maastricht  and  Roermond  were  Spanish,  hut  Yenloo,  Grave,
Meghem,  and  other  towns,  held  for  the  commonwealth.  On  the
Waal,  the  town  of  Nymegen  had,  through  the  dexterity  of  Martin
Schenk,  been  recently  transferred  to  the  royalists,  while  the
rest  of  that  river's  course  was  true  to  the  republic.  The
Rhine,  strictly  so  called,  from  its  entrance  into  Nether  land,
belonged  to  the  rebels.  Upon  its  elder  branch,  the  Yssel,
Zutphen  was  in  Parma's  hands,  while,  a  little  below,
Deventer  had  been  recently  and  adroitly  saved  by  Leicester
and  Count  Meurs  from  falling  into  the  same  dangerous
grasp.

Thus  the  triple  Rhine,  after  it  had  crossed  the  German
frontier,  belonging  mainly,  although  not  exclusively,  to  the
States.  But  on  the  edge  of  the  Batavian  territory,  the
ancient  river,  just  before  dividing  itself  into  its  three  branches,
flowed  through  a  debateable  country  which  was  even  more
desolate  and  forlorn,  if  possible,  than  the  land  of  the  obedient
Provinces.1

This  unfortunate  district  was  the  archi-episcopal  electorate
of  Cologne.  The  city  of  Cologne  itself,  Neusz,  and  Rheinberg,
on  the  river,  Werll  and  other  places  in  Westphalia  and  the
whole  country  around,  were  endangered,  invaded,  ravaged,
and  the  inhabitants  plundered,  murdered,  and  subjected  to
every  imaginable  outrage,  by  rival  bands  of  highwaymen,
enlisted  in  the  support  of  the  two  rival  bishops — beggars,
outcasts,  but  high-born  and  learned  churchmen  both — who
disputed  the  electorate.

At  the  commencement  of  the  year  a  portion  of  the  bishopric
was  still  in  the  control  of  the  deposed  protestant  elector
Gebhard  Truchsess,  assisted  of  course  by  the  English  and  the
States.  The  city  of  Cologne  was  held  by  the  Catholic  elector,
Ernest  of  Bavaria,  bishop  of  Liege  ;  but  Neusz  and  Rheinberg
were  in  the  hands  of  the  Dutch  republic.

The  military  operations  of  the  year  were,  accordingly,
along  the  Meuse,  where  the  main  object  of  Parma  was  to

1  Meteren,  xiii.  235vo.

1586.

THE  ELECTOR  AND  ELECTORATE  OF  COLOGNE.

3

wrest  Grave  from  the  Netherlands  ;  along  the  Waal,  where,
on  the  other  hand,  the  patriots  wished  to  recover  Nymegen  ;
on  the  Yssel,  where  they  desired  to  obtain  the  possession  of
Zutphen  ;  and  in  the  Cologne  electorate,  where  the  Spaniards
meant,  if  possible,  to  transfer  Neusz  and  Rheinberg  from
Truchsess  to  Elector  Ernest.  To  clear  the  course  of  these
streams,  and  especially  to  set  free  that  debateable  portion
of  the  river-territory  which  hemmed  him  in  from  neutral
Germany,  and  to  cut  off  the  supplies  from  his  starving  troops,
was  the  immediate  design  of  Alexander  Farnese.

Nothing  could  be  more  desolate  than  the  condition  of  the
electorate.  Ever  since  Gebhard  Truchsess  had  renounced
the  communion  of  the  Catholic  Church  for  the  love  of  Agnes
Mansfeld,  and  so  gained  a  wife  and  lost  his  principality,  he
had  been  a  dependant  upon  the  impoverished  Nassaus,  or  a
supplicant  for  alms  to  the  thrifty  Elizabeth.  The  Queen
was  frequently  implored  by  Leicester,  without  much  effect,
to  send  the  ex-elector  a  few  hundred  pounds  to  keep  him
from  starving,  as  “  he  had  not  one  groat  to  live  upon/’ 1  and,
a  little  later,  he  was  employed  as  a  go-between,  and  almost
a  spy,  by  the  Earl,  in  his  quarrels  with  the  patrician  party
rapidly  forming  against  him  in  the  States.

At  Godesberg — the  romantic  ruins  of  which  stronghold  the
traveller  still  regards  with  interest,  placed  as  it  is  in  the
midst  of  that  enchanting  region  where  Drachenfels  looks
down  on  the  crumbling  tower  of  Roland  and  the  convent  of
Nonnenwerth — the  unfortunate  Gebhard  had  sustained  a  con¬
clusive  defeat.  A  small,  melancholy  man,  accomplished,
religious,  learned,  u  very  poor  but  very  wise/'  comely,  but  of
mean  stature,  altogether  an  unlucky  and  forlorn  individual,2

1  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  378.

3  “When  I  spake  of  the  Elector
here,”  said  Leicester,  “  I  assure  you
he  is  a  very  wise  gentleman  ;  and  if  it
were  possible  to  set  him  in  his  place
again,  these  countries  were  soon  at

quiet . He  is  exceeding  poor,  and

great  pity.  Believe  me,  my  Lord,  he
is  worthy  to  be  esteemed.  He  doth
greatly  love  and  honour  her  Majesty.

I  would  to  God  your  Lordship  could
but  procure  her  Majesty  to  bestow
500  or  600  pound  on  him  for  a  token.
I  have  received  more  comfort  and  good
advice  of  him  than  of  any  man  here.
He  is  very  virtuous,  and  very  sound  in
religion ;  very  grave,  and  a  comely
person,  but  of  a  mean  stature.  His
adversary  doth  all  he  can  to  put  the
King  of  Spain  into  his  territories,  yea,

4  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  IX.

he  was  not,  after  all,  in  very  much  inferior  plight  to  that  in
which  his  rival,  the  Bavarian  bishop,  had  found  himself.
Prince  Ernest,  archbishop  of  Liege  and  Cologne,  a  hanger-
on  of  his  brother,  who  sought  to  shake  him  off,  and  a
stipendiary  of  Philip,  who  was  a  worse  paymaster  than
Elizabeth,  had  a  sorry  life  of  it,  notwithstanding  his  nominal
possession  of  the  see.  He  was  forced  to  go,  disguised  and
in  secret,  to  the  Prince  of  Parma  at  Brussels,1  to  ask  for
assistance,  and  to  mention,  with  lacrymose  vehemence,  that
both  his  brother  and  himself  had  determined  to  renounce  the
episcopate,  unless  the  forces  of  the  Spanish  King  could  be
employed  to  recover  the  cities  on  the  Khine.  If  Neusz  and
Rheinberg  were  not  wrested  from  the  rebels,  Cologne  itself
would  soon  be  gone.  Ernest  represented  most  eloquently  to
Alexander,  that  if  the  protestant  archbishop  were  reinstated
in  the  ancient  see,  it  would  be  a  most  perilous  result  for  the
ancient  church  throughout  all  northern  Europe.  Parma
kept  the  wandering  prelate  for  a  few  days  in  his  palace  in
Brussels,  and  then  dismissed  him,  disguised  and  on  foot,  in
the  dusk  of  the  evening,  through  the  park-gate.2  He
encouraged  him  with  hopes  of  assistance,  he  represented  to
his  sovereign  the  importance  of  preserving  the  Rhenish
territory  to  Bishop  Ernest  and  to  Catholicism,  but  hinted
that  the  declared  intention  of  the  Bavarian  to  resign  the

even  into  Cologne  itself.  He  is  very
poor,  and  weary  of  his  keeping  that
place  with  such  charge.  His  bishopric
of  Liege  is  all  spoiled  also  with  these
wars,  and  he  no  longer  able  to  main¬
tain  his  charges.  A  small  matter
would  set  up  this  man  now.  He  hath
many  friends  in  Germany,  and  more  of
late  than  ever  he  had.”  Leicester  to
Burghley,  28  Eeb.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

Lord  North  had  also  conceived  a
favourable  opinion  of  Truclisess,  whom
he  spoke  of  as  a  “rare  gentleman,
notably  furnished  with  excellent  gifts,
religious,  and  worthy  of  all  honour  and
estimation.”  North  to  Burghley,  28
Eeb.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Parma  to  Philip  II.  28  Eeb.  1586.
(Archivo  de  Simancas,  MS.)  Compare
Strada,  II.  426.

5  Parma  to  Philip  II.  (MS.  last
cited.)  Compare  Strada,  who  ap¬
pears  to  be  very  much  mistaken  in
representing  the  Elector  Ernest  as
having  been  dismissed  by  Parma  with
great  state,  and  with  a  magnificent
escort  of  Belgian  nobility, — “  because
no  mask  can  ever  entirely  disguise  a
prince,  and  because  suns,  even  when
under  a  cloud,  have  more  spectators
than  ever.”

“Nempe  nulla  larva  totum  princi-
pem  tegit ;  immo  soles,  etiam  isti  quum
deficiunt,  tunc  maxime  spectatores  ha-
bent,”  and  so  on,  II.  421.

MARTIN  SCHENK.

1586.

5

dignity,  was  jorobably  a  trick,  because  the  arcbi-episcopate
was  no  such  very  bad  thing  after  all.1

The  archi-episcopate  might  be  no  very  bad  thing,  but  it
was  a  most  uncomfortable  place  of  residence,  at  the  moment,
for  prince  or  peasant.  Overrun  by  hordes  of  brigands,  and
crushed  almost  out  of  existence  by  that  most  deadly  of  all
systems  of  taxations,  the  ‘  brandschatzung/  it  was  fast
becoming  a  mere  den  of  thieves.  The  ‘  brandschtitzung'
had  no  name  in  English,  but  it  was  the  well-known  impost,
levied  by  roving  commanders,  and  even  by  respectable  gene¬
rals  of  all  nations.  A  hamlet,  cluster  of  farm-houses,  country
district,  or  wealthy  city,  in  order  to  escape  being  burned  and
ravaged,  as  the  penalty  of  having  fallen  into  a  conqueror's
hands,  paid  a  heavy  sum  of  ready  money  on  the  nail  at
command  of  the  conqueror.  The  free  companions  of  the
sixteenth  century  drove  a  lucrative  business  in  this  par¬
ticular  branch  of  industry ;  and  when  to  this  was  added
the  more  direct  profits  derived  from  actual  plunder,  sack,
and  ransoming,  it  was  natural  that  a  large  fortune  was  often
the  result  to  the  thrifty  and  persevering  commander  of  free
lances.

Of  all  the  professors  of  this  comprehensive  art,  the  terrible
Martin  Schenk  was  preeminent ;  and  he  was  now  ravaging
the  Cologne  territory,  having  recently  passed  again  to  the
service  of  the  States.  Immediately  connected  with  the  chief
military  events  of  the  period  which  now  occupies  us,  he  was
also  the  very  archetype  of  the  marauders  whose  existence  was
characteristic  of  the  epoch.  Born  in  1549  of  an  ancient  and
noble  family  of  Grelderland,  Martin  Schenk  had  inherited  no
property  but  a  sword.  Serving  for  a  brief  term  as  page  to
the  Seigneur  of  Ysselstein,  he  joined,  while  yet  a  youth,  the
banner  of  William  of  Orange,  at  the  head  of  two  men-at-arms.
The  humble  knight-errant,  with  his  brace  of  squires,  was
received  with  courtesy  by  the  Prince  and  the  Estates,  but  he
soon  quarrelled  with  his  patrons.  There  was  a  castle  of

1  “  Porque  no  le  esta  tan  mal  el  electorado.”  MS.  letter  of  Parma  last
cited.

6

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

Blyenbeek,  belonging  to  his  cousin,  which  he  chose  to  consider
his  rightful  property,  because  he  was  of  the  same  race,  and
because  it  was  a  convenient  and  productive  estate  and
residence.  The  courts  had  different  views  of  public  law,  and
supported  the  ousted  cousin.  Martin  shut  himself  up  in  the
castle,  and  having  recently  committed  a  rather  discreditable
homicide,  which  still  further  increased  his  unpopularity  with
the  patriots,  he  made  overtures  to  Parma.1  Alexander  was
glad  to  enlist  so  bold  a  soldier  on  his  side,  and  assisted
Schenk  in  his  besieged  stronghold.  For  years  afterwards,
his  services  under  the  King’s  banner  were  most  brilliant,  and
he  rose  to  the  highest  military  command,  while  his  coffers,
meantime,  were  rapidly  filling  with  the  results  of  his  robberies
and  c  brandschatzungs.’  “’Tis  a  most  courageous  fellow,”
said  Parma,  “but  rather  a  desperate  highwayman  than  a
valiant  soldier.”2  Martin’s  couple  of  lances  had  expanded
into  a  corps  of  free  companions,  the  most  truculent,  the  most
obedient,  the  most  rapacious  in  Christendom.  Never  were
freebooters  more  formidable  to  the  world  at  large,  or  more
docile  to  their  chief,  than  were  the  followers  of  General
Schenk.  Never  was  a  more  finished  captain  of  highwaymen.
He  was  a  man  who  was  never  sober,  yet  who  never  smiled.
His  habitual  intoxication  seemed  only  to  increase  both  his
audacity  and  his  taciturnity,  without  disturbing  his  reason.
He  was  incapable  of  fear,  of  fatigue,  of  remorse.  He  could
remain  for  days  and  nights  without  dismounting — eating,
drinking,  and  sleeping  in  the  saddle  ;  so  that  to  this  terrible
centaur  his  horse  seemed  actually  a  part  of  himself.  His
soldiers  followed  him  about  like  hounds,  and  were  treated  by
him  like  hounds.  He  habitually  scourged  them,  often  took
with  his  own  hand  the  lives  of  such  as  displeased  him,  and
had  been  known  to  cause  individuals  of  them  to  jump  from
the  top  of  church  steeples3  at  his  command';  yet  the  pack
were  ever  stanch  to  his  orders,  for  they  knew  that  he  always

1  Meteren,  xiii.  231,  ‘  Levensbeschry-
ving  Nederl.  Mannen,’  vol.  ii.  in  voce.
Strada,  II.  633,  et  aliunde.

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.,  6  June,  1585.
(Arch,  do  Sim.  MS.)

3  Archer,  in  Stowe,  139.

1586.  HIS  CAREER  BEFORE  SERVING  THE  STATES.  7

led  them  where  the  game  was  plenty.  While  serving  under
Parma  he  had  twice  most  brilliantly  defeated  Hohenlo.  At
the  battle  of  Hardenberg  Heath  he  had  completely  outgene-
ralled  that  distinguished  chieftain,  slaying  fifteen  hundred  of
his  soldiers  at  the  expense  of  only  fifty  or  sixty  of  his  own.
By  this  triumph  he  had  preserved  the  important  city  of
Groningen  for  Philip,  during  an  additional  quarter  of  a
century,  and  had  been  received  in  that  city  with  rapture.
Several  startling  years  of  victory  and  rapine  he  had  thus  run
through  as  a  royalist  partisan.  He  became  the  terror  and  the
scourge  of  his  native  Gelderland,  and  he  was  covered  with
wounds  received  in  the  King's  service.  He  had  been  twice
captured  and  held  for  ransom.*  Twice  he  had  effected  his
escape.  He  had  recently  gained  the  city  of  Nymegen.  He
was  the  most  formidable,  the  most  unscrupulous,  the  most
audacious  Netherlander  that  wore  Philip's  colours  ;  but  he
had  received  small  public  reward  for  his  services,  and  the
wealth  which  he  earned  on  the  high-road  did  not  suffice  for
his  ambition.  He  had  been  deeply  disgusted,  when,  at  the
death  of  Count  Penneberg,  Verdugo,  a  former  stable-boy  of
Mansfeld,  a  Spaniard  who  had  risen  from  the  humblest  rank
to  be  a  colonel  and  general,  had  been  made  governor  of
Friesland.  He  had  smothered  his  resentment  for  a  time
however,  but  had  sworn  within  himself  to  desert  at  the  most
favourable  opportunity.  At  last,  after  he  had  brilliantly
saved  the  city  of  Breda  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the
patriots,  he  was  more  enraged  than  he  had  ever  been  before,
when  Haultepenne,  of  the  house  of  Berlaymont,  was  made
governor  of  that  place  in  his  stead.

On  the  25tli  of  May,  1585,  at  an  hour  after  midnight,  he
had  a  secret  interview  with  Count  Meurs,  stadholder  for  the
States  of  Gelderland,  and  agreed  to  transfer  his  mercenary
allegiance  to  the  republic.  He  made  good  terms.  He  was
to  be  lieutenant-governor  of  Gelderland,  and  he  was  to  have
rank  as  marshal  of  the  camp  in  the  States'  army,  with  a
salary  of  twelve  hundred  and  fifty  guilders  a  month.  He
agreed  to  resign  his  famous  castle  of  Blyenbeek,  but  was  to

8

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

be  reimbursed  with  estates  in  Holland  and  Zeeland,  of  the
annual  value  of  four  thousand  florins.1

After  this  treaty,  Martin  and  his  free  lances  served  the
States  faithfully,  and  became  sworn  foes  to  Parma  and  the
King.  He  gave  and  took  no  quarter,  and  his  men,  if
captured,  “paid  their  ransom  with  their  heads/’2  He
ceased  to  be  the  scourge  of  Gelderland,  but  he  became
the  terror  of  the  electorate.  Early  in  1586,  accompanied
by  Herman  Kloet,  the  young  and  daring  Dutch  commandant
of  Neusz,  he  had  swept  down  into  the  Westphalian  country,
at  the  head  of  five  hundred  foot  and  five  hundred  horse.  On
the  18th  of  March  he  captured  the  city  of  Werll  by  a  neat
stratagem.  The  citizens,  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  marauders,
were  in  want  of  many  necessaries  of  life,  among  other  things,
of  salt.  Martin  had,  from  time  to  time,  sent  some  of  his
soldiers  into  the  place,  disguised  as  boors  from  the  neighbour¬
hood,  and  carrying  bags  of  that  article.  A  pacific  trading-
intercourse  had  thus  been  established  between  the  burghers
within  and  the  banditti  without  the  gates.  Agreeable
relations  were  formed  within  the  walls,  and  a  party  of
townsmen  had  agreed  to  cooperate  with  the  followers  of
Schenk.  One  morning  a  train  of  waggons  laden  with  soldiers
neatly  covered  with  salt,  made  their  appearance  at  the  gate.
At  the  same  time  a  fire  broke  out  most  opportunely  within
the  town.  The  citizens  busily  employed  themselves  in
extinguishing  the  flames.  The  salted  soldiers,  after  passing
through  the  gateway,  sprang  from  the  waggons,  and  mastered
the  watch.  The  town  was  carried  at  a  blow.  Some  of  the
inhabitants  were  massacred  as  a  warning  to  the  rest ;  others
were  taken  prisoners  and  held  for  ransom ;  a  few,  more
fortunate,  made  their  escape  to  the  citadel.  That  fortress  was
stormed  in  vain,  but  the  city  was  thoroughly  sacked.  Every
house  was  rifled  of  its  contents.  Meantime  Haultepenne
collected  a  force  of  nearly  four  thousand  men,  boors,  citizens,
and  soldiers,  and  came  to  besiege  Schenk  in  the  town,  while,

1  ‘Nederl.  Mannen,’  &c.,  ubi  sup.

2  Doyley  to  Burghley,  June  24,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1586.

FRANEKER  UNIVERSITY  FOUNDED.

9

at  the  same  time,  attacks  were  made  upon  him  from  the
castle.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  hold  the  city,  hut  he  had
completely  robbed  it  of  every  thing  valuable.  Accordingly  he
loaded  a  train  of  waggons  with  his  booty,  took  with  him  thirty
of  the  magistrates  as  hostages,  with  other  wealthy  citizens,
and  marching  in  good  order  against  Haultepenne,  completely
routed  him,  killing  a  number  variously  estimated  at  from
five  hundred  to  two  thousand,  and  effected  his  retreat,  despe¬
rately  wounded  in  the  thigh,  but  triumphant,  and  laden
with  the  spoils  to  Yenlo  on  the  Meuse,  of  which  city  he  was
governor.1

u  Surely  this  is  a  noble  fellow,  a  worthy  fellow/'  exclaimed
Leicester,  who  was  filled  with  admiration  at  the  bold
marauder's  progress,  and  vowed  that  he  was  u  the  only  soldier
in  truth  that  they  had,  for  he  was  never  idle,  and  had  suc¬
ceeded  hitherto  very  happily." 2

And  thus,  at  every  point  of  the  doomed  territory  of  the
little  commonwealth,  the  natural  atmosphere  in  which  the  in¬
habitants  existed  was  one  of  blood  and  rapine.  Yet  during  the
very  slight  lull,  which  was  interposed  in  the  winter  of  1585-6
to  the  eternal  clang  of  arms  in  Friesland,  the  Estates  of  that
Province,  to  their  lasting  honour,  founded  the  university  of
Franeker.  A  dozen  years  before,  the  famous  institution  at
Leyden  had  been  established,  as  a  reward  to  the  burghers  for
their  heroic  defence  of  the  city.  And  now  this  new  proof
was  given  of  the  love  of  Netherlander,  even  in  the  midst
of  their  misery  and  their  warfare,  for  the  more  humane  arts.
The  new  college  was  well  endowed  from  ancient  church-
lands,  and  not  only  was  the  education  made  nearly  gratuitous,
while  handsome  salaries  were  provided  for  the  professors,  but
provision  was  made  by  which  the  poorer  scholars  could  be  fed
and  boarded  at  a  very  moderate  expense.  There  was  a  table

1  Meteren,  Strada,  Nederl.  Mannen,  ‘
&c.,  ubi  sup.  Bor.  II.  699, 100.  Bruce’s
‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  79,  139,  141,  167,  227,
265,  475.  Lord  North  to  Burghley,
Feb.  28,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Lei¬

cester  to  Burghley,  same  date.  Ibid.
MS.  Leicester  to  Burghley  and  Wal-
singham,  15  March,  1586.  Ibid.  MS.

2  Leicester  to  Burghley  and  Wal-
singham.  MS.  ubi  sup.

10

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

provided  at  an  annual  cost  to  tlie  student  of  but  fifty  florins
(51.),  and  a  second  and  third  table  at  the  very  low  price  of
forty  and  thirty  florins  respectively.  Thus  the  sum  to  be  paid
by  the  poorer  class  of  scholars  for  a  year’s  maintenance  was
less  than  three  pounds  sterling  a  year.  The  voice  with  which
this  infant  seminary  of  the  Muses  first  made  itself  heard
above  the  din  of  war  was  but  feeble,  but  the  institution
was  destined  to  thrive,  and  to  endow  the  world,  for  many
successive  generations,  with  the  golden  fruits  of  science  and
genius.1

Early  in  the  spring,  the  war  was  seriously  taken  in  hand
by  Earnese.  It  has  already  been  seen  that  the  republic  had
been  almost  entirely  driven  out  of  Flanders  and  Brabant.
The  Estates,  however,  still  held  Grave,  Megem,  Batenburg,
and  Venlo  upon  the  Meuse.  That  river  formed,  as  it  were,
a  perfect  circle  of  protection  for  the  "whole  Province  of
Brabant,  and  Farnese  determined  to  make  himself  master  of
this  great  natural  moat.  Afterwards,  he  meant  to  possess
himself  of  the  Khine,  flowing  in  a  parallel  course,  about
twenty-five  miles  further  to  the  east.  In  order  to  gain  and
hold  the  Meuse,  the  first  step  was  to  reduce  the  city  of  Grave.
That  town,  upon  the  left  or  Brabant  bank,  was  strongly  forti¬
fied  on  its  land-side,  where  it  was  surrounded  by  low  and
fertile  pastures,  while,  upon  the  other,  it  depended  upon  its
natural  foss,  the  river.  It  was,  according  to  Lord  North  and
the  Earl  of  Leicester,  the  u  strongest  town  in  all  the  Low
Countries,  though  but  a  little  one.” 2

Baron  Hemart,  a  young  Gueldrian  noble,  of  small  experi¬
ence,  in  military  affairs,  commanded  in  the  city,  his  garrison
being  eight  hundred  soldiers,  and  about  one  thousand  burgher
guard.3  As  early  as  January,  Farnese  had  ordered  Count
Mansfeld  to  lay  siege  to  the  place.  Five  forts  had  accord-

i

1  Bor,  II.  612.

2  North  to  Burghley,  29  May,  1586.
S.  P.  Office  MS.  Leicester  to  Queen

Elizabeth,  16  June,  1586.  S.  P.  Office
MS.

3  Bor,  II.  'TOt,  708.  Hoofd,  Yerv.  154,
155.  Strada,  II.  410.  Wagenaar,  viil
126.

1586.

PARMA  ATTEMPTS  GRATE.

11

ingly  been  constructed,  above  and  below  the  town,  upon  the
left  bank  of  the  river,  while  a  bridge  of  boats  thrown  across
the  stream  led  to  a  fortified  camp  on  the  opposite  side.
Mansfeld,  Mondragon,  Bobadil,  Aquila,  and  other  distin¬
guished  veterans  in  Philip's  service,  were  engaged  in  the
enterprise.  A  few  unimportant  skirmishes  between  Schenk
and  the  Spaniards  had  taken  place,  but  the  city  was  already
hard  pressed,  and,  by  the  series  of  forts  which  environed  it,
was  cut  off  from  its  supplies.  It  was  highly  important,
therefore,  that  Grave  should  be  relieved,  with  the  least
possible  delay.

Early  in  Easter  week,  a  force  of  three  thousand  men,  under
Hohenlo  and  Sir  John  Norris,  was  accordingly  despatched  by
Leicester,  with  orders,  at  every  hazard,  to  throw  April  _£
reinforcements  and  provisions  into  the  place.  They  1586^
took  possession,  at  once,  of  a  stone  sconce,  called  the  Mill-Fort,
which  was  guarded  by  fifty  men,  mostly  boors  of  the  country.1
These  w.ere  nearly  all  hanged  for  u  using  malicious  words,"
and  for  u  railing  against  Queen  Elizabeth," 2  and — a  sufficient
number  of  men  being  left  to  maintain  the  fort — the  whole
relieving  force  marched  with  great  difficulty — for  the  river
was  rapidly  rising,  and  flooding  the  country — along  the  right
bank  of  the  Meuse,  taking  possession  of  Batenburg  and
Bavenstein  castles,  as  they  went.  A  force  of  four  or  five
hundred  Englishmen  was  then  pushed  forward  to  a  point
almost  exactly  opposite  Grave,  and  within  an  English  mile  of
the  head  of  the  bridge  constructed  by  the  Spaniards.  Here,
in  the  night  of  Easter  Tuesday,  they  rapidly  formed  an
entrenched  camp,  upon  the  dyke  along  the  river,  and,  although
molested  by  some  armed  vessels,  succeeded  in  establishing
themselves  in  a  most  important  position.3

On  the  morning  of  Easter  Wednesday,  April  16,  Mansfeld,
perceiving  that  the  enemy  had  thus  stolen  a  march  upon  him,

1  Occurrences  from  Holland,  April,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

21  v

2  Ibid.  Compare  ‘Leycest.  Corresp.’
p.  218,  April  5,  1586.

3  Occurrences  from  Holland,  MS.

12

THE  UNITED  NETHEKLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

ordered  one  thousand  picked  troops,  all  Spaniards,  under
April-,  Casco  and  other  veterans,  to  assault  this  advanced
158g!0  post.1  A  reserve  of  two  thousand  was  placed  in  readi¬
ness  to  support  the  attack.  The  Spaniards  slowly  crossed  the
bridge,  which  was  swaying  very  dangerously  with  the  current,
and  then  charged  the  entrenched  camp  at  a  run.  A  quarrel
between  the  different  regiments  as  to  the  right  of  precedence
precipitated  the  attack,  before  the  reserve,  consisting  of  some
picked  companies  of  Mondragon's  veterans,  had  been  able  to
arrive.  Coming  in  breathless  and  fatigued,  the  first  assailants
were  readily  repulsed  in  their  first  onset.  Aquila  then  oppor¬
tunely  made  his  appearance,  and  the  attack  was  renewed
with  great  vigour.  The  defenders  of  the  camp  yielded  at  the
third  charge  and  fled  in  dismay,  while  the  Spaniards,  leaping
the  barriers,  scattered  hither  and  thither  in  the  ardour  of
pursuit.  The  routed  Englishmen  fled  swiftly  along  the  oozy
dyke,  in  hopes  of  joining  the  main  body  of  the  relieving  party,
who  were  expected  to  advance,  with  the  dawn,  from  their
position  six  miles  farther  down  the  river.  Two  miles  long
the  chace  lasted,  and  it  seemed  probable  that  the  fugitives
would  be  overtaken  and  destroyed,  when,  at  last,  from  behind
a  line  of  mounds  which  stretched  towards  Batenburg  and  had
masked  their  approach,  appeared  Count  Hohenlo  and  Sir
John  Norris,  at  the  head  of  twenty-five  hundred  Englishmen
and  Hollanders.  This  force  advanced  as  rapidly  as  the
slippery  ground  and  the  fatigue  of  a  two  hours'  march  would
permit  to  the  rescue  of  their  friends,  while  the  retreating
English  rallied,  turned  upon  their  pursuers,  and  drove  them
back  over  the  path  along  which  they  had  just  been  charging
in  the  full  career  of  victory.  The  fortune  of  the  day  was
changed,  and  in  a  few  minutes  Hohenlo  and  Norris  would
have  crossed  the  river  and  entered  Grave,  when  the  Spanish
companies  of  Bobadil  and  other  commanders  were  seen  march¬
ing  along  the  quaking  bridge.

1  Strada,  II.  413,  seq.  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,  154,  155.  Occurrences,  &c.  MS.
Bruce’s  ‘  Leycest.  Corresp.  223,  226.

1586.

SUCCESS  OF  LEICESTER.

13

Three  thousand  men  on  each  side  now  met  at  push  of  pike
on  the  hank  of  the  Meuse.1  The  rain  was  pouring  in  torrents,
the  wind  was  blowing  a  gale,  the  stream  was  rapidly  rising,
and  threatening  to  overwhelm  its  shores.  By  a  tacit  and
mutual  consent,  both  armies  paused  for  a  few  moments  in  full
view  of  each  other.  After  this  brief  interval  they  closed
again,  breast  to  breast,  in  sharp  and  steady  conflict.  The
ground,  slippery  with  rain  and  with  blood,  which  was  soon
flowing  almost  as  fast  as  the  rain,  afforded  an  unsteady  footing
to  the  combatants.  They  staggered  like  drunken  men,  fell
upon  their  knees,  or  upon  their  backs,  and  still,  kneeling  or
rolling  prostrate,  maintained  the  deadly  conflict.  For  the
space  of  an  hour  and  a  half  the  fierce  encounter  of  human
passion  outmastered  the  fury  of  the  elements.  Norris  and
Hohenlo  fought  at  the  head  of  their  columns,  like  paladins  of
old.  The  Englishman  was  wounded  in  the  mouth  and  breast,
the  Count  was  seen  to  gallop  past  one  thousand  musketeers
and  caliver-men  of  the  enemy,  and  to  escape  unscathed.  But
as  the  strength  of  the  soldiers  exhausted  itself,  the  violence  of
the  tempest  increased.  The  floods  of  rain  and  the  blasts  of
the  hurricane  at  last  terminated  the  affray.  The  Spaniards,
fairly  conquered,  were  compelled  to  a  retreat,  lest  the  rapidly
rising  river  should  sweep  away  the  frail  and  trembling  bridge,
over  which  they  had  passed  to  their  unsuccessful  assault.
The  English  and  Netherlanders  remained  masters  of  the
field.  The  rising  flood,  too,  which  was  fast  converting  the
meadows  into  a  lake,  was  as  useful  to  the  conquerors  as  it
was  damaging  to  the  Spaniards.

In  the  course  of  the  few  following  days,  a  large  number  of
boats  was  despatched  before  the  very  eyes  of  Parma,  from
April  Batenburg  into  Grave  ;  Hohenlo,  who  had  “  most
i586.lb  desperately  adventured  his  person”  throughout  the
whole  affair,  entering  the  town  himself.  A  force  of  five
hundred  men,  together  with  provisions  enough  to  last  a  year,
was  thrown  into  the  city,  and  the  course  of  the  Meuse  was,

1  Strada,  II.  413,  414.  Occurrences  from  Holland,  MS.

14

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

apparently,  secured  to  the  republic.  In  this  important  action
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  Dutch  and  English  were  killed,
and  probably  four  hundred  Spaniards,  including  several  dis¬
tinguished  officers.1

The  Earl  of  Leicester  was  incredibly  elated  so  soon  as
the  success  of  this  enterprise  was  known.  “Oh  that  her
Majesty  knew/'  he  cried,  “  how  easy  a  match  now  she  hath
with  the  King  of  Spain,  and  what  millions  of  afflicted  people
she  hath  relieved  in  these  countries.  This  summer,  this
summer,  I  say,  would  make  an  end  to  her  immortal  glory/'2
He  was  no  friend  to  his  countryman,  the  gallant  Sir  John
Norris — whom,  however,  he  could  not  help  applauding  on  this
occasion, — but  he  was  in  raptures  with  Hohenlo.  Next  to
God,  he  assured  the  Queen's  government  that  the  victory  was
owing  to  the  Count.  “  He  is  both  a  valiant  man  and  a  wise
man,  and  the  painfullest  that  ever  I  knew,"  he  said  ;  adding
— as  a  secret — that  “  five  hundred  Englishmen  of  the  best
Flemish  training  had  flatly  and  shamefully  run  away,"  when
the  fight  had  been  renewed  by  Hohenlo  and  Norris.  He
recommended  that  her  Majesty  should  send  her  picture  to
the  Count,  worth  two  hundred  pounds,  which  he  would  value
at  more  than  one  thousand  pounds  in  money,  and  he  added
that  “for  her  sake  the  Count  had  greatly  left  his  drink¬
ing."3

6

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,  April
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  R.  Cavendish

g

to  Burghley,  April  — ,  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)  Lord  Willoughby  to

Burghley,  —  April,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  Occurrences  from  Holland,  MS.

Bruce’s  Leyc.  Corresp.’  226,  244,  245,

27

252,  253.  Parma  to  Philip  II.  —

April  and  9  May,  1586.  (Archivo  de
Simancas,  MS.)

2

Lord  North  to  Burghley,  —  May,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  “  Count  Hol-
lock  performed  this  service  with  wis¬
dom  and  most  valiantly  in  his  own
person.  I  cannot  give  him  too  much
praise,  because  there  is  so  much  duo

to  him.”

Compare  Strada,  II.  413,  414.  Me-
teren,  xiii.  234.  Hoofd,  155,  seq.  et  al.
It  is  of  slight  consequence,  at  the  pre¬
sent  day,  to  know  the  exact  number  of
the  combatants  who  perished  in  this
hotly-contested,  but  now  forgotten
field.  As  a  specimen  of  conflicting
statistics,  after  a  battle,  it  is  worth
while  to  observe  that,  according  to  some
eye-witnesses ,  nine  hundred  Spaniards
were  killed,  and,  according  to  others,
thirty,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the
statement  of  the  loss  sustained  by
their  antagonists  varied  from  fifty  to
seven  hundred.

2  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  264,  May

-,  1586.

is

3  Bruce’s  *  Leyc.  Corresp.’  245.

1586.  ST.  GEORGE’S-DAY  KEPT  AT  UTRECHT.  15

As  for  the  Prince  of  Parma,  Leicester  looked  upon  him  as
conclusively  beaten.  He  spoke  of  him  as  “  marvellously  ap¬
palled  ”  by  this  overthrow  of  his  forces,  hut  he  assured  the
government  that  if  the  Prince’s  “  choler  should  press  him  to
seek  revenge,”  he  should  soon  he  driven  out  of  the  country.
The  Earl  would  follow  him  “at  an  inch,”  and  effectually
frustrate  all  his  undertakings.  “  If  the  Spaniard  have  such  a
May  as  he  has  had  an  April,”  said  Lord  North,  “it  will  put
water  in  his  wine.”1

Meantime,  as  St.  George’s  Day  was  approaching,  and  as  the
Earl  was  fond  of  banquets  and  ceremonies,  it  was  thought
desirable  to  hold  a  great  triumphal  feast  at  Utrecht.  His
journey  to  that  city  from  the  Hague  was  a  triumphal  proces¬
sion.  In  all  the  towns  through  which  he  passed  he  was
entertained  with  military  display,  pompous  harangues,  inter¬
ludes,  dumb  shows,  and  allegories.  At  Amsterdam — a  city
which  he  compared  to  Venice  for  situation  and  splendour,  and
where  one  thousand  ships  were  constantly  lying — he  was
received  with  “sundry  great  whales  and  other  fishes  of
hugeness,”  that  gambolled  about  his  vessel,  and  convoyed  him
to  the  shore.  These  monsters  of  the  deep  presented  him  to
the  burgomaster  and  magistrates  who  were  awaiting  him  on
the  quay.  The  burgomaster  made  him  a  Latin  oration,  to
which  Dr.  Bartholomew  Clerk  responded,  and  then  the  Earl
was  ushered  to  the  grand  square,  upon  which,  in  his  honour,  a
magnificent  living  picture  was  exhibited,  in  which  he  figured
as  Moses,  at  the  head  of  the  Israelites,  smiting  the  Philistines
hip  and  thigh.2 3  After  much  mighty  banqueting  in  Amster¬
dam,  as  in  the  other  cities,  the  governor-general  came  to
Utrecht.  Through  the  streets  of  this  antique  and  most  pic¬
turesque  city  flows  the  palsied  current  of  the  Rhine,  and  every
barge  and  bridge  were  decorated  with  the  flowers  of  spring.
Upon  this  spot,  where,  eight  centuries  before  the  Anglo-Saxon
Willebrod  had  first  astonished  the  wild  Frisians  with  the

1  North  to  Burghley,  —  May,  1586.  S.  P.  Office  MS.

12

3  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  4V  6,  seq.

16

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

pacific  doctrines  of  Jesus,  and  had  been  stoned  to  death  as  his
reward,  stood  now  a  more  arrogant  representative  of  English
piety.  The  balconies  were  crowded  with  fair  women,  and
decorated  with  scarves  and  banners.  From  the  Earl’s  resi¬
dence — the  ancient  palace  of  the  Knights  of  Rhodes — to  the
cathedral,  the  way  was  lined  with  a  double  row  of  burgher
guards,  wearing  red  roses  on  their  arms,  and  apparelled  in
the  splendid  uniforms  for  which  the  Netherlanders  were  cele¬
brated.  Trumpeters  in  scarlet  and  silver,  barons,  knights,
and  great  officers,  in  cloth  of  gold  and  silks  of  all  colours  ;  the
young  Earl  of  Essex,  whose  career  was  to  be  so  romantic,  and
whose  fate  so  tragic  ;  those  two  ominous  personages,  the
deposed  little  archbishop-elector  of  Cologne,  with  his  melan¬
choly  face,  and  the  unlucky  Don  Antonio,  Pretender  of  Por¬
tugal,  for  whom,  dead  or  alive,  thirty  thousand  crowns  and  a
dukedom 1  were  perpetually  offered  by  Philip  II. ;  young
Maurice  of  Nassau,  the  future  controller  of  European  destinies;
great  counsellors  of  state,  gentlemen,  guardsmen,  and  port¬
cullis-herald,  with  the  coat  of  arms  of  Elizabeth,  rode  in
solemn  procession  along.  Then  great  Leicester  himself,
u  most  princelike  in  the  robes  of  his  order,”  guarded  by  a
troop  of  burghers,  and  by  his  own  fifty  halberd-men  in  scarlet
cloaks  trimmed  with  white  and  purple  velvet,  pranced
gorgeously  by.2

The  ancient  cathedral,  built  on  the  spot  where  Saint
Willebrod  had  once  ministered,  with  its  light,  tapering,  brick
tower,  three  hundred  and  sixty  feet  in  height,  its  exquisitely
mullioned  windows,  and  its  elegantly  foliaged  columns,  soon
received  the  glittering  throng.  Hence,  after  due  religious
ceremonies,  and  an  English  sermon  from  Master  Knewstubs,
Leicester’s  chaplain,  was  a  solemn  march  back  April,
again  to  the  palace,  where  a  stupendous  banquet  was  1586*
already  laid  in  the  great  hall.3

On  the  dais  at  the  upper  end  of  the  table,  blazing  with

1  Declaration  of  Don  Antonio,  in  Bor,  II.  769.

5  Holingshed,  iv.  658,  seq.  Stowe,  717.  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  145.  sIbid.

1586.

ST.  GEORGE’S  DAY  KEPT  AT  UTRECHT.

17

plate  and  crystal,  stood  the  royal  chair,  with  the  Queen’s  plate
and  knife  and  fork  before  it,  exactly  as  if  she  had  been
present,  while  Leicester’s  trencher  and  stool  were  set  respect¬
fully  quite  at  the  edge  of  the  board.  In  the  neighbourhood
of  this  post  of  honour  sat  Count  Maurice,  the  Elector,  the
Pretender,  and  many  illustrious  English  personages,  with  the
fair  Agnes  Mansfeld,  Princess  Chimay,  the  daughters  of
William  the  Silent,  and  other  dames  of  high  degree.

Before  the  covers  were  removed,  came  limping  up  to  the
dais  grim-visaged  Martin  Schenk,  freshly  wounded,  but
triumphant,  from  the  sack  of  Werll,  and  black  John  Norris,
scarcely  cured  of  the  spear-wounds  in  his  face  and  breast
received  at  the  relief  of  Grave.  The  sword  of  knighthood1
was  laid  upon  the  shoulder  of  each  hero,  by  the  Earl  of
Leicester,  as  her  Majesty’s  vicegerent  ;  and  then  the  ushers
marshalled  the  mighty  feast.  Meats  in  the  shape  of  lions,
tigers,  dragons,  and  leopards,  flanked  by  peacocks,  swans,
pheasants,  and  turkeys  “in  their  natural  feathers  as  in  their
greatest  pride,”  disappeared,  course  after  course, — sonorous
metal  blowing  meanwhile  the  most  triumphant  airs.  After
the  banquet  came  dancing,  vaulting,  tumbling,  together  with
the  “forces  of  Hercules,  which  gave  great  delight  to  the
strangers,”  after  which  the  company  separated  until  even¬
song.

Then  again,  “great  was  the  feast,”  says  the  chronicler, —
a  mighty  supper  following  hard  upon  the  gigantic  dinner.
After  this  there  was  tilting  at  the  barriers,  the  young  Earl  of
Essex  and  other  knights  bearing  themselves  more  chivalrously
than  would  seem  to  comport  with  so  much  eating  and  drinking.
Then,  horrible  to  relate,  came  another  “most  sumptuous
banquet  of  sugar-meates  for  the  men-at-arms,  and  the

1  Bor.  II.  699,  *700.  Stowe,  Holin-
shed,  ubi  sup.  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  252,

253,  April  1586.

2ti

“  Shenks  is  a  worthy  fellow,”  said
Leicester,  who  never  could  get  nearer
than  this  to  the  name  of  the  terrible
partisan.  He  also  mentioned  that  he

VOL.  II. — C

had  given  the  worthy  fellow  a  chain,
as  from  her  Majesty;  adding,  with  an
eye  to  Elizabeth’s  thrift,  that  if  she
thought  he  had  paid  too  much  for  it,
he  would  cheerfully  pay  the  balance
over  what  seemed  the  right  sum  out
of  his  own  pocket.  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’
227,  228.

18

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

ladies/'  after  which,  it  being  now  midnight,  the  Lord  of
Leicester  hade  the  whole  company  good  rest,  and  the  men-at-
arms  and  ladies  took  their  leave.1

But  while  all  this  chivalrous  banqueting  and  holiday¬
making  was  in  hand,  the  Prince  of  Parma  was  in  reality  not
quite  so  much  “  appalled"  by  the  relief  of  Grave  as  his  an¬
tagonist  had  imagined.  The  Earl,  flushed  with  the  success  of
Hohenlo,  already  believed  himself  master  of  the  country,  and
assured  his  government,  that,  if  he  should  be  reasonably  well
supplied,  he  would  have  Antwerp  back  again  and  Bruges
besides  “ before  mid  June."2

Never,  said  he,  was  “  the  Prince  of  Parma  so  dejected  nor
so  melancholy  since  he  came  into  these  countries,  nor  so  far
out  of  courage."3  And  it  is  quite  true  that  Alexander  had
reason  to  be  discouraged.  He  had  but  eight  or  nine
thousand  men,  and  no  money  to  pay  even  this  little  force.
The  soldiers  were  perishing  daily,  and  nearly  all  the  survivors
were  described  by  their  chief  as  sick  or  maimed.  The
famine  in  the  obedient  Provinces  was  universal,  the  whole
population  was  desperate  with  hunger  ;  and  the  merchants,
frightened  by  Drake's  successes,  and  appalled  by  the  ruin  all
around  them,  drew  their  purse-strings  inexorably.4  “  I  know
not  to  what  saint  to  devote  myself,"  said  Alexander.5  He  had
been  compelled,  by  the  movement  before  Grave,  to  withdraw
Haultepenne  from  the  projected  enterprise  against  Neusz,  and
he  was  quite  aware  of  the  cheerful  view  which  Leicester  was
inclined  to  take  of  their  relative  positions.  “The  English
think  they  are  going  to  do  great  things,"  said  he,  “  and  con¬
sider  themselves  masters  of  the  field." 6

Nevertheless,  on  the  11th  May,  the  dejected  melancholy
man  had  left  Brussels,  and  joined  his  little  army,  consisting
of  three  thousand  Spaniards  and  five  thousand  of  all  other

1  Stowe,  Holinshed,  Bor,  Hoofd,
ubi  supra.

„  ,  ,  30  April

2  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  251, - ,  1586.

10  May

3  Ibid.

4  “  Cierran  la  bolsa.”  Parma  to

Philip,  9  May,  15 S6.  (Arch,  de  Si-
mao  cas,  MS.)

5  Same  to  same,  21  April,  1586.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

6  Letter  of  9  May,  MS.

1586.

PARMA  LESS  APPALLED  THAN  WAS  THOUGHT.

19

nations.1  His  veterans,  though  unpaid,  ragged,  and  half-
starved,  were  in  raptures  to  have  their  idolized  ^-ay  n
commander  among  them  again,  and  vowed  that  under  1586-
his  guidance  there  was  nothing  which  they  could  not  accom¬
plish.  The  King's  honour,  his  own,  that  of  the  army,  all  were
pledged  to  take  the  city.  On  the  success  of  that  enterprise,
he  said,  depended  all  his  past  conquests,  and  every  hope  for
the  future.  Leicester  and  the  English,  whom  he  called  the
head  and  body  of  the  rebel  forces,  were  equally  pledged  to
relieve  the  place,  and  were  bent  upon  meeting  him  in  the
field.2  The  Earl  had  taken  some  forts  in  the  Batavia —
Betuwe,  or  “good  meadow,"  which  he  pronounced  as  fertile
and  about  as  large  as  Herefordshire,3 — and  was  now  threaten¬
ing  Nymegen,  a  city  which  had  been  gained  for  Philip  by  the
last  effort  of  Schenk,  on  the  royalist  side.  He  was  now
observing  Alexander’s  demonstrations  against  Grave,  but,
after  the  recent  success  in  victualling  that  place,  he  felt  a  just
confidence  in  its  security.

On  the  31st  May  the  trenches  were  commenced,  and  on
the  5th  June  the  batteries  were  opened.  The  work  went
rapidly  forward  when  Farnese  was  in  the  field.  3ist  May,
“The  Prince  of  Parma  doth  batter  it  like  a  Prince,’’4  loS6‘
said  Lord  North,  admiring  the  enemy  with  the  enthusiasm  of
an  honest  soldier.  On  the  6th  of  June,  as  Alexander  rode
through  the  camp  to  reconnoitre,  previous  to  an  attack,  a  well-
directed  cannon  ball  carried  away  the  hinder  half  of  his  horse.5
The  Prince  fell  to  the  ground,  and,  for  a  moment,  dismay
was  in  the  Spanish  ranks.  At  the  next  instant,  though
somewhat  bruised,  he  was  on  his  feet  again,  and,  having
found  the  breach  sufficiently  promising,  he  determined  on  the
assault.

As  a  preliminary  measure,  he  wished  to  occupy  a  tower

1  Parma  to  Philip  II.  27  May,  1586.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  IT.  27  May,  11
June,  1586.  (Ibid.)

3  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  27  May,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  North  to  Burghley,  29  May,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

5  Stowe,  718.  Strada  II.  416.

20

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

which,  had  been  battered  nearly  to  ruins,  situate  near  the
river.  Captain  de  Solis  was  ordered,  with  sixty  veterans,  to
take  possession  of  this  tower,  and  to  “  have  a  look  at  the
countenance  of  the  enemy,  without  amusing  himself  with
anything  else.”1  The  tower  was  soon  secured,  but  Solis,  in
disobedience  to  his  written  instructions2  led  his  men  against
the  ravelin,  which  was  still  in  a  state  of  perfect  defence.  A
musket-ball  soon  stretched  him  dead  beneath  the  wall,  and  his
followers,  still  attempting  to  enter  the  impracticable  breach,
were  repelled  by  a  shower  of  stones  and  blazing  pitch-hoops.
Hot  sand,  too,  poured  from  sieves  and  baskets,  insinuated
itself  within  the  armour  of  the  Spaniards,  and  occasioned
such  exquisite  suffering,  that  many  threw  themselves  into  the
river  to  allay  the  pain.  Emerging  refreshed,  but  confused,
they  attempted  in  vain  to  renew  the  onset.  Several  of  the
little  band  were  slain,  the  assault  was  quite  unsuccessful,  and
the  trumpet  sounded  a  recal.3  So  completely  discomfited
were  the  Spaniards  by  this  repulse,  and  so  thoroughly  at  their
ease  were  the  besieged,  that  a  soldier  let  himself  down  from
the  ramparts  of  the  town  for  the  sake  of  plundering  the  body
of  Captain  Solis,  who  was  richly  dressed,  and,  having  accom¬
plished  this  feat,  was  quietly  helped  back  again  by  his  com¬
rades  from  above.4

To  the  surprise  of  the  besiegers,  however,  on  the  very  next
morning  came  a  request  from  the  governor  of  the  city,  Baron
Hemart,  to  negociate  for  a  surrender.  Alexander  was,  natu¬
rally,  but  too  glad  to  grant  easy  terms,  and  upon  the  7th
of  June  the  garrison  left  the  town  with  colours  displayed  and
drums  beating,  and  the  Prince  of  Parma  marched  into  it,  at
the  head  of  his  troops.  He  found  a  year’s  provision  there  for
six  thousand  men,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  walls  had
suffered  so  little,  that  he  must  have  been  obliged  to  wait  long
for  a  practicable  breach.5

1  Parma  to  Philip,  11  June,  1586.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.,  MS.  just  cited.

3  Strada,  II.  417.  Bor,  II.  707,  708.

4  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  288.

5  Strada,  II.  418.  Bor,  II.  707,  708.
Parma  to  Philip  II.  27  May,  11  June,
1586.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  North

1586.

HE  BESIEGES  AND  REDUCES  GRAVE.

21

ee  There  was  no  good  reason  even  for  women  to  have  sur¬
rendered  the  place/'  exclaimed  Leicester,  when  he  heard  the
news.1  And  the  Earl  had  cause  to  be  enraged  at  such  a
result.  He  had  received  a  letter  only  the  day  before,  signed
by  Hemart  himself  and  by  all  the  officers  in  Grave,  asserting
their  determination  and  ability  to  hold  the  place  for  a  good
five  months,  or  for  an  indefinite  period,  and  until  they  should
be  relieved.  And  indeed  all  the  officers,  with  three  exceptions,
had  protested  against  the  base  surrender.  But  at  the  bottom
of  the  catastrophe — of  the  disastrous  loss  of  the  city  and  the
utter  ruin  of  young  Hemart — was  a  woman.  The  governor
was  governed  by  his  mistress,  a  lady  of  good  family  in  the
place,  but  of  Spanish  inclinations,  and  she,  for  some  mys¬
terious  reasons,  had  persuaded  him  thus  voluntarily  to  capi¬
tulate.2

Parma  lost  no  time,  however,  in  exulting  over  his  success.
Upon  the  same  day  the  towns  of  Megen  and  Batenburg  sur¬
rendered  to  him,  and  immediately  afterwards  siege  was  laid
to  Yenlo,  a  town  of  importance,  lying  thirty  miles  farther  up
the  Meuse.  The  wife  and  family  of  Martin  Schenk  were  in
the  city,  together  with  two  hundred  horses,  and  from  forty  to
one  hundred  thousand  crowns  in  money,  plate,  and  furniture
belonging  to  him.3

o  o  »

That  bold  partisan,  accompanied  by  the  mad  Welshman,
to  Burghley,  t— — ->  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

8  June

6

MS.)  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  —  June,

1586.  (Ibid.)

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  288.

3  Meteren,  xiii.  235.  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.

Corresp.’  299-310.  Strada,  II.  418.

6

Leicester  to  the  Queen,  —  June,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  North  to  Burghley,

—  June,  1586.  (Ibid.)

“The  governor,  Hemart,”  said
North,  “  is  a  gentleman  of  Gelder,  of
great  kindred,  living,  and  acquaint¬
ance.  There  be  many  vehement  pre¬
sumptions  to  argue  a  treacherous
practice  with  the  enemy.  The  best
that  can  be  made  of  it  was  most  vile

cowardice,  mixed  with  such  negligence
as  is  unspeakable.  In  the  time  of  that
siege  he  spent  his  time  in  his  house,
followed  with  his  harlot,  and  when  he
came  abroad  he  could  not  be  gotten
by  entreaty  of  captains,  burghers,  or
soldiers  to  do  anything  for  the  defence
of  the  town,  but  straightway  entered
into  a  continence  of  the  people,  wish¬
ing  rather  to  give  up  the  town  than
suffer  the  blood  of  so  many  innocents
to  be  spilt.  Which  purpose  he  did  pro¬
secute  with  speed,  and.  sent  a  drum  to
the  enemy  for  parley.  The  town  was

impossible  to  be  assaulted,”  &c.  &c.

„  26  J  une

3  North  to  Burghley - ,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  T.  Doyley  to  Burgh¬
ley,  — _,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  July

/

I  I

22  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  IX.

Roger  Williams,  at  the  head  of  one  hundred  and  thirty
English  lances  and  thirty  of  Schenk’s  men,  made  a  wild
nocturnal  attempt  to  cut  their  way  through  the  besieging  force,
and  penetrate  to  the  city.  They  passed  through  the  enemy’s
lines,  killed  all  the  corps-de-garde,  and  many  Spanish  troopers
— the  terrible  Martin’s  own  hand  being  most  effective  in  this
midnight  slaughter — and  reached  the  very  door  of  Parma’s
tent,  where  they  killed  his  secretary  and  many  of  his  guards.
It  was  even  reported,  and  generally  believed,  that  Farnese
himself  had  been  in  imminent  danger,  that  Schenk  had  fired
his  pistol  at  him  unsuccessfully,  and  had  then  struck  him  on
the  head  with  its  butt-end,  and  that  the  Prince  had  only  saved
his  life  by  leaping  from  his  horse,  and  scrambling  through  a
ditch.1  But  these  seem  to  have  been  fables.  The  alarm  at
last  became  general,  the  dawn  of  a  summer’s  day  was  fast
approaching,  the  drums  beat  to  arms,  and  the  bold  maurauders
were  obliged  to  effect  their  retreat,  as  they  best  might,  hotly
pursued  by  near  two  thousand  men.  Having  slain  many  of
the  Spanish  army,  and  lost  nearly  half  their  own  number,
they  at  last  obtained  shelter  in  Wachtendonk.2

Soon  afterwards  the  place  capitulated  without  waiting  for  a
battery,  upon  moderate  terms.  Schenk’s  wife  was  sent  away

28  June,  courteously  with  her  family,  in  a  coach  and  four,

15S6-  and  with  as  much  “ apparel”  as  might  be  carried
with  her.  His  property  was  confiscated,  for  “  no  fair  wars
could  be  made  with  him.” 3

Thus,  within  a  few  weeks  after  taking  the  field,  the
“ dejected,  melancholy”  man,  who  was  so  “out  of  courage,”
and  the  soldiers  who  were  so  “marvellously  beginning  to  run
away  ” — according  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester — had  swept  their
enemy  from  every  town  on  the  Meuse.  That  river  was  now,

16

1  North  to  Burghley,  —  June,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.  Meteren,  xiii.  235.  Doyley

24  June

to  Burghley,  - - >  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

3  Doyley  to  Burghley,  ubi  sup.  Lei¬

cester  to  the  Queen,  - - ,  1586.  (S.  P.

6  July  V

Office  MS.)  North  to  Burghley,  same
date.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Parma  to
Philip  II.  8  July,  1586.  (Arch,  de
Simancas,  MS.)  Compare  Strada,  II.
423.  Meteren,  xiii.  235.

1586.

AND  IS  MASTER  OF  THE  MEUSE.

23

throughout  its  whole  course,  in  the  power  of  the  Spaniards.
The  Province  of  Brabant  became  thoroughly  guarded  again
by  its  foss,  and  the  enemy’s  road  was  opened  into  the  northern
Provinces.

Leicester,  meantime,  had  not  distinguished  himself.  It
must  be  confessed  that  he  had  been  sadly  outgeneralled.
The  man  who  had  talked  of  following,  the  enemy  inch  by
inch,  and  who  had  pledged  himself  not  only  to  protect  Grave,
and  any  other  place  that  might  be  attacked,  but  even  to
recover  Antwerp  and  Bruges  within  a  few  weeks,  had  wasted
the  time  in  very  desultory  operations.  After  the  St.  George
feasting,  Knewstub  sermons,  and  forces  of  Hercules,  were  all
finished,  the  Earl  had  taken  the  field  with  five  thousand  foot
and  fifteen  hundred  horse.  His  intention  was  to  clear  the
Yssel,  by  getting  possession  of  Doesburg  and  Zutphen,  but,
hearing  of  Parma’s  demonstrations  upon  Grave,  he  abandoned
the  contemplated  siege  of  those  cities,  and  came  to  Arnheim.
He  then  crossed  the  Rhine  into  the  Isle  of  Batavia,  and
thence,  after  taking  a  few  sconces  of  inferior  importance —
while  Schenk,  meanwhile,  was  building  on  the  Island  of
Gravenweert,  at  the  bifurcation  of  the  Rhine  and  Waal,  the
sconce  so  celebrated  a  century  later  as  c  Schenk’s  F ort  ’
(Schenkenschans) — he  was  preparing  to  pass  the  Waal  in
order  to  attack  Farnese,  when  he  heard,  to  his  astonishment,
of  the  surrender  of  Grave.”  1

He  could  therefore — to  his  chagrin — no  longer  save  that
important  city,  but  he  could,  at  least,  cut  off  the  head  of  the
culprit.  Leicester  was  in  Bommel  when  he  heard  of  Baron
Hemart’s  faint-heartedness  or  treachery,  and  his  wrath  was
extravagant  in  proportion  to  the  exultation  with  which  his
previous  success  had  inspired  him.  He  breathed  nothing  but
revenge  against  the  coward  and  the  traitor,  who  had  delivered
up  the  town  in  “  such  lewd  and  beastly  sort.2

ee  I  will  never  depart  hence,”  he  said,  ce  till  by  the  goodness

l  Meteren,  xiii.  235vo.

Leicester  to  tlie  Queen,  —  June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

24

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

of  God  I  be  satisfied  someway  of  this  villain's  treachery." 1
There  could  be  little  doubt  that  Hemart  deserved  punishment.
There  could  be  as  little  that  Leicester  would  mete  it  out  to
him  in  *  ample  measure.  “  The  lewd  villain  who  gave  up
Grave/'  said  he,  “and  the  captains  as  deep  in  fault  as  himself,
shall  all  suffer  together." 2

Hemart  came  boldly  to  meet  him.  “  The  honest  man  came
to  me  at  Bommel,"  said  Leicester,  and  he  assured  the  govern¬
ment  that  it  was  in  the  hope  of  persuading  the  magistrates  of
that  and  other  towns  to  imitate  his  own  treachery.3

But  the  magistrates  straightway  delivered  the  culprit  to
the  governor-general,  who  immediately  placed  him  under
26  June,  arrest.  A  court-martial  was  summoned,  26th  of  June,

15SG*  at  Utrecht,  consisting  of  Hohenlo,  Essex,  and  other
distinguished  officers.  They  found  that  the  conduct  of  the
prisoner  merited  death,  but  left  it  to  the  Earl  to  decide
whether  various  extenuating  circumstances  did  not  justify  a
pardon.4  Hohenlo  and  Norris  exerted  themselves  to  procure
a  mitigation  of  the  young  man's  sentence,  and  they  excited
thereby  the  governor's  deep  indignation.  Norris,  accord¬
ing  to  Leicester,  was  in  love  with  the  culprit's  aunt,  and
was  therefore  especially  desirous  of  saving  his  life.5  More¬
over,  much  use  was  made  of  the  discredit  which  had  been
thrown  by  the  Queen  on  the  Earl's  authority,  and  it  was
openly  maintained,  that,  being  no  longer  governor-general,
he  had  no  authority  to  order  execution  upon  a  Netherland
officer.6

The  favourable  circumstances  urged  in  the  case,  were,  that
Hemart  was  a  young  man,  without  experience  in  military
matters,  and  that  he  had  been  overcome  by  the  supplications
and  outcries  of  the  women,  panic- struck  after  the  first  assault.
There  were  no  direct  proofs  of  treachery,  or  even  of  personal

1  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  285.

5  Ibid.  281.

3  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  MS.  be¬
fore  cited.

1 6

4  North  to  Burghley,  —  Juno,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,
156.

6  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  301,  310,
313.

6  Leicester  to  the  Queen.  —  June,

•  24  ’

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1586.

LEICESTER’S  RAGE  AT  SURRENDER  OE  GRATE.

25

cowardice.  He  begged  bard  for  a  pardon,  not  on  account  of
bis  life,  but  for  tbe  sake  of  bis  reputation.  He  earnestly
implored  permission  to  serve  under  tbe  Queen  of  England,  as
a  private  soldier,  without  pay,  on  land  or  sea,  for  as  many
years  as  sbe  should  specify,  and  to  be  selected  for  tbe  most
dangerous  employments,  in  order  that,  before  be  died,  be
might  wipe  out  tbe  disgrace,  which,  through  bis  fault,  in  an
hour  of  weakness,  bad  come  upon  an  ancient  and  honourable
bouse.1  Much  interest  was  made  for  him — his  family  connec¬
tion  being  powerful — and  a  general  impression  prevailing
that  be  bad  erred  through  folly  rather  than  deep  guilt.
But  Leicester  beating  himself  upon  tbe  breast — as  be  was
wont  when  excited — swore  that  there  should  be  no  pardon
for  such  a  traitor.2  Tbe  States  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,
likewise,  were  decidedly  in  favour  of  a  severe  example.3

Hemart  was  accordingly  led  to  tbe  scaffold  on  tbe  28th
June.  He  spoke  to  tbe  people  with  great  calmness,  and,  in
20th  June,  two  languages,  French  and  Flemish,  declared  that

1586.  ]ie  was  guiltless  of  treachery,  but  that  the  terror
and  tears  of  the  women,  in  an  hour  of  panic,  had  made  a
coward  of  him.4  He  was  beheaded,  standing.  The  two
captains,  Hu  Ban  and  Koeboekum,  who  had  also  been  con¬
demned,  suffered  with  him.5  A  third  captain,  likewise  con¬
victed,  was,  “for  very  just  cause/'  pardoned  by  Leicester.0
The  Earl  persisted  in  believing  that  Hemart  had  surrendered
the  city  as  part  of  a  deliberate  plan,  and  affirmed  that  in  such
a  time,  when  men  had  come  to  think  no  more  of  giving  up  a
town  than  of  abandoning  a  house,  it  was  highly  necessary  to
afford  an  example  to  traitors  and  satisfaction  to  the  people."
And  the  people  were  thoroughly  satisfied,  according  to  the
governor,  and  only  expressed  their  regret  that  three  or  four
members  of  the  States-General  could  not  have  their  heads

1  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,  156.  Meteren,
xiii.  235vo.

2  Iloofd,  ubi  supra.

3  ‘  Resol.  Holl,’  24  June,  1  July,
1586,  bl.  220.  Wagenaar,  viii.  128.

4  Hoofd,  Meteren,  Wagenaar,  ubi

sup.

6  Ibid.

13

6  Leicester  to  Burghley,  —  June,

28

1586.  (S.P.  Office  MS.)

7  Bruce,  1  Leyc.  Corresp.,’  309  seq.

26

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

cut  off  as  well;  being  as  arrant  knaves  as  Hemart ;  “and  so  I
think  they  be/'  added  Leicester.1

Parma  having  thus  made  himself  master  of  the  Meuse,  lost
no  time  in  making  a  demonstration  upon  the  parallel  course
of  the  Rhine,  thirty  miles  farther  east.2  Schenk,  Kloet,  and
other  partisans,  kept  that  portion  of  the  archi-episcopate  and
of  Westphalia  in  a  state  of  perpetual  commotion.3  Early
in  the  preceding  year,  Count  de  Meurs  had,  by  a  fortunate
stratagem,  captured  the  town  of  Neusz  for  the  deposed  elector,
and  Herman  Kloet,  a  young  and  most  determined  Geldrian
soldier,  now  commanded  in  the  place.4

The  Elector  Ernest  had  made  a  visit  in  disguise  to  the
camp  of  Parma,  and  had  represented  the  necessity  of  recover¬
ing  the  city.  It  had  become  the  stronghold  of  heretics,  rebels,
and  banditti.  The  Rhine  was  in  their  hands,  and  with  it  the  per¬
petual  power  of  disturbing  the  loyal  H  etherlands.  It  was  as  much
the  interest  of  his  Catholic  Majesty  as  that  of  the  Archbishop
that  Neusz  should  be  restored  to  its  lawful  owner.  Parma
had  felt  the  force  of  this  reasoning,  and  had  early  in  the
year  sent  Haultepenne  to  invest  the  city.  He  had  been
obliged  to  recal  that  commander  during  the  siege  of  Grave.
The  place  being  reduced,  Alexander,  before  the  grass  could
grow  beneath  his  feet  advanced  to  the  Rhine  in  person.
Early  in  July  he  appeared  before  the  walls  of  Neusz  with
eight  thousand  foot  and  two  thousand  horse.  The  garrison
under  Kloet  numbered  scarcely  more  than  sixteen  hundred
effective  soldiers,5  all  Netlierlanders  and  Germans,  none  being
English.

The  city  is  twenty  miles  below  Cologne.  It  was  so  well
fortified  that  a  century  before  it  had  stood  a  year’s  siege  from
the  famous  Charles  the  Bold,  who,  after  all,  had  been  obliged
to  retire.6  It  had  also  resisted  the  strenuous  efforts  of  Charles

14

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  —  June,

24

18

1586.  Same  to  Burghley,— June,  1586.

28

(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  8  July,  1586.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Wagenaar,  viii.  131.  Hoofd.  Ver-
yolgh,  154.

4  Strada,  II.  425.  Wagenaar,  yiii.  132.

5  Strada,  &c.,  MS.  just  cited.
c  Meteren,  xiii.  235v0.

1586.

HIS  REYENGE— PARMA  ON  THE  RHINE.

27

the  Fifth/  and  was  now  stronger  than  it  ever  had  been.
It  was  thoroughly  well  provisioned,  so  that  it  was  safe  enough
“if  those  within  it,”  said  Leicester,  “be  men/'2  The  Earl
expressed  the  opinion,  however,  that  “  those  fellows  were  not
good  to  defend  towns,  unless  the  besiegers  were  obliged  to
swim  to  the  attack." 3  The  issue  was  to  show  whether  the
sarcasm  were  just  or  not.  Meantime  the  town  was  considered
by  the  governor-general  to  be  secure,  “unless  towns  were
to  be  had  for  the  asking."4

Neusz  is  not  immediately  upon  the  Rhine,  but  that  river,
which  sweeps  away  in  a  north-easterly  direction  from  the
walls,  throws  out  an  arm  which  completely  encircles  the  town.
A  part  of  the  place,  cut  into  an  island  by  the  Erpt,  was
strengthened  by  two  redoubts.  This  island  was  abandoned,
as  being  too  weak  to  hold,  and  the  Spaniards  took  possession
of  it  immediately.5  There  were  various  preliminary  and
sanguinary  sorties  and  skirmishes,  during  which  the  Spaniards
after  having  been  once  driven  from  the  island,  again  occupied
that  position.  Archbishop  Ernest  came  into  the  camp,  and,
before  proceeding  to  a  cannonade,  Parma  offered  to  the  city  cer¬
tain  terms  of  capitulation,  which  were  approved  by  that  prelate.
Kloet  replied  to  this  proposal,  that  he  was  wedded  to  the  town
and  to  his  honour,  which  were  as  one.  These  he  was  incapable
of  sacrificing,  but  his  life  he  was  ready  to  lay  down.6  There
was,  through  some  misapprehension,  a  delay  in  reporting  this
answer  to  F arnese.  Meantime  that  general  became  impatient,
and  advanced  to  the  battery  of  the  Italian  regiment.  Pre¬
tending  to  be  a  plenipotentiary  from  the  commander-in-
chief,  he  expostulated  in  a  loud  voice  at  the  slowness  of  their
counsels.  Hardly  had  he  begun  to  speak,  when  a  shower  of
balls  rattled  about  him.  His  own  soldiers  were  terrified  at
his  danger,  and  a  cry  arose  in  the  town  that  “  Holofernese " —

g

4  Same  to  the  Queen,—  July.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

5  Strada,  II.  430.

6  North  to  Burghley,  26  July,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Meteren,  xiii.  235vo.

2  Bruce’s  *  Leyc.  Corresp.’  250.

20

3  Leicester  to  Burghley,  —  July,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

28  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  IX.

i  x

as  the  Flemings  and  Germans  were  accustomed  to  nickname
Farnese — was  dead.1  Strange  to  relate,  he  was  quite  un¬
harmed,  and  walked  hack  to  his  tent  with  dignified  slowness
and  a  very  frowning  face.  It  was  said  that  this  breach  of
truce  had  been  begun  by  the  Spaniards,  who  had  tired  first,
and  had  been  immediately  answered  by  the  town.  This  was
hotly  denied,  and  Parma  sent  Colonel  Tassis  with  a  flag  of
truce  to  the  commander,  to  rebuke  and  to  desire  an  explana¬
tion  of  this  dishonourable  conduct.2

The  answer  given,  or  imagined,  was  that  Commander  Kloet
had  been  sound  asleep,  but  that  he  now  much  regretted  this
untoward  accident.  The  explanation  was  received  with  deri¬
sion,  for  it  seemed  hardly  probable  that  so  young  and  energetic
a  soldier  would  take  the  opportunity  to  refresh  himself  with
slumber  at  a  moment  when  a  treaty  for  the  capitulation  of  a
city  under  his  charge  was  under  discussion.  This  terminated
the  negociation.3

A  few  days  afterwards,  the  feast  of  St.  James  was  celebrated
in  the  Spanish  camp,  with  bonfires  and  other  demonstrations
of  hilarity.  The  townsmen  are  said  to  have  desecrated  the
same  holiday  by  roasting  alive  in  the  market-place  two  un¬
fortunate  soldiers,  who  had  been  captured  in  a  sortie  a  few
days  before  ;  besides  burning  the  body  of  the  holy  Saint  Qui-
rinus,  with  other  holy  relics.4  The  detestable  deed  was  to
be  most  horribly  avenged.

A  steady  cannonade  from  forty-five  great  guns  was  kept  up
from  2  a.m.  of  July  15  until  the  dawn  of  the  following  day;

16  July,  the  cannoneers  being  all  provided  with  milk  and

1586.  vinegar  to  cool  the  pieces.5  At  daybreak  the  assault
was  ordered.  Eight  separate  attacks  were  made  with  the
usual  impetuosity  of  Spaniards,  and  were  steadily  repulsed.0

1  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  179.

3  Strada,  II.  433.  Hoofd,  ubi  sup.

3  Hoofd.  Strada,  ubi  sup.  Me-
teren,  xiii.  236  seq.

4  Parma  to  Philip  II.  4  Aug.  1586.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  Compare
Strada  II.  434.

Therp  is  no  authority  but  that  of
Farnese  for  the  statement  of  this
horrible  crime,  but  I  feel  it  my  duty
to  record  it.

5  North  to  Burghley,  26  July,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  ^

6  Ibid.

1586.

HE  BESIEGES  AND  ASSAULTS  NEUSZ.

29

At  the  ninth,  the  outer  wall  was  carried,  and  the  Spaniards
shouting  “  Santiago”  poured  over  it,  hearing  back  all  resistance.
An  Italian  Knight  of  the  Sepulchre,  Cesar  Guidiccioni  by
name,  and  a  Spanish  ensign,  one  Alphonso  de  Mesa,  with  his
colours  in  one  hand  and  a  ladder  in  the  other,  each  claimed
the  honour  of  having  first  mounted  the  breach.  Both  being
deemed  equally  worthy  of  reward,  Parma,  after  the  city  had
been  won,  took  from  his  own  cap  a  sprig  of  jewels  and  a
golden  wheat-ear  ornamented  with  a  gem,  which  he  had
himself  worn  in  place  of  a  plume,  and  thus  presented  each
with  a  brilliant  token  of  his  regard.1  The  wall  was  then
strengthened  against  the  inner  line  of  fortification,  and  all
night  long  a  desperate  conflict  was  maintained  in  the  dark
upon  the  narrow  space  between  the  two  barriers.  Before  day¬
light  Kloet,  who  then,  as  always,  had  led  his  men  in  the  most
desperate  adventures,  was  carried  into  the  town,  wounded  in
five  places,  and  with  his  leg  almost  severed  at  the  thigh.2
“’Tis  the  bravest  man,”  said  the  enthusiastic  Lord  North,
“  that  was  ever  heard  of  in  the  world.” 3  “  He  is  but  a  boy,”

said  Alexander  Farnese,  “but  a  commander  of  extraordinary
capacity  and  valour.” 4

Early  in  the  morning,  when  this  mishap  was  known,  an
officer  was  sent  to  the  camp  of  the  besiegers  to  treat.  The
soldiers  received  him  with  furious  laughter,  and  denied  him
access  to  the  general.  “  Commander  Kloet  had  waked  from
his  nap  at  a  wrong  time,”  they  said,  “and  the  Prince  of
Parma  was  now  sound  asleep,  in  his  turn.”5  There  was  no
possibility  of  commencing  a  negociation.  The  Spaniards,
heated  by  the  conflict,  maddened  by  opposition,  and  inspired
by  the  desire  to  sack  a  wealthy  city,  overpowered  all  resistance.
“My  little  soldiers  were  not  to  be  restrained,”6  said  Farnese,
and  so  compelling  a  reluctant  consent  on  the  part  of  the
commander-in-chief  to  an  assault,  the  Italian  and  Spanish

1  Strada.  II.  435.

2  Ibid.  436.  North  to  Burghley,  MS.

3  North  to  Burghley,  MS.

4  Parma  to  Philip,  4  Aug.  1586.  MS.

6  Strada,  II.  431.

6  Parma  to  Philip,  4  Aug.  1586.
(A.rch.  de  Simancas,  MS.)

30

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

legions  poured  into  the  town  at  two  opposite  gates,  which
were  no  longer  strong  enough  to  withstand  the  enemy.  The
two  streams  met  in  the  heart  of  the  place,  and  swept  every
living  thing  in  their  path  out  of  existence.  The  garrison  was
butchered  to  a  man,  and  subsequently  many  of  the  inhabitants
— men,  women,  and  children — also,  although  the  women,  to
the  honour  of  Alexander,  had  been  at  first  secured  from  harm
in  some  of  the  churches,  where  they  had  been  ordered  to  take
refuge.  The  first  blast  of  indignation  was  against  the  com¬
mandant  of  the  place.  Alexander,  who  had  admired  his
courage,  was  not  unfavourably  disposed  towards  him,  but
Archbishop  Ernest  vehemently  demanded  his  immediate
death,  as  a  personal  favour  to  himself.1  As  the  churchman
was  nominally  sovereign  of  the  city,  although  in  reality  a
beggarly  dependant  on  Philip's  alms,  Farnese  felt  bound  to
comply.  The  manner  in  which  it  was  at  first  supposed  that
the  Bishop's  Christian  request  had  been  complied  with,  sent
a  shudder  through  every  heart  in  the  Netherlands.  “  They
took  Kloet,  wounded  as  he  was,"  said  Lord  North,  “and  first
strangled  him,  then  smeared  him  with  pitch,  and  burnt  him
with  gunpowder ;  thus,  with  their  holiness,  they  made  a
tragical  end  of  an  heroical  service.  It  is  wondered  that  the
Prince  would  suffer  so  great  an  outrage  to  be  done  to  so  noble
a  soldier,  who  did  but  his  duty."2

But  this  was  an  error.  A  Jesuit  priest3  was  sent  to  the

1  Tho  Jesuit  Strada,  II.  438,  is  the
authority  for  the  statement,  founded
upon  Alexander’s  own  letters;  more
of  which  were  before  him  than  can
now  be  found  in  any  single  collection
of  documents.  I  have  noticed  very
few  of  the  Simancas  letters  relating
to  Farnese  that  do  not  seem  to  have
been  at  Strada’s  disposal — although,  of
course,  he  only  gives  a  very  brief  epi¬
tome  of  them  in  the  Latin  language
— while  he  has  used  many  others  of
which  there  are  no  copies  at  Simancas.

2  North  to  Burghley,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Leicester’s  account
was  still  more  horrible — “After  Kloet
was  brought  to  the  market-place,”  he

wrote  to  "Walsingham,  “  being  sore-
wounded  before,  they  laid  him  upon  a
table,  and  bound  him,  and  anointed
him  with  tar  all  over  his  body,  and
half- strangling  him,  burnt  him  cruelly.”
Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  369,  2AJ“ly
1586.  g,?

Other  English  letters  described  the
fate  of  the  commandant  in  a  similar
manner,  but  the  crime,  although
odious,  was  not  quite  so  atrocious  as
it  was  at  first  believed  to  be.  *

3  “Ad  quem  lecto  jacentum  misso
Societatis  Jesu  sacerdote,  cujus  opera
in  eo  saltern  mortis  articulo  a  secunda
se  morte  prmriperat,”  &c.  Strada,  IL
438.

1586.  HORRIBLE  FATE  OF  THE  GARRISON  AND  CITY.  21

house  of  the  commandant,  for  a  humane  effort  was  thought
necessary  in  order  to  save  the  soul  of  the  man  whose  life  w~as
forfeited  for  the  crime  of  defending  his  city.  The  culprit  was
found  lying  in  bed.  His  wife,  a  woman  of  remarkable  beauty,1
with  her  sister,  was  in  attendance  upon  him.  The  spectacle
of  those  two  fair  women,  nursing  a  wounded  soldier  fallen
upon  the  field  of  honour,  might  have  softened  devils  with
sympathy.  But  the  Jesuit  was  closely  followed  by  a  band  of
soldiers,  who,  notwithstanding  the  supplications  of  the  women,
and  the  demand  of  Kloet  to  be  indulged  with  a  soldier’s
death,  tied  a  rope  round  the  commandant’s  neck,  dragged
him  from  his  bed,  and  hanged  him  from  his  own  window.
The  Calvinist  clergyman,  Fosserus  of  Oppenheim,  the  deacons
of  the  congregation,  two  military  officers,  and — said  Parma —
u  forty  other  rascals,”  were  murdered  in  the  same  way  at  the
same  time.2  The  bodies  remained  at  the  window  till  they
were  devoured  by  the  flames,  which  soon  consumed  the  house.
For  a  vast  conflagration,  caused  none  knew  whether  by  acci¬
dent,  by  the  despair  of  the  inhabitants,  by  the  previous
arrangements  of  the  commandant,  by  the  latest-arrived  bands
of  the  besiegers  enraged  that  the  Italians  and  Spaniards  had
been  beforehand  with  them  in  the  spoils,  or — as  Farnese  more
maturely  believed — by  the  special  agency  of  the  Almighty,
offended  with  the  burning  of  Saint  Quirinus,3  now  came  to
complete  the  horror  of  the  scene.  Three-quarters  of  the  town
were  at  once  in  a  blaze.  The  churches,  where  the  affrighted
women  had  been  cowering  during  the  sack  and  slaughter,
were  soon  on  fire,  and  now,  amid  the  crash  of  falling  houses
and  the  uproar  of  the  drunken  soldiery,  those  unhapjiy  victims
were  seen  flitting  along  the  flaming  streets,  seeking  refuge
against  the  fury  of  the  elements  in  the  more  horrible  cruelty
of  man.  The  fire  lasted  all  day  and  night,  and  not  one  stone
would  have  been  left  upon  another,  had  not  the  body  of

1  Strada,  II.  MS.  last  cited.

2  “Se  ahorcaron  con  el  comandante,
el  ministro,  los  consistoriantes,  y  qua-
ranta  otros  vellacos,”  &c.  Parma  to

Philip,  4  Aug.  1586.  (Arch,  de  Siman-

cas,  MS.)  Compare  Strada,  II.  438
Meteren,  xiii.  236.  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,
119,  180.  Bor,  II.  138.

3  Strada,  II.  441,  442.

32

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

a  second  saint,  saved  on  a  former  occasion  from  the  heretics
by  the  piety  of  a  citizen,  been  fortunately  deposited  in  his
house.  At  this  point  the  conflagration  was  stayed — for  the
flames  refused  to  consume  these  holy  relics1 — but  almost
the  whole  of  the  town  was  destroyed,  while  at  least  four  thou¬
sand  people,  citizens  and  soldiers,  had  perished  by  sword  or
fire.” 2

Three  hundred  survivors  of  the  garrison  took  refuge  in  a
tower.  Its  base  was  surrounded,  and,  after  brief  parley,  they

4  Aug.,  descended  as  prisoners.  The  Prince  and  Haultepenne
1586-  attempted  in  vain  to  protect  them  against  the  fury

of  the  soldiers,  and  every  man  of  them  was  instantly  put  to
death.3

The  next  day,  Alexander  gave  orders  that  the  wife  and
sister  of  the  commandant  should  be  protected — for  they  had
escaped,  as  if  by  miracle,  from  all  the  horrors  of  that  day  and
night — and  sent,  under  escort,  to  their  friends.4  Neusz  had
nearly  ceased  to  exist,  for,  according  to  contemporaneous
accounts,  but  eight  houses  had  escaped  destruction.

And  the  reflection  was  most  painful  to  Leicester  and  to  every
generous  Englishman  or  Netherlander  in  the  country,  that
this  important  city  and  its  heroic  defenders  might  have  been
preserved,  but  for  want  of  harmony  and  want  of  money.6
Twice  had  the  Earl  got  together  a  force  of  four  thousand  men
for  the  relief  of  the  place,  and  twice  had  he  been  obliged  to  dis¬
band  them  again  for  the  lack  of  funds  to  set  them  in  the  field.

1  Strada,  II.  440.  2  Ibid.  442.

3  Ibid.  439.  4  Ibid.  438.

5  Bor,  II.  ^3 8.  Stowe,  734.  Hoofd,

Vervolgk,  179,  180.  Meteren,  xiii.

236,  seq.  Strada,  II.  436-442.  Parma
to  Philip  II.  4  Aug.  1586.  (Arch,  de
Simancas,  MS.)

North  to  Burgh  ley,  1586.

12

Same  to  same,  —  Aug.  1586.  Leicester

to  Burghley,  ™  T.  Cecil  to  same,

—  July.  B.  Clerko  to  same,  -,1— luly  ‘

31  J  ’3  Aug.

W.  Knollys  to  same,  }_  Aug.  T.  Boy-

n

ley  to  same,  -  Aug.  (S.  P.  Office
MSS.)  13

6  Sir  Thomas  Cecil,  eldest  son  of
the  Lord  Treasurer,  was  then  governor
of  the  cautionary  town  of  Brill.  It
had  been  proposed  to  him  to  change
this  government  for  that  of  Harlington
in  Friesland,  where  Lord  North  was
then  installed.  But  Cecil  observed
that  he  was  “resolved  to  keep  the
Brill  still,  as  one  that  would  rather
keep  a  shrew  he  knoweth  than  a  shrew
he  knoweth  not.”  He  was  much  dis¬
gusted  with  the  perpetual  discord
which  had  succeeded  the  brief  enthu-

1586.  WHICH  LEICESTER  WAS  UNABLE  TO  RELIEVE.  33

He  had  pawned  his  plate  and  other  valuables/  exhausted  his
credit,  and  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  wait  for  the  Queen's  tardy
remittances,  and  to  wrangle  with  the  States  ;  for  the  leaders
of  that  body  were  unwilling  to  accord  large  supplies  to  a
man  who  had  become  personally  suspected  by  them,  and  was
the  representative  of  a  deeply-suspected  government.  Mean¬
while,  one-third  at  least  of  the  money  which  really  found  its
way  from  time  to  time  out  of  England,  was  filched  from  the
“poor  starved  wretches,"  as  Leicester  called  his  soldiers,  by
the  dishonesty  of  Norris,  uncle  of  Sir  John  and  army- trea¬
surer.  This  man  was  growing  so  rich  on  his  peculations,
on  his  commissions,  and  on  his  profits  from  paying  the
troops  in  a  depreciated  coin,  that  Leicester  declared  the
whole  revenue  of  his  own  landed  estates  in  England  to  be
less  than  that  functionary's  annual  income.2  Thus  it  was
difficult  to  say  whether  the  “  ragged  rogues"  of  Elizabeth  or
the  maimed  and  neglected  soldiers  of  Philip  were  in  the  more
pitiable  plight.

The  only  consolation  in  the  recent  reduction  of  Neusz  was
to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  Parma  had  only  gained  a  position,
for  the  town  had  ceased  to  exist ;  and  in  the  fiction  that  he
had  paid  for  his  triumph  by  the  loss  of  six  thousand  soldiers,
killed  and  wounded.3  In  reality  not  more  than  five  hundred
of  Farnese's  armv  lost  their  lives/  and  although  the  town,

siasm  upon  Leicester’s  arrival.  The
wrangling  between  Leicester  and  his
officers,  and  between  them  all  and  the
States,  offended  the  young  soldier  so
much  that  he  was  anxious  to  leave  the
Netherlands.  “Bravely  was  Nuys  de¬
fended  by  Kloet,  but  evil  relieved  by
us,”  he  wrote  to  his  father.  “  Our
affairs  here  be  such  as  that  which  we
conclude  overnight  is  broke  in  the
morning;  we  agree  not  one  with  an¬
other,  but  we  are  divided  in  many  fac¬
tions,  so  as  if  the  enemy  were  as  strong
as  we  are  factious  and  irresolute,  I
think  we  should  make  shipwreck  of
the  cause  this  summer.”  Sir  T.  Cecil

to  Lord  Burghley,  —  July,  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

VOL.  II. — D

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,

10

20

Aug.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  260,  264,
299,  303.

3  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’ 363.  “He
has  lost  3,000  of  his  soldiers  and
as  many  hurt.”  (!).  Leicester  to
Walsingham,  27  July,  1586.  “Of
the  enemy  not  less  than  3,000  slain,”
said  North,  26  July,  MS.  ubi  supra.
“The  town  is  gone,  clean  burnt  to
the  ground,”  wrote  Leicester  to  Burgh¬
ley,  “  and  to  the  number  of  4,000
dead  in  the  ditches .”  Letter  of

!9  July

i  Aug.

MS.  ubi  supra.

12

Xii

4  North,  to  Burghley,  —  Aug.  MS.

22

34

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

excepting  some  churches,  had  certainly  been  destroyed  ;  yet
the  Prince  was  now  master  of  the  Rhine  as  far  as  Cologne,
and  of  the  Meuse  as  far  as  Grave.  The  famine  which  pressed
so  sorely  upon  him,  might  now  be  relieved,  and  his  military
communications  with  Germany  be  considered  secure.

The  conqueror  now  turned  his  attention  to  Rheinberg,
twenty-five  miles  farther  down  the  river.1

Sir  Philip  Sidney  had  not  been  well  satisfied  by  the  com¬
parative  idleness  in  which,  from  these  various  circumstances,
he  had  been  compelled  to  remain.  Early  in  the  spring  he
had  been  desirous  of  making  an  attack  upon  Elanders  by
capturing  the  town  of  Steenberg.  The  faithful  Roger  Williams
had  strongly  seconded  the  proposal.  uWe  wish  to  show  your
Excellency/'  said  he  to  Leicester,  “that  we  are  not  sound
asleep."2 3  The  Welshman  was  not  likely  to  be  accused  of
somnolence,  but  on  this  occasion  Sidney  and  himself  had  been
overruled.  At  a  later  moment,  and  during  the  siege  of  Neusz,
Sir  Philip  had  the  satisfaction  of  making  a  successful  foray
into  Flanders.

The  expedition  had  been  planned  by  Prince  Maurice  of
^Nassau,  and  was  his  earliest  military  achievement.  He  pro¬
posed  carrying  by  surprise  the  city  of  Axel,  a  well-built,
strongly-fortified  town  on  the  south-western  edge  of  the  great
Scheldt  estuary,  and  very  important  from  its  position.  Its
acquisition  would  make  the  hold  of  the  patriots  and  the
English  upon  Sluys  and  Ostend  more  secure,  and  give  them
many  opportunities  of  annoying  the  enemy  in  Flanders.

Early  in  July,  Maurice  wrote  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  com¬
municating  the  particulars  of  his  scheme,  but  begging  that
the  affair  might  be  “  very  secretly  handled,"  and  kept  from
every  one  but  Sidney.  Leicester  accordingly  sent  his  nephew
to  Maurice  that  they  might  consult  together  upon  the  enter¬
prise,  and  make  sure  “  that  there  was  no  ill  intent,  there  being

1  Bor,  Hoofd,  Meteren,  Strada,  ubi  158G.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  ix.  p.  85.

supra.  "  MS.)

3  Williams  to  Leicester,  —  Feb.

1586.

AXEL  SURPRISED  BY  MAURICE  AND  SIDNEY.

35

so  much  treachery  in  the  world.  "1  Sidney  found  no  trea¬
chery  in  young  Maurice,  hut  only  a  noble  and  intelligent
love  of  adventure,  and  the  two  arranged  their  plans  in  har¬
mony.

Leicester,  then,  in  order  to  deceive  the  enemy,  came  to
Bergen-op-Zoom,  with  five  hundred  men,  where  he  remained
two  days,  not  sleeping  a  wink,  as  he  averred,  during  17  juiy,

the  whole  time.  In  the  night  of  Tuesday,  16th  of  1586-

July,  the  five  hundred  English  soldiers  were  despatched  by
water,  under  charge  of  Lord  Willoughby,  “  who/'  said  the
Earl,  u  would  needs  go  with  them/'  Young  Hatton,  too,  son  of
Sir  Christopher,  also  volunteered  on  the  service,  “  as  his  first
nursling."1 2  Sidney  had  five  hundred  of  his  own  Zeeland
regiment  in  readiness,  and  the  rendezvous  was  upon  the  broad
waters  of  the  Scheldt,  opposite  Flushing.3  The  plan  was
neatly  carried  out,  and  the  united  flotilla,  in  a  dark,  calm,
midsummer's  night,  rowed  across  the  smooth  estuary  and
landed  at  Ter  Neuse,  about  a  league  from  Axel.  Here  they
were  joined  by  Maurice  with  some  Netherland  companies,  and
the  united  troops,  between  two  and  three  thousand  strong,
marched  at  once  to  the  place  proposed.  Before  two  in  the
morning  they  had  reached  Axel,  but  found  the  moat  very
deep.  Forty  soldiers  immediately  plunged  in,  however,  carry¬
ing  their  ladders  with  them,  swam  across,  scaled  the  rampart,
killed  the  guard,  whom  they  found  asleep  in  their  beds,  and
opened  the  gates  for  their  comrades.  The  whole  force  then
marched  in,  the  Dutch  companies  under  Colonel  Pyron  being
first,  Lord  Willoughby's  men  being  second,  and  Sir  Philip
with  his  Zeelanders  bringing  up  the  rear.4  The  garrison,
between  five  and  six  hundred  in  number,  though  surprised,
resisted  gallantly,  and  were  all  put  to  the  sword.  Of  the

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  —  July,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Bruce’s  1  Leyc.  Corresp.’  338.

3  “Before  Flushing,  upon  the  water,
that  it  might  be  less  noted.”  Leicester
to  the  Queen,  MS.  before  cited.

4  Sir  T.  Cecil  to  Lord  Burghley,  ^

July,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Leicester,  however,  says,  “  My  ne¬
phew  Sidney,  with  his  band,  would
needs  have  the  first  entry,  as  the  mes¬
senger  told  me”  (Letter  to  the  Queen,
ubi  slip.) ;  but  the  messenger  seems  to
have  been  mistaken.

36

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IS.

invaders,  not  a  single  man  lost  his  life.  Sidney  most  gene¬
rously  rewarded  from  his  own  purse  the  adventurous  soldiers
who  had  swum  the  moat ;  and  it  was  to  his  care  and  intelli¬
gence  that  the  success  of  Prince  Maurice's  scheme  was  generally
attributed.  The  achievement  was  hailed  with  great  satisfac¬
tion,  and  it  somewhat  raised  the  drooping  spirits  of  the  patriots
after  their  severe  losses  at  Grave  and  Yenlo.  “  This  victory
hath  happened  in  good  time,"  wrote  Thomas  Cecil  to  his
father,  “and  hath  made  us  somewhat  to  lift  up  our  heads."1
A  garrison  of  eight  hundred,  under  Colonel  Pyron,  was  left
in  Axel,  and  the  dykes  around  were  then  pierced.  Upwards
of  two  millions'  worth  of  property  in  grass,  cattle,  corn,  was
thus  immediately  destroyed2  in  the  territory  of  the  obedient
Netherlands.

After  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  surprise  Gravelines,3  the
governor  of  which  place,  the  veteran  La  Motte,  was  not  so
easily  taken  napping,  Sir  Philip  having  gained  much  reputa¬
tion  by  this  conquest  of  Axel,  then  joined  the  main  body  of
the  army,  under  Leicester,  at  Arnheim.4

Yet,  after  all,  Sir  Philip  had  not  grown  in  favour  with  her
Majesty  during  his  service  in  the  Low  Countries.  He  had  also
been  disappointed  in  the  government  of  Zeeland,  to  which  post
Lis  uncle  had  destined  him.  The  cause  of  Leicester's  ambi¬
tion  had  been  frustrated  by  the  policy  of  Barneveld  and  Buys,
in  pursuance  of  which  Count  or  Prince  Maurice — as  he  was
now  purposely  designated,  in  order  that  his  rank  might  sur¬
pass  that  of  the  Earl5 — had  become  stadholder  and  captain-

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  ubi  supra.

2  Leicester  to  Burghley,  A— _'y

8  Aug.’

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  Your  Lordship  will  not  believe
how  the  town  of  Axel  is  like  to  annoy
these  parts.  There  is  already  so  much
corn,  cattle,  and  grass  destroyed,  as  is
worth  two  million^  of  florins.”

3  Meteren,  xiii.  236vo.

4  Letters  of  Leicester  and  of  Sir  T.
Cecil  above  cited.  Compare  Meteren,
xiii.  236.  Brooke’s  Life  of  Sidney,  II.

15.  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  181,  182;  Bor,

II.  738;  Wagenaar,  viii.  134.  Bruce’s
‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  337,  338.

5  His  elder  brother,  Philip  ‘William,
son  of  William  the  Silent,  by  his  first
wife  Anna  de  Buren,  was  Prince  of
Orange,  but  was  still  detained  captive
in  Spain.  The  title  of  Prince  was
given  by  courtesy  to  Maurice,  on  the
ground  that  in  Germany  all  the  sons
succeeded  to  the  father’s  title.  As
the  principality  of  Orange  was  not  in
Germany,  and  as  the  title  of  William
in  that  country  was  only  that  of
Count,  it  was  difficult  to  see  any  claim

1586.

THE  ZEELAND  REGIMENT  GIYEN  TO  SIDNEY.

37

general  both  of  Holland  and  Zeeland.  The  Earl  had  given
his  .nephew,  however,  the  colonelcy  of  the  Zeeland  regiment,
vacant  by  the  death  of  Admiral  Haultain  on  the  Kowenstyn
Dyke.  This  promotion  had  excited  much  anger  among  the
high  officers  in  the  Netherlands,  who,  at  the  instigation  of
Count  Hohenlo,  had  presented  a  remonstrance  upon  the  sub¬
ject  to  the  governor-general.  It  had  always  been  the  custom,
they  said,  with  the  late  Prince  of  Orange,  to  confer  promotion
according  to  seniority,  without  regard  to  social  rank,  and  they
were  therefore  unwilling  that  a  young  foreigner,  who  had  just
entered  the  service,  should  thus  be  advanced  over  the  heads
of  veterans  who  had  been  campaigning  there  so  many  weary
years.1  At  the  same  time  the  gentlemen  who  signed  the
paper  protested  to  Sir  Philip,  in  another  letter,  u  with  all  the
same  hands,”  that  they  had  no  personal  feeling  towards  him,
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  they  wished  him  all  honour.” 2

Young  Maurice  himself  had  always  manifested  the  most
friendly  feelings  toward  Sidney,  although  influenced  in  his
action  by  the  statesmen  who  were  already  organizing  a  power¬
ful  opposition  to  Leicester.  u  Count  Maurice  showed  himself
constantly  kind  in  the  matter  of  the  regiment,”  said  Sir
Philip,  “  but  Mr.  Paul  Buss  has  so  many  busses  in  his  head,
such  as  you  shall  find  he  will  be  to  God  and  man  about  one
pitch.  Happy  is  the  communication  of  them  that  join  in  the
fear  of  God.”3  Hohenlo,  too,  or  Hollock,  as  he  was  called
by  the  French  and  English,  was  much  governed  by  Buys  and
Olden-Barneveld.  Beckless  and  daring,  but  loose  of  life  and
uncertain  of  purpose,  he  was  most  dangerous,  unless  under
safe  guidance.  Koger  Williams — who  vowed  that  but  for
the  love  he  bore  to  Sidney  and  Leicester,  he  would  not  remain
ten  days  in  the  Netherlands — was  much  disgusted  by  Ho-
henlo’s  conduct  in  regard  to  the  Zeeland  regiment.  u  Tis  a
mutinous  request  of  Hollock,”  said  he,  u  that  strangers  should
not  command  Netherlanders.  He  and  his  Alemaynes  are

of  Maurice  to  be  entitled  Prince  so
long  as  his  brother  was  alive.  Lei¬
cester  always  considered  his  assump¬
tion  of  this  superior  rank  as  a  per¬
sonal  affront  to  himself.

1  Sidney  to  Davison,  24  Feb.  1586.

(Brit.  Mus.  Galba  0.  ix.  1 5,  MS.)  Com¬
pare  letters  of  Hohenlo  in  Bor,  III.
123  seq.  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  156,  157,
Wagenaar,  viii.  129.

3  Sidney  to  Davison,  ubi  supra.

3  Ibid.

38

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

farther  born  from  Zeeland  than  Sir  Philip  is.  Either  you  must
make  Hollock  assured  to  you,  or  you  must  disgrace  him.  If
he  will  not  be  yours,  I  will  show  you  means  to  disinherit  him
of  all  his  commands  at  small  danger.  What  service  doth  he,
Count  Solms,  Count  Overstein,  with  their  Almaynes,  but
spend  treasure  and  consume  great  contributions  P  " 1

It  Avas  very  natural  that  the  chivalrous  Sidney,  who  had
come  to  the  Netherlands  to  win  glory  in  the  field,  should  be
desirous  of  posts  that  would  bring  danger  and  distinction  with
them.  He  was  not  there  merely  that  he  might  govern  Flush¬
ing,  important  as  it  was,  particularly  as  the  garrison  was,
according  to  his  statement,  about  as  able  to  maintain  the
town,  “as  the  Tower  was  to  answer  for  London/'  He  dis¬
approved  of  his  wife's  inclination  to  join  him  in  Holland,  for
he  was  likely — so  he  wrote  to  her  father,  Walsingham — “to
run  such  a  course  as  would  not  be  fit  for  any  of  the  feminine
gender." 2  He  had  been,  howrever,  grieved  to  the  heart,  by
the  spectacle  which  was  perpetually  exhibited  of  the  Queen's
parsimony,  and  of  the  consequent  suffering  of  the  soldiers.
Twelve  or  fifteen  thousand  Englishmen  were  serving  in  the
Netherlands — more  than  two  thirds  of  them  in  her  Majesty's
immediate  employment.  No  troops  had  ever  fought  better,
or  more  honourably  maintained  the  ancient  glory  of  England.
But  rarely  had  more  ragged  and  wretched  warriors  been  seen
than  they,  after  a  few  months'  campaigning.

The  Irish  Kernes — some  fifteen  hundred  of  whom  were
among  the  auxiliaries — vrere  better  off,  for  they  habitually
dispensed  with  clothing ;  an  apron  from  waist  to  knee  being
the  only  protection  of  these  wild  Kelts,  who  fought  with  the
valour,  and  nearly  in  the  costume  of  Homeric  heroes.  Fear¬
ing  nothing,  needing  nothing,  sparing  nothing,  they  stalked
about  the  fens  of  Zeeland  upon  their  long  stilts,  or  leaped
across  running  rivers,  scaling  ramparts,  robbing  the  highways,
burning,  butchering,  and  maltreating  the  villages  and  their
inhabitants,  with  as  little  regard  for  the  laws  of  Christian
warfare  as  for  those  of  civilized  costume.3

,  17

1  R.  "Williams  to  Leicester,  —  Feb.  1586.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  ix.  85.  MS.)

2  Letters  in  Gray’s  Life  of  Sydney,  291.

3  Reyd,  v.  101.  Hoofd,  Tervolgh,  220.  Strada,  II.  446.

1586.  CONDITION  OP  IRISH  AND  ENGLISH  TROOPS.  39

Other  soldiers,  more  sophisticated  as  to  apparel,  were  less
at  their  ease.  The  generous  Sidney  spent  all  his  means,  and
loaded  himself  with  debt,  in  order  to  relieve  the  necessities
of  the  poor 'soldiers.  He  protested  that  if  the  Queen  would
not  pay  her  troops,  she  would  lose  her  troops,  hut  that  no
living  man  should  say  the  fault  was  in  him.  “  What  relief  I
can  do  them  I  will,”  he  wrote  to  his  father-in-law ;  “  I  will
spare  no  danger,  if  occasion  serves.  I  am  sure  that  no
creature  shall  lay  injustice  to  my  charge/' 1

Very  soon  it  was  discovered  that  the  starving  troops  had  to
contend  not  only  with  the  Queen's  niggardliness  hut  with  the
dishonesty  of  her  agents.  Treasurer  Norris  was  constantly
accused  by  Leicester  and  Sidney  of  gross  peculation.  Five
per  cent.,  according  to  Sir  Philip,  was  lost  to  the  Zeeland
soldiers  in  every  payment,  “  and  Giod  knows,"  he  said,  “  they
want  no  such  hindrance,  being  scarce  able  to  keep  life  with
their  entire  pay.  Truly  it  is  but  poor  increase  to  her  Ma¬
jesty,  considering  what  loss  it  is  to  the  miserable  soldier."
Discipline  and  endurance  were  sure  to  be  sacrificed,  in  the
end,  to  such  short-sighted  economy.  “  When  soldiers,"  said
Sidney,  “  grow  to  despair,  and  give  up  towns,  then  it  is  too
late  to  buy  with  hundred  thousands  what  might  have  been
saved  with  a  trifle." 2

This  plain  dealing,  on  the  part  of  Sidney,  was  anything  but
agreeable  to  the  Queen,  who  was  far  from  feeling  regret  that
his  high- soaring  expectations  had  been  somewhat  blighted  in
the  Provinces.  He  often  expressed  his  mortification  that  her
Majesty  was  disposed  to  interpret  everything  to  his  dis¬
advantage.  “I  understand,"  said  he,  “that  I  am  called
ambitious,  and  very  proud  at  home,  but  certainly,  if  they  knew
my  heart,  they  would  not  altogether  so  judge  me." 3  Eliza¬
beth  had  taken  part  with  Hohenlo  against  Sir  Philip  in  the
matter  of  the  Zeeland  regiment,  and  in  this  perhaps  she  was
not  entirely  to  be  blamed.  But  she  inveighed  needlessly
against  his  ambitious  seeking  of  the  office,  and — as  Walsing-
ham  observed — “  she  was  very  apt,  upon  every  light  occasion,

1  Letters,  in  Gray,  290.  2  Ibid.  214,  321.

3  Ibid.  290.  Brace’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  345.

40

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

to  find  fault  with  him." 1  It  is  probable  that  his  complaints
against  the  army  treasurer,  and  his  manful  defence  of  the
“miserable  soldiers,"  more  than  counterbalanced,  in  the
Queen's  estimation,  his  chivalry  in  the  field.

Nevertheless  he  had  now  the  satisfaction  of  having  gained
an  important  city  in  Flanders  ;  and  on  subsequently  joining
the  army  under  his  uncle,  he  indulged  the  hope  of  earning
still  greater  distinction.

Martin  Schenk  had  meanwhile  been  successfully  defending
Bheinberg,  for  several  weeks,  against  Parma's  forces.  It  was
necessary,  however,  that  Leicester,  notwithstanding  the  im¬
poverished  condition  of  his  troops,  should  make  some  diver¬
sion,  while  his  formidable  antagonist  was  thus  carrying  all
before  him.

He  assembled,  accordingly,  in  the  month  of  August,  all  the
troops  that  could  be  brought  into  the  field,  and  reviewed
them,  with  much  ceremony,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arn-
heim.  His  army  barely  numbered  seven  thousand  foot  and
two  thousand  horse,2  but  he  gave  out,  very  extensively,  that
he  had  fourteen  thousand  under  his  command,3  and  he  was
moreover  expecting  a  force  of  three  thousand  reiters,  and  as
many  pikemen  recently  levied  in  Germany.  Lord  Essex  was
general  of  the  cavalry,  Sir  William  Pelham4 — a  distinguished

1  Letters,  in  Gray,  &c. ,  just  cited.

2  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  11  Oct.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Huddleston

to  Burghley,  6  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

3  Ibid.  Compare  Strada,  who  states
the  number  of  Leicester’s  forces  at
13,000  foot  and  2,000  horse,  besides
reinforcements  of  1,000  English  and
Scotch  who  were  shortly  expected.
Bor,  II.  *738.  Wagenaar,  viii.  135.

4  Sir  William  Pelham  had  been  out
of  favour  with  the  Queen  for  many
months.  He  had  been  held  respon¬
sible  for  some  abuses  in  the  ordnance
office,  and  a  heavy  claim  made  upon
him  by  the  crown  had  reduced  him
to  insolvency.  The  Queen  was  ex¬
cessively  indignant  at  his  conduct,
and  refused  for  a  long  time  to  allow
him  to  accept  the  responsible  post
under  Leicester  which  the  Earl  was
anxious  to  confer  upon  him.  Leicester,

who  was  the  most  generous  of  men,
sent  him  large  sums  of  money  to  extri-
,  cate  him  from  his  difficulties,  but  it
was  many  months  before  the  Queen
relented.  The  Earl  had  an  exalted
opinion  of  Pelham’s  military  capacity,
knew  him  to  be  one  of  his  own  most
devoted  adherents,  and  earnestly  de¬
sired  his  support  to  keep  down  the
hostility  and  insubordination  of  Sir
John  Norris  and  his  brothers.  “  I
begin  to  be  prettily  accompanied  now
with  men,”  he  wrote  to  the  Queen,
“only  lacking  governors  and  leaders,
especially  a  marshal.  I  must  still  say
to  your  Majesty  it  had  been  better  to
have  wanted  the  use  of  20,000  than
the  service  of  Sir  W.  Pelham  here  thus
long.  It  is  not  only  an  insufferable
want  to  all  our  people,  but  the  enemy
hath  bragged  of  it.  I  do  assure  your
Majesty,  by  the  allegiance  I  owe  you,
I  know  the  Prince  of  Parma  hath

1586.

LEICESTER  TAKES  THE  FIELD.

41

soldier,  wlio  had  recently  arrived  out  of  England,  after  the
most  urgent  solicitations  to  the  Queen,  for  that  end,  by  Lei¬
cester — was  lord-marshal  of  the  camp,  and  Sir  John  Norris
was  colonel-general  of  the  infantry.

After  the  parade,  two  sermons  were  preached  upon  the  hill¬
side  to  the  soldiers,  and  then  there  was  a  council  of  war.  It
was  decided — notwithstanding  the  Earl’s  announcement  of
his  intentions  to  attack  Parma  in  person — that  the  condition
of  the  army  did  not  warrant  such  an  enterprise.  It  was
thought  better  to  lay  siege  to  Zutphen.  This  step,  if  success¬
ful,  would  place  in  the  power  of  the  republic  and  her  ally
a  city  of  great  importance  and  strength.  In  every  event  the
attempt  would  probably  compel  Farnese  to  raise  the  siege  of
Berg.

Leicester,  accordingly,  with  “his  brave  troop  of  able  and
likely  men”1 — five  ^  thousand  of  the  infantry  being  English2
— advanced  as  far  as  Doesburg.  This  city,  seated  at  the  con¬
fluence  of  the  ancient  canal  of  Drusus  and  the  Yssel,  five
miles  above  Zutphen,  it  was  necessary,  as  a  preliminary  mea¬
sure,  to  secure.  It  was  not  a  very  strong;  place,  30  Aqg-

.  .  .  °  .  .  9  Sept.)

being  rather  slightly  walled  with  brick,  and  with  a  1586.
foss  drawing  not  more  than  three  feet  of  water.3  By  the
30th  August  it  had  been  completely  invested.

spoken  it  some  months  past,  that  he
was  sure  neither  Pelham  nor  the  Lord
Grey  should  come,  nor  that  any  more
men  by  your  license  or  muster  should
pass ,  which  falls  out  somewhat  to  be
true ,  to  our  discomfort.  But  if  either
Pelham  or  Lord  Grey,  or  rather  both
may  come,  I  trust  your  Majesty  shall
reap  the  greatest  honour  and  good  by
it;  but  first  Sir  William,  for  he  is
readiest.  For  God's  sake  and  your
honour's  sake ,  let  him  come.  We  have
now  some  numbers  increased,  but  no
man  fit  for  such  a  government  as  Sir
W.  Pelham  is.  I  beseech  your  Majesty
trust  me ,  and  believe  me  there  is  not
one ,  no ,  not  one  for  it ,  whatsoever  you
have  heard  or  may  hear ,  or  of  whom¬
soever,  that  I  know  to  be  employed  at
this  time  here.  I  find  it ,  1  feel  it ,  to
my  great  hindrance  and  no  less  danger
every  day.  I  know  here  be  worthy
and  very  valiant  gentlemen,  but  for

so  great  a  charge,  believe  me,  there  is
not  one  yet  here  for  it.  I  am  loath  to
hinder  any  man.  It  hath  not  been
my  custom  to  your  Majesty.  I  be¬
seech  you  that  all  men  may  have  their
deserts,  and  your  poor  army  here  com¬
forted.  Let  all  the  haste  possible  be
used  with  Sir  W.  Pelham,  on  whose
coming  with  that  worthy  gentleman
Sir  W.  Stanley,  I  trust  your  Majesty
shall  hear  well  of  us,”  &c.  &c.  It  was
natural  that  Sir  John  Norris  should
be  indignant  at  being  supplanted  by
Pelham,  and  their  mutual  rivalry  did
infinite  mischief  Leicester  to  the

Queen,  —  June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  Compare  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  31,  45,
55,  125.

1  Huddleston  to  Burghley,  MS.  be¬
fore  cited.

2  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

42

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap  IX.

On  the  same  night,  at  ten  o’clock,  Sir  William  Pelham
came  to  the  Earl  to  tell  him  “what  beastly  pioneers  the
Dutchmen  were.”  Leicester  accordingly  determined,  not¬
withstanding  the  lord-marshal’s  entreaties,  to  proceed  to  the
trenches  in  person.  There  being  but  faint  light,  the  two  lost
their  way,  and  soon  found  themselves  nearly  at  the  gate
of  the  town.  Here,  while  groping  about  in  the  dark,  and
trying  to  effect  their  retreat,  they  were  saluted  with  a  shot,
which  struck  Sir  William  in  the  stomach.  For  an  instant,
thinking  himself  mortally  injured,  he  expressed  his  satis¬
faction  that  he  had  been  between  the  commander-in-chief
and  the  blow,  and  made  other  “  comfortable  and  resolute
speeches.”  Yery  fortunately,  however,  it  proved  that  the
marshal  was  not  seriously  hurt,  and,  after  a  few  days,  he  was
about  his  work  as  usual,  although  obliged — as  the  Earl  of
Leicester  expressed  it — “  to  carry  a  bullet  in  his  belly  as  long
as  he  should  live.” 1

Roger  Williams,  too,  that  valiant  adventurer — “but  no
more  valiant  than  wise,  and  worth  his  weight  in  gold,”  ac¬
cording  to  the  appreciative  Leicester — -was  shot  through  the
arm.  For  the  dare-devil  Welshman,  much  to  the  Earl’s
regret,  persisted  in  running  up  and  down  the  trenches  “  with
a  great  plume  of  feathers  in  his  gilt  morion,”  and  in  otherwise
making  a  very  conspicuous  mark  of  himself  “within  point-
blank  of  a  caliver.”2

Notwithstanding  these  mishaps,  however,  the  siege  went
successfully  forward.  Upon  the  2nd  September  the  Earl
Friday,  began  to  batter,  and  after  a  brisk  cannonade,  from
*  Sept,  dawn  till  two  in  the  afternoon,  he  had  consider-
1586.  ably  damaged  the  wall  in  two  places.  One  of  the
breaches  was  eighty  feet  wide,  the  other  half  as  large,  but  the
besieged  had  stuffed  them  full  of  beds,  tubs,  logs  of  wood,
boards,  and  “  such  like  trash,”  by  means  whereof  the  ascent
was  not  so  easy  as  it  seemed.3  The  soldiers  were  excessively
eager  for  the  assault.  Sir  John  Norris  came  to  Leicester  to
receive  his  orders  as  to  the  command  of  the  attacking  party.

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Cerresp.,  401,  401.  3  Ibid.

s  Huddleston  to  Burghley,  —  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

158G.

HE  REDUCES  DOESBURG.

43

The  Earl  referred  the  matter  to  him.  “  There  is  no  man/'
answered  Sir  John,  u  fitter  for  that  purpose  than  myself ;  for
I  am  colonel-general  of  the  infantry.1

But  Leicester,  not  willing  to  indulge  so  unreasonable  a  pro¬
posal,  replied  that  he  would  reserve  him  for  service  of  less
hazard  and  greater  importance.  Norris  being,  as  usual,
“  satis  prodigus  magnao  animse,’  2  was  out  of  humour  at  the
refusal,  and  ascribed  it  to  the  Earl’s  persistent  hostility  to
him  and  his  family.  It  was  then  arranged  that  the  assault
upon  the  principal  breach  should  be  led  by  younger  officers,  to
be  supported  by  Sir  John  and  other  veterans.  The  other
breach  was  assigned  to  the  Dutch  and  Scotch — black  Norris
scowling  at  them  the  while  with  jealous  eyes  ;  fearing  that
they  might  get  the  start  of  the  English  party,  and  be  first  to
enter  the  town.3  A  party  of  noble  volunteers  clustered  about
Sir  John — Lord  Burgh,  Sir  Thomas  Cecil,  Sir  Philip  Sidney,
and  his  brother  Robert  among  the  rest — most  impatient  for
the  signal.  The  race  was  obviously  to  be  a  sharp  one.  The
governor-general  forbade  these  violent  demonstrations,  but
Lord  Burgh,  “in  a  most  vehement  passion,  waived  the  coun¬
termand,”4  and  his  insubordination  was  very  generally  imi¬
tated.  Before  the  signal  was  given,  however,  Leicester  sent
a  trumpet  to  summon  the  town  to  surrender,  and  lSept
could  wfitli  difficulty  restrain  his  soldiers  till  the  1586.
answer  should  be  returned.  To  the  universal  disappointment,
the  garrison  agreed  to  surrender.  Norris  himself  then  stepped
forward  to  the  breach,  and  cried  aloud  the  terms,  lest  the  re¬
turning  herald,  who  had  been  sent  back  by  Leicester,  should
offer  too  favourable  a  capitulation.5  It  was  arranged  that  the
soldiers  should  retire  without  arms,  with  white  wands  in
4  their  hands — the  officers  remaining  prisoners — and  that  the
burghers,  their  lives,  and  property,  should  be  at  Leicester’s
disposal.6  The  Earl  gave  most  peremptory  orders  that  persons
and  goods  should  be  respected,  but  his  commands  were  dis-

1  MS.  last  cited.
3  Ibid.

3  Ibid.

4  Ibid.

-  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

16

6  “  Lest  the  trumpet  should  offer
too  largely,  I  stepped  to  the  breach
myself  and  proposed  the  conditions,”
&c.  Sir  John  Norris  to  Mr.  Wilkes,

6  U

6  Leicester  to  the  Privy  Council,

3

—  Sept.  1586.  Sir  J.  Norris  to  Wilkes,

ubi  sup.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

44

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

obeyed.  Sir  William  Stanley's  men  committed  frightful  dis¬
orders,  and  thoroughly  rifled  the  town."

“And  because,"  said  Norris,  “I  found  fault  herewith,  Sir
William  began  to  quarrel  with  me,  hath  braved  me  extremely,
refuseth  to  take  any  direction  from  me,  and  although  I  have
sought  for  redress,  yet  it  is  proceeded  in  so  coldly,  that  he
taketh  encouragement  rather  to  increase  the  quarrel  than  to
leave  it." 1

Notwithstanding  therefore  the  decree  of  Leicester,  the  ex¬
postulations  and  anger  of  Norris,  and  the  energetic  efforts  of
Lord  Essex  and  other  generals,  who  went  about  smiting  the
marauders  on  the  head,  the  soldiers  sacked  the  city,  and  com¬
mitted  various  disorders,  in  spite  of  the  capitulation.2

Doesburg  having  been  thus  reduced,  the  Earl  now  pro¬
ceeded  toward  the  more  important  city  which  he  had  deter¬
mined  to  besiege.  Zutphen,  or  South-Fen,  an  antique  town  of
wealth  and  elegance,  was  the  capital  of  the  old  Landgraves
of  Zutphen.  It  is  situate  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Yssel,  that
branch  of  the  Rhine  which  flows  between  Gelderland  and
Overyssel  into  the  Zuyder-Zee.

The  ancient  river,  broad,  deep,  and  languid,  glides  through
a  plain  of  almost  boundless  extent,  till  it  loses  itself  in  the
flat  and  misty  horizon.  On  the  other  side  of  the  stream,  in
the  district  called  the  Veluwe,3 * * 6  or  bad  meadow,  were  three
sconces,  one  of  them  of  remarkable  strength.  An  island
between  the  city  and  the  shore  was  likewise  'well  fortified.
On  the  landward  side  the  town  was  protected  by  a  wall  and
moat  sufficiently  strong  in  those  infant  days  of  artillery.
Near  the  hospital-gate,  on  the  east,  was  an  external  fortress
guarding  the  road  to  Warnsfeld.  This  was  a  small  village,

1  Norris  to  Wilkes,  MS.

2  Huddleston  to  Burghley,  3  Sept.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Leicester  to

Privy  Council,  6  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.

Off.  MS.)  Sir  John  Norris  to  Wilkes,

6  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Com¬

pare  Hoofd,  Yervolgb,  184.  Bor,  II.
750.  Stowe,  736.  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.
Corresp.’  406,  407.

The  town  was  “rifled,”  but  it  was
“  but  poor,  with  nothing  to  answer  the

need  and  greediness  of  the  soldiers,”
said  Huddleston,  adding  that  “  divers
disorders  were  committed,  as  in  such
cases  it  happeneth,  though  (God  be
thanked)  none  specially  notorious.”

3  Yeluwe,  ‘bad  meadow,’  in  opposi¬
tion  to  Betuwe  (Batavia),  *  good
meadow.’  Bet  is  the  positive,  now
obsolete  in  German,  Dutch,  and  Eng¬
lish,  of  the  comparative,  better.

1586.

HE  LAYS  SIEGE  TO  ZUTPHEN.

45

with  a  solitary  slender  church-spire,  shooting  up  above  a
cluster  of  neat  one-storied  houses.  It  was  about  an  English
mile  from  Zutphen,  in  the  midst  of  a  wide,  low,  somewhat
fenny  plain,  which,  in  winter,  became  so  completely  a
lake,  that  peasants  were  not  unfrequently  drowned  in  at¬
tempting  to  pass  from  the  city  to  the  village.  In  summer,
the  vague  expanse  of  country  was  fertile  and  cheerful  of
aspect.  Long  rows  of  poplars  marking  the  straight  high¬
ways,  clumps  of  pollard  willows  scattered  around  the  little
meres,  snug  farm-houses,  with  kitchen-gardens  and  brilliant
flower-patches  dotting  the  level  plain,  verdant  pastures  sweep¬
ing  off  into  seemingly  infinite  distance,  where  the  innumer¬
able  cattle  seemed  to  swarm  like  insects,  wind-mills  swinging
their  arms  in  all  directions,  like  protective  giants,  to  save  the
country  from  inundation,  the  lagging  sail  of  market-boats
shining  through  rows  of  orchard  trees — all  gave  to  the  en¬
virons  of  Zutphen  a  tranquil  and  domestic  charm.

Deventer  and  Kampen,  the  two  other  places  on  the  river,
were  in  the  hands  of  the  States.  It  was,  therefore,  desirable
for  the  English  and  the  patriots,  by  gaining  possession  of
Zutphen,  to  obtain  control  of  the  Yssel ;  driven,  as  they  had
been,  from  the  Meuse  and  Rhine.

Sir  John  Norris,  by  Leicester’s  direction,  took  possession  of
a  small  rising-ground,  called  f  Gibbet  Hill/  on  the  land-side,
where  he  established  a  fortified  camp,  and  proceeded  to  invest
the  city.  With  him  were  Count  Lewis  William  of  Nassau,
and  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  while  the  Earl  himself,  crossing  the
Yssel  on  a  bridge  of  boats  which  he  had  constructed,  reserved
for  himself  the  reduction  of  the  forts  upon  the  Yeluwe  side.

Farnese,  meantime,  was  not  idle  ;  and  Leicester’s  cal¬
culations  proved  correct.  So  soon  as  the  Prince  was'  in¬
formed  of  this  important  demonstration  of  the  enemy  he
broke  up — after  brief  debate  with  his  officers — his  camp  be¬
fore  Rheinberg,  and  came  to  Wesel.1  At  this  place  he  built
a  bridge  over  the  Rhine,  and  fortified  it  with  two  block-houses.
These  he  placed  under  command  of  Claude  Berlot,  who  was
ordered  to  watch  strictly  all  communication  up  the  river  with

1  Strada,  II.  448.

46

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

the  city  of  Rheinberg,  which  he  thus  kept  in  a  partially
beleaguered  state.  Alexander  then  advanced  rapidly  by  way
of  Groll  and  Burik,  both  which  places  he  took  possession  of,
to  the  neighbourhood  of  Zutphen.  He  was  determined,  at
every  hazard,  to  relieve  that  important  city  ;  and  although,
after  leaving  necessary  detachments  on  the  way,  he  had  but
five  thousand  men  under  his  command,  besides  fifteen  hundred
under  Verdugo — making  sixty-five  hundred  in  all — he  had
decided  that  the  necessity  of  the  case,  and  his  own  honour,
required  him  to  seek  the  enemy,  and  to  leave,  as  he  said,  the
issue  with  the  God  of  battles,  whose  cause  it  was.1

Tassis,  lieutenant-governor  of  Gelderland,  was*  ordered
into  the  city  with  two  cornets  of  horse  and  six  hundred  foot.
As  large  a  number  had  already  been  stationed  there.  Yer-
dugo,  who  had  been  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  Prince  at
Borkelo,  a  dozen  miles  from  Zutphen,  with  four  hundred  foot
and  two  hundred  horse,  now  likewise  entered  the  city.2

On  the  night  of  29th  August  (St.  Nov.)  Alexander  himself
entered  Zutphen  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  the  garrison
29  Aug.  by  promise  of  relief,  and  of  ascertaining  the  position
1586.  of  the  enemy  by  personal  observation.  His  presence
as  it  always  did,  inspired  the  soldiers  with  enthusiasm,  so  that
they  could  with  difficuly  be  restrained  from  rushing  forth  to
assault  the  besiegers.3  In  regard  to  the  enemy  he  found
that  Gibbet  Hill  was  still  occupied  by  Sir  John  Norris,  ce  the
best  soldier,  in  his  opinion,  that  they  had/'4  who  had  en¬
trenched  himself  very  strongly,  and  was  supposed  to  have
thirty-five  hundred  men  under  his  command.  His  position
seemed  quite  impregnable.  The  rest  of  the  English  were  on
the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  Alexander  observed,  with
satisfaction,  that  they  had  abandoned  a  small  redoubt,  near
the  leper-house,  outside  the  Loor-Gate,  through  which  the
reinforcements  must  enter  the  city.  The  Prince  determined
to  profit  by  this  mistake,  and  to  seize  the  opportunity  thus
afforded  of  sending  those  much  needed  supplies.  During  the
night  the  enemy  were  found  to  be  throwing  up  works  “  most

1  Parma  to  Philip,  30  Oct.  1586.  (Arch,  de  Simarcas,  MS.)

2  Ibid.  Compare  Strada,  II.  448,  450.

3  Letter  to  Philip,  ubi  sup.  4  Ibid.

1586.

WHICH  PARMA  PREPARES  TO  RELIEVE.

47

furiously/’ 1  and  skirmishing  parties  were  sent  out  of  the
town  to  annoy  them.  In  the  darkness  nothing  of  conse¬
quence  was  effected,  hut  a  Scotch  officer  was  captured,  who
informed  the  Spanish  commander  that  the  enemy  was  fifteen
thousand  strong — a  number  which  was  nearly  double  that  of
Leicester’s  actual  force.  In  the  morning  Alexander  returned
to  his  camp  at  Berkelo — leaving  Tassis  in  command  of  the
Veluwe  Forts,  and  Yerdugo  in  the  city  itself — and  he  at  once
made  rapid  work  in  collecting  victuals.  He  had  soon  wheat
and  other  supplies  in  readiness,  sufficient  to  feed  four  thousand
mouths  for  three  months,  and  these  he  determined  to  send
into  the  city  immediately,  and  at  every  hazard.

The  great  convoy  which  was  now  to  be  despatched  re¬
quired  great  care  and  a  powerful  escort.  Twenty-five  hun¬
dred  musketeers  and  pikemen,  of  whom  one  thousand  were
Spaniards,  and  six  hundred  cavalry,  Epirotes,  Spaniards,  and
Italians,  under  Hannibal  Gonzaga,  George  Crescia,  i  Oct.,  n.s.,
Bentivoglio,  Sesa,  and  others,  were  accordingly  de-  1586.
tailed  for  this  expedition.2  The  Marquis  del  Yasto,  to  whom
was  entrusted  the  chief  command,  was  ordered  to  march  from
Berkelo  at  midnight  on  Wednesday,  October  1  (St.  Nov.).
It  was  calculated  that  he  would  reach  a  certain  hillock  not
far  from  Warnsfeld  by  dawn  of  day.  Here  he  was  to  pause,
and  send  forward  an  officer  towards  the  town,  communicating
his  arrival,  and  requesting  the  cooperation  of  Yerdugo,  who  was
to  make  a  sortie  with  one  thousand  men,  according  to  Alex¬
ander’s  previous  arrangements.  The  plan  was  successfully
carried  out.  The  Marquis  arrived  by  daybreak  at  the  spot
indicated,  and  despatched  Captain  de  Yega  who  contrived  to
send  intelligence  of  the  fact.  A  trooper,  whom  Parma  had
himself  .sent  to  Yerdugo  with  earlier  information  of  the  move¬
ment,  had  been  captured  on  the  way.  Leicester  had  therefore
been  apprized,  at  an  early  moment,  of  the  Prince’s  intentions,

1  Parma  to  Philip,  “a  furia.”  MS.
before  cited.

2  These  are  Parma’s  own  figures.
(Letter  to  Philip,  as  above.)  Every
historian  gives  a  different  statement

one  from  another.  Leicester  declared
that  Crescia  told  him,  “upon  his
honour,  that  there  were  fifteen  cornets
of  horse  and  3,000  foot.”  Bruce’s
‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  417.

48

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

but  he  was  not  aware  that  the  convoy  would  he  accompanied
by  so  strong  a  force  as  had  really  been  detailed.

He  had  accordingly  ordered  Sir  John  Norris,  who  com¬
manded  on  the  outside  of  the  town  near  the  road  which  the
Spaniards  must  traverse,  to  place  an  ambuscade  in  his  way.
Sir  John,  always  ready  for  adventurous  enterprises,  took  a
body  of  two  hundred  cavalry,  all  picked  men,  and  ordered
Sir  William  Stanley,  with  three  hundred  pikemen,  to  follow.
A  much  stronger  force  of  infantry  was  held  in  reserve  and
readiness,  but  it  was  not  thought  that  it  would  be  required.
The  ambuscade  was  successfully  placed,  before  the  dawn  of
*Oct.  2,  n.s.,  Thursday  morning,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Warns-

1586.  feld  church.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Earl  of  Lei¬
cester  himself,  anxious'  as  to  the  result,  came  across  the  river
just  at  daybreak.  He  was  accompanied  by  the  chief  gentle¬
men  in  his  camp,  who  could  never  be  restrained  when  blows
were  passing  current.

The  business  that  morning  was  a  commonplace  and  prac¬
tical  though  an  important,  one — to  u  impeach  ”  a  convoy  of
wheat  and  barley,  butter,  cheese,  and  beef — but  the  names  of
those  noble  and  knightly  volunteers,  familiar  throughout
Christendom,  sound  like  the  roll-call  for  some  chivalrous
tournament.  There  were  Essex  and  Audley,  Stanley,  Pel¬
ham,  Russell,  both  the  Sidneys,  all  the  Norrises,  men  whose
valour  had  been  proved  on*"  many  a  hard-fought  battle-field.
There,  too,  was  the  famous  hero  of  British  ballad  whose  name
was  so  often  to  ring  on  the  plains  of  the  Netherlands —

“  The  brave  Lord  "Willoughby,

Of  courage  fierce  and  fell,

Who  would  not  give  one  inch  of  way
Eor  all  the  devils  in  hell.”

Twenty  such  volunteers  as  these  sat  on  horseback  that  morn¬
ing  around  the  stately  Earl  of  Leicester.  It  seemed  an  in¬
credible  extravagance  to  send  a  handful  of  such  heroes  against
an  army.

But  the  English  commander-in-chief  had  been  listening

,  September  22

*  Thursday - ,

*  October  2

1586.

1586.

THE  ENGLISH  INTERCEPT  THE  CONVOY.

49

to  the  insidious  tongue  of  Roland  York — that  hold,  plausible,
unscrupulous  partisan,  already  twice  a  renegade,  of  whom
more  was  ere  long  to  be  heard  in  the  Netherlands  and  Eng¬
land.  Of  the  man’s  courage  there  could  be  no  doubt,  and  he
was  about  to  fight  that  morning  in  the  front  rank  at  the  head
of  his  company.  But  he  had,  for  some  mysterious  reason,
been  bent  upon  persuading  the  Earl  that  the  Spaniards  were
no  match  for  Englishmen  at  a  hand-to-hand  contest.  When
they  could  ride  freely  up  and  down,  he  said,  and  use  their
lances  as  they  liked,  they  were  formidable.  But  the  English
were  stronger  men,  better  riders,  better  mounted,  and  better
armed.  The  Spaniards  hated  helmets  and  proof  armour,
while  the  English  trooper,  in  casque,  cuirass,  and  greaves,
v/as  a  living  fortress  impregnable  to  Spanish  or  Italian  light
horsemen.  And  Leicester  seemed  almost  convinced  by  his
reasoning.1

It  was  five  o’clock  of  a  chill  autumn  morning.  It  was
time  for  day  to  break,  but  the  fog  was  so  thick  that  a  man  at
the  distance  of  five  yards  was  quite  invisible.  The  Oct.  2,
creaking  of  waggon- wheels  and  the  measured  tramp  1586*
of  soldiers  soon  became  faintly  audible  however  to  Sir  John
Norris  and  his  five  hundred  as  they  sat  there  in  the  mist.
Presently  came  galloping  forward  in  hot  haste  those  nobles
and  gentlemen,  with  their  esquires,  fifty  men  in  all — Sidney,
Willoughby,  and  the  rest — whom  Leicester  had  no  longer  been
able  to  restrain  from  taking  part  in  the  adventure.

A  force  of  infantry,  the  amount  of  which  cannot  be  satis¬
factorily  ascertained,  had  been  ordered  by  the  Earl  to  cross
the  bridge  at  a  later  moment.  Sidney’s  cornet  of  horse  was
then  in  Deventer,  to  which  place  it  had  been  sent  in  order
to  assist  in  quelling  an  anticipated  revolt,  so  that  he  came,
like  most  of  his  companions,  as  a  private  volunteer  and  knight-
errant.

1  Reyd,  v.  82,  83.  Bor,  II.  *750,  751,
Compare  Meteren,  xiii.  237,  who  says
that  York  was  suspected  of  being
secretly  in  league  with  Farnese,  to
contrive  this  ambuscade,  and  thus  to
bring  so  many  English  nobles  of  dis¬
tinction  to  death  or  captivity.  There
VOL.  II. — E

is  no  doubt  that  when  he  deserted  the
Spanish  for  the  English  party,  he
pledged  himself  to  Parma  to  do  him
good  service,  and  that  he  was  always
secretly  in  league  with  the  enemy.
We  shall  see  at  a  later  day  whether
he  was  ready  to  redeem  his  pledge.

50

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

The  arrival  of  the  expected  convoy  was  soon  more  distinctly
heard,  hut  no  scouts  or  outposts  had  been  stationed  to  give
timely  notice  of  the  enemy’s  movements.1  Suddenly  the  fog,
which  had  shrouded  the  scene  so  closely,  rolled  away  like  a
curtain,  and  in  the  full  light  of  an  October  morning  the  Eng¬
lishmen  found  themselves  face  to  face  with  a  compact  body  of
more  than  three  thousand  men.  The  Marquis  del  Yasto  rode
at  the  head  of  the  force,  surrounded  by  a  band  of  mounted
arquebus  men.  The  cavalry,  under  the  famous  Epirote  chief
George  Crescia,  Hannibal  Gonzaga,  Bentivoglio,  Sesa,  Conti,
and  other  distinguished  commanders,  followed  ;  the  columns
of  pikemen  and  musketeers  lined  the  hedge-rows  on  both
sides  the  causeway ;  while  between  them  the  long  train
of  waggons  came  slowly  along  under  their  protection.2  The
whole  force  had  got  in  motion  after  having  sent  notice  of  their
arrival  to  Verdugo,  who,  with  one  or  two  thousand  men,  was
expected  to  sally  forth  almost  immediately  from  the  city-gate.

There  was  but  brief  time  for  deliberation.  Notwithstand¬
ing  the  tremendous  odds  there  was  no  thought  of  retreat.
Black  Norris  called  to  Sir  William  Stanley,  with  whom  he
had  been  at  variance  so  lately  at  Doesburg.

u  There  hath  been  ill-blood  between  us,”  he  said.  “  Let
us  be  friends  together  this  day,  and  die  side  by  side,  if  need
be,  in  her  Majesty’s  cause.”

u  If  you  see  me  not  serve  my  prince  with  faithful  courage
now,”  replied  Stanley,  u  account  me  for  ever  a  coward.
Living  or  dying  I  will  stand  or  lie  by  you  in  friendship.”

As  they  were  speaking  these  words  the  young  Earl  of
Essex,  general  of  the  horse,  cried  to  his  handful  of  troopers  : —

“  Follow  me,  good  fellows,  for  the  honour  of  England  and
of  England’s  Queen  !  ” 3

As  he  spoke  he  dashed,  lance  in  rest,  uj)on  the  enemy’s
cavalry,  overthrew  the  foremost  man,  horse  and  rider,  shivered
his  own  spear  to  splinters,  and  then,  swinging  his  curtel-axe,
rode  merrily  forward.4  His  whole  little  troop,  compact  as  an

1  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  186.

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  80  Oct.  1586.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  Compare

Strada,  II.  450,  452.  Bentivoerlio,
P.  II.  L.  iv.  311.  Bor,  II.  150,  151.

3  Archer,  in  Stowe,  'IBS.  4  Ibid.

1586.

BATTLE  OF  WARNSFELD.

51

arrow-head,  flew  with  an  irresistible  shock  against  the  op¬
posing  columns,  pierced  clean  through  them,  and  scattered
them  in  all  directions.  At  the  very  first  charge  one  hundred
English  horsemen  drove  the  Spanish  and  Albanian  cavalry
hack  upon  the  musketeers  and  pikemen.  Wheeling  witli
rapidity,  they  retired  before  a  volley  of  musket-sliot,  by
which  many  horses  and  a  few  riders  were  killed,  and  then
formed  again  to  renew  the  attack.  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  on
coming  to  the  field,  having  met  Sir  William  Pelham,  the
veteran  lord  marshal,  lightly  armed,  had  with  chivalrous
extravagance  thrown  off  his  own  cuishes,  and  now  rode  to  the
battle  with  no  armour  but  his  cuirass.1  At  the  second  charge
his  horse  was  shot  under  him,  but,  mounting  another,  he  was
seen  everywhere  in  the  thick  of  the  fight,  behaving  himself
with  a  gallantry  which  extorted  admiration  even  from  the
enemy.

For  the  battle  was  a  series  of  personal  encounters  in  which
high  officers  were  doing  the  work  of  private  soldiers.  Lord
North,  who  had  been  lying  “bed-rid"  with  a  musket-shot  in
the  leg,  had  got  himself  put  on  horseback,  and  “  with  one
boot  on  and  one  boot  off,"  bore  himself  “  most  lustily  "  through
the  whole  affair.2  “  I  desire  that  her  Majesty  may  know,"  he
said,  “  that  I  live  but  to  serve  her.  A  better  barony  than  I
have  could  not  hire  the  Lord  North  to  live  on  meaner  terms."3
Sir  William  Eussell  laid  about  him  with  his  curtel-axe  to
such  purpose  that  the  Spaniards  pronounced  him  a  devil
and  not  a  man.  “  Wherever,"  said  an  eye-witness,  “  he  saw
five  or  six  of  the  enemy  together,  thither  would  he  ;  and  with
his  hard  knocks  soon  separated  their  friendship." 4  Lord
Willoughby  encountered  George  Crescia,  general  of  the
famed  Albanian  cavalry,  unhorsed  him  at  the  first  shock,5
and  rolled  him  into  the  ditch.  “  I  yield  me  thy  prisoner,"
called  out  the  Epirote  in  French,  “for  thou  art  a  yreux
chevalier ;"  while  Willoughby,  trusting  to  his  captive's  word,

1  Brooke’s  Sidney  II.  31,  32.

2  Archer,  in  Stowe,  ubi  sup.  Bruce’s

'Leyc.  Corresp.’  417.

29  May

8  North  to  Burghley,  ) — ,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Archer,  in  Stowe,  737.
s  Ibid.  Leicester  to  Burghley,  Sept.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

52

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

galloped  onward,  and  with  him  the  rest  of  the  little  troop,  till
they  seemed  swallowed  up  by>the  superior  numbers  of  the
enemy.  His  horse  was  shot  under  him,  his  basses  were  torn
from  his  legs,  and  he  was  nearly  taken  a  prisoner,  but  fought
fris  way  back  with  incredible  strength  and  good  fortune.  Sir
William  Stanley's  horse  had  seven  bullets  in  him,  but  bore
his  rider  unhurt  to  the  end  of  the  battle.  Leicester  declared
Sir  William  and  “oldReade"  to  be  a  worth  their  weight  in
pearl."  1

Hannibal  Gonzaga,  leader  of  the  Spanish  cavalry,  fell
mortally  wounded.2  The  Marquis  del  Vasto,  commander  of
the  expedition,  nearly  met  the  same  fate.  An  Englishman
was  just  cleaving  his  head  with  a  battle-axe,  when  a  Spaniard
transfixed  the  soldier  with  his  pike.3  The  most  obstinate
struggle  took  place  about  the  train  of  waggons.  The  team¬
sters  had  fled  in  the  beginning  of  the  action,  but  the  English
and  Spanish  Soldiers,  struggling  with  the  horses,  and  pulling
them  forward  and  backward,  tried  in  vain  to,  get  exclusive
possession  of  the  convoy  which  was  the  cause  of  the  action.4
The  carts  at  last  forced  their  way  slowly  nearer  and  nearer
to  the  town,  while  the  combat  still  went  on,  warm  as  ever,
between  the  hostile  squadrons.  The  action  lasted  an  hour
and  a  half,  and  again  and  again  the  Spanish  horsemen
wavered  and  broke  before  the  handful  of  English,  and  fell
back  upon  their  musketeers.  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  in  the  last
charge,  rode  quite  through  the  enemy's  ranks  till  he  came
upon  their  entrenchments,  when  a  musket-ball  from  the  camp
struck  him  upon  the  thigh,  three  inches  above  the  knee.
Although  desperately  wounded  in  a  part  which  should  have
been  protected  by  the  cuishes  which  he  had  thrown  aside,  he
was  not  inclined  to  leave  the  field  ;  but  his  own  horse  had
been  shot  under  him  at  the  beginning  of  the  action,  and  the  one

1  “I  will  leave  no  labour  nor  dan¬
ger,”  said  Lord  North,  “but  serve  as  a
private  soldier,  and  have  thrust  my¬
self  for  service  on  foot  under  Captain
Reade,  whom  I  find  a  noble  and  nota¬
ble  soldier.”  (North  to  Burghley,  MS.
last  cited.)  This  is  the  mettle  the  gal¬
lants  of  Elizabeth’s  court  were  made

of.  Compare  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’ 411.

2  “The  Count  Hannibal  Gonzaga

was  killed,  with  three  others  whose
names  we  know  not,  but  they  had  cas¬
socks  all  embroidered  and  laced  with
silver  and  gold.”  Leicester  to  Burgh¬
ley,  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Strada,  II.  452.  4  Ibid.

1586.

SIR  PHILIP  SIDNEY  WOUNDED.

53

upon  which  he  was  now  mounted  became  too  restive  for  him,
thus  crippled,  to  control.  He  turned  reluctantly  away,  and
rode  a  mile  and  a  half  hack  to  the  entrenchments,  suffering
extreme  pain,  for  his  leg  was  dreadfully  shattered.  As  he
past  along  the  edge  of  the  battle-field  his  attendants  brought
him  a  bottle  of  water  to  quench  his  raging  thirst.  At  that
moment  a  wounded  English  soldier,  “  who  had  eaten  his  last
at  the  same  feast,”  looked  up  wistfully  in  his  face,  when
Sidney  instantly  handed  him  the  flask,  exclaiming,  “Thy
necessity  is  even  greater  than  mine.” 1  He  then  pledged  his
dying  comrade  in  a  draught,  and  was  soon  afterwards  met  by
his  uncle.  “  Oh,  Philip,”  cried  Leicester,  in  despair,  “  I  am
truly  grieved  to  see  thee  in  this  plight.”  But  Sidney  com¬
forted  him  with  manful  words,  and  assured  him  that  death
was  sweet  in  the  cause  of  his  Queen  and  country.  Sir  Wil¬
liam  Russell,  too,  all  blood-stained  from  the  fight,  threw  his
arms  around  his  friend,  wept  like  a  child,  and  kissing  his
hand,  exclaimed,  “  Oh  !  noble  Sir  Philip,  never  did  man
attain  hurt  so  honourably  or  serve  so  valiantly  as  you.” 2  Sir
William  Pelham  declared  “that  Sidney’s  noble  courage  in
the  face  of  our  enemies  had  won  him  a  name  of  continuing
honour.” 3

The  wounded  gentleman  was  borne  back  to  the  camp,  and
thence  in  a  barge  to  Arnheim.  The  fight  was  over.  Sir  J ohn
Norris  bade  Lord  Leicester  “  be  merry,  for,”  said  he,  “  you  have
had  the  honourablest  day.  A  handful  of  men  has  driven  the
enemy  three  times  to  retreat.”4  But,  in  truth,  it  was  now
time  for  the  English  to  retire  in  their  turn.  Their  reserve
never  arrived.  The  whole  force  engaged  against  the  thirty-
five  hundred  Spaniards  had  never  exceeded  two  hundred  and
fifty  horse  and  three  hundred  foot,  and  of  this  number

1  Brooke’s  Sidney,  II.  32.  It  is  to
be  regretted  that  Lord  Brooke  does
not  give  the  authority  for  this  beauti¬
ful  .and  universally  cherished  anec¬
dote.  I  have  searched  in  vain  for  its
confirmation  through  many  contem¬
porary  letters  and  chronicles.  There
is  no  reason  for  rejecting  its  authen¬
ticity,  but  it  would  have  been  an  ex¬
quisite  pleasure  to  find  it  recorded,
for  instance,  in  a  letter  from  Pelham,

or  North,  or  Norris,  or  Leicester — all
of  whom  speak  of  Sidney’s  gallantry
in  the  action,  but  not  one  of  whom
was  acquainted  with,  or  thought  it
worth  while  to  mention  the  charac¬
teristic  and  touching  trait.

2  Stowe,  731.  ?g  g  t>

9  Pelham  to  Walsingham,  tt-1’
1686.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

*  Stowe,  ubi  sup.

54

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

the  chief  work  had  been  done  by  the  fifty  or  sixty  volunteers
and  their  followers.1  The  heroism  which  had  been  displayed
was  fruitless,  except  as  a  proof — and  so  Leicester  wrote  to
the  Palatine  John  Casimir — u  that  Spaniards  were  not  in¬
vincible/'  2  Two  thousand  men  now  sallied  from  the  Loor-
Gate,  under  Verdugo  and  Tassis,3  to  join  the  force  under
Vasto,  and  the  English  were  forced  to  retreat.  The  whole
convoy  was  then  carried  into  the  city,  and  the  Spaniards
remained  masters  of  the  field.4 * * * * * lo

Thirteen  troopers  and  twenty-two  foot  soldiers,  upon  the
English  side,  were  killed.  The  enemy  lost  perhaps  two  hun-

sept.  dred  men.  They  were  thrice  turned  from  their

Oct.  2  .

1586.  position,  and  thrice  routed,  but  they  succeeded  at
last  in  their  attempt  to  carry  their  convoy  into  Zutphen.
Upon  that  day,  and  the  succeeding  ones,  the  town  was  com¬
pletely  victualled.  Very  little,  therefore,  save  honour,  was
gained  by  the  display  of  English  valour  against  overwhelm¬
ing  numbers — five  hundred  against  near  four  thousand.
Never  in  the  whole  course  of  the  war  had  there  been  such

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  411.

2  Reyd,  v.  83.

3  Parma  to  Philip,  30  Oct.  1586.
MS.

4  Ibid.  Leicester  observes  iu  the
letter  to  Burghley  (Sept.  — ,  1586,  S.  P.

Office  MS.)  that,  “notwithstanding

all  these  troops,  the  Prince  did  not
put  in  one  waggon,  save  thirty  which

got  in  in  the  night.”  Alexander,

however,  states  expressly  the  reverse,
and  congratulates  Philip  on  the  entire
success  of  the  undertaking: —

“Pero  nos  debemos  contentar  con

lo  sucedido,  pues  allende  de  liaber
quedado  la  campana  por  nosotros,  y
salido  con  nuestra  pretension ,  y  a  la
barba  de  tan  buen  numero  con  tanta
poca  qente  (!)  haber  metido  y  sacado
tanto  carnage &c.  Letter  to  Philip,
30  Oct.  1586.  MS.

There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever
that  the  Prince  was  entirely  correct  in
his  statement.  The  result  proves  it,
if  there  could  be  any  question  of  it
before.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how
Leicester  could  be  mistaken,  but  he
had  a  temptation  to  misrepresent  an
affair  in  which  his  own  bad  general¬

ship  had  been  as  signal  as  the  heroism
which  it  had  called  forth.  Certainly
Zutphen,  on  that  and  the  succeeding
days,  was  thoroughly  relieved.  The
errors,  wilful  or  otherwise,  as  to  the
numbers  engaged  and  respectively
lost  were  greater  on  both  sides  than
usual  on  such  occasions,  but  this  kind
of  misstatement  has  always  been  uni¬
versal.

Compare  Sidney  Papers,  I.  104,
containing  a  letter  of  Leicester  to
Heneage;  I  have  not  found  the  ori¬
ginal.  Strada,  II.  450,  452.  Bor,  II.
750,  751.  Stowe,  737,  738.  Hoofd,
Vervolgh,  186,  187.  Reyd,  v.  83,  84.
Meteren,  xiii.  237.  Bentivoglio,  P.  II.
L.  IY.  311,  et  mult.  al.

See  also  R.  W.  Tadama,  Geschiedenis
der  Stad  Zutphen  (‘Arnhem  en  Zut¬
phen,  ’  1586),  an  interesting  work,  care¬
fully  written,  and  of  great  research;
composed  mainly  from  original  un¬
published  documents.  I  desire  to  ex¬
press  my  thanks  to  the  learned  author
for  the  kindness  with  which  he  guided
me  over  Zutphen  and  its  neighbour¬
hood,  pointing  out  everything  con¬
nected  with  the  battle  and  the  siege.

1586.

RESULTS  OE  THE  ENCOUNTER.

55

fighting,  for  the  troops  upon  both  sides  were  picked  men  and
veterans.  For  a  long  time  afterwards  it  was  the  custom  of
Spaniards  and  Netherlander,  in  characterising  a  hardly-con¬
tested  action,  to  call  it  as  warm  as  the  fight  at  Zutphen.1

“  I  think  I  may  call  it,”  said  Leicester,  “  the  most  notable
encounter  that  hath  been  in  our  age,  and  it  will  remain  to
our  posterity  famous." 2

Nevertheless  it  is  probable  that  the  encounter  would  have
been  forgotten  by  posterity  but  for  the  melancholy  close  upon
that  field  to  Sidney's  bright  career.  And  perhaps  the  Queen
of  England  had  as  much  reason  to  blush  for  the  incompetency
of  her  general  and  favourite  as  to  be  proud  of  the  heroism
displayed  by  her  officers  and  soldiers.

“  There  were  too  many  indeed  at  this  skirmish  of  the  better
sort,"  said  Leicester ;  “  only  a  two  hundred  and  fifty  horse,

1  Strada,  II.  451.

3  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  416: —
“  That  Thursday  may  run  amongst
any  of  our  Thursdays,”  said  the  Earl,
(‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  430),  adding,  with  a
most  ingenuous  reference  to  himself,
“  In  my  former  letters  I  forgot  one ,
who  not  only  on  that  day  but  at  every
day’s  service  hath  been  a  principal
actor  himself.  A  tall ,  wise,  rare  ser¬
vant  he  is,  as  any  I  know,  and  of  mar¬
vellous  good  government  and  judg¬
ment.  That  gentleman  may  take  a
great  charge  upon  him,  I  warrant
you.”  Self-depreciation  was  not  the
Earl’s  foible.

There  is  hardly  a  battle  on  record
about  which  the  accounts  are  so  hope¬
lessly  conflicting  as  are  those  which
relate  to  tire  battle  of  Zutphen.  The
reason  is  obvious.  The  skirmish  was
a  comparatively  unimportant  one.
The  fate  of  Sidney  has  invested  it
with  undying  interest,  but  it  was  not
supposed  at  that  time  that  he  was
mortally  wounded.  Lord  North,  whose
letters  are  always  spirited,  went  into
the  field  in  such  a  disabled  condition
that  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  send
any  account  of  the  action,  as  he  doubt¬
less  would  otherwise  have  done,  to
Lord  Burghley.  Pelham,  Norris,  and
Leicester,  are  all  meagre  on  this  occa¬
sion  in  details.  Archer,  in  Stowe,  is
fuller,  but  Parma,  in  his  letters  to
Philip,  though  copious,  is  confused.

As  a  specimen  of  conflicting  statistics
it  may  be  observed  that  the  number  of
English  actually  engaged,  according
to  the  statement  of  the  commander-in¬
chief  to  his  government,  was  550,
horse  and  foot  together.  The  Span¬
ish,  according  to  Parnese’s  letter  to
Philip,  was  about  3,100  in  all.  Strada
gives  the  same  number,  writing  from
other  letters  of  Parma,  and  puts  the
English  at  3000  foot  and  400  horse,
exactly  the  same  number  that  is  given
in  the  MS.  letters  of  Simancas,  and
about  seven  times  as  many  as  were
really  in  the  field.  Leicester  puts  the
Spaniards  at  1,200  horse  and  3,000
foot — about  1,000  more  than  the  actual
numbers.  No  doubt  the  numbers  en¬
gaged  on  each  side  should  be  taken
as  correctly  stated  by  the  respective
generals.  There  were  therefore  about
3,100  Spaniards  to  550  English.

Leicester  gives  the  number  of  killed
and  wounded  as  33  English  and  from
250  to  350  Spaniards.

Parma  states  the  number  of  Spaniards
killed  as  9  (!),  wounded  29,  while  he
reports  200  English  killed.

It  seems  impossible  that  there
could  have  been  less  than  150  or  200
Spaniards  killed,  which  is  not  more
than,  half  the  number  claimed  by
Leicester  on  the  authority  of  Spaniards
themselves.  But  it  is  a  waste  of
time  to  indulge  in  these  fruitless
calculations.

56

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IS.

and  most  of  them  the  best  of  this  camp,  and  unawares  to  me.
I  was  offended  when  I  knew  it,  but  could  not  fetch  them
back ;  but  since  they  all  so  well  escaped  (save  my  dear
nephew),  I  would  not  for  ten  thousand  pounds  but  they  had
been  there,  since  they  have  all  won  that  honour  they  have.
Your  Lordship  never  heard  of  such  desperate  charges  as
they  gave  upon  the  enemies  in  the  face  of  their  muskets/' 1

He  described  Sidney's  wound  as  u  very  dangerous,  the  bone
being  broken  in  pieces  but  said  that  the  surgeons  were  in
good  hope.  “I  pray  God  to  save  his  life,"  said  the  Earl,
u  and  I  care  not  how  lame  he  be."  Sir  Philip  was  carried  to
Arnheim,  where  the  best  surgeons  were  immediately  in  at¬
tendance  upon  him.  Pie  submitted  to  their  examination  and
the  pain  which  they  inflicted,  with  great  cheerfulness,  al¬
though  himself  persuaded  that  his  wound  was  mortal.  Eor
many  days  the  result  was  doubtful,  and  messages  were  sent
day  by  day  to  England  that  he  was  convalescent — intelli¬
gence  which  was  hailed  by  the  Queen  and  people  as  a  matter
not  of  private  but  of  public  rejoicing.  He  soon  began  to  fail,
however.  Count  Hohenlo  was  badly  wounded  a  few  days
later  before  the  great  fort  of  Zutphen.  A  musket-ball  en¬
tered  his  mouth,  and  passed  through  his  cheek,  carrying  off
a  jewel  which  hung  in  his  ear.2  Notwithstanding  his  own
critical  condition,  however,  Hohenlo  sent  his  surgeon,  Adrian
van  den  Spiegel,  a  man  of  great  skill,  to  wait  upon  Sir
Philip,3  but  Adrian  soon  felt  that  the  case  was  hopeless.
Meantime  fever  and  gangrene  attacked  the  Count  himself ;
and  those  in  attendance  upon  him,  fearing  for  his  life,  sent  for
his  surgeon.  Leicester  refused  to  allow  Adrian  to  depart,  and
Hohenlo  very  generously  acquiescing  in  the  decree,  but,  also
requiring  the  surgeon's  personal  care,  caused  himself  to  be
transported  in  a  litter  to  Arnheim.4

Sidney  was  first  to  recognise  the  symptoms  of  mortification,
which  made  a  fatal  result  inevitable.  His  demeanour  during
his  sickness  and  upon  his  death-bed  was  as  beautiful  as  his

1  Letter  to  Burghley,  MS.  before
cited.

2  Stowe,  738.  Bor,  II.  728.

3  Letter  of  Hohenlo,  in  Bor,  III.
3.

4  Letter  of  Hohenlo,  in  Bor,  III.  123.

1586.

DEATH  OF  SIDNEY  AT  ARNHEIM.

57

life.  He  discoursed  with  his  friends  concerning  the  immor¬
tality  of  the  soul,  comparing  the  doctrines  of  Plato  and  of
other  ancient  philosophers,  whose  writings  were  so  familiar  to
him,  with  the  revelations  of  Scripture  and  with  the  dictates
of  natural  religion.  He  made  his  will  with  minute  and  ela¬
borate  provisions,  leaving  ^bequests,  remembrances,  and  rings,
to  all  his  friends.  Then  he  indulged  himself  with  music,  and
listened  particularly  to  a  strange  song  which  he  had  himself
composed  during  his  illness,  and  which  he  had  entitled
‘La  Cuisse  rompue/  He  took  leave  of  the  friends  around
him  with  perfect  calmness,  saying  to  his  brother  Robert,
“  Love  my  memory.  Cherish  my  friends.  Above  all,
govern  your  will  and  affections  by  the  will  and  word  of  your
Creator ;  in  me  beholding  the  end  of  this  world  with  all  her
vanities/' 1

And  thus  this  gentle  and  heroic  spirit  took  its  flight.

Parma,  after  thoroughly  victualling  Zutphen,  turned  his
attention  to  the  German  levies  which  Leicester  was  expecting
under  the  care  of  Count  Meurs.  “  If  the  enemy  is  reinforced
by  these  six  thousand  fresh  troops,"  said  Alexander,  “it  will
make  him  master  of  the  field."2  And  well  he  might  hold
this  opinion,  for,  in  the  meagre  state  of  both  the  Spanish  and
the  liberating  armies,  the  addition  of  three  thousand  fresh
reiters  and  as  many  infantry  would  be  enough  to  turn  the
scale.  The  Duke  of  Parma — for,  since  the  recent  death  of
his  father,  Farnese  had  succeeded  to  his  title3 — determined  in
person  to  seek  the  German  troops,  and  to  destroy  them  if
possible.  But  they  never  gave  him  the  chance.4 * *  Their
muster-place  was  Bremen,  but  when  they  heard  that  the
terrible  c  Holofernese 9  was  in  pursuit  of  them,  and  that  the
commencement  of  their  service  would  be  a  pitched  battle  with
his  Spaniards  and  Italians,  they  broke  up  and  scattered  about

1  Brooke’s  Sidney,  II.  32,  40.  Sid¬
ney  Papers,  104,  seq.

2  Parma  to  Philip,  30  Oct.  1586.
Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.

3  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  19  Oct.  1586.

(Archiv.  de  Simancas,  MS.)  “Hence¬

forth,”  said  the  King,  “I  will  be  both

father  and  mother  to  you.”

4  Bentivoglio  is  much  mistaken  (P.
II.  L.  iv.  311)  in  giving  an  account  of
a  pitched  battle  between  Alexander
and  these  mercenaries,  in  which  they
are  represented  as  having  been  utterly
defeated.  The  victory  was  quite
bloodless,  and  it  cost  the  victor  only
a  couple  of  gold  chains.

58

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX,

the  country.  Soon  afterwards  the  Duke  tried  another
method  of  effectually  dispersing  them,  in  case  they  still  re¬
tained  a  wish  to  fulfil  their  engagement  with  Leicester.  He
sent  a  messenger  to  treat  with  them,  and  in  consequence  two
of  their  ‘  rittmeisters  '  paid  him  a  visit.  He  offered  to  give
them  higher  pay,  and  a  ready  money  in  place  of  tricks  and
promises.”  The  mercenary  heroes  listened  very  favourably
to  his  proposals,  although  they  had  already  received — besides
the  tricks  and  promises — at  least  one  hundred  thousand  florins
out  of  the  States'  treasury.2

After  proceeding  thus  far  in  the  negotiation,  however,
Parma  concluded,  as  the  season  was  so  far  advanced,  that  it
was  sufficient  to  have  dispersed  them,  and  to  have  deprived
the  English  and  patriots  of  their  services.  So  he  gave  the
two  majors  a  gold  chain  a-piece,  and  they  went  their  way
thoroughly  satisfied.  u  I  have  got  them  away  from  the
enemy  for  this  year,”  said  Alexander  ;  “  and  this  I  hold  to
be  one  of  the  best  services  that  has  been  rendered  for  many  a
long  day  to  your  Majesty.”3

1  Parma  to  Philip,  30  Oct.  1586.  MS.

last  cited.  2  Meteren,  xiii.  236.

3  Parma  to  Philip,  MS.  last  cited.

According  to  Meteren  (ubi  sup.)
this  mysterious  dispersion .  of  the  Ger¬
man  troops  was  owing  to  the  intrigues
of  Leicester’s  English  advisers,  who
were  unwilling  that  he  should  send
the  money  of  the  States  anywhere  but
to  England,  and  who  therefore  by
their  machinations  contrived  to  spirit
away  this  auxiliary  force  just  at  the
moment  when  by  its  junction  with  his
own  army  the  Earl  was  about  to  have
Farnese  in  his  power.  “  From  this
time  forth,”  says  Meteren,  “it  was
obvious  that  Leicester  was  governed
entirely  by  English  counsels,”  and  so
on.  It  lias  just  been  shown  by  the
Duke’s  private  letters  that  the  gener¬
ally  most  accurate  chronicler  was  mis¬
taken  in  this  instance,  and  that  the
deed  was  accomplished  by  Alexander’s
clever  management  alone.  Some  of
the  German  princes  in  whose  terri¬
tories  these  levies  had  been  made,
were  honourably  indignant  at  the  trea¬
chery  which  had  been  thus  practised  on
the  States.  Some  of  the  officers  were
punished  with  imprisonment,  degrada¬

tion,  and  loss  of  nobility  and  armorial
bearings,  and  the  money  paid  as  their
“  waart  geld”  was  sent  back  to  Hol¬
land.  (Le  Petit,  1  Grand  Chronique,’
II.  536.)

Reyd  is  still  more  severe.  He
maintains  that  Leicester  withheld  the
pay  which  the  States  had  furnished
for  these  important  levies,  whose  ar¬
rival  at  the  time  agreed  upon  would
have  changed  the  fortune  of  the  war;
and  that  he  secretly  prevented  their
coming,  from  a  fear  that  they  would
adhere  too  closely  to  Hohenlo  and
Count  William  Lewis.  Count  Yssel-
stein,  who  had  been  sent  by  the  Earl
to  deal  with  these  mercenaries  and  to
promise  their  money,  was  furious  at
the  treachery  of  which  he  conceived
Leicester  guilty,  and  did  not  scruple
to  say  in  large  companies:  “Leicester
has  done  two  great  things  in  his  life.
He  has  made  my  old  page,  Martin
Schenk  a  knight,  and  myself  a  liar.”
(Reyd,  ‘Nederl.  Gesch.’  v.  85.)

The  suspicion,  as  we  have  seen,  was
quite  groundless,  and  Ysselstein  and
the  historian  (who  was  private  secre¬
tary  to  Count  William  Lewis)  very
much  mistaken.

1586.  GALLANTRY  OF  EDWARD  STANLEY.  59

During  the  period  which  intervened  between  the  action  at
Warnsfeld  and  the  death  of  Sidney,  the  siege-operations  be¬
fore  Zutphen  had  been  continued.  The  city,  strongly  gar¬
risoned  and  well  supplied  with  provisions,  as  it  had  been  by
Parma’s  care,  remained  impregnable  ;  but  the  sconces  beyond
the  river  and  'upon  the  island  fell  into  Leicester’s  hands.1
The  great  fortress  which  commanded  the  Veluwe,  and  which
was  strong  enough  to  have  resisted  Count  Hohenlo  on  a
former  occasion  for  nearly  a  whole  year,  was  the  scene  of
much  hard  fighting.  It  was  gained  at  last  by  the  signal
valour  of  Edward  Stanley,  lieutenant  to  Sir  William.  That
officer,  at  the  commencement  of  an  assault  upon  a  not  very
practicable  breach,  sprang  at  the  long  pike  of  a  Spanish
soldier,  who  was  endeavoring  to  thrust  him  from  the  wall,
and  seized  it  with  both  hands.  The  Spaniard  struggled  to
maintain  his  hold  of  the  weapon,  Stanley  to  wrest  it  from  his
grasp.  A  dozen  other  soldiers  broke  their  pikes  upon  his
cuirass  or  shot  at  him  with  their  muskets.  Conspicuous  by
his  dress,  being  all  in  yellow  but  his  corslet,  he  was  in  full
sight  of  Leicester  and  of  five  thousand  men.  The  earth
was  so  shifty  and  sandy  that  the  soldiers  who  were  to  follow
him  were  not  able  to  climb  the  wall.  Still  Stanley  grasped
his  adversary’s  pike,  but,  suddenly  changing  his  plan,  he
allowed  the  Spaniard  to  lift  him  from  the  ground.  Then,
assisting  himself  with  his  feet  against  the  wall,  he,  much  to
the  astonishment  of  the  spectators,  scrambled  quite  over  the
parapet,  and  dashed  sword  in  hand  among  the  defenders  of
the  fort.  Had  he  been  endowed  with  a  hundred  lives  it
seemed  impossible  for  him  to  escape  death.  But  his  followers,
stimulated  by  his  example,  made  ladders  for  themselves  of
each  others’  shoulders,  clambered  at  last  with  great  exertion
over  the  broken  wall,  overpowered  the  garrison,  and  made
themselves  masters  of  the  sconce.  Leicester,  transported
with  enthusiasm  for  this  noble  deed  of  daring,  knighted  Ed¬
ward  Stanley  upon  the  spot,  besides  presenting  him  next  day
with  forty  pounds  in  gold  and  an  annuity  of  one  hundred

1  Strada,  II.  453,  454.  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  188.  Bor,  II.  752.  "Wagenaar,
yiii.  136.

I

60

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  IX.

marks  sterling  for  life.  u  Since  I  was  born,  I  did  never  see
any  man  behave  himself  as  he  did/'  said  the  Earl.  “  I  shall
never  forget  it,  if  I  live  a  thousand  year,  and  he  shall  have
a  part  of  my  living  for  it  as  long  as  I  live.” 1

The  occupation  of  these  forts  terminated  the  military
operations  of  the  year,  for  the  rainy  season,  precursor  of  the
winter,  had  now  set  in.  Leicester,  leaving  Sir  William
Stanley,  with  twelve  hundred  English  and  Irish  horse,  in  com¬
mand  of  Deventer  ;  Sir  John  Burro wes,  with  one  thousand
men,  in  Doesburg ;  and  Sir  Bobert  Yorke,  with  one  thousand
more,  in  the  great  sconce  before  Zutphen  ;  took  his  departure
for  the  Hague.2  Zutphen  seemed  so  surrounded  as  to  au¬
thorize  the  governor  to  expect  ere  long  its  capitulation.
Nevertheless,  the  results  of  the  campaign  had  not  been
encouraging.  The  States  had  lost  ground,  having  been
driven  from  the  Meuse  and  Khine,  while  they  had  with  diffi¬
culty  maintained  themselves  on  the  Flemish  coast  and  upon
the  Yssel.

It  is  now  necessary  to  glance  at  the  internal  politics  of  the
Bepublic  during  the  period  of  Leicester's  administration  and
to  explain  the  position  in  which  he  found  himself  at  the  close
of  the  year.

1  Bruce’s  £  Leyc.  Corresp.’  428.
Compare  Strada,  II.  455,  456.  Hoofd,
Yervolgh,  188.  Meteren,  xiii.  237,

who  says  that  Leicester  presented
Stanley  with  a  life-rent  of  six  hundred
florins  (£60).  2  Bor,  II.  7  53.

1586.  SHOULD  ELIZABETH  ACCEPT  THE  SOVEREIGNTY  ?  gl

CHAPTER  X.

Should  Elizabeth  accept  the  Sovereignty?  —  The  Effects  of  her  Anger  —
Quarrels  between  the  Earl  and  the  States  —  The  Earl’s  three  Counsellors  —
Leicester’s  Einance-Chamber  —  Discontent  of  the  Mercantile  Classes  —
Paul  Buys  and  the  Opposition  —  Keen  Insight  of  Paul  Buys  —  Truchsess
becomes  a  Spy  upon  him  —  Intrigues  of  Buys  with  Denmark  —  His
Imprisonment — The  Earl’s  Unpopularity — His  Quarrels  with  the  States
—  And  with  the  Norrises — His  Counsellors  Wilkes  and  Clerke  —  Letter
from  the  Queen  to  Leicester  —  A  Supper  Party  at  Hohenlo’s  —  A  drunken
Quarrel  —  Hohenlo’s  Assault  upon  Edward  Norris  —  Ill  Effects  of  the
Riot.

The  brief  period  of  sunshine  had  been  swiftly  followed  by
storms.  The  Governor  Absolute  had,  from  the  outset,  been
placed  in  a  false  position.  Before  he  came  to  the  Nether¬
lands  the  Queen  had  refused  the  sovereignty.  Perhaps  it
was  wise  in  her  to  decline  so  magnificent  an  offer  ;  yet  cer¬
tainly  her  acceptance  would  have  been  perfectly  honourable.
The  constituted  authorities  of  the  Provinces  formally  made
the  proposition.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  whole
population  ardently  desired  to  become  her  subjects.  So  far
as  the  Netherlands  were  concerned,  then,  she  would  have
been  fully  justified  in  extending  her  sceptre  over  a  free  people,
who,  under  no  compulsion  and  without  any  diplomatic  chicane,
had  selected  her  for  their  hereditary  chief.  So  far  as  regarded
England,  the  annexation  to  that  country  of  a  continental
cluster  of  states,  inhabited  by  a  race  closely  allied  to  it  by
blood,  religion,  and  the  instinct  for  political  freedom,  seemed,
on  the  whole,  desirable.

In  a  financial  point  of  view,  England  would  certainly  lose
nothing  by  the  union.  The  resources  of  the  Provinces  were
at  least  equal  to  her  own.  We  have  seen  the  astonishment
which  the  wealth  and  strength  of  the  Netherlands  excited  in
their  English  visitors.  They  were  amazed  by  the  evidences
of  commercial  and  manufacturing  prosperity,  by  the  spectacle
of  luxury  and  advanced  culture,  which  met  them  on  every

62

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

side.  Had  the  Queen — as  it  had  been  generally  supposed —
desired  to  learn  whether  the  Provinces  were  able  and  willing
to  pay  the  expenses  of  their  own  defence  before  she  should
definitely  decide  on  their  olfer  of  sovereignty,  she  was  soon
thoroughly  enlightened  upon  the  subject.1  Her  confidential
agents  all  held  one  language.  If  she  would  only  accept  the
sovereignty,  the  amount  which  the  Provinces  would  pay  was
in  a  manner  boundless.  She  was  assured  that  the  revenue  of
her  own  hereditary  realm  was  much  inferior  to  that  of  the
possessions  thus  offered  to  her  sway.2

In  regard  to  constitutional  polity,  the  condition  of  the
Netherlands  was  at  least  as  satisfactory  as  that  of  England.
The  great  amount  of  civil  freedom  enjoyed  by  those  countries
— although  perhaps  an  objection  in  the  eyes  of  Elizabeth
Tudor — should  certainly  have  been  a  recommendation  to  her
liberty-loving  subjects.  The  question  of  defence  had  been
satisfactorily  answered.  The  Provinces,  if  an  integral  part  of
the  English  empire,  could  protect  themselves,  and  would
become  an  additional  element  of  strength,  not  a  troublesome
encumbrance.

The  difference  of  language  was  far  less  than  that  which
already  existed  between  the  English  and  their  Irish  fellow-
subjects,  while  it  was  counterbalanced  by  sympathy,  instead

’  Hoofd,  xxiii.  1039,  1042.  Wage-
naar,  viii.  102,  104;  141,  142.

2  “  Neither  do  I  easily  see,”  wrote
Richard  Cavendish,  “  how  the  cause
may  be  remedied,  unless  it  may  please
her  most  excellent  Majesty  to  take
that  upon  her  which  the  whole  people
(and  specially  they  of  the  wiser  sort)
both  crave  and  cry  for ,  namely,  the

sovereignty .  There  is  no

doubt  but  the  revenues  will  suffice  to
the  driving  of  the  enemy  out  of  these
countries  for  ever,  and  afterward  in
clear  profit  unto  her  Majesty  far  sur¬
mount  the  receipts  at  home.'"  Caven¬
dish  to  Burghley,  9  April,  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

“The  people,”  said  Leicester,  “still
pray  God  that  her  Majesty  will  be
their  sovereign.  She  would  then  see

what  a  contribution  they  will  all  bring
forth.”  Leicester  to  Burghley,  18
June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  I  may  safely  say  to  your  Majesty,”
said  he  at  about  the  same  period,
“that  if  your  aid  had  been  in  such
apparent  sort  to  the  countries  that
they  might  assure  themselves  of  any
certain  time  of  continuance  of  the
same,  and  that  you  had  taken  their
cause  indeed  to  heart,  I  am  verily
persuaded  that  they  would  have  given
very  good  testimonies  by  their  very
large  contributions  to  maintain  their
wars  for  such  certain  number  of  years
to  be  set  down  as  your  Majesty  should
appoint,  and  no  prince  nor  practice  of
any  person  living  able  to  draw  them
from  you.”  Leicester  to  the  Queen,
27  June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1586.  SHOULD  ELIZABETH  ACCEPT  THE  SOVEREIGNTY  ?  03

of  being  aggravated  by  mutual  hostility  in  the  matter  of
religion.

With  regard  to  the  great  question  of  abstract  sovereign ty,
it  was  certainly  impolitic  for  an  absolute  monarch  to  recog¬
nize  the  right  of  a  nation  to  repudiate  its  natural  allegiance.
But  Elizabeth  had  already  countenanced  that  step  by  assisting
the  rebellion  against  Philip.  To  allow  the  rebels  to  transfer
their  obedience  from  the  King  of  Spain  to  herself  was  only
another  step  in  the  same  direction.  The  Queen,  should  she
annex  the  Provinces,  would  certainly  be  accused  by  the  world
of  ambition  ;  but  the  ambition  was  a  noble  one,  if,  by  thus
consenting  to  the  urgent  solicitations  of  a  free  people,  she
extended  the  region  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  and  raised
up  a  permanent  bulwark  against  sacerdotal  and  royal  ab¬
solutism.

A  war  between  herself  and  Spain  was  inevitable  if  she
accepted  the  sovereignty,  but  peace  had  been  already  ren¬
dered  impossible  by  the  treaty  of  alliance.  It  is  true  that
the  Queen  imagined  the  possibility  of  combining  her  engage¬
ments  towards  the  States  with  a  conciliatory  attitude  towards
their  ancient  master,  but  it  was  here  that  she  committed  the
gravest  error.  The  negotiations  of  Parma  and  his  sovereign
with  the  English  court  were  a  masterpiece  of  deceit  on  the
part  of  Spain.  We  have  shown,  by  the  secret  correspondence,
and  we  shall  in  the  sequel  make  it  still  clearer,  that  Philip
only  intended  to  amuse  his  antagonists  ;  that  he  had  already
prepared  his  plan  for  the  conquest  of  England,  down  to  the
minutest  details  ;  that  the  idea  of  tolerating  religious  liberty
had  never  entered  his  mind ;  and  that  his  fixed  purpose  was
not  only  thoroughly  to  chastise  the  Dutch  rebels,  but  to
deprive  the  heretic  Queen  who  had  fostered  their  rebellion
both  of  throne  and  life.  So  far  as  regarded  the  Spanish
King,  then,  the  quarrel  between  him  and  Elizabeth  was
already  mortal  ;  while,  in  a  religious,  moral,  political,  and
financial  point  of  view,  it  would  be  difficult  to  show  that  it  was
wrong  or  imprudent  for  England  to  accept  the  sovereignty
over  his  ancient  subjects.  The  cause  of  human  freedom

64

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

seemed  likely  to  gain  by  the  step,  for  the  States  did  not
consider  themselves  strong  enough  to  maintain  the  inde¬
pendent  republic  which  had  already  risen.

It  might  be  a  question  whether,  on  the  whole,  Elizabeth
made  a  mistake  in  declining  the  sovereignty.  She  was  cer¬
tainly  wrong,  however,  in  wishing  the  lieutenant-general  of
her  six  thousand  auxiliary  troops  to  be  clothed,  as  such,
with  viceregal  powers.  The  States-General,  in  a  moment  of
enthusiasm,  appointed  him  governor  absolute,  and  placed  in
his  hands,  not  only  the  command  of  the  forces,  but  the  entire
control  of  their  revenues,  imposts,  and  customs,  together
with  the  appointment  of  civil  and  military  officers.  Such  an
amount  of  power  could  only  be  delegated  by  the  sovereign.
Elizabeth  had  refused  the  sovereignty :  it  then  rested  with
the  States.  They  only,  therefore,  were  competent  to  confer
the  power  wThich  Elizabeth  wished  her  favourite  to  exercise
simply  as  her  lieutenant-general.

Her  wrathful  and  vituperative  language  damaged  her  cause
and  that  of  the  Netherlands  more  severely  than  can  now  be
accurately  estimated.  The  Earl  was  placed  at  once  in  a
false,  a  humiliating,  almost  a  ridiculous  position.  The  au¬
thority  which  the  States  had  thus  a  second  time  offered  to
England  was  a  second  time  and  most  scornfully  thrust  back
upon  them.  Elizabeth  was  indignant  that  u  her  own  man  ”
should  clothe  himself  in  the  supreme  attributes  which  she
had  refused.  The  States  were  forced  by  the  violence  of  the
Queen  to  take  the  authority  into  their  own  hands  again,  and
Leicester  was  looked  upon  as  a  disgraced  man.

Then  came  the  neglect  with  which  the  Earl  was  treated  by
her  Majesty  and  her  ill-timed  parsimony  towards  the  cause.
No  letters  to  him  in  four  months,  no  remittances  for  the
English  troops,  not  a  penny  of  salary  for  him.  The  whole
expense  of  the  war  was  thrown  for  the  time  upon  their  hands,
and  the  English  soldiers  seemed  only  a  few  thousand  starving,
naked,  dying  vagrants,  an  incumbrance  instead  of  an  aid.1

1  “  I  find  the  most  part  of  the  bands
that  came  over  in  August  and  Sep¬

tember,”  said  Quartermaster  Digges,
“  more  than  half  wasted,  dead  and

1586.

THE  EFFECTS  OF  HER  ANGER.

65

The  States,  in  their  turn,  drew  the  purse-strings.  The
two  hundred  thousand  florins  monthly  were  paid.  The  four
hundred  thousand  florins  which  had  been  voted  as  an  addi¬
tional  supply  were  for  a  time  held  back,  as  Leicester  expressly
stated,  because  of  the  discredit  which  had  been  thrown  upon
him  from  home.1

The  military  operations  were  crippled  for  want  of  funds,
but  more  fatal  than  everything  else  were  the  secret  negotia¬
tions  for  peace.  Subordinate  individuals,  like  Grafigni  and
De  Loo,  went  up  and  down,  bringing  presents  out  of  England
for  Alexander  Farnese,2  and  bragging  that  Parma  and  them¬
selves  could  have  peace  whenever  they  liked  to  make  it,  and
affirming  that  Leicester's  opinions  were  of  no  account  what¬
ever.  Elizabeth's  coldness  to  the  Earl  and  to  the  Nether-
*  lands  was  affirmed  to  be  the  Prince  of  Parma's  sheet-anchor  ;
while  meantime  a  house

gone,  and  many  of  the  remainder  sick,
lame,  and  shrewdly  enfeebled,  fitter
to  be  relieved  at  home  in  hospitals
than  to  take  her  Majesty’s  pay  here
for  soldiers . Our  soldiers,  not¬

withstanding  great  numbers  of  them  be
'paid  with  earth  in  their  graves ,  yet  the
rest  are  so  ill  contented  of  their  due
for  the  time  past,  that,  if  pay  come
not  speedily,  before  they  be  drawn  to
deal  with  the  enemy,  I  doubt  some
worse  adventure  than  I  will  divine  be¬
forehand.”  ‘  Advertisement  of  the  pre¬
sent  state  of  these  Low  Countries,  by

T.  Digges,’  —  March,  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

1  Strangely  enough,  Elizabeth  was
under  the  impression  that  the  extra
grant  of  400,000  florins  (40,000/'.)  for
four  months  was  four  hundred  thou¬
sand  pounds  sterling  ! . “  The  rest

that  was  granted  by  the  States,  as  ex¬
traordinary  to  levy  an  army,  which
was  400,000  florins,  not  pounds,  as  I
hear  your  Majesty  taketh  it.  It  is
forty  thousand  pounds,  and  to  be  paid
in  March,  April,  May,  and  June  last,”
&c.  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  11  Oct.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

She  had  certainly  formed  already  an
exalted  idea  of  the  capacity  of  the

VOL.  II. — F

ostentatiously3  prejiared  in

Provinces  to  protect  themselves.  She
had  in  a  year  paid  but  seventy  thou¬
sand  pounds  herself,  and  believed  the
States  able,  over  and  above  their  regu¬
lar  contributions,  to  furnish  an  extra¬
ordinary  supply  of  one  hundred  thou¬
sand  pounds  a  month.

2  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  6  June,
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  “Amongst  all  the  enemy’s  means
to  persuade  his  discontented  and  ill-fed
companions,”  said  Cavendish,  “  this
seemeth  to  be  his  sheet-anchor,  name¬
ly,  that  where  the  only  comfort  of  this
people  depen deth  wholly  upon  her
Maj.’s  most  gracious  relief  and  sup¬
port,  now  is  the  disposition  thereof  in
her  so  cooled,  as  she  very  faintly
stretcheth  forth  her  hand  thereunto,
which  evidently  appears,  as  well  by
the  many  disgraces  which  here  my
Lord  hath  received  from  her  Maj.,  to
the  great  blemish  of  his  authority,  as
also  by  the  slack  payment  of  her

troops . and  so  long  as  my  Lord

shall  be  unable  to  front  him  in  the
field,  so  long  will  this  people  be  with¬
out  hope,  and  the  enemy  inflamed  with
assured  hope  of  victory.”  Cavendish
to  Burghley,  15  June,  1586.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)

66

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

Brussels  by  their  direction  for  the  reception  of  an  English
ambassador,  who  was  every  moment  expected  to  arrive.1
Under  such  circumstances  it  was  in  vain  for  the  governor-
general  to  protest  that  the  accounts  of  secret  negotiations
were  false,  and  quite  natural  that  the  States  should  lose  their
confidence  in  the  Queen.  An  unfriendly  and  suspicious  atti¬
tude  towards  her  representative  was  a  necessary  result,  and
the  demonstrations  against  the  common  enemy  became  still
more  languid.  But  for  these  underhand  dealings,  Grave,
Yenlo,  and  Neusz,  might  have  been  saved,2  and  the  current
of  the  Meuse  and  Rhine  have  remained  in  the  hands  of  the
patriots.

The  Earl  was  industrious,  generous,  and  desirous  of  playing
well  his  part.  His  personal  courage  was  undoubted,  and,  in
the  opinion  of  his  admirers — 'themselves,  some  of  them,  men
of  large  military  experience — his  ability  as  a  commander  was
of  a  high  order.3  The  valour  displayed  by  the  English  nobles
and  gentlemen  who  accompanied  him  was  magnificent,
worthy  the  descendants  of  the  victors  at  Crecy,  Poictiers,  and
Agincourt ;  and  the  good  behaviour  of  their  followers — with
a  few  rare  exceptions — had  been  equally  signal.  But  now
the  army  was  dwindling  to  a  ghastly  array  of  scarecrows,  and
the  recruits,  as  they  came  from  England,  were  appalled  by
the  spectacle  presented  by  their  predecessors.4  “  Our  old
ragged  rogues  here  have  so  discouraged  our  new  men/'  said
Leicester;  “ as  I  protest  to  you  they  look  like  dead  men."5
Out  of  eleven  hundred  freshly-arrived  Englishmen,  five  hun-

1  “  It  is  certainly  known  that  the
enemy  hath  not  a  little  prevailed  with
that  stratagem,  causing  to  be  pub¬
lished  that  there  was  a  treaty  of  peace
between  her  Majesty  and  him,  and
that  the  same  should  be  shortly  con¬
cluded;  and  to  make  this  device  to
carry  the  more  shew  of  truth,  he
caused  a  house  to  be  prepared  in
Brussels,  saving  that  it  was  for  an
ambassador  coming,  out  of  England  to
conclude  the  peace,  by  which  means
he  hath  contained  divers  towns  in
terms  of  obedience  that  were  ready  to

revolt,  in  respect  of  their  misery,  po¬
verty,  and  famine.”  Wilkes  to  Burgh-
ley,  7  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  20  June,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  North  to  Burgliley,  23  May,  1586.

Same  to  same,  29  May,  1586.  Heneage
to  Walsingham,  25  May,  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

4  Leicester  to  Burgliley,  18  June,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Bruce’s

‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  338.

6  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  338.

1586.

QUARRELS  BETWEEN  THE  EARL  AND  STATES.

67

dred  ran  away  in  two  days.1  Some  were  caught  and  hanged,
and  all  seemed  to  prefer  hanging  to  remaining  in  the  service,
while  the  Earl  declared  that  he  would  he  handed  as  well
rather  than  again  undertake  such  a  charge  without  being
assured  payment  for  his  troops  beforehand.2

The  valour  of  Sidney  and  Essex,  Willoughby  and  Pelham,
Roger  Williams  and  Martin  Schenk,  was  set  at  nought  by
such  untoward  circumstances.  Had  not  Philip  also  left  his
army  to  starve  and  Alexander  Farnese  to  work  miracles,
it  would  have  fared  still  worse  with  Holland  and  England,
and  with  the  cause  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  in  the  year
1586.

The  States  having  resumed,  as  much  as  possible,  their
former  authority,  were  on  very  unsatisfactory  terms  with  the
governor-general.  Before  long,  it  was  impossible  for  the
twenty  or  thirty  individuals  called  the  States  to  he  in  the
same  town  with  the  man  whom,  at  the  commencement  of  the
year,  they  had  greeted  so  warmly.3  The  hatred  between  the
Leicester  faction  and  the  municipalities  became  intense,  for
the  foundation  of  the  two  great  parties  which  were  long  to
divide  the  Netherland  commonwealth  was  already  laid.  The
mercantile  patrician  interest,  embodied  in  the  states  of  Hol¬
land  and  Zeeland,  and  inclined  to  a  large  toleration  in  the
matter  of  religion,  which  afterwards  took  the  form  of  Armi-
nianism,  was  opposed  by  a  strict  Calvinist  party,  which  desired
to  subject  the  political  commonwealth  to  the  reformed  church  ;
which  nevertheless  indulged  in  very  democratic  views  of
the  social  compact ;  and  which  was  controlled  by  a  few
refugees  from  Flanders  and  Brabant,  who  had  succeeded  in
obtaining  the  confidence  of  Leicester.

Thus  the  Earl  was  the  nominal  head  of  the  Calvinist  demo¬
cratic  party;  while  young  Maurice  of  Nassau,  stadholder  of  Hol¬
land  and  Zeeland,  and  guided  by  Barneveld,  Buys,  and  other
leading  statesmen  of  these  Provinces,  was  in  an  attitude  pre-

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Compare  Wagenaar,

cited.  Bruce,  ubi  sup.  2  Ibid.  viii.  142,  143.

3  Doyley  to  Burghley,  8  Aug.  1586.

68

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

cisely  the  reverse  of  the  one  which  he  was  destined  at  a  later
and  equally  memorable  epoch  to  assume.  The  chiefs  of  the
faction  which  had  now  succeeded  in  gaining  the  confidence
of  Leicester  were  Reingault,  Burgrave,  and  Deventer,  all
refugees.

The  laws  of  Holland  and  of  the  other  United  States  were
very  strict  on  the  subject  of  citizenship,  and  no  one  but  a
native  was  competent  to  hold  office  in  each  Province.  Doubt¬
less,  such  regulations  were  narrow-spirited ;  but  to  fly  in  the
face  of  them  was  the  act  of  a  despot,  and  this  is  what  Lei¬
cester  did.  Reingault  was  a  Fleming.  He  was  a  bankrupt
merchant,  who  had  been  taken  into  the  protection  of  Lamoral
Egmont,  and  by  that  nobleman  recommended  to  Granvelle
for  an  office  under  the  Cardinal's  government.  The  refusal
of  this  favour  was  one  of  the  original  causes  of  Egmont's
hostility  to  Granvelle.  Reingault  subsequently  entered  the
service  of  the  Cardinal,  however,  and  rewarded  the  kindness
of  his  former  benefactor  by  great  exertions  in  finding,  or
inventing,  evidence  to  justify  the  execution  of  that  unfor¬
tunate  nobleman.  He  was  afterwards  much  employed  by  the
Duke  of  Alva  and  by  the  Grand  Commander  Requesens  ;
but  after  the  pacification  of  Ghent  he  had  been  completely
thrown  out  of  service.  He  had  recently,  in  a  subordinate
capacity,  accompanied  the  legations  of  the  States  to  France
and  to  England,  and  had  now  contrived  to  ingratiate  him¬
self  with  the  Earl  of  Leicester.  He  affected  great  zeal  for
the  Calvinistic  religion — an  exhibition  which,  in  the  old
servant  of  Granvelle  and  Alva,  was  far  from  edifying — and
would  employ  no  man  or  maid-servant  in  his  household
until  their  religious  principles  had  been  thoroughly  examined
by  one  or  two  clergymen.  In  brief,  he  was  one  of  those,
who,  according  to  a  homely  Flemish  proverb,  are  wont  to
hang  their  piety  on  the  bell-rope  ;  but,  with  the  exception
of  this  brief  interlude  in  his  career,  he  lived  and  died  a
Papist.1

Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  142,  143.  Reydani,  Y.  89,  90.

i

THE  EARL’S  THREE  COUNSELLORS.

69

1586.

I

Gerard  Proninck,  called  Deventer,  was  a  respectable  inha¬
bitant  of  Bois-le-Duc,  who  had  left  that  city  after  it  had
again  become  subject  to  the  authority  of  Spain.  He  was  of
decent  life  and  conversation,  but  a  restless  and  ambitious
demagogue.  As  a  Brabantine,  he  was  unfit  for  office  ;  and
yet,  through  Leicester’s  influence  and  the  intrigues  of  the
democratic  party,  he  obtained  the  appointment  of  burgo¬
master  in  the  city  of  U trecht.  The  States- General,  however,
always  refused  to  allow  him  to  appear  at  their  sessions  as
representative  of  that  city.1

Daniel  de  Burgrave  was  a  Flemish  mechanic,  who,  by  the
exertion  of  much  energy  and  talent,  had  risen  to  the  post  of
procureur-general  of  Flanders.  After  the  conquest  of  the
principal  portion  of  that  Province  by  Parma,  he  had  made
himself  useful  to  the  English  governor-general  in  various
ways,  and  particularly  as  a  linguist.  He  spoke  English — a
tongue  with  which  few  Netherlander  s  of  that  day  were  fami¬
liar — and  as  the  Earl  knew  no  other,  except  (very  imper¬
fectly)  Italian,  he  found  his  services  in  speaking  and  writing
a  variety  of  languages  very  convenient.  He  was  the  governor’s
private  secretary,  and,  of  course,  had  no  entrance  to  the
council  of  state,  but  he  was  accused  of  frequently  thrusting
himself  into  their  hall  of  sessions,  where,  under  pretence
of  arranging  the  Earl’s  table,  or  j>ortfolio,  or  papers,  he  was
much  addicted  to  whispering  into  his  master’s  ear,  listening
to  conversation, — to  eaves-dropping,  in  short,  and  general
intrusiveness.2

“A  most  faithful,  honest  servant  is  Burgrave,”  said  Lei¬
cester;  aa  substantial,  wise  man.3  ’Tis  as  sufficient  a  man
as  ever  I  met  withal  of  any  nation  ;  very  well  learned,
exceeding  wise,  and  sincere  in  religion.  I  cannot  commend
the  man  too  much.  He  is  the  only  comfort  I  have  had  of
any  of  this  nation.” 4

These  three  personages  were  the  leaders  of’ the  Leicester

1  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  &c.,  just  cited.

2  Hoofd,  Reyd.,  ubi  sup.

3  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  363,  422.

4  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  27  July,
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

70

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

faction.  They  had  much  influence  with  all  the  refugees  from
Flanders,  Brabant,  and  the  Walloon  Provinces.  In  Utrecht,
especially,  where  the  Earl  mainly  resided,  their  intrigues
were  very  successful.  Deventer  was  appointed,  as  already
stated,  to  the  important  post  of  burgomaster ;  many  of  the
influential  citizens  were  banished,  without  cause  or  trial ;  the
upper  branch  of  the  municipal  government,  consisting  of
the  clerical  delegates  of  the  colleges,  was  in  an  arbitrary
manner  abolished  ;  and  finally,  the  absolute  sovereignty  of
the  Province,  without  condition,  was  offered  to  the  Queen  of
England.1

Leicester  was  now  determined  to  carry  out  one  of  the  great
objects  which  the  Queen  had  in  view  when  she  sent  him  to
the  Netherlands.  She  desired  thoroughly  to  ascertain  the
financial  resources  of  the  Provinces,  and  their  capacity  to
defend  themselves.2  It  was  supposed  by  the  States,  and
hoped  by  the  Earl  and  by  a  majority  of  the  Netherland
people,  that  she  would,  in  case  the  results  were  satisfactory,
accept,  after  all,  the  sovereignty.  She  certainly  was  not  to
be  blamed  that  she  wished  to  make  this  most  important
investigation,  but  it  was  her  own  fault  that  any  new  machinery
had  been  rendered  necessary.  The  whole  control  of  the
finances  had,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  been  placed  in  the
EaiTs  hands,3  and  it  was  only  by  her  violently  depriving  him
of  his  credit  and  of  the  confidence  of  the  country  that  he  had
not  retained  it.  He  now  established  a  finance-chamber,
under  the  chief  control  of  Reingault,  who  promised  him
mountains  of  money,  and  who  was  to  be  chief  treasurer.4  Paul

1  Bor,  II.  '722.

2  Hoofd,  1039, 1042.  Wagenaar,  viii.
142.

3  Bruce’s  £Leyc.  Corresp.’  1585;
“And,”  said  lie  to  the  Lord  Mayor  and
Aldermen  of  London,  “you  may  all
sleep  quietly  in  England,  so  long  as
these  countries  may  be  held  in  .their
earnest  good-will.”

4  Bor,  II.  722.

Leicester  to  Burghley,  28  June,
1586.  Cavendish  to  same,  19  June,  1586.

Leicester  to  the  Queen,  26  June,  1586.
Same  to  same,  27  June,  1586.  Wilkes  •
to  Lords  of  Council,  20  Aug.  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

“The  Prince  of  Orange,”  said
Cavendish  (MS.  ubi  sup.),  “being  not
ignorant  of  the  frauds  of  the  States,
often  levelled  at  this  matter  (a  finance-
council),  but  was  never  able  to  hit  it,
because  they  knew  he  was  poor,  and
had  no  way  else  to  live  but  upon  their
alms- basket . Amongst  other

1586.

LEICESTER’S  FINANCE-CHAMBER.

71

Buys  was  appointed  by  Leicester  to  fill  a  subordinate  position
in  the  new  council.  He  spurned  the  offer  with  great  indig¬
nation,  saying  that  Reingault  was  not  fit  to  be  his  clerk,  and
that  he  was  not  likely  himself,  therefore,  to  accept  a  humble
post  under  the  administration  of  such  an  individual.  This
scornful  refusal  filled  to  the  full  the  hatred  of  Leicester
against  the  ex- Advocate  of  Holland.1

The  mercantile  interest  at  once  took  the  alarm,  because  it
was  supposed  that  the  finance-chamber  was  intended  to  crush
the  merchants.  Early  in  April  an  Act  had  been  passed  by
the  state-council,  prohibiting  commerce  with  the  Spanish
possessions.  The  embargo  was  intended  to  injure  the  obe¬
dient  Provinces  and  their  sovereign,  but  it  was  shown  that  its
effect  would  be  to  blast  the  commerce  of  Holland.  It  for¬
bade  the  exportation  from  the  republic  not  only  of  all  provi¬
sions  and  munitions  of  war,  but  of  all  goods  and  merchandize
whatever,  to  Spain,  Portugal,  the  Spanish  Netherlands,  or
any  other  of  Philip's  territories,  either  in  Hutch  or  neutral
vessels.2  It  would  certainly  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  such  an

things,  there  is  one  impost  granted  by-
favour  to  some  parties  for  100/.  by  the
year,  which  is  indeed  worth  8,000/.
With  these  tricks  have  they  enriched
themselves,  all  which  devices  must
now  quail.”  If  such  stories,  which
were  daily  whispered  into  Leicester’s
ears,  had  a  shadow  of  foundation,  it
was  not  surprising  that  he  should  ex¬
pect  to  increase  the  revenue  by  a  more
judicious  farming.  But  he  never
found  his  “mountains  of  gold,”  nor
any  collector  who  could  turn  a  hun¬
dred  pounds  into  eight  thousand.  “I
have,”  said  Leicester  (Letters  to  the
Queen,  ubi  sup.),  “established,  against
the  wills  of  some  here,  a  chamber  of
finance,  by  which  I  shall  be  sure  to
be  privy  to  the  levying  and  bestowing
of  all  their  revenues — a  matter  your
Majesty  hath  often  sought  to  under¬
stand  thereof.  But,  with  all  the  wit
and  means  I  could  use,  could  never
certainly  bring  it  to  pass,  nor  never
will,  but  by  this  only  way.  I  trust
shortly  to  have  very  assured  know¬
ledge  to  satisfy  your  Majesty  of  the
States’  ability,  which  thing  I  have

gone  about  from  the  beginning.  I
hope,  within  twenty  days,  to  give
your  Majesty  some  near  reckoning  of
all  their  revenues  every  way.  Your
Majesty  doth  suppose  I  deal  weakly
with  these  men,  but  I  would  you  knew
how  I  have  dealt  with  them  of  late,
to  bring  the  office  of  finance  to  pass.
I  had  a  good  will  to  have  dealt  long
since  roundly  with  them,  I  confess,
but  my  case  was  too  well  known  to
them.  But  as  soon  as  my  heartening
came  from  mine  old  supporter,  I  was
found  a  more  shrew  than  your  Majesty
will  believe ;  for  mine  old  patience
hath  been  too  much  tried  since  I
came  from  my  quiet  home  to  this
wayward  generation.”

“I  find  that  until  the  time  of  my
coming  hither,”  said  Wilkes  (Letter
to  Council,  ubi  sup.),  “  the  States  have
been  contented  to  disguise  and  conceal
the  truth  of  many  particularities,
which  now  they  profess  to  discover,
meaning,  as  they  say,  to  anatomise
unto  her  Majesty  the  whole  state  of
their  strength.  1  Bor,  II.  722.

2  Bor,  IL  703,  seq.  who  is,  however,

72

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

act  was  reasonable,  although  the  result  would  really  be,  not
to  deprive  the  enemy  of  supplies,  but  to  throw  the  whole
Baltic  trade  into  the  hands  of  the  Bremen,  Hamburg,  and
cc  Osterling”  merchants.  Leicester  expected  to  derive  a  con¬
siderable  revenue  by  granting  passports  and  licenses  to
such  neutral  traders,  but  the  edict  became  so  unpopular
that  it  was  never  thoroughly  enforced,  and  was  before  long
rescinded.1

The  odium  of  the  measure  was  thrown  upon  the  governor-
general,  yet  he  had  in  truth  opposed  it  in  the  state-council,
and  was  influential  in  procuring  its  repeal.2

Another  important  Act  had  been  directed  against  the  mer¬
cantile  interest,  and  excited  much  general  discontent.  The
Netherlands  wished  the  staple  of  the  English  cloth  manufac¬
ture  to  be  removed  from  Emden — the  petty  sovereign  of
which  place  was  the  humble  servant  of  Spain — to  Amsterdam
or  Delft.  The  desire  was  certainly  natural,  and  the  Dutch
merchants  sent  a  committee  to  confer  with  Leicester.  He
was  much  impressed  with  their  views,  and  with  the  sagacity
of  their  chairman,  one  Mylward,  ua  wise  fellow  and  well
languaged,  an  ancient  man  and  very  religious,'"  as  the  Earl
pronounced  him  to  be.3

Notwithstanding  the  wisdom  of  this  well-languaged  fellow,
however,  the  Queen,  for  some  strange  reason,  could  not  be

mistaken  in  ascribing  the  measure  to
the  inspiration  of  Leicester.

1  Bor,  II.,  703,  seq.  Wagenaar,  viii.
147,  seq.  who  is  in  this  matter  even
more  unjust  to  the  Earl  than  con¬
temporary  authorities.

3  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  11  Oct.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  I  have  very  good  testimony  of  all
the  council  here,”  said  the  Earl,  “that
I  only  in  council  stood  against  the
placard,  insomuch  it  lay  a  month  by,
for  indeed  I  thought  it  unreasonable
and  that  it  would  give  all  princes  just
cause  of  offence  toward  this  country,
and,  by  all  duty  to  your  Majesty,  I
did  refuse  to  let  it  pass.  At  length,
both  States  and  council  renewed  the
matter  again  to  me,  and  showed  me

presently  how  the  like  had  been  done,
and  what  profit  it  would  bring,  pres¬
sing  me  to  give  it  some  consideration
in  council  to  be  debated.  It  went  so
through  them  all  as  there  was  not  a
man  spake  against  it,  yet  my  resolu¬
tion  being  to  be  had,  I  would  give  no
consent  till  I  had  advertised  your  Ma¬
jesty  thereof,  which  they  all  liked  well.
And  after  it  was  agreed  and  published,
it  was  again  by  my  means  revoked  and
qualified,  as  doth  appear  by  record.”

Compare  Meteren,  xiii.  234v0.  Wage¬
naar,  ubi  sup.  Bor,  ubi  sup.  who
seems  to  be  mistaken  on  this  point.

The  real  author  of  the  edict  was
Reingault.  (Meteren,  ubi  sup.)

3  Leicester  to  Burghley,  29  July.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1586.

DISCONTENT  OE  THE  MERCANTILE  CLASSES.

73

induced  to  change  the  staple  from  Emden,  although  it  was
shown  that  the  public  revenue  of  the  Netherlands  would
gain  twenty  thousand  pounds  a  year  by  the  measure.  u  All
Holland  will  cry  out  for  it/’  said  Leicester ;  u  but  I  had  rather
they  cried  than  that  England  should  wee}!.” 1

Thus  the  mercantile  community,  and  especially  the  patri¬
cian  families  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  all  engaged  in  trade,
became  more  and  more  hostile  to  the  governor-general  and
to  his  financial  trio,  who  were  soon  almost  as  unpopular  as
the  famous  Consulta  of  Cardinal  Granvelle  had  been.  It  was
the  custom  of  the  States  to  consider  the  men  who  surrounded
the  Earl  as  needy  and  unprincipled  renegades  and  adventurers.
It  was  the  policy  of  his  advisers  to  represent  the  merchants
and  the  States — which  mainly  consisted  of,  or  were  controlled
by  merchants — as  a  body  of  corrupt,  selfish,  greedy  money-
getters.2

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,  10  Aug.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  “  The  wonderful  cunning  dealing
of  those  fellows  here  called  the  States
concerning  the  finances  and  the  re¬
ceipt  of  revenue,  whereupon  the  people
rest  greatly  grieved,  and  themselves,
as  is  thought,  no  less  enriched.”
Cavendish  to  Burghley,  9  April,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“The  States  be  sly  persons,”  said
Lord  North,  “inconstant  and  treacher¬
ous,  the  most  of  them  Papists  (!),  and
so  rich  as  they  will  do  any  turn  to
serve  themselves.  If  they  again  find
that  her  Majesty  likes  not  of  my
Lord’s  authority,  they  will  doubt  of
their  own  safety,  practise  their  own
peace,  and  leave  my  Lord  and  all  his
to  the  spirit  of  the  enemy.  North  to
Burghley,  23  May,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

“  These  be  dainty  and  dangerous
people  to  deal  withal,”  said  Leicester,
“  specially  when  they  shall  be  des¬
perate  of  their  hope,  and  disappointed
of  their  help.  I  must  say  truly  to
your  Majesty  I  do  find  some  of  the
best  sort  as  honest  and  as  thankful  as
ever  I  knew  men,  and  some  others  as
perverse  and  as  in  grate  as  might  well
be  spared  out  of  all  good  company.

There  are  also  men  who  are  able,  and
do  most  hurt.  .  .  .  These  men  begin
utterly  to  despair  of  your  Majesty’s
good  assistance,  and  an  apt  time  is
offered  now  for  the  lewd  and  bad
disposed  persons  to  work  their  feat.”
Leicester  to  the  Queen,  6  June,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  The  whole  people,”  said  Caven¬
dish,  “  are  here  so  addicted  to  her
Majesty,  and  in  respect  of  her  to  my
Lord,  in  whom  they  find  such  inces¬
sant  travail  and  care  for  her  service
and  their  general  good,  and  in  respect
of  whom  they  would  willingly  cashier
or  rather  hang  all  those  called  States.
Your  Lordship  may  think  I  write
vehemently,  but  I  know  I  write  truly.”
Cavendish  to  Burghley,  19  June,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  It  will  be  a  harder  matter,”  said
Leicester  again,  “  than  you  can  ima¬
gine,  to  bring  this  State  in  that  tune
it  was  three  months  past.  It  will
require  a  whole  and  full  countenance
from  her  Majesty  and  with  all  speed
possible,  if  you  will  have  it  kept  from
the  enemy.  And  beware  these  fellows
do  not  prevent  her  Majesty.  If  they
do,  you  can  consider  how  harmful  it
is  like  to  prove,  and  though  they  he
counted  dullards  and  drunkards ,  they

74

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

The  calumnies  put  in  circulation  against  the  States  b}r
Reingault  and  his  associates  grew  at  last  so  outrageous,  and
the  prejudice  created  in  the  mind  of  Leicester  and  his  imme¬
diate  English  adherents  so  intense,  that  it  was  rendered
necessary  for  the  States  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  to  write  to
their  agent  Ortell  in  London,  that  he  might  forestall  the
effect  of  these  perpetual  misrepresentations  on  her  Majesty's
government.1  Leicester,  on  the  other  hand,  under  the

have  shrewd  and  subtle  heads  as  ever  I

found  anywhere . The  best  man

in  England  were  not  too  good ,  as  mat¬
ters  stand ,  to  be  employed  hither ,  either
to  encourage  them  thoroughly ,  or  to
understand  their  estate  more  deeply .”
Leicester  to  Burgliley,  20  July,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  I  did  never  see  such  heady  people
as  these  States  are,”  said  the  Earl,  once
more,  “  I  cannot  blame  the  common
sort  to  mislike  them,  for  there  is  no
reasoning  against  their  resolutions.

. There  must  be  very  wise  and

good  handling  had  in  these  causes.
There  is  no  more  such  people  to  deal
withal  again.  I  mean  these  that  be
•rich  and  politic  fellows.  They  hunt
after  their  own  wealth  and  surety,
and  without  an  assurance  of  a  strange
assistance  they  will  be  suddenly  gone,
and  it  is  high  time  to  look  into  the
course  her  Majesty  will  take  here¬
after.”  Same  to  same,  29  July,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  They  have  given  to  my  Lord  of
Leicester,”  said  Wilkes,  “  a  govern¬
ment  with  the  word  absolute ,  but  with
so  many  restrictions  that  his  authority
is  limited  almost  to  nothing,  and  he  is
in  truth  for  the  politic  government
but  their  servant;  having  reserved  to
themselves,  besides  the  sovereignty,
the  disposing  of  all  the  contributions
(saving  the  monthly  allowance),  the
church  goods,  confiscations,  choice  of
officers  ....  and  to  keep  themselves
from  rendering  account  of  anything,
they  do  impugn  liis  court  of  finances
now  erected,  alleging  that  he  hath
not  authority  to  erect  any  such  court,
or  to  establish  offices  without  their
license.”  Wilkes  to  Lords  of  Council,
20  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  The  exactions  and  excises  are  in¬

credible  that  are  laid  on  this  people,”
said  Digges,  “  and  such  as  in  all  pro¬
bability  do  amount  to  three  times  as
much  (!)  as  the  200,000  florins  monthly
which  they  allow  his  Excellency  to
prosecute  the  war.  The  rest  they
divide  among  themselves  .  .  .  giving
great  stipends  to  Count  Hollock,
Count  Maurice,  Count  Meurs,  Count
William,  and  many  colonels.  But,  for
all  this,  the  States  offer  that  there
shall  be  new  impositions  to  levy
more.”  T.  Digges’s  ‘Advertisement  of
present  state  of  the  Low  Countries/

—  March,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  “You  have  doubtless  understood,”
said  the  States,  “  of  the  erection  of
the  finance-council  for  the  better  hus¬
banding  of  the  money  furnished  by
these  countries,  of  the  which  Jacques
Ringault  is  ordained  treasurer.  ....
Stephen  Perret  (a  seditious  person,
often  imprisoned,  and  a  fraudulent
bankrupt),  being  come  out  of  Antwerp
after  the  yielding  up  of  the  same,
hath  kept  correspondence  with  Rin¬
gault,  whilst  he  was  in  England.
Yery  shortly  after  the  coming  of  his
Excellency  into  these  countries,  he
hath  sought  by  all  possible  means  to
bring  him  in  suspicion  and  jealousy
by  the  Estates  of  the  country,  and
propounded  manifold  novelties  unto
liis  Excellency  whereby  to  levy  money,
and  in  the  propounding  thereof  shame¬
fully  slandered  the  Estates  with  inju¬
rious,  seditious ,  and  untrue  reports  and
drifts.  After  Ringault’s  arrival  here,
he  hath  found  means  to  get  in  better
credit  by  his  Excellency,  and,  laying
their  heads  together,  and  either  being
set  awork  by  the  enemy  or  else  thinking
to  enrich  themselves  out  of  the  calamity
and  misery  of  these  countries,  have

1586.  PAUL  BUYS  AND  THE  OPPOSITION.  75

inspiration  of  his  artful  advisers,  was  vehement  in  his  en¬
treaties  that  Ortell  should  he  sent  away  from  England.1

The  ablest  and  busiest  of  the  opposition-party,  the  “  nimblest
head” 2  in  the  States-General  was  the  ex-Advocate  of  Hol¬
land,  Paul  Buys.  This  man  was  then  the  foremost  statesman
in  the  Netherlands.  He  had  been  the  firmest  friend  to  the
English  alliance  ;  he  had  resigned  his  office  when  the  States
were  offering  the  sovereignty  to  F ranee,  and  had  been  on  the
point  of  taking  service  in  Denmark.  He  had  afterwards  been
prominent  in  the  legation  which  offered  the  sovereignty  to
Elizabeth,  and,  for  a  long  time,  had  been  the  most  firm,
earnest,  and  eloquent  advocate  of  the  English  policy.  Lei¬
cester  had  originally  courted  him,  caressed  him,  especially  re¬
commended  him  to  the  Queen’s  favour,  given  him  money — as
he  said,  “two  hundred  pounds  sterling  thick  at  a  time” — and

made  agreement  between  them  in
April  last  that  all  that  which  they,  by
means  of  any  new  invention  by  them
already  propounded  or  yet  to  be  pro¬
pounded  unto  his  Excellency,  should
get  or  enjoy,  that  the  same  should  be
divided  between  them.  And  after  that
he  sought  of  his  Excellency  the  20th
penny  of  all  that  which  should
proceed  of  his  pretended  inventions.
To  which  end  Ringault,  with  his  own
hand,  has  drawn  an  octroi,  or  warrant,
and  got  his  Excellency  to  sign  the
same,  without  knowledge  of  the  coun¬
cil,  or  any  of  the  secretaries,  namely,
that  he  should  have  the  30th  penny.
They  have  also  taken  great  pains  to
change  the  course  of  the  common
means,  which  so  laudably  and  with-
such  great  travail  his  Excellency  of
worthy  memory  (William  of  Orange)
brought  in  train,  and  so  to  bring  it
into  collectation,  thereby  to  intrude
themselves  and  such  other  (having  no
credit)  to  farm  any  of  the  said  general
means  in  the  collectation.  The  fore-
said  Perret  and  Ringault  have  also
travailed  by  all  means  to  set  mis¬
understanding  between  his  Excellency
and  the  Estates  and  the  council  of
state,  and  practised  many  unlawful
devices  to  alter  the  estate  of  the
countries,  and  to  get  his  Excellency

to  do  all  that  which  they  imagined  to
serve  to  their  intent.  To  which  end
they  have  used  many  unheard-of  and
indecent  proceedings  without  order  of
law,  and  against  the  privileges  and
customs  of  these  countries,  and  against
the  estate  and  welfare  of  the  same,
through  a  company  of  inconstant  and
base  persons,  for  the  greater  part
being  strangers,  applying  unto  them¬
selves  and  their  friends  (a  company  of
strangers)  many  offices  and  receipts,
thinking  to  deal  with  the  same  ac¬
cording  to  their  own  pleasure  and
appetite.  All  which  we  have  at  large  '
imparted  to  Mr.  Wilkes ,  showed  him
the  original  pieces ,  and  given  him  good
instruction  by  writing  thereof,  to  the
end  he  may  give  her  Majesty  and  her
honourable  council  to  understand  the
personage  of  these  two  spirits.”  States
of  Holland  and  Zeeland  to  Ortell,  12
Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  “  You  have  there  his  (Paul  Buys’s)

agent  Ortell.  It  were  well  he  were
thence.  I  did  send  twice  for  him,
but  he  excuseth  himself.”  Leicester
to  Burghley,  20  July,  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)  Compare  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’
311.

2  Bart.  Clerk  to  Burghley,  24  July,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

76

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

openly  pronounced  him  to  be  “in  ability  above  all  men/'1
“No  man  hath  ever  sought  a  man/'  he  said,  “as  I  have
sought  P.  B.”2

The  period  of  their  friendship  was,  however,  very  brief.
Before  many  weeks  had  passed  there  was  no  vituperative
epithet  that  Leicester  was  not  in  the  daily  habit  of  bestowing
upon  Paul.  The  Earl’s  vocabulary  of  abuse  was  not  a  limited
one,  but  he  exhausted  it  on  the  head  of  the  Advocate.  He
lacked  at  last  words  and  breath  to  utter  what  was  like  him.
He  pronounced  his  former  friend  “  a  very  dangerous  man,
altogether  hateJ  of  the  people  and  the  States  ;”  “  a  lewd
sinner,  nursled  in  revolutions ;  “a  most  covetous,  bribing
fellow,  caring  for  nothing  but  to  bear  the  sway  and  grow
rich  “  a  man  who  had  played  many  parts,  both  lewd  and
audacious  “  a  very  knave,  a  traitor  to  his  country  “  the
most  ungrateful  wretch  alive,  a  hater  of  the  Queen  and  of  all
the  English  ;  a  most  unthankful  man  to  her  Majesty  ;  a  prac-
tiser  to  make  himself  rich  and  great,  and  nobody  else
“among  all  villains  the  greatest;”  “a  bolsterer  of  all  papists  and
ill  men,  a  dissembler,  a  devil,  an  atheist,”  a  “most  naughty
man,  and  a  most  notorious  drunkard  in  the  worst  degree.”

Where  the  Earl  hated,  his  hatred  was  apt  to  be  deadly,  and
he  was  determined,  if  possible,  to  have  the  life  of  the  detested
Paul.  “You  shall  see  I  will  do  well  enough  with  him,  and
that  shortly,”  he  said.  “  I  will  course  him  as  he  was  not  so
this  twenty  year.  I  will  warrant  him  hanged  and  one  or  two
of  his  fellows,  but  you  must  not  tell  your  shirt  of  this  yet ;”
and  when  he  was  congratulating  the  government  on  his
having  at  length  procured  the  execution  of  Captain  Hemart,
the  surrenderor  of  Grave,  he  added,  pithily,  “and  you  shall
hear  that  Mr.  P.  B.  shall  follow.”3

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,  10  Aug.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.

3  Leicester  to  Burgliley,  20  June,
1586.  Same  to  same,  10  Aug  1586.
Same  to  same,  20  July,  1586.  B.
Clerk  to  same,  24  July.  (S.  P.  Office
MSS.)

Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  130,  291,
303,  310,  311,  312,  352.  Cavendish
observed  that  “  there  were  many  false
brethren  in  the  higher  form  among
the  people,  of  whom  he  feared  that
Paul  Buys  would  not  prove  the
puisne .”  Cavendish  to  Burghley,  15
June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1586.

KEEN  INSIGHT  OF  PAUL  BUYS.

77

Yet  the  Earl's  real  griefs  against  Buys  may  be  easily
summed  up.  The  lewd  sinner,  nursled  in  revolutions,  had
detected  the  secret  policy  of  the  Queen's  government,  and
was  therefore  perpetually  denouncing  the  intrigues  going  on
with  Spain.  He  complained  that  her  Majesty  was  tired  of
having  engaged  in  the  Netherland  enterprise  ;  he  declared  that
she  would  be  glad  to  get  fairly  out  of  it ;  that  her  reluctance
to  spend  a  farthing  more  in  the  cause  than  she  was  obliged
to  do  was  hourly  increasing  upon  her  ;  that  she  was  deceiving
and  misleading  the  States-General ;  and  that  she  was  hank¬
ering  after  a  peace.  He  said  that  the  Earl  had  a  secret
intention  to  possess  himself  of  certain  towns  in  Holland,  in
which  case  the  whole  question  of  peace  and  war  would  be  in
the  hands  of  the  Queen,  who  would  also  have  it  thus  in  her
power  to  reimburse  herself  at  once  for  all  expenses  that  she
had  incurred.1

It  would  be  difficult  to  show  that  there  was  anything  very
calumnious  in  these  charges,  which,  no  doubt,  Paul  was  in
the  habit  of  making.  Jik  to  the  economical  tendencies  of
her  Majesty,  sufficient  evidence  has  been  given  already  from
Leicester's  private  letters.  u  Bather  than  spend  one  hundred
pounds,"  said  Walsingham,  ashe  can  be  content  to  be  de¬
ceived  of  five  thousand."2  That  she  had  been  concealing
from  the  States,  from  Walsingham,  from  Leicester,  during
the  whole  summer,  her  secret  negotiations  with  Spain,  has
also  been  made  apparent.  That  she  was  disgusted  with
the  enterprise  in  which  she  had  embarked,  Walsingham,
Burghley,  Hatton,  and  all  the  other  statesmen  of  England,
most  abundantly  testified.  Whether  Leicester  had  really  an
intention  to  possess  himself  of  certain  cities  in  Holland — a
charge  made  by  Paul  Buys,  and  denounced  as  especially
slanderous  by  the  Earl — may  better  appear  from  his  own
private  statements.

“  Paul  Buys  —  still  giving  out
slanderous  speeches — for  that  I  only
sought  to  .  .  .  get  their  towns  .  .  .  .
that  thereby,  whensoever  her  Majesty
should  think  good  to  treat  for  peace,

.  .  .  .  I  should  hereby  be  able  to
compel  them  to  what  end  she  should
think  good.”  Leicester  to  Walsing-
ham,  20  July,  1586,  in  Bruce,  3 16.
a  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  213.

78

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

f'  This  I  will  do  ,"  he  wrote  to  the  Queen,  “  and  I  hope  not
to  fail  of  it ,  to  get  into  my  hands  three  or  four  most  principal
places  in  North  Holland ,  which  ivill  be  such  a  strength  and
assurance  for  your  Majesty ,  as  you  shall  see  you  shall  both
rule  these  men  and  make  war  or  peace  as  you  list,  always
provided — whatsoever  you  hear ,  or  is — part  not  with  the
Brill  ;  and  having  these  places  in  your  hands ,  ivhatsoever
should  chance  to  these  countries,  your  Majesty,  I  ivill  warrant
sure  enough  to  make  what  peace  you  ivill  in  an  hour,  and  to
have  your  debts  and  charges  readily  answered.”  1  At  a  some¬
what  later  moment  it  will  he  seen  what  came  of  these  secret
designs.  For  the  present,  Leicester  was  very  angry  with
Paul  for  daring  to  suspect  him  of  such  treachery.

The  Earl  complained,  too,  that  the  influence  of  Buys  with
Holienlo  and  young  Maurice  of  Nassau  was  most  pernicious.
Hohenlo  had  formerly  stood  high  in  Leicester's  opinion.  He
was  a  “  plain,  faithful  soldier,  a  most  valiant  gentleman,"  and
he  was  still  more  important,  because  about  to  marry  Mary  of
Nassau,  eldest  daughter  of  William  the  Silent,  and  coheiress
with  Philip  William,  to  the  Buren  property.  But  he  had
been  tampered  with  by  the  intriguing  Paul  Buys,  and  had
then  wished  to  resign  his  office  under  Leicester.  Being
pressed  for  reasons,  he  had  “  grown  solemn,"  and  withdrawn
himself  almost  entirely.

Maurice,  with  his  “  solemn  sly  wit,"  also  gave  the  Earl
much  trouble,  saying  little,  hut  thinking  much,  and  listening
to  the  insidious  Paul.  He  “  stood  much  on  making  or  mar¬
ring,"  so  Leicester  thought,  “as  he  met  with  good  counsel."
He  had  formerly  been  on  intimate  terms  with  the  governor-
general,  who  affected  to  call  him  his  son  ;  but  he  had  subse¬
quently  kept  aloof,  and  in  three  months  had  not  come  near
him.1 2  The  Earl  thought  that  money  might  do  much,  and  was

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  21  June,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  “  The  Count  Maurice  hath  not
been  three  months  with  his  Lordship.
He  is  utterly  discontented,  and  much
advised  by  Ste.  Aldegonde,  who  is

assuredly  the  King  of  Spain’s,  and
practiseth  (as  an  instrument  of  sedi¬
tion)  to  animate  the  Count,  by  all
means  possible,  to  thwart  my  Lord  in
the  course  of  her  Majesty’s  service.
The  Count,  well  advised  by  Ste.  Aide-

1586.

TRUCHSESS  BECOMES  A  SPY  UPON  HIM.

79

anxious  for  Sir  Francis  Drake  to  come  home  from  the  Indies
with  millions  of  gold,  that  the  Queen  might  make  both
Hohenlo  and  Maurice  a  handsome  present  before  it  should  he
too  late.1

Meantime  he  did  what  he  could  with  Elector  Truchsess  to
lure  them  hack  again.  That  forlorn  little  prelate  was  now
poorer  and  more  wretched  than  ever.  He  was  becoming
paralytic,  though  young,  and  his  heart  was  broken  through
want.  Leicester,  always  generous  as  the  sun,  gave  him  money,
four  thousand  florins  at  a  time,  and  was  most  earnest  that  the
Queen  should  put  him  on  her  pension  list.2  “  His  wisdom,
his  behaviour,  his  languages,  his  person/'  said  the  Earl,  “all
would  like  her  well.  He  is  in  great  melancholy  for  his  town
of  Neusz,  and  for  his  poverty,  having  a  very  noble  mind.  If
he  be  lost,  her  Majesty  had  better  lose  a  hundred  thousand
pounds." 3

The  melancholy  Truchsess  now  became  a  spy  and  a  go-
between.  He  insinuated  himself  into  the  confidence  of  Paul
Buys,  wormed  his  secrets  from  him,  and  then  communicated
them  to  Hohenlo  and  to  Leicester;  “but  he  did  it  very
wisely,"  said  the  Earl,  “  so  that  he  was  not  mistrusted." 4
The  governor  always  affected,  in  order  to  screen  the  elector
from  suspicion,  to  obtain  his  information  from  persons  in
Utrecht ;  and  he  had  indeed  many  spies  in  that  city,  who
diligently  reported  Paul's  table-talk.  Nevertheless,  that
“noble  gentleman,  the  elector,"  said  Leicester,  hath  dealt
most  deeply  with  him,  to  seek  out  the  bottom." 5  As  the
ex-Advocate  of  Holland  was  very  communicative  in  his  cups,
and  very  bitter  against  the  governor-general,  there  was  soon
such  a  fund  of  information  collected  on  the  subject  by  various

gonde  and  Yilliers,  repineth  secretly
that  her  Majesty  should  have  any¬
thing  to  do  in  the  government  of  the
country.  It  is  to  be  feared  his  hidden
malice  will  do  much  mischief,  and
many  ill  offices  in  the  common  cause
now  in  hand.”  ‘Matters  to  be  related
to  her  Majesty  by  a  special  messenger
from  the  Earl  of  Leicester,’  20  June,
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

The  opinion  here  expressed  in  re¬
gard  to  Sainte  Aldegonde  was  subse¬
quently  and  distinctly  contradicted  by
Wilkes.

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  374.

2  Ibid.  378.

3  Ibid.  374.

*  Ibid.  377.

6  Ibid.  377.

80  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  X.

eaves-droppers,  that  Leicester  was  in  hopes  of  very  soon
hanging  Mr.  Paul  Buys,  as  we  have  already  seen.

The  burthen  of  the  charges  against  the  culprit  was  his
statement  that  the  Provinces  would  be  gone  if  her  Majesty
did  not  declare  herself,  vigorously  and  generously,  in  their
favour  ;  hut,  as  this  was  the  perpetual  cry  of  Leicester  him¬
self,  there  seemed  hardly  hanging  matter  in  that.  That
noble  gentleman,  the  elector,  however,  had  nearly  saved
the  hangman  his  trouble,  having  so  dealt  with  Hohenlo  as’to
“  bring  him  into  as  good  a  mind  as  ever  he  was  ;"  and  the  first
fruits  of  this  good  mind  were,  that  the  honest  Count — a  man
of  prompt  dealings — walked  straight  to  Paul's  house  in  order
to  kill  him  on  the  spot.1  Something  fortunately  prevented
the  execution  of  this  plan  ;  hut  for  a  time  at  least  the  ener¬
getic  Count  continued  to  he  “  governed  greatly  "  by  the  ex¬
archbishop,  and  “  did  impart  wholly  unto  him  his  most  secret
heart."

Thus  the  u  deep  wise  Truxy,"  as  Leicester  called  him,  con¬
tinued  to  earn  golden  opinions,  and  followed  up  his  conversion
of  Hohenlo  by  undertaking  to  “  bring  Maurice  into  tune  again
also,"  and  the  young  Prince  was  soon  on  better  terms  with  his
“  affectionate  father  "  than  he  had  ever  been  before.2

Paul  Buys  was  not  so  easily  put  down,  however,  nor  the
two  magnates  so  thoroughly  gained  over.  Before  the  end  of
the  season  Maurice  stood  in  his  old  position,  the  nominal  head
of  the  Holland  or  patrician  party,  chief  of  the  opposition  to
Leicester,  while  Hohenlo  had  become  more  hitter  than  ever
against  the  Earl.  The  quarrel  between  himself  and  Edward
Norris,  to  which  allusion  will  soon  be  made,  tended  to
increase  the  dissatisfaction,  although  he  singularly  misun¬
derstood  Leicester's  sentiments  throughout  the  whole  affair.
Hohenlo  recovered  of  his  wound  before  Zutphen  ;  hut,  on  his
recovery,  was  more  malcontent  than  ever.3  The  Earl  was
obliged  at  last  to  confess  that  “he  was  a  very  dangerous  man,
inconstant,  envious,  and  hateful  to  all  our  nation,  and  a  very

3  Ibid.  876.

1  Bruce’s  ‘Lejc.  Corresp.’  372.

3  Ibid.  378.

1586.

INTRIGUES  OF  BUYS  WITH  DENMARK.

81

traitor  to  the  cause.  There  is  no  dealing  to  win  him,”  he
added,  “  I  have  sought  it  to  my  cost.  His  best  friends  tell  me
he  is  not  to  be  trusted.” 1

Meantime  that  lewd  sinner,  the  indefatigable  Paul,  was
plotting  desperately — so  Leicester  said  and  believed — to
transfer  the  sovereignty  of  the  Provinces  to  the  King  of  Den¬
mark.  Buys,  who  was  privately  of  opinion  that  the  States
required  an  absolute  head,  cc  though  it  were  but  an  onion's
head,” 2  and  that  they  would  thankfully  continue  under
Leicester  as  governor  absolute  if  Elizabeth  would  accept  the
sovereignty,  had  made  up  his  mind  that  the  Queen  would  never
take  that  step.  He  was  therefore  disposed  to  offer  the  crown
to  the  King  of  Denmark,  and  was  believed  to  have  brought
Maurice — who  was  to  espouse  that  King's  daughter3 — to  the
same  way  of  thinking:  Young  Count  Rantzan,  son  of  a  dis¬
tinguished  Danish  statesman,  made  a  visit  to  the  Netherlands
in  order  to  confer  with  Buys..  Paul  was  also  anxious  to  be
appointed  envoy  to  Denmark,  ostensibly  to  arrange  for  the
two  thousand  cavalry,  which  the  King  had  long  before  pro¬
mised  for  the  assistance  of  the  Provinces,  but  in  reality,  to
examine  the  details  of  this  new  project ;  and  Leicester  repre¬
sented  to  the  Queen  very  earnestly  how  powerful  the  Danish
monarch  would  become,  thus  rendered  master  of  the  narrow
seas,  and  how  formidable  to  England*4

1  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  446.

Wilkes  had  also  formed  an  unfa¬
vourable  opinion  of  the  Count.  “  I  do
not  find  that  the  States  or  people,”  he
said,  “have  any  great  affection  for
him.  The  man  is  doubtless  valiant,
but  rash,  bloody,  unfortunate,  and  sub¬
ject  to  many  imperfections.  They
would  willingly  be  rid  of  him,  if  they
might  without  danger.”  Wilkes  to
the  Lords  of  Council,  20  Aug.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Notes  by  Paul  Buys,  1586.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)

3  Ibid.

4  “  Paul  Buys  .  .  perceiving  of  late,”
said  Leicester,  “that  your  Maj.  mean-
eth  not  to  proceed  so  far  in  these
countries  as  he  looked  for,  or  rather
not  finding  himself  the  absolute  direc-

VOL  II. — Gr

tor  and  governor  as  he  would  be,  is
secretly  working  to  make  a  king  in¬
deed  over  those  two  countries,  Hol¬
land  and  Zeeland,  and  one  he  doth
insinuate  unto  men’s  minds  already  all
that  ever  he  can,  is  the  King  of  Den¬
mark — a  matter  not  unlike  to  come  to
pass,  if  your  Maj.  shall  not  assure  these
people  of  the  continuance  of  your
favour,  which,  if  they  should  be,  all  the
princes  of  the  world  cannot  win  them
from  you.  But  this  lewd  sinner  loseth
no  time,  ■where  he  can  be  heard,  to
inform  men  how  fickle  a  trust  there  is
to  be  had  of  your  Majesty’s  favour  or
promise,  repenting  withal  greatly  that
he  ever  procured  me  over,  being  in¬
deed,  as  he  says,  since  fallen  out  in  no

better  grace  with  you . If  the

King  should  have  these  two  provinces

82

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

In  the  midst  of  these  plottings,  real  or  supposed,  a  party  of
armed  men,  one  fine  summer’s  morning,  suddenly  entered
Paul’s  bedroom  as  he  lay  asleep  at  the  house  of  the  burgo¬
master,  seized  his  papers,  and  threw  him  into  prison  in  the
wine-cellar  of  the  town-house.  “  Oh  my  papers,  oh  my  papers  !”
cried  the  unfortunate  politician,  according  to  Leicester’s  state¬
ment,  “  the  Queen  of  England  will  for  ever  hate  me.”  The
Earl  disavowed  all  participation  in  the  arrest;  but  he  was
not  believed.  He  declared  himself  not  sorry  that  the  measure
had  been  taken,  and  promised  that  he  would  not  “  be  hasty
to  release  him,”  not  doubting  that  “he  would  be  found  faulty
enough.”  Leicester  maintained  that  there  was  stuff  enough
discovered  to  cost  Paul  his  head  ;  but  he  never  lost  his  head,
nor  was  anything  treasonable  or  criminal  ever  found  against
him.  The  intrigue  with  Denmark — never  proved — and  com¬
menced,  if  undertaken  at  all,  in  utter  despair  of  Elizabeth’s
accepting  the  sovereignty,  was  the  gravest  charge.  He  re-

absolutely  as  king,  you  must  assure
yourself  he  will  be  lord  and  commander
over  the  narrow  seas,  and  all  your
traffics,  east  and  northward,  wholly
under  his  restraint,  for  he  will  he  the
only  mighty  prince  by  sea.  ...  I  refused
P.  B.  to  go  to  the  King  as  ambassador,
being  mavellous  earnest  therein  .  .  .
but  I  trust  to  come  to  further  know¬
ledge  of  this  matter,  and  to  prevent
Master  Buys  well  enough.  P.  B.  hath
flatly  said  to  me,  of  late,  that  the  King
of  Denmark  were  the  fittest  lord  for
them  in  Christendom,  next  your  Ma¬
jesty”  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  20
June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“It  is  feared,”  said  Cos,  specially
deputed  by  Leicester  to  report  this
matter  to  the  Qeeen’s  government,
“  that  the  King  of  Denmark  is  aliena¬
ted,  and  would  be  glad  to  have  the
sovereignty  of  these  couutries  himself.
Paul  Buys  hath  not  spared  of  late  to
intend  such  a  practice,  and  partici¬
pating  the  same  with  Count  Maurice,
alleging  plainly  to  his  Lordship,  that
it  is  commonly  spoken  and  received  as
current  money,  that  her  Majesty  will
abandon  that  cause  and  people  at
Michaelmas,  and  this  being  so,  that  it
were  fit  for  them  to  think  of  some

other  prince,  who  might  protect  and
defend  them,  before  they  should  fall
into  further  misery.  He  was  of  opinion
that  the  King  of  Denmark  would  most
gladly  entertain  the  action.  He  was
strong  in  shipping,  and  best  able,  in
that  respect,  to  defend  the  best  part
of  their  countries,  which  was  Holland
and  Zeeland.  His  speeches  were  often
intermingled  with  many  coloured  pro¬
testations,  how  much  he  desired  that
her  Maj.  would  continue  their  gracious
lady  in  the  cause,  as  the  fittest  prin¬
cess  to  yield  them  comfort  in  their
calamities,  yet  hath  his  Lorship  been
certainly  informed  that  he  practiseth
with  all  earnestness  to  bring  this  mat¬
ter  to  pass  for  the  King  of  Denmark,
and  hath  greatly  desired  that  he  may
be  the  man  to  go  into  Denmark  to
solicit  for  the  2000  horses  promised,
for  the  end  he  may  better  disguise  his
purpose  under  this  colour,”  &c.  ‘Mat¬
ters  to  be  related  to  her  Majesty,’  20
June,  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Robert  Sidney  was  subsequently
sent  to  Denmark  by  Leicester  to  look
into  this  matter.  Wilkes  to  Lords  of
Council,  20  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

1586.  HIS  IMPRISONMENT.— THE  EARL’S  UNPOPULARITY.  §3

mained,  however,  six  months  in  prison,  and  at  the  beginning
of  1587  was  released,  without  trial  or  accusation,  at  the
request  of  the  English  Queen.1

The  States  could  hardly  he  blamed  for  their  opposition  to
the  Earl's  administration,  for  he  had  thrown  himself  com¬
pletely  into  the  arms  of  a  faction,  whose  object  was  to  vilipend
and  traduce  them,  and  it  was  now  difficult  for  him  to  recover
the  functions  of  which  the  Queen  had  deprived  him.  “The
government  they  had  given  from  themselves  to  me  stuck  in
their  stomachs  always,"  he  said.  Thus  on  the  one  side,  the
States  were  “  growing  more  stately  than  ever,"  and  were  always
“jumbling  underhand,"  while  the  aristocratic  Earl,  on  his
part,  was  resolute  not  to  be  put  down  by  “  churls  and  tinkers."2
He  was  sure  that  the  people  were  with  him,  and  that,  “having
always  been  governed  by  some  prince,  they  never  did  nor
could  consent  to  be  ruled  by  bakers,  brewers,  and  hired  advo¬
cates.  I  know  they  hate  them," 3  said  this  high-born  tribune
of  the  people.  He  was  much  disgusted  with  the  many-headed
chimasra,  the  monstrous  republic,  with  which  he  found  himself
in  such  unceasing  conflict,  and  was  disposed  to  take  a  manful
stand.  “  I  have  been  fain  of  late,"  he  said,  “  to  set  the  better
leg  foremost,  to  handle  some  of  my  masters  somewhat  plainly,
for  they  thought  I  would  droop  ;  and  whatsoever  becomes  of
me,  you  shall  hear  I  will  keep  my  reputation,  or  die  for  it."4

But  one  great  accusation  made  against  the  churls  and
tinkers,  and  bakers  and  hired  advocates,  and  Mr.  Paul  Buys
at  their  head,  was  that  they  were  liberal  towards  the  Papists.
They  were  willing  that  Catholics  should  remain  in  the  country
and  exercise  the  rights  of  citizens,  provided  they  conducted
themselves  like  good  citizens.  For  this  toleration — a  lesson
which  statesmen  like  Buys  and  Barneveld  had  learned  in  the
school  of  William  the  Silent — the  opposition-party'  were  de-

1  Bor.  II.  125,  126,  889,  890.

Hoofd,  Vervolgh,  165.  Wagenaar,
viii.  161-163.  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’
352,  362-364,  386,  436.

Leycester  to  Burghley,  20  July,

1586.  B.  Clerk  to  same,  24  July,
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  312.

3  Ibid.  424.

4  Ibid.  312.

84

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

nounced  as  bolsterers  of  Papists,  and  Papists  themselves  at
heart,  and  “  worshippers  of  idolatrous  idols/'1

From  words,  too,  the  government  of  Leicester  passed  to
acts.  Seventy  papists  were  banished  from  the  city  of  Utrecht
at  the  time  of  the  arrest  of  Buys.2  The  Queen  had  constantly
enforced  upon  Leicester  the  importance  of  dealing  justly  with
the  Catholics  in  the  Netherlands,  on  the  ground  that  they
might  be  as  good  patriots  and  were  as  much  interested  in  the
welfare  of  their  country  as  were  the  Protestants  ; 3  and  he  was
especially  enjoined  “not  to  meddle  in  matters  of  religion."
This  wholesome  advice  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible
for  the  Earl,  under  the  guidance  of  Reingault,  Burgrave,  and
Stephen  Perret,  to  carry  out.  Pie  protested  that  he  should
have  liked  to  treat  Papists  and  Calvinists  “  with  indifference,"
but  that  it  had  proved  impossible  ;  that  the  Catholics  were
perpetually  plotting  with  the  Spanish  faction,  and  that  no
towns  were  safe  except  those  in  which  Papists  had  been
excluded  from  office.  “  They  love  the  Pope  above  all,"  he
said,  “and  the  Prince  of  Parma  hath  continual  intelligence
with  them."  Nor  was  it  Catholics  alone  who  gave  the
governor  trouble.  He  was  likewise  very  busy  in  putting  down
other  denominations  that  differed  from  the  Calvinists.  “Your
Majesty  will  not  believe,"  he  said,  “  the  number  of  sects  that
are  in  most  towns  ;  especially  Anabaptists,  Families  of  Love,
Georgians,  and  I  know  not  what.  The  godly  and  good
ministers  were  molested  by  them  in  many  places,  and  ready
to  give  over  ;  and  even  such  diversities  grew  among  magis¬
trates  in  towns,  being  caused  by  some  sedition-sowers  here." 4
It  is  however,  satisfactory  to  reflect  that  the  anabaptists  and
families  of  love,  although  discouraged  and  frowned  upon,  were
not  burned  alive,  buried  alive,  drowned  in  dungeons,  and
roasted  at  slow  fires,  as  had  been  the  case  with  them  and  with

1  Digges’s  *  Advertisement  of  the
present  State,’  &c.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.

before  cited.

3  R.  Clerk  to  Burghlcy,  24  July,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  26  June,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Ibid.

1586.  HIS  QUARRELS  WITH  THE  STATES.  35

every  other  species  of  Protestants,  by  thousands  and  tens  of
thousands,  so  long  as  Charles  Y.  and  Philip  II.  had  ruled  the
territory  of  that  commonwealth.  Humanity  had  acquired
something  by  the  war  which  the  Netherlanders  had  been
waging  for  twenty  years,  and  no  man  or  woman  was  ever  put
to  death  for  religious  causes  after  the  establishment  of  the
republic.

With  his  hands  thus  full  of  business,  it  was  difficult  for  the
Earl  to  obey  the  Queen's  command  not  to  meddle  in  religious
matters  ;  for  he  was  not  of  the  stature  of  William  the  Silent,
and  could  not  comprehend  that  the  great  lesson  taught  by
the  sixteenth  centurv  was  that  men  were  not  to  meddle  with

i/

men  in  matters  of  religion.

But  besides  his  especial  nightmare — Mr.  Paul  Buys — the
governor-general  had  a  whole  set  of  incubi  in  the  Norris
family.  Probably  no  two  persons  ever  detested  each  other
more  cordially  than  did  Leicester  and  Sir  John  Norris.  Sir
John  had  been  commander  of  the  forces  in  the  Netherlands
before  Leicester’s  arrival,  and  was  unquestionably  a  man  of
larger  experience  than  the  Earl.  He  had,  however,  as  Wal-
singham  complained,  acquired  by  his  services  in  “  countries
where  neither  discipline  military  nor  religion  carried  any
sway,”  a  very  rude  and  licentious  kind  of  government.
u  Would  to  God,”  said  the  secretary,  “that,  with  his  value
and  courage,  he  carried  the  mind  and  reputation  of  a  religious
soldier.”1  But  that  was  pas’t  praying  for.  Sir  John  was
proud,  untractable,  turbulent,  very  difficult  to  manage.  He
hated  Leicester,  and  was  furious  with  Sir  William  Pelham,
whom  Leicester  had  made  marshal  of  the  camp.2  He  com¬
plained,  not  unjustly,  that  from  the  first  place  in  the  army,
which  he  had  occupied  in  the  Netherlands,  he  had  been
reduced  to  the  fifth.3  The  governor- general — who  chose  to
call  Sir  John  the  son  of  his  ancient  enemy,  the  Earl  of  Sussex — •
often  denounced  him  in  good  set  terms.  “  His  brother  Ed¬
ward  is  as  ill  as  he,”  he  said,  “but  John  is  right  the  late  Earl

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp?  222.

2  “He  stomachs  greatly  the  Marshal,”  said  Leicester.  Ibid.  379.  3  Ibid.  380.

86

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

of  Sussex’  son  ;  he  will  so  dissemble  and  crouch,  and  so  cun¬
ningly  carry  his  doings,  as  no  man  living  would  imagine  that
there  were  half  the  malice  or  vindictive  mind  that  plainly  his
words  prove  to  he.”1  Leicester  accused  him  of  constant
insubordination,  insolence,  and  malice,  complained  of  being
traduced  by  him  everywhere  in  the  Netherlands  and  in  Eng¬
land,  and  declared  that  he  was  followed  about  by  “a  pack  of
lewd  audacious  fellows,”  whom  the  Earl  vowed  he  would  hang,
one  and  all,  before  he  had  done  with  them.2  He  swore  openly,
in  presence  of  all  his  camp,  that  he  would  hang  Sir  J ohn  like¬
wise  ;  so  that  both  the  brothers,  who  had  never  been  afraid  of
anything  since  they  had  been  born  into  the  world,  affected  to
be  in  danger  of  their  lives.3

The  Norrises  were  on  bad  terms  with  many  officers — with
Sir  William  Pelham  of  course,  with  “  old  Beade,”  Lord  North,
Roger  Williams,  Hohenlo,  Essex,  and  other  nobles — but  with
Sir  Philip  Sidney,  the  gentle  and  chivalrous,  they  were
friends.4  Sir  J  ohn  had  quarrelled  in  former  times — according
to  Leicester — with  Hohenlo  and  even  with  the  “good  and
brave”  La  Noue,  of  the  iron  arm;  “for  his  pride,”  said  the
Earl,  “  was  the  spirit  of  the  devil.”5  The  governor  complained
every  day  of  his  malignity,  and  vowed  that  he  “  neither  re¬
garded  the  cause  of  God,  nor  of  his  prince,  nor  country.”6

1  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  301.

2  ‘  Notes  of  Remembrances,  by  Mr.

Edward  Norris,’  Sept.  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

3  “  His  Excellency  did  not  only  not
mislike  withal  that  Lord  North,  Cap¬
tain  William,  and  others,  should  rail
at  him,  but  in  his  own  presence  did
suffer  divers  captains  and  noblemen  to
brave  him,  and  did  himself  also  grow
in  great  rages  against  him,  disallowing
him  openly  for  wise  man,  honest  man,
or  soldier ;  preferring  many  men’s
wisdom  and  experience,  saying  his
patience  and  slyness  should  not  save
him,  not  sparing  openly  to  threaten
him  to  hang  him ;  so  that  of  every
honest  man  it  is  feared  lest  some  mis¬
chief  shall  shortly  be  wrought  him.'1'1  Ibid.

4  Sir  John  Norris  to  Walsingham,

25  Oct.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

5  Leicester  to  Wilkes,  22  Aug.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)  e  ibid.

Wilkes,  on  the  contrary,  had  a  very
favourable  opinion  of  Norris,  and
always  secretly  defended  him  to  the
Queen’s  government  against  Leicester’s
charges.  “  Besides  the  value,  wisdom,
and  many  other  good  parts  that  are  in
the  man,”  he  said,  "I  have  noted  a
wonderful  patience  and  modesty  in
bearing  many  apparent  injuries  done
unto  him,  which  I  have  known  to  be
countenanced  and  nourished,  contrary
to  all  reason,  to  disgrace  him.  What¬
soever  may  be  reported  maliciously  to
his  disadvantage,  I  dare  avouch  that
the  Queen  hath  not  a  second  subject  of
his  place  and  quality  so  able  to  serve
in  these  countries  as  he.”  Wilkes  to
Burghley,  11  Nov.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office
MS.)

1586.

AND  WITH  THE  NORRISES.

87

He  consorted  chiefly  with  Sir  Thomas  Cecil,1  governor  of
Brill,  son  of  Lord  Burghley,  and  therefore  no  friend  to
Leicester ;  hilt  the  Earl  protested  that  ec  Master  Thomas
should  hear  small  rule/' 2  so  long  as  he  was  himself  governor-
general.  “  Now  I  have  Pelham  and  Stanley,  we  shall  do  well
enough,"  he  said,  “  though  my  young  master  would  counte¬
nance  him.  I  will  he  master  while  I  remain  here,  will  they,
nill  they." 3

Edward  Norris,  brother  of  Sir  John,  gave  the  governor
almost  as  much  trouble  as  he  ;  but  the  treasurer  Norris,  uncle
to  them  both,  was,  if  possible,  more  odious  to  him  than  all.
He  was — if  half  Leicester's  accusations  are  to  be  believed —
a  most  infamous  peculator.  One-third  of  the  money  sent  by
the  Queen  for  the  soldiers  stuck  in  his  fingers.  He  paid  them
their  wretched  four-pence  a-day  in  depreciated  coin,  so  that
for  their  “  naughty  money  they  could  get  but  naughty  ware."  4
Never  was  such  “fleecing  of  poor  soldiers,"  said  Leicester.5

On  the  other  hand,  Sir  John  maintained  that  his  uncle's
accounts  were  always  ready  for  examination,  and  earnestly
begged  the  home-government  not  to  condemn  that  functionary
without  a  hearing.6  For  himself,  he  complained  that  he  was
uniformly  kept  in  the  background,  left  in  ignorance  of  im¬
portant  enterprises,  and  sent  on  difficult  duty  with  inade¬
quate  forces.  It  was  believed  that  Leicester's  course  was
inspired  by  envy,  lest  any  military  triumph  that  might  be
gained  should  redound  to  the  glory  of  Sir  J ohn,  one  of  the
first  commanders  of  the  age,  rather  than  to  that  of  the
governor-general.  He  was  perpetually  thwarted,  crossed,
calumniated,  subjected  to  coarse  and  indecent  insults,  even
from  such  brave  men  as  Lord  North  and  Boger  Williams,  and
in  the  very  presence  of  the  commander-in-chief,  so  that  his
talents  were  of  no  avail,  and  he  was  most  anxious  to  be  gone
from  the  country.7

3  Letter  to  Wilkes,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  380.

3  Ibid.

4  Ibid.  299,  303.

5  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  2*7  June,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Sir  J.  Norris  to  Burghley,  25  May,

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

7  ‘Notes  of  Remembrance,’  by  Ed.
Norris,  MS.  before  cited.  “  His  Ex-

88

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

Thus  with  the  tremendous  opposition  formed  to  his  govern¬
ment  in  the  States-Greneral,  the  incessant  bickerings  with  the
Norrises,  the  peculations  of  the  treasurer,  the  secret  negotiations
with  Spain,  and  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  money  from  home
for  himself  or  for  his  starving  little  army,  the  Earl  was  in  any¬
thing  but  a  comfortable  position.  He  was  severely  censured
in  England  ;  but  he  doubted,  with  much  reason,  whether  there
were  many  who  would  take  his  office,  and  spend  twenty
thousand  pounds  sterling  out  of  their  own  pockets,  as  he  had
done.1  The  Earl  was  generous  and  brave  as  man  could  be,
full  of  wit,  quick  of  apprehension  ;  but  inordinately  vain,
arrogant,  and  withal  easily  led  by  designing  persons.  lie
stood  up  manfully  for  the  cause  in  which  he  was  embarked,
and  was  most  strenuous  in  his  demands  for  money.  “  Per¬
sonally  he  cared/'  he  said,  “not  sixpence  for  his  post,  but
would  give  five  thousand  sixpences,  and  six  thousand  shillings
beside,  to  be  rid  of  it  ;  " 2  but  it  was  contrary  to  his  dignity  to
“  stand  bucking  with  the  States  "  for  his  salary.  “  Is  it  reason,"
he  asked,  “  that  I,  being  sent  from  so  great  a  prince  as  our
sovereign  is,  must  come  to  strangers  to  beg  my  entertainment.
If  they  are  to  pay  me,  why  is  there  no  remembrance  made  of
it  by  her  Majesty's  letters,  or  some  of  the  lords  ?  " 3

The  Earl  and  those  around  him  perpetually  and  vehemently
urged  upon  the  Queen  to  reconsider  her  decision,  and  accept
the  sovereignty  of  the  Provinces  at  once.  There  was  no  other

cellency  doth  wonderfully  hate  my

brother . I  only  gather  these

causes,”  said  Captain  Norris:  “first,
an  envy  of  some  unworthy  men  about
him,  who  put  into  his  Excellency’s
head  that  as  long  as  Norris  were  here,
the  honour  of  everything  would  be
attributed  to  him,  and  that  he  would
be  a  continual  hindrance  to  the  course
that  his  Excellency  meant  to  hold
concerning  some  things,  neither  should
his  Excellency  have  any  absolute
commandment  as  long  as  his  credit
continued.”

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  27  June,
1586.  “I  pray  God  I  may  live  to  see
you  employ  some  of  them  that  are
thus  careless  of  me,  to  see  whether

they  will  spend  20.000Z.  of  their  own
for  you  in  seven  months ;  but  all  is
in  mine  own  heart  so  little,  though
the  greatest  portion  of  all  my  land
pay  for  it,  so  your  Majesty  do  well
accept  of  it,”  &c.

The  Earl  expended — according  to
his  own  report  to  the  States — three
hundred  thousand  florins  (30,000Z.)  in
the  course  of  the  year  1587.  (Bor,
II.  783.  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,  206.)  Of
course,  he  bad  a  claim  for  such  dis¬
bursements  on  the  Queen’s  exchequer,
and  was  like  to  enforce  it  at  the  proper
season.

2  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  378.

3  Ibid.  323.

1586.

HIS  COUNSELLORS  WILKES  AND  CLERE.

89

remedy  for  the  distracted  state  of  the  country — no  other
safeguard  for  England.  The  Netherland  people  anxiously,
eagerly  desired  it.  Her  Majesty  was  adored  by  all  the  inha¬
bitants,  who  would  gladly  hang  the  fellows  called  the  States.
Lord  North  was  of  this  opinion — so  was  Cavendish  :  Leicester
had  always  held  it.  “  Sure  I  am/'  he  said,  “  there  is  but  one
way  for  our  safety,  and  that  is,  that  her  Majesty  may  take
that  upon  her  which  I  fear  she  will  not/'1  Thomas  Wilkes,
who  now  made  his  appearance  on  the  scene,  held  the  same
language.  This  distinguished  civilian  had  been  sent  by  the
Queen,  early  in  August,  to  look  into  the  state  of  Netherland
affairs.  Leicester  having  expressly  urged  the  importance  of
selecting  as  wise  a  politician  as  could  be  found — because  the
best  man  in  England  would  hardly  be  found  a  match  for  the
dullards  and  drunkards,  as  it  was  the  fashion  there  to  call  the
Dutch  statesmen2 — had  selected  Wilkes.  After  fulfilling  this
important  special  mission,  lie  was  immediately  afterwards  to
return  to  the  Netherlands  as  English  member  of  the  state-
council,  at  forty  shillings  a-day,  in  the  place  of  u  little  Hal
Killigrew,"  whom  Leicester  pronounced  a  u  quicker  and  stouter
fellow"  than  he  had  at  first  taken  him  for,  although  he  had
always  thought  well  of  him.  The  other  English  counsellor,
Dr.  Bartholomew  Clerk,  was  to  remain,  and  the  Earl  declared
that  he  too,  whom  he  had  formerly  undervalued,  and  thought
to  have  cc little  stuff  in  him,"  was  now  “increasing  greatly  in
understanding." 3  But  notwithstanding  this  intellectual  pro¬
gress,  poor  Bartholomew,  who  was  no  beginner,  was  most
anxious  to  retire.  He  was  a  man  of  peace,  a  professor,  a
doctor  of  laws,  fonder  of  the  learned  leisure  and  the  trim
gardens  of  England  than  of  the  scenes  which  now  surrounded
him.  “I  beseech  your  good  Lordship  to  consider,"  he  dis¬
mally  observed  to  Burghley,  a  what  a  hard  case  it  is  for  a  man
that  these  fifteen  years  hath  had  vitam  sedentariam,  un-

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,  10  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Same  to  same,  20  July,  1586.

3  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  375.

90

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

worthily  in  a  place  judicial,  always  in  his  long  robe,  and  who,
twenty-four  years  since,  was  a  public  reader  in  the  University
(and  therefore  cannot  he  young),  to  come  now  among  guns
and  drums,  tumbling  up  and  down,  day  and  night,  over  waters
and  banks,  dykes  and  ditches,  upon  every  occasion  that
falleth  out ;  hearing  many  insolences  with  silence,  bearing
many  hard  measures  with  patience — a  course  most  different
from  my  nature,  and  most  unmeet  for  him  that  hath  ever
professed  learning.” 1

Wilkes  was  of  sterner  stuff.  Always  ready  to  follow  the
camp  and  to  face  the  guns  and  drums  with  equanimity,  and
endowed  beside  with  keen  political  insight,  he  was  more
competent  than  most  men  to  unravel  the  confused  skein  of
Netherland  politics.  He  soon  found  that  the  Queen’s  secret
negotiations  with  Spain,  and  the  general  distrust  of  her  inten¬
tions  in  regard  to  the  Provinces,  were  like  to  have  fatal  con¬
sequences.  Both  he  and  Leicester  painted  the  anxiety  of  the
Netherland  people  as  to  the  intention  of  her  Majesty  in  vivid
colours.2

The  Queen  could  not  make  up  her  mind — in  the  very  midst
of  the  Greenwich  secret  conferences,  already  described — to
accept  the  Netherland  sovereignty.  “  She  ga there th  from
your  letter,”  wrote  Walsingham,  “that  the  only  salve  for  this
sore  is  to  make  herself  proprietary  of  the  country,  and  to  put
in  such  an  army  as  may  be  able  to  make  head  to  the  enemy.
These  two  things  being  so  contrary  to  her  Majesty’s  disposi¬
tion — the  one,  for  that  it  breedeth  a  doubt  of  a  perpetual
war,  the  other,  for  that  it  requireth  an  increase  of  charges —
do  marvellously  distract  her:  and  make  her  repent  that  ever  she
entered  into  the  action. ”3

Upon  the  great  subject  of  the  sovereignty,  therefore,  she
was  unable  to  adopt  the  resolution  so  much  desired  by  Leicester
and  by  the  people  of  the  Provinces  ;  but  she  answered  the

1  B.  Clerk  to  Burghley,  11  Aug.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Wilkes  to  the  Queen,  1  Aug.  1586.

Leicester  to  the  Queen,  2*7  June,  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

3  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  340,  9th
July,  1586.

1586.  LETTER  FROM  THE  QUEEN  TO  LEICESTER.  91

0

Earl’s  communications  concerning  Maurice  and  Hohenlo,  Sir
John  Norris  and  the  treasurer,  in  characteristic  hut  affectionate
language.  And  thus  she  wrote  : —

“Rob,  I  am  afraid  you  will  suppose,  by  my  wandering
writings,  that  a  midsummer’s  moon  hath  taken  large  posses¬
sion  of  my  brains  this  month  ;  but  you  must  needs  take  things
as  they  come  in  my  head,  though  order  be  left  behind  me.
When  I  remember  your  request  to  have  a  discreet  and  honest
man  that  may  carry  my  mind,  and  see  how  all  goes  there,  I
have  chosen  this  bearer  (Thomas  Wilkes),  whom  you  know
and  have  made  good  trial  of.  I  have  fraught  him  full  of  my
conceipts  of  those  country  matters,  and  imparted  what  way  I
mind  to  take  and  what  is  fit  for  you  to  use.  I  am  sure  you
can  credit  him,  and  so  I  will  be  short  with  these  few  notes.-
First,  that  Count  Maurice  and  Count  Hollock  (Hohenlo)  find
themselves  trusted  of  you,  esteemed  of  me,  and  to  be  carefully
regarded,  if  ever  peace  should  happen,  and  of  that  assure  them
on  my  word,  that  yet  never  deceived  any.  And  for  Norris
and  other  captains  that voluntarily  ^  ivitliout  commandment,  have
many  years  ventured  their  lives  and  icon  our  nation  honour  and
themselves  fame ,  let  them  not  be  discouraged  by  any  means,
neither  by  new-come  men  nor  by  old  trained  soldiers  else¬
where.  If  there  be  fault  in  using  of  soldiers,  or  making  of
profit  by  them,  let  them  hear  of  it  without  open  shame,  and
doubt  not  I  will  well  chasten  them  therefore.  It  frets  me  not
a  little  that  the  poor  soldiers  that  hourly  venture  life  should
want  their  due,  that  well  deserve  rather  reward  ;  and  look,  in
whom  the  fault  may  truly  be  proved,  let  them  smart  therefore.
And  if  the  treasurer  be  found  untrue  or  negligent,  according
to  desert  he  shall  be  used.  But  you  know  my  old  wont,  that
love  not  to  discharge  from  office  without  desert.  God  forbid  !
I  pray  you  let  this  bearer  know  what  may  be  learned  herein,
and  for  the  treasure  I  have  joined  Sir  Thomas  Shirley  to  see
all  this  money  discharged  in  due  sort,  where  it  needeth  and
behoveth.

“  Now  will  I  end,  that  do  imagine  I  talk  still  with  you,  and
therefore  loathly  say  farewell  one  hundred  thousand  times  ;

92

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

though  ever  I  pray  God  bless  you  from  all  harm,  and  save  you
from  all  foes.  With  my  million  and  legion  of  thanks  for  all
your  pains  and  cares,

u  As  you  know  ever  the  same,

“  E.  R.

u  P.  S.  Let  Wilkes  see  that  he  is  acceptable  to  you.  If  any¬
thing  there  be  that  W.  shall  desire  answer  of  he  such  as  you
would  have  but  me  to  know,  write  it  to  myself.  You  know  I
can  keep  both  others'  counsel  and  mine  own.  Mistrust  not
that  anything  you  would  have  kept  shall  be  disclosed  by  me,
for  although  this  bearer  ask  many  things,  yet  you  may  answer
him  such  as  you  shall  think  meet,  and  write  to  me  the  rest." 1

Thus,  not  even  her  favourite  Leicester's  misrepresentations
could  make  the  Queen  forget  her  ancient  friendship  for  “  her
own  crow  but  meantime  the  relations  between  that  “  bunch
of  brethren,"  black  Norris  and  the  rest,  and  Pelham,  Hollock,
and  other  high  officers  in  Leicester's  army,  had  grown  worse
than  ever.

One  August  evening  there  was  a  supper-party  at  Count
Hollock's2  quarters  in  Gertruydenberg.  A  military  foray  into
Aug.  6,  Brabant  had  just  taken  place,  under  the  lead  of
1586.  the  Count,  and  of  the  Lord  Marshal,  Sir  William
Pelham.  The  marshal  had  requested  Lord  Willoughby,
with  his  troop  of  horse  and  five  hundred  foot,  to  join  in
the  enterprise,  but,  as  usual,  particular  pains  had  been
taken  that  Sir  John  Norris  should  know  nothing  of  the
affair.3  Pelham  and  Hollock — who  was  “  greatly  in  love
with  Mr.  Pelham"4 — had  invited  several  other  gentlemen
high  in  Leicester's  confidence  to  accompany  the  expe¬
dition  ;  and,  among  the  rest,  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  telling  him

1  Queen  to  Leicester,  19  July,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  It  has  been  already  stated  that

Hohenlo  was  uniformly  called  Hollacli
or  Hollock  by  the  English  and  French,

and  very  often  by  the  Netherlanders.
In  our  text,  sometimes  the  one,  some¬
times  the  other,  appellation  is  used.
The  reader  will  understand  that  there

was  but  one  of  the  name  in  the  Pro¬
vinces — Count  Philip  William  Hohenlo
or  Hohenlohe,  offcener  called  Hollock.

3  “  Whereunto  the  colonel-general

must  not  in  anywise  be  made  privy.”
‘  Advertisement  of  a  difference  at  Ger¬
truydenberg.’  8  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

4  Bruce’s  ‘Leye.  Corresp.’  374.

1586.

A  SUPPER  PARTY  AT  HOHEULO’S.

93

that  he  (C  should  see  some  good  service/'  Sidney  came
accordingly,  in  great  haste,  from  Flushing,  bringing  along
with  him  Edward  Norris — that  hot-headed  young  man,  who,
according  to  Leicester,  “ greatly  governed  his  elder  brother"
— hut  they  arrived  at  Gertruydenberg  too  late.  The  foray  was
over,  and  the  party — “  having  burned  a  village ,  and  hilled  some
boors " — were  on  their  return.  Sidney,  not  perhaps  much
regretting  the  loss  of  his  share  in  this  rather  inglorious  shoot¬
ing  party,  went  down  to  the  water-side,  accompanied  by  Cap¬
tain  Norris,  to  meet  Hollock  and  the  other  commanders.

As  the  Count  stepped  on  shore  he  scowled  ominously,  and
looked  very  much  out  of  temper.

u  What  has  come  to  Hollock  ?"  whispered  Captain  Patton,
a  Scotchman,  to  Sidney.  ce  Has  he  a  quarrel  with  any  of  the
party  P  Look  at  his  face  !  He  means  mischief  to  somebody."

But  Sidney  was  equally  amazed  at  the  sudden  change  in
the  German  general's  countenance,  and  as  unable  to  ex¬
plain  it.

Soon  afterwards,  the  whole  party,  Hollock,  Lewis  William
of  Nassau,  Lord  Carew,  Lord  Essex,  Lord  Willoughby,  both
the  Sidneys,  Roger  Williams,  Pelham,  Edward  Norris,  and
the  rest,  went  to  the  Count's  lodgings,  where  they  supped,
and  afterwards  set  themselves  seriously  to  drinking.

Norris  soon  perceived  that  he  was  no  welcome  guest  ;  for
he  was  not — like  Sidney — a  stranger  to  the  deep  animosity
which  had  long  existed  between  Sir  John  Norris  and  Sir
William  Pelham  and  his  friends.  The  carouse  was  a  tre¬
mendous  one,  as  usually  was  the  case  where  Hollock  was  the
Amphitryon,  and,  as  the  potations  grew  deeper,  an  intention
became  evident  on ‘the  part  of  some  of  the  company  to  behave
unhandsomely  to  Norris.

For  a  time  the  young  Captain  ostentatiously  restrained
himself,  very  much  after  the  fashion  of  those  meek  individuals
who  lay  their  swords  on  the  tavern-table,  with  u  God  grant  I
may  have  no  need  of  thee  ! "  The  custom  was  then  prevalent
at  banquets  for  the  revellers  to  pledge  each  other  in  rotation,
each  draining  a  great  cup,  and  exacting  the  same  feat  from

94

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

his  neighbour,  who  then  emptied  his  goblet  as  a  challenge  to
his  next  comrade.

The  Lord  Marshal  took  a  beaker,  and  called  out  to  Edward
Norris.  “  I  drink  to  the  health  of  my  Lord  Norris,  and  of  my
lady,  your  mother/'  So  saying,  he  emptied  his  glass.

The  young  man  did  not  accept  the  pledge.

“Your  Lordship  knows,"  he  said  somewhat  sullenly,  “that
I  am  not  wont  to  drink  deep.  Mr.  Sidney  there  can  tell  you
that,  for  my  health's  sake,  I  have  drank  no  wine  these  eight
days.  If  your  Lordship  desires  the  pleasure  of  seeing  me
drunk,  I  am  not  of  the  same  mind.  I  pray  you  at  least  to
take  a  smaller  glass.

Sir  William  insisted  on  the  pledge.  Norris  then,  in  no
very  good  humour,  emptied  his  cup  to  the  Earl  of  Essex.

Essex  responded  by  draining  a  goblet  to  Count  Hollock.

“  A  Norris's  father,"  said  the  young  Earl,  as  he  pledged
the  Count,  who  was  already  very  drunk,  and  looking  blacker
than  ever.

“  An  'orse’s  father — an  'orse’s  father  !  "  growled  Hollock  ;

“  I  never  drink  to  horses,  nor  to  their  fathers  either and
with  this  wonderful  witticism  he  declined  the  pledge.

Essex  explained  that  the  toast  was  Lord  Norris,  father  of
the  Captain ;  but  the  Count  refused  to  understand,  and  held
fiercely,  and  with  damnable  iteration,  to  his  jest.

The  Earl  repeated  his  explanation  several  times  with  no
better  success.  Norris  meanwhile  sat  swelling  with  wrath,
but  said  nothing.

Again  the  Lord  Marshal  took  the  same  great  glass,  and
emptied  it  to  the  young  Captain.

Norris,  not  knowing  exactly  what  course  to  take,  placed
the  glass  at  the  side  of  his  plate,  and  glared  grimly  at  Sir
William.

Pelham  was  furious.  Reaching  over  the  table,  he  shoved  -
the  glass  towards  Norris  with  an  angry  gesture.

“  Take  your  glass,  Captain  Norris,"  he  cried  ;  “and  if  you
have  a  mind  to  jest,  seek  other  companions.  I  am  not  to  be
trifled  with  ;  therefore,  I  say,  pledge  me  at  once."

I

1586.

A  DRUNKEN  QUARREL.

I

95

“  Your  Lordship  shall  not  force  me  to  drink  more  wine
than  I  list,”  returned  the  other.  “  It  is  your  pleasure  to  take
advantage  of  your  military  rank.  Were  we  both  at  home,  you
would  he  glad  to  he  my  companion.”

Norris  was  hard  beset,  and  although  his  language  was
studiously  moderate,  it  was  not  surprising  that  his  manner
should  he  somewhat  insolent.  The  veteran  Lord  Marshal,
on  the  other  hand,  had  distinguished  himself  on  many
battle-fields,  hut  his  deportment  at  this  banqueting-table
was  not  much  to  his  credit.  He  paused  a  moment,  and
Norris,  too,  held  his  peace,  thinking  that  his  enemy  would
desist.

It  was  hut  for  a  moment.

“  Captain  Norris,”  cried  Pelham,  cc  I  hid  you  pledge  me
without  more  ado.  Neither  you  nor  your  best  friends  shall
use  me  as  you  list.  I  am  better  horn  than  you  and  your
brother,  the  colonel-general,  and  the  whole  of  you.”

“I  warn  you  to  say  nothing  disrespectful  against  my
brother,”  replied  the  Captain.  “  As  for  yourself,  I  know  how
to  respect  your  age  and  superior  rank.”

(e  Drink,  drink,  drink  !  ”  roared  the  old  Marshal.  u  I  tell
you  I  am  better  horn  than  the  best  of  you.  I  have  advanced
you  all  too,  and  you  know  it ;  therefore  drink  to  me.”

Sir  William  was  as  logical  as  men  in  their  cups  are  prone
to  be.

ec  Indeed,  you  have  behaved  well  to  my  brother  Thomas,”
answered  Norris,  suddenly  becoming  very  courteous,  “  and  for
this  I  have  ever  loved  your  Lordship,  and  would  do  you  any
service.”

“Well,  then,”  said  the  Marshal,  becoming  tender  in  his
turn,  “  forget  what  hath  past  this  night,  and  do  as  you  would
have  done  before.”

“  Very  well  said,  indeed  !  ”  cried  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  trying
to  help  the  matter  into  the  smoother  channel  towards  which
it  was  tending.

Norris,  seeing  that  the  eyes  pf  the  whole  company  were
upon  them,  took  the  glass  accordingly,  and  rose  to  his  feet.

96

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X.

“  My  Lord  Marshal/'  lie  said,  “  yon  have  done  me  more
wrong  this  night  than  you  can  easily  make  satisfaction  for.
But  I  am  unwilling  that  any  trouble  or  offence  should  grow
through  me.  Therefore  once  more  I  pledge  you."

He  raised  the  cup  to  his  lips.  At  that  instant  Hollock,  to
whom  nothing  had  been  said,  and  who  had  spoken  no  word
since  his  happy  remark  about  the  horse's  father,  suddenly
indulged  in  a  more  practical  jest ;  and  seizing  the  heavy  gilt
cover  of  a  silver  vase,  hurled  it  at  the  head  of  Norris.  It
struck  him  full  on  the  forehead,  cutting  him  to  the  hone.
The  Captain,  stunned  for  a  moment,  fell  back  in  his  chair,
with  the  blood  running  down  his  eyes  and  face.  The  Count,
always  a  man  of  few  words,  but  prompt  in  action,  now  drew
his  dagger,  and  strode  forward,  with  the  intention  of  despatch¬
ing  him  upon  the  spot.  Sir  Philip  Sidney  threw  his  arms
around  Hollock,  however,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  others  in
the  company,  succeeded  in  dragging  him  from  the  room.
The  affair  was  over  in  a  few  seconds.

Norris,  coming  back  to  consciousness,  sat  for  a  moment  as
one  amazed,  rubbing  the  blood  out  of  his  eyes  ;  then  rose  from
the  table  to  seek  his  adversary  ;  but  he  was  gone.

Soon  afterwards  he  went  to  his  lodgings.  The  next  morn¬
ing  he  was  advised  to  leave  the  town  as  speedily  as  possible  ;
for  as  it  was  under  the  government  of  Hollock,  and  filled  with
his  soldiers,  he  was  warned  that  his  life  would  not  be  safe
there  an  hour.  Accordingly  he  went  to  his  boat,  accompanied
only  by  his  man  and  his  page,  and  so  departed  with  his  broken
head,  breathing  vengeance  against  Hollock,  Pelham,  Leicester,
and  the  whole  crew,  by  whom  he  had  been  thus  abused.

The  next  evening  there  was  another  tremendous  carouse  at
the  Count's,  and,  says  the  reporter  of  the  preceding  scene,
u  they  were  all  on  such  good  terms,  that  not  one  of  the  com¬
pany  had  falling  band  or  ruff  left  about  his  neck.  All  were
clean  torn  away,  and  yet  there  was  no  blood  drawn." 1

1  1  Advertisement  of  a  Difference  at
Gfertruydenberg,’  8  August,  1586.  T.
Doyley  to  Burghley,  8  Aug.  1586.
B.  Clerk  to  same,  11  Aug.  1586.

E.  Norris  to  Leicester,  21  Nov.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)  Compare  Bor.  II.
786-788.  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’
390-392.

1586.  HOHENLO’S  ASSAULT  UPON  EDWARD  NORRIS.  97

Edward  Norris — so  soon  as  might  be  afterwards — sent  a
cartel  to  the  Count,  demanding  mortal  combat  with  sword
and  dagger.1  Sir  Philip  Sidney  bore  the  message.  Sir  John
Norris,  of  course,  warmly  and  violently  espoused  the  cause  of
his  brother,  and  was  naturally  more  incensed  against  the  Lord
Marshal  than  ever,  for  Sir  William  Pelham  was  considered
the  cause  of  the  whole  affray.  “Even  if  the  quarrel  is  to  be
excused  by  drink,”  said  an  eye-witness,  “'tis  but  a  slender
defence  for  my  Lord  to  excuse  himself  by  his  cups  ;  and  often
drink  doth  bewray  men's  humours  and  unmask  their  malice.
Certainly  the  Count  Hollock  thought  to  have  done  a  pleasure
to  the  company  in  killing  him.” 2

Nothing  could  be  more  ill-timed  than  this  quarrel,  or
more  vexatious  to  Leicester.  The  Count — although  consider¬
ing  himself  excessively  injured  at  being  challenged  by  a
simple  captain  and  an  untitled  gentleman,  whom  he  had
attempted  to  murder — consented  to  waive  his  privilege,  and
grant  the  meeting.

Leicester  interposed,  however,  to  delay,  and,  if  possible,  to
patch  up  the  affair.  They  were  on  the  eve  of  active  military
operations,  and  it  was  most  vexatious  for  the  commander-in¬
chief  to  see,  as  he  said,  “  the  quarrel  with  the  enemy  changed
to  private  revenge  among  ourselves.”  The  intended  duel  did
not  take  place,  for  various  influential  personages  succeeded  in
deferring  the  meeting.  Then  came  the  battle  of  Zutphen.
Sidney  fell,  and  Hollock  was  dangerously  wounded  in  the
attack  which  was  soon  afterwards  made  upon  the  fort.  He

I  have  painted  this  uproarious  scene
thus  minutely  and  in  detail,  because
its  consequences  upon  the  relations
between  England  and  Holland,  be¬
tween  Leicester,  the  Queen,  and  the
Norrises,  Pelham,  Hohenlo,  and  others,
were  so  long,  complicated,  and  im¬
portant,  because  the  brawl,  although
brutal  and  vulgar,  assumed  the  dignity
of  a  political  matter;  because,  on  ac¬
count  of  the  distinguished  person¬
ages  engaged  in  it,  and  the  epoch
at  which  it  occurred,  the  event  fur¬
nishes  us  with  a  valuable  interior  pic-

VOL.  II. — H

ture  of  English  and  Dutch  military
life ;  and  because,  lastly,  in  the
MSS.  which  I  have  consulted,  are
preserved  the  ipsissima  verba  of  the
actors  in  the  riot.  It  is  superfluous  to
repeat  what  has  so  often  been  stated,
that  no  historical  personage  is  ever
made,  in  the  text,  to  say  or  write  any¬
thing,  save  what,  on  ample  evidence,
he  is  known  to  have  said  or  written.

1  Bor,  ubi  sup.  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.
Corresp.’  474.

a  ‘Advertisement,’  &c.  MS.  already
cited.

98

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  X

was  still  pressed  to  afford  the  promised  satisfaction,  however,
and  agreed  to  do  so  whenever  he  should  rise  from  his  bed.1

Strange  to  say,  the  Count  considered  Leicester,  throughout
the  whole  business,  to  have  taken  part  against  him.2

Yet  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  Earl — who  de¬
tested  the  Norrises,  and  was  fonder  of  Pelham  than  of  any
man  living — uniformly  narrated  the  story  most  unjustly,  to
the  discredit  of  the  young  Captain.  He  considered  him  ex¬
tremely  troublesome,  represented  him  as  always  quarrelling
with  some  one — with  Colonel  Morgan,  Roger  Williams,  old
Reade,  and  all  the  rest — while  the  Lord  Marshal,  on  the  con¬
trary,  was  depicted  as  the  mildest  of  men.  u  This  I  must
say,”  he  observed,  u  that  all  present,  except  my  two  nephews
(the  Sidneys),  who  are  not  here  yet,  declare  the  greatest  fault
to  be  in  Edward  Norris,  and  that  he  did  most  arrogantly  use
the  Marshal.” 3

It  is  plain,  however,  that  the  old  Marshal,  under  the  influ¬
ence  of  wine,  was  at  least  quite  as  much  to  blame  as  the
young  Captain  ;  and  Sir  Philip  Sidney  sufficiently  showed  his
sense  of  the  matter  by  being  the  bearer  of  Edward  Norris’s
cartel.  After  Sidney’s  death,  Sir  John  Norris,  in  his  letter
of  condolence  to  Walsingham  for  the  death  of  his  illustrious
son-in-law,  expressed  the  deeper  regret  at  his  loss  because  Sir
Philip’s  opinion  had  been  that  the  Norrises  were  wronged.4
Hollock  had  conducted  himself  like  a  lunatic,  but  this  he  was
apt  to  do  whether  in  his  cups  or  not.  He  was  always  for
killing  some  one  or  another  on  the  slightest  provocation,  and,

1  Dor,  II.  I786-V8S.  Hoofd,  Yervolgh,
209.

2  Letter  of  Hohenlo,  in  Bor,  III.
123  seq.

3  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  391.

“In  all  actions,”  wrote  Sir  J.  Norris
to  Burgh  ley,  “  I  am  crossed,  and  sought
to  be  disgraced,  and  suffered  to  be
brayed  by  the  worst  and  simplest  in
the  company,  only  to  draw  me  into
quarrels.  These  things  I  am  fain  to
endure,  lest  the  hindrance  of  the  ser¬
vice  should  be  laid  to  my  charge — a
thing  greatly  sought  for . The

dishonourable  violence  offered  to  my
brother  in  Count  Hollock’s  house,  is
so  coldly  proceeded  in  as  I  fear  the
despair  of  orderly  repairing  his  honour
will  drive  him  to  a  more  dangerous
course,  and,  in  truth,  it  is  used  as  if
we  were  the  basest  in  the  company.”
Sir  J.  Norris  to  Burghley,  16  Aug.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  J.  Norris  to  Walsingham,  25  Oct.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  B.  Clerk  to

Burghley,  11  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office
MS.)

1586.

ILL  EFFECTS  OF  THE  RIOT.

99

while  the  dog-star  of  1586  was  raging,  it  was  not  his  fault  if
he  had  not  already  despatched  both  Edward  Norris  and  the
objectionable  “Mr.  P.  B."

For  these  energetic  demonstrations  against  Leicester's  ene¬
mies  he  considered  himself  entitled  to  the  Earl's  eternal
gratitude,  and  was  deeply  disgusted  at  his  apparent  coldness.
The  governor  was  driven  almost  to  despair  by  these  quarrels.

His  colonel-general,  his  lord  marshal,  his  lieutenant-gene¬
ral,  were  all  at  daggers  drawn.  “Would  God  I  were  rid
of  this  place  !  "  he  exclaimed.  “  What  man  living  would  go
to  the  field  and  have  his  officers  divided  almost  into  mortal
quarrel  ?  One  blow  but  by  any  of  their  lackeys  brings  us
altogether  by  the  ears."  1

It  was  clear  that  there  was  not  room  enough  on  the  Nether-
land  soil  for  the  Earl  of  Leicester  and  the  brothers  Norris.
The  Queen,  while  apparently  siding  with  the  Earl,  intimated
to  Sir  J ohn  that  she  did  not  disapprove  his  conduct,  that  she
should  probably  recall  him  to  England,  and  that  she  should
send  him  back  to  the  Provinces  after  the  Earl  had  left  that
country.2

Such  had  been  the  position  of  the  governor-general  to¬
wards  the  Queen,  towards  the  States-General,  and  towards  his
own  countrymen,  during  the  year  1586.

1  Bruce’s  ‘Ley c.  Corresp.’  392.

2  “I  had  not  much  to  do,”  wrote
Wilkes  to  Sir  John,  “to  re-establish
in  her  Majesty  and  Mr.  Secretary  a
singular  good  opinion  of  you  and  your
actions.  .  .  .  Believe  me,  I  do  not  find
any  man  on  that  side  equal  with  you
in  her  Majesty’s  grace.  She  pretests
to  me  she  will  not  have  your  safety
hazarded  for  any  treasure,  and  hath
resolved  to  revoke  you.  .  .  .  I  do  find
a  disposition  in  her  Majesty  to  return
you  thither  again,  after  his  Excellency
shall  be  come  home,  which  her  Majesty
meaneth  directly,  although  there  is
much  variety  of  opinion  here,  whether
it  be  fit  to  revoke  him  or  not.  Such

as  desire  the  good  of  that  Slate  do  hold
that  question  affirmatively,  but  such  as
do  not  love  him  (who  are  the  greater
number)  do  maintain  the  negative.
Her  Majesty  and  her  council  do  greatly
stagger  at  the  excessive  charge  of  those
wars  under  his  Excellency’s  govern¬
ment  for  the  past  six  months,  affirming
(as  it  is  true)  that  the  realm  of  England
is  not  able  to  supply  the  moiety  of  that
charge,  notwithstanding  the  necessity
of  the  defence  of  those  countries  is  so
conjoined  with  her  Majesty’s  own  safety
as  the  same  is  not  to  be  abandoned.”
Wilkes  to  Sir  J.  Norris,  23  Sept.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

100

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap  XI.

CHAPTER  XI.

Drake  in  the  Netherlands  —  Good  Results  of  his  Visit  —  The  Babington  Con¬
spiracy  —  Leicester  decides  to  visit  England  —  Exchange  of  parting
Compliments.

Late  in  tlie  autumn  of  tlie  same  year  an  Englishman  arrived
in  the  Netherlands,  hearer  of  despatches  from  the  Queen.
He  had  been  entrusted  by  her  Majesty  with  a  special  mission
to  the  States-General,  and  he  had  soon  an  interview  with  that
assembly  at  the  Hague.

He  was  a  small  man,  apparently  forty-five  years  of  age,  of  a
fair  hut  somewhat  weather-stained  complexion,  with  light-
brown,  closely-curling  hair,  an  expansive  forehead,  a  clear  blue
eye,  rather  common-place  features,  a  thin,  brown,  pointed  beard,
and  a  slight  moustache.  Though  low  of  stature,  he  was  broad-
chested,  with  well-knit  limbs.  His  hands,  which  were  small
and  nervous,  were  brown  and  callous  with  the  marks  of  toil.
There  was  something  in  his  brow  and  glance  not  to  be  mis¬
taken,  and  which  men  willingly  call  master  ;  yet  he  did  not
seem  to  have  sprung  of  the  born  magnates  of  the  earth.  He
wore  a  heavy  gold  chain  about  his  neck,  and  it  might  be
observed  that  upon  the  light  full  sleeves  of  his  slashed  doublet
the  image  of  a  small  ship  on  a  terrestrial  globe  was  curiously
and  many  times  embroidered.

It  was  not  the  first  time  that  he  had  visited  the  Nether¬
lands.  .  Thirty  years  before  the  man  had  been  apprentice  on
board  a  small  lugger,  which  traded  between  the  English  coast
and  the  ports  of  Zeeland.  Emerging  in  early  boyhood  from
his  parental  mansion — an  old  boat,  turned  bottom  upwards  on
a  sandy  down — he  had  naturally  taken  to  the  sea,  and  his
master,  dying  childless  not  long  afterwards,  bequeathed  to
him  the  lugger.  But  in  time  his  spirit,  too  much  confined

1586.

DRAKE  IN  THE  NETHERLANDS.

101

by  coasting  in  the  narrow  seas,  bad  taken  a  bolder  flight.  He
had  risked  his  hard-earned  savings  in  a  voyage  with  the
old  slave-trader,  John  Hawkins — whose  exertions,  in  what
was  then  considered  an  honourable  and  useful  vocation,  had
been  rewarded  by  Queen  Elizabeth  with  her  special  favour,
and  with  a  coat  of  arms,  the  crest  whereof  was  a  negro's  head,
proper,  chained- — but  the  lad's  first  and  last  enterprise  in  this
field  was  unfortunate.  Captured  by  Spaniards,  and  only
escaping  with  life,  he  determined  to  revenge  himself  on  the
whole  Spanish  nation  ;  and  this  was  considered  a  most  legiti¬
mate  proceeding  according  to  the  “sea  divinity"  in  which  he
had  been  schooled.  His  subsequent  expeditions  against  the
Spanish  possessions  in  the  West  Indies  were  eminently  suc¬
cessful,  and  soon  the  name  of  Francis  Drake  rang  through
the  world,  and  startled  Philip  in  the  depths  of  his  Escorial.
The  first  Englishman,  and  the  second  of  any  nation,  he
then  ploughed  his  memorable  “furrow  round  the  earth,"
carrying  amazement  and  destruction  to  the  Spaniards  as
he  sailed,  and  after  three  years  brought  to  the  Queen
treasure  enough,  as  it  was  asserted,  to  maintain  a  war  with
the  Spanish  King  for  seven  years,  and  to  pay  himself
and  companions,  and  the  merchant-adventurers  who  had
participated  in  his  enterprise,  forty-seven  pounds  sterling
for  every  pound  invested  in  the  voyage.  The  specula¬
tion  had  been  a  fortunate  one  both  for  himself  and  for  the
kingdom.

The  terrible  Sea-King  was  one  of  the  great  types  of  the
sixteenth  century.  The  self-helping  private  adventurer,  in
his  little  vessel  the  e  Golden  Hind,'  one  hundred  tons  burthen,
had  waged  successful  war  against  a  mighty  empire,  and  had
shown  England  how  to  humble  Philip.  When  he  again  set
foot  on  his  native  soil  he  was  followed  by  admiring  crowds,
and  became  the  favourite  hero  of  romance  and  ballad  ;  for  it
was  not  the  ignoble  pursuit  of  gold  alone,  through  toil  and
peril,  which  had  endeared  his  name  to  the  nation.  The
popular  instinct  recognized  that  the  true  means  had  been
found  at  last  for  rescuing  England  and  Protestantism  from

102

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XI.

the  overshadowing  empire  of  Spain.  The  Queen  visited  him
in  his  ‘  Golden  Hind/  and  gave  him  the  honour  of  knight¬
hood.

The  treaty  between  the  United  Netherlands  and  England
had  been  followed  by  an  embargo  upon  English  vessels,  per-
sons,  and  property,  in  the  ports  of  Spain ;  and,
after  five  years  of  unwonted  repose,  the  privateers¬
man  again  set  forth  with  twenty-five  small  vessels — of  which
five  or  six  only  were  armed — under  his  command,  conjoined
with  that  of  General  Carlisle.  This  time  the  voyage  was
undertaken  with  full  permission  and  assistance  of  the  Queen
who,  however,  intended  to  disavow  him,  if  she  should  find
such  a  step  convenient.1  This  was  the  expedition  in  which
Philip  Sidney  had  desired  to  take  part.  The  Queen  watched
its  result  with  intense  anxiety,  for  the  fate  of  her  Netherland
adventure  was  thought  to  be  hanging  on  the  issue.  “Upon
Drake's  voyage,  in  very  truth,  dependeth  the  life  and  death
of  the  cause,  according  to  man’s  judgment,”  said  Walsing-
ham.2

The  issue  was  encouraging,  even  if  the  voyage — as  a  mer¬
cantile  speculation — proved  not  so  brilliant  as  the  previous
enterprises  of  Sir  Francis  had  been.  He  returned  in  the
midsummer  of  1586,  having  captured  and  brandschatzed  St.
Domingo  and  Carthagena,  and  burned  St.  Augustine.  “  A
fearful  man  to  the  King  of  Spain  is  Sir  Francis  Drake,”  said
Lord  Burghley.3  Nevertheless,  the  Queen  and  the  Lord-
Treasurer — as  we  have  shown  by  the  secret  conferences  at
Greenwich — had,  notwithstanding  these  successes,  expressed  a
more  earnest  desire  for  peace  than  ever.

A  simple,  sea-faring  Englishman,  with  half-a-dozen  miser¬
able  little  vessels,  had  carried  terror  into  the  Spanish  pos¬
sessions  all  over  the  earth  :  but  even  then  the  great  Queen
had  not  learned  to  rely  on  the  valour  of  her  volunteers  against
her  most  formidable  enemy.4

1  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  173.
9  Ibid.  341.

3  Ibid.  199.

4  Eor  the  life  and  adventures  of

1586.

GOOD  RESULTS  OF  HIS  VISIT.

103

Drake  was,  however,  bent  on  another  enterprise.  The  pre¬
parations  for  Philip's  great  fleet  had  been  going  steadily
forward  in  Lisbon,  Cadiz,  and  other  ports  of  Spain  and  Por¬
tugal,  and,  despite  assurances  to  the  contrary,  there  was  a
growing  belief  that  England  was  to  he  invaded.  To  destroy
those  ships  before  the  monarch's  face,  would  he,  indeed,  to
tc  singe  his  heard."  But  whose  arm  was  daring  enough  for
such  a  stroke  ?  Whose  hut  that  of  the  Devonshire  skipper
who  had  already  accomplished  so  much  ?

And  so  Sir  Francis,  ce  a  man  true  to  his  word,  merciful  to
those  under  him,  and  hating  nothing  so  much  as  idleness," 1
had  come  to  the  Netherlands  to  talk  over  his  project  with  the
States-G-eneral,  and  with  the  Dutch  merchants  and  sea-cap¬
tains.?  His  visit  was  not  unfruitful.  As  a  body  the  assembly
did  nothing ;  hut  they  recommended  that  in  every  maritime
city  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  one  or  two  ships  should  he  got
ready,  to  participate  in  all  the  future  enterprises  of  Sir
Francis  and  his  comrades.3

The  martial  spirit  of  volunteer  sailors,  and  the  keen  in¬
stinct  of  mercantile  speculation,  were  relied  upon — exactly  as

Drake,  see  Fuller,  ‘The  Holy  State  and
the  Profane  State,’  in  voce.  Stowe’s
‘Chronicle,’  805-812.  Em.  v.  Meteren,
115,  seq.  “The  World  Encompassed,”
and  particularly  the  ‘  Life,  Voyages,
and  Exploits  of  Admiral  Sir  Francis
Drake.’  By  John  Barrow.  1843.

1  Fuller.

2  Wagenaar,  viii.  233-234,  who  is,
however,  mistaken  in  saying  that  “they
had  no  ears  for  Drake  in  the  Nether¬
lands.”

3  “The  voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake
into  these  countries,”  wrote  Wilkes,
“  is  not  likely  to  he  unfruitful,  although
at  his  arrival  he  found  no  disposition
in  the  States  and  people  at  all  to  assent
of  his  motions.  They  cannot  yield  to
assist  his  voyage  with  any  general
contribution,  but  are  contented  to  deal
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  principal
maritime  towns,  to  furnish  in  every
of  them  a  ship  or  two,  according  to
the  ability  of  the  merchants  there  re¬
siding,  from  whom  the  States-General,
now  assembled  at  the  Hague,  do  ex¬

pect  a  speedy  answer  and  resolution;
so  as  if  her  Majesty  shall  determine
that  Sir  F.  Drake  do  venture  again  to
the  Indies,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that
he  shall  have  some  good  assistance  from
hence.  Of  what  necessity  it  is  that  the
Queen’s  principal  enemy  be  attempted
that  way,  your  honour  can  best  per¬
ceive;  but  we  find  it  more  than  pro¬
bable  here,  that  if  he  may  enjoy  his
Indies  quietly ,  he  will  make  her  Majesty
and  these  countries  soon  weary  of  their
defence.  I  have  partly  instructed  Sir
F.  Drake  of  the  state  of  these  coun¬
tries.  How  and  in  what  sort  my  Lord
of  Leicester  departeth  hence,  he  hath
best  discerned  by  his  own  experience,
which,  because  it  is  long  to  be  written,
I  am  bold  to  refer  your  honour  to  his
declaration.  I  do  find  the  state  of
things  here  so  disjointed  and  unsettled,
that  I  have  just  cause  to  fear  some
dangerous  alteration  in  the  absence  of
our  governor.  Therefore  I  beseech
you,  as  you  tender  the  preservation  of
her  Majesty's  estate,  depending ,  as  you

104

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XI.

in  England — to  furnish  men,  ships,  and  money,  for  these
daring  and  profitable  adventures.  The  foundation  of  a
still  more  intimate  connection  between  England  and  Holland
was  laid,  and  thenceforth  Dutchmen  and  Englishmen
fought  side  by  side,  on  land  and  sea,  wherever  a  blow  was
to  be  struck  in  the  cause  of  human  freedom  against  despotic
Spain.

The  famous  Babington  conspiracy,  discovered  by  Walsing-
ham’s  “  travail  and  cost/'  had  come  to  convince  the  Queen  and
her  counsellors — if  further  proof  were  not  superfluous — that
her  throne  and  life  were  both  incompatible  with  Philip’s  deep
designs,  and  that  to  keep  that  monarch  out  of  the  Nether¬
lands  was  as  vital  to  her  as  to  keep  him  out  of  England.
“  She  is  forced  by  this  discovery  to  countenance  the
cause  by  all  outward  means  she  may,”  said  Walsingham,
“  for  it  appeareth  unto  her  most  plain,  that  unless  she  had
entered  into  the  action ,  she  had  been  utterly  undone ,  and  that
if  she  do  not  prosecute  the  same  she  cannot  continue.”1
The  Secretary  had  sent  Leicester  information  at  an  early
day  of  the  great  secret,  begging  his  friend  to  “make  the
letter  a  heretic  after  he  had  read  the  same,”  and  express¬
ing  the  opinion  that  “  the  matter,  if  well  handled,  would
break  the  neck  of  all  dangerous  practices  during  her  Majesty’s
reign.” 2

The  tragedy  of  Mary  Stuart — a  sad  but  inevitable  por¬
tion  of  the  vast  drama  in  which  the  emancipation  of  England
and  Holland,  and,  through  them,  of  half  Christendom,  was
accomplished — approached  its  catastrophe  ;  and  Leicester
could  not  restrain  his  anxiety  for  her  immediate  execution.
He  reminded  Walsingham  that  the  great  seal  had  been  put
upon  a  warrant  for  her  execution  for  a  less  crime  seventeen
years  before,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Northumberland  and
Westmorland  rebellion.  “For  who  can  warrant  these  villains

know,  upon  the  maintenance  of  this,  that
you  will  procure  some  speedy  resolu¬
tion  at  home,  and  the  return  of  some
governor  of  wisdom  and  value,  to  re¬
unite  these  distracted  provinces,  who,
for  lack  of  a  head,  are  apt  enough  to

be  the  workers  of  their  own  ruin.”
Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  17  Nov.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  341.

2  Ibid.  342.

1586.

THE  BABIHGrTON  CONSPIRACY.

105

from  her/'  he  said,  “if  that  person  live,  or  shall  live  any
time  ?  God  forbid  !  And  be  you  all  stout  and  resolute  in
this  speedy  execution,  or  be  condemned  of  all  the  world  for
ever.  It  is  most  certain,  if  you  will  have  your  Majesty  safe,  it
must  be  done,  for  justice  doth  crave  it  beside  policy." 1  His
own  personal  safety  was  deeply  compromised.  “  Your  Lord-
ship  and  I,"  wrote  Burghley,  “  were  very  great  motes  in  the
traitors'  eyes  ;  for  your  Lordship  there  and  I  here  should  first,
about  one  time,  have  been  killed.  Of  your  Lordship  they
thought  rather  of  poisoning  than  slaying.  After  us  two  gone,
they  purposed  her  Majesty’s  death." 2

But  on  this  great  affair  of  state  the  Earl  was  not  swayed
by  such  personal  considerations.  He  honestly  thought — as
did  all  the  statesmen  who  governed  England — that  English
liberty,  the  very  existence  of  the  English  commonwealth,  was
-  impossible  so  long  as  Mary  Stuart  lived.3  Under  these  cir¬
cumstances  he  was  not  impatient,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  leave
the  Netherlands.  His  administration  had  not  been  very  suc¬
cessful.  He  had  been  led  away  by  his  own  vanity,  and  by
the  flattery  of  artful  demagogues,  but  the  immense  obstacles
with  which  he  had  to  contend  in  the  Queen's  wavering  policy,
and  in  the  rivalry  of  both  English  and  Dutch  politicians,
have  been  amply  exhibited.  That  he  had  been  generous,
courageous,  and  zealous,  could  not  be  denied ;  and,  on  the
whole,  he  had  accomplished  as  much  in  the  field  as  could
have  been  expected  of  him  with  such  meagre  forces,  and  so
barren  an  exchequer.4

1  Bruce’s  ‘  Leyc.  Corresp.’  431.  (10

Oct.  1586.)  See  also  447.

“That  the  proceeding  of  justice
against  the  Queen  of  Scots  is  deferred
until  a  parliament,  whereat  I  do  greatly
marvel  if  it  should  be  true,  considering
how  dangerous  such  delay  might  be,
for  the  mischief  that  might  in  the
meantime  be  practiced  against  her
Majesty’s  person.  Though  some  small
branches  of  these  conspiracies  be  taken
away,  yet  the  greater  boughs  are  not
unknown  to  remain.  To  whom  it  were
not  good,  in  my  opinion,  to  give  that

opportunity  which  might  be  taken,
while  a  parliament  may  be  called,  and
such  a  cause  debated  and  determined,”
&c.  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  9  Sept.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  412.  (15
Sept.  1586.)

3  One  of  the  Babington  conspirators,

Ralph  Salisbury,  was  a  tenant  of  Lei¬
cester’s,  and  had  “a  farm  under  the
very  castle- wall  of  Denbigh.”  Leicester
'to  Burghley,  29  Aug.  1586.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

4  “Oh  Lord!  who  would  think  it

106

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XI.

It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  his  leaving  the  Nether¬
lands  at  that  moment  was  a  most  unfortunate  step,  both  for
his  own  reputation  and  for  the  security  of  the  Provinces.
Party-spirit  was  running  high,  and  a  political  revolution  was
much  to  be  dreaded  in  so  grave  a  position  of  affairs,  both
in  England  and  Holland.  The  .arrangements — and  particu¬
larly  the  secret  arrangements  which  he  made  at  his  de¬
parture — were  the  most  fatal  measures  of  all ;  but  these  will
be  described  in  the  following  chapter.

On  the  31st  October,  the  Earl  announced  to  the  state-
council  his  intention  of  returning  to  England,  stating,  as  the
31  Oct.,  cause  of  this  sudden  determination,  that  he  had
1586-  been  summoned  to  attend  the  parliament  then  sit¬
ting  in  Westminster.  Wilkes,  who  was  of  course  present,
having  now  succeeded  Killigrew  as  one  of  the  two  English
members,  observed  that  “  the  States  and  council  used  but
slender  entreaty  to  his  Excellency  for  his  stay  and  counte¬
nance  there  among  them,  whereat  his  Excellency  and  we
that  were  of  the  council  for  her  Majesty  did  not  a  little
marvel." 1

Some  weeks  later,  however,  upon  the  21st  November,
Leicester  summoned  Barneveld,  and  five  other  of  the  States-
2i  Nov.,  General,  to  discuss  the  necessary  measures  for  his
1586-  departure,  when  those  gentlemen  remonstrated  very
earnestly  upon  the  step,  pleading  the  danger  and  confusion  of
affairs  which  must  necessarily  ensue.  The  Earl  declared  that
he  was  not  retiring  from  the  country  because  he  was  offended,
although  he  had  many  causes  for  offence  :  and  he  then  alluded
to  the  Navigation  Act,  to  the  establishment  of  the  finance-
council,  and  spoke  of  Burgrave  and  Reingault,  for  his  em¬
ployment  of  which  individuals  so  much  obloquy  had  been
heaped  upon  his  head.  Burgrave  he  pronounced,  as  usual,  a

possible,”  he  cried  on  one  occasion,
“for  any  man  sent  as  we  are,  and  in
action  for  that  realm  (of  England)
chiefly ,  and  for  all  Christendom  also ,
to  be  so  carelessly  and  overwillingly
overthrown  for  ordinary  wants .

To-morrow  and  to-morrow  they  shall
have.  .  .  .  What  opportunities  we  have
lately  lost.  We  are  ready  to  eat  our
own  flesh  for  anger,  but  that  cannot
help.”  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’  366.

1  Bruce’s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.’ 443,  note.

1586.

LEICESTER  DECIDES  TO  VISIT  ENGLAND.

107

substantial,  wise,  faithful,  religious  personage,  entitled  to
fullest  confidence  ;  while  Reingault — who  had  been  thrown
into  prison  by  the  States  on  charges  of  fraud,  peculation,  and
sedition — he  declared  to  be  a  great  financier,  who  had  pro¬
mised,  on  penalty  of  his  head,  to  bring  great  sums  into  the
treasury  for  carrying  on  the  war,  without  any  burthen  to  the
community/' 1  Had  he  been  able  to  do  this,  he  had  certainly
a  claim  to  be  considered  the  greatest  of  financiers  ;  but  the
promised  “ mountains  of  gold"  were  never  discovered,  and
Reingault  was  now  awaiting  his  trial.2

The  deputies  replied  that  the  concessions  upon  the  Navi¬
gation  Act  had  satisfied  the  country,  but  that  Reingault  was
a  known  instrument  of  the  Spaniards,  and  Burgrave  a  mis¬
chief-making  demagogue,  who  consorted  with  malignants,  and
sent  slanderous  reports  concerning  the  States  and  the  country
to  her  Majesty.  They  had  in  consequence  felt  obliged  to
write  private  despatches  to  envoy  Ortel  in  England,  not  be¬
cause  they  suspected  the  Earl,  but  in  order  to  counteract  the
calumnies  of  his  chief  advisers.  They  had  urged  the  agent

1  Bor,  II.  m-m  Hoofd,  201-209.
Wagenaar,  viii.  188-181.

2  “I  must  pray  you  and  require  you
to  be  careful  in  satisfying  the  States
touching  Reingault,”  said  Leicester:
“  I  did  promise  upon  mine  honour  he
should  be  brought  back  again,  and  so
I  have  done,  but  I  will  be  no  butcher
to  the  greatest  monarch  in  the  world,
much  less  the  betrayer  of  a  man’s  life,
whom  I  myself  caused  to  be  appre¬
hended  to  please  them,  and  kept  him
in  safe  guard.  And  now  I  have  been
advertised  of  the  intent  in  proceeding
with  him,  and  with  what  violence,  and
what  some  of  themselves  have  sworn
and  vowed  touching  his  death,  you
know,  and  I  pray  you  declare,  for  as  I
will  keep  promise  with  them  for  the
prison  of  the  man,  so  do  I  look  to  have
mine  own  honour  regarded  at  their
hands,  seeing  more  malice  than  just
desert  against  him.  I  take  the  man
to  have  faults  enough,  but  not  capital.”
Leicester  to  Wilkes,  20  Nov.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Wilkes,  finding  that  the  States  of

Holland  were  furious  against  Rein¬
gault,  and  were  demanding  his  execu¬
tion,  had  managed  to  place  him  under
the  charge  of  the  provost-marshal  of
the  English  troops  at  Utrecht.  When
he  had  thus  saved  the  culprit’s  life,  he
informed  Barneveld  of  what  he  had
done,  and  that  statesman  severely  cen¬
sured  the  act,  on  the  ground  that
grave  consequences  might  follow  this
interposition  in  behalf  of  so  signal  an
offender.  Reingault’s  life  was  pre¬
served,  however,  and  he  subsequently
was  permitted  to  retire  to  the  Spanish
Netherlands,  where  the  violent  demo¬
crat  and  Calvinist  ended  his  days  an
obedient  subject  of  Philip  II.,  and  an
exemplary  papist.  Wilkes  to  Leices¬
ter,  3  and  12  Dec.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  Reyd,  V.  82.

Burgrave  accompanied  the  Earl  to
England,  as  his  chief  secretary  and
adviser  in  Netherland  matters,  while
Deventer  remained  in  Utrecht,  prin¬
cipal  director  of  the  Leicestrian  party,
and  centre  of  all  its  cabals  against
the  States.

108

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XI.

to  bring  the  imprisonment  of  Paul  Buys  before  her  Majesty,
but  for  that  transaction  Leicester  boldly  disclaimed  all  re¬
sponsibility.1

It  was  agreed  between  the  Earl  and  the  deputies  that,
during  his  absence,  the  whole  government,  civil  and  military,
should  devolve  upon  the  state-council,  and  that  Sir  John
Norris  should  remain  in  command  of  the  English  forces.2

Two  days  afterwards  Leicester,  who  knew  very  well  that  a
legation  was  about  to  proceed  to  England,  without  any  pre¬
vious  concurrence  on  his  part,  summoned  a  committee  of  the
States-Greneral,  together  with  Barneveld,  into  the  state-coun¬
cil.  Counsellor  Wilkes  on  his  behalf  then  made  a  speech,  in
which  he  observed  that  more  ample  communications  on  the
part  of  the  States  were  to  be  expected.  They  had  in  previous
colloquies  touched  upon  comparatively  unimportant  matters,
but  he  now  begged  to  be  informed  why  these  commissioners
were  proceeding  to  England,  and  what  was  the  nature  of  their
instructions.  Why  did  not  they  formally  offer  the  sovereignty
of  the  Provinces  to  the  Queen  without  conditions  ?  That  step
had  already  been  taken  by  Utrecht.3

The  deputies  conferred  apart  for  a  little  while,  and  then
replied  that  the  proposition  made  by  Utrecht  was  notoriously
factious,  illegal,  and  altogether  futile.  Without  the  sanction
of  all  the  United  States,  of  what  value  was  the  declaration  of
Utrecht  ?  Moreover  the  charter  of  that  province  had  been
recklessly  violated,  its  government  overthrown,  and  its  leading
citizens  banished.  The  action  of  the  Province  under  such
circumstances  was  not  deserving  of  comment ;  but  should  it
appear  that  her  Majesty  was  desirous  of  assuming  the  sove¬
reignty  of  the  Provinces  upon  reasonable  conditions,  the
States  of  Holland  and  of  Zeeland  would  not  be  found  back¬
ward  in  the  business.4

Leicester  proposed  that  Prince  Maurice  of  Nassau  should
go  with  him  to  England,  as  nominal  chief  of  the  embassy,
and  some  of  the  deputies  favoured  the  suggestion.  It  was

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  & c.,  MS.  just  cited.
3  Bor.  II.  780-783.

3  Wagenaar,  viii.  1 87.

4  Ibid.

1586.  EXCHANGE  OF  PABTING  COMPLIMENTS.  109

however,  vigorously  and  successfully  opposed  by  Barneveld,
who  urged  that  to  leave  the  country  without  a  head  in  such  a
dangerous  position  of  affairs,  would  he  an  act  of  madness.1
Leicester  was  much  annoyed  when  informed  of  this  decision.
He  was  suspected  of  a  design,  during  his  absence,  of  converting
Maurice  entirely  to  his  own  way  of  thinking.  If  unsuccessful,
it  was  believed  by  the  Advocate  and  by  many  others  that  the
Earl  would  cause  the  young  Prince  to  be  detained  in  England
as  long  as  Philip  William,  his  brother,  had  been  kept  in
Spain.  He  observed  peevishly  that  he  knew  how  it  had  all
been  brought  about.2

Words,  of  course,  and  handsome  compliments  were  ex¬
changed  between  the  Governor  and  the  States-General  on  his
departure.  He  protested  that  he  had  never  pursued  any
private  ends  during  his  administration,  but  had  ever  sought
to  promote  the  good  of  the  country  and  the  glory  of  the
Queen,  and  that  he  had  spent  three  hundred  thousand  florins
of  his  own  money  in  the  brief  period  of  his  residence  there.3

The  Advocate,  on  part  of  the  States,  assured  him  that  they
were  all  aware  that  in  the  friendship  of  England  lay  their
only  chance  of  salvation,  but  that  united  action  was  the  sole
means  by  which  that  salvation  could  be  effected,  and  the  one
which  had  enabled  the  late  Prince  of  Orange  to  maintain  a
contest  unequalled  by  anything  recorded  in  history.  There
was  also  much  disquisition  on  the  subject  of  finance — the
Advocate  observing  that  the  States  now  raised  as  much  in  a
month  as  the  Provinces  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  used  to
levy  in  a  year — and  expressed  the  hope  that  the  Queen  would
increase  her  contingent  to  ten  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand
horse.  He  repudiated,  in  the  name  of  the  States-General  and
his  own,  the  possibility  of  peace-negotiations  ;  deprecated  any
allusion  to  the  subject  as  fatal  to  their  religion,  their  liberty,
their  very  existence,  and  equally  disastrous  to  England  and
to  Protestantism,  and  implored  the  Earl,  therefore,  to  use  all

1  Bor,  ubi  sup.  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,  2  Bor,  ubi  sup.

206.  Wagenaar,  viii.  185.  3  Bor,  II.  185.  Hoofd,  ubi  sup.

110

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XI.

his  influence  in  opposition  to  any  pacific  overtures  to  or  from
Spain.1

On  the  24th  November,  acts  were  drawn  up  and  signed
by  the  Earl,  according  to  which  the  supreme  government  of
24  Nov.,  the  United  Netherlands  was  formally  committed  to

1586.  the  state-council  during  his  absence.  Decrees  were
to  be  pronounced  in  the  name  of  his  Excellency,  and  counter¬
signed  by  Maurice  of  Nassau.

On  the  following  day,  Leicester,  being  somewhat  indisposed,
requested  a  deputation  of  the  States-Greneral  to  wait  upon
him  in  his  own  house.  This  was  done,  and  a  formal  and
affectionate  farewell  was  then  read  to  him  by  his  secretary,
Mr.  Atye.  It  was  responded  to  in  complimentary  fashion  by
Advocate  Barneveld,  who  again  took  occasion  at  this  parting
interview  to  impress  upon  the  governor  the  utter  impossi¬
bility,  in  his  own  opinion  and  that  of  the  other  deputies,  of
reconciling  the  Provinces  with  Spain.2

Leicester  received  from  the  States — as  a  magnificent  part¬
ing  present — a  silver  gilt  vase  “as  tall  as  a  man/'  and  then
departed  for  Flushing  to  take  shipping  for  England.3

1  Bor,  Hoofd,  Wagenaar,  ubi  sup.
Reyd,  v.  108,  109.

2  Ibid.  Meteren,  xiii.  238.

3  Bor,  II.  154.  Reyd,  Holl.  4  Oct.
9  Nov.  442,  493.  Wagenaar,  viii.
113.

The  vase  or  cup  (hop)  as  it  was
called,  had  cost  9000  florins.  The

States  pronounced  it  “as  singular  a
jewel  as  could  be  found  in  any  of  the
surrounding  kingdoms.”  It  was  said
that  on  account  of  its  size,  it  could
only  have  been  gilded  at  the  peril  of
the  artisan’s  life.  Yan  Wyn  op  Wagen,
viii.  62.

1586.

ILL-TIMED  INTERREGNUM  IN  THE  PROVINCES.

Ill

CHAPTER  XII.

Ill-timed  Interregnum  in  the  Provinces  —  Firmness  of  the  English  and  Dutch
People  —  Factions  during  Leicester’s  Government  —  Democratic  Theories
of  the  Leicestrians  —  Suspicions  as  to  the  Earl’s  Designs  —  Extreme  Views
of  the  Calvinists  —  Political  Ambition  of  the  Church  —  Antagonism  of  the
Church  and  States  —  The  States  inclined  to  Tolerance  —  Desolation  of
the  Obedient  Provinces  —  Pauperism  and  Famine  —  Prosperity  of  the
Republic  —  The  Year  of  Expectation.

It  was  not  unnatural  that  the  Queen  should  desire  the  pre¬
sence  of  her  favourite  at  that  momentous  epoch,  when  the
dread  question,  u  aut  fer  aut  feri  ”  had  at  last  demanded  its
definite  solution.  It  was  inevitable,  too,  that  Leicester  should
feel  great  anxiety  to  be  upon  the  spot  where  the  great  tragedy,
so  full  of  fate  to  all  Christendom,  and  in  which  his  own
fortunes  were  so  closely  involved,  was  to  be  enacted.  But
it  was  most  cruel  to  the  Netherlands — whose  well-being  was
nearly  as  important  to  Elizabeth  as  that  of  her  own  realm —
to  plunge  them  into  anarchy  at  such  a  moment.  Yet  this
was  the  necessary  result  of  the  sudden  retirement  of  Leicester.

He  did  not  resign  his  government.  He  did  not  bind  him¬
self  to  return.  The  question  of  sovereignty  was  still  unsettled,
for  it  was  still  hoped  by  a  large  and  influential  party,  that  the
English  Queen  would  accept  the  proposed  annexation.  It
was  yet  doubtful,  whether,  during  the  period  of  abeyance,  the
States-General  or  the  States-Provincial,  each  within  their
separate  sphere,  were  entitled  to  supreme  authority.  Mean¬
time,  as  if  here  were  not  already  sufficient  elements  of  dis¬
sension  and  doubt,  came  a  sudden  and  indefinite  interregnum,
a  provisional,  an  abnormal,  and  an  impotent  government.
To  the  state-council  was  deputed  the  executive  authority.
But  the  state-council  was  a  creature  of  the  States-General,
acting  in  concert  with  the  governor-general,  and  having  no
actual  life  of  its  own.  It  was  a  board  of  consultation,  not  of

112

TEE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

decision,  for  it  could  neither  enact  its  own  decrees  nor  interpose
a  veto  upon  the  decrees  of  *the  governor.

Certainly  the  selection  of  Leicester  to  fill  so  important  a
post  had  not  been  a  very  fortunate  one  ;  and  the  enthusiasm
which  had  greeted  him,  “as  if  he  had  been  a  Messiah/'  on
his  arrival,  had  very  rapidly  dwindled  away,  as  his  personal
character  became  known.  The  leading  politicians  of  the
country  had  already  been  aware  of  the  error  which  they  had
committed  in  clothing  with  almost  sovereign  powers  the
delegate  of  one  who  had  refused  the  sovereignty.  They  were
too  adroit  to  neglect  the  opportunity,  which  her  Majesty's
anger  offered  them,  of  repairing  what  they  considered  their
blunder.  When  at  last  the  quarrel,  which  looked  so  much
like  a  lovers'  quarrel,  between  Elizabeth  and  ‘  Sweet  Robin,'
had  been  appeased  to  the  satisfaction  of  Robin,  his  royal
mistress  became  more  angry  with  the  States  for  circumscribing
than  she  had  before  been  for  their  exaggeration  of  his  autho¬
rity.  Hence  the  implacable  hatred  of  Leicester  to  Paul  Buys
and  Barneveld.

Those  two  statesmen,  for  eloquence,  learning,  readiness,
administrative  faculty,  surpassed  by  few  who  have  ever
wielded  the  destinies  of  free  commonwealths,  were  fully  equal
to  the  task  thrown  upon  their  hands  by  the  progress  of  events.
That  task  was  no  slight  one,  for  it  was  to  the  leading  states¬
men  of  Holland  and  England,  sustained  by  the  indomitable
resistance  to  despotism  almost  universal  in  the  English  and
Dutch  nations,  that  the  liberty  of  Europe  was  entrusted  at
that  momentous  epoch.  Whether  united  under  one  crown,
as  the  Netherlands  ardently  desired,  or  closely  allied  for
aggression  and  defence,  the  two  peoples  were  bound  indis¬
solubly  together.  The  clouds  were  rolling  up  from  the  fatal
south,  blacker  and  more  portentous  than  ever  ;  the  artificial
equilibrium  of  forces,  by  which  the  fate  of  France  was  kept
in  suspense,  was  obviously  growing  every  day  more  uncertain  ;
but  the  prolonged  and  awful  interval  before  the  tempest
should  burst  over  the  lands  of  freedom  and  Protestantism,
gave  at  least  time  for  the  prudent  to  prepare.  The  Armada

1586.  FIRMNESS  OF  THE  ENGLISH  AND  DUTCH  PEOPLE.  H3

was  growing  every  day  in  the  ports  of  Spain  and  Portugal,
and  Walsingham  doubted,  as  little  as  did  Buys  or  Barneveld,
toward  what  shores  that  invasion  was  to  he  directed.  Eng¬
land  was  to  he  conquered  in  order  that  the  rebellious  Nether¬
lands  might  he  reduced  ;  and  ‘  Mucio  ’  was  to  he  let  slip  upon
the  unhappy  Henry  III.  so  soon  as  it  was  thought  probable
that  the  Bearnese  and  the  Valois  had  sufficiently  exhausted
each  other.  Philip  was  to  reign  in  Paris,  Amsterdam,
London,  and  Edinburgh,  without  stirring  from  the  Escorial.
An  excellent  programme,  had  there  not  been  some  English
gentlemen,  some  subtle  secretaries  of  state,  some  Devonshire
skippers,  some  Dutch  advocates  and  merchants,  some  Zeeland
fly-boatsmen,  and  six  million  men,  women,  and  children,  on
the  two  sides  of  the  North  Sea,  who  had  the  power  of  ex¬
pressing  their  thoughts  rather  bluntly  than  otherwise  in
different  dialects  of  old  Anglo-Saxon  speech.

Certainly  it  would  be  unjust  and  ungracious  to  disparage
the  heroism  of  the  great  Queen  when  the  hour  of  danger
really  came,  nor  would  it  be  legitimate  for  us,  who  can  scan
that  momentous  year  of  expectation,  1587,  by  the  light  of
subsequent  events  and  of  secret  contemporaneous  record,  to
censure  or  even  sharply  to  criticise  the  royal  hankering  for
peace,  when  peace  had  really  become  impossible.  But  as  we
shall  have  occasion  to  examine  rather  closely  the  secrets  of
the  Spanish,  French,  English,  and  Dutch  councils,  during  this
epoch,  we  are  likely  to  find,  perhaps,  that  at  least  as  great  a
debt  is  due  to  the  English  and  Dutch  people,  in  mass,  for  the
preservation  of  European  liberty  at  that  disastrous  epoch  as
to  any  sovereign,  general,  or  statesman.

F or  it  was  in  the  great  waters  of  the  sixteenth  century  that
the  nations,  whose  eyes  wTere  open,  discovered  the  fountain  of
perpetual  youth,  while  others,  who  were  blind,  passed  rapidly
onward  to  decrepitude.  England  was,  in  many  respects,  a
despotism  so  far  as  regarded  governmental  forms  ;  and  no
doubt  the  Catholics  were  treated  with  greater  rigour  than
could  be  justified  even  by  the  perpetual  and  most  dangerous
machinations  of  the  seminary  priests  and  their  instigators

VOL.  II. — I

114

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

against  the  throne  and  life  of  Elizabeth.  The  word  liberty
was  never  musical  in  Tudor  ears,  yet  Englishmen  had  blunt
tongues  and  sharp  weapons  which  rarely  rusted  for  want  of
use.  In  the  presence  of  a  parliament,  and  the  absence  of  a
standing  army,  a  people  accustomed  to  read  the  Bible  in  the
vernacular,  to  handle  great  questions  of  religion  and  govern¬
ment  freely,  and  to  hear  arms  at  will,  was  most  formidable  to
despotism.  There  was  an  advance  on  the  olden  time.  A
Francis  Drake,  a  John  Hawkins,  a  Roger  Williams,  might
have  been  sold,  under  the  Plantagenets,  like  an  ox  or  an  ass.
A  ‘  female  villain ’  in  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  could  have  been
purchased  for  eighteen  shillings — hardly  the  price  of  a  fatted
pig,  and  not  one-third  the  value  of  an  ambling  palfrey — and
a  male  villain,  such  a#  one  as  could  in  Elizabeth’s  reign
circumnavigate  the  globe  in  his  own  ship,  or  take  imperial
field-marshals  by  the  beard,  was  worth  but  two  or  three  pounds
sterling  in  the  market.  Here  was  progress  in  three  centuries,
for  the  villains  were  now  become  admirals  and  generals  in
England  and  Holland,  and  constituted  the  main  stay  of  these
two  little  commonwealths,  while  the  commanders  who  governed
the  c  invincible  ’  fleets  and  armies  of  omnipotent  Spain,  were
all  cousins  of  emperors,  or  grandees  of  bluest  blood.  Perhaps
the  system  of  the  reformation  would  not  prove  the  least
effective  in  the  impending  crisis.

It  was  most  important,  then,  that  these  two  nations  should
be  united  in  council,  and  should  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder
as  their  great  enemy  advanced.  But  this  was  precisely  what
had  been  rendered  almost  impossible  by  the  course  of  events
during  Leicester’s  year  of  administration,  and  by  his  sudden
but  not  final  retirement  at  its  close.  The  two  great  national
parties  which  had  gradually  been  forming,  had  remained  in
a  fluid  state  during  the  presence  of  the  governor-general.
During  his  absence  they  gradually  hardened  into  the  forms
which  they  were  destined  to  retain  for  centuries.  In  the
history  of  civil  liberty,  these  incessant  contests,  these  oral  and
written  disquisitions,  these  sharp  concussions  of  opinion,  and
the  still  harder  blows,  which,  unfortunately,  were  dealt  on  a

1586.  FACTIONS  DURING-  LEICESTER’S  GOVERNMENT.  H5

few  occasions  by  the  combatants  upon  each  other,  make  the
year  1587  a  memorable  one.  The  great  questions  of  the
origin  of  government,  the  balance  of  dynastic  forces,  the
distribution  of  powers,  were  dealt  with  by  the  ablest  heads,
both  Dutch  and  English,  that  could  be  employed  in  the  service
of  the  kingdom  and  republic.  It  was  a  war  of  protocols,
arguments,  orations,  rejoinders,  apostilles,  and  pamphlets,
very  wholesome  for  the  cause  of  free  institutions  and  the
intellectual  progress  of  mankind.  The  reader  may  perhaps
be  surprised  to  see  with  how  much  vigour  and  boldness  the
grave  questions  which  underlie  all  polity,  were  handled  so
many  years  before  the  days  of  Russell  and  Sidney,  of  Montes¬
quieu  and  Locke,  Franklin,  Jefferson,  Rousseau,  and  Voltaire  ;
and  he  may  be  even  more  astonished  to  find  exceedingly
democratic  doctrines  propounded,  if  not  believed  in,  by  trained
statesmen  of  the  Elizabethan  school.  He  will  be  also  apt  to
wonder  that  a  more  fitting  time  could  not  be  found  for  such
philosophical  debate  than  the  epoch  at  which  both  the  king¬
dom  and  the  republic  were  called  upon  to  strain  every  sinew
against  the  most  formidable  and  aggressive  despotism  that  the
world  had  known  since  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.

The  great  dividing-line  between  the  two  parties,  that  of
Leicester  and  that  of  Holland,  which  controlled  the  action  of
the  States-General,  was  the  question  of  sovereignty.  After
the  declaration  of  independence  and  the  repudiation  of  Philip,
to  whom  did  the  sovereignty  belong  ?  To  the  people,  said
the  Leicestrians.  To  the  States-General  and  the  States-Pro-
vincial,  as  legitimate  representatives  of  the  people,  said  the
Holland  party.  Without  looking  for  the  moment  more  closely
into  this  question,  which  we  shall  soon  find  ably  discussed  by
the  most  acute  reasoners  of  the  time,  it  is  only  important  at
present  to  make  a  preliminary  reflection.  The  Earl  of  Lei¬
cester,  of  all  men  in  the  world,  would  seem  to  have  been
precluded  by  his  own  action,  and  by  the  action  of  his  Queen,
from  taking  ground  against  the  States.  It  was  the  States
who,  by  solemn  embassy,  had  offered  the  sovereignty  to
Elizabeth.  She  had  not  accepted  the  offer,  but  she  had

116

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

deliberated  on  the  subject,  and  certainly  she  had  never  ex¬
pressed  a  doubt  whether  or  not  the  offer  had  been  legally
made.  By  the  States,  too,  that  governor-generalship  had
been  conferred  upon  the  Earl,  which  had  been  so  thankfully
and  eagerly  accepted.  It  was  strange,  then,  that  he  should
deny  the  existence  of  the  power  whence  his  own  authority
was  derived.  If  the  States  were  not  sovereigns  of  the  Nether¬
lands,  he  certainly  was  nothing.  He  was  but  general  of  a
few  thousand  English  troops.

The  Leicester  party,  then,  proclaimed  extreme  democratic
principles  as  to  the  origin  of  government  and  the  sovereignty
of  the  people.  They  sought  to  strengthen  and  to  make  almost
absolute  the  executive  authority  of  their  chief,  on  the  ground
that  such  was  the  popular  will ;  and  they  denounced  with
great  acrimony  the  insolence  of  the  upstart  members  of  the
States,  half  a  dozen  traders,  hired  advocates,  churls,  tinkers,
and  the  like — as  Leicester  was  fond  of  designating  the  men
who  opposed  him — in  assuming  these  airs  of  sovereignty.1

This  might,  perhaps,  be  philosophical  doctrine,  had  its
supporters  not  forgotten  that  there  had  never  been  any  pre¬
tence  at  an  expression  of  the  national  will,  except  through
the  mouths  of  the  States.  The  States-G-eneral  and  the  States-
Provincial,  without  any  usurpation,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact
and  of  great  political  convenience,  had,  during  fifteen  years,
exercised  the  authority  which  had  fallen  from  Philip's  hands.
The  people  hitherto  had  acquiesced  in  their  action,  and  cer-

1  “They  which  have  all  authority
in  this  State,”  said  an  honest  German
traveller,  who  happened  to  be  in  Ana¬
heim  that  winter,  “are  for  the  most
part  merchants,  orators  of  towns,
mechanic  men,  ignorant,  loving  gain
naturally,  without  respect  of  honour ;
.  .  .  .  born  to  obey  rather  than  com¬
mand,  who  haviug  once  tasted  the
sweetness  of  authority,  have  by  little
and  little  persuaded  themselves  that
they  are  sovereigns ;  insulting  over
the  people,  and  controlling  him  to
whom  they  had  by  oath  referred  the
absolute  and  general  government  .  .  .
Seeing  that  the  sovereignty  really  be¬
longs  to  the  people,  to  whom  they  are

but  servants  and  deputies  ....  I
see  no  other  remedy  for  this  mischief,
but  that  the  people  be  wary  how  they
give  such  power  and  authority,  and
suffer  it  to  continue  so  long  in  the
hands  of  men  of  mechanic  and  base
condition,  who,  grown  proud  with  the
command,  abuse  it  daily,  as  well
against  the  people  as  against  the  go¬
vernors,  to  whom  the  people  have  re¬
ferred  the  government  both  over
themselves  and  over  the  whole  estate.”
Raymond  Stockeler  to  a  friend  in
England,  15  Feb.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office
MS.)  The  letter  is  printed  in  Grim-
stone’s  ‘Netherlands,’  pp.  949,  seq .

1586.  DEMOCRATIC  THEORIES  OF  THE  LEICESTRI AN S.  H7

tainly  there  had  not  yet  been  any  call  for  a  popular  conven¬
tion,  or  any  other  device  to  ascertain  the  popular  will.  It
was  also  difficult  to  imagine  what  was  the  exact  entity  of  this
abstraction  called  the  “  people  ”  by  men  who  expressed  such
extreme  contempt  for  “merchants,  advocates,  town-orators,
churls,  tinkers,  and  base  mechanic  men,  horn  not  to  command
hut  to  obey/'  Who  were  the  people  when  the  educated
classes  and  the  working  classes  were  thus  carefully  eliminated  ?
Hardly  the  simple  peasantry — the  boors — who  tilled  the  soil.
At  that  day  the  agricultural  labourers,  less  than  all  others,
dreamed  of  popular  sovereignty,  and  more  than  all  others
submitted  to  the  mild  authority  of  the  States.  According  to
the  theory  of  the  Netherland  constitutions,  they  were  sup¬
posed — and  they  had  themselves  not  yet  discovered  the
fallacies  to  which  such  doctrines  could  lead — to  he  repre¬
sented  by  the  nobles  and  country-squires  who  maintained  in
the  States  of  each  Province  the  general  farming  interests  of
the  republic.  Moreover,  the  number  of  agricultural  peasants
was  comparatively  small.  The  lower  classes  were  rather
accustomed  to  plough  the  sea  than  the  land,  and  their
harvests  were  reaped  from  that  element,  which  to  Hol¬
landers  and  Zeelanders  was  less  capricious  than  the  solid
earth.  Almost  every  inhabitant  of  those  sea-born  territories
was,  in  one  sense  or  another,  a  mariner  ;  for  every  highway
was  a  canal ;  the  soil  was  percolated  by  rivers  and  estuaries,
pools  and  meres  ;  the  fisheries  were  the  nurseries  in  which
still  more  daring  navigators  rapidly  learned  their  trade,  and
every  child  took  naturally  to  the  ocean  as  to  its  legitimate
home.

The  ee  people/’  therefore,  thus  enthroned  by  the  Leicestrians
over  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  appeared  to  many  eyes
rather  a  misty  abstraction,  and  its  claim  of  absolute  sove¬
reignty  a  doctrine  almost  as  fantastic  as  that  of  the  divine
right  of  kings.  The  Netherlanders  were,  on  the  whole,  a  law-
abiding  people,  preferring  to  conduct  even  a  revolution
according  to  precedent,  very  much  attached  to  ancient  usages
and  traditions,  valuing  the  liberties,  as  they  called  them,  which

118

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

they  had  wrested  from  what  had  been  superior  force,  with
their  own  right  hands,  preferring  facts  to  theories,  and  feeling
competent  to  deal  with  tyrants  in  the  concrete  rather  than
to  annihilate  tyranny  in  the  abstract  by  a  bold  and  generalizing
phraseology.  Moreover  the  opponents  of  the  Leicester  party
complained  that  the  principal  use  to  which  this  newly  dis¬
covered  u  people  ”  had  been  applied,  was  to  confer  its  absolute
sovereignty  unconditionally  upon  one  man.  The  people  was
to  be  sovereign  in  order  that  it  might  immediately  abdicate
in  favour  of  the  Earl.1

Utrecht,  the  capital  of  the  Leicestrians,  had  already  been
deprived  of  its  constitution.  The  magistracy  was,  according
to  law,  changed  every  year.  A  list  of  candidates  was  fur¬
nished  by  the  retiring  board,  an  equal  number  of  names
was  added  by  the  governor  of  the  Province,  and  from  the
catalogue  thus  composed  the  governor  with  his  council
selected  the  new  magistrates  for  the  year.  But  De  Villiers,
the  governor  of  the  Province,  had  been  made  a  prisoner
by  the  enemy  in  the  last  campaign ;  Count  Moeurs  had
been  appointed  provisional  stadholder  by  the  States  ;  and,
during  his  temporary  absence  on  public  affairs,  the  Lei¬
cestrians  had  seized  upon  the  government,  excluded  all
the  ancient  magistrates,  banished  many  leading  citizens

1  Even  Leicester  himself  was  asto¬
nished  at  the  subserviency  of  the  de¬
mocratic  party.  “I  remember,”  said
his  confidential  secretary,  “that  your
Excellency  told  me  once  a  very  wise
word — that  those  of  Utrecht  had
given  you  more  authority  than  they
could  well  do.”

“Your  council,”  he  said  further,
“  cannot  allow  of  all  the  doings  of  M.
Deventer  and  of  M.  Modet.  True
it  is  that  they  both  and  all  those  of
Utrecht  do  love  you  with  all  their
hearts,  but  they  do  many  things  very
rashly,  and  do  disunite  themselves
from  the  generality  of  the  United
Provinces.  Insomuch  that,  at  this
present,  those  of  the  magistrates  of
Utrecht  have  disunited  themselves
from  the  States  of  their  own  Province,
and  work  every  day  one  against  an¬
other . I  had  written  to  you  by

M.  Modet  and  M.  Dataller,  but  they
both  stole  away  secretly  from  hence,
and  surely  this  proceeding  is  not  very
well  liked  here  of  the  best  sort,  as
though  he  would  have  prevented  the
other  party,  and  make  his  own  reasons
good  first  to  your  Excellency.”  Oth e-
man  to  Leicester,  *7  Jan.  158U  (Br.
Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  p.  *72,  MS.)

“Cupimus  ut  sua  Excellentia  (Lei-
cestrius)  absolute  imperet,  et  pro  sua
discretione,  salva  religione  et  privi-
legiis  suam  Majestatem  non  offend-
entibus.”  So  ran  a  petition,  to  which
Deventer  procured  signatures  among
the  Utrecht  citizens,  and  then  handed
it  to  Leicester.  “  Such  a  government
as  that  would  be,”  says  a  Frisian  con¬
temporary,  “was  never  seen  in  the
Netherlands,  and  could  hardly  be
found  in  Christendom.”  Reyd,  v.  86.

1586.  SUSPICIONS  AS  TO  THE  EARL’S  DESIGNS.  119

from  the  town,  and  installed  an  entirely  new  board,  with
Gerard  Proninck,  called  Deventer,  for  chief  burgomaster,
who  was  a  Brabantine  refugee  just  arrived  in  the  Province,
and  not  eligible  to  office  until  after  ten  years’  residence.1

It  was  not  unnatural  that  the  Netherlander,  who  remem¬
bered  the  scenes  of  bloodshed  and  disorder  produced  by  the
memorable  attempt  of  the  Duke  of  Anjou  to  obtain  possession
of  Antwerp  and  other  cities,  should  be  suspicious  of  Leicester.
Anjou,  too,  had  been  called  to  the  Provinces  by  the  voluntary
action  of  the  States.  He  too  had  been  hailed  as  a  Messiah
and  a  deliverer.  In  him  too  had  unlimited  confidence  been
reposed,  and  he  had  repaid  their  affection  and  their  gratitude
by  a  desperate  attempt  to  obtain  the  control  of  their  chief
cities  by  the  armed  hand,  and  thus  to  constitute  himself
absolute  sovereign  of  the  Netherlands.  The  inhabitants  had,
after  a  bloody  contest,  averted  the  intended  massacre  and  the
impending  tyranny  ;  but  it  was  not  astonishing  that — so  very
few  years  having  elapsed  since  those  tragical  events — they
should  be  inclined  to  scan  severely  the  actions  of  the  man
who  had  already  obtained  by  unconstitutional  means  the
mastery  of  a  most  important  city,  and  was  supposed  to  harbour
designs  upon  all.

No  doubt  it  was  a  most  illiberal  and  unwise  policy  for  the
inhabitants  of  the  independent  States  to  exclude  from  office
the  wanderers,  for  conscience’  sake,  from  the  obedient  Pro¬
vinces.  They  should  have  been  welcomed  heart  and  hand
by  those  who  were  their  brethren  in  religion  and  in  the  love
of  freedom.  Moreover,  it  was  notorious  that  Hohenlo,  lieu¬
tenant-general  under  Maurice  of  Nassau,  was  a  German,  and
that  by  the  treaty  with  England,  two  foreigners  sat  in  the
state  council,  while  the  army  swarmed  with  English,  Irish,
and  German  officers  in  high  command.  Nevertheless,  violently
to  subvert  the  constitution  of  a  Province,  and  to  place  in
posts  of  high  responsibility  men  'who  were  ineligible — some
whose  characters  were  suspicious,  and  some  who  were  known

1  Bor,  II.  xxi.  722,  735.  Reyd,  v.  85,  86.  Wagenaar,  yiii.  166,  168.

120

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

to  be  dangerous,  and  to  banish  large  numbers  of  respectable
burghers — was  the  act  of  a  despot.1

Besides  their  democratic  doctrines,  the  Leicestrians  pro¬
claimed  and  encouraged  an  exclusive  and  rigid  Calvinism.

It  would  certainly  be  unjust  and  futile  to  detract  from  the
vast  debt  which  the  republic  owed  to  the  Geneva  Church.
The  reformation  had  entered  the  Netherlands  by  the  Walloon
gate.  The  earliest  and  most  eloquent  preachers,  the  most
impassioned  converts,  the  sublimest  martyrs,  had  lived,
preached,  fought,  suffered,  and  died  with  the  precepts  of
Calvin  in  their  hearts.  The  fire  which  had  consumed  the
last  vestige  of  royal  and  sacerdotal  despotism  throughout  the
independent  republic,  had  been  lighted  by  the  hands  of
Calvinists.  *

Throughout  the  blood-stained  soil  of  France,  too,  the  men  who

1  It  was  especially  unfortunate  that
Leicester  should  fall  so  completely
into  the  control  of  Deventer.  That
subtle  politician  filled  the  governor’s
mind  full  with  spite  against  the  States-
General,  inspiring  him  perpetually
with  jealousy  of  all  bodies  or  indi¬
viduals  that  interfered  with  his  hopes
of  attaining  arbitrary,  perhaps  sove¬
reign  power.  “The  States-General,”
Deventer  whispered  in  Leicester’s
ear,  “are  becoming  more  presumptuous
daily.  They  have  dared  to  retain  our
old  members  to  the  assembly  whom
we  ”  (after  the  municipal  revolution)
“had  recalled.  They  have  released
Paul  Buys.  We  are  all  marvellously
scandalized,  for  truly  these  States
assume  more  jurisdiction  than  was
ever  done  by  the  greatest  tyrant  that
ever  usurped  in  this  land.  You  shall
hear  many  particulars  by  an  agent

which  it  is  best  not  to  write  .

Let  her  Majesty  reflect  that  her's  will
he  the  shame ,  on  her  head  descends  the
scorn ,  and  ruin  to  her  realm  will  he  the
result.  Let  her  hrealc  up  this  con¬
spiracy  by  a  sudden  and  heroic  reso¬
lution,  let  her  send  your  Excellency
hither,  with  plenty  of  money  and  sol¬
diers,  and  we  on  our  side  will  take
care  not  to  be  dishonoured  suddenly,
while  waiting  for  your  return.”

Such  were  the  prudent  counsels

given  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  by  Leices¬
ter’s  chief  adviser,  in  a  moment  full
of  darkness  and  difficulty.  To  seize
by  violence  on  the  cities  of  the  Pro¬
vinces,  to  subvert  their  ancient  con¬
stitutions,  to  enact,  in  short,  all  that
had  been  done  or  attempted  by  former
tyrants,  wa3  the  object  proposed  to
the  English  sovereign  and  the  English
governor.  G.  de  Proninck  to  Lei¬
cester,  20  Jan-.  1587.  (Br.  Mus.,  Galba
C.  xi.  95,  MS.)

Otheman,  too,  boldly  assured  the
Queen,  in  a  letter  addressed  directly
to  her  Majesty,  that  the  “root  of  the
whole  evil  in  the  Netherlands  was  the
ochlocracy  and  bad  government  of  the
State,”  and  that  the  reformation  could
only  come  from  her.  He  was  also  of
opinion  that  the  country  had  been
badly  handled  for  a  long  time.  “I
believe,  madam,”  he  observed,  “that
'  this  sick  person  has  had  so  many
diseases  for  twenty  years,  and  has  had
so  many  different  doctors — some  with¬
out  experience  and  others  without
fidelity — that  the  more  despairing  the
patient  is  of  his  own  case,  the  more
honour  it  will  be  to  the  one  who  cures
him ;  and  ’tis  your  Majesty  alone  who
can  now  administer  the  remedy.”
Otheman  to  the  Queen,  15  Feb.  1587.
(Br.  Mus.,  Galba  C.  xi.  p.  263,  MS.)

1586.  EXTEEME  VIEWS  OF  THE  CALVINISTS.  121

were  fighting  the  same  great  battle  as  were  the  Netherlander
against  Philip  II.  and  the  Inquisition,  the  valiant  cavaliers  of
Dauphiny  and  Provence,  knelt  on  the  ground,  before  the
battle,  smote  their  iron  breasts  with  their  mailed  hands,
uttered  a  Calvinistic  prayer,  sang  a  psalm  of  Marot,  and  then
charged  upon  Guise,  or  upon  J oyeuse,  under  the  white  plume
of  the  Bearnese.  And  it  was  on  the  Calvinist  weavers  and
clothiers  of  Rochelle  that  the  great  Prince  relied  in  the  hour
of  danger  as  much  as  on  his  mountain  chivalry.  In  England
too,  the  seeds  of  liberty,  wrapped  up  in  Calvinism  and  hoarded
through  many  trying  years,  were  at  last  destined  to  float  over
land  and  sea,  and  to  bear  large  harvests  of  temperate  freedom
for  great  commonwealths,  which  were  still  unborn.  Never¬
theless  there  was  a  growing  aversion  in  many  parts  of  the
States  for  the  rigid  and  intolerant  spirit  of  the  reformed
religion.  There  were  many  men  in  Holland  who  had  already
imbibed  the  true  lesson — the  only  one  worth  learning  of  the
reformation — liberty  of  thought ;  but  toleration  in  the  eyes  of
the  extreme  Calvinistic  party  was  as  great  a  vice  as  it  could
be  in  the  estimation  of  Papists.  To  a  favoured  few  of  other
habits  of  thought,  it  had  come  to  be  regarded  as  a  virtue  ;  but
the  day  was  still  far  distant  when  men  were  to  scorn  the  very
word  toleration  as  an  insult  to  the  dignity  of  man  ;  as  if  for
any  human  being  or  set  of  human  beings,  in  caste,  class,
synod,  or  church,  the  right  could  even  in  imagination  he
conceded  of  controlling  the  consciences  of  their  fellow-
creatures.

But  it  was  progress  for  the  sixteenth  century  that  there
were  individuals,  and  prominent  individuals,  who  dared  to
proclaim  liberty  of  conscience  for  all.  William  of  Orange
was  a  Calvinist,  sincere  and  rigid,  but  he  denounced  all
oppression  of  religion,  and  opened  wide  the  doors  of  the
commonwealth  to  Papists,  Lutherans,  and  Anabaptists  alike.
The  Earl  of  Leicester  was  a  Calvinist,  most  rigid  in  tenet,
most  edifying  of  conversation,  the  acknowledged  head  of  the
Puritan  party  of  England,  but  he  was  intolerant  and  was
influenced  only  by  the  most  intolerant  of  his  sect.  Certainly

122

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

it  would  have  required  great  magnanimity  upon  his  part  to
assume  a  friendly  demeanour  towards  the  Papists.  It  is
easier  for  us,  in  more  favoured  ages,  to  rise  to  the  heights
of  philosophical  abstraction,  than  for  a  man  placed  as  was
Leicester,  in  the  front  rank  of  a  mighty  battle,  in  which
the  triumph  of  either  religion  seemed  to  require  the  bodily
annihilation  of  all  its  adversaries.  He  believed  that  the
success  of  a  Catholic  conspiracy  against  the  life  of  Elizabeth
or  of  a  Spanish  invasion  of  England,  would  raise  Mary  to  the
throne  and  consign  himself  to  the  scaffold.  He  believed  that
the  subjugation  of  the  independent  Netherlands  would  place
the  Spaniards  instantly  in  England,  and  he  frequently  received
information,  true  or  false,  of  Popish  plots  that  were  ever
hatching  in  various  parts  of  the  Provinces  against  the  English
Queen.1  It  was  not  surprising,  therefore,  although  it  was
unwise,  that  he  should  incline  his  ear  most  seriously  to  those
who  counselled  severe  measures  not  only  against  Papists,
hut  against  those  who  were  not  persecutors  of  Papists,  and
that  he  should  allow  himself  to  he  guided  hy  adventurers,
who  wore  the  mask  of  religion  only  that  they  might  plunder
the  exchequer  and  roh  upon  the  highway.

Under  the  administration  of  this  extreme  party,  therefore,
the  Papists  were  maltreated,  disfranchised,  banished,  and
plundered.2  The  distribution  of  the  heavy  war-taxes,  more

1  “  May  it  please  your  sacred  Ma¬
jesty,”  wrote  Wilkes,  “there  is  come
into  my  hands  the  copy  of  a  letter
written  by  the  Prince  of  Parma  to  the
Bishop  of  Liege,  dated  24th  of
last  month ;  by  the  which,  among
other  things,  doth  appear,  that  there
is  yet  some  bloody  purpose  in  hand  to
be  executed  upon  your  Majesty’s
sacred  person,  as  by  the  same  here

inclosed  doth  appear . It  is

signified  by  the  letter,  that,  although
the  exterior  of  the  treasons  and  prac¬
tices  plotted  and  contrived  against
your  Majesty  be  discovered,  yet  the
core  and  marrow  thereof  is  not  as  yet
uncovered  or  known,  whereby  your
enemies  doubt  not  but  to  achieve  in
time  their  wicked  and  horrible  pur¬

poses  against  you.”  Wilkes  to  the
Queen,  17  Dec.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

It  can  hardly  excite  surprise  that
the  Queen,  receiving  almost  every
week  such  intimations  out  of  the
Spanish  Netherlands  of  attempts
against  her  life,  should  desire  to  deal
severely  with  seminary  priests  and
their  associates  coming  from  those
regions.

3  Yet,  strange  to  say,  it  was  Lord
Buckhurst’s  opinion  that  the  oppo¬
nents  of  the  Catholic  religion  were
but  a  small  minority  of  the  Dutch
people.  “Eor  the  commonwealth  of
these  Provinces,”  wrote  that  envoy,
“consisting  of  divers  parts  and  pro¬
fessions,  as,  namely,  Protestants,  Puri-

1586.  POLITICAL  AMBITION  OF  THE  CHURCH.  123

than  two-thirds  of  which  were  raised  in  Holland  only,  was
confided  to  foreigners,  and  regulated  mainly  at  Utrecht,  where
not  one-tenth  part  of  the  same  revenue  was  collected.  This
naturally  excited  the  wrath  of  the  merchants  and  manu¬
facturers  of  Holland  and  the  other  Provinces,  who  liked  not
that  these  hard-earned  and  lavishly-paid  subsidies  should  be
meddled  with  by  any  but  the  cleanest  hands.

The  clergy,  too,  arrogated  a  direct  influence  in  political
affairs.  Their  demonstrations  were  opposed  by  the  anti-
Leicestrians,  who  cared  not  to  see  a  Geneva  theocracy  in  the
place  of  the  vanished  Papacy.  They  had  as  little  reverence  in
secular  affairs  for  Calvinistic  deacons  as  for  the  college  of
cardinals,  and  would  as  soon  accept  the  infallibility  of
Sixtus  Y.  as  that  of  Herman  Modet.  The  reformed  clergy
who  had  dispossessed  and  confiscated  the  property  of  the
ancient  ecclesiastics  who  once  held  a  constitutional  place  in
the  Estates  of  Utrecht — although  many  of  those  individuals
were  now  married  and  had  embraced  the  reformed  religion —
who  had  demolished,  and  sold  at  public  auction,  for  12,300
florins,1  the  time-honoured  cathedral  where  the  earliest
Christians  of  the  Netherlands  had  worshipped,  and  St.

tans,  Anabaptists,  and  Spanish  hearts,
which  are  no  small  number,  it  is  most
certain,  that,  dividing  this  in  five
parts,  the  Protestants  and  Puritans  do
hardly  contain  even  one  part  of  five;
although,  at  this  present,  the  Pro¬
testants  and  Puritans,  by  having  the
rule  and  sovereignty  in  their  hands,
do  wholly  wage  and  command  the
captains  and  soldiers.”  Buckhurst  to
the  Queen,  27  May,  1587.  Printed  in
‘Cabala,  or  Mysteries  of  State,’  p.  37.

And  again,  in  a  letter  to  Walsing-
ham,  the  same  diplomatist  remarks
that  the  real  object  of  the  revolt  of
the  Netherlanders  was  not  to  defend
their  religious  but  their  civil  freedom,
and  that  Catholics  and  Protestants
were  all  united  to  that  end.  “If  her
Majesty,”  he  said,  “should  not  only
refuse  the  sovereignty,  but  not  give
sufficient  aid,  it  is  in  a  manner  certain
that  the  people,  not  being  the  fifth
man  a  Protestant ,  and  not  making

their  war  in  truth  for  religion,  but
for  their  country  and  liberty  only,  and
to  resist  the  tyranny  of  the  Spaniards,
whose  hatred  is  ingraft  in  the  hearts
of  them  all,  when  they  shall  see  her
Majesty  fail  in  their  defence,  will  turn
and  revolt  to  the  enemy,”  &c.  &c.
Ibid.  p.  11,  13.  13  April,  1587.

These  sweeping  statements  may  not
be  strictly  accurate,  but  there  is  no
doubt  that  Buckhurst  was  struck  by
the  general  and  growing  feeling  of
mutual  toleration  among  the  adherents
to  the  various  forms  of  religion  in
Holland,  and  by  the  instinct  which
prompted  the  whole  commonwealth
to  strike  for  civil  and  religious  liberty
in  one.  Compare  Kluit,  ‘Holl.  Staats-
reg.’  II.  360,  who  states  expressly  that
the  majority  of  every  town  and  village
in  the  Provinces  were,  in  heart,  faith¬
ful  to  the  Roman  Catholic  religion.

1  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  108.

124

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

Willibrod  had  ministered,  were  roundly  rebuked,  on  more
than  one  occasion,  by  the  blunt  Hollanders  for  meddling  with
matters  beyond  their  sphere.1

1  Dor,  III.  xxiii.  108.

“  There  is  a  controversy,”  wrote
Wilkes,  “  within  the  town  and  pro¬
vince  of  Utrecht  (their  estate  being
compounded  of  the  nobility,  clergy,
and  towns,  containing  three  several
members)  between  the  towns  and  the
clergy,  whom  the  towns  have  inhibited
to  appear  any  more  in  the  public
assemblies,  meaning  to  cass  them
upon  pretence  that  the  clergy,  their
third  member,  is  a  hindrance  to  their
good  proceedings.  The  nobility  taketh
part  with  the  clergy,  and  do  not  think
it  fit  nor  agreeable  with  order  or
justice  that  one  third  member,  inferior
to  the  other  two,  should  take  upon
him  to  depose  the  first  member,  being
the  clergy,  without  the  authority  of
the  sovereign  governor  or  the  general
assent  of  the  Union.  At  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  garboile,  it  was  thought
fit  by  this  council  to  depute  the  Count
Moeurs,  Mons.  de  Meetkerk,  and
Doctor  Hottman,  persons  of  judgment,

to  hear  the  controversy . and

as  they  were  travailing  to  reduce  them
to  an  accord,  there  came  a  letter  to
the  captains  of  the  bourgeoisie  of  the
town  of  Utrecht  (being  the  principal
movers  of  this  dissension),  written  by
Mr.  Herle,  by  which  they  have  taken
heart  to  persist  obstinately  in  their
purpose,  persuading  themselves  that
their  proceedings  will  be  avowed  by
her  Majesty.  And  albeit  this  letter
do  not  directly  touch  the  matter,  yet
the  large  promises  he  maketh  in  her
Majesty’s  name  of  her  absolute  pur¬
pose  to  embrace  their  cause,  ‘  avec  la
pleine  main,’  as  he  termeth  it,  hath
been  occasion  that  they  have  uttered
in  public  speeches  that  the  letters  of
her  Majesty’s  ambassador  Herle  hath
given  them  sufficient  hope  that  her
Majesty  will  not  mislike  of  their
doings  in  going  about  to  banish
Popery  out  of  that  Province,  which
they  make  to  be  a  show  and  counte¬
nance  of  their  dealings;  but,  as  I  am
informed,  the  most  part  of  those  that
are  of  this  clergy,  and  do  hold  the
ecclesiastical  livings,  are  married  and
of  the  religion.  And  in  truth,  as  far

as  I  can  perceive,  their  quarrel  is  not
against  the  persons  of  the  ecclesiastics,
because  they  are  contented  that  the
persons  shall  continue  in  their  assem¬
blies,  but  against  the  livings,  which
they  mean  to  convert  to  some  other
uses.  And  although,  for  mine  own
poor  opinion,  I  think  the  church-
livings  were  most  fitly  to  be  converted
to  the  defence  of  the  public  cause,
yet  the  manner  of  the  doing  thereof
should  be  speedily  prevented,  for  all
men  of  judgment  here  are  of  opinion
that  if  it  be  not  stayed,  it  will  hazard
the  loss  of  the  town,  and  consequently
of  the  whole  Province.  I  am  informed
that  the  magistrates  of  Utrecht  have
despatched  towards  my  lord-general
and  her  Majesty  one  Herman  Modet,
their  chief  minister,  to  acquaint  them
with  the  matter,  and  to  make  good
their  proceedings.  The  said  Modet,
by  the  report  of  M.  de  Yilliers,  the
minister,  and  Saravia,  a  great  learned
preacher  of  Leyden,  is  taken  to  bo
the  greatest  mutyne  in  all  these  coun¬
tries  ;  and  it  is  avouched  by  them  and
others  of  the  best  condition  that  he
was  the  only  occasion  of  the  loss  of
Ghent,  upon  the  like  matter  begun  by
him  within  the  town.  The  Prince  of
Orange,  in  his  time,  could  never  brook
the  same  Modet,  and,  as  the  Count
Maurice  telleth  me,  he  did  always
oppose  himself  against  the  counsel
and  designs  of  the  Prince  his  father.
I  thought  it  not  unfit  to  give  you  this
taste  of  the  condition  of  Modet,  be¬
cause  I  know  that  my  Lord  North,
Mr.  Killigrew,  and  Mr.  Webbe  have
greatly  supported  him  in  his  humours
at  Utrecht,  and  it  is  not  to  be  doubted
that  they  will  do  the  like  at  home.”
Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  Dec.  24,  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Such  letters,  written  on  the  spot,
by  a  man  thoroughly  acquainted  with
Netherland  politics,  and  the  expe¬
rienced  faithful  representative  of  her
Majesty  in  the  state-council,  explain
the  intrigues  and  the  instruments  of
the  Leicestrian  party.  It  was  by
honest  and  lucid  expositions  like
these,  that  the  writer  incurred  the

1586.

ANTAGONISM  OP  THE  CHURCH  AND  STATES.

125

The  party  of  the  States-General,  as  opposed  to  the  Leicester
party,  was  guided  by  the  statesmen  of  Holland.  At  a
somewhat  later  period  was  formed  the  States-right  party,
which  claimed  sovereignty  for  each  Province,  and  by  necessary
consequence  the  hegemony  throughout  the  confederacy,  for
Holland.  At  present  the  doctrine  maintained  was  that  the
sovereignty  forfeited  by  Philip  had  naturally  devolved  upon
the  States-General.  The  statesmen  of  this  party  repudiated
the  calumny  that  it  had  therefore  lapsed  into  the  hands  of
half  a  dozen  mechanics  and  men  of  low  degree.  The  States
of  each  Province  were,  they  maintained,  composed  of  nobles
and  country-gentlemen,  as  representing  the  agricultural
interest,  and  of  deputies  from  the  c  vroedschappen/  or  mu¬
nicipal  governments,  of  every  city  and  smallest  towm.

Such  men  as  Adrian  Yan  der  Werff,  the  heroic  burgo¬
master  of  Leyden  during  its  famous  siege,  John  Yan  der
Does,  statesman,  orator,  soldier,  poet,  Adolphus  Meetkerke,
judge,  financier,  politician,  Carl  Eoorda,  Noel  de  Caron,
diplomatist  of  most  signal  ability,  Floris  Thin,  Paul  Buys,
and  Olden-Barneveld,  with  many  others,  who  would  have  done
honour  to  the  legislative  assemblies  and  national  councils  in
any  country  or  any  age,  were  constantly  returned  as  members
of  the  different  vroedschaps  in  the  commonwealth.

So  far  from  its  being  true  then  that  half  a  dozen  ignorant
mechanics  had  usurped  the  sovereignty  of  the  Provinces,  after
the  abjuration  of  the  Spanish  King,  it  may  be  asserted  in
general  terms,  that  of  the  eight  hundred  thousand  inhabitants
of  Holland  at  least  eight  hundred  persons  were  always
engaged  in  the  administration  of  public  affairs,  that  these
individuals  were  perpetually  exchanged  for  others,  and  that
those  whose  names  became  most  prominent  in  the  politics  of
the  day  were  remarkable  for  thorough  education,  high  talents,
and  eloquence  with  tongue  and  pen.1  It  was  acknowledged
by  the  leading  statesmen  of  England  and  France,  on  repeated

deadly  hatred  of  the  Earl,  and  was  in
danger  of  losing  his  life.  (Compare
Bor  and  Reyd,  ubi  sup.  Le  Petit,  II.

xiv.  533.  Wagenaar,  viii.  168.)

1  Kluit,  ‘  Holl.  Staatsregering,’  II.
203.

126

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XH.

occasions  throughout  the  sixteenth  century,  that  the  diplo¬
matists  and  statesmen  of  the  Netherlands  were  even  more
than  a  match  for  any  politicians  who  were  destined  to
encounter  them,  and  the  profound  respect  which  Leicester
expressed  for  these  solid  statesmen,  these  u  substantial,  wise,
well-languaged  ”  men,  these  “  big  fellows/'  so  soon  as  he
came  in  contact  with  them,  and  before  he  began  to  hate  them
for  outwitting  him,  has  already  appeared.  They  were  gene¬
rally  men  of  the  people,  horn  without  any  of  the  accidents  of
fortune  ;  hut  the  leaders  had  studied  in  the  common  schools,
and  later  in  the  noble  universities  of  a  land  where  to  he
learned  and  eloquent  was  fast  becoming  almost  as  great  an
honour  as  to  he  wealthy  or  high  horn.

The  executive,  the  legislative,  and  the  judiciary  depart¬
ments  were  more  carefully  and  scientifically  separated  than
could  perhaps  have  been  expected  in  that  age.  The  lesser
municipal  courts,  in  which  city-senators  presided,  were
subordinate  to  the  supreme  court  of  Holland,  whose  officers
were  appointed  by  the  stadholders  and  council  ;  the  supplies
were  in  the  hands  of  the  States-Provincial,  and  the  supreme
administrative  authority  was  confided  to  a  stadholder  appointed
by  the  States.

The  States-G-eneral  were  constituted  of  similar  materials
to  those  of  which  the  States-Provincial  were  constructed,  and
the  same  individuals  were  generally  prominent  in  both.
They  were  deputies  appointed  by  the  Provincial  Estates,  were
in  truth  rather  more  like  diplomatic  envoys  than  senators,
were  generally  hound  very  strictly  by  instructions,  and  were
often  obliged,  by  the  jealousy  springing  from  the  States-right
principle,  to  refer  to  their  constituents,  on  questions  when
the  times  demanded  a  sudden  decision,  and  when  the  necessary
delay  was  inconvenient  and  dangerous.

In  religious  matters,  the  States-party,  to  their  honour,
already  leaned  to  a  wide  toleration.  Not  only  Catholics  were
not  burned,  but  they  were  not  banished,  and  very  large
numbers  remained  in  the  territory,  and  were  quite  undisturbed
in  religious  matters,  within  their  own  doors.  There  were

1586.  THE  STATES  INCLINED  TO  TOLERANCE.  127

even  men  employed  in  public  affairs  who  were  suspected  of
papistical  tendencies,  although  their  hostility  to  Spain  and
their  attachment  to  their  native  land  could  not  fairly  be
disputed.  The  leaders  of  the  States-party  had  a  rooted
aversion  to  any  political  influence  on  the  part  of  the  clergy
of  any  denomination  whatever.  Disposed  to  be  lenient  to  all
forms  of  worship,  they  were  disinclined  to  an  established
church,  but  still  more  opposed  to  allowing  church-influence
in  secular  affairs.  As  a  matter  of  course,  political  men  with
such  bold  views  in  religious  matters  were  bitterly  assailed
by  their  rigid  opponents.  Barneveld,  with  his  “  nil  scire
tutissima  fifl.es, ”  was  denounced  as  a  disguised  Catholic  or  an
infidel,  and  as  for  Paul  Buys,  he  was  a  “  bolsterer  of  Papists,
an  atheist,  a  devil/’  as  it  has  long  since  been  made  manifest.

Nevertheless  these  men  believed  that  they  understood  the
spirit  of  their  country  and  of  the  age.  In  encouragement  to
an  expanding  commerce,  the  elevation  and  education  of  the
masses,  the  toleration  of  all  creeds,  and  a  wide  distribution  of
political  functions  and  rights,  they  looked  for  the  salvation  of
their  nascent  republic  from  destruction,  and  the  maintenance
of  the  true  interests  of  the  peojfle.  They  were  still  loyal  to
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  desirous  that  she  should  accept  the
sovereignty  of  the  Provinces.  But  they  were  determined
that  the  sovereignty  should  be  a  constitutional  one,  founded
upon  and  limited  by  the  time-honoured  laws  and  traditions
of  their  commonwealth  ;  for  they  recognised  the  value  of  a
free  republic  with  an  hereditary  chief,  however  anomalous
it  might  in  theory  appear.  They  knew  that  in  Utrecht
the  Leicestrian  party  were  about  to  offer  the  Queen  the
sovereignty  of  their  Province,  ivithout  conditions ,  but  they
were  determined  that  neither  Queen  Elizabeth  nor  any  other
monarch  should  ever  reign  in  the  Netherlands,  except  under
conditions  to  be  very  accurately  defined  and  well  secured.

Thus  contrasted,  then,  were  the  two  great  parties  in  the
Netherlands,  at  the  conclusion  of  Leicester’s  first  year  of
administration.  It  may  easily  be  understood  that  it  was  not
an  auspicious  moment  to  leave  the  country  without  a  chief.

128

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

The  strength  of  the  States-party  lay  in  Holland,  Zeeland,
Friesland.  The  main  stay  of  the  democratic  or  Leicester
faction  was  in  the  city  of  Utrecht,  hut  the  Earl  had  many
partizans  in  Gelderland,  Friesland,  and  in  Overyssel,  the
capital  of  which  Province,  the  wealthy  and  thriving  Deventer,
second  only  in  the  republic  to  Amsterdam  for  commercial
and  political  importance,  had  been  but  recently  secured  for
the  Provinces  by  the  vigorous  measures  of  Sir  William
Pelham.

The  condition  of  the  republic  and  of  the  Spanish  Provinces
was,  at  that  moment,  most  signally  contrasted.  If  the  effects
of  despotism  and  of  liberty  could  ever  be  exhibited  at  a
single  glance,  it  was  certainly  only  necessary  to  look  for  a
moment  at  the  picture  of  the  obedient  and  of  the  rebel
Netherlands.

Since  the  fall  of  Antwerp,  the  desolation  of  Brabant,
Flanders,  and  of  the  Walloon  territories  had  become  com¬
plete.  The  King  had  recovered  the  great  commercial
capital,  but  its  commerce  was  gone.  The  Scheldt,  which,  till
recently,  had  been  the  chief  mercantile  river  in  the  world,
had  become  as  barren  as  if  its  fountains  had  suddenly  dried
up.  It  was  as  if  it  no  longer  flowed  to  the  ocean,  for  its
mouth  was  controlled  by  Flushing.  Thus  Antwerp  was
imprisoned  and  paralyzed.  Its  docks  and  basins,  where
2500  ships  had  once  been  counted,  were  empty,  grass  was
growing  in  its  streets,  its  industrious  population  had  vanished,
and  the  Jesuits  had  returned  in  swarms.  And  the  same
spectacle  was  presented  by  Ghent,  Bruges,  Valenciennes,
Tournay,  and  those  other  fair  cities,  which  had  once  been
types  of  vigorous  industry  and  tumultuous  life.  The  sea-coast
was  in  the  hands  of  two  rising  commercial  powers,  the
great  and  free  commonwealths  of  the  future.  Those  powers
were  acting  in  concert,  and  commanding  the  traffic  of  the
world,  while  the  obedient  Provinces  were  excluded  from  all
foreign  intercourse  and  all  markets,  as  the  result  of  their
obedience.  Commerce,  manufactures,  agriculture,  were  dying
lingering  deaths.  The  thrifty  farms,  orchards,  and  gardens,

1586.  DESOLATION  OF  THE  OBEDIENT  PROVINCES.  129

which  had  been  a  proverb  and  wonder  of  industry  were
becoming  wildernesses.  The  demand  for  their  produce  by
the  opulent  and  thriving  cities,  which  had  been  the  work¬
shops  of  the  world,  was  gone.  Foraging  bands  of  Spanish
and  Italian  mercenaries  had  succeeded  to  the  famous  tramp
of  the  artizans  and  mechanics,  which  had  often  been  likened
to  an  army,  but  these  new  customers  were  less  profitable  to  the
gardeners  and  farmers.  The  clothiers,  the  fullers,  the  tapestry-
workers,  the  weavers,  the  cutlers,  had  all  wandered  away,  and
the  cities  of  Holland,  Friesland,  and  of  England,  were  growing
skilful  and  rich  by  the  lessons  and  the  industry  of  the  exiles
to  whom  they  afforded  a  home.  There  were  villages  and
small  towns  in  the  Spanish  Netherlands  that  had  been  literally
depopulated.  Large  districts  of  country  had  gone  to  waste,
and  cane-brakes  and  squalid  morasses  usurped  the  place  of
yellow  harvest-fields.  The  fox,  the  wild  boar,  and  the  wolf,
infested  the  abandoned  homes  of  the  peasantry ;  children
could  not  walk  in  safety  in  the  neighbourhood  even  of  the
larger  cities ;  wolves  littered  their  young  in  the  deserted
farm-houses  ;  two  hundred  persons,  in  the  winter  of  1586-7.
were  devoured  by  wild  beasts  in  the  outskirts  of  Ghent.1
Such  of  the  remaining  labourers  and  artizans  as  had  not  been
converted  into  soldiers,  found  their  most  profitable  employ¬
ment  as  brigands,  so  that  the  portion  of  the  population
spared  by  war  and  emigration  was  assisting  the  enemy  in
preying  upon  their  native  country.  Brandschatzung,  burglary,
highway-robbery,  and  murder,  had  become  the  chief  branches
of  industry  among  the  working  classes.  Nobles  and  wealthy
burghers  had  been  changed  to  paupers  and  mendicants.
Many  a  family  of  ancient  lineage,  and  once  of  large  posses¬
sions,  could  be  seen  begging  their  bread,  at  the  dusk  of
evening,  in  the  streets  of  great  cities,  where  they  had  once
exercised  luxurious  hospitality ;  and  they  often  begged  in
vain.2

1  Bor,  II.  xxii.  984,  985.  Meteren,
xiv.  253.  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,  251.
Wagenaar,  viii.  224,  225.  Van  Wyn
op  Wagen,  viii.  67.

VOL.  II. — K

“  The  bedsteads  of  the  abandoned
cottages,”  says  Meteren,  “swarmed
with  little  wolves,”  ubi  sup.

3  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,  Wagenaar.

130

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

For  while  such  was  the  forlorn  aspect  of  the  country — and
the  portrait,  faithfully  sketched  from  many  contemporary
pictures,  has  not  been  exaggerated  in  any  of  its  dark  details —
a  great  famine  smote  the  land  with  its  additional  scourge.
The  whole  population,  soldiers  and  brigands,  Spaniards  and
Flemings,  beggars  and  workmen,  were  in  danger  of  perishing
together.  Where  the  want  of  employment  had  been  so
great  as  to  cause  a  rapid  depopulation,  where  the  demand
for  labour  had  almost  entirely  ceased,  it  was  a  necessary
result,  that  during  the  process,  juices  should  be  low,  even
in  the  juesence  of  foreign  soldiery,  and  despite  the  inflamed
profits,  which  such  capitalists  as  remained  required,  by  way
not  only  of  profit  but  insurance,  in  such  troublous  times.
Accordingly,  for  the  last  year  or  two,  the  price  of  rye  at
Antwerp  and  Brussels  had  been  one  florin  for  the  veer  tel
(three  bushels)  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  pounds  ;  that  of
wheat,  about  one-third  of  a  florin  more.  Five  pounds  of  rye,
therefore,  were  worth  one  penny  sterling,  reckoning,  as  was
then  usual,  two  shillings  to  the  florin.  A  pound  weight  of
wheat  was  worth  about  one  farthing.1  Yet  this  was  forty-one
years  after  the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Potosi  (a.d.  1545),
and  full  sixteen  years  after  the  epoch,  from  which  is  dated
that  rapid  fall  in  the  value  of  silver,  which  in  the  course  of
seventy  years,  caused  the  average  juice  of  corn  and  of  all
other  commodities,  to  be  tripled  or  even  quadrupled.  At
that  very  moment  the  average  cost  of  wheat  in  England  was
sixty-four  shillings  the  quarter,  or  about  seven  and  sixpence
sterling  the  bushel,2  and  in  the  markets  of  Holland,  which  in

1  A  contemporary  chronicler  has
preserved  a  droll  medley  of  prices  in
the  Netherlands  in  the  year  1548,  but
one  which,  if  accurate,  furnishes  a
striking  instance  of  the  low  money-
valuation  of  the  various  necessaries  of
life,  before  the  great  revolution  in  the
value  of  silver  had  begun.  For  one
hundred  and  sixty  florins  (16 1.)  there
were  bought  a  last  (108  bushels,  or  80
bushels  English)  of  wheat,  a  last  of
rye,  a  last  of  barley,  a  last  of  oats,  a

quarter  hundred- weight  of  butter,  300
pounds  of  lard,  one  hundred  cheeses,
a  doublet,  a  pair  of  shoes,  a  bonnet,
a  bag,  a  barrel  of  excellent  beer,  and
there  were  six  stuyvers  over  for  drink-
money.  “And  let  this  serve  as  a
memorial,”  he  piously  observes,  “of
how  much  the  wrath  of  God  and  how
much  his  benignity  can  do  for  us.”
Met.  xiv.  253.

3  Tables  in  McCulloch’s  edition  of
Adam  Smith,  p.  117.

1586.

PAUPERISM  AND  FAMINE.

131

truth  regulated  all  others,  the  same  prices  prevailed.1  A
bushel  of  wheat  in  England  was  equal  therefore  to  eight
bushels  in  Brussels.

Thus  the  silver  mines,  which  were  the  Spanish  King's
property,  had  produced  their  effect  everywhere  more  signally
than  within  the  obedient  Provinces.  The  South  American
specie  found  its  way  to  Philip's  coffers,  thence  to  the  pay¬
masters  of  his  troops  in  Flanders,  and  thence  to  the  com¬
mercial  centres  of  Holland  and  England.  Those  countries,
first  to  feel  and  obey  the  favourable  expanding  impulse  of
the  age,  were  moving  surely  and  steadily  on  before  it  to
greatness.  Prices  were  rising  with  unexampled  rapidity,  the
precious  metals  "were  comparatively  a  drug,  a  world-wide
commerce,  such  as  had  never  been  dreamed  of,  had  become
an  every-day  concern,  the  arts  and  sciences  and  a  most
generous  culture  in  famous  schools  and  universities,  which
had  been  founded  in  the  midst  of  tumult  and  bloodshed,
characterized  the  republic,  and  the  golden  age  of  English
poetry,  which  was  to  make  the  Elizabethan  era  famous  through
all  time,  had  already  begun.

In  the  Spanish  Netherlands  the  newly-found  treasure
served  to  pay  the  only  labourers  required  in  a  subjugated  and
almost  deserted  country,  the  pikemen  of  Spain  and  Italy,  and
the  reiters  of  Germany.  Prices  could  not  sustain  themselves
in  the  face  of  depopulation.  Where  there  was  no  security  for
property,  no  home-market,  no  foreign  intercourse,  industrial
pursuits  had  become  almost  impossible.  The  small  demand
for  labour  had  caused  it,  as  it  were,  to  disappear  altogether.
All  men  had  become  beggars,  brigands,  or  soldiers.  A
temporary  reaction  followed.  There  were  no  producers.
Suddenly  it  was  discovered  that  no  corn  had  been  planted,
and  that  there  was  no  harvest.  A  famine  was  the  inevitable

1  Bor,  Meteren.  A  veertel  is  about
three  bushels.  A  florin  was  then
always  reckoned  at  two  shillings  ster¬
ling.  The  price  of  a  bushel  of  rye
at  Brussels  and  Antwerp  was  there¬
fore  eightpence;  that  of  a  bushel  of

wheat  about  one-third  more,  say  eleven¬
pence,  or  seven  and  fourpence  for  tho
quarter  (eight  bushels),  about  an  eighth
or  ninth  of  the  price  in  England  and
Holland.

132

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XII.

result.  Prices  then  rose  with  most  frightful  rapidity.  The
veertel  of  rye,  which  in  the  previous  year  had  been  worth
one  florin  at  Brussels  and  Antwerp,  rose  in  the  winter  of
1586-7  to  twenty,  twenty-two,  and  even  twenty-four  florins  ;
and  wheat  advanced  from  one  and  one-third  florin  to  thirty-
two  florins  the  veertel.1  Other  articles  were  proportionally
increased  in  market-value ;  hut  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that
mutton  was  quoted  in  the  midst  of  the  famine  at  nine  stuy  vers
(a  little  more  than  ninepence  sterling)  the  pound,  and  beef
at  fivepence,  while  a  single  cod-fish  sold  for  twenty-two
florins.2  Thus  wheat  was  worth  sixpence  sterling  the  pound
weight  (reckoning  the  veertel  of  one  hundred  and  twenty
pounds  at  thirty  florins),  which  was  a  penny  more  than  the
price  of  a  pound  of  beef ;  while  an  ordinary  fish  was  equal  in
value  to  one  hundred  and  six  pounds  of  beef.  No  better
evidence  could  be  given  that  the  obedient  Provinces  were
relapsing  into  barbarism,  than  that  the  only  agricultural  indus¬
try  then  practised  was  to  allow  what  flocks  and  herds  were
remaining  to  graze  at  will  over  the  ruined  farms  and
gardens,  and  that  their  fishermen  were  excluded  from  the
sea.

The  evil  cured  itself,  however,  and,  before  the  expiration
of  another  year,  prices  were  again  at  their  previous  level.
The  land  was  sufficiently  cultivated  to  furnish  the  necessaries
of  life  for  a  diminishing  population,  and  the  supply  of  labour
was  more  than  enough  for  the  languishing  demand.  Wheat
was  again  at  tenpence  the  bushel,  and  other  commodities
valued  in  like  proportion,  and  far  below  the  market-prices  in
Holland  and  England.

On  the  other  hand,  the  prosperity  of  the  republic  was
rapidly  increasing.  Notwithstanding  the  war,  which  had
been  raging  for  a  terrible  quarter  of  a  century  without  any
interruption,  population  was  increasing,  property  rapidly

1  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,  ubi  sup.  A
last  of  rye  is  quoted  by  Meteren  (xiv.
253v0)  at  800  florins.  A  last  is  equal
to  80  bushels,  English  measure.  This
is  just  ten  florins,  or  one  pound  sterling,

the  bushel  for  rye,  and  one-third  more,
or  twenty-seven  shillings — that  is  to
say,  101.  16s.  the  quarter  for  wheat.

2  Bor,  Hoofd,  Meteren,  ubi  sup.

3  Ibid.

1586.

PROSPERITY  OF  THE  REPUBLIC.

133

advancing  in  value,  labour  in  active  demand.  Famine  was
impossible  to  a  state  which  commanded  the  ocean.  No  corn
grew  in  Holland  and  Zeeland,  but  their  ports  were  the
granary  of  the. world.  The  fisheries  were  a  mine  of  wealth
almost  equal  to  the  famous  Potosi,  with  which  the  commercial
world  was  then  ringing.  Their  commerce  with  the  Baltic
nations  was  enormous.  In  one  month  eight  hundred  vessels
left  their  havens  for  the  eastern  ports  alone.  There  was  also
no  doubt  whatever — and  the  circumstance  was  a  source  of
constant  complaint  and  of  frequent  ineffective  legislation —
that  the  rebellious  Provinces  were  driving  a  most  profitable
trade  with  Spain  and  the  Spanish  possessions,  in  spite  of  their
revolutionary  war.  The  mines  of  Peru  and  Mexico  were  as
fertile  for  the  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders  as  for  the  Spaniards
themselves.  The  war  paid  for  the  war,  one  hundred  large
frigates  were  constantly  cruising  along  the  coasts  to  protect
the  fast-growing  traffic,  and  an  army  of  twenty  thousand  foot-
soldiers  and  two  thousand  cavalry  were  maintained  on  land.
There  were  more  ships  and  sailors  at  that  moment  in  Holland
and  Zeeland  than  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  England.1

While  the  sea-ports  were  thus  rapidly  increasing  in
importance,  the  towns  in  the  interior  were  advancing  as
steadily.  The  woollen  manufacture,  the  tapestry,  the  em¬
broideries  of  Gelderland,  and  Friesland,  and  Overyssel,  were
becoming  as  famous  as  had  been  those  of  Tournay,  Ypres,
Brussels,  and  Valenciennes.  The  emigration  from  the
obedient  Provinces  and  from  other  countries  was  very  great.
It  was  difficult  to  obtain  lodgings  in  the  principal  cities  ;  new
houses,  new  streets,  new  towns,  were  rising  every  day.  The
single  Province  of  Holland  furnished  regularly,  for  ’war-
expenses  alone,  two  millions  of  florins  (two  hundred  thousand
pounds)  a  year,  besides  frequent  extraordinary  grants  for  the

1  Sis  years  later  it  was  asserted  by
the  magistrates  of  Amsterdam,  in  a
communication  made  to  the  States-
G-eneral,  “  that  no  one  could  doubt
that  in  regard  to  the  mercantile  marine
and  the  amount  of  tonnage,  the  Pro¬
vinces  were  so  far  superior  to  England

that  hardly  any  comparison  could  be
made  on  the  subject ,  &c.  Koop  vaardy-
Schepen  in  Nederland  a0  1593.  Brief
v.  d.  Burgemaasteren  en  Raden  der
stad  Amsterdam  aan  de  Staaten-
General.”  (Hague  Archives,  MS.)

134

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

same  purpose,  yet  the  burthen  imposed  upon  the  vigorous
young  commonwealth  seemed  only  to  make  it  the  more
elastic.  “  The  coming  generations  may  see,”  says  a  contem¬
porary  historian,  (C  the  fortifications  erected  at  that  epoch  in
the  cities,  the  costly  and  magnificent  havens,  the  docks,  the
great  extension  of  the  cities  ;  for  truly  the  tear  had  become  a
great  benediction  to  the  inhabitants.” 1

Such  a  prosperous  commonwealth  as  this  was  not  a  prize
to  be  lightly  thrown  away.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that
a  large  majority  of  the  inhabitants,  and  of  the  States  by
whom  the  people  were  represented,  ardently  and  affectionately
desired  to  be  annexed  to  the  English  crown.  Leicester  had
become  unpopular,  but  Elizabeth  was  adored,  and  there  was
nothing  unreasonable  in  the  desire  entertained  by  the  Pro¬
vinces  of  retaining  their  ancient  constitutions,  and  of  trans¬
ferring  their  allegiance  to  the  English  Queen.

But  the  English  Queen  could  not  resolve  to  take  the  step.
Although  the  great  tragedy  which  was  swiftly  approaching
its  inevitable  catastrophe,  the  execution  of  the  Scottish  Queen,
was  to  make  peace  with  Philip  impossible — even  if  it  were
imaginable  before — Elizabeth,  during  the  year  1587,  was
earnestly  bent  on  peace.  This  will  be  made  manifest  in  sub¬
sequent  pages,  by  an  examination  of  the  secret  correspond¬
ence  of  the  court.  Her  most  sagacious  statesmen  disapproved
her  course,  opposed  it,  and  were  often  overruled,  although
never  convinced  ;  for  her  imperious  will  would  have  its  way.

The  States-General  loathed  the  very  name  of  peace  with
Spain.  The  people  loathed  it.  All  knew  that  peace  with
Spain  meant  the  exchange  of  a  thriving  prosperous  common¬
wealth,  with  freedom  of  religion,  constitutional  liberty,  and
self-government,  for  provincial  subjection  to  the  inquisition
and  to  despotism.  To  dream  of  any  concession  from  Philip
on  the  religious  point  was  ridiculous.  There  was  a  mirror
ever  held  up  before  their  eyes  by  the  obedient  Provinces,  in
which  they  might  see  their  own  image,  should  they  too  re¬
turn  to  obedience.  And  there  was  never  a  pretence,  on  the

*  1  Meteren,  xiv.  253v°.

1586.

THE  YEAR  OF  EXPECTATION-.

135

part  of  any  honest  adviser  of  Queen  Elizabeth  In  the  Nether¬
lands,  whether  Englishman  or  Hollander,  that  the  idea  of
peace-negotiation  could  he  tolerated  for  a  moment  by  States
or  people.  Yet  the  sum  of  the  Queen’s  policy,  for  the  year
1587,  may  he  summed  up  in  one  word — peace  ;  peace  for  the
Provinces,  peace  for  herself,  with  their  implacable  enemy.

In  France,  during  the  same  year  of  expectation,  we  shall
see  the  long  prologue  to  the  tragic  and  memorable  1588
slowly  enacting  ;  the  same  triangular  contest  between  the
three  Henrys  and  their  partizans  still  proceeding.  We  shall
see  the  misguided  and  wretched  Yalois  lamenting  over  his
victories,  and  rejoicing  over  his  defeats  ;  forced  into  hollow
alliance  with  his  deadly  enemy  ;  arrayed  in  arms  against  his
only  protector  and  the  true  champion  of  the  realm  ;  and
struggling  vainly  in  the  toils  of  his  own  mother  and  his  own
secretary  of  state,  leagued  with  his  most  powerful  foes.  We
shall  see  c  Mucio,’  with  one  hand  extended  in  mock  friend¬
ship  toward  the  King,  and  with  the  other  thrust  backward  to
grasp  the  purse  of  300,000  crowns  held  forth  to  aid  his  fellow-
conspirator’s  dark  designs  against  their  common  victim  ;  and
the  Bearnese,  ever  with  lance  in  rest,  victorious  over  the
wrong  antagonist,  foiled  of  the  fruits  of  victory,  proclaiming
himself  the  English  Queen’s  devoted  knight,  hut  railing  at  her
parsimony  ;  always  in  the  saddle,  always  triumphant,  always  a
beggar,  always  in  love,  always  cheerful,  and  always  confident  to
outwit  the  Guises  and  Philip,  Parma  and  the  Pope.

And  in  Spain  we  shall  have  occasion  to  look  over  the  King’s
shoulder,  as  he  sits  at  his  study-table,  in  his  most  sacred  re¬
tirement  ;  and  we  shall  find  his  policy  for  the  year  1587
summed  up  in  two  words — invasion  of  England.  Sincerely
and  ardently  as  Elizabeth  meant  peace  with  Philip,  just  so
sincerely  did  Philip  intend  war  with  England,  and  the  de¬
thronement  and  destruction  of  the  Queen.  To  this  great
design  all  others  were  now  subservient,  and  it  was  mainly  on
account  of  this  determination  that  there  was  sufficient  leisure
in  the  republic  for  the  Leicestrians  and  the  States-General
to  fight  out  so  thoroughly  their  party-contests.

136

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

CHAPTER  XIII.

Bameveld’s  Influence  in  the  Provinces  —  Unpopularity  of  Leicester  —
Intrigues  of  his  Servants  —  Gossip  of  his  Secretary  —  Its  mischievous
Effects  —  The  Quarrel  of  Norris  and  Ilollock — The  Earl’s  Participation
in  the  Affair  —  His  increased  Animosity  to  Norris  —  Seizure  of  Deventer
—  Stanley  appointed  its  Governor — York  and  Stanley  —  Leicester’s  secret
Instructions  — Wilkes  remonstrates  with  Stanley  —  Stanley’s  Insolence  and
Equivocation  —  Painful  Rumours  as  to  him  and  York  —  Duplicity  of  York
—  Stanley’s  Banquet  at  Deventer  —  He  surrenders  the  City  to  Tassis —
Terms  of  the  Bargain  —  Feeble  Defence  of  Stanley’s  Conduct  —  Subsequent
Fate  of  Stanley  and  York  —  Betrayal  of  Gelder  to  Parma — These  Treasons
cast  Odium  on  the  English  —  Miserable  Plight  of  the  English  Troops  —
Honesty  and  Energy  of  Wilkes  —  Indignant  Discussion  in  the  Assembly.

The  government  had  not  "been  laid  down  by  Leicester  on  his
departure.  It  had  been  provisionally  delegated,  as  already
mentioned  to  the  state-council.  In  this  body — consisting  of
eighteen  persons — originally  appointed  by  the  Earl,  on  no¬
mination  by  the  States,  several  members  were  friendly  to
the  governor,  and  others  were  violently  opposed  to  him.  The
States  of  Holland,  by  whom  the  action  of  the  States- General
was  mainly  controlled,  were  influenced  in  their  action  by  Buys
and  Barneveld.  Young  Maurice  of  Nassau,  nineteen  years  of
age,  was  stadholder  of  Holland  and  Zeeland.  A  florid  com-
plexioned,  fair-haired  young  man,  of  sanguine-bilious  tem¬
perament  ;  reserved,  quiet,  reflective,  singularly  self-possessed  ;
meriting  at  that  time,  more  than  his  father  had  ever  done,
the  appellation  of  the  taciturn ;  discreet,  sober,  studious.
“  Count  Maurice  saith  but  little,  but  I  cannot  tell  what  he
thinketh,"  wrote  Leicester's  eaves-dropper-in-chief.1  Ma¬
thematics,  fortification,  the  science  of  war — these  were  his
daily  pursuits.  “  The  sapling  was  to  become  the  tree,"  and
meantime  the  youth  was  preparing  for  the  great  destiny
which  he  felt,  lay  before  him.  To  ponder  over  the  works  and
the  daring  conceptions  of  Stevinus,  to  build  up  and  to  batter
the  wooden  blocks  of  mimic  citadels  ;  to  arrange  in  countless
J  Otheman  to  Leicester.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  216,  1  Feb.  1587,  MS.)

1587-  BARNEVELD’S  INFLUENCE  IN  THE  PROVINCES.  137

combinations,  great  armies  of  pewter  soldiers ;  these  were
the  occupations  of  his  leisure-hours.  Yet  he  was  hardly  sus¬
pected  of  bearing  within  him  the  germs  of  the  great  military
commander.  “  Small  desire  hath  Count  Maurice  to  follow
the  wars/'  said  one  who  fancied  himself  an  acute  observer  at
exactly  this  epoch.  u  And  whereas  it  might  be  supposed  that
in  respect  to  his  birth  and  place,  he  would  affect  the  chief
military  command  in  these  countries,  it  is  found  by  experience
had  of  his  humour ,  that  there  is  no  chance  of  his  entering  into
competition  with  the  others/'1  A  modest  young  man,  who
could  bide  his  time — but  who,  meanwhile,  under  the  guidance
of  his  elders,  was  doing  his  best,  both  in  field  and  cabinet,  to
learn  the  great  lessons  of  the  age — -he  had  already  enjoyed
much  solid  practical  instruction,  under  such  a  desperate
fighter  as  Hohenlo,  and  under  so  profound  a  statesman  as
Barneveld.  For  at  this  epoch  Olden-Barneveld  was  the  pre¬
ceptor,  almost  the  political  patron  of  Maurice,  and  Maurice,
the  official  head  of  the  Holland  party,  was  the  declared
opponent  of  the  democratic-Calvinist  organization.  It  is  not
necessary,  at  this  early  moment,  to  foreshadow  the  changes
which  time  was  to  bring.  Meantime  it  would  be  seen,  per¬
haps  ere  long,  whether  or  no,  it  would  be  his  humour  to
follow  the  wars.  As  to  his  prudent  and  dignified  deportment
there  was  little  doubt.  ce  Count  Maurice  behaveth  himself  very
discreetly  all  this  while,"  wrote  one,  who  did  not  love  him,  to
Leicester,  who  loved  him  less  :  “  He  cometli  every  day  to  the
council,  keeping  no  company  with  Count  Hollock,  nor  with
any  of  them  all,  and  never  drinks  himself  full  with  any  of
them,  as  they  do  every  day  among  themselves."2

Certainly  the  most  profitable  intercourse  that  Maurice
could  enjoy  with  Hohenlo  was  upon  the  battle-field.  In
winter-quarters,  that  hard-fighting,  hard-drinking,  and  most
turbulent  chieftain,  was  not  the  best  Mentor  for  a  youth
whose  destiny  pointed  him  out  as  the  leader  of  a  free  com¬
monwealth.  After  the  campaigns  were  over — if  they  ever

1  Project  for  the  Government  of  the
Provinces.  (‘Cabala,’  p.  23.)

2  Otheman  to  Leicester,  16  Jan.
158V.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  99,  MS.)

138

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

could  bo  over — the  Count  and  other  nobles  from  the  same
country  were  too  apt  to  indulge  in  those  mighty  potations,
which  were  rather  characteristic  of  their  nation  and  the  age.

“  Since  your  Excellency’s  departure/’  wrote  Leicester’s
secretary,  “  there  hath  been  among  the  Dutch  Counts  nothing
but  dancing  and  drinking,  to  the  grief  of  all  this  people,  which
foresee  that  there  can  come  no  good  of  it.  Specially  Count
Hollock,  who  hath  been  drunk  almost  a  fortnight  together.”  1
Leicester  had  rendered  himself  unpopular  with  the  States-
General,  and  with  all  the  leading  politicians  and  generals  ;
yet,  at  that  moment,  he  had  deeply  mortgaged  his  English
estates  in  order  to  raise  funds  to  expend  in  the  Nether  land
cause.  Thirty  thousand  pounds  sterling — according  to  his
own  statement — he  was  already  out  of  pocket,  and,  unless
the  Queen  would  advance  him  the  means  to  redeem  his  pro¬
perty,  his  broad  lands  were  to  be  brought  to  the  hammer.2
But  it  was  the  Queen,  not  the  States-General,  who  owed  the
money  ;  for  the  Earl  had  advanced  these  sums  as  a  portion
of  the  royal  contingent.  Five  hundred  and  sixty  thousand
pounds  sterling  had  been  the  cost  of  one  year’s  war  during
the  English  governor’s  administration  ;  and  of  this  sum  one
hundred  and  forty  thousand  had  been  paid  by  England.3
There  was  a  portion  of  the  sum,  over  and  above  their  monthly
levies,  for  which  the  States  had  contracted  a  debt,  and  they
were  extremely  desirous  to  obtain,  at  that  moment,  an  addi¬
tional  loan  of  fifty  thousand  pounds  from  Elizabeth  ;  a  favour
which  Elizabeth  was  very  firmly  determined  not  to  grant.  It
was  this  terror  at  the  expense  into  which  the  Netherland  war
was  plunging  her,  which  made  the  English  sovereign  so
desirous  for  peace,  and  filled  the  anxious  mind  of  Walsingham
with  the  most  painful  forebodings.

1  Otheman  to  Leicester,  I  Jan.  1581.
(Ibid.  p.  72,  MS.)

2  “List  of  the  Earl  of  Leicester’s
mortgages,  to  raise  money  spent  in
doing  her  Majesty  service  in  the  Low
Countries.”  (S.  P.  Office,  1587,  MS.)

There  were  five  different  mortgages
of  estates  and  manors  in  England,
amounting  in  all  to  18,0002.  “All  the

mortgages  above  written  are  past  re¬
demption,  except  on  present  payment
of  the  due  debts.  His  Lordship  doth
owe  an  infinite  sum  besides  for  his  ex¬
penses  made  in  these  services,  over
and  besides  these  debts.”

3  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  12  Jan.
1587.  Same  to  Burghlev,  12  Jan.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

1587.

UNPOPULARITY  OP  LEICESTER.

139

Leicester,  in  spite  of  his  good  qualities — such  as  they  were
— had  not  that  most  necessary  gift  for  a  man  in  his  position,
the  art  of  making  friends.  No  man  made  so  many  enemies.
He  was  an  excellent  hater,  and  few  men  have  been  more
cordially  hated  in  return.  He  was  imperious,  insolent,  hot-
tempered.  He  could  brook  no  equal.  He  had  also  the  fatal
defect  of  enjoying  the  flattery  of  his  inferiors  in  station.
Adroit  intriguers  burned  incense  to  him  as  a  god,  and  em¬
ployed  him  as  their  tool.  And  now  he  had  mortally  offended
Hohenlo,  and  Buys,  and  Barneveld,  while  he  hated  Sir  John
Norris  with  a  most  passionate  hatred.  Wilkes,  the  English
representative,  was  already  a  special  object  of  his  aversion.
The  unvarnished  statements  made  by  the  stiff  counsellor,  of
the  expense  of  the  past  year’s  administration,  and  the  various
errors  committed,  had  inspired  Leicester  with  such  ferocious
resentment,  that  the  friends  of  Wilkes  trembled  for  his  life.1

1  “It  is  generally  bruited  here,”
wrote  Henry  Smith  to  his  brother-in-
law  Wilkes,  “  of  a  most  heavy  displea¬
sure  conceived  by  my  Lord  of  Leicester
against  you,  and  it  is  said  to  be  so
great  as  that  he  hath  protested  to
be  revenged  of  you;  and  to  procure
you  the  more  enemies,  it  is  said  he
hath  revealed  to  my  Lord  Treasurer,
and  Secretary  Davison  some  injurious
speeches  (which  I  cannot  report)  you
should  have  used  of  them  to  him  at
your  last  being  with  him.  Further¬
more  some  of  the  said  Lord’s  secretaries
have  reported  here  that  it  were  good
for  you  never  to  return  hither,  or,  if
their  Lord  be  appointed  to  go  over
again,  it  will  be  too  hot  for  you  to
tarry  there.  These  things  thus  coming
to  the  ears  of  your  friends  have  stricken
a  great  fear  and  grief  into  the  minds
of  such  as  love  you,  lest  the  wonderful
force  and  authority  of  this  man  being
bent  against  you,  should  do  you  hurt,
while  there  is  none  to  answer  for  you.”
Smith  to  Wilkes,  26  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

Wilkes  immediately  wrote  to  Lord
Burghley,  indignantly  denying  that  ho
had  ever  spoken  disrespectfully  or  in¬
juriously  of  him,  as  thus  meanly  re¬
ported  of  him  by  Leicester.

“  I  do  briefly  assure  your  Lordship,”

he  said,  “  which  I  will  avow  with  mine
oath  upon  the  Holy  Testament,  that  I
am  therein  as  falsely  and  injuriously
abused  as  ever  was  poor  man,  and,
upon  that  protestation,  I  utterly  deny
that  ever  I  advised  my  Lord  to  beware
of  your  Lordship,  or  of  any  counsellor
at  your  devotion,  or  that  I  ever  used
unto  him,  or  to  any  creature  living,
any  vile,  uncivil,  lewd,  or  undutiful
term  of  your  Lordship.  I  trust  in  tho
observation  you  have  made  of  my  con¬
versation,  serving  her  Majesty  a  dozen
years  under  your  wing,  did  never  seo
that  I  was  so  indiscreet  as  to  speak
irreverently  of  men  of  your  Lordship’s
place,  and  I  hope  you  have  not  found
me  so  foolish  as  by  such  lightness  to
draw  myself  into  the  hatred  of  so  great
personages,  to  overthrow  myself  wil¬
fully.  I  thank  God  I  was  never  so
mad,  and  I  might  speak  it  without
vaunt,  that  there  was  no  man  in  court
of  my  sort  that  had  more  good-will  of
high  and  low  than  myself,  before  tho
acceptance  of  this  cursed  and  unfor¬
tunate  journey,  which,  as  I  declared
to  your  Lordship  at  the  beginning,
will  be,  I  fear,  the  cause  of  my  ruin ;
and  then  it  pleased  you  to  give  me
this  advice,  that  I  should  serve  her
Majesty  truly,  and  refer  the  rest  to
God.  Your  Lordship  doth  know  tho

140

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

Cordiality  between  tlie  governor-general  and  Count  Maurice
had  become  impossible.  As  for  Willoughby  and  Sir  William
Pelham,  they  were  both  friendly  to  him,  but  Willoughby  was
a  magnificent  cavalry  officer,  who  detested  politics,  and  cared
little  for  the  Netherlands,  except  as  the  best  battle-field  in
Europe,  and  the  old  marshal  of  the  camp — the  only  man  that
Leicester  ever  loved — was  growing  feeble  in  health,  was
broken  down  by  debt,  and  hardly  possessed,  or  wished  for,  any
general  influence.

Besides  Deventer  of  Utrecht,  then,  on  whom  the  Earl
chiefly  relied  during  his  absence,  there  were  none  to  support
him  cordially,  except  two  or  three  members  of  the  state-
council.  u  Madame  de  Brederode  hath  sent  unto  you  a  kind
of  rose/'  said  his  intelligencer,  u  which  you  have  asked  for,
and  beseeches  you  to  command  anything  she  has  in  her
garden,  or  whatsoever.  M.  Meetkerke,  M.  Brederode,  and
Mr.  Dorius,  wish  your  return  with  all  their  hearts.  For  the
rest  I  cannot  tell,  and  will  not  swear.  But  Mr.  Barneveld
is  not  your  very  great  friend,  whereof  I  can  write  no  more  at
this  time.”1

This  certainly  was  a  small  proportion  out  of  a  council  of
eighteen,  when  all  the  leading  politicians  of  the  country  were
in  avowed  hostility  to  the  governor.  And  thus  the  Earl  was,
at  this  most  important  crisis,  to  depend  upon  the  subtle  and
dangerous  Deventer,  and  upon  two  inferior  personages,  the
“ fellow  Junius”2  and  a  non-descript,  whom  Hohenlo  cha-

liumours  and  disposition  of  my  great
adversary  better  than  I,  and  can
judge  thereof  accordingly,  which,  with
silence,  I  will  leave  to  plead  for  me  in
your  grave  conceipt,  together  with  the
unlikelihood  that  I,  having  no  cause
of  offense  and  finding  you  my  good
Lord,  and  that  I  am  not  mad,  or  used
to  precipitate  myself  in  that  manner,
should  in  any  probability  be  so  great
an  enemy  to  myself  as  to  make  your
Lordship  my  foe  by  any  such  levity.
.  .  .  Your  Lordship  hath  herein  dealt
with  me  according  to  yourself,  that
you  have  not  directly  condemned  me
before  you  heard  me . If  my  ad¬

versary  were  as  mean  in  quality  as
myself,  I  would  not  doubt  but  by  God’s
grace  and  help,  to  make  mine  inno-
cency  appear  upon  him  with  my  hand.”
Wilkes  to  Burghley,  17  Peb.  1587.  (S.
P.  Office  MS.)

Thus  it  appears  that  the  Lord  Trea¬
surer’s  conduct  towards  the  Counsellor,
who  had  been  taking  his  advice  of
“  serving  her  Majesty  truly  and  refer¬
ring  the  rest  to  God,”  was  as  honour¬
able  as  that  of  Leicester  was  base.

1  Otheman  to  Leicester,  16  Jan.  1587.
(MS.  already  cited.)

2  Common  expression  of  Hohenlo.
(Bor,  III.  xxiii.  28.)

158?.

INTRIGUES  OF  HIS  SERVANTS.

141

racterized  as  a  “long  lean.  Englishman,  with  a  little  black
beard/'1  This  meagre  individual  however  seems  to  have  been
of  somewhat  doubtful  nationality.  He  called  himself  Othe-
man,  claimed  to  be  a  Frenchman,  had  lived  much  in  Eng¬
land,  wrote  with  great  fluency  and  spirit,  both  in  French  and
English,  but  was  said,  in  reality,  to  be  named  Robert  Dale.2

It  was  not  the  best  policy  for  the  representative  of  the
English  Queen  to  trust  to  such  counsellors  at  a  moment  when
the  elements  of  strife  between  Holland  and  England  were
actively  at  work  ;  and  when  the  safety,  almost  the  existence,
of  the  two  commonwealths  depended  upon  their  acting  cor¬
dially  in  concert.  “Overyssel,  Utrecht,  Friesland,  and  Gel-
derland,  have  agreed  to  renew  the  offer  of  sovereignty  to  her
Majesty,"  said  Leicester.  “  I  shall  be  able  to  make  a  better
report  of  their  love  and  good  inclination  than  I  can  of  Hol¬
land."3  It  was  thought  very  desirable  by  the  English  govern¬
ment  that  this  great  demonstration  should  be  made  once
more,  whatever  might  be  the  ultimate  decision  of  her  Majesty
upon  so  momentous  a  measure.  It  seemed  proper  that  a
solemn  embassy  should  once  more  proceed  to  England  in
order  to  confer  with  Elizabeth  ;  but  there  wTas  much  delay  in
regard  to  the  step,  and  much  indignation,  in  consequence,  on
the  part  of  the  Earl.  The  opposition  came,  of  course,  from
the  Barneveld  party.  “  They  are  in  no  great  haste  to  offer
the  sovereignty,"  said  Wilkes.  “First  some  towns  of  Hol¬
land  made  bones  thereat,  and  now  they  say  that  Zeeland  is  not
resolved." 4

The  nature  and  the  causes  of  the  opposition  offered  by

1  Bor,  III.,  MS.  last  cited.

3  Fowler  to  Burghley,  7  Oct.  1589,
inMurdin’s  State  Papers,  p.  639.

3  Speech  of  Leicester  to  the  deputies
of  States- General,  just  before  his  de¬
parture,  Nov.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“The  town  of  Utrecht,”  said  Wilkes
a  few  weeks  later,  “  doth  dissent  from
the  rest  of  the  provinces  in  the  manner
of  their  sovereignty,  -who  seeming  to
be  best  affected  to  her  Majesty,  do
mean  to  yield  her  the  same  as  Charles

V.  did  hold  it,  reserving  only  their
principal  privileges  and  religiou,  which
the  rest  do  not  intend  to  do,  as  I  can
learn,  who  do  purpose  to  charge  the
same  with  many  strange  conditions.  I
wrould  be  glad  to  know  your  honour’s
opinion  of  her  Majesty’s  purpose  there¬
in,  whereby  I  may  better  direct  my
services  here.”  Wilkes  to  Walsing-
ham,  19  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  24  Dec.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

142

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

Barneveld  and  the  States  of  Holland  have  been  sufficiently
explained.  Bays,  maddened  by  his  long  and  unjustifiable  im¬
prisonment,  had  just  been  released  by  the  express  desire  of
Ilohenlo  ;  and  that  unruly  chieftain,  who  guided  the  German
and  Dutch  magnates,  such  as  Moeurs  and  Overstein,  and  who
even  much  influenced  Maurice  and  his  cousin  Count  Lewis
William,  was  himself  governed  by  Barneveld.  It  would  have
been  far  from  impossible  for  Leicester,  even  then,  to  conciliate
the  whole  party.  It  was  highly  desirable  that  he  should  do
so,  for  not  one  of  the  Provinces  where  he  boasted  his  strength
was  quite  secure  for  England.  Count  Moeurs,  a  potent  and
wealthy  noble,  was  governor  of  Utrecht  and  Gelderland,  and
he  had  already  begun  to  favour  the  party  in  Holland  which
claimed  for  that  Province  a  legal  jurisdiction  over  the  whole
ancient  episcopate.  .Under  these  circumstances  common  pru¬
dence  would  have  suggested  that  as  good  an  understanding  as
possible  might  be  kept  up  with  the  Dutch  and  German  counts,
and  that  the  breach  might  not  be  rendered  quite  irreparable.

Yet,  as  if  there  had  not  been  administrative  blunders
enough  committed  in  one  year,  the  unlucky  lean  Englishman,
with  the  black  beard,  who  was  the  Earl's  chief  representative,
contrived — almost  before  his  master's  back  was  turned — to
draw  upon  himself  the  wrath  of  all  the  fine  ladies  in  Holland.
That  this  should  be  the  direful  spring  of  unutterable  disasters,
social  and  political,  was  easy  to  foretell.

Just  before  the  governor’s  departure  Otheman  came  to  pay
his  farewell  respects,  and  receive  his  last  commands.  He
found  Leicester  seated  at  chess  with  Sir  Francis  Drake.

“I  do  leave  you  here,  my  poor  Otheman,”  said  the  Earl,
u  but  so  soon  as  I  leave  you  I  know  very  well  that  nobody
will  give  you  a  good  look.” 1

“  Your  Excellency  was  a  true  prophet,”  wrote  the  secretary
a  few  weeks  later,  “  for,  my  good  Lord,  I  have  been  in  as
great  danger  of  my  life  as  ever  man  was.  '  I  have  been  hunted
at  Delft  from  house  to  house,  and  then  besieged  in  my  lodg-

1  Otheman  to  Leicester,  2D  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

GOSSIP  OF  HIS  SECRETARY.

1587.

143

ings  four  or  five  hours,  as  though  I  had  been  the  greatest
thief,  murderer,  and  traitor  in  the  land/'

And  why  was  the  unfortunate  Otheman  thus  hunted  to  his
lair  ?  Because  he  had  chosen  to  indulge  in  scandalum  mag -
natum ,  and  had  thereby  excited  the  frenzy  of  all  the  great
nobles  whom  it  was  most  important  for  the  English  party  to
conciliate.

There  had  been  gossip  about  the  Princess  of  Chimay  and
one  Calvaert,  who  lived  in  her  house,  much  against  the  advice
of  all  her  best  friends.  One  day  she  complained  bitterly  to
Master  Otheman  of  the  spiteful  ways  of  the  world.

u  I  protest,"  said  she,  “  that  I  am  the  unhappiest  lady  upon
earth  to  have  my  name  thus  called  in  question." 1 2

So  said  Otheman,  in  order  to  comfort  her  :  “  Your  Highness
is  aware  that  such  things  are  said  of  all.  I  am  sure  I  hear
every  day  plenty  of  speeches  about  lords  and  ladies,  queens
and  princesses.  You  have  little  cause  to  trouble  yourself
for  such  matters,  being  known  to  live  honestly  and  like  a
good  Christian  lady.  Your  Highness  is  not  the  only  lady
spoken  of."

The  Princess  listened  with  attention.

ee  Think  of  the  stories  about  the  Queen  of  England  and  mg
Lord  of  Leicester  /" 2  said  Otheman,  with  infinite  tact.  “No
person  is  exempted  from  the  tongues  of  evil  speakers  ;  hut
virtuous  and  godly  men  do  put  all  such  foolish  matter  under
their  feet.  Then  there  is  the  Countess  of  Moeurs}  how  much
evil  talk  does  one  hear  about  her  ! "

The  Princess  seemed  still  more  interested  and  even  excited ;
and  the  adroit  Otheman  having  thus,  as  he  imagined,  very
successfully  smoothed  away  her  anger,  went  off  to  have  a
little  more  harmless  gossip  about  the  Princess  and  the
Countess,  with  Madame  de  Meetkerke,  who  had  sent  Leicester
the  rose  from  her  garden.

But,  no  sooner  had  he  gone,  than  away  went  her  Highness

1  Otheman  to  Leicester,  last  cited.

2  Ibid — totidem  verbis.  It  is  some¬
what  amusing  to  find,  in  a  letter  to

Leicester  from  his  own  secretary,  these
allusions  to  the  “  scandal  about  Queen
Elizabeth.”

144

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

to  Madame  de  Moeurs,  “  a  marvellous  wise  and  well-spoken
gentlewoman  and  a  grave/' 1  and  informed  her  and  the  Count,
with  some  trifling  exaggeration,  that  the  vile  Englishman,
secretary  to  the  odious  Leicester,  had  just  been  there,  abusing
and  calumniating  the  Countess  in  most  lewd  and  abomin¬
able  fashion.  He  had  also,  she  protested,  used  “  very  evil
speeches  of  all  the  ladies  in  the  country."2  For  her  own  part
the  Princess  avowed  her  determination  to  have  him  instantly
murdered.3  Count  Moeurs  was  quite  of  the  same  mind,  and
desired  nothing  better  than  to  be  one  of  his  executioners.
Accordingly,  the  next  Sunday,  when  the  babbling  secretary
had  gone  down  to  Delft  to  hear  the  French  sermon,  a  select
party,  consisting  of  Moeurs,  Lewis  William  of  Nassau,  Count
Overstein,  and  others,  set  forth  for  that  city,  laid  violent
hands  on  the  culprit,  and  brought  him  bodily  before  Princess
Chimay.  There,  being  called  upon  to  explain  his  inuendos,
he  fell  into  much  trepidation,  and  gave  the  names  of  several
English  captains,  whom  he  supposed  to  be  at  that  time  in
England.  “For  if  I  had  denied  the  whole  matter,"  said  he,
“  they  would  have  given  me  the  lie,  and  used  me  according
to  their  evil  mind."4  Upon  this  they  relented,  and  released
their  prisoner,  but,  the  next  day  they  made  another  attack
upon  him,  hunted  him  from  house  to  house,  through  the  whole
city  of  Delft,  and  at  last  drove  him  to  earth  in  his  own  lodg¬
ings,  where  they  kept  him  besieged  several  hours.  Through
the  intercession  of  Wilkes  and  the  authority  of  the  council
of  state,  to  which  body  he  succeeded  in  conveying  information
of  his  dangerous  predicament,  he  W'as,  in  his  own  language,
“  miraculously  preserved,"  although  remaining  still  in  daily
danger  of  his  life.  “  I  pray  God  keep  me  hereafter  from  the
anger  of  a  woman,"  he  exclaimed,  “  quia  non  est  ira  supra
iram  mulieris."5

He  was  immediately  examined  before  the  council,  and  suc¬
ceeded  in  clearing  and  justifying  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  in  Bruce,  p.  211.
a  Otheman  to  Leicester.  MS.  before  cited.  3  Ibid.  4  Ibid.  6  Ibid.

1587.

ITS  MISCHIEVOUS  EFFECTS.

145

\

his  friends.  His  part  was  afterwards  taken  by  the  councillors,
by  all  the  preachers  and  godly  men,  and  by  the  university  of
Leyden.  But  it  was  well  understood  that  the  blow  and  the
affront  had  been  levelled  at  the  English  governor  and  the
English  nation.

cc  All  your  friends  do  see/'  said  Otheman,  “  that  this  dis¬
grace  is  not  meant  so  much  to  me  as  to  your  Excellency ;
the  Dutch  Earls  having  used  such  speeches  unto  me,  and
against  all  law,  custom,  and  reason,  used  such  violence  to  me,
that  your  Excellency  shall  wonder  to  hear  of  it." 1

Now  the  Princess  Chimay,  besides  being  of  honourable
character,  was  a  sincere  and  exemplary  member  of  the
Calvinist  church,  and  well  inclined  to  the  Leicestrians.  She
was  daughter  of  Count  Meghem,  one  of  the  earliest  victims  of
Philip  II.,  in  the  long  tragedy  of  Netherland  independence,
and  widow  of  Lancelot  Berlaymont.  Count  Moeurs  was
governor  of  Utrecht,  and  by  no  means,  up  to  that  time,  a
thorough  supporter  of  the  Holland  party  ;2  but  thenceforward
he  went  off  most  abruptly  from  the  party  of  England,  became
hand  and  glove  with  Hohenlo,  accepted  the  influence  of
Barneveld,  and  did  his  best  to  wrest  the  city  of  U  trecht  from
English  authority.  Such  was  the  effect  of  the  secretary’s
harmless  gossip.

“I  thought  Count  Moeurs  and  his  wife  better  friends  to
your  Excellency  than  I  do  see  them  to  be,"  said  Otheman
afterwards.  u  But  he  doth  now  disgrace  the  English  nation
many  ways  in  his  speeches — saying  that  they  are  no  soldiers,
that  they  do  no  good  to  this  country,  and  that  these  English¬
men  that  are  at  Arnheim  have  an  intent  to  sell  and  betray
the  town  to  the  enemy."3

1  Otheman  to  Leicester,  1  Feb.  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  G-alba,  C.  xi.  216.  MS.)

2  On  the  contrary,  although  Hohenlo
had  been  doing  his  best  to  gain  him,
having  been  drunk  with  him  most
conscientiously  for  a  fortnight  at  a
time,  his  wife,  who  was  his  command¬
ing  officer,  had  expressed  aversion  to
the  German  party,  and  great  affection
for  that  of  Leicester.  “The  Countess
told  me  but  yesterday,”  Otheman  had

VOL.  II. — L

written  only  a  few  days  before,  “  that
her  husband  was  not  so  foolish  as  to
trust  him,  who  had  deceived  him  so
often,  and  that  she  will  never  permit
her  husband  to  go  from  the  party  of
England.”  Otheman  to  Leicester,  16th
Jan.  1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.
p.  99.  MS.)

3  Otheman  to  Leicester,  1  Feb.  1587.
(MS.  before  cited.)

146  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XIII.

But  the  disgraceful  squabble  between  Hohenlo  and  Edward
Norris  had  been  more  unlucky  for  Leicester  than  any  other
incident  during  the  year;  for  its  result  was  to  turn  the  hatred
of  both  parties  against  himself.  Yet  the  Earl,  of  all  men,
was  originally  least  to  blame  for  the  transaction.  It  has  been
seen  that  Sir  Philip  Sidney  had  borne  Norris’s  cartel  to
Hohenlo,  very  soon  after  the  outrage  had  been  committed.
The  Count  had  promised  satisfaction,  but  meantime  was
desperately  wounded  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Zutphen.  Lei¬
cester  afterwards  did  his  best  to  keep  Edward  Norris  em¬
ployed  in  distant  places,  for  he  was  quite  aware  that  Hohenlo,
as  lieutenant-general  and  count  of  the  empire,  would  con¬
sider  himself  aggrieved  at  being  called  to  the  field  by  a
simple  English  captain,  however  deeply  he  might  have  in¬
jured  him.  The  governor  accordingly  induced  the  Queen  to
recall  the  young  man  to  England,  and  invited  him — much  as
he  disliked  his  whole  race — to  accompany  him  on  his  depar¬
ture  for  that  country.

The  Captain  then  consulted  with  his  brother  Sir  John,
regarding  the  pending  dispute  with  Hohenlo.  His  brother
advised  that  the  Count  should  be  summoned  to  keep  his
promise,  but  that  Lord  Leicester’s  permission  should  pre¬
viously  be  requested.

A  week  before  the  governor’s  departure,  accordingly,
Edward  Norris  presented  himself  one  morning  in  the  dining¬
room,  and,  finding  the  Earl  reclining  on  a  window-seat,
observed  to  him  that  “he  desired  his  Lordship’s  favour  towards
the  discharging  of  his  reputation.”

“  The  Count  Hollock  is  now  well,”  he  proceeded,  “  and  is
feasting  and  banqueting  in  his  lodgings,  although  he  does  not
come  abroad.”

“And  what  way  will  you  take  ?”  inquired  Leicester,  “con¬
sidering  that  he  keeps  his  house.”

“’Twill  be  best,  I  thought,”  answered  Norris,  “to  write
unto  him,  to  perform  his  promise  he  made  me  to  answer  me
in  the  field.”

“  To  whom  did  he  make  that  promise  ?”  asked  the  Earl.

“  To  Sir  Philip  Sidney,”  answered  the  Captain.

1587.

THE  QUARREL  OF  NORRIS  AND  HOLLOCK.

147

(C  To  my  nephew  Sidney/'  said  Leicester,  musingly  ;  u  very
well ;  do  as  you  think  best,  and  I  will  do  for  you  what  I
can." 1

And  the  governor  then  added  many  kind  expressions
concerning  the  interest  he  felt  in  the  young  man's  reputation.
Passing  to  other  matters,  Norris  then  spoke  of  the  great
charges  he  had  recently  been  put  to  by  reason  of  having
exchanged  out  of  the  States'  service  in  order  to  accept  a
commission  from  his  Lordship  to  levy  a  company  of  horse.
This  levy  had  cost  him  and  his  friends  three  hundred  pounds,
for  which  he  had  not  been  able  to  u  get  one  groat."

u  I  beseech  your  Lordship  to  stand  good  for  me,"  said  he  ;

“  considering  the  meanest  captain  in  all  the  country  hath  as
good  entertainment  as  I."

“I  can  do  but  little  for  you  before  my  departure,"  said
Leicester  ;  u  but  at  my  return  I  will  advise  to  do  more."

After  this  amicable  conversation  Norris  thanked  his  Lord-
ship,  took  his  leave,  and  straightway  wrote  his  letter  to  Count  .
Hollock.2

That  personage,  in  his  answer,  expressed  astonishment  that
Norris  should  summon  him,  in  his  u  weakness  and  indisposi¬
tion  but  agreed  to  give  him  the  desired  meeting,  with
sword  and  dagger,  so  soon  as  he  should  be  sufficiently  re¬
covered.  Norris,  in  reply,  acknowledged  his  courteous
promise,  and  hoped  that  he  might'  be  speedily  restored  to
health.3

The  state- council,  sitting  at  the  Hague,  took  up  the
matter  at  once  however,  and  requested  immediate  information
of  the  Earl.  He  accordingly  sent  for  Norris  and  his  brother
Sir  John,  who  waited  upon  him  in  his  bed-chamber,  and  were
requested  to  set  down  in  writing  the  reasons  which  had
moved  them  in  the  matter.  This  statement  was  accordingly

1  Edward  Norris  to  the  Lords,  28
July,  1587.  Sir  John  Norris  to  Wal-
singham,  same  date.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.

3  Edward  Norris  to  Leicester  (the  cor¬
respondence  with  Hohenlo  enclosed),

Nov.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Com¬
pare  Bruce^s  ‘Leyc.  Corresp.,’  Appen¬
dix,  474,  475.  Remonstrance  of  Count
Hohenlo  to  the  States-General,  3  Dec.
1587 ;  apud  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  121-129.
Reyd,  Y.  80,  81.

148

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

furnished,  together  with  a  copy  of  the  correspondence.  The
Earl  took  the  papers,  and  promised  to  allow  most  honourably
of  it  in  the  Council/'1

Such  is  the  exact  narrative,  word  for  word,  as  given  by
Sir  John  and  Edward  Norris,  in  a  solemn  memorial  to  the
Lords  of  Her  Majesty’s  privy  council,  as  well  as  to  the  state-
council  of  the  United  Provinces.  A  very  few  days  after¬
wards  Leicester  departed  for  England,  taking  Edward  Norris
with  him.

Count  Hohenlo  was  furious  at  the  indignity,  notwith¬
standing  the  polite  language  in  which  he  had  accepted  the
challenge.  u  ’T  was  a  matter  punishable  with  death,”  he  said,
ce  in  all  kingdoms  and  countries,  for  a  simple  captain  to  send
such  a  summons  to  a  man  of  his  station,  without  consent  of
the  supreme  authority.  It  was  plain,”  he  added,  “  that  the
English  governor-general  had  connived  at  the  affront,  for
Norris  had  been  living  in  his  family  and  dining  at  his  table.
Nay,  more,  Lord  Leicester  had  made  him  a  knight  at
Flushing  just  before  their  voyage  to  England.”2

There  seems  no  good  reason  to  doubt  the  general  veracity
of  the  brothers  Norris,  although,  for  the  express  purpose  of
screening  Leicester,  Sir  John  represented  at  the  time  to
Hohenlo  and  others  that  the  Earl  had  not  been  privy  to  the
transaction.3  It  is  very  certain,  however,  that  so  soon  as  the
general  indignation  of  Hohenlo  and  his  partizans  began  to
be  directed  against  Leicester,  he  at  once  denied,  in  passionate
and  abusive  language,  having  had  any  knowledge  whatever  of
Norris’s  intentions.  He  protested  that  he  learned,  for  the
first  time,  of  the  cartel  from  information  furnished  to  the
council  of  state.

1  E.  Norris  to  the  Lords.  J.  Norris
to  Leicester.  (MSS.  before  cited.)  E.
Norris  to  Leicester,  21  Nov.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Remonstrance  of  Hohenlo,  before
cited.  Hoofd,  Vervolgh,  209.

3  “For  all  this  I  will  assure  you
that  I  did  always,  both  to  the  Council,
the  States,  and  Count  Hollock,  con¬
fidently  deny  [i.  e.  maintain]  that  my

Lord  knew  not  of  it,  because  they
should  not  for  this  matter  have  any
advantage  against  his  Lordship.”  Sir
John  Norris  to  Sir  F.  Walsingliam,
before  cited.

The  two  negatives  do  not  here  make
an  affirmative;  but  it  is  evident  that
Leicester  made  great  use  of  this
damaging  denial  on  the  part  of  Norris.

1587.

THE  EARL’S  PARTICIPATION  IN  THE  AFEAIR.

149

The  quarrel  between  Hohenlo  and  Norris  was  afterwards
amicably  arranged  by  Lord  Buckhurst,  during  bis  embassy  to
the  States,  at  the  express  desire  of  the  Queen.  Hohenlo  and
Sir  John  Norris  became  very  good  friends,  while  the  enmity
between  them  and  Leicester  grew  more  deadly  every  day.
The  Earl  was  frantic  with  rage  whenever  he  spoke  of  the
transaction,  and  denounced  Sir  John  Norris  as  “  a  fool,  liar,
and  coward  "  on  all  occasions,  besides  overwhelming  his
brother,  Buckhurst,  Wilkes,  and  every  other  person  who  took
their  part,  with  a  torrent  of  abuse  ;  and  it  is  well  known  that
the  Earl  was  a  master  of  Billingsgate.1

“Hollock  says  that  I  did  procure  Edward  Norris  to  send
him  his  cartel/'  observed  Leicester  on  one  occasion,  “  wherein
I  protest  before  the  Lord,  I  was  as  ignorant  as  any  man  in
England.  His  brother  John  can  tell  whether  I  did  not  send
for  him  to  have  committed  him  for  it ;  but  that,  in  very
truth,  upon  the  perusing  of  it"  (after  it  had  been  sent),  “it
was  very  reasonably  written,  and  I  did  consider  also  the  great
wrong  offered  him  by  the  Count,  and  so  forbore  it.  I  was  so
careful  for  the  Count's  safety  after  the  brawl  between  him
and  Norris,  that  I  charged  Sir  John,  if  any  harm  came
to  the  Count's  person  by  any  of  his  or  under  him,  that  he
should  answer  it.  Therefore,  I  take  the  story  to  be  bred  in
the  bosom  of  some  much  like  a  thief  or  villain,  whatsoever  he
were." 2

And  all  this  was  doubtless  true  so  far  as  regarded  the
Earl's  original  exertions  to  prevent  the  consequences  of  the
quarrel,  but  did  not  touch  the  point  of  the  second  correspond¬
ence  preceded  by  the  conversation  in  the  dining-room,  eight
days  before  the  voyage  to  England.  The  affair,  in  itself  of
slight  importance,  would  not  merit  so  much  comment  at  this
late  day  had  it  not  been  for  its  endless  consequences.  The

1  J.  Norris  to  Walsingham,  14  March,
1587.  Same  to  same,  3  June,  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

“The  best  is,  such  tales  can  no
more  irritate  my  Lord’s  anger  against
me,”  said  Sir  John;  “for  since  he
affirmeth  that  I  am  a  fool,  a  coward,

and  a  hinderer  of  all  these  services,  I
know  not  what  more  he  can  be  pro¬
voked  to.”

2  Leicester  to  Buckhurst,  30  April,
1587.  Same  to  Walsingham,  4  Aug.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

150

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

ferocity  with  which  the  Earl  came  to  regard  every  prominent
German,  Hollander,  and  Englishman,  engaged  in  the  service
of  the  States,  sprang  very  much  from  the  complications  of
this  vulgar  brawl.  Norris,  Hohenlo,  Wilkes,  Buckhurst,
were  all  denounced  to  the  Queen  as  calumniators,  traitors,
and  villains  ;  and  it  may  easily  he  understood  how  grave
and  extensive  must  have  been  the  effects  of  such  vituperation
upon  the  mind  of  Elizabeth,1  who,  until  the  last  day  of
his  life,  doubtless  entertained  for  the  Earl  the  deepest  affec¬
tion  of  which  her  nature  was  susceptible.  Hohenlo,  with
Count  Maurice,  were  the  acknowledged  chiefs  of  the  anti-
English  party,  and  the  possibility  of  cordial  cooperation  be¬
tween  the  countries  may  he  judged  of  by  the  entanglement
which  had  thus  occurred.

Leicester  had  always  hated  Sir  John  Norris,  hut  he  knew
that  the  mother  had  still  much  favour  with  the  Queen,  and
he  was  therefore  the  more  vehement  in  his  denunciations  of
the  son  the  more  difficulty  he  found  in  entirely  destroying
his  character,  and  the  keener  jealousy  he  felt  that  any  other
tongue  hut  his  should  influence  her  Majesty.  “  The  story  of
John  Norris  about  the  cartel  is,  by  the  Lord  God,  most  false/'
he  exclaimed ;  “I  do  beseech  you  not  to  see  me  so  dealt
withal,  but  that  especially  her  Majesty  may  understand  these
untruths,  who  perhaps,  by  the  mother’s  fair  speeches  and  the
son’s  smooth  words ,  may  take  some  other  conceit  of  my  doings
than  I  deserve." 2

He  was  most  resolute  to  stamp  the  character  of  falsehood
upon  both  the  brothers,  for  he  was  more  malignant  towards
Sir  J ohn  than  towards  any  man  in  the  world,  not  even  ex-

1  E.  g.  “  The  lies  which  Lord  Buck-
hurst,  Sir  J.  Norris,  and  Wilkes,  did
with  their  malicious  wits  and  slander¬
ous  tongues  devise  and  utter,”  wrote
Leicester  to  the  Privy  Council,  “con¬
cern  my  honour  and  my  life,  I  demand
that  I,  being  found  clear,  and  they  to
have  slandered  me,  may  have  that
remedy  against  them  which  is  in  justice
due.”  Leicester  to  the  Privy  Council,
19  Aug.  1581.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Leicester  to  Burghley,  11  Sept.
1581.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  The  meddling
Otheman  seems  to  have  made  himself
privately  very  busy  in  this  affair.  He
sent  Leicester  copies  of  the  letters
written  by  the  brothers  Norris,  and
declared  that  he  was  “  enticed  by
them,  in  the  Earl’s  absence,  to  become
a  forger  and  liar  in  this  matter,  but
utterly  refused.”  MS.  last  cited.

1587.

HIS  INCREASED  ANIMOSITY  TO  NORRIS.

151

cepting  Wilkes.  To  the  Queen,  to  the  Lords  of  the  Privy
Council,  to  Walsingham,  to  Burghley,  lie  poured  forth  endless
quantities  of  venom,  enough  to  destroy  the  characters  of  a
hundred  honest  men.

“  The  declaration  of  the  two  Norrises  for  the  cartel  is  most
false,  as  I  am  a  Christian/'  he  said  to  Walsingham.  “I  have
a  dozen  witnesses,  as  good  and  some  better  than  they,  who
will  testify  that  they  were  present  when  I  misliked  the
writing  of  the  letter  before  ever  I  saw  it.  And  by  the  alle¬
giance  I  owe  to  her  Majesty,  I  never  knew  of  the  letter,  nor
gave  consent  to  it,  nor  heard  of  it  till  it  was  complained  of
from  Count  ILollock.  But,  as  they  are  false  in  this,  so  you
will  find  J.  N.  as  false  in  his  other  answers  ;  so  that  he  would
be  ashamed,  but  that  his  old  conceit  hath  made  him  past
shame,  I  fear.  His  companions  in  Ireland,  as  in  these  coun¬
tries,  report  that  Sir  J ohn  Norris  would  often  say  that  he  was
but  an  ass  and  a  fool ,  who ,  if  a  lie  would  serve  his  turn ,  would
spare  it.  I  remember  I  have  heard  that  the  Earl  of  Sussex
ivould  say  so  ;  and  indeed  this  gentleman  doth  imitate  him  in
divers  things.” 1

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  12  Aug.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  To  the  Lord
Treasurer  the  Earl  took  pains  to  nar¬
rate  the  whole  story,  with  much  em¬
phasis,  and  in  minute  detail ;  and  it  is
important  to  lay  it  before  the  reader,
as  an  offset  to  the  simple  and  appa¬
rently  truthful  narrative  of  Edward
Norris,  because  such  intimate  revela¬
tions  indicate  to  us  the  really  trifling
springs  of  numerous  great  events.  As
before  observed,  the  affair  in  itself  is
one  which  history  should  justly  dis¬
dain,  but  it  swells  into  considerable
importance,  both  on  account  of  its
extensive  results,  and  from  the  light
which  it  throws  on  the  character  of
Leicester,  the  most  important  person¬
age,  during  his  lifetime,  in  the  whole
kingdom  of  England.

“Would  God,”  said  Leicester  to
Burghley,  “that  it  had  pleased  her
Majesty  to  have  suffered  my  Lord
Buckhurst  and  Sir  John  Norris  to  have
gone  on  with  their  plot,  for  they  laid
a  most  malicious  plot  against  me.  As

for  the  answer  that  Sir  John  Norris
and  his  brother  have  made  touching
their  acquainting  me  with  the  cartel
to  Count  Hollock,  thus  made  now  to
your  Lordship,  if  ever  I  knew  or
heard  any  news  of  this  cartel  till
complaint  came  to  me  from  the  Count,
I  renounce  my  allegiance  and  fidelity
to  my  Sovereign  Lady.  Therefore
mark  the  arrogant  boldness  of  those
young  fellows  that  will  face  a  lie  of
that  sort.  But  I  have  here  Sir
William  Pelham  and  Sir  William
Russel,  besides  others  that  were  pre¬
sent  when  I  called  Sir  John  to  me,
and  threatened  to  lay  his  brother  by
the  heels,  and  himself  too,  if  he  were
privy  to  it.  He  then  besought  me  to
hear  his  brother  and  to  see  the  letters,
assuring  me  there  was  no  such  cartel
as  was  reported.  I  commanded  him
to  give  me  the  copy  of  his  letters,  and
bring  it  to  me.  Meanwhile,  I  was
gone  to  the  council,  and  whilst  we
were  at  council,  an  hour  or  two  after,
Edward  Norris  sent  me  his  letters,

152

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

But  a  very  grave  disaster  to  Holland  and  England  was
soon  the  fruit  of  the  hatred  borne  by  Leicester  to  Sir  J ohn
Norris.  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Zutphen  and  the
investment  of  that  town  by  the  English  and  Netherlander

which  I  took  to  Wilkes  before  I  did
so  much  as  look  into  them.  Being
openly  read  there,  we  did  indeed  per¬
ceive  so  direct  a  cartel  as  could  be
made,  and  divers  of  the  council  made
the  best  of  it,  and  so  did  I,  declaring
what  the  gent.  was.  Yet  did  I  then
declare  to  them  all  what  order  I  had
taken  for  Norris,  that  he  should  go
with  me  to  England,  and  that  her  Ma¬
jesty  had  also  sent  for  him,  protesting
to  your  Lordships,  by  all  faith,  honour,
and  truth,  that  neither  the  one  nor  the
other  did  dare  to  use  those  speeches
that  they  have  set  down ;  saving
that  one  of  the  servants  of  Sir  John
Norris  came  to  me,  hearing  that  his
brother  should  go  over,  to  know  how
his  credit  should  be  saved  with  the
Count  Hollock,  touching  the  disgrace
he  was  in,  with  such  like  words.  I
answered,  1  the  Count  Hollock  is  now
sick  and  sore,  and  it  were  no  honesty
for  Sir  John’s  brother  to  offer  him  any
quarrel.  Besides,  I  will  not  suffer
it,  so  long  as  I  am  here,  and  Edward
Norris  is  commanded  to  go  into  Eng¬
land.  No  doubt  the  Count  will  remem¬
ber  his  promise ,  which — as  Sir  John
Norris  had  told  me — was,  that  when
the  camp  was  broken  up,  he  will  answer
his  brother  in  the  field ,  like  a  gentle¬
man.'1  Never  was  there  more — never
did  any  of  them  tell  me  of  any  cartel
to  be  sent — never  did  any  speak  with
me  at  Deventer.

Besides,  after  I  was  gone,  lying  on
shipboard  at  Brill,  Edward  Norris
being  then  in  ship  with  me,  there
came  a  messenger  from  the  Count
Hollock,  with  a  letter  to  me,  about
midnight.  This  messenger  was  only
to  let  me  know  of  the  Count’s  having
received  such  letters  and  brags  from
Norris,  and  that  now  he  began  to
amend,  Norris,  as  he  heard,  was  gone
away  with  me  into  England.  He
marvelled  much  he  would  do  so,  and
sent  his  messenger  to  see  if  it  were  so.
I  answered  him,  it  was  so,  for  the
gentleman,  Sir  Edward  Norris,  lay
there  asleep,  and  he  was  to  go  into

England  by  her  Majesty’s  express
commandment.  For  my  part,  I  said,
I  was  willing  also  to  carry  him  with
me,  for  that  I  would  be  loth  to  leave
any  occasion  behind  me  of  trouble  or
discord,  knowing  already  some  mislike
to  be  between  his  brother  John  and
the  Count.  This  was  my  answer.
Now,  judge  how  likely  these  tales  be
that  I  would  consent  that  Norris
should  send  a  cartel,  and  yet  take
him  away  when  he  should  perform
the  matter.  Either  he  must  show  to
be  a  coward,  or  else,  if  he  were  in
earnest,  he  must  seem  to  be  angry
with  me  for  taking  him  away.  If
ever  there  were  other  speeches,  either
by  the  one  Norris  or  the  other,  or  if
ever  I  knew  of  this  cartel,  directly  or
indirectly,  more  than  your  Lordship
that  was  in  England,  till  the  com¬
plaint  came  to  me  of  it,  I  am  the
falsest  wretch  that  lives.  If  I  had
liked  of  their  quarrels  or  cartels,
there  was  means  enough  for  me  to
leave  them  to  their  own  revenge.  I
have  troubled  your  Lordship  too  long
with  this  trifle,  but  you  should  know
the  shameless  audacity  of  these  young
fellows,  whose  cunning  sly  heads  you
had  need  look  into.”  Leicester  to
Burghley,  12  Aug.  1587.  (Br.  Mus.
Galba,  D.  I.  240,  MS.)

Thus  the  November  letter  was  not
seen  bv  Leicester  before  it  was  sent,
although  he  was  aware  that  it  was  to
be  sent,  and  in  that  circumstance
seemed  to  reside  the  whole  strength
of  his  case.  So  soon  as  it  appeared
that  the  state-council  was  angry,  and
that  the  Count  considered  himself
outraged,  the  Earl  seems  to  have
taken  advantage  of  a  subterfuge,  and
to  have  made  up  by  violence  what  he
lacked  in  argument.

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  more
paltry  affair  to  occupy  the  attention
of  grave  statesmen  and  generals  for
months,  and  to  fill  the  archives  of
kingdom  and  commonwealth  with
mountains  of  correspondence.

1587.

SEIZURE  OF  DEYENTER.

153

great  pains  were  taken  to  secure  the  city  of  Deventer.  This
was,  after  Amsterdam  and  Antwerp,  the  most  important
mercantile  place  in  all  the  Provinces.  It  was  a  large  pros¬
perous  commercial  and  manufacturing  capital,  a  member  of
the  Hanseatic  League,  and  the  great  centre  of  the  internal
trade  of  the  Netherlands  with  the  Baltic  nations.  There  was
a  strong  Catholic  party  in  the  town,  and  the  magistracy  were
disposed  to  side  with  Parma.  It  was  notorious  that  provisions
and  munitions  were  supplied  from  thence  to  the  beleaguered
Zutphen ;  and  Leicester  despatched  Sir  William  Pelham,
accordingly,  to  bring  the  inhabitants  to  reason.  The  stout
Marshal  made  short  work  of  it.  Taking  Sir  William  Stanley
and  the  greater  part  of  his  regiment  with  him,  he  caused
them,  day  by  day,  to  steal  into  the  town,  in  small  parties  of
ten  and  fifteen.  No  objection  was  made  to  this  proceeding
on  the  part  of  the  city  government.  Then  Stanley  himself
arrived  in  the  morning,  and  the  Marshal  in  the  evening,  of
the  20th  of  October.  Pelham  ordered  the  magistrates  to
present  themselves  forthwith  at  his  lodgings,  and  told  them,
with  grim  courtesy,  that  the  Earl  of  Leicester  excused  himself
from  making  them  a  visit,  not  being  able,  for  grief  at  the
death  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  to  come  so  soon  near  the  scene  of
his  disaster.  His  Excellency  had  therefore  sent  him  to  re¬
quire  the  town  to  receive  an  English  garrison.  “  So  make
up  your  minds,  and  delay  not/'  said  Pelham ;  “  for  I  have
many  important  affairs  on  my  hands,  and  must  send  word  to
his  Excellency  at  once.  To-morrow  morning,  at  eight  o'clock,
I  shall  expect  your  answer." 1

Next  day,  the  magistrates  were  all  assembled  in  the  town-
house  before  six.  Stanley  had  filled  the  great  square  with
his  troops,  but  he  found  that  the  burghers — five  thousand  of
whom  constituted  the  municipal  militia — had  chained  the
streets  and  locked  the  gates.  At  seven  o'clock  Pelham  pro¬
ceeded  to  the  town-house,  and,  followed  by  his  train,  made
his  appearance  before  the  magisterial  board.  Then  there  was

1  Letter  of  Henry  Archer,  from  volume  of  ‘  Leycester  Correspondence,’
Utrecht,  23  Oct.  1586,  in  the  Appendix  478-480.
to  Mr.  Bruce’s  admirably  edited

154

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

a  knocking  at  the  door,  and  Sir  William  Stanley  entered,
having  left  a  strong  guard  of  soldiers  at  the  entrance  to
the  hall.

“  I  am  come  for  an  answer/’  said  the  Lord  Marshal ;  “  tell
me  straight.”  The  magistrates  hesitated,  whispered,  and
presently  one  of  them  slipped  away.

“  There’s  one  of  you  gone,”  cried  the  Marshal.  “  Fetch  him
straight  back ;  or,  by  the  living  God,  before  whom  I  stand,
there  is  not  one  of  you  shall  leave  this  place  with  life.”

So  the  burgomasters  sent  for  the  culprit,  who  returned.

“Now,  tell  me,”  said  Pelham,  “why  you  have,  this  night,
chained  your  streets  and  kept  such  strong  watch  while  your
friends  and  defenders  were  in  the  town  ?  Do  you  think  we
came  over  here  to  spend  our  lives  and  our  goods,  and  to  leave
all  we  have,  to  be  thus  used  and  thus  betrayed  by  you  ?
Nay,  you  shall  find  us  trusty  to  our  friends,  but  as  politic  as
yourselves.  Now,  then,  set  your  hands  to  this  document,”  he
proceeded,  as  he  gave  them  a  new  list  of  magistrates,  all
selected  from  stanch  Protestants.

“  Give  over  your  government  to  the  men  here  nominated,
Straight ;  dally  not  !”

The  burgomasters  signed  the  paper.

“Now,”  said  Pelham,  “let  one  of  you  go  to  the  watch,
discharge  the  guard,  bid  them  unarm,  and  go  home  to  their
lodgings.”

A  magistrate  departed  on  the  errand.

“  Now  fetch  me  the  keys  of  the  gate,”  said  Pelham,  “  and
that  straightway,  or,  before  God,  you  shall  die.”

The  keys  were  brought,  and  handed  to  the  peremptory  old
Marshal.  The  old  board  of  magistrates  were  then  clapped
into  prison,  the  new  ones  installed,  and  Deventer  was  gained
for  the  English  and  Protestant  party.1

There  could  be  no  doubt  that  a  city  so  important  and  thus
fortunately  secured  was  worthy  to  be  well  guarded.  There
could  be  no  doubt  either  that  it  would  be  well  to  conciliate
the  rich  and  influential  Papists  in  the  place,  who,  although

1  Letter  of  Henry  Archer,  &c.,  just  cited.

1587.

STANLEY  APPOINTED  ITS  GOVERNOR.

155

attached  to  the  ancient  religion,  were  not  necessarily  disloyal
to  the  republic  ;  hut  there  could  he  as  little  that,  under  the
circumstances  of  this  sudden  municipal  revolution,  it  would
he  important  to  place  a  garrison  of  Protestant  soldiers  there,
under  the  command  of  a  Protestant  officer  of  known  fidelity.

To  the  astonishment  of  the  whole  commonwealth,  the  Earl
appointed  Sir  William  Stanley  to  he  governor  of  the  town,
and  stationed  in  it  a  garrison  of  twelve  hundred  wild  Irish¬
men.1

Sir  William  was  a  cadet  of  one  of  the  noblest  English
houses.  Pie  was  the  bravest  of  the  brave.  His  gallantry  at
the  famous  Zutphen  fight  had  attracted  admiration,  where
nearly  all  had  performed  wondrous  exploits,  hut  he  was
known  to  he  an  ardent  Papist  and  a  soldier  of  fortune,  who
had  fought  on  various  sides,  and  had  even  borne  arms  in  the
Netherlands  under  the  ferocious  Alva.2  Was  it  strange  that
there  should  he  murmurs  at  the  appointment  of  so  dangerous
a  chief  to  guard  a  wavering  city  which  had  so  recently  been
secured  P

The  Irish  kernes — and  they  are  described  by  all  con¬
temporaries,  English  and  Flemish,  in  the  same  language —
were  accounted  as  the  wildest  and  fiercest  of  barbarians.
There  was  something  grotesque,  yet  appalling,  in  the  pic¬
tures  painted  of  these  rude,  almost  naked,  brigands,  who  ate
raw  flesh,  spoke  no  intelligible  language,  and  ranged  about  the
country,  burning,  slaying,  plundering,  a  terror  to  the  pea¬
santry  and  a  source  of  constant  embarrassment  to  the  more
orderly  troops  in  the  service  of  the  republic.  “  It  seemed/'
said  one  who  had  seen  them,  “that  they  belonged  not  to
Christendom,  but  to  Brazil." 3  Moreover,  they  were  all
Papists,  and,  however  much  one  might  be  disposed  to  censure
that  great  curse  of  the  age,  religious  intolerance — which  was
almost  as  flagrant  in  the  councils  of  Queen  Elizabeth  as  in
those  of  Philip — it  was  certainly  a  most  fatal  policy  to  place
such  a  garrison,  at  that  critical  juncture,  in  the  newly-acquired

1  Reyd.  v.  85.  J.  Norris  to  Burghley,  21  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

156

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

city.  Yet  Leicester,  who  had  banished  Papists  from  Utrecht
without  cause  and  without  trial,  now  placed  most  notorious
Catholics  in  Deventer.1

Zutphen,  which  was  still  besieged  by  the  English  and  the
patriots,  was  much  crippled  by  the  loss  of  the  great  fort,  the
capture  of  which,  mainly  through  the  brilliant  valour  of
Stanley's  brother  Edward,  has  already  been  related.  The
possession  of  Deventer  and  of  this  fort  gave  the  control  of
the  whole  north-eastern  territory  to  the  patriots  ;  but,  as  if
it  were  not  enough  to  place  Deventer  in  the  hands  of  Sir
AVilliam  Stanley,  Leicester  thought  projier  to  confide  the
government  of  the  fort  to  Roland  York.  Not  a  worse  choice
could  be  made  in  the  whole  army.

York  was  an  adventurer  of  the  most  audacious  and  disso¬
lute  character.  He  was  a  Londoner  by  birth,  one  of  those
“ ruffling  blades"  inveighed  against  by  the  governor-general
on  his  first  taking  command  of  the  forces.  A  man  of  des¬
perate  courage,  a  gambler,  a  professional  duellist,  a  bravo,
famous  in  his  time  among  the  “  common  hacksters  and  swag¬
gerers"  as  the  first  to  introduce  the  custom  of  foining,
or  thrusting  with  the  rapier  in  single  combats — whereas
before  his  day  it  had  been  customary  among  the  English  to
fight  with  sword  and  shield,  and  held  unmanly  to  strike  below
the  girdle 2 — he  had  perpetually  changed  sides,  in  the
Netherland  wars,  with  the  shameless  disregard  to  principle
which  characterized  all  his  actions.  He  had  been  lieutenant
to  the  infamous  John  Van  Imbyze,  and  had  been  concerned
with  him  in  the  notorious  attempt  to  surrender  Dendermonde
and  Ghent  to  the  enemy,  which  had  cost  that  traitor  his
head.  York  had  been  thrown  into  prison  at  Brussels,  but
there  had  been  some  delay  about  his  execution,  and  the  con¬
quest  of  the  city  by  Parma  saved  him  from  the  gibbet.  He
had  then  taken  service  under  the  Spanish  commander-in¬
chief,  and  had  distinguished  himself,  as  usual,  by  deeds  of
extraordinary  valour,  having  sprung  on  board  the  burning

1  Reyd.  ubi  sup.  Le  Petit,  II.  xiv.

341.  Bor,  II.  xxii.  818-819.  Wage-
naar,  viii.  196.  Meteren,  xiv.  250.

2  Camden,  III.  391.  Baker’s
1  Chronicle,’  315.

1586.

YORK  AND  STANLEY.

157

volcano-ship  at  the  siege  of  Antwerp.  Subsequently  returning
to  England,  he  had,  on  Leicester's  appointment,  obtained  the
command  of  a  company  in  the  English  contingent,  and  had
been  conspicuous  on  the  field  of  Warnsveld  ;  for  the  courage
which  he  always  displayed  under  any  standard  was  only
equalled  by  the  audacity  with  which  he  was  ever  ready  to
desert  from  it.  Did  it  seem  credible  that  the  fort  of  Zutphen
should  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  Roland  York  ?

Remonstrances  were  made  by  the  States-General  at  once.
With  regard  to  Stanley,  Leicester  maintained  that  he  was,  in
his  opinion,  the  fittest  man  to  take  charge  of  the  whole
English  army,  during  his  absence  in  England.1  In  answer
to  a  petition  made  by  the  States  against  the  appointment  of
York,  “in  respect  to  his  perfidious  dealings  before,"  the  Earl
replied  that  he  would  answer  for  his  fidelity  as  for  his  own
brother  ;  adding  peremptorily — ee  Do  you  trust  me  ?  Then
trust  York."2

But,  besides  his  other  qualifications  for  high  command,
Stanley  possessed  an  inestimable  one  in  Leicester's  eyes.  He
was,  or  at  least  had  been,  an  enemy  of  Sir  John  Norris.  To
be  this  made  a  Papist  pardonable.  It  was  even  better  than
to  be  a  Puritan.

But  the  Earl  did  more  than  to  appoint  the  traitor  York
and  the  Papist  Stanley  to  these  important  posts.  On  the
very  day  of  his  departure,  and  immediately  after  his  final
quarrel  with  Sir  J ohn  about  the  Hohenlo  cartel,  which  had
renewed  all  the  ancient  venom,  he  signed  a  secret  paper,  by
which  he  especially  forbade  the  council* of  state  to  interfere
with  or  set  aside  any  appointments  to  the  government  of
towns  or  forts,  or  to  revoke  any  military  or  naval  commissions,
without  his  consent.3

Now  supreme  executive  authority  had  been  delegated  to
the  state-council  by  the  Governor-General  during  his
absence.  Command  in  chief  over  all  the  English  forces,

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  24  Jan.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.  Sir  John  Conway  to  Wal-

singham,  28  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Meteren,  xiii.  238.  Bor,  II.  xxii.
786-787.  Wagenaar,  viii.  188-189.

158

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

whether  in  the  Queen's  pay  or  the  State's  pay,  had  been
conferred  upon  Norris,  while  command  over  the  Dutch  and
German  troops  belonged  to  Hohenlo  ;  but,  by  virtue  of  the
Earl’s  secret  paper,  Stanley  and  York  were  now  made  inde¬
pendent  of  all  authority.  The  evil  consequences  natural  to  such
a  step  were  not  slow  in  displaying  themselves.

Stanley  at  once  manifested  great  insolence  towards  Norris.
That  distinguished  general  was  placed  in  a  most  *  painful
position.  A  post  of  immense  responsibility  was  confided  to
him.  The  honour  of  England's  Queen  and  of  England's
soldiers  was  entrusted  to  his  keeping,  at  a  moment  full  of
danger,  and  in  a  country  where  every  hour  might  bring  forth
some  terrible  change  ;  yet  he  knew  himself  the  mark  at  which
the  most  powerful  man  in  England  was  directing  all  his
malice,  and  that  the  Queen,  who  was  wax  in  her  great
favourite's  hands,  was  even  then  receiving  the  most  fatal
impressions  as  to  his  character  and  conduct.  “Well  I  know,"
said  he  to  Burghley,  “  that  the  root  of  the  former  malice
borne  me  is  not  withered,  but  that  I  must  look  for  like  fruits
therefrom  as  before  ; " 1  and  he  implored  the  Lord-Treasurer,
that  when  his  honour  and  reputation  should  be  called  in
question,  he  might  be  allowed  to  return  to  England  and  clear
himself.  “For  myself,"  said  he,  “I  have  not  yet  received
any  commission,  although  I  have  attended  his  Lordship  of
Leicester  to  his  ship.  It  is  promised  to  be  sent  me,  and  in
the  meantime  I  understand  that  my  Lord  hath  granted  sepa¬
rate  commissions  to  Sir  William  Stanley  and  Rowland  York,
exempting  them  from  obeying  of  me.  If  this  be  true,  'tis
only  done  to  nourish  factions,  and  to  interrupt  any  better
course  in  our  doings  than  before  hath  been."  He  earnestly
requested  to  be  furnished  with  a  commission  directly  from
her  Majesty.  “The  enemy  is  reinforcing,"  he  added.  “We
are  very  weak,  our  troops  are  unpaid  these  three  months,  and
we  are  grown  odious  to  our  friends." 2

Honest  Councillor  Wilkes,  who  did  his  best  to  conciliate  all
parties,  and  to  do  his  duty  to  England  and  Holland,  to

1  J.  Norris  to  Burghley,  II  Nov.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  2  Ibid.

1587.

LEICESTER’S  SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS.

159

Leicester  and  to  Norris,  had  the  strongest  sympathy  with  Sir
John.  “  Truly,  besides  the  value,  wisdom,  and  many  other
good  parts  that  are  in  him/'  he  said,  u  I  have  noted  wonderful
patience  and  modesty  in  the  man,  in  bearing  many  apparent-
injuries  done  unto  him,  which  I  have  known  to  be  counte¬
nanced  and  nourished,  contrary  to  all  reason,  to  disgrace  him.
Please  therefore  continue  your  honourable  ojiinion  of  him  in
his  absence,  whatsoever  may  be  maliciously  reported  to  his
disadvantage,  for  I  dare  avouch,  of  my  own  poor  skill,  that
her  Majesty  hath  not  a  second  subject  of  his  place  and  quality

so  able  to  serve  in  those  countries  as  he . I  doubt  not

but  God  will  move  her  Majesty,  in  despite  of  the  devil,  to
respect  him  as  he  deserves." 1

Sir  John  disclaimed  any  personal  jealousy  in  regard  to
Stanley's  appointment,  but,  within  a  week  or  two  of  the
Earl's  departure,  he  already  felt  strong  anxiety  as  to  its
probable  results.  u  If  it  prove  no  hindrance  to  the  service,"
he  said,  “it  shall  nothing  trouble  me.  I  desire  that  my
doings  may  show  what  I  am  ;  neither  will  I  seek,  by  indirect
means  to  calumniate  him  or  any  other,  but  will  let  them
show  themselves." 2

Early  in  December  he  informed  the  Lord-Treasurer  that
Stanley's  own  men  were  boasting  that  their  master  acknow¬
ledged  no  superior  authority  to  his  own,  and  that  he  had  said
as  much  himself  to  the  magistracy  of  Deventer.  The
burghers  had  already  complained,  through  the  constituted
guardians  of  their  liberties,  of  his  insolence  and  rapacity,  and
of  the  turbulence  of  his  troops,  and  had  appealed  to  Sir
John  ;  but  the  colonel-general's  remonstrances  had  been  re¬
ceived  by  Sir  William  with  contumely  and  abuse,  and  by
the  vaunt  that  he  had  even  a  greater  commission  than  any
he  had  yet  shown.3

“  Three  sheep,  an  ox,  and  a  whole  hog,"  were  required

1  Wilkes  to  Burgbley,  17  Nov.  1586.
Same  to  Walsingbam,  17  May,  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  J.  Norris  to  Walsingbam,  9  Dec.

1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Same  to  Burgbley,  12  Dec.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.) '

160

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

weekly  of  tlie  peasants  for  his  table,  in  a  time  of  great
scarcity,  and  it  was  impossible  to  satisfy  the  rapacious  appe¬
tites  of  the  Irish  kernes.1  The  paymaster-general  of  the
English  forces  was  daily  appealed  to  by  Stanley  for  funds —
an  application  which  was  certainly  not  unreasonable,  as  her
Majesty's  troops  had  not  received  any  payment  for  three
months — but  there  “  was  not  a  denier  in  the  treasury,"  and
he  was  therefore  implored  to  wait.  At  last  the  States-General
sent  him  a  month’s  pay  for  himself  and  all  his  troops,  although,
as  he  was  in  the  Queen’s  service,  no  claim  could  justly  be
made  upon  them.2

Wilkes,  also,  as  English  member  of  the  state  council,
faithfully  conveyed  to  the  governor-general  in  England  the
complaints  which  came  up  to  all  the  authorities  of  the  republic,
against  Sir  William  Stanley’s  conduct  in  Deventer.  He  had
seized  the  keys  of  the  gates,  he  kept  possession  of  the  towers
and  fortifications,  he  had  meddled  with  the  civil  government,
he  had  infringed  all  their  privileges.  Yet  this  was  the  board
of  magistrates,  expressly  set  up  by  Leicester,  with  the  armed
hand,  by  the  agency  of  Marshal  Pelham  and  this  very  Colonel
Stanley — a  board  of  Calvinist  magistrates  placed  but  a  few
weeks  before  in  power  to  control  a  city  of  Catholic  tendencies.
And  here  was  a  papist  commander  displaying  Leicester’s  com¬
mission  in  their  faces,  and  making  it  a  warrant  for  dealing
with  the  town  as  if  it  were  under  martial  law,  and  as  if  he

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  19  Jan.

1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  “He  is  not  contented  with  the
entertainment  of  40?.  sterling  a  month
allowed  him  by  the  States  as  governor
of  the  place,  but  hath  taken  perforce
from  the  commissioners  lately  sent
thither  to  deliver  a  month's  pay ,  an
allowance  of  10?.  sterling  a  month
over  and  besides  for  every  company  of
his  regiment,  being,  as  he  sayeth,  ten
companies,  amounting  by  the  muster
to  1400  florins  (140?.),  besides  a  pay
for  his  6wn  company,  which  is  more
than  is  allowed  to  Sir  J.  Norris  by
300  florins  a  month,  and  as  much  as  is
given  for  entertainment  to  Count

Hohenlo,  or  to  any  earl  that  serveth
in  these  countries.  He  is  charged
further  to  take  within  the  country
hereabouts,  from  the  poor  villagers,
weekly,  for  the  provisions  of  Ins  table,
one  whole  ox,  three  sheep,  and  one
hog,  or  in  lieu  of  the  hog,  twenty
shillings  sterling;  and  if  it  be  not
brought  every  week,  they  sent  the
soldiers  to  take  it  perforce,”  &c.  &c.
Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  19  Jan.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

This  certainly  was  stronger  diet
than  the  “  bare  cheese  ”  of  which  Sir
William  complained.  Compare  Reyd,
vi.  96-97.  Bor,  II.  xxii.  878-879.

158?.  WILKES  REMONSTRATES  WITH  STANLEY.  161

were  an  officer  of  the  Duke  of  Parma.  It  might  easily  he
judged  whether  such  conduct  were  likely  to  win  the  hearts
of  Nether  landers  to  Leicester  and  to  England.1

cc Albeit,  for  my  own  part/’  said  Wilkes,  “I  do  hold  Sir
William  Stanley  to  he  a  wise  and  a  discreet  gent.,  yet  when  I
consider  that  the  magistracy  is  such  as  was  established  by
your  Lordship,  and  of  the  religion,  and  well  affected  to  her
Majesty,  and  that  I  see  how  heavily  the  matter  is  conceived
of  here  by  the  States  and  council,  I  do  fear  that  all  is  not
well.  The  very  bruit  of  this  doth  begin  to  draw  hatred  upon
our  nation.  Were  it  not  that  I  doubt  some  dangerous  issue
of  this  matter,  and  that  I  might  be  justly  charged  with  negli¬
gence,  if  I  should  not  advertise  you  beforehand,  I  would  have
forborne  to  mention  this  dissension,  for  the  States  are  about
to  write  to  your  Lordship  and  to  her  Majesty  for  reformation
in  this  matter/'2  He  added  that  he  had  already  written
earnestly  to  Sir  William,  (C  hoping  to  persuade  him  to  carry  a
mild  hand  over  the  people."

Thus  wrote  Councillor  Wilkes,  as  in  duty  bound,  to  Lord
Leicester,  so  early  as  the  9th  December,  and  the  warning
voice  of  Norris  had  made  itself  heard  in  England  quite  as  soon.
Certainly  the  governor-general,  having,  upon  his  own  respon¬
sibility,  and  prompted,  it  would  seem,  by  passion  more  than
reason,  made  this  dangerous  *  appointment,  was  fortunate  in
receiving  timely  and  frequent  notice  of  its  probable  results.

And  the  conscientious  Wilkes  wrote  most  earnestly,  as  he
said  he  had  done,  to  the  turbulent  Stanley.

“  Good  Sir  William,"  said  he,  u  the  magistrates  and  burgesses
of  Deventer  complain  to  this  council,  that  you  have  by  violence
wrested  from  them  the  keys  of  one  of  their  gates,  that  you
assemble  your  garrison  in  arms  to  terrify  them,  that  you  have
seized  one  of  their  forts,  that  the  Irish  soldiers  do  commit
many  extortions  and  exactions  upon  the  inhabitants,  that  you
have  imprisoned  their  burgesses,  and  do  many  things  against
their  laws  and  privileges,  so  that  it  is  feared  the  best  affected

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  9  Dec.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

VOL.  II.— M

2  Ibid.

162

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIH.

of  the  inhabitants  towards  her  Majesty  will  forsake  the  towm.
Whether  any  of  these  things  be  true,  yourself  doth  best  know,
hut  I  do  assure  you  that  the  apprehension  thereof  here  doth
make  us  and  our  government  hateful.  For  mine  own  part,  I
have  always  known  you  for  a  gentleman  of  value,  wisdom,  and
judgment,  and  therefore  should  hardly  believe  any  such  thing.

. I  earnestly  require  you  to  take  heed  of  consequences,

and  to  be  careful  of  the  honour  of  her  Majesty  and  the  reputa¬
tion  of  our  nation.  You  will  consider  that  the  gaining  posses¬
sion  of  the  town  grew  by  them  that  are  now  in  office,  who
being  of  the  religion,  and  well  affected  to  his  Excellency's

government,  wrought  his  entry  into  the  same . I  know

that  Lord  Leicester  is  sworn  to  maintain  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  Provinces  in  their  ancient  privileges  and  customs.  I
know  further  that  your  commission  carreeth  no  authority  to
warrant  you  to  intermeddle  any  further  than  with  the  govern¬
ment  of  the  soldiers  and  guard  of  the  town.  Well,  you  may,
in  your  own  conceipt ,  confer  some  words  to  authorize  you  in
some  larger  sort,  but,  believe  me,  Sir,  they  will  not  warrant
you  sufficiently  to  deal  any  further  than  I  have  said,  for  I
have  perused  a  copy  of  your  commission  for  that  purpose.  I
know  the  name  itself  of  a  governor  of  a  town  is  odious  to  this
people ,  and  hath  been  ever  since  the  remembrance  of  the  Spanish
government ,  and  if  we,  by  any  *  lack  of  foresight,  should  give
the  like  occasion,  we  should  make  ourselves  as  odious  as  they
are ,  which  Grod  forbid.

“  You  are  to  consider  that  we  are  not  come  into  these  coun¬
tries  for  their  defence  only,  but  for  the  defence  of  her  Majesty
and  our  own  native  country,  knowing  that  the  preservation  of
both  dependetli  altogether  upon  the  preserving  of  these.  Where¬
fore  I  do  eftsoons  intreat  and  require  you  to  forbear  to  inter¬
meddle  any  further.  If  there  shall  follow  any  dangerous
effect  of  your  proceeding/ after  this  my  friendly  advice,  I  shall
be  heartily  sorry  for  your  sake,  but  I  shall  be  able  to  testify
to  her  Majesty  that  I  have  done  my  duty  in  admonishing
you." 1

1  Wilkes  to  Stanley,  9  Dec.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1581.

STANLEY’S  INSOLENCE  AND  EQUIVOCATION'.

163

Thus  spake  the  stiff  councillor,  earnestly  and  well,  in  behalf
of  England’s  honour  and  the  good  name  of  England’s  Queen.

But  the  brave  soldier,  whose  feet  were  fast  sliding  into  the
paths  of  destruction,  replied,  in  a  tone  of  indignant  innocence,
more  likely  to  aggravate  than  to  allay  suspicion.  “  Finding,”
said  Stanley,  “  that  you  already  threaten,  I  have  gone  so  far
as  to  scan  the  terms  of  my  commission,  which  I  doubt  not  to
execute,  according  to  his  Excellency’ s  meaning  and  mine  honour .
First,  I  assure  you  that  I  have  maintained  justice,  and  that
severely ;  else  hardly  would  the  soldiers  have  been  contented
with  bread  and  hare  cheese.”  1

He  acknowledged  possessing  himself  of  the  keys  of  the
town,  hut  defended  it  on  the  ground  of  necessity,  and  of  the
character  of  the  people,  u  who  thrust  out  the  Spaniards  and
Almaynes,  and  afterwards  never  would  obey  the  Prince  and
States.”  “  I  would  he,”  he  said,  u  the  sorriest  man  that  lives ,  if
by  my  negligence  the  place  should  he  lost.  Therefore  I
thought  good  to  seize  the  great  tower  and  ports.  If  I  meant
evil,  I  needed  no  keys ,  for  here  is  force  enough.” 2

With  much  effrontery,  he  then  affected  to  rely  for  evidence
of  his  courteous  and  equitable  conduct  towards  the  citizens,
upon  the  very  magistrates  who  had  been  petitioning  the
States-Gfeneral,  the  state-council,  and  the  English  Queen,
against  his  violence.

u  For  my  courtesy  and  humanity,”  he  said,  “  I  refer  me
unto  the  magistrates  themselves.  But  I  think  they  sent
some  rhetoricians ,  who  could  allege  of  little  grief,  and  speak
pitiful,  and  truly  I  find  your  ears  have  been  as  pitiful  in  so
timorously  condemning  me.  I  assure  you  that  her  Majesty
hath  not  a  better  servant  than  I  nor  a  more  faithful  in  these
parts.  This  I  will  prove  with  my  flesh  and  blood.  Although
I  know  there  be  divers  flying  reports  spread  by  my  enemies,
which  are  come  to  my  ears,  I  doubt  not  my  virtue  and  truth
will  prove  them  calumniators 3  and  men  of  little.  So,  good

1  Stanley  to  Wilkes,  14  Dec.  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  2  Ibid.

3  “  Callaminaters so  Sir  William

called  the  men  who  were  speaking  the
truth  about  him.  (MS.  ubi  sup.)  He
was  more  used  to  handle  the  sword

164

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

Mr.  Wilkes,  I  pray  you,  consider  gravely,  give  ear  discreetly,
and  advertise  into  England  soundly.  For  me,  I  have  been
and  am  your  friend,  and  glad  to  hear  any  admonition  from
one  so  wise  as  yourself/’

He  then  alluded  ironically  to  the  “  good  favour  and  money  ”
with  which  he  had  been  so  contented  of  late,  that  if  Mr.
Wilkes  would  discharge  him  of  his  promise  to  Lord  Leicester,
he  would  take  his  leave  with  all  his  heart.  Captain,  officers,
and  soldiers,  had  been  living  on  half  a  pound  of  cheese  a  day.
For  himself,  he  had  received  hut  one  hundred  and  twenty
pounds  in  live  months,  and  was  living  at  three  pounds  by  the
day.  “  This  my  wealth  will  not  long  hold  out,”  he  observed,
cc  but  yet  I  will  never  fail  of  my  promise  to  his  Excellency,
whatsoever  I  endure.  It  is  for  her  Majesty’s  service  and  for
the  love  I  bear  to  him.”

He  bitterly  complained  of  the  unwillingness  of  the  country-
people  to  furnish  vivers,  waggons,  and  other  necessaries,  for
the  fort  before  Zutphen.  “  Had  it  not  been,”  he  said,  u  for
the  travail  extraordinary  of  myself,  and  patience  of  my  brother
YorJce ,  that  fort  would  have  been  in  danger.  But,  according
to  his  desire  and  forethought ,  I  furnished  that  place  with
cavalry  and  infantry  ;  for  I  know  the  troops  there  be  mar¬
vellous  weak.” 1

In  reply,  Wilkes  stated  that  the  complaints  had  been  made
aby  no  rhetorician ,  but  by  letter  from  the  magistrates  them¬
selves  (on  whom  he  relied  so  confidently)  to  the  state-council.
The  councillor  added,  rather  tartly,  that  since  his  honest
words  of  defence  and  of  warning,  had  been  “taken  in  so
scoffing  a  manner,”  Sir  William  might  be  sure  of  not  being
troubled  with  any  more  of  his  letters.2

But,  a  day  or  two  before  thus  addressing  him,  he  had
already  enclosed  to  Leicester  very  important  letters  addressed
by  the  council  of  Gelderland  to  Count  Moeurs,  stadholder  of
the  Province,  and  by  him  forwarded  to  the  state-council.  For

than  the  pen,  yet  the  untaught  vigour
of  his  style  causes  an  additional  re¬
gret  that  a  man  so  brave  and  so
capable  should  have  thrown  himself

away.

1  Stanley  to  Wilkes,  ubi  sup.

2  Wilkes  to  Stanley,  18  Dec.  1586.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

158?.

PAINFUL  RUMOURS  AS  TO  HIM  AND  YORK.

165

there  were  now  very  grave  rnmonrs  concerning  the  fidelity  of
“that  patient  and  foreseeing  brother  York/' whom  Stanley
had  been  so  generously  strengthening  in  F ort  Zutphen.  The
lieutenant  of  York,  a  certain  Mr.  Zouch,  had  been  seen
within  the  city  of  Zutphen,  in  close  conference  with  Colonel
Tassis,  Spanish  governor  of  the  place.1  Moreover  there  had
been  a  very  frequent  exchange  of  courtesies — by  which  the
horrors  of  war  seemed  to  be  much  mitigated — between  York
on  the  outside  and  Tassis  within.  The  English  commander
sent  baskets  of  venison,  wild  fowl,  and  other  game,  which  were
rare  in  the  market  of  a  besieged  town.  The  Spanish  governor
responded  with  baskets  of  excellent  wine  and  barrels  of  beer.2
A  very  pleasant  state  of  feeling,  perhaps,  to  contemplate — as '
an  advance  in  civilization  over  the  not  very  distant  days  of
the  Haarlem  and  Leyden  sieges,  when  barrels  of  prisoners’
heads,  cut  off,  a  dozen  or  two  at  a  time,  were  the  social
amenities  usually  exchanged  between  Spaniards  and  Dutch¬
men — but  somewhat  suspicious  to  those  who  had  grown  grey
in  this  horrible  warfare.

The  Irish  kernes  too,  were  allowed  to  come  to  mass  within
the  city,  and  were  received  there  with  as  much  fraternity  by
the  Catholic  soldiers  of  Tassis  as  the  want  of  any  common
dialect  would  allow — a  proceeding  which  seemed  better
perhaps  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  than  for  the  advance¬
ment  of  the  siege.3

The  state-council  had  written  concerning  these  rumours  to
Rowland  York,  but  the  patient  man  had  replied  in  a  manner
which  Wilkes  characterized  as  “unfit  to  have  been  given  to
such  as  were  the  executors  of  the  Earl  of  Leicester’s  autho¬
rity.”  The  councillor  implored  the  governor-general  accord¬
ingly  to  send  some  speedy  direction  in  this  matter,  as  well  to
Rowland  York  as  to  Sir  William  Stanley ;  for  he  explicitly

1  “Le  Conseil  de  GTueldres  au  Comte
de  Moeurs  et  Nieuwenaer,  14  Dec.
1586.  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  16  Dec.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  Hoofd,  Yeryolgh,  220.  Reyd,  yi.  95.

3  Wilkes  to  Stanley,  1?  Dec.  1586,
MS.  strongly  remonstrating  against
the  practice.  Hoofd,  Reyd,  ubi  sup.
Wagenaar,  viii.  196.

166

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

and  earnestly  warned  him,  that  those  personages  would  pay
no  heed  to  the  remonstrances  of  the  state-council.1

Thus  again  and  again  was  Leicester — on  whose  head  rested,
by  his  own  deliberate  act,  the  whole  responsibility — fore¬
warned  that  some  great  mischief  was  impending.  There  was
time  enough  even  then — for  it  was  but  the  16  th  December —
to  place  full  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  state-council,  of  Norris,
or  of  Hohenlo,  and  secretly  and  swiftly  to  secure  the  suspected
persons,  and  avert  the  danger.  Leicester  did  nothing.  How
could  he  acknowledge  his  error  P  How  could  he  manifest
confidence  in  the  detested  Norris  ?  How  appeal  to  the  violent
and  deeply  incensed  Hohenlo  ?

Three  weeks  more  rolled  by,  and  the  much-enduring
Eowland  York  was  still  in  confidential  correspondence  with
Leicester  and  Walsingham,  although  his  social  intercourse
with  the  Spanish  governor  of  Zutphen  continued  to  be  upon
the  most  liberal  and  agreeable  footing.  He  was  not  quite
satisfied  with  the  general  aspect  of  the  Queen's  cause  in  the
Netherlands,  and  wrote  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a  tone
of  despondency,  and  mild  expostulation.  Walsingham  would
have  been  less  edified  by  these  communications,  had  he  been
aware  that  York,  upon^rs^  entering  Leicester’s  service ,  had
immediately  opened  a  correspondence  with  the  Duke  of
Parma,  and  had  secretly  given  him  to  understand  that  his
object  icas  to  serve  the  cause  of  Spain.  This  was  indeed  the
fact,  as  the  Duke  informed  the  King,  “but  then  he  is  such  a
scatter-brained,  reckless  dare-devil,"  said  Parma,  “  that  I
hardly  expected  much  of  him." 2  Thus  the  astute  Sir  Francis
had  been  outwitted  by  the  adventurous  Rowland,  who  was
perhaps  destined  also  to  surpass  the  anticipations  of  the
Spanish  commander-in-chief.

Meantime  York  informed  his  English  patrons,  on  the  7th
January,  that  matters  were  not  proceeding  so  smoothly  in  the

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  16  Dec.  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  12  Feb.  1581.

“  Tan  liviano  y  arriscado,  ”  See.  (Arch,
de  Simancas,  MS.)

1587.

DUPLICITY  OF  YORK.

167

political  world  as  he  could  wish.  He  had  found  “  many  cross
and  indirect  proceedings/'  and  so,  according  to  Lord  Leicester's
desire,  he  sent  him  a  “discourse"  on  the  subject,  which  he
begged  Sir  Francis  to  “  peruse,  add  to,  or  take  away  from,"
and  then  to  inclose  to  the  Earl.  He  hoped  he  should  be
forgiven  if  the  style  of  the  production  was  not  quite  satisfac¬
tory  ;  for,  said  he,  “  the  place  where  I  am  doth  too  much
torment  my  memory,  to  call  every  point  to  my  remembrance." 1

It  must,  in  truth,  have  been  somewhat  a  hard  task  upon  his
memory,  to  keep  freshly  in  mind  every  detail  of  the  parallel
correspondence  which  he  was  carrying  on  with  the  Spanish
and  with  the  English  goverament.  Even  a  cool  head  like
Rowland’s  might  be  forgiven  for  being  occasionally  puzzled.
“So  if  there  be  anything  hard  to  be  understood,"  he  observed
to  Walsingliam,  “advertise  me,  and  I  will  make  it  plainer."
Nothing  could  be  more  ingenuous.  He  confessed,  however,
to  being  out  of  pocket.  “  Please  your  honour,"  said  he,  “  I
have  taken  great  pains  to  make  a  bad  place  something,  and
it  has  •  cost  me  all  the  money  I  had,  and  here  I  can  receive
nothing  but  discontentment.  I  dare  not  ivrite  you  all  lest  you
should  think  it  impossible,"  he  added — and  it  is  quite  probable
that  even  Walsingliam  would  have  been  astonished,  had
Rowland  written  all.  The  game  playing  by  York  and  Stanley
was  not  one  to  which  English  gentlemen  were  much  addicted.

“  I  trust  the  bearer,  Edward  Stanley,  a  discreet,  brave
gentleman,"  he  said,  “  with  details."  And  the  remark  proves
that  the  gallant  youth  who  had  captured  this  very  Fort
Zutplien  in  so  brilliant  a  manner  was  not  privy  to  the
designs  of  his  brother  and  of  York  ;  for  the  object  of  the
“discourse"  was  to  deceive  the  English  government.

“  I  humbly  beseech  that  you  will  send  for  me  home,"  con¬
cluded  Rowland,  “  for  true  as  I  humbled  my  mind  to  please
her  Majesty,  your  honour,  and  the  dead,2  now  am  I  content
to  humble  myself  lower  to  please  myself,  for  now,  since  his

1  Rowland  York  to  Walsingham,
7  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  By  the  dead,  he  meant  Sir  Philip

Sidney,  who  had  been  deceived  into  a
friendly  feeling  for  the  adventurer.
Meteren,  xiv.  250.

168

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

Excellency’s  departure,  there  is  no  form  of  proceeding  neither
honourably  nor  honestly.1

Three  other  weeks  passed  over,  weeks  of  anxiety  and
dread  throughout  the  republic.  Suspicion  grew  darker  than
ever,  not  only  as  to  York  and  Stanley,  but  as  to  all  the
English  commanders,  as  to  the  whole  English  nation.  An
Anjou  plot,  a  general  massacre,  was  expected  by  many,  yet
there  were  no  definite  grounds  for  such  dark  anticipations.
In  vain  had  painstaking,  truth-telling  Wilkes  summoned
Stanley  to  his  duty,  and  called  on  Leicester,  time  after  time,
to  interfere.  In  vain  did  Sir  John  Norris,  Sir  John  Conway,
the  members  of  the  state-council,  and  all  others  who  should
have  had  authority,  do  their  utmost  to  avert  a  catastrophe.
Their  hands  were  all  tied  by  the  fatal  letter  of  the  24th
November.  Most  anxiously  did  all  implore  the  Earl  of
Leicester  to  return.  Never  was  a  more  dangerous  moment
than  this  for  a  country  to  be  left  to  its  fate.  Scarcely  ever
in  history  was  there  a  more  striking  exemplification  of  the
need  of  a  man — of  an  individual — who  should  embody  the
powers  and  wishes,  and  concentrate  in  one  brain  and  arm,  the
whole  energy,  of  a  commonwealth.  But  there  was  no  such
man,  for  the  republic  had  lost  its  chief  when  Orange  died.
There  was  much  wisdom  and  jDatriotism  now.  Olden-Barne-
veld  was  competent,  and  so  was  Buys,  to  direct  the  councils
of  the  republic,  and  there  were  few  better  soldiers  than
Norris  and  Hohenlo  to  lead  her  armies  against  Spain.  But
the  supreme  authority  had  been  confided  to  Leicester.  He
had  not  perhaps  proved  himself  extraordinarily  qualified  for
his  post,  but  he  was  the  governor-in-chief,  and  his  departure,
without  resigning  his  powers,  left  the  commonwealth  headless,
at  a  moment  when  singleness  of  action  was  vitally  important.

At  last,  very  late  in  January,  one  Hugh  Overing,  a
haberdasher  from  Ludgate  Hill,  was  caught  at  Rotterdam,
on  his  way  to  Ireland,  with  a  bundle  of  letters  from  Sir
William  Stanley,  and  was  sent,  as  a  suspicious  character,  to

1  York  to  Walsingkam.  (MS.  last  cited.)

1581.

STANLEY’S  BANQUET  AT  DEVENTER.

169

the  state-council  at  the  Hague.1  On  the  same  day,  another
Englishman,  a  small  youth,  “  well-favoured/'  rejoicing  in  a
“  very  little  red  heard,  and  in  very  ragged  clothes,"  unknown
by  name,  hut  ascertained  to  he  in  the  service  of  Rowland  York
and  to  have  been  the  hearer  of  letters  to  Brussels,  also  passed
through  Rotterdam.  By  connivance  of  the  innkeeper,  one
Joyce,  also  an  Englishman,  he  succeeded  in  making  his
escape.2  The  information  contained  in  the  letters  thus  inter¬
cepted  was  important,  hut  it  came  too  late,  even  if  then  the
state-council  could  have  acted  without  giving  mortal  offence
to  Elizabeth  and  to  Leicester.

On  the  evening  of  28th  January  (N.  S.),  Sir  William  Stanley
entertained  the  magistrates  of  Deventer  at  a  splendid  banquet.
There  was  free  conversation  at  table  concerning  the  idle  sus¬
picions  which  had  been  rife  in  the  Provinces  as  to  his  good
intentions  and  the  censures  which  had  been  cast  upon  him  for
the  repressive  measures  which  he  had  thought  necessary  to
adopt  for  the  security  of  the  city.  He  took  that  occasion  to
assure  his  guests  that  the  Queen  of  England  had  not  a  more
loyal  subject  than  himself,  nor  the  Netherlands  a  more  devoted
friend.  The  company  expressed  themselves  fully  restored  to
confidence  in  his  character  and  purposes,  and  the  burgomasters,
having  exchanged  pledges  of  faith  and  friendship  with  the
commandant  in  flowing  goblets,  went  home  comfortably  to
bed,  highly  pleased  with  their  noble  entertainer  and  with
themselves.3

Very  late  that  same  night,  Stanley  placed  three  hundred  of
his  wild  Irish  in  the  Noorenberg  tower,  a  large  white  structure
which  commanded  the  Zutphen  gate,  and  sent  bodies  E  jan.
of  chosen  troops  to  surprise  all  the  burgher-guards  1587.
at  their  respective  stations.  Strong  pickets  of  cavalry  were
also  placed  in  all  the  principal  thoroughfares  of  the  city.  At
three  o'clock  in  the  following  morning  he  told  his  officers  that
he  was  about  to  leave  Deventer  for  a  few  hours,  in  order  to
bring  in  some  reinforcements  for  which  he  had  sent,  as  he

1  Conway  to  Walsingliam,  28  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.  3  Reyd.  vi.  98.

170

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

liad  felt  much  anxiety  for  some  time  past  as  to  the  disposition
of  the  burghers.  His  officers,  honest  Englishmen,  suspecting
no  evil  and  having  confidence  in  their  chief,  saw  nothing
strange  in  this  proceeding,  and  Sir  William  rode  deliberately
out  of  Zutphen.  After  he  had  been  absent  an  hour  or  two,
the  clatter  of  hoofs  and  the  tramp  of  infantry  was  heard
without,  and  presently  the  commandant  returned,  followed  by
a  thousand  musketeers  and  three  or  four  hundred  troopers.
It  was  still  pitch  dark  ;  but,  dimly  lighted  by  torches,  small
detachments  of  the  fresh  troops  picked  their  way  through  the
black  narrow  streets,  while  the  main  body  poured  at  once
upon  the  Brink,  or  great  square.  Here,  quietly  and  swiftly,
they  were  marshalled  into  order,  the  cavalry,  pikemen,  and
musketeers,  lining  all  sides  of  the  place,  and  a  chosen  band —
among  whom  stood  Sir  William  Stanley,  on  foot,  and  an
officer  of  high  rank  on  horseback — occupying  the  central
space  immediately  in  front  of  the  town-house.1

The  drums  then  beat,  and  proclamation  went  forth  through
the  city  that  all  burghers,  without  any  distinction — municipal
guards  and  all — were  to  repair  forthwith  to  the  city-hall,  and
deposit  their  arms.  As  the  inhabitants  arose  from  their
slumbers,  and  sallied  forth  into  the  streets  to  inquire  the  cause
of  the  disturbance,  they  soon  discovered  that  they  had,  in
some  mysterious  manner,  been  entrapped.  Wild  Irishmen,
with  uncouth  garb,  threatening  gesture,  and  unintelligible
jargon,  stood  gibbering  at  every  corner,  instead  of  the  com¬
fortable  Flemish  faces  of  the  familiar  burgher-guard.  The
chief  burgomaster,  sleeping  heavily  after  Sir  William's  hos¬
pitable  banquet,  aroused  himself  at  last,  and  sent  a  militia-
captain  to  inquire  the  cause  of  the  unseasonable  drum-beat
and  monstrous  proclamation.  Day  was  breaking  as  the  trusty
captain  made  his  way  to  the  scene  of  action.  The  wan  light
of  a  cold,  drizzly  January  morning  showed  him  the  wide,
stately  square — with  its  leafless  lime-trees  and  its  tall  many-
storied,  gable-ended  houses  rising  dim  and  spectral  through

1  Bor,  II.  xxii.  878-879.  Reyd,  vi.
96-97.  Strada,  II.  467.  Hoofd,  Yer-

volgh,  220-22],  Le  Petit,  II.  341.
Wagenaar,  viii.  196,  seq.

1587.  HE  SURRENDERS  THE  CITY  TO  TASSIS.  171

the  mist — filled  to  overflowing  with  troops,  whose  uniforms
and  banners  resembled  nothing  that  he  remembered  in  Dutch
and  English  regiments.  Fires  were  lighted  at  various  corners,
kettles  were  boiling,  and  camp-followers  and  sutlers  were
crouching  over  them,  half  perished  with  cold — for  it  had  been
raining  dismally  all  night 1 — while  burghers,  with  wives  and
children,  startled  from  their  dreams  by  the  sudden  reveillee,
stood  gaping  about,  with  perplexed  faces  and  despairing
gestures.  As  he  approached  the  town-house — one  of  those  mag¬
nificent,  many-towered,  highly-decorated,  municipal  palaces
of  the  Netherlands — he  found  troops  all  around  it ;  troops
guarding  the  main  entrance,  troops  on  the  great  external
staircase  leading  to  the  front  balcony,  and  officers,  in  yellow
jerkin  and  black  bandoleer,  grouped  in  the  balcony  itself.

The  Flemish  captain  stood  bewildered,  when  suddenly  the
familiar  form  of  Stanley  detached  itself  from  the  central  group
and  advanced  towards  him.  Taking  him  by  the  hand  with
much  urbanity,  Sir  William  led  the  militia-man  through  two
or  three  ranks  of  soldiers,  and  presented  him  to  the  strange
officer  on  horseback.2

“  Colonel  Tassis,"  said  he,  “  I  recommend  to  you  a  very
particular  friend  of  mine.  Let  me  bespeak  your  best  offices  in
his  behalf/'

“  Ah  God  !"  cried  the  honest  burgher,  “  Tassis  !  Tassis  !
Then  are  we  indeed  most  miserably  betrayed/'3

Even  the  Spanish  colonel,  who  was  of  Flemish  origin,  was
affected  by  the  despair  of  the  Netherlander.

“Let  those  look  to  the  matter  of  treachery  whom  it  con¬
cerns,"  said  he  ;  “my  business  here  is  to  serve  the  King,  my
master."

“  Render  unto  Caesar  the  things  which  are  Caesar's,  and
unto  God  the  things  which  are  God's,"  said  Stanley,  with  piety.4

The  burgher-captain  was  then  assured  that  no  harm  was
intended  to  the  city,  but  that  it  now  belonged  to  his  most

1  “  Ongeacht  dat  ze  de  gantsche
nacht  gereyst  hadden,  in  seer  quaet
en  kout  weder,  ende  dat  ket  den  sel-

ven  voormiddags  oock  reghende,”  &c.
Reyd,  vi.  96.

2  Ibid.  3  Ibid.  *  ibid.

172

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

Catholic  Majesty  of  Spain — Colonel  Stanley,  to  whom  its
custody  had  been  entrusted,  having  freely  and  deliberately
restored  it  to  its  lawful  owner.  He  was  then  bid  to  go  and
fetch  the  burgomasters  and  magistrates.

Presently  they  appeared — a  dismal  group,  weeping  and
woe-begone — the  same  board  of  strict  Calvinists  forcibly  placed
in  office  but  three  months  before  by  Leicester,  through  the
agency  of  this  very  Stanley,  who  had  so  summarily  ejected
their  popish  predecessors,  and  who  only  the  night  before  had
so  handsomely  feasted  themselves.  They  came  forward,  the
tears  running  down  their  cheeks,  crying  indeed  so  piteously
that  even  Stanley  began  to  weep  bitterly  himself.  “  I  have
not  done  this/'  he  sobbed,  “for  power  or  pelf.  Not  the  hope
of  reward,  but  the  love  of  God  hath  moved  me." 1

Presently  some  of  the  ex-magistrates  made  their  appear¬
ance,  and  a  party  of  leading  citizens  went  into  a  private  house
with  Tassis  and  Stanley  to  hear  statements  and  explanations —
as  if  any  satisfactory  ones  were  possible.

Sir  William,  still  in  a  melancholy  tone,  began  to  make  a
speech,  through  an  interpreter,  and  again  to  protest  that  he
had  not  been  influenced  by  love  of  lucre.  But  as  he  stam¬
mered  and  grew  incoherent  as  he  approached  the  point,  Tassis
suddenly  interrupted  the  conference.  “  Let  us  look  after  our
soldiers,"  said  he,  “  for  they  have  been  marching  in  the  foul
weather  half  the  night."  So  the  Spanish  troops,  who  had
been  standing  patiently  to  be  rained  upon  after  their  long
march,  until  the  burghers  had  all  deposited  their  arms  in  the
city-hall,  were  now  billeted  on  the  townspeople.  Tassis  gave

1  “Sir  William  Stanley  did  fetch
some  of  the  commons  and  magistrates
to  come  and  welcome  Taxis.  With
weeping  tears  and  sad  countenances
they  gave  him  reverence,  sorry  to  see
themselves  so  betrayed.

“  When  Sir  William  Stanley  did  see
the  pitiful  state  and  sorrowful  hearts
of  the  burghers,  God  made  him  have
some  feeling  of  his  sins.  His  own
conscience,  it  seemed,  accused  him,
and  he  wept  with  the  burghers  for  com¬
pany ,  protesting  with  vehement  words

and  oaths  that  he  had  done  it  with  no
covetous  mind  for  profit,  but  only  for
the  discharge  of  his  conscience.  It
is  now  said  he  hath  and  shall  have
30,000Z.”  Sir  John  Comvay  to  Wal-
singham,  28  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

Compare  Reyd,  ubi  sup.  Wilkes  to
Leicester,  MS.  before  cited.  Norris

to  Burghley,  —  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

1581

TERMS  OF  THE  BARGAIN.

173

peremptory  orders  that  no  injury  should  he  offered  to  persons
or  property  on  pain  of  death  ;  and,  by  way  of  wholesome
example,  hung  several  Hibernians  the  same  day  who  had  been
detected  in  plundering  the  inhabitants.1

The  citizens  were,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  offered  the  choice
between  embracing  the  Catholic  religion  or  going  into  exile,
a  certain  interval  being  allowed  them  to  wind  up  their  affairs.
They  were  also  required  to  furnish  Stanley  and  his  regiment
full  pay  for  the  ivliole  period  of  their  service  since  coming  to
the  Provinces,  and  to  Tassis  three  months'  wages  for  his
Spaniards  in  advance.2  Stanley  offered  his  troops  the  privilege
of  remaining  with  him  in  the  service  of  Spain,  or  of  taking
their  departure  unmolested.  The  Irish  troops  were  quite
willing  to  continue  under  their  old  chieftain,  particularly  as  it
was  intimated  to  them  that  there  was  an  immediate  prospect
of  a  brisk  campaign  in  their  native  island  against  the  tyrant
Elizabeth,  under  the  liberating  banners  of  Philip.  And
certainly,  in  an  age  where  religion  constituted  country,  these
fervent  Catholics  could  scarcely  be  censured  for  taking  arms
against  the  sovereign  who  persecuted  their  religion  and  them¬
selves.  These  honest  barbarians  had  broken  no  oath,  vio¬
lated  no  trust,  had  never  pretended  sympathy  with  freedom
or  affection  for  their  Queen.  They  had  fought  fiercely  under
the  chief  who  led  them  into  battle — they  had  robbed  and
plundered  voraciously  as  opportunity  served,  and  had  been
occasionally  hanged  for  their  exploits  ;  but  Deventer  and  Fort
Zutphen  had  not  been  confided  to  their  keeping  ;  and  it  was  a
pleasant  thought  to  them,  that  approaching  invasion  of  Ireland.

“I  will  ruin  the  whole  country  from  Holland  to  Friesland,"
said  Stanley  to  Captain  Hewton,  ec  and  then  I  will  play  such

1  Reyd,  ubi  sup.

2  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  24  Jan.  1581.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“From  the  market-place  Taxis  and
Stanley  went  to  the  town-house,
whither  the  woeful  magistrates  were
called  and  made  to  welcome  Taxis,
and  were  then  required  with  all  expe¬
dition  to  furnish  and  make  ready  so
much  money  as  should  pay  all  the

arrearage  due  to  Stanley  and  his
regiment,  sithence  their  coming  into
these  countries,  who  had  received  a
month’s  pay  of  the  States  not  eight
days  before  he  received  the  enemy
into  the  town.  They  were  also  re¬
quired  to  furnish  and  deliver  as  much
more  money  as  might  give  three
months  to  the  troops  of  the  enemy
then  newly  entered.”

174

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

a  game  in  Ireland  as  the  Queen  has  never  seen  the  like  all
the  days  of  her  life.”  1

Newton  had  already  been  solicited  by  Kowland  York  to  take
service  under  Parma,  and  had  indignantly  declined.  Sir
Edmund  Carey  and  his  men,  four  hundred  in  all,  refused,  to
a  man,  to  take  part  in  the  monstrous  treason,  and  were  allowed
to  leave  the  city.2  This  was  the  case  with  all  the  English
officers.  Stanley  and  York  were  the  only  gentlemen  who  on
this  occasion  sullied  the  honour  of  England.

Captain  Henchman,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner,  in  a
skirmish  a  few  days  before  the  surrender  of  Deventer,  was  now
brought  to  that  city,  and  earnestly  entreated  by  Tassis  and  by
Stanley  to  seize  this  opportunity  of  entering  the  service  of  Spain.

u  You  shall  have  great  advancement  and  preferment/'  said
Tassis.  “  His  Catholic  Majesty  has  got  ready  very  many  ships
for  Ireland,  and  Sir  William  Stanley  is  to  be  general  of  the
expedition^

u  And  you  shall  choose  your  own  preferment,"  said  Stanley,
“for  I  know  you  to  be  a  brave  man."

u  I  would  rather,"  replied  Henchman,  “  serve  my  prince  in
loyalty  as  a  beggar,  than  to  be  known  and  reported  a  rich
traitor,  with  breach  of  conscience."

“  Continue  so,"  replied  Stanley,  unabashed  ;  u  for  this  is  the
very  principle  of  my  own  enlargement :  for,  before,  I  served
the  devil,  and  now  I  am  serving  God."

The  offers  and  the  arguments  of  the  Spaniard  and  the
renegade  were  powerless  with  the  blunt  captain,  and  notwith¬
standing  “  divers  other  traitorous  alledgements  by  Sir  William
for  his  most  vile  facts,"  as  Henchman  expressed  it,  that  officer

1  “  Que  le  Colonel  Stanley  lui  a
profere,  Je  me  comporterai  tellement
que  le  pays  jusqu’en  Hollande  et  entre
Wezel  et  Embden,  seront  en  tout
ruine,  dedans  sis  jours ;  et  causerai  en
Irlande  tel  jeu  de  guerre  que  la  Reine
n’a  vu  en  sa  vie.”  Examination  of  Capt.
Thomas  Newton  touching  the  loss  of
Deventer,  before  the  Council  of  State,

-  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

31

“  That  he  (Lieutenant  John  Reenan,

in  Stanley’s  service,  an  earnest  man)
may  deliver  to  Sir  Francis  Walsing-
ham  some  circumstance  of  the  sur¬
rendering  of  Deventer,  and  what
speeches  passed  from  Sir  William
Stanley  touching  Ireland,  whither  he
thinks  to  be  sent  to  work  her  Majesty
some  trouble  and  annoy,  if  he  shall
be  able.”  Sir  John  Norris  to  F.  Wal-
singham,  29  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Off.  MS.)

2  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  24  Jan.  (MS.
before  cited.)

1587.

FEEBLE  DEFENCE  OF  STANLEY’S  CONDUCT.

175

remained  in  poverty  and  captivity  until  such  time  as  he  could
he  exchanged.1

Stanley  subsequently  attempted  in  various  ways  to  defend
his  character.  He  had  a  commission  from  Leicester,  he  said,
to  serve  whom  he  chose — as  if  the  governor-general  had
contemplated  his  serving  Philip  II.  with  that  commission  ;
he  had  a  passport  to  go  whither  he  liked — as  if  his  passport
entitled  him  to  take  the  city  of  Deventer  along  with  him  ;  he
owed  no  allegiance  to  the  States  ;  he  was  discharged  from  his
promise  to  the  Earl ;  he  was  his  own  master  ;  he  wanted
neither  money  nor  preferment  ;  he  had  been  compelled  by  his
conscience  and  his  duty  to  God  to  restore  the  city  to  its  lawful
master,  and  so  on,  and  so  on.2

But  whether  he  owed  the  States  allegiance  or  not,  it  is
certain  that  he  had  accepted  their  money  to  relieve  himself
and  his  troops  eight  days  before  his  treason.  That  Leicester
had  discharged  him  from  his  promises  to  such  an  extent  as  to
justify  his  surrendering  a  town  committed  to  his  honour  for
safe  keeping,  certainly  deserved  no  answer ;  that  his  duty  to
conscience  required  him  to  restore  the  city  argued  a  somewhat
tardy  awakening  of  that  monitor  in  the  breast  of  the  man  who
three  months  before  had  wrested  the  place  with  the  armed
hand  from  men  suspected  of  Catholic  inclinations  ;  that  his
first  motive  however  was  not  the  mere  love  of  money,  was
doubtless  true.  Attachment  to  his  religion,  a  desire  to  atone
for  his  sins  against  it,  the  insidious  temptings  of  his  evil  spirit,
York,3  who  was  the  chief  organizer  of  the  conspiracy,  and  the

1  Henry  Henchman  to  Walsingham,
22  March,  1587.  (S.  P.  office  MS.)

Totidem  verbis.

3  Bor,  Reyd,  Strada,  Hoofd,  ‘Ver-
volg'h,  ’  Le  Petit,  Wagenaar,  ubi  sup.
Bentivoglio,  P.  IT.  1.  v.  312.  F.
Haraei  Ann.  III.  398.  Camden,  III.
397-398.

3  According  to  Camden,  York  had
persuaded  Stanley  that  he  had  been
aocused  by  the  conspirators  of  being
engaged  in  the  Babington  plot,  and
that  he  was  “forthwith  to  be  sent
into  England,  to  be  hanged.”  Haraeus

( ubi  sup)  has  a  slight  allusion  to  the
same  effect,  but  I  have  found  no  other
intimation  of  this  very  improbable
suspicion  with  regard  to  Sir  William.
The  English  historian  also  states  that
after  the  treason  Stanley  called  his
troops  the  Seminary  regiment  of  sol¬
diers,  to  defend  the  Romish  religion
by  their  swords,  as  the  Seminary
priests  by  their  writings.  Cardinal
Allen  praised  his  deed  in  his  famous
book,  and  excited  all  others  to  go  and
do  likewise.  Camden,  B.  III.  398.

176

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS,

Chap.  XIII.

prospect  of  gratifying  a  wild  and  wicked  ambition — these  were
the  springs  that  moved  him.  Sums — varying  from  30,00(F.
to  a  pension  of  1500  pistolets  a  year — were  mentioned,  as
the  stipulated  price  of  his  treason,  by  Norris,  Wilkes,  Conway,
and  others  ; 1  but  the  Duke  of  Parma,  in  narrating  the  whole
affair  in  a  private  letter  to  the  King,  explicitly  stated  that  he
had  found  Stanley  “  singularly  disinterested.”

ec  The  colonel  was  only  actuated  by  religious  motives,”  he
said,  u  asking  for  no  reward,  except  that  he  might  serve  in  his
Majesty's  army  thenceforth — and  this  is  worthy  to  be  noted.” 2

At  the  same  time  it  appears  from  this  correspondence,  that
the  Duke  recommended,  and  that  the  King  bestowed,  a
u  merced,”  which  Stanley  did  not  refuse  ;3  and  it  was  very  well
known  that  to  no  persons  in  the  world  was  Philij)  apt  to  be  so
generous  as  to  men  of  high  rank,  Flemish,  Walloon,  or  English,
who  deserted  the  cause  of  his  rebellious  subjects  to  serve  under
his  own  banners.  Yet,  strange  to  relate,  almost  at  the  very
moment  that  Stanley ‘"was  communicating  his  fatal  act  of
treason,  in  order  that  he  might  open  a  high  career  for  his
ambition,  a  most  brilliant  destiny  was  about  to  dawn  upon
him.  The  Queen  had  it  in  contemplation,  in  recompense  for
his  distinguished  services,  and  by  advice  of  Leicester,  to  bestow
great  honors  and  titles  upon  him,  and  to  appoint  him  Viceroy
of  Ireland — of  that  very  country  which  he  was  now  proposing,
as  an  enemy  to  his  sovereign  and  as  the  purchased  tool  of  a
foreign  despot,  to  invade.4

1  MS.  Letters  before  cited.  Doyley
to  Walsingliam,  25  March,  1581.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)

2  “  Que  ha  sido  de  nota,”  &c.
Parma  to  Philip,  12  Peb.  1587.  (Arch,
de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Ibid.  Compare  Bentivoglio,  P.  II.
L  ?.  312.  “Era  Cattolico  lo  Stanley,

e  mostro  di  farlo  per  zelo  principal-
mente  di  Religione,”  says  the  Cardi¬
nal,  “contuccio  ne  fu  premiato  larga-
mente  dal  Re,  e  tanto  piu,  perche  egli
tiro  seco  nel  medesimo  servitio  tutti
gli  Inglesi  ch’  eravano  in  Deventer,”
&c.  This  last  statement  we  have  seen
to  be  entirely  a  mistake.

Compare  Strada,  II.  468,  469,  who  is
very  emphatic  with  regard  to  the
purity  of  Stanley’s  motives :  “  Motum
se  ad  dedendam  urbem  Stanlaeus  ad-
junxit,  non  largitionibus,  aut  honorum
titulis,  proditorum  pretiis;  quae  quam-
vis  oblata  respuerit  uti  aliena  a  majo-
rum  claritndine,  vitaque  sua,”  &c.
The  Jesuit  adds,  that  the  Duke  warmly
adjured  his  sovereign  not  to  allow  such
disinterestedness  to  go  unrewarded —
and  it  did  not.

4  This  is  stated  distinctly  by  Lei¬
cester  in  his  letter  to  the  States-Gene-
ral,  on  first  being  informed  of  the
surrender  of  Deventer:  “L’affection

1587.

SUBSEQUENT  FATE  OF  STANLEY  AND  YORK.

177

Stanley's  subsequent  fate  was  obscure.  A  price  of  3000
florins  was  put  by  the  States  upon  his  head  and  upon  that  of
York.1  He  went  to  Spain,  and  afterwards  returned  to  the
Provinces.  He  was  even  reported  to  have  become,  through
the  judgment  of  G-od,  a  lunatic,2  although  the  tale  wanted  con¬
firmation  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  at  the  close  of  the  year  he  had
mustered  his  regiment  under  Farnese,  prepared  to  join  the
Duke  in  the  great  invasion  of  England.3

Rowland  York,  who  was  used  to  such  practices,  cheerfully
consummated  his  crime  on  the  same  day  that  witnessed  the
surrender  of  Deventer.  He  rode  up  to  the  gates  of  that  city
on  the  morning  of  the  29th  January,  inquired  quietly  whether
Tassis  was  master  of  the  place,  and  then  galloped  furiously
back  the  ten  miles  to  his  fort.  Entering,  he  called  his  soldiers
together,  bade  them  tear  in  pieces  the  colours  of  England,  and
follow  him  into  the  city  of  Zutphen.4  Two  companies  of
States'  troops  offered  resistance,  and  attempted  to  hold  the
place ;  but  they  were  overpowered  by  the  English  and  Irish,
assisted  by  a  force  of  Spaniards,  who,  by  a  concerted  move¬
ment,  made  their  appearance  from  the  town.  He  received  a
handsome  reward,  having  far  surpassed  the  Duke  of  Parma's

et  soing  qu  ay  toujours  eu  a  la  con¬
servation  de  l’estat  des  provces  unies
m’augmentent  tant  plus  de  regret  qu
ay  eu  d’entendre  la  trahison  de  la  ville
de  Deventer,  qu  elle  a  este  forme  par
la  laschete  de  celuy  auquel  S.  M.  eut
voulu  confier  royaumes  entiers  et  lequel
elle  pensoit  annoblir  des  plus  grands
titres  avecq  recompenses  condignes,
pour  le  promouvoir  a  la  dignite  de
Yice  Roy  d’lrlande,”  &c.  Leicester

2

to  the  States- General,  —  Feb.  1587.

’  12

(Hague  Archives,  MS.)

1  Bor,  II.  xxii.  882.  Wagenaar,  viii.
199.

a  “By  letters  from  Deventer,  they
write  that  the  traitor  Stanley  groweth
frantic — a  just  punishment  of  God —
and  his  men  very  poor  and  in  misery.
The  other  traitor,  York,  has  been
seen  of  late  in  Antwerp  and  Brussels,
little  regarded,  whose  determination
is  to  go  to  Spain  or  Naples,  there  to

YOL.  II. — N

live  on  his  stipend,  out  of  the  stir  of
these  wars,  fearing  that  which  I  hope
to  God  he  shall  never  escape.”
Captain  Ed.  Burnham  to  Walsingham,
7  March,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  It  is  bruited  that  Stanley  was  now
lately  become  a  lunatic,  void  of  go¬
vernment  and  discretion . If  this

be  true,  as  he  was  known  for  a
traitor,  so  he  may  be  noted  for  a  fool.”
Lloyd  to  Walsingham,  15  Oct.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  “Among  them,  Sir  William  Stan¬
ley  was  the  leader  of  his  companies,
800  or  900  men,  the  most  part  Irish
and  Scotch  and  the  rest  English.  I
heard  an  Italian  captain  report  that
Stanley’s  companies  were  the  best  that
they  make  account  of.”  John  Giles
to  Walsingham,  4  Dec.  1587.  (S.  P.

1  Office  MS.)

4  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  24  Jan.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

i

178

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

expectations,  when  he  made  his  original  offer  of  service.  He
died  very  suddenly,  after  a  great  banquet  at  Deventer,  in  the
course  of  the  same  year,  not  having  succeeded  in  making  his
escape  into  Spain  to  live  at  ease  on  his  stipend.  It  was  sup¬
posed  that  he  was  poisoned  ;  but  the  charge  in  those  days  was
a  common  one,  and  nobody  cared  to  investigate  the  subject.
His  body  was  subsequently  exhumed — when  Deventer  came
into  the  hands  of  the  patriots — and  with  impotent  and  con¬
temptible  malice  hanged  upon  a  gibbet.  This  was  the  end  of
Rowland  York.1

Parma  was  highly  gratified,  as  may  be  imagined,  at  such
successful  results.  “  Thus  Fort  Zutphen,"  said  he,  “  about
which  there  have  been  so  many  fisticuffs,  and  Deventer — which
was  the  real  object  of  the  last  campaign,  and  which  has  cost
the  English  so  much  blood  and  money,  and  is  the  safety  of
Groningen  and  of  all  those  Provinces — is  now  your  Majesty's.
Moreover,  the  effect  of  this  treason  must  be  to  sow  great
distrust  between  the  English  and  the  rebels,  who  will  hence¬
forth  never  know  in  whom  they  can  confide."2

Parma  was  very  right  in  this  conjuncture.  Moreover,  there
was  just  then  a  fearful  run  against  the  States.  The  castle  of
Wauw,  within  a  league  of  Bergen-op-Zoom,  which  had  been
entrusted  to  one  Le  Marchand,  a  Frenchman  in  the  service  of
the  republic,  was  delivered  by  him  to  Parma  for  16,000  florins.
u  'Tis  a  very  important  post,"  said  the  Duke,  u  and  the  money
was  well  laid  out." 3

The  loss  of  the  city  of  Gelder,  capital  of  the  Province  of  the
same  name,  took  place  in  the  summer.  This  town  belonged
to  the  jurisdiction  of  Martin  Schenk,  and  was  his  chief  place
of  deposit  for  the  large  and  miscellaneous  property  acquired
by  him  during  his  desultory,  but  most  profitable,  freebooting
career.  The  famous  partisan  was  then  absent,  engaged  in  a
lucrative  job  in  the  way  of  his  profession.  He  had  made  a

1  Bor,  Reyd,  Hoofd,  Wagenaar,
Strada,  Bentivoglio,  Camden,  Le  Petit,
Haraeus,  locis  citatis.  Baker’s  Chro¬
nicle,  385.  Meteren,  xiv.  245-250.  MS.
Letters  already  cited.

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  12  Feb.  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)

3  Ibid.  Compare  Bor,  II.  xxii.  878.
Strada,  II.  466.  Wagenaar,  viii.  196.
Haraeus,  III.  397  et  mult.  al.

1587.

BETRAYAL  OF  GELDER  TO  PARMA.

179

contract — in  a  very  business-like  way — with  the  States,  to
defend  the  city  of  Rheinberg  and  all  the  country  round
against  the  Duke  of  Parma,  pledging  himself  to  keep  on  foot
for  that  purpose  an  army  of  3300  foot  and  700  horse.  For
this  extensive  and  important  operation  he  was  to  receive
20,000  florins  a  month  from  the  general  exchequer,  and  in
addition  he  was  to  be  allowed  the  brandschatz — the  black¬
mail,  that  is  to  say — of  the  whole  country-side,  and  the
taxation  upon  all  vessels  going  up  and  down  the  river  before
Rheinberg  ;  an  ad  valorem  duty,  in  short,  upon  all  river-
merchandise,  assessed  and  collected  in  summary  fashion.1
A  tariff  thus  enforced  was  not  likely  to  be  a  mild  one  ;  and
although  the  States  considered  that  they  had  got  a  “good
penny-worth''  by  the  job,  it  was  no  easy  thing  to  get  the
better,  in  a  bargain,  of  the  vigilant  Martin,  who  wras  as  thrifty
a  speculator  as  he  was  a  desperate  fighter.  A  more  accom¬
plished  highwayman,  artistically  and  enthusiastically  devoted
to  his  pursuit,  never  lived.  Nobody  did  his  work  more
thoroughly — nobody  got  himself  better  paid  for  his  work —
and  Thomas  Wilkes,  that  excellent  man  of  business,  thought
the  States  not  likely  to  make  much  by  their  contract.2  Never¬
theless,  it  was  a  comfort  to  know  that  the  work  would  not  be
neglected.

Schenk  was  accordingly  absent,  jobbing  the  Rheinberg
siege,  and  in  his  place  one  Aristotle  Patton,  a  Scotch  colonel
in  the  States'  service,  was  commandant  of  Grelders.  Now  the
thrifty  Scot  had  an  eye  to  business,  too,  and  was  no  more
troubled  with  qualms  of  conscience  than  Rowland  York  himself.
Moreover,  he  knew  himself  to  be  in  great  danger  of  losing  his
place,  for  Leicester  was  no  friend  to  him,  and  intended  to
supersede  him.  Patton  had  also  a  decided  grudge  against
Martin  Schenk,  for  that  truculent  personage  had  recently
administered  to  him  a  drubbing,  which  no  doubt  he  had  richly
deserved.3  Accordingly,  when  the  Duke  of  Parma  made  a

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  3  Dec.  1586.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  2  Ibid.

3  Strada,  II.  500.  Baudartii  Polemo-

grapkia,  II.  90.  Compare  Wagenaar,
viii.  226,  who  is  the  authority  for  the
illustrious  pagan  name  of  the  Scot.

180

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

secret  offer  to  him  of  36,000  florins  if  he  would  quietly  sur¬
render  the  city  entrusted  to  him,  the  colonel  jumped  at  so
excellent  an  opportunity  of  circumventing  Leicester,  feeding
his  grudge  against  Martin,  and  making  a  handsome  fortune  for
himself.  He  knew  his  trade  too  well,  however,  to  accept  the
offer  too  eagerly,  and  bargained  awhile  for  better  terms,  and
to  such  good  purpose,  that  it  was  agreed  he  should  have  not
only  the  36,000  florins,  hut  all  the  horses,  arms,  plate,  furni¬
ture,  and  other  moveables  in  the  city  belonging  to  Schenk,
that  he  could  lay  his  hands  upon.  Here  were  revenge  and
solid  damages  for  the  unforgotten  assault  and  battery — for
Schenk's  property  alone  made  no  inconsiderable  fortune — and
accordingly  the  city,  towards  Midsummer,  was  surrendered  to
the  Seigneur  d'Haultepenne.1  Moreover,  the  excellent  Patton
had  another  and  a  loftier  motive.  He  was  in  love.  He  had
also  a  rival.  The  lady  of  his  thoughts  was  the  widow  of
Pontus  de  Noyelle,  Seigneur  de  Bours,  who  had  once  saved
the  citadel  of  Antwerp,  and  afterwards  sold  that  city  and
himself.  His  rival  was  no  other  than  the  great  Seigneur  de
Champagny,  brother  of  Cardinal  Granvelle,  eminent  as  soldier,
diplomatist,  and  financier,  but  now  growing  old,  not  in  affluent
circumstances,  and  much  troubled  with  the  gout.  Madame
de  Bours  had,  however,  accepted  his  hand,  and  had  fixed  the
day  for  the  wedding,  when  the  Scotchman,  thus  suddenly
enriched,  renewed  a  previously  unsuccessful  suit.  The  widow
then,  partially  keeping  her  promise,  actually  celebrated  her
nuptials  on  the  appointed  evening  ;  but,  to  the  surprise  of  the
Provinces,  she  became  not  the  haulte  et  puissante  dame  de
Champagny ,  but  Mrs.  Aristotle  Patton.2

For  this  last  treason  neither  Leicester  nor  the  English  were
responsible.  Patton  was  not  only  a  Scot,  but  a  follower  of
Hohenlo,  as  Leicester  loudly  protested.3  Le  Marchant  was  a

1  Ibid.  Leicester  to  Walsingham,
4  July,  4  Aug.  1587.  Lloyd  to  Wal-
singham,  3  July,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MSS.)  But  Strada  states  that  the
plate  and  other  property  were  reserved
to  the  Spanish  government.

2  Baudart,  ubi  sup.  Le  Petit,  II.
346-347.

3  “  It  is  so  that  Grelders  is  lost,  given
up  by  Paton,  the  Scotchman,  and  com¬
manded  thither  by  the  Count  Hollock,
and  hath  been  wholly  at  his  direction

1587.

THESE  TREASONS  CAST  ODIUM  ON  THE  ENGLISH.  131

Frenchman.  But  Deventer  and  Zutphen  were  places  of  vital
importance,  and  Stanley  an  Englishman  of  highest  considera¬
tion,  one  who  had  been  deemed  worthy  of  the  command  in
chief  in  Leicester's  absence.  Moreover,  a  cornet  in  the  service
of  the  Earl's  nephew,  Sir  Bobert  Sidney,  had  been  seen  at
Zutphen  in  conference  with  Tassis  ;  and  the  horrible  suspicion
went  abroad  that  even  the  illustrious  name  of  Sidney  was  to
be  polluted  also.1  This  fear  was  fortunately  false,  although  the
cornet  was  unquestionably  a  traitor,  with  whom  the  enemy  had
been  tampering  ;  but  the  mere  thought  that  Sir  Robert  Sidney
could  betray  the  trust  reposed  in  him  was  almost  enough  to  make
the  still  unburied  corpse  of  his  brother  arise  from  the  dead.

Parma  was  right  when  he  said  that  all  confidence  of  the
Netherlanders  in  the  Englishmen  would  now  be  gone,  and
that  the  Provinces  would  begin  to  doubt  their  best  friends.
No  fresh  treasons  followed,  but  they  were  expected  every  day.
An  organized  plot  to  betray  the  country  was  believed  in,  and
a  howl  of  execration  swept  through  the  land.  The  noble
deeds  of  Sidney  and  Willoughby,  and  Norris  and  Pelham,  and
Roger  Williams,  the  honest  and  valuable  services  of  Wilkes,
the  generosity  and  courage  of  Leicester,  were  for  a  season
forgotten.  The  English  were  denounced  in  every  city  and
village  of  the  Netherlands  as  traitors  and  miscreants.  Re¬
spectable  English  merchants  went  from  hostelry  to  hostelry,
and  from  town  to  town,  and  were  refused  a  lodging  for  love
or  money.  The  nation  was  put  under  ban.2  A  most  melan¬
choly  change  from  the  beginning  of  the  year,  when  the  very
men  who  were  now  loudest  in  denunciation  and  fiercest  in  hate,
had  been  the  warmest  friends  of  Elizabeth,  of  England,  and  of
Leicester.

and  commandment.  Yet  for  tlie  good
nature  of  Norris  and  Wilkes,  so  soon
as  they  heard  of  this,  reported  to  the
States  that  this  Patton  was  a  colonel
of  my  preferment  to  make  the  people
to  hate  me,”  &c.  Leicester  to  Walsing-
ham,  2  July,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

It  will  be  perceived  that  this  occur¬
rence  has  been  placed  in  juxtaposition
with  similar  occurrences  in  the  narra¬

tive,  although  a  few  months  removed
from  them  in  chronological  sequence.

1  Examination  of  Newton.  MS.
before  cited.  Compare  Meteren,  xiv.
249-250.  Reyd,  vi.  97-98.

3  Wilkes  to  Hatton,  24  Jan.  1587.
Memorial  given  to  Sir  Roger  Williams,
Feb.  1587.  Wilkes  to  the  Queen,
16  Feb.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

182

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

At  Hohenlo's  table  the  opinion  was  loudly  expressed,  even
in  the  presence  of  Sir  Roger  Williams,  that  it  was  highly
imjirobable,  if  a  man  like  Stanley,  of  such  high  rank  in  the
kingdom  of  England,  of  such  great  connections  and  large
means,  could  commit  such  a  treason,  that  he  could  do  so
without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  her  Majesty.1

Barneveld,  in  council  of  state,  declared  that  Leicester,  by
his  restrictive  letter  of  24th  November,  had  intended  to  carry
the  authority  over  the  republic  into  England,  in  order  to
dispose  of  everything  at  his  pleasure,  in  conjunction  with  the
English  cabinet-council,  and  that  the  country  had  never  been
so  cheated  by  the  French  as  it  had  now  been  by  the  English,
and  that  their  government  had  become  insupportable.2

Councillor  Carl  Roorda  maintained  at  the  table  of  Elector
Truchsess  that  the  country  had  fallen  de  tyrannide  in  tyrranni-
dem:  and — if  they  had  spurned  the  oppression  of  the  Spaniards
and  the  French — that  it  was  now  time  to  rebel  against  the
English.  Barneveld  and  Buys  loudly  declared  that  the  Pro¬
vinces  were  able  to  protect  themselves  without  foreign  assist¬
ance,  and  that  it  was  very  injurious  to  impress  a  contrary
opinion  upon  the  public  mind.3

The  whole  college  of  the  States- General  came  before  the
state-council,  and  demanded  the  name  of  the  man  to  whom
the  Earl's  restrictive  letter  had  been  delivered — that  docu¬
ment  by  which  the  governor  had  'dared  surreptitiously  to
annul  the  authority  which  publicly  he  had  delegated  to  that
body,  and  thus  to  deprive  it  of  the  power  of  preventing  an¬
ticipated  crimes.  After  much  colloquy  the  name  of  Bracket
was  given,  and,  had  not  the  culprit  fortunately  been  absent,
his  life  might  have  been  in  danger,  for  rarely  had  grave
statesmen  been  so  thoroughly  infuriated.4

No  language  can  exaggerate  the  consequences  of  this

1  Abuses  offered  to  her  Majesty  and
his  Excellency  and  the  whole  English
nation  by  the  States  and  others.  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Sir  J.  Norris

to  Walsingham,  25  March,  1587.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)  8  Ibid.

3  Ibid.  Compare  Strada,  II.  469  ;
Bentivoglio,  P.  II.  1.  iv.  312-313;
Bor,  II.  xxii.  883;  Wagenaar,  viii.  199;
et  mult.  al.

4  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  24  Jan.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

MISERABLE  PLIGHT  OF  THE  ENGLISH  TROOPS.

183

wretched  treason.  Unfortunately,  too,  the  abject  condition
to  which  the  English  troops  had  been  reduced  by  the  nig¬
gardliness  of  their  sovereign  was  an  additional  cause  of
danger.  Leicester  was  gone,  and  since  her  favourite  was  no
longer  in  the  Netherlands,  the  Queen  seemed  to  forget  that
there  was  a  single  Englishman  upon  that  fatal  soil.  In  five
months  not  one  penny  had  been  sent  to  her  troops.  While  the
Earl  had  been  there  one  hundred  and  forty  thousand  pounds
had  been  sent  in  seven  or  eight  months.  After  his  departure
not  five  thousand  pounds  were  sent  in  one  half  year.1

The  English  soldiers,  who  had  fought  so  well  in  every  Flemish
battle-field  of  freedom,  had  become — such  as  were  left  of
them — mere  famishing  half  naked  vagabonds  and  marauders.
Brave  soldiers  had  been  changed  by  their  sovereign  into
brigands,  and  now  the  universal  odium  which  suddenly
attached  itself  to  the  English  name  converted  them  into
outcasts.  Forlorn  and  crippled  creatures  swarmed  about  the
Provinces,  but  were  forbidden  to  come  through  the  towns,  and
so  wandered  about,  robbing  hen-roosts  and  pillaging  the
peasantry.2  Many  deserted  to  the  enemy.  Many  begged
their  way  to  England,  and  even  to  the  very  gates  of  the
palace,  and  exhibited  their  wounds  and  their  misery  before
the  eyes  of  that  good  Queen  Bess  who  claimed  to  be  the
mother  of  her  subjects, — and  begged  for  bread  in  vain.3

The  English  cavalry,  dwindled  now  to  a  body  of  five
hundred,  starving  and  mutinous,  made  a  foray  into  Holland,
rather  as  highwaymen  than  soldiers.  Count  Maurice  com¬
manded  their  instant  departure,  and  Hohenlo  swore  that  if
the  order  were  not  instantly  obeyed,  he  would  put  himself  at
the  head  of  his  troops  and  cut  every  man  of  them  to  pieces.4
A  most  painful  and  humiliating  condition  for  brave  men  who
had  been  fighting  the  battles  of  their  Queen  and  of  the  republic,
to  behold  themselves — through  the  parsimony  of  the  one  and

1  J.  Norris  to  Walsingliam,  25  March,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Wilkes  to  the  Queen,  16  Feb.  1587.

Same  to  Walsingham,  19  Jan.  1587.

(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

3  Memorial  (in  Burghley’s  hand)  of

things  to  be  declared,  Nov.  1587.  (S.

P.  Office  MS.)

4  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  12  March

1587.  (MS.)

184

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

the  infuriated  sentiment  of  the  other — compelled  to  starve,  to
rob,  or  to  be  massacred  by  those  whom  they  had  left  their
homes  to  defend  !

At  last,  honest  Wilkes,  ever  watchful  of  his  duty,  succeeded
in  borrowing  eight  hundred  pounds  sterling  for  two  months,
by  u  pawning  his  own  carcase  ”  as  he  expressed  himself.  This
gave  the  troopers  about  thirty  shillings  a  man,  with  which
relief  they  became,  for  a  time,  contented  and  well  disposed.1

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  12  March,
1581.  (MS.)  “So  great  is  the  lack  of

discipline  among  the  garrisons,”  wrote
Wilkes,  “especially  of  our  nation,  that
I  am  ashamed  to  hear  the  continual
complaints  which  come  to  this  council
against  them.  And  albeit  Sir  John
Norris  and  I  have  written  often  unto
the  captains  and  governors  to  see  re¬
formation  had  of  the  insolences  and
disorders  of  their  soldiers  within  the
towns,  it  is  notwithstanding  so  slen¬
derly  respected  as  there  followeth  no
amendment  at  all;  so  as  we  begin  to
grow  as  hateful  to  the  people  as  the
Spaniard  himself,  who  governelh  his
towns  of  conquest  with  a  milder  hand
than  ive  do  our  friends  and  allies.  The
causes  hereof  we  find  to  be  two.  The
one  is  for  lack  of  pay,  without  which
it  is  impossible  to  preserve  discipline
among  the  soldiers,  and  most  of  the
troops  in  her  Majesty’s  pay  (excepting
the  garrisons  of  Brill  and  Flushing)
have  not  been  paid  from  the  beginning
of  September  last,  being  now  about
five  months.  The  other  is  lack  of
government  in  the  captains  and  officers,
who  for  the  most  part  are  either  such
as  never  served  before,  and  have  no
judgment — no  not  to  rule  themselves,
and  such  as  make  their  profit  of  the
poor  soldiers  so  extremely  as  they  are
hateful  to  the  companies,  wherein  if
there  is  no  redress,  it  were  better  her
Majesty  did  revoke  all ;  for  as  the  case
of  the  common  soldier  now  standeth
the  States  receive  little  or  no  service
of  them  but  spoil  and  ruin  of  their
towns  and  countries.”  Wilkes  to  Wal-
singham,  19  Jan.  1581.  (MS.)

And  again  he  writes  to  the  Queen,
about  “  the  weakness  and  confusion  to
which  her  troops  are  reduced  for  want
of  pay,  having  received  nothing  from
1  Sept,  to  that  day”  (16 Feb).  “The

captains  of  the  horsemen,”  he  says,
“  are  all  in  England,  and  thereby  the
most  of  the  companies  evil  led  and
governed,  committing  daily  upon  the
villages  and  people  extreme  spoils,  in¬
solences,  and  mischiefs,  which,  toge¬
ther  with  the  example  of  the  late
treasons  of  Stanley  and  York,  hath
drawn  our  nation  into  the  hatred  of
this  people  very  deeply,  so  as  they  are
for  the  most  part  turned  out  of  the
towns,  and  refused  to  be  taken  into
garrison.  The  horsemen,  destitute  of
money  and  food,  are,  without  order,
entered  now  into  Holland  (an  unfit
place  for  their  abode),  where  the  people
are  risen  against  them,  and  they  to
the  number  of  500  or  600,  in  terms
either  themselves  to  do  mischief,  or
themselves  to  be  cut  in  pieces  by  the
country — a  case  very  lamentable  to  us
that  feel  the  grief  of  so  hard  a  choice,
and  can  find  almost  no  way  to  prevent
the  peril.  I  have  urged  the  States  by
earnest  letters  (myself  being  at  this
present  sick,  by  God’s  visitation,  to
the  danger  of  my  life)  to  take  some
order  to  relieve  your  people  in  this
distress,  myself  offering  my  carcase  in
pawn,  to  answer  as  much  as  they  shall
eat,  after  a  certain  rate.  I  find  them
reasonably  inclined,  yet  affected  by
two  impediments — a  strange  jealousy,'
by  them  conceived  of  all  our  nation ;

the  other  their  own  want . The

confusions  are  wonderful  that  are
grown  in  this  State  in  the  absence  of
my  Lord  of  Leicester,  which  hath
opened  many  gaps  to  disorder,”  &c.
Wilkes  to  the  Queen,  16  Feb.  1581.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

And  once  more  he  writes,  “  I  saw
no  remedy  for  them  but  to  engage
myself  for  some  means  to  feed  them
until  other  order  might  be  taken,
whereupon  with  the  help  of  mine  own

158*7.

HONESTY  AND  ENERGY  OF  WILKES.

185

Is  this  picture  exaggerated  ?  Is  it  drawn  by  pencils  hostile
to  the  English  nation  or  the  English  Queen  P  It  is  her  own
generals  and  confidential  counsellors  who  have  told  a  story
in  all  its  painful  details,  which  has  hardly  found  a  place  in
other  chronicles.  The  parsimony  of  the  great  Queen  must
ever  remain  a  blemish  on  her  character,  and  it  was  never
more  painfully  exhibited  than  towards  her  brave  soldiers  in
Flanders  in  the  year  1587.  Thomas  Wilkes,  a  man  of  truth,
and  a  man  of  accounts,  had  informed  Elizabeth  that  the
expenses  of  one  year’s  war,  since  Leicester  had  been  governor-
general,  had  amounted  to  exactly  five  hundred  and  seventy-
nine  thousand  three  hundred  and  sixty  pounds  and  nineteen
shillings,  of  which  sum  one  hundred  and  forty-six  thousand
three  hundred  and  eighty-six  pounds  and  eleven  shillings  had
been  spent  by  her  Majesty,  and  the  balance  had  been  paid,
or  was  partly  owing  by  the  States.1  These  were  not  agreeable
figures,  but  the  figures  of  honest  accountants  rarely  flatter,
and  Wilkes  was  not  one  of  those  financiers  who  have  the  wish
or  the  gift  to  make  things  pleasant.  He  had  transmitted  the
accounts  just  as  they  had  been  delivered,  certified  by  the
treasurers  of  the  States  and  by  the  English  paymasters,  and
the  Queen  was  appalled  at  the  sum-totals.  She  could  never
proceed  with  such  a  war  as  that,  she  said,  and  she  declined
a  loan  of  sixty  thousand  pounds  which  the  States  requested,
besides  stoutly  refusing  to  advance  her  darling  Robin  a
penny  to  pay  off  the  mortgages  upon  two-thirds  of  his  estates,
on  which  the  equity  of  redemption  was  fast  expiring,  or  to
give  him  the  slightest  help  in  furnishing  him  forth  anew  for
the  wars.

Yet  not  one  of  her  statesmen  doubted  that  these  Netherland
battles  were  English  battles,  almost  as  much  as  if  the  fighting-
ground  had  been  the  Isle  of  Wight  or  the  coast  of  Kent,  the

credit,  and  pawn  of  my  own  carcase,
to  repay  at  the  end  of  two  months
800Z.  which  I  divided  among  the  com¬
panies  distressed,  being  eight  in  num¬
ber,  which  extended  to  thirty  shillings

a  man,”  &c.  Wilkes  to  Leicester,
12  March,  1581.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  12  Jan.
1581.  Same  to  Burghley,  12  Jan.  1581.
(S.  T.  Office  MSS.)

186

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Ciiap.  XIII.

charts  of  which  the  statesmen  and  generals  of  Spain  were
daily  conning.

Wilkes,  too,  while  defending  Leicester  stoutly  behind  his
back,  doing  his  best  to  explain  his  short-comings,  lauding  his
courage  and  generosity,  and  advocating  his  beloved  theory  of
popular  sovereignty  with  much  ingenuity  and  eloquence,  had
told  him  the  truth  to  his  face.  Although  assuring  him  that
if  he  came  back  soon,  he  might  rule  the  States  cc  as  a  school¬
master  doth  his  boys/' 1  he  did  not  fail  to  set  before  him  the
disastrous  effects  of  his  sudden  departure  and  of  his  protracted
absence  ;  he  had  painted  in  darkest  colours  the  results  of  the
Deventer  treason,  he  had  unveiled  the  cabals  against  his
authority,  he  had  repeatedly  and  vehemently  implored  his
return  ;  he  had  informed  the  Queen,  that  notwithstanding
some  errors  of  administration,  he  was  much  the  fittest  man
to  represent  her  in  the  Netherlands,  and  that  he  could
accomplish,  by  reason  of  his  experience,  more  in  three  months
than  any  other  men  could  do  in  a  year.  He  had  done  his
best  to  reconcile  the  feuds  which  existed  between  him  and
important  personages  in  the  Netherlands,  he  had  been  the
author  of  the  complimentary  letters  sent  to  him  in  the  name
of  the  States-General — to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  Queen —
but  he  had  not  given  up  his  friendship  with  Sir  John  Norris,
because  he  said  u  the  virtues  of  the  man  made  him  as  worthy
of  love  as  any  one  living,  and  because  the  more  he  knew
him,  the  more  he  had  cause  to  affect  and  to  admire  him/'2

This  was  the  unpardonable  offence,  and  for  this,  and  for
having  told  the  truth  about  the  accounts,  Leicester  denounced
Wilkes  to  the  Queen  as  a  traitor  and  a  hypocrite,  and
threatened  repeatedly  to  take  his  life.  He  had  even  the
meanness  to  prejudice  Burghley  against  him — by  insinuating
to  the  Lord-Treasurer  that  he  too  had  been  maligned  by
Wilkes — and  thus  most  effectually  damaged  the  character  of
the  plain-spoken  councillor  with  the  Queen  and  many  of

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  17  Feb.  1587.  Same  to  Walsingham,  17  May

1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS!)  *  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  Ibid.  Same  to  the  Queen,  16  Feb.

158?.

INDIGNANT  DISCUSSION  IN  THE  ASSEMBLY.

187

her  advisers ;  notwithstanding  that  he  plaintively  besought
her  to  “  allow  him  to  reiterate  his  sorry  song,  as  doth  the
cuckoo,  that  she  would  please  not  condemn  her  poor  servant
unheard/' 1

Immediate  action  was  taken  on  the  Deventer  treason,  and
on  the  general  relations  between  the  States-General  and  the
English  government.  Barneveld  immediately  drew  up  a
severe  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester.  On  the  2nd  February
Wilkes  came  by  chance  into  the  assembly  of  the  States-
General,  with  the  rest  of  the  councillors,  and  found  Barneveld
just  demanding  the  public  reading  of  that  document.  The
letter  was  read.  Wilkes  then  rose  and  made  a  few  remarks.

“  The  letter  seems  rather  sharp  upon  his  Excellency,"  he
observed.  “  There  is  not  a  word  in  it,"  answered  Barneveld
curtly,  “  that  is  not  perfectly  true  ;"  and  with  this  he  cut  the
matter  short,  and  made  a  long  speech  upon  other  matters
which  were  then  before  the  assembly.

Wilkes,  very  anxious  as  to  the  effect  of  the  letter,  both  ujion
public  feeling  in  England  and  upon  his  own  position  as
English  councillor,  waited  immediately  upon  Count  Maurice,
President  van  der  Myle,  and  upon  Villiers  the  clergyman,  and
implored  their  interposition  to  prevent  the  transmission  of  the
epistle.  They  promised  to  make  an  effort  to  delay  its  despatch
or  to  mitigate  its  tone.  A  fortnight  afterwards,  however,
Wilkes  learned  with  dismay,  that  the  document  (the  leading
passages  of  which  will  be  given  hereafter)  had  been  sent  to  its
destination.2

Meantime,  a  consultation  of  civilians  and  of  the  family
council  of  Count  Maurice  was  held,  and  it  was  determined  that
the  Count  should  assume  the  title  of  Prince  more  formally
than  he  had  hitherto  done,3  in  order  that  the  actual  head  of
the  Nassaus  might  be  superior  in  rank  to  Leicester  or  to  any

1  Wilkes  to  the  Queen,  8  Deb.  158?.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

5  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  1?  May,
158?.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  _

Compare  Wagenaar,  viii.  201,  who
states  that  the  famous  4th  of  February
letter  was  read  and  approved  by

Wilkes.  This  is  an  error,  as  appears
in  the  narrative  given  in  the  text  from
the  MS.  letter-book  of  Wilkes.

3  Memorial  given  by  Wilkes  to  Sir
R.  Williams,  Feb.  158?.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  Compare  Le  Petit,  II.  xiv.  541.
Wagenaar,  viii.  203-204.

188

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIII.

man  who  could  he  sent  from  England.  Maurice  was  also
appointed  by  the  States,  provisionally,  governor-general,
with  Hohenlo  for  his  lieutenant-general.1  That  formidable
personage,  now  fully  restored  to  health,  made  himself  very
busy  in  securing  towns  and  garrisons  for  the  party  of  Holland,
and  in  cashiering  all  functionaries  suspected  of  English
tendencies.  Especially  he  became  most  intimate  with  Count
Moeurs,  stadholder  of  Utrecht — the  hatred  of  which  individual
and  his  wife  towards  Leicester  and  the  English  nation,
springing  originally  from  the  unfortunate  babble  of  Otheman,
had  grown  more  intense  than  ever, — “banquetting  and
feasting  ”  with  him  all  day  long,  and  concocting  a  scheme,
by  which,  for  certain  considerations,  the  province  of  Utrecht
was  to  be  annexed  to  Holland  under  the  perpetual  stad-
holderate  of  Prince  Maurice.

1  Meteren,  xiv.  250.  Wagenaar,  viii.  204.  Reyd,  vi.  100,

1587.

LEICESTER  IN  ENGLAND.

189

CHAPTER  XIV.

Leicester  in  England — Trial  of  the  Queen  of  Scots — Fearful  Perplexity  at
the  English  Court — Infatuation  and  Obstinacy  of  the  Queen — Nether-
land  Envoys  in  England — Queen’s  bitter  Invective  against  them —
Amazement  of  the  Envoys — They  consult  with  her  chief  Councillors —
Remarks  of  Burghley  and  Davison — Fourth  of  February  Letter  from  the
States — Its  severe  Language  towards  Leicester — Painful  Position  of  the
Envoys  at  Court — Queen’s  Parsimony  towards  Leicester.

The  scene  shifts.,  for  a  brief  interval,  to  England.  Leicester
had  reached  the  court  late  in  November.  Those  cc  blessed
beams/'  under  whose  shade  he  was  wont  to  find  so  much
u  refreshment  and  nutrition/'  had  again  fallen  with  full
radiance  upon  him.  “  Never  since  I  was  born/'  said  he,  u  did
I  receive  a  more  gracious  welcome."1  Alas,  there  was  not
so  much  benignity  for  the  starving  English  soldiers,  nor
for  the  Provinces,  which  were  fast  growing  desperate  ;  but
although  their  cause  was  so  intimately  connected  with  the
u  great  cause,"  which  then  occupied  Elizabeth,  almost  to  the
exclusion  of  other  matter,  it  was,  perhaps,  not  wonderful,
although  unfortunate,  that  for  a  time  the  Netherlands  should
be  neglected.

The  u  daughter  of  debate"  had  at  last  brought  herself,  it
was  supposed,  within  the  letter  of  the  law,  and  now  began
those  odious  scenes  of  hypocrisy  on  the  part  of  Elizabeth,
that  frightful  comedy — more  melancholy  even  than  the
solemn  tragedy  which  it  preceded  and  followed — which  must
ever  remain  the  darkest  passage  in  the  history  of  the  Queen.
It  is  unnecessary,  in  these  pages,  to  make  more  than  a
passing  allusion  to  the  condemnation  and  death  of  the  Queen
of  Scots.  Who  doubts  her  participation  in  the  Babington
conspiracy?  Who  doubts  that  she  was  the  centre  of  one  endless

1  Leicester  to  Wilkes,  4  Dec.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

190

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIY.

conspiracy  by  Spain  and  Rome  against  the  throne  and  life
of  Elizabeth  ?  Who  doubts  that  her  long  imprisonment  in
England  was  a  violation  of  all  law,  all  justice,  all  humanity  ?
Who  doubts  that  the  fineing,  whipping,  torturing,  hanging,
embowelling  of^men,  women,  and  children,  guilty  of  no  other
crime  than  adhesion  to  the  Catholic  faith,  had  assisted  the
Pope  and  Philip,  and  their  band  of  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish
conspirators,  to  shake  Elizabeth’s  throne  and  endanger  her  life  ?
Who  doubts  that,  had  the  English  sovereign  been  capable  of
conceiving  the  great  thought  of  religious  toleration,  her  reign
would  have  been  more  glorious  than  it  was,  the  cause  of  Pro¬
testantism  and  freedom  more  triumphant,  the  name  of
Elizabeth  Tudor  dearer  to  human  hearts  ?  Who  doubts  that
there  were  many  enlightened  and  noble  spirits  among  her
Protestant  subjects  who  lifted  up  their  voices,  over  and  over
again,  in  parliament  and  out  of  it,  to  denounce  that  wicked
persecution  exercised  upon  their  innocent  Catholic  brethren,
which  was  fast  converting  loyal  Englishmen,  against  their
will,  into  traitors  and  conspirators  ?  Yet  who  doubts  that  it
would  have  required,  at  exactly  that  moment,  and  in  the
midst  of  that  crisis,  more  elevation  of  soul  than  could  fairly
be  predicated  of  any  individual,  for  Elizabeth  in  1587  to
pardon  Mary,  or  to  relax  in  the  severity  of  her  legislation
towards  English  Papists  ?

Yet,  although  a  display  of  sublime  virtue,  such  as  the  world
has  rarely  seen,  was  not  to  be  expected,  it  was  reasonable  to
look  for  honest  and  royal  dealing,  from  a  great  sovereign,
brought  at  last  face  to  face  with  a  great  event.  The  “  great
cause”  demanded  a  great,  straightforward  blow.  It  was
obvious,  however,  that  it  would  be  difficult,  in  the  midst  of
the  tragedy  and  the  comedy,  for  the  Nethetland  business  to
come  fairly  before  her  Majesty.  “  Touching  the  Low  Country
causes,”  said  Leicester,  “  very  little  is  done  yet,  by  reason  of
the  continued  business  we  have  had  about  the  Queen  of
Scots’  matters.  All  the  speech  I  have  had  with  her  Majesty
hitherto  touching  those  causes  hath  been  but  private.”1

1  Leicester  to  Wilkes,  4  Dec.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

TRIAL  OF  THE  QUEEH  OF  SCOTS.

191

Walsingham,  longing  for  retirement,  not  only  on  account  of
“  liis  infinite  grief  for  the  death  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  which
hath  been  the  cause/'  he  said,  “  that  I  have  ever  since  betaken
myself  into  solitariness,  and  withdrawn  from  public  affairs/'
but  also  by  reason  of  the  perverseness  and  difficulty  manifested
in  the  gravest  affairs  by  the  sovereign  he  so  faithfully  served,
sent  information,  that,  notwithstanding  the  arrival  of  some
of  the  States'  deputies,  Leicester  was  persuading  her  Majesty
to  proceed  first  in  the  great  cause.  “  Certain  jn’incipal
persons,  chosen  as  committees,"  he  said,  “  of  both  Houses  are
sent  as  humble  suitors  to  her  Majesty  to  desire  that  she
would  be  pleased  to  give  order  for  the  execution  of  the
Scottish  Queen.  Her  Majesty  made  answer  that  she  wras
loath  to  proceed  in  so  violent  a  course  against  the  said  Queen,
as  the  taking  away  of  her  life,  and  therefore  prayed  them  to
think  of  some  other  way  which  might  be  for  her  owm  and
their  safety.  They  replied,  no  other  way  but  her  execution.
Her  Majesty,  though  she  yielded  no  answer  to  this  their  latter
reply,  is  contented  to  give  order  that  the  proclamation  be
published,  and  so  also  it  is  hoped  that  she  will  be  moved  by
this  their  earnest  instance  to  proceed  to  the  thorough  ending
of  the  cause." 1

And  so  the  cause  "went  slowly  on  to  its  thorough  ending.
And  when  “no  other  way"  could  be  thought  of  but  to  take
Mary's  life,  and  when  “no  other  way"  of  taking  that  life
could  be  “  devised,"  at  Elizabeth’s  suggestion,  except  by
public  execution,  when  none  of  the  gentlemen  “  of  the
association,"  nor  Paulet,  nor  Drury — how  skilfully  soever
their  “pulses  had  been  felt"2  by  Elizabeth's  command —
would  commit  assassination  to  serve  a  Queen  who  was  capable
of  punishing  them  afterwards  for  the  murder,  the  great
cause  came  to  its  inevitable  conclusion,  and  Mary  Stuart
was  executed  by  command  of  Elizabeth  Tudor.  The  world
may  continue  to  differ  as  to  the  necessity  of  the  execution,
but  it  has  long  since  pronounced  a  unanimous  verdict  as  to

1  Walsingham  to  Wilkes,  3  Dec.  1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MSJ

2  Davison,  in  Camden,  iii.  393.

192

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Ciiap.  XIV.

the  respective  display  of  royal  dignity  by  the  two  Queens
upon  that  great  occasion.

During  this  interval  the  Netherland  matter,  almost  as  vital
to  England  as  the  execution  of  Mary,  was  comparatively
neglected.  It  was  not  absolutely  in  abeyance,  but  the  con¬
dition  of  the  Queen’s  mind  coloured  every  state-atfair  with  its
tragic  hues.  Elizabeth,  harassed,  anxious,  dreaming  dreams,
and  enacting  a  horrible  masquerade,  was  in  the  worst  possible
temper  to  be  approached  by  the  envoys.  She  was  furious
with  the  Netherlanders  for  having  maltreated  her  favourite.
She  was  still  more  furious  because  their  war  was  costing  so
much  money.  Her  disposition  became  so  uncertain,  her
temper  so  ungovernable,  as  to  drive  her  counsellors  to
their  wit’s  ends.  Burghley  confessed  himself  u  weary  of  his
miserable  life,”  and  protested  u  that  the  only  desire  he  had  in
the  world  was  to  be  delivered  from  the  ungrateful  burthen  of
service,  which  her  Majesty  laid  upon  him  so  very  heavily.” 1
Walsingham  wished  himself  “well  established  in  Basle.”2
The  Queen  set  them  all  together  by  the  ears.  She  wrangled
spitefully  over  the  sum- totals  from  the  Netherlands ;  she
worried  Leicester,  she  scolded  Burghley  for  defending  Lei¬
cester,  and  Leicester  abused  Burghley  for  taking  part  against
him.3

1  Burghley  to  Leicester,  7  Feb.  158*7.

(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  252.  HS.)

3  Walsingham  to  Wilkes,  2  May,
158*7.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Burghley  to  Leicester.  (MS.  before
cited.)

“  Your  Lordship  is  greatly  offended,”
said  the  Lord  Treasurer,  “  for  my
speeches  in  her  Majesty’s  presence.
What  you  conceive,  my  good  Lord,  is
best  known  to  yourself;  what  I  meant
is  best  known  to  me ;  and  I  do  avow
in  the  presence  of  God  that  I  no  more
meant  to  offend  you  in  any  thing  I
spoke,  than  I  meant  to  offend  the  best
and  dearest  friend  I  can  imagine  in
England.  And  yet  her  Majesty  many
times  chargeth  me  that  I  conceit,  I
flatter,  I  dare  not  speak  anything  that
you  should  mislike.  I  see  my  hard
fortune  continueth  to  be  subject  to

your  doubtful  opinion,  howsoever  I  do
behave  myself.  ....  You  believe  me
to  have  moved  her  Majesty  to  be
offended  with  you  for  lack  of  your
procuring  a  more  certainty  of  the  ex¬
penses  and  accounts  of  the  last  year’s
charges  on  the  States  behalf.  .  .  .  .
But  I  never  did  say,  nor  mean  to  say,
that  your  Lordship  ought  to  be  blamed
for  those  accounts ;  for  I  did  say,  and
do  still  say,  that1  their  accounts  are
obscure,  confused,  and  without  credit.
.  .  .  .  I  say  that  they  ought  to  have
been  commanded  by  your  authority  to
have  reformed  the  same,  and  made
your  Lordship  more  privy  to  their
doings.  For  not  doing  so  I  condemned
them,  and  not  your  Lordship,  -who  had
so  often  complained  that  you  were  not
better  obeyed  by  them  in  those  points.
And  so  your  Lordship  did  fully  answer

1687.

FEARFUL  PERPLEXITY  AT  THE  ENGLISH  COURT.  193

The  Lord-Treasurer,  overcome  with  11  grief  which  pierced
both  his  body  and  his  heart/'  battled  his  way — as  best  he
could — through  the  throng  of  dangers  which  beset  the  path
of  England  in  that  great  crisis.  It  was  most  obvious  to  every
statesman  in  the  realm  that  this  was  not  the  time — when  the
gauntlet  had  been  thrown  full  in  the  face  of  Philip  and  Sixtus
and  all  Catholicism,  by  the  condemnation  of  Mary — to  leave  the
Netherland  cause  “  at  random,"  and  these  outer  bulwarks  of
her  own  kingdom  insufficiently  protected.

“  Your  Majesty  will  hear,"  wrote  Parma  to  Philip,  ce  of  the
disastrous,  lamentable,  and  pitiful  end  of  the  poor  Queen  of
Scots.  Although  for  her  it  will  be  immortal  glory,  and  she
will  be  placed  among  the  number  of  the  many  martyrs  whose
blood  has  been  shed  in  the  kingdom  of  England,  and  be
crowned  in  Heaven  with  a  diadem  more  precious  than  the
one  she  wore  on  earth,  nevertheless  one  cannot  repress  one's
natural  emotions.  I  believe  firmly  that  this  cruel  deed  will
be  the  concluding  crime  of  the  many  which  that  English¬
woman  has  committed,  and  that  our  Lord  will  be  pleased  that
she  shall  at  last  receive  the  chastisement  which  she  has  these
many  long  years  deserved,  and  which  has  been  reserved  till
now,  for  her  greater  ruin  and  confusion." 1  And  with  this,
the  Duke  proceeded  to  discuss  the  all  important  and  rapidly-
preparing  invasion  of  England.  Farnese  was  not  the  man  to
be  deceived  by  the  affected  reluctance  of  Elizabeth  before
Mary's  scaffold,  although  he  was  soon  to  show  that  he  was
himself  a  master  in  the  science  of  grimace.  For  Elizabeth —

my  speeches,  and  I  also  did  affirm  the
same  by  often  repetition  to  her  Majesty
that  both  in  that  as  in  many  other
things,  the  States  had  grossly  and  most
rudely  encountered  your  Lordship.
And  although  her  Majesty  was  dis¬
posed  to  leave  the  cause  unrelieved,
persisting  on  her  misliking  of  the  ac¬
counts,  and  so  to  take  occasion  to  deny
their  requests,  yet  I  trust  that  your
Lordship  and  the  rest  did  see  how
earnest  I  was  to  draw  her  Majesty  from
these  reckonings  of  expenses,  and  to
take  regard  to  the  cause  which  1  said
and  do  say  may  not  now  be  left  at

VOL.  II. — 0

random  for  respect  to  any  charges.  I
do  persist  in  the  opinion  that  her
Majesty  may  not  abandon  the  cause
without  manifest  injury  to  her  state,
as  the  case  and  time  now  forceth  her.
.  .  .  .  Your  Lordship  hath  seen  and
heard  her  tax  me  very  sharply,  that  in
not  applauding  to  her  censures,  I  do
commonly  flatter  you  and  that  I  do
against  my  conscience  hold  opinions
to  please  you — a  very  hard  case  held
against  me.”

1  Parma  to  Philip  IT.,  22  March,
1581.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

194

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIY.

more  than  ever  disposed  to  be  friends  with  Spain  and  Rome,
now  that  war  to  the  knife  was  made  inevitable — was  wistfully
regarding  that  trap  of  negotiation,  against  which  all  her  best
friends  were  endeavouring  to  warn  her.  She  was  more  ill-
natured  than  ever  to  the  Provinces,  she  turned  her  back  upon
the  Bearnese,  she  affronted  Henry  III.  by  affecting  to  believe
in  the  fable  of  his  envoy's  complicity  in  the  Stafford  con¬
spiracy  against  her  life.1

“I  pray  God  to  ojien  her  eyes,"  said  Walsingham,  “to  see
the  evident  peril  of  the  course  she  now  holdeth.  ...  If  it  had
pleased  her  to  have  followed  the  advice  given  her  touching
the  French  ambassador,  our  ships  had  been  released  ....  but
she  has  taken  a  very  strange  course  by  writing  a  very  sharp
letter  unto  the  French  King,  which  I  fear  will  cause  him  to
give  ear  to  those  of  the  League,  and  make  himself  a  party  with
them,  seeing  so  little  regard  had  to  him  here.  Your  Lordship
may  see  that  our  courage  doth  greatly  increase,  for  that  we

make  no  difficulty  to  fall  out  with  all  the  world . I  never

saw  her  worse  affected  to  the  poor  King  of  Navarre,  and  yet
doth  she  seek  in  no  sort  to  yield  contentment  to  the  French
King.  If  to  offend  all  the  world,"  repeated  the  Secretary
bitterly,  “be  a  good  cause  of  government,  then  can  we  not  do

amiss . I  never  found  her  less  disyiosed  to  take  a  course

of  prevention  of  the  approaching  mischiefs  toward  this  realm
than  at  this  present.  And  to  be  plain  with  you,  there  is  none
here  that  hath  either  credit  or  courage  to  deal  effectually  with
her  in  any  of  her  great  causes." 2

Thus  distracted  by  doubts  and  dangers,  at  war  with  her
best  friends,  with  herself,  and  with  all  the  world,  was  Elizabeth
during  the  dark  days  and  months  which  preceded  and  followed
the  execution  of  the  Scottish  Queen.  If  the  great  fight  was
at  last  to  be  fought  triumphantly  through,  it  was  obvious  that
England  was  to  depend  upon  Englishmen  of  all  ranks  and

1  “Declaration  of  the  Negotiations
with  the  French  Ambassador,  l’Aubes-
pine,  at  the  Lord  Treasurer's  house,”
12  Jan.  1581,  in  Murdin,  519-583.
Compare  Mignet,  ‘  Hist,  de  Marie

Stuart,’  3rd  edition,  II.  344,  seq-

3  Walsingham  to  Leicester,  8  April,
1581.  Same  to  Same,  10  April,  1581,
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  319-321.
MSS.)

1587.

INFATUATION  AND  OBSTINACY  OF  THE  QUEEN.  195

classes,  upon  her  prudent  and  far-seeing  statesmen,  upon
her  nobles  and  her  adventurers,  on  her  Anglo-Saxon  and
Anglo-Norman  blood  ever  mounting  against  oppression,  on
Howard  and  Essex,  Drake  and  Williams,  Norris  and
Willoughby,  upon  high-born  magnates,  plebeian  captains,
London  merchants,  upon  yeomen  whose  limbs  were  made  in
England,  and  upon  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders  whose  fearless
mariners  were  to  swarm  to  the  protection  of  her  coasts,  quite
as  much  in  that  year  of  anxious  expectation  as  upon  the
great  Queen  herself.  Unquestionable  as  were  her  mental
capacity  and  her  more  than  woman’s  courage,  when  fairly
brought  face  to  face  with  the  danger,  it  was  fortunately  not
on  one  man  or  woman’s  brain  and  arm  that  England’s  salvation
depended  in  that  crisis  of  her  fate.

As  to  the  Provinces,  no  one  ventured  to  speak  very  boldly
in  their  defence.  “  When  I  lay  before  her  the  peril,”  said
Walsingham,  “she  scorneth  at  it.  The  hope  of  a  peace  with
Spain  has  put  her  into  a  most  dangerous  security.” 1  Nor
would  any  man  now  assume  responsibility.  The  fate  of
Davison — of  the  man  who  had  already  in  so  detestable  a
manner  been  made  the  scape-goat  for  Leicester’s  sins  in  the
Netherlands,  and  who  had  now  been  so  barbarously  sacrificed
by  the  Queen  for  faithfully  obeying  her  orders  in  regard  to
the  death-warrant,  had  sickened  all  courtiers  and  counsellors
for  the  time.  “  The  late  severe  dealing  used  by  her  Highness
towards  Mr.  Secretary  Davison,”  said  Walsingham  to  Wilkes,
“maketh  us  very  circumspect  and  careful  not  to  proceed  in
anything  but  wherein  we  receive  direction  from  herself,  and
therefore  you  must  not  find  it  strange  if  we  now  be  more
sparing  than  heretofore  hath  been  accustomed.” 2

Such  being  the  portentous  state  of  the  political  atmosphere,
and  such  the  stormy  condition  of  the  royal  mind,  it

J  J  1  28  Jan.  (O.  S.)

may  be  supposed  that  the  interviews  of  the  Nether-  Treb.  <n.  s.)

land  envoys  with  her  Majesty  during  this  period

were  not  likely  to  be  genial.  Exactly  at  the  most  gloomy

1  Walsingham  to  Leicester,  &c.,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Walsingham  to  Wilkes,  13  April,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

196

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIV.

moment — thirteen  days  before  the  execution  of  Mary — they
came  first  into  Elizabeth’s  presence  at  Greenwich.1

The  envoys  were  five  in  number,  all  of  them  experienced
and  able  statesmen — Zuylen  van  Nyvelt,  Joos  de  Menyn,
Nicasius  de  Silla,  Jacob  Valck,  and  Vitus  van  Kamminga.2
The  Queen  was  in  the  privy  council-chamber,  attended  by
the  admiral  of  England,  Lord  Thomas  Howard,  Lord  Hunsdon,
great-chamberlain,  Sir  Christopher  Hatton,  vice-chamberlain,
Secretary  Davison,  and  many  other  persons  of  distinction.

The  letters  of  credence  were  duly  presented,  but  it  was
obvious  from  the  beginning  of  the  interview  that  the  Queen
was  ill-disposed  toward  the  deputies,  and  had  not  only  been
misinformed  as  to  matters  of  fact,  but  as  to  the  state  of  feeling
of  the  Netherlanders  and  of  the  States-General  towards  her¬
self.3

Menyn,  however,  who  was  an  orator  by  profession — being
pensionary  of  Dort — made,  in  the  name  of  his  colleagues,  a
brief  but  pregnant  speech,  to  which  the  Queen  listened  atten¬
tively,  although  with  frequent  indications  of  anger  and  im¬
patience.  He  commenced  by  observing  that  the  United
Provinces  still  entertained  the  hope  that  her  Majesty  would
conclude,  upon  further  thoughts,  to  accept  the  sovereignty
over  them,  with  reasonable  conditions ;  but  the  most  important
passages  of  his  address  were  those  relating  to  the  cost  of  the
war.  “  Besides  our  stipulated  contributions,”  said  the  pen¬
sionary,  “of  200,000  florins  the  month,  we  have  furnished
500,000  as  an  extraordinary  grant ;  making  for  the  year
2,900,000  florins,  and  this  over  and  above  the  particular  and
special  expenditures  of  the  Provinces,  and  other  sums  for
military  purposes.  We  confess,  Madam,  that  the  succour  of
your  Majesty  is  a  truly  royal  one,  and  that  there  have  been
few  princes  in  history  who  have  given  such  assistance  to  their
neighbours  unjustly  oppressed.  It  is  certain  that  by  means  of

1  Brief  van  de  Gedeputeerden  uit

9

England,  —  Feb.  1587.  (Hague  Arch.,

MS.)  Compare  Bor,  II.  xxii.  872,  seq.

Wagenaar,  viii.  214,  seq.

2  Menyn  was  pensionary  of  Dort  ;

Silla,  pensionary  of  Amsterdam;  Valck
member  of  the  state-council.  Wage-
naar,  viii.  192.

3  Letter  of  the  Deputies  last  cited.
(Hague  Archives,  MS.)

158V.

NETHERLAND  ENVOYS  IN  ENGLAND.

197

that  help,  joined  with  the  forces  of  the  United  Provinces,  the
Earl  of  Leicester  has  been  able  to  arrest  the  course  of  the
Duke  of  Parma’s  victories  and  to  counteract  his  designs.
Nevertheless,  it  appears,  Madam,  that  these  forces  have  not
been  sufficient  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  the  country.  We  are
obliged,  for  regular  garrison  work  and  defence  of  cities,  to  keep
up  an  army  of  at  least  27,000  foot  and  3500  horse.  Of  this
number  your  Majesty  pays  5000  foot  and  1000  horse,  and  we
are  now  commissioned,  Madam,  humbly  to  request  an  increase
of  your  regular  succour  during  the  war  to  10,000  foot  and
2000  horse.  We  also  implore  the  loan  of  60,0007  sterling,
in  order  to  assist  us  in  maintaining  for  the  coming  season  a  •
sufficient  force  in  the  field.”1

Such,  in  brief,  was  the  oration  of  pen sionary  Menyn,  de¬
livered  in  the  French  language.  He  had  scarcely  concluded,
when  the  Queen — evidently  in  a  great  passion2 — rose  to  her
feet,  and  without  any  hesitation,  replied  in  a  strain  of  vehe¬
ment  eloquence  in  the  same  tongue.

“Now  I  am  not  deceived,  gentlemen,”  she  said,  “and  that
which  I  have  been  fearing  has  occurred.  Our  common
adage,  which  we  have  in  England,  is  a  very  good  one.  When
one  fears  that  an  evil  is  coming,  the  sooner  it  arrives  the
better.  Here  is  a  quarter  of  a  year  that  I  have  been  expect¬
ing  you,  and  certainly  for  the  great  benefit  I  have  conferred
on  you,  you  have  exhibited  a  great  ingratitude,  and  I  consider
myself  very  ill  treated  by  you.  ’Tis  very  strange  that  you
should  begin  by  soliciting  still  greater  succour  without  render¬
ing  me  any  satisfaction  for  your  past  actions,  which  have  been
so  extraordinary,  that  I  swear  by  the  living  God  I  think  it
impossible  to  find  peoples  or  states  more  ungrateful  or  ill-
advised  than  yourselves.

I  have  sent  you  this  year  fifteen,  sixteen,  aye  seventeen  or
eighteen  thousand  men.  You  have  left  them  without  pay¬
ment,  you  have  let  some  of  them  die  of  hunger,  driven
others  to  such  desperation  that  they  have  deserted  to  the

2  “  Zeer  gealtereert,”  MS.  Letter,
ubi  sup.

1  Discours  do  Menin — Audieuco  a
Greenwich.  (Hague  Arch.  MS.)

198

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIY.

enemy.  Is  it  not  mortifying  for  the  English  nation  and  a
great  shame  for  you  that  Englishmen  should  say  that  they
have  found  more  courtesy  from  Spaniards  than  from  Nether-
landers  ?  Truly,  I  tell  you  frankly  that  I  will  never  endure
such  indignities.  Rather  will  I  act  according  to  my  will,  and
you  may  do  exactly  as  you  think  best.

“  If  I  chose,  I  could  do  something  very  good  without  you,
although  some  persons  are  so  fond  of  saying  that  it  was  quite
necessary  for  the  Queen  of  England  to  do  what  she  does  for
her  own  protection.  No,  no  !  Disabuse  yourselves  of  that
impression.  These  are  but  false  persuasions.  Believe  boldly
that  I  can  play  an  excellent  game  without  your  assistance,
and  a  better  one  than  I  ever  did  with  it.1  Nevertheless,  I
do  not  choose  to  do  that,  nor  do  I  wish  you  so  much  harm.
But  likewise  do  I  not  choose  that  you  should  hold  such
language  to  me.  It  is  true  that  I  should  not  wish  the
Spaniard  so  near  me  if  he  should  be  my  enemy.  But  why  should
I  not  live  in  peace,  if  we  were  to  be  friends  to  each  other  ?
At  the  commencement  of  my  reign  we  lived  honourably
together,  the  King  of  Spain  and  I,  and  he  even  asked  me  to
marry  him,  and,  after  that,  we  lived  a  long  time  very  peace¬
fully,  without  any  attempt  having  been  made  against  my  life.
If  we  both  choose,  we  can  continue  so  to  do.

“  On  the  other  hand,  I  sent  you  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  as
lieutenant  of  my  forces,  and  my  intention  was  that  he  should
have  exact  knowledge  of  your  finances  and  contributions.
But,  on  the  contrary,  he  has  never  known  anything  about
them,  and  you  have  handled  them  in  your  own  manner  and
amongst  yourselves.  You  have  given  him  the  title  of  governor,
in  order,  under  this  name,  to  cast  all  your  evils  on  his  head.
That  title  he  accepted  against  my  will,  by  doing  which  he
ran  the  risk  of  losing  his  life,  and  his  estates,  and  the  grace
and  favour  of  his  Princess,  which  was  more  important  to  him
than  all.  But  he  did  it  in  order  to  maintain  your  tottering
state.  And  what  authority,  I  pray  you,  have  you  given  him  ?

i  “  Quo  je  feroy  bien  un  bon  parti  ponse  de  Sa  Majeste  au  Discours  do
sans  vous  y  appeller,  et  meilleur  quo  je  Sr  de  Menin.’  (Hague  Archives,  MB.)
nay  faict  oncques  avecq  vous.”  ‘  Re-

1581.

QUEEN’S  BITTER  INVECTIVE  AGAINST  THEM.

199

A  shadowy  authority,  a  purely  imaginary  one.  This  is  hut
mockery.  He  is,  at  any  rate,  a  gentleman,  a  man  of  honour
and  of  counsel.  You  had  no  right  to  treat  him  thus.  If  I
had  accepted  the  title  which  you  wished  to  give  me,  by  the
living  God,  I  would  not  have  suffered  you  so  to  treat  me.

u  But  you  are  so  badly  advised  that  when  there  is  a  man
of  worth  who  discovers  your  tricks  you  wish  him  ill,  and  make
an  outcry  against  him  ;  and  yet  some  of  you,  in  order  to  save
your  money,  and  others  in  the  hope  of  bribes,  have  been
favouring  the  Spaniard,  and  doing  very  wicked  work.  Ho,
believe  me  that  God  will  punish  those  who  for  so  great  a
benefit  wish  to  return  me  so  much  evil.  Believe,  boldly  too,
that  the  King  of  Spain  will  never  trust  men  who  have  aban¬
doned  the  party  to  which  they  belonged,  and  from  which  they
have  received  so  many  benefits,  and  will  never  believe  a  word
of  what  they  promise  him.  Yet,  in  order  to  cover  up  their
filth,  they  spread  the  story  that  the  Queen  of  England  is
thinking  of  treating  for  peace  without  their  knowledge.  Ho,
I  would  rather  be  dead  than  that  any  one  should  have  occasion
to  say  that  I  had  not  kept  my  promise.  But  princes  must
listen  to  both  sides,  and  that  can  be  done  without  breach  of
faith.1  F or  they  transact  business  in  a  certain  way,  and  with
a  princely  intelligence,  such  as  private  persons  cannot  imitate.2

“  You  are  States,  to  be  sure,  but  private  individuals  in
regard  to  princes.  Certainly,  I  would  never  choose  to  do
anything  without  your  knowledge,  and  I  would  never  allow
the  authority  which  you  have  among  yourselves,  nor  your
privileges,  nor  your  statutes,  to  be  infringed.  Hor  will  I  allow
you  to  be  perturbed  in  your  consciences.  What  then  would
you  more  of  me  P  You  have  issued  a  jiroclamation  in  your
country  that  no  one  is  to  talk  of  peace.  Yery  well,  very
good.  But  permit  princes  likewise  to  do  as  they  shall  think

1  “  Et  encores  que  les  princes  oyent
aulcunes  fois  l’ung  et  l’aultre,  cela  se

peijlt  fair©  sans . ”  There  is  a

broken  sentence  here  in  the  original,
which  seems  to  require  a  phrase  simi¬
lar  to  the  one  which  I  have  supplied.

‘  Reponse,’  &c.,  just  cited.

2  “Car  ils  besoignent  avecq  une
maniere  de  faire  et  intelligence  des
princes,  ce  que  les  particuliers  ne
scauroient  faire.”  (Ibid.)

200

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIY.

best  for  the  security  of  their  state,  provided  it  does  you  no
injury.  Among  us  princes  we  are  not  wont  to  make  such
long  orations  as  you  do,  but  you  ought  to  be  content  with  the
few  words  that  we  bestow  upon  you,  and  make  yourself  quiet
thereby.1

“  If  I  ever  do  anything  for  you  again,  I  choose  to  be  treated
more  honourably.  I  shall  therefore  appoint  some  personages
of  my  council  to  communicate  with  you.  And  in  the  first
place  I  choose  to  hear  and  see  for  myself  what  has  taken
place  already,  and  have  satisfaction  about  that,  before  I  make
any  reply  to  what  you  have  said  to  me  as  to  greater  assist¬
ance.  And  so  I  will  leave  you  to-day,  without  troubling  you
further.”2

With  this  her  Majesty  swept  from  the  apartment,  leaving
the  deputies  somewhat  astounded  at  the  fierce  but  adroit
manner  in  which  the  tables  had  for  a  moment  been  turned
upon  them.

It  was  certainly  a  most  unexpected  blow,  this  charge  of
the  States  having  left  the  English  soldiers — whose  numbers
the  Queen  had  so  suddenly  multiplied  by  three — unpaid  and
unfed.  Those  Englishmen  who,  as  individuals,  had  entered
the  States',  service,  had  been — like  all  the  other  troops — •
regularly  paid.  This  distinctly  appeared  from  the  statements
of  her  own  counsellors  and  generals.3  On  the  other  hand,
the  Queen's  contingent,  now  dwindled  to  about  half  their
original  number,  had  been  notoriously  unpaid  for  nearly  six
months.

This  has  already  been  made  sufficiently  clear  from  the
private  letters  of  most  responsible  persons.  That  these  sol¬
diers  were  starving,  deserting,  and  pillaging,  was,  alas  !  too
true  ;  but  the  envoys  of  the  States  hardly  expected  to  be
censured  by  her  Majesty,  because  she  had  neglected  to  pay

1  “  Entre  nous  princes  nous  ne  sca-
vons  ainsi  orer  comme  vous  faictes,
mais  vous  devriez  estre  contentz  avecq
co  peu  de  parolles  qui’on  vous  diet,  et
vous  asseurer  la  dessus.”  ‘Reponse,’
&c.,  just  cited.

2  Ibid.  Compare  Bor,  II.  xxii.  8 1 3,
814.  Wagenaar,  viii.  193-194.

3  Memorial  given  by  Wilkes  to  .-Sir
R.  Williams,  Eeb.  1587.  (S.  P.  Offico
MS.)

1587.

AMAZEMENT  OP  THE  ENVOYS.

201

her  own  troops.  It  was  one  of  the  points  concerning  which
they  hacl  been  especially  enjoined  to  complain,  that  the  English
cavalry,  converted  into  highwaymen  by  want  of  pay,  had  been
plundering  the  peasantry,1  and  we  have  seen  that  Thomas
Wilkes  had  u  pawned  his  carcase  ”  to  provide  for  their  tem¬
porary  relief.

With  regard  to  the  insinuation  that  prominent  personages
in  the  country  had  been  tampered  with  by  the  enemy,  the
envoys  were  equally  astonished  by  such  an  attack.  The
great  Deventer  treason  had  not  yet  been  heard  of  in  England
— for  it  had  occurred  only  a  week  before  this  first  interview
— but  something  of  the  kind  was  already  feared  ;  for  the
slippery  dealings  of  York  and  Stanley  with  Tassis  and  Parma
had  long  been  causing  painful  anxiety,  and  had  formed  the
subject  of  repeated  remonstrances  on  the  part  of  the  States
to  Leicester  and  to  the  Queen.  The  deputies  were  hardly
prepared  therefore  to  defend  their  own  people  against  dealing
privately  with  the  King  of  Spain.  The  only  man  suspected
of  such  practices  was  Leicester’s  own  favourite  and  financier,
Jacques  Ringault,  whom  the  Earl  had  persisted  in  employing
against  the  angry  remonstrances  of  the  States,  who  believed
him  to  be  a  Spanish  spy  ;  and  the  man  was  now  in  prison,  and
threatened  with  capital  punishment.

To  suppose  that  Buys  or  Barneveld,  Roorda,  Meetkerk,  or
any  other  leading  statesman  in  the  Netherlands,  was  contem¬
plating  a  private  arrangement  with  Philip  II.,  was  as  ludicrous
a  conception  as  to  imagine  Walsingham  a  pensioner  of  the
Pope,  or  Cecil  in  league  with  the  Duke  of  Guise.  The  end
and  aim  of  the  States'  party  was  war.  In  war  they  not  only

1  “  Les  compagnies  Anglaises,”  wrote
the  States- General  to  Leicester,  “  tant
de  cheval  que  de  pied  a  la  charge  de
S.  Majeste,  ayans  delaisse  les  frontieres
se  sont  jectez  en  Hollande,  on  ils
foulent  et  mangent  le  bon  homme
soubs  pretexte  qu’ils  disent  n’avoir
re£u  aulcun  payment  en  cincq  mois,
ce  que  cause  grande  alteration  par-
dessus  l’amoindrissement  des  contri¬
butions  du  Plat  Pays.  Et  commo  ils

tiennent  journellement  plusieurs  pro-
pos  estranges  contre  la  dite  province
d’ Hollande,  et  qu’ils  y  veuillent  pour-
chasser  leur  payement,  a  este  trouve
bon  de  les  faire  contenir  ou  ils  sont,”
&c.  States-General  to  Leicester,
1  March,  1587.  (Hague  Archives,
MS.)

The  statements  of  Wilkes  to  his
government,  of  like  import,  have  been
given  in  the  notes  on  preceding  pages.

I

202  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XIY.

saw  the  safety  of  the  reformed  religion,  but  the  only  means
of  maintaining  the  commercial  prosperity  of  the  commonwealth.
The  whole  correspondence  of  the  times  shows  that  no  politician
in  the  country  dreamed  of  peace,  either  by  public  or  secret
negotiation.  On  the  other  hand — as  will  be  made  still  clearer
than  ever — the  Queen  was  longing  for  peace,  and  was  treating
for  peace  at  that  moment  through  private  agents,  quite
without  the  knowledge  of  the  States,  and  in  spite  of  her
indignant  disavowals  in  her  speech  to  the  envoys.

Yet  if  Elizabeth  could  have  had  the  privilege  of  entering —
as  we  are  about  to  do — into  the  private  cabinet  of  that  excellent
King  of  Spain,  with  whom  she  had  once  been  such  good
friends,  who  had  even  sought  her  hand  in  marriage,  and  with
whom  she  saw  no  reason  whatever  why  she  should  not  live
at  peace,  she  might  have  modified  her  expressions  on  this
subject.  Certainly,  if  she  could  have  looked  through  the
piles  of  papers — as  we  intend  to  do — which  lay  upon  that
library- table,  far  beyond  the  seas  and  mountains,  she  would
have  perceived  some  objections  to  the  scheme  of  living  at
peace  with  that  diligent  letter- writer.

Perhaps,  had  she  known  how  the  subtle  Farnese  was  about
to  express  himself  concerning  the  fast-approaching  execution
of  Mary,  and  the  as  inevitably  impending  destruction  of  ce  that
Englishwoman  ”  through  the  schemes  of  his  master  and  him¬
self,  she  would  have  paid  less  heed  to  the  sentiments  couched
in  most  exquisite  Italian  which  Alexander  was  at  the  same
time  whispering  in  her  ear,  and  would  have  taken  less  offence
at  the  blunt  language  of  the  States-General.

Nevertheless,  for  the  present,  Elizabeth  would  give  no
better  answer  than  the  hot-tempered  one  which  had  already
somewhat  discomfited  the  deputies.

Two  days  afterwards,  the  five  envoys  had  an  interview  with
several  members  of  her  Majesty's  council,  in  the  private  apart¬
ment  of  the  Lord-Treasurer  in  Greenwich  Palace.  Burghley,
being  indisposed,  was  lying  upon  his  bed.  Leicester,  Admiral
Lord  Howard,  Lord  Hunsden,  Sir  Christopher  Hatton,  Lord
Buckhurst,  and  Secretary  Davison,  were  present,  and  the

1587.

THEY  CONSULT  WITH  HER  CHIEF  COUNCILLORS.  203

Lord-Treasurer  proposed  that  the  conversation  should  be  in
Latin,  that  being  the  common  language  most  familiar  to  them
all.1  Then,  turning  over  the  leaves  of  the  report,  a  copy  of
which  lay  on  his  bed,  he  asked  the  envoys,  whether,  in  case
her  Majesty  had  not  sent  over  the  assistance  which  she  had
done  under  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  their  country  would  not  have
been  utterly  ruined.

“  To  all  appearance,  yes/'  replied  Menyn.

“  But,"  continued  Burghley,  still  running  through  the  pages
of  the  document,  and  here  and  there  demanding  an  explana¬
tion  of  an  obscure  passage  or  two,  “  you  are  now  proposing
to  her  Majesty  to  send  10,000  foot  and  2000  horse,  and  to
lend  60,0001.  This  is  altogether  monstrous  and  excessive.
Nobody  will  ever  dare  even  to  speak  to  her  Majesty  on  the  sub¬
ject.  When  you  first  came  in  1585,  you  asked  for  12,000
men,  but  you  were  fully  authorized  to  accept  6000.  No  doubt
that  is  the  case  now." 2

“ On  that  occasion,"  answered  Menyn,  “our  main  purpose
was  to  induce  her  Majesty  to  accept  the  sovereignty,  or  at
least  the  perpetual  protection  of  our  country.  Failing  in  that
we  broached  the  third  point,  and  not  being  able  to  get  12,000
soldiers  we  compounded  for  5000,  the  agreement  being  subject
to  ratification  by  our  principals.  We  gave  ample  security  in
shape  of  the  mortgaged  cities.  But  experience  has  shown  us
that  these  forces  and  this  succour  are  insufficient.  We  have
therefore  been  sent  to  beg  her  Majesty  to  make  up  the  con¬
tingent  to  the  amount  originally  requested."

“But  we  are  obliged  to  increase  the  garrisons  in  the
cautionary  towns,"  said  one  of  the  English  councillors,  “as
800  men  in  a  city  like  Flushing  are  very  little."

“  Pardon  me,"  replied  Valck,  “  the  burghers  are  not  enemies
but  friends  to  her  Majesty  and  to  the  English  nation.  They
are  her  dutiful  subjects  like  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  Nether¬
lands."

1  Rapport  do  la  Legation.  Conference  des  Deputes  avec  les  Commissaires
de  S.  M.,  ^  Feb.  1587.  (Hague  Archives,  MS.)  2  Lbid.

204

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIV.

“  It  is  quite  true/'  said  Burghley,  after  having  made  some
critical  remarks  upon  the  military  system  of  the  Provinces,
“  and  a  very  common  adage,  quod  tunc  tua  res  agitur ,  paries
cum  proximus  ardet ,  hut,  nevertheless,  this  war  principally
concerns  you.  Therefore  you  are  hound  to  do  your  utmost
to  meet  its  expenses  in  your  own  country,  quite  as  much  as
a  man  who  means  to  build  a  house  is  expected  to  provide  the
stone  and  timber  himself.  But  the  States  have  not  done  their
best.  They  have  not  at  the  appointed  time  come  forward
with  their  extraordinary  contributions  for  the  last  campaign.
u  How  many  men,"  he  asked,  u  are  required  for  garrisons  in
all  the  fortresses  and  cities,  and  for  the  field  ?  "

“  But,"  interposed  Lord  Hunsden,  “  not  half  so  many  men
are  needed  in  the  garrisons  ;  for  the  burghers  ought  to  he
able  to  defend  their  own  cities.  Moreover  it  is  probable  that
your  ordinary  contributions  might  be  continued  and  doubled
and  even  tripled ." 1

“  And  on  the  whole,"  observed  the  Lord  Admiral,  “  don't
you  think  that  the  putting  an  army  in  the  field  might  he  dis¬
pensed  with  for  this  year  P  Her  Majesty  at  present  must
get  together  and  equip  a  fleet  of  war  vessels  against  the  King
of  Spain,  which  will  he  an  excessively  large  pennyworth,
besides  the  assistance  which  she  gives  her  neighbours."

u  Yes,  indeed,"  said  Secretary  Davison,  “  it  would  he  diffi¬
cult  to  exaggerate  the  enormous  expense  which  her  Majesty
must  encounter  this  year  for  defending  and  liberating  her
own  kingdoms  against  the  King  of  Spain.  That  monarch  is
making  great  naval  preparations,  and  is  treating  all  English¬
men  in  the  most  hostile  manner.  We  are  on  the  brink  of
declared  war  with  Spain,  with  the  French  King,  who  is  arrest¬
ing  all  English  persons  and  property  within  his  kingdom,  and
with  Scotland,  all  which  countries  are  understood  to  have
made  a  league  together  on  account  of  the  Queen  of  Scotland ,
whom  it  will  be  absolutely  necessary  to  put  to  death  in  order  to
preserve  the  life  of  her  Majesty,  and  are  about  to  make  war

1  MS.  Report  last  cited.

I

1587.  REMARKS  OF  BURGHLEY  AND  DAYISON.  205

upon  England.  This  matter  then  will  cost  us,  the  current
year,  at  least  eight  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling.  Never¬
theless  her  Majesty  is  sure  to  assist  you  so  far  as  her  means
allow  ;  and  I,  for  my  part,  will  do  my  best  to  keep  her  Majesty
well  disposed  to  your  cause,  even  as  I  have  ever  done,  as  you
well  know/' 1

Thus  spoke  poor  Davison,  but  a  few  days  before  the  fatal
8th  of  February,  little  dreaming  that  the  day  for  his  in¬
fluencing  the  disposition  of  her  Majesty  would  soon  be  gone,
and  that  he  was  himself  to  be  crushed  for  ever  by  the  blow
which  was  about  to  destroy  the  captive  Queen.  The  political
combinations  resulting  from  the  tragedy  were  not  to  be  ex¬
actly  as  he  foretold,  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  in  him  the
Netherlands,  and  Leicester,  and  the  Queen  of  England,  were
to  lose  an  honest,  diligent,  and  faithful  friend.

“Well,  gentlemen/7  said  the  Lord- Treasurer,  after  a  few
more  questions  concerning  the  financial  abilities  of  the  States
had  been  asked  and  answered,  “it  is  getting  late  into  the
evening,  and  time  for  you  all  to  get  back  to  London.  Let
me  request  you,  as  soon  as  may  be,  to  draw  up  some  articles
in  writing,  to  which  we  will  respond  immediately.77  2

Menyn  then,  in  the  name  of  the  deputies,  expressed  thanks
for  the  urbanity  shown  them  in  the  conference,  and  spoke  of
the  deep  regret  with  which  they  had  perceived,  by  her  Majesty's
answer  two  days  before,  that  she  was  so  highly  offended  with
them  and  with  the  States-General.  He  then,  notwithstanding
Burghley's  previous  hint  as  to  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  took
up  the  Queen's  answer,  point  by  point,  contradicted  all  its
statements,  appealing  frequently  to  Lord  Leicester  for  con¬
firmation  of  what  he  advanced,  and  concluded  by  begging  the
councillors  to  defend  the  cause  of  the  Netherlands  to  her
Majesty.  Burghley  requested  them  to  make  an  excuse  or
reply  to  the  Queen  in  writing,  and  send  it  to  him  to  present.3

Thus  the  conference  terminated,  and  the  envoys  returned
to  London.  They  were  fully  convinced  by  the  result  of  these

1  MS.  Report  last  cited.  3  Ibid.

3  Ibid.  Compare  Bor,  II.  xxii.  875-877,  seq.

206

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIV.

interviews,  as  they  told  their  constituents,  that  her  Majesty,
by  false  statements  and  reports  of  persons  either  grossly
ignorant  or  not  having  the  good  of  the  commonwealth  before
their  eyes,  had  been  very  incorrectly  informed  as  to  the  con¬
dition  of  the  Provinces,  and  of  the  great  efforts  made  by  the
States-General  to  defend  their  country  against  the  enemy.
It  was  obvious,  they  said,  that  their  measures  had  been  ex¬
aggerated  in  order  to  deceive  the  Queen  and  her  council.1

And  thus  statements  and  counter-statements,  protocols
and  apostilles,  were  glibly  exchanged,  the  heap  of  diplomatic
rubbish  was  rising  higher  and  higher,  and  the  councillors  and
envoys,  pleased  with  their  work,  were  growing  more  and  more
amicable,  when  the  court  was  suddenly  startled  by  the  news
of  the  Deventer  and  Zutphen  treason.  The  intelligence  was
accompanied  by  the  famous  4th  of  February  letter,  which
descended,  like  a  bombshell,  in  the  midst  of  the  decorous
council-chamber.  Such  language  had  rarely  been  addressed
to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  and,  through  him,  to  the  imperious
sovereign  herself,  as  the  homely  truths  with  which  Barneveld,
speaking  with  the  voice  of  the  States-General,  now  smote  the
delinquent  governor.

“My  Lord/'  said  he,  “it  is  notorious,  and  needs  no  illustra¬
tion  whatever,  with  what  true  confidence  and  unfeigned  affec¬
tion  we  received  your  Excellency  in  our  land  ;  the  States-
General,  the  States-Provincial,  the  magistrates,  and  the  com¬
munities  of  the  chief  cities  in  the  United  Provinces,  all  uniting
to  do  honour  to  her  serene  Majesty  of  England  and  to  your¬
self,  and  to  confer  upon  you  the  government-general  over  us.
And  although  wre  should  willingly  have  placed  some  limitations
upon  the  authority  thus  bestowed  on  you,  in  order  that  by
such  a  course  your  own  honour  and  the  good  and  constitutional
condition  of  the  country  might  be  alike  preserved,  yet  finding
your  Excellency  not  satisfied  with  those  limitations,  we  post¬
poned  every  objection,  and  conformed  ourselves  to  your
pleasure,  Yet,  before  coming  to  that  decision,  we  had  well

MS.  Report,  —  Feb.  1587,  before  cited.

19  ’

1587.  FOURTH  OF  FEBRUARY  LETTER  FROM  THE  STATES.  207

considered  that  by  doing  so  we  might  be  opening  a  door  to
many  ambitious,  avaricious,  and  pernicious  persons,  both  of
these  countries  and  from  other  nations,  who  might  seize  the
occasion  to  advance  their  own  private  profits,  to  the  detriment
of  the  country  and  the  dishonour  of  your  Excellency.

“  And,  in  truth,  such  persons  have  done  their  work  so  effi¬
ciently  as  to  inspire  you  with  distrust  against  the  most  faithful
and  capable  men  in  the  Provinces,  against  the  Estates  General
and  Provincial,  magistrates,  and  private  persons,  knowing  very
well  that  they  could  never  arrive  at  their  own  ends  so  long
as  you  were  guided  by  the  constitutional  authorities  of  the,
country.  And  precisely  upon  the  distrust,  thus  created  as  a
foundation,  they  raised  a  back-stairs  council,  by  means  of  which
they  were  able  to  further  their  ambitious,  avaricious,  and  se¬
ditious  practices,  notwithstanding  the  good  advice  and  remon¬
strances  of  the  council  of  state,  and  the  States  General  and
Provincial/'1

He  proceeded  to  handle  the  subjects  of  the  English  rose-
noble,  put  in  circulation  by  Leicester's  finance  or  back-stairs
council  at  two  florins  above  its  value,  to  the  manifest  detriment
of  the  Provinces,  to  the  detestable  embargo  which  had  pre¬
vented  them  from  using  the  means  bestowed  upon  them  by
God  himself  to  defend  their  country,  to  the  squandering  and
embezzlement  of  the  large  sums  contributed  by  the  Provinces
and  entrusted  to  the  Earl's  administration,  to  the  starving
condition  of  the  soldiers,  maltreated  by  government,  and  thus
compelled  to  prey  upon  the  inhabitants — so  that  troops  in
the  States'  service  had  never  been  so  abused  during  the  whole
war,  although  the  States  had  never  before  voted  such  large
contributions  nor  paid  them  so  promptly — to  the  placing  in
posts  of  high  honour  and  trust  men  of  notoriously  bad
character  and  even  Spanish  spies  ;  to  the  taking  away  the
public  authority  from  those  to  whom  it  legitimately  belonged,
and  conferring  it  on  incompetent  and  unqualified  persons ;  to
the  illegal  banishment  of  respectable  citizens,  to  the  violation

1  Lettre  des  Etats  a  Leycestre,
4  Feb.  1587.  (Hague  Archives,  MS.)

Compare  Bor,  II.  xxii.  944,  seq.  Wage-
naar,  viii.  202.  Le  Petit,  II.  xiv.  541.

208

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIY.

of  time-honoured  laws  and  privileges,  to  the  shameful  attempts
to  repudiate  the  ancient  authority  of  the  States,  and  to  usurp
a  control  over  the  communities  and  nobles  by  them  repre¬
sented,  and  to  the  perpetual  efforts  to  foster  dissension,  dis¬
union,  and  rebellion  among  the  inhabitants.  Having  thus
drawn  up  a  heavy  bill  of  indictment,  nominally  against  the
Earl's  illegal  counsellors,  but  in  reality  against  the  Earl  him¬
self,  he  proceeded  to  deal  with  the  most  important  matter  of
all.

u  The  principal  cities  and  fortresses  in  the  country  have
been  placed  in  hands  of  men  suspected  by  the  States  on  legiti¬
mate  grounds,  men  who  had  been  convicted  of  treason  against
these  Provinces,  and  who  continued  to  be  suspected,  notwith¬
standing  that  your  Excellency  had  pledged  your  own  honour
for  their  fidelity.  Finally,  by  means  of  these  scoundrels,1  it
was  brought  to  pass,  that — the  council  of  state  having  been
invested  by  your  Excellency  vTith  supreme  authority  during
your  absence — a  secret  document  was  brought  to  light  after
your  departure,  by  which  the  most  substantial  matters,  and
those  most  vital  to  the  defence  of  the  country,  were  withdrawn
from  the  disposition  of  that  council.  And  now,  alas,  we  see
the  effects  of  these  practices  !

“  Sir  William  Stanley,  by  you  appointed  governor  of  Deven¬
ter,  and  Kowland  York,  governor  of  Fort  Zutphen,  have  re¬
fused,  by  virtue  of  that  secret  document,  to  acknowledge  any
authority  in  this  country.  And  notwithstanding  that  since
your  departure  they  and  their  soldiers  have  been  supported  at
our  expense,  and  had  just  received  a  full  month's  pay  from
the  States,  they  have  traitorously  and  villainously  delivered
the  city  and  the  fortress  to  the  enemy,  with  a  declaration
made  by  Stanley  that  he  did  the  deed  to  ease  his  conscience,
and  to  render  to  the  King  of  Spain  the  city  which  of  right
was  belonging  to  him.  And  this  is  a  crime  so  dishonourable,
scandalous,  ruinous,  and  treasonable,  as  that,  during  this
whole  war,  we  have  never  seen  the  like.  And  we  are  now  in
daily  fear  lest  the  English  commanders  in  Bergen-op-Zoom,

1  “  Gibier.”  MS.  last  cited.

1587.  ITS  SEVERE  LANGUAGE  TOWARDS  LEICESTER.  209

Ostend,  and  other  cities,  should  commit  the  same  crime,-
And  although  we  fully  suspected  the  designs  of  Stanley  and
York,  yet  your  Excellency's  secret  document  had  deprived  us
of  the  power  to  act.

“We  doubt  not  that  her  Majesty  and  your  Excellency  will
think  this  strange  language.  But  we  can  assure  you,  that  we
too  think  it  strange  and  grievous  that  those  places  should
have  been  confided  to  such  men,  against  our  repeated  remon¬
strances,  and  that,  moreover,  this  very  Stanley  should  have
been  recommended  by  your  Excellency  for  general  of  all  the
forces.  And  although  we  had  many  just  and  grave  reasons
for  opposing  your  administration — even  as  our  ancestors  were
often  wont  to  rise  against  the  sovereigns  of  the  country — we
have,  nevertheless,  patiently  suffered  for  a  long  time,  in  order
not  to  diminish  your  authority,  which  we  deemed  so  important
to  our  welfare,  and  in  the  hope  that  you  would  at  last  be
moved  by  the  perilous  condition  of  the  commonwealth,  and
awake  to  the  artifices  of  your  advisers.

“But  at  last — feeling  that  the  existence  of  the  state  can  no
longer  be  preserved  without  proper  authority,  and  that  the
whole  community  is  full  of  emotion  and  distrust,  on  account
of  these  great  treasons — we,  the  States-General,  as  well  as
the  States-Provincial,  have  felt  constrained  to  establish  such  a
government  as  we  deem  meet  for  the  emergency.  And  of
this  we  think  proper  to  apprize  your  Excellency."

He  then  expressed  the  conviction  that  all  these  evil  deeds
had  been  accomplished  against  the  intentions  of  the  Earl  and
the  English  government,  and  requested  his  Excellency  so  to
deal  with  her  Majesty  that  the  contingent  of  horse  and  foot
hitherto  accorded  by  her  “  might  be  maintained  in  good
order,  and  in  better  pay."

Here,  then,  was  substantial  choleric  phraseology,  as  good
plain  speaking  as  her  Majesty  had  just  been  employing,  and
with  quite  as  sufficient  cause.  Here  was  no  pleasant  diplo¬
matic  fencing,  but  straightforward  vigorous  thrusts.  It  was
no  wonder  that  poor  Wilkes  should  have  thought  the  letter

“  too  sharp,"  when  he  heard  it  read  in  the  assembly,  and  that

VOL.  II. — P

210

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIV.

he  should  have  done  his  best  to  prevent  it  from  being  de¬
spatched.  He  would  have  thought  it  sharper  could  he  have
seen  how  the  pride  of  her  Majesty  and  of  Leicester  was
wounded  by  it  to  the  quick.  Her  list  of  grievances  against
the  States  seem  to  vanish  into  air.  Who  had  been  tampering
with  the  Spaniards  now  ?  Had  that  u  shadowy  and  imaginary
authority”  granted  to  Leicester  not  proved  substantial
enough  ?  Was  it  the  States-G-eneral,  the  state-council,  or  was
it  the  “ absolute  governor” — who  had  carried  off  the  supreme
control  of  the  commonwealth  in  his  pocket — that  was  respon¬
sible  for  the  ruin  effected  by  Englishmen  who  had  scorned  all
u  authority”  but  his  own  P

The  States,  in  another  blunt  letter  to  the  Queen  herself,
declared  the  loss  of  Deventer  to  be  more  disastrous  to  them
than  even  the  fall  of  Antwerp  had  been ;  for  the  republic  had
now  been  split  asunder,  and  its  most  ancient  and  vital  por¬
tions  almost  cut  away.  Nevertheless  they  were  not  “  dazzled
nor  despairing,”  they  said,  but  more  determined  than  ever  to
maintain  their  liberties,  and  bid  defiance  to  the  Spanish
tyrant.  And  again  they  demanded  of,  rather  than  implored,
her  Majesty  to  be  true  to  her  engagements  with  them.1

The  interviews  which  followed  were  more  tempestuous  than
ever.  “  I  had  intended  that  my  Lord  of  Leicester  should
return  to  you,”  she  said  to  the  envoys.  “But  that  shall  never
be.  He  has  been  treated  with  gross  ingratitude,  he  has  served
the  Provinces  with  ability,  he  has  consumed  his  own  property
there,  he  has  risked  his  life,  he  has  lost  his  near  kinsman,
Sir  Philip  Sidney,  whose  life  I  should  be  glad  to  purchase
with  many  millions,  and,  in  place  of  all  reward,  he  receives
these  venomous  letters,  of  which  a  copy  has  been  sent  to  his
sovereign  to  blacken  him  with  her.”  She  had  been  advising

1  “  Car  si  la  perte  d’ Anvers  a  este
tres  grande  pour  toute  le  pays,  ceste
cy  tire  avec  soi  plus  grande  conse¬
quence,  tout  au  regard  de  plusieurs
autres  villes  circumvoisines  de  De¬
venter,  lesquelles  ne  pourront  etre
avictuaillees  que  par  force,  que  aultre-
ment.  Non  pas  que  nous  disons  cesq
comme  esblouys  et  par  desespoir .

Car  nous  ne  manquerons  jamais  en
nos  premieres  resolutions  do  nous  vou-
loir  maintenir  contre  le  Roi  d’Espaigne.
pour  la  conservation  do  la  religion
Ohrestienne,  nos  privileges,  franchises,
et  libertes.”  States-General  to  the
Queen,  6  Feb.  1587.  (Hague  Archives,
MS.)

1581.  PAINFUL  POSITION  OF  THE  ENVOYS  AT  COURT.  211

him  to  return,  she  added,  hut  she  was  now  resolved  that  he
should  never  set  foot  in  the  Provinces  again/'1

Here  the  Earl,  who  was  present,  exclaimed — heating  him¬
self  on  the  hreast — ua  tali  officio  lihera  nos,  Domine  !"2

But  the  States,  undaunted  by  these  explosions  of  wrath,
replied  that  it  had  ever  been  their  custom,  when  their  laws
and  liberties  were  invaded,  to  speak  their  mind  boldly  to
kings  and  governors,  and  to  procure  redress  of  their  grievances,
as  became  free  men.3

During  that  whole  spring  the  Queen  was  at  daggers  drawn
with  all  her  leading  counsellors,  mainly  in  regard  to  that  great
question  of  questions — the  relations  of  England  with  the
Netherlands  and  Spain.  Walsingham — who  felt  it  madness
to  dream  of  peace,  and  who  believed  it  the  soundest  policy  to
deal  with  Parma  and  his  veterans  upon  the  soil  of  Flanders,
with  the  forces  of  the  republic  for  allies,  rather  than  to  await
his  arrival  in  London — was  driven  almost  to  frenzy  by  what
he  deemed  the  Queen's  perverseness.

“  Our  sharp  words  continue,"  said  the  Secretary,  u  which
doth  'greatly  disquiet  her  Majesty,  and  discomfort  her  poor
servants  that  attend  her.  The  Lord-Treasurer  remaineth  still
in  disgrace,  and,  behind  my  back,  her  Majesty  giveth  out
very  hard  speeches  of  myself,  which  I  the  rather  credit,  for
that  I  find,  in  dealing  with  her,  I  am  nothing  gracious ;  and  if
her  Majesty  could  be  otherwise  served,  I  know  I  should  not  be

used . Her  Majesty  doth  wholly  lend  herself  to  devise

some  further  means  to  disgrace  her  poor  council,  in  respect

whereof  she  neglecteth  all  other  causes . The  discord

between  her  Majesty  and  her  council  hindereth  the  necessary
consultations  that  were  to  be  destined  for  the  preventing  of

the  manifold  perils  that  hang  over  this  realm . Sir

Christopher  Hatton  hath  dealt  very  plainly  and  dutifully

1  Bor,  II.  xxii.  949.

3  Ibid.

3  “  Nous  sommes  accoustumez,
comme  aussi  ont  ete  nos  predeces-
seurs,  de  remonstrer  a  nos  princes  et
gouverneurs  librement  des  desordres
et  contraventions  quo  nous  trouvons

contre  nos  privileges  et  libertes,  comme
avons  fait  a  Y.  E.  etant  ici, — ce  quo
nous  avons  toujours  tenu  etre  de  notre
devoir  et  vrai  moyen  pour  parvenir  au
redres  desdites  desordres,”  &c.  States-
General  to  Leicester,  1  March,  1581.
(Hague  Archives,  MS.)

212

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIV.

with  her,  which  hath  been  accepted  in  so  evil  part  as  he  is
resolved  to  retire  for  a  time.  I  assure  you  I  find  every

man  weary  of  attendance  here . I  would  to  God  I

could  find  as  good  resolution  in  her  Majesty  to  proceed  in
a  princely  course  in  relieving  the  United  Provinces,  as  I  find
an  honorable  disposition  in  your  Lordship  to  employ  your¬
self  in  their  service/' 1

The  Lord-Treasurer  was  much  puzzled,  very  wretched,  but
philosophically  resigned.  u  Why  her  Majesty  useth  me  thus
strangely,  I  know  not,"  he  observed.  “  To  some  she  saith
that  she  meant  not  I  should  have  gone  from  the  court ;  to
some  she  saith,  she  may  not  admit  me,  nor  give  me  con¬
tentment.  I  shall  dispose  myself  to  enjoy  God’s  favour,
and  shall  do  nothing  to  deserve  her  disfavour.  And  if  I
be  suffered  to  be  a  stranger  to  her  affairs,  I  shall  have  a
quieter  life.’’2

Leicester,  after  the  first  burst  of  his  anger  was  over,  was
willing  to  return  to  the  Provinces.  He  protested  that  he  had
a  greater  affection  for  the  Netherland  people — not  for  the
governing  powers — even  than  he  felt  for  the  people  of  Eng¬
land.’’3  “  There  is  nothing  sticks  in  my  stomach,’’  he  said,
cc  but  the  good-will  of  that  poor  afflicted  people,  for  whom,  I
take  God  to  record,  I  could  be  content  to  lose  any  limb  I  have
to  do  them  good.’’ 4  But  he  was  crippled  with  debt,  and  the
Queen  resolutely  refused  to  lend  him  a  few  thousand  pounds,
without  which  he  could  not  stir.  Walsingham  in  vain  did
battle  with  her  parsimony,  representing  how  urgently  and
vividly  the  necessity  of  his  return  had  been  depicted  by  all
her  ministers  in  both  countries,  and  how  much  it  imported  to
her  own  safety  and  service.  But  she  was  obdurate.  “  She
would  rather,’’ he  said  bitterly  to  Leicester,  u  hazard  the  in¬
crease  of  confusion  there — which  may  put  the  whole  country
in  peril — than  supply  your  want.  The  like  course  she  holdeth
in  the  rest  of  her  causes,  which  maketh  me  to  wish  myself

1  ‘Walsingham  to  Leicester,  3  April,
1587.  Same  to  same,  10  April,  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  315-319.)

2  Burgliley  to  Leicester,  16  April,

1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  333.)

3  Bor,  II.  xxii.  950-952.

4  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  16  April
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

158?.

QUEEN’S  PARSIMONY  TOWARDS  LEICESTER.

213

from  the  helm/'’1  At  last  she  agreed  to  advance  him  ten
thousand  pounds,  hut  on  so  severe  conditions,  that  the  Earl
declared  himself  heart-broken  again,  and  protested  that  he
would  neither  accept  the  money,  nor  ever  set  foot  in  the
Netherlands.  u  Let  Norris  stay  there,”  he  said  in  a  fury  ;
u  he  wall  do  admirably,  no  doubt.  Only  let  it  not  he  sup¬
posed  that  I  can  he  there  also.  Not  for  one  hundred  thousand
pounds  would  I  he  in  that  country  with  him.”2

Meantime  it  was  agreed  that  Lord  Buckhurst  should  he
sent  forth  on  what  Wilkes  termed  a  mission  of  expostulation,

1  “  For  the  10,0002.  for  your  parti¬
cular,”  said  Waisingham,  “  I  have  dealt
very  earnestly,  but  cannot  prevail  to
win  her  Majesty  to  assent  thereunto.
I  caused  Mr.  Barker  to  set  down  a  note
of  your  mortgages  that  stand  upon
forfeiture  for  lack  of  this  promised
support  of  the  10,0002,  wherewith  she
has  been  made  acquainted,  but  not
moved  thereby  to  relieve  you.”  Wai¬
singham  to  Leicester,  6  April,  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  323.  MS.)

And  again,  two  days  later — “lam
sorry  that  her  Majesty  sticketh  with
you  for  the  loan,  for  I  see,  without  your
return,  both  the  cause  and  many  an
honest  man  that  have  showed  them
most  constantly  affected  to  you,  will
go  to  ruin.  I  wish  you  had  it,  though
it  were  for  but  two  months.  The
enemy  is  not  like  to  attempt  any  great
matter  in  respect  of  his  wants.  But
I  am  most  sorry  to  see  so  great  an
advantage  lost  as  her  Majesty  might
have  had,  in  case  she  had  been  induced
to  contribute  towards  the  putting  an
army  into  the  field.”  Same  to  same,
8  April,  1587.  Ibid.  p.  321-331.  MS.

And  once  more,  a  week  afterwards —
“She  can  be  content  to  furnish  you
with  10,0002.,  so  as  you  would  devise,
out  of  her  entertainment  and  the  States
to  pay  her  in  one  year  the  said  sum,
which  she  saith  you  promised  unto
herself}  and  therefore  willed  me  to
write  to  you  to  know  whether  you  can
make  repayment  in  such  order  as  she
requireth.”  Same  to  same,  14  April,
1587.  Ibid.  326.

There  was  not  much  sentiment  be¬
tween  the  “  throned  vestal  ”  and
“Sweet  Robin”  when  pounds  and

shillings  were  discussed;  and  it  will
be  seen  that  the  Earl  was  rendered
quite  frantic  by  the  screwing  process
to  which  he  found  himself  subjected
by  her  whose  “  blessed  beams  ”  had
formerly  been  so  “  nutritious.”

3  “I  perceive  by  your  letters,”  said
Leicester,  “  that  her  Majesty  would
now  I  should  go  over,  and  will  lend
me  10,0002.  so  she  may  be  sure  to  re¬
ceive  it  back  within  a  year.  I  did
offer  to  her  Majesty  heretofore  that
she  should  have  all  I  receive  of  her
entertainment,  and  as  much  besides  as
shall  yield  her  2,0002.,  paid  either
1,0002.  at  Michaelmas  and  the  other  at
our  Lady-day,  or  else  both  at  our  Lady,
which  is  less  than  a  year  ;  and  so  long
as  I  shall  receive,  then  her  Majesty
shall  receive  after  this  sort  till  her
10,0002.  be  paid.  And  this  is  more,  I
am  now  persuaded,  than  I  shall  be  able
to  do,  and  keep  any  countenance  fit
for  the  place  ....  but  seeing  I  find
her  Majesty’s  hardness  continue  still
to  me  as  it  doth,  I  pray  you  let  me
your  earnest  and  true  furtherance  for
my  abode  at  home  and  discharge  .  .  .
for  my  heart  is  more  than  half-broken,
and  I  do  think  her  Majesty  had  rather
far  continue  Sir  J.  Norris  there,  in
respect  to  the  reconciliation  between

him  and  Count  Hollock . But  I

will  never  serve  with  him  again  as  long
as  I  live;  no,  not  for  to  have  100,0002.

given  me . I  know  the  man  too

well  to  trust  to  his  service.  I  shall
have  no  good  thereby — not  if  I  were
an  angel,  for  he  cannot  obey  nor  almost
like  of  an  equal  ....  and  already  he
hath  taken  advantage  to  curry  favour
with  captains  and  soldiers . He

214

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

and  a  very  ill-timed  one.  This  new  envoy  was  to  inquire  into
the  causes  of  the  discontent,  and  to  do  his  best  to  remove
them  :  as  if  any  man  in  England  or  in  Holland  doubted  as  to
the  causes,  or  as  to  the  best  means  of  removing  them  ;  or  as
if  it  were  not  absolutely  certain  that  delay  was  the  very  worst
specific  that  could  be  adopted — delay — which  the  Nether-
land  statesmen,  as  well  as  the  Queen's  wisest  counsellors,  most
deprecated,  which  Alexander  and  Philip  most  desired,  and  by
indulging  in  which  her  Majesty  was  most  directly  playing  into
her  adversary's  hand.  Elizabeth  was  preparing  to  put  cards
upon  the  table  against  an  antagonist  whose  game  was  close,
whose  honesty  was  always  to  be  suspected,  and  who  was  a
consummate  master  in  what  was  then  considered  diplomatic
sleight  of  hand.  So  Lord  Buckhurst  was  to  go  forth  to  ex¬
postulate  at  the  Hague,  while  transports  were  loading  in
Cadiz  and  Lisbon,  reiters  levying  in  Germany,  pikemen  and
musketeers  in  Spain  and  Italy,  for  a  purpose  concerning
which  Walsingham  and  Barneveld  had  for  a  long  time  felt
little  doubt.

Meantime  Lord  Leicester  went  to  Bath  to  drink  the  waters,
and  after  he  had  drunk  the  waters,  the  Queen,  ever  anxious
for  his  health,  was  resolved  that  he  should  not  lose  the  benefit
of  those  salubrious  draughts  by  travelling  too  soon,  or  by
plunging  anew  into  the  fountains  of  bitterness  which  flowed
perennially  in  the  Netherlands.1

shall  never  bear  sway  under  me;  his
disdain  and  craft  hath  no  moderation ;
and  I  know,  for  all  those  speeches  of
my  going-,  his  friends  make  full  account
that  he  shall  remain  there  as  her  Ma¬
jesty’s  general  of  the  forces.”  Leicester
to  Walsingham,  16  April,  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

1  “  Finding  your  presence  here  ne¬
cessary,”  wrote  Walsingham,  “for  the
expedition  of  the  Low  Country  causes,

I  moved  her  Majesty  that  I  might
be  authorised  in  her  name  to  hasten
your  repair  hither,  whereunto  she
would  in  no  sort  consent,  pretend¬
ing  that  after  the  use  of  the  Bath,  it
would  be  dangerous  for  your  Lord-
ship  to  take  any  extraordinary  travail.
There  is  some  doubt  that  Ostend  will
be  presently  besieged,”  &c.  &c.  Wal¬
singham  to  Leicester,  17  April,  1587.
(B.  Mus.  Galba,  C,  xi.  327,  MS.)

158*7.

BUCKHURST  SENT  TO  THE  NETHERLANDS.

215

CHAPTER  XV.

Buckhurst  sent  to  the  Netherlands  —  Alarming  State  of  Affairs  on  his  Arrival
—  His  Efforts  to  conciliate  —  Democratic  Theories  of  Wilkes  —  Sophistry
of  the  Argument — Dispute  between  Wilkes  and  Barneveld  —  Religious
Tolerance  by  the  States  —  Their  Constitutional  Theory  —  Deventer’s  bad
Counsels  to  Leicester  —  Their  pernicious  Effect  —  Real  and  supposed
Plots  against  Hohenlo  —  Mutual  Suspicion  and  Distrust  —  Buckhurst  seeks
to  restore  good  Feeling  —  The  Queen  angry  and  vindictive  —  She  cen¬
sures  Buckhurst’s  Course  —  Leicester’s  Wrath  at  Hohenlo’s  Charges  of  a
Plot  by  the  Earl  to  murder  him  —  Buckhurst’s  eloquent  Appeals  to  the
Queen  —  Her  perplexing  and  contradictory  Orders  —  Despair  of  Wilkes  —
Leicester  announces  his  Return  —  His  Instructions  —  Letter  to  Junius  —
Barneveld  denounces  him  in  the  States.

We  return  to  tlie  Netherlands.  If  ever  proof  were  afforded
of  the  influence  of  individual  character  on  the  destiny  of
nations  and  of  the  world,  it  certainly  was  seen  in  the  year
1587.  We  have  lifted  the  curtain  of  the  secret  council-
chamber  at  Greenwich.  We  have  seen  all  Elizabeth's  ad¬
visers  anxious  to  arouse  her  from  her  fatal  credulity,  from  her
almost  as  fatal  parsimony.  We  have  seen  Leicester  anxious
to  return,  despite  all  fancied  indignities,  Walsingham  eager
to  expedite  the  enterprise,  and  the  Queen  remaining  obdurate,
while  month  after  month  of  precious  time  was  melting  away.

In  the  Netherlands,  meantime,  discord  and  confusion  had
been  increasing  every  day  ;  and  the  first  great  cause  of  such  a
dangerous  condition  of  affairs  was  the  absence  of  the  governor.
In  this  all  parties  agreed.  The  Leicestrians,  the  anti-Leices-
trians,  the  Holland  party,  the  Utrecht  party,  the  English
counsellors,  the  English  generals,  in  private  letter,  in  solemn
act,  all  warned  the  Queen  against  the  lamentable  effects
resulting  from  Leicester's  inopportune  departure  and  pro¬
longed  absence.1

On  the  first  outbreak  of  indignation  after  the  Deventer
affair,  Prince  Maurice  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  general
government,  with  the  violent  Hohenlo  as  his  lieutenant.2  The

1  Documents  in  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  *7 6-80.  2  Wagenaar,  viii.  204.

216

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

greatest  exertions  were  made  by  these  two  nobles  and  by
Barneveld,  who  guided  the  whole  policy  of  the  party,  to
secure  as  many  cities  as  possible  to  their  cause.  Magistrates
and  commandants  of  garrisons  in  many  towns  willingly  gave
in  their  adhesion  to  the  new  government ;  others  refused  ;
especially  Diedricli  Sonoy,  an  officer  of  distinction,  who  was
governor  of  Enkhuyzen,  and  influential  throughout  North
Holland,  and  who  remained  a  stanch  partisan  of  Leicester.1
Utrecht,  the  stronghold  of  the  Leicestrians,  was  wavering  and
much  torn  by  faction  ;  Hohenlo  and  Moeurs  had  u  banquetted
and  feasted  ”  to  such  good  purpose  that  they  had  gained  over
half  the  captains  of  the  burglier-guard,  and,  aided  by  the
branch  of  nobles,  were  making  a  good  fight  against  the
Leicester  magistracy  and  the  clerical  force,  enriched  by  the
plunder  of  the  old  Catholic  livings,  who  denounced  as  Pa¬
pistical  and  Hispaniolized  all  who  favoured  the  party  of
Maurice  and  Barneveld.

By  the  end  of  March  the  envoys  returned  from  London,
and  in  their  company  came  Lord  Buckhurst,  as  special  am¬
bassador  from  the  Queen.2

Thomas  Sackville,  Lord  Buckhurst — afterwards  Earl  of
Dorset  and  lord-treasurer — was  then  fifty-one  years  of  age.

A  man  of  large  culture — poet,  dramatist,  diplomatist — bred  .
to  the  bar  ;  afterwards  elevated  to  the  peerage  ;  endowed  with
high  character  and  strong  intellect ;  ready  with  tongue  and
pen  ;  handsome  of  person,  and  with  a  fascinating  address,  he
was  as  fit  a  person  to  send  on  a  mission  of  expostulation  as
any  man  to  be  found  in  England.  But  the  author  of  the
c  Induction  to  the  Mirror  for  Magistrates  *  and  of  e  Grorboduc/
had  come  to  the  Netherlands  on  a  forlorn  hope.  To  expos¬
tulate  in  favour  of  peace  with  a  people  who  knew  that  their
existence  depended  on  war,  to  reconcile  those  to  delay  who
felt  that  delay  was  death,  and  to  heal  animosities  between
men  who  were  enemies  from  their  cradles  to  their  graves,  was
a  difficult  mission.  But  the  chief  ostensible  object  of  Buck¬
hurst  was  to  smooth  the  way  for  Leicester,  and,  if  possible,  to

1  Wagenaar,  via.  1T6,  185,  209-211,  270-278.  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  10,  seq.
Reyd,  vi.  101.  3  Bor,  xxii.  952.  "Wagenaar,  21G.

158*7.  ALARMING-  STATE  OP  AFFAIRS  AT  HIS  ARRIVAL.  217

persuade  the  Netherlander  as  to  the  good  inclinations  of  the
English  government.  This  was  no  easy  task,  for  they  knew
that  their  envoys  had  been  dismissed,  without  even  a  promise
of  subsidy.  They  had  asked  for  twelve  thousand  soldiers  and
sixty  thousand  pounds,  and  had  received  a  volley  of  abuse.
Over  and  over  again,  through  many  months,  the  Queen  fell
into  a  paroxysm  of  rage  when  even  an  allusion  was  made  to
the  loan  of  fifty  or  sixty  thousand  pounds  ;  and  even  had  she
promised  the  money,  it  would  have  given  but  little  satisfac¬
tion.  As  Count  Moeurs  observed,  he  would  rather  see  one
English  rose-noble  than  a  hundred  royal  promises.  So  the
Hollanders  and  Zeelanders — not  fearing  Leicester’s  influence
within  their  little  morsel  of  a  territory — were  concentrating
their  means  of  resistance  upon  their  own  soil,  intending  to
resist  Spain,  and,  if  necessary,  England,  in  their  last  ditch,
and  with  the  last  drop  of  their  blood.

While  such  was  the  condition  of  affairs,  Lord  Buckhurst
landed  at  Flushing — four  months  after  the  departure  of
Leicester — on  the  24th  March,  having  been  tossing  three  days
and  nights  at  sea  in  a  great  storm,  u  miserably  sick  and  in
great  danger  of  drowning.”1  Sir  William  Russell,  governor
of  Flushing,  informed  him  of  the  progress  making  by  Prince
Maurice  in  virtue  of  his  new  authority.  He  told  him  that  the
Zeeland  regiment,  vacant  by  Sidney’s  death,  and  which  the
Queen  wished  bestowed  upon  Russell  himself,  had  been  given
to  Count  Solms  ;  a  circumstance  which  was  very  sure  to  ex¬
cite  her  Majesty’s  ire  ;  but  that  the  greater  number,  and  those
of  the  better  sort,  disliked  the  alteration  of  government,  and
relied  entirely  upon  the  Queen.  Sainte  Aldegonde  visited  him
at  Middelburgh,  and  in  a  “  long  discourse”  expressed  the
most  friendly  sentiments  towards  England,  with  free  offers  of
personal  service.  u  Nevertheless,”  said  Buckhurst,  cautiously,
u  I  mean  to  trust  the  effect,  not  his  words,  and  so  I  hope  he
shall  not  much  deceive  me.  His  opinion  is  that  the  Earl  of
Leicester’s  absence  hath  chiefly  caused  this  change,  and  that
without  his  return  it  will  hardly  be  restored  again,  but  that

1  Buckhurst  to  Walsingham,  26th  March,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

218

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XY.

upon  his  arrival  all  these  clouds  will  prove  hut  a  summer-
shower/'  1

As  a  matter  of  course  the  new  ambassador  lifted  up  his
voice,  immediately  after  setting  foot  on  shore,  in  favour  of
the  starving  soldiers  of  his  Queen.  “  'Tis  a  most  lamentable
thing/'  said  he,  “  to  hear  the  complaints  of  soldiers  and
captains  for  want  of  pay."  ....  Whole  companies  made  their
way  into  his  presence,  literally  crying  aloud  for  bread.  “For
Jesus'  sake,"  wrote  Buckhurst,  “hasten  to  send  relief  with  all
speed,  and  let  such  victuallers  be  appointed  as  have  a  con¬
science  not  to  make  themselves  rich  with  the  famine  of  poor
soldiers.  If  her  Majesty  send  not  money,  and  that  with  speed,
for  their  payment,  I  am  afraid  to  think  what  mischief  and
miseries  are  like  to  follow."2

Then  the  ambassador  proceeded  to  the  Hague,  holding
interviews  with  influential  personages  in  private,  and  with  the
States-G-eneral  in  public.  Such  was  the  charm  of  his  manner,
and  so  Arm  the  conviction  of  sincerity  and  good-will  which
he  inspired,  that  in  the  course  of  a  fortnight  there  was  already
a  sensible  change  in  the  aspect  of  affairs.  The  enemy,  who,
at  the  time  of  their  arrival,  had  been  making  bonfires  and
holding  triumphal  processions  for  joy  of  the  great  breach
between  Holland  and  England,  and  had  been  “  hoping  to
swallow  them  all  up,  while  there  were  so  few  left  who  knew
how  to  act,"  were  already  manifesting  disappointment.3

In  a  solemn  meeting  of  the  States-G-eneral  with  the  state-
council,  Buckhurst  addressed  the  assembly  upon  the  general
subject  of  her  Majesty's  goodness  to  the  Netherlands.  He
spoke  of  the  gracious  assistance  rendered  by  her,  notwith¬
standing  her  many  special  charges  for  the  common  cause,  and
of  the  mighty  enmities  which  she  had  incurred  for  their  sake.
He  sharply  censured  the  Hollanders  for  their  cruelty  to
men  who  had  shed  their  blood  in  their  cause,  but  who  were
now  driven  forth  from  their  towns,  and  left  to  starve  on  the
highways,  and  hated  for  their  nation's  sake  :  as  if  the  whole

1  Buckhurst  to  Walsingham,  MS.
last  cited.  2  Ibid.

3  Bartholomew  Clerk  to  Burghley,
12  April,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

HIS  EFFORTS  TO  CONCILIATE.

219

English  name  deserved  to  be  soiled  “  for  the  treachery  of  two
miscreants/'  He  spoke  strongly  of  their  demeanour  towards
the  Earl  of  Leicester,  and  of  the  wrongs  they  had  done  him,
and  told  them,  that,  if  they  were  not  ready  to  atone  to  her
Majesty  for  such  injuries,  they  were  not  to  wonder  if  their
deputies  received  no  better  answer  at  her  hands.  “  She  who
embraced  your  cause,"  he  said,  “  when  other  mighty  princes
forsook  you,  will  still  stand  fast  unto  you,  yea,  and  increase
her  goodness,  if  her  present  state  may  suffer  it." 1

After  being  addressed  in  this  manner  the  council  of  state
made  what  Counsellor  Clerk  called  a  “  very  honest,  modest,
and  wise  answer but  the  States-General,  not  being  able
“  so  easily  to  discharge  that  which  had  so  long  boiled  within
them,"  deferred  their  reply  until  the  following  day.  They  then
brought  forward  a  deliberate  rejoinder,  in  which  they  ex¬
pressed  themselves  devoted  to  her  Majesty,  and,  on  the  whole,
well  disposed  to  the  Earl.  As  to  the  4th  F ebruary  letter,  it
had  been  written  “  in  amaritudine  cordis,"  upon  hearing  the
treasons  of  York  and  Stanley,  and  in  accordance  with  “their
custom  and  liberty  used  towards  all  princes,  whereby  they  had
long  preserved  their  estate,"  and  in  the  conviction  that  the
real  culprits  for  all  the  sins  of  his  Excellency's  government
were  certain  “  lewd  persons  who  sought  to  seduce  his  Lord-
ship,  and  to  cause  him  to  hate  the  States."

Buckhurst  did  not  think  it  well  to  reply,  at  that  moment,
upon  the  ground  that  there  had  been  already  crimination  and
recrimination  more  than  enough,  and  that  “a  little  bitterness
more  had  rather  caused  them  to  determine  dangerously  than
resolve  for  the  best."2

They  then  held  council  together — the  envoys  and  the
States-Gfeneral,  as  to  the  amount  of  troops  absolutely  neces¬
sary — casting  up  the  matter  “as  pinchingly  as  possibly  might
be."  And  the  result  was,  that  20,000  foot  and  2000  horse  for
garrison  work,  and  an  army  of  13,000  foot,  5000  horse,  and
1000  pioneers,  for  a  campaign  of  five  or  six  months,  were  pro¬
nounced  indispensable.  This  would  require  all  their  240,000?.

1  Bartholomew  Clerk  to  Burgliley,  ubi  sup.  ’  Ibid.

220

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

sterling  a-year,  regular  contribution,  her  Majesty’s  contingent
of  140,000/.,  and  an  extra  sum  of  150,000/.  sterling.  Of  this
sum  the  States  requested  her  Majesty  should  furnish  two-
thirds,  while  they  agreed  to  furnish  the  other  third,  which
would  make  in  all  240,000/.  for  the  Queen,  and  290,000/.  for
the  States.  As  it  was  understood  that  the  English  subsidies
were  only  a  loan,  secured  by  mortgage  of  the  cautionary  towns,
this  did  not  seem  very  unreasonable,  when  the  intimate  blend¬
ing  of  England’s  welfare  with  that  of  the  Provinces  was
considered.1

Thus  it  will  be  observed  that  Lord  Buckhurst — while  doing
his  best  to  conciliate  personal  feuds  and  heartburnings — had
done  full  justice  to  the  merits  of  Leicester,  and  had  jfiaced
in  strongest  light  the  favours  conferred  by  her  Majesty.

He  then  proceeded  to  Utrecht,  where  he  was  received  with
many  demonstrations  of  respect,  u  with  solemn  speeches”
from  magistrates  and  burgher-captains,  with  military  proces¬
sions,  and  with  great  banquets,  which  were,  however,  con¬
ducted  with  decorum,  and  at  which  even  Count  Moeurs  excited
universal  astonishment  by  his  sobriety.2  It  was  difficult,  how¬
ever,  for  matters  to  go  very  smoothly,  except  upon  the  surface.
What  could  be  more  disastrous  than  for  a  little  common¬
wealth — a  mere  handful  of  people,  like  these  Netlierlanders,
engaged  in  mortal  combat  with  the  most  powerful  monarch
in  the  world,  and  with  the  first  general  of  the  age,  within  a
league  of  their  borders — 'thus  to  be  deprived  of  all  organized
government  at  a  most  critical  moment,  and  to  be  left  to
wrangle  with  their  allies  and  among  themselves,  as  to  the
form  of  polity  to  be  adopted,  while  waiting  the  pleasure  of  a
capricious  and  despotic  woman  P

And  the  very  foundation  of  the  authority  by  which  tho
Spanish  yoke  had  been  abjured,  the  sovereignty  offered  to
Elizabeth,  and  the  government-general  conferred  on  Leicester,
was  fiercely  assailed  by  the  confidential  agents  of  Elizabeth
herself.  The  dispute  went  into  the  very  depths  of  the  social

1  Bartholomew  Clerk  to  Burgliley,

MS.  last  cited.

2  Gilpin  to  Wilkes,  25  April,  158 7.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

DEMOCRATIC  THEORIES  OF  WILKES.

221

contract.  Already  Wilkes,  standing  up  stoutly  for  the  demo¬
cratic  views  of  the  governor,  who  was  so  foully  to  requite  him,
had  assured  the  English  government  that  the  u  people  were
ready  to  cut  the  throats  ”  of  the  States-General  at  any  con¬
venient  moment.  The  sovereign  people,  not  the  deputies,
were  alone  to  he  heeded,  he  said,  and  although  he  never
informed  the  world  by  what  process  he  had  learned  the
deliberate  opinion  of  that  sovereign,  as  there  had  been  no
assembly  excepting  those  of  the  States-General  and  States-
Provincial — he  was  none  the  less  fully  satisfied  that  the  people
were  all  with  Leicester,  and  bitterly  opposed  to  the  States.

“For  the  sovereignty,  or  supreme  authority/'  said  he,
ce  through  failure  of  a  legitimate  prince,  belongs  to  the  people,
and  not  to  you,  gentlemen,  who  are  only  servants,  ministers,
and  deputies  of  the  people.  You  have  your  commissions  or  in¬
structions  surrounded  by  limitations — which  conditions  are  so
widely  different  from  the  power  of  sovereignty,  as  the  might
of  the  subject  is  in  regard  to  his  prince,  or  of  a  servant  in
respect  to  his  master.  For  sovereignty  is  not  limited  either
as  to  power  or  as  to  time.  Still  less  do  you  represent  the
sovereignty  ;  for  the  people,  in  giving  the  general  and  absolute
government  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  have  conferred  upon  him
at  once  the  exercise  of  justice,  the  administration  of  polity,
of  naval  affairs,  of  war,  and  of  all  the  other  points  of  sove¬
reignty.  Of  these  a  governor-general  is  however  only  the
depositary  or  guardian,  until  such  time  as  it  may  please  the
prince  or  people  to  revoke  the  trust ;  there  being  no  other
in  this  state  who  can  do  this  ;  seeing  that  it  was  the  q>eople,
who,  through  the  instrumentality  of  your  offices — through  you
as  its  servants — conferred  on  his  Excellency,  this  power,
authority,  and  government.  According  to  the  common  rule
of  law,  therefore,  quo  jure  quid  statuitur ,  eodem  jure  tolli
debet.  You  having  been  fully  empowered  by  the  provinces
and  cities,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  by  your  masters  and
superiors,  to  confer  the  government  on  his  Excellency,  it  fol¬
lows  that  you  require  a  like  power  in  order  to  take  it  away
either  in  whole  or  in  part.  If  then  you  had  no  commission

222

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XY.

to  curtail  his  authority,  or  even  that  of  the  state-council,  and
thus  to  tread  upon  and  usurp  his  power  as  governor  general
and  absolute,  there  follows  of  two  things  one  :  either  you
did  not  well  understand  what  you  were  doing,  nor  duly  con¬
sider  how  far  that  power  reached,  or — much  more  probably —
you  have  fallen  into  the  sin  of  disobedience,  considering  how
solemnly  you  swore  allegiance  to  him.1

Thus  subtly  and  ably  did  Wilkes  defend  the  authority  of
the  man  who  had  deserted  his  post  at  a  most  critical  moment,
and  had  compelled  the  States,  by  his  dereliction,  to  take  the
government  into  their  own  hands.

For,  after  all,  the  whole  argument  of  the  English  counsellor
rested  upon  a  quibble.  The  people  were  absolutely  sovereign,
he  said,  and  had  lent  that  sovereignty  to  Leicester.  How

1  Kluit.  ‘Holl.  Staatsreg.’  II.  281.
Compare  Wagenaar,  viii.  208.

It  is  very  important  to  observe,  that
Wilkes  retracted  these  democratic
views  before  the  end  of  the  summer,
and  gradually  adopted  the  constitu¬
tional  theory  maintained  by  Holland.
He  informed  the  Queen,  on  the  12th
July,  1587,  that  in  case  she  refused
the  sovereignty,  it  “  should  remain
with  such  as  by  the  laws  of  the
country  do  retain  it ,  which  is  not  in  the
common  people ,  but  in  some  fifty  or
sixty  persons  in  every  city  and  town
called  by  the  name  of  Vroedschap.

.  If  the  Earl  of  Leicester,”

said  he,  “  should  attempt  to  remove
any  of  these  persons  constituting  this
Yroedschap,  as  it  is  rumoured  he  in¬
tends  doing,  it  will  hazard  the  ruin  of
the  whole  country,  endanger  the  Earl
greatly,  and  prove  the  loss  of  all  her
Majesty’s  charge  employed  in  the  de¬
fence  of  the  country.  It  is  a  mistake
to  suppose  that  it  will  be  a  facile
matter  to  carry  the  common  people
into  any  such  violence  at  any  time
against  the  States;  for  the  magistrates
of  every  city  and  town,  upon  pre¬
monition  already  given,  are  holding  a
vigilant  eye  and  severe  hand  over  any
that  shall  stir  within  any  of  their
jurisdiction.”

“  The  remedy,”  continued  Wilkes,
“  to  prevent  any  mischief  that  might
ensue  of  any  popular  commotion,  would

be  to  leave  that  course,  and  to  follow
the  example  of  the  late  Prince  of
Orange,  who  had  quite  as  many  diffi¬
culties  to  contend  with  as  the  Earl  of
Leicester,  and  yet  forebore  to  discredit
the  States  with  the  people — gaining
five  or  six  of  the  States’  members  that
had  the  most  credit  with  the  assem¬
blies,  and  through  them  working  upon
all  the  rest;  there  being  nothing  de¬
termined  or  to  be  handled  in  their
assemblies  but  he  knew  of  it  always
beforehand;  and  whensoever  he  had
anything  to  propound  or  bring  to  pass
among  them,  he  first  consulted  with
these  persons,  and  by  them  was  made
acquainted  whether  the  matter  would
pass  or  be  impugned,  and  acted
accordingly.”  “The  Prince,”  said
Wilkes,  “  never  attempted  anything
of  importance  without  consulting  the
States.  The  people  are  the  same  now
as  they  were  then,  and  do  not  love  to
be  subject  to  any  monarchical  govern¬
ment.”  Wilkes  to  the  Queen,  12  July,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

It  is  obvious,  from  this  change  of
opinion  on  the  part  of  the  counsellor,
that  he  would  become  liable  to  the
disapprobation  of  Leicester ;  but  it
seems  hardly  credible  that  he  should
have  thereby  inspired  the  Earl  with
such  a  hatred  and  longing  for  revenge
against  him  as  he  unquestionably  did
excite.

I

158  Y.

SOPHISTRY  OP  THE  ARGUMENT.

223

had  they  made  that  loan  P  Through  the  machinery  of  the
States-General.  So  long  then  as  the  Earl  retained  the  absolute
sovereignty,  the  States  were  not  even  representatives  of  the
sovereign  people.  The  sovereign  people  was  merged  into  one
English  Earl.  The  English  Earl  had  retired — indefinitely —
to  England.  Was  the  sovereign  people  to  wait  for  months,  or
years,  before  it  regained  its  existence  P  And  if  not,  how  was
it  to  reassert  its  vitality  ?  How  but  through  the  agency  of
the  States-General,  who — according  to  Wilkes  himself — had
been  fully  empowed  by  the  Provinces  and  Cities  to  confer  the
government  on  the  Earl  ?  The  people  then,  after  all,  were  the
provinces  and  cities.  And  the  States-General  were  at  that
moment  as  much  qualified  to  represent  those  provinces  and
cities  as  they  ever  had  been,  and  they  claimed  no  more.
Wilkes,  nor  any  other  of  the  Leicester  j)arty,  ever  hinted  at
a  general  assembly  of  the  people.  Universal  suffrage  was  not
dreamed  of  at  that  day.  By  the  people,  he  meant,  if  he
meant  anything,  only  that  very  small  fraction  of  the  in¬
habitants  of  a  country,  who,  according  to  the  English  system,
in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  constituted  its  Commons.  He  chose,
rather  from  personal  and  political  motives  than  philosophical
ones,  to  draw  a  distinction  between  the  people  and  the
e  States/  but  it  is  quite  obvious,  from  the  tone  of  his  private
communications,  that  by  the  c  States 9  he  meant  the  indi¬
viduals  who  happened,  for  the  time-being,  to  be  the  deputies
of  the  States  of  each  Province.  But  it  was  almost  an  affecta¬
tion  to  accuse  those  individuals  of  calling  or  considering  them¬
selves  ‘  sovereigns  ; '  for  it  was  very  well  known  that  they
sat  as  envoys ,  rather  than  as  members  of  a  congress,  and  were
perpetually  obliged  to  recur  to  their  constituents,  the  States  of
each  Province,  for  instructions.  It  was  idle,  because  Buys  and
Barneveld,  and  Roorda,  and  other  leaders,  exercised  the  in¬
fluence  due  to  their  talents,  patriotism,  and  experience,  to
stigmatise  them  as  usurpers  of  sovereignty,  and  to  hound
the  rabble  upon  them  as  tyrants  and  mischief-makers.  Yet
to  take  this  course  pleased  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  who  saw  no
hope  for  the  liberty  of  the  people,  unless  absolute  and  uncon-

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

224

ditional  authority  over  the  people,  in  war,  naval  affairs,
justice,  and  policy,  were  placed  in  his  hands.  This  was  the
view  sustained  by  the  clergy  of  the  Reformed  Church,  because
they  found  it  convenient,  through  such  a  theory,  and  by  Lei¬
cester's  power,  to  banish  Papists,  exercise  intolerance  in
matters  of  religion,  sequestrate  for  their  own  private  uses  the
property  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  obtain  for  their  own  a
political  power  which  was  repugnant  to  the  more  liberal  ideas
of  the  Barneveld  party.

The  States  of  Holland— inspired  as  it  were  by  the  memory
of  that  great  martyr  to  religious  and  political  liberty,  William
the  Silent — maintained  freedom  of  conscience.

The  Leicester  party  advocated  a  different  theory  on  the
religious  question.  They  were  also  determined  to  omit  no
effort  to  make  the  States  odious.

“  Seeing  their  violent  courses,"  said  Wilkes  to  Leicester,
ec  I  have  not  been  negligent,  as  well  by  solicitations  to  the
ministers ,  as  by  my  letters  to  such  as  have  continued  constant
in  affection  to  your  Lordship,  to  have  the  people  informed  of
the  ungrateful  and  dangerous  proceedings  of  the  States.  They
have  therein  travailed  with  so  good  effect,  as  the  people  are
now  wonderfully  well  disposed,  and  have  delivered  every¬
where  in  speeches,  that  if,  by  the  over  thwart  dealings  of  the
States,  her  Majesty  shall  be  drawn  to  stay  her  succours  and
goodness  to  them,  and  that  thereby  your  Lordship  be  also
discouraged  to  return,  they  will  cut  their  throats.”  1

Who  the  u  people”  exactly  were,  that  had  been  so  wonder¬
fully  well  disposed  to  throat-cutting  by  the  ministers  of  the
Gospel,  did  not  distinctly  appear.  It  was  certain,  however,
that  they  were  the  special  friends  of  Leicester,  great  orators,
very  pious,  and  the  sovereigns  of  the  country.  So  much  could
not  be  gainsaid.

“  Your  Lordship  would  wonder,"  continued  the  councillor,
“to  see  the  people — who  so  lately,  by  the  practice  of  the  said
States  and  the  accident  of  Deventer,  were  notably  alienated —

1  Wilkes  to  Leicester,  12  March,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

DISPUTE  BETWEEN  WILKES  AND  BARNEVELD.

1587.

225

so  returned  to  their  former  devotion  towards  her  Majesty,
your  Lordship,  and  our  nation.”

Wilkes  was  able  moreover  to  gratify  the  absent  governor-
general  with  the  intelligence — of  somewhat  questionable
authenticity  however — that  the  States  were  very  “much
terrified  with  these  threats  of  the  people.”  But  Barneveld
came  down  to  the  council  to  inquire  what  member  of  that
body  it  was  who  had  accused  the  States  of  violating  the
Earl’s  authority.  “  Whoever  he  is,”  said  the  Advocate,  “  let
him  deliver  his  mind  frankly,  and  he  shall  be  answered.”
The  man  did  not  seem  much  terrified  by  the  throat-cutting
orations.  “  It  is  true,”  replied  Wilkes,  perceiving  himself  to
be  the  person  intended,  “  that  you  have  very  injuriously,  in
many  of  your  proceedings,  derogated  from  and  trodden  the
authority  of  his  Lordship  and  of  this  council  under  your
feet.” 1

And  then  he  went  into  particulars,  and  discussed,  more  suo ,
the  constitutional  question,  in  which  various  Leicestrian  coun¬
sellors  seconded  him.

But  Barneveld  grimly  maintained  that  the  States  were  the
sovereigns,  and  that  it  was  therefore  unfit  that  the  governor ,
ivho  drew  his  authority  from  them ,  should  call  them  to  account
for  their  doings.  “  It  was  as  if  the  governors  in  the  time  of
Charles  Y.,”  said  the  Advocate,  “should  have  taxed  that
Emperor  for  any  action  of  his  done  in  the  government.”2

In  brief,  the  rugged  Barneveld,  with  threatening  voice,
and  lion  port,  seemed  to  impersonate  the  States,  and  to  hold
reclaimed  sovereignty  in  his  grasp.  It  seemed  difficult  to
tear  it  from  him  again.

“  I  did  what  I  could,”  said  Wilkes,  “  to  heat  them  from  this
humour  of  their  sovereignty ,  showing  that  upon  that  error  they
had  grounded  the  rest  of  their  wilful  absurdities .”3

Next  night,  he  drew  up  sixteen  articles,  showing  the  dis¬
orders  of  the  States,  their  breach  of  oaths,  and  violations  of
the  Earl’s  authority  ;  and  with  that  commenced  a  series  of

1  "Wilkes  to  Leicester,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Ibid.  Compare  Kluit,  II.  281,
seq.  Bor,  II.  xxii.  918,  921,  seq.

VOL.  II. — Q

Wagenaar,  viii.  208.

3  "Wilkes  to  Leicester,  MS.  last
cited.

/

226

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

papers  interchanged  by  the  two  parties,  in  which  the  topics  of
the  origin  of  government  and  the  principles  of  religious
freedom  were  handled  with  much  ability  on  both  sides,  but
at  unmerciful  length.

On  the  religious  question,  the  States-General,  led  by  Bar-
neveld  and  by  Francis  Franck,  expressed  themselves  man¬
fully,  on  various  occasions,  during  the  mission  of  Buckhurst.

“  The  nobles  and  cities  constituting  the  States/'  they  said,
“have  been  denounced  to  Lord  Leicester  as  enemies  of
religion,  by  the  self-seeking  mischief-makers  who  surround
him.  Why  ?  Because  they  had  refused  the  demand  of
certain  preachers  to  call  a  general  synod,  in  defiance  of  the
States-General,  and  to  introduce  a  set  of  ordinances,  with  a
system  of  discipline,  according  to  their  arbitrary  will .  This
the  late  Prince  of  Orange  and  the  States-General  had  always
thought  detrimental  both  to  religion  and  polity.  They  re¬
spected  the  difference  in  religious  opinions,  and  leaving  all
churches  in  their  freedom,  they  chose  to  compel  no  mail’s  con¬
science — a  course  which  all  statesmen,  knowing  the  diversity
of  human  opinions,  had  considered  necessary  in  order  to
maintain  fraternal  harmony." 1

Such  words  shine  through  the  prevailing  darkness  of  the
religious  atmosphere  at  that  epoch,  like  characters  of  light.

1  Meteren,  xiv.  250-253.

The  States  of  Holland,  under  the
guidance  of  Barneveld,  took  strong
ground,  on  several  occasions  this  year,
against  attempts  made  by  the  Reformed
Church  to  meddle  with  secular  matters.
On  the  presentation  of  a  petition  rela¬
tive  to  politics,  by  a  committee  of  four
preachers,  representing  the  churches
of  Holland,  answer  was  made  through
the  mouth  of  Barneveld,  that  “the
States  were  very  well  acquainted  with
the  matters  mentioned  in  the  petition,
and  with  many  other  things  besides;
that  the  States  were  quite  as  much
interested  as  the  churches  could  be
in  the  welfare  of  the  land,  and  that
they  could  provide  for  it,  without  the
assistance  of  the  preachers.”  The
petitioners  were  accordingly  advised
to  go  home,  and  leave  the  States  to
manage  the  affairs  of  the  country.

(Bor,  III.  xxiii.  76.)

A  few  days  later,  a  resolution  upon
the  subject  of  the  petition  was  passed
by  the  States,  printed,  and  sent  to  all
the  cities  in  the  Province,  with  an
order  to  the  magistrates  to  summon
the  preachers  before  them,  deliver
them  a  copy  of  the  resolution,  warn
them  to  keep  their  congregations  in
tranquillity  and  harmony,  and,  for
their  own  part,  to  occupy  themselves
with  praying,  teaching,  and  preach¬
ing,  and  to  allow  the  States  and  the
magistrates  to  administer  the  govern¬
ment.

The  resolution  itself — which  the
preachers  characterised  as  a  rude
answer  to  a  courteous  request — was
conceived  much  in  the  spirit  of
Barneveld’s  original  verbal  reply.
(See  the  documents  in  Bor,  HI.  xxiii.
76,  85  seq .)

1587.  RELIGIOUS  TOLERANCE  BY  THE  STATES.  227

They  are  beacons  in  the  upward  path  of  mankind.  Never
before,  had  so  bold  and  wise  a  tribute  to  the  genius  of  the
reformation  been  paid  by  an  organized  community.  Indi¬
viduals  walking  in  advance  of  their  age  had  enunciated  such
truths,  and  their  voices  had  seemed  to  die  away ,  but,  at  last,
a  little,  struggling,  half-developed  commonwealth  had  pro¬
claimed  the  rights  of  conscience  for  all  mankind — for  Papists
and  Calvinists,  Jews  and  Anabaptists — because  u  having  a
respect  for  differences  in  religious  opinions,  and  leaving  all
churches  in  their  freedom,  they  chose  to  compel  no  man’s
conscience.”

On  the  constitutional  question,  the  States  commenced  by  an
astounding  absurdity.  “  These  mischief-makers,  moreover,”
said  they,  u  have  not  been  ashamed  to  dispute,  and  to  cause
the  Earl  of  Leicester  to  dispute,  the  lawful  constitution  of  the
Provinces  ;  a  matter  which  has  not  been  disputed  for  eight
hundred  years.”1

This  was  indeed  to  claim  a  respectable  age  for  their
republic.  Eight  hundred  years  took  them  back  to  the  days
of  Charlemagne,  in  whose  time  it  would  have  been  somewhat
difficult  to  detect  a  germ  of  their  States-General  and  States-
Provincial.  That  the  constitutional  government — consisting
of  nobles  and  of  the  vroedschaps  of  chartered  cities — should
have  been  in  existence  four  hundred  and  seventeen  years
before  the  first  charter  had  ever  been  granted  to  a  city,  was  a
very  loose  style  of  argument.  Thomas  Wilkes,  in  reply,
might  as  well  have  traced  the  English  parliament  to  Hengist
and  Horsa.  u  For  eight  hundred  years,”  they  said,  “  Holland
had  been  governed  by  Counts  and  Countesses,  on  whom  the
nobles  and  cities,  as  representing  the  States,  had  legally  con¬
ferred  sovereignty.” 2

Now  the  first  incorporated  city  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  that
ever  existed  was  Middelburg,  which  received  its  charter  from
Count  William  I.  of  Holland  and  Countess  Joan  of  Flanders,
in  the  year  1217.  The  first  Count  that  had  any  legal  or

1  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  76-84.  Meteren,  xiv.  250-253.  Kluit,  II.  286,  seq.

2  Bor,  Meteren,  Kluit,  ubi  sup.

228

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

recognized  authority  was  Dirk  the  First  to  whom  Charles  the
Simple  presented  the  territory  of  Holland,  by  letters-patent,
in  922.  Yet  the  States- General,  in  a  solemn  and  eloquent
document,  gravely  dated  their  own  existence  from  the  year
787,  and  claimed  the  regular  possession  and  habitual  delega¬
tion  of  sovereignty  from  that  epoch  down  !

After  this  fabulous  preamble,  they  proceeded  to  handle  the
matter  of  fact  with  logical  precision.  It  was  absurd,  they
said,  that  Mr.  Wilkes  and  Lord  Leicester  should  atfect  to  con¬
found  the  persons  who  appeared  in  the  assembly  with  the
States  themselves  ;  as  if  those  individuals  claimed  or  exer¬
cised  sovereignty.  Any  man  who  had  observed  what  had
been  passing  during  the  last  fifteen  years,  knew  very  well
that  the  supreme  authority  did  not  belong  to  the  thirty  or

forty  individuals  who  came  to  the  meetings . The  nobles,

by  reason  of  their  ancient  dignity  and  splendid  qiossessions,
took  counsel  together  over  state  matters,  and  then,  appearing
at  the  assembly,  deliberated  with  the  deputies  of  the  cities.
The  cities  had  mainly  one  form  of  government — a  college  of
counsellors,  or  wise  men,  40,  32,  28,  or  24  in  number,  of  the
most  respectable  out  of  the  whole  community.  They  were
chosen  for  life,  and  vacancies  were  supplied  by  the  colleges
themselves  out  of  the  mass  of  citizens.  These  colleges1  alone
governed  the  city,  and  that  which  had  been  ordained  by  them
was  to  be  obeyed  by  all  the  inhabitants — a  system  against
which  there  had  never  been  any  rebellion.  The  colleges
again,  united  with  those  of  the  nobles,  represented  the  whole
state,  the  whole  body  of  the  population  ;  and  no  form  of
government  could  be  imagined,  they  said,  that  could  resolve,
with  a  more  thorough  knowledge  of  the  necessities  of  the
country,  or  that  could  execute  its  resolves  with  more  unity  of

1  “These  colleges,”  says  the  docu¬
ment,  “  are  as  old  as  the  cities ;  or  so
old  at  least,  that  there  is  no  memory
left  of  their  commencement.”

Here,  too,  was  a  gross  misstatement,
for  the  colleges  of  Yroedschappen
dated  only  from  the  time  of  Philip  the
Good — not  much  more  than  a  century
before  the  publication  of  this  docu¬

ment  ;  and  the  cities  themselves,  as
organized  corporations,  were  but  350
years  old,  at  most.  It  is  difficult  to
understand  how  such  inaccuracies
should  find  their  way  into  so  able  a
state-paper.

Compare  Kluit,  £Holl.  Staatsrege-
ring,  II.  291.

1587.

THEIR  CONSTITUTIONAL  THEORY.

229

purpose  and  decisive  authority.  To  bring  the  colleges  into
an  assembly  could  only  be  done  by  means  of  deputies.  These
deputies,  chosen  by  their  colleges;  and  properly  instructed,
were  sent  to  the  place  of  meeting.  During  the  war  they  had
always  been  commissioned  to  resolve  in  common  on  matters
regarding  the  liberty  of  the  land.  These  deputies,  thus  assem¬
bled,  represented ,  by  commission,  the  States  ;  but  they  are  not,
in  their  own  persons,  the  States  ;  and  no  one  of  them  had  any
such  jn'etension.  “  The  people  of  this  country/'  said  the
States,  u  have  an  aversion  to  all  ambition  ;  and  in  these  dis¬
astrous  times,  wherein  nothing  but  trouble  and  odium  is  to  be
gathered  by  public  employment,  these  commissions  are  ac¬
counted  munera  necessaria . This  form  of  government

has,  by  God's  favour,  protected  Holland  and  Zeeland,  during
this  war,  against  a  powerful  foe,  without  loss  of  territory,
without  any  popular  outbreak,  without  military  mutiny,  be¬
cause  all  business  has  been  transacted  with  open  doors  ;  and
because  the  very  smallest  towns  are  all  represented,  and  vote
in  the  assembly."1

In  brief,  the  constitution  of  the  United  Provinces  was  a
matter  of  fact.  It  was  there  in  good  working  order,  and  had,
for  a  generation  of  mankind,  and  throughout  a  tremendous
war,  done  good  service.  Judged  by  the  principles  of  reason
and  justice,  it  was  in  the  main  a  wholesome  constitution,
securing  the  independence  and  welfare  of  the  state,  and  the
liberty  and  property  of  the  individual,  as  well  certainly  as
did  any  polity  then  existing  in  the  world.  It  seemed  more
hopeful  to  abide  by  it  yet  a  little  longer  than  to  adopt  the
throat-cutting  system  by  the  people,  recommended  by  Wilkes
and  Leicester  as  an  improvement  on  the  old  constitution.
This  was  the  view  of  Lord  Buckhurst.  He  felt  that  threats
of  throat-cutting  were  not  the  best  means  of  smoothing  and
conciliating,  and  he  had  come  over  to  smooth  and  conciliate.
u  To  spend  the  time,"  said  he,  “  in  private  brabbles  and  piques
between  the  States  and  Lord  Leicester,  when  we  ought  to
prepare  an  army  against  the  enemy,  and  to  repair  the  shaken

1  Bor,  Meteren,  Kluit,  ubi  sup.

230

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XY.

and  torn  state,  is  not  a  good  course  for  her  Majesty’s  service.” 1
Letters  were  continually  circulating  from  hand  to  hand  among
the  antagonists  of  the  Holland  party,  written  out  of  England
by  Leicester,  exciting  the  ill-will  of  the  populace  against  the
organized  government.  “  By  such  means  to  bring  the  States
into  hatred,”  said  Buckhurst,  “and  to  stir  up  the  people
against  them,  tends  to  great  damage  and  miserable  end.  This
his  Lordship  doth  full  little  consider,  being  the  very  way  to
dissolve  all  government,  and  so  to  bring  all  into  confusion,  and
open  the  door  for  the  enemy.  But  oh,  how  lamentable  a  thing
it  is,  and  how  doth  my  Lord  of  Leicester  abuse  her  Majesty,
making  her  authority  the  means  to  uphold  and  justify,  and
under  her  name  to  defend  and  maintain,  all  his  intolerable
errors.  I  thank  God  that  neither  his  might  nor  his  malice
shall  deter  me  from  laying  open  all  those  things  which  my
conscience  knoweth,  and  which  appertaineth  to  be  done  for  the
good  of  this  cause  and  of  her  Majesty’s  service.  Herein,  though
I  were  sure  to  lose  my  life,  yet  will  I  not  offend  neither  the
one  nor  the  other,  knowing  very  well  that  I  must  die  ;  and
to  die  in  her  Majesty’s  faithful  service,  and  with  a  good
conscience,  is  far  more  happy  than  the  miserable  life  that  I
am  in.  If  Leicester  do  in  this  sort  stir  up  the  people  against
the  States  to  follow  his  revenge  against  them,  and  if  the  Queen
do  yield  no  better  aid,  and  the  minds  of  Count  Maurice  and
Hohenlo  remain  thus  in  fear  and  hatred  of  him,  what  good
end  or  service  can  be  hoped  for  here  P  ” 2

Buckhurst  was  a  man  of  unimpeached  integrity  and  gentle
manners.  He  had  come  over  with  the  best  intentions  towards
the  governor-general,  and  it  has  been  seen  that  he  boldly
defended  him  in  his  first  interviews  with  the  States.  But  as
the  intrigues  and  underhand  plottings  of  the  Earl’s  agents  were
revealed  to  him,  he  felt  more  and  more  convinced  that  there
was  a  deep  laid  scheme  to  destroy  the  government,  and  to
constitute  a  virtual  and  absolute  sovereignty  for  Leicester.
It  was  not  wonderful  that  the  States  were  standing  vigorously
on  the  defensive.

1  Buckhurst  to  Walsingham,  13th  June,  1581.  (Brit.  Mus.  G-alba,  D.  I.
P.  95,  MS.)  2  Ibid.

1587.

DEVENTER’S  BAD  COUNSELS  TO  LEICESTER.

231

The  subtle  Deventer,  Leicester’s  evil  genius,  did  not  cease
to  poison  the  mind  of  the  governor,  during  his  protracted
absence,  against  all  persons  who  offered  impediments  to  the
cherished  schemes  of  his  master  and  himself.  “Your  Ex¬
cellency  knows  very  well,”  he  said,  “that  the  state  of  this
country  is  democratic,  since,  by  failure  of  a  prince,  the
sovereign  disposition  of  affairs  has  returned  to  the  people.
That  same  people  is  everywhere  so  incredibly  affectionate
towards  you  that  the  delay  in  your  return  drives  them  to
extreme  despair.  Any  one  who  would  know  the  real  truth
has  but  to  remember  the  fine  fear  the  States-General  were
in  when  the  news  of  your  displeasure  about  the  4th  February
letter  became  known.” 1

Had  it  not  been  for  the  efforts  of  Lord  Buckhurst  in  calming
the  popular  rage,  Deventer  assured  the  Earl  that  the  writers
of  the  letter  would  “  have  scarcely  saved  their  skins  ;”  and
that  they  had  always  continued  in  great  danger.

He  vehemently  urged  upon  Leicester  the  necessity  of  his
immediate  return — not  so  much  for  reasons  drawn  from  the
distracted  state  of  the  country,  thus  left  to  a  provisional
government  and  torn  by  faction — but  because  of  the  facility
with  which  he  might  at  once  seize  upon  arbitrary  power.
He  gratified  his  master  by  depicting  in  lively  colours  the
abject  condition  into  which  Barneveld,  Maurice,  Hohenlo,
and  similar  cowards,  would  be  thrown  by  his  sudden  return.

“  If,”  said  he,  “  the  States’  members  and  the  counts,  every
one  of  them,  are  so  desperately  afraid  of  the  people,  even
while  your  Excellency  is  afar  off,  in  what  trepidation  will
they  be  when  you  are  here  !  God,  reason,  the  affection  of  the
sovereign  people,  are  on  your  side.  There  needs,  in  a  little
commonwealth  like  ours,  but  a  wink  of  the  eye,  the  slightest
indication  of  dissatisfaction  on  your  part,  to  take  away  all  their
valour  from  men  who  are  only  brave  where  swords  are  too
short.  A  magnanimous  prince  like  yourself  should  seek  at
once  the  place  where  such  plots  are  hatching,  and  you  would

1 G-.  de  Proninck  (Deventer)  an  Comte  de  Leycestre,  22  May,  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  p.  16,  MS.)

232

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

see  the  fury  of  the  rebels  change  at  once  to  cowardice.  There
is  more  than  one  man  here  in  the  Netherlands  that  brags  of
what  he  will  do  against  the  greatest  and  most  highly  endowed
prince  in  England,  because  he  thinks  he  shall  never  see  him
again,  who,  at  the  very  first  news  of  your  return,  my  Lord,
would  think  only  of  packing  his  portmanteau,  greasing  his
boots,  or,  at  the  very  least,  of  sneaking  back  into  his  hole.”  1

But  the  sturdy  democrat  was  quite  sure  that  his  Excellency,
that  most  magnanimous  prince  of  England  would  not  desert  his
faithful  followers — thereby  giving  those  u  filthy  rascals,”  his
opponents,  a  triumph,  and  u  doing  so  great  an  injury  to  the
sovereign  people,  who  were  ready  to  get  rid  of  them  all  at  a
single  blow,  if  his  Excellency  would  but  say  the  word.” 2

He  then  implored  the  magnanimous  prince  to  imitate  the
example  of  Moses,  Joshua,  David,  and  that  of  all  great  em¬
perors  and  captains,  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Koman,  to  come  at
once  to  the  scene  of  action,  and  to  smite  his  enemies  hip  and
thigh.  He  also  informed  his  Excellency,  that  if  the  delay
should  last  much  longer,  he  would  lose  all  chance  of  regaining
power,  because  the  sovereign  people  had  quite  made  up  their
mind  to  return  to  the  dominion  of  Spain  within  three  months,
if  they  could  not  induce  his  Excellency  to  rule  over  them.
In  that  way  at  least,  if  in  no  other,  they  could  circumvent
those  filthy  rascals  whom  they  so  much  abhorred,  and  frustrate
the  designs  of  Maurice,  Hohenlo,  and  Sir  John  Norris,  who
were  represented  as  occupying  the  position  of  the  triumvirs
after  the  death  of  Julius  Caesar.

To  place  its  neck  under  the  yoke  of  Philip  II.  and  the  In¬
quisition,  after  having  so  handsomely  got  rid  of  both,  did  not

1  “  Tel  bravera  es  Pays  Bas  contre  lo
plus  grand  et  qualifie  prince  d’Angle-
terre,  lequel  il  d’asseure  ne  revoir
jamais  pardega,  qui  aux  dernieres  nou-
velles  de  votre  retour,  Monseigneur,
ne  pensoit  qu’a  trousser  bagage  et
faire  graisser  ses  bottes,  ou  du  moins
se  desrober  en  sa  taniere,”  &c.  (Gr.  de
Proninck.  MS.  last  cited.)

2  “  Mais  un  prince  si  tres  magna-
nime,  ne  fera  jamais  ce  tort  ny  a  soy

mesme,  ni  au  bon  peuple  belgique.
Point  a  soy  mesme,  comme  s’il  avait
cede  a  la  bravade  des  pouceux,  dont
toute  sa  posterite  et  liistoires  et  mo-
moires  du  temps  a  venir  portera  l’igno-
minie.  Point  au  peuple,  lequel,  comme
souverain,  ne  doit  recevoir  le  tort  de
cette  injure,  puisque  ne  luy  que  l’in-
formation  de  vostre  mescontentement
pour  se  desfaire  en  un  coup  de  cest
obstacle,”  &c.  (Ibid.)

1587.

THEIR  PERNICIOUS  EFFECT.

233

seem  a  sublime  manifestation  of  sovereignty  on  the  part  of  the
people,  and  even  Deventer  had  some  misgivings  as  to  the
propriety  of  such  a  result.  “  What  then  will  become  of  our
beautiful  churches  ?”  he  cried,  “  What  will  princes  say,  what
will  the  world  in  general  say,  what  will  historians  say,  about
the  honour  of  the  English  nation  ?” 1

As  to  the  first  question,  it  is  probable  that  the  prospect  of
the  reformed  churches  would  not  have  been  cheerful,  had  the
inquisition  been  re-established  in  Holland  and  Utrecht,  three
months  after  that  date.  As  to  the  second,  the  world  and
history  were  likely  to  reply,  that  the  honour  of  the  English
nation  was  fortunately  not  entirely  entrusted  at  that  epoch  to
the  u  magnanimous  prince  ”  of  Leicester,  and  his  democratic
counsellor-in-chief,  burgomaster  Deventer.

These  are  but  samples  of  the  ravings  which  sounded  inces¬
santly  in  the  ears  of  the  governor-general.  Was  it  strange
that  a  man,  so  thirsty  for  power,  so  gluttonous  of  flattery,
should  be  influenced  by  such  passionate  appeals  P  Addressed
in  strains  of  fulsome  adulation,  convinced  that  arbitrary  power
was  within  his  reach,  and  assured  that  he  had  but  to  wink  his
eye  to  see  his  enemies  scattered  before  him,  he  became  im¬
patient  of  all  restraint,  and  determined,  on  his  return,  to  crush
the  States  into  insignificance.

Thus,  while  Buckhurst  had  been  doing  his  best  as  a  me¬
diator  to  prepare  the  path  for  his  return,  Leicester  himself
and  his  partisans  had  been  secretly  exerting  themselves  to
make  his  arrival  the  signal  for  discord,  perhaps  of  civil  war.
The  calm,  then,  immediately  succeeding  the  mission  of  Buck¬
hurst,  was  a  deceitful  one  ;  but  it  seemed  very  promising.
The  best  feelings  were  avowed  and  perhaps  entertained.  The

1  “II  plaira  a  Y.  Exc0  de  nous
veoir  incontinent  Espagnol,  ou  de  nous
en  conserver  par  l’empeschement  de
ce  desseing.  .  .  .  Car  il  ne  peut  tomber
en  aucune  imagination  raisonnable,  en
cas  que  ce  desseing  ne  se  renverse
tout  subit,  que  faute  d’autorite  jointe,
un  desespoir  extreme  ne  nous  rende
a  1’ Espagnol  devant  Tissue  de  trois
mois.  Que  sera  ce  alors  de  nos

pauvres  delaissez  ?  Que  deviendront
ces  belles  eglises,  que  dira  le  monde,
que  diront  les  princes,  que  diront  les
bistoriens,  de  Thonueur  de  la  nation
Anglaise  ?  Le  desespoir  enrage  du
peuple  choisira  plutot  quel  parti  que
ce  soit  avec  l’Espagnol,  que  d’endurer
ceux  qui  leur  auront  renverse  le  re  tour
de  Yotre  Excellence,”  &c.  (Gr.  de  Pro-
ninck,  MS.  just  cited.)

234

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

States  professed  great  devotion  to  her  Majesty  and  friendly
regard  for  the  governor.  They  distinctly  declared  that  the
arrangements  by  which  Maurice  and  Hohenlo  had  been  placed
in  their  new  positions  were  purely  provisional  ones,  subject  to
modifications  on  the  arrival  of  the  Earl.1  u  All  things  are
reduced  to  a  quiet  calm/’  said  Buckhurst,  “  ready  to  receive
my  Lord  of  Leicester  and  his  authority,  whenever  he  cometh.” 1  2

The  quarrel  of  Hohenlo  with  Sir  Edward  Norris  had  been,
by  the  exertions  of  Buckhurst,  amicably  arranged  :3  the  Count
became  an  intimate  friend  of  Sir  John,  “  to  the  gladding  of  all
such  as  wished  well  to  the  country  4  hut  he  nourished  a
deadly  hatred  to  the  Earl.  He  ran  up  and  down  like  a
madman  whenever  his  return  was  mentioned.5  “If  the  Queen
he  willing  to  take  the  sovereignty/'  he  cried  out  at  his  own
dinner-table  to  a  large  company,  “and  is  ready  to  proceed
roundly  in  this  action,  I  will  serve  her  to  the  last  drop  of  my
blood  ;  hut  if  she  embrace  it  in  no  other  sort  than  hitherto
she  hath  done,  and  if  Leicester  is  to  return,  then  am  I  as
good  a  man  as  Leicester,  and  will  never  he  commanded  by
him.  I  mean  to  continue  on  my  frontier,  where  all  who  love
me  can  come  and  find  me."6

He  declared  to  several  persons  that  he  had  detected  a  plot
on  the  part  of  Leicester  to  have  him  assassinated  ;  and  the
assertion  seemed  so  important,  that  Villiers  came  to  Councillor
Clerk  to  confer  with  him  on  the  subject.  The  worthy
Bartholomew,  who  had  again,  most  reluctantly,  left  his  quiet
chambers  in  the  Temple  to  come  again  among  the  guns  and
drums,  which  his  soul  abhorred,  was  appalled  by  such  a  charge.

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  8  April,

1587.  Same  to  same,  13  and  19  April,
1587.  Clerk  to  Burgh  ley,  12  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  Buckhurst  to  Burgkley,  19  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  8  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Memorandum  of  a  speech  between
the  Lord  Buckhurst  and  Count  Ho¬
henlo,  17  April,  1587.  (Br.  Mus.

Galba,  xi.  345,  MS.)

6  Otheman  to  Walsingham,  23rd

March,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  29  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  Hohenlo  is  their  Hercules,”  said
Wilkes,  “and  a  man  fit  for  any  des¬
perate  attempt,  altogether  directed
by  Barneveld  and  Paul  Buys,  who
seeks  (viz.  P.  B.)  by  all  manner  of
devices  to  be  revenged  of  Lord  Lei¬
cester  for  his  imprisonment.”  Wilkes
to  the  Queen,  12  July,  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

1587.

REAL  AND  SUPPOSED  PLOTS  AGAINST  HOHENLO.  235

It  was  best  to  keep  it  a  secret,  he  said,  at  least  till  the  matter
could  be  thoroughly  investigated.  Yilliers  was  of  the  same
opinion,  and  accordingly  the  councillor,  in  the  excess  of  his
caution,  confided  the  secret  only — to  whom  ?  To  Mr.  Atye,
Leicester’s  private  secretary.  Atye,  of  course,  instantly  told
his  master — his  master,  in  a  frenzy  of  rage,  told  the  Queen,
and  her  Majesty,  in  a  paroxysm  of  royal  indignation  at  this
new  insult  to  her  favourite,  sent  furious  letters  to  her  envoys,
to  the  States-Greneral,  to  everybody  in  the  Netherlands — so
that  the  assertion  of  Hohenlo  became  the  subject  of  endless
recrimination.  Leicester  became  very  violent,  and  denounced
the  statement  as  an  impudent  falsehood,  devised  wilfully  in
order  to  cast  odium  upon  him  and  to  prevent  his  return.1
Unquestionably  there  was  nothing  in  the  story  but  table-talk ;
but  the  Count  would  have  been  still  more  ferocious  towards
Leicester  than  he  was,  had  he  known  what  was  actually  hap¬
pening  at  that  very  moment.

While  Buckhurst  was  at  Utrecht,  listening  to  the  ec  solemn
speeches”  of  the  militia-captains  and  exchanging  friendly
expressions  at  stately  banquets  with  Moeurs,  he  suddenly
received  a  letter  in  cipher  from  her  Majesty.  Not  having  the
key,  he  sent  to  Wilkes  at  the  Hague.  Wilkes  was  very  ill ;
but  the  despatch  was  marked  pressing  and  immediate,  so  he
got  out  of  bed  and  made  the  journey  to  Utrecht.  The  letter,
on  being  deciphered,  proved  to  be  an  order  from  the  Queen
to  decoy  Hohenlo  into  some  safe  town,  on  pretence  of  con¬
sultation,  and  then  to  throw  him  into  prison,  on  the  ground
that  he  had  been  tampering  with  the  enemy,  and  was  about
to  betray  the  republic  to  Philip.2

1  ‘  Effect  of  what  passed  between
Dr.  Yilliers  and  me,  Bartholomew
Clerk,  touching  the  discontentment
of  Count  Hohenlo.’  22  May,  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Wilkes  to  Lord  Chancellor,  8  June,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Compare

letters  of  Leicester  to  Sonoy,  and  of
Buckhurst  to  Treslong,  in  Bor,  II.
xxii.  992.  Groen  v.  Prinst.  Archives
I.  63,  68,  69.

2  Queen  to  Buckhurst,  15  April,

1587.  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  29th
April,  1587.  Buckhurst  to  same,
29  April,  1587.  Same  to  same,  30th
April,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

The  Queen’s  Letter  is  as  follows:
— “  Binding  by  a  later  letter  written
to  our  secretary  by  our  ambassador
Wilkes,  that  he  hath  been  given  to
understand  how  Hollock  should  have
some  secret  intelligence  with  the
Prince  of  Parma,  which  being  true,

236

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XT.

The  commotion  which  would  have  been  excited  by  any
attempt  to  enforce  this  order,  could  be  easily  imagined  by
those  familiar  with  Hohenlo  and  with  the  powerful  party  in
the  Netherlands  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  chiefs.  Wilkes
stood  aghast  as  he  deciphered  the  letter.  Buckhurst  felt  the
impossibility  of  obeying  the  royal  will.  Both  knew  the  cause,
and  both  foresaw  the  consequences  of  the  proposed  step.
Wilkes  had  heard  some  rumours  of  intrigues  between  Parma's
agents  at  Deventer  and  Hohenlo,  and  had  confided  them  to
Walsingham,  hoping  that  the  Secretary  would  keep  the  matter
in  his  own  breast,  at  least  till  further  advice.  He  was  appalled
at  the  sudden  action  proposed  on  a  mere  rumour,  which  both
Buckhurst  and  himself  had  begun  to  consider  an  idle  one.
He  protested,  therefore,  to  Walsingham  that  to  comply  with
her  Majesty's  command  would  not  only  be  nearly  impossible,
but  would,  if  successful,  hazard  the  ruin  of  the  republic.
Wilkes  was  also  very  anxious  lest  the  Earl  of  Leicester  should
hear  of  the  matter.  He  was  already  the  object  of  hatred  to
that  powerful  personage,  and  thought  him  capable  of  accom¬
plishing  his  destruction  in  any  mode.  But  if  Leicester  could
wreak  his  vengeance  upon  his  enemy  Wilkes  by  the  hand  of
his  other  deadly  enemy  Hohenlo,  the  councillor  felt  that  this
kind  of  revenge  would  have  a  double  sweetness  for  him.  The
Queen  knows  what  I  have  been  saying,  thought  Wilkes,  and
therefore  Leicester  knows  it ;  and  if  Leicester  knows  it,  he
will  take  care  that  Hohenlo  shall  hear  of  it  too,  and  then  wo

considering  liow  the  said  Hollock  is
possessed  of  divers  principal  towns,  in
the  which  the  captains  and  soldiers
are  altogether  at  his  devotion,  it  is
greatly  to  be  doubted  that  he  may  be
drawn  by  corruption  to  deliver  up
into  the  Prince  of  Parma’s  hands  the
said  towns,  whereby  the  enemy  may
have  the  more  easy  entry  into  those
countries.  We  have  therefore  thought
good,  for  prevention  thereof,  that  you
should  confer  with  our  servants  Co¬
lonel  Norris  and  Wilkes  wha-t  course
were  meet  to  be  taken  therein,
which,  as  we  perceive,  may  be  best
performed  by  staying  of  the  person
of  Hollock ;  wherein,  before  the  execu¬

tion  thereof,  especial  care  would  be
had  that  he  might  be  drawn,  under
colour  of  conference  with  you  about
matters  of  great  importance  contained
in  certain  letters  sent  from  us  unto
you  in  great  diligence,  into  some  of
the  towns  which  you  shall  understand
to  be  devoted  to  us,  and  not  affected
to  him;  wherein  you  may  take  order
for  his  restraint,  being  first  well  fur¬
nished  with  sufficient  matter  to  charge
him  withal,  which  we  wish  to  be  done
in  the  presence  of  such  principal  per¬
sons  of  the  country  as  are  held  for
good  patriots  and  have  credit  with  the
people.”

158?.

MUTUAL  SUSPICION  AND  DISTRUST.

237

be  unto  me.  u  Your  honour  knoweth,”  he  said  to  Walsing-
ham,  u  that  her  Majesty  can  hold  no  secrets ,  and  if  she  do
impart  it  to  Leicester ,  then  am  I  sped  ” 1

Nothing  came  of  it  however,  and  the  relations  of  Wilkes
and  Buckhurst  with  Hohenlo  continued  to  he  friendly.  It
was  a  lesson  to  Wilkes  to  he  more  cautious  even  with  the
cautious  Walsingham.  “We  had  hut  hare  suspicions/'  said
Buckhurst,  u  nothing  fit,  God  knoweth,  to  come  to  such  a
reckoning.  ^Wilkes  saith  he  meant  it  hut  for  a  premonition
to  you  there  ;  hut  I  think  it  will  henceforth  he  a  premonition
to  himself — there  being  hut  hare  presumptions,  and  yet  shrewd
presumptions." 2

Here  then  were  Deventer  and  Leicester  plotting  to  overthrow
the  government  of  the  States  ;  the  States  and  Hohenlo  arm¬
ing  against  Leicester  ;  the  extreme  democratic  party  threaten¬
ing  to  go  over  to  the  Spaniards  within  three  months  ;  the  Earl
accused  of  attempting  the  life  of  Hohenlo  ;  Hohenlo  offering
to  shed  the  last  drop  of  his  blood  for  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  Queen
Elizabeth  giving  orders  to  throw  Hohenlo  into  prison  as  a
traitor  ;  Councillor  Wilkes  trembling  for  his  life  at  the  hands
both  of  Leicester  and  Hohenlo  ;  and  Buckhurst  doing  Ins  best
to  conciliate  all  parties,  and  imploring  her  Majesty  in  vain  to
send  over  money  to  help  on  the  war,  and  to  save  her  soldiers
from  starving.

For  the  Queen  continued  to  refuse  the  loan  of  fifty  thou¬
sand  pounds  which  the  provinces  solicited,  and  in  hope  of
which  the  States  had  just  agreed  to  an  extra  contribution  of  a
million  florins  (100,000?.),  a  larger  sum  than  had  been  levied
by  a  single  vote  since  the  commencement  of  the  war.  It
must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  whole  expense  of  the  war
fell  upon  Holland  and  Zeeland.  The  Province  of  Utrecht,
where  there  was  so  strong  a  disposition  to  confer  absolute
authority  upon  Leicester,  and  to  destroy  the  power  of  the
States-General,  contributed  absolutely  nothing.  Since  the
loss  of  Deventer,  nothing  could  be  raised  in  the  Provinces  of

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  29  April,  2  Buckhurst  to  Wilkes,  29  April,
158?.  MS.  already  cited.

238

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

Utrecht,  Gelderland,  or  Overyssel ;  the  Spaniards  levying
black  mail  upon  the  whole  territory,  and  impoverishing  the
inhabitants  till  they  became  almost  a  nullity.1  Was  it  strange
then  that  the  States  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  thus  bearing
nearly  the  whole  burden  of  the  war,  should  be  dissatisfied
with  the  hatred  felt  toward  them  by  their  sister  Provinces
so  generously  protected  by  them  P  Was  it  unnatural  that
Barneveld,  and  Maurice,  and  Hohenlo,  should  be  disposed  to
bridle  the  despotic  inclinations  of  Leicester,  thus'  fostered  be
those  who  existed,  as  it  were,  at  their  expense  ?

But  the  Queen  refused  the  50,000?.,  although  Holland  and
Zeeland  had  voted  the  100,000?.  “No  reason  that  breedeth
charges/'  sighed  Walsingham,  “can  in  any  sort  be  digested.”  2

It  was  not  for  want  of  vehement  entreaty  on  the  part  of  the
Secretary  of  State  and  of  Buckhurst  that  the  loan  was  denied.
At  least  she  was  entreated  to  send  over  money  for  her  troops,
who  for  six  months  past  were  unpaid.  “  Keeping  the  money
in  your  coffers,”  said  Buckhurst,  “doth  yield  no  interest  to
you,  and — which  is  above  all  earthly  respects — it  shall  be  the
means  of  preserving  the  lives  of  many  of  your  faithful  subjects
which  otherwise  must  needs  daily  perish.  Their  miseries,
through  want  of  meat  and  money,  I  do  protest  to  God  so
much  moves  my  soul  with  commiseration  of  that  which  is
past,  and  makes  my  heart  tremble  to  think  of  the  like  to
come  again,  that  I  humbly  beseech  your  Majesty,  for  Jesus
Christ  sake,  to  have  compassion  on  their  lamentable  estate
past,  and  send  some  money  to  prevent  the  like  hereafter.” 3

These  were  moving  words,  but  the  money  did  not  come —
charges  could  not  be  digested.

“  The  eternal  God,”  cried  Buckhurst,  “  incline  your  heart
to  grant  the  petition  of  the  States  for  the  loan  of  the  50,000?.,
and  that  speedily,  for  the  dangerous  terms  of  the  State  here
and  the  mighty  and  forward  preparation  of  the  enemy  admit
no  minute  of  delay,  so  that  even  to  grant  it  slowly  is  to  deny
it  utterly.”  4

1  Wilkes  to  Walsinsffiam,  15  May,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

9  Walsingham  to  Wilkes,  2  May,

1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Buckhurst  to  the  Queen,  19  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  4  ibid.

1587.  BUCKHURST  SEEKS  TO  RESTORE  GOOD  FEELING.  239

He  then  drew  a  vivid  picture  of  the  capacity  of  the  Nether¬
lands  to  assist  the  endangered  realm  of  England,  if  delay  were
not  suffered  to  destroy  both  commonwealths,  by  placing  the
Provinces  in  an  enemy’s  hand.

“  Their  many  and  notable  good  havens,”  he  said,  “  the  great
number  of  ships  and  mariners,  their  impregnable  towns,  if
they  were  in  the  hands  of  a  potent  prince  that  would  defend
them,  and,  lastly,  the  state  of  this  shore,  so  near  and  opposite
unto  the  land  and  coast  of  England — lo,  the  sight  of  all  this
daily  in  mine  eye,  conjoined  with  the  deep,  enrooted  malice
of  that  your  so  mighty  enemy  who  seeketh  to  regain  them ;
these  things  entering  continually  into  the  meditations  of  my
heart — so  much  do  they  import  the  safety  of  yourself  and
your  estate — do  enforce  me,  in  the  abundance  of  my  love  and
duty  to  your  Majesty,  most  earnestly  to  speak ,  ivrite>  and  weep
unto  you ,  lest  when  the  occasion  yet  offered  shall  be  gone  by,
this  blessed  means  of  your  defence,  by  God’s  provident  good¬
ness  thus  put  into  your  hand,  will  then  be  utterly  lost,  lo,
never,  never  more  to  be  recovered  again.”  1

It  was  a  noble,  wise,  and  eloquent  appeal,  but  it  was
uttered  in  vain.  Was  not  Leicester- — his  soul  filled  with
petty  schemes  for  reigning  in  Utrecht,  and  destroying  the
constitutional  government  of  the  Provinces — in  full  posses¬
sion  of  the  royal  ear  ?  And  was  not  the  same  ear  lent,  at
that  most  critical  moment,  to  the  insidious  Alexander  Far-
nese,  with  his  whispers  of  peace,  which  were  potent  enough
to  drown  all  the  preparations  for  the  invincible  Armada  ?

Six  months  had  rolled  away  since  Leicester  had  left  the
Netherlands  ;  six  months  long,  the  Provinces,  left  in  a  condi¬
tion  which  might  have  become  anarchy,  had  been  saved  by
the  wise  government  of  the  States-General ;  six  months  long
the  English  soldiers  had  remained  unpaid  by  their  sovereign  ;
and  now  for  six  weeks  the  honest,  eloquent,  intrepid,  but
gentle  Buckhurst  had  done  his  best  to  conciliate  all  parties,
and  to  mould  the  Netherlanders  into  an  impregnable  bulwark
for  the  realm  of  England.  But  his  efforts  were  treated  with

1  Buckhurst  to  the  Queen,  MS.  just  cited.

240

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XY.

scorn  by  the  Queen.  She  was  still  maddened  by  a  sense  of
the  injuries  done  by  the  States  to  Leicester.  She  was  indig¬
nant  that  her  envoy  should  have  accepted  such  lame  apolo¬
gies  for  the  4th  of  February  letter  ;  that  he  should  have
received  no  better  atonement  for  their  insolent  infringements
of  the  Earl's  orders  during  his  absence  ;  that  he  should  have
excused  their  contemptuous  proceedings  and  that,  in  short,
he  should  have  been  willing  to  conciliate  and  forgive  when  he
should  have  stormed  and  railed.  u  You  conceived,  it  seemeth,"
said  her  Majesty,  u  that  a  more  sharper  manner  of  proceeding
would  have  exasperated  matters  to  the  prejudice  of  the  ser¬
vice,  and  therefore  you  did  think  it  more  fit  to  wash  the
wounds  rather  with  water  than  vinegar,  wherein  we  would
rather  have  wished,  on  the  other  side,  that  you  had  better
considered  that  festering  wounds  had  more  need  of  corrosives
than  lenitives.  Your  own  judgment  ought  to  have  taught
that  such  a  slight  and  mild  kind  of  dealing  with  a  people  so
ingrate  and  void  of  consideration  as  the  said  Estates  have
showed  themselves  toward  us,  is  the  ready  way  to  increase
their  contempt." 1

The  envoy  might  be  forgiven  for  believing  that  at  any  rate
there  wTould  be  no  lack  of  corrosives  or  vinegar,  so  long  as  the
royal  tongue  or  pen  could  do  their  office,  as  the  unfortunate
deputies  had  found  to  their  cost  in  their  late  interviews  at
Greenwich,  and  as  her  own  envoys  in  the  Netherlands  were
perpetually  finding  now.2  The  Queen  was  especially  indig¬
nant  that  the  Estates  should  defend  the  tone  of  their  letters
to  the  Earl  on  the  ground  that  he  had  written  a  piquant
epistle  to  them.  u  But  you  can  manifestly  see  their  untruths
in  naming  it  a  piquant  letter,"  said  Elizabeth,  “  for  it  has  no
sour  or  sharp  word  therein,  nor  any  clause  or  reprehension,
but  is  full  of  gravity  and  gentle  admonition.  It  deserved  a
thankful  answer,  and  so  you  may  maintain  it  to  them  to  their
reproof." 3

The  States  doubtless  thought  that  the  loss  of  Deventer

1  Queen  to  Buckhurst,  3  May,  1581.  3  Queen  to  Buckhurst.  (MS.  last

(Br.  Mus.  G-alba,  D.  I.  4,  MS.)  cited.)

2  Leicester  to  Walsingham.

1587.

THE  QUEEN  ANGRY  AND  VINDICTIVE.

241

and,  with  it,  the  almost  ruinous  condition  of  three  out  of  the
seven  Provinces,  might  excuse  on  their  part  a  little  piquancy
of  phraseology,  nor  was  it  easy  for  them  to  express  gratitude
to  the  governor  for  his  grave  and  gentle  admonitions,  after
he  had,  by  his  secret  document  of  24th  November,  rendered
himself  fully  responsible  for  the  disaster  they  deplored.

She  expressed  unbounded  indignation  with  Hohenlo,  who,
as  she  was  well  aware,  continued  to  cherish  a  deadly  hatred
for  Leicester.  Especially  she  was  exasperated,  and  with  rea¬
son,  by  the  assertion  the  Count  had  made  concerning  the
governor’s  murderous  designs  upon  him.  “  ’  Tis  a  matter,”
said  the  Queen,  “so  foul  and  dishonourable  that  doth  not
only  touch  greatly  the  credit  of  the  Earl,  hut  also  our  own
honour,  to  have  one  who  hath  been  nourished  and  brought
up  by  us,  and  of  whom  we  have  made  show  to  the  world  to
have  extraordinarily  favoured  above  any  other  of  our  own
subjects,  and  used  his  service  in  those  countries  in  a  place  of
that  reputation  he  held  there,  stand  charged  with  so  horrible
and  unworthy  a  crime.  And  therefore  our  pleasure  is,  even
as  you  tender  the  continuance  of  our  favour  towards  you,  that
you  seek,  by  all  the  means  you  may,  examining  the  Count
Hollock,  or  any  other  party  in  this  matter,  to  discover  and  to
sift  out  how  this  malicious  imputation  hath  been  wrought ;  for
we  have  reason  to  think  that  it  hath  grown  out  of  some  cun¬
ning  device  to  stay  the  Earl’s  coming,  and  to  discourage  him
from  the  continuance  of  his  service  in  those  countries.”  1

And  there  the  Queen  was  undoubtedly  in  the  right.  Ho¬
henlo  was  resolved,  if  possible,  to  make  the  Earl’s  govern¬
ment  of  the  Netherlands  impossible.  There  was  nothing  in
the  story  however  ;  and  all  that  by  the  most  diligent  “  sifting  ”
could  ever  be  discovered,  and  all  that  the  Count  could  be
prevailed  upon  to  confess,  was  an  opinion  expressed  by  him
that  if  he  had  gone  with  Leicester  to  England,  it  might  per¬
haps  have  fared  ill  with  him.2  But  men  were  given  to  loose
talk  in  those  countries.  There  was  great  freedom  of  tongue

1  Queen  to  Buckhurst,  MS.  just  cited.

2  Buckhurst  to  'Walsingkam,  13th  June,  1587.  (Br.  Mus.  Galba.  D.  I.  96,  MS.)

VOL.  II.— R

242

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XY.

and  pen  ;  and  as  the  Earl,  whether  with  justice  or  not,  had
always  been  suspected  of  strong  tendencies  to  assassination,  it
was  not  very  wonderful  that  so  reckless  an  individual  as
Hohenlo  should  promulgate  opinions  on  such  subjects,  without
much  reserve.  “  The  number  of  crimes  that  have  been  im¬
puted  to  me/’  said  Leicester,  “  would  he  incomplete,  had  this
calumny  not  been  added  to  all  preceding  ones."  1  It  is  pos¬
sible  that  assassination,  especially  poisoning,  may  have  been
a  more  common-place  affair  in  those  days  than  our  own.  At
any  rate,  it  is  certain  that  accusations  of  such  crimes  were  of
ordinary  occurrence.  Men  were  apt  to  die  suddenly  if  they
had  mortal  enemies,  and  people  would  gossip.  At  the  very
same  moment,  Leicester  was  deliberately  accused  not  only  of
murderous  intentions  towards  Hohenlo,  hut  towards  Thomas
Wilkes  and  Count  Lewis  William  of  Nassau  likewise.  A
trumpeter,  arrested  in  Friesland,  had  just  confessed  that  he
had  been  employed  by  the  Spanish  governor  of  that  Province,
Colonel  Yerdugo,  to  murder  Count  Lewis,  and  that  four  other
persons  had  been  entrusted  with  the  same  commission.  The
Count  wrote  to  Yerdugo,  and  received  in  reply  an  indignant
denial  of  the  charge.  “  Had  I  heard  of  such  a  project,"  said
the  Spaniard,  “  I  would,  on  the  contrary,  have  given  you
warning.  And  I  give  you  one  now."  He  then  stated,  as  a
fact  known  to  him  on  unquestionable  authority,  that  the  Earl
of  Leicester  had  assassins  at  that  moment  in  his  employ  to
take  the  life  of  Count  Lewis,  adding  that  as  for  the  trum¬
peter,  who  had  just  been  hanged  for  the  crime  suborned  by
the  writer,  he  was  a  most  notorious  lunatic.  In  reply,  Lewis,
while  he  ridiculed  this  plea  of  insanity  set  up  for  a  culprit  who
had  confessed  his  crime  succinctly  and  voluntarily,  expressed
great  contempt  for  the  counter-charge  against  Leicester.
“His  Excellency,"  said  the  sturdy  little  Count,  “is  a  virtuous
gentleman,  the  most  pious  and  God-fearing  I  have  ever
known.  I  am  very  sure  that  he  could  never  treat  his  enemies
in  the  manner  stated,  much  less  his  friends.  As  for  yourself,
may  God  give  me  grace,  in  requital  of  your  knavish  trick,  to

1  G-roen  v.  Prinst.  Archives,  I.  63.  Compare  Bor,  II.  xxii.  992.

SHE  CENSURES  BUCKHURST’S  COURSE.

587.

243

make  such  a  war  upon  you  as  becomes  an  upright  soldier  and
a  man  of  honour.” 1

Thus  there  was  at  least  one  man— and  a  most  important
one — in  the  opposition-party  who  thoroughly  believed  in  the
honour  of  the  governor-general.

The  Queen  then  proceeded  to  lecture  Lord  Buckhurst  very
severely  for  having  tolerated  an  instant  the  States’  pro¬
position  to  her  for  a  loan  of  50,000/.  “The  enemy/’  she
observed,  “  is  quite  unable  to  attempt  the  siege  of  any  town.” 2

Buckhurst  was,  however,  instructed,  in  case  the  States’
million  should  prove  insufficient  to  enable  the  army  to  make
head  against  the  enemy,  and  in  the  event  of  “  any  alteration
of  the  good-will  of  the  people  towards  her,  caused  by  her  not
yielding,  in  this  their  necessity,  some  convenient  support,”  to
let  them  then  understand,  “  as  of  himself,  that  if  they  would
be  satisfied  with  a  loan  of  ten  or  fifteen  thousand  pounds ,  he
would  do  his  best  endeavour  to  draw  her  Majesty  to  yield
unto  the  furnishing  of  such  a  sum,  with  assured  hope  to  ob¬
tain  the  same  at  her  hands.”3

Truly  Walsingliam  was  right  in  saying  that  charges  of  any
kind  were  difficult  of  digestion.  Yet,  even  at  that  moment,
Elizabeth  had  no  more  attached  subjects  in  England  than
were  the  burghers  of  the  Netherlands,  who  were  as  anxious
as  ever  to  annex  their  territory  to  her  realms.

Thus,  having  expressed  an  affection  for  Leicester  which  no
one  doubted,  having  once  more  thoroughly  brow-beaten  the
States,  and  having  soundly  lectured  Buckhurst — as  a  requital
for  his  successful  efforts  to  bring  about  a  more  wholesome
condition  of  affairs — she  gave  the  envoy  a  parting  stab,  with
this  postscript ; — “  There  is  small  disproportion,”  she  said
“  betwixt  a  fool  who  useth  not  wit  because  he  hath  it  not,  and
him  that  useth  it  not  when  it  should  avail  him.”4  Leicester,
too,  was  very  violent  in  his  attacks  upon  Buckhurst.  The
envoy  had  succeeded  in  reconciling  Hohenlo  with  the  bro-

1  Letters  of  Verdugo  and  of  Count
Lewis  William,  in  Bor,  III.  xxiii.

p.  11.

3  Queen  to  Buckhurst,  3  May  (MS.
last  cited.)

3  Ibid.

4  Ibid.

244

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

thers  Norris,  and  had  persuaded  Sir  John  to  offer  the  hand
of  friendship  to  Leicester,  provided  it  were  sure  of  being
accepted.  Yet  in  this  desire  to  conciliate,  the  Earl  found  re¬
newed  cause  for  violence.  u  I  would  have  had  more  regard
of  my  Lord  of  Buckhurst,”  he  said,  u  if  the  case  had  been
between  him  and  Norris,  but  I  must  regard  my  own  reputa¬
tion  the  more  that  I  see  others  would  impair  it.  You  have
deserved  little  thanks  of  me,  if  I  must  deal  plainly,  who  do
equal  me  after  this  sort  with  him,  whose  best  place  is  colonel
under  me,  and  once  my  servant,  and  preferred  by  me  to  all
honourable  place  he  had/'1  And  thus  were  enterprises  of
great  moment,  intimately  affecting  the  safety  of  Holland,  of
England,  of  all  Protestantism,  to  be  suspended  between  tri¬
umph  and  ruin,  in  order  that  the  spleen  of  one  individual —
one  Queen's  favourite — might  be  indulged.  The  contempt  of
an  insolent  grandee  for  a  distinguished  commander — himself
the  son  of  a  Baron,  with  a  mother  the  dear  friend  of  her
sovereign — was  to  endanger  the  existence  of  great  common¬
wealths.  Can  the  influence  of  the  individual,  for  good  or
bad,  upon  the  destinies  of  the  race  be  doubted,  when  the  cha¬
racters  and  conduct  of  Elizabeth  and  Leicester,  Burghley  and
Walsingham,  Philip  and  Parma,  are  closely  scrutinized  and
broadly  traced  throughout  the  wide  range  of  their  effects  ?

“  And  I  must  now,  in  your  Lordship's  sight,"  continued
Leicester,  u  be  made  a  counsellor  with  this  companion,  who
never  yet  to  this  day  hath  done  so  much  as  take  knowledge
of  my  mislike  of  him  ;  no,  not  to  say  this  much,  which  I
think  would  well  become  his  better,  that  he  was  sorry  to  hear
I  had  mislike  to  him,  that  he  desired  my  suspension  till  he
might  either  speak  with  me,  or  be  charged  from  me,  and  if
then  he  were  not  able  to  satisfy  me,  he  would  acknowledge
his  fault,  and  make  me  any  honest  satisfaction.  This  manner
of  dealing  would  have  been  no  disparagement  to  his  better.
And  even  so  I  must  think  that  your  Lordship  doth  me  wrong,
knowing  what  you  do,  to  make  so  little  difference  between
John  Norris,  my  man  not  long  since,  and  now  but  my  colonel

1  Leicester  to  Buckhurst,  30  April,  158L  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

LEICESTER’S  WRATH  AT  HOHENLO’S  CHARGES.  245

158?.

under  me,  as  though  we  were  equals.  And  I  cannot  but
more  than  marvel  at  this  your  proceeding,  when  I  remember
your  promises  of  friendship,  and  your  opinions  resolutely  set
down.  .  .  .  You  were  so  determined  before  you  went

hence,  but  must  have  become  wonderfully  enamoured  of
those  men's  unknown  virtues  in  a  few  days  of  acquaintance,
from  the  alteration  that  is  grown  by  their  own  commenda¬
tions  of  themselves.  You  knoV  very  well  that  all  the  world
should  not  make  me  serve  with  John  Norris.  Your  sudden
change  from  mislike  to  liking  has,  by  consequence,  presently
cast  disgrace  upon  me.  But  all  is  not  gold  that  glitters,  nor
every  shadow  a  perfect  representation.  .  .  .  You  knew

he  should  not  serve  with  me,  but  either  you  thought  me  a
very  inconstant  man,  or  else  a  very  simple  soul,  resolving
with  you  as  I  did,  for  you  to  take  the  course  you  have  done." 1
He  felt,  however,  quite  strong  in  her  Majesty's  favour.  He
knew  himself  her  favourite,  beyond  all  chance  or  change,  and
was  sure,  so  long  as  either  lived,  to  thrust  his  enemies,  by  her
aid,  into  outer  darkness.  Woe  to  Buckhurst,  and  Norris,  and
Wilkes,  and  all  others  who  consorted  with  his  enemies.  Let
them  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  !  And  truly  they  were
only  too  anxious  to  do  so,  for  they  knew  that  Leicester’s
hatred  was  poisonous.  “  He  is  not  so  facile  to  forget  as  ready
to  revenge,"2  said  poor  Wilkes,  with  neat  alliteration.  “My
very  heavy  and  mighty  adversary  will  disgrace  and  undo
me."3

“It  sufflceth,"  continued  Leicester,  “that  her  Majesty
doth  find  my  dealings  well  enough,  and  so,  I  trust  will  gra¬
ciously  use  me.  As  for  the  reconciliations  and  love-days  you
have  made  there,  truly  I  have  liked  well  of  it ;  for  you  did
show  me  your  disposition  therein  before,  and  I  allowed  of  it,
and  I  had  received  letters  both  from  Count  Maurice  and
Hohenlo  of  their  humility  and  kindness,  but  now  in  your  last
letters  you  say  they  have  uttered  the  cause  of  their  mislike

1  Leicester  to  Buckhurst.  The
letter  is  from  Croydon,  and  patheti¬
cally  signed,  “Your  poor  friend,  R.
Leycester.”

2  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  13  April,
158?.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

3  Same  to  the  Lord  Chancellor,

3rd  June,  158?.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

246

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

towards  me,  which  you  forbear  to  write  of,  looking  so  speedily
for  my  return/' 1

But  the  Earl  knew  well  enough  what  the  secret  was,  for  had
it  not  been  specially  confided  by  the  judicious  Bartholomew  to
Atye,  who  had  incontinently  told  his  master  ?  “  This  pretense
that  I  should  kill  Hohenlo,"  cried  Leicester,  “is  a  matter
properly  foisted  in  to  bring  me  to  choler.  I  will  not  suffer  it
to  rest  thus.  Its  authors  shall  be  duly  and  severely  punished.
And  albeit  I  see  well  enough  the  plot  of  this  wicked  device,
yet  shall  it  not  work  the  effect  the  devisers  have  done  it  for.
No,  my  Lord,  he  is  a  villain  and  a  false  lying  knave  whosoever
he  be,  and  of  what  nation  soever  that  hath  forged  this  device.
Count  Hohenlo  doth  know  I  never  gave  him  cause  to  fear  me
so  much.  There  were  ways  and  means  offered  me  to  have
quitted  him  of  the  country  if  I  had  so  liked.  This  new
monstrous  villany  which  is  now  found  out  I  do  hate  and  detest,
as  I  would  look  for  the  right  judgment  of  God  to  fall  upon
myself,  if  I  had  but  once  imagined  it.  All  this  makes  good
proof  of  Wilkes's  good  dealing  with  me,  that  hath  heard  of  so
vile  and  villainous  a  reproach  of  me,  and  never  gave  me
knowledge.  But  I  trust  your  Lordship  shall  receive  her
Majesty's  order  for  this,  as  for  a  matter  that  toucheth  herself
in  honour,  and  me  her  poor  servant  and  minister,  as  dearly  as
any  matter  can  do  ;  and  I  will  so  take  it  and  use  it  to  the
uttermost."  2

%

We  have  seen  howT  anxiously  Buckhurst  had  striven  to  do
his  duty  upon  a  most  difficult  mission.  Was  it  unnatural  that
so  fine  a  nature  as  his  should  be  disheartened,  at  reaping
nothing  but  sneers  and  contumely  from  the  haughty  sovereign
he  served,  and  from  the  insolent  favourite  who  controlled  her
councils  P  “I  beseech  your  Lordship,"  he  said  to  Burghley,
“keep  one  ear  for  me,  and  do  not  hastily  condemn  me  before
you  hear  mine  answer.  For  if  I  ever  did  or  shall  do  any
acceptable  service  to  her  Majesty,  it  was  in  the  stay  and
appeasing  of  these  countries,  ever  ready  at  my  coming  to  have
cast  off  all  good  respect  towards  us,  and  to  have  entered  even

1  Leicester  to  Buckhurst,  30  April.  (MS.  already  cited.)  2  Ibid.

158*7.

OF  A  PLOT  BY  THE  EARL  TO  MURDER  HIM.

247

into  some  desperate  cause.  In  the  meantime  I  am  hardly
thought  of  by  her  Majesty,  and  in  her  opinion  condemned
before  mine  answer  be  understood.  Therefore  I  beseech  you
to  help  me  to  return,  and  not  thus  to  lose  her  Majesty’s  favour
for  my  good  desert,  wasting  here  my  mind,  body,  my  wits,
wealth,  and  all,  with  continual  toils,  cares,  and  troubles,  more
than  I  am  able  to  endure.” 1

But  besides  his  instructions  to  smooth  and  expostulate,  in
which  he  had  succeeded  so  well,  and  had  been  requited  so  ill,
Buckhurst  had  received  a  still  more  difficult  commission.  He
had  been  ordered  to  broach  the  subject  of  peace,  as  delicately
as  possible,  but  without  delay ;  first  sounding  the  leading
politicians,  inducing  them  to  listen  to  the  Queen’s  suggestions
on  the  subject,  persuading  them  that  they  ought  to  be  satisfied
with  the  principles  of  the  pacification  of  Ghent,  and  that  it
was  hopeless  for  the  Provinces  to  continue  the  war  with  their
mighty  adversary  any  longer.2

Most  reluctantly  had  Buckhurst  fulfilled  his  sovereign’s

1  Buckhurst  to  Burghley,  27  May,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

2  “  Whereas  we  have  late  used  your
service  in  an  intended  treaty  of  peaco
betwixt  the  King  of  Spain  and  us,
dealt  in  by  the  Duke  of  Parma  ....
we  send  you  copies  of  such  letters  as
have  lately  been  written  to  ourself  by
the  Duke,  and  by  Champagny  to  the
Controller.  ...  We  have  taken  order
that  the  Duke  shall  bo  put  in  mind
of  the  treaty  of  Ghent,  anno  ’76,  .  .  .
which  being  afterwards  approved  by
the  King,  was  published  in  1577,  .  .  .
having  just  cause  to  hope  that,  if  the
King  be  willing  to  embrace  peaco,
and  the  Duke  to  further  the  same,  as
he  pretendeth,  he  may  be  induced  to
assent  to  such  a  tolerance  as  in  the
said  pacification  is  contained.  Now
it  resteth  that  you  should  seek  to
frame  the  minds  of  the  people  of
those  countries  to  such  good  means  as
by  you  shall  be  thought  expedient  to
content  themselves  with  the  said
tolerance ;  for  which  purpose  you
shall,  as  of  yourself,  as  one  that
wisheth  well  to  those  countries,  deal
with  some  well-chosen  persons  there,
such  as  you  shall  learn  to  be  good

patriots,  ....  laying  before  them
how  impossible  it  is  for  them  by  means
of  their  contributions,  with  the  burden
whereof  the  people  do  already  find
themselves  so  much  grieved  to  con¬
tinue  the  war,  and  to  make  head  any
longer  against  so  mighty  and  puissant
a  prince  as  the  King  of  Spain,  and
how  unable  ourselves  shall  be  to  sup¬
ply  them  still  with  such  relief  as  the
necessity  of  their  state  shall  require.
.  .  .  .  You  may  advise  them  to  dis¬
pose  both  their  own  minds  and  those
of  the  people  to  a  sound  peace,  which,
in  your  opinion,  they  cannot  at  any
time  treat  of  with  greater  advantage
than  at  this  present,  the  King  of
Spain  being  at  so  low  an  ebb  both  at
home  and  in  these  countries,  for  want
as  well  of  victuals  as  of  other  neces¬
sary  things  to  continue  the  wars.  .  .  .
And  if  you  shall  find  that  the  using
of  these  reasons  and  persuasions  in
our  name  may  further  the  cause  by
moving  them  rather  to  hearken  unto
peace,  we  leave  it  to  yourself  to  use,
in  such  case,  your  own  discretion
therein,”  &c.  Queen  to  Buckhurst,
May,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

248

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

commands  in  tliis  disastrous  course.  To  talk  to  the  Hollanders
of  the  Ghent  pacification  seemed  puerile.  That  memorable
treaty,  ten  years  before,  had  been  one  of  the  great  landmarks
of  progress,  one  of  the  great  achievements  of  William  the
Silent.  By  its  provisions,  public  exercise  of  the  reformed
religion  had  been  secured  for  the  two  Provinces  of  Holland
and  Zeeland,  and  it  had  bveen  agreed  that  the  secret  practice
of  those  rites  should  be  elsewhere  winked  at,  until  such  time
as  the  States- General,  under  the  auspices  of  Philip  II.,  should
otherwise  ordain.  But  was  it  conceivable  that  now, — after
Philip's  authority  had  been  solemnly  abjured,  and  the  reformed
worship  had  become  the  public,  dominant  religion,  throughout
all  the  Provinces, — the  whole  republic  should  return  to  the
Spanish  dominion,  and  to  such  toleration  as  might  be  sanc¬
tioned  by  an  assembly  professing  loyalty  to  the  most  Catholic
King  ?

Buckhurst  had  repeatedly  warned  the  Queen,  in  fervid  and
eloquent  language,  as  to  the  intentions  of  Spain.  “  There
was  never  peace  well  made,"  he  observed,  “without  a  mighty
war  preceding,  and  always,  the  sword  in  hand  is  the  best  pen
to  write  the  conditions  of  peace."

“  If  ever  prince  had  cause,"  he  continued,  “  to  think  himself
beset  with  doubt  and  danger,  you,  sacred  Queen,  have  most
just  cause  not  only  to  think  it,  but  even  certainly  to  believe
it.  The  Pope  doth  daily  plot  nothing  else  but  how  he  may
bring  to  pass  your  utter  overthrow ;  the  French  King  hath
already  sent  you  threatenings  of  revenge,  and  though  for  that
pretended  cause  I  think  little  will  ensue,  yet  he  is  blind  that
seeth  not  the  mortal  dislike  that  boileth  deep  in  his  heart  for
other  respects  against  you.  The  Scottish  King,  not  only  in
regard  of  his  future  hope,  but  also  by  reason  of  some  over
conceit  in  his  heart,  may  be  thought  a  dangerous  neighbour  to
you.  The  King  of  Spain  armeth  and  extendeth  all  his  power
to  ruin  both  you  and  your  estate.  And  if  the  Indian  gold
have  corrupted  also  the  King  of  Denmark,  and  made  him
likewise  Spanish,  as  I  marvellously  fear ;  why  will  not  your
Majesty,  beholding  the  flames  of  your  enemies  on  every  side
kindling  around,  unlock  all  your  coffers  and  convert  your

1587.  BUCKHURST’S  ELOQUENT  APPEALS  TO  THE  QUEEN.  249

treasure  for  the  advancing  of  worthy  men ,  and  for  the  arming  of
ships  and  men-of-war  that  may  defend  you ,  since  princes'
treasures  serve  only  to  that  end ,  and ,  lie  they  never  so  fast  or  so
full  in  their  chests ,  can  no  ways  so  defend  them  ?

u  The  eternal  God,  in  whose  hands  the  hearts  of  kings  do
rest,  dispose  and  guide  your  sacred  Majesty  to  do  that  which
may  he  most  according  to  His  blessed  will,  and  best  for  you,
as  I  trust  He  will,  even  for  His  mercy's  sake,  both  toward
your  Majesty  and  the  whole  realm  of  England,  whose  desola¬
tion  is  thus  sought  and  compassed." 1

Was  this  the  language  of  a  mischievous  intriguer,  who  was
sacrificing  the  true  interest  of  his  country,  and  whose  pro¬
ceedings  were  justly  earning  for  him  rebuke  and  disgrace  at  the
hands  of  his  sovereign  ?  Or  was  it  rather  the  noble  advice  of
an  upright  statesman,  a  lover  of  his  country,  a  faithful  servant
of  his  Queen,  who  had  looked  through  the  atmosphere  of
falsehood  in  which  he  was  doing  his  work,  and  who  had  de¬
tected,  with  rare  sagacity,  the  secret  purposes  of  those  who
were  then  misruling  the  world  ?

Buckhurst  had  no  choice,  however,  but  to  obey.  His
private  efforts  were  of  course  fruitless,  but  he  announced  to
her  Majesty  that  it  was  his  intention  very  shortly  to  bring  the
matter — according  to  her  wish — before  the  assembly.

But  Elizabeth,  seeing  that  her  counsel  had  been  unwise
and  her  action  premature,  turned  upon  her  envoy,  as  she  was
apt  to  do,  and  rebuked  him  for  his  obedience,  so  soon  as
obedience  had  proved  inconvenient  to  herself.

“  Having  perused  your  letters,"  she  said,  u  by  which  you
so  at  large  debate  unto  us  what  you  have  done  in  the  matter

of  peace . we  find  it  strange  that  you  should  proceed

further.  And  although  we  had  given  you  full  and  ample
direction  to  proceed  to  a  public  dealing  in  that  cause,  yet
your  own  discretion,  seeing  the  difficulties  and  dangers  that
you  yourself  saw  in  the  propounding  of  the  matter,  ought  to
have  led  you  to  delay  till  further  command  from  us." 2

1  Buckhurst  to  the  Queen,  80  April,  2  Queen  to  Buckhurst,  4  June,
1587.  (Br.  Mus.  Galba,  0.  si.  p.  438,  1587.  (S.P.  Office  MS.)

250

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XT.

Her  Majesty  tlien  instructed  her  envoy,  in  case  he  had  not
yet  “  propounded  the  matter  in  the  state-house  to  the  general
assembly/'  to  pause  entirely  until  he  heard  her  further
pleasure.  She  concluded,  as  usual,  with  a  characteristic  post¬
crip  t  in  her  own  hand.

“Oh  weigh  deeplier  this  matter,"  she  said,  “than,  with  so
shallow  a  judgment,  to  spill  the  cause,  impair  my  honour,  and
shame  yourself,  with  all  your  wit,  that  once  was  supposed
better  than  to  lose  a  bargain  for  the  handling."  1

Certainly  the  sphinx  could  have  propounded  no  more
puzzling  riddles  than  those  which  Elizabeth  thus  suggested  to
Buckhurst.  To  make  war  without  an  army,  to  support  an
army  without  pay,  to  frame  the  hearts  of  a  whole  people  to
peace  who  were  unanimous  for  war,  and  this  without  saying  a
word  either  in  private  or  public  ;  to  dispose  the  Netherlander
favourably  to  herself  and  to  Leicester,  by  refusing  them  men
and  money,  brow-beating  them  for  asking  for  it,  and  subjecting
them  to  a  course  of  perpetual  insults,  which  she  called  “  cor¬
rosives,"  to  do  all  this  and  more  seemed  difficult.  If  not  to
do  it,  were  to  spill  the  cause  and  to  lose  the  bargain,  it  was
more  than  probable  that  they  would  be  spilt  and  lost.

But  the  ambassador  was  no  (Edipus — although  a  man  of
delicate  perceptions  and  brilliant  intellect — and  he  turned
imploringly  to  a  wise  counsellor  for  aid  against  the  tormentor
who  chose  to  be  so  stony-faced  and  enigmatical.

“Touching  the  matter  of  peace,"  said  he  to  Walsingham,
“  I  have  written  somewhat  to  her  Majesty  in  cipher,  so  as  I
am  sure  you  will  be  called  for  to  decipher  it.  If  you  did
hioiv  how  infinitely  her  Majesty  did  at  my  departure  and
before— for  in  this  matter  of  peace  she  hath  specially  used  me
this  good  while — command  me ,  pray  me ,  and  persuade  me  to
further  and  hasten  the  same  with  all  the  speed  possible  that
might  be ,  and  how ,  on  the  other  side ,  I  have  continually  been  the
man  and  the  mean  that  have  most  plainly  dehorted  her  from
such  post-haste ,  and  that  she  should  never  make  good  peace
without  a  puissant  army  in  the  field,  you  would  then  say  that

1  Queen  to  Buckhurst,  MS.  just  cited.

158?.  HER  PERPLEXING-  AND  CONTRADICTORY  ORDERS.  251

I  had  now  cause  to  fear  her  displeasure  for  being  too  slow ,  and
not  too  forward.  And  as  for  all  the  reasons  which  in  my  last
letters  are  set  down,  her  Majesty  hath  debated  them  with  me
many  times.”  1

And  thus  midsummer  was  fast  approaching,  the  common¬
wealth  was  without  a  regular  government,  Leicester  remained
in  England  nursing  his  wrath  and  preparing  his  schemes,  the
Queen  was  at  Greenwich,  corresponding  with  Alexander
Farnese,  and  sending  riddles  to  Buckhurst,  when  the  enemy
— who,  according  to  her  Majesty,  was  u  quite  unable  to  attempt
the  siege  of  any  town  ” — suddenly  appeared  in  force  in
Flanders,  and  invested  Sluys.  This  most  important  seaport,
both  for  the  destiny  of  the  republic  and  of  England  at  that
critical  moment,  was  insufficiently  defended.  It  was  quite
time  to  put  an  army  in  the  field,  with  a  governor-general  to
command  it.

On  the  5th  June  there  was  a  meeting  of  the  state-council
at  the  Hague.  Count  Maurice,  Hohenlo,  and  Moeurs  were
present,  besides  several  members  of  the  States- General.  Two
propositions  were  before  the  council.  The  first  was  that  it
was  absolutely  necessary  to  the  safety  of  the  republic,  now
that  the  enemy  had  taken  the  field,  and  the  important  city  of
Sluys  was  besieged,  for  Prince  Maurice  to  be  appointed
captain-general,  until  such  time  as  the  Earl  of  Leicester  or
some  other  should  be  sent  by  her  Majesty.  The  second  was
to  confer  upon  the  state-council  the  supreme  government  in
civil  affairs,  for  the  same  period,  and  to  repeal  all  limitations
and  restrictions  upon  the  powers  of  the  council  made  secretly
by  the  Earl.

Chancellor  Leoninus,  u  that  grave,  wise  old  man,”  moved
the  propositions.  The  deputies  of  the  States  were  requested
to  withdraw.  The  vote  of  each  councillor  was  demanded.
Buckhurst,  who,  as  the  Queen’s  representative — together
with  Wilkes  and  John  Norris — had  a  seat  in  the  council,  ,
refused  to  vote.  u  It  was  a  matter,”  he  discreetly  observed,

“  with  which  he  had  not  been  instructed  by  her  Majesty  to

1  Buckhurst  to  Walsingham,  13  June,  158?.  (Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  96.  MS.)

252

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

intermeddle."  Norris  and  Wilkes  also  begged  to  be  excused
from  voting,  and,  although  earnestly  urged  to  do  so  by  the
whole  council,  persisted  in  their  refusal.  Both  measures  were
then  carried.1

No  sooner  was  the  vote  taken,  than  an  English  courier
entered  the  council-chamber,  with  pressing  despatches  from
Lord  Leicester.  The  letters  were  at  once  read.  The  Earl
announced  his  speedy  arrival,  and  summoned  both  the  States-
Greneral  and  the  council  to  meet  him  at  Dort,  where  his
lodgings  were  already  taken.  All  were  surprised,  but  none
more  than  Buckhurst,  Wilkes,  and  Norris  ;  for  no  intimation
of  this  sudden  resolution  had  been  received  by  them,  nor  any
answer  given  to  various  propositions,  considered  by  her
Majesty  as  indispensable  preliminaries  to  the  governor's  visit.2

The  council  adjourned  till  after  dinner,  and  Buckhurst  held
conference  meantime  with  various  counsellors  and  deputies.
On  the  reassembling  of  the  board,  it  was  urged  by  Barneveld,
in  the  name  of  the  States,  that  the  election  of  Prince  Maurice
should  still  hold  good.  u  Although  by  these  letters,"  said  he,
u  it  would  seem  that  her  Majesty  had  resolved  upon  the  speedy
return  of  his  Excellency,  yet,  inasmuch  as  the  counsels  and
resolutions  of  princes  are  often  subject  to  change  upon  new
occasion,  it  does  not  seem  tit  that  our  late  purpose  concerning
Prince  Maurice  should  receive  any  interruption."

Accordingly,  after  brief  debate,  both  resolutions,  voted  in
the  morning,  were  confirmed  in  the  afternoon.

“  So  now,"  said  Wilkes,  “  Maurice  is  general  of  all  the
forces,  et  quid  sequetur  nescimus ,"3

But  whatever  else  was  to  follow,  it  was  very  certain  that
Wilkes  would  not  stay.  His  great  enemy  had  sworn  his  de¬
struction,  and  would  now  take  his  choice,  whether  to  do  him
to  death  himself,  or  to  throw  him  into  the  clutch  of  the
ferocious  Hohenlo.  u  As  for  my  own  particular,"  said  the
counsellor,  u  the  word  is  go,  whosoever  cometh  or  cometh  not," 4
and  he  announced  to  Walsingham  his  intention  of  departing

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  8  June,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

4  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  29  April,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

1587.

DESPAIR  OP  WILKES.

253

without  permission,  should  he  not  immediately  receive  it  from
England.  u  I  shall  stay  to  he  dandled  with  no  love-days  nor
leave-takings/'  he  observed.1

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  8  June,
1587.'  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

Prom  the  very  moment  of  Leicester’s
arrival  in  England,  he  seems  to  have
conceived  a  violent  hatred  to  Coun¬
cillor  Wilkes.  Yet  a  careful  inspec¬
tion  of  the  correspondence  shows  that
never  was  hatred  more  unjust.  Wilkes
had  told  the  truth  concerning  the  ex¬
penses  incurred  by  England  and  the
States  during  the  Earl’s  first  term  of
administration.  He  could  not  have
done  less  without  dereliction  of  duty,
and  he  forwarded  certified  vouchers
for  all  his  statements.  He  always
did  his  best  to  sustain  the  governor’s
character,  and  to  carry  out  his  legiti¬
mate  views.  As  time  wore  on,  he
was  obliged  to  state  the  disadvantages
resulting  from  his  protracted  absence,
and  he  was  forced,  at  last,  to  admit
the  truth  as  to  his  great  unpopularity.
He  even  admitted  privately,  on  one
occasion,  that,  in  consequence  of  that
unpopularity,  some  other  governor
might  be  sent  from  England  more
acceptable  to  the  Provinces.  This
was  the  sum  of  his  offences  in  regard
to  Leicester.  Towards  the  Queen  he
manifested  himself  an  intelligent,
honest,  and  most  assiduous  servant,
but  he  had  incurred  the  hostility  of
the  favourite,  and  for  that  there  was
no  redress.  Even  so  early  as  January
he  felt  that  he  had  lost  Leicester’s
favour,  although  he  protested  he
“  would  repurchase  it  with  the  loss  of
his  two  best  fingers”  (Wilkes  to  Lei¬
cester,  27  Jan.  1587.  S.  P.  Office,
MS.) ;  and  he  wrote  at  the  same  time
to  the  Queen,  complaining  that  he
was  in  danger  of  his  life,  as  recom¬
pense  for  his  faithful  service — a  life
which  he  hoped  to  venture  in  better
sort  for  her  Majesty’s  service.  He  was
threatened  at  home,  he  said,  and  en¬
dangered  abroad.  Wilkes  to  the  Queen,
30  Jan.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)  A
few  months  later,  matters  had  grown
much  worse.  Leicester  was  intending
to  wreak  his  revenge  upon  him  by
means  of  third  persons,  who,  by  his
malignant  insinuations,  had  been
made  hostile  to  the  councillor.

“Whereunto  is  now  added  the  danger
of  my  poor  life,”  he  says,  “and  for¬
tune,  for  that  I  am  secretly  given  to
understand,  by  a  dear  friend  of  mine,
and  inward  with  my  great  and  heavy
enemy,  that  he  hath  sworn  and  pro¬
tested,  even  now  of  late,  to  take  his
revenge  on  me — how  or  in  what  sort
I  know  not,  but  have  good  cause  to
doubt,  considering  the  mind  of  my
enemy,  that  he  will  not  be  satisfied
with  any  mere  offence  to  be  done
unto  me,  which  I  suppose  he  will
never  do  of  himself  nor  by  any  of  his
own,  but  a  third  means,  whereunto  he
hath  a  gap  opened  unto  him  by  my
own  letters  written  unto  him  from
hence,  wherein  I  had  touched  some
persons  of  quality  here  for  their  in¬
direct  proceeding  against  her  Majesty
and  our  nation  ....  Therefore,  I
humbly  beseech  you  to  move  her  Ma¬
jesty  for  my  speedy  return.”  W.  to
Hatton,  10  April,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office,

MS.)  In  a  letter  to  Walsingham  of
same  date,  he  alluded  to  the  “  deadly
revenge  threatened  against  him  by
the  Earl  with  very  bitter  words,”  and
indicates  the  same  scheme  by  which
third  persons  are  to  inflict  it.  “I
would  be  loth  to  commit  myself  to
his  mercy,”  he  says;  “your  honour

knoweth  him  better  than  I  do .

God  is  my  witness  I  have,  since  his
departure  from  these  countries,  de¬
served  as  well  of  him  as  ever  did  any.
.  .  .  .  I  will  stand  to  my  justification,
and  prove  that  I  have  done  him  with
her  Majesty  as  many  good  offices  as
any  man  that  came  from  hence,”  and
he  then  most  urgently  solicited  per¬
mission  to  depart.  This  permission
the  government  were  most  reluctant
to  grant,  and  Wilkes  protested  loudly
against  his  continuance  in  office  at
such  “hazard  to  his  poor  life,  without
means  of  defence,  in  the  quality  of  his
ruin  or  death.”  “'Tis  a  hard  reward
for  my  faithful  services,”  lie  said,  “  to  be
left  to  the  mercy  of  such  as  have  will
and  means  by  revenge  to  bereave  her
Majesty  of  a  true  and  obedient  servant,
and  me  of  my  life,  in  an  obscure  sort,
to  my  perpetual  infamy,  to  the  pleasing

254

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

But  Leicester  had  delayed  his  coming  too  long.  The
country  felt  that  it  had  been  trifled  with  by  his  absence — at  so
critical  a  period — of  seven  months.  It  was  known  too  that  the
Queen  was  secretly  treating  with  the  enemy,  and  that  Buck-
hurst  had  been  privately  sounding  leading  personages  upon
that  subject,  by  her  orders.  This  had  caused  a  deep,  sup¬
pressed  indignation.  Over  and  over  again  had  the  English
government  been  warned  as  to  the  danger  of  delay.  “  Your
length  in  resolving/'  Wilkes  had  said,  “  whatsoever  your
secret  purposes  may  he — will  put  us  to  new  plunges  before
long."1  The  mission  of  Buckhurst  was  believed  to  he  “but  a
stale,  having  some  other  intent  than  was  expressed."  And
at  last,  the  new  plunge  had  been  fairly  taken.  It  seemed  now
impossible  for  Leicester  to  regain  the  absolute  authority,
which  he  coveted,  and  which  he  had  for  a  brief  season  possessed.
The  States-Gleneral,  under  able  leaders,  had  become  used  to
a  government  which  had  been  forced  upon  them,  and  which
they  had  wielded  with  success.  Holland  and  Zeeland,  paying
the  whole  expense  of  the  war,  were  not  likely  to  endure  again
the  absolute  sovereignty  of  a  foreigner,  guided  by  a  back¬
stairs  council  of  reckless  politicians — most  of  whom  were  un-
principled,  and  some  of  whom  had  been  proved  to  he  felons —
and  established  at  Utrecht,  which  contributed  nothing  to  the

of  mine  enemies,  and  the  discomfort¬
ing  of  all  honest  men,  by  an  example,
from  serving  of  her  Majesty  with  sin¬
cerity,”  &c.  W.  to  Walsing.  29th
April,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  And  he
soon  afterwards  declared  to  Walsingliam
(15  May,  1587.  S.  P.  Office,  MS.)
that,  in  case  he  should  be  left  there  to
the  mercy  of  his  great  enemy,  if  he  re¬
turned,  he  would  venture  “  to  hazard
her  Majesty’s  favour  in  returning  home
without  license.”  His  alarm  was  no
greater  for  his  life  than  for  his  repu¬
tation,  both  which,  Leicester,  in  his
belief  was  sworn  to  destroy.  “I  do
find  that  my  very  heavy  and  mighty
adversary,”  he  writes  to  the  Lord
Chancellor  (3  June,  1587.  S.  P.  Office,
MS.),  “  doth  perpetually  travail  with
her  Majesty  to  disgrace  and  undo  me,
and  I  have  cause  to  doubt  that  he

doth  or  shall  prevail  against  me,  con¬
sidering  the  goodness  of  her  Majesty’s
nature  to  be  induced  to  believe  whom
she  favoureth,  and  his  subtlety  to  per¬
suade.  I  have  therefore  no  mean  in
respect  of  the  great  inequality  be¬
tween  him  and  me,  but  either  to  be
held  up  by  my  honourable  friends,
assisted  with  the  wings  of  mine  own
integrity,  or  to  fall  to  the  ground  with
disgrace  and  infamy,  to  the  dis¬
couragement  of  all  that  shall  serve
her  Majesty  in  like  places.”

Such  passages  paint  the  condition
of  the  civil  service  in  England,  during
the  reign  of  Leicester  and  Elizabeth,
more  vividly  than  could  be  done  by  a
long  dissertation.

1  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  17  May,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

LEICESTER  ANNOUNCES  HIS  RETURN.

255

general  purse.  If  Leicester  were  really  coming,  it  seemed
certain  that  he  would  he  held  to  acknowledge  the  ancient  con¬
stitution,  and  to  respect  the  sovereignty  of  the  States-General.
It  was  resolved  that  he  should  he  well  bridled.  The  sensa¬
tions  of  Barneveld  and  his  party  may  therefore  be  imagined,
when  a  private  letter  of  Leicester  to  his  secretary — u  the
fellow  named  Junius,”  as  Hohenlo  called  him — having  been
intercepted  at  this  moment,  gave  them  an  opportunity  of
studying  the  Earl's  secret  thoughts.

The  Earl  informed  his  correspondent  that  he  was  on  the
point  of  starting  for  the  Netherlands.  He  ordered  him
therefore  to  juoceed  at  once  to  reassure  those  whom  he  knew
well  disposed  as  to  the  good  intentions  of  her  Majesty  and  of
the  governor-general.  And  if,  on  the  part  of  Lord  Buckhurst
or  others,  it  should  be  intimated  that  the  Queen  was  resolved
to  treat  for  peace  with  the  King  of  Spain,  and  wished  to  have
the  opinion  of  the  Netherlanders  on  that  subject,  he  ivas  to  say
boldly  that  Lord  Buckhurst  never  had  any  such  charge ,  and
that  her  Majesty  had  not  been  treating  at  all.  She  had  only
been  attempting  to  sound  the  King's  intentions  towards  the
Netherlands,  in  case  of  any  accord.  Having  received  no  satis¬
factory  assurance  on  the  subject,  her  Majesty  was  determined
to  proceed  with  the  defence  of  these  countries.  This  appeared
by  the  expedition  of  Drake  against  Spain,  and  by  the  return
of  the  Earl,  with  a  good  number  of  soldiers  paid  by  her
Majesty,  over  and  above  her  ordinary  subsidy.1

“You  are  also,”  said  the  Earl,  “  to  tell  those  who  have  the
care  of  the  people”  (the  ministers  of  the  reformed  church
and  others),  “  that  I  am  returning,  in  the  confidence  that  they
will,  in  future,  cause  all  past  difficulties  to  cease,  and  that
they  will  yield  to  me  a  legitimate  authority,  such  as  befits  for
administering  the  sovereignty  of  the  Provinces,  without  my
being  obliged  to  endure  all  the  oppositions  and  counter¬
minings  of  the  States,  as  in  times  past.  The  States  must
content  themselves  with  retaining  the  power  which  they  claim

1  Leicester  to  Junius,  Greenwich,  Compare  Meteren,  xiv.  255.  Hoofd,
15  June,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)  Vervolgli,  249,  et  mult.  al.

i

256

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

to  have  exercised  under  the  governors  of  the  Emperor  and
the  King — without  attempting  anything  farther  during  my
government — since  I  desire  to  do  nothing  of  importance  with¬
out  the  advice  of  the  council,  which  will  he  composed  legiti¬
mately  of  persons  of  the  country.  You  will  also  tell  them
that  her  Majesty  commands  me  to  return  unless  I  can  obtain
from  the  States  the  authority  which  is  necessary,  in  order  not
to  be  governor  in  appearance  only  and  on  paper.  And  I
wish  that  those  who  are  good  may  be  apprized  of  all  this,  in
order  that  nothing  may  happen  to  their  prejudice  and  ruin,
and  contrary  to  their  wishes/'1

There  were  two  very  obvious  comments  to  be  made  upon
this  document.  Firstly,  the  States — de  jure ,  as  they  claimed,
and  de  facto  most  unquestionably — were  in  the  position  of
the  Emperor  and  King.  They  were  the  sovereigns.  The
Earl  wished  them  to  content  themselves  with  the  power  ■which
they  exercised  under  the  Emperor's  governors.  This  was  like
requesting  the  Emperor,  when  in  the  Netherlands,  to  consider
himself  subject  to  his  own  governor.  The  second  obvious
reflection  was  that  the  Earl,  in  limiting  his  authority  by  a
state-council,  expected,  no  doubt,  to  appoint  that  body  him¬
self — as  he  had  done  before — and  to  allow  the  members  only
the  right  of  talking,  and  of  voting,  without  the  power  of
enforcing  their  decisions.  In  short,  it  was  very  plain  that
Leicester  meant  to  be  more  absolute  than  ever.

As  to  the  flat  contradiction  given  to  Buckhurst's  proceed¬
ings  in  the  matter  of  peace,  that  statement  could  scarcely
deceive  any  one  who  had  seen  her  Majesty's  letters  and  in¬
structions  to  her  envoy.

It  was  also  a  singularly  deceitful  course  to  be  adopted  by
Leicester  towards  Buckhurst  and  towards  the  Netherlands,
because  his  own  private  instructions,  drawn  up  at  the  same
moment,  expressly  enjoined  him  to  do  exactly  what  Buck¬
hurst  had  been  doing.  He  was  most  strictly  and  earnestly
commanded  to  deal  privately  with  all  such  persons  as  had
influence  with  the  u  common  sort  of  people,"  in  order  that

1  Leicester  to  Junius,  uU  sup.

1587.  HIS  INSTRUCTIONS— LETTER  TO  JUNIUS.  257

they  should  use  their  influence  with  those  common  people  in
favour  of  peace,  bringing  vividly  before  them  the  excessive
burthens  of  the  war,  their  inability  to  cope  with  so  potent  a
.prince  as  Philip,  and  the  necessity  the  Queen  was  under  of
discontinuing  her  contributions  to  their  support.  He  was  to
make  the  same  representations  to  the  States,  and  he  was
further  most  explicitly  to  inform  all  concerned,  that,  in  case
they  were  unmoved  by  these  suggestions,  her  Majesty  had
quite  made  up  her  mind  to  accept  the  handsome  offers  of
peace  held  out  by  the  King  of  Spain,  and  to  leave  them  to
their  fate.

It  seemed  scarcely  possible  that  the  letter  to  Junius  and
the  instructions  for  the  Earl  should  have  been  dated  the  same
week,  and  should  have  emanated  from  the  same  mind  ;  but
such  was  the  fact.

He  was  likewise  privately  to  assure  Maurice  and  Hohenlo —
in  order  to  remove  their  anticipated  opposition  to  the  peace —
that  such  care  should  be  taken  in  providing  for  them,  as  that
“they  should  have  no  just  cause  to  dislike  thereof,  but  to  rest
satisfied  withal/'

With  regard  to  the  nature  of  his  authority,  he  was  in¬
structed  to  claim  a  kind  of  dictatorship  in  everything  regard¬
ing  the  command  of  the  forces,  and  the  distribution  of  the
public  treasure.  All  offices  were  to  be  at  his  disposal.  Every
florin  contributed  by  the  States  was  to  be  placed  in  his  hands,
and  spent  according  to  his  single  will.  He  was  also  to  have
plenary  power  to  prevent  the  trade  in  victuals  with  the  enemy
by  death  and  confiscation.

If  opposition  to  any  of  these  proposals  were  made  by  the
States-General,  he  was  to  appeal  to  the  States  of  each  Pro¬
vince,  to  the  towns  and  communities,  and  in  case  it  should
prove  impossible  for  him  “to  be  furnished  with  the  desired
authority,"  he  was  then  instructed  to  say  that  it  was  “  her
Majesty’s  meaning  to  leave  them  to  their  own  counsel  and
defence,  and  to  withdraw  the  support  that  she  had  yielded  to
them  :  seeing  plainly  that  the  continuance  of  the  confused

VOL.  ii. — S

258

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XV.

government  now  reigning  among  them  could  not  hut  work
their  ruin.” 1

Both  these  papers  came  into  Barneveld’s  hands,  through
the  agency  of  Ortel,  the  States’  envoy  in  England,  before  the
arrival  of  the  Earl  in  the  Netherlands.2

Of  course  they  soon  became  the  topics  of  excited  conversa¬
tion  and  of  alarm  in  every  part  of  the  country.  Buckhurst,
touched  to  the  quick  by  the  reflection  upon  those  pro¬
ceedings  of  his  which  had  been  so  explicitly  enjoined  upon
him,  and  so  reluctantly  undertaken — appealed  earnestly  to
her  Majesty.  He  reminded  her,  as  delicately  as  possible,  that
her  honour,  as  well  as  his  own,  was  at  stake  by  Leicester’s
insolent  disavowals  of  her  authorized  ambassador.  He  be¬
sought  her  to  remember  “  what  even  her  own  royal  hand  had
written  to  the  Duke  of  Parma  ;  ”  and  how  much  his  honour
was  interested  “  by  the  disavowing  of  his  dealings  about  the
peace  begun  by  her  Majesty’s  commandment.”  He  adjured
her  with  much  eloquence  to  think  upon  the  consequences  of
stirring  up  the  common  and  unstable  multitude  against  their
rulers  ;  upon  the  pernicious  effects  of  allowing  the  clergy  to
inflame  the  passions  of  the  people  against  the  government.

“  Under  the  name  of  such  as  have  charge  over  the  people,”
said  Buckhurst,  “are  understood  the  ministers  and  chaplains
of  the  churches  in  every  town,  by  the  means  of  whom  it  seems
that  his  Lordship  tendeth  his  whole  purpose  to  attain  to  his
desire  of  the  administration  of  the  sovereignty.”  He  assured
the  Queen  that  this  scheme  of  Leicester  to  seize  virtually
upon  that  sovereignty,  would  be  a  disastrous  one.  “  The  '
States  are  resolved,”  said  he,  “  since  your  Majesty  doth  refuse
the  sovereignty,  to  lay  it  upon  no  creature  else,  as  a  thing
contrary  to  their  oath  and  allegiance  to  their  country.”  He
reminded  her  also  that  the  States  had  been  dissatisfied  with
the  Earl’s  former  administration,  believing  that  he  had  ex-

1  Instructions  for  the  Earl  of  Lei¬
cester,  20  June,  1587.  Corrected  by
Lord  Burghley  and  Secretary  Wal-
singham.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.  Compare
Bor,  II.  xxi.  906,  907.)

3  Bor,  II.  xxii.  906,  907.  “By  the
way,”  writes  Leicester  to  Burghley,
“  send  away  Ortel ;  he  is  a  bad  fellow.”
Leicester  to  Burghley,  17  Aug.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

B  ARNE  VELD  DENOUNCES  HIM  IN  THE  STATES.  259

ceeded  his  commission,  and  that  they  were  determined  there¬
fore  to  limit  his  authority  at  his  return.  “  Your  sacred
Majesty  may  consider,”  he  said,  “what  effect  all  this  may
work  among  the  common  and  ignorant  people,  by  intimating
that,  unless  they  shall  procure  him  the  administration  of  such
a  sovereignty  as  he  requireth,  their  ruin  may  ensue.” 1  Buck-
hurst  also  informed  her  that  he  had  despatched  Councillor
Wilkes  to  England,  in  order  that  he  might  give  more  ample
information  on  all  these  affairs  by  word  of  mouth  than  could
well  be  written.

It  need  hardly  be  stated  that  Barneveld  came  down  to  the
states'-house  with  these  papers  in  his  hand,  and  thundered
against  the  delinquent  and  intriguing  governor  till  the  general
indignation  rose  to  an  alarming  height.  False  statements  of
course  were  made  to  Leicester  as  to  the  substance  of  the  Advo¬
cate's  discourse.  He  was  said  to  have  charged  upon  the  English
government  an  intention  to  seize  forcibly  upon  their  cities,  and
to  transfer  them  to  Spain  on  payment  of  the  sums  due  to  the
Queen  from  the  States,  and  to  have  declared  that  he  had  found
all  this  treason  in  the  secret  instructions  of  the  Earl.2 3  But
Barneveld  had  read  the  instructions,  to  which  the  attention  of
the  reader  has  just  been  called,  and  had  strictly  stated  the  truth,
which  was  damaging  enough,  without  need  of  exaggeration.

1  Buckhurst  to  the  Queen,  28  June,

1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba.  C.  xi.  p.  61,
MS.)

3  Memorial  in  Burghley’s  hand,
Sept.  1587.  Killigrcw  and  Beale  to
the  Lords,  11  Sept.  1587.  Leicester
to  Burghley,  17  Aug.  1587.  Same  to
same,  11  Sept.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MSS.)

“These  persuasions  of  this  fellow
Barnevelt,”  says  the  Earl  in  the  last-
cited  letter,  “wrought  great  impres¬
sions  in  many  men  that  her  Majesty
had  a  former  resolution  in  herself  to
make  peace  without  these  countries,
and  that  my  now  sending  was  only  to
get  authority  here  with  the  command¬
ment  of  places  and  people,  that,  if  these
men  would  not  agree  to  such  peace  as
her  Majesty  would  appoint,  they  should
be  compelled  thereto  by  such  forces
as  I  should  have  at  my  disposition;

alleging  also  that  these  few  supplies
which  I  brought  was  to  augment  my
power  the  stronger  for  this  only  end.
These  informations,  assisted  with  the
report  of  the  copy  of  my  instructions
and  letters,  for  the  verifying  of  which
the  party  took  new  oath  that  they  were
the  true  copies  which  he  had,  and
moved  him  to  speak  so  plainly,  which
matters  were  very  probable  and  greatly
persuadable  to  the  common  sort ;  yet
is  the  matter  so  used  as  notwithstand¬
ing  all  his  allegations  both  of  instruc¬
tions  and  letters,  all  men  are  satisfied ;
and  I  have  not  denied  but  such  words
are  in  my  instructions  and  such  a  letter
written,  and  yet  we  made  all  to  agree
with  an  honourable  and  gracious  in¬
tention  in  her  Majesty  towards  them
all,”  &c.  (Compare  Meteren,  xiv.  255
seq.  Bor,  II.  xxii.  906,  907.  Hoofd,
Verv.  239.  Wagenaar.  viii.  223,  224.)

260

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYI.

CHAPTER  XYI.

Situation  of  Sluys  —  Its  Dutch  and  English  Garrison  —  Williams  writes  from
Sluys  to  the  Queen  —  Jealousy  between  the  Earl  and  States  —  Schemes  to
relieve  Sluys — Which  are  feeble  and  unsuccessful  —  The  Town  Capitu¬
lates —  Parma  enters  —  Leicester  enraged  —  The  Queen  angry  with  the
Anti-Leicestrians  —  Norris,  Wilkes,  and  Buckhurst  punished  —  Drake  sails
for  Spain  —  His  Exploits  at  Cadiz  and  Lisbon  —  He  is  rebuked  by
Elizabeth.

When  Dante  had  passed  through  the  third  circle  of  the
Inferno — a  desert  of  red-hot  sand,  in  which  lay  a  multitude  of
victims  of  divine  wrath,  additionally  tortured  by  an  ever-
descending  storm  of  fiery  flakes — he  was  led  by  Virgil  out  of
this  burning  wilderness  along  a  narrow  causeway.  This  path
was  protected,  he  said,  against  the  showers  of  flame,  by  the
lines  of  vapour  which  rose  eternally  from  a  boiling  brook.
Even  by  such  shadowy  bulwarks,  added  the  poet,  do  the
Flemings  between  Cadzand  and  Bruges  protect  their  land
against  the  ever-threatening  sea.1

It  was  precisely  among  these  slender  dykes  between  Kad-
zand  and  Bruges  that  Alexander  Farnese  had  now  planted  all
the  troops  that  he  could  muster  in  the  field.  It  was  his  deter¬
mination  to  conquer  the  city  of  Sluys  ;  for  the  possession  of
that  important  sea-port  was  necessary  for  him  as  a  basis  for
the  invasion  of  England,  which  now  occupied  all  the  thoughts
of  his  sovereign  and  himself.

Exactly  opposite  the  city  was  the  island  of  Kadzand,
once  a  fair  and  fertile  territory,  with  a  city  and  many  flou¬
rishing  villages  upon  its  surface,  but  at  that  epoch  diminished

i  “  Hora  cen  porta  1’  un  de’  dun  margini
E  il  fumo  del  ruscel’  di  sopra  aduggia
Si  che  dal  fuoco  salva  1’  acqua  e  gl’  argini
Qual  i  Fiamminghi  fra  Guzzante  c  Bruggia
Temendo  il  fiotto  che  ver  lor  s’  avventa
Fanno  li  schermi  acciocho’l  mar  si  fuggia.*’
Inferno ,  Canto  xv.

Compare  Guicciardini,  ‘  Descript,
des  Pays  Bas,’  ed.  1582,  p.  379.
Strada,  II.  487.  Bentivoglio,  P.  II.
L.  Y.  313.

SITUATION  OF  SLUYS.

158T.

261

to  a  small  dreary  sand-bank  by  the  encroachments  of  the
ocean.

A  stream  of  inland  water,  rising  a  few  leagues  to  the  south
of  Sluys,  divided  itself  into  many  branches  just  before  reach¬
ing  the  city,  converted  the  surrounding  territory  into  a
miniature  archipelago — the  islands  of  which  were  shifting
treacherous  sand-banks  at  low  water,  and  submerged  ones  at
flood — and  then  widening  and  deepening  into  a  considerable
estuary,  opened  for  the  city  a  capacious  harbour,  and  an  ex¬
cellent  although  intricate  passage  to  the  sea.  The  city,  which
was  well  built  and  thriving,  was  so  hidden  in  its  labyrinth  of
canals  and  streamlets,  that  it  seemed  almost  as  difficult  a
matter  to  find  Sluys  as  to  conquer  it.  It  afforded  safe  har¬
bour  for  five  hundred  large  vessels  ;  and  its  possession,  there¬
fore,  was  extremely  important  for  Parma.  Besides  these
natural  defences,  the  place  was  also  protected  by  fortifications,
which  were  as  well  constructed  as  the  best  of  that  period.
There  was  a  strong  rampire  and  many  towers.  There  was  also
a  detached  citadel  of  great  strength,  looking  towards  the  sea,
and  there  was  a  ravelin,  called  St.  Anne’s,  looking  in  the
direction  of  Bruges.  A  mere  riband  of  dry  land  in  that
quarter  was  all  of  solid  earth  to  be  found  in  the  environs  of
Sluys.

The  city  itself  stood  upon  firm  soil,  but  that  soil  had  been
hollowed  into  a  vast  system  of  subterranean  magazines,  not
for  warlike  purposes,  but  for  cellars,  as  Sluys  had  been  from
a  remote  period  the  great  entrepot  of  foreign  wines  in  the
Netherlands.1

While  the  eternal  disputes  between  Leicester  and  the  States
were  going  on  both  in  Holland  and  in  England,  while  the
secret  negotiations  between  Alexander  Earnese  and  Queen
Elizabeth  were  slowly  proceeding  at  Brussels  and  Green¬
wich,  the  Duke,  notwithstanding  the  destitute  condition  of  his
troops,  and  the  famine  which  prevailed  throughout  the  obe¬
dient  Provinces,  had  succeeded  in  bringing  a  little  army  of
five  thousand  foot,  and  something  less  than  one  thousand

1  Authorities  last  cited.  Meteren,  xiv.  254™  255.  Hoofd,  Verv.  254.

262

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYI.

horse,  into  the  held.1  A  portion  of  this  force  he  placed  under
the  command  of  the  veteran  La  Motte.  That  distinguished
campaigner  had  assured  the  commander-in-chief  that  the
reduction  of  the  city  would  he  an  easy  achievement.2  Alex¬
ander  soon  declared  that  the  enterprise  was  the  most  difficult
one  that  he  had  ever  undertaken.3  Yet,  two  vears  before,  he
had  carried  to  its  triumphant  conclusion  the  famous  siege  of
Antwerp.  He  stationed  his  own  division  upon  the  isle  of
Kadzand,  and  strengthened  his  camp  by  additionally  fortifying
those  shadowy  bulwarks,  by  which  the  island,  since  the  age  of
Dante,  had  entrenched  itself  against  the  assaults  of  ocean.

On  the  other  hand,  La  Motte,  by  the  orders  of  his  chief,
had  succeeded,  after  a  sharp  struggle,  in  carrying  the  fort  of
St.  Anne.  A  still  more  important  step  was  the  surprising  of
Blankenburg,  a  small  fortified  place  on  the  coast,  about  mid¬
way  between  Os  tend  and  Sluys,  by  which  the  sea-communica¬
tions  with  the  former  city  for  the  relief  of  the  beleaguered  town
were  interrupted.4

Parma’s  demonstrations  against  Sluys  had  commenced  in
the  early  days  of  J une.  The  commandant  of  the  place  was
Arnold  de  Groenevelt,  a  Dutch  noble  of  ancient  lineage  and
approved  valour.  His  force  was,  however,  very  meagre,
hardly  numbering  more  than  eight  hundred,  all  Nether-
landers,  but  counting  among  its  officers  several  most  distin¬
guished  personages — Nicholas  de  Maulde,  Adolphus  de  Meet-

1  Parma  to  Philip  II.,  6  Aug.  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

This  force  was  subsequently  very
much  increased.  It  is  impossible,  how¬
ever,  to  arrive  at  the  exact  numbers.
They  are  not  stated  by  Farnese  in  his
letters  to  the  King,  preserved  in  the
Archives  of  Simancas.  Strada  (II.  489)
gives  the  numbers  as  stated  in  the  text.
Roger  Williams,  however,  in  a  letter
to  Queen  Elizabeth,  sent  from  Sluys
at  an  early  period  of  the  siege,  says
that  the  Duke  of  Parma  had  come
before  the  town,  a  week  before,  in  per¬
son,  with  four  regiments  of  Walloons,
four  of  Germans,  fifty-two  companies
of  Spaniards,  twenty-four  cornets  of
horse,  and  forty-eight  pieces  of  battery,

and  that  the  next  day  there  arrived
one  regiment  of  Italians  and  one  of
Burgundians.  This  would  give  a  total
of  at  least  17,600  men,  more  than  thrice
as  many  as  the  historiographer  of  the
Duke  allows.  R.  Williams  to  the
9

Queen,  —  June,  1587.  (Brit.  Mus.

Galba,  D.  I.  p.  40,  MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.,  6  Aug.  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Ibid.  “  En  mio  poco  juicio  la  mas
dificultosa  y  laboriosa  cosa  que  ho
visto  e  acometido  en  Flandes.”

4  Strada,  II.  488.  Meteren,  ubi  sup.
Bor,  II.  xxii.  984.  Bentivoglio,  Hoofd,
ubi  sup.

1587.  ITS  DUTCH  AND  ENGLISH  GARRISON.  263

kerke  and  liis  younger  brother,  Captain  Heraugiere,  and  other
well-known  partisans.

On  the  threatening  of  danger  the  commandant  had  made
application  to  Sir  William  Russell,  the  worthy  successor  of
Sir  Philip  Sidney  in  the  government  of  Flushing.  He  had
received  from  him,  in  consequence,  a  reinforcement  of  eight
hundred  English  soldiers,  under  several  eminent  chieftains,
foremost  among  whom  were  the  famous  Welshman  Roger
Williams,  Captain  Huntley,  Baskerville,  Sir  Francis  Yere,
Ferdinando  Gorges,  and  Captain  Hart.  This  combined
force,  however,  was  hut  a  slender  one,  there  being  hut  sixteen
hundred  men  to  protect  two  miles  and  a  half  of  rampart,  be¬
sides  the  forts  and  ravelins.1

But,  such  as  it  was,  no  time  was  lost  in  vain  regrets.  The
sorties  against  the  besiegers  were  incessant  and  brilliant.  On
one  occasion  Sir  Francis  Yere — conspicuous  in  the  throng,  in
his  red  mantilla,  and  supported  only  by  one  hundred  English¬
men  and  Dutchmen,  under  Captain  Baskerville — held  at  bay
eight  companies  of  the  famous  Spanish  legion  called  the  Terzo
Yeijo,  at  push  of  pike,  took  many  prisoners,  and  forced  the
Spaniards  from  the  position  in  which  they  were  entrenching
themselves.2  On  the  other  hand,  Farnese  declared  that  he
had  never  in  his  life  witnessed  anything  so  unflinching  as  the
courage  of  his  troops  ;  employed  as  they  were  in  digging
trenches  where  the  soil  was  neither  land  nor  water,  exposed
to  inundation  by  the  suddenly- opened  sluices,  to  a  plunging
fire  from  the  forts,  and  to  perpetual  hand-to-hand  combats
with  an  active  and  fearless  foe,  and  yet  pumping  away  in  the
cotfer-dams — which  they  had  invented  by  way  of  obtaining  a
standing-ground  for  their  operations — as  steadily  and  sedately
as  if  engaged  in  purely  pacific  employments.3  The  besieged
were  inspired  by  a  courage  equally  remarkable.  The  regular
garrison  was  small  enough,  but  the  burghers  were  courageous,

i  Strada,  Meteren,  Bor,  Bentivoglio,
Hoofd,  ubi  sup.  Roger  Williams,
‘Discourse  of  War,’  apud  Grimstone,
‘Hist.  Netherlands,  L.  xiii.  962.

8  R.  Williams,  ubi  sup.

£0  July  „  .

3  Parma  to  Philip  II.  - ,  1587.

1  6  Aug.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  Strada,  IL
491.

264

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVI.

and  even  the  women  organized  themselves  into  a  hand  of
pioneers.  This  corps  of  Amazons,  led  by  two  female  captains,
rejoicing  in  the  names  of  ‘ May  in  the  Heart'  and  ‘ Catherine
the  Rose,'  actually  constructed  an  important  redoubt  between
the  citadel  and  the  rampart,  which  received,  in  compliment  to
its  builders,  the  appellation  of  c  Fort  Venus.' 1

The  demands  of  the  beleaguered  garrison,  however,  upon
the  States  and  upon  Leicester  were  most  pressing.  Captain
Hart  swam  thrice  out  of  the  city  with  letters  to  the  States,
to  the  governor-general,  and  to  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  and  the
same  perilous  feat  was  performed  several  times  by  a  Nether-
land  officer.2  The  besieged  meant  to  sell  their  lives  dearly,
but  it  was  obviously  impossible  for  them,  with  so  slender  a
force,  to  resist  a  very  long  time.

“  Our  ground  is  great  and  our  men  not  so  many,"  wrote
Roger  Williams  to  his  sovereign,  “  but  we  trust  in  God  and

our  valour  to  defend  it . We  mean,  with  God's

help,  to  make  their  downs  red  and  black,  and  to  let  out  every
acre  of  our  ground  for  a  thousand  of  their  lives,  besides  our
own." 3

The  Welshman  was  no  braggart,  and  had  proved  often
enough  that  he  was  more  given  to  performances  than  pro¬
mises.  “We  doubt  not  your  Majesty  will  succour  us,"  he
said,  “for  our  honest  mind  and  plain  dealing  toward  your
royal  person  and  dear  country ; "  adding,  as  a  bit  of  timely
advice,  “Royal  Majesty,  believe  not  over  much  your  peace¬
makers.  Had  they  their  mind,  they  will  not  only  undo  your
friends  abroad,  but,  in  the  end,  your  royal  estate." 4

Certainly  it  was  from  no  want  of  wholesome  warning  from
wise  statesmen  and  blunt  soldiers  that  the  Queen  was  ven¬
turing  into  that  labyrinth  of  negotiation  which  might  prove  so
treacherous.  Never  had  been  so  inopportune  a  moment  for
that  princess  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  him  who  was  charming
her  so  wisely,  while  he  was  at  the  same  moment  battering

1  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  6,  seq.  2  Meteren,  Bor,  R.  Williams,  ubi  sup.

3  R.  Williams  to  the  Queen,  -  June,  1581.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  p.  40,  MS.)

4  Ibid.

158?.  WILLIAMS  WRITES  FROM  SLUYS  TO  THE  QUEEN.  265

the  place,  which  was  to  be  the  basis  of  his  operations  against
her  realm.  Her  delay  in  sending  forth  Leicester,  with  at
least  a  moderate  contingent,  to  the  rescue,  was  most  per¬
nicious.  The  States — ignorant  of  the  Queen's  exact  relations
with  Spain,  and  exaggerating  her  disingenuousness  into  abso¬
lute  perfidy — became  on  their  own  part  exceedingly  to  blame.
There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  both  Hollanders  and  English¬
men  were  playing  into  the  hands  of  Parma  as  adroitly  as  if  he
had  actually  directed  their  movements.  Deep  were  the
denunciations  of  Leicester  and  his  partisans  by  the  States'
party,  and  incessant  the  complaints  of  the  English  and  Dutch
troops  shut  up  in  Sluys  against  the  inactivity  or  treachery  of
Maurice  and  Hohenlo.

“If  Count  Maurice  and  his  base  brother,  the  Admiral
(Justinus  de  Nassau),  be  too  young  to  govern,  must  Holland
and  Zeeland  lose  their  countries  and  towns  to  make  them
expert  men  of  war  ?"  asked  Eoger  Williams.1  A  pregnant
question  certainly,  but  the  answer  was,  that  by  sus¬
picion  and  jealousy,  rather  than  by  youth  and  inexperience,
the  arms  were  paralyzed  which  should  have  saved  the
garrison.  “If  these  base  fellows  (the  States)  will  make
Count  Hollock  their  instrument,"  continued  the  Welshman,
“  to  cover  and  maintain  their  folly  and  lewd  dealing,  is  it
necessary  for  her  royal  Majesty  to  suffer  it  ?  These  are  too
great  matters  to  be  rehearsed  by  me  ;  but  because  I  am  in  the
town,  and  do  resolve  to  sign  with  my  blood  my  duty  in  serv¬
ing  my  sovereign  and  country,  I  trust  her  Majesty  will  pardon
me."2  Certainly  the  gallant  adventurer  on  whom  devolved
at  least  half  the  work  of  directing  the  defence  of  the  city,  had
a  right  to  express  his  opinions.  Had  he  known  the  whole
truth,  however,  those  opinions  would  have  been  modified.
And  he  wrote  amid  the  smoke  and  turmoil  of  daily  and
nightly  battle.

“  Yesterday  was  the  fifth  sally  we  made,"  he  observed.
“  Since  I  followed  the  wars  I  never  saw  valianter  captains,

Williams  to  Walsingham,  29  June,  158?.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  102,  MS.)

l

266

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYI.

nor  willinger  soldiers.  At  eleven  o’clock  the  enemy  entered
the  ditch  of  our  fort,  with  trenches  upon  wheels,  artillery-
proof.  We  sallied  out,  recovered  their  trenches,  slew  the
governor  of  Dam,  two  Spanish  captains,  with  a  number  of
others,  repulsed  them  into  their  artillery,  kept  the  ditch  until
yesternight,  and  will  recover  it,  with  God’s  help,  this  night,

or  else  pay  dearly  for  it . I  care  not  what  may  become

of  me  in  this  world,  so  that  her  Majesty’s  honour,  with  the
rest  of  honourable  good  friends,  will  think  me  an  honest
man.” 1

No  one  ever  doubted  the  simple-hearted  Welshman’s  ho¬
nesty,  any  more  than  his  valour  ;  but  he  confided  in  the
candour  of  others  who  Were  somewhat  more  sophisticated  than
himself.  When  he  warned  her  royal  Majesty  against  the
peace-makers,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  know  that  the
great  peace-maker  was  Elizabeth  herself.

After  the  expiration  of  a  month  the  work  had  become  most
fatiguing.  The  enemy’s  trenches  had  been  advanced  close  to
the  ramparts,  and  desperate  conflicts  were  of  daily  occurrence.
The  Spanish  mines,  too,  had  been  pushed  forward  towards
the  extensive  wine-caverns  below  the  city,  and  the  danger  of
a  vast  explosion  or  of  a  general  assault  from  beneath  their
very  feet,  seemed  to  the  inhabitants  imminent.  Eight  days
long,  with  scarcely  an  intermission,  amid  those  sepulchral
vaults,  dimly-lighted  with  torches,  Dutchmen,  Englishmen,
Spaniards,  Italians,  fought  hand  to  hand,  with  pike,  pistol,
and  dagger,  within  the  bowels  of  the  earth.2

Meantime  the  operations  of  the  States  were  not  commend¬
able.  The  ineradicable  jealousy  between  the  Leicestrians  and
the  Barneveldians  had  done  its  work.  There  was  no  hearty
effort  for  the  relief  of  Sluys.  There  were  suspicions  that,  if
saved,  the  town  would  only  be  taken  possession  of  by  the  Earl
of  Leicester,  as  an  additional  vantage-point  for  coercing  the
country  into  subjection  to  his  arbitrary  authority.  Perhaps

1  Williams  to  Walsingham,  last  cited.

2  Strada,  IT.  486-512.  Meteren,  ubi  sup.  Bor,  III.  sxiii.  5-3,  14-21.  Ha-
rseus,  III.  402-404.

\

1587.

JEALOUSY  BETWEEN  THE  EARL  AND  STATES.

267

it  would  be  transferred  to  Philip  by  Elizabeth  as  part  of  the
price  for  peace.  There  was  a  growing  feeling  in  Holland  and
Zeeland,  that,  as  those  Provinces  bore  all  the  expense  of  the
war,  it  was  an  imperative  necessity  that  they  should  limit
their  operations  to  the  defence  of  their  own  soil.  The  sus¬
picions  as  to  the  policy  of  the  English  government  were
sapping  the  very  foundations  of  the  alliance,  and  there  was
small  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  Hollanders,  therefore,  to
protect  what  remained  of  Flanders,  and  thus  to  strengthen
the  hands  of  her  whom  they  were  beginning  to  look  upon  as
an  enemy.1

Maurice  and  Hohenlo  made,  however,  a  foray  into  Brabant,
by  way  of  diversion  to  the  siege  of  Sluys,  and  thus  com¬
pelled  Farnese  to  detach  a  considerable  force  under  Haulte-
penne  into  that  country,  and  thereby  to  weaken  himself.  The
expedition  of  Maurice  was  not  unsuccessful.  There  was  some
sharp  skirmishing  between  Hohenlo  and  Haultepenne,  in
which  the  latter,  one  of  the  most  valuable  and  distinguished
generals  on  the  royal  side,  was  defeated  and  slain  ;  the  fort  of
Engel,  near  Bois-le-Duc,  was  taken,  and  that  important  city
itself  endangered  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  contingent  on
which  Leicester  relied  from  the  States  to  assist  in  relieving
Sluys  was  not  forthcoming.2

For,  meantime,  the  governor-general  had  at  last  been  sent
back  by  his  sovereign  to  the  post  which  he  had  so  long  aban¬
doned.  Leaving  Leicester  House  on  the  4th  July  ^  j™»

(N.  S.),  he  had  come  on  board  the  fleet  two  days  1587.
afterwards  at  Margate.  He  was  bringing  with  him  to  the
Netherlands  three  thousand  fresh  infantry,  and  thirty  thou¬
sand  pounds,  of  which  sum  fifteen  thousand  pounds  had  been
at  last  wrung  from  Elizabeth  as  an  extra  loan,  in  place  of  the
sixty  thousand  pounds  which  the  States  had  requested.  As
he  sailed  past  Ostend  and  towards  Flushing,  the  Earl  was
witness  to  the  constant  cannonading  between  the  besieged

1  A  brief  Report  of  the  Proceedings  3  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,  Bentivoglio,
of  his  Excellency  for  the  Relief  of  Strada,  ubi  sup.

Sluys,  26  July,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

268

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYI.

city  and  the  camp  of  Farnese,  and  saw  that  the  work  could
hardly  be  more  serious  ;  for  in  one  short  day  more  shots  were
fired  than  had  ever  been  known  before  in  a  single  day  in  all
Parma’s  experience.1

Arriving  at  Flushing,  the  governor-general  was  well  re¬
ceived  by  the  inhabitants  ;  but  the  mischief,  which  had  been
set  a-foot  six  months  before,  had  done  its  work.  The  political
intrigues,  disputes,  and  the  conflicting  party-organizations,
have  already  been  set  in  great  detail  before  the  reader,  in
order  that  their  effect  might  now  be  thoroughly  understood
without  explanation.  The  governor-general  came  to  Flush¬
ing  at  a  most  critical  moment.  The  fate  of  all  the  Spanish
Netherlands,  of  Sluys,  and  with  it  the  whole  of  Philip  and
Parma’s  great  project,  were,  in  Farnese’s  own  language,  hang¬
ing  by  a  thread.2

It  would  have  been  possible — had  the  transactions  of  the
past  six  months,  so  far  as  regarded  Holland  and  England,
been  the  reverse  of  what  they  had  been — -to  save  the  city,
and,  by  a  cordial  and  united  effort,  for  the  two  countries  to
deal  the  Spanish  power  such  a  blow,  that  summer,  as  would
have  paralyzed  it  for  a  long  time  to  come,  and  have  placed
both  commonwealths  in  comparative  security.

Instead  of  all  this,  general  distrust  and  mutual  jealousy
prevailed.  Leicester  had,  previously  to  his  departure  from
England,  summoned  the  States  to  meet  him  at  Dort  upon  his
arrival.  Not  a  soul  appeared.  Such  of  the  state-councillors
as  were  his  creatures  came  to  him,  and  Count  Maurice  made
a  visit  of  ceremony.  Discussions  about  a  plan  for  relieving
the  siege  became  mere  scenes  of  bickering  and  confusion.
The  officers  within  Sluys  were  desirous  that  a  fleet  should
force  its  way  into  the  harbour,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the
English  army,  strengthened  by  the  contingent  which  Leicester
had  demanded  from  the  States,  should  advance  against  the
Duke  of  Parma  by  land.  It  was,  in  truth,  the  only  way

1  Authorities  last  cited.  Lloyd  to
Walsingham,  25  June,  1581.  (S.  P.  Of-

lice  MS.)  Baudart,  Polemog.  II.  96,
“17,800  shots.”

2  Parma  to  Philip,  II.  6  Aug.  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas  MS.)  “  Colgados
da  un  hilo  todos  los  estados  y  todo  lo
dependiente,”  &c.

1587.

SCHEMES  TO  RELIEVE  SLUYS.

269

to  succour  the  place.  The  scheme  was  quite  practicable.
Leicester  recommended  it,  the  Hollanders  seemed  to  favour
it,  Commandant  Groenevelt  and  Roger  Williams  urged  it.

“I  do  assure  you/'  wrote  the  honest  Welshman  to  Leicester
u  if  you  will  come  afore  this  town,  with  as  many  galliots  and
as  many  flat-bottomed  boats  as  can  cause  two  men-of-war  to
enter,  they  cannot  stop  their  passage,  if  your  mariners  will  do
a  quarter  of  their  duty,  as  I  saw  them  do  divers  times.  Before
they  make  their  entrance,  we  will  come  with  our  boats,  and
fight  with  the  greatest  part,  and  show  them  there  is  no  such
great  danger.  Were  it  not  for  my  wounded  arm,  I  would  be
in  your  first  boat  to  enter.  Notwithstanding,  I  and  other
Englishmen  will  approach  their  boats  in  such  sort,  that  we
will  force  them  to  give  their  saker  of  artillery  upon  us.  If
your  Excellency  will  give  ear  unto  those  false  lewd  fellows
(the  Captain  meant  the  States- General),  you  shall  lose  great
opportunity.  Within  ten  or  twelve  days  the  enemy  will  make
his  bridge  from  Kadzand  unto  St.  Anne,  and  force  you  to
hazard  battle  before  you  succour  this  town.  Let  my  Lord
Willoughby  and  Sir  William  Russell  land  at  Terhoven,  right
against  Kadzand,  with  4000,  and  entrench  hard  by  the  water¬
side,  where  their  boats  can  carry  them  victual  and  munition.
They  may  approach  by  trenches  without  engaging  any  danger¬
ous  fight . We  dare  not  show  the  estate  of  this

town  more  than  we  have  done  by  Captain  Herte,  We  must
fight  this  night  within  our  rampart  in  the  fort.  You  may
assure  the  World  here  are  no  Hamerts,  but  valiant  captains
and  valiant  soldiers,  such  as,  with  God's  help,  had  rather  be
buried  in  the  place  than  be  disgraced  in  any  point  that  belongs
to  such  a  number  of  men-of-war." 1

But  in  vain  did  the  governor  of  the  place,  stout  Arnold
Groenevelt,  assisted  by  the  rough  and  direct  eloquence  of
Roger  Williams,  urge  upon  the  Earl  of  Leicester  and  the
States- General  the  necessity  and  the  practicability  of  the  plan

,  _  .  29  June

Williams  to  Leicester, - ,  1587.

’  9  July’

(Brit.  Mus.  G-alba,  D.  I.  p.  152,  MS.)

It  will  be  remembered  that  Baron

Hemart  was  the  unfortunate  omcer
who  so  disgracefully  surrendered  Grave
in  the  first  year  of  Leicester’s  adminis¬
tration.

270

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVI.

proposed.  The  fleet  never  entered  the  harbour.  There  was
no  William  of  Orange  to  save  Antwerp  and  Sluys,  as  Leyden
had  once  been  saved,  and  his  son  was  not  old  enough  to
unravel  the  web  of  intrigue  by  which  he  was  surrounded,  or
to  direct  the  whole  energies  of  the  commonwealth  towards
an  all-important  end.  Leicester  had  lost  all  influence,  all
authority,  nor  were  his  military  abilities  equal  to  the  occasion,
even  if  he  had  been  cordially  obeyed.

Ten  days  longer  the  perpetual  battles  on  the  ramparts  and
within  the  mines  continued,  the  plans  conveyed  by  the  bold
swimmer,  Captain  Hart,  for  saving  the  place  were  still  un¬
attempted,  and  the  city  was  tottering  to  its  fall.  “  Had
Captain  Hart’s  words  taken  place,”  wrote  Williams,  bitterly,
11  we  had  been  succoured,  or,  if  my  letters  had  prevailed,  our
pain  had  been  no  peril.  All  wars  are  best  executed  in  sight
of  the  enemy.  .  .  .  The  last  night  of  J une  (10th  July,  N.S.)
the  enemy  entered  the  ditches  of  our  fort  in  three  several
places,  continuing  in  fight  in  mine  and  on  rampart  for  the
space  of  eight  nights.  The  ninth  he  battered  us  furiously,
made  a  breach  of  five  score  paces  saltable  for  horse  and  man.
That  day  he  attempted  us  in  all  places  with  a  general  assault
for  the  sjiace  of  almost  five  hours.” 1

The  citadel  was  now  lost.  It  had  been  gallantly  defended,
and  it  was  thenceforth  necessary  to  hold  the  town  itself,  in
-  Ju]y,  very  teeth  of  an  overwhelming  force.  “We

1586.  were  forced  to  quit  the  fort,”  said  Sir  Roger,  u  leaving
nothing  behind  us  but  bare  earth.  But  here  we  do  remain
resolutely  to  be  buried,  rather  than  to  be  dishonoured  in  the
least  point.”2

It  was  still  possible  for  the  fleet  to  succour  the  city.  “  I  do
assure  you,”  said  Williams,  “  that  your  captains  and  mariners
do  not  their  duty  unless  they  enter  with  no  great  loss  ;  but
you  must  consider  that  no  wars  may  be  made  without  danger.
What  you  mean  to  do,  we  beseech  you  to  do  with  expedition,

1  Williams  to  Leicester,  —  July,

1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  179,  MS.)
Compare  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,  Benti-

voglio,  Strada,  Ilaraeus,  ubi  sup.  et
mult.  al.

3  Williams  to  Leicester.  (MS.  last
cited.)

1587.

WHICH  ARB  FEEBLE  AND  UNSUCCESSFUL.

271

and  persuade  yourself  that  we  will  die  valiant,  honest  men.
Your  Excellency  will  do  well  to  thank  the  old  President  de
Meetkerk  for  the  honesty  and  valour  of  his  son/' 1

Count  Maurice  and  his  natural  brother,  the  Admiral,  now
undertook  the  succour  by  sea  ;  but,  according  to  the  Leices-
trians,  they  continued  dilatory  and  incompetent.  At  any  rate,
it  is  certain  that  they  did  nothing.  At  last,  Parma  had  com¬
pleted  the  bridge,  whose  construction  was  so  much  dreaded.
The  haven  was  now  enclosed  by  a  strong  wooden  structure,
resting  on  boats,  on  a  plan  similar  to  that  of  the  famous  bridge
with  which  he  had  two  years  before  bridled  the  Scheldt,  and
Sluys  was  thus  completely  shut  in  from  the  sea.  Fire-ships  were
now  constructed,  by  order  of  Leicester — feeble  imitations  of
the  floating  volcanoes  of  Gianibelli — and  it  was  agreed  that
they  should  be  sent  against  the  bridge  with  the  first  flood-tide.
The  propitious  moment  never  seemed  to  arrive,  however,  and,
meantime,  the  citizens  of  Flushing,  of  their  own  accord,
declared  that  they  would  themselves  equip  and  conduct  a  fleet
into  the  harbour  of  ’ Sluys.2  But  the  Nassaus  are  said  to  have
expressed  great  disgust  that  low-born  burghers  should  presumo
to  meddle  with  so  important  an  enterprise,  which  of  right
belonged  to  their  family.3  Thus,  in  the  midst  of  these  alter¬
cations  and  contradictory  schemes,  the  month  of  July  wore
away,  and  the  city  was  reduced  to  its  last  gasp.

1  R.  Williams  toWalsingham  —  July,

1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  p.  179.
MS.)

Compare  1  Discourse  of  War  ’  apud
Grimstone,  xiii.  963.  “Truly  all  the
Dutch  and  Walloons,”  says  Sir  Roger,
“showed  themselves  constant,  resolute,
and  valiant,  especially  those  brave  and
valiant  captains  Meetkerke  and  Herau-
giere.”  He  also  especially  commends
the  valour  of  Huntley,  Udall,  Scott,
Ferdinando  Gorges,  St.  Leger,  and
Nicholas  Baskerville.

2  A  brief  Report  of  the  Proceedings

of  his  Excellency  for  the  relief  of  Sluys,
26  July,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Wil¬
loughby,  Russell,  Pelham  and  others,
to  the  Lords,  12  Aug.  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

3  “Burghers  of  Flushing  proffered
their  services,  which  were  accepted
with  thanks;  but  that  upon  Count
Maurice  and  Admiral  Nassau  being
applied  to  for  necessaries,  they  seemed
to  be  touched  very  much  in  reputation
that  a  piece  of  service  so  respectable
should  have  been  left  to  persons  of
base  quality  instead  of  to  themselves,
who  readily  would  adventure  their  best
means.  His  Excellency,  fearing  to

offend  them,  gave  his  consent .

Maurice  declared  the  enterprise  to  bo
impossible  without  better  means,  from
which  it  appeared  plainly  that  all  had
been  devised  on  purpose  of  delay,  until
it  should  be  too  late  to  help  the  town.”
Willoughby,  Russell,  d  al.  to  the  Lords.
(MS.  last  cited.)

272

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVI.

For  the  cannonading  had  thoroughly  done  its  work.
Eighteen  days  long  the  burghers  and  what  remained  of  the
garrison  had  lived  upon  the  ramparts,  never  leaving  their
posts,  hut  eating,  sleeping,  and  fighting  day  and  night.  Of
the  sixteen  hundred  Dutch  and  English  but  seven  hundred
remained.  At  last  a  swimming  messenger  was  sent  out  by  the
besieged  with  despatches  for  the  States,  to  the  purport  that  the
city  could  hold  out  no  longer.  A  breach  in  the  wall  had  been
effected  wide  enough  to  admit  a  hundred  men  abreast.  Sluys
had,  in  truth,  already  fallen,  and  it  was  hopeless  any  longer  to
conceal  the  fact.  If  not  relieved  within  a  day  or  two,  the
garrison  would  be  obliged  to  surrender  ;  but  they  distinctly
stated,  that  they  had  all  pledged  themselves,  soldiers  and
burghers,  men,  women,  and  all,  unless  the  most  honourable
terms  were  granted,  to  set  fire  to  the  city  in  a  hundred  places,
and  then  sally,  in  mass,  from  the  gates,  determined  to  fight
their  way  through,  or  be  slain  in  the  attempt.  The  messenger
who  carried  these  despatches  w^as  drowned,  but  the  letters  were
saved,  and  fell  into  Parma’s  hands.1

At  the  same  moment,  Leicester  was  making,  at  last,  an
effort  to  raise  the  siege.  Pie  brought  three  or  four  thousand
men  from  Flushing,  and  landed  them  at  Os  tend  ;  thence  he
marched  to  Blanckenburg.  He  supposed  that  if  he  could
secure  that  little  port,  and  thus  cut  the  Duke  completely  off
from  the  sea,  he  should  force  the  Spanish  commander  to  raise
(or  at  least  suspend)  the  siege  in  order  to  give  him  battle.
Meantime,  an  opportunity  would  be  afforded  for  Maurice  and
Hohenlo  to  force  an  entrance  into  the  harbour  of  Sluys.  In
this  conjecture  he  was  quite  correct ;  but  unfortunately  he
did  not  thoroughly  carry  out  his  own  scheme.  If  the  Earl
had  established  himself  at  Blanckenburg,  it  would  have  been
necessary  for  Parma — as  he  himself  subsequently  declared —
to  raise  the  siege.2  Leicester  carried  the  outposts  of  the
place  successfully  ;  but,  so  soon  as  Farnese  was  aware  of  this
demonstration,  he  detached  a  few  companies  with  orders  to

J  Strada,  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,  R.  "Williams,  in  Grimstone,  uhi  sup.  et  al.

3  Strada,  II.  508,  509,  seq.

1587.

THE  TOWN  CAPITULATES.

273

skirmish  with  the  enemy  until  the  commander-in-chief,  with  as
large  a  force  as  he  could  spare,  should  come  in  person  to  his
support.  To  the  unexpected  gratification  of  Farnese,  how¬
ever,  no  sooner  did  the  advancing  Spaniards  come  in  sight,
than  the  Earl,  supposing  himself  invaded  by  the  whole  of  the
Duke’s  army,  under  their  famous  general,  and  not  feeling
himself  strong  enough  for  such  an  encounter,  retired,  with
great  precipitation,  to  his  boats,  re-embarked  his  troops  with
the  utmost  celerity,  and  set  sail  for  Ostend.1

The  next  night  had  been  fixed  for  sending  forth  the  fire¬
ships  against  the  bridge,  and  for  the  entrance  of  the  fleet  into
the  harbour.  One  fire-ship  floated  a  little  way  towards  the
bridge  and  exploded  ingloriously.  Leicester  rowed  in  his
barge  about  the  fleet,  superintending  the  soundings  and
markings  of  the  channel,  and  hastening  the  preparations  ;  but,
as  the  decisive  moment  approached,  the  pilots  who  had  pro¬
mised  to  conduct  the  expedition  came  aboard  his  pinnace  and
positively  refused  to  have  aught  to  do  with  the  enterprise,
which  they  now  declared  an  impossibility.2  The  Earl  was
furious  with  the  pilots,  wfith  Maurice,  with  Hohenlo,  with
Admiral  de  Nassau,  with  the  States,  with  all  the  world.  He
stormed  and  raged  and  beat  his  breast,  but  all  in  vain.  His
ferocity  would  have  been  more  useful  the  day  before,  in  face
of  the  Spaniards,  than  now,  against  the  Zeeland  mariners.
But  the  invasion  by  the  fleet  alone,  unsupported  by  a  successful
land-operation,  was  pronounced  impracticable,  and  very  soon
the  relieving  fleet  was  seen  by  the  distressed  garrison  sailing
away  from  the  neighbourhood,  and  it  soon  disappeared  beneath
the  horizon.  Their  fate  was  sealed.  They  entered  into  treaty
with  Parma,  who,  secretly  instructed,  as  has  been  seen,  of
their  desperate  intentions,  in  case  any  but  the  most  honourable
conditions  were  offered,  granted  those  conditions.  The  gar¬
rison  were  allowed  to  go  out  with  colours  displayed,  lighted
matches,  bullet  in  mouth,  and  with  bag  and  baggage.  Such
of  the  burghers  as  chose  to  conform  to  the  government  of

1  Strada,  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,  Haraeus,  Bentivoglio,  ubi  sup.

2  Lloyd  to  Walsingham,  fi— ^  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Aug.

VOL.  II. — T

274

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SYI.

Spain  and  the  church  of  Rome,  were  permitted  to  remain.
Those  who  preferred  to  depart  were  allowed  reasonable  time
to  make  their  necessary  arrangements.1

“We  have  hurt  and  slain  very  near  eight  hundred,”  said
Sir  Roger  Williams.  u  We  had  not  powder  to  fight  two  hours.
There  was  a  breach  of  almost  four  hundred  paces,  another  of
three  score,  another  of  fifty,  saltable  for  horse  and  men.  We
had  lain  continually  eighteen  nights  all  on  the  breaches.  He
gave  us  honourable  composition.  Had  the  state  of  England
lain  on  it,  our  lives  could  not  defend  the  place  three  hours,
for  half  the  rampires  were  his,  neither  had  we  any  pioneers
but  ourselves.  We  were  sold  by  their  negligence  who  are
now  angry  with  us.” 2

On  the  5th  August  Parma  entered  the  city.  Roger  Williams
— with  his  gilt  morion  rather  battered,  and  his  great  plume
of  feathers  much  bedraggled — was  a  witness  to  the  victor’s
entrance.  Alexander  saluted  respectfully  an  officer  so  well
known  to  him  by  reputation,  and  with  some  complimentary
remarks  urged  him  to  enter  the  Spanish  service,  and  to  take
the  field  against  the  Turks.3

“My  sword,”  replied  the  doughty  Welshman,  “  belongs  to
her  royal  Majesty,  Queen  Elizabeth,  above  and  before  all  the
world.  When  her  Highness  has  no  farther  use  for  it,  it  is  at
the  service  of  the  King  of  Kavarre.” 4

Considering  himself  sufficiently  answered,  the  Duke  then
requested  Sir  Roger  to  point  out  Captain  Baskerville — very
conspicuous  by  a  greater  plume  of  feathers  than  even  that  of
the  Welshman  himself — and  embraced  that  officer,  when  pre¬
sented  to  him,  before  all  his  staff.  “  There  serves  no  prince

1  Brief  Report,  &c.  MS.  already
cited.  Lloyd  to  Walsingham.  MS.
already  cited.  Leicester  to  same,
12  Aug.  1587.  Willoughby  and  others
to  the  Lords,  12  Aug.  1587.  Leicester
to  same,  12  Aug.  1587.  Same  to
Burghley,  27  July,  1587.  Same  to
same,  18  July,  1587.  Same  to  the
Lords,  27  July,  1587.  Same  to  same,
17  Aug.  1587.  E.  Needham  to  Wal¬
singham,  12  Aug.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MSS.)  Compare  Bor,  Meteren,  Hoofd,
Haraeus,  Bentivoglio,  Strada,  R.
Williams,  ubi  sup.  Wagenaar,  viii.
225-227.  Baudart,  Polemog.,  II.  96,

et  mult.  al.

2  Williams  to  Leicester,  5  Aug.  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Gralba,  D.  I.  p.  214.  MS.)

s  Needham  to  Walsingham,  12  Aug.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Ibid.

1587.

PARMA  ENTERS— LEICESTER  ENRAGED.

275

in  Europe  a  braver  man  than  this  Englishman,”  cried  Alex¬
ander,  who  well  knew  how  to  appreciate  high  military  qualities^
whether  in  his  own  army  or  in  that  of  his  foes.1

The  garrison  then  retired,  Sluys  became  Spanish,  and  a
capacious  harbour,  just  opposite  the  English  coast,  was  in
Parma's  hands.  Sir  Eoger  Williams  was  despatched  by
Leicester  to  bear  the  melancholy  tidings  to  his  government,
and  the  Queen  was  requested  to  cherish  the  honest  Welshman,
and  at  least  to  set  him  on  horseback,  for  he  was  of  himself  not
rich  enough  to  buy  even  a  saddle.  It  is  painful  to  say  that
the  captain  did  not  succeed  in  getting  the  horse.2

The  Earl  was  furious  in  his  invectives  against  Hohenlo,
against  Maurice,  against  the  States,  uniformly  ascribing  the
loss  of  Sluys  to  negligence  and  faction.  As  for  Sir  John
Norris,  he  protested  that  his  misdeeds  in  regard  to  this  business
would,  in  King  Henry  VIII/s  time,  have  “  cost  him  his  pate.” 3

1  R.  Williams,  in  Grimstone,  lxiii.  962.

2  “  I  pray  you  be  good  to  this  bearer,

Sir  Roger  Williams,  for  he  is  to  be
cherished.  Her  Majesty  I  trust  will
help  him ;  and  if  these  wars  continue,
return  him  with  speed,  but  set  him  well
on  horseback,  for  he  is  not  worth  the
saddle  of  a  horse.”  Leicester  to  Wal-
singham,  12  Aug.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  Yet  according  to  the  report  of
Captain  Needham,  even  Williams  had
at  last  become  an  object  of  the  Earl’s
jealousy  and  suspicion,  on  account  of
the  flattering  offers  made  to  him  by
Farnese.  “The  Duke  of  Parma  had
essayed,”  says  Needham,  “  by  all  possi¬
ble  means  to  gain  Sir  Roger  Williams,
but  could  not  prevail,  although  he
thought  the  hard  usage  he  had  re¬
ceived  from  the  Earl  of  Leicester  would
be  an  occasion  to  make  him  leave  his
party.  Themistocles  (Leicester)  had
hereupon  conceived  great  jealousy,
and  hath  not  spared  to  give  warning
to  Sir  W.  Russell  to  beware  of  Williams
as  of  one  who  would  be  his  undoing,
and  as  it  seems  reported  as  much  to
the  Lord  North  and  Sir  W.  Pelham.  .  .  .
The  gentleman  (Williams)  was  won¬
derfully  perplexed  that  for  his  faithful
service  he  should  reap  his  utter  un¬
doing,  and  to  be  accounted  a  traitor  to

his  prince.  He  wished  he  were  at
home,  upon  condition  he  should  never
bear  arms  here,  for  he  knew  the  nature
of  Themistocles,  as  he  would  leave  no
means  unsought  to  overthrow  his
credit,”  &c.  The  conversation  of  the
Duke  with  the  Welshman  has  been  re¬
ported  in  the  text.

“  The  Earl  of  Essex  promises  me,”
wrote  Williams  subsequently,  “  that
her  Majesty  will  do  something  for  me.
For  my  part  I  do  hardly  believe  it,  for
I  can  get  no  countenance  from  her
Highness.  I  humbly  desire  your  Ex¬
cellency  to  write  this  for  me,  either  to
give  me  something  or  discharge  me
away  with  nothing.  ...  I  fear  things
will  not  fall  out  here  as  well  as  you
would  wish.  Were  your  Excellency
here,  her  Majesty  would  do  more.  The
more  the  merrier.  Without  your  pre¬
sence  your  friends  dare  not  speak  what
they  would,  for  the  simplest  that  speaks
of  the  peace  is  better  here  than  the
wisest  that  contraries  it.  I  fear  me  it
is  passed  so  far  that  the  King  of
Navarre  is  like  to  smart  for  it,”  &c.
R.  Williams  to  Leicester,  1  Sept.  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  H.  p.  5,  MS.)

3  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  12  Aug.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  As  for  this  matter  of  Sluys,”  said

276

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVI.

The  loss  of  Sluys  was  the  beginning  and  foreshadowed  the
inevitable  end  of  Leicester's  second  administration.  The  in¬
action  of  the  States  was  one  of  the  causes  of  its  loss.  Distrust
of  Leicester  was  the  cause  of  the  inaction.  Sir  William
Russell,  Lord  Willoughby,  Sir  William  Pelham,  and  other
English  officers,  united  in  statements  exonerating  the  Earl
from  all  blame  for  the  great  failure  to  relieve  the  place.  At
the  same  time,  it  could  hardly  .be  maintained  that  his  expe¬
dition  to  Blanckenburg  and  his  precipitate  retreat  on  the  first
appearance  of  the  enemy  were  proofs  of  consummate  general¬
ship.  He  took  no  blame  to  himself  for  the  disaster  ;  but  he
and  his  partisans  were  very  liberal  in  their  denunciations  of
the  Hollanders,* 1  and  Leicester  was  even  ungrateful  enough  to
censure  Roger  Williams,  whose  life  had  been  passed,  as  it  were,
at  push  of  pike  with  the  Spaniards,  and  who  was  one  of  his
own  most  devoted  adherents.

The  Queen  was  much  exasperated  when  informed  of  the  fall
of  the  city.  She  severely  denounced  the  Netherlander  and

the  Earl,  “  I  may  stand  before  the
tribunal  seat  of  God  for  any  fault  in
me.  The  greatest  is  that  I  did  trust
Count  Maurice  too  much,  but  either  I
must  have  trusted  him  or  not  have  had
any  means  at  all  for  shipping.  As  it  is
well  known  beside,  he  offered  his  ser¬
vice  most  frankly  and  willingly,  and
did  take  upon  him  and  his  bastard
brother  to  attempt  the  bridge  by  such
men  as  they  had  chosen,  to  whom  I
gave  30?.  beforehand.”  And  in  the
same  vein  he  says  to  Burleigh,  “  I  am
grieved  to  think,  much  more  to  speak
of  the  loss  of  Sluys.  God  knoweth  we
have  done  for  our  parts  as  much  as  if
a  kingdom  had  stood  upon  it.  But
these  men  have  strange  designs  in
their  heads,  which  will  in  the  end
breed  their  own  ruin.  .  .  .  The  dregs
of  their  dealing  will,  I  fear,  remain  a
good  while,  for  the  practice  and  fashion
continue.  ...  I  must  beg  you  to  bear
with  me,  for  I  scarce  know  what  I
write,  what  with  grief  for  the  loss  of
this  town,  and  with  anger  for  the  vile
lewd  dealing  of  these  men  that  have
so  naughtily  carried  themselves  in  this
matter  for  Sluys.  First,  by  letting  me
have  no  men  of  theirs,  when  I  had  but

a  few  men  furnished ;  then,  their  long
deferring  our  men  to  be  furnished ;
after,  their  lack  of  provisions  of  all
sorts ;  lastly,  vessels  and  barks  to  land
our  men.  And  these  with  such  like
hath  brought  this  poor  town  to  be  lost.”
.  .  .  He  then  makes  an  insinuation
against  the  brave  and  true-hearted
"Welshman,  who  had  been  fighting
night  and  day,  from  the  beginning  of
the  siege  to  the  end.  “  And  yet  I  can¬
not,  for  many  respects,  how  well  soever
I  think  of  Sir  William  Rogers’  valour
and  the  other  captains,  give  them
countenance  or  access  to  me,  before
they  do  give  some  good  reason  for  the
delivery  of  the  town  without  sending

to  me  first.”  Leicester  to  Burghley,
27  July

6  Aug.

1  “  Your  honour  may  see,”  said
Lloyd,  “  how  Count  Hohenlo’s  pro¬
ceedings,  and  States’  practices,  and
this  late  action,  do  concur  as  matters
that  have  been  hammered  on  one  anvil
and  issued  from  one  forge.”  R.  Lloyd

20  J  uly

to  Walsingham, - ,  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

QUEEN  ANGRY  WITH  THE  ANTI-LEICESTRIANS.  277

even  went  so  far  as  to  express  dissatisfaction  with  the  great
Leicester  himself.1  Meantime,  Farnese  was  well  satisfied  with
his  triumph,  for  he  had  been  informed  that  “  all  England  was
about  to  charge  upon  him,”  in  order  to  relieve  the  place.2
All  England,  however,  had  been  but  feebly  represented  by
three  thousand  raw  recruits  with  a  paltry  sum  of  15,0007  to
help  pay  a  long  bill  of  arrears.

Wilkes  and  Norris  had  taken  their  departure  from  the
Netherlands  before  the  termination  of  the  siege,  and  imme¬
diately  after  the  return  of  Leicester.  They  did  not  think
it  expedient  to  wait  upon  the  governor  before  leaving  the
country,3  for  they  had  very  good  reason  to  believe  that  such
an  opportunity  of  personal  vengeance  would  be  turned  to
account  by  the  Earl.  Wilkes  had  already  avowed  his  inten¬
tion  of  making  his  escape  without  being  dandled  with  leave-
takings,  and  no  doubt  he  was  right.  The  Earl  was  indignant
when  he  found  that  they  had  given  him  the  slip,  and  denounced
them  with  fresh  acrimony  to  the  Queen,  imploring  her  to  wreak
full  measure  of  wrath  upon  their  heads  ; 4  and  he  well  knew
that  his  entreaties  would  meet  with  the  royal  attention.

Buckhurst  had  a  parting  interview  with  the  governor-
general,  at  which  Killigrew  and  Beale,  the  new  English  coun¬
sellors  who  had  replaced  Wilkes  and  Clerk,  were  present.
The  conversation  was  marked  by  insolence  on  the  part  of
Leicester,  and  by  much  bitterness  on  that  of  Buckhurst.  The
parting  envoy  refused  to  lay  before  the  Earl  a  full  statement
of  the  grievances  between  the  States-General  and  the  governor,
on  the  ground  that  Leicester  had  no  right  to  be  judge  in  his

31  July

1  Essex  to  Leicester,  - ■’  1587.

10  Aug.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Walsingham  to  same,
2  Aug.  1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.
p.  234,  MS.)  “The  ill  success  of  Sluys
causetli  her  to  pick  some  quarrel  to¬
wards  your  Lordship  in  that  action,  as
by  her  letters  you  may  perceive.”

a  “Corria  la  voz  que  cargava  toda
Inglaterra.”  Parma  to  Philip,  6  Aug.
1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Wilkes  to  the  Lords,  20  July,  1587,
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  explaining — what
had  been  sufficiently  explained  before

— why  he  left  the  Netherlands  without
greeting  Leicester,  “  for  that  he  was
too  terrified  to  come  into  his  presence,
knowing  his  animosity.”  He  expresses
the  hope  that  “  her  Majesty,  being  the
image  of  God  on  earth,  will  be  like  to
Him  in  mercy,  and  not  suffer  more  to
be  laid  upon  him  than  flesh  and  blood
can  bear.”

4  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  4  July,
1587.  Same  to  Queen,  7  July,  1587.
Same  to  Burghley,  13  July,  1587.  (S.

P.  Office  MSS.)

278

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SYI.

own  cause.  The  matter,  he  said,  should  he  laid  before  the
Queen  in  council,  and  by  her  august  decision  he  was  willing
to  abide.  On  every  other  subject  he  was  ready  to  give  any
information  in  his  power.  The  interview  lasted  a  whole  fore¬
noon  and  afternoon.  Buckhurst,  according  to  his  own  state¬
ment,  "answered  freely  all  questions  put  to  him  by  Leicester
and  his  counsellors  ;  while,  if  the  report  of  those  personages  is
to  be  trusted,  he  passionately  refused  to  make  any  satisfactory
communication.  Under  the  circumstances,  however,  it  may
well  be  believed  that  no  satisfactory  communication  was
possible.1

On  arriving  in  England,  Sir  John  Norris  was  forbidden  to
come  into  her  Majesty’s  presence,  Wilkes  was  thrown  into  the
Fleet  Prison,  and  Buckhurst  was  confined  in  his  own  country
house.2

Norris  had  done  absolutely  nothing,  which,  even  by  impli¬
cation,  could  be  construed  into  a  dereliction  of  duty ;  but  it
was  sufficient  that  he  was  hated  by  Leicester,  who  had  not
scrupled,  over  and  over  again,  to  denounce  this  first  general  of
England  as  a  fool,  a  coward,  a  knave,  and  a  liar.

As  for  Wilkes,  his  only  crime  was  a  most  conscientious
discharge  of  his  duty,  in  the  course  of  which  he  had  found
cause  to  modify  his  abstract  opinions  in  regard  to  the  origin
of  sovereignty,  and  had  come  reluctantly  to  the  conviction
that  Leicester’s  unpopularity  had  made  perhaps  another
governor-general  desirable.  But  this  admission  had  only
been  made  privately  and  with  extreme  caution ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  he  had  constantly  defended  the  absent  Earl,
with  all  the  eloquence  at  his  command.  But  the  hatred  of
Leicester  was  sufficient  to  consign  this  able  and  painstaking
public  servant  to  a  prison  ;  and  thus  was  a  man  of  worth,
honour,  and  talent,  who  had  been  placed  in  a  position  of  grave
responsibility  and  immense  fatigue,  and  who  had  done  his  duty

1  Killigrew  and  Beale  to  Walsing-
ham,  13  July,  1581.  Buckhurst  to
Burghley,  22  July,  1581.  A  true  de¬
claration  of  the  proceedings  of  Lord
Buckhurst  and  Dr.  Clerke,  24  July,
1581.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

2  Buckhurst  to  "Walsingham,  24th
July,  1581.  Same  to  Burghley,  24  July,
1581.  Same  to  same,  28  July,  1581.
'Walsingham  to  Leicester,  29  July,
1581.  (S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

1587.  NORRIS,  WILKES,  AND  BUCKHURST  PUNISHED.  279

like  an  upright,  straight-forward  Englishman,  sacrificed  to  the
wrath  of  a  favourite.  “  Surely,  Mr.  Secretary/'  said  the  Earl,
“there  was  never  a  falser  creature,  a  more  seditious  wretch,  than
Wilkes.  He  is  a  villain,  a  devil,  without  faith  or  religion."1
As  for  Buckhurst  himself,  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  a  word  in

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  4  Aug.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Buckhurst
was  of  a  different  opinion.

“Mr.  Wilkes,  having  had  so  long
experience  in  these  parts,”  he  wrote,
“and  being  so  careful  and  diligent  for
the  good  preservation  and  furtherance
of  the  cause,  whereof  in  the  late  dan¬
gerous  times  and  troubles  here  he
made  right  good  testimony,  is  able
therein  to  do  your  Majesty  most  espe¬
cial  and  notable  service,  being  also
otherwise  so  sufficiently  practised  in
the  estate  of  other  countries  and  so
well  trained  in  your  affairs  at  home,
with  such  excellent  gifts  of  utterance ,
memory,  wit ,  courage,  and  knowledge,
and  with  so  faithful  and  careful  a  heart
to  serve  your  Majesey,  as  it  were  a
woeful  case  if  such  a  worthy  servant
should  for  any  respect  be  discomforted
and  disgraced  by  your  Majesty’s  dis¬
pleasure.’”  Buckhurst  to  the  Queen,
28  June,  1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,
C.  xi.  p,  61,  MS.)

Yet  such  a  eulogy  from  so  illustrious
a  man,  and  fully  borne  out  by  the
deeds  and  words  of  Wilkes  himself,
could  not  save  the  councillor  from  the
gaoL  He  had  loved  Sir  John  Norris,
which  was  enough  to  secure  him  the
hatred  of  Leicester,  and  consequently
the  unmitigated  wrath  of  the  Queen.

But  these  pages  have  already  illus¬
trated  the  copiousness  of  the  great
Earl’s  vocabulary  in  vituperation.  Mr.
P.  B.,  Sir  John  Norris,  Hollock,  Wilkes,
Buckhurst  himself,  the  States-Gfeneral,
the  States-Provincial,  and,  in  brief}
any  one  who  crossed  his  schemes,
were  sure  to  draw  down  the  full
tempest  of  wrath.  He  was  now  very
angry  with  those  who  surrounded
young  Maurice,  especially  with  the
minister  Villiers,  whom  he  pronounced
to  be  “a  condemned  man,  not  only
among  all  honest  and  godly  men,  but
also  with  all  the  churches  through  all
the  Provinces.”  Sainte  Aldegonde,
too,  whom  before  and  after  this  point
of  time,  he  seemed  to  appreciate  and

applaud,  was  now  held  up  as  an  object
of  suspicion.  “  I  have  found  cause  of
late,”  he  says,  “to  fear  Sainte  Alde¬
gonde  to  be  an  unsound  and  hollow
man.  There  are  great  presumptions
that  he  is  dealing  in  secret  with  Parma.
He  is  lately  married.  All  men  con¬
demn  him  for  it,  and  his  best  friends
did  greatly  dissuade  him  from  it,  but
it  would  not  be.  And  now  is  he  to
return  again  for  two  or  three  months,
being  known  to  be  greatly  favoured  on
the  other  side,  and  can  enjoy  no  penny
but  by  that  favour.  I  see  he  takes  no
course  to  please  the  church.  The
young  Count  is  directed  by  both  him
and  Yilliers,  albeit  the  one,  Sainte
Aldegonde,  doth  make  less  show  than
the  other.  Oh,  God,  what  a  world  it
is!  Both  these  hot  men  heretofore
are  become  less  than  lukewarm  now,
and  wholly  given  to  policy.”  Leicester
to  Walsingham,  MS  above  cited.

Yet  before  the  end  of  the  year  Sainte
Aldegonde  was  violently  abused  by
others  for  opposite  tendencies.  “The
Count  of  Hollock  being  drunk  the
other  day,”  says  Sir  Robert  Sidney,
“  took  a  quarrel  to  Monsieur  de  Sainte
Aldegonde,  saying  he  was  wont  to  be
a  lover  of  the  house  of  Nassau,  but
now  he  was  grown  altogether  a  Leices-
trian,  the  which  he  repeated  sundry
times  upon  him  before  the  Count  Mau¬
rice  and  many  other  gentlemen.  In
truth,  I  think  Sainte  Aldegonde  very
well  affected  unto  yOur  Excellency.
Surely  he  mislikes  the  proceedings
here,  and  meddles  nothing  with  them.”
Sidney  to  Leicester,  31  Dec.  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  288.)

Nothing  could  be  more  unscrupulous
than  the  denunciations  of  Leicester
whenever  he  was  offended.  They  would
seem  almost  risible,  were  it  not  that
the  capricious  wrath  of  the  all-powerful
favourite  was  often  sufficient  to  blast
the  character,  the  career,  the  hopes,
and  even  take  away  the  lives,  of  honest
men.

280

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVI.

his  defence.  The  story  of  his  mission  has  been  completely
detailed  from  the  most  authentic  and  secret  documents,  and
there  is  not  a  single  line  written  to  the  Queen,  to  her  ministers,
to  the  States,  to  any  public  body  or  to  any  private  friend,  in
England  or  elsewhere,  that  does  not  reflect  honour  on  his  name.
With  sagacity,  without  passion,  with  unaffected  sincerity,  he
had  unravelled  the  complicated  web  of  Netherland  politics,
and,  with  clear  vision,  had  penetrated  the  designs  of  the
mighty  enemy  whom  England  and  Holland  had  to  encounter
in  mortal  combat.  He  had  pointed  out  the  errors  of  the  Earl's
administration — he  had  fearlessly,  earnestly,  but  respectfully
deplored  the  misplaced  parsimony  of  the  Queen — he  had
warned  her  against  the  delusions  which  had  taken  possession
of  her  keen  intellect — he  had  done  -  his  best  to  place  the
governor-general  upon  good  terms  with  the  States  and  with
his  sovereign ;  but  it  had  been  impossible  for  him  to  further
his  schemes  for  the  acquisition  of  a  virtual  sovereignty  over
the  Netherlands,  or  to  extinguish  the  suspicions  of  the  States
that  the  Queen  was  secretly  negotiating  with  the  Spaniard,
when  he  knew  those  suspicions  to  be  just.

Eor  deeds,  such  as  these,  the  able  and  high-minded  am¬
bassador,  the  accomplished  statesman  and  poet,  was  forbidden
to  approach  his  sovereign's  presence,  and  was  ignominiously
imprisoned  in  his  own  house  until  the  death  of  Leicester.
After  that  event, ,  Buckhurst  emerged  from  confinement,  re¬
ceived  the  order  of  the  garter  and  the  Earldom  of  Dorset,
and  on  the  death  of  Burghley  succeeded  that  statesman  in
the  office  of  Lord-Treasurer.  Such  was  the  substantial
recognition  of  the  merits  of  a  man  who  was  now  disgraced  for
the  conscientious  discharge  of  the  most  important  functions
that  had  yet  been  confided  to  him.

It  would  be  a  thankless  and  superfluous  task  to  give  the
details  of  the  renewed  attempt,  during  a  few  months,  made
by  Leicester  to  govern  the  Provinces.  His  second  adminis¬
tration  consisted  mainly  of  the  same  altercations  with  the
States,  on  the  subject  of  sovereignty,  the  same  mutual  re¬
criminations  and  wranglings,  that  had  characterized  the  period

1587.

DRAKE  SAILS  FOR  SPAIN.

281

of  his  former  rule.  He  rarely  met  the  States  in  person,
and  almost  never  resided  at  the  Hague,  holding  his  court  at
Middleburg,  Dort,  or  Utrecht,  as  his  humour  led  him.

The  one  great  feature  of  the  autumn  of  1587  was  the
private  negotiation  between  Elizabeth  and  the  Duke  of
Parma.

Before  taking  a  glance  at  the  nature  of  those  secrets,  how¬
ever,  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  passing  allusion  to  an  event
which  might  have  seemed  likely  to  render  all  pacific  com¬
munications  with  Spain,  whether  secret  or  open,  superfluous.

For  while  so  much  time  had  been  lost  in  England  and
Holland,  by  misunderstandings  and  jealousies,  there  was  one
Englishman  who  had  not  been  losing  time.  In  the  winter
and  early  spring  of  1587,  the  Devonshire  skipper  had  organized
that  expedition  which  he  had  come  to  the  Netherlands,  the
preceding  autumn,  to  discuss.  He  meant  to  aim  a  blow  at
the  very  heart  of  that  iwoject  Philip  was  shrouding

with  so  much  mystery,  and  which  Elizabeth  was  attempting
to  counteract  by  so  much  diplomacy.

On  the  2nd  April,  Francis  Drake  sailed  from  Plymouth
with  four  ships  belonging  to  the  Queen,  and  with  twenty-four
furnished  by  the  merchants  of  London,  and  other  private  in¬
dividuals.  It  was  a  bold  buccaneering  expedition — combining
chivalrous  enterprise  with  the  chance  of  enormous  profit —
which  was  most  suited  to  the  character  of  English  adventurers
at  that  expanding  epoch.  For  it  was  by  England,  not  by
Elizabeth,  that  the  quarrel  with  Spain  was  felt  to  be  a  mortal
one.  It  was  England,  not  its  sovereign,  that  was  instinc¬
tively  arming,  at  all  points,  to  grapple  with  the  great  enemy
of  European  liberty.  It  was  the  spirit  of  self-help,  of  self-re¬
liance,  which  was  prompting  the  English  nation  to  take  the
great  work  of  the  age  into  its  own  hands.  The  mercantile
instinct  of  the  nation  was  flattered  with  the  prospect  of  gain,
the  martial  quality  of  its  patrician  and  of  its  plebeian  blood
was  eager  to  confront  danger,  the  great  Protestant  mutiny
against  a  decrepid  superstition  in  combination  with  an  ag¬
gressive  tyranny,  all  impelled  the  best  energies  of  the  English

282

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYI.

people  against  Spain,  as  the  embodiment  of  all  which  was
odious  and  menacing  to  them,  and  with  which  they  felt  that
the  life  and  death  struggle  could  not  long  he  deferred.

And  of  these  various  tendencies,  there  were  no  more  fitting
representatives  than  Drake  and  Frobisher,  Hawkins  and
Essex,  Cavendish  and  Grenfell,  and  the  other  privateersmen
of  the  sixteenth  century.  ♦The  same  greed  for  danger,  for
gold,  and  for  power,  which,  seven  centuries  before,  had  sent
the  Norman  race  forth  to  conquer  all  Christendom,  was  now
sending  its  Anglo-Saxon  and  Anglo-Norman  kindred  to  take
possession  of  the  old  world  and  the  new.

“  The  wdnd  commands  me  away/'  said  Drake  on  the  2nd
April,  1587  ;  “  our  ship  is  under  sail.  God  grant  that  we  may
so  live  in  His  fear,  that  the  enemy  may  have  cause  to  say  that
God  doth  fight  for  her  Majesty  abroad  as  well  as  at  home." 1

But  he  felt  that  he  was  not  without  enemies  behind  him,
for  the  strong  influence  brought  to  bear  against  the  "bold  policy
which  Walsingham  favoured,  was  no  secret  to  Drake.  “If  we
deserve  ill,"  said  he,  “  let  us  be  punished.  If  we  discharge
our  duty,  in  doing  our  best,  it  is  a  hard  measure  to  be  reported
ill  by  those  who  will  either  keep  their  fingers  out  of  the  fire,
or  who  too  well  affect  that  alteration  in  our  government
which  I  hope  in  God  they  shall  never  live  to  see." 2  In  lati¬
tude  40°  he  spoke  two  Zeeland  ships,  homeward  bound,  and
obtained  information  of  great  warlike  stores  accumulating  in
Cadiz  and  Lisbon.  His  mind  was  instantly  made  up.  For¬
tunately,  the  pinnace  which  the  Queen  despatched  with  orders
to  stay  his  hand 3  in  the  very  act  of  smiting  her  great  adver¬
sary,  did  not  sail  fast  enough  to  overtake  the  swift  corsair  and
his  fleet.  Sir  Francis  had  too  promptly  obeyed  the  wind,
when  it  “commanded  him  away,"  to  receive  the  royal
countermand.  On  the  19th  April,  the  English  ships  entered
the  harbour  of  Cadiz,  and  destroyed  ten  thousand  tons  of
shipping,  with  their  contents,  in  the  very  face  of  a  dozen  great

1  Drake  to  Walsingham  in  Bar¬
row’s  ‘Life  of  Drake ’  (Murray,  1843),
p.  223.

*  Ibid.

3  Walsingham  to  Leicester,  II  April,
1581.  Same  to  same,  11  April,  1581.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  p.  321-344.
MSS.)

158t.  HIS  EXPLOITS  AT  CADIZ  AND  LISBON.  283

galleys,  which  the  nimble  English  vessels  soon  drove  under
their  forts  for  shelter.  Two  nights  and  a  day,  Sir  Francis,
that  (C  hater  of  idleness,”  was  steadily  doing  his  work ;  un¬
loading,  rifling,  scuttling,  sinking,  and  burning  those  transport-
ships  which  contained  a  portion  of  the  preparations  painfully
-made  by  Philip  for  his  great  enterprise.  Pipe-staves  and
spikes,  horse-shoes  and  saddles,  timber  and  cutlasses,  wine,  oil,
figs,  raisins,  biscuits,  and  flour,  a  miscellaneous  mass  of  ingre¬
dients  long  brewing  for  the  trouble  of  England,  were  emptied
into  the  harbour,  and  before  the  second  night,  the  blaze  of  a
hundred  and  fifty  burning  vessels  played  merrily  upon  the
grim  walls  of  Philip’s  fortresses.  Some  of  these  ships  were  of
the  largest  size  then  known.  There  was  one  belonging  to
Marquis  Santa  Cruz  of  1500  tons,  there  was  a  Biscayan  of
1200,  there  were  several  others  of  1000,  800,  and  of  nearly
equal  dimensions.

Thence  sailing  for  Lisbon,  Sir  Francis  captured  and  des¬
troyed  a  hundred  vessels  more,  appropriating  what  was  port¬
able  of  the  cargoes,  and  annihilating  the  rest.  At  Lisbon,
Marquis  Santa  Cruz,  lord  high  admiral  of  Spain  and  general¬
issimo  of  the  invasion,  looked  on,  mortified  and  amazed,  but
offering  no  combat,  while  the  Plymouth  privateersman  swept
the  harbour  of  the  great  monarch  of  the  world.  After
thoroughly  accomplishing  his  work,  Drake  sent  a  message  to
Santa  Cruz,  proposing  to  exchange  his  prisoners  for  such
Englishmen  as  might  then  be  confined  in  Spain.  But  the
Marquis  denied  all  prisoners.  Thereupon  Sir  Francis  decided
to  sell  his  captives  to  the  Moors,  and  to  appropriate  the
proceeds  of  the  sale  towards  the  purchase  of  English  slaves
out  of  the  same  bondage.1  Such  was  the  fortune  of  war  in
the  sixteenth  century.

Having  dealt  these  great  blows,  Drake  set  sail  again  from
Lisbon,  and,  twenty  leagues  from  St.  Michaels,  fell  in  with
one  of  those  famous  Spanish  East  Indiamen,  called  carracks,
then  the  great  wonder  of  the  seas.  This  vessel,  San  Felipe
by  name,  with  a  cargo  of  extraordinary  value,  was  easily  cap-

1  Barrow,  232,  233.

284

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVI.

tured,  and  Sir  Francis  now  determined  to  return.  He  had
done  a  good  piece  of  work  in  a  few  weeks,  but  he  was  by  no
means  of  opinion  that  he  had  materially  crippled  the  enemy.
On  the  contrary,  he  gave  the  government  warning  as  to  the
enormous  power  and  vast  preparations  of  Spain.  “  There  would
be  forty  thousand  men  under  way  ere  long/'  he  said,  “  well
equipped  and  provisioned  ;  "  and  he  stated,  as  the  result  of  per¬
sonal  observation,  that  England  could  not  be  too  energetic  in
its  measures  of  resistance.  He  had  done  something  with  his
little  fleet,  but  he  was  no  braggart,  and  had  no  disposition  to
underrate  the  enemy's  power.  “  God  make  us  all  thankful
again  and  again,"  he  observed,  “  that  we  have,  although  it  be
little ,  made  a  beginning  upon  the  coast  of  Spam” 1  And
modestly  as  he  spoke  of  what  he  had  accomplished,  so  with
quiet  self-reliance  did  he  allude  to  the  probable  consequences.
It  was  certain,  he  intimated,  that  the  enemy  would  soon  seek
revenge  with  all  his  strength,  and  “with  all  the  devices  and
traps  he  could  devise."  This  was  a  matter  which  could  not  be
doubted.  “  But,"  said  Sir  Francis,  “  I  thank  them  much  that
they  have  staid  so  long,  and  when  they  come  they  shall  be  but
the  sons  of  mortal  men”1  2

Perhaps  the  most  precious  result  of  the  expedition,  was  the
lesson  which  the  Englishmen  had  thus  learned  in  handling
the  great  galleys  of  Spain.  It  might  soon  stand  them  in
stead.  The  little  war-vessels  which  had  come  from  Plymouth,
had  sailed  round  and  round  these  vast  unwieldy  hulks,  and
had  fairly  driven  them  off  the  field,  with  very  slight  damage
to  themselves.  Sir  Francis  had  already  taught  the  mariners
of  England,  even  if  he  had  done  nothing  else  by  this  famous
Cadiz  expedition,  that  an  armada  of  Spain  might  not  be  so
invincible  as  men  imagined.

Yet  when  the  conqueror  returned  from  his  great  foray,  he
received  no  laurels.  His  sovereign  met  him,  not  with  smiles,
but  with  frowns  and  cold  rebukes.  He  had  done  his  duty,
and  helped  to  save  her  endangered  throne,  but  Elizabeth  was

1  Barrow,  233.

2  Ibid.  Compare  Camden,  III.  396.

Meteren,  xiv.  253,  254.  Bor,  II.  xxi.
153-168,  xxii.  981,  xxiii.  17.

HE  IS  REBUKED  BY  ELIZABETH.

1587.

285

now  the  dear  friend  of  Alexander  Farnese,  and  in  amicable
correspondence  with  his  royal  master.  This  “  little  ”  beginning
on  the  coast  of  Spain  might  not  seem  to  his  Catholic  Majesty
a  matter  to  be  thankful  for,  nor  be  likely  to  further  a  pacifi¬
cation,  and  so  Elizabeth  hastened  to  disavow  her  Plymouth
captain.1

1  “  True  it  is,  and  I  avow  it  on  my
faith,  her  Majesty  did  send  a  ship  ex¬
pressly  before  he  went  to  Cadiz  with
a  message  by  letters  charging  Sir
Francis  Drake  not  to  show  any  act  of
hostility ,  which  messenger  by  contrary
winds  could  never  come  to  the  place
where  he  was,  but  was  constrained  to
come  home,  and  hearing  of  Sir  F.
Drake's  actions ,  her  Majesty  com¬
manded  the  party  that  returned  to
have  been  punished,  but  that  he  ac¬
quitted  himself  by  the  oaths  of  himself
and  all  his  company.  And  so  unwitting
yea  unwilling  to  her  Majesty  those  ac¬
tions  were  committed  by  Sir  F.  Drake,
for  the  which  her  Majesty  is  as  yet
greatly  offended  with  him.”  Burghley
to  Andreas  de  Loo,  18  July,  1587.

‘  Flanders  Correspondence.’  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)

“There  are  letters  written  to  Sir
Francis  Drake,”  said  Walsingham,
“sent  unto  him  by  a  pinnance  sent
forth  especially  for  that  purpose,  to
command  him  not  to  attempt  anything
by  land,  nor  tp  enter  into  the  ports  to
distress  the  ships.  This  resolution
proceedeth  altogether  upon  a  hope  of
peace  which  I  fear  will  draw  a  dan¬
gerous  war  upon  her  Majesty,  by  the
alienation  of  the  hearts  of  the  well-
affected  people  in  the  Low  Countries.”
Walsingham  to  Leicester,  11  April,
1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Gfalba,  C.  xi.  p.  344.
MS.)

And  agaiu,  a  week  later — “  As  for
Spain,”  says  the  Secretary,  “they  are
so  far  off  from  any  intention  to  assail
England,  as  they  stand  now  upon  their
own  guard  for  fear  of  Sir  Francis  Drake.
There  are  letters  written  from  certain
of  my  lords,  by  her  Majesty’s  effectual
commandment,  to  inhibit  him  to  at¬
tempt  anything  by  land,  or  within  the
ports  of  the  kingdom  of  Spain.  He  is
at  liberty  to  take  any  of  the  King’s
fleets,  either  going  out  of  Spain  or
returning  into  Spain.  There  is  a  bruit
given  out  upon  the  despatch  of  these
letters  that  there  is  order  given  for  his
revocation.”  Same  to  same,  17  April,
1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  xi.  p.  327.
MS.)

It  is  somewhat  amusing,  on  the  other
hand,  to  find  Leicester  claiming  credit
for  her  Majesty,  for  this  demonstration
against  Spain,  and  using  it  in  his  com¬
munications  with  the  States  as  a  proof
of  her  hostile  intentions  towards  that
power.  “There  is  no  such  meaning
in  her  Majesty  to  abuse  you,”  he  ob¬
served,  “  as  you  might  perceive  both
by  the  sending  of  Sir  Francis  Drake
into  Spain  and  by  the  return  of  myself
hither,  to  have  prosecuted  the  war  if  I
had  found  any  means  here.”  Leicester
to  the  States,  6  Sept.  1587.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)

i

286

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVTT.

CHAPTER  XVII.

Secret  Treaty  between  Queen  and  Parma — Excitement  and  Alarm  in  the
States  —  Religious  Persecution  in  England  —  Queen’s  Sincerity  toward
Spain  —  Language  and  Letters  of  Parma  —  Negotiations  of  De  Loo  —
English  Commissioners  appointed  —  Parma’s  affectionate  Letter  to  the
Queen  —  Philip  at  his  "Writing-Table  —  His  Plots  with  Parma  against
England  —  Parma’s  secret  Letters  to  the  King  —  Philip’s  Letters  to  Parma  —
Wonderful  Duplicity  of  Philip  —  His  sanguine  Views  as  to  England  —
He  is  reluctant  to  hear  of  the  Obstacles  —  and  imagines  Parma  in  England
— But  Alexander’s  Difficulties  are  great  —  He  denounces  Philip’s  wild
Schemes  —  Walsingham  aware  of  the  Spanish  Plot — which  the  States  well
understand  —  Leicester’s  great  Unpopularity  —  The  Queen  warned  against
Treating  —  Leicester’s  Schemes  against  Bameveld  —  Leicestrian  Con¬
spiracy  at  Leyden — The  Plot  to  seize  the  City  discovered — Three  Ring¬
leaders  sentenced  to  Death — Civil  War  in  France — Victory  gained  by
Navarre,  and  one  by  Gfuise  —  Queen  recalls  Leicester  —  Who  retires  on
ill  Terms  with  the  States  —  Queen  warned  as  to  Spanish  Designs  —
Results  of  Leicester’s  Administration.

The  course  of  Elizabeth  towards  the  Provinces,  in  the  matter
of  the  peace,  was  certainly  not  ingenuous,  but  it  was  not
absolutely  deceitful.  She  concealed  and  denied  the  nego¬
tiations,  when  the  Netherland  statesmen  were  perfectly  aware
of  their  existence,  if  not  of  their  tenour  ;  but  she  was  not  pre¬
pared,  as  they  suspected,  to  sacrifice  their  liberties  and  their
religion,  as  the  price  of  her  own  reconciliation  with  Spain.
Her  attitude  towards  the  States  was  imperious,  over-bearing,
and  abusive.  She  had  allowed  the  Earl  of  Leicester  to  return,
she  said,  because  of  her  love  for  the  poor  and  oppressed
people,  but  in  many  of  her  official  and  in  all  her  private  com¬
munications,  she  denounced  the  men  who  governed  that
people  as  ungrateful  wretches  and  impudent  liars.1

1  &  g.  “  Nous  avons  renvoye  notre
cousin  de  Leycestre — nonobstant  que
nous  fussions  a  peu  pres  degoutes  .  .  .  .
vus  les  desordres  et  confusions  depuis
son  partement  de  la  .  .  .  les  traverses
ingrates  de  quelques  uns  mal  affectes
par  de  14,  dont  nous  memes  avons  en
•  occasion  de  bien  fort  nous  repentir.
Toutefois  la  consideration  que  nous

avons  eu  de  l’innocence  d’un  si  bon
peuple,  et  le  desir  qu’avons  eu  de  leur
bien,  jointe  la  prompte  volunte  de  notre
cousin,  ont  eu  plus  de  force  a  nous
retenir  en  notre  premiere  affection  ....
et  attendons  que  ce  qu’est  passe  sera
repare  a  l’avenir  .  .  .  .”  Queen  to  State-
Council,  20  June,  158U  (S.  P.  Office,

MS.)  A  letter  to  the  States,  of  nearly

1587.  SECRET  TREATING-  BETWEEN  QUEEN  AND  PARMA.  287

These  were  the  corrosives  and  vinegar  which  she  thought
suitable  for  the  case  ;  and  the  Earl  was  never  weary  in
depicting  the  same  statesmen  as  seditious,  pestilent,  self-
seeking,  mischief-making  traitors.  These  secret,  informal
negotiations,  had  been  carried  on  during  most  of  the  year
1587.  It  was  the  “  comptroller’s  peace,”  as  Walsingham  con¬
temptuously  designated  the  attempted  treaty  ;  for  it  will  he
recollected  that  Sir  James  Croft,  a  personage  of  very  mediocre
abilities,  had  always  been  more  busy  than  any  other  English
politician  in  these  transactions.  He  acted,  however,  on  the
inspiration  of  Burghley,  who  drew  his  own  from  the  fountain¬
head.

But  it  was  in  vain  for  the  Queen  to  affect  concealment.
The  States  knew  everything  which  was  passing,  before  Lei¬
cester  knew.  His  own  secret  instructions  reached  the  Nether¬
lands  before  he  did.  His  secretary,  Junius,  was  thrown  into
prison,  and  his  master’s  letter  taken  from  him,  before  there
had  been  any  time  to  act  upon  its  treacherous  suggestions.1
When  the  Earl  wrote  letters  with  his  own  hand  to  his
sovereign,  of  so  secret  a  nature  that  he  did  not  even  retain  a

the  same  date,  is  likewise  filled  with
expressions  of  her  disgust  at  the
“etrange  et  ingrate  maniere  de  vos
deportements  envers  notre  cousin,
votre  ingratitude  et  traverses,”  and  of
praise  of  the  cousin,  who,  “  nonobstant
toutes  ces  discourtesies  et  ingratitudes,
ne  voudra  espargner  pour  le  bien  de
vous  tous  de  hasarder  ni  sa  vie  ni  sa
fortune,”  &c.  Queen  to  States,  22
June,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

And  three  months  later — “  How  the
town  of  Sluys  was  lost,  we  will  spare
to  write,  that  which  thousands  of  your
native  people  did  affirm,  how  traitor¬
ously  this  town  was  lost,  or  rather  be¬
trayed,  the  world  knoweth,  and  we  do
not  think  that  yourselves  can  deny  it,
from  want  of  supply  from  you  and
your  chieftains,  .  .  .  and  yet  not  with¬
out  the  honour  and  reputation  of  ours
that  defended  it.  .  .  .  Our  lieutenant
(Leicester)  could  not  have  convenient
time  to  deal  with  you  (about  the  peace),
for  that  he  was  so  entangled  with  your
overthwart  dealing  against  him,  with

sundry  false  reports  of  us  and  himself
that  we  had  agreed  to  a  peace  with
the  King  of  Spain,  without  regard  to
you.  .  .  .  That  the  Earl  of  Leicester
was  by  us  directed  to  surprise  divers
towns,  to  yield  to  the  King,  if  you
would  not  assent  to  peace,  with  many
more  such  false  and  slanderous  bruits
spread — yea  believed  and  maintained
for  some  time  by  some  of  your  own
number,  all  which  we  affirm  on  the
word  of  a  prince,  most  false  and  mali¬
ciously  devised  with  devilish  minds,
abhorring,  as  it  seemeth,  all  liking  of
godly  peace  and  quietness,”  &c.  Queen
to  the  States,  20  Sept.  1587.  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)

1Meteren,  xiv.  255.  “This  letter
they  have  taken  perforce  from  him,
and  committed  first  my  man  to  prison,
which  I  think  was  never  durst  to  be
attempted  before,  and  puts  me  past
my  patience,  I  assure  you.”  Leicester
to  Walsingham,  4  July,  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS )

I

288  the  united  Netherlands.  chap.  xyii.

single  copy  for  himself,  for  fear  of  discovery,  he  found,  to  his
infinite  disgust,  that  the  States  were  at  once  provided  with  an
authentic  transcript  of  every  line  that  he  had  written.1  It
was  therefore  useless,  almost  puerile,  to  deny  facts  which
were  quite  as  much  within  the  knowledge  of  the  Netherlander
as  of  himself.  The  worst  consequence  of  the  concealment  was,
that  a  deeper  treachery  was  thought  possible  than  actually
existed.  “  The  fellow  they  call  Barneveld,” 2  as  Leicester  was
in  the  habit  of  designating  one  of  the  first  statesmen  in
Europe,  was  perhaps  justified,  knowing  what  he  did,  in  sus¬
pecting  more.  Being  furnished  with  a  list  of  commissioners,
already  secretly  agreed  upon  between  the  English  and  Spanish
governments,  to  treat  for  peace,  while  at  the  same  time  the
Earl  was  beating  his  breast,  and  flatly  denying  that  there  was
any  intention  of  treating  with  Parma  at  all,  it  was  not  un¬
natural  that  he  should  imagine  a  still  wider  and  deeper
scheme  than  really  existed,  against  the  best  interests  of  his
country.  He  may  have  expressed,  in  private  conversation,
some  suspicions  of  this  nature,  but  there  is  direct  evidence
that  he  never  stated  in  public  anything  which  was  not  after¬
wards  proved  to  be  matter  of  fact,  or  of  legitimate  inference
from  the  secret  document  which  had  come  into  his  hands.
The  Queen  exhausted  herself  in  opprobious  language  against
those  who  dared  to  impute  to  her  a  design  to  obtain  possession
of  the  cities  and  strong  places  of  the  Netherlands,  in  order  to
secure  a  position  in  which  to  compel  the  Provinces  into
obedience  to  her  policy.  She  urged,  with  much  logic,  that

1  “  I  am  credibly  informed  by  an
honest  man,”  says  Leicester,  “who
says  he  saw  it,  that  the  States  have  a
copy  of  my  last  instrument,  as  also  of
the  letter  of  her  Majesty  written  lately
privately  to  me,  touching  the  dealing
in  the  peace.  Yea,  further,  that  they
are  thoroughly  and  particularly  made
acquainted  with  a  late  letter  of  mine
to  her  Majesty,  written  with  my  own
hand,  whereof  I  would  have  no  copy
taken,  because  I  would  have  no  man
acquaint  with  it.  In  which  letter  I
informed  her  Majesty  at  length  of  all
things  here,  and  gave  her  also,  in

some  sort,  my  private  advice.  They
have,  by  some  means,  got  knowledge
of  the  contents  thereof,  and  have
intimated  the  same  secretly  to  the
Provinces,  intending  thereby  to  draw
me  into  hatred  and  suspicion  of  the
people,  as  though  this  dealing  for
peace  were  procured  for  me.  But  for
this  matter,  I  shall  hope  to  deal  well
enough,  for  this  treacherous  usage  of
her  Majesty’s  secrets,”  &c.  Leicester
to  Walsingham,  28  Aug.  1587.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

2  Leicester  to  Burghley,  10-11  Sept.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

EXCITEMENT  AND  ALARM  IN  THE  STATES.

289

as  she  had  refused  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole  country  when
offered  to  her,  she  was  not  likely  to  form  surreptitious  schemes
to  make  herself  mistress  of  a  portion  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,
it  was  very  obvious,  that  to  accept  the  sovereignty  of  Philip’s
rebellious  Provinces,  was  to  declare  war  upon  Philip;  whereas,
had  she  been  pacifically  inclined  towards  that  sovereign,  and
treacherously  disposed  towards  the  Netherlands,  it  would  he  a
decided  advantage  to  her  to  have  those  strong  places  in  her
power.  But  the  suspicions  as  to  her  good  faith  were  ex¬
aggerated.  As  to  the  intentions  of  Leicester,  the  States  were
justified  in  their  almost  unlimited  distrust.  It  is  very  certain
that  both  in  1586,  and  again,  at  this  very  moment,  when
Elizabeth  was  most  vehement  in  denouncing  such  aspersions
on  her  government,  he  had  unequivocally  declared  to  her  his
intention  of  getting  possession,  if  possible,  of  several  cities,
and  of  the  whole  Island  of  Walcheren,  which,  together  with
the  cautionary  towns  already  in  his  power,  would  enable  the
Queen  to  make  good  terms  for  herself  with  Spain,  “if  the  worst
came  to  the  worst’3 1  It  will  also  soon  he  shown  that  he  did

his  best  to  carry  these  schemes  into  execution.  There  is  no
evidence,  however,  and  no  probability,  that  he  had  received
the  royal  commands  to  perpetrate  such  a  crime.

The  States  believed  also,  that  in  those  secret  negotiations
with  Parma  the  Queen  was  disposed  to  sacrifice  the  religious

1  “I  will  go  to  Medenblik  (the  next
town  to  Enkhuyzen),  which  is  at  your
Majesty’s  devotion,  as  the  governor
thereof  (Sonoy)  is,  and  will  do  my
best  to  recover  Enkhuyzen  ere  I  de¬
part  thence.  Then,  indeed,  your  Ma¬
jesty,  having  Flushing ,  Brill,  and
Utrecht ,  as  you  have,  and  these,  ye
shall  be  able  to  bring  the  peace  to
better  conditions,  and  bridle  these
States  of  Holland  at'  your  ‘pleasure.
....  They'  are  full  of  shifts,  and
yet  such  as  for  this  matter  may  ask
toleration,  for  how  hateful  a  matter
peace  hath  been  to  the  generality  almost
of  all  these  countries,  is  well  known
to  all  persons ,  and  how  loathsome  a
thing  it  is  to  all  but  to  such  as  for
love,  and  trust  in  your  Majesty  will
conform  themselves,  I  can  sufficiently
testify ;  and  it  is  the  only  cause  of  the

VOL.  II. — U

world  for  them  to  be  careful  in  their
dealing,  for  it  doth  confirm  them  and
their  posterity  both  in  their  lives  and
liberties,  and  therefore  to  be  borne
withal,  if  they  take  deliberation.”
Leicester  to  the  Queen,  9  Oct.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Yet  the  Earl,  not¬
withstanding  this  admission,  avows
his  determination  of  bridling  the
States  by  gaining  possession  of  their
cities.

And  again,  a  month  later:  “I  will
not  be  idle  to  do  all  that  in  me  shall
lie  to  make  this  island  of  Walcheren
assured ,  whatsoever  shall  fall  out :
which,  if  it  may  be,  your  Majesty  shall
the  less  fear  to  make  a  good  bargain
for  yourself  when  the  worst  shall
come.”  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  5th
Nov.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MS.)

290

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

interests  of  the  Netherlands.  In  this  they  were  mistaken.
But  they  had  reason  for  their  mistake,  because  the  negotiator
De  Loo,  had  expressly  said,  that,  in  her  overtures  to  Farnese,
she  had  abandoned  that  point  altogether.1  If  this  had  been
so,  it  would  have  simply  been  a  consent  on  the  part  of
Elizabeth,  that  the  Catholic  religion  and  the  Inquisition
should  he  re-established  in  the  Provinces,  to  the  exclusion  of
every  other  form  of  worship  or  polity.  In  truth,  however,  the
position  taken  by  her  Majesty  on  the  subject  was  as  fair  as
could  he  reasonably  expected.  Certainly  she  was  no  advocate
for  religious  liberty.  She  chose  that  her  own  subjects  should
be  Protestants,  because  she  had  chosen  to  he  a  Protestant
herself,  and  because  it  was  an  incident  of  her  supremacy,  to
dictate  uniformity  of  creed  to  all  beneath  her  sceptre.  No
more  than  her  father,  who  sent  to  the  stake  or  gallows
heretics  to  transubstantiation  as  well  as  believers  in  the  Pope,
had  Elizabeth  the  faintest  idea  of  religious  freedom.  Heretics
to  the  English  Church  were  persecuted,  fined,  imprisoned,
mutilated,  and  murdered,  by  sword,  rope,  and  fire.  In  some
respects,  the  practice  towards  those  who  dissented  from
Elizabeth  was  more  immoral  and  illogical,  even  if  less  cruel,
than  that  to  which  those  were  subjected  who  rebelled  against
Sixtus.  The  Act  of  Uniformity  required  Papists  to  assist  at
the  Protestant  worship,  but  wealthy  Papists  could  obtain  im¬
munity  by  an  enormous  fine.  The  Boman  excuse  to  destroy
bodies  in  order  to  save  souls,  could  scarcely  be  alledged  by  a
Church  which  might  be  bribed  into  connivance  at  heresy,  and
which  derived  a  revenue  from  the  very  nonconformity  for
which  humbler  victims  were  sent  to  the  gallows.  It  would,
however,  be  unjust  in  the  extreme  to  overlook  the  enormous
difference  in  the  amount  of  persecution,  exercised  respectively
by  the  Protestant  and  the  Eoman  Church.  It  is  probable  that
not  many  more  than  two  hundred  Catholics2  were  executed

1  “  I  have  sent  her  Majesty  another
letter  from  De  Loo,  whereby  it  seemeth
that  now  very  lately  her  Majesty  hath
given  him  to  understand  that  she  will
not  insist  upon  the  matter  of  religion
further  than  shall  be  with  the  King’s
honour  and  conscience.  Whereupon

De  Loo  taketh  no  small  hold,  and  if
she  keep  that  course,  all  will  go  to
ruin,  as  I  have  written  to  her  Majesty.”
Buckhurst  to  Walsingham,  18  June
1581.  (S.  P  Office  MS.)

2  “  Dod  reckons  them  at  191 ;  Mil¬
ner  has  raised  the  list  to  204.  Eifteen

1587.

RELIGIOUS  PERSECUTION  IN  ENGLAND.

291

as  such,  in  Elizabeth’s  reign,  and  this  was  ten  score  too
many.  But  what  was  this  against  eight  hundred  heretics
burned,  hanged,  and  drowned,  in  one  Easter  week  by  Alva,
against  the  eighteen  thousand  two  hundred  sent  to  stake  and
scaffold,  as  he  boasted  during  his  administration,  against  the
vast  numbers  of  Protestants,  whether  they  be  counted  by  tens
or  by  hundreds  of  thousands,  who  perished  by  the  edicts
of  Charles  V.,  in  the  Netherlands,  or  in  the  single  Saint
Bartholomew  Massacre  in  France  P  Moreover,  it  should
never  be  forgotten — from  undue  anxiety  for  impartiality —
that  most  of  the  Catholics  who  were  executed  in  England,
suffered  as  conspirators  rather  than  as  heretics.  No  foreign
potentate,  claiming  to  be  vicegerent  of  Christ,  had  denounced
Philip  as  a  bastard  and  usurper,  or  had,  by  means  of  a
blasphemous  fiction,  which  then  was  a  terrible  reality,  severed
the  bonds  of  allegiance  by  which  his  subjects  were  held,  cut
him  off  from  all  communion  with  his  fellow-creatures,  and
promised  temporal  rewards  and  a  crown  of  glory  in  heaven
to  those  who  should  succeed  in  depriving  him  of  throne  and
life.  Yet  this  was  the  position  of  Elizabeth.  It  was  war  to
the  knife  between  her  and  Rome,  declared  by  Rome  itself ;
nor  was  there  any  doubt  whatever  that  the  Seminary  Priests —
seedlings  transplanted  from  foreign  nurseries,  which  were  as
watered  gardens  for  the  growth  of  treason — were  a  perpetually
organized  band  of  conspirators  and  assassins,  with  whom  it
was  hardly  an  act  of  excessive  barbarity  to  deal  in  somewhat
summary  fashion.  Doubtless  it  would  have  been  a  more  lofty

of  these,  according  to  him,  suffered
for  denying  the  Queen’s  supremacy,
126  for  exercising  their  ministry,  and
the  rest  for  being  reconciled  to  the
Romish  church.  Many  others  died
of  hardships  in  prison,  and  many  were
deprived  of  their  property.  There
seems,  nevertheless,  to  be  good  reason
for  doubting  whether  any  one  who
was  executed  might  not  have  saved
his  life  by  explicitly  denying  the
Pope’s  power  to  depose  the  Queen.
This  certainly  furnishes  a  distinction
between  the  persecution  under  Eliza¬
beth  (which,  unjust  as  it  was  in  its

operation,  yet,  so  far  as  it  extended  to
capital  inflictions,  had  in  view  the
security  of  the  government)  and  that
which  the  Protestants  had  sustained
in  her  sister’s  reign,  springing  from
mere  bigotry  and  vindictive  rancour.”
(Hallam’s  ‘  Constitutional  History,’
fifth  edition.  Murray,  1846.  I.  163.
Compare  Lingard,  viii.  356,  513,

Strype,  iii.  iv.,  and  see  in  particular,
chapters  iii.  and  iv.  of  Hallam,  in
which  the  dealings  of  Elizabeth  in
religious  matters  are  profoundly  in¬
vestigated.)

292

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

policy,  and  a  far  more  intelligent  one,  to  extend  towards  the
Catholics  of  England,  who  as  a  body  were  loyal  to  their
country,  an  ample  toleration.  But  it  could  scarcely  be  ex¬
pected  that  Elizabeth  Tudor,  as  imperious  and  absolute  by
temperament  as  her  father  had  ever  been,  would  he  capable
of  embodying  that  great  principle.

When,  in  the  preliminaries  to  the  negotiations  of  1587,
therefore,  it  was  urged  on  the  part  of  Spain,  that  the  Queen
was  demanding  a  concession  of  religious  liberty  from  Philip
to  the  Netherlander  which  she  refused  to  English  heretics,
and  that  he  only  claimed  the  same  right  of  dictating  a  creed
to  his  subjects  which  she  exercised  in  regard  to  her  own,  Lord
Burghley  replied  that  the  statement  was  correct.  The  Queen
permitted — it  was  true — no  man  to  profess  any  religion  hut
the  one  which  she  professed.  At  the  same  time  it  was  de¬
clared  to  he  unjust,  that  those  persons  in  the  Netherlands  who
had  been  for  years  in  the  habit  of  practising  Protestant  rites,
should  he  suddenly  compelled,  ivithout  instruction ,  to  abandon
that  form  of  worship.  It  was  well  known  that  many  would
rather  die  than  submit  to  such  oppression,  and  it  was  affirmed
that  the  exercise  of  this  cruelty  would  he  resisted  by  her  to
the  uttermost.  There  was  no  hint  of  the  propriety — on  any
logical  basis — of  leaving  the  question  of  creed  as  a  matter
between  man  and  his  Maker,  with  which  any  dictation  on  the
part  of  crown  or  state  was  an  act  of  odious  tyranny.  There
was  not  even  a  suggestion  that  the  Protestant  doctrines  were
true,  and  the  Catholic  doctrines  false.  The  matter  was  merely
taken  up  on  the  uti  possidetis  principle,  that  they  who  had
acquired  the  fact  of  Protestant  worship  had  a  right  to  retain
it,  and  could  not  justly  he  deprived  of  it,  except  by  instruc¬
tion  and  persuasion.  It  was  also  affirmed  that  it  was  not  the
English  practice  to  inquire  into  men’s  consciences.  It  would
have  been  difficult,  however,  to  make  that  very  clear  to
Philip’s  comprehension,  because,  if  men,  women,  and  children,
were  scourged  with  rods,  imprisoned,  and  hanged,  if  they
refused  to  conform  publicly  to  a  ceremony  at  which  their
consciences  revolted — unless  they  had  money  enough  to  pur-

1587.  QUEEN’S  SINCERITY  TOWARDS  SPAIN,  293

chase  non-conformity — it  seemed  to  he  the  practice  to  inquire
very  effectively  into  their  consciences.1

But  if  there  was  a  certain  degree  of  disingenuoTjsness  on
the  part  of  Elizabeth  towards  the  States,  her  attitude  towards
Parma  was  one  of  perfect  sincerity.  A  perusal  of  the  secret
correspondence  leaves  no  doubt  whatever  on  that  point.  She
was  seriously  and  fervently  desirous  of  peace  with  Spain.
On  the  part  of  Farnese  and  his  master,  there  was  the  most
unscrupulous  mendacity,  while  the  confiding  simplicity  and
truthfulness  of  the  Queen  in  these  negotiations  was  almost
pathetic.  Especially  she  declared  her  trust  in  the  loyal  and
upright  character  of  Parma,  in  which  she  was  sure  of  never
being  disappointed.  It  is  only  doing  justice  to  Alexander  to
say ‘that  he  was  as  much  deceived  by  her  frankness  as  she
by  his  falsehood.  It  never  entered  his  head  that  a  royal  per¬
sonage  and  the  trusted  counsellors  of  a  great  kingdom  could
be  telling  the  truth  in  a  secret  international  transaction,  and

1  “  And  when  De  Loo  reporteth
an  objection  made  to  him,  that  there
is  no  more  reason  for  the  King  to  yield
to  any  of  his  subjects  liberty  of  reli¬
gion  contrary  to  the  one  he  professeth
no  more  than  her  Majesty  doth  to  any
of  hers;  indeed,  at  the  first  appear¬
ance,  this  objection  seemeth  of  good
moment  to  be  allowed,  and,  until  it  be
answered,  ought  to  be  taken  by  the
Duke  of  Parma ;  but  if  the  diversities
of  the  comparison  shall  be  marked,
the  case  also  will  therein  be  changed.
The  Queen’s  Majesty  indeed  never  did
permit ,  either  publicly  or  privately,
that  any  persons  for  these  seven  years
should  use  any  exercise  of  religion
contrary  to  that  form  received  and
established  by  public  authority ;  so
as  none  can  challenge'  that  they  were
by  any  liberty  suffered  to  use  any
other,  which  is  contrary  to  the  Low
Countries,  for  the  space  of  about  six
years.  But  if  her  Majesty  had  so
permitted,  surely  reason  would  move
her  not  to  constrain,  otherwise  than  by
instruction,  any  that  by  reason  of  her
permission  had  governed  their  con¬
sciences  to  the  contrary.  And  be¬
cause  it  may  be  also  further  objected,
as  most  falsely  is  divulged,  to  more

offence  against  her  Majesty  from  Ca¬
tholic  places,  that  she  doth  so  severely
punish  them  that  are  in  conscience
contrarily  affected,  it  is  to  be  avowed
for  a  certain  truth  that  her  Majesty
never  did  allow  that  any  person  was
by  inquisition  urged  to  show  his  con¬
science  in  any  matter  of  faith,  nor
ever  was  punished  for  professing  only
of  his  opinion  in  his  conscience,  but
what  any  have  beside  their  profession
of  their  conscience,  moved  by  others,
by  open  acts  to  break  the  law,  or
have,  under  colour  of  encouraging
others  to  change  their  form  of  reli¬
gion,  persuaded  them  also  to  alter
their  obedience  in  all  wordly  duties,
to  practise  rebellion  in  the  realm,  to
solicit  invasions,  and  flatly  to  deny
the  Queen’s  Majesty  to  be  their  lawful
Queen.  In  those  cases,  her  Majesty
and  all  her  ministers  of  justice  had
cause  to  withstand  such  violent
courses  under  colours  of  religion;  and
otherwise  than  to  withstand  these
most  dangerous  attempts,  her  Majesty
did  never  allow  any  should  lose  their
lives  and  shed  their  blood.”  (Rough
draft  of  Burghley,  9  March,  1587.
Br.  Mus.  Galba,  C.  ix.  p.  122,  MS.)

294

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

he  justified  the  industry  with  which  his  master  and  himself
piled  fiction  upon  fiction,  by  their  utter  disbelief  in  every
word  which  came  to  them  from  England.

The  private  negotiations  had  been  commenced,  or  rather
had  been  renewed,  very  early  in  February  of  this  year.
During  the  whole  critical  period  which  preceded  and  followed
the  execution  of  Mary,  in  the  course  of  which  the  language  of
Elizabeth  towards  the  States  had  been  so  shrewish,  there  had
been  the  gentlest  diplomatic  cooing  between  Farnese  and  her¬
self.  It  was — Dear  Cousin,  you  know  how  truly  I  confide  in
your  sincerity,  how  anxious  I  am  that  this  most  desirable
peace  should  be  arranged  ;  and  it  was — Sacred  Majesty,  you
know  how  much  joy  I  feel  in  your  desire  for  the  repose  of
the  world,  and  for  a  solid  peace  between  your  Highness  and
the  King  my  master  ;  how  much  I  delight  in  concord — how
incapable  I  am  by  ambiguous  icords  of  spinning  out  these  tran¬
sactions ,  or  of  deceiving  your  Majesty ,  and  what  a  hatred  I
feel  for  steel,  fire,  and  blood.1

F our  or  five  months  rolled  on,  during  which  Leicester  had
been  wasting  time  in  England,  Farnese  wasting  none  before

\

Sluys,  and  the  States  doing  their  best  to  counteract  the
schemes  both  of  their  enemy  and  of  their  ally.  De  Loo  made
a  visit,  in  July,  to  the  camp  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,  and
received  the  warmest  assurances  of  his  pacific  dispositions.

“  I  am  much  pained/'  said  Alexander,  “  with  this  procrastina¬
tion.  I  am  so  full  of  sincerity  myself,  that  it  seems  to  me  a
very  strange  matter,  this  hostile  descent  by  Drake  upon  the
coasts  of  Spain.  The  result  of  such  courses  will  be,  that  the

1  Parma  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  18th
Peb.  1587.  Same  to  same,  6  April,
1587.  Queen  to  Parma,  13  April,
1587.  (Arch,  de  Simaucas,  MSS.)
And  even  later  still :  —

“  Such  is  the  good  opinion  con¬
ceived  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,”  wrote
Burghley,  “  for  his  own  nature  and
worthiness  in  all  places,  that  he  is  a
prince  of  honour  in  keeping  his  pro¬
mise,  without  respect  of  any  gain  or
benefit.  And,  to  tell  you  true,  it  is
the  only  foundation  which  her  Majesty

maketh  to  proceed  in  this  treaty,
against  the  opinion  of  very  many,  in
that  she  esteemeth  the  Duke  to  have
great  regard  to  his  word  and  promise,
and  also  an  opinion  that  she  hath,
though  he  be  a  great  man  of  war,  that
he  is  Christianly  disposed  rather  to
maintain  peace  than  to  raise  war,
whereof  her  Majesty  looketh  to  make
proof  by  this  treaty,”  &c.  &c.  Burgh¬
ley  to  An  dr.  de  Loo,  10  Oct.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1587.  LANGUAGE  AND  LETTERS  OF  PARMA.  295

King  will  end  by  being  exasperated,  and  I  shall  be  touched  in
my  honour — so  great  is  the  hopes  I  have  held  out  of  being
able  to  secure  a  peace.  I  have  ever  been  and  I  still  am
most  anxious  for  concord,  from  the  affection  I  bear  to  her
sacred  Majesty.  I  have  been  obliged,  much  against  my  will,
to  take  the  field  again.  I  could  wish  now  that  our  nego¬
tiations  might  terminate  before  the  arrival  of  my  fresh  troops,
namely,  9000  Spaniards  and  9000  Italians,  which,  with
Walloons,  Germans,  and  Lorrainers,  will  give  me  an  effective
total  of  30,000  soldiers.  Of  this  I  give  you  my  word  as  a
gentleman.  Go,  then,  Andrew  de  Loo/'  continued  the  Duke,
“  write  to  her  sacred  Majesty,  that  I  desire  to  make  peace,
and  to  serve  her  faithfully ;  and  that  I  shall  not  change  my
mind,  even  in  case  of  any  great  success,  for  I  like  to  proceed
rather  by  the  ways  of  love  than  of  rigour  and  effusion  of
blood/' 1

“  I  can  assure  you,  oh,  most  serene  Duke,"  replied  Andrew,
“that  the  most  serene  Queen  is  in  the  very  same  dispositions
with  yourself."

“Excellent  well  then,"  said  the  Duke,  “we  shall  come  to
an  agreement  at  once,  and  the  sooner  the  deputies  on  both
sides  are  appointed  the  better."

A  feeble  proposition  was  then  made,  on  the  part  of  the
peace-loving  Andrew,  that  the  hostile  operations  against  Sluys
should  he  at  once  terminated.  But  this  did  not  seem  so
clear  to  the  most  serene  Duke.  He  had  gone  to  great  expense
in  that  business  ;  and  he  had  not  built  bridges,  erected  forts,
and  dug  mines,  only  to  abandon  them  for  a  few  fine  words,
Fine  words  were  plenty,  but  they  raised  no  sieges.  Mean¬
time  these  pacific  and  gentle  murmurings  from  Farnese's  camp
had  lulled  the  Queen  into  forgetfulness  of  Roger  Williams  and
Arnold  Groenevelt  and  their  men,  fighting  day  and  night  in
trench  and  mine  during  that  critical  midsummer.  The  wily
tongue  of  the  Duke  had  been  more  effective  than  his  bat-
teries  in  obtaining  the  much-coveted  city.  The  Queen  ob¬
stinately  held  back  her  men  and  money,  confident  of  effecting

1  De  Loo  to  Burghley,  11  July,  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

296

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap,  XVII.

a  treaty,  whether  Sluys  fell  or  not.  Was  it  strange  that  the
States  should  be  distrustful  of  her  intentions,  and,  in  their
turn,  become  neglectful  of  their  duty  ? 1

And  thus  summer  wore  into  autumn,  Sluys  fell,  the  States
and  their  governor-general  were  at  daggers-drawn,  the  Nether-
landers  were  full  of  distrust  with  regard  to  England,  Alexander
hinted  doubts  as  to  the  Queen's  sincerity  ;  the  secret  nego¬
tiations,  though  fertile  in  suspicions,  jealousies,  delays,  and
such  foul  weeds,  had  produced  no  wholesome  fruit,  and  the
26th  Sept.,  excellent  De  Loo  became  very  much  depressed.

15S7.  ^  iast  a  letter  from  Burghley  relieved  his  droop¬

ing  spirits.  From  the  most  disturbed  and  melancholy  man
in  the  world,  he  protested,  he  had  now  become  merry  and
quiet.2  He  straightway  went  off  to  the  Duke  of  Parma,  with
the  letter  in  his  pocket,  and  translated  it  to  him  by  candle¬
light,  as  he  was  careful  to  state,  as  an  important  point  in  his
narrative.  And  Farnese  was  fuller  of  fine  phrases  than  ever.

“  There  is  no  cause  whatever,5'  said  he,  in  a  most  loving
manner,  ato  doubt  my  sincerity.  Yet  the  Lord-Treasurer
intimates  that  the  most  serene  Queen  is  disposed  so  to  do.
But  if  I  had  not  the  very  best  intentions,  and  desires  for  peace,
I  should  never  have  made  the  first  overtures.  If  I  did  not
wish  a  pacific  solution,  what  in  the  world  forced  me  to  do
what  I  have  done  ?  On  the  contrary,  it  is  I  that  have  reason
to  suspect  the  other  parties  with  their  long  delays,  by  which
they  have  made  me  lose  the  best  part  of  the  summer." 3 *

He  then  commented  on  the  strong  expressions  in  the  English
letters,  as  to  the  continuance  of  her  Majesty  in  her  pious  re¬
solutions  ;  observed  that  he  was  thoroughly  advised  of  the

1  Burghley  to  De  Loo,  18  July,

1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  “  Da  turbato  e  melancolico  m’  ha
del  tutto  quietato  e  fatto  star  allegro,”
&c.  De  Loo  to  Burghley,  26  Sept.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  “  Con  dire  nmorevolmente  lo  che
sigue — non  e  (disse),  causa  alcuna  di

dubitare  della  mia  sincera  mente — si

come  sullo  fine  della  lra  si  fa  menzione
che  la  serma  regina  lo  potrebbe  fare —
perche  se  non  avessi  havuto  bonissma

disposizione  e  desiderio  della  pace
non  sarei  gia  ito  a  fame  la  prima  aper-
tura  mi  medesimo,  e  condescendere
alle  cose  che  sapete  (disse  a  me)  se
non  si  fosse  stata  intenzione  di  volerne
venir  a  una  conclusione  (agiongendo)
che  cosa  mi  forzava  di  farlo?  Anzi
piuttosto  avrei  occasione  io  di  suspet-
tar  loro  con  tante  sorte  di  dilazioni  e
haver  mi  fatto  perdere  la  meglior  parte
de  1’  estate,”  &c.  (Ibid.)

1587.

NEGOTIATIONS  OF  DE  LOO.

297

disputes  between  the  Earl  of  Leicester  and  the  States  ;  and
added  that  it  was  very  important  for  the  deputies  to  arrive  at
the  time  indicated  by  the  Queen.

“  Whatever  is  to  be  done/'  said  he,  in  conclusion,  “  let  it
be  done  quickly  and  with  that  he  said  he  would  go  and  eat
a  bit  of  supper.

“And  may  I  communicate  Lord  Burghley's  letter  to  any
one  else  P  ”  asked  De  Loo.

“Yes,  yes,  to  the  Seigneur  de  Champagny,  and  to  my
secretary  Cosimo,"  answered  his  Highness.

So  the  merchant  negotiator  proceeded  at  once  to  the
mansion  of  Champagny,  in  company  with  the  secretary
Cosimo.  There  was  a  long  conference,  in  which  De  Loo
was  informed  of  many  things  which  he  thoroughly  believed,
and  faithfully  transmitted  to  the  court  of  Elizabeth.  Alexander
had  done  his  best,  they  said,  to  delay  the  arrival  of  his  fresh
troops.  He  had  withdrawn  from  the  field,  on  various  pretexts,
hoping,  day  after  day,  that  the  English  commissioners  would
arrive,  and  that  a  firm  and  perpetual  peace  would  succeed  to
the  miseries  of  war.  But  as  time  wore  away,  and  there  came
no  commissioners,  the  Duke  had  come  to  the  painful  con¬
clusion  that  he  had  been  trifled  with.1  His  forces  would  now
be  sent  into  Holland  to  find  something  to  eat ;  and  this  would
ensure  the  total  destruction  of  all  that  territory.  He  had  also
written  to  command  all  the  officers  of  the  coming  troops  to
hasten  their  march,  in  order  that  he  might  avoid  incurring
still  deeper  censure.  He  was  much  ashamed,  in  truth,  to  have
been  wheedled  into  passing  the  whole  fine  season  in  idleness.2
He  had  been  sacrificing  himself  for  her  sacred  Majesty,  and
to  serve  her  best  interests  ;  and  now  he  found  himself  the
object  of  her  mirth.3  Those  who  ought  to  be  well  informed
had  assured  him  that  the  Queen  was  only  waiting  to  see  how
the  King  of  Navarre  was  getting  on  with  the  auxiliary  force
just  going  to  him  from  Germany,  that  she  had  no  intention

1  “  Ma  a  1’  ultimo  il  Duca  vedendo
la  continua  dilazione,  con  giudicaro
che  si  burlasse,”  &c.  (De  Loo  to
Burgh  ley,  MS.  last  cited.)

2  “  Trovandosi  vergogniato  davere,
lasciato  scorrere  si  bella  stagione  in
ozio,”  &c.  (Ibid,)

3  Ibid.

298

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

whatever  to  make  peace,  and  that,  before  long,  he  might
expect  all  these  German  mercenaries  upon  his  shoulders  in
the  Netherlands.  Nevertheless  he  was  prepared  to  receive
them  with  40,000  good  infantry,  a  splendid  cavalry  force,  and
plenty  of  money.1

All  this  and  more  did  the  credulous  Andrew  greedily
devour,  and  he  lost  no  time  in  communicating  the  important
intelligence  to  her  Majesty  and  the  Lord- Treasurer.  He
implored  her,  he  said,  upon  his  bare  knees,  prostrate  on  the
ground,  and  from  the  most  profound  and  veritable  centre  of
his  heart  and  with  all  his  soul  and  all  his  strength,2  to  believe
in  the  truth  of  the  matters  thus  confided  to  him.  He  would
pledge  his  immortal  soul,  which  was  of  more  value  to  him —
as  he  correctly  observed — than  even  the  crown  of  Spain,  that
the  King,  the  Duke,  and  his  counsellors,  were  most  sincerely
desirous  of  peace,  and  actuated  by  the  most  loving  and  benevo¬
lent  motives.  Alexander  Farnese  was  “the  antidote  to  the
Duke  of  Alva/'  kindly  sent  by  heaven,  ut  contraria  contrariis
curenter ,  and  if  the  entire  security  of  the  sacred  Queen  were
not  now  obtained,  together  with  a  perfect  re-integration  of  love
between  her  Majesty  and  the  King  of  Spain,  and  with  the
assured  tranquillity  and  perpetual  prosperity  of  the  Nether¬
lands,  it  would  be  the  fault  of  England,  not  of  Spain.3

And  no  doubt  the  merchant  believed  all  that  was  told  him,
and — what  was  worse — that  he  fully  impressed  his  own  con¬
victions  upon  her  Majesty  and  Lord  Burghley,  to  say  nothing
of  the  comptroller,  who,  poor  man,  had  great  facility  in
believing  anything  that  came  from  the  court  of  the  most
Catholic  King.  Yet  it  is  painful  to  reflect,  that  in  all  these
communications  of  Alexander  and  his  agents,  there  was  not
one  single  word  of  truth.  It  was  all  false  from  beginning  to
end,  as  to  the  countermanding  of  the  troops,  as  to  the  pacific
intentions  of  the  King  and  Duke,  and  as  to  the  proposed
campaign  in  Friesland,  in  case  of  rupture,  and  all  the  rest.
But  this  will  be  conclusively  proved  a  little  later.

1  De  Loo  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.

2  “Flexis  nudisque  genibus  humi

prostratus,  dal  piu  profondo  e  vero

centro  del  mio  cuore  et  ex  corde  et  ex
tota  anima,”  &c.  (Ibid.)

3  Ibid.

5181.

ENGLISH  COMMISSIONERS  APPOINTED.

299

Meantime  the  conference  had  been  most  amicable  and
satisfactory.  And  when  business  was  over;  Champagny — not
a  whit  the  worse  for  the  severe  jilting  which  he  had  so  re¬
cently  sustained  from  the  widow  De  Bours,  now  Mrs.  Aristotle
Patton — invited  De  Loo  and  Secretary  Cosimo  to  supper.
And  the  three  made  a  night  of  it,  sitting  up  late,  and  draining
such  huge  bumpers  to  the  health  of  the  Queen  of  England,
that — as  the  excellent  Andrew  subsequently  informed  Lord
Burgliley — his  head  ached  most  bravely  next  morning.1

And  so,  amid  the  din  of  hostile  preparation  not  only  in
Cadiz  and  Lisbon,  hut  in  Ghent  and  Sluys  and  Antwerp,  the
import  of  which  it  seemed  difficult  to  mistake,  the  comedy  of
negotiation  was  still  rehearsing,  and  the  principal  actors  were
already  familiar  with  their  respective  parts.  There  were  the
Earl  of  Derby,  knight  of  the  garter,  and  my  Lord  Cobham,
and  puzzling  James  Croft,  and  other  Englishmen,  actually
believing  that  the  farce  was  a  solemn  reality.  There  was
Alexander  of  Parma  thoroughly  aware  of  the  contrary.  There
was  Andrew  de  Loo,  more  talkative,  more  credulous,  more
busy  than  ever,  and  more  fully  impressed  with  the  importance
of  his  mission,  and  there  was  the  white-bearded  Lord-
Treasurer  turning  complicated  paragraphs,  shaking  his  head,
and  waving  his  wand  across  the  water,  as  if,  by  such  expedients,
the  storm  about  to  burst  over  England  could  be  dispersed.

The  commissioners  should  come,  if  only  the  Duke  of
Parma  would  declare  on  his  word  of  honour,  that  these  hostile
preparations  with  which  all  Christendom  was  ringing,  were
not  intended  against  England ;  or — if  that  really  were  the
case — if  he  would  request  his  master  to  abandon  all  such
schemes,  and  if  Philip  in  consequence  would  promise  on  the
honour  of  a  prince,  to  make  no  hostile  attempts  against  that
country.2

1  “Con  sommo  contentamento  del
uno  e  T  altro,  a  tal  segno,  che  tenen-
doci  il  Sr  de  Champagny  a  cena,  con
far  li  ragione  di  buon  cuore  d’  un  gran
brindisi  che  fece  alia  sanita  di  sua
sacra  Maesta,  mi  dolse  (con  licenza
per  dirlo  come  va)  la  mattina  seguente

bravamente  la  testa.”  A.  de  Loo  to
Burghley,  26  Sept.  1581.  (S.  P.  Office,
MS.)

3  “If  you  can  possibly,  I  require  you
to  obtain  of  the  Duke,  in  writing  under
his  hand,  an  assurance  either  of  his
knowledge  that  these  preparations  are

300

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SYII.

There  would  really  seem  an  almost  Arcadian  simplicity  in
such  demands,  coming  from  so  practised  a  statesman  as  the
Lord-Treasurer,  and  from  a  woman  of  such  brilliant  intellect
as  Elizabeth  unquestionably  possessed.  But  we  read  the
history  of  1587,  not  only  by  the  light  of  subsequent  events,
but  by  the  almost  microscopic  revelations  of  sentiments  and
motives,  which  a  full  perusal  of  the  secret  documents  in  those
ancient  cabinets,  afford.  At  that  moment  it  was  not  igno¬
rance  nor  dulness  which  was  leading  England  towards  the
pitfall  so  artfully  dug  by  Spain.  There  was  trust  in  the
plighted  word  of  a  chivalrous  soldier  like  Alexander  Farnese,1
of  a  most  religious  and  anointed  monarch  like  Philip  II.
English  frankness,  playing  cards  upon  the  table,  was  no
match  for  Italian  and  Spanish  legerdemain, — a  system  accord¬
ing  to  which,  to  defraud  the  antagonist  by  every  kind  of
falsehood  and  trickery  was  the  legitimate  end  of  diplomacy
and  statesmanship.  It  was  well  known  that  there  were  great
preparations  in  Spain,  Portugal,  and  the  obedient  Netherlands,
by  land  and  sea.  But  Sir  Robert  Sidney2  was  persuaded  that
the  expedition  was  intended  for  Africa  ;  even  the  Pope  was

not  nor  shall  be  meant  against  any  of
her  Majesty’s  dominions;  or  other¬
wise,  if  lie  be  not  able  to  assure  the
same,  then,  at  the  least,  that  he  will,
by  his  writing,  assure  her  Majesty
that  he  will,  upon  his  honour,  witli  all
expedition,  send  to  the  King  his  ad¬
vice  to  stay  all  hostile  actions,  or  to
have  the  King’s  answer,  like  a  prince
of  honour,  whether  he  intendeth  or  no
to  employ  these  forces  against  her
Majesty,  which,  though  in  some  con¬
struction  may  seem  hard  to  require  of
a  king  intending  hostility,  yet,  as  the
case  is,  when  her  Majesty  yieldeth  to
a  cessation  of  arms,  and  to  a  treaty  of
peace  with  the  king,  is  a  request
most  reasonable  to  make,  and  honour¬
able  for  the  king  to  grant.  .  .  .  Such
are  the  frequent  reports  out  of  Spain
of  these  preparations,  and  yet  her
Majesty  will  stand  to  the  Duke's  answer ,
if  the  army  shall  not  be  known  to  be
actually  prepared  against  England —
which,  if  it  shall  be,  no  man  will
think  it  meet  that  her  commissioners

should  come.”  Burghley  to  A.  De
Loo,  10  Oct.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  As  early  as  August,  the  Duke  had
proposed  a  cessation  of  arms,  to  grant
which,  as  has  been  abundantly  shown
by  his  private  correspondence,  was
never  in  his  thoughts.  “  The  Duke
of  Parma,  to  the  end  the  treaty  may
proceed  with  better  success,  hath
made  offer  unto  us  to  yield  to  a  cessa¬
tion  of  arms,  having  put  us  also  in
hope  that  such  forces  as  are  now  pre¬
paring  in  Italy,  amounting  to  15,000
footmen,  at  the  least,  shall  be  stayed.”
Queen  to  Leicester,  9  Aug.  1587.
(Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  293,  MS.)

8  “There  came  some  out  of  Spain
very  lately,  that  say  the  preparations
there  are  for  a  certain  place  in  Africk,
which  greatly  imports  the  passage  of
both  the  Indies.  The  admiral  of  the
Turks  was  to  leave  it  last  year  with
sixty  galleys.”  Sir  R.  Sidney  to
Leicester,  31  Dec.  1587.  (Br.  Mus.
Galba,  D.  II.  p.  288,  MS.)

1587.  PARMA’S  AFFECTIONATE  LETTER  TO  THE  QUEEN.  301

completely  mystified — to  the  intense  delight  of  Philip — and
Burghley,  enlightened  by  the  sagacious  De  Loo,  was  con¬
vinced,  that  even  in  case  of  a  rupture,  the  whole  strength  of
the  Spanish  arms  was  to  he  exerted  in  reducing  Friesland
and  Overyssel.  But  Walsingham  was  never  deceived  ;  for  he
had  learned  from  Demosthenes  a  lesson  with  which  William
the  Silent,  in  his  famous  Apology,  had  made  the  world  familiar,
that  the  only  citadel  against  a  tyrant  and  a  conqueror  was
distrust .

Alexander,  much  grieved  that  doubts  should  still  be  felt  as
to  his  sincerity,  renewed  the  most  exuberant  expressions  of
that  sentiment,  together  with  gentle  complaints  against  the
dilatoriness  which  had  proceeded  from  the  doubt.  Her  Majesty
had  long  been  aware,  he  said,  of  his  anxiety  to  bring  about  a
perfect  reconciliation  ;  but  he  had  waited,  month  after  month,
for  her  commissioners,  and  had  waited  in  vain.  His  hopes  had
been  dashed  to  the  ground.  The  affair  had  been  indefinitely
spun  out,  and  he  could  not  resist  the  conviction  that  her
Majesty  had  changed  her  mind.  Nevertheless,  as  Andrew  de
Loo  was  again  proceeding  to  England,  the  Duke  seized  the
opportunity  once  more  to  kiss  her  hand,  and — although  he
had  well  nigh  resolved  to  think  no  more  on  the  subject — to
renew  his  declarations,  that,  if  the  much- coveted  peace  were
not  concluded,  the  blame  could  not  be  imputed  to  him,  and
that  he  should  stand  guiltless  before  God  and  the  world.  He
had  done,  and  was  still  ready  to  do,  all  which  became  a
Christian  and  a  man  desirous  of  the  public  welfare  and  tran¬
quillity.1

1  “  E  cosi  da  canto  mio  haveva  pre-
parato  gli  affari  di  manera,  e  messo  il
tutto  in  termine,  che  Vra  Mata  haveva
potuto  conoscere  qual  zelo  ch’  io  ab-
braciara  questa  occasione,  e  quanto  io
desiderava  di  veder  rivertire  la  buona
e  mutua  intelligenza  fra  il  Re  mio
signore  et  la  Vra  Mta.  Ma  vedendo
che  non  obstante  le  tante  speranze  che
m’  eravano  state  date  della  venuta  dei
commissarii  di  Yra  Mta,  la  cosa  si  va
tuttavia  tirando  al  lungo,  io  non  posso
se  non  dubitaire  ch’  ella  habbia  mutato

d’  opinione,  e  se  ben  io  ero  quasi  reso-
luto  di  non  ci  pensar  piu,  tuttavia
ritornandosene  per  di  la  il  detto
Andrea  mi  parse  di  scriver  ancor
questi  poclii  versi,  tanto  per  non  perder
1’  occasione  di  baciar  humilte  le  mani
a  Yra  Mta  quanto  per  assigurarla  che
non  restara  per  me,  che  la  risoluzione
presa,  non  passi  avanti,  e  che  succe-
dendo  altrimente  ne  saro  scusato  inanzi
a  Dio  et  al  mondo,  e  havero  almeno
satisfatto  a  me  medesimo,  d’  haver
fatto  quello  che  1’  obligo  Christiano,

302

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SYII.

When  Burghley  read  these  fine  jfiirases,  he  was  much  im¬
pressed  ;  and  they  were  pronounced  at  the  English  court  to
he  “  very  princely  and  Christianly."  An  elaborate  comment
too  was  drawn  up  by  the  comptroller  on  every  line  of  the
letter.  cc  These  be  very  good  words/'  said  the  comptroller.1

But  the  Queen  was  even  more  pleased  with  the  last  proof
of  the  Duke's  sincerity,  than  even  Burghley  and  Croft  had
been.  Disregarding  all  the  warnings  of  Walsingham,  she
renewed  her  expressions  of  boundless  confidence  in  the  wily
Italian.  “  We  do  assure  you,"  wrote  the  Lords,  “and  so  you
shall  do  well  to  avow  it  to  the  Duke  upon  our  honours,  that
her  Majesty  saith  she  thinketh  both  then’  minds  to  accord
upon  one  good  and  Christian  meaning,  though  their  ministers
may  perchance  sound  upon  a  discord."  2  And  she  repeated
her  resolution  to  send  over  her  commissioners,  so  soon  as  the
Duke  had  satisfied  her  as  to  the  hostile  preparations.

We  have  now  seen  the  good  faith  of  the  English  Queen
towards  the  Spanish  government.  We  have  seen  her  boundless
trust  in  the  sincerity  of  Farnese  and  his  master.  We  have
heard  the  exuberant  professions  of  an  honest  intention  to
bring  about  a  firm  and  lasting  peace,  which  fell  from  the  lips
of  Farnese  and  of  his  confidential  agents.  It  is  now  necessary
to  glide  for  a  moment  into  the  secret  cabinet  of  Philip,
in  order  to  satisfy  ourselves  as  to  the  value  of  all  those  pro¬
fessions.  The  attention  of  the  reader  is  solicited  to  these
investigations,  because  the  year  1587  was  a  most  critical
period  in  the  history  of  English,  Dutch,  and  European  liberty.
The  coming  year  1588  had  been  long  spoken  of  in  prophecy,
as  the  year  of  doom,  perhaps  of  the  destruction  of  the  world,
but  it  was  in  1587,  the  year  of  expectation  and  preparation,
that  the  materials  were  slowly  combining  out  of  which  that
year's  history  was  to  be  formed.

et  di  persona  desiderosa  del  bene  e  And  if  blunt  Sir  Roger  ■Williams
riposo  publico  m’  obligara.”  Parma  had  been  standing  by  when  the  re-

to  Queen  Elizabeth,  1587.  (S.P.

Nov.  9

mark  was  made,  he  might  have  ex¬
claimed  with  his  countryman,  honest
Hugh  Evans,  “  Good  worts,  good
worts — good  cabbage!”

Office  MS.)

i  The  Lords  to  A.  de  Loo,  11  Nov.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.

153*7.

PHILIP  AT  HIS  WRITING-TABLE.

303

And  there  sat  the  patient  letter- writer  in  his  cabinet,  busy
with  his  schemes.  His  grey  head  was  whitening  fast.  He
was  sixty  years  of  age.  His  frame  was  slight,  his  figure
stooping,  his  digestion  very  weak,  his  manner  more  glacial
and  sepulchral  than  ever  ;  but  if  there  were  a  hard-working
man  in  Europe,  that  man  was  Philip  II.  And  there  he  sat  at
his  table,  scrawling  his  apostilles.  The  fine  innumerable
threads  which  stretched  across  the  surface  of  Christendom,
and  covered  it  as  with  a  net,  all  converged  in  that  silent
cheerless  cell.  France  was  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual  civil
war ;  the  Netherlands  had  been  converted  into  a  shambles  ;
Ireland  was  maintained  in  a  state  of  chronic  rebellion ;
Scotland  was  torn  with  internal  feuds,  regularly  organized  and
paid  for  by  Philip  ;  and  its  young  monarch — “  that  lying  King
of  Scots/'’  as  Leicester  called  him — was  kept  in  a  leash  ready
to  be  slipped  upon  England,  when  his  master  should  give  the
word ;  and  England  herself  was  palpitating  with  the  daily
expectation  of  seeing  a  disciplined  horde  of  brigands  let  loo.se
upon  her  shores  ;  and  all  this  misery,  past,  present,  and  future,
was  almost  wholly  due  to  the  exertions  of  that  grey-haired
letter-writer  at  his  peaceful  library-table.

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  year  the  King  of  Denmark
had  made  an  offer  to  Philip  of  mediation.  The  letter,  entrusted
to  a  young  Count  de  Rantzan,  had  been  intercepted  by  the
States — the  envoy  not  having  availed  himself,  in  time,  of  his
diplomatic  capacity,  and  having  in  consequence  been  treated,
for  a  moment,  like  a  prisoner  of  war.  The  States  had  imme¬
diately  addressed  earnest  letters  of  protest  to  Queen  Elizabeth,
declaring  that  nothing  which  the  enemy  could  do  in  war  was
half  so  horrible  to  them  as  the  mere  mention  of  peace.  Life,
honour,  religion,  liberty,  their  all,  were  at  stake,  they  said,
and  would  go  down  in  one  universal  shipwreck,  if  peace  should
be  concluded  ;  and  they  implored  her  Majesty  to  avert  the
proposed  intercession  of  the  Danish  King.1  Wilkes  wrote  to
Walsingham,2  denouncing  that  monarch  and  his  ministers  as

1  Bor,  II.  xxii,  945-948.  Meteren,
xii.  247.

2  Wilkes  to  Walsingham,  3  Deo.
1586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

304

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

stipendiaries  of  Spain,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Duke  of
Parma,  after  courteously  thanking  the  King  for  his  offer  of
mediation,  described  him  to  Philip  as  such  a  dogged  heretic,1
that  no  good  was  to  be  derived  from  him,  except  by  meeting
his  fraudulent  offers  with  an  equally  fraudulent  response.
There  will  be  nothing  lost,  said  Alexander,  by  affecting  to
listen  to  his  proposals,  and  meantime  your  Majesty  must
proceed  with  the  preparations  against  England.2  This  was  in
the  first  week  of  the  year  1587.

In  February,  and  almost  on  the  very  day  when  Parma  was
writing  those  affectionate  letters  to  Elizabeth,  breathing
nothing  but  peace,  he  was  carefully  conning  Philip’s  directions
in  regard  to  the  all-important  business  of  the  invasion.  He
was  informed  by  his  master,  that  one  hundred  vessels,  forty
of  them  of  largest  size,  were  quite  ready,  together  with  12,000
Spanish  infantry,  including  3000  of  the  old  legion,  and  that
there  were  volunteers  more  than  enough.  Philip  had  also
taken  note,  he  said,  of  Alexander’s  advice  as  to  choosing  the
season  when  the  crops  in  England  had  just  been  got  in,  as
the  harvest  of  so  fertile  a  country  would  easily  support  an
invading  force  ;  but  he  advised  nevertheless  that  the  army
should  be  thoroughly  victualled  at  starting.3  Finding  that
Alexander  did  not  quite  approve  of  the  Irish  part  of  the  plan,
he  would  reconsider  the  point,  and  think  more  of  the  Isle  of
Wight ;  but  perhaps  still  some  other  place  might  be  discovered,
a  descent  upon  which  might  inspire  that  enemy  with  still
greater  terror  and  confusion.  It  would  be  difficult  for  him,
he  said,  to  grant  the  6000  men  asked  for  by  the  Scotch
malcontents,  without  seriously  weakening  his  armada  ;  but
there  must  be  no  positive  refusal,  for  a  concerted  action  with
the  Scotch  lords  and  their  adherents  was  indispensable.  The
secret,  said  the  King,  had  been  profoundly  kept,  and  neither
in  Spain  nor  in  Rome  had  anything  been  allowed  to  transpire.
Alexander  was  warned  therefore  to  do  his  best  to  maintain

1  “  Emperrado  erege,”  &c.  Parma
to  Philip,  10  Jan.  1587.  (Arch,  de
Simancas,  MS.)

2  Ibid.

3  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  2S  Feb.  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

1587.  HIS  PLOTS  WITH  PARMA  AGAINST  ENGLAND.  305

the  mystery,  for  the  enemy  was  trying  very  hard  to  penetrate
their  actions  and  their  thoughts.1

And  certainly  Alexander  did  his  best.  He  replied  to  his
master,  by  transmitting  copies  of  the  letters  ho  had  been
writing  with  his  own  hand  to  the  Queen,  and  of  the  pacific
messages  he  had  sent  her  through  Champagny  and  De  Loo.2
She  is  just  now  somewhat  confused,  said  he,  and  those  of  her
counsellors  who  desire  peace  are  more  eager  than  ever  for
negociation.  She  is  very  much  afflicted  with  the  loss  of
Deventer,  and  is  quarelling  with  the  French  ambassador
about  the  new  conspiracy  for  her  assassination.  The  oppor¬
tunity  is  a  good  one,  and  if  she  writes  an  answer  to  my  letter,
said  Alexander,  we  can  keep  the  negociation  alive,  while,  if
she  does  not,  Twill  be  a  proof  that  she  has  contracted  leagues
with  other  parties.  But,  in  any  event,  the  Duke  fervently
implored  Philip  not  to  pause  in  his  preparations  for  the  great
enterprise  which  he  had  conceived  in  his  royal  breast.3  So
urgent  for  the  invasion  was  the  peace-loving  general.

He  alluded  also  to  the  supposition  that  the  quarrel  between
her  Majesty  and  the  French  envoy  was  a  mere  fetch,  and
only  one  of  the  results  of  Bellievre’s  mission.  Whether  that
diplomatist  had  been  sent  to  censure,  or  in  reality  to  approve,
in  the  name  of  his  master,  of  the  Scottish  Queen’s  execution,
Alexander  would  leave  to  be  discussed  by  Don  Bernardino
de  Mendoza,  the  Spanish  ambassador  in  Paris ;  but  he
was  of  opinion  that  the  anger  of  the  Queen  with  France
wras  a  fiction,  and  her  supposed  league  with  France  and
Germany  against  Spain  a  fact.4  Upon  this  point,  as  it  appears
from  Secretary  Walsingham’s  lamentations,  the  astute  Farnese
was  mistaken.  In  truth  he  was  frequently  led  into  error
by  attributing  to  the  English  policy  the  same  serpentine
movement  and  venomous  purpose  which  characterized  his
own  ;  and  we  have  already  seen,  that  Elizabeth  was  ready,  on
the  contrary,  to  quarrel  with  the  States,  with  France,  with  all
the  world,  if  she  could  only  secure  the  good-will  of  Philip.

1587.  (Arch,  do  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Ibid.  4  Ibid.

1  Philip  to  Parma,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  22  March,

VOL.  II. — X

306

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

The  French  matter,  indissolubly  connected  in  that  monarch’s
schemes,  with  his  designs  upon  England  and  Holland,  was
causing  Alexander  much  anxiety.  He  foresaw  great  difficulty
in  maintaining  that  indispensable  civil  war  in  France,  and
thought  that  a  peace  might,  some  fine  day,  be  declared
between  Henry  III.  and  the  Huguenots,  when  least  expected.
In  consequence,  the  Duke  of  Guise  was  becoming  very  im¬
portunate  for  Philip’s  subsidies.  u  Mucio  comes  begging  to
me,”  said  Parma,  u  with  the  very  greatest  earnestness,  and
utters  nothing  but  lamentations  and  cries  of  misery.1  He
asked  for  25,000  of  the  150,000  ducats  promised  him.  I  gave
them.  Soon  afterwards  he  writes,  with  just  as  much  anxiety,
for  25,000  more.  These  I  did  not  give  ;  firstly,  because  I  had
them  not,”  (which  would  seem  a  sufficient  reason)  u  and
secondly,  because  I  wished  to  protract  matters  as  much  as
possible.  He  is  constantly  reminding  me  of  your  Majesty’s
promise  of  300,000  ducats,  in  case  he  comes  to  a  rupture  with
the  King  of  France,  and  I  always  assure  him  that  your
Majesty  will  keep  all  promises.”  2

Philip,  on  his  part,  through  the  months  of  spring,  continued
to  assure  his  generalissimo  of  his  steady  preparations  by  sea
and  land.  He  had  ordered  Mendoza  to  pay  the  Scotch  lords
the  sum  demanded  by  them,  but  not  till  after  they  had  done
the  deed  agreed  upon  ;  and  as  to  the  6000  men,  he  felt  obliged,
he  said,  to  defer  that  matter  for  the  moment,  and  to  leave  the
decision  upon  it  to  the  Duke.3  Farnese  kept  his  sovereign
minutely  informed  of  the  negociations  carried  on  through
Champagny  and  De  Loo,  and  expressed  his  constant  opinion
that  the  Queen  was  influenced  by  motives  as  hypocritical  as
his  own.  She  was  only  seeking,  he  said,  to  deceive,  to
defraud,  to  put  him  to  sleep,  by  those  feigned  negotiations,
while  she  was  making  her  combinations  with  France  and
Germany,  for  the  ruin  of  Spain.  There  was  no  virtue  to  be
expected  from  her,  except  she  was  compelled  thereto  by  pure

1  “  Con  grandissima  instancia  y  de
clarandome  lastimas  y  miserias.”  MS.
Letter  of  Parma  to  Philip,  last  cited.

2  Ibid.

3  Philip  to  Parma,  15  April,  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

1587.

PARMA’S  SECRET  LETTERS  TO  THE  KING.

307

necessity.1  The  English,  he  said,  were  hated  and  abhorred
by  the  natives  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,2  and  it  behoved  Philip
to  seize  so  favourable  an  opportunity  for  urging  on  his  great
plan  with  all  the  speed  in  the  world.  It  might  be  that  the
Queen,  seeing  these  mighty  preparations,  even  although  not
suspecting  that  she  herself  was  to  be  invaded,  would  tremble
for  her  safety,  if  the  Netherlands  should  be  crushed.  But  if
she  succeeded  in  deceiving  Spain,  and  putting  Philip  and
Parma  to  sleep,  she  might  well  boast  of  having  made  fools  of
them  all.3  The  negotiations  for  peace  and  the  preparations
for  the  invasion  should  go  simultaneously  forward  therefore,
and  the  money  would,  in  consequence,  come  more  sparingly
to  the  Provinces  from  the  English  coffers,  and  the  disputes
between  England  and  the  States  would  be  multiplied.  The
Duke  also  begged  to  be  informed  whether  any  terms  could  be
laid  down,  upon  which  the  King  really  would  conclude  peace,
in  order  that  he  might  make  no  mistake  for  want  of  instruc¬
tions  or  requisite  powers.  The  condition  of  France  was
becoming  more  alarming  every  day,  he  said.  In  other  words,
there  was  an  ever-growing  chance  of  peace  for  that  distracted
country.  The  Queen  of  England  was  cementing  a  strong
league  between  herself,  the  French  King,  and  the  Huguenots,
and  matters  were  looking  very  serious.  The  impending  peace
in  France  would  never  do,  and  Philip  should  prevent  it  in
time,  by  giving  Mucio  his  money.  Unless  the  French  are
entangled  and  at  war  among  themselves,  it  is  quite  clear,  said
Alexander,  that  we  can  never  think  of  carrying  out  our  great
scheme  of  invading  England.4

The  King  thoroughly  concurred  in  all  that  was  said  and
done  by  his  faithful  governor  and  general.  He  had  no  inten¬
tion  of  concluding  a  peace  on  any  terms  whatever,  and  there¬
fore  could  name  no  conditions  ;  but  he  quite  approved  of  a

1  “No  es  aguardar  do  ella  ninguna
virtud,  sino  fuesse  forzada  do  la  pura
necesidad.”  Parma  to  Philip,  12tli
April,  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  “Odiados  y  aborrecidos  de  los

naturales  de  Olanda  y  Zelanda.”

(Parma  to  Philip,  MS.  last  cited.)

s  “Se  podria  jactar  de  haber  nos
burlado.”  (Ibid.)

4  “  Sin  quedar  embarazados  los  fran-
ceses  entre  si  es  claro  que  no  se  podria
pensar  a  la  efectuacion  del  negocio.”
Parma  to  Philip,  12  April,  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

308

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

continuance  of  the  negotiations.  The  English,  he  was  con¬
vinced,  were  utterly  false  on  their  part,  and  the  King  of
Denmark’s  proposition  to  mediate  was  part  and  parcel  of  the
same  general  fiction.  He  was  quite  sensible  of  the  necessity
of  giving  Mucio  the  money  to  prevent  a  pacification  in  France,
and  would  send  letters  of  exchange  on  Agostino  Spinola  for
the  300,000  ducats.  Meantime  Farnese  was  to  go  on  steadily
with  his  preparations  for  the  invasion.1

The  secretary-of-state,  Don  Juan  de  Idiaquez,  also  wrote
most  earnestly  on  the  great  subject  to  the  Duke.  “  It  is  not
to  he  exaggerated,”  he  said,  “  how  set  his  Majesty  is  in  the
all-important  business.  If  you  wish  to  manifest  towards  him
the  most  flattering  obedience  on  earth,  and  to  oblige  him  as
much  as  you  could  wish,  give  him  this  great  satisfaction  this
year.  Since  you  have  money,  prepare  everything  out  there,
conquer  all  difficulties,  and  do  the  deed  so  soon  as  the  forces
of  Spain  and  Italy  arrive,  according  to  the  plan  laid  down  by
your  Excellency  last  year.  Make  use  of  the  negotiations  for
peace  for  this  one  purpose,  and  no  more ,  and  do  the  business
like  the  man  you  are.  Attribute  the  liberty  of  this  advice  to
my  desire  to  serve  you  more  than  any  other,  to  pjy  knowledge
of  how  much  you  will  thereby  gratify  his  Majesty,  and  to  my
fear  of  his  resentment  towards  you,  in  the  contrary  case.” 2

And,  on  the  same  day,  in  order  that  there  might  be  no
doubt  of  the  royal  sentiments,  Philip  expressed  himself  at
length  on  the  whole  subject.  The  dealings  of  Farnese  with
the  English,  and  his  feeding  them  with  hopes  of  peace,- would
have  given  him  more  satisfaction,  he  observed,  if  it  had.  caused
their  preparations  to  slacken ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  their

1  Philip  to  Parma,  15  April,  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

a  “No  se  puede  encarecer  quan
puesto  esta  su  Magd  en  el  negocio
principal  (the  invasion  of  England).
Si  Y ra  Exca  le  quiere  hazer  la  mayor
lisonja  de  la  tierra,  y  obligarla  a  quanto
quisiere,  de  le  este  contentamto  este
ano,  y  pues  tiene  dinero  prepare  todo
lo  de  alia,  y  venca  las  dificultades  y
haga  el  efeto  que  a  tiempo  llegara  lo

de  Espaha  y  Italia,  para  el  q  Yra  Exca
dezia  el  ano  pasado,  y  sirva  se  de  los
tratos  de  paz  para  este  m  ism  o  fin,  no
mas,  y  haga  esto  hecho  tan  de  quien
es,  y  atribuya  Yra  Exca  la  libertad  des-
to  aviso  a  lo  q  deseo  servirle  mas  que
nadie,  y  a  lo  que  veo  que  obligara  a
su  Magd  con  ello,  y  lo  que  temo  que
sentiria  lo  contrario.”  Don  Juan  de
Idiaquez  to  Parma,  13  May,  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

158*7.

PHILIP’S  LETTERS  TO  PARMA.

309

boldness  had  increased.  They  had  perpetrated  the  inhuman
murder  of  the  Queen  of  Scots,  and  moreover,  not  content  with
their  piracies  at  sea  and  in  the  Indies,  they  had  dared  to
invade  the  ports  of  Spain,  as  would  appear  in  the  narrative
transmitted  to  Farnese  of  the  late  events  at  Cadiz.  And
although  that  damage  ibas  small ,  said  Philip,  there  resulted  a
very  great  obligation  to  take  them  seriously  in  hand.1  He
declined  sending  full  poivers  for  treating  ;  but  in  order  to  make
use  of  the  same  arts  employed  by  the  English,  he  preferred
that  Alexander  should  not  undeceive  them,  but  desired  him  to
express,  as  out  of  his  own  head,  to  the  negotiators,  his  astonish¬
ment  that  while  they  were  holding  such  language  they  should
commit  such  actions.  Even  their  want  of  prudence  in  thus
provoking  the  King,  when  their  strength  was  compared  to  his,
should  be  spoken  of  by  Farnese  as  wonderful,  and  he  was  to
express  the  opinion  that  his  Majesty  would  think  him  much
wanting  in  circumspection,  should  he  go  on  negotiating  while
they  were  playing  such  tricks.  “You  must  show  yourself
very  sensitive  about  this  event/'  continued  Philip,  “  and  you
must  give  them  to  understand  that  I  am  quite  as  angry  as
you.  You  must  try  to  draw  from  them  some  offer  of  satisfac¬
tion — however  false  it  will  be  in  reality — such  as  a  proposal  to
recall  the  fleet,  or  an  assertion  that  the  deeds  of  Drake  in
Cadiz  were  without  the  knowledge  and  contrary  to  the  will  of
the  Queen,  and  that  she  very  much  regrets  them,  or  something
of  that  sort."2

It  has  already  been  shown  that  Farnese  was  very  successful
in  eliciting  from  the  Queen,  through  the  mouth  of  Lord
Burgliley,  as  ample  a  disavowal  and  repudiation  of  Sir  Francis
Drake  as  the  King  could  possibly  desire.  Whether  it  Would
have  the  desired  effect  of  allaying  the  wrath  of  Philip,  might
have  been  better  foretold,  could  the  letter,  with  which  we  are

1  “Y  aunque  el  dano  fue  poco  es  ja
mucha  la  obligation  de  yr  les  muy  do
veras  a  la  mano.”  Philip  to  Parma,
13  May,  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,

MS.)

2  Philip  to  Parma,  13  May,  1587.
(MS.  last  cited.)

310

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

now  occupied,  have  been  laid  upon  the  Greenwich  council-
board.

“  When  you  have  got  such  a  disavowal/'  continued  his
Majesty,  u  you  are  to  act  as  if  entirely  taken  in  and  imposed
upon  by  them,  and,  pretending  to  believe  everything  they  tell
you,  you  must  renew  the  negotiations,  proceed  to  name  com¬
missioners,  and  propose  a  meeting  upon  neutral  territory.1  As
for  powers,  say  that  you,  as  my  governor-general,  will  entrust
them  to  your  deputies,  in  regard  to  the  Netherlands.  For
all  other  matters,  say  that  you  have  had  full  powers  for  many
months,  but  that  you  cannot  exhibit  them  until  conditions
worthy  of  my  acceptance  have  been  offered.  Say  this  only  for
the  sake  of  appearance.2  This  is  the  true  way  to  take  them  in,
and  so  the  peace-commissioners  may  meet.  But  to  you  only
do  I  declare  that  my  intention  is  that  this  shall  never  lead  to
any  result ,  ivhatever  conditions  may  he  offered  by  them.  On  the
contrary,  all  this  is  done — just  as  they  do — to  deceive  them,
and  to  cool  them  in  their  preparations  for  defence,  by  inducing
them  to  believe  that  such  preparations  will  be  unnecessary.3
You  are  well  aware  that  the  reverse  of  all  this  is  the  truth ,  and
that  on  our  part  there  is  to  be  no  slackness,  but  the  greatest
diligence  in  our  efforts  for  the  invasion  of  England,  for  which
we  have  already  made  the  most  abundant  provision  in  men,
.ships,  and  money,  of  which  you  are  well  aware."4

Is  it  strange  that  the  Queen  of  England  was  deceived  ?  Is
it  matter  of  surprise,  censure,  or  shame,  that  no  English  states¬
man  was  astute  enough  or  base  enough  to  contend  with  such
diplomacy,  which  seemed  inspired  only  by  the  very  father
of  lies  P

“  Although  we  thus  enter  into  negotiations,"  continued  the
King — unveiling  himself,  with  a  solemn  indecency,  not  agree-

1  “Y  entonces  hazer  vos  del  en-
ganado  y  que  creyendo  lo  que  os  diren

de  nuevo  volvays  a  la  platica,”  &c.  MS.
last  cited.

3  “  Que  es  camino  disimulado.”
(Ibid.)

3  “  Pero  cou  vos  solo  me  aclaro  que

mia  intencion  no  es  de  que  aquello
llegue  a  effeto  con  ningunas  condi-
ciones,  sino  que  todo  esto  se  tome  por
medio,  como  lo  hazen  ellos,  de  entre-
tenerlos  y  enfriarlos,”  &c.  (Ibid.)

4  Ibid.

1587.

WONDERFUL  DUPLICITY  OF  PHILIP.

311

able  to  contemplate — “without  any  intention  of  concluding
them,  you  can  always  get  out  of  them  with  great  honour,  by
taking  umbrage  about  the  point  of  religion  and  about  some
other  of  the  outrageous  propositions  which  they  are  like  to
propose,  and  of  which  there  are  plenty  in  the  letters  of  Andrew
de  Loo.1  Your  commissioners  must  be  instructed  to  refer  all
important  matters  to  your  personal  decision.  The  English
will  be  asking  for  damages  for  money  spent  in  assisting  my
rebels  ;  your  commissioners  will  contend  that  damages  are
rather  due  to  me.  Thus,  and  in  other  ways,  time  will  be
spent.  Your  own  envoys  are  not  to  know  the  secret  any  more
than  the  English  themselves.  I  tell  it  to  you  only.  Thus
you  will  proceed  with  the  negotiations,  now  yielding  on  one
point,  and  now  insisting  on  another,  but  directing  all  to  the
same  object — to  gain  time  while  proceeding  with  the  prepara¬
tion  for  the  invasion,  according  to  the  plan  already  agreed
upon/' 2

Certainly  the  most  Catholic  King  seemed,  in  this  remark¬
able  letter  to  have  outdone  himself ;  and  Farnese — that  sincere
Farnese,  in  whose  loyal,  truth- telling,  chivalrous  character,
the  Queen  and  her  counsellors  placed  such  implicit  reliance —
could  thenceforward  no  longer  be  embarrassed  as  to  the  course
he  was  to  adopt.  To  lie  daily,  through  thick  and  thin,  and
with  every  variety  of  circumstance  and  detail  which  a  genius
fertile  in  fiction  could  suggest,  such  was  the  simple  rule  pre¬
scribed  by  his  sovereign.  And  the  rule  was  implicitly  obeyed,
and  the  English  sovereign  thoroughly  deceived.  The  secret
confided  only  to  the  faithful  breast  of  Alexander  was  religiously
kept.  Even  the  Pope  was  outwitted.  His  Holiness  proposed
to  Philip  the  invasion  of  England,  and  offered  a  million  to
further  the  plan.  He  was  most  desirous  to  be  informed  if  the
project  was  resolved  upon,  and,  if  so,  when  it  was  to  be  accom-

1  “Con  mucha  honra,  desconcer-
tandovos  sobre  el  punto  ,de  la  religion
o  otro  de  los  desaforados,  que  ellos
ban  de  proponer,  que  harto  lo  son  los
del  papel  de  Andrea  de  Loo.”  (MS.
last  cited.)

2  “  Podreys  yr  afloxando  en  unos
puntos,  y  afirmando  en  otros,  todo  en-
derezado  al  mismo  fin  por  ganar  tiem-
po,  preparando  todo  con  diligenza
segun  la  traza  concebida,”  &c.  (Ibid.)

312

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

plished.  The  King  took  the  Pope’s  million,  but  refused  the
desired  information.  He  answered  evasively.  He  had  a  very
good  will  to  invade  the  country,  he  said,  but  there  were  great
difficulties  in  the  way.1  After  a  time,  the  Pope  again  tried
to  pry  into  the  matter,2  and  again  offered  the  million  which
Philip  had  only  accepted  for  the  time  when  it  might  be  wanted,
giving  him  at  the  same  time,  to  understand  that  it  was  not
necessary  at  that  time,  because  there  were  then  great  impedi¬
ments.  “  Thus  he  is  pledged  to  give  me  the  subsidy,  and  I
am  not  pledged  for  the  time,”  said  Philip,  ec  and  I  keep  my
secret,  which  is  the  most  important  of  all.”3

Yet  after  all,  Farnese  did  not  see  his  way  clear  towards  the
consummation  of  the  plan.  Plis  army  had  wofully  dwindled,
and  before  he  could  seriously  set  about  ulterior  matters,  it
would  be  necessary  to  take  the  city  of  Sluys.  This  was  to
prove — as  already  seen — a  most  arduous  enterprise.  He  com¬
plained  to  Philip 4  of  his  inadequate  supplies  both  in  men  and
money.  The  project  conceived  in  the  royal  breast  was  worth
spending  millions  for,  he  said,  and  although  by  zeal  and  devo¬
tion  he  could  accomplish  something,  yet  after  all  he  was  no
more  than  a  man,  and  without  the  necessary  means  the  scheme
could  not  succeed.5  But  Philip,  on  the  contrary,  was  in  the
highest  possible  spirits.  He  had  collected  more  money,  he
declared,  than  had  ever  been  seen  before  in  the  world.6  He
had  two  million  ducats  in  reserve,  besides  the  Pope’s  million,
the  French  were  in  a  most  excellent  state  of  division,  and  the
invasion  should  be  made  this  year  without  fail.  The  fleet
would  arrive  in  the  English  channel  by  the  end  of  the  summer,
which  would  be  exactly  in  conformity  with  Alexander’s  ideas.
The  invasion  was  to  be  threefold  :  from  Scotland,  under  the

1  Philip  to  Parma,  5  June,  1581.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  “Sehavenido  de  rodear.”  (Ibid.)

3  “  Por  tenirlo  prendado  en  la  ayuda,
y  de  no  prendarme  yo  en  lo  tiempo,  y
mas  por  el  secreto  que  es  la  cosa  prin¬
cipal.”  (Ibid.)

4  Parma  to  Philip,  31  May,  1581.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

6  Ibid.

6  He  had  sent,  he  said,  besides  the
regular  remittances,  700,000  ducats,
and  there  were  then  coming  2,300,000
ducats  additional — 300,000  of  which
were  for  Mucio,  in  case  of  rupture
with  the  French  King.  Otherwise,
not  a  penny  was  to  be  diverted  from
the  great  cause.  Philip  to  Farnese,
5  June,  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,
MS.)

1587.

HIS  SANGUINE  VIEWS  AS  TO  ENGLAND.

313

Scotch  earls  and  their  followers,  with  the  money  and  troops
furnished  by  Philip  ;  from  the  Netherlands,  under  Parma  ;
and  by  the  great  Spanish  armada  itself,  upon  the  Isle  of
Wight.  Alexander  must  recommend  himself  to  God,  in  whose
cause  he  was  acting,  and  then  do  his  duty,  which  lay  very
plain  before  him.  If  he  ever  wished  to  give  his  sovereign
satisfaction  in  his  life,  he  was  to  do  the  deed  that  year,  what¬
ever  might  betide.1  Never  could  there  be  so  fortunate  a
conjunction  of  circumstances  again.  France  was  in  a  state  of
revolution,  the  German  levies  were  weak,  the  Turk  was  fully
occupied  in  Persia,  an  enormous  mass  of  money,  over  and
above  the  Pope's  million,  had  been  got  together,  and  although
the  season  was  somewhat  advanced,  it  was  certain  that  the
Duke  would  conquer  all  impediments,  and  be  the  instrument
by  which  his  royal  master  might  render  to  God  that  service
which  he  was  so  anxious  to  perform.  Enthusiastic,  though
gouty,  Philip  grasped  the  pen  in  order  to  scrawl  a  few  words
with  his  own  royal  hand.  u  This  business  is  of  such  import¬
ance,"  he  said,  u  and  it  is  so  necessary  that  it  should  not  be
delayed,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  urging  it  upon  you  as
much  as  I  can.  I  should  do  it  even  more  amply,  if  this  hand
would  allow  me,  which  has  been  crippled  with  gout  these
several  days,  and  my  feet  as  well,  and  although  it  is  unattended
with  pain,  yet  it  is  an  impediment  to  writing." 2

Struggling  thus  against  his  own  difficulties,  and  triumphantly
accomplishing  a  whole  paragraph  with  disabled  hand,  it  was
natural  that  the  King  should  expect  Alexander,  then  deep  in
the  siege  of  Sluys,  to  vanquish  all  his  obstacles  as  successfully,
and  to  effect  the  conquest  of  England  so  soon  as  the  harvests
of  that  kingdom  should  be  garnered.

Sluys  was  surrendered  at  last,  and  the  great  enterprise  seemed
ripening  from  hour  to  hour.  During  the  months  of  autumn,
upon  the  very  days  when  those  loving  messages,  mixed  with
gentle  reproaches,  were  sent  by  Alexander  to  Elizabeth,  and

1  Philip  to  Parma,  5  June,  158 L
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  “  Importa  tanto  esse  negocio,  y
que  no  so  dilate,  que  no  puedo  dexar
de  encargarosle  todo  quanto  puedo  y

hiziera  lo  aun  mas  largamente  si  me
diera  lugar  esta  mano  que  he  tenido
con  la  gota  estos  dias  y  los  pies,  y
aunque  esta  ya  sin  dolor,  esta  impedida
para  esto.”  (Ibid.)

314

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

almost  at  the  self-same  hours  in  which  honest  Andrew  de  Loo
was  getting  such  liead-aches  by  drinking  the  Queen’s  health
with  Cosimo  and  Champagny,  the  Duke  and  Philip  were  inter¬
changing  detailed  information  as  to  the  progress  of  the  inva¬
sion.  The  King  calculated  that  by  the  middle  of  September
Alexander  would  have  30,000  men  in  the  Netherlands  ready
for  embarcation.  Marquis  Santa  Cruz  was  announced  as
nearly  ready  to  sail  for  the  English  channel  with  22,000  more,
among  whom  were  to  be  16,000  seasoned  Spanish  infantry.
The  Marquis  was  then  to  extend  the  hand  to  Parma,  and
protect  that  passage  to  England  which  the  Duke  was  at  once
to  effect.  The  danger  might  be  great  for  so  large  a  fleet  to
navigate  the  seas  at  so  late  a  season  of  the  year  ;  but  Philip
was  sure  that  God,  whose  cause  it  was,  would  be  pleased  to
give  good  weather.1  The  Duke  was  to  send,  with  infinite
precautions  of  secrecy,  information  which  the  Marquis  would
expect  off  Ushant,  and  be  quite  ready  to  act  so  soon  as  Santa
Cruz  should  arrive.  Most  earnestly  and  anxiously  did  the
King  deprecate  any  thought  of  deferring  the  expedition  to
another  year.  If  delayed,  the  obstacles  of  the  following
summer — a  peace  in  France,  a  peace  between  the  Turk  and
Persia,  and  other  contingencies — would  cause  the  whole  project
to  fail,  and  Philip  declared,  with  much  iteration,  that  money,
reputation,  honour,  his  own  character  and  that  of  Farnese,
and  God’s  service,  were  all  at  stake.2  He  was  impatient  at
suggestions  of  difficulties  occasionally  ventured  by  the  Duke,
who  was  reminded  that  he  had  been  appointed  chief  of  the
great  enterprise  by  the  spontaneous  choice  of  his  master,  and
that  all  his  plans  had  been  minutely  followed.  u  You  are  the
author  of  the  whole  scheme,”  said  Philip,  “  and  if  it  is  all  to
vanish  into  space,  what  kind  of  a  figure  shall  we  cut  the  coming
year  ?  ”  3  Again  and  again  he  referred  to  the  immense  sum
collected — such  as  never  before  had  been  seen  since  the  world

1  “  Aunque  no  dexa  de  ver  Jo  que
so  aventura  en  navegar  con  gruessa
armada  in  invierno,  y  por  esse  canal,
sin  tener  puerto  cierto ;  y  el  tiempo
plazera  a  Dios  cuya  es  la  causa  darle
bueno.”  Philip  to  Parma,  4  Sept.
1581.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  Ibid.

3  “De  que  vos  solo  seys  autor.
Veed  si  hubiesse  de  caer  todo  en  vacio,
quel  es  que  quedariamos  el  ano  que
viene,”  &c.  Philip  to  Parma,  14  Sept.
1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

158?.  HE  IS  RELUCTANT  TO  HEAR  OF  THE  OBSTACLES.  315

was  made — 4, 800, 000  ducats  with  2, 000, 000  in  reserve,  of
which  he  was  authorized  to  draw  for  500,000  in  advance,  to
say  nothing  of  the  Pope’s  million.1

But  Alexander,  while  straining  every  nerve  to  obey  his
master’s  wishes  about  the  invasion,  and  to  blind  the  English
by  the  fictitious  negotiations,  was  not  so  sanguine  as  his  sove¬
reign.  In  truth,  there  was  something  puerile  in  the  eagerness
which  Philip  manifested.  He  had  made  up  his  mind  that
England  was  to  be  conquered  that  autumn,  and  had  en¬
deavoured — as  well  as  he  could — to  comprehend  the  plans
which  his  illustrious  general  had  laid  down  for  accomplishing
that  purpose.  Of  course,  to  any  man  of  average  intellect,  or,
in  truth,  to  any  man  outside  a  madhouse,  it  would  seem  an
essential  part  of  the  conquest  that  the  Armada  should  arrive.
Yet — wonderful  to  relate — Philip,  in  his  impatience,  abso¬
lutely  suggested  that  the  Duke  might  take  possession  of
England  without  ivaiting  for  Santa  Cruz  and  his  Armada.  As
the  autumn  had  been  wearing  away,  and  there  had  been  un¬
avoidable  delays  about  the  shipping  in  Spanish  ports,  the
King  thought  it  best  not  to  defer  matters  till  the  winter.
“You  are,  doubtless,  ready,”  he  said  to  Farnese.  “If  you
think  you  can  make  •  the  passage  to  England  before  the  fleet
from  Spain  arrives,  go  at  once.  You  may  be  sure  that  it  will
come  ere  long  to  support  you.  But  if  you  prefer  to  wait,
wait.  The  dangers  of  winter  to  the  fleet  and  to  your  own
person  are  to  be  regretted,  but  God,  whose  cause  it  is,  will
protect  you.” 2

It  was  easy  to  sit  quite  out  of  harm’s  way,  and  to  make
such  excellent  arrangements  for  smooth  weather  in  the  wintry
channel,  and  for  the  conquest  of  a  maritime  and  martial
kingdom  by  a  few  flat  bottoms.  Philip  had  little  difficulty
on  that  score,  but  the  affairs  of  France  were  not  quite  to  his
mind.  The  battle  of  Coutras,  and  the  entrance  of  the  German
and  Swiss  mercenaries  into  that  country,  were  somewhat  per¬
plexing.  Either  those  auxiliaries  of  the  Huguenots  would  be

1  Philip  to  Parma,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Philip  to  Parma,  4  Nov.  158?.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

316

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

defeated,  or  they  would  be  victorious,  or  both  parties  would
come  to  an  agreement.  In  the  first  event,  the  Duke,  after
sending  a  little  assistance  to  Mucio,  was  to  effect  his  passage
to  England  at  once.  In  the  second  case,  those  troops,  even
though  successful,  would  doubtless  be  so  much  disorganized
that  it  might  be  still  safe  for  Farnese  to  go  on.  In  the  third
contingency — that  of  an  accord — it  would  be  necessary  for
him  to  wait  till  the  foreign  troops  had  disbanded  and  left
France.  He  was  to  maintain  all  his  forces  in  perfect  readi¬
ness,  on  pretext  of  the  threatening  aspect  of  French  matters,
and,  so  soon  as  the  Swiss  and  Germans  were  dispersed,  he
was  to  proceed  to  business  without  delay.1  The  fleet  would
be  ready  in  Spain  in  all  November,  but  as  sea-affairs  were  so
doubtful,  particularly  in  winter,  and  as  the  Armada  could  not
reach  the  channel  till  mid- winter,  the  Duke  ivas  not  to  icait
for  its  arrival.  u  Whenever  you  see  a  favourable  oppor¬
tunity/'  said  Philip,  “  you  must  take  care  not  to  lose  it,  even
if  the  fleet  has  not  made  its  appearance.  For  you  may  be
sure  that  it  will  soon  come  to  give  you  assistance,  in  one  way
or  another."2

Farnese  had  also  been  strictly  enjoined  to  deal  gently  with
the  English,  after  the  conquest,  so  that  they  would  have  cause
to  love  their  new  master.  His  troops  were  not  to  forget  dis¬
cipline  after  victory.  There  was  to  be  no  pillage  or  rapine.
The  Catholics  were  to  be  handsomely  rewarded,  and  all  the
inhabitants  were  to  be  treated  with  so  much  indulgence  that,
instead  of  abhorring  Parma  and  his  soldiers,  they  would  con¬
ceive  a  strong  affection  for  them  all,  as  the  source  of  so  many
benefits.3  Again  the  Duke  was  warmly  commended  for  the
skill  with  which  he  had  handled  the  peace-negotiation.  It
was  quite  right  to  appoint  commissioners,  but  it  was  never  for
an  instant  to  be  forgotten  that  the  sole  object  of  treating  was
to  take  the  English  unawares.  “  And  therefore  do  you  guide

1  Philip  to  Parma,  14  Nov.  1581.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  “Viendo  buena  ocasion  procurays

de  no  perderla,  aunque  no  aya  llegado
la  armada — siendo  cierto  que  luego

llegara  a  hazer  espaldas  y  ayudaros
de  una  mano  o  otra.”  (Ibid.)

3  Philip  to  Parma,  25  Oct.  1581.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

1587.

AND  IMAGINES  PARMA  IN  ENGLAND.

317

them  to  this  end/'  said  the  King  with  pious  unction,  cc  which
is  what  you  owe  to  God,  in  whose  service  I  have  engaged  in
this  enterprise,  and  to  whom  I  have  dedicated  the  whole."1
The  King  of  France,  too — that  unfortunate  Henry  III.,
against  whose  throne  and  life  Philip  maintained  in  constant
pay  an  organized  band  of  conspirators — was  affectionately
abjured,  through  the  Spanish  envoy  in  Paris,  Mendoza,  to
reflect  upon  the  advantages  to  France  of  a  Catholic  king  and
kingdom  of  England,  in  place  of  the  heretics  now  in  power." 2 3

But  Philip,  growing  more  and  more  sanguine,  as  those
visions  of  fresh  crowns  and  conquered  kingdoms  rose  before
him  in  his  solitary  cell,  had  even  persuaded  himself  that  the
deed  was  already  done.  In  the  early  days  of  December,  he
expressed  a  doubt  whether  his  14th  November  letter  had
reached  the  Duke,  who  by  that  time  w as  probably  in  England}
One  would  have  thought  the  King  addressing  a  tourist  just
starting  on  a  little  pleasure-excursion.  And  this  was  precisely
the  moment  when  Alexander  had  been  writing  those  affec¬
tionate  phrases  to  the  Queen  which  had  been  considered  by
the  counsellors  at  Greenwich  so  “  princely  and  Christianly,"
and  which  Croft  had  pronounced  such  u  very  good  words."

If  there  had  been  no  hostile  fleet  to  prevent,  it  was  to  be
hoped,  said  Philip,  that,  in  the  name  of  God,  the  passage
had  been  made.  “  Once  landed  there,"  continued  the  King,
cc  I  am  persuaded  that  you  will  give  me  a  good  account  of
yourself,  and,  with  the  help  of  our  Lord,  that  you  will  do  that
service  which  I  desire  to  render  to  Him,  and  that  He  will
guide  our  cause,  which  is  His  own,  and  of  such  great  import¬
ance  to  His  Church."4  A  part  of  the  fleet  would  soon  after
arrive  and  bring  six  thousand  Spaniards,  the  Pope's  million,
and  other  good  things,  which  might  prove  useful  to  Parma,

1  “  Por  tomarlos  desapercibidos.
Assi  lo  guiad  a  esta  fin  que  es  el  que
deve  a  Dios,  por  cuyo  servicio  hago  lo
principal,  y  se  lo  ofresco.”  (Philip  to
Parma,  last  cited.)

2  Philip  to  Don  Bernardino  de
Mendoza,  4  Nov.  1587.  (Arch,  de
Simancas,  MS.)

3  Philip  to  Parma,  11  Dec.  1587.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

4  “  Y  aviendo  pasado  estoy  muy  per-
suadido  de  vos  que  con  ayuda  de  Nr0
Senor  me  dareys  la  buena  cuenta  que
dezio  que  sareys  cierto  de  hazerle  el
servicio  que  yo  en  esto  pretendo — el
io  guia  como  causa  suya  y  tan  impor-
tante  a  su  yglesia.”  (Ibid.)

318

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

presupposing  that  they  would  find  him  established  on  the
enemy’s  territory.1

This  conviction  that  the  enterprise  had  been  already  accom¬
plished  grew  stronger  in  the  King’s  breast  every  day.  He
was  only  a  little  disturbed  lest  Farnese  should  have  mis¬
understood  that  14th  November  letter.  Philip — as  his  wont
was — had  gone  into  so  many  petty  and  puzzling  details,  and  had
laid  down  rules  of  action  suitable  for  various  contingencies,
so  easy  to  put  comfortably  uj>on  paper,  but  which  might
become  perplexing  in  action,  that  it  was  no  wonder  he
should  be  a  little  anxious.  The  third  contingency  suggested
by  him  had  really  occurred.  There  had  been  a  composition
between  the  foreign  mercenaries  and  the  French  King.
Nevertheless  they  had  also  been  once  or  twice  defeated,  and
this  was  contingency  number  two.  Now  which  of  the  events
would  the  Duke  consider  as  having  really  occurred.  It  was
to  be  hoped  that  he  would  have  not  seen  cause  for  delay,  for
in  truth  number  three  was  not  exactly  the  contingency  which
existed.  France  was  still  in  a  very  satisfactory  state  of  dis¬
cord  and  rebellion.  The  civil  war  was  by  no  means  over.
There  was  small  fear  of  peace  that  winter.  Give  Mucio  his
pittance  with  frugal  hand,  and  that  dangerous  personage
would  ensure  tranquillity  for  Philip’s  project,  and  misery  for
Henry  III.  and  his  subjects  for  an  indefinite  period  longer.
The  King  thought  it  improbable  that  Farnese  could  have
made  any  mistake.2  He  expressed  therefore  a  little  anxiety
at  having  received  no  intelligence  from  him,  but  great
confidence  that,  with  the  aid  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  own
courage  he  had  accomplished  the  great  exploit.  Philip  had
only  recommended  delay  in  event  of  a  general  peace  in
France — Huguenots,  Loyalists,  Leaguers,  and  all.  This  had
not  happened.  “  Therefore,  I  trust,”  said  the  King,  “that
you — perceiving  that  this  is  not  contingency  number  three
which  was  to  justify  a  pause — will  have  already  executed
the  enterprise,  and  fulfilled  my  desire.  I  am  confident  that

1  Philip  to  Parma,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Same  to  same,  24  Dec.  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

BUT  ALEXANDER’S  DIFFICULTIES  ARE  GREAT.

1587.

319

the  deed  is  done,  and  that  Grod  has  blessed  it,  and  I  am  now
expecting  the  news  from  hour  to  hour/' 1

But  Alexander  had  not  yet  arrived  in  England.  The  pre¬
liminaries  for  the  conquest  caused  him  more  perplexity  than
the  whole  enterprise  occasioned  to  Philip.  He  was  very
short  of  funds.  The  five  millions  were  not  to  be  touched,
except  for  the  expenses  of  the  invasion.  But  as  England
was  to  be  subjugated,  in  order  that  rebellious  Holland  might
be  recovered,  it  was  hardly  reasonable  to  go  away  leaving
such  inadequate  forces  in  the  Netherlands  as  to  ensure  not
only  independence  to  the  new  republic,  but  to  hold  out
temptation  for  revolt  to  the  obedient  Provinces.  Yet  this
was  the  dilemma  in  which  the  Duke  was  placed.  So  much
money  had  been  set  aside  for  the  grand  project  that  there
was  scarcely  anything  for  the  regular  military  business.  The
customary  supplies  had  not  been  sent.  Parma  had  leave  to
draw  for  six  hundred  thousand  ducats,  and  he  was  able  to  get
that  draft  discounted  on  the  Antwerp  Exchange  by  consent¬
ing  to  receive  five  hundred  thousand,  or  sacrificing  sixteen
per  cent,  of  the  sum.2  A  good  number  of  transports  and
scows  had  been  collected,  but  there  had  been  a  deficiency  of
money  for  their  proper  equipment,  as  the  five  millions  had
been  very  slow  in  coming,  and  were  still  upon  the  road.  The
whole  enterprise  was  on  the  point  of  being  sacrificed,  accord¬
ing  to  Farnese,  for  want  of  funds.  The  time  for  doing  the
deed  had  arrived,  and  he  declared  himself  incapacitated  by
poverty.  He  expressed  his  disgust  and  resentment  in  lan¬
guage  more  energetic  than  courtly,  and  protested  that  he  was
not  to  blame.  “  I  always  thought/'  said  he  bitterly,  u  that
your  Majesty  would  provide  all  that  was  necessary  even  in
superfluity,  and  not  limit  me  beneath  the  ordinary.  I  did
not  suppose,  when  it  was  most  important  to  have  ready  money,
that  I  should  be  kept  short,  and  not  allowed  to  draw  certain

1  UY  asi  creo,  que  conociendo  que
no  es  este  el  caso  tercero,  en  que
aviades  de  parar,  avreys  executado  la
empresa,  y  cumplido  mio  deseo  .  .  .  .

de  que  quedo  aguardando  el  aviso  de
ora  en  ora.”  (Ibid.)

3  Parma  to  Philip,  18  Sept.  1581.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

320

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

sums  by  anticipation,  which  I  should  have  done  had  you  not
forbidden." 1

This  was,  through  life,  a  striking  characteristic  of  Philip.
Enormous  schemes  were  laid  out  with  utterly  inadequate  pro¬
vision  for  their  accomplishment,  and  a  confident  expectation
entertained  that  wild  visions  were,  in  some  indefinite  way,  to
be  converted  into  substantial  realities,  without  fatigue  or  per¬
sonal  exertion  on  his  part,  and  with  a  very  trifling  outlay  of
ready  money.

Meantime  the  faithful  Farnese  did  his  best.  He  was  inde¬
fatigable  night  and  day  in  getting  his  boats  together  and  pro¬
viding  his  munitions  of  war.  He  dug  a  canal  from  Sas  de
Gand — which  was  one  of  his  principal  depots — all  the  way  to
Sluys,  because  the  water-communication  between  those  two
points  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  Hollanders  and  Zee-
landers.  The  rebel  cruisers  swarmed  in  the  Scheldt,  from
Flushing  almost  to  Antwerp,  so  that  it  was  quite  impossible
for  Parma's  forces  to  venture  forth  at  all ;  and  it  also  seemed
hopeless  to  hazard  putting  to  sea  from  Sluys.2  At  the  same
time  he  had  appointed  his  commissioners3  to  treat  with  the
English  envoys  already  named  by  the  Queen.  There  had
been  much  delay  in  the  arrival  of  those  deputies,  on  account
of  the  noise  raised  by  Barneveld  and  his  followers  ;  but
Burghley  was  now  sanguine  that  the  exposure  of  what  he
called  the  Advocate's  seditious,  false,  and  perverse  proceed¬
ings,  would  enable  Leicester  to  procure  the  consent  of  the
States  to  a  universal  peace.

And  thus,  with  these  parallel  schemes  of  invasion  and
negotiation,  spring,  summer,  and  autumn,  had  worn  away.
Santa  Cruz  was  still  with  his  fleet  in  Lisbon,  Cadiz,  and  the
Azores  ;  and  Parma  was  in  Brussels,  when  Philip  fondly  ima-

1  Parma  to  Philip,  MS.  last  cited.

3  Parma  to  Philip,  21  Dec.  1587.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  “  Pues  de
razon  Olandeses  y  Zelandeses  solos
estan  siempre  a  la  mira  y  asi  como
tienen  medio  de  estorbarnos  la  junta
y  salida  de  nuestros  baxeles  lo  ternan

cada  dia  mayor  para  hazer  lo  mismo
en  el  pasage.”

3  Aremberg,  Champagny,  Richardot,
Maas,  Gamier.  Parma  to  Philip,
18  Sept.  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,
MS.)

1587.

HE  DENOUNCES  PHILIP’S  WILD  SCHEMES.

321

gined  him  established  in  Greenwich  Palace.  When  made
aware  of  his  master’s  preposterous  expectations,  Alexander
would  have  been  perhaps  amused,  had  he  not  been  half  beside
himself  with  indignation.  Such  folly  seemed  incredible.
There  was  not  the  slightest  appearance  of  a  possibility  of
making  a  passage  without  the  protection  of  the  Spanish  fleet,
he  observed.  His  vessels  were  mere  transport-boats,  without
the  least  power  of  resisting  an  enemy.  The  Hollanders  and
Zeelanders,  with  one  hundred  and  forty  cruisers,  had  shut
him  up  in  all  directions.  He  could  neither  get  out  from
Antwerp  nor  from  Sluys.  There  were  large  English  ships,
too,  cruising  in  the  channel,  and  they  were  getting  ready  in
the  Netherlands  and  in  England  u  most  furiously.” 1  The
delays  had  been  so  great,  that  their  secret  had  been  poorly
kept,  and  the  enemy  was  on  his  guard.  If  Santa  Cruz  had
come,  Alexander  declared  that  he  should  have  already  been
in  England.  When  he  did  come  he  should  still  be  prepared
to  make  the  passage  ;  but  to  talk  of  such  an  attempt  without
the  Armada  was  senseless,  and  he  denounced  the  madness  of
that  proposition  to  his  Majesty  in  vehement  and  unmeasured
terms.2  His  army,  by  sickness  and  other  causes,  had  been
reduced  to  one-half  the  number  considered  necessary  for  the
invasion,  and  the  rebels  had  established  regular  squadrons  in
the  Scheldt,  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  forts  at  Lillo,  Liefkens-
hoek,  Saftingen,  and  other  points  close  to  Antwerp.  There
were  so  many  of  these  war- vessels,  and  all  in  such  excellent
order,  that  they  were  a  most  notable  embarrassment  to  him,
he  observed,  and  his  own  flotilla  would  run  great  risk  of  being
utterly  destroyed.  Alexander  had  been  personally  superin¬
tending  matters  at  Sluys,  Ghent,  and  Antwerp,  and  had
strengthened  with  artillery  the  canal  which  he  had  con¬
structed  between  Sas  and  Sluys.  Meantime  his  fresh  troops
had  been  slowly  arriving,  but  much  sickness  prevailed  among
them.  The  Italians  were  dying  fast,  almost  all  the  Spaniards
were  in  hospital,  and  the  others  were  so  crippled  and  worn
out  that  it  was  most  pitiable  to  behold  them ;  yet  it  was  abso-

1  Parma  to  Philip,  21  Dec.,  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  2  Ibid.

VOL.  II. — Y

>

322  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XVII.

lutely  necessary  that  those  who  were  in  health  should  accom¬
pany  him  to  England/  since  otherwise  his  Spanish  force
would  he  altogether  too  weak  to  do  the  service  expected.
He  had  got  together  a  good  number  of  transports.  Not
counting  his  Antwerp  fleet — which  could  not  stir  from  port,  as
he  bitterly  complained,  nor  be  of  any  use,  on  account  of  the
rebel  blockade — he  had  between  Dunkerk  and  Newport
seventy-four  vessels  of  various  kinds  fit  for  sea-service,  one
hundred  and  fifty  flat-bottoms  (pleytas),  and  seventy  river-
hoys,  all  which  were  to  be  assembled  at  Sluys,  whence  they
would — so  soon  as  Santa  Cruz  should  make  his  appearance —
set  forth  for  England.1 2  This  force  of  transports  he  pro¬
nounced  sufficient,  when  properly  protected  by  the  Spanish
Armada,  to  carry  himself  and  his  troops  across  the  channel.
If,  therefore,  the  matter  did  not  become  publicly  known,  and
if  the  weather  proved  favourable,  it  was  probable  that  his
Majesty's  desire  would  soon  be  fulfilled  according  to  the  plan
proposed.  The  companies  of  light  horse  and  of  arquebus-
men,  with  which  he  meant  to  make  his  entrance  into  London,
had  been  clothed,  armed,  and  mounted,  he  said,  in  a  manner
delightful  to  contemplate,  and  those  soldiers  at  least  might
be  trusted — if  they  could  only  effect  their  passage — to  do
good  service,  and  make  matters  quite  secure.3

But  craftily  as  the  King  and  Duke  had  been  dealing,  it
had  been  found  impossible  to  keep  such  vast  preparations
entirely  secret.  Walsingham  was  in  full  possession  of  their
plans  down  to  the  most  minute  details.  The  misfortune  was
that  he  was  unable  to  persuade  his  sovereign,  Lord  Burghley,
and  others  of  the  peace-party,  as  to  the  accuracy  of  his  in¬
formation.  Not  only  was  he  thoroughly  instructed  in  regard
to  the  number  of  men,  vessels,  horses,  mules,  saddles,  spurs,
lances,  barrels  of  beer  and  tons  of  biscuit,  and  other  par¬
ticulars  of  the  contemplated  invasion,  but  he  had  even  received

1  Parma  to  Philip,  Dec.  21,  158?.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Ibid.  (MS.  last  cited.)

3  “  Se  ban  vestido,  armado,  y  enca-
balgado,  que  es  placer  de  verlas,  y  la

soldadesca  de  ellas  es  tal  que,  si  pue-
den  pasar,  haran  a  V.  M.  buen  servizio
y  asegurararan  mucho  el  servizio.”
MS.  Letter  last  cited.

1587.

WALSINGHAM  AWARE  OF  THE  SPANISH  PLOT.

323

curious  intelligence  as  to  the  gorgeous  equipment  of  those
very  troops,  with  which  the  Duke  was  just  secretly  an¬
nouncing  to  the  King  his  intention  of  making  his  triumphal
entrance  into  the  English  capital.  Sir  Francis  knew  how
many  thousand  yards  of  cramoisy  velvet,  how  many  hundred¬
weight  of  gold  and  silver  embroidery,  how  much  satin  and
feathers,  and  what  quantity  of  pearls  and  diamonds,  Farnese
had  been  providing  himself  withal.  He  knew  the  tailors,
jewellers,  silversmiths,  and  haberdashers,  with  whom  the
great  Alexander — as  he  now  began  to  he  called — had  been
dealing ;  hut  when  he  spoke  at  the  council-board,  it  was  to

1  “There  is  provided  for  lights  a
great  number  of  torches,  and  so  tem¬
pered  that  no  water  can  put  them  out.
A  great  number  of  little  mills  for
grinding  corn,  great  store  of  biscuit
baked  and  oxen  salted,  great  number
of  saddles  and  boots,  also  there  is  made
500  pair  of  velvet  shoes — red,  crimson
velvet,  and  in  every  cloister  through¬
out  the  country  great  quantity  of  roses
made  of  silk,  white  and  red,  which  are
to  be  badges  for  divers  of  his  gentle¬
men.  By  reason  of  these  roses  it  is
expected  he  is  going  for  England.
There  is  sold  to  the  Prince  by  John
Angel,  pergaman,  ten  hundred-weight
of  velvet,  gold  and  silver  to  embroider
hi3  apparel  withal.  The  covering  to
his  mules  i3  most  gorgeously  embroi¬
dered  with  gold  and  silver,  which
carry  his  baggage.  There  is  also  sold
to  him  by  the  Italian  merchants  at
least  670  pieces  of  velvet  to  apparel
him  and  his  train.  Every  captain  has
received  a  gift  from  the  Prince  to
make  himself  brave,  and  for  Captain
Corralini,  an  Italian,  who  hath  one
cornet  of  horse,  I  have  seen  with  my
eyes  a  saddle  with  the  trappings  of  his
horse,  his  coat  and  rapier  and  dagger,
which  cost  3.500  French  crowns.  (//)
All  their  lances  are  painted  of  divers
colours,  blue  and  white,  green  and
white,  and  most  part  blood-red — so
there  i3  as  great  preparation  for  a
triumph  as  for  war.  A  great  number
of  English  priests  come  to  Antwerp
from  all  places.  The  commandment
is  given  to  all  the  churches  to  read
the  Litany  daily  for  the  prosperity  of
the  Prince  in  his  enterprise.”  John

Giles  to  Walsingham,  4  Dec.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

The  same  letter  conveyed  also  very
detailed  information  concerning  the
naval  preparations  by  the  Duke,  be¬
sides  accurate  inteligence  in  regard
to  the  progress  of  the  armada  in  Cadiz
and  Lisbon.

Sir  William  Russel  wrote  also  from
Flushing  concerning  these  prepara¬
tions  in  much  the  same  strain ;  but  it
is  worthy  of  note  that  he  considered
Farnese  to  bo  rather  intending  a  move¬
ment  against  Frauce.

“The  Prince  of  Parma,”  he  said,
“  is  making  great  preparations  for  war,
and  with  all  expedition  means  to  march
a  great  army,  and  for  a  triumph,  the
coats  and  costly  apparel  for  his  own
body  doth  exceed  for  embroidery,  and
beset  with  jewels ;  for  all  tho  embroi¬
derers  and  diamond-cutters  work  both
night  and  day ,  such  haste  is  made.
Five  hundred  velvet  coats  of  one  sort
for  lances,  and  a  great  number  of
brave  new  coats  made  for  horsemen ;
30,000  men*,  are  ready,  and  gather  in
Brabant  and  Flanders.  It  is  said  that
there  shall  be  in  two  days  10,000  to
do  some  great  exploit  in  these  parts,
and  20,000  to  march  with  the  Prince  into
France ,  and  for  certain  it  is  not  known
what  way  or  how  they  shall  march,
but  all  are  ready  at  an  hour’s  warning
— 4,000  saddles,  4,000  lances,  6,000
pairs  of  boots,  2,000  barrels  of  beer,
biscuit  sufficient  for  a  camp  of  20,000
men,  &c.  The  Prince  hath  received
a  marvellous  costly  garland  or  crown
from  the  Pope,  and  is  chosen  chief  of
the  holy  league,  and  now  puts  in  his

324

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

ears  wilfully  deaf.  Nor  was  much  concealed  from  the  Argus-
eyed  politicians  in  the  republic.  The  States  were  more  and
more  intractable.  They  knew  nearly  all  the  truth  with  regard
to  the  intercourse  between  the  Queen's  government  and
Farnese,  and  they  suspected  more  than  the  truth.  The  list
of  English  commissioners  privately  agreed  upon  between
Burghley  and  De  Loo  was  known  to  Barneveld,  Maurice,
and  Hohenlo,  before  it  came  to  the  ears  of  Leicester.  In
June,  Buckhurst  had  been  censured  by  Elizabeth  for  opening
the  peace  matter  to  members  of  the  States,  according  to  her
bidding,  and  in  July  Leicester  was  rebuked  for  exactly  the
opposite  delinquency.  She  was  very  angry  that  he  had
delayed  the  communication  of  her  policy  so  long,  but  she  ex¬
pressed  her  anger  only  when  that  policy  had  proved  so  trans¬
parent  as  to  make  concealment  hopeless.  Leicester,  as  well
as  Buckhurst,  knew  that  it  was  idle  to  talk  to  the  Nether-
landers  of  peace,  because  of  their  jirofound  distrust  in  every
word  that  came  from  Spanish  or  Italian  lips  ;  but  Leicester,
less  frank  than  Buckhurst,  preferred  to  flatter  his  sovereign,
rather  than  to  tell  her  unwelcome  truths.  More  fortunate
than  Buckhurst,  he  was  rewarded  for  his  flattery  by  boundless
affection,  and  promotion  to  the  very  highest  post  in  England
when  the  hour  of  England's  greatest  peril  had  arrived,  while
the  truth-telling  counsellor  was  consigned  to  imprisonment
and  disgrace.  When  the  Queen  complained  sharply  that  the
States  were  mocking  her,  and  that  she  was  touched  in  honour
at  the  prospect  of  not  keeping  her  plighted  word  to  Farnese,
the  Earl  assured  her  that  the  Netherlanders  were  fast  changing
their  views  ;  that  although  the  very  name  of  peace  had  till
then  been  odious  and  loathsome,1  yet  now,  as  coming  from
her  Majesty,  they  would  accept  it  with  thankful  hearts.

arras  two  cross  keys.  The  King  of
France  hath  written  for  the  Prince
with  expedition,  and  ’tis  said  he
marches  thither ,  and  on  the  way  will
besiege  Cambray,”  See.  Occurrences,
from  the  Governor  of  Flushing,  Nov.  9,
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Thus  Sir  William  seems  to  have
been  less  accurately  acquainted  with

the  movements  of  Farnese  than  was
John  Giles,  and  the  mysterious  precau¬
tions  of  the  King  and  his  general  had
been  far  from  fruitless.

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  9  Oct.

1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Same  to  same,  1  Oct.  1587.  (S.

P.  Office  MS.)

1587.

WHICH  THE  STATES  WELL  UNDERSTAND.

325

The  States,  or  the  leading  members  of  that  assembly,  factious
fellows,  pestilent  and  seditious  knaves,1  were  doing  their
utmost,  and  were  singing  sirens'  songs2  to  enchant  and  delude
the  people,  but  they  were  fast  losing  their  influence — so
warmly  did  the  country  desire  to  conform  to  her  Majesty's
pleasure.  He  expatiated,  however,  upon  the  difficulties  in  his
path.  The  knowledge  possessed  by  the  pestilent  fellows  as  to
the  actual  position  of  affairs,  was  very  mischievous.  It  was
honey  to  Maurice  and  Hohenlo,3  he  said,  that  the  Queen's
secret  practices  with  Farnese  had  thus  been  discovered.
Nothing  could  be  more  marked  than  the  jollity  with  which
the  ringleaders  hailed  these  preparations  for  peace- making,4
for  they  now  felt  certain  that  the  government  of  their  country
had  been  fixed  securely  in  their  own  hands.  They  were
canonized,  said  the  Earl,  for  their  hostility  to  peace.5

Should  not  this  conviction,  on  the  part  of  men  who  had  so
many  means  of  feeling  the  popular  pulse,  have  given  the
Queen's  government  pause  P  To  serve  his  sovereign  in  truth,
Leicester  might  have  admitted  a  possibility  at  least  of  honesty
on  the  part  of  men  who  were  so  ready  to  offer  up  their  lives
for  their  country.  For  in  a  very  few  weeks  he  was  obliged
to  confess  that  the  people  were  no  longer  so  well  disposed  to
acquiesce  in  her  Majesty's  policy.  The  great  majority,  both
of  the  States  and  the  people,  were  in  favour,  he  agreed,  of
continuing  the  war.  The  inhabitants  of  the  little  Province  of
Holland  alone,  he  said,  had  avowed  their  determination  to
maintain  their  rights — even  if  obliged  to  fight  single-handed —
and  to  shed  the  last  drop  in  their  veins,  rather  than  to  submit
again  to  Spanish  tyranny.6  This  seemed  a  heroic  resolution,
worthy  the  sympathy  of  a  brave  Englishman,  but  the  Earl's
only  comment  upon  it  was,  that  it  proved  the  ringleaders
“  either  to  be  traitors  or  else  the  most  blindest  asses  in  the

1  Same  to  same,  5  Nov.  1587.  (S.
P.  Office  MS.)

2  Same  to  Burghley,  30  Oct.  1587.
(Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  57.  MS.)

3  Leicester  to  Burghley,  17  Aug.

1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Same  to  same,  30  Oct.  1587.  (Brit.

Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  57.  MS.)

6  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  9  Oct.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Leicester  to  Burghley,  30  Oct.
1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  57.  MS.)
Same  to  the  Queen,  11  Oct.  1587.  (S.

P.  Office  MS.)

326

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SYII.

world”1  He  never  scrupled,  on  repeated  occasions,  to  in¬
sinuate  that  Barneveld,  Hohenlo,  Buys,  Roorda,  Sainte  Al-
degonde,  and  the  Nassaus,  had  organized  a  plot  to  sell  their
country  to  Spain.2  Of  this  there  was  not  the  faintest  evidence,
hut  it  was  the  only  way  in  which  he  chose  to  account  for  their
persistent  opposition  to  the  peace-negotiations,  and  to  then
reluctance  to  confer  absolute  power  on  himself.  “;Tis  a
crabbed,  sullen,  proud  kind  of  people,”  said  he,  “  and  bent  on
establishing  a  popular  government,”3 — a  purpose  which  seemed
somewhat  inconsistent  with  the  plot  for  selling  their  country
to  Spain,  which  he  charged  in  the  same  breath  on  the  same
persons.

Early  in  August,  by  the  Queen's  command,  he  had  sent  a
formal  communication  respecting  the  private  negotiations  to
the  States,  but  he  could  tell  them  no  secret.  The  names  of
the  commissioners,  and  even  the  supposed  articles  of  a  treaty
already  concluded,  were  flying  from  town  to  town,  from  mouth
to  mouth,  so  that  the  Earl  pronounced  it  impossible  for  one,
not  on  the  spot,  to  imagine  the  excitement  which  existed.

He  had  sent  a  state-counsellor,  one  Bardesius,  to  the  Hague,
to  open  the  matter  ;  but  that  personage  had  only  ventured
to  whisper  a  word  to  one  or  two  members  of  the  States,  and
was  assured  that  the  proposition,  if  made,  would  raise  such  a
tumult  of  fury,  that  he  might  fear  for  his  life.  So  poor  Bar¬
desius  came  back  to  Leicester,  fell  on  his  knees,  and  implored
him,  at  least  to  pause  in  these  fatal  proceedings.4  After  an
interval,  he  sent  two  eminent  statesmen,  Valk  and  Menin,  to
lay  the  subject  before  the  assembly.  They  did  so,  and  it  was
met  by  fierce  denunciation.  On  their  return,  the  Earl,  finding
that  so  much  violence  had  been  excited,  pretended  that  they
had  misunderstood  his  meaning,  and  that  he  had  never  meant
to  propose  peace-negotiations.  But  Yalk  and  Menin  were  too

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  1*7  Nov.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

9  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  5  Nov.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Same  to

Burghley,  6  Nov.  1587.  (Brit.  Mus.
Galba,  D.  II.  p.  176.  MS.)

3  Same  to  same,  11  Oct.  1587.  (S.

P.  Office  MS.)

4  Leicester  to  Burghley,  30  Sept.
1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  34.
MS.)

1587.

LEICESTER’S  GREAT  UNPOPULARITY.

327

old  politicians  to  be  cangbt  in  such  a  trap,  and  they  produced
a  brief,  drawn  up  in  Italian — the  foreign  language  best  un¬
derstood  by  the  Earl — with  his  own  corrections  and  inter¬
lineations,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  admit  that  there  had  been
no  misconception.1

Leicester  at  last  could  no  longer  doubt  that  he  was  uni¬
versally  odious  in  the  Provinces.  Hohenlo,  Barneveld,  and
the  rest,  who  had  “  championed*  the  country  against  the
peace/’  were  carrying  all  before  them.  They  had  persuaded
the  people,  that  the  “  Queen  was  but  a  tickle  stay  for  them/’
and  had  inflated  young  Maurice  with  vast  ideas  of  his  im¬
portance,  telling  him  that  he  was  “a  natural  patriot,  the
image  of  his  noble  father,  whose  memory  was  yet  great  among
them,  as  good  reason,  dying  in  their  cause,  as  he  had  done.” 2
The  country  was  bent  on  a  popular  government,  and  on
maintaining  the  war.  There  was  no  possibility,  he  confessed,
that  they  would  ever  confer  the  authority  on  him  which  they
had  formerly  bestowed.3  The  Queen  had  promised,  when  he
left  England  the  second  time,  that  his  absence  should  be  for
but  three  months,4  and  he  now  most  anxiously  claimed  per¬
mission  to  depart.  Above  all  things,  he  deprecated  being
employed  as  a  peace-commissioner.  He  was,  of  all  men,  the
most  unfit  for  such  a  post.  At  the  same  time  he  implored
the  statesmen  at  home  to  be  wary  in  selecting  the  wisest
persons  for  that  arduous  duty,  in  order  that  the  peace  might
be  made  for  Queen  Elizabeth,  as  well  as  for  King  Philip.
He  strongly  recommended,  for  that  duty,  Beale,  the  councillor,
who  with  Killigrew  had  replaced  the  hated  Wilkes  and  the
pacific  Bartholomew  Clerk.  “Mr.  Beale,  brother-in-law  to
Walsingham,  is  in  my  books  a  prince,”  said  the  Earl.  “He

1  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  34.  Hoofd,  ‘Yer-
volgh,’  276.  Wagenaar,  viii.  236.
Meteren,  xiv.  260.  Compare  Reyd,  vi.
109,  who  says  however  that  Yalk  and
Menin  could  produce  no  written  in¬
structions  from  Leicester,  but  that  the
characters  of  such  well-known  states¬
men  carried  conviction  of  the  truth  of

their  statements.

2  Leicester  to  the  Lords,  21  Nov.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Leicester  to  Walsnigham,  13  Oct.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Leicester  to  Burghley,  30  Sept.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

328

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

was  droivned  in  England,  but  most  useful  in  the  Netherlands.
Without  him  I  am  naked/'1

And  at  last  the  governor  told  the  Queen  what  Buckhurst
and  Walsingham  had  been  perpetually  telling  lifer,  that  the
Duke  of  Parma  meant  mischief ;  and  he  sent  the  same
information  as  to  hundreds  of  boats  preparing,  with  six
thousand  shirts  for  camisados,  7000  pairs  of  wading  boots,
and  saddles,  stirrups,  and  'Spurs,  enough  for  a  choice  band  of
3000  men.2  A  shrewd  troop,  said  the  Earl,  of  the  first
soldiers  in  Christendom,  to  be  landed  some  fine  morning  in
England.  And  he  too  had  heard  of  the  jewelled  suits  of
cramoisy  velvet,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  finery  with  which  the
triumphant  Alexander  was  intending  to  astonish  London.
u  Get  horses  enough,  and  muskets  enough  in  England,"  ex¬
claimed  Leicester,  “  and  then  our  people  will  not  be  beaten,
I  warrant  you,  if  well  led."3

And  now,  the  governor — who,  in  order  to  soothe  his
sovereign  and  comply  with  her  vehement  wishes,  had  so  long
misrepresented  the  state  of  public  feeling — not  only  confessed
that  Papists  and  Protestants,  gentle  and  simple,  the  States
and  the  people,  throughout  the  republic,  were  all  opposed  to
any  negotiation  with  the  enemy,  but  lifted  up  his  own  voice,
and  in  earnest  language  expressed  his  opinion  of  the  Queen's
infatuation.

“  Oh,  my  Lord,  what  a  treaty  is  this  for  peace,"  said  he  to
Burghley,  “that  we  must  treat,  altogether  disarmed  and
weakened,  and  the  King  having  made  his  forces  stronger  than
ever  he  had  known  in  these  parts,  besides  what  is  coming  out
of  Spain,  and  yet  we  will  presume  of  good  conditions.  It
grieveth  me  to  the  heart.  But  I  fear  you  will  all  smart  for
it,  and  I  pray  God  her  Majesty  feel  it  not,  if  it  be  His  blessed
will.  She  meaneth  well  and  sincerely  to  have  peace,  but  God
knows  that  this  is  not  the  way.  Well,  God  Almighty  defend

3  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  4  Aug.
1581.  Same  to  same,  16  Sept.  1587.
(3.  P.  Office  MSS.)

3  Leicester  to  Burghley,  5  Nov.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Ibid.

1587.

THE  QUEEN  WARNED  AGAINST  TREATING.

323

us  and  the  realm,  and  especially  her  Majesty.  But  look  for  a
sharp  war,  or  a  miserable  peace,  to  undo  others  and  ourselves
after ." 1

Walsingham,  too,  was  determined  not  to  act  as  a  com¬
missioner.  If  his  failing  health  did  not  serve  as  an  excuse,
he  should  be  obliged  to  refuse,  he  said,  and  so  forfeit  her
Majesty's  favour,  rather  than  be  instrumental  in  bringing
about  her  ruin,  and  that  of  his  country.  Never  for  an  instant
had  the  Secretary  of  State  faltered  in  his  opposition  to  the
timid  policy  of  Burghley.  Again  and  again  he  had  detected
the  intrigues  of  the  Lord- Treasurer  and  Sir  J ames  Croft,  and
ridiculed  the  “ comptroller's  peace."2

And  especially  did  Walsingham  bewail  the  implicit  con¬
fidence  which  the  Queen  placed  in  the  sugary  words  of
Alexander,  and  the  fatal  parsimony  which  caused  her  to
neglect  defending  herself  against  Scotland;3  for  he  was  as
well  informed  as  was  Farnese  himself  of  Philip's  arrangements
with  the  Scotch  lords,  and  of  the  subsidies  in  men  and  money
by  which  their  invasion  of  England  was  to  be  made  part  of
the  great  scheme.  “No  one  thing,"  sighed  Walsingham,
“doth  more  prognosticate  an  alteration  of  this  estate,  than
that  a  prince  of  her  Majesty’s  judgment  should  neglect,  in

1  Leicester  to  Burghley,  7  Nov.
1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

And  to  Walsingham  he  wrote  most
earnestly  in  the  same  vein.  “Our
enemies  have  dealt  more  like  politic
men  than  we  have,”  he  said,  “for  it
was  always  agreed  heretofore  among
us  that  there  was  no  way  to  make  a
good  peace  but  by  a  strong  war.  .  .  .
Now  is  the  difference  put  in  experience,
for  we  see  the  Prince  of  Parma  did  not
weaken  himself  to  trust  upon  peace,
but  hath  increased  his  forces  in  the
highest  degree,  whilst  we  talked  of
peace;  that  if  we  break  off,  he  might
either  compel  us  to  his  peace  or  be
beforehand  with  us  by  the  readiness
of  his  forces.  This  was  told  and  fore¬
told,  but  yet  no  ear  given  nor  care
taken.  .  .  .  Surely  you  shall  find  the
Prince  meaneth  no  peace.  I  see  money
doth  undo  all — the  care  to  keep  it,  and
not  upon  just  cause  to  spend  it.  Her

Majesty  doth  still  blame  me  for  the
expense  of  her  treasure  here,  which
doth  make  one  weary  of  my  life ;  but
her  Majesty  will  rue  the  sparing  counsel
at  such  times.

He  then  sent  information  as  to
Parma’s  intentions,  derived  from  an
intercepted  letter  of  a  man  in  Sir  Wil¬
liam  Stanley’s  regiment  to  a  priest  in
England,  “  bidding  his  friend  be  sure
they  are  shortly  to  be  in  England.”
.  .  .  “It  were  better  to  her  Majesty,”
added  Leicester,  “than  a  million
pounds  sterling,  that  she  had  done  as
the  Duke  of  Parma  hath  done.”  Lei¬
cester  to  Walsingham,  7  Nov.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Walsingham  to  Leicester,  21  Sept.
1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  78.
MS.)

3  Walsingham  to  Leicester,  12  Nov.
1587.  (Brit.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  178.
MS.)

330

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

respect  of  a  little  charges,  the  stopping  of  so  dangerous  a

gap . The  manner  of  our  cold  and  careless  proceeding

here,  in  this  time  of  peril,  maketh  me  to  take  no  comfort  of
my  recovery  of  health,  for  that  I  see,  unless  it  shall  please
God  in  mercy  and  miraculously  to  preserve  us,  we  cannot  long
stand.” 1

Leicester,  finding  himself  unable  to  counteract  the  policy
of  Barneveld  and  his  party,  by  expostulation  or  argument,
conceived  a  very  dangerous  and  criminal  project  before  he
left  the  country.  The  facts  are  somewhat  veiled  in  mystery  ;
but  he  was  suspected,  on  weighty  evidence,  of  a  design  to
kidnap  both  Maurice  and  Barneveld,  and  carry  them  off  to
England.  Of  this  intention,  which  was  foiled  at  any  rate,
before  it  could  be  carried  into  execution,  there  is  perhaps
not  conclusive  proof,  but* it  has  already  been  shown,  from  a
deciphered  letter,  that  the  Queen  had  once  given  Buckhurst
and  Wilkes  peremptory  orders  to  seize  the  person  of  Hohenlo,
and  it  is  quite  possible  that  similar  orders  may  have  been
received  at  a  later  moment  with  regard  to  the  young  Count
and  the  Advocate.  At  any  rate,  it  is  certain  that  late  in  the
autumn,  some  friends  of  Barneveld  entered  his  bedroom,  at
the  Hague,  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  informed  him  that  a  plot
was  on  foot  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  him,  and  that  an  armed
force  was  already  on  its  way  to  execute  this  purpose  of  Lei¬
cester,  before  the  dawn  of  day.  The  Advocate,  without  loss  of
time,  took  his  departure  for  Delft,  a  step  which  was  followed,
shortly  afterwards,  by  Maurice.2

Nor  was  this  the  only  daring  stroke  which  the  Earl  had
meditated.  During  the  progress  of  the  secret  negotiations  with
Parma,  he  had  not  neglected  those  still  more  secret  schemes
to  which  he  had  occasionally  made  allusion.  He  had  deter-

1  “  A  letter  from  the  Duke  of  Parma,”
says  the  Secretary,  “bred  in  her  Ma¬
jesty  such  a  dangerous  security,  as  all
advertisements  of  danger  are  neglected,
and  great  expedition  used  in  despatch¬
ing  of  the  commissioners.  I  was  fully
resolved  in  no  sort  to  have  accepted
the  charge,  had  not  my  sickness  pre¬
vented,  for  that  I  would  be  loth  to  be

engaged  in  a  service  that  all  men  of
judgment  may  see  cannot  but  work  her
Majesty’s  ruin.  I  pray  God  I  and
others  of  my  opinion  prove  in  this  false
prophets.”  (Ibid.)

2  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  51.  Hoofd,  ‘Yer-
volgh,’ 281.  Wagenaar,  viii.  240.  Yan
Yryn  op  Wagenaar,  viii.  G8,  69.

1587.  LEICESTER’S  SCHEMES  AGAINST  BARNEYELD.  331

mined,  if  possible,  to  obtain  possession  of  the  most  important
cities  in  Holland  and  Zeeland.  It  was  very  plain  to  him,
that  he  could  no  longer  hope,  by  fair  means,  for  the  great
authority  once  conferred  upon  him  by  the  free  will  of  the
States.  It  was  his  purpose,  therefore,  by  force  and  stratagem
to  recover  his  lost  power.  We  have  heard  the  violent  terms
in  which  both  the  Queen  and  the  Earl  denounced  the  men
who  accused  the  English  government  of  any  such  intention.  It
had  been  formally  denied  by  the  States- General  that  Bar-
neveld  had  ever  used  the  language  in  that  assembly  with
which  he  had  been  charged.  He  had  only  revealed  to  them
the  exact  purport  of  the  letter  to  Junius,  and  of  the  Queen’s
secret  instructions  to  Leicester.1  Whatever  he  may  have
said  in  private  conversation,  and  whatever  deductions  he  may
have  made  among  his  intimate  friends,  from  the  admitted
facts  in  the  case,  could  hardly  be  made  matters  of  record.  It
does  not  appear  that  he,  or  the  statesmen  who  acted  with
him,  considered  the  Earl  capable  of  a  deliberate  design  to  sell
the  cities,  thus  to  be  acquired,  to  Spain,  as  the  price  of  peace
for  England.  Certainly  Elizabeth  would  have  scorned  such  a
crime,  and  was  justly  indignant  at  rumours  prevalent  to  that
effect ;  but  the  wrath  of  the  Queen  and  of  her  favourite  were,
perhaps,  somewhat  simulated,  in  order  to  cover  their  real
mortification  at  the  discovery  of  designs  on  the  part  of  the
Earl  which  could  not  be  denied.  Hot  only  had  they  been  at
last  compelled  to  confess  these  negotiations,  which  for  several
months  had  been  concealed  and  stubbornlv  denied,  but  the
still  graver  plots  of  the  Earl  to  regain  his  much-coveted
authority  had  been,  in  a  startling  manner,  revealed.  The
leaders  of  the  States-General  had  a  right  to  suspect  the
English  Earl  of  a  design  to  reenact  the  part  of  the  Duke  of
Anjou,  and  were  justified  in  taking  stringent  measures  to
prevent  a  calamity,  which,  as  they  believed,  was  impending
over  their  little  commonwealth.  The  high-handed  dealings
of  Leicester  in  the  city  of  Utrecht  have  been  already  de-

2  Resol.  Holl.  15,  16,  18  Sept.  1587,  bl.  253,  254,  258,  cited  in  Yan  Wyn,
ubi  sup.

#

332

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SYII.

scribed.  The  most  respectable  and  influential  burghers  of  the
place  had  been  imprisoned  and  banished,  the  municipal  go¬
vernment  wrested  from  the  hands  to  which  it  legitimately
belonged,  and  confided  to  adventurers,  who  wore  the  cloak  of
Calvinism  to  conceal  their  designs,  and  a  successful  effort  had
been  made,  in  the  name  of  democracy,  to  eradicate  from  one
ancient  province  the  liberty  on  which  it  prided  itself.

In  the  course  of  the  autumn,  an  attempt  was  made  to  play
the  same  game  at  Amsterdam.  A  plot  was  discovered,  before
it  was  fairly  matured,  to  seize  the  magistrates  of  that  im¬
portant  city,  to  gain  possession  of  the  arsenals,  and  to  place
the  government  in  the  hands  of  well-known  Leicestrians.  A
list  of  fourteen  influential  citizens,  drawn  up  in  the  writing
of  Burgrave,  the  EarTs  confidential  secretary,  was  found,  all
of  whom,  it  was  asserted,  had  been  doomed  to  the  scaffold.1

The  plot  to  secure  Amsterdam  had  failed,  but,  in  North
Holland,  Medenblik  was  held  firmly  for  Leicester,  by  Diedrich
Sonoy,  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  States.2  The  important  city
of  Enkhuyzen,  too,  was  very  near  being  secured  for  the  Earl,
but  a  still  more  significant  movement  was  made  at  Leyden.
That  heroic  city,  ever  since  the  famous  siege  of  1574,  in  which
the  Spaniard  had  been  so  signally  foiled,  had  distinguished
itself  by  great  liberality  of  sentiment  in  religious  matters.
The  burghers  were  inspired  by  a  love  of  country,  and  a  hatred
of  oppression,  both  civil  and  ecclesiastical ;  and  Papists  and
Protestants,  who  had  fought  side  by  side  against  the  common
foe,  were  not  disposed  to  tear  each  other  to  pieces,  now  that
he  had  been  excluded  from  their  gates.  Meanwhile,  however,
refugee  Flemings  and  Brabantines  had  sought  an  asylum  in
the  city,  and  being,  as  usual,  of  the  strictest  sect  of  the

1  Hoofd,  xxvi.  1199,  1200.  "Wage-
naar,  viii.  243-246.

Among  them  was  the  name  of  bur¬
gomaster  Hoofd,  father  of  the  illus¬
trious  historian  of  the  Netherlands.
Much  caution  should  be  observed,
however,  in  accepting,  to  their  full
extent,  charges  made  in  times  of  such
violent  party  spirit.  Leicester  would
have  hardly  ventured  to  hang  fourteen

such  men  as  Hoofd  and  his  compeers,
although  he  would  willingly  have
brought  Barneveld  and  Buys  to  the
gibbet.  He  would  have  imprisoned
and  banished,  no  doubt,  as  many
Amsterdam  burghers  of  the  States-
party  as  he  could  lay  hands  on.

2  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  7,  xxiv.  119-204,
208-233,  279-290.  Reyd,  vi.  101.  Wage-
naar,  209,  210,  270-278.

1587.  LEICESTRIAN  CONSPIRACY  AT  LEYDEN.  333

Calvinists  were  shocked  at  the  latitudinarianism  which  pre¬
vailed.  To  the  honour  of  the  city — as  it  seems  to  us  now —
hut,  to  their  horror,  it  was  even  found  that  one  or  two  Papists
had  seats  in  the  magistracy.1  More  than  all  this,  there  was
a  school  in  the  town  kept  by  a  Catholic,  and  Adrian  van  der
Werff  himself — the  renowned  burgomaster,  who  had  sustained
the  city  during  the  dreadful  leaguer  of  1574,  and  who  had
told  the  famishing  burghers  that  they  might  eat  him  if  they
liked,  but  that  they  should  never  surrender  to  the  Spaniards
while  he  remained  alive — even  Adrian  van  der  Werff  had  sent
his  son  to  this  very  school.2  To  the  clamour  made  by  the
refugees  against  this  spirit  of  toleration,  one  of  the  favourite
preachers  in  the  town,  of  Arminian  tendencies,  had  declared
in  the  pulpit,  that  he  would  as  lieve  see  the  Spanish  as  the
Calvinistic  inquisition  established  over  his  country  ;  using  an
expression,  in  regard  to  the  church  of  Geneva,  more  energetic
than  decorous.3

It  was  from  Leyden  that  the  chief  opposition  came  to  a
synod,  by  which  a  great  attempt  was  to  be  made  towards  sub¬
jecting  the  new  commonwealth  to  a  masked  theocracy  ;  a
scheme  which  the  States  of  Holland  had  resisted  with  might
and  main.  The  Calvinistic  party,  waxing  stronger  in  Leyden,
although  still  in  a  minority,  at  last  resolved  upon  a  strong
effort  to  place  the  city  in  the  hands  of  that  great  represen¬
tative  of  Calvinism,  the  Earl  of  Leicester.  Jacques  Yolmar,
a  deacon  of  the  church,  Cosmo  de  Pescarengis,  a  Genoese
captain  of  much  experience  in  the  service  of  the  republic,
Adolphus  de  Meetkerke,  former  president  of  Flanders,  who
had  been,  Joy  the  States,  deprived  of  the  seat  in  the  great
council  to  which  the  Earl  had  appointed  him  ;  Doctor  Sara  via,
professor  of  theology  in  the  university,  with  other  deacons,
preachers,  and  captains,  went  at  different  times  from  Leyden
to  Utrecht,  and  had  secret  interviews  with  Leicester.

A  plan  was  at  last  agreed  upon,  according  to  which,  about
the  middle  of  October,  a  revolution  should  be  effected  in

1  Bor,  xxiii.  93-105.  2  Ibid.

3  Ibid.  “Liever  de  Spaense  Ir.qui-

sitie  dan  de  Gieneefse  discipline,  die
pockige  lioere,”  p.  98.

334

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

Leyden.  Captain  Nicholas  de  Maulde,  who  had  recently  so
much  distinguished  himself  in  the  defence  of  Sluys,  was  sta¬
tioned  with  two  companies  of  States'  troops  in  the  city.  He
had  been  much  disgusted — not  without  reason — at  the  culp¬
able  negligence  through  which  the  courageous  efforts  of  the
Sluys  garrison  had  been  set  at  nought,  and  the  place  sacri¬
ficed,  when  it  might  so  easily  have  been  relieved  ;  and  he
ascribed  the  whole  of  the  guilt  to  Maurice,  Hohenlo,  and  the
States,  although  it  could  hardly  be  denied  that  at  least  an
equal  portion  belonged  to  Leicester  and  his  party.  The  young
captain  listened,  therefore,  to  a  scheme  propounded  to  him  by
Colonel  Cosmo  and  Deacon  Volmar,  in  the  name  of  Leicester.
He  agreed,  on  a  certain  day,  to  muster  his  company,  to  leave
the  city  by  the  Delft  gate — as  if  by  command  of  superior
authority — to  effect  a  junction  with  Captain  Heraugiere,
another  of  the  distinguished  malcontent  defenders  of  Sluys,  who
was  stationed,  with  his  command,  at  Delft,  and  then  to  re-enter
Leyden,  take  possession  of  the  town-hall,  arrest  all  the  magis¬
trates,  together  with  Adrian  van  der  Werff,  ex-burgomaster,
and  proclaim  Lord  Leicester,  in  the  name  of  Queen  Elizabeth,
legitimate  master  of  the  city.1  A  list  of  burghers,  who  were
to  be  executed,  was  likewise  agreed  upon,  at  a  final  meeting
of  the  conspirators  in  a  hostelry,  which  bore  the  ominous
name  of  ‘  The  Thunderbolt.'  A  desire  had  been  signified  by
Leicester,  in  the  preliminary  interviews  at  Utrecht,  that  all
bloodshed,  if  possible,  should  be  spared,2  but  it  was  certainly
an  extravagant  expectation,  considering  the  temper,  the  poli¬
tical  convictions,  and  the  known  courage  of  the  Leyden
burghers,  that  the  city  would  submit,  without  a  struggle,  to
this  invasion  of  all  their  rights.  It  could  hardly  be  doubted
that  the  streets  would  run  red  with  blood,  as  those  of  Antwerp
had  done,  when  a  similar  attempt,  on  the  part  of  Anjou,  had
been  foiled.

Unfortunately  for  the  scheme,  a  day  or  two  before  the
great  stroke  was  to  be  hazarded,  Cosmo  de  Pescarengis  had

J  Bor,  ubi  sup.  Reyd,  vii.  133,  134.  Meteren,  xiv.  261.
3  Bor,  Reyd,  Meteren,  ubi  sup.

1587.  THE  PLOT  TO  SEIZE  THE  CITT  DISCOVERED.  335

been  accidentally  arrested  for  debt.1  A  subordinate  accom¬
plice,  taking  alarm,  bad  then  gone  before  the  magistrate  and
revealed  the  plot.  V olmar  and  de  Maulde  fled  at  once,  but
were  soon  arrested  in  the  neighbourhood.  President  de  Meet-
kerke,  Professor  Saravia,  the  preacher  Yan  der  Wouw,  and
others  most  compromised,  effected  their  escape.2  The  matter
was  instantly  laid  before  the  States  of  Holland  by  the  ma¬
gistracy  of  Leyden,  and  seemed  of  the  gravest  moment.  In
the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  fatal  treason  of  York  and
Stanley  had  implanted  a  deep  suspicion  of  Leicester  in  the
hearts  of  almost  all  the  Netherlander,  which  could  not  be
eradicated.  The  painful  rumours  concerning  the  secret  ne¬
gotiations  with  Spain,  and  the  design  falsely  attributed  to  the
English  Queen,  of  selling  the  chief  cities  of  the  republic  to
Philip  as  the  price  of  peace,  and  of  reimbursement  for  ex¬
penses  incurred  by  her,  increased  the  general  excitement  to
fever.  It  was  felt  by  the  leaders  of  the  States  that  as  mortal
a  combat  lay  before  them  with  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  as  with
the  King  of  Spain,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  strike  a  severe
blow,  in  order  to  vindicate  their  imperilled  authority.

A  commission  was  appointed  by  the  high  court  of  Holland,
acting  in  conjunction  with  the  States  of  the  Provinces,  to  try
the  offenders.  Among  the  commissioners  were  Adrian  van  der
Werff,  John  van  der  Does,  who  had  been  military  commandant
of  Leyden  during  the  siege,  Barneveld,  and  other  distin¬
guished  personages,  over  whom  Count  Maurice  presided.3  The
accused  were  subjected  to  an  impartial  trial.  Without  torture,
they  confessed  their  guilt.4  It  is  true)  however,  that  Cosmo
was  placed  within  sight  of  the  rack.  He  avowed  that  his
object  had  been  to  place  the  city  under  the  authority  of  Lei¬
cester,  and  to  effect  this  purpose,  if  possible,  without  blood¬
shed.  He  declared  that  the  attempt  was  to  be  made  with  the
full  knowledge  and  approbation  of  the  Earl,  who  had  pro¬
mised  him  the  command  of  a  regiment  of  twelve  companies,  as

1  Bor,  Reyd,  Meteren,  ubi  sup.

3  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

4  So  say  Bor  and  Meteren ;  but

Reyd  says  that  they  were  put  to  the
torture,  p.  153.  KNae  pijnlijko
ondervraegi  nge.”

336

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

a  recompense  for  his  services,  if  they  proved  successful.  Lei¬
cester,  said  Cosmo,  had  also  pledged  himself,  in  case  the  men,
thus  executing  his  plans,  should  be  discovered  and  endangered,
to  protect  and  rescue  them,  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  all  his
fortune,  and  of  the  office  he  held.  When  asked  if  he  had  any
written  statement  from  his  Excellency  to  that  effect,  Cosmo
replied,  no,  nothing  hut  his  princely  word  which  he  had  volun¬
tarily  given.1

Volmar  made  a  similar  confession.  He,  too,  declared  that
he  had  acted  throughout  the  affair  by  express  command  of  the
Earl  of  Leicester.  Being  asked  if  he  had  any  written  evidence
of  the  fact,  he,  likewise,  replied  in  the  negative.  u  Then  his
Excellency  will  unquestionably  deny  your  assertion,”  said  the
judges.  “  Alas,  then  am  I  a  dead  man,”  replied  Volmar,  and
the  unfortunate  deacon  never  spoke  truer  words.  Captain  de
Maulde  also  confessed  his  crime.  He  did  not  pretend,  how¬
ever,  to  have  had  any  personal  communication  with  Leicester,
hut  said  that  the  affair  had  been  confided  to  him  by  Colonel
Cosmo,  on  the  express  authority  of  the  Earl,  and  that  he  had
believed  himself  to  he  acting  in  obedience  to  his  Excellency's
commands.2

On  the  26th  October,  after  a  thorough  investigation,  fol¬
lowed  by  a  full  confession  on  the  part  of  the  culprits,  the  three
were  sentenced  to  death.3  The  decree  was  surely  a  most
severe  one.  They  had  been  guilty  of  no  actual  crime,  and
only  in  case  of  high  treason  could  an  intention  to  commit  a
crime  he  considered,  by  the  laws  of  the  state,  an  offence
punishable  with  death.  But  it  was  exactly  because  it  was  im¬
portant  to  make  the  crime  high  treason  that  the  prisoners
were  condemned.  The  offence  was  considered  as  a  crime  not
against  Leyden,  hut  as  an  attempt  to  levy  war  upon  a  city

1  Bor,  Meteren,  uhi  sup.  Reyd  de¬
clares  that  Killigrew  (who  with
Beale,  was  member  of  the  state-
council  as  representative  of  the
Queen)  notified  the  commissioners
that  the  attempt  had  been  made  with
the  knowledge  and  consent  of  Lei¬
cester,  and  warned  them  not  to  be
precipitate  in  the  trial :  but  that  the

I  Earl,  who  was  then  at  Alkmar,

I  denied  all  complicity  in  the  affair.
Cosmo,  according  to  the  same  autho¬
rity,  called  out,  when  upon  the  rack,
“  Oh,  Excellence,  a  quoi  employ ez
vous  les  gens !  ”  P.  134.

2  Bor,  Meteren,  Reyd,  ubi  sup.

3  Ibid.  The  sentences  are  given  in
full  by  Bor.

1587.  THREE  RINGLEADERS  SENTENCED  TO  DEATH.  337

which  was  a  member  of  the  States  of  Holland  and  of  the
United  States.  If  the  States  were  sovereign,  then  this  was  a
lesion  of  their  sovereignty.  Moreover,  the  offence  had  been
aggravated  by  the  employment  of  United  States'  troops
against  the  commonwealth  of  the  United  States  itself.  To  cut
off  the  heads  of  these  prisoners  was  a  sharp  practical  answer
to  the  claims  of  sovereignty  by  Leicester,  as  representing
the  people,  and  a  terrible  warning  to  all  who  might,  in  future,
be  disposed  to  revive  the  theories  of  Deventer  and  Burgrave.

In  the  case  of  De  Maulde  the  punishment  seemed  especially
severe.  His  fate  excited  universal  sympathy,  and  great
efforts  were  made  to  obtain  his  pardon.  He  was  a  universal
favourite  ;  he  was  young ;  he  was  very  handsome ;  his
manners  were  attractive  ;  he  belonged  to  an  ancient  and
honourable  race.  His  father,  the  Seigneur  de  Mansart,  had
done  great  services  in  the  war  of  independence,  had  been  an
intimate  friend  of  the  great  Prince  of  Orange,  and  had  even
advanced  large  sums  of  money  to  assist  his  noble  efforts
to  liberate  the  country.  Two  brothers  of  the  young  captain
had  fallen  in  the  service  of  the  republic.  He,  too,  had  dis¬
tinguished  himself  at  Ostend,  and  his  gallantry  during  the
recent  siege  of  Sluys  had  been  in  every  mouth,  and  had
excited  the  warm  applause  of  so  good  a  judge  of  soldiership
as  the  veteran  Roger  Williams.  The  scars  of  the  wounds
received  in  the  desperate  conflicts  of  that  siege  were  fresh
upon  his  breast.  He  had  not  intended  to  commit  treason,
but,  convinced  by  the  sophistry  of  older  soldiers  than  himself,
as  well  as  by  learned  deacons  and  theologians,  he  had  imagined
himself  doing  his  duty,  while  obeying  the  Earl  of  Leicester.  If
there  were  ever  a  time  for  mercy,  this  seemed  one,  and  young
Maurice  of  Nassau  might  have  remembered,  that  even  in  the
case  of  the  assassins  who  had  attempted  the  life  of  his  father,
that  great-hearted  man  had  lifted  up  his  voice — which  seemed
his  dying  one — in  favour  of  those  who  had  sought  his  life.

But  the  authorities  were  inexorable.  There  was  no  hope  of
a  mitigation  of  punishment,  but  a  last  effort  was  made,  under
favour  of  a  singular  ancient  custom,  to  save  the  life  of  De
VOL.  11. — Z

338

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

Maulde.  A  young  lady  of  noble  family  in  Leyden — Uyten-
broek  by  name — claimed  the  right  of  rescuing  the  condemned
malefactor  from  the  axe,  by  appearing  upon  the  scaffold,  and
offering  to  take  him  for  her  husband.1

Intelligence  was  brought  to  the  prisoner  in  his  dungeon,
that  the  young  lady  had  made  the  proposition,  and  he  was
told  to  be  of  good  cheer.  But  he  refused  to  be  comforted.
He  was  slightly  acquainted  with  the  gentlewoman,  he  ob¬
served,  and  doubted  much  whether  her  request  would  be
granted.  Moreover — if  contemporary  chronicle  can  be  trusted
— he  even  expressed  a  preference  for  the  scaffold,  as  the
milder  fate  of  the  two.2  The  lady,  however,  not  being  aware
of  those  uncomplimentary  sentiments,  made  her  proposal  to
the  magistrates,  but  was  dismissed  with  harsh  rebukes.  She
had  need  be  ashamed,  they  said,  of  her  willingness  to  take  a
condemned  traitor  for  her  husband.  It  was  urged,  in  her  be¬
half,  that  even  in  the  cruel  Alva's  time,  the  ancient  custom
had  been  respected,  and  that  victims  had  been  saved  from  the
executioners,  on  a  demand  in  marriage  made  even  by  women
of  abandoned  character.3  But  all  was  of  no  avail.  The  pri-
Oct.  26,  soners  were  executed  on  the  26tli  October,  the  same

158?-  day  on  which  the  sentence  had  been  pronounced.
The  heads  of  Volmar  and  Cosmo  were  exposed  on  one  of  the
turrets  of  the  city.  That  of  Maulde  was  interred  with  his  body.4

The  Earl  was  indignant  when  he  heard  of  the  event.  As
there  had  been  no  written  proof  of  his  complicity  in  the  con¬
spiracy,  the  judges  had  thought  it  improper  to  mention  his
name  in  the  sentences.  He,  of  course,  denied  any  knowledge
of  the  plot,  and  its  proof  rested  therefore  only  on  the  asser¬
tion  of  the  prisoners  themselves,  which,  however,  was  circum¬
stantial,  voluntary,  and  generally  believed.5

1  Bor,  9 7.  Van  Wyn  op  Wagen,
viii.  *12.

2  “  Maer  by  boerende  de  selve  noe-
men,  en  in  baer  geselscbap  wel  ge-
weest  zijnde,  badde  weynig  moeds  dat

hy  door  verlost  worden  zoude,  of  ook

de  selve  ten  huwelijke  niet  begeerende ,

koude  hem  niet  te  vreden  stellen,”  &c.

Bor,  xxiii.  (III.)  97.

3  Bor,  ubi  sup.

4  Bor,  Meteren,  Reyd,  ubi  sup.  Le
Petit,  II.  xiv.  551.

6  Ibid.

The  only  passage  bearing  on  the
subject  which  I  have  found  in  Lei¬
cester’s  secret  correspondence,  is  this

1587.

CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE.

339

France,  during  the  whole  of  this  year  of  expectation,  was
ploughed  throughout  its  whole  surface  by  perpetual  civil  war.
The  fatal  edict  of  J une,  1585,  had  drowned  the  unhappy  land
in  blood.  Foreign  armies,  called  in  by  the  various  contending
factions,  ravaged  its  fair  territory,  butchered  its  peasantry,  and
changed  its  fertile  plains  to  a  wilderness.  The  unhappy
creature  who  wrore  the  crown  of  Charlemagne  and  of  Hugh
Capet,  was  but  the  tool  in  the  hands  of  the  most  profligate
and  designing  of  his  own  subjects,  and  of  foreigners.  Slowly
and  surely  the  net,  spread  by  the  hands  of  his  own  mother,  of
his  own  prime  minister,1  of  the  Duke  of  Guise,  all  obeying
the  command  and  receiving  the  stipend  of  Philip,  seemed
closing  over  him.  He  was  without  friends,  without  power  to
know  his  friends,  if  he  had  them.  In  his  hatred  to  the  Re¬
formation,  he  had  allowed  himself  to  be  made  the  enemy  of
the  only  man  who  could  be  his  friend,  or  the  friend  of  France.
Allied  with  his  mortal  foe,  whose  armies  were  strengthened

extract  from  a  letter  to  the  Queen  :  —
“  The  States  have  used  great  cruelty
of  late  in  Leyden,  against  three  per¬
sons  that  favoured  your  Majesty,
whom  they  put  to  death,  and  banished
twenty  others,  whereof  their  devoted
head  was  one,  old  Count  Meetkerke
another.  This  gentleman  can  inform
you  of  it,  and  I  will  send  it,  shortly,
at  more  length.”  Leicester  to  the
Queen,  27  Oct.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

This  very  meagro  allusion  to  so  im¬
portant  an  event  is  almost  suspicious
in  itself,  when  coupled  with  the  fact
that  the  details  were  entrusted  to  a
special  messenger  to  communicate  by
word  of  mouth.  The  Earl  knew  very
well  that  his  most  secret  despatches
were  read  by  his  antagonists,  and  ho
might  not  be  unwilling  to  deceive
them  by  the  slighting  tone  of  these
allusions  in  his  private  letters.

Of  course,  it  is  unfair  to  place  im¬
plicit  reliance  on  the  confessions  of
prisoners,  anxious  to  save  their  lives
by  implicating  the  powerful  governor.
Yet  it  is  difficult  to  know  why  they
should  expect  his  intercession  if  they
knew  themselves  to  be  blasting  his
character  by  an  impudent  falsehood.

Moreover,  an  elaborate  pamphlet,
published  in  defence  of  those  persons
who  had  effected  their  escape,  was
dedicated  to  the  Earl  himself,  and
contained  a  statement  of  the  interview
of  the  ringleaders  with  the  Earl,
although  a  strong  attempt  was  made
by  the  writer  to  deprive-  the  plot  of
any  criminal  character.  (Bor,  III.
xxiii.  95,  seq.  gives  the  document.)
But  the  pamphlet  was  denounced  and
prohibited  in  Leyden,  as  an  infamous
libel  and  a  tissue  of  falsehoods,  and  it
is  hardly  just,  therefore,  to  put  it  in
as  good  evidence  either  for  or  against
the  Earl.  >

The  secret  intention  of  Leicester
to  obtain  possession  of  certain  cities,
in  order  to  bridle  the  States,  and  to
make  a  good  bargain  for  the  Queen,
should  the  worst  come  to  the  worst,
has  been  already  shown  from  his
private  letters.

1  In  October  of  this  year,  1587,
Epernon  called  Villeroy,  in  the  king’s
presence,  “  un  petit  coquin,”  accused
him  of  being  a  stipendiary  of  Philip
II.  and  the  League,  and  threatened  to
spur  him  as  he  would  an  obstinate
horse.  (‘L’Estoile,  Registre  Journal
de  Henry  HI.’  ed.  1587,  p.  32.)

340

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Ciiap.  XVII.

by  contingents  from  Parma’s  forces,  and  paid  for  by  Spanish
gold,  he  was  forced  to  a  mock  triumph  over  the  foreign  mer¬
cenaries  who  came  to  save  his  crown,  and  to  submit  to  the
defeat  of  the  flower  of  his  chivalry,  by  the  only  man  who
could  rescue  France  from  ruin,  and  whom  France  could  look
up  to  with  respect.

For,  on  the  20tli  October,  Henry  of  Navarre  had  at  last
gained  a  victory.  After  twenty-seven  years  of  perpetual
defeat,  during  which  they  had  been  growing  stronger  and
stronger,  the  Protestants  had  met  the  picked  troops  of  Henry
III.,  under  the  Due  de  Joyeuse,  near  the  burgh  of  Coutras.
His  cousins  Conde  and  Soissons  each  commanded  a  wing  in
the  army  of  the  Bearnese.  “  You  are  both  of  my  family,”
said  Henry,  before  the  engagement,  “and  the  Lord  so  help
me,  hut  I  will  show  you  that  I  am  the  eldest  born.” 1  And
during  that  bloody  day  the  white  plume  was  ever  tossing
where  the  battle  was  fiercest.  “  I  choose  to  show  myself.
They  shall  see  the  Bearnese,”  was  his  reply  to  those  who  im¬
plored  him  to  have  a  care  for  his  personal  safety.  And  at  last,
when  the  day  was  done,  the  victory  gained,  and  more  French
nobles  lay  dead  on  the  field,  as  Catharine  de’  Medici  bitterly
declared,  than  had  fallen  in  a  battle  for  twenty  years  ;  when
two  thousand  of  the  King’s  best  troops  had  been  slain,  and
when  the  bodies  of  Joyeuse  and  his  brother  had  been  laid  out
in  the  very  room  where  the  conqueror’s  supper,  after  the
battle,  was  served,  hut  where  he  refused,  with  a  shudder,  to
eat,  he  was  still  as  eager  as  before — had  the  wretched  Yalois
been  possessed  of  a  spark  of  manhood,  or  of  intelligence — to
shield  him  and  his  kingdom  from  the  common  enemy.2

For  it  could  hardly  be  doubtful,  even  to  Henry  III.,  at  that
moment,  that  Philip  II.  and  his  jackal,  the  Duke  of  Guise,
were  pursuing  him  to  the  death,  and  that,  in  his  breathless
doublings  to  escape,  he  had  been  forced  to  turn  upon  his
natural  protector.  And  now  Joyeuse  was  defeated  and  slain.
“  Had  it  been  my  brother’s  son,”  exclaimed  Cardinal  de

i  Perefixe  *73.

2  De  Tliou,  X.  L.  lxxxvii.  Perefixe,  75-78.  ‘  L’Estoile,’  232.

158*.  VICTORY  GAINED  BY  NAYARRE,  AND  ONE  BY  GUISE.  34]

V

Bourbon,  weeping  and  wailing,  “  how  much  better  it  would
have  been/'  It  was  not  easy  to  slay  the  champion  of  French
Protestantism  ;  yet,  to  one  less  buoyant,  the  game,  even  after
the  brilliant  but  fruitless  victory  of  Coutras,  might  have
seemed  desperate.  Beggared  and  outcast,  with  literally
scarce  a  shirt  to  his  back,  without  money  to  pay  a  corporal’s
guard,  how  was  he  to  maintain  an  army  ?

But  ‘Mucio’  was  more  successful  than  Joyeuse  had  been,
and  the  German  and  Swiss  mercenaries  who  had  come  across
the  border  to  assist  the  Bearnese,  were  adroitly  handled  by
Philip’s  great  stipendiary.  Henry  of  Yalois,  whose  troops
had  just  been  defeated  at  Coutras,  was  now  compelled  to
participate  in  a  more  fatal  series  of  triumphs.  F or  alas,  the
victim  had  tied  himself  to  the  apron-string  of  “Madam
League,”  and  was  paraded  by  her,  in  triumph,  before  the
eyes  of  his  own  subjects  and  of  the  world.  The  passage  of
the  Loire  by  the  auxiliaries  was  resisted,  a  series  of  petty
victories  was  gained  by  Guise,  and,  at  last,  after  it  was  obvious
that  the  leaders  of  the  legions  had  been  corrupted  with  Spanish
ducats,  Henry  allowed  them  to  depart,  rather  than  give  the
Balafre  opportunity  for  still  farther  successes.1

Then  came  the  triumph  in  Paris — hosannahs  in  the
churches,  huzzas  in  the  public  places — not  for  the  King,  but
for  Guise.  Paris,  more  madly  in  love  with  her  champion
than  ever,  prostrated  herself  at  his  feet.  For  him  pasans  as
to  a  deliverer.  Without  him  the  ark  would  have  fallen  into
the  hands  of  the  Philistines.  For  the  Valois,  shouts  of  scorn

4  J

from  the  populace,  thunders  from  the  pulpit,  anathemas  from
monk  and  priest,  elaborate  invectives  from  all  the  pedants  of
the  Sorbonne,  distant  mutterings  of  excommunication  from
Home — not  the  toothless  beldame  of  modern  days,  but  the
avenging  divinity  of  priest-rid  monarchs.  Such  were  the
results  of  the  edicts  of  June.  Spain  and  the  Pope  had
trampled  upon  France,  and  the  populace  in  her  capital
clapped  their  hands  and  jumped  for  joy.  “  Miserable  country,
miserable  King,”  sighed  an  illustrious  patriot,  “  whom  his  own

1  De  Thou,  ulisup.  ‘L’Estoile,’  232,  234.

342

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

countrymen  wisli  rather  to  survive,  than  to  die  to  defend
him  !  Let  the  name  of  Huguenot  and  of  Papist  be  never
heard  of  more.  Let  us  think  only  of  the  counter-league.  Is
France  to  be  saved  by  opening  all  its  gates  to  Spain  ?  Is
France  to  be  turned  out  of  France,  to  make  a  lodging  for  the
Lorrainer  and  the  Spaniard  ?”  Pregnant  questions,  which
could  not  yet  be  answered,  for  the  end  was  not  yet.  France
was  to  become  still  more  and  more  a  wilderness.  And  well
did  that  same  brave  and  thoughtful  lover  of  his  country
declare,  that  he  who  shoukl  suddenly  awake  from  a  sleep
of  twenty-five  years,  and  revisit  that  once  beautiful  land,
would  deem  himself  transplanted  to  a  barbarous  island  of
cannibals.1

It  had  now  become  quite  obvious  that  the  game  of  Leicester
was  played  out.  His  career — as  it  has  now  been  fully  ex¬
hibited — could  have  but  one  termination.  He  had  made
himself  thoroughly  odious  to  the  nation  whom  he  came  to
govern.  He  had  lost  for  ever  the  authority  once  spontaneously
bestowed,  and  he  had  attempted  in  vain,  both  by  fair  means
and  foul,  to  recover  that  power.  There  was  nothing  left  him
but  retreat.  Of  this  he  was  thoroughly  convinced.2  Ho  was
anxious  to  be  gone,  the  republic  most  desirous  to  be  rid  of
him,  her  Majesty  impatient  to  have  her  favourite  back  again.
The  indulgent  Queen,  seeing  nothing  to  blame  in  his  conduct,
while  her  indignation  at  the  attitude  maintained  by  the  Pro¬
vinces  was  boundless,  permitted  him,  accordingly,  to  return  ;
and  in  her  letter  to  the  States,  announcing  this  decision,  she
took  a  fresh  opportunity  of  emptying  her  wrath  upon  their
heads.

She  told  them,  that,  notwithstanding  her  frequent  messages
to  them,  signifying  her  evil  contentment  with  their  unthankful¬
ness  for  her  exceeding  great  benefits,  and  with  their  gross
violations  of  their  contract  with  herself  and  with  Leicester,
whom  they  had,  of  their  own  accord,  made  absolute  governor

1  Duplessis  Mornay,  ‘  Mem.’  iv.
1-34.

2  “’Tis  time  for  me  now  to  look
after  my  own  head — sta  tempo  ch’  io

guardi  la  mia  testa,”  he  is  said  to
have  exclaimed  when  the  Leyden
plot  was  discovered.  (Reyd,  vii.  134.)

I

158?.

QUEEN  RECALLS  LEICESTER.

343

without  her  instigation ;  she  had  never  received  any  good
answer  to  move  her  to  commit  their  sins  to  oblivion,  nor  had
she  remarked  any  amendment  in  their  conduct.  On  the  con¬
trary,  she  complained  that  they  daily  increased  their  offences,
most  notoriously  in  the  sight  of  the  world,  and  in  so  many
points  that  she  lacked  words  to  express  them  in  one  letter.
She  however  thought  it  worth  while  to  allude  to  some  of  their
transgressions.  She  declared  that  their  sinister  or  rather
barbarous  interpretation  of  her  conduct  had  been  notorious  in
perverting  and  falsifying  her  princely  and  Christian  intentions,
when  she  imparted  to  them  the  overtures  that  had  been  made
to  her  for  a  treaty  of  peace  for  herself  and  for  them  with  the
King  of  Spain.  Yet  although  she  had  required  their  allow¬
ance,  before  she  would  give  her  assent,  she  had  been  grieved
that  the  world  should  see  what  impudent  untruths  had  been
forged  upon  her,  not  only  by  their  sufferance,  but  by  their
special  permission  for  her  Christian  good  meaning  towards
them.  She  denounced  the  statements  as  to  her  having  con¬
cluded  a  treaty,  not  only  without  their  knowledge,  but  with
the  sacrifice  of  their  liberty  and  religion,  as  utterly  false,  either
for  anything  done  in  act,  or  intended  in  thought,  by  her.
She  complained  that  upon  this  most  false  ground  had  been
heaped  a  number  of  like  untruths  and  malicious  slanders
against  her  cousin  Leicester,  who  had  hazarded  his  life,  spent
his  substance,  left  his  native  country,  absented  himself  from
her,  and  lost  his  time,  only  for  their  service.  It  had  been
falsely  stated  among  them,  she  said,  that  the  Earl  had  come
over  the  last  time,  knowing  that  peace  had  been  secretly
concluded.  It  wTas  false  that  he  had  intended  to  surprise
divers  of  their  towns,  and  deliver  them  to  the  King  of  Spain.
All  such  untruths  contained  matter  so  improbable,  that  it  was
most  strange  that  any  person,  having  any  sense,  could  imagine
them  correct.  Having  thus  slightly  animadverted  upon  their
wilfulness,  unthankfulness,  and  bad  government,  and  having,
in  very  plain  English,  given  them  the  lie,  eight  distinct  and
separate  times  upon  a  single  page,  she  proceeded  to  inform
them  that  she  had  recalled  her  cousin  Leicester,  having  great

344

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

cause  to  use  his  services  in  England,  and  not  seeing  how,  by
his  tarrying  there,  he  could  either  profit  them  or  herself.
Nevertheless  she  protested  herself  not  void  of  compassion  for
their  estate,  and  for  the  pitiful  condition  of  the  great  multi¬
tude  of  kind  and  godly  people,  subject  to  the  miseries  which,
by  the  States'  government,  were  like  to  fall  upon  them,  unless
God  should  specially  interpose  ;  and  she  had  therefore  de¬
termined,  for  the  time,  to  continue  her  subsidies,  according
to  the  covenant  between  them.  If,  meantime,  she  should
conclude  a  peace  with  Spain,  she  promised  to  them  the  same
care  for  their  country  as  for  her  own.1

Accordingly  the  Earl,  after  despatching  an  equally  ill-
tempered  letter  to  the  States,  in  which  he  alluded,  at  un¬
merciful  length,  to  all  the  old  grievances,  blamed  them  for  the
loss  of  Sluys,  for  which  place  he  protested  that  they  had  mani¬
fested  no  more  interest  than  if  it  had  been  San  Domingo  in
Hispaniola,  took  his  departure  for  Flushing.2  After  remaining
there,  in  a  very  moody  frame  of  mind,  for  several  days,  ex¬
pecting  that  the  States  would,  at  least,  send  a  committee  to
wait  upon  him  and  receive  his  farewells,  he  took  leave  of  them
by  letter.  “  God  send  me  shortly  a  wind  to  blow  me  from
them  all,” 3  he  exclaimed — a  prayer  which  was  soon  granted —
and  before  the  end  of  the  year  he  was  safely  landed  in  Eng¬
land.  “  These  legs  of  mine,”  said  he,  clapping  his  hands  upon
them  as  he  sat  in  his  chamber  at  Margate,  u  shall  never  go
again  into  Holland.  Let  the  States  get  others  to  serve  their
mercenary  turn,  for  me  they  shall  not  have.”4  Upon  giving
up  the  government,  he  caused  a  medal  to  be  struck  in  his  own
honour.  The  device  was  a  flock  of  sheep  watched  by  an
English  mastilf.  Two  mottoes — ce  non  gregem  sed  ingratos,”
and  “  invitus  desero  ” — expressed  his  opinion  of  Dutch  ingra¬
titude  and  his  own  fidelity.  The  Hollanders,  on  their  part,
struck  several  medals  to  commemorate  the  same  event,  some
of  which  were  not  destitute  of  invention.  Upon  one  of  them,

1  Queen  to  the  States,  8  Nov.  1581.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  141.  Meteren,

xiv.  262.

3  Leicester  to  Atye,  4  Dec.  1581.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Stowe,  ‘Chronicle,’  713.

1587.

WHO  RETIRES,  OH  ILL  TERMS  WITH  THE  STATES.  345

for  instance,  was  represented  an  ape  smothering  her  young
ones  to  death  in  her  embrace,  with  the  device,  “  Libertas  ne
ita  chara  ut  simiae  catuli while  upon  the  reverse  was  a  man
avoiding  smoke  and  falling  into  the  fire,  with  the  inscription,
“Fugiens  fumum,  incidit  in  ignem.''1

Leicester  found  the  usual  sunshine  at  Greenwich.  All  the
efforts  of  Norris,  Wilkes,  and  Buckliurst,  had  been  insufficient
to  raise  even  a  doubt  in  Elizabeth's  mind  as  to  the  wisdom
and  integrity  by  which  his  administration  of  the  Provinces
had  been  characterised  from  beginning  to  end.  Those  who
had  appealed  from  his  hatred  to  the  justice  of  their  sovereign,
had  met  with  disgrace  and  chastisement.  But  for  the  great
Earl,  the  Queen's  favour  was  a  rock  of  adamant.  At  a  private
interview  he  threw  himself  at  her  feet,  and  with  tears  and
sobs  implored  her  not  to  receive  him  in  disgrace  whom  she
had  sent  forth  in  honour.  His  blandishments  prevailed,  as
they  had  always  done.  Instead,  therefore,  of  appearing  before
the  council,  kneeling,  to  answer  such  inquiries  as  ought  surely
to  have  been  instituted,  he  took  his  seat  boldly  among  his
colleagues,  replying  haughtily  to  all  murmurs  by  a  reference
to  her  Majesty’s  secret  instructions.2

The  unhappy  English  soldiers,  who  had  gone  forth  under
his  banner  in  midsummer,  had  been  returning,  as  they  best
might,  in  winter,  starving,  half-naked  wretches,  to  beg  a  morsel
of  bread  at  the  gates  of  Greenwich  palace,  and  to  be  driven
away  as  vagabonds,  with  threats  of  the  stocks.3  This  was  not
the  fault  of  the  Earl,  for  he  had  fed  them  with  his  own  generous
hand  in  the  Netherlands,  week  after  week,  when  no  money
for  their  necessities  could  be  obtained  from  the  paymasters.
Two  thousand  pounds  had  been  sent  by  Elizabeth  to  her
soldiers  when  sixty-four  thousand  pounds  arrearage  were  due,4

1  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  153.  Hoofd,  ‘Ver-
volgh,’  210.  Meteren,  xiii.  238.

2  Camden,  III.  400.  Baker,  375.

3  Memorial,  in  Burghley’s  own

hand,  Nov.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  “  She  would  by  no  means  yield  to
send  over  any  greater  sum  than  2000Z.,
though  the  Lord  Treasurer,  Sir  Thomas

Shirley,  and  myself,  did  let  her  under¬
stand  that  there  was  due  unto  the
soldiers  serving  there  the  first  of  July
last  44,000Z.,  and  before  it  could  arrive
there,  at  the  least  64,0001.”  W alsing-
ham  to  Leicester,  14  Aug.  1587.  (Br.
Mus.  Galba,  D.  I.  p.  253,  MS.)

346

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

and  no  language  could  exaggerate  the  misery  to  which  these
outcasts,  according  to  eye-witnesses  of  their  own  nation,  were
reduced.

Lord  Willoughby  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  what
remained  of  these  unfortunate  troops,  upon  the  Earl’s  de¬
parture.  The  sovereighty  of  the  Netherlands  remained  undis¬
puted  with  the  States.  Leicester  resigned  his  commission  by

an  instrument  dated  -  December,  which,  however,  never

reached  the  Netherlands  till  April  of  the  following  year.1
From  that  time  forth  the  government  of  the  republic  main¬
tained  the  same  forms  which  the  assembly  had  claimed  for  it
in  the  long  controversy  with  the  governor-general,  and  which
have  been  sufficiently  described.

Meantime  the  negotiations  for  a  treaty,  no  longer  secret,
continued.  The  Queen,  infatuated  as  ever,  still  believed  in
the  sincerity  of  Farnese,  while  that  astute  personage  and  his
master  were  steadily  maturing  their  schemes.  A  matrimonial
alliance  was  secretly  projected  between  the  King  of  Scots  and
Philip’s  daughter,  the  Infanta  Isabella,  with  the  consent  of
the  Pojie  and  the  whole  college  of  cardinals ;  and  James,  by
the  whole  force  of  the  Holy  League,  was  to  be  placed  upon  the
throne  of  Elizabeth.  In  the  case  of  his  death,  without  issue,
Philip  was  to  succeed  quietly  to  the  crowns  of  England,  Scot¬
land,  and  Ireland.2  Nothing  could  be  simpler  or  more  rational,

and  accordingly  thesfr  arrangements  were  the  table-talk  at

*  _

Kome,  and  met  with  general  approbation.

Communications  to  this  effect,  coming  straight  from  the
Colonna  palace,  were  thought  sufficiently  circumstantial  to
be  transmitted  to  the  English  government.  Maurice  of  Nassau
wrote  with  his  own  hand  to  Walsingham,  professing  a  warm
attachment  to  the  cause  in  which  Holland  and  England  were
united,  and  perfect  personal  devotion  to  the  English  Queen.3

1  Bor,  III.  xxiii.  143,  seq.  Meteren,
xiv.  262.  Reyd,  vii.  137,  138.

2  Le  Sieur  to  Walsingham,  3  Dec.

1587.  Maurice  de  Nassau,  to  same,
9  Dec.  1587.  (S.  P.  Office,  MSS.)

3  “Je  no  vous  escrirai  rien  sur  les

propos  d’Odo  Colonna,”  wrote  Mau¬
rice,  “  car  vous  les  entendrez  bien  par
la  lecture  du  sommaire  que  je  vous
envoie,  mais  bien  je  vous  assure  qu’il
est  un  jeune  homme  d’esprit  vif  et
prompt,  qui  parle  bien  et  a  ete  bien

158*7.

QUEEN  WARNED  AS  TO  SPANISH  DESIGNS.

347

His  language  was  not  tliat  of  a  youth,  who,  according  to
Leicester’s  repeated  insinuations,  was  leagued  with  the  most
distinguished  soldiers  and  statesmen  of  the  Netherlands  to
sell  their  country  to  Spain.

But  Elizabeth  was  not  to  he  convinced.  She  thought  it
extremely  probable  that  the  Provinces  would  be  invaded,  and
doubtless  felt  some  anxiety  for  England.  It  was  unfortunate
that  the  possession  of  Sluys  had  given  Alexander  such  a  point
of  vantage,  and  there  was  moreover  a  fear  that  he  might  take
possession  of  Ostend.  She  had,  therefore,  already  recom¬
mended  that  her  own  troops  should  be  removed  from  that
city,  that  its  walls  should  be  razed,  its  marine  bulwarks
destroyed,  and  that  the  ocean  should  be  let  in  to  swallow  the
devoted  city  forever — the  inhabitants  having  been  previously
allowed  to  take  their  departure.  For  it  was  assumed  by  her
Majesty  that  to  attempt  resistance  would  be  idle,  and  that
Ostend  could  never  stand  a  siege.1

The  advice  was  not  taken,  and  before  the  end  of  her  reign
Elizabeth  was  destined  to  see  this  indefensible  city — only  fit,
in  her  judgment,  to  be  abandoned  to  the  waves — become
memorable,  throughout  all  time,  for  the  longest,  and,  in  many
respects,  the  most  remarkable  siege  which  modern  history  has
recorded,  the  famous  leaguer,  in  which  the  first  European

nourri.  Toutefois  monstrant  par  ses
propos  qu’ii  ne  sgait  gueres  de  choses
hors  la  cour  de  Rome,  de  la  connois-
sance  des  bonnes  maisons,  et  a  paru  a
aulcuns  des  miens  plus  sages  et  experi-
mentes  que  moi,  qu’ii  y  avoit  fondement
en  ce  qu’ii  disait,  et  que  j’en  devois
advertir  Sa  M.  tant  pour  la  qualite  de
son  dire,  que  pour  faire  connaitre  a
Sa  M.  quand  l’occasion  se  presentoit
que  je  lui  suis  tres  affectionne  servi-
teur,  co  qu’ii  convient  par  ma  qualite
et  maison  de  monstrer  par  effet  et  non
par  parolles.  Et  en  cette  intention  je
me  suis  trouve  en  ceste  armee  assem¬
ble  par  ma  diligence  de  tous  les  en-
droits  de  mes  gouvernements,  en  in¬
tention,  si  Dieu  m’en  fait  la  grace,  de
combattre  la  puissance  des  plus  grands
ennemis  de  Sa  Majeste,  et  de  touto  la
Chretiente,  ce  sont  le  Roi  d’Espagne

et  le  Prince  de  Parme,  lequel  de  tout
mon  ooeur,  je  desire  trouver  en  personne
ou  j’espere  avec  l’aide  de  Dieu  lui  faire
connaitre  q'u’il  n’est  pas  si  bon  soldat
ou  il  trouve  resistance,  que  quand  les
hommes  mal  conseilles  lui  mettent  les
victoires  en  main  de  concevoir  par  leur
lachete  de  tant  de  prises  de  belles  villes.
Je  vous  supplie  mo  tenir  en  la  bonne
grace  de  Sa  M.,  de  me  continuer  l’ami-
tie  que  vous  avez  porte  a  mon  seigneur
mon  pere,  car  j’espero  que  Dieu  mo
fait  grace  de  l’ensuivre  promptement
en  Constance  ct  forme  resolution.  Jus-
qu’a  je  prierai  Dieu,”  &c.  Maurice  de
Nassau  to  Walsingham,  9  Dec.  1587.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Queen  to  Leicester,  8  Nov.  1587,
in  Burghley’s  hand.  (S.  P.  Office
MS.)

348

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

captains  of  the  coming  age  were  to  take  their  lessons,  year
after  year,  in  the  school  of  the  great  Dutch  soldier,  who  was
now  hut  a  cc  solemn,  sly  youth/5  just  turned  of  twenty.

The  only  military  achievement  which  characterized  the
close  of  the  year,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  Provinces
and  the  annoyance  of  Parma,  was  the  surprise  of  the  city  of
Bonn.  The  indefatigable  Martin  Schenk — in  fulfilment  of
his  great  contract  with  the  States- General,  by  which  the  war
on  the  Rhine  had  been  farmed  out  to  him  on  such  profitable
terms — had  led  his  mercenaries  against  this  important  town.
He  had  found  one  of  its  gates  somewhat  insecurely  guarded,
placed  a  mortar  under  it  at  night,  and  occupied  a  neighbouring
pig-stye  with  a  number  of  his  men,  who  by  chasing,  maltreat¬
ing,  and  slaughtering  the  swine,  had  raised  an  unearthly  din,
sufficient  to  drown  the  martial  operations  at  the  gate.  In
brief,  the  place  was  easily  mastered,  and  taken  possession  of
by  Martin,  in  the  name  of  the  deposed  elector,  Gebhard
Truchsess — the  first  stroke  of  good  fortune  which  had  for  a
long  time  befallen  that  melancholy  prelate.1

The  administration  of  Leicester  has  been  so  minutely  pic¬
tured,  that  it  would  be  superfluous  to  indulge  in  many  con¬
cluding  reflections.  His  acts  and  words  have  been  made  to
speak  for  themselves.  His  career  in  the  country  has  been
described  with  much  detail,  because  the  period  was  a  great
epoch  of  transition.  The  republic  of  the  Netherlands,  during
those  years,  acquired  consistency  and  permanent  form.  It
seemed  possible,  on  the  Earl’s  first  advent,  that  the  Provinces
might  become  part  and  parcel  of  the  English  realm.  Whether
such  a  consummation  would  have  been  desirable  or  not,  is  a
fruitless  enquiry.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  selection  of  such
a  man  as  Leicester  made  that  result  impossible.  Doubtless
there  were  many  errors  committed  by  all  parties.  The  Queen

1  Bor,  III.  xxii.  143.  Meteren,  xiv.
262.  Wagenaar,  viii.  266.  Parma  to
Philip  II.  29  Dec.  1587.  (Arch,  de
Simancas,  MS.)

“  According  to  this,  Schenck  is  not
dead  yet,  as  reported,”  (segun  esto

no  es  muerto  como  habian  dicho),
was  Philip’s  judicious  marginal  obser¬
vation  on  the  letter  in  which  Parma
communicated  this  clever  exploit  of
Martin.

1587.  RESULTS  OF  LEICESTER’S  ADMINISTRATION.  349

was  supposed  by  the  Netherlands  to  be  secretly  desirous  of
accepting  the  sovereignty  of  the  Provinces,  provided  she  were
made  sure,  by  the  Earl's  experience,  that  they  were  competent
to  protect  themselves.  But  this  suspicion  was  unfounded.
The  result  of  every  investigation  showed  the  country  so  full
of  resources,  of  wealth,  and  of  military  and  naval  capabilities,
that,  united  with  England,  it  would  have  been  a  source  of  great
revenue  and  power,  not  a  burthen  and  an  expense.  Yet,  when
convinced  of  such  facts,  by  the  statistics  which  were  liberally
laid  before  her  by  her  confidential  agents,  she  never  mani¬
fested,  either  in  public  or  private,  any  intention  of  accepting
the  sovereignty.  This  being  her  avowed  determination,  it
was  an  error  on  the  part  of  the  States,  before  becoming
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  man's  character,  to  confer
upon  Leicester  the  almost  boundless  authority  which  they
granted  on  his  first  arrival.  It  was  a  still  graver  mistake,  on
the  part  of  Elizabeth,  to  give  way  to  such  explosions  of  fury,
both  against  the  governor  and  the  States,  when  informed  of
the  offer  and  acceptance  of  that  authority.  The  Earl,  elevated
by  the  adulation  of  others,  and  by  his  own  vanity,  into  an
almost  sovereign  attitude,  saw  himself  chastised  before  the
world,  like  an  aspiring  lackey,  by  her  in  whose  favour  he  had
felt  most  secure.  He  found  himself,  in  an  instant,  humbled
and  ridiculous.  Between  himself  and  the  Queen  it  was  some¬
thing  of  a  lovers'  quarrel,  and  he  soon  found  balsam  in  the
hand  that  smote  him.  But  though  reinstated  in  authority,
he  was  never  again  the  object  of  reverence  in  the  land  he  was
attempting  to  rule.  As  he  came  to  know  the  Netherlanders
better,  he  recognized  the  great  capacity  which  their  statesmen
concealed  under  a  plain  and  sometimes  a  plebeian  exterior,
and  the  splendid  grandee  hated,  where  at  first  he  had  only
despised.  The  Netherlanders,  too,  who  had  been  used  to  look
up  almost  with  worship  to  a  plain  man  of  kindly  manners,  in
felt  hat  and  bargeman's  woollen  jacket,  whom  they  called
u  Father  William,"  did  not  appreciate,  as  they  ought,  the  mag¬
nificence  of  the  stranger  who  had  been  sent  to  govern  them.
The  Earl  was  handsome,  quick-witted,  brave ;  but  he  was

350

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVII.

neither  wise  in  council  nor  capable  in  the  field.  He  was
intolerably  arrogant,  passionate,  and  revengeful.  He  hated
easily,  and  he  hated  for  life.  It  was  soon  obvious  that  no
cordiality  of  feeling  or  of  action  could  exist  between  him
and  the  plain,  stubborn  Hollanders.  He  had  the  fatal
characteristic  of  loving  only  the  persons  who  flattered  him.
With  much  perception  of  character,  sense  of  humour,  and
appreciation  of  intellect,  he  recognized  the  power  of  the
leading  men  in  the  nation,  and  sought  to  gain  them.  So  long
as  he  hoped  success,  he  was  loud  in  their  praises.  They  were
all  wise,  substantial,  well-languaged,  big  fellows,  such  as  were
not  to  be  found  in  England  or  anywhere  else.  When  they
refused  to  be  made  his  tools,  they  became  tinkers,  boors,
devils,  and  atheists.  He  covered  them  with  curses  and  devoted
them  to  the  gibbet.  He  began  by  warmly  commending  Buys
and  Barneveld,  Hohenlo  and  Maurice,  and  endowing  them
with  every  virtue.  Before  he  left  the  country  he  had  accused
them  of  every  crime,  and  would  cheerfully,  if  he  could,  have
taken  the  life  of  every  one  of  them.  And  it  was  quite  the
same  with  nearly  every  Englishman  who  served  with  or
under  him.  Wilkes  and  Buckhurst,  however  much  the  objects
of  his  previous  esteem,  so  soon  as  they  ventured  to  censure  or
even  to  criticise  his  proceedings,  were  at  once  devoted  to  per¬
dition.  Yet,  after  minute  examination  of  the  record,  public
and  private,  neither  Wilkes  nor  Buckhurst  can  be  found
guilty  of  treachery  or  animosity  towards  him,  but  are  proved
to  have  been  governed,  in  all  their  conduct,  by  a  strong  sense
of  duty  to  their  sovereign,  the  Netherlands,  and  Leicester
himself.

To  Sir  John  Norris,  it  must  be  allowed,  that  he  was  never
fickle,  for  he  had  always  entertained  for  that  distinguished
general  an  honest,  unswerving,  and  infinite  hatred,  which  was
not  susceptible  of  increase  or  diminution  by  any  act  or  word.
Pelham,  too,  whose  days  were  numbered,  and  who  was  dying
bankrupt  and  broken-hearted,  at  the  close  of  the  Earl's  ad¬
ministration,  had  always  been  regarded  by  him  with  tender¬
ness  and  affection.  But  Pelham  had  never  thwarted  him,  had

1587.  RESULTS  OF  LEICESTER’S  ADMINISTRATION.  35 1

exposed  his  life  for  him,  and  was  always  proud  of  being  his
faithful,  unquestioning,  humble  adherent.  With  perhaps  this
single  exception,  Leicester  found  himself,  at  the  end  of  his
second  term  in  the  Provinces,  without  a  single  friend  and  with
few  respectable  partisans.  Subordinate  mischievous  intriguers
like  Deventer,  Junius,  and  Otheman,  were  his  chief  advisers
and  the  instruments  of  his  schemes.

With  such  qualifications  it  was  hardly  possible — even  if
the  current  of  affairs  had  been  flowing  smoothly — that  he
should  prove  a  successful  governor  of  the  new  republic.  But
when  the  numerous  errors  and  adventitious  circumstances  are
considered — for  some  of  which  he  was  responsible,  while  of
others  he  was  the  victim — it  must  be  esteemed  fortunate  that
no  great  catastrophe  occurred.  His  immoderate  elevation,
his  sudden  degradation,  his  controversy  in  regard  to  the
sovereignty,  his  abrupt  departure  for  England,  his  protracted
absence,  his  mistimed  return,  the  secret  instructions  for  his
second  administration,  the  obstinate  parsimony  and  per¬
sistent  ill- temper  of  the  Queen — who,  from  the  beginning  to
the  end  of  the  Earl's  government,  never  addressed  a  kindly
word  to  the  Netherlanders,  but  was  ever  censuring  and  brow¬
beating  them  in  public  state-papers  and  private  epistles — the
treason  of  York  and  Stanley,  above  all,  the  disastrous  and
concealed  negotiations  with  Parma,  and  the  desperate  attempts
upon  Amsterdam  and  Leyden — all  placed  him  in  a  most  un¬
fortunate  position  from  first  to  last.  -But  he  was  not  compe¬
tent  for  his  post  under  any  circumstances.  He  was  not  the
statesman  to  deal  in  policy  with  Buys,  Barneveld,  Ortel,
Sainte  Aldegonde  ;  nor  the  soldier  to  measure  himself  against
Alexander  Farnese.  His  administration  was  a  failure ;
and  although  he  repeatedly  hazarded  his  life,  and  poured
out  his  wealth  in  their  behalf  with  an  almost  unequalled
liberality,  he  could  never  gain  the  hearts  of  the  Nether-
landers.  English  valour,  English  intelligence,  English  truth¬
fulness,  English  generosity,  were  endearing  England  more
and  more  to  Holland.  The  statesmen  of  both  countries  were
brought  into  closest  union,  and  learned  to  appreciate  and  to

352

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYII.

respect  each  other,  while  they  recognized  that  the  fate  of
their  respective  commonwealths  was  indissolubly  united.  But
it  was  to  the  efforts  of  Walsingham,  Drake,  Raleigh,  Wilkes,
Buckhurst,  Norris,  Willoughby,  Williams,  Yere,  Russell,  and
the  brave  men  who  fought  under  their  banners  or  their  coun¬
sels,  on  every  battle-field,  and  in  every  beleaguered  town  in
the  Netherlands,  and  to  the  universal  spirit  and  sagacity  of
the  English  nation,  in  this  grand  crisis  of  its  fate,  that  these
fortunate  results  were  owing ;  not  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,
nor — during  the  term  of  his  administration — to  Queen  Eliza¬
beth  herself.

In  brief,  the  proper  sphere  of  this  remarkable  personage,
and  the  one  in  which  he  passed  the  greater  portion  of  his
existence,  was  that  of  a  magnificent  court  favourite,  the  spoiled
darling,  from  youth  to  his  death-bed,  of  the  great  English
Queen  ;  whether  to  the  advantage  or  not  of  his  country  and
the  true  interests  of  his  sovereign,  there  can  hardly  be  at  this
day  any  difference  of  opinion.

1588.

PROPHECIES  AS  TO  THE  YEAR  1588.

353

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Prophecies  as  to  the  Year  1588  —  Distracted  Condition  of  the  Dutch  Republic
—  Willoughby  reluctantly  takes  Command — English  Commissioners  come
to  Ostend  —  Secretary  Gamier  and  Robert  Cecil  —  Cecil  accompanies  Dale
to  Ghent — And  finds  the  Desolation  complete — Interview  of  Dale  and
Cecil  with  Parma  —  His  fervent  Expressions  in  favour  of  Peace — Cecil
makes  a  Tour  in  Flanders  —  And  sees  much  that  is  remarkable  —
Interviews  of  Dr.  Rogers  with  Parma  —  Wonderful  Harangues  of  the
Envoy  —  Extraordinary  Amenity  of  Alexander  —  With  which  Rogers  is
much  touched  —  The  Queen  not  pleased  with  her  Envoy  —  Credulity  of
the  English  Commissioners  —  Ceremonious  Meeting  of  all  the  Envoys  —
Consummate  Art  in  wasting  Time  —  Long  Disputes  about  Commissions
—  The  Spanish  Commissions  meant  to  deceive  —  Disputes  about  Cessa¬
tion  of  Arms  —  Spanish  Duplicity  and  Procrastination  —  Pedantry  and
Credulity  of  Dr.  Dale  —  The  Papal  Bull  and  Dr.  Allen’s  Pamphlet  —  Dale
sent  to  ask  Explanations  —  Parma  denies  all  Knowledge  of  either — Croft
believes  to  the  last  in  Alexander  —  Dangerous  Discord  in  North  Holland
—  Leicester’s  Resignation  arrives  —  Enmity  of  Willoughby  and  Maurice  —
Willoughby’s  dark  Picture  of  Affairs  —  Hatred  between  States  and  Lei-
cestrians  —  Maurice’s  Answer  to  the  Queen’s  Charges  —  End  of  Sonoy’s
Rebellion  —  Philip  foments  the  Civil  War  in  France  —  League’s  Threats
and  Plots  against  Henry  —  Mucio  arrives  in  Paris  —  He  is  received  with
Enthusiasm  —  The  King  flies,  and  Spain  triumphs  in  Paris  —  States
expostulate  with  the  Queen  —  English  Statesmen  still  deceived  —
Deputies  from  Netherland  Churches  —  hold  Conference  with  the  Queen
— And  present  long  Memorials — More  Conversations  with  the  Queen  —
National  Spirit  of  England  and  Holland  —  Dissatisfaction  with  Queen’s
Course  —  Bitter  Complaints  of  Lord  Howard  —  Want  of  Preparation  in
Army  and  Navy  —  Sanguine  Statements  of  Leicester  —  Activity  of  Parma
—  The  painful  Suspense  continues.

The  year  1588  had  at  last  arrived — that  fatal  year  concern¬
ing  which  the  German  astrologers — more  than  a  century
before  had  prognosticated  such  dire  events.1  As  the  epoch
approached  it  was  firmly  believed  by  many  that  the  end  of
the  world  was  at  hand,  while  the  least  superstitious  could  not
doubt  that  great  calamities  were  impending  over  the  nations.
Portents  observed  during  the  winter  and  in  various  parts  of
Europe  came  to  increase  the  prevailing  panic.  It  rained
blood  in  Sweden,  monstrous  births  occurred  in  France,  and  at
Weimar  it  was  gravely  reported  by  eminent  chroniclers  that

1  Dc  Thou,  x.  218.  Camden,  III.  402.  Strada,  II.  ix.  530.  Pasquier,  Oeuvres,
II.  331.

vol.  ii. — 2  A

354

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

the  sun  had  appeared  at  mid-day  holding  a  drawn  sword  in
his  mouth — a  warlike  portent  whose  meaning  could  not  be
mistaken.1

But,  in  truth,  it  needed  no  miracles  nor  prophecies  to  en¬
force  the  conviction  that  a  long  procession  of  disasters  was
steadily  advancing.  With  France  rent'  asunder  by  internal
convulsions,  with  its  imbecile  king  not  even  capable  of  com¬
manding  a  petty  faction  among  his  own  subjects,  with  Spain
the  dark  cause  of  unnumbered  evils,  holding  Italy  in  its
grasp,  firmly  allied  with  the  Pope,  already  having  reduced
and  nearly  absorbed  France,  and  now,  after  long  and  patient
preparation,  about  to  hurl  the  concentrated  vengeance  and
hatred  of  long  years  upon  the  little  kingdom  of  England,  and
its  only  ally — the  just  organized  commonwealth  of  the  Nether¬
lands — it  would  have  been  strange  indeed  if  the  dullest  in¬
tellect  had  not  dreamed  of  tragical  events.  It  was  not
encouraging  that  there  should  be  distraction  in  the  counsels
of  the  two  States  so  immediately  threatened  ;  that  the  Queen
of  England  should  be  at  variance  with  her  wisest  and  most
faithful  statesmen  as  to  their  course  of  action,  and  that  deadly
quarrels  should  exist  between  the  leading  men  of  the  Dutch
republic  and  the  English  governor,  who  had  assumed  the  re¬
sponsibility  of  directing  its  energies  against  the  common  enemy.

The  blackest  night  that  ever  descended  upon  the  Nether¬
lands — more  disappointing  because  succeeding  a  period  of
comparative  prosperity  and  triumph  • — •  was  the  winter  of
1587-8,  when  Leicester  had  terminated  his  career  by  his
abrupt  departure  for  England,  after  his  second  brief  attempt
at  administration.  For  it  was  exactly  at  this  moment  of
anxious  expectation,  when  dangers  were  rolling  up  from  the
south  till  not  a  ray  of  light  or  hope  could  pierce  the  uni¬
versal  darkness,  that  the  little  commonwealth  was  left  without
a  chief.  The  English  Earl  departed,  shaking  the  dust  from
his  feet  ;  but  he  did  not  resign.  The  supreme  authority — so
far  as  he  could  claim  it — was  again  transferred,  with  his
person,  to  England.

1  Ibid.,  ubi  sup.

1588.  DISTRACTED  CONDITION  OE  DUTCH  REPUBLIC.  355

The  consequences  were  immediate  and  disastrous.  All  the
Leicestrians  refused  to  obey  the  States-General.  Utrecht,
the  stronghold  of  that  party,  announced  its  unequivocal  inten¬
tion  to  annex  itself,  without  any  conditions  whatever,  to  the
English  crown,  while,  in  Holland,  young  Maurice  was  solemnly
installed  stadholder,  and  captain-general  of  the  Provinces,
under  the  guidance  of  Hohenlo  and  Barneveld.  But  his
authority  was  openly  defied  in  many  important  cities  within
his  jurisdiction  by  military  chieftains  who  had  taken  the  oaths
of  allegiance  to  Leicester  as  governor,  and  who  refused  to
renounce  fidelity  to  the  man  who  had  deserted  their  country,
but  who  had  not  resigned  his  authority.  Of  these  mutineers
the  most  eminent  was  Diedrich  Sonoy,  governor  of  North
Holland,  a  soldier  of  much  experience,  sagacity,  and  courage,
who  had  rendered  great  services  to  the  cause  of  liberty  and
Protestantism,  and  had  defaced  it  by  acts  of  barbarity  which
had  made  his  name  infamous.  Against  this  refractory  chief¬
tain  it  was  necessary  for  Hohenlo  and  Maurice  to  lead  an
armed  force,  and  to  besiege  him  in  his  stronghold — the  im¬
portant  city  of  Medenblik — which  he  resolutely  held  for
Leicester,  although  Leicester  had  definitely  departed,  and
which  he  closed  against  Maurice,  although  Maurice  was  the
only  representative  of  order  and  authority  within  the  dis¬
tracted  commonwealth.  And  thus  civil  war  had  broken  out
in  the  little  scarcely-organized  republic,  as  if  there  were  not
dangers  and  bloodshed  enough  impending  over  it  from  abroad.
And  the  civil  war  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  Earl's
departure.

The  English  forces — reduced  as  they  were  by  sickness,
famine,  and  abject  poverty — were  but  a  remnant  of  the  brave
and  well-seasoned  bands  which  had  faced  the  Spaniards  with
success  on  so  many  battle-fields.

The  general  who  now  assumed  chief  command  over  them —
by  direction  of  Leicester,  subsequently  confirmed  by  the
Queen — was  Lord  Willoughby.  A  daring,  splendid  dragoon,
an  honest,  chivalrous,  and  devoted  servant  of  his  Queen,  a
conscientious  adherent  of  Leicester,  and  a  firm  believer  in  his
capacity  and  character,  he  was,  however,  not  a  man  of  suffi-

356

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

cient  experience  or  subtlety  to  perform  the  various  tasks
imposed  ujion  him  by  the  necessities  of  such  a  situation.
Quick-witted,  even  brilliant  in  intellect,  and  the  bravest  of
the  brave  on  the  battle-field,  he  was  neither  a  sagacious
administrator  nor  a  successful  commander.  And  he  honestly
confessed  his  deficiencies,  and  disliked  the  post  to  which  he
had  been  elevated.  He  scorned  baseness,  intrigue,  and  petty
quarrels,  and  he  was  impatient  of  control.  Testy,  choleric,
and  quarrelsome,  with  a  high  sense  of  honour,  and  a  keen
perception  of  insult,  very  modest  and  very  proud,  he  was  not
likely  to  feed  with  wholesome  appetite  upon  the  unsavoury
annoyances  which  were  the  daily  bread  of  a  chief  commander
in  the  Netherlands.  “  I  ambitiously  affect  not  high  titles,
but  round  dealing/’  he  said  ;  ee  desiring  rather  to  be  a  private
lance  with  indifferent  reputation,  than  a  colonel-general
spotted  or  defamed  with  wants.” 1  He  was  not  the  politician
to  be  matched  against  the  unscrupulous  and  all-accomplished
Farnese  ;  and  indeed  no  man  better  than  Willoughby  could
illustrate  the  enormous  disadvantage  under  which  English¬
men  laboured  at  that  epoch  in  their  dealings  with  Italians
and  Spaniards.  The  profuse  indulgence  in  falsehood  which
characterized  southern  statesmanship,  was  more  than  a  match
for  English  love  of  truth.  English  soldiers  and  negotiators
went  naked  into  a  contest  with  enemies  armed  in  a  panoply
of  lies.  It  was  an  unequal  match,  as  we  have  already  seen,
and  as  we  are  soon  more  clearly  to  see.  How  was  an  English
soldier  who  valued  his  knightly  word — how  were'  English
diplomatists — among  whom  one  of  the  most  famous — then  a
lad  of  twenty,  secretary  to  Lord  Essex  in  the  Netherlands
— had  poetically  avowed  that  “  simple  truth  was  highest  skill,”
— to  deal  with  the  thronging  Spanish  deceits  sent  northward
by  the  great  father  of  lies  who  sat  in  the  Escorial  ?

u  It  were  an  ill  lesson,”  said  Willoughby,  “  to  teach  soldiers
the  dissimulations  of  such  as  follow  princes’  courts  in  Italy.
For  my  own  part,  it  is  my  only  end  to  be  loyal  and  dutiful
to  my  sovereign,  and  plain  to  all  others  that  I  honour.  I  see

1  Willoughby  to  Leiceister,  Sept.  1581.  (Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  p.  141,  MS.)

1588.

WILLOUGHBY  RELUCTANTLY  TAKES  COMMAND.  357

the  finest  reynard  loses  his  best  coat  as  well  as  the  poorest
sheep.”  1  He  was  also  a  strong  Leicestrian,  and  had  imbibed
much  of  the  Earl's  resentment  against  the  leading  politicians
of  the  States.  Willoughby  was  sorely  in  need  of  council.
That  shrewd  and  honest  Welshman — Roger  Williams — was,
for  the  moment,  absent.  Another  of  the  same  race  and  cha¬
racter  commanded  in  Bergen-op-Zoom,  but  was  not  more
gifted  with  administrative  talent  than  the  general  himself.

ce  Sir  Thomas  Morgan  is  a  very  sufficient,  gallant  gentle¬
man,”  said  Willoughby,  cc  and  in  truth  a  very  old  soldier  ;  but
we  both  have  need  of  one  that  can  both  give  and  keep  coun¬
sel  better  than  ourselves.  For  action  he  is  undoubtedly  very
able,  if  there  were  no  other  means  to  conquer  but  only  to
give  blows.”  2

In  brief,  the  new  commander  of  the  English  forces  in  the
Netherlands  was  little  satisfied  with  the  States,  with  the
enemy,  or  with  himself  ;  and  was  inclined  to  take  but  a  dismal
view  of  the  disjointed  commonwealth,  which  required  so  in¬
competent  a  person  as  he  professed  himself  to  be  to  set  it  right.

“  'Tis  a  shame  to  show  my  wants,”  he  said,  u  but  too  great
a  fault  of  duty  that  the  Queen's  reputation  be  frustrate.  What
is  my  slender  experience  !  What  an  honourable  person  do  I
succeed  !  What  an  encumbered  popular  state  is  left  !  What
withered  sinews,  which  it  passes  my  cunning  to  restore  !  What
an  enemy  in  head  greater  than  heretofore  !  And  wherewithal
should  I  sustain  this  burthen  ?  For  the  wars  I  am  fitter  to
obey  than  to  command.  For  the  state,  I  am  a  man  prejudi-
cated  in  their  opinion,  and  not  the  better  liked  of  them  that  I
have  earnestly  followed  the  general,  and,  being  one  that
wants  both  opinion  and  experience  with  them  I  have  to  deal,
and  means  to  win  more  or  to  maintain  that  which  is  left,
what  good  may  be  looked  for  P  ” 3

The  supreme  authority — by  the  retirement  of  Leicester —
was  once  more  the  subject  of  dispute.  As  on  his  first  de¬
parture,  so  also  on  this  his  second  and  final  one,  he  had  left  a

1  Same  to  Burghley,  16  July,  1581.  3  Willoughby  to  Burghley,  18  Nov.

(Br.  Mus.  Galba,  I).  I.  p.  10,  MS.)  1581.  (Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  II.  210,  MS.)

2  Willoughby  to  Burghley,  last  cited.

358

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

commission  to  the  state-council  to  act  as  an  executive  body
during  his  absence.  But,  although  he  nominally  still  retained
his  office,  in  reality  no  man  believed  in  his  return  ;  and  the
States-General  were  ill  inclined  to  brook  a  species  of  guardian¬
ship  over  them,  with  which  they  believed  themselves  mature
enough  to  dispense.  Moreover  the  state-council,  composed
mainly  of  Leicestrians,  would  expire,  by  limitation  of  its  com¬
mission,  early  in  February  of  that  year.  The  dispute  for
power  would  necessarily  terminate,  therefore,  in  favour  of  the
States-General.1

Meantime — while  this  internal  revolution  was  taking  place
in  the  polity  of  the  commonwealth — the  gravest  disturbances
were  its  natural  consequence.  There  were  mutinies  in  the
garrisons  of  Heusden,  of  Gertruydenberg,  of  Medenblik,  as
alarming,  and  threatening  to  become  as  chronic  in  their  cha¬
racter,  as  those  extensive  military  rebellions  which  often  ren¬
dered  the  Spanish  troops  powerless  at  the  most  critical  epochs.
The  cause  of  these  mutinies  was  uniformly,  want  of  pay,  the
pretext,  the  oath  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  which  was  declared
incompatible  with  the  allegiance  claimed  by  Maurice  in  the
name  of  the  States-General.  The  mutiny  of  Gertruydenberg
was  destined  to  be  protracted  ;  that  of  Medenblik,  dividing,
as  it  did,  the  little  territory  of  Holland  in  its  very  heart,  it
was  most  important  at  once  to  suppress.  Sonoy,  however —
who  was  so  stanch  a  Leicestrian,  that  his  Spanish  contem¬
poraries  uniformly  believed  him  to  be  an  Englishman 2 — held
out  for  a  long  time,  as  will  be  seen,  against  the  threats  and  even
the  armed  demonstrations  of  Maurice  and  the  States.

Meantime  the  English  sovereign,  persisting  in  her  delusion,
and  despite  the  solemn  warnings  of  her  own  wisest  coun¬
sellors,  and  the  passionate  remonstrances  of  the  States-General
of  the  Netherlands,  sent  her  peace-commissioners  to  the  Duke
of  Parma.

The  Earl  of  Derby,  Lord  Cobliam,  Sir  James  Croft,  Valen¬
tine  Dale,  doctor  of  laws,  and  former  ambassador  at  Vienna,
and  Dr.  Kogers,  envoys  on  the  part  of  the  Queen,  arrived  in

1  Compare  Van  der  Kemp,  ‘Mauritavan  Nassau,’  I.  58,  seq.

3  Herrera,  III.  11,  84.  Cornero,  ‘Guerras  de  Elandes,’  224.

1588.  ENGLISH  COMMISSIONERS  COME  TO  OSTEND.  359

tlie  Netherlands  in  February.1  The  commissioners  appointed
on  the  part  of  Farnese  were  Count  Aremberg,  Champagny,
Richardot,  Jacob  Maas,  and  Secretary  Garnier.

If  history  has  ever  furnished  a  lesson,  how  an  unscrupulous
tyrant,  who  has  determined  upon  enlarging  his  own  territories
at  the  expense  of  his  neighbours,  upon  oppressing  human
freedom  wherever  it  dared  to  manifest  itself,  with  fine  phrases
of  religion  and  order  for  ever  in  his  mouth,  on  deceiving  his
friends  and  enemies  alike,  as  to  his  nefarious  and  almost  in¬
credible  designs,  by  means  of  perpetual  and  colossal  false¬
hoods  ;  and  if  such  lessons  deserve  to  be  pondered,  as  a  source
of  instruction  and  guidance  for  every  age,  then  certainly  the
secret  story  of  the  negotiations  by  which  the  wise  Queen  of
England  was  beguiled,  and  her  kingdom  brought  to  the  verge
of  ruin,  in  the  spring  of  1588,  is  worthy  of  serious  attention.

The  English  commissioners  arrived  at  Ostend.  With  them
came  Robert  Cecil,  youngest  son  of  Lord-Treasurer  Burghley,
then  twenty-five  years  of  age.  He  had  no  official  capacity,
but  was  sent  by  his  father,  that  he  might  improve  his  diplo¬
matic  talents,  and  obtain  some  information  as  to  the  condi¬
tion  of  the  Netherlands.  A  slight,  crooked,  hump-backed
young  gentleman,  dwarfish  in  stature,  but  with  a  face  not
irregular  in  feature,  and  thoughtful  and  subtle  in  expression,
with  reddish  hair,  a  thin  tawny  beard,  and  large,  pathetic,
greenish-coloured  eyes,  with  a  mind  and  manners  already
trained  to  courts  and  cabinets,  and  with  a  disposition  almost
ingenuous,  as  compared  to  the  massive  dissimulation  with
which  it  was  to  be  contrasted,  and  with  what  was,  in  after¬
times,  to  constitute  a  portion  of  his  own  character,  Cecil,  young
as  he  was,  could  not  be  considered  the  least  important  of  the
envoys.  The  Queen,  who  loved  proper  men,  called  him  “her
pigmy and  “although/'  he  observed  with  whimsical  courtli¬
ness,  “  I  may  not  find  fault  with  the  sporting  name  she  gives
me,  yet  seem  I  only  not  to  mislilce  it,  because  she  gives  it.” 2  The
strongest  man  among  them  was  Valentine  Dale,  who  had

1  Camden,  III.  407.

2  R.  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  Feb.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

26

360

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

much  shrewdness,  experience,  and  legal  learning,  hut  who
valued  himself,  above  all  things,  upon  his  Latinity.  It  was  a
consolation  to  him,  while  his  adversaries  were  breaking
Priscian’s  head  as  fast  as  the  Duke,  their  master,  was  break¬
ing  his  oaths,  that  his  own  syntax  was  as  clear  as  his  con¬
science.1  The  feeblest  commissioner  was  James-a-Croft,  who
had  already  exhibited  himself  with  very  anile  characteristics,
and  whose  subsequent  manifestations  were  to  seem  like  dotage.
Doctor  Rogers,  learned  in  the  law,  as  he  unquestionably  was,
had  less  skill  in  reading  human  character,  or  in  deciphering
the  physiognomy  of  a  Farnese,  while  Lord  Derby,  every  inch
a  grandee,  with  Lord  Cobham  to  assist  him,  was  not  the  man
to  cope  with  the  astute  Pichardo t,  the  profound  and  ex¬
perienced  Champagny,  or  that  most  voluble  and  most  rhe¬
torical  of  doctors  of  law,  Jacob  Maas  of  Antwerp.

The  commissioners,  on  their  arrival,  were  welcomed  by
Secretary  Gamier,  who  had  been  sent  to  Ostend  to  greet
them.  An  adroit,  pleasing,  courteous  gentleman,  thirty-six
years  of  age,  small,  handsome,  and  attired  not  quite  as  a
soldier,  nor  exactly  as  one  of  the  long  robe,  wearing  a  cloak
furred  to  the  knee,  a  cassock  of  black  velvet,  with  plain  gold
buttons,  and  a  gold  chain  about  his  neck,  the  secretary  de¬
livered  handsomely  the  Duke  of  Parma’s  congratulations,
recommended  great  expedition  in  the  negotiations,  and  was
then  invited  by  the  Earl  of  Derby  to  dine  with  the  commis¬
sioners.2  He  was  accompanied  by  a  servant  in  plain  livery,
who — so  soon  as  his  master  had  made  his  bow  to  the  English
envoys — had  set  forth  for  a  stroll  through  the  town.  The
modest-looking  valet,  however,  was  a  distinguished  engineer
in  disguise,  who  had  been  sent  by  Alexander  for  the  especial
purpose  of  examining  the  fortifications  of  Ostend3 — that  town
being  a  point  much  coveted,  and  liable  to  immediate  attack
by  the  Spanish  commander.

Meanwhile  Secretary  Gamier  made  himself  very  agreeable,
showing  wit,  experience,  and  good  education ;  and,  after

1  Yalentine  Dale  to  "Walsingham,  14  March,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  R.  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Parma  to  Philip  II.,  20  March,  1588.  (Arch,  cte  Simancas,  MS.)

1538.  SECRETARY  GARNIER  AND  ROBERT  CECIL.  3(J1

dinner,  was  accompanied  to  his  lodgings  by  Dr.  Rogers  and
other  gentlemen,  with  whom — especially  with  Cecil — he  held
much  conversation.

Knowing  that  this  young  gentleman  “  wanted  not  an  ho¬
nourable  father/'  the  Secretary  was  very  desirous  that  he  should
take  this  opportunity  to  make  a  tour  through  the  Provinces,
examine  the  cities,  and  especially  “note  the  miserable  ruins
of  the  poor  country  and  people."  He  would  then  feelingly
perceive  how  much  they  had  to  answer  for,  whose  mad  rebel¬
lion  against  their  sovereign  lord  and  master  had  caused  so
great  an  effusion  of  blood,  and  the  wide  desolation  of  such
goodly  towns  and  territories.

Cecil  probably  entertained  a  suspicion  that  the  sovereign
lord  and  master,  who  had  been  employed,  twenty  years  long,
in  butchering  his  subjects  and  in  ravaging  their  territory  to
feed  his  executioners  and  soldiers,  might  almost  be  justified
in  treating  human  beings  as  beasts  and  reptiles,  if  they  had
not  at  last  rebelled.  He  simply  and  diplomatically  answered,
however,  that  he  could  not  but  concur  with  the  Secretary  in
lamenting  the  misery  of  the  Provinces  and  people  so  utterly
despoiled  and  ruined,  but,  as  it  might  be  matter  of  dispute,
.  “  from  what  head  this  fountain  of  calamity  was  both  fed  and
derived,  he  would  not  enter  further  therein,  it  being  a  matter
much  too  high  for  his  capacity."  He  expressed  also  the  hope
that  the  King's  heart  might  sympathize  with  that  of  her
Majesty,  in  earnest  compassion  for  all  this  suffering,  and  in
determination  to  compound  their  differences.1

On  the  following  day  there  was  some  conversation  with
Gamier,  on  preliminary  and  formal  matters,  followed  in  the
evening  by  a  dinner  at  Lord  Cobham's  lodgings — a  banquet
which  the  forlorn  condition  of  the  country  scarcely  permitted
to  be  luxurious.  “We  rather  pray  here  for  satiety,"  said  Cecil,
“  than  ever  think  of  variety." 2

It  was  hoped  by  the  Englishmen  that  the  Secretary  would
take  his  departure  after  dinner  ;  for  the  governor  of  Ostend,
Sir  John  Conway,  had  an  uneasy  sensation,  during  his  visit,

Cecil  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.

3  Ibid.

362

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

that  the  unsatisfactory  condition  of  the  defences  would  attract
his  attention,  and  that  a  sudden  attack  by  Farnese  might  he
the  result.  Sir  John  was  not  aware,  however,  of  the  minute
and  scientific  observations  then  making — at  the  very  moment
when  Mr.  Gamier  was  entertaining  the  commissioners  with
his  witty  and  instructive  conversation — by  the  unobtrusive
menial  who  had  accompanied  the  Secretary  to  Ostend.  In
order  that  those  observations  might  be  as  thorough  as  possible,
rather  than  with  any  view  to  ostensible  business,  the  envoy  of
Parma  now  declared  that — on  account  of  the  unfavourable
state  of  the  tide — he  had  resolved  to  pass  another  night  at
Ostend.  “We  could  have  spared  his  company/'  said  Cecil,
“but  their  Lordships  considered  it  convenient  that  he  should
be  used  well."  So  Mr.  Comptroller  Croft  gave  the  affable
Secretary  a  dinner-invitation  for  the  following  day.1

Here  certainly  was  a  masterly  commencement  on  the  part
of  the  Spanish  diplomatists.  There  was  not  one  stroke  of
business  during  the  visit  of  the  Secretary.  He  had  been  sent
simply  to  convey  a  formal  greeting,  and  to  take  the  names  of
the  English  commissioners — a  matter  which  could  have  been
done  in  an  hour  as  well  as  in  a  week.  But  it  must  be  remem¬
bered,  that,  at  that  very  moment,  the  Duke  was  daily  expect¬
ing  intelligence  of  the  sailing  of  the  Armada,  and  that  Philip,
on  his  part,  supposed  the  Duke  already  in  England,  at  the
head  of  his  army.  Under  these  circumstances,  therefore —
when  the  whole  object  of  the  negotiation,  so  far  as  Parma
and  his  master  were  concerned,  was  to  amuse  and  to  gain
time — it  was  already  ingenious  in  Gamier  to  have  consumed
several  days  in  doing  nothing ;  and  to  have  obtained  plans
and  descriptions  of  Ostend  into  the  bargain.

Gamier — when  his  departure  could  no  longer,  on  any  pre¬
text,  be  deferred — took  his  leave,  once  more  warmly  urging
Eobert  Cecil  to  make  a  little  tour  in  the  obedient  Nether¬
lands,  and  to  satisfy  himself,  by  personal  observation,  of  their
miserable  condition.  As  Dr.  Dale  purposed  making  a  pre¬
liminary  visit  to  the  Duke  of  Parma  at  Ghent,  it  was  deter¬
mined  accordingly  that  he  should  be  accompanied  by  Cecil.

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.

1588.

CECIL  ACCOMPANIES  DALE  TO  GHENT.

363

That  young  gentleman  had  already  been  much  impressed
by  the  forlorn  aspect  of  the  country  about  Ostend — for,  al¬
though  the  town  was  itself  in  possession  of  the  English,  it  was
in  the  midst  of  the  enemy's  territory.  Since  the  fall  of  Sluys
the  Spaniards  were  masters  of  all  Flanders,  save  this  one
much-coveted  point.  And  although  the  Queen  had  been  dis¬
posed  to  abandon  that  city,  and  to  suffer  the  ocean  to  over¬
whelm  it,  rather  than  that  she  should  he  at  charges  to  defend
it,  yet  its  possession  was  of  vital  consequence  to  the  English-
Dutch  cause,  as  time  was  ultimately  to  show.  Meanwhile  the
position  was  already  a  very  important  one,  for — according  to
the  predatory  system  of  warfare  of  the  day — it  was  an  ex¬
cellent  starting-point  for  those  marauding  expeditions  against
persons  and  property,  in  which  neither  the  Dutch  nor  English
wrere  less  skilled  than  the  Flemings  or  Spaniards.  “  The  land
all  about  here,"  said  Cecil,  u  is  so  devastated,  that  where  the
open  country  was  wont  to  he  covered  with  kine  and  sheep,  it
is  now  fuller  of  wild  hoars  and  wolves  ;  whereof  many  come
so  nigh  the  town  that  the  sentinels — three  of  whom  watch
every  night  upon  a  sand-hill  outside  the  gates — have  had  them
in  a  dark  night  upon  them  ere  they  were  aware."  1

But  the  garrison  of  Ostend  was  quite  as  dangerous  to  the
peasants  and  the  country  squires  of  Flanders,  as  were  the
wolves  or  wild  hoars  ;  and  many  a  pacific  individual  of  retired
habits,  and  with  a  remnant  of  property  worth  a  ransom,  was
doomed  to  see  himself  whisked  from  his  seclusion  by  Conway's
troopers,  and  made  a  compulsory  guest  at  the  city.  Prisoners
were  brought  in  from  a  distance  of  sixty  miles  ;  and  there  was
one  old  gentlemen,  “  well-languaged,"  who  a  confessed  merrily
to  Cecil,  that  when  the  soldiers  fetched  him  out  of  his  own
mansion-house,  sitting  safe  in  his  study,  he  was  as  little  in  fear
of  the  garrison  of  Ostend  as  he  was  of  the  Turk  or  the  devil." 2

1  And  Doctor  Rogers  held  very
similar  language  :  “  The  most  dolorous
and  heavy  sights  in  this  voyage  to
Ghent,  by  me  -weighed,”  he  said;
“  seeing  the  countries  which,  hereto¬
fore,  by  traffic  of  merchants,  as  much
as  any  other  I  have  seen  flourish,  now
partly  drowned,  and,  except  certain
great  cities,  wholly  burned,  ruined,

and  desolate,  possessed,  I  say,  with
wolves,  wild  boars,  and  foxes — a  great
testimony  of  the  wrath  of  God,”  &c.

&c.  Dr.  Rogers  to  the  Queen,—  April,

1588.  (S.  R  Office  MS.)

4

2  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March,  MS.
already  cited.

364

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

—  March,
17

1588.

Three  days  after  the  departure  of  Gamier,  Dr.  Dale  and
his  attendants  started  uj>on  their  expedition  from  Ostend  to
Ghent — an  hour’s  journey  or  so  in  these  modern
times.  The  English  envoys,  in  the  sixteenth  century,
found  it  a  more  formidable  undertaking.  They  were
many  hours  traversing  the  four  miles  to  Oudenburg,  their  first
halting-place  ;  for  the  waters  were  out,  there  having  been  a
great  breach  of  the  sea-dyke  of  Ostend,  a  disaster  threatening
destruction  to  town  and  country.1  At  Oudenburg,  a  u  small
and  wretched  hole,”  as  Gamier  had  described  it  to  be,  there
was,  however,  a  garrison  of  three  thousand  Spanish  soldiers,
under  the  Marquis  de  Renti.  From  these  a  convoy  of  fifty
troopers  was  appointed  to  protect  the  English  travellers  to
Bruges.  Here  they  arrived  at  three  o’clock,  were  met  outside
the  gates  by  the  famous  General  La  Motte,  and  by  him  escorted
to  their  lodgings  in  the  “English  house,”  and  afterwards
handsomely  entertained  at  supper  in  his  own  quarters.

The  General’s  wife,  Madame  de  la  Motte,  was,  according  to
Cecil,  “  a  fair  gentlewoman  of  discreet  and  modest  behaviour,
and  yet  not  unwilling  sometimes  to  hear  herself  speak  2  so
that  in  her  society,  and  in  that  of  her  sister — “  a  nun  of  the
order  of  the  Mounts,  but  who,  like  the  rest  of  the  sisterhood,
wore  an  ordinary  dress  in  the  evening,  and  might  leave
the  convent  if  asked  in  marriage” — the  supper  passed  off
very  agreeably.

In  the  evening  Cecil  found  that  his  father  had  formerly
occupied  the  same  bedroom  of  the  English  hotel  in  which  he

Friday  was  then  lodged  J  for  he  found  that  Lord  Burghley

March  8,  bad  scrawled  his  name  in  the  chimney-corner — a

1858  v

fact  which  was  highly  gratifying  to  the  son.3

The  next  morning,  at  seven  o’clock,  the  travellers  set  forth
for  Ghent.  The  journey  was  a  miserable  one.  It  was  as  cold
and  gloomy  weather  as  even  a  Flemish  month  of  March  could
furnish.  A  drizzling  rain  was  falling  all  day  long,  the  lanes
were  foul  and  miry,  the  frequent  thickets  which  overhung

(MS.  last  cited.)

10

Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March,  1588.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Same  to  same.

3  Ibid.

1588.  AND  FINDS  THE  DESOLATION  COMPLETE.  365

their  path  were  swarming  with  the  freebooters  of  Zeeland,  who
were  “  ever  at  hand/'  says  Cecil,  “  to  have  picked  our  purses,
but  that  they  descried  our  convoy,  and  so  saved  themselves  in
the  woods."  Sitting  on  horseback  ten  hours  without  alighting,
under  such  circumstances  as  these,  was  not  luxurious  for  a
fragile  little  gentleman  like  Queen  Elizabeth’s  “  pigmy  ;’’
especially  as  Dr.  Dale  and  himself  had  only  half  a  red  herring
between  them  for  luncheon,  and  supped  afterwards  upon  an
orange.1  The  envoy  protested  that  when  they  could  get  a
couple  of  eggs  a  piece,  while  travelling  in  Flanders,  “  they
thought  they  fared  like  princes.’’2

Nevertheless  Cecil  and  himself  fought  it  out  manfully,  and
when  they  reached  Ghent,  at  five  in  the  evening,  they  were
met  by  their  acquaintance  Garnier,  and  escorted  to  their
lodgings.  Here  they  were  waited  upon  by  President  Richardot,
“a  tall  gentleman,’’  on  behalf  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,  and  then
left  to  their  much-needed  repose.

Nothing  could  be  more  forlorn  than  the  country  of  the
obedient  Netherlands,  through  which  their  day’s  journey  had
led  them.  Desolation  had  been  the  reward  of  obedience.
“The  misery  of  the  inhabitants,’’  said  Cecil,  “is  incredible,
both  without  the  town,  where  all  things  are  wasted,  houses
spoiled,  and  grounds  unlaboured,  and  also,  even  in  these
great  cities,  where  they  are  for  the  most  part  poor  beggars
even  in  the  fairest  houses.’’ 3

And  all  this  human  wretchedness  was  the  elaborate
work  of  one  man — one  dull,  heartless  bigot,  living,  far
away,  a  life  of  laborious  ease  and  solemn  sensuality  ;  and,
in  reality,  almost  as  much  removed  from  these  fellow-
creatures  of  his,  whom  he  called  his  subjects,  as  if  he  had
been  the  inhabitant  of  another  planet.  Has  history  many
more  instructive  warnings  against  the  horrors  of  arbitrary
government — against  the  folly  of  mankind  in  ever  tolerating
the  rule  of  a  single  irresponsible  individual,  than  the  lesson
furnished  by  the  life-work  of  that  crowned  criminal,  Philip
the  Second  P

14

1  Dale  to  Burghley,  —  March,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  2  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

366

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

The  longing  for  peace  on  the  part  of  these  unfortunate
obedient  Flemings  was  intense.  Incessant  cries  for  peace
reached  the  ears  of  the  envoys  on  every  side.  Alas,  it  would
have  been  better  for  these  peace-wishers,  had  they  stood  side
by  side  with  their  brethren,  the  noble  Hollanders  and  Zee-
landers,  when  they  had  been  wresting,  if  not  peace,  yet  inde¬
pendence  and  liberty,  from  Philip,  with  their  own  right  hands.
Now  the  obedient  Flemings  were  but  fuel  for  the  vast  flame
which  the  monarch  was  kindling  for  the  destruction  of  Chris¬
tendom — if  all  Christendom  were  not  willing  to  accept  his
absolute  dominion.

The  burgomasters  of  Ghent — of  Ghent,  once  the  powerful,
the  industrious,  the  opulent,  the  free,  of  all  cities  in  the  world
now  the  most  abject  and  forlorn — came  in  the  morning  to
wait  upon  Elizabeth's  envoy,  and  to  present  him,  according
to  ancient  custom,  with  some  flasks  of  wine.  They  came  with
tears  streaming  down  their  cheeks,  earnestly  expressing  the
desire  of  their  hearts  for  peace,  and  their  joy  that  at  least
it  had  now  cc  begun  to  be  thought  on." 1

ee  It  is  quite  true,"  replied  Hr.  Hale,  ee  that  her  excellent
Majesty  the  Queen — filled  with  compassion  for  your  condition,
and  having  been  informed  that  the  Buke  of  Parma  is  desirous
of  peace — has  vouchsafed  to  make  this  overture.  If  it  take
not  the  desired  effect,  let  not  the  blame  rest  upon  her,  but
upon  her  adversaries."  To  these  words  the  magistrates  all
said  Amen,  and  invoked  blessings  on  her  Majesty.2  And
most  certainly,  Elizabeth  was  sincerely  desirous  of  peace,
even  at  greater  sacrifices  than  the  Huke  could  well  have
imagined  ;  but  there  was  something  almost  diabolic  in  the
cold  dissimulation  by  which  her  honest  compassion  was  mocked,
and  the  tears  of  a  whole  people  in  its  agony  made  the  laughing¬
stock  of  a  despot  and  his  tools.

On  Saturday  morning,  Kichardot  and  Gamier  waited  upon
the  envoy  to  escort  him  to  the  presence  of  the  Huke.  Cecil,
who  accompanied  him,  was  not  much  impressed  with  the

10

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March.  MS.  already  cited.

2  Ibid.

1588.  INTERVIEW  OF  DALE  AND  CECIL  WITH  PARMA.  367

grandeur  of  Alexander's  lodgings,  and  made  un-  9  March,
favourable  and  rather  unreasonable  comparisons  19  1588*
between  them  and  the  splendour  of  Elizabeth's  court.  They
passed  through  an  ante-chamber  into  a  dining-room,  thence
into  an  inner  chamber,  and  next  into  the  Duke's  room.  In
the  ante-chamber  stood  Sir  William  Stanley,  the  Deventer
traitor,  conversing  with  one  Mockett,  an  Englishman,  long
resident  in  Flanders.  Stanley  was  meanly  dressed,  in  the
Spanish  fashion,  and  as  young  Cecil,  passing  through  the
chamber,  looked  him  in  the  face,  he  abruptly  turned  from  him,
and  pulled  his  hat  over  his  eyes.  u  'Twas  well  he  did  so,”
said  that  young  gentleman*  “  for  his  taking  it  off  would  hardly
have  cost  me  mine.”1  Cecil  was  informed  that  Stanley  was
to  have  a  commandery  of  Malta,  and  was  in  good  favour  with
the  Duke,  who  was,  however,  quite  weary  of  his  mutinous  and
disorderly  Irish  regiment.2

In  the  bed-chamber,  Farnese — accompanied  by  the  Marquis
del  Gruasto,  the  Marquis  of  Benty,  the  Prince  of  Aremberg,
President  Pichardo t,  and  Secretary  Cosimo — received  the
envoy  and  his  companion.  u  Small  and  mean  was  the  furni¬
ture  of  the  chamber, ”  said  Cecil ;  “  and  although  they  attribute
this  to  his  love  of  privacy,  yet  it  is  a  sign  that  peace  is  the
mother  of  all  honour  and  state,  as  may  best  be  perceived  by
the  court  of  England,  which  her  Majesty's  royal  presence  doth
so  adorn,  as  that  it  exceedeth  this  as  far  as  the  sun  surpasseth
in  light  the  other  stars  of  the  firmament.”3

Here  was  a  compliment  to  the  Queen  and  her  upholsterers
drawn  in  by  the  ears.  Certainly,  if  the  first  and  best  fruit  of
the  much-longed-for  peace  were  only  to  improve  the  furniture
of  royal  and  ducal  apartments,  it  might  be  as  well  perhaps  for
the  war  to  go  on,  while  the  Queen  continued  to  outshine  all
the  stars  in  the  firmament.  But  the  budding  courtier  and
statesman  knew  that  a  personal  compliment  to  Elizabeth
could  never  be  amiss  or  ill-timed.

The  envoy  delivered  the  greetings  of  her  Majesty  to  the
Duke,  and  was  heard  with  great  attention.  Alexander  at-.

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.  a  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

/

f

368

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Ciiap.  XYIII.

tempted  a  reply  in  French,  which  was  very  imperfect,  and,
apologizing,  exchanged  that  tongue  for  Italian.1  He  alluded
with  great  fervour  to  the  “  honourable  opinion  concerning  his
sincerity  and  word/'  expressed  to  him  by  her  Majesty,  through
the  mouth  of  her  envoy.  “And  indeed,"  said  he,  “I  have
always  had  especial  care  of  keeping  my  word.  My  body  and
service  are  at  the  commandment  of  the  King,  my  lord  and
master,  but  my  honour  is  my  own,  and  her  Majesty  may  be
assured  that  I  shall  always  have  especial  regard  of  my  wojxl
to  so  great  and  famous  a  Queen  as  her  Majesty."

The  visit  was  one  of  preliminaries  and  of  ceremony.  Never¬
theless  Farnese  found  opportunity*to  impress  the  envoy  and
his  companions  with  his  sincerity  of  heart.  He  conversed
much  with  Cecil,  making  particular  and  personal  inquiries,
and  with  appearance  of  deep  interest,  in  regard  to  Queen
Elizabeth.

“  There  is  not  a  prince  in  the  world — "  he  said,  “  reserving
all  question  between  her  Majesty  and  my  royal  master — to
whom  I  desire  more  to  do  service.  So  much  have  I  heard  of
her  perfections,  that  I  wish  earnestly  that  things  might  so  fall
out,  as  that  it  might  be  my  fortune  to  look  upon  her  face
before  my  return  to  my  own  country.  Yet  I  desire  to  behold
her,  not  as  a  servant  to  him  who  is  not  able  still  to  maintain
war,  or  as  one  that  feared  any  harm  that  might  befall  him  ;
for  in  such  matters  my  account  was  made  long  ago,  to  endure
all  which  God  may  send.  But,  in  truth,  I  am  weary  to
behold  the  miserable  estate  of  this  people,  fallen  upon  them
through  their  own  folly,  and  methinks  that  he  who  should  do
the  best  offices  of  peace  would  perform  a  pium  et  sanctissimum
opus.  Right  glad  am  I  that  the  Queen  is  not  behind  me  in
zeal  for  peace."  He  then  complimented  Cecil  in  regard  to
his  father,  whom  he  understood  to  be  the  principal  mover  in
these  negotiations.2

The  young  man  expressed  his  thanks,  and  especially  for  the

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March.  MS.  already  cited.

1588.  HIS  FERVENT  EXPRESSIONS  IN  FAVOUR  OF  PEACE.  369

good  affection  which  the  Duke  had  manifested  to  the  Queen
and  in  the  blessed  cause  of  peace.  He  was  well  aware  that
her  Majesty  esteemed  him  a  prince  of  great  honour  and  virtue,
and  that  for  this  good  work,  thus  auspiciously  begun,  no  man
could  possibly  doubt  that  her  Majesty,  like  himself,  was  most
zealously  affected  to  bring  all  things  to  a  perfect  peace.

The  matters  discussed  in  this  first  interview  Were  only  in
regard  to  the  place  to  be  appointed  for  the  coming  con¬
ferences,  and  the  exchange  of  powers.  The  Queen’s  commis¬
sioners  had  expected  to  treat  at  Ostend.  Alexander,  on  the
contrary,  was  unable  to  listen  to  such  a  suggestion,  as  it  would
be  utter  dereliction  of  his  master’s  dignity  to  send  envoys  to
a  city  of  his  own,  now  in  hostile  occupation  by  her  Majesty’s
forces.  The  place  of  conference,  therefore,  would  be  matter
of  future  consideration.  In  respect  to  the  exchange  of  powers,
Alexander  expressed  the  hope  that  no  man  would  doubt  as  to
the  production  on  his  commissioners’  part  of  ample  authority
both  from  himself  and  from  the  King.1

Yet  it  will  be  remembered,  that,  at  this  moment,  the  Duke
had  not  only  no  powers  from  the  King,  but  that  Philip  had
most  expressly  refused  to  send  a  commission,  and  that  he  fully
expected  the  negotiation  to  be  superseded  by  the  invasion,
before  the  production  of  the  powers  should  become  indis¬
pensable.

And  when  Farnese  was  speaking  thus  fervently  in  favour
of  peace,  and  parading  his  word  and  his  honour,  the  letters
lay  in  his  cabinet  in  that  very  room,  in  which  Philip  expressed
his  conviction  that  his  general  was  already  in  London,  that
the  whole  realm  of  England  was  already  at  the  mercy  of
a  Spanish  soldiery,  and  that  the  Queen,  upon  whose  perfections
Alexander  had  so  long  yearned  to  gaze,  was  a  discrowned
captive,  entirely  in  her  great  enemy’s  power.

Thus  ended  the  preliminary  interview.  On  the  following
Monday,  11th  March,  Dr.  Dale  and  his  attendants  made  the
best  of  their  way  back  to  Ostend,  while  young  Cecil,  u  March,
with  a  safe  conduct  from  Champagny,  set  forth  on  a  1588,
little  tour  in  Flanders.

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.

vol.  ii. — 2  B

370

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

The  journey  from  Ghent  to  Antwerp  was  easy,  and  he  was
agreeably  surprised  by  the  apparent  prosperity  of  the  country.
At  intervals  of  every  few  miles,  he  was  refreshed  with  the
spectacle  of  a  gibbet  well  garnished  with  dangling  freebooters,
and  rejoiced,  therefore,  in  comparative  security.  For  it  seemed
that  the  energetic  bailiff  of  Waasland  had  levied  a  contribu¬
tion  upon  the  proprietors  of  the  country,  to  be  expended
mainly  in  hanging  brigands  ;  and  so  well  had  the  funds  been
applied,  that  no  predatory  bands  could  make  their  appear¬
ance  but  they  were  instantly  pursued  by  soldiers,  and  hanged
forthwith,  without  judge  or  trial.  Cecil  counted  twelve  such
places  of  execution  on  his  road  between  Ghent  and  Antwerp.1

On  his  journey  he  fell  in  with  an  Italian  merchant,  Lan-
franchi  by  name,  of  a  great  commercial  house  in  Antwerp,  in
the  days  when  Antwerp  had  commerce,  and  by  him,  on  his
arrival  the  same  evening  in  that  town,  he  was  made  an
honoured  guest,  both  for  his  father's  sake  and  his  Queen's.
“  'Tis  the  pleasantest  city  that  ever  I  saw,"  said  Cecil,  “for
situation  and  building,  but  utterly  left  and  abandoned  now  by
those  rich  merchants  that  were  wont  to  frequent  the  place." 2

His  host  was  much  interested  in  the  peace-negotiations,  and
indeed,  through  his  relations  with  Champagny  and  Andreas
de  Loo,  had  been  one  of  the  instruments  by  which  it  had  been
commenced.  He  inveighed  bitterly  against  the  Spanish  cap¬
tains  and  soldiers,  to  whose  rapacity  and  ferocity  he  mainly
ascribed  the  continuance  of  the  war  ;  and  he  was  especially
incensed  with  Stanley  and  other  English  renegades,  who  were
thought  fiercer  haters  of  England  than  were  the  Spaniards
themselves.  Even  in  the  desolate  and  abject  condition  of
Antwerp  and  its  neighbourhood,  at  that  moment,  the  quick
eye  of  Cecil  detected  the  latent  signs  of  a  possible  splendour.
Should  peace  be  restored,  the  territory  once  more  be  tilled,
and  the  foreign  merchants  attracted  thither  again,  he  believed
that  the  governor  of  the  obedient  Netherlands  might  live  there
in  more  magnificence  than  the  King  of  Spain  himself,  ex¬
hausted  as  were  his  revenues  by  the  enormous  expense  of  this

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office'  MS.)

24

2  Ibid.

1588.

CECIL  MAKES  A  TOUR  IN  FLANDERS.

371

protracted  war.  Eight  hundred  thousand  dollars  monthly,
so  Lanfranchi  informed  Cecil,  were  the  costs  of  the  forces  on
the  footing  then  established.  This,  however,  was  probably  an
exaggeration,  for  the  royal  account-books  showed  a  less  for¬
midable  sum,1  although  a  sufficiently  large  one  to  appal  a  less
obstinate  bigot  than  Philip.  But  what  to  him  were  the  ruin
of  the  Netherlands,  the  impoverishment  of  Spain,  and  the
downfall  of  her  ancient  grandeur  compared  to  the  glory  of
establishing  the  Inquisition  in  England  and  Holland  P

While  at  dinner  in  Lanfranchi's  house,  Cecil  was  witness
to  another  characteristic  of  the  times,  and  one  which  afforded
proof  of  even  more  formidable  freebooters  abroad  than  those
for  whom  the  bailiff  of  Waasland  had  erected  his  gibbets.
A  canal-boat  had  left  Antwerp  for  Brussels  that  morning,  and
in  the  vicinity  of  the  latter  city  had  been  set  upon  by  a
detachment  from  the  English  garrison  of  Bergen-op-Zoom,
and  captured,  with  twelve  prisoners  and  a  freight  of  60,000
florins  in  money.  u  This  struck  the  company  at  the  dinner-
table  all  in  a  dump/'  said  Cecil.  And  well  it  might  ;  for  the
property  mainly  belonged  to  themselves,  and  they  forthwith
did  their  best  to  have  the  marauders  waylaid  on  their  return.
But  Cecil,  notwithstanding  his  gratitude  for  the  hospitality  of
Lanfranchi,  sent  word  next  day  to  the  garrison  of  Bergen  of

1  “Relation  particular  de  lo  quo
monta  un  mes  de  sueldo  de  toda  la
gente  de  este  excrcito  asi  infantra  como
caba  y  entretenidos  de  todos  naciones,
artilla  armada,  vituallas,  y  el  numero
de  la  gente  que  hay  conforme  a  la
ultima  muestra  de  29  Apr.,  1588 : —

Infanteria.

Hombres.  Vanderas.

Per  Mes.

Espanola . . .

..  8,118

89

$62,239

Itala  .

,  .  5,339

52

35,225

Borgoga  )

Irlandesca  >•

..  3,218

29

20,591

Escocesa  )

Wallona  . . . .

.  .11,825

144

19,341

Alema  Alta.

.11,309

50

86,691

,,  Baya

8,616

34

51,195

Caballeria  ligera.

3650  Alema

estandartes

.  .38,631

Castillos.

Anversa  . .  }  Per  Mes.

Gande  ..  >  1,180 .  6,508

Cliarlemont )

Entretenidos.

668 . 23,204

El  Armada  de  Mar,  gasto  ordi-  )  9  »

nario  per  mes . \  ’

Artilleria .  8,200

Yituallas,  spedale,  &c . 4,384

Sumario  total.

59,915  hombres,  per  mes,  escu-  >

Sua  Alteza  Alessandro  Farnese,  per
mes,  3000  escudos  d’  oro.

Maesse  del  campo  gen1,  per  mes,  1000.
Monta  el  gasto  ordina0  de  cada  me-
hasta  aqui  $454,315  per  mes  =  310,000
escudos  de  oro.”  (Archivo  de  Siman-
cas,  MS.)

372

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

the  designs  against  them,  and  on  his  arrival  at  the  place  had
the  satisfaction  of  being  informed  by  Lord  Willoughby  that
the  party  had  got  safe  home  with  their  plunder.1

“And  well  worthy  they  are  of  it,”  said  young  Robert,
“  considering  how  far  they  go  for  it.”

The  traveller,  on  leaving  Antwerp,  proceeded  down  the
river  to  Bergen-op-Zoom,  where  he  was  hospitably  entertained
by  that  doughty  old  soldier  Sir  William  Reade,  and  met  Lord
Willoughby,  whom  he  accompanied  to  Brielle  on  a  visit  to  the
deposed  elector  Truchsess,  then  living  in  that  neighbourhood.
Cecil — who  was  not  passion's  slave — had  small  sympathy  with
the  man  who  could  lose  a  sovereignty  for  the  sake  of  Agnes
Mansfeld.  “  'Tis  a  very  goodly  gentleman,"  said  he,  “  well
fashioned,  and  of  good  speech,  for  which  I  must  rather  praise
him  than  for  loving  a  wife  better  than  so  great  a  fortune  as  he
lost  by  her  occasion." 2  At  Brielle  he  was  handsomely  enter¬
tained  by  the  magistrates,  who  had  agreeable  recollections  of
his  brother  Thomas,  late  governor  of  that  city.  Thence  he
proceeded  by  way  of  Delft' — which,  like  all  English  travellers,
he  described  as  “  the  finest  built  town  that  ever  he  saw  " — to
the  Hague,  and  thence  to  Fushing,  and  so  back  by  sea  to
Ostend.  He  had  made  the  most  of  his  three  weeks'  tour,  had
seen  many  important  towns  both  in  the  republic  and  in  the
obedient  Netherlands,  and  had  conversed  with  many  u  tall
gentlemen,"  as  he  expressed  himself,  among  the  English
commanders,  having  been  especially  impressed  by  the  heroes
of  Sluys,  Baskerville  and  that  “proper  gentleman  Francis
Yere." 3

He  was  also  presented  by  Lord  Willoughby  to  Maurice  of
Nassau,  and  was  perhaps  not  very  benignantly  received  by  the
young  prince.  At  that  particular  moment,  when  Leicester's
deferred  resignation,  the  rebellion  of  Sonoy  in  North  Holland,
founded  on  a  fictitious  allegiance  to  the  late  governor-
general,  the  perverse  determination  of  the  Queen  to  treat  for

14  25  March

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March.  MS.  3  Cecil  to  Burghley,  — - ’  1588.

24  6  April

already  cited.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  3  Ibid.

1588.

AND  SEES  MUCH  THAT  IS  REMARKABLE.

373

peace  against  the  advice  of  all  the  leading  statesmen  of  the
Netherlands,  and  the  sharp  rebukes  perpetually  administered
by  her,  in  consequence,  to  the  young  stadholder  and  all  his
supporters,  had  not  tended  to  produce  the  most  tender  feelings
upon  their  part  towards  the  English  government,  it  was  not
surprising  that  the  handsome  soldier  should  look  askance  at
the  crooked  little  courtier,  whom  even  the  great  Queen  smiled
at  while  she  petted  him.  Cecil  was  very  angry  with  Maurice.

“In  my  life  I  never  saw  worse  behaviour/'  he  said,  ee  except
it  were  in  one  lately  come  from  school.  There  is  neither
outward  appearance  in  him  of  any  noble  mind  nor  inward
virtue." 1

Although  Cecil  had  consumed  nearly  the  whole  month  of
March  in  his  tour,  he  had  been  more  profitably  employed  than
were  the  royal  commissioners  during  the  same  period  at
Ostend.

Never  did  statesmen  know  better  how  not  to  do  that  which
they  were  ostensibly  occupied  in  doing  than  Alexander  Farnese
and  his  agents,  Champagny,  Kichardot,  Jacob  Maas,  and
Gamier.  The  first  pretext  by  which  much  time  was  cleverly
consumed  was  the  dispute  as  to  the  place  of  meeting.  Doctor
Dale  had  already  expressed  his  desire  for  Ostend  as  the  place
of  colloquy.  “'Tis  a  very  slow  old  gentleman,2  this  Doctor
Dale,"  said  Alexander  ;  “he  was  here  in  the  time  of  Madam
my  mother,  and  has  also  been  ambassador  at  Vienna.  I  have
received  him  and  his  attendants  with  great  courtesy,  and  held
out  great  hopes  of  peace.  We  had  conversations  about  the
place  of  meeting.  He  wishes  Ostend  :  I  object.  The  first
conference  will  probably  be  at  some  point  between  that  place
and  Newport."3

The  next  opportunity  for  discussion  and  delay  was  afforded
by  the  question  of  powers.  And  it  must  be  ever  borne  in
mind  that  Alexander  was  daily  expecting  the  arrival  of  the
invading  fleets  and  armies  of  Spain,  and  was  holding  himself

19  ,

1  Cecil  to  Burghley,  —  March,  1588.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  “Yiejo  y  pesado.”  Parma  to

Philip  II.,  20  March,  1588.  (Arch,  de
Simancas,  MS.)

3  Ibid.

374

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

in  readiness  to  place  himself  at  their  head  for  the  conquest  of
England.  This  was,  of  course,  so  strenuously  denied  by
himself  and  those  under  his  influence,  that  Queen  Elizabeth
implicitly  believed  him,  Burghley  was  lost  in  doubt,  and
even  the  astute  Walsingham  began  to  distrust  his  own  senses.
So  much  strength  does  a  falsehood  acquire  in  determined  and
skilful  hands.

“  As  to  the  commissions,  it  will  be  absolutely  necessary  for
your  Majesty  to  send  them/’  wrote  Alexander  at  the  moment
when  he  was  receiving  the  English  envoy  at  Ghent,  “for —
unless  the  Armada  arrive  soon — it  will  be  indispensable  for  me
to  have  them,  in  order  to  keep  the  negotiation  alive.  Of
course  they  will  never  broach  the  principal  matters  without
exhibition  of  powers.  Richardot  is  aware  of  the  secret  which
your  Majesty  confided  to  me,  namely,  that  the  negotiations
are  only  intended  to  deceive  the  Queen  and  to  gain  time  for
the  fleet ;  but  the  powers  must  be  sent  in  order  that  we  may
be  able  to  produce  them,  although  your  secret  intentions  will
be  obeyed/' 1

The  Duke  commented,  however,  on  the  extreme  difficulty
of  carrying  out  the  plan,  as  originally  proposed.  “  The  con¬
quest  of  England  would  have  been  difficult,"  he  said,  “  even
although  the  country  had  been  taken  by  surprise.  Now  they
are  strong  and  armed ;  we  are  comparatively  weak.  The
danger  and  the  doubt  are  great ;  and  the  English  deputies,  I
think,  are  really  desirous  of  peace.  Nevertheless  I  am  at
your  Majesty's  disposition — life  and  all — and  probably,  before
the  answer  arrives  to  this  letter ,  the  fleet  will  have  arrived,  and
I  shall  have  undertaken  the  passage  to  England ." 2

After  three  weeks  had  thus  adroitly  been  frittered  away,
the  English  commissioners  became  somewhat  impatient,  and
despatched  Doctor  Rogers  to  the  Duke  at  Ghent.  This  was
extremely  obliging  upon  their  part,  for  if  Valentine  Dale  were
a  “  slow  old  gentleman,"  he  was  keen,  caustic,  and  rapid,  as
compared  to  Daniel  Rogers.  A  formalist  and  a  pedant,  a  man
of  red  tape  and  routine,  full  of  precedents  and  declamatory

1  Parma  to  Philip  II,  20  March,  1588.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  2  Ibid.

1588.  INTERVIEWS  OF  DR.  ROGERS  WITH  PARMA.  375

commonplaces  which  he  mistook  for  eloquence,  honest  as
daylight  and  tedious  as  a  king,  he  was  just  the  time- consumer
for  Alexander's  purpose.  The  wily  Italian  listened  with  pro¬
found  attention  to  the  wise  saws  in  which  the  excellent  diplo¬
matist  revelled,  and  his  fine  eyes  often  filled  with  tears  at  the
Doctor's  rhetoric.

Three  interviews — each  three  mortal  hours  long — did  the
two  indulge  in  at  Ghent,  and  never  was  high  commissioner
better  satisfied  with  himself  than  was  Daniel  Rogers  upon
those  occasions.  He  carried  every  point ;  he  convinced,  he
softened,  he  captivated  the  great  Duke  ;  he  turned  the  great
Duke  round  his  finger.  The  great  Duke  smiled,  or  wept,  or
fell  into  his  arms,  by  turns.  Alexander's  military  exploits
had  rung  through  the  world,  his  genius  for  diplomacy  and
statesmanship  had  never  been  disputed ;  but  his  talents  as  a
light  comedian  were,  in  these  interviews,  for  the  first  time
fully  revealed.

On  the  26th  March  the  learned 'Doctor  made  his  first  bow
and  performed  his  first  flourish  of  compliments  at  Ghent.

26  March  u  I  assure  your  Majesty,"  said  he,  “  his  Highness
5isP88.'  followed  my  compliments  of  entertainment  with  so
much  honour,  as  that — his  Highness  or  I,  speaking  of  the
Queen  of  England — he  never  did  less  than  uncover  his  head  ;
not  covering  the  same,  unless  I  was  covered  also."  1  And  after
these  salutations  had  at  last  been  got  through  with,  thus
spake  the  Doctor  of  Laws  to  the  Duke  of  Parma  : —

“  Almighty  God,  the  light  of  lights,  be  pleased  to  enlighten
the  understanding  of  your  Alteza,  and  to  direct  the  same  to
his  glory,  to  the  uniting  of  both  their  Majesties  and  the
finishing  of  these  most  bloody  wars,  whereby  these  countries,
being  in  the  highest  degree  of  misery  desolate,  lie  as  it  were
prostrate  before  the  wrathful  presence  of  the  most  mighty
God,  most  lamentably  beseeching  his  Divine  Majesty  to  with¬
draw  his  scourge  of  war  from  them,  and  to  move  the  hearts  of
princes  to  restore  them  unto  peace,  whereby  they  might  attain

1  Daniel  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  —  April,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

376  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XYIII.

unto  tlieir  ancient  flower  and  dignity.  Into  the  hands  of
your  Alteza  are  now  the  lives  of  many  thousands,  the  destruc¬
tion  of  cities,  towns,  and  countries,  which  to  put  to  the  fortune
of  war  how  perilous  it  were,  I  pray  consider.  Think  ye,  ye
see  the  mothers  left  alive  tendering  their  offspring  in  your
presence/’  u  nam  matribus  detestata  bellaf  continued  the
orator.  u  Think  also  of  others  of  all  sexes,  ages,  and  con¬
ditions,  on  their  knees  before  your  Alteza,  most  humbly
praying  and  crying  most  dolorously  to  spare  their  lives,  and
save  their  property  from  the  ensanguined  scourge  of  the  insane
soldiers/’  and  so  on,  and  so  on.1

Now  Philip  II.  was  slow  in  resolving,  slower  in  action.
The  ponderous  three-deckers  of  Biscay  were  notoriously  the
dullest  sailers  ever  known,  nor  were  the  fettered  slaves  who
rowed  the  great  galleys  of  Portugal  or  of  Andalusia  very
brisk  in  their  movements  ;  and  yet  the  King  might  have
found  time  to  marshal  his  ideas  and  his  squadrons,  and  the
Armada  had  leisure  to  circumnavigate  the  globe  and  invade
England  afterwards,  if  a  succession  of  Daniel  Rogerses  could
have  entertained  his  Highness  with  compliments  while  the
preparations  were  making.

But  Alexander — at  the  very  outset  of  the  Doctor’s  eloquence
— found  it  difficult  to  suppress  his  feelings.  “ 1  can  assure
your  Majesty,”  said  Rogers,  “  that  his  eyes — he  has  a  very
large  eye — were  moistened.  Sometimes  they  were  thrown
upward  to  heaven,  sometimes  they  were  fixed  full  upon  me,
sometimes  they  were  cast  downward,  well  declaring  how  his
heart  was  affected.”2

Honest  Daniel  even  thought  it  necessary  to  mitigate  the
effect  of  his  rhetoric,  and  to  assure  his  Highness  that  it
was,  after  all,  only  he,  Doctor  Rogers,  and  not  the  minister
plenipotentiary  of  the  Queen’s  most  serene  Majesty,  who  was
exciting  all  this  emotion.

u  At  this  part  of  my  speech,”  said  he,  “  I  prayed  his  High¬
ness  not  to  be  troubled,3  for  that  the  same  only  proceeded  from

1  Daniel  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.  2  Ibid.

3  “  Scontentarsi,”  Ibid.

1588.

WONDERFUL  HARANGUES  OF  THE  ENVOY.

377

Doctor  Rogers ,  who,  it  might  please  him  to  know,  was  so  much
moved  with  the  pitiful  case  of  these  countries,  as  also  that
which  of  war  was  sure  to  ensue,  that  I  wished,  if  my  body
were  full  of  rivers  of  blood,  the  same  to  be  poured  forth  to
satisfy  any  that  were  blood-thirsty,  so  there  might  an  assured
peace  follow.”1

His  Highness,  at  any  rate,  manifesting  no  wish  to  drink  of
such  sanguinary  streams — even  had  the  Doctor’s  body  con¬
tained  them — Rogers  became  calmer.  He  then  descended
from  rhetoric  to  jurisprudence  and  casuistry,  and  argued  at
intolerable  length  the  propriety  of  commencing  the  con¬
ferences  at  Ostend,  and  of  exhibiting  mutually  the  commissions.

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  follow  him  as  closely  as  did
Farnese.  When  he  had  finished  the  first  part  of  his  oration,
however,  and  was  “  addressing  himself  to  the  second  point,”
Alexander  at  last  interrupted  the  torrent  of  his  eloquence.

u  He  said  that  my  divisions  and  subdivisions,”  wrote  the
Doctor,  u  were  perfectly  in  his  remembrance,  and  that  he  would
first  answer  the  first  point,  and  afterwards  give  audience  to
the  second,  and  answer  the  same  accordingly.”

Accordingly  Alexander  put  on  his  hat,  and  begged  the
envoy  also  to  be  covered.  Then,  u  with  great  gravity,  as  one
inwardly  much  moved,”  the  Duke  took  up  his  part  in  the
dialogue.

u  Signor  Ruggieri,”  said  he,  “you  have  jA'opounded  unto
me  speeches  of  two  sorts  :  the  one  proceeds  from  Doctor
Ruggieri,  the  other  from  the  lord  ambassador  of  the  most
serene  Queen  of  England.  Touching  the  first,  I  do  give  you
my  hearty  thanks  for  your  godly  speeches,  assuring  you  that
though,  by  reason  I  have  always  followed  the  wars,  I  cannot
be  ignorant  of  the  calamities  by  you  alleged,  yet  you  have
so  truly  represented  the  same  before  mine  eyes  as  to  effectuate
in  me  at  this  instant,  not  only  the  confirmation  of  mine  own
disposition  to  have  peace,  but  also  an  assurance  that  this  treaty
shall  take  good  and  speedy  end,  seeing  that  it  hath  pleased
God  to  raise  up  such  a  good  instrument  as  you  are.”2

1  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  before  cited.  2  Ibid.

378

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

“Many  are  tlie  causes/'  continued  the  Duke,  “which,  be¬
sides  my  disposition,  move  me  to  peace.  My  father  and
mother  are  dead,  my  son  is  a  young  prince,  my  house  has
truly  need  of  my  presence.  I  am  not  ignorant  how  ticklish  a
thing  is  the  fortune  of  war,  which — how  victorious  soever  I
have  been — may  in  one  moment  not  only  deface  the  same,
but  also  deprive  me  of  my  life.  The  King,  my  master,  is
now  stricken  in  •  years,  his  children  are  young,  his  dominions
in  trouble.  His  desire  is  to  live,  and  to  leave  his  posterity  in
quietness.  The  glory  of  God,  the  honor  of  both  their
Majesties,  and  the  good  of  these  countries,  with  the  stay  of
the  effusion  of  Christian  blood,  and  divers  other  like  reasons,
force  him  to  peace  ." 1

Thus  spoke  Alexander,  like  an  honest  Christian  gentleman,
avowing  the  most  equitable  and  pacific  dispositions  on  the
part  of  his  master  and  himself.-  Yet  at  that  moment  he  knew
that  the  Armada  was  about  to  sail,  that  his  own  nights  and
days  were  passed  in  active  preparations  for  war,  and  that  no
earthly  power  could  move  Philip  by  one  hair's-breadth  from
his  purpose  to  conquer  England  that  summer.2

It  would  be  superfluous  to  follow  the  Duke  or  the  Doctor
through  their  long  dialogue  on  the  place  of  conference,  and
the  commissions.  Alexander  considered  it  “  infamy  "  on  his
name  if  he  should  send  envoys  to  a  place  of  his  master's  held
by  the  enemy.  He  was  also  of  opinion  that  it  was  unheard
of  to  exhibit  commissions  previous  to  a  preliminary  colloquy.

Both  propositions  were  strenuously  contested  by  Rogers.
In  regard  to  the  second  point  in  particular,  he  showed  tri¬
umphantly,  by  citations  from  the  “  Polonians,  Prussians,  and
Lithuanians,"  that  commissions  ought  to  be  previously  exhi¬
bited.3  But  it  was  not  probable  that  even  the  Doctor's  learn¬
ing  and  logic  would  persuade  Alexander  to  produce  his

1  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last
cited.

2  We  have  sufficiently  proved  the
good  faith  of  the  Queen  on  entering
upon  these  negotiations.  Alexander
himself  felt  as  sure  of  her  sincerity

as  he  did  of  his  master’s  duplicity.

“  I  believe  that  she  desires  peace
earnestly,”  said  he  to  Philip,  “on
account  of  her  fear  of  expense.”
Parma  to  Philip  II.  31  Jan.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  already
cited.

1588.  EXTRAORDINARY  AMENITY  OP  ALEXANDER.  379

commission,  because,  unfortunately,  he  had  no  commission  to
produce.  A  comfortable  argument  on  the  subject,  however,
would,  none  the  less,  consume  time.

Three  hours  of  this  work  brought  them,  exhausted  and
hungry,  to  the  hour  of  noon  and  of  dinner.  Alexander,  with
profuse  and  smiling  thanks  for  the  envoy’s  plain  dealing  and
eloquence,  assured  him  that  there  would  have  been  peace  long
ago  “had  Doctor  Rogers  always  been  the  instrument,”  and  re¬
gretted  that  he  was  himself  not  learned  enough  to  deal  credit¬
ably  with  him.  He  would,  however,  send  Richardot  to  bear
him  company  at  table,  and  chop  logic  with  him  afterwards.

Next  day,  at  the  same  hour,  the  Duke  and  Doctor  had
another  encounter.  So  soon  as  the  envoy  made  his  appear¬
ance,  he  found  himself  “embraced  most  cheerfully  and
familiarly  by  his  Alteza,”  who,  then  entering  at  once  into
business,  asked  as  to  the  Doctor’s  second  point.1

The  Doctor  answered  with  great  alacrity.

“  Certain  expressions  have  been  reported  to  her  Majesty,”
said  he,  “  as  coming  both  from  your  Highness  and  from
Richardot,  hinting  at  a  possible  attempt  by  the  King  of
Spain’s  forces  against  the  Queen.  Her  Majesty,  gathering
that  you  are  going  about  belike  to  terrify  her,  commands  me
to  inform  you  very  clearly  and  very  expressly  that  she  does  not
deal  so  weakly  in  her  government,  nor  so  improvidently,  but
that  she  is  provided  for  anything  that  might  be  attempted
against  her  by  the  King,  and  as  able  to  offend  him  as  he  her
Majesty.”2

Alexander — with  a  sad  countenance,  as  much  offended,  his
eyes  declaring  miscontentment — asked  who  had  made  such  a
report.

“Upon  the  honour  of  a  gentleman,”  said  he,  “whoever  has
said  this  has  much  abused  me,  and  evil  acquitted  himself.
They  who  know  me  best  are  aware  that  it  is  not  my  manner
to  let  any  word  pass  my  lips  that  might  offend  any  prince.”
Then,  speaking  most  solemnly,  he  added,  “I  declare  really
and  truly  (which  two  words  he  said  in  Spanish),  that  I

1  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.  2  Ibid.

380

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

know  not  of  any  intention  of  the  King  of  Spain  against  her
Majesty  or  her  realm.” 1

At  that  moment  the  earth  did  not  open — year  of  portents
though  it  was — and  the  Doctor,  “ singularly  rejoicing"  at  this
authentic  information  from  the  highest  source,  proceeded
cheerfully  with  the  conversation.

“I  hold  myself,"  he  exclaimed,  “the  man  most  satisfied
in  the  world,  because  I  may  now  write  to  her  Majesty  that  I
have  heard  your  Highness  upon  your  honour  use  these  words."

“Upon  my  honour,  it  is  true,"  repeated  the  Duke  ;  “for  so
honourably  do  I  think  of  her  Majesty,  as  that,  after  the  King,
my  master,  I  would  honour  and  serve  her  before  any  prince
in  Christendom."  He  added  many  earnest  asseverations  of
similar  imjDort.

“I  do  not  deny,  however,"  continued  Alexander,  “that  I
have  heard  of  certain  ships  having  been  armed  by  the  King
against  that  Draak" — he  pronounced  the  “a"  in  Drake's  name
very  broadly,  or  I) or icl — “  who  has  committed  so  many  out¬
rages  ;  but  I  repeat  that  I  have  never  heard  of  any  design
against  her  Majesty  or  against  England."2

The  Duke  then  manifested  much  anxiety  to  know  by  whom
he  had  been  so  misrepresented.  “  There  has  been  no  one
with  me  but  Dr.  Dale,"  said  he,  “  and  I  marvel  that  he  should
thus  wantonly  have  injured  me."

“Dr.  Dale,"  replied  Bogers,  “is  a  man  of  honour,  of  good
years,  learned,  and  well  experienced ;  but  perhaps  he  unfor¬
tunately  misapprehended  some  of  your  Alteza's  words,  and
thought  himself  bound  by  his  allegiance  strictly  to  report
them  to  her  Majesty."

“  I  grieve  that  I  should  be  misrepresented  and  injured,"
answered  Farnese,  “in  a  manner  so  important  to  my  honour.
Nevertheless,  knowing  the  virtues  with  which  her  Majesty  is
endued,  I  assure  myself  that  the  protestations  I  am  now
making  will  entirely  satisfy  her."

He  then  expressed  the  fervent  hope  that  the  holy  work  of

1  “  Realmente  y  verdaderamente.”  (Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.)

3  Ibid.

1588.  WITH  WHICH  ROGERS  IS  MUCH  TOUCHED.  381

negotiation  now  commencing  would  result  in  a  renewal  of
the  ancient  friendship  between  the  Houses  of  Burgundy  and
of  England,  asserting  that  “  there  had  never  been  so  favour¬
able  a  time  as  the  present/'

Under  former  governments  of  the  Netherlands  there  had
been  many  mistakes  and  misunderstandings.

“  The  Duke  of  Alva/'  said  he,  “  has  learned  by  this  time,
before  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  how  he  discharged  his  func¬
tions,  succeeding  as  he  did  my  mother,  the  Duchess  of  Parma,
who  left  the  Provinces  in  so  flourishing  a  condition.  Of  this,
however,  I  will  say  no  more,  because  of  a  feud  between  the
blouses  of  Farnese  and  of  Alva.  As  for  Requesens,  he  was  a
good  fellow,  but  didn't  understand  his  business.  Don  John  of
Austria  again,  whose  soul  I  doubt  not  is  in  heaven,  was  young
and  poor,  and  disappointed  in  all  his  designs  ;  but  God  has
never  offered  so  great  a  hope  of  assured  peace  as  might  now
be  accomplished  by  her  Majesty."1

Finding  the  Duke  in  so  fervent  and  favourable  a  state  of
mind,  the  envoy  renewed  his  demand  that  at  least  the  first
meeting  of  the  commissioners  might  be  held  at  Os  tend.

“  Her  Majesty  finds  herself  so  touched  in  honour  upon  this
point,  that  if  it  be  not  conceded — as  I  doubt  not  it  will  be,
seeing  the  singular  forwardness  of  your  Highness" — said  the
artful  Doctor  with  a  smile,2  “  we  are  no  less  than  commanded
to  return  to  her  Majesty's  presence."

“  I  sent  Richardot  to  you  yesterday,"  said  Alexander  ;  “  did
he  not  content  you  ?"

“Your  Highness,  no,"  replied  Rogers.  “Moreover  her
Majesty  sent  me  to  your  Alteza,  and  not  to  Richardot.  And
the  matter  is  of  such  importance  that  I  pray  you  to  add  to  all
your  graces  and  favours  heaped  upon  me,  this  one  of  sending
your  commissioners  to  Ostend."

His  Highness  could  hold  out  no  longer ;  but  suddenly
catching  the  Doctor  in  his  arms,  and  hugging  him  “  in  most
honourable  and  amiable  manner,"  he  cried — 3

1  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.

3  Ibid.

2  “I  spake  it  souriant,”  &c.  Ibid.

382

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII..

“Be  contented,  be  cheerful,  my  lord  ambassador.  You
shall  be  satisfied  upon  this  point  also.”

“And  never  did  envoy  depart,”  cried  the  lord  ambassador,
when  he  could  get  his  breath,  “  more  bound  to  you,  and  more
resolute  to  speak  honour  of  your  Highness  than  I  do.”

“  To-morrow  we  will  ride  together  towards  Bruges,”  said
the  Duke,  in  conclusion.  “  Till  then  farewell.”

Upon  this  he  again  heartily  embraced  the  envoy,  and  the
friends  parted  for  the  day.

Next  morning,  28tli  Mjpirch,  the  Duke,  who  was  on  his  way
to  Bruges  and  Sluys  to  look  after  his  gun-boats,  and  other

28  March,  naval  and  military  preparations,  set  forth  on  horse-

‘isss!  back,  accompanied  by  the  Marquis  del  Yasto,  and,
for  part  of  the  way,  by  Rogers.

They  conversed  on  the  general  topics  of  the  approaching
negotiations  ;  the  Duke  expressing  the  opinion  that  the  treaty
of  peace  would  be  made  short  work  with,  for  it  only  needed
to  renew  the  old  ones  between  the  Houses  of  England  and
Burgundy.  As  for  the  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,  and  their
accomplices,  he  thought  there  would  be  no  cause  of  stay  on
their  account ;  and  in  regard  to  the  cautionary  towns  he  felt
sure  that  her  Majesty  had  never  had  any  intention  of  appro¬
priating  them  to  herself,  and  would  willingly  surrender  them
to  the  King.

Rogers  thought  it  a  good  opportunity  to  put  in  a  word  for
the  Dutchmen,  who  certainly  would  not  have  thanked  him
for  his  assistance  at  that  moment.

“Hot  to  give  offence  to  your  Highness,”  he  said,  “if  the
Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,  with  their  confederates,  like  to
come  into  this  treaty,  surely  your  Highness  would  not
object  ?”

Alexander,  who  had  been  riding  along  quietly  during  this
conversation,  with  his  right  hand  on  his  hip,  now  threw  out
his  arm  energetically.

“Let  them  come  into  it,  let  them  treat,  let  them  con¬
clude,”1  he  exclaimed,  “in  the  name  of  Almighty  God!  I

1  “  Entrino,  trattino,  concbiudino.”  Rogers  to  tke.Queen,  MS.  last  cited.

1588.  THE  QUEEN  NOT  PLEASED  WITH  HER  ENVOY.  333

have  always  been  well  disposed  to  peace,  and  am  now  more
so  than  ever.  I  could  even,  with  the  loss  of  my  life,  he  con¬
tent  to  have  peace  made  at  this  time/'

Nothing  more,  worthy  of  commemoration,  occurred  during
this  concluding  interview  ;  and  the  envoy  took  his  leave  at
Bruges,  and  returned  to  Ostend.1

I  have  furnished  the  reader  with  a  minute  account  of  these
conversations,  drawn  entirely  from  the  original  records,  not
so  much  because  the  interviews  were  in  themselves  of  vital
importance,  but  because  they  afforcf  a  living  and  breathing
example — better  than  a  thousand  homilies — of  the  easy  vic¬
tory  which  diplomatic  or  royal  mendacity  may  always  obtain
over  innocence  and  credulity.

Certainly  never  was  envoy  more  thoroughly  beguiled  than
the  excellent  Daniel  upon  this  occasion.  Wiser  than  a  ser¬
pent,  as  he  imagined  himself  to  be,  more  harmless  than  a
dove,  as  Alexander  found  him,  he  could  not  sufficiently  con¬
gratulate  himself  upon  the  triumphs  of  his  eloquence  and
his  adroitness  ;  and  despatched  most  glowing  accounts  of  his
proceedings  to  the  Queen.

His  ardour  was  somewhat  damped,  however,  at  receiving  a
message  from  her  Majesty  in  reply,  which  was  anything  but
benignant.  His  eloquence  was  not  commended  ;  and  even
his  preamble,  with  its  touching  allusion  to  the  live  mothers
tendering  their  offspring — the  passage  which  had  brought  the
tears  into  the  large  eyes  of  Alexander — was  coldly  and  cruelly
censured.

“  Her  Majesty  can  in  no  sort  like  such  speeches'' — so  ran
the  return-despatch — u  in  which  she  is  made  to  beg  for  peace.
The  King  of  Spain  standeth  in  as  great  need  of  peace  as  her¬
self  ;  and  she  doth  greatly  mislike  the  preamble  of  Dr.
Rogers  in  his  address  to  the  Duke  at  Ghent,  finding  it ,  in  very
truth ,  quite  fond  and  vain.  I  am  commanded  by  a  particular
letter  to  let  him  understand  how  much  her  Majesty  is  offended
with  him."  2

and  Lord  Cobham,  —  April.  1588.

21

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Rogers  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Lords  of  Council  to  Earl  of  Derby

384

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

Alexander,  on  his  part,  informed  his  royal  master  of  these
interviews,  in  which  there  had  been  so  much  effusion  of  senti¬
ment,  in  very  brief  fashion.

“  Dr.  Rogers,  one  of  the  Queen's  commissioners,  has  been
here,"  he  said,  u  urging  me  with  all  his  might  to  let  all  your
Majesty's  deputies  go,  if  only  for  one  hour,  to  Ostend.  I
refused,  saying,  I  would  rather  they  should  go  to  England
than  into  a  city  of  your  Majesty  held  by  English  troops.  I
told  him  it  ought  to  be  satisfactory  that  I  had  offered  the
Queen,  as  a  lady,  her  choice  of  any  place  in  the  Provinces,
or  on  neutral  ground.  Rogers  expressed  regret  for  all  the
bloodshed  and  other  consequences  if  the  negotiations  should
fall  through  for  so  trifling  a  cause  ;  the  more  so  as  in  return
for  this  little  compliment  to  the  Queen  she  would  not  only
restore  to  your  Majesty  everything  that  she  holds  in  the
Netherlands,  but  would  assist  you  to  recover  the  part  which
remains  obstinate.1  To  quiet  him  and  to  consume  time,  I
have  promised  that  President  Richardot  shall  go  and  try  to
satisfy  them.  Thus  two  or  three  iveeks  more  ivill  be  wasted.
But  at  last  the  time  will  come  for  exhibiting  the  powers.
They  are  very  anxious  to  see  mine  ;  and  when  at  last  they
find  I  have  none,  I  fear  that  they  will  break  off  the  nego¬
tiations."  2

Could  the  Queen  have  been  informed  of  this  voluntary
offer  on  the  part  of  her  envoy  to  give  up  the  cautionary
towns,  and  to  assist  in  reducing  the  rebellion,  she  might  have
used  stronger  language  of  rebuke.  It  is  quite  possible,  how¬
ever,  that  Farnese — not  so  attentively  following  the  Doctor's
eloquence  as  he  had  appeared  to  do — had  somewhat  inaccu¬
rately  reported  the  conversations,  which,  after  all,  he  knew
to  be  of  no  consequence  whatever,  except  as  time-consumers.
For  Elizabeth,  desirous  of  peace  as  she  was,  and  trusting  to
Farnese's  sincerity  as  she  was  disposed  to  do,  was  more  sensi¬
tive  than  ever  as  to  her  dignity.

1  u  Por  esta  poca  honra  que  se  hara
a  la  Reyna  ella  non  solo  restituyre  a
V.  Magd  todo  lo  que  tiene  destos  esta-
dos  mas  ayudara  a  cobrar  la  parte  que

quedara  obstinada.”
II.,  16  Apr.,  1588.
mancas,  MS.)

2  Ibid.

Parma  to  Philip
(Archivo  de  Si-

1588.  CREDULITY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  COMMISSIONERS.  -  385

“  We  charge  you  all,”  she  wrote  with  her  own  hand  to  the
commissioners,  “  that  no  word  he  overslipt  by  them,  that  may
touch  our  honour  and  greatness,  that  be  not  answered  with
good  sharp  words.  I  am  a  king  that  will  be  ever  known  not
to  fear  any  but  God.” 1

V

It  would  have  been  better,  however,  had  the  Queen  more
thoroughly  understood  that  the  day  for  scolding  had  quite
gone  by,  and  that  something  sharper  than  the  sharpest  words
would  soon  be  wanted  to  protect  England  and  herself  from
impending  doom.  For  there  was  something  almost  gigantic
in  the  frivolities  with  which  weeks  and  months  of  such  pre¬
cious  time  were  now  squandered.  Plenary  powers — “  com-
mision  bastantissima”  —  from  his  sovereign  had  been  an¬
nounced  by  Alexander  as  in  his  possession  ;  although  the
reader  has  seen  that  he  had  no  such  powers*  at  all.  The  mis¬
sion  of  Rogers  had  quieted  the  envoys  at  Ostend  for  a  time,
and  they  waited  quietly  for  the  visit  of  Eichardot  to  Ostend,
into  which  the  promised  meeting  of  all  the  Spanish  commis¬
sioners  in  that  city  had  dwindled.  Meantime  there  was  an
exchange  of  the  most  friendly  amenities  between  the  English
and  their  mortal  enemies.  Hardly  a  day  passed  that  La
Motte,  or  Benty,  or  Aremberg,  did  not  send  Lord  Derby,  or
Cobliam,  or  Robert  Cecil,  a  hare,  or  a  pheasant,  or  a  cast  of
hawks,2  and  they  in  return  sent  barrel  upon  barrel  of  Ostend
oysters,  five  or  six  hundred  at  a  time.3  The  Englishmen,  too,
had  it  in  their  power  to  gratify  Alexander  himself  witli
English  greyhounds,  for  which  he  had  a  special  liking.  u  You
would  wonder,”  wrote  Cecil  to  his  father,  u  how  fond  he  is  of
English  dogs.” 4  There  was  also  much  good  preaching  among
other  occupations,  at  Ostend.  “  My  Lord  of  Derby's  two
chaplains,”  said  Cecil,  cc  have  seasoned  this  town  better  with
sermons  than  it  had  been  before  for  a  year's  space.”5  But  all
this  did  not  expedite  the  negotiations,  nor  did  the  Duke

8

i  Queen  to  the  Commissioners,  —  April,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

18

2  Cecil  to  Burghlej,  —  April,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

15

3  Ibid.  4  Ibid.  ®  Ibid.

vol.  ii. — 2  C

386

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

manifest  so  much  anxiety  for  colloquies  as  for  greyhounds.
So,  in  an  unlucky  hour  for  himself,  another  “  fond  and  vain”
old  gentleman — James  Croft,  the  comptroller,  who  had  already
figured,  not  much  to  his  credit,  in  the  secret  negotiations
between  the  Brussels  and  English  courts — betook  himself,
unauthorized  and  alone,  to  the  Duke  at  Bruges.  Here  he  had
an  interview  very  similar  in  character  to  that  in  which  Daniel
Rogers  had  been  indulged,  declared  to  Farnese  that  the  Queen
was  most  anxious  for  peace,  and  invited  him  to  send  a  secret
envoy  to  England,  who  would  instantly  have  ocular  demon¬
stration  of  the  fact.  Croft  returned  as  triumphantly  as  the
excellent  Doctor  had  done  ;  averring  that  there  was  no  doubt
as  to  the  immediate  conclusion  of  a  treaty.  His  grounds  of
belief  were  very  similar  to  those  upon  which  Rogers  had
founded  his  faith.’  ec  'Tis  a  weak  old  man  of  seventy,”  said
Parma,  u  with  very  little  sagacity.  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  his  colleagues  are  taking  him  in,  that  they  may  the  better
deceive  us.1  I  will  see  that  they  do  nothing  of  the  kind.”
But  the  movement  was  purely  one  of  the  comptroller's  own
inspiration  ;  for  Sir  J ames  had  a  singular  facility  for  getting
himself  into  trouble,  and  for  making  confusion.  Already,
when  he  had  been  scarcely  a  day  in  Ostend,  he  had  insulted
the  governor  of  the  place,  Sir  John  Conway,  had  given  him
the  lie  in  the  hearing  of  many  of  his  own  soldiers,  had  gone
about  telling  all  the  world  that  he  had  express  authority  from
her  Majesty  to  send  him  home  in  disgrace,  and  that  the  Queen
had  called  him  a  fool,  and  quite  unfit  for  his  post.2  And  as
if  this  had  not  been  mischief-making  enough,  in  addition  to
the  absurd  De  Loo  and  Bodman  negotiations  of  the  previous
year,  in  which  he  had  been  the  principal  actor,  he  had
crowned  his  absurdities  by  this  secret  and  officious  visit  to
Ghent.  The  Queen,  naturally  very  indignant  at  this  con¬
duct,  reprehended  him  severely,  and  ordered  him  hack  to

1  “Como  muestra  poca  sagacidad
dexa  de  dar  regelo  de  que  le  enganan
a  el  para  mas  enganar,”  See.  Parma
to  Philip  II.,  13  May,  1588.  (Arch.

de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  Queen  to  Derby  and  Cobham,  ^
April,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.  CEREMONIOUS  MEETING  OF  ALL  THE  ENVOYS.  387

England.1  The  comptroller  was  wretched.  He  expressed
his  readiness  to  obey  her  commands,  but  nevertheless  im¬
plored  his  dread  sovereign  to  take  merciful  consideration  of
the  manifold  misfortunes,  ruin,  and  utter  undoing,  which
thereby  should  fall  upon  him  and  his  unfortunate  family.  All
this  he  protested  he  would  nothing  esteem  if  it  tended  to  her
Majesty’s  pleasure  or  service,  u  but  seeing  it  should  effectuate
nothing  but  to  bring  the  aged  carcase  of  her  poor  vassal  to
present  decay,  he  implored  compassion  upon  his  hoary  hairs,
and  promised  to  repair  the  error  of  his  former  proceedings.
He  avowed  that  he  would  not  have  ventured  to  disobey  for  a
moment  her  orders  to  return,  but  u  that  his  aged  and  feeble
limbs  did  not  retain  sufficient  force,  without  present  death,  to
comply  with  her  commandment.” 2  And  with  that  he  took  to
his  bed,  and  remained  there  until  the  Queen  was  graciously
pleased  to  grant  him  her  pardon.

At  last,  early  in  May — instead  of  the  visit  of  Bichardot —
there  was  a  preliminary  meeting  of  all  the  commissioners  in
tents  on  the  sands,  within  a  cannon-shot  of  Ostend,  and  between
that  place  and  Newport.  It  was  a  showy  and  ceremonious
interview,  in  which  no  business  was  transacted.  The  commis¬
sioners  of  Philip  were  attended  by  a  body  of  one  hundred  and
fifty  light  horse,  and  by  three  hundred  private  gentlemen  in
magnificent  costume.  La  Motte  also  came  from  Newport  with
one  thousand  Walloon  cavalry,  while  the  English  commissioners
on  their  part  were  escorted  from  Ostend  by  an  imposing  array  of
English  and  Dutch  troops.3  As  the  territory  was  Spanish,  the
dignity  of  the  King  was  supposed  to  be  preserved,  and  Alexander,
who  had  promised  Dr.  Bogers  that  the  first  interview  should
take  place  within  Ostend  itself,  thought  it  necessary  to  apologize
to  his  sovereign  for  so  nearly  keeping  his  word  as  to  send  the
envoys  within  cannon-shot  of  the  town.  “  The  English  com-

*  Queen  to  the  Commissioners  for
the  reprehension  of  Sir  James  Croft,

in  Lord  Burghley’s  handwriting,  —

May,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Croft  to  the  Queen,  28  May,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Parma  to  Philip  II.  13  May,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

388

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

missioners,”  said  lie,  “  begged  with  so  much  submission  for
this  concession,  that  I  thought  it  as  well  to  grant  it.” 1

The  Spanish  envoys  were  despatched  by  the  Duke  of
Parma,  well  provided  with  full  powers  for  himself,  which  were
not  desired  by  the  English  government,  but  unfurnished  with
a  commission  from  Philip,  which  had  been  pronounced  indis¬
pensable.2  There  was,  therefore,  much  prancing  of  cavalry,
flourishing  of  trumpets,  and  eating  of  oysters,  at  the  first  con¬
ference,  but  not  one  stroke  of  business.  As  the  English
envoys  had  now  been  three  whole  months  in  Ostend,  and  as
this  was  the  first  occasion  on  which  they  had  been  brought
face  to  face  with  the  Spanish  commissioners,  it  must  be  con¬
fessed  that  the  tactics  of  Farnese  had  been  masterly.  Had
the  haste  in  the  dock-yards  of  Lisbon  and  Cadiz  been  at  all
equal  to  the  magnificent  procrastination  in  the  council-cham¬
bers  of  Bruges  and  Ghent,  Medina  Sidonia  might  already  have
been  in  the  Thames.

But  although  little  ostensible  business  was  performed,  there
was  one  man  who  had  always  an  eye  to  his  work.  The  same
servant  in  plain  livery,  who  had  accompanied  Secretary
Gamier,  on  his  first  visit  to  the  English  commissioners  at
Ostend,  had  now  come  thither  again,  accompanied  by  a
fellow-lackey.  While  the  complimentary  dinner,  offered  in
the  name  of  the  absent  Farnese  to  the  Queen's  representa¬
tives,  was  going  forward,  the  two  menials  strayed  off  together
to  the  downs,  for  the  purpose  of  rabbit-shooting.3  The  one  of
them  was  the  same  engineer  who  had  already,  on  the  former
occasion,  taken  a  complete  survey  of  the  fortifications  of
Ostend  ;  the  other  was  no  less  a  personage  than  the  Duke  of
Parma  himself.  The  pair  now  made  a  thorough  examination
of  the  town  and  its  neighbourhood,  and,  having  finished  their
reconnoitring,  made  the  best  of  their  way  back  to  Bruges.4
As  it  was  then  one  of  Alexander's  favourite  objects  to  reduce

1  “  Suplicado  con  grande  submicion
que  se  diesse  esta  satisfacion  a  la
Reyna,”  &c.  Parma  to  Philip  II.
(MS.  last  cited.)

2  Ibid.

3  Parma  to  Philip  II.  13  May,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

4  Ibid.

1588.

CONSUMMATE  ART  IN  WASTING  TIME.

389

the  city  of  Ostend,  at  the  earliest  possible  moment,  it  must
be  allowed  that  this  preliminary  conference  was  not  so  barren
to  himself  as  it  was  to  the  commissioners.  Philip,  when  in¬
formed  of  this  manoeuvre,  was  naturally  gratified  at  such
masterly  duplicity,  while  he  gently  rebuked  his  nephew  for
exposing  his  valuable  life  ;  and  certainly  it  would  have  been
an  inglorious  termination  to  the  Duke's  splendid  career,  had
he  been  hanged  as  a  spy  within  the  trenches  of  Ostend.  With
the  other  details  of  this  first  diplomatic  colloquy  Philip  was
delighted.  lc  I  see  you  understand  me  thoroughly,"  he  said.
u  Keep  the  negotiation  alive  till  my  Armada  appears,  and  then
carry  out  my  determination,  and  replant  the  Catholic  religion
on  the  soil  of  England."1

The  Queen  was  not  in  such  high  spirits.  She  was  losing
her  temper  very  fast,  as  she  became  more  and  more  con¬
vinced  that  she  had  been  trifled  with.  No  powers  had  been
yet  exhibited,  no  permanent  place  of  conference  fixed  upon,
and  the  cessation  of  arms  demanded  by  her  commissioners  for
England,  Spain,  and  all  the  Netherlands,  was  absolutely
refused.2  She  desired  her  commissioners  to  inform  the  Duke
of  Parma  that  it  greatly  touched  his  honour — as  both  before
their  coming  and  afterwards,  he  had  assured  her  that  he  had
comision  bastantissima  from  his  sovereign — to  clear  himself  at
once  from  the  imputation  of  insincerity.  u  Let  not  the  Duke
think,"  she  wrote  with  her  own  hand,  u  that  we  would  so  long
time  endure  these  many  frivolous  and  unkindly  dealings,  but
that  we  desire  all  the  world  to  know  our  desire  of  a  kingly
peace,  and  that  we  will  endure  no  more  the  like,  nor  any,  but
will  return  you  from  your  charge."3  *

Accordingly — by  her  Majesty's  special  command — Dr.  Dale
made  another  visit  to  Bruges,  to  discover,  once  for  all,  whether
there  was  a  commission  from  Philip  or  not,  and,  if  so,  to  see
it  with  his  own  eyes.  On  the  7th  May  he  had  an  interview

1  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  21  June,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  13  Map,  1588.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Queen  to  the  Commissioners,
soApni  1588.  (S.  p.  office  MS.)

10  May

Chap.  XVIII.

390  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

with  the  Duke.  After  thanking  his  Highness  for  the  honour-
7  able  and  stately  manner  in  which  the  conferences

-  May,  paq  peen  inaugurated  near  Os  tend,  Dale  laid  very

1588  •  °  ;  ^

plainly  before  him  her  Majesty’s  complaints  of
the  tergiversations  and  equivocations  concerning  the  com¬
mission,  which  had  now  lasted  three  months  long.1

In  answer,  Alexander  made  a  complimentary  harangue,
confining  himself  entirely  to  the  first  part  of  the  envoy’s
address,  and  assuring  him  in  redundant  phraseology,  that  he
should  hold  himself  very  guilty  before  the  world,  if  he  had  not
surrounded  the  first  colloquy  between  the  plenipotentiaries  of
two  such  mighty  princes,  with  as  much  pomp  as  the  circum¬
stances  of  time  and  place  would  allow.  After  this  superfluous
rhetoric  had  been  poured  forth,  he  calmly  dismissed  the
topic  which  Dr.  Dale  had  come  all  the  way  from  Ostend  to
discuss,  by  carelessly  observing  that  President  Richardot  would
confer  with  him  on  the  subject  of  the  commission.2

u  But,”  said  the  envoy,  “  ’tis  no  matter  of  conference  or
dispute.  I  desire  simply  to  see  the  commission.”

“  Richardot  and  Champagny  shall  deal  with  you  in  the
afternoon,”  repeated  Alexander ;  and,  with  this  reply,  the
Doctor  was  fain  to  be  contented.  '

Dale  then  alluded  to  the  point  of  cessation  of  arms.
ec  Although,”  said  he,  u  the  Queen  might  justly  require  that
the  cessation  should  be  general  for  all  the  King’s  dominion,
yet  in  order  not  to  stand  on  precise  points,  she  is  content  that
it  should  extend  no  further  than  to  the  towns  of  Flushing,
Briel,  Ostend,  and  Bergen-op-Zoom.”

u  To  this  he  said  nothing,”  wrote  the  envoy,  cc  and  so  I
went  no  further.”

In  the  afternoon  Dale  had  conference  with  Champagny  and
Richardot.  As  usual,  Champagny  was  bound  hand  and  foot
by  the  gout,  but  was  as  quick-witted  and  disputatious  as  ever.
Again  Dale  made  an  earnest  harangue,  proving  satisfactorily

1  Dale  to  the  Queen,  ^  May,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Dale  to  the  Queen.  (MS.  last  cited.)

1588.

LONG-  DISPUTES  ABOUT  COMMISSIONS.

391

— as  if  any  proof  were  necessary  on  such,  a  point — that  a  com¬
mission  from  Philip  ought  to  he  produced,  and  that  a  com¬
mission  had  been  promised,  over  and  over  again.1

After  a  pause,  both  the  representatives  of  Parma  began  to
wrangle  with  the  envoy  in  very  insolent  fashion.  “  Richardot
is  always  their  mouth-piece  ;  "  said  Dale,  “  only  Champagny
choppeth  in  at  every  word,  and  would  do  so  likewise  in  ours  if
we  would  suffer  it."  2

“  We  shall  never  have  done  with  these  impertinent  demands,"
said  the  President.  “You  ought  to  be  satisfied  with  the
Duke's  promise  of  ratification  contained  in  his  commission.
We  confess  what  you  say  concerning  the  former  requisitions
and  promises  to  be  true,  but  when  will  you  have  done  ?  Have
we  not  showed  it  to  Mr.  Croft,  one  of  your  own  colleagues  ?
And  if  we  show  it  you  now,  another  may  come  to-morrow,
and  so  we  shall  never  have  an  end."

“The  delays  come  from  yourselves,'  roundly  replied  the
Englishman,  “for  you  refuse  to  do  what  in  reason  and  law
you  are  bound  to  do.  And  the  more  demands  the  more  mora
aut  potius  culpa  in  you.  You,  of  all  men,  have  least  cause  to
hold  such  language,  who  so  confidently  and  even  disdainfully  .
answered  our  demand  for  the  commission,  in  Mr.  Cecil's  pre¬
sence,  and  promised  to  show  a  perfect  one  at  the  very  first
meeting.  As  for  Mr.  Comptroller  Croft,  he  came  hither
without  the  command  of  her  Majesty  and  without  the  know¬
ledge  of  his  colleagues."

Richardot  then  began  to  insinuate  that,  as  Croft  had  come
without  authority,  so — for  aught  they  could  tell — might  Dale
also.  But  Champagny  here  interruped,  protested  that  the
president  was  going  too  far,  and  begged  him  to  show  the  com¬
mission  without  further  argument.3

Upon  this  Richardot  pulled  out  the  commission  from  under
his  gown,  and  placed  it  in  Dr.  Dale's  hands  ! 4

It  was  dated  17th  April,  1588,  signed  and  sealed  by  the

1  Dale  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Commissioners  to  Privy  Council,

9

3  Dale  to  the  Queen,  —  May,  1588.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Ibid.

7  June,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

392

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

King,  and  written  in  French,  and  was  to  the  effect,  that  as
there  had  been  differences  between  her  Majesty  and  himself,
as  her  Majesty  had  sent  ambassadors  into  the  Netherlands,  as
the  Duke  of  Parma  had  entered  into  treaty  with  her  Majesty,
therefore  the  King  authorised  the  Duke  to  appoint  commis¬
sioners  to  treat,  conclude,  and  determine  all  controversies  and
misunderstandings,  confirmed  any  such  appointments  already
made,  and  promised  to  ratify  all  that  might  he  done  by  them
in  the  premises.1

Dr.  Dale  expressed  his  satisfaction  with  the  tenor  of  this
document,  and  begged  to  he  furnished  with  a  copy  of  it,  hut
this  was  peremptorily  refused.2  There  was  then  a  long  con¬
versation — ending,  as  usual,  in  nothing — on  the  two  other
points,  the  place  for  the  conferences,  namely,  and  the  cessation
of  arms.

Next  morning  Dale,  in  taking  leave  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,
expressed  the  gratification  which  he  felt,  and  which  her
Majesty  was  sure  to  feel  at  the  production  of  the  commission.
It  was  now  proved,  said  the  envoy,  that  the  King  was  as
earnestly  in  favour  of  peace  as  the  Duke  was  himself.

Dale  then  returned,  well  satisfied,  to  Ostend.

In  truth  the  commission  had  arrived  just  in  time.  “  Had
I  not  received  it  soon  enough  to  produce  it  then/'  said
Alexander,  “  the  Queen  would  have  broken  off  the  negotia¬
tions.  So  I  ordered  Eichardot,  who  is  quite  aware  of  your
Majesty's  secret  intentions,  from  which  we  shall  not  swerve
one  jot,  to  show  it  privately  to  Croft,  and  afterwards  to  Dr.
Dale,  hut  without  allowing  a  copy  of  it  to  he  taken." 3

“  You  have  done  very  well,"  replied  Philip,  “but  that  com¬
mission  is,  on  no  account ,  to  be  used ,  except  for  show.  You  know
my  mind  thoroughly." 4

1  Dale  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.

3  Ibid.

3  Parma  to  Philip  II.  8  June,  1588.

(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

4  Philip  to  Parma,  21  June,  1588.

(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

The  King,  when  he  at  last  sent  the
power  on  the  13th  May,  1588,  had

observed  to  Farnese — “I  don’t  think
that  there  will  be  any  trouble  on  ac¬
count  of  your  having  no  commission
from  me.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to
dispel  their  doubts  and  to  remove  all
suspicion,  I  have  ordered  for  the  nonce
one  to  be  sent  in  French.  This,  as  I
have  already  stated,  is  not  to  be  used

1588.

THE  SPANISH  COMMISSIONS  MEANT  TO  DECEIVE.  393

Thus  three  months  had  been  consumed,  and  at  last  one
indispensable  preliminary  to  any  negotiation  had,  in  appear¬
ance,  been  performed.  Full  powers  on  both  sides  had  been
exhibited.  When  the  Queen  of  England  gave  the  Earl  of
Derby  and  his  colleagues  commission  to  treat  with  the  King's
envoys,  and  pledged  herself  beforehand  to  ratify  all  their
proceedings,  she  meant  to  perform  the  promise  to  which  she
had  affixed  her  royal  name  and  seal.  She  could  not  know
that  the  Spanish  monarch  was  deliberately  putting  his  name
to  a  lie,  and  chuckling  in  secret  over  the  credulity  of  his
English  sister,  who  was  willing  to  take  his  word  and  his  bond.
Of  a  certainty  the  English  were  no  match  for  southern
diplomacy.

But  Elizabeth  was  now  more  impatient  than  ever  that  the
other  two  preliminaries  should  be  settled,  the  place  of  con¬
ferences,  and  the  armistice.

u  Be  plain  with  the  Duke,"  she  wrote  to  her  envoys,  u  that
we  have  tolerated  so  many  weeks  in  tarrying  a  commission,
that  I  will  never  endure  more  delays.  Let  him  know  he
deals  with  a  prince  who  prizes  her  honour  more  than  her  life.
Make  yourselves  such  as  stand  of  your  reputations." 1

Sharp  words,  but  not  sharp  enough  to  prevent  a  further
delay  of  a  month  ;  for  it  was  not  till  the  6th  June  that  the
commissioners  at  last  came  together  at  Bourbourg,2  q  June,
that  “  miserable  little  hole,"  on  the  coast  between  1588*

for  the  purpose  of  concluding  or  agree¬
ing  to  anything,  in  any  case  what¬
ever,  but  only  for  the  sake  of  keeping
the  negotiation  alive,  in  order  to  enable
us  the  better  to  execute  our  armed
enterprise;  and  so  I  again  charge  it
upon  you,  with  a  renewed  prohibition
of  any  thing  in  a  contrary  sense,  refer¬
ring  you  always  to  my  letter  of  24th
April,  and  to  my  orders  so  often  given,
which  you  are  to  fulfil  exactly  without
departing  one  jot  therefrom.”  “Para
sacarlos  de  dud  a,  y  quitarlos  toda
sospecha,  ho  mandado  un  poder  por  la
via  en  frances,  del  qual,  como  entonces,
os  lo  adverti  y  declare,  no  se  ha  de
usar  para  asentar  ni  concluyr  por  nin-
gun  caso,  cosa  alguna,  si  no  solo  que
acude  la  platica  para  poder  executar

mejor  lo  de  las  armas  y  empresa,  y  asi
os  lo  torno  a  encargar  con  nueva  pro-
liibicion  de  lo  contrario,  remitiendome
a  la  carta  que  en  esta  materia  se  os
escribio  por  esta  via  a  lo  24  April,  quo
es  la  orden  que  aveys  de  cumplir
puntualmente  sin  apartaros  della,”  &c.
Philip  II.  to  Parma,  13  May,  1588.
(Archivo  de  Simancas,  MS.)

1  Queen’s  Minute  to  the  Commis¬
sioners,  ~  May,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip,  8  June,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  Dale  to

29  Mav

Walsingham,  ^ — ’  1588.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  Commissioners  to  the  Queen.
(Ibid.)

394

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

Ostend  and  Newport,  against  which  Gamier  had  warned  them.
And  now  there  was  ample  opportunity  to  wrangle  at  full
length  on  the  next'  preliminary,  the  cessation  of  arms.  It
would  he  superfluous  to  follow  the  altercations  step  by  step — •
for  negotiations  there  were  none — and  it  is  only  for  the  sake
of  exhibiting  at  full  length  the  infamy  of  diplomacy,  when
diplomacy  is  unaccompanied  by  honesty,  that  we  are  hanging
up  this  series  of  pictures  at  all.  Those  bloodless  encounters
between  credulity  and  vanity  upon  one  side,  and  gigantic
fraud  on  the  other,  near  those  very  sands  of  Newport,  and  in
sight  of  the  Northern  Ocean,  where,  before  long,  the  most
terrible  battles,  both  by  land  and  sea,  which  the  age  had  yet
witnessed,  were  to  occur,  are  quite  as  full  of  instruction  and
moral  as  the  most  sanguinary  combats  ever  waged.

At  last  the  commissioners  exchanged  copies  of  their  re¬
spective  powers.  After  four  months  of  waiting  and  wrangling,
27  May  so  much  had  been  achieved — a  show  of  commissions
6  June  and  a  selection  of  the  place  for  conference.  And

1588  L

now  began  the  long  debate  about  the  cessation  of
arms.  The  English  claimed  an  armistice  for  the  whole
dominion  of  Philip  and  Elizabeth  respectively,  during  the
term  of  negotiation,  and  for  twenty  days  after.  The  Spanish
would  grant  only  a  temporary  truce,  terminable  at  six  days’
notice,  and  that  only  for  the  four  cautionary  towns  of  Holland
held  by  the  Queen.  Thus  Philip  would  be  free  to  invade
England  at  his  leisure  out  of  the  obedient  Netherlands  or
Spain.  This  was  inadmissible,  of  course,  but  a  week  wras
spent  at  the  outset  in  reducing  the  terms  to  writing ;  and
when  the  Duke’s  propositions  were  at  last  produced  in  the
French  tongue,  they  were  refused  by  the  Queen’s  commis¬
sioners,  who  required  that  the  documents  should  be  in  Latin.
Great  was  the  triumph  of  Dr.  Dale,  when,  after  another
interval,  he  found  their  Latin  full  of  barbarisms  and  blunders,
at  which  a  school-boy  would  have  blushed.1  The  King’s
commissioners,  however,  while  halting  in  their  syntax,  had
kept  steadily  to  their  point.

Dale  to  'W'alsingham,  21  June,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1

1588.

DISPUTES  ABOUT  CESSATION  OP  ARMS.

395

“  Yon  promised  a  general  cessation  of  arms  at  our  coming/’7
said  Dale,  at  a  conference  on  the  ~  June,  “and  now  ye
have  lingered  five  times  twenty  days,  and  nothing  done  at
all.  The  world  may  see  the  delays  come  of  you  and  not  of
us,  and  that  ye  are  not  so  desirous  of  peace  as  ye  pretend.77 1

“  But  as  for  your  invasion  of  England,77  stoutly  observed  the
Earl  of  Derby,  “ye  shall  find  it  hot  coming  thither.  England
was  never  so  ready  in  any  former  age,  neither  by  sea  nor  by
land  ;  hut  we  would  show  your  unreasonableness  in  proposing
a  cessation  of  arms  by  which  ye  would  bind  her  Majesty  to
forbear  touching  all  the  Low  Countries,  and  yet  leave  your¬
selves  at  liberty  to  invade  England.77  2

While  they  were  thus  disputing,  Secretary  Gamier  rushed
into  the  room,  looking  very  much  frightened,  and  announced
that  Lord  Henry  Seymour’s  fleet  of  thirty-two  ships  of  war
was  riding  off  Gravelines,  and  that  he  had  sent  two  men  on
shore  who  were  now  waiting  in  the  ante-chamber.

The  men  being  accordingly  admitted,  handed  letters  to  the
English  commissioners  from  Lord  Henry,  in  which  be  begged
to  be  informed  in  what  terms  they  were  standing,  and  whether
they  needed  his  assistance  or  countenance  in  the  cause  in
which  they  were  engaged.  The  envoys  found  his  presence
very  “  comfortable,77  as  it  showed  the  Spanish  commissioners
that  her  Majesty  was  so  well  provided  as  to  make  a  cessation
of  arms  less  necessary  to  her  than  it  was  to  the  King.
They  therefore  sent  their  thanks  to  the  Lord  Admiral,  begging
him  to  cruise  for  a  time  off  Dunkirk  and  its  neighbourhood,
that  both  their  enemies  and  their  friends  might  have  a  sight
of  the  English  ships.3

-  Great  was  the  panic  all  along  the  coast  at  this  unexpected
demonstration.  The  King’s  commissioners  got  into  their
coaches,  and  drove  down  to  the  coast  to  look  at  the  fleet,
a*id — so  soon  as  they  appeared — were  received  with  such  a
thundering  cannonade  an  hour  long,  by  way  of  salute,  as  to

1  Commissioners  to  Privy  Council,  -  June,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Ibid.  °  a  ibid.

396

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

convince  them,  in  the  opinion  of  the  English  envoys,  that  the
Queen  had  no  cause  to  he  afraid  of  any  enemies  afloat  or
ashore.1

But  these  noisy  arguments  were  not  much  more  effective
than  the  interchange  of  diplomatic  broadsides  which  they  had
for  a  moment  superseded.  The  day  had  gone  by  for  blank
cartridges  and  empty  protocols.  Nevertheless  Lord  Henry's
harmless  thunder  was  answered,  the  next  day,  by  a  “  Quintu-
plication"  in  worse  Latin  than  ever,  presented  to  Dr.  Dale
and  his  colleagues  by  Richardot  and  Champagny,  on  the
subject  of  the  armistice.  And  then  there  was  a  return  quin-
tuplication,  in  choice  Latin,  by  the  classic  Dale,  and  then
there  was  a  colloquy  on  the  quintuplication,  and  everything
that  had  been  charged,  and  truly  charged,  by  the  English,
was  now  denied  by  the  King's  commissioners  ;  and  Cham¬
pagny — more  gouty  and  more  irascible  than  ever — “  chopped
in "  at  every  word  spoken  by  King's  envoys  or  Queen's,  con¬
tradicted  everybody,  repudiated  everything  said  or  done  by
Andrew  de  Loo,  or  any  of  the  other  secret  negotiators  during
the  past  year,  declared  that  there  never  had  been  a  general
cessation  of  arms  promised,  and  that,  at  any  rate,  times  were
now  changed,  and  such  an  armistice  was  inadmissible.2  Then
the  English  answered  with  equal  impatience,  and  reproached
the  King’s  representatives  with  duplicity  and  want  of*  faith,
and  censured  them  for  their  unseemly  language,  and  begged
to  inform  Champagny  and  Richardot  that  they  had  not  then
to  deal  with  such  persons  as  they  might  formerly  have  been  in
the  habit  of  treating  withal,  but  with  a  “great  prince  who  did
justify  the  honour  of  her  actions,"  and  they  confuted  the  posi¬
tions  now  assumed  by  their  opponents  with  official  documents
and  former  statements  from  those  very  opponents'  lips.  And
then,  after  all  this  diplomatic  and  rhetorical  splutter,  the
high  commissioners  recovered  their  temper  and  grew  more
polite,  and  the  King’s  “  envoys  excused  themselves  in  a  mild,

1  Commissioners  to  Privy  Council,  —  June,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.  (MS.  last  cited.)  -

1588.

SPANISH  DUPLICITY  AND  PROCRASTINATION.

397

merry  manner/'  for  the  rudeness  of  their  speeches,  and  the
Queen's  envoys  accepted  their  apologies  with  majestic  urbanity,
and  so  they  separated  for  the  day  in  a  more  friendly  manner
than  they  had  done  the  day  before.1

“You  see  to  what  a  scholar's  shift  we  have  been  driven
for  want  of  resolution,"  said  Valentine  Dale.  “If  we  should
linger  here  until  there  should  be  broken  heads,  in  what  case
we  should  be  God  knoweth.  For  I  can  trust  Champagny  and
Bichardot  no  farther  than  I  can  see  them." 2

And  so  the  whole  month  of  June  passed  by;  the  English
commissioners  “  leaving  no  stone  unturned  to  get  a  quiet  ces¬
sation  of  arms  in  general  terms," 3  and  being  constantly  foiled  ;
yet  perpetually  kept  in  hope 4  that  the  point  would  soon  be
carried.  At  the  same  time  the  signs  of  the  approaching
invasion  seemed  to  thicken.  “In  my  opinion,"  said  Dale,
“as  Phormio  spake  in  matters  of  wars,  it  were  very  requisite
that  my  Lord  Harry  should  be  always  on  this  coast,  for  they
will  steal  out  from  hence  as  closely  as  they  can,  either  to  join
with  the  Spanish  navy  or  to  land,  and  they  may  be  very  easily
scattered,  by  God's  grace."  And,  with  the  honest  pride  of  a
protocol-maker,  he  added,  “  our  postulates  do  trouble  the
King's  commissioners  very  much,  and  do  bring  them  to
despair." 5

The  excellent  Doctor  had  not  even  yet  discovered  that  the
King's  commissioners  were  delighted  with  his  postulates  ;  and
that  to  have  kept  them  postulating  thus  five  months  in  suc¬
cession,  while  naval  and  military  preparations  were  slowly
bringing  forth  a  great  event — •which  was  soon  to  strike  them
with  as  much  amazement  as  if  the  moon  had  fallen  out  of
heaven — was  one  of  the  most  decisive  triumphs  ever  achieved

1  Commissioners  to  Privy  Council,

—  June,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

31

4

2  Dale  to  Walsingham,  —  June,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“And  if  her  Majesty  list  to  break,
she  may  now  do  it  upon  their  present
denial  of  the  cessation  of  arms,  which
Richardot  did  in  open  council  promise

to  Norris  and  Andrea  de  Loo  should
be  accorded  at  the  coming  of  her  Ma¬
jesty’s  commissioners,  and  which  is
now  denied  as  ever  spoken,  or  to  bo
performed,  if  promised.”  (Ibid.)

3  Dale  to  Burghley,  J  June,  1588.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Ibid.  5  Ibid.

398

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

by  Spanish  diplomacy.  But  the  Doctor  thought  that  his
logic  had  driven  the  King  of  Spain  to  despair.

At  the  same  time  he  was  not  insensible  to  the  merits  of
another  and  more  peremptory  style  of  rhetoric.  u  I  pray
you/’  said  he  to  Walsingham,  “let  us  hear  some  arguments
from  my  Lord  Harry  out  of  her  Majesty's  navy  now  and  then.
I  think  they  will  do  more  good  than  any  bolt  that  we  can
shoot  here.  If  they  be  met  with  at  their  going  out,  there  is
no  possibility  for  them  to  make  any  resistance,  having  so  few
men  that  can  abide  the  sea  ;  for  the  rest,  as  you  know,  must  be
sea-sick  at  first." 1

But  the  envoys  were  completely  puzzled.  Even  at  the
beginning  of  July,  Sir  James  Croft  was  quite  convinced  of  the
innocence  of  the  King  and  the  Duke  ; 2  but  Croft  was  in  his
dotage.  As  for  Dale,  he  occasionally  opened  his  eyes  and  his
ears,  but  more  commonly  kept  them  well  closed  to  the  signi¬
ficance  of  passing  events,  and  consoled  himself  with  his  pro¬
tocols  and  his  classics,  and  the  purity  of  his  own  Latin.

“’Tis  a  very  wise  saying  of  Terence,"  said  he,  u  omnibus
nobis  ut  res  dant  sese ,  ita  magni  aut  humiles  sumus.  When
the  King’s  commissioners  hear  of  the  King’s  navy  from  Spain,

they  are  in  such  jollity  that  they  talk  loud . In

the  mean  time — as  the  wife  of  Bath  saith  in  Chaucer  by  her
husband,  we  owe  them  not  a  word.  If  we  should  die  to¬
morrow,  I  hope  her  Majesty  will  find  by  our  writings  that  the
honour  of  the  cause,  in  the  opinion  of  the  world,  must  be  with
her  Majesty,  and  that  her  commissioners  are  neither  of  such
imperfection  in  their  reasons  or  so  barbarous  in  language,  as

s'

1  Dale  to  Burgh  ley,  MS.  last  cited.

3  “I  may  be  esteemed  more  credulous
than  cause  requireth,  yet  I  assure  your
Lordship  I  never  embraced  any  opinion
thereof  other  than  such  as  by  some
conjectural  argument  was  made  very
probable  unto  me,  like  as  I  thought
good  at  this  time  to  inform  your  Lord-
ship,  that  yesterday  by  chance  I  had
conference  with  one  of  the  commis¬
sioners  on  the  other  side,  and  was  by
him  in  sort  assured  that  the  matter
of  this  treaty  will  fall  out — so  far  as
in  that  side  lieth — to  as  good  purpose

as  her  Majesty  will  require  it ;  he  not
doubting  that  the  two  years  for  the
toleration  of  religion,  and  the  point  of
her  Majesty’s  security,  and  all  other
things  necessary  in  this  treaty,  will  be
easily  assented  unto,  to  which  purpose
he  wished  me  to  deal  with  Dr.  Dale  to
be  willing  to  urge  that  which  he  un¬
derhand  would  advise  us  unto,  requiring
for  their  letter  justification  to  be  pressed
to  that  which  themselves  much  de¬
sire"  (//)  &c.  Croft  to  Burghley,

2ld^l  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  July  -  V  J

1588.  PEDANTRY  AND  CREDULITY  OP  DR.  DALE.  399

they  who  fail  not,  almost  in  every  line,  of  some  barbarism  not
to  be  borne  in  a  grammar-school,  although  in  subtleness  and
impudent  affirming  of  untruths  and  denying  of  truths,  her
commissioners  are  not  in  any  respect  to  match  with  Cham-
pagny  and  Bichar  dot,  who  are  doctors  in  that  faculty.’'1

It  might  perhaps  prove  a  matter  of  indifference  to  Elizabeth
and  to  England,  when  the  Queen  should  be  a  state-prisoner
in  Spain  and  the  Inquisition  quietly  established  in  her  king¬
dom,  whether  the  world  should  admit  or  not,  in  case  of  his
decease,  the  superiority  of  Dr.  Dale’s  logic  and  Latin  to  those
of  his  antagonists.  And  even  if  mankind  conceded  the  best
of  the  argument  to  the  English  diplomatists,  that  diplomacy
might  seem  worthless  which  could  be  blind  to  the  colossal
falsehoods  growing  daily  before  its  eyes.  Had  the  commis¬
sioners  been  able  to  read  the  secret  correspondence  between
Parma  and  his  master — as  we  have  had  the  opportunity  of
doing — they  would  certainly  not  have  left  their  homes  in
February,  to  be  made  fools  of  until  J uly,  but  would,  on  their
knees,  have  implored  their  royal  mistress  to  awake  from  her
fatal  delusion  before  it  should  be  too  late.  Even  without  that
advantage,  it  seems  incredible  that  they  should  have  been
unable  to  pierce  through  the  atmosphere  of  duplicity  which
surrounded  them,  and  to  obtain  one  clear  glimpse  of  the
destruction  so  steadily  advancing  upon  England.

For  the  famous  bull  of  Sixtus  V.  had  now  been  fulminated.
Elizabeth  had  been  again  denounced  as  a  bastard  and  usurper,
and  her  kingdom  had  been  solemnly  conferred  upon  Philip,
with  title  of  defender  of  the  Christian  faith,  to  have  and  to
hold  as  tributary  and  feudatory  of  Borne.  The  so-called
Queen  had  usurped  the  crown  contrary  to  the  ancient  treaties
between  the  apostolic  stool  and  the  kingdom  of  England,
which  country,  on  its  reconciliation  with  the  head  of  the  church
after  the  death  of  St.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  had  recognised
the  necessity  of  the  Pope’s  consent  in  the  succession  to  its
throne  ;  she  had  deserved  chastisement  for  the  terrible  tortures
inflicted  by  her  upon  English  Catholics  and  God’s  own  saints  ;

Dale  to  Burghley,  —  June,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

31

l

400

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYHI.

and  it  was  declared  an  act  of  virtue,  to  be  repaid  with  plenary
indulgence  and  forgiveness  of  all  sins,  to  lay  violent  hands  on
the  usurper,  and  deliver  her  into  the  hands  of  the  Catholic
party.  And  of  the  holy  league  against  the  usurper,  Philip
was  ajipointed  the  head,  and  Alexander  of  Parma  chief  com¬
mander.  This  document  was  published  in  large  numbers  in
Antwerp  in  the  English  tongue.1

The  pamphlet  of  Dr.  Allen,  just  named  Cardinal,  was  also
translated  in  the  same  city,  under  the  direction  of  the  Duke
of  Parma,  in  order  to  be  distributed  throughout  England,  on
the  arrival  in  that  kingdom  of  the  Catholic  troops.2  The  well-
known  e  Admonition  to  the  Nobility  and  People  of  England
and  Ireland'  accused  the  Queen  of  every  crime  and  vice
which  can  pollute  humanity,  and  was  filled  with  foul  details
unfit  for  the  public  eye  in  these  more  decent  days.3

So  soon  as  the  intelligence  of  these  publications  reached
England,  the  Queen  ordered  her  commissioners  at  Bourbourg
to  take  instant  cognizance  of  them,  and  to  obtain  a  categorical
explanation  on  the  subject  from  Alexander  himself :  as  if  an
explanation  were  possible,  as  if  the  designs  of  Sixtus,  Philip,
and  Alexander,  could  any  longer  be  doubted,  and  as  if  the  Duke
were  more  likely  now  than  before  to  make  a  succinct  state¬
ment  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  her  Majesty.

cc  Having  discovered,"  wrote  Elizabeth  on  the  9th  July
(N.S.),  “  that  this  treaty  of  peace  is  entertained  only  to  abuse
us,  and  being  many  ways  given  to  understand  that  the  prepa¬
rations  which  have  so  long  been  making,  and  which  now  are
consummated,  both  in  Spain  and  the  Low  Countries,  are  pur¬
posely  to  be  employed  against  us  and  our  country  ;  finding
that,  for  the  furtherance  of  these  exploits,  there  is  ready  to  be
published  a  vile,  slanderous,  and  blasphemous  book,  containing
as  many  lies  as  lines,  entitled,  ‘An  Admonition,'  &c.,  and
contrived  by  a  lewd  born-subject  of  ours,  now  become  an
arrant  traitor,  named  Dr.  Allen,  lately  made  a  cardinal  at
Borne  ;  as  also  a  bull  of  the  Pope,  whereof  we  send  you  a

(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

3  Lingard,  viii.  442,  seq.

1  Meteren,  xv.  270,  seq.
s  Parma  to  Philip  II.  21  June,  1588.

1588.

THE  PAPAL  BULL  AND  DR.  ALLAN’S  PAMPHLET.  4Q1

copy,  both  very  lately  brought  into  those  Low  Countries,  the
one  whereof  is  already  printed  at  Antwerp,  in  a  great  multitude,
in  the  English  tongue,  and  the  other  ordered  to  be  printed,
only  to  stir  up  our  subjects,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Grod  and
their  allegiance,  to  join  with  such  foreign  purposes  as  are  pre¬
pared  against  us  and  our  realm,  to  come  out  of  those  Low
Countries  and  out  of  Spain  ;  and  as  it  appears  by  the  said
bull  that  the  Duke  of  Parma  is  expressly  named  and  chosen
by  the  Pope  and  the  King  of  Spain  to  be  principal  executioner
of  these  intended  enterprises,  we  cannot  think  it  honourable
for  us  to  continue  longer  the  treaty  of  peace  with  them  that,
under  colour  of  treaty,  arm  themselves  with  all  the  power  they
can  to  a  bloody  war.” 1

Accordingly  the  Queen  commanded  Dr.  Dale,  as  one  of  the
commissioners,  to  proceed  forthwith  to  the  Duke,  in  order  to
obtain  explanations  as  to  his  contemplated  conquest  of  her
realm,  and  as  to  his  share  in  the  publication  of  the  bull  and
pamphlet,  and  to  u  require  him,  as  he  would  be  accounted  a
prince  of  honour,  to  let  her  plainly  understand  what  she  might
think  thereof.”  The  envoy  was  to  assure  him  that  the  Queen
would  trust  implicitly  to  his  statement,  to  abjure  him  to  declare
the  truth,  and,  in  case  he  avowed  the  publications  and  the
belligerent  intentions  suspected,  to  demand  instant  safe-conduct
to  England  for  her  commissioners,  who  would,  of  course,  in¬
stantly  leave  the  Netherlands.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Duke
disavowed  those  infamous  documents,  he  was  to  be  requested  to
punish  the  printers,  and  have  the  books  burned  by  the  hangman.2

Dr.  Dale,  although  suffering  from  cholic,  was  obliged  to  set
forth  at  once  upon  what  he  felt  would  be  a  bootless  journey.
At  his  return — which  was  upon  the  22 nd  of  July  (N.S.) —
the  shrewd  old  gentleman  had  nearly  arrived  at  the  opinion
that  her  Majesty  might  as  well  break  off  the  negotiations.
He  had  a  u  comfortless  voyage  and  a  ticklish  message;”3
found  all  along  the  road  signs  of  an  approaching  enterprise,
difficult  to  be  mistaken  ;  reported  10,000  veteran  Spaniards,

1  Queen  to  Commissioners,  _9~ _ n.e  3  Dale  to  Burghley,  —  July,  1588.

„  .9  July  22

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.  2  Ibid.)  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

vol.  ii. — 2  D

402

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

to  which  force  Stanley’s  regiment  was  united  ;  6000  Italians,
3000  Germans,  all  with  pikes,  corselets,  and  slash  swords
complete ;  besides  10,000  Walloons.  The  transports  for  the
cavalry  at  Gravelingen  he  did  not  see,  nor  was  he  much
impressed  with  what  he  heard  as  to  the  magnitude  of  the
naval  preparations  at  Newport.  He  was  informed  that  the
Duke  was  about  making  a  foot-pilgrimage  from  Brussels  to
Our  Lady  of  Halle,  to  implore  victory  for  his  banners,  and  had
daily  evidence  of  the  soldier’s  expectation  to  invade  and  to
u  devour  England.”1 2  All  this  had  not  tended  to  cure  him  of
the  low  spirits  with  which  he  began  the  journey.  Nevertheless,
although  he  was  unable — as  will  be  seen — to  report  an  entirely
satisfactory  answer  from  Farnese  to  the  Queen  upon  the  mo¬
mentous  questions  entrusted  to  him,  he,  at  least,  thought  of  a
choice  passage  in  c  The  iEneid,’  so  very  apt  to  the  circumstances,
as  almost  to  console  him  for  the  u pangs  of  his  cholic”  and
the  terrors  of  the  approaching  invasion.

“I  have  written  two  or  three  verses  out  of  Yirgil  for  the
Queen  to  read,”  said  he,  “  which  I  pray  your  Lordship  to
present  unto  her.  God  grant  her  to  iveigh  them.  If  your
Lordship  do  read  the  whole  discourse  of  Yirgil  in  that  place,
it  will  make  your  heart  melt.  Observe  the  report  of  the  am¬
bassadors  that  were  sent  to  Diomedes  to  make  war  against
the  Trojans,  for  the  old  hatred  that  he,  being  a  Grecian,  did
bear  unto  them  ;  and  note  the  answer  of  Diomedes  dissuading
them  from  entering  into  war  with  the  Trojans,  the  perplexity
of  the  King,  the  miseries  of  the  country,  the  reasons  of  Drances
that  spake  against  them  which  would  have  war,  the  violent
persuasions  of  Turnus  to  war;  and  note,  I  pray  you,  one  word,
*  nee  te  ullius  violentia  frangat .’ 2  What  a  lecture  could  I  make
with  Mr.  Cecil  upon  that  passage  in  Yirgil  !”3

The  most  important  point  for  the  reader  to  remark  is  the
date  of  this  letter.  It  was  received  in  the  very  last  days  of

1  Dale  to  Walsingham,  date  last
cited.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  The  reader  who  will  take  the
trouble  to  refer  to  the  iEneid,  lib.  xi.
may  amuse  himself  by  observing  that

the  aptness  of  the  analogy  was  by  no

means  so  wonderful  as  it  seemed  to
Dr.  Dale,  “  nee  te  ullius  violentia  vin-
cat  (frangat),  &c.,  35-1.

12

3  Dale  to  Burghley,  —  July,  1588.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.  DALE  SENT  TO  ASK  EXPLANATIONS.  403

the  month  of  July.  Let  him  observe — as  he  will  soon  have
occasion  to  do — the  events  which  were  occurring  on  land  and
sea,  exactly  at  the  moment  when  this  classic  despatch  reached
its  destination,  and  judge  whether  the  hearts  of  the  Queen  and
Lord  Burgliley  would  he  then  quite  at  leisure  to  melt  at  the
sorrows  of  the  Trojan  War.  Perhaps  the  doings  of  Drake  and
Howard,  Medina  Sidonia,  and  Bicalde,  would  he  pressing  as
much  on  their  attention  as  the  eloquence  of  Diomede  or  the
wrath  of  Turnus.  Yet  it  may  he  doubted  whether  the  reports
of  these  Grecian  envoys  might  not,  in  truth,  be  almost  as
much  to  the  purpose  as  the  despatches  of  the  diplomatic
pedant,  with  his  Yirgil  and  his  cholic,  into  whose  hands  grave
matters  of  peace  and  war  were  entrusted  in  what  seemed  the
day  of  England's  doom.

u  What  a  lecture  I  could  make  with  Mr.  Cecil  on  the
subject !  "  An  English  ambassador,  at  the  court  of  Philip  IP's
viceroy,  could  indulge  himself  in  imaginary  prelections  on  the
^Eneid,  in  the  last  days  of  July,  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  1588  !

The  Doctor,  however — to  do  him  justice — had  put  the  ques¬
tions  categorically  to  his  Highness  as  he  had  been  instructed
-  July,  to  do.  He  went  to  Bruges  so  mysteriously,  that  no

1588.  living  man,  that  side  the  sea,  save  Lord  Derby  and
Lord  Cobham,  knew  the  cause  of  his  journey.1  Poor  puzzling
James  Croft,  in  particular,  was  moved  almost  to  tears,  by  being

kept  out  of  the  secret.2  On  the  —  July  Dale  had  audience  of

the  Duke  at  Bruges.  After  a  few  commonplaces,  he  was
invited  by  the  Duke  to  state  what  special  purpose  had  brought
him  to  Bruges.

“  There  is  a  book  printed  at  Antwerp,"  said  Dale,  u  and  set
forth  by  a  fugitive  from  England,  who  calleth  himself  a  cardinal."3

Upon  this  the  Duke  began  diligently  to  listen.

u  This  book,"  resumed  Dale,  “  is  an  admonition  to  the
nobility  and  people  of  England  and  Ireland  touching  the
execution  of  the  sentence  of  the  Pope  against  the  Queen,
which  the  King  Catholic  hath  entrusted  to  your  Highness  as

i  Dale  to  Burgliley,  MS.  last  cited.

*  Ibid.

3  Ibid.

404

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

chief  of  the  enterprise.  There  is  also  a  hull  of  the  Pope
declaring  my  sovereign  mistress  illegitimate  and  an  usurper,
with  other  matters  too  odious  for  any  prince  or  gentleman  to
name  or  hear.  In  this  hull  the  Pope  saith  that  he  hath  dealt
with  the  most  Catholic  King  to  employ  all  the  means  in  his
power  to  the  deprivation  and  deposition  of  my  sovereign  and
doth  charge  her  subjects  to  assist  the  army  appointed  hy  the
King  Catholic  for  that  purpose,  under  the  conduct  of  your
Highness.  Therefore  her  Majesty  would  he  satisfied  from  your
Highness  in  that  point,  and  will  take  satisfaction  of  none  other  ;
not  doubting  hut  that  as  you  are  a  prince  of  word  and  credit,
you  will  deal  plainly  with  her  Majesty.  Whatsoever  it  may
he,  her  Majesty  will  not  take  it  amiss  against  your  Highness,
so  she  may  only  he  informed  hy  you  of  the  truth.  Wherefore
I  do  require  you  to  satisfy  the  Queen.”  1

“  I  am  glad,”  replied  the  Duke,  “  that  her  Majesty  and  her
commissioners  do  take  in  good  part  my  good-will  towards
them.  I  am  especially  touched  hy  the  good  opinion  her
Majesty  hath  of  my  sincerity,  which  I  should  he  glad  always
to  maintain.  As  to  the  hook  to  which  you  refer,  I  have  never
read  it,  nor  seen  it,  nor  do  I  take  heed  of  it.  It  may  well  he
that  her  Majesty,  whom  it  concerneth,  should  take  notice  of
it ;  hut,  for  my  part,  I  have  nought  to  do  with  it,  nor  can  I
prevent  men  from  writing  or  printing  at  their  pleasure.  I
am  at  the  commandment  of  my  master  only.”2

As  Alexander  made  no  reference  to  the  Pope’s  hull,  Dr.
Dale  observed,  that  if  a  war  had  been,  of  purpose,  undertaken
at  the  instance  of  the  Pope,  all  this  negotiation  had  been  in
vain,  and  her  Majesty  would  he  obliged  to  withdraw  her  com¬
missioners,  not  doubting  that  they  would  receive  safe-conduct
as  occasion  should  require.

“Yea,  God  forbid  else,”  replied  Alexander  ;  “and  further,
I  know  nothing  of  any  hull  of  the  Pope,  nor  do  I  care  for  any,
nor  do  I  undertake  anything  for  him.  But  as  for  any  mis¬
understanding  (nial  entendu)  between  my  master  and  her
Majesty,  I  must,  as  a  soldier,  act  at  the  command  of  my

1  Dale  to  Burghley,  MS.  last  cited.  2  Ibid.  (MS.  last  cited.)

1588.  PARMA  DENIES  ALL  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EITHER.  405

sovereign.  For  my  part,  I  have  always  had  such  respect  for
her  Majesty,  being  so  noble  a  Queen,  as  that  I  would  never
hearken  to  anything  that  might  he  reproachful  to  her.  After
my  master,  I  would  do  most  to  serve  your  Queen,  and  I  hope
she  will  take  my  word  for  her  satisfaction  on  that  point.  And
for  avoiding  of  bloodshed  and  the  burning  of  houses  and  such
other  calamities  as  do  follow  the  wars,  I  have  been' a  petitioner
to  my  sovereign  that  all  things  might  he  ended  quietly  by  a
peace.  That  is  a  thing,  however/'  added  the  Duke,  “  which
you  have  more  cause  to  desire  than  we  ;  for  if  the  King  my
master,  should  lose  a  battle,  he  would  he  able  to  recover  it
well  enough,  without  harm  to  himself,  being  far  enough  off  in
Spain,  while,  if  the  battle  he  lost  on  your  side,  you  may  lose
kingdom  and  all."  1

“  By  God's  sufferance,"  rejoined  the  Doctor,  u  her  Majesty
is  not  without  means  to  defend  her  crown,  that  hath  descended
to  her  from  so  long  a  succession  of  ancestors.  Moreover  your
Highness  knows  very  well  that  one  battle  cannot  conquer  a
kingdom  in  another  country."

“  Well,"  said  the  Duke,  “  that  is  in  God’s  hand."

“  So  it  is,"  said  the  Doctor.

“  But  make  an  end  of  it,"  continued  Alexander  quietly,
“  and  if  you  have  anything  to  put  into  writing,  you  will  dome
a  pleasure  by  sending  it  to  me."  2

Dr.  Valentine  Dale  was  not  the  man  to  resist  the  tempta¬
tion  to  make  a  protocol,  and  promised  one  for  the  next  day.

u  I  am  charged  only  to  give  your  Highness  satisfaction,"
he  said,  “as  to  her  Majesty's  sincere  intentions,  which  have
already  been  published  to  the  world  in  English,  French,  and
Italian,  in  the  hope  that  you  may  also  satisfy  the  Queen  upon
this  other  point.  I  am  hut  one  of  her  commissioners,  and
could  not  deal  without  my  colleagues.  I  crave  leave  to
depart  to-morrow  morning,  and  with  safe-convoy,  as  I  had  in
coming."

After  the  envoy  had  taken  leave,  the  Duke  summoned
Andrea  de  Loo,  and  related  to  him  the  conversation  which  had

1  Dale  to  Burgliley.  (MS.  last  cited.)

2  Ibid.

406

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

taken  place.  He  then,  in  the  presence  of  that  personage,
again  declared  upon  his  honour  and  with  very  constant  affirma¬
tions,  that  he  had  never  seen  nor  heard  of  the  book — the  ‘Admo¬
nition  '  by  Cardinal  Allen — and  that  he  knew  nothing  of  any
hull,  and  had  no  regard  to  it.1

The  plausible  Andrew  accompanied  the  Doctor  to  his  lodg¬
ings,  protesting  all  the  way  of  his  own  and  his  master's
sincerity,  and  of  their  unequivocal  intentions  to  conclude  a
peace.  The  next  day  the  Doctor,  by  agreement,  brought  a
most  able  protocol  of  demands  in  the  name  of  all  the  commis¬
sioners  of  her  Majesty  ; 2  which  able  protocol  the  Duke  did
not  at  that  moment  read,  which  he  assuredly  never  read  sub¬
sequently,  and  which  no  human  soul  ever  read  afterwards.
Let  the  dust  lie  upon  it,  and  upon  all  the  vast  heaps  of  protocols
raised  mountains  high  during  the  spring  and  summer  of  1588.

“Dr.  Dale  has  been  with  me  two  or  three  times,"  said
Parma,  in  giving  his  account  of  these  interviews  to  Philip.
“  I  don't  know  why  he  came,  but  I  think  he  wished  to  make
it  appear,  by  coming  to  Bruges,  that  the  rupture,  when  it
occurs,  was  caused  by  us,  not  by  the  English.  He  has  been
complaining  of  Cardinal  Allen's  book,  and  I  told  him  that  I
didn’t  understand  a  word  of  English,  and  knew  nothing  what¬
ever  of  the  matter." 3

It  has  been  already  seen  that  the  Duke  had  declared,  on
his  word  of  honour,  that  he  had  never  heard  of  the  famous
pamphlet.  Yet  at  that  very  moment  letters  were  lying  in  his
cabinet,  received  more  than  a  fortnight  before  from  Philip,  in
which  that  monarch  thanked  Alexander  for  having  had  the
Cardinal’s  book  translated  at  Antwerp  ! "  4  Certainly  few
English  diplomatists  could  be  a  match  for  a  Highness  so
liberal  of  his  word  of  honour.

But  even  Dr.  Dale  had  at  last  convinced  himself — even
although  the  Duke  knew  nothing  of  bull  or  pamphlet — that
mischief  was  brewing  against  England.  The  sagacious  man,

i  Dale  to  Burghley.  MS.  last

cited.  2  Ibid.

3  Parma  to  Philip,  21  July,  1588.

(Arch,  cle  Sim.  MS.)

4  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  21  June,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1588.  CROFT  BELIEVES  TO  THE  LAST  IN  ALEXANDER.  407

having  seen  large  bodies  of  Spaniards  and  Walloons  making
such  demonstrations  of  eagerness  to  be  led  against  his  country,
and  “  professing  it  as  openly  as  if  they  were  going  to  a  fair  or
market/'  while  even  Alexander  himself  could  u  no  more  hide
it  than  did  Henry  VIII.  when  he  went  to  Boulogne/' 1  could
not  help  suspecting  something  amiss.

His  colleague,  however,  Comptroller  Croft,  was  more  judi¬
cious,  for  he  valued  himself  on  taking  a  sound,  temperate,  and
conciliatory  view  of  affairs.  He  was  not  the  man  to  offend  a
magnanimous  neighbour — who  meant  nothing  unfriendly — by
regarding  his  manoeuvres  with  superfluous  suspicion.  So  this
envoy  wrote  to  Lord  Burghley  on  the  2nd  August  (N.  S.) — let
the  reader  mark  the  date — that,  {e  although  a  great  doubt  had
been  conceived  as  to  the  King's  sincerity,  ....  yet  that
discretion  and  experience  induced  him — the  envoy — to  think,
that  besides  the  reverent  opinion  to  he  had  of  princes'  oaths ,
and  the  general  incommodity  which  will  come  by  the  contrary,
God  had  so  balanced  princes'  powers  in  that  age,  as  they  rather
desire  to  assure  themselves  at  home ,  than  with  danger  to  invade
their  neighbours 2

Perhaps  the  mariners  of  England — at  that  very  instant
exchanging  broadsides  off  the  coast  of  Devon  and  Dorset  with
the  Spanish  Armada,  and  doing  their  best  to  protect  their
native  land  from  the  most  horrible  calamity  which  had  ever
impended  over  it — had  arrived  at  a  less  reverent  opinion  of
princes'  oaths  ;  and  it’  was  well  for  England  in  that  supreme
hour  that  there  were  such  men  as  Howard  and  Drake,  and
Winter  and  Frobisher,  and  a  whole  people  with  hearts  of  oak
to  defend  her,  while  bungling  diplomatists  and  credulous
dotards  were  doing  their  best  to  imperil  her  existence.

But  it  is  necessary — in  order  to  obtain  a  complete  picture
of  that  famous  year  1588,  and  to  understand  the  cause  from
which  such  great  events  were  springing — to  cast  a  glance  at  the
internal  politics  of  the  States  most  involved  in  Philip's  meshes.

1  Dale  to  Burghley,  —  July,  1588.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

23  J uly
2  Aug.’

2  Croft  to  Burghley,
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.

408

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

Certainly,  if  there  had  ever  been  a  time  when  the  new  com¬
monwealth  of  the  Netherlands  should  be  both  united  in  itself
and  on  thoroughly  friendly  terms  with  England,  it  was  exactly,
that  epoch  of  which  we  are  treating.  There  could  be  no
reasonable  doubt  that  the  designs  of  Spain  against  England
were  hostile,  and  against  Holland  revengeful.  It  was  at  least
possible  that  Philip  meant  to  undertake  the  conquest  of  Eng¬
land,  and  to  undertake  it  as  a  stepping-stone  to  the  conquest
of  Holland.  Both  the  kingdom  and  the  republic  should  have
been  alert,  armed,  full  of  suspicion  towards  the  common  foe,
full  of  confidence  in  each  other.  What  decisive  blows  might
have  been  struck  against  Parma  in  the  Netherlands,  when  his
troops  were  starving,  sickly,  and  mutinous,  if  the  Hollanders
and  Englishmen  had  been  united  under  one  chieftain,  and
thoroughly  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  peace  !  Could
the  English  and  Dutch  statesmen  of  that  day  have  read  all
the  secrets  of  their  great  enemy's  heart,  as  it  is  our  privilege
at  this  hour  to  do,  they  would  have  known  that  in  sudden  and
deadly  strokes  lay  their  best  chance  of  salvation.  But,  without
that  advantage,  there  were  men  whose  sagacity  told  them  that
it  was  the  hour  for  deeds  and  not  for  dreams.  For  to  Leicester
and  Walsingham,  as  well  as  to  Paul  Buys  and  Barneveld,
peace  with  Spain  seemed  an  idle  vision.  It  was  unfortunate
that  they  were  overruled  by  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Burghley,
who  still  clung  to  that  delusion  ;  it.  was  still  more  disastrous
that  the  intrigues  of  Leicester  had  done  so  much  to  paralyze
the  republic ;  it  was  almost  fatal  that  his  departure,  without
laying  down  his  authority,  had  given  the  signal  for  civil  war.

During  the  winter,  spring,  and  summer  of  1588,  while  the
Duke — in  the  face  of  mighty  obstacles — was  slowly  proceeding
with  his  preparations  in  Flanders,  to  co-operate  with  the  arma¬
ments  from  Spain,  it  would  have  been  possible  by  a  combined
movement  to  destroy  his  whole  plan,  to  liberate  all  the  Nether¬
lands,  and  to  avert,  by  one  great  effort,  the  ruin  impending
over  England.  Instead  of  such  vigorous  action,  it  was  thought
wiser  to  send  commissioners,  to  make  protocols,  to  ask  for
armistices,  to  give  profusely  to  the  enemy  that  which  he  was

1588.  DANGEROUS  DISCORD  IN  NORTH  HOLLAND.  409

most  in  need  of — time.  Meanwliile  the  Hollanders  and  Eng¬
lish  could  quarrel  comfortably  among  themselves,  and  the
little  republic,  for  want  of  a  legal  head,  could  come  as  near  as
possible  to  its  dissolution.

Young  Maurice — deep  thinker  for  his  years  and  peremptory
in  action — was  not  the  man  to  see  his  great  father’s  life-work
annihilated  before  his  eyes,  so  long  as  he  had  an  arm  and
brain  of  his  own.  He  accepted  his  position  at  the  head  of  the
government  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  and  as  chief  of  the  war-
party.  The  council  of  state,  mainly  composed  of  Leicester’s
creatures,  whose  commissions  would  soon  expire  by  their  own
limitation,  could  offer  but  a  feeble  resistance  to  such  deter¬
mined  individuals  as  Maurice,  Buys,  and  Barneveld.  The
party  made  rapid  progress.  On  the  other  hand,  the  English
Leicestrians  did  their  best  to  foment  discord  in  the  Provinces.
Sonoy  was  sustained  in  his  rebellion  in  North  Holland,  not
only  by  the  Earl’s  partizans,  but  by  Elizabeth  herself.  Her
rebukes  to  Maurice,  when  Maurice  was  pursuing  the  only
course  which  seemed  to  him  consistent  with  honour  and  sound
policy,  were  sharper  than  a  sword.  Well  might  Duplessis
Mornay  observe,  that  the  commonwealth  had  been  rather
strangled  than  embraced  by  the  English  Queen.  Sonoy,  in
the  name  of  Leicester,  took  arms  against  Maurice  and  the
States  ;  Maurice  marched  against  him  ;  and  Lord  Willoughby,
commander-in-chief  of  the  English  forces,  was  anxious  to
march  against  Maurice.  It  was  a  spectacle  to  make  angels
weep,  that  of  Englishmen  and  Hollanders  preparing  to  cut
each  other’s  throats,  at  the  moment  when  Philip  and  Parma
were  bending  all  their  energies  to  crush  England  and  Holland
at  once.

Indeed,  the  interregnum  between  the  departure  of  Leicester
and  his  abdication  was  diligently  employed  by  his  more  reck¬
less  partizans  to  defeat  and  destroy  the  authority  of  the  States.
By  prolonging  the  interval,  it  was  hoped  that  no  government
would  be  possible  except  the  arbitrary  rule  of  the  Earl,  or  of
a  successor  with  similar  views  :  for  a  republic — a  free  com¬
monwealth — was  thought  an  absurdity.  To  entrust  supreme

410

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

power  to  advocates,  merchants,  and  mechanics,  seemed  as
hopeless  as  it  was  vulgar.  Willoughby,  much  devoted  to
Leicester  and  much  detesting  Barneveld,  had  small  scruple  in
fanning  the  flames  of  discord.

There  was  open  mutiny  against  the  States  by  the  garrison
of  Gertruydenberg,  and  Willoughby’s  brother-in-law,  Captain
Wingfield,  commanded  in  Gertruydenberg.  There  were  re¬
bellious  demonstrations  in  Naarden,  and  Willoughby  went  to
Naarden.  The  garrison  was  troublesome,  but  most  of  the
magistrates  were  firm.  So  Willoughby  supped  with  the  burgo¬
masters,  and  found  that  Paul  Buys  had  been  setting  the
people  against  Queen  Elizabeth,  Leicester,  and  the  whole
English  nation,  making  them  all  odious.  Colonel  Dorp  said
openly  that  it  was  a  shame  for  the  country  to  refuse  their  own
natural-born  Count  for  strangers.  He  swore  that  he  would
sing  his  song  whose  bread  he  had  eaten.1  A  “  fat  militia
captain”  of  the  place,  one  Soyssons,  on  the  other  hand,
privately  informed  Willoughby  that  Maurice  and  Barneveld
were  treating  underhand  with  Spain.  Willoughby  was  inclined
to  believe  the  calumny,  but  feared  that  his  corpulent  friend
would  lose  his  head  for  reporting  it.  Meantime  the  English
commander  did  his  best  to  strengthen  the  English  party  in
their  rebellion  against  the  States.

“  But  how  if  they  make  war  upon  us  ?”  asked  the  Leices-
trians.

“It  is  very  likely,”  replied  Willoughby,  u  that  if  they  use
violence  you  will  have  her  Majesty’s  assistance,  and  then  you
who  continue  constant  to  the  end  will  be  rewarded  accord¬
ingly.  Moreover,  who  would  not  rather  be  a  horse-keeper  to
her  Majesty,  than  a  captain  to  Barneveld  or  Buys  ?”  2

1  Willoughby  to  - ,  —  Eeb.  1588.

28

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.  “  It  was  likewise  said  openly
to  Count  Maurice  at  his  table,  ‘  Sir,
if  the  Prince  your  father  had  been
offered  the  third  part  by  the  enemy
which  you  have  been,  he  would  have
accepted  it ;  and  it  is  not  a  good  occa¬
sion  that  you  may  article  what  you

will,  and  have  whatever  you  may
demand.  Soyssons,  a  fat  captain  of
Naarden,  fed  for  their  tooth,  confessed
to  me  that  they  had  practised  with
the  enemy.  Thus  you  may  see  their
dispositions;  much  ado  had  I  to  per¬
suade  the  burgomasters  of  the  honour¬
able  course  her  Majesty  would  hold,
and  no  less  to  assure  the  unfortunate
captain,  whose  head  I  fear  will  pay

1538.

LEICESTER’S  RESIGNATION  ARRIVES.

411

When  at  last  the  resignation  of  Leicester — presented  to  the
States  by  Killegrew  on  the  31st  March1 — seemed  to  promise
comparative  repose  to  the  republic,  the  vexation  of  the  Lei-
cestrians  was  intense.  Their  efforts  to  effect  a  dissolution  of
the  government  had  been  rendered  unsuccessful,  when  success
seemed  within  their  grasp.  “  Albeit  what  is  once  executed
cannot  be  prevented/'  said  Captain  Champernoun  ;  “  yet  'tis
thought  certain  that  if  the  resignation  of  Lord  Leicester's
commission  had  been  deferred  yet  some  little  time,  the  whole
country  and  towns  would  have  so  revolted  and  mutinied
against  the  government  and  authority  of  the  States,  as  that
they  should  have  had  no  more  credit  given  them  by  the
people  than  pleased  her  Majesty.  Most  part  of  the  people
could  see — in  consequence  of  the  troubles,  discontent,  mutiny
of  garrisons,  and  the  like,  that  it  was  most  necessary  for  the
good  success  of  their  affairs  that  the  power  of  the  States
should  be  abolished,  and  the  whole  government  of  his  Excel¬
lency  erected.  As  these  matters  iverc  busily  icorking  into  the
likelihood  of  some  good  effect ,  came  the  resignation  of  his  Excel¬
lency's  commission  and  authority,  which  so  dashed  the  pro¬
ceedings  of  it,  as  that  all  people  and  commanders  well  affected
unto  her  Majesty  and  my  Lord  of  Leicester  are  utterly  dis¬
couraged.  The  States,  with  their  adherents,  before  they  had
my  Lord's  resignation,  were  much  perplexed  what  course  to
take,  but  now  begin  to  hoist  their  heads."  The  excellent
Leicestrian  entertained  hopes,  however,  that  mutiny  and  in¬
trigue  might  still  carry  the  day.  He  had  seen  the  fat  militia¬
man  of  Naarden  and  other  captains,  and  hoped  much  mischief
from  their  schemes.  “The  chief  mutineers  of  Gfertruyden-
berg,"  he  said,  “  may  be  wrought  to  send  unto  the  States,
that  if  they  do  not  procure  them  some  English  governor,  they
will  compound  with  the  enemy,  vjliereon  the  States  shall  be

for  all.  Further,  I  said  it  was  sure
that  the  States-General,  the  council
of  state,  which  I  was  somewhat  ac¬
quainted  with,  nor  the  two  counts
who  had  feasted  us  and  drunk  the
health  of  his  Excellency,  meant  but
all  well  to  us.’  ‘Well,’  said  the  old

burgomaster,  ‘  but  that  I  hear  you  say
so,  I  would  scarcely  believe  it,  for
mine  ears  have  often  borne  witness  to
the  contrary.’  ”  &c.  Willoughby  to

- -  :°Afk  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Mar.

1  Bor,  III.  224.  Wagenaar,  viii.  265.

412

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  -XVIII.

driven  to  request  her  Majesty  to  accept  the  place,  themselves
entertaining  the  garrison.  I  know  certain  captains  discon¬
tented  with  the  States  for  arrears  of  pay,  who  will  contrive  to
get  into  Naarden  with  their  companies,  with  the  States'  con¬
sent,  who,  once  entered,  will  keep  the  place  for  their  satis¬
faction,  pay  their  soldiers  out  of  the  contributions  of  the
country,  and  yet  secretly  hold  the  place  at  her  Majesty’s
command.”  1

This  is  not  an  agreeable  picture  ;  yet  it  is  hut  one  out  of
many  examples  of  the  intrigues  by  which  Leicester  and  his
party  were  doing  their  best  to  destroy  the  commonwealth  of
the  Netherlands  at  a  moment  when  its  existence  was  most
important  to  that  of  England.

To  foment  mutiny  in  order  to  subvert  the  authority  of
Maurice,  was  not  a  friendly  or  honourable  course  of  action
either  towards  Holland  or  England  ;  and  it  was  to  play  into
the  hands  of  Philip  as  adroitly  as  his  own  stipendiaries  could
have  done.2

With  mischief-makers  like  Champernoun  in  every  city,
and  with  such  diplomatists  at  Ostend  as  Croft  and  Rogers
and  Valentine  Dale,  was  it  wonderful  that  the  King  and  the
Duke  of  Parma  found  time  to  mature  their  plans  for  the
destruction  of  both  countries  ?

Lord  Willoughby,  too,  was  extremely  dissatisfied  with  his
own  position.  He  received  no  commission  from  the  Queen
for  several  months.  When  it  at  last  reached  him,  it  seemed
inadequate,  and  he  '  became  more  sullen  than  ever.  He  de¬
clared  that  he  would  rather  serve  the  Queen  as  a  private
soldier,  at  his  own  expense — “  lean  as  his  purse  was  ” — than
accept  the  limited  authority  conferred  on  him.  He  preferred
to  show  his  devotion  “in  a  beggarly  state,  than  in  a  formal
show.”  He  considered  it  beneath  her  Majesty’s  dignity  that

1  Arthur  Champernoun  to  Walsing-

ham,  A  April,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)  He  commanded  an  English
company  in  Utrecht.

2  “I  congratulate  you,”  wrote  Philip

to  Earnese,  11  upon  the  disputes  be¬
tween  the  rebels  and  the  English,  and
among  themselves.  I  trust  you  will
get  good  fruit  from  their  quarrels.”
Philip  to  Parma,  13  May,  1588.  (Arch,
de  Sim.  MS.)

1588.

ENMITY  OF  WILLOUGHBY  AND  MAURICE.

413

lie  should  act  in  the  field  under  the  States,  hut  his  instruc¬
tions  forbade  his  acceptance  of  any  office  from,  that  body  but
that  of  general  in  their  service.  He  was  very  discontented,
and  more  anxious  than  ever  to  be  rid  of  his  functions.  With¬
out  being  extremely  ambitious,  he  was  impatient  of  control.
He  desired  not  “a  larger-shaped  coat,”  but  one  that  fitted
him  better.  u  I  wish  to  shape  my  garment  homely,  after  my
cloth,”  he  said,  u  that  the  better  of  my  parish  may  not  be
misled  by  my  sumptuousness.  I  would  live  quietly,  without
great  noise,  my  poor  roof  low  and  near  the  ground,  not  sub¬
ject  to  be  overblown  with  unlooked-for  storms,  while  the  sun
seems  most  shining.” 1

Being  the  deadly  enemy  of  the  States  and  their  leaders,  it
was  a  matter  of  course  that  he  should  be  bitter  against  Mau¬
rice.  That  young  Prince,  bold,  enterprising,  and  determined,
as  he  was,  did  not  ostensibly  meddle  with  political  affairs
more  than  became  his  years  ;  but  he  accepted  the  counsels  of
the  able  statesmen  in  whom  his  father  had  trusted.  Riding,
hunting,  and  hawking,  seemed  to  be  his  chief  delight  at  the
Hague,  in  the  intervals  of  military  occupations.  He  rarely
made  his  appearance  in  the  state-council  during  the  winter,
and  referred  public  matters  to  the  States-General,  to  the
States  of  Holland,  to  Barneveld,  Buys,  and  Hohenlo.2  Super¬
ficial  observers  like  George  Gilpin  regarded  him  as  a  cipher ;
others,  like  Robert  Cecil,  thought  him  an  unmannerly  school¬
boy  ;  but  Willoughby,  although  cod  sidering  him  insolent  and
conceited,  could  not  deny  his  ability.  The  peace  partisans
among  the  burghers — a  very  small  faction — were  furious
against  him,  for  they  knew  that  Maurice  of  Nassau  repre¬
sented  war.  They  accused  of  deep  designs  against  the  liber¬
ties  of  their  country  the  youth  who  was  ever  ready  to  risk  his
life  in  their  defence.  A  burgomaster  from  Friesland,  who
had  come  across  the  Zuyder  Zee  to  intrigue  against  the  States’
party,  was  full  of  spleen  at  being  obliged  to  dance  attendance

1  Willoughby  to  Burghley,  2“~>  2  Gilpin  to  Walsingham,  —  Feb.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  °  *  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

414

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

for  a  long  time  at  the  Hague.  He  complained  that  Count
Maurice,  green  of  years,  and  seconded  by  greener  counsellors,
was  meditating  the  dissolution  of  the  state-council,  the  appoint¬
ment  of  a  new  board  from  his  own  creatures,  the  overthrow
of  all  other  authority,  and  the  assumption  of  the  sovereignty
of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  with  absolute  power.  cc  And  when
this  is  done/’  said  the  rueful  burgomaster,  “  he  and  his  turbu¬
lent  fellows  may  make  what  terms  they  like  with  Spain,  to
the  disadvantage  of  the  Queen  and  of  us  poor  wretches/'1

But  there  was  nothing  farther  from  the  thoughts  of  the
turbulent  fellows  than  any  negotiations  with  Spain.  Maurice
was  ambitious  enough,  perhaps,  but  his  ambition  ran  in  no
such  direction.  Willoughby  knew  better,  and  thought  that
by  humouring  the  petulant  young  man  it  might  be  possible  to
manage  him.

u  Maurice  is  young,"  he  said,  cc  hot-headed,  coveting  honour.
If  we  do  but  look  at  him  through  our  fingers,  without  much
words,  but  with  providence  enough,  baiting  his  hook  a  little
to  his  appetite,  there  is  no  doubt  but  he  might  be  caught  and
kept  in  a  fish-pool,  while  in  his  imagination  he  may  judge
it  a  sea.  If  not,  'tis  likely  he  will  make  us  fish  in  troubled
waters." 2

Maurice  was  hardly  the  fish  for  a  mill-pond  even  at  that
epoch,  and  it  might  one  day  be  seen  whether  or  not  he  could
float  in  the  great  ocean  of  events.  Meanwhile,  he  swam  his
course  without  superfluous  gambols  or  spoutings.

The  commander  of  her  Majesty's  forces  was  not  satisfied
with  the  States,  nor  their  generals,  nor  their  politicians.
“Affairs  are  going  a  malo  in  pejus,”  he  said.  “  They  embrace
their  liberty  as  apes  their  young.  To  this  end  are  Counts
Hollock  and  Maurice  set  upon  the  stage  to  entertain  the
popular  sort.  Her  Majesty  and  my  Lord  of  Leicester  are
not  forgotten.  The  Counts  are  in  Holland,  especially  Hol¬
lock,  for  the  other  is  but  the  cipher.  And  yet  I  can  assure
you  Maurice  hath  wit  and  spirit  too  much  for  his  time” 3

12

1  Willoughby  to  Burghley,  -  Jan.  3  Same  to  same,  -  Jan.  1588.  (S.

22  26
1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  2  Ibid.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.  WILLOUGHBY’S  DARK  PICTURE  OP  AFFAIRS.  415

As  the  troubles  of  the  interregnum  increased  Willoughby
was  more  dissatisfied  than  ever  with  the  miserable  condition
of  the  Provinces,  but  chose  to  ascribe  it  to  the  machinations
of  the  States’  party,  rather  than  to  the  ambiguous  conduct  of
Leicester.  “  These  evils,”  he  said,  “are  especially  derived
from  the  childish  ambition  of  the  young  Count  Maurice,  from
the  covetous  and  furious  counsels  of  the  proud  Hollanders,
now  chief  of  the  States-G-eneral,  and,  if  with  pardon  it  may
be  said,  from  our  slackness  and  coldness  to  entertain  our
friends.  The  provident  and  wiser  sort — 'Weighing  what  a
slender  ground  the  appetite  of  a  young  man  is,  unfurnished
with  the  sinews  of  war  to  manage  so  great  a  cause — for  a
good  space  after  my  Lord  of  Leicester’s  departure,  gave  him
far  looking  on,  to  see  him  play  his  part  on  the  stage.”  1

Willoughby’s  spleen  caused  him  to  mix  his  metaphors
more  recklessly  than  strict  taste  would  warrant,  but  his  vio¬
lent  expressions  painted  the  relative  situation  of  j)arties  more
vividly  than  could  be  done  by  a  calm  disquisition.  Maurice
thus  playing  his  part  upon  the  stage — as  the  general  pro¬
ceeded  to  observe — was  a  skittish  horse,  becoming  by  little
and  little  assured  of  what  he  had  feared,  and  perceiving  the
harmlessness  thereof  ;  while  his  companions,  finding  no  safety
of  neutrality  in  so  great  practices,  and  no  overturning  nor
barricado  to  stop  his  rash  wilded  chariot,  followed  without
fear ;  and  when  some  of  the  first  had  passed  the  bog,  the
rest,  as  the  fashion  is,  never  started  after.  The  variable
democracy,  embracing  novelty,  began  to  applaud  their  pros¬
perity  ;  the  base  and  lewdest  sorts  of  men,  to  whom  there
is  nothing  more  agreeable  than  change  of  estates,  is  a  better
monture  to  degrees  than  their  merit,  took  present  hold
thereof.  Hereby  Paul  Buys,  Barneveld,  and  divers  others,
who  were  before  mantled  with  a  tolerable  affection,  though
seasoned  with  a  poisoned  intention,  caught  the  occasion,  and
made  themselves  the  Beelzebubs  of  all  these  mischiefs,  and,
for  want  of  better  angels,  spared  not  to  let  fly  our  golden-

19  Feb.

1  Willoughby  to  Walsingham,  - ’  1588.  S.  P.  Offico  MS.

°  J  °  1  Mar.

416

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

winged  ones  in  the  name  of  guilders,  to  prepare  the  hearts
and  hands  that  hold  money  more  dearer  than  honesty,  of
which  sort,'  the  country  troubles  and  the  Spanish  practices
having  suckled  up  many,  they  found  enough  to  serve  their
purpose.  As  the  breach  is  safely  saltable  where  no  defence
is  made,  so  they,  finding  no  head,  but  those  scattered  arms
that  were  disavowed,  drew  the  sword  with  Peter,  and  gave
pardon  with  the  Pope,  as  you  shall  plainly  perceive  by  the
proceedings  at  Horn.  Thus  their  force,  fair  words,  or  cor¬
ruption,  prevailing  everywhere,  it  grew  to  this  conclusion —
that  the  worst  were  encouraged  with  their  good  success,  and
the  best  sort  assured  of  no  fortune  or  favour.” 1

Out  of  all  this  hubbub  of  stage-actors,  skittish  horses,  rash
wilded  chariots,  bogs,  Beelzebubs,  and  golden- winged  angels,
one  truth  was  distinctly  audible  ;  that  Beelzebub,  in  the  shape
of  Barneveld,  had  been  getting  the  upper  hand  in  the  Nether¬
lands,  and  that  the  Lecestrians  were  at  a  disadvantage.  In
truth  those  partisans  were  becoming  extremely  impatient.
Finding  themselves  deserted  by  their  great  protector,  they
naturally  turned  their  eyes  towards  Spain,  and  were  now
threatening  to  sell  themselves  to  Philip.  The  Earl,  at  his
departure,  had  given  them  privately  much  encouragement.
But  month  after  month  had  passed  by  while  they  were  wait¬
ing  in  vain  for  comfort.  At  last  the  “best” — that  is  to  say,
the  unhappy  Leicestrians — came  to  Willoughby,  asking  his
advice  in  their  “  declining  and  desperate  cause.”

“  Well  nigh  -a  month  longer,”  said  that  general,  “  I  nou¬
rished  them  with  compliments,  and  assured  them  that  my
Lord  of  Leicester  would  take  care  of  them.”2  The  diet  was
not  fattening.  So  they  began  to  grumble  more  loudly  than
ever,  and  complained  with  great  bitterness  of  the  miserable
condition  in  which  they  had  been  left  by  the  Earl,  and  ex¬
pressed  their  fears  lest  the  Queen  likewise  meant  to  abandon
them.  They  protested  that  their  poverty,  their  powerful  foes,
and  their  slow  friends,  would  compel  them  either  to  make  their
peace  with  the  States’  party,  or  “  compound  with  the  enemy.”

1  Willoughby  to  Walsingham,  MS.  last  cited.

3  Ibid.

1588.  HATRED  BETWEEN  STATES  AND  LEICESTRIANS.  417

It  would  have  seemed  that  real  patriots,  under  such  circum¬
stances,  would  hardly  hesitate  in  their  choice,  and  would
sooner  accept  the  dominion  of  “  Beelzebub/'  or  even  Paul
Buys,  than  that  of  Philip  II.  But  the  Leicestrians  of  Utrecht
and  Friesland — patriots  as  they  were — hated  Holland  worse
than  they  hated  the  Inquisition.  Willoughby  encouraged
them  in  that  hatred.  He  assured  him  of  her  Majesty’s
affection  for  them,  complained  of  the  factious  proceedings  of
the  States,  and  alluded  to  the  unfavourable  state  of  the
weather,  as  a  reason  why — near  four  months  long — they  had
not  received  the  comfort  out  of  England  which  they  had  a
right  to  expect.  He  assured  them  that  neither  the  Queen
nor  Leicester  would  conclude  this  honourable  action,  wherein
much  had  been  hazarded,  u  so  rawly  and  tragically  ”  as  they
seemed  to  fear,  and  warned  them,  that  “if  they  did  join  with
Holland,  it  would  neither  ease  nor  help  them,  but  draw  them
into  a  more  dishonourable  loss  of  their  liberties  ;  and  that,
after  having  wound  them  in,  the  Hollanders  would  make  their
own  peace  with  the  enemy.”  1

It  seemed  somewhat  unfair — while  the  Queen’s  government
was  straining  every  nerve  to  obtain  a  peace  from  Philip,  and
while  the  Hollanders  were  obstinately  deaf  to  any  propositions
for  treating — that  Willoughby  should  accuse  them  of  secret
intentions  to  negotiate.  But  it  must  be  confessed  that  faction
has  rarely  worn  a  more  mischievous  aspect  than  was  pre¬
sented  by  the  politics  of  Holland  and  England  in  the  winter
and  spring  of  1588.

Young  Maurice  was  placed  in  a  very  painful  position.  He
liked  not  to  be  “  strangled  in  the  great  Queen’s  embrace ;  ”
but  he  felt  most  keenly  the  necessity  of  her  friendship,  and
the  importance  to  both  countries  of  a  close  alliance.  It  was
impossible  for  him,  however,  to  tolerate  the  rebellion  of
Sonoy,  although  Sonoy  was  encouraged  by  Elizabeth,  or  to
fly  in  the  face  of  Barneveld,  although  Barneveld  was  detested
by  Leicester.  So  with  much  firmness  and  courtesy,  notwith¬
standing  the  extravagant  pictures  painted  by  Willoughby,

1  Willoughby  to  Walsingham,  MS.  last  cited.

vol.  ii. — 2  E

418

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

he  suppressed  mutiny  in  Holland,  while  avowing  the  most
chivalrous  attachment  to  the  sovereign  of  England.

Her  Majesty  expressed  her  surprise  and  her  discontent,  that,
notwithstanding  his  expressions  of  devotion  to  herself,  he
should  thus  deal  with  Sonoy,  whose  only  crime  was  an  equal
devotion.  u  If  you  do  not  behave  with  more  moderation  in
future,”  she  said,  u  you  may  believe  that  we  are  not  a  princess
of  so  little  courage  as  not  to  know  how  to  lend  a  helping
hand  to  those  who  are  unjustly  oppressed.  We  should  be
sorry  if  we  had  cause  to  be  disgusted  with  your  actions,  and
if  we  were  compelled  to  make  you  a  stranger  to  the  ancient
good  affection  which  we  bore  to  your  late  father,  and  have
continued  towards  yourself.” 1

But  Maurice  maintained  a  dignified  attitude,  worthy  of  his
great  father's  name.  He  was  not  the  man  to  crouch  like
Leicester,  when  he  could  no  longer  refresh  himself  in  the
u  shadow  of  the  Queen's  golden  beams,”  important  as  he  knew
her  friendship  to  be  to  himself  and  his  country.  So  he  de¬
fended  himself  in  a  manly  letter  to  the  privy  council  against
the  censures  of  Elizabeth.2  He  avowed  his  displeasure,  that,
within  his  own  jurisdiction,  Sonoy  should  give  a  special  oath
of  obedience  to  Leicester ;  a  thing  never  done  before  in  the
country,  and  entirely  illegal.  It  would  not  even  be  tolerated
in  England,  he  said,  if  a  private  gentleman  should  receive  a
military  appointment  in  Warwickshire  or  Norfolk  without  the
knowledge  of  the  lord-lieutenant  of  the  shire.  He  had  treated
the  contumacious  Sonoy  with  mildness  during  a  long  period,
but  without  effect.  He  had  abstained  from  violence  towards
him,  ouf  of  reverence  to  the  Queen,  under  whose  sacred  name
he  sheltered  himself.  Sonoy  had  not  desisted,  but  had  esta¬
blished  himself  in  organized  rebellion  at  Medenblik,  declaring
that  he  would  drown  the  whole  country,  and  levy  black- mail
upon  its  whole  property,  if  he  were  not  paid  one  hundred
thousand  crowns.  He  had  declared  that  he  would  crush  Hol-

1  Queen  to  Maurice  of  Nassau,
-  Feb.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

23

2  Maurice  of  Nassau  to  Privy  Coun¬
cil,  —  March,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.  MAURICE’S  ANSWER  TO  THE  QUEEN’S  CHARGES.  419

land  like  a  glass  beneath  his  feet.  Having  nothing  but  reli¬
gion  in  his  mouth,  and  protecting  himself  with  the  Queen’s
name,  he  had  been  exciting  all  the  cities  of  North  Holland  to
rebellion,  and  bringing  the  poor  people  to  destruction.  He
had  been  offered  money  enough  to  satisfy  the  most  avaricious
soldier  in  the  world,  but  he  stood  out  for  six  years’  full  pay
for  his  soldiers,  a  demand  with  which  it  was  impossible  to
comply.  It  was  necessary  to  prevent  him  from  inundating
the  land  and  destroying  the  estates  of  the  country  gentlemen
and  the  peasants.  u  This,  gentlemen,”  said  Maurice,  “  is  the
plain  truth  ;  nor  do  I  believe  that  you  will  sustain  against  me
a  man  who  was  under  such  vast  obligations  to  my  late  father,
and  who  requites  his  debt  by  daring  to  speak  of  myself  as  a
rascal ;  or  that  -you  will  countenance  his  rebellion  against  a
country  to  which  he  brought  only  his  cloak  and  sword,  and
whence  he  has  filched  one  hundred  thousand  crowns.  You
will  not,  I  aril  sure,  permit  a  simple  captain,  by  his  insubor¬
dination,  to  cause  such  mischief,  and  to  set  on  fire  this  and
other  Provinces.

“  If,  by  your  advice,”  continued  the  Count,  “  the  Queen
should  appoint  fitting  personages  to  office  here — men  who
know  what  honour  is,  born  of  illustrious  and  noble  race,  or
who  by  their  great  virtue  have  been  elevated  to  the  honours
of  the  kingdom — to  them  I  will  render  an  account  of  my
actions.  And  it  shall  appear  that  I  have  more  ability  and
more  desire  to  do  my  duty  to  her  Majesty  than  those  who
render  her  lip-service  only,  and  only  make  use  of  her  sacred
name  to  fill  their  purses,  while  I  and  mine  have  been  ever
ready  to  employ  our  lives,  and  what  remains  of  our  fortunes,
in  the  cause  of  God,  her  Majesty,  and  our  country.” 1

Certainly  no  man  had  a  better  right  to  speak  with  con¬
sciousness  of  the  worth  of  a  race  than  the  son  of  William  the
Silent,  the  nephew  of  Lewis,  Adolphus,  and  Henry  of  Nassau,
who  had  all  laid  down  their  lives  for  the  liberty  of  their
country.  But  Elizabeth  continued  to  threaten  the  States-
General,  through  the  mouth  of  Willoughby,  with  the  loss  of

1  Maurice  of  Nassau  to  Privy  Council,  MS.  last  cited.

420

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

her  protection,  if  they  should  continue  thus  to  requite  her
favours  with  ingratitude  and  insubordination : 1  and  Maurice
once  more  respectfully  hut  firmly  replied  that  Sonoy's  re¬
bellion  could  not  and  would  not  he  tolerated ;  appealing
boldly  to  her  sense  of  justice,  which  was  the  noblest  attribute
of  kings.2

At  last  the  Queen  informed  Willoughby,  that — as  the  cause
of  Sonoy's  course  seemed  to  be  his  oath  of  obedience  to
Leicester,  whose  resignation  of  office  had  not  yet  been  re¬
ceived  in  the  Netherlands — she  had  now  ordered  Councillor
Killigrew  to  communicate  the  fact  of  that  resignation.  She
also  wrote  to  Sonoy,  requiring  him  to  obey  the  States  and
Count  Maurice,  and  to  accept  a  fresh  commission  from  them,
or  at  least  to  surrender  Medenblik,  and  to  fulfil  all  their
orders  with  zeal  and  docility.3

This  act  of  abdication  by  Leicester,  which  had  been  received
on  the  22nd  of  January  by  the  English  envoy,  Herbert,  at  the
moment  of  his  departure  from  the  Netherlands,  had  been  carried
back  by  him  to  England,  on  the  ground  that  its  communication
to  the  States  at  that  moment  would  cause  him  inconveniently
to  postpone  his  journey.  It  never  officially  reached  the  States-
General  until  the  31st  of  March,  so  that  this  most  dangerous
crisis  was  protracted  nearly  five  months  long — certainly  without
necessity  or  excuse — and  whether  through  design,  malice,  wan¬
tonness,  or  incomprehensible  carelessness,  it  is  difficult  to  say.4

So  soon  as  the  news  reached  Sonov,  that  contumacious
chieftain  found  his  position  untenable,  and  he  allowed  the
States'  troops  to  take  possession  of  Medenblik,  and  with  it
the  important  territory  of  North  Holland,  of  which  province

1  Queen  to  Willoughby,  —  March,

1588.  (S.P.  Office  MS.)

3  Maurice  of  Nassau  to  Queen  Eliza¬
beth,'  15  March,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

.  17

Queen  to  Willoughby,  —  March,

27

5

1588.  Queen  to  Sonoy,  —  April,  1588,
(S.  P.  Office  MSS.)

4  Bor,  HI.  xxiv.  119,  seq.  233,  seq.

Van  der  Kemp,  I.  62.  Wagenaar,  viii.
210.  Resol.  Holl.  1  April,  1588.

This  business  of  Col.  Diedrich
Sonoy  occupies  an  enormous  space  in
the  archives  and  chronicles  of  the
day.  It  has  been  here  reduced  to  the
smallest  compass  consistent  with  a
purpose  of  presenting  an  intelligible
account  of  the  politics  of  Leicester’s
administration  and  its  consequences.

1588.

END  OF  SONOY’S  REBELLION.

421

Maurice  now  saw  himself  undisputed  governor.  Sonoy  was  in
the  course  of  the  summer  deprived  of  all  office,  and  betook
himself  to  England.  Here  he  was  kindly  received  by  the
Queen,  who  bestowed  upon  him  a  ruined  tower,  and  a  swamp
among  the  fens  of  Lincolnshire.  He  brought  over  some  of
his  countrymen,  well-skilled  in  such  operations,  set  himself
to  draining  and  dyking,  and  hoped  to  find  himself  at  home
and  comfortable  in  his  ruined  tower.  But  unfortunately,  as
neither  he  nor  his  wife,  notwithstanding  their  English  pro¬
clivities,  could  speak  a  word  of  the  language,  they  found  their
social  enjoyments  very  limited.  Moreover,  as  his  work-people
were  equally  without  the  power  of  making  their  wants  under¬
stood,  the  dyking  operations  made  but  little  progress.  So  the
unlucky  colonel  soon  abandoned  his  swamp,  and  retired  to  East
Friesland,  where  he  lived  a  morose  and  melancholy  life  on  a
pension  of  one  thousand  florins,  granted  him  by  the  States  of
Holland,  until  the  year  1597,  when  he  lost  his  mind,  fell  into
the  fire,  and  thus  perished.1

And  thus,  in  the  Netherlands,  through  hollow  negotiations
between  enemies  and  ill-timed  bickerings  among  friends,  the
path  of  Philip  and  Parma  had  been  made  comparatively  smooth
during  the  spring  and  early  summer  of  1588.  What  was  the
aspect  of  affairs  in  Germany  and  France  ?

The  adroit  capture  of  Bonn  by  Martin  Schenk  had  given
much  trouble.  Parma  was  obliged  to  detach  a  strong  force,
under  Prince  Chimay,2  to  attempt  the  recovery  of  that  im¬
portant  place,  which — so  long  as  it  remained  in  the  power  of
the  States — rendered  the  whole  electorate  insecure  and  a
source  of  danger  to  the  Spanish  party.  Farnese  endeavoured
in  vain  to  win  back  the  famous  partizan  by  most  liberal  offers,
for  he  felt  bitterly  the  mistake  he  had  made  in  alienating  so
formidable  a  freebooter.  But  the  truculent  Martin  remained
obdurate  and  irascible.  Philip,  much  offended  that  the  news
of  his  decease  had  proved  false,  ordered  rather  than  requested
the  Emperor  Rudolph  to  have  a  care  that  nothing  was  done

1  Bor,  III.  290.

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  31  Jan.  1588.  (Arch  de  Sim.  MS.)

422

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYHI.

in  Germany  to  interfere  with  the  great  design  upon  England. 1
The  King  gave  warning  that  he  would  suffer  no  disturbance
from  that  quarter,  but  certainly  the  lethargic  condition  of
Germany  rendered  such  threats  superfluous.  There  were
riders  enough,  and  musketeers  enough,  to  be  sold  to  the
highest  bidder.  German  food  for  powder  was  offered  largely
in  the  market  to  any  foreign  consumer,  for  the  trade  in  their
subjects'  lives  was  ever  a  prolific  source  of  revenue  to  the
petty  sovereigns — numerous  as  the  days  of  the  year' — who
owned  Germany  and  the  Germans.

The  mercenaries  who  had  so  recently  been  making  their
inglorious  campaign  in  France  had  been  excluded  from  that
country  at  the  close  of  1587,  and  furious  were  the  denuncia¬
tions  of  the  pulpits  and  the  populace  of  Paris  that  the  foreign
brigands  who  had  been  devastating  the  soil  of  France,  and
attempting  to  oppose  the  decrees  of  the  Holy  Father  of
Rome,  should  have  made  their  escape  so  easily.  Rabid
Lincestre  and  other  priests  and  monks  foamed  with  rage,  as
they  execrated  and  anathematized  the  devil- worshipper  Henry
of  Yalois,  in  all  the  churches  of  that  monarch's  capital.  The
Spanish  ducats  were  flying  about,  more  profusely  than  ever,
among  the  butchers  and  porters,  and  fishwomen,  of  the
great  city  ;  and  Madam  League  paraded  herself  in  the  day¬
light  with  still  increasing  insolence.  There  was  scarcely  a
pretence  at  recognition  of  any  authority,  save  that  of  Philip
and  Sixtus.  France  had  become  a  wilderness — an  uncul¬
tivated,  barbarous  province  of  Spain.  Mucio- Guise  had  been
secretly  to  Rome,  had  held  interviews  with  the  Pope  and
cardinals,  and  had  come  back  with  a  sword  presented  by  his
Holiness,  its  hilt  adorned  with  jewels,  and  its  blade  engraved
with  tongues  of  fire.2  And  with  this  flaming  sword  the
avenging  messenger  of  the  holy  father  was  to  smite  the
wicked,  and  to  drive  them  into  outer  darkness.

And  there  had  been  fresh  conferences  among  the  chiefs  of
the  sacred  League  within  the  Lorraine  territory,  and  it  was

1  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  24  April,  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

2  ‘  L’Estoile,’  236.

1588.

PHILIP  FOMENTS  THE  CIVIL  "WAR  IN  FRANCE.  423

resolved  to  require  of  the  Valois  an  immediate  extermination
of  heresy  and  heretics  throughout  the  kingdom,  the  publica¬
tion  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  and  the  formal  establishment  of
the  Holy  Inquisition  in  every  province  of  France.  Thus,
while  doing  his  Spanish  master’s  bidding,  the  great  Lieutenant
of  the  league  might,  if  he  was  adroit  enough  to  outwit  Philip,
ultimately  carve  out  a  throne  for  himself.

Yet  Philip  felt  occasional  pangs  of  uneasiness  lest  there
should,  after  all,  he  peace  in  France,  and  lest  his  schemes
against  Holland  and  England  might  he  interfered  with  from
that  quarter.  Even  Farnese,  nearer  the  scene,  could  not  feel
completely  secure  that  a  sudden  reconciliation  among  con¬
tending  factions  might  not  give  rise  to  a  dangerous  inroad
across  the  Flemish  border.  So  Guise  was  plied  more  vigor¬
ously  than  ever  by  the  Duke  with  advice  and  encou¬
ragement,  and  assisted  with  such  Walloon  carabineers  as
could  he  spared,1  while  large  subsidies  and  larger  promises
came  from  Philip,2  whose  prudent  policy  was  never  to  pay
excessive  sums,  until  the  work  contracted  for  was  done.
u  Mucio  must  do  the  job  long  since  agreed  upon,”  said  Philip
to  Farnese,  “  and  you  and  Mendoza  must  see  that  he  prevents
the  King  of  France  from  troubling  me  in  my  enterprize
against  England.” 3  If  the  unlucky  Henry  III.  had  retained
one  spark  of  intelligence,  he  would  have  seen  that  his  only

1  Herrera  III.  iii.  72.  2,000  infantry
and  1,000  horse.

2  Philip  to  Parma,  27  Noy.  1587.
Same  to  same,  29  Jan.  1588.  (Arch,
de  Sim.  MSS.)

3  Philip  to  Parma,  24  April,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  Philip  II.  to
Mendoza,  16  Feb.  1588.  (Arch,  de
Sim.  [Paris.]  MS.)

“  A  Mucio  animad  y  aconsejad  como
soleys,  lo  que  se  cumple  .  .  .  .  y  le
procurad  hazer  tiro.”  Philip  II.  to
Mendoza,  2  June,  1588.  (Arch,  de
Simancas  [Paris.]  MS.)

“  The  King  was,  however,  perpetually
warning  Guise  not  to  allow  himself  or
his  confederates  “to  brag  openly  of
the  assistance  which  they  were  re¬
ceiving  from  Spain,  lest  the  ministers
of  Henry  should  think  Philip  partial;

but  in  reality  not  to  waver  a  hair’s
breadth  in  his  determination,  relying
upon  the  Spanish  King  and  on  the
Duke  of  Parma,”  &c.  Philip  II.  to
Mendoza,  16  July,  1588.  (Arch,  de
Sim.  [Paris.]  MS.)

“The  public  report  that  we  are
assisting  Guise,”  said  the  king  a  year
before,  “  is  very  inconvenient,  and
must  be  suppressed.  .  .  .  My  nephew,
the  Duke  of  Parma,  has  assured  Guise
that  he  will  assist  him,  and  Guise
ought  to  be  grateful.  At  the  same
time  Longlee  has  been  telling  me  that
his  King  desired  to  join  me  against
England.  All  this  was  to  deceive,
and  I  have  answered  all  with  equal
deception,”  &c.  Philip  II.  to  Mendoza,
6  July,  1587,  MS.

424

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIIl

chance  of  rescue  lay  in  the  arm  of  the  Bearnese,  and  in  an
honest  alliance  with  England.  Yet  so  strong  was  his  love  for
the  monks,  who  were  daily  raving  against  him,  that  he  was
willing  to  commit  any  baseness,  in  order  to  win  back  their
affection.  He  was  ready  to  exterminate  heresy  and  to  esta¬
blish  the  inquisition,  but  he  was  incapable  of  taking  energetic
measures  of  any  kind,  even  when  throne  and  life  were  in
imminent  peril.  Moreover,  he  clung  to  Epernon  and  the
f politiques,’  in  whose  swords  he  alone  found  protection,  and
he  knew  that  Epernon  and  the  politiques  were  the  objects
of  horror  to  Paris  and  to  the  League.  At  the  same  time  he
looked  imploringly  towards  England  and  towards  the  great
Huguenot  chieftain,  Elizabeth’s  knight-errant.  He  had  a.
secret  interview  with  Sir  Edward  Stafford,  in  the  garden  of
the  Bernardine  convent,  and  importuned  that  envoy  to  im¬
plore  the  Queen  to  break  off  her  negotiations  with  Philip,
and  even  dared  to  offer  the  English  ambassador  a  large
reward,  if  such  a  result  could  be  obtained.  Stafford  was
also  earnestly  requested  to  beseech  the  Queen’s  influence
with  Henry  of  Navarre,  that  he  should  convert  himself  to
Catholicism,  and  thus  destroy  the  League.

On  the  other  hand,  the  magniloquent  Mendoza,  who  was
fond  of  describing  himself  as  u  so  violent  and  terrible  to  the
French  that  they  wished  to  be  rid  of  him,”1  had — as  usual —
been  frightening  the  poor  King,  who,  after  a  futile  attempt  at
dignity,  had  shrunk  'before  the  blusterings  of  the  ambassador.
u  This  King,”  said  Hon  Bernardino,  “  thought  that  he  could
impose  upon  me  and  silence  me,  by  talking  loud,  but  as  I
didn’t  talk  softly  to  him,  he  has  undeceived  himself.  ....
I  have  had  another  interview  with  him,  and  found  him  softer
than  silk,  and  he  made  me  many  caresses,  and  after  I  went
out,  he  said  that  I  was  a  very  skilful  minister.” 2

1  “El  serlo  yo  tan  terible,  violente,
y  sedigioso,  que  impido  no  se  estreche
este  rey  muy  de  veras  con  Y.  Majd
lo  qual  se  heria  si  faltasse  yo  deste
puesto.”  Mendoza  to  Philip  II.  30  Jan.
1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim,  [Paris.]  MS.)

2  “  Este  rey  creyo  que  me  espantara
liiziera  callar  con  hallar  me  alto,  y  con
el  no  respondalle  yo  baxo,  se  ha
desenganado.  Ha  tenido  despues  au-
diencia,  y  halle  lo  mas  blando  que
una  seda,  y  me  hizo  muchas  caricias

1588.

LEAGUE’S  THREATS  AND  PLOTS  AGAINST  HENRY.  425

It  was  the  purpose  of  the  League  to  obtain  possession  of  the
King’s  person,  and,  if  necessary,  to  dispose  of  the  politiques
by  a  general  massacre,  such  as  sixteen  years  before  had  been
so  successful  in  the  case  of  Coligny  and  the  Huguenots.  So
the  populace — more  rabid  than  ever — were  impatient  that
their  adored  Balafre  should  come  to  Paris  and  begin  the  holy
work.

He  came  as  far  as  Gonesse  to  do  the  job  he  had  promised
to  Philip,  but  having  heard  that  Henry  had  reinforced  him¬
self  with  four  thousand  Swiss  from  the  garrison  of  Lagny,  he
fell  back  to  Soissons.  The  King  sent  him  a  most  abject  mes¬
sage,  imploring  him  not  to  expose  his  sovereign  to  so  much
danger,  by  setting  his  foot  at  that  moment  in  the  capital.
The  Balafre  hesitated,  but  the  populace  raved  and  roared  for
its  darling.  The  Queen-Mother  urged  her  unhappy  son  to
yield  his  consent,  and  the  Montpensier — fatal  sister  of  Guise,
with  the  famous  scissors  ever  at  her  girdle1 — insisted  that
her  brother  had  as  good  a  right  as  any  man  to  come  to  the
city.  Meantime  the  great  chief  of  the  politiques,  the  hated  and
insolent  Epernon,  had  been  appointed  governor  of  Normandy,
and  Henry  had  accompanied  his  beloved  minion  a  part  of  the
way  towards  Bouen.  A  plot  contrived  by  the  Montpensier
to  waylay  the  monarch  on  his  return,  and  to  take  him  into
the  safe-keeping  of  the  League,  miscarried,  for  the  King  re¬
entered  the  city  before  the  scheme  was  ripe.  On  the  other
hand,  Nicholas  Poulain,  bought  for  twenty  thousand  crowns
by  the  politiques,  gave  the  King  and  his  advisers  full  informa¬
tion  of  all  these  intrigues,  and,  standing  in  Henry’s  cabinet,
offered,  at  peril  of  his  life,  if  he  might  be  confronted  with
the  conspirators — the  leaders  of  the  League  within  the  city —
to  prove  the  truth  of  the  charges  which  he  had  made.2

For  the  whole  city  was  now  thoroughly  organized.  The

que  yo  le  reconoci  con  las  palabras
de  vidas,  y  de  spues  del  salir  de  hablalle,
entiendo  que  dixo  que  yo  era  un
ministro  bien  avise,”  &c.  Don  B.  de
Mendoza  to  Don  Juan  de  Idiaquez,
5  April,  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  [Paris.]
MS.)

1  ‘  L’Etoile,’  244.

3  De  Thou,  x.  L.  89,  p.  251,  seq.
Herrera  III.  118,  seq.  ‘Proces  verbal’
de  Nicolas  Poulain,  &c.  320-332.  Apud
‘L’Etoile,  Registre  Journal  de  Henry
III.’

426

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

number  of  its  districts  had  been  reduced  from  sixteen  to  five,
the  better  to  bring  it  under  the  control  of  the  League  ;  and,
while  it  could  not  be  denied  that  Mucio  had  been  doing  his
master’s  work  very  thoroughly,  yet  it  was  still  in  the  power
of  the  King — through  the  treachery  of  Poulain — to  strike  a
blow  for  life  and  freedom,  before  he  was  quite  taken  in  the
trap.  But  he  stood  helpless,  paralyzed,  gazing  in  dreamy
stupor — like  one  fascinated — at  the  destruction  awaiting  him.

At  last,  one  memorable  May  morning,  a  traveller  alighted
outside  the  gate  of  Saint  Martin,  and  proceeded  on  foot
10th  May,  through  the  streets  of  Paris.  He  was  wrapped  in  a

1588.  large  cloak,  which  he  held  carefully  over  his  face.
When  he  had  got  as  far  as  the  street  of  Saint  Denis,  a  young
gentleman  among  the  passers  by,  a  good  Leaguer,  accosted
the  stranger,  and,  with  coarse  pleasantry,  plucked  the  cloak
from  his  face,  and  the  hat  from  his  head.  Looking  at  the
handsome,  swarthy  features,  marked  with  a  deep  scar,  and
the  dark,  dangerous  eyes  which  were  then  revealed,  the  prac¬
tical  jester  at  once  recognized  in  the  simple  traveller  the
terrible  Balafre,  and  kissed  the  hem  of  his  garments  with  sub¬
missive  rapture.  Shouts  of  “  Yive  Guise  ”  rent  the  air  from  all
the  bystanders,  as  the  Duke,  no  longer  affecting  conceal¬
ment,  proceeded  with  a  slow  and  stately  step  toward  the  resi¬
dence  of  Catharine  de’  Medici.1  That  queen  of  compromises
and  of  magic  had  been  holding  many  a  conference  with  the
leaders  of  both  parties  ;  had  been  increasing  her  son’s  stupe¬
faction  by  her  enigmatical  counsels ;  had  been  anxiously
consulting  her  talisman  of  goat’s  and  human  blood,  mixed
with  metals  melted  under  the  influence  of  the  star  of  her
nativity,  and  had  been  daily  visiting  the  wizard  Kuggieri,  in
whose  magic  circle — peopled  with  a  thousand  fantastic  heads
— she  had  held  high  converse  with  the  world  of  spirits,  and
derived  much  sound  advice  as  to  the  true  course  of  action  to  be
pursued  between  her  son  and  Philip,  and  between  the  politicians
and  the  League.  But,  in  spite  of  these  various  sources  of  in-

1  ‘L’Etoile,’  250.  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.  ‘Recit  du  Bourgeois  de  Paris.’  MS.
Dupuys,  cited  by  Capefigue,  ‘Hist,  de  la  Reforme,’  &c.  IT.  318.

1588.

MUCIO  ARRIVES  IN  PARIS.

427

struction,  Catharine  was  somewhat  perplexed,  now  that  deci¬
sive  action  seemed  necessary — a  dethronement  and  a  new
massacre  impending,  and  judicious  compromise  difficult.  So
after  a  hurried  conversation  with  Mucio,  who  insisted  on  an
interview  with  the  King,  she  set  forth  for  the  Louvre,  the
Duke  lounging  calmly  by  the  side  of  her  sedan  chair,  on
foot,  receiving  the  homage  of  the  populace,  as  men,  women,
and  children  together,  they  swarmed  around  him  as  he  walked,
kissing  his  garments,  and  rending  the  air  with  their  shouts.1
For  that  wolfish  mob  of  Paris,  which  had  once  lapped  the
blood  of  ten  thousand  Huguenots  in  a  single  night,  and  was
again  rabid  with  thirst,  was  most  docile  and  fawning  to  the
great  Balafre.  It  grovelled  before  him,  it  hung  upon  his  look,
it  licked  his  hand,  and,  at  the  lifting  of  his  finger,  or  the
glance  of  his  eye,  would  have  sprung  at  the  throat  of  King
or  Queen-Mother,  minister,  or  minion,  and  devoured  them  all
before  his  eyes.  It  was  longing  for  the  sign,  for  much  as  Paris
adored  and  was  besotted  with  Guise  and  the  League,  even
more,  if  possible,  did  it  hate  those  godless  politicians,  who  had
grown  fat  on  extortions  from  the  poor,  and  who  had  converted
their  substance  into  the  daily  bread  of  luxury.

Nevertheless  the  city  was  full  of  armed  men,  Swiss  and
German  mercenaries,  and  burgher  guards,  sworn  to  fidelity  to
the  throne.  The  place  might  have  been  swept  clean,  at  that
moment,  of  rebels  who  were  not  yet  armed  or  fortified  in  their
positions.  The  Lord  had  delivered  Guise  into  Henry’s  hands.
“Oh,  the  madman  !”  cried  Sixtus  V.,  when  he  heard  that  the
Duke  had  gone  to  Paris,  u  thus  to  put  himself  into  the  clutches
of  the  King  whom  he  had  so  deeply  offended  !”  And,  “  Oh,
the  wretched  coward,  the  imbecile  \”  he  added,  when  he  heard
how  the  King  had  dealt  with  his  great  enemy.2

For  the  monarch  was  in  his  cabinet  that  May  morning,
irresolutely  awaiting  the  announced  visit  of  the  Duke.  By
his  side  stood  Alphonse  Corse,  attached  as  a  mastiff  to  his
master,  and  fearing  not  Guise  nor  Leaguer,  man  nor  devil.

1  De  Thou,  ‘  L’Etoile/  ubi  sup.

2  De  Thou,  x.  266.

428

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

u  Sire,  is  the  Duke  of  Guise  your  friend  or  enemy  ?”  said
Alphonse.  The  King  answered  by  an  expressive  shrug.

u  Say  the  word,  Sire/'  continued  Alphonse,  “  and  I  pledge
myself  to  bring  his  head  this  instant,  and  lay  it  at  your  feet."  1
And  he  would  have  done  it.  Even  at  the  side  of  Catharine's
sedan  chair,  and  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  worshipping  mob,
the  Corsican  would  have  had  the  Balafre's  life,  even  though
he  laid  down  his  own.

But  Henry — irresolute  and  fascinated — said  it  was  not  yet
time  for  such  a  blow.2

Soon  afterward,  the  Duke  was  announced.  The  chief
of  the  League  and  the  last  of  the  Valois  met,  face  to  face,
but  not  for  the  last  time.  The  interview  was  coldly  re¬
spectful  on  the  part  of  Mucio,  anxious  and  embarrassed  on
that  of  the  King.  When  the  visit,  which  was  merely
one  of  ceremony,  was  over,  the  Duke  departed  as  he  came,
receiving  the  renewed  homage  of  the  populace  as  he  walked
to  his  hotel.

That  night  precautions  were  taken.  All  the  guards  were
doubled  around  the  palace  and  through  the  streets.  The
Hotel  de  Ville  and  the  Place  de  la  Greve  were  made  secure,
and  the  whole  city  was  filled  with  troops.  But  the  Place
Maubert  was  left  unguarded,  and  a  rabble  rout — all  night
long — was  collecting  in  that  distant  spot.  Four  companies
nth  May,  of  burgher-guards  went  over  to  the  League  at  three
1588-  o'clock  in  the  morning.  The  rest  stood  firm  in  the
cemetery  of  the  Innocents,  awaiting  the  orders  of  the  King.
At  day-break  on  the  11th  the  town  was  still  quiet.  There
was  an  awful  pause  of  expectation.  The  shops  remained
closed  all  the  morning,  the  royal  troops  were  drawn  up  in
battle-array,  upon  the  Greve  and  around  the  Hotel  de  Ville,
but  they  stood  motionless  as  statues,  until  the  populace  began
taunting  them  with  cowardice,  and  then  laughing  them  to
scorn.  For  their  sovereign  lord  and  master  still  sat  paralyzed
in  his  palace.

1  ‘  L’Etoile, ’  248.

2  Ibid.

1588.  HE  IS  RECEIVED  WITH  ENTHUSIASM.  429

The  mob  had  been  surging  through  all  the  streets  and
lanes,  until,  as  by  a  single  impulse,  chains  were  stretched
across  the  streets,  and  barricades  thrown  up  in  all  the  prin¬
cipal  thoroughfares.  About  noon  the  Duke  of  Giuise,  who
had  been  sitting  quietly  in  his  hotel,  with  a  very  few  armed
followers,  came  out  into  the  street  of  the  Hotel  Montmorency,
and  walked  calmly  up  and  down,  arm-in-arm  with  the  Arch¬
bishop  of  Lyons,  between  a  double  hedge-row  of  spectators
and  admirers,  three  or  four  ranks  thick.  He  was  dressed  in
a  white  slashed  doublet  and  hose,  and  wore  a  very  large  hat.1
Shouts  of  triumph  resounded  from  a  thousand  brazen  throats,
as  he  moved  calmly  about,  receiving,  at  every  instant,  ex¬
presses  from  the  great  gathering  in  the  Place  Maubert.

“  Enough,  too  much,  my  good  friends/'  he  said,  taking  off
the  great  hat — (“  I  don't  know  whether  he  was  laughing  in  it,"
observed  one  who  was  looking  on  that  day) — “  Enough  of
f Long  liVe  Guise  !’  Cry  c Long  live  the  King  !'"  2

There  was  no  response,  as  might  be  expected,  and  the
people  shouted  more  hoarsely  than  ever  for  Madam  League
and  the  Balafre.  The  Duke's  face  was  full  of  gaiety  ;  there
was  not  a  shadow  of  anxiety  upon  it  in  that  perilous  and
eventful  moment.  He  saw  that  the  day  was  his  own.

For  now,  the  people,  ripe,  ready,  mustered,  armed,  barri¬
caded,  awaited  but  a  signal  to  assault  the  King’s  mercenaries,
before  rushing  to  the  palace.  On  every  house-top  missiles
were  provided  to  hurl  upon  their  heads.  There  seemed  no
escape  for  Henry  or  his  Germans  from  impending  doom,  when
Guise,  thoroughly  triumphant,  vouchsafed  them  their  lives.

“  You  must  give  me  these  soldiers  as  . a  present,  my  friends,"
said  he  to  the  populace.

And  so  the  armed  Swiss,  French,  and  German  troopers  and
infantry,  submitted  to  be  led  out  of  Paris,  following  with
docility  the  aide-de-camp  of  Guise,  Captain  St.  Paul,  who
walked  quietly  before  them,  with  his  sword  in  its  scabbard,
and  directing  their  movements  with  a  cane.  Sixty  of  them
were  slain  by  the  mob,  who  could  not,  even  at  the  command

i  ‘  L’Etoile,’  250.

2  Ibid.

430

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

of  their  beloved  chieftain,  quite  forego  their  expected  banquet.
But  this  was  all  the  blood  shed  on  the  memorable  day  of
Barricades,  when  another  Bartholomew  massacre  had  been
expected.1

Meantime,  while  Guise  was  making  his  promenade  through
the  city,  exchanging  embraces  with  the  rabble,  and  listening
to  the  coarse  congratulations  and  obscene  jests  of  the  porters
and  fishwomen,  the  poor  King  sat  crying  all  day  long  in
the  Louvre.  The  Queen-Mother  was  with  him,  reproaching
him  bitterly  with  his  irresolution  and  want  of  confidence  in
her,  and  scolding  him  for  his  tears.  But  the  unlucky  Henry
only  wept  the  more  as  he  cowered  in  a  corner.

u  These  are  idle  tears/'  said  Catharine.  u  This  is  no  time
for  crying.  And  for  myself,  though  women  weep  so  easily,  I
feel  my  heart  too  deeply  wrung  for  tears.  If  they  came  to
my  eyes  they  would  be  tears  of  blood." 2

Next  day  the  last  Yalois  walked  out  of  the  Louvre,  as  if
for  a  promenade  in  the  Tuileries,  and  proceeded  straightway
to  the  stalls,  where  his  horse  stood  saddled.  Du  Halde,  his
equerry,  buckled  his  master's  spurs  on,  upside  down.  “  No
matter,"  said  Henry,  “  I  am  not  riding  to  see  my  mistress.  I
have  a  longer  journey  before  me."  3

And  so,  followed  by  a  rabble  rout  of  courtiers,  without
boots  or  cloaks,  and  mounted  on  sorry  hacks — the  King  of
France  rode  forth  from  his  capital  post-haste,  and,  turning
as  he  left  the  gates,  hurled  back  impotent  imprecations  upon
Paris  and  its  mob.4  Thenceforth,  for  a  long  interval,  there
was  no  king  in  that  country.  Mucio  had  done  his  work,  and

1  ‘  L’Estoile.’  De  Thou,  257-261.
Herrera,  ubi  sup.

2  “La  Reyna  Madre  dizo  al  Rey
quan  mal  avisado  havia  sido  que-
xandosele  de  la  poca  confianga  que
tenia  de  ella,  y  que  nunca  la  haria
descubierto  sus  secretos,  ni  procurado
su  dano  para  executar  semejante  resolu-
cion  sin  su  parescer  y  esto  con  palabras

de  tanto  sentimiento  que  el  Rey  se

enternecio  llorando,  y  ella  le  dizo  ser

lagrimas  perdidas  aquellas,  por  no  ser

tiempo  de  llorar;  que  si  bien  las
mugeres  lo  hazian  tan  facilmente,  que
ella  tenia  tan  zerrado  el  pecho  que  no
podria  llorar,  y  que  si  la  viniessen  a
los  ojos  lagrimas,  serian  de  sangre.”
Relacion  de  lo  subcedido  a  Paris  desde
los  9  hasta  13  de  Mayo,  1588.  (Arch,
de  Sim.  [Paris.]  MS.)

3  ‘L’Estoile, 5  252.

4  L’Estoile,  De  Thou,  Herrera,  ubi
sup.  Pasquier,  vol.  ii.,  lettre  iv.,  331-

|  334  (ed.  1723).

1588.  THE  KING-  ELIES,  AND  SPAIN  TRIUMPHS  IN  PARIS.  431

earned  his  wages,  and  Philip  II.  reigned  in  Paris.  The  com¬
mands  of  the  League  were  now  complied  with.  Heretics
were  doomed  to  extermination.  The  edict  of  19th  19th  July,
July,  1588,  was  published  with  the  most  exclusive  1588>
and  stringent  provisions  that  the  most  bitter  Romanist  could
imagine,1  and,  as  a  fair  beginning,  two  young  girls,  daughters
of  Jacques  Forcade,  once  ‘procureur  au  parlement/  were
burned  in  Paris,  for  the  crime  of  Protestantism.2

The  Duke  of  Guise  was  named  Generalissimo  of  the  King¬
dom  (26th  August,  1588).  Henry  gave  in  his  submission  to
the  Council  of  Trent,  the  edicts,  the  Inquisition,  and  the  rest  of
the  League’s  infernal  machinery,  and  was  formally  reconciled
to  Guise,  with  how  much  sincerity  time  was  soon  to  show.3

Meantime  Philip,  for  whom  and  at  whose  expense  all  this
work  had  been  done  by  the  hands  of  the  faithful  Mucio,  was
constantly  assuring  his  royal  brother  of  France,  through
envoy  Longlee,  at  Madrid,  of  his  most  affectionate  friendship,
and  utterly  repudiating  all  knowledge  of  these  troublesome
and  dangerous  plots.  Yet  they  had  been  especially  organized
— as  we  have  seen — by  himself  and  the  Balafre,  in  order  that
France  might  be  kept  a  prey  to  civil  war,  and  thus  rendered
incapable  of  offering  any  obstruction  to  his  great  enterprise
against  England.  Any  complicity  of  Mendoza,  the  Spanish
ambassador  in  Paris,  or  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,  who  were  im¬
portant  agents  in  all  these  proceedings,  with  the  Duke  of
Guise,  was  strenuously  and  circumstantially  denied ;  and
the  Balafre,  on  the  day  of  the  barricades,  sent  Brissac  to
Elizabeth’s  envoy,  Sir  Edward  Stafford,  to  assure  him  as  to
his  personal  safety,  and  as  to  the  deep  affection  with  which
England  and  its  Queen  were  regarded  by  himself  and  all  his

1  The  King  bound  himself  by  oath
to  extirpate  heresy,  to  remove  all  per¬
sons  suspected  of  that  crime  from
office,  and  never  to  lay  down  arms  so
long  as  a  single  heretic  remained.  By
secret  articles,  two  armies  against  the
Huguenots  were  agreed  upon,  one  under
the  Duke  of  Mayenne,  the  other  under
some  general  to  be  appointed  by  the
King.  The  Council  of  Trent  was  forth¬
with  to  be  proclaimed,  and  by  a  re¬

finement  of  malice  the  League  stipu¬
lated  that  all  officers  appointed  in
Paris  by  the  Duke  of  Guise  on  the  day
after  the  barricades  should  resign
their  powers,  and  be  immediately  re¬
appointed  by  the  King  himself.  De
Thou,  x.  1.  86,  pp.  824-325.

2  Duplessis  Mornay,  iv.  246.
‘L’Estoile,’  258.

3  De  Thou,  ubi  sup.

432

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

friends.  Stafford  had  also  been  advised  to  accept  a  guard  for
his  house  of  embassy.  His  reply  was  noble.

“  I  represent  the  majesty  of  England/'  he  said,  “  and  can
take  no  safeguard  from  a  subject  of  the  sovereign  to  whom  I
am  accredited."

To  the  threat  of  being  invaded,  and  to  the  advice  to  close
his  gates,  he  answered,  cc  Do  you  see  these  two  doors  ?  Know
then,  if  I  am  attacked,  I  am  determined  to  defend  myself  to
the  last  drop  of  my  blood,  to  serve  as  an  example  to  the
universe  of  the  law  of  nations,  violated  in  my  person.  Do
not  imagine  that  I  shall  follow  your  advice.  The  gates  of
an  ambassador  shall  be  open  to  all  the  world."

Brissac  returned  with  this  answer  to  Guise,  who  saw  that  it
was  hopeless  to  attempt  making  a  display  in  the  eyes  of
Queen  Elizabeth,  but  gave  private  orders  that  the  ambas¬
sador  should  not  be  molested.1

Such  were  the  consequences  of  the  day  of  the  barricades —
and  thus  the  path  of  Philip  was  cleared  of  all  obstructions  on
the  part  of  France.  His  Mucio  was  now  generalissimo.
Henry  was  virtually  deposed.  Henry  of  Navarre,  poor  and
good-humoured  as  ever,  was  scarcely  so  formidable  at  that
moment  as  he  might  one  day  become.  When  the  news  of  the
day  of  barricades  was  brought  at  night  to  that  cheerful
monarch,  he  started  from  his  couch.  ee  Ha,"  he  exclaimed  with
a  laugh,  u  but  they  havn't  yet  caught  the  Bearnese  !  " 2

And  it  might  be  long  before  the  League  would  catch  the
Bearnese ;  but,  meantime,  he  could  render  slight  assistance
to  Queen  Elizabeth.

In  England  there  had  been  much  fruitless  negotiation  be¬
tween  the  government  of  that  country  and  the  commissioners
from  the  States-General.  There  was  perpetual  altercation  on
the  subject  of  Utrecht,  Leyden,  Sonoy,  and  the  other  causes  of
contention  ;  the  Queen — as  usual — being  imperious  and  cho¬
leric,  and  the  envoys,  in  her  opinion,  very  insolent.  But  the

1  De  Thou,  x.  264-266.  ‘Us  ne  tienment  encore  lo  Bearnois.’  ”

2  “  Etant  couclie  sur  son  lit  vert  il  ‘  L’Estoile,’  252.

se  leva,  et  tout  gaiment  dit  ces  mots:

1588.

STATES  EXPOSTULATE  WITH  THE  QUEEN.

433

principal  topic  of  discussion  was  the  peace-negotiations,  which
the  States-General,  both  at  home  and  through  their  delegation
in  England,  had  been  doing  their  best  to  prevent  ;  steadily  re¬
fusing  her  Majesty.’s  demand  that  commissioners,  on  their
part,  should  he  appointed  to  participate  in  the  conferences  at
Ostend.  Elizabeth  promised  that  there  should  he  as  strict
regard  paid  to  the  interests  of  Holland  as  to  those  of  England,
in  case  of  a  pacification,  and  that  she  would  never  forget  her
duty  to  them,  to  herself,  and  to  the  world,  as  the  protectress
of  the  reformed  religion.  The  dejmties,  on  the  other  hand,
warned  her  that  peace  with  Spain  was  impossible  ;  that  the
intention  of  the  Spanish  court  was  to  deceive  her,  while  pre¬
paring  her  destruction  and  theirs  ;  that  it  was  hopeless  to
attempt  the  concession  of  any  freedom  of  conscience  from
Philip  II.  ;  and  that  any  stipulations  which  might  he  made
upon  that,  or  any  other  subject,  by  the  Spanish  commis¬
sioners,  would  he  tossed  to  the  wind.  In  reply  to  the  Queen’s
loud  complaints  that  the  States  had  been  trifling  with  her,  and
undutiful  to  her,  and  that  they  had  kept  her  waiting  seven
months  long  for  an  answer  to  her  summons  to  participate  in
the  negotiations,  they  replied,  that  up  to  the  15th  October  of
the  previous  year,  although  there  had  been  flying  rumours  of
an  intention  on  the  part  of  her  Majesty’s  government  to
open  those  communications  with  the  enemy,  it  had,  “  never¬
theless  been  earnestly  and  expressly,  and  with  high  words
and  oaths,  denied  that  there  was  any  truth  in  those  rumours.”
Since  that  time  the  States  had  not  once  only,  but  many  times,
in  private  letters,  in  public  documents,  and  in  conversations
with  Lord  Leicester  and  other  eminent  personages,  depre¬
cated  any  communications  whatever  with  Spain,  asserting
uniformly  their  conviction  that  such  proceedings  would  bring
ruin  on  their  country,  and  imploring  her  Majesty  not  to  give
ear  to  any  propositions  whatever.1

And  not  only  were  the  envoys,  regularly  appointed  by  the
States-General,  most  active  in  England,  in  their  attempts  to

1  Bor,  III.  xxiv.  223.

YOL.  II. — 2  E

434

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

prevent  the  negotiations,  but  delegates  from  the  Nether-
land  churches  were  also  sent  to  the  Queen,  to  reason  with  her
on  the  subject,  and  to  utter  solemn  warnings  that  the  cause
of  the  reformed  religion  would  he  lost  for  ever,  in  case  of
a  treaty  on  her  part  with  Spain.  When  these  clerical
envoys  reached  England  the  Queen  was  already  beginning
to  wake  from  her  delusion  ;  although  her  commissioners  were
still — as  we  have  seen — hard  at  work,  pouring  sand  through
their  sieves  at  Ostend,  and  although  the  steady  protesta¬
tions  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,  and  the  industrious  circulation
of  falsehoods  by  Spanish  emissaries,  had  even  caused  her  wisest
statesmen,  for  a  time,  to  participate  in  that  delusion.

For  it  is  not  so  great  an  impeachment  on  the  sagacity  of
the  great  Queen  of  England,  as  it  would  now  appear  to  those
who  judge  by  the  light  of  subsequent  facts,  that  she  still
doubted  whether  the  armaments,  notoriously  preparing  in
Spain  and  Flanders,  were  intended  against  herself ;  and  that
— even  if  such  were  the  case — she  still  believed  in  the  pos¬
sibility  of  averting  the  danger  by  negotiation.

So  late  as  the  beginning  of  May,  even  the  far-seeing  and
anxious  Walsingham  could  say,  that  in  England  “  they  were
doing  nothing  but  honouring  St.  George,  of  whom  the  Spanish
Armada  seemed  to  be  afraid.  We  hear/’  he  added,  u  that
they  will  not  be  ready  to  set  forward  before  the  midst  of  May,
but  I  trust  that  it  ivill  he  May  come  tivelvemontlis .  The  King
of  Spain  is  too  old  and  too  sickly  to  fall  to  conquer  kingdoms.
If  he  be  well  counselled,  his  best  course  will  be  to  settle  his
own  kingdoms  in  his  own  hands/' 1

And  even  much  later,  in  the  middle  of  July — when  the
mask  was  hardly  maintained — even  then  there  was  no  cer¬
tainty  as  to  the  movements  of  the  Armada ;  and  Walsing¬
ham  believed,  just  ten  days  before  the  famous  fleet  was  to
appear  off  Plymouth,  that  it  had  dispersed  and  returned  to

Stowe,  “  it  was  said  by  some  of  honour¬
able  rank  and  great  judgment,  that
the  whole  fleet  of  the  invasion  was  a
Popish  brag  and  a  French  tale.”  750.

1  Walsingham  to  Sir  Ed.  Norris,
— — 1  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  May  ’  v  '

“By  the  middle  of  July,”  says

1588.

ENGLISH  STATESMEN  STILL  DECEIVED.

435

Spain,  never  to  re-appear.1  As  to  Parma’s  intentions,  they
were  thought  to  lie  rather  in  the  direction  of  Ostend  than  of
England  ;  and  Elizabeth,  on  the  20th  July,  was  more  anxious
for  that  city  than  for  her  own  kingdom.  u  Mr.  Ned,  I  am
persuaded,”  she  wrote  to  Norris,  u  that  if  the  Spanish  fleet
break,  the  Prince  of  Parma’s  enterprise  for  England  will  fall
to  the  ground,  and  then  are  you  to  look  to  Ostend.  Haste
your  works.” 2

All  through  the  spring  and  early  summer,  Stafford,  in
Paris,  was  kept  in  a  state  of  much  perplexity  as  to  the
designs  of  Spain — so  contradictory  were  the  stories  circulated,
and  so  bewildering  the  actions  of  men  known  to  he  hostile  to
England.  In  the  last  days  of  April  he  intimated  it  as  a  com¬
mon  opinion  in  Paris,  that  these  naval  preparations  of  Philip
were  an  elaborate  farce  ;  u  that  the  great  elephant  would  bring
forth  hut  a  mouse  ;  that  the  great  processions,  prayers,  and
pardons,  at  Rome,  for  the  prosperous  success  of  the  Armada
against  England,  would  he  of  no  effect ;  that  the  King  of
Spain  was  laughing  in  his  sleeve  at  the  Pope,  that  he  could
make  such  a  fool  of  him  ;  and  that  such  an  enterprise  was  a
thing  the  King  never  durst  think  of  in  deed,  hut  only  in  show
to  feed  the  world.”3

Thus,  although  furnished  with  minute  details  as  to  these
armaments,  and  as  to  the  exact  designs  of  Spain  against  his
country,  hy  the  ostentatious  statements  of  the  Spanish  ambas¬
sador  in  Paris  himself,  the  English  envoy  was  still  inclined  to
believe  that  these  statements  were  a  figment,  expressly  in¬
tended  to  deceive.  Yet  he  was  aware  that  Lord  Westmore¬
land,  Lord  Paget,  Sir  Charles  Paget,  Morgan,  and  other  English
refugees,  were  constantly  meeting  with  Mendoza,  that  they

to  return,  and  have  dispersed  them¬
selves.”  (! !)

2  Leicester  to  E.  Norris.  MS.  by

Queen  Elizabeth  (?)  —  July,  1588.
v  20

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Sir  E.  Stafford  to  Walsingham,

1 9

—  April,  1588.  (S.  P-  Office  MS.)

22

1  ‘Walsingham  to  E.  Norris,  -  July,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  And  for  the  navy  of  Spain,  we  have
lately  received  advertisements  that  by
reason  of  their  great  wants,  as  well  of
mariners,  as  of  necessary  provisions,
but  especially  through  the  infection
fahen  among  their  men,  they  are  forced

436

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

were  told  to  get  themselves  in  readiness,  and  to  go  down — as
well  appointed  as  might  he — to  the  Duke  of  Parma  ;  that  they
had  been  u  sending  for  their  tailor  to  make  them  apparel,  and
to  put  themselves  in  equipage;”  that,  in  particular,  West¬
moreland  had  been  assured  of  being  restored  by  Philip  to  his
native  country  in  better  condition  than  before.  The  Catholic
and  Spanish  party  in  Paris  were  however  much  dissatisfied
with  the  news  from  Scotland,  and  were  getting  more  and
more  afraid  that  King  James  would  object  to  the  Spaniards
getting  a  foot-hold  in  his  country,  and  that  u  the  Scots  would
soon  be  playing  them  a  Scottish  trick.”  1

Stafford  was  plunged  still  more  inextricably  into  doubt  by
the  accounts  from  Longlee  in  Madrid.2  The  diplomatist,
who  had  been  completely  convinced  by  Philip  as  to  his  inno¬
cence  of  any  participation  in  the  criminal  enterprise  of  Guise
against  Henry  III.,  was  now  almost  staggered  by  the  unscru¬
pulous  mendacity  of  that  monarch  with  regard  to  any  supposed
designs  against  England.  Although  the  Armada  was  to  be
ready  by  the  15th  May,  Longlee  was  of  opinion — notwith¬
standing  many  bold  announcements  of  an  attack  upon  Eliza¬
beth — that  the  real  object  of  the  expedition  was  America.
There  had  recently  been  discovered,  it  was  said,  u  a  new
country,  more  rich  in  gold  and  silver  than  any  yet  found,  but
so  full  of  stout  people  that  they  could  not  master  them.”  3
To  reduce  these  stout  people  beyond  the  Atlantic,  therefore,
and  to  get  possession  of  new  gold  mines,  was  the  real  object  at
which  Philip  was  driving,  and  Longlee  and  Stafford  were  both
very  doubtful  whether  it  were  worth  the  Queen's  while  to
exhaust  her  finances  in  order  to  protect  herself  against  an
imaginary  invasion.  Even  so  late  as  the  middle  of  July,  six  to
one  ivas  offered  on  the  Paris  exchange  that  the  Spanish  fleet
would  never  be  seen  in  the  English  seas,  and  those  that

1  Stafford  to  Walsingham,  — ^ — ’

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Depeches  de  Longlee  envoye  de

Henri  III.  en  Espagne,  Mars,  Avril,

Mai,  1588.  Fonds  St.  Germain.
Imp.  de  France,  MS.)

3  Stafford  to  Walsingham,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

(Bib.

24  April
»

4  May

1588.  DEPUTIES  EROM  NETHERLAND  CHURCHES,  437

offered  the  bets  were  known  to  be  well-wishers  to  the  Spanish
party.1

Thus  sharp  diplomatists  and  statesmen  like  Longlee,  Staf¬
ford,  and  Walsingham,  were  beginning  to  lose  their  fear  of
the  great  bugbear  by  which  England  had  so  long  been  haunted.
It  was  therefore  no  deep  stain  on  the  Queen's  sagacity  that
that  she,  too,  was  willing  to  place  credence  in  the  plighted
honour  of  Alexander  Farnese,  the  great  prince  who  prided
himself  on  his  sincerity,  and  who,  next  to  the  King  his
master,  adored  the  virgin  Queen  of  England.

The  deputies  of  the  Netherland  churches  had  come,  with
the  permission  of  Count  Maurice  and  of  the  States  General ;
but  they  represented  more  strongly  than  any  other  envoys
could  do,  the  English  and  the  monarchical  party.  They  were
instructed  especially  to  implore  the  Queen  to  accept  the  sove¬
reignty  of  their  country  ;  to  assure  her  that  the  restoration  of
Philip — who  had  been  a  wolf  instead  of  a  shepherd  to  his
flock — was  an  impossibility,  that  he  had  been  solemnly  and
for  ever  deposed,  that  under  her  sceptre  only  could  the  Pro¬
vinces  ever  recover  their  ancient  prosperity  ;  that  ancient  and
modern  history  alike  made  it  manifest  that  a  free  republic
could  never  maintain  itself,  but  that  it  must,  of  necessity,  run
its  course  through  sedition,  bloodshed,  and  anarchy,  until
liberty  was  at  last  crushed  by  an  absolute  despotism  ;  that
equality  of  condition,  the  basis  of  democratic  institutions,  could
never  be  made  firm  ;  and  that  a  fortunate  exception,  like  that
of  Switzerland,  whose  historical  and  political  circumstances
were  peculiar,  could  never  serve  as  a  model  to  the  Nether¬
lands,  accustomed  as  those  Provinces  had  ever  been  to  a
monarchical  form  of  government ;  and  that  the  antagonism
of  aristocratic  and  democratic  elements  in  the  States  had
already  produced  discord,  and  was  threatening  destruction
to  the  whole  country.  To  avert  such  dangers  the  splen¬
dour  of  royal  authority  was  necessary,  according  to  the
venerable  commands  of  Holy  Writ ;  and  therefore  the  Nether-

1  Stafford  to  Walsingham,  —  July,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

438

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

land  churches  acknowledged  themselves  the  foster-children
of  England,  and  begged  that  in  political  matters  also  the
inhabitants  of  the  Provinces  might  be  accepted  as  the  subjects
of  her  Majesty.  They  also  implored  the  Queen  to  break  off
these  accursed  negotiations  with  Spain,  and  to  provide  that
henceforth  in  the  Netherlands  the  reformed  religion  might  be
freely  exercised,  to  the  exclusion  of  any  other  ."" 1

Thus  it  was  very  evident  that  these  clerical  envoys,  although
they  were  sent  by  permission  of  the  States,  did  not  come
as  the  representatives  of  the  dominant  party.  For  that  ‘Beel¬
zebub/  Barneveld,  had  different  notions  from  theirs  as  to  the
possibility  of  a  republic,  and  as  to  the  propriety  of  tolerating
other  forms  of  worship  than  his  own.  But  it  was  for  such
pernicious  doctrines,  on  religious  matters  in  particular,  that  he
was  called  Beelzebub,  Pope  John,  a  papist  in  disguise,  and  an
atheist ;  and  denounced,  as  leading  young  Maurice  and  the
whole  country  to  destruction.

On  the  basis  of  these  instructions,  the  deputies  drew
up  a  memorial  of  pitiless  length,  filled  with  astounding

12  July,  parallels  between  their  own  position  and  that  of  the

1588,  Hebrews,  Assyrians,  and  other  distinguished  nations
of  antiquity.  They  brought  it  to  Walsingham  on  the  12th  July,  *
1588,  and  the  much-enduring  man  heard  it  read  from  beginning
to  end.  He  expressed  his  approbation  of  its  sentiments,  but
said  it  was  too  long.  It  must  be  put  on  one  sheet  of  paper,
he  said,  if  her  Majesty  was  expected  to  read  it.

“Moreover/"  said  the  Secretary  of  State,  “although  your
arguments  are  full  of  piety,  and  your  examples  from  Holy
Writ  very  apt,  I  must  tell  you  the  plain  truth.  Great  princes
are  not  always  so  zealous  in  religious  matters  as  they  might
be.  Political  transactions  move  them  more  deeply,  and  they
depend  too  much  on  worldly  things.  However  there  is  no
longer  much  danger,  for  our  envoys  will  return  from  Flanders
in  a  few  days/" 2 3

1  Instructions  from  the  Churches  of  the  Netherlands  for  the  Deputies  to

the  Queen  of  England,  apud  Bor,  III.  255-259.

3  ‘Report  of  the  Deputies,’  in  Bor,  III.  259.

1588.  HOLD  CONFERENCE  WITH  THE  QUEEN,  439

“  But/7  asked  a  deputy,  “  if  the  Spanish  fleet  does  not
succeed  in  its  enterprise,  will  the  peace-negotiations  he
renewed  ?”

“  By  no  means/7  said  Walsingham  ;  “the  Queen  can  never
do  that,  consistently  with  her  honour.  They  have  scattered
infamous  libels  against  her — so  scandalous,  that  you  would  be
astounded  should  you  read  them.  Arguments  drawn  from
honour  are  more  valid  with  princes  than  any  other.77

He  alluded  to  the  point  in  their  memorial  touching  the  free
exercise  of  the  reformed  religion  in  the  Provinces.

“  7Tis  well  and  piously  said/7  he  observed ;  “  but  princes  and
great  lords  are  not  always  very  earnest  in  such  matters.  I
think  that  her  Majesty's  envoys  will  not  press  for  the  free
exercise  of  the  religion  so  very  much  ;  not  more  than  for  two
or  three  years.  By  that  time — should  our  negotiations  suc¬
ceed — the  foreign  troops  will  have  evacuated  the  Netherlands
on  condition  that  the  States-General  shall  settle  the  religious
question.77 1

“  But/7  said  Daniel  de  Dieu,  one  of  the  deputies,  “  the
majority  of  the  States  is  Popish.”

“  Be  it  so/7  replied  Sir  Francis  ;  “  nevertheless  they  will
sooner  permit  the  exercise  of  the  reformed  religion  than  take
up  arms  and  begin  the  war  anew.77

He  then  alluded  to  the  proposition  of  the  deputies  to  exclude
all  religious  worship  but  that  of  the  reformed  church — all
false  religion — as  they  expressed  themselves.

“  Her  Majesty/7  said  he,  “  is  well  disposed  to  permit  some
exercise  of  their  religion  to  the  Papists.  So  far  as  regards  my
own  feelings,  if  we  were  now  in  the  beginning  of  the  reforma¬
tion,  and  the  papacy  were  still  entire,  I  should  willingly  con¬
cede  such  exercise  ;  but  'now  that  the  Papacy  has  been  over¬
thrown,  I  think  it  would  not  be  safe  to  give  such  permission.
When  we  were  disputing,  at  the  time  of  the  pacification  of
Ghent,  whether  the  Popish  religion  ‘should  be  partially  per¬
mitted,  the  Prince  of  Orange  was  of  the  affirmative  opinion  \

1  ‘  Report  of  the  Deputies,’  in  Bor,  last  cited.

440

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

but  I,  who  was  then  at  Antwerp,  entertained  the  contrary
conviction/'

u  But/'  said  one  of  the  deputies — pleased  to  find  that  Wal-
singham  was  more  of  their  way  of  thinking  on  religious  tolera¬
tion  than  the  great  Prince  of  Orange  had  been,  or  than
Maurice  and  Barneveld  then  were — “but  her  Majesty  will,
we  hope,  follow  the  advice  of  her  good  and  faithful  coun¬
sellors."

“  To  tell  you  the  truth,"  answered  Sir  Francis,  “  great
princes  are  not  always  inspired  with  a  sincere  and  upright
zeal — it  was  the  third  time  he  had  made  this  observation —
“  although,  so  far  as  regards  the  maintenance  of  the  religion
in  the  Netherlands,  that  is  a  matter  of  necessity.  Of  that
there  is  no  fear,  since  otherwise  all  the  pious  would  depart,
and  none  would  remain  but  Papists,  and,  what  is  more,
enemies  of  England.  Therefore  the  Queen  is  aware  that  the
religion  must  be  maintained." 1

He  then  advised  the  deputies  to  hand  in  the  memorial  to
her  Majesty,  without  any  long  speeches,  for  which  there  was
then  no  time  or  opportunity ;  and  it  was  subsequently
arranged  that  they  should  be  presented  to  the  Queen  as  she
would  be  mounting  her  horse  at  St.  James's  to  ride  to  Bich-
mond.

Accordingly  on  the  15th  July,  as  her  Majesty  came  forth
at  the  gate,  with  a  throng  of  nobles  and  ladies — some  about
15  July,  to  accompany  her  and  some  bidding  her  adieu — the

1588-  deputies  fell  on  their  knees  before  her.  Notwith¬
standing  the  advice  of  Walsingham,  Daniel  de  Dieu  was  bent
upon  an  oration.

“  Oh  illustrious  Queen  !"  he  began,  “  the  churches  of  the
United  Netherlands - "

He  had  got  no  further,  when  the  Queen,  interrupting,  ex¬
claimed,  “  Oh  !  I  beg  you — at  another  time — I  cannot  now
listen  to  a  speech.  Let  me  see  the  memorial."

Daniel  de  Dieu  then  humbly  presented  that  document,

1  ‘  Report  of  the  Deputies.’  Bor,  ubi  sup.

1588.  AND  PRESENT  LONG  MEMORIALS.  441

which  her  Majesty  graciously  received,  and  then,  getting  on
horseback^  rode  off  to  Kichmond.1

The  memorial  was  in  the  nature  of  an  exhortation  to  sustain
the  religion,  and  to  keep  clear  of  all  negotiations  with  idolaters
and  unbelievers  ;  and  the  memorialists  supported  themselves
by  copious  references  to  Deuteronomy,  Proverbs,  Isaiah,
Timothy,  and  Psalms,  relying  mainly  on  the  case  of  Jeliosa-
phat,  who  came  to  disgrace  and  disaster  through  his  treaty
with  the  idolatrous  King  Ahab.  With  regard  to  any  compo¬
sition  with  Spain,  they  observed,  in  homely  language,  that  a
burnt  cat  fears  the  fire  ;  and  they  assured  the  Queen  that,  by
following  their  advice,  she  would  gain  a  glorious  and  immortal
name,  like  those  of  David,  Ezekiel,  Josiah,  and  others,  whose
fragrant  memory,  even  as  precious  incense  from  the  apothe¬
cary's,  endureth  to  the  end  of  the  world.2

It  was  not  surprising  that  Elizabeth,  getting  on  horseback
on  the  15th  J uly,  1588,  with  her  head  full  of  Tilbury  Fort  and
Medina  Sidonia,  should  have  as  little  relish  for  the  affairs  of
Ahab  and  J ehosophat,  as  for  those  melting  speeches  of  Dio¬
mede  and  of  Turnus,  to  which  Dr.  Valentine  Dale  on  his  part
was  at  that  moment  invoking  her  attention.

On  the  20th  July,  the  deputies  were  informed  by  Leicester
that  her  Majesty  would  grant  them  an  interview,  juiy  20,
and  that  they  must  come  into  his  quarter  of  the  15S8>
palace  and  await  her  arrival.

Between  six  and  seven  in  the  evening  she  came  into  the
throne-room,  and  the  deputies  again  fell  on  their  knees  before
her.3

She  then  seated  herself — the  deputies  remaining  on  their
knees  on  her  right  side  and  the  Earl  of  Leicester  standing  at
her  left — and  proceeded  to  make  many  remarks  touching  her
earnestness  in  the  pending  negotiations  to  provide  for  their
religious  freedom.  It  seemed  that  she  must  have  received  a
hint  from  Walsingham  on  the  subject.

1  ‘Report  of  the  Deputies,’  259,

260-262.

3  ‘  Memorial  from  the  United

Churches,’  &c.,  apud  Bor,  III.  260-
262,  seq.

3  Bor,  III.  262,  263.

442

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

“I  shall  provide/'  she  said,  “for  the  maintenance  of 'the
reformed  worship."

De  Dieu. — “  The  enemy  will  never  concede  it."

The  Queen. — “  I  think  differently."

De  Dieu. — “  There  is  no  place  within  his  dominions  where
he  has  permitted  the  exercise  of  the  pure  religion.  He  has
never  done  so."

The  Queen. — “  He  conceded  it  in  the  pacification  of  Ghent."

De  Dieu. — “  But  he  did  not  keep  his  agreement.  Don
John  had  concluded  with  the  States,  but  said  he  was  not  held
to  his  promise,  in  case  he  should  repent ;  and  the  King  wrote
afterwards  to  our  States,  and  said  that  he  was  no  longer  bound
to  his  pledge."

The  Queen. — “  That  is  quite  another  thing."

De  Dieu. — “  He  has  very  often  broken  his  faith."

The  Queen. — “  He  shall  no  longer  be  allowed  to  do  so.  If
he  does  not  keep  his  word,  that  is  my  affair,  not  yours.  It  is
my  business  to  find  the  remedy.  Men  would  say,  see  in  what
a  desolation  the  Queen  of  England  has  brought  this  poor
people.  As  to  the  freedom  of  worship,  I  should  have  proposed
three  or  four  year’s  interval — leaving  it  afterwards  to  the
decision  of  the  States."

De  Dieu. — “  But  the  majority  of  the  States  is  Popish."

The  Queen. — “  I  mean  the  States-General,  not  the  States  of
any  particular  Province."

De  Dieu. — “  The  greater  part  of  the  States-General  is
Popish."

The  Queen. — “I  mean  the  three  estates — the  clergy,  the
nobles,  and  the  cities."  The  Queen — as  the  deputies  observed
— here  fell  into  an  error.  She  thought  that  prelates  of  the
reformed  Church,  as  in  England,  had  seats  in  the  States-
General.  Daniel  de  Dieu  explained  that  they  had  no  such
position.

The  Queen. — “  Then  how  were  you  sent  hither  ?"

De  Dieu. — “We  came  with  the  consent  of  Count  Maurice
of  Nassau."

The  Queen. — “And  of  the  States  ?"

1588.  MORE  CONVERSATIONS  WITH  THE  QUEEN.  443

De  Dieu. — “We  came  with  their  knowledge/'

The  Queen. — “  Are  you  sent  only  from  Holland  and  Zee-
land  ?  Is  there  no  envoy  from  Utrecht  and  the  other  Pro¬
vinces  ?  "

Helmichius. — “We  two/'  pointing  to  his  colleague  Sos-
singius,  “  are  from  Utrecht."

The  Queen. — “  What  P  Is  this  young  man  also  a  minister  ?  "
She  meant  Helmichius,  who  had  a  very  little  heard,  and  looked
young.

Sossingius. — “  He  is  not  so  young  as  he  looks."

The  Queen. — “  Youths  are  sometimes  as  able  as  old  men."

He  Dieu. — “  I  have  heard  our  brother  preach  in  France
more  than  fourteen  years  ago."

The  Queen. — “  He  must  have  begun  young.  How  old  were
you  when  you  first  became  a  preacher  ?  "

Helmichius.— “  Twenty-three  or  twenty-four  years  of  age."

The  Queen. — “  It  was  with  us,  at  first,  considered  a  scandal
that  a  man  so  young  as  that  should  he  admitted  to  the  pulpit.
Our  antagonists  reproached  us  with  it  in  a  hook,  called  e  Scan-
dale  de  l'Angleterre,'  saying  that  we  had  none  hut  school-hoys
for  ministers.  I  understand  that  you  pray  for  me  as  warmly
as  if  I  were  your  sovereign  princess.  I  think  I  have  done  as
much  for  the  religion  as  if  I  were  your  Queen."

Helmichius. — “We  are  far  from  thinking  otherwise.  We
acknowledge  willingly  your  Majesty's  benefits  to  our  churches."

The  Queen. — “  It  would  else  he  ingratitude  on  your  part."

Helmichius. — “  But  the  King  of  Spain  will  never  keep  any
promise  about  the  religion."

The  Queen. — “  He  will  never  come  so  far  :  he  does  nothing
hut  make  a  noise  on  all  sides.  Item,  I  don't  think  he  has
much  confidence  in  himself."

De  Dieu. — “  Your  Majesty  has  many  enemies.  The  Lord
hath  hitherto  supported  you,  and  we  pray  that  he  may  continue
to  uphold  your  Majesty."

The  Queen. — “  I  have  indeed  many  enemies  ;  hut  I  make
no  great  account  of  them.  Is  there  anything  else  you  seek  ?  "

De  Dieu. — “  There  is  a  special  point :  it  concerns  our,  or

444

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII.

rather  your  Majesty's,  city  of  Flushing.  We  hope  that  Rus-
selius — (so  he  called  Sir  William  Russell) — may  be  continued
in  its  government,  although  he  wishes  his  discharge."

“  Aha  !"  said  the  Queen,  laughing  and  rising  from  her  seat,
“I  shall  not  answer  you  ;  I  shall  call  some  one  else  to  answer
you."

She  then  summoned  Russell's  sister,  Lady  Warwick.

u  If  you  could  speak  French,"  said  the  Queen  to  that  gentle¬
woman,  ec  I  should  bid  you  reply  to  these  gentlemen,  who  beg
that  your  brother  may  remain  in  Flushing,  so  very  agree¬
able  has  he  made  himself  to  them."

The  Queen  was  pleased  to  hear  this  good  opinion  of  Sir
William,  and  this  request  that  he  might  continue  to  be  governor
of  Flushing,  because  he  had  uniformly  supported  the  Leicester
party,  and  was  at  that  moment  in  high  quarrel  with  Count
Maurice  and  the  leading  members  of  the  States.

As  the  deputies  took  their  leave,  they  requested  an  answer
to  their  memorial,  which  was  graciously  promised.1

Three  days  afterwards,  23rd  July,  Walsingham  gave  them
a  written  answer  to  their  memorial — conceived  in  the  same
23  July,  sense  as  had  been  the  expressions  of  her  Majesty

1588-  and  her  counsellors.  Support  to  the  Netherlands
and  stipulations  for  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion  were
promised  ;  but  it  was  impossible  for  these  deputies  of  the
churches  to  obtain  a  guarantee  from  England  that  the  Popish
religion  should  be  excluded  from  the  Provinces,  in  case  of  a
successful  issue  to  the  Queen's  negotiation  with  Spain.2

And  thus  during  all  those  eventful  days — the  last  weeks  of
July  and  the  first  iveeks  of  August — the  clerical  deputation
remained  in  England,  indulging  in  voluminous  protocols  and
lengthened  conversations  with  the  Queen  and  the  principal
members  of  her  government.  It  is  astonishing,  in  that
breathless  interval  of  history,  that  so  much  time  could  be
found  for  quill-driving  and  oratory.

Nevertheless,  both  in  Holland  and  England,  there  had  been

1  1  Report  of  the  Deputies  of  the  Netherland  Churches,’  in  Bor,  III.  262,  seg.

3  ‘  Report,’  &c.  ubi  sup.

1588.  NATIONAL  SPIRIT  OF  ENGLAND  AND  HOLLAND.  445

other  work  than  protocolling.  One  throb  of  patriotism  moved
the  breast  of  both  nations.  A  longing  to  grapple,  once  for
all,  with  the  great  enemy  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  in¬
spired  both.  In  Holland,  the  States-G-eneral  and  all  the  men
to  whom  the  people  looked  for  guidance,  had  been  long
deprecating  the  peace-negotiations.  Extraordinary  supplies —
more  than  had  ever  been  granted  before — were  voted  for  the
expenses  of  the  campaign ;  and  Maurice  of  Nassau,  fitly  em¬
bodying  the  warlike  tendencies  of  his  country  and  race,  had
been  most  importunate  with  Queen  Elizabeth  that  she  would
accept  his  services  and  his  advice.1  Armed  vessels  of  every
size,  from  the  gun-boat  to  the  galleon  of  1200  tons — then
the  most  imposing  ship  in  those  waters — swarmed  in  all  the
estuaries  and  rivers,  and  along  the  Dutch  and  Flemish  coast,
bidding  defiance  to  Parma  and  his  armaments ;  and  offers
of  a  large  contingent  from  the  fleets  of  Joost  de  Moor  and
Justinus  de  Nassau,  to  serve  under  Seymour  and  Howard,
were  freely -made  by  the  States-General.

It  was  decided  early  in  July,  by  the  board  of  admiralty,  pre¬
sided  over  by  Prince  Maurice,  that  the  largest  square-rigged
vessels  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  should  cruise  between  England
and  the  Flemish  coast,  outside  the  banks  ;  that  a  squadron
of  lesser  ships  should  be  stationed  within  the  banks  ;  and  that
a  fleet  of  sloops  and  fly-boats  should  hover  close  in  shore,
about  Flushing  and  Rammekens.  All  the  war-vessels  of  the
little  republic  were  thus  fully  employed.  But,  besides  this
arrangement,  Maurice  was  empowered  to  lay  an  embargo —
under  what  penalty  he  chose  and  during  his  pleasure — on  all
square-rigged  vessels  over  300  tons,  in  order  that  there  might
be  an  additional  supply  in  case  of  need.  Ninety  ships  of  war
under  Warmond,  admiral,  and  Van  der  Does,  vice-admiral  of
Holland ;  and  Justinus  de  Nassau,  admiral,  and  Joost  de  Moor,
vice-admiral  of  Zeeland  ;  together  with  fifty  merchant- vessels
of  the  best  and  strongest,  equipped  and  armed  for  active
service,  composed  a  formidable  fleet,2

1  Bor,  III.  318,  319.

2  So  soon  as  the  Sonoy  difficulty

by  which  so  much  mischief  had  been
created  should  be  terminated,  Maurice

446

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

The  States-Greneral,  a  month  before,  had  sent  twenty-five
or  thirty  good  ships,  under  Admiral  Rosendael,  to  join  Lord
Henry  Seymour,  then  cruising  between  Dover  and  Calais.
A  tempest  drove  them  back,  and  their  absence  from  Lord
Henry’s  fleet  being  misinterpreted  by  the  English,  the  States
were  censured  for  ingratitude  and  want  of  good  faith.  But
the  injustice  of  the  accusation  was  soon  made  manifest,  for
these  vessels,  reinforcing  the  great  Dutch  fleet  outside  the
banks,  did  better  service  than  they  could  have  done  in  the
straits.  A  squadron  of  strong  well-armed  vessels,  having  on
board,  in  addition  to  their  regular  equipment,  a  picked  force
of  twelve  hundred  musketeers,  long  accustomed  to  this  pecu¬
liar  kind  of  naval  warfare,  with  crews  of  grim  Zeelanders,
who  had  faced  Alva  and  Valdez  in  their  day,  now  kept  close
watch  over  Farnese,  determined  that  he  should  never  thrust
his  face  out  of  any  haven  or  nook  on  the  coast  so  long  as  they
should  be  in  existence  to  prevent  him.1

And  in  England  the  protracted  diplomacy  at  Ostend,  ill-
timed  though  it  was,  had  not  paralyzed  the  arm  or  chilled
the  heart  of  the  nation.  When  the  great  Queen,  arousing
herself  from  the  delusion  in  which  the  falsehoods  of  Farnese
and  of  Philip  had  lulled  her,  should  once  more  represent— as
no  man  or  woman  better  than  Elizabeth  Tudor  could  repre¬
sent — the  defiance  of  England  to  foreign  insolence ;  the  resolve
of  a  whole  people  to  die  rather  than  yield  ;  there  was  a  thrill
of  joy  through  the  national  heart.  Wrhen  the  enforced
restraint  was  at  last  taken  off,  there  was  one  bound  towards
the  enemy.  Few  more  magnificent  spectacles  have  been
seen  in  history  than  the  enthusiasm  which  pervaded  the

announced  his  intention  to  the  Queen,
u  a  combattre  l’ennemi  par  mer  et
par  terre,  pour  l’empecher  qu’  il  ne
prenne  terre.”  “Je  supplie  V.  M.,”
he  continued,  “de  commander  a  M.
l’admiral  Howard  de  tenir  corre-
spon dance  avec  moi,  comme  aussi  je
ferai  avec  Sa  Seignie.”  Maurice  de

20

Nassau  to  the  Queen,  —  April,  1588.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  Ne  pouvant,  pour  mon  devoir

vous  celer  qu’un  des  plus  grands
empechements  que  je  trouve  en  nos
affaires  de  pardera  est  cette  negotiation
de  paix  qui  engendre  de  telles  con¬
fusions  que  les  forces  ne  peuvent  etro
employees  par  mer  et  par  terre  si  tot
et  si  bien  que  je  desirerai.  Je  ferai
toute  fois  toute  diligence  d’etre  prest
assez  a  temps  pour  rompre  les  des-
seins  du  Due  de  Parma,”  &c.  Same  to
same,  same  date.

1  Bor,  III.  ssiii.  819-321.

1588.  DISSATISFACTION  WITH  QUEEN’S  COURSE.  447

country  as  the  great  danger,  so  long  deferred,  was  felt  at  last
to  be  closely  approaching.  The  little  nation  of  four  millions,
the  merry  England  of  the  sixteenth  century,  went  forward  to
the  death-grapple  with  its  gigantic  antagonist  as  cheerfully  as
to  a  long-expected  holiday.  Spain  was  a  vast  empire,  over¬
shadowing  the  world  ;  England,  in  comparison,  but  a  pro¬
vince  ;  yet  nothing  could  surpass  the  steadiness  with  which
the  conflict  was  awaited.

For,  during  all  the  months  of  suspense,  the  soldiers  and
sailors,  and  many  statesmen  of  England,  had  deprecated,
even  as  the  Hollanders  had  been  doing,  the  dangerous  delays
of  Ostend.  Elizabeth  was  not  embodying  the  national  in¬
stinct,  when  she  talked  of  peace,  and  shrank  penuriously  from
the  expenses  of  war.  There  was  much  disappointment,  even
indignation,  at  the  slothfulness  with  which  the  preparations
for  defence  went  on,  during  the  period  when  there  was  yet
time  to  make  them.  It  was  feared  with  justice  that  Eng¬
land,  utterly  unfortified  as  were  its  cities,  and  defended  only
by  its  little  navy  without,  and  by  untaught  enthusiasm
within,  might,  after  all,  prove  an  easier  conquest  than  Hol¬
land  and  Zeeland,  every  town  in  whose  territory  bristled  with
fortifications.  If  the  English  ships — well-trained  and  swift
sailors  as  they  were — were  unprovided  with  spars  and  cord¬
age,  beef  and  biscuit,  powder  and  shot,  and  the  militia-men,
however  enthusiastic,  were  neither  drilled  nor  armed,  was  it
so  very  certain,  after  all,  that  successful  resistance  would  be
made  to  the  great  Armada,  and  to  the  veteran  pikemen  and
musketeers  of  Farnese,  seasoned  on  a  hundred  battle-fields,
and  equipped  as  for  a  tournament  P  There  was  generous  con¬
fidence  and  chivalrous  loyalty  on  the  part  of  Elizabeth's
naval  and  military  commanders  ;  but  there  had  been  deep
regret  and  disappointment  at  her  course.

Hawkins  was  anxious,  all  through  the  winter  and  spring,  to
cruise  with  a  small  squadron  off  the  coast  of  Spain.  With  a
dozen  vessels  he  undertook  to  “  distress  anything  that  went
through  the  seas."  The  cost  of  such  a  squadron,  with  eighteen
hundred  men,  to  be  relieved  every  four  months,  he  estimated  at

448

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

two  thousand  seven  hundred  pounds  sterling  the  month,  or  a
shilling  a  day  for  each  man  ;  and  it  would  be  a  very  unlucky
month,  he  said,  in  which  they  did  not  make  captures  to  three
times  that  amount ;  for  they  would  see  nothing  that  would
not  he  presently  their  own.  “We  might  have  peace,  but  not
with  God,”  said  the  pious  old  slave-trader  ;  “  but  rather  than
serve  Baal,  let  us  die  a  thousand  deaths.  Let  us  have  open
war  with  these  Jesuits,  and  every  man  will  contribute,  fight,
devise,  or  do,  for  the  liberty  of  our  country.”  1

And  it  was  open  war  with  the  Jesuits  for  which  those  stout¬
hearted  sailors  longed.  All  were  afraid  of  secret  mischief.
The  diplomatists  • —  who  were  known  to  be  flitting  about
France,  Flanders,  Scotland,  and  England — were  birds  of  ill
omen.  King  J ames  was  beset  by  a  thousand  bribes  and  ex¬
postulations  to  avenge  his  mother’s  death  ;  and  although  that
mother  had  murdered  his  father,  and  done  her  best  to  dis¬
inherit  himself,  yet  it  was  feared  that  Spanish  ducats  might
induce  him  to  be  true  to  his  mother’s  revenge,  and  false  to
the  reformed  religion.2  Nothing  of  good  was  hoped  for  from
France.  “  For  my  part,”  said  Lord  Admiral  Howard,  “  I
have  made  of  the  French  King,  the  Scottish  King,  and  the
King  of  Spain,  a  trinity  that  I  mean  never  to  trust  to  be
saved  by,  and  I  would  that  others  were  of  my  opinion.” 3

The  noble  sailor,  on  whom  so  much  responsibility  rested,
yet  who  was  so  trammelled  and  thwarted  by  the  timid  and
parsimonious  policy  of  Elizabeth  and  of  Burghley,  chafed  and
shook  his  chains  like  a  captive.  “  Since  England  was  Eng¬
land,”  he  exclaimed,  u  there  was  never  such  a  stratagem  and
mask  to  deceive  her  as  this  treaty  of  peace.  I  pray  God  that

1  Hawkins  to  Walsingliam,  —  Eeb.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  En  bora  buena  ayen  llegado  el
Conde  de  Morton  y  Coronel  Semple,”
says  Philip,  speaking  of  one  of  the
hundred  attempts  of  the  Scotch  Ca¬
tholics  employed  by  him  to  bring
about  a  co-operation  on  the  part  of
James  with  the  Spanish  designs  upon
England,  “aunque  segun  los  avisos

que  embiastes  de  Inglatierra  menos

frutos  haran  que  se  prometian,  pues
tienen  hereses  al  Rey  tan  de  su
mano.  Pero  bien  es  que  hagaos  las
diligencias  que  se  pueden,  tentando
si  la  sangre  de  su  madre  le  estimola
a  la  venganga,”  &c.  Philip  II.  to
Mendoza,  21  June,  1588.  (Arch,  do
Simancas  [in  the  Arch,  de  l'Empire,
at  Paris],  MS.)

.  27  Jan.

3  Howard  to  Walsmgnam,  -

6  Feb.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.

BITTER  COMPLAINTS  OF  LORD  HOWARD.

449

we  do  not  curse  for  this  a  long  grey  beard  with  a  white  head
witless,  that  will  make  all  the  world  think  us  heartless.  You
know  whom  I  mean/' 1  And  it  certainly  was  not  difficult  to
understand  the  allusion  to  the  pondering  Lord- Treasurer. —
“  Opus  est  aliquo  Dcedalo,  to  direct  us  out  of  the  maze/' 2  said
that  much  puzzled  statesman  ;  but  he  hardly  seemed  to  be
making  himself  wings  with  which  to  lift  England  and  himself
out  of  the  labyrinth.  The  ships  were  good  ships,  but  there
was  intolerable  delay  in  getting  a  sufficient  number  of  them,
as  ready  for  action  as  was  the  spirit  of  their  commanders.

u  Our  ships  do  show  like  gallants  here,"  said  Winter  ;  “  it
would  do  a  man's  heart  good  to  behold  them.  W ould  to  God
the  Prince  of  Parma  were  on  the  seas  with  all  his  forces,  and
we  in  sight  of  them.  You  should  hear  that  we  would  make
his  enterprise  very  unpleasant  to  him." 3

And  Howard,  too,  was  delighted  not  only  with  his  own  little
flag-ship  the  Ark-Royal — cc  the  odd  ship  of  the  world  for  all
conditions," — but  with  all  of  his  fleet  that  could  be  mustered.
Although  wonders  were  reported,  by  every  arrival  from  the
south,  of  the  coming  Armada,  the  Lord- Admiral  was  not  ap¬
palled.  He  was  perhaps  rather  imprudent  in  the  defiance  he
flung  to  the  enemy.  “  Let  me  have  the  four  great  ships  and
twenty  hoys,  with  but  twenty  men  a-piece,  and  each  with  but
two  iron  pieces,  and  her  Majesty  shall  have  a  good  account
of  the  Spanish  forces  ;  and  I  will  make  the  King  wish  his
galleys  home  again.  Few  as  we  are,  if  his  forces  be  not  hun¬
dreds,  we  will  make  good  sport  with  them."  4

But  those  four  great  ships  of  her  Majesty,  so  much  longed
for  by  Howard,  were  not  forthcoming.  He  complained  that
the  Queen  was  “  keeping  them  to  protect  Chatham  Church
withal,  when  they  should  be  serving  their  turn  abroad."6
The  Spanish  fleet  was  already  reported  as  numbering  from
210  sail,  with  36,000  men,6  to  400  or  500  ships,  and  80,000

Howard  to  Walsingham,  MS.  last

cited.

2  Burghley  to  Willoughby,  —  Feb.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Sir  Will.  Winter  to

28  Feb.

- ,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

9  Mar.  v

vol.  ii. — 2  G

Hawkins,

29  Feb.

4  Howard  to  Burghley,  - ,  1588.

°  10  Mar.

11

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

5  Howard  to  Walsingham,  —  March,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Ibid.

450

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XYIII

soldiers  and  mariners  /  and  yet  Drake  was  not  ready  with
his  squadron.  “The  fault  is  not  in  him/'  said  Howard,  “  hut
I  pray  God  her  Majesty  do  not  repent  her  slack  dealing.  We
must  all  lie  together,  for  we  shall  he  stirred  very  shortly  with
heave  ho  !  I  fear  ere  long  her  Majesty  will  he  sorry  she  hath
believed  some  so  much  as  she  hath  done."  2

Howard  had  got  to  sea,  and  was  cruising  all  the  stormy
month  of  March  in  the  Channel  with  his  little  unprepared
squadron,  expecting  at  any  moment — such  was  the  profound
darkness  which  enveloped  the  world  at  that  day — that  the
sails  of  the  Armada  might  appear  in  the  offing.  He  made  a
visit  to  the  Dutch  coast,  and  was  delighted  with  the  enthu¬
siasm  with  which  he  was  received.  Five  thousand  people  a
day  came  on  hoard  his  ships,  full  of  congratulation  and
delight ;  and  he  informed  the  Queen  that  she  was  not  more
assured  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey  than  of  Walcheren.3

Nevertheless  time  wore  on,  and  hoth  the  army  and  navy  of
England  were  quite  unprepared,  and  the  Queen  was  more
reluctant  than  ever  to  incur  the  expense  necessary  to  the
defence  of  her  kingdom.  At  least  one  of  those  galleys,  which,
as  Howard  bitterly  complained,  seemed  destined  to  defend
Chatham  Church,  was  importunately  demanded  ;  hut  it  was
already  Easter-Day  (17tli  April),  and  she  was  demanded  in
vain.  “  Lord  !  when  should  she  serve,"  said  the  Admiral,  “if
not  at  such  a  time  as  this  ?  Either  she  is  fit  now  to  serve,  or
fit  for  the  fire.  I  hope  never  in  my  time  to  see  so  great  a
cause  for  her  to  he  used.  I  dare  say  her  Majesty  will  look
that  men  should  fight  for  her,  and  I  know  they  will  at  this
time.  The  King  of  Spain  doth  not  keep  any  ship  at  home,
either  of  his  own  or  any  other,  that  he  can  get  for  money.
Well,  well,  I  must  pray  heartily  for  peace,"  said  Howard  with
increasing  spleen,  “for  I  see  the  support  of  an  honourable
war  will  never  appear.  Sparing  and  war  have  no  affinity
together." 4

28  April

1  Drake  to  the  Queen, - ,  1588.

7  8  May  7

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

11

2  Howard  to  ’Walsingham,  —  March,

21  7

1588,  MS.

3  Howard  to  "Walsingham,  —  March,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Same  to  same,  —  April,  1588.
S.  P.  Office  (MS.)

1588.  WANT  OP  PREPARATION  IN  ARMY  AND  NAVY.  451

In  truth  Elizabeth’s  most  faithful  subjects  were  appalled  at
the  ruin  which  she  seemed  by  her  mistaken  policy  to  he  ren¬
dering  inevitable.  “  I  am  sorry/’  said  the  Admiral,  u  that
her  Majesty  is  so  careless  of  this  most  dangerous  time.  I
fear  me  much,  and  with  grief  I  think  it,  that  she  relieth  on  a
hope  that  will  deceive  her,  and  greatly  endanger  her,  and
then  it  will  not  he  her  money  nor  her  jewels  that  will  help  ;
for  as  they  will  do  good  in  time,  so  they  will  help  nothing  for
the  redeeming  of  time.”  1

The  preparations  on  shore  were  even  more  dilatory  than
those  on  the  sea.  We  have  seen  that  the  Duke  of  Parma,
once  landed,  expected  to  march  directly  upon  London  ;  and  it
was  notorious  that  there  were  no  fortresses  to  oppose  a  march
of  the  first  general  in  Europe  and  his  veterans  upon  that
unprotected  and  wealthy  metropolis.  An  army  had  been
enrolled — a  force  of  86,016  foot,  and  13,831  cavalry  ;  hut  it
was  an  army  on  paper  merely.  Even  of  the  86,000,  only
48,000  were  set  down  as  trained  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  the
training  had  been  of  the  most  meagre  and  unsatisfactory
description.2  Leicester  was  to  he  commander-in-chief ;  hut
we  have  already  seen  that  nobleman  measuring  himself,  not
much  to  his  advantage,  with  Alexander  Farnese,  in  the  Isle
of  Bommel,  on  the  sands  of  Blankenburg,  and  at  the  gates
of  Sluys.  His  army  was  to  consist  of  27,000  infantry,  and
2000  horse  ;  yet  at  midsummer  it  had  not  reached  half  that
number.  Lord  Chamberlain  Hunsdon  was  to  protect  the
Queen’s  person  with  another  army  of  36,000  ;  hut  this  force
was  purely  an  imaginary  one  ;  and  the  lord-lieutenant  of  each
county  was  to  do  his  best  with  the  militia.  But  men  were
perpetually  escaping  out  of  the  general  service,  in  order  to
make  themselves  retainers  for  private  noblemen,  and  he  kept
at  their  expense.  “You  shall  hardly  believe,”  said  Leicester,
ahow  many  new  liveries  he  gotten  within  these  six  weeks,
and  no  man  fears  the  penalty.  It  would  he  better  that  every

Howard  to  Walsingham,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Murder),  608-613.  ‘  Hardwicke  Papers,’  I.  576.  Lingard,  viii.  273.  Camden,

iii.  405.  Stowe,  750.

452

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

nobleman  did  as  Lord  D  acres,  than  to  take  away  from  the
principal  service  such  as  are  set  down  to  serve/' 1

Of  enthusiasm  and  courage,  then,  there  was  enough,  while
of  drill  and  discipline,  of  powder  and  shot,  there  was  a  defi¬
ciency.  No  braver  or  more  competent  soldier  could  be  found
than  Sir  Edward  Stanley — the  man  whom  we  have  seen  in
his  yellow  jerkin,  helping  himself  into  Fort  Zutphen  with  the
Spanish  soldier's  pike — and  yet  Sir  Edward  Stanley  gave  but
a  sorry  account  of  the  choicest  soldiers  of  Chester  and  Lan¬
cashire,  whom  he  had  been  sent  to  inspect.  u  I  find  them
not,"  he  said,  u  according  to  your  expectation,  nor  mine  own
liking.  They  were  appointed  two  years  past  to  have  been
trained  six  days  by  the  year  or  more,  at  the  discretion  of  the
muster-master,  but,  as  yet,  they  have  not  been  trained  one  day ,
so  that  they  have  benefited  nothing,  nor  yet  know  their
leaders.  There  is  now  promise  of  amendment,  which,  I  doubt,
will  be  very  slow,  in  respect  to  my  Lord  Derby's  absence."  2
My  Lord  Derby  was  at  that  moment,  and  for  many  months
afterwards,  assisting  Valentine  Dale  in  his  classical  prolu¬
sions  on  the  sands  of  Bourbourg.  He  had  better  have  been
mustering  the  train-bands  of  Lancashire.  There  was  a
general  indisposition  in  the  rural  districts  to  expend  money
and  time  in  military  business,  until  the  necessity  should
become  imperative.  Professional  soldiers  complained  bitterly
of  the  canker  of  a  long  peace.  “For  our  long  quietness,
which  it  hath  pleased  God  to  send  us,"  said  Stanley,  “  they
think  their  money  very  ill  bestowed  which  they  expend  on
armour  or  weapon,  for  that  they  be  in  hope  they  shall  never
have  occasion  to  use  it,  so  they  may  pass  muster,  as  they  have
done  heretofore.  I  want  greatly  powder,  for  there  is  little  or
none  at  all."3

1  Leicester  to  "Walsingham,  - ,

3  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Edward  Stanley  to  the  Privy
28  Feb.

Council,  - »  1588.  (S.  P.  Office

9  March

MS.)

3  Ibid.

All  the  spring,  Sir  John  Norris

was  doing  what  he  could  to  exercise
the  soldiers  in  London.  The  cap¬
tains  of  the  Artillery-Garden  had
been  tolerably  well  drilled  for  several
years,  but  the  rank  and  file  were
ignorant  enough  of  the  art  of  war.
“  There  has  been  a  general  muster  of
men  fit  to  bear  arms  here,”  said  a
resident  of  London  in  April,  “  and

1588.

SANGUINE  STATEMENTS  OP  LEICESTER.

453

The  day  was  fast  approaching  when  all  the  power  in  Eng¬
land  would  be  too  little  for  the  demand.  But  matters  had
not  very  much  mended  even  at  midsummer.  It  is  true  that
5  Leicester,  who  was  apt  to  be  sanguine — particularly

15  Jul7’  in  matters  under  his  immediate  control — spoke  of

1588  1

the  handful  of  recruits  assembled  at  his  camp  in
Essex,  as  “  soldiers  of  a  year's  experience,  rather  than  a
month's  camping  ;  "  but  in  this  opinion  he  differed  from  many
competent  authorities,  and  was  somewhat  in  contradiction  to
himself.  Nevertheless  he  was  glad  that  the  Queen  had  de¬
termined  to  visit  him,  and  encourage  his  soldiers.

u  I  have  received  in  secret,"  he  said,  “  those  news  that
please  me,  that  your  Majesty  doth  intend  to  behold  the  poor
and  bare  company  that  lie  here  in  the  field,  most  willingly  to
serve  you,  yea,  most  ready  to  die  for  you.  You  shall,  dear
Lady,  behold  as  goodly,  loyal,  and  as  able  men  as  any  prince
Christian  can  show  you,  and  yet  but  a  handful  of  your  own,  in
comparison  of  the  rest  you  have.  What  comfort  not  only
these  shall  receive  who  shall  be  the  happiest  to  behold  your¬
self  I  cannot  express  ;  but  assuredly  it  will  give  no  small
comfort  to  the  rest,  that  shall  be  overshined  with  the  beams
of  so  gracious  and  princely  a  party,  for  what  your  royal
Majesty  shall  do  to  these  will  be  accepted  as  done  to  all.
Good  sweet  Queen,  alter  not  your  purpose,  if  God  give  you
health.  It  will  be  your  pain  for  the  time,  but  your  pleasure
to  behold  such  people.  And  surely  the  place  must  content
you,  being  as  fair  a  soil  and  as  goodly  a  prospect  as  may  be
seen  or  found,  as  this  extreme  weather  hath  made  trial,  which

there  have  not  been  found  ten  thou¬
sand  sufficient  men.  This  will  seem
strange  to  you,  but  it  is  as  true  as  the
Gospel  of  St.  John.  There  is  a  great
want  of  powder,  and  no  hope  of  sup¬
ply,  except  that  which  can  bo  manu¬
factured  in  England.”  Avis  de  Lon-
dres,  Avril,  1588.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,
MS.)

The  encouragement  given  to  the
peace-party  in  the  metropolis  by  the
Ostend  negotiations  was  acting  like  a
poison.  “The  people  here  are
anxious  for  peace,”  wrote  a  secret  j
correspondent  of  the  Spanish  govern-  J

ment;  “and  if  the  Duke  of  Parma
gives  the  least  hope  in  the  world  of
it,  they  will  all  throw  down  their
arms.”  Much  encouragement,  too,
was  given  to  Philip  by  the  alleged
disloyalty  of  many  inhabitants  of
London.  “There  is  an  infinity  of
fellows  here,”  said  the  writer,  “  who
desire  the  sacking  of  London  not  less
than  the  Spaniards  themselves  do,
and  are  doing  all  they  can  to  advance
the  Catholic  cause.”  Avisos  de  Lon-
dres,  21-25-28  Mayo,  1588.  (Arch,  de
Simancas.  [Paris.]  MS.)

454

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

doth  us  little  annoyance,  it  is  so  firm  and  dry  a  ground.
Your  usher  also  liketh  your  lodging — a  proper,  secret,  cleanly
house.  Your  camp  is  a  little  mile  off,  and  your  person  will
he  as  sure  as  at  St.  James's,  for  my  life."1

But  notwithstanding  this  cheerful  view  of  the  position
expressed  by  the  commander-in-chief,  the  month  of  July  had
passed,  and  the  early  days  of  August  had  already  arrived  ;  and
yet  the  camp  was  not  formed,  nor  anything  more  than  that
mere  handful  of  troops  mustered  about  Tilbury,  to  defend  the
road  from  Dover  to  London.  The  army  at  Tilbury  never
exceeded  sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand  men.2

The  whole  royal  navy — numbering  about  thirty-four  vessels
in  all — of  different  sizes,  ranging  from  1100  and  1000  tons  to
30,  had  at  last  been  got  ready  for  sea.  Its  aggregate  tonnage
was  11,820  ;3  not  half  so  much  as  at  the  present  moment — in
the  case  of  one  marvellous  merchant-steamer— -floats  upon  a
single  keel.

These  vessels  carried  837  guns  and  6279  men.  But  the
navy  was  reinforced  by  the  patriotism  and  liberality  of
English  merchants  and  private  gentlemen.  The  city  of
London  having  been  requested  to  furnish  15  ships  of  war
and  5000  men,  asked  two  days  for  deliberation,  and  then
gave  30  ships  and  10,000  men  4  of  which  number  2710  were
seamen.  Other  cities,  particularly  Plymouth,  came  forward
with  proportionate  liberality,  and  private  individuals,  nobles,
merchants,  and  men  of  humblest  rank,  were  enthusiastic  in
volunteering  into  the  naval  service,  to  risk  property  and  life
in  defence  of  the  country.  By  midsummer  there  had  been  a
total  force  of  197  vessels  manned,  and  partially  equipped,
with  an  aggregate  of  29,744  tons,  and  15,785  seamen.  Of
this  fleet  a  very  large  number  were  mere  coasters  of  less  than
100  tons  each  ;  scarcely  ten  ships  were  above  500,  and  but
one  above  1000  tons — the  Triumph ,  Captain  Frobisher,  of
1100  tons,  42  guns,  and  500  sailors.5

Lord  Howard  of  Effingham,  Lord  High-Admiral  of  Eng-

5

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  —  July,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Stowe,  150.

3  Barrow,  266,  261.

4  Stowe,  143.  Compare  estimates
in  Barrow,  268.

6  Ibid.

1588.

ACTIVITY  OF  PARMA.

455

land,  distinguished  for  his  martial  character,  public  spirit,
and  admirable  temper,  rather  than  for  experience  or  skill  as
a  seaman,  took  command  of  the  whole  fleet,  in  his  “  little  odd
ship  for  all  conditions/’  the  Ark-Royal ,  of  800  tons,  425  sailors,
and  55  guns.

Next  in  rank  was  Vice- Admiral  Drake,  in  the  Revenge ,  of
500  tons,  250  men  and  40  guns.  Lord  Henry  Seymour,
in  the  Rainbow ,  of  precisely  the  same  size  and  strength,
commanded  the  inner  squadron,  which  cruised  in  the  neigh¬
bourhood  of  the  French  and  Flemish  coast.

The  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders  had  undertaken  to  blockade
the  Duke  of  Parma  still  more  closely,  and  pledged  themselves
that  he  should  never  venture  to  show  himself  upon  the  open
sea  at  all.  The  mouth  of  the  Scheldt,  and  the  dangerous
shallows  off  the  coast  of  Newport  and  Dunkirk,  swarmed  with
their  determined  and  well-seasoned  craft,  from  the  flybooter  or
filibuster  of  the  rivers,  to  the  larger  armed  vessels,  built  to
confront  every  danger,  and  to  deal  with  any  adversary.

Farnese,  on  his  part,  within  that  well-guarded  territory,
had,  for  months  long,  scarcely  slackened  in  his  preparations,
day  or  night.  Whole  forests  had  been  felled  in  the  land  of  Waas
to  furnish  him  with  transports  and  gun-boats,  and  with  such
rapidity,  that — according  to  his  enthusiastic  historiographer —
each  tree  seemed  by  magic  to  metamorphose  itself  into  a
vessel  at  the  word  of  command.1  Shipbuilders,  pilots,  and
seamen,  were  brought  from  the  Baltic,  from  Hamburgh,  from
Genoa.  The  whole  surface  of  the  obedient  Netherlands,
whence  wholesome  industry  had  long  been  banished,  was  now
the  scene  of  a  prodigious  baleful  activity.  Portable  bridges
for  fording  the  rivers  of  England,  stockades  for  entrench¬
ments,  rafts  and  oars,  were  provided  in  vast  numbers,  and
Alexander  dug  canals  and  widened  natural  streams  to  facilitate
his  operations.2  These  wretched  Provinces,  crippled,  im¬
poverished,  languishing  for  peace,  were  forced  to  contribute
out  of  their  poverty,  and  to  find  strength  even  in  their  ex-

21  Dec.  1581.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,
MS.)  Meteren,  xv.  210.

1  Strada,  II.  ix.  542.

2  Strada,  ubi  sup.  Parma  to  Philip,

456

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XVIII.

haustion,  to  furnish  the  machinery  for  destroying  their  own
countrymen,  and  for  hurling  to  perdition  their  most  healthful
neighbour.

And  this  approaching  destruction  of  England — now  gene¬
rally  believed  in — was  like  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  throughout
Catholic  Europe.  Scions  of  royal  houses,  grandees  of  azure
blood,  the  bastard  of  Philip  II.,  the  bastard  of  Savoy,  the
bastard  of  Medici,  the  Margrave  of  Burghaut,  the  Archduke
Charles,  nephew  of  the  Emperor,  the  Princes  of  Ascoli  and  of
Melfi,  the  Prince  of  Morocco,  and  others  of  illustrious  name,
with  many  a  noble  English  traitor,  like  Paget,  and  Westmore¬
land,  and  Stanley,  all  hurried  to  the  camp  of  Farnese,  as  to
some  famous  tournament,  in  which  it  was  a  disgrace  to
chivalry  if  their  names  were  not  enrolled.  The  roads  were
trampled  with  levies  of  fresh  troops  from  Spain,  Naples,
Corsica,  the  States  of  the  Church,  the  Milanese,  Germany,
Burgundy.

Bias  Capizucca  was  sent  in  person  to  conduct  reinforce¬
ments  from  the  north  of  Italy.  The  famous  Terzio  of  Naples,
under  Carlos  Pinelo,  arrived  3500  strong — -the  most  splendid
regiment  ever  known  in  the  history  of  war.  Every  man  had
an  engraved  corslet  and  musket-barrel,  and  there  were  many
who  wore  gilded  armour,  while  their  waving  plumes  and
festive  caparisons  made  them  look  like  holiday-makers,  rather
than  real  campaigners,  in  the  eyes  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  various  cities  through  which  their  road  led  them  to
Flanders.1  By  the  end  of  April  the  Duke  of  Parma  saw
himself  at  the  head  of  60,000  men,  at  a  monthly  expense
of  454,315  crowns  or  dollars.2  Yet  so  rapid  was  the  pro¬
gress  of  disease — incident  to  northern  climates — among  those
southern  soldiers,  that  we  shall  find  the  number  wofully
diminished  before  they  were  likely  to  set  foot  upon  the
English  shore.

Thus  great  preparations,  simultaneously  with  pompous

1  Carnero,  ‘Guerras  de  Piandes  ’  April,  1588.  (Arch,  de  Simancas.

(1625),  p.  222.  MS.)  Compare  Strada,  II.  ix.  540.

2  ‘  Relacion  Particular,’  &c.  29th

1588.  THE  PAINFUL  SUSPENSE  CONTINUES.  457

negotiations,  had  been  going  forward  month  after  month,  in
England,  Holland,  Flanders.  Nevertheless,  winter,  spring,
two-thirds  of  summer,  had  passed  away,  and  on  the  29th
July,  1588,  there  remained  the  same  sickening  uncertainty,
which  was  the  atmosphere  in  which  the  nations  had  existed
for  a  twelvemonth.

Howard  had  cruised  for  a  few  weeks  between  England  and
Spain,  without  any  results,  and,  on  his  return,  had  found  it
necessary  to  implore  her  Majesty,  as  late  as  July,  to  “  trust  no
more  to  Judas'  kisses,  but  to  her  sword,  not  her  enemy's
word." 1

23  June

1  Howard  to  "Walsingham,  3  Ju]y‘>  1588,  in  Barrow,  284.

458

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SIX.

CHAPTER  XIX.

Philip  Second  in  his  Cabinet  —  His  System  of  Work  and  Deception  —  His  vast
but  vague  Schemes  of  Conquest  —  The  Armada  sails  —  Description  of  the
Fleet  —  The  Junction  with  Parma  unprovided  for  —  The  Gale  off  Finisterre
—  Exploits  of  David  Gwynn  —  First  Engagements  in  the  English  Channel
—  Considerable  Losses  of  the  Spaniards  —  General  Engagement  near  Port¬
land —  Superior  Seamanship  of  the  English — Both  Fleets  off  Calais  —
A  Night  of  Anxiety  —  Project  of  Howard  and  Winter  —  Impatience  of  the
Spaniards  —  Fire-Ships  sent  against  the  Armada  —  A  great  Galeasse  dis¬
abled —  Attacked  and  captured  by  English  Boats  —  General  Engagement  of
both  Fleets  —  Loss  of  several  Spanish  Ships  —  Armada  flies,  followed  by  the
English  —  English  insufficiently  provided  —  Are  obliged  to  relinquish  the
Chase  —  A  great  Storm  disperses  the  Armada  —  Great  Energy  of  Parma  —
Made  fruitless  by  Philip’s  Dulness  —  England  readier  at  Sea  than  on  Shore
—  The  Lieutenant-General’s  Complaints  —  His  Quarrels  with  Norris  and
Williams — Harsh  Statements  as  to  the  English  Troops  —  Want  of  Organi¬
zation  in  England  —  Royal  Parsimony  and  Delay  —  Quarrels  of  English
Admirals  —  England’s  narrow  Escape  from  great  Peril — Various  Rumours
as  to  the  Armada’s  Fate — Philip  for  a  long  Time  in  Doubt  —  He  believes
himself  victorious  —  Is  tranquil  when  undeceived.

It  is  now  time  to  look  in  upon  the  elderly  letter- writer  in  the
Escorial,  and  see  how  he  was  playing  his  part  in  the  drama.

His  counsellors  were  very  few.  His  chief  advisers  were
rather  like  private  secretaries  than  cabinet  ministers ;  for
Philip  had  been  withdrawing  more  and  more  into  seclusion
and  mystery  as  the  webwork  of  his  schemes  multiplied  and
widened.  He  liked  to  do  his  work,  assisted  by  a  very  few
confidential  servants.  The  Prince  of  Eboli,  the  famous  Ruy
Gfomez,  was  dead.  So  was  Cardinal  G-ranvelle.  So  were
Erasso  and  Delgado.  His  midnight  council— -junta  de  noclie
— for  thus,  from  its  original  hour  of  assembling,  and  the  air
of  secrecy  in  which  it  was  enwrapped,  it  was  habitually  called
— was  a  triumvirate.  Don  Juan  de  Idiaquez  was  chief
secretary  of  state  and  of  war ;  the  Count  de  Chinchon  was
minister  for  the  household,  for  Italian  affairs,  and  for  the
kingdom  of  Aragon  ;  Don  Cristoval  de  Moura,  the  monarch’s
chief  favourite,  was  at  the  head  of  the  finance  department,
and  administered  the  affairs  of  Portugal  and  Castile.1

1  Herrera,  III.  ii.  43-45,  and  138.

1588.

PHILIP  THE  SECOND  IN  HIS  CABINET.

459

The  president  of  the  council  of  Italy,  after  Granvelle’s
death,  was  Quiroga,  cardinal  of  Toledo,  and  inquisitor -general.1
Enormously  long  letters,  in  the  King’s  name,  were  prepared
chiefly  by  the  two  secretaries,  Idiaquez  and  Moura.  In  their
hands  was  the  vast  correspondence  with  Mendoza  and  Parma,
and  Olivarez  at  Eome,  and  with  Mucio,  in  which  all  the  strata¬
gems  for  the  subjugation  of  Protestant  Europe  were  slowly  and
artistically  contrived.  Of  the  great  conspiracy  against  human
liberty,  of  which  the  Pope  and  Philip  were  the  double  head,
this  midnight  triumvirate  was  the  chief  executive  committee.

These  innumerable  despatches,  signed  by  Philip,  were  not
the  emanations  of  his  own  mind.  The  King  had  a  fixed  pur¬
pose  to  subdue  Protestantism  and  to  conquer  the  world  ;  but
the  plans  for  carrying  the  purpose  into  effect  were  developed
by  subtler  and  more  comprehensive  minds  than  his  own.
It  was  enough  for  him  to  ponder  wearily  over  schemes  which
he  was  supposed  to  dictate,  and  to  give  himself  the  appear¬
ance  of  supervising  what  he  scarcely  comprehended.  And
his  work  of  supervision  was  often  confined  to  pettiest  details.
The  handwriting  of  Spain  and  Italy  at  that  day  was  beautiful,

.  and  in  our  modern  eyes  seems  neither  antiquated  nor  ungrace¬
ful.  But  Philip’s  scrawl  was  like  that  of  a  clown  just
admitted  to  a  writing-school,  and  the  whole  margin  of  a  fairly
penned  despatch,  perhaps  fifty  pages  long,  laid  before  him
for  comment  and  signature  by  Idiaquez  or  Moura,  would  be
sometimes  covered  with  a  few  awkward  sentences,  which  it
was  almost  impossible  to  read,  and  which,  when  deciphered,
were  apt  to  reveal  suggestions  of  astounding  triviality.2

Thus  a  most  important  despatch — in  which  the  King,  with
his  own  hand,  was  supposed  to  be  conveying  secret  intelligence
to  Mendoza  concerning  the  Armada,  together  with  minute
directions  for  the  regulation  of  Guise’s  conduct  at  the  me-

1  Ibid.

2  No  man  who  has  had  personal
experience  in  the  Archives  of  Siman-
cas,  or  who  has  studied  with  his  own
eyes  the  great  collection  of  documents
originally  belonging  to  that  deposi¬
tory,  and  now  preserved  in  the
Archives  of  the  Empire  at  Paris,

will  assert  that  the  description  in  the
text  is  exaggerated.  The  paragraphs
written  in  the  King’s  own  hand  are
almost  illegible,  and  evidently  written
with  great  difficulty.  "When  deci¬
phered,  they  are  found  to  be  always
awkward,  generally  ungrammatical,
and  very  often  puerile.

460

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

morable  epoch  of  the  barricades — contained  but  a  single  com¬
ment  from  the  monarch’s  own  pen.  u  The  Armada  has
been  in  Lisbon  about  a  month — quassi  un  mes  ” — wrote  the
secretary.  “  There  is  but  one  s  in  quasi  ,”  said  Philip.1

Again,  a  despatch  of  Mendoza  to  the  King  contained  the
intelligence  that  Queen  Elizabeth  was,  at  the  date  of  the
letter,  residing  at  St.  James’s.  Philip,  who  had  no  objection
to  display  his  knowledge  of  English  affairs — as  became  the
man  who  had  already  been  almost  sovereign  of  England,  and
meant  to  be  entirely  so — supplied  a  piece  of  information  in
an  apostille  to  this  despatch.  “  St.  James  is  a  house  of
recreation,”  he  said,  “  which  was  once  a  monastery.  There  is
a  park  between  it,  and  the  palace  which  is  called  Huytal ;
but  why  it  is  called  Huytal ,  I  am  sure  I  don’t  know.” 2 * 4  His
researches  in  the  English  language  had  not  enabled  him
to  recognize  the  adjective  and  substantive  out  of  which  the
abstruse  compound  White-Hall  (. Huyt-al ),  was  formed.

On  another  occasion,  a  letter  from  England  containing  im¬
portant  intelligence  concerning  the  number  of  soldiers  en¬
rolled  in  that  country  to  resist  the  Spanish  invasion,  the
quantity  of  gunpowder  and  various  munitions  collected,  with
other  details  of  like  nature,  furnished  besides  a  bit  of  infor¬
mation  of  less  vital  interest.  u  In  the  windows  of  the  Queen’s
presence-chamber  they  have  discovered  a  great  quantity  of
lice ,  all  clustered  together,”  said  the  writer.

Such  a  minute  piece  of  statistics  could  not  escape  the
microscopic  eye  of  Philip.  So,  disregarding  the  soldiers  and
the  gunpowder,  he  commented  only  on  this  last-mentioned
clause  of  the  letter  ;  and  he  did  it  cautiously  too,  as  a  King
surnamed  the  Prudent  should  : —

1  Philip  II.  to  Mendoza,  2  June,
1588.  A  56.  152  (Arch,  de  Simancas.
[Paris.]  MS.)  “Ha  un  S  in  quasi.”

2  “  La  reyna  se  avia  retirado  a  San

Gemes,  que  es  a  las  espaldas  de  Huy¬
tal,  la  cassa  de  Londres,  y  para  guarda
de  su  persona  decian  haver  senalada

4  mil  hombres,  y  mil  cavalleros  que
estuviessen  siempre  con  ella,  y  a  causa
da  estar  tan  medrosos  los  de  Lon¬
dres,  llevaron  a  Don  Pedro  de  Yaldez

y  a  todos  los  de  mas  que  se  tomaron
en  carros  a  Londres  para  que  viesse  el
pueblo  que  avian  tornado  presos  espa-
noles  con  vos  de  ser  deshecha  toda
la  armada  de  Y.  Md,”  &c.

Note  in  Philip’s  hand:  “Casa  de
plazer  que  fue  monasterio — es  un
parque  entre  ella  y  el  palacio  que  se
llama  Huytal,  y  no  se  porque  yo.”
Mendoza  to  Philip  II.  20  Aug.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas.  [Paris.]  MS.)

1588.

HIS  SYSTEM  OP  WORK  AND  DECEPTION.

461

u  But  perhaps  they  were  fleas/'  wrote  Philip.1

Such  examples — and  many  more  might  he  given — suffi¬
ciently  indicate  the  nature  of  the  man  on  whom  such  enormous
responsibilities  rested,  and  who  had  been,  by  the  adulation  of
his  fellow-creatures,  elevated  into  a  god.  And  we  may  cast
a  glance  upon  him  as  he  sits  in  his  cabinet — buried  among
those  piles  of  despatches — and  receiving  methodically,  at
stated  hours,  Idiaquez,  or  Moura,  or  Chincon,  to  settle  the
affairs  of  so  many  millions  of  the  human  race  ;  and  we  may
watch  exactly  the  progress  of  that  scheme,  concerning  which
so  many  contradictory  rumours  were  circulating  in  Europe.
In  the  month  of  April  a  Walsingham  could  doubt,  even  in
August  an  ingenuous  comptroller  could  disbelieve,  the  reality
of  the  great  project,  and  the  Pope  himself,  even  while  pledg¬
ing  himself  to  assistance,  had  been  systematically  deceived.
He  had  supposed  the  whole  scheme  rendered  futile  by  the
exploit  of  Drake  at  Cadiz,  and  had  declared  that  u  the  Queen
of  England's  distaff  was  worth  more  than  Philip's  sword,  that
the  King  was  a  poor  creature,  that  he  would  never  be  able  to
come  to  a  resolution,  and  that  even  if  he  should  do  so,  it
would  be  too  late  ;  " 2 3  and  he  had  subsequently  been  doing
his  best,  through  his  nuncio  in  France,  to  persuade  the  Queen
to  embrace  the  Catholic  religion,  and  thus  save  herself  from
the  impending  danger.  Henry  III.  had  even  been  urged  by
the  Pope  to  send  a  special  ambassador  to  her  for  this  purpose
— as  if  the  persuasions  of  the  wretched  Yalois  were  likely  to
be  effective  with  Elizabeth  Tudor — and  Burghley  had,  by
means  of  spies  in  Rome,  who  pretended  to  be  Catholics,  given

1  “  En  les  fenetres  do  la  chambre
de  presence  en  la  cour  de  la  Reyne
on  a  trouve  fort  grand  nombre  de
poulx  qui  se  sont  coules  ensemble.”
There  is  a  Spanish  translation  ap¬
pended  to  this  document,  and  on  the
margin,  in  Philip’s  hand,  is  written :

“  Gran  numero  de  piojos  o  quiza
pulgos.”  Avisos  de  Londres,  1  April,
1586.  (Arch,  de  Simancas  [Paris],
MS.)

3  ITn  Yandini,  gran  vanquero  de
Roma,  que  tiene  correspondencia  con
este  Rey  Xm0  y  intelligencia  con

muchos  Cateos  le  ha  escrito  haver  dicho
el  Papa  quando  supo  lo  que  Draques
avia  hecho  en  Cales,  que  Su  Magd
(Philip  II.)  era  persona  de  poco,  que
nunca  se  acaveva  de  resolver,  y  quando
lo  hiziesse  no  seria  en  tiempo — han
aqui  no  solo  solemnizado  pero  publi-
cado  anadiendo  que  valia  mas  la
rueca  de  la  Reyna  de  Inglaterra  que
la  espada  del  Rey  de  Espana,”  &c.
&c.  Mendoza  to  Idiaquez,  16  July,
1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas  [Paris],
MS.)

462

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

out  intimations  that  the  Queen  was  seriously  contemplating
such  a  step.1  Thus  the  Pope,  notwithstanding  Cardinal
Allan,  the  famous  million,  and  the  hull,  was  thought  by
Mendoza  to  be  growing  lukewarm  in  the  Spanish  cause,  and
to  be  urging  upon  the  “  Englishwoman  ”  the  propriety  of  con¬
verting  herself,  even  at  the  late  hour  of  May,  1588.2

But  Philip,  for  years,  had  been  maturing  his  scheme,  while
reposing  entire  confidence — beyond  his  own  cabinet  doors —
upon  none  but  Alexander  Farnese  ;  and  the  Duke — alone  of
all  men — was  perfectly  certain  that  the  invasion  would,  this
year,  be  attempted.

The  captain-general  of  the  expedition  was  the  Marquis  of
Santa  Cruz,  a  man  of  considerable  naval  experience,  and  of
constant  good  fortune,  who,  in  thirty  years,  had  never  sus¬
tained  a  defeat.3  He  had  however  shown  no  desire  to  risk
one,  when  Drake  had  offered  him  the  memorable  challenge  in
the  year  1587,  and  perhaps  his  reputation  of  the  invincible
captain  had  been  obtained  by  the  same  adroitness  on  previous
occasions.  He  was  no  friend  to  Alexander  Farnese,  and  was
much  disgusted  when  informed  of  the  share  allotted  to  the
Duke  in  the  great  undertaking.4 S  A  course  of  reproach  and
perpetual  reprimand  was  the  treatment  to  which  he  was,  in
consequence,  subjected,  which  was  not  more  conducive  to  the
advancement  of  the  expedition  than  it  was  to  the  health  of
the  captain-general.  Early  in  January  the  Cardinal  Arch¬
duke  was  sent  to  Lisbon  to  lecture  him,  with  instructions  to
turn  a  deaf  ear  to  all  his  remonstrances,  to  deal  with  him

1  “  Me  he  visto  con  el  nuncio,  y  me  !

ha  dicho  que  Su  Santid,  avia  meses,

que  pidio  a  esfce  Rey  embiasse  a

la  de  Inglaterra  lo  bien  que  le  estaria
hazerse  Catolica,  y  esto  por  tener  Su

Sd  avisos  poder  venir  en  ello  con
semej  antes  persuasiones  que  este  Rey
escrivio  a  su  embaxre  que  tiene  en
Inglaterra  le  avisasse  si  estava  en  esta
disposicion  la  Reyna,  el  qual  respondio
el  Tesorero  Cecil  por  medio  ne  espiones
que  tenia  en  Roma  fingiendo  ser
Catolicos  avia  hecho  llegar  esta  voz
a  Su  Sd  para  ganar  tiempo  y  entibiar

le  en  persuadir  la  empresa  a  Y.
Magd  y  que  agora  de  nuevo  Su  Sd
avia  significado  al  Card1  de  Joyosa
que  seria  muy  bien  que  este  Rey  em¬
biasse  un  embaxre  extrado  para  hazer
este  officio  con  la  Ynglesa,”  &c.  &c.
Mendoza  to  Philip  II.  8  May,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas  [Paris],  MS.)

2  Ibid.

3  Herrera,  III.  iii.  70.

4  Las  Advertencias  de  Su  Magd
para  el  Marques  de  Santa  Cruz,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

1588.  HIS  VAST  BUT  YAGUE  SCHEMES  OE  CONQUEST.  463

peremptorily,  to  forbid  bis  writing  letters  on  the  subject  to
his  Majesty,  and  to  order  him  to  accept  his  post  or  to  de¬
cline  it  without  conditions,  in  which  latter  contingency  he  was
to  be  informed  that  his  successor  was  already  decided  upon.1

This  was  not  the  most  eligible  way  perhaps  for  bringing
the  captain-general  into  a  cheerful  mood  ;  particularly  as  he
was  expected  to  be  ready  in  January  to  sail  to  the  Flemish
coast.2  Nevertheless  the  Marquis  expressed  a  hope  to  ac¬
complish  his  sovereign’s  wishes  ;  and  great  had  been  the
bustle  in  all  the  dockyards  of  Naples,  Sicily,  and  Spain  ;  par¬
ticularly  in  the  provinces  of  Guipuzcoa,  Biscay,  and  Anda¬
lusia,  and  in  the  four  great  cities  of  the  coast.  War-ships  of
all  dimensions,  tenders,  transports,  soldiers,  sailors,  sutlers,
munitions  of  war,  provisions,  were  all  rapidly  concentrating
in  Lisbon  as  the  great  place  of  rendezvous  ;  and  Philip  con¬
fidently  believed,  and  as  confidently  informed  the  Duke  of
Parma,  that  he  might  be  expecting  the  Armada  at  any  time
after  the  end  of  January.3

Perhaps  in  the  history  of  mankind  there  has  never  been  a
vast  project  of  conquest  conceived  and  matured  in  so  pro¬
tracted  and  yet  so  desultory  a  manner,  as  was  this  famous
Spanish  invasion.  There  was  something  almost  puerile  in
the  whims  rather  than  schemes  of  Philip  for  carrying  out  his
purpose.  It  was  probable  that  some  resistance  would  be
offered,  at  least  by  the  navy  of  England,  to  the  subjugation
of  that  country,  and  the  King  had  enjoyed  an  oppor¬
tunity,  the  preceding  summer,  of  seeing  the  way  in  which
English  sailors  did  their  work.  He  had  also  appeared  to
understand  the  necessity  of  covering  the  passage  of  Farnese
from  the  Flemish  ports  into  the  Thames,  by  means  of  the
great  Spanish  fleet  from  Lisbon.  Nevertheless  he  never
seemed  to  be  aware  that  Farnese  could  not  invade  England
quite  by  himself,  and  was  perpetually  expecting  to  hear  that
he  had  done  so.

“ Holland  and  Zeeland/’  wrote  Alexander  to  Philip,  “have

1  MS.  last  cited.

2  Orden  de  Su  Magd  que  se  embio  al  Sor  Card1  Archiduque.  Enero,
1588.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)  3  Herrera,  III.  iii.  90,  91.

464

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

been  arming  with  their  accustomed  promptness  ;  England  has
made  great  preparations.  I  have  done  my  best  to  make  the
impossible  possible  ;  but  your  letter  told  me  to  wait  for  Santa
Cruz;  and  to  expect  him  very  shortly.  If,  on  the  contrary,
you  had  told  me  to  make  the  passage  without  him,  I  would
have  made  the  attempt,  although  we  had  every  one  of  us
perished.  Four  ships  of  war  could  sink  every  one  of  my  boats.
Nevertheless  I  beg  to  be  informed  of  your  Majesty's  final
order.  If  I  am  seriously  expected  to  make  the  passage  without
Santa  Cruz,  I  am  ready  to  do  it,  although  I  should  go  all
alone  in  a  cock-boat." 1

But  Santa  Cruz  at  least  was  not  destined  to  assist  in  the
conquest  of  England  ;  for,  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  vexation,
goaded  by  the  reproaches  and  insults  of  Philip,  Santa  Cruz
was  dead.2  He  was  replaced  in  the  chief  command  of  the
fleet  by  the  Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia,  a  grandee  of  vast  wealth,
but  with  little  capacity  and  less  experience.  To  the  iron
marquis  it  was  said  that  a  golden  duke 3  had  succeeded  ;  but
the  duke  of  gold  did  not  find  it  easier  to  accomplish  impossi¬
bilities  than  his  predecessor  had  done.  Day  after  day,  through¬
out  the  months  of  winter  and  spring,  the  King  had  been
writing  that  the  fleet  was  just  on  the  point  of  sailing,  and  as
frequently  he  had  been  renewing  to  Alexander  Farnese  the
intimation  that  perhaps,  after  all,  he  might  find  an  opportunity
of  crossing  to  England,  without  waiting  for  its  arrival.4  And
Alexander,  with  the  same  regularity,  had  been  informing  his
master  that  the  troops  in  the  Netherlands  had  been  daily
dwindling  from  sickness  and  other  causes,  till  at  last,  instead
of  the  30,000  effective  infantry,  with  which  it  had  been
originally  intended  to  make  the  enterprise,  he  had  not  more
than  17,000  in  the  month  of  April.5  The  6000  Spaniards,
whom  he  was  to  receive  from  the  fleet  of  Medina  Sidonia,
would  therefore  be  the  very  mainspring  of  his  army.6  After

1  “Aunque  huviesse  de  passar  solo
en  una  zabra.”  Parma  to  Philip,  21st
Dec.  1587.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,
MS.)

2  Strada,  II.  ix.  549.  Philip  to

Parma,  18  Peb.  1588.  (Arch,  de

Simancas,  MS.)

3  Strada,  ubi  sup.

4  Philip  to  Parma,  6  March,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

5  Parma  to  Philip,  20  March,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

6  “  El  niervo  principal.”  (Ibid.)

1588.

✓

THE  ARMADA  SAILS.

465

leaving  no  more  soldiers  in  tlie  Netherlands  than  were  abso¬
lutely  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the  obedient  Provinces
against  the  rebels,  he  could  only  take  with  him  to  England
23,000  men,  even  after  the  reinforcements  from  Medina.
“  When  we  talked  of  taking  England  by  surprise,''  said  Alex¬
ander,  “  we  never  thought  of  less  than  30,000.  Now  that  she
is  alert  and  ready  for  us,  and  that  it  is  certain  we  must  fight
by  sea  and  by  land,  50,000  would  be  few/' 1  He  almost  ridi¬
culed  the  King's  suggestion  that  a  feint  might  be  made  by
way  of  besieging  some  few  places  in  Holland  or  Zeeland.  The
whole  matter  in  hand,  he  said,  had  become  *as  public  as
possible,  and  the  only  efficient  blind  was  the  peace-nego¬
tiation  ;  for  many  believed,  as  the  English  deputies  were  now
treating  at  Ostend,  that  peace  would  follow.2

At  last,  on  the  28th,  29th,  and  30th  May,  1588,  the  fleet,
which  had  been  waiting  at  Lisbon  more  than  a  month  for
favourable  weather,  set  sail  from  that  port,  after  having  been
duly  blessed  by  the  Cardinal  Archduke  Albert,  viceroy  of
Portugal.3

There  were  rather  more  than  one  hundred  and  thirty  ships
in  all,  divided  into  ten  squadrons.4  There  was  the  squadron
of  Portugal,  consisting  of  ten  galleons,  and  commanded  by
the  captain-general,  Medina  Sidonia.  In  the  squadron  of
Castile  were  fourteen  shifts  of  various  sizes,  under  General
Diego  Flores  de  Yaldez.  This  officer  was  one  of  the  most
experienced  naval  officers  in  the  Spanish  service,  and  was
subsequently  ordered,  in  consequence,  to  sail  with  the  general¬
issimo  in  his  flag-ship.5  In  the  squadron  of  Andalusia  were
ten  galleons  and  other  vessels,  under  General  Pedro  de  Yaldez.
In  the  squadron  of  Biscay  were  ten  galleons  and  lesser  ships,
under  General  Juan  Martinez  de  Eecalde,  upper  admiral  of

1  Parma  to  Philip,  31  Jan.  1588.

(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Same  to  same,  20  March,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

3  Philip  II.  to  Mendoza,  24  April,
1588,  and  2  June,  1588.  (Arch,  de
Simancas  [Paris],  MSS.)  Bor,  III.
321,  322.

vol.  ii. — 2  H

4  Herrera,  III.  iii.  93,  seq.  Philip
II.  to  Parma,  13  May,  1588,  says  150,
hut  there  were  many  small  vessels
and  transports  equipped,  which  never
left  Spain.  The  number  of  effective
ships  of  all  kinds  was  probably  less
than  140.

5  Herrera,  ubi  sup.

466

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SIX.

the  fleet.  In  the  squadron  of  Guipuzcoa  were  ten  galleons,
under  General  Miguel  de  Oquendo.  In  the  squadron  of  Italy
were  ten  ships,  under  General  Martin  de  Bertendona.  In  the
squadron  of  Ureas,  or  store-ships,  were  twenty-three  sail,  under
General  Juan  Gomez  de  Medina.  The  squadron  of  tenders,
caravels,  and  other  vessels,  numbered  twenty-two  sail,  under
General  Antonio  Hurtado  de  Mendoza.  The  squadron  of  four
galeasses  was  commanded  by  Don  Hugo  de  Moncada.  The
squadron  of  four  galeras,  or  galleys,  was  in  charge  of  Captain
Diego  de  Medrado.

Next  in  command  to  Medina  Sidonia  was  Don  Alonzo  de
Leyva,  captain-general  of  the  light  horse  of  Milan.  Don
Francisco  de  Bobadilla  was  marshal-general  of  the  camp.
Don  Diego  de  Pimentel  was  marshal  of  the  camp  to  the
famous  Terzio  or  legion  of  Sicily.1

The  total  tonnage  of  the  fleet  was  59,120  :  the  number  of
guns  was  3165.  Of  Spanish  troops  there  were  19,295  on
board :  there  were  8252  sailors  and  2088  galley-slaves.  Be¬
sides  these,  there  was  a  force  of  noble  volunteers,  belonging
to  the  most  illustrious  houses  of  Spain,  with  their  attendants,
amounting  to  nearly  2000  in  all.  There  was  also  Don  Martin
Alaccon,  administrator  and  vicar-general  of  the  Holy  Inqui¬
sition,  at  the  head  of  some  290  monks  of  the  mendicant  orders,
priests  and  familiars.2  The  grand  total  of  those  embarked
was  about  30,000.  The  daily  expense  of  the  fleet  was  esti¬
mated  by  Don  Diego  de  Pimentel  at  12,000  ducats  a-day,  and
the  daily  cost  of  the  combined  naval  and  military  force  under
Farnese  and  Medina  Sidonia  was  stated  at  30,000  ducats.3

The  size  of  the  ships  ranged  from  1200  tons  to  300.  The
galleons,  of  which  there  were  about  sixty,  were  huge  round¬
stemmed  clumsy  vessels,  with  bulwarks  three  or  four  feet  thick,
and  built  up  at  stem  and  stern,  like  castles.  The  galeasses —
of  which  there  were  four — were  a  third  larger  than  the  ordinary

1  Herrera,  ubi  sup.  Compare  Strada,
II.  ix.  546,  seq.  Bor,  III.  xxv.  317,  seq.
Meteren,  xv.  270.  Camden,  III.  410,
seq.  Carnero,  226.  Coloma,  f.  5,  seq.
Barrow,  266-270.

2  Meteren,  ubi  sup.

3  Examination  of  Don  Diego  de
Pimentel  before  the  council  of  Hol¬
land;  apud  Bor.  III.  325,  seq.

2588.  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  FLEET.  467

g alley,  and  were  rowed  each  by  three  hundred  galley-slaves.
They  consisted  of  an  enormous  towering  fortress  at  the  stern,
a  castellated  structure  almost  equally  massive  in  front,  with
seats  for  the  rowers  amidships.  At  stem  and  stern  and
between  each  of  the  slaves’  benches  were  heavy  cannon.
These  galeasses  were  floating  edifices,  very  wonderful  to  con¬
template.  They  were  gorgeously  decorated.  There  were
splendid  state-apartments,  cabins,  chapels,  and  pulpits  in  each,
and  they  were  amply  provided  with  awnings,  cushions,  stream¬
ers,  standards,  gilded  saints,  and  bands  of  music.1  To  take
part  in  an  ostentatious  pageant,  nothing  could  be  better
devised.  To  fulfil  the  great  objects  of  a  war-vessel — to  sail
and  to  fight — they  were  the  worst  machines  ever  launched
upon  the  ocean.  The  four  galleys  were  similar  to  the  ga¬
leasses  in  every  respect  except  that  of  size,  in  which  they  were
by  one-third  inferior.

All  the  ships  of  the  fleet — galeasses,  galleys,  galleons,  and
hulks — were  so  encumbered  with  top-hamper,  so  overweighted
in  proportion  to  their  draught  of  water,  that  they  could  bear
but  little  canvas,  even  with  smooth  seas  and  light  and  favour¬
able  winds.  In  violent  tempests,  therefore,  they  seemed  likely
to  suffer.  To  the  eyes  of  the  16th  century  these  vessels
seemed  enormous.  A  ship  of  1300  tons  was  then  a  monster
rarely  seen,  and  a  fleet,  numbering  from  130  to  150  sail,  with
an  aggregate  tonnage  of  60,000,  seemed  sufficient  to  conquer
the  world,  and  to  justify  the  arrogant  title,  by  which  it  had
baptized  itself,  of  the  Invincible.

Such  was  the  machinery  which  Philip  had  at  last  set  afloat,
for  the  purpose  of  dethroning  Elizabeth  and  establishing  the
inquisition  in  England.  One  hundred  and  forty  ships,  eleven
thousand  Spanish  veterans,  as  many  more  recruits,  partly
Spanish,  partly  Portuguese,  2000  grandees,  as  many  galley-
slaves,  and  three  hundred  barefooted  friars  and  inquisitors.

The  plan  was  simple.  Medina  Sidonia  was  to  proceed
straight  from  Lisbon  to  Calais  roads  :  there  he  was  to  wait  for
the  Duke  of  Parma,  who  was  to  come  forth  from  Newport,

1  Strada,  II.  ix.  546.  Meteren,  xv.  270.

468

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

Sluys,  and  Dunkerk,  bringing  with  liim  his  17,000  veterans,
and  to  assume  the  chief  command  of  the  whole  expedition.
They  were  then  to  cross  the  channel  to  Dover,  land  the  army
of  Parma,  reinforced  with  6000  Spaniards  from  the  fleet,  and
with  these  23,000  men  Alexander  was  to  march  at  once  upon
London.  Medina  Sidonia  was  to  seize  and  fortify  the  Isle  of
Wight,  guard  the  entrance  of  the  harbours  against  any  inter¬
ference  from  the  Dutch  and  English  fleets,  and — so  soon  as
the  conquest  of  England  had  been  effected — he  was  to  proceed
to  Ireland.1  It  had  been  the  wish  of  Sir  William  Stanley  that
Ireland  should  be  subjugated  first,  as  a  basis  of  operations
against  England  ;  but  this  had  been  overruled.  The  intrigues
of  Mendoza  and  Earnese,  too,  with  the  Catholic  nobles  of
Scotland,  had  proved,  after  all,  unsuccessful.  King  J ames  had
yielded  to  superior  offers  of  money  and  advancement  held  out
to  him  by  Elizabeth,  and  was  now,  in  Alexander's  words,  a
confirmed  heretic.2

There  was  no  course  left,  therefore,  but  to  conquer  England
at  once.  A  strange  omission  had  however  been  made  in  the
plan  from  first  to  last.  The  commander  of  the  whole  expedi¬
tion  was  the  Duke  of  Parma  :  on  his  head  was  the  whole
responsibility.  Not  a  gun  was  to  be  fired — if  it  could  be
avoided — until  he  had  come  forth  with  his  veterans  to  make
his  junction  with  the  Invincible  Armada  off  Calais.  Yet  there
was  no  arrangement  whatever  to  enable  him  to  come  forth
— not  the  slightest  provision  to  effect  that  junction.  It
would  almost  seem  that  the  letter-writer  of  the  Escorial  had
been  quite  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  the  Dutch  fleets  off
Dunkerk,  Newport,  and  Flushing,  although  he  had  certainly
received  information  enough  of  this  formidable  obstacle  to
his  plan.

“  Most  joyful  I  shall  be,"  said  Farnese — writing  on  one  of
the  days  when  he  had  seemed  most  convinced  by  Valentine
Dale's  arguments,  and  driven  to  despair  by  his  postulates —
u  to  see  myself  with  these  soldiers  on  English  ground,  where,

1  Letters  of  Philip  and  of  Parma
already  cited.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

2  Parma  to  Philip  II.  8  June,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1588.  THE  JUNCTION  WITH  PARMA  UNPROVIDED  FOR.  469

with  God’s  help,  I  hope  to  accomplish  your  Majesty’s  de¬
mands.”1  He  was  much  troubled  however  to  find  doubts
entertained  at  the  last  moment  as  to  his  6000  Spaniards ;  and
certainly  it  hardly  needed  an  argument  to  prove  that  the
invasion  of  England  with  but  17,000  soldiers  was  a  somewhat
hazardous  scheme.  Yet  the  pilot  Moresini  had  brought  him
letters  from  Medina  Sidonia,  in  which  the  Duke  expressed
hesitation  about  parting  with  these  6000  veterans,  unless  the
English  fleet  should  have  been  previously  destroyed,  and  had
also  again  expressed  his  hope  that  Parma  would  be  punctual
to  the  rendezvous.2  Alexander  immediately  combated  these
views  in  letters  to  Medina  and  to  the  King.  He  avowed  that
he  would  not  depart  one  tittle  from  the  plan  originally  laid
down.  The  6000  men,  and  more  if  possible,  were  to  be  fur¬
nished  him,  and  the  Spanish  Armada  v~as  to  protect  his  own
flotilla,  and  to  keep  the  channel  clear  of  enemies.  Ho  other
scheme  was  possible,  he  said,  for  it  was  clear  that  his  collection
of  small  flat-bottomed  river-boats  and  hoys  could  not  even
make  the  passage,  except  in  smooth  weather.  They  could
not  contend  with  a  storm,  much  less  with  the  enemy’s  ships,
which  would  destroy  them  utterly  in  case  of  a  meeting,  without
his  being  able  to  avail  himself  of  his  soldiers — who  would  be
so  closely  packed  as  to  be  hardly  moveable — or  of  any  human
help.  The  preposterous  notion  that  he  should  come  out  with
his  flotilla  to  make  a  junction  with  Medina  off  Calais,  was  over
and  over  again  denounced  by  Alexander  with  vehemence  and
bitterness,  and  most  boding  expressions  were  used  by  him  as
to  the  probable  result,  were  such  a  delusion  persisted  in.3

Every  possible  precaution  therefore  but  one  had  been  taken.
The  King  of  France — almost  at  the  same  instant  in  which
Guise  had  been  receiving  his  latest  instructions  from  the
Escorial  for  dethroning  and  destroying  that  monarch — had
been  assured  by  Philip  of  his  inalienable  affection  ;  had  been
informed  of  the  object  of  this  great  naval  expedition — which
was  not  by  any  means,  as  Mendoza  had  stated  to  Henry,  an

1  Parma  to  Philip,  22  June,  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

3  Ibid.  3  ibid.

470

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

enterprise  against  France  or  England,  "but  only  a  determined
attempt  to  clear  the  sea,  once  for  all,  of  these  English  pirates
who  had  done  so  much  damage  for  years  past  on  the  high
seas — and  had  been  requested,  in  case  any  Spanish  ship  should
be  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into  French  ports,  to  afford
them  that  comfort  and  protection  to  which  the  vessels  of  so
close  and  friendly  an  ally  were  entitled.1

Thus  there  was  bread,  beef,  and  powder  enough — there  were
monks  and  priests  enough — standards,  galley-slaves,  and  in¬
quisitors  enough ;  but  there  were  no  light  vessels  in  the
Armada,  and  no  heavy  vessels  in  Parma’s  fleet.  Medina
could  not  go  to  Farnese,  nor  could  Farnese  come  to  Medina.
The  junction  was  likely  to  be  difficult,  and  yet  it  had  never
once  entered  the  heads  of  Philip  or  his  counsellors  to  provide
for  that  difficulty.  The  King  never  seemed  to  imagine  that
Farnese,  with  40,000  or  50,000  soldiers  in  the  Netherlands,
a  fleet  of  300  transports,  and  power  to  dispose  of  very  large
funds  for  one  great  purpose,  could  be  kept  in  prison  by  a  fleet
of  Dutch  skippers  and  corsairs.

With  as  much  sluggishness  as  might  have  been  expected
from  their  clumsy  architecture,  the  ships  of  the  Armada  con¬
sumed  nearly  three  weeks  in  sailing  from  Lisbon  to  the  neigh¬
bourhood  of  Cape  Finisterre.  Here  they  were  overtaken  by
a  tempest,  and  were  scattered  hither  and  thither,  almost  at
the  mercy  of  the  winds  and  waves  ; 2  for  those  unwieldy  hulks

1  “  Hableys  antes  al  Rey  de  mi
parte,  y  conviniendo  hablarle,  le  direys
que  el  atrevimiento  de  los  corsarios
ingleses  me  ha  obligado  a  dessear
limpiar  dellos  la  mar,  este  verano,  y
que  assi  he  mandado  hazer  una  armada
para  este  effecto,  en  la  qual  avra
cuydado  de  hazer  todo  el  buen  trata-
miento  que  es  razon  a  sus  buenos
subditos  que  toparen,  de  que  le  he
querido  dar  parte  y  pedir  le  como
tambien  lo  hareys  en  mi  nombre,  y  si
algunos  baxeles  de  mi  armada  aportaran
con  temporal  a  sus  puertos,  ordene  que
sean  tratados  conforme  a  la  buena  paz
y  hermandad  que  entre  nosotros  hay,
quitandole  por  aqui  la  sospecha  destas
fuerzas,  y  grangeandole  para  lo  que  se

pretende,  y  este  oficio  bastara  por  agora,
sin  llegar  a  mas  particularidades,”  &c.
Philip  II.  to  Mendoza,  24  April,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  [Paris.]  A.  56,  148,
MS.)

This  letter  reached  Mendoza  in
Paris  just  before  that  envoy,  accord¬
ing  to  his  master’s  instructions,  was
assisting  Guise  to  make  his  memorable
stroke  of  the  ‘  barricades.’

There  is  another  letter  of  the  same
purport  nearly  three  months  later.
Philip  II.  to  Mendoza,  18  July,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  [Paris.]  A.  56,  159,
MS.)

2  Herrera,  Strada,  Bor,  Meteren,
Camden.  Carnero,  Coloma,  Barrow,
ubi  sup.

1588.

THE  GALE  OFF  FINISTERRE.

471

were  ill  adapted  to  a  tempest  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay.  There
were  those  in  the  Armada,  however,  to  whom  the  storm  was  a
blessing.  David  Gwynn,  a  Welsh  mariner,  had  sat  in  the
Spanish  hulks  a  wretched  galley-slave — as  prisoner  of  war —
for  more  than  eleven  years,  hoping,  year  after  year,  for  a
chance  of  escape  from  bondage.1  He  sat  now  among  the
rowers  of  the  great  galley,  the  Vasana,  one  of  the  humblest
instruments  by  which  the  subjugation  of  his  native  land  to
Spain  and  Rome  was  to  be  effected.

Very  naturally,  among  the  ships  which  suffered  most  in  the
gale  were  the  four  huge  unwieldy  galleys — a  squadron  of  four
under  Don  Diego  de  Medrado — with  their  enormous  turrets
at  stem  and  stern,  and  their  low  and  open  waists.  The  chapels,
pulpits-,  and  gilded  Madonnas  proved  of  little  avail  in  a  hur¬
ricane.  The  Diana ,  largest  of  the  four,  went  down  with  all
hands  ;  the  Princess  was  labouring  severely  in  the  trough  of
the  sea,  and  the  Vasana  was  likewise  in  imminent  danger.
So  the  master  of  this  galley  asked  the  Welsh  slave,  who  had
far  more  experience  and  seamanship  than  he  possessed  himself,
if  it  were  possible  to  save  the  vessel.  Gwynn  saw  an  oppor¬
tunity  for  which  he  had  been  waiting  eleven  years.  He  was
ready  to  improve  it.  He  pointed  out  to  the  captain  the  hope¬
lessness  of  attempting  to  overtake  the  Armada.  They  should
go  down,  he  said,  as  the  Diana  had  already  done,  and  as  the
Princess  was  like  at  any  moment  to  do,  unless  they  took  in
every  rag  of  sail,  and  did  their  best  with  their  oars  to  gain  the
nearest  port.  But  in  order  that  the  rowers  might  exert  them¬
selves  to  the  utmost,  it  was  necessary  that  the  soldiers,  who
were  a  useless  incumbrance  on  deck,  should  go  below.  Thus
only  could  the  ship  be  properly  handled.  The  captain,  anxious
to  save  his  ship  and  his  life,  consented.  Most  of  the  soldiers
were  sent  beneath  the  hatches  :  a  few  were  ordered  to  sit  on
the  benches  among  the  slaves.  How  there  had  been  a  secret
understanding  for  many  days  among  these  unfortunate  men,
nor  were  they  wholly  without  weapons.  They  had  been
accustomed  to  make  toothpicks  and  other  trifling  articles  for

1  Bor,  iii.  322,  seq.

472

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

sale  out  of  broken  sword-blades  and  other  refuse  bits  of  steel.
There  was  not  a  man  among  them  who  had  not  thus  provided
himself  with  a  secret  stiletto.1

At  first  Gwynn  occupied  himself  with  arrangements  for
weathering  the  gale.  So  soon  however  as  the  ship  had  been
made  comparatively  easy,  he  looked  around  him,  suddenly
threw  down  his  cap,  and  raised  his  hand  to  the  rigging.  It
was  a  preconcerted  signal.  The  next  instant  he  stabbed  the
captain  to  the  heart,  while  each  one  of  the  galley-slaves  killed
the  soldier  nearest  him  ;  then,  rushing  below,  they  surprised
and  overpowered  the  rest  of  the  troops,  and  put  them  all  to
death.2

Coming  again  upon  deck,  David  Gwynn  descried  the  fourth
galley  of  the  squadron,  called  the  Royal,  commanded  by  Com¬
modore  Medrado  in  person,  bearing  down  upon  them,  before
the  wind.  It  was  obvious  that  the  Vasana  was  already  an
object  of  suspicion.

u  Comrades/'  said  Gwynn,  u  God  has  given  us  liberty,  and
by  our  courage  we  must  prove  ourselves  worthy  of  the
boon/'3

As  he  spoke  there  came  a  broadside  from  the  galley  Royal
which  killed  nine  of  his  crew.  David,  nothing  daunted,  laid
his  ship  close  alongside  of  the  Royal ,  with  such  a  shock  that
the  timbers  quivered  again.  Then  at  the  head  of  his  libe¬
rated  slaves,  nbw  thoroughly  armed,  he  dashed  on  board  the
galley,  and,  after  a  furious  conflict,  in  which  he  was  assisted
by  the  slaves  of  the  Royal ,  succeeded  in  mastering  the  vessel,
and  putting  all  the  Spanish  soldiers  to  death.  This  done,  the
combined  rowers,  welcoming  Gwynn  as  their  deliverer  from
an  abject  slavery  which  seemed  their  lot  for  life,  willingly
accepted  his  orders.  The  gale  had  meantime  abated,  and  the
two  galleys,  well  conducted  by  the  experienced  and  intrepid
Welshman,  made  their  way  to  the  coast  of  France,  and  landed
at  Bayonne  on  the  31st,  dividing  among  them  the  property
found  on  board  the  two  galleys.  Thence,  by  land,  the  fugi¬
tives,  four  hundred  and  sixty-six  in  number — Frenchmen,

1  Bor,  iii.  322,  seq.  3  Ibid.  3  Ibid.

*

1588.

EXPLOITS  OF  DAVID  GWYNH.

473

Spaniards,  Englishmen,  Turks,  and  Moors,  made  their  way  to
Rochelle.  Gwynn  had  an  interview  with  HeDry  of  Navarre,
and  received  from  that  chivalrous  king  a  handsome  present.
Afterwards  he  found  his  way  to  England,  and  was  well  com¬
mended  by  the  Queen.  The  rest  of  the  liberated  slaves
dispersed  in  various  directions/' 1

This  was  the  first  adventure  of  the  invincible  Armada.  Of
the  squadron  of  galleys,  one  was  already  sunk  in  the  sea,  and
two  of  the  others  had  been  conquered  by  their  own  slaves.
The  fourth  rode  out  the  gale  with  difficulty,  and  joined  the
rest  of  the  fleet,  which  ultimately  re- assembled  at  Coruna  ;
the  ships  having,  in  distress,  put  in  at  first  at  Vivera,  Ribadeo,
Gijon,  and  other  northern  ports  of  Spain.2  At  the  Groyne — as
the  English  of  that  day  were  accustomed  to  call  Coruna —
they  remained  a  month,  repairing  damages  and  recruiting ;
and  on  the  22nd  of  July3  (N.S.)  the  Armada  set  sail.  Six
days  later,  the  Spaniards  took  soundings,  thirty  leagues  from
the  Scilly  Islands,  and  on  Friday,  the  29th  of  July,  off  the
Lizard,4  they  had  the  first  glimpse  of  the  land  of  promise
presented  them  by  Sixtus  V.,  of  which  they  had  at  last  come
to  take  possession.

On  the  same  day  and  night  the  blaze  and  smoke  of  ten
thousand  beacon-fires  from  the  Land's  End  to  Margate,  and
from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  Cumberland,  gave  warning  to  every
Englishman  that  the  enemy  was  at  last  upon  them.  Almost
at  that  very  instant  intelligence  had  been  brought  from  the
court  to  the  Lord-Admiral  at  Plymouth,  that  the  Armada,
dispersed  and  shattered  by  the  gales  of  June,  was  not  likely
to  make  its  appearance  that  year  ;  and  orders  had  conse¬
quently  been  given  to  disarm  the  four  largest  ships,  and  send

1  Bor,  Meteren,  xv.  212.  Compare

Camden,  iv.  410,  who  had  heard,  how¬
ever,  nothing  but  the  name  of  Gwynn,
and  who  speaks  of  the  “  treachery  of
the  Turkish  rowers.”  (!)

3  Herrera,  III.  iii.  94.

3  Medina  Sidonia  from  his  galleon
San  Martin  to  Parma,  25  July,  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

The  dates  in  the  narrative  will  be
always  given  according  to  the  Hew
Style,  then  already  adopted  by  Spain,
Holland,  and  France,  although  not  by
England.  The  dates  thus  given  are,
of  course,  ten  days  later  than  they
appear  in  contemporary  English  re¬
cords.

4  Herrera,  ubi  sup.

474

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

them  into  dock.1  Even  Walsingham,  as  already  stated,  had
participated  in  this  strange  delusion.2

Before  Howard  had  time  to  act  upon  this  ill-timed  sug¬
gestion — even  had  he  been  disposed  to  do  so — he  received
authentic  intelligence  that  the  great  fleet  was  off  the  Lizard.
Neither  he  nor  Francis  Drake  were  the  men  to  lose  time  in
such  an  emergency,  and  before  that  Friday  night  was  spent,
sixty  of  the  best  English  ships  had  been  warped  out  of  Ply¬
mouth  harbour.3

On  Saturday,  30th  July,  the  wind  was  very  light  at  south¬
west,  with  a  mist  and  drizzling  rain,4  but  by  three  in  the
afternoon  the  two  fleets  could  descry  and  count  each  other
through  the  haze.5

By  nine  o'clock,  31st  July,  about  two  miles  from  Looe,6
on  the  Cornish  coast,  the  fleets  had  their  first  meeting.  There
were  136  sail  of  the  Spaniards,  of  which  ninety  were  large
ships,  and  sixty-seven  of  the  English.7  It  was  a  solemn  mo¬
ment.  The  long-expected  Armada  presented  a  pompous,
almost  a  theatrical  appearance.  The  ships  seemed  arranged
for  a  pageant,  in  honour  of  a  victory  already  won.  Disposed
in  form  of  a  crescent,  the  horns  of  which  were  seven
miles  asunder,  those  gilded,  towered,  floating  castles,  with
their  gaudy  standards  and  their  martial  music,  moved
slowly  along  the  channel,  with  an  air  of  indolent  pomp.
Their  captain-general,  the  golden  Duke,  stood  in  his  pri¬
vate  shot-proof  fortress,8  on  the  deck  of  his  great  galleon
the  Saint  Martin ,  surrounded  by  generals  of  infantry,  and
colonels  of  cavalry,  who  knew  as  little  as  he  did  himself
of  naval  matters.  The  English  vessels,  on  the  other

1  Meteren,  sv.  2t2.  Camden,  III.
410.  Murdin,  615-621.  The  ships
were  the  ‘Triumph,’  ‘White  Bear/
‘Elizabeth  Jonas/  and  ‘Victory.’  Lin-
gard,  viii.  280.

2  Walsingham  to  Sir  Ed.  Norris,
-  July,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  See
page  42,  note  4.

3  Herrera,  ubi  sup.  Howard  to

21

Walsingham,  —  July,  1588,  in  Barrow,
288.

4  Herrera,  101.

6  Ibid.  Howard  to  Walsingham,
ubi  sup.

-  SO  July

c  R.  Tomson  to  - ,  - ,  1588.

’  9  Aug.’

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

7  Ibid.

8  Meteren,  sv.  214.

1588.

FIRST  ENGAGEMENTS  IN  ENGLISH  CHANNEL.

475

hand — with  a  few  exceptions,  light,  swift,  and  easily  handled
— could  sail  round  and  round  those  unwieldy  galleons,
hulks,  and  galleys  rowed  by  fettered  slave-gangs.  The
superior  seamanship  of  free  Englishmen,  commanded  by  such
experienced  captains  as  Drake,  Frobisher,  and  Hawkins —
from  infancy  at  home  on  blue  water — was  manifest  in  the
very  first  encounter.  They  obtained  the  weather-gage  at
once,  and  cannonaded  the  enemy  at  intervals  with  consider¬
able  effect,  easily  escaping  at  will  out  of  range  of  the  sluggish
Armada,  which  was  incapable  of  bearing  sail  in  pursuit,
although  provided  with  an  armament  which  could  sink  all  its
enemies  at  close  quarters.  “We  had  some  small  fight  with
them  that  Sunday  afternoon/'  said  Hawkins.1

Medina  Sidonia  hoisted  the  royal  standard  at  the  fore,  and
the  whole  fleet  did  its  utmost,  which  was  little,  to  offer
general  battle.  It  was  in  vain.  The  English,  following  at
the  heels  of  the  enemy,  refused  all  such  invitations,  and
attacked  only  the  rear-guard  of  the  Armada,  where  Recalde
commanded.  That  admiral,  steadily  maintaining  his  post,
faced  his  nimble  antagonists,  who  continued  to  teaze,  to  mal¬
treat,  and  to  elude  him,  while  the  rest  of  the  fleet  proceeded
slowly  up  the  Channel  closely  followed  by  the  enemy.  And
thus  the  running  fight  continued  along  the  coast,  in  full  view
of  Plymouth,  whence  boats  with  reinforcements  and  volun¬
teers  were  perpetually  arriving  to  the  English  ships,  until  the
battle  had  drifted  quite  out  of  reach  of  the  town.

Already  in  this  first  ee  small  fight  ”  the  Spaniards  had
learned  a  lesson,  and  might  even  entertain  a  doubt  of  their
invincibility.  But  before  the  sun  set  there  were  more  serious
disasters.  Much  powder  and  shot  had  been  expended  by  the
Spaniards  to  very  little  purpose,  and  so  a  master-gunner  on
board  Admiral  Oquendo's  flag-ship  was  reprimanded  for  care¬
less  ball-practice.  The  gunner,  who  was  a  Fleming,  enraged
with  his  captain,  laid  a  train  to  the  powder-magazine,  fired  it,
and  threw  himself  into  the  sea.2  Two  decks  blew  up.  The

1  Hawkins  to  Walsingham,
1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

31  July
9  Aug.’

2  Report  of  certain  Mariners,  Aug.
15S8.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

476

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

great  castle  at  the  stem  rose  into  the  clouds,  carrying  with  it
the  paymaster-general  of  the  fleet,  a  large  portion  of  treasure,
and  nearly  two  hundred  men.1  The  ship  wras  a  wreck,  hut  it
was  possible  to  save  the  rest  of  the  crew.  So  Medina  Sidonia
sent  light  vessels  to  remove  them,  and  wore  with  his  flag-ship,
to  defend  Oquendo,  who  had  already  been  fastened  upon  by
his  English  pursuers.  But  the  Spaniards,  not  being  so  light
in  hand  as  their  enemies,  involved  themselves  in  much  em¬
barrassment  by  this  manoeuvre  ;  and  there  was  much  falling
foul  of  each  other,  entanglement  of  rigging,  and  carrying
away  of  yards.  Oquendo's  men,  however,  were  ultimately
saved,  and  taken  to  other  ships.2

Meantime  Don  Pedro  de  Yaldez,  commander  of  the  Anda¬
lusian  squadron,  having  got  his  galleon  into  collision  with  two
or  three  Spanish 'ships  successively,  had  at  last  carried  away
his  fore-mast  close  to  the  deck,  and  the  wreck  had  fallen
against  his  main-mast.  He  lay  crippled  and  helpless,  the
Armada  was  slowdy  deserting  him,  night  was  coming  on,  the
sea  was  running  high,  and  the  English,  ever  hovering  near,
were  ready  to  grapple  with  him.  In  vain  did  Don  Pedro  fire
signals  of  distress.  The  captain-general,  even  as  though  the
unlucky  galleon  had  not  been  connected  with  the  Catholic
fleet — calmly  fired  a  gun  to  collect  his  scattered  ships,  and
abandoned  Yaldez  to  his  fate.  cc  He  left  me  comfortless  in
sight  of  the  whole  fleet,"  said  poor  Pedro,  “  and  greater  in¬
humanity  and  unthankfulness  I  think  was  never  heard  of
among  men." 3

Yet  the  Spaniard  comported  himself  most  gallantly.  Fro¬
bisher,  in  the  largest  ship  of  the  English  fleet,  the  Triumph ,
of  1100  tons,  and  Hawkins  in  the  Victory ,  of  800,  cannonaded
him  at  a  distance,  but,  night  coming  on,  he  was  able  to
resist ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  following  morning  that  he  sur¬
rendered  to  the  Revenge}

1  Herrera,  III.  iii.  100-102.  Cam¬
den,  III.  412.  Bor,  III.  323.

Ibid.

3  Yaldez  to  Philip  (“Englished”),
31  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Compare  Herrera,  Bor,  Camden,  ubi
sup.

4  MS.  letter  of  Yaldez  before  cited.
Bor,  Camden,  ubi  sup.  Meteren,  xv.
212.  Herrera,  III.  iii.  100-102,  who

1588.

CONSIDERABLE  LOSSES  OF  THE  SPANIARDS.

477

Drake  then  received  the  gallant  prisoner  on  board  his  flag¬
ship — much  to  the  disgust  and  indignation  of  Frobisher  and
Hawkins,  thus  disappointed  of  their  prize-  and  ransom-
money  1 — treated  him  with  much  courtesy,  and  gave  his  word
of  honour  that  he  and  his  men  should  be  treated  fairly  like
good  prisoners  of  war.  This  pledge  was  redeemed,  for  it  was
not  the  English,  as  it  was  the  Spanish  custom,  to  convert
captives  into  slaves,  but  only  to  hold  them  for  ransom.
Yaldez  responded  to  Drake's  politeness  by  kissing  his  hand,
embracing  him,  and  overpowering  him  with  magnificent  com¬
pliments.2  He  was  then  sent  on  board  the  Lord-Admiral,
who  received  him  with  similar  urbanity,  and  expressed  his
regret  that  so  distinguished  a  personage  should  have  been  so
coolly  deserted  by  the  Duke  of  Medina.  Don  Pedro  then
returned  to  the  Revenge ,  where,  as  the  guest  of  Drake,  he
was  a  witness  to  all  subsequent  events  up  to  the  10th  of
August,  on  which  day  he  was  sent  to  London  with  some  other
officers,3  Sir  Francis  claiming  his  ransom  as  his  lawful  due.4

Here  certainly  wus  no  very  triumphant  beginning  for
the  Invincible  Armada.  On  the  very  first  day  of  their  being
in  presence  of  the  English  fleet — then  but  sixty-seven  in
number,  and  vastly  their  inferior  in  size  and  weight  of
metal — they  had  lost  the  flag-ships  of  the  Guipuzcoan  and
of  the  Andalusian  squadrons,  with  a  general-admiral,  450
officers  and  men,  and  some  100,000  ducats  of  treasure.
They  had  been  out-manoeuvred,  out-sailed,  and  thoroughly
maltreated  by  their  antagonists,  and  they  had  been  unable
to  inflict  a  single  blow  in  return.  Thus  the  “  small  fight"  had
been  a  cheerful  one  for  the  opponents  of  the  Inquisition,
and  the  English  were  proportionably  encouraged.

draws  entirely  from  the  journal  of  a
Spanish  officer  in  the  Armada,  and  who
calls  the  two  famous  English  naval  com¬
manders,  Frobesquerio  and  Avesnisio.

Many  English  names  look  almost  as
strangely  in  their  Spanish  dress  as
these  two  familiar  ones  of  Frobisher
and  Hawkins.  Thus  Dr.  Bartholomew
Clerk  is  called,  for  some  mysterious
reason,  Dr.  Quiberich ;  Col.  Patton

becomes  Col.  •  Reyton ;  while  Lord
High  Admiral  Howard,  of  Effingham,
figures  in  the  chronicles  as  Carlos
Haurat,  Count  of  Contuberland.  Her¬
rera,  III.  p.  49.

1  See  page  525,  note  \

2  Meteren,  Bor,  ubi  sup.

31  July

3  Drake  to  TValsingham,  - ,

10  Aug.’

1588,  in  Barrow,  p.  303.  4  Ibid.

478

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

On  Monday,  1st  of  August,  Medina  Sidonia  placed  the
rear-guard — consisting  of  the  galeasses,  the  galleons  St
Matthew ,  St.  Luke ,  St.  James ,  and  the  Florence  and  other
ships,  forty- three  in  all — under  command  of  Don  Antonio  de
Leyva.  He  was  instructed  to  entertain  the  enemy — so  con¬
stantly  hanging  on  the  rear — to  accept  every  chance  of  battle,
and  to  come  to  close  quarters  whenever  it  should  be  possible.
The  Spaniards  felt  confident  of  sinking  every  ship  in  the
English  navy,  if  they  could  but  once  come  to  grappling  ;  but
it  was  growing  more  obvious  every  hour  that  the  giving  or
withholding  battle  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  their  foes.
Meantime — while  the  rear  was  thus  protected  by  Leyva's
division — the  vanguard  and  main  body  of  the  Armada,  led
by  the  captain-general,  would  steadily  pursue  its  way,  accord¬
ing  to  the  royal  instructions,  until  it  arrived  at  its  appointed
meeting-place  with  the  Duke  of  Parma.  Moreover,  the  Duke
of  Medina — dissatisfied  with  the  want  of  discipline  and  of
good  seamanship  hitherto  displayed  in  his  fleet — now  took
occasion  to  send  a  serjeant-major,  with  written  sailing  direc¬
tions,  on  board  each  ship  in  the  Armada,  with  express  orders
to  hang  every  captain,  without  appeal  or  consultation,  who
should  leave  the  position  assigned  him  ;  and  the  hangmen
were  sent  with  the  sergeant-majors  to  ensure  immediate
attention  to  these  arrangements.1  J uan  Gil  was  at  the  same
time  sent  off  in  a  sloop  to  the  Duke  of  Parma,  to  carry  the
news  of  the  movements  of  the  Armada,  to  request  information
as  to  the  exact  spot  and  moment  of  the  junction,  and  to  beg
for  pilots  acquainted  with  the  French  and  Flemish  coasts.
“In  case  of  the  slightest  gale  in  the  world,"  said  Medina,  “I
don't  know  how  or  where  to  shelter  such  large  ships  as
ours."  2

Disposed  in  this  manner,  the  Spaniards  sailed  leisurely
along  the  English  coast  with  light  westerly  breezes,  watched
closely  by  the  Queen's  fleet,  which  hovered  at  a  moderate

1  Herrera,  III.  iii.  105.  “Sin replica
ni  consul  ta,”  &c.

2  “  Con  el  menor  temporal  del  mundo
tnon  so  sabo  donde  se  pueden  abrigar

naos  tan  grandes.”  Medina  Sidonia
to  Parma,  2  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de
Sim.  MS.)

GENERAL  ENGAGEMENT  NEAR  PORTLAND.

1588.

479

distance  to  windward,  without  offering,  that  day,  any  obstruc¬
tion  to  their  course.

By  five  o'clock  on  Tuesday  morning,  2nd  of  August,  the
Armada  lay  between  Portland  Bill  and  St.  Albans'  Head,
when  the  wind  shifted  to  the  north-east,  and  gave  Tues.,  2  Aug.
the  Spaniards  the  weather-gage.1  The  English  did  1588-
their  best  to  get  to  windward,  hut  the  Duke,  standing  close
into  the  land  with  the  whole  Armada,  maintained  his  ad¬
vantage.  The  English  then  went  about,  making  a  tack  sea¬
ward,  and  were  soon  afterwards  assaulted  by  the  Spaniards.
A  long  and  spirited  action  ensued.  Howard  in  his  little  Ark-
Boyal — “  the  odd  ship  of  the  world  for  all  conditions  " — was
engaged  at  different  times  with  Bertendona,  of  the  Italian
squadron,  with  Alonzo  de  Leyva  in  the  Batta ,  and  with  other
large  vessels.  He  was  hard  pressed  for  a  time,  hut  was  gal¬
lantly  supported  by  the  Nonpareil ,  Captain  Tanner  ;  and  after
a  long  and  confused  combat,  in  which  the  St  Mark ,  the  St.
Luke ,  the  St.  Mattlieiv ,  the  St.  Philip ,  the  St.  John ,  the  St.
James ,  the  St.  John  Baptist ,  the  St.  Martin ,  and  many  other
great  galleons,  with  saintly  and  apostolic  names,  fought  pell-
mell  with  the  Lion ,  the  Bear ,  the  Bull ,  the  Tiger ,  the  Dread¬
nought,  the  Bevenge,  the  Victory ,  the  Triumph ,  and  other
of  the  more  profanely-baptized  English  ships,  the  Spaniards
were  again  baffied  in  all  their  attempts  to  close  with,  and  to
board,  their  ever- attacking,  ever-flying  adversaries.  The  can¬
nonading  was  incessant.  “  We  had  a  sharp  and  a  long  fight,"
said  Hawkins.2  Boat-loads  of  men  and  munitions  were  per¬
petually  arriving  to  the  English,  and  many  high-born  volun¬
teers — like  Cumberland,  Oxford,  Northumberland,  Raleigh,
Brooke,  Dudley,  Willoughby,  Noel,  William  Hatton,  Thomas
Cecil,  and  others — could  no  longer  restrain  their  impatience,
as  the  roar  of  battle  sounded  along  the  coasts  of  Dorset,  but
flocked  merrily  on  board  the  ships  of  Drake,  Hawkins,

1  Declaration  of  the  Proceedings  of
the  two  Fleets,  July  19-31  (0.  S),  1588.
(8.  P.  Office  MS.)  Herrera,  III.  iii.  106.

2  Hawkins  to  Walsingham,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Herrera,

III.  hi.  106-108.  Bor,  III.  323.
Meteren,  xv.  273.  Camden,  III.  412,
413.

4S0  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XIX.

Howard,  and  Frobisher,  or  came  in  small  vessels  which  they
had  chartered  for  themselves,  in  order  to  have  their  share  in
the  delights  of  the  long-expected  struggle.1

The  action,  irregular,  desultory,  hut  lively,  continued  nearly
all  day,  and  until  the  English  had  fired  away  most  of  their
powder  and  shot.2  The  Spaniards,  too,  notwithstanding  their
years  of  preparation,  were  already  short  of  light  metal,  and
Medina  Sidonia  had  been  daily  sending  to  Parma  for  a  supply
of  four,  six,  and  ten  pound  balls.3  So  much  lead  and  gun¬
powder  had  never  before  been  wasted  in  a  single  day  ;  for
there  was  no  great  damage  inflicted  on  either  side.  The
artillery-practice  was  certainly  not  much  to  the  credit  of
either  nation.

“  If  her  Majesty’s  ships  had  been  manned  with  a  full  supply
of  good  gunners,”  said  honest  William  Thomas,  an  old  artil¬
leryman,  “  it  would  have  been  the  woefullest  time  ever  the
Spaniard  took  in  hand,  and  the  most  noble  victory  ever  heard
of  would  have  been  her  Majesty’s.  But  our  sins  were  the
cause  that  so  much  powder  and  shot  were  spent,  so  long  time
in  fight,  and  in  comparison  so  little  harm  done.  It  were
greatly  to  be  wished  that  her  Majesty  were  no  longer  deceived
in  this  way.”  4 * *

Yet  the  English,  at  any  rate,  had  succeeded  in  displaying
their  seamanship,  if  not  their  gunnery,  to  advantage.  In  vain
the  un wieldly  hulks  and  galleons  had  attempted  to  grapple
with  their  light-winged  foes,  who  pelted  them,  braved  them,
damaged  their  sails  and  gearing,  and  then  danced  lightly  off
into  the  distance ;  until  at  last,  as  night  fell,  the  wind  came
out  from  the  west  again,  and  the  English  regained  and  kept
the  weather-gage.

The  Queen’s  fleet,  now  divided  into  four  squadrons,  under

1  Herrera,  Bor,  Meteren,  Camden,

ubi  sup.

3  MS.  Letter  of  Hawkins  last  cited.

3  Medina  Sidonia  to  Parma,  2  Aug.

1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  Herrera,
III.  iii.  108.

*  "William  Thomas,  master  gunner

of  Flushing  (who  much  complained

that  the  loss  of  its  charter  by  the
worshipful  corporation  of  gunners,
founded  by  Henry  YIII.,  had  caused
its  decay,  and  much  mischief  in  con-

30  Sept.

sequence),  to  Burghley,  - 7 1588.

10  Oct.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1588.

SUPERIOR  SEAMANSHIP  OF  THE  ENGLISH.

481

Howard,  Drake,  Hawkins,  and  .Frobisher,  amounted  to  near
one  hundred  sail,  exclusive  of  Lord  Henry  Seymour's  division,
which  was  cruising  in  the  Straits  of  Dover.  But  few  of  all
this  number  were  ships  of  war  however,  and  the  merchant
vessels,  although  zealous  and  active  enough,  were  not  thought
very  effective.  “  If  you  had  seen  the  simple  service  done  by
the  merchants  and  coast  ships,"  said  Winter,  u  you  would
have  said  we  had  been  little  holpen  by  them,  otherwise  than
that  they  did  make  a  show." 1

All  night  the  Spaniards,  holding  their  course  towards
Calais,  after  the  long  but  indecisive  conflict  had  terminated,
were  closely  pursued  by  their  wary  antagonists.  On  o  ^  ^  ^

Wednesday,  3rd  of  August,  there  was  some  slight  4  Aug.,’ Thmu
cannonading,  with  but  slender  results  ;  and  on  1588’
Thursday,  the  4th,  both  fleets  were  off  D unnose,  on  the  Isle
of  Wight.  The  great  hulk  Santana  and  a  galleon  of  Por¬
tugal  having  been  somewhat  damaged  the  previous  day,  were
lagging  behind  the  rest  of  the  Armada,  and  were  vigorously
attacked  by  the  Triumph  and  a  few  other  vessels.  Don
Antonio  de  Leyva,  with  some  of  the  galeasses  and  large  gal¬
leons,  came  to  the  rescue,  and  Frobisher,  although  in  much
peril,  maintained  an  unequal  conflict,  within  close  range,  with
great  spirit.2

Seeing  his  danger,  the  Lord  Admiral  in  the  Ark- Royal,
accompanied  by  the  Golden  Lion,  the  White  Bear,  the  Eliza¬
beth,  the  Victory,  and  the  Leicester,  bore  boldly  down  into  the
very  midst  of  the  Spanish  fleet,  and  laid  himself  within  three
or  four  hundred  yards  of  Medina's  flag-ship,  the  St.  Martin,
while  his  comrades  were  at  equally  close  quarters  with  Vice-
Admiral  Recalde  and  the  galleons  of  Oquendo,  Mexia,  and
Almanza.  It  was  the  hottest  conflict  which  had  yet  taken
place.3  Here  at  last  was  thorough  English  work.  The  two
great  fleets,  which  were  there  to  subjugate  and  to  defend  the
realm  of  Elizabeth,  were  nearly  yard-arm  and  yard-arm

1  Sir  W.  Winter  to  Walsingham,
-  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

li  -

3  Declaration  of  the  Proceedings,
VOL.  II. — 2  I

&c.  MS.  before  cited.  Bor,  Herrera,
Meteren,  Camden,  ubi  sup.

3  Ibid.

482

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

together — all  England  on  the  lee.  Broadside  after  broadside
of  great  guns,  volley  after  volley  of  arquebusry  from  maintop
and  rigging,  were  warmly  exchanged,  and  much  damage  was
inflicted  on  the  Spaniards,  whose  gigantic  ships  were  so  easy
a  mark  to  aim  at,  while  from  their  turreted  heights  they  them¬
selves  fired  for  the  most  part  harmlessly  over  the  heads  of
their  adversaries.  The  leaders  of  the  Armada,  however,  were
encouraged,  for  they  expected  at  last  to  come  to  even  closer
quarters,  and  there  were  some  among  the  English  who  were
mad  enough  to  wish  to  board.

But  so  soon  as  Frobisher,  who  was  the  hero  of  the  day,  had
extricated  himself  from  his  difficulty,  the  Lord- Admiral —
having  no  intention  of  risking  the  existence  of  his  fleet,  and
with  it  perhaps  of  the  English  crown,  upon  the  hazard  of  a
single  battle,  and  having  been  himself  somewhat  damaged  in
the  fight — gave  the  signal  for  retreat,  and  caused  the  Ark-Royal
to  be  towed  out  of  action.  Thus  the  Spaniards  were  frustrated
of  their  hopes,  and  the  English,  having  inflicted  much  punish¬
ment  at  comparatively  small  loss  to  themselves,  again  stood
off  to  windward,  and  the  Armada  continued  its  indolent  course
along  the  cliffs  of  Freshwater  and  Blackgang.1

On  Friday,  5th  August,  the  English,  having  received  men
and  munitions  from  shore,  pursued  their  antagonists  at  a
Frid.,  5  Aug.  moderate  distance;  and  the  Lord- Admiral,  profiting
1583  by  the  pause — for  it  was  almost  a  flat  calm — sent
for  Martin  Frobisher,  John  Hawkins,  Roger  Townsend,  Lord
Thomas  Howard,  son  of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  and  Lord  Ed¬
mund  Sheffield,  and  on  the  deck  of  the  Royal  Ark  conferred
the  honour  of  knighthood  on  each  for  his  gallantry  in  the  action
of  the  previous  day.2  Medina  Sidonia,  on  his  jiart,  was  again
despatching  messenger  after  messenger  to  the  Duke  of  Parma,
asking  for  small  shot,  pilots,  and  forty  fly-boats,  with  which
to  pursue  the  teasing  English  clippers.3  The  Catholic  Ar¬
mada,  he  said,  being  so  large  and  heavy,  was  quite  in  the

1  Declaration,  &c.,  MS.  before  cited.

2  Camden,  HI.  414.  Bor,  III.  323,  324.

s  Medina  Sidonia  to  Parma,  4  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1588.

BOTH  FLEETS  OFF  CALAIS.

483

power  of  its  adversaries,  who  could  assault,  retreat,  fight,  or
leave  otf  fighting,  while  he  had  nothing  for  it  hut  to  proceed,
as  expeditiously  as  might  he,  to  his  rendezvous  in  Calais
roads.

And  in  Calais  roads  the  great  fleet — sailing  slowly  all
next  day  in  company  with  the  English,  without  a  Sat.,  6  Aug.
shot  being  fired  on  either  side — at  last  drojyped  1588.
anchor  on  Saturday  afternoon,  August  6th.

Here  then  the  Invincible  Armada  had  arrived  at  its  ap¬
pointed  resting-place.  Here  the  great  junction  of  Medina
Sidonia  with  the  Duke  of  Parma  was  to  be  effected,  and  now
at  last  the  curtain  was  to  rise  upon  the  last  act  of  the  great
drama  so  slowly  and  elaborately  prepared.

That  Saturday  afternoon,  Lord  Henry  Seymour  and  his
squadron  of  sixteen  lay  between  Dungeness  and  Folkestone,
waiting  the  approach  of  the  two  fleets.  He  spoke  several
coasting-vessels  coming  from  the  west  ;  but  they  could
give  him  no  information — strange  to  say — either  of  the
Spaniards  or  of  his  own  countrymen.1  Seymour,  having
hardly  three  days’  provision  in  his  fleet,  thought  that  there
might  be  time  to  take  in  supplies,  and  so  bore  into  the  Downs.
Hardly  had  he  been  there  half  an  hour,  when  a  pinnace
arrived  from  the  Lord-Admiral,  with  orders  for  Lord  Henry’s
squadron  to  hold  itself  in  readiness.  There  was  no  longer
time  for  victualling,  and  very  soon  afterwards  the  order  was
given  to  make  sail  and  bear  for  the  French  coast.  The  wind
was  however  so  light,  that  the  whole  day  was  spent  before
Seymour  with  his  ships  could  cross  the  channel.  At  last,
towards  seven  in  the  evening,  he  saw  the  great  Spanish  Ar¬
mada  drawn  up  in  a  half-moon,  and  riding  at  anchor — the
ships  very  near  each  other — a  little  to  the  eastward  of  Calais,
and  very  near  the  shore.2  The  English,  under  Howard,  Drake,
Frobisher,  and  Hawkins,  were  slowly  following,  and — so  soon
as  Lord  Henry,  arriving  from  the  opposite  shore,  had  made

1  Sir.  W.  Winter  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Ibid.

484

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

his  junction  with  them — the  whole  combined  fleet  dropped
anchor  likewise  very  near  Calais,  and  within  one  mile  and  a
half  of  the  Spaniards.  That  invincible  force  had  at  last  almost
reached  its  destination.  It  was  now  to  receive  the  cooperation
of  the  great  Farnese,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  veterans,
disciplined  on  a  hundred  battle-fields,  confident  from  countless
victories,  and  arrayed,  as  they  had  been  with  ostentatious
splendour,  to  follow  the  most  brilliant  general  in  Christendom
on  his  triumphal  march  into  the  capital  of  England.  The
long-threatened  invasion  was  no  longer  an  idle  figment  of
politicians,  maliciously  spread  abroad  to  poison  men’s  minds
as  to  the  intentions  of  a  long-enduring  but  magnanimous,  and
on  the  whole  friendly  sovereign.  The  mask  had  been  at  last
thrown  down,  and  the  mild  accents  of  Philip’s  diplomatists
and  their  English  dupes,  interchanging  protocols  so  decorously
month  after  month  on  the  sands  of  Bourbourg,  had  been
drowned  by  the  peremptory  voice  of  English  and  Spanish
artillery,  suddenly  breaking  in  upon  their  placid  conferences.
It  had  now  become  supererogatory  to  ask  for  Alexander’s
word  of  honour  whether  he  had  ever  heard  of  Cardinal  Allan’s
pamphlet,  or  whether  his  master  contemplated  hostilities
against  Queen  Elizabeth.

Never,  since  England  was  England,  had  such  a  sight  been
seen  as  now  revealed  itself  in  those  narrow  straits  between
Dover  and  Calais.  Along  that  long,  low,  sandy  shore,  and  quite
within  the  range  of  the  Calais  fortifications,  one  hundred  and
thirty  Spanish  ships — the  greater  number  of  them  the  largest
and  most  heavily  armed  in  the  world — lay  face  to  face,  and
scarcely  out  of  cannon-shot,  with  one  hundred  and  fifty  English
sloops  and  frigates,  the  strongest  and  swiftest  that  the  island
could  furnish,  and  commanded  by  men  whose  exploits  had
rung  through  the  world.

Farther  along  the  coast,  invisible,  but  known  to  be  per¬
forming  a  most  perilous  and  vital  service,  was  a  squadron  of
Dutch  vessels  of  all  sizes,  lining  both  the  inner  and  outer
edges  of  the  sandbanks  off  the  Flemish  coasts,  and  swarming
in  all  the  estuaries  and  inlets  of  that  intricate  and  dangerous

1588.

A  NIGHT  OF  ANXIETY.

485

cruising-ground  between.  Dunkerk  and  Walcheren.  Those
fleets  of  Holland  and  Zeeland,  numbering  some  one  hundred
and  fifty  galleons,  sloops,  and  fly-boats,  under  Warmond,
Nassau,  Van  der  Does,  de  Moor,  and  Rosendael,  lay  patiently
blockading  every  possible  egress  from  Newport,  or  Gravelines,
or  Sluys,  or  Flushing,  or  Dunkerk,  and  longing  to  grapple
with  the  Duke  of  Parma,1  so  soon  as  his  fleet  of  gunboats  and
hoys,  packed  with  his  Spanish  and  Italian  veterans,  should
venture  to  set  forth  upon  the  sea  for  their  long-prepared
exploit.

It  was  a  pompous  spectacle,  that  midsummer  night,  upon
those  narrow  seas.  The  moon,  which  was  at  the  full,  was
rising  calmly  upon  a  scene  of  anxious  expectation.  Would
she  not  be  looking,  by  the  morrow’s  night,  upon  a  subjugated
England,  a  re-enslaved  Holland — upon  the  downfall  of  civil
and  religious  liberty  ?  Those  ships  of  Spain,  which  lay  there
with  their  banners  waving  in  the  moonlight,  discharging
salvoes  of  anticipated  triumph  and  filling  the  air  with  strains
of  insolent  music,  would  they  not,  by  daybreak,  be  moving
straight  to  their  purpose,  bearing  the  conquerors  of  the  world
to  the  scene  of  their  cherished  hopes  P

That  English  fleet,  too,  which  rode  there  at  anchor,  so
anxiously  on  the  watch — would  that  swarm  of  nimble,  lightly-
handled,  but  slender  vessels,  which  had  held  their  own  hitherto
in  hurried  and  desultory  skirmishes — be  able  to  cope  with
their  great  antagonist  now  that  the  moment  had  arrived  for
the  death  grapple  ?  Would  not  Howard,  Drake,  Frobisher,
Seymour,  Winter,  and  Hawkins,  be  swept  out  of  the  straits  at
last,  yielding  an  open  passage  to  Medina,  Oquendo,  Recalde,
and  Farnese?  Would  those  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,
cruising  so  vigilantly  among  their  treacherous  shallows,  dare
to  maintain  their  post,  now  that  the  terrible  c  Holofernese/
with  his  invincible  legions,  was  resolved  to  come  forth  ?

So  soon  as  he  had  cast  anchor,  Howard  despatched  a  pin¬
nace  to  the  Vanguard,  with  a  message  to  Winter  to  come  on

1  Bor,  III.  321,  seq.  Meteren,  xv.  272,  273.

486

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

board  the  flag-ship.1  When  Sir  William  reached  the  Ark,  it
was  already  nine  in  the  evening.  He  was  anxiously  consulted
by  the  Lord-Admiral  as  to  the  course  now  to  be  taken.
Hitherto  the  English  had  been  teasing  and  perplexing  an
enemy,  on  the  retreat,  as  it  were,  by  the  nature  of  his  instruc¬
tions.  Although  anxious  to  give  battle,  the  Spaniard  was
forbidden  to  descend  upon  the  coast  until  after  his  junction
with  Parma.  So  the  English  had  played  a  comparatively  easy
game,  hanging  upon  their  enemy's  skirts,  maltreating  him  as
they  doubled  about  him,  cannonading  him  from  a  distance,
and  slipping  out  of  his  reach  at  their  pleasure.  But  he  was
now  to  be  met  face  to  face,  and  the  fate  of  the  two  free  com¬
monwealths  of  the  world  was  upon  the  issue  of  the  struggle,
which  could  no  longer  be  deferred.

Winter,  standing  side  by  side  with  the  Lord- Admiral  on
the  deck  of  the  little  Ark-Boyal ,  gazed  for  the  first  time  on
those  enormous  galleons  and  galleys  with  which  his  companion
was  already  sufficiently  familiar.

u  Considering  their  hugeness,"  said  he,  “  'twill  not  be  pos¬
sible  to  remove  them  but  by  a  device." 2

Then  remembering,  in  a  lucky  moment,  something  that  he
had  heard  four  years  before  of  the  fire  ships  sent  by  the  Ant-
werpers  against  Parma's  bridge — the  inventor  of  which,  the
Italian  Gianibelli,  was  at  that  very  moment  constructing  forti¬
fications  on  the  Thames 3  to  assist  the  English  against  his  old
enemy  Earnese — Winter  suggested  that  some  stratagem  of
the  same  kind  should  be  attempted  against  the  Invincible
Armada.4  There  was  no  time  nor  opportunity  to  prepare  such
submarine  volcanoes  as  had  been  employed  on  that  memorable
occasion ;  but  burning  ships  at  least  might  be  sent  among
the  fleet.  Some  damage  would  doubtless  be  thus  inflicted  by
the  fire,  and  perhaps  a  panic,  suggested  by  the  memories  of  Ant¬
werp  and  by  the  knowledge  that  the  famous  Mantuan  wizard

1  Winter  to  Walsingham,  MS.
already  cited.

2  Ibid.

8  Meteren,  xv.  272.

4  Thus  distinctly  stated  .  by  Sir  Wm.
Winter,  in  his  admirable  letter  of

l

—  Aug.  (MS.  already  cited.)

1588.

PROJECT  OF  HOWARD  AND  WINTER.

487

was  then  a  resident  of  England,  would  be  still  more  effective.
In  Winter’s  opinion,  the  Armada  might  at  least  he  compelled
to  slip  its  cables,  and  he  thrown  into  some  confusion  if  the
project  were  fairly  carried  out.

Howard  approved  of  the  device,  and  determined  to  hold,
next  morning,  a  council  of  war  for  arranging  the  details  of  its
execution.1

While  the  two  sat  in  the  cabin,  conversing  thus  earnestly,
there  had  well  nigh  been  a  serious  misfortune.  The  ship,
White  Bear ,  of  1000  tons  burthen,  and  three  others  of  the
English  fleet,  all  tangled  together,  came  drifting  with  the
tide  against  the  Ark.  There  were  many  yards  carried  away,
much  tackle  spoiled,  and  for  a  time  there  was  great  danger,
in  the  opinion  of  Winter,  that  some  of  the  very  best  ships  in
the  fleet  would  be  crippled  and  quite  destroyed  on  the  eve
of  a  general  engagement.  By  alacrity  and  good  handling,
however,  the  ships  were  separated,  and  the  ill-consequences
of  an  accident — such  as  had  already  proved  fatal  to  several
Spanish  vessels — were  fortunately  averted.2

Next  day,  Sunday,  7th  August,  the  two  great  fleets  were
still  lying  hut  a  mile  and  a  half  apart,  calmly  gazing  at  each
other,  and  rising  and  falling  at  their  anchors  as  idly  guru  ^  ^ug.
as  if  some  vast  summer  regatta  were  the  only  pur-  1588-
pose  of  that  great  assemblage  of  shipping.  Nothing  as  yet
was  heard  of  Farnese.  Thus  far,  at  least,  the  Hollanders  had
held  him  at  bay,  and  there  was  still  breathing-time  before
the  catastrophe.  So  Howard  hung  out  his  signal  for  council
early  in  the  morning,  and  very  soon  after  Drake  and  Hawkins,
Seymour,  Winter,  and  the  rest,  were  gravely  consulting  in  his
cabin.3

1  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

It  has  been  stated  by  many  writers
— Camden,  III.  415,  Meteren,  xv.  273,
and  others — that  this  project  of  the
fire-ships  was  directly  commanded  by
the  Queen.  Others  attribute  the  de¬
vice  to  the  Lord  Admiral  (Bor,  III.
324),  or  to  Drake  (Strada,  ix.  559),
while  Coloma  (I.  7)  prefers  to  regard
the  whole  matter  as  quite  a  trifling

accident,  “harto  pequeno  accidente;”
but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  merit
of  the  original  suggestion  belongs  ex¬
clusively  to  Winter.  To  give  the
glory  of  the  achievement  to  her  Ma¬
jesty,  who  knew  nothing  of  it  what¬
ever,  was  a  most  gratuitous  exhibition
of  loyalty.

2  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

3  Ibid.

488

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

It  was  decided  that  Winter's  suggestion  should  be  acted
upon,  and  Sir  Henry  Palmer  was  immediately  despatched  in
a  pinnace  to  Dover,  to  bring  off  a  number  of  old  vessels  fit
to  be  fired,  together  with  a  supply  of  light  wood,  tar,  rosin,
sulphur,  and  other  combustibles,  most  adapted  to  the  purpose.1
But  as  time  wore  away,  it  became  obviously  impossible  for
Palmer  to  return  that  night,  and  it  was  determined  to  make
the  most  of  what  could  be  collected  in  the  fleet  itself.2  Other¬
wise  it  was  to  be  feared  that  the  opportunity  might  be  for
ever  lost.  Parma,  crushing  all  opposition,  might  suddenly
appear  at  any  moment  upon  the  channel ;  and  the  whole
Spanish  Armada,  placing  itself  between  him  and  his  enemies,
would  engage  the  English  and  Dutch  fleets,  and  cover  his
passage  to  Dover.  It  would  then  be  too  late  to  think  of  the
burning  ships.

On  the  other  hand,  upon  the  decks  of  the  Armada,  there
was  an  impatience  that  night  which  increased  every  hour.
The  governor  of  Calais,  M.  de  Grourdon,  had  sent  his  nephew
on  board  the  flag-ship  of  Medina  Sidonia,  with  courteous
salutations,  professions  of  friendship,  and  bountiful  refresh¬
ments.  There  was  no  fear — now  that  Mucio  was  for  the  time
in  the  ascendency — that  the  schemes  of  Philip  would  be  inter¬
fered  with  by  France.  The  governor,  had,  however,  sent
serious  warning  of  the  dangerous  position  in  which  the
Armada  had  placed  itself.  He  was  quite  right.  Calais  roads
were  no  safe  anchorage  for  huge  vessels  like  those  of  Spain  and
Portugal ;  for  the  tides  and  cross-currents  to  which  they  were
exposed  were  most  treacherous.3  It  was  calm  enough  at  the
moment,  but  a  westerly  gale  might,  in  a  few  hours,  drive  the
whole  fleet  hopelessly  among  the  sand-banks  of  the  dangerous
Flemish  coast.  Moreover,  the  Duke,  although  tolerably  well
furnished  with  charts  and  pilots  for  the  English  coast,  was
comparatively  unprovided  against  the  dangers  which  might
beset  him  off  Dunkerk,  Newport,  and  Flushing.  He  had  sent
messengers,  day  after  day,  to  Farnese,  begging  for  assistance

1  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

2  Ibid.

3  Herrera,  III.  iii.  108.

1588.

IMPATIENCE  OP  THE  SPANIARDS.

489

of  various  kinds,  but,  above  all,  imploring  bis  instant  presence
on  the  field  of  action.1  It  was  the  time  and  place  for  Alexander
to  assume  the  chief  command.  The  Armada  was  ready  to
make  front  against  the  English  fleet  on  the  left,  while  on  the
right,  the  Duke,  thus  protected,  might  proceed  across  the
channel  and  take  possession  of  England.

And  the  impatience  of  the  soldiers  and  sailors  on  board  the
fleet  was  equal  to  that  of  their  commanders.  There  was
London  almost  before  their  eyes — a  huge  mass  of  treasure,
richer  and  more  accessible  than  those  mines  beyond  the
Atlantic  which  had  so  often  rewarded  Spanish  chivalry  with
fabulous  wealth.  And  there  were  men  in  those  galleons  who
remembered  the  sack  of  Antwerp,  eleven  years  before — men
who  could  tell,  from  j)ersonal  experience,  how  helpless  was  a
great  commercial  city,  when  once  in  the  clutch  of  disciplined
brigands — men  who,  in  that  dread  ‘fury  of  Antwerp/  had
enriched  themselves  in  an  hour  with  the  accumulations  of  a
merchant's  life-time,  and  who  had  slain  fathers  and  mothers,
sons  and  daughters,  brides  and  bridegrooms,  before  each
others'  eyes,  until  the  number  of  inhabitants  butchered  in
the  blazing  streets  rose  to  many  thousands  ;  and  the  plunder
from  palaces  and  warehouses  was  counted  by  millions,  before
the  sun  had  set  on  the  ‘  great  fury.'  Those  Spaniards,  and
Italians,  and  Walloons,  were  now  thirsting  for  more  gold,  for
more  blood ;  and  as  the  capital  of  England  was  even  more
wealthy  and  far  more  defenceless  than  the  commercial  metro¬
polis  of  the  Netherlands  had  been,  so  it  was  resolved  that  the
London  ‘  fury '  should  be  more  thorough  and  more  productive
than  the  ‘fury'  of  Antwerp,  at  the  memory  of  which  the
world  still  shuddered.  And  these  professional  soldiers  had
been  taught  to  consider  the  English  as  a  pacific,  delicate,
effeminate  race,  dependent  on  good  living,  without  experience
of  war,  quickly  fatigued  and  discouraged,2  and  even  more
easily  /to  be  plundered  and  butchered  than  were  the  excellent
burghers  of  Antwerp.

1  Medina  Sidonia  to  Parma,  2  Aug.
1588,  4  Aug.  1588,  5  Aug.  1588.
Parma  to  Philip  II.,  1  Aug.  1588,
8  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,

MSS.)

2  Examination  of  Don  Diego  do
Pimentel,  in  Bor,  III.  325,  326.

490

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

And  so  these  southern  conquerors  looked  down  from  their
great  galleons  and  galeasses  upon  the  English  vessels.  More
than  three  quarters  of  them  were  merchantmen.  There
was  no  comparison  whatever  between  the  relative  strength
of  the  fleets.  In  number  they  w^ere  about  equal  —  being
each  from  one  hundred  and  thirty  to  one  hundred  and
fifty  strong — hut  the  Spaniards  had  twice  the  tonnage  of  the
English^  four  times  the  artillery,  and  nearly  three  times  the
number  of  men.

Where  was  Farnese  ?  Most  impatiently  the  Golden  Duke
paced  the  deck  of  the  Saint  Martin.  Most  eagerly  were
thousands  of  eyes  strained  towards  the  eastern  horizon  to
catch  the  first  glimpse  of  Parma’s  flotilla.  But  the  day  wore
on  to  its  close,  and  still  the  same  inexplicable  and  mysterious
silence  prevailed.  There  was  utter  solitude  on  the  waters  in
the  direction  of  Gravelines  and  Dunkerk — not  a  sail  upon
the  sea  in  the  quarter  where  hustle  and  activity  had  been
most  expected.  The  mystery  was  profound,  for  it  had  never
entered  the  head  of  any  man  in  the  Armada  that  Alexander
could  not  come  out  when  he  chose.1

And  now  to  impatience  succeeded  suspicion  and  indigna¬
tion  ;  and  there  were  curses  upon  sluggishness  and  upon
treachery.  For  in  the  horrible  atmosphere  of  duplicity,  in
which  all  Spaniards  and  Italians  of  that  epoch  lived,  every
man  suspected  his  brother,  and  already  Medina  Sidonia  sus¬
pected  Farnese  of  playing  him  false.  There  were  whispers
of  collusion  between  the  Duke  and  the  English  commissioners
at  Bourbourg.  There  were  hints  that  Alexander  wras  playing
his  own  game,  that  he  meant  to  divide  the  sovereignty  of  the
Netherlands  with  the  heretic  Elizabeth,  to  desert  his  great
trust,  and  to  effect,  if  possible,  the  destruction  of  his  master’s
Armada,  and  the  downfall  of  his  master’s  sovereignty  in  the
north.  Men  told  each  other,  too,  of  a  vague  rumour,  concern¬
ing  which  Alexander  might  have  received  information,  and  in
which  many  believed,  that  Medina  Sidonia  was  the  bearer  of
secret  orders  to  throw  Farnese  into  bondage,  so  soon  as  he

3  Examination,  &c.,  last  cited.

1588.  FIRE-SHIPS  SENT  AGAINST  THE  ARMADA.  491

should  appear,  to  send  liim  a  disgraced  captive  hack  to  Spain
for  punishment,  and  to  place  the  baton  of  command  in  the
hand  of  the  Duke  of  Pastrana,  Philip's  bastard  by  the  Eboli.1
Thus,  in  the  absence  of  Alexander,  all  was  suspense  and
suspicion.  It  seemed  possible  that  disaster  instead  of  triumph
was  in  store  for  them  through  the  treachery  of  the  commander-
in-chief.  Four  and  twenty  hours  and  more,  they  had  been
lying  in  that  dangerous  roadstead,  and  although  the  weather
had  been  calm  and  the  sea  tranquil,  there  seemed  something
brooding  in  the  atmosphere.

As  the  twilight  deepened,  the  moon  became  totally  obscured,
dark  cloud-masses  spread  over  the  heavens,  the  sea  grew
black,  distant  thunder  rolled,  and  the  sob  of  an  approaching
tempest  became  distinctly  audible.2  Such  indications  of  a
westerly  gale  were  not  encouraging  to  those  cumbrous  vessels,
with  the  treacherous  quicksands  of  Flanders  under  their  lee.

At  an  hour  past  midnight,  it  was  so  dark  that  it  was  difficult
for  the  most  practiced  eye  to  pierce  far  into  the  gloom.  But  a
faint  drip  of  oars  now  struck  the  ears  of  the  Spaniards  as
they  watched  from  the  decks.  A  few  moments  afterwards
the  sea  became  suddenly  luminous,  and  six  flaming  vessels
appeared  at  a  slight  distance,  bearing  steadily  down  upon
them  before  the  wind  and  tide.3

There  were  men  in  the  Armada  who  had  been  at  the  siege
of  Antwerp  only  three  years  before.  They  remembered  with
horror  the  devil-ships  of  Gianibelli,  those  floating  volcanoes,
which  had  seemed  to  rend  earth  and  ocean,  whose  explosion
had  laid  so  many  thousands  of  soldiers  dead  at  a  blow,  and
which  had  shattered  the  bridge  and  floating  forts  of  Farnese,
as  though  they  had  been  toys  of  glass.  They  knew,  too,  that
the  famous  engineer  was  at  that  moment  in  England.

In  a  moment  one  of  those  horrible  panics,  which  spread
with  such  contagious  rapidity  among  large  bodies  of  men,
seized  upon  the  Spaniards.  There  was  a  yell  throughout  the

1  Strada,  II.  x.  56*7,  568.

2  Strada,  II.  x.  560.

3  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.  already
cited.  Compare  Herrera,  III.  iii.  108.

Meteren,  xv.  273.  Bor,  III.  324,  seq.
Strada,  II.  x.  560,  561.  Camden,
III.  415.

492

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

fleet — u  tlie  fire-ships  of  Antwerp,  the  fire-ships  of  Antwerp !''
and  in  an  instant  every  cable  was  cut,  and  frantic  attempts
were  made  by  each  galleon  and  galeasse  to  escape  what
seemed  imminent  destruction.  The  confusion  was  beyond
description.  Four  or  five  of  the  largest  ships  became  en¬
tangled  with  each  other.  Two  others1  were  set  on  fire  by
the  flaming  vessels,  and  were  consumed.  Medina  Sidonia,
who  had  been  warned,  even  before  his  departure  from  Spain,2
that  some  such  artifice  would  probably  be  attempted,  and  who
had  even,  early  that  morning,  sent  out  a  party  of  sailors  in  a
pinnace3  to  search  for  indications  of  the  scheme,  was  not  sur¬
prised  or  dismayed.  He  gave  orders — as  well  as  might  be —
that  every  ship,  after  the  danger  should  be  passed,  was  to
return  to  its  post,  and  await  his  further  orders.4  But  it  was
useless,  in  that  moment  of  unreasonable  panic  to  issue  com¬
mands.  The  despised  Mantuan,  who  had  met  with  so  many
rebuffs  at  Philip's  court,  and  who — owing  to  official  incredulity
• — had  been  but  partially  successful  in  his  magnificent  enter¬
prise  at  Antwerp,  had  now,  by  the  mere  terror  of  his  name,
inflicted  more  damage  on  Philip's  Armada  than  had  hitherto
been  accomplished  by  Howard  and  Drake,  Hawkins  and
Frobisher,  combined.

So  long  as  night  and  darkness  lasted,  the  confusion  and
uproar  continued.  When  the  Monday  morning  dawned,  several

,r  ,  of  the  Spanish  vessels  lav  disabled,  while  the  rest  of

Monday,  1  \  7

Aug.  8.  the  fleet  was  seen  at  a  distance  of  two  leagues  from
1588'  Calais,  driving  towards  the  Flemish  coast.  The
threatened  gale  had  not  yet  begun  to  blow,  but  there  were
fresh  squalls  from  the  W.S.W.,  which,  to  such  awkward
sailers  as  the  Spanish  vessels,  were  difficult  to  contend  with.
On  the  other  hand,  the  English  fleet  were  all  astir,  and  ready
to  pursue  the  Spaniards,  now  rapidly  drifting  into  the  North

1  This  fact,  mentioned  by  no  his¬
torian,  distinctly  appears  from  Winter’s
Letter,  so  often  cited.  “We  per¬
ceived  that  there  were  two  great  fires
more  than  ours  (previously  stated  by
him  as  six  in  number),  and  far  greater
and  huger  than  any  our  fired  vessels

could  make.”

3  “Advertido  va  el  duque  del  in-
tento  de  Drake  quanto  al  quemar  los
navios.”  Philip  II.  to  Mendoza,  21st
June,  1588.  (Archives  de  Simancas
[Paris],  MS.)

3  Herrera,  III.  iii.  108.

4  Ibid.

1588.

A  GREAT  GALEASSE  DISABLED.

493

Sea.  In  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Calais,  the  flag¬
ship  of  the  squadron  of  galeasses,  commanded  by  Don  Hugo
de  Moncada,  was  discovered  using  her  foresail  and  oars,  and
endeavouring  to  enter  the  harbour.  She  had  been  damaged
by  collision  with  the  St.  J ohn  of  Sicily  and  other  ships,  during
the  night’s  panic,  and  had  her  rudder  quite  torn  away.1  She
was  the  largest  and  most  splendid  vessel  in  the  Armada — the
show-ship  of  the  fleet,  u  the  very  glory  and  stay  of  the
Spanish  navy  2  and  during  the  previous  two  days  she  had
been  visited  and  admired  by  great  numbers  of  Frenchmen
from  the  shore.

Lord  Admiral  Howard  bore  down  upon  her  at  once,  but
as  she  was  already  in  shallow  water,  and  was  rowing
steadily  towards  the  town,  he  saw  that  the  ArJc  could  not
follow  with  safety.  So  he  sent  his  long-boat  to  cut  her
out,  manned  with  fifty  or  sixty  volunteers,  most  of  them  “  as
valiant  in  courage  as  gentle  in  birth  ” 3 — as  a  partaker  in  the
adventure  declared.  The  Margaret  and  Joan  of  London,  also
following  in  pursuit,  ran  herself  a-ground,  but  the  master
despatched  his  pinnace  with  a  body  of  musketeers,  to  aid  in
the  capture  of  the  galeasse.4

That  huge  vessel  failed  to  enter  the  harbour,  and  stuck
fast  upon  the  bar.  There  was  much  dismay  on  board,  but
Don  Hugo  prepared  resolutely  to  defend  himself.  The  quays
of  Calais  and  the  line  of  the  French  shore  were  lined  with
thousands  of  eager  spectators,  as  the  two  boats — rowing
steadily  toward  a  galeasse,  which  carried  forty  brass  pieces
of  artillery,  and  was  manned  with  three  hundred  soldiers  and
four  hundred  and  fifty  slaves — seemed  rushing  upon  their
own  destruction.  Of  these  daring  Englishmen,  patricians
and  plebeians  together,  in  two  open  pinnaces,  there  were  not
more  than  one  hundred  in  number,  all  told.  They  soon  laid
themselves  close  to  the  Capitana ,  far  below  her  lofty  sides,
and  called  on  Don  Hugo  to  surrender.  The  answer  was  a

„  SO  July

3  R.  Tomson  to - , -  1588.

9  Aug.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  3  Ibid.  4  Ibid.

1  ‘Declaration  of  the  Proceedings
of  the  two  Fleets,’  MS.  already  cited.

494

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

smile  of  derision  from  the  haughty  Spaniard,  as  he  looked
down  upon  them  from  what  seemed  an  inaccessible  height.
Then  one  Wilton,  coxswain  of  the  Delight ,  of  Winter’s
squadron,  clambered  up  to  the  enemy’s  deck  and  fell  dead
the  same  instant.1  Then  the  English  volunteers  opened  a
volley  upon  the  Spaniards.  “  They  seemed  safely  ensconced
in  their  ships,”  said  bold  Dick  Tom  son,  of  the  Margaret  and
Joan,  “while  we  in  our  open  pinnaces,  and  far  under  them,
had  nothing  to  shroud  and  cover  us.”  Moreover  the  numbers
were  seven  hundred  and  fifty  to  one  hundred.  But  the
Spaniards,  still  quite  disconcerted  by  the  events  of  the  pre¬
ceding  night,  seemed  under  a  spell.  Otherwise  it  would  have
been  an  easy  matter  for  the  great  galeasse  to  annihilate  such
puny  antagonists  in  a  very  short  space  of  time.2

The  English  pelted  the  Spaniards  quite  cheerfully,  how¬
ever,  with  arquebus-shot,  whenever  they  showed  themselves
above  the  bulwarks,  picked  off  a  considerable  number,  and
sustained  a  rather  severe  loss  themselves,  Lieutenant  Preston,
of  the  Ark-Royal ,  among  others,  being  dangerously  wounded.
“  We  had  a  pretty  skirmish  for  half-an-hour,”  said  Tomson.
At  last  Don  Hugo  de  Moncada,  furious  at  the  inefficiency  of
his  men,  and  leading  them  forward  in  person,  fell  back  on  his
deck  with  a  bullet  through  both  eyes.3  The  panic  was  in¬
stantaneous,  for,  meantime,  several  other  English  boats —
some  with  eight,  ten,  or  twelve  men  on  board — were  seen
pulling  towards  the  galeasse ;  while  the  dismayed  soldiers
at  once  leaped  overboard  on  the  land  side,  and  attempted
to  escape  by  swimming  and  wading  to  the  shore.  Some  of
them  succeeded,  but  the  greater  number  were  drowned.  The
few  who  remained — not  more  than  twenty  in  all4 — hoisted
two  handkerchiefs  upon  two  rapiers  as  a  signal  of  truce.5
The  English,  accepting  it  as  a  signal  of  defeat,  scrambled

1  Winter  to  Walsingham,  MS.  be¬
fore  cited.

2  Tomson’s  Letter,  MS.  Compare

Herrera,  III.  iii.  108.  Bor,  III.  324,

325.  Meteren,  xv.  273.  CamdeD,

III.  415.  Strada,  II.  ix.  561.  Coloma,
I.  7,  8.  3  Ibid.

4  Coloma,  ubi  sup.

6  Tomson’s  Letter,  MS.  before
cited.

1588.  ATTACKED  AND  CAPTURED  BY  ENGLISH  BOATS.  495

with1  great  difficulty  up  the  lofty  sides  of  the  Capitana ,  and,
for  an  hour  and  a  half,  occupied  themselves  most  agreeably
in  plundering  the  ship  and  in  liberating  the  slaves.1

It  was  their  intention,  with  the  flood-tide,  to  get  the  vessel
off,  as  she  was  hut  slightly  damaged,  and  of  very  great  value.
But  a  serious  obstacle  arose  to  this  arrangement.  For  pre¬
sently  a  boat  came  along-side,  with  young  M.  de  Gourdon
and  another  French  captain,  and  bailed  the  galeasse.  There
was  nobody  on  hoard  who  could  speak  French  hut  Bicliard
Tomson.  So  Kichard  returned  the  hail,  and  asked  their
business.2  They  said  they  came  from  the  governor.

“And  what  is  the  governor’s  pleasure  ?”  asked  Tomson,
when  they  had  come  up  the  side.

“  The  governor  has  stood  and  beheld  your  fight,  and  re¬
joiced  in  your  victory,”  was  the  reply  ;  “  and  he  says  that  for
your  prowess  and  manhood  you  well  deserve  the  pillage  of
the  galeasse.  He  requires  and  commands  you,  however,  not
to  attempt  carrying  off  either  the  ship  or  its  ordnance ;  for
she  lies  a-ground  under  the  battery  of  his  castle,  and  within
his  jurisdiction,  and  does  of  right  appertain  to  him.”

This  seemed  hard  upon  the  hundred  volunteers,  who,  in
their  two  open  boats,  had  so  manfully  carried  a  ship  of  1200
tons,  40  guns,  and  750  men;  but  Bichard  answered  diplo¬
matically.

“We  thank  M.  de  Gourdon,”  said  he,  “for  granting  the
pillage  to  mariners  and  soldiers  who  had  fought  for  it,  and
we  acknowledge  that  without  his  good-will  we  cannot  carry
away  anything  we  have  got,  for  the  ship  lies  on  ground
directly  under  his  batteries  and  bulwarks.  Concerning  the
ship  and  ordnance,  we  pray  that  he  would  send  a  pinnace  to
my  Lord  Admiral  Howard,  who  is  here  in  person  hard  by,
from  whom  he  will  have  an  honourable  and  friendly  answer,
which  we  shall  all  obey.”

With  this  the  French  officers,  being  apparently  con¬
tent,  were  about  to  depart ;  and  it  is  not  impossible  that

Bor,  III.  325.

1

3  Tomson’s  Letter,  MS.  before  cited.

496

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

the  soft  answer  might  have  obtained  the  galeasse  and  the
ordnance,  notwithstanding  the  arrangement  which  Philip  II.
had  made  with  his  excellent  friend  Henry  III.  for  aid  and
comfort  to  Spanish  vessels  in  French  ports.  Unluckily,  how¬
ever,  the  inclination  for  plunder  being  rife  that  morning,
some  of  the  Englishmen  hustled  their  French  visitors,  plun¬
dered  them  of  their  rings  and  jewels,  as  if  they  had  been
enemies,  and  then  permitted  them  to  depart.  They  rowed
off  to  the  shore,  vowing  vengeance,  and  within  a  few  minutes
after  their  return  the  battery  of  the  fort  was  opened  upon  the
English,  and  they  were  compelled  to  make  their  escape  as
they  could  with  the  plunder  already  secured,  leaving  the
galeasse  in  the  possession  of  M.  de  Gourdon.1

This  adventure  being  terminated,  and  the  pinnaces  having
returned  to  the  fleet,  the  Lord- Admiral,  who  had  been  lying
off  and  on,2  now  bore  away  with  all  his  force  in  pursuit  of  the
Spaniards.  The  Invincible  Armada,  already  sorely  crippled,
was  standing  n.n.e.  directly  before  a  fresh  topsail-breeze  from
the  s.s.w.  The  English  came  up  with  them  soon  after  nine
o'clock  a.m.  off  Gravelines,  and  found  them  sailing  in  a  half¬
moon,  the  admiral  and  vice-admiral  in  the  centre,  and  the
flanks  protected  by  the  three  remaining  galeasses  and  by  the
great  galleons  of  Portugal.3

Seeing  the  enemy  approaching,  Medina  Sidonia  ordered
his  whole  fleet  to  luff  to  the  wind,  and  prepare  for  action.4
The  wind  shifting  a  few  points,  was  now  at  w.N.w.,  so  that  the
English  had  both  the  weather-gage  and  the  tide  in  their
favour.  A  general  combat  began  at  about  ten,  and  it  was  soon
obvious  to  the  Spaniards  that  their  adversaries  were  intending
warm  work.  Sir  Francis  Drake  in  the  Revenge ,  followed  by
Frobisher  in  the  Triumph ,  Hawkins  in  the  Victory ,  and  some
smaller  vessels,  made  the  first  attack  upon  the  Spanish  flag¬
ships.  Lord  Henry  in  the  Rainbow ,  Sir  Henry  Palmer  in  the
Antelope ,  and  others,  engaged  with  three  of  the  largest

1  Tomson’s  Letter,  MS.  before  cited.
Compare  Herrera,  Bor,  Meteren,  Cam¬
den,  Strada,  Coloma,  ubi  sup.

2  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.  before  cited.
s  Ibid.

4  Herrera,  III.  iii.  110.

1583.  GENERAL  ENGAGEMENT  OP  BOTH  FLEETS.  497

galleons  of  the  Armada,  while  Sir  William  Winter  in  the
Vanguard ,  supported  by  most  of  his  squadron,  charged  the
starboard  wing.1

The  portion  of  the  fleet  thus  assaulted  fell  back  into  the
main  body.  Four  of  the  ships  ran  foul  of  each  other,2  and
Winter,  driving  into  their  centre,  found  himself  within
musket-shot  of  many  of  their  most  formidable  ships.

“  I  tell  you,  on  the  credit  of  a  poor  gentleman/'  he  said,
“that  there  were  five  hundred  discharges  of  demi-cannon,
culverin,  and  demi-culverin,  from  the  Vanguard  ;  and  when
I  was  farthest  off  in  firing  my  pieces,  I  was  not  out  of  shot
of  their  harquebus,  and  most  time  within  speech,  one  of
another." 3

The  battle  lasted  six  hours  long,  hot  and  furious  ;  for  now
there  was  no  excuse  for  retreat  on  the  part  of  the  Spaniards,
but,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  the  intention  of  the  Captain-
G-eneral  to  return  to  his  station  off  Calais,  if  it  were  within
his  power.  Nevertheless  the  English  still  partially  main¬
tained  the  tactics  which  had  proved  so  successful,  and  reso¬
lutely  refused  the  fierce  attempts  of  the  Spaniards  to  lay
themselves  along-side.  Keeping  within  musket-range,  the
well-disciplined  English  mariners  poured  broadside  after
broadside  against  the  towering  ships  of  the  Armada,  which
afforded  so  easy  a  mark ;  while  the  Spaniards,  on  their  part,
found  it  impossible,  while  wasting  incredible  quantities  of
powder  and  shot,  to  inflict  any  severe  damage  on  their  ene¬
mies.  Throughout  the  action,  not  an  English  ship  was
destroyed,  and  not  a  hundred  men  were  killed.4  On  the
other  hand,  all  the  best  ships  of  the  Spaniards  were  riddled
through  and  through,  and  with  masts  and  yards  shattered,
sails  and  rigging  torn  to  shreds,  and  a  north-west  wind  still
drifting  them  towards  the  fatal  sand-banks  of  Holland,  they
laboured  heavily  in  a  chopping  sea,  firing  wildly,  and  re¬
ceiving  tremendous  punishment  at  the  hands  of  Howard,

1  Herrera,  last  cited.  Winter’s
Letter,  MS.  Lord  H.  Seymour  to  the
Queen,  in  Barrow,  305.

vol.  11. — 2  K

2  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

3  Ibid.

4  Herrera,  III.  iii.  110.

498  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XIX.

Drake,  Seymour,  Winter,  and  their  followers.  Not  even
master-gunner  Thomas  could  complain  that  day  of  “  blind
exercise”  on  the  part  of  the  English,  with  “  little  harm  done”
to  the  enemy.  There  was  scarcely  a  ship  in  the  Armada  that
did  not  suffer  severely  ;l  for  nearly  all  were  engaged  in  that
memorable  action  off  the  sands  of  Gravelines.  The  Captain-
General  himself,  Admiral  Kecalde,  Alonzo  de  Leyva,  Oquendo,
Diego  Flores  de  Valdez,  Bertendona,  Don  Francisco  de
Toledo,  Don  Diego  de  Pimentel,  Telles  Enriquez,  Alonzo
de  Luzon,  Garibay,  with  most  of  the  great  galleons  and
galeasses,  were  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  and  one  after
the  other  each  of  those  huge  ships  was  disabled.  Three  sank
before  the  fight  was  over,  many  others  were  soon  drifting
helpless  wrecks  towards  a  hostile  shore,  and,  before  five
o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  at  least  sixteen  of  their  best  ships
had  been  sacrificed,  and  from  four  to  five  thousand  soldiers
killed.2

Nearly  all  the  largest  vessels  of  the  Armada,  therefore,
having  been  disabled  or  damaged — according  to  a  Spanish
eye-witness — and  all  their  small  shot  exhausted,  Medina
Sidonia  reluctantly  gave  orders  to  retreat.  The  Captain-
General  was  a  bad  sailor,  but  he  was  a  chivalrous  Spaniard  of
ancient  Gothic  blood,  and  he  felt  deep  mortification  at  the
plight  of  his  invincible  fleet,  together  with  undisguised  resent¬
ment  against  Alexander  Farnese,  through  whose  treachery
and  incapacity  he  considered  the  great  Catholic  cause  to
have  been  so  foully  sacrificed.  Crippled,  maltreated,  and
diminished  in  number,  as  were  his  ships,  he  would  have  still
faced  the  enemy,  but  the  winds  and  currents  were  fast  driving
him  on  a  lee-shore,  and  the  pilots,  one  and  all,  assured  him

4

singham,  rr  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

2  Bor,  III.  321.  Herrera,  ubi  sup.
‘Declaration  of  the  Proceedings,’  MS.

7

Howard  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.  1588.

g

Drake  to  the  Queen,  —  Aug.  1588:

18

in  Barrow,  306-310.

1  “God  hath  mightily  preserved
her  Majesty’s  forces  with  the  least
losses  that  ever  hath  been  heard  of,
being  within  the  compass  of  so  great
volleys  of  shot,  both  small  and  great.
I  verily  believe  there  is  not  three¬
score  men  lost  of  her  Majesty’s
forces.”  Captain  J.  Eenner  to  Wal-

1588.

LOSS  OF  SEVERAL  SPANISH  SHIPS.

499

that  it  would  be  inevitable  destruction  to  remain.  After  a
slight  and  very  ineffectual  attempt  to  rescue  Don  Diego  de  Pi¬
mentel  in  the  St.  Matthew — who  refused  to  leave  his  disabled
ship — and  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo,  whose  great  galleon,  the
St.  Philip ,  was  fast  driving,  a  helpless  wreck,  towards  Zee-
land,  the  Armada  bore  away  n.n.e.  into  the  open  sea,  leaving
those,  who  could  not  follow,  to  their  fate.1

The  St.  Mattheio ,  in  a  sinking  condition,  hailed  a  Dutch
fisherman,  who  was  offered  a  gold  chain  to  pilot  her  into
Newport.  But  the  fisherman,  being  a  patriot,  steered  her
close  to  the  Holland  fleet,  where  she  was  immediately  assaulted
by  Admiral  Van  der  Does,  to  whom,  after  a  two  hours'  bloody
fight,  she  struck  her  flag.2  Don  Diego,  marshal  of  the  camp
to  the  famous  legion  of  Sicily,  brother  of  the  Marquis  of
Tavera,  nephew  of  the  viceroy  of  Sicily,  uncle  to  the  Viceroy
of  Naples,  and  numbering  as  many  titles,  dignities,  and  high
affinities  as  could  be  expected  of  a  grandee  of  the  first  class,
was  taken,  with  his  officers,  to  the  Hague.3  “  I  was  the
means,"  said  Captain  Borlase,  u  that  the  best  sort  were  saved,
and  the  rest  were  cast  overboard  and  slain  at  our  entry.  He
fought  with  us  two  hours,  and  hurt  divers  of  our  men,  but  at
last  yielded."  4

John  Van  der  Does,  his  captor,  presented  the  banner  of
the  Saint  Matthew  to  the  great  church  of  Leyden,  where —
such  was  its  prodigious  length — it  hung  from  floor  to  ceiling
without  being  entirely  unrolled ; 5  and  there  it  hung,  from
generation  to  generation,  a  worthy  companion  to  the  Spanish
flags  which  had  been  left  behind  when  Valdez  abandoned  the
siege  of  that  heroic  city  fifteen  years  before.

The  galleon  St.  Philip ,  one  of  the  four  largest  ships  in  the
Armada,  dismasted  and  foundering,  drifted  towards  Newport,
where  camp-marshal  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo  hoped  in
vain  for  succour.  La  Motte  made  a  feeble  attempt  at  rescue,
but  some  vessels  from  the  Holland  fleet,  being  much  more

1  Herrera,  III.  iii.  109.  Meteren,
xv.  273,  274.  Bor,  III.  325.  Camden,
III.  415,  416.

2  Bor,  ubi  sup.

4  Borlase  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Bor,  Meteren,  ubi  sup.

3  Ibid.

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

500

active,  seized  the  unfortunate  galleon,  and  carried  her  into
Flushing.  The  captors  found  forty-eight  brass  cannon  and
other  things  of  value  on  board,  but  there  were  some  casks  of
Ribadavia  wine  which  was  more  fatal  to  her  enemies  than
those  pieces  of  artillery  had  proved.  For  while  the  rebels
were  refreshing  themselves,  after  the  fatigues  of  the  capture,
with  large  draughts  of  that  famous  vintage,  the  St.  Philip  ^
which  had  been  bored  through  and  through  with  English  shot,
and  had  been  rapidly  filling  with  water,  gave  a  sudden  lurch,
and  went  down  in  a  moment,  carrying  with  her  to  the  bottom
three  hundred  of  those  convivial  Hollanders.1

A  large  Biscay  galleon,  too,  of  Recalde’s  squadron,  much
disabled  in  action,  and  now,  like  many  others,  unable  to
follow  the  Armada,  was  summoned  by  Captain  Cross,  of  the
Hope ,  48  guns,  to  surrender.  Although  foundering,  she  re¬
sisted,  and  refused  to  strike  her  flag.  One  of  her  officers
attempted  to  haul  down  her  colours,  and  was  run  through  the
body  by  the  captain,  who,  in  his  turn,  was  struck  dead  by  a
brother  of  the  officer  thus  slain.  In  the  midst  of  this  quarrel
the  ship  went  down  with  all  her  crew.2

Six  hours  and  more,  from  ten  till  nearly  five,  the  fight  had
lasted — a  most  cruel  battle,  as  the  Spaniard  declared.  There
were  men  in  the  Armada  who  had  served  in  the  action  of
Lepanto,3  and  who  declared  that  famous  encounter  to  have
been  far  surpassed  in  severity  and  spirit  by  this  fight  off
Gravelines.  u  Surely  every  man  in  our  fleet  did  well,”  said
Winter,  u  and  the  slaughter  the  enemy  received  was  great.” 4

1  Coloma,  I.  8V0.  Compare  Me-
teren,  Bor,  ubi  sup.  et  al.

2  Meteren,  xv.  2  7  3 v0,  who  relates
the  anecdote  on  the  authority  of  some
sailors  who  made  their  escape  by
jumping  overboard,  and  who  were
picked  up  just  before  she  sank.  1  De¬
claration  of  the  Proceedings,’  &c.  MS.

g

3  Howard  to  Walsingham,  -  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  “Some

make  little  account,”  says  the  Lord
Admiral,  “  of  the  Spanish  forces  by
sea,  but,  I  do  warrant  you,  all  the
world  never  saw  such  a  force  as
their’s  was.  And  some  Spanish  there

we  have  taken  that  were  in  the  fight
of  Lepanto,  do  say,  that  the  worst  of
our  four  fights  that  we  have  had  with
them  did  exceed  far  the  fight  they
had  there ;  and  they  say  that  at  some
of  our  fights  we  had  twenty  times  as
much  great  shot  there  played  than
they  had  there.”

“  It  was  a  most  cruel  battle”  (cru-
delissima  batalla)  says  Herrera,  from
the  journal  of  a  Spaniard  present,  III.
108.

4  Winter’s  Letter,  ^  Aug.  158S.
MS.  before  cited.

1588.

ARMADA  FLIES  FOLLOWED  BY  THE  ENGLISH.

501

Nor  would  the  Spaniards  have  escaped  even  worse  punishment,
had  not,  most  unfortunately,  the  penurious  policy  of  the
Queen's  government  rendered  her  ships  useless  at  last,  even
in  this  supreme  moment.  They  never  ceased  cannonading
the  discomfited  enemy  until  the  ammunition  was  exhausted.
“  When  the  cartridges  were  all  spent,"  said  Winter,  “  and  the
munitions  in  some  vessels  gone  altogether,  we  ceased  fighting,
but  followed  the  enemy,  who  still  kept  away." 1  And  the
enemy — although  still  numerous,  and  seeming  strong  enough,
if  properly  handled,  to  destroy  the  whole  English  fleet — fled
before  them.  There  remained  more  than  fifty  Spanish  vessels,
above  six  hundred  tons  in  size,  besides  sixty  hulks  and  other
vessels  of  less  account ;  while  in  the  whole  English  navy  were
but  thirteen  ships  of  or  above  that  burthen.  “  Their  force  is
wonderful  great  and  strong,"  said  Howard,  “  hut  we  pluck
their  feathers  by  little  and  little." 2

For  Medina  Sidonia  had  now  satisfied  himself  that  he  should
never  succeed  in  hoarding  those  hard-fighting  and  swift-sailing
craft,  while,  meantime,  the  horrible  panic  of  Sunday  night
and  the  succession  of  fights  throughout  the  following  day,  had
completely  disorganized  his  followers.  Crippled,  riddled,  shorn,
but  still  numerous,  and  by  no  means  entirely  vanquished,  the
Armada  was  flying  with  a  gentle  breeze  before  an  enemy
who,  to  save  his  existence,  could  not  have  fired  a  broadside.

“  Though  our  powder  and  shot  was  well  nigh  spent,"  said
the  Lord-Admiral,  “  we  put  on  a  brag  countenance  and  gave
them  chase,  as  though  we  had  wanted  nothing." 3  And  the
brag  countenance  was  successful,  for  that  “  one  day's  ser¬
vice  had  much  appalled  the  enemy," 4  as  Drake  observed  ;
and  still  the  Spaniards  fled  with  a  freshening  gale  all
through  the  Monday  night.  “  A  thing  greatly  to  8  Aug.,
be  regarded,"  said  Fenner,  of  the  Nonpariel ,  “is  1588-
that  the  Almighty  had  stricken  them  with  a  wonderful  fear.

1  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.  last  cited.  •

29  July

2  Howard  to  Walsingham,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

8  Aug.

3  Same  to  same,  —  Aug.  1588,  in
’  17

Barrow,  306,  307.

*  Drake  to  Walsingham,  in  Barrow,
301.

502

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

I  have  hardly  seen  any  of  their  companies  succoured  of  the
extremities  which  befell  them  after  their  tights,  hut  they
have  been  left  at  utter  ruin,  while  they  bear  as  much  sail  as
ever  they  possibly  can.”  1

On  Tuesday  morning,  9th  August,  the  English  ships  were
off  the  Isle  of  Walcheren,  at  a  safe  distance  from  the  shore.
Tues.,  Aug.  9,  ee  The  wind  is  hanging  westerly,”  said  Richard  Tom-
1588-  son,  of  the  Margaret  and  Joan ,  “and  we  drive  our

enemies  apace,  much  marvelling  in  what  port  they  will  direct
themselves.  Those  that  are  left  alive  are  so  weak  and  heart¬
less  that  they  could  be  well  content  to  lose  all  charges  and  to
be  at  home,  both  rich  and  poor.” 2

“In  my  conscience,”  said  Sir  William  Winter,  “I  think
the  Duke  would  give  his  dukedom  to  be  in  Spain  again.” 3

The  English  ships,  one  hundred  and  four  in  number,4  being
that  morning  half-a-league  to  windward,  the  Duke  gave  orders
for  the  whole  Armada  to  lay  to  and  await  their  approach.
But  the  English  had  no  disposition  to  engage,  for  at  that
moment  the  instantaneous  destruction  of  their  enemies  seemed
inevitable.  Ill-managed,  panic-struck,  staggering  before
their  foes,  the  Spanish  fleet  was  now  close  upon  the  fatal
sands  of  Zeeland.  Already  there  were  but  six  and  a-half
fathoms  of  water,  rapidly  shoaling  under  their  keels,  and  the
pilots  told  Medina  that  all  were  irretrievably  lost,  for  the
freshening  north-wester  was  driving  them  steadily  upon  the
banks.  The  English,  easily  escaping  the  danger,  hauled
their  wind,  and  paused  to  see  the  ruin  of  the  proud  Armada
accomplished  before  their  eyes.  Nothing  but  a  change  of
wind  at  the  instant  could  save  them  from  perdition.  There
was  a  breathless  shudder  of  suspense,  and  then  there  came  the
change.  Just  as  the  foremost  ships  were  about  to  ground  on
the  Ooster  Zand,  the  wind  suddenly  veered  to  the  south-west,
and  the  Spanish  ships  quickly  squaring  their  sails  to  the  new
impulse.,  stood  out  once  more  into  the  open  sea.5

4

1  Fenner  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Tomson’s  Letters,  MS.  before  cited.

3  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.  before  cited.

4  Herrera,  110.

5  Ibid.  Camden,  III.  416.

1588.

ENGLISH  INSUFFICIENTLY  PROVIDED.

503

All  that  day  the  galleons  and  galeasses,  under  all  the  can¬
vas  which  they  dared  to  spread,  continued  their  flight  before
the  south-westerly  breeze,  and  still  the  Lord- Admiral,  main¬
taining  the  brag  countenance,  followed,  at  an  easy  distance,
the  retreating  foe.  At  4  p.  m.,  Howard  fired  a  signal  gun,  and
ran  up  a  flag  of  council.  Winter  could  not  go,  for  he  had
been  wounded  in  action,  but  Seymour  and  Drake,  Hawkins,
Frobisher,  and  the  rest  were  present,  and  it  was  decided  that
Lord  Henry  should  return,  accompanied  by  Winter  and  the
rest  of  the  inner  squadron,  to  guard  the  Thames  mouth
against  any  attempt  of  the  Duke  of  Parma,  while  the  Lord-
Admiral  and  the  rest  of  the  navy  should  continue  the  pursuit
of  the  Armada.1

Very  wroth  was  Lord  Henry  at  being  deprived  of  his  share
in  the  chase,  u  The  Lord- Admiral  was  altogether  desirous
to  have  me  strengthen  him,”  said  he,  ee  and  having  done  so  to
the  utmost  of  my  good-will  and  the  venture  of  my  life,  and
to  the  distressing  of  the  Spaniards,  which  was  thoroughly  done
on  the  Monday  last,  I  now  find  his  Lordship  jealous  and  loath
to  take  part  of  the  honour  which  is  to  come.  So  he  has  used
his  authority  to  command  me  to  look  to  our  English  coast,
threatened  by  the  Duke  of  Parma.  I  pray  God  my  Lord-
Admiral  do  not  find  the  lack  of  the  Rainbow  and  her  com¬
panions,  for  I  protest  before  God  I  vowed  I  would  be  as  near
or  nearer  with  my  little  ship  to  encounter  our  enemies  as  any
of  the  greatest  ships  in  both  armies.”2

There  was  no  insubordination,  however,  and  Seymour's
squadron,  at  twilight  of  Tuesday  evening,  August  9th — ac¬
cording  to  orders,  so  that  the  enemy  might  not  see  their
departure — bore  away  for  Margate.3  But  although  Winter
and  Seymour  were  much  disappointed  at  their  enforced  re¬
turn,  there  was  less  enthusiasm  among  the  sailors  of  the  fleet.
Pursuing  the  Spaniards  without  powder  or  fire,  and  without
beef  and  bread  to  eat,  was  not  thought  amusing  by  the  Eng¬
lish  crews.  Howard  had  not  three  days'  supply  of  food  in  his

1  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

3  Lord  H.  Seymour  to  Walsingham,

—  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

504

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

lockers,  and  Seymour  and  his  squadron  had  not  food  for  one
day.  Accordingly,  when  Seymour  and  Winter  took  their
departure,  “  they  had  much  ado,”  so  Winter  said,  ee  with  the
staying  of  many  ships  that  would  have  returned  with  them,
besides  their  own  company.” 1  Had  the  Spaniards,  instead
of  being  panic-struck,  but  turned  on  their  pursuers,  what
might  have  been  the  result  of  a  conflict  with  starving  and
unarmed  men  ? 2

Howard,  Drake,  and  Frobisher,  with  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  fol¬
lowed  the  Armada  through  the  North  Sea  from  Tuesday  night
(9th  August)  till  Friday  (the  12th),  and  still,  the  strong  south-
wester  swept  the  Spaniards  before  them,  uncertain  whether  to
seek  refuge,  food,  water,  and  room  to  repair  damages,  in  the
realms  of  the  treacherous  King  of  Scots,  or  on  the  iron-bound
coasts  of  Norway.  Medina  Sidonia  had  however  quite  aban¬
doned  his  intention  of  returning  to  England,  and  was  only
anxious  for  a  safe  return  to  Spain.  So  much  did  he  dread  that
northern  passage,  unpiloted,  around  the  grim  Hebrides,  that  he
would  probably  have  surrendered,  had  the  English  overtaken
him  and  once  more  offered  battle.  He  was  on  the  point  of
hanging  out  a  white  flag — as  they  approached  him  for  the
last  time — but  yielded  to  the  expostulations  of  the  ecclesias¬
tics  on  board  the  Saint  Martin ,  who  thought,  no  doubt,  that
they  had  more  to  fear  from  England  than  from  the  sea,
should  they  be  carried  captive  to  that  country,  and  who
persuaded  him  that  it  would  be  a  sin  and  a  disgrace  to  sur¬
render  before  they  had  been  once  more  attacked.3

On  the  other  hand,  the  Devonshire  skipper,  Vice- Admiral
Drake,  now  thoroughly  in  his  element,  could  not  restrain  his
hilarity,  as  he  saw  the  Invincible  Armada  of  the  man  whose
beard  he  had  so  often  singed,  rolling  through  the  German

1  Winter’s  Letter,  MS.

3  “  Had  the  English  been  well  fur¬
nished  with  victuals  and  munition,”
says  Stowe,  “they  would  in  the  pur¬
suit  have  brought  the  Spaniards  to
their  mercy.  On  the  other  hand,  had
the  Spaniards  but  two  days  longer
continued  fight,  they  must  have  driven

the  English  to  retreat,  for  want  of
shot  and  powder,  leaving  the  Spaniards
masters  of  the  field,”  '719.

3  Meteren,  xv.  274,  on  the  autho¬
rity  of  certain  Dutch  fishermen,  who
had  been  impressed  on  board  the
San  Martin .  Reyd,  viii.  147.

1588.

ARE  OBLIGED  TO  RELINQUISH  THE  CHASE.

505

Ocean,  in  full  flight  from  the  country  which  was  to  have
been  made,  that  week,  a  Spanish  province.  Unprovided  as
were  his  ships,  he  was  for  risking  another  battle,  and  it  is
quite  possible  that  the  brag  countenance  might  have  proved
even  more  successful  than  Howard  thought.

“We  have  the  army  of  Spain  before  us,”  wrote  Drake,
from  the  Revenge ,  “and  hope  with  the  grace  of  God  to
wrestle  a  pull  with  him.  There  never  was  any  thing  pleased
me  better  than  seeing  the  enemy  flying  with  a  southerly  wind
to  the  northward.  God  grant  you  have  a  good  eye  to  the
Duke  of  Parma,  for  with  the  grace  of  God,  if  we  live,  I  doubt
not  so  to  handle  the  matter  with  the  Duke  of  Sidonia  as
he  shall  wish  himself  at  St.  Mary’s  Port  among  his  orange
trees.” 1 *

But  Howard  decided  to  wrestle  no  further  pull.  Having
followed  the  Spaniards  till  Friday,  12th  of  August,  as  far  as
the  latitude  of  56°  17;  the  Lord  Admiral  called  a  Friday,

12  _A.no*

council.  It  was  then  decided,  in  order  to  save  Eng-  1588.°'
lish  lives  and  ships,  to  put  into  the  Frith  of  Forth  for  water
and  provisions,  leaving  two  “  pinnaces  to  dog  the  fleet  until  it
should  be  past  the  Isles  of  Scotland.”3  But  the  next  day,  as
the  wind  shifted  to  the  north-west,  another  council  decided  to
take  advantage  of  the  change,  and  bear  away  for  the  North
Foreland,  in  order  to  obtain  a  supply  of  powder,  shot,  and
provisions.4

Up  to  this  period,  the  weather,  though  occasionally  threat¬
ening,  had  been  moderate.  During  the  week  which  succeeded
the  eventful  night  off  Calais,  neither  the  Armada  nor  the
English  ships  had  been  much  impeded  in  their  manoeuvres  by
storms  of  heavy  seas.  But  on  the  following  Sunday,  14th  of
August,  there  was  a  change.  The  wind  shifted  again  to  the
south-west,  and,  during  the  whole  of  that  day  and  the  Mon¬
day,  blew  a  tremendous  gale.5  u  ’Twas  a  more  violent  storm,”

1  Drake  to  Walsingham, - ,

°  10  Aug.

1588,  in  Barrow,  804.

3  Bor,  III.  326.

4

3  Fenner  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  Howard  to

7

Walsingham,  —  Aug.  1588,  in  Barrow,
306.

4  Fenner’s  Letter,  MS.  last  cited.

6  Ibid.

\

506

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  SIS.

said  Howard,  “  than  was  ever  seen  before  at  this  time  of  the
year/'1  The  retreating  English  fleet  was  scattered,  many
ships  were  in  peril,  “among  the  ill-favoured  sands  off  Nor¬
folk/'  but  within  four  or  five  days  all  arrived  safely  in  Mar¬
gate  roads.2

Far  different  was  the  fate  of  the  Spaniards.  Over  their
Invincible  Armada,  last  seen  by  the  departing  English  mid¬
way  between  the  coasts  of  Scotland  and  Denmark,  the  black¬
ness  of  night  seemed  suddenly  to  descend.  A  mystery  hung
for  a  long  time  over  their  fate.  Damaged,  leaking,  without
pilots,  without  a  competent  commander,  the  great  fleet  en¬
tered  that  furious  storm,  and  was  whirled  along  the  iron  crags
of  Norway  and  between  the  savage  rocks  of  Faroe  and  the
Hebrides.  In  those  regions  of  tempest  the  insulted  North
wreaked  its  full  vengeance  on  the  insolent  Spaniards.  Dis¬
aster  after  disaster  marked  their  perilous  track ;  gale  after
gale  swept  them  hither  and  thither,  tossing  them  on  sand¬
banks  or  shattering  them  against  granite  cliffs.  The  coasts
of  Norway,  Scotland,  Ireland,  were  strewn  with  the  wrecks  of
that  pompous  fleet,  which  claimed  the  dominion  of  the  seas  ;
with  the  bones  of  those  invincible  legions  which  were  to  have
sacked  London  and  made  England  a  Spanish  vice-royalty.

Through  the  remainder  of  the  month  of  August  there  was
a  succession  of  storms.  On  the  2nd  September  a  fierce  south-
wester  drove  Admiral  Oquendo  in  his  galleon,  together  with
one  of  the  great  galeasses,  two  large  Venetian  ships,  the  Batta
and  the  Balauzara ,  and  thirty-six  other  vessels,  upon  the
Irish  coast,  where  nearly  every  soul  on  board  perished,  while
the  few  who  escaped  to  the  shore — notwithstanding  their
religious  affinity  with  the  inhabitants — were  either  butchered
in  cold  blood,  or  sent  coupled  in  halters  from  village  to  village,
in  order  to  be  shipped  to  England.3  A  few  ships  were  driven
on  the  English  coast ;  others  went  ashore  near  Rochelle.

Of  the  four  galeasses  and  four  galleys,  one  of  each  returned

]  586.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Ibid.

1  Howard  to  Walsingliam,  —  Aug.

3  Drake,  in  Stowe,  750,  seq.  Bar-
row,  319.  Meteren,  xv.  274.  Bor,  III,
326,  327.

1588.

A  GREAT  STORM  DISPERSES  THE  ARMADA.

507

to  Spain.  Of  the  ninety-one  great  galleons  and  hulks,  fifty-
eight  were  lost  and  thirty-three  returned.1  Of  the  tenders  and
zabras,  seventeen  were  lost  and  eighteen  returned.  Of  one
hundred  and  thirty-four  vessels,  which  sailed  from  Coruna
in  July,  hut  fifty- three, 2  great  and  small,  made  their  escape  to
Spain,  and  these  were  so  damaged  as  to  be  utterly  worthless.
The  invincible  Armada  had  not  only  been  vanquished  but
annihilated.

Of  the  30,000  men  who  sailed  in  the  fleet,  it  is  probable
that  not  more  than  10,000  ever  saw  their  native  land  again.
Most  of  the  leaders  of  the  expedition  lost  their  lives.  Medina
Sidonia  reached  Santander  in  October,  and,  as  Philip  for  a
moment  believed,  “with  the  greater  part  of  the  Armada/'
although  the  King  soon  discovered  his  mistake.3  Kecalde,
Diego  Flores  de  Valdez,  Oquendo,  Maldonado,  Bobadilla,
Manriquez,  either  perished  at  sea,  or  died  of  exhaustion  imme¬
diately  after  their  return.  Pedro  de  Valdez,  Vasco  de  Silva,
Alonzo  de  Sayas,  Piemontel,  Toledo,  with  many  other  nobles,
were  prisoners  in  England  and  Holland.  There  was  hardly  a
distinguished  family  in  Spain  not  placed  in  mourning,  so  that,  to
relieve  the  universal  gloom,  an  edict  was  published,  forbidding
the  wearing  of  mourning  at  all.  On  the  other  hand,  a  mer¬
chant  of  Lisbon,  not  yet  reconciled  to  the  Spanish  conquest
of  his  country,  permitted  himself  some  tokens  of  hilarity  at
the  defeat  of  the  Armada,  and  was  immediately  hanged  by
express  command  of  Philip.  Thus — as  men  said — one  could
neither  cry  nor  laugh  within  the  Spanish  dominions.4

This  was  the  result  of  the  invasion,  so  many  years  pre¬
paring,  and  at  an  expense  almost  incalculable.  In  the  year
1588  alone,  the  cost  of  Philip's  armaments  for  the  subjugation
of  England  could  not  have  been  less  than  six  millions  of  ducats,

1  Meteren  and  Bor,  ubi  sup.

2  Ibid.  Compare  Strada,  II.  ix.
563,  who  sets  before  his  readers  the

“•absurd  discrepancy  ”  between  the
English-Dutch  and  the  Spanish  ac¬
counts  of  these  losses.  According  to
the  Spaniards,  thirty-three  vessels

were  lost  or  captured,  and  10,000  men

were  missing.  According  to  their
enemies,  only  10,000  men  and  about
sixty  ships  escaped.  Meteren’s  ac¬
count,  xv.  274.  is  minute,  and  seems
truthful,  and  is  followed  in  the  text.

3  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  10  Oct.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Simancas,  MS.)

4  Reyd,  viii.  14S.

508

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

and  there  was  at  least  as  large  a  sum  on  board  the  Armada
itself,  although  the  Pope  refused  to  pay  his  promised  million.1
And  with  all  this  outlay,  and  with  the  sacrifice  of  so  many
thousand  lives,  nothing  had  been  accomplished,  and  Spain,  in
a  moment,  instead  of  seeming  terrible  to  all  the  world,  had
become  ridiculous.2

u  Beaten  and  shuffled  together  from  the  Lizard  to  Calais,
from  Calais  driven  with  squibs  from  their  anchors,  and  chased
out  of  sight  of  England  about  Scotland  and  Ireland,”  as  the
Devonshire  skipper  expressed  himself,  it  must  be  confessed
that  the  Spaniards  presented  a  sorry  sight.  u  Their  invincible
and  dreadful  navy,”  said  Drake,  “  with  all  its  great  and  terrible
ostentation,  did  not  in  all  their  sailing  about  England  so  much
as  sink  or  take  one  ship,  bark,  pinnace,  or  cock-boat  of  ours,
or  even  burn  so  much  as  one  sheep-cote  on  this  land.” 3

Meanwhile  Farnese  sat  chafing  under  the  unjust  reproaches
heaped  upon  him,  as  if  he,  and  not  his  master,  had  been  respon¬
sible  for  the  gigantic  blunders  of  the  invasion.4

“  As  for  the  Prince  of  Parma,”  said  Drake,  u  I  take  him  to
be  as  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps.”5  The  Admiral  was  quite
right.  Alexander  was  beside  himself  with  rage.  Day  after
day,  he  had  been  repeating  to  Medina  Sidonia  and  to  Philip
that  his  flotilla  and  transports  could  scarcely  live  in  any  but
the  smoothest  sea,  while  the  supposition  that  they  could  serve
a  warlike  purpose  he  pronounced  absolutely  ludicrous.  He
had  always  counselled  the  seizing  of  a  place  like  Flushing,  as
a  basis  of  operations  against  England,  but  had  been  over-

1  Philip  to  Parma,  10  Oct.  1588.

(Arch,  dc  Simancas,  MS.)

3  The  wits  of  Rome  were  very-
severe  upon  Philip.  “  S’il  y  a  aucun,”
said  a  Pasquil  stuck  up  in  that  city,
“qui  sache  des  nouvelles  de  l’armee
d’Espagne,  perdue  en  mer  depuis
trois  semaines  ou  environ,  et  qui
puisse  apprendre  ce  qu’  elle  est  de-
venue,  qu’  il  en  vienne  a  revelation,  et
s’  addresse  au  palais  St.  Pierre  ou  le
St.  Pere  lui  fera  donner  son  vin.”

‘L’Etoile,’  263.

3  Drake,  in  Stowe,  before  cited.

4  “It  seems  the  Duke  of  Parma  is
in  a  great  chafe,”  said  Seymour,  “to
see  his  ships  in  durance  at  Dunkirk,
also  to  find  such  discomfiture  of  the
Spanish  fleet  hard  by  his  nose.  I  can
say  no  more,  but  God  doth  show  his
mighty  hand  for  protecting  this  little
island.”  Seymour  to  Walsingham,

Aug.  -,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

17

5  Drake  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.

°  20

1588,  in  Barrow,  310.

1588;

GREAT  ENERGY  OF  PARMA,

509

ruled  ;  and  he  had  at  least  reckoned  upon  the  Invincible
Armada  to  clear  the  way  for  him,  before  he  should  be  expected
to  take  the  sea.1

With  prodigious  energy  and  at  great  expense  he  had  con¬
structed  or  improved  internal  water-communications  from
Ghent  to  Sluys,  Newport,  and  Dunkerk.  He  had  thus  trans¬
ported  all  his  hoys,  barges,  and  munitions  for  the  invasion,
from  all  points  of  the  obedient  Netherlands  to  the  sea-coast,
without  coming  within  reach  of  the  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,
who  were  keeping  close  watch  on  the  outside.  But  those
Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,  guarding  every  outlet  to  the  ocean,
occupying  every  hole  and  cranny  of  the  coast,  laughed  the
invaders  of  England  to  scorn,  braving  them,  jeering  them,
daring  them  to  come  forth,  while  the  Walloons  and  Spaniards
shrank  before  such  amphibious  assailants,  to  whom  a  combat
on  the  water  was  as  natural  as  upon  dry  land.  Alexander,
upon  one  occasion,  transported  with  rage,  selected  a  band  of
one  thousand  musketeers,  partly  Spanish,  partly  Irish,  and
ordered  an  assault  upon  those  insolent  boatmen.  With  his
own  hand — so  it  was  related — he  struck  dead  more  than  one
of  his  own  officers  who  remonstrated  against  these  commands  :
and  then  the  attack  was  made  by  his  thousand  musketeers
upon  the  Hollanders,  and  every  man  of  the  thousand  was
slain.2

He  had  been  reproached  for  not  being  ready,  for  not  having
embarked  his  men  ;  but  he  had  been  ready  for  a  month,  and
•his  men  could  be  embarked  in  a  single  day.  “  But  it  was
impossible/'  he  said,  “  to  keep  them  long  packed  up  on  board
vessels,  so  small  that  there  was  no  room  to  turn  about  in  :  the
people  would  sicken,  would  rot,  would  die." 3  So  soon  as  he
had  received  information  of  the  arrival  of  the  fleet  before
Calais — which  was  on  the  8th  August — he  had  proceeded  the

1  Parma’s  Letters  to  Philip,  before
cited  passim.  (Arch,  de  Simancas,
MS.)

2  Bor,  III.  323,  324.  Strada,  II.  ix.
662.  Reyd,  viii.  147.

3  “  Porque  los  baxeles  son  tan

pequenos  que  no  liay  plaza  para  re-
volverse.  La  gente  se  enfermeria,
pudriera,  y  perderia.”  Parma  to
Philip,  8  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Si¬
mancas,  MS.)

510

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

same  night  to  Newport  and  embarked  16,000  men,  and  before
dawn  be  was  at  Dunkerk,  where  the  troops  stationed  in  that
port  were  as  rapidly  placed  on  board  the  transports.1  Sir
William  Stanley,  with  bis  700  Irish  kernes,  were  among  the
first  shipped  for  the  enterjuise.2  Two  days  long  these  regi¬
ments  lay  heaped  together,  like  sacks  of  corn,  in  the  boats —
as  one  of  their  officers  described  it 3 — and  they  lay  cheerfully,
hoping  that  the  Dutch  fleet  would  he  swept  out  of  the  sea  by
the  Invincible  Armada,  and  patiently  expecting  the  signal  for
setting  sail  to  England.  Then  came  the  Prince  of  Ascoli,
who  had  gone  ashore  from  the  Spanish  fleet  at  Calais,  accom¬
panied  by  serjeant-major  Gallinato  and  other  messengers
from  Medina  Sidonia,  bringing  the  news  of  the  fire-ships  and
the  dispersion  and  flight  of  the  Armada.4

u  God  knows/'  said  Alexander,  “  the  distress  in  which  this
event  has  plunged  me,  at  the  very  moment  when  I  expected
to  he  sending  your  Majesty  my  congratulations  on  the  success
of  the  great  undertaking.  But  these  are  the  works  of  the
Lord,  who  can  recompense  your  Majesty  by  giving  you  many
victories,  and  the  fulfilment  of  your  Majesty's  desires,  when
He  thinks  the  proper  time  arrived.  Meantime  let  Him  he
praised  for  all,  and  let  your  Majesty  take  great  care  of  your
health,  which  is  the  most  important  thing  of  all."5

Evidently  the  Lord  did  not  think  the  proper  time  yet  arrived
for  fulfilling  his  Majesty's  desires  for  the  subjugation  of  Eng¬
land,  and  meanwhile  the  King  might  find  what  comfort  he
could  in  pious  commonplaces  and  in  attention  to  his  health.

But  it  is  very  certain  that,  of  all  the  high  parties  concerned,
Alexander  Farnese  was  the  least  reprehensible  for  the  over¬
throw  of  Philip's  hopes.  No  man  could  have  been  more
judicious — as  it  has  been  sufficiently  made  evident  -in  the
course  of  this  narrative — in  arranging  all  the  details  of  the
great  enterprise,  in  pointing  out  all  the  obstacles,  in  providing
for  all  emergencies.  No  man  could  have  been  more  minutely

1  Parma  to  Philip,  10  Aug.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

2  Meteren,  sv.  273,  274.

3  Strada,  II.  x.  559,  562.

4  Parma  to  Philip,  10  Aug.  MS.

last  cited.  s  Ibid.

1588.  MADE  FRUITLESS  BY  PHILIP’S  DULNESS.  51 1

faithful  to  his  master,  more  treacherous  to  all  the  world  beside.
Energetic,  inventive,  patient,  courageous,  and  stupendously
false,  he  had  covered  Flanders  with  canals  and  bridges,
had  constructed  flotillas,  and  equipped  a  splendid  army,  as
thoroughly  as  he  had  puzzled  Comptroller  Croft.  And  not
only  had  that  diplomatist  and  his  wiser  colleagues  been  hood¬
winked,  but  Elizabeth  and  Burghley,  and,  for  a  moment,  even
Walsingham,  were  in  the  dark,  while  Henry  III.  had  been  his
passive  victim,  and  the  magnificent  Balafre  a  blind  instrument
in  his  hands.  Nothing  could  equal  Alexander's  fidelity  but
his  perfidy.  Nothing  could  surpass  his  ability  to  command
but  his  obedience.  And  it  is  very  possible  that  had  Philip
followed  his  nephew's  large  designs,  instead  of  imposing  upon
him  his  own  most  puerile  schemes,  the  result  for  England,
Holland,  and,  all  Christendom  might  have  been  very  different
from  the  actual  one.  The  blunder  against  which  Farnese
had  in  vain  warned  his  master,  was  the  stolid  ignorance
in  which  the  King  and  all  his  counsellors  chose  to  remain
of  the  Holland  and  Zeeland  fleet.  For  them  Warmond  and
Nassau,  and  Van  der  Does  and  Joost  de  Moor,  did  not  exist,
and  it  was  precisely  these  gallant  sailors,  with  their  intrepid
crews,  who  held  the  key  to  the  whole  situation.

To  the  Queen's  glorious  naval  commanders,  to  the  dauntless
mariners  of  England,  with  their  well-handled  vessels,  their
admirable  seamanship,  their  tact  and  their  courage,  belonged
the  joys  of  the  contest,  the  triumph,  and  the  glorious  pursuit ;
but  to  the  patient  Hollanders  and  Zeelanders,  who,  with  their
hundred  vessels,  held  Farnese,  the  chief  of  the  great  enter¬
prise,  at  bay,  a  close  prisoner  with  his  whole  army  in  his  own
ports,  daring  him  to  the  issue,  and  ready — to  the  last  jflank  of
their  fleet  and  to  the  last  drop  of  their  blood — to  confront  both
him  and  the  Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia,  an  equal  share  of  honour
is  due.  The  safety  of  the  two  free  commonwealths  of  the
world  in  that  terrible  contest  was  achieved  by  the  people  and
the  mariners  of  the  two  states  combined.

Great  was  the  enthusiasm  certainly  of  the  English  people
as  the  volunteers  marched  through  London  to  the  place  of

512

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

rendezvous,  and  tremendous  were  the  cheers  when  the  brave
Queen  rode  on  horseback  along  the  lines  of  Tilbury.  Glowing
pictures  are  revealed  to  us  of  merry  little  England,  arising  in
its  strength,  and  dancing  forth  to  encounter  the  Spaniards,  as
if  to  a  great  holiday.  “It  was  a  pleasant  sight/'  says  that
enthusiastic  merchant-tailor  J ohn  Stowe,  u  to  behold  the
cheerful  countenances,  courageous  words,  and  gestures,  of  the
soldiers,  as  they  marched  to  Tilbury,  dancing,  leaping  wherever
they  came,  as  joyful  at  the  news  of  the  foe's  approach  as  if
lusty  giants  were  to  run  a  race.  And  Bellona-like  did  the
Queen  infuse  a  second  spirit  of  loyalty,  love,  and  resolution,
into  every  soldier  of  her  army,  who,  ravished  with  their  sove¬
reign's  sight,  prayed  heartily  that  the  Spaniards  might  land
quickly,  and  when  they  heard  they  were  fled,  began  to
lament." 1

But  if  the  Spaniards  had  not  fled,  if  there  had  been  no
English  navy  in  the  Channel,  no  squibs  at  Calais,  no  Dutch¬
men  off  Dunkerk,  there  might  have  been  a  different  picture
to  paint.  No  man  who  has  studied  the  history  of  those  times,
can  doubt  the  universal  and  enthusiastic  determination  of  the
English  nation  to  repel  the  invaders.  Catholics  and  Pro¬
testants  felt  alike  on  the  great  subject.  Philip  did  not  flatter
himself  with  assistance  from  any  English  Papists,  save  exiles
and  renegades  like  Westmoreland,  Paget,  Throgmorton,  Mor¬
gan,  Stanley,  and  the  rest.  The  bulk  of  the  Catholics,  who
may  have  constituted  half  the  population  of  England,  although
malcontent,  were  not  rebellious  ;  and  notwithstanding  the
precautionary  measures  taken  by  government  against  them,
Elizabeth -proudly  acknowledged  their  loyalty.2

1  Stowe,  149.

2  “Said  it  was  their  intention  to
occupy  the  whole  kingdom  of  Eng¬
land — to  keep  the  English  Queen  a
prisoner,  but  to  treat  her  as  a  Queen,
until  the  King  should  otherwise  or¬
dain.  Said  that  they  had  understood
that  there  were  many  Catholics  in  Eng¬
land,  but  that  they  made  not  much
account  of  them,  knowing  that  the
Queen  had  taken  care  that  they
should  not  give  any  assistance,  and

believing  that  most  of  them  would
have  fought  for  their  native  land,”
&c.,  &c.  Answers  of  Don  Diego  de
Pimentel  to  Interrogations  before
Adrian  van  der  Myle,  John  van
Olden-Barneveld,  Admiral  Yillers,  and
Famars,  in  Bor,  III.  xsiii.  325,  326.

“This  invasion,  tending  to  the  re¬
ducing  of  this  realm  to  the  subjection
of  a  stranger — a  matter  so  greatly
misliked  generally  by  the  subjects  of
this  realm  of  all  sorts  and  of  all  reli-

1588.  ENGLAND  READIER  AT  SEA  THAN  ON  SHORE.  513

But  loyalty,  courage,  and  enthusiasm,  might  not  have  suf¬
ficed  to  supply  the  want  of  numbers  and  discipline.  According
to  the  generally  accepted  statement  of  contemporary  chroni¬
clers,  there  were  some  75,000  men  under  arms  :  20,000  along
the  southern  coast,  23,000  under  Leicester,  and  33,000  under
Lord  Chamberlain  Hunsdon,  for  the  special  defence  of  the
Queen’s  person.1

But  it  would  have  been  very  difficult,  in  the  moment  of
danger,  to  bring  anything  like  these  numbers  into  the  field.
A  drilled  and  disciplined  army — whether  of  regulars  or  of
militia-men — had  no  existence  whatever.  If  the  merchant-
vessels,  which  had  been  joined  to  the  royal  fleet,  were  thought
by  old  naval  commanders  to  be  only  good  to  make  a  show,
the  volunteers  on  land  were  likely  to  be  even  less  effective
than  the  marine  militia,  so  much  more  accustomed  than  they
to  hard  work.  Magnificent  was  the  spirit  of  the  great  feudal
lords  as  they  rallied  round  their  Queen.  The  Earl  of  Pem¬
broke  offered  to  serve  at  the  head  of  three  hundred  horse  and
five  hundred  footmen,  armed  at  his  own  cost,  and  all  ready
to  “ hazard  the  blood  of  their  hearts”  in  defence  of  her
person.  a  Accept  hereof  most  excellent  sovereign,”  said  the
Earl,  “from  a  person  desirous  to  live  no  longer  than  he  may
see  your  Highness  enjoy  your  blessed  estate,  maugre  the
beards  of  all  confederated  leaguers.” 2

The  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  too,  was  ready  to  serve  at  the
head  of  his  retainers,  to  the  last  drop  of  his  blood.  “  Though
I  be  old,”  he  said,  “  yet  shall  your  quarrel  make  me  young
again.  Though  lame  in  body,  yet  lusty  in  heart  to  lend  your
greatest  enemy  one  blow,  and  to  stand  near  your  defence,
every  way  wherein  your  Highness  shall  employ  me.” 3

But  there  was  perhaps  too  much  of  this  feudal  spirit.  The

gions,  yea,  by  no  small  number  of  them
that  are  known  to  be  addicted  to  the
Romish  religion — who  are  resolutely
bent  to  withstand  the  same  with  the
employment  of  their  goods  and  hazard
of  their  lives,”  &c.  Queen  to  the
Commissioners  at  Bourbourg  (signed,
but  staid  by  her  Majesty’s  order),

vol.  11. — 2  L

July  ~  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1  Camden,  III.  405.

_  28  July

2  Pembroke  to  the  Queen,  — — —

7  Aug.’

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

9

3  Shrewsbury  to  the  Queen,  —  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  19

514

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX

lieutenant-general  complained  bitterly  that  there  was  a  most
mischievous  tendency  among  all  the  militia-men  to  escape
from  the  Queen’s  colours,  in  order  to  enrol  themselves  as  re¬
tainers  to  the  great  lords.1  This  spirit  was  not  favourable  to
efficient  organization  of  a  national  army.  Even  had  the  com¬
mander-in-chief  been  a  man  of  genius  and  experience  it
would  have  been  difficult  for  him,  under  such  circumstances,
to  resist  a  splendid  army,  once  landed,  and  led  by  Alexander
Farnese,  but  even  Leicester’s  most  determined  flatterers  hardly
ventured  to  compare  him  in  military  ability  with  that  first
general  of  his  age.  The  best  soldier  in  England  was  un¬
questionably  Sir  John  Norris,  and  Sir  John  was  now  marshal
of  the  camp  to  Leicester.  The  ancient  quarrel  between  the
two  had  been  smoothed  over,  and — as  might  be  expected —
the  Earl  hated  Norris  more  bitterly  than  before,  and  was
perpetually  vituperating  him,  as  he  had  often  done  in  the
Netherlands.  Roger  Williams,  too,  was  entrusted  with  the
important  duties  of  master  of  the  horse,  under  the  lieutenant-
general,  and  Leicester  continued  to  bear  the  grudge  towards
that  honest  Welshman,  which  had  begun  in  Holland.  These
were  not  promising  conditions  in  a  camp,  when  an  invading
army  was  every  day  expected  ;  nor  was  the  completeness  or
readiness  of  the  forces  sufficient  to  render  harmless  the  quarrels
of  the  commanders.

The  Armada  had  arrived  in  Calais  roads  on  Saturday
afternoon,  the  6th  August.  If  it  had  been  joined  on  that
day,  or  the  next — as  Philip  and  Medina  Sidonia  fully  expected
— hy  the  Duke  of  Parma’s  flotilla,  the  invasion  yould  have  been
made  at  once.  If  a  Spanish  army  had  ever  landed  in  Eng¬
land  at  all,  that  event  would  have  occurred  on  the  7th  August.
The  weather  was  not  unfavourable,  the  sea  was  smooth,  and  the
circumstances  under  which  the  catastrophe  of  the  great  drama
was  that  night  accomplished,  were  a  profound  mystery
to  every  soul  in  England.  For  aught  that  Leicester,  or
Burghley,  or  Queen  Elizabeth,  knew  at  the  time,  the  army  of

24  July

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham, - ,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Aug.

1588.  THE  LIEUTENANT-GENERAL’S  COMPLAINTS.  515

Farnese  might,  on  Monday,  have  been  marching  upon  London.
Now,  on  that  Monday  morning,  the  army  of  Lord  Hunsdon
was  not  assembled  at  all,  and  Leicester,  with  but  four  thou¬
sand  men  under  his  command,  was  just  commencing  his  camp
at  Tilbury.1 *  The  “  Bellona-like"  appearance  of  the  Queen
on  her  white  palfrey,  with  truncheon  in  hand,  addressing  her
troops  in  that  magnificent  burst  of  eloquence  which  has  so
often  been  repeated,  was  not  till  eleven  days  afterwards,

9

August  —  ;3  not  till  the  great  Armada,  shattered  and  tempest-

tossed,  had  been,  a  week  long,  dashing  itself  against  the
cliffs  of  Norway  and  the  Faroes,  on  its  forlorn  retreat  to
Spain.

Leicester,  courageous,  self-confident,  and  sanguine  as  ever,
could  not  restrain  his  indignation  at  the  parsimony  with  which
his  own  impatient  spirit  had  to  contend.  “  Be  you  assured/'
said  he,  on  the  3 rd  August ,  when  the  Armada  ivas  off  the  Isle
of  Wight ,  “if  the  Spanish  fleet  arrive  safely  in  the  narrow  seas,
the  Duke  of  Parma  will  join  presently  with  all  his  forces,
and  lose  no  time  in  invading  this  realm.  Therefore  I  beseech
you,  my  good  Lords,  let  no  man,  by  hope  or  other  abuse,
prevent  your  speedy  providing  defence  against  this  mighty
enemy  now  knocking  at  our  gate." 3

F or  even  at  this  supreme  moment  doubts  were  entertained
at  court  as  to  the  intentions  of  the  Spaniards.

Next  day  he  informed  Walsingham  that  his  four  thousand
men  had  arrived.  “  They  be  as  forward  men  and  willing  to  meet
the  enemy  as  I  ever  saw,"  said  he.4  He  could  not  say  4  Aug.
as  much  in  praise  of  the  commissariat.  “  Some  want  1588-
the  captains  showed,"  he  observed,  “for  these  men  arrived  with¬
out  one  meal  of  victuals,  so  that,  on  their  arrival,  they  had  not

1  “  I  have  a  most  apt  place  to  begin
our  camp  in,  not  far  from  the  fort,  at
a  place  called  West  Tilbury.”  Lei-

24  July

cester  to  Privv  Council,  — — >  1588.
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)  3  A”e-

“I  did  peruse  and  make  choice  of
the  ground  for  the  encamping  of  the
soldiers.  Yesterday  went  to  Chelms¬
ford  to  order  all  the  soldiers  hither

this  day.”  Same  to  Walsingham,

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Aug.’  v

3  Lingard,  viii.  285.  24  July

3  Leicester  to  Privy  Council, - >

3  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  Same  to  Walsingham,
1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

25  July

_ i

4  Aug.

516

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

one  barrel  of  beer  nor  loaf  of  bread — enough  after  twenty
miles'  march  to  have  discouraged  them,  and  brought  them  to
mutiny.  I  see  many  causes  to  increase  my  former  opinion  of
the  dilatory  wants  you  shall  find  upon  all  sudden  hurley
burleys.  In  no  former  time  was  ever  so  great  a  cause,  and
albeit  her  Majesty  hath  appointed  an  army  to  resist  her
enemies  if  they  land,  yet  how  hard  a  matter  it  will  be
to  gather  men  together,  I  find  it  now.  If  it  will  be  five
days  to  gather  these  countrymen,  judge  what  it  will  be
to  look  in  short  space  for  those  that  dwell  forty,  fifty,  sixty
miles  off." 1

He  had  immense  difficulty  in  feeding  even  this  slender
force.  “I  made  proclamation,"  said  he,  “two  days  ago,  in
all  market  towns,  that  victuallers  should  come  to  the  camp
and  receive  money  for  their  provisions,  but  there  is  not  one
victualler  come  in  to  this  hour.  I  have  sent  to  all  the  justices
of  peace  about  it  from  place  to  place.  I  speak  it  that  timely
consideration  be  had  of  these  things,  and  that  they  be  not
deferred  till  the  worst  come.  Let  her  Majesty  not  defer  the
time ,  upon  any  supposed  hope,  to  assemble  a  convenient  force  of
horse  and foot  about  her .  Her  Majesty  cannot  be  strong  enough
too  soon,  and  if  her  navy  had  not  been  strong  and  abroad  as  it
is,  what  care  had  herself  and  her  whole  realm  been  in  by  this
time  !  And  what  care  she  will  be  in  if  her  forces  be  not  only
assembled,  but  an  army  presently  dressed  to  withstand  the
mighty  enemy  that  is  to  approach  her  gates."

“  God  doth  know,  I  speak  it  not  to  bring  her  to  charges.  I
would  she  had  less  cause  to  spend  than  ever  she  had,  and
her  coffers  fuller  than  ever  they  were  ;  but  I  will  prefer  her
life  and  safety,  and  the  defence  of  the  realm,  before  all  sparing
of  charges  in  the  present  danger."2

Thus,  on  the  5th  August,  no  army  had  been  assembled —
not  even  the  body-guard  of  the  Queen — and  Leicester,  with
four  thousand  men,  unprovided  with  a  barrel  of  beer  or  a  loaf
of  bread,  was  about  commencing  his  entrenched  camp  at

26  July

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)  3  Ibid.

1588.  HIS  QUARRELS  WITH  NORRIS  AND  WILLIAMS.  517

Tilbury.  On  the  6th  August  the  Armada  was  in  Calais
roads,  expecting  Alexander  Farnese  to  lead  his  troops  upon
London  !

Norris  and  Williams,  on  the  news  of  Medina  Sidonia’s
approach,  had  rushed  to  Dover,  much  to  the  indignation  of
Leicester,  just  as  the  Earl  was  beginning  his  entrenchments
at  Tilbury.  “I  assure  you  I  am  angry  with  Sir  John  Norris
and  Sir  Eoger  Williams/'  he  said.  “I  am  here  cook,
caterer,  and  huntsman.  I  am  left  with  no  one  to  supply  Sir
J ohn's  place  as  marshal,  but,  for  a  day  or  two,  am  willing  to
work  the  harder  myself.  I  ordered  them  both  to  return  this
day  early,  which  they  faithfully  promised.  Yet,  on  arriving
this  morning,  I  hear  nothing  of  either,  and  have  nobody  to
marshal  the  camp  either  for  horse  or  foot.  This  manner  of
dealing  doth  much  mislike  me  in  them  both.  I  am  ill-used.
'Tis  now  four  o'clock,  but  here's  not  one  of  them.  If  they
come  not  this  night,  I  assure  you  I  will  not  receive  them  into
office,  nor  bear  such  loose  careless  dealing  at  their  hands.  If
you  saw  how  weakly  I  am  assisted  you  would  be  sorry  to  think
that  we  here  should  be  the  front  against  the  enemy  that  is  so
mighty,  if  he  should  land  here.  And  seeing  her  Majesty  hath
appointed  me  her  lieutenant-general,  I  look  that  respect
be  used  towards  me,  such  as  is  due  to  my  place." 1

Thus  the  ancient  grudge  between  Leicester  and  the  Earl
of  Sussex's  son  was  ever  breaking  forth,  and  was  not  likely  to
prove  beneficial  at  this  eventful  season.

Next  day  the  Welshman  arrived,  and  Sir  John  promised  to
come  back  in  the  evening.  Sir  Roger  brought  word  from  the
coast  that  Lord  Henry  Seymour's  fleet  was  in  want  both  of
men  and  powder.  “Good  Lord  !"  exclaimed  Leicester,  “how
is  this  come  to  pass,  that  both  he  and  my  Lord- Admiral  are
so  weakened  of  men.  I  hear  they  be  running  away.  I
beseech  you,  assemble  your  forces,  and  play  not  away  this
kingdom  by  delays.  Hasten  our  horsemen  hither  5  Aug.
and  footmen . If  the  Spanish  fleet  come  to  1588.

25  July

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  — — j  MS.  already  cited.

518

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

\

the  narrow  seas  the  Prince  of  Parma  will  play  another  part
than  is  looked  for.”  1

As  the  Armada  approached  Calais,  Leicester  was  informed
that  the  soldiers  at  Dover  began  to  leave  the  coast.  It  seemed
that  they  were  dissatisfied  with  the  penuriousness  of  the
government.  “  Our  soldiers  do  break  away  at  Dover,  or  are
not  pleased.  I  assure  you,  without  wages,  the  people  will  not
tarry,  and  contributions  go  hard  with  them.  Surely  I  find
that  her  Majesty  must  needs  deal  liberally,  and  be  at  charges
to  entertain  her  subjects  that  have  chargeably  and  liberally
used  themselves  to  serve  her/'2  The  lieutenant-general  even
thought  it  might  he  necessary  for  him  to  proceed  to  Dover  in
person,  in  order  to  remonstrate  with  these  discontented  troops  ;
for  it  was  possible  that  those  ill- paid,  undisciplined,  and
very  meagre  forces,  would  find  much  difficulty  in  opposing
Alexander’s  march  to  London,  if  he  should  once  succeed  in
landing.  Leicester  had  a  very  indifferent  opinion  too  of  the
train-hands  of  the  metropolis.  “  For  your  Londoners,”  he  said,
“I  see  their  service  zuill  be  little ,  except  they  have  their  own
captains,  and  having  them,  I  look  for  none  at  all  by  them ,
when  we  shall  meet  the  enemy.”3  This  was  not  compli¬
mentary,  certainty,  to  the  training  of  the  famous  Artillery
Garden,  and  furnished  a  still  stronger  motive  for  defending
the  road  over  which  the  capital  was  to  be  approached.  But
there  was  much  jealousy,  both  among  citizens  and  nobles,  of
any  authority  entrusted  to  professional  soldiers.  “  I  know
what  burghers  be,  well  enough,”  said  the  Earl,  “  as  brave  and
well-entertained  as  ever  the  Londoners  were.  If  they  should
go  forth  from  the  city  they  should  have  good  leaders.  You
know  the  imperfections  of  the  time,  how  few  leaders  you  have,
and  the  gentlemen  of  the  counties  are  very  loth  to  have  any
captains  placed  with  them.  So  that  the  beating  out  of  our
best  captains  is  like  to  be  cause  of  great  danger.” 4

Sir  John  Smith,  a  soldier  of  experience,  employed  to  drill
and  organize  some  of  the  levies,  expressed  still  more  dis-

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,
MS.  already  cited.

26  July
5  Aug.

2  Same  to  same,
P.  Office  MS.)

28  July

■?

7  Aug.

3  Ibid.

1588.  (S.

4  Ibid.

1588.  HARSH  STATEMENTS  AS  TO  THE  ENGLISH  TROOPS.  519

paraging  opinions  than  those  of  Leicester  concerning  the
probable  efficiency  in  the  field  of  these  English  armies.1  The
Earl  was  very  angry  with  the  knight,  however,  and  con¬
sidered  him  imcompetent,  insolent,  and  ridiculous.  Sir  John
seemed,  indeed,  more  disposed  to  keep  himself  out  of  harm's
way,  than  to  render  service  to  the  Queen  by  leading  awkward
recruits  against  Alexander  Farnese.  He  thought  it  better  to
nurse  himself.

“  You  would  laugh  to  see  how  Sir  John  Smith  has  dealt
since  my  coming,"  said  Leicester.  “  He  came  to  me,  and  told
me  that  his  disease  so  grew  upon  him  as  he  must  needs  go  to
the  baths.  I  told  him  I  would  not  be  against  his  health,  but
he  saw  what  the  time  was,  and  what  pains  he  had  taken  with
his  countrymen,  and  that  I  had  provided  a  good  place  for
him.  Next  day  he  came  again,  saying  little  to  my  offer  then,
and  seemed  desirous,  for  his  health,  to  be  gone.  I  told  him
what  place  I  did  appoint,  which  was  a  regiment  of  a  great
part  of  his  countrymen.  He  said  his  health  was  dear  to  him,
and  he  desired  to  take  leave  of  me,  which  I  yielded  unto.
Yesterday,  being  our  muster-day,  he  came  again  to  me  to
dinner  ;  but  such  foolish  and  vain-glorious  paradoxes  he  burst
withal,  without  any  cause  offered,  as  made  all  that  knew  any¬
thing  smile  and  answer  little,  but  in  sort  rather  to  satisfy  men
present  than  to  argue  with  him." 2

And  the  knight  went  that  day  to  review  Leicester's  choice
troops — the  four  thousand  men  of  Essex — but  was  not  much
more  deeply  impressed  with  their  proficiency  than  he  had
been  with  that  of  his  own  regiment.  He  became  very  cen¬
sorious.

“  After  the  muster,"  said  the  lieutenant-general,  ec  he
entered  again  into  such  strange  cries  for  ordering  of  men,  and
for  the  fight  with  the  weapon,  as  made  me  think  he  was  not
well.  G-od  forbid  he  should  have  charge  of  men  that  knoweth
so  little,  as  I  dare  pronounce  that  he  doth."3

28  July

2  Leicester  to  ’W’alsingham, - ,

7  Aug.

1588,  MS.  already  cited.  3  Ibid.

1  Hardwicke  Papers,  I.  515.  Strype,
iv.  47.  Lingard,  viii.  273.

520

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

Yet  the  critical  knight  was  a  professional  campaigner,
whose  opinions  were  entitled  to  respect ;  and  the  more  so,  it
would  seem,  because  they  did  not  materially  vary  from  those
which  Leicester  himself  was  in  the  habit  of  expressing.  And
these  interior  scenes  of  discord,  tumult,  parsimony,  want  of
organization,  and  unsatisfactory  mustering  of  troops,  were
occurring  on  the  very  Saturday  and  Sunday  when  the  Armada
lay  in  sight  of  Dover  cliffs,  and  when  the  approach  of  the
Spaniards  on  the  Dover  road  might  at  any  moment  be  ex¬
pected.

Leicester’s  jealous  and  overbearing  temper  itself  was  also
proving  a  formidable  obstacle  to  a  wholesome  system  of
defence.  He  was  already  displeased  with  the  amount  of  au¬
thority  entrusted  to  Lord  Hunsdon,  disposed  to  think  his  own
rights  invaded,  and  desirous  that  the  Lord  Chamberlain
should  accept  office  under  himself.  He  wished  saving  clauses
as  to  his  own  authority  inserted  in  Hunsdon’s  patent.  “  Either
it  must  be  so,  or  I  shall  have  wrong,”  said  he,  “if  he  abso¬
lutely  command  where  my  patent  doth  give  me  power.  You
may  easily  conceive  what  absurd  dealings  are  likely  to  fall
out,  if  you  allow  two  absolute  commanders.”1

Looking  at  these  pictures  of  commander-in-chief,  officers,
and  rank  and  file — as  painted  by  themselves — we  feel  an
inexpressible  satisfaction  that  in  this  great  crisis  of  England’s
destiny,  there  wrere  such  men  as  Howard,  Drake,  Frobisher,
Hawkins,  Seymour,  Winter,  Fenner,  and  their  gallant
brethren,  cruising  that  week  in  the  Channel,  and  that  Nassau
and  Warmond,  De  Moor  and  Yan  der  Does,  were  blockading
the  Flemish  coast.

There  was  but  little  preparation  to  resist  the  enemy  once
landed.  There  were  no  fortresses,  no  regular  army,  no  popu¬
lation  trained  to  any  weapon.  There  were  patriotism,  loyalty,
courage,  and  enthusiasm,  in  abundance  ;  but  the  commander-
in-chief  was  a  queen’s  favourite,  odious  to  the  people,  with
very  moderate  abilities,  and  eternally  quarrelling  with  officers
more  competent  than  himself ;  and  all  the  arrangements  were

1  Leicester  to  Walsingham,  MS.  already  cited.

1588.  WANT  OF  ORGANIZATION  IN  ENGLAND.  521

so  hopelessly  behind-hand,  that  although  great  disasters  might
have  been  avenged,  they  could  scarcely  have  been  avoided.

Remembering  that  the  Invincible  Armada  was  lying  in
Calais  roads  on  the  6th  of  August,  hoping  to  cross  to  Dover
the  next  morning,  let  us  ponder  the  words  addressed  on  that
very  day  to  Queen  Elizabeth  by  the  Lieutenant-General  of
England.

“  My  most  dear  and  gracious  Lady,”  said  the  Earl,  “  it  is
most  true  that  those  enemies  that  approach  your  kingdom
and  person  are  your  undeserved  foes,  and  being  so,  and  hating
you  for  a  righteous  cause,  there  is  the  less  fear  to  be  had  of
their  malice  or  their  forces  ;  for  there  is  a  most  just  God  that
beholdeth  the  innocence  of  that  heart.  The  cause  you  are
assailed  for  is  His  and  His  Church's,  and  He  never  failed  any
that  faithfully  do  put  their  chief  trust  in  His  goodness.  He
hath,  to  comfort  you  withal,  given  you  great  and  mighty
means  to  defend  yourself,  which  means  I  doubt  not  but  your
Majesty  will  timely  and  princely  use  them,  and  your  good
God  that  ruleth  all  will  assist  you  and  bless  you  with  vic¬
tory.”  1

He  then  proceeded  to  give  his  opinion  on  two  points  con¬
cerning  which  the  Queen  had  just  consulted  him — the  pro¬
priety  of  assembling  her  army,  and  her  desire  to  place  herself
at  the  head  of  it  in  person.

On  the  first  point  one  would  have  thought  discussion  super¬
fluous  on  the  6th  of  August.  u  For  your  army,  it  is  more
than  time  it  ivere  gathered  and  about  you”  said  Leicester,
“  or  so  near  you  as  you  may  have  the  use  of  it  at  a  few  hours'
warning.  The  reason  is  that  your  mighty  enemies  are  at
hand,  and  if  God  suffers  them  to  pass  by  your  fleet,  you  are
sure  they  will  attempt  their  purpose  of  landing  with  all  expe¬
dition.  And  albeit  your  navy  be  very  strong,  but,  as  we  have
always  heard,  the  other  is  not  only  far  greater,  but  their
forces  of  men  much  beyond  yours.  Ho  doubt  if  the  Prince
of  Parma  come  forth,  their  forces  by  sea  shall  not  only  be

Leicester  to  the  Queen,  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

6  Aug.

i

522

tfHE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

greatly  augmented,  but  his  power  to  land  shall  the  easier  take
effect  whensoever  he  shall  attempt  it.  Therefore  it  is  most
requisite  that  your  Majesty  at  all  events  have  as  great  a  force
every  way  as  you  can  devise  ;  for  there  is  no  dalliance  at
such  a  time  nor  with  such  an  enemy.  You  shall  otherwise
hazard  your  own  honour,  besides  your  person  and  country,
and  must  offend  your  gracious  God  that  gave  you  these  forces
and  power,  though  you  will  not  use  them  when  you  should’71

It  seems  strange  enough  that  such  phrases  should  be  neces¬
sary  when  the  enemy  was  knocking  at  the  gate ;  but  it  is
only  too  true  that  the  land-forces  were  never  organized  until
the  hour  of  danger  had,  most  fortunately  and  unexpectedly,
passed  by.  Suggestions  at  this  late  moment  were  now  given
for  the  defence  of  the  throne,  the  capital,  the  kingdom,  and  the
life  of  the  great  Queen,  which  would  not  have  seemed  prema¬
ture  had  they  been  made  six  months  before,  but  which,  when
offered  in  August,  excite  unbounded  amazement.  Alexander
would  have  had  time  to  march  from  Dover  to  Durham  before
these  directions,  now  leisurely  stated  with  all  the  air  of
novelty,  could  be  carried  into  effect.

“Now  for  the  placing  of  your  army/'  says  the  lieutenant-
general  on  the  memorable  Saturday,  6th  of  August,  “  no  doubt
but  I  think  about  London  the  meetest,  and  I  suppose  that
others  will  be  of  the  same  mind.  And  your  Majesty  should
forthwith  give  the  charge  thereof  to  some  special  nobleman  about
you,  and  likewise  place  all  your  chief  officers  that  every  man
may  know  ivhat  he  shall  do ,  and  gather  as  many  good  horse
above  all  things  as  you  can,  and  the  oldest,  best,  and  assuredest
captains  to  lead  ;  for  therein  will  consist  the  greatest  hope  of
good  success  under  God.  And  so  soon  as  your  army  is  assem¬
bled,  let  them  by  and  by  be  exercised ,  every  man  to  know  his
iveapon,  and  that  there  be  all  other  things  prepared  in  readi¬
ness  for  your  army,  as  if  they  should  march  upon  a  day’s
warning,  especially  carriages,  and  a  commissary  of  victuals,
and  a  master  of  ordnance.”2

Certainly,  with  Alexander  of  Parma  on  his  way  to  London,

1  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  MS.  last  cited.

2  Ibid.

1588.

ROYAL  PARSIMONY  AND  DELAY.

523

at  the  head  of  his  Italian  pikemen,  his  Spanish  musketeers,
his  famous  veteran  legion — “  that  nursing  mother  of  great
soldiers  ”  1 — it  was  indeed  more  than  time  that  every  man
should  know  what  he  should  do,  that  an  army  of  Englishmen
should  be  assembled,  and  that  every  man  should  know  his
weapon.  ce  By  and  by  ”  was  easily  said,  and  yet  on  the  6th  of
August  it  was  by  and  by  that  an  army,  not  yet  mustered,  not,
yet  officered,  not  yet  provided  with  a  general,  a  commissary
of  victuals,  or  a  master  of  ordinance,  was  to  be  exercised —
u  every  man  to  know  his  weapon/'

English  courage  might  ultimately  triumph  over  the  mis¬
takes  of  those  who  governed  the  country,  and  over  those
disciplined  brigands  by  whom  it  was  to  be  invaded.  But
meantime  every  man  of  those  invaders  had  already  learned
on  a  hundred  battle-fields  to  know  his  weapon.

It  was  a  magnificent  determination  on  the  part  of  Elizabeth
to  place  herself  at  the  head  of  her  troops  ;  and  the  enthu¬
siasm  which  her  attitude  inspired,  when  she  had  at  last
emancipated  herself  from  the  delusions  of  diplomacy  and  the
seductions  of  thrift,  was  some  recompense  at  least  for  the
perils  caused  by  her  procrastination.  But  Leicester  could  not
approve  of  this  hazardous  though  heroic  resolution.2 3

The  danger  passed  away.  The  Invincible  Armada  was

1  “  Aquel  tercio  viejo,  padre  de  todos

los  demas,  y  semiuario  de  los  mayores
solados  que  ha  visto  en  nuestro
tiempo  Europa.”  Coloma,  ii.  26v0.

3  Leicester  to  the  Queen,  MS.  before
cited.

“  Now  for  your  person,”  he  said,
*l  being  the  most  dainty  and  sacred
thing  we  have  in  this  world  to  care
for,  a  man  must  tremble  when  he
thinks  of  it,  especially  finding  your
Majesty  to  have  that  princely  courage
to  transport  yourself  to  the  uttermost
confines  of  your  realm  to  meet  your
enemies  and  defend  your  subjects,
I  cannot,  most  dear  Queen,  consent  to
that;  for  upon  your  well-doing  con¬
sists  all  and  some  for  your  whole  king¬
dom,  and  therefore  preserve  it  above
all!  Yet  will  I  not  that,  in  some  sort,
so  princely  and  so  rare  a  magnanimity
should  not  appear  to  your  people  and
the  world  as  it  is,  and  thus  far,  if  it

please  you,  you  may  do  it  to  draw
yourself  to  your  house  at  Havering;
and  your  army,  being  about  London,
as  at  Stratford,  Eastham,  Hackney,
and  the  villages  there  about,  shall  bo
alway  not  only  a  defence  but  a  ready
supply  to  those  counties  of  Essex
and  Kent,  if  need  be,  and  in  the  mean¬
time  your  Majesty  may  comfort  this
army  and  the  people  of  both  those
counties,  and  may  see  both  the  camp
and  the  forts.  It  is  not  above  fourteen
miles  from  Havering,  and  a  very  con¬
venient  place  for  your  Majesty  to  lie
in  by  the  way.  To  rest  you  at  the
camp,  I  trust  you  will  be  pleased  with
your  poor  lieutenant’s  cabin,  and
within  a  mile  there  is  a  gentleman’s
house  where  you  may  also  lie.  Thus
you  may  comfort  not  only  these  thou¬
sands,  but  many  more  that  shall  hear
of  it,  and  thus  far,  but  no  farther,  can
I  consent  to  adventure  your  person.”

524

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

driven  out  of  the  Channel  by  the  courage,  the  splendid  sea¬
manship,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  English  sailors  and  volun¬
teers.  The  Duke  of  Parma  was  kept  a  close  prisoner  by  the
fleets  of  Holland  and  Zeeland  ;  and  the  great  storm  of  the
14th  and  15th  of  August  at  last  completed  the  overthrow  of
the  Spaniards.

It  was,  however,  supposed  for  a  long  time  that  they  would
come  back,  for  the  disasters  which  had  befallen  them  in  the
north  were  but  tardily  known  in  England.  The  sailors,  by
whom  England  had  been  thus  defended  in  her  utmost  need,
were  dying  by  hundreds,  and  even  thousands,  of  ship-fever,  in
the  latter  days  of  August.  Men  sickened  one  day,  and  died
the  next,  so  that  it  seemed  probable  that  the  ten  thousand
sailors  by  whom  the  English  ships  of  war  were  manned,  would
have  almost  wholly  disappeared,  at  a  moment  when  their
services  might  be  imperatively  required.  Nor  had  there  been
the  least  precaution  taken  for  cherishing  and  saving  these
brave  defenders  of  their  country.  They  rotted  in  their  ships,
or  died  in  the  streets  of  the  naval  ports,  because  there  were
no  hospitals  to  receive  them.1

“  'Tis  a  most  pitiful  sight/'  said  the  Lord- Admiral,  “  to  see
here  at  Margate  how  the  men,  having  no  place  where  they
can  be  received,  die  in  the  streets.  I  am  driven  of  force
myself  to  come  on  land  to  see  them  bestowed  in  some  lodg¬
ings  ;  and  the  best  I  can  get  is  barns  and  such  outhouses,  and
the  relief  is  small  that  I  can  provide  for  them  here.  It  would
grieve  any  man’s  heart  to  see  men  that  have  served  so  valiantly
die  so  miserably!’ 2

The  survivors,  too,  were  greatly  discontented  ;  for,  after
having  been  eight  months  at  sea,  and  enduring  great  priva¬
tions,  they  could  not  get  their  wages.  “  Finding  it  to  come
thus  scantily,"  said  Howard,  “  it  breeds  a  marvellous  altera¬
tion  among  them."3

But  more  dangerous  tnan  the  pestilence  or  the  discontent

1  Lord  Howard  to  the  Queen ;  Same
to  "Walsingham;  Same  to  Privy  Coun¬

cil  (s.  p.  Office  MSS.)

1  Sept.  v  1

2  Howard  to  Burghley,  -
(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Howard  to  Privy  Council,
1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

Aug.

22  Augr.

1  Sept.

1588.  QUARRELS  OF  ENGLISH  ADMIRALS.  525

was  the  misunderstanding  which  existed  at  the  moment
between  the  leading  admirals  of  the  English  fleet.  Not  only
was  Seymour  angry  with  Howard,  but  Hawkins  and  Frobisher
were  at  daggers  drawn  with  Drake  ;  and  Sir  Martin — if  con¬
temporary  affidavits  can  be  trusted — did  not  scruple  to  heap
the  most  virulent  abuse  upon  Sir  Francis,  calling  him,  in
language  better  fitted  for  the  forecastle  than  the  quarter¬
deck,  a  thief  and  a  coward,  for  appropriating  the  ransom  of

Don  Pedro  Valdez,  in  which
claimed  at  least  an  equal  share

10

1  “The  —  tli  day  of  August.  1588,

20

I  arrived  at  Harwick,”  says  Matthew
Starke,  mariner  on  board  the  *  Re¬
venge,’  flag  ship  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,
“and  delivered  letters  sent  by  the
Lord-Admiral  to  the  Lord  Sheffield.

.  .  .  .  I  found  with  him  Sir  John  Haw¬
kins,  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,  with  divers
others.  .  .  .  Then  Sir  Martin  Fro¬
bisher  began  some  speeches  concern¬
ing  the  service  done  in  this  action,  and
said: — Sir  Francis  Drake  reporteth
that  no  man  hath  done  any  good  ser¬
vice  but  he,  but  he  shall  well  under¬
stand  that  others  have  done  as  good
service  as  he,  and  better  too.  He
came  bragging  up  at  the  first  indeed,
and  gave  them  his  prow  and  his  broad¬
side,  and  then  kept  his  luff,  and  was
glad  that  he  was  gone  again,  like  a
cowardly  knave  or  traitor — I  rest
doubtful  which,  but  the  one  I  will
swear.

“‘Further,  said  he,  he  hath  done'
good  service  indeed,  for  he  took  Don
Pedro ;  for  after  he  had  seen  her  in
the  evening  that  she  had  spent  her
masts,  then,  like  a  coward,  he  kept  by
her  all  night,  because  he  would  have
the  spoil.  He  thinketh  to  cozen  us
of  our  shares  of  15,000  ducats,  but  we
will  have  our  shares,  or  I  will  make
him  spend  the  best  blood  in  his  belly ,
for  he  hath  done  enough  of  those
cozening  cheats  already.

“  ‘  He  hath  used  certain  speeches  of
me  (continued  Sir  Martin)  which  I
will  make  him  eat  again,  or  I  will
make  him  spend  the  best  blood  in  his
belly.  Furthermore,  he  reporteth  that
no  man  hath  done  so  good  service
as  he,  but  he  lieth  in  his  teeth,  for

both  Frobisher  and  Hawkins
with  himself.1

there  are  others  that  have  done  as
good,  aud  better  too.

“  ‘  Then  he  demanded  of  me  if  we  (in
the  ‘  Revenge  ’)  did  not  see  Don  Pedro
overnight  or  no.  Unto  which  I  an¬
swered  No.  Then  he  told  me  that
I  lied,  for  she  was  seen  to  all  the  fleet.
Unto  which  I  answered  I  would  lay
my  head  that  not  any  one  man  in  the
fleet  did  see  her  until  it  was  morning,
that  we  were  within  two  or  three
cables’  lengths  of  her.  Whereunto  ho
answered,  Aye,  marry,  you  were  with¬
in  two  or  three  cables’  lengths,  for
you  were  no  farther  off  all  night,  but
lay  a-hull  by  her.  Whereunto  I  an¬
swered  No,  for  we  bear  a  good  sail  all
night,  off  and  on.

“  ‘  Then  he  asked  me  to  what  end
we  stood  off  from  the  fleet  all  night.
I  answered  that  we  had  descried  three
or  four  hulks,  and  to  that  end  wo
wrought,  not  knowing  what  they  were.
Then  said  he,  Sir  Francis  was  ap¬
pointed  to  bear  a  light  all  that  night,
which  light  we  looked  for,  but  there
was  none  to  be  seen ;  and  in  the  morn¬
ing,  when  we  should  have  dealt  with
them,  there  was  not  about  five  or  six
near  to  the  admiral,  by  reason  we  saw
not  his  light.  After  this,  and  many
more  speeches  which  I  am  not  able  to
remember,  the  Lord  Sheffield  de¬
manded  of  me  what  I  was.  Unto  which
I  answered  I  had  been  in  the  action
with  Sir  Francis  in  the  ‘  Revenge '
this  seven  or  eight  months.  Then  he
demanded  of  me,  what  art  thou — a
soldier?  And  I  answered  I  am  a
mariner,  like  your  Honour.  Then  said
he,  I  have  no  more  to  say  unto  you.
You  may  depart.’

“  All  this  I  do  confess  to  be  true,  as

526

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

And  anxious  enough  was  the  Lord- Admiral,  with  his  sailors
perishing  by  pestilence,  with  many  of  his  ships  so  weakly
manned  that — as  Lord  Henry  Seymour  declared — there  were
not  mariners  enough  to  weigh  the  anchors,1  and  with  the  great
naval  heroes,  on  whose  efforts  the  safety  of  the  realm  depended,
wrangling  like  fisherwomen  among  themselves,  when  rumours
came,  as  they  did  almost  daily,  of  the  return  of  the  Spanish
Armada,  and  of  new  demonstrations  on  the  part  of  Farnese.
He  was  naturally  unwilling  that  the  fruits  of  English  valour
on  the  seas  should  now  be  sacrificed  by  the  false  economy  of
the  government.  He  felt  that,  after  all  that  had  been  endured
and  accomplished,  the  Queen  and  her  counsellors  were  still
capable  of  leaving  England  at  the  mercy  of  a  renewed  attempt.
ce  I  know  not  what  you  think  at  the  court/'  said  he  ;  u  but  I
think,  and  so  do  all  here,  that  there  cannot  be  too  great  forces
maintained  for  the  next  five  or  six  weeks.  God  knoweth
whether  the  Spanish  fleet  will  not,  after  refreshing  themselves
in  Norway,  Denmark,  and  the  Orkneys,  return.  I  think  they
dare  not  go  back  to  Spain  with  this  dishonour  to  their  King
and  overthrow  of  the  Pope's  credit.  Sir,  sure  bind,  sure 'find.
A  kingdom  is  a  grand  wager.  Security  is  dangerous,  and,  if
God  had  not  been  our  best  friend ,  we  should  have  found  it  so." 2

Nothing  could  be  more  replete  with  sound  common  sense
than  this  simple  advice,  given  as  it  was  in  utter  ignorance  of
the  fate  of  the  Armada,  after  it  had  been  lost  sight  of  by  the
English  vessels  off  the  Frith  of  Forth,  and  of  the  cold  refresh-

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

g

2  Howard  to  Walsmgham,  —  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

“  Some  haply  may  say  that  winter
cometh  on  apace.”  said  Drake,  “hut
my  poor  opinion  is  that  1  dare  not  ad¬
vise  her  Majesty  to  hazard  a  kingdom
with  the  saving  of  a  little  charge.
The  Duke  of  Parma  is  nigh,  and  will
not  let  to  send  daily  to  the  Duke  of
Sidonia,  if  he  may  find  him.”  Drake

to  Walsingkam,  —  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.

Office  MS.)

it  was  spoken  by  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,
and  do  acknowledge  it  in  the  presence
of  these  parties  whose  names  are  here¬
under  written.  Captain  Platt :  Captain
Vaughan  ;  Mr.  Grange,  master  of  the
Arke ;  John  Graye,  master  of  the
Revenge ;  Captain  Spendeloe.

“  Moreover,  he  said  that  Sir  Francis
was  the  cause  of  all  these  troubles,
and  in  this  action  he  showed  himself
the  most  coward.  By  me,  Matthew

Starke  Aug.  1588.”  (S.  P.  Office

MS.)

23  Aug.

1  Seymour  to  ‘Walsingham,  - -

1  2  Sept.

1588.  ENGLAND’S  NARROW  ESCAPE  PROM  GREAT  PERIL.  527

ment  which  it  had  found  in  Norway  and  the  Orkneys.  But
Burghley  had  a  store  of  pithy  apophthegms,  for  which  he
knew  he  could  always  find  sympathy  in  the  Queen’s  breast,
and  with  which-  he  could  answer  these  demands  of  admirals
and  generals.  ec  To  spend  in  time  convenient  is  wisdom  he
observed — Ci  to  continue  charges  without  needful  cause  bringeth
repentance  — cc  to  hold  on  charges  without  knowledge  of  the
certainty  thereof  and  of  means  how  to  support  them,  is  lack
of  wisdom  1  and  so  on.

Yet  the  Spanish  fleet  might  have  returned  into  the  Channel —
for  aught  the  Lord-Treasurer  on  the  22nd  August  knew — or
the  Dutch  fleet  might  have  relaxed  in  its  vigilant  watching
of  Famese’s  movements.  It  might  have  then  seemed  a  most
plentiful  lack  of  wisdom  to  allow  English  sailors  to  die  of
plague  in  the  streets  for  want  of  hospitals,  and  to  grow  mu¬
tinous  for  default  of  pay.  To  have  saved  under  such  circum¬
stances  would  perhaps  have  brought  repentance.

The  invasion  of  England  by  Spain  had  been  most  por¬
tentous.  That  the  danger  was  at  last  averted  is  to  be  ascribed
to  the  enthusiasm  of  the  English  nation — both  patricians  and
plebeians — to  the  heroism  of  the  little  English  fleet,  to  the
spirit  of  the  naval  commanders  and  volunteers,  to  the  stanch
and  effective  support  of  the  Hollanders,  and  to  the  hand  of
God  shattering  the  Armada  at  last ;  but  very  little  credit  can
be  conscientiously  awarded  to  the  diplomatic  or  the  military
efforts  of  the  Queen’s  government.2  Miracles  alone,  in  the

1  Memorial  in  Bnrghley’s  hand,
“  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  An  exception  is  always  to  be  made
in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
Although  stunned  for  a  moment  by
the  superhuman  perfidy  of  Philip  aud
Farnese,  and  deceived  by  false  intel¬
ligence  as  to  the  conditions  of  the
Armada  after  the  gale  near  Coruna,
Walsingham  had  been  ever  watchful,
and  constantly  uttering  words  of  solemn
warning.  •  ‘  Plain  dealing  is  best  among
friends,”  said  Seymour.  “I  will  not
flatter  you,  but  you  have  fought  more
with  your  pen  than  many  here  in  our

English  navy  with  their  enemies.  But
that  your  place  and  most  necessary
attendance  about  her  Majesty  cannot
be  spared,  your  value  and  deserts
opposite  the  enemy  had  showed  itself.”

“  For  myself,”  added  the  bold  sailor,
who  was  much  dissatisfied  at  the  pro¬
spect  of ‘‘  being  penned  and  moored  in
roads,”  instead  of  cruizing  after  the
Spaniards,  “I  have  not  spared  my
body,  which,  I  thank  God,  is  able  to
go  through  thick  and  thin.  .  .  .  Spare
me  not  while  I  am  abroad,  for  when
God  shall  return  me,  I  will  be  kin  to
the  bear.  I  will  hold  to  the  stake
before  I  come  abroad  again.”  Lord

528

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

opinion  of  Roger  Williams,  had  saved  England  on  this  occa¬
sion  from  perdition.1

Towards  the  end  of  August,  Admiral  de  Nassau  paid  a  visit
to  Dover  with  forty  ships,  “well  appointed  and  furnished/' 2
He  dined  and  conferred  with  Seymour,  Palmer,  and  other
officers — Winter  being  still  laid  up  with  his  wound — and
expressed  the  opinion  that  Medina  Sidonia  would  hardly
return  to  the  Channel,  after  the  banquet  he  had  received  from
her  Majesty's  navy  between  Calais  and  Gravelines.  He  also
gave  the  information  that  the  States  had  sent  fifty  Dutch
vessels  in  pursuit  of  the  Spaniards,  and  had  compelled  all  the
herring-fishermen  for  the  time  to  serve  in  the  ships  of  war,
although  the  prosperity  of  the  country  depended  on  that
industry.  “  I  find  the  man  very  wise,  subtle,  and  cunning,"
said  Seymour  of  the  Dutch  Admiral,  “and  therefore  do  I
trust  him." 3

Nassau  represented  the  Duke  of  Parma  as  evidently  dis¬
couraged,  as  having  already  disembarked  his  troops,  and  as
very  little  disposed  to  hazard  any  further  enterprise  against
England.  “I  have  left  twenty-five  Kromstevens,"  said  he,
“to  prevent  his  egress  from  Sluys,  and  I  am  immediately
returning  thither  myself.  The  tide  will  not  allow  his  vessels
at  present  to  leave  Dunkerk,  and  I  shall  not  fail — before  the
next  full  moon — to  place  myself  before  that  place,  to  prevent
their  coming  out,  or  to  have  a  brush  with  them  if  they  venture
to  put  to  sea." 4

But  after  the  scenes  on  which  the  last  full  moon  had  looked
down  in  those  waters,  there  could  be  no  further  pretence  on
the  part  of  Farnese  to  issue  from  Sluys  and  Dunkerk,  and

H.  Seymour  to  Walsingham,  from  the
18

Rainbow,  —  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office
28

23  Aug.

MS.)  Same  to  same, - MS.

'  2  Sept.

3  R.  Williams  to  Walsingham,  July,
1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

2  Seymour  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.
1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

u

3  Seymour  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

4  “  Cependant  je  ne  fauldrai  de  me
retourner  contre  la  prochaine  lune
devant  Dunquerque  pour  empecher  la
sortie  a  ceux  dedaDS,  ou  de  me  meler
avec  eux  s’ils  se  deliberent  se  mettre
en  mer.”  Just,  de  Nassau  to  Wal¬
singham,  k  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office
MS.)

1538.

VARIOUS  RUMOURS  AS  TO  THE  ARMADA’S  FATE.  529

England  and  Holland  were  thenceforth  saved  from  all  naval
enterprises  on  the  part  of  Spain.

Meantime,  the  same  uncertainty  which  prevailed  in  England
as  to  the  condition  and  the  intentions  of  the  Armada  was  still
more  remarkable  elsewhere.  There  was  a  systematic  decep¬
tion  practised  not  only  upon  other  governments,  hut  upon  the
King  of  Spain  as  well.  Philip,  as  he  sat  at  his  writing-desk,
was  regarding  himself  as  the  monarch  of  England,  long  after
his  Armada  had  been  hopelessly  dispersed.1

In  Paris,  rumours  were  circulated  during  the  first  ten  days
of  August  that  England  was  vanquished,  and  that  the  Queen
was  already  on  her  way  to  Eome  as  a  prisoner,  where  she  was
to  make  expiation,  barefoot,  before  his  Holiness.  Mendoza —
now  more  magnificent  than  ever — stalked  into  Notre  Dame
with  his  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  crying  out  with  a  loud
voice,  u  Victory,  victory  !'' 2  and  on  the  10th  of  August
ordered  bonfires  to  be  made  before  his  house  ;  but  afterwards
thought  better  of  that  scheme.3  He  had  been  deceived  by  a
variety  of  reports  sent  to  him  day  after  day  by  agents  on  the
coast  ;  and  the  King  of  France — better  informed  by  Stafford,
but  not  unwilling  thus  to  feed  his  spite  against  the  insolent
ambassador — affected  to  believe  his  fables.  He  even  confirmed
them  by  intelligence,  which  he  pretended  to  have  himself
received  from  other  sources,  of  the  landing  of  the  Spaniards
in  England  without  opposition,  and  of  the  entire  subjugation
of  that  country  without  the  striking  of  a  blow.4

Hereupon,  on  the  night  of  August  10th,  the  envoy — “  like
a  wise  man/'  as  Stafford  observed5 — sent  off  four  couriers,  one
after  another,  with  the  great  news  to  Spain,  that  his  master's
heart  might  be  rejoiced,  and  caused  a  pamphlet  on  the  subject
to  be  printed  and  distributed  over  Paris.6  ee  I  will  not  waste
a  large  sheet  of  paper  to  express  the  joy  which  we  must  all
feel/'  he  wrote  to  Idiaquez,  “at  this  good  news.  God  he

1  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  18  Aug.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

2  Stowe,  1 44-150.

3  Sir  E.  Stafford  to  Walsingham,

i  Aug.  1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

vol.  ii. — 2M

*  Reyd,  viii.  148.

6  Stafford  to  Walsingham,  MS.  last
cited.

6  Ibid.  Reyd,  ubi  sup.

530

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

praised  for  all,  wlio  gives  us  small  chastisements  to  make  us
better,  and  then,  like  a  merciful  Father,  sends  us  infinite
rewards.” 1  And  in  the  same  strain  he  wrote,  day  after  day,
to  Moura  and  Idiaquez,  and  to  Philip  himself.

Stafford,  on  his  side,  was  anxious  to  be  informed  by  his
government  of  the  exact  truth,  whatever  it  were,  in  order  that
these  figments  of  Mendoza  might  be  contradicted.  “  That
which  cometh  from  me,”  he  said,  “will  be  believed,  for  I
have  not  been  used  to  tell  lies,  and  in  very  truth  I  have  not
the  face  to  do  it. ' 2

And  the  news  of  the  Calais  squibs,  of  the  fight  off  Grave¬
lines,  and  the  retreat  of  the  Armada  towards  the  north,  could
not  be  very  long  concealed.  So  soon,  therefore,  as  authentic
intelligence  reached  the  English  envoy  of  those  events —
which  was  not  however  for  nearly  ten  days  after  their  occur¬
rence3 — Stafford  in  his  turn  wrote  a  pamphlet,  in  answer  to
that  of  Mendoza,  and  decidedly  the  more  successful  one  of
the  two.  It  cost  him  but  five  crowns,  he  said,  to  print  four
hundred  copies  of  it ;  but  those  in  whose  name  it  was  published
got  one  hundred  crowns  by  its  sale.  The  English  ambassador
was  unwilling  to  be  known  as  the  author — although  “  desirous
of  touching  up  the  impudence  of  the  Spaniard  ;” — but  the
King  had  no  doubt  of  its  origin.  Poor  Henry,  still  smarting
under  the  insults  of  Mendoza  and  c  Mucio,'  was  delighted  with
this  blow  to  Philip's  presumption,  was  loud  in  his  praises  of
Queen  Elizabeth's  valour,  prudence,  and  marvellous  fortune,
and  declared  that  what  she  had  just  done  could  be  compared
to  the  greatest  exploits  of  the  most  illustrious  men  in  history.4

1  “No  quiero  ocupar  V.  M.  con  larga
carta  el  Regozijo  que  tendra  con  las
buenas  nuevas  con  que  queria  de-
spachar.  Dios  sea  alavado  por  todo,
qui  nos  muestra  chicos  castigos  por
enmendarnos,  y  da  como  padre  de
misericordia  inflnitos  mercedes  y
beneficios.”  Mendoza  to  Idiaquez,
13  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  [Paris.]
MS.)  Same  to  Philip  II.  same  date.

The  envoy  thought  that  the  “  Al¬
mighty  Father  of  mercy  had  conferred
as  infinite  rewards  and  benefits,”  upon

His  Spanish  children,  the  sacking  of
London,  and  the  butchering  of  the
English  nation — rewards  and  benefits
similar  to  those  which  they  had  for¬
merly  enjoyed  in  the  Netherlands.

2  Stafford  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.

MS.  before  cited.

„  9

3  Same  to  same,  —  Aug.  1588.  (S.

19  v

P.  Office  MS.)

4  “  Este  Rey  ha  loado,  hablandose
con  algunos  de  sus  favoridos  grande-

1588.  PHILIP  FOR  A  LONG-  TIME  IN  DOUBT.  531

“  So  soon  as  ever  he  saw  the  pamphlet/'  said  Stafford,  “he
offered  to  lay  a  wager  it  was  my  doing,  and  laughed  at  it
heartily."1  And  there  were  malicious  pages  about  the  French
court,  who  also  found  much  amusement  in  writing  to  the
ambassador,  begging  his  interest  with  the  Duke  of  Parma  that
they  might  obtain  from  that  conqueror  some  odd  refuse  town
or  so  in  England,  such  as  York,  Canterbury,  London,  or  the
like — till  the  luckless  Don  Bernardino  was  ashamed  to  show
his  face.2

A  letter  from  Farnese,  however,  of  10th  August,  apprized
Philip  before  the  end  of  August  of  the  Calais  disaster,  and
caused  him  great  uneasiness,  without  driving  him  to  despair.
“  At  the  very  moment,"  wrote  the  King  to  Medina  Sidonia,
“  when  I  was  expecting  news  of  the  effect  hoped  for  from  my
Armada,  I  have  learned  the  retreat  from  before  Calais,  to
which  it  was  compelled  by  the  weather ;[!]  and  I  have  received
a  very  great  .shock,  which  keeps  me  in  anxiety  not  to  be
exaggerated.  Nevertheless  I  hope  in  our  Lord  that  he  will
have  provided  a  remedy,  and  that  if  it  was  possible  for  you  to
return  upon  the  enemy,  to  come  back  to  the  appointed  post,
and  to  watch  an  opportunity  for  the  great  stroke,  you  will
have  done  as  the  case  required  ;  and  so  I  am  expecting,  with
solicitude,  to  hear  what  has  happened,  and  please  God  it  may
be  that  which  is  so  suitable  for  his  service." 3

mente  del  valor,  animo,  y  prudencia
de  la  Reyna  de  Inglaterra,  tavorecida
de  una  maravillosa  fortuna,  diziendo
que  lo  que  ella  avia  hecho  ultimamente
se  podia  comparar  con  las  may  ores
hazanas  de  los  hombres  mas  ilustres
del  tiempo  passado,  pues  avia  osado
con  solas  sus  fuerzas  aguardar  las  que
eran  tan  pujantes  como  las  de  Espana
y  combatir  las,  cerrando  juntamente  el
paso  a  la  armada  del  duca  de  Parma,
que  era  no  menos  poderosa,  y  aver
tardado  quatro  afios  V.  Magd.  con
juntar  semejantes  armadas,  poniendo
al  mundo  en  admiracion  de  ser  las  de
las  quales  se  podia  dezir  aver  trionfado
la  Reyna  de  Inglaterra.”  Mendoza  to
Philip,  13  Oct.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.
[Paris.]  MS.)

Of  course  all  the  exploits  of  the

English  and  Dutch  admirals  and  their
crews  were,  in  the  opinion  of  Henry
III.,  the  work  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  It
was  the  royal  prudence,  valor,  and
good  fortune,  which  saved  England,
not  the  merits  of  Drake  and  Howard,
Nassau  and  De  Moor.

1  Stafford  to  Walsingham,  MS.  before
cited.

2  Stowe,

3  “Al  tiempo  que  se  aguardavan
nuevas  del  effeto  que  de  las  fuerzas
dessa  armada  se  esperaba,  se  ha  enten-
dido  la  derrota  que  desde  sobre  Cales
la  for^o  a  tomar  el  temporal,  y  recibido
muy  gran  sobresalto  que  me  tiene  con
mas  cuydado  que  se  puede  encarecer,
aunque  espero  en  nuestro  Senor  que
avra  proveydo  de  remedio,  y  que  os  fue
posible  rebolver  sobre  el  enemigo  v

532

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

And  in  the  same  strain,  melancholy  yet  hopeful,  were  other
letters  despatched  on  that  day  to  the  Duke  of  Parma.  “  The
satisfaction  caused  by  your  advices  on  the  8th  August  of  the
arrival  of  the  Armada  near  Calais,  and  of  your  preparations
to  embark  your  troops,  was  changed  into  a  sentiment  which
you  can  imagine,  by  your  letter  of  the  10th.  The  anxiety
thus  occasioned  it  would  be  impossible  to  exaggerate,  although
— the  cause  being  such  as  it  is — there  is  no  ground  for  distrust.
Perhaps  the  Armada,  keeping  together,  has  returned  upon  the
enemy,  and  given  a  good  account  of  itself,  with  the  help  of
the  Lord.  So  I  still  promise  myself  that  you  will  have  per¬
formed  your  part  in  the  enterprise  in  such  wise  as  that  the
service  intended  to  the  Lord  may  have  been  executed,  and
repairs  made  to  the  reputation  of  all,  which  has  been  so  much
compromised/' 1

And  the  King's  drooping  spirits  were  revived  by  fresh
accounts  which  reached  him  in  September,  by  way  of  France.
He  now  learned  that  the  Armada  had  taken  captive  four
Dutch  men-of-war  and  many  English  ships  ;  that,  after  the
Spaniards  had  been  followed  from  Calais  roads  by  the  enemy's
fleet,  there  had  been  an  action,  which  the  English  had
attempted  in  vain  to  avoid,  off  Newcastle  ;  that  Medina
Sidonia  had  charged  upon  them  so  vigorously  as  to  sink  twenty
of  their  ships,  and  to  capture  twenty-six  others,  good  and
sound ;  that  the  others,  to  escape  perdition,  had  fled,  after
suffering  great  damage,  and  had  then  gone  to  pieces,  all
hands  perishing  ;  that  the  Armada  had  taken  a  port  in  Scot¬
land,  where  it  was  very  comfortably  established  ;  that  the

acudir  al  puesto  senalado,  y  atender
el  effecto  principal  lo  pariades  como
pedia  el  caso,  y  assi  aguardo  con  desseo
aviso  de  lo  sucedido,  que  plega  a  Dios
sea  lo  que  tanto  conviene  a  su  servicio.”
Philip  II.  to  Medina  Sidonia,  31  Aug.
1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1  “  Prometo  me  de  vos  quo  avreys
executado  lo  que  os  toca  de  manera
que  se  consiga  al  servicio  que  se  ha
pretendido  hazer  a  Dios,  y  el  reparo
de  la  reputacion  de  todos  que  esta  tan
empeiiada.”  The  underlined  words

were  stricken  out  by  Philip,  from  the
draft  of  the  letter — prepared  as  usual
by  the  secretary — with  the  note  in  the
King’s  hand:  “  See  if  it  be  well  to  omit
the  passage  erased,  because  in  that
which  God  does,  or  by  which  He  is
served,  there  is  no  gaining  or  losing
of  reputation,  and  it  is  better  not  to
speak  of  it  at  all.”  (“  Pues  en  lo  que
Dios  haze,  y  es  servido,  no  ay  que  per-
der  ni  ganar  reputacion,  y  es  major  no
bablar  en  elio.”)  Philip  II.  to  Parma,
31  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1588.

HE  BELIEVES  HIMSELF  VICTORIOUS.

533

flag-ship  of  Lord-admiral  Howard,  of  Drake,  and  of  that  “  dis¬
tinguished  mariner  Hawkins/'  had  all  been  sunk  in  action,  and
that  no  soul  had  been  saved  except  Drake,  who  had  escaped
in  a  cock-boat.  u  This  is  good  news,"  added  the  writer,  “  and
it  is  most  certain." 1

The  King  pondered  seriously  over  these  conflicting  accounts,
and  remained  very  much  in  the  dark.  Half  the  month  of
September  went  by,  and  he  had  heard  nothing  official  since
the  news  of  the  Calais  catastrophe.  It  may  be  easily  under¬
stood  that  Medina  Sidonia,  while  flying  round  the  Orkneys
had  not  much  opportunity  for  despatching  couriers  to  Spain,
and  as  Farnese  had  not  written  since  the  10th  August,  Philip
was  quite  at  a  loss  whether  to  consider  himself  triumphant  or
defeated.  From  the  reports  by  way  of  Calais,  Dunkerk,  and
Rouen,  he  supposed  that  the  Armada  had  inflicted  much
damage  on  the  enemy.  He  suggested  accordingly,  on  the
3rd  September,  to  the  Duke  of  Parma,  that  he  might  now
make  the  passage  to  England,  while  the  English  fleet,  if  any¬
thing  was  left  of  it,  was  repairing  its  damages.  u  'Twill  be
easy  enough  to  conquer  the  country,"  said  Philip,  ee  so  soon  as
you  set  foot  on  the  soil.  Then  perhaps  our  Armada  can  come
back  and  station  itself  in  the  Thames  to  support  you." 2

Nothing  could  be  simpler.  Nevertheless  the  King  felt  a
pang  of  doubt  lest  affairs,  after  all,  might  not  be  going  on  so
swimmingly  ;  so  he  dipped  his  pen  in  the  inkstand  again,  and
observed  with  much  pathos,  “  But  if  this  hope  must  be  given
up,  you  must  take  the  Isle  of  Walcheren  :  something  must  be
done  to  console  me." 3

And  on  the  15th  September  he  was  still  no  wiser.  ec  This
business  of  the  Armada  leaves  me  no  repose,"  he  said  ;  u  I  can
think  of  nothing  else.  I  don't  content  myself  with  what  I
have  written,  but  write  again  and  again,  although  in  great
want  of  light.  I  hear  that  the  Armada  has  sunk  and  captured
many  English  ships,  and  is  refitting  in  a  Scotch  port.  If  this

1  Avisos  de  Dunquerque,  30  Aug.
1588.  Carta  de  Roan  de  Juan  de
Gramarra,  31  Aug.  1588.  ‘A  sido
buena  nueva,  y  esto  es  certissimc.”

(Arch,  de  Sim.  [Paris.]  MSS.)

2  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  3  Sept.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

J  Ibid.

534

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

is  in  the  territory  of  Lord  Huntley,  I  hope  he  will  stir  up  the
Catholics  of  that  country/' 1

And  so7  in  letter  after  letter,  Philip  clung  to  the  delusion
that  Alexander  could  yet  cross  to  England,  and  that  the
Armada  might  sail  up  the  Thames.  The  Duke  was  directed
to  make  immediate  arrangements  to  that  effect  with  Medina
Sidonia,  at  the  very  moment  when  that  tempest-tossed  grandee
was  painfully  creeping  back  towards  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  with
what  remained  of  his  invincible  fleet.

Sanguine  and  pertinacious,  the  King  refused  to  believe  in
the  downfall  of  his  long-cherished  scheme  ;  and  even  when
the  light  was  at  last  dawning  upon  him,  he  was  like  a  child
crying  for  a  fresh  toy,  when  the  one  which  had  long  amused
him  had  been  broken.  If  the  Armada  were  really  very  much
damaged,  it  was  easy  enough,  he  thought,  for  the  Duke  of
Parma  to  make  him  a  new  one,  while  the  old  one  was  repair¬
ing.  “  In  case  the  Armada  is  too  much  shattered  to  come
out,"  said  Philips,  “and  winter  compels  it  to  stay  in  that
port,  you  must  cause  another  Armada  to  he  constructed  at
Emden  and  the  adjacent  towns,  at  my  expense,  and,  with
the  two  together,  you  will  certainly  be  able  to  conquer
England."  2

And  he  wrote  to  Medina  Sidonia  in  similar  terms.  That
naval  commander  wTas  instructed  to  enter  the  Thames  at  once,
if  strong  enough.  If  not,  he  was  to  winter  in  the  Scotch  port
which  he  was  supposed  to  have  captured.  Meantime  Farnese
would  build  a  new  fleet  at  Emden,  and  in  the  spring  the  two
dukes  would  proceed  to  accomplish  the  great  purpose.3

But  at  last  the  arrival  of  Medina  Sidonia  at  Santander4
dispelled  these  visions,  and  now  the  King  appeared  in  another
attitude.  A  messenger,  coming  post-haste  from  the  captain-
general,  arrived  in  the  early  days  of  October  at  the  Escorial.
Entering  the  p>alace  he  found  Idiaquez  and  Moura  pacing  up
and  down  the  corridor,  before  the  door  of  Philip's  cabinet,

1  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  15  Sept.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

2  Ibid.

3  Philip  II.  to  Medina  Sidonia,

15  Sept.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

4  Philip  II.  to  Parma,  10  Oct.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)

1588.

IS  TRANQUIL  WHEN  UNDECEIVED.

535

and  was  immediately  interrogated  by  those  counsellors,  most
anxious,  of  course,  to  receive  authentic  intelligence  at  last  as
to  the  fate  of  the  Armada.1  The  entire  overthrow  of  the
great  project  was  now,  for  the  first  time,  fully  revealed  in
Spain  ;  the  fabulous  victories  over  the  English,  and  the  anni¬
hilation  of  Howard  and  all  his  ships,  were  dispersed  in  air.
Broken,  ruined,  forlorn,  the  invincible  Armada — so  far  as  it
still  existed — had  reached  a  Spanish  port.  Great  was  the  con¬
sternation  of  Idiaquez  and  Moura,  as  they  listened  to  the  tale,
and  very  desirous  was  each  of  the  two  secretaries  that  the
other  should  discharge  the  unwelcome  duty  of  communicating
the  fatal  intelligence  to  the  King.2

At  last  Moura  consented  to  undertake  the  task,  and  entering
the  cabinet,  he  found  Philip  seated  at  his  desk.  Of  course
he  was  writing  letters.3  Being  informed  of  the  arrival  of  a
messenger  from  the  north,  he  laid  down  his  pen,  and  inquired
the  news.  The  secretary  replied  that  the  accounts  concerning
the  Armada  were  by  no  means  so  favourable  as  could  be  wished.
The  courier  was  then  introduced,  and  made  his  dismal  report.
The  King  did  not  change  countenance.  u  Great  thanks/'  he
observed,  u  do  I  render  to  Almighty  God,  by  whose  generous
hand  I  am  gifted  with  such  power,  that  I  could  easily,  if  I
chose,  place  another  fleet  upon  the  seas.  Nor  is  it  of  very
great  importance  that  a  running  stream  should  be  sometimes
intercepted,  so  long  as  the  fountain  from  which  it  flows  re¬
mains  inexhaustible."

So  saying  he  resumed  his  pen,  and  serenely  proceeded  with
his  letters.4  Christopher  Moura  stared  with  unaffected  amaze¬
ment  at  his  sovereign,  thus  tranquil  while  a  shattered  world
was  falling  on  his  head,  and  then  retired  to  confer  with  his
colleague.

u  And  how  did  his  Majesty  receive  the  blow  ?"  asked
Idiaquez.

“  His  Majesty  thinks  nothing  of  the  blow,"  answered  Moura,

1  Strada,  II.  ix.  564.

2  Ibid.

3  “  Regem  literas  scribentem  re¬

pent.”  (Ibid.)

4  Ibid.  “  His  dictis  calamum  re-
sumit,  et  eadem  qua  ceperat  tranquil-
litate  vultus  ad  scribendum  redit.

536

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XIX.

“nor  do  I,  consequently,  make  more  of  this  great  calamity
than  does  his  Majesty/'1

So  the  King — as  fortune  flew  away  from  him,  wrapped
himself  in  his  virtue  ;  and  his  counsellors,  imitating  their
sovereign,  arrayed  themselves  in  the  same  garment.  Thus
draped,  they  were  all  prepared  to  hide  the  pelting  of  the
storm  which  was  only  heating  figuratively  on  their  heads,
while  it  had  been  dashing  the  King's  mighty  galleons  on  the
rocks,  and  drowning  by  thousands  the  wretched  victims  of  his
ambition.  Soon  afterwards,  when  the  particulars  of  the
great  disaster  were  thoroughly  known,  Philip  ordered  a  letter
to  be  addressed  in  his  name  to  all  the  bishops  of  Spain,  order¬
ing  a  solemn  thanksgiving  to  the  Almighty  for  the  safety  of
that  portion  of  the  invincible  Armada  which  it  had  pleased
Him  to  preserve.2

And  thus,  with  the  sound  of  mourning  throughout  Spain —
for  there  was  scarce  a  household  of  which  some  beloved
member  had  not  perished  in  the  great  catastrophe — and  with
the  peals  of  merry  bells  over  all  England  and  Holland,  and
with  a  solemn  ‘  Te  Eeum'  resounding  in  every  church,  the
curtain  fell  upon  the  great  tragedy  of  the  Armada.

1  “Rex,  inquit,  totum  hoc  infortu-  2  Strada,  II.  ix.  565.  Herrera,  III.
nium  nihili  facit,  nec  ego  pluris  quarn  iii.  113.
ipse.”  (Ibid.)

1588.

ALEXANDER  BESIEGES  BERGEN-OP-ZOOM.

537

CHAPTER  XX.

Alexander  besieges  Bergen-op-Zoom — Pallavicini’s  Attempt  to  seduce  Parma
— Alexander’s  Fury — He  is  forced  to  raise  the  Siege  of  Bergen — Gertruy-
denberg  betrayed  to  Parma — Indignation  of  the  States — Exploits  of
Schenk — His  Attack  on  Nymegen — He  is  defeated  and  drowned — Eng-
lish-Dutch  Expedition  to  Spain — Its  meagre  Results — Death  of  Guise
and  of  the  Queen-Mother — Combinations  after  the  Murder  of  Henry  III.
— Tandem  fit  Surculus  Arbor.

The  fever  of  the  past  two  years  was  followed  by  comparative
languor.  The  deadly  crisis  was  past,  the  freedom  of  Europe
was  saved,  Holland  and  England  breathed  again  ;  hut  tension
now  gave  jflace  to  exhaustion.  The  events  in  the  remainder
of  the  year  1588,  with  those  of  1589 — although  important  in
themselves — were  the  immediate  results  of  that  history  which
has  been  so  minutelv  detailed  in  these  volumes,  and  can  he
indicated  in  a  very  few  pages.

The  Duke  of  Parma,  melancholy,  disappointed,  angry —
stung  to  the  soul  by  calumnies  as  stupid  as  they  were
venomous,  and  already  afflicted  with  a  painful  and  lingering
disease,  which  his  friends  attributed  to  poison  administered
by  command  of  the  master  whom  he  had  so  faithfully
served  —  determined,  if  possible,  to  afford  the  consola¬
tion  which  that  master  was  so  plaintively  demanding  at  his
hands.

So  Alexander  led  the  splendid  army  which  had  been  packed
in,  and  unpacked  from,  the  flat  boats  of  Newport  and  Dunkerk,
against  Bergen-op-Zoom,  and  besieged  that  city  in  form.  Once
of  great  commercial  importance,  although  somewhat  fallen
away  from  its  original  prosperity,  Bergen  was  well  situate  on
a  little  stream  which  connected  it  with  the  tide-waters  of  the
Scheldt,  and  was  the  only  place  in  Brabant,  except  Willem¬
stad,  still  remaining  to  the  States.  Opposite  lay  the  Isle  of
Tholen  from  which  it  was  easily  to  he  supplied  and  rein-

53S

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

forced.  Tlie  Vosmeer,  a  branch  of  the  Scheldt,  separated  the
island  from  the  main,  and  there  was  a  path  along  the  bed  of
that  estuary,  which,  at  dead  low-water,  was  practicable  for
wading.  Alexander,  accordingly,  sent  a  party  of  eight  hundred
pikemen,  under  Montigny,  Marquis  of  Renty,  and  Ottavio
Mansfeld,  supported  on  the  dyke  by  three  thousand  mus¬
keteers,  across  the  dangerous  ford,  at  ebb-tide,  in  order  to
seize  this  important  island.  It  was  an  adventure  similar  to
those,  which,  in  the  days  of  the  grand  commander,  and  under
the  guidance  of  Mondragon,  had  been  on  two  occasions  so
brilliantly  successful.  But  the  Isle  of  Tholen  was  now  de¬
fended  by  Count  Solms  and  a  garrison  of  fierce  amphibious
Zeelanders — of  those  determined  bands  which  had  just  been
holding  Farnese  and  his  fleet  in  prison,  and  daring  him  to  the
issue — and  the  invading  party,  after  fortunately  accomplishing
their  night-journey  along  the  bottom  of  the  Vosmeer,  were
unable  to  effect  a  landing,  were  driven  with  considerable
loss  into  the  waves  again,  and  compelled  to  find  their  way
back  as  best  they  could,  along  their  dangerous  path,  and  with
a  rapidly  rising  tide.  It  was  a  blind  and  desperate  venture,  and
the  Vosmeer  soon  swallowed  four  hundred  of  the  Spaniards.
The  rest,  half-drowned  or  smothered,  succeeded  in  reaching
the  shore — the  chiefs  of  the  expedition,  Renty  and  Mansfeld,
having  been  with  difficulty  rescued  by  their  followers,  when
nearly  sinking  in  the  tide.1

The  Duke  continued  the  siege,  but  the  place  was  well
defended  by  an  English  and  Dutch  garrison,  to  the  number
of  five  thousand,  and  commanded  by  Colonel  Morgan,  that
bold  and  much  experienced  Welshman,  so  well  known  in  the
Netherland  wars.  Willoughby  and  Maurice  of  Nassau,  and
Olden-Barneveld  were,  at  different  times,  within  the  walls  ;  for
the  Duke  had  been  unable  to  invest  the  place  so  closely  as  to
prevent  all  communications  from  without ;  and,  while  Maurice
was  present,  there  were  almost  daily  sorties  from  the  town,
with  many  a  spirited  skirmish,  to  give  pleasure  to  the  martial

1  Bor.  III.  xsv.  338-341.  Parma  to  Philip  II.,  1  Oct.  1588.  (Arch,  do  Sim.
MS.)  Herrera,  III.  ii.  114,  seq.

1588.

PALLAVICINPS  ATTEMPT  TO  SEDUCE  PARMA.

539

young  Prince.1  The  English  officers,  Yere  and  Baskerville,
and  two  Netherland  colonels,  the  brothers  Bax,  10  Oct.
most  distinguished  themselves  on  these  occasions.  1588-
The  siege  was  not  going  on  with  the  good  fortune  which  had
usually  attended  the  Spanish  leaguer  of  Dutch  cities,  while,
on  the  29th  September,  a  personal  incident  came  to  increase
Alexander's  dissatisfaction  and  melancholy.

On  that  day  the  Duke  was  sitting  in  his  tent,  brooding,  as
he  was  apt  to  do,  over  the  unjust  accusations  which  had  been
heaped  upon  him  in  regard  to  the  failure  of  the  Armada,  when
a  stranger  was  announced.  His  name,  he  said,  was  Giacomo
Morone,  and  he  wTas  the  bearer  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Horace
Pallavicini,  a  Genoese  gentleman  long  established  in  London,
and  known  to  be  on  confidential  terms  with  the  English
government.  Alexander  took  the  letter,  and  glancing  at  the
bottom  of  the  last  page,  saw  that  it  was  not  signed.

u  How  dare  you  bring  me  a  dispatch  without  a  signature  ?”
he  exclaimed.  The  messenger,  who  was  himself  a  Genoese,
assured  the  Duke  that  the  letter  was  most  certainly  written
by  Pallavicini — who  had  himself  placed  it,  sealed,  in  his
hands — and  that  he  had  supposed  it  signed,  although  he  had
of  course,  not  seen  the  inside.

Alexander  began  to  read  the  note,  which  was  not  a  very
long  one,  and  his  brow  instantly  darkened.  He  read  a  line
or  two  more,  when,  with  an  exclamation  of  fury,  he  drew  his
dagger,  and,  seizing  the  astonished  Genoese  by  the  throat,
was  about  to  strike  him  dead.  Suddenly  mastering  his  rage,
however,  by  a  strong  effort,  and  remembering  that  the  man
might  be  a  useful  witness,  he  flung  Morone  from  him.

“  If  I  had  Pallavicini  here,"  he  said,  “  I  would  treat  him
as  I  have  just  refrained  from  using  you.  And  if  I  had  any
suspicion  that  you  were  aware  of  the  contents  of  this  letter,  I
would  send  you  this  instant  to  be  hanged."  2

The  unlucky  despatch-bearer  protested  his  innocence  of  all

1  Bor,  ubi  sup.

2  “  Y  como  fue  viendo  la  desver-
guenza  y  vellaqueria  me  altero  de

manera  quo  me  levante  de  donde
estaba  con  resolucion  de  darle  esto-
cadas,  y  Dios  me  alumbro  con  ponerme

540

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  NX.

complicity  with  Pallavicini,  and  his  ignorance  of  the  tenor  of
the  communication  by  which  the  Duke's  wrath  had  been  so
much  excited.  He  was  then  searched  and  cross-examined
most  carefully  by  Richardot  and  other  counsellors,  and —
his  innocence  being  made  apparent — he  was  ultimately  dis¬
charged.

The  letter  of  Pallavicini  was  simply  an  attempt  to  sound
Farnese  as  to  his  sentiments  in  regard  to  a  secret  scheme,
which  could  afterwards  be  arranged  in  form,  and  according  to
which  he  was  to  assume  the  sovereignty  of  the  Netherlands
himself,  to  the  exclusion  of  his  King,  to  guarantee  to  England
the  possession  of  the  cautionary  towns,  until  her  advances  to
the  States  should  be  refunded,  and  to  receive  the  support  and
perpetual  alliance  of  the  Queen  in  his  new  and  rebellious
position.1

Here  was  additional  evidence,  if  any  were  wanting,  of  the
universal  belief  in  his  disloyalty  ;  and  Alexander,  faithful,  if
man  ever  were  to  his  master — was  cut  to  the  heart,  and
irritated  almost  to  madness,  by  such  insolent  propositions.
There  is  neither  proof  nor  probability  that  the  Queen's  govern¬
ment  was  implicated  in  this  intrigue  of  Pallavicini,  who  ap¬
pears  to  have  been  inspired  by  the  ambition  of  achieving
a  bit  of  Machiavellian  policy  quite  on  his  own  account.
Nothing  came  of  the  proposition,  and  the  Duke,  having  trans¬
mitted  to  the  King  a  minute  narrative  of  the  affair,  together
with  indignant  protestations  of  the  fidelity  which  all  the
world  seemed  determined  to  dispute,  received  most  affectionate
replies  from  that  monarch,  breathing  nothing  but  unbounded
confidence  in  his  nephew's  innocence  and  devotion.2

delante  que  convenia  que  este  hombre
se  guardase  a  buen  recado,  porque
Y.  M.  pueda  entender  del  lo  que  para
este  neg°  reporte  me;  y  le  dije  que  si
yo  tuviesse  al  Palavicino  se  la  daria
cual  el  merece,  y  a  vos  si  supiese  quo
sabeis  este  neg°,  os  mandaria  luego
colgar.  Acabe  de  leer  la  carta,  y  cuanto
mas  la  vi  y  considere  la  halle  mas
vellaca  y  enconsonada.”  Parma  to
Philip  II.  29  Sept.  1588.  (Arch,  de

Sim.  MS.)  Compare  Strada,  II.  1.  iii.
573,  seq.

1  Parma  to  Philip,  MS.  last  cited.
Orazio  Pallavicini  to  Giacomo  Morone,
31  Aug.  1588.  (Arch,  de  Sim.  MSS.)
Strada,  ubi  sup.

3  Parma  to  Idiaquez,  1  Oct.  1588.
Philip  to  Parma,  17  Oct.  1588.  Idia¬
quez  to  Parma,  17  Oct.  1588.  (Arch,
de  Sim.  MSS.)

1588.

ALEXANDER’S  FURY.

541

Such  assurances  from  any  other  man  in  the  world  might
have  disarmed  suspicion,  hut  Alexander  knew  his  master  too
well  to  repose  upon  his  word,  and  remembered  too  bitterly
the  last  hours  of  Don  John  of  Austria — whose  dying  pillow
he  had  soothed,  and  whose  death  had  been  hastened,  as  he
knew,  either  by  actual  poison  or  by  the  hardly  less  fatal  venom
of  slander — to  regain  tranquillity  as  to  his  own  position.

The  King  was  desirous  that  Pallavicini  should  be  invited
over  to  Flanders,  in  order  that  Alexander,  under  pretence  of
listening  to  his  propositions,  might  draw  from  the  Genoese
all  the  particulars  of  his  scheme,  and  then,  at  leisure,  inflict
the  punishment  which  he  had  deserved.1  But  insuperable
obstacles  presented  themselves,  nor  was  Alexander  desirous
of  affording  still  further  pretexts  for  his  slanderers.

Yery  soon  after  this  incident — most  important  as  showing
the  real  situation  of  various  parties,  although  without  any
immediate  result — Alexander  received  a  visit  in  his  tent
from  another  stranger.  This  time  the  visitor  was  an  English¬
man,  one  Lieutenant  Grimstone,  and  the  object  of  his  inter¬
view  with  the  Duke  was  not  political,  but  had  a  direct  refer¬
ence  to  the  siege  t)f  Bergen.  He  was  accompanied  by  a
countryman  of  his  own,  Bedhead  by  name,  a  camp-suttler  by
profession.  The  two  represented  themselves  as  deserters  from
the  besieged  city,  and  offered,  for  a  handsome  reward,  to
conduct  a  force  of  Spaniards,  by  a  secret  path,  into  one  of  the
gates.  The  Duke  questioned  them  narrowly,  and  being
satisfied  with  their  intelligence  and  coolness,  caused  them  to
take  an  oath  on  the  Evangelists,  that  they  were  not  playing
him  false.  He  then  selected  a  band  of  one  hundred  mus¬
keteers,  partly  Spaniards,  partly  Walloons — to  be  followed  at
20  Oct.  a  distance  by  a  much  more  considerable  force,

1588.  two  thousand  in  number,  under  Sancho  de  Leyva
and  the  Marquis  of  Eenti — and  appointed  the  following  night
for  an  enterprise  against  the  city,  under  the  guidance  of
Grimstone.

It  was  a  wild  autumnal  night,  moonless,  pitch-dark,  with  a

1  Idiaquez  to  Parma,  MS.  last  cited.

542

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

storm  of  wind  and  rain.  The  waters  were  out — for  the  dykes
had  been  cut  in  all  directions  by  the  defenders  of  the  city —
and;  with  exception  of  some  elevated  points  occupied  by
Parma's  forces,  the  whole  country  was  overflowed.  Before
the  party  set  forth  on  their  daring  expedition,  the  two  Eng¬
lishmen  were  tightly  hound  with  cords,  and  led,  each,  by  two
soldiers  instructed  to  put  them  to  instant  death  if  their  con¬
duct  should  give  cause  for  suspicion.  But  both  Grimstone
and  Redhead  preserved  a  cheerful  countenance,  and  inspired
a  strong  confidence  in  their  honest  intention  to  betray  their
countrymen.  And  thus  the  band  of  bold  adventurers  plunged
at  once  into  the  darkness,  and  soon  found  themselves  con¬
tending  with  the  tempest,  and  wading  breast  high  in  the
black  waters  of  the  Scheldt.

After  a  long  and  perilous  struggle,  they  at  length  reached
the  appointed  gate.  The  external  portcullis  was  raised,  and
the  fifteen  foremost  of  the  band  rushed  into  the  town.  At
the  next  moment,  Lord  Willoughby,  who  had  been  privy  to
the  whole  scheme,  cut  with  his  own  hand  the  cords  which  held
the  portcullis,  and  entrapped  the  leaders  of  the  expedition,
who  were  all  at  once  put  to  the  sword,  while  their  followers
were  thundering  at  the  gate.  The  lieutenant  and  subtler,
who  had  thus  overreached  that  great  master  of  dissimulation,
Alexander  Farnese,  were  at  the  same  time  unbound  by  their
comrades,  and  rescued  from  the  fate  intended  for  them.

Notwithstanding  the  probability — when  the  portcullis  fell —
that  the  whole  party  had  been  deceived  by  an  artifice  of  war,
the  adventurers,  who  had  come  so  far,  refused  to  abandon  the
enterprise,  and  continued  an  impatient  battery  upon  the  gate.
At  last  it  was  swung  wide  open,  and  a  furious  onslaught  was
made  by  the  garrison  upon  the  Spaniards.  There  was  a
fierce,  brief  struggle,  and  then  the  assailants  were  utterly
routed.  Some  were  killed  under  the  walls,  while  the  rest
were  hunted  into  the  waves.  Nearly  every  one  of  the  expe¬
dition  (a  thousand  in  number)  perished.1

1  Parma  to  Philip  II.  30  Oct.  1588.
(Arch,  de  Sim.  MS.)  Meteren,  xv.

275vo.  Bor,  III.  xxv.  340.  Herrera,
III.  ii.  118,  seq.  Strada,  II.  x.  582,  585.

1588.

HE  IS  FORCED  TO  RAISE  THE  SIEOE  OF  BERGEN.  543

It  had  now  become  obvious  to  the  Duke  that  bis  siege  must
be  raised.  The  days  were  gone  when  the  walls  of  Dutch
towns  seemed  to  melt  before  the  first  scornful  glance  of  the
Spanish  invader,  and  when  a  summons  meant  a  surrender,
and  a  surrender  a  massacre.  Now,  strong  in  the  feeling  of
independence,  and  supported. by  the  courage  and  endurance
of  their  English  allies,  the  Hollanders  bad  learned  to  bumble
the  pride  of  Spain  as  it  had  never  been  bumbled  before.
The  hero  of  a  hundred  battle-fields,  the  inventive  and  bril¬
liant  conqueror  of  Antwerp,  seemed  in  the  deplorable  issue
of  the  English  invasion  to  have  lost  all  his  genius,  all  his
fortune.  A  cloud  had  fallen  upon  bis  fame,  and  he  now  saw
himself,  at  the  head  of  the  best  army  in  Europe,  compelled
to  retire,  defeated  and  humiliated,  from  the  walls  of  Bergen.
Winter  was  coming  on  apace ;  the  country  was  flooded  ;  the
storms  in  that  bleak  region  and  inclement  season  were  inces¬

sant  ;  and  he  was  obliged  to  retreat  before  his  army  should
be  drowned.

On  the  night  of  12-13  November  he  set  fire  to  his  camp,
and  took  his  departure.  By  daybreak  he  was  descried  in  full
retreat,  and  was  hotly  pursued  by  the  English  and  Dutch  from
the  city,  who  drove  the  great  Alexander  and  his  legions  before
them  in  ignominious  flight.  Lord  Willoughby,  in  full  view
of  the  retiring  enemy,  indulged  the  allied  forces  with  a  chi¬
valrous  spectacle.  Calling  a  halt,  after  it  had  become  obvi¬
ously  useless,  with  their  small  force  of  cavalry,  to  follow  any

Camero,  Guerras  de  Flandes  (Bruseles,
1625),  p.  231,  232.  Coloma,  Guerras

de  los  Estados  Baxos,  I.  10,  11.  Sir

20

W.  Drury  to  Burghley,  —  Oct.  1588.
(S.  R  Office  MS.)

“Seemeth  to  my  simple  opinion  a
great  commendation  unto  the  gentle¬
man  that  could  so  sweetly  charm  so
wise  and  learned  a  master  in  his  own
art  as  the  Duke  of  Parma  is,”  &c.

The  Jesuit  Strada,  however — who
narrates  all  the  trickeries  of  Philip  and
of  Farnese  with  so  much  applause — is
shocked  at  the  duplicity  of  Lieutenant
Grimstone;  and  Coloma  is  ineffably

'  disgusted  at  such  sharp  practice.

It  has  been  stated  by  Meteren  (xv.
27  5V0)  and  others,  that  Sir  William
Stanley  was  in  this  expedition,  and
that  he  very  narrowly  escaped  being
taken  with  the  first  fifteen.  This
would  have  been  probable  enough,
had  he  been  there,  for  his  valour  was
equal  to  his  treachery.  But  Parma
does  not  mention  his  name  in  the  letters
describing  the  adventure,  and  it  is
therefore  unlikely  that  he  was  present.
At  any  rate  he  escaped  capture,  and,
with  it,  a  traitor’s  death.  Strada  says
expressly,  “  Stanlaeo  ad  id  operis
nequaquam  adhibito.”

544

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

longer,  through  a  flooded  country,  an  enemy  who  had  aban¬
doned  his  design,  he  solemnly  conferred  the  honour  of  knight¬
hood,  in  the  name  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  on  the  officers  who
had  most  distinguished  themselves  during  the  siege,  Francis
Vere,  Baskerville,  Powell,  Parker,  Knowles,  and  on  the  two
Netherland  brothers,  Paul  and  Marcellus  Bax.1

The  Duke  of  Parma  then  went  into  winter  quarters  in
Brabant,  and,  before  the  spring,  that  obedient  Province  had
been  eaten  as  bare  as  Flanders  had  already  been  by  the
friendly  Spaniards.

An  excellent  understanding  between  England  and  Holland
had  been  the  result  of  their  united  and  splendid  exertions
against  the  Invincible  Armada.  Late  in  the  year  1588  Sir
John  Norris  had  been  sent  by  the  Queen  to  offer  her  congra¬
tulations  and  earnest  thanks  to  the  States  for  their  valuable
assistance  in  preserving  her  throne,  and  to  solicit  their
cooperation  in  some  new  designs  against  the  common  foe.2
Unfortunately,  however,  the  epoch  of  good  feeling  was  but
of  brief  duration.  Bitterness  and  dissension  seemed  the  ine¬
vitable  conditions  of  the  English-Dutch  alliance.  It  will  bo
remembered,  that,  on  the  departure  of  Leicester,  several  cities
had  refused  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  Count  Maurice
and  the  States  ;  and  that  civil  war  in  the  scarcely-born  com¬
monwealth  had  been  the  result.  Medenblik,  Naarden,  and  the
other  contumacious  cities,  had  however  been  reduced  to  obedi¬
ence  after  the  reception  of  the  Earl’s  resignation,  but  the  impor¬
tant  city  of  Gertruydenberg  had  remained  in  a  chronic  state  of
mutiny.  This  rebellion  had  been  partially  appeased  during  the
year  1588  by  the  efforts  of  Willoughby,  who  had  strengthened
the  garrison  by  reinforcements  of  English  troops  under  command
irgg  of  his  brother-in-law,  Sir  John  Wingfield.  Early  in  1589
however,  the  whole  garrison  became  rebellious,  disarmed
and  maltreated  the  burghers,  and  demanded  immediate  pay¬
ment  of  the  heavy  arrearages  still  due  to  the  troops.  Wil-

1  Bor,  ubi  sup.  Meteren.  Compare
Coloma,  I.  11,  12.  Herrera,  uM  sup.
Strada,  x.  588.

2  Propositions  of  Sir  John  Norris  to

Council  of  State.  Bor,  III.  xxv.  361,

90  Oct

362.  Sir  Ed.  Norris  to  - ,  ,

8  Nov.

1588.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

1589.

GERTRUYDENBERG  BETRAYED  TO  PARMA.

545

loughby,  who — much  disgusted  with  his  career  in  the  Nether¬
lands — was  about  leaving  for  England,  complaining  that  the
States  had  not  only  left  him  without  remuneration  for  his
services,  but  had  not  repaid  his  own  advances,  nor  even  given
him  a  complimentary  dinner,  tried  in  vain  to  pacify  them.
A  rumour  became  very  current,  moreover,  that  the  garrison
had  opened  negotiations  with  Alexander  Earnese,  and  accord¬
ingly  Maurice  of  Nassau — of  whose  patrimonial  property  the
city  of  G-ertruydenberg  made  a  considerable  proportion,  to  the
amount  of  eight  thousand  pounds  sterling  a  year1 — after  sum¬
moning  the  garrison,  in  his  own  name  and  that  of  the  States,
to  surrender,  laid  siege  to  the  place  in  form.  It  would  have
been  cheaper,  no  doubt,  to  pay  the  demands  of  the  garrison
in  full,  and  allow  them  to  depart.  But  Maurice  considered
his  honour  at  stake.  His  letters  of  summons,  in  which  he
spoke  of  the  rebellious  commandant  and  his  garrison  as  self-
seeking  foreigners  and  mercenaries,  were  taken  in  very  ill
part.  *  Wingfield  resented  the  statement  in  very  insolent
language,  and  offered  to  prove  its  falsehood  with  his  sword
against  any  man  and  in  any  place  whatever.  Willoughby
wrote  to  his  brother-in-law,  from  Flushing,  when  about  to
embark,  disapproving  of  his  conduct  and  of  his  language  ;
and  to  Maurice,  deprecating  hostile  measures  against  a  city
under  the  protection  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  At  any  rate,  he
claimed  that  Sir  John  Wingfield  and  his  wife,  the  Countess
of  Kent,  with  their  newly-born  child,  should  be  allowed  to
depart  from  the  place.  But  Wingfield  expressed  great  scorn
at  any  suggestion  of  retreat,  and  vowed  that  he  would  rather
surrender  the  city  to  the  Spaniards  than  tolerate  the  presump¬
tion  of  Maurice  and  the  States.  The  young  Prince  accordingly
opened  his  batteries,  but  before  an  entrance  could  be  effected  into
the  town,  was  obliged  to  retire  at  the  approach  of  Count  Mansfeld
with  a  much  superior  force.  Gertruydenberg  was  iq  April,
now  surrendered  to  the  Spaniards  (10  April,  1589)  1589-

in  accordance  with  a  secret  negociation  which  had  been
proceeding  all  the  spring,  and  had  been  brought  to  a  conclu-

1  Ortell  to  Wolley,  9  April,  1589.  (S.  P.  Office  MS.)

YOL.  II. — 2  N

546

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

sion  at  last.  The  garrison  received  twelve  months’  pay  in
full  and  a  gratuity  of  five  months  in  addition,  and  the  city
was  then  reduced  into  obedience  to  Spain  and  Eome  on  the
terms  which  had  been  usual  during  the  government  of  Far-
nese.1

The  loss  of  this  city  was  most  severe  to  the  republic,  for
the  enemy  had  thus  gained  an  entrance  into  the  very  heart
of  Holland.  It  was  a  more  important  acquisition  to  Alex¬
ander  than  even  Bergen-op-Zoom  would  have  been,  and  it  was
a  bitter  reflection  that  to  the  treachery  of  Netherlander  and
of  their  English  allies  this  great  disaster  was  owing.  All  the
wrath  aroused  a  year  before  by  the  famous  treason  of  York
and  Stanley,  and  which  had  been  successfully  extinguished,
now  flamed  forth  afresh.  The  States  published  a  placard
denouncing  the  men  who  had  thus  betrayed  the  cause  of
freedom,  and  surrendered  the  city  of  Gertruydenberg  to  the
Spaniards,  as  perjured  traitors  whom  it  was  made  lawful  to
hang,  whenever  or  wherever  caught,  without  trial  or  sentence,
and  offering  fifty  florins  a-head  for  every  private  soldier  and
one  hundred  florins  for  any  officer  of  the  garrison.  A  list  of
these  Englishmen  and  Netherlanders,  so  far  as  known,  was
appended  to  the  placard,  and  the  catalogue  was  headed  by
the  name  of  Sir  John  Wingfield.2

Thus  the  consequences  of  the  fatal  event  were  even  more
deplorable  than  the  loss  of  the  city  itself.  The  fury  of  Olden-
Barneveld  at  the  treason  was  excessive,  and  the  great  Advo¬
cate  governed  the  policy  of  the  republic,  at  this  period,  almost
like  a  dictator.3 * * 6  The  States,

-j  /

1  Bor,  III.  xxvi.  403-419.  Strada,

II.  s.  600-609.  Coloma,  I.  20-23.

2  Bor,  ubi  sup.  Bodley  to  Burghley,

—  April,  1589.  (B.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  iv.

20

144,  MS.)

6  “Eor  all  here  is /  directed  by
Holland,  and  Holland  is  carried  away
by  Barneveld,  whose  resolutions  are
so  full  of  self-will,  and  so  opposite  to
her  Majesty’s  proceedings,  as  there
are  of  the  wisest  among  themselves
that  fear  by  his  dealing  some  great

easily  acknowledging  the  sway

alteration.  Eor  the  hindrance  of
which,  I  cannot  propose  any  better
means  than  if  that  course  which  is
held  between  him  and  Ortell  might
be  stopped  in  England.  For  matters
here  are  so  handled  at  this  present,
as  in  whatsoever  cause  the  States-
General,  or  they  of  Holland  and  Zee-
land,  have  to  deal  with  her  Majesty,
they  neither  propose  it  before  to  the
council  of  state,  nor  impart  it  with
her  Majesty’s  lieutenant  or  counsel¬
lors;  but,  by  Barneveld’s  direction,

1589.

INDIGNATION  OF  THE  STATES.

547

of  the  imperious  orator,  became  bitter  and  wrathful  with  the
English,  side  by  side  with  whom  they  had  lately  been  so
cordially  standing.

Willoughby,  on  his  part,  now  at  the  English  court,  was
furious  with  the  States,  and  persuaded  the  leading  counsellors
of  the  Queen  as  well  as  her  Majesty  herself,  to  adopt  his  view
of  the  transaction.  Wingfield,  it  was  asserted,  was  quite
innocent  in  the  matter ;  he  was  entirely  ignorant  of  the
French  language,  and  therefore  was  unable  to  read  a  word  of
the  letters  addressed  to  him  by  Maurice  and  the  replies  which
had  been  signed  by  himself.  Whether  this  strange  excuse
ought  to  be  accepted  or  not,  it  is  quite  certain  that  he  was  no
traitor  like  York  and  Stanley,  and  no  friend  to  Spain  ;  for  he
had  stipulated  for  himself  the  right  to  return  to  England,  and
had  neither  received  nor  desired  any  reward.  He  hated  Mau¬
rice  and  he  hated  the  States,  but  he  asserted  that  he  had
been  held  in  durance,  that  the  garrison  was  mutinous,  and
that  he  was  no  more  responsible  for  the  loss  of  the  city  than
Sir  Francis  Vere  had  been,  who  had  also  been  present,  and
whose  name  had  been  subsequently  withdrawn,  in  honourable
fashion  from  the  list  of  traitors,  by  authority  of  the  States.
His  position — so  far  as  he  was  personally  concerned — seemed
defensible,  and  the  Queen  was  thoroughly  convinced  of  his
innocence.  Willoughby  complained  that  the  republic  was
utterly  in  the  hands  of  Barneveld,  that  no  man  ventured  to
lift  his  voice  or  his  eyes  in  presence  of  the  terrible  Advocate
who  ruled  every  Netherlander  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  that  his
violent  and  threatening  language  to  Wingfield  and  himself  at
the  dinner-table  in  Bergen-op-Zoom  on  the  subject  of  the
mutiny  (when  one  hundred  of  the  Gertruydenberg  garrison
w’ere  within  sound  of  his  voice)  had  been  the  chief  cause  of
the  rebellion.1  Inspired  by  these  remonstrances,  the  Queen
once  more  emptied  the  vials  of  her  wrath  upon  the  United

solicit  all  by  Ortell,  and  so  receive
their  despatch.  W  hereunto  the  repu¬
tation  of  every  action  doth  redound
unto  him,  and  her  Majesty’s  lieutenant
and  ministers  are  little  regarded.”

Bodley  to  Burghley, - 1589.

J  °  J  '  2  March

(Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  iv.  55,  MS.)

1  Bor,  ubi  sup.

548

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

Netherlands.  The  criminations  and  recriminations  seemed
endless,  and  it  was  most  fortunate  that  Spain  had  been  weak¬
ened,  that  Alexander,  a  prey  to  melancholy  and  to  lingering
disease,  had  gone  to  the  baths  of  Spa  to  recruit  his  shattered
health,  and  that  his  attention  and  the  schemes  of  Philip  for
the  year  1589  and  the  following  period  were  to  he  directed
towards  France.  Otherwise  the  commonwealth  could  hardly
have  escaped  still  more  severe  disasters  than  those  already
experienced  in  this  unfortunate  condition  of  its  affairs,  and
this  almost  hopeless  misunderstanding  with  its  most  important
and  vigorous  friend.1

While  these  events  had  been  occurring  in  the  heart  of  the
republic,  Martin  Schenk,  that  restless  freebooter,  had  been
pursuing  a  hustling  and  most  lucrative  career  on  its  outskirts.
All  the  episcopate  of  Cologne — that  debatable  land  of  the
two  rival  paupers,  Bavarian  Ernest  and  Gebhard  Truchsess —
trembled  before  him.  Mothers  scared  their  children  into
quiet  with  the  terrible  name  of  Schenk,  and  farmers  and
land-younkers  throughout  the  electorate  and  the  land  of
Berg,  Cleves,  and  Juliers,  paid  their  black -mail,  as  if  it  were
a  constitutional  impost,  to  escape  the  levying  process  of  the
redoubtable  partisan.

But  Martin  was  no  longer  seconded,  as  he  should  have
been,  by  the  States,  to  whom  he  had  been  ever  faithful  since
he  forsook  the  banner  of  Spain  for  their  own  ;  and  he  had

sever  ourselves  from  them  without  in¬
finite  danger,  their  errors  are  to  be
winked  at  for  a  time.  It  may  be  that
the  disgrace  inflicted  on  them  through
the  loss  of  Gertruydenberg  will  some¬
what  humble  them;  for  seeing  Barne-
velt,  the  principal  ringleader  amongst
them,  begins  to  stick  sail,  I  think  the
rest  will  stoop.  But  when  I  look  into
their  strange  course  in  publishing
their  placcard,  after  the  loss  of  the
town  to  hazard  the  loss  of  her  Ma¬
jesty’s  favour,  I  must  conclude  that
with  the  loss  of  the  town  they  have
lost  their  wits.”  Walsingham  to

Burghley,  1589.  (Br.  Mus.

Galba,  D.  iv.  171,  MS.)

1  Bor,  ubi  sup.  and  443-457.

Willoughby  published  a  very  bitter
pamphlet  in  reply  to  the  severe  at¬
tacks  of  Olden-Bameveld  and  his  parti¬
sans.  “The  child  of  Milord  Wil¬
loughby  is  born  at  last,”  said  Joachim
Ortell ;  “  the  book  is  printed,  and  is
as  full  of  lies  as  an  egg  is  of  meat  ”
(so  vol  leugens  als  een  ey  vol  suyvels).

Walsingham — as  might  be  supposed
— much  regretted  these  misunder¬
standings,  although  he  was  inclined
to  censure  the  States.  “I  like  very
well,”  he  said,  “that  the  placcard
should  rather  be  answered  by  Lord
Willoughby  than  by  her  Majesty.
But  to  have  it  not  answered  at  all
were  the  best . Their  ingrati¬

tude  is  great,  yet  seeing  we  cannot

1589.

EXPLOITS  OF  SCHENK.

549

even  gone  to  England  and  complained  to  the  Queen  of  the
short-cominsfs  of  those  who  owed  him  so  much.  His  in-

°  #  -t

genious  and  daring  exploit — the  capture  of  Bonn — has  already
been  narrated,  but  the  States  had  neglected  the  proper  pre¬
cautions  to  secure  that  important  city.  It  had  consequently,
after  a  six  months'  siege,  been  surrendered  to  the  Spaniards
under  Prince  Chimay,  on  the  19  th  of  September  ; 1  while,  in
December  following,  the  city  of  Wachtendonk,  between  the
Rhine  and  Meuse,  had  fallen  into  Mansfield's  hands.2 3  Rhein-
berg,  the  only  city  of  the  episcopate  which  remained  to  the
deposed  Truchsess,  was  soon  afterwards  invested  by  the  troops
of  Parma,  and  Schenk  in  vain  summoned  the  States- General
to  take  proper  measures  for  its  defence.  But  with  the  enemy
now  eating  his  way  towards  the  heart  of  Holland,  and  with  so
many  dangers  threatening  them  on  every  side,  it  was  thought
imprudent  to  go  so  far  away  to  seek  the  enemy.  So  Gebhard
retired  in  despair  into  Germany,  and  Martin  did  what  he
could  to  protect  Rheinberg,  and  to  fill  his  own  coffers  at  the
expense  of  the  whole  country  side.

He  had  built  a  fort,  which  then  and  long  afterwards  bore
his  name — Schenken  Schans,  or  Schenk’s  Sconce — at  that
important  point  where  the  Rhine,  opening  its  two  arms  to
enclose  the  u  good  meadow  "  island  of  Batavia,  becomes  on
the  left  the  Waal,  while  on  the  right  it  retains  its  ancient
name ;  and  here,  on  the  outermost  edge  of  the  republic,
and  looking  straight  from  his  fastness  into  the  fruitful  fields
of  Munster,  Westphalia,  and  the  electorate,  the  industrious
Martin  devoted  himself  with  advantage  to  his  favourite
pursuits.

On  the  7th  of  August,  on  the  heath  of  Lippe,  he  had
attacked  a  body  of  Spanish  musketeers,  more  than  a  thousand

i  Strada,  X.  584-595.  Coloma,  I.

12-14.  Bor,  III.  xxv.  328.

3  Strada,  X.  599,  who  states  that
bomb-shells — -which  he  elaborately  de¬
scribes,  were  first  used  at  this  siege
of  Wachtendonk.  They  had  been  in¬
vented,  he  says,  a  few  days  before  its

commencement,  by  an  artizan  of  Yenlo,
for  his  own  misfortune  and  that  of  his
city;  for  he  set  the  town  of  Yenlo  on
fire,  and  burned  down  two-thirds  of
it,  by  a  premature  explosion  of  his
new  projectiles.

550  THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.  Chap.  XX.

strong,  who  were  protecting  a  convoy  of  provisions,  treasure,
1  Aug.  and  furniture,  sent  by  Farnese  to  Yerdugo,  royal  go-
1589.  yernor  of  Friesland.  Schenk,  without  the  loss  of  a
single  man,  had  put  the  greater  part  of  these  Spaniards  and
Walloons  to  the  sword,  and  routed  the  rest.  The  leader  of
the  expedition,  Colonel  Aristotle  Patton,  who  had  once  played
him  so  foul  a  trick  in  the  surrender  of  Gelder,  had  soon  taken
to  flight,  when  he  found  his  ancient  enemy  upon  him,  and,
dashing  into  the  Lippe,  had  succeeded,  by  the  strength  and
speed  of  his  horse,  in  gaining  the  opposite  bank,  and  effecting
his  escape.  Had  he  waited  many  minutes  longer  it  is  pro¬
bable  that  the  treacherous  Aristotle  would  have  passed  a
comfortless  half-hour  with  his  former  comrade.  Treasure  to
the  amount  of  seven  thousand  crowns  in  gold,  five  hundred
horses,  with  jewels,  plate,  and  other  articles  of  value,  were  the
fruit  of  this  adventure,  and  Schenk  returned  with  his  followers,
highly  delighted,  to  Sclienkenschans,1  and  sent  the  captured
Spanish  colours  to  her  Majesty  of  England  as  a  token.2

A  few  miles  below  his  fortress  was  Nymegen,  and  towards
that  ancient  and  wealthy  city  Schenk  had  often  cast  longing
eyes.  It  still  held  for  the  King,  although  on  the  very  con¬
fines  of  Batavia ;  but  while  acknowledging  the  supremacy  of
Philip,  it  claimed  the  privileges  of  the  empire.  From  earliest
times  it  had  held  its  head  very  high  among  imperial  towns,
had  been  one  of  the  three  chief  residences  of  the  Emperor
Charlemagne,  and  still  paid  the  annual  tribute  of  a  glove  full
of  pepper  to  the  German  empire.3

On  the  evening  of  the  10th  of  August,  1589,  there  was  a
wedding-feast  in  one  of  the  splendid  mansions  of  the  stately
city.  The  festivities  were  prolonged  until  deep  in  the  mid¬
summer’s  night,  and  harp  and  viol  were  still  inspiring  the  feet
of  the  dancers,  when  on  a  sudden,  in  the  midst  of  the  holiday-
groups,  appeared  the  grim  visage  of  Martin  Schenk,  the  man

1  Strada,  X.  630,  631.  Coloma,  II.

26-27.  Bor,  III.  xxvi.  459.  Bodley
2

to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.  1589.  (Br.

Mus.  Galba,  D.  v.  p.  60,  MS.)

3  Bodley  to  Burghley,  —  Aug.  1589.

(Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  iv.  p.  55,  MS.)

3  Guicciardini,  in  voce.

1589.

HIS  ATTACK  ON  NYMEGTEN.

551

who  never  smiled.  Clad  in  no  wedding-garment,  but  in

O  O  7

armour  of  proof,  with  morion  on  head,  and  sword  in  hand,  the
great  freebooter  strode  heavily  through  the  ball-room,  fol¬
lowed  by  a  party  of  those  terrible  musketeers  who  never  gave
or  asked  for  quarter,  while  the  affrighted  revellers  fluttered
away  before  them.

Taking  advantage  of  a  dark  night,  he  had  just  dropped
down  the  river  from  his  castle,  with  five-and-twenty  barges,
had  landed  with  his  most  trusted  soldiers  in  the  foremost
vessels,  had  battered  down  the  gate  of  St.  Anthony,  and
surprised  and  slain  the  guard.  Without  waiting  for  the  rest
of  his  boats,  he  had  then  stolen  with  his  comrades  through
the  silent  streets,  and  torn  away  the  lattice-work,  and  other
slight  defences  on  the  rear  of  the  house  which  they  had  now
entered,  and  through  which  they  intended  to  possess  them¬
selves  of  the  market-place.  Martin  had  long  since  selected
this  mansion  as  a  proper  position  for  his  enterprise,  but  he
had  not  been  bidden  to  the  wedding,  and  was  somewhat  dis¬
concerted  when  he  found  himself  on  the  festive  scene  which
he  had  so  grimly  interrupted.  Some  of  the  merry-makers
escaped  from  the  house,  and  proceeded  to  alarm  the  town  ;
while  Schenk  hastily  fortified  his  position,  and  took  posses¬
sion  of  the  square.  But  the  burghers  and  garrison  were
soon  on  foot,  and  he  was  driven  back  into  the  house.  Three
times  he  recovered  the  square  by  main  strength  of  his  own
arm,  seconded  by  the  handful  of  men  whom  he  had  brought
with  him,  and  three  times  he  was  beaten  back  by  overwhelm¬
ing  numbers  into  the  wedding  mansion.  The  arrival  of  the
greater  part  of  his  followers,  with  whose  assistance  he  could
easily  have  mastered  the  city  in  the  first  moments  of  surprise,
was  mysteriously  delayed.  He  could  not  account  for  their
prolonged  absence,  and  was  meanwhile  supported  only  by
those  who  had  arrived  with  him  in  the  foremost  barges.

The  truth — -of  which  he  was  ignorant — was,  that  the  re¬
mainder  of  the  flotilla,  borne  along  by  the  strong  and  deep
current  of  the  Waal,  then  in  a  state  of  freshet,  had  shot  past
the  landing-place,  and  had  ever  since  been  vainly  struggling

552

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

against  wind  and  tide  to  force  their  way  hack  to  the  necessary
point.  Meantime  Schenk  and  his  followers  fought  desperately
in  the  market-place,  and  desperately  in  the  house  which  he
had  seized.  But  a  whole  garrison,  and  a  town  full  of  citizens
in  arms  proved  too  much  for  him,  and  he  was  now  hotly
besieged  in  the  mansion,  and  at  last  driven  forth  into  the
streets.

By  this  time  day  was  dawning,  the  whole  population,
soldiers  and  burghers,  men,  women,  and  children,  were
thronging  about  the  little  band  of  marauders,  and  assailing
them  with  every  weapon  and  every  missile  to  be  found.
Schenk  fought  with  his  usual  ferocity,  but  at  last  the  mus¬
keteers,  in  spite  of  his  indignant  commands,  began  rapidly  to
retreat  towards  the  quay.  In  vain  Martin  stormed  and  cursed,
in  vain  with  his  own  hand  he  struck  more  than  one  of  his
soldiers  dead.1  He  was  swept  along  with  the  panic-stricken
band,  and  when,  shouting  and  gnashing  his  teeth  with  frenzy,
he  reached  the  quay  at  last,  he  saw  at  a  glance  why  his  great
enterprise  had  failed.  The  few  empty  barges  of  his  own  party
were  moored  at  the  steps  ;  the  rest  were  half  a  mile  off,  con¬
tending  hopelessly  against  the  swollen  and  rapid  Waal.
Schenk,  desperately  wounded,  was  left  almost  alone  upon  the
wharf,  for  his  routed  followers  had  plunged  helter  skelter  into
the  boats,  several  of  which,  overladen  in  the  panic,  sank  at
once,  leaving  the  soldiers  to  drown  or  struggle  with  the  waves.
The  game  was  lost.  Nothing  was  left  the  freebooter  but
retreat.  Reluctantly  turning  his  back  on  his  enemies,  now
in  full  cry  close  behind  him,  Schenk  sprang  into  the  last  re¬
maining  boat  just  pushing  from  the  quay.  Already  over¬
laden,  it  foundered  with  his  additional  weight,  and  Martin
Schenk,  encumbered  with  his  heavy  armour,  sank  at  once  to
the  bottom  of  the  Waal.2

Some  of  the  fugitives  succeeded  in  swimming  down  the

1  Schencius  ira  furens  et  frendens

. suorum  nonnullis  sua  manu

interemptis,”  &c.  Strada,  X.  632.

2  Bor,  III.  xxvi.  459-460.  Wage-
naar,  viii.  307,  308.  Strada,  X.  631-

633.  Coloraa,  II.  27.  Bodley  to  Wal-

3

singham,  —  Aug.  1589.  (S.  P.  Office

13

MS.)  Bentivoglio,  II.  v.  335.  Haraei
Turn.  Belg.  III.  425.

1589.

HE  IS  DEFEATED  AND  DROWNED.

553

stream,  and  were  picked  up  by  their  comrades  in  the  barges
below  the  town,  and  so  made  their  escape.  Many  were
drowned  with  their  captain.  A  few  days  afterwards,  the
inhabitants  of  Nymegen  fished  up  the  body  of  the  famous
partisan.  He  was  easily  recognized  by  his  armour,  and  by
his  truculent  face,  still  wearing  the  scowl  with  which  he  had
last  rebuked  his  followers.  His  head  was  taken  off  at  once,
and  placed  on  one  of  the  turrets  of  the  town,  and  his  body,
divided  in  four,  was  made  to  adorn  other  portions  of  the
battlements  ;  so  that  the  burghers  were  enabled  to  feast  their
eyes  on  the  remnants  of  the  man  at  whose  name  the  whole
country  had  so  often  trembled.

This  was  the  end  of  Sir  Martin  Schenk  of  Niddegem,
knight,  colonel,  and  brigand ;  save  that  ultimately  his  dis¬
severed  limbs  were  packed  in  a  chest,  and  kept  in  a  church-
tower,  until  Maurice  of  Nassau,  in  course  of  time  becoming
master  of  Nymegen,  honoured  the  valiant  and  on  the  whole
faithful  freebooter  with  a  Christian  and  military  burial.1

A  few  months  later  (October,  1589)  another  man  who  had
been  playing  an  important  part  in  the  Netherlands’  drama
lost  his  life.  Count  Moeurs  and  Niewenaar,  stadholder  of
Utrecht,  Gelderland,  and  Overyssel,  while  inspecting  some
newly-invented  fireworks,  was  suddenly  killed  by  their  acci¬
dental  ignition  and  explosion.2  His  death  left  vacant  three
great  stadholderates,  which  before  long  were  to  be  conferred
upon  a  youth  whose  power  henceforth  was  rapidly  to  grow
greater.

The  misunderstanding  between  Holland  and  England  con¬
tinuing,  Olden-Barneveld,  Aerssens,  and  Buys,  refusing  to  see
that  they  had  done’  wrong  in  denouncing  the  Dutch  and
English  traitors  who  had  sold  Gertruydenberg  to  the  enemy,
and  the  Queen  and  her  counsellors  persisting  in  their  anger

publish  an  edict  upon  it,  that  no
quarter  shall  be  kept  with  Nymegen.”

9

Bodley  to  Walsingham,  —  Aug.  1589.

(S.  P.  Office  MS.)

3  Bor,  III.  xxvi.  480.

genaar,  Strada,  ubi  sup.

“  The  townsmen  since  have  fished
for  Schenk,  and  found  him  in  his
armour,  and  since  have  cut  him  in
quarters  and  set  him  on  their  gates ;
which  extraordinary  inhumanity  doth
so  exasperate  the  States  as  they  will

554

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

at  so  insolent  a  proceeding,  it  may  easily  be  supposed  that
there  was  no  great  heartiness  in  the  joint  expedition  against
Spain,  which  had  been  projected  in  the  autumn  of  1588,  and
was  accomplished  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1589.

Nor  was  this  well-known  enterprise  fruitful  of  any  remark¬
able  result.  It  had  been  decided  to  carry  the  war  into  Spain
itself,  and  Don  Antonio,  prior  of  Crato,  bastard  of  Portugal,
and  pretender  to  its  crown,  had  persuaded  himself  and  the
English  government  that  his  name  would  be  potent  to  conjure
with  in  that  kingdom,  hardly  yet  content  with  the  Spanish
yoke.  Supported  by  a  determined  force  of  English  and  Dutch
adventurers,  he  boasted  that  he  should  excite  a  revolution  by
the  magic  of  his  presence,  and  cause  Philip’s  throne  to  tremble,
in  return  for  the  audacious  enterprise  of  that  monarch  against
England.

If  a  foray  were  to  be  made  into  Spain,  no  general  and  no
admiral  could  be  found  in  the  world  so  competent  to  the
adventure  as  Sir  John  Norris  and  Sir  Francis  Drake.  They
were  accompanied,  too,  by  Sir  Edward  Norris,  and  another  of
those  c chickens  of  Mars/  Henry  Norris;  by  the  indomitable
and  ubiquitous  Welshman,  Boger  Williams,  and  by  the  young
Earl  of  Essex,  whom  the  Queen  in  vain  commanded  to  remain
at  home,  and  who,  somewhat  to  the  annoyance  of  the  leaders
of  the  expedition,  concealed  himself  from  her  Majesty’s  pur¬
suit,  and  at  last  embarked  in  a  vessel  which  he  had  equipped,
in  order  not  to  be  cheated  of  his  share  in  the  hazard  and  the
booty.  “If  I  speed  well,”  said  the  spendthrift  but  valiant
youth,  “  I  will  adventure  to  be  rich  ;  if  not,  I  will  never  live
to  see  the  end  of  my  poverty.” 1

But  no  great  riches  were  to  be  gathered  in  the  expe¬
dition.  With  some  fourteen  thousand  men,  and  one  hundred
and  sixty  vessels — of  which  six  were  the  Queen’s  ships  of
war,  including  the  famous  Revenge  and  the  Dreadnought ,  and
the  rest  armed  merchantmen,  English,  and  forty  Hollanders —
and  with  a  contingent  of  fifteen  hundred  Dutchmen  under

1  Essex  to  the  Vice-Chamberlain,  March,  1589,  in  Barrow’s  ‘Life  of
Drake,’  3 71.

1589.  ENG-LISH-DUTCH  EXPEDITION  TO  SPAIN.  555

Nicolas  van  Meetkerke  and  Van  Laen,  the  adven-  ig  April,
turers  set  sail  from  Plymouth  on  the  18th  of  April,  1589*
1589.

They  landed  at  Coruna — at  which  place  they  certainly
could  not  expect  to  create  a  Portuguese  revolution,  which  was
the  first  object  of  the  expedition — destroyed  some  shipping
in  the  harbour,  captured  and  sacked  the  lower  town,  and  were
repulsed  in  the  upper ;  marched  with  six  thousand  men  to
Burgos,  crossed  the  bridge  at  push  of  pike,  and  routed  ten
thousand  Spaniards  under  Andrada  and  Altamira — Edward
Norris  receiving  a  desperate  blow  on  the  head  at  the  passage
of  the  bridge,  and  being  rescued  from  death  by  his  brother
J ohn — took  sail  for  the  south  after  this  action,  in  which  they
had  killed  a  thousand  Spaniards,  and  had  lost  but  two  men  of
their  own  ;  were  joined  off  Cape  Finisterre  by  Essex  ;  landed
a  force  at  Peniche,  the  castle  of  which  place  surrendered  to
them,  and  acknowledged  the  authority  of  Don  Antonio  ;  and
thence  marched  with  the  main  body  of  the  troops,  under  Sir
John  Norris,  forty-eight  miles  to  Lisbon,  while  Drake,  with
the  fleet,  was  to  sail  up  the  Tagus.

Nothing  like  a  revolution  had  been  effected  in  Portugal.
No  one  seemed  to  care  for  the  Pretender,  or  even  to  be  aware
that  he  had  ever  existed,  except  the  governor  of  Peniche
Castle,  a  few  ragged  and  bare-footed  peasants,  who,  once  upon
the  road,  shouted  “Viva  Don  Antonio/'  and  one  old  gentle¬
man  by  the  way  side,  who  brought  him  a  plate  of  plums.  His
hopes  of  a  crown  faded  rapidly,  and  when  the  army  reached
Lisbon  it  had  dwindled  to  not  much  more  than  four  thousand
effective  men — the  rest  being  dead  of  dysentery,  or  on  the
sick-list  from  imprudence  in  eating  and  drinking — while  they
found  that  they  had  made  an  unfortunate  omission  in  their
machinery  for  assailing  the  capital,  having  not  a  single  field-
piece  in  the  whole  army.  Moreover,  as  Drake  was  prevented
by  bad  weather  and  head- winds  from  sailing  up  the  Tagus,  it
seemed  a  difficult  matter  to  carry  the  city.  A  few  cannon,
and  the  co-operation  of  the  fleet,  were  hardly  to  be  dispensed
with  on  such  an  occasion.  Nevertheless  it  would  perhaps

556

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

have  proved  an  easier  task  than  it  appeared — for  so  great  was
the  panic  within  the  place  that  a  large  number  of  the  in¬
habitants  had  fled,  the  Cardinal  Viceroy  Archduke  Albert
had  but  a  very  insufficient  guard,  and  there  were  many  gentle¬
men  of  high  station  who  were  anxious  to  further  the  entrance
of  the  English,  and  who  were  afterwards  hanged  or  garotted
for  their  hostile  sentiments  to  the  Spanish  government.1

"While  the  leaders  were  deliberating  what  course  to  take,
they  were  informed  that  Count  Fuentes  and  Henriquez  de
Guzman,  with  six  thousand  men,  lay  at  a  distance  of  two
miles  from  Lisbon,  and  that  they  had  been  proclaiming  by
sound  of  trumpet  that  the  English  had  been  signally  defeated
before  Lisbon,  and  that  they  were  in  full  retreat.

Fired  at  this  bravado,  Norris  sent  a  trumpet  to  Fuentes
and  Guzman,  with  a  letter  signed  and  sealed,  giving  them  the
lie  in  plainest  terms,  appointing  the  next  day  for  a  meeting  of
the  two  forces,  and  assuring  them  that  when  the  next  en¬
counter  should  take  place,  it  should  be  seen  whether  a
Spaniard  or  an  Englishman  would  be  first  to  fly ;  while  Essex,
on  his  part,  sent  a  note,  defying  either  or  both  those  boastful
generals  to  single  combat.  Next  day  the  English  army  took
the  field,  but  the  Spaniards  retired  before  them  ;  and  nothing
came  of  this  exchange  of  cartels,  save  a  threat  on  the  part
of  Fuentes  to  hang  the  trumpeter  who  had  brought  the
messages.  From  the  execution  of  this  menace  he  refrained,
however,  on  being  assured  that  the  deed  would  be  avenged
by  the  death  of  the  Spanish  prisoner  of  highest  rank  then  in
English  hands,  and  thus  the  trumpeter  escaped.

Soon  afterwards  the  fleet  set  sail  from  the  Tagus,  landed,
and  burned  Vigo  on  their  way  homeward,  and  returned  to
Plymouth  about  the  middle  of  July.

Of  the  thirteen  thousand  came  home  six  thousand,  the  rest
having  perished  of  dysentery  and  other  disorders.  They  had
braved  and  insulted  Spain,  humbled  her  generals,  defied  her
power,  burned  some  defenceless  villages,  frightened  the  pea¬
santry,  set  fire  to  some  shipping,  destroyed  wine,  oil,  and  other

1  Dor,  III.  xxvi.  439.

1589.

ITS  MEAGRE  RESULTS.

557

merchandize,  and  had  divided  among  the  survivors  of  the  ex¬
pedition,  after  landing  in  England,  live  shillings  a  head  prize-
money  ;  but  they  had  not  effected  a  revolution  in  Portugal.
Don  Antonio  had  been  offered  nothing  by  his  faithful  sub¬
jects  but  a  dish  of  plums — so  that  he  retired  into  obscurity
from  that  time  forward — and  all  this  was  scarcely  a  magni¬
ficent  result  for  the  death  of  six  or  seven  thousand  good
English  and  Dutch  soldiers,  and  the  outlay  of  considerable
treasure.

As  a  freebooting  foray — and  it  was  nothing  else — it  could
hardly  be  thought  successful  ;  although  it  was  a  splendid
triumph  compared  with  the  result  of  the  long  and  loudly
heralded  Invincible  Armada.1

i

In  France,  great  events  during  the  remainder  of  1588  and
the  following  year,  and  which  are  well  known  even  to  the
most  superficial  student  of  history,  had  much  changed  the
aspect  of  European  affairs.  It  was  fortunate  for  the  two  com-

1  For  particulars  of  this  expedition,
see  Camden,  IY.  429-433.  Stowe,
751-756.  Barrow’s  ‘Life  of  Drake,’
with  the  letters  of  Drake,  Norris,  and
others,  335  379.  Bor,  III.  xxvi.  430-
443.  Herrera,  III.  v.  170,  seq.

Sir  Roger  Williams  to  the  Lord
Chancellor,  Lord  Treasurer,  and  Secre¬
tary  Walsingham,  July,  1589:  (S.  P.
Office  MS.)—

“  Had  we  gone  to  Lisbon,”  says  the
Welsh  knight,  “and  not  touched  at
the  Groyne,  we  had  found  the  town
unprovided  with  men  of  war;  in  such
sort,  with  the  favour  of  God,  we  had
carried  it  away  without  blows  ....
We  have  returned  the  most  of  our
ships  into  England  that  should  have
been  laden  with  rich  merchandise  and
great  treasure.  With  that  lading,  our
sovereign  and  your  honours  might
have  returned  our  shipping  unto  us
with  a  new  supply.  In  going  into  the
Groyne,  we  lost  a  number  of  brave
men  in  dislodging.  At  the  least  2000
took  their  course — some  for  England,
some  for  France.  There  we  took  our
sickness,  partly  by  the  hot  winds,  but
chiefly  by  the  old  clothes  and  bag¬
gage  of  those  which  returned  with

the  Duke  of  Medina  out  of  England.
There  we  lost  many  a  day,  in  the
which  time  the  enemy  arrived,  and
placed  his  forces  where  he  thought
most  necessariest,  chiefly  in  Lisbon.
Notwithstanding,  when  we  arrived,
we  gave  the  law  in  the  field,  that
none  durst  fight  with  us,  in  twelve
days,  with  5000  footmen,  and,  God
knows,  poor  people,  save  2000,  and
those  all  volunteers.  All  the  horse¬
men  we  had  amounted  not  to  45 ;  wo
had  not  any  Portuguese  to  speak  of,
and  such  as  we  had  did  us  more  hurt

than  good . Some  will  say,  How

could  you  have  kept  Lisbon  ?  Believe
it  not.  With  six  thousand  we  would
have  kept  it  against  all  Spain  and

Portugal . Our  journey  was)

most  honourable  and  profitable  unto
our  sovereign  and  estate.  First,  and
principally,  the  world  will  speak  how
5000  Englishmen  dared  the  Spaniards
to  battle  at  the  gates  of  Lisbon — not
stealing,  but  after  giving  leave  to  arm
two  months;  for  the  world  must  think
they  knew  where  we  meant  to  direct
our  course,  when  Don  Antonio  dis¬
lodged  from  his  house  at  London,”
&c.  &c.

i

558

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

monwealths  of  Holland  and  England,  engaged  in  the  great
struggle  for  civil  and  religious  liberty,  and  national  inde¬
pendence,  that  the  attention  of  Philip  became  more  and
more  absorbed — as  time  wore  on — with  the  affairs  of  France.
It  seemed  necessary  for  him  firmly  to  establish  his  do¬
minion  in  that  country  before  attempting  once  more  the
conquest  of  England,  or  the  recovery  of  the  Netherlands.
For  France  had  been  brought  more  nearly  to  anarchy  and
utter  decomposition  than  ever.  Henry  III.,  after  his  fatal
forgiveness  of  the  deadly  offence  of  Guise,  felt  day  by  day
more  keenly  that  he  had  transferred  his  sceptre — such  as  it
was — to  that  dangerous  intriguer.  Bitterly  did  the  King
regret  having  refused  the  prompt  offer  of  Alphonse  Corse  on
the  day  of  the  barricades  ;  for  now,  so  long  as  the  new
generalissimo  should  live,  the  luckless  Henry  felt  himself  a
superfluity  in  his  own  realm.  The  halcyon  days  were  for  ever
past,  when,  protected  by  the  swords  of  Joyeuse  and  of  Epernon,
the  monarch  of  France  could  pass  his  life  playing  at  cup  and
ball,  or  snipping  images  out  of  pasteboard,  or  teaching  his
parrots  to  talk,  or  his  lap-dogs  to  dance.  His  royal  occupa¬
tions  were  gone,  and  murder  now  became  a  necessary  pre¬
liminary  to  any  future  tranquillity  or  enjoyment.  Discrowned
as  he  felt  himself  already,  he  knew  that  life  or  liberty  was
only  held  by  him  now  at  the  will  of  Guise.  The  assassina¬
tion  of  the  Duke  in  December  was  the  necessary  result  of  the
barricades  in  May  ;  and  accordingly  that  assassination  was
arranged  with  an  artistic  precision  of  which  the  world  had
hardly  suspected  the  Valois  to  be  capable,  and  which  Philip
himself  might  have  envied.

The  story  of  the  murders  of  Blois — the  destruction  of  Guise
and  his  brother  the  Cardinal,  and  the  subsequent  imprison¬
ment  of  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  the  Cardinal  Bourbon,  and
the  Prince  de  Joinville,  now,  through  the  death  of  his  father,
become  the  young  Duke  of  Guise — all  these  events  are  too
familiar  in  the  realms  of  history,  song,  romance,  and  painting,
to  require  more  than  this  slight  allusion  here.

1589.

DEATH  OF  GUISE  AND  OF  THE  QUEEN-MOTHER.  559

Never  liacl  an  assassination  been  more  technically  success¬
ful  ;  yet  its  results  were  not  commensurate  with  the  monarch’s
hopes.  The  deed  which  he  had  thought  premature  in  May
was  already  too  late  in  December.  His  mother  denounced
his  cruelty  now,  as  she  had,  six  months  before,  execrated  his
cowardice.  And  the  old  Queen,  seeing  that  her  game  was
played  out — that  the  cards  had  all  gone  against  her — that  her
son  was  doomed,  and  her  own  influence  dissolved  in  air,  felt
that  there  was  nothing  left  for  her  but  to  die.  In  a  week  she
was  dead,  and  men  spoke  no  more  of  Catharine  de’  Medici,
and  thought  no  more  of  her  than  if — in  the  words  of  a
splenetic  contemporary — u  she  had  been  a  dead  she-goat.” 1
Paris  howled  with  rage  when  it  learned  the  murders  of  Blois,
and  the  sixteen  quarters  became  more  furious  than  ever
against  the  Yalois.  Some  wild  talk  there  was  of  democracy
and  republicanism  after  the  manner  of  Switzerland,  and  of
dividing  France  into  cantons — aud  there  was  an  earnest  desire
on  the  part  of  every  grandee,  every  general,  every  soldier  of
fortune,  to  carve  out  a  portion  of  French  territory  with  his
sword,  and  to  appropriate  it  for  himself  and  his  heirs.  Dis¬
integration  was  making,  rapid  progress,  and  the  epoch  of  the
last  Yalois  seemed  more  dark  and  barbarous  than  the  times
of  the  degenerate  Carlovingians  had  been.  The  letter-writer
of  the  Escorial,  who  had  earnestly  warned  his  faithful  Mucio,2
week  after  week,  that  dangers  were  impending  over  him,
and  that  cc  some  trick  would  be  played  upon  him,”  should  he
venture  into  the  royal  presence,  now  acquiesced  in  his  assassi¬
nation,  and  placidly  busied  himself  with  fresh  combinations
and  newer  tools.

Baffled,  hunted,  scorned  by  all  beside,  the  luckless  Henry
now  threw  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  Bearnese — the  man
who  could  and  would  have  protected  him  long  before,  had  the
King  been  capable  of  understanding  their  relative  positions

1  ‘L’Etoile.’

2  A.  56.  liS.  Arch,  de  Simancas,
[at  Paris,]  MS.  passim.

E.  g “  Con  Mucio  a  quien  siempre
aconsejad  que  mire  por  si  y  no  se

dexe  enganar  y  timer  alguna  burla,
pues  anda  a  tanto  peligro.”  And,  in
the  King’s  own  hand,  “Y  se  acuerde
de  su  padre.”  Philip  to  Mendoza,
3  Sept.  1588,  MS.

560

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

and  his  own  true  interests.  Could  the  Yalois  have  conceived
the  thought  of  religious  toleration,  his  throne  even  then  might
have  been  safe.  But  he  preferred  playing  the  game  of  the
priests  and  bigots,  who  execrated  his  name  and  were  bent
upon  his  destruction.  At  last,  at  Plessis  les  Tours,  the  Bear-
nese,  in  his  shabby  old  chamois  jacket  and  his  well-dinted
cuirass  took  the  silken  Henry  in  his  arms,  and  the  two — the
hero  and  the  fribble — swearing  eternal  friendship,  proceeded

2  Aug.,  to  besiege  Paris.  A  few  weeks  later,  the  dagger  of

1539.  Jacques  Clement  put  an  end  for  ever  to  the  line  of
Yalois.1  Luckless  Henry  III.  slept  with  his  forefathers,  and
Henry  of  Bourbon  and  Navarre  proclaimed  himself  King  of
France.  Catharine  and  her  four  sons  had  all  past  away  at
last,  and  it  would  be  a  daring  and  a  dexterous  schemer  who
should  now  tear  the  crown,  for  which  he  had  so  long  and  so
patiently  waited,  from  the  iron  grasp  of  the  Bearnese.  Philip
had  a  more  difficult  game  than  ever  to  play  in  France.
It  would  be  hard  for  him  to  make  valid  the  claims  of  the
Infanta  and  any  husband  he  might  select  for  her  to  the  crown
of  her  grandfather  Henry  II.  It  seemed  simple  enough  for
him,  while  waiting  the  course  of  events,  to  set  up  a  royal
effigy  before  the  world  in  the  shape  of  an  effete  old  Cardinal
Bourbon,  to  pour  oil  upon  its  head  and  to  baptize  it  Charles  X. ;
but  meantime  the  other  Bourbon  was  no  effigy,  and  he  called
himself  Henry  IY.

It  was  easy  enough  for  Paris,  and  Madam  League,  and  Philip
the  Prudent,  to  cry  wo  upon  the  heretic ;  but  the  cheerful

1  The  spelling  of  the  sixteenth  cen¬
tury,  in  all  European  languages,  was
capricious  and  unsettled ;  yet  the
little  note  in  which  the  Duchess  Mary
of  Luxemburg  announced  the  death
of  Henry  III.  is  a  curiosity,  even  for
that  age ; —

“  Qui  la  ette  tue — sa  ette  par  un
Jacobin  qui  luy  a  donne  dun  cou  de
pissetolle  dan  la  tayte.  Ill  i  a  dotre
nouvelle  beaucoup  avantajeuse  pour
les  bon  Catolique.  jay  donne  charge
a  se  deporteur  de  les  vous  dire.”
Duchess  Maria  de  Luxembourg  au
Commandeur  Moreo,  9  Aug.  1589.

(Archivo  de  Simancas,  MS.)

Philip’s  wonderful  comment  on  the
words  “  pissetolle  ”  and  “  tayte  ”  in
this  communication,  has  been  already
•  published,  but  will  bear  repetition : —
“Perhaps,”  he  wrote  with  his  own
hand,  “ ‘  pissetolle  ’  is  some  kind  of
knife,  and  ‘  tayte,’  I  don’t  know  if
it  can  be  anything  else  than  head,
which  is  not  ‘tayte,’  but  ‘tete’  or
‘teyte,’  as  you  know.”

“  Quiza  es  alguna  manera  de  cuchillo,
y  la  tayte  no  se  si  podria  ser  otra
coza  que  cabeza,  qui  no  es  tayte,  sino
tete,  o  teyte,  como  sabreys.”

1589.  COMBINATIONS  AFTER  MURDER  OF  HENRY  III

leader  of  the  Huguenots  was  a  philosopher,  who  in  the  days  of
St.  Bartholomew  had  become  orthodox  to  save  his  life,  and  who
was  already  “  instructing  himself”  anew  in  order  to  secure  his
crown.  Philip  was  used  to  deal  with  fanatics,  and  had  often
been  opposed  by  a  religious  bigotry  as  fierce  as  his  own  ;  hut
he  might  perhaps  he  baffled  by  a  good-humoured  free-thinker,
who  was  to  teach  him  a  lesson  in  political  theology  of  which
he  had  never  dreamed.

The  Leaguers  were  not  long  in  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of
c:  instruction,”  and  they  were  thoroughly  persuaded  that — so
soon  as  Henry  IY.  should  reconcile  himself  with  Rome — their
game  was  likely  to  become  desperate.

Nevertheless  prudent  Philip  sat  in  his  elbow-chair,  writing
his  apostilles,  improving  himself  and  his  secretaries  in  ortho¬
graphy,  hut  chiefly  confining  his  attention  to  the  affairs  of
France.  The  departed  Mucio’s  brother  Mayenne  was  installed
as  chief  stipendiary  of  Spain  and  lieutenant-general  for  the
League  in  France,  until  Philip  should  determine  within  him¬
self  in  what  form  to  assume  the  sovereignty  of  that  kingdom.
It  might  he  questionable  however  whether  that  corpulent
Duke,  who  spent  more  time  in  eating  than  Henry  IY.  did  in
sleeping,  and  was  longer  in  reading  a  letter  than  Henry  in
winning  a  battle,  were  likely  to  prove  a  very  dangerous  rival
— even  with  all  Spain  at  his  hack — to  the  lively  Bearnese.
But  time  would  necessarily  he  consumed  before  the  end  was
reached,  and  time  and  Philip  were  two.  Henry  of  Navarre
and  France  was  ready  to  open  his  ears  to  instruction  ;  but  even
he  had  declared,  several  years  before,  that  iC  a  religion  was  not
to  he  changed  like  a  shirt.”  So  while  the  fresh  garment  was
airing  for  him  at  Rome,  and  while  he  was  leisurely  stripping
off  the  old,  he  might  perhaps  he  taken  at  a  disadvantage.
Fanaticism  on  both  sides,  during  this  process  of  instruction,
might  he  roused.  The  Huguenots  on  their  part  might  de¬
nounce  the  treason  of  their  great  chief,  and  the  Papists,  on
theirs,  howl  at  the  hypocrisy  of  the  pretended  conversion.
But  Henry  IY.  had  philosophically  prepared  himself  for  the
denunciations  of  the  Protestants,  while  determined  to  protect
vol.  ii. — 2  0

562

THE  UNITED  NETHERLANDS.

Chap.  XX.

them  against  the  persecutions  of  the  Romanism  to  which  he
meant  to  give  his  adhesion.  While  accepting  the  title  of
renegade,  together  with  an  undisputed  crown,  he  was  not  the
man  to  rekindle  those  fires  of  religious  bigotry  which  it  was
his  task  to  quench,  now  that  they  had  lighted  his  way  to  the
throne.  The  demands  of  his  Catholic  supporters  for  the
exclusion  from  the  kingdom  of  all  religions  but  their  own,
were  steadily  refused.1

And  thus  the  events  of  1588  and  1589  indicated  that  the
great  game  of  despotism  against  freedom  would  be  played,  in
the  coming  years,  upon  the  soil  of  France.  Already  Elizabeth
had  furnished  the  new  King  with  22,000 1.  in  gold — a  larger
sum,  as  he  observed,  than  he  had  ever  seen  before  in  his  life,2
and  the  States  of  the  Netherlands  had  provided  him  with  as
much  more.3  Willoughby  too,  and  tough  Roger  Williams,
and  Baskerville,  and  Umpton,  and  Yere,  with  4000  English
pikemen  at  their  back,  had  already  made  a  brief  but  spirited
campaign  in  France ; 4  and  the  Duke  of  Parma,  after  recruiting
his  health,  so  far  as  it  was  possible,  at  Spa,  was  preparing
himself  to  measure  swords  with  that  great  captain  of  Hugue¬
nots,  who  now  assumed  the  crown  of  his  ancestors,  upon  the
same  ground.  It  seemed  probable  that  for  the  coming  years
England  would  be  safe  from  Spanish  invasion,  and  that  Hol¬
land  would  have  a  better  opportunity  than  it  had  ever  enjoyed
before  of  securing  its  liberty  and  perfecting  its  political  organi¬
zation.  While  Parma,  Philip,  and  Mayenne  were  fighting  the
Bearnese  for  the  crown  of  France,  there  might  be  a  fairer  field
for  the  new  commonwealth  of  the  United  Netherlands.

And  thus  many  of  the  personages  who  have  figured  in  these
volumes  have  already  passed  away.  Leicester  had  died  just
after  the  defeat  of  the  Armada,  and  the  thrifty  Queen,  while
dropping  a  tear  upon  the  grave  of  ‘  sweet  Robin/  had  sold
his  goods  at  auction  to  defray  his  debts  to  herself ;  and  Moeurs,

1  De  Thou,  X.  1.  89,  pp.  270,  680.

Perefixe,  80,  96.  ‘  L’Etoile,’  258,  291.

2  Camden,  IV.  436.

3  Bodley  to  Burghley,  20  Aug.

1589.  (Br.  Mus.  Galba,  D.  iv.  p.  55,
MS.)

4  Camden,  ubi  sup.

1590.  TANDEM  FIT  SURCULUS  ARBOR.  563

and  Martin  Schenk,  and  c  Mucio/  and  Henry  III.,  and  Catha¬
rine  de’  Medici,  were  all  dead.  But  Philip  the  Prudent  re¬
mained,  and  Elizabeth  of  England,  and  Henry  of  France  and
Navarre,  and  John  of  Olden-Barneveld ;  and  there  was  still
another  personage,  a  very  young  man  still,  hut  a  deep-thinking,
hard-working  student,  fagging  steadily  at  mathematics  and
deep  in  the  works  of  Stevinus,  who,  before  long,  might  play  a
conspicuous  part  in  the  world's  great  drama.  But,  previously
to  1590,  Maurice  of  Nassau  seemed  comparatively  insignificant,
and  he  could  be  spoken  of  by  courtiers  as  a  cipher,  and  as  an
unmannerly  boy  just  let  loose  from  school.

END  OF  VOL.  II.

STANDARD  LIBRARY  WORKS

PUBLISHED  BY

HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  NEW  YORK.

S3F"  Harper  &  Brothers  will  send  either  of  the  following  Works  by  Mail,  postage  prepaid  (for
any  distance  in  the  United  States  under  3000  miles),  on  receipt  of  the  Money.

Harper  &  Brothers’  New  Descriptive  Catalogue  op  their  Publications  may  be  ob¬
tained  gratuitously  on  application  to  the  Publishers  personally,  or  by  letter  inclosing  Six  Cents
in  Postage  Stamps.

Abbott’s  History  of  the  French  Rev¬
olution.  With  100  Engravings.  8vo,  Muslin,
$2  50;  Half  Calf,  $3  50.

Abbott’s  History  of  Napoleon  Bona¬
parte.  With  Maps,  Wood-cuts,  and  Portraits  on
Steel.  2  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $5  00 ;  Sheep,  $5  75 ;
Half  Calf,  $7  00 ;  Turkey  Morocco,  $10  00.

Abbott’s  Napoleon  at  St.  Helena.

Interesting  Anecdotes  and  Remarkable  Conver¬
sations  of  the  Emperor  during  the  Five  and  a
Half  Years  of  his  Captivity.  From  the  Memo¬
rials  of  Las  Casas,  O’Meara,  Montholon,  Antom-
marchi,  &c.  With  Illustrations.  Svo,  Muslin,
$2  50;  Sheep,  $2  871  ;  Half  Calf,  $3  50.

Addison’s  Complete  Works,  embrac¬
ing  the  whole  of  the  “Spectator.”  Complete  in
3  vols.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $4  50 ;  Half  Calf,  $6  75.

Alford’s  Greek  Testament.  The
Greek  Testament:  with  a  Critically  Revised
Text;  a  Digest  of  Various  Readings;  Marginal
References  to  Verbal  and  Idiomatic  Usage;  Pro¬
legomena;  and  a  Critical  and  Exegetical  Com¬
mentary.  For  the  use  of  Theological  Students
and  Ministers.  By  Henry  Alford,  B.D.,  Min¬
ister  of  Quebec  Chapel,  London,  and  late  Fellow
of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  Vol.  I.,  con¬
taining  the  Four  Gospels.  944  pages,  Svo,  Mus¬
lin,  $5  00 ;  Sheep  extra,  $5  50 ;  Half  Calf  extra,
$6  00.

Alison’s  History  of  Europe,  complete.

First  Series _ From  the  Commencement  of

the  French  Revolution,  in  17S9,  to  the  Restora¬
tion  of  the  Bourbons,  in  1815.  In  addition  to
the  Notes  on  Chapter  LXXVI.,  which  correct  the
Errors  of  the  Original  Work  concerning  the
United  States,  a  copious  Analytical  Index  has
been  appended  to  this  American  Edition.  4  vols.
8vo,  Muslin,  $6  00;  Sheep  extra,  $7  00;  Half
Calf,  $10  00.

Second  Series — From  the  Fall  of  Napoleon,
in  1815,  to  the  Accession  of  Louis  Napoleon,  in
1852.  With  a  copious  Analytical  Index.  4  vols.
8vo,  Muslin,  $6  00;  Sheep  extra,  $7  00;  Half
Calf,  $10  00.

Alison’s  Military  Life  of  John,  Duke
of  Marlborough.  With  Maps.  12mo,  Muslin,
$150;  Half  Calf,  $2  35.

Atkinson’s  Oriental  and  Western  Si¬
beria.  Map  and  numerous  Illustrations  from
Drawings  by  the  Author.  8vo,  Muslin,  $3  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Atkinson’s  Travels  in  the  Regions  of
the  Upper  and  Lower  Amoor  and  the  Russian
Acquisitions  on  the  Confines  of  India  and  China.
With  Adventures  among  the  Mountain  Kirghis ;
and  the  Manjours,  Manyargs,  Toungouz,  Tou-
zemtz,  Goldi,  and  Gelyaks;  the  Hunting  and
Pastoral  Tribes.  With  a  Map  and  numerous  Il¬
lustrations.  Svo,  Muslin,  $2  50 ;  Half  Calf,  $3  50.

Barth’s  Travels  and  Discoveries  in
North  and  Central  Africa.  Profusely  and  ele¬
gantly  Illustrated.  The  only  complete  American
Edition.  3  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $7  50 ;  Half  Calf,
$10  50.

Bancroft’s  Literary  and  Historical
Miscellanies.  Svo,  Muslin,  $2  00;  Half  Calf,
$3  00.

Barnes’s  Notes  on  the  New  Testa¬
ment.  For  Bible  Classes  and  Sunday-Schools.
Maps  and  Engravings.  11  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,
75  cents  per  volume ;  Half  Calf,  $17  60  per  set.
The  Vols.  sold  separately.

Blackstone’s  Commentaries  on  the
Laws  of  England.  With  copious  Notes,  adapting
the  Work  to  the  American  Student.  By  John
L.  Wendell,  late  State  Reporter  of  New  York.
4  vols.  Svo,  Law  Sheep,  $7  00.

Boswell’s  Life  of  Dr.  Johnson.  Por¬
trait  of  Boswell.  2  vols.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $3  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $4  50.

Brodhead’s  History  of  the  State  of
New  York.  First  Period,  1609-1664.  Svo,  Mus¬
lin,  $3  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Bulwer’s  Novels.  Harper’s  Library

Edition,  in  handsome  12mo,  $1  00  per  vol.  Noio

Ready :  The  Caxtons,  1  vol _ “My  Novel,”  2

vols.  Half  Calf,  $1  85  per  vol.

Bunting’s  (Rev.  Dr.  Jabez)  Life.
With  Notices  of  Contemporary  Persons  and
Events.  By  his  Son,  Thomas  Percivai.  Bunt¬
ing.  Vol.  I.,  with  a  Portrait.  12mo,  Muslin,
$1  00.

Burke’s  Complete  Works.  With  a
Memoir.  Portrait.  3  vols.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,
$4  50;  Half  Calf,  $6  75.

Burns’s  Life  and  Works.  Edited  by
Robert  Chambers.  4  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $3  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $6  40.

Burr’s  Memoirs,  with  Miscellaneous
Correspondence.  By  M.  L.  Davis.  Portraits.
Svo,  Muslin,  $3  00;  Half  Calf,  $5  00.

Burr’s  Private  Journal,  during  his
Residence  in  Europe;  with  Selections  from  his
Correspondence.  By  M.  L.  Davis.  2  vols.  Svo,
Muslin,  $4  50;  Half  Calf,  $6  50.

Burton’s  Lake  Regions  of  Central
Africa.  A  Picture  of  Exploration.  By  Richard
F.  Burton,  Capt.  H.M.I.  Army.  With  Maps
and  Engravings  on  Wood.  Svo,  Muslin,  $3  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Carlyle’s  History  of  Frederick  the
Great.  4  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  25  each ;  Half
Calf,  $2  10  each.  Vols.  I.  and  II.,  with  Por¬
traits  and  Maps,  now  ready.

Carlyle’s  French  Revolution.  2  vols.

12mo,  Muslin,  $2  00;  Half  Calf,  $3  70.

2  Harper  &  Brothers’  Standard  Library  Works.

Carlyle’s  Oliver  Cromwell.  2  vols.

12mo,  Muslin,  $2  00;  Half  Calf,  $3  70.

Carlyle’s  Fast  and  Present,  Chart¬
ism,  and  Sartor  Resartus.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Chalmers’s  Life  and  Writings.  4
vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00  per  vol. ;  Half  Calf,
$7  40  par  set.

Chalmers’s  Posthumous  Works.  Ed¬
ited  by  liis  Son-in-law,  Rev.  William  Hanna,
LL.D.  Complete  in  9  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00
each;  Sheep  extra,  $1  121  each;  Half  Calf,
$16  65  per  set.  Comprising  Daily  Scripture
Readings,  3  vols. ;  Sabbath  Scripture  Read¬
ings,  2  vols. ;  Sermons,  from  1798  to  1847,  1
vol. ;  Institutes  op  Theology,  2  vols. ;  Pre¬
lections  on  Butler’s  Analogy,  Paley’s  Evi¬
dences  op  Christianity,  and  Hill’s  Lectures
on  Divinity,  with  two  Introductory  Lectures
and  Four  Addresses,  delivered  in  the  New  Col¬
lege,  Edinburgh,  1  vol.  The  vols.  sold  separately.

Chalmers’s  Correspondence.  1  vol.

12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Claiborne’s  Life  and  Correspondence
of  John  A.  Quitman,  Major-General  U.S.A.,  and
Governor  of  the  State  of  Mississippi.  Portrait.
2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $3  00.

Coleridge’s  Complete  Works.  With
an  Introductory  Essay  upon  his  Philosophical
and  Theological  Opinions.  Edited  by  Professor
Shedd.  Complete  in  7  vols.  Portrait.  Small
8vo,  Muslin,  $7  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $13  00.  The  vols.
sold  separately.

Vol.  I.  Aids  to  Reflection. — Statesman’s  Man¬
ual.  II.  The  Friend.  III.  Biographia  Literaria.
IV.  Lectures  on  Shakspeare  and  Other  Dramat¬
ists.  V.  Literary  Remains.  VI.  Second  Lay
Sermon  and  Table-Talk.  VII.  Poetical  and
Dramatic  Works.

Crabb’s  English  Synonyms.  Svo,

Sheep  extra,  $2  00.

Creasy’s  Fifteen  Decisive  Battles  of
the  World:  from  Marathon  to  Waterloo.  12mo,
Muslin,  $1  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Curran  and  his  Contemporaries.  By
Charles  Phillips.  12mo,  Muslin,  S71  cents;
Half  Calf,  $1  82.

Geo.  Wm.  Curtis’s  Works:

Trumps.  Illustrated  by  Hoppin.
12mo,  Muslin.

The  Potiphar  Papers.  Illustrated
from  Drawings  by  Darley.  12mo,  Muslin,
$100;  Half  Calf,  $185.

Prue  andL.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00 ;

Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Lotus-Eating.  A  Summer-Book.
Beautifully  Illustrated  from  Designs  by  Ken-
sett.  12mo,  Muslin,  75  cents;  Haif  Calf,
$1  60.

The  Howadji  in  Syria.  12mo,

Muslin,  $1  00;  Half  Calf,  $1S5.  _

Nile  Notes  of  a  Howadji.  12mo,

Muslin,  $1  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Davis’s  Carthage  and  her  Remains:
being  an  Account  of  the  Excavations  and  Re¬
searches  on  the  site  of  the  Phoenician  Metropolis
in  Africa  and  other  adjacent  Places.  Conducted
under  the  Auspices  of  Her  Majesty’s  Govern¬
ment.  By  Dr.  N.  Davis,  F.R.G.S.,  &c.  With
Illustrations.  Svo,  Muslin.

De  Tocqueville’s  Old  Regime  and
the  French  Revolution.  *  Translated  by  John
Bonner.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00;  Hah'  Calf,
$1  85.

D’lsraeli’s  Amenities  of  Literature.

2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  50 ;  Half  Calf,  $3  20.

Dante’s  Inferno.  A  Literal  Prose
Translation.  By  John  A.  Carlyle,  M. D.
12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Draper’s  Human  Physiology,  Statical
and  Dynamical ;  or,  The  Conditions  and  Course
of  the  Life  of  Man.  Illustrated  by  nearly  300
fine  Wood-cuts  from  Photographs.  New  Edition.
Svo,  650  pages,  Muslin,  $4  00;  Sheep,  $4  25;
Half  Calf,  $5  00.

Dry  den’s  Complete  Works.  With
Life,  by  Mitford.  2  vols.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,
$3  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $4  50.

Dwight’s  Theology,  in  a  Series  of
Sermons.  With  Memoir  of  the  Author.  Por¬
trait.  4  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $6  00 ;  Sheep  extra,
$6  50 ;  Half  Calf,  $10  00.

Miss  Edgeworth’s  Tales  and  Novels.
Engravings.  10  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $7  50 ;
Half  Calf,  $16  00.  The  vols.  sold  separately  in
Muslin.

Ellis’s  Three  Visits  to  Madagascar,
during  the  Years  1853-1S54-1S56.  Including  a
Journey  to  the  Capital,  with  Notices  of  the  Nat¬
ural  History  of  the  Country  and  the  Present  Civ¬
ilization  of  the  People.  Map  and  Wood-cuts  from
Photographs.  Complete  and  unabridged.  Svo,
Muslin,  $2  50.

Forster’s  Celebrated  British  States¬
men.  Portraits.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $1  50 ;  Half
Calf,  $2  25.

Fowler’s  English  Language,  in  its
Elements  and  Forms.  With  a  History  of  its
Origin  and  Development,  and  a  full  Grammar.
New  and  Revised  Edition.  8vo,  Muslin,  $1  50 ;
Sheep  extra,  $1  75.

Franklin’s  Life,  Illustrated.  With
numerous  exquisite  Designs,  by  John  G.  Chap¬
man.  Svo,  Muslin,  $2  00 ;  Sheep,  $2  25 ;  Half
Calf,  $3  00.

Gibbon’s  History  of  the  Decline  and
Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.  With  Notes,  by
Rev.  II.  II.  Milman  and  M.  Guizot.  Maps  and
Engravings,  complete  Index  and  Portrait  of  the
Author.  6  vols.  12mo  (uniform  with  Hume  and
Macaulay),  Muslin,  $3  75;  Sheep  extra,  $4  50;
Half  Calf,  $9  00.

Gieseler’s  Church  History.  Trans¬
lated.  A  New  American  Edition,  Revised  and
Edited  by  Rev.  Henry  B.  Smith,  D.D.  Vols.
I.,  II.,  and  III.  Svo,  Sheep,  $6  75;  Half  Calf,
$9  00.

Godwin’s  History  of  France.  From
the  Earliest  Times  to  the  French  Revolution  of
1789.  Yol.  I.  (Ancient  Gaul.)  Svo,  Muslin,
$2  00.

Goodrich’s  Select  British  Eloquence ;
embracing  the  best  Speeches  entire  of  the  most
eminent  Orators  of  Great  Britain  for  the  last
two  Centuries ;  with  Sketches  of  their  Lives,  an
Estimate  of  their  Genius,  and  Notes  Critical  and
Explanatory.  Svo,  Muslin,  $3  50 ;  Sheep  extra,
$3  75;  Half  Calf,  $4  50.

Grote’s  History  of  Greece.  12  vols.

12mo,  Muslin,  $9  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $19  20  per  Set.

Hale’s  (Mrs.)  Woman’s  Record;  or,

Biographical  Sketches  of  all  Distinguished  Wo¬
men,  from  the  Creation  to  the  Present  Time.
With  Selections  from  Female  Writers  of  each
Era.  More  than  200  Portraits,  engraved  by
Lossing.  Svo,  Muslin,  $3  50.

Hallam’s  Historical  Works.  4  vols.

Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $7  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $10  00.

3

Harper  &  Brothers’  Standard  Library  Works.

Hall’s  (Rev.  Robert)  Complete  Works.
Memoir  by  Dr.  Gregory,  and  Observations  on
his  Character  as  a  Preacher,  by  Rev.  John  Fos¬
ter.  Portrait.  4  vols.  12mo,  Sheep  extra,
$6  00;  Half  Calf,  $9  00.

Sir  William  Hamilton’s  Discussions
on  Philosophy,  Literature,  and  University  Re¬
form.  Chiefly  from  the  Edinburgh  Review.
Corrected,  Vindicated,  Enlarged,  in  Notes  and
Appendices.  8vo,  Muslin,  $1  50;  Half  Calf,
$2  50.

Homans’s  Cyclopaedia  of  Commerce
and  Commercial  Navigation.  Royal  Svo,  2000
pages,  Muslin,  1  vol.,  $6  00 ;  Sheep,  1  vol.,
$6  75;  Half  Calf,  1  vol.,  $S  00;  Sheep,  2  vols.,
$8  00;  Law  Sheep,  2  vols.,  $S  00;  Half  Calf,  2
vols.,  $8  75.

Harper’s  New  Classical  Library.  Lit¬
eral  Translations  of  Greek  and  Latin  Authors.
12mo,  Muslin,  75  cents  per  vol. ;  Half  Calf,  $1  60
per  vol.  Comprising  C.esar,  Virgil,  Sallust,
Horace,  Cicero’s  Orations,  Cicero’s  Offices,
&c.,  Cicero  on  Oratory  and  Orators,  Taci¬
tus,  2  vols.,  Terence,  Juvenal,  Xenophon,
Homer’s  Iliad,  Homer’s  Odyssey,  Herodotus,
Demosthenes,  2  vols.,  Thucydides,  ./Eschylus,
Sophocles,  Euripides,  2  vols.

Head’s  Daily  Walk  with  Wise  Men;
or,  Religious  Exercises  for  Every  Day  in  the
Year.  Selected,  Arranged,  and  specially  adapt¬
ed,  by  Rev.  Nelson  Head.  Large  12mo,  Mus¬
lin.  ( Nearly  Ready.)

Helps’s  Spanish  Conquest  in  America,

and  its  Relation  to  the  History  of  Slavery  and  to
the  Government  of  the  Colonies.  3  vols.  12mo,
Muslin,  $3  00;  Half  Calf,  $5  50.

Hildreth’s  History  of  the  United

States.  First  Series _ From  the  First  Settle¬

ment  of  the  Country  to  the  Adoption  of  the  Fed¬
eral  Constitution.  3  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $6  00;
Sheep  extra,  $6  75;  Half  Calf,  $9  00.

Second  Series _ From  the  Adoption  of  the

Federal  Constitution  to  the  End  of  the  Sixteenth
Congress.  3  vols.  8vo,  Muslin,  $6  00;  Sheep
extra,  $6  75 ;  Half  Calf,  $9  00.

Humboldt’s  Cosmos.  6  vols.  12mo,

Muslin,  $4  25;  Half  Calf,  $8  50.

Hume’s  History  of  England.  5  vols.
12mo,  Muslin,  $3  75;  Sheep,  $4  50;  Half  Calf,
$9  00.  (Uniform  with  Macaulay  and  Gibbon.)

Jay’s  Complete  Works.  3  vols.  Svo,

Sheep  extra,  $4  50 ;  Half  Calf,  $6  75.

Johnson’s  Complete  Works.  Por¬
trait.  2  vols.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $3  00;  Half
Calf,  $4  50.

Lamartine’s  History  of  the  Giron¬
dists;  or,  Personal  Memoirs  of  the  Patriots  of
the  French  Revolution.  From  unpublished
Sources.  3  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $2  10 ;  Half
Calf,  $4  65.

Lamartine’s  Memoirs  of  Celebrated
Characters.  3  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $2  63 ;  Half
Calf,  $5  20.

Lamb’s  Works.  Comprising  his  Let¬
ters,  Poems,  Essays  of  Elia,  Essays  upon  Shak-
speare,  Hogarth,  &c.,  and  a  Sketch  of  his  Life,
with  the  Final  Memorials,  by  T.  Noon  Tal-
fourd.  Portrait.  2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $2  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $3  70.

Layard’s  Popular  Account  of  the
Discoveries  at  Nineveh.  Abridged.  With  nu¬
merous  Wood  Engravings.  12me,  Muslin,  75
cents ;  Half  Calf,  $1  60.

Layard’s  Fresh  Discoveries  in  Nine¬
veh  and  Babylon  ;  with  Travels  in  Armenia,
Kurdistan,  and  the  Desert :  being  the  Result  of
a  Second  Expedition,  undertaken  for  the  Trus¬
tees  of  the  British  Museum.  With  all  of  the
Maps  and  Engravings  in  the  English  Edition.
Svo,  Muslin,  $2  25;  Half  Calf,  $3  25.

Livingstone’s  Missionary  Travels  and
Researches  in  South  Africa.  Maps  by  Arrow-
smith,  a  Portrait  on  Steel,  and  numerous  Illus¬
trations.  Only  complete  American  edition.
With  elaborate  Index.  Svo,  Muslin,  $3  00;
Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Macaulay’s  History  of  England,  from
the  Accession  of  James  II.  With  an  original
Portrait  of  the  Author.  A  Handsome  Octavo
Library  Edition,  on  superfine  Paper,  Muslin,
$1  50  a  volume ;  Half  Calf,  $2  50 — A  Popular
Duodecimo  Edition.  With  Portrait  and  In¬
dex.  Printed  on  fine  Paper,  Muslin,  62j  cents;

Half  Calf,  $1  50 _ A  Cheap  Octavo  Edition.

Paper  Covers,  25  cents  a  volume — A  Cheap  Oc¬
tavo  Edition.  The  four  volumes  neatly  bound
in  two  volumes,  Muslin,  62i  cents  a  volume.
The  volumes  of  any  of  the  above  editions  sold
separately.

Maury’s  Physical  Geography  of  the
Sea.  Wood-cuts  and  Charts.  New  Edition,
greatly  Enlarged  and  Improved.  Svo,  Muslin,
$1  50;  Half  Calf,  $2  50.

Mill’s  Logic.  Svo,  Muslin,  $1  50.
Mills’s  Literature  and  Literary  Men
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  2  vols.  Svo,  Mus¬
lin,  $3  50;  Half  Calf,  $5  50.

Hannah  More’s  Complete  Works.
Engravings.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $2  50;  Half
Calf,  $3  25.  Muslin,  2  vols.,  $2  75;  Half  Calf,
$4  25.  The  same  Work,  printed  from  large
type,  7  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $5  25;  Half  Calf,
$11  20.

Hannah  More’s  Life  and  Correspond¬
ence.  By  W.  Roberts.  2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,
$150;  Half  Calf,  $3  20.

Mosheim’s  Ecclesiastical  History.
Ancient  and  Modern.  2  vols.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,
$3  00;  Half  Calf,  $4  50.

Motley’s  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic.
A  History.  3  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $6  00 ;  Sheep,
$6  75;  Half  Calf,  $9  00.

Motley’s  History  of  the  United  Neth¬

erlands.  2  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $4  00.

Neale’s  History  of  the  Puritans.  2
vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $2  75;  Sheep  extra,  $3  00;
Half  Calf,  $4  50.

Neander’s  Life  of  Christ.  Translated
by  Professors  McClintock  and  Blumenthal.
Svo,  Muslin,  $2  00;  Sheep  extra,  $2  25;  Half
Calf,  $3  00.

Page’s  La  Plata ;  The  Argentine

Confederation  and  Paraguay.  Being  a  Narrative
of  the  Exploration  of  the  Tributaries  of  the  River
La  Plata  and  Adjacent  Countries  during  the
Years  1853,  ’54,  ’55,  and  ’56,  under  the  orders  of
the  United  States  Government.  With  Map  and
numerous  Engravings.  Svo,  Muslin,  $3  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Miss  Pardoe’s  Louis  XIV.  and  the
Court  of  France  in  the  Seventeenth  Century.
Illustrated  with  numerous  Engravings.  Por¬
traits,  &c.  2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $3  50;  Half
Calf,  $5  20.

Plutarch’s  Lives.  Portrait.  Svo,
Sheep,  $1  25.  Large  type,  4  vols.  12mo,  Sheep
extra,  $3  50 ;  Half  Cali',  $6  50.

4

Harper  &  Brothers'  Standard  Library  Works.

Robertson’s  Historical  Works :  Dis¬
covery  ob’  America.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $1  50 ;
Half  Calf,  $2  25.— Charles  V.  Svo,  Sheep  ex¬
tra,  $1  50;  Half  Calf,  $2  25 — Scotland  and
Ancient  India.  Svo,  Sheep  extra,  $1 50 ;  Half
Calf,  $2  25.

Prime’s  Boat  Life  in  Egypt  and  Nu¬
bia.  Illustrations.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  25 ;  Half
Calf,  $2  10.

Prime’s  Tent  Life  in  the  Holy  Land.
Illustrations.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  25;  Half  Calf,
$2  10.

Prime’s  Coins,  Medals,  and  Seals,
Ancient  and  Modern.  Illustrated  and  Described.
Svo,  Muslin,  $2  50.

Rollin’s  Ancient  History.  Numer¬
ous  Maps  and  Engravings.  In  2  vols.  Svo,  Sheep
extra,  $2  75.  1  vol.,  Sheep,  $2  50.

Russell’s  History  of  Modern  Europe.

Engravings.  3  vols.  Svo,  Sheep,  $4  50.

Miss  Sedgwick’s  Works.  Embracing
Memoir  of  Joseph  Curtis.  lGmo,  Muslin,  50
c. — Married  or  Single.  2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,
$1  75;  Half  Calf,  $3  45. — Letters  from  Ahroad
to  Kindred  at  Home.  2  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,
$1  90;  Half  Calf,  $3  60 — Live  and  Let  Live;
or,  Domestic  Service  Illustrated.  ISmo,  Muslin,
45  c.  —  Means  and  Ends  ;  or,  Self-training.
ISmo,  Muslin,  45  c _ A  Love-Token  for  Chil¬
dren.  ISmo,  Muslin,  45  c _ The  Poor  Rich  Man

and  the  Rich  Poor  Man.  ISmo,  Muslin,  45  c.
— Stories  for  Young  Persons.  ISmo,  Muslin,
45  c. — Wilton  Harvey,  and  Other  Tales.
ISmo,  Muslin,  45  cents.  —  The  Linwoods.  2
vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  50 ;  Half  Calf,  $3  20.

Saurin’s  Sermons.  Portrait.  2  vols.

Sheep  extra,  $3  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $4  50.

Shakspeare’s  Dramatic  Works.  En¬
gravings.  6  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $4  50 ;  Plalf
Calf,  $9  60.

Mrs.  Sigourney’s  Works.  Lucy
Howard’s  Journal.  16mo,  Muslin,  75  c — Let¬
ters  to  Mothers.  12mo,  Muslin,  75  c. ;  Mus¬
lin,  gilt  edges,  90  c _ Letters  to  Young  Ladies.

12mo,  Muslin,  75  c. ;  Muslin,  gilt  edges,  90  c —
Myrtis,  and  other  Sketchings.  l2mo,  Mus¬
lin,  75  c. ;  Half  Calf,  $1  60 _ Pocahontas,  and

Other  Poems.  Engravings.  12mo,  Muslin,  90
c. ;  Half  Calf,  $1  75.

Sismondi’s  Historical  View  of  the
Literature  of  the  South  of  Europe.  2  vols.  12mo,
Muslin,  $1  SO;  Half  Calf,  $3  50.

Smiles’s  Self-Help.  With  Illustra¬
tions  of  Character  and  Conduct.  New  Edition,
Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  Portraits  on  Wood,
chiefly  by  Lossing.  12mo,  Muslin,  50  cents.

Sparks’s  Library  of  American  Biog¬
raphy.  10  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $7  50.  The  vol¬
umes  sold  separately,  at  75  cents  each;  Half
Calf,  $16  00  a  set.

Squier’s  Nicaragua :  Its  People,
Scenery,  Monuments,  Resources,  Conditions,  and
Proposed  Canal.  Revised  Edition.  With  100
Maps  and  Illustrations.  Svo,  Muslin,  $3  00;
Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Squier’s  States  of  Central  America:

their  Geography,  Topography,  Climate,  Popula¬
tion,  Resources,  Productions,  Commerce,  Political
.Organizations,  Aborigines,  &c.,  &c.  Comprising
Chapters  on  Honduras,  San  Salvador,  Nicaragua,
Costa  Rica,  Guatemala,  Belize,  the  Bay  Islands,
the  Mosquito  Shore,  and  the  Honduras  Inter-Oce¬
anic  Railway.  With  numerous  Original  Maps
and  Illustrations.  A  New  and  Enlarged  Edition.
Svo,  Muslin,  $3  00;  Half  Calf,  $4  00.  .

Stephen’s  (Sir  James)  Lectures  on
the  History  of  France.  Svo,  Muslin,  $1  75;
Half  Calf,  $2  75.

Stephens’s  (John  L.)  Works.  Trav¬
els  in  Central  America,  Chiapas,  and  Yucatan.
With  a  Map  and  SS  Engravings.  2  vols.  Svo,
Muslin,  $5  00;  Half  Calf,  $7  (10.

Incidents  of  Travel  in  Yucatan.
120  Engravings,  from  Drawings  by  F.  Catiier-
wood.  2  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $5;  Half  Calf,  $7.

Travels  in  Greece,  Turkey,  Russia,
and  Poland.  Engravings.  2  vols.  12mo,  Mus¬
lin,  $1  75;  Half  Calf,  $3  45.

Travels  in  Egypt,  Arabia  Petrma,
and  the  Holy  Land.  Engravings.  2  vols.
12mo,  Muslin,  $1  75 ;  Half  Calf,  $3  45.
Strickland’s  (Miss)  Queens  of  Scot¬
land.  Complete  in  8  vols.  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00
each;  Sets  in  Muslin,  $8  00;  Half  Calf,  $14  SO.

Taylor’s  Wesley  and  Methodism.

12mo,  Muslin,  75  cents ;  Half  Calf,  $1  60.

Taylor’s  World  of  Mind.  12mo,

Muslin,  $1  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $1  85.

Thackeray’s  Works:

The  Four  Georges.  With  Illus¬

trations  by  the  Author.  12mo,  Muslin,  75  cts.

English  Humorists  of  the  Eight¬
eenth  Century.  Together  with  his  Lecture  on
“  Charity  and  Humor.”  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  00 ;
Half  Calf,  $1  S5.

The  Virginians.  A  Tale  of  the
Last  Century.  With  Illustrations  by  the  Au¬
thor.  Svo,  Paper,  $1  75 ;  Muslin,  $2  00 ;  Half
Calf,  $3  00.

The  Newcomes.  8vo,  Muslin,

$2  00;  Half  Calf,  $3  00.

Vanity  Fair.  Svo,  Muslin,  $1  25  ;

Half  Calf,  $2  25.

Pendennis.  2  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,

$2  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $4  00.

Thirlwall’s  History  of  Greece.  2
vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $2  75;  Sheep,  $3  00;  Half
Calf,  $4  75.

Thompson’s  Christian  Theism :  The

Testimony  of  Reason  and  Revelation  to  the  Ex¬
istence  of  the  Supreme  Being.  (The  First  Bur¬
nett  Prize  of  $9000  was  awarded  to  this  Treat¬
ise.)  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  25;  Half  Calf,  $2  10.

Thomson’s  Land  and  the  Book ;  or,
Biblical  Illustrations  drawn  from  the  Manners
and  Customs,  the  Scenes  and  the  Scenery  of  the
Holy  Land.  With  two  elaborate  Maps  of  Pales¬
tine,  an  Accurate  Plan  of  Jerusalem,  and  several
Hundred  Engravings ,  representing  the  Scenery,
Topography,  and  Productions  of  the  Holy  Land,
and  the  Costumes,  Manners,  and  Habits  of  the
People.  Two  elegant  Large  12mo  Volumes,  Mus¬
lin,  $3  50;  Half  Calf,  $5  20;  Half  Calf  extra,
$5  50 ;  Half  Morocco  extra,  $6  00.

Ticknor’s  History  of  Spanish  Litera¬
ture.  3  vols.  Svo,  Muslin,  $6  00 ;  Sheep  extra,
$6  75;  Half  Calf,  $9  00.

Vaux’s  Villas  and  Cottages:  A  Se¬
ries  of  Designs  prepared  for  Execution  in  the
United  States.  Illustrated  by  300  Engravings.
Svo,  Muslin,  $2  00 ;  Half  Calf,  $3  00.

Wharton’s  Queens  of  Society.  Illus¬

trations.  Large  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  50.

Wharton’s  Wits  and  Beaux  of  Soci¬

ety.  Illustrations.  Large  12mo,  Muslin,  $1  50.

Wilkinson’s  Ancient  Egyptians.  Il¬
lustrated  with  500  Wood-cuts.  2  vols.  12mo,
Muslin,  $2  00;  Half  Calf,  $3  70.

*

*

'

y

-
