Google

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I

r

THE LIFE AIH) DEATH

OF

JOHN OF BARNEVELD.

THE LIFE AND DEATH

OP

JOHN OF BARNEVELD

ADVOCATE OP HOLLAND

WITH

A VIEW OF THE PRIMARY CAUSES AND MOVEMENTS
OF THE THIRTY YEARS' WAR

BY

JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY, D.C.L., LL.D.

OOBBUrONDING lOMBSB OF THX INSnTUTB OF TRAKd, ETC.

IN TWO VOLUMES— Vol. II

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS

NEW YORK

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS

FRANKLIN SQUARE
1880

\{f i^'J

M

. /^j. I'V^

/ (

' w

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1874, by

John Lothrop Motlet,
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

^mtt

CHAPTER XI.

riam
The Advocate Boands the Alarm in Germany — Hib InstractionB to

LangeTAC and his Foiethonght — ^The Prinoe-Palatine and his Forces
take Aachen, MtUheim, and other Towns — Sapineness of the Pro-
testants — Increased Activity of Austria and the League — Bame-
veld strives to obtain Help from England — Neubuig departs for
Gennany— Bameveldthe Prime Minister of Protestantism — ^Ernest
Mansf eld takes service under Charles Emmanuel — Count John of
Nassau goes to Savoy — Slippery Conduct of King James in regard
to the New Treaty proposed — Bameveld's Influence greater in
France than in England — Sequestration feared — The Elector of
Brandenburg cited to appear before the Emperor at Prague —
Murder of John van Wely — Uytenbogaert incurs Maurice's Dis-
pleasure — Marriage of the ^ing of France with Anne of Austria —
Conference between King James and Caron concerning Piracy,
Cloth Trade, and Treaty of Xanten — Bameveld's Survey of the
Condition of Europe — His Efforts to avert the impending general
War 1

CHAPTER XII.

James still presses for the Payment of the Dutch Republic's Debt to
him — A Compromise effected, with Restitution of the Cautionary
Towns — Treaty of Loudun — James's Dream of a Spanish Marriage
revives — James visits Scotland — The States-General agree to
furnish Money and Troops in Fulfilment of the Treaty of 1609 —
Death of Condni— Villeroy returns to Power . . . . 67

CHAPTER XIII.

Ferdinand of Gratz crowned King of ^hernia— His Enmity to Pro-
testants — Slawata and Martini tz thrown from the Windows of
the Hradschin — Real Beginning of the Thirty Years' War— The
Elector^Palatine's Intrigues in Opposition to the House of Austria
— He supports the Duke of Savoy — The Emperor Matthias
visits Dresden — Jubilee for the Hun^bedth Anniversary of the Re-
formation 81

vi CX)NTENTS OP VOL. IL

CHAPTER XIV.

Bameveld connected with the East India Company, bat opposed to
the West India Company — Carleton comes from Venice inimical to
Bameveld — Maurice openly the Chieftain of the Contra-Remon-
strants' — Tmnnlts around the Churches — '* Orange or Spain " the
Cry of Prince Maurice and his Party — They take possession of the
Cloister Church— "The Sharp Resolve " — Carleton's Orations
before the States-General 107

CHAPTER XV.

The Commonwealth bent on Self-destruction — EMls of a Confederate
System of Government — Rem Bischop's House sacked — Aerseens'
unceasing Efforts against Bameveld — The Advocate's Interview
with Maurice — The States of Utrecht raise the Troops — The
Advocate at Utrecht — Bameveld urges mutual Toleration — Bar-
neveld accused of being Partisan of Spain — Carleton takes his
Departure '...*. 151

CHAPTER XVI.

Maurice revolutionizes the Provinces — Danckaerts' libellous Pam-
phlet — Bameveld's Appeal to the Prince — Bameveld's Remon-
strance to the States — The Stadholder at Amsterdam — The Treaty
of Truce nearly expired — King of Spain and Archduke Albert —
Scheme for recovering the Provinces — Secret Plot to make Maurice
Sovereign 189

CHAPTER XVII.

A Deputation from Utrecht to Maurice — The Fair at Utrecht —
Maurice and the States' Deputies at Utrecht — Ogle refuses to
act in Opposition to the States — The Stadholder disbands the
Waartgelders — ^The Prince appoints forty Magistrates — The States
formally disband the Waartgelders 228

CHAPTER XVIII.

Fruitless Interview between Bameveld and Maurice — The Advocate,
vramed of his Danger, resolves to remain at the Hague — Arrest of
Bameveld, of Grotius, and of Hoogerbeets — The States-General
assume the Responsibility in a '* Billet"— The States of Holland
protest — The Advocate's Letter to his Family — Audience of de

CONTENTS OP VOL. H. vu

PACT

BoiflsisBe — Miscbief-making of Aerssens — The French AmbasBadon
intercede for Bameveld — The King of England opposes their
Efforts — Langerac's Treachery to the Advocate — Maurice <5on-
tinnes his Changes in the Magistracy throoghoat the Country —
Vote of Thanks by the States of Holland ...... 238

CHAPTER XIX.

Rancour between the Politico-Religious Parties — Spanish Intrigues
— Inconsistency of James — Brewster and Robinson's Congregation
at Leyden — They decide to leave for America — Robinson's Fare-
well Sermon and Prayer at Parting 278

CHAPTER XX.

Bameveld's Imprisonment — Ledenberg's Examination and Death —
Remonstrance of de Boississe — Aerssens admitted to the Order of
Knights — Trial of the Advocate — Bameveld's Defence — The
States prodaim a Public Fast — Du Maurier's Speech before the
Assembly — Bameveld's Sentence — Bameveld prepares for Death
— Goes to Execution 298

CHAPTER XXI.

Bameveld's Execution — The Advocate's Conduct on the Scaffold —
The Sentence printed and sent to the Provinces — The Proceed-
ings irregular and inequitable 884

CHAPTER XXII.

Grotius urged to ask Forgiveness — Grotius shows great Weakness —
Hoogerbeets and Grotius imprisoned for Life — Grotius confined at
Loevestein — Grotius' early Attainments — Grotius* Deportment in
Prison — Escape of Grotius — Deventer's Rage at Grotius' Escape . 894

CHAPTER XXIII.

Bameveld's Sons plot against Maurice — The Conspiracy betrayed to
Maurice — Escape of Stoutenburg — Groeneveld is arrested — Mary
of Bameveld appeals to the Stadholder — Groeneveld condemned to
Death — Execution of Groeneveld 428

THE LIFE AND DEATH

OF

JOHN OF BARNEVELD.

CHAPTER XI.

The Advocate sounds the Alarm in Germany — His Instructions to Langerac
and his Forethou^^ht — The Prince-Palatine and his Forces take Aachen,
Millheim, and other Towns — Supineness of the Protestants — Increased
Activity of Austria and the League — Bameveld strives to obtain Help
from England — Neuburg departs for Germany — Bameveld the Prime
Minister of Protestantism — Ernest Mansfield takes service under Charles
Emmanuel — Ck>unt John of Nassau goes to Savoy — Slippery Conduct of
King James in regard to the New Treaty proposed — ^Bameveld's Influence
greater in France than in England — Sequestration feared — The Elector
of Brandenburg cited to appear before the Emperor at Prague— Murder of
John van Wely — Uytenbogaert incurs Maurice's Displeasure — Marriage
of the King of France with Anne of Austria — Conference between King
James and Caroiv concemiug Piracy, Cloth Trade and Treaty of Xanten —
Bameveld's Snrvey of the Condition of Europe — His Efforts to avert the
impending general War.

I HAYK thus purposely sketched the leading features of a
couple of momentous^ although not eventful, years — so far
as the foreign policy of the Republic is concerned — ^in order
that the reader may better understand the bearings and the
value of the Advocate's actions and writings at that period.
This work aims at being a political study. I would attempt
to exemplify the influence of individual humours and pas-
sions — some of them among the highest and others certainly
the basest that agitate humanity — upon the march of great
events, upon general historical results at certain epochs, and
upon the destiny of eminent personages. It may also be
not uninteresting to venture a glance into the internal
structure and workings of a republican and federal systenl

VOL. IL B

2 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BAENEVELD. Chap. XL

of government, then for the first time reproduced almost
spontaneously upon an extended scale.

Perhaps the revelation of some of its defects, in spite of
the faculty and vitality struggling against them, may not
be without value for our own country and epoch. The system
of Switzerland was too limited and homely, that of Venice
too purely oligarchical, to have much moral for us now, or
to render a study of their pathological phenomena especially
instructive. The lessons taught us by the history of the
Netherland confederacy may have more permanent meaning.

Moreover, the character of a very considerable statesman
at an all-important epoch, and in a position of vast respon-
sibility, is always an historical possession of value to man-
kind. That of him who furnishes the chief theme for these
pages has been either overlooked and neglected or perhaps
misunderstood by posterity. History has not too many really
important and emblematic men on its records to dispense
with the memory of Bameveld, and the writer therefore
makes no apology for dilating somewhat fully upon his life-
work by means of much of his entirely unpublished and
long forgotten utterances.

The Advocate had ceaselessly been sounding the alarm in
Germany. For the Protestant Union, fascinated, as it were,
by the threatening look of the Catholic League, seemed re- '
lapsing into a drowse.

" I believe," he said to one of his agents in that country,^
"that the Evangelical electors and princes and the other
estates are not alive to the danger. I am sure that it is not
apprehended in Great Britain, France is threatened with
troubles. These are the means to subjugate the religion, the
laws and liberties of Germany. Without an army the
troops now on foot in Italy cannot be kept out of Germany.
Yet we do not hear that the Evangelicals are making

1 Bameveld to Brederode, 3 March 1614. (Hague Arch. MS.)

1614. THE ADVOCATE SOUNDS THE ALARM IN GERMANY. 3

provision of troops, money, or any other necessaries. In this
country we have about one hundred places occupied with
our troops, among whom are many who could destroy a
whole army. But the maintenance of these places prevents
our being very strong in the field, especially outside our
frontiers. But if in all Germany there be many places held
by the Evangelicals which would disperse a great army is
very doubtful. Keep a watchful eye. Economy is a good
thing, but the protection of a country and its inhabitants
must be laid to heart. Watch well if against these Provinces,
and against Bohemia, Austria, and other as it is pretended
rebellious states, these plans are not directed. Look out for
the movements of the Italian and Bavarian troops against
Germany. You see how they are nursing the troubles and
misunderstandings in France, and turning them to account.''
He instructed the new ambassador in Paris to urge upon
the French government the absolute necessity of punctuality
in furnishing the payment of their contingent in the
Netherlands according to convention. The States of Hol-
land themselves had advanced the money during three
years* past, but this anticipation was becoming very onerous.
It was necessary to pay the troops every month regularly,
but the funds from Paris were always in arrear. England con-
tributed about one-half as much in subsidy, but these moneys
went in paying the garrisons of Brielle, Flushing, and Eam-
mekens, fortresses pledged to that crown. The Ambassador
was shrewdly told not to enlarge on the special employment
of the English frmds while holding up to the Queen's
government that she was not the only potentate who helped
bear burthens for the Provinces, and insisted on a continua-
tion of this aid. " Remember and let them remember," said
the Advocate, " that the reforms which they are pretending
to make there by relieving the subjects of contributions

> Bameveld to Langerac, 14 April 1614. (Hagae Arch. MS.)

4 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

tends to enervate the royal authority and dignity both
within and without, to diminish its lustre and reputation,
and in sum to make the King imable to gratify and assist
his subjects, friends, and allies. Make them imderstand that
the taxation in these Provinces is ten times higher than
there, and that My Lords the States hitherto by the grace of
God and good administration have contrived to maintain it
in order to be useful to themselves and their friends. Take
great pains to have it well understood that this is even more
honourable and more necessary for a king of France, espe-
cially in his minority, than for a republic ^hoc turhato
seculo* We all see clearly how some potentates in Europe
are keeping at all time under one pretext or another strong
forces well armed on a war footing. It therefore behoves
his Majesty to be likewise provided with troops, and at
least with a good exchequer and all the requirements of
war, as well for the security of his own state as for the
maintenance of the grandeur and laudable reputation left to
him by the deceased king."

Truly here was sound and substantial advice, never and
nowhere more needed than in France. It was given too
with such good effect as to bear fruit even upon stoniest
ground, and it is a refreshing spectacle to see this plain
Advocate of a republic, so lately sprung into existence out
of the depths of oppression and rebellion, calmly summoning
great kings as it were before him and instructing them in
those vital duties of government in discharge of which
the country he administered already furnished a model.
Had England and France each possessed a Bameveld at
that epoch, they might well have given in exchange for him
a wilderness of Epernons and Sillerys, Bouillons and Condes ;
of Win woods, Lakes, Carrs, and Villierses. But Elizabeth with
her counsellors was gone, and Henry was gone, and Richelieu
had not come ; while in England James and his minions

1014. HIS INSTRUCTIONS TO LANGBRAC 5

were diligently opening an abyss between government and
people which in less than half a lifetime more should en-
gulph the kingdom.

Two months later he informed the States' ambassador of
the communications made by the Prince of Conde and the
Dukes of Nevers and Bouillon to the government at the
Hague now that they had effected a kind of reconciliation
with the Queen. Langerac was especially instructed to do
his best to assist in bringing about cordial relations^ if that
were possible, between the crown and the rebels, and mean-
time he was especially directed to defend du Maurier against
the calumnious accusations brought against him, of which
Aerssens had been the secret sower.

" Tou will do your best to manage," he said,* " that no
special ambassador be sent hither, and that M. du Maurier
may remain with us, he being a very intelligent and mode-
rate person now well instructed as to the state of our affairs,
a professor of the Keformed religion, and having many other
good qualities serviceable to their Majesties and to us.

" You will visit the Prince,^ and other princes and officers
of the crown who are coming to court again, and do all
good offices as well for the court as for M. du Maurier, in
order that through evil plots and slanderous reports no harm
may come to him.

"Take great pains to find out all you can there as to
the designs of the King of Spain, the Archdukes, and the
Emperor, in the affair of Jiilich. You are also to let it be
known that the change of religion on the part of the Prince-
Palatine of Neuburg will not change our good wiU and
affection for him, so far as his legal claims are concerned/'

So long as it was possible for the States to retain their
hold on both the claimants, the Advocate, pursuant to his

* Barneveld to Langerac, 18 June
1614. (Ha^ue AichiTes MS.)

• The Prince of Conde, being first

prince of the blood, was always de-
signated simply **M. le Prince."

6 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

uniform policy of moderation, was not disposed to help throw
the Palatine into the hands of the Spanish party. He was
well aware, however, that Neubm-g by his marriage and his
conversion was inevitably to become the instrument of the
League and to be made use of in the duchies at its pleasure,
and that he especially would be the first to submit with
docility to the decree of the Emperor. The right to issue
such decree the States under guidance of Barneveld were
resolved to resist at all hazards.

" Work diligently, nevertheless," said he, " that they per-
mit nothing there directly or indirectly that may tend to
the furtherance of the League, as too prejudicial to us and
to all our fellow religionists. Tell them too that the late
king, the King of Great Britain, the united electors and
princes of Germany, and ourselves, have always been reso-
lutely opposed to making the dispute about the succession
in the duchies depend on the will of the Emperor and his
court. AH our movements in the year 1610 against the
attempted sequestration under Leopold were to carry out
that purpose. Hold it for certain that our present proceed-
ings' for strengthening and maintaining the city and fortress
of Julich are considered serviceable and indispensable by the
British king and the German electors and princes. Use
your best efforts to induce the French government to pursue
the same policy — if it be not possible openly, then at least
secretly. My conviction is that, unless the Prince-Palatine
is supported by, and his whole designs founded upon, the
general league against all our brethren of the religion,
affairs may be appeased."

The Envoy was likewise instructed to do his best to further
the matrimonial alliance which had begun, to be discussed
between the Prince of Wales and the second daughter of
France. Had it been possible at that moment to bring the
insane dream of James for a Spanish alliance to naught, the

m4. HIS INSTRUCTIONS TO LANGBRAC. 7

States would have breathed more freely. He was also to urge
payment of the money for the French regiments, always in
arrears since Henry's death and Sully's dismissal, and always
supplied by the exchequer of Holland. He was informed
that the Bepublic had been sending some war ships ta the
Levant, to watch the armada recently sent thither by Spain,
and other armed vessels into the Baltic, to pursue the corsairs
with whom every sea was infested. In one year alone he
estimated the loss to Dutch merchants by these pirates at
800,000 florins. " We have just captured two of the rovers,
but the rascally scum is increasing," he said.

Again alluding to the resistance to be made by the
States to the Imperial pretensions, he observed, '^The
Emperor is about sending us a herald in the Jiilich matter,
but we know how to stand up to him.''

And notwithstanding the bare possibility which he had
admitted, that the Prince of Neubui^ might not yet have
wholly sold himself, body and soul, to the Papists, he gave
warning a day or two afterwards in France that aU should
be prepared for the worst.

" The Archdukes and the Prince of Neuburg appear to be
taking the war earnestly in hand," he said. " We believe
that the Papistical League is about to make a great eifort
against all the co-religionists. We are watching closely their
movements. Aachen is first threatened, and the Elector-
Palatine likewise. France surely, for reasons of state, cannot
permit that they should be attacked. She did, and helped
us to do, too much in the Julich campaign to suffer the
Spaniards to make themselves masters there now." ^

It has been seen that the part played by France in the
memorable campaign of 1610 was that of adnodring auxiliary
to the States' forces ; Marshal de la Chatre having in all
things admitted the superiority of their army and the mag-

1 Bameveld to Langerac, 18 June 1614. (Hague Arohiyes MS.)

8 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

nificent generalflhip of Prince Maurice. But the government
of the Dowager had been committed by that enterprise to
carry out the life-long policy of Henry, and to maintain his
firm alliance with the Republic. Whether any of the great
kingis acuteness and vigour in countermining and shattering
the plans of the House of Austria was left in the French court,
time was to show. Meantime Bameveld was crying himself
hoaxse with warnings into the dull ears of England and France.

A few weeks later the Prince of Neuburg had thrown oif
the mask. Twelve thousand foot and 1500 horse had been
raised in great haste, so the Advocate informed the French
court,^ by Spain and the Archdukes, for the use of that
pretender. Five or six thousand Spaniards were coming
by sea to Flanders, and as many Italians were crossing the
mountains, besides a great number mustering for the same
purpose in Germany and Lorraine. Bameveld was con-
stantly receiving most important intelligence of military
plans and movements from Prague, which he placed daily
before the eyes of governments wilfully blind.

'^ I ponder well at this crisis," he said to his friend Caron,'
" the intelligence I received some months back from Ratis-
bon, out of the cabinet of the Jesuits, that the design of
the Catholic or Roman League is to bring this year a
great army into the field, in order to make Neuburg, who
was even then said to be of the Roman profession and
League, master of Jiilich and the duchies ; to execute
the Imperial decree against Aachen and Miilheim, prQ-
venting any aid from being sent into Germany by these
Provinces, or by Great Britain, and placing the Archduke
and Marquis Spinola in command of the forces ; to put
another army on the frontiers of Austria, in order to prevent
any succour coming from Hungary, Bohemia, Austria,
Moravia, and Silesia into Germany; to keep all these

1 Barneveld to Oaion, 18 Jvlj, 1614. (Hagae Archives MS.) * Ibid.

1614. BARNEVELD'S FORETHOUGHT. 9

disputed territories in subjection and devotion to the
Emperor^ and to place the general conduct of all these affairs
in the hands of Archduke Leopold and other princes of the
House of Austria. A third army is to be brought into the
Upper Palatinate, under command of the Duke of Bavaria
and others of the League, destined to thoroughly carry
out its designs against the Elector-Palatine, and the other
electors, princes, and estates belonging to the religion,*'

This intelligence, plucked by Bameveld out of the
cabinet of the Jesuits, had been duly communicated by him
months before to those whom it most concerned, and as
usual it seemed to deepen the lethargy of the destined
victims and their friends. Not only the whole Spanish
campaign of the present year had thus been duly mapped
out by the Advocate, long before it occurred, but this long
buried and forgotten correspondence of the statesman seems
rather like a chronicle of transactions already past, so closely
did the actual record, which posterity came to know too
well, resemble that which he saw, and was destined only to
see, in prophetic vision.

Could this political seer have cast his horoscope of the
Thirty Years' War at this hour of its nativity for the
instruction of such men as Walsingham or Burleigh, Henry
of Navarre or Sully, Richelieu or Gustavus Adolphus,
would the course of events have been modified ? These
very idlest of questions are precisely those which inevitably
occur as one ponders the seeming barrenness of an epoch
in reaUty so pregnant.

" One would think," said Bameveld, comparing what was
then the future with the real past, "that these plans in
Prague against the Elector-Palatine are too gross for
belief ; but when I reflect on the intense bitterness of these
people, when I remember what was done within living men's
memory to the good elector Hans Frederic of Saxony for

10 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

exactly the same reasons, to wit, hatred of our religion, and
determination to establish Imperial authority, I have great
apprehension. I believe that the Boman League will use the
present occasion to cany out her great design ; holding France
incapable of opposition to her, Germany in too great divi-
sion, and imagining to themselves that neither the King of
Q-reat Britain nor these States are willing or able to offer
effectual and forcible resistance. Yet his Majesty of Great
Britain ought to be able to imagine how greatly the
religious matter in general concerns himself and the
electoral house of the Palatine, as principal heads of the
religion, and that these vast designs should be resisted
betimes, and with all possible means and might. My Lords
the States have good will, but not sufficient strength, to
oppose these great forces single-handed. One must not
believe that without great and prompt assistance in force
from his Majesty and other fellow religionists My Lords the
States can undertake so vast an affair. Do your uttermost
duty there, in order that, ere it be too late, this matter be
taken to heart by his Majesty, and that his authority and
credit be earnestly used with other kings, electors, princes,
and republics, that they do likewise. The promptest
energy, good will, and affection may be reckoned on from us."
Alas I it was easy for his Majesty to take to heart the
matter of Conrad Yorstius, to spend reams of diplomatic
correspondence, to dictate whole volumes for orations
brimming over with theological wrath, for the edification of
the States-General, against that doctor of divinity. But
what were the special interests of his son-in-law, what the
danger to all the other Protestant electors and kings,
princes and republics, what the imperilled condition of the
United Provinces, and, by necessary consequence, the storm
gathering over his own throne, what the whole fate of
Protestantism, from Friesland to Hungary, threatened by

1614. BARNEVELiyS FORETHOUaHT. 11

the insatiable, all-devouring might of the double house
of Austria, the ancient church, and the Papistical League,
what were hundred thousands of men marching towards
Bohemia, the Netherlands, and the duchies, with the drum
beating for mercenary recruits in half the villages of Spain,
Italy, and Catholic Germany, compared with the danger
to Christendom from an Arminian clergyman being ap-
pointed to the theological professorship at Leyden ?

The world was in a blaze, kings and princes were arming,
and aU the time that the monarch of the powerful, adven-
turous, and heroic people of Great Britain could spare from
slobbering over his minions, and wasting the treasures of
the realm to supply their insatiate greed, was devoted to
polemical divinity, in which he displayed his learning,
indeed, but changed his positions and contradicted himself
day by day. The magnitude of this wonderful sovereign's
littleness oppresses the imagination.

Moreover, should he listen to the adjurations of the States
and his fellow religionists, should he allow himself to be
impressed by the eloquence of Bameveld and take a manly
and royal decision in the great emergency, it would be indis-
pensable for him to come before that odious body, the Parlia-
ment of Great Britain, and ask for money. It would be
perhaps necessary for him to take them into his confidence,
to d^rade himself by speaking to them of the national
afiairs. They might not be satisfied with the honour of
voting the supplies at his demand, but were capable of
asking questions as to their appropriation. On the whole
it was more king-like and statesman-like to remain quiet,
and give advice. Of that, although always a spendthrift,
he had an inexhaustible supply.

Bameveld had just hopes from the Commons of Great
Britain, if the King could be brought to appeal to Parlia-
ment. Once more he sounded the bugle of alarm. " Day

12

THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

by day the Archdukes are making greater and greater en-
rolments of riders and infiantry in ever increasing mass," he
cried, "and therewith vast provision of artillery and all
mmiitions of war. Within ten or twelve days they will be
before JiiUch in force. We are sending great convoys to
reinforce our army there. The Prince of Neuburg is en-
rolling more and more troops every day. He will soon be
master of Mulheim. If the King of Great Britain will lay
this matter earnestly to heart for the preservation of the
princes, electors, and estates of the religion, I cannot doubt
that Parliament would co-operate well with his Majesty, and
this occasion should be made use of to redress the whole
state of affairs.'' ^

It was not the Parliament nor the people of Great Britain
that would be in fault when the question arose of paying in
money and in blood for the defence of civil and religious
liberty. But if James should venture openly to oppose
Spain, what would the Count of Gondemar say, and what
would become of the Infanta and the two millions of dowry ?

It was not for want of some glimmering consciousness in
the mind of James of the impending dangers to Northern
Europe and to Protestantism from the insatiable ambition
of Spain, and the unrelenting grasp of the Papacy upon
those portions of Christendom which were slipping from its
control, that his apathy to those perils was so marked. We
have seen his leading motives for inaction, and the world
was long to feel its effects.

" His Majesty firmly believes,'' wrote Secretary Winwood,^
" that the Papistical League is brewing great and dangerous
plots. To obviate them in everything that may depend
upon him, My Lords the States will find him prompt. The

' Bameveld to Caron, 13 July 1614.
(Hagae Archives MS.)

* Win wood to Bameveld, 19 Aa$r.
(o. 8.) 1614. (Hague Arch. MS.
From a collection kindly furnished to

me by M. van Deventer, the distin-
guished editor of the papers of Bame-
veld, which he has published up to
the year 1609.)

1614 BABXEVELD'S FORETHOUGHT. 13

source of all these entanglements comes from Spain. We
do not think that the Archduke will attack Jiilich this
year, but rather fear for Mulheim and Aix-la-Chapelle/'

But the Secretary of State, thus acknowledging the peril,
chose to be blind to its extent, while at the same time under-
valuing the powers by which it might be resisted. "To
oppose the violence of the enemy,'' he said, "if he does
resort to violence, is entirely impossible. It would be
furious madness on our part to induce him to fall upon the
Elector-Palatine, for this would be attacking Great Britain
and all her friends and allies. Germany is a delicate morsel,
but too much for the throat of Spain to swallow all at once.
Behold the evil which troubles the conscience of the
Papistical League. The Emperor and his brothers are all
on the brink of their sepulchre, and the Infants of Spain
are too young to succeed to the Empire. The Pope would
more willingly permit its dissolution than its faUing into
the hands of a prince not of his profession. All that we
have to do in this conjuncture is to attend the best we
can to our own affairs, and afterwards to strengthen the
good alliance existing among us, and not to let ourselves
be separated by the tricks and sleights of hand of our ad-
versaries. The common cause can reckon firmly upon the
King of Great Britain, and will not find itself deceived."

Excellent commonplaces, but not very safe ones. Un-
luckily for the allies, to attend each to his own affairs when
the enemy was upon them, and to reckon firmly upon a king
who thought it furious madness to resist the enemy, was
hardly the way to avert the danger. A fortnight later, the
man who thought it possible to resist, and time to resist,
before the net was over every head, replied to the Secre-
tary by a picture of the Spaniards' progress.

" Since your letter," he said,^ " you have seen the course of

* Bameveld to Winwood, 14 Sept. 1611 (MS., van Deventer.)

14 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BABNEVELD. Chap. XL

Spinola with the army of the King and the Archdukes. You
have seen the Prince-Palatine of Neuborg with his forces
maintained by the Pope and other members of the Papistical
League. On the 29th of August they forced Aachen, where
the magistrates and those of the Beformed religion have
been extremely maltreated. Twelve hundred soldiers are
lodged in the houses there of those who profess our religion.
Mulheim is taken and dismantled, and the very houses about
to be torn down. Diiren, Castre, Grevenborg, Orsoy,
Duisburg, Buhrort, and many other towns, obliged to re-
ceive Spanish garrisons. On the 4th of September they
invested Wesel. On the 6th it was held certain that the
cities of Cleve, Emmerich, Bees, and others in that quarter,
had consented to be occupied. The States have put one
hundred and thirty-five companies of foot (about 14,000
men) and 4000 horse and a good train of artillery in the
field, and sent out some ships of war. Prince Maurice left
the Hague on the 4th of September to assist Wesel, succour
the Prince of Brandenburg, and oppose the hostile proceed-
ings of Spinola and the Palatine of Neuburg. . . . Consider,
I pray you, this state of things, and think how much heed
they have paid to the demands of the Kings of Great
Britain and France to abstain from hostilities. Be sure that
without our strong garrison in Julich they would have
snapped up every city in Julich, Cleve, and Berg. But
they will now try to make use of their slippery tricks, their
progress having been arrested by our army. The Prince of
Neuburg is sending his chancellor here ^ cum mediia compo-
nendae pads" in appearance good and reasonable, in reality
deceptive. ... If their Majesties, My Lords the States, and
the princes of the Union, do not take an energetic resolution
for making head t^ainst their designs, behold their League
in full vigour and ours without soul. Neither the strength
nor the wealth of the States are sufficient of themselves to

1614 SUPINENESS OF THE PROTESTANTS. 16

withstand their ambitious and dangerous designs. We see
the possessory princes treated as enemies upon their own
estates, and many thousand souls of the Reformed religion
cruelly oppressed by the Papistical League. For myself I
am confirmed in my apprehensions and believe that neither
our religion nor our Union can endure such indignities.
The enemy is makmg use of the minority in France and
the divisions among the prmces of Germany to their great
advantage. ... I believe that the singular wisdom of his
Majesty will enable him to apply promptly the suitable
remedies, and that your Parliament will make no diflSculty
in acquitting itself well in repairing those disorders."

The year dragged on to its close. The supineness of the
Protestants deepened in direct proportion to the feverish
increase of activity on the part of Austria and the League.
The mockery of negotiation in which nothing could be
negotiated, the parade of conciliation when war of extermina-
tion was intended, continued on the part of Spain and
Austria. Bameveld was doing his best to settle all minor
differences between the States and Great Britain, that these
two bulwarks of Protestantism might stand firmly together
against the rising tide. He instructed the Ambassador to
exhaust every pacific means of arrangement in regard to the
Greenland fishery disputes, the dyed cloth question, and
like causes of ill feeling. He held it more than necessary,
he said, that the inhabitants of the two countries should now
be on the very best terms with each other. Above all, he
implored the King through the Ambassador to summon
Parliament in order that the kingdom might be placed in
position to face the gathering danger.

" I am amazed and distressed," he said,^ " that the states-
men of England do not comprehend the perils with which
their fellow religionists are everywhere threatened, especially

> Bameveld to Caron, 21 Nov. 1614 (Hagae Archives MS.)

16 THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

in Germany and in these States. To assist us with bare advice
and sometimes with traducing our actions^ while leaving
us to bear alone the burthens^ costs^ and dangers^ is not
serviceable to us." Referring to the information and advice
which he had sent to England and to France fifteen months
before, he now gave assurance that the Prince of Neuburg
and Spinola were now in such force, both foot and cavalr}*^,
with all necessary munitions, as to hold these most im-
portant territories as a perpetual " sedem belli," out of which
to attack Germany at their pleasure and to cut off all pos-
sibility of aid from England and the States. He informed
the court of St. James that besides the forces of the
Emperor and the House of Austria, the Duke of Bavaria and
Spanish Italy, there were now several thousand horse and
foot under the Bishop of Wiirzburg, 8000 or 9000 under
the Bishop-Elector of Mayence, and strong bodies of
cavalry under Count Vaudemont in Lorraine, all mustering
for the war. The pretext was merely to reduce Frankfurt to
obedience, even as Donauworth had previously been used as
a colour for vast designs. The real purpose was to bring the
Elector-Palatine and the whole Protestant party in Germany
to submission. " His Majesty," said the Advocate, " has now
a very great and good subject upon which to convoke Parlia-
ment and ask for a large grant. This would be doubtless con-
sented to if Parliament receives the assurance that the money
thus accorded shall be applied to so wholesome a purpose.
You will do your best to further this great end. We are
waiting daily to hear if the Xanten negotiation is broken
off or not. I hope and I fear. Meantime we bear as heavy
burthens as if we were actually at war."

He added once more the warning, which it would seem
superfluous to repeat even to schoolboys in diplomacy, that
this Xanten treaty, as proposed by the enemy, was a mere
trap.

1614. GREAT ACTIVITT OP AUSTRIA AND THE LEAGUE. 17

Spinola and Neuborg, in case of the mutual disbanding^
stood ready at an instant's warning to re-enlist for the League
not only all the troops that the Catholic army should
nominally discharge, but those which would be let loose
fix)m the States' army and that of Brandenbuig as well. They
would hold Bheinberg, Groll, Lingen, Oldenzaal, Wachten-
donk, Maestricht, Aachen, and Mulheim with a permanent
force of more than 20,000 men. And they could do all this
in four days' time.

A week or two later all his prophesies had been fulfilled.
" The Prince of Neuburg," he said, " and Marquis Spinola
have made game of us most impudently in the matter of
the treaty.^ This is an indignity for us, their Majesties, and
the electors and princes. We regard it as intolerable. A
despatch came from Spain forbidding a further step in the
negotiation without express order from the King, The
Prince and Spinola are gone to Brussels, the ambassadors
have returned to the Hague, the armies are established in
winter-quarters. The cavalry are ravaging the debateable
land and living upon the inhabitants at their discretion.
M. de Refuge is gone to complain to the Archdukes of the
insult thus put upon his sovereign. Sir Henry Wotton is
still here. We have been plunged into an immensity of extra-
ordinary expense, and are amazed that at this very moment
England should demand money from us when we ought to
be assisted by a large subsidy by her. We hope that now
at least his Majesty will take a vigorous resolution and not
suffer his grandeur and dignity to be vilipended longer.
If the Spaniard is successful in this step, he is ready for
greater ones, and will believe that mankind is ready to bear
and submit to everything. His Majesty is the first king of
the religion. He bears the title of Defender of the Faith.

* Barneveld to Caron, without date (late in 1614). (Hague Aichives MS.)
"... hebben het tractaet spottelyk geilludeert."

VOL. 11.

18 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BABNEVELD. Chap. XL

His religion^ his only daughter, his son-in-law, his grandson
are all especially interested besides his own dignity, besides
the common weal/' ^

He then adverted to the large subsidies from Queen Eliza-
beth many years before, guaranteed, it was true, by the cau-
tionary towns, and to the gallant English regiments, sent by
that great sovereign, which had been fighting so long and so
splendidly in the Netherlands for the common cause of Pro-
testantism and liberty. Yet England was far weaker then,
for she had always her northern frontier to defend against
Scotland, ever ready to strike her in the back. " But now
his Majesty," said Bameveld, "is King of England and
Scotland both. His frontier is free. Ireland is at peace.
He possesses quietly twice as much as the Queen ever did.
He is a king. Her Majesty was a woman. The King has
children and heirs. His nearest blood is engaged in this
issue. His grandeur and dignity have been wronged. Each
one of these considerations demands of itself a manly resolu-
tion. You will do your best to further it."

The almost ubiquitous power of Spain, gaining after
its exhaustion new life through the strongly developed
organization of the League, and the energy breathed into
that mighty conspiracy against human liberty by the infinite
genius of the " cabinet of Jesuits," was not content with over-
shadowing Germany, the Netherlands, and England, but was
threatening Savoy with 40,000 men, determined to bring
Charles Emmanuel either to perdition or submission.

Like England, France was spell-bound by the prospect of
Spanish marriages, which for her at least were not a chimera,
and looked on composedly while Savoy was on point of being
sacrificed by the common invader of independent nationality
whether Protestant or Catholic. Nothing ever showed more
strikingly the force residing in singleness of purpose with

> Bameyeld to Coron, without date (late in 1614). (Hogae AichiTee MB.)

1614. HE STRIVES TO OBTAIN HELP FROM ENGLAND. 19

breadth and unity of design than all these primary move-
ments of the great war now b^inning. The chances super-
ficially considered were vastly in favour of the Protestant
cause. In the chief lands, under the sceptre of the younger
branch of Austria, the Protestants outnumbered the Catholics
by nearly ten to one. Bohemia, the Austrias, Moravia, Silesia,
Hungary were filled fall of the spirit of Huss, of Luther, and
even of Calvin. If Spain was a unit, now that the Moors
and Jews had been expelled, and the heretics of Castillo and
Aragon burnt into submission, she had a most lukewarm ally
in Venice, whose policy was never controlled by the Church,
and a dangerous neighbour in the warlike, restless, and adven-
turous House of Savoy, to whom geographical considerations
were ever more vital than religious scruples. A sincere
alliance of France, the very flower of whose nobility and
people inclined to the Reformed religion, was impossible,
even if there had been fifty infantes to espouse fifty
daughters of France. Great Britain, the Netherlands, and
the united princes of Germany seemed a solid and serried
phalanx of Protestantism, to break through which should be
hopeless. Yet at that moment, so pregnant with a mon-
strous future, there was hardly a sound Protestant policy
anywhere but in Holland. How long would that policy
remain sound and united ? How long would the Republic
speak through the imperial voice of Bameveld ? Time was
to show and to teach many lessons. The united princes of
Germany were walking, talking, quarrelling in their sleep ;
England and France distracted and bedrugged, while Maxi-
milian of Bavaria and Ferdinand of Gratz, the cabinets of
Madrid and the Vatican, were moving forward to their aims
slowly, steadily, relentlessly as Fate. And Spain was more
powerful than she had been since the Truce began. In five
years she had become much more capable of aggression.
She had strengthened her positions in the Mediterranean by

20 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BABNEVELD. Chap. XL

the acquisition and enlargement of considerable fortresses
in Barbary and along a large sweep of the African coast, so
as to be almost supreme in Africa. It was necessary for the
States, the only power save Turkey that could face her in
those waters, to maintain a perpetual squadron of war ships
there to defend their commerce against attack from the
Spaniard and from the corsairs, both Mahometan and
Christian, who infested every sea. Spain was redoubtable
everywhere, and the Turk, engaged in Persian campaigns,
was offering no diversion against Hungary and Vienna.

" Reasons of state worthy of his Majesty's consideration
and wisdom," said Bameveld,^ "forbid the King of Great
Britain from permitting the Spaniard to give the law in
Italy. He is about to extort obedience and humiliation
from the Duke of Savoy, or else vrith 40,000 men to
mortify and ruin him, while entirely assuring himself of
France by the double marriages. Then comes the attack
on these Provinces, on Protestant Germany, and all other
states and realms of the religion."'

With the turn of the year, affairs were growing darker
and darker. The League was rolling up its forces in all
directions ; its chiefs proposed absurd conditions of pacifica-
tion, while war was already raging, and yet scarcely any
government but that of the Netherlands paid heed to the
rising storm. James, fatuous as ever, listened to Gondemar,
and wrote admonitory letters to the Archduke. It was still
gravely proposed by the Catholic party that there should be
mutual disbanding in the duchies, with a guarantee from
Marquis Spinola that there should be no more invasion of
those territories. But powers and pledges from the King
of Spain were what he needed.

To suppose that the Republic and her allies would wait
quietly, and not lift a finger until blows were actually

^ Bameveld to Caron, without date (late in 1614). (Hague Archives MS.)

1615. GREAT ACTlVITr OP AUSTRIA AND THE LEAGUE. 21

Btxack against the Protestant electors or cities of Germany,
was expecting too much ingenuousness on the part of states-
men who had the interests of Protestantism at heart. What
they wanted was the signed, sealed, ratified treaty faithfully
carried out. Then if the King of Spain and the Archdukes
were willing to contract with the States never to make an
attempt against the Holy German Empire, but to leave
everything to take its course according to the constitutions,
liberties, and traditions and laws of that empire, under
guidance of its electors, princes, estates, and cities, the
United Provinces were ready, under mediation of the two
kings, their allies and friends, to join in such an arrange-
ment. Thus there might still be peace in Germany, and
religious equality as guaranteed by the " Majesty-Letter,"
and the '^Compromise'' between the two great churches.
Soman and Reformed, be maintained. To bring about this
result was the sincere endeavour of Barneveld, hoping against
hope. For he knew that all was hollowness and sham on
the part of the great enemy. Even as Walsingham almost
alone had suspected and denounced the delusive negotiations
by which Spain continued to deceive Elizabeth and her
diplomatists until the Armada was upon her coasts, and
denounced them to ears that were deafened and souls that
were stupified by the finauds practised upon them, so did
Barneveld, who had vritnessed all that stupendous trickery
of a generation before, now utter his cries of warning that
Germany might escape in time from her impending doom.

"Nothing but deceit is lurking in the Spanish pro-
TpoBBiSy" he said.* "Every man here wonders that the
English government does not comprehend these malver-
sations. Truly the affair is not to be made straight by new
propositions, but by a vigorous resolution of his Majesty.
It is in the highest degree necessary to the salvation of
> Barneveld to Caron, 15 Jan. 1615. (Hagoe Archives MS.)

22 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF 3ARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

GhriBtendom^ to the conservation of his Majesty^s dignity
and greatness, to the service of the princes and provinces,
and of all Germany, nor can this vigorous resolution be
longer delayed without enormous disaster to the common

weal I have the deepest afifection for the cause of

the Duke of Savoy, but I cannot further it so long as I
cannot tell what his Majesty specifically is resolved to
do, and what hope is held out from Venice, Germany, and
other quarters. Our taxes are prodigious, the ordinary
and extraordinary, and we have a Spanish army at our
front door."

The armaments, already so great, had been enlarged
during the last month of the year. Yaudemont was at the
head of a further force of 2000 cavalry and 8000 foot, paid
for by Spain and the Pope; 24,000 additional soldiers,
riders and infantry together, had been gathered by
Maximilian of Bavaria at the expense of the League. Even
if the reports were exaggerated, the Advocate thought it
better to be too credulous than as apathetic as the rest of
the Protestants.

"We receive advices every day," he wrote to Caron,*
"that the Spaniards and the Roman League are going
forward with' then- design. They are trying to amuse the
British king and to gain time, in order to be able to deal
the heavier blows. Do all possible duty to procure a timely
and vigorous resolution there. To wait again until we are
anticipated will be fatal to the cause of the Evangelical
electors and princes of Germany and especially of his
Electoral Highness of Brandenburg. We likewise should
almost certainly suffer irreparable damage, and should again
bear our cross, as men said last year in regard to Aachen,
Wesel, and so many other places. The Spaniard is sly,
and has had a long time to contrive how he can throw the

1 BuneTeld to Caion, 19 Jan. 1615. (Hague Archives MS.)

1615. GREAT ACTIVITY OP AUSTRIA AND THE LEAGUE. 23

net over the beads of all our religious allies. Bemember
all the warnings sent from here last year, and how they
were all tossed to the winds, to the ruin of so many of our
co-religionists. If it is now intended over there to keep th
Spaniards in check merely by speeches or letters, it would
be better to say so clearly to our friends. So long as
Parliament is not convoked in order to obtain consents and
subsidies for this most necessary purpose, so long I fail to
believe that this great common cause of Christendom, and
especially of Germany, is taken to heart by England."

He adverted with respectfully subdued scorn to King
James's proposition that Spinola should give a guarantee.
"I doubt if he accepts the suggestion," said Bameveld,
'''^unless as a notorious trick, and if he did, what good would
the promise of Spinola do us ? We consider Spinola a great
commander having the purses and forces of the Spaniards
and the Leaguers in his control ; but should they come into
other hands, he would not be a very considerable personage
for us. And that may happen any day. They don't seem
in England to understand the difference between Prince
Maurice in his relations to our state and that of Marquis
Spinola to his superiors. Try to make them comprehend it.
A promise from the Emperor, King of Spain, and the
princes of the League, such as his Majesty in his wisdom
has proposed to Spinola, would be most tranquillizing for
all the Protestant princes and estates of the Empire,
especially for the Elector and Electress Palatine, and for
ourselves. In such a case no difficulty would be made on
our side."

After expressing his mind thus freely in regard to James
and his policy, he then gave the Ambassador a word of
caution in characteristic fashion. "Ci)ytto,"he said, "but
beware of censuring his Majesty's projects. I do not myselt
mean to censure them, nor are they publicly laughed at

24

THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

here, but look closely at everything that comes from
Brussels, and let me know with diligence/' ^

And even as the Advocate was endeavouring with every
effort of his skill and reason to stir the sluggish James into
vigorous resolution in behalf of his own children, as well as
of the great cause of Protestantism and national liberty,
so was he striving to bear up on his strenuous shoulders
the youthful king of France, and save him from the swollen
tides of court intrigue and Jesuitical influence fast sweeping
him to destruction.

He had denounced the recent and paltry proposition made
on the part of the League, and originally suggested by
James, as a most open and transparent trap, into which none
but the blind would thrust themselves. The Treaty of
Xanten, carried out as it had been signed and guaranteed
by the great Catholic powers, would have brought peace to
Christendom. To accept in place of such guarantee the
pledge of a simple soldier, who to-morrow might be nothing,
was almost too ridiculous a proposal to be answered gravely.
Yet Bameveld through the machinations of the Catholic
party was denounced both at the English and French
courts as an obstacle to peace, when in reality his powerful
mind and his immense industry were steadily directed to
the noblest possible end — to bring about a solemn engage-
ment on the part of Spain, the Emperor, and the princes of
the League, to attack none of the Protestant powers of Ger-
many, especially the Elector-Palatine, but to leave the laws,
liberties, and privileges of the States within the Empire in
their original condition. And among those laws were the great
statutes of 1609 and 1610, the " Majesty-Letter " and the
'^ Compromise,'' granting full right of religious worship to the

' Barneveld to Oaron, 19 Jan. 1015.
(Hacrae Archives MS.) ** CogUaxoBieT
wacfit U van te censareeren S. M"
piojecten, gely kick cook niet verstae

te doen ende zyn oock alhier int pu-
bliek nyet bespot, maer let wel wat
van Brassel koniem," &c.

iei5. HE STRIVES TO OBTAIN HELP FROM ENGLAND. 25

Protestants of the Kingdom of Bohemia. If ever a policy
deserved to be called truly liberal and truly conservative, it
was the policy thus steadily maintained by Bameveld.

Adverting to the subterfuge by which the Catholic party
had sought to set aside the treaty of Xanten, he instructed
Langerac, the States' ambassador in Paris, and his own pupil,
to make it clear to the French government that it was im-
possible that in such arrangements the Spanish armies would
not be back again in the duchies at a moment's notice. It
could not be imagined even that they were acting sincerely.

" If their upright intention," he said,^ " is that no actual,
hostile, violent attack shall be made upon- the duchies, or
upon any of the princes, estates, or cities of the Holy
Empire, as is required for the peace and tranquillity of
Christendom, and if all the powers interested therein will
come into a good and solid convention to that effect. My
Lords the States will gladly join in such undertaking and
bind themselves as firmly as the other powers. If no
infraction of the laws and liberties of the Holy Empire
be attempted, there will be peace for Germany and its
neighbours. But the present extravagant proposition
can only lead to chicane and quarrels. To press such a
measure is merely to inflict a disgrace ' upon us. It is an
attempt to prevent us from helping the Elector-Palatine
and the other Protestant princes of Germany and co-
religionists everywhere against hostile violence. For the
Elector-Palatine can receive aid firom us and from Great
Britain through the duchies only. It is plainly the object
of the enemy to seclude us from the Palatine and the rest
of Protestant Germany. It is very suspicious that the
proposition of Prince Maurice, supported by the two kings
and the united princes of Germany, has been rejected,"

> Barneveld to Langerac, Jan. 1615. (Hagae Archives MS.)
• "Schandvlet"

26 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

The Advocate knew well enough that the religions
franchises granted by the House of Habsburg at the very
moment in which Spain signed her peace with the Nether-
lands, and exactly as the mad duke of Cleve was expiring —
with a dozen princes, Catholic and Protestant, to dispute his
inheritance — would be valuable just so long as they could
be maintained by the united forces of Protestantism and of
national independence and no longer. What had been ex-
torted from the Catholic powers by force would be retracted
by force whenever that force could be concentrated. It had
been necessary for the Republic to accept a twelve years^
truce with Spain in de&ult of a peace, while the death of
John of Cleve, and subsequently of Henry IV., had made the
acquisition of a permanent pacification between Catholicism
and Protestantism, between the League and the Union, more
difficult than ever. The so-called Thirty Years' War —
rather to be called the concluding portion of the Eighty
Years' War — ^had opened in the debateable duchies exactly
at the moment when its forerunner, the forty years' war of
the Netherlands, had been temporarily and nominally sus-
pended. Bameveld was perpetually baffled in his efforts
to obtain a favourable peace for Protestant Europe, less by
the open diplomacy and military force of the avowed
enemies of Protestantism than by the secret intrigues
and faintheartedness of its nominal friends. He was un-
wearied in his efforts simultaneously to arouse the courts
of England and France to the danger to Europe from
the overshadowing power of the House of Austria and the
League, and he had less difficulty in dealing with the
Catholic Lewis and his mother than with Protestant James.
At the present moment his great designs were not yet
openly traversed by a strong Protestant party within the
very republic which he administered.

" Look to it with earnestness and grave deliberation," he

1615. HE STRIVES TO OBTAIN HELP FROM ENGLAND. 27

said to Langerac,^ ^^ that they do not pursue us there with
Tain importunity to accept something so notoriously inad-
missible and detrimental to the conmion weaL We know
that from the enemy's side every kind of unseemly trick is
employed; with the single object of bringing about mis-
understanding between us and the King of France. A
prompt and vigorous resolution on the part of his Majesty,
to see the treaty which we made duly executed, would be
to help the. cause. Otherwise, not. We cannot here believe
that his Majesty, in this first year of his majority, will
submit to such a notorious and flagrant al&ont, or that he
will tolerate the oppression of the Duke of Savoy. Such an
affiiir in the beginning of his Majesty's reign cannot but
have very great and prejudicial consequences, nor can it
be left to linger on in uncertainty and delay. Let him be
prompt in this. Let him also take a most Christian-kingly,
vigorous resolution against the great affront put upon him
in the failure to carry out the treaty. Such a resolve on
the part of the two kings would restore all things to
tranquillity and bring the Spaniard and his adherents ^in
terminoa modestiae' But so long as France is keeping a
suspicious eye upon England, and England upon France,
eveiything wiU run to combustion, detrimental to their
Majesties and to us, and ruinous to all the good in-
habitants."

To the Treaty of Xanten faithfully executed he held as to
an anchor in the tempest until it was torn away, not by
violence from without, but by insidious mutiny within. At
last the government of James proposed that the pledges on
leaving the territory should be made to the two allied kings
as mediators and umpires. This was better than the naked
promises originally suggested, but even in this there was
neither heartiness nor sincerity. Meantime the Prince

' Bameveld to LaDgerac, Jan. 1615. (Hague Arcbivefl MS.)

28

THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BABNBVELD.

Chap. XL

of Neuburg, negotiations being broken off, departed for
Q^rmanj, a step which the Advocate considered ^ ominous.
Soon afterwards that prince received a yearly pension of
24^000 crowns from Spain, and for this stipend his claims
on the sovereignty of the duchies were supposed to be sur-
rendered.

** If this be true/' said Bameveld, " we have been served
with covered dishes.^' *

The King of England wrote spirited and learned letters
to the Elector-Palatine, assuring him of his father-in-law's
assistance in case he should be attacked by the League.
Sir Henry Wotton, then on special mission at the Hague,
showed these epistles to Bameveld.

^' When I hear that Parliament has been assembled and
has granted great subsidies/' was the Advocate's comment,
''I shall believe that e£fects may possibly follow firom all
these assurances."

It was wearisome for the Advocate thus ever to be foiled,
by the pettinesses and jealousies of those occupying the
highest earthly places, in his efforts to stem the rising tide
of Spanish and Catholic aggression, and to avert the out-
break of a devastating war to which he saw Europe doomed.
It may be wearisome to read the record. Yet it is the
chronicle of Christendom during one of the most important
and fateful epochs of modem history. No man can
thoroughly understand the complication and precession of
phenomena attending the disastrous dawn of the renewed
war, on an even more awful scale than the original conflict
in the Netherlands, without studying the correspondence of
Bameveld. The history of Europe is there. The fate of
Christendom is there. The conflict of elements, the crash

> Bameveld to Caron. 9 Peb. 1615.
(Hague Archives MS.) Same to Lan-
geTac,10Feb.l615. (MS. ibid.) Same
to same, 26 Peb. 1615. (MS. ibid.)

• ** Indien dit waer is worden wj
nit gedeckte plateelen fredient."
Same to same, 9 Mav 1615. (M^
ibidj

1615. BABNEVELD PRIME MINISTER OF PROTESTANTISM. 29

of contending forms of religion and of nationalities, is
pictured there in vivid if homely colours. The Advocate,
while acting only in the name of a slender confederacy, wao
in truth, so long as he held his place, the prime minister of
European Protestantism. There was none other to rival
him, few to comprehend him, fewer stiU to sustain him. As
Prince Maurice was at that moment the great soldier of
Protestantism without clearly scanning the grandeur of the
field in which he was a chief actor, or foreseeing the vastness
of its future, so the Advocate was its statesman and its
prophet. Could the two have worked together as harmo-
niously as they had done at an earlier day, it would have
been a blessing for the conmion weal of Europe. But, alas I
the evil genius of jealousy, which so often forbids cordial
relations between soldier and statesman, already stood
shrouded in the distance, darkly menacing the strenuous j

patriot, who was wearing his life out in exertions foi"
what he deemed the true cause of progress and humanity.

Nor can the fate of the man himself, his genuine cha-
racter, and the extraordinary personal events towards which
he was slowly advancing, be accurately unfolded without an
attempt by means of his letters to lay bare his inmost
thoughts. Especially it will be seen at a later moment how
much value was attached to this secret correspondence with
the ambassadors in London and Paris. i

The Advocate trusted to the support of France, Papal and
Medicean as the court of the young king was, because the
Protestant party throughout the kingdom was too powerful,
warlike, and numerous to be trifled with, and because geo-
graphical considerations alone rendered a cordial alliance
between Spain and France very di£Gicult. Notwithstanding
the Spanish marriages, which he opposed so long as opposi-
tion was possible, he knew that so long as a statesman
remained in the kingdom, or a hope for one existed, the

30 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BAENEVELD. Chap. XL

international policy of Henry, of SuUy, and of Jeannin could
not be wholly abandoned.

He relied much on Villeroy, a political hack certainly, an
ancient Leaguer, and a Papist, but a man too cool, expe-
rienced, and wily to be ignorant of the very hornbook of
diplomacy, or open to the shallow stratagems by which
Spain found it so easy to purchase or to deceive. So long
as he had a voice in the council, it was certain that the
l^etherland alliance would not be abandoned, nor the Duke
of Savoy crushed. The old secretary of state was not
especially in favour at that moment, but Bameveld could
not doubt his permanent place in French affairs until some
man of real power should arise there. It was a dreary
period of barrenness and disintegration in that kingdom
while France was mourning Henry and waiting for Richelieu.

The Dutch ambassador at Paris was instructed accordingly
to maintain good relations with Villeroy, who in Bameveld's
opinion had been a constant, and sincere friend to the
Netherlands. ^^ Don't forget to caress the old gentleman
you wot of," said the Advocate frequently, but sup-
pressing his name, "without troubling yourself with the
reasons mentioned in your letter. I am firmly convinced
that he will overcome all diificulties. Don't believe either
that France will let the Duke of Savoy be ruined. It is
against every reason of State." ^ Yet there were few to help
Charles Emmanuel in this Montferrat war, which was destined
to drag feebly on, with certain interludes of negotiations, for
two years longer. The already notorious condottiere Ernest
Mansfeld, natural son of old prince Peter Ernest, who played
so long and so high a part in command of the Spanish
armies in the Netherlands, had, to be sure, taken service
under the Duke. Thenceforth he was to be a leader and a

^ Barnereld to Langerac, 10 Peb. 1615. (Hagae Archives MS.) Same to
same, 21 Nov. 1615. (MS. ibid.)

MANSFELD TAKES BERVICE WITH CHABLES EMMANUEL. 31

master in that wild business of plunder^ burning^ black-
mailing, and murder, which was opening upon Europe, and
was to afford occupation for many thousands of adventurers
of high and low degree.

Mansfeld, reckless and profligate, had already changed his
banner more than once. Commanding a company under Leo-
pold in the duchies, he had been captured by the forces of the
Union, and, after waiting in vain to be ransomed by the Arch-
duke, had gone secretly over to the enemy.* Thus recovering
his liberty, he had enlisted a regiment under Leopold's name
to fight the Union, and had then, according to contract, trans-
ferred himself and most of his adventurers to the flag of the
Union. The military operations fading away in the duchies
without being succeeded by permanent peace, the Count, as
he was called, with no particular claim to such title, had
accepted a thousand florins a year as retainer from the
Union and had found occupation under Charles Emmanuel.
Here the Spanish soldier of a year or two before found much
satisfaction and some profit in fighting Spanish soldiers. He
was destined to reappear in the Netherlands, in France,
in Bohemia, in many places where there were villages to be
burned, churches to bo plundered, cities to be sacked, nuns
and other women to be outraged, dangerous political intrigues
to be managed. A man in the prime of his age, fair-haired,
prematurely wrinkled, battered, and hideous of visage, with a
hare-lip and a humpback ; slovenly of dress, and always wear-
ing an old grey hat without a band to it ; ' audacious, cruel,
crafty, and licentious — such was Ernest Mansfeld, whom
some of his contemporaries spoke of as Ulysses Germanicus,
others as the new Attila, all as a scourge to the human race.
The cockneys of Paris called him " Machefer,'' and nurses

' GHndely, 'Geschichte des diei-
ssi^&hrigen Kriegs/ i. 887, sqq.
This eminent historian calls Mans-

feld *'the remarkable forerunner of
Waldstein."
* Dn Maorier, 234

32

THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BABNEYELD. Chap. XL

long kept children quiet by threatening them with that
word. He was now enrolled on the Protestant side, although
at the moment serving Savoy against Spain in a question
purely personal. His armies, whether in Italy or in
Germany, were a miscellaneous collection of adventurers
of high and low degree, of all religions, of all countries,
unfrocked priests and students, ruined nobles, bankrupt
citizens, street vagabonds— earliest type perhaps of the
horrible military vermin which wero destined to feed so
many years long on the unfortunate dismembered carcass
of Q-ermany.^

Many demands had been made upon the States for assist-
ance to Savoy, as if they and they alone were to bear the
brunt and pay the expense of all the initiatory campaigns
against Spain.

" We are much importuned," said the Advocate, " to do
something for the help of Savoy. . . . We wish and we
implore that France, Great Britain, the German princes, the
Venetians, and the Swiss would join us in some scheme of
effective assistance. But we have enough on our shoulders
at this moment." *

They had hardly money enough in their exchequer,
admirably ordered as it was, for enterprises so far from
home when great Spanish armies were permanently encamped
on their border.

Partly to humour King James and partly from love of

1 See <' Acta Mansfeldica/' 1623,
auoted by the historian Wolfgang
Menzel, ill. 224.

* Barneveld to Langerac, 29 April
1615. (Ha^ae Archives MS.)

In a later letter the Advocate in-
Ibrmed the Ambassador that Cbnnt
John had gone to the Dnke with ex-
cuses from the States for not com-
plying with the reqaest in his letters,
on account of their actual and nearer
dangers and heavy burdens, but with

their hopes that, if the Spaniard
could not be brought to reasonable
conditions, a common plan of aaalBt-
ance would be made with the kings,
princes, and republics, their friends,
to help him against violence and op-
pression. Count John took with him
twenty or thirty adventurers, and
meant to raise a couple of companies
of riders in Germany for the service
of Savov. Same to same, 17 May
1615. (ibid.)

1015. COUNT JOHN OP NASSAU GOBS TO SAVOY. 33

adventure, Oount John of Najssau had gone to Savoy at the
bead of a small well disciplined body of troops famished by
the States.

" Make use of this piece of news/' said Bameveld, com-
municating the fact to Langerac/ ^^opportunely and with
discretion. Besides the wish to give some contentment to
the King of Great Britain, we consider it inconsistent with
good conscience and reasons of state to refuse help to a great
prince against oppression by those who mean to give the
law to everybody ; especially as we have been so earnestly
and frequently importuned to do so."

And still the Spaniards and the League kept their hold
on the duchies, while their forces, their munitions, their
accumulation of funds waxed hourly. The war of chicane
was even more deadly than an actual campaign, for when
there was no positive fighting the whole world seemed
against the Bepublic. And the chicane was colossal.

" We cannot understand," said Bameveld,^ " why M. de
Frevaulx is coming here on special mission. When a treaty
is signed and sealed, it only remains to execute it. The
Archduke says he is himself not known in the treaty, and
that nothing can be demanded of him in relation to it.
This he says in his letters to the King of Great Britain.
M. de Befuge knows best whether or not Marquis Spinola,
Ottavio Visconti, Chancellor Pecquius, and others, were em-
ployed in the negotiation by the Archduke. We know very
well here that the whole business was conducted by them.
The Archduke is willing to give a clean and sincere promise
not to re-occupy, and asks the same firom the States. If he
were empowered by the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the
League, and acted in such quality, something might be done
for the tranquillity of Germany. But he promises for

» Bameveld to Lan^rac, 17 May 1615. (Hapme Archives MS.)
* Same to same, 26 Feb. 1615. (Hague Archives MS.)

VOL. II. I>

34 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

himself only, and Emperor, King, or League, may send any
general to do what they like to-morrow. What ia to pre-
vent it ?

" And BO My Lords the States, the Elector of Brandenburg,
and others interested are cheated and made fools of. And
we are as much troubled by these tricks as by armed force.
Yes, more ; for we know that great enterprises are preparing
this year against Germany and ourselves, that all Neuburg's
troops have been disbanded and re-enlisted under the
Spanish commanders, and that forces are levying not only
in Italy and Spain, but in Germany, Lorraine, Luxemburg,
and Upper Bui^ndy, and that Wesel has been stuffed full
of gunpowder and other munitions, and very strongly
fortified."

For the States to agree to a treaty by which the disputed
duchies should be held jointly by the Princes of Neuburg
and of Brandenburg, and the territory be evacuated by all
foreign troops ; to look quietly on while Neuburg converted
himself to Catholicism, espoused the sister of Maximilian of
Bavaria, took a pension from Spain, resigned his claims in
favour of Spain, and transferred his army to Spain ; and
to expect that Brandenburg and all interested in Branden-
burg, that is to say, every Protestant in Europe, should
feel perfectly easy under such arrai^ment and perfectly
protected by the simple promise of a soldier of fortune
against Catholic aggression, was a fantastic folly hardly
worthy of a child. Yet the States were asked to accept
this position, Brandenburg and all Protestant Germany were
asked to accept it, and Bameveld was howled at by his
allies as a marplot and mischief-maker, and denounced and
insulted by diplomatists daily, because he mercilessly tore
away the sophistries of the League and of the League's
secret fiiend, James Stuart.

The King of Spain had more than 100,000 men under

1615. SLIPPERY CONDUCT OP JAMEa 35

arms, and was enlisting more soldiers everywhere and
every day, had just deposited 4,000,000 crowns with his
Antwerp bankers for a secret purpose,^ and all the time
was exuberant in his assurances of peace. One would have
thought that there had never been negotiations in Bourbourg,
that the Spanish Armada had never sailed from Coruna.

" You are wise and prudent in France,'' said the Advocate,^
^^ but we are used to Spanish proceedings, and from much
disaster sustained are filled with distrust. The King of
England seems now to wish that the Archduke should draw
up a document according to his good pleasure, and that the
States should make an explanatory deed, which the King
should sign also and ask the King of France to do the same.
But this is very hazardous.

" We do not mean to receive laws from the King of Spain,
nor the Archduke. . . . The Spanish proceedings do not
indicate peace but war. One must not take it ill of us that
wo think these matters of grave importance to our friends
and ourselves. Affairs have changed very much in the last
four months. The murder of the first vizier of the Turkish
emperor and his designs against Persia leave the Spanish
king and the Emperor free from attack in that quarter, and
their armaments are far greater than last year. ... I cannot
understand why the treaty of Xanten, formerly so highly
applauded, should now be so much disapproved. . . . The
King of Spain and the Emperor with their party have a vast
design to give the law to all Christendom, to choose a
Roman king according to their will, to reduce the Evan-
gelical electors, princes, and estates of Germany to obedience,
to subject all Italy, and, having accomplished this, to proceed
to triumph over us and our allies, and by necessary con-
sequence over France and England. They say they have
established the Emperor's authority by means of Aachen and

' Bameveld to Langerac, 26 Feb. 1615. (Hague Arch. MS.) • Ibid.

36 THE LIFE OF JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

Miilheim, will soon have driven us out of Jiilich, and have
thus arranged matters entirely to their heart's content They
can then, in name of the Emperor, the League, the Prince
of Neuburg, or any one else, make themselves in eight
days masters of the places which they are now imaginarily
to leave, as well as of those which we are actually to sur-
render, and by possession of which we could hold out a long
time against all their power/' ^

Those very places held by the States — Julich, Emmerich,
and others — ^had recently been fortified ^ at much expense,
under the superintendence of Prince Maurice, and by advice
of the Advocate. It would certainly be an act of madness
to surrender them on the terms proposed. These warnings
and forebodings of Bameveld sound in our ears like recorded
history, yet they were far earlier than the actual facts.
And now to please the English king, the States had listened
to his suggestion that his name and that of the King of
France should be signed as mediators to a new arrangement
proposed in lieu of the Xanten treaty. James had sug-
gested this, Lewis had agreed to it. Yet before the ink
had dried in James's pen, he was proposing that the names
of the mediating sovereigns should be omitted from the
document 1 And why ? Because Gondemar was again
whispering in his ear. " They are renewing the negotiations
in England," said the Advocate, " about the alliance between
the Prince of Wq.les and the second daughter of Spain ;
and the King of Great Britain is seriously importuning
us that the Archdukes and My Lords the States should
make their pledges impersonaUter and not to the kings." ^
James was also willing that the name of the Emperor

' Barneveld to Langerac, 27 Feb.
1615. (Hague Archives MS.)

* Same to same, 29 April, 1615.
(HafTcie Archives MS.)

' Barneveld to Gillis van Leden-
berg, 29 June 1615. (Hague Aichives

MS.) '^ . . dat den Coninck aldaer
serieuse instantien doet dat die Eerts-
hertogen ende M. H. die Staten
haere acten van beloften imperaonali-
ter ende nyet aen de Coninghen
eouden doen/' &c.

1615. SLIPPBEY CONDUCrr OP JAMES. 37

should appear upon it. To prevent this, Bameveld would
have had himself burned at the stake. It would be an
ignominious and unconditional surrender of the whole
cause.

"The Archduke will never be contented/'^ said the
Advocate, "unless his Majesty of Great Britain takes a
royal resolution to bring him to reason. That he tries to
lay the fault on us is pure malice. We have been ready
and are still ready to execute the treaty of Xanten. The
Archduke is the cause of the dispute concerning the act.
We approved the formularies of their Majesties, and have
changed them three times to suit the King of Great
Britain.^ Our Provincial States have been notified in the
matter, so that we can no longer digest the Spanish impu-
dence, and are amazed that his Majesty can listen any more
to the Spanish ministers. We fear that those ministers are
working through many hands, in order by one means or
another to excite quarrels between his Majesty, us, and

the respective inhabitants of the two countries Take

every precaution that no attempt be made there to bring
the name of the Emperor into the act. This would be
contrary to their Majesties' first resolution, very prejudicial
to the Elector of Brandenbuig, to the duchies, and to our-
selves. And it is indispensable that the promise be made
to the two kings as mediators, as much for their reputa-
tion and dignity as for the interests of the Elector, the
territories, and ourselves. Otherwise too the Spaniards will
triumph over us as if they had driven us by force of arms
into this promise.''

The seat of war, at the opening of the apparently
inevitable conflict between the Catholic League and the
Protestant Union, would be those debateable duchies, those

* Bameveld to Caron, 16 May 1615. (Ha^e Archivee MS.)
' ** . . tot syne M** oontemplatie na diiemael verandert."

38 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

border provinces^ the posBession of which was of such vital
importance to each of the great contending parties^ and the
populations of which, although much divided, were on the
whole more inclined to the League than to the Union. It
was natural enough that the Dutch statesman should chafe
at the possibility of their being lost to the Union through
the adroitness of the Catholic mani^ers and the supineness
of the great allies of the Bepublic.

Three weeks later than these last utterances of the Ad-
vocate, he was given to understand that King James was
preparing to slide away from the position which had been
three times changed to make it suitable for him. His
indignation was hot.

" Sir Henry Wotton/' he said, " has communicated to me
his last despatches from Newmarket.^ I am in the highest
degree amazed that after all our efforts at acconmiodation,
with so much sacrifice to the electors, the provinces, and
ourselves, they are trying to urge us there to consent that
the promise be not made to the Kings of France and Great
Britain as mediators, although the proposition came from
the Spanish side. After we had renounced, by desire of his
Majesty, the right to refer the promise to the Treaty of
Xanten, it was judged by both kings to be needful and sub-
stantial that the promise be made to their Majesties. To
change this now would be prejudicial to the kings, to the
electors, the duchies, and to our commonwealth ; to do us a
wrong and to leave us naked. France maintains her position
as becoming and necessary. That Great Britain should
swerve from it is not to be digested here. You will do yout
utmost according to my previous instructions to prevent any
pressure to this end. You will also see that the name of
the Emperor is mentioned neither in the preamble nor the
articles of the treaty. It would be contrary to all our policy

> Bameveld to Caron, 6 June 1615. (Hague ArduveB MS.)

1615. BABNEVELIVS INFLUBKCE GREATEB IN FRANCE. 39

Bince 1610. You may be firmly convinced that malice is
lurldng imder the Emperor's name, and that he and the
King of Spain and their adherents, now as before, are
attempting a sequestration. This is simply a pretext to
bring those principsJities and provinces into the hands of
the Spaniards, for which they have been labouring these
thirty years. We are constantly cheated by these Spanish
tricks. Their intention is to hold Wesel and all the other
places until the conclusion of the Italian affair, and then to
strike a great blow.''

Certainly were never words more full of sound statesman-
ship, and of prophecy too soon to be fulfilled, than these
simple but pregnant warnings. They awakened but little
response from the English government save cavils and
teasing reminders that Wesel had been the cradle of German
Calvinism, the Bhenish Geneva, and that it was sinful to leave
it longer in the hands of Spain.^ As if the Advocate had
not proved to demonstration that to stock hands for a new
deal at that moment was to give up the game altogether.

His influence in France was always greater than in
England, and this had likewise been the case with William
the Silent. And even now that the Spanish matrimonial
alliance was almost a settled matter at the French court,
while with the English king it was but a perpetual will-o'-
the-wisp conducting to quagmires ineffable, the government
at Paris sustained the policy of the Advocate with tolerable
fidelity, while it was constantly and most capriciously
traversed by James.

Bameveld sighed over these approaching nuptials, but did
not yet despair. " We hope that the Spanish-French mar-
riages," he said,^ " may be broken up of themselves ; but we
fear that if we should attempt to delay or prevent them

> Dudley Carleton's Letters, pasrim et ad nmueam.

* Bameveld to Caron, 6 Jnne 1616. (Hagae Aichiyes MS.)

40

THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

authoritatively, or in conjunction with others, the effort
would have the contrary effect."

In this certainly he was doomed to disappointment.

He had already notified the French court of the absolute
necessity of the great points to be insisted upon in the
treaty, and there he found more docility than in London or
Newmarket.^

AU summer he was occupied with this most important
matter, uttering Cassandra-like warnings into ears wilfully
deaf. The States had gone as far as possible in concession.
To go farther would be to wreck the great cause upon the
very quicksands which he had so ceaselessly pointed out.
" We hope that nothing further will be asked of us, no
scruples be felt as to our good intentions,"" he said,^ ^^ and that
if Spain and the Archdukes are not ready now to fulfil the
treaty, their Majesties will know how to resent this trifling
with their authority and dignity, and how to set matters to
rights with their own hands in the duchies. A new treaty,
still less a sequestration, is not to be thought of for a
moment."

Yet the month of August came and still the names of the
mediating kings were not on the treaty, and still the spectre
of sequestration had not been laid. On the contrary, the
peace of Asti, huddled up between Spain and Savoy, to be
soon broken again,^ had caused new and painful appre-
hensions of an attempt at sequestration, for it was established
by several articles in that treaty that all questions between
Savoy and Mantua should be referred to the Emperor's

* Bameveld to Langerac, 17 May
1615. (Hague Archives MS.) "We
hope no more changes wiU be desired,
and above all the name of the Em-
peror must be omitted from the act,
for the whole affair of JtLlich was
originallj undertaken agunst the
Emperor by his late Majesty, the
united electors and princes, and our-

selves. Tlie pledges must be of ne-
cessity given to Uie two kings as
mediators. Otherwise we have no
security whatever, and they will tri-
umph over us."

* Same to same, June 1615.
(Hague Archives MS.)

» Gindely, i. 887.

1615. BRANDENBURG TO APPEAR BEFORE Em>EROa 41

decision.^ TUs precedent was Bore to be followed in the
duchies if not resisted by force, as it had been so successfully
resisted five years before by the armies of the States
associated with those of France. Moreover the first step at
sequestration had been actually taken. The Emperor had
peremptorily summoned the Elector of Brandenburg and
all other parties interested to appear before him on the
Ist of August in Prague.^ There could be but one object in
this citation, to drive Brandenburg and the States out of
the duchies until the Imperial decision as to the legitimate
sovereignty should be given. Neuburg being already dis-
posed of and his claims ceded to the Emperor, what pos-
sibility was there in such circumstances of saving one scrap
of the territory firom the clutch of the League ? None
certainly if the Bepublic faltered in its determination, and
yielded to the cowardly advice of James. " To comply with
the summons,^' said Bameveld, '^and submit to its con-
sequences will be an irreparable injury to the electoral house
of Brandenburg, to the duchies, and to our co-religionists
everywhere, and a very great disgrace to both their Majesties
and to us.'' '

He continued, throtigh the ambassador in London, to hold
up to the King, in respectful but plain language, the shame-
lessness of his conduct in dispensing the enemy from his
pledge to the mediators, when the Republic expressly, in
deference to James, had given up the ampler guarantees of
the treaty. The arrangement had been solemnly made, and
consented to by all the provinces,* acting in their separate
and sovereign capacity. Such a radical change, even if it
were otherwise permissible, could not be made without long
debates, consultations, and votes by the several states.
What could be more fatal at such a crisis than this childish

1 Barneveld to Gaion, 18 Jnlj 1615. (Haffue ATcbives MS.)
« Ibid. « Ibid. < Ibid.

42 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BABNEVELD. Chap. XI.

and causeless delay. There could be no doubt in any
statesman's eyes that the Spanish party meant war and a
preparatory hoodwinking. And it was even worse for the
government of the Republic to be outwitted in diplomacy
than beaten in the field.

" Every man here," said the Advocate, " has more appre-
hension of fraud than offeree. According to the constitution
of our state, to be overcome by superior power must be
endured, but to be overreached by trickery is a reproach to
the government." ^

The summer passed away. The States maintained their
positions in the duchies, notwithstanding the objurgations
of James, and Bameveld remained on his watch-tower ob-
serving every movement of the fast-approaching war, and
refusing at the price of the whole territory in dispute to
rescue Wesel and Aix-la-ChapeUe from the grasp of the
League.

Caron came to the Hague to have personal consultations
with the States-General, the Advocate, and Prince Maurice,
and returned before the close of the year. He had an audi-
ence of the King at the palace of Whitehall early in Novem-
ber, and found him as immovable as ever in his apathetic
attitude in regard to the affairs of Q-ermany. The murder of
Sir Thomas Overbury and the obscene scandals concerning
the King's beloved Carr and his notorious bride were then
occupying the whole attention of the monarch, so that he
had not even time for theological lucubrations, still less for
affairs of state on which the peace of Christendom and the
fate of his own children were hanging.

The Ambassador found him sulky and dictatorial, but
insisted on expressing once more to him the apprehensions
felt by the States-General in regard to the trickery of the
Spanish party in the matter of Cleve and Jiilich. He

' Bameveld to Caron, 3 Aug. 1615. (Hagae Archives MS.)

1615.

SEQUESTRATION FEARED.

43

assured his Majesty that they had no intention of maintain-
ing the Treaty of Xanten^ and respectfully requested that
the King would no longer urge the States to surrender the
places held by them. It was a matter of vital importance
to retain them, he said.^

" Sir Henry Wotton told me," replied James, " that
the States at his arrival were assembled to deliberate
on this matter, and he had no doubt that they would take
a resolution in conformity with my intention. Now I see
very well that you don't mean to give up the places. If I
had known that before, I should not have warned the Arch-
duke so many times, which I did at the desire of the States
themselves. And now that the Archdukes are ready to
restore their cities, you insist on holding yours. That is the
dish you set before me."

And upon this James swore a mighty oath, and beat
himself upon the breast.'

"Now and nevermore will I trouble myself about the
States' afeirs, come what come will," he continued. "I
have always been upright in my words and my deeds, and
I am not going to embark myself in a wicked war because
the States have plunged themselves into one so entirely
unjust. Next summer the Spaniard means to divide him-
self into two or three armies in order to begin his enterprises
in Germany."

Caron respectfully intimated that these enterprises would
be most conveniently carried on from the very advantageous
positions which he occupied in the duchies. " No," said the
King, " he must restore them on the same day on which you
make your surrender, and he will hardly come back in a
hurry."

* Caron to the Statefl^General, 7
Nov. 1615. (Hagrue Archives MS.)
. dat is het plat in effecte

i n

voor mj, seyde i^yne Ma't ; tselve bo-
vestigende met grooten eede et op
haer boret slaende." — Ibid,

44

THE UFB OP JOHN OP BARNBVBLD.

Chap. XI.

" Quite the contrary/' said the Ambassador, " they will be
back again in a t^vinkling, and before we have the slightest
warning of their intention."

But it signified not the least what Caron said. The
King continued to vociferate that the States had never had
any intention of restoring the cities.

*'You mean to keep them for yonrselves," he cried,
" which is the greatest injustice that could be perpetrated.
You have no right to them, and they belong to' other
people."

The Ambassador reminded him that the Elector of Bran-
denburg was well satisfied that they should be occupied by
the States for his greater security and until the dispute
should be concluded.

"And that will never be," said James; "never, never.
The States are powerful enough to carry on the war all
alone and against all the world." ^

And so he went on, furiously reiterating the words with
which he had begun the conversation, "without accepting
any reasons whatever in payment," as poor Caron observed.

" It makes me very sad," said the Ambassador, " to find
your Majesty so impatient and so resolved. K the names of
the kings are to be omitted from the document, the Treaty
of Xanten should at least be modified accordingly."

" Nothing of the kind," said James ; " I don't understand
it so at all. I speak plainly and without equivocation. It
must be enough for the States that I promise them, in case
the enemy is cheating or is trying to play any trick what-
ever, or is seeking to break the Treaty of Xanten in a single
point, to come to ^heir assistance in person."

And again the warlike James swore a big oath and smote
his breast, affirming that he meant everything sincerely;

1 ti

. de Staten macliticli ende
sterk genoch waren omme aUene
d' oirloge tegen alle de werelt te

doene." — Caron to the States-General.
7 Nov. 1615. (Hague Aicliives MS.)

1615. SEQUESTRATION PEAMDD. 45

that he cheated no one^ but always spoke his thoughts right
on, clearly and uprightly.

It was certainly not a cheerful prospect for the States.
Their chief ally was determined that they should disarm,
should strip themselves naked, when the mightiest con-
spiracy against the religious freedom and international in-
dependence of Europe ever imagined was perfecting itself
before their eyes, and when hostile armies, more numerous
than ever before known, were at their very door. To
wait until the enemy was at their throat, and then to
rely upon a king who trembled at the sight of a drawn
sword, was hardly the highest statesmanship. Even if it
had been the chivalrous Henry instead of the pacific James
that had held out the promise of help, they would have been
mad to follow such counsel.

The conversation lasted more than an hour. It was in
vain that Caron painted in dark colours the cruel deeds
done by the Spaniards in Miilheim and Aachen, and the
proceedings of the Archbishop of Cologne in Rees. The
King was besotted, and no impression could be made upon
him.^

" At any rate,'* said the Envoy, " the arrangement cannot
be concluded without the King of France."

" What excuse is that ?" said James. " Now that the
King is entirely Spanish, you are trying to excuse your
delays by referring to him. You have deferred rescuing
the poor city of Wesel from the hands of the Spaniard long
enough. I am amazed to have heard never a word from
you on that subject since your departure. I had expressed
my wish to you clearly enough that you should inform the
States of my intention to give them any assurance they
chose to demand.''

***... maer bevondt datter niet eaecke."— Caron to the StatefrCten-
met alien Sy. M» en beweechde boo era!, 7 Nov. 1615. (Hague Archiveo
Yerre was hy transporteert in dese MS.)

46 THE L1A3 OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

Caron was mucli disappointed at the humour of his
Majesty. Coming freshly as he did from the council of the
States^ and almost from the seat of war, he had hoped to
convince and content him. But the King was very angry
with the States for putting him so completely in the wrong.
He had also been much annoyed at their having failed to
notify him of their military demonstration in the Electorate
of Cologne to avenge the cruelties practised upon the Pro-
testants there. He asked Caron if he was instructed to give
him information regarding it. Being answered in the
negative, he said he had thought himself of sufficient im-
portance to the States and enough in their confidence to be
apprised of their military movements. It was for this, he
said, that his ambassador sat in their council. Caron ex-
pressed the opinion that warlike enterprises of the kind
should be kept as secret as possible in order to be successful.
This the King disputed, and loudly declared his vexation at
being left in ignorance of the matter. The Ambassador
excused himself as well as he could, on the ground that he
had been in Zealand when the troops were marching, but
told the King his impression that they had been sent to
chastise the people of Cologne for their cruelty in burning
and utterly destroying the city of Miilheim.

'* That is none of your affair," said the King.

" Pardon me, your Majesty," replied Caron, " they are our
fellow religionists, and some one at least ought to resent the
cruelty practised upon them."

The King admitted that the destruction of the city had
been an unheard-of cruelty,^ and then passed on to speak of
the quarrel between the Duke and City of Brunswick, and
other matters. The interview ended, and the Ambassador,
very downhearted, went to confer with the Secretary of State
Sir Ealph Winwood, and Sir Henry Wotton.

'•'... een ongehoirde Wreetheit." — Caion to the States-General, 7 Nov.
1615. (Hi^g^ Archives MS.)

1615.

SEQUESTRATION FEABED.

47

He assured these gentlemen that without fully consulting
the French goyemment these radical changes in the nego-
tiations would never be consented to by the States. Win-
wood promised to confer at once with the French ambas-
sador, admitting it to be impossible for the King to take up
this matter alone. He would also talk with the Archduke^s
ambassador next day noon at dinner, who was about leaving
for Brussels, and ^^ he would put something into his hand
that he might take home with him.''

" When he is fairly gone," said Caron, " it is to be hoped
that the King's head will no longer be so muddled about
these things. I wish it with all my heart." ^

It was a dismal prospect for the States. The one ally on
whom they had a right to depend, the ex-Calvinist and
royal Defender of the Faith, in this mortal combat of Pro-
testantism with the League, was sUpping out of their grasp
with distracting lubricity. On the other hand, the Most
Christian King, a boy of fourteen years, was still in the
control of a mother heart and soul with the League — ^so far
as she had heart or soul — was betrothed to the daughter
of Spain, and saw his kingdom torn to pieces and almost
literally divided among themselves by rebellious princes,
who made use of the Spanish marriages as a pretext for
unceasing civil war.

The Queen-Mother was at that moment at Bordeaux, and
an emissary from the princes was in London. James had
sent to offer his mediation between them and the Queen.
He was fond of mediation. He considered it his special
mission in the world to mediate. He imagined himself
as looked up to by the nations as the great arbitrator of
Christendom, and was wont to issue his decrees as if binding
in force and infallible by nature. He had protested vigor-

' " . . . 800 vertoope ick hy wech
^ynde dat het hooft van den donmck
daermede soo veele niet gebroockeii

en sal woiden, tweick ick wensche
dat alzoo mach gescbieden."

48

THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD.

Chap. XI

ously against the Spanish-French marriages, and dechired
that the princes were justified in formalizing an opposition
to them, at least until affairs in France were restored to
something like order. He warned the Queen against throw-
ing the kingdom ^^into the combustion of war without
necessity/' and declared that, if she would trust to his guid-
ance, she might make use of him as if her affairs were his
own. An indispensable condition for such assistance, how-
ever, would be that the marriages should be put off.^

As James was himself pursuing a Spanish mairiage for his
son as the chief end and aim of his existence, there was
something almost humorous in this protest to the Queen-
Dowager and in his encouragement of mutiny in France in
order to prevent a catastrophe there which he desired at
home.

The same agent of the princes, de Monbaran by name,
was also privately accredited by them to the States with
instructions to borrow 200,000 crowns of them if he could.
But so long as the policy of the Republic was directed by
Bameveld, it was not very probable that, while maintaining
friendly and even intimate relations with the legitimate
government, she would enter into negotiations with rebels
against it, whether princes or plebeians, and oblige them
with loans. " He will call on mc soon, no doubt," said Caron,
" but being so well instructed as to your Mightinesses' in-
tentions in this matter, I hope I shall keep him away from
you."* Monbaran was accordingly kept away, but a few
weeks later another emissary ^ of Cond^ and Bouillon made
his appearance at the Hague, do YaUgny by name. He
asked for money and for soldiers to reinforce Bouillon's city
of Sedan, but he was refused an audience of the States-
G-eneral. Even the martial ardour of Maurice and his

^ Caron to the States-General,
7 Nov. 1815. (Hague Archives MS.)
» Ibid. ' -^

s Bameveld to Caron, 21 Jan. 16ia
(Hague Archives MS.)

1616. SEQUESTRATION FEARED. 49

sympathy for his relatives were cooled by this direct assault
on his pocket. " The Prince/' wrote the French ambassador,
du Maurier, ^^ wiU not famish him or his adherents a thou-
sand crowns, not if they had death between their teeth.
Those who think it do not know how he loves his money.'' ^

In the very last days of the year (1615) Caron had another
interview with the King in which James was very benignant.
He told the Ambassador that he should wish the States to
send him some special commissioners to make a new treaty
with him, and to treat of all unsettled affairs which were
daily arising between the inhabitants of the respective
countries. He wished to make a firmer union and accord
between Great Britain and the Netherlands. He was very
desirous of this, " because," said he, " if we can unite with
and understand each other, we have under God no one what-
ever to fear, however mighty they may be."

Caron duly notified Bameveld of these enthusiastic expres-
sions of his Majesty. The Advocate too was most desirous
of settling the troublesome questions about the cloth trade,
the piracies, and other matters, and was in favour of the
special commissioD. In regard to a new treaty of alliance
thus loosely and vaguely suggested, he was not so sanguine
however. He had too much difficulty in CDforcing the
interests of Protestantism in the duchies against the infatua-
tion of James in regard to Spain, and he was too well aware
of the Spanish marriage delusion, which was the key to the
King's whole policy, to put much faith in these casual out-
bursts of eternal friendship with the States. He contented
himself therefore with cautioning Caroc to pause before
committing himself to any such projects.^ He had fre-
quently instructed him, however, to bring the disputed

» Despatch, 17 Feb. 1616, in Ouvr€,
p. 245.

' » * * Waerop hy " (Bameveld) " ray
ontboed eode vennaende dat ic dies-

aenfi^nde wel sonde wacbten my in
sulcx ofte diergelyke engageren."
This is all.

VOL. n. B

50 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BABKEVELD. Csap. XL

questions to his Majesty's notice as often as possible with a
view to amicable arrangement.^

This preventive policy in regard to France was highly
approved by Bameveld, who was willing to share in the
blame profusely heaped upon such sincere patriots and
devoted Protestants as Duplessis-Momay and others, who
saw small advantage to the great cause from a mutiny
against established government, bad as it was, led by such
intriguers as Cond6 and Bouillon. Men who had recently
been in the pay of Spain, and one of whom had been cog-
nizant of Biron's plot against the throne and life of Henry
rV., to whom sedition was native atmosphere and daily bread,
were not likely to establish a much more wholesome ad-
ministration than that of Mary de' Medici. Prince Maurice
sympathized with his relatives by marriage, who were leading
the civil commotions in France and endeavouring to obtain
funds in the Netherlands. It is needless to say that Francis
Aerssens was deep in their intrigues, and feeding full the
grudge which the Stadholder already bore the Advocate for
his policy on this occasion.

The Advocate thought it best to wait until the young
king should himself rise in mutiny against his mother
and her minions. Perhaps the downfall of the Concini's
and their dowager and the escape of Lewis from thraldom
might not be so distant as it seemed. Meantime this
was the legal government, bound to the States by
treaties of friendship and alliance, and it would be a poor
return for the many favours and the constant aid bestowed
by Henry IV. on the Republic, and an imbecile mode
of avenging his murder to help throw his kingdom into

* I Imvo foand neither the letter of
Caron nor Bameveld's reply in the
Archives. But in a very important
memorandnm of the Ambassador,
dated 15 April 1619, for the use of

the States, I find the brief charac-
terization given in the text of the
two documents. On a later page will
be seen the important use to which
they were put.

1616.

MURDER OF JOHN VAN WELT.

51

bloodshed and confufiion before his son was able to act for
himsel£ At the same time he did his best to cultivate
amicable relations with the princes^ while scmpulously
abstainiDg from any sympathy with their movements. " If
the Prince and the other gentlemen come to court/' he wrote
to Langerac, " you will treat them with all possible caresses
so far as can be done without disrespect to the govern-
ment." ^

While the British court was occupied with the foul details
of the Overbury murder and its consequences, a crime of a
more commonplace nature, but perhaps not entirely without
influence on great political events, had startled the citizens
of the Hague. It was committed in the' apartments of the
Stadholder and almost under his very eyes. A jeweller
of Amsterdam, one John van Wely, had come to the court of
Maurice to lay before him a choice collection of rare jewellery.
In his caskets were rubies and diamonds to the value of
more than 100,000 florins, which would be the equivalent of
perhaps ten times as much to-day. In the Prince's absence
the merchant was received by a confidential groom of the
chambers, John of Paris by name, and by him, with the aid of
a third John, a soldier of his Excellency's guard, called Jean
de la Vigne, murdered on the spot.^ The deed was done in
the Prince's private study. The unfortunate jeweller was
shot, and to make sure was strangled with the blue riband of
the Order of the Garter recently conferred upon Maurice,
and which happened to be lying conspicuously in the room.

The ruffians had barely time to take possession of the
booty, to thrust the body behind the tapestry of the cham-
ber, and to remove the more startling evidences of the

' Barneveld to LaDgerac, 12 May
1616. (Hagae AichSyes Ma)

* Barneveld to Langerac, 13 May
1616 (Hagae Archives MS.), gives
the&ct Comp. Brandt, * Regtspl.' pp.

814, 815. The souroe of the details
of the murder I cannot at this mo-
ment recall, but they are contempo-
raneous and authentic

62 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

crimej when the Prince arrived. He supped soon afterwards
in the same room, the murdered jeweller still lying behind
the arras. In the night the valet and soldier carried the
corpse away from the room, down the stairs, and through
the great courtyard, where, strange to say, no sentinels were
on duty, and threw it into an ashpit.

A deed so bloody, audacious, and stupid was of course
soon discovered and the murderers arrested and executed.
Nothing would remove the incident from the catalogue of
vulgar crimes, or even entitle it to a place in history save a
single circumstance. The celebrated divine John Uyten-
bogaert, leader among the Arminians, devoted friend of
Barneveld, and up to that moment the favorite preacher of
Maurice, stigmatized indeed, as we have seen, by the ortho-
dox as " Court Trumpeter," was requested by the Prince to
prepare the chief criminal for death. He did so, and from
that day forth the Stadholder ceabed to be his friend,
although regularly listening to his preaching in the French
chapel of the court for more than a year longer. Some time
afterwards the Advocate informed .Uytenbogaert that the
Prince was very much embittered against him.^ " I knew
it well," says the clergyman in his memoirs, " but not the
reasons for it, nor do I exactly comprehend them to this
day. Truly I have some ideas relating to certain things
which I was obliged to do in discharge of my official duty,
but I wiU not insist upon them, nor will I reveal them to
any man." ^

These were mysterious words, and the mystery is said to
have been explained ; for it would seem that the eminent
preacher was not so entirely reticent among his confidential
friends as before the public. Uytenbogaert — so ran the
tale — ^in the course of his conversation with the condemned

1 * Job. TJTtenbogaertB Leven/ &c. c. iz. p. 140 (2xid ed. 1646.)
»Ibid.

1616. UYTENBOGAEBT INCURS MAURICE'S DISPLEASURE. 53

murderer, John of Paris, expressed a natural surprise that
there should have been no soldiers on guard in the court on
the evening when the crime was committed and the body
subsequently removed. The valet informed him that he
had for a long time been empowered by the Prince to with-
draw the sentinels from that station, and that they had been
instructed to obey his orders — Maurice not caring that they
should be witnesses to the equivocal kind of female society
that John of Paris was in the habit of introducing of an
evening to his master's apartments. The valet had .made
use of this privilege on the night in question to rid himself
of the soldiers who would have been otherwise on guard.

The preacher felt it his duty to communicate these state-
ments to the Prince, and to make perhaps a somewhat severe
comment upon them. Maurice received the information
sullenly, and, as soon as Uytenbogaert was gone, fell into a
violent passion, throwing his hat upon the floor, stamping
upon it, refusing to eat his supper, and allowing no one to
speak to him. Next day some courtiers asked the clergy-
man what in the world Jie had been saying to the Stad-
holder.

From that time forth his former partiality for the divine,
on whose preaching he had been a regular attendant, was
changed to hatred ; a sentiment which lent a lurid colour to
subsequent events.^

The attempts of the Spanish party by chicane or by force
to get possession of the coveted territories continued year
after year, and were steadily thwarted by the watchfulness

' The authority for the story is the
annotator to the second edition of
G. Brandt's ' Hist. v. d. Repteple^g.'
p. 315, sag. Note R (Rotteniam,
1610). Of oourse it may be easily
disputed, and is only ^ven in the
text as a tale which was generally
believed. Those who think it an im-
peachment upon the private character

of the Prince had better consult the
professed eulogist of Maurice and of
the Nassau family, de la Pise, espe-
cially p. 809. Nor can the anecdote
be considered beneath the dimity of
history when one remembers the
great influence of pettiest passions
on the &te of persona jifes, and conse-
quently on the march of events.

64 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

of the States under guidance of Bameveld. The martial
Btadholder was more than ever for open war, in which he
was opposed by the Advocate, whose object was to postpone
and, if possible, to avert altogether the dread catastrophe
which he foresaw impending over Europe. The Xanten
arrangement seemed hopelessly thrown to the winds, nor was it
destined to be carried out ; the whole question of sovereignty
and of mastership in those territories being swept subse-
quently into the general whirlpool of the Thirty Years' War.
So long as there was a possibility of settlement upon that
basis, the Advocate was in favour of settlement, but to give
up the guarantees and play into the hands of the Catholic
League was in his mind to make the Republic one of the
conspirators against the liberties of Christendom.

" Spain, the Emperor and the rest of them," said he,
"make all three modes of pacification — the treaty, the
guarantee by the mediating kings, the administration
divided between the possessory princes — alike impossible.
They mean, under pretext of sequestration, to make
themselves absolute masters there. I have no doubt that
Yilleroy means sincerely, and understands the matter, but
meantime we sit by the fire and burn. If the conflagration
is neglected, all the world will throw the bkme on us." ^

Thus the Spaniards continued to amuse the British king
with assurances of their frank desire to leave those fortresses
and territories which they really meant to hold till the
crack of doom. And while Gondemar was making these
ingenuous assertions in London, his colleagues at Paris and
at Brussels distinctly and openly declared that there wa8
no authority whatever for them, that the Ambassador had
received no such instructions, and that there was no thought
of giving up Wesel or any other of the Protestant strong-

' Bameveld to Longerac, 12 Jane 1016. (Hague ArcbiTes MS.)

16ie. KINO OF FRANCE ESPOUSES ANKE OF AUSTBU. 55

holds captured, whether in the duchies or out of them.^ And
Gondemar^ still more to keep that monarch in subjection^
had been unusually flattering in regard to the Spanish
marriage. " We are in great alarm here/' * said the Ad-
vocate, ^^at the tidings that the projected alliance of the
Prince of Wales with the daughter of Spain is to be re-
newed ; from which nothing good for his Majest/s person,
his kingdom, nor for our state can be presaged. We live in
hope that it will never be."

But the other marriage was made. Despite the protest of
James, the forebodings of Bameveld, and the mutiny of the
princes, the youthful king of France had espoused Anne of
Austria early in the year 1616. The British king did his
best to keep on terms with France and Spain, and by no
means renounced his own hopes. At the same time, while
fixed as ever in his approbation of the policy pursued by the
Emperor and the League, and as deeply convinced of their
artlessness in r^ard to the duchies, the Protestant princes
of Germany, and the Republic, he manifested more cordiality
than usual in his relations with the States. Minor questions
between the countries he was desirous of arranging — so far
as matters of state could be arranged by orations — and
among the most pressing of these affairs were the systematic

' Bameveld to Caron, 15 June 1616.
(Hagae Aieh. MS.) Indeed these flat
contradictionBofQondemar'BpToiniBee
to James bj the Spanish ambeaaador
at the French court — as well as by the
agent at Brassels — were as regular as
they were audadons. Noel de Caron
called the ELing's attention to them
more than once, in order to aroose him
from his dream to a sense of the com-
mon danger. Nine months later than
this period the Datdi ambassador
bluntly warned James of the effhmt-
ery'of the deception. ^*I reminded
the King," said Caron, '' that the
Spanish ambassador in France, and
his resident near the Archdukes,
deny the statements made here about

the surrender of Weeel and the other
cities, in case My Lords the States
could be induced to give up JtLlich
and the rest, and say expressly that
they know very well that he has had
no commission to that effect. To this
the King answered that this was true,
and that he had mentioned it to the
Ambassador, who replied that his
Majesty might be assured of his state-
ments. Let his Mi^esty only procure
from the States the surrender of their
places, he said, and he would see the
Archdukes at once deliver Wesel and
the rest."

'Ibid. Same to same, 15 Jan. 1617.
(Hague Arch. MS.)

56 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

piracy existing and encouraged in English ports, to the
great damage of all seafaring nations and to the Hollanders
most of aU, and the quarrel about the exportation of undyed
cloths, which had almost caused a total cessation of the
woollen trade between the two countries. The English, to
encourage their own artisans, had forbidden the export of
undyed cloths, and the Dutch had retorted by prohibiting
the import of dyed ones.

The King had good sense enough to see the absurdity of
this condition of things, and it will be remembered that
Bameveld had frequently urged upon the Dutch ambas-
sador to bring his Majesty's attention to these dangerous
disputes. Now that the recovery of the cautionary towns
had been so dexterously and amicably accomplished, and at
so cheap a rate, it seemed a propitious moment to pi-oceed
to a general extinction of what would now be called ^'burning
questions."

James was desirous that new high commissioners might
be sent from the States to confer with himself and his
ministers upon the subjects just indicated, as well as upon
the fishery questions as regarded both Greenland and Scot-
land, and upon the general afiOdrs of India.^

He was convinced, he said to Caron, that the sea had
become more and more unsafe and so fuU of freebooters that
the like was never seen or heard of before. It will be remem-
bered that the Advocate had recently called his attention to
the fact that the Dutch merchants had lost in two months
800,000 florins' worth of goods by English pirates.

The King now assured the Ambassador of his intention
of equipping a fleet out of hand and to send it forth as
speedily as possible under command of a distinguished
nobleman, who would put his honour and credit in a suc-
cessful expedition, without any connivance or dissimulation

^ Caron to States^eneral, 18 July 1616. (Hagae ArchiyeB MS.)

.161(1 C50NFBBBNCE CX)NCBRNINa PIRACY. 57

whatever.^ In order thoroughly to bcout these pirates from
the seaS; he expressed the hope that their Mightinesses the
States would do the same either jointly or separately as
they thought most advisable. Garon bluntly replied that
the States had already ten or twelve war-ships at sea for
this purpose, but that unfortunately, instead of finding any
help from the English in this regard, they had always
found the pirates favoured in his Majesty's ports, especially
in Ireland and Wales.

" Thus they have so increased in numbers," continued the
Ambassador, ^^ that I quite believe what your Majesty says,
that not a ship can pass with safety over the seas. More-
over, your Majesty has been graciously pleased to pardon
several of these corsairs, in consequence of which they have
become so impudent aa to swarm everywhere, even in the
river Thames, where they are perpetually pillaging honest
merchantmen."

" I confess," said the King, " to having pardoned a certain
Manning,^ but this was for the sake of his old father, and
I never did anything so unwillingly in my life. But I
swear that if it were the best nobleman in England, I would
never grant one of them a pardon again."

Caron expressed his joy at hearing such good intentions
on the part of his Majesty, and assured him that the States-
General would be equally delighted.^

In the course of the summer the Dutch ambassador had
many opportunities of seeing the King very confidentially,
James having given him the use of the royal park at
Bayscot,* so that during the royal visits to that place Caron
was lodged under his roof.

On the whole, James had much regard and respect for

^ Caron, vhi fup.

• Or Mannevinck T

* MS. of Caron, ubi nip.

* Caron to the States-General, 13
Sept. 1616. (Hague Archives MS.)

68 THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL*

Noel de Caron. He knew him to be able, although he
thought him tiresome. It is amusing to observe the King
and Ambassador in their utter^ces to confidential friends
each frequently making the charge of tediousness against
the other. ^^ Garon's general education/' said James on one
occasion to Cecil, ^^ cannot amend his native German pro-
lixity, for had I not interrupted him, it had been to-morrow
morning before I had begun to speak. G-od preserve me
from hearing a cause debated between Don Diego and him !
.... But in truth it is good dealing with so wise and
honest a man, although he be somewhat longsome.'' ^

Subsequently James came to Whitehall for a time, and
then stopped at Theobalds for a few days on his way to
Newmarket, where he stayed imtil Christmas. At Theobalds
he sent again for the Ambassador, saying that at Whitehall
he was so broken down with afigurs that it would be impos-
sible to live if he stayed there.^

He asked if the States were soon to send the commis-
sioners, according to his request, to confer in regard to the
cloth-trada Without interference of the two governments,
he said, the matter would never be settled. The merchants
of the two countries would never agree except under higher
authority.

" I have heard both parties,'' he said, " the new and the

1 King James to Cedl. MS. in
the GecU Archives at Hatfield Hoase,
the seat of Robert Cecil's descend-
ant, the distinguished statesman and
man of letters, the present Mar*
qnis of Salisbary. Both Lord and
Lady Salisbury will permit me to ex-
press, in this note, my deep sense of
their kindness in permitting me to
use these invaluable papers with per-
fect freedom. The collection is rich
in confidential correspondence during
the reign of Elizabeth and the first
seven years of James, and it is most
agreeable to all lovers of historical
sdenoe to see such treasures in hands

so appreciative to guard and so boun-
tiful to dispense tnem.

The letter above cited begins, as
all the confidential letters of James
to Cecil, of which there is a large col-
lection in these archives, begin/' My
little beagle."

I give a very few specimens of these
letters in the Appendix, with the ori-
ginal spelling, as illustrative of the
filing's manner of dealing privately
with his great minister.

' Caron to the Statcs-Qeneral, 14
Nov. (o. B.) 1616. (Hague AichiveB
Ma)

1616. OBSERVATIONS OF KING JAMES. 59

I

old companies, two or three'thnes in full council, and tried
to bring them to an agreement, but it won't do. I have
heard that My Lords the States have been hearing both
sides, English and the Hollanders, over and over again, and
that the States have passed a provisional resolution, which
however does not suit us. Now it is not reasonable, as we
are allies, that our merchants should be obliged to send
their cloths roundabout, not being allowed either to sell
them in the United Provinces or to pass them through your
territories. I wish I could talk with them myself, for I am
certain, if they would send some one here, we could make
an agreement. It is not necessary that one should take
everything from them, or that one should refuse everything
to us. I am sure there are people of sense in your assembly
who will justify me in favouring my own people so far as
I reasonably can, and I know very well that My Lords the
States must stand up for their own citizens. If we have
been driving this matter to an extreme and see that we
are mining each other, we must take it up again in other
fashion, for Yesterday is the preceptor of To-morrow. Let
the conunissioners come as soon as possible. I know they
have complaints to make, and I have my complaints also.
Therefore we must listen to each other, for I protest before
God that I consider the community of your state with mine
to be so entire that, if one goes to perdition, the other must
quickly follow it," ^

Thus spoke James, like a wise and thoughtful sovereign
interested in the welfeire of his subjects and allies, with
enlightened ideas for the time upon public economy. It is
difficult, in the man conversing thus amicably and sensibly
with the Dutch ambassador, to realise the shrill pedant
shrieking against Yorstius, the crapulous comrade of Carrs

' I take theee passages literally from Caron's report to the States-Qenenl,
written the day after the interview. (MS. last dted.)

60 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BAKNEVELD. Chap. XL

and SteenieS; the fawning solicitor of Spanish marriages,
the " pepperer " and hangman of Puritans, the butt and
dupe of Gondemar and Spinola.

"I protest/' he said further, "that I seek nothing in
your state but all possible friendship and good feUowship.
My own subjects complain sometimes that your people
follow too closely on their heels, and confess that your
industry goes far above their own. If this be so, it is a
lean kind of reproach ; for the English should rather study
to follow you. Nevertheless, when industry is directed by
malice, each may easily be attempting to snap an advantage
from the other. I have sometimes complained of many
other things in which my subjects suffered great injustice
from you, but all that is excusable. I will willingly listen
to your people and grant them to be in the right when they
are so. But I will never allow them to be in the right when
they mistrust me. If I had been like many other princes, I
should never have let the advantage of the cautionary towns
slip out of my fingers, but rather by means of them attempted
to get even a stronger hold on your country. I have had
plenty of warnings from great statesmen in France, Ger-
many, and other nations that I ought to give them up never-
more. Yet you know how frankly and sincerely I acquitted
myself in that matter without ever making pretensions
upon your state than the pretensions I still make to your
friendship and co-operation."

James, after this allusion to an important transaction to
be explained in the next chapter, then made an observation
or two on a subject which was rapidly overtopping all others
in importance to the States, and his expressions were sin-
gularly at variance with his last utterances in that regard.
" I tell you," he said, " that you have no right to mistrust
me in anything, not even in the matter of religion. I grieve
indeed to hear that your religious troubles continue. You

1616.

OBSERVATIONS OP KING JAMES.

61

know that in the beginning I occupied myself with this
affair, but fearing that my course might be misunderstood,
and that it might be supposed that I was seeking to
exercise authority in your republic, I gave it up, and I
will never interfere with the matter again, but will ever
pray God that he may give you a happy issue out of these
troubles.'' ^

Alas 1 if the King had always kept himself on that height
of amiable neutrality, if he had been able to govern himself
in the future by these simplest principles of reason and
justice, there might have been perhaps a happier issue from
the troubles than time was like to reveal

Once more James referred to the crisis pending in German
affairs, and as usual spoke of the Cleve and Jiilich ques-
tion as if it were a simple matter to be settled by a few
strokes of the pen and a pennyworth of sealing-wax, instead
of being the opening act in a vast tragedy, of which neither
he, nor Caron, nor Bameveld, nor Prince Maurice, nor the
youthful king of France, nor Philip, nor Matthias, nor any
of the men now foremost in the conduct of affairs, was
destined to see the end.

The King informed Caron that he had just received most
satisfactory assurances from the Spanish ambassador in his
last audience at Whitehall.

1 *t

. ic segge dat sy van m j nyet
te diffideren en nebben ende ick mede
int 8ta(^ van de religie daer ic wel
d roeve om sy dat tselve boo ic yerstaen
alB noch dnert ; ffhy weet dat icker mj
in den beginne nebbe mede eemoeyt
doch Treesende dat bet an&rs yer-
staen conde werden al of ic eeni^e
anthoritejt in eene andere Repa-
blique sochte, ic bebbet daer gelaten
Bonder dat ic my daermede meer wil
moeyen, maer i^ril Qodt bidden dat
by bemlnyden een goet nytende
daerin wil geven."

It is a pity tbat tbe words of this
remarkable conyeraation, in whicb I

James appears at bis yery best, bave
to be filtered tbroagb two ortbree
languages. Tbe States' ambassadors
always of course wrote their confiden-
tial as well as tbeir public despatches
to tbeir goyemment in Dutch. This
conyersation was probably held in
English, as Caron had lived so long in
the country as to make that language
like his mother tongue. He does not
say whether James spoke French on
this occasion, but Queen Elizabeth
always used that language in con-
versing with him or with any foreign
ambassador.

62 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BABNEVELD. Chap. XL

^^ He has announced to me on the part of the King his
master with great compliments that his Majesty seeks to
please me and satisfy me in everything that I could possibly
desire of him/' said James, rolling over with satisfaction
these unctuous phrases as if they really had any meaning
whatever.

" His Majesty says further," added the King, " that as he
haa been at various times admonished by me, and is daUy
admonished by other princes, that he ought to execute the
treaty of Xanten by surrendering the city of Wesd and all
other places occupied by Spinola, he now declares himself
ready to carry out that treaty in every point. He will
accordingly instruct the Archduke to do this, provided the
Margrave of Brandenburg and the States will do the same
in regard to their captured places. As he understands how-
ever that the States have been fortifying Jiilich even as he
might fortify Wesel, he would be glad that no innovation
be made before the end of the coming month of March.
When this term shall have expired, he will no longer be
bound by these offers, but will proceed to fortify Wesel and
the other places, and to hold them as he best may for
himself. Bespect for me has alone induced his Majesty
to make this resolution."

We have already seen that the Spanish ambassador in
Paris was at this very time loudly declaring that his col-
league in London had no commission whatever to make
these propositions. Nor when they were in the slightest
degree analysed, did they appear after all to be much
better than threats. Not a word was said of guarantees.
The names of the two kings were not mentioned. It was
nothing but Albert and Spinola then as always, and a re-
commendation that Brandenburg and the States and all
the Protestant princes of Germany should trust to the
candour of the Catholic League. Caron pointed out to

1616. OOMMENTS OF BABNEVELD. 63

the King that in these proposals there \irere no guarantees
nor even promises that the fortresses would not be reoccu-
pied at convenience of the Spaniards. He engaged however
to report the whole statement to his masters. A few weeks
afterwards the Advocate replied in his usual vein^ reminding
the King through the Ambassador that the Bepublic feared
fraud on the part of the League much more than force.
He also laid stress on the affiiirs of Italy, considering the
fate of Savoy and the conflicts in which Venice was engaged
as components of a general scheme. The States had been
much solicited, as we have seen, to render assistance to the
Duke of Savoy, the temporary peace of Asti being already
broken, and Bameveld had been unceasing in his efforts to
arouse France as well as England to the danger to them-
selves and to all Christendom should Savoy be crushed.
We shall have occasion to see the prominent part reserved
to Savoy in the fast ripening debate in Germany. Mean-
time the States had sent one Count of Nassau with a couple
of companies to Charles Emmanuel, while another (Ernest)
had just gone to Venice at the head of more than three
thousand adventurers. With so many powerful armies at
their throats, as Bameveld had more than once observed,
it was not easy for them to despatch laige forces to the
other end of Europe, but he justly reminded his allies that
the States were now rendering more effective help to the
common cause by holding great Spanish armies in check
on their own frontier than if they assumed a more aggres-
sive line in the south. The Advocate, like every statesman
worthy of the name, was accustomed to sweep the whole
horizon in his consideration of public policy, and it will be
observed that he always regarded various and apparently
distinct and isolated movements in different parts of Europe
as parts of one great whole. It is easy enough for us, cen-
turies after the record has been made up, to observe the

64 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BARNEVELD. Chap. XI.

gradual and^ as it were^ harmonious manner in which the
great Catholic conspiracy against the liberties of Europe
was unfolded in an ever widening sphere. But to the eyes
of contemporaries all was then misty and chaotic, and it
required the keen vision of a sage and a prophet to discern
the awful shape which the future might assume. Absorbed
in the contemplation of these portentous phenomena, it was
not unnatural that the Advocate should attach less signi-
ficance to perturbations nearer home. Devoted as was his
life to save the great European cause of Protestantism, in
which he considered political and religious liberty bound
up, from the absolute extinction with which it was menaced,
he neglected too much the furious hatreds growing up
among Protestants within the narrow limits of his own
province. He was destined one day to be rudely awakened.
Meantime he was occupied with organizing a general de-
fence of Italy, Germany, France, and England, as well
as the Netherlands, against the designs of Spain and the
League.

" We wish to know," he said,^ in answer to the affectionate
messages and fine promises of the King of Spain to James
as reported by Caron, " what his Majesty of Great Britain has
done, is doing, and is resolved to do for the Duke of Savoy
and the Republic of Venice. If they ask you what we are
doing, answer that we with our forces and vigour are keeping
off from the throats of Savoy and Venice 2000 riders and
10,000 infantry, with which forces, let alone their experience,
more would be accomplished than with four times the
number of new troops brought to the field in Italy. This
is our succour, a great one and a very costly one, for the
expense of maintaining our armies to hold the enemy in
check here is very great."

He alluded with his usual respectful and quiet scorn to

1 Barneveld to Caron, 29 Dec 1616. (HaguG Archives MS.)

1616. COMMENTS OF BABNEVELD. 65

the arrangements by which James so wilfully allowed him-
self to be deceived.

" If the Spaniard really leaves the duchies," he said, " it
is a grave matter to decide whether on the one side he is
not resolved by that means to win more over us and the
Elector of Brandenburg in the debateable land in a few days
than he could gain by force in many years, or on the
other whether by it he does not intend despatching 1200
or 1500 cavalry and 6000 or 6000 foot, all his most ex-
perienced soldiers, from the Netherlands to Italy, in order to
give the law at his pleasure to the Duke of Savoy and the
Republic of Venice, reserving his attack upon Germany and
ourselves to the last. The Spaniards, standing under a
monarchical government, can in one hour resolve to seize
to-morrow all that they and we may abandon to-day. And
they can carry such a resolution into effect at once. Our
form of government does not permit this, so that our
republic must be conserved by distrust and good garrisons."^

Thus during this long period of half hostilities Bameveld,
while sincerely seeking to preserve the peace in Europe,
was determined, if possible, that the Republic should main^
tain the strongest defensive position when the war which ho
foreboded should actually begin. Maurice and the war party
had blamed him for the obstacles which he interposed to
the outbreak of hostilities, while the British court, as we
have seen, was perpetually urging him to abate from his
demands and abandon both the well strengthened fortresses
in the duchies and that strong citadel of distrust which in
his often repeated language he was determined never to
surrender. Spinola and the military party of Spain,
while preaching peace, had been in truth most anxious for
fighting. " The only honour I desire henceforth," said that

* " Onse regeeringhe en laet zulcx nyet toe, zodat onsen staet mit diffidentie
ende goede b^ettinghe moet worden geconsenreert"

VOL. II. F

66 THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XL

great commander, "is to give battle to Prince Maurice."^
The generals were more anxious than the governments to
make use of the splendid armies arrayed against each other
in such proximity that, the signal for conflict not having
been given, it was not uncommon for the soldiers of the
respective camps to aid each other in unloading munition
waggons, exchanging provisions and other articles of neces-
sity, and performing other small acts of mutual service.

But heavy thunder clouds hanging over the earth so long
and so closely might burst into explosion at any moment.
Had it not been for the distracted condition of France, the
infatuation of the English king, and the astounding inert-
ness of the princes of the German Union, great advantages
might have been gained by the Protestant party before the
storm should break. But, as the French ambassador at the
Hague well observed, "the great Protestant Union of
Germany sat with folded arms while Hannibal was at their
gate, the princes of which it was composed amusing them-
selves with staring at each other. It was verifying," he
continued, bitterly, "the saying of the Duke of Alva,
^ Germany is an old dog which still can bark, but has lost its
teeth to bite with/ " ^

To such imbecility had that noble and gifted people —
which had never been organized into a nation since it crushed
the Boman empire and established a new civilization on its
ruins, and was to wait centuries longer until it should recon-
struct itself into a whole — ^been reduced by subdivision,
disintegration, the perpetual dissolvent of religious dispute,
and the selfish policy of infinitesimal dynasties.

> Ouvre, p. 227. » Ibid. 228.

1616. JAMES PRESSES FOR PATMENT OF DUTCH DEBT. 67

CHAPTER XII.

James still presses for the Pajment of the Datcb Repablic's Debt to bim —
A Compromise effected, witb Bestitation of tbe Cautionary Towns —
Treaty of Londnn — James's Dream of a Spanish Marriage reviTes —
James visits Scotland — Tbe States-General agree to furnish Money and
Troops in fulfilment of tbe Treaty of 1609 — Death of Concini — Villeroy
returns to Power.

Besides matters of predestination there were other subjects
political and personal which increased the King's jealousy
and hatred. The debt of the Republic to the British crown,
secured by mortgage of the important sea-ports and fortified
towns of Flushing, Brielle, Bammekens, and other strong
places, still existed. The possession of those places by
England was a constant danger and irritation to the States.
It was an axe perpetually held over their heads. It
threatened their sovereignty, their very existence. On
more than one occasion, in foreign courts, the representatives
of the Netherlands had been exposed to the taunt that the
Bepublic was after all not an independent power, but a
British province. The gibe had always been repelled in
a manner becoming the envoys of a proud commonwealth ;
yet it was sufficiently galling that English garrisons should
continue to hold Dutch towns ; one of them among the
most valuable seaports of the Bepublic, the other the very
cradle of its independence, the seizure of which in Alva's
days had always been reckoned a splendid achievement.
Moreover, by the fifth article of the treaty of peace between
James and Philip III.,^ although the King had declared

1 Wagenaar, ix. 175. 29 Ang. 1604.

68 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XU.

himself bound by the treaties made by Elizabeth to deliver
up the cautionary towns to no one but the United States^ he
promised Spain to allow those States a reasonable time to
make peace with the Archdukes on satisfactory conditions.
Should they refuse to do so, he held himself bound by no
obligations to them, and would deal with the cities as ho
thought proper, and as the Archdukes themselves might
deem just.

The King had always been furious at " the huge sum of
money to be advanced, nay, given, to the States," as he
phrased it. ^^ It is so far out of all square,"' he had said, ^^ as
on my conscience I cannot think that ever they craved it
^ animo ohttnendi/ but only by that objection to discourage
me from any thought of getting any repayment of my debts

from them when they shall be in peace Should I

ruin myself for maintaining them ? Should I bestow as much
on them as cometh to the value of my whole yearly rent ? '*
He had proceeded to say very plainly that, if the States did
not make great speed to pay him all his debt so soon as peace
was established, he should treat their pretence at independ-
ence with contempt, and propose dividing their territory
between himself and the King of France.

** If they be so weak as they cannot subsist either in peace
or war,'' he said, " without I ruin myself for upholding them,
in that case surely ^ minus malum est eligendum/ the nearest
harm is first to be eschewed, a man will leap out of a burn-
ing ship and drown himself in the sea ; and it is doubtless a
farther off harm for me to suffer them to fall again in the
hands of Spain, and let God provide for the danger that
may with time fall upon me or my posterity than presently
to starve myself and mine with putting the meat in their
mouth. Nay, rather if they be so weak as they can neither
sustain themselves in peace nor war, let them leave this vain-
glorious thirsting for the title of a free state (which no people

1616. JAMES PRESSES FOR PAYMENT OP DUTCH DEBT. 69

are worthy or able to enjoy that cannot stand by themselves
like substantives), and ^dividantur inter noa ;' I mean, let
their countries be divided between France and me, otherwise
the King of Spain shall be sure to consume us.'' ^

Such were the eyes with which James had always regarded
the great commonwealth of which he affected to be the ally,
while secretly aspiring to be its sovereign, and such was
his capacity to calculate political forces and comprehend
coming events.

Certainly the sword was hanging by a thread. The States
had made no peace either with the Archdukes or with
Spain. They had made a truce, half the term of which
had already run by. At any moment the keys of their very
house-door might be placed in the hands of their arch enemy.
Treacherous and base as the deed would be, it might be
defended by the letter of a treaty in which the BepubUc
had no part ; and was there anything too treacherous or too
base to be dreaded from James Stuart ?

But the States owed the crown of England eight millions
of florins, equivalent to about £750,000. Where was this
vast sum to be found ? It was clearly impossible for the
States to beg or to borrow it, although they were nearly
as rich as any of the leading powers at that day.

It was the merit of Bameveld, not only that he saw
the chance for a good bai^in, but that he fully compre-
hended a great danger. Years long James had pursued the
phantom of a Spanish marriage for his son. To achieve this
mighty object, he had perverted the whole policy of the
realm ; he had grovelled to those who despised him, had
repaid attempts at wholesale assassination with boundless
sycophancy. It is difficult to imagine anything more abject
than the attitude of James towards Philip. Prince Henry
was dead, but Charles had now become Prince of Wales in

1 King to Cecil (Hatfield Archives MS.) See Appendix.

70 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XIL

his tum^ and there was a younger infanta whose hand was
not yet disposed of.

So long as the possible prize of a Most Catholic princess
was dangling before the eyes of the royal champion of Pro-
testantism, so long there was danger that the Ketherlanders
might wake up some fine morning and see the flag of Spain
waving over the walls of Flushing, Brielle, and Banmiekens.

It was in the interest of Spain too that the envoys of
James at the Hague were perpetually goading Bameveld to
cause the States' troops to be withdrawn from the duchies
and the illusory treaty of Xanten to be executed. Instead
of an eighth province added to the free Netherlands, the
result of such a procedure would have been to place that
territory enveloping them in the hands of the enemy ; to
strengthen and sharpen the claws, as the Advocate had
called them, by which Spain was seeking to clutch and to
destroy the Republic.

The Advocate steadily refused to countenance such
policy in the duchies, and he resolved on a sudden stroke to
relieve the Commonwealth from the incubus of the English
mortgage.^

James was desperately pushed for money. His minions,
as insatiable in their demands on English wealth as the
parasites who fed on the Queen-Begent were exhaustive of
the French exchequer, were greedier than ever now that
James, who feared to face a parliament disgusted with the
meanness of his policy and depravity of his life, could not
be relied upon to minister to their wants.

The Advocate judiciously contrived that the proposal of
a compromise should come fit>m the English government
Noel de Caron, the veteran ambassador of the States in
London, after receiving certain proposals, offered, under in-
structions from Bameveld, to pay £250,000 in full of

1 Bapin, vil. 108, »eq, Wagenaar, z. 98-105.

1616. RESTITUTION OF THE CAUTIONARY TOWNS. 71

all demands. It was made to appear that the additional
£50^000 was in reality in advance of his instructions. The
mouths of the minions watered at the mention of so magni-
ficent a sum of money in one lump.

The bargain was struck. On the 11th June 1616^ Sir
Robert Sidney, who had become Lord Lisle, gave over the
city of Flushing to the States, represented by the j^^ n
Seignior van Maldere, while Sir Horace Vere placed ^®^^-
the important town of Brielle in the hands of the Seignior
van Mathenesse. According to the terms of the bargain, the
English garrisons were converted into two regiments, re-
spectively to be commanded by Lord Lisle's son, now Sir
Robert Sidney, and by Sir Horace Vere, and were to serve
the States. Lisle, who had been in the Netherlands since
the days of his uncle Leicester and his brother Sir Philip
Sidney, now took his final departure for England.^

Thus this ancient burthen had been taken off the Re-
public by the masterly policy of the Advocate. A great
source of dread for foreign complication was closed for
ever.*

The French-Spanish marriages had been made. Henry lY.
had not been murdered in vain. Cond^ and his confederates
had issued their manifesto. A crisis came to the States,
for Maurice, always inclined to take part for the princes, and

' Wa^irenaar, x. 03-105.

* **We understand," said Barne-
veld to Caron, ''your arrangement to
be that the transfer of the cities and
places (Brielle^Flushing, and Ramme-
Kens) is promised, on condition that,
a month or six weeks after the trans-
fer, £100,000 sterling shall be paid,
and every six months, three times,
shall £50,000 be paid, making in all
£250,000."— Bameveld to Caron, 20
Feb. 1610. (Hague Archives MS.)

After the depvtnre of the English
troops from the cautionary towns, a
IHendly farewdl buiquet was given.

with many compliments, toasts, and
expressions of good feeling between
the two nations. The officers and
magistrates were relieved of their
oaths of fidelity to the English go-
vernment, and the first insUument of
the debt was ordered to be paid.
The States-General presented each
English governor with a gold chain
and medal worth 8000 florins, and the
lieutenant-governors with presents
each of half that value. Bameveld
to Caron, 21 June 1616. (Hague
Archives MS.)

72 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XTL

urged on by Aerssens, who was inspired by a deadly hatred
for the French government ever since they had insisted on
his dismissal from his post^ and who fed the Stadholder's
growing jealousy of the Advocate to the full, was at times
almost ready for joining in the conflict. It was most diffi-
cult for the States-General, led by Bameveld, to maintain
relations of amity with a government controUed by Spain,
governed by the Concini^s, and wafted to and fro by every
wind that blew. Still it was the government, and the
States might soon be called upon, in virtue of their treaties
with Henry, confirmed by Mary de' Medici, not only to pre-
vent the daily desertion of officers and soldiers of the French
regiments to the rebellious party, but to send the regiments
themselves to the assistance of the King and Queen.

There could be no doubt that the alliance of the French
Huguenots at Grenoble with the princes made the position of
the States very critical. Bouillon was loud in his demands
upon Maurice and the States for money and reinforcements,
but the Prince foi-tunately understood the character of the
Duke and of Conde, and comprehended the nature of French
politics too clearly to be led into extremities by passion or
by pique. He said loudly to any one that chose to listen :
" It is not necessary to ruin the son in order to avenge the
death of the father. That should be left to the son, who
alone has legitimate authority to do if ^ Nothing could
be more sensible, and the remark almost indicated a belief
on the Prince's part in Mary's complicity in the murder of
her husband. Duplessis-Momay was in despair, and, like all
true patriots and men of earnest character, felt it almost
an impossibility to choose between the two ignoble parties
contending for the possession of France, and both secretly
encouraged by France's deadly enemy.

The Treaty of Loudun followed, a treaty which, said du

* DespatclieB of da Maarler, Sept. and Oct. 1616, in Ouvr^, 240.

1616.

TREATr OP LOUDUN.

73

Maurier^ had about as many negotiators as there were indi-
viduals interested in the arrangements. The rebels May 8,
were forgiven, Conde sold himself out for a million ^^^^■
and a half livres and the presidency of the council, came to
court, and paraded himself in greater pomp and ap- 8ept.i.
pearance of power than ever. Four months after- ^^^^•
wards he was arrested and imprisoned. He submitted like
a lamb, and offered to betray his confederates.^

King James, faithful to his self-imposed part of mediator-
general, which he thought so well became him, had been
busy in bringing about this pacification,^ and had considered
it eminently successful. He was now angry at this unex-
pected result. He admitted that Conde had indulged in
certain follies and extravagancies, but these in his opinion
all came out of the quiver of the Spaniard, ^^ who was the head
of the whole intrigue." He determined to recall Lord Hayes
from Madrid and even Sir Thomas Edmonds from Paris, so
great was his indignation. But his wrath was likely to cool
under the soothing communications of Gondemar, and the
rumour of the marriage of the second infanta with the
Prince of Wales soon afterwards started into new life. " We
hope," wrote Barneveld, " that the alliance of his Highness
the Prince of Wales with the daughter of the Spanish king
will make no further progress, as it will place us in the
deepest embarrassment and pain." ^

For the reports had been so rife at the English court in
regard to this dangerous scheme that Caron had stoutly
gone to the King and asked him what he was to think
about it. " The King told me," said the Ambassador, " that
there was nothing at all in it, nor any appearance that
anything ever would come of it. It was true, he said, that

> Micbelet, 'Henri IV et Biche-
lieu/ p. 260.
' Caron to States-Qeneral, 13 and

18 Sept. 161 6. (Hague Archives MS.)
* Barneveld to Caron, 17 May 1617.
(Hagne Archives MS.)

74

THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XIL

on the overfcures made to him by the Spanish ambassador
he had ordered his minister in Spain to listen to what they
had to say^ and not to bear himself as if the overtures would
be rejected/' ^

The coyness thus affected by James could hardly impose
on so astute a diplomatist as Noel de Caron^ and the effect
produced upon the policy of one of the Republic's chief
allies by the Spanish marriages naturally made her states-
men shudder at the prospect of their other powerM friend
coming thus under the malign influence of Spain.

"He assured me, however," said the Envoy, "that the
Spaniard is not sincere in the matter, and that he has
himself become so far alienated from the scheme that we
may sleep quietly upon it." And James appeared at that
moment so vexed at the turn afibirs were taking in France,
so wounded in his self-love, and so bewildered by the ubi-
quitous nature of nets and pitfalls spreading over Europe by
Spain, that he really seemed waking from his delusion. Even
Caron was staggered.^ " In all his talk he appears so fkr
estranged from the Spaniard," said he, " that it would seem
impossible that he should consider this marriage as good
for his state. I have also had other advices on the subject
which in the highest degree comfort me. Now your Mighti-
nesses may think whatever you like about it."

The mood of the King was not likely to last long in so
comfortable a state. Meantime he took the part of Cond^
and the other princes, justified their proceedings to the
special envoy sent over by Mary de' Medici, and wished
the States to join with him in appealing to that Queen to
let the affair, for his sake, pass over once more.^

"And now I will tell your Mightinesses," said Caron,*

^ Caron to the States-General, 80
Jan. 1617. (Haffue AichiTes MS.)
« Ibid.

' Same to same, 10 March IGIZ
(Haprae Archives MS.)
«Ibid.

JAMES'S DBEAM OF A SPANISH MABBIAGE RETIVES. 75

reverting once more to the dreaded marriage which occupies
BO conspicuous a place in the strangely mingled and party-
coloured tissue of the history of those days^ '^ what the King
has again been telling me about the alliance between his
son and the Infanta. He hears firom Carleton that you are
in very great alarm lest this event may take place. He
understands that the special French envoy at the Hague^
M. de la Noue^ has been representing to you that the Eling
of Great Britain is following afber and begging for the
daughter of Spain for his son. He says it is untrue. But
it is true that he has been sought and solicited thereto,
and that in consequence there have been talks and propo-
sitions and rejoinders, but nothing of any moment. As he
had already told me not to be alarmed until he should
himself give me cause for it, he expressed his amazement
that I had not informed your Mightinesses accordingly. He
assured me again that he should not proceed further in the
business without communicating it to his good friends and
neighbours, that he considered My Lords the States as his
best friends and allies, who ought therefore to conceive no
jealousy in the matter."

This certainly was cold comfort. Caron knew well enough,
not a clerk in his office but knew well enough, that James
had been pursuing this prize for years. For the King to
represent himself as persecuted by Spain to give his son
to the Infanta was about as ridiculous as it would have been
to pretend that Emperor Matthias was persuading him to
let his son-in-law accept the crown of Bohemia. It was
admitted that negotiations for the marriage were going on,
and the assertion that the Spanish court was more eager for
it than the English government was not especially calcu-
lated to allay the necessary alarm of the States at such
a disaster. Nor was it much more tranquillizing for them
to be assured, not that the marriage was oflF, but that, when

A

76 THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XLL

it was settled^ they, as the King's good friends and neigh-
bours, should have early information of it,

" I told him/' said the Ambassador, " that undoubtedly
this matter was of the highest importance to your Mighti-
nesses, for it was not good for us to sit between two king-
doms both so nearly allied with the Spanish monarch, con-
sidering the pretensions he still maintained to sovereignty
over us. Although his Majesty might not now be willing to
treat to our prejudice, yet the afiair itself in the sequence
of time must of necessity injure our commonwealth. We
hoped therefore that it would never come to pass."

Caron added that Ambassador Digby was just going to
Spain on extraordinary mission in regard to this affair, and
that eight or ten gentlemen of the council had been deputed
to confer with his Majesty about it. He was still inclined
to believe that the whole negotiation would blow over, the
King continuing to exhort him not to be alarmed, and
assuring him that there were many occasions moving princes
to treat of great affairs although often without any effective
issue.

At that moment too the King was in a state of vehement
wrath with the Spanish Netherlands on account of a stinging
libel against himself, ^^an infamous and wonderfully scan-
dalous pamphlet," as he termed it, called Corona RegiSj
recently published at Louvain. He had sent Sir John
Bennet as special ambassador to the Archdukes to demand
from them justice and condign and public chastisement on
the author of the work — ^a rector Putianus as he believed, suc-
cessor of Justus Lipsius in his professorship at Louvain — and
upon the printer, one Flaminius. Delays and excuses having
followed instead of the punishment originally demanded,
James had now instructed his special envoy in case of
further delay or evasion to repudiate all ftirther friendship
or intercourse with the Archduke, to ratify the recall of his

1617. JAMES VISITS SCX)TLAND. 77

minister-resident TrombuU^ and in effect to announce formal
hostilities.^

" The King takes the thing wonderfully to heart/' said
Caron.

James in effect hated to be made ridiculous, and we shall
have occasion to see how important a part other publications
which he deemed detrimental to the divinity of his person
were to play in these affairs.

Meantime it was characteristic of this sovereign that—
while ready to talk of war with Philip's brother-in-law for a
pamphlet, while seeking the hand of Philip's daughter for
his son — ^he was determined at the very moment when
the world was on jSre to take himself, the heaven-born ex-
tinguisher of all political conflagrations, away from affairs
and to seek the solace of a long holiday in Scotland. His
counseUors persistently and vehemently implored him to defer
that journey until the following year at least, all the neigh-
bouring nations being now in a state of war and civil com-
motion. But it was in vain. He refused to listen to them
for a moment, and started for Scotland before the middle of
March.

Conde, who had kept France in a turmoil, had sought aid
alternately from the Calvinists at Grenoble and the Jesuits
in Bome, from Spain and from the Netherlands, from the
Pope and from Maurice of Nassau, had thus been caged at last.
But there was little gained. There was one troublesome but
incompetent rebel the less, but there was no king in the land.
He who doubts the influence of the individual upon the fate
of a country and upon his times through long passages of
history may explain the difference between France of 1609,
with a martial king aided by great statesmen at its head,
with an exchequer overflowing with revenue hoarded for a

***... ende in effecte alle viantschap te bieden." — Caron to the States-
General, 10 March 1617. (Hagne ArcluYes MS.)

78 THE lilFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XH.

great cause — and that cause an attempt at least to paciflcate
Christendom and avert a universal and almost infinite
conflict now already opening — and the France of 1617^ with
its treasures already squandered among ignoble and ruffianly
favourites, with every office in state^ church, court, and
magistracy sold to the highest bidder, with a queen governed
by an Italian adventurer who was governed by Spain, and
with a little king who had but lately expressed triumph at
his confirmation because now he should no longer be whipped,^
and who was just married to a daughter of the hereditary
and inevitable foe of France.

To contemplate this dreary interlude in the history of a
powerful state is to shiver at the depths of inanity and
crime to which mankind can at once descend. What need
to pursue the barren, vulgar, and often repeated chronicle ?
France pulled at by scarcely concealed strings and made to
perform fantastic tricks according as its various puppets
were swerved this way or that by supple hands at Madrid
and Bome is not a refi*eshing spectacle. The States-General
at last, after an agitated discussion, agreed in fulfilment of
the treaty of 1609 to send 4000 men, 2000 being French, to
help the King against the princes still in rebellion. But
the contest was a most bitter one, and the Advocate had a
difficult part to play between a government and a rebel-
lion, each more despicable than the other. Still Louis XIIL
and his mother were the legitimate government even if
ruled by Concini. The words of the treaty made with
Henry IV. were plain, and the ambassadors of his son had
summoned the States to fulfil it. But many impediments
were placed in the path of obvious duty by the party led by
Francis Aerssens.

" I know very well,*' said the Advocate to ex-Burgomaster

bert, 4 Feb. 1611. (Arch, du Boy.
Bruxelles MS., relating a conversation
of King James with the French am
bassador in London.)

1 M

. . . qn'U y avoit ony que lore de
son sacre il dit que de la envant 11
estait bien aise d'estre affiranchi du
fonet." — Degroote to Archduke Al-

1617. DEATH OF CX)NCINI. 79

Hooft of Amsterdam, father of the great historian, sending
him confidentially a copy of the proposals made bj the
French ambassadors, '' that many in this country are striving
hard to make ns refuse to the King the aid demanded, not-
withstanding that we are bound to do it bj the pledges given
not only by the States-General but by each province in par-
ticular. By this no one will profit but the Spaniard, who
unquestionably will offer much, aye, very much, to bring
about dissensions between France and us, from which I fore-
see great damage, inconvenience, and difficulties for the
whole commonwealth and for Holland especially. This
province has already advanced 1,000,000 florins to the
general government on the money still due fit)m France,
which will all be lost in case the subsidy should be withheld,
besides other evils which cannot be trusted to the pen.'" ^

On the same day on which it had been decided at the
Hague to send the troops, a captain of guards came to
the aid of the poor little king and shot Concini ^p^i 24,
dead one fine spring morning on the bridge of the ■^^'''•
Louvre. " By order of the King,'' said Vitry. His body was
burned before the statue of Henry IV. by the people delirious
with joy.* " L'hanno ammcmato " was shouted to his wife,
Eleanora Galigai, the supposed sorceress. They were the
words in which Concini had communicated to the Queen the
murder of her husband seven years before.^ Eleanora, too,
was burned after having been beheaded. Thus the Marshal
d'Ancre and wife ceased to reign in France.

The officers of the French r^ments at the Hague danced
for joy on the Vyverberg when the news arrived there.
The States were relieved from an inmiense embarrassment,
and the Advocate was rewarded for having pursued what
was after all the only practicable policy. " Do your best,''
said he to Langerac, ^^ to accommodate differences so far as

* Bameveld to Cornelia Pieterez. Hooft, 5 April 1617. (Hague Arch. MS.)

* OaYr€, 249. Michelet, 255. < Ibid. 256.

80 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XH.

consistent with the conservation of the King's authority.
We hope the princes will submit themselves now that the
lapis ofenMoniSy according to their pretence, is got rid of. We
received a letter from them to-day sealed with the King's
arms, with the circumscription ^PericlUante Begno, Begia vita
et Begia familial " ^

The shooting of Concini seemed almost to convert the
little king into a hero. Eveiyone in the Netherlands, with-
out distinction of party, was delighted with the achievement.
"I cannot represent to the King," wrote du Maurier to
Villeroy, " one thousandth part of the joy of all these people
who are exalting him to heaven for having delivered the
earth from this miserable burthen. I can't tell you in what
execration this public pest was held. His Majesty has not
less won the hearts of this state than if he had gained a
great victory over the Spaniards. You would not believe it,
and yet it is true, that never were the name and reputation
of the late king in greater reverence than those of our
reigning king at this moment." '

Truly here was glory cheaply earned. The fame of Henry
the Great, after a long career of brilliant deeds of arms,
high statesmanship, and twenty years of bountiful friend-
ship for the States, was already equalled by that of
Louis XIII., who had tremblingly acquiesced in the sum-
mary execution of an odious adventurer — ^his own possible
father — and who never had done anything else but feed his
canary birds.

As for Villeroy himself, the Ambassador wrote that he
could not find portraits enough of him to furnish those who
were asking for them since his return to power.*

Bameveld had been right in so often instructing Langerac
to " caress the old gentleman,"

* BameTeld to Lanflrerac, 1 May 1617. (Hague Arcliives MS.)

• Despatch, 4 May 1617, in Oavr€, p. 249. » Ibid.

1617. FERDINAND OF QRATZ. 81

CHAPTER XIII.

Ferdinand of Gratz crowned King of Bohemia — Iffis Enmity to Protestants

Slawata and Martinitz thrown from the Windows of the Hradschin

Real Beginning of the Thirty Yeais' War— -The Elector-Palatine's In-
trigaes in Oppodtion to the House of Anstria — He sapports the Dnke
of Savoy — The Emperor Matthias visits Dresden — Juhllee for the
Hnndredth Anniyeisary of the Reformation.

When the forlorn emperor Rudolph had aigned the per-
mission for his brother Matthias to take the last crown but
one from his head, he bit the pen in a paroxysm of helpless
rage. Then rushing to the window of his apartment, he
looked down on one of the most stately prospects that the
palaces of the earth can offer. From the long monotonous
architectural lines of the Hradschin, imposing from its
massiveness and its imperial situation, and with the dome
and minarets of the cathedral clustering behind them, the
eye swept across the fertile valley, through which the rapid,
yellow Moldau courses, to the opposite line of cliffs crested
with the half imaginary fortress-palaces of the Wyscherad.
There, in the mythical legendary past of Bohemia had
dwelt the shadowy Libuscha, daughter of Krok, wife of
King Premysl, foundress of Prague, who, when wearied of
her lovers, was accustomed to toss them from those heights
into the river. Between these picturesque precipices lay
the two Pragues, twin-bom and quarrelsome, fighting each
other for centuries, and growing up side by side into a double,
bellicose, stormy, and most splendid city, bristling with
steeples and spires, and united by the ancient many-statued
bridge with its blackened mediaeval entrance towers.

VOL. II. o

82 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XIH.

But it was not to enjoy the prospect that the aged^ dis-
crowned, solitary emperor, almost as dim a figure among
sovereigns as the mystic Libuscha herself, was gazing from
the window upon the imperial city.

" Ungrateful Prague," he cried, " through me thou hast
become thus magnificent, and now thou hast turned upon
and driven away thy benefactor. May the vengeance of
God descend upon thee; may my curse come upon thee
and upon all Bohemia." ^

History has failed to record the special benefits of the
Emperor through which the city had derived its magni-
ficence and deserved this malediction. But surely if ever
an old man's curse was destined to be literally fulfilled, it
seemed to be this solemn imprecation of Budolph. Mean-
time the coronation of Matthias had gone on with pomp and
popular gratulations, while Rudolph had withdrawn into
his apartments to pass the little that was left to him of life
in solitude and in a state of hopeless pique with Matthias,
with the rest of his brethren, with all the world.

And now that five years had passed since his death,
Matthias, who had usurped so much power prematurely,
found himself almost in the same condition as that to which
he had reduced Budolph.

Ferdinand of Styria, his cousin, trod closely upon his
heels. He was the presumptive successor to all his crowns,
had not approved of the movements of Matthias in the life-
time of his brother, and hated the Vienna Protestant baker's
son, Cardinal^ Clesel, by whom all those movements had been
directed. Professor Taubmann, of Wittenberg, ponderously
quibbling on the name of that prelate, had said that he was
of "one hundred and fifty ass power."* Whether that was

J W. Menzel. iii. 218.

» To wit, *'QL Esel " (W. Menzel, Iii. 189) ; but the name is more properly
spelt *'KhleBl.*'

1617. FERDINAND CROWNED KING OF BOHEMIA. 83

a fair measure of his capacity may be doubted, but it cer-
tainly was not destined to be sufficient to elude the ven-
geance of Ferdinand, and Ferdinand would soon have him
in his power.

Matthias, weary of ambitious intrigue, infirm of purpose,
and shattered in health, had withdrawn from affairs to
devote himself to his gout and to his fair young wife.
Archduchess Anna of Tyrol, whom at the age of fifby-four
he had espoused.

On the 29th June 1617, Ferdinand of Gratz was
crowned King of Bohemia. The event was a shock and a
menace to the Protestant cause all over the world. The
sombre figure of the Archduke had for years appeared in the
ba(^kground, foreshadowing as it were the wrath to come,
while throughout Bohemia and the neighbouring countries
of Moravia, Silesia, and the Austrias, the cause of Pro-
testantism had been making such rapid progress. The
Emperor Maximilian II. had left five stalwart sons, so that
there had seemed little probability that the younger line,
the sons of his brother, would succeed. But all the five
were childless, and now the son of Archduke Charles, who
had died in 1590, had become the natural heir after the
death of Matthias to the immense family honours — ^his
cousins Maximilian and Albert having resigned their claims
in his favour.

Ferdinand, twelve years old at his father's death, had
been placed under the care of his maternal uncle, Duke
William of Bavaria. By him the boy was placed at the
high school of Ingolstadt, to be brought up by the Jesuits,
in company with Duke William's own son Maximilian, five
years his senior. Between these youths, besides the tie of
oousinship, there grew up the most intimate union founded
on perfect sympathy in religion and politics.

When Ferdinand entered upon the government of hii

84 THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BABNEVELD. Chap. ZUL

paternal estates of Styria, Carinthia, and Camiola^ he found
that the new religion, at which the Jesuits had taught him
to shudder as at a curse and a crime, had been widely spread*
ing. His father had fought against heresy with all his
might, and had died disappointed and broken-hearted at its
progress. His uncle of Bavaria, in letters to his son and
nephew, had stamped into their minds with the enthusiasm
of perfect conviction that all happiness and blessing for
governments depended on the restoration and maintenance
of the unity of the Catholic faith. All the evils in times
past and present resulting from religious differences had
been held up to the two youths by the Jesuits in the most
glaring colours. The first duty of a prince, they had
inculcated, was to extirpate all false religions, to give the
opponents of the true church no quarter, and to think no
sacrifice too great by which the salvation of human society,
brought almost to perdition by the new doctrines, could be
effected.

Never had Jesuits an apter scholar than Ferdinand.
After leaving school, he made a pilgrimage to Loretto
to make his vows to the Virgin Mary of extirpation of
heresy, and went to Rome to obtain the blessing of Pope
Clement VIII.

Then, returning to the government of his inheritance, he
seized that terrible two-edged weapon of which the Pro-
testants of Germany had taught him the use.

^^Cujua regio y'us religio;'* to the prince the choice of
religion, to the subject conformity with the prince, as if
that formula of shallow and selfish princelings, that insult
to the dignity of mankind, were the grand result of a move-
ment which was to go on centuries after they had all been
forgotten in their tombs. For the time however it was a
valid and mischievous maxim. In Saxony Catholics and
Calvinists were proscribed ; in Heidelberg Catholics and

1617. FBBDINANiyS ENMITY TO PROTESTANTa 85

Lutherans. Why should either Galnnists or Lutherans be
tolerated in Styria ? Why, indeed ? No logic could be
more inexorable, and the pupil of the Ingolstadt Jesuits
hesitated not an instant to carry out their teaching with
the very instrument forged for him by the Beformation«
Qidlows were erected in the streets of all his cities, but
there was no hanging. The sight of them proved enough
to extort obedience to his edict, that every man, woman, and
child not belonging to the ancient church should leave his
dominions. They were driven out in hordes in broad day-
light from Gratz and other cities. Rather reign over a
wilderness than over heretics was the device of the Arch-
duke, in imitation of his great relative, Philip IL of Spain.
In short space of time his duchies were as empty of Pro-
testants as the Palatinate of Lutherans, or Saxony of Cal-
vinists, or both of Papists. Even the churchyards were rifled
of dead Lutherans and Utraquists, their carcasses thrown
where they could no longer pollute the true believers moul-
dering by their side.^

It was not strange that the coronation as King of Bohe-
mia of a man of such decided purposes — a country number-
ing ten Protestants to one Catholic — should cause a thrill
and a flutter. Could it be doubted that the great elemental
conflict so steadily prophesied by Bameveld and instinc-
tively dreaded by all capable of feeling the signs of the
time would now begin ? It had begun* Of what avail
would be Majesty-Letters and Compromises extorted by
force from trembling or indolent emperors, now that a man
who knew his own mind, and felt it to be a crime not to
extirpate all religions but the one orthodox religion, had
mounted the throne ? It is true that he had sworn at his
coronation to maintain the laws of Bohemia, and that the
Majesty-Letter and the Compromise were part of the laws.

» W. Menzel, iiL

86 THE LIFE OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XUL

But when were doctors ever wanting to prove the unlawful-
ness of law which interferes with the purposes of a despot
and the convictions of the bigot ?

" NovtM rexy nova lex,' muttered the Catholics, lifting up
their heads and hearts once more out of the oppression and
insults which they had unquestionably suffered at the hands
of the triimiphant Reformers. "There are many empty
poppy-heads now flaunting high that shall be snipped off/'
said others. " That accursed German Count Thum and his
fellows, whom the devil has sent from hell to Bohemia for
his own purposes, shall be disposed of now,'' was the
general cry.^

It was plain that heresy could no longer be maintained
except by the sword. That which had been extorted by
force would be plucked back by force. The succession of
Ferdinand was in brief a war-shout to be echoed by all the
Catholics of Europe. Before the end of the year the Pro-
testant churches of Brunnau were . sealed up. Those at
Klostergrab were demolished in three days by command of
the Archbishop of Prague.^ These dumb walls preached in
their destruction more stirring sermons than perhaps would
ever have been heard within them had they stood. This
tearing in pieces of the Imperial patent granting liberty
of Protestant worship, this summary execution done upon
senseless bricks and mortar, was an act of defiance to the
Beformed religion everywhere. Protestantism was struck in
the face, spat upon, defied.

The effect was instantaneous. Thum and the other
defenders of the Protestant faith were as prompt in action
as the Catholics had been in words. A few months passed
away. The Emperor was in Vienna, but his ten stadholders
were in Prague. The fateful 23rd of May 1618 arrived.

« Gindely, 286.

' 12 and 18 Dec. 1617. C. A. Menzel. Ui. 292. Qindely, 249.

1618. THE WmDOW-TUMBLE AT PRAGUE. 87

Slawata, a Bohemian Protestant, who had converted himself
to the Boman Church in order to marry a rich widow, and
who converted his peasants by hunting them to mass with
his hounds, and Martinitz, the two stadholders who at Fer-
dinand's coronation had endeavoured to prevent him from
including the Majesty-Letter among the privileges he was
swearing to support, and who were considered the real
authors of the royal letters revoking all religious rights
of Protestants, were the most obnoxious of all. They were
hurled from the council-chamber window of the Hradschin.
The unfortunate secretary Fabricius was tossed out after
them. Twenty-eight ells deep they fell, and all escaped
unhurt by the fall ; Fabricius being subsequently ennobled
by a grateful emperor with the well-won title of Baron
Summerset.^

The Thirty Tears' War, which in reality had been going
on for several years already, is dated from that day. A pro-
visional government was established in Prague by the
Estates under Protestant guidance, a coU^e of thirty
directors managing affairs.

The Window-Tumble,^ as the event has always been
called in history, excited a sensation in Europe. Especially
the young king of France, whose political position should
bring him rather into alliance with the rebels than the
Emperor, was disgusted and appalled. He was used to
rebellion. Since he was ten years old there had been a
rebellion against himself every year. There was rebellion
now. But his ministers had never been thrown out of
window. Perhaps one might take some day to tossing out
kings as well. He disapproved the process entirely.

Thus the great conflict of Christendom, so long impend-
ing, seemed at last to have broken forth in full fury on a

» Freiherr von Hohenfall. W. Menzel, liJ. 815. Gindely, 284, 285.
' Fensterstoiz.

88 THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BABNEVELD. Chap. XHI.

comparatively insignificant incident. Thus reasoned the
superficial public, as if the throwing out of window of twenty
stadholders could have created a general war in Europe had
not the causes of war lain deep and deadly in the whole
framework of society.

The succession of Ferdinand to the throne of the holy
Wenzel, in which his election to the German Imperial
crown was meant to be involved, was a matter which con-
cerned almost every household in Christendom. Liberty of
religion, civil franchise, political charters, contract between
government and subject, right to think, speak, or act,
these were the human rights everywhere in periL A com-
promise between the two religious parties had existed for
half a dozen years in Germany, a feeble compromise by
which men had hardly been kept from each others' throats.
That compromise had now been thrown to the winds. The
vast conspiracy of Spain, Rome, the House of Austria, against
human liberty had found a chief in the docile, gloomy pupil
of the Jesuits now enthroned in Bohemia, and soon perhaps
to wield the sceptre of the Holy Boman Empire. There
was no state in Europe that had not cause to put hand on
sword-hilt. ^^ Distrust and good garrisons,'' in the prophetic
words of Bameveld, would now be the necessary resource for
all intending to hold what had been gained through long
years of toil, martyrdom, and hard fighting.

The succession of Ferdinand excited especial dismay and
indignation in the Palatinate. 'The young elector had
looked upon the prize as his own. The marked advance
of Protestant sentiment throughout the kingdom and its
neighbour provinces had seemed to render the succession of
an extreme Papist impossible. When Frederic had sued
for and won the hand of the fair Elizabeth, daughter of the
King of Great Britain, it was understood that the alliance
would be more brilliant for her than it seemed. James

1618. REAL BEGHNMNG OP THE THIRTT TBABS' WAR. 89

mth his usual vanity spoke of his son-in-law as a future

It was a golden dream for the Elector and for the general
cause of the Beformed religion. Heidelberg enthroned in
the ancient capital of the Wenzels, Maximilians^ and
Budolphs, the Catechism and Confession enrolled among
the great statutes of the land, this was progress far beyond
flimsy Majesty-Letters and Compromises, made only to be
torn to pieces.

Through the dim vista of futurity and in ecstatic vision
no doubt even the Imperial crown might seem suspended
over the Palatine's head. But this would be merely a
midsummer's dream. Events did not whirl so rapidly as
they might learn to do centuries later, and the time for a
Protestant to grasp at the crown of Germany could then
hardly be imagined as ripening.

But what the Calvinist branch of the House of Wittels-
bach had indeed long been pursuing was to interrupt the
succession of the House of Austria to the German throne.
That a Catholic prince must for the inunediate future con-
tinue to occupy it was conceded even by Frederic, but the
electoral votes might surely be now so manipulated as to
prevent a slave of Spain and a tool of the Jesuits from
wielding any longer the sceptre of Charlemagne.

On the other hand the purpose of the House of Austria
was to do away with the elective principle and the prescrip-
tive rights of the Estates in Bohemia first, and afterwards
perhaps to send the Golden Bull itself to the limbo of worn-
out constitutional devices. At present however their object
was to secure their hereditary sovereignty in Prague first,
and then to make sure of the next Imperial election at
Frankfurt. Time afterwards might fight still more in their
favour, and fix them in hereditary possession of the German
throne.

90 THE LIFE OP JOHN OF BARNEVELD. Chap. XUL

The Elector-Palatine had lost no time. His counsellors
even before the coronation of Ferdinand at Prague had
done their best to excite alarm throughout Germany at the
document by which Archdukes Maximilian and Albert had
resigned all their hereditary claims in favour of Ferdinand
and his male children. Should there be no such issue, the
King of Spain claimed the succession for his own sons as
great-grandchildren of Emperor Maximilian^ considering
himself nearer in the line than the Styrian branch, but
being willing to waive his own rights in favour of so ardent
a Catholic as Ferdinand. There was even a secret negotia-
tion going on a long time between the new king of Bohemia
and Philip to arrange for the precedence of the Spanish
males over the Styrian females to the hereditary Austrian
states, and to cede the province of Alsace to Spain.^

It was not wonderful that Protestant Germany should be
alarmed. After a century of Protestantism, that Spain
should by any possibility come to be enthroned again over
Grermany was enough to raise both Luther and Calvin from
their graves. It was certainly enough to set the lively
young palatine in motion. So soon as the election of
Frederic was proclaimed, he had taken up the business in
person. Fond of amusement, young, married to a beautiful
bride of the royal house of England, he had hitherto left
politics to his counsellors.

Finding himself frustrated in his ambition by the election
of another to the seat he had fondly deemed his own, he
resolved to unseat him if he could, and, at any rate, to pre-
vent the ulterior consequences of his elevation. He made a
pilgrimage to Sedan, to confer with that irrepresBible in-
triguer and Huguenot chieftain, the Due de Bouillon. He
felt sure of the countenance of the States-General, and, of
course, of his near relative the great stadholder. He was

^ Barter, ill. 5, 6. C. A. Menzel, iii. 270. Qindely, 52, 9qq,

1618.

THE ELECTOR-PALATINE'S INTRIGUES.

91

resolved to invite the Duke of Lorraine to head the anti-
Austrian party^ and to stand for the kingship of the Bomans
and the Empire in opposition to Ferdinand. An emissary
sent to Nancy came back with a discouraging reply. The
Duke not only flatly refused the candidacy, but warned the
Palatine that if it really came to a struggle he could reckon
on small support anywhere, not even from those who now
seemed warmest for the scheme. Then Frederic resolved to
try his cousin, the great Maximilian of Bavaria, to whom all
Catholics looked with veneration and whom all German Pro-
testants respected. Had the two branches of the illustrious
house of Wittelsbach been combined in one purpose, the
opposition to the House of Austria might indeed have been
formidable. But what were ties of blood compared to the
iron bands of religious love and hatred ? How could Maxi-
milian, sternest of Papists, and Frederick V., flightiest of
Calvinists, act harmoniously in an Imperial election ? More-
over, Maximilian was united by ties of youthful and tender
friendship as well as by kindred and perfect religious sym-
pathy to his other cousin. King Ferdinand himself. The
case seemed hopeless, but the Elector went to Munich,^ and
held conferences with his cousin. Not willing to take No
for an answer so long as it was veiled under evasive or
ornamental phraseology, he continued to negotiate with
Maximilian through his envoys Camerarius and Secretary
Neu, who held long debates with the Duke's chief coun-
cillor. Doctor Jocher. Camerarius assured Jocher that his
master was the Hercules to untie the Gordian knot, and the
lion of the tribe of Judah.' How either the lion of Judah or
Hercules were to untie the knot which was popularly sup-
posed to have been cut by the sword of Alexander did not

» Feb. 1618. Hurter, 7, 8. Gin-
dely, 193.
* Bat the obeervatioD seems to have

been made at a later Interview. Hur-
ter, i. 25,

92

THE LIFE OP JOHN OP BABNEVELD. Chap. XHT.

appear^ but Maximilian at any rate was moved neither by
entreaties nor tropes. Being entirely averse from entering
himself for the German crown, he grew weary at last of the
importunity with which the scheme was urged. So he
wrote a short billet to his councillor, to be shown to
Secretary Neu.

" Dear Jocher," he said, " I am convinced one must let
these people understand the matter in a little plainer Ger-
man. I am once for all determined not to let myself into
any misunderstanding or even amplifications with the
House of Austria in regard to the succession. I think also
that it would rather be harmful than useful to my house
to take upon myself so heavy a burthen as the German
crown." ^

This time the German was plain enough and produced its
effect. Maximilian was too able a statesman and too con-
scientious a friend to wish to exchange his own proud position
as chief of the League, acknowledged head of the great
Catholic party, for the sUppery, comfortless, and unmeaning
throne of the Holy Empire, which he considered Ferdinand's
right.

The chiefs of the anti-Austrian party, especially the
Prince of Anhalt and the Margrave of Anspach, in unison

Dec ^itii the Heidelberg cabinet, were forced to look for

1618. another candidate.* Accordingly the Margrave and
the Elector-Palatine solemnly agreed that it was indis-
pensable to choose an emperor who should not be of the House
of Austria nor a slave of Spain. It was, to be sure, not pos-
sible to think of a Protestant prince. Bavaria would not
oppose Austria, would also allow too much influence to the

^ Htirter, i 8, sqg,

• Harter, i. 9, 10, who says that
the document drawn up in French
for the two princes, as was usually
the case with the functionaries of the

Palatinate, was amon^t^ those which
set the fashion for Germans to use
a foreign tongue instead of their own
for court and state afl&irs.
