EARLY
RELIGIOUS
POETRY
OF  PERSIA
J.H.MOULTON
Presented  to  the
UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY
by  the
ONTARIO  LEGISLATIVE
LIBRARY
1980
The  Cambridge Manuals  of  Science  and
Literature
EARLY RELIGIOUS POETRY
OF PERSIA
PRESS
^FETTER  LANE,  E.G.
C. F.  CLAY,  MANAGER
: 100,  PE1NCES  STREET
Brrlin: A.  ASHER  AND  CO.
mipjig: V.  A. BROCKHAUS
^eto  $orfe: G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS
Bombay  antj  Calcutta: MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD.
All  rights  reserved
EARLY RELIGIOUS
POETRY OF PERSIA
JAMES  HOPE  MOULTON,  M.A
D.Lit.  (Lond.),  D.D.  (Edin.),
D.C.L.  (Durh.),  D.Theol.  (Berlin).
Greenwood  Professor  in  the
University  of  Manchester
Cambridge  :
at  the  University  Press
1911
dambrtoge:
PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
With  the  exception  of  the  coat  of  arms  at
the  foot,  the  design  on  the  title  page  is  a
reproduction  of  one  used  by  the  earliest  known
Cambridge  printer,  John  Siberch,  1521
IN PIAM MEMORIAM
EDVARDI BYLES COWELL
TPO<t>EIA


a3


PREFACE

THE  fascinating  field  of  Avestan  literature  has
been  strangely  neglected  in  our  country.  I  have
tried  in  a  modest  way  to  open  it  up  for  students  of
poetry  and  students  of  religion,  who  will  I  trust  at
least  recognise  from  these  pages  that  the  subject  is
worth  pursuing  further.  The  little  book  ventures  on
ground  which  is  full  of  pitfalls  for  investigators  who
are  not  able  to  give  undivided  attention.  I  have
therefore  appreciated  very  specially  the  help  of  two
old  friends  who  have  looked  over  my  proofs — the
Editor,  with  whom  I  read  the  Gathas  under  Cowell
long  ago,  and  (for  the  first  half  of  the  book)  Prof.
Williams  Jackson,  whose  paramount  authority  in
Iranian  subjects  every  expert  knows.  To  them  and
to  other  scholars  named  in  the  book  itself  I  offer
very  warm  thanks,  only  asking  the  reader  not  to  hold
them  responsible  when  I  have  dared  to  be  original —
and  very  likely  wrong.

J.  H.  M.


WESLEYAN  COLLEGE,  DIDSBURY.
August  1911.


:  A *
te1 ier#i! ,3


CONTENTS

CHAP.  PAOE

Preface .... . .  vii

Transcription  and  Pronunciation .

I.  The  Aryans  and  their  Language .  1

II.  General  Description  of  the  Avesta  10

III.  Avestan  Verse-forms 17

IV.  Early  History  of  the  Religion ....  28

V.  Zarathushtra 48

VI.  After  Zarathushtra  ....  74

VII.  The  Gathas :  Literary  features ....  80

VIII.  Contents  of  the  Gathas 87

IX. The  Yashts  and  Later  Avesta . . . .119

Bibliography 162

Index 165


TRANSCRIPTION  AND  PRONUNCIATION


The  alphabet  which  appears  in  Avestan  MSS  is  replaced
throughout  with  Western  letters.  The  system  of  transliteration
here  adopted  has  been  governed  mainly  by  the  desire  for  sim
plicity  :  no  attempt  has  been  made  to  differentiate  certain  sounds
which  have  separate  symbols,  but  no  intelligible  distinction  of
quality.  Transliterations  enclosed  in  brackets  are  used  in  the
body  of  the  text,  the  others  where  an  Avestan  or  Old  Persian
word  is  given  as  such.


Voweh  :—

a  a  (a  in  father)
e  e  (cf.  u  in  but)
e  §  (as  in  \et,  fete)
o  o  (as  in  note)

Consonants : —

k

g  (hard)

X  (kh)  (as  in  loch)

y  (gh)  (dialectic  Ger.  Ta#e)

c  (ch)  (as  in  church)

j  (as  in  judge)

t  (hard)

d

6  (th)  (as  in  bzth)

8  (dh)  (as  in  ba^e)

t  (th)  (?  nearly  =  0  or  8)

P
b

f


a.  (as  in  French  an)
a  (as  in  laic)
i  I  (as  in  quinine)
u  a  (as  in  pwll,  pool).


n  (ng)  (as  in

n

m

y

V

r  (trilled)

s  (as  in  seal)

z  (as  in  zeal)

s  (sh)  (as  in  sure)

%  (zh)  (as  in  azure)

h

XV  (hv)  (as  in  Welsh  chicech).


CHAPTER  I

THE  ARYANS  AND  THEIR  LANGUAGE

THE  continent  of  Asia,  apart  from  the  tiny  country
of  Palestine,  has  produced  very  little  poetry  that
has  made  any  impression  upon  the  West.  The  vast
literature  of  India  is  known  at  a  respectful  distance,
and  its  philosophy  has  to  some  extent  compelled
recognition ;  but  the  genius  is  yet  unborn  who  shall
popularise  Veda  or  MaMbharata  in  Europe.  One
Eastern  country  alone,  beyond  the  fortieth  parallel
of  longitude,  has  sung  so  as  to  make  the  West  listen ;
and  that  is  Persia,  whose  early  religious  poetry  is  the
subject  of  this  little  book.  We  are  not  concerned
with  the  times  that  gave  us  Firdausi  or  Hdfiz,  Nizami
and  Omar  Khayyam.  The  poetry  of  our  period  is
utterly  unknown  in  Europe  and  America  except  to  a
handful  of  scholars.  We  compare  our  FitzGerald's
Omar  with  the  Rubdiydt  in  sober  English  prose,  and
we  are  inclined  to  see  a  sufficient  reason  in  Horace's

MO.  l


2  THE  ARYANS  AND  THEIR  LANGUAGE  [CH.

carent  quia  vate  sacro. Of  FitzGerald  and  Omar  we
are  tempted  to  ask

Which  is  the  Potter,  pray,  and  which  the  Pot?

Would  Omar  have  been  heard  of  in  English  literary
circles  had  (say)  Carey  translated  him  ?

To  answer  that  question  is  not  our  present  busi
ness,  nor  does  a  similar  question  arise  in  connexion
with  the  literature  we  are  about  to  describe.  There
is  no  FitzGerald,  to  begin  with,  and  if  there  had  been,
one  must  doubt  whether  he  would  have  found  a  sub
ject  to  his  mind.  Speaking  generally,  this  early
Persian  religious  poetry  interests  the  thinker  more
than  the  man  of  letters.  It  has  not  a  little  beauty,
and  the  student  of  religion  lets  his  plummet  down
into  its  depths  with  increasing  wonder.  But  there  is
no  modernity  about  it,  and  no  mirage  of  antiquity  to
quicken  a  poet's  fancy.  The  oldest  and  most  im
portant  parts  of  it  are  sermons  in  metre,  and  perhaps
rather  dull  sermons  too  for  those  who  are  not
seriously  minded.  Yet  it  may  be  hoped  that  before
this  little  book  comes  to  its  last  page  the  modern
reader  may  be  stirred  to  some  interest  in  the
doctrine  of  God  and  Man  proclaimed  perhaps
thirty  centuries  since  by  the  Prophet  Zarathushtra
(Zoroaster),  whose  dim  figure  through  the  mists  of
time  looms  large  among  the  highest  thinkers  of
humanity.


i]  ARYAN  AND  INDO-EUROPEAN  3

At  a  period  which  in  the  hoary  annals  of  Egypt
or  Babylonia  might  be  counted  as  fairly  recent,  there
lived  together  in  Western  Asia  a  people  who  called
themselves  Aryans1.  They  formed  the  easternmost
branch  of  the  great  speech-family  in  which  our
Geimanic  tribes  have  held  one  of  the  most  westerly
positions  since  history  began  tardily  to  fling  us  a
recognition.  Linguistic  science  enables  us  to  re
construct  a  common  language,  spoken  in  prehistoric
times  by  a  closely  linked  assembly  of  tribes  occupying
central  or  northern  Europe.  We  only  infer  this  com
mon  language  by  the  careful  analysis  of  historical
dialects  that  are  derived  from  it :  a  Hindustani  word
is  compared  with  an  English,  a  French  word  with  a
Russian,  a  Welsh  with  an  Armenian,  and  the  linguistic
changes  which  have  carried  them  so  far  apart  are
recognised  as  we  trace  the  history  back  to  the
earliest  speech  we  know.  The  actual  home  of  the
original  "Indo-Germanic"  or  "Indo-European"  tribes
we  cannot  determine  with  certainty,  though  "  some
where  in  Europe"  is  at  present  the  reasoned  and
confident  answer  of  science  to  a  question  which  fifty
years  ago  produced  the  merely  instinctive  but  equally
confident  "somewhere  in  Asia."  At  the  very  dawn

1  The  term  is  generally  used  in  England  in  the  sense  popularised
by  Max  Miiller,  to  denote  what  we  call  Indo-European  or  Indo-
Germanic.  In  this  book  "  Aryan"  always  has  the  narrower  and  more
correct  connotation  of  Indo-Iranian.

1—2
\

•3


4  THE  ARYANS  AND  THEIR  LANGUAGE  [CH.

of  our  historical  knowledge  one  section  of  the  family
was  some  distance  beyond  the  frontier  of  Europe
towards  the  south-east,  and  it  is  this  section  with
which  we  are  concerned.

The  unity  of  ancestry  that  binds  together  the
Indian  and  the  Persian  languages  is,  like  the  larger
unity,  a  scientific  induction  and  not  proved  from
actual  monuments.  The  oldest  relics  we  possess  of
these  languages  reveal  dialects  already  as  distinct  as
Dutch  and  English.  But  the  most  casual  acquain
tance  soon  shows  that  the  application  of  a  few  simple
sound-changes  will  suffice  to  turn  the  one  language
into  the  other.  For  instance,  we  find  that  an  s  at  the
beginning  of  a  word  before  a  vowel  becomes  h  in  the
Iranian  languages.  Seven  is  saptd  in  Sanskrit,  and
retains  its  initial  s  in  all  the  languages  derived  from
Sanskrit.  In  Iranian  it  is  hapta,  as  in  Greek.  Our
familiar  proper  name  Indus  betrays  by  its  initial,  when
contrasted  with  the  native  Sindh,  the  fact  that  it
comes  to  us  from  a  foreign  source :  the  h  that  is
still  preserved  in  Hindu  tells  us  that  the  source  is
Persian.  The  application  of  this  and  similar  laws  of
change  will  enable  us  to  turn  whole  pages  of  the
oldest  Iranian  into  the  dialect  of  the  Rigveda,  and
comparatively  seldom  find  an  independent  variation
of  form.  Thus  Professor  Geldner  cites  a  line  of  the
GMhas  which  he  sets  by  the  side  of  one  from  the
MahabMrata,  thus :—


i]  THE  IRANIAN  BRANCH  5

(Gath.) ke  me  na  0rata  vistO  anyo  [asa^]  flwatfca]  ?
(M.bh.) na  nas  trata  vidyate  [vai]  tvad  anyafc.

The  latter  is  negative,  and  uses  the  finite  verb  instead
of  the  participle.  Otherwise,  except  for  two  words,
they  would  become  identical  if  we  altered  them  thus
(writing  the  Sanskrit  without  "sandhi")  :—

(1)  ke  moi  na  0rata  visto  anyo  #wat  ?

(2)  kas  me  na  trata  vittas  anyas  tvat?

In  the  application  of  this  process  on  a  larger  scale
we  not  seldom  find  the  Iranian  nearer  the  original
when  they  disagree.  We  can  best  appreciate  the  sig
nificance  of  this  if  we  take  a  stanza  of  verse  in  English
and  write  under  each  word  the  cognate  word  in  Dutch.
We  should  have  to  try  Scotch  instead  before  we  could
reduce  the  differences  to  the  level  of  our  Aryan  com
parison.  It  has  seemed  worth  while  to  present  this
affinity  in  a  form  which  can  be  appreciated  without
knowledge  of  either  language,  because  of  the  funda
mental  importance  of  the  issue  involved.  The  dif
ference  of  pronunciation  between  such  a  passage  as
we  have  printed  above  and  the  Aryan  form  of  it,  as
reconstructed  by  the  comparative  method,  is  no
greater  than  that  between  the  English  of  Chaucer
and  that  of  Tennyson.  We  are  allowed  to  be  con
tent  with  a  few  centuries  of  separation  between  the
two  branches,  lying  behind  our  oldest  representative
literature.  Then  we  come  to  the  period  of  unity,  in


6  THE  ARYANS  AND  THEIR  LANGUAGE  [CH.

which  the  line  above  quoted  would  run  somewhat  as
follows,  allowing  for  some  uncertainties  and  a  margin
of  small  dialectic  differences  which  we  cannot  detect
to-day  :—

(3) kas  mai  na  trata  vit'tas  anyas  tvad?

During  this  period  we  may  picture  the  Aryan  tribes
living  together  in  a  fairly  extended  country  perhaps
round  the  south-west  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  Their
language  would  be  homogeneous  enough  for  mutual
understanding,  though  we  may  presume  dialectic
differences  much  like  those  which  distinguish  the
speech  of  different  English  counties.  To  their  com
mon  religion  we  shall  return  later.  The  cleavage
that  ultimately  scattered  the  Aryan  tribes  was  very
probably  social  in  its  character.  Part  of  the  popu
lation  were  settled  on  the  land  as  agriculturists,
another  part  were  nomads.  The  latter  behaved  to
the  former  much  as  the  Kurds  behave  to  the
Armenians  in  the  same  regions  still.  But  at  last
great  hordes  of  nomads  hived  off  to  the  south-east,
seeking  more  productive  fields  for  plunder ;  and
establishing  themselves  in  the  Panjab  they  ulti
mately  became  the  masters  of  India  and  the
authors  of  its  intellectual  wealth.

We  are  concerned  here  with  the  tribes  that
remained  behind  in  Iran,  as  the  country  came  to
be  called :  it  is  Airyanem  Vaejo,  "  the  Aryan


i]  BEHISTAN  INSCRIPTIONS  7

country  (?),"  in  the  Avesta.  How  far  their  territory
extended  in  prehistoric  times  we  need  not  enquire  at
this  point ;  but  we  may  remind  ourselves  that  Iranian
languages  to-day  may  be  found  in  Persia,  Afghanistan,
Bokhara,  Kurdistan,  Baluchistan,  and  as  far  north
west  as  the  Ossetes  in  the  Caucasus.  Iran,  then,  is
the  bridge  between  Europe  and  India ;  and  Iranian
languages  still  mark  the  road  along  which  our  own
kith  and  kin  migrated  from  Europe  ages  before
history  began  to  tell  of  the  peoples  they  left  behind.
Antiquity  preserves  for  us  three  dialects  from  Iran.
The  remarkable  discoveries  at  Turfan  within  the  last
decade  have  added  a  fourth,  in  the  Christian  and
Manichaean  manuscripts  in  the  Sogdianian  dialect.
These  are  of  the  highest  interest  to  the  linguist  as
well  as  the  theologian,  but  do  not  concern  us  here.
Nor  must  we  do  more  than  mention  the  Old  Persian
language,  preserved  for  us  upon  the  cliff  at  Behistan,
where  the  servants  of  Darius  and  Xerxes  smoothed
the  surface  of  the  rock  and  cut  the  great  cuneiform
inscriptions  which  through  twenty-three  centuries
have  told  of  the  victories  of  Persian  kings  to  any
travellers  who  risk  their  necks  in  the  climb.  But  if
Alexander  passed  that  way,  it  is  doubtful  whether  his
Persian  guides  could  have  read  to  him  the  parts  of
the  royal  annals  in  which  Marathon  and  Salamis  were
so  unaccountably  passed  over.  The  Old  Persian
quickly  lost  its  ancient  flexions,  and  developed  into


8  THE  ARYANS  AND  THEIR  LANGUAGE  [OH.

the  Pahlavi  of  the  Sassanian  era  and  the  almost
uninflected  Persian  of  the  modern  period.  How
Grotefend  and  Rawlinson  recovered  the  key  of  this
long-lost  writing,  and  with  it  opened  the  door  to
the  new  science  of  Assyriology,  is  a  long  and  fas
cinating  story  on  which  we  may  not  enter — the
story  of  one  of  the  mightiest  triumphs  of  human
intellect.  The  records  of  the  Behistan  Rock  are
told  in  sober  prose,  or  we  might  find  excuse  to
linger  before  that  wonderful  relic  of  the  past.  We
must  be  content  to  refer  our  readers  to  an  intensely
interesting  book  of  travel  by  one  of  the  greatest
of  Oriental  scholars,  Persia  Past  and  Present,  by
Professor  A.  V.  Williams  Jackson,  of  Columbia
University,  who  in  1903  climbed  the  Rock  and  read
afresh  some  of  the  comparatively  few  characters
which  time  had  obscured  to  Rawlinson's  pene
trating  eye.

We  pass  on  to  the  two  dialects  in  which  are  written
the  literature  that  forms  the  subject  of  this  little  book.
They  have  the  common  name  of  Avestan,  from  the
Avesta,  the  sacred  library  of  the  ancient  Persian
religion.  The  name  Zend  is  often  given  to  this
language ;  and  there  really  does  not  seem  to  be
any  very  convincing  reason  why  a  short  and  con
venient  term  should  be  discarded  merely  because
it  happens  to  be  based  on  a  misunderstanding  of
the  (to  most  of  us)  unknown  tongue  to  which  it


i]  IRANIAN  DIALECTS  9

belongs.  However,  aa  science  has  banned  the  word,
we  have  no  choice  but  to  obey.  We  proceed  to
define  the  two  varieties  of  Avestan.  The  older  we
call  Gdthic,  as  the  dialect  of  the  Gathas  or  Hymns,
the  most  ancient  and  by  far  the  most  important
section  of  the  Avesta,  though  scanty  in  bulk  by
comparison  with  the  rest.  The  Later  Avestan  is  a
dialect  closely  akin  to  the  Gtithic,  but  manifestly
separated  from  it  by  many  generations,  if  indeed
we  may  not  conjecture  that  its  immediate  parent
was  not  the  Gathic  itself  but  a  contemporary  dialect
diverging  from  it  in  a  few  features  of  pronunciation.

NOTE. — The  possibility  of  throwing  light  on  the  prehistoric
period  of  Aryan  unity  luus  been  raised  lately  by  the  Mitanian
inscriptions  discovered  at  Boghaz-keui  by  Winckler,  dated  in  the
fourteenth  century  B.C.  Pending  further  researches  by  the  dis
coverer,  we  must  recognise  results  as  tentative ;  but  it  seems
clear  that  names  of  Aryan  divinities  have  been  found,  the  form
of  which  antedates  the  phonetic  change  of  *  to  h  described  above
(p.  4).  Whether  their  origin  is  Indian,  Iranian  (of  a  pre-Gathic
dialect),  or  proto- Aryan,  is  still  debated.  The  Journal  of  tfie
Royal  Asiatic  Society  for  1909  and  1910  contains  several  inter
esting  papers  on  the  subject.


* ft


*

I-


Off"


CHAPTER  II

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  AVESTA

THE  Avesta  was  brought  to  the  West  in  the  year
1771.  Manuscripts  were  before  that  date  reposing
in  European  libraries,  notably  the  Bodleian,  but  no
one  could  read  them,  and  the  little  noticed  Oriental
curiosity  was  a  book  with  seven  seals.  Fairly  copious
notices  of  ancient  Persian  religion,  and  even  allusions
to  the  Avesta,  existed  in  classical  authors  ;  and  they
had  been  collected  and  examined  with  great  wealth
of  learning  by  the  Oxford  scholar,  Thomas  Hyde,  in
a  massive  work  published  in  17001.  But  the  Parsi
Dasturs  of  Bombay  kept  their  secret  to  themselves
until  it  was  tempted  from  them  by  the  Frenchman
Anquetil  du  Perron.  He  had  seen  an  Avestan  manu
script  and  conceived  the  ambition  to  interpret  it  to
the  Western  world.  He  reached  Bombay  in  the  face
of  manifold  difficulties,  gained  the  confidence  of  the

1  Historia  Religionis  veterum  Persarum  eorumque  Magorum  (Oxford).


CH.II]  THE  AVESTA  11

Parsis  by  his  enthusiasm,  and  after  many  years  of
study  brought  his  treasures  to  Europe  for  pub
lication.  Anquetil's  translation  is  of  course  entirely
superseded  now,  for  reasons  that  will  shortly  appear,
though  his  collection  of  traditions  is  still  serviceable.
But  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  this  does  not  detract
from  the  glory  due  to  the  great  pioneer.  It  is  sad  to
have  to  record  that  the  discoverer's  reward  came
mostly  long  after  he  had  passed  beyond  the  enjoy
ment  of  it.  A  chorus  of  scepticism  assailed  him.  A
leader  in  it  was  Sir  William  Jones,  the  very  man  who
ought  to  have  been  foremost  in  recognising  Anquetil's
merit  and  correlating  his  discovery  with  the  newly-
found  treasures  of  Sanskrit.  Jones  was  himself  a
pioneer  in  Sanskrit  study,  and  well  acquainted
with  Persian.  It  is  strange  that  the  acute  scholar
who  first  saw  the  linguistic  connexion  of  Sanskrit,
Greek,  Latin,  and  Germanic,  and  thus  laid  the
foundation  of  all  modern  philology,  could  not  see
how  the  new  Avestan  dialect,  obscured  though  it
was  by  imperfect  traditional  interpretation,  fitted
in  with  the  facts  he  already  knew.

The  Avestan  manuscripts  which  were  thus  brought
within  the  range  of  Western  scholarship  are  all  of
quite  recent  date :  the  oldest  known  is  dated
1278  A.D.  They  are  written  in  a  script  of  relatively
late  origin,  running  from  right  to  left,  in  an
alphabet  of  great  richness,  comprising  some  fifty


•

'

s  C


12  THE  AVESTA  [OH.

different  signs.  It  has  retained  the  Aryan  sibilants,
and  developed  a  number  of  fresh  spirants  (sounds  like
fj  v,  th,  etc.),  giving  the  language  some  of  the  charac
teristic  softness  of  Spanish  or  Modern  Greek ;  while
it  resembles  all  the  Indo-European  languages  in
dropping  the  difficult  "  voiced  aspirates  "  (bh,  dh,  gh\
which  only  Sanskrit  and  its  descendants  have  kept.
It  has  considerably  augmented  the  scanty  vowel-
system  it  inherited  from  the  Aryan  period,  in  which
primitive  a,  e  and  o  were  already  fused  together.

The  divisions  of  the  Avesta  must  here  be  noticed.
First  in  importance  comes  the  Yasna  ("worship"),
the  kernel  of  which  are  the  Five  Gathas,  already
alluded  to  :  the  rest  of  the  Yasna  contains  texts
relating  to  ritual,  some  of  them  essentially  similar
in  character  to  the  Yashts  (Av.  Y$&ti,  "  praise  "-
from  same  root  as  yasna,  and  nearly  the  same  in
meaning).  The  Yashts  are  hymns  of  praise,  twenty-
one  in  number,  addressed  to  the  Yazatas  or  "angels,"
of  whom  we  shall  have  to  speak  presently.  The  Yasna
and  the  Yashts  include  very  nearly  all  the  verse  that
the  Avesta  contains ;  and  we  may  pass  over  the  minor
texts,  only  further  naming  the  Vendiddd  ( Av.  vlda$va
data,  "anti-demoniac  law"),  which  is  nearly  all  in
prose,  comprising  the  ceremonial  code,  with  some
more  interesting  matter  to  which  we  shall  recur.
Mention  of  other  parts  may  be  omitted,  as  they
contain  practically  no  verse.


n] LOSSES  OF  PRIMITIVE  TEXTS  13

The  Avesta  has  had  a  long  and  chequered  history,
which  lias  witnessed  the  irretrievable  loss  of  its  larger
portions  and  an  unknown  amount  of  damage  to  the
text  of  what  has  survived.  Pliny  tells  us  of  two
million  verses  composed  by  Zoroaster ;  and  the  Arab
historian  Tabari  says  that  his  writings  were  inscribed
on  twelve  thousand  cowhides.  Parsi  tradition  accuses
Alexander  of  destroying  one  of  two  complete  copies
of  the  Avesta  in  the  sack  of  Persepolis ;  and  the
other  copy  at  Samarkand,  it  is  implied,  vanished  simi
larly.  How  far  there  still  survived  scattered  copies
of  certain  texts,  and  how  far  tradition  preserved  others,
we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  To  King  Valkhash,
who  probably  lived  in  the  first  century  of  our  era,  is
ascribed  the  initiation  of  the  work  which  ultimately
produced  our  Avesta.  It  was  taken  up  with  great
enthusiasm  by  the  earliest  monarchs  of  the  Sassanian
dynasty  (226  A.D.  to  the  Mohammedan  conquest).
The  final  revision  of  the  text  took  place  in  the
fourth  century,  when  the  canon  was  authoritatively
settled.  We  have  in  the  early  Pahlavi  writers
descriptions  of  the  contents  of  this  canon,  showing
how  much  was  even  then  believed  to  have  been  past
recovery.  But  heavier  losses  still  have  followed.
Alexander's  destructiveness,  if  not  purely  mythical,
was  accidental :  he  was  the  last  man  to  burn  a
literature  of  set  purpose.  It  was  otherwise  with
the  Moslem  invasion  of  the  seventh  century.  When


14  THE  AVESTA  [OH.

the  choice  was  between  death  with  the  Avesta  and
life  with  the  Koran,  the  palpable  inferiority  of  the
latter  was  easily  overlooked.  The  faithful  remnant
who  in  the  next  century  took  refuge  on  the  hospitable
shores  of  India,  to  find  there  a  liberty  of  conscience
which  Mohammedan  Persia  denied  them,  brought
with  them  only  fragments  of  the  literature  that
Sassanian  piety  had  so  laboriously  gathered.  Alto
gether,  Prof.  Williams  Jackson  calculates,  about
two-thirds  of  the  Avesta  have  disappeared  since  the
last  Zoroastrian  monarch  sat  on  the  Persian  throne.

It  is  not  surprising  that  a  book  which  has  passed
through  so  many  vicissitudes  should  have  prompted
some  questioning  among  critics  of  to-day.  James
Darmesteter,  one  of  the  very  greatest  Orientalists
of  the  nineteenth  century,  carried  scepticism  to  its
utmost  conceivable  length  in  his  attempt  to  demon
strate  that  the  G^thas  are  no  older  than  the  first
century  of  our  era,  and  that  the  Sassanian  editors
are  to  be  credited  with  very  much  more  originality
than  tradition  allows  them.  Darmesteter's  theory
was  set  forth  in  the  introduction  to  his  monu
mental  French  translation  of  the  Avesta,  published
in  the  Annales  du  Musfo  Guimet  only  a  year  before
the  great  scholar  died,  still  in  the  forties,  but  with
achievement  behind  him  large  enough  to  give  dis
tinction  to  any  lifetime.  The  theory  needs  prominent
mention  here,  because  it  is  expounded  for  English


ii]  DARMESTETER'S  THEORY  15

readers  in  the  second  edition  of  Darmesteter's  trans
lation  of  the  Vendidfid  in  Sacred  Books  of  the
East.  Its  appearance  in  the  standard  volume  from
which  ordinary  readers  naturally  get  what  ideas  they
have  of  the  Avesta  makes  it  necessary  to  explain  that
its  brilliant  author  never  made  a  convert  among  ex
perts  :  we  may  feel  quite  confident  that,  had  he  lived,
he  would  have  abandoned  it  himself  under  stress  of
unbroken  opposition  from  everyone  whose  opinion
was  based  on  knowledge.  The  reasons  for  our  trust
in  the  antiquity  of  the  G&thas  will  come  out  as  we
proceed  There  is  the  subtle  evidence  of  versification
and  dialect,  which  would  have  been  alike  impossible
to  fashion  in  the  period  to  which  Darmesteter  assigns
them.  There  is  the  evidence  of  their  contents,  psycho
logically  incongruous  if  regarded  as  built  up  around
an  imaginary  character.  The  preservation  of  venerated
poetry  for  centuries  by  unaided  tradition  seems  to  us
very  wonderful,  but  it  is  no  unparalleled  marvel.  The
days  are  long  past  when  the  Homeric  poems  were
assumed  to  be  late  because  it  could  be  shown  that
they  were  not  written  down  in  the  age  when  they
were  first  composed.  As  for  the  rest  of  the  Avesta,
its  close  connexion  with  religion  accounts  in  the  end
for  its  preservation.  We  know  the  forces  which
carried  our  own  sacred  books  through  even  hotter
fires  of  persecution  than  those  which  raged  round
the  Parsis  when  Islam  came.  Carried  largely  in  the


16  THE  AVESTA  [CH.  n

memory,  or  furtively  copied  by  unskilful  hands,  the
Gospels  suffered  not  a  little  from  textual  corruption,
which  could  not  be  wholly  repaired  when  in  quieter
days  students  began  to  edit  the  sacred  text  from  two
or  three  early  recensions  ;  and  in  particular  there
was  considerable  disturbance  of  the  grammar  and
orthography  of  the  originals.  But  no  one  imagines
that  the  text  as  a  whole  is  discredited  by  its  having
passed  through  conditions  which  would  have  destroyed
mere  literature,  however  full  of  genius,  and  however
beloved  by  aesthetic  devotees  of  art.  Much  the  same
in  its  own  degree  may  be  said  of  the  Avestan  texts.
Their  grammar  and  their  verse-form,  except  in  the
constantly  chanted  Gathas  (see  p.  26),  were  badly
corrupted  by  their  custodians  through  imperfect
knowledge  of  a  sacred  tongue  long  dead.  But  we
can  feel  little  surprise  at  the  preservation  of
documents  so  fundamental  to  religion,  by  those
Pilgrim  Fathers  of  Zoroastrianism  who  gave  up
everything  for  their  faith.  And  happily  modern
science  can  apply  stringent  tests  to  assure  us  that
it  was  not  cunningly  devised  fables  they  guarded
so  long  and  so  well.


CHAPTER  III

AVESTAN  VERSE-FORMS

FEW  subjects  are  more  overladen  with  technicality,
and  more  obstinate  when  one  would  rouse  the
interest  of  the  general  reader,  than  that  of  Metre,
especially  as  developed  by  modern  scientific  study.
The  present  writer  cannot  hope  to  succeed  where
even  specialists  seem  bound  to  fail  ;  but  the  subject
cannot  be  altogether  passed  over,  and  we  must
attempt  to  give  some  general  account  of  the  elements
which  constitute  verse  in  the  A  vesta.  These  are
"  elements "  indeed  in  more  senses  than  one  ;  for
nothing  more  elementary  can  be  found  among  all  the
verse-forms  of  Indo-European  languages.  Verse  in
the  Avesta  depends  only  on  the  numbering  of
syllables  and  the  placing  of  the  caesura.  In  his  very
important  monograph  on  the  Metre  of  the  Later
Avesta,  Prof.  Geldner  has  noted  the  total  absence,
after  prolonged  and  various  tests,  of  any  discoverable

MO.  2


18  AVESTAN  VERSE-FORMS  [CH.

rhythm  or  any  certain  influence  by  accent  or  quantity.
There  is  one  possible  exception,  if  Geldner's  suspicion
is  justifiable  that  three  main  accents  as  a  rule  may
be  found  in  the  eight-syllabled  verse.  There  may
be  added  Bartholomae's  argument  to  prove  that  in
Gathic  verse  enclitic  pronouns  and  particles  were
normally  placed  after  the  first  main  accent  in  a  verse
unit.  This  marks  the  extent  to  which  modern  re
search  has  been  able  to  trace  the  rudiments  of  any
advance  beyond  a  prosody  dependent  on  syllable-
counting  alone.

The  most  conspicuous  feature  of  Avestan  metric
system  is  the  complete  severance  between  the  Gathas
and  the  Later  Avesta,  In  the  former  we  have
elaborate  metres,  differing  widely  in  the  several
groups.  We  need  not  describe  them  here,  for  we
must  try  to  give  some  idea  of  them  in  Chap.  vin.  as
we  come  to  each  G&tha.  The  metre  of  the  Later
Avesta  is  very  much  simpler,  and  practically  uniform.
It  consists  of  eight-syllable  verses,  very  rarely  (it
would  seem)  lengthened  into  twelve.  The  only
variety  is  in  the  length  of  the  stanza,  which  may
contain  three,  four  or  five  lines.  We  come  as  near
to  it  as  English  can  in  the  metre  of  Hiawatha,  which
will  be  used  for  our  renderings  in  Chap.  ix.  But  we
must  remember  to  eliminate  our  accent,  and  be  pre
pared  as  preliminary  discipline  to  sing  a  quatrain  of
Longfellow  to  the  Old  Hundredth,  by  way  of  ridding


in]  LATER  AVESTAN  19

ourselves  effectively  of  the  element  which  is  so  vital
in  English  verse.

The  Later  Avesta  is  characterised  by  perpetual
mixture  of  verse  and  prose.  According  to  Geldner,
there  is  only  one  section  (the  Horn  Yasht,  Ys.  9)
which  is  wholly  in  verse ;  and  we  have  the  two
elements  mingled  in  varying  proportions  till  we
come  to  the  Vendidrul,  where  there  is  hardly  any
continuous  verse.  We  may  generally  assume  that
the  prose  represents  accretions  of  an  age  which
had  probably  lost  touch  with  the  ancient  metre.
Theoretically  the  mixture  might  be  ancient.  Thus,
in  his  ReaUexikon  der  indogermanischen  Alter-
t  ninth  nude  (p.  134),  Prof.  Schrader  mentions  "a
combination  of  prose  and  strophically  arranged  verse,
to  be  found  in  the  Veda  as  in  the  Edda."  There  is
seldom  any  temptation  to  fall  back  on  this  possibility
in  the  Avesta  :  the  specimens  we  give  in  Chap.  ix.  will
enable  the  reader  to  judge  very  fairly  for  himself.
The  metrical  sequence  may  often  have  been  lost  by
textual  corruption  where  the  matter  is  old.  More
often,  we  must  believe,  new  matter  has  been  added
in  an  age  which  had  forgotten  how  to  sing  the  old
songs,  just  as  it  had  forgotten  the  idiom  of  the  old
language.

There  is  a  possible  exception  to  break  the
monotony  of  octosyllabic  verse  in  the  Later  Avesta.
Geldner  in  his  Mcti-ih  ( 1877)  gave  some  specimens  of

2—2


20  AVESTAN  VERSE-FORMS  [CH.

ten-syllabled  lines,  scattered  about  in  the  midst  of
ordinary  verse,  without  any  obvious  reason,  to  say
nothing  of  rhyme.  More  hopeful  decidedly  is  a
strophe  which,  as  he  says,  "  answers  completely  to
the  Indian  aksarapankti  of  4  x  10  or  rather  8x5
syllables."  It  is  worth  quoting  in  the  original  for
some  features  which  are  discernible  even  by  readers
who  know  nothing  of  the  language.

Yat  yayo  dayat,  aat  daeva  xuisen ;

Yat  siSus  dayat,  aat  daeva  tusen ;

Yat  pistro  dayat,  aat  dagva  Uru0en;

Yat  gundo  dayat,  aat  dapva  p^Sen. (Vend.  S32.)

There  follows  a  line  of  prose,  which  we  cannot  turn
into  verse  without  drastic  revision,  and  then  there
are  three  lines  of  octosyllabic  metre.  Prof.  Cowell
rendered  the  whole  passage  thus,  verse  and  prose
together,  for  his  Cambridge  pupils :

At  the  sight  of  the  barley  the  demons  sweat ;

At  the  sight  of  the  fan  the  demons  cough ;

At  the  sight  of  the  millstone  the  demons  greet ;

At  the  sight  of  the  doughcake  the  demons  are  off.

The  demons  he  sends  in  haste  away :

From  the  house  of  the  doughcake  scared  they  fly.

They  scorch  their  jaws,  they  cannot  stay,

Where  the  barley  storeheaps  multiply.

The  version  of  this  "  Pittacus  Song,"  as  Cowell  called
it,  will  indicate  the  general  character  of  a  snatch  of
popular  poetry  which  breathes  the  whole  spirit  of  the


in]  GATHAS  AND  VEDA  21

early  Mazdayasnian  community  in  its  enthusiasm  for
agriculture.  But  Geldner,  in  his  great  critical  edition
of  the  Avesta,  prints  these  decasyllabics  as  prose ;
and  to  judge  from  his  silence  on  the  subject  in  the
Gnmdriss  (n.  23)  he  has  given  up  his  former  view.
Prof.  E.  V.  Arnold  in  a  letter  to  the  writer  says,  "  It
seems  rather  doubtful  whether  these  lines  are  verse :
they  suggest  to  me  rather  the  parallelism  of  form
and  meaning  which  is  the  foundation  of  verse  and
a  stepping-stone  towards  it."

It  remains  for  us  to  bring  these  characteristics  of
Avestan  verse  into  comparison  with  what  we  find  in
India.  We  have  already  remarked  on  the  closeness
of  the  nexus  between  the  two  divisions  of  the  Aryan
language-unity  ;  and  we  shall  find  under  this  new
heading  some  features  of  close  relationship  that  are
both  suggestive  and  perplexing.  We  start  with
observing  how  the  intense  individuality  of  the  Gathas
is  maintained  even  in  their  prosody.  In  dialect,  as
we  have  seen,  they  stand  much  nearer  than  the  Later
Avesta  to  the  Rigveda  ;  but  in  metre  and  in  thought
alike  it  is  the  Yashts  and  not  the  Gathas  in  which
the  Vedic  student  finds  himself  at  home.  Four  out  of
the  five  verse-systems  of  the  Gathas  have  no  complete
parallel  in  the  Veda,  according  to  Geldner ;  though
Prof.  Arnold  in  his  Vedic  Metre  enumerates  not  less
than  88  metrical  forms.  We  are  not  surprised  to
find  that  Vedic  bards  developed  their  own  metres


22  AVESTAN  VERSE-FORMS  [CH.

to  a  considerable  extent,  as  lyric  poets  will  in  every
age  which  has  not  fallen  into  slavish  artificiality.
That  so  original  a  thinker  as  Zarathushtra  should
have  done  the  same  need  cause  no  surprise.

What  is  remarkable,  and  not  readily  explained  by
mere  coincidence,  is  the  fact  that  in  metrical  form
the  approximation  between  Indian  and  Iranian
becomes  most  marked  in  the  later  stages  of  both
literatures.  The  octosyllabic  verse  of  the  Later
Avesta  is  found  in  the  Veda,  and  provides  ultimately
the  ploJca  of  the  Epic,  to  be  numbered  there  by  the
hundred  thousand.  We  have  therefore  the  curious
fact  that  later  Indian  and  later  Avestan  poetry  alike
not  only  developed  the  same  metre  but  practically
discarded  all  others.  Prof.  Arnold  is  even  disposed
to  think  that  the  bards  travelled  from  Persia  to
India  :  so  hard  does  it  seem  to  him  to  explain  by
parallel  development.  Contacts  between  India  and
the  Persia  of  the  Later  Avestan  period  are  distinctly
suggested  by  some  phenomena  in  the  religion  of  that
period  ;  but  so  far  as  they  go  the  suggestions  are
rather  of  influence  travelling  in  the  other  direction.

There  is  one  detailed  result  of  Prof.  Arnold's
brilliant  and  laborious  researches  which  may  be  con
jectured  to  possess  significance  for  our  subject.  He
has  shown  that  in  the  Vedic  period  there  are  a  great
many  originally  short  final  vowels  which  have  become
regularly  long,  while  in  classical  Sanskrit  they  are


. in]  FINAL  SHORT  VOWELS  23

short  again.  Now  we  find  in  our  MS.  tradition  of
the  Gathas  that  all  final  vowels  are  long,  whatever
their  etymological  record.  Prof.  Arnold  himself
thinks  that  in  both  cases  we  have  to  do  not  with
a  dialectical  peculiarity  but  a  metrical  fashion,  "  due
to  an  artificial  emphasis  on  final  syllables  partly
based  on  analogy,  and  developed  by  the  Avestan
poets  into  a  rule."  This  explanation  does  not  seem
available  for  the  Old  Persian  of  the  Inscriptions,
where  final  long  vowels  equally  unoriginal  occur  in  a
considerable  number.  One  can  hardly  help  regarding
the  coincidence  in  this  matter  between  Vedic,  Old
Persian  and  GAthic  as  due  to  a  real  common  ten
dency,  which  Gathic  has  pushed  further  than  the
others.  In  that  case  classical  Sanskrit  lies  outside
the  area  affected  by  this  tendency  ;  and  we  recall
the  fact  that  there  are  many  inflexional  forms  in
which  Gathic  and  Vedic  agree,  while  later  Sanskrit
diverges,  inasmuch  as  Vedic  is  not  the  parent  of
Sanskrit,  but,  so  to  speak,  its  aunt.  The  same  is
probably  true  of  Gathic  and  Later  Avestan,  though
this  phenomenon  cannot  be  adduced  in  evidence,  for
in  Later  Avestan  all  final  vowels  (except  in  mono
syllables)  are  impartially  short :  it  may  therefore  go
back  to  an  ancestry  agreeing  with  Gathic  here,  or  to
one  which  is  like  classical  Sanskrit  free  from  this
peculiar  infection.

But  this  is  obviously  uncertain  ground  to  tread


24  AVESTAN  VERSE-FORMS  [CH.

upon,  and  we  must  pass  to  a  less  problematical  result
of  the  comparison  between  Veda  and  Avesta.  We  have
noted  that  from  first  to  last  Avestan  verse  shows
no  sign  of  dependence  on  quantity.  Long  and  short
syllables  are  entirely  indifferent,  and  the  student  of
prosody  has  only  to  count  and  not  to  weigh.  Now
the  verse  of  the  Veda  has  manifestly  passed  into  a
new  and  more  developed  stage,  in  which  (as  Prof.
Arnold  puts  it)  "  preferences  arise  for  long  and  short
syllables,  and  for  groups  of  these,  at  certain  points  in
the  verse."  Nor  is  this  the  only  mark  of  development
on  the  Indian  side.  The  rules  of  vowel-combination
which  in  the  Rigveda  (according  to  Whitney)  cause  a
vowel-ending  to  coalesce  with  a  vowel  initial  in  the
next  word  about  seven  times  for  every  one  in  which
hiatus  is  left,  mark  a  great  change  from  the  con
ditions  found  in  the  Avesta,  where  this  "  sandhi "  is
relatively  rare.  This  all  means  that  the  Rigveda
belongs  to  a  very  much  more  advanced  stage  of
literary  evolution  than  any  part  of  the  Avesta,
although  the  latest  Avestan  poetry  must  be  cen
turies  later  in  date  than  the  latest  hymns  of  the
Rigveda.  Indian  literary  development  was  clearly
a  hothouse  plant.  The  Vedic  poets  belonged  to  a
regular  craft,  like  Pindar ;  and  the  bardic  families
had  no  doubt  been  elaborating  the  lines  of  their
models  for  generations  before  our  oldest  extant  hymn
was  composed.  In  Persia,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was


in]  RELATIVE  ANTIQUITY  25

well-nigh  two  thousand  years  before  poets  arose  who
cared  much  for  literary  form.  We  may  not  therefore
argue  that  the  more  primitive  system  of  Gothic  verse
gives  the  Hymns  of  Zarathushtra  higher  antiquity
than  the  oldest  Indian  poetry  with  its  abundant
marks  of  literary  development.  But  when  we  set
this  mark  of  primitive  simplicity  by  the  side  of  the
evidence  from  language,  which  makes  us  recognise
Gathic  to  lie  at  least  as  near  as  Vedic  to  the  parent
Aryan,  we  feel  it  increasingly  difficult  to  acquiesce  in
the  traditional  date  for  the  Prophet  (p.  48  f.)  if  the
Vedic  poets  are  not  to  be  brought  down  out  of  the
second  millennium  B.C.

Lastly  we  must  comment  on  the  welcome  evidence
afforded  by  the  test  of  metre  as  to  the  remarkable
faithfulness  with  which  the  Gathas  have  been  pre
served.  Our  oldest  MSS.  were  written  less  than  six
centuries  ago,  and  during  by  far  the  largest  pro
portion  of  their  long  history  the  Hymns  have  been
chanted  in  a  dead  language.  In  spite  of  this  they
present  to  modern  scholarship  a  text  which  will
stand  close  testing  by  laws  of  metre  established  out
of  a  cognate  literature  of  which  the  authors  never
heard.  We  may  as  well  add  the  transmitters  also,
for  even  if  the  Parsi  priests  who  wrote  our  MSS.
knew  the  Veda  well — a  sufficiently  unlikely  hypo
thesis — they  could  never  have  detected  the  subtle
traces  of  identity  beneath  a  diversity  which  they


26  AVESTAN  VERSE-FORMS  [CH.

never  attempted  to  impair.  They  must  have  done
much  more  if  they  attempted  anything  at  all.  The
accuracy  of  transmission  of  course  arises  from  the
unique  sanctity  with  which  the  Hymns  were  invested,
as  it  does  in  the  parallel  case  of  the  Samhita  text  of
the  Rigveda,  In  both  Gathas  and  Veda  the  metre
enables  us  to  restore,  on  curiously  similar  lines,  a
more  archaic  pronunciation  than  our  traditional
spelling  witnesses.  We  may  safely  assume  that  fixed
tunes  or  chants  preserved  the  metre,  and  so  pre
served  the  grammatical  accuracy  of  texts  in  a  dialect
long  dead.  However  this  may  be,  we  have  beyond
question  copies  made  in  the  fourteenth  century  of
our  era  presenting  us  with  poems  that  we  may  com
pare  word  after  word  with  ancient  or  modern  speech-
material  from  all  the  languages  of  our  Indo-European
family.  And  such  comparison  equally  beyond  all
question  gives  us  trustworthy  scientific  results,  even
though  we  have  to  believe  that  when  the  Magi
chanted  the  Gath£s  to  the  rising  sun  as  they  jour
neyed  to  Bethlehem  long  ages  ago,  the  language  of
their  hymn  may  have  been  less  clear  to  them  than
it  is  to  their  modern  successors  in  Bombay.

What  has  been  said  of  the  Gath§s  is  much  less
true  of  the  Later  Avesta,  though  (as  we  have  seen)
ritual  use  preserved  even  there  a  large  amount  of
verse  when  the  secret  of  its  scansion  and  com
position  was  lost.  Priests  and  theologians  and


in] ACCURACY  OF  PRESERVATION 27

lovers  of  national  folklore  could  add  their  glosses  to
these  less  venerated  poems  without  hindrance,  and
the  glosses  might  often  extend  beyond  the  bulk  of
the  original.  These  glosses  betray  themselves  to  us
not  only  by  their  unmetrical  form,  but  often  by
grammatical  blunders  showing  under  what  impossible
limitations  their  authors  tried  to  compose  in  a
sacred  language  which  for  generations  had  never
been  spoken.


CHAPTER  IV

EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION

IN  the  "  Religious  Poetry  "  that  forms  our  subject
we  very  soon  discover  that  the  adjective  bulks  much
larger  than  the  noun.  The  merely  literary  side  of
our  survey  will  give  us  but  little  to  do.  A  lover  of
the  Avesta  is  loth  to  admit  it,  but  the  confession
must  be  made  that  the  man  whose  interest  in  religion
is  only  aesthetic  is  not  very  likely  to  tarry  long  in
this  field.  It  might  even  be  suggested  that  one
reason  for  the  failure  of  Parsism  to  win  a  com
manding  place  among  the  world's  religions  lies  in  its
weakness  on  that  side  where  literature  makes  itself,
even  when  its  creators,  like  the  writers  of  the  New
Testament,  are  totally  unconscious  of  any  literary
gift  or  mission.  Around  the  figure  of  the  Founder
himself  there  is  no  halo,  nor  anything  out  of  which  a
halo  could  be  developed.  Few  facts  are  recorded
about  his  life,  and  in  his  own  poems  he  contrives  to


CH.  iv]  THE  FOUNDER  29

suppress  his  personality  more  than  any  other  religious
genius  known  to  history.  Later  legend  about  him  is
hardly  ever  picturesque.  It  revels  in  the  marvellous,
but  the  marvels  are  mostly  trivial  or  absurd.  We
can  admire  Zarathushtra,  and  we  can  set  him  with
thankfulness  among  the  Prophets  through  whom  God
spake  to  the  fathers  of  old  time.  But  we  can  neither
realise  nor  idealise  him  :  like  his  own  angelic  ab
stractions  around  the  throne  of  his  very  impersonal
God,  he  is  "a  voice  and  nothing  more."

In  delineating  the  nature  of  Zarathushtra's  work
we  have  to  keep  in  mind  constantly  our  dependence
on  conjecture,  and  we  must  proportionately  shun  any
tendency  to  dogmatism.  It  is  obviously  essential,  in
estimating  the  life-work  of  a  religious  reformer,  that
we  should  have  a  thorough  understanding  of  the
religious  conditions  of  his  own  upbringing  and  of  the
people  to  whom  he  preached.  But  in  the  case  of
Zarathushtra  this  milieu  cannot  be  described  from
documentary  evidence  or  recalled  by  ordinary  his
torical  methods.  It  has  to  be  sought  in  a  pre
historic  twilight  and  reconstructed  by  methods  which
are  thoroughly  scientific  but  admittedly  not  infallible.
The  nature  of  these  methods  we  have  sketched
already  :  we  have  now  to  indicate  some  results  of
their  application  to  Aryan  religion.  Our  recon
struction  can  of  course  only  give  us  a  partial  idea
of  the  religion  of  the  Aryan  tribes  themselves,  as


30 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [OH.

evidenced  by  common  elements  traceable  in  Indian
and  Iranian  worship.  "  Partial,"  we  say,  for  there
may  well  have  been  many  features  in  proto-Aryan
religion  which  died  out  in  one  branch  or  the  other  of
the  divided  Aryan  family,  and  therefore  cannot  be
recognised  as  primitive  by  the  only  test  we  can  apply.
And  it  must  also  be  remembered  that  common
elements  may  be  susceptible  of  another  inter
pretation.  There  are  two  or  three  divine  names  in
the  A  vesta  which  were  most  probably  borrowed  at  a
late  period  from  Indian  religion  by  way  of  direct
polemic — Indian  gods  being  turned  into  Avestan
fiends l.  Then  there  is  a  further  gap  in  our  evidence,
in  our  having  hardly  any  means  of  depicting  the
religion  of  tribes  among  whom  these  Aryans  lived.
As  the  Aryans  were  certainly  only  a  dominant
minority  in  the  population,  this  aboriginal  religion  is
likely  to  have  influenced  that  of  their  overlords  in
many  directions,  just  as  the  Dravidian  cults  of  India
influenced  most  profoundly  the  whole  religious  system
of  the  Aryan  castes  in  after  days.  The  immensely
important  question  of  Babylonian  influence  has  to  be
examined  under  this  heading.  But  we  may  safely
put  this  aside  for  the  early  period  with  which  we  are
concerned :  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  recog
nisable  evidence  for  it  till  a  much  later  stage  in  the

1  Just  as  an  Avestan  reference  to  "Gaotema"  is  best  taken  as  a
definite  attack  upon  Gautama  the  Buddha  :  see  below,  p.  141.


iv]  PRIMITIVE  TRAITS  31

history  of  Parsism,  with  one  exception  to  be  men
tioned  presently.

There  are  quite  enough  positive  traits,  however,
which  we  can  assign  with  certainty  to  the  religion  of
the  Aryan  period.  To  determine  them  we  seek  for
elements  common  to  Veda  and  Avesta,  and  have  only
to  check  our  collection  by  eliminating  what  appears
to  arise  from  later  contacts.  Confidence  in  the
resultant  picture  is  heightened  by  its  remarkable
agreement  with  the  obviously  truthful  description  of
Herodotus  (i.  131  tf.)  of  Persian  religion  in  the  fifth
century  B.C.  We  naturally  expect  to  find  in  the
Aryan  period  the  main  lines  of  the  religion  which
the  comparative  method  enables  us  to  trace  for
the  primitive  Indo-European  age.  In  his  masterly
article — or  rather  treatise — on  "Aryan  [i.e.  Indo-
European]  Religion  "  in  Hastings'  Encyclopaedia  of
Religion  and  Ethics,  Professor  Otto  Schrader  gives
us  the  latest  results  of  scientific  research  in  a  form
both  novel  and  convincing.  He  makes  large  use  of
the  evidence  we  have  of  Lithuanian  religion  in
the  period  immediately  preceding  the  advent  of
Christianity.  These  people  having  remained  from
prehistoric  times  within  the  district  from  which  the
Indo-European  tribes  originally  radiated — according
to  the  most  probable  view — preserved  with  least
change  to  a  very  late  date  the  conditions  pre
vailing  among  the  primitive  folk,  as  linguistic  and


32 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [CH.

archaeological  evidence  enables  us  to  reconstruct
them  \  (An  illustration  of  this  principle  appears  in  the
point  just  noted,  that  the  Persians,  who  remained  in
the  old  Aryan  country,  preserved  far  more  perfectly
than  the  Indians  the  characteristics  of  Aryan  religion.)
Schrader  adopts  and  reinforces  the  doctrine  of
Hermann Usener  as  to  "special gods"  (Sander g otter),
presiding  over  particular  actions  or  functions :
Roman  religion  preserves  this  extremely  ancient
type  unchanged  to  the  last.  Side  by  side  with  these
"  special  gods "  there  are  the  "  heavenly  ones "
(deiwos),  the  great  elemental  forces  of  nature  which
most  seriously  influence  the  well-being  of  men.
These  nature-powers  were  not  distinguished  in  title
from  the  material  objects  in  which  they  resided.
Our  earliest  evidence  presents  us  with  "nameless
gods,"  that  is  gods  worshipped  without  changing  into
a  proper  noun  the  common  noun  that  described  their
function.  A  modern  minor  poet  can  personify  at
pleasure  by  the  easy  resource  of  capitals,  which  was
denied  to  the  ancients  ;  but  the  difference  between
"  dawn  "  and  "  Dawn,"  "  sky  "  and  "  Sky,"  is  much  the
same  in  one  case  as  in  the  other.  This  is  the  reason
why  the  reconstructed  language  of  the  original  Indo-
Europeans  contains  no  real  divine  names.  Father

1  Schrader's  own  words  may  be  cited  :  "Of  all  the  Aryans  [Indo-
Europeans]  the  Slavs  are  the  race  that  remained  nearest  the  original
home,  and  are  thus  the  last  to  enter  into  history."


iv]  "NAMELESS  GODS"  :w

Heaven  and  Mother  Earth  were  most  assuredly
worshipped,  but  whereas  dyeus  remained  in  most  of
the  Indo-European  dialects  the  name  for  the  sky,  it
happens  that  no  universal  name  survived  for  the
earth  ;  and  we  get  the  erroneous  impression  that  the
cult  of  the  common  ancestor  of  the  Vedic  Dyaush-
pitar,  the  Greek  Father  Zeus,  the  Latin  Diespiter
(Jupiter),  the  Germanic  Tiu  (Tuesday),  was  more  im
portant  than  that  of  his  consort  Mother  Earth,  whose
imnu'  varies.  We  might  as  well  argue  that  our  Indo-
European  forefathers  had  feet  (77-0^9,  pes,  foot,  Skt.
pad,  etc.)  but  no  hands,  since  a  common  name  for
the  latter  does  not  happen  to  survive.  Side  by  side
with  the  "heavenly  ones,"  we  have  the  equally  im
portant,  perhaps  more  important,  cult  of  the  dead.
Two  distinct  strands  may  be  observed  in  Greek
religion,  the  coexistence  of  which  in  the  faith  of  one
people  will  help  us  to  understand  what  we  find  among
the  Aryans  and  other  branches  of  our  family.  The
Olympians  as  a  whole  belong  clearly  to  the  deiwos,  in
so  far  as  they  have  taken  the  general  character  of
their  chief  Zeus,  the  Sky.  But  the  worship  of  the
Heroes,  the  ancestors,  appears  to  have  touched  much
deeper  springs  in  the  Greek  mind  ;  and  it  is  significant
that  their  general  name  for  God  comes  from  this
side.  For  tfeo?  (dhwesos,  cf.  L&t.festus,  and  especially
feralis,  "ghostly")  meant  originally  a  ghost:  Oeol
i,  "  ancestral  spirits,"  is  a  phrase  that  retains


(On! /I  i  10


34 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [OH.

the  most  ancient  meaning  of  the  word.  Roman
religion  keeps  the  two  elements  even  more  obviously
in  view,  though  the  Latin  general  word  dens  or  divos
is  the  old  name  of  the  "  heavenly  ones."  It  is  one  of
the  Roman  festivals  of  the  dead  which  is  responsible
for  the  still  surviving  superstition  about  marriages  in
May.  Now  in  Aryan  language  there  were  two  general
words  for  a  god,  asura  (Skt.  asura,  Av.  ahura)  and
daiva  (Skt.  deva,  Av.  daeva).  The  latter  is  of  course
the  Indo-European  deiivo-,  "  heavenly,"  whose  plural
deiwos  we  have  already  referred  to.  The  former  is
an  Aryan  derivative  from  the  Indo-European  dsu-,
the  breath  of  life,  whence  in  the  West  we  have  Anglo-
Saxon  fee,  "  elves,"  that  is  "  spirits."  That  in  Avestan
ahura  came  to  mean  "  Lord,"  and  daeva,  "  demon,"
is  a  fundamental  part  of  the  later  history  of  Iranian
religion,  which  we  must  treat  in  its  place.  Here  it
is  enough  to  note  that  the  names  are  significant  of
the  two  most  prominent  elements  in  Aryan  ideas
about  God.  Their  coexistence  may  possibly  be  due
ultimately  to  race-mixture,  the  fusion  of  a  race
worshipping  ancestors  with  another  race  worshipping
the  "  heavenly  ones."  But  it  is  not  easy  to  find  any
Indo-European  folk  that  in  primitive  times  worshipped
either  the  one  or  the  other  exclusively  ;  and  we  may
as  well  acquiesce  in  the  recognition  of  the  com
bination  as  far  back  as  our  knowledge  will  carry  us.
Aryan  ancestor-worship  is  represented  in  the


iv]  ARYAN  ANCESTOR-WORSHIP  35

Veda  by  the  cult  of  the  P-itdras,  "  fathers,"  and  in
the  Avesta  by  the  conception  of  the  "  Fravashis  of
the  Righteous,"  so  far  as  they  answer  to  the  Roman
Di  Manes  :  another  side  of  this  important  conception
we  shall  examine  below  (p.  145).  It  will  be  useful
here  to  recall  Schrader's  acute  remark  that  the
ancestor  spirits  rather  than  the  deiwos  were  the
guardians  of  morality.  The  "  heavenly  ones  "  were
the  Sondergotter  of  spheres  far  less  concerned  with
human  action  than  were  the  spirits  of  men's  ancestors
that  always  hovered  within  range.  An  exception  to
this  principle  might  well  be  found  in  the  "  All-seeing
Sun "  of  Greek  thought,  which  was  certainly  not
foreign  to  Indian  or  Iranian  theology.  Mithra
(below,  p.  37),  who  is  sufficiently  solar  to  give  his
name  to  the  Sun  in  modern  Persian  (Mihr\  is  in  the
Avesta  the  guardian  of  Truth  (cf.  p.  137  below);  and
in  a  striking  passage  of  the  Mahabharata,  one  in
which  Indian  thought  comes  nearest  to  the  concep
tion  of  Conscience,  a  kingly  wrongdoer  is  reminded
that  the  Sun  sees  secret  sin.  But  it  is  hardly  likely
that  the  idea  dates  from  Aryan  times.

The  Aryan  nature-gods  may  fairly  be  catalogued
in  the  words  of  Herodotus,  who  says  that  the  Persians
"  worshipped  sun,  moon,  earth,  fire,  water  and  winds  "
(i.  131).  These  answer  excellently  to  the  kind  of
deities  whose  common  recognition  in  Veda  and
Avesta  assures  us  that  they  belonged  to  the  Aryan

3—2


36 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [OH.

pantheon.  The  account  the  same  authority  gives
(iv.  59)  of  Scythian  religion  may  be  thrown  into  the
same  scale,  for  the  Scyths  seem  to  have  been  Iranians
left  behind  in  the  great  south-easterly  migration,
who  preserved  the  Aryan  inheritance  in  a  very
primitive  form.  He  says  they  venerated  the  Hearth-
fire  (Hestia)  most  of  all,  and  in  addition  Zeus  and
Earth.  That  the  primeval  Sky-god  (Aryan  Dyaus)
still  kept  in  the  Aryan  period  his  ancient  primacy
is  made  somewhat  doubtful  by  the  disappearance  of
the  name  from  the  Avesta  (except  in  one  place-
see  p.  124  below),  and  the  very  secondary  position
he  takes  in  the  Veda.  But  Herodotus  says  the
Persians  "  called  the  whole  orb  of  heaven  Zeus  "  and
worshipped  him.  This  probably  means  that  the  his
torian  had  heard  the  old  name,  which  he  identified  with
the  Greek  Zeus — quite  correctly,  as  we  know.  He  was
describing  the  religion  of  the  common  people  inhabit
ing  Medo-Persia,  who  appear  to  have  retained  in  the
fifth  century  with  little  change  the  religion  their  Aryan
forefathers  had  professed  in  the  same  land  at  least
fifteen  hundred  years  before.  The  Aryans  presumably
worshipped  Mother  Earth  mostly  without  making  a
proper  noun  out  of  her  name  ;  but  they  seem  to  have
created  one  special  appellation  for  the  Earth  spirit,
Aramati,  which  we  shall  find  occupying  a  very  pro
minent  position  in  the  Gathas  and  after  (pp.  62  f.).  An
extremely  important  Aryan  god  whose  province  came


iv]  MITHRA  37

very  near  that  of  Dyaus  was  Mithra  (Skt.  Mitra,
Av.  MiOra  etc.).  He  seems  to  have  belonged  to
the  upper  air  rather  than  to  the  sun.  Prof.  E.  V.
Arnold  says  there  is  little  support  in  the  Veda  for
the  solar  connexion,  unless  it  be  in  hymns  which
compare  Agni  to  Mitra.  Nor  is  the  Avestan  yazata
decisively  sun-like.  His  name  has  no  very  convincing
cognates  in  Indo-European  languages,  and  we  are
rather  tempted  to  speculate  on  a  prehistoric  link
between  the  Aryans  and  Babylon,  or  some  source
influenced  by  Babylon.  The  "  firmament "  of  the
first  chapter  of  Genesis  was  very  prominent  in  early
Semitic  mythology  ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the
Assyrian  metrn,  "rain,"  comes  so  near  to  Mithra's
name1.  If  this  is  his  origin,  we  get  a  reasonable
basis  for  the  Avestan  use  of  the  word  to  denote  a
contract,  as  also  for  the  fact  that  the  deity  is  in  the
Avesta  patron  of  Truth,  and  in  the  Veda  of  Friend
ship.  He  is  "the  Mediator"  between  heaven  and
earth,  as  the  firmament  was  by  its  position,  both  in
nature  and  in  mythology  :  an  easy  corollary  is  his
function  of  regulating  the  relations  of  man  and  man.
Our  suspicions  of  Mithra's  alien  origin  prompt  the
mention  here  of  a  water-spirit  who  does  not  belong
to  the  Indians  at  all  and  therefore  is  presumably  non-
Aryan.  Anfihita,  "the  undefiled,"  is  a  river-genius,
who  in  the  Later  Avesta  has  a  special  association

1  I  owe  this  to  my  colleague  Prof.  H.  W.  Hogg. See  further  p.  47  below.


38 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [CH.

with  Mithra,  seen  also  in  the  latest  of  the  Achae-
menian  Inscriptions,  and  in  Herodotus  (i.  131),  who
actually  confuses  the  two.  The  name  is  a  cult
epithet  attached  to  a  mythical  river  Ardvi,  but  the
epithet  drove  out  the  name.  When  however  we  find
that  the  Elamites  had  a  corresponding  deity  Nahunti
(Jensen),  we  begin  to  suspect  that  An^hita  is  an
aboriginal  figure  and  her  name  among  the  Iranians  a
product  of  popular  etymology  on  familiar  lines.  The
very  association  of  god  and  goddess  which  we  find
here  is  enough  to  make  us  look  towards  the  native  cults
of  Western  Asia  :  whether  Elamite  or  Assyrian  was  re
sponsible  in  this  case  we  will  not  presume  to  decide.
Next  to  Heaven  and  Earth  we  may  take  Fire,
who  among  the  Aryans  generally,  as  among  the
Iranian  Scythae  (above,  p.  36),  held  at  least  an
equal  position  to  theirs,  if  not  one  higher  still.
E.  Lehmann  acutely  points  out  the  significance  of
the  change  which  the  Indian  tribes  made  in  their
conception  of  the  sacred  Fire.  They  used  a  different
word,  Agni  (cognate  with  Latin  ignis,  cf.  Lithuanian
ugnls  szwentti,  "  holy  fire  "),  and  his  special  function
was  the  consuming  of  the  sacrifice,  which  he  bore  up
to  the  "heavenly  ones."  But  in  Aryan  days,  as  still
in  the  days  of  Herodotus  (I.  132)  and  in  the  Avesta,
the  sacrifice  was  not  burnt  at  all,  but  the  gods  were
invited  to  come  down  and  partake  on  the  spot.  Fire
then  in  its  sacrificial  aspect  was  the  messenger  that


iv]  FIRE WORSHIP  39

called  them  down.  The  sacred  Fire  was  called  Atar,
with  which  name  we  compare  the  Latin  dtrium,  the
room  that  contained  the  hearthfire.  The  Indians  in
their  torrid  climate  had  no  use  for  the  old  institution
which  Greeks  ('E<rria)  and  Romans  (Vesta)  and  other
northern  tribes  continued  to  regard  as  divine.  It  is
suggestive  to  compare  the  change  of  the  old  word
teposy  which  connoted  grateful  warmth  in  Italy,  and
gave  the  Scyths  in  their  inhospitable  country  a
goddess  Tabiti  :  in  India  it  meant  "  penance,"  the
religious  character  of  which  applies  in  a  very  different
way  the  primitive  association.  Lehmann  shows  how
dtar  was  the  purifier,  who  exorcised  evil  things —
illuminated  the  night,  kept  off  bitter  cold  and  wild
beasts,  and  destroyed  noxious  and  devilish  powers
generally.  The  old  nomadic  life  on  the  plains  might
well  raise  Fire  to  the  first  place  among  the  friends
of  man.  The  myth  of  the  victory  of  Atar  over  the
serpent  Azhi  Dahaka  is  thoroughly  Iranian,  but
it  seems  to  go  back  to  Aryan  and  even  Indo-
European  antiquity  :  Lehmann's  comparison  with  the
saga  of  Loki's  binding  by  Thor,  or  that  of  the  Wolf
Fenris,  is  very  suggestive.  So  is  his  note  on  the  con
trast  of  the  Iranian  with  the  characteristic  Indian
myth  of  Indra  Vrtrahan.  But  he  seems  to  be  wrong
when  he  assumes  that  the  primitive  meaning  of  the
Aryan  word  vrtraghan-  was  lost  in  Iran,  as  in  the
Avestan  Verethraghna,  the  genius  of  "Victory."  On


40 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION  [OH.

the  contrary,  this  is  the  original  meaning  of  the
word1,  which  is  derived  from  an  adjective  =  "  assault-
repelling,  victorious."  The  drought  demon  Vrtra,
slain  by  the  hero  Indra,  is  a  creation  of  imaginative
etymology  :  if  vrtrahan  means  "  striking  or  slaying
x"  and  x  is  an  unknown  quantity,  the  way  is  clear
for  inventing  a  demon  with  which  to  solve  the  equa
tion.  It  is  of  a  piece  with  the  invention  of  a
particular  hell  called  put  from  which  the  putra  (Skt.
for  "son")  delivers  his  father.  It  would  be  un
reasonable  to  expect  comparative  philology  too  early
in  human  history  !

Having  thus  parenthetically  disposed  of  a  further
element  in  the  Aryan  heritage,  we  may  go  on  to  note
the  suggestiveness  of  these  conceptions  of  a  perpetual
strife  between  powers  of  light  and  darkness,  heat  and
cold,  beneficent  and  malignant  forces  of  nature.  In
the  Aryan  and  early  Iranian  periods  alike  they  re
mained  purely  naturalistic,  and  they  had  nothing  in
them  to  separate  them  in  character  from  myths  of
the  same  order  to  be  found  in  other  parts  of  the
world.  But  they  were  a  very  prominent  feature
in  the  mental  furniture  of  the  people  to  whom
Zarathushtra  came  ;  and  they  supplied  a  ready

1  See  Bartbolomae,  Worterbuch,  s.v.  t'«jre0ra="Angriff."  Prof.
E.  V.  Arnold  remarks,  "Indra  appears  to  have  stolen  his  title  of
Vrtraghna  from  some  earlier  god  or  gods."  It  doubtless  meant  only
"  victorious  "  when  he  took  it.


iv]  NATURE  POWERS  41

background  for  the  most  fundamental  novelty  of  his
teaching,  as  we  shall  presently  see.  The  persistence
of  the  naturalistic  conception  among  the  people  long
after  the  Reformation  is  well  seen  in  the  myth  of
Tishtrya  and  Apaosha,  which  forms  the  subject  of
Yasht  8  (p.  132).

We  need  not  go  exhaustively  through  the  religious
and  mythological  conceptions  which  approve  them
selves  as  primitive.  There  is  only  one  other  of
primary  importance,  and  the  rest  may  be  left  till  we
meet  them  again  in  the  Yashts.  The  Aryan  Sauma
(Ved.  Soma,  Av.  Haoma)  was  originally  the  drink
which  confers  immortality,  a  parallel  to  which  may
be  found  elsewhere  in  Indo-European  mythology.
Such  it  remains  in  the  A  vesta,  but  in  India  it
becomes  the  drink  of  the  gods  :  the  change  is
analogous  to  that  of  the  Greek  nectar.  Other  de
velopments  on  Indian  soil  we  need  not  chronicle.  It
will  be  observed  that  here  as  in  many  other  respects
the  Indian  tribes,  migrating  into  a  tropical  climate
and  all  the  differing  conditions  of  a  new  country,
have  changed  the  character  of  their  Aryan  inheri
tance.  We  do  not  find  it  easy  to  name  an  Aryan
cult  which  the  Iranians  have  altered  and  the  Indians
have  left  alone.  That  Lehmann  wrongly  cites  the
Avestan  Verethraghna  we  have  already  seen.  The
myth  of  Yama  (Av.  Yima,  according  to  what  is  pre
sumably  the  Later  Avestan  form)  is  a  somewhat


42 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION  [OH.

better  case,  though  not  very  decisive.  In  the  Rigveda
Yama  and  his  sister  Yami,  children  of  Vivasvant  (Av.
Vwahvant)  are  the  first  human  pair.  It  is  easy  to
equate  the  name  with  yama  "  twin,"  and  assume  that
the  myth  made  mankind  start  from  twin  "  children
of  heaven" — that  one  of  every  pair  of  twins  was
among  primitive  peoples  imagined  to  be  a  child  of
the  sky  has  been  abundantly  shown  in  Dr  Rendel
Harris's  researches  on  the  cult  of  the  Dioscuri.  This
conjecture  is  borne  out  by  the  name  of  Yama's  father,
which  may  well  be  a  cult- epithet  of  the  bright  sky,
"shining  abroad"  (from  the  root  vas,  "to  shine").
In  India  Yama  subsequently  became  King  of  the
Dead,  a  conception  which  Parsism  clearly  could  not
have  used.  But  it  is  probably  not  Aryan  :  Yama's
posthumous  royalty  is  only  like  that  of  Minos
among  the  Greeks,  and  it  is  a  serious  difficulty  when
we  bring  in  the  Iranian  factor.  In  the  A  vesta  Yima
Xsaqta,  "Yima  the  bright," — Firdausi's  Jamshid,
familiar  to  readers  of  FitzGerald's  Omar — is  no
longer  the  first  man  :  the  Bundahish  sets  him  in  the
fifth  generation,  and  it  is  probably  dependent  on  lost
Avestan  texts,  for  our  Avesta  has  very  clearly  aban
doned  what  seems  to  have  been  the  Aryan  view  of  him.
But  now  we  must  note  that  as  early  as  the  G&th&s
we  read  of  Yima's  sin.  In  Ys.  32 8,  according  to  Bar-
tholomae's  version,  which  solves  best  the  difficulties
of  the  passage,  Zarathushtra  says  :  "  To  these  sinners


iv]  YIMA  43

belonged,  as  fame  tells,  Yima  also,  son  of  Vivahvant,
who  desiring  to  satisfy  mortals  gave  our  people  por
tions  of  cow's  flesh  to  eat."  In  the  context  the
Da^vas  are  said  to  have  deprived  men  of  immortality
by  deception.  It  is  very  clear  that  the  Prophet  is
referring  to  an  already  existing  myth.  Its  points  of
contact  with  the  Fall  -story  in  Genesis  are  temptingly
suggestive.  Yima  reigns  over  a  community  which
may  well  have  been  composed  of  his  own  descendants,
for  he  lived  yet  longer  than  Adam.  To  render  them
immortal,  he  gives  them  to  eat  forbidden  food,  being
deceived  by  the  Da^vas.  What  was  this  forbidden
food?  May  we  connect  it  with  another  legend
whereby  at  the  Regeneration  Mithra  is  to  make  men
immortal  by  giving  them  to  eat  the  fat  of  the  Ur-kuh,
the  primeval  Cow  from  whose  slain  body,  according
to  the  Aryan  legends  adopted  by  Mithraism,  mankind
was  first  created  ?  It  is  perhaps  possible  (see  pp.  47,
55)  that  Zarathushtra  made  Mithra  a  chief  among
the  Da^vas.  If  so,  he  used  the  old  saga  to  show  that
the  first  man  sinned  by  presumptuously  grasping  at
immortality  for  himself  and  mankind,  on  the  sug
gestion  of  an  evil  power,  instead  of  waiting  for
Ahura's  good  time.  Yima's  punishment,  according  to
a  legend  which  is  difficult  to  dovetail  with  the  story  in
the  second  Fargard  of  the  Vendidad  (pp.  154  IF.),  was
the  loss  of  the  "  Kingly  Glory  "  (xvarenah).  Yima's
Paradise  we  refer  to  when  we  come  to  the


44 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [CH.

Vendidad  I.e.  Has  this  story,  with  its  many  incon
sistent  elements,  owed  anything  to  Babylon?  Our
reconstruction  is  beset  with  too  many  uncertainties,
of  translation  and  interpretation  and  comparative
mythology,  to  allow  us  the  luxury  of  being  dogmatic ;
but  the  possibility  must  be  noted.  One  more  in
congruity  in  the  Yima-saga  may  be  referred  to  as
significant  in  a  different  way,  the  epithet  "good
shepherd "  that  clings  to  him  still  in  the  Yashts.
The  Iranian  Adam  is  not  like  Tennyson's  "grand  old
gardener":  he  takes  after  Abel,  the  "keeper  of
sheep."  Lehmann  couples  this  with  the  extraordinary
sanctity  of  the  Cow,  which  of  course  survived  in
India,  and  the  equally  striking  Iranian  veneration  of
the  Dog.  They  are  survivals  from  the  nomad  life  on
the  plains,  adapted  to  their  strangely  different  en
vironment  with  as  great  or  as  little  success  as  the
relics  of  naive  animism  that  come  down  from  a
higher  antiquity  still.

We  need  not  further  elaborate  our  delineation  of
the  milieu  in  which  the  Prophet  began  his  work.  It
is  obvious  that  we  have  done  very  little  to  describe
the  Iranians  after  their  Indian  kin  left  them,  during
a  period  which  when  Zarathushtra  came  may  have
lasted  a  thousand  years  or  more.  If  we  have  made
our  principles  clear,  it  will  be  seen  that  we  have  a
method  for  our  exploration  of  the  earlier  period
which  fails  us  for  the  later.  The  reader  may  perhaps


iv]  IRANIAN  DEVELOPMENT  45

be  incredulous  when  we  assert  the  probability  that
the  Iranian  period  differed  very  little  from  the  Aryan.
But  slowness  of  change  in  a  people  remaining  in  the
same  country,  and  unfertilised  by  foreign  influences,
notoriously  exhibits  astonishing  results.  We  have  in
our  own  time  watched  the  swift  awakening  of  Japan
under  the  touch  of  the  West,  and  we  are  seeing
China  similarly  shaking  off  a  changelessness  which
has  lasted  as  long  as  the  annals  of  civilisation.
Another  illustration  we  have  used  already  in  this
chapter,  the  extraordinary  faithfulness  with  which
in  Lithuania  the  language,  culture  and  religion  of
the  primitive  Indo-European  period  were  preserved
up  to  the  fifteenth  or  sixteenth  century  of  the
Christian  era.  On  these  analogies  we  should  expect
to  find  that  what  changes  Iranian  culture  underwent
during  the  period  of  its  separate  existence  were
almost  entirely  limited  to  those  caused  by  foreign
influence,  which  for  this  purpose  means  Babylonian.
We  have  already  indicated  two  or  three  points
in  which  Babel  may  have  touched  the  Bible  of
Zoroastrianism.  Two  more  suggestions  of  this  kind
may  be  added  from  Hermann  Oldenberg,  as  endorsed
by  Schrader.  He  thinks  the  great  Light-gods  were
borrowed  from  Sumerians  or  Semites,  or  at  least  got
their  astronomical  character  there.  Mithra  is  the
only  one  with  whom  we  are  concerned  (see  above,
p.  37).  The  remark  has  mainly  to  do  with  the  seven


46 EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE  RELIGION [OH.

Adityas  of  the  Veda,  whom  Oldenberg  (Religion  des
Veda,  p.  193)  makes  ultimately  to  come  from  the
sun,  moon  and  five  planets.  This  presumes  Baby
lonian  influence  in  the  Aryan  period  ;  but  it  must  be
contended  that  the  link  between  the  Adityas  and
their  supposed  Iranian  congeners  is  very  feeble.
Lehmann  denies  it  altogether,  and  he  seems  to  be
right.  Another  Aryan  conception  is  claimed  by
Oldenberg  as  of  foreign  origin,  that  of  Skt.  Rta  —  Av.
Asa,  the  universe  as  an  ordered  whole.  Apart  from
the  fact  that  the  equation  is  not  quite  exact,  the
recognition  of  this  astronomico-philosophical  idea  in
the  Aryan  period  can  hardly  be  claimed  as  a  cer
tainty.  A  Babylonian  connexion  which,  unlike  these
of  Oldenberg,  will  belong  to  the  Iranian  period,  is
suggested  by  the  statement  of  Herodotus  (i.  131)
that  the  Persians  had  learnt  from  Assyrians  and
Arabs  to  sacrifice  to  Ovpavirj.  This  will  refer  to  the
cult  of  An^hita,  whose  points  of  contact  with  the
great  Semitic  goddess  Ishtar  and  her  kin  will  appear
when  we  describe  her  Yasht  (see  also  above,  pp.  37  f.).

We  have  dwelt  at  length  upon  the  religion  of  the
pre-Reformation  epoch  because  of  its  bearing  upon
the  work  of  the  Reformer  himself.  But  we  need  to
understand  it  also  because  of  what  we  may  call  the
Counter-reformation,  which  produces  much  the  largest
part  of  the  Avestan  poetry,  the  Yashts  and  analogous


iv]  BABEL  AND  IRAN  47

matter  in  Yasna  and  Vendidad.  Of  this  we  shall  not
speak  more  fully  here.  Our  general  picture  will
suffice  to  show  the  relatively  high  religious  position
of  the  people  to  whom  Zarathushtra  preached,  and
the  plastic  character  of  the  material  he  moulded  into
a  shape  so  novel  in  accordance  with  his  own  pro
found  and  original  mind.

NOTE. — It  is  right  to  notice  that  the  suggestion  made  here
(pp.  37,  43,  and  55  f.  below)  as  to  Mithra's  real  origin  and  standing
in  Ziirathushtra's  system  is  an  individual's  hypothesis  only,  pre
sented  with  all  diffidence  as  a  possibility.  It  has  not  convinced
Prof.  Williams  Jackson.  Bartholomae  agrees  with  Oldenberg  and
Hillebrandt  in  regarding  Mithra  as  in  Aryan  times  a  sun-god.
Moreover  Brugmann  propounds  a  connexion  between  his  name,
as  meaning  "friend,"  and  the  Latin  mitis,  Greek  /iftXi'^tor.
Against  this  weight  of  authority  we  cannot  plead  here.  We  may
just  quote  Bartholomae's  view  that  "  in  the  strict  Zarathushtrian
doctrine  Mithra  was  not  recognised  as  a  divinity,  as  little  as
Haoma ;  but  as  his  worship  was  too  firmly  rooted  among  the
people,  the  priests  were  obliged  afterwards  to  allow  it."  This  is
not  far  from  our  theory  that  for  Zarathushtra  he  was  a  Da^va.
For  our  view  that  Mithra  was  not  the  Sun  we  can  quote  the  high
authority  of  Cumont :  see  p.  136,  and  pp.  224  n.4,  225  n.1,  in
Cumont's  Textes  et  Monuments.


CHAPTER  V

ZARATHUSHTRA

THAT  the  Prophet's  personality  belongs  to  history
we  have  already  asserted  (p.  15) :  only  the  greatness
of  James  Darmesteter's  authority  makes  it  necessary
even  to  mention  the  doubt.  When  he  lived  and
where  he  lived  are  very  much  harder  questions,
which  we  have  no  room  to  discuss  here.  The  tra
ditional  dates  of  Zaratlmshtra's  birth  and  death  are
660  B.C.  and  583  B.C.  respectively.  Since  the  appear
ance  of  Prof.  Williams  Jackson's  classical  paper
"  On  the  Date  of  Zoroaster1/'  this  period  has  been
largely  accepted  as  approximately  right  :  if  anything
can  be  settled  by  weight  of  authority,  it  will  be  hard
to  dispute  a  doctrine  which  has  been  accepted  by
F.  Justi,  L.  C.  Casartelli  and  E.  W.  West,  even
though  Bartholomae  holds  out  strongly  for  a  "  much
higher "  antiquity.  The  older  doctrine,  which  put

1  Published  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society  for
1896,  and  reprinted  with  additions  in  Zoroaster,  pp.  150-81.  The
equally  important  companion  paper,  "  Zoroaster's  Native  Place  and
the  Scene  of  his  Ministry,"  follows  it  in  the  same  work.


CH.  v]  HIS  DATE  49

Zarathushtra  into  the  second  millennium  B.C.,  has  been
held  by  distinguished  scholars,  including  formerly
Prof.  Williams  Jackson  himself;  and  the  linguistic
argument  for  bringing  the  Gathas  nearer  in  date  to
the  Veda  is  certainly  powerful.  Prof.  Geldner  (Enc.
Brit.  nxxi.  246 — but  contrast  xxviii.  1041  !)  regards
the  fourteenth  century  B.C.  as  "most  probable."  We
cannot  be  dogmatic :  the  primitive  character  of  Gathic
language  might  be  explicable  by  the  fact  that  there  was
no  migration  into  new  territory — another  application
of  the  principle  discussed  above  (pp.  31  f.,  41,  45).
Bishop  Casartelli  calls  attention  to  the  striking
approximation  of  the  traditional  date  to  the  times  of
Buddha,  Confucius  and  Socrates.  The  sixth  and  fifth
centuries  B.C.  were  a  period  of  immense  importance
in  the  religious  history  of  the  world.

Passing  on  thus  ambiguously  from  the  question
When  ? ,  we  ask  the  rather  less  important  question
Where  ?  This  again  has  been  exhaustively  discussed
by  Prof.  Jackson  (op.  tit.  p.  48  n.  above).  It  seems
possible  to  fix  with  fair  certainty  the  region  of  his
birth  and  early  life  as  lying  in  Adarbaijau.  His
mother  Dughdhova's  family  seems  to  have  been  con
nected  with  Ragha,  a  district  which  gave  its  name  to
the  well-known  town  of  Rhagae,  named  in  the  Book
of  Tobit  and  identified  with  Hal  in  Media,  near
Teheran.  Personal  names  in  his  circle,  by  the  way,
are  freely  found.  His  father  Pourushaspa  is  named

MO.  4


50  ZARATHUSHTRA  [OH.

several  times  in  the  Avesta,  and  bis  clan-name
Spitama  or  Spitama  occurs  very  frequently.  His
daughter  Pouruchista's  marriage  to  Jamaspa  is  the
subject  of  one  of  the  Gathas.  These  names  are  men
tioned  to  illustrate  the  precision  of  the  Avestan
notices,  for  all  their  scantiness  serving  well  to  bring
the  man's  real  personality  before  us.  The  names  are
not  of  the  stuff  of  which  myths  are  made.  Spitama
means  the  same  as  the  English  White:  Zarathushtra1
itself,  like  Frashaoshtra  (p.  89),  contains  the  word
ustra,  "  camel,"  just  as  Jamaspa,  Visht^spa  and  other
prominent  names  contain  aspa,  "horse."  The  first
element  in  the  Prophet's  name  is  uncertain  :  perhaps
"  old  "  (cf.  yep&v)  is  as  likely  as  any.  The  ingenious
persons  who  turn  all  the  prophets  of  mankind  into
solar  or  other  myths  have  in  Zarathushtra's  name
a  problem  worthy  of  their  skill.  The  place  where
Zarathushtra  first  preached  is  much  disputed,  as  the
tradition  is  evenly  balanced.  Prof.  Williams  Jackson
is  inclined  to  combine  the  two  accounts  by  supposing
that  he  travelled  to  Eastern  Iran  (Bactria),  and  after
much  discouragement,  reflected  in  the  G&thas,  there
made  his  royal  convert  Visht^spa,  returning  later  on
the  full  tide  of  success  to  press  his  propaganda  in  his
native  land.  Wrhether  Vishtaspa  reigned  in  Eastern

1  The  classical  ZwpodcrrpTjs,  Zoroaster,  appear  to  owe  their  form  to
the  mediation  of  Old  Persian,  as  is  the  case  with  'ftpofJLda-drjs,  'Apei-
s,  and  other  special  names  of  Zoroastrianism.


v]  HIS  HOME  51

or  Western  Iran  may  be  left  uncertain  :  that  he  was
the  Constantine  of  the  new  faitli  is  one  of  the  very
few  historical  facts  emerging  from  the  Gathas.  The
reappearance  of  the  name  Vishtaspa — perhaps  half  a
century  later,  on  Jackson's  theory  of  the  Prophet's
date — with  the  father  of  King  Darius  I  is  suggestive  :
it  may  possibly  link  Darius's  branch  of  the  Achae-
inenian  family  with  the  royal  house  in  which  the
Prophet  first  won  recognition.  There  are  other
reasons  for  supposing  Darius  to  have  been  the  first
successor  of  Cyrus  to  hold  a  definitely  Zarathushtrian
faith.  But  this  is  a  thorny  question,  which  hardly
concerns  us  here.

Legend  has  added  immensely  to  the  scanty  record
of  the  Prophet's  life.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  refer
to  the  stories  of  the  later  literature,  whose  only  value
lies  in  their  throwing  out  in  strong  relief  the  simple
verisimilitude  of  the  picture  in  the  Gathas.  Two
only  we  will  refer  to,  for  special  reasons.  One,  which
was  known  to  the  Romans  at  least  as  early  as  Pliny
(Nat.  Hist.  vii.  15),  was  that  "Zoroaster  was  the
only  human  being  to  laugh  on  the  very  day  of  his
birth."  It  is  tempting  to  recognise  an  earlier  allusion
to  this  well-known  story,  in  one  of  the  most  famous
passages  in  Roman  literature.  At  the  end  of  the
Fourth  Eclogue,  Virgil  thus  apostrophises  his
wondrous  Babe :

Incipe,  parue  puer,  risu  cognoscere  matrcm.

4—2


52  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

Assuming  that  this  means  "  to  greet  thy  mother  with
a  smile  " — and  the  alternative  "by  her  smile  "  forces
the  Latin  intolerably — we  have  at  once  a  difficulty
which  seems  to  have  escaped  the  commentators.
The  whole  point  of  the  passage  is  that  the  child  is
new-born — indeed,  if  Prof.  Con  way  is  right1,  not
even  that.  And  when  did  a  new-born  child  laugh
or  even  smile  at  anybody  ?  Is  not  the  poet  here,  as
in  so  much  of  this  mysterious  poem,  using  Eastern
imagery  ?  "  Risisse  eadem  die  quo  genitus  esset
unum  hominem  accepimus  Zoroastrem,"  says  Pliny,
a  century  after  the  Eclogue  was  written.  Virgil's
Child  should  share  that  unique  distinction.  Indeed
the  remaining  lines  of  the  poem  will  gain  point  if  we
assume  that  Virgil,  so  diligent  a  reader  of  Greek
literature,  knew  what  Greek  writers  had  told  of
Zoroaster  generations  before,  his  receiving  laws  in
direct  converse  with  the  Deity.  Virgil's  conclusion,

Incipe,  parue  puer:  qui  non  risere  parent!  [or  parentis],
nee  deus  hunc  mensa,  dea  nee  dignata  cubili  est,

is  in  its  first  element  well  satisfied  by  this  allusion,
assuming  the  classical  embellishment  that  the  divinity
not  only  instructed  but  feasted  the  sage.  To  bring

1  VergiVs  Messianic  Eclogue  (London,  1907),  pp.  13  ff.  Note
Mr  Warde  Fowler's  interesting  citation  from  Suetonius  in  the  same
book  (p.  71),  showing  that  Virgil  himself  was  believed  at  birth  to
have  abstained  from  crying.


v]  THE PROPHET IN  VIRGIL?  53

in  the  second  point  involves  the  assumption  that  the
West  had  received  another  very  prominent  element
in  the  Zoroaster-legend  :  that  we  have  no  evidence
of  this  may  be  frankly  confessed,  but  its  absence  is
entirely  natural.  In  the  Yashts  we  read  of  Zara-
thushtra's  wife  Hvovi,  a  member  of  a  noble  family  at
Vishtaspa's  court.  Two  brothers  of  this  family  are
named  with  their  patronymic  in  the  Gathas  as  con
spicuous  among  Zarathushtra's  disciples  and  helpers.
He  became  the  son-in-law  of  the  one,  Frashaoshtra
Hvogva,  and  the  father-in-law  of  the  other,  Jam^spa
Hvogva,  whom  he  calls  saosyant,  "  one  who  will
deliver"  men — a  title  especially  belonging  to  himself.
On  this  wholly  natural  basis  later  legend  built  a
marvellous  superstructure.  Unfortunately  we  cannot
fix  the  period,  or  tell  whether  there  was  authority
for  it  in  ancient  Avestan  texts1.  According  to  this
story,  Zarathushtra  has  no  children  by  Hvovi  in  the
natural  order,  but  they  are  to  become  the  parents2
of  three  sons  who  shall  be  born  as  the  Regeneration
draws  near  :  the  last  of  them,  Saoshyant,  is  to  bring

1  The  Bundahish  undoubtedly  depends  largely  on  Avestan  texts
no  longer  preserved  ;  but  if  they  were  prose  in  this  case,  like  the  parts
of  Yt.  13  which  are  taken  to  allude  to  this  story,  we  could  not  claim
sufficient  antiquity  for  them  except  in  a  tentative  way.

*  The  manner  of  this  supernatural  generation  may  be  seen  in
Darmesteter's  quotations  on  Yt.  1362  (S.  B.  E.  xxm.  195) :  any  intelli
gent  reader  may  judge  of  its  resemblance  to  Matthew  i,  with  which  it
has  been  solemnly  compared  !


54  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

about  the  final  deliverance  of  creation  from  all  evil.
It  is  obvious  that  Hvovi  might  just  as  well  be  a
goddess  bride  outright,  and  Virgil  may  very  easily
have  heard  the  story  in  this  form,  which  assimi
lates  it  to  myths  of  Greece  long  familiar  to  him.
If  this  conjecture  is  reasonable — and  of  course  it
is  conjecture  and  no  more — the  promised  birth
of  the  Zoroastrian  Messiah,  who  is  to  bring  in  the
Age  of  Gold,  becomes  a  most  important  element  in
the  Oriental  lore  that  gave  the  great  poet  his  motive.
We  pass  on  from  this  only  too  seductive  pursuit
of  dim  possibilities  to  describe  the  Prophet's  doctrine,
which  we  have  to  draw  out  of  poems  obscure  enough
in  their  diction,  but  eminently  well  preserved,  and
proceeding,  we  can  hardly  doubt,  mainly  from
Zarathushtra  himself,  or  at  least  his  immediate
followers  :  there  seems  to  be  no  consideration  of
weight  against  the  former  alternative,  which  we
shall  assume  henceforth  in  general.  The  individu
ality  of  Zarathushtra's  mind  comes  out  with  vivid
emphasis  as  we  examine  the  environment  in  which
he  was  brought  up,  and  again  as  we  trace  in  the  later
Avesta  the  development  of  Parsism  after  his  day.
There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  kindred  spirit  in
ancient  Iran  :  Zarathushtra's  brethren  would  be
found  rather  in  India.  He  is  intensely  abstract  in
his  thinking.  Anthropomorphism  and  nature  wor
ship,  such  as  the  earlier  and  later  Aryans  of  both


v]  THE  OLD GODS  55

brandies  practised,  he  tried  to  expel  from  religion
altogether.  He  was  not  content  with  merely  ignoring
the  old  gods,  so  that  Mithra  and  Anfihita,  the  Fra-
vashis,  Verethraghna  and  Haoma  are  never  named
in  the  (iatlifis1.  Most  of  these,  with  the  "nameless
<X<xls"  of  the  sky  and  the  light  and  the  heavenly
bodies,  were  included  among  the  Aryan  daivas  ;  and
it  solves  most  simply  the  old  problem  of  the  fact  that
Avestan  daeva  means  "demon,"  if  we  assume  that
Zarathushtra  himself  denounced  the  old  "heavenly
ones"  as  evil  powers,  even  as  Hebrew  prophets
denounced  Baal  and  Ashtoreth.  When  the  cult  of
Mithra  and  his  troop  came  back  again,  not  very  long
after  the  Prophet  passed  away,  there  was  no  Gatha
text  to  remind  Zarathushtra's  nominal  followers  that
Mithra  was  repudiated  by  the  Founder.  This  may  be
mere  ignorance  :  lapse  of  time,  or  geographical  sepa
ration  from  the  first  home  of  the  Faith — one  of  which
causes  at  least  must  be  postulated  to  account  for
the  linguistic  differences  between  the  Gathas  and  the
Later  Avesta — would  explain  such  a  fundamental
misunderstanding  of  the  doctrine.  But  the  absence
of  a  Gatha  to  show  explicitly  who  the  Daevas  were
looks  more  like  design  than  accident.  The  Gat  has
were  only  preserved  by  priestly  recitation  in  worship ;
and  priests  who  wanted  to  go  on  worshipping  Mithra

1  On  Mithra  see  p.  47. Haoma  is  probably  alluded  to,  though
not  named : see  p.  110.


56  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

were  quite  clever  enough  to  forget  a  Gatha  which
denounced  them  expressly  as  daqvayasna  for  doing
so.  The  coast  was  thus  clear  for  reintroducing  the
Iranian  nature-gods,  whom  the  people  (teste  Herodoto)
had  never  ceased  to  worship,  regularising  them  by
making  them  saints  or  angels  :  the  process  is  familiar
enough  in  the  history  of  Christianity.  Then  da$va
could  continue  to  mean  "demon,"  but  denote  only
Angra  Mainyu  and  his  infernal  crew,  whom  Zara-
thushtra  himself  had  included  under  this  title,  the
better  to  discredit  the  old  gods.

Having  thus  discarded  conceptions  of  Deity  which
failed  to  satisfy  his  spiritual  sense,  Zarathushtra  pro
claimed  his  own  conceptions  in  their  stead.  One
inherited  name  for  God  was  good  enough  for  him.
Ahura  in  the  Gathas  already  means  "  Lord,"  its  ety
mological  meaning  "  spiritual "  having  apparently
died  out  before  the  division  of  the  Aryans.  Who
or  what  was  "the  Lord"?  His  relation  to  Nature
is  wholly  in  accord  with  the  Bible  itself.  "Who
covereth  Himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment"  is
almost  a  quotation  from  the  Gathas.  But  his  own
nature  is  something  higher  yet.  He  is  "  the  Wise  "
(Mazdah),  which  seems  specially  to  denote  the
"knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  the  unerring  in
stinct  that  can  distinguish  between  Truth  and  False
hood,  which  for  the  Prophet  were  the  most  vital
aspects  of  good  and  evil.  Not  only  is  this  conception


v]  AHURA MAZDAH  57

free  from  material  and  external  conceptions  of  God  :
it  is  conspicuous  for  its  ethical  character.  It  is  not
a  speculative  philosophy  but  a  thoroughly  practical
doctrine.  Abstract  and  profound  though  Zara-
thushtra's  thought  was,  he  was  characteristically
Iranian  in  his  outlook — free  from  mysticism  and
asceticism  and  dreaminess.  "Wisdom"  was  very
much  like  the  Old  Testament  conception,  the  gift
for  which  Solomon  prayed.  The  attainment  of
Wisdom  lay  through  the  characteristic  stages  of
"good  thoughts,  good  words,  good  deeds,"  and  for
Zarathushtra's  disciple  "  good  deeds  "  were  not  futile
sacrifices  or  vain  austerities,  but  diligent  tilling  of
the  soil,  hatred  of  deceit  and  lying,  and  kindness  to
the  creatures  of  Ahura.

It  is  necessary  to  outline  thus  Zarathushtra's
ethics  in  order  to  understand  his  conception  of  God,
which  was  more  closely  bound  up  with  conduct  than
in  any  non-Christian  religion.  In  the  absence  of
a  recent  discovery,  for  which  see  p.  73,  we  should
be  inclined  to  regard  this  name  "  Wise  "  as  Zara
thushtra's  own  special  revelation.  The  elements  of
the  combination  Ahura  Mazdah  in  the  Gathas  are
declined  as  separate  words,  arranged  indifferently,
and  either  word  may  be  used  alone.  "The  Wise
Lord  "  will  probably  represent  it  to  us  better  than
"  Ahura  Mazdah."  It  soon  became  fixed  as  a  proper
name.  By  the  time  of  the  great  Darius,  the  first


58  ZARATHUSHTRA  [OH.

Zarathushtrian  King  of  Persia  (it  would  seem),  the
name  has  become  a  single  word,  Auramazda,  with
flexion  only  at  the  end.

We  can  only  conjecture  the  motive  of  Zara-
thushtra's  next  step  in  the  formulation  of  his  doctrine
of  God.  The  G&thas  are  crowded  with  allusions  to
six  highly  abstract  conceptions,  which  are  known
collectively  by  the  name  A  mesa  Spenta,  "  Immortal
Holy  Ones  "  (Persian  Amshaspands).  They  (or  some
of  them)  expressly  share  the  divine  title  of  Ahura ;
and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  whether  we  should  call
them  archangels  or  actual  parts  of  the  divine  essence.
It  has  been  supposed  that  Zarathushtra  was  making
concession  to  human  weakness,  trying  to  supplant
polytheism  by  giving  men  a  plurality  of  objects  for
worship,  which  were  only  complementary  attributes
of  Deity.  As  we  shall  see,  this  was  the  result,  but  we
need  not  suppose  that  it  was  the  design.  "  Arch
angel  "  is  too  humble  a  title  for  beings  who  actually
share  adoration  with  Deity.  We  should  be  poly-
theists,  not  Christians,  if  we  prayed  to  "God  and
Michael  and  Gabriel/'  The  analogy  of  the  Trinity
comes  much  closer.  The  Ameshas  are  within  the
Deity,  essential  parts  of  the  divine  hypostasis.  If
the  Apocalyptist  was  really  borrowing  imagery  from
Zarathushtra  when  he  wrote  of  "  the  seven  spirits  of
God"  (Rev.  iii.  1),  he  certainly  fathomed  the  Iranian
Prophet's  thought  extraordinarily  well.  For  Mazdah


v]  THE  AMESHA  SPENTA  59

is  sometimes  one  of  the  Ameshas,  while  at  other
times  his  superiority  to  them  is  indicated  by  their
being  set  apart,  often  with  Sraosha  (p.  99)  to  make
up  the  number  seven.  We  might  even  see  this  alter
native  in  "the  seven  spirits  which  are  before  the
throne  "  (Rev.  i.  4).  But  thorny  questions  of  Apoca
lyptic  exegesis  are  outside  our  present  province,  and
we  must  go  on  to  examine  Zarathushtra's  doctrine.
Before  taking  up  the  Ameshas  one  by  one,  we
must  observe  that  they  are  not  wholly  new  con
ceptions.  Each  of  them  has  a  special  province  in  the
material  world,  which  in  one  case  at  any  rate  descends
with  the  Amesha's  name  itself  from  the  Aryan  period.
We  may  suppose  the  Reformer  to  have  selected  from
old  inherited  beliefs  some  which  were  capable  of
adaptation  to  his  system.  While  this  implies  some
amount  of  personification,  traceable  rarely  in  this
form  within  the  Gfithas  themselves,  we  find  the
divine  names  used  perpetually  as  abstract  nouns,
without  any  personification  at  all.  One  of  the
greatest  difficulties  in  the  Gfithas  is  that  of  deciding
when  to  put  the  initial  capital  in  our  rendering  of
these  words  :  the  Germans  have  a  great  advantage
in  having  the  choice  made  for  them !  Thus  in  very
many  places  the  word  asci,  if  taken  as  an  instru
mental  case,  may  be  either  u  with  Tightness,  rightly,
duly,"  or  "  with  the  help  of  Rightness  (Asha) " ;  and
in  a  fair  proportion  of  them  we  could  equally  well


60  ZARATHUSHTRA  [OH.

construe  it  vocative,  "  0  Asha."  An  example  of  this
may  be  seen  in  a  stanza  quoted  below  (p.  87).  We
might  add  that  the  personification  is  never  very  real.
Bishop  Casartelli  is  quite  justified  in  his  insistence
upon  the  necessity  of  translating  them  :  Asha  and
Vohu  Manah  are  the  best  renderings  in  the  Later
Avesta,  but  they  should  always  be  "  Rightness "
and  "Good  Thought"  or  the  like  in  the  Gathas.
Dr  Casartelli  goes  on  to  compare  Bunyan's  per
sonified  virtues  and  vices.  The  comparison  however
must  be  used  cautiously,  for  Bunyan  has  no  ab
stractions,  even  when  his  personification  lasts  only
for  a  line  or  two,  and  the  Gathas  have  nothing  else.
"  Mercy  "  in  the  Pilgrim's  Progress  is  much  more  of
a  human  being  than  most  heroines  in  fiction  ;  while
Aramaiti  has  not  flesh  and  blood  enough  to  make  a
goddess  !

Proceeding  to  deal  with  the  "Immortals"  individu
ally,  we  begin  with  Vohu  Manah  and  Asha,  who  have
at  all  periods  the  closest  association  with  Ahura.  In
the  Gathas  Asha  is  nearer  to  him,  but  in  the  Later
Avesta  he  yields  pride  of  place  to  Vohu  Manah.
Asha  has  often  the  epithet  vahista,  "  best,"  which  in
later  times  was  stereotyped  as  part  of  his  name.  It
is  used  interchangeably  with  its  positive  vohil  in  the
G^thas  as  the  epithet  of  Manah,  "Thought,"  where
sometimes  "Thy  Thought"  (addressing  Mazdah)  serves
instead  as  the  Amesha's  name.  The  conception  of


v]  VOHU  MANAH  AND  ASHA  61

Asha  is  at  least  Iranian,  if  not  older,  for  the  name
is  identical  with  the  Persian  Arta-,  which  figures  so
constantly  in  proper  names.  Its  relation  to  the  San
skrit  rid  is  not  perfectly  regular,  but  it  is  generally
accepted  as  proving  Aryan  antiquity.  Plutarch
renders  it  '\\ij0eia,  and  the  Persian  connotation  of
Truth  was  so  wide  that  it  represents  Asha  well
enough.  "  Right,"  "  Rightness,"  "  the  Divine  Order,"
are  equivalents  as  near  as  we  can  supply.  Lehmann
interprets  Asha's  connexion  with  Fire  by  assuming
that  he  followed  an  old  Sondergott  of  the  ordeal  fire.
Like  asa,  vohu  manah  is  a  neuter,  but  comes  nearer
to  personality  by  its  meaning  —  "Good  Thought,"
which  is  thought  in  accord  with  "  the  Wise  Lord."  As
we  have  seen,  this  implies  practical  rightmindedness,
which  makes  the  Amesha's  special  connexion  with
cattle  readily  understood:  the  care  of  cattle  is  a
distinguishing  mark  of  Zarathushtra's  good  man.
The  common  comparison  with  the  Greek  Logos  is
therefore  at  best  only  partial.  Plutarch,  who  ren
dered  EtWa,  "  Goodwill,"  did  not  think  of  it.

Next  comes  "  Sovranty  "  or  "  Dominion,"  ysaQra,
in  the  Later  A  vesta  linked  with  the  adjective  vairya,
"desired,"  which  may  imply  "according  to  divine
Will."  Plutarch  renders  evvopla.  The  association
of  this  Amesha  with  metals,  already  hinted  at  in  the
Gathas,  is  connected  by  Prof.  Jackson  with  the  ayah
,  the  flood  of  molten  iron  which  is  at  last  to


62  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

purify  the  world.  It  will,  we  are  told,  burn  up  all
evil,  while  the  righteous  will  feel  it  like  a  bath  of
warm  milk.  (A  writer  in  the  Athenaeum  recently
suggested  that  Orphism  had  been  affected  by  this
conception:  the  Orphic  initiate  felt  "like  a  kid
bathed  in  milk.")  The  conception  is  essentially
eschatological,  even  as  some  are  saying  the  Gospel
"Kingdom  of  God"  was  in  the  thought  of  Jesus.
Anyhow,  whether  the  "Good  Time  Coming"  is  on
this  side  or  that  side  of  the  grave,  the  good  Zara-
thushtrian  could  pray  with  us  djamyat  ysaQrem
Owem,  and  mean  what  we  do  in  the  Lord's  Prayer.

The  fourth  Amesha,  whom  we  have  already  met
with  (p.  36)  as  an  Aryan  divinity,  is  of  feminine  gender
like  the  remaining  pair.  The  epithet  spenta,  which
belongs  to  all  the  six,  is  specially  appropriated  to
her,  so  that  her  name  in  later  language  is  Spandara-
mat.  It  may  be  remarked  that  the  Iranian  idea  of
"holiness"  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the  practical
character  of  the  religion.  It  is  no  cloistered  virtue,
divorced  from  conduct,  but  connotes  beneficence.
The  divine  attributes  which  meet  in  the  circle  of  the
Seven  are  all  alike  "  holy  "  in  that  they  promote  the
coming  of  the  New  Order,  to  which  Ahura's  whole
creation  moves.  Aramaiti  (ao<j)ia  in  Plutarch)  repre
sents  the  man- ward  side  of  what  Khshathra  describes
on  the  divine  side:  God's  Kingdom,  and  man's  atti
tude  of  loyal  devotion  to  it.  Such  a  spirit  may  well


v]  ARAMAITI  63

have  the  attribute  spenta  in  a  peculiar  sense.  This
understanding  of  Arainaiti  as  "piety"  or  "devotion"
goes  back  to  Aryan  times,  and  attaches  itself  to  an
etymology  which  (whether  right  or  wrong)  was  well
set  in  the  popular  consciousness:  it  produced  an
antithesis  taro-maiti,  "  perverseness."  Of  course
this  product  no  more  proves  that  Aramaiti  originally
meant  "  devotion  "  than  Epimetheus  proves  that  Pro
metheus  meant  "  forethought "  -  to  take  the  first
parallel  that  strikes  us.  Now,  according  to  Sayana,
the  greatest  of  ancient  Indian  commentators  on  the
Rigveda,  there  is  a  Vedic  passage  where  Aramati
means  the  Earth.  This  must  be  entirely  independent
of  the  A  vesta,  where  from  the  first  there  are  strong
traces  of  the  same  association.  May  we  conjecture
that  two  originally  distinct  words  were  fused  by
popular  etymology  in  the  Aryan  period?  Ara  matar
is  a  possible  Aryan  name  for  Mother  Earth :  compare
the  old  Greek  epa  (e/oafe,  "earthwards")  and  the
Germanic  word  from  which  our  earth  and  German
Erde  are  descended.  (We  might  easily  explain  the
added  consonant  by  postulating  conflation  in  Ger
manic  between  this  name  and  that  of  the  independent
earth-deity  Nerthus,  of  whom  Tacitus  tells  us.)  This
seems  a  simpler  link  than  those  usually  fashioned  to
connect  the  two  ideas.

Last,  we  have  a  pair  never  found  apart,  Haurvatat
and  Ameretat,  Health  ("wholeness")  and  Immortality.


64  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

Their  respective  provinces  may  be  seen  in  Ys.  5 17,
where  "  water  and  plants,  Health  and  Immortality  "
are  named  together  in  a  list  of  blessings.  Professor
Jackson  notes  "  the  primeval  idea  of  the  tree  of  life
and  the  fountain  of  youth."  There  is  very  little
specific  lore  about  them.  It  is  curious  that  Plutarch
goes  wholly  astray  with  so  simple  an  idea  as  that
of  Ameretat.

We  cannot  attempt  to  be  exhaustive,  and  need
say  no  more  about  Zarathushtra's  Deity.  The  pure
and  lofty  character  of  his  concept  will  be  obvious.
It  would  be  hard  indeed  to  find  any  non-Christian
idea  of  God  so  wholly  free  from  unworthy  elements.
But  the  absence  of  the  attributes  of  grace  and  love
is  by  itself  sufficient  reason  for  the  failure  of  Parsism
to  establish  itself  as  a  world-religion.

The  other  side  of  Zarathushtra's  contribution
towards  the  solving  of  the  Weltratsel  is  found  in  his
doctrine  of  Evil,  which  is  fully  as  profound  and  as
abstract  as  the  side  we  have  been  studying.  It  is
commonly  denominated  dualistic,  a  name  it  by  no
means  deserves,  unless  Christianity  is  to  bear  the
same  reproach.  Good  and  Evil  are  not  co-ordinate
and  co-eternal  Powers  for  him  any  more  than  for  us.
The  superiority  of  Good  is  manifest  throughout,  and
the  triumph  of  Good  at  the  last  is  as  complete  as  it
is  in  the  Bible  eschatology.  It  was  difficult  to  be
original  in  framing  a  doctrine  of  evil  spirits.  There


v]  DEMONOLOGY  65

are  few  parts  of  the  world  where  men  would  not  have
regarded  scornfully  the  hypothetical  tone  of  Luther's
great  defiance—

And  were  this  world  all  devils  o'er,
And  watching  to  devour  us — .

Iranian  religion  was  less  devil-ridden  than  most,
but  it  was  well  enough  supplied  to  give  the  great
thinker  all  necessary  hints.  But  Zarathushtra  de
veloped  them  in  his  own  way.  He  taught  how  the
two  primeval  spirits  in  the  beginning  chose  Good
and  Evil  respectively,  and  thereupon  commenced  an
antagonism  that  will  not  cease  till  the  spirit  of  Evil
and  they  that  are  of  his  portion  are  finally  destroyed.
Into  this  great  strife  men  are  to  enter  with  heart  and
soul,  and  by  lives  of  purity,  devotion,  righteousness
and  strenuous  industry  to  assault  perpetually  the
kingdom  of  Evil.  Zarathushtra  continued  to  employ
a  name  which  had  come  down  from  Aryan  antiquity,
Druj,  "  Lie."  That  this  was  its  earliest  connotation
is  suggested  not  only  by  the  Old  Persian  noun  drauga,
from  the  same  root  and  with  the  same  meaning,  but
also  by  the  German  Be-trug.  On  the  other  hand,
Skt.  dnih  means  generally  "to  injure,"  while  Schrader
notes  from  the  other  end  of  the  Indo-European  area
the  Old  Norse  draugr  and  Old  English  drfag,  mean
ing  "  ghost."  Whether  Schrader  is  right  or  wrong  in
making  malignant  ghosts  the  root  of  the  idea,  the
MO.  5


66  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

Iranian  meaning  is  not  doubtful.  It  is  a  tribute  to
national  character  that  all  evil  should  be  summed
up  in  the  she-devil  "  Deceit."  Zarathushtra  did  not
bring  a  new  teaching  to  the  Persians  in  his  emphasis
on  Truth:  the  Reformation  had  in  Herodotus'  day
but  little  permeated  the  classes  whose  education  was
summed  up  in  the  three  famous  divisions — riding,
shooting,  speaking  the  truth.  The  Prophet's  special
name  for  the  spirit  of  evil  was  Angra  Mainyu,
"  hostile  spirit " — an  idea  exactly  reproduced  in  "  the
Satan "  of  post-exilic  Judaism,  which  very  probably
owes  something  to  Parsism1.  In  the  locus  classicus,
Ys.  30,  a  GatM  which  has  been  described  as  a  Lehr-
gedicht,  a  kind  of  catechism  in  verse,  Zarathushtra
calls  "  the  Better  and  the  Bad  "  spirits  twins,  which
implies  not  merely  their  coexistence,  but  the  fact
that  they  are  thought  of  only  in  their  mutual  relation
— the  thought  of  the  one  implies  that  of  the  other.
There  has  been  much  discussion  on  the  question
whether  Angra  Mainyu  is  the  direct  antagonist  of
Mazdah  or  of  his  "holy  Spirit,"  Spenta  Mainyu,
who  appears  often  in  the  G&thas.  It  will  be  sufficient
here  to  repeat  Geiger's  judgement,  cited  with  approval
by  Prof.  Jackson  (Grundriss,  II.  648):  "So  far  as
Ahura  Mazda  is  the  positive,  to  which  Evil  makes
the  negative,  he  is  called  Spenta  Mainyu;  Evil  or

1  See  the  writer's  article  "Zoroastrianism "  in Hastings'  Bible
Dictionary,  iv.


v] "HOLY"  AND  "HOSTILE"  SPIRITS 67

its  personification  is  Anra  Mainyu  or  Aka  Mainyu.
Spenta  Mainyu  and  Aka  Mainyu  are  thus  called
twins  (Ys.  303),  inasmuch  as  they  do  not  exist  inde
pendently,  but  each  in  relation  to  the  other;  they
meet  in  the  higher  unity  Ahura  Mazda.  They  exist
before  the  beginning  of  the  world,  but  their  opposi
tion  only  comes  to  its  expression  in  the  world  that
we  see.  Ahura  Mazda  is  Creator  of  everything ;  but
when  he  creates  anything  as  Spenta  Mainyu,  there
comes  with  it  of  itself  the  negative  counterpart,  or
as  the  poet  puts  it  in  popular  form,  *  Anra  Mainyu,
the  bad  spirit,  creates  Evil  in  opposition  to  the
Good '  ( Ys.  304ff •)."  If  Zarathushtra  conceived  of  the
two  spirits  as  alike  proceeding  from  God,  we  may
recognise  in  his  statement  about  their  "choosing"
of  good  and  evil  a  doctrine  essentially  identical  with
that  of  the  fall  of  Satan,  made  so  familiar  to  us  by
Milton1.  In  the  antagonism  of  "holy  "  and  "  hostile  "
spirits  we  recall  what  has  just  been  said  of  the  mean
ing  of  spenta,  which  marks  Mazdah's  Spirit  as  the
friend  and  helper  of  man  and  creation,  while  the
other  spirit  is  their  enemy.  Zarathushtra's  name  for
the  fiend  ultimately  predominated,  the  Druj  being
specialised  in  the  Later  Avesta.  But  she  left  an

1  See  on  the  whole  subject  Casartelli's  Mazdnyasnian  Religion  under
the  Sassanids  (Bombay,  1899),  pp.  1-71.  Prof.  Jackson  denies  that
Ahriman  is  a  fallen  angel  (Grundriss,  n.  649)  ;  and  he  now  regards
the  two  principles  as  distinct  and  separate.

5—2


68  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

interesting  trace  behind.  The  Persian  Ahriman  and
the  Greek  'Apetyna^o?  presume  in  Old  Persian  (from
which,  and  not  from  Avestan,  we  have  seen  the
Greeks  received  the  Zoroastrian  names)  a  form
* Ahrimanyus,  instead  of  * Ahramanyus,  the  equi
valent  of  the  Avestan.  This  involves,  it  would  seem,
that  the  name  was  treated  as  feminine,  the  influence
of  the  Druj  thus  persisting  when  the  name  has  been
supplanted1.

With  Angra  Mainyu  as  their  chief  Zarathushtra
associated  the  Daevas.  Their  original  character  has
been  discussed  already.  Assuming  our  results,  we
may  suppose  that  he  put  them  with  Angra  Mainyu
as  spirits  of  deception,  drawing  men  away  from  the
true  God  and  eternal  life.  Hardly  any  Daevas  are
individually  named  in  the  Gathas,  beyond  those  al
ready  described ;  but  there  is  one  of  them  who  must  be
introduced  here,  Aesma,  "  Wrath"  (cf.  ol^a,  Lat.  ira).
In  later  times  he  specially  represented  "drunken
rage,"  and  the  name  daeva  was  appended  so  as  to
make  a  single  word  in  the  Persian  language :  hence  the
fiend  'AoyioSato?  in  Tobit.  In  the  Median  folk-story
which  may  be  presumed  to  be  the  basis  of  that  book2

1  That  Ahriman  and  the  Greek  name  presume  a  feminine  form  in
Old  Persian  was  urged  by  the  present  writer  in  a  paper  published  in
1892. Bartholomae's  assumption  that  a  by-form  Ahriya-  is  implied
seems  much  less  probable.

2  See  the  writer's  paper  in  Expository  Times,  March  1900,  or  more
briefly  in  Hastings'  Diet.  Bib.  iv.  989.


v]  ASMODAEUS  69

Asmodaeus  played  a  rather  different  part,  probably
because  that  story  comes  from  a  distinct  stratum
of  Iranian  life  (see  p.  77).  Human  members  of  the
Satan's  host  include  of  course  the  datywyOBM)  un
believers  who  worship  the  Daevas,  otherwise  viewed
as  dregvato,  "men  having  the  Druj,"  as  opposed  to
asavano,  "  men  having  Asha  "  :  they  are  "  those  who
love  and  make  a  lie."  Various  tribes  and  individuals
are  named  in  the  Gathas  as  thus  hostile  to  the  Re
ligion:  we  should  name  especially  the  Kavayo,  the
chiefs  who  maintained  the  unreformed  religion,  the
Usijo  and  Karapano,  its  priests  and  teachers.
Creatures  of  Angra  in  a  lower  scale  are  %ra/s£ra,
"wild  beasts,"  a  term  which  even  in  the  Gathas  is
extended  to  include  all  that  robs  and  ravens,  Daevas
and  men  alike.  The  list  of  demons  grows  in  later  times.
It  remains  to  describe  Zarathushtra's  eschatology,
the  part  of  his  system  which  on  the  whole  suffered
least  from  the  counter-reformation  of  later  days.
The  individualist  side  of  the  picture  will  be  presented
subsequently  (pp.  159f.),  as  developed  by  poets  and
thinkers  of  the  generations  following  the  Prophet.
It  is  perhaps  risky  to  trust  general  impressions  where
the  material  is  so  scanty  and  so  obscure  as  it  is  in
the  Gathas,  but  we  cannot  mistake  Zarathushtra's
pre-eminent  concern  with  the  bearing  of  eschatology
on  conduct,  and  with  the  victory  of  all  that  is  good
in  the  world  when  the  long  struggle  with  evil  comes


70  ZARATHUSHTRA  [OH.

to  its  climax.  He  looks  forward  to  a  "  Great  Crisis,"
a  day  of  reckoning  when  men's  lives  shall  be  finally
weighed,  and  the  followers  of  Asha  shall  have  their
reward.  The  followers  of  the  Druj  shall  go  for  ever
to  the  House  of  the  Druj : —

Whoso  cometh  to  the  Righteous  One,  far  from  him  shall  be  the
future  long  aeon  of  misery,  of  darkness,  ill  food  and  crying  of  woe.
To  such  an  existence,  ye  followers  of  the  Druj,  shall  your  own  Self
bring  you  by  your  actions  ( Ys.  3120,  after  Bartholomae).

What  is  involved  in  the  daregem  ayu  is  a  question
essentially  like  that  over  which  Christian  expositors
have  differed  so  much  in  the  rendering  of  the  Greek
"aeon"  which  we  have  used  to  translate  it.  The
word  in  both  languages  (as  in  Latin  aevom)  may  be
applied  to  the  term  of  a  human  life,  which  was  prob
ably  its  earliest  meaning.  But  there  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  connotation  of  the  word  in  Avestan
as  in  Hellenistic  was  in  such  contexts  that  of  time
without  visible  horizon.  The  universalist  conception,
by  which  the  ayah  ysusta  (see  pp.  61  f.)  will  burn  up
the  evil  and  so  purify  evil  beings,  may  well  have
been  outside  Zarathushtra's  thought.  But  there  re
main  at  any  rate  two  unreconciled  anticipations  of
annihilation  and  of  penal  suffering,  as  the  future  of
the  wicked  after  death,  which  co-exist  in  the  Gathas,
much  as  they  do  in  the  New  Testament,  and  later
Parsi  theology  was  left  to  harmonise  them  if  it  could.
After  all,  they  were  alike  but  figures,  by  which  in


v]  ESCHATOLOGY  71

different  moods  the  Prophet  expressed  his  conviction
of  a  Theodicy — that  one  day  it  would  be  well  with
the  righteous  and  ill  with  the  wicked,  a  final  and
complete  reversal  of  the  unequal  justice  that  this  life
so  often  metes  out  to  them ;  and  if  in  a  matter  lying
beyond  direct  vision  he  only  saw  in  a  mirror  riddle-
wise,  we  need  not  be  too  careful  to  remove  his  in
consistency,  remembering  the  "  reverent  agnosticism  "
which  must  very  largely  condition  our  own  thought
on  the  problem  of  retribution.

Very  prominent  in  Zarathushtra's  doctrine  of  the
Last  Things  is  cinvato  peretti,  "The  Bridge  of  the
Separater."  Over  it  he  promises  to  conduct  the  pious
into  the  "  House  of  Song,"  garo  demand,  where  God
dwells  for  ever  with  His  own.  It  is  likely  enough
that  this  was  an  old  myth,  originating  perhaps  with
the  rainbow,  which  lent  itself  to  the  Prophet's  ethical
purpose.  In  later  conceptions — whether  starting
from  the  earlier  age  or  not  we  have  no  means  of
divining — the  Bridge  was  broad  for  the  righteous,
narrow  as  a  razor  for  the  wicked,  who  fell  off  it  into
hell:  Islam  borrowed  this  idea  in  the  well-known
Arch  of  Al-Sirat.  The  "Separater"  or  Judge  may
have  been  Rashnu,  the  yazata  with  the  scales,  who
weighs  the  good  and  evil  in  each  life  and  gives  his
verdict  on  the  balance.  But  it  is  probably  significant
that  Zarathushtra  does  not  name  him:  he  does  not
seem  anxious  to  add  to  the  number  of  spiritual  beings


72  ZARATHUSHTRA  [OH.

whose  names  may  stand  among  the  angels  of  Ahura.
That  a  man's  Self  is  his  own  determinant  of  destiny
is  the  one  doctrine  that  matters.

One  more  technical  term  of  the  eschatology  calls
for  comment,  the  frasokereti  or  "  advancement "  of
the  world  of  life :  the  abstract  noun  does  not  appear
till  the  Yashts,  but  the  verbal  phrase  is  prominent  in
the  GatMs — see  for  example  Ys.  309  (below,  p.  95).
The  machinery  whereby  the  Regeneration  is  to  be
achieved  has  been  already  described,  and  it  will  be
apparent  that  any  who  expect  prosaic  consistency  or
a  sharply  defined  mental  picture  of  the  future  will  be
disappointed.  It  is  without  form  and  void,  as  Apoca
lyptic  is  wont  to  be  when  studied  by  unsympathetic
minds.  But  the  ideas  of  Prophets  are  at  least  as
worthy  of  study  as  crabs  or  even  stars ;  and  old-world
eschatological  dreams  are  at  the  present  moment
exacting  very  special  attention  from  various  students
of  human  thought.  We  do  well  to  make  some  effort
to  realise  the  figures  that  loomed  for  Zarathushtra
out  of  the  mists  of  the  dim  future.  They  were  des
tined,  it  would  seem,  to  exercise  extraordinary  in
fluence  upon  the  world  of  the  next  millennium,  and
through  that  world  upon  our  own.  Are  we  justified
in  claiming  Zarathushtra's  right  to  be  acknowledged
as  the  founder  of  Apocalyptic?  It  is  too  large  a
question  to  answer  here  in  any  adequate  way,  but
we  may  briefly  recognise  the  strong  probability  that


v]  APOCALYPTIC  73

contacts  with  a  Zoroastrianiscd  Persia  did  much  to
stimulate  in  Israel  the  growth  of  a  form  of  literature
which  from  the  Maccabaean  era  downwards  dominated
,Ie  wish  thought  and  created  the  milieu  of  the  Gospel
proclamation.  This  fact  alone,  even  if  the  proof  of
contact  between  Parsism  and  Judaism  were  held  to
be  insufficient,  gives  a  profound  modern  interest  to
the  visions  of  the  Sage  of  Iran.  Others  before  him
dm i mod  of  a  paradise,  a  very  earthly  paradise  indeed.
He  was  the  earliest  thinker  to  make  it  ethical.  He
saw  no  houris  and  no  winecups  in  his  abode  of  bliss.
He  "  looked  for  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  where
in  dwelleth  Righteousness."  We  have  quoted  the
very  latest- written  words  of  the  Christian  Scriptures
to  be  a  summary  of  his  ideal ;  and  thereby  we  have
only  paid  just  tribute  to  the  moral  grandeur  of  this
dim  figure  from  the  distant  past — a  man  who  believed
in  God  and  believed  therefore  in  the  Triumph  of  Good,
and  taught  men  by  this  great  Hope  to  guide  the  life
of  every  day.

NOTE. — Hominel's  discovery  of  the  name  Assara  Mazas  in
an  Assyrian  record  of  the  middle  of  the  second  millennium  B.C.
takes  the  divine  name  back  to  the  Aryan  period,  or  to  Iranian
antiquity  prior  to  the  change  of  s  to  h  (cf.  p.  9).  The  Boghaz-
keui  ///<//v/  and  .\<i.«i//<>  might  be  Indo-Aryan,  but  Mazas  cannot
It  seems  probable  therefore  that  Maxdah  was  a  cult  epithet  of
a  great  Ah  lira — some  would  say  the  Vedic  Varuna — long  before
/arathushtra.  This  must  apparently  dispose  of  the  otherwise
more  pro!  table  view  referred  to  on  p.  57.


CHAPTER  VI

AFTER  ZARATHUSHTRA

As  the  history  of  religion  everywhere  leads  us  to
expect,  the  Reformer's  victory  over  lower  forms  of
faith  was  only  partial.  A  counter-reformation  set  in
before  the  Gathic  dialect  ceased  to  be  spoken.  The
prose  "Gatha  of  Seven  Chapters"  (Haptanghaiti—
Ys.  35-42)  shows  us  the  old  nature  deities  back
again  ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  their  adorers  laid
much  stress  on  the  fine  distinction  between  poly
theism  and  angelolatry.  The  Gathas  continued  to  be
chanted  in  the  divine  service,  but  they  must  have
been  difficult  even  when  their  dialect  was  still
familiar.  When  the  interpretation  of  them  fell  more
and  more  into  the  hands  of  the  priests,  and  the  Gothic
was  to  the  masses  of  the  people  exactly  what  Latin
is  in  Romance  countries  to-day,  there  was  nothing
left  to  check  polytheism,  till  the  systematisation  of
orthodox  Parsism  under  the  Sassanian  kings.  Had


CH.  vi]  THE  MAGI  75

the  Gathas  not  been  preserved,  we  should  have
recognised  very  little  in  the  Yashts  to  set  in  a
different  class  from  what  we  find  in  the  Rigveda.

As  we  must  examine  the  Yashts  in  some  detail
later  on,  we  need  say  no  more  now  on  this  side  of
the  degeneration  which  marks  the  centuries  between
Zarathushtra  and  the  Sassanians.  Nor  must  we
spare  much  space  for  the  other  side,  which  scarcely
concerns  us  in  our  study  of  the  verse  parts  of  the
Avesta :  we  will  attempt  for  completeness'  sake  a
brief  summary  of  results  without  either  argument  or
evidence,  which  would  have  to  be  rather  technical.

The  Magi  are  stated  by  Herodotus  (i.  101)  to
have  been  one  of  the  six  tribes  of  the  Medes.  As
one  of  the  other  tribes  is  called  by  him  "  Aryan,"  we
may  assume  that  the  Magi  were  indigenous  in  a
country  where  the  Aryans  were  immigrant  con
querors.  They  may  well  have  been  a  sacred  caste,
analogous  to  the  Brahmans  in  India.  Darius  in  his
great  inscription  at  Behistan  tells  how  Gaumata  the
Magus,  when  Kambujiya  (Cambyses)  was  in  Egypt,
personated  the  king's  murdered  brother  Bardiya
(Smerdis),  and  raised  a  revolt.  Herodotus  tells  the
story  with  embellishments  ;  and  he  gives  us  the
significant  statement  that  the  triumphant  conspiracy
of  Persian  nobles  under  Darius,  which  set  him  on  the
throne,  was  commemorated  by  the  annual  festival  of
the  Magophonia,  a  sort  of  Fifth  of  November.  It


76  AFTER  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

looks  like  an  attempt  of  the  native  population  to
shake  off  the  Persian  yoke,  and  one  that  came  near
success:  the  pretenders,  the  expiation  of  whose  "lie"
is  recorded  on  the  Behistan  Rock,  may  well  have
been  insurgents  in  the  same  cause.  If  we  read  the
history  aright,  the  Magi  waited  their  time  and
gradually  won  compensation  in  spiritual  power.  The
people,  nominally  conformed  to  Zarathushtra's  reli
gion,  were  ready  enough  to  accept  them  as  priests,
and  it  would  not  be  long  before  the  upper  classes
followed  suit.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  a  syncretism
thus  arose,  with  religion  increasingly  under  the
direction  of  priests  who  could  use  the  opportunities
well  for  bringing  in  their  own  doctrines  and  cults.
They  did  not  introduce  their  own  unpopular  name
into  the  sacred  texts  that  grew  up  under  their  in
spiration  l :  it  was  left  to  foreigners  like  the  Greeks  to
suit  names  to  facts,  and  give  the  Magi  the  credit  they
deserved  for  the  upgrowth  of  a  virtually  new  religious
system.  In  two  very  important  matters  even  the
Greeks  retained  the  consciousness  that  the  Magi  had
to  be  distinguished  from  the  Persians.  One  of  them
ultimately  established  itself  in  Parsism,  and  is  a  con
spicuous  feature  of  the  customs  of  Parsis  to-day.
The  Dakhmas,  or  "  Towers  of  Silence,"  on  which  the
bodies  of  the  dead  are  exposed  till  the  vultures  have
stripped  the  skeleton  bare,  have  their  place  in  the

1  Except  in  one  passage — an  exception  proving  the  rule.


vi]  MAGIAN  CUSTOMS  77

Vendldild,  but  were  certainly  not  known  in  Persia
under  the  Achaeinenid  kings.  It  was  an  aboriginal
custom,  described  by  Diodorus  as  characteristic  of
a  barbarous  people  called  Oreitae,  dwelling  in
Baluchistan :  see  Schrader  in  Enc.  Relig.  II.  16.
The  other,  which  equally  staggered  the  Greeks,
was  the  practice  of  marriage  between  the  closest
kin — according  to  the  Magian  theology  a  religious
duty  of  the  most  extravagant  sanctity.  It  is,  how
ever,  at  least  open  to  the  gravest  doubt  whether
this  can  be  traced  .in  the  Avesta  ;  and  of  course
modern  Parsis  vehemently  repudiate  the  idea  that
it  ever  formed  a  recognised  element  in  their  creed
or  practice.  To  these  we  may  probably  add,  as
characteristic  of  the  Magi  but  not  of  Parsism,  the
"science"  of  astrology,  the  practice  of  magic — named
from  them — and  divination  by  dreams.  We  might
mention  here  that  there  seems  reason  to  suppose
the  Book  of  Tobit  to  be  a  Jewish  reconstruction
of  an  old  Median  folklore  story  which  in  many
features  still  preserves  characteristics  of  Magian,  not
Zarathushtrian,  doctrine  and  custom  (cf.  p.  68).

Into  the  Avesta  the  Magi  brought,  to  speak
generally,  the  elements  which  we  find  in  the  Veu-
didad.  The  Gathas  are  almost  as  innocent  of  ritual
as  the  New  Testament :  like  prophets  elsewhere,
Zarathushtra  seems  to  have  cared  little  for  outward
forms  of  worship.  The  Magi  supplied  the  omission,


78  AFTER  ZARATHUSHTRA  [CH.

and  it  suffices  to  record  with  sincere  relief  that
their  book  of  offices  is  in  prose.  They  hardened  the
Prophet's  profound  adumbrations  of  truth  into  a
mechanical  system  of  dogma,  therein  showing  the
usual  skill  of  priests  in  preserving  the  letter  and
destroying  the  spirit.  Zarathushtra's  doctrine  of
Evil  was  developed  into  a  systematic  division  of
the  world  between  Ahura  Mazdah  and  Angra
Mainyu.  Every  angel  and  every  creation  of  the
former  had  its  exact  counterpart  in  the  infernal
order.  The  fact  that  the  ingenious  process  was  not
always  completed  may  be  evidence  of  the  limitation
of  Magian  influence  during  the  formative  period  of
Parsism.  The  Amesha  Spentas  are  only  perfunctorily
provided  with  fiends  to  match.  It  is  a  suggestive
fact  that  "  Yasht  22,"  the  general  lines  of  which  we
have  tried  to  present  in  modern  form  below  (pp.  159ff.),
appears  as  a  fragment :  something  sealed  the  lips  of
the  dogmatic  interpolator  as  he  tried  to  spoil  the
lovely  picture  of  the  good  man's  soul  entering  heaven
with  an  exact  counterpart  describing  the  journey  to
hell.

There  is  very  much  more  which  would  have  to  be
said  if  our  principal  purpose  were  the  description  of
Persian  religion  as  a  whole.  Limited  as  we  are  to
the  poetical  portions  of  the  Avesta,  we  must  pass  by
the  Sassanian  reform,  which  unified  and  established
Parsi  faith,  the  devastation  that  followed  the  coming


vi]  LATER  HISTORY  79

of  Islam,  the  settlement  in  India  and  the  modern
history  of  the  Parsi  community.  Similarly  we  must
be  content  with  naming  two  by-products  of  Persian
thought  which  loom  large  in  the  early  history  of
Christianity — the  Parsi  heresy  of  Manichaeism,  and
the  most  important  and  long  victorious  cult  of
Mithra,  the  latter  seemingly  a  direct  descendant  of
unreformed  Iranian  religion,  scarcely  touched  by
Zarathushtra's  ideas,  but  considerably  mixed  with
indigenous  elements  from  the  countries  where  it
took  its  rise.


CHAPTER  VII

THE  GATHAS  : LITERARY  FEATURES

FOR  us  as  much  as  for  the  Parsis  the  kernel  of
the  Avesta  is  to  be  found  in  the  Gathas,  which  we
are  briefly  reviewing  in  general  before  we  proceed  to
take  them  in  detail.  They  were  the  only  part  believed
to  come  immediately  from  Zarathushtra,  and  as  such
they  had  a  unique  sanctity,  which  was  doubtless  en
hanced  very  early  by  the  rapid  loss  of  the  key  to
their  meaning.  Their  dialect,  as  we  have  seen,  was
quite  distinct  from  that  of  the  Later  Avesta  ;  arid
even  if  they  had  been  normalised — a  very  easy  pro
cess  which  was  actually  applied  several  times  when
quotations  were  made — their  obscurity  would  not
have  been  materially  lightened.  To  this  we  return
presently.  The  title  GaOa  claims  our  attention  first.
The  word  is  Aryan,  for  Sanskrit  gives  us  Gdtha  (with
th  as  in  "  ho^ouse  " — the  Avestan  6  is  a  spirant  like
th  in  "  thin  ").  Originally  the  name  presumes  poetical
form,  but  when  the  reverence  of  a  later  age  canonised


«n.  vii] MEANING  OF  "GATHA"  81

them,  surrounded  with  the  glamour  of  antique  diction
and  archaic  dialect,  their  name  began  to  be  applied
to  all  ancient  sacred  writing  that  was  clothed  in  the
same  language.  Hence  we  have  the  name  GatM
given  to  seven  short  compositions  in  prose,  the
changed  religious  position  of  which  we  noted  above
(p.  74).  A  paragraph  may  be  quoted  here  from
Professor  Geldner's  brief  account  of  the  Avestan
literature  in  Grundriss  d.  iran.  Philologie  (n.  29)  :—

The  term  Gatha  is  probably  not  to  be  understood  according
to  its  etymology  simply  as  "song"  or  "hymn."  We  must  re
member  that  in  India  the  term  gat' a  is  often  used  in  a  technical
sense.  Among  the  Brahmans  as  among  the  Buddhists  it  denotes
verses  scattered  about  in  narrative  prose,  which  either  form  an
integral  part  of  the  narrative  or  are  attached  to  the  prose  and
recapitulate  its  contents  in  concise  phrase  which  it  was  easy  to
remember.  By  their  form  they  were  peculiarly  adapted  for  oral
transmission,  and  were  perhaps  originally  designed  for  that  end.
Often  they  have  become  detached  from  the  accompanying  prose,
and  have  been  preserved  alone  without  it.  If  we  might  postulate
similar  conditions  for  the  Gathas  of  the  Avesta,  these  would  like
wise  presuppose  a  lost  substratum  of  prose,  for  which  the  Gathas
supplied  introduction,  resumes  and  aper$us.  In  favour  of  this
stands  their  peculiar  structure,  their  for  the  most  part  uniform
arrangement,  and  the  continuous  line  of  thought  within  the
closely-connected  unity  of  each  separate  stanza.  Many  stanzas
(e.g.  Ys.  303)  point  to  a  lost  context  by  the  presence  of  a  demon
strative  which  finds  no  explanation  in  the  text  that  precedes.

Geldner  concludes  that  "we  have  preserved  for  us
in  the  Gathas  the  quintessence  of  instruction  or

MO.  6


82 THE  GATHAS: LITERARY  FEATURES  [CH.

preaching  which  the  oldest  tradition  put  in  the
Prophet's  mouth  and  left  to  be  guarded  in  the  circle
of  the  faithful,  his  school  and  privileged  followers."
We  compare  with  this  the  judgement  of  another  great
expert,  that  the  Gathas  are  "  Verspredigten,"  ver
sified  sermons  (Bartholomae).  That  the  Gathas  were
essentially  esoteric  lore,  betrayed  as  such  by  frequent
reference  to  "  him  that  knows,"  the  Gnostic  for  whom
these  deep  things  will  be  clear,  we  may  accept  from
Geldner  without  necessarily  agreeing  with  him  that
the  polytheistic  elements  were  allowed  by  the
Prophet  to  survive  in  the  outer  circle.

There  are  however  other  reasons  for  the  obscurity
in  question,  of  which  we  may  name  two,  one  of  them
doubtless  applying  mainly  to  foreigners  studying
a  dialect  long  extinct,  while  the  other  probably
operated  almost  as  powerfully  with  those  who  first
heard  the  hymns  sung.  The  first  of  these  depends
on  the  conditions  of  Gathic  as  a  language  peculiarly
endowed  with  grammatical  ambiguities.  An  ex
cellent  illustration  is  provided  by  Bishop  Casartelli,
when  introducing  to  readers  of  the  Dublin  Review
a  verse  translation  of  "The  Plaint  of  the  Kine"
(Ys.  29).  Of  Bartholomae's  Die  Gatha's  des  Avesta
he  says : —

It  impresses  one  with  the  almost  hopeless  divergence  of  views
of  even  the  most  qualified  experts,  when  we  find  what  strange
discrepancies  of  translation  each  new  attempt  produces.  Thus  in


vii]  OBSCURITY  OF  LANGUAGE  83

the  very  first  verse  of  this  Gatha  a  word  which  hitherto  has  been
universally  accepted  as  a  substantive,  and  variously  rendered  as
"drought"  (Justi),  "evil,  prey"  (Darmesteter),  "desolation "(Mills),
"  filth  "  (Kanga),  is  by  Bartholomae  construed  as  the  perfect  of  a
verb  meaning  "  to  oppress  ";  and  in  verse  7  a  word  hitherto  taken
as  an  adjective  meaning  "sixfold"  is  by  him  treated  as  a  sub
stantive  meaning  "  milk  "  !  In  both  cases  I  have  with  consider
able  hesitation  followed  him.

We  shall  meet  with  many  other  illustrations  as  we
go  through  the  Gathas.  The  ambiguities  of  Gathic
arise  from  various  causes,  one  of  which  may  be  men
tioned  as  a  sample.  Through  the  Aryan  fusion  of
a,  e  and  o  into  the  single  vowel  a,  and  the  Gathic
indiscriminate  lengthening  of  all  final  vowels  (see
pp.  12,  23  above),  such  a  word  as  bar  a  might  answer
to  the  Greek  $epw  (indie,  or  subj.)  or  <f>epe,  or1  to  Qope,
<f>6po)  (the  lost  instrumental),  <f>6pa)  (dual),  or  again
to  the  feminine  <}>opd,  or  a  neuter  plural  nominative.
Needless  to  say  all  these  alterations  do  not  coexist
in  all  such  words,  or  indeed  in  this  one,  but  these
are  typical.  Vedic  Sanskrit  might  be  quite  as  am
biguous,  but  it  has  the  advantage  of  an  immensely
larger  literature  by  which  to  check  results,  while  it
has  also  a  much  more  reliable  native  tradition.
Phonetic  change  has  moreover  been  more  active  in
Iranian  than  in  Indian  speech,  in  certain  directions

1  Putting  aside  a  disputed  question  whether  it  should  not  in  this
case  be  bdrd.

6—2


84  THE  GATHAS: LITERARY  FEATURES  [CH.

which  tend  specially  to  produce  confusion  of  originally
different  words.

The  other  source  of  obscurity  to  be  mentioned
here  arises  from  the  extraordinarily  abstract  character
of  Zarathushtra's  thought.  The  Ameshas  in  particular
are  responsible  for  a  great  deal  of  ambiguity.  Thus
when  we  meet  with  the  word  asd  (cf.  pp.  59  f.  above)
we  must  start  with  a  problem  of  parsing — is  it  vocative
or  instrumental,  the  latter  perhaps  used  by  a  peculiar
syntax  as  a  nominative  ?  And  then  we  want  to  know
whether  it  is  the  personification  or  the  common  noun,
and  which  of  finely  shaded  meanings  applies  best  to
the  passage  before  us.  The  perpetual  recurrence  of
these  shadowy  abstractions  not  only  makes  the
language  difficult,  but  robs  it  of  literary  distinction.
Of  course,  if  Geldner's  suggestions  given  above  be
accepted,  we  can  hardly  expect  this  quality.  Versified
summaries  of  the  most  eloquent  sermons,  composed
to  help  the  faithful  to  retain  their  essence  in  the
memory,  have  almost  as  little  chance  of  rising  into
literature  as  the  mnemonic  stanzas  by  which  at
school  we  painfully  acquired  the  mysteries  of  Latin
genders.

"  Almost " — for  after  all  the  Prophet  was  in  deadly
earnest,  and  he  preached  on  great  themes,  and
spiritual  fervour  can  make  literature  malgrg  lui,
even  under  such  unfavourable  surroundings.  We
close  this  section  with  two  extracts  that  have  a


vii] DIFFICULTIES  OF  THOUGHT  85

beauty  of  their  own,  while  not  pretending  that  it
would  be  easy  to  match  them  with  more.  Zara-
thushtra's  glory  does  not  need  any  forced  extension
of  his  claims,  and  prophets  are  rarer  than  poets  after
all.

First  then  we  cite  Ys.  31 7>  8 :

He  that  in  the  beginning  thus  thought,  "Let  the  blessed
realms  be  filled  with  lights,"  he  it  is  that  by  his  wisdom  created
Right.  Those  realms  which  the  Best  Thought  shall  possess,
thou  dost  glorify  through  thy  spirit,  O  Lord,  who  art  evermore
the  same.

I  conceived  of  thee,  O  Wise  One,  in  my  thought,  that  thou,  the
First,  art  also  the  Last — that  thou  art  Father  of  Good  Thought,
for  so  I  apprehended  thee  with  mine  eye — that  thou  didst  truly
create  Right,  and  art  the  Lord  to  judge  the  deeds  of  life.

Are  the  "happy  spaces"  those  of  the  visible  skies
or  the  Paradise  where  the  good  shall  dwell  at  last  ?
The  former  gives  us  a  fine  parallel  to  Kant's  famous
saying  about  the  starry  heavens  and  the  moral  law —
the  thought  which  united,  if  it  did  not  originally  pro
duce,  the  two  halves  of  the  nineteenth  Psalm.  If  the
eschatological  thought  is  uppermost,  we  can  appre
ciate  the  grandeur  of  the  conception  of  Him  who
"  prepared  the  kingdom  "  for  His  own  "  before  the
foundation  of  the  world,"  and  by  His  unchanging
purpose  has  been  preparing  it  ever  since  then — He
the  First  and  the  Last,  who  inspires  Religion,  frames
the  Moral  Law,  and  at  last  by  it  shall  "judge  the


86  THEGATHAS:  LITERARY  FEATURES  [CH.VII

world  in  righteousness."  Thoughts  lofty  as  these
could  not  express  themselves  in  language  that  fell
short  of  poetry.

Next  we  might  quote  the  Prophet's  musing  on  the
mystery  of  Nature  :—

This  I  ask  thee,  tell  me  truly,  0  Lord.  Who  is  by  generation
the  father  of  Right  at  the  first  [i.e.  the  Divine  Order,  or  perhaps
collective,  the  ordered  Kosmos]  ?  Who  determined  the  path  of
sun  and  stars  ?  Who  is  it  by  whom  the  moon  waxes  and  wanes  ?
This,  0  wise  One,  and  yet  more  am  I  fain  to  know.

This  I  ask  thee,  tell  me  truly,  0  Lord.  Who  upheld  the  earth
beneath  and  the  firmament  from  falling  ?  Who  the  waters  and
the  plants  ?  Who  yoked  swiftness  to  winds  and  clouds  ?  Who
is,  0  Wise  One,  creator  of  Good  Thought  [possibly  also  collective,
the  pious]  ?

This  I  ask  thee,  tell  me  truly,  0  Lord.  What  artist  made  light
and  darkness  ?  What  artist  made  sleep  and  waking  ?  Who  made
the  morning,  the  noon  and  the  night,  that  call  the  understanding
to  their  duties  ?  ( Ys.  443~5.)

We  had  marked  a  stanza  in  a  later  hymn,  but  the
doctors  disagree  so  badly  in  the  proper  treatment  of
certain  weak  points  in  its  interpretation,  that  it
seems  safer  to  leave  it,  and  proceed  to  our  analysis
of  the  Gathas  in  detail.


CHAPTER  VIII

CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS

THE  first  hymn  in  Gad  a  Ahunavaiti  (Ys.  28)  is
one  of  a  rather  general  character,  and  has  few
features  on  which  we  need  tarry.  The  metre,  as
throughout  the  seven  hymns  of  this  Gath&,  consists
of  three  lines  with  7  +  9  syllables  each.  Gathic
metre  has  been  generally  described  already,  but  it
may  be  worth  while  to  make  a  fairly  exact  transcript
of  a  specimen  stanza,  the  opening  one,  in  a  literal
translation  :—

With  hands  outstretched  entreating

for  support,  I  will  pray,  0  Mazdah
first  of  all  things  for  his  works,

the  holy  Spirit's  works,  0  Rightness,
wherewith  I  may  please  the  Will

of  Good  Thought  and  the  Soul  of  the  Kine.

Whether  the  Gathic  original  had  any  more  rhythm
than  our  English  we  cannot  tell  :  nothing  has  been
discovered  beyond  what  the  student  of  prosody


88  CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

might  recognise  in  the  version,  a  fixed  number  of
syllables  in  each  line.  The  stanza  presents  us  with
a  bizarre  conception  which  needs  explanation.  Gem
urvan  is  "  Soul  of  Kine  "  among  scholars  who  try
to  be  literary  :  for  some  unassignable  reason  "  kine  "
is  acknowledged  to  be  nearer  to  poetry  than  its
singular,  which  answers  more  exactly  to  gem,  a
phonetic  equivalent  of  Latin  bovis  and  our  cow's.
The  gender  however  is  indeterminate.  As  was
pointed  out  above  (p.  44),  Aryan  veneration  for
the  indispensable  Ox  or  Cow  is  a  survival  of  the
days  when  the  Aryans  were  nomads  on  the  plains.
Its  animistic  deification  is  very  natural  among  a
people  who  instinctively  bowed  before  the  creature
that  made  their  plough  go.  "Who  killed  the
Ur-kuht"  (p.  43)  is  a  question  not  quite  easy  to
answer.  In  Mithraism  it  is  Mithra  himself,  who  is
represented  in  every  sculpture  seated  on  the  bull's
back,  plunging  the  blade  into  its  neck.  The  creative
and  the  regenerating  results  of  the  action  form  the
subject  of  the  Mithraic  mysteries.  On  the  other
hand  we  might  be  sure  the  Da^vas  would  be  credited
with  what  seems  primd  facie  an  unfriendly  act
towards  the  Cow.  In  either  case  the  deified  soul  of
the  primeval  ox  or  cow  will  be  the  most  natural  re
presentative  in  heaven  of  the  spirit  of  agriculture
that  was  so  dear  to  Zarathushtra.  The  rest  of  Ys.  28
is  a  prayer  for  enlightenment,  grace  and  zeal  to  work


vin]  YASNA XXVIII  89

in  the  light  of  future  blessedness.  One  stanza  may
be  quoted  as  typical :

Spirit-of- Holiness ! when  shall  I  face  to  face
Thee  and  the  Good-Mind  see,  and  bounteous  Ahura's  throne,
And  the  Divine  Obedience  ? Through  this  sacred  prayer
May  we  in  might  ward  off  the  wicked  by  our  tongue !

So  renders  Dr  Casartelli,  observing  that  the  last  line
might  be  "convert  the  wicked."  This  agrees  with
Bartholomae's  translation,  "By  this  word  (of  promise)
we  would  convert  the  ruffians  to  that  which  is
greatest."  It  is  worth  marking  in  view  of  the
Prophet's  more  normal  attitude  towards  the  enemies
of  the  faith,  which  is  essentially  that  of  the  Impre
catory  Psalms  :  such  an  utterance  as  Ps.  cxxxix.  21,  22
could  be  very  easily  matched  in  the  Gathas.  Fol
lowing  on  this  (the  fifth)  stanza  there  comes  a  general
prayer  of  the  community,  with  phrases  that  seem  to
exclude  the  direct  authorship  of  Zarathushtra  him
self.  "Give  to  Zarathushtra  and  to  us  strong  sup
port/'  "  0  Aramaiti,  give  to  Vishtaspa  and  to  me  our
desire,"  and  again  "  I  pray  for  the  best  gifts,  desiring
them  for  the  hero  Frashaoshtra  and  for  myself,  and
for  those  to  whom  thou  wilt  grant  of  the  Good
Thought  for  all  time  " : — the  speaker  here  must  be
the  faithful  people,  praying  for  their  Prophet
himself,  their  king  Vishtaspa,  the  prime  minister
Frashaoshtra  (p.  50)  and  the  community  as  a  whole.


90  CONTENTS  OF  THE GATHAS [CH.

The  "  I  "  is  accordingly  collective,  as  so  often  in  the
Hebrew  Psalter  and  in  modern  hymns,  but  the  ex
press  mention  of  Zarathushtra  shows  that  it  is  a
disciple  and  not  the  Master  who  composes  the  hymn.
So  at  least  we  should  imagine,  but  it  is  fair  to  say
that  Bartholomae  assumes  the  Prophet  to  be  speaking
in  the  last  stanza.  This,  as  will  be  seen,  is  appro
priate  enough ;  but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  its
utterance  by  the  disciples.  It  runs  thus  in
Casartelli's  version  : —

That  by  these  laws  I  may  for  all  eternity
The  grace  of  Holiness  preserve  and  the  Good-Mind,  do  Thou
Teach  me,  from  Thine  own  soul,  by  Thine  own  mouth,  to  preach
Those  laws  whereby  the  world  primeval  first  was  made.

Here  again  we  have  to  chronicle  a  serious  differ
ence  between  our  authorities.  Anhm pourvyobavat
is  translated  as  above  by  Mills  and  Casartelli  in
accordance  with  the  tradition.  But  Bartholomae
renders  "how  it  will  be  with  the  First  Life."  The
verb  may  be  future  as  well  as  past,  and  Bartholomae
makes  "the  first  life"  mean  "life  in  this  world,
before  death,"  also  called  "corporeal  life"  or  "this
life " :  its  antithesis  is  "  the  future  "  or  "  second  "
or  "  spiritual  life."  According  to  this  attractive  ex
planation,  the  preacher  asks  for  inspiration  that  he
may  set  forth  the  way  in  which  this  life  may  be  so
lived  as  to  lead  on  to  another.


vm]  THE  OX-SOUL  91

The  second  hymn  is  a  much  more  remarkable
composition  than  the  first.  It  is  a  dialogue  in
heaven,  the  interlocutors  in  which  are  variously
given.  Chief  among  them  in  any  case  is  Geus
urvan,  the  deified  "  Ox-Soul "  whom  we  described
just  now.  Ahura  Mazdah  is  also  beyond  question
among  the  speakers,  and  seemingly  Vohu  Manah  and
Asha,  and  an  enigmatical  genius  called  Geus  tasan,
"  Creator  of  the  Ox,"  who  in  earlier  mythology  may
very  well  have  been  Mithra  himself:  the  tacit
ignoring  of  a  spirit  who  had  possibly  become  chief
of  the  daevas,  and  the  maintenance  of  a  mythology
which  could  be  adapted  to  the  new  purpose,  are  alike
characteristic.  It  is  remarkable  that  Zarathushtra
intervenes  in  the  heavenly  debate.  Justi  found  here
a  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  fravashis  (pp.  142  ff.)  :
"it  is  his  angel"  that  thus  converses  with  Ahura
and  his  closest  attendant  spirits.  In  a  symbolic
poem  like  this  we  hardly  need  call  in  a  doctrine
which  is  never  alluded  to  in  the  Gathas  elsewhere,
and  was  probably  set  aside  by  the  Prophet  as  super
stitious.  Adopting  Bartholomae's  arrangement  of
the  hymn,  we  may  summarise  thus.  The  Ox-Soul
complains  among  the  spirits  who  surround  Ahura
that  he  (that  is,  his  earthly  fellows,  the  cattle  them
selves)  receives  no  care  or  kindness  from  men.  The
Ox-Creator  takes  up  the  appeal  and  pleads  with
Asha,  who  naturally  bears  responsibility,  as  the


92  COOTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

impersonation  of  things  as  they  should  be.  Asha
acknowledges  that  there  is  no  adequate  protector :
Ahura  only  knows,  and  he  must  determine.  So  to
Ahura  the  Ox- Creator  betakes  himself  with  his
client,  who  is  promptly  reminded  that  he  has  no
locus  standi — the  cattle  are  only  chattels,  created
to  serve  the  agriculturist.  So  the  Ox-Soul  turns  to
Vohu  Manah  and  asks  who  has  been  appointed  by
the  divine  will  to  care  for  the  pleaders.  The  re
sponse  is  the  naming  of  Zarathushtra,  "  who  alone
our  commands  hath  heard."  The  Ox-Soul  is  not
grateful :  he  expected  an  effective  protector,  "  one
that  commands  mightily,"  and  not  one  armed  only
"  with  the  ineffectual  word  of  an  impotent  man."  At
this  Zarathushtra  breaks  in  with  a  fervent  prayer  to
the  trinity  of  Spirits,  Ahura,  Asha  and  Vohu  Manah,
that  he  may  receive  strength  and  dominion  for  the
protectorship  that  is  assigned  him,  with  men's
recognition  of  his  appointment.  The  Ox-Soul  is
satisfied :  "  0  Lord,  now  is  help  ours  :  we  will  be
of  the  service  of  your  like,"  i.e.  simply  "  you  divine
spirits,"  as  Bartholomae  takes  it.  The  obscurity  of
the  poem  lies  very  largely  in  a  condition  of  ancient
dialogue  verse,  seen  conspicuously  in  the  manifold
interpretations  of  the  "Song  of  Solomon,"  the  loss
of  indications  standing  outside  the  verse  to  show
by  whom  the  utterances  are  successively  spoken.
Despite  this  we  can  recognise  dramatic  effectiveness


vm]  ZARATHUSHTRA'S  CREED  93

in  the  method  the  Prophet  takes  for  acknow
ledging  his  own  insufficiency  for  a  task  demanding
strength  as  well  as  wisdom ;  and  we  can  appreciate
the  unquestioning  faith  with  which  he  assumes,  and
makes  his  clients  assume,  that  Ahura's  promise  avails
for  him  against  a  world  in  arms.

Ys.  30  follows,  and  soon  proves  itself  one  of  the
central  expositions  of  the  creed.  It  will  be  advisable
to  quote  it  in  a  complete  form,  as  a  specimen  of  a
G&th£  and  more  particularly  to  exhibit  the  funda
mental  doctrines  of  the  Prophet  in  his  own  words.

1.  Now  will  I  proclaim  to  those  who  will  the  things  that  the
wise  should  remember,  for  hymns  unto  the  Lord  and  prayers  to
Good  Thought ;  the  blessing  also  that  through  Right  shall  be  seen
by  the  wise  thinker,  which  is  with  the  heavenly  lights.

2.  Hear  ye  with  your  ears  the  best  things ;  behold  them  with
a  clear-seeing  thought,  for  decision  between  the  two  Beliefs,  each
man  for  himself  before  the  Great  Consummation,  bethinking  you
that  it  may  be  accomplished  unto  our  pleasure.

3.  Now  the  two  primeval  Spirits,  who  revealed  themselves  in
vision  as  Twins  [see  p.  66],  are  the  Better  and  the  Bad  in  thought
and  word  and  deed. And  between  these  two  the  understanding
ones  chose  aright,  the  void  of  understanding  not  so.

We  stop  to  note  that  in  this  doctrinally  crucial  verse
the  pundits  differ  grievously.  Thus  tfafna,  taken
above  as  =  Lat.  somno,  is  rendered  by  Geldner  "  of
their  own  action,  automatic  " ;  and  the  same  scholar
denies  the  traditional  "  twins  "  for  yema,  taking  it  as
"  directors  "  (Skt.  ydma,  a  charioteer,  etc.),  with  "  the


94  CONTENTS  OF  THE GATHAS [CH.

Better  and  the  Bad"  as  a  kind  of  object.  Bartholo-
mae  here  seems  more  satisfactory,  but  the  uncertainty
should  be  registered.

4.  And  when  these  Spirits  twain  met  in  the  beginning  they
ordained  Life  and  Not-life,  and  that  at  the  end  the  worst  exist
ence  shall  be  to  the  followers  of  the  Lie,  the  best  abode  (?)  to  the
follower  of  Right

Here  Bartholomae  takes  vahistem  mand  to  be  "  best
abode"  i.e.  paradise  —  a  translation  based  on  ety
mology  (cf.  Greek  /zoz^').  But  "Best  Thought"  is
the  meaning  of  the  combination  in  hosts  of  passages  ;
and  the  name  of  the  archangel  does  not  seem  forced
as  a  designation  of  heaven.  Humanah,  "  Good
Thought,"  was  one  of  the  heavens  through  which
the  righteous  passed  to  the  "House  of  Song."

5.  Of  these  twain  Spirits  he  that  held  to  the  Lie  chose  the
doing  the  worst  things  ;  the  holiest  Spirit  chose  Right,  he  that
clothes  himself  with  the  massy  heavens  as  a  garment.

Compare  Ps.  civ.  2.  In  Yt.  133  the  sky  is  Mazd&h's
"  starry  robe  "  :  the  original  recalls  Aeschylus'  77


So  likewise  they  that  are  fain  to  please  the  Wise  Lord  by
deeds  of  truth.

6.  Between  those  twain  the  -Daevas  chose  not  aright,  for
infatuation  came  upon  them  as  they  took  counsel  together,  so  that
they  chose  the  worst  thought.  Then  they  rushed  together  to
Violence,  that  they  might  enfeeble  the  world  of  man.


vni]  YASNA  XXX  95

A  esma  ("  violence  ")  is  a  semi-personification :  see
above  (pp.  68  f.)  on  Asmodaeus  in  Tobit.  The  word
"  rushed,"  hendvarentti,  illustrates  a  curious  principle
which  is  fixed  in  the  Later  Avesta,  but  at  most  only
in  germ  in  the  Gathfis,  the  setting  apart  of  a  complete
series  of  synonyms,  nouns  and  verbs,  to  be  used  when
demoniacal  creations  are  spoken  of.  The  verb  dvar  is
peculiar  to  daqvas  and  their  kin,  where  ay  (eo,  el/xt)  is
used  for  creatures  of  Ahura.  The  latter  have  "heads"
(vay&ana),  where  demons  and  men  and  animals  of
their  creation  have  "pates "  (kamereSa),  and  so  on.

7.  And  to  him  (i.e.  mankind)  came  Dominion,  Good  Thought
and  Right ;  and  Aramaiti  gave  continued  life  of  their  bodies,  and
indestructibility,  so  that  by  thy  retributions  through  the  (molten)
metal  [p.  61]  he  may  be  victorious  over  these  (foes).

Aramaiti' s  connexion  with  the  Earth  accounts
for  her  bestowing  resurrection  on  those  who  sleep
in  her  bosom.

8.  So  when  there  cometh  the  punishment  of  these  evil  ones,
then,  0  Wise  One,  at  thy  command  shall  Good  Thought  establish
the  Dominion  in  its  fulness  for  those,  0  Lord,  who  deliver  the  Lie
into  the  hands  of  Right.

9.  So  may  we  be  those  that  make  the  world  advance ! 0
Wise  One  and  ye  other  Lords  [Mazdascd  Ahuraiiho,  lit.  "ye
Mazdah  Ahuras  "]  and  Right,  gather  together  the  assembly,  that
thoughts  may  meet  where  Wisdom  is  at  home.

A  very  hard  stanza,  in  which  we  have  specially  taken
into  account  Justi's  criticism  of  Bartholoniae. The


96  CONTENTS OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

"advancement"  of  the  world  (mankind,  lit.  "life")
is  a  conspicuous  eschatological  conception,  the  fra-
Sokereti,  or  "Regeneration,"  of  which  we  have  said
enough  already  (p.  72).  That  the  Great  Assembly  in
such  a  context  should  be  understood  as  the  concourse
of  a  Judgement  Day  seems  probable,  despite  Bar-
tholomae's  denial.  The  plural  which  here  and  in
Ys.  3 14  appears  to  compromise  the  sole  godhead  of
Ahura  Mazdah  may  fairly  be  interpreted  in  the
light  of  considerations  explained  above  (p.  58):  the
"Wise  Lords"  cannot  possibly  include  any  conceptions
outside  the  circle  of  the  Amesha  Spenta,  and  these
are  simply  divine  attributes  together  forming  a  unity.

10.  Then  indeed  shall  come  upon  the  Lie  the  destruction  of
delight,  but  they  that  get  them  good  name  shall  be  partakers  in
the  promised  reward  in  the  fair  abode  of  Good  Thought,  of  the
Wise  One  and  of  Right.

There  is  abundant  choice  of  renderings  for  the
word  we  have  given  as  "  delight " :  tradition  took  it
as  "army,"  i.e.  of  the  Druj,  while  Tiele  makes  it  a
proper  name,  Spayathra,  an  angel  of  death,  and  others
make  skendo  spayaOrahya  "  the  blow  of  destruction."
Druj,  "  the  Lie,"  here  means  the  followers  of  Druj,
the  dregvato.

11.  If,  0  ye  mortals,  ye  mark  those  commandments  that  the
Wise  One  hath  ordained,  even  happiness  and  pain,  the  eternal
punishment  for  the  followers  of  the  Lie,  and  the  blessings  for  the
righteous,  then  hereafter  shall  ye  have  bliss.


vm]  YASNA  XXXII  97

The  scale  on  which  this  book  is  planned  will  not
permit  a  similar  full  treatment  of  other  Gathas ;  but
what  has  been  attempted  will  both  illustrate  the
style  of  these  poems  and  give  some  idea  of  the  am
biguities  that  make  it  frequently  difficult  to  believe
that  two  or  three  versions  by  first-rate  scholars  really
all  go  back  to  the  same  original.  We  have  also  met
with  many  of  the  leading  conceptions  of  Zarathushtra,
expressed  in  what  was  clearly  intended  to  be  used
as  a  summary  of  the  creed.  The  long  hymn,  Ys.  31,
has  been  represented  in  Chap.  vn.  and  must  not
claim  space  here.  Without  further  description  we
may  note  Ys.  32  as  a  dialogue,  and  accordingly  beset
with  some  of  the  ambiguities  we  observed  in  the
second  Gath&:  in  some  of  its  stanzas  Zarathushtra
is  vigorously  denouncing  the  Dafvas.  He  takes
occasion  also  to  denounce  unbelievers  of  various
kinds.  The  lines  on  the  sin  of  Yima  we  quoted
above  (pp.  42  f.).  One  quotation  may  be  made  :—

(Ys.  3210)  He  it  is  that  destroyeth  (holy)  words,  who  declares
that  the  Ox  and  the  Sun  are  the  worst  thing  to  behold  with  the
eyes,  and  hath  made  the  pious  into  followers  of  the  Lie,  and
desolateth  the  pastures  and  lifteth  his  weapon  against  the
righteous.

Bartholomae  sees  a  reference  here  to  nocturnal
orgiastic  animal  sacrifices  perpetrated  by  the  Da^va-
worshippers.  We  hear  more  in  this  hymn  of  these
enemies  of  the  faith,  including  even  the  name  of  one

MO.  7


98  CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [OH.

family  of  them,  the  Grehmas,  who  were  presumably
foremost  among  Zarathushtra's  antagonists.  The
vigorous  polemic  leaves  a  vivid  impression,  for  all
its  crabbed  language.  No  one  could  fail  to  recognise
the  outbursts  of  a  real  man — unless  it  might  be  those
clever  people  who  have  recovered  the  long-lost  gift
of  recognising  Solar  Myths  in  every  ancient  character
they  read  of1.  But  this  by  the  way.  Ys.  33  arrests
us  on  the  threshold  with  a  stanza  that  may  introduce
a  conception  characteristic  of  later  Parsism.  It  runs
thus : —

According  as  it  is  with  those  laws  that  belong  to  the  former
[i.e.  earthly]  life,  so  shall  the  Judge  act  with  most  just  deed
towards  the  follower  of  the  Lie  and  the  follower  of  Right  and  him
whose  false  things  and  good  things  balance.

This  last  word,  hememyasaite,  is  taken  by  Bar-
tholomae  as  meaning  literally  "are  mixed  (in  equal
proportions) " :  the  prefix  hem  (Skt.  sam,  Greek  a-  in
a-Traf ,  aOpovs,  etc.)  suggests  the  essential  element  that
is  given  in  the  brackets.  Roth  was  the  first  to  recog
nise  in  this  stanza  the  later  Parsi  doctrine  of  hamis-
taktin,  as  it  was  called  in  Pahlavi — a  limbo  said  to
extend  from  the  earth  to  the  stars,  in  which  souls
abide  whose  record  of  good  and  evil  is  exactly  even.
In  the  Later  Avesta  it  was  called  misva  gatus,  "  place

1  Drews,  in  his  much-discussed  book  Die  Christusmythe  (1910),
makes  great  use  of  Parsism.  He  shows  his  qualification  by  con
founding  Sraosha  and  Saoshyant  (p.  8  of  ed.  4) !


vin]  HAMISTAKAN  99

of  the  mixed,"  from  a  kindred  adjective.  Soderblom,
Mills  and  Casartelli  refuse  to  believe  that  the  idea  is
Gathic ;  but  the  arguments  of  the  last-named  scholar
against  Roth's  translation  do  not  affect  Bartholomae's
entirely  different  reading,  which  ultimately  produces
the  same  meaning.  Even  if  Bartholomae  is  wrong  in
finding  another  Gathic  allusion  to  the  Hamistakan
(Ys.  484),  there  seems  to  be  adequate  ground  for
allowing,  with  Prof.  Williams  Jackson,  that  the  stanza
here  discussed  does  foreshadow  the  doctrine  of  an
intermediary  state,  though  no  doubt  the  detailed
conception  is  late.  A  few  minor  points  of  interest
occur  in  this  hymn.  The  singer  speaks  of  himself
as  "I,  the  priest."  Since  Zarathushtra  is  referred
to  as  "the  Judge"  in  the  opening  stanza,  with  the
verb  in  the  third  person,  it  may  well  be  that  the
hymn  does  not  profess  to  come  from  his  hand;  and
in  any  case  the  zaotar  is  no  member  of  a  priestly
caste — that  feature  is  not  grafted  on  the  religion  till
the  coming  of  the  Magi.  There  are  also  references
to  "Thy  Obedience"  (srao$a) — Mazdah  is  addressed
—and  to  Haurvatat  and  Ameretat,  the  Ameshas
Health  and  Immortality,  which  enlarge  the  hitherto
scanty  references  to  these  subordinate  members  of
the  celestial  hierarchy.  The  last  hymn  of  this  first
Gath&,  Ys.  34,  gives  us  little  on  which  to  tarry.  We
note  a  reference  to  the  Saoshyants  (p.  53,  above),  in
which  as  elsewhere  in  the  Gathas  the  title  belongs  to

7-2


100 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [OH.

Zarathushtra  himself  and  his  foremost  helpers,  like
Jamaspa.  It  has  an  eschatological  connotation,  how
ever,  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  these  "Deliverers"
are  to  accomplish  the  final  victory  over  evil.  The
transference  of  the  title  to  supernatural  beings  who
are  entirely  in  the  future  is,  as  we  have  seen,  post-
Gathic.

The  second  Gath&,  called  ustavaiti,  from  its  first
word  usta,  is  in  a  stanza  of  five  equal  lines,  each
containing  4  +  7  syllables.  This  coincides  with  the
fakvari  Vedic  stanza  (Arnold,  no.  58),  an  exten
sion  of  the  tristubh  (cf.  Geldner,  Metrik,  p.  vii).
It  contains  four  hymns  (Ys.  43 — 46),  with  a  total  of
66  stanzas,  as  against  101  in  the  seven  hymns  of
GatM  Ahunavaiti,  which  we  have  just  left.  The
metre  may  be  represented  as  before  by  a  literal
translation  of  one  stanza  (Ys.  433),  so  as  to  give  the
syllabic  value  of  the  lines : —

May  he  attain  |  to  what  is  better  than  good,

who  would  teach  us the  straight  paths  to  blessedness

in  this  life  here  |  of  body  and  that  of  thought,

true  paths  that  lead  |  to  realms  where  dwells  Ahura —

leal  man,  like  thee,  |  Mazdah,  well-knowing,  holy.

This  almost  chance-chosen  verse  will  serve  to  bring
out  one  or  two  new  features  of  Gathic  phraseology.
The  recurring  adjective  "like  thee"  (Owavant)  is
always  followed  by  the  vocative,  "  0  Mazdah."  Ofter


vni]  YASNA  XLIII  101

it  is  used  of  the  Prophet  himself,  as  here,  where
Zarathushtra,  speaking  of  himself  in  the  third  person,
claims  that  he  has  likeness  to  the  Deity  in  that  he
is  learned  in  heavenly  lore  and  "holy,"  or  possibly
rather  "beneficent"  (p.  62):  he  cherishes  the  am
bition  of  winning  the  eternal  reward  like  that  pro
mised  to  the  "  teachers  "  in  Dan.  xii.  2,  and  those  "  who
turn  many  to  righteousness."  This  is  another  Biblical
verse  that  would  go  most  naturally  into  Avestan.
The  hymn  continues  with  a  recapitulation  by  the
Prophet  of  a  series  of  six  visions,  in  which  he  had
received  from  Ahura  and  the  Ameshas  illumination
on  the  great  themes  of  his  mission.  Each  opens  with
the  formula  "I  recognised  Thee  as  the  Holy  (or
Beneficent)  One,  0  Wise  Lord,  when..."  The  first
of  these  proceeds  "  when  I  saw  Thee  first  at  the  birth
of  Life,"  that  is,  the  creation  of  earthly  life,  as  dis
tinguished  from  the  Future  Life.  Tiele  draws  from
this  verse  the  inference  that  for  the  writer  Zara
thushtra  is  a  saint  of  the  dim  past.  This  seems
unnecessary,  for  the  assumption  that  a  vision  is
being  described  is  altogether  simple  and  reasonable.
The  visions  successively  name  the  ordaining  of  the
moral  law  at  the  beginning,  the  divine  setting  apart
of  the  Prophet  himself  and  his  questioning  of  Mazdah
which  gave  him  the  revelation,  with  Vohu  Manah
as  the  constant  medium  of  illumination.  There  is  a
note  of  urgency  which  reminds  Bartholomae  of  the


102 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

preaching  of  John,  "Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of
heaven  is  at  hand":  especially  note  this  stanza —

And  when  thou  saidst  to  me  "  Thou  shalt  go  to  Right  to  be
instructed,"  then  thou  didst  not  command  what  I  did  not  obey :
"  Speed  thee,  ere  my  Obedience  come,  followed  by  treasure-laden
Recompense,  who  shall  render  to  men  severally  the  recompense
of  the  twofold  award"  (Ys.  4312).

(Literally  "the  two  blessings,"  which  by  an  idiom
very  common  in  both  branches  of  Aryan  means
"the  blessing  and  the  curse.")  The  visions  that
prepared  the  Prophet  for  his  mission  are  naturally
followed  by  the  questions  in  detail  addressed  by  him
to  Mazdah  in  Ys.  44.  The  twenty  stanzas  of  the
hymn,  except  the  last  (which  may  be  interpolated),  all
begin  with  the  recurrent  line,  unchanged  throughout,
"  Thus  I  ask  thee,  tell  me  truly,  0  Lord."  The  answer
is  in  each  question  to  be  inferred  from  the  question,
unless  this  is  rather  a  petition  for  spiritual  blessings
which  Ahura  may  be  assumed  to  give  at  Zarathush-
tra's  prayer.  The  two  first  stanzas  may  be  roughly
thus  rendered : —

This  I  ask  thee— tell  me  truly,  tell  me  duly,  Holy  Lord —
How  to  worship  with  a  service  worthy  thee,  0  King  adored.
Teach  me,  Wise  One,  as  the  heavenly  may  the  earthly,  as  to  friend
Friend  may  speak— so  may  the  kindly  Right  his  timely  succour

bring,
And  with  heaven's  Good  Thought  to  usward  in  his  gracious  power

descend.


vin]  YASNA  XLIV  103

Tell  me  duly,  tell  me  truly  as  I  pray,  O  Holy  King:
When  the  Highest  Life  is  dawning,  at  thy  Kingdom's  opening,
Shall  the  dooms  of  heaven's  tribunal  give  to  every  man  his  due  ?
Surely  he,  the  holy  prophet,  to  his  watchful  soul  doth  lay
All  men's  sin,  yet  ever  friendly  doth  the  worlds  of  life  renew.

The  stanzas  that  follow  have  been  already  cited
(p.  86).  The  rest  of  the  questions  largely  concern
the  rewards  and  punishments  that  are  to  follow
orthodox  and  heretic,  mostly  in  the  future  life.  But
the  poet  is  not  so  engrossed  with  the  other  world  as
to  ignore  the  present  We  have  already  seen  how
practical  Zarathushtra  is,  and  how  convinced  he  is
that  industry  as  a  farmer  makes  up  a  large  proportion
of  the  whole  duty  of  man.  It  is  therefore  quite  con
gruous  when  he  asks  the  rather  grotesque-sounding
question,

Shall  I  indeed,  0  thou  the  Right,  obtain  that  reward,  even  ten
mares  with  a  stallion  and  a  camel,  which  was  promised  to  me,
0  Wise  One,  even  as  through  thee  the  future  gift  of  Health  and
Immortality  ?  ( Ys.  4418).

We  need  not  judge  severely  the  determination  to
make  the  best  of  both  worlds,  nor  the  intolerance
which  animates  the  Prophet  as  he  claims  the  future
blessedness  for  himself  and  his  followers,  fiercely
invoking  divine  judgement  upon  the  foes  of  his  faith
and  (it  would  seem)  rival  prophets  who  strove  to
pervert  what  he  felt  to  be  the  right  ways  of  Ahura.
The  days  were  not  yet  born  when  a  reformer  of


104 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

profound  convictions would account  it  less than
virtue  to  say

I  was  ordained  at  the  first  by  thee  :  all  other  I  look  upon  with
hatred  of  the  soul  ( Ys.  4411).

The  next  hymn  (Ys.  45)  invites  fuller  treatment,
as  it  is  of  great  importance  for  the  theology  of  the
reform :  we  may  translate  it  entire,  relying  this  time
largely  on  Geldner  (in  Grundriss,  n.  30)  as  well  as
Bartholomae.

1.  I  will  speak  forth  :  hear  now  and  hearken  now,  ye  who  from
near  desire  (instruction),  ye  who  from  far. Now  observe  him
[i.e.  Ahura  ?]  in  your  mind,  all  of  you,  for  he  is  manifested. Never
shall  the  false  teacher  destroy  the  Second  Life,  the  follower  of  the
Lie,  who  with  his  tongue  perverted  (men)  to  evil  beliefs.

2.  I  will  speak  of  the  twain  spirits  at  the  beginning  of  the
world, of whom  the  holier  thus  addressed  the fiendly  one :
"  Neither  our  thoughts,  nor  our  teachings,  nor  our  wills,  nor  our
beliefs,  nor  our  words,  nor  our  deeds,  nor  our  selves,  nor  our  souls
can  be  in  harmony."

3.  I  will  speak  of  that  which  the  Wise  Lord  the  all-knowing
revealed  to  me  in  the  beginning  of  this  (earthly)  life. Those  of
you  that  put  not  in  practice  this  word  as  I  think  and  utter  it,  to
them  shall  be  woe  at  the  end  of  life.

4.  I  will  speak  of  that  is  best  in  this  life — from  Right  the
Wise  One  knoweth  it,  who  created  the  same,  even  the  father  of
the  active  Good  Thought  [i.e.  the  doctrine  of  Agriculture];  and  the
daughter  of  the  same  is  Aramaiti  of  goodly  deeds. Not  to  be
deceived  is  the  all-seeing  Lord.

Both  Geldner  and  Bartholomae  render  "  I  have  learnt
it,  0  Mazdah,"  which  seems  to  involve  a  change  of


viii]  YASNA  XLV  105

text.  The  true  faith  of  Agriculture  is  apparently
the  "  father  "  of  Good  Thought,  which  is  here  really
collective,  the  pious  workers  in  the  field.  Another
Amesha,  the  genius  of  the  Earth  (p.  63),  is  also  child
of  this  "greatest  thing  in  the  world,"  which  the
all-knowing  Mazdah  knows  through  Asha,  the  Right
Order  of  things,  essentially  a  part  of  his  own  self.

5.  I  will  speak  of  that  which  the  Holiest  declared  unto  me  as
the  word  that  is  best  for  mortals'  hearing:  he,  the  Wise  Lord
(said),  "They  who  at  my  bidding  render  to  him  [i.e.  Zarathushtra]
obedience,  they  all  shall  attain  unto  Health  and  Immortality  by
the  deeds  of  the  Good  Spirit."

6.  I  will  speak  of  what  is  best  of  all,  praising  him,  0  thou  the
Right,  who  is  bounteous  to  all  that  live. By  his  holy  spirit  may
the  Wise  Lord  hear,  in  whose  praise  I  have  been  taught  by  Good
Thought. By  his  wisdom  let  him  teach  me  what  is  best

7.  He  whose  two  awards  [cf.  p.  102]  as  he  disposeth  all  living
men  shall  receive  [or,  less  probably,  "whose  blessings  all  living
men  should  desire  "],  and  they  that  have  been  and  they  that  shall
be. In  immortality  shall  the  soul  of  the  righteous  be  joyful :  in
eternity  shall  be  the  torments  on  the  men  that  follow  the  Lie.
And  all  this  the  Wise  Lord  doth  appoint  by  his  Dominion.

8.  Him  thou  shouldst  seek  to  win  for  us  by  praises  of  wor
ship,  for  now  have  I  seen  it  with  mine  eye,  that  which  is  of  the
Good  Spirit  and  of  (good)  deed  and  word,  knowing  by  the  Right
the  Wise  Lord :  so  will  we  offer  him  homage  in  the  House  of
Song.

9.  Him  thou  shouldst  seek  to  propitiate  for  us  with  Good
Thought,  who  at  his  will  maketh  us  weal  or  woe. May  the  Wise
Lord  by  his  Dominion  bring  us  to  work,  that  we  may  prosper  our
beasts  and  our  men,  for  our  assurance  of  Good  Thought  gained
through  the  Right.


>3


106 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

10.  Him  thou  shouldst  honour  with  the  prayers  of  Devotion
(Aramaiti),  him  that  is  called  Wise  Lord  for  ever,  for  that  he  hath
promised  through  his  Rightness  and  Good  Thought  Health  and
Immortality  to  be  in  his  Dominion,  strength  and  continuance  in
his  house.

11.  Whoso  therefore  in  the  future  lightly  esteemeth  the
Daevas  and  those  mortals  who  lightly  esteem  him  [i.e.  Saosyant],
even  all  others  save  that  one  who  highly  esteemeth  him, — unto
him  shall  the  holy  Self  of  the  Deliverer  (Saosyant)  as  Lord  of  the
house  be  friend,  brother  or  father,  O  Thou  Wise  Lord.

The  last  two  stanzas  here  have  some  points  of  special
interest.  In  the  tenth  we  note  that  all  six  Ameshas
are  named,  and  linked  by  the  possessive  pronoun
with  Mazdah.  In  the  eleventh  we  are  again  in  the
eschatological  realm:  Zarathushtra  is  promising  to
stand  by  his  faithful  followers  in  the  Judgement —
they  shall  be  to  him  then  as  his  own  personal  friend,
brother  or  even  father.  There  is  nothing  here  to
exclude  Zarathushtra's  authorship,  for  he  speaks  as
a  Prophet  in  profound  conviction  that  the  truth  he
brings  will  save  at  the  last.  We  are  reminded  how
in  Ys.  4610  he  promises  to  cross  with  them  the
"  Bridge  of  the  Separater  "  (p.  71).  The  lofty  tone
of  this  great  seer  is  best  realised  when  we  compare
the  eschatology  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  There  are
indeed  other  striking  parallels  here ;  for  the  Prophet
calls  himself  not  only  "Saviour"  but  "Lord  of  the
house  "  (deng  pati,  identical  with  Seo-TroT???),  thus  re
calling  Matt.  xiii.  27  and  xx.  1  (and  x.  25  !)  in  a  context


vni]  YASNA  XLVI  107

curiously  like  Mark  iii.  35.  But  the  Parsi  traditional
rendering  spoils  this  :  a  theory  of  dependence  would
require  that  the  Gathas  were  better  understood  in
Palestine  than  in  Persia.

Last  in  this  Gatha  comes  Ys.  46,  a  hymn  of  the
persecuted.  It  has  nineteen  stanzas,  falling  into
sections  but  loosely  bound  together ;  and  this,  com
bined  with  the  obviously  corrupt  state  of  the  text
in  sundry  places,  suggests  that  the  unity  of  the  poem
is  not  beyond  question.  The  poem  starts  with  an
almost  despairing  cry —

1.  To  what  land  shall  I  go  to  flee,  whither  to  flee  ? From
nobles  and  my  peers  they  sever  me,  nor  are  the  people  pleased
with  me  [...a  corruption  in  text...],  nor  the  rulers  of  the  land  that
follow  the  Lie  :  how  am  I  to  please  thee,  0  thou  Wise  Lord  ?

2.  I  know  wherefore  I  am  without  success,  0  Wise  One :
(because)  few  cattle  are  mine,  and  for  that  I  have  but  few  folk.
I  cry  to  thee ;  see  thou  to  it,  Lord,  granting  me  support,  as
friend  giveth  to  friend. Teach  me  by  the  Right  the  acquisition
of  Good  Thought  [i.e.  Paradise}

These  stanzas,  and  others  like  them  telling  of  savage
raids  upon  quiet  pastoral  people,  only  desirous  of
security  in  avocations  sacred  to  Ahura  and  beneficial
to  men,  belong  obviously  to  a  period  or  a  district  in
which  the  religion  had  as  yet  won  no  firm  hold.  The
speaker  may  well  be  Zarathushtra  himself,  who  would
thus  appear  to  have  originally  practised  the  agri
cultural  life  which  he  preached  as  the  ideal.  It  is
hard  to  reconcile  this  situation  with  that  of  a  later


108 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [OH.

section  in  this  hymn,  where  Zarathushtra  recounts
to  Ahura  the  names  of  his  leading  adherents,  includ
ing  King  Vishtaspa  and  the  other  men  of  high  degree
who  followed  him  in  the  days  of  his  triumph.  We
may  safely  assume  that  fragments  have  been  unskil
fully  pieced  together,  though  their  authenticity  as
separate  items  need  not  be  questioned.

We  pass  to  the  Third  Gatha,  called  Spenta-mainyu
from  its  first  two  words.  The  stanza  is  composed  of
four  lines  with  4  +  7  syllables,  thus  agreeing  with  the
metre  of  the  Second  except  in  its  containing  one  line
less.  There  are  four  hymns  in  the  G&th&,  consisting
severally  of  six,  twelve,  twelve  and  eleven  stanzas.
Ys.  47  is  as  featureless  as  it  is  short.  We  may  as
before  give  the  opening  verse  in  the  metre  of  the
original,  which  will  enable  the  reader  again  to  notice
how  in  a  poem  designed  for  worship  the  six  Ameshas
are  once  more  gathered  all  together  under  the  head
ship  of  Ahura.

By  his  blest  Spirit  |  and  by  the  Best  Thought
and  deed  and  word  |  according  unto  the  Right
The  "Wise  joined  with Dominion  and  Devotion
shall  give  to  us  |  Health  and  Immortality.

The  stanza  is  almost  a  mnemonic,  into  which  is  also
ingeniously  woven  the  fundamental  triad  of  Thought,
Word  and  Deed,  as  an  expansion  of  Vohu  Manah.
The  triad  is  suggested  again  in  the  next  stanza  by
mention  of  tongue,  hands  and  intellect;  while  four


vin]  YASNA  XLVII, XLVIII  109

Ameshas  are  worked  in,  and  Mazdah  is  declared  to
be  the  father  of  Asha,  Truth  or  Rightness,  the  Good
Order,  as  in  the  next  verse  he  is  of  the  Holy  Spirit
(spenta  mainyu) — in  this  context  mostly  the  spirit
of  a  pious  man,  though  the  distinction  is  as  hard  to
draw  as  it  is  sometimes  in  the  New  Testament.  We
have  in  this  short  hymn  a  maximum  of  characteristic
terms  brought  in,  almost  suggesting  that  it  was  a
neophyte's  first  lesson.  There  is  the  Ox,  and  the
Fire  by  which  the  followers  of  Asha  and  of  Druj
shall  at  last  be  parted,  and  the  demon  world  repre
sented  by  Aka  Manah,  111  Thought,  as  well  as  by  the
older  Druj.  Ys.  48  is  not  such  a  bundle  of  dry  bones,
though  a  bundle  it  is,  of  rather  disconnected  snatches
which  may  well  have  no  original  unity.  The  first
part  is  eschatological,  with  one  stanza  which  Bar-
tholomae  and  Geldner  very  plausibly  set  by  Ys.  331
as  a  reference  to  the  Hamistakan  (pp.  98  f.) :—

Whoso,  0  Wise  One,  maketh  his  thought  better  and  (then)
worse,  and  (likewise)  his  Self  by  deed  and  word,  and  followeth  his
own  inclinations,  wishes  and  choices,  he  shall  according  to  thy  will
be  separated  at  the  last  (  Ys.  484).

The  hymn  ends  with  three  stanzas  which  Bartholomae
acutely  interprets  as  an  appeal  to  the  still  uncon
verted  class  of  the  nobles — naro,  which  may  mean
simply  "men,"  but  like  its  cognate  dvrjp  and  the
Latin  cognomen  Nero  (with  Umbrian  nerf,  "  chiefs  ")
may  be  specialised  to  denote  an  upper  class.


110 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

When,  0  Wise  One,  will  the  nobles  understand  the  Message  ?
When  wilt  thou  smite  the  pollution  of  this  intoxicant,  through
which  the  Karapans  [p.  69]  evilly  deceive,  and  the  wicked  lords  of
the  lands  with  purpose  fell  ?  (  Ys.  4810).

Bartholomae  finds  here  the  old  Haoma,  the  Indian
Soma  that  reappeared  in  the  Yashts.  Alcohol  was
indeed  a  product  of  prehistoric  Indo-European  bar
barism,  for  the  mada  of  this  passage  is  first  cousin
to  the  Greek  peOv  and  the  English  mead.  Passing
on  to  Ys.  49,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  immediate
presence  of  the  most  urgent  difficulties  of  the  early
propaganda.  A  certain  Bendva,  apparently  a  chief
who  fosters  daeva-worship,  is  fiercely  denounced  as
the  worst  hindrance  to  the  Prophet's  work.  His
deeds  of  rapine  and  teachings  of  falsehood  are  at
tacked,  and  contrasted  with  the  loyalty  of  Frashaosh-
tra  and  Jamaspa.  A  comprehensive  curse  at  the  end
paints  the  ultimate  future  of  these  rebels : —

But  these  that  are  of  an  evil  dominion,  of  evil  deeds,  evil
words,  evil  self  and  evil  thought,  followers  of  the  Lie,  the  Souls  go
to  receive  them  with  foul  food :  in  the  House  of  the  Lie  shall  they
be  meet  inhabitants  ( Ys.  4911).

The  GatM  is  closed  with  Ys.  50,  a  homogeneous
composition  after  the  first  three  verses.  As  in  the
other  hymns  of  this  part  of  the  Parsi  Psalter,  the
imprecatory  element  is  to  the  front ;  but  it  soon  fades
into  a  fervent  prayer  for  the  future  reward  of  the
faithful  Prophet  and  his  community.  One  striking


viii]  YASNA  XLIX—  LI  111

stanza  we  came  near  giving  earlier  (p.  86),  in  our
small  collection  of  passages  where  the  seer's  earnest
ness  allows  him  to  deviate  into  poetry.

The  Fourth  and  Fifth  Gathas  consist  of  only  one
hymn  apiece.  Ys.  51,  called  GdBa  VohuxsaOrd  from
its  first  words,  has  twenty-two  stanzas  containing
three  lines  with  7  +  7  syllables.  The  metre  may
again  be  represented  with  a  specimen:—

The  good  Desired  Dominion, a  most  surpassing  portion,

even  this  shall  Right  accomplish  |  for  him  that  by  deeds  with  zeal

achieves  the  Best,  O  Wise  One.  |  That  will  I  now  win  for  us.

The  hymn  presents  us  with  little  that  is  artistically
noteworthy,  but  we  may  quote  a  stanza  which  crystal
lises  the  doctrine  of  retribution  very  clearly  :  —

The  Wise  Lord  who  through  his  Dominion  gives  what  is
better  than  good  to  him  that  is  attentive  to  his  will,  but  what  is
worse  than  evil  to  him  that  obeyeth  him  not,  at  the  latter  end  of


The  outward  circumstance  of  Judgement  is  seen  in
another  verse:  —

What  joy  through  thy  two  ministers  [so  Williams  Jackson—
Bartholomae  gives  "  WThat  as  reward  to  the  two  sides,"  i.e.  good
and  bad]  thou  wilt  give,  0  Mazdah,  to  the  destruction  of  the
wicked  but  to  save  the  righteous,  a  sign  (of  that)  give  us  for  our
souls  (  Ys.  51*—  Prof.  Jackson's  version).

The  prospect  of  final  damnation  for  those  who  reject
the  truth  fills  the  thought  of  the  seer  up  to  the  end,


112 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

together  with  the  assurance  of  bliss  for  his  faithful
friends.  We  may  quote  one  curious  verse  which
Bartholomae,  in  a  weighty  compressed  note  on  Zara-
thushtra's  historical  reality  (Altiran.  Worterb.  1675),
selects  as  "significant  for  the  reality  of  the  conditions
under  which  the  Gathas  arose  " : —

The  Kavi's  wanton  did  not  please  Zarathushtra  Spitama  at  the
Winter  Gate,  in  that  he  stayed  him  from  taking  refuge  with  him,
and  when  there  came  to  him  also  (Zarathushtra's)  two  steeds
shivering  with  cold  ( Ys.  5 112).

Zarathushtra  is  overtaken  by  a  storm,  when  travel
ling  in  the  bitter  cold  of  a  Persian  winter,  and  is
repulsed  by  the  servant  of  Bendva  (?),  a  Kavi,  or
chief,  of  the  old  daeva- worshipping  clans  :  he  fiercely
calls  him  by  an  opprobrious  name.  The  stanza  cer
tainly  presents  difficulties  to  the  would-be  allegoriser ;
and  the  believer  in  the  legendary  character  of  the
central  figure  of  the  G&thas  will  find  it  hard  to
discover  a  meaning  for  a  palpable  incident  of  real
life.

Last  we  come  to  the  GdOd  Vahisto-isti,  consisting
of  Ys.  53.  The  metre  is  rather  complex — four  lines  with
7  +  5,  7  +  5,  7  +  7  +  5,  7  +  7  +  5  syllables  respectively.
It  is  a  marriage  hymn,  celebrating  the  nuptials  of
the  Prophet's  youngest  daughter  Pouruchista  with
jam^spa,  whom  we  have  met  before.  Though  the
hymn  is  corrupt  and  very  difficult,  it  may  be  as  well
to  give  a  provisional  translation  of  it,  adopting


viii]  YASNA  LIII  113

mostly  Bartholoinae's  interpretation  with  a  general
caveat  as  to  the  possibility  of  very  different  views —
as  may  be  seen,  for  instance,  by  anyone  who  consults
Professor  Mills  in  Sacred  Books  of  the  East  (xxxi.).
We  must  not  pause  for  any  discussion.

1.  Zarathushtra. The  best  possession  known is that  of
Zarathushtra  Spitama,  which  is  that  the  Wise  Lord  will  grant  to
him  through  the  Right  the  glories  of  blessed  life  unto  all  time.
(So  is  it)  also  for  them  who  practise  and  learn  the  words  and
works  of  his  Good  Religion.

2.  Then  let  them  seek  the  pleasure  of  the  Wise  One  with
thought,  words  and  actions  gladly  unto  his  praise,  and  (seek)
his  worship,  even  the  Kavi  Vishtaspa,  and  Zarathushtra's  son
the  Spitainid  [IshatvSstra  by  name],  and  Frashaoshtra,  making
straight  the  paths  for  the  Religion  of  the  Deliverer  [Saoshyant]
which  the  Lord  appointed.

3.  Him,  0  Pouruchista,  thou  scion  of  Hafcathaspa  and  Spi
tama,  youngest  of  Zarathushtra's  daughters,  hath  he  [the  Prophet]
appointed  as  one  to  enjoin  upon  thee  the  fellowship  with  Good
Thought,  High tn ess  and  the  Wise  One. So  take  counsel  with
thine  own  understanding :  with  good  insight  practise  the  holiest
works  of  Devotion  [Aramaiti].

4.  Jdmdspa. Earnestly  will  I  lead  her  to  the  Faith,  that
she  may  serve  her  father  and  her  husband,  the  farmers  and
the  nobles,  as  a  righteous  woman  (serving)  the  righteous. The
glorious  heritage  of  Good  Thought  [...(three  syllables  corrupt)]
shall  the  Wise  Lord  grant  to  her  good  Self  for  all  time.

5.  Zarathushtra. Teachings  address  I  to  maidens  marrying
and  to  you  [bridegrooms],  giving  counsel. Lay  them  to  heart,  and
learn  to  get  them  within  your  own  Selves  in  earnest  attention  to
the  life  of  Good  Thought. Let  each  of  you  seek  to  excel  the  other
in  the  Right,  for  it  will  be  a  prize  for  that  one.

MO.  8


114 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [OH.

6.  So  is  it  in  fact,  ye  men  and  women  ! Whatever  fortune
ye  look  for  in  union  with  the  Lie  [...(corrupt)]. To  them,  the
followers  of  the  Lie,  crying  Woe !,  shall  be  ill  food ;  happiness
shall  flee  away  from  those  that  injure  righteousness. In  such
wise  do  ye  destroy  for  yourselves  the  spiritual  life.

7.  And  there  shall  be  for  you  the  reward  of  this  community,
if  most  faithful  zeal  be  with  the  wedded  pair  (?),  where  in  the
abyss  the  spirit  of  the  follower  of  the  Lie,  shrinking  and  cowering,
shall  fall  into  perdition. Separate  ye  from  the  Community,  so
shall  your  word  at  the  last  be  Woe !

8.  So  they  whose  deeds  are  evil,  let  them  be  the  deceived,
and  they  that  are  reprobate  let  them  cry  out  all  of  them. By
good  rulers  let  him  give  slaughter  and  bloodshed  to  them,  and
peace  for  the  happy  homedwellers. Grief  let  him  bring  on
those,  he  that  is  greatest,  with  the  chain  of  death ;  and  soon  let
it  be !

9.  To  them  of  evil  belief  belongs  the  place  of  corruption.
They  that  go  to  despise  the  worthy,  contemners  of  Right,  who
forfeit  their  own  self— where  is  the  righteous  Lord  that  shall  rob
them  of  life  and  freedom  ? Thine,  Wise  One,  is  the  Dominion,
whereby  thou  canst  give  to  the  right-living  poor  the  better
portion.

Rather  a  sombre  marriage  song  !

Before  we  leave  the  Gathas  we  must  give  the
three  great  Prayers,  which  take  a  supreme  place  in
the  ritual.  It  is  not  at  first  sight  easy  to  see  why
they  take  such  precedence  :  like  the  "  Gayatri "  of
the  Rigveda,  they  hardly  seem  adequate  for  so  much
emphasis,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  religion  to
which  they  minister.  But  the  reader  may  judge.
First  comes  the  Ahuna  Vairya  or  Honover(Ys.  2713),


vm]  THE  AHUNA VAIRYA  115

in  a  metre  form  containing  three  lines  with  7  +  9
syllables  apiece.  It  may  be  thus  rendered  after
Bartholomae  : —

Even  as  he  (Zarathushtra)  is  the  Lord  (ahu,  whence  Ahura}
for  us  to  choose,  so  is  he  the  Judge,  according  to  Rightness,  he
that  bringeth  the  life-works  of  Good  Thought  unto  the  Wise  One,
and  (so)  the  Dominion  unto  the  Lord,  even  he  whom  they  made
shepherd  for  the  poor.

This  prayer,  or  rather  creed,  was  intelligible  in  the
early  period,  but  the  key  must  have  been  lost  before
long :  a  glance  at  other  versions,  such  as  Tiele's
(Geschichte  der  Religion,  n.  186),  will  sufficiently
show  how  unrecognisable  the  stanza  may  easily  be
made.  The  version  we  have  adopted  is  supported
not  only  by  the  authority  of  Bartholomae,  but  also  in
the  main  by  that  of  Geldner,  who  rendered  it  on
these  lines  generally  in  his  Studien  (1882,  pp.  144  ff.).
It  becomes  essentially  eschatological.  The  Prophet
is  marked  out  by  Asha,  the  Right  Order  of  things,
to  take  command  of  this  life,  and  then  at  the  last
to  present  before  God  the  life-works  of  his  faithful
followers  :  Vohu  Manah,  as  so  often,  has  a  practically
collective  significance.  This  final  work  will  cause
the  Kingdom  of  God  to  come,  the  complete  victory
over  the  forces  of  Evil.  From  the  last  function  of
the  Prophet  the  verse  comes  back  to  his  preparatory
work  in  this  life,  where  he  is  "  shepherd  of  the  poor,"
the  oppressed  agriculturists  whose  toil  is  pleasing  to

8—2


116 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.

Ahura,  but  harried  perpetually  by  the  fierce  nomads
who  follow  the  ancient  gods.  This  interpretation  of
a  very  dark  saying  may  not  be  certain,  but  it  gives
the  words  an  adequate  meaning,  and  accounts  for
their  preeminent  sanctity.

Next  comes  the  Asem  vohu  (Ys.  27U),  which  on
Bartholomae's  interpretation  is  a  play  upon  two
meanings  of  Asha  (p.  61).  Primarily  denoting  ab
stract  Right,  the  divine  order,  it  comes  to  mean

(2)  right-doing, action  in  accord  with  Right,  and

(3)  a  man's rights,  as  determined  by  that  divine
order. This enigmatic sentence, which Geldner
gives  as  prose  (Grundriss,  n.  27),  but  Bartholomae
as  three  lines  with  7,  9  and  3  +  5  syllables,  runs
thus : —

Right  is  the  best  good :  it  falls  by  desire,  it  falls  by  desire
to  our  portion,  even  our  right  to  that  which  is  the  best  right.

He  who  lives  rightly  gets  his  rights  in  the  end,  and
therefore

because  right  is  right,  to  follow  right
Were  wisdom  in  the  scorn  of  consequence.

More  complex  is  the  Airyema  isyo  (Ys.  541),
which  seems  to  be  in  the  metre  of  the  last  GatM
(Geldner) :  Bartholomae  prints  it  in  six  lines  of
4  +  7,  4  +  7,  3  +  5,  4  +  7,  4  +  7,  3  +  5  syllables  respec
tively — a  metre  recalling  two  or  three  Vedic  systems


vin]  THE  GREAT  PRAYERS  117

(Arnold,  p.  246,  nos.  36,  39,  40).  We  may  tentatively
render  :—

Let  the  dear  Healer  (?)  come  for  support  of  Zarathushtra's
men  and  women,  for  support  of  Good  Thought.  Whatever  Self
may  win  the  precious  meed  of  Right,  I  entreat  of  this  the  dear
reward  that  the  Wise  Lord  bestowed(?).

Airyeman,  doubtfully  rendered  Healer  on  the
strength  of  definitions  in  the  Vendidad,  is  a  figure
of  Aryan  antiquity,  for  Aryaman  is  the  name  of  an
Aditya  or  archangel  in  Indian  lore.  He  appears  in
the  Gathas  elsewhere  only  in  the  word  airyeman,
meaning  "comrade,"  a  term  apparently  of  rank,
attaching  to  a  priestly  order :  so  at  least  says  Bar-
tholomae.  Are  we  to  assign  this  prayer  to  the  period
of  the  "  Gatha  of  Seven  Chapters  "  (p.  74),  dating
from  the  post-Zarathushtrian  epoch  in  which  so
many  of  the  old  Iranian  gods  came  back  to  their
own  again  ?

Last  comes  the  yehhq  hatym  (Ys.  2715),  a  little
fragment  of  three  lines  with  4  +  7  syllables  each —
the  metre  called  in  Sanskrit  virdj,  or  tripadd  tristubh
(Arnold,  no.  16).  It  is  not  in  Gathic  dialect  but  in
Later  Avestan,  though  it  is  of  course  possible  that  it
has  been  transferred  by  adaptation.  However  that
may  be,  we  had  better  treat  it  here.  Geldner  observes
that  it  is  an  imitation  of  the  last  stanza  of  the  Fourth
Gathft  (Ys.  5 122)  :  it  seems  quite  possible  that  it  was
derived  from  it  by  simply  paring  down  the  fourteen-


118 CONTENTS  OF  THE  GATHAS [CH.VIII

syllable  lines  so  as  to  fit  a  more  familiar  metre.
That  makes  its  post-Gathic  date  fairly  certain.  It
may  be  rendered  thus  : —

The  man  among  all  that  are,  the  women  too,  to  whom  for  his
prayer  (yasna]  the  Wise  Lord  knows  the  better  portion  doth  fall,
in  accordance  with  Right,  these  men  and  women  do  we  reverence.

We  may  put  beside  this  its  model : —

He,  I  ween,  that,  among  all  that  have  been  and  are,  the  Wise
Lord  knoweth  as  one  to  whom  in  accordance  with  Right  the  best
portion  falls  for  his  prayer,  these  will  I  reverence  by  their  names,
and  go  before  them  with  honour  (  Ys.  5 122).

Here  the  summary  follows  a  glowing  eulogy  of  the
leading  men  whose  help  has  at  last  prospered  Zara-
thushtra's  mission.  It  is  somewhat  suspicious  that
here  only  in  the  Gath&s  is  the  verb  yaz  (whence
Yasna  and  Yasht — the  Greek  H^o/juat  and  #7*09)
applied  to  men :  the  possibility  may  be  admitted
that  the  GaitM  has  been  rounded  off  with  a  stanza
in  the  style  of  later  worship,  which  was  quite
addicted  to  "worship"  of  the  fravashi  (pp.  141  ff.)
of  a  living  man.


CHAPTER IX

THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA

THE  step  from  Gathas  into  Yashts  is  a  step  into
a  new  world.  The  dialect  is  different,  but  this  has
little  to  do  with  the  sensation  of  strangeness  that
comes  over  us,  for  the  difference  is  not  greater  than
we  note  when  we  move  from  one  English  county  to
another  two  or  three  hundred  miles  away.  We  still
meet  the  old  familiar  names  :  Ahura  Mazdah  is  still
supreme,  with  the  Amesha  Spentas  around  him,  and
Zarathushtra  is  still  the  Prophet  of  the  Faith.  But
even  while  we  shut  our  eyes  to  the  new  divine
names  which  crowd  upon  us,  we  cannot  help  seeing
that  the  familiar  names  carry  new  associations.  The
Prophet  is  no  longer  a  man  of  like  passions  with  our
selves,  a  fervid  religious  and  moral  Reformer,  eagerly
pressing  his  lofty  doctrine  of  God  and  duty  against
much  opposition,  and  exhibiting  very  human  emotions
of  elation  and  discouragement  as  the  fortunes  of  the


120 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

campaign  sway  to  and  fro.  He  is  a  purely  super
natural  figure,  holding  converse  with  Ahura  Mazdah
on  theological  and  ritual  subjects,  which  rarely  come
near  the  practical  and  homely  religion  inculcated  by
the  singer  of  the  Gathas.  Nor  is  Ahura  himself  less
changed.  He  is  nominal  head  of  a  hierarchy  in
which  we  soon  find  old  gods  in  what  are  virtually  old
relationships  :  if  they  are  pro  forma  subordinated  as
angels,  they  do  not  get  less  worship.  Sacrifice  on  a
large  scale  becomes  the  centre  of  religion,  and  we
realise  by  the  contrast  how  strangely  absent  the
institution  has  been  in  our  reading  of  the  GalMs.
Prayer  has  mostly  degenerated  into  spells,  in  which
the  use  of  the  right  title  for  deity  takes  the  promi
nence  we  know  so  well  when  we  read  magical  texts
or  the  hymns  of  ritual  religion.  In  other  words,  we
are  back  again  in  the  pre-Reformation  days.  The
authors  of  the  Yashts  are  first  cousins  to  those  of
the  Veda.  They  have  learnt  nothing  since  the  days
of  Aryan  unity,  except  some  new  gods  to  set  in
their  pantheon,  and  forgotten  extremely  little.  Had
Zarathushtra  come  back  awhile  from  the  House  of
Song,  he  would  have  had  to  begin  his  work  over
again  ;  nor  would  he  have  abated  his  censure  of  this
new  daevayasna  because  his  own  name  had  become
semi-divine.

The  limits  of  our  subject  do  not  allow  us  to  show
how  far  this  lost  ground  was  regained  in  the  revival


ix] CONTRAST  OF  GATHAS  AND  YASHTS 121

of  religion  under  the  Sassanian  kings  ;  nor  need  we
stay  longer  to  recapitulate  what  has  been  already
sketched  above  (Chap.  vi.).  If  the  contrast  between
Gathas  and  Yashts  is  violent  on  the  side  of  religion,
it  is  scarcely  less  conspicuous  from  the  literary  point
of  view.  The  difference  of  metrical  form  has  been
already  described,  and  we  have  seen  how  the  uniform
metre  of  the  verse  in  the  Yashts  agrees  with  that
which  gains  increasing  predominance  in  India  from
the  Vedic  period  onwards — an  outward  and  visible
sign  of  that  close  kinship  with  the  other  branch  of
the  Aryan  family  which  we  have  seen  interrupted  by
the  Zarathushtrian  Reform.  But  this  external  differ
ence  is  a  small  part  of  the  contrast.  The  crabbed,
compressed,  obscure  style  of  the  Gathas  has  been
replaced  by  language  which  is  generally  easy  and
clear  enough,  though  its  lucidity  is  very  largely  the
effect  of  a  great  poverty  of  ideas.  Formulae  are
ubiquitous,  and  repetitions  perpetual.  A  favourite
form  in  the  glorification  of  successive  Yazatas  is  the
piling  up  of  epithets  for  some  lines  together.  Such
strings  of  adjectives  may  in  skilful  hands  produce  a
striking  literary  effect :  one  recalls  a  superb  passage
in  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  (vii.  22  f.),  and  familiar  sen
tences  in  the  artless  prose  of  Paul.  But  the  poets  of
the  Yashts  are  generally  artificial  rather  than  artistic;
and  if  they  become  simple,  they  are  not  so  much  art
less  as  bald,  through  the  absence  of  the  intensity


*

£<  k9.fi 2


122 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

which  makes  the  simplest  language  glow.  This
general  verdict  needs  qualifying  with  one  or  two
counter-statements.  As  might  be  expected  where
the  work  of  many  different  hands  is  gathered  into
one  book,  there  are  very  varying  degrees  of  literary
merit ;  and  in  one  instance,  as  we  shall  see,  a  nameless
author  has  achieved  a  supremely  beautiful  concep
tion,  or  inherited  it  and  given  it  expression.  Then
we  should  also  observe  that  for  all  their  wearisome
repetitions  the  Yashts  are  not  dull,  if  we  know
how  to  skip.  There  is  abundance  of  curious  lore,
folk-legend,  and  epic  material  in  embryo,  such  as
finds  full  expression  centuries  later  in  the  Shdh-
ndmeh.  For  matter  of  this  kind  we  shall  stop
as  we  go  through  the  Yashts,  always  assuming  that
verse  form  brings  it  within  the  limits  of  our  subject.
But  where  these  elements  are  missing  we  may
perhaps  excuse  our  silence  by  pleading  that  our  title
only  makes  room  for  "poetry,"  and  by  inference
allows  us  to  ignore  mere  verse  when  we  are  so
inclined.

Professor  Geldner,  in  his  concise  account  of
Avestan  literature  in  the  second  volume  of  the
Iranian  Grundriss,  makes  an  important  distinction
between  the  Yashts  in  our  collection  in  the  matter
of  their  form.  A  true  Yasht  has  a  division  into
cantos  with  a  fixed  introduction  and  a  refrain.  Thus
many  Yashts  contain  'a  succession  of  heroes  (or


ix]  FORM  OF  A  YASHT  123

others)  who  worshipped  the  Yazata,  asked  a  boon
and  got  it  (or  failed).  This  will  be  described  in  set
formulae,  with  no  variation  in  introduction  or  refrain
except  for  the  name  of  the  new  worshipper.  On  this
test  Geldner  rejects  all  the  Yashts  but  eleven,  viz.
nos.  5,  8,  9,  10,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  19  and  the  Srosh
Yasht  (Ys.  57).  It  will  be  seen  that  this  test  rules
out  also  Yashts  which  we  shall  pass  by  on  the  ground
of  their  preponderance  of  prose.  On  this  subject  we
have  said  enough  in  Chap.  in.  We  have  seen  that
the  Yashts  were  interpolated  with  prose  when  still
only  deutero-canonical,  like  Daniel  and  Esther  when
the  Greek  version  was  made.  Many  of  the  Yashts
bear  obvious  signs  of  dislocated  text :  sections  have
been  torn  away,  and  sections  of  alien  origin  brought
into  a  context  that  does  not  suit  them.  With  this
naturally  goes  considerable  corruption  in  the  text
of  individual  passages.  The  history  of  the  Avesta,  as
sketched  above  (pp.  13  ff.),  is  sufficient  explanation
of  these  derangements  :  we  can  only  wonder  that
they  are  not  more  serious  still.

With  this  preface  we  may  proceed  to  review  the
Yashts.  There  is  hardly  anything  in  the  first  four
of  them,  which  are  largely  in  prose,  and  ill  pre
served,  late  and  uninteresting  to  boot.  Yt.  1  stands
at  the  head  as  addressed  to  Ahura,  whose  appro
priate  titles  are  enumerated.  A  verse  spell  without
original  connexion  may  be  cited  as  a  sample :


124 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  A  VEST  A [CH.

we  attempt  a  verse  rendering  in  confidence  that
we  cannot  fall  below  the  level  of  the  poetry  we
translate  : —

By  the  holy  Aramaiti

All  their  malice  break  to  pieces,

Bind  their  hands  and  tear  their  ears  off,

Maim  their  knees  [v.l.  weapons]  and  bind  in  fetters  (?)  ( Yt.  I27).

The  citing  of  this  elegant  extract  will  serve  as  an
adequate  reason  for  making  no  further  efforts  in  this
line.  A  solitary  fragment  of  verse  in  the  third  Yasht
(dedicated  to  Asha  Vahishta)  may  be  cited  for  special
reasons : —

Headlong  down  from  heaven  fell  he,
He  of  demons  the  most  lying,
Angra  Mainyu  many-slaying  ( Yt.  313).

The  word  rendered  heaven  here  (dyaos — ablative  of
dyaus)  is  interesting  as  the  only  survival  in  the
Avesta  of  the  primitive  Indo-European  word  dyeus,
sky,  for  which  see  above,  p.  33.  The  Fiend  falling
from  the  sky  belongs  to  old  folklore  about  war  in
heaven  between  powers  of  light  and  darkness  :  we
are  very  familiar  with  the  application  of  a  similar
idea  in  the  Revelation.

The  fourth  Yasht,  named  from  Haurvatat,  the
Amesha  "  Health  "  or  "  Well-being,"  is  specially  cor
rupt,  and  its  verse-snatches  are  only  spells.  With
the  fifth  we  come  at  last  to  coherent  and  ancient


ix] THE  GENII  OF  THE  YASHTS 125

material.  The  Yasht  is  in  honour  of  the  river  genius
Ardvi  Silra  Anahita,  partly  as  representative  of
the  Waters,  of  which  she  was  the  queen.  It  will
be  remembered  that  the  Waters  were  among  the
highest  objects  of  reverence  in  the  Persian  religion
described  by  Herodotus  (pp.  35  and  38  above).
Suggestions  as  to  the  earlier  history  of  the  name
Anahita,  well  known  to  the  Greeks  as  Anaitis,  were
given  above :  we  need  only  reinforce  them  here
by  remarking  that  if  our  extant  Yashts  can  enable
us  by  their  relative  length,  integrity  and  apparent
antiquity  to  estimate  the  importance  of  the  deities
worshipped  in  the  community  that  produced  these
hymns,  we  can  find  no  rival  but  Mithra,  her  partner
in  Herodotus  (seemingly)  and  on  the  highly  significant
Hamadan  inscription  of  Artaxerxes  Mnemon,  who
joins  them  with  Auramazda  as  a  trinity.  Next  to
them  on  this  test  would  come  Tishtrya  (Yt.  8),
Drvaspa  (Yt.  9),  the  Fravashis  (Yt.  13),  Verethraghna
(Yt.  14),  Vayu  (Yt.  15),  Ashi  (Yt.  17),  the  Hvareno
(Yt.  19),  and  Haoma  (Ys.  9).  None  of  these  is  even
named  in  the  Gathas  :  the  deities  of  this  period  form
a  wholly  independent  pantheon,  in  which  Ahura
Mazdah  and  the  Amesha  Spentas  are  almost
strangers.  The  part  taken  by  Ahura  in  Yasht  5  is
worth  a  little  attention.  He  is  only  named  about
ten  times  in  the  verse  parts  of  the  Yasht,  gener
ally  as  Creator.  Thus  the  earth  is  "Ahura-made"


126 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [OH.

(1.  s8),  so  is  Victory  (1.  86) ;  Anfthita  comes  "  from
the  Creator  Mazdah"  (I.7),  who  has  "made  four
steeds  "  for  her  (1. 12°),  Just  as  he  has  "  made  thee
judge  of  the  corporeal  world,"  says  Anahita  to
Zarathushtra,  so  "hath  he  made  me  "...what  the
verse  fails  to  say — the  prose  goes  on  "  protectress
of  all  the  world  of  good."  This  agrees  with  the
familiar  formula  of  the  Persian  Kings  at  Persepolis
and  Naks-i-Rustam  : —

A  great  god  is  Auramazda,  who  created  this  earth,  who  created
yon  heaven,  who  created  man,  who  created  welfare  for  man,  who
made  Darius  [etc.]  king,  one  king  of  many,  one  lord  of  many.

Such  declarations  regularise  the  doctrine,  and  make
the  supremacy  of  Ahura  clear.  If  the  Yashts  re
present  a  phase  of  the  religion  which  prevailed  for  a
time  in  some  outlying  part  of  the  empire  of  the
Achaemenid  Kings,  we  can  understand  this  degree
of  conformity  to  the  court  worship  of  Auramazda,
and  at  the  same  time  realise  the  patent  fact  that  the
old  Aryan  nature-gods  loomed  much  larger  than  he
in  the  real  thoughts  of  priests  who  sang  these  hymns.
This  consideration  will  explain  an  otherwise  as
tonishing  stanza  which  opens  the  long  list  of
Anahita's  worshippers  that  extends  over  about  half
the  Yasht.  We  attempt  to  reproduce  the  mixture  of
verse  and  prose  which  presumably  must  guide  us  in
our  effort  to  trace  its  original  form.


ix]  YASHT  V  127

Her  worshiped

Ahura  Mazdah,  Creator

in  the  Airt/<in>i  /  V /'<///  [home-land  of  Iran— locality  unknown],
on  the  goodly  Daitya  (river) ;

Came  with  milk  and  Horn,  with  barsom,

Came  with  skill  of  tongue,  with  Maiithnt,
with  word  and  act  and  libations  and  right-spoken  utterances.
Then  he  prayed  of  her,

Upon  me  bestow  this  blessing,
thou  good,  beneficent  Ardvi  Sura  Anahita,

That  the  son  of  Pourushaspa,

Him  the  righteous  Zarathushtra,

I  may  lead  to  thinking,  speaking,

Acting  after  my  Religion.

Ardvi  Sura  Anahita  bestowed  on  him  this  blessing,  even  on
him  as  he  at  once  brought  libations,  devoutly  worshipped  and
prayed,  bestowing  the  blessing  (Yt.  517~19).

(A  word  of  commentary  is  needed  before  we  go
on.  For  Horn,  or  Haoma,  see  p.  41.  MynOra  is  a
spell.  The  barsom  (baresmari)  is  a  Magian  ritual
instrument,  a  bundle  of  twigs  held  before  the  face:
cf.  Ezekiel  viii.  17.  It  adapts  the  name  of  an  Aryan
institution  of  a  very  different  kind,  the  Indian  barhis,
or  carpet  of  grass  on  which  the  sacrifice  was  laid.)

The  passage  thus  printed — a  fair  sample  of  a
phenomenon  perpetually  recurrent  in  the  Yashts —
forms  an  easy  exercise  in  higher  criticism.  We  find
later  on  (11. 104-106)  that  Zarathushtra  also  sacrificed  to
Anahita  in  the  Iranian  home-land,  and  that  he  offered
the  same  ritual  gift,  one  very  characteristic  of  fully
developed  Parsism,  in  contrast  to  the  other  heroes,


128 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

who  all  come  with  a  hundred  horses  (like  the  Indian
acvamedha,  familiar  to  us  from  Southey's  Curse  of
Kehamd),  a  thousand  bulls  and  ten  thousand  sheep.
His  prayer  is  in  identic  language,  with  the  sub
stitution  of  Kavi  Vishtaspa,  his  Constantine,  for  his
own  name.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  second  section
is  original  and  the  first  modelled  upon  it  when
Anahita  was  to  be  credited  with  the  first  impulse
by  which  Zarathushtra  himself  became  the  prophet
of  the  Religion  ;  unless  indeed  both  alike  merely
apply  with  new  names  inserted  the  verse  formula
in  which  any  priest's  ritual  was  described.  The
accretion  of  prose  glosses  is  here  very  obvious,  and
typical  of  the  Yashts  as  a  whole.

Space  forbids  a  lengthened  description  of  this
interesting  Yasht.  Its  concluding  section  may  be
referred  to  first,  as  it  affects  the  whole  character
of  a  goddess  of  supreme  importance  in  this  stage
of  Persian  religion.  We  find  here  a  description
of  Anahita,  in  verse  throughout,  and  extraordinarily
full  of  pictorial  detail.  Windischmann  can  hardly
be  wrong  in  tracing  it  to  typical  statues  of  the  god
dess.  If  that  is  so,  we  are  tempted  at  once  to
compare  the  descriptions  of  the  Ephesian  "Great
Artemis,"  who  was  in  any  case  first  cousin  to
An&hita:  we  may  note  that  the  chief  priest  at
Ephesus  bore  a  Persian  title,  Meya/3f£b9,  baga-
lux$a,  "  delivered  by  the  deity."  Sir  W.  M.  Ramsay
(in  Hastings'  Bible  Dictionary  i.  605)  describes  the


ix]  ANAHITA  129

Ephesian  so-called  Artemis  fully  from  coins  and
statues,  and  we  may  select  two  features  for  com
parison.  In  the  first  place,  "the  upper  part  of  the
body  in  front  is  covered  with  rows  of  breasts,  sym
bolising  her  function  as  the  nourishing  mother  of  all
life."  With  this  we  compare  the  Yasht  (1. 127)  :—

Tightened  she  her  cincture,  making
Shapely  breasts  and  full  of  beauty.

The  latter  looks  as  if  civilised  art  had  been  at  work
upon  the  barbaric  figure  which  Ephesus  was  not
Hellenised  enough  to  improve  upon.  Our  Persian
sculptor's  Anahita  is  completely  human,  but  she
keeps  the  attributes  which  were  symbolised  by  the
shapeless  block  with  the  many-breasted  bust  above  :
the  Yasht  repeatedly  tells  us  how  maidens  besought
her  for  husbands  and  young  wives  for  happy  child
birth.  We  are  further  told  that  Artemis'  "head  is
surmounted  either  by  a  lofty  ornament,  polos,  or  by
a  mural  crown,  and  something  like  a  heavy  veil
hangs  on  each  side  of  the  face  down  to  the  shoul
ders."  Without  laying  stress  on  the  "  costly  mantle  "
Anahita  wears  (1. 126),  we  may  perhaps  trace  re
semblance  in  the  headdress  : —

Bound  she  diadem  upon  her,
Hundred-starred  it  was  and  golden,
Doubly  quartered,  wheel-shaped,  splendid,
Streamer-decked,  full-spreading,  shapely  (1. 128).

Though  painfully conscious of  trespassing  on the
MO.  9


130 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

preserves  of  archaeologists  and  historians  of  art,
we  venture  to  recognise  here  a  definite  artistic
development  which  prompts  inferences  as  to  the
culture  attained  by  the  people  among  whom  the
Yashts  first  gained  currency.  We  leave  the  hint
to  the  specialists  for  what  it  is  worth,  candidly
warning  them  however  that  much  may  turn  on  the
right  interpretation  of  some  questionable  words  in
the  Avestan  extracts  given.

We  must  not  tarry  much  longer,  and  will  only
add  one  or  two  notes  on  items  in  what  we  have
called  the  epic  material  of  the  Yasht.  We  are  told
of  the  paradata,  heroes  of  a  primeval  age,  standing
to  Mazdeism  rather  like  Noah  and  Abraham  to
Mosaism,  who  worshipped  An^hita  and  won  their
sovranty  through  her.  Sometimes  by  way  of  variety
the  arch-enemies  of  these  patriarchs  appeal  to  An&-
hita  in  the  same  formula,  and  the  sequel  is  told  in
the  invariable  form,  but  with  the  laconic  negative
added.  One  of  these  foes  is  Azhi  DaMka,  a  da^va-
worshipping  king  of  Iran,  conceived  as  a  three-headed
serpent.  It  is  very  noteworthy  that  the  locality  of
his  invocation  is  Babylon,  indicating  apparently  an
early  feud  between  Aryan  and  Chaldaean.  We  must
close  our  sketch  of  the  Yasht  by  quoting  one  section,
obviously  prepared  for  the  first  Parsi  aviator.  The
prose  interpolation  is  significant1.

1  Some  lines  where  the  metre  shows  corruption  are  obelised. The
extract  opens  with  a  twelve- syllabled  verse :  see  p.  18.


ix]  STORY  OF  PAURVA  131

61  Her  worshipped

Paurva  once,  the  skilful  sailor,

When  the  conquering,  strong  Thra^taona1

Whirled  him  vulture-formed  to  heaven.
62 Full  three  days  on  flew  he  homewards,

Three  nights,  yet  descend  he  could  not
tThree  nights  past,  he  came  to  morning,

To  the  shining  of  the  Mighty2;

Cried  he  out  to  Ardvi  Sura :
^O  Anahita,  speed  hither,

Swiftly  bring  me  thy  protection.

A  thousand  libations  will  I  bring,  mixed  with  Horn  and  milk,
piously  prepared,  strained,  by  the  Rangha  [Tigris]  river,

If  alive  I  win  to  earthward,

Earth  of  Ahura's  creation,

To  the  home  that  is  my  dwelling.
^tHastened  Ardvi  Sura  to  him,

As  a  maiden  fair  and  lusty,

Tall,  high-cinctured,  stately,  noble —

Lineage  hers  of  great  possessions.
tShod  with  buskins  ankle-reaching

Came  she,  golden-pointed  (?),  shining.
66  On  his  arms  her  firm  grasp  laid  she —

Swift  her  aid  and  did  not  tarry —

That  he  won  with  rapid  gliding

Earth  of  Ahura's  creation,

To  the  home  that  was  his  dwelling,

Safe  and  sound,  unharmed  as  ever.


1  Feridun  of the Shahnameh. The boatman had apparently
tried  to  dispute  the  hero's  passage  of  the  Tigris,  and  Thraetaona
turned  him  into  a  vulture.

2  Probably  the  Dawn,  but  there  is  deep-seated  corruption  here.

9—2


132 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [OH.

Past  the  short  prose  Yashts  addressed  to  the  Sun
and  the  Moon,  we  come  to  the  hymn  to  Tishtrya,
which  is  probably  the  star  Sirius1  (Yt  8).  It  is
about  half  the  length  of  that  we  have  just  left,  and
the  verse  form  is  preserved  fairly  well  as  far  as  L  47.
Tishtrya  is  the  chief  of  the  four  great  stars  named  in
the  A  vesta,  all  of  them  (as  is  natural)  appearing  in
this  Yasht.  They  guard  four  quarters  of  the  sky,
and  have  been  conjecturally  identified  as  Fomal-
haut  (Satava^sa)  for  the  S.W.,  Vega  (Vanant)  for
N.W.,  and  the  Great  Bear  (Hapto-iringa)  for  N.E.,
the  stars  being  roughly  in  these  quarters  when
Sirius  rises  first  before  the  sun  in  the  S.E. 2  Each  of

1  If  we  may  venture  on  etymological  conjecture,  2e/pios  may  be
"  Twinkler,"  from  a  root  tveis  ;  and  this  looks  like  a  doublet  of  teis,
from  which  Tiltrya  comes  naturally. But  of  course  we  cannot  argue
the  point  here.

2  On  this  point,  where  the  authorities  differ  considerably,  and
there  is  no  evidence  how  far  the  opinions  expressed  are  supported  by
experts  in  a  field  very  far  away  from  that  of  the  Zendist,  I  have
thought  it  well  to  consult  my  friend  the  Rev.  R.  Killip,  F.B.A.S.,  who
has  kindly  secured  for  me  a  further  opinion  from  Mr  E.  W.  Maunder
of  Greenwich  Observatory. Mr  Maunder,  assuming  the  latitude  38°  N.
(about  that  of  Merv)  and  the  epoch  400  B.C.,  says  that  at  the  moment
of  Sirius'  rising  (E.S.E.),  Fomalhaut  was  setting  (S.W.  by  S.),  Vega
being  18°  high  (N.W.  by  W.)  and  the  Great  Bear  wholly  visible,  with
i)  on  the  meridian,  sub-polar. "  Reviewing  the  whole  problem,  the
most  symmetrical  solution  would  obviously  be  to  take  the  four  as
Sirius,  Fomalhaut,  Vega  and  Charles'  Wain. All  four  would  be  close
to  the  horizon,  and  would  be  90°  apart,  the  figure  being  a  little
slewed  round  with  regard  to  the  meridian." Mr  Maunder  discusses


ix]  TISHTRYA  133

them  in  the  later  Parsi  writings  had  a  planet  for
special  antagonist,  for  in  the  Magian  system  the
planets  were  creatures  of  Ahriman.  Whether  they
were  really  so  in  the  pure  Iranian  Mazdeism  may  be
doubted,  for  they  were  named  after  the  Yazatas —
Jupiter  was  Ormazd,  Venus  An&hit,  etc.  It  seems
at  least  possible  that  we  have  here  a  deep-lying
difference  between  the  Aryan  and  the  Magian  strata
in  Parsism.  However  this  may  be,  we  note  that
more  obviously  Ahrimanian  opponents  are  provided
in  the  meteors,  which  are  called  Pairika,  "  Peris  "  or
evil  fairies.  These  Peris  are  conspicuous  among  the
creatures  of  the  Evil  Spirit,  being  regularly  associated
with  Ydtus,  "  sorcerers,"  who  may  be  either  demons
or  men.  It  is  suggestive  that  with  this  whole-hearted
abhorrence  of  sorcery  in  the  forefront  of  the  Maz-
dayasna,  the  very  name  of  "magic"  in  the  West
should  be  derived  from  the  men  who  became  priests
of  that  religion.  The  reason  belongs  to  the  develop
ments  described  in  Chap.  vi.  above.

The  most  important  part  of  Yasht  8  is  that  which
describes  the  great  fight  between  Tishtrya  and  his
opponent  Apaosha,  the  Drought  demon,  a  motive

some  other  stars,  and  makes  some  interesting  suggestions  as  to  the
possibility  of  using  the  legend  for  determining  the  date — a  tempting
line,  but  beyond  our  limits  here.  The  stars  I  have  given  are  the
same  as  those  for  which  Geiger  decides  (Civilisation  of  the  Eastern
Iranians,  i.  141),  but  he  puts  Satavaesa  in  the  West,  wrongly  inter
preting  the  Pahlavi  evidence  (Bartholomae).


134 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

very  suggestive  of  the  Rigveda.  We  read  how  his
first  appearance — his  heliacal  rising,  or  first  emer
gence  from  the  sun's  rays  so  as  to  shine  before
sunrise — is  eagerly  awaited  by  "  flocks  and  herds  and
men."  The  myth  itself  occupies  stanzas  13-34.  Tish-
trya  appears  at  last,  and  for  ten  nights  moves  forward
in  the  form  of  a  man  in  his  prime  :  fifteen  years  is
the  prime  in  the  Avesta.  Ten  nights  more  he  has
the  form  of  a  golden-horned  bull,  and  then  for  ten
nights  that  of  a  white  horse,  in  each  case  making
promises  to  men  who  will  worship  him — male  children,
herds  of  oxen,  troops  of  horses,  according  to  his  suc
cessive  forms.  In  this  last  form  he  goes  down  to  the
sea  Vouru-kasha,  the  earth-encircling  Ocean,  in  the
midst  of  which  is  the  Shining  Mount.  But  the  demon
Apaosha  rushes  up  to  meet  him  as  a  black  horse,  and
(after  a  conflict  of  three  days  and  three  nights,  if  we
may  follow  the  prose  stanza  22)  Tishtrya  retires
baffled.  At  this  crisis  the  prose  interpolator  signifi
cantly  steps  in,  to  tell  how  Ahura  Mazdah  offered
Tishtrya  the  sacrifice  with  his  name  invoked,  the
neglect  of  which  by  men  had  produced  this  rout.
What  original  element  in  the  story  was  ejected  to
admit  this  characteristic  accretion,  the  fellow  to
which  we  met  with  in  Yasht  5,  we  do  not  know.
That  some  power,  probably  enough  Ahura,  gave  him
the  strength  of  ten  horses,  ten  camels,  ten  bulls,
ten  mountains  and  ten  rivers,  is  duly  recorded


ix]  YASHTS  VIII  AND  IX  135

in  verse ;  and  when  after  another  prose  interval
the  poetic  afflatus  returns,  the  victory  is  achieved,
thanksgiving  offered,  and  the  rains  descend.

Lack  of  space  forbids  comment  on  the  miscellane
ous  praises  that  occupy  the  rest  of  the  verse  portion
of  Yasht  8.  Nor  must  we  say  much  of  the  next
hymn.  Drvftspa  (or  rather  Drufispa,  trisyllabic)  is
a  Yazata  whose  function"  according  to  her  name  is
to  keep  horses  healthy.  She  is  closely  connected
with  Geus-urvan  and  Geus-tasan,  "Ox-soul"  and
"  Ox-iushioner,"  who  were  described  above  (pp.  87  f.,
91  f.):  the  Yasht  accordingly  may  be  compared  with
the  Gatha  that  deals  with  the  subject  (Ys.  29),  to
point  the  contrast  between  Gathas  and  Yashts  in
general.  Practically  the  whole  of  Yasht  9  recurs  in
the  middle  of  the  hymn  addressed  to  Ashi  Vanuhi
(Yt.  17).  It  is  on  lines  familiar  in  the  Yashts  (see
p.  122),  a  list  of  Iranian  heroes  who  sacrificed  to  the
Yazata  and  asked  certain  blessings,  which  are  granted.
The  list  is  identical  in  the  two  Yashts,  in  contents  and
in  order,  and  only  the  name  of  the  divinity  is  changed :
the  formula  also  which  records  the  giving  of  the  boon
is  longer  for  Drvfispa  than  for  Ashi.  There  are  fuller
ritual  interpolations  in  prose  in  the  former  Yasht.
Which  was  the  original  we  cannot  tell.

As  might  be  expected,  the  Hymn  to  Mithra
(Yt.  10)  is  the  most  important  of  all  the  Yashts.
Enough  has  already  been  said  (pp.  37,  55,  and  88)  of


136 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

the  origin  and  character  of  this  supremely  important
Yazata.  We  have  seen  reason  for  regarding  him
as  originally  the  firmament,  giver  of  light,  which
primitive  peoples  may  well  have  assigned  to  it
independently  of  sun  and  moon:  we  remember  how
Light  is  anterior  to  "the  lights"  in  Genesis.  It  is
as  a  Light-god  that  Franz  Cumont  regards  Mithra.
To  the  fascinating  pages  of  this  great  scholar  we
refer  those  who  would  read  how  in  parts  of  Iran
that  were  untouched  by  the  Reformation  the  old
Aryan  light-god  more  than  regained  his  old  promi
nence,  and  without  associates  like  the  Indian  Varuna
and  the  Iranian  (or  Iranianised)  Anahita,  took  to
himself  fresh  features  from  Semitic  religion  and
began  to  dominate  the  West.  The  Mithra  of  Mith-
raism  is  not  to  be  recognised  in  our  Yasht  as  far  as
we  are  concerned  with  it,  even  if  Darmesteter  is  right
in  tracing  a  dim  feature  of  him  in  a  prose  addition.
What  common  elements  exist  descend  from  the
prehistoric  Indo-Iranian  period.  The  commanding
position  of  Mithra  in  that  age  is  recalled  in  the
Yasht,  it  would  seem,  by  a  passage  in  verse,  which
though  fragmentary  may  be  old,  where  Mithra  and
Ahura  are  joined  in  a  pair  as  "the  two  great  im
perishable,  holy  ones  "  (1.  145).  We  are  familiar  with
such  association  between  Mazdah  and  Asha  or  Vohu
Manah  in  the  Gathas,  and  we  have  shown  how  entirely
consistent  it  is  with  the  monotheism  Zarathushtra


ix]  MITHRA  137

came  to  proclaim. But  Mithra  is  another  matter—
what  concord  hath  Ahura  with  him  ?

The  reader  of  the  Yasht  will  find  however  that
the  old  Aryan  divinity  has  assimilated  himself  very
successfully  to  his  new  environment.  The  utmost
is  made  of  his  function  as  Lord  of  Truth,  the
preeminent  Zarathushtrian  virtue.  The  very  first
verse-line  of  the  hymn  presents  us  with  a  splendid
declaration  of  the  universal  duty:—

Spitama,  break  not  the  promise  [miOrem]

Made  with  sinner,  made  with  faithful,

Comrade  in  thy  Law,  for  Mithra

Stands  for  sinner,  stands  for  faithful  ( Yt  10s).

The  hymn  is  mainly  composed  of  instances  to  prove
that  the  invincible  deity  will  crush  the  miOradruj —
where  it  does  not  matter  whether  we  use  a  capital
initial  or  not,  say  " Mithra-deceiver "  or  "contract-
breaker" — and  save  him  who  is  faithful  to  the  genius
and  what  he  represents.  The  desultory  character  of
the  Yasht  makes  it  difficult  to  summarise,  and  it  will
suffice  to  pick  out  a  few  passages  that  are  specially
noteworthy.  The  fifth  canto  may  be  quoted  as  fairly
typical :  as  before,  we  cite  the  prose,  that  the  reader
may  do  his  own  higher  criticism.

Mithra,  lord  of  spacious  pastures  [we  worship]1

True  of  speech,  and  wise  in  council,

With  a  thousand  ears,  well-shapen,

With  a  myriad  eyes,  exalted,

1  This  may  be  a  twelve-syllable  line :  see  p.  18.


138 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

From  his  worldwide  watchtower  gazing,
Strong,  unsleeping,  ever  watchful;

who  is  not  deceived  of  any,  whether  lord  of  house,  or  lord  of

village,  lord  of  town  or  lord  of  province. If  the  lord  of  a  house,  a

village,  a  town  or  a  province  lies  unto  him,

Then  doth  Mithra,  fierce  and  angered,
Crush  the  house  and  crush  the  village,
Crush  the  town  and  crush  the  province,

and  the  lords  of  the  houses,  the  villages,  the  towns,  the  provinces

and  the  chief  men  of  the  provinces.

From  this  point  Geldner  notes  the  regular  alter
nation  of  four-line  and  five-line  stanzas  (Vedic  Anu-
and  Pankti  metres) : —

Thither  Mithra,  fierce  and  angered,
Hies  him  forth  where'er  he  findeth
One  that  lies  to  him,  and  lying
Cares  not,  for  his  heart  is  hardened.

So  the  steeds  of  all  those  liars
Fling  their  riders  from  the  saddle:
Though  they  run,  one  step  they  stir  not,
Though  they  ride,  one  pace  they  move  not,
Though  they  drive,  one  yard  advance  not.

Backward  lo !  the  spear  is  flying
That  the  foe  of  Mithra  hurleth,
For  the  mass  of  magic  mischief
That  the  foe  of  Mithra  worketh.

Yea,  though  well  he  throws  and  truly,
Though  he  reach  his  foeman's  body,
Yet  to  wound  the  strokes  avail  not,
For  the  mass  of  magic  mischief
That  the  foe  of  Mithra  worketh.


ix]  YASHT  X  139

Lo!  that  spear  the  wind  is  warping

That  the  foe  of  Mithra  hurleth,

For  the  mass  of  magic  mischief

That  the  foe  of  Mithra  worketh  ( Yt.  1017~81).
Darmesteter  explains  this  recurring  phrase  by  noting
that  "the  sacramental  words  of  the  contract,  by
their  not  being  kept,  turn  to  evil  spells  against
the  con  tract-breaker. "  Our  next  quotation  has  an
interesting  resemblance  to  a  gem  of  European  poetry,
that  lovely  passage  in  the  Odyssey  which  Lucretius
even  bettered  in  the  borrowing,  and  our  own  great
poet  wove  into  his  picture  of  the  "  island  valley  of
Avilion."  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  just  as
Homer  idealises  Olympus,  till  commentators  dispute
whether  his  "seat  of  the  gods"  is  on  earth  at  all,
even  so  the  Persian  holy  mountain  Hara  Berezaiti
or  Alburz  ("High  Mountain")  is  ambiguously  the
dominating  feature  of  an  earthly  landscape  or  a
mythic  peak  wholly  appropriated  to  the  divine.  But
let  us  give  the  lines  as  well  as  we  can,  for  here  at  last
the  translator  feels  a  shrinking  as  he  lays  his  hand

on  poetry : —

J

For  him  Mazdah  the  Creator  ^  *

Reared  a  palace  on  the  Mountain,  §, *

Alburz,  with  its  hills  encircled,

Glorious,  where  nor  night  nor  darkness

Climbs,  nor  blows  the  chill,  the  searching

Wind,  nor  sickness  comes  death-dealing,

Nor  the  devil-born  pollution ;

Nor  upon  that  Mighty  Mountain

Are  the  dark  clouds  seen  ascending  (Yt.  1060).


140 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [OH.

It  is  characteristic  that  the  orthodox  and  con
scientious  interpolator  feels  himself  bound  to  add  in
prose,  helped  out  with  an  irrelevant  couplet  from  an
earlier  canto,  that  the  Amesha  Spentas  made  the
palace  of  Mithra,  "in  one  accord  with  the  Sun."
One  more  extract  claims  a  place.

He  from  whom  true  Glory  fleeth,

From  the  straightest  path  forwandered,

In  his  inmost  heart  hath  sorrow.

Thus  he  thinketh,  that  Inglorious,

"Blind  is  Mithra:  all  the  ill  deeds,

All  the  lying  words,  he  sees  not."

But,  for  me,  I  think  within  me,

"Surely  nowhere  under  heaven

Is  a  worldly  man  who  thinketh

Evil  thoughts  to  match  the  good  thoughts

Of  the  spiritual  Mithra"  (Yt.  10106'-).

And  so  for  words  and  deeds,  mutatis  mutandis.  The
parallels  in  the  Psalms  are  obvious.  Dus-tf  arena,
"  one  who  has  evil  glory,"  suggests  the  Hebrew  name
Ichabod,  but  only  superficially.  "  Glory  "  is  a  tech
nical  word,  as  we  shall  see  when  we  come  to  Yasht
19 ;  and  it  should  be  remembered  in  connexion  with
the  present  passage  that  its  possession  depends  abso
lutely  on  truthfulness.

One  or  two  snatches  of  verse  are  not  adequate
warrant  for  our  staying  on  the  eleventh  Yasht,
addressed  to  Sraosha.  For  the  same  reason  we  shall
be  content  with  naming  the  twelfth  (to  Rashnu),  the
sixteenth  (to  Chista,  or  the  creed  of  Zarathushtra — an


ix] AN  ALLUSION  TO  BUDDHA? 141

obviously  late  composition,  wholly  in  prose),  and  the
eighteenth,  a  short  prose  piece  (except  for  one  stanza),
which  occupies  itself  with  the  same  subject  as  the  one
next  to  it.  Only  two  really  important  hymns  are  left.
The  thirteenth,  to  the  Fravashis,  is  the  longest  of  all,
but  in  only  about  half  of  its  stanzas  does  it  show
even  single  lines  of  verse.  There  is  an  interesting
problem  in  it  which  affects  its  date.  In  1.  16  we  read
how  the  Fravashis  cause  a  man  to  be  born  who  is
a  master  in  assemblies  and  skilled  in  sacred  lore,  so
that  he  "comes  away  from  debate"  a  victor  over
"Gaotema."  Now  Gotama,  which  answers  exactly
to  this,  is  a  Vedic  proper  name,  and  Bartholomae
is  satisfied  with  recognising  an  otherwise  unknown
unbeliever.  Geldner  (in  1877)  took  it  as  a  common
noun.  But  the  temptation  to  see  here  Gautama  the
Buddha  is  extremely  strong.  Darmesteter  says  that
Buddhism  had  established  a  footing  in  Western  Iran
as  early  as  the  second  century  B.C.  Professor  Cowell
used  to  point  out  that  prapna,  the  cognate  of  the
word  rendered  "  debate  "  just  now,  was  a  prominent
word  in  Buddhism.  On  the  same  side  is  a  concise
and  telling  argument  in  Prof.  Jackson's  ZoroasteTj
pp.  177f.  Accepting  this  view,  first  suggested  by
Haug,  we  are,  in  Darmesteter's  opinion,  brought
down  to  the  age  of  the  Arsacid  dynasty;  but  there
hardly  seems  adequate  reason  for  rejecting  the  possi
bility  that  isolated  missionaries  of  Buddhism  might


142 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  A  VESTA [OH.

have  been  found  in  Iran  many  generations  earlier,
and  Prof.  Jackson  gives  a  good  argument  for  this
earlier  date  drawn  from  the  Yasht  itself.  One  might
even  hazard  the  suggestion  that  the  mistake  by  which
the  name  of  Gautama  is  transferred  to  a  man  who
preached  Gautama's  gospel,  may  be  due  to  the
very  fact  that  the  preaching  was  thus  isolated,  that
Buddhism  was  still  almost  unknown.

Much  might  be  written  here  on  the  subject  of  the
Fravashis,  by  far  the  most  interesting  of  the  concep
tions  which  appear  (or  more  probably  reappear)  in
the  age  immediately  following  Zarathushtra.  The
etymological  meaning  of  the  name  is  wisely  left  as
unknown  in  Bartholomae's  Lexicon.  It  is  often
given  as  "confession"  or  "belief,"  for  which  might
be  pleaded  the  curious  coincidence  that  in  the  Gathas
the  word  daqna  combines  two  senses  (or  two  different
words),  the  (Zarathushtrian)  Law  and  the  Ego  of  a
man,  an  idea  not  far  away  from  that  of  the  Fravashi.
But  everything  else  in  the  picture  of  these  beings
seems  to  make  against  this  interpretation.  Very
tentatively  we  would  suggest  another  account,  coming
directly  from  one  of  the  Fravashis'  functions.  There
is  an  Avestan root  var,  "to  impregnate,"  smdfravasi
might  mean  "  birth-promotion."  This  takes  us  back
to  one  of  the  most  primitive  functions  of  ancestor-
spirits,  who  in  sundry  savage  tribes  are  believed  to
be  responsible  for  the  pregnancy  of  women.  (Cf.


ix]  THE  FRAVASHIS  143

J.  G.  Frazer,  Totcmism  and  Exogamy,  I.  191,  n.  508,
Adonis,  Attis  and  Osiris,  pp.  76  ff.)  Whether  our
guess  is  right  or  wrong,  there  is  no  question  as  to  the
prominence  of  this  function  of  the  Fravashis  in  the
Yasht,  nor  any  doubt  that  it  is  a  function  entirely
appropriate  to  ancestof -spirits.  No  less  appropriate,
according  to  universal  folklore,  is  their  puissance  in
war,  which  is  very  conspicuous  in  the  Yasht.  Less
easy  to  account  for  is  their  intimate  connexion  with
the  Waters.  Dr  Frazer  notes  for  me  the  fact  that
in  ancient  Greece  a  good  many  people  claimed  to  be
descended  from  rivers,  referring  me  to  his  Pausanias,
I.  p.  lix ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  a  very  prominent
function  of  the  Manes  to  preside  over  waters.  Per
haps  it  is  only  derived  from  their  connexion  with
childbirth,  with  which  water-spirits  had  a  great  deal
to  do  in  Avestan  lore:  compare  especially  Yasht  5.
There  is  also  a  connexion  with  the  stars,  rather
doubtfully  suggested  in  this  Yasht,  and  proclaimed
in  a  Pahlavi  treatise  which  lies  somewhat  aside  from
the  fiill  stream  of  Parsi  orthodoxy.  This  obviously
suits  their  identification  with  spirits  of  the  dead.
The  identification  is  clearly  Aryan.  The  Pitdras  or
"  Fathers "  of  the  Vedic  system  have  many  features
in  common  with  them.  The  last-mentioned,  their
not  very  strongly  developed  stellar  character,  recalls
the  fact  that  in  the  Veda  the  Fathers  "  are  said  to
have  adorned  the  sky  with  stars  and  placed  darkness


144 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

in  the  night  and  light  in  the  day  "  (Macdonell,  Vedic
Mythology,  p.  171). Similarly  (Yt.  1357f)  the  Fra-
vashis  "  showed  their  paths  to  the  sun,  the  moon,  the
sun  and  the  endless  lights." It  must  be  allowed  that
though  they  thus  "  preserve  the  stars  from  wrong,"
this  falls  short  of  identification  with  stars :  probably
the  Magian  element  in  the  theology  of  the  Fravashis
was  mainly  responsible  for  the  equation  which  pro
duces  the  inference  of  the  Magi  in  the  second  chapter
of  our  first  Gospel. Deeply  rooted  in  the  ritual  of
Parsism,  and  clearly  indicated  in  the  rather  broken
verse  of  11.  49~52,  is  the  annual  All  Souls'  feast  in
honour  of  the  Fravashis. Like  the  Athenians  and
the  Romans,  the  Parsis  kept  it  at  the  end  of  the  year,
just  before  the  opening  of  spring,  when  the  Fravashis
were  invited  to  abide  with  their  living  friends ;  and
after  the  five  intercalary  days  were  over  and  the  New
Year  dawned,  they  departed  leaving  a  blessing. The
rite  is  worldwide — see  J.  G.  Frazer's  Adonis,  Attis  and
Osiris,  pp.  301 — 320. One  further  trait,  conspicuous
in  a  recurrent  formula  of  this  Yasht,  "  the  Fravashis
of  the righteous," gets  its explanation from the
ancestral  character  of  these  spirits. They  are  the
Manes,  "  the  good  folk " ; and  when  their  original
features  were  lost  they  were  bound  to  be  attached,
as  objects  of  worship,  to  the  righteous  alone. (See
Soderblom,  Les  Fravashis,  p.  66.)

But  this  is  not  all. In  1.  17,  a  verse  passage  and


ix]  YASHT  XIII  145

therefore  presumably  original,  we  read  that  the  most
powerful  Fravashis  were  those  of  the  men  of  the
primitive  law  (cf.  above,  p.  130)  or  the  still  unborn
Saoshyants  who  will  restore  the  world.  Next  to
these,  "the  Fravashis  of  the  living  righteous  are
more  powerful  than  those  of  the  dead."  They  are
therefore  not  only  ancestor  spirits.  The  later  Parsi
books  tell  us  that  the  Fravashi  is  a  part  of  a  good
man's  identity,  living  in  heaven  and  reuniting  with
the  soul  at  death.  It  is  not  exactly  a  guardian  angel,
for  it  shares  in  the  development  or  deterioration  of
the  rest  of  the  man.  It  is  in  fact  derived  from  the
well-known  primitive  concept  of  the  External  Soul,
described  at  length  by  Dr  Frazer  (Golden  Bough2,
in.  351  ff.).  It  seems  reasonable  to  attribute  this
totally  distinct  element  to  the  non- Aryan  Magi1,  who
will  thus  have  laid  hold  of  the  old  Aryan  doctrine
and  imported  their  own  ideas  before  the  Yasht
was  composed,  or  the  ideas  on  which  it  was  based
developed.  The  prose  parts  of  the  Yashts  are
full  of  names  of  heroes  male  and  female,  Aryan
and  Turanian,  born  and  unborn,  whose  fravashis
are  adored.  These  must  not  detain  us.  We  will
only  stay  now  to  cite  one  passage  whereby  the

1  On  this  reference  may  be  made  to  the  writer's  papers,  "  It  is
His  Angel"  (Journ.  of  Theol.  Studies,  1902,  pp.  514  ff.)  and  "Syn
cretism  in  Religion,  as  illustrated  in  the  History  of  Parsism  "  (Oxford
Congress  of  the  History  of  Religions,  esp.  n.  99  f.).

MO.  10


146 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

quality  of  the  Yasht  in  its  original  kernel  may  be
gauged.

By  their  brightness  and  their  glory,

Zarathushtra,  I  stay  from  ruin

Yonder  heaven,  sublime  and  shining,

That  the  whole  earth  doth  encompass ;

Like  a  palace  spirit-fashioned,

Stablished,  far  withdrawn  its  limit,

With  the  form  of  glowing  metal,

Lightens  it  the  world's  three  regions.

With  that  heaven,  as  with  a  garment

Star-embroidered,  spirit-woven,

Mazdah  clothes  him  and  his  angels,

Mithra,  Rashnu,  Aramaiti ;

Nor  on  any  side  beginning

Nor  an  end  thereof  appeareth  (Yt.  132f).

The  fourteenth  Yasht  is  a  medley,  of  no  special
interest.  It  is  addressed  to  Verethraghna,  the  genius
of  Victory,  whose  successive  avatars  in  various  animal
and  human  forms  are  the  subject  of  its  longest  section.
We  have  already  (pp.  39  f.)  remarked  on  the  original
character  of  Verethraghna  as  an  Aryan  divinity,
already  unintelligible  in  name  when  the  Indian  tribes
migrated.  There  is  much  in  this  Yasht  that  is  sheer
magic:  spells  and  talismans  for  success  in  battle
belong  to  the  most  primitive  of  savages,  and  relics
of  savagery  survive  most  naturally  in  connexion  with
war.  There  is  some  vigour  in  the  description  of  the
vdreyna  bird,  the  seventh  avatar  of  the  Genius ;  but
we  have  no  space  to  quote  it  (Yt.  1420f).  Still  less


ix]  YASHTS  XIV  AND  XVII  147

are  we  disposed  to  linger  over  the  "  late  hackwork,"
as  Bartholomae  calls  it,  of  the  fifteenth  Yasht,  dedi
cated  to  Vayu,  the  atmosphere.  We  pass  on  accord
ingly  to  the  seventeenth,  though  here  also  for  no
lengthy  survey.  Asi  Vanuhi,  "good  reward,"  is  a
personification  of  Gathic  antiquity:  good  and  bad
rewards  alike  appear  in  the  ancient  hymns,  and
in  Ys.  3 14  Ashi  is  named  without  epithet  in  close
connexion  with  Aramaiti.  In  the  Later  Avesta  she
becomes  the  genius  of  the  blessings  assigned  to  piety.
Her  etymological  association  with  Asha  must  not  be
depended  on :  the  names  have  only  the  root  in  com
mon,  and  the  conceptions  do  not  touch.  In  the  Yasht
Ashi  is  rather  like  the  Latin  Fortuna.  She  gives  all
manner  of  wealth  and  prosperity  to  a  series  of  the
faithful  who  court  her  (see  above  on  Yt.  9);  and  in
particular  she  blesses  marriage.  Her  affection  for
Zarathushtra  is  expressed  in  the  only  passage  that
tempts  us  in  any  way  to  quote,  illustrating  as  it  does
the  contrast  with  the  wholly  human  Prophet  of  the

Gathas.

Thus  she  spake  then,  the  Good  Ashi,
She  the  lofty  one,  "Come  nearer,
True  and  holy  Zarathushtra,
Lean  thee  here  against  my  chariot."
Nearer  to  her  came  Spitama,
On  her  car  leaned  Zarathushtra.
From  above  she  then  caressed  him
With  the  left  arm  and  the  right  arm,
With  the  right  arm  and  the  left  arm ;

10—2


148 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

Thus  she  then  with  words  addressed  him :

"Beauteous  art  thou,  Zarathushtra,

Shapely  art  thou,  0  Spitama ;

Fair  of  limb  and  long  i'  th'  arm  thou.

Glory  to  thy  body  is  given,

To  thy  soul  long  bliss  in  heaven,

Sure  as  that  I  thus  have  spoken"  (Yt.  1721f-).

These  lovely  verses  of  ours  are  without  unseemly
pride  guaranteed  equal  to  the  original,  which,  how
ever,  in  the  fourth  line  from  the  end  has  "with
beautiful  calves  " — quod  versu  dicer e  non  est !  It
may  be  added  that  long  arms  were  a  beauty :  Arta-
xerxes  Longimanus  (Dirazdast)  might  seem  to  own
a  nickname,  rather  like  our  own  King  Longshanks,
but  the  resemblance  is  misleading.

Practically  last  among  the  Yashts  proper  comes
the  nineteenth,  the  most  original  of  all,  as  Geldner
calls  it.  It  is  devoted  to  the  " Glory"  (^arenah —
see  above,  p.  43),  and  the  heroes  who  attained  it,
from  Ahura  Mazdah  down  to  Saoshyant.  As  Dar-
mesteter  observes,  the  Yasht  "  would  serve  as  a  short
history  of  the  Iranian  monarchy,  an  abridged  Shall
Nameh."  It  begins  with  the  ninth  stanza  of  the
hymn  as  given  in  our  MSS.,  being  very  irrelevantly
tacked  on  to  a  prose  enumeration  of  mountains.
Then  we  open  with  stanzas  which  recur  thrice  in
the  later  parts  of  the  Yasht,  with  of  course  a  variation
each  time  as  a  new  recipient  of  the  Glory  is  described.
Prose  tells  us  that  the  Powerful  Kingly  Glory  is


ix]  YASHT  XIX  149

worshipped,  which  belongs  to  Ahura  (the  Ameshas,  the
Yazatas,  the  Saoshyants).  Then,  with  various  attach
ments,  come  these  verses,  which  obviously  might  as
well  have  been  composed  for  any  other  Yasht.

That  the  world  they  may  establish,
Ne'er  henceforth  to  age  or  perish,
Ne'er  corrupting,  ne'er  decaying,
Ever  living,  ever  growing,

Master  of  itself. ;

When,  the  dead  to  new  life  rising,
He1  the  Living,  Unimperilled,
Cometh,  and  the  world's  desiring
Shall  be  sated  with  renewal.
Then,  to  Asha's  Law  obedient,
Shall  creation  aye  be  deathless,
And  the  Lie  be  thither  driven
Whence  she  came (Yt.  19llf-).

"  The  rest  was  prose,"  to  cite  the  suggestive  colophon
from  one  of  Milton's  early  poems ;  and  as  our  print
ing  indicates,  the  fragment  has  suffered  metrically  in
transmission.  But  it  is  worth  citing  to  compare  with
Gothic  eschatology.  As  will  be  seen  when  we  come
to  the  beautiful  "  Yasht  22,"  the  doctrine  of  the  Last
Things  is  the  side  of  Parsism  that  has  been  least
marred  in  the  interval  between  Zarathushtra  and  the
Sassanian  revival.  A  further  comparison  with  the
Gathas  may  be  suggested  by  the  passage  about  Yima

1  i.e.  Saoshyant.


150 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [OH.

(see  pp.  42  IF.).  (The  gaps  again  roughly  indicate  flaws
in  the  metre.)

From  the  Devils  plundered  Yima

Riches,  welfare,  flocks  and  fatness,

Peace  and  honour  bare  he  from  them.

By  his  sovranty  abounded

Ever  food  and  drink  unfailing.

Flocks  and  men  were  all  undying,

Waters,  plants,  no  fell  drought  touched  them;

Neither  cold  nor  hot  wind  blowing,

Neither  eld  nor  death,  nor  envy

Devil-born  were ,

Ere  he  first  to  lies  and  untruth

Bent  his  thought  and  tongue

Then  before  all  eyes  the  Glory

Bird-like  fled  away  from  Yima.

When  he  saw  the  Glory  vanish,

Yima  Khsha^ta,  noble  shepherd,

Rushed  he  round  distraught,  and  smitten

By  his  foes  on  earth  he  laid  him  ( Yt.  1932"-).

It  will  be  seen  by  this  time  that  the  "Glory"  is
a  mythical  talisman  which  belonged  essentially  to
the  royal  house  of  Iran,  though  two-thirds  of  it
vanished  with  Yima's  sin.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the
succession  comes  down  no  further  than  Visht^spa,
passing  on  immediately  to  Saoshyant,  who  belongs
to  eschatology  alone.  The  opportunity  of  bringing
in  Cyrus  and  Darius  was  not  taken.  It  may  well  be
that  the  Yasht— and  consequently  perhaps  much  else
in  the  Yashts — was  composed  either  before  their  day


ix]  YIMA  AND  THE  "GLORY"  151

or  in  another  part  of  Iran :  if  the  latter,  the  rulers  of
that  district  equally  missed  celebration.  Of  course
we  know  too  little  about  the  conditions  to  attach
great  weight  to  such  argument.  We  may  note  in
passing  that  the  Glory  was  prominent  enough  in
Western  Iran  in  the  Achaemenid  period:  proper
names  like  Tissaphernes  and  Intaphernes  contain  its
Old  Persian  equivalent  (famah).

There  is  one  passage  in  this  Yasht  which  we  may
refer  to  for  the  sake  of  the  interesting  literary  parallel
drawn  by  Darmesteter.  The  famous  Iranian  hero
Keresftspa  seized  the  Glory  when  it  departed  the
third  time  from  Yima,  and  among  other  monsters  he
killed  Snavidhaka,  whose  boast  was : —

Child  I  am  as  yet— if  ever

With  the  years  I  come  to  full  age,

I  will  make  the  earth  a  whirling

Wheel,  and  of  the  heaven  my  chariot.

I  will  drag  blest  Spenta  Mainyu

Down  from  shining  House  of  Singing;

I  will  speed  fell  Angra  Mainyu

Up  from  dreary  Home  of  Evil.

They  shall  draw  for  me  my  chariot,

Those  twain  Spirits,  Blest  and  Evil—

If  he  do  not  first  assail  me,

He,  brave-hearted  Keresaspa  ( Yt.  1943f-)—

which  of  course,  according  to  the  prose,  he  promptly
did.  Darmesteter  compares  Otus  and  Ephialtes  in


152 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [OH.

the  Odyssey,  who  were  nine  fathoms  high  at  nine
years,  and  threatened  the  Immortals: —

Aye  and  the  deed  had  they  done,  had  they  reached  but  the

noontide  of  life ;

But  Zeus'  and  Leto's  son  destroyed  them  in  that  first  strife,
Or  ever,  their  temples  beneath,  bloomed  blossom  of  young  down

fair,
Or  on  chin  and  on  cheek  as  a  wreath  fell  the  shadow  of  clustering

hair  (Od.  XL  314  ff.  Way's  translation).

We  have  by  no  means  exhausted  the  interest  of
this  Yasht,  but  we  have  outstripped  our  space,  and
other  things  to  be  named  raise  problems  too  difficult
for  us  here.  There  is  no  more  verse  in  the  Yashts,
as  printed  in  Geldner's  great  critical  edition.  For  the
only  remaining  poems  of  the  kind  we  turn  to  the  later
parts  of  the  Yasna,  where  hymns  are  found  to  Haoma
(Ys.  9—11)  and  to  Sraosha  (Ys.  57).  These  Yazatas
are  among  the  very  highest  in  the  pre-Zarathushtrian
and  the  Reformed  periods  respectively.  Haoma,  the
Indian  Soma,  was  an  intoxicating  drink,  prepared  by
crushing  the  stalk  of  a  plant  very  doubtfully  identified.
In  the  Veda  it  is  of  pre-eminent  importance,  but  Zara-
thushtra  (as  might  have  been  expected)  preserved  a
severe  silence  about  it,  if  indeed  he  did  not  expressly
denounce  so  demoralising  an  element  in  the  national
religion.  So  at  least  Bartholomae  reads  Ys.  3214 —
compare  what  was  said  on  this  GatM  above,  p.  97,
also  p.  110.  When  this  Bacchic  divinity  emerged  from


ix]  HAOMA  163

his  eclipse,  he  seems  to  have  been  to  some  extent
sobered  into  a  reformed  character :  we  have  no  par
ticular  evidence  of  alcohol,  and  Haoma  appears  to  have
become  mostly  magical  or  mystical.  One  interesting
old  folklore  story  may  be  quoted  in  Prof.  L.  H.  Mills's
words :  it  is  an  exploit  of  Keresaspa.

He  who  smote  the  horny  dragon  swallowing  men  and  swallow
ing  horses,  poisonous,  and  green  of  colour,  over  which,  as  thick  as
thumbs  are,  greenish  poison  flowed  aside;  on  whose  back  once
Keresaspa  cooked  his  meat  in  iron  caldron  at  the  noonday  meal ;
and  the  deadly,  scorched,  upstarted,  and  springing  off,  dashed  out
the  water  as  it  boiled.  Headlong  fled  affrighted  manly-minded
Keres&pa  ( Ys.  911— see  S.  B.  E.  xxxi.  234).

(The  places  where  the  rhythm  fails  in  Dr  Mills's
version  do  not  quite  answer  to  the  weak  spots  in  the
original  metric:  we  print  it  as  prose,  as  he  does.)
There  is  an  amusing  comment  by  the  Pahlavi  trans
lator  upon  the  hero's  "affrighted"  flight.  "His
manly-mindedness  was  this,  that  he  kept  his  wits
on  the  occasion."  We  need  not  be  careful  to  excuse
Keresaspa  too  elaborately  for  his  fright  under  cir
cumstances  that  were  obviously  trying.  The  story
occurs  in  practically  the  same  form  in  Ft  1940,  where
Darmesteter's  version  (S.  B.  E.  xxm.  295)  may  be
compared.  Another  touch  of  folklore  may  be  cited
from  this  hymn,  the  prayer  addressed  to  Haoma  :—

First  may  we  be  ware  of  robber,

First  of  wolf  and  first  of  bandit :

Let  them  not  of  us  be  first  ware,

Let  us  of  them  all  be  first  ware  ( Ys.  921).


154 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

We  compare  at  once  Virgil's  familiar  "  lupi  Moerim
videre  priores."

Nor  may  we  overlook  the  promise  that  follows : —

They  that  long  sit  searching  scriptures,

Haoma  grants  them  grace  and  knowledge  ( Ys.  922).

The  Nasks  or  "scriptures"  here  mentioned  mean
essentially  no  doubt  the  G&thas,  for  if  the  word
means  the  Avesta  as  a  whole — which  was  in  Sas-
sanian  times  divided  into  21  Nasks — we  must  put
this  verse  fragment  too  late.

The  hymn  to  Sraosha  does  not  present  anything
special  to  dwell  on,  and  we  have  now  come  very
nearly  to  the  end  of  the  poetry  of  the  Avesta.  There
are  plenty  of  scraps  of  verse  scattered  up  and  down
the  prose  portions  of  the  Parsi  scriptures;  but  in
a  little  book  which  cannot  be  exhaustive  we  are
justified  in  passing  them  by.  Two  compositions  alone
we  can  find  space  for.  The  second  fargard  (chapter)
of  the  Vendidad  is  almost  isolated  in  the  Leviticus
of  Parsism  as  containing  a  fairly  long  piece  of  con
tinuous  verse,  and  subject-matter  of  real  interest.  It
is  the  story  of  Yima  (see  pp.  41  ff.),  of  whom  Ahura
Mazdah  tells  Zarathushtra  that  he  was  the  first  mortal
before  him  to  receive  the  revelation  of  Ahura.

Spake  I  to  him,  Zarathushtra,
I  that  am  the  Lord  of  Wisdom,
"Keeper  be  thou,  beauteous  Yima,
Bearer  of  my  Revelation."


ix]  VENDIDAD II  155

But  the  beauteous  Yima  answered,

"Not  for  this  was  I  appointed,

Nor  was  taught,  to  be  the  keeper,

Bearer  of  the  Revelation."

Spake  I  to  him,  Zarathushtra,

I  that  am  the  Lord  of  Wisdom,

"  If  thou  wilt  not  be  the  keeper,

Bearer  of  my  Revelation,

Prosper  thou  my  good  Creation,

Increase  thou  my  good  Creation,

Be  thou  Guardian,  Overseer,

Watcher  over  my  Creation "  ( Vend.  22~4).

Yima  agrees,  but  the  text  becomes  corrupt  for  a
stanza  or  two.  The  result  is  that  for  three  hundred
years

Then  the  earth  became  abounding,
Full  of  flocks  and  full  of  cattle,
Full  of  men,  of  birds,  dogs  likewise,
Full  of  fires  all  bright  and  blazing,
Nor  did  men,  flocks,  herds  of  cattle,
Longer  find  them  places  on  it

(Vend.  28— tr.  A.  V.  W.  Jackson).

In  response  to  the  Creator's  warning  Yima  has
his  remedy  for  overcrowding,  which  lasts  another
three  centuries,  to  be  finally  repeated  for  a  third
period.  Death  and  disease  being  unknown,  this  suc
cessive  enlargement  of  the  earth  by  increments  of
one-third  each  time — so  the  prose  says — saves  the
situation  up  to  the  end  of  Yima's  reign :  for  this  end
see  above,  p.  43.  Here  is  his  expedient :—


156 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

He  the  earth  with  golden  arrow

Clave,  and  bored  her  with  his  poniard,

Saying  "Holy  Aramaiti,

Stretch  thee  widely,  cleave  asunder "  ( Vend.  210).

The  identification  of  Aramaiti  and  the  Earth  will  be
noted.  The  second  half  of  this  fargard  is  peculiarly
interesting  to  us,  but  is  in  prose,  a  rare  exception  to
the  rule  that  the  verse  parts  monopolise  the  interest.
It  tells  of  the  Vara,  the  refuge  Yima  built  on  Ahura's
suggestion  to  shelter  mankind  and  animals  from  a
terrible  winter.  The  picture  strongly  tempts  us  to
recognise  the  influence  of  the  Babylonian  Flood-
story  :  if  so,  it  is  very  noteworthy  that  the  hall-mark
of  lateness,  prose,  should  be  stamped  upon  this  almost
solitary  specimen  of  borrowed  matter.  The  prose
warns  us  off  here,  or  we  should  have  liked  to  observe
that  the  Vara  recalls  Revelation  more  even  than
Genesis — it  is  a  city,  built  foursquare,  with  a  river
through  it,  as  one  of  the  only  two  scraps  of  verse
tells  us: —

Make  a  river  there  of  water,

In  a  mile-long  channel  lead  it;

There  establish  grassy  meadows,

There  establish  pleasant  mansions  ( Fend.  226).

We  take  leave  of  the  Vendid^d  with  two  typical
contrasted  extracts.  One  is  the  benediction  upon
the  ritualist: —


ix]  VENDlDAD  XVIII  157

"  Unto  thee  of  cattle  plenty,

Unto  thee  be  wealth  of  children,

Unto  thee  be  active  spirit,

Active  soul  attend  upon  thee !

Live  with  joyful-minded  being

All  the  nights  that  here  thou  livest ! "

Such  is  A  tar's  blessing  on  him,
Whoso  bringeth  to  him  fuel,
Dried,  prepared  for  clear  bright  burning,
Cleansed  with  rite  of  holy  service  ( Vend.  18'27).

The  prose  that  precedes  tells  us  that  of  two  bed
fellows  who  hear  the  cock  crowing,  the  one  who  gets
up  first  shall  first  enter  Paradise ;  and  the  one  who
feeds  the  fire  (Atar)  will  receive  the  above  blessing.
This  ritual,  as  any  housewife  will  cheerfully  acknow
ledge,  is  of  an  eminently  practical  character — which
cannot  be  said  of  all  rituals.  In  the  same  fargard
we  have  an  antithesis  which  gives  the  deeper  side
of  the  religion,  setting  against  one  another  the  false
Athravan  (fire-priest)  and  the  true.

"  Him  shalt  call  by  priestly  title,"
So  he  spake,  the  Lord  of  Wisdom,
"0  thou  holy  Zarathushtra,
Who  throughout  the  time  of  darkness
Still  enquires  of  holy  Wisdom.
*  *  *

Ask  of  me,  the  great  Creator,

Most  beneficent  of  beings,

That  for  thee  there  may  be  blessing,

That  thyself  may  be  the  happier,

If  thou  make  enquiry  of  me"  (Vend.  187f).


158 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [OH.

We  close  with  a  freer  description  of  a  true  poem,
which  paradoxically  enough  comes  to  us  mainly  in
prose.  Westergaard  included  it  in  his  Avesta  as
Yasht  22,  for  which  Geldner  corrects  him.  We  could
have  easily  forgiven  the  veteran  Professor  for  making
the  same  mistake,  and  so  finding  room  in  his  monu
mental  work  for  a  critical  edition  of  this  beautiful
piece.  It  is  a  picture  of  the  passage  of  the  soul  after
death.  We  can  hardly  say  how  old  its  material  is.
On  the  one  side  it  touches  the  Gathas,  with  which
it  is  truly  one  in  spirit ;  on  the  other  it  comes  near
to  the  Pahlavi  Vision  of  Ardii  Viraf,  the  Parsi  ana
logue  of  the  "Apocalypse  of  Peter"  and  similar  pre
decessors  of  Dante's  Divine  Comedy.  Perhaps  as  it
is  the  thoughts  more  than  the  words  that  can  be
described  as  poetry,  we  may  represent  it  best  in  a
free  modern  substitute,  in  which  we  may  try  to  gather
together  the  eschatology  of  Parsism  from  first  to  last.
For  such  a  purpose  we  must  ask  to  be  excused
presenting  the  obverse  of  the  medal :  whoever  will
may  go  through  our  halting  verses  and  by  substituting
devils  for  angels,  hideous  hags  for  lovely  maidens,
and  so  forth,  gain  an  accurate  idea  of  the  mechani
cally  balanced  fate  which  the  seer  prepared  for  the
wicked.  The  details  will  mostly  be  clear  from  ex
planations  given  up  and  down  this  little  book:  it
is  intended  that  the  index  should  enable  readers  to
find  them.


ix]  "YASHT  XXII"  159

AD  ASTRA.

Glory  to  thee,  0  Mazdah !  Lo,  I  turn
From  dazzling  visions  of  Thy  home  of  light,
And  find  me  weary  in  the  strife  again,
To  battle  with  the  watchful  fiends  that  line
Man's  path  to  Heaven. Yet  in  the  sacred  Fire
I  pray  Thee  let  my  waking  thoughts  recall
Sights  that  can  soothe  and  strengthen.

I  beheld,

And  lo,  from  out  the  eternal  House  of  Song,
One  came  and  answered  my  unspoken  prayer : —
"  How  came  I  hither  ? Thou  must  tell  the  tale
Of  what  I  was,  a  mortal,  for  the  years
Of  bliss  have  swept  the  memory  away.
It  may  be  the  fell  demons  of  disease
Vanquished  my  body,  while  the  Death-fiend  nigh
Waited  the  hour  to  swoop  upon  her  prey.
What  recked  I  ?  I  was  free.

Three  days  I  watched

Hard  by  the  spot  whence  weeping  friends  had  borne
The  demon-haunted  frame  that  once  was  mine.
New  light  had  dawned  on  all  the  earthly  scenes
Where  once  I  seemed  to  struggle  all  alone
Against  the  Lie ;  for  myriad  angel  forms
Thronged  o'er  the  foughten  field,  and  silently
Strengthened  the  weary  warrior  with  their  aid.
And  joy  whose  like  the  world  had  never  known
Bade  me  forget  the  tears  that  death  had  drawn
And  death  should  dry.

Four  glorious  Dawns  had  risen,
And  with  the  wakening  loveliness  of  day
Came  breezes  whispering  from  the  southern  sky,
Laden  with  fragrant  sweetness. I  beheld,


160 THE  YASHTS  AND  LATER  AVESTA [CH.

And  floating  lightly  on  the  enamoured  winds

A  Presence  sped  and  hovered  over  me,

A  maiden,  roseate  as  the  blush  of  morn,

Stately  and  pure  as  heaven,  and  on  her  face

The  freshness  of  a  bloom  untouched  of  Time.

Amazed  I  cried,  'Who  art  thou,  Maiden  fair,

Fairer  than  aught  on  earth  these  eyes  have  seen  ? '

And  she  in  answer  spake,  *  I  am  Thyself,

Thy  thoughts,  thy  words,  thy  actions,  glorified

By  every  conquest  over  base  desire,

By  every  offering  of  a  holy  prayer

To  the  Wise  Lord  in  Heaven,  every  deed

Of  kindly  help  done  to  the  good  and  pure.

By  these  I  come  thus  lovely,  come  to  guide

Thy  steps  to  the  dread  Bridge  where  waits  for  thee

The  Prophet,  charged  with  judgement.'

On  the  winds

A  little  space  we  flew,  yet  spanned  therein
Ten  times  the  gulf  that  severs  sun  and  star,
On  to  the  South,  where  like  a  buried  noon
Glimmered  a  growing  glory — onward  still,
Till  heavens  burning  with  ethereal  light
Revealed  the  House  of  Song. High-towered  it  stood,
With  flashing  diamonds  walled,  suspense  in  air ;
And,  far  beneath,  a  chasm  fathomless
To  keenest  vision,  whence  a  muffled  wail
Strained  through  the  solid  darkness  and  betrayed
Fell  Angra  Mainyu's  realm. Long  time  I  gazed
Dazzled  at  Heaven,  or  blinded  upon  Hell ;
Till  o'er  the  abyss  I  saw  a  thin  bright  line
Stretched  up  to  that  fair  portal,  and  I  knew
The  Bridge  of  Judgement Lo,  an  angel  dread
Sat  there  beside,  and  in  his  hand  the  scales
To  weigh  the  good  and  evil. At  his  bar


ix]  L'ENVOI  161

I  stood,  yet  feared  not,  while  good  angels  pled

And  demons  fierce  accused  me,  till  the  scale

Sank  with  the  load  of  everlasting  joy.

So  with  my  Angel  forth  I  sped  and  passed

The  Bridge  of  .Judgement,  passed  the  Heavens  Three,

Good  Thought,  Good  Word,  Good  Action,  and  beyond

Soared  to  the  place  of  Everlasting  Light,

Ahum  Mazdah's  boundless  House  of  Song.

A  Saint's  voice  hailed  me,  "  How  hast  hither  come,

From  carnal  world  to  spiritual,  from  the  realm

Of  death  to  life,  to  bliss  that  cannot  die  ?

And  from  the  Throne  came  answer,  'Question  not

Him  that  hath  trod  the  dread  and  unknown  path

Which  parts  the  body  and  the  soul  for  aye.3"


0  Thou  Wise  Lord,  who  when  Thy  world  was  young
Didst  pierce  the  grim  night  of  the  eastern  sky
With  gladsome  rays  of  truth  and  purity,
Forgive  the  error  of  this  venturous  song
That  strives  to  hymn  Thy  bounty. May  my  tongue
Tell  of  Thy  Seer,  and  how  against  the  Lie
Pure  thoughts,  pure  words,  pure  actions'  victory
Rang  from  his  herald  trumpet  loud  and  long:—
So  from  the  blaze  wherein  Thy  glories  dwell
Once  more  athwart  the  sunless  gloom  a  Star
Shall  flash  its  guiding  message,  and  from  far
The  Sage  of  Iran  answer  to  the  spell,

And  speed  with  trophies  of  a  faith  long  dim
To  find  his  Lord  and  bow  the  knee  to  Him.
MO.  11


BIBLIOGRAPHY

A  few  of  the  most  necessary  books  for  study  are  mentioned
here.  Generally  speaking,  those  which  are  named  in  the  text  are
not  repeated.

A. TEXT,  GRAMMAR  AND  LEXICON

Geldner. Avesta,  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  Parsis. Stuttgart,

1886—1895. Also  published  in  German. The  only  obtainable

text,  superseding  all  others.
Jackson,  A.  V.  W. An  Avesta  Grammar. Part  I  (all  published).

Stuttgart,  1892. The  most  convenient  Grammar,  but  difficult

to  get.

Avesta  Reader: First  Series. Easier  Texts,  Notes  and

Vocabulary. Stuttgart,  1893.

Bartholomae,  C.  Vorgeschichte  der  iranischen  Sprachen ;  also
Awestasprache  und  Altpersisch.  In  vol.  I.  of  Geiger  and
Kuhn's  Grundriss  der  iranischen  Philologie.  Strassburg,
1896—1904.  Very  elaborate  and  full.

Handbuch  der  Zendsprache. A  Grammar,  with  chresto-

mathy  and  vocabulary. Leipzig,  1883.

Altiranisches  Worterbuch. Strassburg, 1905. An  indis
pensable  book.

Justi,  F.  Handbuch  der  Zendsprache.  Leipzig,  1864.  For  forty
years  our  only  Avestan  dictionary.  Named  here  because  in
its  Chrestomathie  it  has  a  text  of  "Yasht  22,"  which  Geldner
does  not  include.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  163

B. TRANSLATIONS

Darmesteter  and  Mills.  The  Zend-Avesta.  In  Sacred  Books  of
the  East,  3  vols.  Vol.  I.  (cd.2)  contains  Darmesteter's  theory
as  to  the  date  of  the  Avesta,  and  translation  of  the  Vendidad ;
vol.  ii.  translates  the  Yashts ;  vol.  ill.  (by  Prof.  Mills)  the
(iathas  and  later  Yasna.

Mills,  L.  H.  The  Hymns  of  Zoroaster,  Bombay,  1909.  This  little
book  (to  be  obtained  from  the  Cooper  Publishing  Company,
Ilford,  London)  contains  Dr  Mills's  "free"  translations  of  the
(iatlias  without  commentary.  As  metre  they  mainly  illus
trate  the  impossibility  of  rendering  the  Gathas  into  anything
but  prose;  but  the  version  must  be  studied  for  the  reason
given  under  the  next-cited  work.

—  The  Five  Zoroastrian  Gathas.  Leipzig,  1894.  This  ency
clopaedic  work  is  indispensable  for  the  student  of  the
original,  because  of  the  traditional  material  it  contains.

Bartholomae,  C.  Die  Gatha's  des  Awesta.  Zarathushtra's  Ver-
spredigten,  iibersetzt  von  C.  B.  Strassburg,  1905.  A  beautiful
little  book,  the  latest  and  most  trustworthy  version.  There
is  perhaps  somewhat  too  much  originality  in  the  lexico
grapher's  work,  which  is  very  often  found  differing  widely
from  the  other  authorities,  see  above,  p.  82  f.

Wolff,  F.  Avesta.  A  German  translation  based  on  Bartholomae's
Lexicon.  The  Gathas  are  omitted.  Strassburg,  1910.

Casartelli,  L.  C.  Leaves  from  my  Eastern  Garden.  Market
Weighton,  1908.  A  little  collection  of  verse  renderings,
mostly  from  the  Avesta  :  these  include  Yt.  1930-38,  820-'3,
Vend.  1.9  (and  its  Pahlavi),  and  three  hymns  of  the  Gathas.
There  is  also  a  free  adaptation  of  "  Yt  22 "  and  its  kindred
material,  planned  in  much  the  same  way  as  that  given  above,
but  closer  to  the  Avestan  texts.

Cooper,  Nasarvanji  M.  The  Imitation  of  Zoroaster.  Quotations
from  Zoroastrian  Literature.  Ilford,  London,  1910.  A  con
venient  little  collection  of  maxims  from  early  and  later  Parsi
writings.

11—2


164  BIBLIOGRAPHY


C. LITERATURE  AND  RELIGION  OF  THE  AVESTA

Geldner. Awestalitteratur. In  the  Grundriss  (see  above),  vol.  n.

-  A  concise  and  masterly  sketch. The  same  volume  contains
authoritative  accounts  of  all  branches  of  Iranian  literature
to  modern  times,  also  of  the  history  and  civilisations  of  Iran.

Articles  "Persia"  (pp.  246 f.),  "Zend-Avesta"  and  "Zoroaster"

in  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  ed.  n.

Jackson,  A.  V.  W.  Die  iranische  Religion.  In  the  same  volume
of  the  Grundriss.  This  is  the  fullest  and  best  account  we  have.

Zoroaster. New  York, 1899. An  indispensable  mono
graph,  giving  all  the  material  there  is  for  the  history  of
Zoroaster,  and  the  legends  that  have  grown  up  round  his
name. The  dissertations  on  his  date  and  the  sphere  of  his
work  are  peculiarly  valuable.

Lehmann,  E.  Die  Perser,  in  Chantepie  de  la  Saussaye's  Re-
ligionsgeschichte,  II.  162 — 233.  Tubingen,  1905.  An  admirable
sketch.

Tiele,  C.  P.  Geschichte  der  Religion  im  Altertum,  vol.  n.  Gotha,
1903.  This  volume  (translated  from  Dutch)  is  entirely  de
voted  to  Parsism.

Carnoy,  A.  Religion  of  the  Avesta.  London  (Catholic  Truth
Society).  An  excellent  summary  in  a  penny  pamphlet,  by  a
Louvain  Professor.

Geiger,  A.  Civilisation  of  the  Eastern  Iranians  in  Ancient  Times.
London,  1885.  An  excellent  and  readable  description,  in  two
volumes,  translated  by  the  Parsi  Dastur  Peshotan  Sanjana.

Soderblom,  N.  La  Vie  Future  d'apres  de  Mazdeisme.  Paris,
1901.  A  very  full  monograph  on  Avestan  and  post-Avestan
eschatology.

Cumont,  F.  Textes  et  Monuments  figures  relatifs  aux  Mysteres
de  Mithra.  Brussels,  1899.  The  great  authority  on  Mithraism.


INDEXES

(1) PASSAGES OF  THE  AVESTA
Ys.  2713f-,  115  f.  Ys.  443-5,  86  Yt.  313,  124


27  18,  117

451-11,  104  ff.

5,  125  ff.,  143

28,  87  ff.

46,  107

8,  41,  132  ff.

29,  91  f.

4610,  106

10,  135  ff.

30,  66  f.,  81

47,  108  f.

13,  141  ff.

SO*-",  93  ff.

48,  109  f.

1362,  53

314,  96,  147

48  4,  99

14,  146

317f-,  85

49,  110

17,  135,  147  f.

32,  97

50,  110

19,  148  ff.

328,  42

51,  111

"22,"  78,  149,

32",  152

517,  64

158  ff.,  163

33,  98  f.

512"2,  117  f.

Ys.  9—11,  152  ff.

34,  99  f.

53i~»,  113  f.

Vend.  2,  43,  154  ff.

43,  100  ff.
44,  102  ff.

54i,  116  f.
Yt.  I27,  124

3s2,  20
187f-27,  157

(2) GENERAL


(Avestan  or  other  Iranian  words  in  italics)


Aboriginal  influence,  30,  38
Abstract  thought,  54  fif.,  84
Achaemenid  kings,  7,  38,  51,  77,

126,  151
Adityas,  46

Aeshma  (Asmodaeus),  68  f.,  95
Agni,  37,  38
Agriculture, 88, 103, 105, 107,

115

Ahuna  Vairya  (Honover),  114  f.
Ahura,  34,  56,  58,  73,  115. See

Mazddh

Airyana  Vaejah,  6,  127
airyemd  i$yo,  116  f.
Alburz,  139
Alexander,  7,  13
All  Souls'  Feast,  144
Alphabet  of  Avestan,  11  f.
Ambiguities  of  Gathas,  82  ff.
Ameretat,  63  f.,  99,  108
Amesha  Spenta,  58  ff.,  78,  96, 106,

125,  140,  etc.
Anahita  (Anahid),  37  f.,  46,  55,

125  ff.

Ancestor-worship,  33  ff.,  143  f.
Angra Mainyu (Ahriman), 56,

66  ff.,  78,  160,  etc.
Anthropomorphism,  54  f.
Antiquity  of  Gathas,  14  f.
Apaosha,  41,  133  f.
Apocalypse  of  John,  58  f., 124,

156
Apocalyptic,  72  f.


Aramaiti (Spandaramat) , 36,

62  f.,  95,  etc.
Ardd  Viraf,  158
Artaxerxes  I.,  148,  II,  125
Artemis  of  Ephesus,  128  f.
Aryan  unity,  3  ff.,  29  ff.,  etc.
Aslia,  46,  60  f.,  109,  116,  etc.
aSem  vohii,  116
Ashi  Vanuhi,  125, 135,  147  f.
Assyrian,  8,  37,  73
Astrology,  77
Atar,  39,  157. See  Fire
Avesta,  Avestan,  8  ff.,  etc.
ayah  x$usta,  61  f.,  70,  95
dyu,  daregem  ayu,  70
Azhi  Dahdka,  39,  130

Babylon, 30, 37, 44  ff., 130,

156

bagabux$a,  128
baresman  (barsom),  127
Behistan,  7  f.,  75  f.
Bendva,  110,  112
Boghaz-keui,  9,  73
Bridge. See  Cinvato  peretu
Buddha,  30,  49,  141  f.
Bundahish (S.B.E. vol  v.), 42,

53
Bunyan,  60

Cambyses  (Kajnbujiya),  75
Canon  of  Avesta,  13
Cattle,  61. See  Geu§  urvan


INDEX


167


Chanting  of  Gathas,  16,  26,  55,

74

Chista,  140
Christianity, 16, 28, 53, 70  f.,

73,  77,  98,  101  f.,  109,  161
ciiit'utu  pt-r*'tu,  71, 106, 160  f.
Conscience,  35
Cuneiform,  7  f.
Cyrus  (KuruS),  51,  150


("Self"), 72, 106, 109,

113,  142,  100,  etc.
Daeva,  34,  43,  55  f.,  etc.
dafvagatHOi  09,  120,  130
Dante,  158

Ihirius  I.,  7,  51,  57  f.,  75,  150
Date  of  Zarathushtra,  48  f.
Diodorus  Siculus,  77
Dog,  44

Dreams,  Divination  by,  77
J>ruj,  05  ff.,  109,  159
Dualism, 04
Ituyhdhova,  49
Dya«i  (Ind.  Eur.  Dyeus),  33,  36,

124

Earth,  Mother,  33, 36, 63, 95,

105

Ekmite,  38
Eschatology,  62,  64,  69  ff.,  85,  96,

98  ff.,  106,  109  ff.,  114  f.,  149,

158  ff.

Esoteric  teaching,  82
Evil,  problem  of,  64  ff.,  78
External  Soul,  145

Fall  of  man. See  Yima
Final  vowels,  22  f.,  83
Firdausi,  1,  42,  122,  131  _
Fire,  38  f.,  159. See  Atar
"  First  Life,"  1,  48,  90
FitzGerald,  1  f.,  42


Frashaoshtra, 50, 53, 89, 110,

113

fraiokereti,  53  f.,  72  f.,  96
Fravashi,  35,  55,  91,  118,  141  ff.

Gaotema. See  Buddha

Gdttu'is,  80  ff.,  etc.

Gdthd  haptanyhuiti,  74,  81,  117

Gathic  dialect,  9,  23  ff.,  etc.

Gaumata,  75

Genesis, Book of, 37, 43,  136,

156

Germanic,  33,  39,  63,  65
GFftfl  urvan,  88,  91,  109,  135
Glory  (hvarenuh), 43, 125, 140,

148  ff.

Grammar,  Avestan,  16,  26  f.
Grehtmi,  98
Greek  religion,  33,  39

, , writers  on  Zoroastrianism,

10,  50,  52,  68,  76  f.

Hamistakan,  98  f.,  109
Haoma,  41,  47,  55,  110,  152  f.
Haurvatat, 124. See  Ameretdt
Hearth,  36,  39
Heaven  and  Earth,  33
"Heavenly  ones,"  32  ff.,  55
Hebrew  Prophets,  55
Herodotus,  31,  35  f.,  38,  46,  56,

66,  75,  125

Home  of  Indo-Europeans,  3,  31
Homer,  139,  152
House of Song, 71, 94, 110,

159  ff.

House  of  the  Lie,  110
Humanah,  94,  161
Hvovi,  Hvogva,  53  f.

Indian literature, 1, 4  f., 121.

See  Veda
Indian  migration,  6,  38  f.


168


INDEX


Indian  religion,  30  ff.,  etc.
Indo-European,  3,  31  ff.,  37,  41,

45

Indra,  73

Iran,  6  ff.,  44  f.,  50  f.,  73,  etc.
Ishtar,  46
Islam,  13  f.,  71,  78

Jdmaspa,  50,  53,  100,  110,  112  ff.
Judaism  and  Zoroastrianism,  66,

73
Judgement. See  Eschatology

Karapano,  69,  110
Kavayo,  69,  112
Keresdspa,  151,  153
khrafstrd  (xrafstrd),  69
Khshathra  (XSaBra),  61  f.,  etc.

Later  Avestan,  9,  23, 118 ff.,  etc.
Laughing  at  birth,  51  ff.
Legendary?  Is  Zarathushtra,  15,

50,  112

Lie.  See  Truth,  also  Druj
Light-gods,  45  f.,  56,  136
Literary  features,  2,  28,  84  ff. ,

121  f.,  etc.

Lithuanian,  3!.,  38,  45
Lucretius,  139

Magi,  26,  75  ff.,  99,  133,  145
Magic,  77,  133,  146
Mahabharata,  1,  4  f.,  35
Manes,  35,  144
Manichaeism,  7,  79
mandra,  127

Manuscripts,  Avestan,  11  f.,  25 f.
Marriage  hymn,  112  ff.

,, of  next  kin,  77
Matthew,  Gospel  of,  26,  53,  144,

161
Mazdah,  Ahura  Mazdah,  (Aura-


mazda,  Ormazd),  50,  56  ff.,  66  f.,

73,  120,  125  f.,  etc.
Media,  36,  49,  75
Metals,  61  f.
Meteors,  133
Metre, 17  ff., 87  f., 100, 108,

lllf.,  115  f.,  130,  etc.
Mithra, 35  ff., 43, 47, 55, 91,

125,  135  ff.,  etc.
Mithraism,  43,  79,  88,  136
Midradruj,  137
Morality,  69. See  Truth
Moslem  conquest,  13  f.,  78

"  Nameless  gods,"  32  f.,  55

Nasatya  (Nanhai8ya),  73
Nasks,  154

Nature-worship,  35  ff.,  56
Nomadic  life,  39,  44

Old  Persian,  7  f.,  etc.

Omar  Khayyam,  1  f.,  42

Oreitae,  77

Orphism,  62

Ox-Creator  (Geu$  taSan),  91  f.

Ox-Soul. See  GeuS  urvan

Pahlavi,  7  f.,  13, 98, 143, 153,

158

Pairika  (Peri),  133
paraddta,  130
Paradise,  ethical,  73,  107
Parsi  migration,  14  ff.,  78
Parsism, no  world-religion, 28,

64

Persepolis,  13,  126
Persia  and  India,  21  ff.
Persian,  4,  8,  35,  68
Personification,  59  f.
Place  of  Z.'s  ministry,  49  ff.
Planets,  133
Plants,  64


INDEX


169


Pliny,  13,  51  f.

Plutarch,  61  ff.

Polytheism,  58,  74

I'otiruchista,  50,  112  f.

Ponrushaspa,  49,  127

Priests  (a6ravan,  zaotar),  55,  74,

99, 157
Prose,  19,  123,  etc.

Ragha,  49

liashmt,  71,  140,  146,  160

Regeneration. See  fraSdkereti

Religion  of  Persia,  31  ff.

Ritual,  12,  77  f.

Roman  Religion,  32  fif.

"Sacred Books of the East"

(S.B.E.),  15,  163
Sanskrit, 4, 11, 22, etc. See

Vedic
Saoshyant,  53,  91)  f.,  106,  149  f.,

etc.
Sassanian era,  8,  13  f.,  74,  78,

121,  149,  154
Satan,  66
Sfvyana,  63
Scythians,  36,  3_8  f.
Self. See  dannl
Shdhnameh. See  Firdausi
Sky-gods,  33,  42
Sraerdis  (Bardiya),  75
Sndvidliaka,  151
11  Sondergotter,"  32,  35,  61
spay ad ra,  96
spenta,  62,  67,  101
Spenta  Mainyu,  66  f., 109,  151
Spitama,  50
Srnoxha  (Obedience),  59,  89,  99,

102,  140,  152

Stars,  46,  85  f.,  132  f.,  143
Sun,  35,  97,  132. See  Mithra
Syncretism,  religious,  76,  145


Tabari,  13

Tennyson,  44,  139

Text  of  Gathas,  25  f.

Theodicy,  71

0e6j,  original  meaning,  33

Thought,  Word,  Deed,  57, 108,

140,  160  f.

Thraetaona  (Feridun),  131
"  Thy Kingdom Come  " in

Avestan,  62

Tishtrya,  41,  125,  132  ff.
Tobit,  49,  68  f.,  77,  95
Towers  of  Silence  (dakhma),  76  f.
Truth,  37,  56,  66,  137,  140
Twins  (yema),  42,  66,  93

Universalism,  70
Ur-kuh,  43,  88
Usijo,  69

Valkhash  (Vologeses),  13

Vara  (Far),  156

vdreyna,  146

Varuna,  73,  136

Vayu,  147

Veda,  21  ff.,  31  ff.,  49,  63,  143  f.,

etc.

Vendidad,  12,  19,  77,  154  ff.
Verethraglma, 39  f., 55,  f  125,

146

Virgil,  51  ff.,  154
Vtshtdspa (Hystaspes), 50, 89,

108,  128,  150
Vlvahvant  (Vivasvant),  42
Vohu  Manah,  60  f.,  92,  101,  107,

115,  etc.
Vouru-kasJia,  134

Waters,  64,  125,  143
Wisdom,  57. See  Mazddh
Words  peculiar to  daera-world,
95


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


BL  Moulton, James  Hope
1515  Early  religious  poetry

.If  of  Persia

M6
