IMPERATORIS  lUSTINIANI


INSTITUTIONUM    LIBRI    QUATTUOR


/  B.  MOYLE


HENRY   FROWDE
STEVENS  AND  SONS,  LIMITED


^fACMII.I.AN     &     C<
66  Fifth  Avenhr


*

IMPERATORIS    lUSTlNlANI


INSTITUTIONUM


LIBRI     QUATTUOR


ly/r//  INTRODUCTIONS,   COMMENTARY,   AND  EXCURSUS


BY


J.     B.     MOYLE,     D.C.L.


OF   LINCOLN'S   INN,    BARRISTER-AT-LAW
FELLOW   AND    LATE    TU'IX)R    OF    NEW    COLLEGE,    OXFORU


THIBD     SDITION


©;tfor^
AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS

LONDON :   HENRY  FROWDE

OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS    WAREHOUSE,   AMEN    CORNER

AMD

STEVENS    &    SONS,    LIMITED
119  &  >ao  Chancery  Lank

1896


m


PRINTKD  AT  THE   CLARENDON    PRESS

BY  HORACE   HART

PRINTER  TO   THR   UNIVERSITY

APR  2  9  1940


PREFACE


■♦♦■


The  text  which  I  have  followed  is  that  published  by
Krueger  in  his  and  Mommsen's  Edition  of  the  Corpus  Juris
Civilis  (Berlin,  1877).  In  writing  the  Introduction,  Com-
mentary, and  Excursus,  I  believe  I  have  consulted  the  best
and  most  recent  authorities,  and  to  the  names  which  I  men-
tioned in  earlier  editions  I  must  add  those  of  Voigt,  Sohm,
and  Cuq  ;  the  contribution  of  the  latter  to  the  historical  study
of  the  subject  is  of  perhaps  greater  value  than  anything  since
Voigt'-s  Jus  Naturale.  My  constant  difficulty,  in  explaining
the  text,  has  been  to  know  where  to  draw  the  line  between
notes,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  and  a  more  systematic
treatment  of  l^al  topics.  A  French  or  German  edition  of
the  Institutes  might  well  have  been  far  shorter,  but  there  the
reader  can  be  referred  to  recognized  Institutional  treatises
upon  points  which  hardly  occur  in  our  text ;  and  although
since  this  work  first  appeared  in  1883  the  Delegates  of  the
Clarendon  Press  have  published  a  translation,  by  Mr.  J.  C.
Ledlie,  of  Sohm's  admirable  Institutionen,  I  have  not  thought
it  desirable  to  largely  abbreviate  notes  which  had  once  been
written.

The  reader  will  find  but  few  changes  in  comparing  this
with  the  Second  Edition.  One  or  two  works  on  the  History  of
Roman  La^,  which  have  appeared  since  1890,  have  suggested
a  few  changes  in  those  portions  of  the  book  which  deal  with


vi  PREFACE.

historical  points ;  but,  speaking  generally,  I  have  contented
myself  with  further  rectifying  a  small  number  of  passages
in  the  notes  which,  upon  consideration,  I  thought  faulty  or
misleading.

I  have  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  Right  Hon.  James
Bryce,  M.P.,  until  recently  Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Law  in
this  University,  for  constant  encouragement  and  much  actual
assistance  in  preparing  this  work  for  the  press.  Some  of  it
he  revised  with  great  care,  and  there  is  hardly  any  part  of
it  which  he  has  not  benefited  by  many  valuable  suggestions
and  criticisms.

Oxford,  June,  1896.


CONTENTS


■♦♦-


PACK

General  Introduction i

Book  I.

Introduction 85

Prooemium 97

Text  and  Commentary 99

Excursus  I.    Capitis  deminutio 184

Book  II.

Introduction 189

Text  and  Commentary 197

Excursus  II.     lura  in  re  aliena  other  than  Servitudes    .        .  328

„       III.     Possession 337

Book  III.

Introduction 347

Text  and  Commentary 355

Excursus  IV.  Origin  and  Development  of  Bonorum  Possessio  476
f,         V.  The  general  nature  of  Obligations  .        .        .481

„       VI.  Dolus,  Culpa,  and  Casus 490

„     VII.  Joint  and  several   Liability.     Correality  and

Solidarity 493

y,   VIII.   The  Roman  literal  contract  and  its  history      .  500

„       IX.  Agency 505

Book  IV.

Introduction 509

Text  and  Commentary 518

Excursus  X.    On  the  earlier  history  of  Roman  Civil  Pro-
cedure         634

Index  to  the  Text 667

General  Index 681


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION.


■♦♦■


The  purpose  of  this  Introduction  is  to  give  as  full  an  account  as
is  practicable,  in  a  work  such  as  this  edition  of  the  Institutes,  of  the
history  of  Roman  Law  and  Legislation.  In  order  to  allow  the  largest
possible  amount  of  space  to  strictly  legal  topics,  constitutional  history
has  been  avoided,  except  so  far  as  it  seemed  that  these  could  not
be  adequately  understood  without  occasionally  touching  upon  it.  It  is
of  course  impossible  to  write  on  the  history  of  any  legislation  without
taking  some  notice  of  the  persons  or  bodies  by  whom  legislative
functions  are  or  have  been  exercised;  but  such  digressions  from
purely  legal  matters  can  fortunately  be  confined  within  tolerably
narrow  limits,  because  the  Roman  system  owed  so  large  a  part  of  its
development  in  point  of  matter  to  the  praetor,  whose  powers,  so  far
as  they  were  legislative,  were  exercised  indirectly,  and  it  may  almost
be  said  covertly,  and  in  point  of  form  to  the  jurists,  whose  constitu-
tional position,  despite  their  direct  influence  on  law,  was  in  reality
quite  unimportant.

So  far  as  legislation  goes,  what  will  here  be  said  is  little  more  than
a  commentary,  written  in  historical  sequence,  on  the  seven  sources  of
law  from  which  the  Roman  system  is  said  (Inst.  i.  2.  3)  to  be  derived.
As  regards  the  system  itself,  apart  from  the  agencies  by  which  it  was
directly  developed,  or  viewed  from  within  rather  than  from  without,
the  principal  topics  which  will  be  treated  are  the  relation  of  public  and
private  law  at  Rome ;  the  influence  of  caste,  or,  more  precisely,  of  the
patrician  and  plebeian  elements  respectively  on  the  material  character
of  the  system  ;  the  '  duplication  of  institutions '  which  resulted  from
the  co-existence  of  what  we  may  perhaps  call  a  purely  national  with
a  cosmopolitan  legislative  organ ;  the  gradual  absorption  by  what  was
cosmopolitan  of  what  was  purely  national ;  and  the  development  and
character  of  the  Roman  scientiflc  or  philosophical  jurisprudence.

0


a  INTRODUCTION.

Finally,  the  legislative  work  of  Justinian  will  be  described  with
tolerable  fullness,  concluding,  in  particular,  with  an  examination  of
the  scope  and  system  of  the  Institutes.

Of  the  form  of  the  earliest  Roman  law  it  is  possible  to  speak  more
positively  than  of  its  matter  and  contents.  The  first  trace  of  genuine
legislation  is  to  be  found  in  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  the  mythical-
founding  of  the  city  preceded  by  more  than  three  hundred  years.
During  these  three  centuries,  the  law  by  which  the  Romans  were
governed  was  unwritten ;  it  was  pure  custom  handed  down  by  tradi-
tion from  past  generations,  and  doubtless  identical  in  origin  with  the
usages  of  the  primitive  Aryan  stock.  Modern  comparative  juris-
prudence has  established  resemblances  so  striking  between  the
usages  of  the  earliest  known  inhabitants  of  Rome,  of  the  primitive
Irish,  and  of  those  Asiatic  Aryan  peoples  which  have  been  most
open  to  observation,  that  (while  admitting  that  it  was  modified  on
every  side  by  such  agencies  as  climate  and  the  circumstances  of
a  military  people  ever  in  arms)  we  must  allow  that  the  customary
law  of  Rome,  from  which  a  new  departure  was  taken  at  the  time
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  was  of  very  great  antiquity,  though  conjec-
tures as  to  its  age  are  no  less  unprofitable  than  idle.  How  the
custom  was  preserved,  and  protected  from  contamination  by  foreign
elements,  we  know  from  writers  on  the  early  history  of  Rome;  it
was  jealously  treasured  up  by  the  college  of  Pontifices,  who  were
the  first  judges  in  all  matters  relating  to  the  family  and  property,
and  who  thereby  acquired  the  title  of  *  guardians  of  the  law ; '  *  om-
nium tamen  harum  (legum)  et  interpretandi  scientia  et  actiones  apud
collegium  pontificum  erant,  ex  qui  bus  constituebatur^  quis  quoque
anno  praeesset  privatis '  (Dig.  i.  2.  2.  6).

The  statement  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  nature  of  statute  law
until  the  enactment  of  the  Twelve  Tables  may  seem  to  be  contra-
dicted by  the  existence  of  the  so-called  *  leges  regiae,*  of  which
however  we  know  little  that  is  certain.  'Leges  quasdam  et  ipse
(Romulus)  curiatas  ad  populum  tulit  Tulerunt  et  sequentes  reges,
quae  omnes  conscriptae  extant  in  libro  Sexti  Papirii,  qui  fuit  illis
temporibus  ...  Is  liber,  ut  diximus,  appellatur  ius  civile  Papirianum,
non  quia  Papirius  de  suo  quidquam  ibi  adiecit,  sed  quod  leges  sine
ordine  latas  in  unum  composuit'  (Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2.  2).
From  this  it  would  appear  that  Sextus  Papirius,  who,  according  to
Dionysius  (iii.  36),  was  a  pontifex,  made  a  compilation  of  these  leges
regiae  in  the  reign  of  the  last  of  the  kings.  Dionysius  also  tells  us
that,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  Papirius  re-established  those  of


THE  COMITIA   CURIA  TA.  3

which  Numa  was  said  to  be  the  author ;  and  we  know  a  commentary
to  have  been  written  on  his  compilation  towards  the  end  of  the  Re-
public by  Granius  Flaccus,  which  is  quoted  in  Dig.  50.  16.  144.  It
is  clear,  from  the  passage  cited  above  from  the  Digest,  that  the  jurist
Pomponius  assumed  the  identity  of  the  work,  on  which  Flaccus  based
his  commentary,  with  the  original '  ius  civile  Papirianum : '  but  the
truth  of  his  assumption  is  much  doubted  by  later  historians.  So  far
as  we  are  able  to  determine  their  character,  it  would  seem  that  many
of  these  '  leges  regiae '  related  to  matters  of  religious  ritual,  and  that
the  sanction  of  even  those  which  laid  down  rules  of  law  proper  was
sacral,  not  political,  so  that  it  is  most  unlikely  that  they  were  clothed
with  the  force  <rf  the  law  by  the  *  comitia/

The  application  of  the  word  *  curiatae  '  to  these  leges  in  the  pas-
sage last  cited  from  the  Digest  leads  one  on  to  describe  the  origin
and  early  history  of  the  comitia  or  legislative  assemblies  of  Rome.
The  earliest  of  these  was  the  *  comitia  curiata,'  which,  when  con-
voked for  certain  kinds  of  business,  such  as  the  sanctioning  of  testa-
ments (Inst  ii.  10.  i),  was  called  'comitia  calata.'  Whatever  opinion
may  be  held  as  to  the  names  and  ethnic  origin  of  the  three  tribes
(Ramnes,  Luceres,  and  Tities  or  Quirites)  from  whose  union  the
Roman  state  is  mythically  said  to  have  sprung,  it  cannot  be  denied
that  the  populus  Romanus,  when  we  first  know  anything  certain
about  it,  actually  consisted  of  three  tribes,  each  of  which  comprised
ten  auiae,  while  each  curia  consisted  of  a  number  of  gentes,  and
each  gens  of  an  indefinite  number  of  families,  between  which  there
was  originally  perhaps  a  genuine  tie  of  blood,  which  gradually  be-
came a  mere  fiction,  respected  and  supported  for  the  sake  of  the
ancient  family  worship  and  religious  rites.  The  family  was  thus  not
merely  a  microcosm  of  the  state ;  it  was  the  foundation  on  which
were  based  all  the  privileges  which  the  Roman  citizen  enjoyed  within
the  state ;  the  populus  contained  the  tribe,  the  tribe  the  curia,  the
curia  the  gens,  the  gens  the  family,  the  family  the  individual ;  to
belong  to  the  first  a  man  must  also  belong  to  the  last  member  of  the
series ;  or  rather  we  should  say  that  primitive  law  takes  little  account
of  individuals,  but  of  groups,  that  is  to  say,  of  families  or  gentes
only.

The  comitia  curiata,  and  in  fact  the  whole  constitution,  was  based
on  this  family,  gentile,  and  tribal  organization.  The  comitia  curiata,
which  was  the  popular  assembly,  was  composed  of  all  the  patres-
familias,  possibly  of  all  the  males,  of  the  gentes;  it  was  thus  a
gathering  arranged  on  the  principle  of  real  or  fictitious  relationship

B  2


4  INTRODUCTION.

(Gellius  XV.  27  'quum  ex  generibus  hominum  sufTragium  feratur,
curiata  comitia  esse*),  in  which  the  voting  was  *curiatim,'  each
curia  expressing  its  opinion  on  the  matter  in  hand  in  turn.  But  the
services  of  the  great  majority  of  able-bodied  citizens  were  constantly
required  by  the  military  exigencies  of  a  state  which  as  yet  drew  no
distinction  between  a  stranger  and  an  enemy;  consequently,  to
superintend  the  general  conduct  of  affairs,  there  was  a  council  or
senatus  consisting,  after  Tarquinius  Priscus,  of  three  hundred  of  the
patres  gentium,  a  hundred  from  each  tribe.  The  principles  of  de-
mocracy and  oligarchy  were  thus  both  represented,  and  two  examples
may  be  quoted  to  illustrate  the  '  system  of  checks  and  balances  *  by
which  harmony  was  preserved  between  them.  The  nomination  of
the  king,  or  supreme  executive  magistrate,  lay  with  the  senate,  but
required  confirmation  by  the  comitia,  which,  by  a  lex  curiata  (Inst.  i.
2.  6),  invested  him  with  an  imperium  of  life-long  duration,  whereby
he  became,  externally,  the  leader  of  the  host  in  arms,  internally,  the
depositary  of  the  highest  administrative  functions  of  government.
On  the  other  hand,  it  was  to  the  populus  alone,  assembled  in  its
comitia,  that  the  legislative  function  belonged,  though  this  function
could  not  be  called  into  action  without  the  authority  of  the  senate,
which  alone  possessed  the  right  of  submitting  subjects  for  delibera-
tion, arid  of  initiating  changes  of  law ;  it  was  the  populus  which
decided  upon  war  and  peace,  and  which  chose  the  king  nominally,
and  the  senators  actually :  but  in  the  exercise  of  all  these  rights  it  had
to  wait  for  action  to  be  first  taken  by  the  probouleutic  body,  whose
members  it  chose  itself,  but  whose  personal  constitution,  when  once
selected,  it  could  modify  only  in  a  constitutional  manner.

The  origin  of  the  other  comitia  was  later  in  date.  So  far  nothing
has  been  said  to  suggest  that  there  were  any  inhabitants  of  Roman
territory  who  were  not  citizens — either  themselves  heads  of  families,
or  subject  to  the  potestas  of  a  paterfamilias.  From  the  very  first,
however,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  number  of  free  persons  dwel-
ling around  the  three  tribes,  and  yet  not  belonging  to  them  ;  abiding
on  Roman  soil,  and  therefore  subject  to  the  dominion  of  Rome,  yet
possessed  of  no  civil  rights  whatever.  Some  sort  of  legal  status  it
was  deemed  requisite  to  give  them,  and  this  was  done  by  placing
them  in  immediate  relation  to  some  paterfamilias,  whereby  he  be-
came their  patron,  they  his  clients.  But  with  the  family  of  their
patron  they  had  no  connection  ;  their  connection  was  with  his  gens ;
they  took  the  gentile  name  and  became  his  '  gentiles.'  In  this  way
they  were  brought  within  the  protection  of  the  law,  as  dependents  of


ORIGIN  OF  THE  PLEBS.  5

a  citizen ;  an  object  which  could  not  have  been  secured  except
by  some  such  device,  for  the  primitive  Roman  law  recognised  no
claim  to  its  support  unless  the  claimant  could  in  some  way  show  that
he  was  within  the  pale  of  the  tribal  constitution.  But  the  clientes
acquired  no  political  rights,  though  the  public  duty  of  military  ser-
vice was  imposed  upon  them,  and  a  considerable  force  of  infantry
was  thus  added  to  the  resources  of  the  state.

This  process,  however,  of  attaching  all  peregrini  residing  on
Roman  soil  to  the  populus  by  the  tie  of  clientela  could  not  be
prolonged  indefinitely.  Circumstances  were  gradually  augmenting
the  number  of  non-citizens  so  largely  as  to  necessitate  some  new
mode  of  dealing  with  these  classes.  The  military  temper  and  strong
organization  of  the  Roman  people  resulted  in  a  continuous  addition
of  territory  to  the  domains  of  the  city ;  little  districts,  principally  of
Latin  population,  were  constantly  being  annexed,  and  their  villages
razed,  the  inhabitants  being  encouraged  to  flock  towards  Rome,
because  thus  they  could  be  most  easily  cowed  into  obedience  and
hindered  from  rebellion.  These  immigrants  were  at  first  settled  on
the  stretch  of  land,  bordering  the  three  hills  of  the  populus,  known
from  them  as  esquiliae  ;  as  their  numbers  swelled,  king  Ancus,  who
was  afterwards  honoured  as  the  founder  of  the  plebs  ('Romuli
Ancique  gentem '  Catullus  34),  assigned  them  the  Aventine  as  a
dwelling-place.  This  was  the  population  which  became  the  plebs,
and  which  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  strictly  legal,  no  less
than  in  the  constitutional,  history  of  Rome.  The  question  how  to
deal  with  them  became  daily  a  more  pressing  political  problem.  To
incorporate  them  into  the  existing  tribe-economy  was,  to  Roman
ideas,  quite  out  of  the  question;  the  populus,  being  based  upon
the  gentes,  was  a  kind  of  close  corporation  whose  constitution  was
limited  by  the  definite  number  of  gentile  aggregates.  The  plebs
then  must  remain  a  body  apart  from  the  populus,  and  therefore  its
members  could  have  no  political  rights.  But  there  seemed  no
reason  why  the  private  should  not  be  separated  from  the  public
elements  of  the  law ;  and  the  result — whether  it  should  be  ascribed
to  a  happy  accident,  or  to  the  deep-seated  legal  instincts  of  the
Roman  race — was  that  the  plebs  was  made  a  participator  in  all  those
rights  which,  in  the  later  law,  are  usually  described  as  the  private
rights  involved  in  the  Roman  civitas.  Thus  the  plebeians  had  the
commercium,  and  could  acquire  property  by  mancipation  they
shared  the  family  law  of  Rome,  except  so  far  as  this  was  of  a  public
character ;  that  is  to  say,  such  parts  of  family  law  as  preserved  and


6  INTRODUCTION.

perpetuated  the  tie  between  family  and  populus  had  no  relation  to
them  whatever.  The  Roman  principle  of  political  exclusion  led  to
considerable  results  in  the  field  of  pure  law ;  it  produced  a  dupli*
cation  of  institutions.  Thus,  the  wife  of  a  plebeian  could  be  in  his
manus,  but  they  could  not  be  married  by  con&rreatio,  which  was
publici  iuris  (see  Commentary  on  i.  lo  pr.) :  hence  the  two  other
modes  in  which  manus  could  be  produced,  coemptto  and  usus
(Gains  i.  no),  may  be  conjectured  to  have  been  of  plebeian  origin.
Again,  the  plebeian  could  have  his  children  under  his  potestas,  but  it
may  be  doubted  whether  he  could  adopt  by  adrogation,  which  was  an
act  of  high  political  and  religious  significance,  effected  in  the  comitia ;
hence  it  is  probably  to  the  plebs  that  we  should  ascribe  the  form  of
adoption  imperio  magistratus  (Inst.  i.  ii.  i);  finally,  as  a  plebeian
could  not,  at  any  rate  personally,  submit  his  testament  to  the  comitia
calata  for  legislative  sanction,  we  may  suppose  that  this  was  the  origin
of  the  will  'per  aes  et  libram'  (Gains  ii.  102),  the  validity  of  which
was  expressly  confirmed  by  the  Twelve  Tableis.  In  fact,  the  com-
munication of  private  rights  to  the  plebs  led  to  a  vast  development
of  private  law.  Had  the  Roman  populus  contrived  to  live  apart
by  itself  in  arrogant  isolation :  had  it  stubbornly  refused  to  recognise
a  tittle  of  right  in  any  man  who  was  not  a  member  of  itself;  had  it,
in  short,  not  happily  hit  upon  the  device  of  separating  the  public
from  the  private  portion  of  the  ius  Romanum,  the  history  of  Roman
jurisprudence  would  in  all  probability  have  been  far  different  from
what  it  has  been  \

Under  Servius  Tullius,  the  constitution  was  to  a  great  degree  revo-
lutionised by  two  reforms,  which  in  the  end  completely  altered  the
political  centre  of  gravity.  The  importance  of  the  plebs,  on  account
no  less  of  its  wealth  and  military  use  as  infantry  than  of  its  numbers,
became  daily  more  obvious ;  it  was  clear  that  the  time  at  which  its
political  position  should  be  recognised  could  not  be  long  deferred.
It  was  Servius,  of  whom  it  is  related  (Cic.  de  Republ.  ii.  21)  that  he
attained  the  royal  dignity  by  plebeian  support,  who  practically  effected
its  recognition.  It  has  been  already  said  that  the  plebs  could  not
possibly  be  brought  within  the  political  constitution  by  means  of  the
personal  principle  of  family,  gentile,  and  tribal  connection.  Servius
thus  had  to  cast  about  for  a  new  system  of  political  association,  and


'  For  a  diflferent  view  of  the  original  position  of  the  plebs,  in  the  main  derived
from  Mommsen,  see  the  article  *  Rome '  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  sinth
edition,  p.  736.


REFORMS  OF  SERVIUS  TULLIUS.  ^

a  basis  for  this  was  found  in  the  principle  of  local  contiguity.  He
divided  the  plebs  into  local  tribes  (or  rather  '  parishes ')  each  with  its
own  president,  each  occupying  a  certain  district,  and  each  responsible
for  a  certain  quota  of  taxation  and  a  certain  military  contingent.
Four  of  these  were  *  tribus  urbanae,'  others,  the  number  of  which
seems  to  have  fluctuated  with  circumstances,  '  tribus  rusticae ; '  but
the  former  only  had  any  political  influence  until  the  plebeian
secession,  though  it  is  possible  that  for  political  purposes  the  mem-
bers of  the  country  belonged  to  the  town  tribes  also.  Nor  can  it  be
reasonably  doubted — in  spite  of  the  dissent  of  Niebuhr — that  this
tribal  arrangement  comprehended  the  patricians,  the  old  populus  in
its  three  tribes.  Its  very  object  was  to  make  the  plebs  an  integral
element  in  the  state,  and  this  could  not  have  been  done  unless  the
reform  of  Servius  had  embraced  every  citizen,  every  inch  of  Roman
soil.  In  point  of  fact,  the  new  arrangement  was  based  on  the  prin-
ciple of  local  contiguity,  and  therefore  comprehended  the  whole  of
Roman  territory,  large  portions  of  which  were  in  patrician  occupation.
The  second  reform  of  Servius  Tullius  in  its  origin  was  military,  but
it  eventually  led  to  an  important  constitutional  development.  By
the  new  tribal  constitution,  the  old  relation  between  infantry  and
cavalry,  according  to  which  the  former  had  been  but  a  subordinate
appendage  of  the  latter,  had  been  superseded.  Nevertheless,  the
distinction  of  cavalry  and  infantry  still  remained  a  distinction  of
caste ;  the  patrician  alone  could  be  an  eques ;  the  plebeian,  however
rich  he  might  be,  was  condemned  to  serve  on  foot  To  reduce  the
prominence  of  the  distinction  between  plebs  and  populus,  if  not  to
sweep  it  away  altogether,  it  was  necessary  to  disconnect  the  military
organization  from  the  old  constitution  of  curiae  and  gentes ;  to  sub-
stitute for  this  principle  a  new  one ;  to  base  the  military  system  on
a  new  idea.  This  new  principle^  this  new  idea,  were  those  of
timocracy.  The  leading  feature  in  Servius*  second  reform  was
his  division  of  the  whole  body  of  freeholders  (assidui),  which  could  be
called  on  for  infantry  service,  into  Ave  classes,  in  which  each  man's
position  was  determined  by  the  amount  of  his  property.  The  first
comprised  all  those  whose  property  was  valued  at  100,000  asses  and
upwards ;  of  the  second,  the  qualification  was  75,000  asses ;  of  the
third,  50,000;  of  the  fourth,  25,000;  of  the  fifth,  10,000.  Those
citizens  whose  means  did  not  qualify  them  even  for  this  fifth  grade,
belonged  to  subsidiary,  but  of  course  unimportant  classes,  known
as  accensi  velati  and  proletarii.  To  this  proprietary  classification
corresponded  an  anangemem  of  the  fighting  men  in  centuries  or  com-


8  INTRODUCTION.

panies  of  a  hundred.  Of  cavalry  there  were  eighteen  centuries,  six  of
which  were  drawn  from  the  old  populus,  in  accordance  with  the  plan
of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  and  twelve  from  the  plebs.  The  first  of  Servius'
new  classes  furnished  eighty-two  centuries  of  heavily-armed  infantry ;
the  second,  third,  and  fourth,  twenty  fighting  centuries  each,  and  also
a  couple  of  additional  companies,  consisting  of  buglers  and  musicians ;
thirty  centuries  were  contributed  by  the  fifth  class ;  at  each  step  down-
wards in  the  scale  the  armour  became  lighter,  the  equipment  less
complete.  The  full  number  of  centuries  seems  to  have  been  one
hundred  and  ninety-two.

It  is,  however,  the  political  side  of  the  centurial  organization  which
is  of  most  interest  in  the  history  of  Roman  law,  though  this  was  not
a  working  reality  until  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings.  The  principle
which  underlay  its  application  to  this  branch  of  the  national  life  was
this— that  a  man  ought  to  have  an  influence  in  public  affairs  pro-
portioned to  the  burdens  which  he  bore  in  defending  the  state
against  its  external  foes.  On  the  expulsion  of  the  kings  we  find  the
centurial  organization  adapted  to  a  new  political  assembly,  the
comitia  centuriata,  which  was  destined  to  throw  the  old  assembly  of
the  patricians  at  once  into  the  shade,  and  to  engross  the  discussion
of  public  questions,  such  as  war  and  peace,  legislation  as  to  matters
affecting  the  constitution,  the  choice  of  magistrates,  and  the  decision
of  all  judicial  proceedings  which  involved  the  *  caput '  of  a  Roman
citizen.  In  the  comitia  centuriata,  where  each  century  had  a  single
vote,  the  influence  of  the  richer  middle  class  had  an  irresistible
preponderance.  In  the  order  which  furnished  cavalry,  the  patrician
votes  were  outnumbered  in  the  proportion  of  two  to  one  by  those  of
the  plebeians  J  while  the  eighty  votes  of  the  first  of  Servius'  infantry
classes  formed  a  compact  political  force  which  could  win  or  lose  the
day  in  a  contested  election,  or  on  a  public  question  upon  which
opinions  differed.  The  political,  however,  were  not  precisely  iden-
tical with  the  military  centuries ;  the  proportion  between  the  classes
was  the  same,  but  by  the  addition  of  a  proletariate  suffrage  the
number  of  military  companies  was  exceeded  by  the  number  of  votes
in  the  comitia  by  one.

With  the  expulsion  of  the  sons  of  Tarquinius  Superbus  (circ.  509
B.  c),  the  kingly  government  of  Rome  came  to  an  end.  The  act  had
been  that  of  the  patricians ;  but  the  plebeians  were  in  full  accord
with  them.  The  constitutional  functions  of  the  king  were  vested  in
two  supreme  magistrates  of  co-ordinate  authority,  who  were  chosen
from  year  to  year,  and  called  at  first  praetors,  and  later  consuls ;  of


THE  FIRST  PLEBEIAN  SECESSION.  9

the  first  two  who  were  elected  one  was  the  plebeian  L.  Junius  Brutus.
It  would  seem  too  that  the  plebeians  now  gained  the  entree  to  the
senate — at  leasts  henceforward  two  classes  of  senators  are  distin-
guished— patres  and  conscripti.  But  no  provision  apparently  was
made  to  secure  an  adequate  senatorial  representation  of  the  plebs,
and  after  Brutus  there  is  no  plebeian  consul  for  very  many  years.
This  will  make  it  clear  at  once  that,  though  the  plebs  commanded  an
overwhelming  majority  in  the  comitia,  its  political  influence  in  general
was  far  less  real  than  might  be  suppK)sed.  A  mine  of  gunpowder  is
harmless  unless  there  be  some  one  to  apply  the  match;  and  the
practical  helplessness  of  the  plebeians  will  be  comprehended  if  we
remember  three  facts.  In  the  first  place,  no  citizen  could  constitu-
tionally bring  any  matter  before  the  centuries  except  one  or  other  of
the  consuls.  In  the  second  place,  the  senate  still  preserved  its  pro-
bouleutic  function  already  described ;  that  is  to  say,  even  a  consul
could  not  submit  a  single  question  to  the  comitia  until  it  had  pre-
viously been  discussed  by  the  senate,  and  its  reference  to  the  larger
assembly  had  been  approved  by  that  body.  Thirdly,  it  was  required
that  all  elective  or  legislative  acts  which  needed  a  religious  sanction
should  be  confirmed  by  a  lex  curiata  in  the  comitia  of  that  name,
in  which  it  will  be  remembered  that  patricians  alone  were  entitled
to  take  part ;  such  confirmation  was  essential,  for  instance,  to  the
validity  of  consular  elections,  for  on  consuls  a  lex  curiata  alone  could
confer  the  imperium,  and  of  all  alterations  in  the  constitution.

The  first  secession  of  the  plebs  (b.c.  494)  seems  to  have  been
occasioned  principally  by  financial  distress.  Unsuccessful  wars
against  the  allies  of  the  royal  family  of  the  Tarquins  had  largely
increased  taxation,  and  taxation  fell  in  the  main  on  the  plebeians
alone.  The  story  of  Athens  in  the  time  of  Solon  was  once  more
repeated.  The  patricians  availed  themselves  of  their  comparative
freedom  from  financial  burdens  to  cast  the  net  of  usury  round  the
plebs,  and  the  severe  form  of  execution  in  vogue  for  debt  was
abused  for  political  purposes.  Returning  from  a  campaign^  the
plebeian  section  of  the  host  occupied  a  hill  in  the  vicinity  of  Rome,
subsequently  known  as  the  Mons  Sacer,  and  refused  to  re-enter  the
dty.  There  they  were  joined  by  the  rest  of  the  plebs,  and  threats
uttered  of  a  permanent  secession,  and  of  the  establishment  of  an
opposition  state.  The  patricians  saved  themselves  from  a  catastrophe
which  would  have  thrown  the  history  of  Rome  centuries  backward,
and,  in  all  probability,  totally  altered  its  character,  by  conceding
certain  reforms,  by  surrendering  certain  of  their  privileges.     An


lo  INTRODUCTION.

agreement  was  concluded  between  the  two  orders,  by  which  the
plebeians  were  in  future  to  have  two  special  elective  magistrates  of
their  own — a  number  very  shortly  raised  to  five,  and  then  to  ten —
whose  office  none  could  hold  unless  he  were  himself  plebeian.  The
function  of  these  *  tribunes  of  the  plebs '  was  to  protect  members  of
their  own  order  against  the  consuls,  and  those  who  violated  their
personal  liberty  or  security  were  to  be  outside  the  law ;  they  were
not,  like  the  consuls,  magistrates  of  the  Roman  people,  and  therefore
could  not  take  the  political  initiative.  Gradually,  however,  this
limited  authority  was  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  unrestricted  right
of  veto  which  is  so  familiar  to  readers  of  Roman  history,  and  which
eventually  enabled  the  tribune  to  paralyse  the  whole  machinery  of
government.  This  growth  of  tribunician  power  was  mainly  the
result  of  the  organization  of  the  plebs  as  a  political  force  by  its  new
leaders.  Assemblies  of  that  order,  known  as  concilia  plebis,  were
summoned  by  them,  in  which  their  grievances  were  ventilated,  and
resolutions  were  carried  demanding  redress.  These  could  be  laid
before  the  Senate  by  the  tribunes,  who,  though  not  members  of  that
body  in  virtue  of  their  office,  were  permitted  for  this  purpose  to
appear  at  the  threshold  of  the  building  where  it  held  its  deliberations :
if  approved,  these  proposals  could  then  be  referred  in  the  ordinary
way  to  the  assembly  of  the  centuries,  and  thereby  become  genuine
enactments  of  the  sovereign  populus  \  It  will  shortly  be  seen  that
when  the  jealousies  between  the  plebeians  and  patricians  had  abated,
these  concilia  plebis  expanded  into  a  new  comitia.  Measures  were
also  taken  to  relieve  insolvent  debtors  from  their  obligations,  and
promises  were  made  of  reforms  in  this  branch  of  law.

One  or  two  other  subjects  of  plebeian  complaint  may  be  here
mentioned,  along  with  the  half  measures  by  which  it  was  attempted
to  remedy  them,  in  order  to  show  that  the  enactment  of  the  Twelve
Tables  was  preceded  by  a  period  of  discontent  and  even  active
agitation,  and  that  the  relations  of  the  two  parties  were  still  in  a  sort
of  ferment,  and  incapable  of  satisfactory  adjustment  except  by  some
constitutional  reform  of  more  than  ordinary  comprehensiveness.
Numbers  of  the  leading  plebeians  were  injured  by  the  exclusion  of
connubium  between  themselves  and  the  patrician  order.  Though
this  anomaly  had  originaUy  been  grounded  on  political  considerations,
it  was  now  retained  for  purposes  of  mere  annoyance  only ;  but  the
deliverance  of  the  plebeians  was  not  yet     Even  now  too  they  were

'  Valerius  Maximns,  ii.  a.  7.


THE  TWELVE  TABLES.  ii

still  legally  incapable  of  possessing  the  ager  publicus ;  and  this  ap-
peared the  more  hard,  because,  on  the  one  hand,  their  taxation  was
out  of  all  proportion  to  that  of  the  patricians,  while  the  possession
of  the  ager  publicus  was  untaxed,  and  yet,  on  the  other,  it  was
mainly  through  their  own  valour  that  it  had  become  ager  publicus
at  all.  Some  slight  compensation  was  made  for  this  by  a  lex  Cassia
(b.c.  486)  which  effected  a  distribution  of  newly-conquered  territory,
and  placed  some  restrictions  on  the  patrician  enjoyment  of  the  public
land.  A  third  grievance  was  the  unlimited  power  of  the  magistrates
to  inflict  pecuniary  fines ;  this  was  curtailed  by  the  leges  Menenia,
Tarpeia,  and  Papiria,  passed  between  460  and  430  b.c.  Lastly,  the
patricians  controlled  the  entire  administration  of  justice ;  it  was  the
consul  who  presided  over  the  preliminary  stage  of  every  action,  and
if  he  did  not  decide  it  out  of  hand,  the  judges  were  most  usually
the  patrician  decemviri,  upon  whom  this  function  had  been  cast  by
Servius  Tullius,  it  was  the  pontifices  themselves,  members  of  the
patrician  caste,  who  interpreted  the  law,  and  solved  its  knotty  prob-
lems. Moreover,  the  very  enforcement  of  the  law  depended  on  the
observance  of  minute  forms  and  technicalities  of  which,  by  reason
of  their  implication  with  the  ius  sacrum,  the  plebeian  could  know
little  or  nothing.  Some  slight  amelioration  of  these  hard  conditions
must  have  been  afforded  by  the  lex  Pinaria  \  which  belongs  to  this
period,  and  which,  in  certain  classes  of  actions  (we  may  suppose,  in
particular,  actions  of  debt),  allowed  the  parties  to  choose  a  single
judge,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  magistrates'  own  jurisdiction  and  of  the
decemviral  court  (Gaius  iv.  15).  But  the  class  from  which  the  judge
was  to  be  chosen  seems  to  have  been  limited  in  some  way  of  which
we  have  no  certain  knowledge;  and  the  chief  interest  of  the  lex
Pinaria  is  that  it  served  as  a  precedent  for  the  principle  enunciated
by  Cicero  (pro  Cluentio  43)  in  the  words  ^neminem  voluerunt
maiores  nostri  esse  iudicem  nisi  qui  inter  adversarios  convenisset.'

In  the  year  b.  c.  462  the  tribune  Terentilius  had  procured  a  reso-
lution of  the  plebs,  *  ut  quinque  viri  creentur  legibus  de  imperio  con-
sulari  scribendis,'  which  the  senate  refused  to  send  on  to  the  comitia
centuriata.  Nothing  daunted,  he  proposed,  in  the  next  year  and  in
the  same  way,  a  codification  of  the  whole  law  by  decemviri.  This
last  hint  was  taken,  after  an  interval  of  ten  years,  by  the  patricians  ;
they  consented  (b.c.  451)  that  the  powers  of  consuls  and  tribunes
should  for  a  while  be  suspended,  and  the  whole  authority  of  the

^  Its  date  wai^  accoidJiig  to  Hnschke,  B.c.  473  (Verfiurang  det  Serrius,  p.  595).


12  INTRODUCTION.

state  entrusted  to  ten  commissioners,  on  whom  was  imposed  the  task
of  codifying  the  public  and  private  law  of  Rome.  In  that  same  year
they  submitted  to  the  people  a  code  of  ten  tables,  which,  along  with
two  tables  added  in  the  following  year,  were  accepted,  as  genuine
statute  law,  by  the  comitia.  These  were  the  celebrated  Twelve
Tables,  described  by  Livy  as  'corpus  omnis  Romani  iuris,'and  '  fons
publici  privatique  iuris ; '  as  '  finis  aequi  iuris '  by  Tacitus,  though  in
reality  not  so  much  '  finis '  as  a  fresh  starting-point  for  a  new  and
vigorous  legal  development.  '  Placuit  publica  auctoritate  decern  con-
stitui  viros,  per  quos  peterentur  leges  a  Graecis  civitatibus,  et  civitas
fundaretur  legibus,  quas  in  tabulas  eboreas  (?)  perscriptas  pro  rostris
composuerunt,  ut  possint  leges  apertius  percipi,  datumque  est  eis
ius  eo  anno  in  civitate  summum,  uti  leges  et  corrigerent,  si  opus
esset,  et  interpretarentur,  neque  provocatio  ab  eis,  sicut  a  reliquis
magistratibus  fieret.  Et  ita  ex  accedenti  appellatae  sunt  leges  duo-
decim  tabularum,  quarum  ferendarum  auctorem  fuisse  decemviris
Hermodorum  quendam  Ephesium,  exulantem  in  Italia,  quidam
retulerunt '  (Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2.  4).

The  allusion  to  the  Ephesian  Hermodorus  contained  in  this  pass-
age,  and  the  reference  (which  is  confirmed  by  other  writers,  e.g.
Livy  iii.  31,  32,  33,  Servius  in  Veig.  Aen.  vii.  695)  to  an  embassy  of
which  he  was  the  interpreter,  and  which  the  Romans  sent  to  Greece
to  search  out  the  laws  of  her  cities,  and  especially  those  which  Solon
had  given  to  Athens,  has  led  many  historians  to  believe  that  a  large
proportion  of  the  decemviral  legislation  was  derived  from  foreign
sources,  and  some  even  to  suppose  that  the  whole  of  it,  in  substance,
was  Greek  law.  It  would  seem  that  in  point  of  fact  no  theory  was
ever  wider  of  the  truth :  the  foreign  influence  was  trifling,  and  left
little  or  no  trace  whatever  on  the  private  portion  of  the  code  *.  A
consideration  of  the  task  of  the  decemvirs  confirms  a  conclusion
suggested  by  such  knowledge  as  we  possess  of  the  result  of  their
labours.  To  remove  the  uncertainty  of  the  law,  which  was  an
inevitable  consequence  of  its  form,  as  in  the  main  unwritten  custom
and  tradition,  and  which  favoured  capriciousness  in  its  adminis*
tration  by  the  magistrate :  so  far  as  possible,  to  place  all  freemen,
irrespective  of  their  birth  or  order,  on  the  same  footing  in  respect  of
legal  right  and  duty;  and  to  put  an  end  to  plebeian  discontent
arising  from  economical  conditions — these  were  the  chief  objects  to
be  attained,  and  it  would  not  seem  that  their  attainment  would  be

^  For  a  careful  examination  of  this  question  see  M.  Voigt,  Die  xii  Tafeln,  I.
pp.  II  sq.t  and  Cuq,  Institutions  jnridiqoes  des  Romains^  i.  pp.  133-137.


THE   TWELVE  TABLES.  13

promoted  by  even  a  liberal  adoption  of  foreign  usages.  In  the
extant  portions  of  the  Twelve  Tables  there  are  unmistakeable  traces
of  the  equalising  policy  :  the  ius  sacrum  was  to  a  considerable  extent
stripped  of  its  exclusive  character,  and  the  law  of  procedure,  as  to
which  we  have  important  fragments,  was  settled  upon  a  basis  which
gave  justice  a  chance  of  being  fairly  administered  by  saving  from
magisterial  caprice  the  decision  of  most  points  upon  which  the  suc-
cessful bringing  of  an  action  depended.  How  far  the  Tables  were
a  complete  codification  of  existing  rules  must  always  remain  some-
what doubtful.  It  appears  beyopd  dispute  that  being  intended  as  an
exposition  of  the  general  civil  law,  applicable  to  all  classes  alike,  they
did  not  regulate  practices  or  institutions  peculiar  to  either  order,  such
as  the  older  forms  of  marriage  and  adoption  ^ :  nor  did  they  include
the  leges  regiae,  law  and  religion  having  now  been  differentiated.
Much  again  relating  to  the  effects  of  legal  acts  and  dispositions,
which  was  matter  of  common  knowledge  and  formed  no  subject  of
dispute,  remained,  as  we  might  say,  'common  law,'  the  familiar
possession  of  every  citizen,  and  the  same  remark  may  be  made  of
many  laconic  aphorisms  similar  to  others  which  we  know  to  have
been  embodied  in  the  Tables.  Finally,  it  may  be  observed  that  the
enactment  of  the  Twelve  Tables  is  also  direct  evidence  of  the  inde-
pendent position  which  private  law  had  won  for  itself  under  plebeian
auspices,  and  at  the  same  time  starts  it  on  a  new  career  of  develop-
ment ;  it  was  no  longer  the  peculiar  province  of  the  plebeian  order ;
but  having  been  sanctioned  by  the  whole  populus  in  its  comitia,
it  b^an  to  be  looked  on  more  by  all  parties  as  the  best  security  for
order  and  prosperity.  But  this  is  part  of  a  subject  on  which  there  is
great  diversity  of  opinion,  and  to  which  we  shall  shortly  return — the
relation,  at  Rome,  of  private  to  public  law.

English  lawyers  in  particular  will  fully  appreciate  the  advantage
which  was  secured  by  the  expression  of  the  law  in  a  more  scientific
and  therefore  more  convenient  form  than  that  in  which  it  had  hitherto
been  clothed.  But  it  was  a  still  larger  boon  that  provision  was  made
for  its  being  generally  known  by  all  citizens  who  cared  to  make  them-
selves acquainted  with  it.  Historical  analogy  would  perhaps  lead  us
to  suppose  that  the  knowledge  of  the  law  had  hitherto  been  engrossed
by  the  patrician  caste,  as  represented  by  the  pontifices,  who  are  de-
scribed in  a  passage  of  Pomponius  already  cited  (Dig.  i.  2.  2.  6)  as
the  only  masters  of  the  legal  rules  and  forms  of  procedure  at  that

^  £.  g.  Gaius,  iii.  8a.


14  INTRODUCTION.

time  binding.  But  it  has  already  been  suggested  that  private  law
was  to  a  large  degree  of  plebeian  creation,  and  the  sole  possession  of
legal  knowledge  by  a  dominant  aristocracy  is  truer  of  the  Greek
oligarchies  than  of  Rome,  of  which  we  may,  with  some  qualification,
accept  the  view  of  the  German  historical  school  of  jurists,  who  assert
that  the  material  law  was  no  secret,  being  founded  on  the  common
legal  consciousness  (Rechtsbewusstsein)  of  the  nation  as  evidenced
and  attested  by  its  usages  and  customs.  Still,  it  is  of  no  avail  to
know  the  law,  if  one  cannot  get  one's  rights  protected  and  enforced
by  action ;  and  of  the  forms  of  actions,  as  already  observed,  the
plebeian  could  know  little,  through  their  implication  with  the  ius
sacrum.  The  decemviral  legislation  introduced  simplicity  and  uni-
formity into  these ;  it  was  exposed  in  a  public  place  for  all  to  read,
and  from  the  fact  that  in  Cicero's  boyhood  the  Roman  youth  was
used  to  learn  the  Twelve  Tables  by  heart,  it  is  evident  that  they  were
long  used  as  the  foundation  of  a  legal  education  as,  in  the  three
centuries  and  a  half  preceding  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  a  mastery
of  the  Institutes  of  Gains  was  considered  the  proper  groundwork  of
an  adequate  knowledge  of  the  law.  For  nearly  a  thousand  years
they  remained  the  only  complete  legislation  which  professed  to
embrace  the  whole  positive  law  of  Rome,  and  though  in  point  of
fact  the  greater  part  of  their  original  substance  was  repealed  or
modified  by  subsequent  enactments,  the  Roman  citizen,  even  under
the  Empire,  always  continued  to  revere  them  as  the  solid  basis  of  the
noble  system  of  jurisprudence  by  which  all  his  rights  and  duties  were
determined ;  and  it  was  only  by  the  great  work  of  Justinian  that,
nine  hundred  and  eighty-four  years  after  their  enactment,  they  were
formally  deprived  of  their  authority.

At  this  point  it  will  be  well  to  pause  in  order  to  look  back  over  the
centuries  behind  us  and  try  to  ascertain  what  was  the  material  con-
tent and  what  the  scope  of  the  customary  law  which,  as  we  have
seen,  was  to  the  early  Romans  the  only  rule  of  life,  and  which  was
summed  up  and  (if  we  may  use  the  expression)  codified  in  the
Twelve  Tables.  Ausonius  (Idyll  xi.  6i)  describes  the  contents  of
the  latter  as  '  ius  triplex : '

*  Sacnim,  privatam,  populi  commnne  quod  asquam  est'

But  even  if  we  admit  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  attempts
which  have  been  made  to  reconstruct  the  Tables  in  outline  it  is
not  easy  to  distinguish  these  three  elements  with  any  precision.
There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  the  first  three  Tables  dealt  with


PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  LAW,  15

civil  procedure,  from  summons  down  to  execution  of  judgment.
According  to  the  most  recent  authority  on  the  subject  \  the  fourth
regulated  inheritance,  both  testamentary  and  intestate,  and  patria
potestas:  the  fifth  various  titles  to  property,  servitude,  and  con*
tract :  the  fifth  and  sixth  related  to  divorce  and  the  two  varieties  of
guardianship :  the  seventh  to  delict  and  usury :  the  eighth  to  a
variety  of  topics,  including  the  relations  of  adjoining  proprietors
and  certain  criminal  matters  :  the  ninth  continued  the  latter  subject,
and  prescribed  the  procedure  on  criminal  prosecutions :  the  tenth
regulated  interment;  while  the  last  two  made  provision  for  appeals
from  the  action  of  the  magistrates,  and  contained  other  subordinate
enactments.  The  scantiness  of  the  law  relating  to  contract  is
noteworthy.

Legal  antiquaries  on  the  Continent  who  have  accepted  as  sub-
stantially true  the  myth  which  ascribes  the  origin  of  Rome  to  the
union  of- three  tribes  belonging  to  different  ethnic  stocks,  two  of
which  are  by  them  identified  as  Pelasgic  and  Sabine ',  have  spent
much  ingenuity  in  attemping  to  detect  the  original  diversity  of  the
elements  contributed  to  the  common  stock  of  jurisprudence  by  the
two  dominant  tribes,  and  to  trace  the  gradual  process  by  which  these
were  blended  into  a  homogeneous  system  of  law.  They  speak  of
the  element  peculiar  to  the  Ramnes,  as  opposed  to  that  peculiar  to
the  Quirites ;  the  genius  of  the  former  people  lay  in  the  direction  of
conquest  and  activity  in  external  relations,  that  of  the  latter  in  the
promotion  of  domestic  order  and  peaceful  internal  development ;  and
the  genius  of  each  is  supposed  to  have  reflected  and  reproduced
itself  in  their  legal  habits  and  in  their  modes  of  life  and  thought.  Such
speculations  assuredly  cannot  claim  our  serious  attention;  but
a  question  which  is  suggested  by  them  is  of  larger  interest,  because
the  answer  to  it  will  affect  our  judgment  upon  the  general  character
of  the  legal  system  through  a  great  part  of  its  history,  and  will  deter-
mine our  explanation  of  many  of  its  most  peculiar  phenomena.  It  is
the  view  of  many  who  have  deeply  studied  the  institutions  of  Rome
that,  in  its  infancy,  the  consciousness  of  the  people  as  a  military  state,
which  had  perpetually  to  be  defending  its  very  existence  with  the
sword,  asserted  itself  so  irresistibly  as  to  colour  the  law  of  Rome  to
the  very  end  of  its  history.  In  periods  of  grave  national  peril  citizens
always  realise  most  fully  their  membership  one  with  another,  and  are
most  ready  to  sacrifice  the  fleeting  interest  of  the  individual  to  the

1

^  M.  Voigt,  Die  xii  Tafeln,  1883.  '  PnchU,  Institutionen,  L  p.  73.


i6  INTRODUCTION.

higher  and  more  engrossing  requirements  of  the  state.  Hence  is
inferred  a  fact  which  (as  it  is  represented)  left  its  mark  upon  Roman
law  even  in  the  age  of  Justinian,  twelve  hundred  years  after  the  epoch
which  we  are  now  considering ;  the  fact,  namely,  that  in  the  earliest
period  of  the  nation's  history  almost  every  relation  with  which  juris-
prudence has  ever  had  any  concern  was  dominated  by  public  law,  or
by  the  idea,  expressing  itself  in  law,  that  beside,  or  apart  from,  the
state,  the  citizen  is  as  nothing,  and  that  he  has  no  ground  for  com-
plaint if  his  family  life,  his  religion,  his  dealings  with  his  fellow-men,
his  very  liberty  and  life  are  treated  principally  as  means  to  the  end
of  government,  and  placed  under  state  control.  The  position  of  the
family  in  the  state  economy  has  been  already  indicated.  The  very
existence  of  the  people,  as  an  organic  whole,  depended  on  the  main-
tenance of  the  gentes  through  families ;  and  as  a  new  family  could
arise  only  from  the  lawful  wedlock  of  two  citizens,  marriage  was  made
a  public  act  and  placed  under  sacerdotal  supervision;  the  solemn
rite  of  confarreatio  (Gaius  i.  112),  by  which  alone  it  could  be
contracted,  was  a  ceremony  of  deep  public  and  religious  import.
Again,  through  lack  of  children,  or  through  the  death  of  such  as
might  be  born,  a  family  might  be  in  danger  of  dissolution ;  hence
the  supreme  political  importance  of  the  institution  led  to  the  recog-
nition of  adoption  as  an  artificial  means  of  perpetuating  its  existence ;
and  adoption,  too,  was  a  public  act,  accomplished  under  the  auspices
of  the  priestly  college  before  the  comitia  curiata.

There  is  perhaps  less  probability  in  the  alleged  extension  to  the
field  of  property  of  this  domination  of  public  over  private  law.  The
old  principle  of  law,  it  is  said,  laid  it  down  that  conquered  land  and
captured  booty  belonged,  primarily,  to  the  state,  and  that  it  was
through  the  state  alone  that  it  could  become  the  property  of  indi-
viduals. Thus  according  to  the  view  now  under  consideration,  no
citizen  originally  owned  an  inch  of  Roman  soil ;  he  could  only
possess  and  enjoy  it  by  permission  of  the  populus,  and  it  remained

*  ager  publicus '  until  the  settlement  of  large  numbers  of  strangers  on
Roman  territory  had  brought  into  prominence  the  legal  distinction
between  civis  and  peregrinus,  a  distinction  which  then  became  em-
phasised by  the  former  being  held  capable,  the  latter  incapable,  of
owning  land  ex  iure  Quiritium.  But  to  maintain  the  principle  that  all
res  mobiles  belonged,  ultimately,  to  the  state,  was  less  easy.  On  one
explanation,  however,  of  a  famous  distinction  of  Roman  law — that  of

*  res  mancipi '  and  *  res  nee  mancipi ' — the  traces  of  that  principle  were
retained  until  the  distinction  itself  was  swept  away  by  Justinian.     It


PRIVATE  AND  PUBLIC  LAW.  17

is  suggested  that  the  idea  that  all  'res  mobiles'  belong  ultimately  to  the
state  survived  only  in  connection  with  certain  subjects  of  property —
things,  in  other  words,  which  usually  form  the  staple  of  military  booty,
and  of  which  individuals  were  thus  most  likely  to  have  got  possession
by  concession  from  the  state.  This  idea,  it  is  maintained,  led  to  the
introduction  of  a  peculiar  mode  of  alienation  for  these  kinds  of  ob-
jects, namely,  mancipatio,  in  which  the  sanction  of  the  populus  to  the
transaction  was  supplied  by  the  presence  of  a  definite  number  of
witnesses  who  were  full  citizens  of  Rome  (Gaius  i.  119)  *.  But  what-
ever may  be  the  truth  as  to  the  distinction  of  res  mancipi  and  res  nee
mancipi,  we  know  that  for  many  centuries  a  slave  could  not  be
eflectually  enfranchised  except  by  a  public  act ;  that  the  earliest
forms  of  wills  were  dispositions  sanctioned  either  by  direct  legislative

^  This  is  but  one  of  many  views  as  to  the  origin  of  the  distinction.  Sir  Henry
Maine  (Ancient  Law,  p.  275)  says :  '  The  explanation  which  appears  to  cover  the
greatest  nnmber  of  instances  is,  that  the  objects  of  enjoyment  honoured  above  the
rest  were  the  forms  of  property  known  first  and  earliest  to  each  particular  com-
munity, and  dignified  therefore  emphatically  with  the  designation  of  Property,
On  the  other  hand,  the  articles  not  ennmerated  among  the  favoured  objects  seem
to  have  been  placed  on  a  lower  standing,  because  the  knowledge  of  their  value
was  posterior  to  the  epoch  at  which  the  catalogue  of  superior  property  was  settled.
They  were  at  first  unknown,  rare,  limited  in  their  uses,  or  else  regarded  as  mere
appendages  to  the  privileged  objects.  Thus,  though  the  Roman  res  mancipi
indaded  a  number  of  moveable  articles  of  great  value,  still  the  most  costly  jewels
were  never  allowed  to  take  rank  as  res  mancipi,  because  they  were  unknown  to
the  early  Romans.'  Ihering  thinks  that  the  res  mancipi  were  those  objects  of
property  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  the  joint  family  life  :  '  ohne  beides  (i.  e.
free  persons  and  zes  mancipi)  lasst  es  sich  ein  ordentliches  Hauswesen,  eine
gesunde  Wiithschaft  gar  nicht  denken '  ^Geist  des  romischen  Rechts,  ii.  p.  165').
Other  explanations  are  based  on  the  actual  market  value  (Kostbarkeit)  of  the
objects  (  Cujacius,  Bynkershoek),  or  on  the  supposition  that  a  special  return  of  res
mancipi  was  required  in  the  census  (Puffendorf,  Gottling).  The  last  theory  is  in
substance  adopted  and  ably  argued  by  Prof.  Muirhead  (Roman  Law,  pp.  57-64%
who  attributes  the  distinction  to  Servius  TuUius,  the  founder  of  the  census :  res
mancipi  meant '  a  man's  land  and  its  appurtenances :  *  and  '  in  order  to  ensure  as
far  as  possible  certainty  of  title,  and  to  relieve  the  officials  of  troublesome  investi-
gations of  the  genuineness  of  every  alleged  change  of  ownership  between  two
valuations,  it  was  declared  that  no  transfer  would  be  recognised  which  had  not
been  effected  publicly,  with  observance  of  certain  solemnities,  or  else  by  surrender
in  court  before  the  supreme  magistrate  (in  iure  cessio).'  The  majority  of  recent
authorities  seem  however  to  agree  that  the  distinction  is  based  upon  a  still  older
one  between  Familia  and  Pecunia,  the  former  denoting  family,  the  latter,  private
property.  Upon  this  see  in  particular  Cuq,  Institutions  juridiques  des  Romains,
i.  pp.  91-100.  Voigt  (Rom.  Rechtsgeschichte,  i.  pp.  437  sq.)  holds  that  the  dis-
tinction of  things  into  mancipi  and  nee  mancipi  is  no  older  than  about  150  B.  c,
and  was  established  by  a  constitutio  jurisperitorum  {constituehcUur  quasdam  res
mancipi  esse,  quasdam  non  mancipi,  Gaius  ii.  16).

C


i8  INTRODUCTION.

authority  of  the  populus  or  by  its  representatives,  the  five  witnesses
of  the  mancipation ;  and  that  the  earliest  mode  in  which  a  binding
contract  could  be  concluded  was  almost  certainly  the  so-called  neximi,
which  in  all  essential  features  was  identical  with  mancipation.  Thus
the  authority  of  the  populus — the  sanction  of  public  law — was  required
to  validate  almost  every  dealing  between  man  and  man,  whether  it
was  a  marriage,  a  sale,  a  contract,  the  manumission  of  a  slave,  the
emancipation  of  a  son,  or  a  testamentary  disposition.

The  prominent  influence  of  the  plebeian  element  of  the  state  in
the  development  of  private  law  has  been  already  alluded  to  as  a  fact
which  by  itself  appears  beyond  question.  The  theory  now  under
discussion  has  the  merit  of  explaining  this  fact,  and  of  carrying  the
history  of  the  evolution  of  private  law  even  further  backwards.  Suits
in  which  religious  considerations  or  a  religious  sanction  were  involved
were  submitted  for  decision  to  the  pontifices,  presided  over  by  the
king  as  pontifex  maximus ;  and  it  is  represented  that  religion  occu-
pied so  large  a  sphere  in  the  life  of  early  Rome  that  the  whole  of  the
original  law  may  be  regarded  as  partly  ius  publicum,  partly  ius
sacrum.  What  was  subsequently  known  as  '  ius  privatum '  attained
a  gradual  recognition  and  advanced  by  timid  steps  to  independence
under  the  protecting  aegis  of  ius  sacrum :  '  ius  sacrum  was  the  form
which  private  law  at  first  assumed,  and  in  which  it  first  received  an
independent  though  subordinate  existence,  as  against  the  absorbing
and  preponderating  weight  of  ius  publicum.'  But  the  plebs,  when  it
became  an  integral  part  of  the  Roman  state,  was  free  from  all  pre-
judices based  on  the  history  of  the  populus ;  and  '  it  was  in  the  plebs
that  the  ius  Quiritium,  the  private  portion  of  the  code,  received
its  full  development,  and  from  the  plebs  that  Rome  got  an  idea
which  perhaps  otherwise  she  would  never  have  got— the  idea  of  a
private  person.'  The  relations  of  a  private  person  must  be  governed
by  private  law,  and  thus  it  is  to  the  plebeian  element  in  the  state
that  the  main  institutions  of  private  law  are  to  be  ascribed.  Some  of
these  developments — the  new  forms  of  marriage  and  of  adoption —
have  been  already  suggested.  But  the  plebs  consisted  of  persons
who  were  no  part  of  the  populus ;  exactly  then  as  the  members  of  the
latter  (who  had  now  come  to  be  called  patricians)  could  only  possess
and  enjoy  land,  but  not  own  it,  so  the  members  of  the  former,
precisely  because  they  were  not  of  the  populus,  could  only,  if  they
were  to  hold  land  at  all,  hold  it  in  absolute  private  ownership,  ex
iure  Quiritium.  And  thus,  it  is  argued,  private  ownership  of  land
originated  with  the  plebeians,  and  was  extended  to  the  populus  from


PRIVATE  AND  PUBLIC  LAW.  19

9  feeling  that  the  latter  ought  in  no  way  to  be  inferior  to  a  population
which  politically  lay  so  far  below  it.  Similarly,  emancipation,  as  a
form  of  escape  from  patria  potestas,  manumission  of  slaves  and  the
resulting  patronatus,  nexum,  and  manus  iniectio,  are  all  supposed  to
have  been  institutions  due  to  the  plebeian  development  of  private  law.

This  view,  however,  of  the  relation  of  public  and  private  law  in
early  Rome,  attractive  though  it  is,  and  though  very  widely  accepted^
has  not  passed  without  challenge.  By  its  chief  opponent^  the  earliest
character  of  the  Roman  law  is  explained  by  reference  to  another
principle,  that  of  the  *  subjective  wilV  or  mere  brute  force  and  indi-
vidual strength,  uncontrolled  by  any  state  organization  whatever.
'  Might  is  right '  is  the  first  principle  by  which  disputes  between. man
and  man  are  determined.  This  social  condition  is  followed  by  a
period  in  which  self-redress  is  no  longer  arbitrary,  but  is  regulated  by
minute  rules  sanctioned  by  custom';  and  eventually  the  stage  of
legal  history  is  reached  which  is  so  vividly  represented  to  us  in  the
'  legis  actio  sacramenti,'  disputes  being  referred  at  first  to  the  arbi-
tration of  a  'vir  pietate  gravis,'  though  a  private  individual,  and
subsequently  to  that  of  an  official  of  the  state.  The  question  thus
arises,  What  then  is  the  origin  of  the  state  ?  This  is  found  in  the
family  organization,  and  in  the  association  of  a  number  of  families
connected  by  real  or  fictitious  relationship  for  the  purpose  of  common
defence,  and  forming  an  aggregate  known  to  us  as  the  gens :  '  die
Gens  ist  eine  Familie  im  Grossen,  und  ein  Staat  im  Kleinen.'  The
individual  thus  precedes  the  family,  the  family  the  gens,  and  the
gens  the  state ;  and  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  '  subjective
principle'  the  state  is  based  upon  a  contract  or  quasi  contract,
whence  the  connection  of  the  terms  pax,  pactum,  pacisci.

To  those  who  hold  this  view,  private  law  appears,  in  origin,
entirely  independent  of  the  state.  '  The  plausibility  of  the  theory
(first  stated)  is  due  to  the  public  forms  in  which  private  law  at  first- is
clothed,  and  to  the  absence  of  opposition  between  the  different  parts
of  the  system.  It  is,  however,  just  those  forms  which  prove  that  the
state,  in  itself,  had  nothing  to  do  with  private  law ;  for  their  very
purpose  is  to  place  the  two  in  a  relation  to  one  another  which
previously  did  not  exist ;  and  that  absence  of  opposition  consists,  not
in  the  domination  of  private  law  by  the  state,  but  of  the  state  by


^  Ihering,  Geist  des  romischen  Rechts,  part  i.  bk.  i.  §§  9-19  :  'die  Aosgangs-
pancte  oder  die  Urelemente  des  romischen  Rechts.'
'  Maine,  Early  History  of  InsutatioDS,  p.  373.

c  a


20  INTRODUCTION.

private  law :  that  is  to  say,  the  state  is  constructed  on  private  law
principles.  The  evolution  of  private  law  out  of  the  state  would  be  a
contradiction  of  all  history'.'  Nor  is  the  force  of  this  argument  in
any  way  weakened  by  the  admitted  fact  that  the  principal  dispositions
known  to  early  Roman  law  were  effected  under  state  supervision
(p.  1 8,  supr.).  The  object  of  this  was  to  obtain  a  public  guarantee
for  the  rights  which  they  conferred:  a  citizen  who  disputed  such
rights  would  be  resisting  the  authority  of  the  whole  people.  And  it
is  conceivable  that  the  idea  of  law  backed  by  irresistible  force,  with
which  Austin  has  made  us  familiar,  and  which  is  peculiar  to  societies
in  which  the  judicature  is  and  has  long  been  organized  on  an  effective
system,  was  developed  out  of  this  expedient  of  defending  individual
rights,  through  the  medium  of  a  form,  by  the  collective  force  of  the
whole  community:  *das  Concrete  war  hier  wie  so  oft  in  der  Ge-
schichte  des  romischen  Rechts  die  Briicke  zum  Abstracten ;  aus  dem
Schutz  der  Rechte  entwickelte  sich  der  Schutz  des  Rechts.'

Like  so  many  other  irresponsible  rulers,  the  'decemviri  legibus
scribundis'  were  corrupted  by  the  taste  of  power  which  they  had
enjoyed;  so  much  did  they  relish  it  that  they  attempted  to  make
their  own  office  permanent,  and  to  revolutionise  the  form  of  govern-
ment by  substituting  themselves  entirely  for  the  consuls  and  tribunes.
Pretending  to  make  an  '  exaequatio  iuris '  the  main  object  of  their
policy,  they  set  to  work  to  attain  it  by  reactionary  measures ;  but  the
plebs,  whose  interests  were  mainly  threatened,  saw  through  the
design,  and  resorted  once  again  to  the  well-tried  stratagem  of  a
secession.  The  fall  of  the  decemviri  marks  an  important  epoch  in
the  history  of  that  order.  It  would  seem  that  the  concilia  plebis,
whose  frequent  convocation  we  have  seen  to  have  been  a  principal  con-
sequence of  the  institution  of  the  tribunate,  had  so  rapidly  gained
weight  that  by  a  lex  Publilia  of  471  b.c.  their  legality  was  recognised,
along  with  the  constitutional  right  of  the  tribunes  to  submit  resolu-
tions for  discussion  therein,  though  it  was  not  yet  admitted  that  such
resolutions,  when  carried,  were  of  binding  force  for  the  people  at
large.  The  voting  in  such  concilia  was  *tributim' — according  to
the  Servian  division  into  districts  or  parishes — so  that  it  can  hardly
be  doubted  that  a  patrician  who  chose  to  attend  with  others  who
belonged  to  the  same  local  tribe  as  himself  had  the  constitutional
right  to  do  so.  It  may  perhaps  be  conjectured  that  some  inclination
of  the  patricians  to  take  part  in  these  meetings,  added  to  the  valuable


^  Iheringy.p.  219.


THE  COMITIA   TRIBUTA.  21

assistance  which  the  plebeians  had  rendered  in  overthrowing  the
decemvirs,  led  to  the  passing  (b.c.  449)  of  a  statute  named  after  the
two  consuls  Valerius  and  Horatius,  by  which  it  was  provided  ^  *  ut
quod  tributim  plebs  iussisset  populum  teneret'  It  is  generally  ad-
mitted  that  in  consequence  of  this  enactment  the  plebeian  concilia
became  from  this  time  onward  a  regular  lawmaking  assembly,
comitia  tributa,  possessed  of  legislative  power  concurrent  with  the
comitia  centuriata,  though  their  resolutions  (plebiscita)  were  not  as
yet  binding  unless  confirmed  by  the  senate.  There  is,  however,  a
great  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  constitution  of  the  new  comitia.
Upon  one  view,  which  is  supported  by  Gaius  i.  3  (reproduced  in
Inst  L  2.  4),  it  consisted  always  of  plebeians  only :  upon  another,
every  citizen,  being  a  member  of  a  tribe,  was  necessarily  entitled  to
vote  in  it,  whether  plebeian  or  patrician.  It  must  be  confessed  that
the  latter  opinion  has  a  considerable  balance  of  textual  authority
against  it,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  may  be  argued  that  these  very
authorities  are  obscure  and  unintelligent  on  early  constitutional  his-
tory, and  that  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  so  absolute  a  legislative
power  could  have  belonged  to  only  one  portion  of  the  community,
even  though  it  were  one  whose  numbers,  wealth,  and  political  in-
fluence were  so  constantly  increasing.  It  seems  more  probable  there-
fore that  the  constituent  elements  of  the  two  comitia  were  identical,
the  difference  between  them  lying  in  the  fact  that  in  the  one  the
voting  was  by  centuries,  in  the  other  by  tribes :  and  the  language  of
the  historians  in  so  habitually  associating  the  plebs  with  the  latter
may  be  attributed  to  its  origin  and  earlier  history,  the  fact  mther
being  that  when  the  patricians  and  plebeians  had  ceased  to  be  in
constant  opposition  they  both  took  part  indifferently  in  the  proceed-
ings of  both  assemblies  \  By  a  second  lex  Valeria-Horatia  it  was
provided  that  in  future  no  new  magistrate  should  be  created  from
whose  decisions  there  should  be  no  appeal  (provocatio)  to  the  cen-
turies.

The  measures  by  which  the  coveted  *  exaequatio  iuris  *  was  finally
attained  require  a  brief  review.  The  lex  Canuleia  (B.a  445)  legiti-
mated connubium  between  patricians  and  plebeians,  and  by  uniting
the  members  of  the  two  orders  by  the  tie  of  blood  rapidly  paved  the


^  Livy  iii.  55  ;  Dionyi.  xi.  45.

'  This  riew  is  held  by  Mommsen,  Rom.  Forsch.  i.  pp.  154  sq. ;  Karlowa,  Rom.
Rechtsgeschichte,  i.  pp.  118  sq.;  Padeletti,  History  of  Roman  Law,  ch.  iv.  note  7  ;
and  Mnirhead,  Roman  Law,  p.  85.


22  INTRODUCTION.

way  for  the  other  enactments  which  at  length  welded  them  into
a  united  people,  with  identical  interests,  and  equal  one  with  another
in  the  eye  of  the  law.  Two  years  later  was  introduced  the  office
of  censor,  which  immediately  became  of  large  political  importance.
The  duty  of  making  out  the  lists  of  citizens  in  their  various  classes  of
course  involved  a  very  considerable  power  of  affecting  the  individual
in  his  political  rights ;  thus,  for  instance,  the  censors  were  privileged
to  exclude  a  man  from  the  senate,  to  deprive  an  eques  of  his  horse
and  rank,  or  to  remove  a  plebeian  from  his  tribe,  on  account  of
defects  not  only  of  legal  qualification  but  even  of  moral  character ;
while  as  moribus  praefecti  they  could  lower  his  position  in  the  eye  of
his  fellow-citizens  by  the  subscriptio  censoria,  or  mark  set  against  his
name  in  their  official  list — the  sure  indication  of  dishonesty  or  pro-
fligacy. Among  the^other  functions  through  which  they  gained  their
political  influence  may  be  enumerated  the  administration  of  the  public
revenues,  the  farming  of  the  customs,  and  the  making  of  all  contracts
for  public  works.

At  the  time  of  the  passing  of  the  lex  Canuleia,  the  plebeians  had
striven  hard  to  gain  access  to  the  consulship,  but  their  efforts  had
been  bafHed  by  the  patricians,  who,  however,  conceded  that  a  new
magistracy  should  be  established,  'tribuni  militum  consulari  potestate,'
to  relieve  the  consuls  of  some  of  their  duties,  and  to  this  new  office
members  of  the  plebs  were  to  be  eligible.  At  first  it  seems  to  have
been  frequently  held  by  plebeians,  but  by  degrees  the  patricians
succeeded  in  making  it  almost  as  exclusively  their  own  as  the  consul-
ship had  ever  been,  and  Livy  represents  (vi.  37)  a  tribune  of  the
plebs  as  saying  in  the  year  b.  c.  369  that  no  plebeian  had  attained  this
magistracy  for  forty-four  years.  Seven  years  before  that  date  C.  Licinius
Stolo  had  renewed  the  plebeian  agitation  for  admission  to  the  consul-
ship, and  in  B.C.  367  he  succeeded  in  procuring  a  statute  by  which
the  military  tribunesKip  was  abolished,  and  it  was  provided  that  one
at  least  of  the  consuls  should  be  chosen  from  the  plebs.  The  same
date  is  usually  assigned  to  the  introduction  of  the  praetorship,  an  office
which  seems  really  to  have  been  in  existence  for  some  time  previously,
and  of  which  more  will  be  said  hereafter.  The  praetor  was  charged
with  the  administration  of  civil  justice  and  the  general  management  of
domestic  affairs^  so  far  as  they  had  not  been  already  appropriated  to
existing  offices.  The  institution  of  the  curule  aedileship  belongs  to  the
same  period,  an  office  at  first  exclusively  patrician,  but  soon  thrown
open  to  the  plebeians  also ;  the  aedile's  functions,  which  at  first  re-
lated only  to  certain  affairs  peculiar  to  the  patrician  order,  such  as


LEGES  PUBLILIAE  AND  HORTENSIA,  23

the  games  of  the  great  festivals,  were  very  shortly  extended  to  all
matters,  whether  connected  with  the  public  health,  religion,  morality,
streets,  buildings,  or  security  of  person  and  property,  so  far  as  they
could  be  placed  under  the  control  of  police.

Besides  the  lex  Licinia  by  which  the  consulship  was  opened  to  the
plebs,  there  are  two  others  of  the  same  name,  which  were  due  to  the
energy  of  the  same  Licinius  Stolo.  Of  these  one  was  designed  to
relieve  embarrassed  debtors  by  striking  off  from  the  amount  of  their
principal  debts  the  sums  which  they  had  paid  as  interest,  and  by
allowing  them  an  interval  for  the  complete  satisfaction  of  their
creditors;  the  other  was  a  land  law  in  favour  of  small  holdings,
which  prohibited  even  the  richest  from  owning  more  than  five  hun-
dred jugera  of  arable  land,  or  putting  more  than  one  hundred  head  of
cattle  and  five  hundred  sheep  to  graze  upon  the  public  pastures.
Before  long,  too,  an  adequate  senatorial  representation  of  the  plebs
was  seciu-ed  by  the  lex  Ovinia  (circ.  350  B.C.),  which  directed  the
censors,  in  the  selection  of  the  senate,  to  choose  the  fittest  persons
without  distinction  of  order:  *.  .  .  donee  Ovinia  intervenit,  qua
sanctum  est  ut  censores  ex  omni  ordine  optimum  quemque  curiatim
(iurati,  Meier,  ex  coniectura)  in  senatum  legerent '  (Festus).  Magi-
strates of  curule  rank  (consuls,  praetors,  and  aediles)  were  members
of  the  senate  ex  tfficioy  and  retained  their  seats  even  at  the  end  of
their  year  of  office,  until  the  next  revision  of  that  body  by  the  cen-
sors, when  their  re-election  depended  on  the  view  which  those
magistrates  took  of  their  merits.

Further  provisions  relating  to  the  comitia  were  contained  in  the
leges  Publiliae,  which  were  passed  in  b.c.  339,  at  the  instance  of
Q.  Publilius  Philo,  a  plebeian  dictator.  One  of  them  appears  to
have  merely  re-stated  the  enactment  of  the  lex  Valeria-Horatia
respecting  plebiscita  ('ut  plebiscita  omnes  Quirites  tenerent'  Livy
viiL  12),  though  some  writers  are  of  opinion  that  its  true  object  was
to  do  the  same  for  plebiscita  as  another  law  of  Publilius  did  for
leges  passed  in  the  comitia  centuriata :  others,  that  it  made  plebiscita
binding  on  the  plebeians  apart  from  senatorial  confirmation.  But
the  statute  which  Gains  (i.  3)  and  Justinian  (Inst.  i.  2-4)  regard  as
having  placed  the  validity  of  plebiscita  above  all  doubt  was  a  lex
Hortensia,  passed  b.  c.  287.  The  language  in  which  Pliny  ^  and
Gellius'  describe  its  provisions  differs  little  from  that  used  of  the
leges  Valeria-Horatia  and  Publilia  by  Livy :  but  it  is  clear  that  it

*  Hirt.  Nat  xvi.  10.  *  xv.  27.


24  INTRODUCTION.

must  have  relieved  the  enactments  of  the  comitia  tributa  from  some
conditions  to  which  they  had  hitherto  been  subject,  and  it  is
generally  supposed  that  its  real  effect  was  to  dispense  them  from
the  necessity  of  any  confirmation  whatever  by  the  senate.  The
numbers  of  the  plebs  were  largely  augmented  b.c.  312,  when  Appius
Caecus,  the  censor,  distributed  among  the  tribes  a  great  mass  of
libertini,  a  term  which  at  this  epoch  denoted  the  freebom  descendants
of  a  manumitted  slave  ^  These  libertini  were  thus  enrolled  in  the
centuries,  and  possessed  very  considerable  influence  through  the
wealth  which  they  derived  from  their  almost  exclusive  control  of
Roman  handicrafts  and  commerce,  occupations  which  were  deemed
humiliating  and  derogatory  to  genuine  Quirites;  in  Rome  they
played  the  part,  and  exercised  the  influence,  though  in  a  far  less
degree,  which  with  us  are  connected  with  *  the  city.'  Eight  years
later  than  the  censorship  of  Appius  Caecus,  the  democratic  tendency
of  his  measure  was  to  some  degree  counteracted  by  the  new  censors,
Q.  Fabius  and  P.  Decius,  who  confined  the  *forensis  turba'  of
libertini  to  the  four  city  tribes,  and  thus  reduced  the  preponderance
which  the  lower  orders  had  acquired  in  the  two  important  comitia.
A  second  lex  Publilia  enacted  '  ut  legum  quae  comitiis  centuriatis
ferrentur  ante  initum  suffragium  patres  auctores  fierent : '  it  thus  at
first  sight  merely  reaffirmed  the  constitutional  doctrine,  that  no  bill
should  be  submitted  to  the  centuries,  with  a  view  to  its  becoming
law,  unless  it  had  been  previously  approved  by  the  senate ;  but  it  is
generally  supposed  to  have  deprived  the  patricians  of  the  power,
which  they  seem  to  have  exercised  before,  of  rejecting  laws  properly
passed  by  refusing  a  subsequent  ratification  by  the  senate.  In
future  the  senatorial  approval  was  required  to  be  given  in  all  cases
before  the  bill  was  referred  to  the  popular  vote.  It  is  clear  from
Cicero  that  in  his  time  the  Servian  centurial  constitution  had  under-
gone considerable  alterations,  effected  by  in  some  way  combining
tjie  centurial  organization  with  that  of  the  tribes.  The  two  comitia,
with  their  respective  functions,  still  remained  perfectly  distinct,  but
the  centuries  had  been  incorporated  with  the  tribes;  Cicero  (pro
Plane.  20)  expressly  speaks  of  them  as  thus  incorporated,  and  in
another  passage  alludes  to  the  votes  of  the  tribes  in  his  own  election
as  consul.  The  exact  date  of  this  change  is  uncertain.  Niebuhr
ascribes  it  to  the  censors  Fabius  and  Decius;  Mommsen  places  it
somewhat  earlier.     Its  motive  was  apparently  the  desire  to  reduce

'  Suetonius,  Claudius,  34.


THE  COMITIA   TRIBUTA  AND  CENTURIATA.        25

the  influence  of  moderate  fortunes  in  the  comitia,  and  to  exalt  that
of  birth,  landed  property,  and  military  rank.  The  proprietary
qualification  for  even  the  first  of  the  Servian  classes  had,  through  the
growing  prosperity  of  Rome,  ceased  to  be  the  measure  of  a  consider-
able fortune  or  even  the  index  of  social  respectability ;  thus  a  great
mass  of  the  lower  middle  class  had  found  its  way  into  a  body  which
Ser\ius  had  conceived  as  consisting  of  only  the  higher  or  richer
orders.  The  same  observation  may  be  made  of  the  second  and
succeeding  classes ;  the  social  position  of  the  members  of  this  or
that  class  had  altered  along  with  the  change  in  the  value  of  money,
and  the  relative  rank  in  the  state  of  those  who  composed  class  one,
and  who,  as  we  have  seen,  formed  a  political  force  of  overwhelming
influence,  had  fallen  in  proportion;  the  timocratic  constitution
remained  the  same,  while  money  had  come  to  be  worth  less;  the
result  being  a  complete  change  in  the  political  centre  of  gravity.
The  natural  remedy  seemed  to  be  to  give  up,  at  any  rate  partially,
the  timocratic  system,  to  diminish  the  number  of  the  centuries,
whereby  the  influence  of  the  equestrian  order  would  be  increased,
and  to  bring  them  into  a  subordinate  relation  with  the  tribes,  in
whose  assembly  the  political  preponderance  lay  rather  with  the
landed  proprietors.  These  at  least  appear  to  be  the  general  lines  of
the  reforming  policy.  Though  the  exact  changes  are  more  or  less
matter  of  conjecture,  the  best  theory  of  them  seems  to  be  that,
while  the  old  equestrian  centuries,  eighteen  in  number,  were  left
untouched,  those  of  the  five  Servian  classes  were  distributed  among
the  tribes  and  at  the  same  time  reduced  in  number,  there  being
fifty-four  centuries  in  the  rusticae,  eight  in  the  urbanae  tribus ;  so
that  the  whole  number  of  centuries  would  now  be  eighty.  The
classes  still  voted  in  their  old  order,  but  speaking  generally,  were,  so
far  as  related  to  the  comitia,  no  longer  determined  by  a  property
qualification.  The  right  of  a  citizen  to  vote  in  the  comitia  centuriata
depended  on  his  being  enrolled  in  a  tribe,  and  to  what  tribe  he
belonged  was  settled  by  the  censors.  By  the  year  B.C.  241,  the
number  of  tribes  had  by  successive  additions  been  raised  to  thirty-
five.

Of  the  two  comitia  which  we  have  just  been  considering,  the
comitia  tributa,  as  might  have  been  inferred  from  its  history,  con-
cerned itself  mainly  with  ordinary  domestic  legislation,  the  great
majority  of  enactments  which  relate  to  private  law  being  plebiscita  ;
the  leading  business  of  the  comitia  centuriata  was  the  election  of
magistrates  and  deliberation  on  high  political  matters.     After  the


26  INTRODUCTION.

latter  assembly  had  acquired  its  full  powers,  the  oldest  gathering  of
all,  the  comitia  curiata,  dropped  back  into  a  position  of  quite  secon-
dary importance,  and  its  right  of  independent  legislation  was  less  and
less  frequently  exercised.  The  functions  which  it  continued  to  dis-
charge were  the  approval  of  such  resolutions  of  the  centuries  as  by
inveterate  custom  required  a  religious  sanction,  and  of  other  legal
dispositions  which  were  deemed  incomplete  unless  confirmed  in  this
manner.  The  action  of  the  curiae  is  in  fact  implicated  with  that  of
the  pontifices,  to  whom  was  first  submitted  any  business  for  which  it
was  desired  to  obtain  the  legislative  sanction  of  this  comitia ;  for
instance,  the  form  of  adoption  known  as  adrogation,  and  the  lex
curiata  de  imperio,  by  which  the  higher  magistrates,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  censors,  were  invested  with  their  authority,  both  have  a
religious  significance.  It  is  not  known  how  long  the  patricians  con-
tinued to  attend  the  meetings  in  person;  far  before  Cicero's  time
they  were  merely  represented  by  thirty  lictors.

The  senate  apparently  did  not  exercise  any  purely  legislative
authority,  at  any  rate  in  respect  of  private  law,  till  the  last  century
B.  c.  Besides  its  important  function  of  discussing  all  matters  before
they  were  submitted  to  the  assembly  of  the  centuries,  which  indeed
could  not  be  so  submitted  at  all  without  a  senatorial  resolution  '  ut
de  ea  re  ad  populum  ferretur,'  it  exercised  a  considerable  influence  in
this  period  over  the  elections.  Originally  it  nominated  the  candi-
dates whose  names  the  consul  was  to  lay  before  the  comitia ;  when
the  plebeians  became  eligible  to  all  the  higher  magistracies,  this  right
fell  into  desuetude,  and  free  canvassing  became  the  rule.  But  the
senate  was  still  able  to  make  its  weight  felt  through  the  magistrate
who  conducted  the  elections ;  and  by  the  necessity  of  its  *  auctoritas  *
it  controlled  the  comitia  curiata,  whose  approval  of  the  choice  made
by  the  centuries  was  given,  as  has  just  been  observed,  by  the  lex
curiata  de  imperio.  Even  of  this  influence  the  senate  was  indirectly
deprived  by  a  lex  Maenia,  by  which  it  was  enacted  that  the  sena-
torial auctoritas  to  the  comitia  curiata  should  be  given  before  instead
of  after  the  assembly  of  the  centuries  in  which  the  magistrates  were
elected.

The  period  between  the  reform  of  the  comitia  centuriata  and  the
fall  of  the  Republic  produced  few  constitutional  changes  which  left
their  mark  on  private  law  or  on  the  form  of  direct  legislation.  The
gradual  extension  of  the  Roman  dominion  over  Italy,  and  then  even
beyond  its  confines  into  Gaul  and  Spain,  Greece,  Asia,  and  Africa,
resulted  in  a  constant  increase  in  the  value  of  the  Roman  civitas,  and


COLONIES— lUS  LATIL  27

in  a  perpetual  struggle  for  the  acquisition  of  it  and  the  privileges
which  it  conveyed  on  the  part  of  the  Italian  allies  of  the  city.  Their
rebellion  ninety  years  before  Christ,  and  the  legislation  (leges  lulia
and  Plautia  Papiria)  by  which  they  became  full  citizens  of  Rome,
are  too  well  known  to  need  repetition ;  but  the  political  weight  which
numerically  they  deserved  was  denied  them  by  their  not  being  fairly
distributed  among  the  thirty-five  existing  tribes,  but  probably  among
eight  of  them  only.  The  establishment,  however,  by  Rome  of  colonies
at  various  points  in  her  dominions  had  led  to  a  distinction  of  civil
rights  which  subsequently  became  of  some  prominence,  and  which
therefore  requires  a  brief  notice.  The  earliest  colonies  of  this  kind
consisted  of  Roman  citizens,  who  retained  their  full  rights  of  civitas
even  in  their  new  home.  Contrasted  with  them  are  what  are  called
'  coloniae  Latinae,'  by  which  we  should  understand  Roman  colonies
whose  members  enjoyed  only  the  ius  Latii  or  Latinitas.  These
coloniae  Latinae  were  of  two  kinds,  those  which  originated,  like  the
old  Roman  colonies,  in  the  actual  '  deductio '  or  leading  of  a  number
of  citizens  to  a  new  residence  amid  a  conquered  population,  which
was  thereby  to  be  awed  into  submission,  and  those  which  existed  as
townships  before,  but  received  the  character  of  Latin  colonies,  without
change  in  their  inhabitants,  by  statutory  enactment.  1  he  ius  Latii
comprised  certain  of  the  rights  enjoyed  by  a  full  Roman  citizen,  and
some  of  them  which  were  not  possessed  by  the  municipia  and  prae-
fecturae  in  various  parts  of  Italy  upon  which  Rome  had  conferred  a
limited  civitas.  The  inhabitants  of  a  municipium  or  praefectura  had,
before  the  leges  lulia  and  Plautia  Papiria,  no  political  rights  (suffra-
gium  and  honores),  nor  in  all  probability  had  they  the  connubium ;
but  they  had  the  commercium,  and  consequently  could  hold  property
and  make  contracts  and  wills  exactly  like  full  Roman  citizens.  The
chief  advantage  of  Latinitas  over  the  limited  civitas  of  a  municeps  was
that  if  a  citizen  of  a  Latin  colony  served  therein  the  office  of  a  superior
magistrate  he  thereby  acquired  the  full  citizenship  of  Rome  (Gaius
i.  96) ;  other  modes  were  subsequently  introduced  in  which  '  Latins '
could  become  perfect  Quirites,  and  this  capacity  of  rising  to  the
Roman  citizenship  is  the  distinctive  feature  of  the  ius  Latii  as  a  legal
status.  After  that,  by  the  leges  lulia  and  Plautia  Papiria,  the  Italian
allies  had  been  incorporated  with  the  Roman  people,  the  limited
rights  denoted  by  Latinitas  were  retained  as  a  kind  of  reward  which
could  be  bestowed  on  cities  or  districts  outside  Italy  which  had  de-
served well  of  Rome,  but  on  which  she  hesitated  to  confer  the  civitas;
it  was  thus  quite  clear  what  was  meant  by  a  '  Latin ' ;  it  was  no  longer


28  INTRODUCTION.

an  ethnical  or  geographical,  but  a  legal  term,  and  by  Latinitas  or  ius
Latii  was  understood  a  limited  citizenship,  which  in  certain  ways
might  be  converted  into  full  citizenship  of  Rome.  The  lex  lunia
Norbana  (a.d.  19)  enacted  that  slaves  who  had  received  their  liberty
in  some  other  way  than  by  one  of  the  three  civil  modes  of  manu-
mission (vindicta,  census,  testamentum),  and  who  had  hitherto  re-
mained legally  slaves,  though  protected  in  the  enjoyment  of  liberty
by  the  praetor,  should  possess  this  ius  Latii,  whence  they  were  called
Latini  luniani ;  but  the  lex  expressly  prohibited  them  from  making
a  will  (Ulp.  Reg.  20.  14;  Gaius  i.  22  sqq.)\

The  character  of  the  substantive  law  in  the  period  intervening  be-
tween the  final  constitution  of  the  state  and  the  fall  of  the  Republic
is  a  subject  important  because  it  involves  a  discussion  of  the  origin
and  nature  of  the  praetor's  indirect  power  of  legislation,  and  of  the
kindred  distinction  between  ius  civile  and  ius  gentium.  Ius  civile
is  one  of  the  two  contrasted  terms  in  two  celebrated  oppositions  of
Roman  law,  between  which  there  is  an  intimate  relation.  It  is  op-
posed, firstly,  to  ius  gentium  or  naturale  in  general,  and  in  this  con-
nection it  is  said  (Dig.  41.  i.  i.  pr.)  to  be  '  ius  proprium  civitatis
nostrae ; '  so  too  private  law  is  described  (Inst.  i.  i.  4)  as  tripertitum,
'collectum  est  enim  ex  naturalibus  praeceptis,  aut  gentium,  aut
civilibus.'  Secondly,  it  is  opposed  to  the  praetorian  law  which  was
based  on  and  drawn  from  the  ius  gentium :  '  ius  civile  est,  quod  ex
legibus,  plebiscitis,  senatus  consultis,  decretis  Principum,  auctoritate
prudentium  venit :  ius  praetorium  est,  quod  Praetores  introduxerunt
adiuvandi,  vel  supplendi,  vel  corrigendi  iuris  civilis  gratia'  (Dig.  i.
I.  7)',     The  proper  meaning  of  ius  civile  is  thus  the  peculiar  in-

^  Thus  in  the  time  of  the  classical  jurists  there  were  two  kinds  of  Latins :  (i)  the
Latinitas  of  the  Latini  coloniarii,  which  was  still  to  be  foond  in  some  cities  on
which  the  ius  Latii  had  been  conferred,  and  which  contained  the  commercium
without  any  limitation ;  (2)  Latinitas  acquired  by  manumission,  in  consequence  of
the  lex  lunia  Norbana,  of  which  there  were  four  varieties :  {a)  slaves  informally
manumitted,  {b)  slaves  manumitted  under  the  age  of  thirty  years  without  observ-
ance of  the  provisions  of  the  lex  Aelia  Sentia  (Gaius  i.  i8~2i),  {c)  slaves  manu-
mitted by  a  '  bonitary  *  owner,  or  by  a  true  owner,  while  they  were  the  subjects  of
a  usufruct  or  pledge,  (</)  the  descendants  of  libertini  whose  Latinitas  had  been  due
immediately  to  manumission.

'  Certain  deviations  frorh  this  most  common  use  of  the  first  of  the  contrasted
expressions  may  be  noticed,  (i)  In  some  passages  ius  civile  signifies  the  older
civil  law,  whatever  its  specific  source,  as  contrasted  with  later  enactments  which
either  {a)  partook  of  the  nature  of  ius  gentium  (thus  in  Gaius  ii.  197,  8,  it  is
opposed  to  the  SC.  Neronianum),  or  {b)  were  based  on  political  rather  than  on
purely  legal  considerations  (thus  in  Gaius  ii.  206,  and  Ulp.  Keg.  24.  12.  13  it  is


lUS  CIVILE  AND  GENTIUM.  29

digenous  law  of  Rome,  as  contrasted  either  with  the  whole  ius  gen-
tium, or  with  such  part  of  the  latter  as  was  taken  up  by  the  praetor
into  his  edict.  Its  sources  are  enumerated  in  a  passage  already  cited,
as  M^es,  plebiscita,  senatus  consulta,  decreta  principum,  auctoritas
prudentium.'  Only  the  first  two  of  these  are  of  practical  importance
until  the  establishment  of  the  empire,  but  all  are  explained  below  or
in  the  Commentary  on  Book  I.  Title  2.  Cicero  (Top.  5)  adds  to
these  sources  of  the  civil  law  three  others,  viz.  res  iudicatae,  mos
(cf.  Inst  i.  2.  9),  and  aequitas.  Usage,  as  a  source  of  positive  law,
will  be  treated  in  the  passage  of  the  Institutes  referred  to\  The
authority  of  precedents,  expressly  recognised  by  a  rescript  of  Severus,
was  established,  as  we  may  gather  from  Cicero,  at  a  far  earlier  period.
'  Nam  imperator  noster  Severus  rescripsit,  consuetudinem  aut  rerum
perpetuo  similiter  iudicatarum  auctoritatem  vim  legis  obtinere  de-
bere'  (Callistratus  in  Dig.  i.  3.  38).  By  res  iudicatae  in  Roman  law
are  to  be  understood  those  rules  of  customaiy  law  which  gained
acceptance  by  the  uniformity  of  their  judicial  application  to  individual
cases,  and  which,  according  to  Austin,  are  the  only  true  customary
law  whatsoever;  among  them  the  most  important  were  the  prae-
iudicia  of  the  centumviral  court.  Their  importance,  however,  as  a
source  of  law  is  so  trifling  that  neither  Gaius  nor  Justinian  mentions
them  ^ ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  points  of  difference
between  the  English  and  the  Roman  system,  which  Sir  Henry  Maine
explains  by  the  difference  in  their  early  history:  *The  theoretical
descent  of  Roman  jurisprudence  from  a  code,  the  theoretical  ascrip*
tion  of  English  law  to  immemorial  unwritten  tradition,  were  the  chief
reasons  why  the  development  of  their  system  differed  from  the  de-
velopment of  ours.'  By  *  aequitas '  Cicero  seems  to  have  meant  the
internal,  Uving,  intellectual  principle  which  is  an  element  in  all  law,
and  consequently  not  a  distinct  source  from  which  a  particular  kind
of  positive  law  is  generated ;  his  use  of  the  term  is  popular  rather
than  scientific.  Not  far  different  from  this  is  the  sense  which  it  bears
in  certain  passages  of  the  Digest  (e.g.  47.  4.  i.  i ;  16.  3.  31.  i)
as  equivalent  to  *  ratio,'  the  correspondence  between  a  legal  rule  or


opposed  to  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea).  (2)  It  is  sometimes  opposed  to  the  criminal
law  (e.g  Cicero  in  Verrem,  i.  42,  pro  Caecina  2).  (3)  In  Dig.  i.  2.  2.  5  and  12
it  is  used  to  denote  the  law  made  by  the  Roman  jnrists,  '  quod  sine  scripto  in  sola
pradentinm  interpretatione  consistit.'  (4)  It  sometimes  expresses  the  ius  Quiri-
tium  as  summed  up  in  the  Twelve  Tables.

^  Cf.  Holland,  Jurisprudence,  pp.  44-49.

'  See  CIark*s  Practical  Jurisprudence,  pp.  216-218.


30  INTRODUCTION.

institution  and  the  spirit  of  civil  or  natural  law.  In  other  passages
aequitas  denotes  {a)  the  agreement  between  rules  of  positive  law  and
the  natural  sense  of  right  (e.  g.  naturalis  aequitas,  Dig.  2.  14.  i  pr. ;
37.  5.  I  pr.),  {b)  the  decision  of  a  legal  question  with  special
reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case  (Dig.  44.  4  pr.),  or  {c)
equity  in  the  modern  sense,  i.  e.  mitigation  of  strict  law  in  accordance
with  a  higher  sense  of  justice  (e.  g.  Dig.  1.  3.  25 ;  4.  i.  7  pr. ;  15.  i.

The  ius  praetorium,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  was  contrasted
by  the  Roman  lawyers  with  the  ius  civile,  though  equally  with  it  a
part  of  the  positive  law  of  Rome,  originated  in  the  ius  edicendi
possessed  by  the  higher  magistrates.  The  distinction  between
magistratus  maiores  and  minores  was  connected  with  the  right  to
take  the  auspices ;  auspicia  maxima  might  be  taken  only  by  consuls
and  praetors,  on  whom  'iustum  imperium  auspiciumque  domi  et
militiae'  were  conferred  by  a  lex  curiata.  The  imperium  carried
with  it  also  the  ius  decemendi ;  a  magistrate  invested  with  imperium
had  the  right  of  issuing  a  decretum,  of  summoning  a  citizen  (vocatio)
to  appear  before  him  by  his  lictors,  of  enforcing  obedience  to  his
orders  by  the  strong  arm  of  the  law.  Some  of  the  magistratus
minores,  e.  g.  the  tribuni  plebis,  had  the  ius  prensionis,  the  right  of
arresting  persons  present  before  them  and  keeping  them  in  detention ;
others  had  neither  vocatio  nor  prensio.  The  praetor,  however,  who,
as  has  been  remarked,  was  the  supreme  judicial  magistrate,  and  who
by  means  of  his  ius  edicendi  was  enabled  to  gradually  develop  a
system  of  law  in  which  the  ius  civile  was  eventually  swallowed  up,
had  little  opportunity  of  modifying  existing  law,  still  less  of  introduc-
ing new  rules,  in  the  earliest  period  of  his  activity.  This  incapacity
arose  from  the  system  of  procedure  (legis  actiones)  sanctioned  by
the  Twelve  Tables  and  somewhat  expanded  by  later  legislation ;  the
forms  of  actions  were  rigidly  prescribed  by  statute,  and  the  magistrate
had  no  power  to  directly  alter  or  extend  them ;  from  the  forms  of
actions  only  could  a  citizen  deduce  the  rights  which  were  guaranteed
him  by  the  civil  law.  The  only  mode  in  which  the  praetor  could
enforce  a  legal  principle  not  contained  in  that  law  was  by  an
exercise  of  his  imperium ;  he  could  compel  a  party  to  enter  into  a
wager  (sponsio)  with  his  adversary,  and  the  fact  upon  which  the
wager  turned  could  then  be  decided  in  a  legis  actio.  This,  for
instance,  was  the  origin  of  the  possessory  interdicts,  and  thus  of  the
whole  law  of  possession  as  distinct  from  ownership.  But  the  praetor's
real  power  to  introduce  new  legal  principles  dates  from  the  lex


THE  EDICT  AND  lUS  HONORARIUM,  31

Aebutia*  which  (Gaius  iv.  30)  practically  superseded  the  l^is
actiones  in  the  majority  of  cases  by  a  new  form  of  procedure,  by
which  the  praetor  was  enabled  to  grant  actions  (actiones  honorariae)
not  based  on  the  civil  law.  He  did  this  at  first  mainly  by  the
employment  of  fictions ;  in  the  formula  in  which  he  indicated  to  the
iudex  the  issue  to  be  tried  he  referred  to  some  rule  of  law  already
established,  by  analogy  with  which  the  present  case  was  to  be
decided  (Gaius  iv.  32-38).  Subsequently,  becoming  bolder,  he
habitually  granted  actions  on  grounds  of  which  there  was  not  even  a
shadowy  recognition  in  the  civil  law,  and  the  whole  formula  con-
sequently contained  no  reference  to  rules  or  principles  which  the
law  had  established.

As  has  been  already  observed,  the  form  in  which  praetorian
changes  were  made  in  the  law  was  the  edict  The  higher  magistrates
of  Rome  had  always  possessed  the  ius  edicendi,  the  right  of  issuing
to  the  people  public  and  imperative  notices  on  matters  which  fell
within  their  jurisdiction  or  formed  part  of  their  official  business.
The  censors  issued  edicts  relating  to  a  coming  census ;  the  consuls
in  this  way  summoned  the  senate  and  the  comitia,  and  Plautus
speaks  of  edictiones  aediliciae  regulating  the  public  markets.  The
praetor,  as  invested  with  the  supreme  civil  jurisdiction,"  would
naturally  find  the  most  frequent  occasion  for  publishing  such  edicts,
and  it  became  usual  for  him,  at  the  commencement  of  his  year  of
office,  to  proclaim  in  this  manner  the  principles  which,  apart  from
the  established  rules  of  the  ius  civile,  he  intended  to  observe  in  the
administration  of  justice.  Such  proclamation  was  no  small  security
for  the  impartial  treatment  of  all  suitors,  and  saved  the  citizen  from
the  hardships  of  ex  post  facto  legislation ;  it  thus  became  a  con-
stitutional obligation  of  every  praetor,  on  taking  office,  to  state  the
general  rules  by  which,  as  chief  judicial  magistrate,  he  should  guide
himself  during  the  year.     This  edict,  which  he  issued  at  the  com-

^  The  date  of  the  lex  Aebutia  is  cnknown.  The  Aebatii  given  by  Pighius
(Annates  viii.  p.  98)  are  pronoonced  by  Voigt  to  be  apocryphal.  That  writer
axgnes,  upon  grounds  which  cannot  be  summarised  here,  that  the  statute  was
enacted  between  the  years  341-237  b.  c.  The  only  direct  evidence  on  the  point  is
a  passage  of  Poroponius,  in  Dig.  i.  a.  a.  7,  from  which  it  seems  clear  that  the  trial
of  actions  by  formula  existed  in  the  time  of  Sextus  Aelius  Paetus,  B.  c.  304 ;  see
Voigt,  Rom.  Rechtsgeschichte,  I,  Beilage  vi.  The  lex  Cornelia  (mentioned  below)
warrants  the  supposition  that  m  B.  c.  67  the  Praetor's  Edict  had  grown  to  consider-
able dimensions  ;  cf.  Cicero,  de Invent,  ii.  23  :  'in ea  autem  iura  sunt quaedam  ipsa
iam  certa  propter  vetustatem.  Quo  in  genere  et  alia  sunt  multa,  et  eorum  multo
maxima  pan,  quae  praetores  edioere  consuerunt.*


32  INTRODUCTION.

mencement  of  his  administration,  was  called  edictum  perpetuum,
because  the  practice  was  constant  and  unbroken,  and  was  contrasted
with  edicta  repentina,  isolated  orders  made  by  the  praetor  during
and  not  at  the  commencement  of  his  year  of  office,  and  generally,
though  not  always,  relating  to  some  specific  case.  The  distinction
between  edictum  perpetuum  and  edictum  repentinum  is  thus  not
identical  with  Austin's  distinction  between  law  and  particular
command,  for  edicta  repentina  not  uncommonly  enounced  a  rule  or
principle  of  law ;  for  instance,  the  edict  which  the  praetor  Atilius
(b.c.  213)  directed  against  the  encroachments  of  strange  religions,
though  a  Maw,'  was  yet  an  edictum  repentinum.  It  also  became
usual  for  each  successive  praetor  to  adopt,  in  substance,  the  edict  of
his  predecessor,  with  such  additions,  abrogations,  and  changes  as  he
deemed  expedient.  Such  part  of  his  edict  as  a  praetor  derived  from
that  of  his  predecessor  in  office  was  called  edictum  tralaticium.  It
was  owing  to  this  fact  that,  though  the  edict  of  each  individual
praetor  had  such  an  ephemeral  validity,  the  praetorian  law  was  at
once  so  stable  and  yet  so  elastic.  By  the  constant  accretion  of  new
rules  which  legal  development  and  increasing  commercial  activity
required,  the  edict  assumed  the  form  of  a  permanent  body  of  law,
which  had  the  advantage  of  the  ius  civile  in  the  ease  with  which  it
could  be  repealed,  altered,  or  extended,  and  which,  therefore,  apart
from  other  considerations,  recommended  itself  as  a  mode  of  legislation
in  many  ways  preferable  to  that  of  the  comitia.  It  must  indeed  be
remembered  that,  technically,  the  praetor  had  no  actual  legislative
power.  But  no  judge  could  hear  an  action  save  by  his  authority:
he  could  grant  an  action  where  none  lay  before :  by  the  introduction
of  exceptiones  he  admitted  defences  previously  unrecognised,  and
by  his  system  of  possessory  interdicts  he  created  proprietary  interests
entirely  strange  to  the  civil  law.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a
better  illustration  of  the  extent  to  which  one  having  the  control  of
the  courts,  and  of  the  forms  of  civil  procedure,  can  react  on  the
substantive  law.

The  danger  of  entrusting  to  the  caprice  of  a  single  individual  so
large  a  power  of  altering  the  law  will  strike  every  reader ;  but  it  had
two  very  efficient  safeguards.  One  of  these  was  a  strong  public  and
professional  opinion :  the  other  was  the  short  duration  of  the  praetor's
office.  If  one  praetor  ventured  on  innovations  which  were  not
approved  by  the  people  or  the  lawyer  class,  his  successor  could  easily
remove  his  obnoxious  additions  from  the  edict ;  for  a  year  they  would
be  binding,  but  beyond  that  they  had  not  necessarily  any  validity.


THE  PRAETOR  PEREGRINUS,  33

In  point  of  fact,  it  would  seem  that  each  praetor  framed  his  edict
after  careful  consultation  with  his  friends  learned  in  the  law,  and  that
changes  were  but  rarely  introduced  for  which  public  opinion  was  not
ready ;  the  fact,  already  noticed,  that  each  praetor  always  accepted
a  very  large  portion  of  the  edict  of  his  predecessor,  a  portion,  indeed,
which  every  year  grew  comparatively  larger,  as  every  year  made  the
edict  more  complete,  proves  that  tlie  Roman  praetors,  as  a  class,
were  the  best  of  conservatives.  Cicero  accuses  Verres  of  having
issued  *edicta  nova  in  re  vetere,'  and  altered  rules  for  which  the
constant  acceptance  of  his  predecessors  had  won  the  confidence  and
affection  of  the  people;  but  we  may  believe  that  Verres  had  few
imitators,  and  that,  as  a  general  rule,  both  parts  of  the  edictum  per-
petuum — the  part  which  was  old  and  the  part  which  was  new — were
alike  viewed  with  approval  by  the  mass  of  the  people.  Though,
however,  few  were  guilty  of  Verres'  breach  of  faith,  who,  according
to  Cicero  (in  Verr.  i.  46),  in  his  judicial  administration  sometimes
followed  a  course  the  very  opposite  of  that  which  in  his  edict  he  had
deliberately  stated  he  intended  to  take,  it  seems  that  in  the  last
century  of  the  Republic  it  became  very  usual  for  the  praetor  to  vary
the  rules  stated  in  his  edictum  perpetuum  by  subsidiary  edicts  issued
during  his  year  of  office.  This  violation  of  constitutional  usage
menaced  the  stability  of  the  law,  and  accordingly  was  made  illegal
by  a  lex  Cornelia  (b.c.  67),  'aliam  deinde  legem  Cornelius,  etsi  nemo
repugnare  ausus  est,  multis  tamen  invitis,  tulit,  ut  praetores  ex  edictis
suis  perpetuis  ius  dicerent  Quae  res  cunctam  gratiam  ambitiosis
praetoribus,  qui  varie  ius  dicere  solebant,  sustulit '  (Asconius  ad  Cic.
orat  pro  Comelio,  cf.  Dion  Cassius,  xxxvi.  23).

The  reference  to  Verres  seems  to  make  this  a  convenient  place  to
describe  how  the  number  of  praetors  was  increased,  and  to  point  out
the  bearing  of  this  on  the  development  of  Roman  law.  As  will  be
shortly  seen,  the  large  number  of  foreigners  who  established  them-
selves at  Rome  for  commercial  purposes  led  (b.c.  247)  to  the  ap-
pointment of  a  second  praetor,  called  the  praetor  peregrinus,  who
administered  justice  at  Rome  as  between  foreigners  or  foreigners  and
citizens.  This  praetor  also  issued  an  edictum  perpetuum  consisting,
as  will  be  shown,  of  rules  derived  from  what  was  known  as  the  ius
gentium,  a  general  law  applicable  to  the  Romans  and  to  all  people,
which  became  binding  for  Romans  inUr  se  by  being  imported  steadily,
though  gradually,  from  the  edict  of  the  praetor  peregrinus  into  that  of
the  praetor  urbanus.  The  former  edict  may  thus  be  regarded  as  an
almost  inexhaustible  reservoir  whence  the  praetor  urbanus  drew  those

D


3+  INTRODUCTION.

streams  of  ius  naturale  by  which  the  civil  law  of  Rome  was  expanded
and  liberalised.  When  the  territories  of  the  state  were  extended
beyond  the  limits  of  Italy  new  praetors  were  made.  Thus,  two  were
created,  B.C.  227,  for  the  administration  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  and  two
more  were  added  when  the  Spanish  provinces  were  formed,  B.C.  197.
Sulla  increased  the  number  from  six  to  eight,  which  Julius  Caesar  raised
successively  to  ten,  twelve,  fourteen,  and  sixteen.  Many  of  these,
and  also  the  consuls  after  their  year  of  office,  were  entrusted  with  the
government  of  a  province ;  usually  for  a  year,  though  the  time  was
often  prolonged.  Such  governors,  w^hether  proconsuls  or  propraetors,
were  invested  with  imperium  and  jurisdiction  within  the  limits  of
their  respective  provinces,  and  presided  there  as  completely  over  the
administration  of  civil  justice  as  did  the  praetor  urbanus  at  Rome.
Accordingly,  provincial  governors  naturally  adopted  the  practice  of
issuing,  at  the  commencement  of  their  term  of  office,  an  edictum
stating  the  rules  and  principles  which  they  should  observe  in  the
exercise  of  their  jurisdiction.  Hence  arose  a  number  of  edicta  pro-
vincialia,  which  we  should  have  supposed  consisted  partly  of  rules
of  the  ius  gentium,  partly  of  the  indigenous  law  of  the  provincial
population;  though,  on  the  analogy  of  the  edict  of  the  praetor
Urbanus,  the  latter  would  have  been  excluded.  Mr.  Long  *  says,
however,  that  they  were  founded  on  the  edictum  urbanum,  though
they  likewise  comprehended  rules  applicable  only  to  the  admini-
stration of  justice  in  the  provinces.  They  are  often  mentioned  by
Cicero,  who  says  (e.g.  in  his  letters  to  Atticus,  vi.  i)  that  he  pro-
mulgated in  his  province  two  edicta,  one  provinciale,  which,  among
other  matters,  contained  everything  that  related  to  the  publicani,  and
another,  to  which  he  gives  no  name,  relating  to  matters  of  which  he
'  says  *  ex  edicto  et  postulari  et  fieri  solent.'  As  to  all  the  rest  he  made
no  edict,  but  declared  that  he  would  frame  all  his  decreta  on  the
edicta  urbana.  The  provincial  edicts  may  thus  perhaps  be  regarded
as  in  some  way  serving  the  purposes  which,  for  the  generalisations  of
modem  social  science,  are  obtained  by  collections  of  statistics  in
various  parts  of  the  world.  The  edict  of  the  praetor  peregrinus  was
a  collection  of  legal  rules  which  were  found  to  be  observed  in
common  by  all  the  peoples  with  whom  Rome  was  acquainted ;  and
the  formulation  of  such  rules  would  be  facilitated,  and  their  number
largely  increased,  by  a  comparison  of  the  various  provincial  edicts.

*  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,  article  *  Edictum  ;  *  from
which  much  of  this  information  respecting  the  provincial  edict  has  been  obtained.


METHOD  OF  THE  PRAETORIAN  CHANGES.        35

The  institution  of  the  provinces,  and,  with  them,  of  the  edictum
provinciale,  must  have  given  a  great  impulse  to  the  development  of
the  edict  of  the  praetor  peregrinus;  through  the  medium  of  the
latter  they  were  brought  into  relation  with  the  edictum  urbanum.
We  do  not  know  whether  the  work  of  Ofilius,  referred  to  by
Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2,  was  an  attempt  to  collect  and  arrange
the  various  edicta;  but  we  shall  see  that  when  the  edict  was
systematised  by  Salvius  Julianus,  in  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  he  pro-
bably incorporated  in  it  some  portion  of  the  provincial  legislation
(see  p.  46  inf.).

The  activity  of  the  praetor  urbanus  in  this  mode  of  indirect  legisla-
tion was  due,  to  a  very  large  extent,  to  the  lex  Aebutia,  which  had  cast
upon  him  the  task  of  devising  and  elaborating  a  new  code  of  procedure,
and  thereby  enormously  increased  his  power  of  altering  and  extending
the  substantive  law.  But  it  was  also  due  in  no  small  degree  to  the
exclusiveness  of  the  Roman  legal  system,  and  to  the  consequent  ne-
cessity of  discovering  some  rules,  other  than  the  rules  of  the  ius  civile,
by  which  the  commercial  relations  between  Romans  and  peregrini
should  be  governed.  In  some  cases  these  were  settled  by  treaty',  by
which  it  was  agreed  that  legal  disputes  between  members  of  the  re-
spective states  should  be  decided  by  a  special  tribunal,  the  judges  of
which  were  called  recuperatores,  though  they  seem  always  to  have
been  citizens  of  the  state  in  which  the  court  lay  *.  So  far  the  arrange-
ment was  satisfactory,  and  in  many  respects  more  complete  than  might
have  been  expected  in  so  rude  an  age :  the  difficulty  was  as  to  the  law
which  the  recuperatores  were  to  apply.  This  could  not,  ex  vi  termini,
be  the  ius  civile ;  and  we  may  suppose  that  the  trading  peregrini  partly
adapted  themselves  to  Roman  legal  habits,  partly  introduced  a  con-
ventional code  based  on  their  own  mercantile  usages,  and  that  the
recuperatores  decided  each  case  as  it  came  before  them  on  evidence
of  the  terms  upon  which  the  contract  was  concluded,  and  with  refer-


^  The  oldest  example  of  such  a  treaty  is  that  concladed  between  Rome  and
Latinm,  b.  c.  493,  which  provided  that  actions  on  contract  between  Romans  and
Latins  should  be  decided,  after  ten  days'  interval,  in  the  locus  contractus,  by
recuperatores  appointed  by  the  local  magistrate.  The  term  was  connected  with
reciperatiOy  the  treaty :  reciperatio  est,  ut  ait  Gallus  Aelius,  cum  inter  populum
et  reges  nationesque  et  civitates  peregrinas  lex  convenit,  quomodo  per  recipera-
tores  reddantur  res  reciperenturque,  resqne  privatas  inter  se  persequantur  *  (Festus).

*  Many  writers  (e.g.  Huschke  and  Rudorff)  maintain  that  the  recuperatores
were  a  mixed  court  composed  of  citizens  of  both  states.  Keller  (Civil  Prozess,
p.  31)  is  unable  to  come  to  any  conclusion,  but  Bethmann-Hollweg  (Civil  Prozess,
§  25)  denies  that  there  is  any  evidence  in  favour  of  their  view.

D  2


36  INTRODUCTION.

ence  to  the  generally  accepted  commercial  custom.  The  trade  of
Rome,  however,  expanded  so  much  with  her  conquests,  and  the  deal-
ings between  citizens  and  allies  of  Rome  on  the  one  hand,  and  pere-
grini  on  the  other,  increased  so  largely  in  number  and  importance,
that,  if  only  to  relieve  the  praetor  urbanus  of  the  duty  of  appointing
recuperatores  upon  so  many  occasions,  it  was  found  necessary  to
establish  a  praetor  peregrinus  in  the  mode  already  described :  '  Post
aliquot  deinde  annos,  non  sufficiente  eo  Praetore,  quod  multa  turba
etiam  peregrinorum  in  civitatem  venirent,  creatus  est  et  alius  Praetor,
qui  peregrinus  appellatus  est  ab  eo,  quod  plerumque  inter  peregrinos
ius  dicebat '  (Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2.  28).  In  addition  to  cases
which  had  to  be  tried  by  recuperatores,  the  new  praetor  thus  dealt
with  suits  to  which  both  parties  were  peregrini,  and  for  the  hearing
and  decision  of  which  apparently  no  machinery  had  existed  at  Rome.
The  procedure  which  he  applied  was  probably  of  the  same  nature  as
that  which,  somewhat  later,  the  praetor  urbanus  adopted  after  the
enactment  of  the  lex  Aebutia.  Gaius  tells  us  that  the  action  rested
on  his  imperium  as  distinct  from  statutory  form  (iv.  103  sqq.),  and  we
may  suppose  that  he  first  heard  the  allegations  of  the  parties,  and
then  fixed  the  issue  to  be  tried  in  written  instructions,  which  were
delivered  to  the  recuperatores  or  to  the  single  iudex  whom  he  ap-
pointed, and  to  whom  the  decision  of  the  case  was  committed.

The  law  which,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  praetor
peregrinus,  these  judges  administered,  was  of  course,  in  origin,  the
same  which  the  recuperatores  had  always  applied  in  the  decision  of
actions  which  were  brought  before  them.  But  it  now  assumed
a  more  consistent  and  permanent  character  by  being  embodied  in
the  new  praetor's  edict.  Its  steady  growth  was  thus  assured,  no  less
than  through  the  activity  of  leading  citizens  themselves,  who  became
connected  with  foreign  towns  or  districts  in  the  Roman  dominions
by  the  tie  of  patron  and  client,  and  who,  in  this  relation,  took  a  lively
interest  in  the  development  of  this  new  branch  of  law.  The  mode
in  which  the  praetor  peregrinus  gradually  elaborated  a  tolerably
complete  body  of  rules  by  which  actions  between  citizens  and
foreigners,  or  foreigners  only,  should  be  decided,  has  been  variously
represented.  Sir  Henry  Maine  (Ancient  Law,  p.  48  sq.)  seems  to
adopt  the  view  of  those  who  hold  that  he  compared  the  usages  of
the  various  Italian  nations  with  whom  Rome  was  acquainted,  and  by
this  conscious  and  deliberate  process  collected  a  system  of  principles
which  the  majority  of  peregrini  engaged  in  commerce  on  Roman
territory  with  citizens  or  with  one  another,   would  recognise  as


ORIGIN  OF  THE  lUS  GENTIUM.  37

binding : '  naturalia  iura  quae  apud  omnes  gentes  peraeque  servantur '
(Inst  i.  2.  1 1).  But  this  seems  an  instance  of  the  common  error  of
ascribing  scientific  habits  to  a  prescientific  period,  and  the  eclectic
process  implies  a  mental  constitution  which  was  not  common  among
the  Romans.  It  is  true  that  this  view  is  not  unsupported  by  some
dicta  of  the  Roman  jurists  themselves;  but  these,  we  must  re-
member, wrote  at  a  time  when  the  treatment  of  law  had  passed
from  the  empirical  to  the  scientific  stage,  and  their  evidence  is
therefore  the  less  trustworthy.  It  would  seem  more  probable  that
this  body  of  law  originated  in  a  practical  necessity  \  which,  though
slight  at  first,  became  gradually  more  and  more  pressing,  and  that  it
grew  with  that  necessity,  its  development  being  accidental  and  due  to
circumstances,  though  effected  under  the  fostering  care  of  the  praetor
peregrinus;  rather  than  that  it  sprang  into  existence,  so  to  speak,
uno  ictu,  as  the  result  of  a  conscious  comparison  of  Italian  usages.
This  body  of  law,  however,  whatever  may  have  been  its  precise
origin,  was  what  the  Romans  knew  as  the  ius  gentium ;  a  collection
of  rules,  embodied  in  the  edict  of  the  praetor  peregrinus,  for  the
regulation  of  commercial  transactions  of  peregrini  at  Rome,  either
inter  se^  or  with  the  citizens  and  allies  of  the  Roman  state.  In  its
original  signification  it  is  the  law  which  Rome  applied  in  favour  of
the  *  gentes,'  the  non-Roman  peoples,  whose  members  sought  justice
at  the  hands  of  Roman  magistrates ;  a  law  not  binding  any  people
in  particular,  but  supposed  to  bind  all  people  in  general,  in  their
private  dealings  with  one  another.  As  such,  it  had  no  validity  for
Roman  citizens  inter  se ;  their  rights  and  obligations  were  determined,
in  relation  to  one  another,  by  the  ius  civile:  'Nam  quod  quisque
populus  ipse  sibi  ius  constituit,  id  ipsius  civitatis  proprium  est,  voca-
turque  ius  civile,  quasi  ius  proprium  ipsius  civitatis '  (Gaius  i.  i,  Inst-
i.  2.  i) :  and  we  have  already  seen  that  the  imtivile  was  a  law  based
on  the  religion  and  customs  of  the  race,  which  we  may  perhaps  believe
was  at  first  considered  far  higher  and  more  precious  than  the  ius  gen-
tium or  any  other  law  whatsoever,  and  which  accordingly  the  Romans
persistently  refused  to  extend  to  anyone  who  was  not  himself  a  citizen.
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  in  the  course  of  time  a  very  great
change  came  over  the  feelings  with  which  the  Romans,  and  especially
the  lawyer  class,  regarded  the  law  of  all  nations  in  contrast  with  their
own  indigenous  law.  Sir  Henry  Maine  (Ancient  Law,  p.  52  sq.)  has
fixed  the  date  of  this  change  as  contemporaneous  with  the  conquest

^  So  too  Mr.  Long,  Cicero^s  Orations,  voL  i.  p.  168.


38  INTRODUCTION.

of  Greece,  and  the  importation  of  the  Stoic  philosophy  to  Rome.
He  has  described  the  revolution  which  ensued  upon  the  wide
acceptance  of  that  philosophy  in  the  West,  and  more  particularly
from  the  ardour  with  which  the  lawyer  class  threw  themselves  into
its  study.     He  has  shown  how  its  leading  principle  was  life  accord-
ing to  the  law  which  nature  had  once,  in  a  far-off  age,  laid  down  for
the  governance  of  human  relations,  when  states,  and  therefore  civil
law,  had  not  begun  to  exist,  and  which  had  become  lost  and  forgotten
in  the  artificial  society  of  nations  which  prided  themselves  on  their
civilisation ;  how  the  Roman  lawyers  leapt  to  the  conclusion  that  the
ius  gentium,  with  its  universal  validity,  was  no  less  than  this  lost
code  of  nature,  and  how,  as  was  only  consistent,  they  transferred  to
it  all  the  affection  and  veneration  which  hitherto  they  had  bestowed
on  their  own  narrow  and  exclusive  municipal  law.     Attractive  as
this  theory  is,  it  is  submitted  that  it  cannot  be  received  without
some   qualification.      Greece   became  a  Roman  province  in  the
middle  of  the  second  century  before  Christ:  but  her  philosophies
were  as  yet  regarded  at  Rome  with  dislike  and  suspicion,  and  in'
B.C.  i6i  their  teachers  had  been  expelled  from  the  city.     Stoicism
was  first  raised  to  full  influence  in  the  higher  ranks  of  Roman  society
by  means  of  the  group  which  gathered  round  Scipio  Aemilianus,  who
died  B.  c.  129;  and  Quintus   Scaevola,   consul  b.  c.  95,  and  the
founder  of  scientific  jurisprudence,  was  one  of  its  earliest  eminent
disciples.      We  may  believe  that  from    the    last-mentioned    date
onward  its  doctrines  were  applied  to  the  development  of  law  with
consistency  and  success ;  but  it  still  remains  to  be  proved  that  the
Romans  did  not  begin  to  regard  the  ius  gentium  with  feelings  other
than  of  disdain  until  this  period.    The  edict  of  the  praetor  peregrinus
had  been  in  existence,  and  applied  to  citizens  in  their  relations  with
foreigners,  for  more  tHpi  a  century  and  a  half,  and  edicta  provincialia
had   been   issued  for  considerably  more  than  a  century;   and  we
cannot  believe,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the  praetor  urbanus  could
have  witnessed  the  continuous  growth  of  this  liberal  and  reasonable
system  of  law  without  having  adopted  portions  of  it  in  his  own  edict
during  the  second  century  b.  c,  while,  on  the  other,  it  is  impossible
that  this  could  have  been  done  without  the  approval  of  the  profession
and  of  the  nation.    Stoicism  then,  it  would  seem,  cannot  be  credited
with  having  been  the  original  and  entire  cause  of  the  change  in  the
feelings  with  which  the  Romans  regarded  the  ius  gentium  \     On  the


^  A  friendly  reviewer  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work  in  the  *  Times '  of  Sept.  8,


STOICISM  AND  THE  lUS  NATURALE.  39

other  hand,  it  is  probably  true  that,  after  the  time  of  Scaevola,  the
improvements  in  the  law,  in  respect  not  only  of  internal  development,
but  also  'of  scientific  treatment,  were  due  in  a  very  large  degree  to
the  alliance  between  the  lawyers  and  the  Stoa.  The  identification
of  the  ius  gentium  with  the  law  of  nature  was  not  universally  ad<
mitted  till  the  age  of  the  classical  jurists,  among  whom  we  find  one
so  eminent  even  as  Ulpian  attempting  to  distinguish  them  \  But
we  cannot  overestimate  the  effect  which  the  Stoic  philosophy  had
upon  legal  method.  Scaevola,  the  first  great  lawyer  of  the  School,
was  also  the  first  Roman  who  wrote  a  systematic  legal  treatise ;  and
it  is  to  the  habits  of  thought  which  the  profession  acquired  with  its
tenets  that  we  should  ascribe  not  only  the  systematic  classification,
the  mapping  out  of  the  field  of  private  law  bequeathed  to  us  by
Gains,  but  also  the  wealth  of  Roman  law  in  legal  principles,  and  the
admirable  logic  of  their  subordination  and  interconnection  ^

1883,  criticised  this  page  as  an  unintentional  misrepresentation  of  Sir  H.  Maine,
bat  on  a  carefal  repemsal  of  the  third  chapter  of '  Ancient  Law  *  the  writer  can  see
no  reason  for  changing  his  statement  of  the  author's  view.  The  following  citations
may  be  useful.  '  This  crisis  (at  which  the  Romans  altered  their  attitude  towards
the  ins  gentium)  arrived  when  the  Greek  theory  of  a  Law  of  Nature  was  applied  to
the  practical  Roman  administration  of  the  law  common  to  all  nations*  (p.  5  a).  '  It
is  notorious  that  this  proposition — ^live  according  to  nature — was  the  sum  of  the
tenets  of  the  famous  Stoic  philosophy.  Now  on  the  subjugation  of  Greece  that
philosophy  made  instantaneous  progress  in  Roman  society '  (p.  54).  *■  In  the  front
of  the  disciples  of  the  new  Greek  school,  we  might  be  sure,  even  if  we  did  not  know
it  historically,  that  the  Roman  lawyers  figured. .  .  .  The  alliance  of  the  lawyers  with
the  Stoic  philosophy  lasted  through  many  centuries '  (p.  55).

^  The  position  of  ius  naturale  in  the  legal  system,  as  compared  with  ius  gentium,
is  not  precisely  determined  in  the  passages  of  the  Corpus  luris  which  relate  to  it.
Sometimes,  and  indeed  most  frequently,  they  are  used  as  synonymous  (e.g.  Inst.  ii.
I.  II,  where  they  are  identified) ;  and  where  this  is  so,  the  expression  ius  naturale
refers  to  its  assumed  origin,  and  to  the  accord  of  certain  legal  principles  with  the
needs  and  requirements  of  the  reasonable  nature  of  man.  It  is  this  'naturalis
ratio  *  which  furnishes  the  raw  material  of  the  ius  naturale,  and  from  which  the
latter  derives  its  universal  validity ;  as  reason  is  man's  '  differentia,*  ius  naturale  must
be  valid  wherever  man  is  to  be  found,  and  therefore  is  coextensive  with  ius  gentium.
Sometimes,  however,  a  narrower  signification  is  given  to  ius  naturale,  and  it  is
used  to  indicate  the  aggregate  of  those  institutions  of  Roman  law  which  were
deemed  to  be  based  not  so  much  on  the  intellectual  as  on  the  moral  side  of  human
nature,  or  to  a  certain  extent  on  an  instinct  shared  with  man  by  the  lower  animals.
This  is  the  sense  which  the  expression  bears  in  Inst.  i.  a.  pr.  (on  which  see  note),
where  it  is  distinguished  from  ius  gentium,  and  in  Ulpian  in  Dig.  i.  i.  i.  4'  ius
gentium  est  quo  gentes  humanae  utuntur.  Quod  a  naturali  recedere,  facile  in-
telligere  licet,  quia  illud  omnibus  animalibus,  illud  solb  hominibus  inter  se  com-
mune sit.'  But  in  other  passages  of  the  Institutes,  as  has  been  observed,  the  two
are  identified.

'  See  Zeller's  Stoics,  Epicureans,  and  Sceptics,  ch.  iv.


40  INTRODUCTION.

It  was  in  some  such  way  as  this  that  the  Romans  came  to  recognise
in  the  ius  naturale  or  ius  gentium  a  universal  law  binding  on  them-
selves, and  to  say  of  it,  as  Cicero  does  (de  Offic.  iii.  17  ,  *  quod  civile
non  idem  continuo  gentium,  quod  autem  gentium,  idem  civile  (i.e.
civium)  esse  debet.'  Notwithstanding,  however,  the  fact  that  the  ius
gentium  was  constantly  being  absorbed  into  the  system  through  the
edict  of  the  praetor  urbanus,  the  ius  civile  still  retained  its  peculiari-
ties ;  the  streams  of  the  two  did  not  intermingle,  so  that  the  contrast
between  civil  and  praetorian  law  from  this  time  onward  becomes  em-
phasised. The  result  was  very  similar  to  that  which  ensued  upon  the
incorporation  of  the  plebs  in  the  Roman  state,  namely,  a  duplication
of  institutions.  Whether  it  be  in  the  domain  of  the  family,  of  property,
or  of  obligations,  the  legal  institutions  of  Rome  are  henceforward
found  to  a  large  degree  in  duplicate,  institutions  of  the  ius  gentium
existing  side  by  side  with  institutions  of  the  ius  civile.  The  thorough-
ness of  this  is  perhaps  best  attested  by  the  prominence,  in  all  depart-
ments of  the  code,  of  the  opposition  between  '  the  natural '  and  '  the
civil'  Thus,  the  conditions  of  marriage  depend  upon  either  civilis  or
naturalis  ratio  (Inst.  i.  10  pr.) :  there  is  a  natural  as  distinct  from  a
civil  relationship,  and  the  history  of  the  law  of  intestate  succession  is
merely  the  history  of  the  substitution  of  the  former  title  for  the  latter
by  equity,  as  represented  first  by  the  praetor,  and  later  by  the  imperial
legislation ;  there  are  both  natural  and  civil  modes  of  acquisition  in
the  two  fields  of  ownership  and  obligation ;  there  is  natural  as  well  as
civil  possession,  natural  as  well  as  civil  obligation.

In  many  cases  the  rules  of  the  edict  differed  in  form  only  firom  those
of  the  civil  law ;  in  substance  they  were  the  same.  But  the  vast  ma-
jority of  them  are  distinct  in  kind  as  well  as  in  form ;  they  have  none  of
the  peculiarities  of  the  civil  law — formality,  exclusiveness,  rigidity ;  they
are  liberal,  equitable,  fitted  to  endure  through  all  time ;  and  these  are
based  upon  the  ius  gentium,  or  rather  upon  the  natural  sense  of  right,
the  naturalis  aequitas,  in  which  the  Romans  recognised  that  law's
internal  and  generative  principle.  The  ius  gentium  and  the  ius  hono-
rarium or  praetorium  (for  practical  purposes  the  expressions  are
nearly  synonymous)  thus  require  to  be  distinguished,  and  their  relation
to  one  another  ascertained.  The  distinction  of  ius  civile  and  ius
honorarium  is  based  on  the  difference  of  the  organs  to  whose  activity
they  respectively  owed  their  existence ;  that  of  ius  civile  and  ius  gen-
tium on  differences  of  nature  and  of  extension.  The  two  would  have
corresponded  exactly  if  the  whole  ius  gentium  had  been  taken  up  into
the  urban  edict,  and  the  latter  had  contained  no  other  law  whatsoever;


lUS  GENTIUM  AND  THE  EDICT.  41

but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  though  there  is  a  very  intimate  relation  between
them,  rules  could  and  did  belong  to  the  one  without  also  belonging  to
the  other.  Still,  the  most  important  portion  of  the  rules  enunciated
in  the  edict  can  be  traced  to  the  ius  gentium,  which  indeed  was  the
element  in  it  which  gave  it  such  an  honourable  prominence  among  the
sources  of  the  positive  law  of  Rome.  Hence  the  common  opposition,
to  which  attention  has  been  already  drawn,  between  the  ius  praeto-
rium  and  the  ius  civile.  Yet  not  unfrequently  the  former  is  reckoned
part  of  the  latter,  or  rather  the  edicta  magistratuum  are  enumerated
among  its  sources  (e.  g.  Cic.  Top.  5),  though  it  is  far  more  usual  to
find  them  contrasted  (as  in  Dig.  28.  i.  23  'testamentum  utroque
iure  valebit,  tam  civili  quam  praetorio ').  The  contrast  was  in  part
a  material  one ;  the  civil  law  was  *  proprium  civitatis  nostrae/  whereas
the  greater  part  of  the  ius  praetorium  was  derived  from  the  ius  gen-
tium, and  therefore  its  validity  extended  itself  beyond  the  limits  of  the
Roman  state  into  all  nations  which  were  under  the  rule  of  law.  But
in  part,  as  has  been  remarked  above,  it  arose  from  the  difference  of
the  organs  through  which  the  civil  and  the  praetorian  law  respectively
came  into  existence.  A  rule  of  the  ius  praetorium  had  no  validity
other  than  that  which  could  be  given  it  by  the  praetor  by  whom  it
was  issued ;  it  did  not  bind  his  successors  or  even  his  official  col-
leagues ;  its  force  was  far  less,  both  in  duration  and  in  universality,
than  that  of  a  lex  enacted  by  the  sovereign  populus.  Rights  conferred
in  the  latter  way  were  necessarily  protected  by  the  praetor  at  all  times,
but  they  existed  apart  from  and  independentiy  of  him ;  rights  con-
ferred by  the  edict  depended  purely  and  simply  on  his  good  faith ;
thus  (Dig.  7.  4,  i)  *  usus  fructus  iure  constitutus '  is  opposed  to  *  usus
fructus  tuitione  praetoris  constitutus;'  and  it  was  through  this  formally
ephemeral  character  of  the  ius  praetorium  that  the  ius  civile  always
preserved  its  distinctness  and  its  separate  existence.

The  connection  which  we  have  sketched  between  the  ius  gentium
and  the  edicts  of  the  praetors,  though  maintained  by  perhaps  the
majority  of  writers  on  Roman  law,  is  entirely  a  matter  of  inference,
and  there  are  distinguished  authorities  by  whom  it  is  entirely  denied.
That  there  was  a  special  praetor  to  adjudicate  upon  causes  in  which
either  party  was  an  alien  is  too  well  proved  by  the  evidence  of
Pomponius,  Gaius,  and  others,  to  need  further  demonstration,  and
that  he  had  an  edict  distinct  from  that  of  the  praetor  urbanus,
though  disputed  by  some  writers ',  is  clearly  stated  by  Gaius  himself

^  £.  g.  Clark,  Practical  Jurispnidenoe,  p.  549.


42  INTRODUCTION,

(i.  6).  The  existence  of  the  second  edict  is  convincing  evidence
that  the  law  administered  in  suits  between  aliens,  or  between  aliens
and  citizens,  was  fundamentally  different  from  that  administered  by
the  praetor  urbanus :  and  in  believing  this  there  should  be  no  diffi-
culty, for  we  know  that  aliens  were  never  permitted  to  take  part  in
the  forms  and  dispositions  of  the  civil  law\  such  as  sponsio,  legis  actio,
testamentum,  mancipatio,  expensilatio,  and  in  b.c.  247  the  Roman
law  relating  to  nearly  all  matters  upon  which  litigation  was  likely  to
arise  before  the  praetor  peregrinus  was  purely  'civil.*  Upon  any
other  hypothesis  than  that  which  has  been  adopted  it  is  extremely
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  understand  how  the  notion  of  a  ius
gentium  exercised  such  an  extraordinary  influence  upon  the  Roman
legal  mind :  it  would  seem  to  have  been  a  living  reality,  always
present  in  actual  manifestation  before  their  eyes.  Perhaps  a  solution
of  the  difficulty  of  deciding  between  the  two  conflicting  theories'  will
be  found  in  the  belief  that  the  expression  '  ius  gentium '  somewhat
changed  its  meaning  between  the  earlier  and  the  later  period  of
Roman  legal  history.  By  the  earlier  Romans  it  was  doubtless  con-
ceived as  an  historical  fact :  as  a  body  of  rules  (e.  g.  those  relating  to
most  of  the  modes  of  acquisition  subsequently  known  as  '  natural,'
and  to  some  of  the  more  common  subjects  of  contract)  actually
recognised  not  only  in  the  law  of  Rome  itself,  but  also  in  that  of  the
surrounding  Italian  tribes,  and  possibly  among  even  more  distant
peoples '.  The  stage  in  which  other  rules  and  practices  attributed  to
the  ius  gentium  are  applied  by  the  praetor  peregrinus  in  determining

*  Cicero,  Top.  a.

■  Voigt  and  Karlowa  may  be  taken  as  respectively  their  most  eminent  modem
exponents.  The  learning  and  research  of  the  former  make  bis  opinion  on  this
matter,  to  which  he  has  devoted  years  of  study,  particularly  valuable.  He  is
followed,  among  more  recent  writers,  by  Sohm,  Institutionen,  and  edition  (1886),
p.  48  (pp.  53,  54,  in  the  English  translation  by  J.  C.  Ledlie).

•  See  an  article  on  the  subject  by  Prof.  H.  Nettleship  in  the  Journal  of  Philology,
xxvi.  pp.  169-182.  After  a  careful  review  of  all  the  passages  in  which  the  expres-
sion occurs,  in  non-legal  as  well  as  in  legal  writers,  he  comes  to  the  conclusion  that
ins  gentium  meant '  the  usage  of  the  world,  of  all  mankind,  and  that  it  was  in  all
probability  first  employed  as  a  quasi-technical  expression  by  the  lawyers  of  the
second  century  B.  c,  Cicero's  maiores  (de  Off.  iii.  69).  They  originally  intended
to  express  by  it  such  customs  or  usages  as  the  Romans  found,  in  the  experience
which  they  would  pick  up  away  from  Italy  in  war  or  commerce  or  travel,  or  in  their
intercourse  with  peregrini  in  Italy  itself,  to  be  universally  observed.  These  usages
would  naturally  be  connected  in  the  main  with  war  or  commerce,  and  thus  ius
gentium,  when  the  terra  is  applied  to  the  dealings  of  Romans  with  foreigners,  is
u?ed  mostly  of  the  laws  of  war  and  of  transactions  involved  in  a  state  of  war,  or  of
commerce  or  transactions  connected  with  it,  such  as  obligationes  of  various  kinds.'


FOUNDATION  OF  THE  EMPIRE,  43

suits  between  aliens,  but  without  having  become  part  and  parcel  of
the  law  of  Rome,  is  an  intermediate  one ;  but  when  the  ius  gentium
came  to  be  identified  with  the  ius  naturale,  it  became  a  philosophical
ideal,  a  system  in  the  clouds,  with  no  historical  basis,  but — ^as  an
ideal — infinitely  valuable.

The  political  changes  which  took  place  in  the  years  immediately
succeeding  the  death  of  Julius  Caesar  are  not  unfrequently  misunder-
stood. It  has  been  usual  to  speak  of  'the  establishment  of  the
empire,'  and  thence  to  infer  that  the  form  of  constitution  was  revolu-
tionised, and  an  open  despotism  suddenly  substituted  for  the  free
Republic  with  which  the  Romans  had  now  for  centuries  been  familiar.
The  real  fact  is  that  formally  the  constitution  remained  republican
under  and  even  long  after  Augustus ;  the  only  outward  change  has
been  not  inappropriately  described  as  the  addition  to  the  old  magis-
tracies of  a  new  one,  which  was  held  for  life,  and  whose  holder  was
invested  with  an  authority  far  larger,  because  more  compact,  than  that
of  all  the  old  magistrates  together.  On  Augustus  was  conferred,
sometimes  for  life,  sometimes  for  shorter  periods,  but  always  to  be
renewed,  the  tribunicia  potestas,  the  proconsulare  imperium,  the  prae-
fectura  morum,  the  supreme  pontificate,  and  in  fact  all  the  highest
offices  of  state :  but  in  each  of  these  capacities  he  acted  merely  as
a  magistrate  of  the  Republic,  whose  outward  forms  he  was  studious
to  observe.  Hence,  according  to  the  theory  of  the  constitution,  the
supreme  power  continued  to  reside  in  the  populus  Roman  us,  and  was
exercised,  as  before,  in  the  two  comitia  for  elective  and  legislative
purposes.  Augustus  himself  voted  amongst  the  tribes  like  any  other
citizen,  and  the  theoretical  sovereignty  of  the  people  remained  intact
until  the  accession  of  Constantine.

The  legislation  of  the  early  empire  accordingly  proceeded  at  first  in
the  same  manner  as  it  had  been  accustomed.  Leges  are  still  enacted
in  the  comitia,  though  usually  introduced  by  the  emperor  in  person,
and  if  by  some  other  magistrate,  always  with  his  sanction ;  for  his
tribunicia  potestas  enabled  him  to  veto  any  project  which  did  not
meet  with  his  approval.  Gaius,  who  belongs  to  the  middle  of  the
second  century,  speaks  of  this  form  of  enactment  as  still  potentially
subsisting :  *  lex  est,  quod  populus  iubet  atque  constituit '  (i.  3).  But
in  fact  comitial  legislation  had  received  its  death  blow  from  the
extension  of  the  franchise  to  the  Italians  some  sixty  years  before  the
battle  of  Actium  made  Augustus  the  sole  ruler  of  Rome :  and  though
we  read  *  of  an  agrarian  law  passed  under  Nerva  (a.  d.  96-98),  it  may

*  Dig.  47.  31.  3. 1.


44  INTRODUCTION.

be  doubted  whether  this  was  a  lex  rogata,  and  it  is  more  probable
that  statutes  enacted  by  the  whole  populus  came  to  an  end  half
a  century  earlier.  The  legislative  authority  of  the  senate  endured
longer.  This  had  originated  partly  in  its  old  probouleutic  functions,
partly  in  its  relation  to  the  administration.  In  connection  with  the
latter,  it  would  seem  that  even  under  the  Republic  its  rights  had
practically  been  admitted  of  regulating  the  government  of  the
provinces,  maintaining  religion,  suspending  or  repealing  laws  in  cases
of  urgent  public  necessity,  guarding  the  privil^es  of  the  aerarium
and  the  publicani,  and  superintending  the  treatment  of  the  Italians
and  provincials;  upon  all  of  which  matters  it  was  in  the  habit  of
making  consulta  to  which  it  required  general  obedience.  Its  legis-
lation was  thus  at  first  confined  to  public  matters ;  the  earliest  senatus
consultum  which  we  know  is  that  de  Bacchanalibus  (b.c.  i86),
discovered  on  bronze  in  Calabria  in  1640.  But  the  party  of  the
optimates  had  regarded  the  senate  as  the  fundamental  element  of
the  state,  of  co-ordinate  authority  with  the  populus,  and  had  there-
fore maintained  that  its  resolutions  ought  in  all  cases  to  have  equal
validity  with  leges ;  thus  Cicero  enumerates  senatus  consulta  among
the  sources  of  ius  civile,  and  says  of  the  senate  (de  Leg.  iii.  3.  12)
*  eius  decreta  rata  sunto.'  The  claim  was  constantly  resisted  by  the
populares,  though  supported  by  usage;  nevertheless  the  senatorial
legislation  by  degrees  extended  itself  to  matters  of  private  law,
though  but  little  of  it  relating  to  this  is  found  in  the  pre-imperial
period.  That  senatus  consulta  under  the  early  empire  gradually
superseded  leges  is  attributed  by  Justinian  after  Pomponius  (Dig.  i,
2.  2)  to  the  extension  of  the  suffrage,  and  the  consequent  unwieldi-
ness  of  the  comitia :  '  Nam  cum  auctus  esset  populus  Romanus  in
eum  modum  ut  difficile  esset  in  unum  eum  convocari  legis  sancien-
dae  causa,  aequum  visum  est  senatum  vice  populi  consuli'  (Inst,
i.  2.  5).  Under  Augustus,  and  still  more  under  his  successors,  it
became  so  usual  to  ascribe  the  force  of  law  to  senatus  consulta
without  sending  them  on  to  the  comitia,  that  at  length  they  actually
acquired  the  title  of  leges  (e.  g.  Gains  i.  83-86) ;  similarly,  the  name
comitia  was  commonly  given  to  the  sittings  of  the  senate  (Tacitus,
Ann.  i.  15,  Capitol.  Marc.  10).  The  transference  of  legislative
authority  from  populus  to  senate  is  indicated  by  the  practice  of
naming  senatus  consulta,  like  leges,  after  their  proposers ;  but  this
was  not  invariable :  for  instance,  the  SC.  Macedonianum  seems  from
Dig.  14.  6.  I  to  have  received  its  title  from  an  unscrupulous  usurer
called  Macedo,  though  Theophilus  says  that  Macedo  was  the  bor-


THE  SENATE  AND   THE  EMPEROR,  45

rower.  Most  of  the  senatus  consulta  relating  to  private  law  fall
between  Claudius  (a.d.  41)  and  Septimius  Severus  (a.d.  193-211);
none  occur  after  the  last-named  emperor.  Like  leges  in  this  period,
they  always  owed  their  introduction  to  the  imperial  will,  though
usually  proposed  by  a  consul ;  in  effect,  they  were  laws  made  by  the
emperor,  though  under  observance  of  republican  forms.

The  emperor,  however,  possessed  the  right  of  making  laws  directly,
without  reference  to  either  senate  or  comitia.  This  right  had  not  be-
longed to  Augustus  and  his  immediate  successors ;  as  magistrates  of
the  Republic  they  could  issue  edicts,  which  had  a  greater  validity  than
those  of  the  old  annual  magistrates,  because  they  held  office  for  life :
but  in  theory  their  force  died  with  them.  Thus,  Dion  Cassius  (Ivi.  28)
mentions  a  lex  of  a.d.  12,  by  which  it  was  provided  that  resolutions
arrived  at  by  Augustus  with  the  advice  of  his  council  should  have  the
force  of  a  senatus .  consultum.  The  authority  which  Augustus  pos-
sessed in  virtue  of  his  various  offices  was  conferred  on  his  successors
by  separate  leges ;  later,  the  emperor  was  invested  with  his  powers
uno  ictu,  by  a  lex  de  imperio,  after  the  analogy  of  the  lex  curiata  of
the  early  l^al  period,  which  also  gave  his  enactments  the  force  of
statutes  (Gaius  i.  5)  and  released  him  from  the  control  of  the  laws
(Dion  Cassius,  liii.  18.  28).  This  lex  de  imperio  is  in  Inst.  i.  2.  6
and  other  passages  of  the  Corpus  luris  called  lex  regia,  but  it  was
probably  never  so  entitled  before  the  third  century,  when  to  avoid  the
comparison  between  rex  and  imperator  would  have  been  mere  affec-
tation. An  important  fragment  of  the  lex  de  imperio  of  Vespasian
(a.  d.  69)  is  extant ;  it  empowers  the  emperor  to  conclude  alliances,
procure  senatus  consulta,  nominate  the  magistrates,  extend  the  po-
moerium,  and  issue  enactments  with  the  force  of  law.  And  so  abso-
lute did  the  imperial  authority  become  in  the  next  150  years,  that
Ulpian  could,  early  in  the  third  century,  speak  of  a  complete  devolution
of  the  power  of  the  people  to  the  emperor : '  Cum  lege,  quae  de  impe-
rio eius  lata  est,  populus  ei  et  in  eum  omne  suum  imperium  et  po-
testatem  conferat '  (Dig.  i.  4. 1  pr.).  The  general  term  used  to  denote
law  made  either  directly  or  indirectly  by  the  emperor  is  constitutiones ;
their  various  kinds  are  described  in  a  note  to  Bk.  i.  2.  6.  After
Septimius  Severus,  in  whose  reign,  as  has  been  observed,  the  last  of
the  senatus  consulta  was  enacted,  the  whole  legislative  authority  of
the  state  concentrated  itself  in  the  hands  of  the  emperor.  Up  to
the  time  of  Constantine,  however,  the  emperors  legislated  with
reference  to  specific  cases  of  litigation,  by  decreta  and  rescripta,
rather  than  by  direct  and  merely  prospective  enactment ;  and  such


46  INTRODUCTION.

changes  as  were  thus  made  in  the  law  were  far  less  comprehensive
than  those  made  by  leges  and  senatus  consulta.  The  period  in  which
direct  imperial  legislation  was  most  active  had  yet  to  come.

The  distinction  between  the  ius  civile  and  the  ius  praetorium  in  no
way  ceased  with  the  introduction  of  the  empire,  but  rather  became
emphasised.  Even  had  the  office  of  praetor  been  suppressed,  and  the
edictum  perpetuum  ceased  to  appear,  the  development  of  the  praeto-
rian law,  in  its  peculiar  character  as  a  liberal  and  equitable  system,
could  hardly  under  the  circumstances  have  been  arrested :  in  parti-
cular we  know  that  a  fresh  impulse  was  given  to  the  growth  of  the
praetorian  law  of  succession  by  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea  in  the  time  of
Augustus.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  two  praetors  at  Rome,  and
the  governors  in  the  provinces,  continued  to  issue  their  annual  edicts
under  not  only  Augustus  but  also  his  successors,  and  the  ius  gentium
was  still,  as  before,  being  constantly  worked  into  the  legal  system,  and
alterations  and  additions  being  made  in  that  large  part  of  the  urban
edict  which  had  now  been  handed  down  from  praetor  to  praetor
for  generations.  These  additions  and  alterations,  however,  were
largely  occasioned  by  contemporaneous  legislation  (e.g.  the  leges
Falcidia,  lulia  et  Papia,  and  various  senatus  consulta) ;  for  we  may
venture  to  suppose  that,  when  the  comitia  passed  no  statutes  which
were  pot  originated  by  the  emperor,  a  magistrate  would  have  hesi-
tated to  repeal  or  alter,  or  extend  the  law,  with  the  independence
which  had  been  usual  under  the  free  Republic.

From  the  time  of  Hadrian  (a.d.  i  17-138)  the  formal  separation
which  has  been  noticed  between  the  respective  edicts  of  successive
praetors  ceased  to  exist.  That  emperor  divided  the  whole  of  Italy
into  Rome,  with  its  immediately  surrounding  territory,  and  four  other
districts ;  Rome  and  its  suburbs  remained  under  the  authority  of  the
old  magistrates,  and  among  them  of  the  praetor,  while  the  other
districts  were  placed  under  the  administration  of  a  new  class  of
officials,  called  at  first  consulares,  and.after  M.  Aurelius  (a.d.  161-180)
iuridici.  With  this  change  was  in  all  probability  connected  a  still  more
sweeping  reform  effected  by  Hadrian.  The  perpetual  edict  had  by
this  time  seemingly  become  unexpansive  and  stereotyped,  and  it  was
deemed  desirable  to  finally  determine  its  contents,  and  its  relation  to
the  legislative  authority  of  the  emperor.  Accordingly  in  131  a.d.
Hadrian  instructed  the  famous  lawyer  Salvius  Julian  us  to  revise  and
systematise  in  a  compact  form  the  edicts  of  the  praetores  urbanus
and  peregrinus,  incorporating  also  certain  portions  of  the  aedilician
edict  relating  to  market  law,  or  providing  for  the  preservation  of  the


THE  EDICT  OF  JULIANUS—THE  PRUDENTES.     47

public  order  and  safety  in  streets  and  open  spaces :  the  resulting
work  was  ratified  by  an  imperial  senatusconsult,  and  there  seems  to
be  some  ground  for  supposing  that  a  general  provincial  edict  was
issued  at  the  same  time,  to  be  observed  uniformly  by  the  governors
of  the  provinces  throughout  the  empire  \  That  the  edict  of  Julianus
— known  henceforth  as  edictum  perpetuum /or  excellence — was  still
regarded  as  *ius  honorarium'  by  the  lawyers  of  later  generations
lends  some  colour  to  the  belief  that  it  continued  to  be  formally  pro-
mulgated each  year,  and  derived  its  validity  from  the  magistrate's
imperium :  but  whether  this  was  so  or  not,  the  magistrate  had  no
power  to  change  any  of  its  provisions,  and  Hadrian  himself  evidently
directed  that  any  defect  which  might  subsequently  be  discovered  in
the  law  should  be  supplied  by  imperial  legislation :  '  et  hoc  non
primum  a  nobis  dictum  est,  sed  ab  antiqua  descendit  prosapia,  quum
et  ipse  lulianus,  legum  et  edicti  perpetui  subtilissimus  conditor,  in
suis  libris  hoc  retulit,  ut,  si  quid  imperfectum  inveniatur,  ab  imperiali
sanctione  hoc  repleatur ;  et  non  ipse  solus,  sed  et  divus  Hadrianus,
in  compositione  edicti  et  senatus  consulto,  quod  eam  secutum  est,
hoc  apertissime  definivit,  ut  si  quid  in  edicto  positum  non  inveniatur,
hoc  ad  eius  regulas  eiusque  coniecturas  et  imitationes  possit  nova
instruere  auctoritas  *  (Justinian  in  Const.  *  tanta '  de  Confirm.  Digest.

The  mention  of  the  responsa  prudentium  among  the  sources  of  the
ius  civile  makes  it  necessary  to  speak  of  the  work  done  by  the  class
of  professional  lawyers  in  the  development  of  Roman  law ;  and  as
it  was  to  these  jurists  that  that  law  owed  what  scientific  form  it
possessed,  besides  many  of  its  other  special  merits,  it  will  not  be
amiss  to  discuss  this  subject  with  some  fullness.  The  names  of  the
early  prudentes  who  lived  under  the  free  Republic  are  collected  by
Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2.  35-39;  the  first  is  that  of  Papirius,  whose
compilation  of  the  leges  regiae  has  been  already  noticed.  These
earliest  lawyers  are  styled  prudentes  not  because  their  knowledge  of
the  law  was  more  scientific,  less  empirical,  than  that  of  other  men,


*  This  is  denied  by  Mommsen.  But  what  else  could  have  been  the  subject  of
Gains*  work  of  32  books  ad  edictum  provinciale?  The  edict  of  'his  own '  province,
which  Mommsen  imagines  to  have  been  the  topic,  could  hardly  have  deserved  so
extensive  a  treatment.    See  Roby,  Introduction  to  Justinian's  Digest,  p.  clxxviii.

'  The  most  successful  attempt  to  reconstruct  the  perpetual  edict  is  that  of
Lenel  (1883).  The  order  of  the  titles  can  be  ascertained  with  some  precision  by
comparing  together  the  commentaries  written  on  it  by  subsequent  lawyers,  especi*
ally  Paolus  and  Ulpian.     See  Muirhead,  Roman  Law,  p.  309.


48  INTRODUCTION,

but  rather  because  they  knew  it  more  fully;  a  philosophical  treat-
ment of  law  had  not  yet  commenced,  and  such  distinction  as  there
was  between  their  legal  knowledge  and  that  of  the  ordinary  citizen
was  quantitative  rather  than  qualitative.  The  first  condition  of  their
existence  as  a  professional  class  was  the  cessation  of  the  pontifices  to
be  'iuris  conditores,'  and  the  liberation  of  private  law  from  the
fetters  of  the  ius  sacrum ;  it  has  been  su^ested  that  this  was  effected
in  the  main  by  the  incorporation  of  the  plebeian  element  in  the  state.
The  direction  of  their  legal  activity  is  denoted  by  Cicero  (de  Orat.  i.
48)  by  the  four  terms  respondere,  cavere,  agere,  and  scribere.
Respondere  expressed  the  delivery  of  opinions  ('  iuris  civilis  scientiam
publice  profiteri ')  when  consulted  by  either  judges  or  private  persons ;
cavere,  the  advising  more  definitely  on  legal  matters,  such  as  the
proper  mode  of  concluding  some  transaction,  or  of  enforcing  a  right
in  the  courts;  agere,  the  actual  participation  in  the  process  as
patronus,  or  by  presently  superintending  a  legal  disposition ;  scribere,
the  drafting  of  technical  documents  in  proper  legal  phrase,  the  more
mechanical  part  of  the  labour  being  perhaps  undertaken  by  clerks
or  secretaries.  But  the  most  prominent  of  their  functions,  the
capacity  in  which  the  ordinary  citizen  had  most  frequent  occasion  to
consult  them,  was  as  advisers  on  the  practice  of  the  law.  The
ordinary  citizen  could  not  be  acquainted  with  the  complicated  forms
of  procedure,  or  master  the  difficulties  of  the  calendar,  upon  whose
distinctions  of  dies  fasti  and  dies  nefasti  the  successful  issue  of  an
action  so  much  depended.  These  mysteries  were  somewhat  sim-
plified by  Cn.  Flavins,  who,  as  aedile  (circ.  304  b.c.),  for  the  first
time  published  a  calendar,  in  which  dies  fasti  and  dies  nefasti  were
distinguished,  the  people  being  thus  enabled  to  know  the  days  on
which  they  could  and  those  on  which  they  could  not  perform  public
acts ;  and  who  also  made  a  compilation  of  formulae  required  in  the
legis  actiones  and  in  the  due  performance  of  solemn  dispositions :
'  postea  cum  Appius  Claudius  proposuisset  et  ad  formam  redegisset
has  actiones,  Cn.  Flavius,  scriba  eius,  libertini  filius,  subreptum
librum  populo  tradidit ;  et  adeo  gratum  fuit  id  munus  populo,  ut  tri-
bunus  plebis  fieret,  et  senator  et  aedilis  curulis.  Hie  liber,  qui
actiones  continet,  appellatur  ius  civile  Flavianum,  sicut  ille  ius  civile
Papirianum ;  nam  nee  Cn.  Flavius  de  suo  quidquam  adiecit  libro.
Augescente  civitate,  quia  deerant  quaedam  genera  agendi,  non  post
multum  temporis  spatium  Sextus  Aelius  alias  actiones  composuit,  et
librum  populo  dedit,  qui  appellatur  ius  Aelianum '  (Pomponius  in
Dig.  I.  2.  2.  7).     A  further  and  very  important  step  towards  mak-


THE  LAWYERS  OF  THE  REPUBLIC,  49

ing  the  technicalities  of  the  law  accessible  to  all,  which  in  fact
laid  the  foundation  of  the  legal  profession,  was  taken  by  Tiberius
Conincanius,  the  first  plebeian  pontifex  maxirous  who  about  b.c.  254
proclaimed  his  willingness  to  expound  it  to  any  one  who  made  ap-
plication K  The  mode  in  which  the  early  prudentes  acquired  their
knowledge  was  by  attending  as  auditores,  while  young,  an  experienced
jurisconsult  in  the  practical  work  of  his  profession,  and  by  a  careful
study  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  such  other  books  on  the  subject  as
were  available.  Among  these  may  be  mentioned  those  of  Cn.  Flavins
and  S.  Aelius,  alluded  to  in  the  passage  just  cited  from  Pomponius,
and  works  by  the  Catos,  P.  Mucins,  Brutus,  and  Manilius.  Of
systematic  teaching  in  schools  or  lecture-rooms  there  is  as  yet  no
trace.  The  influence  of  the  jurists  on  the  law  in  this  earliest  period
is  of  a  very  definite  character,  and  is  expressed  by  the  term  '  inter-
pretation by  which  should  be  understood  the  completion  or  supple-
menting of  the  written  out  of  the  unwritten  law ;  not  in  the  sense  that
they  were  strictly  tied  by  the  letter  of  the  statute,  or  by  the  express
words  of  the  lawgiver,  but  that  they  were  guided  by  its  spirit,  by
a  conception  of  law  as  a  living  and  growing  organism,  and  by
a  realisation  of  the  necessity  of  adapting  it  to  the  growing  re-
quirements of  an  advancing  civilisation.  '  His  legibus  latis  coepit
(ut  naturaliter  evenire  solet  ut  interpretatio  desideraret  prudentium
auctoritatem)  necessariam  esse  disputationem  fori.  Haec  disputatio
et  hoc  iusy  quod  sine  scripto  venit  compositum  a  prudentibus  pro-
pria parte  (appellatione  ?)  aliqua  non  appellatur,  ut  ceterae  partes
iuris  suis  nominibus  designantur,  sed  communi  nomine  appellatur
ius  civile  (Dig.  i.  2.  2.  5).  It  was  then  on  the  Twelve  Tables  and
succeeding  statutes  that  this  interpretatio  was  brought  to  bear :  and
its  operation  may  be  illustrated  by  an  example.  The  Twelve  Tables
had  given  an  action  against  the  owner  of  a  quadruped  which  caused
a  damnum ;  as  cases  occurred  in  which  damage  was  done  by  two-
footed  animals  in  the  same  way  as  the  statute  had  contemplated,  it
was  inferred  that  to  grant  an  action  here  too  was  required  by  its
spirit ;  the  action  was  accordingly  introduced,  and  brought  as  under
the  Twelve  Tables,  new  law  being  thus  grafted  on  to  the  old '.  This
limitation  of  interpretatio  had,  however,  ceased  in  the  time  of  Cicero,
who  says  (de  Leg.  i.  5)  that  the  jurists  who  were  his  contemporaries
applied  themselves  also  to  the  praetorian  edict,  while  their  pre-

*  Dig.  1.  a.  a.  35,

'  Cf.  the  interpretatio  of  the  lex  Aquilia  la  Inst  iv.  3.  10.

E


50  INTRODUCTION.

decessors  had  not  gone  beyond  the  ius  civile.  The  sphere  of  their
activity  was  largely  extended  on  the  fall  of  the  free  Republic.
Savigny  has  remarked  (Hist,  of  the  Roman  Law  in  the  Middle  Ages,
i.  p.  25)  that  the  art  of  public  speaking,  which  in  the  time  of  freedom
had  been  the  first  among  the  arts  of  peace,  had  with  the  disappear-
ance of  freedom  lost  all  power  and  influence.  Yet  the  Romans  had
from  the  earliest  time  devoted  themselves  more  to  law  than  to  any
other  branch  of  public  life,  and  it  was  accordingly  in  the  study  of  law
that  the  highest  and  noblest  intellects  now  engaged,  and  in  which
they  found  the  completest  satisfaction  of  such  aspirations  as  were
still  tolerated  by  the  empire  *.  With  them  we  first  get  the  idea  of
a  scientific  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  law  or  jurisprudence,
a  science  which  was  entirely  of  their  creation.  Its  favourable  and
symmetrical  growth  under  their  hands  was  due  in  no  small  degree  to
a  peculiarity  which  is  worthy  of  attention,  namely,  the  theoretical,
scientific  purpose  of  the  work  by  which  it  was  elaborated,  or  rather
the  complete  adjustment  which  they  effected  between  theory  and
practice,  between  principle  and  detail.  The  Roman  jurists  to  whom
the  science  of  law  is  most  indebted  held  themselves  aloof  from
the  mechanical  business  which  had  formed  a  considerable  portion  of
the  vocation  of  the  older  prudentes,  and  left  it  to  their  pupils  or  to
men  of  less  repute  than  themselves.  Their  theory  was  thus  always
full  of  life,  their  practice  always  in  harmony  with  and  conducted  with
reference  to  their  principles ;  with  them  *  theory  and  practice  stood
to  one  another  in  the  only  possible  true  relation,  that  each  paid  due
regard  to  the  other.'  Thus  the  practitioner  could  not  reproach  the
scientific  jurist  with  being  a  mere  theorist  or  dreamer,  or  the  scientific
jurist  the  practitioner  with  having  nothing  but '  a  beggarly  account  of
scraps  and  fragments*.*  There  are  points  of  resemblance  which
make  a  comparison  between  the  development  of  law  at  Rome  by  the
prudentes  and  its  growth  in  England  through  a  vast  series  of  judicial
decisions,  both  interesting  and  instructive ;  but  there  is  a  difference
of  very  great  importance  between  them,  which  is  this ; — at  Rome  the
jurists  were  not  usually  judges,  nor  were  the  judges  usually  jurists  ;
and  hence  it  was  not  with  strict  reference  only  to  an  actual  concrete
case  that  a  jurist  could  make  new  law  ;  he  could  do  this,  at  any  rate
after  Hadrian's  time,  in  a  legal  treatise,  upon  a  hypothetical  set  of
circumstances  imagined  by  himself,  or  submitted  to  him  by  a  pupil  or
any  other  person  -,  and,  as  is  remarked  by  Sir  Henry  Maine ',  *  where

*  Cf.  Maine,  Ancient  Law,  p.  362.  '  Austin,  Jorisprudence,  voL  L  p.  483.

'  Ancient  I<aw,  p.  39.


THE  PROCULIAN  AND  SABINIAN  SECTS,         51

the  data  can  be  multiplied  at  pleasure,  the  facilities  for  evolving
a  general  rule  are  immensely  increased.'  The  development  of  English
case  law,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  merely  the  outcome  of  practical
necessity,  and  from  the  scientific  point  of  view  is  open  to  many  of
the  objections  which  have  been  stated  as  against  it  by  Austin  \  The
Roman  jurisprudence  owed  its  perfection  precisely  to  the  fact  that  in
it  theory  and  practice  were  never  in  a  constant  state  of  antagonism ;
whereas  in  England  the  practical  disregard  of  the  one  in  favour  of
the  other^  or  injudicious  efforts  at  reconciliation,  had  often  had  the
effect  of  at  once  marring  the  theory,  and  perverting  the  practice.

As  has  been  observed,  the  first  Roman  jurist  who  can  be  credited
with  a  genuine  scientific  treatment  and  exposition  of  the  law  was
Q.  Mucius  Scaevola,  who  *  ius  civile  primus  constituit  generatim  in
libros  decem  et  octo  redigendo '  (Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2.  41).
From  another  work  of  his,  Liber  singularis  optov  (definitions)^  there  are
four  excerpts  in  the  Digest  C.  Aquilius  Gallus,  Cicero's  colleague  in
the  praetorship,  to  whom  are  due  the  actio  and  exceptio  doli,  postumi
Aquiliani,  and  the  Aquilian  stipulation  (Inst.  iii.  29. 2),  was  Scaevola's
most  celebrated  auditor,  and  himself  the  teacher  of  Servius  Sulpicius
Rufus,  consul  b.  c.  51,  whom  Cicero  calls  the  first  of  all  jurists,  and
who  in  his  discussions  of  legal  questions  followed  a  logical  method
which  gave  a  powerful  impulse  to  the  scientific  treatment  of  law.
Among  the  jurists  of  Cicero's  age  who  composed^  works  on  the  sub-
ject are  Aufidius  Namusa,  Aulus  Ofilius  (author  of  the  first  com-
mentary on  the  edict),  Alfenus  Varus,  C.  Trebatius  Testa,  Aulus
Cascellius,  Q.  Tubero,  and  Aelius  Gallus.

Under  Augustus  we  first  find  traces  of  a  division  of  the  jurists  into
two  sects  or  schools.  Their  respective  founders,  distinguished  from
one  another  by  a  difference  of  political  no  less  than  of  legal  views,
were  Antistius  Labeo  and  C.  Ateius  Capito.  Labeo  had  inherited
from  his  father  a  strong  republican  sentiment,  and  was  in  the  habit
of  lamenting  the  prevailing  disrespect  of  the  good  old  laws  which
had  never  been  constitutionally  abrogated.  At  first  an  auditor  of
Trebatius,  he  attended  the  chambers  of  all  the  prominent  jurists  of
his  day ;  and  the  width  of  his  studies  liberalised  his  views  on  law,
and  saved  him  from  a  failing  which  was  not  uncommon  among  his
contemporaries,  a  slavish  devotion  to  the  tenets  of  some  particular
teacher.  A  man  of  varied  culture  and  instructed  in  far  more  than  one
department  of  knowledge,  his  leading  characteristics  were  a  wide

'  Jurisprudence,  Lectures,  38,  39.
E   2


52  INTRODUCTION.

intellectual  range,  a  correct  appreciation  of  the  place  of  law  in  social
development  and  of  its  relation  to  other  sciences,  a  dislike  of  all
pedantry,  a  wealth  of  new  views  and  principles,  with  which  he  was
ever  ready  to  challenge  and  supersede  the  old.  Socrates-like,  he
thoroughly  perceived  the  value  of  clear  logical  division  and  definition
as  the  basis  and  condition  of  sound  legal  progress.  Capito  was  more
or  less  of  a  novus  homo,  and  a  supporter  of  the  imperial  rigime^  in
which  he  saw  the  best  prospects  of  his  own  advancement.  It  is
related  of  him  that,  with  a  false  show  of  independence,  he  opposed
Tiberius  when  the  latter  wished  to  stop  the  prosecution  of  a  man
accused  of  putting  an  affront  upon  the  imperial  dignity.  As  a  jurist
he  was  distinguished  by  his  devotion  to  the  letter  of  the  law  and  the
traditional  treatment  of  legal  questions,  and  by  a  too  literal  interpre-
tation of  positive  rules.

The  opposition  between  the  two  was  thus  the  opposition  between
an  absolute  reliance  on  traditional  principles  and  opinions  supported
by  approved  authority,  and  a  legal  mind  conscious  of  its  powers,  of
the  living  organic  nature  of  law,  of  the  inevitableness  of  its  growth
and  expansion.  It  resulted  in  a  number  of  legal  controversies  be-
tween Labeo  and  Capito,  which  they  bequeathed  to  their  successors ;
thus  originating  the  two  schools  whose  disputes  were  ever  widening
their  range,  and  which  termed  their  founders  and  leaders  'nostri
praeceptores,'  and  those  of  their  opponents  *  diversae  scholae  prae-
ceptores/  respectively.  The  leading  disciple  of  Capito  was  Masurius
Sabinus  (Gaius  ii.  218),  from  whom  the  school  derived  its  name
*  Sabinian,'  and  who,  as  having  given  it  a  new  direction,  is  to  be
r^arded  as  its  proper  founder  ^  Capito  had  contented  himself  with
a  passive  resistance  to  Labeo's  innovations :  Sabinus  took  the  line  of
promoting  the  development  of  the  law  by  releasing  it  from  its  tradi-
tional formah'sm.  Among  the  leading  Sabinians  may  be  mentioned
C  Cassius  Longinus,  who  died  under  Vespasian,  Caelius  Sabinus,
Javolenus  Priscus*  (206),  Salvius  Julianus  (457),  who  has  been
already  mentioned  as  the  compiler  of  the  edictum  perpetuum  under
Hadrian,  Sextus  Pomponius  (585),  Sextus  Caecilius  Africanus  (131),


'  Whether  these  schools  had  a  local  habitation,  with  regular  courses  of  instruc-
tion and  pa}ment  of  fees,  is  an  open  question.  Sabinus  formed  his  school  before
Proculus,  and  Pomponius  tells  us  (Dig.  i.  a.  a.  50)  that  he  was  a  poor  man,  sup-
ported  mainly  by  his  pupils,  which  gives  some  support  to  this  view.  See  Roby,
Introduction  to  Justinian^s  Digest,  p.  czxvii.

^  The  figures  in  brackets  after  a  jurist*s  name  denote  the  number  of  extracts  from
his  writings  preserved  in  the  Digest.


LAWYERS  OF  THE  CLASSICAL  PERIOD.  53

and  finally  Gains  (535),  anthor  of  the  Institutionum  Commentarii
quatuor,  the  first  book,  so  far  as  we  know,  bearing  this  title  and
intended  for  elementary  instruction,  and  also  of  Libri  septem  rerum
quotidianarum  sive  aureorum,  and  Commentaries  on  the  Twelve
Tables,  the  lex  lulia  and  Papia,  and  the  urban,  provincial,  and
aedilician  edicts.  Labeo's  first  two  successors  were  M.  Cocceius
Nerva,  mentioned  in  Tacitus,  Ann.  vi.  26,  and  Sempronius  Proculus
(37)1  After  whom  this  school  was  called  Proculian;  the  character
which  he  impressed  upon  its  views  was  one  of  adherence  to  tradi-
tion, unrelieved  by  the  genius  of  its  master  Labeo.  His  principal
followers  were  Pegasus,  praefectus  urbi  under  Vespasian,  the  younger
Juventius  Celsus  (142),  and  Neratius  Priscus  (64),  whom  Trajan  is
said  to  have  preferred  to  Hadrian  as  his  successor  in  the  empire.
After  him  on  the  one  hand,  and  Gaius  on  the  other,  we  have  no  further
traces  of  the  controversy  between  the  schools  \  It  would  seem  that
a  reaction  had  set  in,  probably  because  differences  of  opinion  which
had  once  been  genuine  had  now  been  degraded  to  mere  hair  splitting,
or  because  the  jurists  on  both  sides  had  become  possessed  with  the
spirit  of  Labeo,  and  were  beginning  to  revolt  against  the  abuse  of
authority ;  at  least  we  may  infer  from  Gaius  (iii.  98)  that  the  pupils
had  taken  to  criticising  their  masters.  Bocking  (Institutionen,  §  17)
is  of  opinion  that  the  disappearance  of  the  schools  is  sufficiently
accounted  for  by  the  condition  of  law  and  legislation  in  the  age  of
the  Antonines,  and  by  the  establishment  of  public  instruction  in  legal
subjects,  upon  which  more  will  be  said  hereafter.  However  this  may
be,  the  subsequent  jurists  took  each  his  own  line,  though  only  the  most
famous  of  them  need  be  mentioned  here.  From  Ulpius  Marcellus,
commander-in-chief  in  Britain  under  Commodus,  there  are  a  hundred
and  fifty-nine  excerpts  in  the  Digest ;  Q.  Cervidius  Scaevola  (307)
was  teacher  of  Papinian  and  of  the  emperor  Septimius  Severus;
besides  these,  Claudius  Tryphoninus  (79),  Venuleius  Satuminus  (71),
Callistiatus  (29X  Aelius  Marcianus  (275),  and  Florentinus  (42),
deserve  notice.  But  the  greatest  names  are  yet  to  come.  Aemilius
PapiniaDus  was  esteemed  by  all  his  successors  the  greater  of  Roman
jurists.  He  commenced  under  Marcus  Aurelius  (a.  d.  i6i-i8o)
a  political  career  which  ended  in  his  being  made  praefectus  praetorio.


^  A  carefiil  enumeration  of  the  questions  known  to  have  been  matten  of  dispute
between  the  Sabinians  and  Procnlians  may  be  fomid  in  Roby's  Introdnction  to
JnstinisKi's  Digest,  pp.  czxxi-cxli.  Allusions  to  them  occur  in  IniL  i.  aa  pr. ;
ii.  I.  35 ;  ii.  13  pr. ;  ii.  ao.  34;  iii.  19.  4,  ib.  11 ;  iii.  as.  a ;  iii.  a8.  3 :  iii.  39  pr. ;
iv.  la.  a.


54  INTRODUCTION,

next  to  that  of  the  princeps  the  highest  post  in  the  empire,  and
throughout  which  he  maintained  a  moral  rectitude  and  an  int^rity
of  character  to  which  he  owed  his  fame  no  less  than  to  his  distinction
as  a  lawyer.  After  Caracalla  (a.  d.  21 1-2 17)  had  murdered  his
brother  Geta,  he  called  upon  Papinian  to  justify  the  deed  before  the
senate  and  people ;  but  the  jurist  replied  that  to  accuse  a  man  who
had  been  wrongfully  put  to  death,  was  as  good  as  to  murder  him
a  second  time,  and  steadily  refused  to  speak  a  word  in  the  emperor's
behalf;  the  refusal  cost  him  his  head.  From  his  writings  there  are
five  hundred  and  ninety-five  excerpts  in  the  Digest,  but  this  number
is  no  criterion  of  the  authority  which  he  enjoyed  in  legal  circles.
Contemporary  with  Papinian  was  Domitius  Ulpianus,  who  wrote
principally  under  Caracalla,  and  became  praetorian  prefect  to  Helio-
gabalus  (218-222  a.  d.)  ;  he  met  with  a  violent  death  at  the  hands  of
the  soldiers  under  his  command  in  a.  d.  222.  Owing  to  the  large
number  of  his  writings  which  were  extant  in  the  time  of  Justinian,
the  aggregate  of  extracts  from  them  (2462)  in  the  Digest  exceeds
that  from  any  other  jurist ;  in  fact  he  contributed  to  that  compilation
nearly  one-third  of  its  contents.  Julius  Paulus,  who  sat  in  the
council  of  Septimius  Severus  (198-2 11  a.  d.)  and  was  praefectus
praetorio  under  Alexander,  was  author  of  the  receptae  sententiae,
and  is  represented  in  the  Digest  by  two  thousand  and  eighty  passages.
The  series  of  classical  jurists  closes  with  Herennius  Modestinus,  a
pupil  of  Ulpian,  and  teacher  of  the  young  Maximinus  about  a.  d.
238,  from  whose  writings  the  Digest  contains  three  hundred  and
forty-five  extracts.

So  far  we  have  given  no  account  of  Gaius,  who  as  the  author  of
a  text-book  which  is  familiar  to  most  students  of  Roman  law,  and
upon  which  the  Institutes  of  Justinian  is  so  largely  founded,  deserves
a  somewhat  more  extended  notice.  It  will  seem  a  strange  thing  to
say  that  we  possess  less  knowledge  of  him  than  of  almost  any  other
famous  Roman  lawyer,  and  yet  beyond  his  works  and  approximate
date  we  know  little  or  nothing  :  even  his  full  name  appears  to  have
been  forgotten  before  he  became  celebrated.  From  an  extract  from
one  of  his  works  preserved  in  the  Digest  *  it  seems  clear  that  he  lived
as  early  as  Hadrian,  and  from  internal  evidence '  it  is  conjectured
that  the  later  portions  of  his  Institutes  were  written  shortly  after  the
death  of  Antoninus  Pius  in  a.  d.  161  :  the  last  of  his  writings  is  a  *  liber
singularis  ad  Senatus  consultum  Orfitianum,'  which  was  enacted  a.  d.


*  Dig.  34.  5.  7  pr.  «  E.  g.  ii.  195.


CAWS.  55

178.  Besides  the  elementary  manual  upon  which  his  reputation
chiefly  rests,  he  was  the  author  of  twelve  other  works,  including
commentaries  on  the  urban  and  provincial  edicts,  seven  books
'  Aureonim '  (from  which  considerable  extracts  are  embodied  in  the
Institutes  of  Justinian),  six  on  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  minor  mono-
graphs :  535  excerpts  from  these  volumes  appear  in  the  Digest.
The  only  other  fact  which  we  know  about  Gaius,  and  to  which
a  later  reference  will  be  made,  is  that,  unlike  the  great  lawyers  whose
names  have  been  recently  mentioned,  his  works  were  not  made
technically  authoritative  till  nearly  three  centuries  after  their  com-
position. There  is,  it  is  true,  an  ingenious  hypothesis  of  Mommsen,
which  does  not  seem  to  meet  with  much  countenance  from  con-
temporary writers,  that  Gaius  was  a  provincial,  and  taught  rather
than  practised  the  law,  probably  at  Troas  in  Asia :  a  theory  alleged
to  be  supported  by  his  familiarity  with  the  Greek  language  and
writers  who  employed  it  and  with  the  laws  of  foreign  peoples,
and  by  the  proportions  of  his  treatise  upon  the  provincial  edict,
which  no  other  lawyer  is  known  to  have  taken  as  his  theme.  It
certainly  appears  strange  that  he  omits  to  mention  enactments  made  at
Rome  before  or  in  his  own  lifetime,  which  have  an  intimate  bearing
on  topics  that  he  dealt  with,  and  with  which  no  lawyer  living  there
could  have  been  unfamiliar,  and  that  his  own  works  not  only  are  not
cited  by  his  greater  followers,  but  do  not  seem  to  have  enjoyed  any
reputation  till  long  after  his  decease;  on  the  other  hand,  there  is
some  evidence  in  his  Institutes  that  the  courts  with  which  he  was
acquainted  were  Roman  rather  than  provincial.  The  character  of
his  best  known  work  has  also  been  the  subject  of  speculation,  it
having  been  thought  that  it  was  compiled  rather  as  notes  for  profes-
sional lectures  than  as  a  set  manual  for  elementary  students.  Few
books  have  liad  a  more  romantic  history.  Superseded  in  Justinian's
time  by  that  emperor's  own  Institutes,  all  trace  of  it  was  from  that
time  lost :  and  it  was  only  in  18 16  that  a  copy  of  it  was  discovered
by  Niebuhr  in  the  Chapter  Library  at  Verona^  over  which  a  later
scribe  had  written  the  Epistles  of  St.  Jerome.

It  remains  to  consider  the  nature  of  the  influence  which  these
great  lawyers  exercised  upon  the  law  of  Rome,  and  which  is  mainly
attributable  to  a  change  in  their  position  coincident  with  the  fall  of
the  Republic.  Under  the  free  Commonwealth  it  had  been  com-
petent to  any  one  to  profess  the  law,  and  to  give  advice  on  con-
sultation :  the  form  and  effect  of  the  counsel's  opinions  (responsa)
bad  been  under  no  limitations.    So  far  as  the  profession,  as  such.


56  INTRODUCTION.

left  any  mark  upon  the  material  system,  it  was  through  the  weight  of
a  united  opinion,  which  in  the  form  of  '  disputatio  fori  *  (to  which
effect  was  apparently  given  by  the  praetor;  no  doubt  brought  about
a  considerable  expansion  of  the  civil  law.  The  influence  of  the
jurists  was  one  which  the  emperors  would  naturally  find  it  difficult  to
destroy,  not  only  because  by  its  long  and  steady  growth  it  had
achieved  a  stature  and  a  traditional  position  which  might  have  long
defied  the  direct  attacks  of  opponents,  but  because  it  had  always
been  independent  of  political  rank,  and  unconnected  with  any  con-
stitutional office  through  which  it  might  have  been  assailed.  The
craft  of  Augustus  suggested  the  scheme  of  bringing  it  into  con-
nection with,  and  placing  it  in  a  subordinate  relation  to,  the  new
imperial  system.  He  resolved  to  make  the  function  of  a  jurist,
so  far  as  the  class  was  to  possess  any  authority,  a  quasi-public  func-
tion ;  and  this  was  effected  by  conferring  on  certain  of  the  more
eminent  lawyers  the  ius  respondendi,  whereby  their  responsa
would  be  given,  as  it  were,  under  imperial  sanction :  '  et,  ut  obiter
sciamus,  ante  tempora  Augusti  publice  respondendi  ius  non  a  prin-
cipibus  dabatur,  sed,  qui  fiduciam  studiorum  suorum  habebant,
consulentibus  respondebant.  Neque  responsa  utique  signata  dabant,
sed  plerumque  iudicibus  ipsi  scribebant,  aut  testabantur,  qui  illos
consulebant.  Primus  divus  Augustus,  ut  maior  iuris  auctoritas
haberetur,  constituit,  ut  ex  auctoritate  eius  responderent,  et  ex  illo
tempore  peti  hoc  pro  beneficio  coepit  Et  ideo  optimus  princeps
Hadrianus,  cum  ab  eo  viri  praetorii  peterent,  ut  sibi  liceret  re-
spondere,  rescripsit  eis,  hoc  non  peti,  sed  praestari  solere,  et  ideo,  si
quis  fiduciam  sui  haberet,  delectari  se,  populo  ad  respondendum  se
praepararet'  (Pomponius  in  Dig.  i.  2.  2.49).  Augustus  himself  does
not  seem  to  have  done  more  than  conceive  this  system,  for  Pom-
ponius observes,  in  immediate  connection  with  the  passage  just
cited,  that  Masurius  Sabinus  was  the  first  lawyer  *qui  publice  re-
spond it,'  and  that  the  privil^e  of  giving  opinions  to  the  people
(populo)  was  bestowed  on  him  by  Tiberius.  There  is  no  small
difficulty  in  understanding  this  meagre  notice  of  the  genesis  of  the
most  valuable  portion  of  the  extant  Ronian  law,  which  is  unsupple-
mented  by  the  information  of  any  other  writer  of  authority.  As-
suming that  there  is  no  difference  of  meaning  between  'publice*
and  *  populo'  respondere,  it  seems  clear  that  to  Pomponius  these
expressions  denote  the  same  idea  as  'respondere  ex  auctoritate
principis,*  and  the  anecdote  about  Hadrian  almost  justifies  the  belief
that  in  the  reign  of  that  emperor  the  opinion  of  an  unauthorised


THE  lUS  RESPONDENDI.  57

lawyer  was  not  dignified  with  the  style  of  *  responsum '  at  all.  The
requirement  that  official  responsa  should  be  written  and  sealed  by
their  author,  as  a  precaution  against  forgery,  suggests  that  the  true
difference  between  them  and  the  advice  of  inferior  practitioners  was
that  the  former  were  statements  of  law  bearing  on  a  case  actually
under  litigation,  and  binding  on  the  judge,  whose  sole  function  was
to  apply  the  law  so  stated  to  the  facts  in  issue.  That  counsel  should
lay  down  the  law  to  judge,  rather  than  judge  to  counsel,  will  to
English  readers  seem  altogether  anomalous,  but  the  sense  of
anomaly  will  disappear  if  it  be  remembered  that  under  the  formulary
procediu-e  which  held  its  ground  till  the  time  of  Diocletian  the
'iudex'  was  merely  a  private  individual  appointed  by  the  praetor
to  hear  and  determine  the  particular  case,  and  that  it  had  always
been  the  practice  for  these  '  private  judges '  to  inform  themselves
respecting  the  law  by  which  it  should  be  governed  by  consulting  the
lawyers  who  frequented  the  forum  for  the  purpose.  Others,  again,
would  give  the  sealed  responsum  a  more  extended  force,  and  main-
tain that  it  was  authoritative  not  only  for  the  case  with  reference  to
which  it  was  issued,  but  for  all  similar  cases  as  well.  However  this
may  be,  the  practice  of  investing  certain  selected  jurists  with  the  ius
respondendi  was  continued  by  Tiberius'  successors,  and  the  pre-
rogative was  constantly  assuming  more  and  more  the  character  of
a  magisterial  function ;  thus  Gaius  (i.  7)  defines  the  prudentes  as
those  *quibus  permissum  est  iura  condere,'  and  a  later  writer  speaks
of  a  jurist  being  possessed  of  vo/Ao^erix^  Swafu?.  It  is  not  certain
what  discretion  a  iudex  had  under  the  older  system  as  to  accepting
or  rejecting  the  opinion  of  a  prudens  whom  he  consulted.  Now,
however,  he  was  obliged  to  decide  in  accordance  with  the  advice  of
any  jurist  to  whom  the  ius  respondendi  had  been  del^ated  by  the
emperor.  Yet  among  those  who  were  possessed  of  this  privilege
there  was  no  ascertained  order  of  precedence ;  how  then  was  the
matter  decided  if  the  two  parties  to  an  action  submitted  discordant
responsa  ?  In  such  a  case  we  must  suppose  that  the  judge  was  free
to  choose  whichever  of  the  two  opinions  seemed  to  him  the  more
satisfactory.  But  the  difficulty  became  greater  as  in  course  of  time
coUections  of  responsa  were  published  by  their  authors,  to  which
even  after  their  death  litigants  could  appeal  no  less  than  to  those
given  by  living  men;  and  it  was  obviously  easier  every  day  for
a  party  to  quote  from  this  or  that  jurist  an  opinion  diametrically
opposed  to  that  brought  forward  by  his  adversary,  and  even  to
involve  the  judge  in  perplexity  with  an  array  of  responsa  of  which  no


S8  INTRODUCTION.

single  one  agreed  precisely  with  any  of  the  rest.  A  solution  of  this
difficulty  was  attempted  by  a  rescript  of  Hadrian,  of  which  Gaius
speaks  in  the  passage  in  which  he  is  defining  the  responsa  pru-
dentium :  '  responsa  prudentium  sunt  sententiae  et  opiniones  eorum
quibus  permissum  est  iura  condere ;  quorum  omnium  si  in  unum
sententiae  concurrant,  id  quod  ita  sentiunt  legis  vicem  obtinet ;  si
vero  dissentiunt,  iudici  licet  quam  velit  sententiam  sequi,  idque
rescripto  divi  Hadriani  significatur '  (i.  ^\  It  is  less  easy  to  under-
stand Gaius'  own  words  here  than  the  effect  of  Hadrian's  somewhat
off-hand  piece  of  legislation.  Incidentally  it  seems  to  have  given
authority  to  a  practice,  which  had  perhaps  already  acquired  some
vogue,  of  citing  for  the  judge's  information  not  only  responsa,  but
any  written  work  of  an  authorised  jurist :  this  interpretation  is  sup-
ported by  Theophilus,  who  (Paraphr.  i.  2.  8)  speaking  of  law  made
by  the  prudentes,  says,  to  3c  tto/d*  avroiv  i^o/to^erov/jicvov  y€VLK^  6v6fuvn
K€K\riTai '  responsum  prudentium,'  and  by  Papinian's  general  use  of
the  phrase  'auctoritas  prudentium'  to  denote  any  statements  or
records  from  which  the  opinions  of  jurists  could  be  collected.  On
the  other  hand,  Savigny  (System,  L  p.  156)  gives  responsa  here  a
strictly  literal  interpretation,  and  if  his  view  is  right  no  inference  can
be  drawn  from  the  passage  as  to  the  judicial  procedure  when  the
parties  to  a  suit  supported  their  respective  allegations  by  citing
diverse  views  from  the  writings  of  iuris  auctores.  A  third  view  is
put  forward  by  Professor  Muirhead,  who  thinks  that  the  number  of
living  authorised  counsel  was  very  limited :  that  a  judge,  if  he
desired  their  assistance,  was  required  by  this  rescript  of  Hadrian
to  consult  them  all  (quorum  omnium,  etc.):  that  if  they  were
unanimous,  but  only  then,  their  opinion  might  be  no  more  dis-
regarded than  a  statute  might:  and  that  when  they  differed  the
judge  must  decide  for  himself.

The  end  of  jurisprudence  is  in  general  the  same  as  that  of  all
science;  a  complete  grasp,  a  systematic  penetration  of  its  subject-
matter  ;  the  power  of  following  the  most  general  propositions  into
their  minutest  ramifications,  and  inversely  of  ascending  from  the
most  concrete  case,  through  all  intermediate  stages  of  thought,  to
the  principle  which  governs  it.  This  grasp  and  this  power  belonged
in  an  admirable  degree  to  the  Roman  jurists ;  their  highest  qualities
are  their  mastery  of  their  subject,  their  wonderful  capacity  of  regard-
ing and  deciding  every  concrete  case  with  reference  to  some  rule,
and  their  logical  subsumption  of  all  their  rules  under  a  comparatively
small  number  of  great  legal  principles.     Accordingly,  in  some  re-


ROMAN  LEGAL  EDUCATION.  59

spects  their  legal  method  left  nothing  to  be  desired.  But  from
another  point  of  view  the  Roman  jurisprudence  is  more  open  to
criticism.  The  cause  may  be  disputed ;  it  may  have  been  the  back-
ward state  of  general  scientific  knowledge  or  the  exclusion  of  the
jurists  from  all  other  departments  of  political  life :  but  certain  it  is
that  their  absorption  in  their  peculiar  study  blinded  them  to  the  fact
that  law  is  but  one  of  the  agencies  by  which  the  life  of  a  nation  is
developed,  and  that  it  stands  in  close  relation  to  other  influences  all
of  which  must  play  their  part  in  duly  promoting  the  welfare  of  the
social  organism.  These  other  influences— literature,  what  are  now
called  the  moral  or  social  sciences,  art,  and  we  may  perhaps  add,
religion — they  left  more  or  less  out  of  sight,  or  at  any  rate  failed  to
see  the  inevitable  correlation  between  them  and  their  own  favourite
subject,  to  appreciate  the  function  of  philosophy  as  the  common
element  in,  the  connecting  link  between,  the  various  branches  of
human  thought.  As  the  queen  of  the  sciences,  philosophy  watches
over  the  element  which  they  share  each  with  one  another,  by  keeping
them  before  her  in  orderly  review,  by  restraining  each  within  its  due
sphere,  by  maintaining  them  in  their  proper  relation,  she  discharges
her  function  of  giving  to  each  its  perfect  form,  its  true  development.
This  relation  between  philosophy  and  the  sciences  was  not  ade-
quately perceived  by  the  Roman  jurists,  because  its  true  appreciation
depends  on  conditions  many  of  which  are  realised  only  in  the
modem  world.  To  them  jurisprudence  was  philosophy  and  all
philosophy.  Ulpian  says,  '  iustitiam  colimus,  et  boni  et  aequi  noti-
tiam  profitemur;  aequum  ab  iniquo  separantes,  licitum  ab  illicito
discernentes,  bonos  non  solum  metu  poenarum,  verum  etiam  prae-
miorum  quoque  exhortatione  efficere  cupientes,  veram  nisi  fallor
philosophiam,  non  simulatam  affectantes.'  The  words  are  those  of
a  moralist,  not  of  a  lawyer ;  and  the  failure  to  distinguish  sufficiently
between  jurisprudence  and  the  other  sciences,  notably  ethics,  resulted
in  logical  faults,  especially  of  definition,  which  mar  in  no  small
degree  the  excellences  by  which  the  Roman  law  is  on  other  grounds
distinguished  \

The  mode  in  which  the  earlier  prudentes  acquired  their  know-
ledge of  law  has  been  already  noticed.  After  a  short  preliminary
instruction  in  the  leading  terms  and  distinctions  of  jurisprudence,
which  was  denoted  by  the  term  instituere,  their  training  was  purely

'  See,  for  example,  the  definitions  of  justice  and  jurisprudence  in  the  first  three
lines  in  Inst.  bk.  i.


6o  INTRODUCTION.

practical,  and  consisted  in  attending  a  leading  lawyer  in  court  and
chambers,  and  in  thus  picking  up  both  learning  and  the  modes  of
applying  it.  No  jurist  refused  the  youth  of  Rome  the  privilege  of
thus  attaching  themselves  to  him  as  auditores,  in  order  under  his
auspices  to  learn  the  law ;  indeed  it  was  considered  an  honourable
distinction  :  '  ius  civile  docere,'  says  Cicero,  '  semper  pulcrum  fuit,
hominumque  clarissimorum  discipulis  floruerunt  domus;'  and  of  Q.
M.  Scaevola  he  says,  '  qui  quamquam  nemini  se  ad  docendum  dabat,
tamen  consulentibus  respondendo  studiosos  audiendi  docebat'  This
practical  course  of  instruction  continued  throughout  to  be  the  prin*
cipal  mode  in  which  a  professional  lawyer  acquired  a  knowledge  of
his  subject-matter  and  of  civil  procedure.  The  only  change  was  that
it  now  usually  extended  over  a  longer  period ;  a  prominent  jurist  s
auditores  continued  their  connection  with  him  even  after  they  had
attained  a  competent  legal  knowledge,  in  order  to  have  the  advantage
of  his  authority  and  advice  in  their  own  practice.  In  this  relation
they  were  called  studiosi.  Modestinus  was  studiosus  to  Ulpian
('  Herennio  Modestino  studioso  meo  de  Dalmatia  consulenti  re-
scripsi '  Ulp.  in  Dig.  47.  2.  52.  20),  and  Paulus  says  (Dig.  50.  13.  4)
'  Divus  Antoninus  Pius  rescripsit,  iuris  studiosos,  qui  salaria  petebant,
haec  exigere  posse ; '  so  that  studiosi  are  frequently  contrasted  with
iuris  auctores,  as  lawyers  who  had  not  achieved  an  independent
position.  Naturally  too  book  learning  now  occupied  a  larger  share
of  a  student's  attention  than  before,  owing  to  the  increase  and  greater
excellence  of  the  juristic  literature.

In  the  preliminary  course  which,  as  has  been  observed,  preceded
the  stage  in  which  one  became  an  *  auditcH*,'  there  were  considerable
changes  in  the  time  of  the  classical  jurists.  Systematic  teachers  of
elementary  legal  knowledge  arose,  after  the  pattern  of  the  rhetoricians
whom  Cicero  decried  (Orat.  41.  42),  and  opened  regular  schools
with  a  fixed  rate  of  remuneration.  The  exact  date  of  this  innovation
is  uncertain,  but  it  can  hardly  be  later  than  Antoninus  Pius  (a.  d.
1 38-161);  Gellius,  who  wrote  shortly  after  this  period,  alludes  to  a
legal  problem  which  in  his  youth  was  much  discussed  '  in  plerisque
Romae  stationibus  ius  publice  docentium  aut  respondentium,'  and
by  the  stationes  ius  docentium  (whom  he  distinguishes  from  respon-
dentes  or  jurists)  he  probably  meant  elementary  schools  of  law.
These  teachers  are  called  by  Ulpian  '  iuris  civilis  professores '  (Dig.
50.  13.  I.  5)^  and  to  the  profession  of  a  liberal  art  were  attached
some  not  inconsiderable  privileges  (see  Inst.  i.  26.  15) ;  but  they
were  not  held  in  any  very  high  esteem,  such  as  that  enjoyed  by  the


CONDITION  OF  THE  LAW  AFTER  CONSTANTINE.  6i

great  jurists,  though  some  writers  have  erroneously  thought  that  the
latter  even  actually  engaged  in  this  form  of  instruction.  But  the  old
theory  that  the  teaching  of  a  liberal  art  should  be  gratuitous,  which
was  in  part  the  foundation  of  the  dislike  of  the  sophists,  was  main-
tained. Ulpian  says  (Dig.  loc.  cit)  that  the  iuris  civilis  professores
could  not  sue  in  the  courts  for  their  fees,  for  to  make  a  traffic  of
such  a  'res  sanctissima'  was  a  disgrace;  though  one  of  the  statutory
privileges  of  all  'professors'  was  the  obligation  of  the  praeses  to
assist  them  in  recovering  their  honoraria  by  his  extraordinaria
cognitio  (Dig.  loc  cit.  §  6).

Under  Constantine  (a.d.  306-337)  the  constitution  lost  its  last
sembUmce  of  republican  form,  and  assumed  the  character  of  an
open  despotism.  The  most  important  results  of  this  were  a  more
rigid  concentration  of  all  executive  authority,  separation  of  the  civil
and  military  administrations,  which  had  hitherto  existed  in  close
combination,  and  the  institution  of  a  graduated  official  hierarchy,
with  a  consequent  division  of  ranks  and  dignities.  The  distinctions
of  condition  rest  either  on  an  independent  foundation  or  on  the
simple  will  of  the  emperor.  Of  the  first  kind  are  the  old  contrasts
between  elves,  Latini,  and  peregrini,  between  ingenui  and  libertini,
and  between  men  of  unblemished  civil  reputation  and  infames ;  also
a  new  one  between  proprietors  and  non-proprietors  of  land  Of  the
second  kind  are  the  patriciate,  a  new  distinction  devised  by  the
emperors  as  a  reward  for  feithful  service  in  the  state  or  in  the  field,
and  the  other  dignities  of  the  court  and  of  the  civil  and  military
administration,  dignitates  palatinae,  civiles,  militares.  All  of  these
were  arranged  in  a  fixed  order  of  precedence,  and  differentiated  from
one  another  by  terms  of  honour  such  as  illustris,  spectabilis,
clarissimus.  It  would  be  tedious,  however,  to  enter  into  a  full
account  of  these,  though  more  or  less  connected  with  the  subject  of
l^slative  power.  Constantine*s  three  sons,  Constantine  II,  Con-
stantius,  and  Constans  (a.d.  336-361),  by  their  internal  discords
and  the  weakness  of  their  efforts  to  suppress  other  pretenders
to  the  throne,  paved  the  way  to  the  final  division  of  the  empire
into  West  and  East,  which  took  place  under  Arcadius  and
Honorius,  a.  d.  395.  For  some  generations  the  two  empires
subsisted  side  by  side  with  one  another.  From  the  commence-
ment of  the  fifth  century,  however,  the  Germanic  peoples  began
to  intrude  themselves  into  the  dominions  of  the  Western  Em-
peror, and  their  agressions  became  year  by  year  more  menacing,
until,  after  having^long  been  a  mere  object  of  booty  to  the  bar-


62  INTRODUCTION.

barians,  the  Western  Empire  was  finally  absorbed  in  their  conquests
A.  D.  476.

From  this  brief  notice  of  the  political  history  we  turn  to  a  more
appropriate  subject,  the  condition  of  the  law  in  the  period  intervening
between  Constantine  and  Justinian.  Of  the  influences  to  which
must  be  attributed  the  general  character  and  tendency  of  its  develop-
ment one  is  intimately  connected  with  the  division  of  the  empire
into  West  and  East.  The  jurists  had  raised  the  ius  gentium  to
a  level  with  the  ius  civile,  and  had  esteemed  naturalis  as  powerful
a  principle  as  civilis  ratio.  But  among  the  peoples  which  composed
the  Eastern  Empire,  and  which  were  Roman  in  name  only^  it  was
inevitable  that  the  universal  should  gain  the  preponderance  over  the
particular  jural  element,  as  more  favourable  to  the  survival  of  the
legal  system  beyond  the  life  of  the  individual  nation ;  the  part  which
was  '  civitatis  proprium '  and  strictly  national  could  not  fail  to  decay
and  gradually  disappear.  Old  legal  dispositions,  such  as  mancipatio
and  in  iure  cessio,  were  practically  superseded  by  free  forms  peculiar
to  no  single  nation,  and  simultaneously  the  distinctions  of  cives,
Latini,  and  peregrini  ceased  to  have  any  real  meaning,  even  if  they
were  still  occasionally  to  be  found ;  thus  the  old  separation  of  ius
civile  and  ius  gentium  rapidly  tended  to  disappear  by  the  former
becoming  absorbed  in  and  swallowed  up  by  the  latter.  Secondly,
it  is  to  be  observed  that  Constantine  had  publicly  sanctioned
Christianity,  which  Theodosius  further  proclaimed  as  the  religion  of
the  state :  and  the  effects  of  this  b^an  to  show  themselves  at  once
in  the  field  of  private  law.  There  was  thus  infused  into  both
legislation  and  judicature  the  spirit  of  a  higher  equity  and  a  diviner
justice  than  bad  been  familiar  to  the  classical  jurists,  which  left  its
traces  during  this  period  on  many  of  the  rules  relating  to  slavery,
colonatus,  marriage,  concubinage,  and  patria  potestas.  Justinian
himself  legislated  openly  in  favour  of  the  Church ;  for  examples  of
this  reference  may  be  made  to  the  index  to  the  text  (s.  v.  *  Church ').
Lastly,  the  constitutional  changes  which  have  been  briefly  noticed
produced  modifications  in  private  law  through  the  revolution  which
they  effected  in  judicature,  and  consequently  in  civil  procedure,  and
which  will  be  treated  in  a  later  part  of  this  book.

The  legislative  authority  by  which  the  legal  changes  thus  generally
described  were  introduced  requires  some  notice.  The  old  magistrates
of  the  populus  had  now  formally  been  transformed  into  imperial
officials,  and  we  can  hardly  believe  that  the  latter  could  have  deemed
themselves  competent  to  exercise  the  praetor's  function  of  harmonis-


THE  LAW  OF  THE  LATER  EMPIRE.  63

ing  the  'strictum  ius'  with  the  *ius  aequum'  by  their  own  in-
dependent action.  '£x  abundanti  cautela/  however,  Constantine
issued  a  constitution  expressly  forbidding  th^m  to  attempt  any  such
task :  '  inter  aequitatem  iusque  interpositam  interpretationem  nobis
solis  et  oportet  et  licet  inspicere'  (Constantine  in  Cod-  i.  14.  i).
Nor  is  it  to  be  expected  that,  under  such  conditions  as  those  of  the
Eastern  £mpire,  new  law  could  be  begotten  by  usage.  Usage  or
custom,  so  far  as  it  is  fitted  to  become  law,  is  grounded  upon
a  common  apprehension  of  an  unwritten  rule,  upon  a  common
conviction  that  so  and  so  is  right  and  ought  to  be  done.  Now  the
peoples  of  whom  the  empire  was  composed  were  so  diverse  that
they  had  but  one  characteristic  in  common,  viz.  that  they  were  not
Romans.  They  could  have  no  common  legal  habit  as  a  nation,
and  thus  could  generate  no  new  positive  customary  law  save  merely
local  rules  ;  the  only  influence  they  could  unite  to  exercise  was  a  ne-
gative one,  to  abandon  all  such  portions  of  the  system  as  were
purely  and  exclusively  Roman.  And  this  destructive  work,  as  we
have  seen,  they  did  do.  So  with  the  other  sources  of  the  ius  scriptum
which  are  enumerated  in  the  Institutes  (i.  2.  3).  Leges  proper,
plebiscita,  and  senatus  consulta,  as  we  know,  had  long  been  obsolete;
and  it  has  been  seen  that  all  growth  of  the  ius  honorarium  had
ceased  since  the  time  of  Hadrian.  Still,  the  development  of  law
might  have  been  carried  on,  as  it  had  been  from  Augustus  to
Maximian,  by  the  responsa  prudentium  and  systematic  treatises  of
authorized  jurists;  but  we  look  in  vain  for  these  forms  of  legal
activity,  for  true  jurisprudence  had  already  died  a  natural  death.
The  juristic  literature  of  the  period  now  under  consideration  consists
merely  of  compilations  from  statutes  or  constitutions  and  from  the
writings  of  earlier  prudentes.  Theodosius  II  (a.  d.  408-450)  attests
the  cessation  of  true  juristic  work  in  the  enactment  by  which  he
promulgated  his  codex  constitutionum :  '  saepe  nostra  dementia
dubitavit,  quae  causa  faceret,  ut  tantis  propositis  praemiis,  quibus
artes  et  studia  nutriuntur,  tarn  pauci  raroque  extiterint,  qui  plena
iuris  civilis  scientia  ditarentur,  et  in  tanto  lucubrationum  tristi  pallore
vix  unus  aut  alter  receperit  soliditatem  perfectae  doctrinae.'  His
own  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  is  the  vast  multiplicity  of
imperial  ordinances  and  juristic  books  without  an  adequate  study  of
which  a  knowledge  of  the  law  was  impossible;  and  the  hope  is
expressed  that  a  remedy  for  this  will  be  afforded  by  the  comparatively
small  dimensions  of  his  own  compilation.
Direct  imperial  legislation  thus  remained  the  only  form  in  which


64  INTRODUCTION.

changes  could  be  effected  in  positive  law.  What  Justinian  says  in
Cod.  I.  14.  12  is  true  of  the  whole  period  extending  backward  from
himself  to  Constantine :  '  In  praesenti  leges  condere  soli  imperatori
concessum  est,  et  leges  interpretari  solum  dignum  imperio  esse
oportet ;'  and  this  will  account  for  the  ever-increasing  activity  of  the
imperial  legislation*  In  the  interval  of  T30  years  between  Constan-
tine and  Theodosius  II  the  mass  of  general  constitutions  had  already
become  so  great  that  the  latter  emperor's  compilation  formed  a  book  of
very  considerable  dimensions,  and  yet  in  this  much  was  curtailed,  still
more  omitted  :  for  instance,  it  contained  none  of  the  enactments  of
Diocletian,  whose  contributions  in  the  code  of  Justinian  number  1247.
We  have  already  touched  upon  the  practical  difficulties  which
arose  in  the  application  of  responsa  to  the  judicial  decision  of  actions
which  came  before  the  courts,  and  noticed  the  usage  which  apparently
prevailed  as  to  this  matter  in  the  earlier  empire,  and  which  Gaius
tells  us  was  directly  confirmed  by  a  rescript  of  Hadrian.  In  the  200
years  which  had  elapsed  between  the  period  marked  by  the  names
of  such  men  as  Ulpian  and  Papinian  and  the  age  of  Theodosius  II
these  difficulties  had  considerably  increased ;  for  it  seems  beyond
dispute  that,  whether  through  Hadrian's  rescript  or  some  other
cause,  the  authority  which  had  at  first  belonged  only  to  responsa  had
extended  itself  to  the  voluminous  general  legal  writings  of  lawyers
who  had  possessed  the  ius  respondendi,  and  it  had  become  im-
peratively necessary  to  discover  some  remedy.  That  which  most
immediately  suggested  itself  was  to  limit  the  authority  which  this
literature  in  general  enjoyed  to  a  moderate  number  of  books,  a  plan
which  had  already  in  its  &vour  the  rough  scheme  of  precedence
which  general  practice  had  established  among  the  works  of  the
classical  jurists.  Certain  books  had  acquired  a  prescriptive  authority
in  the  various  schools  of  law,  public  and  private,  which  were  located
in  various  parts  of  the  empire.  A  student  commenced  with  the
Institutes  of  Gaius,  which  were  followed  by  the  Commentaries  on
the  Edict,  especially  those  of  Ulpian  and  Paulus,  and  the  latter's
responsa,  quaestiones,  and  receptae  sententiae:  the  course  closed
with  Papinian  and  Modestinus.  The  writings  of  these  five  jurists
had  thus  obtained  a  preponderance  which  naturally  extended  itself
from  the  schools  to  the  tribunals.  Yet  among  them  there  were  a
great  many  controversies,  and  in  this  epoch  neither  the  emperor  nor
the  parties  to  an  action  were  likely  to  be  satisfied  with  the  rule  which
Gaius  (i.  7)  states  on  the  authority  of  Hadrian,  that  where  jurists  of
different  views  were  cited  the  judge  might  adopt  whichever  of  the


THE  LAW  OF  CITATIONS.  65

conflicting  views  he  pleased.  In  order  to  obviate  these  difficulties,
Constantine  had  (a.d.  321)  deprived  of  all  validity  the  notes  of
Ulptan  and  Pauius  on  Papinlan,  in  which  they  had  often  found
occasion  to  controvert  his  opinions.  A  more  complete  remedy  was
provided  by  the  so-called  Maw  of  Citations/  issued  a.  d.  426  by  the
emperors  Theodosius  II  and  Valentinian  III.  By  this  it  was
enacted  that  when  conflicting  opinions  were  cited  in  a  court  of
justice  from  juristic  writings  with  statutory  authority,  that  opinion
should  be  adopted  by  the  judge  in  whose  favour  most  jurists  were
brought  forward ;  if  the  numbers  were  equal,  the  view  of  Papinian
should  prevail ;  if,  in  case  of  equality,  no  definite  opinion  on  the
case  in  hand  could  be  extracted  from  this  jurist,  the  judge  might
select  from  the  conflicting  views  at  his  own  discretion.  It  thus
became  the  business  of  the  parties  to  relieve  the  judge  of  the  labour
of  collating  the  Muris  auctores.'  The  procedure  is  compared  by
Rudorfi*  to  that  of  the  imperial  council,  or  court  of  appeal,  in  which
the  majority  of  votes  had  always  won  the  day ;  '  when  it  had  ceased
to  be  usual  to  convoke  and  consult  living  jurists,  the  practice  was
transferred  to  the  councils  of  the  dead.'  So  far  the  '  law  of  Citations '
creates  no  difficulty ;  but  as  to  the  eflect  of  another  passage  there
has  been  much  diversity  of  opinion.  That  passage  runs  as  follows :
'Papiniani,  Pauli,  Gaii,  Ulpiani  atque  Modestini  scripta  universa
firmamus,  ita  ut  Gaium,  quae  Paulum,  Ulpianum  et  cunctos,  comitetur
auctoritas,  lectionesque  ex  omni  ejus  opere  recitentur.  Eorum
quoque  scientiam,  quorum  tractatus  atque  sententias  praedicti  omnes
suis  operibus  miscuerunt,  ratam  esse  censemus,  ut  Scaevolae,  Sabini,
Juliani  atque  Marcelli,  omniumque  quos  illi  celebrarunt,  si  tamen
eorum  libri,  propter  antiquitatis  incertum,  codicum  collatione
firmentur.  Ubi  autem  diversae  sententiae  proferuntur,'  etc.  (Cod.
Theod.  I.  4.  3).  This  is  explained  by  some  writers*  to  mean  (i)
that  statutory  force  was  hereby  for  the  first  time  given  to  the  works
of  Gaius,  Papinian,  Ulpian,  Pauius,  and  Modestinus,  and  to  those  of
other  prudentes  who  were  therein  cited  ;  and  (2)  that  all  other  juristic
literature  (including  the  notes  of  Ulpian  and  Pauius  on  Papinian)
was  in  future  to  have  no  validity  whatever.  If  this  interpretation  is
the  true  one,  the  view  which  has  been  above  stated,  that  the  writings
of  authorized  jurists  had  for  some  time  possessed  authority  equal  to


'  £.g.  Sayigny,  System,  i.  §  a6 ;  History  of  the  Roman  Law  in  the  Middle  Ages,
p.  38.  The  view  adopted  in  the  text  is  supported  by  Pnchta,  Bethmann-HoUweg,
Danz,  and  Karlowa.


66  INTRODUCTION.

that  of  their  responsa,  is  clearly  erroneous.  But  the  arguments
against  it  are  extremely  strong.  Though  the  Maw  of  Citations'
confirms  the  authority  of  the  five  leading  jurists,  it  is  very  far  from
expressly  excluding  the  authority  of  others ;  it  mentions  others,  and
dearly  only  exempli  gratia,  as  representative  of  the  great  mass  of
other  juristic  literature;  and  the  weight  which  it  allows  to  these
others  is  not  less,  except  in  cases  of  equality  of  voices,  than  that  of
the  five.  Secondly,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  works  of  other
jurists  are  frequently  cited  as  authorities  by  later  emperors  (e.  g.
Julian  by  Leo  and  Anthemius  in  Cod.  6.  6i.  5 ;  Marcian  by
Justinian  in  Cod.  7.  7.  i ;  TertuUian  in  Cod.  5.  70.  7).  But  the
strongest  argument  of  all  is  to  be  found  in  the  Constitutions  issued
by  Justinian  with  reference  to  the  compilation  of  the  Digest,  in
which  he  instructs  the  compilers  to  make  excerpts  from  the  authorized
jurists,  and  in  the  fact  that,  acting  under  this  commission,  they
selected  thirty-eight  writers,  and  inserted  in  the  work  passages  from
every  one  of  them ;  this  they  could  not  possibly  have  done  if  the
only  authorized  jurists  at  the  time  of  their  appointment  had  been
the  five  whose  names  have  been  mentioned.  And  the  force  of  this
fact  is  irresistibly  increased  by  the  words  used  by  Justinian  in  Cod.
I.  17.  2.  20  with  reference  to  the  publication  of  the  Digest,  where  he
says  that  he  has  therein  made  selections  from  the  jurists  (legislatores
et  commentatores)  '  quos  et  anteriores  piissimi  principes  admittere
non  sunt  indignati.'

It  would  seem  then  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  disputed  passage
is  that  which  has  been  given  to  it  by  other  civilians  ^ ;  namely,  that
it  was  intended  to  supply  a  criterion  by  which  the  authority  of  any
and  every  juristic  writer  could  be  tested.  Its  intention  was  not  to
exclude  any  authorized  jurist,  but  to  remove  the  difficulty  which
arose  from  the  existence  and  quotation  of  works  by  writers  who  had
received  no  auctoritas  or  ius  respondendi,  and  to  which  Justinian  bears
witness  in  Cod.  i.  17.  i.  4.  The  test  was  to  be  the  ius  respondendi,
and  the  possession  of  this  was  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  of  one
jurist  being  cited  as  an  authority  by  another  of  undeniable  reputation.
The  legislator  attained  his  object  by  selecting  a  small  number  of
the  most  recent  and  distinguished  jurists  who  had  possessed  the  ius
respondendi,  and  by  confirming  their  authority,  and  also  that  of  all
others  whose  views  they  quoted.  Some  difficulty  is  occasioned  by
the  words  '  si  tamen  eorum  libri  propter  antiquitatis  incertum  codicum

^  £.  g.  Puchta,  Institationen,  vol.  1.  p.  37a,  (8th  edition,  1875).


PARTIAL  CODIFICATIONS  BEFORE  JUSTINIAN,    67

coUatione,'  which  seem  to  mean  that  even  when  a  jurist  is  cited
by  one  of  the  five,  he  is  not  to  be  allowed  a  voice  in  the  decision  of
a  case  unless  his  view,  as  quoted,  is  proved  and  confirmed  by  a  com-
parison of  the  passage  of  the  citing  jurist  with  the  original  work
(codices)  of  the  author  quoted.  The  enactment  would  thus  prac-
tically secure  to  all  approved  writers  the  weight  which  they  had
hitherto  enjoyed,  while  it  would  relieve  judges  of  the  weary  task  of
listening  to  the  opinions  of  others  of  only  second-rate  importance ;
it  excluded  only  jurists  who  had  never  possessed  a  first-rate  repu-
tation, and  in  particular  those  who  lived  after  Modestinus  \

The  only  subject  with  which  we  have  yet  to  deal,  before  proceeding
to  speak  of  the  legislation  of  Justinian^  is  that  of  the  codices  constitu-
tionum,  or  compilations  of  imperial  ordinances,  which  spread  them-
selves over  about  two  and  a  half  centuries.  The  first  with  which  we
are  acquainted  is  the  codex  Gregorianus,  a  collection  mainly  of
rescripts  issued  from  the  time,  probably,  of  Hadrian  up  to  a.  d.  284,
and  principally  rescripts  of  Septimius  Severus  and  the  emperors  who
succeeded  him.  Its  exact  date  is  uncertain,  but  it  cannot  well  be
placed  earlier  than  a.  d.  295 ;  its  arrangement  was  based  upon  that  of
the  current  commentaries  on  the  Edict.  Another  compilation  of  the
same  character  is  the  codex  Hermogenianus,  which  may  be  regarded
as  an  appendix  to  the  foregoing.  The  oldest  constitution  which  it
contained  was  issued  a.  d.  290  or  291 ;  the  great  majority  of  them
belong  to  Diocletian  and  Maximian  (a.  d.  284-305),  though  seven
enacted  by  Valens  and  Valentinian,  about  a.  d.  365,  are  also  referred
to  it ;  if  this  is  correct,  its  composition  must  lie  between  a.  d.  365  and
A.  D.  398,  but  there  are  civilians  who  place  it  many  years  before  the
earlier  of  these  two  dates,  and  accordingly  deny  that  it  could  have
comprised  constitutions  of  Valens  and  Valentinian.  Both  of  these
codices,  so  far  as  we  know,  were  formed  by  private  persons,  that  is  to
say,  not  under  the  authority  of  an  imperial  commission  ;  they  were  in
constant  use  both  in  the  West  and  in  the  East,  and  lost  their  im-
portance in  the  latter  half  of  the  empire  only  by  being  absorbed  in
his  own  code  by  Justinian.

m  I  ■         ■  .  II        I  I  III

m

^  The  opening  words  in  the  passage  transcribed  above  from  the  *  law  of  Cita-
tions,' by  which  the  statutory  authority  which  the  other  four  leading  jurists  had
always  possessed  is  extended  to  Gains,  go  to  show  that  the  latter  was  not  a
'  imis  anctor/  and  had  never  been  invested  with  the  '  ius  respondendi.'  This  in-
ference is  supported  by  the  fact  that,  though  his  writings  were  so  various,  they
contained  no  responsa,  though  among  them  was  a  '  liber  de  casibus/  in  which  he
collected  a  large  number  of  illustrative  cases,  many  of  which  were  imaginary,
while  of  the  real  ones  none  had  been  authoritatively  pronounced  upon  by  himself.

F   2


68  INTRODUCTION.

The  contents  of  the  so-called  'Vatican  fragments '  are  more  mis-
cellaneous. They  are  portions  of  a  compilation  of  excerpts  from
juristic  writings  and  imperial  rescripts  and  edicts,  and  were  discovered
in  1820  and  first  published  in  1823.  The  author  is  unknown,  but  the
date  of  the  work  must  be  between  a.  d.  372  and  a.  d.  438,  for  it  con-
tains a  constitution  issued  in  the  first  of  these  two  years,  and  in  the
latter  the  Theodosian  code  was  published.  The  jurists  whose  works
are  most  largely  laid  under  contribution  are  Papinian  (responsa  and
quaestiones),  Ulpian  (libri  ad  edictum,  etc)  and  Paulus  (libri
ad  edictum,  sententiae,  responsa,  quaestiones,  etc.) ;  Celsus,  Julian,
and  Pomponius  are  also  often  cited.  The  work  seems  to  have  had
a  purely  practical  purpose,  and  was  arranged  in  Titles  subdivided
into  rubrics.  Seven  of  the  Titles  are  extant,  relating  to  the  following
subjects  :  (i)  ex  empto  et  vendito ;  (2)  de  usufructu  ;  (3)  de  re  uxoria
et  dotibus;  (4)  de  excusatione;  (5)  quando  donator  intelligatur
revocasse  voluntatem;  (6)  de  donationibus  ad  legem  Cinciam;
(7)  de  cognitoribus  et  procuratoribus.

In  A.  D.  429  Theodosius  II,  Emperor  of  the  East,  informed  the
senate  of  his  resolution  to  codify  the  constitutions  of  Constantine  I
(a.  d.  306-337)  and  all  his  successors  by  means  of  a  commission  of
nine  persons:  ^Ad  similitudinem  Gregoriani  atque  Hermogeniani
codicis  cunctas  colligi  constitutiones  decernimus,  quas  Constantinus
inclytus  et  post  eum  divi  principes  nosque  tulimus,  edictorum  viribus
aut  sacra  generalitate  subnixas '  (Cod.  Theod.  1. 1 . 5).  Nothing,  how-
ever, was  done  till  a.  d.  435,  when  a  fresh  commission  of  sixteen  per-
sons was  appointed  for  the  purpose,  with  power  to  make  alterations
in  individual  constitutions.  The  result  was  the  Theodosian  Code,  pro-
mulgated in  February  a.  d.  438,  with  statutory  force  from  and  after  the
commencement  of  a.  d.  439,  as  the  only  authority  for  the  *  ius  principale,'
or  imperial  legislation,  from  Constantine  I  to  that  date.  It  consisted
of  sixteen  books,  arranged  separately  in  Titles  and  rubrics,  and  the
constitutions  in  each  Title  were  placed  in  chronological  order.  The
first  five  books  were  arranged  on  the  plan  of  the  commentaries  on  the
Edict,  and  contained  most  of  the  enactments  relating  to  private  law.
The  sixth  to  the  eighth  books  consist  principally  of  constitutional
and  administrative  ordinances ;  the  ninth  is  criminal  law ;  the  tenth
and  eleventh  relate  to  the  financial  system,  and  in  part  to  procedure ;
the  twelfth  to  the  fifteenth,  to  the  constitution  and  administration  of
towns  and  other  corporations,  and  the  sixteenth  contains  the  consti-
tutions which  deal  with  the  church  and  the  ecclesiastical  system  in
general.    This  code  was  accepted  in  the  West  as  well  as  in  the  East,


THE  THEODOSIAN  CODE.  69

and  partly  thus,  partly  by  the  '  law  of  Citations '  of  twelve  years'  earlier
date,  uniformity  of  law  was  secured  throughout  the  two  halves  of  the
empire.  Precautions  were  also  taken  against  subsequent  divergence :
the  two  governments  agreed  that  constitutions  which  either  might
find  occasion  to  make  should  be  communicated  by  the  one  to  the  other,
and  subject  to  revision  by  mutual  consent  be  published  by  both  legis-
latures ;  in  default  of  this  procedure  they  should  have  no  universal
validity.  In  contradistinction  to  the  code,  such  single  enactments
were  called  novellae  leges  or  novels ;  a  number  of  them  were  issued
by  Theodosius,  a.  d.  448,  and  confirmed  by  Valentinian  III  in  the
West  in  the  following  year.  The  joint  style  of  enactment  was  actually
followed  till  A.D.  455,  and  there  are  several  collections  of  novels  which
belong  to  this  period.  From  a.  d.  455  the  tie  between  the  two  empires
was  greatly  weakened,  though  Anthemius  (a.d.  467-472)  published
in  the  West  an  enactment  issued  in  the  East  by  Leo :  formally,  how-
ever, the  connection  was  maintained,  so  that. the  new  constitutions
still  bore  the  names  of  both  emperors,  though  the  place  of  their  issue
or  the  province  of  the  magistrates  to  whom  they  were  addressed
enable  one  to  infer  to  which  of  the  two  empires  they  more  properly
belong.

Certain  compilations  of  Roman  law  made  by  the  barbarians  who
swept  away  the  Western  empire  deserve  a  passing  notice,  (i)  Among
the  Ostrogoths,  whose  king  Theodoric  (a.d.  475-526)  conquered  Italy
in  A.  D.  493,  and  ruled  it  as  representative  of  the  emperor  at  Constan-
tinople, the  Roman  and  German  systems  did  not,  as  elsewhere,  stand
in  opposition  to  one  another,  but  the  Gothic  invaders  resigned  their
own  law  and  submitted  themselves  to  that  of  Rome.  The  '  Edictum
Theodorid '  is  a  collection  of  the  most  practically  important  rules  of
Roman  law  arranged  in  statute  form  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the
countrymen  of  Theodoric  to  know  the  law  under  which  they  lived,
and  is  based  on  the  imperial  constitutions  and  the  sententiae  and
responsa  of  Paulus.  Among  the  Visigoths  and  fiurgundians,  on  the
other  band,  the  <Miginal  subjects  of  the  empire  retained  their  own
jurisprudence,  to  which  their  conquerors  declined  to  submit  them-
selves. Thus  (2)  the  codex  Alaricianus  (or  breviarium)  was  a  kind
of  Digest  of  the  law  observed  by  the  Roman  subjects  of  the  Visigoth
king  Alaric  II  (a.  d.  484-507),  comprising,  besides  imperial  constitu-
tions, very  large  portions  of  the  commentaries  of  Gaius,  and  excerpts
from  the  sententiae  of  Paulus  and  Papinian's  liber  I  responsorum.
(3)  A  compilation  of  Roman  law  for  the  Roman  subjects  of  the
Burgundian  empire  was  made  by  order  of  king  Sigismund  about  517


70  INTRODUCTION.

A.  D.;  it  is  usually  termed  'Papian'  (abbreviated  from  Papinian,
because  it  is  said  to  have  commenced  with  that  jurist's  liber  I  respon-
scrum)  and  contains  forty-seven  Titles,  part  of  which  are  taken  from
the  code  of  Alaric

Justinian,  who  was  of  Sclav  descent,  was  at  the  age  of  forty-five
(a.  d.  527)  raised  by  his  uncle  Justinus  to  the  position  of  joint  ruler  of
the  Eastern  Empire,  and  in  the  same  year,  by  the  death  of  his  partner,
he  became  sole  emperor.  In  the  interval  of  somewhat  less  than  a
century  which  had  elapsed  since  the  legal  reforms  of  Theodosius  and
Valentinian,  a  process  of  divergence  had  been  constantly  going  on
between  the  law  as  laid  down  in  the  code  of  Theodosius  and  the  '  law
of  Citations,'  and  the  law  as  actually  applied  in  the  tribunals.  This
was  principally  due  to  the  small  number  of  copies  which  existed  of  the
authorized  enactments  and  juristic  literature :  ^  Homines  etenim,  qui
antea  lites  agebant,  licet  multae  leges  fuerant  positae,  tamen  ex  paucis
lites  praeferebant,  vel  propter  inopiam  librorum,  quos  comparare  eis
impossibile  erat,  vel  propter  ipsam  inscientiam,  et  voluntate  judicum
magis  quam  legitima  auctoritate  lites  dirimebantur '  (Justinian  in  Cod.
I.  17.  2.  17).  It  had  thus  become  extremely  necessary  that  these
should  be  multiplied,  and  also,  if  possible,  recast  in  a  more  convenient
form,  which  should  enable  such  alterations  to  be  made  in  the  substan-
tive law  as  circumstances  demanded,  and  also  secure  the  incorporation
in  the  main  work  of  the  detached  constitutions  which  had  been  pub-
lished since  the  code  of  Theodosius.  Theodosius  had  himself  con-
ceived the  design  of  combining  the  writings  of  the  authorized  jurists
and  the  imperial  legislation  (which  had  now  been  long  contrasted
under  the  terms  ius  and  leges)  in  one  comprehensive  statute  book ;
but  the  idea  of  combination  had  produced  no  results,  and  of  that
emperor's  two  great  reforms  the  one  related  to  ius,  the  other  to  leges
only.  When  Justinian  had  resolved  on  his  great  scheme  of  giving  a
new  form  to  the  Roman  law,  the  enormous  mass  of  the  material  and
the  convenience  of  dividing  the  labour  of  codification  caused  him  to
prefer  the  retention  of  the  two  elements  of  the  ius  scriptum  in  separa-
tion. He  also  hesitated  whether  to  retain  them  in  their  existing
shape,  subject  of  course  to  such  alterations  as  were  called  for  by  the
necessity  of  harmonising  them  inter  se^  and  with  the  law  as  at  present
administered,  or,  while  preserving  their  tenor  and  substance,  to  com-
pletely alter  their  literary  form  \  he  tells  us  that  a  regard  for  the  past,
and  admiration  for  the  services  which  the  jurists  and  his  imperial  pre-
decessors had  rendered  to  jurisprudence,  had  decided  him  in  favour
of  the  former  alternative.


THE  CODE  AND  DIGEST  OF  JUSTINIAN.  71

The  codification  of  the  imperial  legislation,  as  having  been  in  part
already  executed,  presented  the  least  difficulty ;  its  claim  was  also  the
more  pressing,  because  all  imperial  officers  were  required  by  law  to
possess  copies  of  the  existing  codices.  This  task  was  accordingly
first  taken  in  hand.  In  a.d.  528  Justinian  appointed  a  commission
for  the  purpose  of  ten  persons,  among  them  being  Tribonian,  who
played  so  important  a  part  in  the  legislative  work  of  the  next  few
years,  and  who  not  improbably  suggested  to  his  master  his  whole
scheme  of  l^;al  reform.  The  work  with  which  they  were  entrusted
was  to  form  a  single  code  out  of  the  codices  Gregorianus,  Hermoge*
nianus,  and  Theodosianus,  and  the  constitutions  issued  since  a.d.  439 ;
omitting  aU  that  was  superfluous,  reconciling  such  enactments  as  were
inconsistent  with  one  another,  and,  where  convenience  required,  com-
bining several  into  one  ('  colligentes  vero  in  unam  sanctionem,  quae
in  variis  constitutionibus  dispersa  sunt,  et  sensum  earum  clariorem
efficientes ') ;  finally,  they  were  authorized  to  make  any  alterations  in
individual  constitutions  which  they  should  deem  necessary  ('  adiici-
entes  quidem  et  detrahentes,  immo  et  mutantes  verba  earum,  ubi  hoc
rei  commoditas  exigebat ').  The  separate  laws  were  to  be  arranged  in
chronological  order  under  generic  titles,  and  each,  so  far  as  was  pos-
sible, identified  by  date  and  the  name  of  the  prince  to  whom  it  owed
its  introduction.  The  work  was  completed  in  April  a.d.  529,  and  was
published  under  the  name  codex  Justinianeus  with  force  of  law  from
the  1 6th  of  that  month.  The  older  codices  and  constitutions  were  at
the  same  time  deprived  of  all  validity,  and  it  was  even  forbidden  to
appeal  to  any  leges  cited  in  the  juristic  writings,  if  they  had  been
incorporated,  even  in  a  modified  form,  in  the  new  code.

The  task  of  dealing  in  a  similar  manner  with  the  writings  of  the
jurists  was  not  commenced  till  the  end  of  the  year  a.d.  530,  but  the
intervening  months  had  been  employed  in  a  preparatory  labour  which
could  not  be  dispensed  with,  and  the  purpose  of  which  was  a  rough
settlement  of  the  points  in  controversy  between  the  prudentes.  This
had  been  done  by  a  series  of  fifty  constitutions,  known  as  the  quin-
quaginta  decisiones,  which  were  regarded  as  a  separate  compilation :
'  Postea  vero,  quum  vetus  jus  considerandum  recepimus,  tam  quin-
quaginta  decisiones  fecimus^  quam  alias  ad  commodum  propositi
operis  pertinentes  plurimas  constitutiones  promulgavimus,  quibus
maximus  antiquarum  rerum  articulus  emendatus  et  coartatus  est.'
Subject  to  these,  the  commission  appointed  to  execute  the  work,
which  consisted  (besides  Tribonian,  who  superintended  it  through^
out)  of  sixteen  persons,  possessed  the  same  powers  of  omission.


73  INTRODUCTION.

alteration,  and  modification  as  had  been  exercised  by  the  compilers
of  the  Code.  They  were  instructed  not  to  limit  themselves  to  the
five  leading  jurists  who  occupy  so  prominent  a  position  in  the  '  law
of  Citations,'  but  to  select  whatever  was  valuable  in  the  works  of  all
the  ^  juris  auctores.'  The  only  exception  to  this  was  their  admission
of  Arcadius  Charisius  and  Hermogenian,  both  of  whom  lived  after
Modestinus,  and  accordingly  had  not  possessed  the  jus  respondendi.
The  total  number  of  jurists  upon  whom  they  drew  for  their  materials
was  thirty-eight :  and  Tribonian  himself  informs  us  that  the  com-
mission dealt  with  two  thousand  '  libri '  and  three  million  '  versus '
(lines  ?),  of  which  they  selected  about  one  twentieth  part  There
has  been  no  little  speculation^  as  to  the  principle  which  they
followed  in  arranging  their  matter  in  the  fifty  Books,  the  number
of  which  had  been  determined  by  Justinian  himself;  but  there  seems
no  reason  to  doubt  that  they  obeyed  in  the  main  his  instructions,
which  were  to  adopt  the  order  which  was  ready  to  hand  in  the  Code
and  in  the  Perpetual  Edict,  though  some  authorities  profess  to  be
able  to  identify  here  also  the  arrangement  under  persons,  things,  and
actions  so  familiar  in  the  Institutes  of  Gaius  and  Justinian.  Each
book  was  divided  into  Titles,  headed  by  a  brief  indication  of  their
respective  subject-matter,  and  the  excerpts  from  the  writings  of  the
jurists,  of  which  the  Titles  consisted,  were  distinguished  by  the  name
of  the  jurist  and  of  the  specific  work  from  which  they  were  taken.
As  to  the  mode  in  which  the  extracts  were  disposed  in  the  separate
Titles  the  theory  of  Bluhme  is  now  generally  accepted,  according  to
which  the  commissioners  were  broken  up  into  three  committees,  to
each  of  which  was  assigned  the  task  of  reading  and  making  extracts
from  a  particular  portion  of  the  works  to  be  digested  These
accordingly  were  divided  into  three  groups,  the  first  of  which  com*
prised  Ulpian's  commentary  on  Sabinus,  and  similar  treatises  on
topics  mainly  governed  by  the  civil  law :  the  second,  the  bulk  of
the  commentaries  on  the  Perpetual  Edict :  and  the  third,  Papinian's
writings  and  supplementary  works :  they  are  termed  the  Sabinian,
the  Edictal,  and  the  Papinian  groups  respectively,  and  are  estimated
by  Bluhme  to  have  contributed  to  the  total  result  in  the  proportion
5,  4,  and  3.  When  each  of  the  three  committees  had  completed
its  portion  of  the  work  they  met  together,  and  their  contributions
were  collocated  rather  than  combined  under  each  Title,  the  most
considerable  being  placed  first,  and  the  others  following  after  excision

* ^

^  £.  g.  Roby,  Introduction  to  Joitinian's  Digest,  chap.  iii.


JUSTINIAN'S  DIGEST  AND  INSTITUTES,  73

of  portions  dealing  with  points  already  sufficiently  treated  in  the  main
contribution  \

The  whole  work  was  called  Pandectae  or  Digesta^  the  latter  name
being  derived  perhaps  from  Justinian's  expression  in  the  ordinance
appointing  the  commission  ('  codex  in  quinquaginta  libros  digestus '),
or  more  probably  from  a  work  of  Salvius  Julianus  which  bore  the
same  title.  It  was  published  on  Dec.  19th,  533,  with  statutory  force
from  the  30th  of  the  same  month,  and  the  use  of  the  juristic  writings
from  which  it  was  compiled  was  for  the  future  interdicted ;  along  with
the  Code  and  the  Institutes,  it  was  intended  to  form  the  exclusive
authority  for  the  earlier  law.  Though  the  names  of  their  authors  had
been  prefixed  to  the  individual  excerpts,  Justinian  ordained  that  they
should  be  taken  to  be  immediately  enacted  by  himself,  and  to  derive
their  force  from  him,  not  from  the  reputation  of  the  jurist  or  from  the
empercM'  who  had  conferred  on  him  the  ius  respondendi ;  finally,  in
order  to  prevent  all  controversies  in  the  future,  he  forbade  all  com-
mentaries  on  the  Digest,  allowing  only  Greek  paraphrases  and  sum-
maries of  the  contents:  'Omnibus  similiter  interdicimus,  ne  quis
audeat  hominum,  qui  sunt  nunc,  aut  in  posterum  erunt,  commentarios
scribere  harum  legum^  praeterquam  si  velit  quis  in  Graccam  linguam
haec  transferre,  quern  etiam  volumus  sola  secundum  pedem  seu  narh
iroda  nuncupata  uti  legum  interpretatione,  et  si  quid  secundum  nomi-
natorum  paiatitlorum,  ut  conveniens  est,  adscribere  voluerit  usum.
Aliud  autem  nihil  omnino  ne  tantillum  quidem  circa  ea  facere,  nee
nirsum  dare  seditionis  et  dubitationis,  aut  infinitae  multitudinis
legibus  occasionem'  (Justinian  in  Const,  'dedit  nobis,'  21).

With  the  completion  of  the  Code  and  the  Digest,  which  between
them  exhausted  all  the  sources  of  Roman  law,  Justinian's  plan  was
fully  executed.  These  bulky  works,  however  (as  Justinian  himself
observes  in  Inst  Prooem.  3),  were  ill-suited  for  the  elementary  instruc-
rion  of  students.  Accordingly,  as  the  commentaries  of  Gains  and  the
other  books  which  had  long  formed  the  curriculum  of  the  schools  had
been  deprived  of  all  force,  and  their  very  study  forbidden,  or  at  least
discouraged,  it  was  necessary  to  bring  out  a  new  work  in  lieu  of  them.
Upon  this  there  had  been  engaged,  even  during  the  composition  of
the  Digest,  a  small  committee  consisting  of  Tribonian,  Theophilus,
and  Dorotheus,  the  two  latter  being  professors  of  law  at  Constan-
tinople and  Berytus  respectively,  and  already  members  of  the  Digest
commission.    The  book  which  they  produced  was  called  '  Institu-

*  For  a  fuller  explanation  see  Roby,  op.  dt.,  ch.  iv.


74  INTRODUCTION.

tions  of  Justinian/  though  in  England  it  is  better  known  as  the '  Insti-
tutes ' ;  in  form,  and  to  a  great  extent  also  in  substance,  it  was  founded
on  the  commentaries  of  Gaius,  but  also  contained  large  extracts  from
the  '  Aurei '  of  the  same  writer,  as  well  as  from  the  *  Institutiones '  of
other  jurists  (e.  g.  Ulpian,  Marcian,  and  Florentinus) ;  finally,  by  apt
references  to  the  Code,  it  was  so  '  brought  up '  to  the  present  date  as
to  give  the  student  a  general  conspectus  of  the  rules  of  private  law
then  binding.

It  will  here  perhaps  not  be  unprofitable  to  inquire  briefly,  from  the
point  of  view  of  general  jurisprudence,  what  is  the  field  and  what  the
subject-matter  of  private  as  distinguished  from  public  law ;  and  in
pursuing  this  inquiry  the  method  and  terminology  of  Savigny  seem
preferable  to  those  of  the  English  analytical  school  of  jurists,  not  only
because  the  student,  if  not  already  familiar  with  the  latter,  can  easily
become  so  by  reference  to  standard  works  ^,  but  also  because  a  con-
sideration of  the  German  arrangement  will  enable  him  to  understand
more  fully  the  logical  completeness  and  the  interconnection  of  the
parts  of  the  Roman  system.  Savigny  represents  jurisprudence  as  the
science  of  legal  relations,  and  a  legal  relation  is  a  relation  between
person  and  person  defined  and  determined  by  a  rule  of  law :  this
determination  by  a  rule  of  law  consisting  in  the  assignment  of
a  sphere  or  province  to  the  individual  will,  in  which  it  is  supreme  and
independent  of  every  other  will.  Private  law  then  will  be  the  aggre-
gate of  those  positive  rules  which  define  and  determine  the  relations
between  men  in  their  private  capacity,  and  its  subject-matter  will  be
fully  discovered  by  ascertaining  the  possible  kinds  of  legal  relations.
This  is  done  by  reverting  to  the  effect  of  a  rule  of  law  on  the  relation
between  man  and  man  ;  that  is  to  say,  by  considering  the  objects  on
which  the  human  will  can  operate.  These  are,  in  brief,  one's  own
person,  and  the  external  world ;  the  latter  again  being  divided  into
reasonable  and  unreasonable,  or  persons  and  things.

As  regards  one's  own  person,  our  attention  is  at  once  directed  to
the  so-called  primordial  rights,  or  rights  of  personal  inviolability  in
respect  of  freedom,  reputation,  and  so  forth.  These,  however,  apart
and  by  themselves,  Savigny  does  not  consider  a  proper  subject  of
law.  He  admits  that  a  man  ought  to  have  the  sole  control  of
his  own  person  and  powers,  but  the  right  to  such  control  does  not
fall  within  the  ken  of  the  law  except  as  the  basis  of  rights  and  re-
lations which   belong  to  other  parts  of  the  code — which,  that  is

^  Especially  Aastin's  Lectures,  and  Holland's  Jurisprudence.


THE  SYSTEM  OF  PRIVATE  LAW,  75

to  say,  ought  not  to  be  regarded  simply  as  developments  of  this  per-
sonal inviolability,  from  which  their  content  is  clearly  distinguishable
(System  i.  p»  336-7).  'Acquired  rights'  are  thus  the  only  proper
subject  of  private  law,  and  these,  as  has  been  pointed  out,  can  relate
to  either  persons  or  things.

i.  Over  unreasonable  portions  of  the  external  world,  or  things,
a  person  may  exercise  absolute  control.  Such  absolute  control  is
called  dominion  or  ownership,  and  the  law  relating  to  it  is  known  as
the  law  of  things  (Sachenrecht).  Ownership,  however,  is  capable
of  many  forms  and  modifications ;  the  separation  of  its  elements
leads  to  the  conception  of  servitudes  and  other  rights  in  re  aliena ;
and  again,  its  actual  exercise  is  distinguishable  from  the  right,
whence  arises  the  law  relating  to  Possession.  The  main  elements  of
the  law  of  things  will  thus  be  *  Ownership,  iura  in  re  aliena,  and
Possession.

ii.  To  the  reasonable  portion  of  the  external  world,  or  to  other
persons,  one  may  stand  in  either  of  two  quite  different  relations.
Firstly,  one  man  may  be  related  to  another  somewhat  in. the  way  in
which,  as  we  have  seen,  he  may  be  related  to  things.  Over  a  thing
be  may  exercise  complete  dominion,  in  which  case  it  is  absolutely
subjected  to  his  will ;  over  a  person  he  cannot  exercise  this  power,
which  implies  an  entire  negation  of  freedom  and  personality.  But
he  may  exercise  a  partial  dominion,  a  dominion  which  consists  with
that  other  person's  freedom,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  extend  to
all  his  actions,  but  only  to  one  or  some  of  them.  If  one  man  is
absolutely  subjected  to  the  will  of  another,  he  is,  jurally,  not  a  person,
but  a  thing ;  but  if  that  other  is,  jurally,  master  of  only  certain  of  his
actions,  and  jurally  entitled  to  compel  him  to  this  or  that  act  or  for-
bearance only,  he  is,  except  in  respect  of  this  portion  of  his  activity,
still  free  and  a  person.  We  thus  get  the  idea  of  obligation  as  distinct
from  dominion,  and  these  together  form  the  two  parts  of  what  is
called  the  law  of  property,  the  relation  between  them  being  twofold  :
(a)  if  one  person  refuses  to  perform  the  act  which  he  is  bound  to
perform  in  favour  of  another,  the  law  will  condemn  him  to  pay  pecu-
niary damages,  the  obligation  being  thus  transformed  into  owner-
ship (of  money) :  {b)  the  object  of  the  vast  majority  of  obligations  is
the  acquisition  or  the  transitory  enjoyment  of  dominion.  But,
secondly,  one  man  may  be  related  to  another  as  being,  along  with
him,  a  member  of  the  organic  whole,  humanity.  In  obligation  a  per-
son is  regarded  as  an  individual  atom,  standing  apart  by  himself;
here  he  is  regarded  as  a  being  incomplete,  and  finding  his  complete-


76  INTRODUCTION.

ness  in  the  great  interconnection  of  nature.  This  is  especially
observable  in  two  points:  (a)  the  distinction  of  the  sexes,  whose
incompleteness  is  perfected  in  marriage :  and  (b)  the  limited  duration
of  human  life ;  and  here  the  deficiency  is  supplied  by  the  perpetua-
tion of  the  race,  which  leads  us  to  the  idea  of  the  periods  of  human
life,  infancy,  puberty,  manhood,  etc.,  and  the  connected  theme  of
education,  with  the  control  of  one  ][)erson  by  another  which  this  im-
plies. These  are  grouped  together  under  the  idea  of  parental  power,
with  which  is  intimately  connected  the  notion  of  kinship.  Marriage,
parental  power  and  kinship  form  together  a  department  of  the  private
code  which  we  may  call  family  law.

We  can  thus  picture  to  ourselves  three  concentric  circles,  within
which  the  human  will  can  exercise  its  supremacy :  (i)  The  original
self,  the  so-called  rights  to  which  are  not,  according  to  Savigny,
properly  subjects  of  jurisprudence,  (ii)  The  self  expanded  in  the
family ;  the  legal  relations  comprised  under  this  belong  to  family  law.
(iii)  The  external  world  apart  from  the  family;  the  rights  which
arise  from  the  relations  to  this  of  the  individual  will  belong  to
property  law,  in  \\&  two  departments,  law  of  things,  and  law  of
obligations.  Though  however  the  field  of  private  law  has  thus  been
mapped  out  into  three  great  departments,  family  law,  law  of  things,
and  law  of  obligations^  with  their  three  great  corresponding  classes  of
rights,  these  can  be  thus  sharply  separated  only  in  abstraction,  and
a  further  development  is  accordingly  desirable  in  two  directions.
Firstly,  the  rights  and  duties  which  arise  from  many  legal  relations
seem  to  belong,  for  some  reasons,  to  family  law,  for  others  to  the  law
of  property ;  that  is  to  say,  there  are  some  forms  of  ownership  and
of  obligation  which  cannot  exist  apart  from  the  family,  and  which  in
fact  are  of  supreme  importance  in  investing  the  family  with  a  jural
character.  In  the  Roman  law,  for  instance,  the  institutions  of  dos,
donatio  propter  nuptias,  peculium,  patronatus,  and  the  contractual
relations  enforced  by  the  '  actiones  adjectitiae  qualitatiis '  are  of  this
character.  Legal  relations  of  this  kind  may  with  convenience  be
classed  by  themselves  under  the  head  of  applied  (as  distinct  from
pure)  family  law.  Secondly,  the  relation  of  the  law  of  inheritance  or
succession  to  the  classification  so  far  suggested  is  by  no  means  clear.
If,  however,  we  ask  what  is  comprised  in  the  idea  of  an  inheritance,
the  reply  must  be,  the  relations  of  the  deceased  person  in  the  depart-
ments of  ownership  and  obligation,  or,  as  the  Romans  significantly
expressed  it,  his  universitas  iuris ;  his  successor  takes  his  property,
and  has  to  pay  his  debts.   The  law  of  succession  is  thus  a  division  of


PRIVATE  LAW  AS  TREATED  IN  THE  INSTITUTES.  77

the  law  of  property,  but  its  importance  in  all  legal  systems  forbids
our  making  it  a  merely  subordinate  division.  Rather,  we  should
divide  the  latter  into  simultaneous  and  successive  property  law ;  the
former  comprising  the  law  of  things  and  the  law  of  obligations,  the
latter  the  law  of  inheritance.

The  field  of  private  law  then  comprises  five  great  departments : —

i.  Pure  family  law,  including  marriage,  parental  power,  kinship,  and
the  relation  of  guardian  and  ward.

ii.  Applied  family  law.

iii.  The  law  of  things,  under  its  three  main  heads  of  ownership,
possession,  and  iura  in  re  aliena.

iv.  The  law  of  obligations.

V.  The  law  of  inheritance.

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  this  is  the  classification  of  the  Roman
lawyers ;  it  is  one  which  Savigny  arrives  at  by  an  a  priori  method,
and,  so  far  as  we  know,  there  was  not  one  among  the  prudentes  who
in  his  systematic  writings  arranged  his  subject-matter  upon  this  prin-
ciple. The  reason  why  the  outlines  of  Savigny's  system  have  been
so  fully  considered  is,  partly,  to  suggest  to  the  reader  an  alternative
classification  to  that  of  the  analytical  school,  partly  to  show  how
complete  the  Institutes  of  Justinian,  and  their  model  the  Institutes  of
Gaius,  are  in  their  material  if  not  in  their  formal  treatment  of  private
law.  Marriage,  parental  power,  kinship,  and  guardianship  are  treated
with  great  fulness  in  Book  i.  Applied  family  law  forms  no  compact,
independent  part  of  the  work,  but  is  found,  to  some  extent^  distributed
among  the  other  departments.  Thus,  though  dos  is  not  explicitly
treated,  donatio  propter  nuptias  is  discussed  as  one  of  the  forms  of
gift  in  Book  ii.  Title  7.  The  capacity  of  a  filiusfamilias  (a)  to  own
property  independently  of  his  pater  is  noticed  in  Book  ii.  Titles  9,  1 1,
and  12;  (p)  to  bind  his  pater  by  his  contracts  in  Book  iv.  Title  7 :
his  position  in  respect  of  delict  is  the  subject  of  Title  8  in  the  same
book ;  the  relation  of  patron  and  freedman,  though  only  with  reference
to  the  former's  rights  of  succession  to  the  latter,  is  treated  in  Book  iii.
Title  7 ;  the  effect  of  adoption  on  the  property  and  debts  of  the
adopted  in  Book  iii.  Title  10.  Ownership  and  jura  in  re  aliena  are
comprised  in  Book  ii.  Titles  i  to  9 ;  possession  is  touched  upon  in-
ddentally  only,  in  connection  with  usucapion  (Book  ii.  Title  6)  and
interdicts  (Book  iv.  Title  15).  Obligations  occupy  Book  iii.  Title  13
to  Book  iv.  Title  5 ;  and  inheritance,  testamentary  and  intestate,  with
the  cognate  topics  of  legacy  and  fideicommissum,  is  the  subject  of
Book  ii.  Title  10  to  Book  iii.  Title  9.    The  consideration  of  the


78  INTRODUCTION.

arrangement  adopted  by  Justinian  himself  after  Gains  is  reserved  for
the  introductions  to  the  separate  books,  in  which  too  the  reader's
attention  will  be  called  to  the  chief  particulars  in  which  the  law  of
Justinian  had  advanced  upon  that  of  Gains,  or  in  which  the  rules
stated  by  the  latter  had  become  obsolete,  and  thus  a  mere  matter  of
antiquarian  learning,  in  the  age  of  the  former.

The  Institutes  were  published  on  Nov.  21,  a.  d.  533,  with  statutory
force,  along  with  the  Digest,  from  Dec.  30th  of  the  same  year.  At
the  same  time  Justinian  fixed  the  system  of  study  to  be  in  future
followed  in  the  public  schools  of  law.  The  course  was  to  occupy  five
years.  The  first  wa5  to  be  devoted  to  the  Institutes  and  the  first
four  books  {rrpSna)  of  the  Digest ;  the  second,  to  the  parts  of  the
latter  relating  to  judicia  and  res  creditae  (Books  5-19),  and  also  to
certain  portions  of  later  books  dealing  with  the  proprietary  relations
of  husband  and  wife,  guardian  and  ward,  and  testaments  and  legacies.
In  the  third  year  Books  20-22  of  the  Digest  were  to  be  studied,  and
also  certain  portions  to  be  gone  over  again  which  had  been  already
read  in  the  preceding  year.  These  were  to  be  followed,  in  the
fourth  year,  by  the  parts  of  Books  20-36  which  had  not  already
engaged  the  student's  attention.  The  subjects  prescribed  for  the
last  year  of  the  course  were  Books  37-50  of  the  Digest,  and  the
Code;  these  were  read  privately,  so  that  the  subject-matter  of
the  professorial  lectures,  which  spread  themselves  over  the  first
four  years,  were  the  Institutes  and  the  first  thirty-six  books  of  the
Digest.

Justinian's  design  had  been  to  embrace  in  his  three  authoritative
works  every  jot  and  tittle  of  positive  law.  It  was  transparent,  however,
as  things  stood  at  the  end  of  a.d.  533,  that  this  object  had  not  been
fully  attained.  The  Digest  and  the  Institutes,  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  legal  reformer  of  that  epoch,  left  little  to  be  desired ;  but  it
was  at  once  perceived  that  the  Code  of  a.d.  529  was  far  from  com-
plete ;  the  great  majority  of  Justinian's  own  constitutions  had  been
issued  subsequently  to  its  promulgation,  and  Tribonian,  who  had  not
been  president,  but  merely  an  ordinary  member  of  the  commission
which  had  compiled  it,  was  naturally  not  backward  in  calling  his
master's  attention  to  this  imperfection.  Justinian,  therefore,  in  a.  d.
534,  appointed  a  new  commission,  consisting  of  Tribonian,  as  presi-
dent, and  four  others,  to  revise  the  Code  of  a.d.  529.  Within  a  few
months  the  latter,  and  also  the  constitutions  issued  after  its  enact-
ment, were  deprived  of  all  authority,  and  withdrawn  from  circulation,
their  place  being  taken  by  a  new  Code,  known  as  the  *  codex  repetitae


LEGAL  EDUCATION— THE  REVISED  CODE.        79

praelectionis,'  in  which  were  incorporated  Justinian's  own  constitu-
tions,  as  well  as  many  others  which  the  earlier  code  had  not  con-
tained :  some  again  which  had  stood  in  the  latter  were  now  omitted,
and  there  were  numerous  alterations  and  interpolations,  Tribonian
sfxiring  no  pains  to  make  the  revision  as  complete  as  possible.  The
codex  repetitae  praelectionis  was  promulgated  on  Nov.  16,  534,  with
statutory  force  from  the  ensuing  29th  of  December.  It  consisted  of
twelve  books,  and  in  arrangement  followed  very  closely  the  order  of
the  Digest

The  adversaries  of  codification  have  made  great  capital  out  of  an
error  into  which  its  advocates  have  sometimes  fallen,  and  which  con-
sists in  supposing  that  a  good  Code  dispenses  with  the  necessity  of
any  further  legislation ;  they  have  even  accused  Justinian  of  believing
that  in  his  three  great  bodies  of  law  was  summed  up  the  perfection
of  human  wisdom,  and  that  they  would  suffice^  without  addition  or
alteration,  to  determine  for  all  time  the  rights  and  duties  of  his  sub-
jects. It  is  quite  certain  that  Justinian  never  believed  anything  of  the
kind.  His  main  purpose  had  been  to  set  the  law  upon  a  solid  foun-
dation, and  to  cast  it  in  a  form  which  his  successors  would  not  lightly
venture  to  alter ;  by  the  completeness  of  his  work  he  hoped  to  endow
his  subjects  with  the  inestimable  blessing  of  a  legal  system  pruned  of
all  relics  of  antiquity,  adequate  in  substance,  and  so  judiciously
arranged  as  to  reduce  the  necessity  of  future  change  to  a  minimum.
But  within  five  years  to  have  entirely  recast  a  large  portion  of  his  own
work  might  well  arouse  the  suspicion,  that  the  law  had  lost  all  its  old
stability ;  that  the  legislature  had  become  too  active ;  that  as  the  first
Code  had  been  thrust  aside  to  make  room  for  a  second,  so  the  second
would  soon  be  swept  away  in  favour  of  a  third,  and  that  in  the  confu-
sion which  such  constant  change  could  not  fail  to  produce  the  many-
sided  security  which  all  law  is  intended  to  guarantee  would  cease  to
exist  In  his  publication  of  the  codex  repetitae  praelectionis  Justinian
deemed  it  necessary  to  deprecate  all  fear  of  such  a  tendency.  He
expressly  recognised  the  probability,  if  not  the  necessity,  of  subse-
quent change,  and  enacted  that  constitutions  issued  after  the  pub-
lication of  the  Code  should  be  formed  into  a  distinct  collection,
under  the  title  of  'novellae  constitutiones ' :  'Si  quid  in  posterum
melius  inveniatur  et  ad  constitutionem  necessario  sit  redigendum,
hoc  a  nobis  et  constituatur,  et  in  aliam  congregationem  referatur,
quae  novellarum  nomine  constitutionum  significetur '  (Just  in  Cod.
cordi  nobis,  §  4).  The  first  of  Justinian's  Novels  was  enacted  very
shortly  after  the  publication  of  the  Code ;  their  total  number  was  at


8o  INTRODUCTION.

least  165,  but  they  were  never  authoritatively  collected  and  published
in  a  connected  form  by  their  author.  Though  most  of  them  relate
to  administrative  business  and  ecclesiastical  matters,  there  are  some
by  which  individual  institutions  of  private  law  were  entirely  re-
modelled; the  most  important  of  these  will  be  noticed  in  the
commentary  below.

The  subsequent  history  of  the  Roman  law  in  the  West  and  East,
the  labour  which  the  glossators  and  the  modern  civilians  have  spent
upon  its  interpretation,  and  the  acumen  with  which,  especially  in
Germany,  they  have  adapted  it  to  modem  social  conditions,  is  too
large  a  subject  to  be  here  entered  into ;  all  that  can  be  done  is  very
-  briefly  to  explain  the  form  in  which  the  Justinian  legislation  at
present  exists  in  the  countries  where  it  still  possesses  the  force  of
law.  Since  Dionysius  Gothofredus,  in  1582,  published  it  in  its  en-
tirety with  the  name  '  Corpus  iuris  civilis/  this  has  been  regarded  as
its  proper  technical  title,  especially  in  contradistinction  to  the  '  Cor-
pus iuris  Canonici,'  or  Canon  law.  As  positive  law,  Justinian's  three
great  compilations,  the  Institutes,  the  Digest,  and  the  Code  (along
with  the  Novels,  their  natural  appendix),  form  a  system  apart  by
itself,  and  as  such  they  were  viewed  by  the  glossators,  who  divided
them  into  five  volumes,  each  distinguished  by  a  separate  name.  The
first  three  volumes  comprised  the  Digest,  and  were  known  re-
spectively as  Digestum  vetus,  infortiatum,  and  novum.  In  the
Digestum  vetus  was  contained  the  Digest  up  to  Book  24,  Title  2  ;  it
thus  ended  with  the  title  *  de  divortiis  et  repudiis.'  The  *  infortiatum '
began  with  the  third  title  of  Book  24,  and  ended  with  Book  38.
The  Digestum  novum  contained  the  remaining  books  (39-50)  of  the
Digest  of  Justinian.  The  fourth  volume  of  the  glossators'  corpus
iuris  comprised  the  Code,  with  the  exception  of  Books  10-12,  which
were  not  discovered  till  later,  and  was  entitled  *  Codex  repetitae
praelectionis ; '  the  fifth  (called  *volumen  parvum*  or  *volumen'
simply)  contained  the  Institutes,  and,  eventually,  also  the  three  last
books  of  the  Code.

This  division  into  five  volumes  is  still  found  in  the  oldest  editions
of  the  Corpus  iuris ;  but  in  the  more  modern  ones,  in  which  it  is  dis-
carded, the  Institutes  are  placed  first,  and  are  followed  by  the  Digest,
the  Code,  and  the  Novels  in  the  order  named.  Many  of  these
editions  also  contain  certain  extraneous  fragments  which  properly  do
not  belong  to  the  work  at  all;  among  these  are  thirteen  so-called
*  edicts '  of  Justinian,  which  are  in  reality  novels  of  merely  local  or
particular  import ;  fifteen  constitutions  of  Justin  the  younger ;  several


LATER  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMAN  LAW,  8i

of  the  younger  Tiberius  ;  one  hundred  and  eighteen  novels  of  Leo ;
one  of  Zeno ;  a  series  of  constitutions  of  various  emperors,  under  the
common  titles  imperatoriae  constitutiones — canones  sanctorum  et
▼enerandorum  apostolorum — libri  feudorum ;  some  constitutions  of
Frederic  II;  two  ordinances  of  Henry  VII  (extravagantes) ;  and
a  'liber  de  pace  Constantiae.'  Sometimes  also  there  is  to  be  found
an  attempt  to  reconstruct  the  Twelve  Tables,  the  Praetorian  Edict,
and  other  celebrated  monuments  of  the  older  ius  civile  ^.


*  It  will  have  been  observed  that  little  or  nothing  has  been  said  in  these  pages
of  the  history  of  judicial  institutions  and  dvil  procedure.  This  is  briefly  supplied
in  an  excorsos  at  the  end  of  the  volume.


DOMINI  NOSTRI  lUSTINIANI  PERPETUO  AUGUST!


INSTITUTIONUM  SIVE  ELEMENTORUM


UBBI   QUATTUOB


o  a


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  I.

The  first  two  Titles  of  this  book  are  merely  introductory,  and
afford  no  clue  to  the  principle  on  which  it  is  intended  to  distribute
the  rules  of  the  private  code.  Title  i  is  derived  in  the  main  from
the  '  Institutions '  of  Ulpian ;  it  contains  definitions  of  Justice  and
Jurisprudence,  determines  the  scope  of  the  work  as  a  treatise  on
private  law,  and  draws  the  distinction  between  ius  naturale,  gentium,
and  civile,  which  has  been  adverted  to  in  the  general  Introduction
(pp.  28  sq.,  supr.).  In  the  second  Title  ius  naturale  is  defined  after
Ulpian,  and  then  ius  civile  and  ius  gentium  are  distinguished  in  the
words  of  Gaius,  though,  as  has  been  pointed  out  elsewhere^  the  latter
contrast  is  the  true  and  important  one,  and  in  other  parts  of  the
work  ius  gentium  and  ius  naturale  are  identified.  The  sources
of  the  positive  law  of  Rome  are  then  specified  and  each  briefly
described.

In  the  opening  words  of  the  third  Title  we  meet  with  the  signi-
ficant statement  of  the  principle  upon  which  the  arrangement  of  the
Institutes  is  to  proceed.  That  principle,  and,  accordingly,  that
arrangement,  is  taken  literally  from  Gaius,  and  an  exposition  of  its
meaning  will  be  as  important  for  the  work  of  the  jurist  as  for  that  of
the  prince.  *  The  whole  law  by  which  we  are  governed  relates  either
to  persons,  or  to  things,  or  to  actions.'  The  division  of  the  Institutes
into  these  three  departments  is  perfectly  clear;  the  'ius  quod  ad
personas  pertinet '  occupies  Bk.  i,  Title  3,  to  the  end ;  the  *  ius  quod
ad  res '  extends  from  the  beginning  of  Bk.  ii.  to  Bk.  iv.  Title  5 ;  the
remainder  of  Bk.  iv.  '  pertinet  ad  actiones.'  In  this  particular  point
the  Gaian  distribution  is  more  satisfactory,  as  it  makes  the  break
between  res  and  actiones  at  the  end  of  the  third  commentary,  and
devotes  the  whole  of  the  fourth  to  the  latter  subject ;  in  the  Insti-
tutes the  formal  division  of  Books  tends  somewhat  to  obscure  the
material  classification  of  the  system.  This,  however,  presents  no
obstacle  to  our  comprehension  of  the  system  itself;  but  we  are  at
once  met  by  difficulties,  and  by  great  differences  of  opinion  among
the  commentators,  when  we  attempt  to  discover  the  meaning  of  the


86  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L

division  into  persons,  things,  and  actions,  and  to  ascertain  its  relation
to  other  arrangements  of  private  law,  such  as  those  of  Savigny
(General  Introduction,  pp.  74  siq.,  supr.)  or  of  Austin  and  his  school.

Our  only  business  here  is  to  ascertain  what  Gaius  and  Justinian
intended  by  '  ius  quod  ad  personas  pertinet'  It  seems  clear  that  the
only  method  by  which  this  can  be  done  is  the  analytical.  Austin,
it  is  to  be  regretted,  set  in  England  the  example  of  pursuing  a  '  high
a  priori  road  *  in  connection  with  this  matter;  the  principal  form  of
which  is  to  adopt,  as  the  leading  division  of  law,  that  into  '  the  law  of
persons '  and  ^  the  law  of  things/  though  in  a  sense  differing  consider-
ably from  that  in  which  it  was  understood  by  the  Roman  lawyers,
and  then  either  to  find  fault  with  the  latter  for  not  having  meant  the
same  as  the  writer,  or  to  imply  that  they  really  meant  the  same
thing,  though  owing  to  the  weakness  of  their  l^al  philosophy  they
did  not  adhere  with  any  consistency  to  their  own  principle,  and
thereby  committed  most  egregious  faults  of  classification.  Even  if
this  be  true,  it  is  probably  a  worse  fault  still  to  take  a  classical
expression  (such  as  '  law  of  persons,'  which  to  its  authors,  we  may
surely  believe,  meant  something  perfectly  precise),  give  it  a  new
signification  without  frankly  confessing  that  a  liberty  has  been  taken ;
and  then  to  irresistibly  suggest  that  the  two  meanings  are  the  same,
if  the  authors  of  the  expression  really  meant  anything  by  it  at  all.
To  an  English  reader  the  greatest  difficulty,  in  the  effort  to  under-
stand the  arrangement  of  Gaius  and  Justinian,  arises  from  Austin's
perversion  of  the  expressions  'law  of  persons '  and  '  law  of  things '  for
the  purposes  of  his  own  system.  If  he  had  meant  something  totally
different  from  them  there  would  have  been  no  confusion ;  but  the
very  fact  that  his  meaning  was  somewhat  the  same,  but  at  the  same
time  somewhat  different,  has  surrounded  the  matter  with  difficulties,
to  remove  which  an  attempt  will  be  made  by  pursuing  a  strictly
analytical  method,  and  by  attending  strictly  to  the  language  of  the
Roman  lawyers  themselves,  without  giving  any  fancy  meaning  to
classical  expressions  whose  actual  signification  can  be  ascertained
with  tolerable  certainty.

What  did  the  Romans  mean  by  'persona'?  It  is  clear  there  is
some  relation  between  persona  and  homo ;  for  the  leading  division
of  the  '  ius  quod  ad  personas  pertinet '  (L  3.  pr.)  is  that  all  men
are  either  free  or  slaves.  It  is  equally  clear  that  they  did  not
regard  all  men  as  persons;  it  is  not  said  all  persons,  but  all
men^  are  either  free  or  slaves.  Slaves,  in  fact,  though  men  in-^
tellectually   and    morally,  are  'things'  in   the  eye   of  the  law:


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L  87

it  is  only  because  their  intellectual  and  moral  nature  sets  theia
above  the  beasts  that  the  law  treats  the  two  in  some  respects  in
different  ways.  It  is  true  that  now  and  then,  though  very  rarely,  the
word  '  persona '  is  applied  to  slaves  (e.  g.  Bk.  i.  8  pr.) ;  but  the  uni-
form language  of  legal  authorities  is  the  other  way  \  and  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  it  is  only  per  incuriam  that  occasionally  a  writer  using
this  or  other  terms  (such  as  caput,  status)  implying  personality
includes  the  slave  as  well  as  free  persons  within  his  view.  An  esseo-  |
tial  element  in  the  conception  of  'persona'  is  the  capacity  of
acquiring  or  possessing  legal  rights,  and,  as  will  be  seen,  a  slave
could  have  no  l^al  rights  of  any  kind  whatsoever*.  In  other  words,
a  persona  is  a  man  regarded  as  invested  with  legal  rights,  or  as
capable  of  acquiring  them,  so  that  our  attention  is  drawn  away  from
the  man  to  the  rights,  or  to  the  capacity  of  having  them  in  virtue  of
which  he  is  a  persona.  The  aggregate  of  a  man's  rights  was  called
his  status  \  and  accordingly  the  old  civilians  defined  a  persona  as
'homo  cum  statu  suo  consideratus.'  But  what  is  it  in  virtue  of
which  a  man  has  legal  rights?  In  modern  times  it  is  usually  in
virtue  of  his  submission,  absolute  or  partial,  to  the  sovereign  of  the
country  in  which  he  happens  to  reside ;  a  man  is  usually  capable  of
acquiring  all  the  rights  which  are  comprised  under  the  private  law
of  a  state  within  whose  limits  he  is  domiciled.  This  view  is  essen-
tially modem,  and  by  realizing  its  strangeness  to  the  Roman  mind
we  shall  have  advanced  some  way  towards  understanding  the  ius
personarum.  To  a  man,  as  free,  the  Roman  state  conceded  such
rights  only  as  were  based  on  the  ius  gentium ;  but  the  civis  possessed
far  more  rights,  even  in  the  field  of  private  law,  than  the  free  pere-
grinus ;  and  many  of  these  he  enjoyed  not  through  being  a  civis  but
because  he  was  a  member  of  a  definite  Roman  family.  The  rights
or  status  with  which  a  man  could  be  invested  within  the  Roman
state  were  thus  always  referable  to  either  freedom,  citizenship,  or
family  connection ;  and  this  way  of  looking  at  the  matter  became  so
habitual  to  the  Roman,  that  of  status  in  general  he  has  little  to  say ;
he  always  connects  it  with  one  of  these  three  '  momenta,'  and  classi-
fies a  man's  capacity  of  acquiring  rights  (or  '  status ')  according  as  he


'  'Senri  nee  personam  habentes,*  Not.  Theod.  xvii.  2.  a ;  ol  oUirtu  6Mp6wmoi
Strr€tf  Theophilos  iiL  17,  pr.;  'servos,  qui  personam  legibns  non  habebant*'
Cassiodori  Variar.  vi.  8.

'  '  Eigeniham,  Fordenmgsrechte,  Scbnlden  babcn  konnen,  das  heisst  fur.  das
Priyatrecbt,  Person  sein ' :  Sohm,  Institntionen,  $  20:


88  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L

'  is  merely  free,  is  a  citizen,  or  belongs  to  the  agnatic  circle  of  this  or
that  Roman  familia.

If  then  the  Maw  of  persons'  is  the  law  relating  to  human  beings
considered  as  invested  with  or  as  capable  of  acquiring  rights,  it  is
clearly  much  the  same  thing  as  the  law  relating  to  these  three
' status '  of  libertas,  civitas,  and  familia :  it  is  'the  treatment  of  men
in  respect  of  their  position  in  and  in  relation  to  the  Roman  state,
because,  according  to  that  position,  their  capacity  of  nght,  and  their
capacity  of  performing  legal  acts,  will  differ  ^'  But  it  is  obvious  that
much  that  can  be  said,  in  respect  at  any  rate  of  one  of  these  three
topics,  has  no  relation  to  private  law;  the  latter  has  to  point  out
distinctions  between  persons  only  so  far  as  they  are  of  importance
to  itself,  and  the  distinction  between  civis  and  peregrinus  is  mainly
public!  iuris.  Nor  again  does  the  '  ius  quod  ad  personas  pertinet '
follow  these  differences  into  all  their  consequences.  It  points  them
out ;  but  the  effect  of  them,  in  the  law  of  property  and  obligation,  is
left  to  be  treated  elsewhere,  or,  as  is  most  commonly  the  case,  is  not
treated  at  all '.

As  to  the  status  of  liberty  the  non-free  are  not  'persons,'  and
therefore  it  might  seem  that  they  should  be  passed  over.  But  some
mention  is  necessary  (Tide  3)  of  the  modes  in  which  men  can  be-
come slaves ;  and,  again,  slaves  are  capable  of  becoming  '  persons '
by  liberation,  and  therefore  the  ways  in  which  this  can  take  place
are  described  (Title  5),  and  some  account  is  given  of  the  grounds  on
which  manumission  is  prohibited  by  positive  law  (Tides  6  and  7)  as
also  of  restrictions  imposed  on  the  powers  of  masters  over  their
slaves  (Title  8).  Moreover,  the  precise  effect  of  manumission  had
depended  on  the  form  of  the  act,  the  age  of  the  master  and  the

^  Bockizig,  Institntionen,  f  a8.

'  This  appears  to  be  the  point  in  which  the  writers  who  have  been  referred  to
have  gone  astray.  They  would  have  been  correct  in  defining  the  '  law  of  Persons '
as  '  the  law  of  Unequals '  or  '  Abnormal  law  *  if  they  had  confined  it  to  the  mere
description  of  differences  between  Persons,  in  virtue  of  which  some  were  *  Unequal '
or  '  Abnormal ' ;  but  they  have  further  made  it  follow  up  the  consequences  of  such
inequality  in  respect  of  property,  contract,  and  dispositions  generally.  Thus  in
the  '  law  of  Persons,*  Austin  would  not  only  describe  infancy  as  a  fact  which
modified  a  personas  capacity  of  right  and  disposition,  but  he  would  proceed  to
enumerate  the  points  of  modification :  e.  g.  an  infant's  incapacity  to  make  a  valid
conveyance,  give  a  valid  receipt,  or  bind  himself  by  contract.  But,  though  Gains
and  Justinian  enumerate,  among  the  differences  between  Persons,  that  of  sui  and
alieni  iuris,  they  speak  of  the  filiusfamilias'  proprietary  capacity  in  Bk.  ii,  and  of
the  effect  of  his  contracts  in  Bks.  iii  and  iv,  under  the  ius  quod  ad  res,  or  ad  aetiones
pertinet


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L  89

slave,  and  the  character  of  the  latter ;  freedmen  had  thus  not  always
been  of  the  same  kind,  and  means  had  been  provided  to  enable
them  to  rise  from  a  lower  grade  in  their  class  to  a  higher ;  but  these
distinctions,  though  referred  to  by  Justinian,  were  abolished  by  him
(Title  5),  and  the  law  was  thereby  much  simplified,  though  the
division  of  freemen  into  freebom  (ingenui)  and  freedmen  (libertini)
still  remained,  and  had  important  consequences  in  the  law  of
succession,  which  are  detailed  in  Book  iii.  Title  7.

The  status  of  dvitas,  being  historically  of  importance  mainly  in
relation  to  public  law,  is  not  treated  independently  under  the  ius
personarum  by  either  Gains  or  Justinian.  It  would  not  be  difficult
to  explain  this  in  the  latter,  in  whose  time  peregrin!  were  rare,  and
the  ius  civile  had  been  so  swallowed  up  in  the  ius  gentium  that  the
distinction  between  citizen  and  foreigner,  in  respect  of  private  rights,
was  merely  microscopic.  But  in  the  age  of  Gaius  peregrini  were
plentiful,  and  the  distinctive  features  of  the  civil  law  were  still
sufficiently  prominent  to  place  them  at  some  disadvantage  in  respect
of  conveyance,  contract,  and  civil  procedure ;  the  '  ius  commercii '
was  still  a  privilege.  We  thus  might  have  reasonably  expected  to
find  in  Gaius  the  sentence  'rursus  liberorum  hominum  alii  cives
sunt,  alii  peregrini ' ;  but  it  is  not  there,  and  the  omission,  it  must  be
aUowed,  is  a  grave  flaw  in  the  view  which  we  have  taken  of  the  '  ius
quod  ad  personas  pertinet'  Still,  it  is  equally  to  be  accounted  for
on  most  other  theories  of  the  meaning  of  the  phrase,  and  perhaps
the  best  explanation  which  can  be  offered  is  that,  as  the  difference
between  civis  and  peregrinus  is  merely  that  the  former  had,  while
the  latter  had  not,  the  commercium  and  connubium,  the  distinction
is  a  bare  one,  of  which  little  can  be  said  except  in  the  '  ius  quod  ad
res '  or  *  ad  actiones  pertinet,*  under  the  heads  of  property,  contract,
and  procedure.  It  is  true  that  in  the  time  of  Gaius  there  were
certain  intermediate  classes,  dediticii  and  Latini  luniani,  which
might  have  been  mentioned  or  described  in  this  connection ;  but
Gaius  had  already  spoken  of  these,  though  perhaps  less  logically,
under  the  head  of  manumission ;  so  that  to  omit  the  distinction  of
civis  and  peregrinus  was  excusable,  because  it  would  have  led  to
a  repetition  and  to  difficulties  of  arrangement  And  it  may,  lastly,  be
observed  that  the  ius  personarum  was  but  little  affected  by  the
praetorian  innovations ;  it  was,  in  the  main,  pure  ius  civile ;  and  if
we  may  believe  that  Gaius'  intention  was  under  this  head  to  describe
the  classes  of  persons  who,  iure  civili,  possessed  a  status,  the  pere-
grini did  not  form  one  of  these  classes,  and  therefore  the  bare


90  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L

distinction  between  them  and  cives  did  not  require  notice.  *Tuitione
praetoris'  they  might  possess  rights;  *iure  civili,*  however,  they
were  unimportant.

There  remains  the  status  familiae,  and  the  discussion  of  this
occupies  the  really  greater  portion  of  the  first  book  of  the  Institutes.
It  is  introduced  in  connection  with  the  distinction  of  persons  into
independent  (sui  iuris)  and  dependent  (alieni  iuris)  (Title  8).  Ex-
cluding the  form  of  dependency  found  in  slavery,  which  has  been
already  treated,  the  only  mode  in  which  such  subjection  still  existed
in  Justinian's  time  was  the  patria  potestas  (Title  9);  and  the  various
ways  in  which  this  may  originate  are  described.  These  are  (i)
marriage,  in  connection  with  which  a  tolerably  full  account  is  in-
directly given  of  the  grades  of  consanguinity,  apropos  to  the  degrees
within  which  it  is  forbidden  to  marry.  As  bearing  closely  on  the
law  of  intestate  succession,  the  same  subject  is  more  explicitly
treated  in  Bk.  iii,  Title  6.  (2)  Adoption,  in  its  two  forms  adro-
gation and  adoption  sensu  stricto  (Title  11),  and  (3)  legitimation
(Title  10,  §  13).  Corresponding  to  these  are  described  the  modes
in  which  patria  potestas  may  be  dissolved^  and  a  person  alieni  may
become  sui  iuris  (Title  1 2),  most  of  which  may  be  grouped  together
under  the  three  kinds  of  capitis  deminutio,  which  is  described  in
Title  16,  rather  out  of  its  proper  place.  The  guidance  and  control
which  children  require  in  their  tender  years  is  naturally  provided  by
the  care  of  the  father ;  but  to  meet  the  contingency  of  the  latter's
death  while  a  child  is  still  impubes,  and  especially  to  protect  his
proprietary  interests,  the  Roman  law  established  various  forms  of
guardianship,  to  which  the  reader  is  introduced  by  a  further  dis-
tinction of  persons  sui  iuris  into  those  who  have  a  tutor  or
curator,  and  those  who  act  entirely  for  themselves  (Title  13).  The
various  forms  of  guardianship  are  treated  in  the  succeeding  titles,
and  the  functions  of  a  guardian,  together  with  the  limits  of  their
necessary  exercise,  are  touched  on  in  Title  21.  Title  22  relates  to
the  modes  in  which  guardianship  is  terminated,  and  Title  23  to
curators,  or  persons  appointed  by  the  magistrate  to  manage  the
property  of  various  classes  of  persons — minors  over  the  age  of
puberty,  lunatics,  interdicted  prodigals,  and  others  who,  from  some
mental  or  bodily  infirmity,  are  incapable  of  adequately  attending  to
their  own  affairs.  Title  24  describes  the  circumstances  under  which
guardians  and  curators  have  to  give  security  for  the  due  administra-
tion of  their  ofilice,  the  nature  of  such  security,  and  the  liability
of  magistrates  who  neglect  to  exact  it  when  they  appoint  these


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L  91

functionaries.  lastly,  in  Title  25,  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  duties
of  guardians  and  curators  are  of  a  public  nature,  and  cannot,  as
a  general  rule,  be  declined  by  any  one  called  upon  to  undertake
them ;  certain  grounds  of  excuse  however  were  recognised  by  law,
and  these  are  enumerated  in  detail.

The  very  exhaustive  treatment  which  the  status  familiae,  as  con-
trasted with  libertas  and  civitas,  obtains  in  Gaius  and  the  Institutes
of  Justinian  has  led  Savigny  to  r^ard  the  ^  ius  quod  ad  personas
pertinet '  as  merely  family  law,  and  to  maintain  that  such  was  the
meaning  which  those  writers  themselves  attributed  to  it.  He  examines
the  view  that  the  real  subject  of  their  first  book  is  status,  though
not  exactly  in  the  sense  in  which  we  have  understood  the  term;
that  is  to  say,  he  distinguishes  status  into  natural  and  civil ;  by  the
latter  he  means  the  three  great  status  to  which  alone  we  have  given
oar  attention ;  by  the  former  he  would  express  the  difTerences  which
exist  among  persons  as  subjects  of  rights  and  duties  on  account  of
differences  of  age,  sex,  health,  etc.  This,  of  course,  is  a  perversion
of  the  strict  Roman  idea  of  the  t^rm  status ;  and  his  rejection  of  this
view  is  no  reason  for  also  rejecting  that  which  we  have  adopted  as
the  true  one.  To  Hugo's  theory,  that  the  real  subject  of  the  *  ius
quod  ad  personas  pertinet '  is  '  capacity  of  right,'  or  the  three  charac-
ters which  correspond  to  the  three  forms  of  capitis  deminutio  (which
coincides  in  the  main  with  our  own  exposition)  Savigny  is  more
favourable,  but  he  finds  himself  unable  to  accept  it  because  it  does
not  account  for  the  facts,  and  therefore  lacks  the  very  essence  of
a  tenable  explanation  :  his  main  objections  being  that  tutela  has*  no
relation  to  *  capacity  of  right '  (Rechtsfahigkeit)  but  only  to  *  capacity
for  legal  disposition '  (Handlungsfahigkeit),  and  the  omission  of  the
important  distinction  between  cives  and  peregrini,  upon  which  some-
thing has  been  already  said.  If,  says  Savigny,  we  look  more  closely
into  the  actual  contents  of  the  first  book  of  the  Institutes,  we  find
that  it  corresponds  very  nearly  to  what  he  calls  family  law.  It  treats,
in  point  of  fact,  of  marriage,  patria  potestas,  slavery,  patronatus,
guardianship  (and,  in  Gaius,  of  manus  and  mancipium).  On  the
other  hand,  the  division  into  cives,  Latini,  and  peregrini,  important
as  it  is  in  relation  to  capacity  of  right,  is  not  to  be  found,  because  it
belongs,  in  its  real  nature,  to  public  law.  The  most  serious  objection,
in  Savigny's  opinion,  which  can  be  urged  against  his  own
view,  is  the  omission  (in  Gaius)  of  kinship,  but  this  he  does  not
consider  fatal.  It  is  remarkable  that  he  did  not  see  how  slender
was  the  coincidence  between  family  law,  as  he  conceived  it,  and  the


92  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  L

'  ius  quod  ad  personas  pertinet '  of  Gaius  and  Justinian.  The  former
is  in  some  ways  of  larger  extent  than  the  latter ;  thus  it  comprises
the  whole  of  the  relations  between  husband  and  wife,  and  parent
and  child,  though  these  belong  to  the  latter  only  so  far  as  they
relate  to  patria  potestas,  and  also  the  rules  in  respect  of  patronatus
and  colonatus,  which  find  no  place  in  the  '  ius  quod  ad  personas
pertinet '  whatsoever.  In  some  points,  on  the  other  hand^  its  con-
tent is  less.  The  classification  of  *  persons '  in  Gaius  and  Justinian
is  based  upon  two  great  divisions,  one  of  which  is  iuris  gentium — all
men  are  either  free  or  slaves — ^while  the  other — all  free  men  are
either  ingenui  or  libertini — is  iuris  civilis  ;  the  first  of  these,  promi-
nent as  it  is  in  Gaius  and  Justinian,  has  nothing  to  do  with  family
law,  because  the  relation  between  master  and  slave  is  one  which
belongs  properly  to  the  '  law  of  things,'  and  which,  as  has  been
pointed  out,  is  touched  upon  in  the  first  book  only  by  reason  of
the  capacity  of  the  slave,  as  distinct  from  other  '  res,'  of  becoming
a  '  persona '  by  manumission.

Perhaps  one  reason  why  there  has  been  so  much  dispute  as  to
the  real  signification  of  this  division  of  law  into  personae,  res,  and
actiones,  is  the  supposition  that  it  was  a  classification  of  great
antiquity  among  the  Romans  themselves,  a  classification  which  they
regarded  as  fundamental  and  not  lightly  to  be  departed  from,  and
by  understanding  which  therefore  we  shall  obtain  a  deeper  insight
into  their  national  legal  habit,  and  comprehend  more  fully  the  lead-
ing distinctions  of  their  system,  and  the  interconnection  of  its  parts.
It  may  be  true,  as  some  authorities  maintain  \  that  the  arrangement
was  traditional  among  the  Roman  lawyers,  and  inherited  from  the
old  pontifical  jurisprudence  :  but  Sir  H.  Maine  *  is  probably  right  in
observing  that  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  they  set  any
extraordinary  value  upon  it.  It  was  confined,  he  says,  to  their  in-
stitutional treatises,  or  primers  of  law,  the  educational  manuals
placed  in  the  hands  of  their  banners.  We  may  add  that  Gaius'
other  well-known  work,  the  *res  quotidianae,'  was  composed  on
another  plan,  and  that  the  order  followed  in  the  Institutes  of  Floren-
tinus,  who  wrote  after  Gaius,  was  also  quite  different.  The  Twelve
Tables  again,  and  the  Praetorian  £dict  as  consolidated  by  Salvius
Julianus,  have  no  trace  of  the  Gaian  classification ;  the  Gregorian


*  E.  g.  Karlowa,  Rom,  Rechtsgeschichte,  i.  p.  725.

*  '  Ancient  Ideas  as  to  the  Arrangement  of  Codes'  in  Early  Law  and  Custom,
p.  367.


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  I.  93

and  Hermogenian  codes  were  arranged  upon  a  different  principle ;
so  was  the  code  of  Theodosius  II ;  so  are  the  two  larger  works  of
Justinian  himself.  Upon  any  view,  we  cannot  suppose  that  by  the
ordinary  Roman  jurist  the  division  was  regarded  as  much  more
important  than  other  current  contrasts  which  Savigny  instances,
such  as  those  of  vi,  clam,  and  precario,  the  three  forms  of  domestic
dependence,  potestas,  manus,  and  mancipium,  the  three  capitis
deminutiones,  and  the  three  classes  of  cives,  Latini,  and  peregrini.
If  there  was  any  traditional  view  among  the  Romans  as  to  the  true
mode  of  classifying  their  legal  rules.  Sir  H.  Maine  has  shown,  in  the
chapter  referred  to,  that  it  was  probably  the  view  which  from  the
force  of  circumstances  has  prevailed  in  nearly  every  indigenous
S3rstem  of  law  under  primitive  conditions,  and  which  assigns  the  first
place  in  the  code  to  judicature  and  rules  of  procedure,  in  the  inter-
stices of  which  the  substantive  law  has  in  early  times  the  appearance
of  being  gradually  secreted.  The  material  law  tends  to  become
distributed  into  'heads  of  dispute'  in  an  order  which  seems  to
depend  on  their  relative  importance  when  it  was  finally  determined,
and  in  which,  in  more  celebrated  codes  than  one,  a  prominent  place
b  given,  in  particular,  to  deposits  and  thefts.

In  the  foregoing  remarks  it  has  been  assumed  that  Gains  and
Justinian  did  actually  intend  to  sketch  in  outline  the  main  principles
of  the  private  law  of  Rome  under  the  three  heads  of  persons,  things,
and  actions.  Another  view  is  that  the  division  is  a  subjective  one :
that  its  true  meaning  is  that  one  may  regard  any  given  rule  of  law
at  pleasure  from  any  of  three  different  points  of  view :  either  from
that  of  persons  as  invested  with  rights :  from  that  of  things  as  their
objects :  or  from  that  of  the  remedy  by  which,  if  infringed,  the
right  is  vindicated  \  This  explanation  of  Gains'  celebrated  dictum
seems  to  have  originated  with  Fran9ois  Duarenus,  who  wrote  about
the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  * :  but  however  attractive  it  may
appear  at  first  sight,  it  will  not  bear  examination.     Putting  aside  the

'  See  e.  g.  Knntze,  Cursns  des  rom.  Rechts,  §  56a.

'  '  Haec  verba  (omne  ins  &c)  sic  intellexenint  [qaidam  nostii  temporis  iaris
professores]  quasi  nulla  sit  aptior  nee  commodior  iniis  tractandi  docendiqne  ratio,
qnam  si  de  his  tribus  sepazatim  disseratur.  Vernm  longe  aliter  sensisse  Gaium  non
dnbito:  nempe  nnllam  partem  iaris  esse,  nullum  contractum,  nullum  negodum,
noUam  actionem,  nullum  iudicium,  in  quo  tractando  hi  loci  simul  non  incurrant,
nt  e.g.  in  tractatu  de  stipulationibus  oritur  imprimis  qnaestio  de  personis,  quae
stipnlationem  contrabere  possunt :  . . .  de  rebus  quaeritur,  sitne  res  sacra  .  . .  .  de
actione  quae  ex  contractu  nascitur,  sitne  bonae  fidei  * :  Duarenus,  disput.  anniy.
I.  c.  55,  dted  in  Bocking,  Institutionen,  §  a 8,  note  a.


94  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  I.

objection  that  it  credits  Gaius  with  a  refined  analytical  fstculty
of  which  little  trace  appears  in  his  other  writings,  and  which  is  more
characteristic  of  modem  works  on  abstract  jurisprudence,  this  theory
is  sufficiently  disproved  by  the  facts  obviously  revealed  in  the  books
before  us.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Gaius  does  divide  the  law  into  three
distinct  heads  or  chapters.  *  Prius  videamus  de  personis,'  he  says
(i.  8 :  Inst.  i.  3.  pr.) :  then,  having  exhausted  the  topic  of  persons,
'rnodo  videamus  de  rebus'  (ii.  i:  Inst.  ii.  i.  pr.):  and  finally
'  superest  ut  de  actionibus  loquamur '  (iv.  i :  Inst.  iv.  6.  pr.).  To
understand  these  phrases  as  meaning  Met  us  look  at  the  law  first
from  the  point  of  view  of  persons '  and  so  on  requires  the  possession
of  an  exegetical  power  apparently  rare  among  modem  exponents  of
the  Roman  Law  ^

Between  the  private  law  of  Rome  as  stated  by  Gaius,  and  as  stated
by  Justinian,  there  is  far  more  difference  in  the  matter  of  personae
and  actiones  than  in  the  intermediate  department,  the  '  ius  quod  ad
res  pertinet,'  except  perhaps  in  such  part  of  the  latter  as  relates  to
inheritance  or  succession.  The  most  important  points  of  change
in  the  subject  now  under  our  immediate  consideration  are  briefly  as
follows:  (i)  The  threefold  division  of  libertini  into  cives,  Latini,  and
dediticii,  which  was  important  when  Gaius  wrote,  was  practically
obsolete  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  who  formally  abolished  it ;  this
necessitated  a  change  in  the  law  of  manumission,  which  was  greatly
simplified,  the  statutes  which  had  introduced  these  distinctions  being
to  that  extent  repealed,  as  also  was  the  lex  Fufia  Caninia,  limiting
the  number  of  slaves  who  could  be  manumitted  by  testament;
{2)  of  persons  *  alieno  iuri  subiectae,'  exclusive  of  slaves,  there  had
in  Gaius'  time  been  three  classes,  viz.  those  in  paternal  power,  those
in  manu,  and  those  in  mancipio.  In  the  Institutes  patria  potestas
is  still  a  living  reality,  but  manus  and  mancipium  have  become
obsolete ;  hence  a  second  simplification,  the  modes  in  which  manus
could  arise,  and  some  of  the  purposes  for  which  it  had  been
employed,  being  a  somewhat  complicated  and  difficult  branch  of


^  Recently  Duarenns'  ioterpxetation  has  been  defended  in  a  monograph  by
Dr.  W.  P.  Emeiton  (London,  1888),  who  relies  principally  npon  Gains'  use  of*  vel '
rather  than  'ant  'in  drawing  the  distinction.  But  the  writer  has  authority  for
saying  that  even  in  Cicero  the  usage  of  vel  and  ant  is  not  so  precise  as  Dr.  Emerton
assumes  it  to  be  in  a  much  later  writer  :  and  it  is  possible  that  Gaius  deliberately
preferred  the  less  dogmatic  disjunctive  because  he  felt  that  the  division  of  the  whole
law  into  three  masses  could  not  possibly  be  so  dean  cut  as  might  have  been
inferred  if  he  had  said  aut .  .  .  ant . . .  ant.


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  I.  95

law.  (3)  In  Justinian  legitimation  of  children  not  under  patria
potestas  at  birth  is  definitely  treated  as  one  of  the  modes  in  which
this  power  may  originate ;  in  Gaius'  time  this  occurred  only  by  the
fact  of  a  Latinus  acquiring  the  civitas,  and  by  his  children  born
before  this  event  being  subjected  to  his  potestas ;  but  in  the  later
period  there  were  no  Latini ;  and  accordingly  the  long  discussion  in
Gaius  (i.  65-96)  '  de  statu  liberorum,'  and  on  the  modes  in  which
a  Latin  could  become  a  civis,  has  no  counterpart  in  Justinian  except
the  paragraph  on  legitimation  in  i.  10.  13;  (4)  with  regard  to
adoption  sensu  stricto,  Justinian  completely  altered  its  form,  and  also
its  eflfect  unless  the  adopting  person  was  a  natural  ascendant ;  with
regard  to  '  adrogatio/  the  form  had  been  changed  between  the  two
writers,  it  being  now  effected  'principali  rescripto/  not  'populi
auctoritate/  as  in  the  time  of  Gaius;  but  no  other  change  of  any
great  importance  had  been  made  in  this  branch  of  law.  (5)  Justinian
entirely  changed  the  mode  of  emancipation  (i.  12.  6.)  by  substituting
for  the  old  fictitious  sale  a  mere  declaration  by  the  parent  before
a  magistrate.  (6)  In  the  department  of  guardianship  the  '  perpetua
roulierum  tutela,'  with  which,  though  still  existing  in  his  day,  Gaius
(i.  190)  had  expressed  his  dissatisfaction,  had  altogether  disappeared
long  before  the  compilation  of  the  Corpus  luris.  The  meaning  of
the  expression  '  fiduciaria  tutela '  has  also  been  narrowed  (see  notes  on
Title  19),  and  the  mode  of  magisterial  appointment,  in  default  of
a  testamentary  or  agnatic  guardian,  is  different  from  what  it  was  in
the  time  of  the  earlier  writer.  On  the  subject  of  curators  Justinian  is
far  fuller  than  the  latter,  and  to  his  last  two  Titles  (de  excusationibus
— de  suspectis  tutoribus  et  curatoribus)  there  is  no  corresponding
matter  in  Gaius  at  all.  This  is  probably  to  be  explained  by  the
tact  that  the  conception  of  tutela  had  changed  between  the  two
writers,  or  at  any  rate  had  in  the  later  period  come  to  be  regarded
far  more  as  a  'publicum  munus,'  from  which  exemption  could  be
claimed  only  on  very  sufficient  grounds,  than  in  the  age  even  of  the
Antonines.


IN  NOMINE  DOMINI  NOSTRI  lESU  CHRISTI

IMPERATOR  CAESAR  FLAVIUS  lUSTINIANUS  ALAMANNICUS
GOTHICUS  FRANCICUS  GERMANICUS  ANTICUS  ALAN-
ICUS  VANDALICUS  AFRICANUS  PIUS  FELIX
INCLITUS  VICTOR  AC  TRIUMPHATOR
SEMPER  AUGUSTUS  CUPIDAE
LEGUM   lUVENTUTI.

Imperatoriam  maiestatem  non  solum  armis  decoratam,
sed  etiam  legibus  oportet  esse  armatam,  ut  utrumque  tempus
et  bellorum  et  pacis  recte  possit  gubernari  et  princeps
Romanus  victor  existat  non  solum  in  hostilibus  proeliis,  sed
etiam  per  legitimos  tramites  calumniantium  iniquitates  ex-
pellens,  et  fiat  tarn  iuris  religiosissimus  quam  victis  hostibus
triumphator.

Quorum  utramque  viam  cum  summis  vigiliis  et  summa  i
provident ia  adnuente  deo  perfecimus.  et  belHcos  quidem
sudores  nostros  barbaricae  gentes  sub  iuga  nostra  deductae
cognoscunt  et  tarn  Africa  quam  aliae  innumerosae  provinciae
post  tanta  temporum  spatia  nostris  victoriis  a  caelesti  numine
praestitis  iterum  dicioni  Romanae  nostroque  additae  imperio
protestantur.  omnes  vero  popuH  legibus  iam  a  nobis  vel
promulgatis  vel  compositis  reguntur.  Et  cum  sacratissimas  2
constitutiones  antea  confusas  in  luculentam  ereximus  con-
sonantiam,  tunc  nostram  extendimus  curam  et  ad  immensa
prudentiae  veteris  volumina,  et  opus  desperatum  quasi  per
medium  profundum  euntes  caelesti  favore  iam  adimplevimus.
Cumque  hoc  deo  propitio  peractum  est,  Triboniano  viro  3
magniiico  magistro  et  exquaestore  sacri  palatii  nostri  nee
non  Theophilo  et  Dorotheo  viris  illustribus  antecessoribus,
quorum  omnium  soUertiam  et  legum  scientiam  et  circa  nostras
iussiones  (idem  iam  ex  multis  rerum  argumentis  accepimus,
convocatis    specialiter    mandavimus,    ut    nostra    auctoritate

H


98  PROOEMIUM.

nostrisque  suasionibus  componant  institutiones :  ut  liceat
vobis  prima  legum  cunabula  non  ab  antiquis  fabulis  discere,
sed  ab  imperiali  splendore  appetere  et  tarn  aures  quam
animae  vestrae  nihil  inutile  nihilque  perperam  positum,  sed
quod  in  ipsis  rerum  optinet  argumentis  accipiant : .  et  quod  in
priore  tempore  vix  post  quadriennium  prioribus  contingebat,
ut  tunc  constitutiones  imperatorias  legerent,  hoc  vos  a
primordio  ingrediamini  digni  tanto  honore  tantaque  reperti
felicitate,  ut  et  initium  vobis  et  finis  legum  eniditionis  a  voce

4  principali  procedat.  Igitur  post  libros  quinquaginta  diges-
torum  seu  pandectarum,  in  quos  omne  ius  antiquum  collatum
est  (quos  per  eundem  virum  excelsum  Tribonianum  nee  non
ceteros  viros  illustres  et  facundissimos  confecimus),  in  hos
quattuor  libros  easdem  institutiones  partiri  iussimus,  ut  sint

5  totius  legitimae  scientiae  prima  elementa.  Quibus  breviter
expositum  est  et  quod  antea  optinebat  et  quod  postea  desue-
tudine  inumbratum  ab  imperiali   remedio  illuminatum  est.

6  Quas  ex  omnibus  antiquorum  institutionibus  et  praecipue
ex  commentariis  Gaii  nostri  tarn  institutionum  quam  rerum
cottidianarum  aliisque  multis  commentariis  compositas  cum
tres  praedicti  viri  prudentes  nobis  optulerunt,  et  legimus  et
cognovimus  et  plenissimum  nostrarum  constitutionum  robur
eis  accommodavimus.

7  Summa  itaque  ope  et  alacri  studio  has  leges  nostras
accipite  et  vosmet  ipsos  sic  eruditos  ostendite^  ut  spes  vos
pulcherrima  foveat  toto  legitimo  opere  perfecto  posse  etiam
nostram  rem  publicam  in  partibus  eius  vobis  credendis
gubernare.

Data  undecimo  kalendas  Decembres  Constantinopoli  do*
mino  nostro  lustiniano  perpetuo  Augusto  tertium  consule.


DOMINI   NOSTRI  lUSTINIANI  PERPETUO  AUGUSTI

INSTITUTIONUM   SIVE   ELEMENTORUM

COMPOSITORUM  PER  TRIBONIANUM  VIRUM  EXCELSUM  lURIS-
QUE  DOCTISSIMUM  MAGISTRUM  ET  EXQUAESTORE  SACRI
PALATII  ET  THEOPHILUM  VIRUM   MAGNIFICUM  lU-
RIS  PERITUM  ET  ANTECESSOREM  HUIUS  ALMAE
URBIS    ET    DOROTHEUM    VIRUM    MAGNIFI-
CUM QUAESTORIUM  lURIS  PERITUM  ET
ANTECESSOREM   BERYTENSIUM
INCLITAE  CIVITATIS


LIBER  PRIMUS.
I.

DE  lUSTITIA  ET  lURE.

lUSTlTIA  est  constans  et  perpetua  voluntas  lus  suum  cuique
tribuens.     luris  prudentia  est  divinarum  atque  humanarum  1
renim  notitia,  iusti  atque  iniusti  scientia.

His  generaliter  cognitis  et  incipientibus  nobis  exponere  iura  2
populi  Roman!  ita  maxime  videntur  posse  tradi  commo-
dissime,  si  primo  levi  ac  simplici,  post  deinde  diligentissima
atque  exactissima  interpretatione  singula  tradantur.  alioquin
si  statim  ab  initio  rudem  adhuc  et  infirmum  animum  studiosi
multitudine  ac  varietate  rerum  oneraverimus,  duorum  alterum
aut  desertorem  studiorum  efficiemus  aut  cum  magno  labore

Tit.  L  On  these  definitions  of  justice  and  jurisprudence  see  General
Introduction,  p.  59,  supr.  The  first  is  as  old  as  Simonides  (rh  o(^ftXo/x€ya
iKotrrtf  mrofiMpai  diKat6»  tarty  cited  in  Plato,  Rep.  i.) :  for  close  parallels
cf.  Cic  de  Fin.  V.  23,  de  Off.  i.  2,  iii.  2.

H  2


lOO  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

eius,  saepe  etiam  cum  difiidentia,  quae  plerumque   iuvenes
avertit,  serius  ad  id  perducemus,  ad  qucxl  leniore  via  ductus
sine  magno  labore  et  sine  uUa  diffidentia  maturius  perduci
potuisset.
3      luris   praecepta   sunt  haec:   honeste  vivere,  alterum   non

§  3.  As  a  term  of  Roman  law,  ius  has  various  significations,  viz.  (i.)
objectively,  law ;  and  this  with  several  shades  of  meaning  :  {a)  the  whole
body  of  law,  or  large  divisions  of  it  (e.  g.  ius  quo  urbs  Roma  utitur :
ius  civile,  gentium,  honorarium,  publicum,  privatum ;  (b)  single  rules
of  law  (e.  g.  '  iura  condere '  Bk.  i.  2.  8,  '  ius  senatus  consult!  inducere '
Dig.  38.  4.  3.  2) ;  {c)  law  established  or  recognised  by  judicial  decision
(e.g.  *ius  fieri  ex  sententia  iudicis'  Dig.  5.  2.  17.  i,  'praetor  ius  red-
dere  dicitur,  etiam  cum  inique  decemit'  Dig.  i.  i.  11);  (d)  law  as  a
subject  of  study,  =  jurisprudence  (e.  g.  Dig.  i.  i.  pr.  'ius  est  ars  boni  et
aequi,'  ib.  i.  22.  i  '  iuri  operam  daturus,  studiosus  iuris.'  (ii.)  Subjec-
tively, a  right  conferred  by  ius  in  sense  (i.) :  e.  g.  pr.  supr. :  so  frequently
iura  praediorum  =  servitutes  ;  or  a  collection  of  such  rights,  e.  g. '  succedere
in  ius  demortui ;'  Bk.  ii.  20.  1 1  '  legatarii  et  fidei  commissarii  non  iuris
successores  sunt ; '  (iii.)  the  place  in  which  the  praetor  sat  to  administer
justice:  'alia  significatione  ius  dicitur  locus,  in  quo  ius  redditur:  quern
locum  determinare  hoc  modo  possumus  :  ubicunque  praetor  salva  maies-
tate  imperii  sui  salvoque  maiorum  more  ius  dicere  constituit,  is  locus
recte  ius  appellatur'  Dig.  i.  i.  11.  In  this  sense,  under  the  formulary
system  of  procedure,  ius  was  usually  employed  to  denote  the  court  of  the
praetor,  as  distinguished  from  the  proceedings  before  the  iudex  whom  he
appointed  to  hear  and  decide  the  case,  which  were  called  indicium :  e.  g.
the  common  expressions  in  ius  vocare,  in  iure  cedere,  in  iure  interrogari,
confiteri,  etc. ;  (iv.)  judicial  proceedings  themselves,  e,  g. '  dies  in  quibus
debcnt  iura  difTerri'  Cod.  3.  12.  73;  (v.)=potestas,  as  in  the  common
phrases  persona  sui  iuris,  persona  ali^no  iuri  subjecta,  e.  g.  Bk.  i.  8  pr. ;
Gaius  i.  48.  49;  so  Dig.  36.  2.  14.  3  *in  ius  alicuius  pervenire ;'  (vi.)  =
status:  'emancipari  a  patre  adoptivo,  atque  ita  pristinum  ius  recuperare'
Dig.  I.  7.  33.  (vii.)  The  jural  nature  of  a  person  or  thing,  e.g.  *iusactoris
deterius  facere '  Dig.  2.  9.  i.  i, '  ius  fundi  deterius  factum  *  Dig.  50.  16. 126,
'domum  cum  iure  suo  omni  legare'  Dig.  33.  10.  8;  (viii.)  relation,  e.  g.
'  adoptio  non  ius  sanguinis,  sed  ius  agnationis  affert'  Dig.  i.  7.  23,  *  non-
nunquam  ius  pro  necessitudine  accipimus,  veluti  est  ius  cognationis  vel
afiinitatis'  Dig.  i.  i.  12.

In  the  expression  'iuris  praecepta,'  ius  seems  hardly  to  bear  any  of
these  meanings,  for  the  precept  '  honeste  vivere  '  is  rather*  an  ethical
principle  than  a  rule  of  positive  law ;  at  least  men  often  practise  what
cannot  be  termed  an  honest  calling  without  bringing  themselves  within
reach  of  the  law.  Perhaps  it  is  better  to  regard  the  three  iuris  praecepta
not  as  legal  rules  themselves,  but  as  the  basis  of  a  classification  of  legal
rules  according  to  the  various  departments  of  the  whole  duty  of  man,  self-
regarding  and  extra-regarding  (Savigny,  System  i.  409).    It  may  be,  how-


Tit.  1.]  DE  lUSTITIA  ET  JURE.  loi

laedere,  suum  cuique  tribuere.  Huius  studii  duae  sunt  4
positiones,  publicum  et  privatum,  publicum  ius  est,  quod  ad
statum  rei  Romanae  spectat,  privatum,  quod  ad  singulorum
utilitatem  pertinet.  dicendum  est  igitur  de  iure  privato,  quod
est  tripertitum :  collectum  est  enim  ex  naturalibus  praeceptis
aut  gentium  aut  civilibus.


ever,  that  Ulpian,  from  whom  pr.  and  §§  i  and  3  of  this  Title  are
taken,  and  in  whose  '  Regulae,'  Bk.  i,  they  stand  in  close  connection,
meant  §  3  to  be  an  expansion  or  explanation  of  pr. ;  by  enouncing,  as
the  first  precept  of  the  law,  a  rule  relating  to  oneself  and  not  to  other
persons,  he  intended  to  say,  that  although  justice  is  what  he  defines  it
to  be  in  pr.,  it  is  not  yet  enough  to  injure  no  one,  and  to  give  every  man
his  due,  in  order  to  save  oneself  from  collision  with  the  law :  the  law
also  punishes  any  unworthy  conduct  by  which  one's  own  personality  is
degraded.

§  4.  Public  law  '  in  sacris,  in  sacerdotibus,  in  magistratibus  consistit '
Dig.  I.  I.  I.  2.  In  the  Roman  view  it  comprised  two  parts  :  (i)  constitu-
tional law  in  its  widest  sense,  i.  e.  the  law  which  determines  in  whom  the
sovereign  power  shall  reside,  how  it  shall  be  exercised,  and  to  what
checks  the  persons  among  whom  it  may  be  distributed  shall  be  subject.
It  thus  embraces  all  administrative  law,  which  indeed  under  the  later
Empire  fonued  its  largest  portion ;  see  the  account  of  Theodosius'  Code
in  the  General  Introduction,  p.  68  supr.  Another  important  portion  of
it  was  the  ius  sacrum,  even  after  Theodosius  II  had  made  Christianity  the
national  religion.  (2)  Criminal  law :  privata  delicta  (torts)  were  distin-
guished from  publica  delicta  or  crimes  :  '  publica  crimina,  quorum  delatio
omnibus  conceditur'  Cod.  9.  9.  30.  pr.,  see  Bk.  iv.  18.  i.  inf.

It  is  of  course  impossible  to  draw  a  perfectly  hard  and  fast  line  between
public  and  private  law,  and  this  was  for  historical  reasons  particularly
true  of  Rome  (General  Introd.  p.  16  sq.,  supr.) ;  many  institutions  are
from  one  point  of  view  regarded  as  publici,  from  another  as  privati  iuris ;
thus  tutela,  though  discussed  in  the  Institutes,  was  a  munus  publicum,
and  so  in  Dig.  28.  i.  3,  it  is  said  'testamenti  factio  publici  iuris  est.'
Civil  procedure,  from  the  prominence  with  which  it  is  treated  in  Bk.  iv,
and  also  by  Gains,  was  apparently  considered  a  part  of  private  law  ;  but
by  many  this  is  regarded  as  arbitrary  and  unjustifiable,  on  the  ground
that  rules  of  procedure  are  properly  rules  determining  how  the  powers  of
certain  officers  (magistrates  and  judges)  shall  be  exercised.

The  division  of  the  whole  body  of  law  observed  within  the  limits  of  any
given  state  into  public  and  private,  though  as  old  as  Aristotle  (Rhet  i.
13.  3)9  and  adopted  by  the  modem  civilians  no  less  than  by  the  Roman
jurists,  is  severely  criticised  and  rejected  by  Austin  (jurisprudence,
lect.  44),  who  would  make  the  greater  part  of  public  law  so  called  part  of
the  law  of  persons.  This  is  scientifically  correct  if  we  take  law  of
persons,  as  he  does,  in  a  sense  very  different  from  that  given  to  it  by


I02  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

11.
DE  lURE  NATURALI  ET  GENTIUM  ET  CIVILI.

lus  naturale  est,  quod  natura  omnia  animalia  docuit.  nam
ius  istud  non  humani  generis  proprium  est,  sed  omnium  ani-
malium,  quae  in  caelo,  quae  in  terra,  quae  in  man  nascuntur.
hinc  descendit  maris  atque  feminae  coniugatio,  quam  nos
matrimonium  appellamus,  hinc  liberorum  procreatio  et  edu-
catio:  videmus  etenim  cetera  quoque  animalia  istius  iuris
1  peritia  censeri.  Ius  autem  civile  vel  gentium  ita  dividitur :
omnes  populi,  qui  legibus  et  moribus  reguntur,  partim  suo
proprio,  partim  communi  omnium  hominum  lure  utuntur :
nam  quod  quisque  populus  ipse  sibi  ius  constituit,  id  ipsius
proprium  civitatis  est  vocaturque  ius  civile,  quasi  ius  proprium
ipsius  civitatis :  quod  vero  naturalis  ratio  inter  omnes  homines
constituit,  id  apud  omnes  populos  pereaque  custoditur  voca-
turque ius  gentium,  quasi  quo  iure  omnes  gentes  utuntur.  et
populus  itaque  Romanus  partim  suo  proprio,  partim  communi
omnium  hominum  iure  utitur.     quae  singula  qualia  sunt,  suis

its  originators :  but  this  seems  to  be  just  one  of  those  cases  in  which  strict
scientific  accuracy  may  be  sacrificed  to  considerations  of  convenience.

At  the  close  of  this  paragraph  naturalia  praecepta  are  distinguished
from  praecepta  gentium  and  praecepta  civilia :  so  in  the  next  Title  ius
naturale  is  distinguished  from  both  ius  gentium  and  ius  civile.  This,
however,  is  (with  two  exceptions,  Bk.  i.  2.  2,  ib.  5.  pr.)  the  only  passage  in
the  Institutes  in  which  ius  gentium  is  opposed  to  ius  naturale,  and  it
leaves  no  mark  on  the  system:  in  all  other  places  the  two  expressions
are  used  as  synonymous,  and  in  Bk.  ii.  i.  11  they  are  expressly  identified,
' .  .  .  iure  naturali,  quod,  sicut  diximus,  appellatur  ius  gentium.'  The
explanation  of  the  seeming  anomaly  is  that  in  Tit.  i.  4,  and  Tit  2.  i.
Justinian  is  quoting  verbatim  from  the  Institutes  of  Ulpian,  who  is  the
only  leading  jurist  who  makes  anything  of  the  distinction,  while  Tit.  2.
I.  is  taken  from  Gaius.  For  the  history  and  meaning  of  the  terms  see
General  Introd.  pp.  28  sq.,  supr.

Tit.  n.  The  idea  of  ius  naturale  as  distinct  from  ius  gentium  is
derived  from  notions  of  a  prehistoric  epoch  in  which  men  were,  in
point  of  social  development,  hardly  distinguishable  from  other  animals.
Savigny  (Syst.  i.  p.  415)  attempts  to  justify  Ulpian's  attribution  of
a  jural  character  to  natural  instincts  by  drawing  a  distinction  between
the  matter  and  the  form  in  every  legal  relation.  The  matter  here  is  the
sexual  relation,  or  the  relation  between  parent  and  offspring,  the  form  is
given  to  it,  among  men,  by  positive  law ;  and  what  Ulpian  ascribes  to


Tit.  2.]  DE  lURE  NATURALI,  ETC.  103

locis  pix>ponemu&  Sed  ius  quidem  civile  ex  unaquaque  2
civitate  appellatur,  veluti  Atheniensium :  nam  si  quis  velit
Solonis  vel  Draconis  leges  appellare  ius  civile  Atheniensium,
non  erraverit  sic  enim  et  ius,  quo  populus  Romanus  utitur,
ius  civile  Romanorum  appellamus:  vel  ius  Quiritium,  quo
Quirites  utuntur:  Romani  enim  a  Quirino  Quirites  appel-
lantur.  sed  quotiens  non  addimus,  cuius  sit  civitatis,  nostrum
ius  significamus :  sicuti  cum  poetam  dicimus  nee  addimus
nomen,  subauditur  apud  Graecos  egregius  Homerus,  apud  nos
Vergilius.  ius  autem  gentium  omni  humano  generi  commune
est  nam  usu  exigente  et  humanis  necessitatibus  gentes
humanae  quaedam  sibi  constituerunt :  bella  etenim  orta  sunt
et  captivitates  secutae  et  servitutes,  quae  sunt  iuri  natural!
contrariae.  iure  enim  naturali  ab  initio  omnes  homines  liberi
nascebantur.  ex  hoc  iure  gentium  et  omnes  paene  contractus
introducti  sunt,  ut  emptio  venditio,  locatio  conductio,  societas^
depositum,  mutuum  et  alii  innumerabiles.

Constat  autem  ius   nostrum   aut   ex  scripto  aut  ex   non  3
scripto,  ut  apud   Graecos :   r<av  vofxatv  ol  fxkv  iyypa(f>oi,y  ol  be
iypa<poi,    Scriptum  ius  est  lex,  plebiscita,  senatus  consulta,
principum  placita,  magistratuum  edicta,  responsa  prudentium.

the  animal  world  is  not  the  form  (law  itself),  but  the  matter  of  law.  But
Savigny  admits  not  only  that  the  threefold  division  of  law  is  unsuit-
able for  purposes  of  law,  but  that  the  twofold  division  (ius  gentium  and
naturale  being  identified)  is  far  the  more  common,  being  adopted  by
Paulus^  Marcian,  Florentinus,  and  Licinius  Rufus,  as  well  as  by  Gaius,
and  traceable  in  every  department  of  the  system.  Thus  the  conditions
of  marriage  rest  on  either  civilis  or  naturalis  ratio,  Bk.  i.  10.  pr.  inf. :
there  are,  even  in  Ulpian  (Dig  i.  7.  17.  i),  two  kinds  of  relationship,
civilis  and  paturalis  cognatio ;  rights  both  in  rem  and  in  personam  could
be  acquired  either  civiliter  or  naturaliter;  and  Ulpian  himself  distin-
guishes possession  (Dig.  10.  4.  3.  15)  and  obligation  (Dig.  44.  7.  14)  into
dvil  and  natural.

§  2,  Slavery  is  here  said  to  be  naturali  iuri  contraria,  and  so  in  Tit.  5.
pr.  inf.  Justinian  (following  Ulpian,  Inst.  l.  i.)  says  that  by  natural  law
all  men  are  bom  free,  slavery  having  been  introduced  iure  gentium.
Similarly  Florentinus  says  'servitus  est  constitutio  iuris  gentium,  qua
quis  dominio  aiieno  contra  naturam  subiicitur '  Dig.  i.  5.  4.  i ;  cf.  Gaius
I.  52,  Tit  8.  I.  inf.,  and  Aristotle,  Pol.  u  26 yap  v6fjLos  SfioXoyia  ns  tarivf  iv
f  ra  Kari.  ir6\«iiOP  Kparovfitva  t&p  KparoCvrctv  ccyat  <l>aa'iv.

§  3.  The  terms  ius  scriptum  and  non  scriptum  were,  to  the  Roman
mind,  free  from  all  modem  ambiguities  as  to  law  written  and  unwritten


I04  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUAT7U0R.         [Lib.  I.

4  Lex  est,  quod  populus  Romanus  senatore  magistratu  inter-
rogante,  veluti  consule,  constituebat  plebiscitum  est,  quod
plebs  plebeio  magistratu  interrogante,  veluti  tribuno,  con-
stituebat. plebs  autem  a  populo  eo  differt,  quo  species  a
genere:  nam  appellatione  populi  universi  cives  significantur
connumeratis  etiam  patriciis  et  senatoribus:  plebis  autem
appellatione  sine  patriciis  et  senatoribus  ceteri  cives  signi-
ficantur.   sed   et  plebiscita  l^e   Hortensia  lata  non   minus

5  valere  quam  leges  coeperunt.  Senatus  consultum  est,  quod
senatus  iubet  atque  constituit.  nam  cum  auctus  est  populus
Romanus  in  eum  modum,  ut  difficile  sit  in  unum  eum  con-
vocare   legis  sanciendae  causa,  aequum  visum   est  senatum

6  vice  populi  consuli.  Sed  et  quod  principi  placuit,  legis  habet
vigorem,  cum  lege  r^ia,  quae  de  imperio  eius  lata  est,  populus


(Austin,  lect.  29) ;  they  were  taken  quite  literally,  the  former  indicating
law  which  in  its  very  origin  was  embodied  in  writing  ;  thus,  as  is  said  in
this  section,  the  praetor's  edict  was  ius  scriptum,  even  when  based,  as
it  not  unfrequently  was,  on  immemorial  custom.

§  4.  Properly,  lex  is  a  statute  made  in  the  comitia  centuriata,  plebis-
citum one  made  in  the  comitia  tributa :  for  explanation  of  these  terms  see
General  Introd.  pp.  8,  21  sq.,  supr.  After  the  lex  Hortensia,  however,
plebiscita  were  frequently  called  leges,  e.g.  Dig.  9.  2.  i.  i  (Mex  Aquilia
plebiscitum  est,  quum  eam  Aquilius  tribunus  a  plebe  rogaverit  *).  Later
still  senatus-consulta  were  called  leges  (e.  g.  SC.  Macedonianum  in  Dig.
14.  6.  9.  4,  and  cf.  Gaius  i.  85),  and  finally  the  term  was  applied  to  imperial
constitutions  :  'quodcunque  imperator  statuit,  legem  esse  constat.'  The
false  view  of  the  relations  of  populus  and  plebs  which  this  section  gives  is
noted  by  Mr.  Poste  on  Gaius  i.  3,  cf.  General  Introd.  p.  21,  supr.  The
words  'et  senatoribus'  were  apparently  inserted  in  those  of  Gaius  by
Justinian,  for  the  earlier  writer  must  have  remembered  that  plebeians
elected  to  the  senate  remained  plebeians  still,  while  in  the  latter*s  time  the
plebs  was  probably  conceived  as  a  rabble,  and  the  patriciate  was  a  dignity
higher  even  than  that  of  senator,  Cod.  12.  3.  3.  pr.

§  6.  For  senatus-consulta  see  General  Introd.  pp.  43  sq.,  supr.

§  6.  For  the  lex  regia  see  General  Introd.  p.  45,  supr. ;  cf.  Cic.  de
Republ.  ii.  13,  17,  18,  and  20  :  Tacitus,  Hist.  i.  47,  ii.  55,  iv.  3,  6.

The  general  term  employed  to  denote  law  made  by  the  emperor  in
virtue  of  the  lex  regia  is  constitutiones ;  he  is  not  said  iubere,  like  the
populus  and  plebs  (Gaius  i.  3),  but  decemere,  censere,  constituent,  like
other  magistrates ;  and  in  Dig.  50.  16.  120  even  prudentes  are  said  Mura
const!  tuere.'  At  first  such  ordinances  seem  to  have  been  regarded  as
differing  from  the  edicta  of  the  old  republican  magistrates  only  in  their
frequency  and  in  the  binding  force  which  they  possessed  for  all  other


Tit.  2.]  DE  lURE  NATURALI,  ETC,  105

ei  et  in  eum  omne  suum  imperium  et  potestatem  concessit,
quodcumque  igitur  imperator  per  epistulam  constituit  vel
cognoscens  dccrevit  vel  edicto  praecepit,  legem  esse  constat :
haec  sunt,  quae   constitutiones    appellantur.     plane    ex   his


public  officers ;  and  it  has  been  already  observed  that  under  the  first
Emperors  the  form  of  legislation  by  the  comitia  was  retained :  that
leges  were  gradually  superseded  by  senatus-consulta ;  and  that  finally,
about  the  end  of  the  second  century,  the  princeps  cast  off  the  form  of
expressing  his  orders  as  the  orders  of  the  senate,  and  boldly  carried  on
the  work  of  direct  legislation  in  his  own  name  only.

Under  this  general  term  *'  constitutio  *  are  comprised  many  varieties  of
enactments.  (1)  When  the  emperor  laid  before  the  senate  a'projet  de
loi,'  it  was  usual  for  him  to  introduce  it  by  an  oratio  (e.  g.  Oratio  Per-
tinacis,  Bk.  ii.  17.  7.  inf.;  cf.  Dig.  2.  12.  i.  2;  2.  15.  8.  pr. ;  5.  3.  22);
these  orationes  were  regarded  as  law  apart  from  the  senatus-consulta
themselves,  and  were  cited  as  such,  often  in  preference  to  the  latter,  by
the  jurists,  and  after  Constantine  an  oratio  was  known  as  an  imperial
ordinance  of  which  notice  had  been  given  to  the  senate.  (2)  Edicta,
issued  by  the  emperor  in  virtue  of  his  authority  as  supreme  magistrate.
Gaius  mentions  an  edict  of  Trajan  in  iii.  172,  and  one  of  Hadrian  in
>•  55*  93;  one  of  Marcus  Aurelius  is  referred  to  in  Bk.  ii.  6.  14  inf.
When  the  emperor  had  become  the  sole  legislative  power,  constitutions
which,  as  containing  a  general  rule  of  law,  corresponded  to  the  leges  and
plebiscita  of  the  Republic,  were  called  edicta  or  edictales  constitutiones ;
they  were  addressed  either  to  the  subjects  of  the  empire  at  large  (ad
populum,  ad  omnes  populos),  to  the  senate,  or  to  an  imperial  officer,  the
praefectus  urbi  or  praetorio,  for  promulgation.  (3)  Mandata,  by  which
the  emperor  delegated  his  jurisdiction  to  other  magistrates  (legati,  and
the  two  praefects  just  mentioned),  and  which  may  be  regarded  as  laws
proper  only  so  far  as  they  contained  general  instructions  as  to  the
exercise  of  the  delegated  authority ;  that  they  are  not  enumerated
among  the  kinds  of  constitutions  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  1.4.  i.  i),  from  whom
this  passage  of  the  Institutes  is  taken,  or,  in  Gaius  i.  5,  is  probably
because  the  great  majority  of  them  related  to  matters  not  of  private
but  of  public  law.  (4)  Decreta  and  rescripta,  which  up  to  the  time
of  Constantine  were  by  far  the  commonest  kinds  of  constitutio,  and
which  necessitate  a  brief  notice  of  the  judicial  functions  exercised  by  the
princeps.

In  the  first  place  he  frequently  exercised  the  functions  which  had  under
the  Republic  been  discharged  by  the  praetor :  Augustus  '  assidue  ius
dixit '  Sueton.  Octav.  33 ;  and  these  judicial  functions  were,  according
to  the  usual  distinction,  partly  ordinary,  partly  extraordinary ;  he  either
appointed  a  index  to  hear  and  decide  the  case,  or  he  retained  the
cognisance  of  it  to  himself,  and  decided  it  by  a  decretum.  Secondly,
through  his  tribunicia  potestas  he  acquired  and  exercised  an  important
appellate  jurisdiction,  in  virtue  of  which  he  assumed  to  modify  and  even


io6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  I.

quaedam  sunt  personales^  quae  nee  ad  exemplum  trahuntur,
quoniam  non  hoe  princeps  vult :  nam  quod  alicui  ob  merita
indulsit,  vel  si  cui  poenam  irrogavit,  vel  si  cui  sine  exemplo
subvenit,  personam  non  egreditur.  aliae  autem,  cum  gene-
reverse  the  sentence  of  a  judge,  exactly  as  the  republican  tribuni  plebis
had  been  entitled  to  veto  the  act  of  other  magistrates.  Out  of  this  grew
the  practice  of  referring  legal  points  in  the  first  instance  to  the  emperor
by  petition,  or  to  be  considered  by  him  in  private,  and  not,  as  had  been
usual  with  the  praetor,  in  the  public  forum.  These  matters  he  sometimes
decided  once  for  all  by  a  decretum ;  but  far  oftener  he  replied  by  rescrip-
tum,  which  was  a  provisional  decision  of  the  legal  point  at  issue,  leaving
the  facts  alleged  by  the  petitioner  to  be  inquired  into,  and  a  final
settlement  made,  by  another  magistrate  or  an  ordinary  index.  It  also
became  usual  for  magistrates,  and  especially  the  provincial  praesides,
to  refer  difficult  cases  of  law,  when  in  doubt,  to  the  emperor  for  advice^
and  the  replies  to  such  consultations  were  also  called  rescripta.  Rescripta
were  technically  of  two  kinds :  epistolae  (e.  g.  Bk.  iii.  20.  4  inf.),  inde-
pendent replies  to  questions  referred  to  the  imperial  judgment,  which
was  usually  the  form  employed  in  answering  a  magistrate ;  and  subscript
tiones,  brief  opinions  on  cases  submitted  by  petition,  and  written  at  the
foot  of  the  petition  itself,  this  being  the  common  form  in  answering
private  persons  (e.g.  subscriptio  Hadriani,  Bk.  li.  12.  pr.  inf.).

The  precise  authority  of  these  decreta  and  rescripta  has  been  much
disputed.  Savigny  (Syst  i.  pp.  1 25-1 41)  contends  that  their  sole  binding
force  was  for  the  particular  case  for  which  they  were  issued  :  they  might
be  cited  as  authorities  for  other  similar  cases,  but  the  judge  was  under
no  strict  obligation  to  apply  them  in  the  way  in  which  he  was  bound  to
apply  and  follow  leges  proper.  If  this  is  true,  then  lex  in  Ulpian's  words
('quodcumque  ergo  imperator  vel  per  epistulam  constituit,  vel  cognoscens
decrevit,  vel  edicto  praecepit  legem  esse  constat ')  must  have  a  very  dif-
ferent sense  from  that  which  it  usually  bears,  and  the  words  in  the  text
('  plane  ex  his  [constitutionibus]  quaedam  sunt  personales,  quae  nee  ad  ex-
emplum trahuntur')  are  still  more  against  Savigny;  for  upon  his  view  all
decreta  and  rescripta  are  personales  constitutiones,  and  yet  it  is  quite  clear
from  the  paragraph  immediately  succeeding  ('  nam  quod  alicui  ob  merita
indulsit,'  etc.,  in  this  section)  that  Ulpian  did  not  conceive  them  as  such.
Even  stronger  arguments  against  him  are  to  be  found  in  our  knowledge
that  the  Emperor  Macrinus  (218  A.  D.)  meditated  the  repeal  of  all  his
predecessors'  rescripta,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  intolerable  that  the
capricious  judgments  of  such  tyrants  as  Commodus  and  Caracalla  should
be  regarded  as  law;  and  that  Arcadius  and  Honorius,  in  A.D.  398,
forbade,  in  future,  the  application  of  rescripta,  and  doubtless  of  decreta
as  well,  to  cases  other  than  those  which  they  were  immediately  designed
to  determine;  the  enactment  was  made  even  more  stringent  by  Theo-
dosius  and  Valentinian.  This  rule  was  reversed  by  Justinian,  who
bears  strong  evidence  against  Savigny:  ^sciant  hade  esse  legem  non


Tit  2.]  DE  lURE  NATURALI,  ETC.  107

rales  sunt,  omnes  procul  dubio  tenent.     Praetorum  quoque  7
edicta  non  modicam  iuris  optinent  auctoritatem.    haec  etiam
ius  honorarium  solemus  appellare,  quod  qui  honores  gerunt,
id  est  magistratus,  auctoritatem  huic  iuri  dederunt.     propone-
bant  et  aediles  curules  edictum  de  quibusdam  casibus,  quod

solum  illi  causae,  pro  qua  producta  est,  sed  et  omnibus  similibus  .  .  .
cum  et  veteris  iuris  conditores  constitutiones,  quae  ex  imperiali  decreto
processerunt,  Icgis  vim  obtinere  aperte  dilucideque  definiant'  Cod.  i.  14.
12.  pr.

It  appears  then  more  probable  that  decreta  and  rescripta  possessed
the  force  of  general  law  in  reference  to  later  cases  resembling  those  for
whose  decision  they  were  originally  issued,  provided  that  the  intention
of  their  respective  issuers  had  been  that  they  should  enounce  a  legal
rule,  and  not  merely  determine  a  specific  case.  Despite  the  evidence  of
St.  Augustine  ('  ut  etiam  idiotae  intelligant,  quid  specialiter,  quid  gener-
aliter  in  quocunque  praecepto  imperiali  sit  constitutum '  de  Doctr.  Christ.
liL  34),  the  question  whether  a  particular  rescript  was  intended  by  its
author  to  be  merely  personale  (e.  g.  Bk.  ii.  19.  6  inf.),  or  to  state  a  prin-
ciple of  law,  became  a  frequent  subject  of  juristic  disputation.  Such  as
were  undoubtedly  of  the  latter  character  were  called  generalia  rescripta
(e.  g.  Dig.  35.  2.  89.  I  'divi  Severus  et  Antoninus  generaliter  rescrip-
serunt  Bononio  Maximo,'  Dig.  11.  4.  i.  2  'est  etiam  generalis  epistola
divorum  Marci  et  Commodi ').  But  rescripts  were  also  called '  generalia '
when  it  was  held  that  the  rule  which  they  contained  might  be  extended
to  cases  even  remotely  resembling  the  one  originally  decided ;  e.  g.  the
rule  ignorantia  iuris  non  excusat  is  derived  in  its  geneial  form  by  Papinian
from  a  rescript  of  Severus  and  Antoninus,  Dig.  22.  6.  9.  5.

From  the  time  of  Constantine  onward,  and  in  the  Eastern  Empire,  a
particular  kind  of  rescripta  acquired  the  name  of '  pragmatic  sanctions.'
These  are  rescripta  in  answer  to  petitions,  drawn  up  in  a  peculiar  and
solemn  form,  and  distinguished  from  other  rescripts  by  being  more
highly  taxed :  Zeno  restricted  their  use  to  petitions  preferred  by  corpo-
rations.

In  framing  constitutions  (to  whichever  of  these  species  they  belonged)
the  emperor  was  assisted  by  a  council,  called  in  the  later  period  con-
sistorium  (Cod.  i.  14.  8),  to  which  the  praefecti  urbi  and  praetorio  and
the  most  celebrated  jurists  belonged,  and  which  gradually  assumed  the
character  of  a  general  council  of  state ;  it  was  regularly  consulted  by  the
emperor  in  the  exercise  of  his  supreme  appellate  jurisdiction,  and  the
chamber  in  which  such  consultations  were  held  was  as  early  as  M.  Aurelius
called  auditorium  principis.  It  was  mainly  in  this  way  that  the  jurists
acquired  their  knowledge  of  the  imperial  constitutions,  of  which  some  of
them  (e.  g.  Papirius  Justus  and  Paulus)  even  made  systematic  collections.

$  7.  For  the  praetor's  edict,  and  its  relation  to  the  ius  gentium,  see
General  Introd.  pp.  31  sq.  supr.  The  place  of  the  edict  of  the  curule  aedile
in  private  law  is  due  to  his  official  control  of  the  markets,  streets,  etc.


io8  INSTITUTIONUM  LlBRl  QUATTUOR,         [Lib.  I.

8  edictum  iuris  honorarii  portio  est.  Responsa  prudentium
sunt  sententiae  et  opiniones  eorum,  quibus  permissum  erat
iura  condere.  nam  antiquitus  institutum  erat,  ut  essent  qui
iura  publice  interpretarentur,  quibus  a  Caesare  ius  respon-
dendi  datum  est,  qui  iuris  consulti  appellabantur.  quorum
omnium  sententiae  et  opiniones  eam  auctoritatem  tenent,  ut
iudici   recedere  a  responso   eorum   non  liceat,  ut   est  con-

9  stitutum.     Ex  non  scripto  ius  venit,  quod  usus  comprobavit.

(General  Introduction,  p.  22  supr.)  The  first  title  of  Dig.  21.  is  'de
aedilicio  edicto/  and  out  of  his  jurisdiction  in  such  matters  arose  certain
actions  of  Roman  law  (actio  redhibitoria  and  actio  aestimatoria  seu
quanti  minoris,  note  on  Bk.  iii.  23.  3  inf. ;  cf.  Bk.  iv.  9.  i  inf.)  imposing
an  obligation  of  warranty  on  vendors,  at  first  in  market  overt,  and  then
in  all  sales.  Stipulationes  aediliciae,  analogous  to  the  praetorian  stipula-
tions mentioned  in  Bk.  iii.  18.  2  inf.,  are  spoken  of  in  Dig.  45.  i.  5.  pr.

§  8.  For  the  responsa  prudentium  see  General  Introd.  p.  55  supr.,
and  for  the  difficulties  of  this  particular  passage,  p.  57.  Theophilus  dis-
tinguishes between  sententiae  and  opiniones  thus :  sententia  . . .  ava/i^i-
PoXot  air6KpuriSf  opinio  fura  cV9ocao-/ioO  npoiT<l>€pofuptj  a.n6Kpi<rK.

§  9.  To  the  ius  non  scriptum  belongs  (besides  the  mores  maiorum,  the
national  customary  law  of  Rome)  the  whole  of  the  ius  gentium  originally,
and  subsequently  such  parts  of  it  as  did  not  become  scriptum  by  being
worked  into  the  edict  or  other  legislation.

Mos  is  to  be  distinguished  from  consuetudo  (in  so  far  as  the  latter
term  has  a  jural  meaning),  for  it  includes  '  positive  morality '  no  less  than
rules  strictly  legal :  *  morem  esse  communem  consensum  omnium  simul
habitant ium,  qui  inveteratus  consuetudinem  facit '  Servius  ad  Verg.  Aen.
vii.  601,  'morem  praecedere,  sequi  consuetudinem  .  .  .  perseverantium
consuetudinis  .  .  .  cultus  moris,  quod  est  consuetudo'  Macrob.  Saturn,
iii.  8.  It  has  been  stated  in  the  General  Introduction  (p.  2  supr.)  that
originally  the  Roman  law  existed  only  in  the  form  of  custom.  Legislation,
direct  and  indirect,  was  of  later  introduction,  but  steadily  tended  to  absorb
customary  law.  The  Twelve  Tables  were  in  the  main  a  statutory  re-enact-
ment of  the  customs  then  recognised  as  binding :  others  were  taken  up
into  subsequent  statutes,  the  Edict,  and  the  writings  of  the  iuris  auctores,
until  in  the  time  of  Gaius,  and  still  more  of  course  in  the  period  im-
mediately preceding  Justinian,  there  were  but  few  general  customs  pos-
sessing legal  validity  as  such,  though  many  statutes  and  quasi-statutory
rules  could  be  traced  in  their  origin  to  this  source.  This  is  the  case  with
acquisition  by  conventio  in  manum  (Gaius  iii.  82)  and  by  adrogation  (ib.
and  Bk.  iii.  10.  pr.  inf.),  and  with  substitutio  pupillaris  (Bk.  ii.  16  pr.  inf.).
The  validity  of  customary  law  is  stated  emphatically  not  only  here  and
in  Bk.  iv.  17.  pr.,  but  also  in  the  Digest  and  Code:  'de  quibus  causis
scriptis  legibus  non  utimur,  id  custodiri  oportet,  quod  moribus  et  consue-
tudine  inductum  est'  Dig.  i.  4. 32  pr. ' inveterata  consuetudo  pro  lege  non


Tit.  2.]  DE  lURE  NATURALI,  ETC.  109

nam   diuturni   mores  consensu  utentium   comprobati   legem

iromerito  custoditur'  ib.,  'quae  sunt  moris  et  consuetudinis,  in  bonae
fidei  iudiciis  debent  venire'  Dig.  21.  i.  31.  20, ' consuetudinis  ususque
longaevi  non  vilis  auctoritas  est '  Cod.  8.  52.  2 ;  cf.  the  strong  expressions
of  Aristotie  in  Pol.  ii.  5  ^  y^p  v6fAos  lax^p  ov^fuav  ?x<*  wpos  t6  ntiStaSai^
wX^v  itapit  t6  fBos,  ib.  iii.  1 1  icvpivTfpoi  r&v  Korii  ypafifAora  infiMP  ol  Korii  ra
ZBrf  €toip.

Few  subjects  have  been  so  much  disputed,  and  we  may  perhaps  say
misunderstood,  by  modem  jurists,  as  the  nature  of  customary  law,  its
validity,  and  the  relation  (if  the  two  terms  are  to  be  distinguished)  between
customary  law  and  custom.  That  custom  ever  has  any  force  as  positive
law  is  vehemently  denied  by  Austin ;  until  it  receives  the  impress  of  the
judge  or  legislator,  it  is  only  positive  morality  (Jurisprudence  p.  37) ;
when  it  has  received  that  impress  it  ceases  to  be  custom  and  becomes
positive  law,  though  the  name  *  customary  law '  for  it  is  convenient  as
perhaps  suggesting  the  ground  on  which  it  has  been  invested  with  a  legal
sanction  (ib.  p.  204).  The  error  of  this  view  (which  Austin  himself  admits
runs  counter  to  all  the  utterances  of  the  Roman  jurists)  has  been  shown
by  Sir  H.  Maine  (Early  History  of  Institutions,  lectures  12  and  13)  to  have
originated  in  Austin's  habit  of  basing  his  generalisations  on  observations
only  of  Western  communities,  in  which  the  engrossing  power  of  direct
legislation  had  been  kept  in  men's  memories  by  traditions  of  the  Roman
Empire.  As  to  the  way  in  which  custom,  as  law  (i.e.  before  it  is  em*
bodied  in  legislation  direct  or  indirect),  is  generated,  and  how  it  acquires
its  binding  force,  there  have  also  been  great  differences  of  opinion.  The
question  is  really  as  to  the  relation  between  the  usage,  and  the  conscious-
ness that  that  usage  is  a  right  one,  and  one  which  (legally)  ought  to  be
followed,  or  as  to  the  relation  between  the  usage  and  the  binding  rule,  or,
as  it  is  sometimes  shortly  though  unhappily  expressed,  between  custom
and  law.  The  earlier  view  was  that  customary  law  is  law  generated  by
custom,  diutumus  usus.  In  this  or  that  relation  of  life,  people  follow
a  uniform  practice,  and  this  practice,  in  virtue  of  its  uniformity,  is  called
a  custom ;  before  long  it  gains  so  strong  a  hold  upon  the  mind  as  to  be
followed  as  law,  and  in  fact  to  become  law,  which  the  Courts  (the  protec-
tion of  security,  and  attainment  of  fixity  of  relations,  being  part  of  their
business)  will  enforce.  Custom  is  thus  said  to  be  a  source  of  law,  and  law
proper,  in  the  history  of  nearly  every  nation,  to  be  preceded  by  custom.

Savigny  was  the  author  (Syst.  i.  p.  34  sq.)  of  the  view,  now  generally
accepted  by  German  jurists,  that  custom  is  not  one  of  the  sources  of  law,
but  only  its  token  or  external  manifestation ;  the  law  itself  is  grounded
on  the  common  legal  consciousness  of  the  nation.  If  the  people,  as
a  people,  is  conscious  of  a  rule,  or  thinks  that  such  or  such  a  principle
ought  to  be  followed  as  law,  this  principle  so  asserts  itself  as  to  be  applied
and  developed ;  the  usage  is  thus  evoked  and  occasioned  by  the  principle
which  the  popular  mind  approves  and  accepts,  instead  of  being  itself  the
source  of  that  principle.  The  consciousness  of  the  rule  must  precede  the
usage  or  custom,  for  it  is  upon  this  that  the  uniformity  of  action  is  based :


no  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

10  imitantur.  Et  non  ineleganter  in  duas  species  ius  civile
distributum  videtur.  nam  origo  eius  ab  institutis  duarum
civitatium,  Athenarum  scilicet  et  Lacedaemonis,  fluxisse
videtur :  in  his  enim  civitatibus  ita  agi  solitum  erat,  ut  Lace-
daemonii  quidem  magis  ea,  quae  pro  legibus  observarent,
memoriae  mandarent,  Athenienses  vero  ea,  quae  in  legibus
scripta  reprehendissent,  custodirent

11  Sed  naturalia  quidem  iura,  quae  apud  omnes  gentes
peraeque  servantur,  divina  quadam  providentia  constituta,
semper  firma  atque  immutabilia  permanent :  ea  vero,  quae
ipsa  sibi  quaeque  civitas  constitult,  saepe  mutari  solent  vel
tacito  consensu  populi  vel  alia  postea  lege  lata.

if  the  uniformity  of  action  is  merely  accidental,  and  not  due  to  common
consciousness  of  a  rule,  it  is  unreasonable  and  unfit  to  be  law.

The  principle  thus  precedes  and  generates  the  usage ;  but  the  older
view  contains  a  certain  truth,  viz.  that  the  principle  first  acquires  practical
validity  through  the  usage  of  which  it  is  the  parent,  exactly  as  ius  scriptum
acquires  binding  force  through  publication ;  and  to  this  extent  one  can
say  with  truth,  that  as  a  statute  comes  into  existence  through  publication,
so  customary  law  comes  into  existence  through  usage  or  custom.  Savigny
also  grants  that  in  some  cases  the  rule  is  actually  begotten  of  the  usage ;
in  particular,  where  the  substance  of  the  rule  is  more  or  less  immaterial,
so  long  as  the  rule  is  there  (e.  g.  fixing  of  legal  periods,  forms,  etc.).  On
the  whole  subject  see  Holland's  Jurisprudence,  chap.  v.

§  10.  Aaiecdaffi($i/fot  luv  .  .  .  t6€aiv  enaibtvovy  ov  \6yoi^'  'ABqvaiOi  bt  ,  »  .  A
fi€v  xph  irpoTTetu  7  /li^,  irpoeriraao-ov  dia  t&v  vofuap  Josephus  c.  Apionem  ii.,
fiia  T«v  prjrp&Vy  firj  xp^ioSai  p6fioig  tyypa<f>ois  Plutarch,  Lycurgus  13.  Never-
theless, the  Attic  writers  often  eulogise  unwritten  law,  e.  g.  S(5Xa>ira  vofMP

•  •  •  $vyy pa<l}€a  Ka\  tBStv  t&p  aplarap  tvp^rrjp  Lucianus,  Anach.  C.  1 4.

§  IL  It  is  clearly  said  here  that  a  statute  may  in  effect  be  abrogated  by
a  contrary  custom :  cf. '  legibus  istis  situ  atque  senio  obliteratis '  Gell.  ii.
24,  Plautus,  Trinum.  iv.  3.  30.  33,  Livy  37.  8,  and  the  strong  expression
of  Julian  in  Dig.  i.  3.  32.  i  *  Quare  rectissime  illud  receptum  est,  ut  leges
non  solum  suffragio  legislatoris,  sed  etiam  tacito  consensu  omnium  per
desuetudinem  abrogentur.'  The  very  contrary  seems  to  be  maintained
in  a  passage  already  cited  in  part  (Cod.  8.  52.  2)  '  Consuetudinis  usus-
que  non  vilis  auctoritas  est,  sed  non  usque  adeo  suo  valitura  momento  ut
rationem  vincat  aut  legem.'  Perhaps  the  simplest  way  out  of  the  difH-
culty  is  to  suppose  that  the  latter  passage  refers  to  a  statute  in  which  it
is  expressly  provided  that  in  no  case  shall  it  be  taken  to  be  repealed  by
a  contrary  custom  of  later  development.  Now  if  approved  custom  *  legis
vicem  sustinet,*  such  a  provision  is  absurd,  and  resembles  the  well-
known  rule  privilegia  ne  irroganto  in  assuming  that  a  sovereign  is  capable
of  being  legally  bound.     The  question  was  submitted  to  the  Emperor


Tit.  3.]  DE  lURE  PERSONARUM.  iii

Omne  autem  ius,  quo  utimur,  vel  ad  personas  pertinet  vel  12
ad  res  vel  ad  actiones.    ac  prius  de  personis  videamus.     nam
parum  est  ius  nosse,  si  personae,  quarum  causa  statutum  est,
ignorentur.

III.

DE  JURE  PERSONARUM.

Summa  itaque  divisio  de  iure  personarum  haec  est,  quod
omnes  homines  aut  liberi  sunt  aut  servi.     Et  libertas  quidem  1
est,  ex  qua  etiam  liberi  vocantur,  naturalis  facultas  eius  quod
cuique  facere  libet,  nisi  si   quid  aut  vi  aut  iure  prohibetur.
Servitus  autem  est  constitutio  iuris  gentium,  qua  quis  dominlo  2

Constantine,  and  he  decides  it  in  the  passage  cited  from  the  Code :  a
custom  can  certainly  abrogate  a  statute,  but  (he  says)  there  is  an  excep-
tion to  this  general  rule,  if  the  statute  itself  contains  a  provision  that  no
custom  is  to  be  allowed  to  grow  up  in  future  contrary  to  its  tenor ;  a  pro-
vision addressed  to  the  subject,  and  forbidding  the  custom  itself,  not  to
the  sovereign,  and  forbidding  the  repeal  of  the  statute.

For  the  permanence  and  immutability  of  natural  law  cf.  Cicero,  de
RepubL  iii.  22,  Dig.  7.  5.  2.  i ;  50.  17.  8.  By  such  passages  it  is  not
meant  that  it  is  always  binding  on  the  citizen,  but  that  what  is  '  natural '
once  is  natural  for  ever ;  for,  as  Ulpian  says,  *  ius  civile  [iuri  naturali]  non
per  omnia  servi t '  Dig.  i.  i.  6.  pr.  Similarly  Gains,  speaking  of  the  quasi
usufruct  mentioned  in  Bk.  ii.  4.  2  infr.,  remarks  that  though  the  authority
of  the  senate  cannot  overcome  naturalis  ratio,  its  commands  are  binding ;
Dig.  7.  5.  2.  I.

Tit.  m.  For  the  division  of  private  law  made  in  pr.  see  the  Introduc-
tion to  this  Book.

§  1.  Liberty  does  not  require  that  one  should  be  free  to  act  against
the  laws, '  legum  quum  servi  sumus,  ut  liberi  esse  possimus '  Cicero  pro
Cluentio  53.  146.  Cf.  Persius,  Sat.  v.  86  '  Liceat,  iussit  quodcunque  vo*
luntas,  Excepto  si  quid  Masuri  [i.  e.  Sabinus'  work  on  law]  rubrica  vetavit,'
Dio  Chrysostom,  Or.  14  ^o-  f^  mrtiprjrai  virb  ri>v  p6fioaVf  firjde  rrpoarfTaKTM,
6  ntpi  TovTtav  €X^v  r^v  e^ovaiav  rov  irpantiv  w  /SouXcrai  .  •  .  iXtCBtpos.

§  2.  In  respect  of  capacity  of  right,  slavery  is  a  condition  of  absolute
'  rightlessness.'  A  slave  could  have  no  rights  against  either  his  master
or  any  one  else ;  and,  remembering  what  has  been  said  of  the  legal  mean-
ing of  '  person '  in  the  Introduction  to  this  Book,  it  follows  that  a  slave
was  not  a  'person'  at  all:  he  had  no  caput,  Tit.  16.  4  inf.  The  Roman
lawyers  looked  upon  him  as  a  '  res,'  and  applied  to  him,  as  an  object
of  property,  the  same  rules  which  they  laid  down  as  to  domestic  animals ;
so  far  as  there  is  any  difference  of  treatment  it  is  due  to  the  slave's  pos-
session of  reason,  so  that  (a)  he  is  able  to  increase  his  master's  means  by
his  intellectual  as  well  as  by  his  physical  powers,  and  (d)  by  manumission


112  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

3  alieno  contra  naturam  subicitur.  Servi  autem  ex  eo  appellati
sunt,  quod  imperatores  captivos  vendere  iubent  ac  per  hoc
servare  nee  occidere  solent.     qui  etiam  mancipia  dicti  sunt,

4  quod  ah  hostibus  manu  capiuntur.  Servi  autem  aut  nascuntur
aut  fiunt.     nascuntur  ex  ancillis  nostris  :   Aunt  aut  iure  gen-


he  is  capable  of  becoming  a  '  person,'  which  explains  the  treatment  of  his
position  in  this  book  (Tit.  5).

In  relation  to  his  master,  the  slave's  condition  is  one  of  absolute  de-
pendence :  hence  the  application  to  him  of  the  rules  and  ideas  of  owner-
ship, such  as  the  capacity  of  being  jointly  owned  by  co-proprietors.
Originally,  the  rights  of  a  dominus  over  his  slave  were  as  absolute  as
over  any  other  object  of  property :  limitations  were  first  imposed  on
them  by  the  Emperors.  Claudius  gave  freedom  to  slaves  whom  their
masters  had  turned  out  of  doors  on  account  of  ill-health  or  disease,  and
punished  those  that  killed  slaves  who  from  some  such  cause  had  become
a  burden  to  them.  A  lex  Petronia  (a  copy  of  which  was  found  in  Pompeii,
so  that  its  enactment  must  have  been  before  79  A.D.)  forbade  slaves  to
be  matched  against  wild  beasts  in  the  arena :  *  post  legem  Petroniam  et
senatusconsulta  ad  eam  legem  pertinentia  dominis  potestas  ablata  est,
ad  bestias  depugnandas  suo  arbitrio  servos  tradere.  Oblato  tamen  iudici
servo,  si  iusta  sit  domini  querela,  sic  poenae  tradetur'  Dig.  48.  8.  11.  2.
Hadrian  animadverted  in  strong  terms  on  the  arbitrary  killing  of  slaves
without  judicial  sanction;  and  finally  Antoninus  Pius  enunciated  the
general  principle  that  they  ought  to  be  protected  against  unwarranted
seventy.  Tit.  8.  2  inf. ;  cf.  Gaius  i.  53.  By  his  enactment  a  man  who
killed  his  own  slave  without  just  cause  became  liable  to  the  penalty  of  the
lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis,  Bk.  iv.  18.  5  inf.  These  laws,  however,  must  not
be  supposed  to  have  conferred  rights  upon  the  slave,  and  so  made  him
a  persona ;  they  merely  limited  the  general  rights  of  ownership  on  grounds
of  expediency,  and  their  rationale  is  well  expressed  by  Gaius  in  the
passage  last  referred  to  :  '  male  enim  nostro  iure  uti  non  debemus ;  qua
ratione  et  prodigis  interdicitur  bonorum  suorum  administratio.'  For  the
whole  subject  see  Mr.  Poste's  notes,  Gaius,  loc.  cit.  and  Mr.  Roby's  note
on  Dig.  7.  1.  17.  I  in  his  edition  of  that  title  (Introduction  to  Justinian's
Digest,  p.  128).

§  8.  For  mancipium  in  its  more  technical  sense  see  note  on  Tit.  8.  pr.

§  4.  The  general  rule  of  the  ius  gentium  was  that  children  followed  the
condition  of  their  mother,  whatever  might  be  that  of  the  father :  thus  the
children  of  a  female  slave  (ancilla)  were  bom  slaves  themselves.  Two
exceptions  to  this  which  have  no  relation  to  servile  descent  are  noticed
by  Mr.  Poste  on  Gaius  i.  76  sq.  In  one  or  two  cases,  however,  anomalous
rules  of  positive  law  reserved  the  general  principle,  so  that  the  children
of  an  ancilla  were  bom  free,  those  of  a  free-woman  slaves.  By  the
SC.  Claudianum  (Gaius  i.  84-86)  it  was  enacted  that  (i)  the  children  of
a  free  man  by  an  ancilla,  whom  he  believed  to  be  free,  should  be  free


Tit  3]  DE  lURE  PERSONA  RUM.  113

tium,  id  est  ex  captivitate,  aut  iure  civili,  cum  homo  liber  maior
viginti  annis  ad  pretium  participandum  sese  venumdari  passiis

if  males,  slaves  if  females ;  but  this  rule  was  repealed  by  Vespasian  in
favour  of  the  old  principle  of  the  ius  gentium ;  (2)  it  might  be  agreed
between  a  free-woman  and  the  owner  of  a  slave  that  though  she  should
remain  free  herself,  children  bom  of  her  by  the  slave  should  belong  to
the  tatter's  master :  this  was  repealed  by  Hadrian,  Gaius  i.  84 ;  (3)  if
a  free-woman  knowingly  cohabited  with  a  servus  alienus  without  the
consent  of  the  tatter's  master,  and  persisted  in  the  intercourse  after
prohibition  by  him,  after  three  denunciations  on  his  part  she  was  awarded
to  him  as  a  slave  by  the  magistrate,  and  her  children,  whether  bom
before  or  after  this  award,. shared  her  fate  :  her  property  passed  to  him
with  her  person,  Gaius  i.  91,  160.  This  was  only  repealed  by  Justinian
himself;  Bk.  iii.  12.  i.  inf.

When  a  free  person  became  a  slave,  he  was  said  to  suffer  capitis  de-
minutio  maxima  (Tit.  16.  i  inf.).  Of  this  there  was  one  mode  iure
gentium,  and  three  iure  civili.  (i)  It  was  a  principle  of  ius  gentium  that
a  person  becomes  a  slave  by  filing  under  the  power  of  a  foreign  nation  ;
this  of  course  usually  occurred  in  the  form  of  capture  in  war,  but  it  was
sufficient  if  there  was  no  friendly  treaty  or  intercourse  between  the  two
peoples,  Dig.  491  15.  5.2.  Persons  c.iptured  in  civil  war  did  not  become
slaves,  Dig.  49.  15.  21.  i,  nor  did  those  who  were  captured  by  brigands,
ib.  19.  2.  Liberty  lost  in  this  way  could  be  recovered  by  postliminium,
Tit.  12.  5,  and  notes  inf. ;  Tit.  20.  2.  (2)  In  certain  cases  the  law  allowed
a  free  person  to  be  sold  as  a  slave,  e.  g.  those  who  attempted  to  evade
public  burdens  by  not  having  their  names  entered  on  the  census,  or  who
shirked  military  service  ;  so  too  the  insolvent  debtor  under  the  old  law
of  execution  by  manus  iniectio.  In  all  these  cases,  which  were  obsolete
long  before  Justinian,  except  possibly  the  last,  it  was  necessary  that  the
guilty  person  should  be  sold  trans  Tiberim,  i.  e.  to  a  foreign  people.  From
the  time  of  ComnKxius,  and  possibly  earlier,  a  libertus  guilty  of  gross  in-
gratitude to  his  patron  might  be  sold  as  a  slave  by  the  latter  or  (later)
revocatus  in  patroni  servitutem.  Tit.  16.  i  inf.;  Sueton.  Claud.  25  ;  Dig.  37.
14.  5.  pr.;  Tac  Ann.  xiii.  26.  27  ;  Dig.  25.  3.  6.  i.  Lastly,  there  was  the
case  noticed  in  the  text.  The  rule  stated  in  Cod.  7.  16.  10  (Miberos  pri-
vatis  pactis  non  posse  servos  fieri  certi  iuris  erat ')  had  led  to  the  kind  of
fraud  referred  to  in  the  text  as  early  as  Plautus(Pers.  i.  3-  55  ;  iii*  i);  and
by  the  time  of  Mucins  Scaevola  it  had  become  an  established  principle  of
praetorian  law  that  if  a  free  person  twenty  years  of  age  collusively  allowed
himself  to  be  sold  as  a  slave,  in  the  intention  of  sharing  the  price  with  the
vendor,  the  praetor  should  refuse  him  the  prodamatio  in  libertatem  or
liberalis  causa  and  adjudge  him  actually  a  slave  :  this  was  confirmed  by
senatusconsulta,  Dig.  40.  13.  3.  (3)  A  free- woman  might  become  a  slave
under  the  SC.  Claudianum,  see  supr.  (4)  Persons  condemned  to  death,  to
labour  in  the  mines,  or  to  fight  with  wild  beasts,  became  servi  poenae  (Tit.
12.  3  inf.),  i.  e.  slaves  with  no  master  at  all :  by  Nov.  22. 8  Justinian  enacted
that  this  should  no  longer  dissolve  the  marriage  of  the  condemned  person*

I


114  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

b  est.     in  servorum  condicione  nulla  differentia  est.     In  liberis
multae  differentiae  sunt,    aut  enim  ingenui  sunt  aut  libertini.

§  5.  For  the  twofold  division  of  men  into  liberi  and  servi  Ulpian  in
Dig.  I.  I.  4  substitutes  one  of  three  classes  :  '  liberi,  et  his  contrarium
servi,  et  tertium  genus  liberti : '  cf.  Tit.  5.  pr.  inf.  But  between  absolute
slavery  and  complete  legal  freedom  there  were  two  intermediate  conditions.
The  first  of  these  is  that  of  the  statuliber  ('  qui  statutam  et  destinatam  in
tempus  vel  condicionem  libertatem  habet'  Dig.  40.  7.  1.  pr.) ;  the  other  is
that  of  the  slave  who  was  said  '  in  libertate  esse/  i.  e.  who  was  manumitted
in  some  mode  not  recognised  as  conferring  full  legal  freedom  (note  on  Tit.
5. 1  inf.),  and  who  therefore  remained  a  slave  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  though
protected  by  the  magistrate  in  the  actual  enjoyment  of  liberty.

From  these  cases  diflfer  certain  others  in  which  a  person,  though
actually  free,  was  subject  to  an  external  control  which  limited  his  freedom,
and  placed  him  to  a  considerable  degree  in  the  position  of  a  slave  :  (i )  the
free  person  bona  fide  serviens,  i.  e.  who  thinks  he  is  a  slave  ;  in  some
matters,  especially  with  regard  to  acquisition,  he  was  treated  as  a  slave,
and  all  that  he  acquired  under  definite  conditions  belonged  to  his  quasi
dominus ;  see  Bk.  ii.  9.  4  inf.,  Gaius  ii.  92.  (2)  The  auctoratus,  who  hired
himself  out  as  a  gladiator,  Gaius  iii.  199 ;  the  hirer  could  sue  by  actio
furti  if  he  were  removed  £rom  his  control.  The  gladiatorial  fights  were
prohibited  by  Constantine,  Cod.  11.  43.  i.  (3)  If  a  prisoner  of  war  was
redeemed,  his  owner  had  a  kind  of  lien  on  him  until  the  whole  redemption
sum  was  paid,  and  so  long  the  ius  posdiminii  was  suspended.  (4)  The
debitor  addictus  under  the  middle  law  of  bankruptcy  did  not  become  his
creditor's  slave,  but  was  bound  to  work  for  him  until  the  debt  was  satisfied ;
see  Gaius  iii.  199  for  a  parallel  between  him  and  the  auctoratus.  (5)  The
free  person  in  mancipio,  for  which  see  note  on  Tit  8.  pr.  inf.  (6)  The
colonus<  Coloni  (in  this  sense)  were  persons  inseparably  attached  from*
birth  to  the  soil  of  some  particular  estate  or  district  (glebae  adscript!)  for
purposes  of  cultivation  ;  they  were  personally  free,  but  as  it  were  slaves
of  the  land,  ^  licet  condicione  videantur  ingenui  servi  tamen  terrae  ipsius
cui  nati  sunt  existimentur '  Cod.  11.  51.  i  ;  under  the  later  Empire  they
composed  the  greater  part  of  the  agricultural  population.  In  many
respects  they  were  completely  assimilated  to  slaves  ;  thus  their  property
was  called  peculium,  and  was  considered,  like  themselves,  an  appendage
of  the  soil,  and  if  they  ran  away  they  could  be  recovered  by  real  action :
for  a  longer  notice  of  them  see  Mr.  Poste's  note  on  Gaius  iii.  146.  One
theory  of  the  origin  of  colonatus  is  that  it  is  to  be  traced  to  the  Roman
practice  of  distinguishing  between  town  and  country  slaves  (familia
urbana  and  rustica) ;  the  latter,  being  engaged  in  tillage,  seem  always
to  have  enjoyed  a  certain  freedom  of  action,  and  came  more  and  more
to  be  regarded  as  accessions  to  the  land ;  their  position  was  actually
much  the  same  as  that  of  the  colonus,  except  that  the  status  of  the
latter  was  a  legal  one,  and  it  is  urged  that  the  transition  from  the  un-
free  to  the  free  condition  perhaps  resulted  from  some  statute  empower*
ing  domini  to  manumit  rural  slaves  on  condition  of  their  remaining


Tits.]  DE  LIBERTINIS.  115

IV.

DE  INGENUIS.

Ingenuus  is  est,  qui  statim  ut  natus  est  liber  est,  sive  ex
duobus  ingenuis  matrimonio  editus,  sive  ex  libertinis,  sive  ex
altero  libertino  altera  ingenuo.  sed  et  si  quis  ex  matre  libera
nascatur,  patre  servo,  ingenuus  nihilo  minus  nascitur :  quem-
admodum  qui  ex  matre  libera  et  incerto  patre  natus  est,
quoniam  vulgo  conceptus  est  sufficit  autem  liberam  fuisse
matrem  eo  tempore  quo  nascitur,  licet  ancilla  conceperit  et
ex  contrario  si  libera  conceperit,  deinde  ancilla  facta  pariat,
placuit  eum  qui  nascitur  liberum  nasci,  quia  non  debet  cala-
mitas  matris  ei  nocere,  qui  in  utero  est  ex  his  et  illud
quaesitum  est,  si  ancilla  praegnans  manumissa  sit,  deinde
ancilla  postea  facta  peperit,  liberum  an  servum  pariat?  et
Marcellus  probat  liberum  nasci :  sufficit  enim  ei  qui  in  ventre
est  liberam  matrem  vel  medio  tempore  habuisse :  quod  et
verum  est  Cum  autem  ingenuus  aliquis  natus  sit,  non  officit  1
ill!  in  servitute  fuisse  et  postea  manumissum  esse :  saepissime
enim  constitutum  est  natalibus  non  ofircere  manumissionem.

V.

DE   LIBERTINIS.

Libertini  sunt,  qui  ex  iusta  servitute  manumissi  sunt,
xnanumissio  autem  est  datio  libertatis :  nam  quamdiu  quis  in

glebae  adscripti  and  paying  a  substantial  rent  (canon)  for  their  hold-
ings. Other  writers  on  the  subject  however,  among  them  Savigny,
derive  colonatus  from  repeated  settlements  of  homeless  and  home-seek-
ing barbarians  in  the  Roman  provinces.

Tit  TV.  The  law  as  stated  in  the  words  '  et  ex  contrario .  . .  qui  in
utero  est,'  unless  the  child  was  conceived  in  lawful  wedlock,  is  contrary
to  the  principle  laid  down  by  Gaius  i.  89  'qui  illegitime  concipiuntur,
statum  sumunt  ex  eo  tempore,  quo  nascuntur :  qui  legitime  concipiuntur,
ex  conceptionis  tempore  '  which  is  confirmed  by  Ulpian,  Reg.  5.  10,  and
Neratius  in  Dig.  50.  i.  9.  By  the  time  of  Paulus,  however,  this  had  been
altered, '  id  enim  favor  libertatis  exposcit '  rec  sent.  2.  24. 1-3.  Paulus
also  agrees  with  Marcellus  upon  the  question  for  which  the  latter*s  opinion
is  dted  :  '  media  enim  tempora  libertati  prodesse,  non  nocere  etiam  pos-
sunt '  loc.  cit.

{  L  For  the  meaning  of '  in  servitute  fuisse '  see  on  Tit.  3.  5  supr.

Titb  V.  By  '  iusta  servitus '  is  meant  a  slavery  which  is  legal  as  well  as

I  2


Ii6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

servitute  est,  manui  et  potestati  suppositus  est,  et  manumissus
liberatur  potestate.  quae  res  a  iure  gentium  originem
sumpsit,  utpote  cum  iure  natural!  omnes  liberi  nascerentur  nee
esset  nota  manumissio,  cum  servitus  esset  incognita ;  sed
posteaquam  iure  gentium  servitus  invasit,  secutum  est  bene-
ficium  manumissionis.  et  cum  uno  communi  nomine  homines
appellaremur,  iure  gentium  tria  genera  hominum  esse  coepe-
runt,  liberi  et  his  contrarium  servi  et  tertium  genus  libertini,
1  qui  desierant  esse  servi.  Multis  autem  modis  manumissio
procedit :  aut  enim  ex  sacris  constitutionibus  in  sacrosanctis
ecclesiis  aut  vindicta  aut  inter  amicos  aut  per  epistulam  aut
per  testamentum   aut  aliam  quamlibet  ultimam  voluntatem.

actual,  so  that  it  is  contrasted  with  mancipium,  in  servitute  esse,  and  the
slavery  of  a  prisoner  of  war ;  i.e.  the  rights  of  ingenuitas  were  not  de-
stroyed by  captivity,  but  could  be  recovered  by  postliminium ;  Dig.  49.
15.  21.  pr.

The  modes  in  which  a  slave  could  become  free  (and  which  are  not
systematically  discussed  by  Justinian,  who  confines  himself  in  the  main
to  manumission)  are  three  in  number,  viz.  (1)  postliminium,  note  on  Tit.
12.  5  inf.;  (2)  manumission,  of  which  below;  and  (3)  certain  irregular
modes  in  which  freedom  was  conferred  by  positive  law  without  manu-
mission by  the  dominus  (Dig.  40.  8  'Qui  sine  manumissione  ad  liber-
tatem  perveniunt')'  Thus  (a)  the  SC.  Silanianum  of  Augustus'  period
liberated  slaves  who  discovered  their  masters'  murderers,  and  the  same
was  done  by  later  enactments  as  a  reward  for  the  detection  of  certain
other  crimes,  Cod.  7.  13.  (j3)  An  edict  of  Claudius  gave  liberty  to  slaves
exposed  by  their  masters  (see  note  on  Tit.  3.  2  supr.).  (y)  An  enact-
ment of  Vespasian  did  the  same  for  ancillae  who  were  exposed  to  pros-
titution against  the  terms  of  the  disposition  under  which  they  were
acquired,  (d)  If  a  slave  were  aliened  under  a  promise  to  manumit,
which  the  alienee  failed  to  perform,  the  slave  was  declared  free  by  a  law
of  Marcus  and  Commodus.  (e)  A  number  of  senatusconsulta  beginning
under  Trajan  provide  in  the  same  manner  for  the  enfranchisement  of
slaves  to  whom  liberty  was  bequeathed  by  a  fideicommissum.  {()  Certain
less  important  modes  introduced  by  Leo  and  Justinian  are  noticed  in
Cod.  12.  5.  4.  and  Nov.  5.  2.  1  ;  123.  4. 17.

§  1.  Manumission  was  an  act  of  the  master  by  which  the  slave  became
free.  Its  effect,  under  the  older  law,  was  to  make  the  slave  not  only  free,
but  a  citizen  of  Rome;  indeed,  he  might  even  become  a  member  of
a  Roman  family  by  being  given  in  adoption  to  a  paterfamilias  by  his
master,  Gellius  5.  19,  but  under  the  later  law  this  was  not  allowed.  The
act  was  thus  one  of  political  import  (see  Mr.  Poste  on  Gaius  i.  17),  and
therefore  was  required  to  be  performed  in  some  mode  or  other  in  which
the  state,  by  participation,  could  give  its  sanction  and  consent.

Such  '  iustae  ac  legitimae  manimiissiones '  (Gaius  i.  17)  were  three  in


■■  Xjf  »m'^i^''B*m


Tils]  DE  LIBERTINIS.  117

sed  et  aliis  multis  modis  libertas  servo  competere  potest,  qui
tarn   ex  veteribus  quam  nostris  constitutionibus   introducti

number,     (i)  Vindicta,  a  form  of  the  praetor's  voluntary  jurisdiction,  or
prearranged  suit  at  law :  the  freedom  of  the  slave  was  affirmed  in  a  real
action  (vindicatio)  by  an  adsertor  libertatis :  the  master,  as  defendant,
instead  of  resisting  the  claim  by  laying  the  vindicta  or  rod  on  the  slave
before  the  praetor,  released  him  (manu  mittebat),  thereby  confessing
himself  in  the  wrong,  whereupon  the  praetor  adjudged  the  slave  free
(Plautus,  Mil.  Glor.  4.  l.  15).    The  procedure,  which  at  first  was  strictly
that  of  the  Megis  actio  sacramenti'  (for  which  see  Gaius  iv.  16,  and
Index,  inf.)  was  simplified  in  course  of  time  by  the  part  of  adsertor  being
played  by  one  of  the  praetor's  lictors,  and  by  the  release  of  the  master
from  all  formal  cooperation :   finally,  the  necessity  of  an   adsertor  was
altogether  dispensed  with,  and  it  was  held  sufficient  if  the  master,  ac-
companied by  the  slave,  declared  his  intention  of  enfranchising  him  to
the  praetor,  whenever  ('  semper '  in  the  text  is  explained  by  Theophilus
'  jcai  cV  airpdjcry  W^P9*)  and  wherever  he  met  the  latter,  and  if  the  latter
thereon  formally  adjudged  him  free :  see  §  2  of  this  Title,  and  for  the
process  generally  Poste's  Gaius  loc.  cit.    (2)  Censu  (for  the  census  see
General  Introd.  pp.  17  (note)  and  21  supr.).    The  censor  could  make
any  one  a  citizen  of  Rome  by  entering  his  name  on  the  census  or  official
list,  and  this  was  used  for  manumission  by  the  master's  taking  his  slave
to  the  censor  and  allowing  him  to  make  his  'professio'  before  him
without  entering  an  objection.     Ulpian  speaks  of  the  census  as  a  thing
of  the  past,  only  three  having  been  held  since  the  Christian  era,  the  last
AJ>.  74 ;  the  form  was  revived  but  once  afterwards,  A.D.  249,  so  that
Justinian  does  not  mention  this  as  one  of  the  modes  in  which  a  slave
could  gain  his  IreedonL    (3)  Testamento;  the  master  bequeathing  the
slave  his  liberty  directly  by  legacy,  Ulp.  Reg.  2.  7,  whereby  he  became
'  liberttts  ordnus,'  Bk.  ii.  24.  2  inf.,  and  was  free  from  the  moment  the
heir  accepted  the  inheritance,  unless  the  manumission  was  conditional
or  ex  die  (note  on  Tit.  20.  i  inf.).    The  master  could  also  impose  on  the
heir  (or  some  other  person)  an  obligation  to  manumit  a  slave  (libertas
fideicommissaria) ;  here  he  became  the  freedman  of  the  person  by  whom
he  was  in  fact  manumitted,  but  this  is  not  testamentary  manumission :  cf.
Ulpian,  Reg.  2.  7.  8.

These  were  in  Cicero*s  time  the  only  modes  in  which  a  manumitted
slave  could  become  free.  If  the  master  attempted  to  enfranchise  him
in  any  other  way  (e.  g.  by  a  declaration  in  the  presence  of  witnesses  —
'manumissio  inter  amicos'  Ulpian,  Reg.  i.  18,  Pliny,  £p.  7.  16,  Seneca
de  Vit  Beat  24.  2 — by  a  letter, '  per  epistulam,'  Martial,  £p.  9.  89,  Isi-
dorus,  Orig.  9.  4,  or  by  treating  him  as  free,  e.g.  convivii  adhibitione,  by
inviting  him  to  sit  at  meat  with  him — which  were  called  manumissiones
minus  solennes),  the  man  remained  legally  a  slave,  but  was  said  Mn
iibertate  esse,'  Gaius  iii.  56,  note  on  Tit.  3.  5  supr.  A  legal  status  was
first  conferred  on  slaves  manumitted  in  any  of  these  informal  ways  by
the  lex  lunia  Norbana,  A.D.  19,  for  which  see  on  §  3  inL    A  new  form  of


ii8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  L

2  sunt.  Servi  vero  a  dominis  semper  manumitti  solent :
adeo  ut  vel  in  transitu  manumittantur,  veluti  cum  praetor
aut  proconsul  aut  praeses  in  balneum  vel  in  theatrum  eat

3  Libertinorum  autem  status  tripertitus  antea  fuerat:  nam
qui  manumittebantur,  modo  maiorem  et  iustam  libertatem
consequebantur  et  fiebant  cives  Romani,  modo  minorem  et
Latini  ex  lege  lunia  Norbana  fiebant,  modo  inferiorem  et
fiebant  ex  lege  Aelia  Sentia  dediticiorum  numero.  sed
dediticiorum  quidem  pessima  condicio  iam  ex  multis  tem-
poribus  in  desuetudinem  abiit,  Latinorum  vero  nomen  non
frequentabatur :  ideoque  nostra  pietas  omnia  augere  et  in
meliorem  statum  reducere  desiderans  in  duabus  constitutio-
nibus  hoc  emendavit  et  in  pristinum  statum  reduxit,  quia  et
a  primis  urbis  Romae  cunabulis  una  atque  simplex  libertas
competebat,  id  est  eadem,  quam  habebat  manumissor,  nisi
quod  scilicet  libertinus  fit  qui  manumittitur,  licet  manumissor
ingenuus  sit.    et  dediticios  quidem  per  constitutionem  ex-

manumission  (in  ecclesiis)  which  had  complete  legal  effect  was  intro-
duced by  Constantine,  consisting  in  a  declaration  by  the  master  in
church  in  the  presence  of  the  congregation  and  the  bishop,  attested  by
a  document  signed  by  the  latter;  Cod.  i.  2.

The  right  of  the  full  owner  to  manumit  was  originally  subject  to  no
restrictions,  except  so  far  as  he  was  bound  by  any  contract  or  testa-
mentary disposition  under  which  the  slave  came  into  his  possession.
Subsequently,  however,  limitations  were  imposed,  in  the  main  on  political
grounds,  by  the  lex  Aelia  Sentia,  A.D.  4,  §  4  inf.,  and  Tit.  6.  pr.,  and  the
lex  Fufia  Caninia,  Tit.  7  inf.,  and  by  the  lex  lulia  de  adulteriis,  Bk.  iv.
18.  4  inf.,  in  order  to  assist  the  conduct  of  criminal  proceedings.

Until  Justinian  abolished  the  distinction  between  Bonitary  and  Quiritary
ownership  (note  on  Bk.  iL  i.  11  inf.)  a  slave  might  belong  to  one  person
ex  iure  Quiritium,  and  be  ^  in  bonis '  of  another ;  the  latter  alone  could
manumit  him,  but  only  so  as  to  make  him  a  Latinus  lunianus ;  Ulpian,
Reg.  I.  16.  Where  one  person  had  a  usufruct  in  a  slave  belonging  to
another,  any  attempt  by  the  former  to  manumit  him  merely  resulted
in  the  extinction  of  his  usufruct ;  he  could  be  manumitted  by  the  owner,
who,  however,  could  not  thus  prejudice  the  right  of  the  usufructuary;
Ulpian,  ib.  19:  Justinian  (Cod.  7.  15.  i)  made  some  alteration  in  this.
The  same  principles  were  observed  in  respect  of  a  slave  who  had  been
given  in  security  by  pledge  ;  but  the  manumission  of  any  slave  in  whom
another  person  had  a  ius  in  re  aliena  made  him  Latinus  only  and  not
civis,  until  Latinitas  was  abolished  by  Justinian.  For  the  manumission
of  a  slave  owned  by  joint  proprietors  see  Bk.  ii.  7.  4  and  note  inf.

§  8.  The  lex  lunia  Norbana  bestowed  on  slaves  manumitted  ^  minus


TiL  5.]  DE  LIBERTINIS.  119

pulimus,  quam  promulgavimus  inter  nostras  decisiones,  per
quas  suggerente  nobis  Triboniano  viro  excelso  quaestore
antiqui  iuris  altercationes  placavimus :  Latinos  autem  lunianos
et  omnem  quae  circa  eos  fuerit  observantiam  alia  constitutione
per  eiusdem  quaestoris  suggestionem  correximus,  quae  inter
imperiales  radiat  sanctiones,  et  omnes  libertos  nullonec  aetatis
manumissi  nee  dominii  manumissoris  nee  in  manumissionis
modo  discrimine  habito,  sicuti  antea  observabatur,  civitate
Romana  donavimus :  multis  additis  modis,  per  quos  possit
libertas  servis  cum  civitate  Romana,  quae  sola  in  praesenti
est,  praestari.

solenniter'  the  rights  of  Latinitas  (Genera!  Introd.  p.  28  supr.),  whence
they  were  called  Latini  luniani.  The  Latinitas  of  the  Latini  coloniani
had  conferred  the  commercium  without  the  connubium,  i.e.  the  power
of  holding  property  and  engaging  in  commerce  under  the  peculiar  forms
and  protection  of  Roman  Uw,  and  of  making  a  testament  valid  iure
dvili.  But  these  rights  were  seriously  curtailed,  in  the  case  of  Latini
luniani,  by  the  lex  lunia  Norbana,  which  (Gaius  i.  22-24)  deprived  them
of  the  privileges  of  making  a  will,  being  named  testamentary  guardians,
and  benefiting  as  heir  or  legatee  under  the  will  of  another  person.  Con-
sequently, when  a  Latinus  lunianus  died,  as  he  could  have  no  suus
heres  or  agnate,  his  whole  property  went  '  iure  quodammodo  peculii '  to
hb  patron ;  Bk.  iii.  7,  4  inf.  Justinian  repealed  the  lex  lunia,  and  as  to
the  modes  of  manumission  to  which  it  had  related,  he  enacted  that  they
should  make  a  slave  a  full  citizen  provided  they  were  evidenced  by
a  document  attested  by  five  witnesses ;  Cod.  7.  6.  The  alii  multi  modi
alluded  to  in  §  i  are  specified  in  the  same  constitution :  among  them  are
the  formal  designation  of  the  slave  by  the  master  as  his  son,  and  the
delivery  to  him  of  the  documents  by  which  his  servitude  could  be  proved.
There  were  numerous  modes  in  which  a  Latinus.  could  attain  the  civitas ;
see  Gaius  i.  28-35,  ^^id  Mr.  Poste's  notes.

The  object  of  the  lex  Aelia  Sentia  (a.D.  4)  was  to  throw  obstacles  in
the  way  of  inconsiderate  manumissions,  and  to  guard  the  state  against
the  dangers  which  might  result  from  the  bestowal  of  citizenship  on
slaves  of  bad  character  and  antecedents;  it  should  thus  be  read  in
close  connection  with  the  lex  Fufia  Caninia,  Tit  7  inf.  Four  of  its  pro-
visions concern  us.  (1)  It  enacted  that  slaves  who  had  been  guilty  of
some  serious  crime,  or  subjected  to  some  degrading  treatment  by  their
masters  for  misconduct,  if  subsequently  manumitted,  should  have  only  the
same  rights  as  dediticii,  or  enemies  surrendered  at  discretion:  Mege
itaque  AeJia  Sentia  cavetur,  ut  qui  servi  a  dominis  poenae  nomine  vincti
sint,  quibusve  stigmata  inscripta  sint,  deve  quibus  ob  noxam  quaestio
tormentis  habita  sit,  et  in  ea  noxa  fuisse  convicti  sint,  quique  ut  ferro  aut
cum  bestiis  depugnarent  traditi  sint,  inve  ludum  custodiamve  coniecti
iuerinty  et  postea  vel  ab  eodem  domino  vel  ab  alio  manumissi,  eiusdem


I20  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Libv  I.

VI.

QUI   EX  QUIBUS  CAUSIS  MANUMITTERE  NON   POSSUNT.

Non  tamen  cuicumque  volenti  manumittere  licet,  nam  is
qui  in  fraudem  creditorum  manumittit  nihil  agit,  quia  lex
1  Aelia  Sentia  impedit  libertatem.  Licet  autem  domino,  qui
solvendo  non  est,  testamento  servum  suum  cum  libertate
heredem  instituere,  ut  fiat  liber  heresque  ei  solus  et  neces-
sarius,  si  modo  nemo  alius  ex  eo  testamento  heres  extiterit,
aut  quia  nemo  heres  scriptus  sit,  aut  quia  is  qui  scriptus  est
qualibet  ex  causa  heres  non  extiterit.  idque  eadem  l^e
Aelia  Sentia  provisum  est  et  recte :  valde  enim  prospiciendum
erat,  ut  egentes  homines,  quibus  alius  heres  extaturus  non
esset,  vel  servum  suum  necessarium  heredem  habeant,   qui

condicionis  liberi  fiant,  cuius  condicionis  sunt  peregrini  dediticii'  Gaius  i.  13.
They  could  not  by  any  possibility  rise  to  the  status  of  cives  or  even  of
Latini ;  the  statute  forbade  them  to  live  within  one  hundred  miles  of  Rome
under  penalty  of  becoming  slaves  again  without  possibility  of  a  subsequent
manumission  ;  and  their  property  on  decease  went  to  their  patron,  Gaius
iii.  74-76.  This  dediticia  libertas  was  practically  obsolete  before  Justinian
('  nee  in  usu  esse  reperimus '  Cod.  7.  5),  and  was  formally  abolished  by
him,  as  is  stated  in  this  section.  (2)  It  placed  restrictions  on  manu-
missions by  masters  less  than  twenty  years  of  age,  Tit.  d  4  inf. ;  and  also
(3)  provided  that  no  slave  under  thirty  years  of  age  should  be  enfranchised
so  as  to  become  a  Roman  citizen  unless  the  manumission  were  by  vin-
dicta,  and  an  adequate  motive  were  proved  before  a  council  at  Rome,
and  in  the  provinces  before  a  body  of  twenty  recuperatores ;  Gaius
i.  18-20.  This  provision  was  repealed  by  Justinian ;  see  this  paragraph,
ad  fin.  (4)  It  invalidated  manumissions  in  fraud  of  creditors  or  patron  ;
see  TiL  6  pr.  inf.,  Gaius  i.  37.

It  was  said  above  that  a  Latinus  could  in  certain  ways  become  a
civis ;  there  were  also  modes  in  which  a  libertus  could  become  ingenuus,
one  of  which,  operative  only  under  the  old  law,  has  been  noticed  in  the
note  on  §  I  supr.  Ingenuitas,  however,  could  be  conferred  by  imperial
grant  ('natalibus  restitui'  Dig.  40.  11.  2);  and  by  the  acquisition  from
the  emperor  of  the  Mus  aureorum  anulorum'  a  freedman  became  in-
genuus during  his  lifetime,  but  could  not  prejudice  his  patron's  rights
of  succession ;  Dig.  38.  2.  3.  pr.,  Fragm.  Vat  226,  Dig.  4a  10.  6.  By
Nov.  78.  I  and  2  Justinian  bestowed  the  ius  anulorum  on  all  freed-
men  and  freedwomen  whatsoever:  'si  quis  manumittens  servum  aut
ancillam  suam  . . .  qui  libertatem  acceperit,  habebit  et  aureorum  anu-
lorum et  regenerationis  ius.'

Tit.  VI.  For  the  term '  heres  necessarius,'  and  the  purpose  of  insti-
tuting one's  own  slave,  see  Bk.  ii.  19.  i  inf.


Tit 6.]  QUI  EX  QUIBUS  CAUSIS,  ETC.  I2i

satisfacturus  esset  creditoribus,  aut  hoc  eo  non  faciente  credi-
tores  res  hereditarias  servi  nomine  vendant,  ne  iniuria  de*
functus  afiiciatur.  Idemque  iuris  est  et  si  sinelibertate  servus  2
heres  institutus  est.  quod  nostra  constitutio  non  solum  in
domino,  qui  solvendo  non  est,  sed  generaliter  constituit  nova
humanitatis  ratione,  ut  ex  ipsa  scriptura  institutionis  etiam
libertas  ei  competere  videatur,  cum  non  est  verisimile  eum,
quern  heredem  sibi  elegit,  si  praetermiserit  libertatis  dationem,
servum  remanere  voluisse  et  neminem  sibi  heredem  fore.  In  3
fraudem  autem  creditorum  manumittere  videtur,  qui  vel  iam
eo  tempore  quo  manumittit  solvendo  non  est,  vel  qui  datis
libertatibus  desiturus  est  solvendo  esse,  praevaluisse  tamen
videtur,  nisi  animum  quoque  fraudandi  manumissor  habuit,
non  impediri  libertatem,  quamvis  bona  eius  credltoribus  non
sufficiant :  saepe  enim  de  facultatibus  suis  amplius  quam  in
his  est  sperant  homines,  itaque  tunc  intellegimus  impediri
libertatem,  cum  utroque  modo  fraudantur  creditores,  id  est  et
consilio  manumittentis  et  ipsa  re.  eo  quod  bona  non  suflfectura
sunt  credltoribus.

Eadem  lege  Aelia  Sentia  domino  minori  annis  viginti  non  4
aliter  manumittere  permittitur,  quam  si  vindicta  apud  con*
silium  iusta  causa  manumissionis  adprobata  fuerint  manumissi.


The  lex  Aelia  Sentia  did  not  apply  to  peregrini,  to  whom,  however,
this  part  of  it  relating  to  manumission  in  fraud  of  creditors  was  extended
by  a  senatusoonsultum  under  Hadrian ;  Gaius  i.  47.  Gaius  says  (i.  37)
that  the  statute  allowed  a  patron  to  revoke  manumissions  by  his  freed-
men  which  would  seriously  impair  his  own  rights  of  succession.  For  the
sale  of  a  deceased  insolvent's  property  see  Gaius  iii.  78-80 :  it  entailed
posthumous  infamia,  whence  it  is  said  *  servus  necessarius  . . .  non  magis
patrimonium  quam  infamiam  consequi  videtur '  Cod.  Theod.  2.  19.  3.

§  2.  The  enactment  referred  to  is  in  Cod.  6.  27.  5.

§  4.  The  motive  of  this  part  of  the  statute  is  stated  by  Theophilus,  ^C
tSivwav  rm¥  tX€v$€powTwy  ffwioTOTO  yhp  a>ff  .  .  •  tvx^pms  carar&vrM  .  .  .  r^i'
iaurmw  iXarTQwnv  imoarao'ip.  It  would  seem  however  from  Gaius  that  the
real  objection  was  to  the  inconsiderate  creation  of  citizens ;  for  in  i.  41  he
says  that  a  master  under  twenty,  with  the  consent  of  the  consilium,
could  make  a  slave  a  Latinus  lunianus  by  manumitting  him  inter  amicos,
so  that  no  stress  must  be  laid  on  '  vindicta '  in  this  §.  The  consilium
consisted  at  Rome  of  five  senators  and  five  knights  above  the  age  of
puberty,  who  sat  on  fixed  days ;  Gaius  i.  20^  Ulpian,  Reg.  1. 13,  Dig.  i.  10.
pr.  and  2.


122  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

5  lustae  autem  manumissionis  causae  sunt,  veluti  si  quis  patrem
aut  matrem  aut  filium  filiamve  aut  fratrem  sororemve  natu-
rales  aut  paedagogum  nutricem  educatorem  aut  alumnum
alumnamve  aut  collactaneum  manumittat,  aut  servum  pro-
curatoris  habendt  gratia,  aut  ancillam  matrimonii  causa,
dum  tamen  intra  sex  menses  uxor  ducatur,  nisi  iusta  causa
imped  iat,  et  qui  manumittitur  procuratoris  habendi  gratia  ne

6  minor  septem  et  decem  annis  manumittatur.  Semel  autem
causa  adprobata,  sive  vera  sive  falsa  sit,  non  retractatur.

7  Cum  ergo  certus  modus  manumittendi  minoribus  viginti
annis  dominis  per  l^em  Aeliam  Sentiam  constitutus  sit,
eveniebat,  ut,  qui  quattuordecim  annos  aetatis  expleverit,  licet
testamentum  facere  possit  et  in  eo  heredem  sibi  instituere
legataque  relinquere  possit,  tamen,  si  adhuc  minor  sit  annis
viginti,  libertatem  servo  dare  non  poterat.  quod  non  erat
ferendum,  si  is,  cui  totorum  bonorum  in  testamento  dispositio
data  erat,  uni  servo  libertatem  dare  non  permittebatur.  quare
nos  similiter  ei  quemadmodum  alias  res  ita  et  servos  suos
in  ultima  voluntate  disponere  quemadmodum  voluerit  per-
mittimus,  ut  et  libertatem  eis  possit  praestare.  sed  cum
libertas  inaestimabilis  est  et  propter  hoc  ante  vicesimum
aetatis  annum  antiquitas  libertatem  servo  dari  prohibebat:
ideo  nos  mediam  quodammodo  viam  eligentes  non  aliter
minori  viginti  annis  libertatem  in  testamento  dare  servo  suo
concedimus,  nisi  septimum  et  decimum  annum  impleverit  et

§  6.  For  the  common  employment  of  slaves  as  paedagogi  cf.  Plutarch,
de  educ.  liberis  7,  Plautus,  Mercat  prolog.  89,  Dig.  40.  5.  35.  The
difference  between  paedagogus  and  educator  is  perhaps  that  the  boy
passed  from  the  charge  of  the  first  to  that  of  the  second  at  the  age  of
twelve  or  thereabouts ;  Apul.  Met.  x.  p.  687.

An  ancilla  manumitted  with  the  consent  of  the  consilium  on  the
ground  that  the  dominus  intended  to  marry  her  did  not  become  abso-
lutely free  until  the  marriage  took  place.  Dig.  40.3.  19^40.  9.  21;  the
senate  required  the  master  to  swear  he  would  marry  her  within  the  six
months.  Dig.  40.  2.  13.

As  appears  from  §  7  inf.,  no  one  was  allowed  to  act  as  processual
agent  for  another  until  he  was  seventeen  years  of  age,  from  which  we
may  infer  that  liberti  were  used  as  procurators  mainly  in  matters  of
litigation.

§  7.  By  Nov.  119.  2  Justinian  enabled  domini  to  manumit  slaves  by
will  immediately  they  had  completed  their  fourteenth  year.


Tit  8.]        DE  HIS  QUI  SUI  VEL  ALIENI,  ETC.  123

octavum  decimum  tetigerit.  cum  enim  antiquitas  huiusmodi
aetati  et  pro  aliis  postulare  concessit,  cur  non  etiam  sui  iudicii
stabilitas  ita  eos  adiuvare  credatur,  ut  et  ad  libertates  dandas
servis  suis  possint  provenire  ?

VII.

DE  LEGE  FUFIA  CANINIA  SUBLATA.

L^e  Fufia  Caninia  certus  modus  constitutus  erat  in  servis
testamento  manumittendis.  quam  quasi  libertatibus  impe-
dientem  et  quodammodo  invidam  tollendam  esse  censuimus,
cum  satis  fuerat  inhumanum  vivos  quidem  licentiam  habere
totam  suam  familiam  libertate  donare,  nisi  alia  causa  impediat
libertati,  morientibus  autem  huiusmodi  licentiam  adimere.

VIII.

DE  HIS  QUI  SUI  VEL  ALIENI  lURIS  SUNT.

Sequitur  de  iure  personarum  alia  divisio.  nam  quaedam
personae  sui  iuris  sunt,  quaedam  alieno  iuri  subiectae  sunt :
rursus  earum,  quae  alieno  iuri  subiectae  sunt,  aliae  in  potestate

Tit  Vn.  The  lex  Fufia  Caninia  (Gaius  i.  42-46,  Ulpian,  reg.  i.  24. 25,
Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  4.  14)  was  passed  in  the  reign  of  Augustus,  about  the
same  time  as  the  lex  Aelia  Sentia  (Suetonius,  Octav.  40) ;  its  design  was
to  put  a  check  on  the  reckless  testamentary  manumissions  by  which
testators  sought  to  glorify  themselves.  It  enacted  that  in  future  an
owner  of  three  slaves  should  be  able  by  will  to  manumit  only  two ;  of
from  four  to  ten,  only  one  half ;  of  from  eleven  to  thirty,  only  one- third  ;
of  from  thirty-one  to  one  hundred,  only  a  fourth ;  and  of  from  one  hun-
dred and  one  to  five  hundred,  only  a  fifth :  but  in  no  case  might  more
than  a  hundred  be  enfianchised  in  this  way.  The  slaves  whom  the
testator  wished  to  manumit  must  be  specified  by  name  (Ulpian,  Reg.
I.  24)9  or  by  some  adequate  description:  ^nominatim  videntur  liberi
esse  iussi,  qui  vel  ex  artificio,  vel  officio,  vel  quolibet  alio  modo  evidenter
denotati  essent,  veluti  dispensator  mens,  cellarius  meus,  coquus  meus,
Pamphili  servi  mei  filius'  Dig.  40.  4.  24,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  4.  14.  i.

If  the  testator  attempted  to  evade  the  statute  by  naming  more  than
made  up  the  number  permitted,  and  arranging  their  names  in  a  circle,
liberty  was  denied  them  all,  'quia  nuUus  ordo  manumissionis  inve-
nitur*  Gaius  i.  46.  For  Justinian's  repeal  of  the  lex  Fufia  Caninia  see
Cod.  7.  3.

Tit  VUL  1.  For  the  rights  of  a  master  over  his  slaves  see  on  Tit.  3.
2  supr.


134  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

parentum,  aliae  in  potestate  dominorum  sunt,  videamus
itaque  de  his  quae  alieno  iuri  subiectae  sunt :  nam  si  c<^-
noverimus,  quae  istae  personae  sint,  simul  intell^emus,  quae

Besides  the  public  authority  of  the  State  over  all  men,  free  or  slaves,
who  lived  within  its  territory,  the  Roman  law  recognised  certain  powers
resting  purely  on  rules  of  the  private  code,  and  exercised  by  one  man
over  others,  free  no  less  than  unfree,  in  virtue  of  titles  which  carry  us
back  to  the  very  infancy  of  the  people.  The  general  term  used  to  express
this  authority,  which  was  invariably  based  on  some  family  or  quasi-family
relation,  was  ius  or  potestas.  A  man  was  said  to  be  sui  iuris  if  he
were  not,  alien!  iuris  if  he  were,  subject  to  one  or  other  of  these  forms
of  domestic  control.  One  of  them  was  the  dominica  potestas,  upon
which  enough  has  been  said  already.  With  regard  to  free  persons  who
were  in  some  way  or  other  legally  dependent  on  a  domestic  superior,  the
term  filius  familias  was  used  in  a  very  general  way  to  denote  them  all :
'nam  civium  Romanorum  quidam  sunt  patresfamiliarum,  alii  filiifami-
liarum,  quaedam  matresfamiliarum,  quaedam  filiaefamiliarum.  Patres-
familiarum sunt,  qui  sunt  suae  potestatis,  sive  puberes,  sive  impuberes :
simili  modo  matresfamiliarum.  Filiifamiliarum  et  filiae,  quae  sunt  in
aliena  potestate '  Dig.  i.  6.  4.

Justinian  speaks  of  only  one  form  of  domestic  authority  over  free  per-
sons, the  patria  potestas.  When  we  turn  to  the  passage  in  Gaius  (i.  48,
49)  which  corresponds  to  this  section  of  the  Institutes,  we  find  three :
'  sed  rursus  earum  personarum  quae  alieno  iuri  subiectae  sunt,  aliae  in
potestate,  aliae  in  manu,  aliae  in  mancipio  sunt.'

Manus  was  a  power  which  could  be  exercised  only  by  males  over
females,  and  which  originally  could  be  exercised  only  by  husbands  over
their  wives;  later,  women  came  to  be  in  manu  to  men  who  were  not
their  husbands,  but  in  these  cases  the  relation  was  merely  momentary.
The  usual  case  is  the  manus  of  the  husband,  which  in  many  of  its  incidents
exactly  resembled  patria  potestas ;  but  as  the  moral  relation  of  husband
and  wife  is  different  from  that  between  parent  and  child,  there  are  points
of  contrast ;  e.  g.  though  the  wife  in  manu  was  said  to  be  filiae  loco,  the
husband  had  not,  like  the  father,  an  absolute  his  vitae  necisque  over  her ;
he  could  inflict  death  only  after  a  judicial  consultation  with  other  mem-
bers of  the  family :  Dion.  ii.  25  ;  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  32  ;  Val.  Max.  ii  9.  2  ;
Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  xiv.  14.  3.  In  respect  of  property,  however,  a  wife  in
manu  and  a  child  in  power  were  on  the  same  footing ;  all  the  wife's  pro-
perty went  to  the  husband  by  a  '  successio  per  universitatem  *  (Gaius  iii.
80),  and  whatever  she  acquired  subsequently  she  acquired  for  him  (ib.  ii.
90) ;  her  liability  on  contract  is  touched  on  in  Gaius  iv.  8a

Manus  could  arise  in  three  ways,  Gaius  i.  1 10 :  by  confarreatio,  a
religious  marriage  ceremony  in  the  presence  of  ten  witnesses ;  by  coemp-
tio,  a  sale  by  the  woman  herself  by  mancipation  before  ^v^  witnesses,
a  libripens  and  an  antestatus  ;  and  by  usus,  continuous  residence  of  the
woman  beneath  her  husband's  roof  for  one  year ;  absence  for  three  nights


Tit.  8.]         DE  HIS  QUI  SUI  VEL  ALIENI,  ETC.  125

sui  iuris  sunt,  ac  prius  dispiciamus  de  his  qui  in  potestate
dominorum  sunt.

In  potestate  itaque  dominorum  sunt  servi  (quae  quidem  1
potestas  iuris  gentium  est :   nam  apud  omnes  peraeque  gentes
animadvertere   possumus  dominis   in    servos   vitae  necisque
potestatem  esse)  et  quodcumque  per  servum  adquiritur^  id

in  the  year  (per  trinoctium)  saved  her  her  freedom.  Though  manus  per
usiim  was  not  unknown  in  Cicero's  time  (pro  Flacco  34,  cited  by  Mn
Poste  in  his  note  on  this  subject)  it  had  become  obsolete  by  that  of  Gaius,
who  says  (i.  iii)'  sed  hoc  totum  ius  partim  legibus  sublatum  est,  partim
ipsa  desuetudine  obliteratum  est/  and  possibly  as  early  as  Augustus  (Tac.
Ann.  iv.  16).  Confarreatio,  on  the  other  hand,  was  still  practised  in
Gaius'  age  ('  nam  flamines  maiores,  id  est,  Diales,  Martiales,  Quirinales,
sicut  reges  sacrorum,  nisi  sint  confarreatis  nuptiis  nati,  inaugurari  non
videmus '  i.  112);  but  a  law  passed  under  Tiberius,  A.  D.  23,  had  enacted
that  a  woman  married  by  confarreatio  should  in  future  pass  into  her
husband's  manus  only  sacrorum  causa ;  i.  e,  as  Mr.  Poste  says,  it  only
operated  a  change  of  family  in  respect  of  sacred  rites ;  the  woman  ceased
to  have  the  domestic  gods  and  worship  of  her  father,  and  took  in  exchange
those  of  her  husband.  But  in  secular  matters  her  family  was  unchanged;
she  remained,  if  filiafJEunilias,  subject  to  patria  potestas,  and  did  not  be-
come quasi-filiafamilias  in  the  household  of  her  husband :  her  old  ties  of
agnation  in  her  father's  family  were  not  snapped,  and  no  new  ties  of
agnation  in  her  husband's  family  were  acquired.  Of  course  the  whole
institution  passed  away  with  the  acceptance  of  Christianity  as  the  national
religion,  if  not  before.  Coemption  was  employed  either  for  marriage,  or
for  certain  anomalous  purposes,  e.  g.  to  extinguish  the  obligation  of
onerous  sacred  rites  attached  to  the  estate  of  an  heiress,  or  to  enable
a  woman  to  select  her  own  guardian,  or  to  break  the  ties  of  agnation,  and
thus  become  capable  of  making  a  will ;  see  Mr.  Poste  on  Gaius  i.  108- 1 15.
Manus,  though  mentioned  in  the  Vatican  Fragments  (General  Introd.
p.  67  supr.),  had  ceased  to  exist  in  any  form  before  Justinian,  in  whose
compilations  it  is  not  so  much  as  referred  to.

Mancipium  (Gaius  i.  1 16-123)  was  a  form  of  legal  control  which  arose
from  a  man's  right  to  sell  free  persons  in  his  potestas  or  manus  by  man-
cipation ;  a  person  thus  sold  was  said  to  be  in  mancipio  to  the  purchaser.
The  features  in  which  his  position  differed  from  that  of  a  slave  are
pointed  out  by  Mr.  Poste  on  the  sections  of  Gaius  referred  to.  What-
ever the  free  person  in  mancipio  acquired  belonged  to  his  superior,
except  perhaps  possession,  as  he  himself  was  not  possessed,  Gaius  ii.  90.
Mancipium  was  not  uncommon  in  Gaius'  time ;  it  was  a  comparatively
permanent  status  in  cases  of  '  noxae  datio '  (Gaius  iv.  79),  but  a  merely
temporary  and  fictitious  one  in  emancipations  and  adoptions.  Justinian
completely  altered  the  form  of  the  two  latter,  and  abolished  the  noxal
surrender  of  free  persons  (Bk.  iv.  8.  7  inf.),  so  that  in  his  system  manci-
pium altogether  disappears.


126  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

2  domino  adquiritur.  sed  hoc  tempore  nullis  hominibus,  qui
sub  imperio  nostro  sunt,  licet  sine  causa  legibus  cognita  et
supra  modum  in  servos  suos  saevire.  nam  ex  constitutione
divi  Pii  Antonini  qui  sine  causa  servum  suum  occiderit,  non
minus  puniri  iubetur,  quam  qui  servum  alienum  occiderit.
sed  et  maior  asperitas  dominorum  eiusdem  principis  con-
stitutione coercetur.  nam  consultus  a  quibusdam  praesidibus
provinciarum  de  his  servis,  qui  ad  aedem  sacram  vel  ad
statuas  principum  confugiunt,  praecepit  ut,  si  intolerabilis
videatur  dominorum  saevitia,  cogantur  servos  bonis  con-
dicionibus  vendere,  ut  pretium  domitiis  daretur,  et  recte:
expedit  enim  rei  publicae,  ne  quis  re  sua  male  utatur.  cuius
rescript!  ad  Aelium  Marcianum  emissi  verba  haec  sunt :  '  Do-
minorum quidem  potestatem  in  suos  servos  illibatam  esse
oportet  nee  cuiquam  hominum  ius  suum  detrahi.  sed  domi-
norum interest,  ne  auxilium  contra  saevitiam  vel  famem  vel
intolerabilem  iniuriam  denegetur  his  qui  iuste  deprecantur.
ideoque  cognosce  de  querellis  eorum,  qui  ex  familia  lulii
Sabini  ad  statuam  confugerunt,  et  si  vel  durius  habitos,  quam
aequum  est,  vel  infami  iniuria  affectos  cognoveris,  veniri  iube,
ita  ut  in  potestatem  doniini  non  revertantur.  qui  Sabinus,  si
meae  constitutioni  fraudem  fecerit,  sciet  me  admissum  severius
exsecuturum.'

IX.

DE  PATRIA  POTESTATE.

In  potestate  nostra  sunt  liberi  nostri,  quos  ex  iustis  nuptiis

Tit.  IX.  The  children  bom  of  lawful  wedlock  between  an  independent
citizen  and  a  woman  with  whom  he  had  connubium  were  bom  in  his
potestas ;  and  unless  he  died  first,  or  they  were  voluntarily  released  by
him,  they  remained  under  it,  with  trifling  exceptions,  to  the  day  of  their
death.  The  peculiarity  of  this,  as  compared  with  other  peoples,  is
noticed  by  many  writers  (Gains  i.  55  ;  cf.  Sextus  Empir.  Pyrrhon.  iii.  24
€n  re  *FfafiaUitif  pofioBirai  tow  ncudas  {mox€ipiavs  xal  bovXovs  twp  nar4p9^9
K(\tvoviTi¥  tjycu  .  . .  irap*  Mpois  di  »£  rvpawiKhv  rovro  iK^t^XtfTOi^  Servius
ad  Verg.  Aen.  xi.  143  '  filii  in  potestate  patris  . . .  servi  loco  ').  What  is
strange  about  it  is  not  so  much  its  stringency,  as  its  survival,  through
centuries  of  legal  history,  to  the  time  of  Justinian,  and  its  deliberate
perpetuation  in  his  legislation.  This  is  explained  in  some  degree  by  the
Roman  aversion  to  any  change  in  old  established  custom  which  the


Tit.  9.]  DE  PATRIA  POTESTATE.  127

procreaverimus.    Nuptiae  autem  sive  matrimonium  est  viri  et  1
mulieris  coniunctio,  individuam  consuetudinem  vitae  continens.

advance  in  social  conditions  did  not  render  absolutely  necessary ;  still
more  by  the  fact  that  the  patria  potestas  of  the  sixth  century  of  our  own
era  was  a  very  diflferent  institution  from  that  of  the  earlier  period ;  the
rights  of  the  father  over  the  person  of  the  child  had  been  largely  curtailed
by  both  law  and  custom,  and  by  the  development  of  the  different  kinds
of  peculium  (Bk.  ii.  9.  i,  and  notes,  inf.),  the  position  of  the  son  in  respect
of  property  and  contract  had  been  largely  assimilated  to  that  of  an
independent  person.  But  without  doubt  the  chief  reason  why  it  had
never  been  found  necessary  to  cut  short,  by  legislative  interference,  the
duration  of  patria  potestas  at  puberty  or  majority  was  the  fact  that  to
public  matters  it  had  no  relation  whatever.  In  respect  of  all  public
functions  the  filiusfamilias  was  an  independent  person  :  in  the  field  of
private  law  he  was  incapable  of  right,  or  power,  or  authority  on  his  own
account,  but  in  all  other  matters  he  was  as  capable  of  right  as  his  £ather :
'filiusfamilias  in  publicis  causis  loco  patrisfamilias  habetur,  veluti  ut
magistrattun  gerat,  ut  tutor  detur'  Dig.  i.  6.  9,  *quod  ad  ius  publicum
attinet,  non  sequitur  ius  potestatis'  Dig.  36.  i.  14;  cf.  Maine's  Ancient
Law  p.  139.

At  first,  perhaps,  there  was  little  to  distinguish  the  power  of  a  father
over  his  children  from  that  of  a  master  over  his  slaves,  except  the  fact
that  the  filiusfamilias  was  always  recognised  as  a  '  persona ; '  accordingly,
though  his  pater  could  sell  him,  the  purchaser  could  not  own  him  as  he
could  own  a  slave,  but  could  only  hold  him  in  mancipio.  The  absolute
control  which  the  father  possessed  over  him  is  best  appreciated  by  con-
sidering the  former's  powers  over  his  person,  and  the  son's  own  position
in  respect  of  property,  contract,  and  capacity  to  sue.

Originally  the  paterfamilias  had  ius  vitae  necisque  over  those  in  his
power,  so  that,  as  Mr.  Poste  remarks,  the  lex  Pompeia  de  parricidiis»
B.C  52  (Bk.  iv.  18.  6  inf.)  omits  the  father  from  the  list  of  persons  who
could  be  guilty  of '  parricide ':  a  fortiori^  he  possessed  the  right  of  uncon-
trolled corporal  chastisement  But  under  the  Empire  these  powers  had
dwindled  to  the  mere  right  of  bringing  serious  domestic  offences  under
the  cognisance  of  the  magistrate,  though  in  trifling  matters  the  father
might  still  take  the  law  into  his  own  hands  :  Cod.  viiL  47. 3.  The  killing
of  a  child  was  first  made  '  parricide '  by  Constantine ;  in  the  time  of
Hadrian  a  father  who  had  acted  thus  under  great  provocation  had  been
deported  to  an  island.  From  Plautus  (Plut.  Amphitruo.  i.  3.  3)  it  seems
to  have  then  been  common  for  parents  to  expose  their  infants  to  perish  of
cold  and  hunger ;  this  was  strictly  prohibited  A.  D.  374  (Cod.  8.  52.  2)  and
a  law  of  Diocletian  and  Maximian  forbade  children  to  be  sold,  pledged,
or  given  away  by  their  pater,  though  Constantine  permitted  their  sale
immediately  after  birth  in  cases  of  extreme  poverty,  reserving,  however,
an  '  equity  of  redemption '  which  could  in  no  way,  be  forfeited.  Justinian
(Nov.  134. 7)  found  it  necessary  to  repeat  the  prohibition  of  child-pledging,
and  increased  the  penalties  against  creditors  who  attempted  to  enforce


128  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

2  lus  autem  potestatis,  quod  in  liberos  habemus,  proprium  est
civium  Romanonim :  nulli  enim  alii  sunt  homines,  qui  talem


rights  thus  acquired ;  his  abolition  of  noxal  surrender  of  filiifamilias  has
been  noticed  on  Tit.  8  pr.  supr.  So,  too,  the  pater  could  originally  marry
his  son  or  daughter  to  whomsoever  he  pleased,  and  divorce  them  at
pleasure,  besides  transferring  them  to  another  family  by  adoption  ;  '  but
later  in  the  imperial  period  the  privilege  of  dictating  marriage  had
declined  into  a  conditional  veto ;  and  adoption  itself,  destined  to  lose
almost  all  its  ancient  importance  in  the  reformed  system  of  Justinian,
could  no  longer  be  effected  without  the  assent  of  the  child  transferred  to
the  adoptive  parentage*  (Maine,  Ancient  Law  p.  138).  By  a  constitution
of  Marcus  Aurelius  the  pater  was  forbidden  to  divorce  a  son  or  daughter
in  his  power  without  the  latter's  consent.  Accordingly,  Ulpian  says  in
l^i&  43-  3<^  1*5'  si  quis  filiam  suam,  quae  mihi  nupta  sit,  velit  abducere,
vel  exhiberi  sibi  desideret,  an  adversus  edictum  ezceptio  danda  sit,  si
forte  pater  concordans  matrimonium,  forte  et  liberis  subnixum  velit  dis*
solvere?  £t  certo  iure  utimur,  ne  bene  concordantia  matrimonia  iure
patriae  potestatis  turbentur.'

In  the  field  of  property,  the  original  rule  was  that  the  filiusfamilias
could  have  no  proprietary  rights,  and  whatever  he  acquired  by  gift,
inheritance,  or  otherwise,  belonged  to  his  father  only.  This  doctrine  was
not  broken  in  upon  till  the  Empire,  when,  by  the  institution  of  peculium
castrense,  the  son  was  enabled  to  own  property  acquired  in  certain  modes.
For  this,  and  the  later  history  of  his  proprietary  rights,  see  Bk.  ii.  9.  i,
and  notes  inf.

In  respect  of  contract  the  filiusfamilias  had  always  been  in  a  different
position  from  a  slave.  A  slave  could  be  a  party  to  a  contract,  and  any
advantage  which  was  to  be  derived  belonged  to  and  could  be  sued  for  by
the  master  (Bk.  iii.  1 7  inf.) ;  but  if  he  attempted  to  bind  himself  by  a  pro-
mise the  resulting  obligation  was  '  naturalis '  only,  and  neither  he  nor  his
master  could  be  sued  upon  it ;  '  melior  condicio  nostra  per  servos  fieri
potest,  deteriornon  potest'  Dig.  50.  17.  133.  Some  alteration,  however,
was  made  in  this  latter  point  by  the  introduction  of  the  actiones  adiectitiae
qualitatis,  Bk.  iv.  7  inf.  But  the  promise  of  a  filiusfamilias  had  always
given  rise  to  civilis  obligatio  :  '  filiusfamilias  ex  omnibus  causis  tanquam
paterfamilias  obligatur,  et  ob  id  agi  cum  eo  tanquam  cum  patrefamilias
potest ,  Dig.  44.  7.  39.  Thus,  on  the  son's  contracts,  the  pater  took  all
the  gains,  while  for  the  debts  the  son  was  liable  to  be  sued,  the  pater  not.
But  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  people  would  be  over  ready  to  contract
with  a  person  who  had  no  means  wherewithal  to  satisfy  the  judgment  in
case  he  was  condemned ;  hence  we  may  say  generally  that,  in  Roman
law,  though  the  capacity  to  validly  bind  oneself  by  contract  does  not  go
hand  in  hand  with  proprietary  capacity,  yet  the  practical  exercise  of  that
capacity  probably  did:  and  accordingly  it  was  not  until  the  filius-
familias had  acquired  proprietary  rights  through  the  development  of  the
doctrine  of  peculiwn,  and  the  introduction  of  the  actiones  adiectitiae


Tit  lo.]  DE  NUPTIIS.  129

in  liberos  habeant  potestatem,  qualem  nos  habemus.  Qui  3
igitur  ex  te  et  uxore  tua  nascitur,  in  tua  potestate  est :  item
qui  ex  filio  tuo  et  uxore  eius  nascitur,  id  est  nepos  tuus  et
neptis,  aeque  in  tua  sunt  potestate,  et  pronepos  et  proneptis
et  deinceps  ceteri.  qui  tamen  ex  iilia  tua  nascitur,  in  tua
potestate  non  est,  sed  in  patris  eius.

X.

DE  NUPTIIS.

lustas  autem  nuptias  inter  se  cives  Romani  contrahunt,  qui
secundum  praecepta  legum  coeunt,  masculi  quidem  puberes

qualitatis  had  to  some  extent  rendered  a  father  liable  on  his  son*s  en-
gagements, that  the  latter's  contractual  capacity  was  often  called  into
exercise.

As  the  filiusfamilias  had  no  rights  of  property,  so  he  could  have  no
rights  of  action  in  respect  thereof,  and  therefore  could  not,  as  a  rule,  sue
in  his  own  name  in  a  court  of  justice.  To  this  there  were  a  few  excep-
tions :  *  filiusfamilias  suo  nomine  nuliam  actionem  habet  nisi  iniuriarum,
et  quod  vi  aut  clam,  et  deposit!  et  commodati  ut  lulianus  putat'  Dig.  44.
7.  9.    For  an  explanation  of  this  anomaly  see  Mr.  Poste  on  Gaius  i.  55.

Patria  potestas  could  originate  in  three  ways:  (i)  by  birth,  as  men-
tioned in  this  Title  ;  (2)  children  not  in  the  father's  power  at  birth  might
be  afterwards  subjected  to  it  by  legitimation  or  some  analogous  process,
Tit.  10.  13,  and  notes,  inf. ;  (3)  by  adoption,  Tit.  il  inf.

§  3.  Grandchildren  by  a  son  are  in  the  power  of  their  grandfather  only
if  their  father  was  himself  subject  to  it  at  the  time  of  their  conception :  if,
before  that  time,  he  had  been  emancipated,  they  are  bom  in  his  potestas,
not  in  that  of  their  grandfather :  so  too  with  great-grandchildren  by  a
grandson,  and  so  on.  The  children  of  a  daughter,  or  of  a  granddaughter
by  a  son,  etc.,  were  never  in  the  power  of  her  father  or  grandfather,  but
in  that  of  their  own  father  or  paternal  grandfather.  This  was  expressed
in  the  maxim  'mulier  familiae  suae  et  caput  et  finis  est'  Dig.  5a  16.  195.
5 ;  cf.  Miune,  Ancient  Law  p*  14S.

Tit.  X.  Nuptiae,  matrimonium,  or  marriage,  has  been  defined  in  the
preceding  Title  as  '  viri  et  mulieris  coniunctio,  individuam  vitae  con-
suetudinem  continens.*  This  definition  was  borrowed  by  Justinian  from
Modestinus,  who  says  (Dig.  23.  2.  i),  'nuptiae  sunt  coniunctio  maris  et
feminae,  et  consortitun  omnis  vitae,  divini  et  humani  iuris  communicatio.'
The  last  words  remind  us  that  in  the  earliest  days  of  Rome  marriage  was
a  holy  relation.  In  whatever  form  it  took  place,  and  not  only  in  that  of
confarreatio,  it  founded  a  religious  communion  between  husband  and
wife,  and  therefore  received  at  its  commencement  a  religious  sanction.
But  in  his  own  age  Modestinus*  words  were  a  mere  reminiscence  of  the

K


13©  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

feminae  autem  viripotentes,  sive  patres  familias  sint  sive  filii
familias,   dum    tamen    filii    familias   et  consensum    habeant


primitive  practice,  and  must  not  be  understood  to  express  the  Christian
conception  of  the  married  state,  Christianity  not  having  become  the
national  religion  till  many  years  afterwards.

lustae  nuptiae,  legitimum  matrimonium,  or  marriage  which  would  give
patria  potestas  over  the  issue,  required  one  special  condition  besides
those  necessary  for  marriage  in  general,  viz.  connubium,  and  this  belonged
to  Roman  citizens  only,  with  the  exception  of  certain  classes  or  com-
munities on  whom  it  had  been  bestowed  as  a  special  boon  (*  connubium
concessum'  Ulpian,  Reg.  5.  4);  an  example  will  be  found  in  Gaius  i.
57.  After  Caracalla  (211-217  a.d.)  had  conferred  the  civitas  on  all
free  subjects  of  the  empire,  of  course  absence  of  connubium  was  rather
the  exception  than  the  rule.

Apart  from  this,  the  general  conditions  of  marriage  were  as  follow,
(i)  Certain  persons  were  absolutely  incapable  of  contracting  marriage,
viz.  slaves,  castrati,  lunatics  and  idiots,  persons  below  the  age  of  puberty,
those  already  married,  and  women  whose  husbands  had  not  yet  been  dead
a  certain  time  fixed  by  law.  (2)  The  parties  must  not  stand  within  cer-
tain degrees  of  relationship  to  one  another,  §§  i-ii  inf.,  and  must  (3)
themselves  consent  to  the  marriage :  '  nuptias  non  concubitus  sed  con-
sensus facit'  Dig.  50.  17.  30.  (4)  They  must,  if  alieni  iuris,  have  the
consent  of  the  persons  in  whose  power  they  are :  cL  with  this  paragraph
Dig.  23.  2.  2  *  nuptiae  consistere  non  possunt,  nisi  consentiant  omnes,  id
est,  qui  coeunt,  quorumque  in  potestate  sunt.'  For  exceptional  cases,  in
which  the  parents'  consent  was  required  for  the  marriage  even  of  emanci-
pated daughters,  see  Livy  4.  9,  Cod.  5.  4.  i,  18.  20.  (5)  Marriage  was
forbidden  by  positive  law  between  the  members  of  certain  ranks  or  orders
of  society:  e.g.  between  ingenuus  and  infamis,  between  senators  and
libertae,  members  of  the  dramatic  profession,  etc.,  by  the  lex  lulia  et
Papia  Poppaea.  Other  enactments  of  a  similar  kind  were  made  by  Con-
stantine,  Cod.  5. 27. 1,  Leo  and  Anthemius  (Nov.  Anthem,  i),  and  Justinus,
Cod.  5.  4.  23.  On  the  religious  ground  marriage  was  forbidden  between
Jew  and  Christian,  and  on  account  of  official  relation  between  the  praeses
and  his  provincial  subjects,  between  the  tutor  and  his  female  ward,  etc.  (6)
Persons  convicted  of  adultery  with  one  another  might  not  subsequently
marry  (Nov.  134.  14),  and  the  same  rule  applied  in  cases  of  abduction,
Cod.  9.  13.  I,  Nov.  143.  150.

Marriage  was  contracted  merely  by  consent,  and  no  form  was  pre-
scribed by  law.  It  is  true  that  in  the  earlier  period  marriage  was  usually
accompanied  by  manus,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  not  completely
obsolete  even  in  the  time  of  Gaius;  but  the  former  was  independent
of  the  latter,  which  was  superimposed  on  it  by  some  additional  ceremony
or  fact — confarreatio,  coemptio,  or  usus.  The  agreement  to  marry  was
usually  entered  into  by  mutual  promises  (sponsalia),  originally  made  by
sponsio  and  restipulatio,  Dig.  23.  i.  2,  a  form  which  would  always  sup-


TiL  la]  DE  NUPTIIS.  131

parentum,  quorum  in  potestate  sunt,     nam  hoc  fieri  debere  et
civilis  et  naturalis  ratio  suadet  in  tantum,  et  iussum  parentis


port  an  action,  so  that  we  may  believe  that  (in  an  indirect  way)  the
action  for  breach  of  promise  of  marriage  was  not  unknown  to  the  early
Romans ;  i.e.  though  they  never  allowed  a  direct  action  on  the  promise
to  marry,  they  allowed  the  stipulation  of  a  penalty  in  case  of  breach,  and
this  could  be  recovered.  Finally,  however,  even  this  indirect  form  of
compulsion  came  to  be  deemed  contra  bonos  mores,  and  by  the  intro-
duction of  an  exceptio  doli  even  the  exaction  of  the  penalty  was  pre-
vented. Dig.  45.  I.  134;  and  from  this  time  onward  the  betrothal  by
stipulation  seems  to  have  been  discontinued  in  favour  of  an  informal
engagement,  and  the  principle  was  established,  sufficit  nudus  consensus
ad  constituenda  sponsalia.  In  earnest  of  the  engagement  mutual  gifts
(arrha  sponsalicia.  Cod.  5.  i)  were  usual,  which  were  forfeited  by  a  de-
faulting party,  who  had  also  to  restore  those  given  by  the  other  side ;  and
this  forfeiture  seems,  with  the  exception  of  some  social  disapprobation,  to
have  been  the  only  penalty  incurred  for  breach  in  the  time  c^  the  classical
jurists.

The  transition  from  the  state  of  betrothal  to  that  of  actual  marriage
was  not  effected  by  any  necessary  form,  religious  or  otherwise,  but  by
actual  cohabitation,  as  evidenced  by  the  wife  going  to  live  with  the  hus-
band, accompanied  by  maritalis  affectio,  of  which  the  deductio  in  domum,
or  taking  home  of  the  woman  by  the  man,  was  regarded  only  as  a  proof.
By  Nov.  74.  4.  5  Justinian  prescribed  certain  conditions  for  the  marriage
of  imperial  officials,  but  for  the  rest  of  the  Roman  world  the  old  rule  was
left  standing.

From  iustae  nuptiae  one  has  to  distinguish  nuptiae  simply.  Originally
the  former  was  the  only  kind  of  marriage  known  at  Rome.  Even,  how-
ever,  in  the  time  of  the  Republic  there  had  grown  into  almost  equal
recognition  a  matrimonium  iuris  gentium,  a  lawful  wedlock  of  persons
between  whom  there  was  not  connubium,  which,  inferior  to  iustae  nuptiae
only  in  not  creating  patria  potestas,  was  held  in  great  favour  under  the
empire.  In  Justinian's  time  every  free  subject  of  the  empire  practically
had  connubium,  so  that  the  distinction  between  nuptiae  and  iustae
nuptiae,  important  before  the  edict  of  Caracalla,  had  ceased  to  have  any
significance.

The  marriage  state  was  terminated  (i)  by  either  party  dying  or  becom-
ing a  slave.  When  the  slavery  resulted  from  captivity,  postliminium
had  not  originally  the  effect  of  restoring  the  married  condition,  but  a
fresh  consensus  was  required  if  the  parties  still  wished  to  be  husband
and  wife,  Dig.  49.  15.  14.  i.  This  rule,  however,  underwent  a  gradual
change,  and  eventually  captivity  was  regarded  as  in  no  way  different
from  ordinary  absence,  proof  being  required  of  the  absent  party's  death
before  the  other  could  contract  another  marriage,  Nov.  117.  11.  (2)  By
Mncestus  superveniens ; '  e.g.  if  a  man  adopts  his  daughter*s  husband,
the  latter  thereby  becomes  his  own  wife's  brother,  Dig.  23.  2.  67.  3 ;  cf.

K  %


132  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

praecedere  debeat.  unde  quaesitum  est,  an  furiosi  iilia
nubere  aut  furiosi  filius  uxorem  ducere  possit  ?  cumque  super

this  Title,  passim.  (3)  By  divorce.  Upon  this  the  Romans  held  that  as
the  essence  of  marriage  lay  in  the  maritalis  affectio,  it  could  be  terminated
by  the  mere  mind  of  either  party  no  longer  to  live  in  wedlock  with  the
other ;  the  continuance  of  the  marriage  depended  on  that  of  the  affectio.
Either  party  was  thus  free  to  terminate  the  connection  at  pleasure,  and
agreements  surrendering  this  privilege  were  void:  'libera  matrimonia
esse  antiquitus  placuit,  ideoque  pacta  ne  liceat  divertere  non  valere
constat '  Cod.  8.  39.  2.  If  the  separation  was  effected  by  mutual  arrange-
ment, it  was  usually  called  divortium,  if  by  the  act  of  one  party  only,
repudium :  '  in  repudiis  vero,  id  est,  renunciatione,  comprobata  sunt
haec  verba:  tuas  res  tibi  habeto:  item  haec,  tuas  res  tibi  agito*  Dig.
24.  2.  2.  I.  Persons  who  had  been  married  by  confarreatio  could  ori-
ginally not  be  divorced  at  all  (Fest.  Ep.  s.  v.  flammeo ;  Gell.  Noct.  Att
10.  15) ;  but  from  the  time  probably  of  Domitian  (Plut.  QuaesL  Rom.  50)
they  could  be  separated  by  a  religious  form  of  divorce  called  diffarreatio.
It  seems  uncertain,  where  manus  was  produced  by  usus  or  coemptio,
whether  the  wife  was  as  free  '  repudium  mittere '  as  when  she  was  not  in
manu  mariti,  though  Gaius  says  (i.  137)  'a  wife  subject  to  manus  can  no
more  compel  her  husband  to  release  her  therefrom  without  dissolution  of
the  marriage  than  a  daughter  can  compel  her  father  to  emancipate  her.'
A  special  form  was  prescribed  for  repudia  by  the  lex  lulia  de  adulteriis,
B.C.  17,  which  required  the  message  to  be  delivered  by  a  freedman  of  the
family,  in  the  presence  of  seven  witnesses  above  the  age  of  puberty,  and
citizens  of  Rome,  Dig.  24.  2.  9.

The  recklessness  with  which  the  right  of  divorce  was  exercised  in  the
darker  days  of  the  Empire  is  well  known.  For  centuries  the  only  attempts
made  to  check  the  evil  consisted  in  imposing  certain  proprietary  disad-
vantages on  persons  who  unjustifiably  divorced  their  consorts,  or  who
occasioned  a  divorce  by  their  own  infidelity.  Thus  a  wife  whose  adultery
led  to  her  dismissal  forfeited  a  sixth  of  her  dos,  and  an  eighth  for  more
venial  offences ;  and  if  there  were  children  bom  of  the  marriage,  the  hus-
band might  retain  for  their  benefit  a  sixth  of  the  dos  for  each,  though  the
whole  amount  thus  retained  might  not  exceed  a  half  of  the  whole  dos
(*  retentio  propter  liberos,'  Ulpian,  Reg.  6.  9  sq.).  A  husband  who  occa-
sioned a  divorce  had  to  restore  the  dos  either  at  once,  or  at  least  before
the  whole  time  had  elapsed  for  which,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  he
would  have  been  entitled  to  enjoy  it.  The  acceptance  of  Christianity  as
the  State  religion  brought  with  it  a  large  amount  of  imperial  legislation  on
this  subject.  On  divorce  by  mutual  consent  no  restraint  was  imposed
until  Justinian  (Novels,  117.  10,  and  134.  11),  as  a  penalty  forced  the
parties  into  the  retirement  of  a  religious  house.  Constantine  enumerated
the  grounds  on  which  repudiation  should  be  deemed  justifiable,  and  addi-
tions to  the  list  were  made  by  his  successors.  The  penalties  inflicted  on
the  guilty  parties,  as  fixed  by  Honorius,  were  loss  of  dos  and  donatio


Tit.  I  a]  DE  NUPTIIS.  133

filio  variabatur,  nostra  processit  decisio,  qua  permissum  est  ad
exemplum   filiae  furiosi  iilium  quoque  posse  et  sine  patris


propter  nuptias  respectively.  Repudiation  without  any  such  good  reason
was  still  more  severely  punished  with  enforced  retirement  to  a  cloister^
and  forfeiture  of  the  whole  property  in  favour  partly  of  the  cloister,  partly
of  the  guilty  person's  statutory  heirs,  Nov.  134.  11.

A  few  words  are  necessary  on  the  proprietary  relations  of  husband
and  wife.  If  the  latter  passed  in  manum,  of  course  such  property  as
she  had  went  absolutely  with  her  to  the  husband ;  but  if  the  marriage
was  unaccompanied  by  manus,  and  the  wife  was  not  in  potestas,  her
property  remained  as  completely  under  her  own  control,  and  as  free
from  that  of  the  husband,  as  if  she. had  never  married  at  all.  Yet  the
Roman  law  imposed  on  the  husband  the  burden  of  all  domestic  expenses,
and  of  the  rearing  of  the  issue ;  and  it  was  doubtless  this  inequality  which
led  to  the  institution  of  dos,  which  was  a  contribution  from  the  wife  or
some  one  on  her  behalf  towards  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  married
state, '  ad  matrimonii  onera  ferenda.'  The  obligation  to  provide  a  dos
was  imposed  on  the  father  or  paternal  grandfather  partly  by  the  lex  I'apia
Poppaea,  partly  by  imperial  constitutions,  and  this  whether  the  daughter  or
granddaughter  was  in  power  or  not,  Cod.  5.  1 1.  7.  The  mother  was  under
no  such  obligation  until  after  an  enactment  of  Diocletian  and  Maximian,
and  then  only  under  exceptional  circumstances.  Cod.  5.  12.  14  ;  the  wife
was  never  bound  to  provide  a  dos  herself  at  all.  This  led  to  a  difference
of  terminology :  '  dos  aut  profectitia  dicitur,  id  est,  quam  pater  mulieris
dedit,  aut  adventitia,  id  est  ea,  quae  a  quovis  alio  data  est'  Ulpian,  Reg.
6.  3  :  dos  receptitia  was  a  kind  of  adventitia,  being  a  dos  given  by  some
third  person  other  than  a  male  ascendant  on  the  express  condition  that  it
should  be  restored  to  him  or  some  one  else  (dotis  receptio)  at  the  termin-
ation of  the  marriage.  There  could  be  no  dos  unless  the  wedlock  were
lawful,  '  neque  enim  dos  sine  matrimonio  esse  potest ;  ubicunque  igitur
matrimonii  nomen  non  est,  nee  dos  est '  Dig.  23.  3.  3, '  ibi  dos  esse  debet,
ubi  onera  matrimonii  sunt '  ib.  56.  i.  If  the  husband  were  a  filiusfamilias,
the  dos  went  to  his  pater,  on  whom  the  onera  matrimonii  fell.  Anything
could  serve  as  dos  whereby  the  property  of  the  husband  (or  of  his
pater)  was  augmented — ownership,  iura  in  re  (e.  g.  usufruct),  rights  in
personam,  or  release  of  a  debt

The  modes  of  constituting  a  dos  were  three  in  number :  dos  aut  datur,
aut  dicitur,  aut  promittitur.  *  Dotem  dicere  potest  mulier,  quae  nuptura
est,  et  debitor  mulieris,  si  iussu  eius  dicat,  institutus,  parens  mulieris
virilis  sexus,  per  virilem  sexum  cognatione  iunctus,  velut  pater,  avus
patemus  :  dare,  promittere  dotem  omnes  possunt '  Ulpian,  Reg.  6.  i  and  2 ;
cf.  note  on  Bk.  iii.  1 5.  pr.  inf.  The  general  rule  was  that  the  dos  existed,
as  such,  only  during  the  continuance  of  the  marriage,  and  at  its  termination
must  be  restored  to  the  woman  or  other  person  from  whom  it  proceeded,
Dig.  24.  3.  2 ;  but  this  might  be  modified  by  special  agreement,  e.  g.  so  as
to  give  the  husband  a  life  interest.    The  latter  became  owner  of  the  dotal


134  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

interventu  matrimonium  sibi  copulare  secundum  datum  ex
constitutione  modum.

1  Ergo  non  omnes  nobis  uxores  ducere  licet :  nam  quarun-
dam  nuptiis  abstinendum  est.  inter  eas  enim  personas,  quae
parentum  liberorumve  locum  inter  se  optinent,  nuptiae  con-
trahi  non  possunt,  veluti  inter  patrem  et  filiam  vel  avum  et
neptem  vel  matrem  et  filium  vel  aviam  et  nepotem  et  usque
ad  infinitum :  et  si  tales  personae  inter  se  coierint,  nefarias
atque  incestas  nuptias  contraxisse  dicuntur.  et  haec  adeo  ita
sunt,  ut,  quamvis  per  adoptionem  parentum  liberorumve  loco
sibi  esse  coeperint,  non  possint  inter  se  matrimonio  iungi
in  tantum,  ut  etiam  dissoluta  adoptione  idem  iuris  maneat:
itaque  eam,  quae  tibi  per  adoptionem  filia  aut  neptis  esse
coeperit,  non  poteris  uxorem  ducere,  quamvis  eam  eman-
cipaveris,

2  Inter  eas  quoque  personas,  quae  ex  transverso  gradu  cog-
nationis  iunguntur,  est  quaedam  similis  observatio,  sed  non

property,  and  so  entitled  to  its  absolute  management :  '  si  res  in  dotem
dentur,  puto,  in  bonis  mariti  fieri '  Dig.  23.  3.  7.  3  ;  of.  Gains  ii.  63,  Bk.  ii.
8.  pr.  inf. ;  in  other  passages,  however,  the  wife's  reversion  is  recognised
as  strictly  qualifying  the  husband's  ownership  :  e.  g.  '  quamvis  in  bonis
mariti  dos  sit,  mulieris  tamen  est '  Dig.  loc.  cit.  75  ;  and  in  Cod.  5.  12.  20
Justinian  expresses  an  opinion  that  the  dos  belongs  to  the  husband  only
'  legum  subtilitate,'  and  iure  naturali  is  the  property  of  the  wife.

It  was  considered  a  matter  of  public  interest  to  secure  the  return  of
the  dos  at  the  termination  of  the  marriage,  as  a  provision  for  the  wife,  or
in  case  she  married  a  second  time.  The  husband  often  guaranteed  this
by  stipulatio,  but  apart  from  this  there  was  an  action  for  recovery  (dotis
exactio,  §  12  inf.)  called  actio  rei  uxoriae,  which  was  bonae  fidei  in  cha-
racter :  for  Justinian's  changes  in  this  matter  see  Bk.  iv.  6.  29  inf.  The
wife  was  also  by  an  enactment  of  Justinian  (Cod.  5.  13.  i.  i)  a  privileged
creditor  in  case  of  the  husband's  insolvency,  and  the  provisions  of  the  lex
Julia  de  fundo  dotali,  with  Justinian's  amendments  (Bk.  ii.  8.  pr.  inf.),  were
directed  to  the  same  purpose.  For  this  whole  subject  see  Sir  H.  Maine^s
chapter  on  the  history  of  the  settled  property  of  married  women,  in  the
Early  History  of  Institutions ;  and  for  the  counterpart  of  dos,  the  donatio
ante  or  propter  nuptias,  Bk.  ii.  7.  3,  and  notes,  inf.

§  1.  This  and  the  following  sections  contain  the  rules  of  Roman  law
prohibiting  certain  marriages  on  the  ground  of  kinship  between  the
parties.  It  will  be  observed  that  adoptive  was  as  effectual  as  natural
relationship  to  bar  such  unions ;  and  the  same  incapacity  resulted  in
Justinian's  time  (Cod.  5.  4.  26)  from  '  cognatio  spiritualis,'  the  relation  of
godparent  and  godchild,  and  to  a  still  larger  degree  under  the  Canon


Tit.  lo.]  DE  NUPTIIS,  135

tanta.  sane  enim  inter  fratrem  sororemque  nuptiae  prohibitae
sunt,  sive  ab  eodem  patre  eademque  matre  nati  fuerint,  sive
ex  alterutro  eonim.  sed  si  qua  per  adoptionem  soror  tibi  esse
coeperit,  quamdiu  quidem  constat  adoptio,  sane  inter  te  et
earn  nuptiae  consistere  non  possunt :  cum  vero  per  emanci-
pationem  adoptio  dissoluta  sit,  poteris  earn  uxorem  ducere :
sed  et  si  tu  emancipatus  fueris,  nihil  est  impedimento  nuptiis.
et  ideo  constat,  si  quis  generum  adoptare  velit,  debere  eum
ante  filiam  suam  emancipare:  et  si  quis  velit  nurum  adoptare^
debere  eum  ante  filium  emancipare.  Fratris  vel  sororis  filiam  3
uxorem  ducere  non  licet,  sed  nee  neptem  fratris  vel  sororis
ducere  quis  potest,  quamvis  quarto  gradu  sint.  cuius  enim
filiam  uxorem  ducere  non  licet^  eius  neque  neptem  per-
mittitur.  eius  vero  mulieris,  quam  pater  tuus  adoptavit,  filiam
non  videris  impediri  uxorem  ducere,  quia  neque  natural!
neque  civili  iure  tibi  coniungitur.  Duorum  autem  fi-atrum  4
vel  sororum  liberi  vel  fratris  et  sororis  iungi  possunt.  Item  5
amitam  licet  adoptivam  uxorem  ducere  non  licet,  item
materteram,  quia  parentum  loco  habentur.  qua  ratione
verum  est  magnam  quoque  amitam  et  materteram  magnam
prohiberi  uxorem  ducere.  Adfinitatis  quoque  veneratione  6
quarundam  nuptiis  abstinere  necesse  est.  ut  ecce  privignam
aut  nurum  uxorem  ducere  non  licet,  quia  utraeque  filiae
loco  sunt  quod  scilicet  ita  accipi  debeat,  si  fuit  nurus
aut  privigna :  nam  si  adhuc  nurus  est,  id  est  si  adhuc  nupta
est  filio  tuo,  alia  ratione  uxorem  eam  ducere  non  possis,  quia
eadem  duobus  nupta  esse  non  potest :  item  si  adhuc  privigna

Law ;  see  some  remarks  of  Sir  H.  Maine,  Early  History  of  Institutions,
pp.  240  sq.  There  is  a  good  account  of  the  prohibited  degrees  of  Marriage
in  Marquardt,  Privatleben  der  Rdmer,  pp.  29  sq.

§  8.  Gaius  (i.  62  ;  cf.  Tac.  Ann.  12.  5.  7,  Suetonius,  Claud.  26)  says  that
marriage  between  a  man  and  his  brother*s  daughter  was  legalised  by
Claudius,  who  married  Agrippina  under  his  own  rule,  though  it  was
always  unlawful  to  marry  a  niece  by  a  sister.  I^iocletian  first  (Cod.  5.
4.  17)  and  then  Constantine  restored  the  ancient  law,  and  branded  mar-
riage with  a  brother's  daughter  with  the  name  of  incest,  Cod.  Theod.  i.  2.

§  4.  Marriage  between  first  cousins,  which  originally  was  unknown,
gradually  came  to  be  permitted,  Livy  42.  34,  Tac.  Ann.  12.  6,  and  after
being  prohibited  by  Theodosius  I,  was  again  made  lawful  by  Arcadiusand
Honorius,  Cod.  5.  4.  19.


136  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,         [Lib.  I.

tua  est,  id  est  si  mater  eius  tibi  nupta  est,  ideo  earn  uxorem
ducere  non  poteris,  quia  duas  uxores  eodem  tempore  habere

7  non  licet.  Socrum  quoque  et  novercam  prohibitum  est  uxorem
ducere,  quia  matris  loco  sunt,  quod  et  ipsum  dissoluta
demum  adfinitatc  procedit :  alioquin  si  adhuc  noverca  est,  id
est  si  adhuc  patri  tuo  nupta  est,  communi  iure  impeditur  tibi
nubere,  quia  eadem  duobus  nupta  esse  non  potest:  item  si
adhuc  socrus  est,  id  est  si  adhuc  filia  eius  tibi  nupta  est,  ideo
impediuntur  nuptiae,  quia  duas  uxores  habere  non  possis.

8  Mariti  tamen  filius  ex  alia  uxore  et  uxoris  filia  ex  alio  marito
vel  contra  matrimonium  recte  contrahunt,  licet  habeant  fratrem

9  sororemve  ex  matrimonio  postea  contracto  natos.  Si  uxor
tua  post  divortium  ex  alio  filiam  procreaverit,  haec  non  est
quidem  privigna  tua:  sed  lulianus  huiusmodi  nuptiis  abstinere
debere  ait:  nam  nee  sponsam  filii  nurum  esse  nee  patris
sponsam  novercam  esse,  rectius  tamen  et  iure  facturos  eos,  qui

10  huiusmodi  nuptiis  se  abstinuerint.  lUud  certum  est  serviles
quoque  cognationes  impedimento  esse  nuptiis,  si  forte  pater

1 1  et  filia  aut  frater  et  soror  manumissi  fuerint  Sunt  et  aliae
personae,  quae  propter  diversas  rationes  nuptias  contrahere
prohibentur,  quas  in  libris  digestorum  seu  pandectarum  ex
veteri  iure  coUectarum  enumerari  permisimus.

12  Si  adversus  ea  quae  diximus  aliqui  coierint,  nee  vir  nee
uxor  nee  nuptiae  nee  matrimonium  nee  dos  intellegitur.
itaque  ii,  qui  ex  eo  coitu  nascuntur,  in  potestate  patris  non
sunt,  sed  tales  sunt,  quantum  ad  patriam  potestatem  pertinet,
quales  sunt  ii,  quos  mater  vulgo  concepit.    nam  nee  hi  patrem


§  7.  Marriage  with  a  deceased  wife's  sister  was  forbidden  by  Constan-
tine's  sons  in  the  East,  and  by  Valentinian,  Theodosius,  and  Arcadius  in
the  West,  Cod.  5.  5.  5.

§  10.  Slaves  were  incapable  of  marriage  (sensu  legali)  of  any  kind,  but
a  permanent  connection  between  two  slaves,  or  a  slave  and  a  free  person,
was  called  contubemium,  PauL  Sent.  Rec  2.  19.  6.  Here  the  natural  rela-
tion of  father  and  child  was  to  some  extent  recognised  :  e.  g.  as  iusta  causa
manumissionis  under  the  lex  Aelia  Sentia,  Gains  i.  19.  Accordingly,  when
slaves  had  become  free,  and  thus  capable  of  intermarriage,  they  were  held
to  be  within  the  rules  as  to  prohibited  degrees.

§  12.  Children  bom  of  a  connection  which  was  not  a  legal  marriage,
either  because  it  was  prohibited  by  some  positive  rule,  or  because  there
was  no  maritalis  affectio,  were  deemed,  as  a  rule,  to  have  no  father:


Tit  la]  DE  NUPTIIS.  137

habere  intelleguntur,  cum  is  etiam  incertus  est :  unde  solent
filii  spurii  appellari,  vel  a  Graeca  voce  quasi  avopibriv  concept!
vel  quasi  sine  patre  filii.  sequitur  ergo,  ut  et  dissoluto  tali
coitu  nee  dotis  exactioni  locus  sit.  qui  autem  prohibitas
nuptias  coeunt,  et  alias  poenas  patiuntur,  quae  sacris  con-
stitutionibus  continentur.

Aliquando  autem  evenit,  ut  liberi,  qui  statim  ut  nati  sunt  13
in  potestate  parentum  non  iiant,  postea  tamen  redigantur  in
potestatem.    qualis  est  is,  qui,  dum  naturalis  fuerat,  postea

'  vulgo  concepti  dicuntur,  qui  patrem  demonstrare  non  possunt,  vel  qui
possunt  quidem,  sed  eum  habent  quern  habere  non  licet,  qui  et  spurii
appellantur  wapa  r^y  cnropav*  Dig.  I.  5.  23.  Such  a  connection  when  it
amounted  to  stuprum,  adulterium,  or  incestus,  was  visited  with  severe
penalties  by  the  lex  lulia  de  adulteriis  (Bk.  iv.  18.  4  inf.) ;  '  stuprum  com-
mittit,  qui  liberam  miilierem,  consuetudinis  causa,  non  matrimonii,  con-
tinet,  excepta  videlicet  concubina'  Dig.  48.  5.  35.  i.  From  this  it  will  be
understood  that  concubinatus,  a  permanent  connection  without  affectio
maritalis,  was  a  relation  tolerated  by  law :  the  Romans  say  of  it,  '  per
leges  nomen  assumpsit'  Dig.  25.  7.  3.  i ;  i.e.  it  has  received  by  statute
a  legal  significance.  In  many  respects  it  was  assimilated  to  marriage :
thus  Ulpian  says  (Dig.  32. 49.  4)  '  parvi  autem  refert,  uxori  anconcubinae
quis  leget,  quae  eius  causa  emta  parata  sunt :  sane  enim,  nisi  dignitate,
nihil  interest.'  But  the  position  was  thought  a  degrading  one  to  the
woman ;  no  *  honesta  femina '  could  become  a  concubine  without  an  express
'  testatio,'  Dig.  25.  7.  3.  pr. ;  otherwise  the  relation  was  regarded  as
stuprum.  A  man  could  have  but  one  concubine  at  a  time,  and  concu-
binatus was  incompatible  with  marriage :  '  eo  tempore  quo  quis  uxorem
habet,  concubinam  habere  non  potest :  concubina  igitur  ab  uxore  solo
dilectu  separatur '  Paul  Sent.  Rec  2.  20.  The  connection  was  terminated
by  insanity  of  either  party,  except  between  patronus  and  liberta.  The
paternity  of  the  children  was  recognised  to  a  considerable  extent :  they
were  capable  of  legitimation,  section  13  inf.;  and  in  the  law  of  Justinian
they  were  entitled  to  maintenance  from  the  father,  and  under  certain
circumstances  to  succeed  him  on  intestacy.  By  the  later  emperors  con-
cubinatus was  discouraged.  The  amount  which  the  father  might  leave  in
his  will  to  the  mother  and  children  was  strictly  limited  by  Arcadius  and
Honorius,  but  these  restrictions  were  removed  by  Justinian  where  there
were  no  legitimate  children.  The  practice  was  altogether  forbidden  in
the  ninth  century  by  Leo  Philosophus.  If  a  dos  were  given  in  a  marriage
which  violated  the  rules  as  to  prohibited  degrees,  it  escheated,  when  the
marriage  terminated,  to  the  Treasury,  Cod.  5.  5.  4.

§  13.  In  the  time  of  Gaius  children  who  were  not  in  potestas  at  birth,
owing  to  the  nuptiae  not  being  iustae,  could  sometimes  be  afterwards  sub-
jected to  it  by  causae  probatio,  by  which  Latins  and  peregrini,  with  their
consorts,  obtained  the  civitas :  their  matrimonium  thereby  became  legiti-


138  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

curiae  datus  potestati  patris  subicitur.  nee  non  is,  qui  a
muliere  libera  procreatus,  cuius  matrimonium  minime  legibus
interdictum  fuerat,  sed  ad  quam  pater  consuetudinem  habuerat,
postea  ex  nostra  constitutione  dotalibus  instrumentis  com*
positis  in  potestate  patris  efiicltur  :  quod  et  aliis,  si  ex  eodem
matrimonio  fuerint  procreati,  similiter  nostra  constitutio
praebuit.


mum,  and  even  the  children  already  bom  were  subjected,  by  a  process
analogous  to  that  of  postliminium,  to  the  resulting  potestas.  Among  such
causae  were  the  birth  of  a  child  to  a  Latin  father  (Gains  i.  66),  and  justi-
fiable mistake  (ib.  67) ;  see  generally,  Gains  i.  29-32,  66-75.

In  Justinian's  time,  natural  children  could  be  subjected  to  potestas  by
legitimation,  and  this  in  three  ways,  two  of  which  are  mentioned  in  the
text:  (i)  by  oblatio  curiae:  i.e.  the  father  made  a  son  a  decurio,  or
married  the  daughter  to  a  decurio,  in  a  provincial  town.  The  decuriones
formed  a  kind  of  town  council,  or  body,  which  had  to  bear  the  burden
of  the  magistracies  (honores)  and  other  municipal  expenses  (munera) :
though  an  honourable,  it  was  an  extremely  costly  function,  and  one  which
it  had  become  practically  necessary  to  either  force  or  bribe  persons  to
undertake;  in  the  Theodosian  Code  (12.  18)  they  were  prohibited  from
living  in  the  country,  lest  the  flavour  of  freedom  should  tempt  them  to  run
away  altogether.  (2)  Per  subsequens  matrimonium.  Constantine  and
some  of  his  successors  had  enacted  that  marriage  of  a  man  with  his
concubine  should  legitimise  their  (natural)  offspring,  provided  the  man
had  no  legitimate  descendants.  Justinian  abolished  the  latter  restriction.
The  closing  words  of  this  section  occasion  considerable  difficulty.  To
interpret  them  so  as  to  make  Justinian  say  that  he  had,  by  express
enactment,  conferred  on  children  bom  after  the  execution  of  dotalia
instrumenta  identical  privileges  with  those  bestowed  on  children  bom
before  (and  so  in  concubinatu)  seems  absurd  :  for  the  former  class  of
children  would  be  bom  of  lawful  wedlock,  and  so  be  in  potestate  anyhow,
without  any  necessity  for  legislative  interference.  The  meaning  of '  prae-
buit '  seems  rather  to  be  '  has  been  the  occasion  of  their  obtaining,'  the
sense  being  '  we  have  hereby  done  a  service  not  only  to  the  children  bom
before  the  marriage,  but  also  to  those  bom  afterwards :  for  these  too
would  have  been  illegitimate  had  it  not  been  for  our  enactment,  which  has
induced  the  man  to  make  a  wife  of  the  woman  who  before  was  merely  his
concubine ;  and  if  he  had  not  been  induced  to  do  so,  he  would  have  con-
tinued to  live  in  concubinatu' :  cf.  iii.  i.  2  inf.  (3)  Per  rescriptum  prin-
cipis.  Anastasius  had  permitted  the  legitimation  of  natural  children  in  this
manner,  but  it  was  forbidden  by  Justinus  and  Justinian  :  the  latter,  how-
ever, reintroduced  it  by  two  Novels  (74  and  89),  but  allowed  it  only  where
the  marriage  was  no  longer  possible,  owing  to  the  death  or  disappearance
of  the  woman,  and  the  man  had  no  legitimate  descendants.

Legitimation,  owing  to  its  consequences,  could  not  take  place  without


Tit  II.]  DE  ADOPTIONIBUS.  139

XI.

DE  ADOPTIONIBUS.

Non  solum  tamen  naturales  liberi  secundum  ea  quae  dixi-
mus  in  potestate  nostra  sunt,  verum  etiam  ii  quos  adoptamus.
Adoptio  autem  duobus  modis  fit,  aut  principali  rescripto  aut  1

the  child's  consent ;  ' . . .  dum  et  filii  hoc  ratum  habuerint.  Nam  si
solvere  ius  patriae  potestatis,  invitis  filiis,  non  permissum  est  patribus,
multo  magis  sub  potestatem  redigere  invitum  filium  et  nolentem,  sive  per
oblationem  ad  curiam,  sive  per  instrumentorum  celebrationem,  sive  per
aliam  quamlibet  machinationem,  tanquam  sortem  metuentem  patemam
iustum  non  est '  Nov.  89.  11.  pr.

Tit.  XI.  §  L  '  Adoptionis  nomen  est  quidem  generale :  in  duas  autem
species  dividitur,  quorum  altera  adoptio  similiter  dicitur,  altera  adrogatio.
Adoptantur  filiifamilias :  adrogantur  qui  sui  iuris  sunt' Dig.  i.  7.  I.  i.
Both  parties  in  either  kind  of  adoption  must  be  cives,  and  the  adopter,
of  course,  must  be  sui  iuris.  In  the  parallel  passage  of  Gains  (i.  98,  99)
adrogation  is  said  to  take  place  populi  auctoritate,  and  the  term  is  ex-
plained :  *'  quod  et  is  qui  adoptat  rogatur,  id  est,  interrogatur  an  velit  eum
quem  adoptaturus  sit  iustum  sibi  filium  esse,  et  is  qui  adoptatur  rogatur  an
id  fieri  patiatur,  et  populus  rogatur  an  id  fieri  iubeat : '  cf.  Gell.  v.  19 ;  Cic.
pro.  dom.  29.  Adrogation  was  thus  originally  effected  by  a  legislative  act
of  the  comitia  curiata,  after  a  preliminary  enquiry  which  was  held  by  the
pontifices  because  the  adrogatus  changed  his  family  gods  and  worship
(sacrorum  detestatio)  and  this  might  conceivably  be  a  reason  for  refusing
to  sanction  the  proposed  adrogation.  Subsequently  the  thirty  curiae
dwindled  down  to  thirty  lictors,  who  represented  the  authority  of  the
people,  and  under  the  early  empire  the  assent  of  the  pontifices  appears  to
have  been  the  material  element  in  the  transaction  (Tac.  Hist  i.  15).
About  the  middle  of  the  second  century  (see  Gains  in  Dig.  i.  7.  21)
adrogation  by  imperial  rescript  came  into  vogue,  and  no  doubt  rapidJy
supplanted  the  older  method.  From  this  time  onward,  instead  of  the
preliminary  pontifical  enquiry,  there  was  an  investigation  by  a  magistrate
thereto  commissioned  by  the  emperor,  of  which  the  main  purpose  was  the
protection  of  the  person  to  be  adrogated,  especially  against  the  danger  of
adoption  by  some  one  much  poorer  than  himself,  whose  motive  might  be
mere  avarice:  ' adrogationes  non  temere  nee  inexplorate  committuntur.
Nam  comitia  arbitris  pontificibus  praebentur,  quae  curiata  appellantur,
aetasque  eius,  qui  adrogare  vult,  an  liberis  potius  gignendis  idonea  sit,
bonaque  eius,  qui  adrogatur,  ne  insidiose  appetita  sint,  consideratur'
Gellius,  Noct.  Att.  5. 10 :  this  was  particularly  the  case  in  the  adrogatio  of
impubes,  §  3  inf.  The  effects  of  adrogatio  were  to  bring  adrogatus  under
the  potestas  of  adrogator,  and  with  him  all  those  persons  who  had  before
been  in  his  power :  all  his  property  passed  to  the  adrogator  per  universi-


I40  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

imperio  magistratus.  imperatoris  auctoritate  adoptamus  eos
easve,  qui  quaeve  sui  iuris  sunt,  quae  species  adoptionis
dicitur  adrogatio.  imperio  magistratus  adoptamus  eos  easve,
qui  quaeve  in  potestate  parentium  sunt,  sive  primum  gradum
liberorum  optineant,  qualis  est  filius  filia,  sive  inferiorem,
2  qualis  est  nepos  neptis,  pronepos  proneptis.  Sed  hodie  ex
nostra  constitutione,  cum  filius  familias  a  patre  naturali  ex-
traneae  personae  in  adoptionem  datur,  iura  potestatis  naturalis
patris  minime  dissolvuntur  nee  quidquam  ad  patrem  adoptivum
transit  nee  in  potestate  eius  est,  licet  ab  intestato  iura  suc-
cessionis  ei  a  nobis  tributa  sunt,  si  vero  pater  naturalis  non
extraneo,  sed  avo  filii  sui  matemo,  vel  si  ipse  pater  naturalis

tatem  (Bk.  iii.  lo  inf.)  until  Justinian  allowed  the  latter  only  the  usufruct,
ib.  §  2 :  as  to  the  debts  of  adrogatus  see  ib.  §  3,  Gaius  iii.  82-84.  Women
could  not  be  adrogated  until  the  rescript  form  was  introduced,  because
they  could  not  appear  in  the  comitia :  Dig.  i.  7.  21.

§  2.  Adoption  stricto  sensu,  where  a  paterfamilias  gives  a  person  in
his  power  in  adoption  to  some  one  else,  seems  not  to  have  been  prac-
tised in  the  early  time,  and  the  law  provided  no  direct  means  for  effecting
it :  hence  the  complicated  nature  of  the  process  described  by  Gaius.  The
child  was  mancipated  by  the  paterfamilias  to  the  adopting  party  (in  the
case  of  a  son  this  had  to  be  repeated  three  times,  the  first  two  mancipa-
tions being  followed  by  manumission  at  the  hands  of  the  alienee,  Gaius
i.  134),  the  object  of  this  being  the  extinction  of  the  patria  potestas;  he
(or  she)  was  then  usually  remancipated  to  the  father,  and  by  him  finally
ceded  in  iure  to  the  adoptive  parent.  Another  mode,  practised  only  in
the  case  of  a  son,  was  for  the  third  mancipation  to  be  made  to  some
person  different  from  both  the  patres  (pater  fiduciarius),  by  whom  he  was
ceded  in  iure  to  the  pater  adoptans.  Adoption  being  thus  a  judicial  act
was  said  to  take  place  '  imperio  magistratus.'  In  the  earlier  periods  the
consent  of  the  child  was  unnecessary,  but  later  this  was  altered,  Dig.
I.  7.  5.  For  this  complicated  system  Justinian  substituted  a  simple  de-
claration of  the  parties  before  a  judge,  which  was  registered  in  the  acta.
Cod.  8.  48.  II.  Until  the  changes  referred  to  in  this  section,  the  effect  of
adoption  had  been  the  translation  of  the  adopted  child  from  the  potestas
and  family  of  the  one  parent  to  those  of  the  other :  to  his  old  father  he
became  a  stranger,  but  acquired  compensating  rights  of  succession,  etc,
in  his  new  family.  Justinian  enacted  that  in  future  these  consequences
should  ensue  only  where  the  adoptive  father  was  a  blood  relation  of  the
child  in  the  ascending  line  (adoptio  plena) ;  if  the  adoptive  father  was
any  other  relation  or  a  stranger  in  blood  (adoptio  minus  plena),  the  child
remained  in  his  old  family,  and  subject  to  the  same  potestas, as  before,
but  acquired  a  right  of  succeeding  his  adoptive  father  ab  intestato,  Cod.
8.  48.  10.


Tit.  II.]  DE  ADOPTIONIBUS.  141

fuerit  emancipatus,  etiam  paterno,  vel  proavo  simili  modo
paterno  vel  materno  filium  suum  dederit  in  adoptioncm :  in
hoc  casu  quia  in  unam  personam  concurrunt  et  naturalia  et
adoptionis  iura,  manet  stabile  ius  patris  adoptivi  et  natural!
vinculo  copulatum  et  legitimo  adoptionis  modo  constrictum,
ut  et  in  familia  et  in  potestate  huiusmodi  patris  adoptivi  sit.
Cum  autem  impubes  per  principale  rescriptum  adrogatur,  3
causa  cognita  adrogatio  permittitur  et  exquiritur  causa  adro-
gationis,  an  honesta  sit  expediatque  pupillo,  et  cum  quibusdam
condicionibus  adrogatio  fit,  id  est  ut  caveat  adrogator  personae
publicae,  hoc  est  tabulario,  si  intra  pubertatem  pupillus  de-
cesserit,  restituturum  se  bona  illis,  qui,  si  adoptio  facta  non
esset,  ad  successionem  eius  venturi  essent.  item  non  alias
emancipare  eos  potest  adrogator,  nisi  causa  cognita  digni
enAncipatione  fuerint  et  tunc  sua  bona  eis  reddat.  sed  et  si
decedens  pater  eum  exheredaverit  vel  vivus  sine  iusta  causa
eum  emancipaverit,  iubetur  quartam  partem  ei  suorum  bo-
norum  relinquere,  videlicet  praeter  bona,  quae  ad  patrem
adoptivum  transtulit  et  quorum  commodum  ei  adquisivit
postea.  Minorem  natu  non  posse  maiorem  adoptare  placet :  4
adoptio  enim  naturam  imitatur  et  pro  monstro  est,  ut  maior

§  8.  The  old  rule  was  that  an  impubes  could  not  be  adrogated,  Gell.
5. 19,  Ulpian,  Reg.  8.  5,  no  doubt  for  the  same  reason  as  women;  then  it
was  permitted  in  special  cases,  apparently  by  imperial  favour  (Gaius  i.
102),  and  eventually  an  epistola  of  Antoninus  Pius  (Gaius  ib.)  allowed  it
generally,  though  only  after  inquiry  held,  and  under  conditions :  thus  all
the  pupil's  guardians  had  to  sanction  the  act,  Cod.  5.  59.  5,  and,  as  is
mentioned  in  the  text,  the  adrogator  had  to  give  security  for  restoration  of
adrogatus'  property  to  his  next  heirs  (legitimi  or  pupillariter  substituti)  if
he  died  below  puberty ;  this  limit  being  fixed  because  at  that  date  the
pupillary  substitutions  became  void,  and  the  child,  if  he  had  not  been
adrogated,  would  have  been  able  to  make  a  will  for  himself.  If  on  attain-
ing puberty  he  could  show  that  the  adrogation  had  been  detrimental  to
him  he  could  demand  emancipation.  Dig.  i.  7.  33.  The  tabularius  to
whom  security  was  given  was  a  servus  publicus.  Dig.  i.  7.  18,  Cod.  8.  48*
1:  cf.  Gothofredus  ad  Cod.  Theod.  8.  2.  i,  and  Cod.  10.  69.  3.  The
fourth  part  of  the  adrogator  s  property,  to  which  adrogatus  became  entitled
under  the  circumstances  mentioned  in  the  text,  was  called  quarta  Antonina
or  quarta  divi  Pii,  and  the  right  to  claim  it  seems  to  have  been  extin-
guished by  the  attainment  of  puberty.

§  4.  The  principle  adoptio  naturam  imitatur,  at  least  in  this  applica-
tion, was  of  comparatively  late  growth,  for  Gaius  says  (i.  106) '  sed  et  ilia


142  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,         [Lib.  I.

sit  filius  quam  pater,     debet  itaque  is,  qui   sibi   per   adro-

gationem  vel  adoptionem  filium  facit,  plena  pubertate,  id  est

6  decern  et  octo  annis  praecedere.     Licet  autem  et  in  locum

nepotis  vel  neptis  vel  in  locum  pronepotis  vel  proneptis  vel

6  deinceps  adoptare^  quamvis  filium  quis  non  habeat.  Et  tam
filium  alienum  quis  in  locum  nepotis  potest  adoptare.  quam

7  nepotem  in  locum  filii.  Sed  si  quis  nepotis  loco  adoptet  vel
quasi  ex  eo  filio,  quem  habet  iam  adoptatum,  vel  quasi  ex
illo,  quem  naturalem  in  sua  potestate  habet :  in  eo  casu  et
filius  consentire  debet,  ne  ei  invito  suus  heres  adgnascatur.
sed  ex  contrario  si  avus  ex  filio  nepotem  dat  in  adoptionem,

8  non  est  necesse  filium  consentire.  In  plurimis  autem  causis
adsimilatur  is,  qui  adoptatus  vel  adrogatus  est,  ei  qui  ex
legitimo  matrimonio  natus  est.  et  ideo  si  quis  per  impera-
torem  sive  apud  praetorem  vel  apud  praesidem  provinftae
non  extraneum  adoptaverit,  potest  eundem  alii  in  adoptionem

9  dare.  Sed  et  illud  utriusque  adoptionis  commune  est,  quod
et  hi,  qui  generare  non  possunt,  quales  sunt  spadones,  adoptare


quaestio,  an  minor  natu  maiorem  natu  adoptare  possit,  utriusque  adop-
tionis commune  est.*  Cicero  (pro  Domo  13. 14)  accuses  Clodius  of  having
been  adrogated  by  a  person  younger  than  himself,  though  in  c.  13  he  says
it  was  done  with  the  approval  of  the  pontiiices:  cf.  Suetonius,  Tib.  2.
The  doubt  was  settled  by  the  time  of  Modestinus,  who  says  that  in  either
form  of  adoption  the  adoptans  must  be  older  by  at  least  eighteen  years.
Dig.  I.  7.  40.  I.  For  the  definition  of  this  age  as  plena  pubertas  cf-
Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  3.  4.  2,  Dig.  40.  2.  13 :  35.  i.  loi.  2.

§  6.  ov  yap  dvdyKri  tirtcBai  rfj  rafci  r^  oUtrji  irnph  rf  ^ucrcicflp  narpi
Theoph.

§  8.  One  could  not  readopt  an  adoptive  child  whom  one  had  emanci-
pated or  given  in  adoption,  Dig.  i.  7.  37.  i,  though  this  could  be  done
with  a  natural  child,  in  which  case  the  latter  was,  in  most  respects,  as  if
he  had  never  left  the  family :  but  in  relation  to  his  own  children,  who
had  remained  in  their  grandfather's  power,  his  position  was  different :
*.  .  .  mortuo  (avo)  nepos  in  patris  non  revertitur  potestatem*  Dig.  i.  7.  41.
Again,  adoptive  did  not,  like  natural  children,  retain  the  ius  liberonun
after  emancipation,  Bk.  iii.  i.  11  inf.  For  other  minor  differences  between
a  natural  and  an  adoptive  child  cf.  Tit.  25  pr.  inf.,  Fragm.  Vat.  169,  196,
Tac.  Ann.  15.  19.

§  0.  After  Justinian's  changes,  described  on  §  2  supr.,  it  was  of  course
impossible  for  a  spado  to  adopt  plene,  because  none  could  do  this  but  a
natural  ascendant,  and  ex  vi  termini  he  could  have  no  issue,  but  he  could
adrogate,  Dig.  i.  7.  40.  2.


Tit.  II.]  DE  ADOPTION IBVS.  143

possunt,  castrati  autem  non  possunt  Feminae  quoque  adop-  10
tare  non  possunt,  quia  nee  naturales  liberos  in  potestate  sua
habent:  sed  ex  indulgentia  principis  ad  solatium  liberorum
amissorum  adoptare  possunt.  Illud  proprium  est  illius  adop-  1 1
tionis,  quae  per  sacrum  oraculum  fit,  quod  is,  qui  liberos  in
potestate  habet,  si  se  adrogandum  dederit,  non  solum  ipse
potestati  adrogatoris  subicitur,  sed  etiam  liberi  eius  in  eiusdem
fiunt  potestate  tamquam  nepotes.  sic  enim  et  divus  Augustus
non  ante  Tiberium  adoptavit,  quam  is  Germanicum  adoptavit :
ut  protinus  adoptione  facta  incipiat  Germanicus  Augusti  nepos
esse.  Apud  Catonem  bene  scriptum  refert  antiquitas,  servi  si  12
a  domino  adoptati  sint,  ex  hoc  ipso  posse  liberari.  unde  et
nos  eruditi  in  nostra  constitutione  etiam  eum  servum,  quem
dominus  actis  intervenientibus  filium  suum  nominaverit^  libe-
rum  esse  constituimus,  licet  hoc  ad  ius  filii  accipiendum  ei  non
suflRcit.

§  10.  The  earliest  instance  of  this  quasi-adoption  by  women  of  which
we  know  is  that  of  Galba  by  his  stepmother,  Suet.  Galba  4 :  it  was  first
generally  permitted  by  Diocletian  and  Maximian,  in  Cod.  8.  48.  5.  Chil-
dren thus  adopted  could  of  course  not  be  in  potestas,  but  the  act  produced
the  relation  of  parent  and  child,  and  thus  conferred  on  the  latter  rights
of  intestate  succession,  and  to  bring  the  querela  inofficiosi  testament!
(Bk.  ii.  18  inf.),  if  passed  over  in  the  adoptive  mother*s  will.

§  11.  For  the  adoption  of  Tiberius  by  Augustus  cf.  Tac  Ann.  4.  57,
Suet  Tiberius  1 5.

§  12.  It  is  not  clear  whether  Cato  was  thinking  of  adrogation  of  a  slave
by  his  own  dominus,  or  of  the  master's  giving  him  in  adoption  to  a  third
person,  though  certainly  the  words  read  in  favour  of  the  former  view.
According  to  that,  his  argument  would  seem  to  have  been  as  follows  : —
a  slave  can  become  free  by  a  resolution  of  the  people,  without  manu-
mission by  his  dominus :  consequently  adrogation  by  his  master  (which
took  place  populi  auctoritate)  must  make  him  free  too.  But  possibly
Cato  was  thinking  of  the  second  case,  which  many  of  the  older  jurists
regarded  as  quite  lawful :  alioquin  si  iuris  ista  antiquitas  servetur,  etiam
servus  a  domino  per  praetorem  dari  in  adoptionem  potest,  idque  ait
(Sabinus)  plerosque  iuris  veteris  auctores  posse  fieri  scripsisse,  Gellius
5.  19.  Adoption  (until  Justinian)  involved  a  vindicatio,  as  the  adoptans
claimed  the  adoptee  as  his  son  from  his  present  father,  and  we  may  sup-
pose that  the  jurists  referred  to  by  Gellius  inferred  from  this  vindicatio
a  tacit  vindicatio  '  in  libertatem,'  and  treated  the  giving  in  adoption  as
equivalent  to  a  manumission  by  vindicta.  Possibly,  however,  Cato  was
thinking  of  the  slave  being  first  mancipated  by  his  master  to  another
person,  and  then  being  claimed  from  the  latter  by  the  former  as  his  son.


144  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

XII.

QUIBUS  MODIS  lUS  POTESTATIS  SOLVITUR.

Videamus  nunc,  quibus  modis  ii,  qui  alieno  iuri  subiecti
sunt,  eo  iure  liberantur.  et  quidem  servi  quemadmodum
potestate  liberantur,  ex  his  intellegere  possumus,  quae  de
servis  manumittendis  superius  exposuimus.  hi  vero,  qui  in
potestate  parentis  sunt,  mortuo  eo  sui  iuris  fiunt.  sed  hoc
distinctionem  recipit.  nam  mortuo  patre  sane  omnimodo  Alii
fih'aeve  sui  iuris  efficiuntur.  mortuo  vero  avo  non  omnimodo
nepotes  neptesque  sui  iuris  fiunt,  sed  ita,  si  post  mortem  avi
in  potest atem  patris  sui  recasuri  non  sunt :  itaque  si  moriente
avo  pater  eorum  et  vivit  et  in  potestate  patris  sui  est,  tunc
post  obitum  avi  in  patris  sui  potestate  fiunt :  si  vero  is,  quo
tempore  avus  moritur,  aut  iam  mortuus  est  aut  exiit  de  po-
testate patris,  tunc  hi,  quia  in  potestatem  eius  cadere  non
1  possunt.  sui  iuris  fiunt.     Cum  autem  is,  qui  ob  aliquod  male-

The  words  of  Gellius  strongly  suggest  that  under  the  later  law  slaves  could
not  be  given  in  adoption  by  their  masters.  The  constitution  referred  to
by  Justinian  is  in  Cod.  7.  6.  10.

The  acta  intervenientia  were  the  official  records  of  a  magistrate  or
judge.  Even  under  the  Republic  it  had  not  been  unusual  for  magis-
trates to  co-operate  in  private  dispositions  by  entering  a  minute  of  them
in  their  records  (gesta  et  acta),  which  entry  served  as  irrefragable  evidence
of  the  transaction.  Later,  a  special  effect  was  in  some  cases  given  to  such
entries  by  statute  (e.  g.  in  testaments,  and  in  the  appointment  of  procura-
tors), and  after  Constantine  *  insinuatio '  or  entry  in  the  acta  was  required
by  statute  to  give  validity  to  many  dispositions.  Thus  in  Dig.  2.  4.  17  we
have  apud  acta  promittere  (cf.  Bk.  ii.  7.  2  inf.) :  actis  mandatum  insinuare
(Bk.  iv.  II.  3  inf.):  actorum  testificatione  coniicere  donationem  (Cod.  8.
54.  27) :  apud  acta  contestari  (Dig.  50.  2.  7.  3) :  interrogari  et  profiteri
(Cod.  7.  16.  24) ;  and  judicial  appeals  were  also  registered  in  the  acta,
apud  or  inter  acta  appellare,  Dig.  49.  i.  2.  The  right  to  take  acta  be-
longed to  municipal  magistrates  (Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  I.  3.  i,  Cod.  i.  56.  2)  as
well  as  to  magistrates  with  jurisdiction.

Tit.  Xn.  What  Justinian  says  about  grandchildren  not  becoming  sui
iuris  on  the  grandfather's  death,  if  their  own  father  is  in  the  same  potestas
with  them,  must  be  qualified  by  what  has  been  said  above  on  Tit.  11.  8
in  remarking  upon  Dig.  i.  7.  41.

§  L  Gaius  (i.  128)  speaks  of  condemnation  to  loss  of  civitas  as  taking
the  form  of  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio,  which  originally  was  merely  a
solemn  confirmation  of  voluntary  exile  by  which  an   accused  citizen


Tit  12.]  QUIBUS  MODIS  lUS  POTESTATIS  SOLVITUR.  145

ficium  in  insulam  deportatur,  civitatem  amittit,  sequitur  ut,
quia  eo  modo  ex  numero  civium  Romanorum  tollitur,  perinde
acsi  mortuo  eo  desinant  libert  in  potestate  eius  esse,  pari
ratione  et  si  is,  qui  in  potestate  parentis  sit,  in  insulam  de-
portatus  fuerit,  desinit  in  potestate  parentis  esse,  sed  si  ex
indulgentia  principali  restituti  fuerint,  per  omnia  pristinum
statum  recipiunt.  Relegati  autem  patres  in  insulam  in  po-  2
testate  sua  liberos  retinent :  et  e  contrario  liberi  relegati  in
potestate  parentum  remanent  Poenae  servus  effectus  filios  3
in  potestate  habere  desinit.    servi  autem  poenae  efficiuntur,

withdrew  himself  from  a  criminal  prosecution,  and  only  subsequently
came  to  be  used,  apart  frt>m  that,  as  a  form  of  punishment :  see  Livy,
35.  4 ;  26. 3 ;  Cic.  pro  Caec.  33. 34.  Deportatio  in  insulam,  a  sentence  of
banishment  for  life  either  to  an  island  or  to  some  confined  space  on  the
mainland  (Dig.  32.  i.  3)  originated  with  Augustus  (Dion.  55.  20),  and  was
a  very  common  form  of  punishment  with  his  successors :  Tac.  Ann.  3.  68 ;
4. 13. 21 ;  6. 30.  Deportation  of  either  child  or  father  put  an  end  to  potes-
tas,  because  (Tit.  9.  2  supr.)  '  ius  potestatis  proprium  est  civium  Romano-
rum  : '  by  losing  his  civitas  the  child  lost  his  capacity  of  being  in  potestas,
the  father  that  of  exercising  it.  In  case  of  restoration  by  imperial  favour,
as  mentioned  in  the  text,  it  seems  that  at  first  only  such  rights  were
recovered  as  were  expressly  specified  (Vitellius  ab  exilio  reversis  iura
libertorum  concessit,  Tac.  Hist.  2.  92),  and  this  was  true  in  particular  of
patria  potestas:  Mn  insulam  filio  deportato,  hacque  ratione  vinculo
patemae  potestatis  exempto,  si  postea  ex  indulgentia  divi  Alexandri,  ut
proponis,  reditus  in  patrium  solum  praecedensque  dignitas  restituta  sit,
potestas  tamen  patria  repetita  non  videtur'  Gordian  in  Cod.  9.  51.  6;
but  this  must  probably  be  taken  to  have  been  overruled  by  Constantine
in  Cod.  loc.  cit.  13,  'in  quaestione  testamenti,  quod  deportati  filius  re-
meante  patre  fecisset,  remotis  Ulpiani  atque  Pauli  notis  Papiniani  placet
valere  sententiam,  ut  in  patris  filius  sit  potestate,  cui  dignitas  ac  bona
restituta  sunt'  It  will  be  observed  that  here  the  termination  of  the
patria  potestas  was  accompanied  by  capitis  deminutio.  In  one  or  two
anomalous  cases,  however,  the  pater  was  deprived  of  his  potestas  as
a  punishment,  without  the  child  being  capite  minutus :  e.  g.  for  ex-
posing his  children.  Cod.  8.  52.  2,  for  compelling  them  to  prostitute
themselves,  Cod.  11.  40.  6,  and  for  contracting  an  incestuous  marriage,
Nov.  12.  2.

§  2.  Relegation  was  banishment  unattended  with  any  loss  of  civil
rights :  '  relegati  in  insulam  in  potestate  suos  liberos  retinent,  quia  et  alia
omnia  iura  sua  retinent :  tantum  enim  insula  eis  egredi  non  licet :  et
bona  quoque  sua  omnia  retinent  praeter  ea,  si  quae  eis  adempta  sunt'
Dig.  48.  22.  4.  So  too  Ovid  says  (Trist.  4.  9.  1 1)  *  Omnia  .  .  .  Caesar
mihi  iura  reliquit,  £t  sola  est  patria  poena  carere  mea.'

§  d.  For  the  poenae  servus  see  on  Tit.  3.  4  supr.    Loss  of  liberty  of

L


146  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  I.

4  qui  in  metallum  damnantur  et  qui  bestiis  subiciuntur.  Filius
familias  si  militaverit,  vel  si  senator  vel  consul  fuerit  factus,
manet  in  patris  potestate.  militia  enim  vel  consularis  dignitas
patris  potestate  filium  non  liberat.  sed  ex  constitutione
nostra  summa  patriciatus  dignitas  ilico  ab  imperialibus  codi-
cillis  praestitis  a  patria  potestate  liberat.  quis  enim  patiatur
patrem  quidem  posse  per  emancipationis  modum  suae  potes-
tatis  nexibus  filium  relaxare^  imperatoriam  autem  celsitudinem
non  valere  eum  quern  sibi  patrem  elegit  ab  aliena  eximere

6  potestate  ?  Si  ab  hostibus  captus  fuerit  parens,  quamvis
servus  hostium  fiat,  tamen  pendet  ius  liberorum  propter  lus
postliminii :  quia  hi,  qui  ab  hostibus  capti  sunt,  si  reversi
fuerint,  omnia  pristina  iura  recipiunt.  idcirco  reversus  et
liberos  habebit  in  potestate,  quia  postliminium  fingit  eum
qui  captus  est  semper  in  civitate  fuisse :  si  vero  ibi  decesserit,
exinde,  ex  quo  captus  est  pater,  filius  sui  iuris  fuisse  videtur.
ipse  quoque  filius  neposve  si  ab  hostibus  captus  fuerit,  similiter
dicimus  propter  ius  postliminii  ius  quoque  potestatis  parentis

course  entailed  loss  of  citizenship,  whether  the  master  were  '  poena '  or
any  one  else.  Tit.  16.  i  inf.

§4.  There  had  always  been  certain  dignities,  by  the  attainment  of
which  a  child  in  power  was  released  therefrom  without  undergoing  capitis
deminutio :  thus  a  son  who  became  flamen  Dialis,  and  a  daughter
who  became  virgo  Vestalis  (Gaius  iii.  1 14,  i.  130)  were  released  from
power,  though  still  remaining  members  of  their  old  agnatic  family.  The
Patriciate  of  the  later  Empire  seems  to  have  originated  in  the  old
practice  of  calling  persons  of  advanced  age  pater  as  a  compliment  or
token  of  respect,  Horace,  £p.  i.  6.  54-55,  Ncpo)y . . .  n-arfpa  avrhv  act
6vofmC<i>v  Dio  Cass.  63.  17,  'ad  Ulpianum  praefectum  praetorio  et  paren-
tem  meum  *  Alexander  in  Cod.  4<  65.  4.  Besides  the  Patriciate,  Justinian
attached  this  effect  also  to  elevation  to  sundry  other  high  dignities,
especially  that  of  consul  and  bishop,  Nov.  81.  pr.  3.

§  6.  The  ius  postliminii  was  an  institution  by  which  rights  which  under
ordinary  circumstances  would  have  been  destroyed  (by  captivity)  were
merely  suspended  for  an  indefinite  time,  until  the  occurrence  of  some
event.  It  has  two  aspects,  passive  and  active.  In  the  former,  a  person
returning,  or  a  thing  recovered,  from  captivity  is  restored  to  the  power
in  which  he  or  it  was  previous  to  the  capture :  e.  g.  free  persons  in
power  (Bk.  ii.  i.  17  inf.),  slaves,  land,  ships  of  war,  horses  and  mules.
Dig.  49.  15.  2.  3  and  19.  10,  Cic.  Top.  8.  In  its  active  aspect,  a  person
who  has  been  in  captivity  recovers  all  his  previous  rights,  provided
(i)  that  this  was  the  intention  of  his  return,  Dig.  49.  15.  5.  3 :  (2)  that
he  did  not  desert,  or  voluntarily  surrender,  or  was  not  surrendered  by  the


Tit.  12.]  QUIBUS  MODIS  lUS  POTESTATIS  SOLVITUR.  147

in  suspense  esse,  dictum  est  autem  postliminium  a  limine  et
post,  ut  eum,  qui  ab  hostibus  captus  in  fines  nostros  postea
pervenit,  postliminio  reversum  recte  dicimus.  nam  limina
sicut  in  domibus  finem  quendam  faciunt,  sic  et  imperii  finem
limen  esse  veteres  voluerunt.  hinc  et  limes  dictus  est  quasi
finis  quidam  et  terminus,  ab  eo  postliminium  dictum,  quia
eodem  limine  revertebatur,  quo  amissus  erat.  sed  et  qui  victis
hostibus  recuperatur,  postliminio  rediisse  existimatur.  Prae-  6
terea  emancipatione  quoque  desinunt  liberi  in  potestate
parentum  esse,  sed  ea  emancipatio  antea  quidem  vel  per
antiquam  legis  observationem  procedebat,  quae  per  imagi-
narias  venditiones  et  intercedentes  manumissiones  celebra-
batur,  vel  ex  imperiali  rescripto.  nostra  autem  providentia  et
hoc  in  melius  per  constitutionem  reformavit,  ut  fictione  pristina
explosa  recta  via  apud  competentes  indices  vel  magistratus

state :  i.  e.  he  mast  have  been  bona  fide  captured  with  arms  in  his  hands :
and  (3)  that  the  return  did  not  take  place  during  an  annistice,  Dig.  49.  15.
19. 1.  In  Gaius'  time  the  exact  position  of  children  whose  father  died  in
captivity  was  not  settled  :  '  si  vero  illic  mortuus  sit,  erunt  quidem  liberi
sui  iuris,  sed  utrum  ex  hoc  tempore  quo  mortuus  est  apud  hostes  parens,
an  ex  illo  quo  ab  hostibus  captus  est,  dubitari  potest '  i.  129.  The  deriva*
tion  of  the  word  given  in  this  section  originated  with  Scaevola,  and  was
accepted  by  Festus,  Boethius,  and  Isidorus,  but  rejected  by  Sulpicius,
Cic.  Top.  8.

For  the  recovery  of  his  tutela  by  a  tutor  under  the  ius  postliminii
see  Tit.  20.  2.  inf. ;  and  for  the  application  of  the  doctrine  to  testaments,
Bk.  iL  12.  5  inf.

§  6.  Emancipation  was  not  effectual  unless  three  conditions  were  satis-
fied :  (i)  The  consent  of  the  pater ;  the  general  rule  is  stated  in  §  10  inf.,
to  which  a  few  exceptions  are  noticed  in  Dig.  i.  7.  32.  33  ;  27.  10.  16.  2 ;
35. 1. 92  ;  37. 12. 1. 3 ;  ib.  5.  (2)  The  consent  of  the  child :  it  was  sufficient,
however,  if  he  did  not  protest  against  the  emancipation :  *  solvere  ius
potestatis  invitis  filiis  non  est  permissum  patribus  *  Nov.  89. 1 1  pr.  (3)  Due
performance  of  the  act  of  emancipation.  This,  as  described  by  Gaius
(i.  132),  was  effected  by  the  pater*s  mancipating  the  child  to  a  friend  fidu-
ciae  causa,  who  remancipated  him  to  the  pater,  and  by  the  latter's  then
manumitting  him,  like  a  slave,  vindicta.  If  it  were  a  son  three  mancipa-
tions were  necessary,  owing  to  the  rule  of  the  XII  Tables, '  si  pater  filium
ter  venumduit,  a  patre  filius  liber  esto  :  *  after  each  of  the  two  first  man-
cipations he  was  manumitted  by  the  alienee,  whereby  he  again  fell  under
the  patria  potestas ;  the  third  mancipation  was  made  cum  fiducia,  and
was  followed  by  remancipation  to,  and  manumission  by,  the  emancipating
father,  unless  the  remancipation  were  dispensed  with,  and  the  child  were

L  2


148  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  I.

parentes  intrent  et  filios  suos  vel  filias  vel  nepotes  vel  neptes
ac  deinceps  sua  manu  dimitterent.  et  tunc  ex  edicto  praetoris
in  huius  filii  vel  filiae,  nepotis  vel  neptis  bonis,  qui  vei  quae
a  parente  manuniissus  vel  manumissa  fuerit,  eadem  iura  prae«
stantur  parenti,  quae  tribuuntur  patrono  in  bonis  liberti :  et
praeterea  si  impubes  sit  filius  vel  filia  vel  ceteri,  ipse  parens

7  ex  manumissione  tutelam  eius  nanciscitur.  Admonendi  autem
sumus  liberum  esse  arbitrium  ei,  qui  filium  et  ex  eo  nepotem
vel  neptem  in  potestate  habebit,  filium  quidem  de  potestate
dimittere,  nepotem  vero  vel  neptem  retinere:  et  ex  diverso,
filium  quidem  in  potestate  retinere,  nepotem  vero  vel  neptem
manumittere  (eadem  et  de  pronepote  vel  pronepte  dicta  esse

8  intellegantur),  vel  omnes  sui  iuris  efficere.  Sed  et  si  pater
filium,  quern  in  potestate  habet,  avo  vel  proavo  naturali  se-
cundum nostras  constitutiones  super  his  habitas  in  adoptionem
dederit,  id  est  si  hoc  ipsum  actis  intervenientibus  apud  com-
petentem  iudicem  manifestavit,  praesente  eo  qui  adoptatur  et
non  contradicente  nee  non  eo  qui  adoptat,  solvitur  quidem  ius
potestatis  patris  naturalis,  transit  autem  in  huiusmodi  paren-
tem  adoptivum,  in  cuius  persona  et  adoptionem  plenissimam

9  esse  antea  diximus.  Illud  autem  scire  oportet^  quod,  si  nurus
tua  ex  filio  tuo  conceperit  et  filium  postea  emancipaveris  vel


actually  manumitted  by  the  alienee,  usually  under  an  agreement  to  hold
the  iura  patronatus  in  trust  for  the  father ;  see  on  Bk.  iii.  2.  8  inf.  For
this  clumsy  form  Justinian  substituted  (Cod.  8.  49.  6)  a  simple  declaration
before  a  judge  or  magistrate,  which  was  registered  in  the  acta.  '  Recta
via,'  in  the  text,  is  explained  by  Cod.  8.  49.  6  'sine  sacro  rescripto,'
a  reference  to  emancipation  by  imperial  rescript,  which  was  introduced  by
Anastasius  (Cod.  loc  cit.  5),  and  was  mainly  resorted  to  when  absence  of
the  child  prevented  the  old  form  from  being  employed.  For  the  effect
of  emancipation  on  filiusfamilias'  property  see  Bk.  ii.  9.  2,  and  notes  inf. :
he  was  allowed  to  retain  his  peculium  profectitium  unless  it  was  expressly
taken  from  him,  Fragm.  Vat.  261.  Of  the  iura  patronatus,  said  in  the
text  to  have  been  given  to  the  emancipating  pater  by  the  edict,  the
most  important  was  the  right  of  succession,  guaranteed  by  the  praetor
through  the  system  of  bonorum  possessio ;  see  Bk.  Hi.  2.  6  inf.,  and
Dig.  37.  12.  I.

§  9.  This  is  only  an  illustration  of  the  rule  that  the  status  of  children
bom  of  lawful  wedlock  was  determined  at  the  time  of  their  conception,
because  they  followed  the  condition  of  their  father :  '  hi  qui  legitime  con-
cipiuntur  ex  conceptionis  tempore  statum  sumunt '  Gaius  i.  89.    On  the


Tit.  13.]  DE   TUTELIS.  149

in  adoptionem  dederis  praegnante  nuru  tua,  nihilo  minus
quod  ex  ea  nascitur  in  potestate  tua  nascitur:  quod  si  post
emancipationem  vel  adoptionem  fuerit  conceptum,  patris  sui
emancipati  vel  avi  adoptivi  potestati  subicitur :  et  quod  neque  10
naturales  liberi  neque  adoptivi  ullo  paene  modo  possunt  cogere
parentem  de  potestate  sua  eos  dimittere.

XIII.

DE  TUTELIS.

Transeamus  nunc  ad  aliam  divisionem.  nam  ex  his  per-
sonis,  quae  in  potestate  non  sunt,  quaedam  vel  in  tutela  sunt

other  handy  iilegitimate  children  followed  the  condition  of  their  mother,
being  'spurii/  Tit.  10.  12  supn,  and  accordingly  in  the  time  of  Gains  their
condition  was  determined  by  her  status  at  the  time  of  birth  :  for  the  later
modification  of  this  rule  see  Tit.  4,  and  note  supr.

If  the  potestas  were  terminated  in  some  mode  by  which  the  filius-
£EuniIias  underwent  capitis  deminutio,  he  ceased  to  belong  to  his  previous
agnatic  family,  and  thereby  lost  all  his  rights  of  intestate  succession  and
guardianship  to  its  members:  consequently  the  distinction  between
modes  in  which  this  occurred  and  those  in  which  it  did  not  is  important.
The  former  are  three  in  number  :  loss  of  libertas  or  civitas  (apart  from
the  ius  postliminii),  emancipation,  and  subjection  to  some  other  power,
whether  potestas,  manus,  or  mancipium  (e.  g.  the  latter  as  produced  in
noxal  surrender  before  Justinian).

Tit.  Xm.  Tutela  was  originally  conceived  rather  as  a  right  than  as
a  duty  (whence  the  phrase  'tutelam  nancisci,'  Tit.  12.  6.  supr.,  Tit.  19.
pr.  inf.),  but  in  Justinian's  time  it  had  become  a  publicum  munus  (Tit.  25.
pr.  inf.),  a  function  which  the  state  required  all  its  qualified  members  to
discharge  if  called  upon,  and  from  which  they  could  be  excused  only
on  definite  grounds  enumerated  in  Tit  25.  inf.  Women,  however,  pere-
grini,  slaves,  minors  (Tit.  35.  13.  inf.),  and  soldiers  (ib.  14)  were  absolutely
incapacitated  from  serving  the  office,  though  under  the  earlier  Emperors
this  rule  was  sometimes  relaxed  by  special  favour  on  behalf  of  the  mother
or  grandmother  of  the  ward  :  and  in  the  time  of  Justinian  it  was  settled
that  a  mother  or  grandmother  could  after  the  death  of  her  husband
demand  the  tutela  of  her  children  or  grandchildren,  provided  (i)  she
engaged  'apud  acta^  (see  on  Tit.  11.  12  supr.)  not  to  marry  again;
(3)  resigned  the  benefits  of  the  SC.  Velleianum  and  other  enactments
passed  in  favour  of  the  weaker  sex,  and  (3)  gave  an  express  hypothec
to  the  children  over  her  whole  property.  A  second  marriage  caused
immediate  forfeiture  of  the  tutela.

Under  the  later  law,  the  leading  idea  in  the  conception  of  tutela  is
the  pupil's  imperfect  capacity  of  disposition,  to  supply  which  is  the


mm


150  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  I.

vel  in  curatione,  quaedam  neutro  lure  tenentur.     videamus
igitur  de  his,  quae  in  tutela  vel  in  curatione  sunt :  ita  enim

guardian's   main  duty  (Tit.  21   inf.).    According  to  modem  ideas,  in-
capacity of  disposition  results  only  from  deficiency  of  intellectual  powers,
and  this  was  the  view  which  prevailed  in  the  later  Roman  law ;  but  it
seems  dear  that  in  the  earlier  period  the  purpose  of  tutela  was  fiar  less
the  protection  of  the  ward  than  that  of  the  ward's  family :  it  was  regarded
as  a  right  to  look  after  his  property,  and  to  prevent  any  alienation  by
which  it  would  leave  the  family  in  case  of  his  decease  before  the  tutela
determined  :  hence  the  association  between  rights  of  guardianship  and  of
succession :    '  quo  tutela  redit,  eo  hereditas  pervenit,  nisi  cum  feminae
heredes  intercedunt'  Dig.  50.  17.  73.  pr.    This  conception  of  tutela  is  well
illustrated  by  an  institution  which  had  become  obsolete  before  Justinian,
the  perpetua  tutela  mulierum.    Justinian  speaks  only  of  impuberes  as
under  guardianship  (§  i),  but  the  earlier  Roman  law  maintained  in  the
interest  of  the  family  the  fiction  of  a  woman's  imperfect  capacity  of
disposition,  and  retained  her,  if  sui  iuris,  under  the  supervision  of  a  tutor
throughout  her  life :  '  itaque  si  quis  filio  filiaeque  testamento  tutorem
dederit,  et  ambo  ad  pubertatem  pervenerint,  filius  quidem  desinit  habere
tutorem,  filia  vero  nihilominus  in  tutela  permanet'  Gaius  i.  145.    This
mulierum  tutela,  at  least  in  Gaius'  time,  was  of  two  kinds.     Its  main
object  was  to  secure  to  tjie  patron  and  the  agnates  their  right  to  the
woman's  property  at  her  death,  not  to  protect  the  woman  herself;  thus,
where  the  tutela  was  legitima,  i.  e.  vested  in  the  agnates  or  patron,  she
could  neither  make  a  will,  manumit  a  slave,  alienate  res  mancipi,  bring
a  legis  actio  or  indicium  legitimum,  nor  incur  a  contractual  obligation
without  their  auctoritas  or  sanction,  Gaius  i.  192,  Ulp.  Reg.  11.  27.
The  XII  Tables  had  appointed  as  a  woman's  guardian  her  patron  if  she
were  libertina  or  had  been  emancipated :  failing  a  patron,  her  nearest
agnates— all  of  these  being  the  persons  first  in  succession  to  her  property
on  her  decease.     But,  besides  the  tutela  of  the  patron  and  agnates
(tutores  legitimi),  other  forms  in  course  of  time  came  into  existence
('alterius  generis  tutores '  Gaius  i.  194),  viz.  (i)  tutores  optivi,  selected  by
the  woman  herself  under  a  power  given  by  the  will  of  a  husband  in  whose
manus  she  had  been ;  (2)  tutores  fiduciarii,  in  case  of  a  freebom  woman's
manumission  e  mancipio  (Gaius  i.  115  a) :  (3)  tutores  cessicii ;  (4)  tutores
Atiliani,  appointed  by  the  magistrates.    Testamentary  guardians  were  as
old  as  the  XII  Tables  (note  on  §  3  inf.) ;  but  in  relation  to  women  they
resembled  the  four  kinds  just  specified  in  possessing  but  the  shadow  of
those  powers  of  veto  and  control  which  belonged  to  a  tutor  legitimus.
The  sanction  of  a  tutor  who  was  not  legitimus  was  required  to  validate  the
woman's  dispositions,  wherever  that  of  a  statutory  guardian  would  have
been  necessary :  '  tutoris  auctoritas  necessaria  est  mulieribus  quidem  in
his  rebus :   si  lege  aut  legitime  iudicio  agant :  si  se  obligent,  si  civile
negotium  gerant,  si  libertae  suae  permittant  in  contubemio  alieni  servi
morari,  si  rem  mancipi  alienent'  Ulpian,  Reg.  11.  27 ;  in  2a  15  he  adds
the  execution  of  a  will.    But  in  all  these  cases  the  sanction  was  merely


Til  13.]  DE  TUTELIS.  151

intell^emus  ceteras  personas,  quae  neutro  lure  tenentur.    ac
prius  dispiciamus  de  his  quae  in  tutela  sunt.     Est  autem  1


formal:  'papillonira  pupillarumque  tutores  et  negotia  gerant,  et  auo
toritatem  interponunt:  mulierum  autem  tutores  auctoritatem  duntaxat
interponunt '  Ulpian,  loc.  cit.  25,  and  the  auctoritas  of  a  non-statutory
guardian  could  be  demanded  by  the  woman  as  a  matter  of  right :  '  loqui-
mur  autem  de  his  scilicet  feminis  quae  non  in  legitima  parentium  aut
patronorum  tutela  sunt,  sed  de  his  quae  alterius  generis  tutores  habent,
qui  etiam  inviti  coguntur  auctores  fieri'  Gains  ii.  lao,  'saepe  etiam
[tutor]  in  Vitus  auctor  fieri  a  praetore  cogitur'  i.  190.

It  was  in  respect  of  making  a  will  that  the  woman  was  most  restricted,
the  original  rule  being  that  no  woman  could  do  this  who  had  not  sub-
jected herself  to  capitis  deminutio  by  coemption,  followed  by  remanci-
pation  and  manumission,  or,  in  other  words,  by  a  fictitious  marriage,
Gains  i.  115  a ;  she  thus  obtained  a  tutor  fiduciarius,  who  authorized  the
testament '  dicis  causa,'  ib.  190,  though  in  all  this  business  the  interests  of
the  patron  or  agnates  were  completely  secured,  for  without  their  sanction
at  the  first  the  coemption  could  not  have  taken  place  at  all.

The  only  independent  women  who  were  exempted  by  the  older  law
from  perpetual  guardianship  were  the  vestal  virgins,  on  whom  this  privilege
had  been  bestowed  by  the  XII  Tables,  Gains  i.  145 ;  but  after  the  fall  of
the  Republic  important  changes  were  made,  especially  in  respect  of
testaments.  The  lex  lulia  and  Papia  Poppaea,  a.d.  9,  released  from
guardianship  all  women  who  had  borne  a  certain  number  of  children  (ius
liberorum),  and  this  boon  must  have  benefited  a  considerable  proportion
of  married  women  who  were  sui  iuris.  Not  many  years  later  a  law  of
Claudius  entirely  abolished  the  legitima  tutela  of  agnates  over  women,
Gaius  i.  157,  and  by  a  senatusconsult  passed  under  Hadrian  they  were
enabled  to  make  a  will  without  the  necessity  of  a  coemption,  though  the
auctoritas  of  the  guardian  was  not  dispensed  with.  Thus,  in  the  time  of
the  classical  jurists,  every  woman  who  was  sui  iuris,  and  who  was  not
a  vestal  virgin  or  exempted  under  the  lex  Papia,  must  have  a  guardian :
but  his  auctoritas  was  not  requisite  for  the  validity  of  all  dispositions,  and
where  it  was  he  could  not  refuse  it  unless  he  were  a  patronus  or  parens
manumissor;  Gaius  even  says  (i.  192)  that  a  tutor  legitimus  would  be
compelled  to  give  his  auctoritas  to  the  alienation  of  a  res  mancipi  or  the
making  of  a  contract,  if  there  were  a  thoroughly  sound  reason  for  it.
The  whole  institution  in  fact  had  ceased  to  have  any  significance,  and
the  jurists  themselves  seem  to  have  thought  it  an  absurdity :  '  feminas
vero  perfectae  aetatis  in  tutela  esse  fere  nulla  pretiosa  ratio  suasisse
videtur:  nam  quae  vulgo  creditur,  quia  levitate  animi  plerumque
decipiuntur,  et  aequum  erat  eas  tutorum  auctoritate  regi,  magis  speciosa
videtur  quam  vera '  Gaius  i.  190.  It  is  not,  however,  till  after  Diocletian
that  guardianship  of  women  entirely  disappears.  Cf.  Mr.  Fosters  note  on
Gaius  L  189,  and  Savigny,  Vermiscbte  Schriften  i.  10.

§  L  Though  the  power  of  the  tutor  was  data  ac  permissa  by  the  civil


152  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  I.

tutela,  ut  Servius  definivit,  ius  ac  potestas  in  capite  libero  ad
tuendum  eum,  qui  propter  aetateni  se  defendere  nequit,  iurc
2  civili  data  ac  permissa.  Tutores  autem  sunt,  qui  earn  vim
ac  potestateni  habent,  ex  qua  re  ipsa  nomen  ceperunt  itaque
appellantur   tutores  quasi   tuitores   atque    defensores,   sicut

law,  tutela  was  not  regarded  by  the  Romans  as  an  institution  iuris
civilis :  '  impuberes  autem  in  tutela  esse  naturali  iure  conveniens  est,  ut
is  qui  perfectae  aetatis  non  sit,  alterius  tutela  regatur'  Tit.  20.  6  inf.,
'  impuberes  quidem  in  tutela  esse  omnium  civitatium  iure  contingit '
Gaius  i.  189,  the  latter  contrasting  guardianship  in  this  respect  with
patria  potestas.  Mr.  Poste,  on  the  other  hand,  ascribes  it  to  ius  civile,
on  the  ground  that  no  institution  containing  numerical  definitions  can
be  supposed  to  belong  to  natural  law,  if  this  is  the  less  arbitrary  element
of  the  positive  code.  But  this  does  not  show  that  the  institution  is  not
imris  gentium,  but  only  that  each  state  fills  up  voids  in  the '  natural  theory*
by  rules  of  its  own,  e.  g.  as  to  age,  the  persons  who  are  to  act,  their  precise
powers,  etc.

A  guardian's  responsibilities  commenced  immediately  he  was  aware
that  the  office  had  been  cast  upon  him  :  'ex  quo  innotuit  tutori  se
tutorem  esse,  scire  debet  periculum  tutelae  ad  eum  pertinere'  Dig.
26.  7.  5.  10,  and  if  he  had  a  valid  excuse  it  had  to  be  stated  within  the
time  allowed  by  law,  or  else  it  was  of  no  avail,  Dig.  ib.  i.  i.  The  main
purpose  of  the  tutela  impubenim,  at  least  in  the  later  Roman  law,  was
the  supplementing  of  the  ward's  imperfect  capacity  of  disposition,  and
the  guardian's  functions  related  to  both  his  person  and  his  property.
He  was  responsible  for  his  maintenance  and  education,  so  far  as  his
means  sufficed,  unless  exempted  from  this  by  special  direction  of  the
appointing  parent  or  magistrate.  In  relation  to  the  property,  his  sphere
of  action  depended  greatly  on  the  pupil's  age.  If  he  were  infans  (for
which  see  on  Bk.  iii.  19.  10  inf.)  he  was  incapable  of  any  act  or  dis*
position,  and  the  tutor  was  said  '  negotia  pupilli  gerere '  and  to  have  the
administratio.  In  this  respect  his  freedom  of  action  was  largely  cur-
tailed by  imperial  legislation :  '  imperatoris  Severi  oratione  prohibiti
sunt  tutores  et  curatores  praedia  rustica  vel  suburbana  distrahere  (sell) '
Dig.  27.  9.  I.  pr.  Constantine  extended  the  prohibition  still  further:
Mam  ergo  venditio  tutoris  nulla  sit  nisi  interpositione  decreti,  exceptis
duntaxat  his  vestibus,  quae  detritae  usu,  aut  corruptae  servando  servari
non  potuerint.  Animalia  quoque  supervacua  minorum,  quin  veneant,  non
vetamus '  Cod.  5.  37.  22.  6  and  7.  Justinian  forbade  tutors  and  curators
to  intermeddle  in  the  ward's  affairs  until  they  had  caused  a  complete
inventory  of  his  property  to  be  made.  Cod.  5.  51.  13.  2.  But  on  ceasing
to  be  infans  the  pupil  was  held  to  acquire  a  power  of  volition,  and  thereby
capacity  of  disposition ;  yet  his  lack  of  intellectual  powers  was  thought
likely  to  betray  him  into  transactions  by  which  he  might  be  injured,  and
thus  the  rule  was  established,  that  for  all  acts  by  which  the  pupil  could
possibly  injure  his  proprietary  interests  the  guardian's  auctoritas  was


Tit.  13.]  DE  TUTELIS.  153

aeditui  dicuntur  qui  aedes  tuentur.  Permissum  est  itaque  3
parentibus  liberis  impuberibus,  quos  in  potestate  habent,  testa-
mento  tutores  dare,  et  hoc  in  filio  iiliaque  omnimodo  procedit ;
nepotibus  tamen  neptibusque  ita  demum  parentes  possunt
testamento  tutores  dare,  si  post  mortem  eorum  in  patris  sui
potestatem  recasuri  non  sunt,  itaque  si  filius  tuus  mortis  tuae
tempore  in  potestate  tua  sit,  nepotes  ex  eo  non  poterunt
testamento  tuo  tutorem  habere,  quamvis  in  potestate  tua
fuerint ;  scilicet  quia  mortuo  te  in  patris  sui  potestatem  re-
casuri sunt.  Cum  autem  in  compluribus  aliis  causis  postumi  4
pro  iam  natis  habentur,  et  in  hac  causa  placuit  non  minus
postumis  quam  iam  natis  testamento  tutores  dari  posse,  si
modo  in  ea  causa  sint,  ut,  si  vivis  parentibus  nascerentur,  sui

necessary,  though  the  former  was  regarded  as  himself  the  acting  party,
espedaliy  in  dispositions  which  were  iuris  civilis,  and  therefore  *  procura-
torem  non  recipiebant ; '  see  Tit.  21.  pr.  inf.,  and  cf.  the  note  on  Bk.  iii.
19.  10  referred  to.  The  relation  between  guardian  and  pupil  was  quasi
ex  contractu,  Bk.  iiL  37.  2  inf.,  q.  v.

§  9.  The  right  of  the  paterfamilias  to  appoint  by  his  will  tutors  to  such
females  in  his  power  as  would  become  sui  iuris  on  his  decease,  and  to
such  males  in  the  same  position  as  were  impuberes,  was  established,  if
not  for  the  first  time  conferred,  by  the  XII  Tables :  *  testamento  quoque
nominatim  tutores  dati  confirmantur  eadem  lege  duodecim  tabularum,
his  verbis  :  uti  kgassit  super  pecunia  tutelave  suae  rei,  ita  ius  esto :  qui
tutores  dativi  appellantur'  Ulpian,  R^.  11.  14.  The  intended  tutor  must
have  testamenti^ctio  with  the  testator,  and  Latini  luniani  could  not  be
thus  appointed,  Gains  i.  24.  It  would  seem  that  a  testamentary  guardian
could  at  one  time  decline  the  office,  or  even  lay  it  down  after  acceptance,
Ulpian,  Reg.  II.  17  :  this  right  is  not  mentioned  in  Justinian,  which  marks
the  transition  from  the  conception  of  tutela  as  a  right  to  that  of  a  munus
publicum.  For  the  formulae  by  which  testamentary  guardians  were
appointed  see  Gains  i.  149 ;  for  the  effect  of  placing  such  appointment
before  the  institution  of  the  heir.  Gains  ii.  231 :  cf.  Tit.  14.  3  inf.  A
testamentary  guardian  might  be  appointed  by  codicils  testamento  con-
finnati.  Dig.  26.  2.  3 :  ib.  8.  pr.

§  4.  Postiuni  liberi  are  children  bom  after  the  execution  of  the  will :
whether  after  the  death  of  the  testator  or  in  his  life-time  is  immaterial.
A  paterfEunilias  could  not  give  a  testamentary  guardian  to  a  posthumous
grandson,  if,  supposing  he  had  died  immediately  after  the  execution  of
the  will,  the  grandson  would  have  been  bom  in  the  potestas  of  his  own
father,  the  testator's  son :  for  in  that  case,  the  father  being  in  the  same
potestas,  the  child  would  not  have  been  a  suus  heres  to  the  testator.
Guardianship  was  only  intended  as  a  substitute  for  patria  potestas,  and
the  existence  of  the  latter  barred  the  possibility  of  the  former.


154  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

5  et  in  potestate  eorum  fierent.  Sed  si  emancipato  filio  tutor
a  patre  testamento  datus  fuerit,  confirtnandus  est  ex  sententia
praesidis  omnimodo,  id  est  sine  inquisitione.


XIV.

QUI  DARI  TUTORES  TESTAMENTO  POSSUNT.

Dari  autem   potest  tutor  non  solum   pater  familias^  sed

1  etiam   fiiius  familias.      Sed  et   servus   proprius   testamento

cum  libertate  recte  tutor  dari  potest,     sed  sciendum  est  eum

et  sine  libertate  tutorem  datum  tacite  et  libertatem  directam


§  6.  There  were  five  other  cases  in  which  magisterial  confirmation  of
a  testamentary  appointment  was  required,  viz.  (i)  where  a  father  gave  by
will  a  guardian  to  his  natural  child,  Dig.  26.  3.  7 ;  (2)  where  the  appoint-
ment was  made  in  unconfirmed  codicils  or  in  an  invalid  will,  Dig.  ib.
I.  I ;  (3)  where  the  appointment  violated  the  SC.  Libonianum  by  being
written  by  the  guardian  himself ;  here  a  '  praevia  inquisitio '  was  neces-
sary. Dig.  26.  2.  29 :  48.  10.  18.  I ;  (4)  where  a  mother  attempted  to  give
a  testamentary  guardian  to  her  child,  the  appointment  would  be  confirmed
only  '  ex  inquisitione,'  and  only  if  the  child  were  instituted  heir  in  the  will,
Dig.  26.  3.  2 ;  (5)  if  a  man  appK>inted  a  testamentary  guardian  to  the
child  of  some  other  person,  the  appointment  would  be  confirmed  ex
inquisitione  if  the  child  were  instituted  heir  in  the  will,  and  had  no  other
property,  Dig.  ib.  4.  5.  In  all  these  cases,  or  at  any  rate  where  an  inqui-
sitio was  held,  the  appointment  was  deemed  magisterial  rather  than
testamentary.  Dig.  26.  2.  26.  2  :  48.  10.  18.  i.

Tit  XTV.  The  two  main  rules  of  testamentary  appointments  are,
(i)  there  must  be  testamentifactio  (Bk.  ii.  19.  4  inf.)  between  testator
and  the  intended  guardian,  Dig.  26.  2.  21,  and  (2)  the  person  must  be
clearly  specified,  Bk.  ii.  20.  P7  inf.

§  1.  Ulpian  (Dig.  26.  2.  10.  4)  and  Paulus  (Dig.  ib.  32.  2)  both  say  that
the  appK>intment  of  a  slave  of  the  testator's  as  tutor  implied  a  gift  of
freedom.  But  this  was  not  so  if  the  slave  was  instituted  heir  until
Justinian's  own  time.  Tit.  6.  2  supr..  Cod.  6.  27.  5.  i.

The  words  '  libertatem  directam '  are  possibly  a  reference  to  Dig.  26.  2.
28. 1  '  verbis  fidei  commissi  manumissus  non  iure  tutor  testamento  datur.'
But  it  seems  doubtful  whether  this  was  really  the  law :  see  Cod.  7.  4. 10,
Dig.  26.  2.  10.  4.

Ulpian  says  in  Dig.  26.  2.  10.  4  that  even  an  unconditional  (pure)
appointment  of  another  man's  slave  as  testamentary  guardian  implied
the  condition  'cum  liber  erit/  and  a  gift  of  fidei- commissaria  libertas  'si
voluntas  apertissime  non  refhigetur.'  It  seems  impossible  to  reconcile
this  with  the  text.


Tit  14.]  QUI  DARI  TUTORES  TESTAMENTO  POSSUNT.   155

accepisse  videri  et  per  hoc  recte  tutorem  tsst.  plane  si  per
errorem  quasi  liber  tutor  datus  sit,  aliud  dicendum  est.  servus
autem  alienus  pure  inutiliter  datur  testamento  tutor :  sed  ita
*  cum  liber  erit '  utiliter  datur.  proprius  autem  servus  inutiliter
eo  modo  datur  tutor.  Furiosus  vel  minor  viginti  quinque  annis  2
tutor  testamento  datus  tutor  erit,  cum  compos  mentis  aut  maior
viginti  quinque  annis  fuerit  factus.

Ad  certum  tempus  et  ex  certo  tempore  vel  sub  .condicione  3
vel  ante  heredis  institutionem  posse  dari  tutorem  non  dubitatur.
Certae  autem  rei  vel  causae  tutor  dari  non  potest,  quia  per-  4
sonae,  non  causae  vel  rei  datur.

Si  quis  filiabus  suis  vel  filiis  tutores  dederit,  etiam  postumae  5
vel  postumo  videtur  dedisse,  quia  filii  vel  filiae  appellatione  et


§  2.  Until  the  minor  reached  twenty-five  or  the  lunatic  recovered  his
senses,  a  tutor  or  curator  would  be  appointed  by  the  magistrate  ad
interim,  Tit  23.  5  inf.

§  4.  It  is  possible  that  the  rule  '  certae  rei  vel  causae  tutor  dari  non
potest'  is  true  only  of  testamentary  appointments  (cf.  the  analogy  in
institution  :  'heredis  institutio  ex  certa  re  inutiliter  fit ') :  at  any  rate  there
are  many  cases  in  which  a  guardian  was  appointed  certae  causae,  Gaius
i.  150  Wei  in  omnes  res,  vel  in  unam  forte  aut  duas  optare,'  ib.  176  'ad
hereditatem  adeundam,' ib.  178.  iSo'dotis  constituendae  causa,'  Ulpian,
Reg.  II.  22 '  ad  nuptias  contrahendas,'  ib.  24  for  a  specific  suit,  cf.  Tit.  21.
3  inf. :  Fragm.  Vat  229,  Dig.  26.  5.  9 :  27.  i.  21.  2  and  4,  Cod.  5.  62. 11 :
5. 44. 3  and  4.  Some  passages  even  go  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  the  tutor
was  given  rei  rather  than  personae,  'non  numerus  pupillorum  plures
tutelas  iacit,  sed  patrimoniorum  separatio '  Dig.  27.  1.3,'  non  rebus  dun-
taxat,  sed  etiam  moribus'  Dig.  26.  7.  12.  3.  One  explanation  is  that
originally  the  guardian  was  appointed  to  the  person  and  whole  patrimony
of  the  ward,  but  that  gradually  the  practice  grew  up  of  allowing  him  to
look  after  specific  matters  only;  this  being  thought  Mnelegans,'  and
inconsistent  with  the  true  nature  of  the  institution,  was  discouraged,  and
the  later  lawyers  inclined  to  support  the  rule  stated  in  the  text,  treating
the  charge  of  specific  matters  as  cura  rather  than  tutela ;  d.  Tit  21.  3  inf.
'  non  praetorius  tutor,  ut  olim,  sed  curator  in  eius  locum  datur,'  Tit.  23.  2
*  curator  enim  et  ad  certam  causam  dari  potest.'  It  cannot,  however,  be
inferred  from  the  word  '  personae '  that  the  guardian's  main  duty  was  the
maintenance  and  education  of  the  pupil :  for  this  is  absolutely  untrue  of
the  tutela  mulierum,  and  even  with  impuberes  he  had,  generally  speaking,
nothing  to  do  with  the  child's  education,  which  was  managed  by  the
nearest  relatives  under  magisterial  supervision :  the  tutor  had  only  to
provide  the  means  in  proportion  to  the  pupil's  property,  as  determined
by  the  magistrate.


156  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

postumus  et  postuma  continentur.  quid  si  nepotes  sint,  an
appellatione  filiorum  et  ipsis  tutores  dati  sunt  ?  dicendum  est,
ut  ipsis  quoque  dati  videantur,  si  modo  liberos  dixit,  ceterum
si  filios,  non  continebuntur :  aliter  enim  filii,  aliter  nepotes
appellantur.  plane  si  postumis  dederit,  tarn  filii  postumi  quam
ceteri  liberi  continebuntur.


XV.

DE  LEGITIMA  ADGNATORUM  TUTELA.

Quibus  autem  testamento  tutor  datus  non  sit,  his  ex  l^e

duodecim  tabularum  adgnati  sunt  tutores,  qui  vocantur  legitioii.

1  Sunt  autem  adgnati  per  virilis  sexus  cognationem  coniuncti,

Tit.  XV.  Agnates  are  also  defined  in  Bk.  iii.  2.  i,  from  which  we  may
apply  here  too  the  rule  'non  tamen  omnibus  simul  adgnatis  dat  lex
hereditatem  (tutelam),  sed  iis  qui  tunc  proximiore  gradu  sunt  cum  certum
esse  coeperit  aliquem  intestatum  decessisse,'  for  which  cf.  also  Tit.  16.  7
inf.  The  definition,  to  be  made  perfectly  accurate,  requires  both  exten-
sion and  restriction.  It  must  be  extended  so  as  to  include  (i)  adoptive
relations,  e.  g.  brothers  and  uncles  :  for  these  cannot  properly  be  said  to
be  cognati  at  all  if  cognates  are  persons  related  naturali  iure,  by  the  tie
of  blood :  and  (2)  women  who  by  passing  in  manum  came  to  be  filiae
loco  to  their  husbands,  and  thus  (by  a  process  analogous  to  adoption)
became  agnates  to  their  own  children  and  to  their  husband's  agnates  in
general.  It  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  restricted  so  as  to  exclude
cognates  who,  even  though  per  virilis  sexus  personas  coniuncti,  had  by
capitis  deminutio  left  their  (agnatic)  family.  This  last  error  of  Gaius'
and  Justinian's  definition  is  avoided  by  Ulpian,  Reg.  11.  4,  who  adds
'eiusdem  familiae.'  Agnates,  in  &ct,  are  persons  related  to  one  another
through  males,  whether  the  relationship  be  natural,  adoptive,  or  quasi-
adoptive  as  produced  by  manus,  and  between  whom  no  barrier  has
been  interposed  by  capitis  deminutio ;  and  agnation  is  the  tie  between
two  or  more  persons  which  is  based  on  the  pK>testas  or  manus  to  which
all  of  them  would  be  subject  if  the  head  of  the  familia  were  stiil  alive :
see  Maine,  Ancient  Law  pp.  146-8.  For  the  reason  why  the  descendants
of  a  woman  were  not  agnates  of  her  blood  relations  see  on  Tit.  9.  3  supr.

The  praetorian  changes  in  the  law  of  intestate  succession  (between
which  and  the  tutela  legitima  there  was  such  an  intimate  connection)
were  not  accompanied  by  corresponding  changes  in  the  law  of  guardian-
ship. By  Nov.  1 18.  c.  4  and  5,  Justinian  revolutionized  the  former  branch
of  law  by  substituting  title  by  cognation  for  tide  by  agnation,  and  modified
the  law  of  guardianship  in  accordance  therewith,  cognatic  relationship
alone  in  future  conferring  a  claim  to  tutela  legitima.


Tit.i6.]  DE  CAPITIS  MINUTIONE,  157

quasi  a  patre  cognati,  veluti  frater  eodem  patre  natus,  fratris
filius  neposve  ex  eo,  item  patruus  et  patrui  filius  neposve  ex
eo.  at  qui  per  feminini  sexus  personas  cognatione  iunguntur,
non  sunt  adgnati,  sed  alias  naturali  iure  cognati.  itaque
amitae  tuae  filius  non  est  tibi  adgnatus,  sed  cognatus  (et
invicem  scilicet  tu  illi  eodem  iure  coniungeris),  quia  qui
nascuntur  patris,  non  matris  familiam  sequuntur.  Quod  2
autem  lex  ab  intestato  vocat  ad  tutelam  adgnatos,  non  banc
habet  significationem,  si  omnino  non  fecerit  testamentum  is
qui  poterat  tutores  dare,  sed  si  quantum  ad  tutelam  pertinet
intestatus  decesserit.  quod  tunc  quoque  accidere  intellegitur,
cum  is  qui  datus  est  tutor  vivo  testatore  decesserit.  Sed  3
adgnationis  quidem  ius  omnibus  modis  capitis  deminutione
plerumque  perimitur :  nam  adgnatio  iuris  est  nomen.  cogna-
tionis  vero  ius  non  omnibus  modis  commutatur,  quia  civilis
ratio  civilia  quidem  iura  corrumpere  potest,  naturalia  vero  non
utique.

XVI.

DE  CAPITIS  MINUTIONE.

Est  autem  capitis  deminutio  prioris  status  commutatio.
eaque  tribus  modis  accidit:  nam  aut  maxima  est  capitis
deminutio    aut   minor,  quam   quidam   mediam    vocant,  aut

§  3.  This  passage  is  borne  out  by  Bk.  iii.  1. 11  inf. '  naturalia  enim  iura
civilis  ratio  perimere  non  potest/  but  (as  is  observed  by  Mr.  Poste  on
Gaius  i.  158)  is  almost  completely  contradicted  by  Tit.  16.  6  inf.,  which
expressly  (and  truly)  says  that  the  two  higher  kinds  of  capitis  deminutio
destroyed  naturalia  iura  based  on  cognatio  no  less  than  civilia  iura  based
on  adgnatio.

Tit.  XVI.  By  status,  in  a  general  sense,  the  Romans  denote  a  man's
position  in  respect  of  legal  rights,  and  this  is  usually  determined  by
reference  to  three  *  momenta,'  libertas,  civitas,  and  familia,  the  importance
of  which  in  this  connection  was  so  great  that  they  came  to  be  regarded
as  specific  status  themselves,  cf.  p.  Zj  supr.  Hence  the  dictum  that  no
man  can  have  a  status  unless,  to  begin  with,  he  is  free  ;  and  the  statement
of  Paulus,  servile  caput  nullum  ius  habet,  practically  adopted  in  §  4  inf.,  is
amplified  by  Modestinus,  Dig.  4.  5. 4,  who  adds,  *  hodie  enim  incipit  statum
habere  : '  a  slave,  until  he  is  manumitted,  has  no  more  a  *  status '  than  he
has  a  Mus '  or '  caput.'  It  is  in  this  specific  sense  that  status  is  used  here :
by  defining  capitis  deminutio  as  prioris  status  commutatio  Justinian


158  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  1.

1  minima.  Maxima  est  capitis  deminutio,  cum  aliquis  simul
et  civitatem  et  libertatem  amittit  quod  accidit  in  his,  qui
servi  poenae  efficiuntur  atrocitate  sententiae,  vel  liberti  ut
ingrati  circa  patronos  condemnati,  vel  qui  ad  pretium  par-

2  ticipandum  se  venumdari  passi  sunt.  Minor  sive  media  est
capitis  deminutio,  cum  civitas  quidem  amittitur,  libertas  vero
retinetur.    quod  accidit  ei,  cui  aqua  et  igni  interdictum  fuerit,

3  vel  ei,  qui  in  insulam  deportatus  est.  Minima  est  capitis
deminutio,  cum  et  civitas  et  libertas  retinetur,  sed  status


means  that  when  a  man  'capite  minuitur'  he  either  (i)  loses  the  freedom
which  he  possessed  before,  or  (2)  though  retaining  his  freedom,  ceases  to
be  a  citizen  of  Rome,  or  finally  (3)  while  remaining  liber  and  civis,  ceases
to  belong  to  the  familia  of  which  he  has  hitherto  been  a  member.  Similarly
caput,  in  the  expression  capitis  deminutio,  bears  a  close  analogy  to  status
in  this  specific  sense  :  it  means  the  rights  a  man  enjoys  in  virtue  of  being
free,  or  a  civis,  or  a  member  of  a  family :  by  being  '  capite  deminutus '  he
loses  some  or  all  of  these  rights.

§  L  For  some  modes  of  capitis  deminutio  maxima  which  were  obsolete
in  Justinian's  time  see  Tit  3.  4  supr. :  to  them  may  be  added  surrender
by  the  pater  patratus  to  a  foreign  state  for  an  offence  against  International
Law,  Livy  5.  36.  For  the  cases  mentioned  here  in  the  text  see  the  note
referred  to.

§  2.  For  deportatio  and  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio  see  on  Tit.  12.  i  supr.
Capitis  deminutio  media  occurred  also  when  a  Roman  citizen  became
civis  of  another  town,  e.g.  a  civitas  peregrina  or  a  Latin  colony,  between
which  and  Rome  there  was  not  a  complete  community  of  civil  rights,  Cic.
pro  Balbo  11.  12,  pro  Caec.  33.  34,  de  Orat.  i.  40.  In  his  note  on  Gaius
i.  161  Mr.  Poste  suppK>ses  that  there  was  a  capitis  deminutio  media  when
a  Latinus  was  degraded  to  peregrinus  by  interdiction  or  deportation,  but
the  evidence  seems  to  show  that  the  notion  of  capitis  deminutio  was  never
applicable  to  any  persons  except  Roman  citizens.

§  8.  The  essence  of  capitis  deminutio  minima  is  the  leaving,  by  the
minutus,  of  his  previous  agnatic  family.  It  is  defined  in  this  passage
(which  is  taken  from  Gaius  i.  162)  as  a  status  commutatio,  a  change  of
status  unaccompanied  by  any  loss  of  liberty  or  citizenship.  Similarly
Paulus  says  in  Dig.  4.  5.  1 1  '  cum  et  libertas  et  civitas  retinetur,  familia
tantum  mutatur,  minimam  esse  capitis  deminutionem  constat,'  ib.  3
Miberos,  qui  adrogatum  parentem  sequuntur,  placet  minui  caput,  quum
in  aliena  potestate  sunt,  et  quum  familiam  mutaverint,'  ib.  7  *  tutelas
etiam  non  amittit  capitis  minutio :  sed  legitimae  tutelae  ex  duodecim
tabulis  intervertuntur  eadem  ratione,  qua  et  hereditates  exinde  legitimae,
quia  adgnatis  deferuntur,  qui  desinunt  esse  familia  mutati ; '  cf. '  minima
capitis  deminutio  est,  per  quam  et  civitate  et  Hbertate  salva  status  dun-
tiixat  hominis  mutatur'  Ulpian,  Reg.  11.  13.    The  practical  coincidence


Tit  i6.]  DE  CAPITIS  MINUTIONE.  159

hominis  commutatur.     quod  accidit  in  his,  qui,  cum  sui  iuris
fuerunt,  coeperunt  alieno  iuri  subiecti  esse,  vel  contra.    Servus  4
autem  manumissus  capite  non  minuitur,  quia  nullum  caput
habuit.  Quibus  autem  dignitas  magis  quam  status  permutatur,  5

of  Gaius  and  Ulpian  with  Paulus  in  describing  capitis  deminutio  minima
as  a  mere  change,  and  not  necessarily  a  change  for  the  worse,  involving
a  degradation,  and  the  fact  that  they  differ  from  him  only  in  being  less
clear  and  emphatic  in  their  definition,  is  noteworthy,  because  writers
who  take  a  different  view  upon  this  subject  from  that  here  adopted
contend  that  Paulus  is  the  only  jurist  by  whose  writings  the  latter  is
supported.

In  the  law  of  Justinian's  time,  then,  capitis  deminutio  minima  occurred
in  the  following  cases:  (1)  where  a  person  sui  iuris  became  alieni  iuris
by  adrogatio  or  legitimatio.  It  may  be  objected  that  a  person  who  is
adrogated  or  legitimated  may  stand  by  himself  in  the  world,  and  there-
fore have  no  familia  to  leave:  but  to  this  it  may  be  replied  that  the
Roman  law  regarded  such  a  person  as  having  a  familia  in  virtue  of  his
capacity  to  create  one  by  marrying  and  begetting  children,  ' . . .  idemque
eveniet  et  in  eo  qui  emancipatus  est :  nam  et  hie  sui  iuris  effectus  pro-
priam  familiam  habet'  Dig.  50.  16.  195.  2.  (2)  Where  a  person  alieni
iuris  entered  a  new  family,  e.  g.  the  filiusfamilias  given  in  adoptio  plena,
and  the  children  of  an  adrogatus  or  legitimatus.  (3)  Where  a  person
alieni  became  sui  iuris  by  emancipation.  For  a  discussion  of  another
view  upon  this  subject  see  Excursus  I  at  the  end  of  Book  I,  and  for  the
eflfect  of  capitis  deminutio  minima  on  adrogatus'  property,  debts,  &c.  see
Bk.  lit  10.  3  and  notes  inf.

§  6.  So  status  and  dignitas  are  distinguished  by  Ulpian  in  Dig.  i.  5.  20
*  qui  furere  coepit,  et  statum  et  dignitatem  in  qua  fuit  et  magistratum  et
potestatem  videtur  retinere,  sicut  rei  suae  dominium  retinet.'

Every  Roman  citizen  was  held  in  virtue  of  his  citizenship  to  possess
a  certain  dignity  called  his  existimatio,  which  remained  untarnished  and
unimpaired  so  long  as  he  did  nothing  to  incur  reproach  from  his  fellow
burghers,  but  which  was  capable  of  being  either  entirely  destroyed  or
partially  lost :  *"  existimatio  est  dignitatis  illaesae  status,  legibus  ac  mori-
bus  comprobatus,  qui  ex  delicto  nostro  auctoritate  legum  aut  minuitur
aut  consumitur '  Dig.  50. 13.  5.  i.  Existimatio  was  said  to  be '  consumed '
if  its  foundation,  the  civitas,  were  forfeited  by  either  maxima  or  media
capitis  deminutio,  Dig.  50.  13.  5.  3.  In  other  cases,  where  a  man  had
been  guilty  of  such  conduct  as  was  held  to  justify  a  deprivation  of  some
portion  of  his  civil  rights  and  privileges,  he  was  said  to  be  branded  with
ignominia  or  nota,  and  his  existimatio  to  be  '  diminished : '  '  minuitur
existimatio  quotiens  manente  libertate  circa  statum  dignitatis  poena
plectimur,  sicuti  cum  relegatur  quis,  vel  cum  ordine  movetur,  vel  cum
prohibetur  honoribus  publicis  fungi,  vel  cum  plebeius  fustibus  caeditur,
vel  in  opus  publicum  datur,  vel  cum  in  eam  causam  quis  incidit,  quae
edicto  perpetuo  infamiae  causa  enumeratur '  Dig.  50. 13.  5. 2.    The  oldest


i6o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  I.

capite  non  minuuntur :  et  ideo  senatu  motos  capite  non  minui
constat.

6  Quod  autem  dictum  est  manere  c<^nationis  ius  et  post
capitis  deminutionem,  hoc  ita  est,  si  minima  capitis  deminutio
interveniat :  manet  enim  cognatio.  nam  si  maxima  capitis
deminutio  incurrat,  ius  quoque  cognationis  perit,  ut  puta  ser-
vitute  alicuius  cognati,  et  ne  quidem,  si  manumissus  fuerit,
recipit  cognationem.     sed  et  si  in  insulam  deportatus  quis  sit,

7  cognatio  solvitur.  Cum  autem  ad  adgnatos  tutela  pertineat,
non  simul  ad  omnes  pertinet.  sed  ad  eos  tantum,  qui  proximo
gradu  sunt,  vel,  si  eiusdem  gradus  sint,  ad  omnes.

XVII.

DE  LEGITIMA  PATRONORUM   TUTELA.

Ex  eadem  lege  duodecim  tabularum  libertorum  et  liber-
tarum  tutela  ad  patronos  liberosque  eorum  pertinet,  quae  et
ipsa  legitima  tutela  vocatur :  non  quia  nominatim  ea  lege  de
hac  tutela  cavetur,  sed  quia  perinde  accepta  est  per  inter-
pretationem,  atque  si  verbis  legis  introducta  esset.  eo  enim
ipso,  quo  hereditates  libertorum  libertarumque,  si   intestati

form  of  minutio  existimationis  can  be  traced  back  to  an  enactment  prob-
ably comprised  in  the  XII  Tables,  which  declared  citizens  who  committed
certain  crimes  improbi  and  intestabiles  :  '  cum  lege  quis  intestabilis
iubetur  esse,  eo  pertinet,  ne  eius  testimonium  recipiatur,  et  eo  amplius,
ut  quidam  putant,  neve  ipsi  dicatur  testimonium'  Dig.  28.  i.  26.  Simi-
larly a  man's  exist imatio  was  affected,  though  perhaps  less  permanently^
by  the  subscriptio  or  nota  censoria,  for  which  see  General  Introd.  p.  22.
The  commonest  cause  of  minutio,  however,  was  infamia,  an  institution
doubtless  known  to  the  old  civil  law,  but  which,  as  may  be  gathered  from
the  passage  cited  supr.  from  the  Digest,  was  raised  to  an  honourable
prominence  by  the  care  with  which  the  praetor  used  it  as  an  instrument
of  morality  and  justice,  and  defined  in  the  Edict  the  circumstances  under
which  it  would  attach,  and  the  penalties  and  disabilities  which  it  would
entail,  for  both  of  which  see  on  Bk.  iv.  16.  2  inf.  For  a  discussion  of  the
question  whether  infamia  ever  operated  as  a  capitis  deminutio  see
Mr.  Poste's  note  on  Gaius  L  161 :  cf.  Greenidge,  Infamia,  p.  6.

T^t.  XVIL  Where  a  libertus  civis  died  intestate,  having  no  suus  heres
(the  meaning  of  intestati  in  the  text),  the  patron  took  his  property  as  (by
a  fiction)  his  nearest  agnate,  and  the  tutela  went  in  the  same  way  on  the
analogy  of  the  legitima  adgnatorum  tuteku    But  when  a  Latinus  lunianus


Tit.  i8, 19.]  DE  LEGITIMA  PARENTIUM  TUTELA.  i6i

decessissent,  iusserat  lex  ad  patronos  liberosve  eorum  per*
tinere,  crediderunt  veteres  voluisse  legem  etiam  tutelas  ad  eos
pertinere,  cum  et  adgnatos,  quos  ad  hereditatem  vocat,  eosdem
et  tutores  esse  iussit  et  quia  plenimque,  ubi  successionis  est
emolumentum^  ibi  et  tutelae  onus  esse  debet,  ideo  autem
diximus  plerumque,  quia,  si  a  femina  impubes  manumittatur,
ipsa  ad  hereditatem  vocatur,  cum  alius  est  tutor.


XVIII.

DE  LEGITIMA  PARENTIUM  TUTELA.

Exempio  patronorum  recepta  est  et  alia  tutela,  quae  et  ipsa
legitima  vocatur.  nam  si  quis  filium  aut  filiam,  nepotem  aut
neptem  ex  filio  et  deinceps  impuberes  emancipaverit,  legitimus
eorum  tutor  erit

XIX.

DE  FIDUCIARIA  TUTELA.

Est  et  alia  tutela,  quae  fiduciaria  appellatur.  nam  si  parens
filium  vel  filiam^  nepotem  vel  neptem  et  deinceps  impuberes

(who  could  neither  have  a  suus  heres  nor  make  a  will)  died,  the  patron
took  the  property  by  a  different  title,  iure  peculii  (Bk.  iii.  7.  4  inf.).  Hence
the  succession  and  the  tutela  did  not  necessarily  go  together :  '  unde  si
ancilla  ex  iure  Quiritium  tua  sit,  in  bonis  mea,  a  me  quidem  solo,  non
etiam  a  te  manumissa,  Latina  fieri  potest,  et  bona  eius  ad  me  pertinent,
sed  eius  tutela  tibi  competit :  nam  ita  lege  lulia  cavetur '  Gains  i.  167.
This  is  another  exception  to  the  rule  here  stated  by  Justinian, '  plerumque
ubi  successionis  est  emolumentum,  ibi  et  tutelae  onus  esse  debet/  If
a  free  person  in  mancipio  were  manumitted  while  impubes  by  his  superior,
there  having  been  no  fiducia  (note  on  Tit.  12.  6  supr.)  between  the  latter
and  the  father,  the  superior  became  patronus,  and  thus  tutor  legitimus.
For  some  remarks  on  the  '  interpretatio '  of  the  XII  Tables  and  other  old
statutes  see  General  Introd.  p.  49  supr.

Tit.  XVIH.  It  does  not  seem  that  any  express  statute  had  conferred
on  the  parens  manumissor  the  tutela  of  children  whom  he  emancipated
while  impuberes.  It  is  said  '  vicem  legitimi  tutoris  sustinet '  Dig.  26.  4.  3.
10,  'legitimus  tutor  habetur'  Gains  i.  172 ;  the  latter  stating  as  the  reason
'quia  non  minus  huic  quam  patronis  honor  praestandus  est.'

Tit.  XTX.  Tutores  fidudarii  are  the  male  agnatic  children  of  the  parens

M


i62  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

manumiserit,  legitimam  nanciscitur  eorum  tutelam :  quo  de-
functo  si  liberi  viriiis  sexus  extant,  fiduciarii  tutores  filiorum
suorum  vel  fratris  vel  sororis  et  ceterorum  efficiuntur.  atqui
patrono  legitimo  tutore  mortuo,  liberi  quoque  eius  legitimi
sunt  tutores :  quoniam  filius  quidem  defuncti,  si  non  esset  a
vivo  patre  emancipatus,  post  obitum  eius  sui  iuris  efficeretur
nee  in  fratrum  potestatem  recideret  ideoque  nee  in  tutelam,
libertus  autem  si  servus  mansisset,  utique  eodem  iure  apud
liberos  domini  post  mortem  eius  futurus  esset.  ita  tamen  ii  ad
tutelam  vocantur,  si  perfectae  aetatis  sint.  quod  nostra  con-
stitutio  generaliter  in  omnibus  tutelis  et  curationibus  observari
praecepit.

XX.

DE  ATILIANO  TUTORE  VEL  EO  QUI   EX   LEGE  lULIA

ET  TITIA  DABATUR.

Si  GUI  nullus  omnino  tutor  fuerat,  ei  dabatur  in  urbe
quidem  Roma  a  praetore  urbano  et  maiore  parte  tribunorum
plebis  tutor  ex  l^e  Atilia,  in  provinciis  vero  a  praesidibus

manumissor,  Gaius  i.  175.  As  long  as  the  old  form  of  emancipation  was
in  use  the  term  was  also  applied  to  the  extraneus  manumissor,  i.  e.  the
person  into  whose  mancipium  the  coemptionator  or  pater  had  conveyed
the  woman  or  child  in  power  with  the  fiducia  *  ut  manumittatur,'  and  (on
his  death)  to  his  male  agnatic  descendants  proximiore  gradu,  Gaius  L  166,
Ulpian,  Reg.  11.  5.  As  Justinian  expressly  enacted  that  the  father  who
emancipated  a  child  in  the  new  form  introduced  by  him  should  have  pre-
cisely the  same  rights  as  the  old  parens  manumissor  (Bk.  iii.  2.  8  inf.),  the
legitima  parentium  tutela  and  the  tutela  fiduciaria  of  the  parens  manu-
missor*s  children  were  untouched :  nor  were  they  affected  by  the  reforms
of  Nov.  118,  which  introduced  a  legitima  cognatorum  tutela  only  as  a
substitute  for  the  old  tutela  of  the  agnates.

Tit.  XX.  The  business  of  appointing  guardians  to  persons  who  re-
quired them,  and  who  were  not  already  provided,  was  not  an  ordinary
function  of  any  magistrate,  and  could  therefore  be  exercised  only  in  virtue
of  special  statutory  authorization  :  *  tutoris  datio  neque  imperii  est  neque
iurisdictionis,  sed  ei  soli  competit  cui  nominatim  hoc  dedit  vel  lex  vel
senatusconsultum  vel  princeps'  Dig.  26.  i.  6.  2.  The  lex  Atilia  (the  date
of  which  was  certainly  earlier  than  188  B.C.,  cf.  Livy  39.  9)  conferred  this
power,  in  the  city  of  Rome,  on  the  praetor  urbanus  acting  in  conjunction
with  the  majority  of  the  tribuni  plebis  (for  other  examples  of  joint  action
among  the  tribunes  cf.  Cic  in  Verr.  2.  2.  41,  Gellius  7.  19,  Valerius  Max.


Tit.3o.]  DE  ATILIANO  TUTORE,  ETC.  163

provinciarum  ex  lege  lulia  et  Titia.     Sed  et  si  testamento  1
tutor  sub   condicione  aut   die   certo   datus  fuerat,  quamdiu


6.  I.  7. 5. 4) ;  by  the  lex  lulia  et  Titia  B.c  31  it  was  extended  to  the  prae-
sides  of  provinces  within  their  respective  jurisdictions.  Guardians  thus
appointed  were  called  dativi,  a  term  applied  by  Gains  (i.  154)  and  Ulpian
(Reg.  II.  14)  to  those  appointed  in  a  testament.  Under  Justinian  they
were  thus  given  in  the  following  cases :  (i)  When  there  was  no  other
tutor,  testamentary,  statutory,  or  fiduciary.  (2)  When  the  person  to  whom
the  tutela  naturally  belonged  was  excluded  by  an  '  excusatio  necessaria,'
or  had  some  valid  ground  for  exemption,  Gaius  i.  182,  Ulpian,  Reg.  li.  23.
(3)  The  cases  referred  to  in  §  i  of  this  Title.  (4)  Where  a  tutor  was
incapacitated,  acquired  a  ground  of  excuse,  or  was  removed  on  suspicion
after  actually  entering  on  his'  functions  :  but  if  a  testamentary  guardian
died,  or  was  capite  minutus,  the  tutela  devolved  on  the  legitimi,  Dig.  26.
2.  II.  3  and  4.  (5)  In  one  or  two  cases  where  an  exception  was  allowed
to  the  rule  tutorem  habenti  tutor  non  datur,  viz.  (a)  if  there  were  several
testamentary  guardians  of  whom  one  died  or  was  capite  minutus  a  substi-
tute was  given  by  the  magistrate,  Dig.  26.  2.  ii.  4;  (b)  where  the  tutor
legitimus  was  a  minor,  deaf,  dumb,  insane,  or  absent :  for  a  case  obsolete
under  Justinian  see  Tit.  21.  3  inf.

§  L  When  the  effect  of  a  disposition  is  made  to  depend  on  the  occur-
rence or  non-occurrence  of  some  uncertain  event  in  the  future,  even
where  that  event  is  the  ascertainment  of  some  past  or  present  fact,  it  is
said  to  depend  on  a  condition :  where  it  is  an  occurrence,  the  condition
is  positive  or  affirmative :  where  a  non-occurrence,  it  is  negative.  It  may
depend  on  a  condition  in  two  ways;  a  man  may  say,  *my  disposition
shall  not  take  effect  unless  so  and  so  occurs,'  in  which  case  the  condition
is  suspensive ;  or, '  my  disposition  shall  take  effect  at  once,  but  that  effect
shall  be  stopped  and  cancelled  if  so  and  so  occurs,'  in  which  case  the
condition  is  resolutive.  The  importance  of  the  latter  class  is  mainly  in
relation  to  dispositions  involving  a  transfer  of  property,  in  particular  to
the  law  of  sale  :  the  condition  referred  to  in  the  text  is  suspensive.  Some
dispositions  were  by  the  Roman  law  completely  void  if  made  to  depend
on  a  condition  or  dies  (for  which  see  below) ;  '  actus  legitimi,  qui  non
recipiunt  diem  vel  condicionem,  velut  emancipatio,  acceptilatio,  heredi-
tatis  aditio,  servi  optio,  datio  libertatis,  in  totum  vitiantur  per  temporis
vel  condicionis  adiectionem'  Dig.  50.  17.  77.  When  the  condition  was
satisfied  or  fulfilled,  it  was  said,  condicio  existit :  when  it  was  certain
that  it  had  not  been  fulfilled,  condicio  deficit.  Negative  conditions  are
fulfilled  when  the  fa.ct  or  event  whose  non-occurrence  is  contemplated
has  become  impossible ;  and  in  some  cases  a  condition  was  regarded  as
fulfilled  when  in  point  of  fact  it  had  not  been  :  (l)  '  iure  civili  receptum
est,  quotiens  per  eum,  cuius  interest  condicionem  non  impleri,  fiat  quo-
minus  impleatur,  perinde  haberi  ac  si  impleta  condicio  fuisset'  Dig.  50.
17.  161.  (2)  If  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  is  prevented  by  some  other
person's  arbitrarily  refusing  consent  or  co-operation,  'plerumque  haec

M  %


i64  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  I.

condido  aut    dies   pendebat   ex    isdem    legibus  tutor  dari
poterat.     item  si  pure  datus  fuerit,  quamdiu  nemo  ex  testa-


condido,  si  uxorem  duxerit,  si  dederit,  si  fecerit,  ita  accipi  opoitet,  quod
per  cum  ncm  stet,  quominus  ducat,  det  aut  faciat'  Dig.  38.  7.  23:  or  if
the  person  entitled  on  fulfilment  is  prevented  from  fulfilling  by  other
accidental  circumstances.

As  regards  the  eflfect  of  a  condition  annexed  to  a  disposition :

(a)  If  suspensive,  the  disposition,  until  it  is  fulfilled,  is  there  and  in
existence,  and  does  not  come  into  existence  only  on  its  fulfilment :  accord-
ingly, it  may  have  legal  consequences  even  though,  through  failure  of  the
condition,  it  is  subsequently  annihilated :  e.g.  a  second  will,  in  which  the
heir  is  instituted  conditionally,  revokes  a  prior  one,  even  though  the  con-
^  dition  is  never  fiilfiUed  and  the  will  as  a  whole  thus  never  takes  effect.
Dig.  28.  3.  16.  But  rights  conferred  by  the  disposition  arc  merely  condi-
tional, and  can  have  no  practical  effect  until  the  condition  is  fulfilled:
speaking  precisely,  there  is  only  a  chance  of  having  the  right,  which
chance  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  becomes  an  actuality :  a  con-
tmgent  becomes  a  vested  right.    Cf.  the  note  on  Bk.  iii.  15.  4-

{b)  If  resolutive,  the  disposition  has  presently  all  the  effects  which  it
would  have,  had  it  been  unconditional,  though  these  are  liable  to  be
cancelled  and  rendered  null  by  the  future  fulfilment  of  the  condition.

On  the  fulfilment  of  a  suspensive  condition,  the  disposition  which  has
hitherto  been  conditional  becomes  unconditionally  operative,  and  its
operation  is  carried  back  to  the  time  at  which  it  was  made :  '  cum  enim
semel  condicio  extitit,  perinde  habetur  ac  si  illo  tempore,  quo  stipulatio
interposita  est,  sine  condicione  facta  esset'  Dig.  20.  4.  11.  i  :  this  rule  is
expressed  in  the  formula  'condicio  existens  ad  initium  negotii  retrotra-
hitur.'  On  the  Ailfilment  of  a  resolutive  condition,  the  whole  effect  of  the
dispK>sition  is  nullified,  the  condition  operating  retrospectively  so  as  to
place  the  parties  as  far  as  possible  in  the  position  in  which  they  would
have  been  had  the  disposition  never  been  made;  Dig.  6.  i.  41 ;  13.  7.
13  pr. ;  18.  2.  4.  3.  For  the  effect  of  impossible  conditions  see  on  Bk.  ii.
14.  10  inf.  and  cf.  Bk.  iii.  19.  11.

By  dies,  in  connection  with  dispositions,  is  meant  the  fixing  of  a  time,
which  may  mark  either  {a)  the  commencement  of  a  right :  (b)  its  termina-
tion :  or  (c)  both  its  termination  and  commencement,  i.  e.  its  duration :
'  vel  ex  die  incipit  obligatio  aut  confertur  in  diem :  ex  die,  veluti  Kalendis
Martiis  dare  spondes  ?  in  diem  autem,  usque  ad  Kalendas  Martias  dare
spondes  ?'  Dig.  44.  7.  44.  i  (the  language  in  Bk.  iii.  15.  2  inf.  differs  from
this  and  is  inaccurate).  The  dies  may  be  limited  by  express  reference  to
the  calendar  (dies  certus)  or  to  some  event  certain  to  happen,  though
when  it  wiU  actually  happen  is  uncertain:  e.g.  (as  in  wills)  'after  my
death,'  or  'a  year  after  my  death*  (dies  incertus  quando) :  finally  dies
and  condicio  may  be  combined  :  e.  g.  '  three  months  after  so  and  so  shall
happen,  if  it  ever  shall '  (dies  incertus  an  et  quando).  Dies  ex  quo  may
be  described  as  suspensive,  dies  in  quern  as  resolutive.    In  the  latter.


Tit.2o.]  DE  ATILIANO   TUTORE,  ETC.  165

mento  heres  exbtat,  tamdiu  ex  isdem  legibus  tutor  petendus
erat,  qui  desinebat  tutor  esse,  si  condicio  existeret  aut  dies
veniret  aut  heres  existeret  Ab  hostibus  quoque  tutore  capto  2
ex  his  legibus  tutor  petebatur,  qui  desinebat  esse  tutor,  si  is
qui  captus  erat  in  civitatem  reversus  fuerat :  nam  reversus
recipiebat  tutelam  iure  postliminii.  Sed  ex  his  legibus  puptllis  3
tutores  desierunt  dari,  posteaquam  primo  consules  pupillis
utriusque  sexus  tutores  ex  inquisitione  dare  coeperunt,  deinde
praetores  ex  constitutionibus.  nam  supra  scriptis  legibus  neque
de  cautione  a  tutoribus  exigenda  rem  salvam  pupillis  fore
neque  de  compellendis  tutoribus  ad  tuteiae  administrationem
quidquam  cavetur.     Sed  hoc  iure  utimur,  ut  Romae  quidem  4


the  disposition  is  completely  operative,  and  has  its  full  effect  until  die
dies  comes,  after  which  it  has  no  effect  whatever :  e.  g.  the  grant  of  a
usufruct  till  this  day  five  years.  In  dies  ex  quo,  on  the  other  hand,  the
dispK>sidon  has  no  jural  effect  until  the  dies  arrives ;  '  dies  adiectus  efficit
ne  praesenti  die  debeatur'  Dig.  45.  i.  41.  i.  Still,  it  is  certain  that  the
jural  effect  will  coroe  into  existence  sooner  or  later ;  '  pecunia,  quam  in
diem  certum  dari  stipulamur . . .  certum  est  earn  debitum  iri,  licet  post
tempus  petatur '  Gains  iii.  124,  cf.  Dig.  7. 9. 9. 2 ;  so  that  it  is  not  improper
to  speak  of  the  right  as  already  existing  as  a  vested  right,  though  it  may
not  be  realized  as  yet  in  possession.  It  is  this  which  distinguishes  dies
from  condicio :  it  does  not,  like  the  latter,  leave  it  uncertain  whether  a
l^al  relation  will  be  established  or  not,  but  it  fixes  the  relation,  only  post-
poning the  time  at  which  the  right  can  be  realized  in  action :  see  Bk.  iii.
15.  2  inf.  'quod  in  diem  (ex  die?)  stipulamur,  statim  quidem  debetur
sed  peti  prius  quam  dies  veniat  non  potest:'  so  too  Dig.  45.  i.  46.  pr.
'  oentesimis  Kalendis  dari  utiliter  stipulamur,  quia  praesens  obligatio  est,
in  diem  autem  dilata  solutio.*  For  other  passages  in  which  condicio  and
dies  occur  together  see  Bk.  iii.  15.  2,  ib.  16.  2,  ib.  19.  5,  ib.  26.  12,  ib.  29.
3 ;  Bk.  iv.  6.  33  inf.,  and  for  the  expression  *  heres  existere'  see  Bk.  ii.
19.  5  inf.

§  2.  For  '  postliminium '  see  on  Ut.  12.  5  supr.

§  &  The  functions  of  the  consuls  in  appointing  tutors  are  alluded  to
in  Fragm.  Vat  155  :  cf.  Sueton.  Claudius  23  'sanxit  ut  pupillis  extra  ordi-
nem  tutores  a  consuHbus  darentur.'  The  scope  of  the  'inquisitio'  is
explained  by  Theophilus,  tl  iihropoi  tla-tp  .  . .  <i  xp^^'^^*  txown  ^lov,  %  bwd-
itMwci  hvHKfip  aXXoTpiav  ntpiovaiap.  Subsequently  a  special  praetor  tutelaris
was  established  for  the  purpose  by  M.  Aurelius :  '  praetorem  tutelarem
primus  fecit,  cum  antea  a  consulibus  poscerentur,  ut  diligentios  de  tutori-
bus tractaretur'  Capitol.  Marc.  10:  the  date  of  this  change  is  fixed  as
about  1 6 1-9  A.D.  by  a  tablet  found  in  Venice.  For  the  cautio  given  by
tntors  see  Tit.  24  inf.

§  4.  '  Secundum  suam  iurisdictionem '  is  explained  by  the  glossators


i66  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

praefectus  urbis  vel  praetor  secundum  suam  iurisdictionem,  in
provinciis  autem  praesides  ex  inquisitione  tutores  crearent,  vel
magtstratus  iussu  praesidum,  si  non  sint  magnae  pupilli  facul-

5  tates.  Nos  autem  per  constitutionem  nostram  et  huiusmodi
diflficultates  hominum  resecantes  nee  exspectata  iussione  prae-
sidum disposuimus,  si  facultas  pupiili  vel  adulti  usque  ad
quingentos  solidos  valeat,  defensores  civitatum  una  cum  eius-
dem  civitatis  religiosissimo  antistite  vel  apud  alias  publicas
personas,  id  est  magistratus,  vel  iuridicum  Alexandrinae  civi-
tatis tutores  vel  curatores  creare,  legitima  cautela  secundum
eiusdem  constitutionis  normam  praestanda,  videlicet  eorum
periculo  qui  eam  accipiant.

6  Impuberes  autem  in  tutela  esse  naturali  iure  conveniens
est,  ut  is  qui  perfectae  aetatis  non  sit  alterius  tutela  regatur.

7  Cum  igitur  pupillorum  pupillarumque  tutores  negotia  gerunt,
post  pubertatem  tutelae  iudicio  rationem  reddunt.


thus :  *  iurisdictio  eorum  est  haec :  ut  puta  a  patriciis  usque  ad  illustres
praefectus  urbi  tutores  dat,  ab  illustribus  usque  ad  inferiores  praetor.'
But  it  seems  just  as  probable  that  the  praetor's  functions  related  only  to
pupilli  whose  property  fell  below  a  certain  maximum  value — possibly  500
solidi :  at  least  (§  5)  municipal  magistrates  in  the  provinces  were  authorized
to  appoint  when  the  pupil's  fortune  was  less  than  this.

§  6.  The  reference  is  to  Cod.  i.  4.  30.  The  iuridicus  of  Alexandria
received  the  power  of  appointing  tutors  from  M.  Aurelius,  Dig.  i.  20 :  cf.
Cod.  I.  57 ;  magistrates  of  the  same  name  exercised  the  same  functions
in  Italy  (Capitol.  Marc.  11)  and  perhaps  elsewhere,  Apul.  Metam.  i.  5,
but  they  seem  to  have  been  extinct  before  the  time  of  Justinian.

§  6.  See  on  Tit.  13.  i  supr.

§  7.  For  *  negotia  gerere '  see  the  note  last  referred  to.  On  the  ward's
attaining  the  age  of  puberty  the  tutor  could  be  compelled  by  the  actio
tutelae  directa  to  lay  before  him  full  accounts  of  his  income  and  expendi-
ture for  the  years  during  which  he  had  administered  the  property  (df.  note
on  Bk.  iii.  27.  2  inf.) :  condemnation  entailed  infamia,  Bk.  iv.  16.  2  inf.
Where  the  charge  was  one  of  conversion  to  his  own  use  the  proper  remedy
was  the  actio  de  rationibus  distrahendis,  a  penal  action  dating  from  the
XII  Tables,  Cic.  de  Off.  iii.  15.  pr.  and  6,  by  which  double  damages  could
be  recovered,  Dig.  26.  7.  55.  i :  27.  3.  i.  19.


Tit  21.]  DE  AUCTORITATE  TUTORUM.  167

XXI.

DE  AUCTORITATE  TUTORUM.

Auctoritas  autem  tutoris  in  quibusdam  causis  necessaria
^  pupillis  est,  in  quibusdam  non  est  necessaria.  ut  ecce  si  quid
dari  sibi  stipulentur,  non  est  necessaria  tutoris  auctoritas :
quod  si  aliis  pupilli  promittant,  necessaria  est :  namque  placuit
meliorem  quidem  suam  condicionem  licere  eis  facere  etiam
sine  tutoris  auctoritate,  deteriorem  vero  non  aliter  quam
tutore  auctore.     unde  in  his  causis,  ex  quibus  mutuae  obli-


Tit.  XXI.  The  administration  of  property  in  general  is  carried  on  by
dispositions  such  as  alienation,  contract,  release,  and  so  forth ;  but  the
functions  of  a  tutor  relate  in  the  main  only  to  acts  or  dispositions  by
which  the  ward^s  property  might  be  diminished  :  with  an  act  of  the  ward
by  which  he  is  merely  enriched  the  tutor  need  have  nothing  to  do.  The
most  important  acts  of  the  former  class  are  alienation  and  contract:
these  might  ('  si  procuratorem  recipiebant ')  be  the  acts  of  the  tutor  alone :
but  if  the  actus  were  legitimus  the  ward  must  act  in  person.  But  when-
ever the  latter  attempted  to  make  a  disposition  by  which  his  proprietary
position  might  be  prejudiced,  it  could  confer  no  rights  on  other  parties
unless  the  tutor  *  auctoritatem  suam  interposuit : '  it  was  this  alone  that
gave  the  act  a  full  legal  character :  '  tutoris  auctoritas  necessaria ...  si
lege  aut  legitimo  iudicio  agant,  si  se  obligent,  si  civile  negotium  gerant
(e.g.  hereditatis  aditio,  note  on  §  i)  si  rem  mancipi  alienent . . .  etiam  in
rerum  nee  mancipi  alienatione  tutoris  anctoritate  opus  est '  Ulpian,  Reg.
II.  27.  There  were  in  fact  only  three  cases  in  which  a  pupil  could  be
sued  on  an  act  of  his  own  which  had  not  been  sanctioned  by  his  tutor :
(i)  for  his  own  delict,  Dig.  9.  2.  5.  2 ;  (2)  si  actio  ex  re  venit,  i.e.  where
the  obligation  is  merely  one  of  restitution,  Dig.  44.  7.  46  :  13.  6.  3 ;  and
(3)  where  and  so  far  as  he  had  been  enriched  by  the  transaction,  Dig.
26.  8.  5.  pr.  There  is  also  considerable  authority  for  saying  that  the
contract  of  a  pupillus  infantia  major  bound  him  naturaliter  even  though
not  authorised  by  the  guardian  :  cf.  with  iii.  29.  3  inf.  Dig.  46.  2. 1. 1  :  12.

42.  pr. :  46.  3.  44,  ib.  95.  4 :  39.  5.  19-  4 :  36.  i.  66.  pr.  If  this  view  is
correct  we  must  supply  a  word  in  the  last  sentence  of  this  section,  and
understand  it  'at  invicem  pupilli  [civiliter]  non  obligantur.'  But  other
passages  besides  the  text  above  say  that  no  obligation  whatever  arose
from  the  unauthorised  promise  of  a  pupillus  :  e.  g.  Dig.  26.  8.  9.  pr. :  16.
I.  8.  15:  Cod.  8.  39. 1.  The  commentators  take  different  views  of  the
antinomy,  some  believing  in  the  superior  authority  of  the  passages  first
cited,  others  in  that  of  those  last  referred  to,  and  others  attempting  to
reconcile  them.  See  the  writer's  Contract  of  Sale  in  the  Civil  Law,
pp.  11-15.


i68  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

gationes  nascuntur,  in  emptionibus  venditionibus,  locationibus
conductionibus,  mandatis,  depositis,  si  tutoris  auctoritas  non
interveniat,  ipsi  quidem  qui  cum  his  contrahunt  obligantur,  at

1  invicem  pupilli  non  obligantur.  Neque  tamen  hereditatem
adirc  neque  bonorum  possessionem  pctere  neque  hereditatem
ex  fideicommisso  suscipere  aliter  possunt  nisi  tutoris  auc-
toritate,  quamvis  lucrosa  sit  neque  ullum  damnum  habeat.

2  Tutor  autem  statim  in  ipso  negotio  praesens  debet  auctor
fieri,  si  hoc  pupillo  prodesse  existimaverit.    post  tempus  vero

3  aut  per  epistulam  interposita  auctoritas  nihil  agit.  Si  inter
tutorem  pupillumve  iudicium  agendum  sit,  quia  ipse  tutor  in
rem  suam  auctor  esse  non  potest,  non  praetorius  tutor  ut  olim
constituitur,  sed  curator  in  locum  eius  datur,  quo  interveniente
iudicium  peragitur  et  eo  peracto  curator  esse  desinit.


§  1.  The  reason  of  the  rule  here  stated  is  that  hereditas,  bonorum  pos-
sessio,  and  hereditas  fideicomniissaria  always  comprised  liabilities  as  well
as  rights,  and  though  the  latter  might  more  than  outbalance  the  former,
yet  on  the  general  principle  the  pupil  could  incur  no  liability  by  contract
whatever  without  his  tutor's  auctoritas :  cf.  Seneca,  Nat.  Quaest  2.  49,
Dig.  29.  2.  8.  pr.  The  aditio  of  an  inheritance  had  always  been  an  actus
legitimus,  an  act  which  by  law  was  required  to  be  personally  performed,
and  which  consequently  could  not  be  undertaken  by  the  tutor  alone  on
the  pupil's  behalf.  In  bonorum  possessio,  on  the  contrary,  which  being
a  praetorian  institution  was  governed  by  more  liberal  rules,  free  represen-
tation was  always  permitted.  By  imperial  enactment  (Cod.  6. 30. 18. 2-4)
the  tutor  was  allowed  to  make  aditio  for  the  pupil  without  any  co-operation
on  the  latter's  part.

§  8.  Suits  in  which  a  pupil  was  a  party  might  be  undertaken  by  the
tutor  alone,  or  by  the  pupil  himself  with  the  former's  auctoritas  :  '  sufficit
tutoribus  ad  plenam  defensionem,  sive  ipsi  iudicium  suscipiant,  sive
pupillus  ipsis  auctoribus  . . .  ita  tamen,  ut  pro  his,  qui  fari  non  possint
vel  absint,  ipsi  tutores  iudicium  suscipiant,  pro  his  autem,  qui  supra
septimum  annum  aetatis  sunt  et  praesto  fuerint,  auctoritatem  praestent '
Dig.  26.  7.  I.  2.

The  suit  between  tutor  and  ward  contemplated  in  the  text  is  one
arising  out  of  other  matters  than  the  guardianship,  e.g.  a  will  or  in-
testacy under  which  both  claimed  to  succeed.  For  the  tutor  praetorius
see  Gaius  i.  173-187,  Cod.  5.  44,  and  note  on  Tit.  14.  4  supr.


Tit.  22.]  QUIBUS  MODIS  TUTELA  FINITUR,  169


XXII.

QUIBUS  MODIS  TUTELA  FINITUR.

PupilH  pupillaeque  cum  puberes  esse  coeperint,  tutela
liberantur.  pubertatem  autem  veteres  quidem  non  solum  ex
annis^  sed  etiam  ex  habitu  corporis  in  masculis  aestimari
volebant.  nostra  autem  maiestas  dignum  esse  castitate  tem-
porum  nostrorum  bene  putavit,  quod  in  feminis  et  antiquis
impudtcum  esse  visum  est^  id  est  inspectionem  habitudinis
corporis,  hoc  etiam  in  masculos  extendere:  et  ideo  sancta
constitutione  promulgata  pubertatem  in  masculis  post  quartum
decimum  annum  completum  ilico  initium  accipere  disposuimus,
antiquitatis  normam  in  feminis  personis  bene  positam  suo
ordine  relinquentes,  ut  post  duodecimum  annum  completum
viripotentes  esse  credantur.  Item  iinitur  tutela,  si  adrogati  1
sint  adhuc  impuberes  vel  deportati:  item  si  in  servitutem
pupil  lus  redigatur  vel  ab  hostibus  fuerit  captus.  Sed  et  si  2
usque  ad  certam  condicionem  datus  sit  testamento,  aeque
evenit,  ut  desinat  esse  tutor  existente  condicione.  Simili  3
modo  finitur  tutela  morte  vel  tutorum  vel  pupillorum.     Sed  4

Tit.  XXTT.  The  precise  age  at  which  a  male  pupillus  be^me  pubes
had  been  disputed  by  the  two  schools  of  jurists :  the  Sabinians  were
in  iJBivoQr  of  determining  it  in  each  individual  by  reference  to  actual
physical  maturity,  the  Procolians  of  fixing  fourteen  years  as  the  age  in  all
cases :  Javolenus  Priscus  inclined  to  combine  both  requirements,  Ulpian,
Reg.  II.  28,  Gains  i.  196.  The  constitution  referred  to  by  Jusdnian  is  in
Cod.  5.  60.  3.

§  L  The  release  of  a  pupillus  from  guardianship  on  being  deportatus
might  be  taken  to  support  the  theory  that  tutela  was  iuris  dvilis;  see
note  on  Tit.  13.  i  supr.  If  the  ward  was  taken  captive  a  curator  was
usually  appointed  to  look  after  his  property,  on  the  chance  of  his  restora-
tion by  postliminium,  Dig.  4.  6. 1 5.  pr.

§  2.  The  office  of  a  testamentary  guardian,  who  was  appointed  sub-
ject to  a  resolutive  condidon  or  a  dies  in  quern  (§  5  inf.),  determined  on
the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  or  the  arrival  of  the  dies.  So  too  if  he
were  appointed  by  a  magistrate  certae  rei  vel  causae,  he  ceased  to  be
guardian  as  soon  as  the  purpose  for  which  he  had  been  nominated  was
attained,  Dig.  26.  2.  10,  Cod.  5.  44.

§  4.  The  tutela  legitima  of  an  agnate  was  extinguished  by  his  under-
going  capitis   minutio   minima,  because  thereby  he  lost   his  agnatic


lyo  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

et  capitis  deminutione  tutoris,  per  quam  libertas  vel  civitas
eius  amittitur,  omnis  tutela  perit.  minima  autem  capitis
deminutione  tutoris,  veluti  si  se  in  adoptionem  dederit,  legi-
tima  tantum  tutela  perit,  ceterae  non  pereunt:  sed  pupilli
et  pupillae  capitis  deminutio,  licet  minima  sit,  omnes  tutelas

5  tollit.     Praeterea  qui  ad  certum  tempus  testamento  dantur

6  tutores,  finite  eo  deponunt  tutelam.  Desinunt  autem  esse
tutores,  qui  vel  removentur  a  tutela  ob  id  quod  suspecti  visi
sunt,  vel  ex  iusta  causa  sese  excusant  et  onus  administrandae
tutelae  deponunt  secundum  ea  quae  inferius  proponemus.


XXIII.

DE  CURATORIBUS.

Masculi  puberes  et  feminae  viripotentes  usque  ad  vice-
simum  quintum  annum  completum  curatores  accipiunt :  qui,
licet  puberes  sint,  adhuc  tamen  huius  aetatis  sunt,  ut  negotia


character,  so  that  the  whole  reason  for  his  being  tutor  in  that  particular
case  fell  away.  The  legitima  tutela  of  cognates  was  not  destroyed  by  this
event :  '  ex  novis  autem  legibus  . . .  tutelae  plerumque  sic  deferuntur,  ut
personae  naturaliter  designentur'  Dig.  4.  5.  7.  pr.  A  tutor  who  lost  his
liberty  by  capture  in  war  might  recover  his  office  iure  postliminii,  Tit.
20.  2  supr.

In  Dig.  4.  5.  7.  pr.  Paulus  writes  'tutelas  autem  non  amittit  capitis
minutio,  exceptis  his  quae  in  iure  alieno  personis  positis  deferuntur.'
Literally,  these  words  would  seem  to  mean  that  the  tutela  exercised  by
a  filiusfamilias  (under  a  testament  or  magisterial  appointment)  was  ex-
tinguished by  cap.  dim.  minima :  but  this  is  contradicted  by  Dig.  27.  3.
II,  which  expressly  says  that  emancipation  did  not  have  this  effect.
Consequently,  the  commentators  have  either  restricted  the  sense  of  the
passage  to  capitis  deminutio  by  datio  in  adoptionem  (though  that  this
should  destroy  tutela  seems  quite  unreasonable)  or  have  attempted  to
correct  the  passage  so  as  to  make  it  refer  only  to  agnatic  guardianship.
An  explanation  of  this  kind  is  given  without  any  emendation  by  a
scholiast,  who  interprets  the  disputed  words  by  saying  rovrcori  roU  dm-
fifivatriv  uirc^ovo-ioiff  fi*xP^  ""^^  ''<*«'  varp^s  rcXcvr^r  (hoc  est,  qui  remanserunt
in  potestate  usque  ad  mortem  patris  :  i.  e.  the  agnates).

Tit  XXTII.  Cura,  like  tutela,  was  a  munus  publicum.  A  tutor's  func-
tions were  partly  of  administration,  partly  of  auctoritas :  those  of  a  curator
related  to  administration  only,  so  that  he  was  not  said,  like  the  tutor,
to  be  '  personae  datus,'  and  it  is  the  auctoritatis  interpositio  which  forms


Tit.  23-]  DE  CURATORIBUS.  171

sua  tueri  non  possint.     Dantur  autem  curatores  ab  isdem  1
magistratibus,  a  quibus  et  tutores.     sed  curator  testamento
non  datur,  sed  datus  confirmatur  decreto  praetoris  vel  prae-
sidis.     Item  inviti  adulescentes  curatores  non  accipiunt  prae-  2


the  characteristic  difference  between  the  two :  '  si  tutoris  auctoritas  fuerit
necessaria . . .  tutor  ei  necessario  dabitur,  quoniam  curatoris  auctoritas
ad  hoc  inutilis  est'  Dig.  49.  i.  17.  i.  The  exact  scope  of  the  curator's
administratio  of  course  depended  on  the  circumstances  of  the  case  :
somedmes  he  entirely  managed  the  ward's  property :  sometimes  he
aUowed  him  practically  to  manage  it  himself,  and  here  he  took  no  per-
sonal part  in  the  business,  having  no  power  to  interpose  auctoritas  :  but
his  consensus  was  presumed,  and  his  responsibility  in  no  way  diminished :
sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  lunadcs,  he  had  charge  of  the  ward's  person
also.

The  cura  of  adulescentes  or  minors — i.  e.  persons  between  the  ages  of
puberty  and  twenty-five  years — originated  in  the  lex  Plaetoria,  often
mentioned  by  Plautus,  who  died  B.C.  183,  which  subjected  those  who
fraudulently  overreached  minors  to  a  indicium  publicum  entailing  a
pecuniary  mulct  and  infamia  on  conviction.  In  the  face  of  such  a  prose-
cution few  people  would  be  likely  to  give  credit  to  minors  or  even  to
have  any  dealings  with  them  whatsoever  (Plautus,  Pseudolus  i.  3.  68,
Rudens,  5.  3. 24) :  hence  the  rule  was  established  (it  is  uncertain  whether
by  the  praetor  or  by  the  statute  itself:*  Capitolinus  Marc  10  is  in  favour
of  the  latter  view)  that  minors  who  wished  to  contract  or  deal  with  others
should  be  compellable  to  receive  a  curator  on  their  appHcation,  by  whose
assent  to  the  transaction  the  penal  consequences  of  the  lex  Plaetoria
would  be  avoided.  M.  Aurelius  ordained  that  any  minor,  apart  from
such  special  occasion,  should  be  able  to  obtain  from  the  praetor  a  general
curator  to  undertake  the  general  administration  of  his  property.  A  further
protection  afforded  to  minors  against  the  consequences  of  their  own  inex-
perience or  indiscretion  was  the  praetorian  practice  of  in  integrum
restitutio,  for  which  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  33  inf.

§  L  Dio  Cassius  (44.  35)  says  that  Julius  Caesar  appointed  in  his  will
mrpSiFovt  to  Augustus  'qui  propter  provectiorem  aetatem  curatores
fnerint : '  these  must  have  been  magisterially  confirmed.  The  reason  why
testamentary  appointment  of  curators  was  never  allowed  was  perhaps
that  in  the  earliest  form  of  the  institution  (the  cura  of  furiosi  and  prodigi)
a  causae  cognitio  was  required  in  order  to  settle  whether  the  person
actually  was  furiosus  and  prodigus,  and  this  would  have  seemed  to  admit
an  undue  interference  of  the  magistrate  with  testamentary  power.

§  2.  This  means  only  that  a  general  curator  could  not  be  forced  on
a  minor :  but  he  could  be  compelled  to  have  one  temporarily,  ad  certam
causam  (i)  in  litem,  as  is  observed  in  the  text,  for  no  judgment  could  be
given  against  a  minor  unless  the  litigation  were  sanctioned  by.  a  curator.
Dig.  43.  I.  45.  2 :  (2)  that  his  tutor's  accounts  might  be  passed.  Cod.
5.  31.  7:   (3)  when  his  debtor  wished  to  discharge  a  debt  and  obtain


172  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

terquam  in  litem :  curator  enim  et  ad  certain  causam  dari

3  potest.  Furiosi  quoque  et  prodigi,  licet  maiores  v^;inti
quinque  annis  sint,  tamen  in  curatione  sunt  adgnatorum  ex
lege  duodecim  tabularum.  sed  solent  Romae  pracfectus  urbis
vel  praetor  et  in  provinciis  praesides  ex  inquisitione  eis  dare

4  curatores.     Sed  et  mente  captis  et  surdis  et  mutis  et  qui


a  release,  Dig.  4.  4.  7.  2  :  (4)  if  he  wished  to  give  himself  in  adrogation.
Dig.  I.  7.  8.

Whether  a  minor  who  had  a  general  curator  could  bind  himself  by
contract  without  the  latter's  consent  is  disputed.  The  general  rule,  even
as  late  as  the  time  of  Modestinus,  seems  to  have  been  that  he  could,
Dig.  45.  I.  1 01,  but  of  course  he  could  not  be  effectively  sued  without  it.
A  rescript,  however,  of  Diocletian  and  Maximian  shows  that  a  little  later
the  rule  had  been  altered  (Cod.  2.  21.  3),  a  minor  with  a  curator  being
put  on  a  par  with  an  interdicted  prodigal.  The  same  passage  states  that
against  a  contract  made  without  such  consent  he  could  get  himself  in
integrum  restitutus,  and  from  Cod.  2.  24.  2  and  3  it  appears  that  he  could
avail  himself  of  the  same  remedy  if  he  couid  show  that  even  with  it  he
had  made  any  disposition  detrimental  to  himself.

§  8.  The  cura  of  furiosi  and  prodigi,  which  the  XII  Tables  had  given
to  the  agnates,  went  doubtless  on  default  of  the  latter  to  the  Gentiles,
on  the  analogy  of  intestate  succession :  Cic.  de  Invent.  2.  50,  Varro^
de  Ke  Rust.  i.  2.  Appointment  by  the  magistrate  does  not  seem  to  have
superseded  this  legitima  cura*  which  is  often  spoken  of  as  still  in  existence
('eo  (legitimo)  cessante,  aut  non  idoneo  forsitan  existente,  ex  iudiciali
electione  curatorem  ei  dare  necesse  fuerit'  Cod.  S*  7^*  7*  6)  cf.  Dig.  27.
10.  13) :  it  was  resorted  to  only  when  the  legitimi  failed.

The  interdiction  of  prodigals  had  been  a  matter  of  customary  law  even
before  the  XII  Tables,  Dig.  27.  10.  i.  pr.  The  prodigus  was  subjected  to
cura  on  an  application  to  that  effect  being  made  to  the  praetor  by  his
near  relations :  the  form  of  interdiction  is  given  by  Paulus,  Sent.  Rec.  3.
4  a.  7  '  moribus  per  praetorem  bonis  interdicitur  hoc  modo :  quando  tua
bona  patema  avitaque  nequitia  tua  disperdis  liberosque  tuos  ad  ^es-
tatem  perducis,  ob  earn  rem  tibi  ea  re  commercioque  interdico.'  Under
the  early  law  the  office  belonged  to  the  agnates  only  if  the  prodigus  had
succeeded  his  father  ab  intestato,  Ulpian,  Reg.  12.  3.  As  to  when  furiosi
and  prodigi  were  released  from  cura  cf.  Dig.  27.  10.  i.  pr. '  £t  tamdiu
amboerunt  in  curatione,  quamdiu  vel  furiosus  sanitatem  velille  (prodigus)
sanos  mores  receperit :  quod  si  evenerit,  ipso  iure  desinunt  esse  in  potes-
tate  curatorum.'

§  4.  By  mente  capti,  as  distinct  from  furiosi,  is  meant  to  be  expressed
imbecility  or  weakness  of  intellect,  in  contrast  with  actual  insanity:
synonymous  tenns  are  stultus,  fatuus,  insanus.  Such  persons  can  have
curators  given  them  on  application,  because  they  cannot  manage  their
own  affairs,  or  even  be  relied  on  in  the  selection  of  agents :  for  Paulus


Tit  24.]        DE  SATISDATIONE  TUTORUM,  ETC.  173

morbo  perpetuo  laborant,  quia  rebus  suis  superesse  non
possunt,  curatores  dandi  sunt.  Interdum  autem  et  pupilli  5
curatores  accipiunt,  ut  puta  si  legitimus  tutor  non  sit  idoneus,
quia  habenti  tutorem  tutor  dari  non  potest,  item  si  testamento
datus  tutor  vel  a  praetore  vel  a  praeside  tdoneus  non  sit  ad
admin istrationem  nee  tamen  fraudulenter  negotia  administrat,
solet  ei  curator  adiungi.  item  in  locum  tutorum,  qui  non  in
perpetuum,  sed  ad  tempus  a  tutela  excusantur,  solent  curatores
dari.

Quodsi  tutor  adversa  valetudine  vel  alia  necessitate  im*  6
peditur,   quo  minus  negotia  pupilli   administrare  possit,  et
pupillus  vel  absitvel  infans  sit,  quem  velit  actorem  periculo
ipsius  praetor  vel  qui  provinciae  praeerit  decreto  constituet.

XXIV.

DE  SATISDATIONE  TUTORUM   ET  CURATORUM.

Ne  tamen  pupillorum  pupillarumve  et  eorum,  qui  quaeve
in  curatione  sunt,  negotia  a  tutoribus  curatoribusve  consu-
mantur  aut  deminuantur,  curat  praetor,  ut  et  tutores  et
curatores  eo  nomine  satisdent  sed  hoc  non  est  perpetuum  ;
nam  tutores  testamento  dati  satisdare  non  coguntur,  quia
fides  eorum  et  diligentia  ab  ipso  testatore  probata  est :  item
ex   inquisitione   tutores  vel   curatores  dati  satisdatione  non

says  (Sent.  Rec.  4.  12.  9)  'caeco  curator  dari  non  potest,  quia  ipse  sibi
procuratorem  instituere  potest'

§  6.  For  the  maxim  *  tutorem  habenti  tutor  dari  non  potest '  see  on
Tit  2a  pr.  supr.

§  6.  For  the  'actor'  mentioned  in  this  section  see  Dig.  26.  7.  24.  pr.,
ib.  32.  7  ;  26.  9.  6 ;  46.  8.  9.

Tit.  XXTV.  The  squandering  of  pupils'  fortunes  by  their  tutors  is  often
dwelt  upon  by  old  writers :  *  divitias  .  . . .  ut  ferme  evenit^.  tutor  immi-
nuit'  Apuleius  Apol., '  multiformis  plerumque  perfidia  tutorum '  Symmach.
Ep.  7.  65,  *cottidie  suspecti  tutores  postulantur*  Dig.  26.  10.  I.  pr.
Tutors  and  curators,  with  the  exceptions  mentioned  in  the  text,  had  to
give  security  *rem  pupilli  salvam  fore*  Bk.  iii.  18,  4  inf.,  their  own
engagement  always  being  supported  by  sureties.  It  was  a  question
whether  the  patron  and  his  sons  were  exempted  from  satisdatio:  the
better  view  seems  to  have  been  that  it  depended  on  the  circumstances  of
the  particular  case,  Dig.  26.  4.  5.  i.


1 74  I^S  TITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUA  TTUOR.        [Lib.  I .

1  onerantur,  quia  idonei  electi  sunt.  Sed  et  si  ex  testamento
vel  inquisitione  duo  pluresve  dati  fuerint,  potest  unus  offerre
satis  de  indemnitate  pupilli  vel  adulescentis  et  contutori  vel
concuratori  praeferri,  ut  solus  administret,  vel  ut  contutor
satis  offerens  praeponatur  ei,  ut  ipse  solus  administret.  itaque
per  se  non  potest  petere  satis  a  contutore  vel  concuratore  suo,
sed  offerre  debet,  ut  electionem  det  contutori  suo,  utrum  velit
satis  accipere  an  satis  dare,  quodsi  nemo  eorum  satis  offerat,
si  quidem  adscriptum  fuerit  a  testatore,  quis  gerat,  ille  gerere
debet:  quodsi  non  fuerit  adscriptum,  quern  maior  pars elegerit,
ipse  gerere  debet,  ut  edicto  praetoris  cavetur.  sin  autem  ipsi
tutores  dissenserint  circa  eligendum  eum  vel  eos  qui  gerere
debent,  praetor  partes  suas  interponere  debet,  idem  et  in
pluribus  ex  inquisitione  datis  probandum  est,  id  est  ut  maior
pars  eligere  possit,  per  quem  administratio  fieret.

2  Sciendum  autem  est  non  solum  tutores  vel  curatores  pupillis
et  adultis  ceterisque  personis  ex  administratione  teneri,  sed
etiam  in  eos  qui  satisdationes  accipiunt  subsidiariam  actionem

§  1.  Where  there  were  several  joint  tutors  or  curators  (i)  the  business
might  be  entrusted  specially  to  one  of  them,  and  that  either  by  direction
of  the  appointing  testator  or  magistrate,  or  by  mutual  arrangement :  the
mode  in  which  this  last  was  settled  is  described  in  this  section.  The
managing  tutor  or  curator  was  then  called  tutor  or  curator  gerens,  the
others  honorarii :  '  sunt  quidam  tutores,  qui  honorarii  appellantur :  sunt,
qui  rei  notitiae  gratia  dicuntur :  sunt,  qui  ad  hoc  dantur,  ut  gerant,  et  hoc
vel  pater  adicit,  ut  unus  puta  gerat,  vel  voluntate  tutorum  uni  committitur
gestus,  vel  praetor  ita  decemit.  Dico  igitur,  cuicunque  ex  tutoribus
fuerit  solutum,  etsi  honorariis — nam  et  ad  hos  periculum  pertinet —
recte  solvi,  nisi  interdicta  iis  a  praetore  fuerit  administratio :  nam  si
interdicta  est,  non  recte  solvitur'  Dig.  46.  3.  I4«  i  :  cf.  Dig.  26.  7.  3.  i.
The  tutores  honorarii  were  responsible  for  the  gerens'  faults  of  commis-
sion and  omission,  and  therefore  had  to  keep  an  eye  on  his  administration
(cf.  Bk.  iii.  19.  20  inf.).  (2)  Each  one  might  have  been  specially  assigned
to  look  after  certain  kinds  of  the  ward's  property,  or  his  property  in  some
specific  locality ;  in  this  case  he  was,  within  his  sphere  of  action,  possessed
of  all  the  rights  and  subject  to  all  the  duties  of  a  single  guardian.
(3)  The  administration  might  be  undivided:  in  which  case  each  had
a  complete  right  to  manage  the  ward*s  affairs  subject  to  his  colleagues*
right  of  veto,  and  the  liability  was  joint  throughout,  even  where  loss  was
occasioned  by  the  act  or  omission  of  a  single  member.

§  2.  When  inferior  magistrates  appointed  tutors  or  curators  to  persons
whose  fortunes  fell  below  a  certain  minimum  (Tit.  20.  4  supr.),  they  did


Tit.  24.]        DE  SATISDATIONE  TUTORUM,  ETC.  175

esse,  quae  ultimum  eis  praesidium  possit  afierre.  subsidiaria
autem  actio  datur  in  eos,  qui  vel  omnino  a  tutoribus  vel
curatoribus  satisdari  non  curaverint  aut  non  idonee  passi  essent
caveri.  quae  quidem  tam  ex  prudentium  responsis  quam  ex
constitutionibus  imperialibus  et  in  heredes  eorum  extenditur.
Quibus  constitutionibus  et  illud  exprimitur,  ut,  nisi  caveant  3
tutores  vel  curatores,  pignoribus  captis  coerceantur.  Neque  4
autem  praefectus  urbis  neque  praetor  neque  praeses  provinciae
neque  quis  alius  cui  tutores  dandi  ius  est  hac  actione  tenebitur,
sed  hi  tantummodo  qui  satisdationem  exigere  solent.


so  sine  inquisitione,  and  therefore  were  bound  to  make  the  selected
person  give  satisdatio  in  the  usual  manner.  If  they  exacted  insufficient
security,  they  were  made  liable  in  person  for  all  loss  resulting  from  their
negligence  by  a  senatusconsult  of  Trajan,  Cod.  5.  75.  5,  and  this  liability
was  extended  to  their  heirs  by  Antoninus  Pius,  Dig.  27.  8.  6.  Higher
magistrates  who  appointed  ex  inquisitione  were  never  thus  responsible,
§  4  inf.

This  title  deals  with  only  one  of  the  modes  in  which  persons  in  tutela
or  cura  were  secured  against  loss  from  the  dishonesty  or  negligence  of
their  tutors  or  curators.  They  were  also  protected  (i)  by  the  possibility
of  remotio,  Tit.  26  inf.  (2)  By  statutory  restrictions  on  the  tutor's  or
curator's  powers,  especially  in  respect  of  alienation:  see  on  Tit.  13.  i
supr.  (3)  By  a  statutory  hypothec  over  the  tutor's  or  curator's  whole
property,  which  had  certainly  been  established  as  early  as  the  time  of
Constantine,  Cod.  5.  yj.  20.  (4)  By  responsibility  of  other  persons  for
the  tutor  or  curator  (in  addition  to  his  sureties  and  the  appointing  magis-
trate). These  were  the  affirmatores,  who  had  at  the  inquisitio  borne
witness  to  the  character  of  the  person  appointed,  and  the  nominatores,
persons  who  proposed  or  suggested  a  tutor  or  curator  in  any  particular
case;  this  might  happen  (a)  at  the  petitio  tutoris.  If  a  pupil  had  no
tutor,  anyone  could  apply  for  or  suggest  one,  and  some  persons  were
bound  to  do  this:  e.g.  the  mother  (Bk.  iii.  3.  6  inf.),  and  other  heirs
presumptive  ab  intestato,  under  penalty,  in  default,  of  forfeiting  their
rights  of  succession  if  the  pupil  died  impubes,  Dig.  26.  6.  2.  2 :  also  the
libertus,  under  a  pecuniary  penalty,  (b)  In  cases  where  a  man  was
appointed  tutor  or  curator  by  a  magistrate,  he  could  usually  procure
exemption  by  suggesting  some  one  better  qualified  (potioris  nominatio)
by  reason  of  relationship.  This  right  of  nominatio  was  in  many  cases
restricted  (Fragm.  Vat.  158,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  2.  29  *qui  potiores  nominare
non  possunt '),  and  was  altogether  abolished  by  Justinian.


176  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

XXV.
DE  EXCUSATIONIBUS.

Excusantur  autem  tutores  vel  curatores  variis  ex  causis:
plerumque  autem  propter  liberos,  sive  in  potestate  sint  sive
emancipati.  si  enim  tres  liberos  quis  superstites  Romae
habeat  vel  in  Italia  quattuorvel  in  provinciis  quinque,  a  tutela
vel  cura  possunt  excusari  exemplo  ceterorum  munerum :  nam
et  tutelam  et  curam  placuit  publicum  munus  esse,  sed
adoptivi  liberi  non  prosunt,  in  adoptionem  autem  dati  natural!
patri  prosunt  item  nepotes  ex  filio  prosunt,  ut  in  locum
patris  succedant,  ex  filia  non  prosunt.  filii  autem  superstites
tantum  ad  tutelae  vel  curae  muneris  excusationem  prosunt,
defunct!  non  prosunt.  sed  si  in  bello  amiss!  sunt,  quaesitum
est,  an  prosint  et  constat  eos  solos  prodesse  qui  in  ac!e
amittuntur:    hi  enim,  quia   pro    re   publica    ceciderunt,  in

1  perpetuum   per  gloriam   vivere  intell^untur.      Item    divus
Marcus  in  semestribus  rescripsit  eum,  qui  res  fisc!  administrat,

2  a  tutela  vel  cura  quamdiu  administrat  excusari  posse.     Item
qui  rei  publicae  causa  absunt,  a  tutela  et  cura  excusantur.

Tit.  XXV.  For  the  Eastern  Empire  Romae  means  Constantinople,  and
Italia  Thrace,  schol.  Theoph.  By '  ut  in  patris  locum  succedant '  is  meant
that  any  number  of  grandchildren  by  one  dead  son  count  only  as  one,
00*01  d*  &y  &<riv  tlyyoyoi  e(  cvor  vlov,  dim  ivht  T€Kvov  dpiSfiovvraij  Dig.  27*  I*
2.  7.  For  the  sentiment  at  the  end  of  the  section  cf.  Tyrtaeus,  Carm.  i.  i ;
iii.  31,  Plautus,  Capt.  3.  5.  32,  Cic.  pro  Balbo  17.  21,  Plana  77,  Seneca,
Controv.  i.  8.

§  L  Persons  employed  by  the  emperor  on  his  own  affairs  could  also
claim  exemption:  'hi  vero,  quibus  princeps  curam  alicuius  rei  iunxit,
excusantur  a  tutela,  donee  curam  gerunt'  Dig.  27.  i.  22.  i ;  ib.  41.  pr.,
Cod.  5  62.  ID.  The  semestria  was  a  collection  of  decisions  delivered  by
M.  Aurelius  in  his  privy  council — so  called  perhaps  because  the  latter  was
subject  to  reconstitution  half  yearly,  Dig.  2.  14.  46;  18.  7.  10;  29.  2.  I2.
But  a  gloss  says  '  semestria  sunt  codex,  in  quo  legislationes  per  sex  menses
prolatae  in  unum  redigebantur.'

§  2.  Persons  absent  rei  publicae  causa  were  exempt  from  newly-
tendered  guardianships  during  their  absence  and  for  a  year  after  their
return  :  when  sent  abroad  on  such  state  business  they  were  excused  from
any  tutela  which  they  were  invested  with  at  the  time,  but  on  their  return
they  had  to  resume  it  without  any  *  anni  vacatio'  Dig.  27.  i.  10.  2,  Cod.  5.
64.  I.


Tit  250  DE  EXCUSATIONIBUS.  177

sed  et  si  fuerunt  tutores  vel   curatores,  deinde  rei  publicae
causa  abesse  coeperunt,  a  tutela  et  cura  excusantur,  quatenus
rei  publicae  causa  absunt,  et  interea  curator  loco  eorum  datur.
qui  si  reversi  fuerint,  recipiunt  onus  tutelae  nee  anni  habent
vacationem,  ut  Papinianus  responsorum  libro  quinto  scripsit :
nam  hoc  spatium  habent  ad  novas  tutelas  vocati.     Et  qui  3
potestatem  aliquam  habent,  excusare  se  possunt,  ut  divus
Marcus  rescripsit,  sed  coeptam  tutelam  deserere  non  possunt.
Item  propter  litem,  quam  cum  pupillo  vel  adulto  tutor  vel  4
curator  habet,  excusare  se  nemo  potest :  nisi  forte  de  omnibus
bonis  vel  hereditate  controversia  sit.     Item  tria  onera  tutelae  5
non    affectatae   vel    curae    praestant    vacationem,    quamdiu
administrantur :    ut  tamen  plurium    pupillorum   tutela   vel
cura  eorundem  bonorum,  veluti  fratrum,  pro  una  computetur.
Sed  et  propter  paupertatem  excusationem  tribui  tam  divi  6
fratres  quam  per  se  divus  Marcus  rescripsit,  si  quis  imparem
se  oneri  iniuncto  possit  docere.     Item  propter  adversam  vale-  7

§  d.  Potestas  means  any  magistracy,  superior  or  inferior,  Dig.  27.  i.  6.
14-16;  ib.  17.  4-5.  Fragm.  Vat.  146  (*  qui  Romae  magistratu  funguntur,
quamdiu  hoc  funguntur,  dari  tutores  non  possunt ')  is  not  meant  to  exclude
municipal  magistrates.

§  4.  '  Propter  litem,  quam  quis  cum  pupillo  habet,  excusare  se  a  tutela
non  potest,  nisi  de  omnibus  bonis  aut  plurima  parte  eorum  controversia
sit '  Dig.  27.  I.  21  pr., '  volumus  ....  si  quis  obligatum  habuerit  minorem
aut  eius  res,  hunc  non  omnino  ad  curationem  eius,  vel  si  a  legibus  vocetur,
accedere '  Nov.  72.  i.

§  6.  Yet  if,  even  where  a  man  already  had  three  independent  tutelae,
they  gave  him  but  little  trouble,  or  if  one  of  them  was  near  its  termination,
he  would  not  be  easily  excused  ;  while  conversely  a  single  tutela  of  great
difficulty  or  responsibility  would  be  regarded  as  ground  for  exemption,
Dig.  27.  1. 17.  pr. ;  ib.  31.  24.  It  was  not  necessary  that  the  three  tutelae
should  be  vested  in  the  same  person,  provided  they  were  '  in  domo  ima,'
and  the  paterfamilias  was  pecuniarily  liable  on  them  all,  Dig.  ib.  2.  9.
'  [AfTectata  est]  si  vel  appetita  videatur,  vel,  cum  posset  quis  se  excusare,
se  non  excusavit,'  Fragm.  Vat.  188.

§  6.  The  excusandus  must  apparently  be  so  poor  as  to  require  all  his
time  to  earn  his  own  living,  Dig.  27.  1.7;  ib.  4a  i.  Persons  too  poor  to
give  security  if  required  were  removed,  Cod.  5.  42.  2.  The  divi  fratres
are  M.  Anrelius  and  Lucius  Verus  (a.d.  161-169).

§  7.  In  a  case  of  merely  temporary  illness  a  curator  would  be  appointed
ad  interim.  Dig.  27. 1. 10. 8.  Physical  defects,  such  as  blindness,  deafness,
or  dumbness,  were  also  grounds  of  excuse  (Fragm.  Vat  238),  though  the
last  two  are  said  in  Dig.  26.  i.  i.  2  and  3  to  incapacitate.

N


1 78  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

tudinem,  propter  quam  nee  suis  quidem  negotiis  interesse

8  potest,  excusatio  locum  habet.  Similiter  eum  qui  litteras
nesciret  excusandum  esse  divus  Pius  rescripsit :  quamvis  et
imperiti  litterarum  possunt  ad  administrationem  n^otiorum

9  suflicere.  Item  si  propter  inimicitiam  aliquem  testamento
tutorem  pater  dederit,  hoc  ipsum  praestat  ei  excusationem :
sicut  per  contrarium  non  excusantur,  qui  se  tutelam  patri

10  pupillorum  administraturos  promiserunt.  Non  esse  autem
admittendam  excusationem   eius,  qui  hoc  solo  utitur,  quod

11  ignotus  patri  pupillorum  sit,  divi  fratres  rescripserunt.  Inimi-
citiae,  quas  quis  cum  patre  pupillorum  vel  adultorum  exercuit,
si  capitales  fuerunt  nee  reconciliatio  intervenit,  a  tutela  solent

12  excusare.      Item  si  quis  status  controversiam  a  pupillorum

13  patre  passus  est,  excusatur  a  tutela.  Item  maior  septuaginta
annis  a  tutela  vel  cura  se  potest  excusare.  minores  autem
viginti  et  quinque  annis  olim  quidem  excusabantur :  a  nostra

§  8.  In  Dig.  27. 1. 6. 19  Paulus  and  Modestinus  cite  a  rescript  of  Hadrian
and  A.  Pius, '  eius  qui  neget  literas  se  scire  excusatio  accipi  non  debet,  si
modo  non  sit  expers  negotiorum.'  Perhaps  the  best  way  of  reconciling
this  with  the  text  is  to  take  §  8  in  close  connexion  with  §  7  (similiter) :
*  ignorance  of  reading  and  writing  is  not,  as  a  rule,  a  ground  of  excuse,  any
more  than  mere  ill  health :  in  both  cases  there  must  be  absolute  inability
to  cope  with  business.'

§  8.  The  last  sentence  of  this  section  requires  some  such  addition  as
'  etiamsi  alias  excusationem  habeant'  Dig.  27.  i.  15.  i ;  26.  2.  39.

§  IL  For  this  use  of '  capitalis '  cf.  Cod.  2.  20.  7, '  capitales  minae.'

§  12.  A  suit  relating  to  a  person's  status  (status  controversia)  might  be
undertaken  on  political  grounds  (quaestio  de  civitate)  by  reason  of  the
public  rights  which  citizenship  conferred :  more  often  it  arose  through
the  connexion  between  it  and  some  private  right,  to  enjoy  which  the
civitas  of  some  individual  was  asserted  or  denied.  In  this  case  the  con-
troversia was  usually  made  up  into  an  independent  issue  in  the  form  of
a  praeiudicium,  though  in  effect  only  incidental  to  another  (and  the  main)
question.  Thus  (e.  g.)  the  validity  of  a  will  might  be  disputed  on  the
ground  that  the  testator  was  no  civis.  Sometimes  the  status  controversia
was  in  reality,  as  well  as  in  show,  an  independent  suit,  undertaken  to
establish  dominium  over  a  slave,  or  potestas  over  a  filiusfamilias  ;  and
here  the  person  whose  status  was  in  question  could  not  appear  person-
ally, but  must  be  represented  (as  e.  g.  the  slave  by  an  adsertor  libertatis).
Another  not  uncommon  subject  of  this  kind  of  suit  was  free  birth,
ingenuitas.

§  18.  If,  before  Justinian's  enactment  (Cod.  5.  30.  5),  a  minor  became
tutor  (e.  g.  legitimus  or  testamento)  he  was  not  disqualified,  but  a  tutor


Tit  250  DE  EXCUSATIONIBUS.  179

autem  constitutione  prohibentur  ad  tutclam  vel  curam  aspi-
rate, adeo  ut  nee  excusatione  opus  fiat,    qua  constitutione
cavetur,  ut  nee  pupillus  ad  legitimam  tutelam  vocetur  nee
adultus  :  cum  erat  incivile  eos,  qui  alieno  auxilio  in  rebus  suis
administrandis  egere  noscuntur  et  sub  aliis  reguntur,  aliorum
tutelam  vel  curam  subire.     Idem  et  in  milite  observandum  14
est,  ut  nee  volens  ad  tutelae  munus  admittatur.     Item  Romae  15
grammatici  rhetores  et  medici  et  qui  in  patria  sua  id  exercent
et  intra  numerum  sunt,  a  tutela  vel  cura  habent  vacationem.
Qui  autem  se  vult  exeusare,  si  plures  habeat  excusationes  16


praetorius  was  put  in  until  he  came  of  age  (Dig.  27.  3.  9.  i).  The  result
of  his  law  (nemo  in  tutelam  vocetur,  antequam  quintum  et  vicesimum
suae  aetatis  annum  impleat)  was  that,  if  the  nearest  agnate  was  a  minor,
he  was  completely  passed  over  in  favour  of  the  next  legitimus  who
was  of  age.  Yet  if  a  minor  were  appointed  by  will  a  tutor  dativus  was
still  nominated  ad  interim,  as  is  clear  from  Tit.  4.  2  supr.,  and  Dig.

26.  2.  32.  2.

§  14.  Soldiers  on  actual  service,  i.e.  before  discharge,  were  absolutely
disabled  from  being  tutors  or  curators,  Cod.  5.  34.  4.  If  honourably  dis-
charged at  the  end  of  the  full  term  of  service  (twenty  years)  they  were
permanently  entitled  to  exemption,  except  from  the  tutela  or  cura  of
children  of  soldiers,  as  to  whom  their  excusatio  lasted  one  year  only.  In
case  of  honourable  discharge  after  less  than  five  years'  service  no  exemp-
tion was  allowed  :  after  five  years  they  were  excused  for  one  year,  afler
eight  for  two,  after  twelve  for  three,  and  after  sixteen  for  four.  Dig.

27.  I.  8.

§  16.  '  Gnunmatid  sunt,  qui  aliquid  diligenter  et  acute  scienterque
possint  aut  dicere  aut  scribere,  proprie  poetarum  interpretes '  (Com.  Nepos
apud  Suet,  de  IlL  Gramm.  4),  'grammatica  professio  recte  loquendi
scientia  et  poetarum  enarratio'  Quintil.  Inst.  Or.  I.  4.  2,  'grammatica
circa  curam  sermonis  versatur,  circa  historias,  circa  carmina'  Seneca,
£p.  88.  2.  The  '  numerus '  was  determined  by  the  size  of  the  town,  and
a  granmiaticus,  physician,  or  rhetorician,  was  admitted  into  it  by  magis-
terial decree :  '  est  autem  etiam  numerus  definitus  eorum,  qui  in  singulis
civitatibus  immunitatem  habeant,  et  condiciones  quaedam  adiectae  in
lege :  quod  inteUegitur  ex  epistola  Antonini  quae  data  est  ad  commune
Asiae,  sed  pertinet  ad  orbem  universum,  cuius  est  caput  infra  scriptum :
dvitates  minores  possunt  habere  immunes  medicos  quinque  et  sophistas
tres  eodemque  numero  granmiaticos :  maiores  civitates  septem  qui  me-
deantur,  quattuor  sophistas,  quattuor  qui  doceant  literas  utrasque  :
maximae  vero  medicos  decem  et  rhetores  quinque  eodemque  numero
grammaticos,  super  hunc  autem  numerum  ne  maxima  quidem  dvitas
immunitatem  confert'  Dig.  27.  i.  6.  2-3.

§  16.  So,  too,  Ulpian  says  in  Dig.  49.  4.  I.  i  'si  quis  tutor  datus

N  a


i8o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  I.

et  de  quibusdam  non  probaverit,  aliis  uti  intra  tempora  non
prohibetur.  qui  excusare  se  volunt,  non  appellant :  sed  intra
dies  quinquaginta  continues,  ex  quo  cognoverunt,  excusare  se
debent  (cuiuscumque  generis  sunt,  id  est  qualitercumque  dati
fuerint  tutores),  si  intra  centesimum  lapidem  sunt  ab  eo  loco,
ubi  tutores  dati  sunt :  si  vero  ultra  centesimum  habitant,  dinu-
meratione  facta  viginti  millium  diumorum  et  amplius  triginta
dierum.    quod  tamen,  ut  Scaevola  dicebat,  sic  debet  compu-

17  tari,  ne  minus  sint  quam  quinquaginta  dies.     Datus  autem

18  tutor  ad  universum  patrimonium  datus  esse  creditur.  Qui
tutelam  alicuius  gessit,  invitus  curator  eiusdem  fieri  non  com-
pellitur,  in  tantum  ut,  licet  pater,  qui  testamento  tutorem  de-
derit,  adiecit  se  eundem  curatorem  dare,  tamen  invitum  eum
curam  suscipere  non  cogendum  divi  Severus  et  Antoninus

19  rescripserunt.     Idem  rescripserunt  maritum  uxori  suae  cura-


fuerit  vel  testamento  vel  a  quo  alio  qui  ius  dandi  habet,  non  oportet  eum
provocare ;  hoc  enim  divus  Marcus  efTecit :  sed  intra  tempora  praesti-
tuta  excusationem  allegandam  habet,  et  si  fuerit  pulsa,  tunc  demum
appellare  debebit,  caeterum  ante  frustra  appellatur.'  It  must  not  be
inferred  from  *'  datus '  in  this  passage,  or  from  ^  id  est,  qualitercumque  dati
fuerint '  in  the  text,  that  the  exemptions  did  not  extend  to  tutores  legitimi.

Theophilus  explains  rtvrafxtvrapioi  .  .  Xcytrt/ioi  .  .  vwh  apxwrog  dcdo/ici^oc.
For  the  time  within  which  the  excuse  must  be  proved  cf.  Dig.  27.  i,  38
'quinquaginta  dierum  spatium  tantummodo  ad  contestandas  excusa-
tionum  causas  pertinet:  peragendo  enim  negotio  ex  die  nominationis
continui  quattuor  menses  constituti  sunt.'

Besides  the  classes  of  persons  mentioned  in  this  Title,  the  following
could  claim  exemption  :  (i)  Spiritual  persons  who  were  not  already  inca-
pacitated (bishops  and  monks,  Nov.  123.  5)  Cod.  i.  3.  52.  (2)  Jurists
who  belonged  to  the  emperor's  consilium.  Dig.  27.  i.  3a  (3)  Persons
not  domiciled  in  the  place  where  their  tutorial  functions  were  to  be
exercised,  Dig.  27.  i.  46.  2.  Similarly  a  tutor  or  curator  could  claim  to
be  excused  from  the  management  of  property  in  another  province,  or  at
least  100  miles  from  his  usual  place  of  residence.  Dig.  ib.  10. 4.  (4)  Mem-
bers of  a  corporation  on  which  this  privilege  had  been  conferred  by
special  enactment,  Dig.  ib.  17.  i.  Finally,  a  tutor  or  curator  could  lay
down  an  office  which  he  had  already  begun  to  administer  (i)  when  he
was  made  a  member  of  the  imperial  council.  Dig.  4.  4.  11.  2;  (2)  when
he  changed  his  domicile  with  the  emperor's  sanction,  provided  the  latter
knew  he  was  a  tutor  or  curator.  Dig.  27. 1. 12.  i ;  (3)  on  occasion  of  illness
so  severe  as  to  entirely  incapacitate  him  for  the  discharge  of  his  duties,
Dig.  ib.  10.  8  ;  ib.  45.  4.

§  18.  Immixtio  amounted  to  an  implied  promise  to  undertake  the  office.


Tit  36.]         DE  SUSPECTIS  TUTORIBUS,  ETC.  i8i

torem  datum  excusare  se  posse,  licet  se  immisceat.     Si  quis  20
autem  falsis  allegationibus  excusationem  tutelae  meruit,  non
est  liberatus  onere  tutelae.

XXVI.

DE  SUSPECTIS  TUTORIBUS  ET  CURATORIBUS.

Sciendum  est  suspecti  crimen  e  lege  duodecim  tabularum
descendere.    Datum  est  autem  ius  removendi  suspectos  tutores  1
Romae  praetori  et  in  provinciis  praesidibus  earum  et  legato
proconsulis.     Ostendimus,  qui  possunt  de  suspecto  cognoscere :  2
nunc  videamus,  qui  suspecti  fieri  possunt.     Et  quidem  omnes    '
tutores  possunt,  sive  testamentarii  sint  sive  non,  sed  alterius
generis  tutores.    quare  et  si  legitimus  sit  tutor,  accusari  po-
tent,   quid  si  patronus  ?  adhuc  idem  erit  dicendum :  dummodo
meminerimus  famae  patroni  parcendum,  licet  ut  suspectus
remotus  fuerit    Consequens  est,  ut  videamus,  qui  possint  sus-  3
pectos  postulare.    et  sciendum  est  quasi  publicam  esse  hanc
actionem,  hoc  est  omnibus  patere.    quin  immo  et  mulieres
admittuntur  ex  rescripto  divorum  Seven  et  Antonini,  sed  hae
solae,  quae  pietatis  necessitudine  ductae  ad  hoc  procedunt,  ut
puta  mater :  nutrix  quoque  et  avia  possunt,  potest  et  soror :
sed  et  si  qua  mulier  fuerit,  cuius  praetor  perpensam  pietatem

and  those  who  had  promised  were  as  a  rule  debarred  Irom  urging  any
ground  of  excuse  whatever,  see  on  §  9  supr.

Tit.  ZXn.  8.  The  actio  suspecti  tutoris  was  not  a  genuine  crimen
publicum  (for  which  see  Bk.  iv.  18  inf.),  and  though  it  resembles  the
actiones  popolares  in  lying  at  the  suit  of  any  one  (except  infames)  the
object  of  these  was  properly  rather  the  recovery  of  a  penalty,  see  Bk.  iv.
5.  I ;  ib.  9.  I  inf.  There  is  evidence,  however,  that  the  magistrate  some-
times inflicted  a  fine,  of  which  a  half  went  to  the  accuser.  Colleagues  of
the  tutor  gerens  were  legally  bound  to  accuse  him  as  suspectus,  if  they
saw  cause;  and  in  default  of  an  accuser  the  magistrate  might  take
measures  for  his  deposition  virtute  officii,  Dig.  26.  10.  3.  4.

Some  further  information  as  to  the  meaning  of  suspectus  is  given  in
§§  9  and  13  inf.  Ulpian  thought  that  a  person  proposed  as  tutor  might
be  rejected  on  the  ground  of  some  misconduct  of  which  he  had  been
guilty  before  entering  on  the  office,  but  that  until  he  had  done  so  he
could  not  be  proceeded  against  as  suspectus,  even  though  the  wrong
bad  affected  the  pupil's  interests,  Dig.  26.  10.  3.  4  and  5.  Julianus  (Dig.
27.  I.  20)  held  the  opinion  maintained  in  the  text,  that  even  before  enter-
ing on  his  duties  he  could  be  charged  as  suspectus.


i82  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,         [Lib.  I.

intellexerit  non  sexus  verecundiam  egredientis,  sed  pietate
productam  non  continere  iniuriam  pupillorum,  admittit  earn  ad

4  accusationem.  Impuberes  non  possunt  tutores  suos  suspectos
postulate :  puberes  autem  curatores  suos  ex  consilio  necessa-
riorum  suspectos  possunt  arguere :  et  ita  divi  Severus  et  An-

5  toninus  rescripserunt  Suspectus  est  autem,  qui  non  ex  fide
tutelam  gerit,  licet  solvendo  est,  ut  et  lulianus  quoque  scripsit.
sed  et  ante,  quam  incipiat  gerere  tutelam  tutor,  posse  eum
quasi  suspectum  removeri  idem  lulianus  scripsit  et  secundum

6  eum    constitutum   est.     Suspectus  autem   remotus,   si   qui-

7  dem  ob  dolum,  famosus  est :  si  ob  culpam,  non  aeque.  Si
quis  autem  suspectus  postulatur,  quoad  cognitio  finiatur,  inter-

8  dicitur  ei  administratio,  ut  Papiniano  visum  est.  Sed  si  sus-
pecti  cognitio   suscepta  fuerit  posteaque   tutor  vel  curator

9  decesserit,  extinguitur  cognitio  suspecti.  Si  quis  tutor  copiam
sui  non  faciat,  ut  alimenta  pupillo  decemantur,  cavetur  epistula
divorum  Severi  et  Antonini,  ut  in  possessionem  bonorum  eius
pupillus  mittatur:  et  quae  mora  deteriora  futura  sunt,  dato
curatore  distrahi  iubentur.     ergo  ut  suspectus  removeri  poterit

10  qui  non  praestat  alimenta.  Sed  si  quis  praesens  n^at  propter
inopiam  alimenta  posse  decemi,  si  hoc  per  mendacium  dicat,
remittendum  eum  esse  ad  praefectum  urbis  puniendum  placuit,

§  6.  '  Suspectos  tutores  ex  dolo,  non  etiam  eos,  qui  ob  neglegentiam
remoti  sunt,  infames  fieri  manifestum  est'  Cod.  5.  43.  9.  It  seems,  how-
ever, that  removal  for  gross  negligence  entailed  infamia :  '  si  fraus  non  sit
admissa,  sed  lata  neglegentia,  quia  ista  prope  fraudem  accedit,  removeri
hunc  quasi  suspectum  oportet'  Dig.  26.  10.  7.  i,  'si  neglegentia  et  nimia
cessatio  obiciatur .  . .  removendum  eum,  qui  dignus  tali  nota  videbitur '
Dig.  27.  2.  6.

§  8.  It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  as  a  general  rule  the  tutor
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  rearing  and  education  of  his  pupil ;  this  was
entrusted  to  the  latter's  nearest  relations,  to  whom  the  tutor  made  a  pay-
ment of  so  much  per  annum  for  this  purpose,  the  precise  sum  being  fixed
by  the  magistrate  in  proportion  to  the  pupil's  fortune  as  estimated  by
the  tutor  himself.  If,  after  the  annual  allowance  being  thus  fixed,  the
tutor  failed  to  provide  it  regularly,  there  was  prima  facie  evidence  of
maladministration  sufficient  to  warrant  removal.  The  object  of  the
pupil's  being  '  missus  in  possessionem '  of  the  tutor's  property  was  partly
to  induce  the  latter  to  appear,  partly  to  guarantee  the  former  against
losses  which  might  have  occurred  in  his  fortune  through  the  tutor's  fraud
or  carelessness,  Dig.  26. 10.  7.  2.


Tit.  26.]         DE  SUSPECTIS   TUTOR/BUS,  ETC  183

sicut  ille  remittitur,  qui  data  pecunia  ministerium  tutelae  re-
demit.     Libertus  quoque,  si   fraudulenter  gessisse  tutelam  11
filiorum  vel  nepotum  patroni  probetur,  ad  praefectum  urbis
remittitur  puniendus.     Novissime  sciendum  est  eos,  qui  frau-  12
dulenter  tutelam  vel  curam  administrant,  etiamsi  satis  offerant,
removendos  a  tutela,  quia  satisdatio  propositum  tutoris  male-
volum  non  mutat,  sed  diutius  grassandi  in  re  familiari  faculta-
tem  praestat.    Suspectum  enim  eum  putamus,  qui  moribus  id
talis  est,  ut  suspectus  sit :  enimvero  tutor  vel  curator  quamvis
pauper  est,  fidelis  tamen  et  diligens,  removendus  non  est  quasi
suspectus.


EXCURSUS   I.

CAPITIS  DEMINUTIO.

Upon  the  nature  of  capitis  deminutio  minima  a  different  view  is
maintained  by  Savigny  from  that  adopted  in  the  note  on  Bk.  i.  i6.  3.
He  argues  that  the  essence  of  all  capitis  deminutio  is  a  degradation,
or  *  downward  step  on  the  ladder  of  status.'  As  applied  to  the  two
higher  modes  (maxima  and  media)  this  theory  is  not  out  of  accord
with  the  facts :  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  free  man  who  became
a  slave,  or  a  civis  who  became  Latinus  or  peregrinus,  was  thereby
degraded  to  a  lower  civil  position.  As  applied,  however,  to  capitis
deminutio  minima  it  presents  insuperable  difficulties :  it  is  neither
established  by  the  authorities,  nor  can  the  inferences  which  must
logically  be  drawn  from  it  be  reconciled  with  the  statements  of  the
jurists  and  other  writers.

(i)  On  Savigny's  hypothesis  capitis  deminutio  minima  occurred
only  in  two  cases  :  (a)  where  a  person  sui  iuris  passed  into  potestas
or  manus :  {d)  where  a  filiusfamilias,  or  woman  -in  manu,  was  con-
veyed into  the  condition  of  mancipium  in  order  thereby  to  be  emanci-
pated or  given  in  adoption.  Accordingly,  the  children  of  an  adrogatus,
will  not  be  capite  minuti  when  they  pass  along  with  him  into  the
potestas  and  familia  of  the  adrogator :  yet  the  very  opposite  of  this
is  stated  by  Paulus  in  Dig.  4.  5.  3  '  liberos  qui  adrogatum  parentem
sequuntur  placet  minui  caput,  cum  in  aliena  potestate  sunt,  et  cum
familiam  mutaverint.'  Savigny  boldly  says  that  Paulus  was  vrrong,
that  his  view  is  unsupported  by  any  other  jurist,  and  is  in  fact
peculiar  to  himself :  but  he  seems  to  have  overlooked  the  force  of
the  word  *  placet,*  which  certainly  means  *  is  the  received  doctrine '
('  verbum  de  iure  antea  controverso,  iurisconsultorum  responsis  sta-
bilito,  soUemne'  Schrader),and  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  if  Paulus
had  been  slating  his  own  individual  opinion  he  would  have  said '  puto,'


CAPITIS  DEMINUTIO.  185

or  '  videtur  mihi.'    On  this  point  Savigny  is  altogether  unsupported
by  textual  authority.

(2)  On  Savign3r's  hypothesis  a  woman  who  passed  in  manum  was
capite  minuta  only  if  she  were  sui  iuris  before  theconventio  in  manum,
not  if  she  were  already  in  potestas.  But  this  distinction  is  quite
unknown  to  the  authorities:  Gaius  says  (i.  115  a,  162 ;  iv.  38)  that
a  woman  who  passed  in  manum  underwent  capitis  deminutio,  and
does  not  add  that  this  occurred  only  when  she  had  been  sui  iuris,  and
there  is  the  same  silence  as  to  the  assumed  distinction  in  Ulpian,
Reg.  II.  13,  and  Cic.  Top.  4.  Savigny  affirms  that  though  in  these
passages  there  is  no  express  limitation  to  the  case  of  independent
women,  yet  this  limitation  must  be  understood,  in  which  supposition
Mr.  Poste  (note  on  Gaius  i.  162)  thinks  there  is  nothing  '  outrageous.'

(3)  In  reply  to  the  question  why  a  child,  on  being  emancipated  or
given  in  adoption,  was  capite  minutus,  Savigny  answers  '  because  a
necessary  step  in  these  processes  was  the  assumption  of  the  condition
of  mancipium,  a  semiservile  condition  (*'  cum  emancipari  nemo  possit
nisi  in  imaginariam  servilem  causam  deductus  "  Dig.  4.  5.  3),  and  it
was  this  d^radation,  not  the  emancipation  or  adoption  itself,  which
produced  the  capitis  deminutio.'  Assuming  the  truth  of  this  for  the
sake  of  argument,  it  follows  that  when  for  the  old  forms  of  emancipa-
tion and  adoption  Justinian  substituted  new  forms  (notes  on  Bk.  i.
Tit  II.  2,  Tit.  12.  6  supr.)  in  which  there  was  no  approach  to  *  degra-
dation,' emancipation  and  adoption  must  have  ceased  to  be  attended
by  capitis  deminutio.  But  the  passages  in  the  Corpus  iuris  which
affirm  that  capitis  deminutio  still  accompanied  emancipation  (e.  g.  Bk.  i.
16.  3.  supr.  *vel  contra:'  Dig.  4.  5. 3,  ib.  9,  etc.),  are  too  numerous  to
allow  us  to  believe,  as  Savigny  supposes,  that  they  were  admitted  into
the  Corpus  by  an  oversight  of  the  compilers  :  and  as  adoptio  plena
extinguished  patria  potestas,  we  may  almost  certainly  conclude  that
this  extinction  was  still  attended  by  change  of  agnatic  family,  which
(except  in  one  or  two  anomalous  cases)  always  went  hand  in  hand
with  any  extinction  of  patria  potestas  which  was  produced  by  act  of
the  parties.

There  are  certain  legal  facts  upon  which  Savigny  relies  as  abso-
lutely irreconcileable  with  the  view  adopted  in  the  notes  referred  to,
and  which  are  supplied  by  the  cases  of  the  Vestal  Virgin  and  the
Flamen  Dialis.  As  regards  the  former  Gellius  says  (i.  2)  'virgo
autem  Vestalis  simul  est  capta  atque  in  atrium  Vestae  deducta  et
pontificibus  tradita,  eo  statim  tempore  sine  emancipatione  ac  sine
capitis  minutione  e  patris  potestate  exit  et  ius  testamenti  faciendi


i86  EXCURSUS  L

adipiscitur  ....  virgo  Vestalis  neque  heres  est  cuiquam  intestato
neque  intestatae  quisquam,  sed  bona  eius  in  publicum  redigi  aiunt.
Id  quo  iure  fiat,  quaeritur.'  From  this  passage  Savigny  infers  that
— though,  as  is  expressly  stated,  she  had  not  been  capite  minuta— a
Vestal  Virgin  left  her  previous  agnatic  family.  It  is  to  be  observed
that  this  is  merely  an  inference  :  all  that  is  stated  in  the  text  is  that
on  a  vestal's  dying  intestate  she  had  no  heir  ab  intestato^  but  that  her
estate  escheated  to  the  treasury,  and  the  lawyers  were  puzzled  to
explain  this :  *  id  quo  iure  fiat  quaeritur.'  Savigny  says  the  explana-
tion is  simple :  '  The  reason  why  a  vestal  had  no  intestate  heirs  was
that  a  woman  could  have  no  suus  heres,  and  that  she,  in  particular,
had  no  agnates  to  take  in  default,  because  she  had  left  her  agnatic
family.'  But  if  this  had  been  the  true  solution,  can  we  believe  that
the  Roman  lawyers  were  unable  to  discover  it  ?  It  would  have  sug-
gested itself  to  the  veriest  tyro ;  and  it  is  inconceivable  that  had  this
been  the  case  Gellius  could  have  written  the  words  '  id  quo  iure  fiat
quaeritur.'  A  better  explanation  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the
vestal's  immediate  relation  to  the  gods :  her  life  had  been  devoted  to
their  service,  and  it  was  only  consistent  that,  on  her  dying  without
disposing  of  her  property  by  will,  it  should  go  to  the  treasury  for
sacrificial  purposes.  The  case  of  the  Flamen  Dialis  is  exactly
parallel :  see  Gains  iii.  114.

The  real  fact  seems  to  be  that  Savigny  has  been  misled  by  his
desire  to  establish  '  a  harmonious  system  of  legal  conceptions'  into
adopting  a  view  against  which  there  is  an  irresistible  weight  of
textual  authority ;  he  has  been  overpowered  by  the  word  '  deminutio,'
and  by  the  analogy  which,  according  to  him,  there  ought  to  be
between  deminutio  maxima,  media,  and  minima.  Not  to  speak  of
the  impropriety  of  arguing  from  words  in  the  fisice  of  the  clearest
authority  to  the  contrary,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  jurists  agree  in
describing  the  essence  of  capitis  deminutio  as  a  mere  change  rather
than  a  deterioration  of  condition :  it  is  a  '  status  mutatio.'  It  is  true
that  in  many  cases  of  capitis  deminutio  minima  (e.  g.  often  in  adop-
tion) the  agnatic  rights  which  were  lost  were  more  than  outbalanced
by  the  rights  acquired  in  the  new  family ;  but  the  prominent  idea,
the  feature  on  which  the  legal  mind  is  concentrated,  is  usually  the
immediate  loss,  not  the  compensatory  gain.  Savigny  himself  would
not  deny  that  there  was  a  capitis  deminutio  (media)  when  a  Roman
citizen  lost  his  civitas,  even  though  he  acquired  citizenship  in  another
city  whereby  he  enjoyed  far  greater  advantages :  and  similarly,  it  is
always  a  capitis  deminutio  (minima)  if  a  man  loses  his  previous


CAPITIS  DEMINUTIO,  187

agnatic  rights,  even  though  he  acquires  in  exchange  a  perhaps  better
and  more  advantageous  position  in  another  family.

It  would  seem  that  in  the  earliest  period  of  Roman  history,  '  caput '
denoted  specifically  the  statement  of  a  man's  property  and  belongings
in  the  census  :  '  ces  inscriptions  se  faisaient  par  t^te,  d'oii  la  deno-
mination donnde  au  citoyen  considdr^  dans  ses  rapports  avec  la  citd  :
on  dit  qu'il  a  un  caput*  (Cuq,  Institutions  juridiques  des  Remains,  i.
p.  199).  If  this  is  so,  capitis  deminutio  meant  originally  the  loss  of
a  man's  caput,  the  erasure  of  his  name  from  the  censor's  list  in  con-
sequence of  his  loss  of  civitas.  Later  it  came  to  mean  what  is  called
capitis  deminutio  minima,  because  the  entry  of  a  man's  name  on  the
censor's  list  was  accompanied  by  a  statement  not  only  of  his  pro-
perty, but  also  (inter  alia)  of  the  number  and  names  of  children  in
his  power,  so  that  if  the  number  had  to  be  altered  in  consequence
of  one  passing  out  of  his  power,  this  was  a  '  capitis '  deminutio.


INTRODUCTION   TO  BOOK   II.

With  the  second  Book  of  the  Institutes  we  enter  upon  the  discus-
sion of  the  ius  quod  ad  res  pertinet.  Instead  of  giving  a  plain  state-
ment of  the, contents  of  this  branch  of  the  legal  system,  Justinian
follows  Gaius  in  presenting  us  with  a  number  of  very  perplexing  cross
divisions  of  res,  which,  however,  only  partially  correspond  with  those
of  the  earlier  writer,  and  from  which  we  are  left  to  infer  the  meaning
in  which  they  both  use  the  term  when  they  make  it  their  basis  of
classification.  In  three  of  these  divisions  there  is  no  divergence
between  the  two  writers.  Res  are,  firstly,  either  in  patrimonio  nostro
or  extra  patrimonium  nostrum  (G.  ii.  i,  Inst.  ii.  i.  pr.);  secondly,
they  are  either  corporales  or  incorporales  (G.  ii.  12,  Inst.  ii.  2.  pr.)  :
thirdly  (though  this  classification  is  rather  matter  of  inference  than
of  direct  statement),  they  are  either  res  singulae  or  universitates
(G.  ii.  97,  Inst.  ii.  9.  6).

The  main  point  wherein  Justinian  differs  from  Gaius  is  his  further
treatment  of  the  res  in  patrimonio  and  extra  patrimonium.  This
distinction  Gaius  hardly  seems  to  consider  of  much  importance,  for,
after  stating  it,  he  proceeds :  *  Summa  itaque  rcrum  divisio  in  duos
articulos  deducitur,  nam  aliae  sunt  divini  iuris,  aliae  humani  $ '  res
divini  iun's,  as  he  goes  on  to  remark,  comprising  res  sacrae,  religiosae,
and  sanctae;  res  humani  iuris  being  either  publicae  or  privatae.
Justinian,  however,  makes  it  the  basis  of  a  further  subdivision ;  he
arranges  the  res  which  are  extra  patrimonium  in  subordinate  classes
— res  communes,  res  universitatis,  res  publicae,  and  res  nullius — the
last  corresponding  with  Gaius'  res  divini  iuris.  Res  in  patrimonio,
on  the  other  hand,  either  belong,  or  can  belong,  to  private  individuals
(res  singulorum) ;  they  seem  to  be  identical  with  the  res  privatae  of
Gaius,  and  (the  subject  of  the  treatise  being  Private  Law)  are  alone
important  for  the  purpose  in  hand.    For  the  ascertainment  of  the


I90  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IL

meaning  of  the  ius  (privatum)  quod  ad  res  pertinet,  the  classifications
of  res  as  communes,  sacrae,  religiosae,  publicae,  and  universitatis
may  be  regarded  as  eliminated.

If  we  cast  our  eyes  over  the  contents  of  the  second  and  third
books  of  Gaius  and  Justinian,  we  shall  find  that,  so  far  as  the
system  is  concerned,  the  only  divisions  of  res  which  are  of  primary
importance  are,  first,  that  into  res  corporales  and  incorporales,  and,
second,  that  into  res  singulae  and  universitates.  Res  corporales
having  been  defined  (G.  ii.  13,  Inst  ii.  2.  i)  as  tangible  objects,  and
such  tangible  objects  as  cannot  be  in  singulorum  dominio  having
already  been  excluded,  the  modes  in  which  ownership  (and  inciden-
tally possession)  of  them  can  be  acquired,  natural  (Tit  1)  and  civil
(Tit  6  and  7),  are  explained.  Res  incorporales  having  been  defined
(G.  ii.  14,  Inst  ii.  2.  2),  the  nature  of  some  of  them  (viz.  servitudes)
and  their  modes  of  acquisition  are  described  in  Titles  3-5 :  others,
viz.  obligations,  occupy  the  greater  portion  of  the  third  Book.  These
are  all  res  singulae :  universitates  and  their  modes  of  vesting  are
examined  under  the  heads  of  hereditas,  whether  testamentary  (ii.
10-25)  or  intestate  (iii.  1-9),  adrogation  (iii.  10),  and  bonorum
addictio  libertatis  causa  (iii.  11).

Speaking  briefly,  then,  the  ius  quod  ad  res  pertinet,  extending  over
the  whole  of  the  second  and  third  Books  and  part  of  the  fourth  Book
of  the  Institutes,  treats  of  tangible  external  objects  of  property,  with
their  titles;  real  rights  over  them  of  less  orbit  than  dominium;
inheritance,  comprising  the  subject  of  l^acies :  two  less  considerable
forms  of  universal  succession ;  and  finally  obligations,  under  the  two
heads  of  contracts  and  delicts  or  torts.  All  these  are  '  res ; '  the
question  still  remains,  What  is  the  common  property  in  virtue  of
which  they  are  classed  together,  and  the  law  relating  to  them  set
apart  as  one  of  the  three  great  departments  of  the  private  code  ?  To
this  question  Mr.  Poste  (Gaius  pp.  148  sq.),  following  Austin,  answers
that  the  law  relating  to  res  is  set  apart  because  it  is  the  law  of  equal
rights.  By  this  he  appears  to  mean,  that  in  it  all  persons  are  regarded
as  equal,  in  the  sense  that  exactly  the  same  capacity  of  right  and  of
disposition  is  ascribed  to  all,  and  that  differences  in  such  capacity
are  left  out  of  sight,  as  belonging  properly  to  the  law  of  Persons  or
unequal  rights.  If  this  is  his  meaning,  we  cannot  but  reject  it  as
entirely  misleading.  The  division  of  law  into  law  of  equal  and  law
of  unequal  rights  is  no  older  than  Austin,  and  to  attribute  an
acquaintance  with  it  to  Gaius  is  a  mere  anachronism.  If  by  the  ius
quod  ad  res  pertinet  Gaius  had  meant  to  express  the  law  of  equal


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  II.  191

rights,  he  would  not,  in  it,  have  noticed  incapacities  of  disposition
(as  he  does  in  ii.  47.  80  sq. :  cf.  Inst.  ii.  8.  2),  incapacities  of  right
(as  he  does  in  ii.  87  sq. :  cf.  Inst.  ii.  9.  i  and  2),  disabilities  in  cer-
tain classes  to  take  benefits  of  a  particular  kind  (as  he  does  in  ii.  1 1 1)
or  exceptions  from  the  ordinary  rules  for  the  execution  of  testaments
(ii.  109;  Inst.  ii.  11)  :  it  would  be  superfluous  to  multiply  instances
from  the  law  of  contract  or  delict,  for  the  objection  that  nearly  the
whole  of  the  law  relating  to  remedial  rights,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact
is  placed  under  the  head  of  actions,  would  on  his  hypothesis  belong
to  the  law  of  res,  is  fatal  by  itself.

A  fan  truer  explanation  of  this  branch  of  the  system  is  given  by
Professor  Holland  (Jurisprudence  p.  85),  who,  following  Savigny
(System  §  53),  defines  it  as  the  department  of  law  which  treats  of
such  modifications  of  rights  as  result  from  varieties  in  the  objects
or  in  the  acts  with  which  they  are  concerned.  ' "  Res  "  (the  Roman
lawyers  tell  us),  are  either  "  corporeal,"  things  which  can  be  touched,
such  as  a  £au-m,  a  slave :  or  "  incorporeal,"  which  cannot  be  touched,
consisting  in  right  only,  such  as  a  right  of  servitude,  a  right  of  action,
a  right  arising  out  of  contract.  Now  "  corporeal "  things  are  obviously
what  we  have  called  the  "objects"  of  the  right;  "incorporeal"
things  are  the  advantages  which  the  person  entitled  can  insist  upon ;
in  other  words,  "  the  acts  or  forbearances  "  to  which  he  is  entitled.'
Though  this  may  be  true  in  the  abstract,  it  seems  erroneous  to  credit
Gains,  to  whom  Justinian  owed  his  classification,  with  a  conscious
juristic  analysis  of  which  there  is  no  clear  indication  in  his  writings,
and  the  importance  of  which,  though  familiar  to  us,  seems  to  have
first  been  placed  in  clear  light  by  the  continental  jurists  from  whom
it  was  derived  by  Austin.

The  true  point  of  contact  between  the  various  res  seems  in  reality
to  be  the  fact  that  whoever  has  a  res  is,  actually  or  prospectively,  so
much  the  better  off.  If  then  we  embrace  everything  by  acquiring
which  a  man  is  materially  better  off — be  it  an  estate  or  a  five-pound
note,  a  ius  in  re  aliena  or  an  inheritance,  a  right  of  action  on  a  con-
tract or  a  delict — under  the  general  notion  of  property,  we  shall  find
in  the  ius  quod  ad  res  pertinet  the  law  of  proprietary  relations,  which
is  treated  under  the  heads  of  Ownership,  real  rights  less  than  Owner-
ship, Possession,  Inheritance,  other  universal  successions.  Contracts
and  Delicts.  Of  ownership  or  dominium,  as  a  right  or  aggregate  of
rights,  we  are  told  little  in  the  abstract ;  we  have  to  gather  its  content
from  isolated  passages.  That  it  includes  the  rights  of  use  and
enjoyment  is  clear  from  the  power  of  the  dominus  to  separate  them


192  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IL

off  from  his  dominium,  and  vest  them  in  other  persons  as  distinct  and
independent  iura  in  re  aliena  (Tit.  4.  i) :  from  Tit  i.  12  we  gather
that  the  owner  has  the  exclusive  right  to  the  thing,  and  may  lawfully
prohibit  others  from  interfering  with  his  own  enjoyment  of  it ;  the
right  of  alienation  inter  vivos  is  stated  emphatically  in  Tit.  i.  40 ;
that  of  testamentary  disposition  is  attested  by  the  phrase  of  the
Twelve  Tables — uti  legassit  super  pecunia  tutelave  suae  rei,  ita  ius
esto — and  is  expounded  at  length  in  Titles  10-25.  Certain  abnormal
cases,  in  which  a  person,  though  not  owner,  may,  or,  though  owner,
may  not  alienate,  are  noticed  in  Tit.  8.  But  the  bulk  of  the  text
relating  to  dominium  is  taken  up  by  the  modes,  natural  and  civil,
original  and  derivative,  in  which  it  may  be  acquired,  the  preponder-
ance of  natural  over  civil  titles,  as  compared  with  the  law  of  Gaius'
age,  being  particularly  noteworthy.  Titles  3-5  relate  to  the  fragments
of  ownership  called  servitudes,  which  correspond  very  roughly  to  the
easements  and  profits  of  English  Law.  Tide  9  discusses  the  ques-
tion of  agency  in  the  acquisition  of  ownership,  and  states  the  changes
which  had  taken  place  since  Gaius  in  the  proprietary  capacity  of
filiifamilias ;  here  too  we  get  a  reference  to  Possession,  which  is  not
treated  in  extenso,  but  a  knowledge  of  its  rules  is  presupposed  in  the
Title  on  Usucapio^  and  is  supplied  in  an  Excursus  below.

The  transition  from  modes  '  quibus  res  singulae  adquiruntur '  to
those  '  quibus  adquiruntur  per  universitatem,'  brings  us  to  the  law  of
Inheritance;  the  rules  which  prescribe  the  devolution  of  a  man's
universitas  iuris  on  his  decease.  This  may  take  place  either  ex
testamento  or  ab  intestato :  the  exposition  of  testamentary  succession
occupies  the  remainder  of  the  Book.  Firstly  (Title  10),  are  described
the  solemnities  necessary  for  the  execution  of  a  valid  will,  the  qualifi-
cation required  in  the  witnesses  taking  up  some  considerable  space ;
but  from  these  formalities  soldiers,  while  on  actual  service,  are  exempt,
and  Title  1 1  points  out  the  chief  anomalies  involved  in  this  exemp-
tion. In  Title  12  are  stated  the  qualifications  required  in  the  testator,
such  as  puberty  and  '  testamentifactio,'  and  the  special  precautions  to
be  observed  in  the  execution  of  a  blind  man's  will  are  alluded  to. .
Four  successive  Titles  then  explain  the  most  ordinary  contents  of
a  testament,  viz.  exheredation  of  issue  whom  the  testator  wishes  to
exclude  from  all  share  in  his  succession  (Title  13) ;  the  institution  of
the  heres  or  universal  successor  (Title  14);  substitutions  'vulgar'
(Title  15)  and  '  pupillary  *  (Title  16),  answering  in  some  degree  to  the
remainders  so  familiar  in  English  deeds  and  wills.  Title  1 7  enumer-
ates the  modes  in  which  a  testament  might  be  or  become  void,  such


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  11.  193

as  original  informality,  revocation,  subsequent  birth  of  a  suus  heres,
and  capitis  deminutio  of  the  testator:  and  in  Title  18  is  discussed
the  querella  inofficiosi  testamenti,  the  right  of  certain  relatives  of  the
deceased  to  impeach  and  upset  his  will,  for  not  having  left  them
a  certain  minimum  of  his  property.  The  division  of  heredes  into
necessarii,  sui  et  necessarii,  and  extranei,  the  necessary  qualiidcations
of  the  last,  and  the  modes  in  which  they  can  accept  the  inheritance,
follow  in  Title  19,  which  also  contains  a  reference  to  the  vast  revolu-
tion effected  in  the  character  of  heres  by  Justinian's  own  introduction
of  the  *  inventory.'  Legacies  are  treated  at  length  in  Titles  20  and
21,  and  the  successive  limitations  placed  upon  their  amount  in
Title  22.  The  last  three  Titles  are  occupied  with  the  subject  of
fideicommissa,  trust  successions  and  bequests,  the  legislation  relating
to  them,  and  codicilli,  a  form  of  disposition  resembling  a  will,  but
incapable  of  directly  passing  the  deceased's  universitas  iuris,  and
employed  for  the  purpose  of  creating  fideicommissa,  or  of  adding  to
or  modifying  a  previously  executed  testament.

No  small  amount  of  criticism  has  been  passed  upon  the  grouping
tc^ether  in  one  department  (flP  a  legal  system  of  the  topics  which  are
comprised  under  the  ius  quod  ad  res  pertinet,  and  which,  we  may
truly  say,  would  not  be  co-ordinated  upon  any  other  principle  of
classification.  The  most  solid  objection  is  the  inclusion  of  the  law
of  Inheritance  and  that  of  obligations  in  the  same  division  with  that
of  property  and  other  real  rights.  The  place  of  the  first  is  due  to  its
character  as  one  of  the  modes  of  universal  succession,  among  which
it  ranks  with  adrogation,  bonorum  addictio  libertatis  causa^  and  (in
Gaius)  conventio  in  manum,  hereditatis  in  iure  cessio,  and  venditio
bonorum.  Through  this  false  idea  of  proportion  the  importance  of
Testamentary  and  Intestate  succession,  as  an  independent  branch  of
law,  is  altogether  obscured:  moreover,  as  Savigny  has  remarked,
these  modes  *  quibus  res  per  universitatem  adquiruntur '  are  exclu-
sively regarded  as  titles  to  nghts,  whereas  they  are  equally  sources
of  obligations.  Accordingly,  the  German  jurists,  in  their  systematic
treatises  on  Roman  law,  here  abandon  the  Roman  classification,  and
make  Inheritance  one  of  their  main  divisions,  instead  of  subordinating
it  to  that  between  titles  to  res  singulae,  and  titles  to  universitates.

Why  obligations  are  *  res '  has  been  already  pointed  out  When
an  obligatio  is  said  to  be  a  res,  the  active,  or  creditor's  side  of  the
relation  is  intended.  The  promisee  in  a  contract,  unless  the  promise
is  performed,  and  the  plaintiff  in  an  action  on  delict,  have  the  power
of  recovering  damages  by  action ;  this  partial  control  over  another's

O


194  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IL

freedom  of  action  is  money's  worth,  and  falls  under  the  category  of
property,  in  the  wide  sense  in  which  the  term  has  been  used  above.
An  even  more  intimate  point  of  contact  between  the  law  of  owner-
ship and  the  law  of  obligations  may  be  found  in  the  ultimate  purpose
of  the  largest  and  most  important  class  of  the  latter,  viz.  the  creation
of  real  rights,  or  the  communication  of  their  exercise  and  enjoyment  *.
This  co-ordination  however  of  obligations  with  rights  in  rem  is  re-
garded by  the  Austinian  school  as  an  egregious  error  of  arrangement,
on  the  ground  that  the  distinction  between  rights,  according  as  they
are  real  or  personal,  is  a  radical  one  for  purposes  of  classification  :
yet  it  is  adopted  by  the  continental  writers  on  Roman  law,  who  sub-
divide Vermogensrecht,  or  Property  law,  into  Sachenrecht,  com-
prising ownership,  possession,  and  iura  in  re  aliena,  and  the  law  of
obligations,  whether  arising  ex  contractu  or  ex  delicto.  Indeed,  the
very  treatment  of  contracts  and  delicts  together,  as  facts  or  events
from  which  obligations  arise,  is  considered  faulty  by  Dr.  Hunter,
because,  as  he  alleges,  the  sole  connection  between  them  was  that
they  formed  two  subdivisions  of  actiones  in  personam.  *  In  the  state-
ment of  claim  it  was  alleged  that  the  #efendant  ought  to  do  or  pay
something.  In  an  action,  then,  upon  a  contract  or  delict,  the  for-
mulae were  very  similar,  while  both  stood  in  marked  contrast  to  the
formula  in  an  actio  in  rem.  It  was  easy  to  understand,  therefore,  why
the  Roman  writers  included  contract  and  delict  under  the  common
designation  of  obligatio '  (Roman  Law,  Introduction  p.  xxxvi).  It  is
not  however  the  action,  but  the  right  which  the  action  is  designed
to  enforce,  to  which  attention  should  be  directed ;  and  whether  a
man  refuses  to  perform  his  contract,  or  violates  a  right  in  rem,  the
right  which  arises  from  the  refusal  or  the  violation  is  a  right  in  per-
sonam. It  may  be  replied  that  this  involves  a  confusion  between
antecedent  and  remedial  rights :  but  this  is  a  purely  party  objection
which  Gaius  could  not  have  been  expected  to  answer.  On  the  other
hand.  Dr.  Hunter  may  himself  be  met  by  the  charge  that  he  regards
contracts  from  the  wrong  point  of  view.  A  contract  may  be  analysed
into  two  elements,  the  agreement  or  promise,  and  the  obligation  which
is  annexed  to  it  by  law.  Now  Roman  and  modern  law  differ  as
regards  the  importance  which  they  respectively  attribute  to  these  two
elements :  the  former  bringing  the  obligation  into  the  foreground,
the  latter  rather  dwelling  on  the  consensus  of  the  parties.  Yet  the
Roman  view  here  seems  to  be  strictly  correct  and  lawyer-like,  for  a
promise  without  an  obligation,  such  as  English  lawyers  call  a  nudum

*  Cf.  Savigny,  System  i.  p.  572.


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  II.  195

pactum,  is  in  the  eye  of  the  law  non-existent,  while  an  obligation  has
an  independent  legal  existence :  it  is  the  obligation,  consequently,
which  for  legal  purposes  should  be  deemed  of  primary  importance,
and  constituted  a  summum  genus  for  purposes  of  classification.  If
contracts  are  not  to  stand  isolated  and  out  of  all  connection  with
other  parts  of  the  system,  they  must,  in  reason,  be  co-ordinated
with  other  facts  from  which  the  same  kind  of  legal  relation,  namely
obligation,  arises.  And  from  this  point  of  view  Dr.  Hunter  is  him-
self inconsistent,  for  he  co-ordinates  with  contracts  certain  other
sources  of  obligation,  viz.  quasi-contract,  and  what  he  calls  Status,
while  he  omits  delict  from  this  connection  altogether.  Under  Status,
as  a  source  of  obligation,  he  groups  the  family  relations  of  husband
and  wife,  and  parent  and  child ;  but  the  incorrectness  of  this  had
been  long  before  shown  by  Savigny  (System  §  58),  who  remarks  that
these  relations,  and  that  produced  by  contract  or  delict,  are  altogether
disparate ;  the  latter  being  the  partial  and  temporary  subjection  of  one
person  to  the  will  of  another,  the  former  being  permanent,  and  having
a  content  natural  and  moral  as  well  as  legal :  its  legal  content  being
not  so  much  the  personal  right  against  the  other  party  as  a  real  right
to  non-disturbance  by  the  world  at  large  ^

Important  changes  had  taken  place  in  the  law  comprised  in  this
second  Book  since  the  time  of  Gains.  In  respect  of  modes  of
acquisition  the  ius  gentium  had  reaped  another  triumph ;  in  iure
cessio  and  mancipatio,  the  oldest  titles  of  the  ius  civile,  had  already
become  practically  obsolete,  and  the  latter  was  formaUy  abolished  by
Justinian,  who  also  swept  away,  in  its  train,  a  troublesome  distinction
and  much  antiquated  learning.  The  simplification  of  law  effected  by
the  recognition  of  traditio  or  mere  delivery  as  the  universal  mode  of
conveying  res  singulae  is  however  perhaps  no  more  to  be  admired
than  Justinian's  masterly  codification,  or  more  properly  reform,  of  the
law  of  Usucapio  or  Prescription,  which  had  hitherto  consisted  of  two
different  sets  of  rules,  the  one  civil,  the  other  praetorian,  whose
divergence  had  been  occasioned  by  the  absurd  survival  of  the  doc-
trine that  provincial  soil  could  not  be  owned  by  private  individuals.
The  great  change  in  the  proprietary  rights  of  filiifamilias,  initiated
under  Constantine  by  the  institution  of  quasi-castrense  and  adventi-
tium  peculium,  was  consummated  by  Justinian  himself ;  the  survival
of  the  patria  potestas  was  thus  made  tolerable  by  the  partial  surrender
of  one  of  it^most  valuable  privileges.  The  direct  acquisition  of
possession,  and  so  of  ownership,  through  agents,  had  been  sanctioned

'  Cf.  HoUand's  Jorisprndence,  pp.  iia  and  165.

O  %


196  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IL

by  a  constitution  of  Sevenis,  based  upon  a  consensus  among  the
jurists,  who  in  Gaius'  time  had  been  divided  upon  the  question ;  and
the  interests  of  mortgagors  were  carefully  guarded  by  Justinian's
regulations  as  to  the  exercise  of  powers  of  sale  and  foreclosure.  In
the  law  of  wills,  apart  from  changes  in  their  form,  and  the  introduc*
tion  already  noticed,  of  the  ^  inventory/  by  far  the  most  important
development  was  that  effected  by  Justinian's  assimilation  of  l^acies
and  fideicommissa.  When  Gaius  wrote,  prescribed  forms  were  still
required  for  the  former,  which  were  also  recovered  by  different
remedies ;  but,  by  requiring  the  observance  of  certain  evidentiary
solemnities  in  the  creation  of  fideicommissa,  by  freeing  legacies  from
the  trammels  of  language,  and  by  the  abolition  of  the  formulary  pro-
cedure, later  emperors  had  removed  many  of  the  distinctions  between
them,  and  such  as  had  remained  were  swept  away  by  Justinian's
ordinance,  that  in  future  the  rules  and  remedies  of  each  should  apply
to  both  indifferently,  which  also  presented  an  opportunity  for  con-
structing one  consistent  enactment  from  the  provisions  of  the  senatus
consulta  Trebellianum  and  Pegasianum,  the  latter  of  which  had
half  undone  the  judicious  rule  introduced  by  the  former  for  the
assimilation  of  fideicommissarii  to  directi  heredes.  Many  unreason-
able prohibitions,  such  as  those  of  legacies  to  incertae  personae,
poenae  nomine,  and  post  mortem  heredis,  were  also  abolished  by
Justinian,  whose  changes  in  connection  with  the  querella  inofficiosi
testamenti,  both  before  and  after  the  publication  of  the  Institutes,  are
noticed  in  the  notes  to  Title  i8.


LIBER   SECUNDUS.

I.

DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.

SUPERIORE  libro  de  iure  personarum  exposuimus:  modo
videamus  de  rebus,  quae  vel  in  nostro  patrimonio  vel  extra
nostrum  patrimonium  habentur.  quaedam  enim  natural!  iure
communla  sunt  omnium,  quaedam  publica,  quaedam  universi-
tatis,  quaedam  nullius,  pleraque  singulorum,  quae  variis  ex
causis  cuique  adquiruntur,  sicut  ex  subiectis  apparebit.

Et  quidem  naturali  iure  communia  sunt  omnium  haec :  aer  i
et  aqua  profluens  et  mare  et  per  hoc  litora  maris,    nemo  igitur
ad  litus  maris  accedere  prohibetur,  dum  tamen  villis  et  monu-
mentis  et  aedificiis  abstineat,  quia  non  sunt  iuris  gentium,
sicut  et  mare.    Flumina  autem  omnia  et  portus  publica  sunt :  2


Tit.  I.  By  res  extra  patrimonium  seems  to  be  meant  a  thing  which  is
legally  incapable  of  being  owned  by  a  private  person,  i.e.  it  does  not
cease  to  be  in  patrimonio  by  not  having,  or  by  ceasmg  to  have,  a  private
owner.  Extra  patrimonium  is  thus  equivalent  to  extra  commercium:
but  in  the  fonner  the  res  is  viewed  as  incapable  of  private  dominium,
in  the  latter  rather  as  incapable  of  acquisition  by  a  private  person.
Having  drawn  the  distinction,  Justinian  proceeds  to  classify  res  extra
patrimonium  under  four  heads.

§  L  Cf.  Plautus,  Rud.  4.  3.  36  '  mare  quidem  commune  certo'st  omni*
bus,' -Cicero,  pro  Rose.  26  'quid  tam  est  commune,  quam  spiritus  vivis,
mare  fluctuantibus,  litus  eiectis  ? '  Seneca,  Benef.  4.  28,  Ovid,  Metam.  6.
349.  The  seashore  up  to  the  line  of  the  highest  tide  in  flood  or  storm
(hibemus»per  hiemem,  vel  ventis  excitatus),  §  3,  was  communis  because
incapable  of  appropriation,  though  if  by  driving  piles  one  erected  a  build-
ing upon  any  part  of  it  he  acquired  property  in  the  structure  (but  not  in
the  soil,  §  5  inf.)  so  long  as  it  stood.  This,  however,  could  not  be  done
without  a  decretum  of  the  praetor.  Dig.  41.  i.  5c.  The  modem  doctrine
that  the  seashore  between  high  and  low  tide  belongs  to  the  state  is
derived  from  Celsus,  Dig.  43.  8.  3.

§  2.  Res  pnblicae  seem  to  be  divisible  into  two  classes,  (1)  Things


198  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  II.

ideoque    ius   piscandi   omnibus    commune  est   in  portubus

3  iluminibusque.      Est  autem  litus  maris,  quatenus   hibernus

4  iluctus  maximus  excurrit  Riparum  quoque  usus  publicus
est  iuris  gentium,  sicut  ipsius  iluminis :  itaque  navem  ad  eas
appellere,  funes  ex  arboribus  ibi  natis  religare,  onus  aliquid  in
his  reponere  cuilibet  liberum  est,  sicuti  per  ipsum  flumen
navigare.  sed  proprietas  earum  illorum  est,  quorum  praediis
haerent :  qua  de  causa  arbores  quoque  in  isdem  natae  eorun-

5  dem  sunt.  Litorum  quoque  usus  publicus  iuris  gentium  est,
sicut  ipsius  maris :  et  ob  id  quibuslibet  liberum  est  casam  ibi
imponere,  in  qua  se  recipiant,  sicut  retia  siccare  et  ex  mare
deducere.  proprietas  autem  eorum  potest  intell^i  nullius  esse,
sed  eiusdem  iuris  esse,  cuius  et  mare  et  quae  subiacent  mari,

6  terra  vel  harena.  Universitatis  sunt,  non  singulorum  veluti
quae  in  civitatibus  sunt,  ut  theatra  stadia  et  similia  et  si  qua
alia  sunt  communia  civitatium.

which  belong  to  and  are  used  by  the  state  as  by  a  private  person:  e.g.
public  slaves,  money,  stores,  &c. :  these  are  not  properly  extra  patri-
monium  nostrum.  (2)  Things  which  are  publico  usui  destinatae,  (i.e.
not  communes  generally,  but  only  to  cives),  e.g.  roads,  harbours,  public
rivers  (i.e.  flumina  perennia  Dig.  43.  12.  3)  and  their  beds.  The  banks
of  public  rivers  were  private  property,  subjected  by  the  law  to  a  kind  of
servitude  in  favour  of  all  members  of  the  state,  §  4  inf.

§  6.  Universitas  here  seems  to  be  used  as  equivalent  to  civitas,  i.e.
a  Roman  dty  or  municipium.  Taken  in  this  sense,  res  universitatis  are
analogous  to  res  publicae,  and  are  divisible  in  the  same  manner.  Such
property  only  of  a  provincial  city  as  is  municipiun  usui  destinatum  is
extra  patrimonium :  a  res  pubiica  is  a  thing  which  any  civis  may  use :
a  res  universitatis  is  one  which  may  be  used  as  of  right  only  by  the
members  of  the  universitas.

Taken  in  its  widest  sense,  universitas  is  fairly  equivalent  to  the  'juristic
person'  of  modem  writers.  For  the  definition  and  characteristics  of
juristic  persons  in  general  reference  may  be  made  to  Holland's  Jurispru-
dence pp.  225  sq. :  those  recognised  by  Roman  law  may  be  subdivided
into  universitates  personarum  and  universitates  bonorum.  [The  latter
should  not  be  confounded  with  so-called  universitates  rerum  (distantium),
such  as  a  flock  of  sheep,  which  have  no  independent  legal  existence  apart
from  the  elements  which  go  to  make  them  up:  here  both  whole  and
parts  are  actual  and  corporeal;  see  Dig.  7.  i.  70.  3  :  41.  i.  7.  11 :  41.  3.
23.  pr.]

A  universitas  personarum  (or  corporation)  is  an  aggregate  of  natural
persons  forming  an  ideal  whole,  regarded  by  the  law  as  a  '  person '  distinct
from  its  members  for  the  time  being,  because  its  existence  does  not


Tit  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  199

Nullius  autem  sunt  res  sacrae  et  religiosae  et  sanctae :  quod  7
enim  divini  iuris  est,  id  nullius  in  bonis  est.  Sacra  sunt,  quae  8
rite  et  per  pontifices  deo  consecrata  sunt,  veluti  aedes  sacrae
et  dona,  quae  rite  ad  ministerium  dei  dedicata  sunt,  quae
etiam  per  nostram  constitutionem  alienari  et  obligari  pro-
hibuimus,  excepta  causa  redemptionis  captivorum.  si  quis
vero  auctoritate  sua  quasi  sacrum  sibi  constituerit,  sacrum
non  est,  sed  profanum.  locus  autem,  in  quo  sacrae  aedes
aedificatae  sunt,  etiam  diruto  aedificio   adhuc  sacer  manet,


cease  along  with  theirs,  and  invested  with  rights  and  subject  to  daties,
other  than  those  of  the  individuals,  taken  singly,  of  which  it  is  com-
posed :  so  that  legal  relations  can  subsist  between  it  and  them  and  any
number  of  them  no  less  than  between  it  and  other  persons  generally.
Such  corporations  may  be  exemplified  by  the  state  (Dig.  49.  14,  Cod.
10.  1),  ecclesiastical  bodies  and  commercial  associations,  collegia  pis-
tonim,  fabrorum,  &c.  (Dig.  3.  4.  i.  pr.).

Universitates  bonorum  are  juristic  persons  not  necessarily  supported
by  any  natural  person  :  they  are  so  much  property,  or  masses  of  rights
and  duties  (Giiterinbegriff)  personified  and  regarded  as  capable  of  per-
petuating their  separate  existence  and  fictitious  unity  indefinitely,  e.g.
the  treasury  or  fiscus :  foundations  such  as  churches,  hospitals,  and
almshouses :  hereditates  iacentes,  i.  e.  inheritances  on  which  no  heir  has
yet  entered,  and  the  '  estate '  or  universitas  iuris  of  a  citizen  lying  in
captivity  with  the  enemy,  Dig.  3.  5.  19.  5.  Savign/s  dictum  as  to  the
origin  of  corporations  (which  is  stated  by  Mr.  Poste,  Gains  p.  145)  seems
untrue  in  the  face  of  Dig.  34.  5.  20,  from  which  it  may  be  argued  that
persons  could  always  incorporate  themselves  for  lawful  purposes  without
the  special  assent  of  the  sovereign :  cf.  Cod.  i.  3.  24.  28.  29.

§  7.  When  it  is  said  that  res  sacrae,  religiosae,  and  sanctae  are  res
nullius,  what  is  meant  is  rather  that  they  were  nullius  in  bonis,  i.  e.  extra
patrimonium.  Res  nullius,  in  the  more  technical  sense,  are  those  things
which  *  fiunt  singulorum '  by  occupatio,  §§  12-18  inf.

§  8.  Res  sacrae  could  become  so  only  by  being  dedicated  under  public
authority  by  a  priestly  ceremony  (for  which  in  the  pagan  time  see  Cic.
pro  Domo  47,  Ovid,  Fast.  I.  610,  Valer.  Max.  5.  10),  in  the  later  period
the  imperial  sanction  seems 'to  have  been  sufficient,  Dig.  5.  3.  50.  i  ;
II.  7.  8.  pr.  By  consecration  they  ceased  to  be  in  commercio  and  became
inalienable,  though  in  Justinian's  time  moveable  res  sacrae  might  be  sold
for  the  purpose  mentioned  in  the  text  (cf.  Gregor.  Ep.  6.  13,  Socrates,
Trist.  Eccl.  7.  21)  and  also  for  the  support  of  the  poor  in  time  of  famine,
and  for  payment  of  the  debts  of  the  church,  Cod.  i.  2.  21,  Nov.  120.  10.
If  sacred  ground  was  captured  by  the  enemy,  it  became  profanum,
though  by  a  kind  of  postliminium  it  could  recover  its  former  character,
Dig.  II.  7.  36.


200  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  11.

9  ut  et  Papinianus  scripsit.  Religiosum  locum  unusquisque
sua  voluntate  facit,  dum  mortuum  infert  in  locum  suum.
in  communem  autem  locum  purum  invito  socio  inferre  non
licet :  in  commune  vero  sepulcrum  etiam  invitis  ceteris  licet
inferre.  item  si  alienus  usus  fructus  est,  proprietarium  placet
nisi  consentiente  usufructuario  locum  religiosum  non  facere.
in  alienum  locum  concedente  domino  licet  inferre:  et  licet
postea   ratum    habuerit,  quam    illatus  est  mortuus,   tamen

10  religiosus  locus  fit.  Sanctae  quoque  res,  veluti  muri  et  portae,
quodammodo  divini  iuris  sunt  et  ideo  nullius  in  bonis  sunt,
ideo  autem  muros  sanctos  dicimus,  quia  poena  capitis  con-
Stituta  sit  in  eos,  qui  aliquid  in  muros  deliquerint.  ideo  et
J^pm  eas  partes,  quibus  poenas  constituimus  adversus  eos
qui  contra  leges  fecerint,  sanctiones  vocamus.

11  Singulorum  autem  bominum  multis  modis  res  fiunt:  qua-
rundam  enim  rerum  dominium  nanciscimur  iure  naturali^  quod,
sicut  diximus,  appellatur  ius  gentium,  quarundam  iure  civili.
commodius  est  itaque  a  vetustiore  iure  incipere.      palam  est


§  9.  Gaius  (ii.  4)  describes  res  religiosae  as  things  '  quae  dis  manibus
relictae  sunt : '  here  little  seems  to  be  expressed  by  the  term  except
ground  used  for  burial,  though  there  is  reference  to  moveable  res
religiosae  in  Bk.  iv.  18.  9.  inf.,  and  Dig.  48.  13.  i.  As  is  said  in  the  text,
soil  could  be  made  religiosus  by  its  full  owner  burying  a  corpse  in  it,  or
(Dig.  II.  7.  4)  being  buried  in  it  himself:  hence,  as  Gaius  points  out  (ii.  7),
provincial  soil  could  not  properly  become  religiosus  because  it  could  not
be  owned  ex  iure  Quiritium  by  a  private  person :  however, '  pro  religioso
habebatur.'  Ground  which  had  thus  become  divini  iuris  was  to  a  certain
extent  private  property,  as  in  the  case  of  family  burial-places :  it  was  extra
patrimonium  only  in  the  sense  that  it  could  not  be  diverted  from  the
purpose  to  which  it  had  been  devoted.

§  10.  Under  the  older  law  res  were  made  sanctae  by  a  religious  cere-
mony :  '  sanctum ...  a  sanguine  hostiae  . . .  nihil  enim  sanctum  apud
veteres  dicebatur,  nisi  quod  hostiae  sanguine  esset  consecratum  aut  con-
spersum '  I  si  dor.  Orig.  1 5. 4,  the  result  being '  ut  violari  sine  poena  (maiore)
non  possent '  Aelius  Gall,  apud  Festum, '  sancire  est  confirmare  et  irro-
gatione  poenae  ab  iniuriis  defendere '  Isidor.  1.  c.  It  is  probably  the
retention  of  the  penalty  without  the  ceremony  of  consecration  which  makes
Gaius  (ii.  8)  speak  of  them  as  *  quodammodo  divini  iuris.'

§  11.  Having  excluded  the  consideration  of  res  which  cannot  be  the
private  property  of  individuals,  Justinian  proceeds  to  point  out  the  various
modes  in  which  ownership  over  res  singulae  (corporales)  can  be  acquired.
Before  passing  on  to  these,  it  is  necessary  to  note  briefly  the  various


Tit.  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  201

autem  vetustius  esse  naturale  ius,  quod  cum  ipso  genere  hu-
mano  rerum  natura  prodidit :  civilia  enim  tura  tunc  coeperunt,
cum  et  civitates  condi  et  magistratus  creari  et  leges  scribi
coeperunt.


meanings  which  the  term  dominium  (ownership)  bore  in  the  course  of
legal  history  and  its  relation  to  other  cognate  notions.

Full  Roman  ownership,  dominium  ex  lure  Quiritium,  had  two  con-
ditions. It  could  be  exercised  only  over  such  objects  as  were  in  commercio
(and  therefore  not  over  res  divini  iuris  and  res  publicae,  especially
provincial  soil) :  and  it  could  be  vested  only  in  persons  who  had  the  com-
mercium  (p.  27  supr.),  Le.  cives,  Latini,  and  peregrini  to  whom  it  might
have  been  granted  as  a  special  favour.  With  the  rapid  provincial  exten-
sion of  Rome  and  the  large  influx  of  peregrini,  the  strict  '  civil '  Roman
dominium  soon  reproduced  itself  in  a  *  natural '  counterpart.  He  who  had
the  commercium,  though  he  could  not '  own '  provincial  soil,  could  stand
to  it  in  a  very  similar  relation,  called  possessio  properly,  and  later  even,
though  laxly,  dominium.  Similarly  the  peregrinus,  though  he  could
not  be  dominus  ex  iure  Quiritium,  had  a  sort  of  property :  the  praetor
granted  him  actions  for  its  recovery  differing  only  in  small  technical
points  from  those  which  lay  at  the  suit  of  the  full  citizen.  In  short,  we
arrive  at  the  idea  of  a  new  kind  of  dominium  (Gaius  ii.  40)  called  by
the  modems  dominium  ex  iure  gentium,  or  gentile  ownership,  because
recognised  by  the  ius  gentium,  though  not  by  the  ius  civile :  acquirable
only  in  modes  not  peculiar  to  the  latter,  and  differing  from  full  Roman
ownership  also  in  respect  of  the  persons  in  whom  it  could  be  vested,  in
the  objects  over  which  it  could  be  exercised,  and  in  the  remedies  by  which
it  was  recovered.

This  distinction  is  one  between  civil  and  natural  law.  But  we  also  find
another,  implicated  with  the  former  only,  and  originating  in  defective
conveyances.  In  certain  things  (res  mancipi)  property  could  be  trans-
ferred ex  iure  Quiritium  only  by  a  precise  observance  of  the  mancipation
form.  In  course  of  time,  however,  the  practice  of  traditio  extended  itself
largely  also  to  res  mancipi,  but  the  effect  of  this  was  to  leave  the  dominium
in  the  transferor ;  aU  that  the  transferee  acquired  was  bona  fide  posses-
sion, he  was  said  to  have  the  thing  '  in  bonis ; '  by  later  writers  he  is
called  'bonitarian'  owner.  In  a  short  time  (Tit.  6  inf.)  his  possession
ripens  by  prescription  into  full  ownership  :  meanwhile  his  transferor's
rights  over  the  object  (termed  nudum  ius  Quiritium)  are  merely  nominal,
and  against  him  sometimes  (note  (3)  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  4  inf.)  no  less  than
against  the  rest  of  the  world,  the  transferee,  as  bona  fide  possessor,  has
the  actio  Publiciana  for  the  recovery  of  the  property  if  taken  out  of  his
hands.  Other  cases  of '  bonitarian  *  ownership,  though  less  common  than
this,  sprang  up  from  the  praetorian  legal  innovations,  e.g.  those  of
praetorian  universal  succession  in  bankruptcy  and  upon  death :  in  these
the  proper  remedy  was  some  other  fictitious  action  (Gaius  iv.  35).


202  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR       [Lib.  IL

12  Ferae  igitur  bestiae  et  volucres  et  pisces,  id  est  omnia
animalia,  quae  in  terra  mari  caelo  nascuntur,  simulatque  ab
aliquo  capta  fuerint,  lure  gentium  statim  illius  esse  incipiunt :
quod  enim  ante  nullius  est,  id  naturali  ratione  occupanti  con-
ceditur.  nee  interest,  feras  bestias  et  volucres  utrum  in  suo
fundo  quisque  capiat,  an  in  alieno :  plane  qui  in  alienum  fun-
dum  ingreditur  venandi  aut  aucupandi  gratia,  potest  a  domino,
si  is  provident,  prohiberi  ne  ingrediatur.  quidquid  autem
eorum  ceperis,  eo  usque  tuum  esse  intellegitur,  donee  tua
custodia  coercetur :  cum  vero  evaserit  custodiam  tuam  et  in
naturalem  libertatem  se  receperit,  tuum  esse  desinit  et  rursus

In  the  time  of  Gaius  this  distinction  between  dominium  ex  iure  Quiri-
tium  and  in  bonis  habere  is  of  every-day  occurrence,  but,  except  in  respect
of  manumission  (note  on  Bk.  i.  5.  i  supr.),  the  differences  between  them
are  not  of  any  practical  importance.  When  Justinian  had  abolished  the
old  points  of  difference  between  solum  Italicum  and  solum  provinciale
(Tit.  6pr.inf.,  Cod.  7.  31 ;  5.  13. 15),  and  peregrini  had  practically  become
unknown,  all  these  refinements  disappeared :  there  was  but  one  dominium
left ;  the  only  contrast  was  between  it  and  possessio.

Some  of  the  modes  in  which  ownership  is  acquired  in  res  singulae  are
common  to  most  systems  of  law :  others  are  peculiar  to  this  people  or
that.  The  former  the  Romans  supposed  to  have  been  prescribed  or
sanctioned  by  the  law  of  nature,  and  therefore  to  be  prior  in  time
(vetustius  ius)  to  those  which  are  peculiar :  for  a  peculiar  mode  of
acquisition  exists  only  in  virtue  of  municipal  law  or  custom,  which  is
itself  the  outcome  of  political  society,  and  political  association  was  pre-
ceded in  their  view  (derived  from  the  Stoics,  p.  37  supr.)  by  ages  in  which
nature*s  was  the  only  law,  and  civitates,  magistratus,  and  leges  had  not
yet  come  into  existence.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe  that  this
view  is  quite  erroneous :  the  history  of  Roman  law  alone  might  con-
vince us  that  among  primitive  peoples  absolute  private  ownership  is
a  thing  at  first  unknown,  and  that  when  it  has  been  developed,  alienation
is  the  exception,  not  the  rule,  and  the  modes  in  which  it  is  effected
formal  and  essentially  '  iuris  civilis.'

§  12.  The  first '  natural '  mode  of  acquisition  discussed  by  Justinian  is
occupatio,  the  advisedly  taking  possession  of  an  object  which  has  no
owner  (res  nullius)  with  the  intention  of  appropriating  it.  The  following
kinds  of  res  nullius  are  mentioned  in  the  text :  wild  animals,  birds,  and
fishes,  §§  12-16:  enemies'  property,  §  17:  stones  and  pebbles  found  on
the  seashore,  §  18 :  islands  rising  in  the  sea,  §  22  :  treasure-trove,  §  39  :
and  res  derelictae,  §  47.  The  Romans  had  no  game  laws,  which  in
England  grew  out  of  feudalism  and  the  great  forests  of  the  Norman
kings  and  nobility.  Some  writers  have  maintained  the  contrary,  but  Dig.
47.  10.  13.  7  is  explicit  to  the  effect  that  the  landowner  can  prevent  others


Tit  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  203

occupantis  fit.  naturalem  autem  libertatem  recipere  intelle-
gitur,  cum  vel  oculos  tuos  effugerit  vel  ita  sit  in  conspectu  tuo,
ut  difficilis  sit  eius  persecutio.  Illud  quaesitum  est,  an,  si  fera  13
bestia  ita  vulnerata  sit,  ut  capi  possit,  statim  tua  esse  intelle-
gatur.  quibusdam  placuit  statim  tuam  esse  et  eo  usque  tuam
videri,  donee  earn  persequaris,  quodsi  desieris  persequi^  de-
sinere  tuam  esse  et  rursus  fieri  occupantis.  alii  non  aliter
putaverunt  tuam  esse,  quam  si  ceperis.  sed  posteriorem  sen-
tentiam  nos  confirmamus,  quia  muita  accidere  solent,  ut  eam
non  capias.  Apium  quoque  natura  fera  est.  itaque  quae  in  14
arbore  tua  consederint,  antequam  a  te  alveo  includantur,  non
magis  tuae  esse  intelleg^ntur,  quam  volucres,  quae  in  tua
arbore  nidum  fecerint :  ideoque  si  alius  eas  incluserit,  is  earum
dominus  erit.  favos  quoque  si  quos  hae  fecerint,  quilibet  exi-
mere  potest,  plane  Integra  re  si  provideris  ingredientem  in
fundum  tuum,  potes  eum  iure  prohibere  ne  ingrediatur.  exa-
men,  quod  ex  alveo  tuo  evolaverit,  eo  usque  tuum  esse  intelle-
gitur,  donee  in  conspectu  tuo  est  nee  difficilis  eius  persecutio
est:  alioquin  occupantis  fit  Pavonum  et  columbarum  fera  15
natura  est.  nee  ad  rem  pertinet,  quod  ex  consuetudine  avolare
et  revolare  solent :  nam  et  apes  idem  faciunt,  quarum  constat
feram  tsse  naturam:  cervos  quoque  ita  quidam  mansuetos
habent,  ut  in  silvas  ire  et  redire  soleant,  quorum  et  ipsorum
feram  esse  naturam  nemo  negat  in  his  autem  animalibus,
quae  ex  consuetudine  abire  et  redire  solent,  talis  regula
comprobata  est,  ut  eo  usque  tua  esse  intellegantur,  donee
animum  revertendi  habeant :  nam  si  revertendi  animum  habere
desierint,  etiam  tua  esse  desinunt  et  fiunt  occupantium.
revertendi    autem   animum    videntur  desinere  habere,   cum

(even  by  force,  Cic.  pro  Caec.  8,  Dig.  43.  16.  3.  9)  from  coming  on  his
land,  but  not  from  exercising  occupatio  when  there.  It  would  seem  from
the  text  that  express  notice  not  to  enter  was  necessary  to  constitute  a  tres-
pass in  every  case.

§  18.  The  view  here  confirmed  by  Justinian  was  that  most  generally
held.  Dig.  41.  i.  5.  i :  the  other  was  that  of  Trebatius,  whose  opinion  is
highly  spoken  of  in  general  in  Tit  25  pr.  inf.

§  15.  Animals  wild  by  nature,  but  which  had  been  partially  tamed,
were  thus  treated  differently  from  those  which  were  genuinely  wild  :  the
latter  became  res  nullius  again  direcdy  they  were  out  of  one's  control,
the  former  only  when  they  had  ceased  to  have  the  animus  revertendi.


204  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  11.

16  revertendi  consuetudinem  deseruerint.  Gallinarum  et  anserum
non  est  fera  natura  idque  ex  eo  possumus  intellegere,  quod
aliae  sunt  gallinae,  quas  feras  vocamus,  item  alii  anseres,  quos
feros  appellamus.  ideoque  si  anseres  tui  aut  gallinae  tuae
aliquo  casu  turbati  turbataeve  evolaverint,  licet  conspectum
tuum  effugerinty  quocumque  tamen  loco  sint,  tui  tuaeve  esse
intelleguntur :   et  qui   lucrandi    animo   ea  animalia  retinet,

1 7  furtum  committere  intellegitur.  Item  ea,  quae  ex  hostibus
capimus,  iure  gentium  statim  nostra  fiunt ;  adeo  quidem,  ut
et  liberi  homines  in  servitutem  nostram  deducantur,  qui
tamen,  si  evaserint  nostram  potestatem  et  ad   suos  reversi

18  fuerint,  pristinum  statum  recipiunt.  Item  lapilli  gemmae  et
cetera,  quae  in  litore  inveniuntur,  iure  naturali  statim  inven-

19  toris  fiunt.  Item  ea,  quae  ex  animalibiis  dominio  tuo  subiectis
nata  sunt,  eodem  iure  tibi  adquiruntur.

20  Praeterea  quod  per  alluvionem  agro  tuo  flumen  adiecit,
iure  gentium  tibi  adquiritur.  est  autem  alluvio  incrementum
latens.  per  alluvionem  autem  id  videtur  adici,  quod  ita  paula-
tim  adicitur,  ut  intellegere  non  possis,  quantum  quoquo  mo-

§  17.  The  nile  of  the  ius  gentium  is  stated  by  Cyrus  in  Xenoph.  Cyrop.
7*  5*  7Z  v^l*^  *v  iraat¥  avOpmroig  dtdi^  ianVy  orap  frok€fiov¥T»»  if6Kis  i^^f
T&v  cXSvTtav  §l»at  rii  xphv^^^^  The  Romans  did  not  adhere  consistently
to  the  principle :  property  taken  from  the  enemy  on  his  own  soil  belonged
to  the  state,  and  became  'singulorum'  only  by  sale  or  grant,  Dionys.
Halic.  Antiq.  7.  63  :  the  rule  of  occupatio  by  individuals  applied  only  to
hostile  property  within  the  territory  of  the  other  belligerent ,  *  quae  res
hostilesapud  nos  sunt  non  publicae  sed  occupantium  fiunt '  Dig.  41.  i.  51.
For  restoration  by  postliminium  see  on  Bk.  i.  12.  5  supr.,  and  for  the
influence  of  this  principle  in  modem  International  Law,  Maine,  Ancient
Law  p.  246  sq.

§  19.  By  eodem  iure  may  be  meant  either  *  iure  natural!'  or  'dominio.'
Justinian  passes  from  occupatio  to  a  second  title  of  natural  law,  viz.
accessio,  by  which  is  meant  the  accrual  (i)  of  res  nuUius  or  (2)  of  res
alienae  to  our  own  property.  Each  of  these  heads  comprises  a  number
of  distinct  cases,  most  of  which  are  known  by  specific  names.  Under
accessio  rerum  nuUius  may  be  grouped  (a)  accession  through  natural
increment,  mentioned  in  this  section;  (b)  alluvio,  §  20;  {c)  formation
of  an  island  in  a  river,  §  22  ;  {d)  dereliction  of  a  river-bed,  §  23 :  under
accessio  rerum  alienarum  (e)  adjunctio,  which  comprises  inaedificatio,
§§  29, 30,  plantatio  and  satio,  §§31, 32,  and  accession  of  writing  to  parch-
ment, §  33  (cf.  §  26),  and  of  canvas  or  board  to  the  picture  painted
thereon,  §  34 ;  (/)  confusio  and  commixtio,  §§27  and  28.


Tit  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  205

mento  temporis  adiciatur.  Quodsi  vis  fluminis  partem  aliquam  21
ex  tuo  praedio  detraxerit  et  vicini  praedio  appulerit,  palam
est  earn  tuam  pemianere.  plane  si  longiore  tempore  fundo
vicini  haeserit  arboresque,  quas  secum  traxerit,  in  eum  fundum
radices  egerint,  ex  eo  tempore  videntur  vicini  fundo  adquisitae
esse.  Insula,  quae  in  mari  nata  est,  quod  raro  accidit,  occu-  22
pantis  fit :  nullius  enim  esse  creditur.  at  in  flumine  nata,  quod
frequenter  accidit,  si  quidem  mediam  partem  iluminis  teneat,
communis  est  eorum,  qui  ab  utraque  parte  fluminis  prope
ripam  praedia  possident,  pro  modo  latitudinis  cuiusque  fundi,
quae  latitudo  prope  ripam  sit.  quodsi  alteri  parti  proximior
sit,  eorum  est  tantum,  quia  ab  ea  parte  prope  ripam  praedia
possident.  quodsi  aliqua  parte  divisum  flumen,  deinde  infra
unitum  agrum  alicuius  in  formam  insulae  redegerit,  eiusdem
permanet  is  ager,  cuius  et  fuerat.  Quodsi  naturali  alveo  in  23
universum  derelicto  alia  parte  fiuere  coeperit,  prior  quidem
alveus  eorum  est,  qui  prope  ripam  eius  praedia  possident,  pro
modo  scilicet  latitudinis  cuiusque  agri,  quae  latitudo  prope
ripam  sit,  novus  autem  alveus  eius  iuris  esse  incipit,  cuius  et
ipsum  flumen  id  est  publicus.  quodsi  post  aliquod  tempus  ad
priorem  alveum  reversum  fuerit  flumen,  rursus  novus  alveus
eorum  esse  incipit,  qui  prope  ripam  eius  praedia  possident.
Alia  sane  causa  est,  si  cuius  totus  ager  inundatus  fuerit.  24
neque  enim  inundatio  speciem  fundi  commutat  et  ob  id,
si  recesserit  aqua,  palam  est  eum  fundum  eius  manere,  cuius
et  fuit.

Cum  ex  aliena  materia  species  aliqua  facta  sit  ab  aliquo^  25
quaeri  solet,  quis  eorum  naturali  ratione  dominus  sit,  utrum

§  22.  An  island  formed  in  a  river  is  acquired  by  accessio  onJy  when
the  flumen  is  publicum  (note  on  §  2  supr.) :  if  the  stream  is  not  publicum
its  bed  already  belongs  to  the  riparian  owners.  The  rule  for  determining
the  ownership  of  insula  nata  is  incorrectly  stated  in  the  text :  it  belonged
exclusively  to  the  riparian  owner  or  owners  on  one  side  only  when  a  line
drawn  down  the  centre  of  the  river-bed  would  pass  wholly  to  the  right  or
left  of  it.  If  such  a  line  cut  it  at  all,  the  ownership  was  divided  ('  non  pro
indiviso,  sed  r^onibus  quoque  divisis'  Dig.  41.  i.  29)  even  though  it  was
far  from  the  exact  middle.

§  25.  It  is  usual  to  enumerate,  as  a  third  natural  mode  of  acquisition,
specificatio,  the  converting  of  another's  material  into  a  new  form  or
*  species,'  as  in  the  illustrations  given  in  the  text.    The  Proculians  argued


2o6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  II.

is  qui  fecerit,  an  ille  potius  qui  materiae  dominus  fuerit :
ut  ecce  si  quis  ex  alienis  uvis  aut  olivis  aut  spicis  vinum
aut  oleum  aut  frumentum  fecerit,  aut  ex  alieno  auro  vel  ar*
gento  vel  aere  vas  aliquod  fecerit,  vel  ex  alieno  vino  et  melle
mulsum  miscuerit,  vel  ex  alienis  medicamentis  emplastrum
aut  collyrium  composuerit,  vel  ex  aliena  lana  vestimentum
fecerit,  vel  ex  alienis  tabulis  navem  vel  armarium  vel  subsel-
lium  fabricaverit.  et  post  multas  Sabinianorum  et  Proculiano-
rum  ambiguitates  placuit  media  sententia  existimantium,  si  ea
species  ad  materiam  reduci  possit,  eum  videri  dominum  esse,
qui  materiae  dominus  fuerat,  si  non  possit  reduci,  eum  potius
intellegi  dominum  qui  fecerit :  ut  ecce  vas  conflatum  potest
ad  rudem  massam  aeris  vel  argenti  vel  auri  reduci,  vinum
autem  aut  oleum  aut  frumentum  ad  uvas  et  olivas  et  spicas
reverti  non  potest  ac  ne  mulsum  quidem  ad  vinum  et  mel  re-
solvi  potest,  quodsi  partim  ex  sua  materia,  partim  ex  aliena
speciem  aliquam  fecerit  quisque,  veluti  ex  suo  vino  et  alieno
melle  mulsum  aut  ex  suis  et  alienis  medicamentis  emplastrum
aut  collyrium  aut  ex  sua  et  aliena  lana  vestimentum  fecerit,
dubitandum  non  est  hoc  casu  eum  esse  dominum  qui  fecerit :
cum  non  solum  operam  suam  dedit,  sed  et  partem  eiusdem
26  materiae  praestavit.    Si  tamen  alienam  purpuram  quis  intexuit


the  case  on  the  analogy  of  occupatio,  and  regarded  the  giver  of  the  form
as  the  owner  of  the  product ;  a  view  which  seems  to  have  commended
itself  to  Ulpian  ('mutata  fonna  prope  interimit  substantiam  rei'  Dig.  lo.
4.  9.  3).  The  Sabinians  viewed  it  as  a  kind  of  accessio,  and  denied  any
transfer  of.  ownership,  Gaius  ii.  79.  The  intermediate  opinion,  confirmed
by  Justinian,  is  found  in  Gaius  (Dig.  41.  i.  7. 7),  Paulus  (ib.  24),  and  other
jurists.  In  Justinian,  consequently,  specification  as  a  mode  of  acquisition
occurs  only  when  '  ea  species  ad  materiam  reduci  non  possit,'  and  is  really
a  form  of  occupatio,  as  appears  from  the  words  of  Ulpian  cited  above,
and  the  expression  in  the  Digest  '  quod  factum  est  antea  nuUius  fuerat.'
Of  course  the  giver  of  the  form  had  in  all  cases  to  pay  the  owner  of  the
material  its  full  value,  on  the  principle  '  neminem  cum  alterius  detrimento
fieri  locupletiorem.'  It  has  been  much  disputed  whether  bona  fides  is
essential  to  acquisition  by  specificatio :  the  passages  bearing  upon  this
point  are  Dig.  13.  i.  13  ;  ib.  14.  3  ;  10.  4. 12.  3  ;  41.  3.  4.  20 ;  47.  2.  52. 14,
and  seem  to  establish  the  affirmative.

§  26.  The  principles  which  govern  this  case  of  the  purple  are  as  follow :
accessio  cannot  affect  the  right  to  things  'quae  singulae  suam  speciem
retinent '  or  '  quae  distant/  but  only  to  those  which  are  so  combined  that


Tit.  1.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  207

sue  vestimento,  licet  pretiosior  est  purpura,  accessionis  vice
cedit  vestimento  :  et  qui  dominus  fuit  purpurae,  adversus  eum
qui  subripuit  habet  furti  actionem  et  condictionem,  sive  ipse
est  qui  vestimentum  fecit,  sive  alius,  nam  extinctae  res  licet
vindicari  non  possint,  condici  tamen  a  furibus  et  a  quibusdam
aliis  possessoribus  possunt.  Si  duorum  materiae  ex  volun-  27
tate  dominorum  confusae  sint,  totum  id  corpus,  quod  ex  con-
fusione  fit,  utriusque  commune  est,  veluti  si  qui  vina  sua
confuderint  aut  massas  argenti  vel  auri  conflaverint.  sed  si
diversae  materiae  sint  et  ob  id  propria  species  facta  sit,  forte
ex  vino  et  melle  mulsum  aut  ex  auro  et  argento  electrum,
idem  iuris  est :  nam  et  eo  casu  communem  esse  speciem  non
dubitatur.  quodsi  fortuitu  et  non  voluntate  dominorum  con-
fusae fuertnt  vel  diversae  materiae  vel  quae  eiusdem  generis
sunt,  idem  iuris  esse  placuit.  Quodsi  frumentum  Titii  tuo  28
frumento  mixtum  fuerit,  si  quidem  ex  voluntate  vestra,  com-
mune erit,  quia  singula  corpora,  id  est  singula  grana,  quae
cuiusque  propria  fuerunt,  ex  consensu  vestro  communicata
sunt,  quodsi  casu  id  mixtum  fuerit  vel  Titius  id  miscuerit
sine  voluntate  tua,  non  videtur  commune  esse,  qoia  singula
corpora  in  sua  substantia  durant  nee  magis  istis  casibus  com-
mune fit  frumentum,  quam  grex  communis  esse  intellegitur,
si  pecora  Titii  tuis  pecoribus  mixta  fuerint:  sed  si  ab  alter-
utro  vestrum  id  totum  frumentum  retineatur,  in  rem  quidem
actio  pro  modo  frumenti  cuiusque  competat,  arbitrio  autem

the  independent  existence  of  the  one  is  lost  in  the  other  ('  quae  cohae-
rent ')  Dig.  6.  i.  23.  5 :  when  this  is  the  case,  and  the  one  thing  forms
a  whole  by  itself  (i.e.  is  a  res  '  in  qua  propria  qualitas  spectatur,*  such  as
a  cup,  a  statue,  a  ship,  a  building,  a  garment),  it  absorbs  the  other  lire-
spective  of  the  latter's  relative  value.  Dig.  41.  i.  26.  i ;  ib.  27.  pr.,  and  the
former  owner  of  the  purple  cannot  sue  for  it  by  real  action  (vindicatio)
because  its  independent  existence  is  gone.  But,  supposing  the  case  to  be
one  of  theft  (the  definition  of  which  was  very  wide,  see  on  Bk.  iv.  i.  i
inf.),  he  could  bring  the  actio  furti  for  the  recovery  of  a  penalty  for  the
delict  (ib.  19)  and  also  the  condictio  furtiva  for  the  value  of  the  purple.  If
it  was  not  theft,  but  the  aliena  purpura  had  been  bona  fide  possessed  by
the  person  who  wove  it  into  his  garment,  the  only  action  which  would  lie
was  a  condictio  sine  causa,  also  applicable  in  the  cases  mentioned  in  the
following  sections,  its  ground  being  the  enrichment  of  the  one  party  at
the  expense  of  the  other  without  any  consideration,  which  affords  the  due
to  the  meaning  of  the  '  quidam  alii  possessores.'


2o8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  II.

iudicis  continetur,  ut  is  aestimet,  quale  cuiusque  frumentum

29  fuerit.  Cum  in  suo  solo  aliquis  aliena  materia  aedtfi-
caverit,  ipse  dominus  intellegitur  aedificii,  quia  omne  quod
inaedificatur  solo  cedit.  nee  tamen  ideo  is,  qui  materiae
dominus  fuerat,  desinit  eius  dominus  esse :  sed  tantisper  neque
vindicare  eam  potest  neque  ad  exhibendum  de  ea  re  agere
propter  legem  duodecim  tabularum,  qua  cavetur,  ne  quis
tignum  alienum  aedibus  suis  iniunctum  eximere  cogatur,  sed
duplum  pro  eo  praestet  per  actionem  quae  vocatur  de  tigno
iuncto  (appellatione  autem  tigni  omnis  materia  signiiicatur,  ex
qua  aedificia  fiunt) :  quod  ideo  provisum  est,  ne  aediiicia  re-
scindi  necesse  sit.  sed  si  aliqua  ex  causa  dirutum  sit  aedifi-
cium,  potent  materiae  dominus,  si  non  fuerit  duplum  iam

30  persecutus,  tunc  eam  vindicare  et  ad  exhibendum  agere.  Ex
diverso  si  quis  in  alieno  solo  sua  materia  domum  aedificaverit,

§  29.  It  would  seem  that  the  materials  were  in  this  case  subject  to
a  double  ownership :  the  person  to  whom  they  belonged  before  being  used
for  building  '  non  desinit  dominus  eius  esse,'  and  yet  the  builder  '  dominus
intellegitur  aedificii,  quia  omne  quod  inaedificatur  solo  cedit.'  The  solu-
tion of  the  difficulty  lies  perhaps  in  the  notion  of  dominium  dormiens  or
dormant  rights,  of  which  there  is  an  illustration  in  Gains  iv.  78,  or  in
the  analogy  of  postliminium ;  cf.  Dig.  6.  1.  59  '  simul  atque  . . .  dempta
essent,  continuo  in  pristinam  causam  reverti.'  The  actio  de  tigno  in-
iuncto  lay  only  where  the  materials  of  which  the  house  was  built  had
been  stolen:  'sed  in  hoc  solum  agi  potest,  ut  sola  vindicatio  soluta  re
competat  mulieri,  non  in  duplum  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum:  neque
enim  furtivum  est,  quod  sciente  domino  inclusum  est '  Dig.  24.  i.  63.  If
the  materials  had  been  stolen  the  action  lay  against  a  bona  fide  pos-
sessor  of  the  house  no  less  than  against  the  thief  in  possession  himself :
but,  as  is  stated  in  the  text,  the  former  was  not,  like  the  latter,  liable
also  to  the  actio  ad  exhibendum  (for  which  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  31  inf.)
which  entailed  separation,  and  vindicatio.  If  they  were  not  stolen,  the
only  remedy  available  before  separation  was  an  actio  in  factum,  Dig.  6.
I.  23.  5.

§  80.  The  principles  laid  down  in  this  section  cannot  be  applied
between  landlord  and  tenant,  dominus  and  usufructuary,  etc.,  in  whose
cases  this  matter  of  fixtures  was  regulated  by  rules  specially  governing
such  relations.  The  true  position  of  a  mala  fide  possessor  of  solum
alienum  who  builds  upon  it  with  his  own  materials  is  somewhat  con-
tradictorily stated  in  the  Corpus  iuris,  but  the  two  following  conclusions
appear  to  be  warranted :  (i)  provided  he  does  not  injure  the  soil  he  may
raze  the  building  and  remove  his  materials,  though  he  cannot  claim
compensation  for  his  outlay  (even  by  advancing  the  exceptio  doli,  Dig*


Tit  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  209

illius  fit  domus,  cuius  et  solum  est.  sed  hoc  casu  materiae
dominus  proprietatem  eius  amittit,  quia  voluntate  eius  alienata
intelleg^tur,  utique  si  non  ignorabat  in  alieno  solo  se  aedificare  :
et  ideo,  licet  diruta  sit  domus,  vindicare  materiam  non  possit.
certe  illud  constat,  si  in  possessione  constituto  aedificatore
soli  dominus  petat  domum  suam  esse  nee  solvat  pretium  ma-
teriae et  mercedes  fabrorum,  posse  eum  per  exceptionem  doli
mali  repelli,  utique  si  bonae  fidei  possessor  fuit  qui  aedi-
ficasset:  nam  scienti  alienum  esse  solum  potest  culpa  obici,
quod  temere  aedificaverit  in  eo  solo,  quod  intellegeret  alienum
esse.  Si  Titius  alienam  plantam  in  suo  solo  posuerit,  ipsius  31
erit:  et  ex  diverso  si  Titius  suam  plantam  in  Maevii  solo
posuerit^  Maevii  planta  erit,  si  modo  utroque  casu  radices
^erit,  antequam  autem  radices  egerit,  eius  permanet,  cuius
et  fuerat  adeo  autem  ex  eo,  ex  quo  radices  agit  planta,  pro-
prietas  eius  commutatur,  ut,  si  vicini  arborem  ita  terra  Titii
presserit,  ut  in  eius  fundum  radices  ageret,  Titii  effici  arborem
dicimus :  rationem  etenim  non  permittere,  ut  alterius  arbor
esse  intellegatur,  quam  cuius  in  fundum  radices  egisset.    et

6.  I.  17)^  Cod.  8.  10.  5 ;  3.  32.  5 ;  the  passage  of  Paulus  in  which  the
latter  right  is  afBrmed  (Dig.  5.  3.  38)  relates  to  an  exceptional  case,  and
under  ordinary  circumstances  would  be  overridden  by  the  latter  part  of
this  section,  as  well  as  by  Dig.  6.  i.  37,  Cod.  3.  32.  5 ;  ib.  16.  (2)  If  the
domus  is  diruta,  he  can  bring  vindicatio  to  recover  the  materials,  unless  it
was  animo  donandi  that  he  erected  the  building :  '  sed  et  id  quod  in  solo
tuo  aedificatum  est,  quoad  in  eadem  causa  manet,  iure  ad  te  pertinet :  si
vero  fuerit  dissolutum,  materia  eius  ad  pristinum  dominium  redit,  sive
bona  sive  mala  fide  aedificium  exstructum  sit,  si  non  donandi  animo
aedificia  alieno  solo  imposita  sint '  Cod.  3.  32.  2.  It  is  true  that  this
passage  seems  directly  to  contradict  the  text  before  us  and  Dig.  41.  1.  7.
12,  but  in  both  of  these  statements  of  the  law  the  animus  donandi  must
be  taken  to  be  implied.  The  general  rule  applicable  in  this  and  the  four
following  sections  as  to  improvements  made  by  the  possessor  of  a  res
aliena  may  be  briefly  stated  thus :  (1)  every  possessor  (except  the  fur,
Cod.  8.  52.  i)  can  demand  compensation  for  impensae  necessariae,  Dig.
25.  I.  I  ;  ib.  3 ;  ib.  2  and  4 ;  ib.  14.  pr. ;  (2)  for  impensae  utiles  only  the
bona  fide  possessor  is  entitled  to  compensation.  Dig.  41.  i.  7.  12;  ib.  9.
pr.  and  i,  though  the  value  of  fruits  which  he  retains  may  be  set  off;  (3)
mala  fide  no  less  than  bona  fide  possessors  may,  where  possible,  remove
the  results  of  their  outlay ;  see  the  passages  cited  above.

§  81*  Plants,  cereab,  etc.  raised  from  seed  belonged  even  after  separa-
tion from  the  soil  to  the  latter's  owner,  the  reason  why  they  were  thus

P


2IO  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

ideo  prope  confinium  arbor  posita  si  etiam  in  vicini  fundum

32  radices  egerit,  communis  fit.  Qua  ratione  autem  plantae,
quae  terrae  coalescunt,  solo  cedunt,  eadem  ratione  frumenta
quoque,  quae  sata  sunt,  solo  cedere  intelleguntur.  ceterum
sicut  is  qui  in  alieno  solo  aedificaverit,  si  ab  eo  dominus  petat
aedificium,defendi  potest  per  exceptionem  doli  mali  secundum
ea  quae  diximus :  ita  eiusdem  exceptionis  auxilio  tutus  esse
potest  is  qui  alienum  fundum  sua  impensa  bona  fide  consevit.

33  Litterae  quoque,  licet  aureae  sint,  perinde  chartis  membranis-
que  cedunt,  acsi  solo  cedere  solent  ea  quae  inaedificantur  aut
inseruntur :  ideoque  si  in  chartis  membranisve  tuis  carmen
vel  historiam  vel  orationem  Titius  scripserit,  huius  corporis
non  Titius,  sed  tu  dominus  esse  iudiceris.  sed  si  a  Titio  petas
tuos  libros  tuasve  membranas  esse  nee  impensam  scripturae
solvere  paratus  sis,  poterit  se  Titius  defendere  per  exceptionem
doli  mali,  utique  si  bona  fide  earum  cbartarum  membrana-

34  rumve  possessionem  nanctus  est.  Si  quis  in  aliena  tabula
pinxerit,  quidam  putant  tabulam  picturae  cedere :  aliis  vide-
tur  picturam,  qualiscumque  sit,  tabulae  cedere.  sed  nobis
videtur  melius  esse  tabulam  picturae  cedere :  ridiculum  est
enim  picturam  Apellis  vel  Parrhasii  in  accessionem  vilissimae
tabulae  cedere.  unde  si  a  domino  tabulae  imaginem  possi-
dente  is  qui  pinxit  eam  petat  nee  solvat  pretium  tabulae,
poterit  per  exceptionem  doli  mali  summoveri :  at  si  is  qui
pinxit  possideat,  consequens  est,  ut  utilis  actio  domino  tabulae
adversus  eum  detur,  quo  casu,  si  non  solvat  impensam  pic-
treated  diflferently  from  materials  used  for  building  being  that  they  were
no  longer  what  they  had  been :  '  nam  credibile  est  alio  terrae  alimento
aliam  factam'  Dig.  41.  i.  26.  i.

§  34.  Gaius  (iL  78)  remarks  on  the  unreasonableness  of  treating  paint-
ings differently  from  writings,  and  in  Dig.  6.  i.  23.  3  exactly  the  opposite
rule  is  stated  by  Paulus,  *  sed  necesse  est  ei  rei  (so.  tabulae)  cedi,  quod
sine  ilia  esse  non  potest ; '  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  anomaly  was
supported  by  great  weight  of  legal  opinion.  If  the  painter  had  posses-
sion of  the  tabula,  the  latter*s  former  owner  could  bring  only  a  utilis
rei  vindicatio,  because  in  point  of  fact  he  was  its  owner  no  longer :  and
even  then,  if  the  painter*s  possession  was  bona  fide,  the  latter  could
meet  him  with  the  exceptio  doli  or  plea  of  fraud,  if  he  refused  to  pay  the
value  of  the  painting,  and  could  even  exclude  the  action  altogether  by
himself  offering  to  pay  the  value  of  the  board.  The  actio  furti  lay  only
against  the  thief.


[m  ^.1 1.  L  juii  uv^B^sfss^assts^ss^sf^m^gramKBtmrn^f^^m^mm^mmmm


Tit.  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  211

turae,  poterit  per  exceptionem  doli  mali  repelli,  utique  si  bona
fide  possessor  fuerit  ille  qui  picturam  imposuit.  illud  enim
palam  est,  quod,  sive  is  qui  pinxit  subripuit  tabulas  sive  alius,
competit  domino  tabularum  furti  actio.

Si  quis  a  non  domino,  quern  dominum  esse  crederet,  bona  35
fide  fundum  emerit  vel  ex  donatione  aliave  qua  iusta  causa
aeque  bona  fide  acceperit :   natural!  ratione  placuit  fructus
quos  percepit  eius  esse  pro  cultura  et  cura.    et  ideo  si  postea
dominus  supervenerit  et  fundum  vindicet,  de  finictibus  ab  eocon-


§  85.  A  fourth  natural  mode  of  acquisition  is  fructuum  perceptio,  as
exemplified  in  those  persons  who  derive  their  right  to  take  fruits  from
the  consent  of  the  owner,  especially  the  usufructuary  and  lessee  (colonoSy
§  35  inf.).    The  rights  of  other  persons  to  fruits  were  based  on  other
titles.    The  dominus  of  a  fruit-bearing  object  (e.  g.  land)  is  entitled  to
the  fruits,  while  still  unseparated,  as  part  of  the  land  itself:  after  separa-
tion, as  a  consequence  of  his  property  in  the  soiL    The  title,  or  rather  the
quality  of  the  right,  is  not  the  same  before  and  after  separation :  for  the
fructus  separoti  of  an  estate  which  a  man  has  only  in  bonis  belong  to  him
ex  lure  Quiritium.    The  title  of  the  emphyteuta  (Excursus  II  at  the  end
of  this  Book)  was  separation :  '  sicut  eius  qui  vectigalem  fundum  habet
fructus  fiunt  simul  atque  solo  separati  sunt '  Dig.  22.  i.  25.  i :  the  reason
of  his  being  difTerendy  treated  from  the  lessee  being  the  larger  nature  of
his  interest,  evidenced  also  by  his  having  a  vindicatio  utilis.    The  precise
rights  of  the  bona  fide  possessor  (i.e.  one  who  has  obtained  a  res  aliena
by  a  iustus  titulus,  usually  from  another  whom  he  believed  to  have  the
right  of  alienation)  are  much  disputed  :  but  the  better  opinion  seems  to
be  that  he  became  complete  owner  of  all  fruits  whatsoever  (though  not  of
accessions)  by  the  mere  fact  of  separation :  *  lulianus  ait,  fructuarii  fructus
tunc  fieri,  cum  eos  perceperit :  bonae  fidei  possessoris  mox  cum  a  solo
separati  sunt'  Dig.  7.  4.  13:  cf.  Dig.  22.  i.  25.  i ;  41.  i.  48.  pr.    If  this
be  correct,  the  words  quos  percepit  in  this  section  must  be  read  as  if  they
were  'qui  separati  sunt.'    If,  however,  the  dominus  was  successful  in
a  vindicatio  against  the  bona  fide  possessor,  the  latter  had  to  restore
fructus  extantes  (i.  e.  separati  but  not  consumpti,  Bk.  iv.  17. 2  inf.),  but  for
fructus  consumpti,  as  is  observed  in  the  text,  he  was  not  answerable;
under  consumptio  being  included  specification  and  alienation.    Of  acces-
sions, as  of  the  main  object,  he  was  bona  fide  possessor  only  :  henoe  as
the  partus  ancillae  is  not  fructus  (§  37  inf.)  it  became  the  property  of  the
andlla's  bona  fide  possessor  only  by  usucapio.    The  mala  fide  possessor
acquired  no  right  to  fruits  in  any  way  whatsoever,  so  that  if  the  dominus
established  his  title  against  him,  he  could  be  compelled  to  restore  fructus
extantes  by  vindicatio,  and  the  value  of  fructus  consumpti  (from  the  very
commencement  of  his  possession)  could  be  recovered  from  him  by  con-
dictio,  Dig.  13.  7.  22.  2 ;  Cod.  4«  9*  3 ;  9*  32.  4.

P  2


212  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  II.

sumptis  agere  non  potest    ei  vero,  qui  sciens  alienum  fundum
possederit,  non  idem  concessum  est.     itaque  cum  fundo  etiam

36  fructus,  licet  consumpti  sint,  cogitur  restituere.  Is,  ad  quern
usus  fructus  fundi  pertinet,  non  aliter  fructuum  dominus  effici*
tur,  quam  si  eos  ipse  perceperit.  et  ideo  licet  maturis  fruc-
tibus,  nondum  tamen  perceptis  decesserit,  ad  heredem  eius
non  pertinent,  sed  domino  proprietatis  adquiruntur.     eadem

37  fere  et  de  colono  dicuntur.  In  pecudum  fructu  etiam  fetus
est,  sicuti  lac  et  pilus  et  lana :  itaque  agni  et  haedi  et  vituli
et  equuli  statim  naturali  iure  dominii  sunt  fructuarii.  partus
vero  ancillae  in  fructu  non  est  itaque  ad  dominum  proprietatis
pertinet :  absurdum  enim  videbatur  hominem  in  fructu  esse,
cum  omnes  fructus  rerum  natura  bominum  gratia  comparavit.


§  86.  By  perceptio,  as  indicating  the  moment  of  acquisition,  is  meant
the  actual  taking  of  possession ;  percipere  est  in  potestatem  suam  redi-
gere,'  or  (as  Paulus  says  in  Dig.  6.  i.  78) '  colligere :  fructum  percipi  .  .  .
foeno  caeso  . .  .  uva  adempta  . . .  quamvis  nondum  vindemia  coacta  sit '
Dig.  7.  4.  13,  'non  si  perfecti  coUecti,  sed  etiam  coepti  ita  percipi,  ut
terra  continere  se  fructus  desierint'  Dig.  6.  i.  78.  Colonus  here  denotes
the  lessee  of  land,  that  of  a  house  being  called  inquilinus :  for  another
sense  of  the  word  see  on  Bk.  i.  3.  5  supr.  The  difference  between  the
colonus  and  the  usufructuary  marked  by  the  word  '  fere '  seems  to  be  that
the  right  of  the  former  devolved  on  his  heirs.

§  d7.  The  first  lines  of  this  section  are  taken  substantially  from  Dig.
22.  I.  28.  pr.  ('itaque  agni  et  haedi  et  vituli  statim  pleno  iure  sunt  bonae
fidei  possessoris  et  fructuarii '),  and  might,  if  the  '  statim  '  were  pressed,
seem  to  contradict  the  rule  that  fruits  become  the  property  of  the  fhictuary
only  by  perceptio,  at  any  rate  as  regards  such  fruits  as  the  young  of
animals.  The  statim  may  be  reconciled  with  that  rule  by  taking  it  to
mean  either  merely  that  usucapio  is  not  necessary  to  perfect  the  fruc-
tuary's  title,  or  that  the  requirements  of  perceptio  are  satisfied  if  the
mother,  at  the  time  of  the  birth,  is  under  his  care  and  charge.  Nor  can
pleno  iure  be  pressed  in  relation  to  the  bona  fide  possessor,  owing  to  his
obligation  to  restore  fructus  extantes.

For  the  question  whether  partus  ancillae  can  be  regarded  as  fructus  cf.
Cicero,  de  Fin.  i.  4.  2,  Dig.  7.  i.  68.  pr.  and  i.

Fructus  naturales  are  distinguished  from  the  so-called  fructus  civiles,
by  which  is  meant  the  return  made  for  the  use  of  a  res  aliena :  '  prae-
diorum  urbanorum  pensiones  pro  fructibus  accipiuntur'  Dig.  22.  i.  36,
'  mercedes  plane  a  colonis  acceptae  loco  sunt  fructuum :  operae  quoque
servorum  in  eadem  erunt  causa,  qua  sunt  pensiones;  item  vectura  navium
et  iumentorum'  Dig.  5.  3.  29,  'usurae  vicem  fructuum  obtinent'  Dig.
22.  1.  34.


ii»i^  |*>ipw^<


Tit.  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE  213

Sed  si  gregis  usum  fructum  quis  habeat,  in  locum  demortuo-  38
rum   capitum  ex   fetu   fructuarius  summittere  debet,  ut  et
luliano  visum  est,  et  in  vinearum  demortuarum  vel  arborum
locum  alias  debet  substituere.  recte  enim  colere  debet  et  quasi
bonus  pater  familias  uti  debet

Thesauros,  quos  quis  in  suo  loco  invenerit,  divus  Hadrianus  39
naturalem  aequitatem  secutus  ei  concessit  qui  invenerit.  idem-
que  statuit,  si  quis  in  sacro  aut  in  religioso  loco  fortuito  casu
invenerit.  at  si  quis  in  alieno  loco  non  data  ad  hoc  opera,  sed
fortuitu  invenerit,  dimidium  domino  soli  concessit,  et  conve^
nienter,  si  quis  in  Caesaris  loco  invenerit,  dimidium  inventoris,
dimidium  Caesaris  esse  statuit.  cui  conveniens  est,  ut,  si  quis
in  publico  loco  vel  fiscali  invenerit,  dimidium  ipsius  esse,
dimidium  fisci  vel  civitatis.

Per  traditionem  quoque  iure  naturali  res  nobis  adquiruntur:  40
nihil  enim  tam  conveniens  est  naturali  aequitati,  quam  volun-
tatem  domini,  volentis  rem  suam  in  alium  transferre,  ratam
haberi.  et  ideo  cuiuscumque  generis  sit  corporalis  res,  tradi
potest  et  a  domino  tradita  alienatur.  itaque  stipendiaria  quoque
et  tributaria  praedia  eodem  modo  alienantur.    vocantur  autem

§  89.  Thesaurus  is  defined  as  '  vetus  quaedam  depositio  pecuniae,
cuius  non  extat  memoria,  ut  iam  dominum  non  habeat,  sic  enim  fit  eius
qui  invenerit,  quod  non  alterius  sit :  alioquin  si  quis  aliquid  vel  lucri
causa,  vel  metus,  vel  custodiae  condiderit  sub  terra,  non  est  thesaurus,
cuius  etiam  furtum  est'  Dig.  41.  i.  31.  i :  but  valuables  other  than  money
were  included  in  the  notion :  '  thesaurum  ...  id  est  condita  ab  ignotis
dominis  tempore  vetustiore  mobilia'  Cod.  10.  15.  i.  i.  If  A  found  a
treasure  on  B's  land  otherwise  than  by  accident  it  belonged  altogether
to  B.  It  would  seem  that  the  English  rule,  which  vests  treasure-trove
in  the  Crown  (3  Inst.  132),  was  established  also  at  Rome  at  some  time
after  the  legislation  of  Hadrian  referred  to  in  the  text  (for  which  cf.
Spartianus,  Hadr.  18) ;  thus  it  is  mentioned  as  a  special  act  of  grace  on
the  part  of  the  Emperor  Alexander  that  he  permitted  thesaurus  to  be
kept  by  the  finder.  Possibly  it  was  the  concealment  of  such  discoveries
which  must  have  resulted  from  this  privilege  of  the  fiscus  that  led  to
Constantine's  general  enactment  (Cod.  Theod.  10.  18.  l)  rewarding  the
finder  with  a  half.  Hadrian's  rule  was  re-established  by  Leo,  whose
constitution  passed  into  the  legislation  of  Justinian,  Cod.  10.  15.

§  40.  A  fifth  natural  mode  of  acquisition  is  traditio,  bare  delivery
without  any  prescribed  form,  which  after  Justinian*s  abolition  of  the  dis-
tinction between  Quiritarian  and  bonitarian  ownership  remained  the
universal  mode  of  conveying  property  in  res  corporales.    No  mere  mental


^LM^


214  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

stipendiaria  et  tributaria  praedia,  quae  in  provinciis  sunt,  inter
quae  nee  non  Italica  praedia  ex  nostra  constitutione  nulla

act  was  sufficient  for  this  purpose :  there  must  be  corporeal  delivery :
^  traditionibus  et  usucapionibus  dominia  rerum,  non  nudis  pactis  trans-
fcruntur '  Cod.  2.  3.  20.  The  only  exception  to  this  rule  in  Roman  law
is  societas  omnium  bonorum  (for  which  see  on  Bk.  iii.  25.  pr.  in£),  though
iura  in  re  aliena  could  be  created  by  bare  agreement,  as  in  hypotheca,
and  perhaps  in  servitudes  generally,  see  on  Tit.  3.  4  inf.  Traditio,  how-
ever, by  itself  transferred  only  possession ;  the  dominium  of  an  object
passed  only  if  the  transferor  was  owner  (for  which  see  inf.),  and  the
delivery  was  accompanied  by  a  iusta  causa  traditionis,  i.e.  the  intention
on  the  one  hand  to  give,  on  the  other  to  receive  ownership  :  ^  nunquam
nuda  traditio  transfert  dominium,  sed  ita,  si  vendicio  vel  aliqua  iusta
causa  praecesserit,  propter  quam  traditio  sequeretur'  Dig.  41.  i.  31.  pr«
Among  such  causae,  besides  venditio,  dos,  and  donatio,  which  are  men-
tioned in  the  text,  may  be  enumerated  solutio  (payment),  mutuum  (loan),
and  permutatio  (exchange).  Though  the  causa  usually  existed  con-
temporaneously with  the  delivery,  it  might  arise  subsequently,  as  in  the
cases  mentioned  in  §  44  inf.,  in  which  the  result  of  the  traditio  by  itself
was  either  mere  detention  (as  in  deposit),  or  civil  possession  (as  in
pignus  and  precarium) ;  the  causa  superveniens  converted  this  into
dominium.  Provided  there  was  a  sufficient  causa,  a  mistake  of  the
parties  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  transaction  did  not  prevent  the
property  from  passing :  thus  if  A  thinks  he  is  paying  B  a  debt,  while
the  latter  thinks  he  is  making  him  a  present,  the  property  passes  to  B,
and  he  becomes  owner  of  the  res  tradita,  for  this  was  intended  by  both,
though  the  transaction  is  neither  g^ft  nor  payment,  Dig.  41.  i.  36.

According  to  the  general  rule  that  no  one  can  give  a  better  title  than
he  has  himself,  the  owner  alone  could  usually  transfer  dominium :  '  tra-
ditio nihil  amplius  transferre  debet,  vel  potest,  ad  eum  qui  accepit,  quam
est  apud  eum  qui  tradit:  si  igitur  quis  dominium  in  fundo  habuit,  id
tradendo  transfert,  si  non  habuit,  ad  eum,  qui  accipit,  nihil  transfert'
Dig.  41.  I.  20.  pr.  Some  apparent  exceptions  to  this  are  explained  by
the  transferor's  being  actually  (§  42  inf.)  or  constructively  the  owner's
agent  (e.  g.  his  tutor,  curator,  or  pledgee) ;  a  real  exception  is  found  in
the  sale  of  res  alienae  by  the  (iscus  (Tit.  6.  14  inf.).  In  some  cases  even
the  owner  could  not  convey,  either  because  he  was  incapable  of  perform-
ing legal  acts  (Handlungsunfahigkeit),  or  because  he  was  by  law  prohibited
from  the  management  of  his  own  property  (e.  g.  prodigi),  or  because  his
alienation  was  nullified  by  positive  enactment,  Tit.  8  inf.

'  Stipendiaria  (praedia)  sunt  ea,  quae  in  provinciis  sunt  quae  propriae
populi  Romani  esse  intelleguntur ;  tributaria  sunt  ea  quae  propriae
Caesaris  esse  creduntur'  Gains  ii.  21.  Italian  soil  was  a  res  mancipi,
and  therefore  property  in  it  could  not  be  conveyed  by  traditio.  The
distinction  of  tributary  and  stipendiary  provinces  was  merely  nominal
in  Gains'  time,  and  ceased  entirely  about  the  end  of  the  second  century  ;
see  Mr.  Poste's  note  on  the  passage  of  Gaius  just  cited.


Tit.  I.]  DE  RERUM  DIVISIONE.  215

differentia  est    Sed  si  quidem  ex  causa  donationis  aut  dotis  41
aut  qualibet  alia  ex  causa  tradantur,  sine  dubio  transferuntur :
venditae  vero  et  traditae  non  aliter  emptori  adquiruntur,quam
si  is  venditori  pretium  solverit  vel  alio  modo  ei  satisfecerit,
veluti  expromissore  aut  pignore  dato.    quod  cavetur  quidem
etiam  lege  duodecim  tabularum :  tamen  recte  dicitur  et  iure
gentium,  id  est  iure  natural!^  id  effici.    sed  si  is  qui  vendidit
fidem  emptoris  secutus  fuerit,  dicendum  est  statim  rem  emp-
toris  fieri.    Nihil  autem  interest,  utrum  ipse  dominus  tradat  42
alicui  rem,  an  voluntate  eius  alius.     Qua  ratione,  si  cui  libera  43
n^otiorum   administratio  a  domino    permissa  fuerit  isque
ex  his  n^otiis  rem  vendiderit  et  tradiderit,  facit  eam  acci-
pientis.    Interdum  etiam  sine  traditione  nuda  voluntas  sufiicit  44
domini  ad  rem  transferendam,  veluti  si  rem,  quam  tibi  aliquis
commodavit  aut  locavit  aut  apud  te  deposuit,  vendiderit  tibi
aut  donaverit.    quamvis  enim  ex  ea  causa  tibi  eam  non  tradi-
derit,  eo  tamen  ipso,  quod  patitur  tuam  esse,  statim  adqui-
ritur  tibi  proprietas  perinde  ac  si  eo  nomine  tradita  fuisset.
Item  si   quis  merces  in  horreo  depositas  vendiderit,  simul  46


§  4L  The  word  'traditae'  in  this  passage  seems  to  be  what  is  called
a  '  Tribonianism.'  Voigt  (xil  Tafein  p.  709)  supposes  that  the  rule  of  the
Twelve  Tables  ran  'venditae  et  mancipatae  res  non  aliter  emptori  ad-
quiruntur  quam  si  is  venditori  pretium  solverit  aut  iustum  vadem  dederit : '
of.  his  Jus  Naturale,  Beilage  xxi.  §  18.  For  the  general  statement  in  the
text,  of.  Varro,  de  Re  Rust.  2.  2.  26 ;  QuintiL  Decl.  336.  Dig.  18.  i.  19.
Some  commentators  account  for  the  rule  by  considerations  of  the  in-
completeness of  the  old  Roman  law  of  contract :  some  suppose  it  to  have
been  derived  from  Greece ;  others  find  in  it  a  rule  of  construction  only,
the  intention  to  transfer  ownership  being  presumed  to  be  absent  unless
one  of  the  three  specified  conditions  is  satisfied.  The  last  two  lines  of
the  section  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  if  the  vendor  gives  credit  the
property  immediately  passes  to  the  vendee  without  traditio  :  from  the  ex-
pression '  venditae  res  et  traditae '  supr.  it  is  clear  that  vendidit  here  means
vendidit  et  tradidit  For  the  expromissor  (surety)  see  Bk.  iii.  20.  inf. ;  for
pignus.  Excursus  II,  at  the  end  of  this  Book.

§  43.  From  a  comparison  of  Dig.  3.  3.  58  with  ib.  63  it  would  seem
that  an  agent  entrusted  with  a  libera  administratio  had  wider  powers
than  one  whose  authority  was  undefined.

§  44.  Cf.  Dig.  41.  I.  9.  5;  ib.  21.  i ;  41.  2.  3.  3.  'Solo  animo  non
posse  nos  adquirere  possessionem,  si  non  antecedat  naturalis  possessio.'

§  4L5.  The  keys  must  be  delivered  apud  horrea,  Dig.  18.  i.  74:  in  prae-
sentia,  Dig.  41.  2.  i.  21.    Many  commentators  regarded  traditio  of  the


2i6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  IL

atque  claves  horrei  tradiderit  emptori,  transfert  proprietatem

46  mercium  ad  emptorem.  Hoc  amplius  interdum  et  in  incertam
personam  collocata  voluntas  domini  transfert  rei  proprie-
tatem :  ut  ecce  praetores  vel  consules,  qui  missilia  iactant  in
vulgus,  ignorant,  quid  eorum  quisque  excepturus  sit,  et  tamen,
quia  volunt   quod  quisque  exceperit  eius.  esse  statim  eum

47  dominum  efficiunt.  Qua  ratione  verius  esse  videtur  et,  si
rem  pro  derelicto  a  domino  habitam  occupaverit  quis,  statim
eum  dominum  effici.  pro  derelicto  autem  habetur,  quod  do-
minus  ea  mente  abiecerit,  ut  id  rerum  suarum  esse  noUet,

48  ideoque  statim  dominus  esse  desinit.  Alia  causa  est  earum
rerum,  quae  in  tempestate  maris  levandae  navis  causa  eici-
untur.  hae  enim  dominorum  permanent,  quia  palam  est  eas
non  eo  animo  eici,  quo  quis  eas  habere  non  vult,  sed  quo
magis  cum  ipsa  nave  periculum  maris  effugiat :  qua  de  causa
si  quis  eas  fluctibus  expulsas  vel  etiam  in  ipso  mari  nactus

keys  as  a  symbolical  traditio  of  the  contents  of  the  building,  in  the  same
way  as  the  handing  over  the  keys  of  a  town  to  a  king  on  his  entry  sym-
bolised the  surrender  of  the  town  itself.  But  Savigny  has  shown  (Pos-
session §  14)  that  what  is  essential  is  not  so  much  the  transfer  of  the
thing  itself  as  the  enabling  of  the  transferee  to  exercise  exclusive  control
over  it ;  cf.  Cic.  Philipp.  2.  28.

§  46.  The  case  put  in  the  text  is  a  genuine  traditio :  for  the  transferee
is  intended,  though  indefinitely :  the  transferor  contemplates  somebody
or  other  in  the  crowd  before  him  as  the  receiver.  But  in  the  next  para-
graph the  circumstances  are  different;  the  person  who  may  take  pos-
session of  the  res  derelicta  is  absolutely  uncertain,  and  does  not  conceive
the  abandonment  as  made  in  his  favour  at  all.

§  47.  For  dereliction  see  on  §  12  supr.  The  opinion  that  the  prior
ownership  ceased  immediately  with  the  abandonment,  confirmed  here  by
Justinian,  had  been  that  of  the  Sabinians ;  the  Proculian  school  con-
strued the  act  of  abandonment  as  one  which  made  acquisition  of  owner-
ship by  occupatio  possible,  but  divested  the  owner  of  his  property  only
when  the  occupatio  had  supervened,  Dig.  41.  7.  2.  i.  Observe  that  to
get  rid  of  one's  dominium  an  overt  act  (abiecerit)  is  requisite  besides
intention  (nollet) ;  to  lose  possession  it  was  different :  '  dominium  nihilo-
minus  eius  manet,  qui  dominus  esse  non  vult :  possessio  autem  recedit '
Dig.  41.  2.  17.  I.  The  mere  finding  of  property  gave  no  title,  Dig.  6.  i.
67,  and  appropriation  of  it  was  theft,  Dig.  47.  2.  43.  4.

§  48.  Cf.  Aristotle,  Ethics  iii.  i.  The  lex  Rhodia  de  iactu  provided
that  when  property  was  thrown  overboard  to  lighten  and  thereby  save  a
ship,  a  proportionate  share  of  the  loss  should  be  borne  by  the  owners  of
the  ship  and  cargo  saved ;  Dig.  14.  2.  i,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  2.  7.


Tit.  2.]  DE  REBUS  INCORPORALIBUS.  217

lucrandi  animo  abstulerit^  furtum  committit.  nee  longe  disce-
dere  videntur  ab  his,  quae  de  rheda  currente  non  intellegen-
tibus  dominis  cadunt.


II.

DE  REBUS  INCOKPORALIBUS-

Quaedam  praeterea  res  corporales  sunt,  quaedam  incor-
porales.  Corporales  eae  sunt,  quae  sui  natura  tangi  possunt :  1
veluti  fundus  homo  vestis  aurum  argentum  et  denique  aliae
res  innumerabiles.  Incorporates  autem  sunt,  quae  tangi  non  2
possunt.  qualia  sunt  ea,  quae  in  iure  consistunt :  sicut  here-
ditas,  usus  fructus,  obligationes  quoquo  modo  contractae.  nee
ad  rem  pertinet,  quod  in  hereditate  res  corporales  continentur :


Tit.  2.  The  division  of  res  into  corporeal  and  incorporeal  was  in
origin  a  philosophical  one  derived  from  the  Stoics  (Diog.  Laert.  7.  140,
141) :  'rerum  definitionum  autem  duo  sunt  genera:  unum  earum  rerum,
quae  sunt,  alteram  earum  rerum,  quae  intelleguntur.  Esse  ea  dico,  quae
cerni  tangive  possunt :  non  esse  rursus  ea  dico,  quae  tangi  demonstra-
rive  non  possunt,  cerni  tamen  animo  at  que  intellegi  possunt '  Cic.  Top.  5.
If  this  distinction  is  to  be  used  in  law,  it  must  be  remembered  that  a
res  which  is,  philosophically,  corporalis  or  incorporalis  need  not  be  either
legally ;  it  becomes  so  only  if  the  law  takes  notice  of  it.  Thus  the  sea  is
a  res  corporalis  in  Cicero*8  sense,  but  not  in  that  of  the  Roman  lawyer ;
it  cannot  be  the  object  of  rights.  Similarly  many  objects  of  the  intelli-
gence have  no  legal  existence  whatever.

By  res  corporalis  (sensu  legali)  is  to  be  understood  any  limited  portion
of  external  nature  which  is  not  a  person,  or  any  tangible  object  over
which  ownership  can  be  asserted  in  a  real  action  :  by  res  incorporalis  is
to  be  understood  any  l^al  right  except  the  right  of  ownership  itself.
When  Gaius  (from  whom,  ii.  12-14,  Justinian  literally  transcribes  the
whole  of  this  Title)  describes  obligatio  and  hereditas  as  res  incorporales,
he  explains  that  he  means  the  right  of  the  creditor  in  the  former  case,
and  in  the  latter  the  right  of  the  person  to  whom  the  hereditas  is  delata
to  become  heres  actually  by  acceptance.  Why  Gaius  excludes  the  right
of  dominium  alone  from  the  cat^ory  of  res  incorporales  is  explained  by
Mr.  Poste  (Gaius  p.  150)  by  reference  to  the  Roman  system  of  pleading,
under  which,  in  an  action  asserting  ownership  over  an  object,  the  object
itself  was  brought  into  the  foreground  of  the  formula,  whereas,  in  the  for-
mulae of  all  other  actions,  whether  real  (asserting  a  ius  in  re  aliena)  or
personal,  the  stress  was  laid,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  on  the  existence  of
the  plaintiff's  right.    But  perhaps  the  true  explanation  of  the  seeming


2i8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

nam  et  fructus,  qui  ex  fundo  percipiuntur,  corporales  sunt  et
id,  quod  ex  aliqua  obligatione  nobis  debetur,  plerumque
corporale  est,  veluti  fundus  homo  pecunia:  nam  ipsum
ius  hereditatis  et  ipsum  ius  utendi  fruendi  et  ipsum  ius
3  obligationis  incorporale  est.     Eodem  numero  sunt  iura  prae-


anomaly  is  that  given  by  Dr.  Hunter  (Roman  Law  p.  142),  who  points
out  that  the  most  striking  difference  between  the  right  of  dominium,  and
all  other  rights,  was  that  the  former  could  be  transferred  only  by  actual
delivery  of  the  object,  which  for  the  conveyance  of  the  latter  was  un-
necessary and  often  impossible.

§  8.  A  right  over  a  definite  tangible  object  is  called  a  ius  in  re,  or  real
right :  if  the  object  be  our  own,  it  is  ius  in  re  propria :  if  some  one's
else,  ius  in  re  aliena.  The  rights  comprised  in  the  complex  notion  of
dominium  are  so  indefinite  that  no  satisfactory  enumeration  of  them
seems  possible  (see  Holland's  Jurisprudence  p.  133);  conceivably,  any
one  or  more  of  these  might  be  separated  from  the  rest,  and  vested  in  some
other  person  than  the  dominus,  so  as  to  become  a  ius  in  re  aliena :  but
practically  no  system  of  law  recognises  by  specific  names  and  rules  more
than  a  limited  number  of  such  rights.  Those  known  to  Roman  law  are
divided  into  (i)  those  which  were  recognised  by  the  old  civil  law,  and
which  are  called  generically  servitudes,  and  (2)  those  which  were  not  so
recognised,  and  are  denoted  by  specific  names.

Servitudes  are  either  praedial  (divided  into  rustic  and  urban)  or  per-
sonal, the  latter  comprising  usus,  ususfructus,  habitatio,  and  operae  ser-
vorum  or  animalium ;  the  second  class  of  iura  in  re  aliena  consists  of
three  distinct  rights,  emphyteusis,  superficies,  and  pignus.

Properly  speaking,  the  term  servitus  denotes  the  quasi-nonfree  con-
dition of  an  object  over  which  rights  are  enjoyed  by  a  person  other
than  its  owner  ('  posteaquam  ius  suum  deminuit,  alterius  auxit,  hoc  est,
posteaquam  servitutem  aedibus  suis  imposuit '  Dig.  39.  i.  5.  9) ;  but
more  commonly  it  is  used  to  express  the  deducted  right  itself.  So
understood,  it  may  be  defined  as  a  real  right,  vested  in  or  annexed  to  a
definite  person  or  piece  of  land,  over  some  object  belonging  to  another,
and  limiting  the  enjoyment  of  that  object  by  that  other  in  a  definite
manner.    The  following  general  points  deserve  notice : —

(1)  Servitudes  may  be  either  positive  or  negative,  the  former  being
said  to  consist  in  patiendo  (i.  e.  the  dominus  has  to  allow  the  other  party
to  do  something  from  which  otherwise  he  could  legally  hinder  him,  such
as  walking  across  his  field),  the  latter  in  non  fociendo  (the  dominus
being  obliged  to  refrain  from  doing  some  act  which  otherwise  he  would
be  at  perfect  liberty  to  do,  e.g.  servitus  altius  non  toUendi,  inf.).  But  no
servitude  can  consist  in  faciendo ;  in  other  words,  the  obligation  of  the
dominus  cannot  be  to  peiform  some  positive  duty,  for  this  would  give
rise  to  a  right  in  personam  only,  whereas  a  servitude  is  a  right  in  rem.
Dig.  8.  I.  15.  I.    (2)  The  right  of  servitude  is  extinguished  so  soon  as


Tit.  2.]  DE  REBUS  INCORPORALIBUS.  219

diorum  urbanorum    et    rusti.corum,    quae    etiam    servitutes
vocantur.


the  person  in  whom  it  is  vested  becomes  dominus  of  the  res  serviens,
or  vice  versa:  'nuUi  res  sua  servit'  Dig.  8.  2.  26.  (3)  One  servitude
cannot  be  the  object  of  another :  '  servitus  servitutis  esse  non  potest '
^ig-  33*  2.  I.  (4)  A  servitude  must  not  merely  limit  the  rights  of  the
dominus,  but  it  must  confer  a  positive  advantage  on  the  other  party,
Dig.  8.  I.  15.  pr.  (5)  Servitudes  being  created  solely  for  the  advantage
of  a  definite  subject,  they  are  intransferable,  or  inseparable  from  the  sub-
ject itself.  Dig.  10.  2.  15  ;  8.  4.  12.

The  meaning  of  the  distinction  between  praedial  (or  real)  and  personal
servitudes  is  explained  in  §  3  of  the  next  Title,  (i)  A  praedial  servitude
can  belong  to  a  man  only  as  being  owner  of  a  parcel  of  land  or  a  house
(praedium) ;  he  can  have  a  personal  servitude  without  any  such  limita-
tion. The  latter  can  be  enjoyed  over  any  object  of  property ;  the  former
only  over  another  praedium,  near  to  (vicinum)  but  not  necessarily  adjoin-
ing that  in  whose  fJEivour  it  exists,  and  to  which  it  is  appurtenant :  Dig.
8.  3.  5. 1 :  8.  5.  2.  I :  ib.  3.  Thus  there  cannot  be  a  praedial  servitude
without  two  praedia,  Tit.  3.  3.  inf.,  called  the  praedium  dominans  and  the
praedium  serviens.  (2)  The  right  must  be  of  such  a  nature  that  by  it  the
use  and  enjoyment  of  the  praedium  dominans  is  increased,  or  rendered
more  complete  and  effectual  It  is  consequently  inseparable  from  the
latter,  passing  with  it  when  conveyed,  and  its  maximum  extent  or  orbit
is  determined  only  by  the  requirements  of  the  praedium  to  which  it  is
attached.  Dig.  8.  3.  5.  i.  (3)  But  the  owner  of  the  praedium  dominans
must  exercise  his  right  with  proper  regard  for  the  other  party,  civiliter
modo.  Dig.  8.  i.  9,  while  the  latter  is  bound  to  permit  him  to  do  all  acts
necessary  for  its  due  enjoyment,  such  as  repairs,  ib.  10.  (4)  The  nature
of  a  praedial  servitude  is  further  iUustrated  by  the  rule  *  omnes  servitutes
praediorum  perpetuas  causas  habere  debent '  Dig.  8.  2.  28 ;  i.  e.  no  right
can  be  a  praedial  servitude  whose  enjoyment  necessitates  constant  action
on  the  part  of  the  owner  of  the  praedium  serviens,  or  which  can  in  the
nature  of  things  be  enjoyed  only  for  a  limited  time, '  ideo  neque  ex  lacu
neque  ex  stagno  concedi  aquae  ductus  potest'  Dig.  loc.  cit.  (5)  ^Ser-
vitutes (praediorum)  ipso  quidem  iure  neque  ex  tempore,  neque  ad  tem-
pus,  neque  sub  condicione,  neque  ad  certam  condicionem  consiitui
possunt '  Dig.  8.  i.  4.  pr.

Different  views  are  held  as  to  the  rationale  of  the  division  of  praedial
servitudes  into  rustic  and  urban.  According  to  some,  it  turns  upon  the
nature  of  the  praedium  dominans,  the  question  being  whether  this  is  a
building  merely,  or  a  piece  of  land  comparatively  free  from  buildings,
such  as  a  farm  or  a  country  estate  :  others  regard  only  the  nature  of  the
praedium  serviens ;  while  a  third  school  determines  the  species  of  ser-
vitude purely  by  reference  to  its  content,  holding  that  where  the  right  is
to  do  something,  it  is  rustic,  where  it  consists  in  habendo  or  prohibendo,
urban.    The  following  Titles  will  make  the  distinction  clear.


220  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

III.
DE  SERVITUTIBUS.

Rusticorum  praediorum  iura  sunt  haec  :  iter  actus  via  aquae
ductus,  iter  est  ius  eundi  ambulandi  homini,  non  etiam
iumentum  agendi  vel  vehiculum:  actus  est  ius  agendi  vel
iumentum  vel  vehiculum.  itaque  qui  iter  habet,  actum
non  habet  qui  actum  habet,  et  iter  habet  eoque  uti  potest
etiam  sine  iumento.  via  est  ius  eundi  et  agendi  et  am-
bulandi: nam  et  iter  et  actum  in  se  via  continet.  aquae
1  ductus  est  ius  aquae  ducendae  per  fundum  alienum.  Prae-
diorum urbanorum  sunt  servitutes,  quae  aedificiis  inhaerent,
ideo  urbanorum  praediorum  dictae,  quoniam  aedificia  omnia
urbana  praedia  appellantur,  etsi  in  villa  aedificata  sunt,
item  praediorum  urbanorum  servitutes  sunt  hae:  ut  vicinus
onera  vicini  sustineat:  ut  in  parietem  eius  liceat  vicino  tig-
num  immittere :  ut  stiliicidium  vel  flumen  recipiat  quis  in
aedas  suas  vel   in   aream,  vel   non  recipiat:    et    ne    altius

Tit.  m.  Via  differs  from  iter  and  actus  (i)  in  implying  a  regular
roadway,  the  minimum  width  of  which,  in  the  absence  of  express  agree-
ment, was  fixed  by  law  at  eight  feet  where  straight,  and  sixteen  where  it
curved,  Dig.  8.  3.  8  ;  (2)  in  entitling  one  to  the  use  of  the  road  for  heavy
traffic,  which  is  expressly  excluded  from  actus  in  Dig.  ib.  7.  pr.  Iter,  unless
otherwise  specified,  included  the  right  of  riding  or  being  carried  in  a
litter,  ib.  7  and  12 ;  and  though  actus  usually  comprehended  iter,  it
could  be  excluded  by  express  agreement,  Dig.  8.  5.  4.  i.  In  all  of  these
three  rights  of  way  the  person  entitled  might  use  only  the  road  or  path
assigned  to  him  by  the  owner  of  the  praedium  serviens,  or  that  which  he
had  once  selected  for  himself.

§  L  In  Dig.  8.  I.  3  Paulus  seems  to  define  urban  servitudes  as  those
quae  in  superficie,  as  contrasted  with  those  quae  in  solo,  consistunt.
They  are  either  positive,  e.  g.  tigni  immittendi,  oneris  ferendi,  stillicidii
avertendi,  proiiciendi  (right  of  building  some  structure  such  as  a  balcony
out  over  one's  neighbour's  land)  and  cloacae — or  negative,  securing  an
advantage  to  the  praedium  dominans  of  which  it  could  be  deprived  by
some  alteration  in  the  praedium  serviens,  e.  g.  altius  non  toUendi,  the
right  of  preventing  one*s  neighbour  from  raising  the  height  of  his  house,
and  ne  luminibus  or  prospectui  officiatur.

In  this  section,  as  well  as  in  Gaius  iL  31,  iv.  3,  and  many  passages  of
the  Digest  (e.  g.  8.  2.  i.  pr. ;  8.  3.  2.  pr. ;  8.  4. 7.  i ;  44. 2.  26.  pr.),  an  urban
servitude  is  mentioned  which  has  occasioned  considerable  difficulty,  viz.
the  servitudes  altius  tollendi,  officiendi  luminibus  vicini,  and  stillicidii
non  avertendi,  which  seem  to  operate  only  in  the  way  of  freeing  a
building  from  some  pre-existing  obligadon.    Mr.  Poste  (Gaius  p.  168)


Tit  3.]  DE  SERVITUTIBUS,  221

tollat  quis  aedes  suas,  ne  luminibus  vicini  officiatur.    In  rusti-  2
corum  praediorum  servitutes  quidam  computari  recte  putant
aquae  haustum,  pecoris  ad  aquam  adpulsum,  ius  pascendi,
calcis  coquendae,  harenae  fodiendae.

Ideo  autem  hae  servitutes  praediorum  appellantur,  quoniam  3
sine  praediis  constitui  non  possunt     nemo  enim  potest  ser-
vitutem  adquirere  urbani  vel  rustici  praedii,  nisi  qui  habet
praedium,  nee  quisquam  debere,  nisi  qui  habet  praedium.     Si  4
quis  velit  vicino  aliquod   ius   constituere,  pactionibus  atque

explains  this  by  supposing  that  an  urban  servitude  can  be  extinguished
only  by  the  acquisition  of  a  contrary  servitude  by  the  praedium  serviens.
But  perhaps  it  is  better  to  suppose  that  these  anomalous  servitudes
occurred  only  where  the  laws  limited  the  rights  of  owners  by  forbidding
them  to  build  above  a  certain  height,  compelling  them  to  receive  their
neighbour's  rainwater,  etc  A  law  of  Zeno  of  this  nature,  enacted  origin-
ally for  Constantinople  only,  was  extended  to  all  the  cities  of  the  empire
by  Justinian  (Cod.  8. 10. 12  and  13).  If  this  is  so,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive
the  right  in  question  as  a  servitude  at  all.

§  2.  The  rights  mentioned  in  this  section  are  treated  as  rustic  ser-
vitudes by  Neratius  (Dig.  8.  3.  2  sq.)f  and  by  Papinian,  Paulus,  and
Ulpian.  The  word  *  recte '  seems  to  imply  that  by  some  they  were  not
so  considered,  though  there  is  no  trace  in  the  authorities  of  a  difference
of  opinion.

§  4.  The  old  mode  of  constituting  servitudes  between  the  parties  had
been  in  iure  cessio,  Gaius  ii.  29.  30,  rustic  servitudes  in  Italy  also  ad-
mitting of  creation  by  mancipatio.  These  processes,  however,  could  be
employed  only  in  respect  of  objects  which  could  themselves  be  trans-
ferred in  the  same  manner,  so  that  (Gaius  ii.  31)  servitudes  over  praedia
provincialia,  which  were  not  '  in  patrimonio,'  could  not  thus  be  created.
In  default,  the  occupiers  of  land  in  the  provinces  resorted  to  bare  agree-
ments (pactio),  subsequently  expressed  in  a  formal  and  solemn  contract
(stipulatio),  by  which  the  owner  of  the  land  which  was  to  be  subjected
to  the  servitude  bound  himself  to  allow  its  enjoyment,  or  in  default  to
pay  a  penal  sum,  e.  g.  '  per  te  non  fieri  neque  per  heredem  tuum,  quo-
minus  mihi  heredique  meo  ire  agere  liceat;  si  adversus  ea  factum  sit,
tantum  dari'  Dig.  45.  i.  2.  5.  A  right  thus  created  could  not  in  itself
avail  in  rem,  or  '  run  with  the  land  ; '  yet  it  seems  clear  from  Gaius  (ii.
31)  that  in  his  time  such  pactiones  and  stipulationes  were  as  effectual  to
create  servitudes  over  provincial  soil  as  in  iure  cessio  and  mancipatio
over  praedia  Italica.  We  must  consequently  suppose  that  the  provincial
governors  had  intervened,  and  by  the  introduction  of  an  utilis  actio  (con-
lessoria)  for  the  protection  of  the  promisee  against  all  successors  of  the
other  in  title  had  given  the  right  a  genuine  ^real '  character.  In  Justinian's
time  of  course  pactio  et  stipulatio  was  the  sole  mode  of  contractually
creating  servitudes  of  every  kind.


I


222  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

stipulationibus  id  efficere  debet,    potest  etiam  in  testarnento

There  is  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  whether,  in  addition  to  the
pactio  et  stipulatio,  a  quasi-traditio  of  the  right  was  required  to  endow
it  with  the  full  proportions  of  a  servitude.  Gains  expressly  says  (ii.  28)
that  servitudes,  like  res  incorporates  in  general,  do  not  admit  of  traditio ;
but  if  the  latter  be  conceived  as  the  granting  of  the  physical  control  over
a  thing,  or  as  the  permitting  it  to  be  enjoyed,  servitudes  will  also  admit
of  this  figurative  operation,  and  accordingly  many  hold  that  as  boni-
tarian  ownership  at  least  could  always  be  conveyed  by  traditio  proper,
so  pactio  et  stipulatio  required  the  supplement  of  this  quasi-  or  figura-
tive traditio  to  gain  full  praetorian  protection  for  the  right  created,  as
a  '  real '  right.  For  instance,  it  is  afHrmed  that  this  traditio  gave  a  quasi-
possession,  entitling  the  recipient  to  use  the  Publician  action,  as  well  as
the  actio  confessoria,  whereby  he  was  exempted  from  the  onus  of  proving
his  transferor's  title,  and  which  availed  also  against  non-owners  of  the
praedium  serviens.  It  is  quite  certain  that  in  many  passages  (e.  g.  Dig.
6.  2.  II.  I ;  7.  I.  25.  7  ;  7.  4.  I.  pr. ;  7-  6.  3 ;  8.  i.  20}  traditio  is  specified
as  a  mode  of  creating  servitudes  ;  but  obviously  it  must  have  been
preceded  by  agreement,  and  the  question  is  whether  a  real  right  could
be  created  by  the  latter  unsupplemented  by  the  former.  There  is  no
passage  in  the  authorities  which  affirms  the  necessity  of  traditio,  and
the  prevailing  view  now  seems  to  be  that  it  was  not  essential ;  though  the
contrary  is  still  maintained  by  some  who  argue  from  the  jural  impossi-
bility of  creating  real  rights  by  a  contract  '  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
term,'  and  explain  the  absence  of  passages  affirming  the  necessity  of
traditio  by  the  consideration  that  in  the  time  of  the  classical  jurists
servitudes  were,  iure  civili,  not  thus  created  at  all.  C£  Mr.  Rob/s
edition  of  Dig.  7.  i,  pp.  36,  174-175.
The  other  modes  in  which  servitudes  in  general  could  originate  are  : —
(i)  Testamentary  disposition  or  legacy;  this  was  commonest  in  per-
sonal servitudes,  especially  usufruct,  which  could  either  be  bequeathed
directly  (Tit.  4.  i  inf.),  or  the  heir  could  be  directed  to  create  it  in  fevour
of  the  legatee :  '  ususfructus  uniuscuiusque  rei  legari  potest,  et  aut  ipso
iure  constituetur  aut  per  heredem  praestabitur :  ex  causa  danmationis
per  heredem  praestabitur,  ipso  iure  per  vindicationem '  Paul.  Sent.  Rec  3*
6.  17.  Bequest  of  praedial  servitudes,  to  be  duly  constituted  by  the  heir,
is  spoken  of  in  this  section  ;  cf.  Dig.  8.  4.  16 ;  33.  3.

(2)  Deductio ;  reservation  of  the  servitude  in  conveying  the  dominium
either  inter  vivos  or  by  will ;  Tit.  4.  i  vaL^  Fragm.  Vat.  47.  50. 80 ;  Dig.  7«
I.  36.  I ;  ib.  54  ;  Gains  ii.  33.

(3)  Judicial  decision,  either  {a)  by  adiudicatio  in  a  iudicium  divisorium,
Bk.  iv.  6.  20;  ib.  17.  4  and  5  inf.;  {b)  declaring  a  servitude  duly  consti-
tuted as  against  a  recalcitrant  defendant  who  refuses  to  create  it  him-
self; or  (jc)  reviving  by^in  integrum  restitutio'  a  servitude  which  has
been  lost,  Dig.  8.  5.  8.  4.

(4)  In  certain  cases  usufruct  arose  ipso  iure  in  virtue  of  statutory
enactment  (lex) ;  e.  g.  the  pater's  usufruct  in  the  peculium  adventitium


Tit.  3.]  DE  SERVITUTIBUS.  223

quis  heredem  suum  damnare,  ne  altius  toUat,  ne  luminibus


of  his  son  (note  on  Tit.  9.  pr.  inf.)  ;  Cod.  6.  6O9 1  and  3 ;  6.  61. 6.  pr. ;  5.  9.
3.  pr. ;  ib.  6.  I.

(5)  Actual  enjoyment  of  the  right  for  a  prescribed  period  of  time.
Wheie  a  praedium  was  acquired  by  usucapio  (Tit  6  inf.),  the  servitudes
appurtenant  to  it  were  acquired  along  with  it ;  but  apart  and  by  them-
selves, such  rights  could  not  thus  arise,  for  usucapio  presupposes  pos-
session of  the  thing  to  be  acquired,  and  a  bare  right  cannot  be  possessed :
'hoc  iure  utimur,  ut  servitutes  per  se  nusquam  longo  tempore  capi
possint,  cum  aedificiis  possint'  Dig.  41,  3.  la  l;  cf.  Dig.  8.  i.  14.  It
would  seem,  however,  that  at  one  time  this  principle  was  not  fully
admitted,  for  a  lex  Scribonia  of  uncertain  date  (Dig.  41.  3.  4.  29)  forbade
usucapion  of  servitudes,  except  the  anomalous  class  spoken  of  on  §  i  supr. ;
but  it  is  now  very  commonly  held  that  though  rustic  servitudes  could
never  be  acquired  by  usucapio,  urban  could,  as  in  them  there  is  a  greater
semblance  of  uninterrupted  possession  than  in  the  former,  and  that  the
lex  Scribonia  related  to  the  urban  class  only.

Servitudes  over  provincial  soil,  however,  could  be  acquired  by  an
analogous  institution  of  praetorian  origin,  more  fully  explained  in  Ex-
cursus III  at  the  end  of  this  Book,  viz.  long^  quasi-possessio,  actual
exercise  of  the  right  for  ten  years  if  the  owner  of  the  praedium  serviens
lived  in  the  same  province,  twenty  if  in  another ;  Dig.  8. 5. 10.  pr. ;  39. 3.  i.
33,  This  mode  of  acquisition  came  to  be  recognised,  through  the  Praetor's
Edict,  in  Italy  also,  so  that  in  effect  the  lex  Scribonia  lost  much  of  its
force :  under  Justinian  it  is  in  full  operation  for  all  kinds  of  servitudes.
Cod.  7.  33.  12,  its  conditions  being  {a)  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  the
right  for  the  periods  specified,  which  (b)  must  not  be  violent,  or  without
the  knowledge  of  the  other  party,  or  in  virtue  of  express  permission  from
him;  but  bona  fides  does  not  seem  necessary;  Dig.  8.  6.  24;  43.  20.  i.
10;  cf.  Roby,  op.  cit.  p.  138.

Servitudes  generally  might  be  extinguished  in  the  following  ways : —

(i)  Destruction  .of  the  res  serviens  (Tit.  4.  3  inf.),  or  its  withdrawal
from  commercium.  Personal  servitudes  perished  also  if  the  res  serviens
underwent  a  complete  and  essential  transformation,  Dig.  7.  4.  5.  2  and  3.

(2)  Confusio,  i.  e.  the  dominium  and  the  servitude  becoming  vested  in
one  and  the  same  person  by  operation  of  law.  This  occurred  frequently
in  succession  upon  death.

(3)  Surrender  of  the  right  to  the  dominus  of  the  res  serviens.  Tit.  4.  3
inf.  The  proper  form  of  surrender  had  originally  been  in  iure  cessio  and
for  nistic  servitudes  in  Italy  probably  also  mancipatio;  in  Justinian's
time  a  mere  agreement  (cessio  or  concessio)  was  sufficient  without  any
formal  surrender.  So  too  the  person  entitled  to  the  servitude  might
purchase  the  dominium.  Dig.  7.  4.  17;  this  in  Tit.  4.  3  inf.  is  called
oonsolidatio.  There  is  some  ground  for  supposing  that  abandonment
(derelictio)  extinguished  usufruct,  though  not  other  servitudes ;  but  its
effect  seems  really  to  have  been  to  terminate,  not  the  usufhictuary's
right's,  but  only  his  liabilities.


224  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

aedium  vicini  officiat :  vel  ut  patiatur  eum  tignum  in  parietem

(4)  Extinction  of  the  subject  entitled.  In  praedial  servitudes  this  is
the  praedium  dominans :  personal  servitudes  expire  with  the  death  of
the  person  in  whom  they  are  vested,  unless  granted  to  him  and  his  heirs,
or  an  earlier  time  has  been  fixed  for  their  termination.  If  a  personal
servitude  belonged  to  a  juristic  person,  it  could  not  endure  beyond  one
hundred  years  except  by  express  provision,  Dig.  7.  I.  56.

(5)  Non-exercise  of  the  right  for  a  prescribed  time.  Rustic  servitudes
were  lost  by  non-exercise  for  two  years,  personal  servitudes  by  non-user
for  one  year  or  two  according  as  the  res  serviens  was  mobilis  or  immobilis,
Paul.  Sent.  Kec.  3.  6.  30.  For  the  loss  of  an  urban  servitude  mere  non-
user  was  insufficient ;  there  was  required  also  some  positive  act  on  the
part  of  the  owner  of  the  praedium  serviens,  e.  g.  raising  of  the  house,
building  up  of  the  hole  in  which  the  beam  had  rested,  etc. ;  two  years
after  this  had  occurred  the  right  was  extinguished,  this  being  called
usucapio  libertatis:  'haec  autem  lura  [praediorum  urbanorum]  similiter,
ut  rusticorum  quoque  praediorum,  certo  tempore  non  utendo  pereunt:
nisi  quod  haec  dissimilitudo  est,  quod  non  omnino  pereunt  non  utendo,
sed  ita,  si  vicinus  simul  libertatem  usucapiat '  Dig.  8. 2. 6 ;  cf.  Roby,  op.  cit.
p.  139.  For  servitudes  over  provincial  soil  the  periods  were  the  longer
ones  already  mentioned,  and  these  continued  to  be  required  universally
under  Justinian,  no  distinction  being  drawn  between  moveables  and  im-
moveables; Cod.  3.  33.  16. 1 ;  3.34.  13;  7.  33. 12.  Two  personal  servitudes,
habitatio  and  operae,  were  never  liable  to  destruction  by  non-user.

(6)  In  Tit.  4.  3  inf.  Justinian  says  usufruct  was  also  extinguished  'non
utendo  per  modum : '  which  may  be  explained  (i)  as  an  allusion  to  Cod.
3.  33.  16.  I  'nee  usumfructum  non  utendo  cadere,  nisi  talis  exceptio
opponatur  quae,  etiamsi  dominium  vindicaret,  posset  eum  excludere ; '  or
(2)  as  referring  to  restrictions  upon  the  right,  limiting,  e.  g.  the  kinds  of
fruits  which  might  be  taken,  cf.  Dig.  8.  6.  10.  i ;  ib.  18.  pr.

(7)  Lapse  of  the  time  fixed  for  the  duration  of  the  right,  or  fulfilment  of
a  resolutive  condition.  Praedial  servitudes  could  not  in  strict  law  be
qualified  in  this  manner,  but  if  the  grantee  asserted  his  right  against
the  terms  of  the  limitation,  he  could  be  defeated  by  exceptio  pacti  or
doli.  Dig.  8.  1.  4.  pr.

(8)  By  the  old  law  usus  and  ususfructus  were  extinguished  by  capitis
deminutio  of.  the  person  entitled.  Gains  iii.  83.  By  an  enactment  of
Justinian,  capitis  deminutio  minima  ceased  to  have  this  effect.  Tit.  4.  3.
inf.  and  Bk.  iii.  10.  I ;  cf.  Cod.  3.  33.  16.  2.

The  remark  of  Gaius  in  ii.  30,  and  of  the  text  in  Tit.  4.  3  inf.,  that  a
right  of  usufruct  is  inalienable  except  by  way  of  release  to  the  owner
of  the  res  serviens  is  true  of  all  servitudes  whatever:  any  attempt
to  transfer  was  altogether  inoperative.  But  a  usufructuary,  though
he  could  not  divest  himself  of  his  right  in  fevour  of  a  third  person,
could  transfer  its  exercise  or  enjoyment  to  him  by  sale,  gift,  etc.,  Dig.
7. 12.  2 ;  18.  68.  2 ;  24.  3.  57.  For  the  actions  relating  to  servitudes  see
Bk.  iv.  6.  2  and  notes  inf.


Tit.  4.]  DE  USU  FRUCTU.  225

immittere  vel  stillicidium  habere:    vel  ut  patiatur  eum  per
fundum  ire  agere  aquamve  ex  eo  ducere.


IV,

DE  USU   FRUCTU.

Usus  fructus  est  ius  alienis  rebus  utendi  fruendi  salva  rerum
substantia,  est  enim  ius  in  corpore :  quo  sublato  et  ipsum
tolli  necesse  est.  Usus  fructus  a  proprietate  separationem  1
recipit  idque  plurimis  modis  acctdit.  ut  ecce  si  quis  alicui
usum  fructum  legaverit :  nam  heres  nudam  habet  proprietatem,
legatarius  usum  fructum:  et  contra  si  fundum  legaverit  de-
ducto  USU  fructu,  l^atarius  nudam  habet  proprietatem,  heres
vero  usum  fructum :  item  alii  usum  fructum,  alii  deducto  eo
fundum  legare  potest  sine  testamento  vero  si  quis  velit  alii
usum  fructum  constituere,  pactionibus  et  stipulationibus  id
efficere  debet,  ne  tamen  in  universum  inutiles  essent  pro-
prietates  semper  abscedente  usu  fructu,  placuit  certis  modis
extingui  usum  fructum  et  ad  proprietatem  reverti.  Constituitur  3

Tit.  IV.  Usufruct  is  distinguished  from  usus  by  its  greater  orbit,  the
usufructuarius  being  entitled  '  frui '  as  well  as  *  uti.'  The  differentia  of
the  right  thus  lies  in  the  word  fructus,  for  which  see  Tit.  i.  37  supr.
Subject  to  the  obligation  not  to  abuse  or  misuse  ('recte  enim  colere  debet,
et  quasi  bonus  paterfamilias '  ib.  38),  and  in  the  absence  of  express  pro-
vision to  the  contrary,  the  holder  of  the  right  may  take  all  fruits  of  the
object,  civil  as  well  as  natural ;  and  where  it  is  land,  he  may  ordinarily
dig  for  minerals,  Dig.  7.  i.  9.  2;  ib.  13.  5,  but  not  to  such  an  extent  as
to  violate  the  rule  *  boni  viri  arbitratu  uti  frui  debet,  causam  proprietatis
deteriorem  facere  non  debet'  His  general  obligations  in  this  respect  are
contained  in  the  expression '  salva  rerum  substantia,'  for  which  see  Ulpian,
Reg.  24.  26  ^  earum  rerum,  quarum  salva  substantia  utendi  fruendi  potest
esse  facultas : '  he  may  not  use  the  object  over  which  his  right  exists  for
purposes  clearly  other  than  those  for  which  it  was  designed,  Dig.  7.  i.  13.
8  ;  ib.  15.  I,  nor  may  he  change  its  character,  and  he  must  restore  it  in  as
good  condition  as  that  in  which  he  received  it.  Where  the  right  was
given  testamento,  the  discharge  of  these  obligations  was  secured  by
a  cautio  usufructuaria,  or  personal  undertaking  guaranteed  by  sureties :
subsequently  the  dominus  was  held  entitled  to  demand  it  in  nearly  all
cases :  Dig.  7.  9.  i.  2  ;  ib.  9-  i ;  7-  '•  I3-  pr.

§  1.  For  the  modes  in  which  usufruct  could  be  created  and  extinguished
see  notes  on  the  preceding  Title.

§  2.  The  date  of  the  senatus-consult  by  which  this  ^quasi-usufruct'  was
intnxiuced,  though  not  precisely  known,  is  supposed  to  lie  between

Q


226  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

autem  usus  fructus  non  tantum  in  fundo  et  aedibus,  verum
etiam  in  servis  et  iu mentis  ceterisque  rebus  exceptis  his  quae
ipso  usu  consumuntur :  nam  eae  neque  natural!  ratione  neque
civili  recipiunt  usum  fructum.  quo  numero  sunt  vinum  oleum
frumentum  vestimenta.  quibus  proxima  est  pecunianumerata:
namque  in  ipso  usu  adsidua  permutatione  quodammodo  ex-
tinguitur.  sed  utilitatis  causa  senatus  censuit  posse  etiam
earum  rerum  usum  fructum  constitui,  ut  tamen  eo  nomine
heredi  utiliter  caveatur.  itaque  si  pecuniae  usus  fructus  legatus
sit,  ita  datur  legatario,  ut  eius  fiat,  et  legatarius  satisdat  heredi
de  tanti  pecunia  restituenda,  si  morietur  aut  capite  minuetur.
ceterae  quoque  res  ita  traduntur  legatario,  ut  eius  fiant :  sed
aestimatis  his  satisdatur,  ut^  si  morietur  aut  capite  minuetur,
tanta  pecunia  restituatur,  quanti  eae  fuerint  aestimatae.  ergo
senatus  non  fecit  quidem  eainim  rerum  usum  fructum  (nee
enim  poterat),  sed  per  cautionem  quasi  usum  fructum  con-
3  stituit.  Finitur  autem  usus  fructus  morte  fructuarii  et  duabus
capitis  deminutionibus,  maxima  et  media,  et  non  utendo  per
modum  et  tempus,  quae  omnia  nostra  statuit  constitutio.  item
finitur  usus  fructus,  si  domino  proprietatis  ab  usufructuario
cedatur  (nam  extraneo  cedendo  nihil  agitur) :  vel  ex  contrario
si  fructuarius  proprietatem  rei  adquisierit,  quae  res  consoli-
datio  appellatur.  eo  amplius  constat,  si  aedes  incendio  con-
Cicero  (on  account  of  Top.  3  *non  debet  ea  mulier,  cui  vir  bonorum
suorum  usumfructum  legavit,  cellis  vinariis  et  oleariis  plenis  relictis,
putare  ad  se  pertinere,  usus  enim,  non  abusus  legatus  est')  and  the
enactment  of  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  which  often  speaks  of  usufruct  of
a  part  of  a  whole  property.  Doubtless  the  main  object  of  the  innovation
was  to  enable  testators  to  bequeath  a  general  usufruct  over  all  their
property.  That  the  right  was  not  a  usufruct  proper  is  clear  from  the
text  (*nec  ususfructus  est*  Fragm.  Vat.  46,  *non  id  effectum,  ut  pecuniae
ususfructus  proprie  esset*  Dig.  7.  5.  2.  i).  Under  the  senatus-consult  it
could  be  created  only  by  will  ('  ut  omnium  rerum,  quas  in  cuiusque
patrimonio  esse  constaret,  ususfructus  legari  possit '  Dig.  7.  5.  i),  and
was  extinguished  only  by  death  and  capitis  deminutio  of  the  person
entitled.  Dig.  ib.  9  and  10.

§  8.  The  jurists  seem  to  have  disagreed  as  to  the  effect  of  an  attempt
to  cede  a  usufruct  to  a  third  person  :  Gains  (ii.  30)  states  the  law  in  the
same  way  as  the  text,  and  Fragm.  Vat.  75,  Dig.  10.  2.  15  agree;  but  in
^^Z'  ^3-  3*  ^  Pomponius  writes  ^si  extraneo  cedatur,  nihil  ad  eum
transire,  sed  ad  dominum  proprietatis  reversurum  usumfructum.'  Some
writers  attempt  to  reconcile  this  with  the  passages  last  referred  to :  see


m^i,n_,,m  '^m'^^m^mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmBmmfmmmmmmmamm


Tits.]  DE  USU  ET  HAIUTATIONE.  227

sumptae  fuerint  vel  etiam  terrae  motu  aut  vitio  suo  corruerint,
extingui   usum  fructum  et   ne  areae  quidem  usum  fructum
deberi.     Cum    autem   finitus   fuerit   usus  fnictus,   revertitur  4
scilicet  ad  proprietatem  et  ex  eo  tempore  nudae  proprietatis
dominus  incipit  plenam  habere  in  re  potestatem.

y.

DE  USU  ET   HABITATIONE.

Isdem  istis  modis,  quibus  usus  fructus  constituitur,  etiam
nudus  usus  constitui  solet  isdemque  illis  modis  finitur,  qui-
bus et  usus  fructus  desinit.  Minus  autem  scilicet  iuris  in  1
USU  est  quam  in  usu  fructu.  namque  is,  qui  fundi  nudum
usum  habet,  nihil  ulterius  habere  intellegitur,  quam  ut  oleri-
bus  pomis  floribus  feno  stramentis  lignis  ad  usum  cotti-
dianum  utatur:  in  eoque  fundo  hactenus  ei  morari  licet,
ut  neque  domino  fundi  molestus  sit  neque  his,  per  quos
opera  rustica  fiunt,  impedimento  sit :  nee  ulli  alii  ius  quod
habet  aut  vendere  aut  locare  aut  gratis  concedere  potest,
cum  is  qui  usum  fructum  habet  potest  haec  omnia  facere.
Item  is,  qui  aedium  usum  habet,  hactenus  juris  habere  intel-  2

Roby,  op.  cit.  p.  82.    Upon  '  et  ne  areae  quidem,'  etc.,  Theophilus  says

Tit.  V.  The  points  wherein  usus  differed  from  usufruct  are  clearly
pointed  out  in  §§  1-4.  The  commonest  mode  in  which  the  right  was
created  was  testament,  and  upon  the  principle  Mn  testamentis  plenius
voluntates  testantium  interpretamur '  the  powers  of  the  usuary  were  then
sometimes  enlarged  beyond  their  normal  compass  in  order  to  give  effect
to  the  bequest :  e.  g.  if  the  usus  were  bequeathed  of  a  wood,  he  might
cut  and  sell  it.  Dig.  7.  8.  22.  pr.  On  the  same  principle  the  legatee
of  the  usus  of  a  house  might  let  such  part  of  it  as  he  did  not  require
for  himself  and  his  family,  Dig.  ib.  2.  I,  but  not  the  whole:  though  the
general  rule  was  that  a  usuary  could  not  transfer  even  the  enjoyment  of
his  right  or  any  part  of  it,  fur  to  let  another  use  a  thing  is  not  to  use  it
oneself,  and  to  do  so  for  a  merces  is  practically  fructus.

§  L  For  the  transfer  by  a  usufructuary  of  the  actual  enjoyment  of  his
right  see  the  concluding  note  on  Tit.  3  supr. :  '  alii  fruendam  concedere,
vel  locare,  vel  vendere  potest  (usufructuarius)  .  .  .  precario  concedat  vel
donet'  Dig.  7.  i.  12.  2.

§  2.  Before  Q.  Mucins  even  the  husband  of  a  woman  to  whom  the  usus
of  a  hQUse  was  left  might  not  live  in  it  with  her.  Dig.  7.  8.  4.  i :  whether
the  usuary*s  liberti  might  be  housed  was  a  question  to  the  time  of  Celsus,
Dig.  ib.  2.  I.    With  ^  aliis  quibus  non  minus  quam  servis  utitur '  cf.  Dig.

Q  2


228  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

legitur,  ut  ipse  tantum  habitet,  nee  hoc  ius  ad  alium  transferre
potest :  et  vix  receptum  videtur,  ut  hospitem  ei  recipere  liceat.
et  cum  uxore  sua  liberisque  suis,  item  libertis  nee  non  aliis
liberis  personis,  quibus  non  minus  quam  servis  utitur^  habi-
tandi  ius  habeat :  et  convenienter  si  ad  mulierem  usus  aedium

3  pertineat^  cum  marito  habitare  liceat.  Item  is,  ad  quem  servi
usus  pertinet,  ipse  tantum  operis  atque  ministerio  eius  uti
potest :  ad  alium  vero  nullo  modo  ius  suum  transferre  et  con-

4  cessum  est.  idem  scilicet  iuris  est  et  in  iumento.  Sed  si
pecoris  vel  ovium  usus  legatus  fuerit,  neque  lacte  neque  agnis
neque  lana  utetur  usuarius,  quia  ea.  in  fructu  sunt,  plane  ad
stercorandum  agrum  suum  pecoribus  uti  potest.

5  Sed  si  cui  habitatio  legata  sive  aliquo  modo  constituta  sit,
neque  usus  videtur  neque  usus  fructus,  sed  quasi  proprium
aliquod  ius.  quam  habitationem  habentibus  propter  rerum
utilitatem  secundum  Marcelli  sententiam  nostra  decisione
promulgata  permisimus  non  solum  in  ea  degere,  sed  etiam
aliis  locare.

6  Haec  de  servitutibus  et  usu  fructu  et  usu  et  habitatione
dixisse  sufiiciat.  de  hereditate  autem  et  de  obligationibus  suis
locis  proponamus.  exposuimus  summatim,  quibus  modis  iure
gentium  res  adquiruntur :  modo  videamus,  quibus  modis  legi-
timo  et  civili  iure  adquiruntur.

7.  8.  4.  pr. '  quos  loco  servonim  in  operis  habet,  licet  liberi  sint  vel  servi
alieni.'

§  4.  The  ius  stercorandi  seems  to  correspond  to  the  usus  cottidianus
of  §  I  supr.

§  6.  It  was  a  question  among^  the  jurists  whether  habitatio  and  operae
servorum  sive  animalium  were  distinct  rights  from  usus  and  usufruct:
'  operis  servi  legatis  usum  datum  intellegi  et  ego  didici  et  lulianus  existi-
mat '  Clemens  in  Dig.  7.  7.  5  ;  for  the  different  views  respecting  habitatio
see  Ulpian  in  Dig.  7.  8.  10,  and  Cod.  33.  3.  13.  Finally  the  distinction
was  admitted  ;  the  points  of  difference  between  these  two  rights  and  usus,
which  they  most  resemble,  being  that  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  that
they  were  not  extinguished  by  non-user  or  capitis  deminutio,  Dig.  7.  8.
10.  pr.

For  the  three  iura  in  re  aliena  which  were  not  servitudes  see  Excursus
II  at  the  end  of  this  Book.

§  6.  Having  described  the  natural  modes  of  acquiring  res  (corporales)
singulae  in  Tit.  i  Justinian  takes  occasion,  after  drawing  the  distinction
between  things  corporeal  and  incorporeal  in  Tit.  2,  to  discuss  an  im-
portant branch  of  the  latter,  viz.  servitudes.     He  now  returns  to  the  civil


Tit.  6.]  DE  USUCAPIONIBUS,  ETC.  229

VI.

DE  USUCAPIONIBUS  ET  LONGI   TEMPORIS

POSSESSIONIBUS.

lure  civili  constitutum  fuerat,  ut,  qui  bona  fide  ab  eo,  qui
dominus  non  erat,  cum   crediderit  eum  dominum   esse,  rem


modes  of  acquisition,  which  are  two  in  number,  usucapio  (Tit.  6),  and
donatio  (Tit.  7).

It  has  been  already  observed  that  in  the  Roman  system  civil  are  older
than  natural  titles.  Three  of  the  former  were  obsolete  before  Justinian's
time,  or  were  abolished  by  him,  viz.

(i)  Addictio  in  the  wider  sense,  the  making  over  of  property  to  indi-
viduals in  the  name  of  the  people  by  the  decree  of  a  magistrate,  especially
in  the  fonn  of  emptio  sub  corona  (Cell.  7.  4  ;  13.  24),  and  sectio  bonorum
(Gains  iv.  146).  (2)  In  iure  cessio,  a  voluntary  transfer  effected  under
magisterial  authority  through  the  fiction  of  a  suit  at  law,  as  in  the  English
fines  and  recoveries.  It  is  described  by  Gains  ii.  24,  who  tells  us  (25)  that
even  in  his  day  it  had  been  abandoned  for  the  conveyance  of  corporeal
single  things,  though  this  is  hardly  consistent  with  his  59th  section,  where
he  speaks  of  property  being  conveyed  in  this  manner  with  a  fiducia,  for
the  purpose  of  mortgage  or  deposit.  It  is  possible  that  here,  as  in  some
other  passages  of  his  book,  he  uses  the  present  tense  in  describing
practices  or  institutions  which  in  fact  had  become  obsolete.  It  was,  how-
ever, still  used  in  emancipations,  adoptions  (note  on  Bk.  i.  11.  2  supr.),
transfer  of  tutelalegitima  over  women  (Gaius  i.  168),  creation  of  servitudes,
and  conveyance  of  the  right  to  accept  an  inheritance  (Gaius  ii.  35-37).  In
Justinian's  time  it  had  altogether  disappeared.  (3)  Mancipatio :  res  mancipi
viz;^  land  and  rustic  servitudes  in  Italy,  slaves,  domestic  beasts  of  burden,
free  persons  in  potestas,  manus  or  mancipium,  and  under  certain  circum-
stances a  man's  whole  property  in  the  aggregate  (familia)  could  be  con-
veyed in  full  ownership  only  by  this  or  in  iure  cessio ;  it  is  described  by
Gaius  i.  119-122.  Mancipation  disappeared  from  the  law  of  Justinian
owing  to  his  abolition  of  the  distinction  between  res  mancipi  and  nee
mancipi.  Cod.  7.  31.

Two  other  civil  modes  of  acquisition  still  operative  under  Justinian
are  not  here  treated  by  him,  viz.

(4)  Lex,  which  includes  legacy  (Tit  20.  pr.  inf.)  and  caduca  and  erep-
toria;  Ulpian,  Reg.  19.  17.

(5)  Adiudicatio,  the  sentence  of  a  judge  in  a  indicium  divisorium
whereby  property  vests  in  the  individual  in  severalty  without  the  neces-
sity of  ordinary  conveyance,  Bk.  iv.  17.  8  inf.

The  next  Title,  on  the  subject  of  usucapio,  presupposes  some  know-
ledge of  the  Roman  law  of  Possession.  For  this  see  Excursus  1 1 1  at  the
end  of  this  Book.

Tit.  VI.  'Usucapio  est  adiectio  dominii  per  continuationem  posses-


230  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

emerit  vel  ex  donatione  aliave  qua  iusta  causa  acceperit  is
earn  rem,  si  mobilis  erat,  anno  ubique,  si  immobilis,  biennio
tantum  in  Italico  solo  usucapiat,  ne  rerum  dominia  in  incerto
essent.  et  cum  hoc  placitum  erat,  putantibus  antiquioribus
dominis  sufficere  ad  inquirendas  res  suas  praefata  tempora,
nobis  melior  sententia  resedit,  ne  domini  maturius  suis  rebus

sionis  temporis  lege  definiti'  Dig.  41.  3.  3;  it  was  as  old  as  the  Twelve
Tables,  in  which  it  is  called  simply  usus ;  see  Muirhead,  Roman  Law,
p.  145.  For  its  operation  the  following  conditions  were  required  to  be
satisfied : —

(i)  Usucapio,  being  a  mode  of  acquiring  dominium  ex  iure  Quiritium,
presupposes  (a)  that  the  person  acquiring  has  the  commercium :  by  this
peregrini  were  excluded:  'adversus  hostem  aetema  auctoritas'  Cic.  de
Off.  i.  12. 37 ;  (b)  that  the  thing,  which  is  to  be  acquired,  is  not  only  capable
of  being  possessed,  but  is  in  commercio.  This  excludes  free  men  (Gaius
ii.  48),  res  divini  iuris  (ib.),  and  res  publicae,  in  particular  solum  provin-
ciale  (ib.  46) ;  the  last,  however,  could  be  possessed  (Savigny,  Poss.  §  9).
In  addition  to  this,  certain  things  were  prohibited  by  positive  enactment
from  being  acquired  in  this  way,  especially  res  furtivae  and  vi  possessae
(§  2  inf.),  res  mancipi  of  women  in  agnatic  guardianship,  unless  delivered
by  the  woman  herself  with  the  guardian's  auctoritas  (Gaius  ii.  47) ;  res
fiscales  (§14  inf.)  ;  property  of  the  emperor  (Cod.  7.  38),  and  of  minors
(Cod.  7.  35.  3) ;  res  dotales  under  certain  circumstances,  and  immoveable
property  of  religious  and  charitable  corporations.

(2)  The  object  must  be  'possessed,'  not  merely  detained,  during  the
period  required  by  law,  and

(3)  The  possession  must  have  originated  in  a  iusta  causa  or  a  iustus
titulus  ('  usucapio,  non  praecedente  vero  titulo,  procedere  non  potest,  nee
prodesse  neque  tenenti  neque  heredi  eius  potest '  Cod.  7.  29.  4 ;  cL  the
opening  section  of  this  Title),  and  have  been  accompanied  at  its  inception
by  bona  fides  (§§  i  and  3  inf.) :  these  requirements  having  been  grafted
on  to  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  by  the  later  jurisprudence.  Both  o*
these  expressions  need  a  little  elucidation.  By  the  requirement  of  iusta
causa  is  meant  that  the  possessor  must  have  got  possession  in  some  way
which  would  have  made  him  owner,  only  that  in  the  particular  case,  owing
to  some  external  defect,  acquisition  of  possession  is  not  equivalent  to
acquisition  of  ownership ;  Justinian's  language  in  the  first  lines  of  the  text
is  misleading,  as  the  chief  use  of  usucapio  had  before  him  been  in  cases
where  res  mancipi  were  transferred  by  mere  traditio  (Gaius  ii.  41),  p.  201
supr.  Such  causae  of  course  are  numerous,  the  clue  to  them  in  the
authorities  being  the  word  'pro'  (possidet  pro  soluto,  pro  empto,  pro
herede,  pro  donato,  pro  derelicto,  pro  legato,  pro  dote,  etc.).  By  bona
fides  is  meant  a  negative  rather  than  a  positive  state  of  mind,  i.  e.  ignor-
ance, occasioned  by  excusable  error,  of  the  circumstances  which  prevent  the
acquisitionof  ownership  ('qui  ignorabat. . .  alienum. . .  bonaefidei  possessor'
Dig.  48.  15.  3.  pr.) ;  the  cases  in  which  its  presence  can  be  really  a  ques-


Tit  6.]  DE  USUCAPIONIBUS,  ETC.  231

defraudentur  neque  certo  loco  beneficium  hoc  concludatur.  et
ideo  constitutionem  super  hoc  promulgavimus,  qua  cautum
est,  ut  res  quidem  mobiles  per  triennium  usucapiantur,  immo-
biles  vero  per  longi  temporis  possessionem,  id  est  inter  prae-
sentes  decennio,  inter  absentes  viginti  annis  usucapiantur  et
his  modis  non  solum  in  Italia,  sed  in  omni  terra,  quae  nostro

tion  are  cases  of  materially  defective  acquisition,  where  the  usucapio  has
to  prevail  against  an  actual  (and  not  merely  Quiritarian)  owner,  as  e.  g.  if
a  non-owner  sells  and  delivers  property,  the  purchaser,  besides  this  causa
(pro  empto)  must  not  know  that  it  belongs  to  some  one  other  than  the
vendor,  or  that  the  vendor  has  no  authority  to  sell ;  '  bonae  fidei  emptor
esse  videtur,  qui  ignoravit  earn  rem  alienam  esse,  aut  putavit  eum,  qui
vendidit,  ius  vendendi  habere,  puta  procuratorem  aut  tutorem  esse '  Dig.
50.  16.  109.  By  Roman  law  bona  fides  was  required  only  at  the  inception
of  possession,  and  in  sales  also  at  the  time  of  the  contract :  under  the
canon  and  modem  civil  law  it  is  different.

(4)  The  possession  must  continue  uninterruptedly  during  the  period
fixed  by  law;  in  case  of  interruption  (usurpatio)  the  whole  time  must
commence  and  run  again.  The  time  required  by  the  Twelve  Tables  was
two  years  for  acquisition  of  immoveables,  one  for  that  of  moveables.

The  exclusion  of  provincial  soil  from  the  operation  of  usucapio  led
indirectly  to  very  considerable  changes  in  the  law.  The  ground  upon
which  Justinian  tells  us  usucapio  was  recognised— ne  rerum  dominia  in
incerto  essent — was  as  real  a  one  in  the  provinces  as  in  Italy ;  and  in
them  its  place  was  taken  by  an  analogous  institution,  longi  temporis
praescriptio  or  possessio,  which  owed  its  efficacy  to  the  edicts  of  the
provincial  governors,  and  whose  operation  was  extended— probably  for
the  benefit  of  peregrini— to  moveables  by  Caracalla,  Dig.  44.  3.  9.  By
this,  if  a  man  ]>ossessed  land  for  ten  years  (or  twenty,  if  the  owner  lived
out  of  the  province)  Dig.  18.  i.  76.  i,  the  latter's  action  for  its  recovery
could,  after  the  lapse  of  that  period,  be  defeated  by  a  plea  (called  ori-
ginally praescriptio,  later  exceptio)  alleging  the  length  of  the  defendant's
possession.  The  rules  already  stated  as  to  iusta  causa  and  bona  fides,
and  the  positive  enactments  excluding  certain  things  from  this  mode  of
acquisition  (e.  g.  res  furtivae  and  vi  possessae)  were  applied  here  as  well
as  in  usucapio.  It  operated  at  first,  as  it  were,  as  a  Statute  of  Limitation
only,  but  eventually  it  conferred  ownership,  the  longi  temporis  possessor
being  allowed  by  Justinian  to  bring  a  real  action  for  the  recovery  of  the
object  if  deprived  of  it ;  see  Cod.  7.  39.  8.  pr.,  where  he  says  hoc  *  enim  et
veteres  leges,  si  quis  eas  recte  inspexerit,  sanciebant ' :  for  this  see  Dig.  12.
2.  13.  I ;  Cod.  7.  33.  7.

When  Justinian  became  emperor,  the  law  of  Prescription  in  his  domi-
nions consisted  really  of  two  heterogeneous  portions.  Res  mobiles  could
be  acquired  by  the  old  civil  law  usucapio  in  a  year ;  but  practically  all  the
soil  of  the  Eastern  Empire  was  'provincial,'  so  that  the  old  biennii
usucapio  had  no  application;  its  place  was  supplied  by  the  praetorian


232  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

imperio  gubernatur,  dominium  rerum  iusta  causa  possessionis
praecedente  adquiratur.

1  Sed  aliquando  etiamsi  maxime  quis  bona  fide  rem  possederit,
non  tamen  illi  usucapio  ullo  tempore  procedit,  veluti  si  quis
liberum  hominem  vel  rem  sacram  vel  religiosam  vel  servum

2  fugitivum  possideat.  Furtivae  quoque  res  et  quae  vi  pos-
sessae  sunt,  nee  si  praedicto  longo  tempore  bona  fide  pos-
sessae  fuerint^  usucapi  possunt:  nam  furtivarum  rerum  lex
duodecim  tabularum  et  lex  Atinia  inhibet  usucapionem,  vi

3  possessarum  lex  Julia  et  Plautia.     Quod  autem  dictum  est

longi  temporis  possessio  of  ten  or  twenty  years.  Justinian  reformed  the
old  law  as  follows :  (i)  he  did  away  with  the  old  legal  distinction
between  Italian  and  provincial  soil;  (2)  altered  the  periods  of  time
required,  as  stated  in  this  section,  three  years  instead  of  one  being  now
necessary  for  the  usucapio  of  res  mobiles ;  and  (3)  upon  the  analogy
of  Theodosius  ITs  limitation  of  actions,  he  enacted  that  thirty  years'
possession  of  property,  moveable  or  immoveable,  should  confer  ownership,
whether  it  admitted  of  the  ordinary  usucapio  or  no,  and  even  in  the
absence  of  iustus  titulus,  Cod.  7.  39.  8.  Thb  was  called  longissimi  tem-
poris praescriptio.

§  1.  The  mention  of  the  runaway  slave  in  this  rather  than  in  the  next
section  ('  ancilla  fugitiva  sui  furtum  facere  intellegittu* '  Dig.  47.  2.  60 ;  c£
Cod.  6.  I.  I )  is  perhaps  due  to  the  senatus-consult  (Dig.  48.  15.  2)  which
prohibited  alienation  of  fugitivi,  and  so  might  be  said  in  some  sense  to
have  placed  them  in  the  category  of  res  extra  commercium.

§  2.  The  relation  between  the  enactment  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  the
lex  Atinia  (which  apparently  was  passed  about  the  middle  of  the  second
century  B.  c)  seems  to  have  been  that  the  latter,  while  repeating  the  pro-
hibition of  the  former,  added  that  the  vitium  furti  should  be  purged
as  soon  as  the  object  returned  to  the  possession  of  the  owner,  Dig.  41.  3.
4.  6 ;  50.  16.  215  :  see  on  §  3  inf.

The  lex  Julia  et  Plautia  of  this  secdon  and  of  Gaius  ii.  45  is  in  Dig.  41.
3.  33.  2  called  Plautia  et  lulia.  Theophilus  tells  us  that  they  were  two
distinct  statutes :  the  one  perhaps  the  lex  Plautia  de  vi,  mentioned  by
Cicero  pro  Mil  13,  ad  Fam.  viii.  8,  and  enacted  probably  B.a  79:  the
other  the  well-known  lex  lulia  de  vi,  iv.  18.  8  inf.,  Dig.  48.  7.  So  far  as
concerns  usucapion  they  related  mainly  to  land,  which  did  not  come
within  the  operation  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  the  lex  Atinia,  §  7  inf.  It
is  dear  from  that  section  that  if  a  piece  of  land  was  once  '  vi  possessa '
not  even  a  bona  fide  possessor  could  acquire  it  by  usucapion,  any  more
than  he  could  a  thing  which  had  been  stolen :  but  a  man  might  be  vi
deiectus  without  his  land  being  possessed  by  force :  '  lex  Plautia  et  lulia
ea  demmn  vetuit  longa  possessione  capi,  quae  vi  possessa  fuissent,  non
etiam  ex  quibus  vi  quis  deiectus  fuisset,'  Dig.  43.  i.  33.  2.

§  8.  The  vitium  furti  was  purged,  so  that  the  thing  became  again  capable


Titd]  DE  USUCAPIONIBUS,  ETC.  233

furtivarum  et  vi  possessarum  rerum  usucapionem  per  legem
prohibitam  esse,  non  eo  pertinet,  ut  ne  ipse  fur  quive  per  vim
possidet  usucapere  possit :  nam  his  alia  ratione  usucapio  non
competit,  quia  scilicet  mala  fide  possident :  sed  ne  uUus  alius^
quamvis  ab  eis  bona  fide  emerit  vel  ex  alia  causa  acceperit,
usucapiendi  ius  habeat.  unde  in  rebus  mobilibus  non  facile
procedit,  ut  bonae  fidei  possessor!  usucapio  competat.  nam
qui  alienam  rem  vendidit  vel  ex  alia  causa  tradidit,  furtum
eius  committit.  Sed  tamen  id  aliquando  aliter  se  habet.  nam  4
si  heres  rem  defuncto  commodatam  aut  locatam  vel  apud  eum
depositam  existimans  hereditariam  esse  bona  fide  accipienti
vendiderit  aut  donaverit  aut  dotis  nomine  dederit,  quin  is  qui
acceperit  usucapere  possit,  dubium  non  est,  quippe  ea  res  in
furti  vitium  non  ceciderit,  cum  utique  heres,  qui  bona  fide
tamquam  suam  alienaverit,  furtum  non  committit.  Item  si  is,  5
ad  quem  ancillae  usus  fructus  pertinet,  partum  suum  esse
credens  vendiderit  aut  donaverit,  furtum  non  committit :  fur-
tum enim  sine  affectu  furandi  non  committitur.  Aliis  quoque  6
modis  accidere  potest,  ut  quis  sine  vitio  furti  rem  alienam  ad
aliquem  transferat  et  efficiat,  ut  a  possessore  usucapiatur.
Quod  autem  ad  eas  res,  quae  solo  continentur,  expeditius  pro-  7
cedit,  ut  quis  loci  vacantis  possessionem  propter  absentiam
aut  neglegentiam  domini,  aut  quia  sine  successore  decesserit,

of  being  acquired  by  usucapion,  if  it  returned  into  the  hands  of  its  owner  (§  8
inf. ;  cf.  Bk.  iv.  i .  1 2)  or  of  his  agent  to  his  knowledge.  Hence  if  a  man  steals
his  own  property  (e.  g.  from  a  usufructuary  or  bona  fide  possessor)  usucapion
is  not  hindered.  Dig.  47.  2.  20.  i.  It  is  deemed  to  have  returned  to  his
hands  as  soon  as  he  knows  who  has  got  it,  and  is  consequently  able  to
bring  a  real  action  for  its  recovery ;  '  in  lege  Atinia  in  potestatem  domini
rem  furti vam  venisse  videri,  et  si  eius  vindicandae  potestatem  habuerit,
Sabinus  et  Cassius  aiunt'  Dig.  5a  16.  215.  It  is  uncertain  whether  the
vitium  was  purged  by  the  property  being  restored  to  the  possession  of
him  from  whom,  though  not  its  owner,  it  was  stolen,  e.  g.  the  bona  fide
possessor,  usufructuary,  or  pledgee ;  Dig.  41.  3.  4.  6  distinctly  says  no,  but
49  of  the  same  Title  contains  a  genuine  exception.

§  6.  For  other  cases  see  Dig.  41.  8.  4,  Paul  Sent.  Rec.  5. 2.  5,  Cod.  7.

33-  I-

§  7.  Justinian  altered  the  law,  as  it  is  here  stated,  by  Nov.  119.  7,  by

which  he  enacted  that  a  bona  fide  possessor  of  land  by  transfer  from
a  mala  fide  possessor  should  become  owner  by  usucapio  in  ten  or  twenty
years  only  if  all  the  facts  were  known  to  the  owner ;  otherwise  thirty
years'  possession  was  required.


234  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

sine  vi  nanciscatur.  qui  quamvis  ipse  mala  fide  possidet,  quia
intellegit  se  alienum  fundum  occupasse,  tamen,  si  alii  bona
fide  accipienti  tradiderit,  potent  ei  longa  possessione  res  ad-
quiri,  quia  neque  furtivum  neqiie  vi  possessum  accepit,  abolita
est  enim  quonindam  veterum  sententia  existimantium  etiam
fundi  locive  furtum  fieri  et  eorum,  qui  res  soli  possident,  prin-
cipalibus  constitutionibus  prospicitur,  ne  cui  longa  et  indubi-

8  tata  possessio  auferri  debeat.  Aliquando  etiam  furtiva  vel  vi
possessa  res  usucapi  potest:  veluti  si  in  domini  potestatem
reversa  fuerit.     tunc  enim  vitio  rei  purgato  procedit  eius  usu-

9  capio.  Res  fisci  nostri  usucapi  non  potest,  sed  Papinianus
scribit  bonis  vacantibus  fisco  nondum  nuntiatis  bona  fide  emp-
torem  sibi  traditam  rem  ex  his  bonis  usucapere  posse  :  et  ita

10  divus  Pius  et  divus  Severus  et  Antoninus  rescripserunt.  No-
vissime  sciendum  est  rem  talem  esse  debere,  ut  in  se  non
habeat  vitium,  ut  a  bona  fide  emptore  usucapi  possit  vel  qui
ex  alia  iusta  causa  possidet.

1 1  Error  autem  falsae  causae  usucapionem  non  parit.  veluti  si
quis^  cum  non  emerit,  emisse  se  existimans  possideat :  vel  cum
ei  donatum  non  fuerat,  quasi  ex  donatione  possideat.

12  Diutina  possessio,  quae  prodesse  coeperat  defimcto,  et
heredi  et  bonorum  possessor!  continuatur,  licet  ipse  sciat  prae-


§  0.  Bona  vacantia  is  property  of  a  deceased  person  who  leaves  no
successor,  civil  or  praetorian,  Dig.  49.  14.  i.  2;  44.  3.  10.  i ;  Cod.  10.  10.

§  10.  Apparently  a  general  statentent  of  the  rule  which  §§  1-9  are
intended  to  exemplify.

§  11.  The  commentators  use  the  phrase  titulus  putativus  for  cases  of
this  sort  Justinian's  statement  of  the  law  must  be  taken  subject  to  the
exception  that  a  titulus  putativus  will  support  usucapio  where  the  error  is
of  fact  and  excusable,  Dig.  41.  10.  5  ;  41.  4.  11.  Conversely,  usucapio  will
operate  where  there  is  a  iusta  causa  unknown  to  the  possessor,  Dig.  ib.
2.  2.  The  rule  has  no  application  when  there  is  a  mere  mistake  in  the
causa,  as  where  the  transferor  means  to  give,  and  the  transferee  to  buy,
Dig.  41.  3.  31.  6,  ib.  44.  4 ;  see  Tit.  2a  30  inf.,  and'cf.  note  on  Tit.  i.  40
supr.  ad  fin.

§  12.  Accessio  temporis  or  possessionis,  the  reckoning  together,  as
one  possession,  the  otherwise  unbroken  possession  of  a  man  and  his
successor  in  tide  for  purposes  of  usucapio,  had  been  allowed  very  early,
if  not  always,  between  a  deceased  person  and  his  heirs,  on  the  ground
of  their  fictitious  identity,  which  was  so  consistently  realised  that  (as  is
remarked  in  the  text)  if  the  deceased  was  in  condicione  usucapiendi,  no


Tit.6J  DE  USUCAPIONIBUS,  ETC.  235

dium  alienum :  quodsi  ille  initium  iustum  non  habuit,  heredi
et  bonorum  possessor!  licet  ignorant!  possessio  non  prodest.
quod  nostra  constitutio  similiter  et  in  usucapionibus  observari
constituit,  ut  tempora  continuentur.  Inter  venditorem  quoque  13
et  emptorem  coniungi  tempora  divus  Severus  et  Antoninus
rescripserunt.

Edicto  divi  Marci  cavetur  eum,  qui  a  Asco  rem  alienam  14
emit,  si  post  venditionem  quinquennium  praeterierit,  posse
dominum  rei  per  exceptionem  repellere.  constitutio  autem
divae  memoriae  Zenonis  bene  prospexit  his,  qui  a  iisco  per
venditionem  vel  donationem  vel  alium  titulum  aliquid  acci-
piunt,  ut  ipsi  quidem  securi  statim  fiant  et  victores  existant,
sive  conveniantur  sive  experiantur:  adversus  sacratissimum
autem  aerarium  usque  ad  quadriennium  liceat  intendere  his,
qui  pro  dominio  vel  hypotheca  earum  rerum,  quae  alienatae
sunt,  putaverint  sibi  quasdam  competere  actiones.  nostra
autem  divina  constitutio,  quam  nuper  promulgavimus,  etiam
de  his,  qui  a  nostra  vel  venerabilis  Aug^ustae  domo  aliquid


mala  fides  on  the  part  of  the  heir  on  succeeding  vitiated  the  possession.
Under  the  contrary  supposition,  not  on]y  could  the  heir  not  reckon  the
deceased*s  possession,  but  could  not  acquire  by  usucapio  even  if  his  own
possession  had  commenced  bona  fide.  Dig.  44.  3.  11,  and  though  the  heir*s
alienee  in  §  4  supr.  could  acquire  in  this  manner,  he  could  not  do  so
himself.  The  same  principles  were  applied  to  the  bonorum  possessor,
but  not  the  legatee.  By  usucapionibus  at  the  end  of  the  section  is  meant
Justinian's  new  system  of  usucapio.

§  18.  In  the  case  of  singular  as  distinct  from  universal  succession  acces-
sio  possessionis  does  not  seem  to  have  been  allowed  in  the  old  civil  law
usucapio  except  between  vendor  and  vendee,  and  that  not  until  the
rescript  mentioned  in  the  text.  In  the  corresponding  praetorian  system
(longi  temporis  possessio)  it  was  permitted  if  the  justice  of  the  particular
case  seemed  to  require  it :  '  de  accessionibus  possessionum  nihil  in  per-
petuum  neque  generaliter  definire  possumus,  consistunt  enim  in  sola
aequitate'  Dig.  44.  3.  14.  pr.  Under  Justinian  it  was  allowed  in  all  cases
between  the  usucapion  possessor  and  his  predecessor  in  title  (Dig.  41.  4.
2.  17  and  30;  44.  3.  15.  1-6,  Cod.  7.  31)  provided  there  had  been  no
break,  vacuum  tempus.  Dig.  44.  3.  15.  i.

$  14.  For  Zeno*s  constitution  see  Cod.  7.  37.  2.  Under  the  older  law
there  had  been  three  abnormal  cases  of  usucapio,  in  which  the  ordinary
rules  were  suspended  in  respect  either  of  bona  fides,  titulus,  or  length
of  the  possession,  viz.  usucapio  lucrativa  or  possessio  pro  herede,  prac-
tically abolished  by  a  senatus-consult  of  Hadrian's  time  (SO.  luventianum).


236  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

acceperint,  haec  statuit,  quae  in  fiscalibus  alienationibus  prae-
fata  Zenoniana  constitutione  continentur.

VII.

DE  DONATIONIBUS.

Est  etiam  aliud  genus  adquisitionis  donatio,  donationum
autem  duo  genera  sunt :  mortis  causa  et  non  mortis  causa.
1  Mortis  causa  donatio  est,  quae  propter  mortis  fit  suspicionem,
cum  quis  ita  donat,  ut,  si  quid  humanitus  ei  contigisset,
haberet  is  qui  accepit :  sin  autem  supervixisset  qui  donavit,
reciperet,  vel  si  eum  donationis  poenituisset  aut  prior  deces-
serit  is  cui  donatum  sit.  hae  mortis  causa  donationes  ad
exemplum  legatorum  redactae  sunt  per  omnia,  nam  cum
prudentibus  ambiguum  fuerat,  utrum  donationis  an  legati
instar  earn  optinere  oporteret,  et  utriusque  causae  quaedam
habebat  insignia   et  alii  ad  aliud  genus  eam  retrahebant :  a

Gaius  ii.  52-58 ;  usureceptio  lucrativa,  ib.  59 ;  and  usureceptio  ex  prae-
diatura,  ib.  60.  61.

Tit.  Vn.  Donatio  was  perhaps  treated  by  the  older  jurists  as  a  distinct
mode  of  acquisition  because,  under  the  law  of  the  lex  Cincia  (for  which  see
inf.),  as  a  rule  *  sola  promissio  non  perficit  donationem,  sed  exigitur,  ut . . .
et  interdicto  superior  sit  is,  cui  [donatum  est] '  Fragm.  Vat.  311 :  and  to
succeed  in  the  interdict  it  was  necessary  that  the  donee  should  have  a
possession  which  would  suffice  to  make  him  dominus  either  Quiritarian
or  bonitarian.  They  regarded  it  as  a  civilis  adquisitio  probably  because
res  mancipi  could  be  given  only  by  mancipatio,  Fragm.  Vat.  263,  4.  Jus-
tinian's treatment  of  it  as  a  civil  mode  of  acquisition  is  indefensible  :  it  is
not  gift  alone,  as  Savigny  remarks,  which  confers  dominium  in  any  case,
but  gift  in  combination  with  and  serving  as  a  iusta  causa  (p.  214  supr.)  for
traditio,  exactly  as  sale  or  exchange  might  serve.  Again,  it  is  not  neces-
sary that  donatio  should  take  the  form  of  conferring  dominium :  it  may
consist  in  the  constitution  of  a  ius  in  re  aliena,  the  transfer  of  possession,
the  giving  of  an  actionable  promise,  or  the  release  of  a  debt

Donatio  in  the  widest  sense  is  any  other  than  a  testamentary  dis-
position, which  (i)  is  accompanied  by  consensus  between  the  two  parties:
(2)  voluntarily,  gratuitously,  and  intentionally  improves  the  proprietary
position  of  the  donee ;  and  (3)  actually  or  prospectively  diminishes  the
property  of  the  donor.  Provided  these  conditions  are  satisfied,  it  may
take  any  of  the  forms  above  mentioned.

§  1.  A  donatio  mortis  causa  stands  midway  between  a  legacy  and  a
gift  inter  vivos.  In  that  it  consists  in  a  present  act  of  bounty  ('  praesens
praesenti  dat '  Dig.  39.  6.  38)  it  differs  from  the  former,  which  confers  no
right  whatever  on  the  legatee  until  the  testator  is  dead  and  his  heir  has


Tit.;.]  DE  DONATIONIBUS,  237

nobis  constitutum  est,  ut  per  omnia  fere  leg^tis  connumeretur
et  sic  procedat,  quemadmodum  earn  nostra  formavit  consti-
tutio.  et  in  summa  mortis  causa  donatio  est,  cum  magis  se
quis  velit  habere,  quam  eum  cui  donatur,  magisque  eum  cui
donat,  quam  heredem  suum.  sic  et  apud  Homerum  Tele-
machus  donat  Piraeo.

accepted  the  inheritance  :  here,  if  the  donee  outlives  the  donor,  the  thing
given  never  goes  to  the  heir  at  all  It  differs  from  the  latter  in  being
absolutely  perfected  only  by  the  donor's  decease.  The  gift  may  be  made
so  conditional  on  that  event,  that  the  [iroperty  in  the  gift  does  not  pass
to  the  donee  until  its  occurrence  ;  in  the  meanwhile  he  has  only  its  use
and  enjoyment :  or  the  property  may  pass  at  once,  subject  to  the  under-
standing that  it  is  to  revert  to  the  donor  in  case  of  his  proving  the  better
life.  Where  the  gift  is  made  in  anticipation  of  some  especial  danger
threatening  him,  it  is  cancelled  not  only  by  the  donee's  prior  decease,  but
also  so  soon  as  that  danger  is  survived.  In  any  case  the  donor  may
revoke  the  gift  at  any  moment  prior  to  his  decease  ('  cum  quis  ita  donat
ut . . .  reciperet  si  eum  donationis  poenituisset ').  Justinian's  later  state-
ment, that  in  nearly  all  respects  donationes  mortis  causa  were  governed
by  the  same  rules  as  legacies,  is  truer  than  his  earlier  one,  that  the
parallelism  was  complete.  Thus  (i)  donatio  m.  c.  was  quite  independent
of  the  fate  of  the  inheritance:  legacy  depended  on  acceptance  of  the
hereditas.  (2)  No  particular  qualification  in  the  way  of  commercium
was  required  in  either  donor  or  donee  :  the  validity  of  a  legacy  pre-
supposed testament!  factio  in  both  parties :  similarly  a  filiusfamilias  could
with  his  patei^s  consent  make  gifts  mortis  causa  from  his  peculium
profectitium,  but  in  no  case  could  he  bequeath  it  (3)  Legacies  were
avoided  by  the  successful  bringing  of  a  querella  inofficiosi  (Tit.  18  inf.),  but
gifts  m.  c  were  not  so  affected :  '  qui  mortis  causa  donationem  accepit
a  tesiatore,  non  est  similis  in  hac  causa  legatario'  Dig.  34.  9.  5.  17.  But
among  the  points  of  resemblance  are  the  following:  (i)  The  rules  of  the
leges  Furia  and  Voconia,  Tit.  32.  pr.  inf.  applied  to  both,  Gains  ii.  225, 6 ;
iv.  23.  (2)  The  provisions  of  the  leges  lulia  and  Papia  Poppaea  (note  on
Tit.  14.  pr.  inf.)  as  to  capacity  to  take  legacies  was  extended  to  gifts  m.  c.
by  a  senatus-consult,  Dig.  39.  6.  35.  pr.  (3)  By  a  constitution  of  Septimius
Severus  the  heir  was  entitled  to  deduct  the  Falcidian  fourth  (Tit.  22  inf.)
from  such  gifts,  Cod.  8.  57.  2.  2  ;  6.  50.  5.  (4)  If  the  donor  became  in-
solvent the  creditors  might  impeach  his  gifts  mortis  causa:  'nam  cum
I^;ata  ex  testamento  eius,  qui  solvendo  non  fuit,  omnimodo  inutilia
sunt,  possunt  videri  etiam  donationes  mortis  causa  factae  rescindi  debere,
quia  legatorum  instar  obtinent '  Dig.  39. 6. 17.  (5)  Gifts  m.  c,  like  legacies,
became  void  if  the  donor  underwent  capital  punishment,  Dig.  ib.  7.

No  particular  form  was  prescribed  for  this  class  of  gift  unless  its  amount
exceeded  500  solidi,  in  which  case  it  must  either  be  registered  (insinuatio
in  acta)  or  made  before  five  witnesses  of  the  same  qualification  as  was
required  in  the  execution  of  codicilli  (note  on  Tit.  25.  3  inf.),  Cod.  8.  57. 4.


238  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

2  Aliae  autem  donationes  sunt,  quae  sine  ulla  mortis  cogita-
tione  iiunt,  quas  inter  vivos  appellamus.  quae  omnino  non
comparantur  legatis:  quae  si  fuerint  perfectae,  temere  revo-

Most  editions  of  the  Institutes  insert  at  the  end  of  this  section  some
lines  from  Odyssey  17.  78-83.  They  are  not  found,  however,  in  the  great
majority  of  the  MSS.,  or  in  the  passage  of  Marcianus  in  Dig.  39.  6.  i
from  which  our  text  is  obviously  derived.

§  2.  When  the  gift  takes  the  form  of  a  promise,  the  latter,  and  not  its
performance,  is  the  gift,  for  performance  can  be  enforced  by  action,  and
*'  donari  videtur  quod  nullo  iure  cogente  conceditur  *  Dig.  50. 17.  82.  Such
promises  origrinally  were  not  actionable  unless  made  by  stipulatio :  Anto-
ninus Pius  made  a  mere  formless  promise  actionable  between  parents
ai>d  children  (Fragm.  Vat.  314) ;  and,  as  appears  from  this  section,  Jus-
tinian extended  this  to  all  persons  whatsoever :  '  non  ex  hoc  inutilis  sit
donatio,  quod  res  non  traditae  sunt,  nee  confirmetur  ex  traditione
donatio  *  Cod.  8.  54.  35.  5.

Gifts  inter  vivos  were  not  as  a  rule  revocable,  like  those  made  mortis
causa.  By  the  old  law,  the  pater  or  patronus  might  revoke  gifts  to  an
emancipated  child  or  libertus  during  their  joint  lives  (Fragm.  Vat.  272),
but  this  right  was  limited  by  Diocletian  and  succeeding  emperors  to
cases  in  which  ingratitude  could  be  proved,  or  where  children  were  sub-
sequently bom  to  the  donor.  Justinian,  as  he  here  says,  while  permitting
all  donors  without  distinction  to  revoke  on  the  first  of  these  grounds,
carefully  specified  the  acts  which  amounted  to  legal  ingratitude.  Cod.
8.  56.  10.

Gifts  were  forbidden  between  husband  and  wife  by  customary  law,
'ne  mutuo  amore  invicem  spoliarentur '  Dig.  24.  i.  i.  Allusion  is  also
made  in  this  section  to  the  invalidity  of  gifts  exceeding  a  certain  maximum
unless  made  under  prescribed  forms.  The  oldest  enactment  on  this
subject  is  the  lex  Cincia  de  moneribus,  B.a  204,  from  the  operation  of
which,  however,  certain  classes  of  persons  were  excepted  on  the  ground
of  kinship,  affinity,  patronatus,  or  the  donor's  being  the  donee's  guardian.
It  appears  to  have  enacted  that,  as  between  personae  non  exceptae,  gifts
should  be  imperfect  and  revocable  in  whole  or  part  either  if  they  exceeded
a  certain  maximum,  the  amount  of  which  is  unknown,  or  unless  both
ownership  and  possession  of  the  thing  given  were  conveyed  in  the  ap-
propriate manner  (mancipatio  and  traditio),  Fragm.  Vat.  310-313.  Being
a  lex  imperfecta,  it  did  not  avoid  a  gift  which  failed  to  satisfy  both  of
these  conditions,  or  impose  a  penalty  on  the  donee :  but  the  introduc-
tion of  the  exceptio  legis  Cinciae  practically  enabled  donors  to  revoke
gifts  which  violated  the  statute  at  any  moment  prior  to  their  decease
('  morte  Cincia  removetur '  Fragm.  Vat.  259.  266).  If  one  may  argue  from
the  analogy  of  the  lex  Furia  testamentaria  (Tit.  22.  pr.  inf.),  the  maximum
fixed  by  the  lex  Cincia  was  one  which  two  hundred  years  afterwards
must  have  seemed  ridiculously  small :  it  is  not  improbable  that  after
some  while  observation  of  the  statutory  requirement  as  to  form  (con-


Tit.  7 J  DE  DONATIONIBUS.  239

cari  non  possunt.  perficiuntur  autem,  cum  donator  suam
voluntatem  scriptis  aut  sine  scriptis  manifestaverit :  et  ad
exemplum  venditionis  nostra  constitutio  eas  etiam  in  se
habere  necessitatem  traditionis  voluit,  ut^  et  si  non  tradantur,
habeant  plenissimum  et  perfectum  robur  et  traditionis  neces-
sitas  incumbat  donatori.  et  cum  retro  principum  dispositiones
insinuari  eas  actis  intervenientibus  volebant,  si  maiores  ducen-
torum  fuerant  solidorum,  nostra  constitutio  et  quantitatem
usque  ad  quingentos  solidos  ampliavit,  quam  stare  et  sine
insinuatione  statuit,  et  quasdam  donationes  invenit,  quae  pe-
nitus  insinuationem  fieri  minime  desiderant,  sed  in  se  plenis-
simam  habent  firmitatem.  alia  insuper  multa  ad  uberiorem
exitum  donationum  invenimus,  quae  omnia  ex  nostris  consti-
tutionibus,  quas  super  his  posuimus,  colligenda  sunt,  sciendum
tamen  est,  quod,  etsi  plenissimae  sint  donationes,  tamen  si
ingrati  existant  homines,  in  quos  beneiicium  coUatum  est,
donatoribus  per  nostram  constitutionem  licentiam  praestavi-
mus  certis  ex  causis  eas  revocare,  ne,  qui  suas  res  in  alios
contulerunt,  ab  his  quandam  patiantur  iniuriam  vel  iacturam,
secundum  enumeratos  in  nostra  constitutione  modos.     Est  et  3


veyance)  was  allowed  to  atone  for  violation  of  the  rule  as  to  amount,
so  that  the  latter  became  tacitly  repealed  by  disuse:  the  rareness  of
passages  referring  to  the  maximum  seems  to  require  some  such  hypothesis.

To  facilitate  proof,  it  appears  to  have  become  common  under  the
empire  to  register  gifts  apud  acta  (Fragm.  Vat.  266  a,  268).  Such  registra-
tion was  made  compulsory  for  all  gifts  exceeding  200  solid i  in  value,
except  those  to  personae  exceptae  lege  Cincia,  by  Constantius  Chlorus :  of
this  privilege  even  they  were  deprived  by  Constantine,  Cod.  Theod.  8.  12.
3.  5,  as  later  still  they  were  of  the  other  advantage  they  had  enjoyed  under
the  old  statute,  viz.  that  gifts  between  them  did  not  require  conveyance
for  their  perfection  (Cod.  Theod.  8.  12.  5),  which  was  allowed  to  survive
in  favour  only  of  parents  and  children.  Justinian,  as  he  says  here,  enacted
that  delivery  should  in  no  case  be  essential  for  the  perfection  of  the  gift,
and  relieved  gifb  of  more  than  200  but  not  exceeding  500  solidi  from  the
necessity  of  registration :  where  one  exceeding  that  amount  was  un-
registered, the  excess  could  not  be  claimed.  The  gifts  to  which  he  refers
as  not  requiring  registration  however  large  are  gifts  to  and  from  the
emperor,  those  forming  a  dos  so  far  as  they  can  be  construed  as  gifts  to
the  wife,  and  such  as  were  made  for  the  redemption  of  captives  and
the  rebuilding  of  houses  fallen  or  otherwise  destroyed,  Cod.  8.  54.  34 ;
5-  12.  31.

§  3.  The  donatio  ante  or  propter  nuptias  was  gradually  developed  out


240  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  IT.

aliud  genus  inter  vivos  donationum,  quod  veteribus  quidem
prudentibus  penitus  erat  incognitum,  postea  autem  a  iunioribus
divis  principibus  introductum  est,  quod  ante  nuptias  vocabatur
et  tacitam  in  se  condicionem  habebat^  ut  tunc  ratum  esset,
cum  matrimonium  fuerit  insecutum :  ideoque  ante  nuptias  ap-
pellabatur,  quod  ante  matrimonium  efficiebatur  et  nusquam
post  nuptias  celebratas  talis  donatio  procedebat.  sed  primus
quidem  divus  lustinus  pater  noster,  cum  augeri  dotes  et  post
nuptias  fuerat  permissum,  si  quid  tale  evenit,  etiam  ante
nuptias  donationem  augeri  et  constante  matrimonio  sua  con-
stitutione  permisit ;  sed  tamen  nomen  inconveniens  remanebat,
cum  ante  nuptias  quidem  vocabatur,  post  nuptias  autem  tale
accipiebat  incrementum.  sed  nos  plenissimo  fini  tradere  sanc-
tiones  cupientes  et  consequentia  nomina  rebus  esse  studentes
constituimus,  ut  tales  donationes  non  augeantur  tantum,  sed
et  constante  matrimonio  initium  accipiant  et  non  ante  nuptias,
sed  propter  nuptias  vocentur  et  dotibus  in  hoc  exaequentur,
ut,  quemadmodum  dotes  et  constante  matrimonio  non  solum
augentur,  sed  etiam  fiunt,  ita  et  istae  donationes,  quae  propter
nuptias  introductae  sunt,  non  solum  antecedant  matrimonium,
sed  etiam  eo  contracto  et  augeantur  et  constituantur,
4      Erat  olim  et  alius  modus  civilis  adquisitionis  per  ius  ad-

of  the  arrha  or  sponsalicia  largitas,  and  its  object,  like  that  of  the  dos,  was
to  support  the  expenses  of  the  joint  household  :  hence  the  extension
to  it  of  nearly  all  the  niles  relating  to  the  former,  and  the  name  avTi^€pva
(antidos)  given  to  it  in  Cod.  5. 3. 20. 2.  There  are  no  constitutions  bearing
upon  it  earlier  than  Theodosius  IT.  The  woman  had  a  legal  claim  against
the  husband's  paterfamilias  to  a  donatio  propter  nuptias.  Cod.  5.  11.  2,
and  by  Nov.  97.  i  and  2  Justinian  enacted  that  the  donatio  should  be
equivalent  in  amount  to  the  dos  which  the  wife  brought  with  her.  During
the  continuance  of  the  marriage  it  was  under  the  control  of  the  husband,
and  in  fact  belonged  to  him,  but  he  could  not  alienate  land  or  houses
comprised  in  it  even  with  the  consent  of  the  wife,  who  had  by  Justinian's
law  a  statutory  hypothec  over  all  his  property  to  secure  its  delivery
should  she  become  entitled.  In  case  of  her  death,  or  divorce  through
her  fault,  it  ceased  to  have  any  further  legal  existence  ;  if  the  marriage
terminated  through  the  husband's  death  or  divorce  occasioned  by  him,
she  had  no  claim  upon  it,  unless  there  was  issue,  save  by  express  agree-
ment ;  if  there  was  issue,  she  was  entitled  to  the  usufruct ;  the  dominium
she  shared  with  the  children.  If  the  husband  became  insolvent,  or  even
embarrassed,  she  could  demand  it  at  once,  Cod.  5.  12.  29.

§  4.  For  this  ius  adcrescendi  cf.  Ulpian,  Reg.  I.  18,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec  4.


Tit.  8.]        QUIBUS  ALIENARE  LICET  VEL  NON.  241

crescendiy  quod  est  tale :  si  communem  servum  habens  aliquis
cum  Titio  solus  libertatem  ei  imposuit  vel  vindicta  vel  testa-
mento,  eo  casu  pars  eius  amittebatur  et  socio  adcrescebat.
sed  cum  pessimo  fuerat  exempio  et  libertate  servum  defrau-
dari  et  ex  ea  humanioribus  quidem  dominis  damnum  inferri,
severioribus  autem  lucrum  adcrescere:  hoc  quasi  invidiae
plenum  pio  remedio  per  nostram  constitutionem  mederi  neces-
sarium  duximus  et  invenimus  viam,  per  quam  et  manumissor
et  socius  eius  et  qui  libertatem  accepit  nostro  fruantur  beneficio,
libertate  cum  efTectu  procedente  (cuius  favore  et  antiquos
legislatores  multa  et  contra  communes  regulas  statuisse  mani-
festissimum  est)  et  eo  qui  eam  imposuit  suae  liberalitatis  sta-
bilitate  gaudente  et  socio  indemni  conservato '  pretiumque
servi  secundum  partem  dominii,  quod  nos  definivimus,  acci*
piente.

VIIL

QUIBUS  ALIENARE  LICET  VEL  NON.

Accidit  aliquando,  ut  qui  dominus  sit  alienare  non  possit
et  contra,  qui  dominus  non  sit  alienandae  rei  potestatem
habeat.  nam  dotale  praedium  maritus  invita  muliere  per
legem  luliam   prohibetur  alienare,  quamvis  ipsius  sit  dotis

12. 1,  and  for  Justinian's  change  Cod.  7.  7.  With  '  cuius  favore  et  antiquos
legislatores,'  etc.  cf  Dig.  40.  5.  24.  10  'multa  contra  iuris  rigorem  pro
libertate  sunt  constituta,'  35. 2. 32.  5  '  favor  libertatis  . . .  saepe  beuigniores
sententias  exprimit.'    By  legislatores  seems  to  be  meant  the  jurists.

Tit.  Vlll.  For  the  anomalies  mentioned  here  cf.  Seneca,  Benef.  7.  12
*"  non  est  argumento,  ideo  aliquid  tuum  non  esse,  quia  vendere  non  potcs,'
Dig.  41. 1. 46  '  non  est  novum,  ut,  qui  dominium  non  habeat,  alii  dominium
praebeat,'  Cic  pro  Balbo  13  'fundamenta  firmissima  nostrae  libertatis,
sui  quemque  iuris  et  retinendi  et  dimittendi  esse  dominum,'  Tit.  i.  40
supr.  and  Dig.  5a  17.  54  'nemo  plus  iuris  in  alium  transferre  potest,
quam  ipse  haberet.'

The  lex  lulia  was  that  of  Augustus,  de  adulteriis,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  2.
21  b.  2.  In  the  time  of  Gains  (ii.  63)  it  had  been  doubted  whether  it
applied  to  praedia  provincialia.

Besides  the  cases  mentioned  in  the  text,  alienation  was  prohibited
(i)  of  res  litigiosa,  property  which  was  the  subject  of  a  real  action  or
iudicium  divisorium,  Nov.  112.  i  ;  (2)  of  immoveable  property  forming
part  of  a  donatio  propter  nuptias  or  belonging  to  religious  or  charitable
foundations ;  (3)  of  peculium  adventitium  without  the  consent  of  the
paterfamilias.    The  effect  of  an  alienation  forbidden  by  law  is  niL

R


242  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

causa  ei  datum,  quod  nos  legem  luliam  corrigentes  in
meliorem  statum  deduximus.  cum  enim  lex  in  soli  tantum-
modo  rebus  locum  habebat,  quae  Italicae  fuerant,  et  aliena*
tiones  inhibebat  quae  invita  muliere  iiebant,  hypothecas
autem  earum  etiam  volente :  utrisque  remedium  imposuimus,
ut  etiam  in  eas  res,  quae  in  provinciali  solo  positae  sunt,
interdicta  fiat  alienatio  vel  obligatio  et  neutrum  corum  neque
consentientibus  mulieribus  procedat,  ne  sexus  muliebris  fra-

1  gilitas  in  pemiciem  substantiac  earum  converteretur.  Contra
autem  creditor  pignus  ex  pactione,  quamvis  eius  ea  res  non
sit,  alienare  potest,  sed  hoc  forsitan  ideo  videtur  fieri,  quod
voluntate  debitoris  intellegitur  pignus  alienare,  qui  ab  initio
contractus  pactus  est,  ut  liceret  creditori  pignus  vendere,  si
pecunia  non  solvatur.  sed  ne  creditores  ius  suum  persequi
impedirentur  neque  debitores  temere  suarum  rerum  dominium
amittere  videantur,  nostra  constitutione  consultum  est  et  certus
modus  impositus  est,  per  quem  pignorum  distractio  possit
procedere,  cuius  tenore  utrique  parti  creditorum  et  debitorum

2  satis  abundeque  provisum  est.  Nunc  admonendi  sumus  ne-
que pupillum  neque  pupillam  ullam  rem  sine  tutoris  auctori-
tate  alienare  posse,  ideoque  si  mutuam  pecuniam  alicui  sine
tutoris  auctoritate  dederit,  non  contrahit  obligationem,  quia
pecuniam  non  facit  accipientis.  ideoque  vindicare  nummos
possunt,  sicubi  extent :  sed  si  nummi,  quos  mutuos  dedit,  ab
eo  qui  accepit  bona  fide  consumpti  sunt,  condici  possunt,  si
mala  fide,  ad  exhibendum  de  his  agi  potest,  at  ex  contrario
omnes  res  pupillo  et  pupillae  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  recte
dari  possunt.  ideoque  si  debitor  pupillo  solvat,  necessaria  est
tutoris  auctoritas:  alioquin  non  liberabitur.  sed  etiam  hoc
evidentissima  ratione  statutum  est  in  constitutione,  quam  ad
Caesareenses  advocatos  ex  suggestione  Triboniani  viri  eminen-
tissimi  quaestoris  sacri  palatii  nostri  promulgavimus,  qua
dispositum  est  ita  licere  tutori  vel  curatori  debitorem  pupil-

§  1.  For  the  power  of  sale  in  a  pignus  and  for  Justinian's  own  regula-
tions thereon  see  Excursus  II.  inf.  '  Ab  initio  contractus'  represents
'olim'  in  the  corresponding  passage  of  Gaius  (ii.  64),  who  seems  to  be
referring  to  the  time  when  a  ]>ower  of  sale  was  not  inherent  in  a  pignus :
see  Javolenus  in  Dig.  47.  2.  73.

§  2.  For  the  necessity  of  the  guardian's  auctoritas  in  certain  classes  of


Tit  9.]   PER  QUAS  PERSONAS  NOBIS  ADQUIRITUR,  243

larem  solvere,  ut  prius  sententia  iudicialis  sine  omni  damno
celebrata  hoc  permittat.  quo  subsecuto,  si  et  iudex  pronun-
tiaverit  et  debitor  solvent,  sequitur  huiusmodi  solutionem
plenissima  securitas.  sin  autem  aliter  quam  disposuimus
solutio  facta  fuerit  et  pecuniam  salvam  habeat  pupillus  aut  ex
ea  locupletior  sit  et  adhuc  eandem  summam  pecuniae  petat,
per  exceptionem  doli  mali  summoveri  poterit:  quodsi  aut
male  consumpserit  aut  furto  amiserit,  nihil  proderit  debitori
doll  mali  exceptio,  sed  nihilo  minus  damnabitur,  quia  temere
sine  tutoris  auctoritate  et  non  secundum  nostram  dispositionem
solvent  sed  ex  diverso  pupilli  vel  pupillae  solvere  sine  tutore
auctore  non  possunt,  quia  id  quod  solvunt  nan  fit  accipientis,
cum  scilicet  nuUius  rei  alienatio  eis  sine  tutoris  auctoritate
concessa  est.

IX.

PER  QUAS  PERSONAS   NOBIS  ADQUIRITUR.

Adquiritur  nobis  non  solum  per  nosmet  ipsos,  sed  etiam
per  eos  quos  in  potestate  habemus:  item  per  eos  servos,  in
quibus  usum  fructum  habemus :  item  per  homines  liberos  et
servos  alienos  quos  bona  fide  possidemus.  de  quibus  singulis
diligentius  dispiciamus.     Igitur  liberi  vestri  utriusque  sexus,  1

dispositions  see  on  Bk.  i.  21.  pr.  supr. :  for  condictio  v.  General  Index  :
for  the  actio  ad  exbibendum,  Bk.  iv.  6.  31  inf.  The  enactment  to  which
Justinian  refers,  requiring  a  judicial  order  before  payment  could  safely
be  made  to  a  guardian,  is  in  Cod.  5.  37.  25.

Tit.  IX.  The  problem  of  agency  in  the  acquisition  of  ownership  and
possession,  upon  which  there  is  a  good  deal  in  this  Title,  may  be  stated
thus: — Will  delivery  of  possession,  or  conveyance  of  ownership,  to  B,
acting  as  agent  for  A,  make  A  possessor  or  owner  without  more,  or  is  it
necessary  that  there  shall  be  a  second  conveyance  from  B  to  A  ?  This
question  the  old  law  answered  in  the  negative :  it  tolerated  only  one
necessary  exception.  Some  persons,  viz.  slaves,  filiifamilias,  and  those  in
manu  or  mancipio,  could  not  hold  property  owing  to  their  subjection  to
a  .<niperior :  if  ownership  or  possession  (as  to  the  latter  there  was  a  doubt
in  respect  of  those  in  manu  or  mancipio,  Gains  ii.  90)  was  transferred  to
them,  the  conveyance,  unless  it  was  to  be  nugatory,  must  enure  solely  to
the  benefit  of  the  superior  :  they  served  solely  as  conduit-pipes  through
whom  rights  passed  instantaneously  to  the  latter.  Gains  ii.  86-88.  Other
gradual  modifications  of  the  strict  <^d  rule  are  noticed  in  the  text  and
following  notes.

§§  1, 2.    The  first  inroad  upon  the  proprietary  incapacity  of  the  filius-

R  %


244  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

quos  in  potestate  habetis,  olim  quidem,  quidquid  ad  eos
pervenerat  (exceptis  videlicet  castrensibus  peculiis),  hoc  parcn-
tibus  suis  adquirebant  sine  uUa  distinctione:  et  hoc  ita
parentum  fiebat,  ut  esset  eis  licentia,  quod  per  unum  vel
unam  eorum  adquisitum  est,  alii  vel  extraneo  donare  vel
vendere  vel  quocumque  mode  voluerant  applicare.  quod
nobis  inhumanum  visum  est  et  general!  constitutione  emissa
et  liberis  pepercimus  et  patribus  debitum  reservavimus.  san-
citum  etenim  a  nobis  est,  ut,  si  quid  ex  re  patris  ei  obveniat,
hoc  secundum  antiquam  observationem  totum  parent!  adquirat
(quae  enim  invidia  est,  quod  ex  patris  occasione  profectum
est,  hoc  ad  eum  revert!  ?):  quod  autem  ex  alia  causa  sib!  filius
familias  adquisivit,  huius  usum  fructum  quidem  patri  adquiret,
dominium  autem  apud  eum  remaneat,  ne,  quod  ei  suis  labo-
ribus  vel  prospera  fortuna  accessit,  hoc  in  alium  perveniens
2  luctuosum  e!  procedat.  Hocque  a  nobis  dispositum  est  et  in
ea  specie,  ubi  parens  emancipando  liberum  ex  rebus  quae
adquisitionem  effugiunt  sibi  partem  tertiam  retinere  si  voluerat
licentiam  ex  anterioribus  constitutionibus  habebat  quasi  pro

familias  was  made  about  the  time  of  Augustus,  in  favour  of  the  military
profession,  it  being  enacted  that  of  whatever  a  sofi  in  power  acquired  as
soldier,  e.  g.  outfit,  pay,  booty,  gifts,  legacies,  etc.  from  comrades,  etc,  he
should  be  absolute  owner,  under  the  name  of  peculium  castrense,  with
full  powers  of  disposition  both  inter  vivos  and  by  will,  Dig.  49.  17.  11  :
<  filiifiamilias  in  castrensi  peculio  vice  patrumfamiliarum  funguntur,'  Dig.  14.
6.  2  :  cf.  Dig.  4.  4.  3.  10 :  49.  17.  15.  3  :  cf.  ii.  12.  pr.  inf. :  if  he  died
without  disposing  of  it  in  the  latter  way,  it  went  to  the  pater,  iure  com-
muni,  as  peculium.  No  further  changes  were  made  for  about  three
hundred  years  ;  but  under  Constantine  the  earnings  of  a  filiusfamilias  in
certain  offices  of  the  public  service  were  made  entirely  his  own  (peculium
quasi-castrense)  except  that  as  a  rule  he  could  not  dispose  of  them  by  will
(Tit  II.  6  inf.),  a  privilege  first  conferred  by  Justinian;  and  the  term
was  gradually  made  to  include  all  official,  public,  and  ecclesiastical
salaries,  fees  earned  by  advocates,  and  gifts  from  the  emperor.  Under
Justinian  the  succession  to  peculium  castrense  or  quasi-castrense,  if  the
owner  died  intestate,  was  governed  by  the  ordinary  rules  :  the  pater  could
succeed  only  as  heres,  not  iure  peculii,  and  was  postponed  to  certain
other  relations  of  the  deceased.  By  another  enactment  of  Constantine
bona  matema,  property  descending  to  a  child  in  power  from  his  or  her
mother,  were  in  future  to  belong  to  the  child,  the  pater,  however,  having
the  administration  and  usufruct  during  his  lifetime.  This,  which  is  com-
monly called  peculium  adventitium  (in  contradistinction  to  peculium
profectitium,  property  of  his  own  which  the  pater  allowed  the  child  to


Tit  9.]    PER  QUAS  PERSONAS  NOBIS  ADQUIRITUR.  245

pretio  quodammodo  emancipationis  et  inhumanum  quid  acci-
debat,  ut  filius  rerum  suarum  ex  hac  emancipatione  dominio
pro  parte  defraudetur  et,  quod  honoris  ei  ex  emancipatione
additum  est,  quod  sui  iuris  effectus  est,  hoc  per  rerum  deminu-
tionem  decrescat.  ideoque  statuimus,  ut  parens  pro  tertia
bonorum  parte  dominii,  quam  retinere  poterat,  dimidiam  non
dominii  rerum,  sed  usus  fructus  retineat:  ita  etenim  et  res
intactae  apud  filium  remanebunt  et  pater  ampliore  summ£^
fruetur  pro  tertia  dimidia  potiturus.  Item  vobis  adquiritur^  3
quod  servi  vestri  ex  traditione  nanciscuntur  sive  quid  stipu-
lentur  vel  ex  qualibet  ah'a  causa  adquirunt.  hoc  enim  vobis
et  ignorantibus  et  invitis  obvenit.  ipse  enim  servus  qui  in
potestate  alterius  est  nihil  suum  habere  potest,  sed  si  heres
institutus  sit,  non  alias  nisi  iussu  vestro  hereditatem  adire
potest :  et  si  iubentibus  vobis  adierit,  vobis  hereditas  adquiri-
tur,  perinde  ac  si  vos  ipsi  heredes  instituti  essetis,  et  con*
venienter  scilicet  l^atum  per  eos  vobis  adquiritur.  non  solum
autem  proprietas  per  eos  quos  in  potestate  habetis  adquiritur
vobis,  sed  etiam  possessio :  cuiuscumque  enim  rei  possessionem

enjoy  without  prejudicing  his  right  to  resume  it  at  any  moment)  was  ex-
tended by  the  emperors  between  Gratian  and  Honorius  so  as  to  include
all  bona  matemi  generis,  property  coming  to  the  child  from  the  mother  or
maternal  ancestors  by  any  title  whatever:  Theodosius  II  added  lucra
nuptialia  (dos  and  donatio  propter  nuptias),  and  reformed  the  rules  as  to
the  intestate  succession  to  peculium  adventitium  by  preferring  the  child's
own  issue  to  the  pater,  who  by  Leo  and  Anthemius  was  postponed  also
to  brothers  and  sisters.  Justinian,  as  he  says  in  §  i,  included  under
peculium  adventitium  (which  in  the  text  is  called  '  res  quae  adquisitionem
efTugiunt ')  all  that  the  child  acquired  otherwise  than  ex  re  patris  or  in  the
way  of  peculium  castrense  or  quasi-castrense  :  under  his  legislation  con-
sequently a  child  might  have  rights  over  property  of  three  kinds,  over  one
of  which  he  had  the  absolute  control ;  one  over  which  his  pater  had  a
usufruct,  while  he  was  its  dominus ;  and  lastly  peculium  profectitium,
property  of  the  pater  which  the  latter  could  resume  at  will,  and  of  which,
he  himself  had  only  the  use  and  enjoyment  If  he  were  emancipated,
the  £ither  originally  was  entitled  absolutely  to  one-third  of  the  peculium
adventitium,  'quasi  pro  pretio  emancipationis:'  the  change  which  Jus-
tinian made  in  this  matter  is  mentioned  in  §  2.

§  8.  For  the  institution  of  servus  alienus  as  heres  see  Tit.  14.  1,2,  Tit.
19.  4  inf. :  for  the  stipulations  of  slaves,  Bk.  iii.  17  inf. :  for  acquisition  of
possession  through  one's  own  slave,  p.  243  supr.  Possession  could  not  be
thus  acquired  unless  the  slave  was  himself  possessed  by  the  dominus,
Dig.  41.  I.  21.  pr.,  e.  g.  if  he  was  in  pledge,  Dig.  41.  2.  i.  15.


246  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  II.

adepti  fuerint,  id  vos  possidere  videmini.     unde  etiam  per  eos

4  usucapio  vel  longi  temporis  possessio  vobis  accedit.  De  his
autem  servis,  in  quibus  tantum  usum  fructum  habetis,  ita
placuit,  ut,  quidquid  ex  re  vestra  vel  ex  operibus  suis  adqui-
rant,  id  vobis  adiciatur,  quod  vero  extra  eas  causas  persecuti
sunt,  id  ad  dominum  proprietatis  pertineat.  itaque  si  is  servus
heres  institutus  sit  legatumve  quid  ei  aut  donatum  fuerit,  non
usufructuario,  sed  domino  proprietatis  adquiritur.  idem  placet
et  de  eo,  qui  a  vobis  bona  fide  possidetur,  sive  is  liber  sit  sive
alienus  servus :  quod  enim  placuit  de  usufructuario,  idem
placet  et  de  bonae  fidei  possessore,  itaque  quod  extra  duas
istas  causas  adquiritur,  id  vel  ad  ipsum  pertinet,  si  liber  est,
vel  ad  dominum,  si  servus  est.  sed  bonae  fidei  possessor  cum
usuceperit  servum,  quia  eo  modo  dominus  fit,  ex  omnibus  cau-
sis  per  eum  sibi  adquirere  potest :  fructuarius  vero  usucapere
non  potest,  primum  quia  non  possidet,  sed  habet  ius  utendi
fruendi,  deinde  quia  scit  servum  alienum  esse,  non  solum
autem  proprietas  per  eos  servos,  in  quibus  usum  fructum
habetis,  vel  quos  bona  fide  possidetis,  vel  per  liberam  personam,
quae  bona  fide  vobis  servit,  adquiritur  vobis,  sed  etiam  pos-
sessio: loquimur  autem  in  utriusque  persona  secundum
definitionem,  quam  proxime  exposuimus,  id  est  si  quam
possessionem  ex  re  vestra  vel  ex  operibus  suis  adepti  fuerint.

5  Ex  his  itaque  apparet  per  liberos  homines,  quos  neque  iuri

§  4.  A  free  man  bona  fide  possessed,  though  he  could  own,  could  not
possess,  for  the  latter  presupposes  a  condition  in  which  free  actions  are
possible,  Savigny,  Poss.  §  9.

In  Gaius  (ii.  94)  it  is  stated  as  a  question  whether  one  can  acquire
possession  through  a  slave  in  whom  one  has  a  usufruct ;  but  it  had  been
settled  in  the  affirmative  by  the  time  of  Papinian,  on  the  ground  that
though  one  does  not  possess  him,  one  does  not  possess  a  filiusfiunilias
either,  Paulus  in  Dig.  41.  2.  i.  8:  presumably  the  doubt  expressed  in
Gaius  ii.  90  was  settled  in  the  same  manner.  But  the  limits  within  which
he  could  acquire  possession  for  the  person  who  had  the  usufruct  are
fixed,  precisely  as  they  are  here,  by  Papinian  in  Dig.  41.  2.  49.  pr.,  who
explains  Gaius*  difficulty  by  remarking  that  the  usufructuary  at  any  rate
has  detention  of  the  slave,  and  detention  '  borrows  much  from  the  law.'

§  5.  A  person  who  was  not  in  our  potestas,  manus,  or  mancipium,
or  bona  fide  possessed  by,  or  a  slave  in  usufruct  to,  us,  was  called
an  extranea  persona :  and  the  earlier  Roman  law,  so  far  from  al.owing
a  man  to  acquire  ownership  through  such  an  outsider  to  him,  would  not


Tit.  9.]  PER  QUAS  PERSONAS  NOBIS  ADQUIRITUR.  247

vestro  subiectos  habetis  neque  bona  fide  possidetis,  item  per
alienos  servos,  in  quibus  neque  usum  fructum  habetis  neque
iustam  possessionem,  nulla  ex  causa  vobis  adquiri  posse,  et
hoc  est  quod  dicitur,  per  extraneam  personam  nihil  adquiri
posse :  excepto  eo,  quod  per  liberam  personam  veluti  per
procuratorem  placet  non  solum  scientibus,  sed  etiam  igno-
rantibus  vobis  adquiri  possessionem  secundum  divi  Severi
constitutionem  et  per  hanc  possessionem  etiam  dominium,  si
dominus  fuit  qui  tradidit,  vcl  usucapionem  aut  longi  temporis
praescriptionem,  si  dominus  non  sit.     '

Hactenus    tantisper  admonuisse  sufRciat,   quemadmodum  6
singulac   res  adquiruntur:   nam  legatorum   ius,  quo  et  ipso

hear  of  his  so  acquiring  even  possession,  the  old  maxim  being  '  per  ex-
traneam personam  nihil  adquiri  potest.'  Such  extraneae  personae  had
always  been  able  to  retain  for  a  man  a  possession  which  he  had  validly
got  for  himself:  and  it  would  seem  that  soon  after  the  establishment  of
the  empire  (Dig.  41.  2.  51)  it  was  attempted  by  an  extension  of  the
principle  to  break  down  the  old  rule  as  to  the  original  acquisition  of
possession,  and  thus  to  get  over  the  necessity  of  a  double  tradiiio.  Labeo
seems  by  implication  (Dig.  loc.  cit.)  to  have  favoured  the  proposed  inno-
vation, which  was  also  approved  by  Javolenus.  Neratius,  writing  under
Trajan,  says  *  per  procuratorem  possessionem  adipisci  nos  iamfere  con-
venir  Dig.  41.  3.  41 :  Gains  (ii.  95)  refers  to  the  controversy  as  still
unsettled  :  but  Paulus  (Sent.  Rec.  5.  2.  2),  Ulpian  (Dig.  41.  I.  20.  2),  and
Modestinus  (ib.  53),  assert  the  new  doctrine  as  though  in  their  day  it  was
completely  and  universally  recognised.  Thus  the  constitution  of  Severus
(Cod.  7.  32.  i)  alluded  to  in  the  text  did  not  make  new  law,  but  was  merely
a  statutory  confirmation  of  a  principle  already  sufficiently  established  by
juristic  consensus,  as  indeed  its  terms  themselves  allow.  Its  importance
was  that,  in  respect  of  all  objects  in  which  ownership  could  be  transferred
by  mere  traditio,  even  ownership  could  be  acquired  for  one  by  an  extranea
persona :  '  ea  quae  civi liter  adquiruntur  per  eos,  qui  in  potestate  nostra
sunty  adquirimus,  veluti  stipulationem  (mancipationem  ?) ;  quod  natura-
liter  adquiritur,  sicuti  est  possessio,  per  quemlibet  volentibus  nobis  pos-
sidere  adquirimus'  (Modestinus  in  Dig.  41.  i.  53):  ^placet  per  liberam
personam  omnium  rerum  possessionem  quaeri  posse  et  per  hanc  domi-
nium,' Ulpian  in  Dig.  41.  i.  20.  2.  When,  as  under  Justinian,  traditio
was  the  universal  mode  of  transferring  dominium  in  res  corporales,
delivery  of  possession  to  one*s  agent,  if  the  transferor  was  owner,  was
delivery  of  ownership  to  oneself :  if  he  was  not,  all  that  one  got  was  pos-
session, which,  however,  usucapio  could  convert  into  ownership :  but
usucapio  did  not  begin  to  run  until  the  acquisition  of  possession  by  the
agent  was  made  known  to  the  principal,  Cod.  7.  32.  i.

§  6.  Justinian  now  proceeds  to  discuss  universal  successions,  or  the


248  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  11.

singulae  res  vobis  adquiruntur,  item  fideicommtssorum,  ubi
singulae  res  vobis  re]inquuntur,opportunius  inferiori  loco  refere-
mus.  videamus  itaque  nunc,  quibus  modis  per  untversitatem
res  vobis  adquiruntur.  si  cui  ergo  heredes  fact!  sitis  sive  cuius
bonorum  possessionem  petieritis  vel  si  quern  adrc^veritis  vel
si  cuius  bona  libertatum  conservandarum  causa  vobis  addicta
fuerint,  eius  res  omnes  ad  vos  transeunt  ac  prius  de  here-
ditatibus  dispiciamus.  quarum  duplex  condicio  est :  nam  vel
ex  testamento  vel  ab  intestato  ad  vos  pertinent,    et  prius  est,

modes  in  which  a  man's  entire  proprietary  relations — his  property  and
his  rights  and  liabilities,  so  far  as  they  are  not  purely  personal — pass
uno  ictu  to  another,  or  others  viewed  collectively.  Four  such  modes
are  here  enumerated,  but  far  the  most  important  of  them  are  hereditas
and  bonorum  possessio,  which  are  treated  together  and  practically  form
a  single  institution.  Their  problem  is  this: — When  a  man  dies,  what
becomes  of  his  property,  and  who,  if  any  one,  becomes  answerable  for
his  liabilities  ?

According  to  the  Roman  view,  as  soon  as  a  man  died  his  proprietary
relations  assumed  a  separate,  independent,  and  collective  existence :  his
universitas  iuris  became  specifically  an  hereditas,  belonging,  in  many
cases,  as  yet  to  no  one,  and  as  it  were  perpetuating  the  existence  of  the
deceased  :  '  res  hereditariae,  antequam  aliquis  heres  existat,  nuUius  in
bonis  sunt '  Dig.  i.  8.  i.  pr.  It  became,  in  fact,  a  juristic  person,  as  capable,
in  many  respects,  of  acquiring  rights  and  incurring  liabilities  as  a  natural
person :  '  hereditas  non  heredis  personam  sed  defuncti  sustinet,  ut  multis
argumentis  iuris  civilis  comprobatum  est'  Dig.  41.  i.  34:  'mortuo  reo
promittendi  et  ante  aditam  hereditatem  fideiussor  acdpi  i)otest,  quia
hereditas  personae  vice  fungitur,  sicuti  municipium  et  decuria  et  societas '
Dig.  46.  I.  22.

There  is  no  precise  resemblance  between  the  Roman  heres  and  the
English  heir.  The  latter  is  the  person  who  succeeds  to  such  real  property
of  a  deceased  person  as  he  has  not  disposed  of  by  will :  the  former  was
the  person  who  succeeded  to  the  universitas  iuris  of  a  deceased,  whether
under  a  will  or  an  intestacy :  and  succeeding  as  he  did  to  the  universitas
iuris,  there  was  necessarily  no  more  distinction  between  realty  and  per-
sonalty than  between  rights  and  liabilities.

Until  the  hereditas  had  vested  in  an  heir  or  heirs,  and  so  lost  its  inde-
pendent existence,  it  remained  a  persona  under  the  name  of  hereditas
iacens.  In  the  heir  or  heirs,  taken  collectively,  it  can  vest  only  as  a
whole  :  until  it  has  so  vested,  the  rights  and  liabilities  of  which  it  consists
are  inseparable.  Where  there  is  no  will,  this  is  not  difficult  to  realise
even  to  a  mind  habituated  to  the  English  distinction  between  realty  and
personalty  :  but  even  where  there  was  a  will,  the  testator  could  not  begin
by  saying  '  I  bequeath  so  and  so  to  A  : '  he  must  first  give  it  to  the  heir
or  heirs,  as  a  part  of  the  aggregate  universitas,  and  charge  them  to  give


Tit.  9.]   PER  QUAS  PERSONAS  NOBIS  ADQUIRITUR.  249

ut  dc  his  dispiciamus,  quae  vobis  ex  testamento  obveniunt
qua  in  re  necessarium  est  initio  de  ordinandis  testamentis
exponere.


it  to  the  intended  legatee.  Universality  of  successfon  is  thus  the  prime
characteristic  of  the  Roman  law  of  inheritance  :  'nihil  est  aliud  hereditas,
quam  successio  in  universum  ius,  quod  defunctus  habuit'  Dig.  50. 16. 24.

The  answer  to  the  question,  to  whom  the  hereditas  belongs,  or  who
is  entitled  to  become  heres,  depends  upon  the  further  question,  whether
the  deceased  has  left  behind  him  a  valid  testament.  There  is  reason
to  believe  that  at  one  time  wills  were  unknown  in  Roman  law:  that
when  a  man  died,  his  universitas  iuris  devolved  on  a  person  or  persons
by  rules  rigidly  prescribed  by  law,  which  he  had  no  power  to  alter  or
override.  But  the  testamentary  power,  when  once  admitted,  was  very
generally  exercised :  which  will  perhaps  account  for  its  being  treated  first
by  both  Gains  and  Justinian.  The  two  modes  of  succession  are  mutually
exclusive.  If  a  man  made  a  will,  all  his  property  (unless  he  were
a  soldier)  must  perforce  go  to  the  heir  or  heirs  therein  instituted,  even
though  expressly  instituted  to  certain  portions  of  it  only :  there  was
nothing  left  for  the  rules  of  intestate  succession  to  operate  on,  or  to  go
to  the  person  or  persons  who  would  have  succeeded  him  had  he  died
intestate:  'neque  enim  idem  ex  parte  testatus  et  ex  parte  intestatus
decedere  potest,  nisi  sit  miles*  (Tit.  14.  5  inf. :  cf.  Cicero,  de  Invent.  2. 21).

Two  other  technical  terms  require  a  brief  explanation.  In  some  cases
the  law  cast  the  inheritance  upon  a  person  or  persons  whether  they
wished  it  or  not.  Tit.  19.  i  and  2  inf. :  immediately  upon  a  man's  decease
they  became  heirs  if  so  facto,  and  could  in  no  way  at  law  disencumber
themselves  of  the  legal  rights  and  duties,  taken  in  the  aggregate,  which
that  character  imposed  upon  them.  But  in  other  cases  (Tit.  19.  5  inf.)  no
one  became  heres  immediately,  though  some  one  (or  more)  was  entitled
to  become  so  if  he  pleased :  here,  as  soon  as  it  was  known  who  was  the
person  so  entitled,  the  hereditas  was  said  to  be  'delata'  to  him  :  delatio
is  the  right  actually  to  become  heir:  'delata  hereditas  intellegitur,  quam
quis  possit  adeundo  consequi*  Dig.  50.  16.  151.  If,  after  consideration,
he  decides  that  the  inheritance  is  worth  taking,  delatio  is  followed  by
aditio  (Tit.  19.  5  and  7  inf.),  actual  acceptance  of  the  succession.  First
comes  the  death  ;  then  delatio ;  and  finally,  after  a  greater  or  less  interval,
aditia  But,  whether  the  law  makes  one  heir  nolens  volens,  or  whether
one  deliberately  accepts  the  inheritance  after  fully  weighing  its  advan-
tages and  disadvantages,  one  cannot  get  rid  of  the  character  of  heres,
with  all  its  liabilities,  when  one  has  once  been  invested  with  it :  '  semel
heres,  semper  heres.'  How  far  this  principle,  as  well  as  the  other  already
cited  supr.  from  Tit  14.  5,  had  been  modified  at  the  end  of  Justinian's
legislative  w^ork  will  appear  from  the  following  Titles.


250  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

X.

DE  TESTAMENTIS  ORDINANDIS.

Testamentum  ex  eo  appellatur,  quod  testatio  mentis  est.

1  Sed  ut  nihil  antiquitatis  penitus  ignoretur,  sciendum  est
olim  quidem  duo  genera  testamentorum  in  usu  fuisse,  quorum
altero  in  pace  et  in  otio  utebantur,  quod  calatis  comitiis
appellabatur,  altero,  cum  in  proelium  exituri  essent,  quod
procinctum  dicebatur.  accessit  deinde  tertium  genus  testa-
mentorum, quod  dicebatur  per  aes  et  libram,  scilicet  quia  per
emancipationem>  id  est  imaginariam  quandam  venditionem,
agebatur  quinque  testibus  et  libripende  civibus  Romanis
puberibus  praesentibus  et  eo  qui  familiae  emptor  dicebatur.
sed  ilia  quidem  priora  duo  genera  testamentorum  ex  veteribus
temporibus  in  desuetudinem  abierunt :  quod  vero  per  aes  et
libram  fiebat,  licet  diutius  permansit,  attamen  partim  et  hoc

2  in  usu  esse  desiit.  Sed  praedicta  quidem^nomina  testamen-
torum ad  ius  civile  referebantur.  postea  vero  ex  edicto  prae  -
tons  alia  forma  faciendorum  testamentorum  introducta  est :

Tit.  X.  1.  The  two  earliest  forms  of  wills  were  in  reality  legislative
acts  of  the  whole  populus,  either  peaceably  assembled  in  the  comitia
at  Rome,  or  when  starting  for  a  campaign  in  the  field :  Serv.  ad  Verg.
Aen.  vii.  6i2  ;  Velleius  Paterc.  2.  5  ;  Plutarch,  Coriol.  9 :  for  the  evidence
hereby  afforded  that  intestate  was  older  than  testamentary  succession  see
Maine,  Ancient  Law,  pp.  199,  200.  The  proceedings  were  of  course
entirely  oral.  The  will  made  per  aes  et  libram  was  perhaps  due  in
origin  to  the  plebeians,  who  had  no  locus  standi  in  the  comitia  calata,
though  it  must  have  been  largely  used  by  the  patricians,  owing  to  the
length  of  the  intervals  at  which  wills  could  be  made  in  the  comitia,  'quae
bis  in  anno  testamentis  faciendis  destinata  erant'  Gains  ii.  loi.  When
writing  came  into  general  use,  so  that  the  proceedings  need  no  longer  be
entirely  oral,  it  underwent  important  changes,  which  are  noticed  by
Gains  ii.  103-108,  and  alluded  to  here  by  Justinian  (partim  in  usu  esse
desiit),  in  particular  acquiring  the  property  of  secrecy.  The  will  in  pro-
cinctu  which  was  common  a  few  years  before  the  conquest  of  Numantia,
Velleius  Paterc.  2.  5,  was  obsolete  in  the  time  of  Cicero,  de  Nat.  Deor.  2, 3.
Even  though  at  first  it  was  of  the  character  described  at  the  com-
mencement of  this  note,  in  later  times  it  seems  to  have  been  merely
a  declaration  made  by  a  soldier  to  some  of  his  comrades  immediately
before  a  battle:  Mn  procinctu  factum  testamentum  dicitur,  quod  miles
pugnaturus  nuncupat  praesentibus  commilitonibus,'  Festus:  cf.  Plut.  Cor.  9.

§  2.  The  praetorian  will,  as  it  is  usually  called,  was  really  no  will  at  all :


Tit.  lo.]  DE  TESTAMENTIS  ORDINANDIS,  251

iure   cnim   honorario   nulla    emancipatio   desiderabatur,   sed
septem  testium  signa  sufficiebant,  cum  iure  civili  signa  testium
non  erant  necessaria.     Sed  cum  paulatim  tam  ex  usu  homi-  3
num  quam  ex  constitutionum  emendationibus  coepit  in  unam

for  a  will  is  a  disposition  of  the  civil  law,  bestowing  the  hereditas,  and
the  person  taking  under  it  is  heres.  It  grew  out  of  the  irksomeness  of  the
formalities  required  in  the  will  per  aes  et  libram,  and  of  the  grave  injustice
which  must  frequently  have  resulted  from  the  avoidance  of  wills  through
trivial  defects  of  form,  which  eventually  induced  the  praetors  to  uphold
incomplete  mancipatory  testaments.  Regarding  form  as  of  value  only
so  far  as  it  secured  evidence,  all  that  they  required  was  that  the  written
tabulae  of  the  will  should  be  attested  by  the  seals  of  seven  competent
witnesses :  (Justinian's  remark  that  sealing  had  not  been  necessary  by
the  civil  law  seems  contradicted  by  Cicero  (in  Verr.  2.  i.  45),  who  says
that  the  edict  required  *  tabulas  testamenti  obsignatas  non  minus  multis
signis  quam  e  lege  oportet ').  How  far,  and  in  what  sense,  such  dis-
positions were  upheld  is  deserving  of  careful  notice,  for  nothing  affords
a  more  instructive  or  characteristic  illustration  of  the  mode  in  which
the  praetorian  law  modified  and  supplemented  the  old  ius  civile.  By  the
latter,  such  an  instrument  as  a  mere  written  document,  no  matter  by  how
many  witnesses  attested,  had  absolutely  no  validity  whatever  for  the  pur-
pose intended.  Nor  had  the  praetor  authority  to  enact  that  it  should  avail
to  pass  the  hereditas,  or  that  the  person  named  in  it  as  heir  should  be
heir :  '  quos  autem  praetor  vocat  ad  hereditatem,  hi  heredes  ipso  quidem
iure  non  fiunt:  nam  praetor  heredes  facere  non  potest'  Gains  iii.  32,
Tit.  9.  2  inf.,  Ulpian,  Reg.  28.  12.  What  he  could,  and  did,  do  was  to
say  that  if  the  person  named  as  heir  in  the  informal  will  applied  to  him,
he  would  award  him  the  bonorum  possessio  (i.e.  bonitarian  ownership,
Gaius  iii.  80)  on  condition  of  his  executing  the  directions  therein  con-
tained, and  would  protect  him  in  that  possession  by  special  remedies
until  usucapio  had  converted  it  into  ownership :  the  bonorum  possessor
*loco  heredis  constituitur'  Gaius,  loc.  cit. :  he  is  *  velut  heres  *  Dig.  5.  5.  i.
Gaius  tells  us  (ii.  119)  that  the  praetor  would  not  uphold  such  a  will  in
favour  of  an  extraneous  person  instituted  therein  if  any  one  entitled  ab
intestato  'legitimo  iure*  insisted  on  his  strict  legal  rights.  His  illustra-
tions of  such  persons  are  all  agnates ;  and  the  question  arises,  what  if  a
suus  heres  of  the  testator  put  forward  such  a  claim  ?  If  he  were  not  dis-
inherited nominatim  in  the  will,  it  is  obvious  that  the  praetor  would  hold
it  void :  if  he  were,  it  would  seem  that  he  would  uphold  the  will  against
him  in  any  case.  But  by  a  rescript  of  M.  Aurelius  (Gaius  ii.  120)  the
instituted  heir  was  enabled  to  repel  the  claim  of  the  agnate  by  pleading
cxceptio  doli,  and  the  praetorian  will  thus  became  impregnable.  The
gradual  development  of  bonorum  possessio  into  a  supplementary  scheme
of  succession  by  the  side  of  the  hereditas  is  sketched  in  an  Excursus  at
the  end  of  Bk.  iii.

§  8.  This  is  usually  called  testamentum  tripertitum.    Theodosius  II


252  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

consonantiam  ius  civile  et  praetorium  iungi,  constitutum  est,
ut  uno  eodemque  tempore,  quod  ius  civile  quodammodo
exigebat,  septem  testibus  adhibitis  et  subscriptione  testium,
quod  ex  constitutionibus  inventum  est,  et  ex  edicto  praetoris
signacula  testamentis  imponerentur :  ut  hoc  ius  tripertitum
esse  videatur,  ut  testes  quidem  et  eonim  praesentia  uno  con-
textu  testament!  celebrandi  gratia  a  iure  civili  descendant,
subscriptiones  autem  testatoris  et  testium  ex  sacrarum  con-
stitutionum   observatione   adhibeantur,  signacula    autem    et

4  numerus  testium  ex  edicto  praetoris.  Sed  his  omnibus  ex
nostra  constitutione  propter  testamentorum  sinceritatem,  ut
nulla  fraus  adhibeatur,  hoc  additum  est,  ut  per  manum  testa-
toris vel  testium  nomen  heredis  exprimatur  et  omnia  secundum
illius  constitutionis  tenorem  procedant.

6  Possunt  autem  testes  omnes  et  uno  anulo  sig^are  testamen-
tum  (quid  enim,  si  septem  anuH  una  sculptura  fuerint?)  se-
cundum quod  Pomponio  visum  est.     sed  et   alieno  quoque

6  anulo  licet  signare.  Testes  autem  adhiberi  possunt  ii,  cum
quibus  testamenti  factio  est.  sed  neque  mulier  neque  impubes
neque  servus  neque  mutus  neque  surdus  neque  furiosus  nee

(Cod.  6.  23.  21)  first  required  that  the  witnesses  should  subscribe  as  well
as  seal  the  will :  the  adscriptio  or  adnotatio  mentioned  in  Dig.  28.  i.  22.
4,  ib.  30,  refers  to  the  practice  of  tlie  witnesses  writing  their  names  under
or  near  the  seal  by  which  the  will  was  fastened  in  order  to  facilitate  their
attendance  when  it  was  opened :  Dig.  29.  3.  4-7 ;  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  4.  6.  I.
The  same  emperor  required  that  the  testator  must  either  sign  the  docu-
ment, or  have  it  signed  for  him  by  an  eighth  witness  if  unable  to  write
himself.  If,  however,  the  whole  will  was  expressly  stated  upon  its  face  to
be  written  by  his  own  hand,  his  signature  was  unnecessary  (testamentum
holograph um,  Cod.  6.  23.  28.  6).

§  4.  Justinian  subsequently  repealed  this  rule,  which  is  found  in  Cod.
6.  23.  29,  by  Nov.  1 19.  9.  A  SC.  Libonianum  of  the  time  of  Tiberius  had
enacted  that  if  one  man  wrote  out  a  will  for  another,  any  disposition
which  it  contained  in  his  own  favour  should  be  void :  later  an  edictum  of
Claudius  subjected  the  writer  to  the  penalties  of  the  lex  Cornelia  de
falsis,  Bk.  iv.  18.  7  inf.

§  6.  Capacity  was  required  in  a  witness  only  at  the  time  of  the  execu-
tion of  the  will.  Testamenti  factio  means  capacity  (a)  to  make  a  wiU,
{b)  to  take  under  a  will  either  as  heir  or  legatee,  {c)  as  here,  to  witness
a  will ;  the  common  element  seems  to  be  the  presence  of  commerciuro,
for  slaves  could  be  instituted  or  made  legatees  in  virtue  of  the  com-
mercium  of  their  master :  01  oiVcrm  asrpoa-omoi  6yr€s  tK  t&p  npoc^nt^p  rfiv


Tit.  loj  DE  TESTAMENTIS  ORDINANDIS.  253

cui  bonis  interdictum  est  nee  is,  quern  leges  iubent  improbum
intestabilemque  esse,  possunt  in  numero  testium  adhiberi.
Sed  cum  aliquis  ex  testibus  testament!  quidem  faciendi  tern-  7
pore  liber  existimabatur,  postea  vero  servus  apparuit,  tam
divus  Hadrianus  Catonio  Vero  quam  postea  divi  Severus  et
Antoninus  rescripserunt  subvenire  se  ex  sua  liberalitate  testa-
mento,  ut  sic  habeatur,  atque  si  ut  oportet  factum  esset,  cum
eo  tempore,  quo  testamentum  signaretur,  omnium  consensu
hie  testis  liberorum  loco  fuerit  nee  quisquam  esset,  qui  ei
status  quaestionem  moveat.  Pater  nee  non  is,  qui  in  potes-  8
tate  eius  est,  item  duo  fratres,  qui  in  eiusdem  patris  potestate
sunt,  utrique  testes  in  unum  testamentum  fieri  possunt :  quia
nihil  nocet  ex  una  domo  plures  testes  alieno  negotio  adhiberi.
In  testibus  autem  non  debet  esse  qui  in  potestate  testatoris  9
est  sed  si  filius  familias  de  castrensi  peculio  post  missionem
faeiat  testamentum,  nee  pater  eius  reete  testis  adhibetur  nee
is  qui  in  potestate  eiusdem  patris  est :  reprobatum  est  enim


oUtitap  dttyvSray  xapaKnjpiCovrai  Theoph.  ad  iii.  1 7.  pr.  inf.  The  other
classes  of  persons  mentioned  in  this  and  the  following  sections  could
not  be  witnesses  on  other  grounds  than  want  of  commercium,  except  the
interdicted  prodigal,' cui  commercio  interdictum  est '  Ulpian,  Reg.  20.  13.
Improbi  et  intestabiles  include,  besides  the  case  mentioned  in  the  Twelve
Tables  ('  qui  se  sierit  testarier  libripensve  fuerit,  ni  testimonium  fariatur,
improbus  intestabilisque  esto ')  convicted  libellers  and  lampooners,  Dig.
28.  I.  18.  I ;  heretics,  Cod.  1.  5.  4  ;  and  apostates,  Cod.  i.  7.  4.  Persons
convicted  of  adultery  (Dig.  22.  5.  14),  and  perhaps  of  repetundae  (ib.  15.
pr. :  per  contra  Ulpian  in  Dig.  28.  i.  20.  5)  were  also  prohibited  from
being  witnesses.  Oral  testaments  only  (§  14  inf.)  could  be  witnessed  by
blind  persons.

§  7.  This  rescript  of  Hadrian  is  in  Cod.  6.  23.  i.  Probably  its  principle
might  be  extended  to  other  cases  of  incapacity,  on  the  analogy  of  Dig.  14.
6.  3.  pr.  (de  SC.  Macedoniano)  '  si  quis  patremfamilias  esse  credidit  non
vana  simpHcitate  deceptus  nee  iuris  ignorantia,  sed  quia  publice  pater-
familias plerisque  videbatur,  sic  agebat,  sic  contrahebat,  sic  muneribus
fungebatur,  cessabit  senatusconsultum.'

§  9.  In  the  mancipatory  form  of  will  no  witness  might  be  in  the  potestas
of  either  the  testator  or  familiae  emptor,  Gaius  it.  105.  The  incapacity
of  a  paterfamilias  or  any  one  in  his  power  to  witness  his  own  son's  will  of
castrense  peculium,  though  affirmed  by  Justinian  here  after  Gaius  (ii.  106),
is  denied  by  Ulpian  in  Dig.  28.  i.  20.  2  on  the  authority  of  Marcellus.
Probably  the  two  passages  relate  to  different  cases :  the  latter  to  a  will
made  by  the  son  as  soldier,  that  before  us  to  one  made  after  discharge.


254  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

10  in  ea  re  donjesticum  testimonium.  Sed  neque  heres  scriptus
neque  is  qui  in  potestate  eius  est  neque  pater  eius  qui  habet
eum  in  potestate  neque  fratres  qui  in  eiusdem  patris  potestate
sunt  testes  adhiberi  possunt,  quia  totum  hoc  negotium,  quod
agitur  testamenti  ordinandi  gratia,  creditur  hodie  inter  here-
dem  et  testatorem  agi.  licet  enim  totum  ius  tale  conturbatum
fuerat  et  veteres,  qui  familiae  emptorem  et  eos,  qui  per  potes-
tatem  ei  coadunati  fuerant,  testamentariis  tcstimoniis  repelle-
bant,  heredi  et  his,  qui  coniuncti  ei  per  potestatem  fuerant,
concedebant  testimonia  in  testamentis  praestare,  licet  hi,  qui
id  permittebant,  hoc  lure  minime  abuti  debere  eos  suadebant :
tamen  nos  eandem  observationem  corrigentes  et,  quod  ab  lUis
suasum  est,  in  legis  necessitatem  transferentes  ad  imitationem
pristini  familiae  emptoris  merito  nee  heredi,  qui  imaginem
vetustissimi  familiae  emptoris  optinet,  nee  aliis  personis,  quae
ei  ut  dictum  est  coniunctae  sunt,  licentiam  concedimus  sibi
quodammodo   testimonia   praestare:    ideoque  nee  eiusmodi

11  veterem  constitutionem  nostro  codici  inseri  permisimus.  Le-
gatariis  autem  et  fideicommissariis,  quia  non  iuris  successores
sunt,  et  aliis  personis  eis  coniunctis  testimonium  non  dene-
gamus,  immo  in  quadam  nostra  constitutione  et  hoc  specialiter
concessimus,  et  multo  magis  his  qui  in  eorum  potestate  sunt,
vel  qui  eos  habent  in  potestate,  huiusmodi  licentiam  damus.

12  Nihil  autem  interest,  testamentum  in  tabulis  an  in  chartis

13  membranisve  vel  in  alia  materia  fiat.  Sed  et  unum  testa-
mentum pluribus  codicibus  conficere  quis  potest,  secundum
optinentem  tamen  observationem  omnibus  factis.  quod  inter-
dum  et  necessarium  est,  si  quis  navigaturus  et  secum  ferre  et

§  10.  Though  by  strict  law  the  heir  and  persons  connected  with  him  by
the  tie  of  potestas  had  not  been  incompetent  to  witness  (*  testamentum
simul  obsignavi  cum  Clodio  . .  .  et  ilium  heredem  et  me  scripserat '  Cic
pro  Milone  i8 :  cf.  Posters  Gaius  p.  206*,  it  was  deemed  improper  for
them  to  do  so  (Gaius  ii.  108),  and  Ulpian  expressly  affirms  their  incom-
petence in  Dig.  28.  1. 20.  pr.  It  is  conjectured  that  this  last  passage  either
is  an  interpolation,  or  relates  only  to  praetorian  wills,  as  Justinian  in  this
section  speaks  as  if  he  had  made  a  complete  change  in  excluding  the
testimony  of  these  persons.

§  13.  Cf.  Suetonius,  Octav.  loi  '  testamentum  duobus  codicibus  scrip-
turn,'  and  ib.  Tiber.  76  '  testamentum  duplex,  eodem  exemplo.'  For  the
necessity  of  each  copy  being  formally  executed  see  Dig.  37. 11.  i.  7  *  si . . .


Tit.  II.]  DE  MILITARI  TESTAMENTO.  255

domi  relinquere  iudiciorum  suorum  contestationem  velit,  vel
propter  alias  innumerabiles  causas,  quae  humanis  necessitatibus
imminent.  Sed  haec  quidem  de  testamentis,  quae  in  scriptis  14
coniiciuntur.  si  quis  autem  voluerit  sine  scriptis  ordinare  iure
civili  testamentum,  septem  testibus  adhibitis  et  sua  voluntate
coram  eis  nuncupata  sciat  hoc  perfectissimum  testamentum
iure  civili  firmumque  constitutum.

XL

DE  MILITARI  TESTAMENTO.

Supra  dicta  diligens  observatio  in  ordinandis  testamentis
militibus  propter  nimiam  imperitiam  constitutionibus  principa-
libus  remissa  est.  nam  quamvis  hi  neque  legitimum  numerum
testium  adhibuerint  neque  aliam  testamentorum  sollemnitatem


unutn  fecerit  testator  quasi  testamentum,  aliud  quasi  exemplum  (i.e.  a
mere  copy,  without  observance  of  form)  si  extat  quod  exemplum  erat,
bonorum  possessio  peti  non  poterit'

§  14.  The  purely  oral  or  nuncupative  will  here  described  seems  to  have
originated  with  Theodosius  II :  Cod.  6.  23.  21.  4.  The  statement  in  Tit.
II.  I.  inf.,  that  even  civilians  could  make  a  will  without  writing  in  Trajan's
time,  can  only  refer  to  one  formally  executed  per  aes  et  libram.

Besides  the  private  forms  already  noticed,  a  will  might  be  'publice
confectum  '  either  (i)  by  being  oblatum  by  petition  to  the  emperor,  Cod.
6.  23.  19,  or  (2)  by  a  statement  of  its  contents,  usually  accompanied  by  a
copy,  being  made  to  a  judge,  who  entered  a  minute  thereof  in  the  official
acta,  Cod.  loc.  cit  18.

Tit.  XI.  The  exemption  of  soldiers  from  the  ordinary  requirements
of  testamentary  form  dates  from  the  time  of  Augustus :  Ulp.  Reg.  20.  10.
A  soldier's  will  (i)  if  written,  did  not  require  to  be  witnessed  at  all :  ofuiprv-
povt  .  .  .  Kvpova0(u  TCLS  diard^fis,  &air€p  iir\  tS>v  tp  rrapara^ci  wiirrdvrtAV
iffHaarOf  Nov.  Leonis  40,  though  §  i,  'convocatis  ad  hoc  hominibus,'
might  seem  to  imply  the  contrary :  (2)  if  oral,  and  declared  to  only  a
single  witness,  would  not  suffice  to  make  the  latter  heir  himself,  §1.  By
the  enactment  to  which  he  refers  (Cod.  6.  21.  17)  Justinian  allowed  the
exercise  of  this  privilege  by  a  soldier  only  while  he  was  in  camp  or
barracks  on  actual  service  (this  being  the  meaning  of  expeditio  in  the
text),  not  while  on  furlough :  and  a  will  so  executed  remained  in  force
only  one  year  after  his  discharge,  §  5  inf.,  and  even  lost  all  validity  if  the
discharge  was  *  with  ignominy.'

It  was  not  merely  in  respect  of  form  that  soldiers'  wills  were  privileged.
They  were  not  bound  by  the  rule  *nemo  pro  parte  testatus,  pro  parte
intestatus  decedere  potest'  Tit.  14.  5  inf.,  or  by  the  lex  Falcidia  and
similar  enactments  relating  to  fideicommissa :  they  need  not  formally


256  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

observavcrint,  recte  nihilo  minus  testantur,  videlicet  cum  in
expeditionibus  occupati  sunt :  quod  merito  nostra  constitutio
induxit.  quoquo  enim  modo  voluntas  eius  suprema  sive
scripta  inveniatur  sive  sine  scriptura,  valet  testamentum  ex
voluntate  eius.  illis  autem  temporibus,  per  quae  citra  expe-
ditionum  necessitatem  in  aliis  locis  vel  in  suis  sedibus  degunt,
minime  ad  vindicandum  tale  privil^ium  adiuvantur:  sed
testari  quidem  et  si  filii  familias  sunt  propter  militiam  con-
ceduntur,  iure  tamen  communi,  ea  observatione  et  in  eorum
testamentis  adhibenda,  quam  et  in  testamentis  paganorum
1  proxime  exposuimus.  Plane  de  militum  testamentis  divus
Traianus  Statilio  Severo  ita  rescripsit :  *  Id  privil^ium,  quod
mtlitantibus  datum  est,  ut  quoque  modo  facta  ab  his  testa-
menta  rata  sint,  sic  intellegi  debet,  ut  utique  prius  constare
debeat  testamentum  factum  esse,  quod  et  sine  scriptura  a  non
militantibus  quoque  fieri  potest,  is  ergo  miles,  de  cuius  bonis
apud  te  quaeritur,  si  convocatis  ad  hoc  hominibus,  ut  volun-
tatem  suam  testaretur,  ita  locutus  est,  ut  declararet,  quern
vellet  sibi  esse  heredem  et  cui  libertatem  tribuere,  potest
videri  sine  scripto  hoc  modo  esse  testatus  et  voluntas  eius  rata
habenda  est.  ceterum  si,  ut  plerumque  sermonibus  fieri  solet,
dixit  alicui :  '  ego  te  heredem  facio '  aut  '  tibi  bona  mea
relinquo,'  non  oportet  hoc  pro  testamento  observari.  nee
ullorum  magis  interest  quam  ipsorum,  quibus  id  privil^ium
datum  est,  eiusmodi  exemplum  non  admitti:  alioquin  non
diflficulter  post  mortem  alicuius  militis  testes  existerent,  qui
adfirmarent  se  audisse  dicentem  aliquem  relinquere  se  bona,


disinherit  their  children,  Tit.  13.  6  inf.,  nor  were  their  wills  avoided  by
their  undergoing  capitis  deminutio  (§  5  inf.,  Dig.  28.  3.  6.  6) :  they  could
institute  as  heirs  persons  who  could  not  inherit  from  an  ordinary  testator
(Gaius  ii.  1 10),  and  could  dispose  of  the  inheritance  by  codicils.  Dig.  29.
I.  36.  pr.

The  wills  of  certain  other  persons  besides  soldiers  were  privileged  in
the  matter  of  form.  By  an  enactment  of  Justinian  the  general  law  might
in  rural  districts  be  overridden  by  local  custom,  and  signature  by  the  wit-
nesses was  dispensed  with  if  it  was  difficult  to  find  seven  who  could  write,
and  even  ^\^  were  held  enough  if  more  could  not  be  got.  Cod.  6.  23.  31.
Where  a  man  disposed  of  his  property  solely  in  favour  of  his  own
descendants,  his  will,  if  written,  need  not  be  attested  ('testamentum
parentium  inter  liberos  *  Nov.  107.  1).


Tit  12.]      QUIBUS  NON  EST  PERMISSUM,  ETC  257

cui  visum  sit,  et  per  hoc  iudicia  vera  subvertantur/     Quin  2
immo  et  mutus  et  surdus  miles  testamentum  facere  possunt.
Sed  hactenus  hoc  illis  a  principalibus  constitutionibus  conce-  3
ditur,  quatenus  militant  et  in  castris  degunt :  post  missionem
vero  veterani  vel  extra  castra  si  faciant  adhuc  militantes  tes-
tamentum, communi  omnium  civium  Romanorum  iure  facere
debent    et  quod  in  castris  fecerint  testamentum  non  com-
muni  iure,  sed    quomodo  voluerint,  post    missionem   intra
annum  tantum  valebit.     quid  igitur,  si  intra  annum  quidem
decesserit,  condicio  autem  heredi  adscripta  post  annum  exti-
terit  ?    an  quasi  militis  testamentum  valeat  ?    et  placet  valere
quasi  militis.    Sed  et  si  quts  ante  militiam  non  iure  fecit  testa-  4
mentum  et  miles  factus  et  in  expeditione  d^ens  resignavit
illud  et  quaedam  adiecit  sive  detraxit  vel  alias  manifesta  est
militis  voluntas  hoc  valere  volentis,  dicendum  est  valere  testa-
mentum quasi  ex  nova  militis  voluntate.     Denique  et  si  in  5
adrogationem  datus  fuerit  miles  vel  filius  familias  emancipatus
est,  testamentum  eius  quasi  militis  ex  nova  voluntate  valet  nee
videtur  capitis  deminutione  irritum  fieri.

Sciendum  tamen  est,  quod  ad  exemplum  castrensis  peculii  6
tam  anteriores  leges  quam  principales  constitutiones  quibus-
dam  quasi  castrensia  dederunt  peculia,  quorum  quibusdam
permissum  erat  etiam  in  potestate  degentibus  testari.  quod
nostra  constitutio  latius  extendens  permisit  omnibus  in  his
tantummodo  peculiis  testari  quidem,  sed  iure  communi :  cuius
constitutionis  tenore  perspecto  licentia  est  nihil  eorum  quae
ad  praefatum  ius  pertinent  ignorare.


XII.

QUIBUS  NON  EST  PERMISSUM  TESTAMENTA  FACERE.

Non  tamen  omnibus  licet  facere  testamentum.  statim  enim
hi,  qui  alieno  iuri  subiecti  sunt,  testament!  faciendi  ius  non

§  2.  By  Cod.  6.  22.  10  all  deaf  or  dumb  people  who  could  speak
or  write  were  enabled  to  make  a  will.  Perhaps  the  text  means  that
a  soldier  who  was  deaf  or  dumb  might  do  so  even  by  signs :  for  analogies
c£  Dig.  29.  I.  15.  I ;  29.  7.  8.  4 ;  32.  21.  pr.

Tit^  XIT.  So  far  as  commercium  is  an  element  in  the  capacity  to  make

S


258  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,        [Lib.  IK

habent,  adeo  quidem  ut,  quamvis  parentes  eis  permiserint,
nihilo  magis  iure  testari  possint:  exceptis  his  quos  antea
enumeravimus  et  praecipue  militibus  qui  in  potestate  paren-
tum  sunt,  quibus  de  eo  quod  in  castris  adquisierint  permissum
est  ex  constitutionibus  principum  testamentum  facere.  quod
quidem  initio  tantuni  militantibus  datum  est  tarn  ex  auctori-
tate  divi  Augusti  quam  Nervae  nee  non  optimi  imperatoris
Traiani,  postea  vero  subscriptione  divi  Hadriani  etiam  dimissis
militia,  id  est  veteranis,  concessum  est.  itaque  si  quidem
fecerint  de  castrensi  peculio  testamentum,  pertinebit  hoc  ad
eum  quem  heredem  reliquerint :  si  vero  intestati  decesserint
nullis  liberis  vel  fratribus  superstitibus,  ad  parentes  eorum
iure  communi  pertinebit.  ex  hoc  intellegere  possumus,  quod
in  castris  adquisierit  miles,  qui  in  potestate  patris  est,  neque
ipsum  patrem  adimere  posse  neque  patris  creditores  id  vendere
vel  aliter  inquietare  neque  patre  mortuo  cum  fratribus  esse
commune,  sed  scilicet  proprium  eius  esse  id  quod  in  castris
adquisierit,  quamquam  iure  civili  omnium  qui  in  potestate
parentum  sunt  peculia  perinde  in  bonis  parentum  computan->
tur,  acsi  servorum  peculia  in  bonis  dominorum  numerantur;
exceptis  videlicet  his,  quae  ex  sacris  constitutionibus  et  prae-
cipue nostris  propter  diversas  causas  non  adquiruntur.  praeter
hos  igitur,  qui  castrense  peculium  vel  quasi  castrense  habcnt,
si  quis  alius  filius  familias  testamentum  fecerit,  inutile  est,  licet

a  valid  will  (testamenti  factio  activa)  it  was  (except  in  the  case  of  the
prodigus,  §  2  inf.)  required  to  exist  both  at  the  time  of  execution  and  at
that  of  the  testator's  decease.  If  at  any  moment  between  these  two
dates  he  lost  it,  the  will,  iure  civili.  became  void,  except  in  the  case  of
capture  in  war,  §  5  inf. :  and  a  will  invalidated  by  the  testator's  undergoing
capitis  deminutio  minima  might  be  upheld  by  the  praetor :  see  on  Tit.  17.
6  inf. :  cf.  Gaius  ii.  147,  Ulpian,  Reg.  23.  6:  Dig.  37.  11.  i.  8.

The  requirement  of  commercium  excluded  (i)  slaves,  though  a  servus
populi  Romani  might  make  a  will  of  half  his  peculium,  Ulpian,  Reg.  2a
16.  (2)  The  interdicted  prodigal,  §  2  inf.,  see  note  on  Tit.  10.  6  supr.  (3)
The  citizen  in  captivity,  §  5  inf.  (4)  Peregrini,  including  dediticii ;  if,
however,  an  alien  belonged  to  a  determinate  state,  he  could  make  a  valid
will  according  to  its  laws,  Ulpian,  Reg.  20.  14.  A  citisen  who  was  con-
victed on  a  capital  charge  either  became  a  slave,  or  underwent  capitis
deminutio  media,  whereby  he  became  a  peregrinus:  but  not  belonging
to  any  particular  state  he  could  not  make  a  will  of  any  kind,  Dig.  28.  i.
8.  6.    Latini  luniani  were  disqualified  by  the  lex  lunia  Norbana,  Gaius


i


Tit.  13.]     QUIBUS  NON  EST  PERMISSUM,  ETC  259

suae  potestatis  factus   decesserit.      Praeterea    testamentum  1
facere  non  possunt  impuberes,  quia   nullum   eorum    animi
iudicium  est:  item  furiosi,  quia  mente  carent.     nee  ad  rem
pertinet,  si  impubes  postea  pubes  factus  aut  furiosus  postea
compos  mentis  factus  fuerit  et  decesserit.     furiosi  autem  si
per  id  tempus  fecerint  testamentum,  quo  furor  eorum  inter-
missus  est,  iure  testati  esse  videntur,  certe  eo  quod  ante  furo-
rem  fecerint  testamento  valente  :  nam  neque  testamenta  recte
facta  neque  aliud  ullum  negotium  recte  gestum  postea  furor
interveniens   peremit.     Item  prodigus,   cui  bonorum  suorum  2
administratio  interdicta  est,  testamentum  facere  non  potest,
sed  id  quod  ante  fecerit,  quam  interdictio  ei  bonorum  fiat,
ratum  est.     Item  mutus  et  surdus  non  semper  facere  testa-  3
mentum  possunt.     utique  autem  de  eo  surdo  loquimur,  qui
omnino  non  exaudit,  non  qui  tarde  exaudit:  nam  et  mutus
is  intellegitur,  qui  eloqui  nihil  potest,  non  qui  tarde  loquitur,
saepe  autem  etiam  litterati  et  eruditi  homines  variis  casibus
et  audiendi  et  loquendi  facultatem  amittunt :  unde  nostra  con-
stitutio  etiam  his  subvenit,  ut  certis  casibus  et  modis  secundum
normam  eius  possint  testari  aliaque  facere  quae  eis  permissa
sunt,     sed  si  quis  post  testamentum  factum  valetudine  aut

i.  23,  Ulpian,  Reg.  30.  14 ;  see  p.  1 19  supr. :  for  the  testamentary  capacity
of  women  see  p.  151  supr.

A  will  of  castrense  pecuHum,  unless  executed  while  the  testator  was
on  actual  service,  was  not  exempted  from  any  of  the  ordinary  require-
ments of  form.  For  subscriptio  [Hadriani]  see  p.  106  supr.,  and  for
the  succession  to  peculium  castrense  on  intestacy  note  on  Bk.  iii.  i.
15  inf.  Of  peculium  adventitium  a  filiusfamilias  could  in  no  case  dis-
pose by  wiU,  even  with  bis  pater's  consent  (Dig.  28.  i.  6.  pr.) ;  nor  make
gifts  from  it  mortis  causa,  which,  however,  he  could  do  from  peculium
profectitium  with  his  father's  sanction.  Dig.  39.  5.  7.  4  ;  39.  6.  25.  i.

§  1.  The  reason  of  the  furiosus'  inability  to  make  a  will  (quia  mente
caret)  is,  perhaps,  an  allusion  to  the  definition  of  testamentum  as  testatio
mentis,  Tit.  10.  pr.  supr.  Whether  he  could  do  so  in  a  lucid  moment  had
at  one  time  been  disputed.  Cod.  6.  22.  9.

§  3.  Deaf  or  dumb  persons  had  been  altogether  unable  to  make  a  will
per  aes  et  libram,  the  former, '  quoniam  verba  familiae  emptoris  exaudire
non  potest,'  the  latter,  ^  quoniam  verba  nuncupationis  loqui  non  potest '
Ulpian,  Reg.  20.  13.  By  Cod.  6.  22. 10  Justinian  removed  the  incapacity,
save  from  those  who  were  deaf  and  dumb  from  birth  (except  perhaps
soldiers,  Tit.  11.  2.  supr.),  but  he  required  those  who  were  dumb  to  write
their  own  wills  throughout

S  2


26o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

quolibet  alio  casu  mutus  aut  surdus  esse  coeperit,  ratum  nihilo

4  minus  eius  remanet  testamentum.  Caecus  autem  non  potest
facere  testamentum  nisi  per  observationem,  quam  lex  divi

5  lustini  patris  mei  introduxit.  Eius,  qui  apud  hostes  est,  testa-
mentum quod  ibi  fecit  non  valet,  quamvis  redierit :  sed  quod
dum  in  civitate  fuerat  fecit,  sive  redierit,  valet  iure  postliminii,
sive  illic  decesserit,  valet  ex  l^e  Cornelia.

XIII.

DE  EXHEREDATIONE  LIBERORUM.

Non  tamen,  ut  omnimodo  valeat  testamentum,  sufficit  haec
observatio,  quam  supra  exposuimus.  sed  qui  filium  in  po-
testate  habet,  curare  debet,  ut  eum  heredem  instituat  vel
exheredem  nominatim  faciat:  alioquin  si  eum  silentio  prae-
terierit,  inutiliter  testabitur,  adeo  quidem  ut,  etsi  vivo  patre

§  4.  The  execution  of  a  blind  man's  will  required  the  presence  of
a  notary,  or,  if  one  could  not  be  procured,  of  an  additional  witness,  and
all  eight  had  to  sign  and  seal  the  testament.  Cod.  6.  22.  8.

§  6.  The  will  of  a  civis  who  was  taken  captive  by  the  enemy  was
avoided  by  his  capitis  deminutio  maxima  unless  rehabilitated  by  post-
liminium (note  on  Bk.  i.  12.  5  supr.) ;  if  he  died  apud  hostes  he  must
needs  die  intestate.  This  was  remedied  in  a  somewhat  curious  manner
by  the  lex  Cornelia  de  falsis  (circ.  B.C.  81,  Bk.  iv.  18. 7  inf.),  which  imposed
penalties  on  those  who  forged  wills  of  prisoners  who  died  in  captivity,
i.  e.  who  produced  a  forged  will  which  they  pretended  had  been  executed
by  the  deceased  prior  to  his  capture.  From  this  it  was  inferred  that,
had  such  a  will  been  actually  so  executed,  the  law  would  not  have  treated
it  as  void ;  it  could  not  have  stultified  itself  by  penalising  the  forgery  of
an  instrument  which,  ex  hypothesis  could  have  no  legal  effect  whatever
(fictio  legis  Comeliae) :  '  lege  Cornelia  testamenta  eorum,  qui  in  hostium
potestate  decesserunt,  perinde  confirmantur  ac  si  hi,  qui  ea  fecissent,
in  hostium  potestatem  non  pervenissent '  Dig.  28.  i.  12.  The  principle
of  the  fiction  was  subsequently  extended  to  all  rights  and  dispositions
whatever, '  in  omnibus  partibus  iuris  is,  qui  reversus  non  est  ab  hostibus,
quasi  tunc  decessisse  videtur,  cum  captus  esset '  Dig.  49.  15.  18.

Tit.  Zm.  Having  ascertained  who  can  make  wills  (Tit.  12)  and  in
what  necessary  form,  if  any,  they  must  be  expressed  (Tits.  10  and  11),
Justinian  proceeds  to  their  necessary  or  most  usual  contents,  viz.  exhere-
dations  (Tit.  13),  the  institution  of  the  heir  or  heirs  (Tit.  14),  and
substitutions  (Tits.  15  and  16).

The  practice  of  exheredation,  based  on  the  patria  potestas,  §  7,  is


Tit.  13.]        DE  EXHEREDATIONE  LIBERORUM.  261

filius  mortuus  sit,  nemo  ex  eo  testamento  heres  existere  pos-
sit,  quia  scilicet  ab  initio  non  constiterit  testamentum.  sed
non  ita  de  filiabus  vel  aliis  per  virilem  sexum  descendentibus
liberis  utriusque  sexus  fuerat  antiquitati  observatum :  sed  si
non  fuerant  hcredes  scripti  scriptaeve  vel  exheredati  exhere-
dataeve,  testamentum  quidem  non  infirmabatur,  ius  autem
adcrescendi  eis  ad  certam  portionem  praestabatur.  sed  nee
nominatkn  eas  personas  exheredare  parentibus  necesse  erat,
sed  licebat  et  inter  ceteros  hoc  facere.


peculiarly  Roman,  and  a  clear  survival  of  the  old  joint  ownership  of  pro-
perty by  family  groups,  Gaius  li.  157,  Dig.  28.  2.  11,  Tit.  19.  2  inf.  The
Roman  law  regarded  certain  of  a  man*s  relations  as  having  so  strong
a  claim  to  succeed  to  his  property,  that  it  required  him,  if  he  wished  effec-
tually to  exclude  them,  to  disinherit  them  in  his  will ;  not,  as  we  should,
by  simply  not  mentioning  them  at  all,  but  by  explicitly  stating  his  desire
that  they  should  not  be  his  heirs.  Merely  to  pass  them  over,  without
either  instituting  them  heirs  or  expressly  disinheriting  them,  did  not
exclude  them  at  all ;  it  simply  avoided  the  will,  either  in  whole,  or  in  part.
What  classes  of  relations  the  civil  and  the  praetorian  law  respectively
required  should  be  thus  disinherited,  the  forms  by  which  exheredation
was  effected,  and  the  final  changes  made  in  this  department  by  Justinian,
appear  in  this  Title.

Whether  a  will  was  void,  in  which  a  filiusfamilias  of  the  first  degree,
who  died  after  its  execution  in  the  testator^s  lifetime,  was  praeteritus  or
not  disinherited  in  proper  form,  had  been  a  question  between  the  two
schools  of  jurists.  The  Sabinians,  whose  opinion  Justinian  here  confirms,
pronounced  it  void  ab  initio ;  the  Proculians  held  that  it  was  void  only  if
the  son  in  question  outlived  the  testator,  Gaius  ii.  123.

Sui  in  the  first  degree,  i.e.  the  testator's  own  sons,  natural  or  adoptive,
if  in  his  power  at  the  time  of  the  execution  of  the  will  (see  Tit.  19.  2  inf.),
were  required  by  the  civil  law  to  be  either  instituted,  or  disinherited
nominatim,  in  the  form  given  in  this  section.  As  regards  all  sui  and
suae  except  sons,  the  civil  law  was  satisfied  if,  in  default  of  institution,
they  were  disinherited  by  a  general  clause  ('ceteri  exheredes  sunto'
Gaius  iL  128,  which,  if  Justinian  in  Cod.  6.  28.  42  is  to  be  believed,  would
originally  be  enough  for  sons  as  well).  The  civil  law  effect  of  preter-
mitting these  was  not  (as  in  the  case  of  a  son)  to  avoid  the  will,  but
merely  to  entitle  them  to  a  share  in  the  succession  varying  with  the
character  of  the  instituted  heir  or  heirs.  If  these  were  sui,  the  praeteriti
took  share  and  share  alike  with  them  (adcrescunt  in  virilem  portionem) ;
if  extranei  (Tit.  19.  3  inf.)  they  were  entitled  to  half  the  inheritance ;  for
illustrations  see  Gaius  ii.  124.  An  extraneus,  however,  who  was  instituted
heir  in  a  will  in  which  such  persons  were  praeteriti,  was  more  hardly
treated  by  the  praetor,  who  gave  the  praeteriti  bonorum  possessio  (contra


262  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

1  Nominatim  autem  exheredari  quis  videtur,  sive  ita  exhere-
detur  '  Titius  filius  meus  exheres  esto/  sive  ita  '  filius  meus
exheres  esto'  non  adiecto  proprio  nomine,  scilicet  si  alius
filius  non  extet  postumi  quoque  liberi  vei  heredes  institui
debent  vel  exheredari.  et  in  eo  par  omnium  condicio  est,
quod  et  in  filio  postumo  et  in  quolibet  ex  ceteris  liberis  sive
feminini  sexus  sive  masculini  praeterito  valet  quidem  testa-

tabulas)  of  the  whole,  '  qua  ratione  extranei  heredes  a  tota  hereditate
repelluntur'  Gaius  ii.  125  ;  but  a  rescript  of  M.  Aurelius  again  curtailed
the  rights  of  suae  praeteritae  by  enacting  that  they  should  in  no  case
take  more  by  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  than  they  would  have
taken  by  the  ius  adcrescendi  of  the  civil  law  (ib.  126) ;  the  effect  of  this
was  to  augment  the  rights  of  pretermitted  sui  not  in  the  first  degree  (e.  g.
grandsons).

The  praetor,  not  satisfied  with  the  civil  law  rules  of  exheredation  in
respect  of  persons  in  the  testator's  power,  required  all  sui— grandsons,
greatgrandsons,  etc.,  no  less  than  sons,  to  be  disinherited  nominatim,
promising  them  in  default  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  (Gaius
ii.  129);  according  to  which,  though  the  will  remained  formally  valid,
the  inheritance  was  divided  among  all  the  sui,  whether  instituted  or  not
disinherited  nominatim,  as  under  the  rules  of  intestacy.  Dig.  37.  4.  I.  I.
To  summarise  what  has  been  said — unless  instituted

(i)  Sui  filii  must  be  disinherited  nominatim;  else  the  will  is  void,  and
the  man  dies  intestate.

(2)  Other  sui  may  (a)  iure  civili  be  disinherited  inter  ceteros ;  in  default,
they  are  entitled  either  to  the  ius  adcrescendi  or  to  half  the  inheritance ;
(b)  iure  praetorio,  they  must  be  disinherited  nominatim;  in  default,  if
the  institutus  is  extraneus,  they  can  get  bonorum  possessio  of  the  whole ;
as  against  instituted  sui  they  are  entitled  to  have  the  bona  distributed
^  tanquam  intestatus  decessisset.*

(3)  Suae  of  whatever  grade  may  be  disinherited  by  a  general  clause :
in  default  {a)  iure  civili,  the  will  is  not  void,  but  they  are  entitled  to
the  ius  adcrescendi ;  (Jb)  iure  praetorio,  they  could  claim  bonorum  pos-
sessio of  the  whole  against  an  extraneus  heres  until  the  rescript  of
M.  Aurelius,  when  the  older  law  (by  which  they  got  half)  was  in  effect
restored.

§  L  Speaking  generally,  a  postumus  is  a  person  who  is  bom  after
the  making  of  a  will :  postumi  sui  are  those  persons  who  come  under  the
immediate  (Tit.  19.  2  inf.)  power  of  the  testator  after  the  execution  of  the
will,  or  would  have  done  so,  if  he  had  not  died  first.  Thus  they  com-
prise (i)  postumi  sui  proper,  the  testator*s  own  children,  sons  and
daughters,  bom  after  the  execution  of  the  will,  who  become  sui  by  the
mere  fact  of  birth ;  (2)  persons  postumorum  suorum  loco,  i.e.  (a)  those
adopted  or  adrogated,  and  children  legitimated  by  the  testator  after
making  the  will,  Gaius  ii.  138,  Tit.  17.  1  inf.,  Ulpian,  Reg.  23.  3 ;  {b):  filii-


Tit  13.]        DE  EXHEREDATIONE  LIBERORUM.  263

mentum,  sed  postea  adgnatione  postumi  sive  postumae
rumpitur  et  ea  ratione  totum  infirmatur :  ideoque  si  mulier,
ex  qua  postumus  aut  postuma  sperabatur,  abortum  fecerit,
nihil  impedimento  est  scriptis  heredibus  ad  hereditatem  ade-
undam.  sed  feminini  quidem  sexus  personae  vel  nominatim
vel  inter  ceteros  exheredari  solebant,  dum  tamen,  si  inter
ceteros  exheredentur,  aliquid  ^is  legetur,  ne  videantur  per
obiivionem  praeteritae  esse,  masculos  vero  postumos,  id  est
filtum  et  deinceps,  placuit  non  aliter  recte  exheredari,  nisi
nominatim  exheredentur,  hoc  scilicet  modo :  '  quicumque  mihi
filius  genitus  fuerit,  exheres  esto.'  Postumorum  autem  loco  2
sunt  et  hi,  qui  in  sui  heredis  locum  succedendo  quasi  adgna-
scendo  fiunt  parentibus  sui  heredes.  ut  ecce  si  quis  filium  et
ex  eo  nepotem  neptemve  in  potestate  habeat,  quia  filius  gradu
praecedit,  is  solus  iura  sui  heredis  habet  quamvis  nepos  quo-
que  et  neptis  ex  eo  in  eadem  potestate  sunt :  sed  si  filius  eius

iamilias  or  filiaefamilias  who  become  sui  by  *  successio  in  suorum  heredum
locum  '  as  described  in  Gaius  ii.  1 33,  and  §  2  inf. ;  and  {c)  the  child  who
fell  under  the  inmiediate  power  and  so  became  suus  heres  of  his  soldier
father  by  the  death  of  the  grandfather  in  whose  power  both  of  them  had
previously  been :  he  is  postumus  in  relation  to  his  father's  will  of
castrense  peculium  made  while  a  filiusfamilias,  Dig.  28.  2.  28.  i.

Postumi  were  Mncertae  personae'  (Tit.  20.  25  inf.),  Gaius  ii.  242,  and
therefore  by  the  old  law  could  be  neither  instituted  heirs  nor  disinherited,
Ulpian,  Reg.  22.  4:  consequently,  if  they  were  sui,  the  will  necessarily
became  void.  It  was  only  by  very  gradual  steps  that  it  became  possible
to  institute  or  disinherit  postumi  sui.  In  the  most  pressing  case,  viz.
where  a  postumus  suus  was  born  after  the  testator's  decease,  so  that
he  could  not  mend  matters  by  executing  a  fresh  will — the  civil  law  itself
tolerably  early  permitted  his  institution  or  exheredation,  Ulpian,  Reg.
22.  19.  Doubtless  the  rule  was  the  same  in  respect  of  a  grandchild  in
utero  whose  father  was  no  longer  in  the  testator's  power  at  the  time  of
the  making  of  the  will,  though  he  had  been  when  the  child  was  con-
ceived. Eventually  testators  were  enabled  to  institute  or  disinherit
all  grandchildren  postumi  sui,  partly  under  a  formula  introduced  by
Aquilius  Gallus,  Cicero's  colleague  in  the  praetorship.  Dig.  28.  2.  29.  pr.,
partly  under  the  lex  lunia  Vellaea,  A.  D.  9,  mentioned  in  §  2  inf. :  and
partly  on  the  authority  of  the  jurist  Salvius  Julianus  :  see  Poste's  Gaius
pp.  236-7.

For  those  who  were  in  postumorum  loco  by  adrogation  or  adoption
the  law  was  not  so  simple.  Gaius  says  (ii.  138-140)  that  a  will  was
avoided  by  the  subsequent  adoption  of  *a  suus  heres,  even  if  the  latter
was  instituted  heir  in  it :  but  this  doctrine  was  disputed  by  Scaevola


264  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  11.

vivo  eo  moriatur  aut  qualibet  alia  ratione  exeat  de  potestate
eius,  incipit  nepos  neptisve  in  eius  locum  succedere  et  eo  modo
iura  suorum  heredum  quasi  adgnatione  nanciscuntur.  ne  ergo
eo  modo  rumpatur  eius  testamentum,  sicut  ipsum  filium  vel
heredem  instituere  vel  nominatim  exheredare  debet  testator,
ne  non  iure  faciat  testamentum,  ita  et  nepotem  neptemve  ex
filio  neces^e  est  ei  vel  heredem  instituere  vel  exheredare,  ne
forte  vivo  eo  filio  mortuo,  succedendo  in  locum  eius  nepos
neptisve  quasi  adgnatione  rumpant  testamentum.  idque  lege
lunia  Vellaea  provisum  est,  in  qua  simul  exheredationis  modus

3  ad  similitudinem  postumorum  demonstratur.  Emancipatos
liberos  iure  civili  neque  heredes  instituere  neque  exheredare
necesse  est,  quia  non  sunt  sui  heredes.  sed  praetor  omnes
tam  feminini  quam  masculini  sexus,  si  heredes  non  instituan-
tur,  exheredari  iubet,  virilis  sexus  nominatim,  feminini  vero  et
inter  ceteros.  quodsi  neque  heredes  instituti  fuerint  neque  ita
ut  diximus  exheredati,  promittit  praetor  eis  contra  tabulas

4  te^tamenti  bonorum  possessionem.  Adoptivi  liberi  quamdiu
sunt  in  potestate  patris  adoptivi,  eiusdem  iuris  habentur,  cuius


(Dig.  28.  3.  18)  and  Papinian  (Dig.  28.  2.  23.  i),  whose  view  was  adopted
by  Justinian.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an  extraneus  was  disinherited  in
a  will,  and  then  was  subsequently  adopted  or  adrogated  by  the  testator,
the  will  was  always  avoided.  Dig.  37.  4.  8.  8  ('  exheredatio  res  in  extraneo
inepta  est ').  The  only  exception  to  this  was  where  a  son  who  had  been
emancipated  or  given  in  adoption  was  disinherited,  and  subsequently
adrogated  or  readopted  by  his  own  natural  father,  the  testator,  Dig.
28.  2.  23.  pr.  Probably  the  same  rule  applied  to  the  postumus  suus  by
legitimation.

If  the  son  of  a  filiusfamilias  who  had  made  a  will  of  castrense  peculium
was  not  therein  instituted  or  disinherited,  and  then  became  suus  heres  by
the  grandfather's  death,  the  will  was  avoided.  Dig.  28.  2.  28.  i.

In  Ulpian's  time  it  was  not  established  that  all  male  postumi  sui  must
be  disinherited  nominatim,  though  he  says  (Reg.  22.  22)  that  if  one  in
a  remoter  degree  than  the  first  was  disinherited  inter  ceteros,  it  was  neces-
sary to  give  him  a  legacy  for  the  same  reason  alleged  in  this  section  in
respect  of  postumae  suae :  but  he  adds, '  sed  tutius  est  nominatim  eos
exheredari,  et  id  observatur  magis.*

§  3.  By  liberi  in  this  section  is  not  meant  all  the  testator's  descendants,
but  only  those  who,  had  he  died  intestate,  would  have  been  entitled  to
succeed  him  by  the  clause  in  the  edict  '  unde  liberi,'  see  Bk.  iii.  9.  3.
and  notes,  inf.


Tit.  13.]        DE  EXHEREDATIONE  LIBERORUM,  265

sunt  iustis  nuptiis  quaesiti :  itaque  heredes  instituendi  vel  ex-
heredandi  sunt  secundum  ea  quae  de  naturalibus  exposuimus  :
emancipati  vero  a  patre  adoptive  neque  lure  civili  neque
quod  ad  edictum  praetoris  attinet  inter  liberos  numerantur.
qua  ratione  accidit,  ut  ex  diverso  quod  ad  naturalem  paren-
tem  attinet,  quamdiu  quidem  sint  in  adoptiva  familia,  extra-
neorum  numero  habeantur,  ut  eos  neque  heredes  instltuere
neque  exheredare  necesse  sit :  cum  vero  emancipati  fuerint
ab  adoptivo  patre,  tunc  incipiant  in  ea  causa  esse,  in  qua
futuri  essent,  si  ab  ipso  naturali  patre  emancipati  fuissent.
Sed  haec  vetustas  introducebat.  nostra  vero  constitutio  inter  5
masculos  et  feminas  in  hoc  iure  nihil  interesse  existimans,
quia  utraque  persona  in  hominum  procreatione  similiter  naturae
officio  fungitur  et  lege  antiqua  duodecim  tabularum  omnes
similiter  ad  successiones  ab  intestato  vocabantur^  quod  et
praetores  postea  secuti  esse  videntur,  ideo  simplex  ac  simile  ius
et  in  Aliis  et  in  filiabus  et  in  ceteris  descendentibus  per  virilem
sexum  personis  non  solum  natis,  sed  etiam  postumis  intro-
duxit,  ut  omnes,  sive  sui  sive  emancipati  sunt,  et  nominatim
exheredentur  et  eundem  habeant  effectum  circa  testamenta
parentum  suorum  infirmanda  et  hereditatem  auferendam,  quem
filii  sui  vel  emancipati  habent,  sive  iam  nati  sunt  sive  adhuc  in
utero  constituti  postea  nati  sunt,  circa  adoptivos  autem  cer-
tam  induximus  divisionem,  quae  constitutione  nostra,  quam
super  adoptivis  tulimus,  continetur.  Sed  si  expeditione  occu-  6
patus  miles  testamentum  faciat  et  liberos  suos  iam  natos  vel
postumos  nominatim  non  exheredaverit,  sed  silentio  prae-
terierit   non   ignorans,  an  habeat  liberos,  silentium  eius  pro


§  5.  By  th^  constitution  to  which  he  refers  (Cod.  6.  28.  4)  Justinian
required  all  descendants,  whom  before  it  had  been  necessary  to  disinherit
at  all,  to  be  in  future  either  instituted,  or  disinherited  nominatim.  In
default,  if  the  pretermitted  child  was  a  suus,  the  will  was  void  :  if  he  was
emancipated,  he  could  only  demand  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas.
Children  given  in  adoption  had  to  be  either  instituted  or  disinherited
unless  the  adoptio  was  plena  (p.  140  supr.),  Cod.  8.  48.  10  pr.

It  is  not  clear  what  the  words  'quod  et  praetores  postea  secuti  esse
videntur '  refer  to :  perhaps  to  the  bonorum  possessio  intestati,  but  more
probably  to  the  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  inmiediately  before
the  rescript  of  M.  Aureiius,  p.  262  supr.


266  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  II.

exheredatione  nominatim  facta  valere  constitutionibus  prin-
7  cipum  cautum  est.  Mater  vel  avus  maternus  necesse  non
habent  liberos  suos  aut  heredes  instituere  aut  exheredare,  sed
possunt  eos  omittere.  nam  silentium  matris  aut  avi  matemi
ceterorumque  per  matrem  ascendentium  tantum  facit,  quantum
exheredatio  patris.  neque  enim  matri  Alium  filiamve  neque
avo  materno  nepotem  neptemve  ex  filia,  si  eum  eamve  here-
dem  non  instituat,  exheredare  necesse  est,  sive  de  iure  civili
quaeramus,  sive  de  edicto  praetoris,  quo  praeteritis  liberis
contra  tabulas  bonorum  possessionem  promittit.  sed  aliud  eis
adminiculum  servatur,  quod  paulo  post  vobis  manifestum  fiat

§  7.  The  'adminiculum'  referred  to  is  the  querella  inofiiciosi  testa-
menti,  for  which  see  Tit.  i8  inf.

Bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas,  referred  to  in  this  Title,  was
granted)  not  only  to  pretermitted  liberi,  but  also,  under  certain  circum-
stances, {a)  to  the  parens  manumissor  against  the  will  of  his  emancipated
son,  Bk.  i.  12.  6  supr.,  Dig.  37.  12;  {b)  to  a  patron  and  his  agnatic
descendants  against  the  will  of  his  libertus  (Bk.  iii.  7  inf.)  or  liberta  (Gaius
i.  192,  ii.  122,  iii.  43-4) ;  (c)  to  a  patroness  against  the  will  of  her  liberta,
Gaius  iii.  52.

When  granted  to  a  descendant  who  was  not  disinherited  by  the
ancestor  in  the  form  required  by  the  Edict,  its  effect,  if  the  praeteritus
was  a  suus,  was  practically  to  substitute  intestate  succession  for  succes-
sion under  the  will ;  if  not,  its  effect  will  appear  more  clearly  from  the
following : —

(i)  Upon  the  pretermitted  child  demanding  bonorum  possessio,  liberi
who  were  instituted  heirs  in  the  will  came  in  with  him  under  the  grant
(commisso  per  alium  edicto),  and  thus  might  be  largely  benefited  if  the
part  in  which  they  were  instituted  was  less  than  their  intestate  portion,
^ig-  37*  A'  S*  14:  but  they  could  not  take  advantage  of  the  bonorum
possessio  if  they  had  in  any  way  accepted  under  the  will.  Liberi  who
were  properly  disinherited  in  the  will  could  take  nothing  under  it,  i.  e.
the  exheredations  stand,  even  though  the  will  is  practically  nullified,
unless  the  will  itself  becomes  void  by  being  *  desertum.*    ♦

(2)  The  effect  of  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  being  not  to  sub-
stitute the  ordinary  rules  of  intestacy,  but  to  make  the  deceased's  bona
divisible  among  such  liberi  as  are  not  duly  disinherited,  later  changes
in  the  law  of  intestate  succession  (e.g.  Nov.  118)  have  no  influence  here,
and  the  nova  clausula  luliani  (for  which  see  Mr.  Posters  note  on  Gaius  ii.
135)  applies.

(3)  Certain  portions  of  the  will,  if  valid  iure  civili,  still  remain  in  force,
viz.  (a)  the  exheredations.  Dig.  37.  4.  8.  pr.,  ib.  10.  5 ;  {b)  the  pupillary
substitutions  (Tit.  16  inf.)  and  appointments  of  testamentary  guardians;
(c)  legacies  and  fideicommissa  to  coniunctae  personae,  i.e.  ascendants  and


Tit.  14.1  DE  HEREDIBUS  INSTITUENDIS,  267

XIV.
DE  HEREDIBUS  INSTITUENDIS.

Heredes  instituere  permissutn  est  tarn  liberos  homines
quam  servos  tarn  proprios  quam  alienos.  proprios  autem  olim
quidem  secundum  plurium  sententias  non  aliter  quam  cum
libertate  recte  instituere  licebat.  hodie  vero  etiam  sine  liber-
tate  ex  nostra  constitutione  heredes  eos  instituere  permissum
est.  quod  non  per  innovationem  induximus,  sed  quoniam  et
aequius  erat  et  Atilicino  placuisse  Paulus  suis  libris,  quos  tam
ad  Masurium  Sabinum  quam  ad  Plautium  scripsit,  refert.
proprius  autem  servus  etiam  is  intellegitur,  in  quo  nudam
proprietatem  testator  habet,  alio  usum  fructum  habente.
est  autem  casus,  in  quo  nee  cum  libertate  utiliter  sei-vus  a
domina  heres  instituitur,  ut  constitutione  divorum  Severi  et
Antonini  cavetur,  cuius  verba  haec  sunt :  *  Servum  adulterio
maculatum  non  iure  testamento  manumissum  ante  sententiam
ab  ea  muh'ere  videri,  quae  rea  fuerat  eiusdem  criminis  postulata,
rationis  est :  quare  sequitur,  ut  in  eundem  a  domina  coUata
institutio  nuUius  momenti  habeatur.'  alienus  servus  etiam  is
intellegitur,   in   quo   usum  fructum   testator  habet.     Servus  1

descendants  of  the  testator,  and  praelegata  dotis  to  the  wife  (Tit.  20.  15
inf.),  or  wife  of  a  descendant,  Dig.  37.  5.  1.  pr.  A  constitution  of  A.  Pius
(Dig.  37.  5.  7)  limited  the  amount  of  such  dispositions  by  enacting  that  all
the  coniunctae  personae  together  could  -not  take  more  than  each  of  the
bonoram  possessores.

Tit.  XrV.  If  a  slave  in  whom  another  had  a  usufruct  was  manumitted
by  his  owner,  under  the  old  law  he  remained  a  slave  until  the  usufnict
determined,  Dig.  28.  5.  9.  2a  By  Justinian's  constitution  (Cod.  7.  15.
I.  pr.)  '  inter  libertos  proprietarii .  . .  quasi  servus  apud  usufructuarium
permaneat.'

The  constitution  of  Severus  and  Antoninus  here  referred  to  had  been
in  some  degree  suggested  by  the  lex  lulia  de  adulteriis,  which  provided
'  ne  mulier  intra  sexagesimum  divortii  diem  servos  manumittat '  Dig.  40.
9.  12-14.  I^  manumitted  under  the  circumstances  of  the  text  the  act  was
not  quite  'nullius  momenti:'  he  became  statu  liber,  Dig.  40.  9.  13,  and
absolutely  free  if  acquitted— maculatum  meaning  ^  accusatum '  (Dig.  28.  5.

48.  2  :  cf.  Theoph.  wo^ov  ovra  rfj  fioix^tq).

The  purpose  of  a  will  being  the  bestowal  of  the  universal  succession,
the  institution  of  the  heir  or  heirs  was  regarded  as  of  more  importance


268  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  11.

autem  a  domino  suo  heres  institutus,  si  quidem  in  eadem
causa  manserit,  fit  ex  testamento  liber  heresque  necessarius.
si  vero  a  vivo  testatore  manumissus  fuerit,  suo  arbitrio  adire
hereditatem  potest,  quia  non  fit  necessarius,  cum  utrumque  ex
domini  testamento  non  consequitur.  quodsi  alienatus  fuerit,
iussu  novi  domini  adire  hereditatem  debet  et  ea  ratione  per
eum  dominus  fit  heres  :  nam  ipse  alienatus  neque  liber  neque
heres  esse  potest,  etiamsi  cum  libertate  heres  institutus  fuerit ;
destitisse  etenim  a  libertatis  datione  videtur  dominus  qui  eum
alienavit.  alienus  quoque  servus  heres  institutus  si  in  eadem
causa  duraverit,  iussu  domini  adire  hereditatem  debet,  si  vero
alienatus  ab  eo  fuerit  aut  vivo  testatore  aut  post  mortem  eius

than  any  other  part — as  in  fact  the  only  part  which  was  in  every  case
indispensal^ie, '  quia  testamenta  vim  ex  institutione  heredis  accipiunt,  ob
id  velut  caput  et  fundamentum  intellegitur  totius  testament!  heredis  in-
stitutio '  Gaius  ii.  229 :  cf.  Tit.  20.  34  inf.  Hence,  under  the  old  law,  no
disposition  could  precede  it  in  the  will  except  exheredations  (e.g.  legacy
or  manumission) ;  and  the  Sabinians  even  held  that  the  appointment  of
a  testamentary  guardian  ante  heredis  institutionem  was  void  (Gaius  ii.
230-1).  This  was  all  changed  by  Justinian,  Tit.  20.  34  inf.,  Bk.  i.  14.  3
supr.,  Cod.  6.  23.  24.

Originally,  too,  solemn  forms  of  institution  were  prescribed :  '  heres
institui  recte  potest  his  verbis :  Titius  heres  esto,  Titius  heres  sit,  Titium
heredem  esse  iubeo.  Ilia  autem  institutio;  heredem  instituo,  heredem
facio,  plerisque  improbata  est'  Ulpian,  Reg.  21.  i  :  cf.  Gaius  ii.  117.  The
necessity  of  using  such  formulae  was  first  abolished  by  Constantine  1 1,
A.D.  339,  'quibus  libet  confecta  sententiis,  vel  quolibet  loquendi  genere
formata  institutio  valeat,  si  modo  per  earn  liquebit  voluntatis  intentio '
Cod.  6.  23.  15  ;  even  the  name  of  the  heir  was  unnecessary,  if  it  was
certain  who  was  intended.  Dig.  28.  5.  9.  8 ;  cf.  Tit.  20.  29  inf.

Some  persons  cannot  be  validly  instituted  at  all :  they  lack  testamenti
factio.  Others,  though  they  can  be  validly  instituted,  can  either  take
nothing  at  all  as  heirs,  or  at  least  the  portion  they  can  take  is  limited
by  law.  Between  these  two  classes  there  is  an  important  difference.
The  will  is  void,  if  the  person  instituted  lacks  testamenti  factio  cum
testatore  (Ulpian,  Keg.  22.  i)  at  the  date  either  of  the  execution  of  the
will,  or  of  the  testator's  decease,  or  at  which  he  ought  to  make  aditio.
Dig.  28.  5.  49.  I,  Tit.  19.  4  inf.  But  where  one  of  the  second  class  was
instituted,  the  will  was  never  void  on  that  ground  alone,  and  capacity  to
take  was  required  to  exist  only  at  the  time  when  the  benefit  vested :  '  non
oportet  prius  de  condicione  cuiusquam  quaeri,  quam  hereditas  legatumve
ad  eum  pertinet.'

Those  who  could  not  be  validly  instituted  at  all  are  (1)  peregrini ;
(2)  intestabiles,  Dig.  28.  i.  18.  I ;  Theoph.  ad  Inst.  ii.  10.  6,  though  the


Tit.  14.]  DE  HEREDIBUS  INSTITUENDIS.  269

antequam  adeat,  debet  iussu  novi  domini  adire.     at  si  manu-
missus  est  vivo  testatore,  vel  mortuo  antequam  adeat,  suo


incapacity  of  this  class  in  Justinian's  time  has  been  doubted  ;  (3)  heretics,
Cod.  I.  5.  4,  and  apostates,  Cod.  i.  7.  3  and  4;  (4)  children  of  persons
convicted  of  treason,  Cod.  9.  8.  5.  1  ;  (5)  children  of  and  parties  to
unlawful  marriages  could  not  be  instituted,  the  former  by  the  parents,
the  latter  by  one  another,  Cod.  5.  5.  6;  5.  9.  6;  (6)  incertae  personae,
in  particular  (a)  postumi ;  but  the  last  relic  of  this  rule,  viz.  that  a
postumus  alienus  could  not  be  instituted  heir  or  take  a  legacy  was
repealed  by  Justinian  himself,  Tit.  20.  28,  Bk.  iii.  9.  pr.  inf. :  and  (b)
juristic  persons,  Ulpian,  Reg.  22.  5.  This  restriction  had,  however,  to
a  large  extent  been  removed  ;  the  fiscus  could  be  instituted  heir,  and  so
could  municipal  corporations  (Cod.  6.  24.  12),  churches  and  religious
and  charitable  foundations  (Cod.  i.  2.  1  and  23).  Other  corporations
could  acquire  testamenti  factio  only  by  special  grant  from  the  emperor,
Cod.  6.  24.  8 ;  (7)  the  lex  Voconia  (see  on  Tit.  22  pr.  inf.)  had  made
women  incapable  of  being  instituted  heirs  to  persons  ranked  in  the
highest  class  of  the  census  as  possessing  100,000  asses  or  upwards
(Gains  ii.  274),  though  they  might  be  legatees  to  the  extent  of  half  the
property,  QuintiL  Declam.  264.  This  disqualification  was  quite  obsolete
under  Justinian.

Among  the  enactments  disabling  certain  classes  from  taking  under
a  will  either  in  whole  or  in  part  are  the  following  :—

(i)  By  the  lex  lunia  Norbana  Latini  luniani  were  prohibited  from
taking  either  as  heirs  or  as  legatees,  unless  they  acquired  the  civitas
within  100  days.  Gains  i.  23-4,  ii.  no,  275,  Ulpian,  Reg.  17.  1.

(2)  By  a  lex  lulia  of  Augustus,  the  coelebs  (unmarried  person)  could
take  nothing  under  the  will  of  one  unrelated  to  him  or  her  within  the
sixth  degree  as  either  heir  or  legatee,  unless  he  or  she  married  within
100  days  next  after  hearing  of  the  right.  Certain  classes  were  excepted  on
account  of  age,  physical  incapacity,  etc.,  Ulpian,  Reg.  17.  i.

(3)  By  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  fiv^  years  later  in  date,  the  orbus  (i.e.
person  who  had  been  married  but  had  no  children  living,  Ulpian,  Reg.
16.  i)  could  take  under  wills  of  persons  outside  the  sixth  degree  only
a  moiety  of  what  was  given  them.  One  child  was  sufficient  to  save  a  man
from  the  statute,  for  ingenuae  three,  for  libertae  four  were  required.  Here
again  there  were  exceptions  on  the  ground  of  age  and  absence  reipublicae
causa.

(4)  By  the  same  statute,  husband  and  wife  who  had  no  children  by
the  marriage  could  take  under  one  another's  wills  only  a  tenth  of  what
was  given  them  (lex  decimaria),  though  the  amount  was  increased  by
the  existence  of  issue  by  a  previous  marriage,  or  if  such  issue  had  died.
They  were,  however,  entitled  in  addition  to  the  usufruct  of  a  third  of  the
residue  from  which  they  were  excluded.  Portions  which  under  these
last  two  statutes  could  not  be  taken  by  those  for  whom  they  had  been
intended,  became  caduca,  and  went  in  the  first  instance  to  co-legatees


270  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

2  arbitrio  adire  hereditatem  potest.  Servus  alienus  post  domini
mortem  recte  heres  instituitur,  quia  et  cum  hereditariis  servis
est  testament!  factio :  nondum  enim  adita  hereditas  personae
vicem  sustinet,  non  heredis  futuri,  sed  defuncti,  cum  et  eius,


with  children,  in  the  second,  to  instituted  male  heirs  with  children,  in  the
third,  to  male  legatees  with  children,  and  in  default  of  all,  to  the  treasury.
These  restrictions,  however,  no  longer  existed  under  Justinian,  the
penalties  of  coelibatus  and  orbitas  having  been  abolished  by  the  sons  of
Constantine,  Cod.  8.  58.  i,  and  the  lex  decimaria  repealed  by  Honorius
and  Theodosius,  Cod.  ib.  2.

(5)  Domitian  disqualified  feminae  probrosae  from  taking  either  the
hereditas  or  legata.  Dig.  29.  i.  41.  i,  Cod.  5.  4.  23.  3.  For  other  disabili"
ties  imposed  on  persons  who  married  a  second  time,  or  on  illegitimate
while  legitimate  children  were  living,  see  Cod.  5.  9.  6  and  10,  Nov.  22.  27
and  28,  Nov.  89.  12,  for  a  different  case,  Tit  17.  8  inf.  Finally,  the
hereditas  or  legata  were  sometimes  '  erepta '  from  the  person  prima  facie
entitled  on  the  ground  of  un worthiness  (see  Dig.  34.  9,  Cod.  6.  35),  the
forfeiture  being  in  favour  sometimes  of  the  fiscus,  sometimes  of  other
persons.

For  the  institution  of  servus  proprius  sine  libertate  see  Gaius  ii.  186,
Bk.  i.  6.  2  supr.,  Cod.  6.  27.  5.

§  2.  The  opening  words  of  this  paragraph  are  ambiguous ;  they  may
refer  to  the  institution  of  a  slave  actually  at  the  time  belonging  to  a  here-
ditas iacens  (Dig.  28.  '5.  S^,  ib.  64),  or  to  an  institution  not  to  take  effect
until  the  dominus  of  the  slave  instituted  is  dead,  Theoph.

The  institution  of  a  servus  alienus  is  at  first  sight  enigmatical,  for  as  he
could  acquire  the  inheritance  only  for  his  master,  why  not  institute  the
latter  at  once  ?  The  solution  is  twofold.  Firstly,  the  institution  of  the
slave  secured  the  transmission  of  the  inheritance  to  the  heirs  of  his
master,  whereas  if  the  latter  had  been  instituted  himself  and  had  pre-
deceased the  testator,  the  institution  would  have  lapsed :  and  this  could
not  be  prevented  by  giving  a  '  remainder '  to  his  heirs  by  substitution,  for
they  were  incertae  personae ;  nemo  est  heres  viventis.  To  guard  against
the  contingency  of  the  slave's  own  death  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,
several  slaves  might  be  instituted  by  way  of  substitution.  The  other
advantage  of  instituting  a  servus  alienus  will  appear  from  a  considera-
tion of  the  difficulty  of  transferring  an  inheritance  inter  vivos.  The
maxim  being  seniel  heres,  semper  heres,  it  was  idle  to  talk  of  trans-
ferring the  universitas  iuris  when  a  man  had  once  actually  become  heir
by  aditio.  But  at  an  earlier  moment  it  might  have  been  possible ;  what
was  there  to  prevent  one  to  whom  a  hereditas  was  delata,  and  who  thus
had  the  right  of  accepting,  from  transferring  that  right  of  acceptance
to  another  ?  The  aditio  of  an  inheritance,  however,  was  an  actus  legi-
timus,  performable  only  by  the  actual  person  to  whom  it  was  delata,
so  that  even  where  the  person  was  a  slave,  who  got  nothing  by  aditioy
he  must  accept  himself ;  his  master  could  not  do  it  for  him,  and  conse-


Tit.  14.]  DE  HEREDIBUS  INSTITUENDIS,  271

qui  in  utero  est,  servus  recte  heres  instituitur.     Servus  plurium,  3
cum  quibus  testamenti  factio  est,  ab  extraneo  institutus  heres
unicuique  dominorum,  cuius  iussu  adierit,  pro  portione  dominii
adquirit  hereditatem.

£t  unum  hominem  et  plures  in  infinitum,  quot  quts  velit,  4
heredes  facere  licet.  Hereditas  plerumque  dividitur  in  duode-  5
cim  uncias,  quae  assis  appellatione  continentur.  habent  autem
et  hae  partes  propria  nomina  ab  uncia  usque  ad  assem,  ut  puta
haec :  sextans,  quadrans,  triens,  quincunx,  semis,  septunx,  bes,
dodrans,  dextans,  deunx,  as.  non  autem  utique  duodecim  uncias
esse  oportet.  nam  tot  unciae  assem  efficiunt,  quod  testator  volu-

quently  the  Romans  refused  consistently  to  admit  any  such  assignment.
To  this  general  rule  there  are  but  very  few  exceptions,  usually  called
'  cases  of  transmission,'  only  one  of  which  concerns  us  here.  Gaius  tells
us  (ii.  35)  that  when  an  inheritance  was  delata  to  an  agnate  under  an
intestacy,  he  could,  in  lieu  of  personally  exercising  his  right  of  aditio,
transfer  it  by  in  iure  cessio  to  anyone  he  pleased,  and  then  '  perinde  fit
heres  is  cui  in  iure  cesserit,  ac  si  ipse  per  legem  ad  hereditatem  vocatus
esset'  But  this  was  the  only  case  in  which  such  transfer  was  possible  :
and  considering  the  Roman  dislike  of  intestacy,  and  the  subordinate
position  of  agnates  to  sui,  it  must  even  in  Gaius'  time  have  been  a  very
rare  one.

I^  however,  A  instituted  C,  the  slave  of  B,  on  A's  decease  B  could
either  actually  become  heir  by  directing  C  to  make  aditio,  or  he  could
get  all  the  advantage  derivable  from  the  succession,  without  incurring  the
trouble  of  administration,  by  selling  C  at  a  price  enhanced  by  his  character
of  institutus :  C  then  made  aditio  at  the  direction  of  the  purchaser,  who
thereby  became  heres.  If  the  first  owner  was  reluctant  to  permanendy
part  with  his  slave,  he  had  only  to  bargain  for  his  reconveyance  by
a  covenant  annexed  to  the  sale.

Another  clumsy  expedient  for  effecting  the  same  purpose  was  a  sale  of
the  inheritance  by  the  heres  after  acceptance.  This  was  no  violation  of
the  rule  semel  heres,  semper  heres,  because  it  did  not  produce  a  universal
succession:  the  purchaser  became  owner  of  the  deceased's  tangible
property  only  by  traditio  (Cod.  4.  39.  6),  succeeded  to  his  rights  in  per-
sonam only  as  cessionary  (Dig.  18.  4.  2.  3  and  8),  and  became  answerable
for  his  debts  only  according  to  the  ordinary  rules  of  intercession.  When,
however,  the  inheritance  was  purchased  from  the  fiscus,  the  vendee  was
a  genuine  universal  successor,  Cod.  4.  39.  i.  For  practical  illustrations
of  such  sales  see  Tit.  23  inf.

§  6.  The  rules  stated  in  this  and  the  three  following  sections  for  the
division  of  an  inheritance  among  two  or  more  instituti  may  be  summarised
thus  :--

(i)  The  hereditas  is  conceived  as  an  as  of  twelve  ounces,  in  fractions


272  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  11.

erit,  et  si  unum  tantum  quis  ex  semisse  verbi  gratia  heredem
scripserit,  totus  as  in  semisse  erit :  neque  enim  idem  ex  parte
testatus  et  ex  parte  intestatus  decedere  potest,  nisi  sit  miles,
cuius  sola  voluntas  in  testando  spectatur.  et  e  contrario  potest
quis  in  quantascumque  voluerit  plurimas  uncias  suam  here-

6  ditatem  dividere.  Si  plures  instituantur,  ita  demum  partium
distributio  necessaria  est,  si  nolit  testator  eos  ex  aequis  parti-
bus  heredes  esse:  satis  enim  constat  nuUis  partibus  nomi-
natis  aequis  ex  partibus  eos  heredes  esse,  partibus  autem  in
quorundam  personis  expressis,  si  quis  alius  sine  parte  nomt-
natus  erit,  si  quidem  aliqua  pars  assi  deerit,  ex  ea  parte
heres  fit :  et  si  plures  sine  parte  scripti  sunt,  omnes  in  eadem
parte  concurrent,  si  vero  totus  as  completus  sit,  in  partem
dimidiam  vocatur  et  illc  vel  illi  omnes  in  alteram  dimidiam.
nee   interest,  primus  an   medius   an  novissimus   sine   parte

7  scriptus  sit :  ea  enim  pars  data  intellegitur  quae  vacat  Videa-
mus,  si  pars  aliqua  vacet  nee  tamen  quisquam  sine  parte  heres
institutus  sit,  quid  iuris  sit  ?  veluti  si  tres  ex  quartis  partibus
heredes  scripti  sunt,  et  constat  vacantem  partem  singulis  tacite
pro  hereditaria  parte  accedere  et  perinde  haberi,  ac  si  ex

of  which  the  heirs  respectively  are  instituted  or  take :  thus  A  may  be
instituted  ex  quincunce  (^),  and  B  ex  septance  (^^).

(2)  If  the  testator  specifies  no  shares,  the  coheirs  take  in  equal  shares,
§  6,  unless  it  is  clear  that  he  intended  otherwise :  e.  g.  '  Titius  heres
esto :  Seius  et  Maevius  heredes  sunto :  verum  est  quod  Proculo  placet,
duos  semisses  esse,  quorum  alter  coniunctim  duobus  datur '  Dig.  2S.  5.
59.2.

(3)  If  he  specifies  the  shares  of  one  or  some  only,  those  to  whom  no
shares  are  specifically  assigned  take  in  equal  proportions  the  difference
between  the  sum  of  the  shares  assigned  and  the  aggregate  of  ^|  (e.g.  A
heres  ex  sextante  (^),  B  heres  ex  quincunce  (^) ;  C,  the  heir  to  whom
no  share  is  assigned,  takes  ex  quincunce  as  well).  If,  however,  the  sum
of  the  share  assigned  exceeds  ^f,  then  the  heirs  whose  shares  are  not
specified  take  the  difference  between  it  and  f|,  and,  if  this  is  exceeded,  f(
and  so  on,  §§  6  and  8.

(4)  If  he  specifies  shares  for  each  and  all  of  the  heirs,  which,  however,
do  not  together  make  up  the  number  12  or  any  multiple  of  12,  their  shares
arerateably  increased  until  12  or  its  next  multiple  is  reached  :  conversely,
if  he  gives  away  more  than  the  as  in  fractions  among  all  the  heirs,  their
shares  are  rateably  diminished,  §  7.

It  should  be  observed  in  addition  that  if  it  is  clear  that  the  testator's
intention,  in  giving  the  instituted  heirs  less  than  the  whole  as,  was  to


Tit.  14.]  DE  HEREDIBUS  INSTITUENDIS.  273

tertiis  partibus  heredes  script!  essent :  et  ex  diverse  si  plus  in
portionibus  sit,  tacite  singulis  decrescere,  ut,  si  verb!  gratia
quattuor  ex  tertiis  partibus  heredes  scripti  sint,  perinde  ha-
beantur,  ac  si  unusquisque  ex  quarta  parte  scriptus  fuisset
Et  si  plures  unciae  quam  duodecim  distributae  sunt,  is,  qui  8
sine  parte  institutus  est,  quod  dipondio  deest  habebit :  idemque
erit,  si  dipondius  expletus  sit  quae  omnes  partes  ad  assem
postea  revocantur,  quamvis  sint  plurium  unciarum.

Heres  et  pure  et  sub  condicione  institui  potest,    ex  certo  9
tempore  aut  ad  certum  tempus  non  potest,  veluti  *  post  quin-
quennium quam  moriar '  vel '  ex  kalendis  illis '  aut '  usque  ad
kalendas  illas  heres  esto : '  diemque  adiectum  pro  supervacuo
haberi  placet  et  perinde  esse,  ac  si  pure  heres  institutus  esset.

limit  them,  and  if  it  is  certain  to  whom  he  meant  the  residue  to  go,  they
or  one  of  them  can  be  compelled  to  convey  it  to  him  as  a  fideicommissum ;
and  where  a  testator  institutes  one  of  two  heirs  ex  asse,  and  the  other  in
a  fraction,  the  will  is  to  be  interpreted,  as  a  rule,  as  if  no  definite  share
had  beien  assigned  to  the  first  at  all,  Cod.  6.  37.  23.  pr.

§  9.  For  condicio  and  dies  in  general  see  pp.  163-165  supr.  An  exhe*
redation  could  not  be  made  subject  to  a  condition  unless  the  child  were
instituted  in  the  contrary  event,  Dig.  28.  2.  3.  i ;  37.  4.  18.  pr.

The  institution  of  an  heir  ex  tempore  or  ad  tempus  (i.e.  ex  die  or  in
diem),  or  subject  to  a  resolutive  condition,  would  violate  the  maxim  semel
heres,  semper  heres,  and  such  qualifications  were  accordingly  taken  pro
non  scriptis,  Dig.  28.  5.  34,  ib.  88,  except  in  soldiers*  wills,  in  which  the
effect  of  a  dies  ex  quo  was  delation,  until  the  arrival  of  the  dies,  to  the
intestate  heirs.  Dig.  29.  i.  41.  pr.,  that  of  a  dies  in  quem,  or  the  fulfilment
of  a  resolutive  condition  was  to  shift  the  hereditas  on  to  the  substitutus,
or,  if  there  were  none,  to  the  heredes  ab  intestato.

Thus  the  only  condition  upon  which  an  ordinary  institution  can  be
made  to  depend  is  a  suspensive  one.  The  effect  of  this  was,  strictly,  to
postpone  delatio  to  the  institutus  till  the  condition  was  fulfilled,  Dig.  29.
2.  69 :  but  the  opinion  of  Mucins  Scaevola  was  gradually  recognised  as
law,  that  a  person  instituted  under  a  condicio  non  faciendi  practically
fulfils  the  condition,  and  becomes  at  once  entitled  to  the  inheritance,  by
giving  security  that  if  he  breaks  the  condition  he  will  transfer  the  estate
to  those  entitled  next  after  him  (cautio  Muciana,  Dig.  35.  1.  7).  And  even
any  one  conditionally  instituted  could,  before  the  fulfilment  of  the  condi-
tion, obtain  provisional  bono^m  possessio  from  the  praetor  by  giving  the
same  security,  Dig.  37.  11.  5.  pr. ;  2.  8.  12.  If  he  did  not  avail  himself  of
this  privilege,  and  the  condition  was  one  whose  fulfilment  was  entirely
within  his  own  control  (e.g.  si  servum  suum  manumiserit),  the  creditors
of  the  estate  could  get  a  limit  of  time  fixed  within  which  he  must  fulfil  the
condition  or  forfeit  his  right,  Dig.  28.  5.  23.  i  :  if  the  condition  was  not  of

T


274  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

10  Impossibilis  condicio  in  institutionibus  et  legatis  nee  non  in

1 1  fideicommissis  et  libertatibus  pro  non  scripto  habetur.  Si  plures
condiciones  institutioni  adscriptae  sunt,  si  quidem  coniunctim,
ut  puta  '  si  illud  et  illud  factum  erit/  omnibus  parendum  est :
si  separatim,  veluti  '  si  illud  aut  illud  factum  erit/  cuilibet
obtemperare  satis  est.

12  Hi,  quos  numquam  testator  vidit,  heredes  institui  possunt.
veluti  si  fratris  filios  peregri  natos  ignorans  qui  essent  heredes
instituerit :  ignorantia  enim  testantis  inutilem  institutionem
non  facit.

XV.

DE  VULGARI  SUBSTITUTIONE.

Potest  autem  quis  in  testamento  suo  plures  gradus  heredum
facere,  ut  puta   *  si   ille  heres  non  erit,  ille  heres  esto : '   et


this  kind  (e.g.  si  Titius  consul  factus  erit)  the  creditors  could  obtain  a  grant
of  possessio  of  the  inheritance,  and  pay  themselves  from  the  proceeds  of
its  sale,  Dig.  ib.  23.  2.

§  10.  Impossible  conditions  are  those  which  cannot  be  fulfilled  either
(i)  on  natural  grounds  (physically  impossible,  e.g.  Bk.  iii.  19.  11),  or
(2)  on  jural  grounds  (Weluti  sororem  nupturam  sibi  aliquis  stipulatur'
Dig.  45.  I.  35.  i) :  turpes  (immoral)  condiciones  are  treated  in  the  same
way  as  those  which  cannot  legally  be  performed.  Dig.  28.  7.  15.  A  further
distinction  is  that  between  conditions  which  are  absolutely  or  objectively
impossible,  and  those  which  are  only  relatively  impossible ;  by  the  latter
being  meant  such  as  might  have  been  performed  under  other  circum-
stances, but  which  under  existing  circumstances  cannot :  e.  g.  release  of
a  non-existent  debt,  or  manumission  of  a  slave  who  is  dead.  Between
these,  however,  and  those  which  are  objectively  impossible  there  is,  in
general,  no  difference  of  treatment  or  effect :  Savigny,  System  iii.  p.  165.
A  contract  made  subject  to  an  impossible  condition  was  void,  Bk.  iii.  19.
1 1  inf. :  the  Proculians  had  maintained  the  same  of  testamentary  disposi-
tions, but  the  Sabinians  held  that  an  impossible  condition  in  a  will  ought
to  be  taken  pro  non  scripto,  though  Gaius  himself  (iii.  98)  admitted  the
unreasonableness  of  the  distinction  between  wills  and  contracts,  which
nevertheless  was  confirmed  by  Justinian.  A  condition  whose  fulfilment
becomes  impossible  only  after  the  makfng  of  the  will  does  not  come  within
the  rule,  Dig.  9.  2.  23.  2.

Tit.  XV.  Substitutions  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  remainders  of
English  law.  They  were  dictated  partly,  no  doubt,  by  the  natural  desire
to  be  succeeded  by  a  number  of  persons,  not  collectively,  but  in  sub-
ordination to  one  another ;  A  (e.g.)  being  preferred  to  B,  but  if  A  could


Tit  15.]  DE  VULGARI  SUBSTITUTIONE.  275

deinceps   in   quantum   velit    testator    substituere    potest   et
novissimo  loco  in  subsidium  vel  servum  necessarium  heredem
instituere.     Et  plures  in  unius  locum  possunt  substitui,  vel  1
unus  in  plurium,  vel   singfuli  singulis,  vel   invicem   ipsi  qui
heredes  instituti  sunt.     Et  si  ex  disparibus  partibus  heredes  2
scriptos  invicem  substituerit  et  nuUam  mentionem  in  substi-
tutione  habuerit  partium,  eas  videtur  partes  in  substitutione
dedisse,  quas   in    institutione  expressit :    et  ita  divus  Pius
rescripsit.     Sed  si  institute  heredi  et  coheredi  suo  substitute  3
dato  alius  substitutus  fuerit,  divi  Severus  et  Antoninus  sine
distinctione  rescripserunt  ad  utramque  partem  substitutum
admitti.     Si  servum  alienum  quis  patrem  familias  arbitratus  4

or  would  not  take  the  inheritance,  then  B  being  preferred  to  C,  and  so
on :  but  they  were  due  still  more,  as  is  suggested  by  the  concluding  words
of  the  opening  section,  and  as  appears  even  more  clearly  from  the  next
Title,  to  the  Roman  dislike  of  intestacy.  A  substitution,  as  may  be  seen
from  the  form  given  in  the  text,  is  in  effect  a  conditional  institution  :
conditional  either  on  another  and  earlier  named  institutus  not  taking  the
inheritance  (Tit.  15),  or,  not  only  on  this,  but  also  on  his  taking  and  dying
before  he  is  old  enough  to  make  a  will  for  himself  (pupillary  substitution,
Tit.  16).  The  modes  in  which  the  condition  might  be  fulfilled,  and  the
substitution  take  effect,  were  (i)  the  institutus  dying  before  the  testator:
(2)  his  failing  to  comply  with  the  testator's  directions,  e.  g.  as  to  the  time
within  which  he  must  accept :  (3)  his  refusal  to  accept,  or  (4)  disability  of
being  instituted  or  inability  to  take.

§  1.  When  several  joint  instituti  were  reciprocally  substituted  each  to
one  another,  any  one  of  them  who  made  aditio  thereby  also  acquired  his
share  in  the  portion  of  any  other  who  failed  from  any  reason  to  take,
which  he  could  not  refuse ;  and  any  one  of  them  who  refused  to  make
aditio  as  institutus  could  claim  nothing  as  substitutus.

§  3.  This  is  expressed  by  the  maxim  substitutus  substitute  est  substitu-
tus institute,  which  can  be  broken  up  into  two  quite  different  propositions :
(i)  if  B  is  substituted  to  A,  and  C  to  B,  and  B  predeceases  C,  the  latter  is
entitled  to  A's  share  si  heres  non  erit :  (2)  if  of  two  coheirs,  A  and  B,  B
is  substituted  to  A,  and  C,  an  extraneus,  is  substituted  to  B,  then  C,  if
A  and  B  both  drop  out,  gets  B's  share  not  only  as  substitutus,  but  also  as
institutus.

For  the  question  whether  a  vulgar  was  implied  in  a  pupillary  sub-
stitution see  Mr.  Poste's  note  on  Gains  ii.  179.  M.  Aurelius  enacted
that  each  should  be  implied  in  the  other:  'iam  hoc  iure  utimur  ex
D.  Marci  et  Seven  constitutione,  ut  quum  pater  impuberi  filio  in  alterum
casum  substituisset,  in  utrumque  casum  substituisse  intellegatur,  sive  filius
heres  non  extiterit,  sive  extiterit  et  impubes  decesserit '  Dig.  28.  6.  4.  pr.

§  4.  If  it  could  be  proved  that  the  testator  would  not  have  instituted

T  2


276  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

heredem  scripserit  et,  si  heres  non  esset,  Maevium  ei  substi-
tuerit  isque  servus  iussu  domini  adierit  hereditatem,  Maevius
in  partem  admittitur.  ilia  enim  verba  '  si  heres  non  erit '  in  eo
quidem,  quern  alieno  iuri  subiectum  esae  testator  scit,  sic  acci-
piuntur :  si  neque  ipse  heres  erit  neque  alium  heredem  effecerit :
in  eo  vero,  quem  patrem  familias  esse  arbitratur,  illud  signi^
ficant:  si  hereditatem  sibi  eive,  cuius  iuri  postea  subiectus
esse  coeperit,  non  adquisierit.  idque  Tiberius  Caesar  in  per*
sona  Parthenii  servi  sui  constituit.


XVI.

DE  PUPILLARI  SUBSTITUTIONE.

Liberis  suis  impuberibus^  quos  in  potestate  quis  habet,  non
solum  ita  ut  supra  diximus  substituere  potest,  id  est  ut,  si  here-
des  ei  non  extiterint,  alius  ei  sit  heres,  sed  eo  amplius  ut  et,  si
heredes  ei  extiterint  et  adhuc  impuberes  mortui  fuerint,  sit  eis
aliquis  heres.  veluti  si  quis  dicat  hoc  modo:  'Titius  filius
mens  heres  mihi  esto :  si  filius  meus  heres  mihi  non  erit,  sive


the  alienus  servus,  had  he  known  his  actual  condition,  the  institution
was  void,  and  the  substitute  took  all,  Cod.  6.  24.  3.

Tit.  XVI.  Substitutio  pupillaris,  like  the  right  of  appointing  testa-
mentary guardians  to  one's  own  filiifamilias  under  the  age  of  puberty,
was  a  pure  outcome  of  patria  potestas,  and,  as  Justinian  tells  us  here,  an
institution  of  customary  law.  Where  a  paterfamilias  instituted  a  child
under  the  age  of  puberty  and  in  his  immediate  power  (or  one  not  yet
bom,  postumus,  §  4  inf.,  Dig.  28.  6.  2.  pr.)  as  his  heir,  he  could  substitute
to  the  latter  so  as  to  meet  not  only  the  event  of  his  predeceasing  him
himself,  and  so  not  becoming  heir  at  all,  but  also  that  of  his  becoming
heir,  and  then  dying  before  he  reached  puberty :  and  even  if  he  dis-
inherited the  child,  he  could  appoint  a  substitutus  to  him  in  the  event  of
his  dying  impubes,  to  take  any  property  which  he  might  himself  acquire
between  his  becoming  sui  iuris  and  his  death.  The  object  of  the  practice
in  either  case  was  dearly  to  save  the  child  from  dying  intestate :  not
being  able,  ex  hypothesis  to  make  a  valid  will  for  himself,  his  paterfamilias
was  allowed  to  make  one  for  him,  §  2,  which  became  void  eo  instanti  that
he  himself  acquired  testamentary  capacity,  §  8.  The  differences  between
this  and  vulgar  substitution  are  clear  at  a  glance.  The  latter  operates
only  if  the  institutus  fails  to  take  the  inheritance :  if  he  once  accepts,  the
contingent  right  of  the  substitutus  falls  to  the  ground.  But  pupillary
substitution  is  not  necessarily  made  to  an  institutus  at  all:  it  may  be


Tit.  i6.]  DE  PUPILLARI  SUBSTITUTIONE.  277

heres  erit  et  prius  moriatur,  quam  in  suam  tutelam  venerit
(id  est  pubes  factus  sit),  tunc  Seius  heres  esto.'  quo  casu  si
quidem  non  extiterit  heres  filius,  tunc  substitutus  patri  fit
heres  :  si  vero  extiterit  heres  filius  et  ante  pubertatem  deces-
serit,  ipsi  filio  fit  heres  substitutus.  nam  moribus  institutum
est,  ut,  cum  eius  aetatis  sunt,  in  qua  ipsi  sibi  testamentum
facere  non  possunt,  parentes  eis  faciant.  Qua  ratione  excitati  1
etiam  constitutionem  in  nostro  posuimus  codice,  qua  pro-
spectum  est,  ut,  si  mente  captos  habeant  filios  vel  nepotes  vel
pronepotes  cuiuscumque  sexus  vel  gradus,  liceat  eis,  etsi
puberes  sint,  ad  exemplum  pupillaris  substitutionis  certas
personas  substituere :  sin  autem  resipuerint,  eandem  substitu-
tionem  infirmari,  et  hoc  ad  exemplum  pupillaris  substitutionis,
quae  postquam  pupillus  adoleverit  infirmatur.     Igitur  in  pu-  2


made  to  a  disinherited  child ;  and  even  if  the  child  as  a  fact  is  instituted,
and  actuaUy  takes  the  inheritance,  the  substitution  may  still  operate,  and
will,  if  the  heir  dies  under  the  age  of  puberty.

If  the  pupillariter  substitutus  was  himself  instituted,  jointly  with  the
child,  to  the  inheritance  and  refused  it,  he  could  not  take  under  the
substitution  :  conversely,  his  acceptance  of  it  was  an  implicit  acceptance
of  the  child's  inheritance  in  case  he  became  entitled.  Dig.  28.  6.  10.  2  and
3,  Cod.  6.  30.  20.  I.

A  pupillary  substitution  became  void  not  only  on  the  child's  attaining
puberty,  but  also  by  his  dying  or  otherwise  passing  out  of  potestas
during  the  father's  lifetime,  and  by  his  falling  on  the  pater's  death  under
the  potestas  of  another,  though  not  by  his  subsequent  adrogation,  Dig.
I.  7.  17.  1.

§  1.  This  quasi  pupillaris  or  exemplaris  substitutio,  as  it  is  commonly
called,  was,  as  a  general  right,  a  new  creation  of  Justinian,  and  was  quite
independent  of  patria  potestas,  being  allowed  to  ascendants  of  either
sex.  Cod.  6.  26.  9,  provided  they  left  to  the  lunatic  or  idiot  child  the
legitima  portio  (Tit.  18  inf.).  It  is  doubtful  whether  they  might  make  a
will  of  this  legitima  portio  only,  or  of  the  child's  whole  property:  and  in
their  choice  of  a  successor  to  the  mente  captus  they  were  limited,  in  the
first  instance,  to  descendants  of  the  latter,  in  the  second,  to  descendants
of  their  own ;  in  default  of  both  they  might  select  whom  they  pleased :
this  is  the  meaning  of  *  certas  personas'  in  the  text.  In  general  the  rules
of  substitutio  pupillaris  applied.  By  special  permission  from  the  emperor
a  father  might  name  an  heir  for  a  child  who  was  on  other  grounds  dis-
abled from  making  a  will  for  himself,  but  such  appointment  became  void
if  the  incapacity  ceased,  or  the  child  had  a  suus  heres  bom  to  him.  Dig.
28.  6.  43.  pr.

§  2.  In  pr.  the  substitutus  is  said  to  become  heir  to  the  child,  and  so


278  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

pillari  substitutione  secundum  praefatum  modum  ordinata  duo
quodammodo  sunt  testamenta,  alterum  patris,  alterum  Alii,
tamquam  si  ipse  filius  sibi  heredem  instituisset :  aut  certe
unum  est  testamentum  duarum  causaruni,  id  est  duarum  here-

3  ditatum.  Sin  autem  quis  ita  formidolosus  sit,  ut  timeret,  ne
filius  eius  pupillus  adhuc  ex  eo^  quod  palam  substitutum
accepit,  post  obitum  eius  periculo  insidiarum  subiceretur:
vulgarem  quidem  substitutionem  palam  facere  et  in  primis
testamenti  partibus  debet,  illam  autem  substitutionem,  per
quam  et  si  heres  extiterit  pupillus  et  intra  pubertatem  deces-
serit  substitutus  vocatur,  separatim  in  inferioribus  partibus
scribere  eamque  partem  proprio  lino  propriaque  cera  consig-
nare  et  in  priore  parte  testamenti  cavere,  ne  inferiores  tabulae
vivo  filio  et  adhuc  impubere  aperiantur.  illud  palam  est  non
ideo  minus  valere  substitutionem  impuberis  filii,  quod  in  isdem
tabulis  scripta  sit,  quibus  sibi  quisque  heredem  instituisset,

4  quamvis  hoc  pupillo  periculosum  sit.  Non  solum  autem
heredibus  institutis  impuberibus  liberis  ita  substituere  parentes
possunt,  ut  et  si  heredes  eis  extiterint  et  ante  pubertatem
mortui  fuerint,  sit  eis  heres  is  quem  ipsi  voluerint,  sed  etiam
exheredatis.  itaque  eo  casu  si  quid  pupillo  ex  hereditatibus
l^atisve  aut  donationibus  propinquorum  atque  amicorum
adquisitum  fuerit,  id  omne  ad  substitutum  pertineat.  quae-
cumque  diximus  de  substitutione  impuberum  liberorum  vel
heredum   institutorum  vel  exheredatorum,  eadem  etiam  de

too  in  Gaius  ii.  180;  earlier  he  seems  rather  to  have  been  regarded  as
successor  to  the  father,  *  si  mihi  filius  gignitur,  isque  prius  moritur  [quam
in  suam  tutelam  veniat,  sc]  turn  ut  mihi  ille  sit  heres*  Cic.  de  Orat.  2.  32,
'non  filio,  sed  sibi*  de  Invent.  2.  21  ;  cf.  Dig.  37.  11.  8.  i.

The  pupillary  substitution,  as  appears  from  §  3  inf.,  might  be  con-
tained in  a  separate  instrument,  or  even  in  a  separate  will.  Dig.  28.  6.
16.  I,  ib.  2a  I,  though  in  the  latter  case  the  pater's  will  must  be  made
first.  Dig.  ib.  2.  4 :  it  was,  however,  always  regarded  as  a  mere  appendage
of  the  latter,  with  which  it  stood  or  fell,  §  5  inf..  Dig.  28.  6.  10.  4.

§  8.  Gaius  observes  (ii.  181)  that  it  was  far  safer  to  make  both  sub-
stitutions in  separate  instruments, '  quod  ex  priore  [substitutione]  potest
intellegi  in  altera  quoque  idem  esse  substitutus.'  For  illustrations  of  the
danger  referred  to  see  Cic.  pro  Cluent  11.  32,  Horace,  Sat.  2.  5.  49,
Persius,  Sat.  2.  12.  13,  Suetonius,  Galba  9,  Dig.  27.  2.  i.  i.

§  4.  The  right  of  substituting  to  disinherited  children  was  doubtful  in
the  time  of  Cicero,  de  Invent.  2.  21.


Tit  17.]  QUIBUSMODIS  TESTAMENTA  INFIRMANTUR.  279

postumis  intellegimus.     Liberia  autem  suis  testamentum  facere  5
nemo  potest,  nisi  et  sibi  faciat :  nam  pupillare  testamentum
pars  et  sequela  est  paterni  testament! ,  adeo  ut,  si  patris  testa-
mentum  non   valeat,  ne  filii  quidem  valebit.     Vel   singulis  6
autem  liberis  vel  qui   eorum  novissimus  impubes  morietur
substitui  potest,    singulis  quidem,  si  neminem  eorum  intestato
decedere  voluit:   novissimo,  si  ius  legitimarum  hereditatium
integrum  inter  eos  custodiri  velit.     Substituitur  autem  impu-  7
beri  aut  nominatim,  veluti  '  Titius/  aut  generaliter  *  quisquis
mihi  heres  erit ' :  quibus  v^bis  vocantur  ex  substitutione  im-
pubere  filio  mortuo,  qui  et  script!  sunt  heredes  et  extiterunt,
et  pro  qua  parte  heredes  facti  sunt.     Masculo  igitur  usque  ad  8
quattuordecim  annos  substitui  potest,  feminae  usque  ad  duo-
decim  annos  :  et  si  hoc  tempus  excesserit,  substitutio  evanescit.
Extraneo  vero  vel  filio  puberi  heredi  instituto  ita  substituere  9
nemo  potest,  ut,  si  heres  extiterit  et  intra  aliquod  tempus
decesserit,  alius  ei  sit  heres  :  sed  hoc  solum  permissum  est,  ut
eum  per  fideicommissum  testator  obliget  alii  hereditatem  eius
vel  totam  vel  pro  parte  restituere:  quod  ius  quale  sit,  suo
loco  trademus.

XVIL

QUIBUS   MODIS  TESTAMENTA   INFIRMANTUR.

Testamentum  iure  factum  usque  eo  valet,  donee  rumpatur
irritumve  fiat.     Rumpitur  autem  testamentum,  cum  in  eodem  1
statu  manente  testatore  ipsius  testamenti  ius  vitiatur.     si  quis

§  9.  As  is  said  in  the  text,  the  power  of  a  testator  to  control  the
devolution  of  property  after  his  own  decease  depended  on  the  operation  of
fideicommissa  (Tit.  23  inf.).  Apparently  he  could  not  control  or  tie  up  the
'  hereditas '  for  more  than  two  lives,  viz.  those  of  the  instituted  impubes
Alius  and  of  the  pupillariter  substitutus.  But  it  would  seem  that  the
devolution  of  specific  property  might  be  prescribed  for  an  unlimited
period  by  imposing  on  each  successive  recipient  a  charge  to  bequeath
it  to  the  next,  at  any  rate  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  it  in  a  particular
family:  Dig.  30.  114.  14-18 :  31.  32.  6  :  ib.  67.  pr — 7  :  ib.  69.  1.  3.  4:  see
Amdts,  Pandekten,  §  549.  By  Nov.  159.  c.  2  it  was  enacted  that  the
fourth  holder  should  be  discharged  from  the  trust :  but  in  the  modem
civil  law  this  is  not  binding :  Wachter,  Pandekten,  §  316,  note  6.

Tit.  XVn.  For  the  modes  in  which  a  will  might  be  or  become  void
see  Bk.  iii.  i.  pr.  inf.    A  will  which  was  void  ab  initio  was  said  to  be


28o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

enim  post  factum  testamentum  adoptaverit  sibi  filium  per  im-
peratorem  eum,  qui  sui  iuris  est,  aut  per  praetorem  secundum
nostram  constitutionem  eum,  qui  in  potestate  parentis  fuerit,
testamentum  eius  rumpitur  quasi  adgnatione  sui  heredis.
2  Posteriore  quoque  testamento,  quod  lure  perfectum  est,  supe-
rius  rumpitur.  nee  interest,  an  extiterit  aliquis  heres  ex  eo,
an  non  extiterit:  hoc  enim  solum  spectatur,  an  aliquo  casu
existere  potuerit  ideoque  si  quis  aut  noluerit  heres  ossc^  aut
vivo  testatore  aut  post  mortem  eius  antequam  hereditatem
adiret  decesserit,  aut  condicione,  3iib  qua  heres  institutus  est,
defectus  sit,  in  his  casibus  pater  familias  intestatus  moritur:
nam  et  prius  testamentum  non  valet  ruptum  a  posteriore  et
posterius  aeque  nullas  vires  habet,  cum  ex  eo  nemo  heres


iniustum  or  non  iure  factum ;  this  might  occur  (i)  through  want  of
testament!  factio  in  the  testator  at  the  time  of  its  execution,  p.  258  supr. ;
(2)  through  defect  of  form,  pp.  250-255  supr.;  (5)  through  defect  in  the
institution,  especially  praeterition  of  a  suus  heres,  pp.  260  sqq.  supr.,  and
institution  of  a  person  who  has  not  testament!  factio  passiva,  p.  268  supr.,
Dig.  28.  5.  49.  I.

§  L  Tlie  subsequent  birth  (agnatio)  of  a  postumus  suus  avoided  a
previously  executed  will,  unless  the  postumus  was  by  anticipation  in-
stituted or  disinherited;  but,  as  is  observed  on  Tit.  13.  i  supr.,  certain
postumi  by  quasi-agnatio  could  never  be  disinherited  so  as  to  save  the
will.  Adoptio  minus  plena  did  not  avoid  a  will  previously  executed  by
the  adoptans,  for  the  adopted  child  did  not  come  under  his  potestas.

§  2.  A  later  valid  will  revoked  an  earlier  one,  even  though  the  testator
had,  by  the  latter  or  any  other  declaration,  proclaimed  any  subsequent
testamentary  disposition  of  his  own  void :  and  even  a  statement  in  the
first  that  it  should  be  revoked  by  a  later  one  only  if  executed  in  a  special
form,  was  altogether  ineffectual  for  the  purpose  contemplated,  for  '  am-
bulatoria  est  voluntas  .  •  •  usque  ad  vitae  supremum  exitum'  Dig.  24.

I.  3^  3.

One  exception,  however,  to  the  rule,  that  the  second  will,  to  revoke
the  first,  must  be  valid  iure  civili,  is  stated  by  Ulpian  in  Dig.  28.  3.  2  :
'  tunc  autem  prius  testamentum  rumpitur,  quum  posterius  rite  perfectum
est,  nisi  forte  posterius  vel  iure  militari  sit  factum,  vel  in  eo  scriptus  est,
qui  ab  intestato  venire  potest:  tunc  enim  et  posteriore  non  perfecto
superius  rumpitur,'  i.e.  a  prior  valid  will  is  revoked  by  a  later  invalid
one,  if  the  intestate  heirs  of  the  deceased  are  passed  over  in  the  first
and  instituted  in  the  second,  cf.  Cod.  6.  23.  21.  5.  Conversely,  as  ap-
pears from  §  3,  the  institutus  would  be  bound  by  the  provisions  of  an
earlier  will  which  the  later  one  had  revoked,  if  the  dispositions  of  that
in  which  he  was  instituted  could  be  read  as  imposing  on  him  a  fidei-


Tit.  17.]  QUIBUS  MODIS  TESTAMENTA  INFIRMANTUR.  281

extiterit.  Sed  si  quis  priore  testamento  lure  perfecto  poste-  3
rius  aeque  lure  fecerit,  etiamsi  ex  certis  rebus  in  eo  heredem
instituerit,  superius  testamentum  sublatum  esse  divi  Severus
et  Antoninus  rescripserunt.  cuius  constitutionis  insert  verba
iussimus,  cum  aliud  quoque  praeterea  in  ea  constitutione
expressum  est.  *  Imperatores  Severus  et  Antoninus  Cocceio
Campano.  Testamentum  secundo  loco  factum,  licet  in  eo
certarum  rerum  heres  scriptus  sit,  iure  valere,  perinde  ac  si
rerum  mentio  facta  non  esset,  sed  teneri  heredem  scriptum,
ut  contentus  rebus  sibi  datis  aut  suppleta  quarta  ex  lege
P'alcidia  hereditatem  restituat  his,  qui  in  priore  testamento
scripti  fuerant,  propter  inserta  verba  secundo  testamento,  qui-
bus  ut  valeret  prius  testamentum  expressum  est,  dubitari  non
oportet.'  et  ruptum  quidem  testamentum  hoc  modo  efficitur.
Alio  quoque  modo  testamenta  iure  facta  infirmantur,  veluti  4
cum  is  qui  fecerit  testamentum  capite  deminutus  sit.  quod
quibus  modis  accidit,  primo  libro  rettulimus.  Hoc  autem  5
casu  irrita  fieri  testamenta  dicuntur,  cum  alioquin  et  quae
rumpuntur  irrita  fiant  et  quae  statim  ab  initio  non  iure  fiunt
irrita  sunt :  et  ea,  quae  iure  facta  sunt,  postea  propter  capitis
deminutionem  irrita  fiunt,  possumus  nihilo  minus  rupta  dicere.
sed  quia  sane  commodius  erat  singulas  causas  singulis  appel-
lationibus  distingui,  ideo  quaedam  non  iure  facta  dicuntur,
quaedam  iure  facta  rumpi  vel  irrita  fieri.  Non  tamen  per  6
omnia  inutilia  sunt  ea  testamenta^  quae  ab  initio  iure  facta

commissum  taciturn.  Such  an  inference  is  there  drawn  from  the  fact
that  he  was  instituted  to  res  certae  only :  though,  if  those  res  certae  did
not  amount  to  as  much,  he  might  retain  enough  in  addition  as  would
make  up  the  clear  fourth  of  the  inheritance  to  which  he  was  entitled
under  the  SC.  Pegasianum  (not  the  lex  Falcidia,  as  is  erroneously  stated
in  the  text).

Besides  the  two  modes  mentioned  in  §§  i  and  2,  a  will  might  be
ruptum  {a)  as  described  in  §  7  inf. ;  {b)  by  an  oral  or  otherwise  informal
declaration  of  revocation,  if  made  before  three  witnesses,  or  registered
in  the  acta,  and  at  least  ten  years  since  the  execution  of  the  will,  Cod.
6.  23.  27.  2.

§  4.  Capitis  deminutio  is  only  an  instance  of  a  will  becoming  irritum
(veluti) ;  another  would  be  that  of  a  soldier's  will  avoided  at  the  end  of
a  year  after  his  discharge.  Dig.  28.  3.  7.

§  6.  The  only  kind  of  capitis  deminudo  whose  effect,  in  making  the
will  irritum,  could  be  overridden  in  this  manner  by  bonorum  possessio


a82  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  II.

propter  capitis  deminutionem  irrita  facta  sunt,  nam  si  scptem
testium  signis  signata  sunt,  potest  scriptus  heres  secundum
tabulas  testament!  bonorum  possessionem  agnoscere,  si  mode
defunctus  et  civis  Romanus  et  suae  potestatis  mortis  tempore
fuerit:  nam  si  ideo  irritum  factum  sit  testamentum,  quod
civitatem  vel  etiam  libertatem  testator  amisit,  aut  quia  in
adoptionem  se  dedit  et  mortis  tempore  in  adoptivi  patris
potestate  sit,  non  potest  scriptus  heres  secundum  tabulas
7  bonorum  possessionem  petere.  Ex  eo  autem  solo  non  potest
infirmari  testamentum,  quod  postea  testator  id  noluit  valere :
usque  adeo  ut  et,  si  quis  post  factum  prius  testamentum  pos-


secundum  tabulas  was  capitis  deminutio  minima.  The  bonorum  pos-
sessio  was  sine  re,  i.  e.  could  always  be  practically  defeated  by  the  civil
heirs  ab  intestato  of  the  deceased,  if  there  were  such  (Gaius  ii.  148,  9,
Ulpian,  Reg.  23.  6),  unless  the  testator,  after  recovering  testament!  factio,
expressly  declared  his  desire  that  the  will  should  stand.  Dig.  37.  11.  11.  2.
If  the  capitis  deminutio  resulted  from  capture  in  war,  the  will  was  not
irritum,  being  upheld  either  iure  postliminii  or  by  the  fictio  legis  Come-
liae,  see  on  Tit.  12.  5  supr.

Bonorum  possessio  secundum  tabulas  usually  found  its  application
where  there  was  a  will  which  iure  dvili  was  void,  but  which  satisfied
the  praetorian  requirements ;  cases  of  this,  besides  that  in  the  text,  and
the  praetorian  will  mentioaed  p.  250  supr.  are  (i)  pretermission  of  a  suus
heres,  though  the  bonorum  possessio  was  sine  re,  unless  the  suus  pre-
deceased the  testator  or  abstained  from  the  inheritance,  Dig.  28. 3. 12.  pr.,
ib.  17.  (2)  If  a  later  will  became  void,  bonorum  possessio  would  be
granted  secundum  tabulas  prioris  testamenti,  Dig.  37.  11.  11.  2.  (3)  If
there  were  two  or  more  wills,  none  of  which  could  be  proved  to  be  the
most  recent,  they  would  be  read  together  as  one  (praetorian)  testament,
l^igr*  37*  II*  I*  6:  for  a  case  obsolete  under  Justinian  see  Gaius  ii.  118-
122.  (4)  Where  the  instituted  heir  was  a  postumus  alienus,  Bk.  iii.  9.  pr.
inf. :  note  on  Tit.  20.  28  inf.

A  will  might  become  void,  not  only  by  being  niptum  or  irritum,  but
also  (i)  by  being  desertum,  i.e.  by  the  failure  of  all  instituted  heirs  to
take,  whether  from  refusal,  from  predeceasing  the  testator,  or  from  want
of  testamenti  factio  between  delatio  and  aditio  (Tit.  19.  4  inf.) ;  and
(2)  by  being  successfully  impeached  on  the  ground  of  inofficiositas,  as
described  in  the  next  Title.

§  7.  For  *oratio*  see  p.  105  supr.,  and  for  the  enactment  of  Pertinax
cf.  Capitol.  Pert.  7  '  legem  . . .  tulit,  ut  testamenta  priora  non  prius  essent
irrita,  quam  alia  perfecta  essent,  neve  ob  hoc  fiscus  aliquando  suc-
cederet.'  To  cancel  a  written  will  otherwise  than  by  the  execution  of
a  later  one  it  was  necessary  to  destroy  the  instrument  by  tearing  or  cutting
it,  or  by  erasing  the  institution,  though  unintentional  erasure  after  execu-


Tit.  1 8.]  DE  INOFFICIOSO  TESTA MENTO,  283

terius  facere  coeperit  et  aut  mortalitate  praeventus,  aut  quia
eum  eius  rei  paenituit,  id  non  perfecisset,  divi  Pertinacis  ora-
tione  cautum  est,  ne  alias  tabulae  priores  iure  factae  irritae
iiant,  nisi  sequentes  iure  ordinatae  et  perfectae  fuerint.  nam
imperfectum  testamentum  sine  dubio  nullum  est.  Eadem  8
oratione  expressit  non  admissurum  se  hereditatem  eius,  qui
litis  causa  principem  hcredem  reliquerit,  neque  tabulas  non
legitime  factas,  in  quibus  ipse  ob  eam  causam  heres  institutus
erat,  probaturum  neque  ex  nuda  voce  heredis  nomen  admis-
surum neque  ex  ulla  scriptura,  cui  iuris  auctoritas  desit,  aliquid
adepturum.  secundum  haec  divi  quoque-Severus  et  Antoninus
saepissime  rescripserunt :  '  licet  enim '  inquiunt '  legibus  soluti
sumus,  attamen  legibus  vivimus.'

XVIII.

DE  INOFFICIOSO  TESTAMENTO.

Quia  plerumque  parentes  sine  causa  liberos  suos  vel  exhe-
redant  vel  omittunt,  inductum  est,  ut  de  inofficioso  testamento
agere  possint  liberi,  qui  queruntur  aut  inique  se  exheredatos
aut  inique  praeteritos,  hoc  colore,  quasi  non  sanae  mentis
fuerunt,  cum  testamentum  ordinarent  sed  hoc  dicitur,  non
quasi  vere  furiosus  sit,  sed  recte  quidem  fecit  testamentum,
non  autem  ex  officio  pietatis :  nam  si  vere  furiosus  est,  nul-


tion  did  not  affect  the  validity  of  its  dispositions  if  their  tenor  was  known.
Dig.  28.  4.  I.  2.  Single  disf>ositions  could  similarly  he  revoked  by  erasure,
without  affecting  the  vahdity  of  the  will  as  a  whole,  Dig.  ib.  2.

§  8.  Cf.  Paulus,  Sent.  Rec.  5.  12.  8  (in  Dig.  28.  5.  9.  i.)  Mmperatorem
litis  causa  heredem  insdtui  invidiosum  est,  nee  calumniae  facultatem  ex
principali  maiestate  capi  oportet.'  For  acceptance  under  informal  wills
by  the  Emperors  cf.  Suetonius,  Calig.  38,  Domit.  12,  Pliny,  Paneg.  43.
'Nuda  vox'  seem  to  mean  the  allegation  of  having  heard  so  and  so
declare  informally  that  he  had  made  the  emperor  his  heir  ('  qui  diceret
audisse  se  ex  defuncto,  cum  viveret,  heredem  sibi  Caesarem  esse'
Suetonius,  I.e.).

Tit.  XVIII.  The  practice  of  exheredation  formally  enabled  a  father
to  debar  his  children  from  all  share  in  his  succession ;  in  this  Title  is
described  the  remedy  for  too  harsh  an  exercise  of  this  privilege,  which
practically  secured  to  the  nearest  relations  within  a  certain  degree  of  every
testator  a  fixed  proportion  of  his  or  her  property.    The  persons  to  whom


284  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

1  lum  est  testamentum.  Non  tantum  autem  liberis  permis-
sum  est  parentum  testamentum  inofficiosum  accusare,  verum
etiam  parentibus  liberorum.  soror  autem  et  frater  turpibus
personis  scriptis  heredibus  ex  sacris  constitutionibus  praelati
sunt :  non  ergo  contra  omnes  heredes  agere  possunt.  ultra
fratres  et  sorores  cognati  nullo  modo  aut  agere  possunt  aut

2  agentes  vincere.  Tam  autem  naturales  liberi,  quam  secundum
nostrae  constitutionis  divisionem  adoptati  ita  demum  de  in-
officioso  testamento  agere  possunt,  si  nullo  alio  iure  ad  bona
defuncti  venire  possunt.  nam  qui  alio  iure  veniunt  ad  totam
hereditatem  vel  partem  eius,  de  inofficioso  agere  non  possunt
postumi  quoqu^  qui  nullo  alio  iure  venire  possunt,  de  inofficioso


this  right  of  impeaching  a  wiU  as  inofficiosum  belonged  are  specified  in
§§  I  and  2,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  could  be  exercised  in  §  3.
The  querella,  or  action  for  the  rescission  of  the  will,  had  to  be  brought
within  five  years  of  the  testator's  decease  :  its  ordinary  effect  was  to  avoid
it  in  toto,  and  to  substitute  succession  ab  intestato,  Dig.  5.  2.  8.  16,  ib.  13,
though  it  might  be  brought  against  one  or  some  only  of  several  joint
heirs,  in  which  case  the  will  was  upset  only  in  part,  the  testator  remaining
pro  parte  testatus.  Dig.  5.  2. 19.  24.  For  the  plea  upon  which  the  will
was  avoided  (quasi  non  sanae  mentis)  cf.  VaL  Max.  7.  8.  i,  Seneca,
Clement,  i.  14,  Dio  Cassius  59.  i,  Pliny,  Paneg.  43.

§  1.  Descendants  could  bring  the  querella  against  the  wills  of  ascen-
dants ('  exheredant . . .  omittunt '  in  pr.  indicating  respectively  ascendants
exercising  potestas  and  all  other  ascendants,  female  as  well  as  male)  and
vice  versa,  if,  supposing  the  testator  had  died  intestate,  they  would  have
been  the  heirs,  civil  or  praetorian.  Dig.  5. 2. 6. 2  :  ib.  7  :  ib.  8  pr.  As  to  the
rights  of  brothers  and  sisters  against  one  another,  Ulpian  writes '  omnibus
enim  tam  parentibus  quam  liberis  de  inofficioso  licet  disputare :  cognati
enim  proprii  qui  sunt  ultra  fratrem  melius  facerent  si  se  sumptibus
inanibus  non  vexarent,  cum  obdnere  spem  non  haberent'  Dig.  5.  2.  I.
Constantine  enacted  that  only  agnatic  brothers  and  sisters  should  be
entitled  to  bring  the  querella;  Justinian  extended  it  to  germani,  but
excluded  uterini,  and  repealed  the  requirement  of  agnatic  connection.  Cod.
3.  28.  27,  though  still  allowing  the  action  only  where  turpes  personae  were
preferred  ('si  scripti  heredes  infamiae  vel  turpitudinis  vel  levis  notae
macula  adsparguntur').

§  2.  The  plene  adoptatus  alone  (unless  emancipated  before  the  testator's
death)  could  impeach  his  adoptive  father's  will,  Cod.  8.  48.  10.  pr. :  the
minus  plene  adoptatus  retained  the  right  against  his  natural  father.  As
is  remarked  in  the  text,  the  action  was  barred  if  the  claimant  could
obtain  his  due  alio  iure,  e.g.  by  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas,  if  he
were  an  emancipated  son  and  praeteritus,  or  by  the  quarta  Antonina,  if,


Tit.  i8.]  DE  INOFFICIOSO   TESTAMENTO.  285

agere  possunt.    Sed  haec  ita  accipienda  sunt,  si  nihil  eis  penitus  3
a  testatoribus  testamento  relictum  est.   quod  nostra  constitutio
ad  verecundiam  naturae  introduxit.    sin  vero  quantacumque
pars  hereditatis  vel  res  eis  fuerit  relicta,  de  inofiicioso  querella
quiescente  id  quod  eis  deest  usque  ad  quartam  legitiniae  partis
repletur,  licet  non  fuerit  adiectum  boni  viri  arbitratu  debere
earn  repleri.     Si  tutor  nomine  pupilH,  cuius  tutelam  gerebat,  4
ex  testamento  patris  sui  legatum  acceperit,  cum  nihil  erat  ipsi
tutori  relictum  a  patre  suo,  nihiio  minus  possit  nomine  suo
de  inofficioso  patris  testamento  agere.     Sed  et  si  e  contrario  5
pupilli  nomine,  cui  nihil  relictum  fuerit,  de  inofficioso  egerit
et  superatus  est,  ipse  quod  sibi  in  eodem  testamento  legatum
relictum  est  non  amittit.     Igitur  quartam  quis  debet  habere,  6
ut  de  inofficioso  testamento  agere  non  possit :  sive  iure  here-
ditario  sive  iure  legati  vel  fideicommissi,  vel  si  mortis  causa

having  been  adrogated  as  impubes,  he  was  subsequently  disinherited ;  see
Bk.  i.  II.  3  supr.

§  3.  Before  Justinian  the  querella  lay  whenever  the  claimant  had  re-
ceived less  from  the  testator  than  he  was  entitled  to  by  law :  '  si  parum,
quam  ei  debebatur,  fuerit  consecutus,  movere  de  inofficioso  testamento
querellam  concedatur*  Nov.  Theod.  i.  22.  He,  however,  enacted  (Cod.
3.  28.  30-36)  that  in  future  the  sole  ground  for  the  action  should  be  that
the  claimant  had  received  nothing  at  all :  if  he  had  received  something,
though  ever  so  little,  his  sole  remedy  was  to  bring  the  new  action  ad
supplendam  legitimam  against  the  heir  or  heirs,  which  left  the  will
untouched:  for  precedents  for  this  rule  cf.  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  4.  5.  10,  Cod.
3.  28.  4.  The  share  which  one  could  demand  was  one-fourth  of  what  one
would  have  had  if  the  testator  had  died  intestate,  Dig.  5. 2. 8. 8.  Justinian
subsequently  enacted,  by  Nov.  18.  i,  that  if  a  man  had  less  than  five
children  he  must  leave  them  together,  in  equal  shares,  at  least  a  third  of
the  inheritance ;  if  five  or  more,  at  least  one-half.

§  4.  Acceptance  of  anything,  with  full  knowledge,  under  the  will  was
taken  to  imply  acquiescence  in  its  dispositions,  and  so  barred  the  querella.
Dig.  34.  9.  5.  pr. ;  a  rule  sometimes  so  strictly  construed  that  to  assist
a  claimant  under  the  will  as  counsel  was  held  to  exclude  one  from  impeach-
ing it  on  one*s  own  account,  Dig.  ib.  32.  pr.

§  5.  '  Qui  testamentum  inofficiosum  dixit,  et  non  obtinuit,  id  quod  in
testamento  accepit,  perdere,  et  id  fisco  vindicari,  quasi  indigno  ablatum '
Dig.  5.  2.  8.  14.  For  other  exceptions  see  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  4.  5.  9.  lo,
^i&  34*  9'  5)  5'  2.  22.  I  and  3,  ib.  30.  i.

§  6.  Gifts  from  the  testator  inter  vivos  (i.  e.  not  mortis  causa)  could  not
as  a  rule  be  counted  as  part  of  the  quarta,  unless  made  propter  nuptias  or
by  way  of  dos.  Cod.  3.  28.  29,  or  unless  it  had  been  so  expressly  agreed


286  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

ei  quarta  donata  fuerit,  vel  inter  vivos  in  his  tantummodo
casibus,  quorum  nostra  constitutio  mentionem  facit,  vel  aliis
7  modis  qui  constitutionibus  continentur.  Quod  autem  de
quarta  diximus,  ita  intellegendum  est,  ut,  sive  unus  fuerit  sive
plures,  quibus  agere  de  inofficioso  testamento  permittitur,  una
quarta  eis  dari  possit,  ut  pro  rata  distribuatur  eis,  id  est  pro
virili  portione  quarta.

XIX.  '

DE   HEREDUM   QUALITATE  ET  DIFFERENTIA.

Heredes  autem  aut  necessarii  dicuntur  aut  sui  et  necessarii

1  aut  extranei.     Necessarius  heres  est  servus  heres  institutus :

ideo  sic  appellatus,  quia,  sive  velit   sive  nolit,  omnimodo  post

between  the  parties,  Cod.  ib.  35.  2  ;  for  other  exceptions  see  Cod.  ib.  3a  2,
Cod.  6.  20.  20.  pr.,  Dig.  5.  2.  25.  pr.

§  7.  The  true  ground  of  the  querelia  inofficiosi  being  the  testator's
impietas  or  want  of  natural  affection,  success  depended  on  the  plaintiffs
ability  to  show  '  immerentem  se  et  ideo  et  indigne  praeteritum  vel  etiam
exheredatione  summotum '  Dig.  5.  2.  5  :  the  onus  of  proving  the  existence
of  reasonable  grounds  for  the  plaintiffs  exclusion  lay  on  the  defendant
(instituted  heir),  who  might  meet  the  plaintiff  by  the  exceptio  ingratitu-
dinis.  Cod.  3.  28.  19,  ib.  23.

By  Nov.  115.  3-5  Justinian  made  a  considerable  change  in  this  branch
of  law;  he  required  that  ascendants  should  not  only  leave  descendants
the  portio  (and  vice  versa),  but  should  institute  them  heirs,  exheredation
being  allowed  only  for  definite  reasons  (of  which  more  than  a  dozen  are
specified  in  the  enactment),  and  the  reason  in  the  particular  case  being
required  to  be  stated  in  the  will.  Violation  of  this  new  rule  entailed
avoidance  of  the  actual  institution,  the  intestate  heirs  taking  the  place  of
the  institutus;  in  other  respects  the  dispositions  of  the  will  were  not
affected.  It  was  not  necessary  that  the  amount  in  which  an  ascendant
or  descendant  was  instituted  should  be  equivalent  to  his  due  share.  This
enactment  made  no  change  in  respect  of  the  reciprocal  rights  of  brother
and  sister,  but  it  altogether  excluded  ascendants  and  descendants  from
the  old  querelia  :  if  not  instituted  at  all,  they  took  the  place  of  the  heir
instituted,  the  will  in  other  respects  remaining  good  (c.  3.  14) :  if  instituted
in  less  than  they  were  entitled  to,  they  sued  the  heir  for  the  balance
(c.  s.  pr.).

Tit.  XIX.  §  L  Only  servi  of  the  testator's  own  (proprii)  could  be
necessarii  heredes,  including  also  a  free  person  in  mancipio  to  him,  who,
however,  was  entitled,  like  sui,  to  the  beneficium  abstinendi,  referred  to
in  §  2  inf.  (Gaius  ii.  160).    As  appears  from  Tit.  15.  pr.  supr.,  it  was  usual


Tit  19.]  DE  HEREDUM  QUALITATE  ET  DIFFERENTIA,  387

mortem  testatoris  protinus  liber  et  necessarius  heres  fit.  unde
qui  facultates  suas  suspectas  habent,  solent  servum  suum  primo
aut  secundo  vel  etiam  ulteriorc  gradu  heredem  instituere,  ut,
si  creditoribus  satis  non  fiat,  potius  eius  heredis  bona  quam
ipsius  testatoris  a  creditoribus  possideantur  vel  distrahantur  vel
inter  eos  dividantur.  pro  hoc  tamen  incommodo  illud  ei  com-
modum  praestatur,  ut  ea,  quae  post  mortem  patroni  sui  sibi
adquisierit,  ipsi  reserventur:  et  quamvis  non  sufficiant  bona
defunct!  creditoribus,  iterum  ex  ea  causa  res  eius,  quas  sibi
adquisierit,  non  veneunt.  Sui  autem  et  necessarii  heredes  2
sunt  veluti  filius  filia  nepos  neptisque  ex  filio  et  deinceps
ceteri  liberi,  qui  modo  in  potestate  morientis  fuerint,  sed  ut
nepos  neptisve  sui  heredes  sint,  non  sufficit  eum  eamve  in
potestate  avi  mortis  tempore  fuisse,  sed  opus  est,  ut  pater  eius


for  testators,  if  they  had  the  least  reason  to  suspect  their  circumstances
to  he  embarrassed,  to  appoint  one  or  more  of  their  own  slaves  as  final
substituti,  whereby  they  were  saved  from  intestacy  and  posthumous
insolvency :  and  by  the  lex  Aeiia  Sentia  the  testamentary  manumission
and  institution  of  a  slave  was  allowed  for  this  purpose  even  in  fraudem
creditorum,  Gaius  i.  21,  Cod.  6.  27.  2.  Under  the  bankruptcy  system
called  venditio  bononim  (Poste*s  Gaius  pp.  326  sq.)  the  banloiipt  had
become  infamis,  but  in  Justinian's  time  only  fraudulent  t>ankruptcy
operated  thus.  The  first  stage  in  such  proceedings  was  to  obtain
a  decree  from  the  praetor  of  missio  in  possessionem  (bonorum)  rei
servandae  causa:  ultimately  the  property  was  sold  in  lots  (bonorum
distractio,  whence  distrahantur  in  the  text)  and  the  proceeds  divided
among  the  creditors  according  to  their  proved  claims;  see  on  Bk.  iii.
12  inf.

The  privilege  which  a  necessarius  heres  enjoyed  of  being  liable  for
the  testators  debts  only  so  far  as  the  estate  went,  is  called  beneficium
separationis, '  item  sciendum  est  necessarium  heredem  servum  cum  liber-
tate  institutum  impetrare  posse  separationem,  scilicet  ut,  si  non  attigerit
bona  patroni,  in  ea  causa  sit,  ut  ei  quicquid  postea  adquisierit  separetur,
sed  et  si  quid  ei  a  testatore  debetur'  Dig.  42.  6.  i.  18.  Gaius  (ii.  155)
says  that  he  was  not  entitled  to  keep  for  himself  anything  which  *  ei  ex
hereditaria  causa  fiierit  adquisitum.'

§  2.  With  the  description  of  sui  as  domestic!  heredes  cf.  Plautns,
Trinum.  2.  2.  48,  where  a  son  says  to  his  £aither  '  de  meo :  nam  quod
tuum'st,  meum'st,'  cf.  also  Terence,  Heaut.  i.  i.  79,  Cic.  in  Verr.  2.  i.  44
'quibuscum  (i.e.  ex  liberis)  vivi  bona  partimur,*  Pliny,  Paneg.  37,
Ausonius,  Idyl.  3.  3.  It  seems  from  Dig.  29.  2.  6.  5  that  grandchildren
who  are  in  their  grandfather's  power  along  with  their  own  father  are
domestic!  heredes  and  necessarii,  so  that  if  the  grandfather  institutes  such


288  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

vivo  patre  suo  desierit  suus  heres  esse  aut  morte  interceptus
aut  qualibet  alia  ratione  liberatus  potestate :  tunc  enim  nepos
neptisve  in  locum  patris  sui  succedit  sed  sui  quidem  heredes
ideo  appellantur,  quia  domestic!  heredes  sunt  et  vivo  quoque
patre  quodammodo  domini  existimantur.  unde  etiam,  si  quis
intestatus  mortuus  sit,  prima  causa  est  in  successione  liberorum.
necessarii  vero  ideo  dicuntur,  quia  omnimodo,  sive  velint  sive
nolint,  tam  ab  intestato  quam  ex  testamento  heredes  fiunt.
sed  his  praetor  permittit  volentibus  abstinere  se  ab  hereditate,
ut  potius  parentis  quam  ipsorum  bona  similiter  a  creditoribus
possideantur.

3  Ceteri,  qui  testatoris  luri  subiecti  non  sunt,  extranei  heredes
appellantur.  itaque  liberi  quoque  nostri,  qui  in  potestate  nostra
non  sunt,  heredes  a  nobis  instituti  extranei  heredes  videntur.
qua  de  causa  et  qui  heredes  a  matre  instituuntur,  eodem  numero
sunt,  quia  feminae  in  potestate  liberos  non  habent.  servus
quoque  a  domino  heres  institutus  et  post  testamentum  factum

4  ab  eo  manumissus  eodem  numero  habetur.  In  extraneis  here-
dibus  illud  observatur,  ut  sit  cum  eis  testament!  factio,  sive
ipsi  heredes  instituantur  sive  hi  qui  in  potestate  eorum  sunt,
et  id  duobus  temporibus  inspicitur,  testament!  quidem  facti,  ut

a  grrandchild,  the  inheritance  is  ipso  iure  acquired  for  the  child's  own
father :  see  Sohm,  Institutionen,  §  96  (p.  417  in  the  English  Translation
by  Ledlie).

This  '  beneficium  abstinendi '  exempted  a  suus  heres  from  all  liability
for  his  father's  debts,  '  si  se  hereditati  non  immiscuerit,'  i.  e.  if  he  did
nothing  from  which  acceptance  of  the  hereditas  could  be  inferred ;  '  ut
quamvis  creditoribus  hereditariis  iure  civili  teneantur,  tamen  in  eos  actio
non  detur,  si  velint  derelinquere  hereditatem'  Dig.  29.  2.  57.  pr.;  and
a  suus  heres  who  was  a  minor  was  not  prejudiced  even  by  such  '  immix-
tion,*  §  5  inf.,  Dig.  29.  2.  57.  pr.  and  i.  The  result  of  this  privilege  was
practically  to  assimilate  the  suus  et  necessarius  heres  to  an  extraneus ;
consequently,  he  could,  like  the  latter,  be  compelled  by  the  magistrate  to
decide  within  a  prescribed  time  whether  he  meant  to  avail  himself  of  it
or  not,  Dig.  28.  8.  7.  pr.,  Cod.  6.  30.  19.  If  he  did,  he  was  treated  as  if  he
was  not  really  heir  at  all ;  he  had  merely  '  nudum  nomen  heredis '  Dig.
38.  17.  2.  8,  'hunc  qui  abstinuit  praetor  non  habet  heredis  loco'  Dig.  11.
I.  12.  pr.  Consequently,  the  bonorum  possessio  became  delata,  in  the
first  instance,  to  the  substituti.  Dig.  42.  i.  44,  and  in  default  of  these  to  the
heredes  ab  intestato  in  their  several  degrees  of  proximity,  and  in  the  last
resort  to  the  fiscus.  The  beneficium  abstinendi  passed  to  the  heirs  of  the
instituted  suus,  Dig.  29.  2.  7.  i,  Cod.  6.  3a  19.

§  4.  For  '  testamenti  factio  passiva '  see  on  Tit.  14.  pr.,  Tit.  17.  6  supr.


Tit.  19.]  DEHEREDUM  QUALITATE  ET DIFFERENTIA.  289

constiterit  institutio,  mortis  vero  testatoris,  ut  effectum  habeat
hoc  amplius  et  cum  adit  hereditatem,  esse  debet  cum  eo
testament!  factio,  sive  pure  sive  sub  condicione  heres  institutus
sit :  nam  ius  heredis  eo  vel  maxime  tempore  inspiciendum
est,  quo  adquirit  hereditatem.  medio  autem  tempore  inter
factum  testamentum  et  mortem  testatoris  vel  condicionem
institutionis  existentem  mutatio  iuris  heredi  non  nocet,  quia
ut  diximus  tria  tempora  inspici  debent.  testament!  autem
factionem  non  solum  is  habere  videtur,  qui  testamentum  facere
potest,  sed  etiam  qui  ex  alieno  testamento  vel  ipse  capere  potest
vel  alii  adquirere,  licet  non  potest  facere  testamentum.  et  ideo
et  furiosus  et  mutus  et  postumus  et  infans  et  filius  familias  et
servus  alienus  testament!  factionem  habere  dicuntur :  licet  enim
testamentum  facere  non  possunt,  attamen  ex  testamento  vel
sib!  vel  alii  adquirere  possunt.  Extraneis  autem  heredibus  5
deliberandi  potestas  est  de  adeunda  hereditate  vel  non  adeunda.

§  5.  By  the  civil  law  the  institutus  was  not  bound  to  accept  or  decline
the  hereditas  within  any  definite  time,  though  such  a  period  was  often
fixed  by  the  testator,  non-acceptance  within  which  caused  forfeiture  of
delatio  to  the  substituti.  Where  this  was  done,  both  the  prescribed
interval  and  the  signification  of  acceptance  were  called  cretio,  Gaius  ii.
164 ;  the  latter  was  required  to  be  made  in  a  recognized  form  (ib.  166)
and  before  witnesses  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lat.6. 81,  Cic.  ad  Att.  13.  46).  Two
kinds  of  cretio  were  distinguished,  vulgaris  (Gaius  ii.  171,  2),  by  which
the  institutus  was  bound  to  accept  within  so  many  days  only  after  he
knew  of  his  institution  and  was  able  to  make  aditio,  and  continua  (Gaius
ii.  172,  3),  which  was  not  so  favourable  to  the  institutus,  because  the
time  began  to  run  immediately  on  the  testator's  decease,  and  might  have
who  ly  elapsed  before  he  was  able  to  take  advantage  of  his  rights  or  was
even  aware  of  them.  The  solemn  forms  of  cretio,  which  are  preserved  by
Gaius,  were  abolished  A.  D.  407  by  Honorius  and  Arcadius,  Cod.  6. 30. 17,
though  of  course  this  did  not  in  any  way  prevent  testators  from  still
making  the  institution  conditional  on  acceptance  within  a  fixed  time  from
the  date  of  decease.

But  though  no  rule  of  law  required  a  reasonably  prompt  aditio,  it  was
always  open  to  the  deceased's  creditors  (and  we  may  add  to  legatees,
fideicommissarii,  substituti,  and  other  persons  jointly  instituted,  Cod.  6.
30.  9)  to  petition  the  praetor  to  fix  a  time  within  which  it  must  be  made,
*  solet  praetor,  postulantibus  hereditariis  creditoribus,  tempus  constituere,
intra  quod  si  velit  adeat  hereditatem  ;  si  minus,  ut  liceat  creditoribus  bona
defunct!  vendere  *  Gaius  ii.  167.  The  interval  so  fixed  was  called  *  spa-
tium  deliberandi :  ait  praetor,  si  tempus  ad  deliberandum  petet,  dabo '
Dig.  28.  8.  I.  I.    Under  Justinian  no  longer  than  nine  months  might  be

U


290  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

sed  sive  is,  cut  abstinendi  potestas  est,  immiscuerit  se  bonis
hereditariis,  sive  extraneus,  cui  de  adeunda  hereditate  deli-


allowed  for  this  purpose,  though  this  might  be  extended  to  a  year  upon
personal  petition  to  the  emperor,  Cod.  6.  3a  9,  and  be  also  entirely
altered  the  legal  position  of  the  institutus  by  enacting  that  by  doing
nothing  in  the  way  of  either  refusal  or  acceptance  within  the  time
allowed  he  lost  not  the  latter  right  but  the  former,  Cod.  6.  30.  22.  14.
An  institutus  whose  title  was  threatened  by  querella  inofficiosi  was  required
to  accept  within  six  months,  or  within  twelve  if  he  and  the  claimant
resided  in  different  jurisdictions,  Cod.  3.  28.  36.  3.  Bonorum  possessio
(as  contrasted  with  the  hereditas)  had  in  every  case  to  be  accepted  wifhin
a  fixed  limit  of  time,  a  year  being  allowed  to  ascendants  and  descendants,
and  a  hundred  days  (tempus  utile  in  both  cases)  to  all  other  persons,  Bk.  iii.
9.  9  and  10  inf.

By  the  act  of  acceptance  the  interval  which  had  elapsed  since  the
decease  was  held  by  a  fiction  to  be  obliterated ;  *  heres  quandoque
adeundo  hereditatem  iam  tunc  a  morte  successisse  defuncto  intellegitur '
Dig.  29.  2.  54.  The  effect  of  acceptance  (until  Justinian)  had  been  to
produce  a  confusio  between  the  proprietary  relations  of  the  deceased  and
those  of  the  heir ;  what  had  been  two  properties,  two  sets  of  rights  of
action,  two  sets  of  liabilities,  were  now  combined  in  one ;  hence  debts
which  either  owed  to  the  other  were  cancelled,  *  si  debitor  heres  creditori
extiterit,  confusio  hereditatis  perimit  petitionis  actionem '  Dig.  46.  3.  75,
and  iura  in  re  which  the  one  had  enjoyed  over  the  property  of  the  other
were  extinguished,  Dig.  18.  4.  2.  18  and  19;  cf.  (2)  p.  223  supr.  But
possession  did  not  pass  to  the  heir  without  an  independent  apprehensio
by  him, '  quia  hereditas  in  eum  id  tantum  transfundit,  quod  est  heredi-
tatis :  non  fuit  autem  possessio  hereditatis'  Dig.  47.  4.  i.  15.

Subject  to  the  exceptions  noticed  in  the  text,  the  acceptance  was
irrevocable.  The  heir  might  have  been  mistaken  in  his  estimate  of  the
assets  and  liabilities  of  the  deceased,  but  having  once  taken  upon  himself
the  universitas  iuris,  he  could  not  get  rid  of  it :  semel  heres,  semper  heres.
He  thus  became  as  fully  liable  for  the  deceased's  debts  as  though  he  had
contracted  them  himself,  'hereditas  autem  quin  obliget  nos  aeri  alieno
etiamsi  non  sit  solvendo  plus  quam  manifestum  est'  Dig.  29.  2.  8.  pr.
Under  such  circumstances  the  hereditas  was  said  to  be  damnosa.  Dig.
17.  I.  32  ;  29.  2.  57.  I ;  but  if  its  solvency  appeared  doubtful,  the  institutus
could  protect  himself  by  making  an  arrangement  with  the  creditors  before
acceptance,  by  which  the  latter  resigned  any  claims  which  they  might
have  against  the  estate  beyond  its  actual  value ;  he  then  accepted  as  their
agent  and  mandatary,  and  could  recover  from  them  any  loss  which  he
might  sustain  in  so  doing.  Dig.  17.  i.  32  :  the  creditors  might  even  agree
by  resolution  to  accept  so  much  in  the  pound,  and  here  the  majority
bound  the  minority,  Dig.  2.  14.  7.  17,  ib.  8-10  pr.  Conversely,  the
creditors  of  the  deceased  might  suspect  that  though  the  latter's  assets
were  sufficient  to  meet  all  their  claims,  they  would  not,  even  with  the


Tit.  19.]  DE  HEREDUM QUALITATE  ET DIFFERENTIA,  291

berare  licet,  adierit,  postea  relinquendae  hereditatis  facultatem
non  habet,  nisi  minor  sit  annis  viginti  quinque :  nam  huius
aetatis  hominibus  sicut  in  ceteris  omnibus  causis  deceptis,  ita
et  si  temere  damnosam  hereditatem  susceperint,  praetor  suc-
currit.     Sciendum  tamen  est  divum  Hadrianum  etiam  maiori  6


heir's  own  property,  suffice  to  pay  the  latter's  debts  «ilso ;  in  such  a  case
as  this  they  were  entitled  to  apply  within  five  years  to  the  praetor  for
a  separatio  bonorum,  the  effect  of  which  was  to  prefer  their  own  rights
against  the  bona  separata  to  those  of  the  heir's  own  creditors,  though
they  forfeited  all  claim  to  any  subsequent  payment  from  the  heir's  own
property,  should  the  separated  portion  prove  in  fact  insufficient  for  their
satisfaction,  Dig.  42.  6.  i.  i.  The  heir,  however,  is  bound  by  his
testator's  dispositions.  He  may  in  his  will  have  done  more  than
institute  an  heir;  he  may  have  given  legacies  or  fideicommissa,  left
instructions  as  to  his  funeral,  appointed  guardians  to  his  children  and
settled  the  arrangements  for  their  education,  forbidden  alienation  of  certain
res  hereditariae,  and  so  forth.  All  these  dispositions  are  valid  and  bind-
ing on  the  heir.

When  there  are  two  or  more  joint  heirs,  the  hereditas  passes  to  them
collectively,  as  a  whole ;  there  is  said  to  be  a  communio  in  it  between
them,  but  to  each  of  them  individually  it  passes  only  pro  rata;  each
coheres  is  not  liable  for  the  testator's  debts  in  full,  but  only  in  the  same
ratio  in  which  he  is  instituted,  the  liabilities  being  divided  between  them
ipso  iure,  Cod.  3.  36.  3.  Division  of  course  would  usually  take  place  by
arrangement,  but  if  any  one  refused  to  concur,  he  could  be  compelled  by
the  actio  familiae  erciscundae,  to  which  also  he  could  resort  if  he  thought
he  was  being  unfairly  treated  by  his  coheirs  ;  '  haec  actio  proficiscitur  ex
lege  duodecim  tabularum,  namque  coheredibus,  volentibus  a  communione
discedere,  necessarium  videbatur  aliquam  actionem  constitui,  qua  inter
eos  res  hereditariae  distribuerentur '  Dig.  10.  2.  i  pr.  Sometimes  a
coheres  could  not  claim  a  division  without  bringing  into  the  inheritance
certain  property  of  his  own  (collatio  bonorum).  This  practice  had
originated  in  the  praetorian  bonorum  possessio,  whether  contra  tabulas
or  ab  intestato;  the  praetor  would  not  admit  emancipati  to  share  the
estate  with  their  unemancipated  brothers  and  sisters  unless  they  brought
into  *  hotchpot '  all  that  they  had  acquired  for  themselves  since  their  own
release  from  potestas,  Dig.  37.  6.  1.  14.  The  emperors,  especially  A.  Pius
and  Leo,  further  developed  the  obligation,  requiring  that  where  a  number
of  descendants  succeeded  jointly  to  a  common  ascendant,  each  female
should  bring  in  the  dos  which  she  had  received  from  the  latter  (dotis
collatio),  and  the  rule  was  subsequently  extended  to  much  other  property
which  descendants  of  either  sex  had  received  from  the  common  ascendant
in  his  lifetime,  Dig.  37.  6.

For  the  relief  of  minors  by  in  integrum  restitutio  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6. 33  inf.

§  6.  For  the  privilege  of  soldiers  cf.  Cod.  6.  30.  22.  pr.  and  15  ^milites,

U  %


9^2  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

viginti  quinque  annis  veniam  dedisse,  cum  post  aditam  here-
ditatem  grande  aes  alienum,  quod  aditae  hereditatis  tempore
latebat,  emersisset.  sed  hoc  divus  quidem  Hadrianus  speciali
beneficio  cuidam  praestitit :  divus  autem  Gordianus  postea  in
militibus  tantummodo  hoc  extendit :  sed  nostra  benevolentia
commune  omnibus  subiectis  imperio  nostro  hoc  praestavit
beneficium  et  constitutionem  tam  aequissimam  quam  nobilem
scripsit,  cuius  tenorem  si  observaverint  homines,  licet  eis  adire
hereditatem  et  in  tantum  teneri,  in  quantum  valere  bona
hereditatis  contingit:  ut  ex  hac  causa  neque  deliberationis
auxilium  eis  fiat  necessarium,  nisi  omissa  observatione  nostrae
constitutionis  et  deliberandum  existimaverint  et  sese  veteri

etsi  propter  simplicitatem  praesentis  legis  subtilitatem  non  observaverint,.
in  tantum  tamen  teneantiir,  quantum  in  hereditate  invenerint.'

By  the  important  change  to  which  he  here  alludes  Justinian  eflfected
a  complete  reformation  in  the  Roman  law  of  inheritance,  so  far  as  relates
to  the  character  and  liabilities  of  the  heres.  As  Dr.  Hunter  says  (Roman
Law  p.  574), '  it  was  a  bold  and  successful  stroke  to  convert  the  heir  into
a  mere  official,  designated  by  the  deceased  for  the  purpose  of  winding  up
his  affairs  and  distributing  his  property.  The  heir  was  now  a  mere
executor,  with  the  privilege  of  being  residuary  legatee,  and  if  the  testator
did  not  forbid  it,  of  retaining  the  Falcidian  fourth.*

By  this  enactment  (Cod.  6.  30.  22 j  Justinian  gave  the  person  to  whom
the  hereditas  was  delata,  whether  ab  intestato  or  under  a  will,  the  option
between  applying  for  a  spatium  deliberandi,  and  making  a  complete
inventory  of  the  property  of  the  deceased.  If  he  chose  the  latter,  he
must,  with  the  assistance  of  a  notary  and  a  prescribed  number  of  witnesses
representing  the  creditors  and  legatees,  begin  the  inventory  within  one
month  of  his  becoming  aware  of  his  right,  and  finish  it  within  two  months
more :  if,  however,  he  was  at  a  distance,  he  was  allowed  a  year ;  Cod.  6.
50.  22.  2  and  3.  During  this  interval  neither  creditors  nor  legatees  might
molest  him  in  any  way,  though  at  its  termination  they  could  require  him
to  swear  to  the  accuracy  of  the  inventory,  which  he  also  had  to  sign.  By
selecting  this  procedure,  the  heir  was  exempted  from  all  liability  beyond
the  assets  of  the  deceased,  Cod.  loc.  cit.  4,  and  also  from  the  obligation  of
ascertaining  rights  of  priority,  etc.  among  creditors ;  these  and  legatees
were  to  be  paid  in  the  order  in  which  they  applied  to  him,  and  if  the
assets  were  exhausted  unpaid  creditors  might  resort  to  paid  legatees,  Cod.
ib.  4-6,  8.  The  universitas  iuris  in  fact  no  longer  passed  to  the  heir :
there  was  no  confusio  between  his  proprietary  relations  and  those  of  the
deceased,  so  that  iura  in  re  aliena  and  debts  were  no  longer  affected  in
the  way  described,  p.  288  supr..  Cod.  ib.  9.

If  the  institutus  or  person  entitled  preferred  to  apply  for  a  spatium
deliberandii  his  old  liabilities  remained,  ib.  14 :  even  in  this  case  he  must


Tit  19.]  DEHEREDUM  QUALITATE ET DIFFERENTIA,  293

gravamini  aditionis  supponere  maluerint.  Item  extraneus  7
heres  testamento  institutus  aut  ab  intestato  ad  legitimam  here>
ditatem  vocatus  potest  aut  pro  herede  gerendo  vel  etiam  nuda
voluntate  suscipiendae  hereditatis  heres  fieri,  pro  herede
autem  gererequisvidetur,  si  rebus  hereditariis  tamquam  heres
utatur  vel  vendendo  res  hereditarias  aut  praedia  colendo
locandove  et  quoquo  modo  si  voluntatem  suam  declaret  vel  re
vel  verbis  de  adeunda  hereditate,  dummodo  sciat  eum,  in  cuius
bonis  pro  herede  gerit,  testato  intestatove  obiisse  et  se  ei
heredem  esse,  pro  herede  enim  gerere  est  pro  domino  gerere :
veteres  enim  heredes  pro  dominis  appellabant.  sicut  autem
nuda  voluntate  extraneus  heres  fit,  ita  et  contraria  destinatione
statim  ab  hereditate  repellitur.  eum,  qui  mutus  vel  surdus
natus  est  vel  postea  factus,  nihil  prohibet  pro  herede  gerere  et
adquirere  sibi  hereditatem,  si  tamen  intellegit  quod  agitur.

make  an  inventory ;  if  he  did  not,  and  accepted  the  inheritance,  he  lost
his  right  to  the  Falcidian  fourth,  and  must  pay  legacies  and  fideicommissa
in  full.  The  practical  result,  as  Dr.  Hunter  remarks,  was  that  if  there
was  any  doubt  as  to  the  solvency  of  the  hereditas,  the  heir  was  compelled
to  make  an  inventory.

§  7.  No  form  was  at  any  time  prescribed  by  law  for  acceptance  of  an
inheritance,  though  before  the  abolition  of  cretiones  (note  on  §  5  supr.)
a  formal  acceptance  might  have  been  required  by  the  testator.  The
mere  intention  to  accept,  provided  it  was  evidenced  by  words  or  acts
(pro  herede  gestio),  was  sufficient.  It  might  not,  however,  be  partial
('sed  et  si  quis  ex  pluribus  partibus  in  eiusdem  hereditate  institutus  sit,
non  potest  quasdam  partes  repudiare,  quasdam  agnoscere'  Dig.  29.  2.  2),
or  conditional,  for  hereditatis  aditio  was  an  actus  legitimus :  *  sed  et  si
quis  ita  dixerit,  si  solvendo  hereditas  est,  adeo  hereditatem,  nulla  aditio
est '  Dig.  ib.  51.  2.  It  would  seem  that  aditio  itself  could  not  be  made  on
behalf  of  the  institutus  by  an  agent.  Dig.  36.  i.  65.  pr. ;  though  this  rule
admitted  of  exceptions  in  favour  of  juristic  persons,  Dig.  36.  i.  6.  4,
infants.  Cod.  6.  30.  18.  pr.,  and  those  of  weak  intellect,  Cod.  5.  70.  7.  pr.,
and  the  declaration  of  acceptance  might  be  made  by  an  agent  always.
Dig.  36.  I.  65.  3.  Before  delatio  a  person  could  not  bind  himself  by
either  acceptance  or  repudiation,  but  after  delatio  either  determination,
when  once  manifested,  was  irrevocable,  Cod.  6.  31.

For  the  mode  in  which  bonorum  possessio  was  obtained  see  Bk.  iii.
9.  10  inf.


294  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  II.

XX.

DE  LEGATIS.

Post  haec  videamus  de  legatis.  quae  pars  iuris  extra  pro-
positam  quidem  materiam  videtur :  nam  loquimur  de  his  iuris
figuris,  quibus  per  universitatem  res  nobis  adquiruntur.  sed
cum  omnino  de  testamentis  deque  heredibus  qui  testamento
instituuntur  locuti  sumus,  non  sine  causa  sequenti  loco  potest
haec  iuris  materia  tractari.

1  Legatum  itaque  est  donatio  quaedam  a  defuncto  relicta.

2  Sed  olim  quidem  erant  legatorum  genera  quattuor :  per  vindi-
cationem,  per  damnationem,  sinendi  modo,  per  praeceptionem  :
et  certa  quaedam  verba  cuique  generi  legatorum  adsignata
erant,  per  quae  singula  genera  legatorum  significabantur.  sed
ex  constitutionibus  divorum  principum  sollemnitas  huiusmodi
verborum  penitus  sublata  est.  nostra  autem  constitutio,  quam
cum  magna  fecimus  lucubratione,  defunctorum  voluntates  vali-
diores  esse  cupientes  et  non  verbis,  sed  voluntatibus  eorum
faventes,  disposuit,  ut  omnibus  l^atis  una  sit  natura  et,  qui-
buscumque  verbis  aliquid  derelictum  sit,  liceat  legatariis  id
persequi  non  solum  per  actiones  personates,  sed  etiam  per  in

Tit.  ZX.  1.  Hereditas  is  universal  succession,  sometimes  under  a  will,
sometimes  ab  intestato:  legatum  is  singular  succession,  under  a  will
only,  to  a  part,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  the  testator's  property :  '  legatum
est  delibatio  hereditatis,  qua  testator  ex  eo,  quod  universum  heredis
foret,  alicui  quid  coUatum  velit'  Dig.  30.  116.  pr.  Historically,  the  idea
of  legacy  is  inseparable  from  that  of  testamentum ;  a  legacy  can  be
charged  only  on  a  testamentary  heir,  and  only  through  the  will  itself,
Tit.  23.  10  inf. :  no  legatee  is  entitled  unless  some  one  accepts  under  the
testamentum:  no  one  can  be  a  legatee  who  has  not  testamenti  factio
passiva  (note  on  Tit.  14.  pr.  supr.) ;  the  words  in  which  a  legacy  is  given
must  be  formal,  imperative,  and  in  the  Latin  tongue  (civilia  verba) ;
'  legatum  est,  quod  legis  modo,  id  est  imperative^  testamento  relinquitur :
nam  ea,  quae  precativo  modo  relinquuntur,  fideicommissa  vocantur'
Ulpian,  Reg.  24.  i.

§  2.  The  four  formulae,  alluded  to  here,  in  which  legacies  could  be
given  under  the  older  law,  are  described  at  length  in  Gaius  ii.  192-223,
and  Ulpian,  Reg.  24.  2-13.  They  differed  from  one  another,  inter  cUia^
(i)  in  respect  of  the  property  which  could  be  given  by  them  respectively.
Nothing  could  be  given  per  vindicationem,  with  small  exceptions,  which


Tit.  20.]  DE  LEGATIS.  295

rem  et  per  hypothecariam :  cuius  constitutionis  perpensum
modum  ex  ipsius  tenore  perfectissime  accipere  possibile  est.
Sed  non  usque  ad  earn  constitutionem  standum  esse  existi-  3
mavimus*  cum  enim  antiquitatem  invenimus  legata  quidem
stricte  concludentem,  fideicommissis  autem,  quae  ex  voluntate
magis  descendebant  defunctorum,  pinguiorem  naturam  indul-

did  not  belong  to  the  testator  ex  iure  Quiritium  at  the  time  both  of  the
execution  of  the  will  and  of  his  decease ;  a  legacy  sinendi  modo  might
comprise  property  of  the  heir  as  well  as  of  the  testator:  per  damna-
tionem  could  be  given  property  belonging  to  any  one,  the  heir  being
bound,  if  possible,  to  procure  and  convey  it  to  the  legatee ;  see  §  4  inf.
(2)  In  respect  of  the  remedy  available  to  the  legatee :  if  the  disposition
were  made  per  vindicationem  or  praeceptionem,  he  could  recover  by
real  action  :  if  sinendi  modo,  it  was  doubted  whether  the  heir  was  under
any  active  obligation  at  all,  Gaius  ii.  213-14:  if  per  damnationem,  the
remedy  was  in  personam  only.  (3)  In  respect  of  the  effect  of  a  gift
of  the  same  thing  to  two  or  more  persons  disiunctim,  Gaius  ii.  205*
The  importance  of  these  distinctions  of  form  was  much  reduced  by  the
SC.  Neronianum,  A.  D.  64,  which  apparently  enacted  that  whichever  of
the  four  formulae  was  actually  employed,  it  should  be  construed  as
though  it  were  that  most  favourable  to  the  legatee,  which  usually  would
be  that  per  damnationem :  'SC^  Neroniano  cautum  est,  ut  quod  minus
aptis  (or  ratis)  verbis  legatum  est,  perinde  sit  ac  si  Optimo  iure  legatum
esset:  optimum  autem  ius  legati  per  damnationem  est'  Ulpian,  Reg.  24.
1 1 :  its  usual  effect  was  thus  to  render  valid  legacies  left  in  one  of  the
other  three  forms  which  previously  would  have  been  void:  Gaius  ii.  197.
212.  218.  Some  hundreds  of  years  later  testators  were  enabled  by  an
enactment  of  Constantius,  A.  D.  339,  to  give  legacies  in  any  words  they
chose,  whether  Greek  or  Latin,  Cod.  6.  37.  21.  Justinian's  own  regula-
tions, mentioned  in  this  and  the  following  sections,  assimilated  the  civil
law  bequest  (legatum)  so  far  as  was  possible  to  fideicommissa,  the  nature
of  which  will  appear  from  Tits.  23  and  24  inf.  Any  legal  superiority
which  either  had  possessed  over  the  other  was  in  future  to  be  conmion  to
both,  and  the  object  of  a  bequest,  whether  technically  a  legatum  or
a  fideicommissum,  was  to  be  recoverable  by  the  beneficiary  by  the  most
appropriate  remedy,  real  or  personal.  The  legatee  acquired  a  real  right
to  the  res  legata  in  every  case  where  it  belonged  to  the  testator,  unless
indeed  the  testator  himself  expressed  a  contrary  intention,  Cod.  6.  43.  i,
and  in  no  other ;  he  acquired  a  personal  right  against  the  heir  in  every
case,  and  this  was  secured  by  a  statutory  hypotheca,  first  given  by
Justinian  himself,  over  everything  which  the  person  on  whom  the  legacy
or  fideicommissum  was  charged  had  himself  received  from  the  inheritance.
Cod.  6.  43.  I.  2.

§  8.  For  the  principal  original  differences  between  legacies  and  fidei*
commissa  see  on  Tit.  23.  i  inf.


396  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.        [Lib.  II.

gentem :  necessarium  esse  duximus  omnia  l^ata  fideicom-
missis  exaequare,  ut  nulla  sit  inter  ea  differentia,  sed  quod
deest  legatis,  hoc  repleatur  ex  natura  iideicommissorum  et,  si
quid  ampUus  est  in  legatis,  per  hoc  crescat  fideicommissi
natura.  sed  ne  in  primis  legum  cunabulis  permixte  de  his
exponendo  studiosis  adulescentibus  quandam  introducamus
difficultatem,  operae  pretium  esse  duximus  interim  separatim
prius  de  legatis  et  postea  de  fideicommissis  tractare,  ut  natura
utriusque  iuris  cognita  facile  possint  permixtionem  eorum
eruditi  suptilioribus  auribus  accipere.

4  Non  solum  autem  testatoris  vel  heredis  res^  sed  et  aliena
legari  potest :  ita  ut  heres  cogatur  redimere  cam  et  praestare
vel,  si  non  potest  redimere,  aestimationem  eius  dare,  sed  si
talis  res  sit,  cuius  non  est  commercium,  nee  aestimatio  eius
debetur,  sicuti  si  campum  Martium  vel  basilicas  vel  templa
vel  quae  publico  usui  destinata  sunt  l^averit:  nam  nuUius
momenti  legatum  est  quod  autem  diximus  alienam  rem
posse  legari,  ita  intellegendum  est,  si  defunctus  sciebat  alienam
rem  esse,  non  et  si  ignorabat :  forsitan  enim,  si  scisset  alienam,
non  legasset.  et  ita  divus  Pius  rescripsit.  et  verius  est  ipsum
qui  agit,  id  est  legatarium,  probare  oportere  scisse  alienam
rem  legare  defunctum,  non  heredem  probare  oportere  ignorasse
alienam,  quia  semper  necessitas  probandi  incumbit  illi  qui  agit.

5  Sed  et  si  rem  obligatam  creditori  aliquis  legaverit,  necesse
habet  heres  lucre,  et  hoc  quoque  casu  idem  placet,  quod  in
re  aliena,  ut  ita  demum  lucre  necesse  habeat  heres,  si  sciebat
defunctus  rem  obligatam  esse :  et  ita  divi  Severus  et  Anto-
ninus rescripserunt.    si  tamen  defunctus  voluit  legatarium  luere

6  et  hoc  expressit,  non  debet  heres  earn  luere.  Si  res  aliena
legata  fuerit  et  eius  vivo  testatore  legatarius  dominus  factus


§  4.  The  true  rule,  of  which  only  an  illustration  is  afforded  by  the
legacy  of  a  res  extra  commercium,  is  that  the  act  which  the  heres  has  to
perform  in  favour  of  the  legatee  must  be  both  physically  possible  and
legally  permitted :  as  he  cannot  convey  to  the  latter  a  res  extra  com-
mercium, so  he  ought  not  to  be  compelled  to  pay  him  its  value.

§  6.  The  maxim  '  duas  lucrativas  causas  in  eundem  hominem  et  in
eandem  rem  concurrere  non  posse'  may  be  otherwise  stated  thus:  if
the  res  legata  already  belongs  to  the  legatee  when  the  dies  legati  cedit
(Dig.  30.  82.  pr.),  the  latter  can  claim  its  value  from  the  heir  only  if  and


Tit.  20.]  DE  LEG  ATI S,  297

fuerit,  si  quidem  ex  causa  emptionis,  ex  testamento  actione
pretium  consequi  potest :  si  vero  ex  causa  lucrativa,  veluti  ex
donatione  vel  ex  alia  simili  causa,  agere  non  potest,  nam
traditum  est  duas  lucrativas  causas  in  eundem  hominem  et  in
eandem  rem  concurrere  non  posse,  hac  ratione  si  ex  duobus
testamentis  eadem  res  eidem  debeatur,  interest,  utrum  rem  an
aestimationem  ex  testamento  consecutus  est:  nam  si  rem,
agere  non  potest,  quia  habet  eam  ex  causa  lucrativa,  si  aesti-
mationem, agere  potest.  Ea  quoque  res,  quae  in  rerum  7
natura  non  est,  si  modo  futura  est,  recte  legatur,  veluti  fructus
qui  in  illo  fundo  nati  erunt,  aut  quod  ex  ilia  ancilla  natum
erit.  Si  eadem  res  duobus  legata  sit  sive  coniunctim  sive  8
disiunctim,  si  ambo  perveniant  ad  legatum,  scinditur  inter  eos
legatum :  si  alter  deficiat,  quia  aut  spreverit  legatum  aut  vivo
testatore  decesserit  aut  alio  quolibet  modo  defecerit,  totum  ad
coUegatarium  pertinet.     coniunctim  autem  legatur,  veluti  si

so  far  as  he  obtained  it  after  the  execution  of  the  will  for  valuable  con-
sideration. If  at  that  time  it  belonged  to  him,  the  disposition  is  void,
unless  he  alienated  it  before  the  testator's  death  (Dig.  34.  7.  i.  2),  or
unless  his  own  ownership  was  revocable  (Dig.  30.  82.  i),  or,  thirdly,
unless  the  testator  or  the  heir  had  some  real  right  over  the  object  by
which  the  legatee  could  practically  be  deprived  of  its  enjoyment  (e.g.
pignus,  usufruct,  or  emphyteusis),  or  a  personal  right  by  which  he  could
be  forced  to  deliver  it  up,  Dig.  30.  71.  5,  ib.  39.  2.

§  8.  So  far  as  the  form  per  vindicationem  is  concerned,  the  rule  as  to
legacy  of  the  same  thing  disiunctim  to  two  or  more  persons  is  similarly
stated  by  Gains  ii.  199,  but  in  §  205  he  adds  *  si  eadem  res  duobus  pluri-
busve  per  damnationem  legata  sit  .  .  .  disiunctim,  singulis  solida  res
debetur,  ut  scilicet  heres  alteri  rem,  alteri  aestimationem  eius  praestare
debeat.'  In  this  point  the  SC.  Neronianum  appears  not  to  have  operated
at  all :  otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  rule  did  not  become
exactly  the  contrary  of  that  which  is  here  stated  in  the  text.  Justinian
enacted  that  in  no  case  should  co-legatees  of  the  same  thing  be  entitled,
the  one  to  it,  the  other  or  rest  to  its  value, '  nisi  testator  apertissime  et
expressim  disposuerit,  ut  uni  quidem  res  solida,  aliis  autem  aestimatio
rei  singulis  in  solidum  praestetur'  Cod.  6.  51.  i.  11.  As  Gaius  remarks
(ii.  206),  an  important  modification  was  made  in  the  law  of  accrual
between  co-heirs  and  co-legatees  by  the  leges  lulia  and  Papia  Poppaea,
for  which  see  on  Tit.  14.  pr.  supr. ;  these  statutes,  however,  were  no
longer  in  force  under  Justinian,  who  speaks  of  the  caducitas  which  they
introduced  as  altogether  abolished  from  his  system,  Cod.  6.  51.  i.  i.

Two  or  more  persons  are  said  to  be  co-heirs  or  co-legatees  when  the
same  thing  is  given  to  both  or  all  of  them.    As  to  the  technical  expres-


298  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

quis  dicat  *  Titio  et  Seio  hominem  Stichum  do  lego : '  dis-
iunctim  ita  *  Titio  hominem  Stichum  do  lego,  Seio  Stichum
do  lego.*  sed  et  si  expresserit  *  eundem  hominem  Stichum/
9  aeque  disiunctim  legatum  intellegitur.  Si  cui  fundus  alienus
legatus  fuerit  et  emerit  proprietatem  detracto  usu  fructu  et
usus  fructus  ad  eum  pervenerit  et  postea  ex  testamento  agat,

sions  or  modes  by  which  testators  could  effect  such  conjunction,  we
must  at  the  outset  exclude  what  is  called  conjunction  Werbis/  in  which
each  of  the  apparently  conjoined  heirs  or  legatees  is  in  fact  given  some-
thing different  from  the  other  or  rest,  *  item  verbis,  non  etiam  re  [con-
iuncti  videntur] :  Titio  et  Seio  fundum  aequis  partibus  do  lego '  Dig.  32.
89;  here  Titius  and  Seius  are  not  co-legatees  in  the  proper  sense,  for
what  is  bequeathed  to  them  is  not  the  same  thing,  but  equal  shares  in
the  same  thing,  i.  e.  different  things,  or,  as  Pomponius  puts  it  in  Dig.  28.
5.  66  '  quia  non  tam  coniunxisse  quam  celerius  dixisse  videatur.*  In  such
cases,  as  there  is  no  true  conjunction,  the  ius  adcrescendi  has  no  applica-
tion. Genuine  conjunction,  in  which  the  co-heirs  or  co-^legatees,  though
limiting  one  another's  rights,  are  regarded  as  against  other  heirs  or
legatees  as  one  person  (coniunctim  heredes  institui,  and  'coniunctim
legari,  hoc  est,  totam  hereditatem  et  tota  legata  singulis  data  esse,
partes  autem  concursu  fieri  *  Dig.  32.  80),  could  be  produced  in  two  ways,
(i)  're  et  verbis  (the  coniunctim  of  the  text) :  nee  dubium  est,  quin  con-
iuncti  sint,  quos  et  nominum  et  rei  complexus  iungit;  veluti  Titius  et
Maevius  ex  parte  dimidia  heredes  sunto:  vel  ita,  Titius  Maeviusque
heredes  sunto:  vel,  Titius  cum  Maevio  ex  parte  dimidia  heredes  sunto.
Videamus  autem  ne,  etiamsi  hos  articulos  detrahas,  et,  que,  cum,  inter-
dum  tamen  coniunctos  accipi  oporteat,  veluti,  Lucius  Titius,  Publius
Maevius  ex  parte  dimidia  heredes  sunto,  vel  ita :  P.  Maevius,  L.  Titius
heredes  sunto:  Sempronius  ex  parte  dimidia  heres  esto,  ut  Titius  et
Maevius  veniant  in  partem  dimidiam,  et  re  et  verbis  coniuncti  videantur '
Dig.  50.  16,  142  ;  (2)  *re  (the  disiunctim  of  the  text) :  re  coniuncti  viden-
tur, non  etiam  verbis,  cum  duobus  separatim  eadem  res  legatur*  Dig.  32.
89 ;  for  this  mode  of  conjoining  heirs  see  Dig.  50.  16.  142.

The  general  rule  of  accrual  between  co-legatees  is  tersely  stated  in  the
text,  though  there  was  some  difference  according  to  the  form  employed.
If  they  were  conjoined  re,  i.  e.  disiunctim,  and  one  or  more  of  them  failed
to  take,  the  accrual  operated  ipso  iure:  there  was  no  right  of  refusal
in  those  who  took,  and  who  consequently  were  unaffected  by  any  fidei-
commissa  or  other  burdens  imposed  by  the  testator  on  those  who  had
failed :  if  they  were  conjoined  re  et  verbis,  they  had  the  option  of  refusing
the  shares  of  those  who  failed,  or  of  taking  them  subject  to  such  charges,
Cod.  6.  51.  I.  II.

§  9.  That  by  *  pervenerit '  is  meant  *  has  come  by  a  lucrativa  causa '  is
clear  from  the  passage  of  lulianus  referred  to,  'fundus  mihi  legatus  est:
proprietatem  eius  fundi  redemi,  detracto  usufructu :  postea  venditor  capite


Tit  20.]  DE .  LEG  A  TIS.  299

recte  eum  agere  et  fundum  petere  lulianus  ait,  quia  usus  fruc-
tus  in  petitione  servitutis  locum  optinet:  sed  officio  iudicis
contineri,  ut  deducto  usu  fructu  iubeat  aestimationem  praestari.
Sed  si  rem  legatarii  quis  ei  legaverit,  inutile  legatum  est,  quia  10
quod  proprium  est  ipsius,  amplius  eius  fieri  non  potest :  et
licet  alienaverit  earn,  non  debetur  nee  ipsa  nee  aestimatio  eius.
Si  quis  rem  suam  quasi  alienam  legaverit,  valet  legatum  :  nam  1 1
plus  valet,  quod  in  veritate  est,  quam  quod  in  opinione.  sed
et  si  l^atarii  putavit,  valere  constat,  quia  exitum  voluntas
defunct!  potest  habere.  Si  rem  suam  legaverit  testator  post- 12
eaque  eam  alienaverit,  Celsus  existimat,  si  non  adimendi
animo  vendidit,  nihilo  minus  deberi,  idque  divi  Severus  et
Antoninus  rescripserunt.  idem  rescripserunt  eum,  qui  post
testamentum  factum  praedia  quae  legata  erant  pignori  dedit,
ademisse  legatum  non  videri  et  ideo  legatarium  cum  herede
agere  posse,  ut  praedia  a  creditore  luantur.  si  vero  quis  par-
tem rei  legatae  alienaverit,  pars  quae  non  est  alienata  omni-
modo  debetur,  pars  autem  alienata  ita  debetur,  si  non  adi-
mendi animo  alienata  sit.  Si  quis  debitori  suo  liberationem  13
legaverit,  legatum  utile  est  et  neque  ab  ipso  debitore  neque
ab  herede  eius  potest  heres  petere  nee  ab  alio  qui  heredis  loco
est :  sed  et  potest  a  debitore  conveniri,  ut  liberet  eum.    potest


minutus  est  ([8],  p.  224  supr.),  et  ususfructus  ad  me  pertinere  coepit :  si
ex  testamento  egero,  iudex  tanti  litem  aestimare  debebit,  quantum  mihi
aberit.  (MarcelJus.)  idem  erit,  et  si  partem  redemero,  pars  mihi  legata
aut  donata  sit:  partem  enim  duntaxat  petere  debebo'  Dig.  30.  82.  2
and  3.

§  10.  Cf.  Bk.  iv.  6.  14  inf.  For  the  principle  (regula  Catoniana)  upon
which  a  legacy  of  this  kind  was  void  see  on  §  32  inf.

§  11.  It  is  difficult  to  see  why  the  rule  '  plus  valet  quod  in  veritate  est
quam  quod  in  opinione '  did  not  apply  to  legacy  of  a  res  aliena  which
the  testator  thought  was  sua,  which  in  §  4  supr.  is  said  to  be  void :  cf.
also  Dig.  29.  2.  15  'plus  est  in  opinione  quam  in  veritate.'

§  12.  The  generally  received  opinion  in  Gaius*  time  (ii.  198)  was  that
such  a  legacy  was  void,  unless  given  per  damnationem,  and  even  then
the  heir  on  being  sued  could  repel  the  legatee  by  exceptio  doli :  cf.
Pomponius  in  Dig.  30.  8.  pr.  '  si  partem  alienasset,  partem  duntaxat . .  •
deberi.'

§  13.  If  the  testator  was  himself  the  creditor,  the  debtor,  under
Justinian,  was  usually  released  ipso  facto  by  the  legacy ;  for  his  right
to  compel  the  heir  to  release  him  cf.  Dig.  34.  3.  3.  3  *  agere,  ut  liberer


300  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

14  autem  quis  vel  ad  tempus  iubere  ne  heres  petat.  Ex  con-
trario  si  debitor  creditori  suo  quod  debet  legaverit,  inutile  est
legatum,  si  nihil  plus  est  in  legato  quarn  in  debito,  quia  nihil
amplius  habet  per  legatum.  quodsi  in  diem  vel  sub  condicione
debitum  ei  pure  legaverit,  utile  est  legatum  propter  repraesen-
tationem.  quodsi  vivo  testatore  dies  venerit  aut  condicio
extiterit,  Papinianus  scripsit  utile  esse  nihilo  minus  legatum,
quia  semel  constitit.  quod  et  verum  est:  non  enim  placuit
sententia  existimantium  extinctum  esse  legatum,  quia  in  earn

15causam  pervenit,  a  qua  incipere  non  potest.  Sed  si  uxori
maritus  dotem  legaverit,  valet  legatum,  quia  plenius  est  lega-
tum quam  de  dote  actio,  sed  si  quam  non  acceperit  dotem
legaverit,  divi  Severus  et  Antoninus  rescripserunt,  si  quidem
simpliciter  legaverit,  inutile  esse  legatum  :  si  vero  certa  pecunia
vel  certum  corpus  aut  instrumentum  dotis  in  praelegando  de-

per  acceptilationem.'  If  the  creditor  was  some  one  else,  the  debtor  could
compel  the  heir  to  pay  the  debt  and  so  discharge  him,  Dig.  ib.  8.  pr.,  ib.
II  and  14.  If  the  supposed  debt  was  non-existent,  the  legatee  got
nothing ;  and  the  legacy  was  extinguished  by  extinction  of  the  debt
during  the  testator*s  lifetime.

§  14.  Where  money  due  on  a  certain  day,  or  on  the  fulfilment  of
a  condition,  is  paid  before  the  time  or  the  occurrence  of  the  event
specified,  the  creditor  is  pro  tanto  better,  the  debtor  pro  tanto  worse
off:  this  gain  or  loss  is  called  interusurium,  commodum  or  incommodum
repraesentationis.  If  a  testator  leaves  to  a  supposed  creditor  the  amount
of  a  non-existent  debt,  the  legacy  is  void  if  the  debt  is  simply  referred  to,
but  if  its  amount  is  clearly  specified  it  can  be  claimed,  *si  decem  quae
Titio  debeo  legavero  nee  quicquam  debeam,  falsa  demonstratio  (§  30  inf.)
non  perimit  legatum'  Dig.  30.  75.  i,  cf.  Dig.  31.  88.  10,  and  the  next
section  of  this  Title.  The  doctrine  of  Papinian  here  stated  is  not  univer-
sally recognised  in  the  Corpus  luris  ;  it  is  confirmed  by  Dig.  50.  17.  85.  i,
but  is  contradicted,  in  its  general  form,  in  Dig.  34.  8.  3.  2  *  nam  quae  in
eam  causam  pervene'runt  a  qua  incipere  non  poterant  pro  non  scriptis
habentur,'  and  in  its  particular  application  in  Dig.  31.  82.  pr.  (Paulus)
'  dicendum  erit  inutile  effici  legatum,  quanquam  constiterit  ab  initio.'
For  the  technical  meaning  of  dies  venit  in  connection  with  obligations  see
on  §  20  inf.

§  15.  The  advantages  of  the  action  on  the  legacy  over  the  actio  dc
dote  were  that  the  heir  could  not  claim  the  statutory  interval  of  one  year
before  restitution,  which  was  allowed  in  ordinary  cases  (which  probably
is  the  explanation  of  '  praelegare,'  so  common  in  this  form  of  legacy),
^iR-  33-  4-  !•  2,  and  that  certain  sets-off  were  excluded  which  could  be
pleaded  in  the  action.


Tit2o.]  DE  LEGATIS,  301

monstrata  sunt,  valere  legatum.   Si  res  legata  sine  facto  heredis  16
perierit,  legatario  decedit.     et  si  servus  alienus  l^atus  sine
facto  heredis  manumissus  fuerit,  non  tenetur  heres.     si  vero
heredis  servus  legatus  fuerit  et  ipse  eum  manumiserit,  teneri
eum  lulianus  scripsit,  nee  interest,  scierit  an  ignoraverit  a  se
l^atum  esse,     sed  et  si  alii  donaverit  servum  et  is  cui  donatus
est  eum  manumiserit  tenetur  heres,  quamvis  ignoraverit  a  se
eum  legatum  esse.     Si  quis  ancillas  cum  suis  natis  legaverit,  17
etiamsi  ancillae  mortuae  fuerint,  partus  legato  cedunt.     idem
est,  si  ordinarii  servi  cum  vicariis  legati  fuerint.  ut,  licet  mortui
sint  ordinarii,  tamen  vicarii  legato  cedant.     sed  si  servus  cum
peculio  fuerit  legatus,  mortuo  servo  vel  manumisso  vel  alienato
et  peculii  legatum  extinguitur.     idem  est,  si  fundus  instructus
vel  cum  instrumento  legatus  fuerit :  nam  fundo  alienato  et
instrumenti  legatum  extinguitur.     Si  grex  I^atus  fuerit  post-  18
eaque  ad  unam  ovem  pervenerit,  quod  superfuerit  vindicari
potest.     Grege  autem  legato  etiam  eas  oves,  quae  post  testa-  19
mentum  factum  gregi  adiciuntur,  I^ato  cedere  lulianus  ait :
esse  enim  gregis  unum  corpus  ex  distantibus  capitibus^  sicuti

§  17.  The  opposition  of  ordinarius  to  vicarii  servi  is  found  in  Dig.  14.
4. 5. 1 ;  15. 1. 17,  ib.  19.  pr.  The  former  was  a  slave  holding  some  definite
post  in  his  master's  household,  the  latter  were  his  assistants,  and  usually
formed  part  of  his  peculium  :  in  fact,  a  slave  often  bought  a  vicarius  with
part  of  his  peculium  to  lighten  his  own  duties,  Horace,  Sat.  2.  7.  79 ;  for
the  whole  subject  v.  Becker's  Callus.

For  the  difference  between  instructus  and  cum  instrumento  cf.  Dig.
33.  7.  12.  27  'plus  esse,  cum  instructli^  fundus  legetur,  quam  si  cum
instrumento :  . . .  omnia,  quae  eo  collata  sunt,  ut  instructior  esset  pater-
familias, instructo  contineri,'  ib.  pr.  '  instrumentum  [fundi]  est  apparatus
rerum  diutius  mansurarum,  sine  quibus  exerceri  nequiret  possessio,'  ib.
27.  16  '  inter  instrumentum  et  ornamentum  multum  interesse,  instrumenti
enim  ea  esse,  quae  ad  tutelam  domus  pertinerent,  omamenti,  quae  ad
voluptatem.'  Thus  ^  instrumentum  involved  the  idea  of  a  means  to  an
end,  but  that  end  was  to  get  the  use  of  the  land ;  it  did  not  include
household  furniture.  Fundus  instructus,  although  there  was  some  variety
of  opinion  on  the  subject,  seems  to  have  been  considered  as  including
not  only  instrumentum,  but  everything  prepared  for  the  comfort  or
pleasure  of  the  owner.  Such  a  legacy,  therefore,  includes  the  furniture
of  the  farmhouse,  the  clothes,  gold,  silver,  wine,  and  utensils  of  the
testator,  also  the  domestic  slaves,  the  books  and  library,  but  not  the
crop  ready  for  the  market.'  Hunter,  Roman  Law  p.  723 ;  cf.  Mr.  Roby's
edition  of  Dig.  7.  i.  pp.  74,  75.


302  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

aedium  unum  corpus  est  ex  cohaerentibus  lapidibus :  aedibus
denique.  legatis  columnas  et  marmora,  quae  post  testamentum
20  factum  adiecta  sunt,  l^ato  cedere.  Si  peculium  legatum
fuerit,  sine  dubio  quidquid  peculio  accedit  vel  decedit  vivo
testatore,  legatarii  lucro  vel  damno  est.  quodsi  post  mortem
testatoris  ante  aditam  hereditatem  servus  adquisierit,  lulianus
ait,  si  quidem  ipsi  manumisso  peculium  legatum  fuerit^  omne,
quod  ante  aditam  hereditatem  adquisitum  est,  legatario  cedere,
quia  dies  huius  legati  adita  hereditate  cedit :  sed  si  extraneo
peculium  legatum  fuerit,  non  cedere  ea  legato,  nisi  ex  rebus
peculiaribus  auctum  fuerit  peculium.  peculium  autem  nisi
legatum   fuerit,  manumisso   non  debetur,  quamvis   si   vivus

§  20.  Dies  cedit  marks  the  commencement  of  a  right,  or  the  moment
at  which  it  comes  into  existence :  dies  venit  indicates  the  moment  at
which  it  can  first  be  enforced  by  action  :  '  cedere  diem  significat,  incipere
deberi  pecuniam  :  venire  diem  significat,  eum  diem  venisse,  quo  pecunia
peti  possit'  Dig.  50.  16.  213.  Thus,  if  a  man  promises  to  pay  10/.  this
day  six  months,  he  is  bound,  and  the  other  party  acquires  a  right  to  have
the  money  then,  at  once  (dies  cedit) :  but  he  cannot  be  compelled  to  pay
until  dies  venit,  i.e.  until  the  six  months  have  elapsed;  Bk.  iii.  15.  2  inf.
Originally,  if  the  legatee  outlived  the  testator,  and  the  legacy  was  uncon-
ditional (or  the  condition,  if  there  were  one,  had  been  fulfilled),  dies  cessit
immediately  on  the  testator's  decease :  the  right  was  acquired,  and  there-
fore passed  to  the  legatee's  heir  even  if  he  himself  died  immediately  after
the  testator :  '  si  post  diem  legati  cedentem  legatarius  decesserit,  ad
heredem  suum  transfert  legatum  *  Dig.  36.  2.  5.  pr.  This  was  altered  by
the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  which  postponed  dies  cedit  to  the  date  of  the
opening  of  the  will,  Ulpian,  Reg.  17.  i,  but  the  old  law  was  restored  by
Justinian,  Cod.  6.  51.  i  c.  If  the  legacy  was  conditional,  dies  cessit  only
on  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  :  with  rights  arising  ex  contractu  it  was
different;  see  on  Bk.  iii.  15.  4  inf.  Dies  (legati)  venit  when  the  heir
accepted,  unless  of  course  the  dies  cedens  was  later  owing  to  an  unful-
filled condition,  or  unless  a  later  day  was  fixed  by  the  testator  himself :
'  omnia  quae  testamentis  sine  die  vel  condicione  adscribuntur,  ex  die
aditae  hereditatis  praestentur*  Dig.  31.  32.  pr.

No  acceptance  of  a  legacy  was  necessary,  in  the  sense  that  an  institutus
could  not  become  heir  without  aditio :  but  one  could  be  declined,  and  if
this  were  done,  the  legatee  was  regarded  as  never  having  acquired  any
right  upon  the  testator's  decease  whatever.  Dig.  30.  38.  i.

If  a  slave's  peculium  was  bequeathed  to  an  extraneus,  the  latter's  rights
were  fixed  (dies  cedit)  at  the  testator's  decease :  he  became  entitled  to
the  amount  of  the  peculium  as  it  stood  at  that  moment,  but  to  nothing
which  was  subsequently  added  to  it,  as  it  were,  from  outside.  But  if  the
slave,  being  manumitted  by  the  will,  was  himself  the  legatee,  his  rights


Tit.  20.]  DE  LEG  ATI S,  303

manumiserit,  sufficit,  si  non  adimatur :  et  ita  divi  Severus  et
Antoninus  rescripserunt.  idem  rescripserunt  peculio  legato
non  videri  id  relictum,  ut  petitionem  habeat  pecuniae,  quam
in  rationes  dominicas  impendit.  idem  rescripserunt  peculium
videri  legatum,  cum  rationibus  redditis  liber  esse  iussus  est  et
ex  eo  reliquas  inferre.  Tam  autem  corporales  res  quam  incor-  21
porales  legari  possunt.  et  ideo  et  quod  defuncto  debetur,
potest  alicui  legari,  ut  actiones  suas  heres  legatario  praestet,
nisi  exegerit  vivus  testator  pecuniam  :  nam  hoc  casu  legatum
extinguitur.  sed  et  tale  legatum  valet :  *  damnas  esto  heres
domum  illius  reficere '  vel  *  ilium  acre  alieno  liberare.'  Si  22
generaliter  servus  vel  alia  res  legetur,  electio  legatarii  est,  nisi

were  not  fixed  till  aditio  (an  exception  to  the  general  rule),  because  unless
and  until  some  institutus  accepted  his  manumission  did  not  take  effect,
and  being  still  a  slave  he  could  have  no  rights.

The  words  *  et  ex  eo  reliquas  inferre '  at  the  end  of  the  section  are
interpreted  by  Theophilus  as  part  of  the  rescript,  not  of  the  will :  but  it
is  clear  that  they  belong  to  the  latter,  the  manumission  being  ex  die,  and
taking  effect  from  the  giving  in  of  the  slave's  accounts  with  his  master,
the  adverse  balance  being  made  up  out  of  his  peculium,  *et  quod  reli-
quum  est .  .  .  solvere  debet'  Dig.  35.  i.  111.

§  21.  This  is  called  legatum  nominis,  nomen  being  the  technical  term
for  what  we  call  a  chose  in  action.  The  legatee  could  sue  the  testator*s
debtor  by  actio  utilis.  Cod.  6.  37.  18,  and  could  also  claim  an  express
assignment  from  the  heres,  Dig.  30.  44.  6.  If  the  debtor  paid  the  heir,
the  latter  could  be  compelled  to  transfer  the  amount  so  received  to  the
legatee  :  if  payment  were  made  to  the  testator  in  his  lifetime,  the  legacy
became  void  unless  the  will  clearly  disclosed  a  contrary  intention,  Dig.
32.  II.  13,  ib.  64.

§  22.  Where  a  res  non  fungibilis  (for  which  see  on  Bk.  iii.  14.  pr.  inf.)
is  bequeathed  without  further  specification  (e.  g.  a  slave,  a  horse,  a  jewel)
it  is  technically  called  a  legatum  generis.  Unless  there  was  evidence  of
a  contrary  intention,  such  legacies  were  valid  only  (i)  if  the  inheritance
actually  comprised  a  thing  or  things  of  the  genus  bequeathed,  Dig.  30.
71.  pr.,  and  (2)  if  the  genus  was  sufficiently  definite:  thus  the  legacy  of
an  estate  is  void,  that  of  a  house  is  valid.  Dig.  23.  3.  69.  4:  30.  71.  pr.
Under  the  older  law  it  would  seem  that  as  a  general  rule  the  legatee  had
the  choice  of  the  object  if  the  bequest  was  per  vindicationem,  the  heir  if
it  was  per  damnationem :  but,  as  is  said  in  the  text,  under  Justinian,
unless  the  testator  directed  otherwise,  the  election  always  rested  with  the
former,  subject  to  the  restriction  that  he  must  not  choose  the  best  specimen
of  the  genus ;  but  cf.  Dig.  33.  6.  4.  If  the  choice  was  given  to  the  heir,
he  might  not  select  the  worst:  if  to  a  third  person,  he  might  choose
neither  the  best  nor  the  worst,  Dig.  30,  37.  pr.


304  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

23  aliud  testator  dixerit.  Optionis  legatum,  id  est  ubi  testator  ex
servis  suis  vel  aliis  rebus  optare  legatariutn  iusserat,  habebat
in  se  condicionem,  et  ideo  nisi  ipse  legatarius  vivus  optaverat,
ad  heredem  legatum  non  transmittebat.  sed  ex  constitutione
nostra  et  hoc  in  meliorem  statum  reformatum  est  et  data  est
licentia  et  heredi  legatarii  optare,  licet  vivus  legatarius  hoc  non
fecit,  et  diligentiore  tractatu  habito  et  hoc  in  nostra  consti-
tutione additum  est,  ut,  sive  plures  l^atarii  existant,  quibus
optio  relicta  est,  et  dissentiant  in  corpore  eligendo,  sive  unius
legatarii  plures  heredes,  et  inter  se  circa  optandum  dissentiant
alio  aliud  corpus  eligere  cupiente,  ne  pereat  legatum  (quod
plerique  prudentium  contra  benevolentiam  introducebant),  for-
tunam  esse  huius  optionis  iudicem  et  sorte  esse  hoc  dirimen-
dum,  ut,  ad  quern  sors  perveniat,  illius  sententia  in  optione
praecellat.

24  Legari  autem  illis  solis  potest,  cum  quibus  testamenti  factio

25  est.  Incertis  vero  personis  neque  legata  ncque  fideicommissa
olim  relinqui  concessum  erat :  nam  nee  miles  quidem  incertae
personae  poterat  relinquere,  ut  divus  Hadrianus  rescripsit.
incerta  autem  persona  videbatur,  quam  incerta  opinione
animo  suo  testator  subiciebat,  veluti  si  quis  ita  dicat :  '  qui-
cumque  filio  meo  in  matrimonium  filiam  suam  collocaverit,  ei
heres  meus  ilium  fundum  dato : '  illud  quoque,  quod  his  relin-
quebatur,  qui  post  testamentum  scriptum  primi  consules
designati  erunt,  aeque  incertae  personae  legari  videbatur:  et
denique  multae  aliae  huiusmodi  species  sunt.  libertas  quoque
non  videbatur  posse  incertae  personae  dari,  quia  placebat
nominatim  servos  liberari.  tutor  quoque  certus  dari  debebat.
sub  certa  vero  demonstratione,  id  est  ex  certis  personis  in-
certae personae,  recte  legabatur,  veluti  '  ex  cognatis  meis  qui
nunc  sunt  si  quis  filiam  meam  uxorem  duxerit,  ei  heres  meus
illam  rem  dato.'  incertis  autem  personis  legata  vel  fideicom-
missa relicta  et  per  errorem  soluta  repeti  non  posse  sacris

26  constitutionibus  cautum  erat.     Postumo  quoque  alieno  inuti-

§  28.  Justinian's  enactment  on  this  matter  is  in  Cod.  6.  43.  3.

§  26.  For  incertae  personae  and  testamenti  factio  see  Gaius  ii.  238-240,
and  note  on  Tit.  14.  pr.  supr. ;  for  the  validity  of  fideicommissa  to  incertae
personae,  note  (3)  on  Tit.  23.  i  inf.

§§  26,  27.  For  legacy  to  postumi  alieni  see  Gaius  ii.  241  and  note  on


Tit.  20.]  DE  LEGATIS,  305

liter  legabatur:  est  autem  alienus  postumus  qui  natus  inter
suos  heredes  testatoris  futurus  non  est :  ideoque  ex  eman-
cipato  filio  conceptus  nepos  extraneus  erat  postumus  avo.
Sed  nee  huiusmodi  species  penitus  est  sine  iusta  emendatione  27
derelicta,  cum  in  nostro  codice  constitutio  posita  est,  per  quam
et  huic  parti  medevimus  non  solum  in  hereditatibus.  sed  etiam
in  legatis  et  fideicommissis :  quod  evidenter  ex  ipsius  consti-
tutionis  lectione  clarescit.  tutor  autem  nee  per  nostram  con-
stitutionem  incertus  dari  debeat,  quia  certo  iudicio  debet  quis
pro  tutela  suae  posteritati  cavere.  Postumus  autem  alienus  28
heres  institui  et  antea  poterat  et  nunc  potest,  nisi  in  utero
eius  sit,  quae  iure  nostra  uxor  esse  non  potest.  Si  quid  in  29
nomine  cognomine  praenomine  legatarii  erraverit  testator,  si
de  persona  constat,  nihilo  minus  valet  legatum  :  idem  in
heredibus  servatur  et  recte:  nomina  enim  significandorum
hominum  gratia  reperta  sunt,  qui  si  quolibet  alio  modo  intel-

Tit.  14.  pr.  supr.  The  constitution  by  which  Justinian  altered  the  law  is
not  in  the  Code  which  has  come  down  to  us,  but  there  is  a  statement  of
its  contents  in  the  abstract  of  the  Basilica  made  by  one  Tipucitus.

§  28.  What  Justinian  says  as  to  the  possibility  of  instituting  a  postumus
alienus  before  his  own  time  refers  (as  is  clear  from  Bk.  iii.  9.  pr.  inf.)  not
to  the  validity  of  such  institution  iure  civili,  but  to  the  resulting  bonorum
possessio :  cf.  Gaius  ii.  242,  287.  For  the  latter  part  of  the  section  cf.
Gaius  ii.  141  '  item  qui  in  utero  eius  est  quae  connubio  non  interveniente
ducta  est  uxor  extraneus  postumus  patri  contingit '  and  Dig.  28.  2.  9.  i
*  sed  si  ex  ea,  quae  alii  nupta  sit,  postumum  quis  heredem  instituerit,
ipso  iure  non  valet,  quod  turpis  sit  institution  ib.  4  *  sed  si  per  adop-
tionem  sororem  factam  habeam,  potero  postumum  ex  ea  heredem
instituere,  quia  adoptione  soluta  possum  eam  ducere  uxorem.'

§  29.  Mistake  is  of  two  kinds :  it  may  exist  either  in  forming  an  inten-
tion, or  in  expressing  one  already  genuinely  formed.  In  this  and  the
next  section  Justinian  is  speaking  of  the  latter.  An  error  in  a  name,  si  de
persona  constat,  does  not  affect  the  validity  of  a  testamentary  disposition,
'  rerum  enim  vocabula  immutabilia  sunt,  hominum  mutabilia'  Dig.  30.
4.  pr.  Again,  if  a  testator  expressed  a  different  quantity  from  what  he
intended,  the  expression  must  yield  to  the  intention,  Dig.  28.  5.  0.  2-4  ;
30.  15  :  and  if  he  inserted  a  condition  which  he  never  intended,  it  was
taken  pro  non  scripto,  but  a  disposition  which  in  form  is  absolute,  but
which  the  testator  intended  to  make  conditional,  is  void,  Dig.  28.  5.  9.  5.

A  disposition  made  under  a  mistake,  or  in  ignorance  of  certain  facts
(the  first  kind  of  mistake  above  mentioned)  as  a  mle  has  all  the  effect
which  it  would  have  had,  had  there  been  no  mistake  at  all.  In  wills,
however,  this  rule  is  reversed,  and  the  disposition  is  void.     Thus,  if

X


306  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

30  l^antur,  nihil  interest  Huic  proxima  est  ilia  iuris  regula
falsa  demonstratione  legatum  non  peremi.  veluti  si  quis  ita
legaverit '  Stichum  servum  meum  vernam  do  lego : '  licet  enim
non  vema,  sed  emptus  sit,  de  servo  tamen  constat,  utile  est
legatum.  et  convenienter  si  ita  demonstraverit  '  Stichum
servum,  quern  a  Seio  emiV  sitque  ab  alio  emptus,  utile  legatum

31  est,  si  de  servo  constat.  Longe  magis  l^^to  falsa  causa  npn
nocet.  veluti  cum  ita  quis  dixerit :  *  Titio,  quia  absente  me
negotia  mea  curavit,  Stichum  do  lego/  vel  ita :  '  Titio,  quia
patrecinio  eius  capitali  crimine  liberatus  sum,  Stichum  do
lego : '  licet  enim  neque  n^otia  testatoris  umquam  gessit
Titius  neque  patrocinio  eius  liberatus  est,  l^atum  tamen
valet,  sed  si  condicionaliter  enuntiata  fuerit  causa,  aliud
iuris  est,  veluti  hoc  modo :  '  Titio,  si  negotia  mea  curaverit,

32  fundum  do  lego.'  An  servo  heredis  recte  legamus,  quaeritur.
et  constat  pure  inutiliter  legari  nee  quidquam  proficere,  si  vivo

a  testator  institutes  or  gives  a  legacy  to  a  person  whom  he  erroneously
believes  to  be  his  son  or  brother,  the  institution  or  legacy  is  invalid,  Cod.
6.  23.  5 ;  6.  24.  4 :  so  too  if  he  institutes  an  extraneus  supposing  that
he  has  no  children  of  his  own,  Dig.  5.  3.  28,  or  executes  a  second  will
under  the  impression  that  the  person  instituted  in  the  first  is  dead,
Dig.  28.  5.  92.  According  to  this  rule,  the  master  of  the  instituted  slave
in  Tit.  15.  4  supr.  would  be  entitled  to  nothing,  but  the  decision  of
Tiberius,  though  quite  opposed  to  principle,  is  to  be  excused  as  a  rough
and  ready  attempt  to  adjust  a  conflict  between  equitable  and  strictly  legal
claims.  The  inconsistency  between  §§  4  and  1 1  has  been  pointed  out  in
the  note  on  the  latter.

§  80.  '  Quicquid  demonstratae  rei  additur  satis  demonstratae,  frustra
est '  Dig.  33.  4.  I.  8,  the  reason  being  that '  demonstratio  plerumque  vice
nominis  fungitur'  Dig.  35.  i.  34.

§  31.  The  general  rule  is  that  a  testamentary  disposition  is  void  if  the
testator*s  motive  in  making  it  is  a  mistaken  one,  e.  g.  if  he  erroneously
supposes  the  institutus  or  legatee  to  have  saved  his  life,  to  be  his  agent,
etc. :  and  it  is  only  apparently  that  this  is  contradicted  by  the  maxim
falsa  causa  non  nocet.  All  that  the  latter  means  is  that  an  institution
or  legacy  is  not  avoided  by  the  mere  fact  that  the  testator  states  a  motive
for  his  disposition  which  is  unreal :  to  avoid  it  it  must  also  be  proved
that  he  believed  it  to  be  real :  '  falsam  causam  legato  non  obesse  verius
est,  quia  ratio  legandi  legato  non  cohaeret :  sed  plerumque  doli  exceptio
locum  habebit,  si  probetur  alias  legaturus  non  fuisse '  Dig.  35.  i.  72.  6 ;
cf.  Cod.  6.  44.  I.

§  82.  This  distinction  between  a  legacy  given  pure,  and  sub  condicione
to  a  slave  of  the  institutus  had  been  supported  by  the  Sabinians :  the
Proculians  held  it  void  in  either  case :  Servius  maintained  that  the


Tit.  ao.]  DE  LEGATIS.  307

testatore  de  potestate  heredis  exierit,  quia  quod  inutile  foret
legatum,  si  statim  post  factum  testamentum  decessisset  tes-
tator, hoc  non  debet  ideo  valere,  quia  diutius  testator  vixerit.
sub  condicione  vero  recte  legatur,  ut  requiramus,  an,  quo
tempore  dies  legati  cedtt,  in  potestate  heredis  non  sit.  Ex  33
diverso  herede  instituto  servo  quin  domino  recte  etian)  sine
condicione  legetur,  non  dubitatur.  nam  et  si  statim  post
factum  testamentum  decesserit  testator,  non  tamen  apud  eum
qui  heres  sit  dies  legati  cedere  intellegitur,  cum  hereditas  a
legato  separata  sit  et  possit  per  eum  servum  alius  heres  effici,
si  prius,  quam  iussu  domini  adeat,  in  alterius  potestatem
translatus  sit,  vel  manumissus  ipse  heres  efRcitur:  quibus
casibus  utile  est  l^atum :  quodsi  in  eadem  causa  permanserit
et  iussu  l^^tarii  adierit,  evanescit  legatum.  Ante  heredis  34
institutionem  inutiliter  antea  legabatur,  scilicet  quia  testa-
menta  vim  ex  institutione  heredum  accipiunt  et  ob  id  veluti
caput  atque  fundamentum  intellegitur  totius  testamenti  here-
dis institutio.  pari  ratione  nee  libertas  ante  heredis  institu-
tionem dari  poterat.  sed  quia  incivile  esse  putavimus  ordinem
quidem  scripturae  sequi  (quod  et  ipsi  antiquitati  vituperandum
fuerat  visum),  sperni  autem  testatoris  voluntatem  :  per  nostram
constitutionem  et  hoc  vitium  emendavimus,  ut  liceat  et  ante
heredis  institutionem  et  inter  medias  heredum  institutiones
legatum  relinquere  et  multo  magis  libertatem,  cuius  usus
favorabilior  est.     Post  mortem  quoque  heredis  aut  legatarii  35

bequest  was  provisionally  valid,  whether  conditional  or  not,  but  became
void  if  the  legatee  was  in  the  institutus*  power  on  the  dies  legati  cedens,
Gaius  ii.  244.  The  Proculian  view  was  based  upon  what  is  called  the
regula  Catoniana,  because  it  was  ascribed  to  one  of  the  Catos,  probably
the  younger  :  '  regula  Catoniana  sic  definit ;  quod,  si  testamenti  fajcxi
tempore  decessisset  testator,  inutile  foret,  id  legatum,  quandocunque
decesserit,  non  valere'  Dig.  34.  7.  i.  But  this  rule  did  not  apply  to
conditional  legacies,  whose  validity  was  tested  at  the  fulfilment  of  the
condition,  Dig.  35.  i.  98,  or  to  those  which  were  given  ex  die :  '  Catoniana
regula  non  pertinet  ad  ea  legata,  quorum  dies  non  mortis  tempore,  sed
post  aditam  cedit  hereditatem '  Dig.  34.  7.  3.

§  34.  Cod.  6.  23.  24 :  see  note  on  Tit.  14  pr.  supr.  ad  init  The  words
'  quod  et  ipsi  antiquitati  vituperandum  fuerat  visum '  relate  to  the  whole
sentence, '  ordinem  scripturae  sequi,  sperni  autem  testatoris  voluntatem.'

§  86.  Gaius  says  (ii.  232)  that  a  legacy  '  cum  heres  meus  morietur '  was
valid,  but  one  *cum  heres  meus  mortuus  erit'  or  ^pridie  quam  heres

X  2


3o8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

simili  modo  inutiliter  legabatur :  veluti  si  quis  ita  dicat :  '  cum
heres  meus  mortuus  erit,  do  lego : '  item  *  pridie  quam  heres
aut  legatarius  morietur.*  sed  simili  modo  et  hoc  correximus
firmitatem  huiusmodi  legatis  ad  fideicommissorum  similitu-
dinem  praestantes,  ne  vel  in  hoc  casu  deterior  causa  legatorum
36  quam  fideicommissorum  inveniatur.  Poenae  quoque  nomine
inutiliter  legabatur  et  adimebatur  vel  transferebatur.  poenae
autem  nomine  legari  videtur,  quod  coercendi  heredis  causa
relinquitur,  quo  magis  is  aliquid,  faciat  aut  non  faciat:  velut,
si  quis  ita  scripserit :  ^  heres  meus  si  filiam  suam  in  matri-
monium  Titio  collocaverit '  (vel  ex  diverso  *st  non  colloca*
verit)/  *  dato  decem  aureos  Seio/  aut  si  ita  scripserit  *  heres
meus  si  servum  Stichum  alienaverit  *  (vel  ex  diverso  *  si  non
alienaverit)/  *  Titio  decem  aureos  dato.'  et  in  tantum  haec
regula  observabatur,  ut  perquam  pluribus  principalibus  consti-
tutionibus  significetur  nee  principem  quidem  agnoscere,  quod
ei  poenae  nomine  legatum  sit.  nee  ex  militis  quidem  testa-
mento  talia  legata  valebant,  quamvis  aliae  militum  voluntates
in  ordinandis  testamentis  valde  observantur.  quin  etiam  nee
libertatem  poenae  nomine  dari  posse  placebat.  eo  amplius
nee  heredem  poenae  nomine  adici  posse  Sabinus  existimabat,
veluti  si  quis  ita  dicat :  '  Titius  heres  esto :  si  Titius  filiam
suam  Seio  in  matrimonium  collocaverit,  Seius  quoque  heres
esto : '  nihil  enim  intererat,  qua  ratione  Titius  coerceatur,  utrum
legati  datione  an  coheredis  adiectione.  at  huiusmodi  scrupu-
lositas  nobis  non  placuit  et  generaliter  ea  quae  relinquuntur,

meus  morietur '  was  void  :  a  distinction,  he  adds,  *  quod  non  pretiosa
ratione  receptum  videtur/  The  ground  of  the  rule  was  *  ne  ab  heredis
herede  legari  videatur,  quod  iuris  civilis  ratio  non  patitur '  Ulpian,  Reg.
24.  16,  cf.  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  3.  6.  5,  which  itself  was  only  an  application  of
the  larger  principle  '  inelegans  visum,  ex  heredis  persona  incipere  obliga-
tionem  '  Gains  iii.  100:  see  on  Bk.  iii.  19.  13  inf.  A  fideicommissum  was
valid  in  any  of  the  three  forms  given  above,  Gains  ii.  277,  Ulpian,  Reg.
25. 8.  Justinian^s  enactments  on  the  subject  are  in  Cod.  4. 1 1. 1  ;  8. 38. 11.
§  36.  Some  conditional  legacies  are  difficult  to  distinguish  from  legacies
poenae  nomine,  viz.  those  in  which  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  depends
on  the  legatee  himself.  These,  however,  were  not  necessarily  treated  as
penal  under  the  old  law :  the  test  was  the  intention  of  the  testator  ('poenam
a  condicione  voluntas  testatoris  separat,  et  an  poena,  an  condicio  sit  ex
voluntate  defuncti  apparet '  Dig.  34.  6.  s) ;  unless  it  appeared  that  the
testator  designed  the  legacy  as  a  means  of  compulsion,  it  was  valid.


Tit.  22.]  DE  LEGE  FALCIDIA,  309

licet  poenae  nomine  fuerint  relicta  vcl  adempta  vel  in  alios
translata,  nihil  distare  a  ceteris  legatis  constituimus  vel  in
dando  vel  in  adimendo  vel  in  transferendo  :  exceptis  his  vide-
licet, quae  impossibilia  sunt  vel  legibus  interdicta  aut  alias
probrosa :  huiusmodi  enim  testatorum  dispositiones  valere
secta  temporum  meorum  non  patitur.

XXI.

DE  ADEMPTION E   LEGATORUM   ET  TRANSLATIONE.

Ademptio  legatorum,  sive  eodem  testamento  adimantur
sive  codicillis,  firma  est,  sive  contrariis  verbis  fiat  ademptio,
veluti  si,  quod  ita  quis  legaverit  '  do  lego,'  ita  adimatur  '  non
do  non  lego,'  sive  non  contrariis,  id  est  aliis  quibuscumque
verbis.  Transferri  quoque  legatum  ab  alio  ad  alium  potest,  1
veluti  si  quis  ita  dixerit:  'hominem  Stichum,  qucm  Titio
legavi,  Seio  do  lego,'  sive  in  eodem  testamento  sive  in
codicillis  hoc  fecerit :  quo  casu  simul  Titio  adimi  videtur  et
Seio  dari.

XXII.

DE  LEGE  FALCIDIA.

Superest,  ut  de  lege  Falcidia  dispiciamus,  qua  modus
novissime  legatis  impositus  est.  cum  enim  olim  lege  duo-
Tit.  XXI.  For  codicilli  see  Tit  25  and  notes  inf.  Besides  the  modes
mentioned  in  the  text,  a  legacy  might  be  taken  away  by  erasing  the  dis-
position from  the  will.  Dig.  34.4.  16  and  17,  or  tacitly  by  any  act  from
which  it  could  be  gathered  that  the  testator  no  longer  wished  the  legatee
to  have  the  bequest,  e.  g.  by  alienation  of  the  res  legata,  12  supr.,  Dig.
34.  4.  15,  and  a  legacy  was  even  held  to  be  revoked  if  the  relations
between  the  parties  became  such  that  a  continuance  of  the  testator*s
benevolent  intention  could  not  be  presumed,  e.g.  if  a  serious  enmity
arose  between  them,  Dig.  34.  4.  3.  11.  Under  the  older  law  contraria
verba  had  been  required  for  an  express  ademption, '  dum  tamen  eodem
modo  adimatur,  quo  modo  datum  est '  Ulpian,  Reg.  24.  29.

§  1.  '  Translatio  legati  fit  quattuor  modis  :  aut  enim  a  persona  in  per-
sonam transfertur :  aut  ab  eo,  qui  dare  iussus  est,  transfertur  ut  alius  det :
aut  cum  res  pro  re  datur,  ut  pro  fundo  decem  aurei :  aut  quod  pure
datum  est,  transfertur  sub  condicione  '  Dig.  34.  4.  6.  pr.

Tit.  XXH.  For  the  well-known  enactment  of  the  Twelve  Tables  here
quoted  cf.  Cic.  de  Inv.  2.  50,  148,  Auctor  ad  Herenn.  i.  13,  23,  Dig.  50.


3IO  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

decim  tabularum  libera  erat  legandi  potestas,  ut  liceret  vel
totum  patrimonium  legatis  erogare  (quippc  ea  lege  ita  cautum
esset:  uti  legassit  suae  rei,  ita  ius  esto):  visum  est  banc
legandi  licentiam  coartare,  idque  ipsorum  testatorum  gratia
provisum  est  ob  Id,  quod  plerumque  intestati  moriebantur,
recusantibus  scriptis  heredibus  pro  nullo  aut  minimo  lucro
hereditates  adire.  et  cum  super  hoc  tam  lex  Furia  quam  lex
Voconia  latae  sunt,  quarum  neutra  sufficiens  ad  rei  con-
summationem  videbatur:  novissime  lata  est  lex  Falcidia,
qua  cavetur,  ne  plus  legare  liceat,  quam  dodrantem  totorum
bonorum,  id  est  ut,  sive  unus  heres  institutus  esset  sive  plures,
1  apud  eum  eosve  pars  quarta  remaneret.    Et  cum  quaesitum


l6.  1 20,  Ulpian,  Reg.  11.  14;  its  content  is  pithily  put  by  Gaius  ii.  224
'  quod  quisque  de  re  sua  testatus  esset,  id  ratum  haberetur.'

The  lex  Furia  testamentaria,  the  date  of  which  is  unknown,  but  which
must  have  been  enacted  before  the  lex  Voconia,  Gaius  ii.  226,  imposed  a
penalty  of  four  times  the  excess  upon  any  one  (except  the  cognates  within
certain  degrees,  Fragm.  Vat.  301,  or  the  cognates  of  the  person  by  whom
the  testator  had  been  emancipated  or  manumitted,  Ulpian,  Reg.  28.  7)
who  took  as  a  legacy,  or  mortis  causa,  more  than  1000  asses  from  the
same  person.  As  Gaius  remarks,  it  altogether  failed  in  its  object,  '  qui
enim  verbi  gratia  quinque  millium  aeris  patrimonium  habebat,  poterat
quinque  hominibus  singulis  millenos  asses  legando  totum  patrimonium
erogare'  ii.  225.  The  lex  Voconia,  B.C.  169  (Cic  de  Fin.  2.  17  :  in  Verr.
I.  43),  one  provision  of  which  has  been  already  noticed  on  p.  269  supr.,
enacted  (Gaius  ii.  226)  that  no  one  should  take  more  by  way  of  legacy  or
donatio  mortis  causa  than  the  heir  or  heirs  jointly.  Thus  a  person  pos-
sessing 100,000  asses  or  upwards  could  leave  a  woman  half  his  property
as  a  legacy,  though  he  could  not  institute  her  his  hen- :  and  this  perhaps
was  the  origin  of  legata  partitionis  (see  on  Tit.  23.  4-6  inf.).  The  enact-
ment failed  in  its  object,  for,  as  Gaius  says,  <  in  multas  legatariorum  per-
sonas  distributo  patrimonio,  poterat  adeo  heredi  minimum  relinquere
[testator]  ut  non  expediret  heredi,  huius  lucri  gratia,  totius  hereditatis
onera  sustinere.'  Both  statutes  were  superseded  by  the  lex  Falcidia,
B.  C.  40,  the  terms  of  which  ran  as  follows,  'quicunque  civis  Romanus
post  banc  legem  rogatam  testamentum  faciet,  is  quantam  cuique  civi
Romano  pecuniam  iure  publico  dare  legare  volet,  ius  potestasque  esto,
dum  ita  detur  legatum,  ne  minus  quam  partem  quartam  hereditatis  eo
testamento  heredes  capiant'  Dig.  35.  2.  i.  pr.  The  provisions  of  the  lex
Falcidia  were  not  extended  to  donationes  mortis  causa  till  the  time  of
Septimius  Severus,  Dig.  24.  i.  32.  i ;  31.  77.  i.

§  1.  The  maxim  '  in  singulis  heredibus  ratio  legis  Falcidiae  ponenda  est'
can  best  be  explained  by  an  illustration.  A  leaves  a  property  of  800/.
between  B  and  C  as  co- heredes.    He  charges  B  with  legacies  to  the


Tit.  22.]  DE  LEGE  FALCIDIA,  311

csset,  duobus  heredibus  institutis,  veluti  Titio  ct  Seio,  si  Titii
pars  aut  tota  exhausta  sit  legatis,  quae  nominatim  ab  eo
data  sunt,  aut  supra  modum  onerata,  a  Seio  vero  aut  nulla
relicta  sint  legata,  aut  quae  partem  eius  dumtaxat  in  partem
dimidiam  minuunt,  an,  quia  is  quartam  partem  totius  here-
ditatis  aut  amplius  habet,  Titio  nihil  ex  legatis,  quae  ab  eo
relicta  sunt,  retinere  liceret :  placuit  retinere  licere,  ut  quartam
partem  suae  partis  salvam  habeat :  etenim  in  singulis  here-

extent  of  550/. :  C  he  leaves  comparatively  free.  The  legatees  argue  that
their  legacies  ought  to  be  paid  in  full,  for  even  so  the  heirs  between
them  will  get  far  more  than  a  fourth  of  the  whole  inheritance.  B  argues
that  they  ought  not,  for  else  he  will  not  get  a  clear  fourth,  but  only  an
eighth,  of  his  own  share.  B's  argument  prevails,  each  heir  being  entitled
separately  to  claim  the  Falcidian  fourth  on  his  share  of  the  inheritance,
even  though  the  legatees  collectively  thus  get  less  than  the  three-fourths
to  which  they  are  apparently  entitled  under  the  statute.

If  B  had  refused  to  accept,  C  would  by  acctual  have  had  two  distinct
shares  in  the  same  inheritance,  and  as  this  might  happen  in  other  ways,
it  is  important  to  determine  how  the  Falcidian  fourth  is  calculated,  if
necessary,  in  such  cases.  Three  different  modes  of  such  calculation  are
found  in  the  authorities,  (i)  The  several  shares  in  the  inheritance,  and
the  legacies  charged  upon  them  respectively,  are  taken  in  the  aggregate,
and  a  fourth  deducted  from  that  aggregate  only.  (2)  The  several  shares
are  regarded  as  still  belonging  to  different  heirs,  and  the  maxim  stated
in  this  section  is  applied  to  them  severally.  (3)  They  are  still  kept
separate,  and  the  fourth  is  calculated  on  each  share  by  itself:  but  the
excess  on  some  shares  is  allowed  to  benefit  the  legatees  whose  bequests
are  charged  on  others,  but  not  vice  versa.  This  is  the  principle  applied
in  the  case  of  accrual  between  B  and  C  supposed  ;  the  legatees  whose
bequests  are  charged  on  the  heir  who  takes  (C)  are  benefited  by  the
surplus  (if  there  be  one)  on  the  share  of  the  heir  who  refuses,  but  not
conversely, '  quod  si  alterutro  eorum  deficiente  alter  heres  solus  extiterit,
utrum  perinde  ratio  legis  Falcidiae  habenda  sit,  ac  si  statim  ab  initio  is
solus  heres  institutus  esset,  an  singularum  portionum  separatim  causae
spectandae  sunt?  et  placet,  si  eius  pars  legatis  exhausta  sit,  qui  heres
extiterit,  adiuvari  legataries  per  deficientem  partem  ...  si  vero  defecta
pars  fuerit  exhausta,  perinde  in  ea  ponendam  rationem  legis  Falcidiae,
atque  si  ad  eum  ipsum  pertineret,  a  quo  defecta  fieret '  Dig.  35.  2.  78.
We  find  the  same  system  in  cases  of  substitution.  The  first  method  of
calculating  the  fourth  is  found  pure  and  simple  only  where  the  same  heir
is  instituted  to  different  shares  ('ex  variis  portionibus'  Dig.  35.  2.  11.  7)
in  the  same  inheritance,  though  we  often  see  it  in  combination  with  the
second  (as  in  the  ca.se  of  accrual) ;  the  second  applies  by  itself  where  one
of  two  co-heirs  becomes  heir  to,  or  otherwise  entitled  to  the  share  of,  the
other  after  acceptance,  'si  coheredem  meum  post  aditam  hereditatem


312  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  II.

2  dibus  ratio  l^is  Falcidiae  ponenda  est.  Quantitas  autem
patrimonii,  ad  quam  ratio  legis  Falcidiae  redigitur,  mortis
tempore  spectatur.  itaque  si  verbi  gratia  is,  qui  centum
aureorum  patrimonium  habebat,  centum  aureos  l^averit,  nihil
legatariis  prodest,  si  ante  aditam  hereditatem  per  servos
hereditarios  aut  ex  partu  ancillarum  hereditariarum  aut  ex
fetu  pecorum  tantum  accesserit  hereditati,  ut  centum  aureis
legatorum  nomine  erogatis  heres  quartam  partem  hereditatis
habiturus  sit,  sed  necesse  est  ut  nihilo  minus  quarta  pars
legatis  detrahatur.     ex  diverso  si  septuaginta  quinque  lega*


adrogavero,  non  dubitatur  quin  separandae  sint  portiones,  perinde  atque
81  cohered!  meo  heres  extitissem'  Dig.  35.  2.  i.  15.

§  2.  The  mode  in  which  the  fourth  was  ascertained  was  as  follows.
Immediately  on  the  testator's  decease,  the  inheritance  was  valued  :  after
deducting  the  costs  and  charges  specified  in  section  3,  three-fourths  of  the
residue  is  set  apart  for  the  legatees,  who,  if  any  one  accepts  under  the
will,  can  claim  this,  whatever  happens,  unless  indeed  they  agree  to  take
less  :  but  under  no  circumstances  can  they  demand  more.  What  remains
is  reserved  for  the  heir,  whether  its  amount  is  increased  or  diminished
between  the  testator's  decease,  and  acceptance  by  him.

For  instance,  after  deducting  the  costs  and  charges  referred  to,  the
inheritance  is  valued  at  1200/.  The  legacies  charged  on  the  heir  amount
to  1 1 50/.,  but  all  that  the  legatees  can  get  is  900/.,  even' if  subsequently
and  before  aditio  the  inheritance  doubles  in  value,  e.  g.  by  a  servus  here-
ditarius  being  instituted  heir  to  a  rich  deceased,  or  in  any  other  manner
whatsoever.  The  only  person  benefited  by  this  is  the  heir:  instead  of
300/.,  his  share  at  the  testator's  decease,  he  gets  (under  the  circumstances
supposed)  1500/.,  and  yet  the  legatees  cannot  claim  more  than  900/.,
because  their  rights  are  fixed  at  the  date  of  death.

In  the  converse  case  of  the  inheritance  seriously  falling  in  value  after
that  date,  the  heir  (as  is  remarked  in  the  text)  need  not  accept,  and
naturally  will  not,  if  his  share  has  dwindled  so  much  as  to  be  no  com-
pensation for  the  trouble  and  risk  of  administration  :  but  if  he  does  not
accept  (supposing  no  substitutus  does  either)  intestate  succession  will
take  the  place  of  the  will,  and  the  legacies  will  fall  to  the  ground  :  it  will
consequently  be  the  legatees'  interest  to  abate  their  claims  so  far  as  to
make  aditio  not  unprofitable  to  the  institutus.

In  valuing  the  inheritance,  all  its  debtors  who  were  not  known  to  be
bankrupt  were  regarded  as  solvent,  though  only  to  the  extent  that  they
could  pay :  '  cuius  debitor  non  solvendo  est,  tantum  habet  in  bonis  quan-
tum exigere  potest'  Dig.  35.  2.  63.  i,  so  that  if  any  subsequently  became
insolvent  the  loss  fell  on  the  heir:  Mn  ratione  legis  Falcidiae  .  .  .
debitorum  facta  peiora  nomina  . . .  heredi  pereunt'  Dig.  ib.  30.  pr.  In
the  opposite  case  the  rule  was  inconsistent :  if  bankrupt  debtors  subse-


Tit.  22.]  DE  LEGE  FALCIDIA,  313

verit  et  ante  aditam  hereditatem  in  tantum  decreverint  bona
incendiis  forte  aut  naufragiis  aut  morte  servorum,  ut  non
amplius  quam  septuaginta  quinque  aureorum  substantia  vel
etiam  minus  relinquatur,  solida  legata  debentur.  nee  ea  res
damnosa  est  heredi,  cui  liberum  est  non  adire  hereditatem  :
quae  res  efficit,  ut  necesse  sit  legatariis,  ne  destitute  testa-
mento  nihil  consequantur,  cum  herede  in  portione  pacisci.
Cum  autem  ratio  legis  Falcidiae  ponitur,  ante  deducitur  aes  3
alienum,  item  funeris  impensa  et  pretia  servorum  manu-
missorum,  tunc  deinde  in  reliquo  ita  ratio  habetur,  ut  ex  eo
quarta  pars  apud  heredes  remaneat,  tres  vero  partes  inter
legataries  distribuantur,  pro  rata  scilicet  portione  eius,  quod
cuique  eorum  legatum  fuerit.  itaque  si  fingamus  quadrin-
gentos  aureos  legatos  esse  et  patrimonii  quantitatem,  ex
qua    legata   erogari    oportet,  quadringentorum    esse,   quarta

quently  acquired  property,  the  legatees  were  so  much  the  better  ofT,  Dig.
ib.  56.  I.

The  heir  was  entitled  to  his  fourth  €u  heir :  whatever  else  he  got  from
the  testator,  by  legacy,  fideicommissum,  or  donatio  mortis  causa,  was  not
included  in  it,  unless  the  testator  directed  otherwise,  Dig.  ib.  29 ;  ib.  74 ;
ib.  91.

§  d.  Besides  debts,  funeral  expenses,  and  the  value  of  slaves  whom  the
testator  had  manumitted  either  directly  or  by  fideicommissum,  there
were  deducted  the  costs  of  administration,  Dig.  32.  5.  72.  The  heir  could
not  claim  his  legitima  pars  (Tit.  18  supr.),  Dig.  5.2.89,  in  addition  to  the
Falcidian  fourth  :  the  Canon  law  altered  this  where  he  was  charged  with
a  fideicommissaria  hereditas  (for  which  see  next  Title).  The  legitima
pars  of  those  relations  of  the  testator  who  could  claim  it  was  treated  as  a
debt  due  from  the  inheritance.

The  cases  in  which  the  heir  could  not  claim  the  Falcidian  fourth  are
briefly  as  follows,  (i)  Where  the  testament  was  that  of  a  soldier  exe-
cuted in  accordance  with  the  rules  laid  down  in  Tit.  11  supr.,  Cod.  6.  21.
12.  (2)  When  the  testator  explicitly  denied  the  fourth  to  the  heir,  which
Justinian  enabled  him  to  do  in  all  cases  by  Nov.  i.  2.  2.  (3)  Where  the
heir  renounced  the  right,  such  renunciation  being  presumed  if  he  paid
the  legacies  in  full,  Cod.  6.  50.  19:  but  no  such  renunciation  bound  the
heir  if  made  during  the  testator's  lifetime,  Dig.  32.  5.  15.  i.  (4)  Where
the  heir  forfeited  his  right,  as  he  did  (a)  by  neglecting  to  make  an  inven-
tory (p.  292  supr.),  Cod.  6.  30.  22.  14  c,  (b)  by  any  attempt  to  defraud  the
legatees,  Dig.  32.  5.  59.  pr. :  and  (c)  by  accepting  the  inheritance  only
under  compulsion  from  the  legatees  or  fideicommissarii.  Dig.  36.  i.  4:
ib.  14.  4.  (5)  The  right  to  deduct  the  fourth  did  not  exist  in  respect  of
certain  kinds  of  legacies,  e.  g.  those  of  liberty  to  slaves.  Dig.  35.  2.  33,


314  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  II.

pars  singulis  legatariis  detrahi  debet.  quodsi  trecentos
quinquaginta  l^atos  fingamus,  octava  debet  detrahi.  quodsi
quingentos  legaverit,  initio  quinta,  deinde  quarta  detrahi
debet:  ante  enim  detrahendum  est,  quod  6xtra  bonorum
quantitatem  est,  deinde  quod  ex  bonis  apud  heredem  re-
manere  oportet.

XXIII.

DE  FIDEICOMMISSARIIS  HEREDITATIBUS.

Nunc  transeamus  ad  fideicommissa.     et  prius  de  heredi«
tatibus  fideicommissariis  videamus.
1      Sciendum  itaque  est  omnia  fideicommissa  primis  tempo-

of  objects  possessing  xk)  proper  pecuniary  value,  such  as  documents  of
title,  Cod.  6.  50.  15,  legata  debiti  when  there  is  no  commodum  repraesen-
tationis  (Tit  20.  14  supr.),  Dig.  30.  28.  i ;  legacies  ad  pias  causas,  Nov.
131.  12,  and  those  which  go  to  make  up  the  legitima  pars  of  persons  who
could  bring  the  querella  inofficiosi  testament!  or  the  actio  ad  supplendam
legitimam,  Cod.  3.  38.  36  pr. :  and  legacies  to  a  wife  of  articles  in  her
personal  use,  Dig.  35.  2.  81.  2.

Tit.  XXTH.  L  Fideicommissa,  which  under  Justinian's  final  legis-
lation practically  formed  one  institution  with  legacies,  in  origin  differed
from  them  in  nearly  every  respect.  Not  being  legally  binding  in  any
case  on  the  heir  or  other  person  who  was  charged  with  them,  there  was
nothing  to  be  gained  by  insertmg  them  in  a  will,  so  that  probably  they
were  in  most  cases  oral  or  contained  in  codicilli  (Tit  25  inf.) ;  diis  at
least  seemsno  be  the  natural  inference  from  the  fact  that  codicilli  were
clothed  with  obligatory  force  almost  simultaneously  with  Augustus'  inter-
vention in  favour  of  fideicommissa.  In  Cicero's  time  it  was  considered
an  honest  man's  duty  to  carry  out  fideicommissa  whose  objecfwas  legi-
timate, while  those  which  aimed  at  an  evasion  of  law  were  disregarded ;
de  Fin.  2.  17  and  18.  For  their  conversion  into  an  'adsidua  iurisdictio'
cf.  Suetonius,  Claud.  23  '  iurisdictionem  de  fideicommissis  quotannis  et
tantum  in  lu-be  delegari  magistratibus  solitam,  in  perpetuum  atque  etiam
per  provincias  potestatibus  demandavit.'  The  praetor  fideicommissarius
is  mentioned  by  Gaius  ii.  278,  Ulpian,  Reg.  25. 12,  and  often  in  the  Digest.

The  following  are  perhaps  the  most  characteristic  of  the  many  points
of  difference  which  Gaius  (ii.  269-289)  mentions  as  originally  existing
between  these  two  kinds  of  bequest : —

(i)  A  legacy  could  not  exist  apart  from  a  will,  and  had  to  be  expressed
'  civilibus  verbis ' :  a  fideicommissum  could  be  imposed  on  intestate  heirs
as  well  as  heirs  under  a  will,  and  even  when  contained  in  a  will  might  be
written  in  Greek,  Ulpian,  Reg.  25.  9.  Indeed,  while  no  one  could  be
charged  with  a  legacy  except  the  testamc^ntary  heir,  a  fideicommissum
could  be  imposed  on  any  one  who  took  a  benefit  from  the  deceased  upon


Tit.  23,]  DE  FIDEICOMMISSARIIS  HEREDITATIBUS.    315

ribus  infirma  esse,  quia  nemo  invitus  cogebatur  praestare  id
de  quo  rogatus  erat :  quibus  enim  non  poterant  hereditates
vel  l^rata  relinquere,  si  relinquebant,  fidei  tommittebant
eorum,  qui  capere  ex  testamento  poteiant:  et  ideo  fidei-
commissa  appellata  sunt,  quia  nuUo  vinculo  iuris,  sed  tantum
pudore  eorum  qui  rogabantur  continebantur.  postea  primus
divus  Augustus  semel  iterumque  gratia  personarum  motus,
vel  quia  per  ipsius  salutem  rogatus  quis  diceretur,  aut  ob
insignem  quorundam  perfidiam  iussit  consulibus  auctoritatem
suam  interponere.  quod  quia  iustum  videbatur  et  populare
erat,  paulatim  conversum  est  in  adsiduam  iurisdictionem :
tantusque  favor  eorum  factus  est»  ut  paulatim  etiam  praetor
proprius  crearetur,  qui  (ideicommissis  ius  diceret,  quern  fidei-
commissarium  appellabant.


his  death,  Tit.  24.  i  inf. :  and  though  certain  forms  were  generally  cm-
ployed,  a  mere  gesture,  if  unmistakeable,'was  sufficient,  Ulpian,  Reg.  25.  2
and  3.

(2)  A  legacy  created  an  actionable  obligation  (quasi  ex  contractu)
between  the  heir  and  legatee:  a  fideicommissum  gave  rise  only  to  a
moral  obligation  :  the  deceased  was  said  fidei  committere,  as  opposed  to
directo  iure  relinquere.  Even  when  fideicommissa  had  become  an
adsidua  iurisdictio,  they  could  not  be  sued  upon  by  a  regular  action  at
law,  which  was  tried  by  a  index,  but  (if  he  saw  fit  in  the  particular  case
to  enforce  them)  they  were  adjudicated  upon  by  the  praetor  fideicom-
missarius  in  person,  thus  forming  a  branch  of  the  extraordinaria  cognitio  :
and  it  was  not  till  Justinian's  own  time  (Tit.  20.  2  and  3  supr.)  that  in
respect  of  remedy  they  were  placed  upon  precisely  the  same  footing  with
legacies.

(3)  To  benefit  by  a  fideicommissum  the  recipient  need  not  have  testa-
menti  factio  or  any  other  kind  of  capacity  (see  Tit.  20.  24  supr.) :  thus
one  could  be  given  to  peregrini,  Latini  luniani,  women  who  by  the  lex
Voconia  were  disabled  from  succeeding  to  testators  possessed  of  ico,ooo
asses  or  upwards,  incertae  personae,  coelibes,  and  orbi.  The  incapa-
city of  peregrini  to  take  legacies  is  mentioned  by  Gains  (ii.  285)  as  the
probable  origin  of  fideicommissa  of  res  singulae :  that  of  women  under
the  lex  Voconia  seems  to  be  connected  with  the  first  cases  of  fideicom-
missaria  hereditas,  Cic.  de  Fin.  2.  17  and  18.  But  by  the  SC.  Pegasianum
(§5  inf..  Gains  ii.  286)  fideicommissa  were  subjected  to  the  rules  of  the
leges  lulia  and  Papia  Poppaea  respecting  coelibes  and  orbi  (p.  269  supr.),
and  peregrini  and  incertae  personae  were  incapacitated  by  senatus
consulta  of  Hadrian,  Gaius  ii.  285,  287.

(4)  The  lex  Falcidia  had  not  included  fideicommissa  within  its  scope :
this  was  remedied  by  the  SC.  Pegasianum,  §  8  inf.


3i6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

2  In  primis  igitur  sciendum  est  opus  esse,  ut  aliquis  recto
iure  testamento  heres  instituatur  eiusque  fidei  committatur,
ut  earn  hereditatem  alii  restituat:  alioquin  inutile  est  testa-
mentum,  in  quo  nemo  heres  instituitur.  cum  igitur  aliquis
scripserit :  *  Lucius  Titius  heres  esto/  poterit  adicere :  *  rogo
te,  Luci  Titi,  ut,  cum  primum  possis  hereditatem  meam  adire,
eam  Gaio  Seio  reddas  restituas.'  potest  autem  quisque  et
de  parte  restituenda  heredem  rogare :  et  liberum  est  vel  pure
vel  sub  condicione  relinquere  fideicommissum  vel  ex  die  certo.

3  Restituta  autem  hereditate  is  quidem  qui   restituit  nihilo

§  2.  After  the  passing  of  the  SC.  Trebellianum  (§  4  inf.)  a  fideicom-
missum was  called  a  fideicommissaria  hereditas  if  the  heir  was  requested
to  transfer  either  the  whole  inheritance,  or  some  definite  fraction  of  it,  to
the  intended  beneficiary :  this  following  the  analogy  of  a  genuine  heir-
ship, in  which  a  person  is  heres  though  instituted  in  a  very  small  fraction
of  the  succession  as  a  whole  :  in  other  words,  as  a  man  was  directus  heres
who  was  instituted  in  only  a  tenth,  or  a  fiftieth,  of  the  inheritance,  so  he
was  regarded  as  heres  fideicommissarius,  and  entitled  to  a  fideicommis-
saria hereditas,  if  the  instituted  heir  was  requested  to  transfer  to  him
some  definite  quota  of  the  universal  succession,  see  §  7  inf.  Nor,  as
might  be  hastily  inferred  from  the  text,  was  it  essential  that  there  should
be  a  will :  a  fideiconunissaria  hereditas  could  be  created  by  a  person
charging  his  heredes  ab  intestato  with  the  restitution  of  the  succession
either  in  whole  or  in  part :  *  meminisse  autem  oportebit  de  herede  instituto
senatum  loqui :  ideoque  tractatum  est  apud  lulianum,  ad  intestatos  locum
habeat :  sed  est  verius  eoque  iure  utimur,  ut  hoc  senatusconsultum  ad
intestatos  quoque  pertineat,  sive  legitimi  sive  honorarii  sint  successores '
Dig.  36.  I.  6.  I ;  cf.  §  10  inf.

§  d.  Before  the  legislation  mentioned  in  the  next  section,  the  effect  of
a  request  to  the  heres  to  transfer  to  some  other  person  the  hereditas  or
some  definite  fraction  of  it  had  not  been  to  produce  a  universal  succession
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term.  The  transfer  was  at  that  time  effected
under  the  guise  of  a  sale  at  a  nominal  price  ('nummo  uno'  Gains  ii.  252),
and  the  heir  under  the  will  (heres  fiduciarius),  and  the  transferee  entered
into  a  contract  by  reciprocal  stipulations  (stipulationes  quasi  emptae  et
venditae  hereditatis) ;  the  former  bargaining  that  he  should  be  indemni-
fied, in  proportion  to  the  quota  of  the  hereditas  which  he  transferred,
against  all  judgments,  legal  expenses,  etc  incurred  by  him  as  heir,  the
latter,  that  the  other  should  hand  over  to  him  his  due  share  of  the  present
or  subsequent  assets,  and  allow  him  if  necessary  to  sue  as  his  agent  upon
debts  owed  to  the  testator,  Gaius  ii.  252.  In  other  words,  the  maxim
semel  heres  semper  heres  was  consistently  adhered  to:  the  institutus,
being  charged  with  the  transfer  of  so  large  a  share  of  the  succession  that
otherwise  it  would  not  be  worth  his  while  to  accept,  considering  the
liabilities  with  which  he  was  saddled,  was  only  induced  to  do  so  by  the


Tit,  23.]    DE  FIDEICOMMISSARIIS  HEREDITATIBUS.  317

minus  heres  permanet:  is  vero  qui  recipit  hereditatem
aliquando  heredis  aliquando  legatarii  loco  habebatur.  Et  4
in  Neronis  quidem  temporibus  Trebellio  Maximo  et  Annaeo
Seneca  consulibus  senatus  consultum  factum  est,  quo  cautum
est,  ut)  si  hereditas  ex  fideicommissi  causa  restituta  sit,  omnes
actiones,  quae  iure  civili  heredi  et  in  heredem  competerent,
ei  et  in  eum  darentur,  cui  ex  fideicommisso  restituta  esset
hereditas.  post  quod  senatus  consultum  praetor  utiles  ac-
tiones ei  et  in  eum  qui  recepit  hereditatem  quasi  heredi  et  in
heredem  dare  coepit.  Sed  quia  heredes  script!,  cum  aut  5
totam  hereditatem  aut  paene  totam  plerumque  restituere
rogabantur,  adire  hereditatem  ob  nullum  vel  minimum  lucrum
recusabant  atque  ob  id  exting^ebantur  fideicommissa :  postea
Vespasian!  August!  temporibus  Pegaso  et  Pusiohe  consulibus
senatus  censuit,  ut  ei,  qui  rogatus  esset  hereditatem  resti-
tuere, perinde  liceret  quartam  partem  retinere,  atque  lege
Falcidia  ex  legatis  retinere  conceditur.  ex  singulis  quoque
rebus,  quae  per  fideicommissum  relinquuntur,  eadem  retentio
permissa  est.  post  quod  senatus  consultum  ipse  heres  onera
hereditaria  sustinebat :  ille  autem,  qui  ex  fideicommisso
recepit  partem  hereditatis,  legatarii  partiarii  loco  erat,  id  est


tmnsferee*s  expressly  undertaking  to  bear  a  fair  share  in  all  debts  and
other  expenses  which  he  incurred  as  heir.

This  section  is  wrongly  placed,  as  it  refers  really  to  the  law  as  it  stood
after  the  passing  of  the  SC».  TrebelHanum  and  Pegasianum.

§§  4-6.  The  SC.  Trebellianum,  A.D.  62,  was  designed  in  order  to  dis-
pense with  the  clumsy  process  of  fictitious  sale  and  the  stipulations  quasi
emptae  et  venditae  hereditatis  which  had  previously  been  necessary.  For
actiones  utiles  see  the  pages  referred  to  s.  v.  '  actiones  directae  et  utiles '
in  the  General  Index.  The  operation  of  the  senatusconsult  was  much
narrowed  eleven  years  later  by  the  enactment  of  the  SC.  Pegasianum,
which  (inter  alia)  provided  (i)  that  fideicommissa  should  in  future  be
subject  to  the  rule  which  had  been  established  for  legacies  by  the  lex
Falcidia,  and  the  heir  be  entitled  to  retain  for  himself  a  fourth  of  the
inheritance  dear  of  fideicommissa :  (2)  that  where  fideicommissa  were
charged  upon  an  inheritance  in  excess  of  three-fourths  of  its  value,  the
SC.  Trebellianum  should  have  no  application.  The  general  result  after
this  was  as  follows :

(i)  If  the  fideicommissa  did  not  exceed  three-fourths  of  the  whole  suc-
cession, the  transfer  of  those  of  them  which  were  '  hereditates '  was
governed  by  the  SC.  Trebellianum :  the  transferee  became  quasi-heir  (as
described  in  §  4)  and  could  sue  and  be  sued  by  utilis  actio  in  respect  of


3i8  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  11.

etus  legatarii,  cui  pars  bonorum  l^;abatur.  quae  species  l^ati
partitio  vocabatur,  quia  cum  herede  legatarius  partiebatur
hereditatem.  unde  quae  solebant  stipulationes  inter  heredem
et  partiarium  legatarium  interponi,  eaedem  interponebantur
inter  eum,  qui  ex  fideicommisso  recepit  hereditatem,  et
heredem,  id  est  ut  et  lucrum  et  damnum  hereditarium  pro
6  rata  parte  inter  eos  commune  sit.  Ergo  si  quidem  non  plus
quam  dodrantem  hereditatis  scriptus  heres  rogatus  sit  resti-
tuere,  tunc  ex  Trebelliano  senatus  consulto  restituebatur
hereditas  et  in  utrumque  actiones  hereditariae  pro  rata  parte
dabantur:  in  heredem  quidem  iure  civili,  in  eum  vero  qui
recipiebat  hereditatem  ex  senatus  consulto  Trebelliano  tam-
quam  in  heredem.    at  si  plus  quam  dodrantem   vel  etiam

the  share  he  took :  no  stipulations  between  htm  and  the  heres  directus
were  required.

(2)  If  the  fideicommissa,  whether  singular  or  universal,  exceeded  three-
fourths  of  the  hereditas,  the  only  person  who  could  sue  and  be  sued
was  the  heres  directus,  the  SC.  Trebellianum  being  excluded.  Accord-
ingly, if  any  of  them  were  universal,  it  was  necessary  to  go  back  to  the
old  contract  of  indemnification :  else  the  heir  would  in  all  probability  find
the  hereditas  damnosa.  The  exact  matter  of  the  contract,  however,  as  is
remarked  in  §  6,  differed  according  as  the  heir  availed  himself  of  the  SC.
Pegasianum,  and  retained  his  fourth,  or  was  unable  or  declined  to  take
advantage  of  it.

In  the  former  case,  the  procedure  was  based  upon  an  older  institution,
the  legatum  partitionis,  by  which  the  heres  was  instructed  in  a  will  to
hand  over  to  a  legatee  some  definite  fraction  of  the  inheritance,  e.g.
'heres  meus  cum  Titio  hereditatem  partito,  dividito'  Ulpian,  Reg.  24.  25.
As,  under  such  circumstances,  instituti  not  unfrequently  refused  to  accept
unless  guaranteed  pro  rata  portione  against  creditors*  claims  and  other
expenses,  it  became  usual  for  the  heir  and  the  partiary  legatee  to  enter
into  a  contract  (stipulationes  partis  et  pro  parte),  by  which  the  latter
engaged  to  indemnify  the  former  against  liabilities  in  proportion  to  the
share  which  he  took  in  the  estate,  and  the  former  that  he  would  transfer
to  the  legatee  his  fair  proportion  of  the  assets.  This  system  was  adopted
where  the  heir  retained  his  fourth  under  the  SC.  Pegasianum.  But  if  he
did  not  do  so,  but  transferred  the  whole  hereditas,  the  transaction  was
regarded  as  a  quasi-sale,  and  the  contract  took  the  form  of  stipulations
quasi  emptae  et  venditae  hereditatis,  which  the  SC.  TrebeLianum  had
thus  dispensed  with  for  some  dozen  years  only.

The  SC.  Pegasianum,  having  thus  fully  protected  the  heir  from  being
unfairly  burdened  with  fideiconunissa,  also  disabled  him,  as  is  pointed
out  at  the  end  of  §  6,  from  disappointing  the  expectations  of  fideicom-
missarii  by  refusing  to  accept  the  inheritance  on  the  ground  that  the


Tit.  23.]   DE  FIDEICOMMISSARIIS  HEREDITATIBUS.   319

totam  hereditatem  restituere  rogatus  sit,  locus  crat  P^^asiano
senatus  consulto,  et  hcres,  qui  semel  adierit  hereditatem,  si
modo  sua  voluntate  adierit,  sive  retinuerit  quartam  partem
sive  noluerit  retinere,  ipse  universa  onera  hereditaria  sus-
tinebat  sed  quarta  quidem  retenta  quasi  partis  et  pro
parte  stipulationes  interponebantur  tamquam  inter  partiarium
legatarium  et  heredem  :  si  vero  totam  hereditatem  restituerit,
emptae  ct  venditae  hereditatis  stipulationes  interponebantur.
sed  si  recuset  scriptus  heres  adire  hereditatem  ob  id,  quod
dicat  eam  sibi  suspectam  esse  quasi  damnosam,  Cavetur  P^a-
siano  senatus  consulto,  ut  desiderante  eo,  cui  restituere  rogatus
est,  iussu  praetoris  adeat  et  restituat  hereditatem  perindeque
ei  et  in  eum  qui  recipit  hereditatem  actiones  dentur,  acsi  iuris
est  ex  Trebclliano  senatus  consulto  :  quo  casu  nullis  stipula-
tionibus  opus  est,  quia  simul  et  huic  qui  restituit  securitas
datur  et  actiones  hereditariae  ei  et  in  eum  transferuntur  qui
recipit  hereditatem,  utroque  senatus  consulto  in  hac  specie
concurrente.     Sed    quia    stipulationes  ex    senatus   consulto  7


liabilities  exceeded  the  assets.  Under  such  circumstances  he  could  be
compelled  by  the  magistrate  to  accept  and  transfer,  whereby  he  forfeited
his  right  to  the  fourth :  his  relation  to  the  hereditas  was  in  fact  purely
formal  and  momentary ;  the  liabilities  attached,  as  the  rights  belonged,
to  the  transferee  alone,  who  alone  could  sue  the  debtors,  and  be  sued
by  the  creditors,  of  the  estate:  see  §  7  ad  fin.  Consequently,  if  after
such  enforced  acceptance  there  was  no  one  to  whom  the  transfer  could
be  made  (e.  g.  if  the  intended  transferee  had  died  leaving  no  successor)
the  creditors  would  claim  it  themselves,  Dig.  36. 1. 11. 2.  If,  after  exercising
his  right  of  compulsion,  the  fideicommissarius  drew  back,  and  refused  the
transfer,  it  was  taken  in  law  to  have  been  made  (Dig.  36.  i.  44.  pr.),  and
even  though  the  share  of  the  inheritance  actually  given  to  him  was  only
a  fraction,  he  was  bound  to  take  over,  as  he  was  entitled  to  claim,  the
whole.  Dig.  ib.  i.  9;  ib.  16.  4.  5.  This  right  of  compulsion  could  never
be  exercised  by  a  fideicommissarius  of  a  res  singula,  or  by  a  legatee :
'sed  in  fideicommissariis  hereditatibus  id  provisum  est,  ut  si  scriptus
heres  noUet  adire  hereditatem,  iussu  praetoris  adeat  et  restituat :  quod
beneficium  his,  qui  bus  singulae  res  per  fideicommissum  relictae  sunt,  non
magis  tributum  est  quam  legatariis'  Dig.  29. 4.  17.

§  7.  Justinian  combined  the  two  senatusconsulta  in  one  enactment :
retaining  those  provisions  of  the  SC.  Pegasianum  which  gave  the  heir  a
right  to  a  fourth  of  the  inheritance  clear  of  fideicommissa,  and  which
enabled  the  heres  fideicommissarius  to  compel  the  direct  heir  to  make
aditio;  but  repealing  that  which  had  suspended  the  operation  of  the


320  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

Pegasiano  descendentes  et  ipsi  antiquitati  displicuerunt  et
quibusdam  casibus  captiosas  eas  homo  excels!  ingenii  Papi-
nianus  appellat  et  nobis  in  legibus  magis  simplicitas  quam
difficultas  placet,  ideo  omnibus  nobis  suggestis  tam  simili-
tudinibus  quam  diflferentiis  utriusque  senatus  consult!  placuit
exploso  senatus  consulto  Pegasiano,  quod  postca  supervenit,
omnem  auctoritatem  Trebelliano  senatus  consulto  praestare,
ut  ex  eo  fideicommissariae  hereditates  restituantur,  sive
habeat  heres  ex  voluntate  testatoris  quartam  sive  plus  sive
minus  sive  penitus  nihil,  ut  tunc,  quando  vel  nihil  vel  minus
quarta  apud  eum  remaneat,  liceat  ei  vel  quartam  vel  quod
deest  ex  nostra  auctorjtate  retinere  vel  repetere  solutum,
quasi  ex  Trebelliano  senatus  consulto  pro  rata  portione
actionibus  tam  in  heredem  quam  in  fideicommissarium  com-
petentibus.  st  vero  totam  hereditatem  sponte  restituerit,
omnes  hereditariae  actiones  fideicommissario  et  adversus  eum
competunt.  sed  etiam  id,  quod  praecipuum  Pegasiani  senatus
consult!  fuerat,  ut,  quando  recusabat  heres  scriptus  sibi  datam
hereditatem  adire,  necessitas  ei  imponeretur  totam  heredi-
tatem volenti  fideicommissario  restituere  et  omnes  ad  eum  et

SC.  Trebellianum  where  the  fideicoinmissa  exceeded  in  amount  three-
fourths  of  the  hereditas.  Under  his  system,  whenever  a  definite  fraction
of  an  inheritance  is  transferred  under  a  legacy  or  fideicommissum,  the
transferee  is  in  loco  heredis,  and  capable  of  suing  and  being  sued,  in  the
ratio  of  the  share  which  comes  to  him.

The  right,  which  Justinian  confers  upon  the  heir,  of  recovering  the
fourth  even  afler  he  had  paid  in  excess  to  the  fideicommissarius,  was  un-
known to  the  older  law :  *  qui  totam  hereditatem  restituit,  cum  quartam
retinere  ex  Pegasiano  debuisset,  si  non  retineat,  repetere  earn  non  potest,
nee  enim  indebitum  solvisse  videtur,  quia  plenam  fidem  defuncto  prae-
stare maluit '  Paul.  Sent.  Kec.  4.  3.  4.  In  Gaius'  time  (ii.  283)  if  one  by
mistake  paid  more  than  was  due  under  a  fideicommissum,  the  balance
could  be  recovered :  with  a  legacy  it  was  otherwise.

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  partiary  legatee  was  only  a  ^  singular '
successor:  he  became  liable  for  the  testator's  debts,  not  ipso  iure,  in
virtue  of  the  transfer  to  him  of  a  share  of  the  hereditas,  but  only  by
express  agreement  (stipulationes  partis  et  pro  parte)  with  the  heir.  After
Justinian's  *  exaequatio '  of  legacies  and  fideicommissa  this  ceased  to  be
so,  and  the  partiary  legatee  became  a  universal  successor  just  like  the
heres  fideicommissarius.  For  some  illustrations  of  the  joint  operation  of
the  lex  Falcidia  and  the  law  relating  to  fideicommissa  see  Poste's  Gaius,
pp. 281-283.


Tit  23.]   DE  FIDEICOMMISSARIIS  HEREDITATIBUS.    321

contra  eum  transire  actiones,  et  hoc  transponimus  ad  senatus
consultum  Trebellianum,  ut  ex  hoc  solo  et  necessitas  heredi
imponatur,  si  ipso  nolente  adire  fideicommissarius  desiderat
restitui  sibi  hereditatem,  nullo  nee  damno  nee  commodo
apud  heredem  manente.  Nihil  autem  interest,  utrum  aliquis  8
ex  asse  heres  institutus  aut  totam  hereditatem  aut  pro  parte
restituere  rogatur,  an  ex  parte  heres  institutus  aut  totam
earn  partem  aut  partis  partem  restituere  rogatur :  nam  et  hoc
casu  eadem  observari  praecipimus,  quae  in  totius  hereditatis
restitutione  diximus.  Si  quis  una  aliqua  re  deducta  sive  9
praecepta,  quae  quartam  continet,  veluti  fundo  vel  alia  re
rogatus  sit  restituere  hereditatem,  simili  modo  ex  Trebelliano
senatus  consulto  restitutio  fiat,  perinde  ac  si  quarta  parte
retenta  rogatus  esset  reliquam  hereditatem  restituere.  sed
illud  interest,  quod  altero  casu,  id  est  cum  deducta  sive
praecepta  aliqua  re  restituitur  hereditas,  in  solidum  ex  eo
senatus  consulto  actiones  transferuntur  et  res  quae  remanet
apud  heredem  sine  ullo  onere  hereditario  apud  eum  manet
quasi  ex  legato  ei  adquisita,  altero  vero  casu,  id  est  cum
quarta  parte  retenta  rogatus  est  heres  restituere  hereditatem
et  restituit,  scindantur  actiones  et  pro  dodrante  quidem
transferantur  ad  fideicommissarium,  pro  quadrante  remaneant
apud  heredem.  quin  etiam  licet  in  una  re,  qua  deducta  aut
praecepta  restituere  aliquis  hereditatem  rogatus  est,  maxima
pars  hereditatis  contineatur,  aeque  in  solidum  transferuntur
actiones  et  secum  deliberare  debet  is,  cui  restituitur  hereditas,
an  expediat  sibi  restitui.  eadem  scilicet  interveniunt  et  si
duabus  pluribusve  rebus  deductis  praeceptisve  restituere
hereditatem  rogatus  sit.  sed  et  si  certa  summa  deducta
praeceptave,   quae    quartam    vel    etiam    maximam    partem

§  9.  This  is  called  institutio  ex  re  certa.  The  general  rule,  where  a
person  was  instituted  to  specific  property  only,  was  to  take  the  limitation
as  pro  non  scripto:  'si  ex  fundo  fuisset  aliquis  solus  institutus,  valet
institutio  detracta  fundi  mentione'  Dig.  28.  5.  i.  4;  cf.  Dig.  28.  6.  41.  8 :
36.  I.  30.  If,  however,  it  was  clear  that  the  testator  meant  some  one  else
to  take  the  residue,  the  intention  would  be  executed,  as  in  the  case  of  an
express  fideicommissum  before  us :  or  a  fideicommissum  would  be  im-
plied in  favour  of  the  intestate  heirs  (Dig.  31.  69.  pr.),  the  instituti  in  an
earlier  will  (Tit  17.  3  supr.,  Dig.  36.  i.  30)  or  the  coheredes  of  the  insti-
tutus, Dig.  28.  5.  35.  pr. ;  ib.  jZ,  pr.

Y


322  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  11.

hereditatis  continet,  rogatus  sit  aliquis  hereditatem  restituere,
idem  iuris  est.  quae  diximus  de  eo  qui  ex  asse  heres  in-
stitutus  est,  eadem  transferimus  et  ad  eum  qui  ex  parte  heres
scriptus  est.

10  Praeterea  intestatus  quoque  moriturus  potest  rogare  eum,
ad  quern  bona  sua  vel  legitimo  iure  vel  honorario  pertinere
intellegit,  ut  hereditatem  suam  totam  partemve  eius  aut  rem
aliquam,  veluti  fundum  hominem  pecuniam,  alicui  restituat:

1 1  cum  alioquin  legata  nisi  ex  testamento  non  valeant.  Eum
quoque,  cui  ah'quid  restituitur,  potest  rogare,  ut  id  nirsus  alii

12totum  aut  pro  parte  vel  etiam  aliud  aliquid  restituat.  Et
quia  prima  fideicommissorum  cunabula  a  fide  heredum  pen-
dent et  tam  nomen  quam  substantiam  acceperunt  et  ideo
divus  Augustus  ad  necessitatem  iuris  ea  detraxit :  nuper  et
nos  eundem  principem  superare  contendentes  ex  facto,  quod
Tribonianus  vir  excelsus  quaestor  sacri  palatii  suggessit,
constitutionem  fecimus,  per  quam  disposuimus:  si  testator
fidei  heredis  sui  commisit,  ut  vel  hereditatem  vel  speciale
Adeicommissum  restituat,  et  neque  ex  scriptura  neque  ex
quinque  testium  numero,  qui  in  fideicommissis  legitimus
esse  noscitur,  res  possit  manifestari,  sed  vel  pauciores  quam
quinque  vel  nemo  penitus  testis  intervenerit,  tunc  sive  pater
heredis  sive  alius  quicumque  sit,  qui  fidem  elegit  heredis  et
ab  eo  aliquid  restitui  voluerit,  si  heres  periidia  tentus  adim-
plere  fidem  recusat  negando  rem  ita  esse  subsecutam,  si
fideicommissarius  iusiurandum  ei  detulerit,  cum  prius  ipse
de  calumnia  iuraverit,  necesse  eum  habere  vel  iusiurandum
subire,  quod  nihil  tale  a  testatore  audivit,  vel  recusantem  ad
fideicommissi  vel  universitatis  vel  specialis  solutionem  coartari,

§  11.  It  was  one  of  the  differences  between  legacies  and  fideiconxmissa
that  this  could  not  be  done  by  means  of  a  legacy:  'item  a  legatario
legari  non  potest,  sed  fideicommissum  relinqui  potest :  quinetiam  ab  eo
quoque  cui  per  fideicommissum  relinquimus  rursus  alii  per  fideicom-
missum relinquere  possumus'  Gaius  ii.  271  :  cf.  Tit.  24.  pr.  inf.

§  12.  The  enactment  referred  to  is  in  Cod.  6.  42.  32.  The  procedure
described  here  was  not  confined,  as  has  been  supposed,  to  the  case  of  an
oral  fideicommissum  stricto  sensu :  it  could  be  appealed  to  when  there
had  been  any  kind  of  communication  made  by  the  testator  to  the  heir  or
other  person,  whether  by  writing*  or  word  of  mouth :  and  by  the  words
'  et  neque  ex  scriptura .  •  •  .  intervenerit '  Justinian  seems  to  have  meant


Tit.  24.]  DE  SINGULIS  REBUS,  ETC.  323

ne  depereat  ultima  voluntas  testatoiis  fidei  heredis  commissa.
eadem  observari  censuimus  et  si  a  legatario  vel  fideicom-
missario  aliquid  similiter  relictum  sit.  quod  si  is,  a  quo
relictum  dicitur,  coniiteatur  quidem  aliquid  a  se  relictum  esse,
sed  ad  legis  suptilitatem  decurrat,  omnimodo  cc^endus  est
solvere.

XXIV.

DE  SINGULIS  REBUS  PER  FIDEICOMMISSUM  RELICTIS.

Potest  autem  quis  etiam  singulas  res  per  fideicommissum
relinquere,  veluti  fundum  hominem  vestem  argentum  pecu-
niam  numeratam,  et  vel  ipsum  heredem  rogare,  ut  alicui
restituat,  vel  legatarium,  quamvis  a  legatario  legari  non
possit.  Potest  autem  non  solum  proprias  testator  res  per  1
fideicommissum  relinquere,  sed  et  heredis  aut  legatarii  aut
fideicommissarii  aut  cuiuslibet  alterius.  itaque  et  legatarius
et  fideicommissarius  non  solum  de  ea  re  rogari  potest,  ut  eam
alicui  restituat,  quae  ei   relicta  sit,  sed   etiam  de  alia,  sive


that  his  regulation  was  to  apply  whenever  there  was  neither  a  formal  will
nor  codicil,  nor  an  oral  declaration  before  five  witnesses  :  the  heir  had  to
swear  w  ol  KareXtUpSri  il>id«iKCfifuir<rw  Theoph.  For  calumnia  in  the  sense
of  groundless  or  vexatious  litigation  6ee  Bk.  iv.  16.  i  inf.

Tit.  XXrV.  As  has  been  observed  above,  a  fideicommissum  could
be  charged  on  anyone  who  took  a  benefit  by  the  decease :  i.  e.  on  heirs,
testamentary  or  intestate,  legatees,  fideicommissarii,  donees  mortis  causa
(Dig.  32. 3.  3  ;  31.  77.  i),  the  fiscus,  if  the  estate  came  to  it  as  bona  vacan-
tia (Dig.  30. 114.  2),  the  heirs  of  all  these  persons  (Dig.  32.  5.  i  :  ib.  6.  pr.),
and  the  father  of  a  filius^unilias,  or  master  of  a  slave,  who  was  instituted
or  to  whom  a  legacy  of  fideicommissum  was  given.

§  1.  Cf.  Ulpian,  Reg.  25.  5  '  per  fideicommissum  relinqui  possunt,  quae
per  damnationem  legari.'  The  rule  *ne  plus  quisquam  rogetur  alicui
restituere  quam  ipse  ex  testamento  ceperit,'  and  the  inference  from  it  that
a  beneficiary  may  be  charged  with  fideicommissa  to  the  same  extent  to
which  he  is  benefited,  each  admit  of  an  exception :  (i) '  si  pecunia  accepta
rogatus  sit  rem  propriam,  quamquam  maioris  pretii  est,  restituere,  non
est  audiendus  legatarius,  legato  percepto  si  velit  computare'  Dig.  31.  70.
I :  cf.  the  same  principle  applied  to  the  manumission  of  the  legatee's  or
fideicommissarius'  slave  in  Dig.  40.  5.  24.  12.  Similarly  if  liberty  was
bequeathed  to  a  servus  alienus  the  master  could  not  refuse  to  sell  or
manumit  him  if  he  had  taken  any  benefit  by  the  testator's  decease.  Cod.  6.
50.  13,  Dig.  40.  5.  19. 1.  (2)  No  fideicommissum  could  be  validly  imposed
on  the  'legitima  pars'  Cod.  3.  28.  32  ;  ib.  39.  pr.  and  i.

Y  a


324  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

ipsius  sive  aliena  sit.  hoc  solum  observandum  est,  ne  plus
quisquam  rogetur  alicui  restituere,  quam  ipse  ex  testamento
ceperit :  nam  quod  amplius  est,  inutiliter  relinquitur.  cum
autem  aliena  res  per  fideicommissum  relinquitur,  necesse  est
ei  qui  rogatus  est   aut   ipsam    redimere   et    praestare    aut

2  aestimationem  eius  solvere.  Libertas  quoque  servo  per
fideicommissum  dari  potest,  ut  heres  eum  rogetur  manu-
mittere  vel  legatarius  vel  fideicommissarius.  nee  interest,
utrum  de  suo  proprio  servo  testator  roget,  an  de  eo  qui  ipsius
heredis  aut  legatarii  vel  etiam  extranei  sit.  itaque  alien  us
servus  redimi  et  manumitti  debet :  quod  si  dominus  eum  non
vendat,  si  modo  nihil  ex  iudicio  eius  qui  reliquit.  libertatem
percepit,  non  statim  extinguitur  fideicommissaria  libertas,  sed
differtur,  quia  possit  tempore  procedente,  ubicumque  occasio
redimendi  servi  fuerit,  praestari  libertas.  qui  autem  ex
causa  fideicommissi  manumittitur,  non  testatoris  fit  libertus,
etiamsi  testatoris  servus  sit,  sed  eius  qui  manumittit:  at  is,
qui  directo  testamento  liber  esse  iubetur,  ipsius  testatoris  fit
libertus,  qui  etiam  orcinus  appellatur.  nee  alius  ullus  directo
ex  testamento  libertatem  habere  potest,  quam  qui  utroque
tempore  testatoris  fuerit,  et  quo  faceret  testamentum  et  quo
moreretur.  directo  autem  libertas  tunc  dari  videtur,  cum
non  ab    alio  servum    manunlitti    rogat,  sed  velut   ex   suo

3  testamento  libertatem  ei  competere  vult.  Verba  autem
fideicommissorum  haec  maxime  in  usu  habeantur :  peto,  rogo,
volo,  mando,  fidei  tuae  committo.  quae  perinde  singula
firma  sunt,  atque  si  omnia  in  unum  congcsta  essent.

XXV.

DE  CODICILLIS.

Ante  Augusti  tempora  constat  ius  codicillorum  non  fuisse,
sed  primus  Lucius  Lentulus,  ex  cuius  persona  etiam  fidei-

§  2.  See  preceding  note.  In  Gaius'  time  the  refusal  of  the  master  to
sell  a  slave  to  whom  a  testator  had  bequeathed  freedom  by  a  fideicom-
missum had  been  fatal  to  the  disposition :  ^  si  dominus  eum  non  vendat,
sane  extinguitur  libertas,  quia  pro  libertate  pretii  computatio  nulla  inter-
venit '  ii.  265.

Tit.  XXV.  When  first  recognised  as  binding  under  Augustus,  codicilli
were  informal  documents  in  the  nature  of  notes  or  memoranda  containing


Tit.  25.]  DE  CODICILLIS.  325

commtssa  coeperunt,  codicillos  introduxit.  nam  cum  dece-
deret  in  Africa,  scripsit  codicillos  testamento  confirmatos,
quibus  ab  Augusto  petiit  per  fideicommissum,  ut  faceret
aliquid :  et  cum  divus  Augustus  voluntatem  eius  implesset^
deinceps  reliqui  auctoritatem  eius  secuti  fideicommissa  prae-
stabant  et  filia  Lentuli  legata,  quae  iure  non  debebat,  solvit,
dicitur  Augustus  convocasse  prudentes,  inter  quos  Trebatium
quoque,  cuius  tunc  auctoritas  maxima  erat,  et  quaesisse,  an
possit  hoc  recipi  nee  absonans  a  iuris  ratione  codicillorum
usus  esset:  et  Trebatium  suasisse  Augusto,  quod  diceret
utilissimum  et  necessarium  hoc  civibus  esse  propter  magnas
et  longas  per^rinationes,  quae  apud  veteres  fuissent,  ubi,  si
quis  testamentum  facere  non  posset,  tamen  codicillos  posset,
post  quae  tempora  cum  et  Labeo  codicillos  fecisset,  iam
nemini  dubium  erat,  quin  codicilli  iure  optimo  admitte-
rentur.

Non  tantum  autem  testamento  facto  potest  quis  codicillos  1

directions  from  the  deceased  to  his  heir,  and  employed  principally  for  the
creation  of  fideicommissa — eXXiirow  cV  huiBi)KjB  yvc^fuis  aimn'^Tip^a'is  Theoph.
Traces  of  this  original  formlessness  even  survive  in  the  Digest,  e.  g.  29.  7.
6.  I ;  31.  89.  pr.:  cf.  Cod.  6.  42.  22.  As  soon,  however,  as  they  acquired
legal  force,  it  became  possible  to  do  by  codicilli  much  which  hitherto  had
required  a  testament :  the  result  being,  as  Mr.  Poste  remarks,  the  practi-
cal abolition  of  what  had  tiU  then  been  an  unbending  rule  of  testamentary
law,  viz.  the  requirement  of  unity  in  the  act  of  testation.  Before  this,  no
disposition  of  property  to  take  effect  after  one's  death,  apart  from  dona-
tiones  mortis  causa,  had  been  valid  unless  the  whole  of  it  were  made  uno
contextu,  uno  eodemque  tempore :  but  a  man  <  might  now  distribute  his
fortune  in  a  series  of  fragmentary  or  piecemeal  and  unrelated  disposi-
tions.' It  is  in  this  that  the  legal  advance  marked  by  the  recognition  of
codicilli  consists,  not  in  their  freedom  from  form,  which  was  corrected  by
later  enactments.

§  L  Intestate  codicilli  'nihil  desiderant,  sed  vicem  testamenti  exhi-
bent '  Dig.  29.  7.  16.  Those  which  accompany  a  will  are  merely  acces-
sory to  the  latter,  with  which  they  stand  or  fall  (^  codicilli ....  testamento
facto  ius  sequuntur  eius '  Dig.  loc.  cit, '  si  ex  testamento  hereditas  adita
non  fuisset,  fideicommissum  ex  huiusmodi  codicillis  nullius  momenti
erit*  ib.  3.  2),  and  as  a  general  rule  are  read  as  part  of  the  will  itself:
*  codicillorum  ius  singulare  est,  ut,  quaecunque  in  his  scribenttu-,  perinde
haberentur  ac  si  in  testamento  scripta  essent '  Dig.  ib.  2.  2.  Occasionally,
however,  the  codicilli  are  looked  at  by  themselves,  and  apart  from  the
will :  e.  g.  if  the  testator  is  insolvent,  or  less  than  twenty  years  of  age,  at
the  time  of  executing  his  will,  and  then  subsequently,  when  solvent  or  over


3a6  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  II.

facere,  sed  et  intestatus  quis  decedens  fideicommittere  codi-
cillis  potest,  sed  cum  ante  testamentum  factum  codicilli
fact!  erant,  Papinianus  ait  non  aliter  vires  habere  quamsi
special!  postea  voluntate  confirmentur.  sed  divi  Severus  et
Antoninus  rescripserunt  ex  his  codicillis  qui  testamentum
praecedunt  posse  fideicommissum  peti,  si  appareat  eum,  qui
postea  testamentum  fecerat,  a  voluntate  quam  codicillis  ex-
2  presserat  non  recessisse.  Codicillis  autem  hereditas  neque
dari  neque  adimi  potest,  ne  confundatur  ius  testamentorum  et
codicillorum,  et  ideo  nee  exheredatio  scribi.  directo  autem
hereditas  codicillis  neque  dari  neque  adimi  potest:  nam  per


that  age,  manumit  a  slave  by  codicilli,  the  manumission  holds  good,
though  it  would  have  been  invalid  if  made  in  the  will,  Dig.  29.  7.  4,  ib.  i.

There  were  at  one  time  important  differences  in  effect  among  codicUs
according  as  they  were  or  were  not  confinned,  antecedently  or  subse-
quently, by  a  will.  By  unconfirmed  codicils  fideicommissa  alone  could
be  created  :  by  codicilli  confirmati  the  testator  could  give  legacies  (Gaius
ii.  270,  Ulpian,  Reg.  25.  8),  appoint  testamentary  guardians,  Dig.  26.  2.  3.
pr.,  and  directly  manumit  his  own  slaves :  but  under  Justinian  little  re-
mained of  these  distinctions  excepting  that  relating  to  tutoris  datio.

It  was  usual  for  wills  to  contain  a  '  clausula  codicillaris,'  by  which  the
testator  declared  his  desire,  that  if  the  will  should  prove  invalid  on  any
ground  it  should  have  force  as  codicilli.  Such  declaration  might  be  in
any  form,  and  need  not  even  mention  the  word  codicils :  '  ex  his  verbis,
quae  paterfiamilias  scriptorae  addidit :  ravniw  r^y  din^^y  fiovkofMoi  thai
KvpUof  enl  nwTfif  f^cwias,  videri  eum  voluisse  omnimodo  valere  ea  quae
reliquit,  etiamsi  intestatus  decessisset'  Dig.  38.  i.  29.  i.  By  this  clause
the  dispositions  of  the  will  were  validated  only  so  far  as  they  would  have
held  good  had  they  been  originally  executed  as  codiciUi :  thus  they  fell
to  the  ground  unless  the  forms  required  for  the  execution  of  codicils
(3  inf.)  were  observed,  or  if  the  testator  had  not  testamenti  £eictio :  *  sci-
endum est  eos  demum  fideicommissum  posse  relinquere,  qui  testandi  ius
habent'  Dig.  30.  2.  Subject  to  this,  the  effect  of  the  clausula  was  to  con-
vert the  institution  of  the  will  into  a  fideicommissaria  hereditas.  Dig.  31.
88.  17,  binding  on  the  intestate  heirs,  or  those  instituted  in  an  earlier  or
later  testament  If,  however,  the  ground  of  the  wilFs  invalidity  was
violation  of  the  rules  relating  to  the  legitima  pars,  the  institution  became
altogether  void.  The  legacies  and  fideicommissa  remained  good  in  any
case.

§  2.  Nothing  can  be  done  by  codicils  affecting  the  direct  universal
succession.  To  what  is  said  in  the  text  it  may  be  added,  that  no  invalid
institution  could  be  validated  by  a  codicillary  confirmation,  however
express.  Dig.  29.  7.  a.  4 ;  though  such  confirmation,  and  also  pupillary
substitutions  made  by  codicils^  would  be  upheld  by  a  *  benignior  interpre-


Tit.  25.]  DE  CODICILUS.  327

fideicommissum  hereditas  codicillis  iure  relinquitur.    nee  coa-
dicionem  heredi  institute  codicillis  adicere  neque  substituerc
directo  potest.     Codicillos  autem  etiam  plures   quis  facere  3
potest :  et  nullam  soUemnitatem  ordinationis  desiderant.

tatio'  as  fideicommissa,  Dig.  loc.  cit. ;  36.  i.  76.  So  too  the  heir*s  name,
which  the  testator  had  omitted  or  suppressed  in  a  will,  might  be  supplied
in  later  codicilli,  Dig.  28.  5.  yy :  and  in  the  same  way  a  testator  might
declare  the  institutus  of  an  earlier  will  indignus,  whereby  his  portion  was
forfeited  to  the  fiscus,  Cod.  6.  35.  4.  Soldiers  were  exempted  from  the
restrictions  of  this  section,  Dig.  29.  i.  36.  pr.

§  3.  The  statement  of  the  text  that  codicilli  were  subject  to  no  require-
ments of  form  is  misleading :  all  that  it  means  is  that  they  could  be  ex-
pressed in  any  phrase  or  language.  Constantine  prescribed  for  intestate,
and  Theodosius  II  for  all  codicils  the  same  number  and  qualification  of
witnesses  as  were  necessary  for  a  testament.  Under  Justinian  they  had
to  be  signed  by  the  maker  before  at  least  five  witnesses.  Cod.  6.  23.  28.  6,
and  to  be  signed  and  sealed  by  the  latter  in  his  presence :  many  writers,
however,  hold  that  sealing  was  unnecessary.  If  these  formalities  were
not  complied  with,  the  procedure  described  in  Tit.  23.  12  supr.  might  still
be  appealed  to,  so  far  as  the  would-be  codicils  could  be  construed  as
creating  a  fideicommissum.


EXCURSUS   II.

lURA  IN   RE  ALIENA  OTHER  THAN  SERVITUDES.

Superficies  is  a  right  in  rem  (Dig.  43.  18.  i.  3)  of  praetorian
origin  to  a  building  or  part  of  one,  either  in  perpetuity  or  for  a  very
extended  term,  without  any  right  to  the  soil  upon  which  it  stands :
it  is  a  ius  in  re  aliena  because  *  superficies  solo  cedit ; '  the  house  is
properly  owned  by  the  owner  of  the  soil :  *  superficiarias  aedes  appel-
lamus,  quae  in  conducto  solo  positae  sunt,  quarum  proprietas  et
civili  et  naturali  iure  eius  est,  cuius  et  solum '  Dig.  43.  18.  2.  The
modes  in  which  it  could  arise  are — (i)  contract,  whether  it  took  the
form  of  gift,  exchange,  sale  (Dig.  43.  18.  i.  i),  hire  (the  annual  rent
being  called  solarium),  or  permissive  building  upon  land  of  the  state
(Dig.  43.  8.  2.  17),  or  a  private  person;  (2)  legacy;  (3)  judicial
decree.  Whether  it  could  be  acquired  by  usucapio  is  much  dis-
puted: see  Dig.  6.  2.  12.  3;  41.  3.  26.  Superficies  was  alienable
inter  vivos  or  by  will  (Dig.  43.  18.  i.  7),  was  heritable  (Dig.  10.  2.
10),  and  could  be  made  the  subject  of  a  pledge  or  servitude,  Dig.
13.  7.  16.  2 ;  43.  18.  I.  6  and  9.  For  the  protection  of  his  right
the  superficiarius  could  bring  in  their  '  utilis  *  form  all  the  actions
available  to  the  dominus — rei  vindicatio,  negatoria,  confessoria,  and
Publiciana,  Dig.  ib.  i.  i.  3  and  9,  Dig.  6.  i.  73.  i ;  and  he  had
a  special  interdict  de  superficie  (Dig.  43.  18.  i.  2)  analogous  in
operation  to  uti  possidetis.  Of  the  building  itself  the  superficiarius
had  only  detention :  of  his  right  he  had  quasi-possession,  and  con-
sequently could  bring  directly  the  interdicts  unde  vi^Dig.  43.  16.  i.  5,
and  de  precario,  Dig.  43.  26.  2.  3.

The  origin  of  Emphyteusis  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  leases  of
public  land  for  cultivation  given  to  private  persons  by  the  state,  the
enjoyment  of  which  Ulpian  tells  us  (Dig.  43.  8)  was  protected  by  the
praetor  by  means  of  an  interdict  de  loco  publico  fruendo.  As  how-
ever Niebuhr  (Rom.  Geschichte,  i.  p.  171.  2)  has  shown,  the  amount
of  the  public  land  was  enormously  reduced  by  the  agrarian  laws  of


lURA  IN  RE  ALIEN  A   OTHER   THAN  SERVITUDES.  329

the  later  Republic,  the  foundation  of  military  colonies,  and  the  grants
made  to  his  victorious  soldiery  by  Vespasian :  but  the  practice  of
letting  their  lands  out  for  tillage  at  a  rent  (vectigal)  was  adopted  by
the  collegia  of  priests  and  municipal  corporations^  and  the  ordinary
duration  of  the  term  seems  to  have  been  constantly  growing  until
a  lease  in  perpetuity  became  the  most  usual  form  of  the  tenure.  The
lessee  in  such  cases  enjoyed  the  protection  of  the  interdict  already
referred  to:  and  though  it  would  seem  that  in  Gaius'  day  (iii.  145)
his  interest  was  conceived  as  contractual  only,  it  had  by  the  time
when  Paulus  wrote  definitely  acquired  the  character  of  a  right  in  rem,
which  could  be  asserted  even  against  the  lessor  himself  when  non-
payment of  rent  was  not  alleged  :  '  agri  civitatum  vectigales  vocantur,
qui  in  perpetuum  locantur,  id  est  hac  lege,  ut  quamdiu  pro  his
vectigal  pendatur,  tamdiu  neque  ipsis,  qui  conduxerint,  neque  his,
qui  in  locum  eorum  successerunt,  auferri  eos  liceat.  Qui  in  perpe-
tuum fruendum  conduxerunt  a  municipibus,  quamvis  non  efficiantur
domini,  tamen  placuit  competere  eis  in  rem  actionem  adversus  ipsos
municipes,  ita  tamen,  si  vectigal  solvant,'  Dig.  6.  3.  i  and  2 :  in  Dig.
39.  2.  15.  26  this  action  is  called  actio  vectigalis.  The  approximate
date  of  this  development  suggests  that  it  was  due  to  juristic  rather
than  to  praetorian  action.  Similarly,  though  not  owner  (Dig.  loc.
cit.)  the  lessee  of  ager  vectigalis  might  bring  an  actio  confessoria
utilis  (Dig.  8.  I.  16)  for  the  vindication  of  servitudes  appurtenant  to
his  land,  and  other  actions  which  properly  lie  only  at  the  suit  of  an
owner  (Dig.  47.  7.  5.  2).

In  the  Greek  provinces  of  Rome  perpetual  leases  of  agricultural
land  seem  to  have  been  commonly  granted  by  private  individuals  no
less  than  by  Corporations  (<^vr«i;<rif ,  hriKapmla) ;  and  in  the  Eastern
portion  of  the  Empire  the  practice  was  extensively  adopted  by  large
landowners  of  all  kinds,  including  the  Emperor  and  Fiscus.  The
provincial  usages,  and  the  jurist  law  relating  to  ager  vectigalis,  were
the  basis  of  the  legislation  on  the  subject  which  commences  with  the
Christian  Emperors.  In  this  the  tenure  is  termed  Emphyteusis,  and
lands  so  held  praedia  Emphyteutica  or  Emphyteuticaria  :  the  annual
rent  is  termed  pensio  or  canon  more  often  than  vectigal.  The  pre-
cise nature  of  the  lease  and  of  the  Emphyteuta's  right,  which  in  Gaius'
day  had  been  matters  of  dispute,  was  determined  by  Zeno  (Cod.  4.
66.  I,  Bk.  iii.  24.  3  inf.),  who  enacted  that  the  transaction  should  be
neither  sale  nor  ordinary  hire,  but  be  governed  by  special  rules  of  its
own :  his  settlement  of  the  law  passed  with  little  or  no  alteration  into
the  Corpus  iuris  of  Justinian.


330  EXCURSUS  II.

Writing  was  necessary  for  the  creation  of  an  Emphyteusis  if  the
land  belonged  to  the  church  or  a  charitable  foundation  (Nov.  120.  6.
2) ;  in  other  cases  only  if  it  was  desired  to  introduce  some  modifica-
tion into  the  ordinary  rules  governing  the  tenure  (Cod.  4.  66.  i).
The  Emphyteuta  was  entitled  to  the  complete  use  of  the  land,  vKth-
out  being  subject  to  the  limitations  imposed  on  the  usufructuary
(p.  225,  supr.).  He  became  the  owner  of  its  fruits  by  separation
(Dig.  22. 1.  25. 1 :  see  note  on  Bk.  ii.  i.  35),  and  might  freely  alter  its
character,  though  he  could  not  claim  any  compensation  for  improve-
ments, provided  he  did  it  no  permanent  injury  (Nov.  7.  3  ;  120.  6) :
in  that  event  he  must  indemnify  the  owner,  and  might  even  be  evicted
if  that  owner  were  a  church  or  charitable  foundation  (Nov.  120.  8).
His  rights  were  heritable,  and  alienable  both  inter  vivos  (Cod.  4.  66.
3)  and  by  will:  he  could  mortgage  them  (Dig.  13.  7.  16.  2),  and
create  servitudes  over  the  land  available  so  long  as  his  interest
endured  (Dig.  30.  71. 5-6).  In  the  form  of  actiones  utiles  he  enjoyed
all  the  remedies  of  an  owner,  and  like  the  superficiarius  he  had  deten-
tion of  the  land  and  quasi-possession  of  his  own  interest,  being
thereby  entitled  to  avail  himself  of  the  possessory  interdicts.

His  chief  duties  were  to  pay  his  rent  and  all  taxes  assessed  upon
the  land  (Nov.  7.  3.  2 ;  120.  8),  and  so  long  as  his  rent  was  unpaid
the  owner  might  prevent  him  and  others  claiming  through  him  from
exercising  any  rights  over  it  (arg.  Dig.  13.  7.  17).  He  was  liable
to  eviction  (i)  if  he  was  in  arrear  with  taxes  for  three  years
(Cod.  4.  66.  2):  (2)  if  his  rent  was  unpaid  for  the  same  time,
or  two  years  if  the  owner  was  a  church  or  charitable  foundation  :  (3)
if  he  neglected  his  duties  on  alienation  (Cod.  4.  66.  3).  Unlike  the
colonus  or  ordinary  ^ming  tenant,  he  was  not  entitled  to  any  remis-
sion of  rent  on  account  of  bad  seasons  or  difficulty  in  getting  in  his
crops  (Cod.  ib.  i :  see  iii.  24.  3  inf.).  If  he  proposed  to  alienate  his
interest,  he  was  bound  to  give  his  lord  notice,  and  obtain  his  assent
and  approval  of  the  person  of  the  alienee :  this  could  be  refused  only
on  reasonable  grounds,  and  must  otherwise  be  given  within  two
months  of  the  application.  The  alienee  became  liable  for  the  alienor's
arrears  of  rent  (Dig.  30.  39.  5),  and  the  lord  was  entitled  to  a  com-
mission or  fine  of  two  per  cent  on  the  purchase  money  or  value  of
the  holding,  besides  having,  if  he  chose  to  exercise  it  within  two
months,  the  right  of  pre-emption  at  the  price  agreed  upon  (Cod.  4.
66.  3).  The  modes  in  which  Emphyteusis  arose  are  substantially
the  same  with  those  for  the  creation  of  superficies,  and  the  doubt  as
to  the  admissibility  of  usucapion  applies  to  both.


lURA  IN  RE  ALIENA  OTHER  THAN  SERVITUDES.  331

The  mention  of  pignus,  the  last  of  the  three  iura  in  re  aliena  which
are  not  servitudes,  makes  this  the  most  convenient  place  for  discus-
sing the  different  forms  which  pledge  or  mortgage  took  in  Roman
law.  The  object  of  pledge  is  to  give  a  creditor  a  real  security  in
addition  to  the  personal  security  of  his  debtor.  If  the  creditor  relies
for  satisfaction  of  his  debt  solely  on  a  general  belief  in  his  debtor's
ability  and  willingness  to  meet  his  liabilities,  he  contents  himself  with
a  personal  security,  and  if  the  debtor's  assets  prove  insufficient,  he
must  pro  tanto  be  a  loser :  but  if  by  any  means  he  obtains  rights
over  some  definite  portion  of  the  debtor's  property,  to  which  he  can
resort  in  the  event  of  non-payment,  his  security  is  real,  '  quia  expedit
ei  pignori  potius  incumbere  quam  in  personam  agere'  Bk.  iv.  i.  14
inf.  Real  security,  in  short,  is  a  means  of  protecting  a  creditor
against  the  risk  of  the  debtor's  insolvency  :  for  creditors  who  are  only
*  personally'  secured  have  no  rights*  against  the  specific  property
to  which  the  *  really '  secured  creditor  can  resort  until  the  latter  has
been  paid  in  full  Bearing  this  in  mind,  it  is  clear  that  that  form  of
real  security  is  the  most  satisfactory  which,  while  it  absolutely  secures
the  creditor,  causes  the  least  inconvenience  in  other  ways  to  the
parties  concerned.  It  is  important  to  observe  how  far  these  condi-
tions respectively  are  satisfied  by  the  different  forms  of  real  security
known  to  the  Roman  lawyers,  and  also  how  far  these  themselves
belong  to  the  department  of  iura  in  re  aliena.

The  earliest  form  was  that  known  as  fiducia  \  a  term  which  here
bears  the  same  meaning  as  in  connection  with  deposit,  emancipation,
and  coemption,  the  general  idea  being  that  of  a  conveyance  under
an  agreement  of  trust,  whereby  the  transferee  is  laid  under  an  obli-
gation to  deal  with  the  person  or  property  conveyed  to  him  in
a  particular  manner.  The  aim  of  real  security  was  obtained  by  the
debtor's  conveying  specific  property  (if  res  mancipi,  by  mancipation,
if  nee  mancipi,  by  in  iure  cessio)  to  the  creditor,  upon  terms  that  the
latter  shall  reconvey  upon  payment  of  the  debt  and  such  interest  as
might  be  agreed  upon  within  a  specified  time :  '  fiducia  est  cum
res  aliqua  sumendae  mutuae  pecuniae  gratia  vel  mancipatur  vel  in
iure  ceditur '  Isidor.  Orig.  5.  25 :  Gaius  ii.  59.  The  effect  of  the
transaction  was  thus  to  transfer  the  property  in  absolute  ownership
(subject  to  the  trust  agreement)  to  the  creditor :  hence  a  striking
resemblance  to  the  English  mortgage  of  realty.  Consequently,  the
creditor  could,  subject  to  the  terms  of  his  fiducia,  deal  with  it  as  he

^  See  Muirhead,  Roman  Law,  pp.  139- 143*


333  EXCURSUS  11.

pleased,  though  any  gain  he  made  by  it  until  the  debtor  lost  his  right
of  redemption  went  to  reduce  the  principal  debt :  'quidquid  creditor
per  fiduciarium  servum  quaesivit  sortem  debiti  minuit'  Paul  Sent.
Rec.  2.  13.  2  :  he  had  the  right  of  sale  necessarily,  as  being  dominus,
though  if  he  exercised  this  right  before  the  day  fixed  for  payment  had
passed  he  did  so  at  his  peril,  and  of  it  he  could  not  deprive  himself
even  by  express  agreement,  Paulus  I.  c.  5.  But  the  debtor,  though
no  longer  owner,  could  still  sell  it  as  well :  for  (Bk.  ii.  i.  41  supr.)
he  could  not  be  compelled  to  transfer  to  the  vendee  until  the  latter
had  paid  the  price,  and  with  this  he  could  redeem  the  property,  and
so  make  a  good  title :  but  he  could  not  sell  to  the  creditor,  for  *  suae
rei  emptio  non  valet.'  In  the  event  of  sale  by  the  creditor  the
debtor  was  entitled  to  any  surplus  after  satisfaction  of  the  debt,
Paulus  1.  c.  I :  and  it  seems  probable  that,  in  the  absence  of  agree-
ment to  the  contrary,  he  might  redeem  the  property  at  any  time  so
long  as  the  creditor  had  not  yet  parted  with  it.  Such  contrary
agreement  usually  took  the  form  of  a  foreclosure  clause  (lex  com-
missoria),  providing  that  in  default  of  punctual  payment  the  fiducia
should  lapse,  and  the  property  vest  absolutely  in  the  creditor :  this
was  prohibited  for  all  forms  of  pledge  by  Constantine,  but  foreclosure
was  reintroduced  in  a  modified  form  by  Justinian.  The  remedy  by
which  the  debtor  enforced  his  rights  against  the  creditor  was  the
actio  fiduciae,  condemnation  in  which  entailed  infamia,  Gains  iv.  182.
The  advantages  of  fiducia^  as  a  species  of  real  security,  lie  in
the  fact  that  no  subsequent  dealing  with  the  property  by  the  debtor
can  prejudice  the  creditor,  so  that  collisions  between  different  creditors
become  impossible :  its  faults  are  mainly  that  only  such  kinds  of
property  can  thus  be  used  which  admit  of  mancipatio  or  in  iure
cessio  (by  which  provincial  land  was  excluded),  and  that  the  debtor
was  deprived  of  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  the  object  pledged.  This
last  inconvenience,  however,  was  frequently  obviated  by  his  being
allowed  to  receive  it  back  on  hire  or  as  precarium.  If  the  debtor
after  paying  his  debt  acquired  possession  of  the  property  and  retained
it  for  a  year,  he  became  its  owner  again  (usureceptio  ex  fiducia,
Gains  ii.  59.  60) :  for  this  variety  of  usucapion  neither  bona  fides  nor
iusta  causa  possessionis  was  required.

When  possession  had  been  raised  to  a  legal  interest  by  the  praetor's
introduction  of  special  remedies  (possessory  interdicts)  for  its  protec-
tion, a  new  form  of  real  security,  called  pignus,  came  into  existence,
the  transaction  consisting  in  mere  delivery  (traditio)  of  possession  of
the  object  (as  distinct  from  its  ownership)  from  debtor  to  creditor.


lURA  IN  RE  ALIENA  OTHER   THAN  SERVITUDES.  333

with  the  understanding  that  the  possession  should  be  redelivered  on
payment  of  the  debt :  *  pignus  est,  quod  propter  rem  creditam  obli-
gatiir,  cuiusque  rei  possessionem  solum  ad  tempus  consequitur
creditor,  dominium  penes  debitorem  est '  Isidor.  Orig.  5.  25,  ^  proprie  •
pignus  dicimus,  quod  ad  creditorem  transit,  hypothecam,  cum  non
transit,  nee  possessio,  ad  creditorem'  Dig.  13.  7.  9.  2  ;  Bk.  iv.  6.  7
inf.  In  origin  perhaps  pignus  was  regarded  less  as  a  form  of  security
than  as  a  device  by  which  the  debtor,  being  deprived  of  the  posses-
sion and  enjoyment  of  property,  would  be  strongly  induced  to  make
every  effort  to  discharge  his  liability  as  soon  as  possible.  This
conjecture  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  a  right  of  sale  was  not
incidental  to  a  pignus,  as  such ;  if  the  creditor  had  it  at  all^  it  was
only  by  express  agreement  (Bk.  ii.  8.  i  supr.  from  Gaius  ii.  64),  and
to  sell  it  without  such  right  was  theft  in  law :  '  si  is  qui  pignori  rem
accepit,  cum  de  vendendo  pignore  nihil  convenisset,  vendidit  ....
furti  se  obligat '  Dig.  47.  2.  74.  As  a  matter  of  common  right,  the
creditor  was  entitled  only  to  retain  possession  of  the  object  pledged  ;
he  might  not  use  it :  *  si  pignore  creditor  utatur,  furti  tenetur '  Dig.
ib.  54  pr. ;  cf.  Bk.  iv.  i.  6  inf. :  but  where  the  object  was  a  fruit-
bearing  thing,  it  was  often  agreed  that  the  pledgee  should  be  entitled
to  the  fruits  in  lieu  of  interest :  the  pignus  was  then  called  specifi-
cally antichresis.  If  the  pledgee  had  bargained  for  and  exercised  a
power  of  sale,  he  was  taken  to  sell  as  the  pledgor's  agent  ('  nihil  enim
interest  utrum  ipse  dominus  per  se  tradat  alicui  rem  an  voluntate  eius
aliquis '  Dig.  41.  i.  9.  4 :  cf.  '  voluntate  debitoris  intellegitur  pignus
alienari '  Gaius  ii.  64),  and  therefore  would  vest  in  the  purchaser  the
ownership  or  whatever  other  right  belonged  to  the  latter.  Of  course
the  debtor  was  entitled  to  any  surplus  of  the  purchase  money  after
satisfaction  of  the  creditor's  claims.  Pignus  then,  in  itself,  is  not
a  ius  in  re  aliena.  The  sole  right  which  the  pledgee  could  assert
against  the  world  was  the  right  of  possession,  and  this  is  never  treated
as  a  ius  in  re  aliena  by  the  Roman  lawyers.  Though  it  marks
a  considerable  advance  upon  fiducia,  it  laboured  under  four  defects.
It  deprived  the  debtor  of  the  possession  of  his  property,  though  in
respect  of  land  this  might  be  safely  obviated  by  allowing  him  to  hold
it  as  precarium  or  on  hire.  The  same  object  could  not  be  pledged
to  two  different  people,  though  possibly  ample  security  for  both  debts,
for  '  plures  eandem  rem  in  solidum  possidere  non  possunt.'  Again,
although  no  doubt  things  could  be  pledged  in  this  way  which  could
not  be  the  subject  of  a  fiducia,  such  as  provincial  land,  no  security
could  be  thus  created  except  over  corporeal  things  which  admitted  of


334  EXCURSUS  11.

physical  possession.  And,  finally,  in  respect  of  some  species  of  pro-
perty pignus  was  no  real  security  at  all :  even  if  the  pledgee  were  in
possession  of  a  praedium  Italicum,  the  pledgor  could  mandpate  it  to
a  third  person  (the  transaction  not  being  required  to  take  place  on
the  land,  Gaius  i.  121),  who  could  recover  it  by  real  action.

The  latest  and  most  refined  form  of  pledge  is  hj^potheca,  in  which
there  was  no  conveyance  of  either  ownership  or  possession ;  it  was
effected  by  a  bare  formless  agreement  between  the  debtor  and  cre-
ditor, that  certain  property,  general  or  specific,  of  the  former  should
be  liable  in  full  for  his  debt  to  the  latter,  who  should  be  entitled  to
sell  in  default  of  payment  within  a  prescribed  time :  '  contrahitur
hypotheca  per  pactum  conventum,  cum  quis  paciscatur,  ut  res  eius
propter  aliquam  obligationem  sint  hypothecae  nomine  obligatae:
nee  ad  rem  pertinet,  quibus  fit  verbis'  Dig.  20.  i.  4.  Such  an
agreement,  in  itself,  was  inoperative  to  create  rights  either  real  or
personal :  it  was,  however,  enforced  by  the  praetor,  who,  even  before
Cicero's  time  (ad  Fam.  13.  56),  treated  the  right  of  sale  as  a  ius  in
re  aliena,  of  which  the  creditor  could  not  be  deprived  by  any  sub-
sequent act  of  the  debtor,  and  which  he  could  successfully  assert
(by  remedies  of  his  own  introduction)  against  any  other  person  what-
soever, whether  the  creditor,  his  successor,  alienee,  or  trustee  in
bankruptcy.  The  steps  by  which  this  praetorian  innovation  reached
its  full  development  are  these.  It  was  first  introduced  in  the  joint
interest  of  landlord  and  tenant  farmer,  in  order  to  enable  the  latter
to  pledge  his  farming  stock  and  crops  as  security  for  his  rent,  a  pur-
pose for  which  pignus  was  not  conveniently  applicable :  subsequently
it  came  to  be  recognised  as  a  universal  mode  of  pledge,  of  use
between  debtors  and  creditors  of  every  kind,  though  the  rights  of
the  latter,  in  cases  other  than  that  of  landlord  and  tenant,  were
protected  by  remedies  differing  slightly  in  form  and  name  from
those  then  employed:  for  these,  and  the  relation  between  them,
reference  should  be  made  to  Bk.  iv.  6.  7,  ib.  15.  3  inf.,  and  the  notes
on  both  passages.

Hypotheca  possessed  great  advantages  over  the  earlier  forms  of
pledge,  of  which  fiducia  was  quite  obsolete  in  the  time  of  Justinian.
The  pledgor  was  never  deprived  of  the  use  and  possession  of  his
property,  and  yet  the  creditor  was  absolutely  secured.  The  class  of
pledgeable  objects  was  largely  augmented :  money  could  now  be  lent
on  the  security  of  things  not  yet  in  existence,  e.  g.  future  crops  and
expectations  ('  et  quae  nondum  sunt,  futura  tamen  sunt,  hypothecae
dari  possunt,  ut  fructus  pendentes,  partus  ancillae,  fetus  pecorum'


lURA  IN  RE  ALIEN  A  OTHER  THAN  SERVITUDES,  335

(Dig.  20.  I.  15.  pr.),  or  of  mere  incorporeal  rights,  real  and  personal
(Dig.  ib.  9.  I ;  ib.  II.  2  ;  Dig.  13.  7.  18.  pr.).  Moreover  it  became
possible  to  create  a  general  mortgage,  which  was  done  by  statute  in
favour  of  many  classes  of  persons  :  e.  g.  of  a  wife,  or  other  person
who  gave  a  dos,  over  ^he  property  of  her  husband,  to  secure  its
return,  and  of  pupils  ov^r  that  of  their  guardians.  So  too  the  land-
lord of  a  house  had  a  tadt  hypothec  over  things  '  invecta  and  illata/
as  security  for  his  rent :  '  eo  iure  utimur,  ut  quae  in  praedia  urbana
inducta  illata  sunt,  pignori  esse  credantur,  quasi  id  tacite  convenerit :
in  rusticis  praediis  contra  observatur '  Dig.  20.  2. 4.  pr. :  and  the  lessor
of  agricultural  land  had  (he  same  implied  right  over  the  crops :  '  in
praediis  rusticis  fructus,  qui  ibi  nascuntur,  tacite  intelleguntur  pignori
esse  domino  fundi  locati,  etsi  nominatim  id  non  convenerit '  Dig.  ib.
7.  pr.  Lastly  should  be  noticed  the  new  power  of  pledging  the  same
property  to  several  persons  in  succession,  though  to  do  this  without
notice  to  prior  pledgees  rendered  the  debtor  liable  to  a  charge
of  stellionatus.  Dig.  13.  7.  36.  i.  Hence,  too,  questions  of  collision
and  priority  among  competing  pledgees,  which  occupy  so  large
a  space  in  modern  Roman  law :  a  subject,  however,  too  wide  to  be
touched  upon  here.

One  result  of  the  general  use  of  hypotheca  was  the  extension  of  its
rules  and  remedies  to  pignus.  In  the  time  of  Ulpian  the  right  of  sale
had  become  an  essential  and  inherent  part  of  every  pignus :  '  etsi  non
convenerit  de  distrahendo  pignore,  hoc  tamen  iure  utimur,  ut  liceat
distrahere,  si  modo  non  convenit  ne  liceat.  Ubi  vero  convenit  ne
distraheretur,  creditor,  si  distraxerit,  furti  obligatur,  nisi  ei  ter  fuerit
denuntiatum  ut  sol  vat,  et  cessaverit'  Dig.  13.  7.  4.  The  remedies
again  were  the  same,  whether  the  pledge  was  effected  by  pignus  or
hypotheca :  so  that  in  Justinian's  time  (as  he  remarks,  Bk.  iv.  6.  7
inf.),  there  was  but  one  surviving  point  of  difference  between  them  :
if  possession  of  the  object  pledged  passed  to  the  creditor,  it  was
called  pignus,  if  not,  hypotheca ;  cf.  Dig.  20.  i.  5.  i  (Marcianus)  :
'inter  pignus  et  hypothecam  tantum  nominis  sonus  differt.'  The
enumeration  of  pignus  among  the  iura  in  re  aliena  is  thus  accounted
for :  it  is  a  right  in  the  property  of  another,  sensu  Romano,  only  qua
hypotheca.

The  modes  in  which  the  right  was  extinguished  require  a  brief
notice.  It  ceased  to  exist  with  the  destruction  of  the  object  pledged,
Dig.  20.  6.  8.  pr. :  it  might  be  released,  without  affecting  the  debt
which  it  secured,  and  that  either  by  legacy  or  agreement  inter  vivos.
Dig.  ib.  4. 1 :  and  under  certain  circumstances  it  could  be  destroyed


336  EXCURSUS  11.

or  affected  by  usucapio  or  limitation  of  actions :  see  Dig.  41.  3.  44.
5  ;  Cod.  7. 36.  I ;  8.  30.  2-  But  as  a  general  rule  the  right  of  pledge
ceases  to  exist  only  along  with  the  principal  debt :  for  the  ways  in
which  this  might  occur  see  Bk.  iii.  29  inf.  and  notes.  As  to  the
exercise  of  the  right  of  sale  in  particular  it  should  be  observed,  (i)
that  the  creditor  cannot  sell  until  the  day  fixed  for  payment  has
passed ;  (2)  he  must  give  notice  to  the  debtor  of  his  intention  to
sell,  and  Justinian  even  enacted  (Cod  8,  34.  3.  i)  that  he  should  be
unable  to  sell  until  two  years  had  elapsed  from  notice  so  given ;
(3)  neither  pledgor  nor  pledgee  can  become  the  purchaser ;  (4)  the
debtor  is  entitled  to  any  surplus  from  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  after
satisfaction  of  the  debt.  If  no  one  could  be  found  to  purchase
at  a  reasonable  price,  the  pledgee  could  in  Justinian's  time  (by
a  kind  of  reintroduction  of  foreclosure,  Cod.  8.  35)  petition  the
Emperor  to  adjudge  him  the  property  in  full  ownership :  but  even
such  adjudication  was  not  final,  the  debtor  being  still  entitled  to
redeem  within  two  years  from  its  date.


EXCURSUS   IIL


POSSESSION.

Possession  must  be  conceived  as  distinct  from  ownership  or  do-
minium. In  most  cases,  of  course,  the  two  are  conjoined:  the
owner  has  possession  of  his  property.  Often,  however,  they  are
separated :  the  landlord  owns  the  soil  which  his  tenant  possesses :
his  solicitor  has  possession  of  the  title-deeds  to  his  estates:  the
finder  of  property  possesses  it,  though  another  is  its  owner:  and
numberless  other  cases  will  at  once  occur  in  which  the  owner  and
the  possessor  of  a  thing  are  different  persons :  '  separata  esse  debet
possessio  a  proprietate;  fieri  enim  potest,  ut  alter  possessor  sity
dominus  non  sit,  alter  dominus  quidem  sit,  possessor  vero  non  sit ;
fieri  potest,  ut  et  possessor  idem  et  dominus  sit,'  Dig.  43.  7.  i.  2.  But
(it  may  be  argued)  though  this  is  so,  yet  the  relation  of  a  person  to
a  thing  which  he  possesses  is  immaterial  for  purposes  of  law:  the  law
recognises  no  rights  less  than  that  of  ownership  or  its  fragments.
Because  I  happen  to  have  found  a  bank  note,  and  then  lose  it  again,
I  cannot  recover  it  from  the  second  finder :  possession  in  itself  is
not  a  legal  right  at  all.  If  this  were  the  case,  law-books  would  be
spared  one  of  their  most  difficult  chapters ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
all  legal  systems  treat  possession,  under  certain  circumstances,  as
a  right,  distinct  from  and  independent  of  ownership,  and  guarantee
it  protection.  It  remains  to  see  what,  under  Roman  law,  those
circumstances  are.

Mere  possession,  in  itself,  is  no  right  at  all.  A  person  '  merely '
possesses  who  has  the  physical  power  of  dealing  with  a  tangible
object  to  the  exclusion  of  every  one  else,  and  is  aware  of  such
power :  possessio  appellata  est  ...  a  sedibus  quasi  positio,  quia
naturaliter  tenetur  ab  eo  qui  ei  insistit.  Dig.  41.  2.  i.  pr.  Of  such
a  relation  between  person  and  thing,  by  itself,  the  law  takes  no
notice;  but  being  the  foundation  of  all  legally  recognised  posses-

z


338  EXCURSUS  III.

sioti  it  requires  to  be  carefully  noted.  Very  frequently  it  is  called
naturalis  possessio  (e.g.  Dig.  41.  2.  i.  i),  but  it  is  also  denoted  by
the  expressions  custodia  (Dig.  36.  4.  5.  pr.),  in  possessione  esse  (Bk.
iv.  15.  5  inf.),  tenere  (Dig.  41.  2.  24),  naturaliter  possidere  (Dig.  ib.
12.  pr.).  We  shall  call  it  uniformly  Detention.  For  examples  of
persons  who  had  only  Detention,  as  distinct  from  possession  proper
(e.g.  the  slave,  filiusfamilias,  agent,  borrower,  lessee,  and  depositary)
reference  may  be  made  to  Mr.  Poste's  Gaius,  pp.  616  sq.  The
idea  of  Detention  is  limited  to  certain  classes  of  objects.  Nothing
can  be  '  detained '  (and  therefore,  as  we  shall  see,  possessed)  which
is  not  corporeal ;  hence  no  one  can  stand  in  this  relation  to  a  mere
right  (p.  2  23  (5)  supr.).  The  right  to  interdicts,  however,  was  grounded
upon  a  distiu-bance  in  some  unlawful  manner  of  the  exercise  of
ownership,  and  the  exercise  of  other  rights,  as  well  as  that  of  owner-
ship, can  be  unlawfully  disturbed ;  so  that  it  seemed  only  logical  that
here  too  unwarranted  interference  should  be  guarded  against  by  the
same  remedies.  Accordingly,  the  enjoyment  of  iura  in  re  aliena  was
protected  by  possessory  interdicts ;  they  were  deemed  to  be  quasi-
possessed  ('iuris  quasi  possessio'  Dig.  8.  5.  10^  'possessionem  vel
corporis  vel  iuris'  Dig.  43.  26.  2.  3).  The  expression,  as  Savigny
remarks,  is  an  improper  extension  of  analogical  language;  quasi
possessio  indicates  the  exercise  of  a  ius  in  re  aliena,  being  related  to
the  latter  in  the  same  way  as  possession  stricto  sensu  is  to  dominium.
Nor  is  it  possible  to  '  detain '  an  object  which,  though  corporeal,  is
indeterminate,  such  as  an  uncertain  portion  of  a  thing.  Finally,  the
idea  of  detention  being  that  of  exclusive  physical  control,  we  have
the  rule  'plures  eandem  rem  in  solidum  possidere  non  possunt'
Dig.  41.  ?.  3.  5 ;  i.e.  if  we  read  that  a  previously  existing  possession
(and  a  fortiori  detention)  still  continues,  no  new  possession  (and
a  fortiori  A^lttition)  can  possibly  have  commenced;  and  conversely,
if  the  law  recognises  a  new  possession,  the  previous  possession  must
have  ceased  to  exist.

When  to  this  Detention  is  superadded  a  further  (mental)  element,
it  becomes  Possession,  an  interest  protected  by  special  legal  reme-
dies, yvi,  interdicts.  That  mental  element  is  the  intention,  on  the
part  of  the  detainer,  of  dealing  with  the  thing  detained  as  owner ;  of
exercising  over  it,  on  his  own  behalf,  the  rights  which  an  owner
exercises  on  his:  'furiosus  et  pupillus  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  non
potest  incipere  possidere,  quia  affectionem  tenendi  non  habent,  licet
maxime  corpore  suo  rem  contingant,  sicuti  is  qui  dormienti  aliquid
in  manu  ponat '  Dig.  41.  2.  i.  3.    This  intention  is  usually  called  the


POSSESSION.  339

animus  domini  or  sibi  habendi ;  the  phrase  does  not  occur  in  the
authorities,  the  nearest  approach  to  it  being  Theophilus'  veiitaBai
9<m  t6  ^Intxi  ^aw6(ovTot  Kor^xft^'  It  should  carefully  be  marked,  that
it  is  an  intention ;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  a  belief  that  one  is
owner  (opinio  or  cogitatio  domini),  for  the  possessing  thief  or  robber
is  as  capable  of  the  animus  domini  as  the  most  innocent  possessor,
and  is  as  fully  entitled  to  the  protection  of  interdicts  as  the  latter ;
'adversus  extraneos  vitiosa  possessio  prodesse  solet'  Dig.  41.  2.  53  ;
ib.  3.  5.  In  other  words,  possession  is  independent  of  bona  fides :
*  it  is  possession,  whether  iusta  or  iniusta ; '  the  ius  possessionis,  the
right  involved  in  possession,  the  right  protected  by  interdicts,  is
quite  distinct  from  and  independent  of  the  ius  possidendi,  or  right  to
possess,  which  belongs  to  the  law  not  of  possession,  but  of  owner-
ship.

There  has  been  much  learned  discussion  of  the  question  whether
Possession  is  a  fact  or  a  right.  No  doubt  it  differs  from  ownership
in  requiring  a  de  facto  relation  between  a  person  and  an  object,  and
to  that  extent  it  is  a  £act.  But  there  is  no  doubt  also  that  it  has
legal  consequences  *,  and  if  that  is  so  it  seems  to  be  little  less  than
quibbling  to  say  it  is  not  a  right  as  well.  Among  those  conse-
quences are  its  protection  by  legal  remedies,  already  referred  to,  and
the  facts  that  in  some  cases  acquisition  of  possession  is  acquisition
of  ownership  either  at  once  (occupatio,  p.  202  supr.)  or,  under  special
circumstances,  in  conjunction  with  lapse  of  time  (Bk.  ii.  6.  supr.).

Possession  then,  as  a  legal  right,  consists  of  two  elements,  deten-
tion and  the  animus  domini.  No  one  possesses  who  has  not  the
exclusive  physical  power  of  dealing  with  an  object,  coupled  with  the
intention  of  dealing  with  it  as  his  own  against  all  the  world ;  the  pre-
sence of  these  two  marks  entitles  the  person  in  whom  they  are  united
to  the  protection  of  interdicts.  This  possession,  as  distinct  from
detention,  is  called  in  the  authorities  most  frequently  possessio
simply,  but  sometimes  also  possessio  civilis  (e.g.  Dig.  41.  2.  24;   10.


^  'Possession,  though  no  right,  has  legal  conseqnences.*  Windscheid,  Lehrbuch,
(  148.  'Possession  is  no  right,  and  as  such  gives  no  right  to  the  thing  which
one  possesses.  It  is  merely  a  state  of  things  (Znstand),  a  fact,  a  mere  de  facto
relation  to  a  thing  into  which  a  man  has  brought  himself:  which,  however,
inasmuch  as  it  may  under  certain  circumstances  bring  about  a  right  to  the  thing,
enjoys  in  itself  the  protection  of  the  law  against  arbitrary  disturbance.  This
claim  to  be  protected  in  possession  is  certainly  a  right — a  jus  possessionis — that  is,
a  right  of  the  possessor  implicated  with  the  lact  of  possession.*  AVachter,  Pan-
dekten,  §  laa.

Z  2


340  EXCURSUS  III.

4.  7.  I ;  45.  I.  38.  7);  Savigny  terms  it  'possessio  ad  interdicta;'
we  shall  call  it  uniformly  Possession.

In  respect  of  three  cases  the  preceding  statement  requires  a  slight
modification.  Possession  is  ascribed  in  the  Digest  to  the  pledgee  in
a  pignus  (41.  3.  16),  the  sequester  or  stakeholder  (16.  3.  17  ;  see  on
Bk.  iii.  14.  3  inf.),  and  ordinarily  to  the  precario  rogans  (43.  26. 4.  i),
yet  in  no  case  can  they  be  said  to  have  the  animus  domini,  for  they
all  recognise  and  respect  the  dominium  of  another  person.  In  these
cases,  then,  for  the  animus  domini  the  law  allows  the  substitution  of
an  animus  alienam  possessionem  exercendi;  they  are  termed  by
Savigny  cases  of  derivative  or  representative  possession,  and  are
clearly  distinguishable  from  those  of  the  agent,  borrower,  ordinary
bailee,  hirer,  usufructuary,  and  the  missus  in  possessionem  (Dig.  41.
2.  3.  23  ;   ib.  10.  i),  none  of  whom  have  more  than  Detention.

Possession  is  acquired  by  the  production  of  its  two  elements,  viz.
corpus  or  factum  (when  this  alone  is  present  there  is  detention)  and
animus ;  '  adipiscimur  possessionem  corpore  et  animo,  neque  per  se
animo  aut  per  se  corpore'  Dig.  41.  2.  3.  i.  The  act  by  which  corpus,
the  physical  control,  is  produced,  is  called  usually  apprehensio,  or,
where  effected  with  the  consent  or  co-operation  of  the  prior  holder,
traditio.  Apprehensio  of  immoveables  most  commonly  takes  the
form  of  actual  presence  upon  the  land  (Dig.  41.  2.  3.  i),  but  actual
entry  is  not  necessary  if  one  stand  near  enough  to  overlook  it  all,  for
here  one's  control  over  it  is  as  great  as  if  one  had  actually  entered
(Dig.  41.  2.  18.  2).  Nor,  to  'apprehend'  moveables,  is  it  strictly
necessary  to  grasp  them  with  the  hand ;  it  is  sufficient  if  the  thing
could  at  any  moment  be  so  actually  grasped  as  to  give  the  exclusive
control  (Dig.  loc.  cit.  i.  21) ;  in  both  cases  it  is  not  the  nearness,  or
even  the  presence,  of  the  object  which  constitutes  corpus,  but  the
capacity  of  physical  control  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others;  thus,
a  man  has  not  detention  of  objects  placed  in  his  house,  if  it  is  in  the
occupation  of  another,  e.g.  a  lessee.

The  animus  domini  will  of  course  usually  precede,  as  well  as
accompany,  apprehension.  But  sometimes  it  arises  later:  e.g.  a
person  has  merely  Detention,  without  the  animus;  he  then  deter-
mines to  hold  for  himself  exclusively;  the  Detention  is  converted
into  Possession  (for  the  analogous  case  of  detention  passing  into
dominium  see  Bk.  ii.  i.  44  supr.).  Where  A  has  detention  of  an
object  which  B  possesses  (e.g.  if  he  is  B's  lessee),  and  it  is  then
agreed  that  A  shall  possess  instead  of  detain,  A  becomes  possessor
ipso  facto.    This  is  called  traditio  brevi  manu;  but  the  sole  will  of


POSSESSION.  341

a  person  who  detains  by  permission  or  on  behalf  of  another  cannot,
by  itself^  give  him  Possession :  see  (3)  p.  343  inf.

The  animus  domini  implies  volition ;  hence  from  lack  of  this  power
the  following  classes  cannot  acquire  Possession :  (i)  Juristic  persons,
Dig.  41.  2.  I.  22 ;  (2)  persons  of  unsound  or  weak  intellect,  ib.  i.  3^
(3)  pupilli  of  tender  age,  unless  they  have  their  guardian's  auctoritas;
but  possession  can  be  acquired  for  these  three  classes  by  agents,  and
the  law  regards  the  possession  somewhat  anomalously  as  theirs ;  Dig.
41.  2.  I.  22 ;  ib.  I.  3 ;  ib.  i.  20 :  (4)  persons  in  potestas,  or  manus,
cannot  acquire  more  than  Detention ;  for,  being  incapable  of  holding
property,  they  are  incapable  of  animus  domini,  except  in  relation  to
peculium  castrense  or  quasi  castrense ;  'qui  in  aliena  potestate  sunt,
rem  peculiarem  tenere  possunt,  habere  et  possidere  non  possunt,
quia  possessio  non  tantum  corporis  sed  et  iuris  est'  Dig.  41.  2.  49.  i.
Again,  certain  things  are  excluded  from  possession  on  this  ground,
viz.  res  extra  commercium,  Dig.  41.  2.  30.  i,  though  it  is  admitted  in
respect  of  ager  publicus  and  provincial  soil ;  and  the  animus  domini
is  inconceivable  in  relation  to  an  object  which  cannot  itself  be  con-
ceived as  a  single  individual  thing.  Hence  the  question  arises,  how
far  is  it  possible  to  acquire  Possession  of  a  single  part  of  a  whole  ?
Where  the  single  part  is  to  be  possessed  alone,  this  is  possible
(i)  where  the  part  is  in  point  of  fact  a  whole  itself:  e.g.  a  plot  of
land  of  definite  extent,  which  the  previous  possessor  happens  to  have
treated  as  part  of  a  larger  whole :  and  (2)  where  the  division  of  the
whole  into  parts  is  merely  intellectual,  provided  the  ideal  part  to  be
possessed  is  precisely  conceived  as  a  definite  fraction  of  that  whole.
But  where  the  part  is  to  be  possessed  in  and  through  the  whole,  the
rule  is,  that  though  the  whole  is  possessed,  the  parts  individually  are
not.  For  applications  of  this  principle,  which  is  of  great  importance
in  the  usucapio  of  buildings,  see  Poste,  Gaius,  pp.  621  sq.

We  can  also  acquire  Possession  through  other  persons  as  well  as
through  ourselves.  For  this  the  following  conditions  must  be
satisfied  :

(i)  The  other  person  (whom  for  convenience  sake  we  will  call  the
agent)  must  have  Detention,  and  also  intend  to  acquire  Possession
for  the  principal.

(2)  The  principal,  or  would-be  possessor,  must  intend  to  acquire
Possession  through  the  other,  though  this  intention  will  be  implied
where  that  other  is  his  own  slave  acquiring  ex  peculiari  causa,
a  guardian,  curator,  or  the  agent  of  a  juristic  person.

(3)  There  must  be  a  certain  legal  relation  between  principal  and


343  EXCURSUS  III.

agent.  Possession  can  be  acquired  through  slaves  by  the  dominus
(provided  he  possesses  the  slave),  the  bona  fide  possessor,  and  the
usufructuary ;  through  filiifamilias  by  the  pater  (for  persons  in  manu
or  mancipio  see  Gaius  ii.  90) ;  through  guardians  or  curators  by  the
ward,  and  through  free  agents  by  any  principal  who  has  previously
given  them  a  commission,  or  who  has  subsequently  ratified  their  acts
(Dig.  41.  2.  I.  20;  ib.  9.  34.  2).  Where  the  agent  already  has
possession  of  the  object  prior  to  his  commission,  the  mere  subse-
quent exercise  of  will  turns  his  possession  into  detention;  the
possession  vests  immediately  in  the  principal.  This,  which  is  the
converse  of  traditio  brevi  manu,  is  called  constitutum  possessorium ;
Dig.  41.  2.  18 :   6.  I.  77.

Possession  already  acquired  is  retained  by  the  continuing  presence
of  its  two  elements ;  but  the  law  does  not  require  for  its  retention
so  much  'energy'  (so  to  speak)  on  either  side  as  for  its  original
acquisition :  see  Poste,  Gaius,  pp.  620,  621.  The  question  how  pos-
session is  retained  is  practically  equivalent  to  that  how  it  is  lost ;  and
it  is  lost  by  the  cessation  of  either  corpus  or  animus  domini :  *  quem-
admodum  nulla  possessio  adquiri  nisi  animo  et  corpore  potest,  ita
nulla  amittitur  nisi  in  qua  utrumque  (i.e.  aut  utrumque  aut  alter-
utrum,  Sav.  Possession,  §  30)  in  contrarium  actum  est'  Dig.  41.  2.  8:
50.  17.  153.  Corpus  ceases  so  soon  as  the  possessor  loses  his  ability
of  dealing  with  the  thing  himself,  and  of  preventing  others  from
dealing  with  it ;  this  may  occur  by  its  destruction,  by  his  altogether
forgetting  where  it  is,  or  losing  it  from  beyond  his  reach  (except  in
the  case  of  a  runaway  slave,  who  is  possessed  till  some  one  else
possesses  him,  or  unless  he  bona  fide  believes  himself  free,  Dig.
41.  2.  13.  pr.);  by  its  being  stolen,  or  being  taken  in  possession
under  a  magisterial  decree ;  by  the  possessor's  being  taken  captive,
or  by  the  thing  itself  ceasing  to  be  in  commercio.  In  order  to  lose
Possession  animo  solely,  more  is  required  than  a  mere  cessation  of
the  previous  mental  attitude ;  there  must  be  a  new  determination  of  the
will,  an  animus  in  contrarium  actus,  a  deliberate  desire  to  transfer
or  abandon  possession.  Consequently,  persons  of  weak  or  unsound
mind  and  pupils  cannot  lose  Possession  animo  solo.  In  many  cases
of  course  Possession  is  lost  animo  et  corpore  simul;  viz.  in  abandon-
ment, conveyance,  manumission  of  slaves,  and  violent  ejectment
from  land  on  which  the  ejected  person  fears  to  reenter.

As  to  loss  of  Possession  through  agents,  it  should  be  observed,
(i)  That  mere  intention  of  the  principal  no  longer  to  possess  is
sufficient ;  Detention  may  remain,  but  one  of  the  elements  of  Pos-


POSSESSION.  343

session,  animus,  has  ceased  to  exist.  (2)  On  the  other  hand^  if,
though  the  principal  no  longer  has  detention,  his  representative  has,
the  Possession  is  not  terminated :  '  si  quis  me  vi  deiecerit,  meos  non
deiecerit ....  per  eos  retineo  possessionem'  Dig.  43.  16.  i.  45 :  nor
is  it  lost  even  by  cessation  of  the  representative's  Detention,  unless
Detention  becomes  physically  impossible,  or  Possession  is  assumed
by  some  one  else.  (3)  For  the  representative  to  convert  his  own
Detention  into  Possession,  there  must  be  either  traditio  brevi  manu
(contrarius  animus  on  the  part  of  the  principal),  or  (Dig.  41.  2.
3.  18)  some  contrectatio  on  the  other's  part  amounting  to  furtum.
(4)  Misdealing  by  the  agent  (i.e.  conveyance  or  abandonment)  does
not  terminate  the  Possession  unless  another  party  directly  assumes
it.  (5)  Mere  termination  of  the  relation  of  principal  and  agent  does
not,  in  itself,  extinguish  the  Possession,  Dig.  41.  2.  38 ;  ib.  25.  i ;
ib.  40.  T.

A  question  which  has  been  much  discussed  is  why  Possession,  apart
from  bona  fides  and  title,  came  to  be  treated  as  a  right,  and  protected
by  legal  remedies.  To  this  Savigny  answers,  that  the  violation  of
Possession,  being  in  itself  no  wrong,  can  originally  have  been  re^
dressed  only  because  it  went  hand  in  hand  with  some  violation  of  an
actual  right,  and  that  full  justice  could  not  have  been  done  in  the
matter  of  this  latter  violation,  unless  at  the  same  time  the  Possession
were  protected.  All  the  possessory  interdicts,  he  says,  presuppose
some  wrongful  act  In  cases  of  violent  dispossession  this  is  obvious ;
but  even  where  there  is  no  violence  the  idea  is  the  same ;  e.g.  in  the
application  of  the  interdict  de  precario  there  is  the  wrongful  act  of
abusing  another  person's  good  nature :  cf.  Holland's  Jurisprudence,
p.  130.  Ihering  (VJber  den  Grund  des  Besitzesschutzes)  thinks  that
Possession  was  protected  originally  in  the  interest  of  the  owner,  in
order  to  relieve  him  of  the  onus  of  proving  his  proprietary  title,  and
that  the  protection  came  necessarily  to  be  extended  to  possessors
who  were  not  owners ;  but  if  this  were  true,  a  possessor  would  never
be  protected  against  an  owner,  and  the  relief  imagined  would  be
afforded  not  to  the  possessor  as  such,  but  only  to  him  whose  posses*
sion  was  wrongfully  infringed  ^.  On  the  historical  question,  in  what
connection  the  necessity  of  legal  protection  was  first  felt,  Savigny
adopts  the  theory  of  Niebuhr,  that  possessory  interdicts  were
originally  devised  in  order  to  giiard  the  interest  of  the  individual


^  Ihering's  theory  does  not  seem  at  present  to  meet  with  much  support :   see
Wachter,  Paadekten,  note  to  §  laa :  Windscheid,  Lehrbnch,  (  148,  note  (w


344  EXCURSUS  III.

citizen  in  the  ager  publicus,  which  the  State  permitted  him  to  occupy
and  enjoy,  and  were  subsequently  extended  to  the  Possession  of
private  property,  moveable  and  immoveable.  In  support  of  this  it  is
pointed  out  that  possessio  and  possidere  are  very  uniformly  used  to
technically  denote  this  kind  of  occupation,  and  that  the  interdicts
recuperandae  possessionis  relate  only  to  immoveables ;  other  argu-
ments are  derived  from  the  known  facts  of  precarium  and  emphy-
teusis (Savigny,  Possession,  §  12*).  A  different  view  is  taken  by
Puchta,  who  connects  the  earliest  protection  of  Possession  with  the
primitive  form  of  Real  Action.  In  this,  both  plaintiff  and  defendant
were,  until  decision  of  the  suit,  regarded  by  the  law  as  equally
entitled  to  the  dominium.  It  was  necessary,  however,  that  one  of
them  should  be  magisterially  instated  in  the  possession  of  the
disputed  property  pending  litigation,  and  we  learn  from  Gains
(iv.  16)  how  such  interim  possession  was  awarded.  Having  been
magisterially  awarded,  it  must  also  be  magisterially  protected,  and
this  was  done  by  an  interdict ;  a  remedy  which  came  subsequently
to  be  used  for  the  protection  of  all  Possession,  independently  of
a  pending  suit

Dr.  Hunter  (Roman  Law,  ist  ed.  pp.  195-222)  believes  that
Possessio  entirely  changed  its  meaning  in  the  course  of  Roman  legal
history.  In  origin  he  connects  it  with  the  technical  incapacity  of
aliens  to  own  property  iure  civili  rather  than  with  the  occupation
of  ager  publicus,  and  maintains  that  it  properly  means  Equitable  or
Gentile  ownership.  When,  after  the  edict  of  Caracalla,  all  subjects
of  the  Empire  practically  became  cives,  its  functions,  in  this  connec-
tion, were  exhausted,  and  it  'came  to  have  precisely  the  same
meaning  that  it  has  in  every  system  of  law ;  it  is  a  temporary  separa-
tion between  the  person  exercising  rights  and  the  person  invested  by
law  with  rights.'

There  is  no  evidence  of  this  change  of  meaning,  and  nothing  to
show  that  the  Roman  lawyer's  idea  of  Possessio  differed  in  the  time
of  Justinian  from  what  it  had  been  in  that  of  Cicero,  or  that  he  con-
ceived Possession  as  otherwise  than  the  very  antipodes  of  dominium
{'nihil  commune  habet  possessio  cum  proprietate'  Dig.  41.  2.  12.  i :
ib.  52.  pr. :  cf.  Dig.  43.  17.  1  2,  cited  on  p.  337  supr,);  or,  finally,
that  the  *  gentile '  ownership  of  the  alien  (p.  201  supr.)  was  specially
protected  by  interdicts;  he  recovered  his  property,  not  by  an  interdict,
but  by  a  real  action,  fictitia  or  utilis  perhaps,  but  still  a  remedy
which  recognised  his  proprietorship.  On  the  other  hand,  as  all
Possession,  whether  iusta  or  iniusta,  whether  bona  fide  or  mala  fide,


POSSESSION  345

was  protected  by  interdicts,  to  dwell  upon  the  close  resemblance,
the  almost  complete  matenal  identity,  between  many  cases  of  bona
fide  Possession,  and  Equitable  ownership,  as  Dr.  Hunter  does,  is  not
to  the  point.  The  actio  Publiciana  was  open  to  any  possessor  whose
Possession  could  ripen  by  usucapio  into  ownership ;  and  if  he  could
bring  it  with  effect  against  not  only  third  persons  but  the  technically
Quiritarian  owner  as  well  (as  where  the  owner  of  a  res  mancipi
delivers  it  to  some  one  else  with  the  intention  of  passing  the  property,
Dig.  44.  4.  4.  32)  his  interest  was  more  than  Possession;  it  was
inchoate  or  Bonitarian  ownership,  or,  adopting  an  expression  of
Mr.  Poste's,  we  may  say  that  the  ius  in  rem,  and  the  interdict*
possession  are  distinct  though  concurrent.  The  fallacy  of  arguing
that,  because  many  cases  of  (bona  fide)  Possession  are  equivalent  to
Bonitarian  ownership,  therefore  (all)  Possession  is  equivalent  to
Equitable  ownership,  is  obvious.  In  the  law  of  Justinian  the  case  in
which  the  plaintiff  in  an  actio  Publiciana  could  prevail  against  any
and  every  defendant  has  disappeared  with  the  abolition  of  the  dis-
tinction between  res  mancipi  and  nee  mancipi.  It  can  now  be
brought  by  one  who  has  acquired  possession  in  good  faith  (Dig.  6.  2.
7.  11-17 :  9.  4.  28)  and  with  iusta  causa  (Dig.  6.  2.  13.  pr.)  of  an
object  acquirable  by  ordinary  usucapion  (Dig.  6.  2.  9.  5)  against  any-
one who  withheld  possession  from  him  except  the  owner,  who  could
repel  him  by  the  exceptio  iusti  dominii  (si  ea  res  possessoris  non  sit),
Dig.  6.  2.  16  and  17.

Dr.  Hunter  seems  to  have  been  led  into  what  we  cannot  but
regard  as  other  than  a  completely  wrong  theory  by  not  rigidly  con-
fining his  attention  to  Possession — not  this  possession  or  that
possession,  but  all  Possession — whether  bona  fide  or  mala  fide.
His  insurmountable  difficulty  lies  in  the  impossibility  of  identifying
Possession,  when  accompanied  by  mala  fides,  with  Equitable  owner-
ship. Upon  mala  fide  Possession  he  is  inconsistent.  In  one
passage  (p.  205)  he  says, '  the  interdicts  were  open  equally  to  mala
fide  possessors;'  in  another  (p.  200),  *the  mala  fide  possessor  of
moveables  had  no  right  against  third  persons.'  The  latter  statement,
which  is  based  solely  on  the  inability  of  a  mala  fide  possessor  to
bring  an  actio  furti  or  bonorum  vi  raptorum,  is  shown  to  be  untrue,
so  far  as  interdicts  are  concerned,  by  Savigny  and  Dr.  Walker
(Selected  Titles  from  the  Digest,  Introduction  to  Digest  41.  2) :  and
interdicts  are  all  that  here  we  need  concern  ourselves  with ;  other
remedies  are  not  for  the  protection  of  Possession,  as  such,  at  all.  In
fact.  Dr.  Hunter's  general  position  seems  defensible  only  to  this


346  EXCURSUS  III.

extent,  viz.  that  where  a  man  has  usucapion  Possession,  he  also  has
Equitable  ownership.

For  a  discussion  of  the  question,  to  what  part  of  the  Roman  system
the  doctrine  of  Possession  logically  belongs,  see  Poste,  Gaius,  pp.
622  sqq. ;  and  for  the  possessory  interdicts,  and  the  cases  to  which
they  were  individually  applicable,  Bk.  iv.  Title  15,  and  notes  inf.


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III.

In  this  book  the  treatment  of  universal  succession  is  continued,  the
first  subject  considered  being  the  mode  in  which  a  person's  univer-
sitas  iuris  devolves  on  his  dying  intestate.  This  falls  naturally  into
two  divisions,  according  as  the  deceased  was  free-born  or  libertus.
Of  the  devolution  of  a  free-bom  man's  universitas  we  have  a  full
historical  account  The  first  two  Titles  in  the  main  describe  the
classes  of  persons  who  succeeded  an  intestate  under  the  law  of  the
Twelve  Tables :  in  the  first  rank  being  the  sui  heredes  to  the  ex-
clusion of  all  other  descendants ;  in  the  second  the  nearest  agnate  or
agnates,  in  preference  to  ascendants  and  all  other  collateral  relatives
whatsoever.  No  portion  of  the  Institutes  presents  so  clearly  the
contrast  between  modern  and  ancient  law,  or  brings  out  more  vividly
the  exclusive  regard  paid  to  agnatic  relationship  in  primitive  society.
While  pointing  out  the  injustice  which  this  system  of  succession
entailed  upon  many  classes,  especially  emancipated  children  and
descendants  or  collaterals  who  traced  their  kinship  with  the  deceased
through  a  female,  Justinian  takes  occasion  to  describe  briefly  the
extent  to  which  a  remedy  had  been  supplied  by  the  bonorum  possessio
intestati  of  the  Praetor,  a  subject  more  explicitly  treated  in  Title  9,
and  also  various  disconnected  changes  made  in  the  law  by  earlier
Emperors  as  well  as  by  himself.  To  the  most  sweeping  of  the
Praetor's  innovations,  namely  that  by  which  he  granted  rights  of
succession  upon  intestacy  to  persons  related  to  the  deceased  by
cognation  alone,  though  only  in  subordination  to  the  classes  recog-
nised by  the  Twelve  Tables,  the  fifth  Title  is  exclusively  devoted ;  that
which  follows  details  the  mode  in  which  the  degrees  of  this  natural
relationship  are  calculated.  The  third  and  fourth  Titles  deal  with
two  enactments  of  the  civil  law  passed  in  the  latter  half  of  the  second
century,  the  SC*  Tertullianum  and  Orfitianum,  which  redressed
a  wrong  arising  from  the  Twelve  Tables  for  which  no  adequate
remedy  had  been  provided  by  the  praetorian  bonorum  possessio.


348  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III.

The  first  of  these  preferred  the  mother  to  many  of  the  agnates
of  her  deceased  children :  the  second  raised  a  woman's  children
from  the  rank  of  mere  cognates,  in  relation  to  her,  to  that  of  sui
heredes,  thus  giving  them  a  statutory  right  of  succeeding  her  to
the  exclusion  of  her  agnates.

The  intestate  succession  to  freedmen  is  dealt  with  in  Title  7,
the  earlier  paragraphs  of  which  give  a  historical  summary  of  the  old
rules  in  cases  of  both  testacy  and  intestacy,  and  of  the  changes  intro-
duced in  the  interest  of  the  patron  by  the  Praetor  and  the  lex  Papia
Poppaea.  Between  this,  and  a  brief  account  of  the  curiously  con-
trasted mode  of  succession  to  Latini  luniani,  a  class  of  freedmen
which  as  we  know  was  abolished  by  Justinian,  is  a  statement  of  his
own  settlement  of  the  classes  entitled  to  succeed  upon  the  intestacy
of  a  civis  libertus,  and  of  the  latter's  testamentary  rights  against  the
patron.  The  modification  which  might  conceivably  be  effected  in
these  rules  by  the  exercise  of  a  power,  conferred  by  a  senatusconsult,
of  assigning  any  particular  freedman  to  any  particular  child  in  one's
power  is  considered  in  Title  8.

The  Roman  law  of  intestate  succession,  especially  to  ingenui,  is  an
admirable  illustration  of  the  heterogeneous  mass  of  rules  which  may
grow  round  any  subject  usually  regulated  by  law  where  there  is
a  variety  of  legislative  organs,  often  actuated  by  diverse  motives,  and
little  anxiety  in  the  supreme  legislature  or  in  the  lawyer  class  to
reduce  them  to  formal  order  and  unity  by  some  process  of  codifi-
cation. Technically,  of  course,  the  rules  which,  at  the  date  of  the
publication  of  the  Institutes,  decided  on  whom  an  intestate  person's
universitas  iuris  should  devolve,  were  enacted  by  Justinian  himself;
historically,  they  originated  either  in  the  Twelve  Tables,  or  in  the
Edict  relating  to  bonorum  possessio,  or  in  the  later  civil  law,  which
either  through  senatusconsulta  or  imperial  constitutions,  conferred
at  long  intervals  of  legislation,  and  in  an  entirely  disconnected
manner,  rights  of  succession  upon  relatives  of  the  deceased  whom
the  earlier  law  had  altogether  passed  over.  The  main  drift  of  this
series  of  changes  was  the  same  throughout;  to  fill  up  the  voids
and  correct  the  anomalies  of  the  Twelve  Tables;  to  substitute
cognation  for  agnation  as  the  sole  title  a  person  could  have  to
succeed.  No  department  of  law  called  more  imperatively  for  a
comprehensive  simplification,  such,  for  instance,  as  that  which  we
have  seen  Justinian  effected  in  the  law  of  Usucapion  and  Prescrip-
tion ;  but  the  changes  made  in  the  Code  are  hesitating  and  tentative,
the  most  considerable  perhaps  being  that  in  the  classes  of  bonorum


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III.  349

possessores,  necessitated  by  Justinian's  reform  in  the  succession  to
libeiti,  of  which  a  full  account  is  given  in  Title  9.  When  the
Institutes  were  published,  the  three  distinct  bodies  of  rules  relating
to  one  subject  still  coexisted  side  by  side :  the  successor  of  an
intestate  might  base  his  claim  on  the  Twelve  Tables,  on  the  Edict,
or  on  some  enactment  of  the  later  civil  law ;  in  the  second  case,  it
is  true,  he  was  not  technically  heres,  but,  as  we  have  already  seen,
his  rights  were  substantially  identical  with  those  of  a  civil  law
successor.  Cases  were  even  still  to  be  found,  in  which  agnatic
relationship  entitled  a  claimant  to  priority  over  others  who,  if
cognation  alone  were  considered,  would  at  least  take  with  him  pari
passu.  It  was  not  unnatural  that  Justinian  should  be  dissatisfied
with  his  work,  and  by  a  Novel  issued  in  the  year  a.  d.  543  he
substituted  for  the  system  of  succession  which  has  here  been
sketched  a  new  scheme  based  entirely  upon  blood  relationship,  of
which  an  account  is  given  in  the  notes  to  Title  9.  9.

Two  other  modes  *quibus  res  per  universitatem  adquiruntur,'
though  of  far  less  interest  and  importance  than  inheritance,  are
described  in  Titles  10  and  1 1.  The  first  of  these  is  the  type  of  adop-
tion known  as  adrogation.  When  a  person  sui  iuris  gave  himself  in
adoption  to  another,  his  universitas  iuris  passed,  under  the  law  as
previously  settled,  to  the  latter ;  but  the  development  of  the  filius-
familias'  proprietary  capacity  had  infringed  upon  the  necessity  of  this
rule,  and  Justinian,  as  he  himself  remarks,  limited  the  adrogator's
right  in  accordance  with  the  principle  which  he  had  already  estab-
lished in  the  second  book.  The  liability  of  the  adrogator  for  debts
contracted  by  the  adopted  son  while  sui  iuris  is  treated  in  the  last
paragraph  of  the  Title.  The  last  remaining  form  of  universal  succes-
sion, which  was  introduced  by  a  constitution  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  was
a  provision  *  favore  libertatis,'  to  secure  the  freedom  of  slaves  who
had  been  manumitted  in  a  will  under  which  no  heres  accepted,  and
enabled  any  one  who  would  give  the  creditors  full  security  for  the
satisfaction  of  their  claims  to  have  the  estate  adjudged  to  him,  thus
putting  it  in  his  power,  as  quasi  heir,  to  fulfil  the  intentions  of  the
deceased.

Title  12  briefly  touches  on  two  universal  successions  obsolete
under  Justinian*s  legislation  ;  the  one  the  peculiar  form  of  bankruptcy
execution  known  as  bonorum  emptio — a  subject  which  is  more  fully
discussed  in  a  note  on  the  text;  the  other  introduced  by  the  SC.
Claudianum,  of  which  we  have  already  read,  and  which,  with  its
consequences,  was  repealed  by  Justinian  in  person.


350  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III.

From  this  subject  we  pass  at  Title  13  to  the  consideration  of  the
important  class  of  res  incorporales  called  obligations.  An  obligation
is  a  legal  relation  between  two  ascertained  persons,  in  virtue  of  which
the  one  is  entitled  to  claim  an  act  or  forbearance  from  the  other.
The  one,  or  creditor,  has  a  right  in  personam,  the  other,  or  debtor,
owes  to  him  a  relative  duty ;  both  right  and  duty  are  conceived  as
obligationes,  or  as  correlative  parts  of  a  single  obligatio ;  but  it  is  the
right,  or  creditor  side,  alone  which  is  a  res  incorporalis,  and  owing  to
which  this  department  of  law  falls  under  the  head  of  *  res '  at  all.

This  is  not  so  clear  and  above  doubt  as  never  to  have  been
questioned.  The  position  of  obligations  between  the  law  of  Inheri-
tance and  the  law  of  Actions  has  led  Hugo  and  others  to  regard  them
as  a  portion  of  the  latter  rather  than  of  the  ius  quod  ad  res  pertinet ;
a  theory  to  some  extent  countenanced  by  the  fact  that  in  the  Digest
(de  obligationibus  et  actionibus,  44.  7)  and  Code  (4.  10)  actions  and
obligations  are  treated  together,  and  by  the  technical  meaning  of
*  actio '  as  action  in  personam,  in  contrast  with  *  petitio '  or  action  in
rem,  Dig.  44.  7.  28  ;  50.  16.  178.  2.  It  has  even  been  attempted  to
support  this  view  by  a  statement  of  Theophilus  in  his  commentary  on
Tit.  13.  pr.  of  this  book,  where  he  says,  *Now  that  we  have  spoken
of  persons  and  of  things,  we  ought  logically  to  treat  of  actions  \  but
this  arrangement,  i.  e.  the  treating  of  obligations  first,  is  not  inexcus-
able, for  in  discussing  obligations  one  is  implicitly  discussing  actions
also,  of  which  they  are  the  mothers.'  But  it  is  clear  from  his  remarks
on  Bk.  iv.  6.  pr.,  that  Theophilus  is  preferring  a  fourfold  division  of
the  law,  making  obligationes  a  fourth  and  independent  department
intermediate  between  res  and  actiones ;  and  this  cannot  convince  us
that  Justinian  in  his  Institutes  intended  to  depart  from  the  arrange-
ment of  Gaius  :  for  although,  had  we  the  Institutes  alone,  a  reason-
able suspicion  might  be  justified  by  the  fact  that  obligations  are
partly  treated  in  the  third  book,  which  no  one  doubts  begins  with
res,  and  partly  in  the  fourth,  which  no  one  doubts  ends  with  actiones,
yet  this  is  removed  by  our  knowledge  that  Gaius  concludes  the  sub-
ject of  obligations  in  his  third  book,  and  devotes  the  whole  of  the
fourth  to  actions.  Indeed,  the  enumeration  of  obligations  among
res  incorporales  in  Bk.  ii.  2.  2,  is  sufficient  proof  in  itself  of  the
wrongness  of  Hugo's  theory.

The  acts  or  events  which  give  rise  to  this  kind  of  legal  relation
called  obligatio  are  of  course  different  from  one  another  in  character,
but  they  may  be  grouped  with  tolerable  correctness  in  two  principal
and  two  subordinate  classes.    One  of  the  former,  which  is  prominent


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III.  351

in  all  developed  systems  of  law,  is  agreement ;  the  other  is  delict,
which  may  here  be  defined  with  sufficient  accuracy  as  civil  wrong
other  than  breach  of  contract  But  there  are  obligations  which  take
their  rise  in  circumstances  in  which  the  person  held  liable  has
neither  entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  other  party  to  the  relation,
nor  committed  a  delict  against  him,  in  the  technical  Roman  sense  of
the  word.  In  these  circumstances,  however,  it  is  always  possible  to
find  more  or  less  of  analogy  with  one  or  other  of  the  main  sources  of
obligations:  so  that  obligations  are  said  in  Tit.  13.  2  always  to  arise
from  contract  or  quasi  ex  contractu,  or  from  delict  or  quasi  ex
delicto.

Not  all  agreements  are  contracts;  in  other  words,  it  does  not
follow  that  because  a  person  has  given  a  promise  he  can  be  compelled
to  keep  it  by  action  at  law.  Primitive  law,  it  would  seem,  at  first
enforces  promises  only  when  they  are  accompanied  by  some  striking
and  solemn  formality :  formal  contracts  are  actionable  before  those
which  are  formless.  There  were  three  kinds  of  form  known  to  the
Roman  system  in  which  a  promise  might  be  clothed  so  as  to  be
enforceable  at  law,  two  of  which,  nexum  and  expensilatio  or  litterae,
were  obsolete  long  before  Justinian,  though  there  is  some  notice  of
the  second,  and  a  lame  attempt  to  represent  it  as  still  existing,  in
Title  21.  The  third  was  stipulatio,  the  expression  of  the  agreement
in  a  solemn  question  and  answer,  which,  however,  by  a  gradual  pro-
cess of  change  had  in  Justinian's  own  age  been  so  stripped  of  its
original  characteristics,  that  it  is  only  by  an  abuse  of  language  that  it
can  be  described  as  a  formal  contract  at  all.  But  quite  early  in  the
history  of  the  Roman  Law  this  requirement  of  form,  coupled  with
the  inability  of  aliens  to  employ  it,  was  found  so  to  hamper  the  free-
dom of  commercial  intercourse,  and  to  interfere  so  largely  with  (he
transactions  of  everyday  life,  that  certain  contracts  of  the  ius  gentium
were  added  to  the  small  circle  already  recognised :  two  kinds  of  loan,
deposit,  and  pledge  were  held  to  be  actionable  merely  in  virtue  of
delivery  by  one  party  to  the  other,  whence  the  obligation  was  said  to
be  imposed  *  re,'  while  sale,  hire,  partnership,  and  agency  could  now
be  contracted  by  the  mere  consent  of  the  parties  without  the  necessity
of  any  formality,  and  consequently  were  called  *  consensual '  contracts.
All  of  these  subjects  are  treated  at  considerable  length  in  this  part  of
the  Institutes.  The  contracts  which  are  called  Real — mutuum,  or
loan  for  consumption,  commodatum,  or  loan  for  use,  deposit,  and
pledge — ^because  the  '  causa '  through  which  they  become  actionable
is  '  res '  or  delivery,  are  discussed  in  Title  14.    Stipulation  receives


352  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III.

a  consideration  commensurate  with  the  importance  of  the  part  it
played  in  so  large  a  proportion  of  the  daily  dealings  between  man
and  man.  In  Title  15  a  historical  account  is  given  of  the  changes
which  took  place  in  the  form  of  the  contract  between  the  earliest  and
the  latest  phases  of  the  Roman  Law ;  alternatives  are  soon  tolerated
for  the  old  sacramental  terms,  which  none  could  use  but  Roman
citizens,  and  thus  peregrini  are  enabled  to  avail  themselves  of  this
universally  applicable  contract  form ;  the  question  and  answer  are
allowed  to  be  expressed  in  other  languages  than  Latin,  and  the
strict  and  literal  correspondence  between  them  is  no  longer  regarded
as  indispensable;  finally,  that  they  should  be  not  only  oral,  but
interrogative  in  form,  is  found  to  be  an  inconvenient  and  unneces-
sary condition,  and  the  original  solemnities  of  stipulation  have
dwindled  into  a  written  memorandum  of  a  promise  fictitiously  repre-
sented as  having  been  made  in  answer  to  a  preceding  question.
Some  minor  matters,  such  as  the  qualification  of  such  promises  by
time  and  conditions,  and  the  use  of  penalties  under  .many  circum-
stances, are  touched  upon  in  the  same  Title.  Joint  and  several
liability,  or  as  the  modem  civilians  term  it,  Correality  or  Solidarity,
is  briefly  noticed  in  Title  16,  because  whenever  it  arose  ex  contractu
It  usually  took  the  form  of  stipulation.  In  Title  17  we  have  a  state-
ment of  the  effect  of  promises  made  by  stipulation  to  a  slave:
a  subject  treated  in  relation  to  obligations  generally,  and  to  persons
in  patria  as  well  as  dominica  potestas,  in  Title  28.  Title  18  relates
to  a  classification  of  stipulations  according  as  they  are  based  upon
genuine  consent,  or  are  forced  upon  a  party  by  a  judge  or  magistrate,
and  so  reminds  the  reader  of  the  traditional  division  of  contracts  in
English  law  into  *  contracts  of  record '  and  contracts  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  the  term.  This  is  followed  in  Title  19  by  an  ill-arranged
exposition  of  circumstances  which  affect  the  validity  of  contracts  in
general,  and  of  stipulations  in  particular,  such  as  illegality,  impossi-
bility, infancy,  and  weakness  of  intellect;  and  here  too  we  have
a  precise  statement  of  the  jural  maxim  that  an  obligation  is  a  tie
between  ascertained  parties,  incapable  of  conferring  rights  or  imposing
liabilities  on  others  who  are  not  parties  to  it  themselves,  and  Justinian's
own  repeal  of  some  previously  existing  rules  invalidating  stipulations,
but  out  of  harmony  with  the  modern  principle  that '  consent  is  the
essence  of  contract,'  Title  20  relates  to  fideiussio,  a  form  of  surety-
ship effected  by  stipulation;  other  modes  in  which  this  important
relation  could  be  established  are  described  in  the  notes  to  this  Title
and  Title  26.    Title  21,  professedly  on  literal  contract,  tells  us  little


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IIL  353

more  than  that  literal  contract  in  the  true  sense  (expensilatio)  had
long  been  obsolete,  though  it  also  touches  a  subject  upon  which  more
is  said  in  Excursus  VIII  inf. — the  defence  of  no  consideration.
The  five  succeeding  Titles  contain  a  very  full  treatment  of  the
important  class  of  contracts  called  consensual.  In  the  first,  their
characteristic  features,  as  contrasted  with  those  of  stipulation  and
Real  contract,  are  tersely  noticed.  Sale  is  considered  in  Title  23 ;
the  principles  relating  to  the  moment  at  which  the  contract  is  held
to  be  concluded,  the  necessity  of  the  price  being  fixed  and  in  money,
and  the  'periculum  rei,'  are  clearly  set  forth,  together  with  one  or
two  changes  made  in  the  law  by  Justinian  himself,  and  an  incidental
notice  of  a  subject  touched  upon  elsewhere  in  this  part  of  the  book,
the  doctrine  of  negligence  in  contractual  relations.  Locatio  con-
ductio,  or  hire,  is  discussed  upon  much  the  same  lines  in  Title  24,
and  in  Title  25  are  described  the  chief  forms  of  partnership,  the
relations  of  partners  inter  se,  and  the  modes  in  which  this  contract  is
determined.  Title  26  is  upon  the  subject  of  agency,  the  species  of
which  are  classified  according  to  the  variations  in  the  persons  benefited
by  the  agent's  commission ;  the  modes  in  which  that  commission
terminates,  and  the  reciprocal  duties  of  agent  and  principal,  are  also
noticed.  The  question  which  is  of  so  much  practical  importance  in
modem  law,  namely  the  capacity  of  the  agent  to  bind  and  entitle  his
principal,  is  passed  over  in  silence,  but  is  treated  at  some  length  in
Excursus  IX  inf.  Quasi-contractual  obligations  are  illustrated  in
Title  27  by  negotiorum  gestio,  indebiti  solutio,  joint  ownership  and
inheritance,  and  the  relations  of  guardian  and  ward,  heir  and  legatee ;
and  Tide  29  deals  with  the  discharge  of  obligations,  and  more  par-
ticularly of  those  which  arise  ex  contractu  ;  the  chief  modes  described
are  performance,  accord  and  satisfaction,  release,  and  substituted
agreement.  Assignment,  of  which  some  treatment  might  have  been
looked  for,  is  discussed  in  the  Excursus  (V)  on  the  general  nature  of
obligations.

The  description  here  given  of  the  Roman  contract  system — if  we
may  use  that  expression  to  indicate  the  aggregate  of  actionable
agreements — is  somewhat  misleading.  It  must  not  be  supposed
that  in  the  time  of  Justinian,  or  even  of  Gaius,  no  agreement  was
ground  to  support  an  action  which  was  neither  expressed  in  the  form
of  stipulation,  nor  belonged  to  one  or  other  of  the  classes  of  Real  and
Consensual  contracts.  There  had  been  a  considerable  advance  in
two  directions  since  the  time  when  usage  had  restricted  the  term
'contract'  to  denote  the  four  classes  of  agreement  enumerated  in

A  a


354  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  III,

Title  13.  Between  the  establishment  of  the  Empire  and  the  age  of
the  last  great  classical  jurists  the  principle  of  the  Real  contracts  h£(d
received  a  great  development  by  the  recognition  of  the  rule,  that
where  one  party  to  any  agreement  whatsoever  had  performed  what
he  had  undertaken,  he  had  always  a  remedy  by  action  to  enforce  per-
formance by  the  other.  This  great  group  of  so-called  *  innominate '
contracts  is  treated  in  a  note  on  Title  14.  4.  New  contracts,  though
not  so  called,  which  in  effect  were  consensual,  were  called  into  ex-
istence at  different  times  by  the  Edict  and  imperial  action ;  constitu-
tum  (note  on  iii.  20.  8)  is  the  great  example  of  the  former ;  emphy-
teusis (pp.  328-330  supr.)  and  donatio  (ii.  7)  of  the  latter.  And
lastly,  though  this  matter  is  disputed  (Excursus  V),  it  may  be  true
that  from  the  theory  of  *  natural '  obligation  every  agreement  whatso-
ever came  to  receive  all  the  legal  attributes  possessed  by  even  the
oldest  of  the  Roman  contracts,  except  that  of  exposing  the  promisor
to  an  action  for  the  enforcement  of  his  promise.


LIBER  TERTIUS.


I.


DE  HEREDITATIBUS  QUAE  AB  INTESTATO  DEFERUNTUR,

Intestatus  decedit,  qui  aut  omnino  testamentum  non  fecit
aut  non  iure  fecit  aut  id  quod  fecerat  ruptum  irritumve  factum
est  aut  nemo  ex  eo  heres  extitit.

Intestatorum  autem   hereditates  ex  lege  duodecim  tabu-  1
larum  primum  ad  suos  heredes  pertinent.     Sui  autem  heredes  2
existimantur,  ut  et  supra  diximus,  qui  in  potestate  morientis
fuerunt :   veluti  filius  filia,  nepos  neptisve  ex  filio,  pronepos
proneptisve  ex  nepote  filio  nato  prognatus  prognatave.     nee
interest,  utrum   naturales  sunt  liberi   an    adoptivi.     Quibus  2  a
connumerari  necesse  est  etiam  eos,  qui  ex  legitimis  quidem
matrimoniis  non  sunt  progeniti,  curiis  tamen  civitatum  dati
secundum   divalium   constitutionum,  quae   super  his  positae
sunt,  tenorem  suorum  iura  nanciscuntur :  nee  non  eos,  quos
nostrae   amplexae   sunt  constitutiones,  per  quas  iussimus,  si
quis   mulierem  in  suo  contubernio  copulaverit  non  ab  initio

Tit.  I.  For  the  precise  meaning  of  testamentum  non  iure  factum,
ruptum,  irritum,  and  destitutum  see  on  Bk.  ii.  17.  pr.  supr.

§  L  The  Twelve  Tables,  whose  words  ran  *  si  intestatus  moritur,  cui
suus  heres  nee  escit,  agnatus  proximus  familiam  habeto/  did  not  conceive
the  succession  of  a  suus  heres  as  a  succession  at  all,  but  as  a  continuation
of  a  common  proprietorship  whose  exercise  had  lain  dormant  during  the
lifetime  of  the  deceased  paterfamilias  :  cf.  Gains  ii.  157,  Bk.  ii.  19.  2  supr.,
and  §  3  inf.  *  quasi  continuatur  dominium,'  Dig.  28.  2.  11  'in  suis  heredi-
bus  evidentius  apparet,  continuationem  dominii  eo  rem  perducere,  ut  nulla
videatur  hereditas  fuisse,  quasi  olim  hi  domini  essent,  qui  etiam  vivo
patre  quodammodo  heredes  existimantur : . . .  itaque  post  mortem  patris
non  hereditatem  percipere  videntur,  sed  magis  liberam  bonorum  adminis-
trationem  consequuntur.'

§  2.  For  the  modes  of  legitimating  illegitimate  children  see  on  Bk.  i.  10.

A  a  ri


356  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

aflfectione  maritali,  earn  tamen,  cum  qua  poterat  habere
coniugium^  et  ex  ea  liberos  sustulerit,  postea  vero  affectione
procedente  etiam  nuptialia  instrumenta  cum  ea  fecerit  filios-
que  vel  filias  habuerit :  non  solum  eos  liberos,  qui  post  dotem
editi  sunt,  iustos  et  in  potestate  esse  patribus,  sed  etiam
anteriores,  qui  et  his  qui  postea  nati  sunt  occasionem  legittmi
nominis  praestiterunt :  quod  optinere  censuimus,  etiamsi  non
progeniti  fuerint  post  dotale  instrumentum  confectum  liberi
2b  vel  etiam  nati  ab  hac  luce  subtracti  fuerint.  Ita  demum
tamen  nepos  neptisve  et  pronepos  proneptisve  suorum  here-
dum  numero  sunt,  si  praecedens  persona  desierit  in  potestate
parentis  esse,  sive  morte  id  acciderit  sive  alia  ratione,  veluti
emancipatione :  nam  si  per  id  tempus,  quo  quis  moreretur,
filius  in  potestate  eius  sit^  nepos  ex  eo  suus  heres  esse  non
potest,  idque  et  in  ceteris  deinceps  liberorum  personis  dictum
intellegimus.   postumi  quoque,  qui,  si  vivo  parente  nati  essent,

3  in  potestate  futuri  forent,  sui  heredes  sunt.  Sui  autem  etiam
ig^orantes  fiunt  heredes  et,  licet  furiosi  sint,  heredes  possunt
existere  :  quia  quibus  ex  causis  ignorantibus  adquiritur  nobis,
ex  his  causis  et  furiosis  adquiri  potest,  et  statim  morte
parentis  quasi  continuatur  dominium :  et  ideo  nee  tutoris
auctoritate  opus  est  in  pupillis,  cum  etiam  ignorantibus
adquiritur  suis  heredibus  hereditas  :   nee  curatoris  consensu

4  adquiritur  furioso,  sed  ipso  iure.  Interdum  autem,  licet  in
potestate  mortis  tempore  suus  heres  non  fuit,  tamen  suus
heres  parentl  efficitur,  veluti  si  ab  hostibus  quis  reversus  fuerit

5  post  mortem  patris  sui :  ius  enim  postliminii  hoc  facit.  Per
contrarium  evenit  ut,  licet  quis  in  familia.  defuncti  sit  mortis
tempore,  tamen  suus  heres  non  fiat,  veluti  si  post  mortem
suam  pater  iudicatus  fuerit  reus  perduellionis  ac  per  hoc
memoria  eius  damnata  fuerit :    suum  enim  heredem  habere

13.  pr. :  the  note  on  which  section  will  also  explain  the  words 'qui  et  his,
qui  postea  nati  sunt,  occasionem  legitimi  nominis  praestiterunt.'

§  8.  Sui  heredes,  however,  could  not  be  prejudiced  against  their  will  by
a  damnosa  hereditas,  as  they  enjoyed  the  praetorian  *  beneficium  absti-
nendi '  whether  called  to  succeed  under  a  will  or  ab  intestato :  see  Bk.  ii.
19.  2  and  notes  supr.

§  4.  For  the  ius  postliminii  see  on  Bk.  i.  12.  5  supr.

§  6.  Of  the  term  perduellio  Festus  says  *  hostis  apud  antiquos  pere-
grinus  dicebatur,  et  qui  nunc  hostis  perduellio : '  the  offence  is  defined  in


Tit.  I.]  DE  HEREDITATIBUS,  ETC.  357

non  potest,  cum  fiscus  ei  succedit.  sed  potest  dici  ipso  iure
esse  suum  heredem,  sed  desinere.  Cum  filius  filiave  et  ex  6
altero  filio  nepos  neptisve  extant,  pariter  ad  hereditatem
vocantur  nee  qui  gradu  proximior  est  ulteriorem  cxcludit:
aequum  enim  esse  videtur  nepotes  neptesque  in  patris  sui
locum  succedere.  pari  ratione  et  si  nepos  neptisque  sit  ex
filio  et  ex  nepote  pronepos  proneptisve,  simul  vocantur.  et
quia  placuit  nepotes  neptesque,  item  pronepotes  proneptesque
in  parentis  sui  locum  succedere^  conveniens  esse  visum  est  non
in  capita,  sed  in  stirpes  hereditatem  dividi,  ut  filius  partem
dimidiam  hereditatis  habeat  ct  ex  altero  filio  duo  pluresve
nepotes  alteram  dimidiam.  item  si  ex  duobus  filiis  nepotes
extant  et  ex  altero  unus  forte  aut  duo,  ex  altero  tres  aut
quattuor,  ad  unum  aut  duos  dimidia  pars  pertinet,  ad  tres  vel
ad  quattuor  altera  dimidia.  Cum  autem  quaeritur,  an  quis  7
suus  heres  existere  potest :  eo  tempore  quaerendum  est,  quo
certum  est  aliquem  sine  testamento  decessisse :  quod  accidit
et  destituto  testamento.  hac  ratione  si  filius  exheredatus
fuerit  et  extraneus  heres  institutus  est,  filio  mortuo  postea
certum  fiierit  heredem  institutum  ex  testamento  non  fieri
heredem,  aut  quia  noluit  esse  heres  aut  qiiia  non  potuit:
nepos  avo  suus  heres  existet,  quia  quo  tempore  certum  est
intestatum  decessisse  patrem  familias,  solus  invenitur  nepos.
et  hoc  certum  est.  Et  licet  post  mortem  avi  natus  sit,  tamen  8
avo  vivo  conceptus,  mortuo  patre  eius  posteaque  deserto  avi
testamento  suus  heres  efficitur.    plane  si  et  conceptus  et  natus

Dig.  48.  4. 1 1  ^  perdaellionis  reus  hostili  animo  adversus  rempublicam  vel
principem  animatus.'  Theophilus  remarks  that  it  was  the  only  crime  for
which  a  man  could  be  proceeded  against  after  his  decease :  cf.  note  on
Bk.  iv.  18.  3  inf.

§  0.  For  a  discussion  of  the  two  systems  of  division,  per  capita  and  per
stirpes,  see  Maine,  Early  History  of  Institutions,  p.  195.

§  7.  What  is  meant  is  that  the  persons  who  would  be  sui  heredes  at  the
moment  of  the  decease  may  not  exactly  correspond  with  those  who  would
occupy  that  position  at  the  moment  when  it  first  becomes  certain  that  the
man  has  died  intestate,  and  that,  where  there  is  a  difference,  it  is  the
latter  who  take,  not  the  former.  £.  g.  A  dies,  having  instituted  B,  an  ex*
traneus,  and  leaving  two  sui,  C  and  D :  if,  before  B  refuses  the  inherit-
ance, C  gives  himself  in  adrogation,  D  will  succeed  to  the  whole  on
B's  refusal,  for  at  the  time  when  the  sui  are  to  be  ascertained  C  has
ceased  to  be  a  suus  by  having  undergone  capitis  deminutio.


358  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  III.

fuerit  post  mortem  avi,  mortuo  patre  suo  desertoque  postea
avi  testamento  suus  heres  avo  non  existit,  quia  nuUo  iure
cc^nationis  partem  sui  patris  tetigit.  sic  nee  ille  est  inter
liberos  avo,  quem  filius  emancipatus  adoptaverat.  hi  autem
cum  non  sunt  quantum  ad  hereditatem  liberi,  neque  bonorum
possessionem  petere  possunt  quasi  proximi  cognati.  haec  de
suis  heredibus.
9  Emancipati  autem  liberi  iure  civili  nihil  iuris  habent :  neque
enim  sui  heredes  sunt,  quia  in  potestate  esse  desierunt  pa-
rentis, neque  alio  ullo  iure  per  legem  duodecim  tabularum
vocantur.  sed  praetor  naturali  aequitate  motus  dat  eis
bonorum  possessionem  unde  liberi,  perinde  ac  si  in  potestate
parentis  mortis  tempore  fuissent,  sivt^  soli  sint  sive  cum  suis
heredibus  concurrant.  itaque  duobus  liberis  extantibus,
emancipato  et  qui  mortis  tempore  in  potestate  fuerit,  sane
quidem  is  qui  in  potestate  fuerit  solus  iure  civili  heres  est,
id  est  solus  suus  heres  est:  sed  cum  emancipatus  beneficio
praetoris  in  partem  admittitur,  evenit,  ut  suus  heres  pro  parte


§  9.  The  old  civil  law  of  intestate  succession  regarded  agnatic  relation-
ship exclusively :  those  only  who  were  in  the  agnatic  family  of  a  deceased
person  could  succeed  him.  Thus  those  whom  natural  reason  and  more
refined  law  deem  nearer  relations  were  often  excluded  by  persons  to  whom
later  they  would  have  been  preferred  :  sons  or  daughters  might  be  post-
poned to  a  distant  cousin,  because  by  being  emancipated  or  given  in  adop-
tion they  had  been  capite  deminuti,  and  so  ceased  to  be  agnatic  kindred
of  their  own  father.  These  anomalies,  as  they  seem  to  us,  were  but  gradu-
ally corrected.  Arranging  the  persons  who  possessed  rights  of  intestate
succession  to  a  deceased  in  classes  according  to  priority,  so  that  the  first
excludes  the  second,  the  second  the  third,  and  so  on,  the  first  class  under
the  old  law,  as  we  have  seen,  consisted  of  the  sui.  It  was  enlarged  by  the
action  of  the  praetor,  whose  mode  of  intervention  has  already  been  alluded
to  on  Bk.  ii.  lo.  2  supr.  He  could  not  affect  the  hereditas,  which  was
altogether  beyond  his  control :  but  he  could  promise  the  bonorum  posses-
sio  to  whomsoever  he  pleased :  and  by  promising  it,  in  the  first  instance,
to  liberi  of  the  deceased,  he  practically  added  persons  to  the  class  of  sui  who
by  the  civil  law  had  no  claim  whatever.  '  Liberi '  are  those  descendants
of  a  deceased  man  who  either  are,  or  would  be,  sui  (had  they  been  able  to
be  in  potestas)  if  they  had  not  been  emancipated  or  given  in  adoptio
plena,  Gaius  iii.  26 :  though  while  in  the  adoptive  family  they  could  not
claim  to  succeed  their  natural  father,  §  10  inf.  Thus  children  are  not
'  liberi '  in  relation  to  their  mother,  their  maternal  grandfather,  and  so  on.
The  principle  was  analogous  to  that  of  the  civil  law:  no  descendant


Tit.  I.]  DE  HEREDITATIBUS,  ETC,  359

heres  fiat.  At  hi,  qui  emancipati  a  parentc  in  adoptionem  10
se  dederunt,  non  admittuntur  ad  bona  naturalis  patris  quasi
liberi,  si  modo  cum  is  moreretur  in  adoptiva  familia  sint.  nam
vivo  eo  emancipati  ab  adoptivo  patre  perinde  admittuntur  ad
bona  naturalis  patris,  ac  si  emancipati  ab  ipso  essent  nee
umquam  in  adoptiva  familia  fuissent:  et  convenienter  quod
ad  adoptivum  patrem  pertinet  extraneorum  loco  esse  inci-
piunt.  post  mortem  vero  naturalis  patris  emancipati  ab
adoptivo  et  quantum  ad  hunc  aeque  extraneorum  loco  fiunt
et  quantum  ad  naturalis  parentis  bona  pertinet  nihilo  magis
liberorum  gradum  nanciscuntur :  quod  ideo  sic  placuit,  quia
iniquum  erat  esse  in  potestate  patris  adoptivi,  ad  quos  bona
naturalis  patris  pertinerent,  utrum  ad  liberos  eius  an  ad
adgnatos.  Minus  ergo  iuris  habent  adoptivi  quam  naturales.  11
namque  naturales  emancipati  beneficio  praetoris  gradum
liberorum  retinent,  licet  iure  civili  perdunt :  adoptivi  vero
emancipati  et  iure  civili  perdunt  gradum  liberorum  et  a
praetore  non  adiuvantur.  et  recte :  naturalia  enim  iura  civilis
ratio  peremere  non  potest  nee,  quia  desinunt  sui  heredes
esse,  desinere  possunt  filii  filiaeve  aut  nepotes  neptesve  esse :
adoptivi  vero   emancipati   extraneorum   loco  incipiunt  esse,

could  claim  bonorum  possessio  in  this  class,  if  another  stood  between
him  and  the  deceased,  exactly  as  no  one  is  a  suus  heres  who  is  not  in
the  immediate  power  of  the  paterfamilias.  It  admitted  of  one  excep-
tion. If  a  son  were  emancipated,  while  his  children  were  retained  in
the  grandfather's  power,  the  latter  were  sui,  and  entitled  by  the  Twelve
Tables ;  on  the  praetorian  system  the  son  would  naturally  exclude  them.
To  admit  both  the  son  and  the  grandchildren  to  independent  shares  would
have  wronged  other  liberi :  accordingly,  the  son  was  allowed  to  take  the
portion  which  he  would  have  received  had  he  not  been  emancipated,  on
condition  of  transferring  a  moiety  to  his  children.  Dig.  37.  8.  i.  pr.

Liberi  who  were  not  sui  could  claim  bonorum  possessio  as  such  only  on
condition  of  making  a  coUatio  bonorum  (see  on  Bk.  ii.  19.  5  supr.).  Coll.
16.  7,  though  bona  castrensia  and  quasi  castrensia  were  excepted  from
hotchpot  because  they  would  have  been  the  son's  own  had  he  not  been
emancipated  at  all,  Dig.  37.  6.  I.  15.  So  too  a  daughter  must  make  a
collatio  of  her  dos,  whether  she  took  as  bonorum  possessor  or  heres,  Dig.
37.  6.  I.  pr.

§  10.  Non  . .  .  quasi  liberi :  but  they  are  admitted  in  another  order,  as
cognati,  13  inf.

§  11.  For  the  dictum  '  naturalia  iura  civilis  ratio  peremere  non  potest ;
see  on  Bk.  i.  15.  3  supr.


36o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

quia  ius  nomenque  filii  filiaeve,  quod  per  adoptionem  con-
secuti  sunt,  alia  ctvili  ratione,  id  est  emancipatione,  perdunt.

12  Eadem  haec  observantur  et  in  ea  bonorum  possessione,  quam
contra  tabulas  testamenti  parentis  liberis  praeteritis,  id  est
neque  heredibus  institutis  neque  ut  oportet  exheredatis,
praetor  pollicetur.  nam  eos  quidem,  qui  in  potestate  parentis
mortis  tempore  fuerunt,  et  emancipatos  vocat  praetor  ad  earn
bonorum  possessionem :  eos  vero,  qui  in  adoptiva  familia
fuerunt  per  hoc  tempus,  quo  naturalis  parens  moreretur,  re-
pellit.  item  adoptivos  liberos  emancipatos  ab  adoptivo  patre
sicut  ab  intestato,  ita  longe  minus  contra  tabulas  testamenti
ad  bona  eius  admittit,  quia  desinunt  in  liberorum  numero

13  esse.  Admonendi  tamen  sumus  eos,  qui  in  adoptiva  familia
sunt  quive  post  mortem  naturalis  parentis  ab  adoptivo  patre
emancipati  fuerint,  intestato  parente  naturali  mortuo  licet  ea
parte  edicti,  qua  liberi  ad  bonorum  possessionem  vocantur,
non  admittantur,  alia  tamen  parte  vocari,  id  est  qua  cognati
defuncti  vocantur.  ex  qua  parte  ita  admittuntur,  si  neque
sui  heredes  liberi  neque  emancipati  obstent  neque  adgnatus
quidem  uUus  interveniat :  ante  enim  praetor  liberos  vocat  tam
suos  heredes  quam   emancipatos,  deinde  legitimos  heredes,

14  deinde  proximos  cognatos.  Sed  ea  omnia  antiquitati  quidem
placuerunt :  aliquam  autem  emendationem  a  nostra  con-
stitutione  acceperunt,  quam  super  his  personis  posuimus,  quae
a  patribus  suis  naturalibus  in  adoptionem  aliis  dantur.  in-
venimus  etenim  nonnuUos  casus,  in  qutbus  Alii  et  naturalium
parentum  successionem  propter  adoptionem  amittebant  et
adoptione  facile  per  emancipationem  soluta  ad  neutrius  patris
successionem  vocabantur.  hoc  solito  more  corrigentes  con-
stitutionem  scripsimus,  per  quam  deAnivimus,  quando  parens


§  12.  See  on  Bk.  ii.  13.  pr.  supr.

§  13.  For  the  rights  of  cognates  see  Tit.  5  and  notes,  inf.  The  rule  here
stated  did  not  apply  even  before  Justinian  if  the  effect  of  the  adoption  was
not  to  transfer  the  adoptatus  to  a  new  cognatic  feunily,  as  e.  g.  where  he
was  adopted  by  a  paternal  ascendant :  here  he  ranked  among  liberi.  Dig.
37*  4-  3-  7  ^i^d  8  ;  ib.  21.  I.  So  too  if  a  paterfamilias,  after  emancipating
a  son,  gave  himself  in  adrogation,  the  son  did  not.  lose  his  right  of  suc-
ceeding in  the  first  class,  Dig.  loc.  cit.  3.  9.

§  14.  The  SC.  Afinianum  had  enacted  that  if  a  father  gave  one  of


Tit.  ij  DE  HEREDITATIBUS,  ETC  361

naturalis  filium  suum  adoptandum  alii  dederit>  Integra  omnia
iura  ita  servari,  atque  si  in  patris  naturalis  potestate  per-
mansisset  nee  penitus  adoptio  fuerit  subsecuta :  nisi  in  hoc
tantummodo  casu,  ut  possit  ab  intestato  ad  patris  adoptivi
venire  successionem.  testamento  autem  ab  eo  facto  neque
iure  civili  neque  praetorio  aliquid  ex  hereditate  eius  persequi
potest  neque  contra  tabulas  bonorum  possessione  agnita
neque  inofficiosi  querella  instituta,  cum  nee  necessitas  patri
adoptivo  imponitur  vel  heredem  eum  instituere  vel  exhere-
datum  facere  utpote  nuUo  naturali  vinculo  copulatum«  neque
si  ex  Afiniano  senatus  consulto  ex  tribus  maribus  fuerit
adoptatus:  nam  et  in  huiusmodi  casu  neque  quarta  ei  ser-
vatur  nee  ulla  actio  ad  eius  persecutionem  d  competit.
nostra  autem  constitutione  exceptus  est  is,  quern  parens
naturalis  adoptandum  susceperit:  utroque  enim  iure  tarn
naturali  quam  legitimo  in  banc  personam  concurrente  pri-
stina  iura  tali  adoptioni  servavimus,  quemadmodum  si  pater
familias  sese  dederit  adrogandum.  quae  specialiter  et  sin-
gillatim  ex  praefatae  constitutionis  tenore  possunt  colHgi.

Item  vetustas  ex  masculis  progenitos  plus  diligens  solos  15
nepotes  vel  neptes,  qui  ex  virili  sexu  descendunt,  ad  suorum
vocabat  successionem  et  iuri  adgnatorum  eos  anteponebat:
nepotes  autem,  qui  ex  filiabus  nati  sunt,  et  pronepotes  ex
neptibus  cognatorum  loco  numerans  post  adgnatorum  lineam
eos  vocabat  tam  in  avi  vel  proavi  matemi  quam  in  aviae

three  sons  in  adoption,  the  adoptive  father  must  leave  him  a  fourth  of  his
property  at  least,  Theoph.  For  Justinian's  changes  in  the  law  of  adoption
(Cod.  8.  48.  10)  see  on  Bk.  i.  11.  2  supr.  Their  result,  so  far  as  relates
to  intestate  succession,  was  as  follows :

(i)  If  the  adoptio  was  minus  plena,  the  adoptatus  retained  all  his
rights  against  the  estate  of  his  natural  father,  and  acquired  besides  a
claim  as  suus  to  that  of  the  adoptive  father,  if  he  died  intestate,  though
none  to  that  of  the  latter's  agnates.  To  the  property  of  the  adoptatus
the  adoptans  had  no  rights  of  succession  whatever.  (2)  if  the  adoptio
was  plena,  the  rights  of  the  adoptatus  against  the  property  of  both  his
patres  and  that  of  his  mother  remained  unaltered.  As  to  his  relation  to
his  natural  father's  inheritance  there  is  some  difference  of  opinion,  though
the  expression  in  the  text  (pristina  iura  tali  adoptioni  servavimus)  coupled
with  the  whole  tenor  of  Cod.  8. 48. 10,  and  Bk.  i.  11.  2  supr.  may  be  taken
as  conclusive.

§  16.  The  enactments  referred  to  are  those  of  Valentinian,  Theodosius,


363  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  III.

vel  proaviae  sive  paternae  sive  mateniae  successionem.  divi
autem  principes  noa  passi  sunt  talem  contra  naturam  iniuriam
sine  competent!  emendatione  relinquere :  sed  cum  nepotis  et
pronepotis  nomen  commune  est  utrisque,  qui  tam  ex  masculis
quam  ex  feminis  descendunt,  ideo  eundem  gradum  et  ordi-
nem  successionis  eis  donaverunt:  sed  ut  aliquid  amplius  sit
eis,  qui  non  solum  naturae,  sed  etiam  veteris  iuris  sufiVagio
muniuntur,  portionem  nepotum  et  neptium  vel  deinceps,  de
quibus  supra  diximus,  paulo  minuendam  esse  existimaverunt,
ut  minus  tertiam  partem  acciperent,  quam  mater  eorum  vel
avia  fuerat  acceptura,  vd  pater  eorum  vel  avus  patemus  sive
matemus,  quando  femina  mortua  sit  cuius  de  hereditate
agitur,  bisque,  licet  soli  sint,  adeuntibus  adgnatos  minime
vocabant  et  quemadmodum  lex  duodecim  tabularum  filio
mortuo  nepotes  vel  neptes  vel  pronepotes  et  proneptes  in
locum  patris  sui  ad  successionem  avi  vocat :  ita  et  principalis

and  Arcadius  in  Cod.  6.  55.  9  and  Cod.  Theod.  5.  i.  4  (a.  D.  389) :  they
provided  that  grandchildren  and  still  remoter  descendants  should  rank  as
liberi  of  their  maternal  grandparents  or  paternal  grandmother,  etc.,  in  lieu
of  their  mother,  father,  etc.,  their  portion,  however,  being  diminished  by
one  third  in  favour  of  liberi  admitted  by  the  earlier  law,  or  if  there  were
none,  by  one  fourth  in  favour  of  the  agnates.  This  last  deduction
was  abolished  by  Justinian  in  Cod.  6.  55.  12,  and  that  of  the  third  by
Nov.  18. 4.

It  may  be  as  well  to  state  briefly  the  rules  of  intestate  succession  where
the  deceased  was  a  filiusfamilias  with  peculium  or  an  emancipatus.  In
respect  of  peculium  adventitium,  Theodosius  and  Vaientinian  enacted
that  (i)  bona  matema  should  go  to  the  pater,  (2)  lucra  nuptialia  to  the
children  of  the  deceased  filiusfamilias,  the  pater  having  the  usufruct  for
life :  in  default  of  children  to  the  pater,  and  failing  him  to  brothers  and
sisters.  Leo  and  Anthemius  postponed  the  pater  to  brothers  and  sisters,
even  of  the  half  blood.  Justinian  extended  these  rules  relating  to  bona
nuptialia  to  bona  matema  and  matemi  generis  in  their  integrity,  Cod.  6.
59.  II,  and  later  still  to  all  peculium  adventitium  from  whatever  source
derived.

For  the  earlier  law  relating  to  peculium  castrense  see  on  Bk.  ii.  9.  pr.
supr.  In  Justinian's  time  brothers  and  sisters  as  well  as  children  of  the
deceased  were  preferred  to  the  pater  (Bk.  ii.  12.  pr.  supr.  *  si  vero  intestati
decesserint,  nullis  liberis  vel  fratribus  superstitibus,  ad  parentes  eorum
iure  communi  pertinebit : '  cf.  Cod.  6.61. 3  and  4),  who  took  the  peculium
only  if  there  were  none  to  precede  him.  The  same  rules  governed  the
succession  to  peculium  quasi  castrense.

If,  finally,  an  emancipatus  died  intestate,  the  parens  manumissor  under


Tit.  I.]  DE  HEREDITATIBUS,  ETC  363

dispositio  in  locum  matris  suae  vel  aviae  eos  cum  iam  de-
signata  partis  tertiae  deminutione  vocat.  Sed  nos,  cum  adhuc  16
dubitatio  manebat  inter  adgnatos  et  memoratos  nepotes,
partem  quartam  defunct!  substantiae  adgnatis  sibi  vindi-
cantibus  ex  cuiusdam  constitutionis  auctoritate,  memoratam
quidem  constitutionem  a  nostro  codice  s^regavimus  neque
inseri  earn  ex  Theodosiano  codice  in  eo  concessimus.  nostra
autem  constitutione  promulgata  toti  iuri  eius  derogatum  est :
et  sanximus  talibus  nepotibus  ex  filia  vel  pronepotibus  ex
nepte  et  deinceps  superstitibus  adgnatos  nuUam  partem
mortui  successionis  sibi  vindicare,  ne  hi,  qui  ex  transversa
linea  veniunt,  potiores  his  habeantur,  qui  recto  iure  de-
scendunt  quam  constitutionem  nostram  optinere  secundum
sui  vigorem  et  tempora  et  nunc  sancimus :  ita  tamen  ut,
quemadmodum  inter  filios  et  nepotes  ex  filio  antiquitas  statuit
non  in  capita  sed  in  stirpes  dividi  hereditatem,  similiter  nos

the  old  law  had  stood  next  after  the  sui,  as  being  patron  (Tit.  7  inf.).
Gratian  and  later  emperors  preferred  the  children  of  an  emancipated
daughter  (who  of  course  neither  were  nor  ranked  as  sui)  to  the  parens
manumissor,  Cod.  Theod.  5.  i.  3 :  Anastasius  allowed  family  rights  to  be
reserved  in  emancipation  by  imperial  rescript,  Cod.  6.  58.  11:  see  on  Bk.  i.
12.  6  supr.  Through  Justinian's  abolition  of  the  old  form  of  emancipation
the  pater*s  rights  of  succession,  qua  patron,  and  the  connected  bonorum
possessio  unde  decem  personae  (Tit.  9.  4  inf.)  disappeared,  and  in  his
system  the  order  of  succession  to  an  emancipatus  is,  first,  liberi,  second,
the  pater,  Bk.  i.  12.  6  supr. ;  Tit.  9.  4  inf.  If,  however,  the  deceased  left
surviving  him,  besides  the  pater,  a  mother  and  brothers  or  sisters,  the
proprietas  belonged  to  the  brothers  or  sisters,  the  usufruct  in  thirds  to
them,  the  father  and  the  mother  respectively  :  if  he  left  no  mother,  but
brothers  or  sisters  as  well  as  the  i>ater,  the  latter  had  the  usufruct,  the
former  the  proprietas,  of  the  whole.

Under  Justinian  consequently  (before  the  changes  effected  by  Nov.  118,
for  which  see  on  Tit.  9.  9  inf.,  and  omitting  the  cases  of  filiusfamilias  and
emancipatus  just  considered),  the  following  persons,  though  owing  their
respective  titles  historically  to  different  legislative  organs,  ranked  in  the
first  class  as  successors  on  an  intestacy,  viz.  sui  (Twelve  Tables),  liberi
(Edict),  and  grandchildren  by  a  deceased  daughter  (Cod.  Theod.  5.  i.  4).
If  the  deceased  were  a  woman,  as  she  could  have  no  sui  or  liberi  in  the
technical  sense,  there  was,  strictly  speaking,  no  first  class  to  succeed  her :
the  first  right  belonged  to  her  children  by  the  SC.  Orfitianum,  Tit.  4  inf.,
and  to  grandchildren  by  issue  deceased,  all  of  whom  the  Romans  them-
selves rank  in  the  second  class  as  legitimi :  see  the  next  Title.

§  16.  For  the  '  pars  quarta'  see  note  on  §  15,  ad  init.


364  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

inter  filios  et  nepotes  ex  filia  distributionem  fieri  iubemus,  vel
inter  omnes  nepotes  et  neptes  et  alias  deinceps  personas,  ut
utraque  progenies  matris  suae  yel  patris,  aviae  vel  avi  por-
tionem  sine  uUa  deminutione  consequantur,  ut,  si  forte  unus
vel  duo  ex  una  parte,  ex  altera  tres  aut  quattuor  extent,  unus
aut  duo  dimidiam,  alter!  tres  aut  quattuor  alteram  dimidiam
hereditatis  habeant

11.

DE  LEGITIMA  ADGNATORUM  SUCCESSIONE.

Si  nemo  suus  heres  vel  eorum,  quos  inter  suos  heredes
praetor  vel  constitutiones  vocant,  extat  et  successionem  quo-
quo  modo  amplectatur:  tunc  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum
1  ad  adgnatum  proximum  hereditas  pertinet.  Sunt  autcm
adgnati,  ut  primo  quoque  Hbro  tradidimus,  cognati  per  virilis
sexus  personas  cognatione  iuncti,  quasi  a  patre  cognati.
itaque  eodem  patre  nati  fratres  adgnati  sibi  sunt,  qui  et  con-
sanguinei  vocantur,  nee  requiritur,  an  etiam  eandem  matrem
habuerint.  item  patruus  fratris  filio  et  invicem  is  illi  adgnatus
est.  eodem  numero  sunt  fratres  patrueles,  id  est  qui  ex
duobus  fratribus  procreati  sunt,  qui  etiam  consobrini  vo-
cantur. qua  ratione  etiam  ad  plures  gradus  adgnationis
pervenire  poterimus.  hi  quoque,  qui  post  mortem  patris
nascuntur,  nanciscuntur  consanguinitatis  iura.  non  tamea
omnibus  simul  adgnatis   dat  lex  hereditatem,  sed  his,  qui

Tit.  H.  1.  For  the  precise  meaning  of  '  agnate'  see  on  Tit.  i.  15.  I
supr.  The  rule  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which,  in  default  of  sui,  gave  the
succession  to  the  nearest  agnate  or  agnates  in  the  same  degree,  was  so
strictly  construed,  that  if  he  or  the>r  were  unable  or  refused  to  take  the
inheritance,  more  remote  agnates  were  not  admitted  as  such,  nor  were  the
gentiles,  to  whom  the  inheritance  was  given  only  *  si  adgna^s  nee  escit ' ;
it  escheated  to  the  Treasury:  see  §§  5  and  7  infr.,  cf.  Gaius  iii.  12
'  nee  in  eo  iure  successio  est :  ideoque  si  adgnatus  proximus  hereditatem
omiserit,  vel  antequam  adierit  decesserit,  sequentibus  nihil  iuris  ex  lege
competit.'  Perhaps  the  hardship  of  this  was  to  some  extent  mitigated
by  the  anomalous  right  which  the  nearest  agnate  enjoyed  of  transferring
his  right  of  aditio  by  in  iure  cessio,  Gaius  ii.  35.  p.  271  supr.  The  degrees
of  agnation  were  calculated  in  the  same  way  as  those  of  cognation,  each
generation  as  one  degree  of  removal,  Tit.  6.  8  inf.  For  the  significance
of  the  expression  'cum  certum  esse  coeperit  aliquem  intestatum  decessisse'
see  on  Tit.  I.  7  supr.  and  Mr.  Poste*s  note  on  Gaius  iii.  13.


Tit.  2.]   DE  LEGITIMA  ADGNATORUM  SUCCESSIONE,    365

tunc  proximo  gradu  sunt,  cum  certum  esse  coeperit  aliquem
intestatum  decessisse.  Per  adoptionem  quoque  adgnationis  2
ius  consistit,  veluti  inter  Alios  naturales  et  eos  quos  pater
eorum  adoptavit  (nee  dubium  est,  quin  proprie  consanguinei
appellentur) :  item  si  quis  ex  ceteris  adgnatis  tuis,  veluti
frater  aut  patruus  aut  denique  is  qui  longiore  gradu  est,
aliquem  adoptaverit,  adgnatos  inter  suos  esse  non  dubitatur.
Ceterum  inter  masculos  quidem  adgnationis  iure  hereditas  3
etiam  long^simo  gradu  ultro  citroque  capitur.  quod  ad
feminas  vero  ita  placebat,  ut  ipsae  consanguinitatis  iure
tantum  capiant  hereditatem,  si  sorores  sint,  ulterius  non
capiant :  masculi  vero  ad  earum  hereditates^  etiam  si  longis-
simo  gradu  sint,  admittantur.  qua  de  causa  fratris  tui  aut
patrui  tui  filiae  vel  amitae  tuae  hereditas  ad  te  pertinet,  tua
vero  ad  illas  non  pertinebat.  quod  ideo  ita  constitutum  erat,
quia  commodius  videbatur  ita  iura  constitui,  ut  plerumque
hereditates  ad  masculos  confluerent.  sed  quia  sane  iniquum
erat  in  universum  eas  quasi  extraneas  repelli,  praetor  eas  ad
bonorum  possessionem  admittit  ea  parte,  qua  proximitatis
nomine  bonorum  possessionem  pollicetur:  ex  qua  parte  ita
scilicet  admittuntur,  si  neque  adgnatus  uUus  nee  proximior
cognatus  interveniat.  Et  haec  quidem  lex  duodecim  tabu-  3a
larum  nullo  modo  introduxit,  sed  simplicitatem  legibus
amicam  amplexa  simili  modo  omnes  adgnatos  sive  masculos
sive  feminas  cuiuscumque  gradus  ad  similitudinem  suorum
invicem  ad  successionem  vocabat:  media  autem  iurispru-
dentia,  quae  erat  lege  quidem  duodecim  tabularum  iunior,
imperiali  autem  dispositione  anterior,  suptilitate  quadam
excogitata  praefatam  differenttam  inducebat  et  penitus  eas
a  successione  adgnatorum  repellebat,  omni  alia  successione
incognita,  donee  praetores,  paulatim  asperitatem  iuris  civilis
corrigentes  sive  quod  deest  adimplentes,  humano  proposito
alium  ordinem  suis  edictis  addiderunt  et  cognationis  linea
proximitatis  nomine  introducta  per  bonorum  possessionem

§  8.  The  nde  that  female  agnates  were  not  entitled  to  succeed  as  such
if  more  remotely  related  to  the  deceased  than  as  sisters  of  the  whole  blood
was  due  to  what  Justinian  calls  the  media  iurisprudentia,  being  based  on
the  principle  which  either  before  or  later  was  embodied  in  the  lex  Voconia  :
^feminae  ad  hereditates  legitimas  ultra  consanguineas  successiones  non


366  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  III.

eas  adiuvabant  et  pollicebantur  his  bononim  possessionem,
3b  quae  unde  cognati  appellatur.  Nos  vero  legem  duodecim
tabularum  sequentes  et  eius  vestigia  in  hac  parte  conservantes
laudamus  quidem  praetores  suae  humanitatis,  non  tamen
eos  in  plenum  causae  mederi  invenimus:  quare  etenim  uno
eodemque  gradu  naturali  concurrente  et  adgnationis  titulis
tarn  in  masculis  quam  in  feminis  aequa  lance  constitutis
masculis  quidem  dabatur  ad  successionem  venire  omnium
adgnatorum^  ex  adgnatis  autem  mulieribus  nullis  penitus  nisi
soli  sorori  ad  adgnatorum  successionem  patebat  aditus  ?  ideo
in  plenum  omnia  reducentes  et  ad  ius  duodecim  tabularum
eandem  dispositionem  exaequantes  nostra  constitutione  sanxi-
mus  omnes  legitimas  personas,  id  est  per  virilem  sexum
descendentes,  sive  masculini  sive  feminini  generis  sunt^  simili
modo  ad  iura  successionis  legitimae  ab  intestato  vocari
secundum  gradus  sui  praerogativam  nee  ideo  excludendas,
4  quia  consanguinitatis  iura  sicuti  germanae  non  habent.  Hoc
etiam  addendum  nostrae  constitutioni  existimavimus,  ut
transferatur  unus  tantummodo  gradus  a  iure  cognationis  in
legitimam  successionem,  ut  non  solum  fratris  filius  et  filia
secundum  quod  iam  definivimus  ad  successionem  patrui  sui
vocentur,  sed  etiam  germanae  consanguineae  vel  sororis
uterinae  filius  et  filia  soli  et  non  deinceps  personae  una  cum
his  ad  iura  avunculi  sui  perveniant  et  mortuo  eo,  qui  patruus
quidem  est  fratris  sui  filiis,  avunculus  autem  sororis  suae
suboli,  simili  modo  ab  utroque  latere  succedant^  tamquam  si
omnes  ex  masculis  descendentes  legitimo  iure  veniant,  scilicet
ubi  frater  et  soror  superstites  non  sunt  (his  etenim  personis

admittuntur,  idque  iure  civili  Voconiana  ratione  videtur  efTectum:
ceterum  lex  duodecim  tabularum  nulla  discretione  sexus  adgnatos  admittit '
Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  4.  9.  22.  Remoter  female  agnates  than  sisters  had  a
praetorian  title  only ;  they  could  obtain  bonorum  possessio  in  the  third
rank,  as  cognates  (proximitatis  nomine),  unless  excluded  by  nearer
relations  of  the  same  class.  Justinian's  enactment  restoring  to  them  their
original  rights  is  in  Cod.  6.  58.  14.

§  4.  Into  the  second  order  of  succession,  which  goes  generally  by  the
name  of  legitimi,  and  which  (omitting  the  patron)  consisted  by  the  old  law
of  the  nearest  agnates  only,  were  admitted  by  successive  changes,  though
in  different  degrees  of  priority  :

(i)  The  deceased's  mother  if  she  had  the  ius  liberorum,  Tit.  3  inf.


Tit  2.]  DE  LEGITIMA  ADGNATORUM  SUCCESS/ONE.    367

praecedentibus  et  successionem  admittentibus  ceteri  gradus
remanent  penitus  semoti) :  videlicet  hereditate  non  ad  stirpes,
sed  in  capita  dlvidenda.  Si  plures  sint  gradus  adgnatorum,  5
aperte  lex  duodecim  tabularum  proximum  vocat:  itaque  si
verbi  gratia  sit  frater  defuncti  et  alterius  fratris  filius  aut
patruus,  frater  potior  habetur.  et  quamvis  singulari  numero
usa  lex  proximum  vocet,  tamen  dubium  non  est,  quin  et,
si  plures  sint  eiusdem  gradus,  omnes  admittantur:  nam  et
proprie  proximus  ex  pluribus  gradibus  intellegitur  et  tamen
dubium  non  est,  quin,  licet  unus  sit  gradus  adgnatorum,
pertineat  ad  eos  hereditas.     Proximus  autem,  si  quidem  nullo  6

(2)  The  children  of  a  deceased  woman,  Tit.  4  inf.,  though  these  practi-
cally belonged  to  the  first  class,  as  no  one  was  preferred  to  them ;  see
on  Tit.  I.  15  supr.  ad  fin.

(3)  Brothers  and  sisters  of  the  deceased  who  had  been  capite  minuti,
though  by  the  enactment  of  Anastasius  (Cod.  5. 30. 4),  by  which  this  right
was  given  them,  they  were  allowed  to  take  only  half  as  much  as  those
who  were  adgnati ;  this  restriction  was  removed  by  Justinian,  Cod.  6.  58.
15. 1.  If  emancipated  (i.e.  capite  minuti)  brothers  and  sisters  were  dead,
their  children  were  admitted  by  Justinian  in  their  place  along  with  the
issue  of  those  who  had  died  without  having  been  capite  minuti,  Cod.
6.  58.  15.3.

(4)  Uterine  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  deceased  (Cod.  6.  56.  7,  Jus-
tinian), but  by  Nov.  84  the  whole  was  preferred  to  the  half  blood.

(5)  Children  of  a  deceased  sister.  Cod.  6.  58.  15.  i,  and  this  section.
Taking  in  combination  with  these  changes  the  enactment  of  Justinian

which  introduced  successio  ordinum  among  agnates  (§  7  inf.),  the  second
class  under  his  system,  before  Nov.  118,  consisted  of  the  following  per-
sons, in  the  following  order  of  priority  :

i.  The  mother  (SC.  Tertullianum)  and  brothers  and  sisters  of  the
whole  blood,  whether  agnates  of  the  deceased  (Twelve  Tables)  or  not
(Cod.  6.  58.  15.  i).

ii.  Brothers  and  sisters  of  the  half  blood  (Twelve  Tables  and  Cod.  6.

56.  7).

iii.  Agnates  in  the  next  degree  after  brothers  and  sisters,  whether
male  (Twelve  Tables)  or  female  (Cod.  6.  58.  14),  and  the  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  deceased  brothers  and  sisters,  whether  the  latter  were  related
to  the  deceased  by  the  whole  or  the  half  blood,  and  whether  they  were
his  agnates  or  not.

iv.  Male  and  female  agnates  of  remoter  degrees,  according  to  prox-
imity (§  7).  Where  there  were  several  persons  entitled  equally,  as
legitimi,  the  division  was  always  per  capita  (this  section,  ad  fin.),  i.e.
the  principle  of  representation  of  parents  by  children  ad  infinitum,  which
held  in  succession  by  the  first  order,  had  here  no  application.


368  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Ub.  III.

tettamento  facto  quuque  decesserit,  per  hoc  tempus  rcquiritur,
quo  mortuus  est  is  cuius  de  hereditate  quaeritur.  quod  si
lacto  tcstamento  quisquam  decesserit,  per  hoc  tempus  requi-
ritur,  quo  certum  esse  coeperit  nullum  ex  testamento  heredem
extaturum :  turn  enim  proprie  quisque  intellegitur  intestatus
decessisse.  quod  quidem  aliquando  loi^o  tempore  dedaratur :
in  quo  spatio  temporis  saepe  accidit,  ut  proximiore  mortuo
proximus  esse  incipiat,  qui  moriente  testatore  non  erat  proxi-

7  mut.  Placebat  autem  in  eo  genere  percipiendanim  here*
ditatum  successionem  non  esse,  id  est  ut,  quamvis  proximus,
qui  secundum  ea  quae  diximus  vocatur  ad  hereditatem,  aut
sprevcrit  hereditatem  aut  antequam  adeat  decesserit,  nihilo
magis  *  legitimo  iure  sequentes  admittuntur.  quod  iterum
praetores  imperfecto  iure  corrigentes  non  in  totum  sine  admi-
niculo  relinquebant,  sed  ex  cognatorum  ordine  eos  vocabant,
utpote  adgnationis  iure  eis  recluso.  sed  nos  nihil  deesse
perfectissimo  iuri  cupientes  nostra  constitutione  sanximus,
quam  de  iure  patronatus  humanitate  suggerente  protulimus,
successionem  in  adgnatorum  hereditatibus  non  esse  eis  dene-
gandam,  cum  satis  absurdum  erat,  quod  cognatis  a  praetore
apertum  est,  hoc  adgnatis  esse  reclusum,  maxime  cum  in  onere
quidem  tutelarum  et  primo  gradu  deficiente  sequens  succedit
et,  quod  in  onere  optinebat,  non  erat  in  lucro  permissum.

8  Ad  Icgitimam  successionem  nihilo  minus  vocatur  etiam
parens,  qui  contracta  iiducia  iilium  vel  iiliam,  nepotem  vel
ncptem  ac  deinceps  emancipat.  quod  ex  nostra  constitutione
omnimodo  inducitur,  ut  emancipationes  liberorum  semper
videantur  contracta   fiducia   fieri,   cum   apud   antiquos    non

§7.  For  the  last  lines  of  this  section  cf.  Bk.  i.  17  and  notes  supr.
According  to  Gaius  iii.  28  some  lawyers  of  his  own  day  thought  that  suc-
cessio  ordinum  among  agnates  was  introduced  by  the  Edict :  but  from
the  text  it  seems  clear  that  they  were  wrong.

§  8.  Under  the  old  system  of  emancipation  (p.  147  supr.),  if  the  final
manumission  of  the  child  was  made  by  the  fictitious  vendee,  the  latter
technically  became  patron;  hence  it  was  usual  for  him  to  agree  (con-
tracta fiducia)  to  hold  the  iura  patronatus  in  trust  for  the  father.  By
Cod.  8.  49.  6  Justinian  enacted  that  every  emancipation  under  his  new
form  should  have  the  same  effects,  in  respect  of  guardianship  and  succes-
sion (subject  to  other  intermediate  changes,  see  on  Tit.  i.  1 5  supr.)  as  if
it  had  been  effected  by  the  father  himself  under  the  old  method.


Tit.  3.]    DE  SENATUS  CONSULTO   TERTULLIANO,        369

aliter  hoc  optinebat,  nisi  specialiter  contracta  iiducia  parens
manumisisset.

III.

DE  SENATUS  CONSULTO  TERTULLIANO.

Lex  duodecim  tabularum  ita  stricto  iure  utebatur  et  prae-
ponebat  masculorum  progeniem  et  eos,  qui  per  feminini  sexus
necessitudinem  sibi  iunguntur,  adeo  expellebat,  ut  ne  quidem
inter  matrem  et   filium    Aliamve   ultro  citroque   hereditatis
capiendae    ius    daret,   nisi   quod    praetores    et    proximitate
cognatorum    eas   personas   ad   successionem    bonorum  pos-
sessione    unde    cognati   accommodata  vocabant      Sed   hae  1
iuris  angustiae  postea  emendatae  sunt,    et  primus  quidem
divus  Claudius  matri  ad  solacium  liberorum  amissorum  le-
gitimam  eorum  detulit  hereditatem.     Postea  autem  senatus  2
consulto  Tertulliano,  quod  divi  Hadriani  temporibus  factum
est,  plenissime  de  tristi  successione  matri,  non  etiam  aviae
deferenda  cautum  est :  ut  mater  ingenua  trium  liberorum  ius
habens,  libertina  quattuor  ad  bona  filiorum   filiarumve  ad-
mittatur  intestatorum  mortuorum,  licet  in  potestate  parentis
est,  ut  scilicet,  cum  alieno  iuri  subiecta  est,  iussu  eius  adeat
cuius  iuri   subiecta  est.      Praeferuntur   autem    matri    liberi  3
defuncti,  qui  sui  sunt  quive  suorum  loco,  sive  primi  gradus


Tit.  m.  The  only  claim  which  a  woman  had  to  succeed  to  her  chil-
dren on  intestacy  by  the  Twelve  Tables  was  that,  if  she  were  in  manu
mariti,  she  became  their  agnate  in  the  nearest  possible  degree,  and  so
came  in  in  default  of  sui,  Gaius  iii.  24.

§  2.  The  SC.  Tertullianum  seems  not  to  have  been  passed  under
Hadrian,  as  is  stated  in  the  text,  but  in  A.D.  158  under  A.  Pius,  who
succeeded  Hadrian  a.D.  138,  and  was  himself  succeeded  by  M.  Aurelius
AJ>.  161  (Zonaras  12.  i),  so  that  it  is  curious  that  it  is  not  mentioned
by  Gaius,  who  (ii.  195)  speaks  of  A.  Pius  as  deceased.  An  extension,
clearly,  of  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  which  conferred  rights  on  women  with
a  certain  number  of  children  (p.  269  supr..  Tit.  7.  2  inf.),  it  gave  to  in-
genuae  who  had  borne  three,  and  libertinae  who  had  borne  four  children
(§  4  inf.),  a  statutory  title  to  succeed  their  own  issue  who  died  intestate
in  preference  to  the  agnates ;  by  whom  they  were  themselves  excluded
appears  from  the  next  section.

§  3.  The  mother  was  excluded  from  the  first  by  the  children  of  a
deceased  son,  if  they  ranked  as  liberi  ;  if  they  were  merely  cognati  (Tit

B  b


370  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  III.

sive  ulterioris.  sed  et  filiae  suae  mortuae  filius  vel  filia
opponitur  ex  constitutionibus  matri  defunctae,  id  est  aviae
suae,  pater  quoque  utriusque,  non  etiam  avus  vel  proavus
matri  anteponitur,  scilicet  cum  inter  eos  solos  de  hereditate
agitur.  frater  autem  consanguineus  tam  iilii  quam  filiae
excludebat  matrem :  soror  autem  consanguinea  pariter  cum
matre  admittebatur :  sed  si  fuerat  frater  et  soror  consanguinei
et  mater  liberis  honorata,  frater  quidem  matrem  excludebat,
commynis  autem  erat  hereditas  ex  acquis  partibus  fratri  et

4  sorori.  Sed  nos  constitutione,  quam  in  codice  nostro  nomine
decorate  posuimus,  matri  subveniendum  esse  existimavimus,
respicientes  ad  naturam  et  puerperium  et  periculum  et  saepe
mortem  ex  hoc  casu  matribus  illatam.  ideoque  impium  esse
credidimus  casum  fortuitum  in  eius  admitti  detrimentum:
si  enim  ingenua  ter  vel  libertina  quater  non  peperit,  immerito
defraudabatur  successione  suorum  liberorum  :  quid  enim  pec-
cavit,  si  non  plures,  sed  paucos  pepererit?  et  dedimus  ius
legitimum  plenum  matribus  sive  ingenuis  sive  libertinis,  etsi
non  ter  enixae  fuerint  vel  quater,  sed  eum  tantum  vel  eam,
qui  quaeve  morte  intercepti  sunt,  ut  et  sic  vocentur  in  libe-

6  rorum  suorum  legitimam  successionem.  Sed  cum  antea
constitutiones  iura  legitima  perscrutantes  partim  matrem
adiuvabant,  partim  eam   praegravabant  et   non  in   solidum

I.  13  supr.)  they  and  the  mother  c^me  in  together  by  bonorum  possessio
under  a  rescript  of  A.  Pius,  Dig.  38.  17.  2.  9.  After  the  enactment  of  the
SC.  Orfitianum  it  was  ruled  by  imperial  constitutions,  as  is  remarked  in
the  text,  that  she  must  give  way  also  to  the  children  of  a  deceased
daughter,  Cod.  6.  57.  i.  4 ;  6.  55.  11.  She  was  also  postponed  to  the
deceased  child's  natural  father,  whether  he  were  entitled  as  parens  manu-
missor  or  as  bonorum  possessor  cum  re,  Ulpian,  Reg.  26.  8.

The  following  changes  were  made  in  the  mother's  rights  in  the  inter-
mediate period  before  Justinian's  own  settlement  of  the  law.  Constantine
enacted  that  a  mother  with  ius  liberorum  should  not  only  divide  the
succession  with  the  soror  consanguinea  of  the  deceased,  but  should  also
lose  a  third  of  it  in  favour  of  his  or  her  agnatic  uncle  (patruus)  and  his
issue  to  the  second  degree,  irrespective  of  capitis  deminutio.  He  further
conferred  on  mothers  without  the  ius  liberorum  a  right  of  succession  to
a  third  of  a  deceased  child's  property,  the  residue  going  to  the  nearest
agnate  or  agnates;  this  third  was  doubled  by  Theodosius  and  Valen-
tinian,  who  also  gave  a  third  to  the  deceased's  emancipated  brothers,
whom  previously  the  mother  had  altogether  excluded.

§§  4, 6.  Justinian  abolished  the  ius  liberorumi  along  with  the  deduc-


Tit.  4]        DE  SENATUS  CONSULTO  ORFITIANO,  371

earn  vocabant,  sed  in  quibusdam  casibus  tertiam  partem  ei
abstrahentes  certis  legitimis  dabant  personis,  in  aliis  autem
contrarium  faciebant:  nobis  visum  est  recta  et  simplici  via
matrem  omnibus  legitimis  personis  anteponi  et  sine  ulla
deminutione  filiorum  suorum  successionem  accipere,  excepta
fratris  et  sororis  persona,  sive  consanguinei  sint  sive  sola
cc^ationis  iura  habentes,  ut  quemadmodum  eam  toto  alio
ordini  legitimo  praeposuimus,  ita  omnes  fratres  et  sorores,
sive  legitimi  sint  sive  non,  ad  capiendas  hereditates  simul
vocemus,  ita  tamen  ut,  si  quidem  solae  sorores  cognatae  vel
adgnatae  et  mater  defuncti  vel  defunctae  supersint,  dimidiam
quidem  mater,  alteram  vero  dimidiam  partem  omnes  sorores
habeant,  si  vero  matre  superstite  et  fratre  vel  fratribus  solis
vel  etiam  cum  sororibus  sive  legitima  sive  sola  cognationis
iura  habentibus  intestatus  quis  vel  intestata  moriatur,  in  capita
distribuatur  eius  hereditas.  Sed  quemadmodum  nos  matribus  6
prospeximus,  ita  eas  oportet  suae  suboli  consulere :  scituris
eis,  quod,  si  tutores  liberis  non  petierint  vel  in  locum  remoti
vel  excusati  intra  annum  petere  neglexerint,  ab  eorum  im-
puberum  morientium  successione  merito  repellentur.  Licet  7
autem  vulgo  quaesitus  sit  filius  filiave,  potest  ad  bona  eius
mater  ex  TertuUiano  senatus  consulto  admitti.

IV.

DE  SENATUS  CONSULTO  ORFITIANO.

Per  contrarium  autem  ut  liberi  ad  bona  matrum  intes-
tatarum  admittantur,  senatus  consulto  Orfitiano  effectum  est,
quod  latum  est  Orfito  et  Rufo  consulibus,  divi  Marci  tem-

tions  made  in  favour  of  certain  other  relations  which  are  noticed  on  §  3,
and  preferred  the  mother  to  all  other  legitimi,  except  that  brothers  and
sisters  shared  the  inheritance  with  her ;  if  there  were  brothers  only,  or
brothers  and  sisters,  it  was  divided  in  capita  between  them  and  the
mother ;  if  sisters  only,  they  together  and  the  mother  took  in  moieties.
By  Nov.  22.  4;r  Justinian  enacted  that  even  where  there  were  sisters  only
the  division  should  be  in  capita.

§  6.  This  rule  originated  in  an  epistola  of  Septimius  Severus,  extant  ia
Dig.  26.  6.  2. 2.

Tit.  IV.  Under  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  the  children  of  a  woman
who  died  intestate  had  no  claim  to  succeed  her  whatever;  they  were

B  b  2


373  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

poribus.  et  data  est  tam  filio  quam  filiae  legitima  hereditas,
etiamsi  alieno   iuri  subiecti   sunt:   et  praeferuntur  et  con-

1  sanguincis  et  adgnatis  defunctae  matris.  Sed  cum  ex  hoc
senatus  consulto  nepotes  ad  aviae  successionem  l^itimo  iure
non  vocabantur,  postea  hoc  constttutionibus  principalibus
emendatum  est,  ut  ad  similitudinem  filiorum  filiarumque  et

2  nepotes  et  neptes  vocentur.  Sciendum  autem  est  huiusmodi
saccessiones,  quae  a  Tertulliano  et  Orfitiano  deferuntur,  capitis
deminutione  non  peremi  propter  illam  r^ulam,  qua  novae
hereditates  legitimae  capitis  deminutione  non  pereunt,  sed
illae  solae   quae  ex  l^e   duodecim  tabularum   deferuntur.

3  Novissime  sciendum  est  etiam  illos  Itberos,  qui  vulgo
quaesiti  sunt,  ad  matris  hereditatem  ex  hoc  senatus  consulto
admitti.

4  Si  ex  pluribus  legitimis  heredibus  quidam  omiserint  he-

neither  sui  nor  her  agnates  (unless  indeed  she  was  in  manu  mariti,  in
which  case,  unless  a  widow,  she  could  leave  no  property  to  inherit).  The
praetor  admitted  them  to  bonorum  possessio  in  the  third  (practically
second)  rank  only,  postponing  them  to  their  mother's  agnates,  Gaius  iii.
30;  the  SC.  Orfitianum,  a.d.  178  ('Antonini  et  Commodi  oratione'
Ulpian,  Reg.  26.  7,  cf.  Capitolinus  Marc  11),  gave  them  a  statutory  title  in
preference  to  all  agnates  (Ulpian,  loc  cit.),  and  the  woman's  patronus,  if
she  were  liberta,  Dig.  38.  17.  1.9.

§  1.  The  enactments  referred  to  are  those  already  cited  and  summarised
on  Tit.  I.  15  supr.

§  2.  Justinian  is  here  speaking  of  capitis  deminutio  minima  only ;  the
child's  right  to  succeed  was  based  on  natural  cognation,  and  in  Bk.  i.  16.
6  supr.  he  says  *  quod  autem  dictum  est  manere  cognationis  ius  et  post
capitis  deminutionem,  hoc  ita  est,  si  minima  capitis  deminutio  inter-
veniat,'  and  in  the  Digest.  (38.  17.  i.  8)  Ulpian,  speaking  of  succession
under  this  SC,  says  '  sive  quis  ante  delatam  capite  minuitur,  ad  legiti-
mam  hereditatem  admittetur,  nisi  magna  capitis  deminutio  interveniat,
quae  vel  civitatem  adimit,  ut  puta,  si  deportetur.'  The  '  ilia  regula'  is
rather  too  widely  stated,  as  there  were  some  cases  in  which  bonorum
possessio  unde  liberi  was  lost  by  capitis  deminutio,  Dig.  38.  6.  9.

§  3.  Cf.  Tit.  3.  7  supr.  and  Cod.  6.  57.  5  (Justinian)  *  sancimus  .  .  .  ut
neque  ex  testamento,  neque  ab  intestato,  neque  ex  liberalitate  inter  vivos
habita,  iustis  liberis  existentibus,  aliquid  ab  illustribus  matribus  ad
spurios  perveniat.  Sin  autem  concubina  liberae  condicionis  constituta
filium  vel  filiam,  ex  licita  consuetudine  ab  homine  libero  habita,  pro-
creaverit,  eos  etiam  cum  legitimis  liberis  ad  matema  venire  bona  .  .  .
nulla  dubitatio  est.'

§  4.  The  law  of  accrual  among  joint  heirs  ab  intestato  differed  accord-


Tit.  5.]  DE  SUCCESS/ONE  COGNATORUM,  373

reditatem  vel  morte  vel  alia  causa  impediti  fuerint  quominus
adeant:  reliquis  qui  adierint  adcrescit  illorum  portio  et,
licet  ante  decesserint  qui  adierint,  ad  heredes  tamen  eorum
pertinet

V.

DE  SUCCESSION  E  COGNATORUM.

PosF  suos  heredes  eosque,  quos  inter  suos  heredes  praetor
et  constitutiones  vocant,  et  post  l^itimos  (quo  numero  sunt
adgnati  et  hi,  quos  in  locum  adgnatorum  tarn  supra  dicta
senatus  consulta  quam  nostra  erexit  constitutio)  proximos
cognatos  praetor  vocat.  Qua  parte  naturalis  cognatio  spec-  1
tatur.  nam  adgnati  capite  deminuti  quique  ex  his  progeniti
sunt  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum  inter  legitimos  non  ha-
bentur,  sed  a  praetore  tertio  ordine  vocantur,  exceptis  solis
tantummodo  fratre  et  sorore  emancipatis,  non  etiam  liberis
eorum,  quos  lex  Anastasiana  cum  fratribus  integri  iuris  con-
stitutis  vocat  quidem  ad  legitimam  fratris  hereditatem  sive
sororis,  non  aequis  tamen  partibus,  sed  cum  aliqua  deminutione,
quam  facile  est  ex  ipsius  constitutionis  verbis  colligere^  alits

ing  to  the  mode  of  division.  If  this  was  per  capita,  all  the  joint  heirs
who  took  benefited  equally  by  the  refusal  or  inability  of  those  who  did
not ;  if  it  was  per  stirpes,  the  accrual  enured  primarily  to  the  benefit
only  of  those  who  belonged  to  the  same  stirps  with  them  that  had  failed,
^ig-  y?'  4-  12.  pr^  others  gained  only  if  there  was  no  one  left  of  that
stirps  to  take.

Tit.  V.  Failing  sui  and  agnates  (p.  364  supr.),  the  Twelve  Tables  had
given  the  inheritance  to  the  gentiles  of  the  deceased ;  '  si  adgnatus  nee
escit,  gentilis  familiam  nancitor.'  In  iii.  17  Gaius  alludes  to  a  definition
of  gentiles  in  an  earlier  part  of  his  work,  which,  however,  has  been  lost,
and  the  best  account  we  have  of  them  is  that  of  Cicero,  Top.  6,  cited  by
Mr.  Poste  in  his  note  on  the  passage  of  Gaius  referred  to.  Who  they
were  precisely  is  of  no  practical  importance,  for  Gaius  observes  that
even  in  his  day  the  whole  of  the  law  relating  to  the  subject  was  obsolete,
*  totum  gentilicium  ius  in  desuetudinem  abiisse.'  There  was  in  fact  no
longer  any  civil  law  successor  to  an  intestate  in  de&ult  of  sui  and
agnates ;  the  gap  was  filled  by  the  praetor,  who  through  the  system  of
bonorum  possessio  substituted  for  the  gentiles  a  third  order  of  claimants,
ranking  after  liberi  and  legitimi,  viz.  the  deceased's  cognates  or  next  of
kin,  in  their  several  degrees  of  proximity.  Between  two  or  more  cog-
nates related  in  the  same  degree  the  division  was  always  in  capita.

§  1.  For  the  lex  Anastasiana  see  (3),  note  on  Tit.  2.  4  supr.    By  capitis


374  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

vero  adgnatis  inferioris  gradus,  licet  capitis  deminutionem
passi    non    sunt,    tamen    eos    anteponit    et    procul    dubio

2  cognatis.  Hos  etiam,  qui  per  feminini  sexus  personas  ex
transverse   cognatione  iunguntur,  tertio  gradu  proximitatis

3  nomine  praetor  ad  successionem  vocat.  Liberi  quoque,
qui  in  adoptiva  familia  sunt,  ad  naturalium  parentum  here-

4  ditatem  hoc  eodem  gradu  vocantur.  Vulgo  quaesitos  nullum
habere  adgnatum  manifestum  est,  cum  adgnatio  a  patre,
cognatio  sit  a  matre,  hi  autem  nullum  patrem  habere  in-
telleguntur.  eadem  ratione  nee  inter  se  quidem  possunt
videri  consanguinei  esse,  quia  consanguinitatis  ius  species
est  adgnationis :  tantum  igitur  cognati  sunt  sibi,  sicut  et
matris  cognatis.  itaque  omnibus  istis  ea  parte  competit
bonorum  possessio,  qua  proximitatis  nomine  cognati  vocantur.

5  Hoc  loco  et  illud  necessario  admonendi  sumus  adgnationis
quidem  iure  admitti  aliquem  ad  hereditatem  et  si  decimo
gradu  sit,  sive  de  lege  duodecim  tabularum  quaeramus,  sive
de  edicto  quo  praetor  legitimis  heredibus  daturum  se  bonorum
possessionem  pollicetur.  'proximitatis  vero  nomine  his  solis
praetor  promittit  bonorum  possessionem,  qui  usque  ad  sextum
gradum  cognationis  sunt,  et  ex  septimo  a  sobrino  sobrinaque
nato  nataeve.

•      VI.

DE  GRADIBUS  COGNATIONIS.

Hoc  loco  necessarium  est  exponere,  quemadmodum  gradus
cognationis  numerentur.  qua  in  re  inprimis  admonendi  sumus
cognationem  aliam  supra  numerari,  aliam  infra,  aliam  ex
transverso,  quae  etiam  a  latere  dicitur.  superior  cognatio  est
parentium,  inferior  liberorum,  ex  transverso  fratrum  sororumve

deminutio  in  this  section  is  of  course  meant  only  capitis  deminutio
minima.

§  2.  The  praetor  had  also  admitted  persons  related  directa  linea
through  females  among  cognati ;  but  by  the  SC*  TertuUianum  and
Orfitianum  and  their  developments  these  had  been  raised  to  the  rank
of  legitimi,  whence  'ex  transverso '  in  the  text.

§  3.  This  refers  of  course  only  to  adrogatio  and  adoptio  plena ;  if  it
were  minus  plena  the  adoptatus  succeeded  to  his  natural  father  in  the
first  order  (liberi) ;  see  on  Tit.  i.  14  supr.


Tit.  6.]  DE  GRADIBUS  COGNATIONIS.  375

eorumque,  qui  ex  bis  progenerantur,  et  convenienter  patrui
amitae  avunculi  materterae.  et  superior  quidem  et  inferior
cognatio  a  primo  gradu  incipit :  at  ea,  quae  ex  transverso
numeratur,  a  secundo.  Primo  gradu  est  supra  pater  mater,  1
infra  iilius  filia.  Secundo  supra  avus  avia,  infra  nepos  neptis,  2
ex  transverso  frater  soror.  Tertio  supra  proavus  proavia,  3
infra  pronepos  proneptis,  ex  transverso  fratris  sororisque
filius  filia  et  convenienter  patruus  amita  avunculus  matertera.
patruus  est  patris  frater,  qui  Graece  itirfms  vocatur :  avunculus
est  matris  frater,  qui  apud  Graecos  proprie  firJTfxos  appellatur  :
et  promiscue  Belos  dicitur.  amita  est  patris  soror,  matertera
vero  matris  soror :  utraque  OcCa  vel  apud  quosdam  rriOls  ap-
pellatur. Quarto  gradu  supra  abavus  abavia,  infra  abnepos  4
abneptis,  ex  transverso  fratris  sororisque  nepos  neptis  et  con-
venienter patruus  magnus  amita  magna  (id  est  avi  frater  et
soror),  item  avunculus  magnus  matertera  magna  (id  est  aviae
frater  et  soror),  consobrinus  consobrina  (id  est  qui  quacve  ex
fratribus  aut  sororibus  progenerantur).  sed  quidam  recte
consobrinos  eos  proprie  putant  dici,  qui  ex  duabus  sororibus
progenerantur,  quasi  consororinos :  eos  vero,  qui  ex  duobus
fratribus  progenerantur,  proprie  fratres  patrueles  vocari  (si
autem  ex  duobus  fratribus  filiae  nascantur,  sorores  patrueles
appellantur) :  at  eos,  qui  ex  fratre  et  sorore  propagantur,
amitinos  proprie  dici  (amitae  tuae  filii  consobrinum  te  ap-
pellant, tu  illos  amitinos).  Quinto  supra  atavus  atavia,  infra  5
adnepos  adneptis,  ex  transverso  fratris  sororisque  pronepos
proneptis  et  convenienter  propatruus  proamita  (id  est  proavi
frater  et  soror),  proavunculus  promatertera  (id  est  proaviae
frater  et  soror),  item  fratris  patruelis  sororis  patruelis,  con-
sobrini  et  consobrinae,  amitini  amitinae  iilius  filia,  proprior
sobrinus  sobrina  (hi  sunt  patrui  magni  amitae  magnae  avunculi
magni  materterae  magnae  filius  filia).  Sexto  gradu  sunt  supra  6
tritavus  tritavia,  infra  trinepos  trineptis,  ex  transverso  fratris
sororisque  abnepos  abneptis  et  convenienter  abpatruus  abamita
(id  est  abavi  frater  et  soror)*  abavunculus  abmatertera  (id  est
abaviae  frater  et  soror),  item  sobrini  sobrinaeque  (id  est  qui
quaeve  ex  fratribus  vel  sororibus  patruelibus  vel  consobrinis
vel  amitinis  progenerantur).  Hactenus  ostendisse  sufficiet,  7
quemadmodum  gradus  cognationis  numerentur.    namque  ex


376  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

his  palam  est  mtellegere,  quemadmodum  ulterius  quoque
gradus  numerare  debemus :  quippe  semper  generata  quaeque
persona  gradum  adiciat,  ut  longe  facilius  sit  respondere,  quoto
quisque  gradu  sit,  quam  propria  cognationis  appellatione  quem-

8  quam  denotare.     Adgnationis  quoque  gradus  eodem  modo

9  numerantur.  Sed  cum  magis  Veritas  oculata  fide  quam  per
aures  animis  hominum  infigitur,  ideo  necessarium  duximus
post  narrationem  graduum  etiam  eos  praesenti  libro  inscribi,
quatenus  possint  et  auribus  et  inspectione  adulescentes  per-
fectissimam  graduum  doctrinam  adipisci.  {Locus  in  codice
manuscripto  vacuus  qui  genecUogico  stemmati  fuerat  desti-
natus,)

10      Iliud  certum  est  ad  serviles  cognationes  illam  partem  cdicti,
qua  proximitatis  nomine  bonorum  possessio  promittitur^  non
pertinere:    nam  nee  ulla  antiqua  lege  talis  cognatio  com-
putabatur.    sed  nostra  constitutione,  quam  pro  iure  patronatus
fecimus  (quod  ius  usque  ad  nostra  tempora  satis  obscurum
atque    nube    plenum    et   undique  confusum   fuerat)  et  hoc
humanitate  suggerente  concessimus,  ut  si  quis  in  servili  con-
sortio  constitutus  liberum  vel  liberos  habuerit  sive  ex  libera
s!ve  servilis  condicionis  muHere,  vel  contra  serva  mulier  ex
libero  vel  servo  habuerit  liberos  cuiuscumque  sexus,  et  ad
libertatem  his  pervenientibus  et  hi,  qui  ex  servili  ventre  nati
sunt,  libertatem  meruerunt,  vel  dum  mulieres  liberae  erant,
ipsi   in  servitutem   eos  habuerunt  et   postea  ad   libertatem
pervenerunt,  ut  hi   omnes  ad  successionem  vel  patris   vel
matris  veniant,  patronatus  iure  in  hac  parte  sopito :  hos  enim
liberos  non  solum  in  suorum  parentium  successionem,  sed
etiam  alterum  in  alterius  mutuam  successionem  vocavimus,
ex   ilia  lege  specialiter  eos  vocantes,  sive  soli  inveniantur
qui  in  servitute  nati  et  postea  manumissi  sunt,  sive  una  cum
aliis,  qui  post  libertatem  parentium   concepti  sunt  sive  ex
eadem  matre  vel  eodem  patre  sive  ex  aliis  nuptiis,  ad  simi-
litudinem  eorum  qui  ex  iustis  nuptiis  procreati  sunt.

Tit.  VI.  9.  For  a  genealogical  table  exhibiting  the  degrees  of  cogna-
tion see  Hunter's  Roman  Law,  ist  ed.,  p.  651.

§  10.  Cf.  Dig.  38.  8.  I.  2  'nee  enim  facile  ulla  servilis  videtur  esse
cognatio ; '  so  too,  in  Dig.  38. 10.  10.  5.  it  is  said  that,  though  loosely  one
may  speak  of  slaves  as  being  kin  to  one  another, '  ad  leges  serviles  cogna-


Tit,  7.]  DE  SUCCESS/ONE  LIBERTORUM.  377

Repetitis  itaque  omnibus  quae  iam  tradidimus  apparet  non  1 1
semper  eos,  qui  parem  gradum  c(^[nationis  optinent,  pariter
vocari  eoque  amplius  nee  eum  quidem,  qui  proximior  sit
cognatus,  semper  potiorem  esse,  cum  enim  prima  causa  sit
suorum  heredum  quosque  inter  suos  heredes  iam  enumera-
vimus,  apparet  pronepotem  vel  adnepotem  defuncti  potiorem
esse  quam  fratrem  aut  patrem  matremque  defuncti,  cum
alioquin  pater  quidem  et  mater,  ut  supra  quoque  tradidimus,
primum  gradum  cognationis  optineant,  frater  vero  secundum,
pronepos  autem  tertio  gradu  sit  cognatus  et  abnepos  quarto :
nee  interest,  in  potestate  morientis  fuerit  an  non  fuerit,  quod
vel  emancipatus  vel  ex  emancipato  aut  ex  feminino  sexu
propagatus  est.  Amotis  quoque  suis  heredibus  quosque  inter  12
suos  heredes  vocari  diximus,  adgnatus,  qui  integrum  ius
adgnationis  habet,  etiamsi  longissimo  gradu  sit,  plerumque
potior  habetur  quam  proximior  cognatus :  nam  patrui  nepos
vel  pronepos  avunculo  vel  materterae  praefertur.  totiens  igitur
dicimus  aut  potiorem  haberi  eum  qui  proximiorem  gradum
cognationis  optinet,  aut  pariter  vocari  eos  qui  cognati  sint,
quotiens  neque  suorum  heredum  iure  quique  inter  suos
heredes  sunt  neque  adgnationis  iure  aliquis  praeferri  debeat
secundum  ea  quae  tradidimus,  exceptis  fratre  et  sorore  eman-
cipatis,  qui  ad  successionem  fratrum  vel  sororum  vocantur,
qui  et  si  capita  deminuti  sunt,  tamen  praeferuntur  ceteris
ulterioris  gradus  adgnatis.

VIL

DE  SUCCESSIONE  LIBERTORUM.

Nunc  de  libertorum  bonis  videamus.  olim  itaque  licebat
liberto  patronum  suum  impune  testamento  praeterire:  nam
ita  demum  lex  duodecim  tabularum  ad  hereditatem  liberti
vocabat  patronum,  si  intestatus  mortuus  esset  libertus  nullo

tiones  non  pertinent'  On  the  other  hand,  Ulpian  says  (Dig.  5a  17.  32)
*  quod  attinet  ad  ius  civile,  servi  pro  nullis  habentur  :  non  tamen  et  iure
naturali;  quia,  quod  ad  ius  naturale  attinet,  omnes  homines  aequales
sunt.'  This  no  doubt  is  due  to  his  distinction  between  the  ius  gentium
and  the  ius  naturale ;  see  on  Bk.  i.  I.  4,  ib.  2.  pr.  supr.  Justinian's  own
enactments  referred  to  in  this  section  are  in  Cod.  6.  57.  6 ;  6.  4.  4.


378  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

suo  herede  relicto.  itaque  intestato  quoque  mortuo  liberto,  si
is  suutn  heredem  reliquisset,  nihil  in  bonis  eius  patrono  ius
erat.  et  si  quidem  ex  naturalibus  liberis  aliquem  suum
heredem  reliquisset,  nulla  videbatur  querella :  si  vero  adoptivus
fiiius  esset,  aperte  iniquum  erat  nihil  iurls  patrono  superesse.

1  Qua  de  causa  postea  praetoris  edicto  haec  iuris  iniquitas
emendata  est.  sive  enim  faciebat  testamentum  libertus,  iube-
batur  ita  testari,  ut  patrono  partem  dimidiam  bonorum  suorum
relinqucret :  et  si  aut  nihil  aut  minus  partis  dimidiae  reliquerat,
dabatur  patrono  contra  tabulas  testament!  partis  dimidiae  bo-
norum possessio.  si  vero  intestatus  moriebatur  suo  herede
relicto  filio  adoptivo,  dabatur  aeque  patrono  contra  hunc
suum  heredem  partis  dimidiae  bonorum  possessio.  prodesse
autem  liberto  solebant  ad  excludendum  patronumnaturales
liberi,  non  solum  quos  in  potestate  mortis  tempore  habebat,
sed  etiam  emancipati  et  in  adoptionem  dati,  si  modo  ex  aliqua
parte  heredes  script!  erant  aut  praeteriti  contra  tabulas  bo-
norum possessionem  ex   edicto   petierant:    nam  exheredati

2  nuUo  modo  repellebant  patronum.  Postea  lege  Papia  adaucta
sunt  iura  patronorum,  qui  locupletiores  libertos  habebant.
cautum  est  enim,  ut  ex  bonis  eius,  qui  sestertiorum  centum
millium  patrimonium  reliquerit  et  pauciores  quam  tres  liberos
habebat,  sive  is  testamento  facto  sive  intestato  mortuus  erat,
virilis  pars  patrono  debebatur.  itaque  cum  unum  filium
filiamve  heredem  reliquerit  libertus,  perinde  pars  dimidia
patrono  debebatur,  ac  si  is  sine  ullo  filio  filiave  decessisset :
cum  duos  duasve  heredes  reliquerat,  tertia  pars  debebatur

3  patrono :  si  tres  reliquerat,  repellebatur  patronus.  Sed  nostra
constitutio,  quam  pro  omnium  notione  Graeca  lingua  com-
pendioso  tractatu  habito  composuimus,  ita  huiusmodi  causas
definivit,  ut  si  quidem  libertus  vel  liberta  minores  centenariis
sint,  id  est  minus  centum  aureis  habeant  substantiam  (sic  enim
legis  Papiae  summam  interpretati  sumus,  ut  pro  mille  ses-
tertiis  unus  aureus  computetur),  nullum  locum  habeat  patronus


Tit.  VH.  2.  For  the  effect  of  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea  on  the  rights
of  patronae  and  fiiiae  patroni  see  Mr.  Poste's  note  on  Gaius  iii.  54.  Pr.-2
of  this  Title  correspond  with  Gaius  iii.  39-42.

§  8.  The  constitution  referred  to^  which  is  in  Cod.  6.  4.  4,  abolished


Tit.  7.]  DE  SUCCESS/ONE  LIBERTORUM,  379

in  eorum  successionem,  si  tamen  testamentutn  fecerint.  sin
autem  intestati  decetserint  nullo  liberonim  relicto,  tunc  pa-
tronatus  ius,  quod  erat  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum,  integrum
reservavit  cum  vero  maiores  centenariis  sint,  si  heredes  vel
bonorum  possessores  liberos  habeant  sive  unum  sive  plures
cuiuscumque  sexus  vel  gradus,  ad  eos  successionem  parentum
deduximus,  omnibus  patronis  una  cum  sua  progenie  semotis.
sin  autem  sine  liberis  decesserint,  si  quidem  intestati,  ad
omnem  hereditatem  patronos  patronasque  vocavimus :  si  vero
testamentum  quidem  fecerint,  patronos  autem  vel  patronas
praeterierint»  cum  nullos  liberos  haberent  vel  habentes  eos
exheredaverint,  vel  mater  sive  avus  maternus  eos  praeterierit,
ita  ut  non  possint  argui  inofficiosa  eorum  testamenta :  tunc  ex
nostra  constitutione  per  bonorum  possessionem  contra  tabulas
non  dimidiam,  ut  ante,  sed  tertiam  partem  bonorum  liberti
consequantur,  vel  quod  deest  eis  ex  constitutione  nostra
repleatur,  si  quando  minus  tertia  parte  bonorum  suorum
libertus  vel  liberta  eis  reliquerint,  ita  sine  onere,  ut  nee
liberis  liberti  libertaeve  ex  ea  parte  legata  vel  fideicommissa
praestentur,  sed  ad  coheredes  hoc  onus  redundaret:  multis
aliis  casibus  a  nobis  in  praefata  constitutione  congregatis,
quos  necessarios  esse  ad  huiusmodi  iuris  dispositionem  per-
speximus:  ut  tam  patroni  patronaeque  quam  liberi  eorum
nee  non  qui  ex  transverso  latere  veniunt  usque  ad  quintum
gradum  ad  successionem  libertorum  vocentur,  sicut  ex  ea
constitutione  intellegendum  est:  ut  si  eiusdem  patroni  vel
patronae  vel  duorum  duarum  pluriumve  sint  liberi,  qui
proximior  est,  ad  liberti  seu  libertae  vocetur  successionem
et  in  capita,  non  in  stirpes  dividatur  successio,  eodem  modo
et  in  his  qui  ex  transverso  latere  veniunt  servando.  paene
enim  consonantia  iura  ingenuitatis  et  libertinitatis  in  succes-


all  previous  distinctions  of  sex  between  libertus  and  liberta,  patron  and
patroness  or  their  children,  and  regulated  the  succession  to  freedmen
and  freedwomen  |ls  follows :

(i)  As  regards  the  power  of  testation,  a  libertus  or  liberta  who  possessed
less  than  100  aurei  might  freely  dispose  of  it  by  will,  without  any  obligation
to  give  the  patron  or  patroness  anything  either  as  heir  or  legatee.  If  the
property  amounted  to  100  aurei  or  upwards  they  might  make  what  will
they  pleased  only  if  they  instituted  their  issue ;  if  there  was  no  issue,  or


38o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  III.

4  sionibus  fecimus.  Sed  haecde  his  libertinis  hodie  dicenda
suixt,  qui  in  civitatem  Romanam  perve^erunt,  cum  nee  sunt
alii  liberti  simul  et  dediticiis  et  Latinis  sublatis,  cum  Latinorum
legitimae  successiones  nullae  penitus  erant,  qui  licet  ut  liberi
vitam  suam  peragebant,  attamen  ipso  ultimo  spiritu  simul
animam  atque  libertatem  amittebant,  et  quasi  servorum  ita
bona  eorum  iure  quodammodo  peculii  ex  lege  lunia  manu-
missores  detinebant.  postea  vero  senatus  consulto  Largiano
cautum  fuerat,  ut  liberi  manumissoris  non  nominatim  ex-
heredati  facti  extraneis  heredibus  eorum  in  bonis  Latinorum
praeponerentur.  quibus  supervenit  etiam  divi  Traiani  edictum,
quod  eundem  hominem,  si  invito  vel  ignorante  patrono  ad
civitatem  venire  ex  beneficio  principis  festinavit,  faciebat
vivum  quidem  civem  Romanum,  Latinum  autem  morientem.
sed  nostra  constitutione  propter  huiusmodi  condicionum  vices
et  alias  difficultates  cum  ipsis  Latinis  etiam  legem  luniam  et
senatus  consultum  Largianum  et  edictum  divi  Traiani  in  per-
petuum  deleri  censuimus,  ut  omnes  liberti  civitate  Romana
fruantur,  et  mirabili  modo  quibusdam  adiectionibus  ipsas
vias,  quae  in  Latinitatem  ducebant,  ad  civitatem  Romanam
capiendam  transposuimus.

if  it  were  disinherited,  and  they  did  not  institute  the  patron  or  patroness
in  a  third,  clear  of  legacies  and  fideicommissa,  the  latter  could  demand
possession  of  it  contra  tabulas.

(2)  A  libertus  or  liberta  who  died  intestate  was  succeeded,  in  the  first
instance,  by  his  or  her  natural  descendants  of  either  sex,  irrespective  of
capitis  deminutio,  and  whether  they  were  bom  in  slavery  or  not,  so  long
as  they  were  free  at  the  parents'  decease.  Tit.  6.  10  supr. ;  in  default  of
these,  by  the  patron  or  patroness ;  thirdly,  by  the  latter's  children
according  to  proximity,  without  regard  to  capitis  deminutio;  and  lasdy
by  the  patron  or  patroness*  collaterals  to  the  fifth  degree.

§  4.  A  patron  who  succeeded  to  the  estate  of  his  libertus  civis  took  it
quasi  hereditario  iure,  practically  as  his  nearest  agnate ;  but  he  took  that
of  his  Latinus  lunianus,  whom  the  lex  lunia  Norbana  had  disabled  from
making  a  will,  p.  258  supra,  simply  as  his  master,  Sure  quodammodo
peculii '  Gains  iii.  56 ;  it  was  regarded  as  so  much  potential  property  of  the
manumitter,  devisable  by  him,  along  with  the  rest  of  his  fortune,  to  whom-
soever he  pleased.  The  fact  that  a  civis  libertus  died  free,  and  was
succeeded  on  intestacy  by  a  relation  or  quasi-relation,  while  a  Latinus
died  a  slave,  and  was,  properly  speaking,  not  succeeded  at  all,  accounts
for  the  differences  which  existed  in  Gaius*  time  (iii.  57-62)  between  the
devolutions  of  their  respective  properties.    Thus,  the  right  of  succeeding


Tit.  8.]  DE  ADSIGNATIONE  LIBERTORUM.  381

VIII.
DE  ADSIGNATIONE  LIBERTORUM.

In  summa  quod  ad  bona  libertorum  admonendi  sumus
senatum  censuisse,  ut  quamvis  ad  omnes  patroni  liberos,  qui
eiusdem  gradus  sint,  aequaliter  bona  libertorum  pertineant,
tamen  liceret  parenti  uni  ex  liberis  adsignare  libertum,  ut  post
mortem  eius  solus  is  patronus  habeatur,  cui  adsignatus  est,  et
ceteri  liberi,  qui  ipsi  quoque  ad  eadem  bona  nulla  adsignatione
interveniente  pariter  admitterentur,  nihil  iuris  in  his  bonis
habeant.  sed  ita  demum  pristinum  ius  recipiunt,  si  is  cui
adsignatus  est  decesserit  nullis  liberis  relictis.  Nee  tantum  1
libertum,  sed  etiam  libertam,  et  non  tantum  filio  nepotive,
sed  etiam  filiae  neptive  adsignare  permittitur.  Datur  autem  2
haec  adsignandi  facultas  ei,  qui  duos  pluresve  liberos  in
potestate  habebit,  ut  eis,  quos  in  potestate  habet,  adsignare
et  libertum  libertamve  liceat.     unde  quaerebatur,  si  eum  cui


to  a  libertus  civis  invariably  descended  to  the  patron's  children ;  that  of
taking  the  property  of  a  Latinus  belonged  to  the  patron's  heres  (Gaius
iii.  58) :  a  libertus  civis  was  succeeded  by  joint  patrons  in  equal  shares,
though  'before  his  manumission  they  might  have  owned  him  in  unequal
proportions :  '  bona  vero  Latinorum  pro  ea  parte  pertinent  pro  qua  parte
quisque  eorum  dominus  fuit '  (Gaius  ib.  59).  One  patron  of  a  civis  ex-
cluded another  patron's  son,  and  so  on,  but  the  property  of  a  Latinus
went  to  one  patron  and  another  patron's  heir  in  the  ratio  in  which  it
would  have  belonged  to  the  two  patrons  (ib.  60) ;  between  joint  patrons
of  a  civis  there  was  accrual,  'bona  autem  Latini  pro  parte  decedentis
patroni  caduca  fiunt  et  ad  populum  pertinent'  (ib.  62).  The  SC.  Lar-
gianum,  A.D.  42,  enacted  that  where  the  patron  of  a  Latinus  instituted  an
extraneus  heres,  the  right  of  taking  his  property  upon  his  decease  should
belong  to  the  patron's  children  so  far  as  they  were  not  expressly  dis-
inherited, Gaius  ib.  67-71.  For  the  attainment  of  civitas  by  a  Latinus  ex
beneficio  principis,  to  which  the  edict  of  Trajan  related,  cf.  Gaius  iii.  72,
Ulpian,  Reg.  3.  2,  and  Mr.  Poste's  notes  on  Gaius  i.  28-35.

The  fate  of  the  property  of  a  deceased  dediticius  libertus  had  depended
upon  the  mode  of  his  manumission.  If  it  had  been  such  as  would  have
made  him  a  civis,  were  it  not  for  the  '  vitium '  owing  to  which  he
necessarily  became  dediticius  (p.  119,  supra),  the  property  devolved  as
though  he  actually  were  a  civis  libertus  :  if,  except  for  the  disqualification,
it  would  have  made  him  a  Latinus,  it  devolved  as  though  he  actually
were  a  Latinus,  Gaius  iii.  74-76.

Tit.  vm.    This  right  of  assignment  modified  the  rule,  that  when  a


382  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

adsignaverit  postea  emancipaverit,  num  evanescat  adsignatio  ?
sed  placuit  evanescere,  quod  et  luliano  et  aliis  plerisque  visum
3  est.  Neg  interest,  testamento  quis  adsignet  an  sine  testamento :
sed  etiam  quibuscumque  verbis  hoc  patronis  permittitur  facere
ex  ipso  senatus  consulto,  quod  Claudianis  temporibus  factum
est  Suillo  Rufo  et  Ostorio  Scapula  consulibus.

IX.

DE  BONORUM  POSSESSIONIBUS.

I  us  bonorum  possessionis  introductum  est  a  praetore
emendandi  veteris  iuris  gratia,  nee  solum  in  intestatorum
hereditatibus  vetus  ius  eo  modo  praetor  emendavit,  sicut
supra  dictum  est,  sed  in  eorum  quoque,  qui  testamento  facto
decesserint.  nam  si  alienus  postumus  heres  fuerit  institutus,
quamvis  hereditatem  iure  civili  adire  non  poterat,  cum  in-
stitutio  non  valebat,  honorario  tamen  iure  bonorum  possessor
efficiebatur,  videlicet  cum  a  praetore  adiuvabatur:  sed  et
hie  a  nostra  constitutione  hodie  recte  heres  instituitur,  quasi
1  et  iure  civili  non  incognitus.  Aliquando  tamen  neque
emendandi  neque  impugnandi  veteris  iuris,  sed  magis  con-
iirmandi  gratia  poUicetur  bonorum  possessionem,     nam  illis

patron  died  his  rights  of  succeeding  to  his  liberti  cives  passed  to  all  his
children  who  were  not  capite  minuti  in  equal  proportions,  by  enabling
him  to  give  to  any  one  or  more  of  those  in  his  power  a  preference  over
the  rest  in  relation  to  all  or  any  of  his  freedmen :  '  adsignare  libertum
hoc  est  testificari,  cuius  ex  liberis  libertum  esse  voluit '  Dig.  50.  16.  107.
It  became  a  question  among  the  jurists  whether  such  an  assignment
might  be  made  to  an  emancipated  child,  and  in  Dig.  38.  4.  9  Modestinus
says  the  better  opinion  was  in  the  affirmative,  except  where  he  had  only
one  in  his  power :  but  under  Justinian  the  law  seems  to  have  been  other-
wise :  ifiayKiirartd  yhp  adtriypoTtvfiv  ov  bvvaj6v  Theoph.     So  limited,  the

practice  shows  clearly  that  if  the  patron  or  his  children  succeeded  the
libertus  at  all,  they  did  so  as  his  nearest  agnates :  if  they  or  he  were
capite  minuti,  the  agnatic  tie  was  broken,  and  the  right  of  succession
lost :  hence  the  rule  that  a  freedman  could  not  give  himself  in  adrogation,
Dig.  I.  7.  15.  3.

Tit.  TX.  For  the  institution  of  postumi  alieni  see  on  Bk.  ii.  20.  28
supr.  •

§  1.  For  bonorum  possessio  secundum  tabulas  see  on  Bk.  ii.  17.  6
supr. :  for  the  succession  of  sui,  Tit.  i  supr. :  of  agnates,  Tit.  2.


Tit.  9.]  DE  BONORUM  POSSESSION/BUS.  383

quoque,  qui  recte  facto  testamento  heredes  instituti  sunt,  dat
secundum  tabulas  bonorum  possessionem :  item  ab  intestato
suos  heredes  et  adgnatos  ad  bonorum  possessionem  vocat:
sed  et  remota  quoque  bonorum  possessione  ad  eos  hereditas
pertinet  iure  civili.  Quos  autem  praetor  solus  vocat  ad  2
hereditatem,  heredes  quidem  ipso  iure  non  fiunt  (nam  praetor
heredem  facere  non  potest:  per  legem  enim  tantum  vel
similem  iuris  constitutionem  heredes  fiunt,  veluti  per  senatus
consultum  et  constitutiones  principales) :  sed  cum  eis  praetor
dat  bonorum  possessionem,  loco  heredum  constituuntur  et
vocantur  bonorum  possessores.  adhuc  autem  et  alios  com-
plures  gradus  praetor  fecit  in  bonorum  possessionibus  dandis,
dum  id  agebat,  ne  quis  sine  successore  moriatur:  nam
angustissimis  finibus  constitutum  per  legem  duodecim  tabu-
larum  ius  percipiendarum  hereditatum  praetor  ex  bono  et
aequo  dilatavit.  Sunt  autem  bonorum  possessiones  ex  tes-  3
tamento  quidem  hae.  prima,  quae  praeteritis  liberis  datur
vocaturque  contra  tabulas.  secunda,  quam  omnibus  iure
scriptis  heredibus  praetor  pollicetur  ideoque  vocatur  secundum
tabulas.  et  cum  de  testamentis  prius  locutus  est,  ad  intestatos
transitum  fecit,  et  primo  loco  suis  heredibus  et  his,  qui  ex
edicto  praetoris  suis  connumerantur,  dat  bonorum  posses-
sionem quae  vocatur  unde  liberi :  secundo  legitimis  heredibus :
tertio  decem  personis,  quas  extraneo  manumissori  praeferebat
(sunt  autem  decem  personae  hae :  pater  mater,  avus  avia  tam

§  8.  The  principal  cases  of  bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas  have
been  already  pointed  out  on  Bk.  ii.  13.  7  supr.  Possession  of  goods  was
awarded  on  intestacy  to  eight  different  classes  of  persons,  in  the  following
order  of  priority,  each  being  known  by  a  technical  name  derived  from  its
place  in  the  edict :

(i)  Liberi  :  see  on  Tit.  i.  9  supr.

(2)  Legitimi:  see  on  Tit.  2.  4  supr.  In  succession*  to  freedmen,  this
class  consisted  originally  only  of  the  patron,  his  children  who  had  not
been  capite  minuti,  and  the  patroness :  how  it  was  modified  by  the  SC*
TertuUianum  and  Orfitianum  has  been  noticed  on  Tits.  3  and  4  supr.

(3)  Decem  personae  :  this  class  relates  only  to  succession  to  an  eman-
cipatus  ;  under  the  old  law,  when  the  final  act  of  manumission  was  per-
formed by  the  extraneous  vendee  (p.  147  supra)  the  latter  was  postponed
by  the  praetor  to  all  the  deceased's  cognates  in  the  ascending  and
descending  lines  within  the  second  degree.

(4)  The  cognates  according  to  proximity,  Tit.  5  supr.


384  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

paterni  quam  materni,  item  filius  filia,  nepos  neptis  tain  ex
filio  quam  ex  filia,  frater  soror  sive  consanguine!  sive  uterini) :

(5)  Turn  quam  ex  familia :  the  patron  or  patroness's  nearest  coUateral
agnates.

(6)  Patronus,  patrona,  liberi  et  parentes  eorum :  i.e.  the  patron's  or
patroness's  own  patron  or  patroness,  and  his  or  her  cognates  in  the  direct
line.

(7)  Vir  et  uxor :  the  surviving  consort  of  the  deceased^  who  by  the  civil
law  had  no  right  of  succession  whatever.

(8)  The  collateral  cognates  of  the  patron  within  the  sixth  degree,  Tit
5.  5  supr.  In  the  extremely  improbable  event  of  there  being  no  one
belonging  to  even  the  lowest  of  these  classes  to  take  bonorum  possessio,
the  estate  escheated  to  the  aerarium  (later  to  the  fiscus) :  '  si  nemo  sit,
ad  quem  bonorum  possessio  pertinere  possit,  aut  sit  quidem,  sed  ius
suum  omiserit,  populo  bona  deferuntur  ex  lege  lulia  caducaria '  Ulpian,
Reg.  28.  7.

It  will  be  observed  that,  besides  class  3,  which  related  to  what  cannot
ever  have  been  a  very  common  case,  classes  5,  6,  and  8  did  not  come
into  consideration  unless  the  intestate  were  a  freedman  or  a  freed  woman.
Class  3  became  meaningless  under  Justinian's  new  system  of  emancipa-
tion, and  the  other  three  he  altogether  abolished.  Thus  in  his  legislation
intestate  bonorum  possessores  were  arranged  in  four  classes  only,  their
order  being — liberi,  legitimi,  cognati,  vir  et  uxor ;  but  he  also  retained  an
anomalous  group  (§  8  inf.),  called  sometimes  for  the  sake  of  brevity  '  tum
quibus  ex  legibus,'  comprising  those  persons  to  whom  the  statute  law
had  enacted  that  bonorum  possessio  (as  distinct  from  the  hereditas)
should  be  given :  e.  g.  the  patron  in  concurrence  with  the  children  of  a
libertus  under  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  Tit.  7.  i  and  2  supr. :  *  quippe  cum
non  alias  huic  competit  bonorum  possessio,  quam  si  lex  specialiter  deferat
bonorum  possessionem'  Dig.  38.  14.  i.  2.

For  a  discussion  of  the  probable  origin  of  bonorum  possessio,  and  of
its  development  into  an  organized  scheme  of  succession,  see  Excursus  IV,
at  the  end  of  this  Book.  A  little  more  is  necessary  in  order  to  thoroughly
understand  its  nature.

In  order  to  obtain  possession  of  property  belonging  to  the  deceased,
the  bonorum  possessor  had,  as  such,  a  special  procedure,  the  interdict
Quorum  bonorum  (Dig.  43.  2,  Gains  iv.  144),  which  had  certain  ad-
vantages over  the  remedy  available  to  the  heres,  qua  heres  (viz.  here-
ditatis  petitio,  by  which  he  established  his  title  to  the  universitas  iuris).
Thus,  the  interdict  was  never  excluded  by  usucapio  lucrativa  (p.  235
supr.:  cf.  Gains  ii.  52-58),  and  availed  also  against  persons  'qui  dolo
desierant  possidere  : '  hereditatis  petitio  was  not  thus  privileged  until  the
time  of  Hadrian,  Dig.  5.  3.  20.  6-21,  ib.  25.  pr.-i7.  It  is  then  no  matter
for  surprise  that  heirs,  who  had  an  unimpeachable  civil  title,  applied  for
bonorum  possessio  secundum  tabulas  in  order  to  be  able  to  use  the
interdict,  §  i  supr..  Gains  iii.  34 ;  and  similarly,  as  the  heir  could  claim  to
become  bonorum  possessor,  so  the  praetor  treated  the  bonorum  possessor


Tit.  9.]  DE  BONORUM  POSSESSION/BUS.  385

quarto  cognatis  proximis :  quinto  turn  quam  ex  familia :
sexto  patrono  et  patronae  liberisque  eorum  et  parentibus:

as  heir  (§  2  supr. :  cf.  note  on  Bk.  ii.  10.  3  supr.) :  i.  e.  he  allowed  him  to
sue  and  be  sued  under  a  fiction  by  the  actions,  which  lay  at  the  suit  of
and  against  the  heres  :  Ulpian,  Reg.  28.  12. :  cf.  Gaius  iv.  34  ^  .  .  .  is
qui  ex  edicto  bonoram  possessionem  petiit,  ficto  se  herede  agit'  After
the  establishment  of  the  Empire,  and  before  Hadrian,  he  was,  like  the
heres,  enabled  to  sue  for  the  universitas  by  a  'possessoria  hereditatis
petitio'  Dig.  5.  5.  For  another  view  of  the  relation  between  the  interdict
and  hereditatis  petitio  see  on  Bk.  iv.  1 5.  3  inf.

A  noticeable  point  of  difference  between  bonorum  possessio  and  here-
ditas  is  that  the  former  was  never  acquired  ipso  iure,  as  the  latter  was
by  necessarii  or  sui  et  necessarii  heredes.  It  was  obtained  originally  by
application  to  the  praetor  (agnitio  or  petitio  bonorum  possessionis),
which  could  be  made  by  an  agent,  while  no  one  could  accept  an  inherit-
ance except  the  person  to  whom  it  was  delata,  note  on  Bk.  ii.  19.  7  supr.
This  application  was  usually  g^ranted  without  precise  inquiry  into  the
applicant's  title,  which,  if  investigated  at  all,  was  investigated  later,  and
only  because  it  was  disputed  by  some  one  who  alleged  that  his  own  right
was  a  better  one.  In  this  case  the  latter  would  be  granted  a  second  and
formal  bonorum  possessio  '  litis  ordinandae  gratia.'  The  sons  of  Con-
stantine  enacted  that  bonorum  possessio  might  be  obtained  from  any
judge  or  magistrate  by  a  mere  signification  of  acceptance,  Cod.  6.  9.  8
and  9,  though  this  was  still  called  agnitio  or  petitio ;  and  this  is  the  rule
referred  to  by  Justinian  in  §  la  inf.  as  holding  in  his  day.

The  right  to  take  the  possession  could  be  lost  by  either  express  re-
pudiation (§  10  inf.)  or  lapse  of  the  time  (specified  in  §  9 ;  Ulpian,  Reg.  28.
10 ;  cf.  note  on  Bk.  ii.  19.  5  supr.)  within  which  it  was  required  by  law  to
be  exercised.  A  person  barred  by  such  lapse  was  excluded  only  from  one
rank  or  class :  if  he  was  admitted  by  the  edict  in  a  lower  rank  also,  he
had  another  opportunity  ('sibi  ipse  succedere'  Dig.  38.  9.  i.  10  and  11).
Occasionally,  however,  the  praetor  would  not  grant  bonorum  possessio
without  an  examination  into  the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case.
For  instance,  the  edictum  Carbonianum  provided,  that  if  the  parentage  of
an  impubes,  upon  which  his  rights  of  succession  depended,  was  disputed,
the  magistrate  should  hold  a  summary  inquiry,  and  if  in  this  his  alleged
parentage  was  not  clearly  disproved,  bonorum  possessio  should  be  granted
provisionally  to  him  upon  security  being  given  against  waste,  until  the
question  at  issue  was  definitely  settled,  such  settlement  often  being  post-
poned until  the  child  attained  puberty.  In  cases  of  this  sort,  if  bononun
possessio  was  eventually  granted  after  the  magisterial  examination,  it  was
called  bonorum  possessio  decretalis  in  contrast  with  that  which  was
given  under  the  general  provisions  of  the  edict  (edictalis).

Even  supposing  the  bonorum  possessor  had  an  indefeasible  title  as
such,  the  praetor  did  not  necessarily  guarantee  him  the  succession
against  a  possible  heres,  who  might  have  remained  satisfied  with  his
civil  law  title.    £.  g.  a  suus  is  praeteritus  in  the  father's  will,  by  which  the

C  C


386  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  III.

4  septimo  viro  et  uxor! :  octavo  cognatis  manumissoris.  Sed
eas  quidem  praetoria  induxit  iurisdictio.  nobis  tamen  nihil
incuriosum  praetermissum  est,  sed  nostris  constitutionibus
omnia  corr^entes  contra  tabulas  quidem  et  secundum  tabulas
bonorum  possessiones  admisimus  utpote  necessariasconstitutas,
nee  non  ab  intestato  unde  liberi  et  unde  legitimi  bonorum

5  possessiones.  Quae  autem  in  praetoris  edicto  quinto  loco
posita  fuerat,  id  est  unde  decern  personae,  earn  pio  proposito
et  compendioso  sermone  supervacuam  ostendimus :  cum  enim
praefata  bonorum  possessio  decem  personas  praeponebat  ex-
traneo  manumissori,  nostra  constitution  quam  de  emancipatione
liberorum  fecimus,  omnibus  parentibus  eisdemque  manumis-
soribus  contracta  fiducia  manumissionem  facere  dedit,  ut  ipsa
manumissio  eorum  hoc  in  se  habeat  privil^um  et  supervacua
fiat  praedicta  bonorum  possessio.  sublata  igitur  praefata
quinta  bonorum  possessione  in  gradum  eius  sextam  antea
bonorum  possessionem  reduximus  et  quintam  fecimus,  quam

6  praetor  proximis  cognatis  pollicetur.  Cumque  antea  septimo
loco  fuerat  bonorum  possessio  tum  quam  ex  familia  et  octavo
unde  liberi  patron!  patronaeque  et  parentes  eorum,  utramque
per  constitutionem  nostram,  quam  de  iure  patronatus  fecimus,
penitus  vacuavimus :  cum  enim  ad  similitudinem  successionis
ingenuorum  libertinorum  successiones  posuimus,  quas  usque
ad  quintum  tantummodo  gradum  coartavimus,  ut  sit  aliqua
inter  ingenuos  et  libertos  differentia,  sufliciunt  eis  tam  contra
tabulas  bonorum  possessio  quam  unde  legitimi  et  unde  c(%-

latter  is  avoided,  so  that  he  becomes  heres  ab  iDtestato ;  the  institutus  in
the  will  obtains  bonorum  possessio  secundum  tabulas:  or  upon  an
intestacy  the  cognates  obtain  bonorum  possessio,  while  there  is  a  suus  or
agnate  as  heres.  Under  such  circumstances  as  these,  if  the  claim  of  the
praetorian  successor  is  overridden  by  that  of  the  heres,  the  bonorum
possessio  is  said  to  be  sine  re,  or  ineffectual:  'bonorum  possessio  aut
cum  re  datur,  aut  sine  re :  cum  re,  si  is  qui  accepit  cum  eifectu  bona  re-
tineat :  sine  re,  cum  alius  iure  civili  evincere  hereditatem  possit '  Ulpian,
Reg.  28.  13  :  cf.  Gains  iii.  35-38.  The  rule  upon  this  matter  may  be  thus
stated :  where  there  is  a  collision  between  the  civil  and  the  praetorian
title,  the  latter  must  yield  to  the  former,  and  be  sine  re,  except  in  cases
of  bonorum  possessio  iuris  civilis  impugnandi  gratia,  viz.  where  the
possession  is  given  to  liberi  upon  intestacy,  and  to  emancipated  children
contra  tabulas,  and  in  certain  instances  of  bonorum  possessio  secundum
tabulas,  for  which  see  on  Bk.  ii.  17.  6  supr.


Tit.  9.]  DE  BONORUM  POSSESSION/BUS.  387

nati,  ex  quibus  possint  sua  iura  vindicarey  omni  scrupulositate
et  inextricabili  errore  duarum  istarum  bonorum  possessionum
resoluta.  Aliam  vero  bonorum  possessionem,  quae  unde  vir  7
et  uxor  appellatur  et  nono  loco  inter  veteres  bonorum  pos-
sessiones  posita  fuerat,  et  in  suo  vigore  servavimus  et  altiore
locO)  id  est  sexto,  earn  posuimus,  decima  veteri  bonorum
possessione  quae  erat  tmde  cognati  manumissoris  propter
causas  enarratas  merito  sublata:  ut  sex  tantummodo  bo-
norum possessiones  ordinariae  permaneant  suo  vigore  pol-
lentes.  Septima  eas  secuta,  quam  optima  ratione  praetores  8
introduxerunt.  novissime  enim  promittitur  edicto  his  etiam
bonorum  possessio,  quibus  ut  detur  lege  vel  senatus  consulto
vel  constitutione  comprehensum  est,  quam  neque  bonorum
possessionibus  quae  ab  intestato  veniunt  neque  eis  quae  ex
testamento  sunt  praetor  stabili  iure  connumeravit.  sed  quasi
ultimum  et  extraordinarium  auxilium,  prout  res  exigit,  ac-
commodavit  scilicet  his,  qui  ex  legibus  senatus  consultis
constitutionibus  principum  ex  novo  iure  vel  ex  testamento
vel  ab  intestato  veniunt.  Cum  igitur  plures  species  succes-  9
sionum  praetor  introduxisset  easque  per  ordinem  disposuisset
et  in  unaquaque  specie  successionis  saepe  plures  extent
dispari  gradu  personae:  ne  actiones  creditorum  diflferantur,
sed  haberent  quos  convenirent,  et  ne  facile  in  possessionem
bonorum  defuncti  mittantur  et  eo  modo  sibi  consulerent,  ideo
petendae  bonorum  possessioni  certum  tempus  praefinivit.
liberis  itaque  et  parentibus  tam  naturalibus  quam  adoptivis
in  petenda  bonorum  possessione  anni  spatium,  ceteris  centum
dierum  dedit.  Et  si  intra  hoc  tempus  aliquis  bonorum  pos-  10
sessionem  non  petierit,  eiusdem  gradus  personis  adcrescit:
vel  si  nemo  sit,  deinceps  ceteris  proinde  bonorum  posses-
sionem ex  successorio  edicto  pollicetur,  ac  si  is  qui  praecedebat
ex  eo  numero  non  esset.  si  quis  itaque  delatam  sibi  bonorum
possessionem  repudiaverit,  non  quousque  tempus  bonorum
possessioni  praefinitum  excesserit  exspectatur,  sed  statim
ceteri  ex  eodem  edicto  admittuntur.  In  petenda  autem  11
bonorum  possessione  dies  utiles  singuli  considerantur.     Sed  12

§  11.  The  distinction  between  tempus  utile  and  continuum  has  been
already  explained  on  Bk.  ii.  19. 5  supr.    The  idea  of  the  former  originated

C  C  a


388  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,     [Lib.  III.

bene  anteriores  principes  et  huic  causae  providerunt,  ne  quis
pro  petenda  bonorum  possessione  curet,  sed,  quocumque  modo

in  the  necessity  of  performing  some  act  within  a  prescribed  time,  by
the  non-performance  of  which  a  right  might  be  lost,  and  which  might
be  interfered  with  either  (i)  by  the  courts  being  closed;  (2)  by  the
absence  of  some  person  whose  presence  y^s  essential,  Dig.  44.  3.  i ;
(3)  by  some  disability  of  the  person  by  whom  the  act  had  to  be  per-
formed, e.  g.  absence,  illness,  or  excusable  ignorance  of  his  right.  As  a
rule,  time  was  reckoned  as  continuum;  it  is  usually  utile  when  the
interval  for  performance  is  not  more  than  a  year  and  b  prescribed  by  law,
and  where  the  act  itself  is  a  judicial  one.

Before  finally  leaving  the  subject  of  intestate  succession  it  is  necessary
to  notice  briefly  the  important  revolution  which  Justinian  effected  in  its
rules  by  Nov.  118,  A.  D.  543.  By  this  he  repealed  all  existing  law  on  the
subject :  'prioribuslegibus  pro  hac  causa  positis  cessantibus,  de  cetero  ea
sola  servari  quae  nunc  constituimus.'  The  new  system  was  based  solely
on  cognation,  between  which  and  agnation  it  disowned  any  distinction,
save  so  far  as  was  involved  in  the  recognition  of  adoptive  relationship :
it  also  treated  males  and  females  on  precisely  the  same  footing.  Intes-
tate successors  were  arranged  in  four  classes,  in  the  followii^  order  of
priority :

(i)  Descendants,  division  between  these  being  in  stirpes  :  '  tantam
de  hereditate  morientis  accipientes  partem,  quanticunque  sint,  quantam
eorum  parens,  si  viveret,  habuisset,  quam  successionem  in  stirpes  vocavit
antiquitas'  Nov.  118.  i:  thus  a  descendant  related  to  the  deceased
through  both  parents  received  a  double  portion.  The  descendant  did
not,  however,  in  every  case  inherit  the  usufruct  along  with  the  proprietas ;
e.  g.  if  the  deceased  was  in  potestas,  note  on  Tit.  i.  15  supr. ;  or  if  the
deceased  was  a  woman,  the  surviving  husband  was  entitled  to  the  usu-
fruct of  a  part,  Cod.  6.  6a  3.

(2)  Ascendants  and  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  whole  blood  succeed
together.  A  nearer  was  preferred  to  a  more  remote  ascendant :  if  there
were  two  or  more  ascendants  in  the  same  degree,  they  divided  the  suc-
cession per  capita  if  they  belonged  to  the  same  line,  paternal  or  maternal :
if  to  different  lines,  each  took  half.  If  there  are  no  ascendants,  sons  and
daughters  of  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  whole  blood  deceased  came  in
with  those  still  surviving,  of  course  per  stirpes.

(3)  Brothers  and  sisters  of  the  half  blood,  and  descendants  in  the  first
degree  of  such  brothers  and  sisters  deceased.

(4)  All  other  cognates,  according  to  proximity,  whether  related  by  the
whole  or  half  blood :  '  si  vero  neque  fratres  neque  filios  fratrum,  sicut
diximus,  defunctus  reliquerit,  omnes  a  latere  cognatos  ad  hereditatem
vocamus,  secundum  uniuscuiusque  gradus  praerogativam,  ut  viciniores
gradu  reliquis  praeponantur.  Si  autem  plurimi  eiusdem  gradus  invenian-
tur,  secundum  personarum  numerum  inter  eos  hereditas  dividatur,  quod
in  capita  nostrae  leges  appellant'  Nov.  118. 3.  i.


Tit.  lo.]    DE  ADQUISITIONE  PER  ADROGATIONEM.     389

si  admittentis  earn  indicium,  intra  statuta  tamen  tempora,
ostenderit,  plenum  habeat  earum  beneficium.


X.

DE  ADQUISITIONE  PER  ADROGATIONEM.

Est  et  alterius  generis  per  universitatem  successio,  quae
neque  lege  duodecim  tabularum  neque  praetoris  edicto,  sed
eo  iure,  quod  consensu  receptum  est,  introducta  est.  Ecce  1
enim  cum  pater  familias  sese  in  adrogationem  dat,  omnes  res
eius  corporales  et  incorporates  quaeque  ei  debitae  sunt  adro-
gatori  ante  quidem  pleno  iure  adquirebantur,  exceptis  his
quae  per  capitis  deminutionem  pereunt  quales  sunt  operarum
obligationes  et  ius  adgnationis.  usus  etenim  et  usus  fructus,
licet  his  antea  connumerabantur,  attamen  capitis  deminutione
minima  eos  toUi  nostra  prohibuit  constitutio.     Nunc  autem  2


These  rules  have  been  summarised  in  the  following  memorial  lines :
Descendens  omnis  succedit  in  ordine  primo:
Ascendens  propior,  gennanus,  filius  eius:
Tunc  latere  ex  uno  frater,  quoque  filius  eius:
Hi  cuncti  in  stirpes  succedunt,  in  capita  autem
luncti  ascendentes,  fratrum  proles  quoque  sola.
Denique  proximior  reliquorum  quisque  superstes.
§  12.  Failing  even  cognates,  the  praetorian  rule  of  vir  et  uxor  was
followed.    Under  certain  circumstances  indeed  a  widow  had  a  claim
against  the  estate  of  her  deceased  husband,  even  when  the  latter  left  a
will,  or  died  intestate  having  other  successors :  i.  e.  when  she  was  poor,
and  had  no  dos,  she  was  entitled  to  a  fourth  of  her  husband's  property,
or,  if  there  were  more  than  three  legitimate  children  bom  of  the  marriage,
to  a  virilis  portio,  Nov.  117.  5.

Tit.  X.  So  too  in  Dig.  i.  6.  8  pr.  patria  potestas  is  said  to  be
moribus  recepta,  and  in  iii.  82  Gains  ascribes  the  universal  succession
resulting  from  conventio  in  manum  to  the  ius  quod  consensu  receptum
est.

§  1.  For  the  extinction  of  usus  and  ususfructus  by  capitis  deminutio
minima  see  p.  222  supr.  By  operarum  obligationes  are  meant  operae
liberti  secured  by  stipulation  or  iurata  promissio,  Gaius  iii.  83 :  operae
servorum  sive  animalium  were  not  extinguished  in  this  manner,  note  on
Bk.  ii.  5.  5  supr. :  cf.  Dig.  4.  5.  10;  7'7'^\  7«  8.  10.  pr.

§  2.  Over  castrensia  and  quasi  castrensia  bona  of  adrogatus  the  adro-
gator  had  no  rights  whatever :  the  rest  of  his  property,  not  being  derived


390  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

nos  eandem  adquisitionem,  quae  per  adrogationem  fiebat,
coartavimus  ad  similitudinem  naturalium  parentum :  nihil
etenim  aliud  nisi  tantummodo  usus  fructus  tarn  naturalibus
patribus  quam  adoptivis  per  filios  familias  adquiritur  in  his
rebus  quae  extrinsecus  filiis  obveniunt,  dominio  eis  int^ro
servato:  mortuo  autem  filio  adrogato  in  adoptiva  familia
etiam  dominium  eius  ad  adrogatorem  transit,  nisi  supersint
aliae  personae,  quae  ex  nostra  constitutione  patrem  in  his
3  quae  adquiri  non  possunt  antecedunt.  Sed  ex  diverso  pro  eo,
quod  is  debuit  qui  se  in  adoptionem  dedit,  ipso  quidem  iure
adrogator  non  tenetur,  sed  nomine  iilii  convenietur  et,  si
noluerit  eum  defendere,  permittitur  creditoribus  per  com-
petentes  nostros  magistratus  bona,  quae  eorum  cum  usu
fructu  futura  fuissent,  si  se  alieno  iuri  non  subiecissent,  pos-
sidere  et  legitimo  modo  ea  disponere.

ex  re  paths  [adoptivi],  would  constitute  peculium  adventitium,  so  that  the
usufruct  of  it  would  belong  to  the  adrogator.  For  the  *  aliae  personae '
see  on  Tit.  i.  15  supr.  (succession  to  filiusfiEunilias  having  peculium).

§  8.  Though  under  the  ius  civile  neither  adrogator  nor  adrogatus  could
be  sued  for  debts  incurred  by  the  latter  before  his  capitis  deminutio,  the
debts  remained  as  obligationes  naturales,  Dig.  4.  5.  2.  2,  and  the  praetor
granted  actiones  utiles  against  adrogatus  himself  (Gaius  iii.  84)  under  the
fiction  that  he  was  sdll  sui  iuris:  'rescissa  capitis  deminutione,  id  est
[actio]  in  qua  fingitur  capite  deminutus  non  esse'  Gaius  iv.  38.  This  was
a  genuine  in  integrum  restitutio  of  the  creditors :  '  integri  restitutionem
praetor  tribuit  ex  his  causis  quae  per  . . .  status  permutationem  gesta  esse
dicuntur'  PauL  Sent.  Rec.  i.  7.  2.  Obligations  arising  from  delict  were
never  extinguished  by  capitis  deminutio  minima  ('  nemo  delictis  exuitur,
quamvis  capite  minutus  sit '  Dig.  4.  5.  2.  3),  neither  was  the  obligation
arising  ex  deposito  if  the  depositee  remained  in  possession  after  the
capitis  deminutio,  Dig.  16.  3. 21,  nor  debts  owed  by  an  inheritance  accepted
by  adrogatus  before  adrogation,  Gaius  iii.  84.  Under  Justinian,  after
having  been  in  integrum  restituti  against  the  civil  extinction  of  their  claims
(Dig.  4.  5.  2.  i),  the  creditors  sued  the  adrogator  as  adrogatus'  repre-
sentative ;  but  the  restitutio  in  this  particular  case  was  abnormal,  being
claimable  as  a  matter  of  right,  '  sine  causa  cognita '  Dig.  loc  cit.,  and
not  being  subject  to  the  ordinary  rules  of  limitation:  'hoc  iucicium
perpetuum  est '  Dig.  4.  5.  2.  5.


Tit  II.]  DE  EO  cm  LIBERT ATIS,  ETC.  391

XI.
DE  EO  GUI   LIBERTATIS  CAUSA  BONA  ADDICUNTUR.

Accessit  novus  casus  successionis  ex  constitutione  divi
Marci.  nam  si  hi,  qui  libertatem  acceperunt  a  domino  in
testamento,  ex  quo  non  aditur  hereditas,  velint  bona  sibi
addici  libertatium  conservandarum  causa,  audiuntur.  et  ita
rescripto  divi  Marci  ad  Popilium  Rufum  continetur.  Verba  1
rescripti  ita  se  habent:  *Si  Virginio  Valenti,  qui  testamento
suo  libertatem  quibusdam  adscripsit,  nemine  successore  ab
intestato  existente  in  ea  causa  bona  esse  coeperunt,  ut  veniri
debeant :  is  cuius  de  ea  re  notio  est  aditus  rationem  desiderii
tui  habebit,  ut  libertatium  tarn  earum,  quae  directo,  quam
earum,  quae  per  speciem  iideicommissi  relictae  sunt,  tuen-
darum  gratia  addicantur  tibi,  si  idonee  creditoribus  caveris
de  solido  quod  cuique  debetur  solvendo.  et  hi  quidem,
quibus  directa  libertas  data  est,  perinde  liberi  erunt,  ac  si
hereditas  adita  esset :  hi  autem,  quos  heres  rogatus  est  manu-
mittere,  a  te  libertatem  consequantur :  ita  ut  si  non  alia
condicione  velis  bona  tibi  addici,  quam  ut  etiam  qui  directo
libertatem  acceperunt  tui  liberti  fiant,  nam  huic  etiam  volun-
tati  tuae,  si  ii  de  quorum  statu  agitur  consentiant,  aucto-
ritatem  nostram  accommodamus.  et  ne  huius  rescriptionis
nostrae  emolumentum  alia  ratione  irritum  fiat,  si  fiscus  bona
ag^oscere  voluerit :  et  hi  qui  rebus  nostris  attendunt  scient
commodo  pecuniario  praeferendam  libertatis  causam  et  ita
bona  cogenda,  ut  libertas  his  salva  sit,  qui  earn  adipisci
potuerunt,  si  hereditas  ex  testamento  adita  esset.*  Hoc  2
rescripto  subventum  est  et  libertatibus  et  defunctis,  ne  bona
eorum  a  creditoribus  possideantur  et  veneant.    certe  si  fuerint


Tit.  XI.  1.  The  estate  would  be  adjudged  to  the  creditors,  in  order
to  be  sold  in  satisfaction  of  their  claims,  only  after  being  rejected  by  the
instituti,  all  the  intestate  heirs,  and  the  fiscus.  The  rescript  of  M.  Au-
relius  seems  to  have  contemplated  only  addictio  to  one  of  the  slaves
manumitted  by  the  will  (Popilius  Rufus  being  efr  r«y  rvx^vrmv  €ktv3«pias
ip  TJi  duiBriKjf  Theophilus) ;  Gordian  permitted  it  to  be  made  to  any  one
who  would  give  the  security  *  de  solido  quod  cuique  debetur  solvendo,'
Cod.  7.  2.  6.


393  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

ex  hac  causa  bona  addicta,  cessat  bonorum  venditio :  extitit
enim  defunct!  defensor,  et  quidem   idoneus,  qui   de  solido

3  creditoribus  cavet  Inprimis  hoc  rescriptum  totiens  locum
habet,  quotiens  testamento  libertates  datae  sunt,  quid  ergo
si  quis  intestatus  decedens  codicillis  libertates  dederit  neque
adita  sit  ab  intestato  hereditas?  favor  constitutionis  debet
locum  habere,    certe  si  testatus  decedat  et  codicillis  dederit

4  libertatem,  competere  eam  nemini  dubium  est  Tunc  con-
stitution! locum  esse  verba  ostendunt,  cum  nemo  successor
ab  intestato  existat:  ergo  quamdiu  incertum  sit,  utrum
existat  an  non,  cessabit  constitutio :  si  certum  esse  coeperit

5  neminem  extare,  tunc  erit  constitution!  locus.  Si  is,  qui
in  int^rum  restitui  potest,  abstinuit  se  ab  hereditate,  an,
quamvis  potest  in  integrum  restitui,  potest  admitti  con-
stitutio et  addictio  bonorum  fieri  ?  quid  ergo,  si  post  addic-
tionem  libertatum  conservandarum  causa  factam  in  int^^rum
sit  restitutus?   utique  non  erit  dicendum  revocari  libertates,

6  quae  semel  competierunt.  Haec  ccxistitutio  libertatum  tuen-
darum  causa  introducta  est :  ergo  si  libertates  nullae  sint
datae,  cessat  constitutio.  quid  ergo,  si  vivus  dedit  libertates
vel  mortis  causa  et,  ne  de  hoc  quaeratur,  utrum  in  fraudem
creditorum  an  non  factum  sit,  idcirco  velint  addici  sibi  bona,
an   audiendi   sunt?    et   magis   est,  ut   audiri  debeant,  etsi

7  deficiant  verba  constitutionis.  Sed  cum  multas  divisiones
eiusmodi  constitution!  deesse  perspeximus,  lata  est  a  nobis
plenissima  constitutio,  in  quam  multae  species  collatae  sunt,
quibus  ius  huiusmodi  successionis  plenissimum  est  eflfectum :
quas  ex  ipsa  lectione  constitutionis  potest  quis  cc^noscere.

XII.

DE  SUCCESSIONIBUS  SUBLATIS,  QUAE  FIEBANT  PER

BONORUM  VENDITIONEM   ET  EX  SENATUS

CONSUI.TO  CLAUDIANO,

Erant  ante   praedictam   successionem   olim   et   aliae  per

§  6.  For  in  integrum  restitutio  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  33  in£,    The  causa  for
the  restitutio  here  is  minor  aetas.
§  7.  Justinian's  own  constitution  is  in  Cod.  7.  2.  15.  1-6.
Tit.  12.  For  the  system  of  bankruptcy  execution  in  use  under  the


Tit.  12.]        DE  SUCCESSI0NIBU3  SUBLATIS,  ETC.        393

universitatem  successiones.  qualis  fuerat  bonorum  emptio,
quae  de  bonis  debitoris  vendendts  per  multas  ambages  fuerat
introducta  et  tunc  locum  habebat,  quando  iudicia  ordinaria
in  usu  fuerunt :  sed  cum  extraordinariis  iudiciis  posteritas  usa
est,  ideo  cum  ipsis  ordinariis  iudiciis  etiam  bonorum  vendi-
tiones  exspiraverunt  et  tantummodo  creditoribus  datur  officio

iudida  ordinaria  see  Excursus  X  at  the  end  of  this  volume,  and  Mr.  Poste's
note  on  Gaius  iii.  77,  He  adopts  Savigny*8  theory  that  there  were,  from
the  first,  two  different  modes  of  proceeding  against  insolvent  debtors :
the  one — ^manus  iniectio  or  personal  execution— applying  only  where  the
judgment  or  confession  on  which  execution  issued  was  on  a  money  loan,
real  (mutuum)  or  fictitious  (nexum)  or  on  certain  other  obligations  assimi-
lated by  statute  to  mutuum,  Gaius  iv.  22  ;  the  other,  or  execution  against
the  property,  being  resorted  to  in  all  other  cases.  A  commoner  view  is
that,  until  about  100  B.C.,  roanus  iniectio  (though  its  severities  were
mitigated  by  the  lex  Poetelia,  Livy  viii.  28)  was  the  only  remedy  open  to
a  creditor  if  his  debtor  refused  or  was  unable  to  satisfy  a  judgment  debt ;
about  which  time  a  new  form  of  execution  against  the  property,  or  real'
execution,  was  introduced  by  the  Edict,  of  which  a  leading  feature  was
sale  of  the  bankrupt's  universitas  iuris  by  auction  to  the  bidder  who
offered  the  creditors  the  highest  percentage  on  their  claims,  this  prae-
torian form  of  bankruptcy  execution  being  called  bonorum  emptio  or  ven-
ditio,  and  being  described  by  Gaius  (iii.  77-81)  as  one  of  the  kinds  of
universal  succession.

Though  it  is  difficult  to  come  to  any  definite  conclusion  on  so  obscure
a  topic,  the  latter  view  seems  best  supported  by  the  facts,  apart  from  its
inherent  probability  on  grounds  of  historical  jurisprudence.  Savigny  has
to  prove  two  positions :  first,  that  personal  execution  was  confined  to  the
classes  of  debts  specified ;  and  second,  that  a  system  of  real  execution  was
in  vogue  at  Rome  from  the  earliest  times.

In  support  of  the  former  he  calls  attention  to  what  seems  an  undeniable
fact,  viz.  that  the  Romans  always  drew  a  broad  distinction  between  debts
incurred  by  money  loans  and  all  other  debts,  and  cites  various  authors
(e.  g.  Gellius  20.  i,  quoting  the  Twelve  Tables,  and  Livy  vi.  14,  viii.  28,
xxiii.  14)  to  show  that  manus  iniectio  is  almost  invariably  associated  with
debts  of  the  first  kind.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  explicit  state-
ment of  Gaius  (iv.  21)  that  it  was  the  proper  procedure  on  every  judgment
debt,  however  incurred.  Savigny,  however,  relies  most  on  chaps.  21  and
22  of  the  lex  Rubria  or  lex  Galliae  Cisalpinae,  in  which  it  is  provided  that
when  an  action  is  brought  for  pecunia  certa  credita,  manus  iniectio  shall
be  employed :  when  on  any  other  liability,  another  procedure  may  be  re-
sorted to—'  eos  duci,  bona  eorum  possideri  iubeto.'  On  his  interpretation,
this  means  that,  for  pecunia  certa  credita,  the  execution  must  be  personal,
while  in  other  cases  it  must  be  real ;  but  it  is  far  more  natural  to  suppose
that,  except  for  money  loans,  the  statute  gave  the  magistrate  the  option  of


394  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

iudicis  bona  possidere  et  prout  eis  utile  visum  fuerit  ea  dis-
ponere,  quod  ex  latioribus  digestorum  libris  perfectius  ap-

either  applying  the  harsher  procedure,  or  putting  the  creditor  in  possession
of  the  debtor's  property.

In  the  second  place,  if  a  system  of  real  execution  had  existed  at  Rome
from  the  time  of  the  Twelve  Tables  onwards,  and  with  the  width  of  opera-
tion which  Savigny  assigns  to  it,  the  rules  by  which  it  was  regulated  must
have  formed  no  inconsiderable  body  of  law,  which  (one  might  reasonably
suppose)  would  have  been  mentioned  by  general  writers,  and  even  been
described  at  length  by  those  who  specially  concerned  themselves  with
legal  topics.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case.  It  can  hardly  be  denied
that  in  isolated  cases  the  praetor  allowed  a  debtor's  estate  to  be  seized
and  sold,  and  Savigny  cites  an  instance  of  this  even  before  the  lex  Poe-
telia  (Livy  it  24) ;  but  we  have  the  express  statement  again  of  Gaius  (iv.
35)  that  the  systematic  employment  of  such  a  procedure  was  believed  to
date  from  the  praetorship  of  Publius  Rutilius,  doubtless  the  well  known
statesman  and  jurist  who  was  consul  B.C.  105  :  *  quae  species  actionis  . . .
a  praetore  Publio  Rutilio,  qui  et  bonorum  venditionem  introduxisse  dicitur,
comparata  est.'  If  bonorum  venditio,  as  a  system  of  execution  in  bank-
ruptcy standing  in  contrast  with  manus  iniectio,  had  existed  from  the
beginning  of  Roman  legal  history,  we  may  surely  presume  that  the  iaxX
would  have  been  known  to  Gaius.

In  the  text  before  us  Justinian  connects  the  disappearance  of  bonorum
venditio  with  the  abolition  of  the  indicia  ordinaria.  It  seems  more  probable
that  both  its  disappearance,  and  the  procedure  in  use  under  Justinian
himself  were  in  some  way  due  to  or  connected  with  a  senatus-consult
passed  under  one  of  the  earlier  emperors,  and  mentioned  in  Dig.  27. 10.  5
and  9,  by  which  it  was  provided  that  where  the  bankrupt  was  of  senatorial
rank,  and  the  creditors  assented,  instead  of  the  estate  being  sold  en  bloc
(bonorum  venditio),  a  curator  bonorum  should  be  appointed  by  the  magis-
trate for  the  purpose  of  disposing  of  the  assets  piecemeal  and  in  lots,  and
paying  the  creditors  pro  rata  out  of  the  proceeds.  The  ordinary  execution
in  bankruptcy  of  Justinian's  time  (bonorum  distractio,  Bk.  iL  19.  i  supr.)
was  very  similar  in  character.  The  creditors,  or  some  of  them,  applied  to
the  magistrate  for  missio  in  bona :  from  the  granting  of  this  application
an  interval  was  allowed  for  others  to  come  in  and  prove  their  claims  by
action,  those  who  resided  in  the  same  province  having  two,  others  four
years  for  this  purpose.  As  soon  as  it  had  elapsed,  those  who  had  not  yet
proved  their  ckums  were  excluded  from  all  benefit  in  the  proceedings,  and
could  demand  satisfaction  out  of  the  bona  possessa  only  if  a  balance  re-
mained after  paying  the  rest  in  full,  Cod.  7.  72.  10,  unless  they  were
hypothecary  creditors,  in  which  case,  if  they  preferred  it,  they  could  rely
exclusively  on  their  security,  and  take  no  part  in  the  liquidation  at  alL
During  the  two  or  four  years  the  estate,  though  technically  possessed  by
the  creditors  who  had  been  missi  in  possessionem,  was  administered  by  a
curator,  whom  other  creditors  made  their  defendant  (and  not  the  bankrupt
himself)  in  the  actions  which  they  brought  for  the  establishment  of  their


Tit.  13.]  DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS.  395

parebit.  Erat  et  ex  sentatus  consulto  Claudiano  miserabilis  1
per  universitatem  adquisitio,  cum  libera  mulier  servili  amore
bacchata  ipsam  libertatem  per  senatus  consultum  amittebat
et  cum  libertate  substantiam:  quod  indignum  nostris  tem-
poribus  esse  existimantes  et  a  nostra  civitate  deleri  et  non
inseri  nostris  digestis  concessimus.

XIIL

DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS.

Nunc  transeamus  ad  obligationea  obligatio  est  iuris  vin-
culum, quo  necessitate  adstringimur  alicuius  solvendae  rei
secundum  nostrae  civitatis  iura.    Omnium  autem  obligationum  1

claims,  and  by  whom  the  assets  were  sold  in  lots ;  the  proceeds  of  the  sale
were  distributed  by  the  judge  among  the  creditors,  in  a  determinate  order
of  priority.  Property  which  the  insolvent  migfht  subseqoently  acquire
remained  liable  to  successive  sales,  until  the  creditors  had  been  paid
in  fulL

Embarrassed  debtors  could  also  usually  avail  themselves  of  a  procedure
more  in  the  nature  of  a  voluntary  composition  with  creditors,  called  cessio
bonorum  (Bk.  lii.  25.  8;  iv.  6.  40;  ib.  14.  4  inf.),  which  was  introduced  by
a  lex  lulia  of  one  of  the  two  first  Caesars.  By  adopting  this  course  they
escaped  liability  to  arrest  and  imprisonment.  Cod.  7.  71.  i,  which  bank-
rupts proper  might  still  incur  if  the  missio  in  bona  produced  no  results  ;
a  debtor  could  be  committed  to  prison  at  the  outset  only  on  the  application
of  the  Treasury.  Further,  they  did  not  become  infames,  like  bankrupts,
Cod.  2.  12.  II :  7.  71.  8.  pr.,  and  were  allowed  to  retain  so  much  of  their
after-acquired  property  as  was  necessary  for  their  subsistence  (bene-
ficium  competentiae,  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  37  inf.),  Dig.  42.  3.  4,  Cod.  7.  71.  i.
No  debtor,  however,  could  claim  to  make  a  cessio  bonorum  whose
insolvency  was  due  to  his  own  fault.  The  procedure  after  the  surrender
seems  in  all  essential  points  to  have  been  the  same  as  in  bankruptcy.

§  1.  For  the  SC.  Claudianum  see  Bk.  i.  3. 4  supr.

A  mode  of  universal  succession  described  by  Gains  (iii.  85-87),  but  not
alluded  to  by  Justinian,  as  being  obsolete  in  his  day,  is  in  iure  cessio  of
an  hereditas  by  an  agnate  entitled  on  intestacy,  for  which  see  p.  271  supr.
It  seems  improper  to  regard  this  as  a  universal  succession,  for  what  the
agnate  transferred  was,  not  the  hereditas,  but  the  single  rig^t  of  becoming
heres  to  a  succession  as  yet  only  delata.

Tit.  XXII.  For  the  general  nature  of  obligations,  their  chief  divisions,
and  modes  of  transfer,  see  Excursus  V,  at  the  end  of  this  Book.

§  L  The  divisions  oif  obligations  into  civiles  and  praetoriae  or  honorariae
obviously  does  not  correspond  with  that  explained  in  Excursus  V  inf.  into


396  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

summa  divisio  ia  duo  genera  diducitur :  namque  aut  civiles
sunt  aut  praetoriae.  civiles  sunt,  quae  aut  legibus  constitutae
aut  certe  iure  civili  comprobatae  sunt,  praetoriae  sunt,  quas
praetor  ex  sua  iurisdictione  constituit,  quae  etiam  honorariae
2  vocantur.  Sequens  divisio  in  quattuor  species  diducitur :  aut
enim  ex  contractu  sunt  aut  quasi  ex  contractu  aut  ex  male*
ficio  aut  quasi  ex  maleficio.  prius  est,  ut  de  his  quae  ex
contractu  sunt  dispiciamus.    harum  aeque  quattuor  species


civil  and  natural :  it  has  reference,  as  appears  from  the  text,  to  the  legis-
lative organ  by  which  it  was  declared  that  such  or  such  an  act  or  event
should  engender  a  (civil)  obligation.  In  this  sense  civiles  obligationes  are
those  which  were  made  actionable  by  the  organs  of  the  civil  law — by  a  lex,
plebiscitum,  senatusconsult,  imperii  constitution,  or  by  the  action  of  the
jurists :  obligationes  praetoriae  are  those  which  owed  their  actionability  to
the  edict :  '  quas  praetor  ex  sua  iurisdictione  constituit '  seems  to  mean
'  quas,  occasione  a  iuris  dicundi  munere  sumpta,  decretis  primum,  deinde
edicto  perpetuo  constituit.'

§  2.  The  sources  of  obligations  are  thus  enumerated  by  Modestinus  in
Dig.  44. 7.  52.  pr. :  res — verba— consensus  (the  three  forms  of  contractual
liability)— lex— ius  honorarium — necessitas — peccatum.  Lex  and  neces-
sitas  he  explains  as  follows :  '  lege  obligamur,  cum  obtemperantes  legibus

aliquid  secundum  praeceptum  legis  aut  contra  fsurimus  : necessitate

obligantur  quibus  non  licet  aliud  facere,  quam  quod  praeceptum  est :  quod
evenit  in  necessario  herede.'  The  fourfold  division  of  Justinian,  though
more  complete  than  that  given  by  Gaius  in  his  Institutes  (iii.  %Z\  is  in
effect  derived  from  the  same  writer's  liber  tertius  aureorum  (Dig.  44. 7.  5),
from  which  Justinian  literally  takes  his  instances  of  obligations  arising
quasi  ex  contractu  and  quasi  ex  delicto,  and  in  which  (§§  i  and  5)  these
terms  occur,  though  a  few  lines  above  they  are  comprised  under  the  per-
plexing expression  *  variarum  causarum  figurae.'  llie  meaning  of  these
four  sources  of  obligations  will  appear  sufficiently  from  the  text  relating  to
them  respectively:  but  they  do  not  comprehend  all  the  obligations  of
Roman  law,  and  therefore  the  classification  must  be  condemned  as  in  the
first  place  inexhaustive.  Contracts  (sensu  Romano)  are  those  agreements
which  were  actionable  under  even  the  old  civil  law :  but  in  course  of  time
a  considerable  number  of  other  agreements  were  made  actionable  by  the
influence  of  the  jurists,  the  edict,  and  imperial  enactment :  in  none  of
these,  which  the  commentators  call  pacta  vestita,  to  distinguish  them  from
pacta  nuda,  was  the  obligation  said  to  arise  ex  contractu,  and  in  fact  they
have  no  place  whatever  in  Justinian's  arrangement.  No  system  of  law
probably  can  dispense  with  the  notion  of  obligation  quasi  ex  contractu,  for
there  must  always  be  circumstances  in  which  one  person  is  placed  under
an  obligation  to  another  without  any  promise,  express  or  implied,  made
by  him  to  the  latter,  and  which  yet  so  closely  resemble  those  of  contract


Tit  13.]  ^^  OBUGATIONIBUS.  397

sunt:  aut  enim  re  contrahuntur  aut  verbis  aut  litteris  aut
consensu,     de  quibus  singulis  dispiciamus.

as  to  make  this  their  most  reasonable  denomination  :  but  the  fault  of
Justinian  is  that  nothing  which  he  says  about  this  source  of  obligation
suggests  any  general  criterion  by  which  one  can  precisely  draw  the  line
between  it  and  contract  proper,  or  which  accounts  for  the  existence  of  an
obligation  in  the  particular  instances  by  which  he  illustrates  the  concep-
tion. But  the  idea  of  obligation  quasi  ex  delicto,  which  is  open  to  the  same
objection,  is  further  to  be  condemned  as  really  unnecessary,  as  will  appear
from  the  cases  by  which  it  is  exemplified  (Bk.  iv.  5  in£),  most  of  which
are  instances  of  vicarious  responsibility  analogous  to  the  liability  in  tort  of
a  railway  company  or  other  employer  for  the  wrong-doing  or  negligence
of  its  servants.  Its  existence  is  to  be  accounted  for  purely  on  historical
grounds  (see  Hunter's  Roman  Law  p.  xxxvi),  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that
Justinian  tolerated  its  survival.  The  actual  sources  of  obligation  in  Roman
law  may  more  logically  be  arranged  as  follows :  (i)  Agreement,  comprising
the  four  classes  of  contracts,  the  so-called  innominate  contracts,  and  pacta
vestita.  (2)  Circumstances  analogous  to  contract,  including  tutela,  cura,
negotiorum  gestio,  joint  inheritance,  joint  ownership  not  arising  ex  con-
tractu, litis  contestatio,  and  perhaps  the  unjust  enrichment  of  one  man  at
the  cost  of  another  (cf.  Tit.  14.  i.  with  Tit.  27.  6  inf.).  (3)  A  person's
mere  '  unilateral '  expression  of  will  (exemplified  by  some  cases  of  poUici-
tatio,  e.g.  Dig.  50.  12.  i.  i,  ib.  2,  though  as  a  general  rule  'ex  nuda
pollicitatione  nulla  actio  nasdtur'  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  5.  12.  9),  or  that  of
another  by  whose  decease  one  has  taken  a  benefit  (exemplified  by  legacy
and  fideicommissum).  (4)  Judgment  or  magisterial  order.  (5)  Delict.
For  an  enumeration  of  the  sources  of  obligation  in  English  law  see  Sir
W.  R.  Anson's  Law  of  Contract  (Introductory  chapter).

The  idea  of  agreement  (conventio  or  pactio)  underlies  that  of  contractus  :
'  et  est  pactio  duorum  pluriumve  in  idem  placitum  et  consensus '  Dig.  2.
14.  I.  2.  Its  analysis  into  the  elements  of  offer  or  proposal  and  acceptance
is  the  work  rather  of  general  jurisprudence  than  of  a  particular  system,
which  has  been  done  once  for  all  by  Savigny,  Oblig.  §  52,  System  iii.
§§  140,  141 :  cf.  Pollock's  Principles  of  Contract,  chap.  i.  Pactio  then  is
the  genus  of  which  contractus  is  the  species :  the  differentia  lies  in  the
circumstance  that  to  certain  pacta  or  pactiones  a  civilis  obligatio  was
annexed  by  the  older  Roman  civil  law  in  virtue  either  of  their  nature,  or
of  their  being  attended  by  some  other  fact  besides  the  mere  fact  c^  agree-
ment. That,  through  which  a  pactum  is  also  a  contract,  is  usually  called
its  causa  civilis,  and  of  such  causae  civiles  there  are  four,  viz.  (i)  res,  ac-
ceptance of  ownership,  possession  or  detention  of  an  object  by  one  party
from  the  other,  with  an  express  or  implied  undertaking  to  do  something  in
return,  whence  the  four  Real  Contracts.  (2)  The  expression  of  the  agree-
ment in  a  certain  verbal  form  (obligatio  verborum),  that  of  question  and
answer  (stipulatio)  being  regarded  as  the  verbal  contract  par  excellencB.
(3)  The  employment  of  writing  in  a  manner  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the
Romans,  whence  the  obligatio  litteraxum ;  and  (4)  in  transactions  of  four


398  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

XIV.
QUIBUS  MODIS  RE  CONTRAHITUR  OBLIGATIO.

Re  contrahitur  obligatio  veluti  mutui  datione.  mutui  autem
obligatio  in  his  rebus  consistit,  quae  pondere  numero  men-
surave  constant,  veluti  vino  oleo  frumento  pecunia  numerata
aere  argento  auro,  quas  res  aut  numerando  aut  metiendo  aut
pendendo  in  hoc  damus,  ut  accipientium  fiant  et  quandoque
nobis  non  eaedem  res,  sed  aliae  dusdem  naturae  et  qualitatis
reddantur.  unde  etiam  mutuum  appellatum  sit,  quia  ita  a  me
tibi  datur,  ut  ex  meo  tuum  fiat,    ex  eo  contractu  nasdtur

specific  kinds  the  mere  agreement  (consensus)  of  the  parties :  whence  the
consensual  contracts  of  sale,  hire,  partnership,  and  agency.  How  other
pacts  besides  these  were  gradually  made  actionable,  though  not  dignified
by  the  Romans  with  the  name  of  contract  (which  is  less  a  legal  than
a  historical  term)  will  appear  as  we  proceed.

It  is  difiicult  to  say  why  Gains  (whom  Justinian  follows)  discussed  the
four  classes  of  contracts  in  the  order — Real,  Verbal,  Literal,  and  Consen-
suaL  Mr.  Poste  supposes  that  it  was  perhaps  the  order  of  their  chrono-
logical development,  here  following  Savigny,  who  holds  that  mutuum  was
the  earliest  contract  which  the  Roman  law  enforced  by  action :  for  an
acute  criticism  of  this  hypothesis,  and  of  Ortolan's  and  Sir  Henry  Maine's
theory  that  there  was  a  time  when  the  Roman  law  possessed  but  one
common  form  for  contract  and  conveyance  (the  negotium  per  aes  et
libram),  see  Hunter's  Roman  law  pp.  352-379,  where  the  whole  question
of  the  origin  and  development  of  the  Roman  contract  system  is  well  and
fully  discussed.

The  real  and  consensual  contracts  were  said  to  be  iuris  gentium :  and  to
suppose  that  one  of  these  (mutuum),  at  any  rate  in  the  form  in  which  we
know  it,  was  actionable  at  Rome  before  the  fomud  civil  law  contracts
of  nexum  and  stipulatio  seems  entirely  opposed  to  the  general  conclusions
of  historical  law.  On  the  other  hand  it  must  be  admitted  that  mutuum
seems  to  stand  clearly  apart  from  the  three  other  real  contracts:  the
remedy  on  it  was  condictio,  a  stricti  iuris  indicium,  while  they  were  all
pursued  by  bonae  fidei  actions ;  and  in  mutuum  the  borrower  is  made
owner  of  the  thing  borrowed ;  the  lender  '  dat,*  i.  e.  parts  with  his  own
dominium :  whereas  in  the  other  three  nothing  is  ever  transferred  beyond
possession,  so  that  the  transferor  can  always  in  case  of  breach  recover  his
own  by  real  action.  These  are  conjectured  by  Dr.  Hunter  to  have  been
derived  from  fiducia  (the  nature  of  which  has  been  already  described,
p.  331  supr.),  and  the  action  on  which  was  bonae  fidei,  Gaius  iv.  62 :
the  difficulty  of  ascribing  the  same  origin  to  mutuum  lies  in  the  difference
of  the  remedy.

Tit.  XIV.  The  obligation  in  a  real  contract  is  generated  by  delivery,


Tit  14.]  QUIBUS MODIS RE  CONTRAHITUR  OBLIGATIO.  399

actio  quae  vocatur  condictio.  Is  quoque,  qui  non  debitum  1
accepit  ab  eo  qui  per  errorem  solvit,  re  obligator:  daturque
agenti  contra  eum  propter  repetitionem  condicticia  actio,
nam  proinde  ei  condici  potest  *  si  paret  eum  dare  oportere '
ac  si  mutuum  accepisset:  unde  pupillus,  si  ei  sine  tutoris
auctoritate  non  debitum  per  errorem  datum  est,  non  tenetur
indebiti  condictione  non  magis  quam  mutui  datione.  sed
haec  species  obligationis  non  videtur  ex  contractu  consistere,
cum  is  qui  solvendi  animo  dat  magis  distrahere  voluit  nego-

whether  what  passes  is  dominium,  as  in  mutuum,  possession,  as  in  pignus,
or  detention,  as  in  commodatum  and  depositum.  The  bare  agreement  to
deliver  was  by  itself  not  binding :  else  the  contract  would  have  been  not
real,  but  consensual.

A  mutuum  (loan  for  consumption,  as  contrasted  with  commodatum,  loan
for  use)  exists  only  if  the  property  passes  in  what  is  lent :  '  si  non  fiat  tuum,
non  nascitur  obligatio'  Dig.  12.  i.  2.  2,  so  that  as  a  general  rule  no  one
can  lend  in  this  form  unless  he  is  owner.  Dig.  ib.  2. 4,  and  has  the  capacity
of  alienation,  Bk.  li.  8.  2  supr. :  cf.  Dig.  26.  8. 9.  pr.  The  chief  duty  of  the
borrower  is  specified  in  the  text,  viz.  to  give  back  as  much  and  as  good  as
was  lent  him :  not  the  same  thing,  for  only  those  objects  can  be  thus  lent
which  the  commentators  call  res  fungibiles,  and  the  Romans  quantitas ;
or,  as  it  is  otherwise  expressed,  they  have  to  be  returned  not  in  specie,
but  in  genere.  Unless  a  date  for  repayment  was  agreed  upon  either  ex-
pressly or  by  implication,  it  could  be  demanded  at  any  time.  If  interest
was  part  of  the  bargain,  it  could  not  be  sued  for  under  the  mutuum  itself,
owing  to  the  nature  of  the  remedy:  the  agreement  to  pay  it  must  be
entered  into  by  stipulation,  so  that  it,  and  the  promise  to  repay  the  prin-
cipal, were  distinct  contracts.  The  action  on  a  loan  of  money  was  called
condictio  certi,  that  on  any  other  mutuum  condictio  triticaria  :  see  the  re-
ferences in  the  General  Index.  For  the  bearing  of  the  SC.  Macedonianum
on  the  law  of  money  loans  see  Bk.  iv.  7.  7  and  notes  inf.

§  1.  In  Tit.  27.  6  inf.  (derived  from  Gains  in  Dig.  44.  7.  5.  3)  the  person
to  whom  money  not  really  due  is  paid  by  mistake  is  said  to  be  bound  to
return  it  quasi  ex  contractu.  In  Gaius'  time  (iii.  91)  it  had  been  a  moot
point  whether  a  pupillus  to  whom  such  a  payment  had  been  made  without
his  guardian's  auctoritas  was  liable  to  condictio  indebiti ;  perhaps  this  was
part  of  the  larger  question  whether  a  pupillus  was  bound  even  naturaliter  by
his  unauthorized  contracts,  Dig.  26.  8.  5.  pr.  and  i.  Gaius  himself  was  in
favour  of  the  affirmative  opinion,  which  on  principle  seems  right,  for  (as
Mr.  Poste  says)  condictio  was  not  founded  on  contract,  but  on  the  fact
that  a  defendant  had  been  without  cause  enriched  at  the  expense  of  the
plaintiff.

Condictio  indebiti  lay  only  under  the  following  conditions  :

(i)  What  is  paid  must  not  really  be  owed  by  the  one  party  to  the  other,
even  naturaliter :  '  si  quod  dominus  servo  debuit  manumisso  solvit,  quam-


40O  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

2  tium  quam  contrahere.  Item  is  cui  res  aliqua  utenda  datur,
id  est  commodatur,  re  obligatur  et  tenetur  commodati  actione*
sed  is  ab  eo  qui  mutuum  accepit  longe  distat :  namque  non
ita  res  datur,  ut  eius  fiat,  et  ob  id  de  ea  re  ipsa  restituenda
tenetur.  et  is  quidem  qui  mutuum  accepit,  si  quolibet  fortuito
casu  quod  accepit  amiserit,  veluti  incendio  ruina  naufragio
aut  latronum  hostiumve  incursu,  nihilo  minus  obligatus  per-
manet.  at  is  qui  utendum  accepit  sane  quidem  exactam
diligentiam  custodiendae  rei  praestare  iubetur  nee  sufficit  ei
tantam  diligentiam  adhibuisse,  quantam  suis  rebus  adhibere
solitus  est,  si  modo  alius  diligentior  poterit  eam  rem  cus-
todire :  sed  propter  maiorem  vim  maioresve  casus  non  tenetur,
s\  modo  non  huius  culpa  is  casus  intervenerit :  alioquin  si  id
quod  tibi  commodatum  est  peregre  ferre  tecum  malueris  et
vel    incursu  hostium   praedonumve  vel    naufragio   amiseris,

vis  existimans  ei  aliqua  teneri  actione,  tamen  repetere  non  potent,  quia
naturale  agnovit  debitum '  Dig.  12. 6. 64,  *  indebitum  est  non  tantum^  quod
omnino  non  debetur,  sed  et  quod  alii  debetur,  si  alii  solvatur,  aut  si  idy
quod  alius  debebat,  alius,  quasi  ipse  debeat,  sol  vat '  Dig.  ib.  65.  9.  If  the
defendant  in  an  action  in  which  '  lis  crescit  in  duplum '  (Tit  27.  7  in£)  ad-
mitted his  liability  and  paid  the  single  damages,  and  subsequently  was
able  to  show  that  in  fact  he  had  not  been  liable,  he  could  not  recover  the
money  as  indebitum  (loc.  cit..  Gains  ii.  283),  on  the  ground  that  his  volun-
tary payment  was  in  effect  a  compromise,  and  so  by  implication  a  contract.
On  this  principle  money  paid  under  a  supposed  but  non-existent  judgment
was  irrecoverable,  Dig.  10.  2.  36 :  conversely,  if,  though  there  is  an  actual
debt,  the  debtor  pays  something  different  from  what  he  really  owes,  he  can
recover,  Dig.  12. 6.  32.  3.

(2)  The  payment  must  be  made  in  error :  '  et  quidem  si  indebitum
ignorans  solvit,  per  banc  actionem  condicere  potest :  sed  si  sciens  se  non
debere  solvit,  cessat  repetitio'  Dig.  12.  6.  i.  i :  and  this  in  some  cases
even  if  the  mistake  was  one  of  law,  Dig.  36.  4.  i.  pr.

(3)  The  payment  must  be  accepted  by  the  payee  in  good  faith ;  i.  e.  he
must  believe  the  debt  to  be  due :  else  he  commits  theft,  and  should  be
sued  by  condictio  furtiva,  which  excludes  the  condictio  indebiti :  Dig.  47.
2.  43.  pr. ;  13.  I.  18.

The  defendant  in  condictio  indebiti,  if  judgment  went  against  him,  was
not  bound  to  restore  the  whole  of  what  had  been  paid  him,  but  only  so
far  as  he  was  enriched  by  the  payment  at  the  time  of  litis  contestatio :
'  bonae  fidei  possessor  in  quantum  locupletior  factus  est  tenetur '  Dig.  12.
6.  3 ;  ib.  26.  12  ;  ib.  32.  pr.

§  2.  The  duties  of  the  borrower  in  a  commodatum  besides  that  of  rea-
sonable care  (diligentia,  for  which  see  Excursus  VI  at  the  end  of  this


Tit.  14.]  QUIBUS MODIS RE  CONTRAHITUR  OBLIGATIO.  401

dubium  non  est,  quin  de  restituenda  ea  re  tenearis.  com-
modata  autem  res  tunc  proprie  intellegitur,  si  nulla  mercede
accepta  vel  constituta  res  tibi  utenda  data  est.  alioquin
mercede  interveniente  locatus  tibi  usus  rei  videtur  :  gratuitum
enim  debet  esse  commodatum.  Praeterea  et  is,  apud  quern  3
res  aliqua  deponitur,  re  obligatur  et  actione  deposit!,  qui  et
ipse  de  ea  re  quam  accepit  restituenda  tenetur.  sed  is  ex  eo
solo  tenetur,  si  quid  dolo  commiserit,  culpae  autem  nomine,
id  est  desidiae  atque  neglegentiae,  non  tenetur :  itaque  securus

Book)  were  (i)  to  restore  the  object  lent  at  the  time  agreed  upon,  or  so
soon  as  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  lent  was  satisfied :  it  could  be  re-
demanded  earlier  only  upon  breach  of  another  general  term  of  the  con-
tract, viz.  (2)  to  use  it  only  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  lent :  to  use  it
for  others  was  theft,  if  the  borrower  was  aware  that  the  other  would  not
have  permitted  it,  Bk.  iv.  i.  6-8  inf.,  (3)  to  return  it  in  as  good  condition
as  when  received,  excepting  such  deterioration  as  naturally  results  from  its
use,  or  as  might  reasonably  have  been  expected :  '  si  reddita  quidem  sit
res  commodata,  sed  deterior  reddita,  non  videtur  reddita,  quae  deterior
facta  redditur,  nisi  quod  interest  praesLetur :  proprie  enim  dicitur  res  non
reddita  quae  deterior  redditur '  Dig.  13.  6.  3.  i  :  for  the  exceptions  see  ib.
23,  and  5. 7,  cited  in  Hunter's  Roman  Law  p.  302,  (4)  to  restore  not  only  it,
but  also  any  gain  which  he  may  have  made  by  using  it  in  a  manner  not
authorized  by  the  contract,  Dig.  ib.  13.  i.

Like  depositum,  pignus,  and  mandatum,  commodatum  is  said  to  gene-
rate an  obligation  only  imperfectly  bilateral :  i.  e.  as  a  general  rule,  only
one  of  the  parties  (the  borrower)  is  bound,  and  only  one  (the  lender)  is
entitled.  But  very  often  a  liability  of  the  latter  will  arise  from  circum-
stances posterior  to  the  contract  itself :  thus,  in  commodatum,  though  (4)
supr.  implies  that  all  ordinary  expenses  in  connection  with  the  object
lent  must  be  borne  by  the  borrower,  the  lender  will  be  bound  to  indemnify
him  for  any  extraordinary  costs  necessarily  incurred :  e.  g.  *  quidquid
in  rem  commodatam  ob  morbum  vel  aliam  rationem  impensum  est  a
domino  recipi  potest '  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  2.  4.  i :  or  for  any  injury  caused
by  it  to  the  borrower  or  his  property,  if  this  can  be  attributed  to  the
fault  of  the  lender :  e.g.  Dig.  13.  6.  22.  These  duties  can  be  enforced
against  the  lender  either  by  retentio  (lien)  or  by  actio  commodati  (con-
traria).

§  8.  Like  commodatum,  depositum  was  a  gratuitous  contract :  in  the
absence  of  special  agreement,  the  depositary's  duties  were  as  follow :
(i)  it  is  commonly  said  that  he  is  answerable  only  for  dolus  (and  culpa
Lata) :  see  the  text  above ;  Dig.  13.  6.  5.  2 :  16.  3.  i.  8 :  but  he  is  answer-
able also  for  culpa  levis  in  concreto  even' where  it  does  not  amount  to
culpa  lata:  'nisi  tamen  ad  suum  modum  curam  in  deposito  praestat,
fraude  non  caret :  nee  enim  salva  fide  minorem  his  quam  suis  rebus  dili-
gentiam  praestabit '  Dig.  16.  3.  32,  hence  he  was  not  as  a  rule  answerable

D  d


402  INSTITUTIONUM  LlBRl  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

est  qui  parum.diligenter  custoditam  rem  furto  amisit,  quia,
qui  negl^enti  amico  rem  custodiendam  tradit,  suae  facilitati

if  the  property  was  stolen,  though  as  a  rule  it  was  presumed  that  allowing
theft  argued  absence  of  diligentia  exacta,  Dig.  17.  2.  52.  3 :  (2)  to  return
it  in  as  good  condition  as  when  delivered  to  him,  unless  its  deterioration  is
due  to  causes  not  within  the  ken  of  that  degree  of  diligence  which  he  is
bound  to  show,  Dig.  16.  3.  i.  16,  (3)  to  restore  it  (and  any  fruits  it  nuiy
have  borne  while  in  his  custody,  Dig.  22.  i.  38.  10)  on  demand :  even  if  a
time  was  agreed  upon  for  its  return,  he  must  give  it  up  before  if  required,
Cod.  4.  34.  II.  pr.  The  obligation  to  return  a  depositum  was  absolute :
so  that  even  if  the  depositary  alleged  that  it  belonged  to  him,  he  must
first  give  it  up,  and  then  might  claim  the  dominium  by  real  action,  Cod.
4.  34.  II.  Lastly,  (4)  be  might  not  use  the  depositum  :  such  use  without
the  depositor's  consent  amounted  to  theft,  Bk.  iv.  i.  6  inf.,  unless  made
bona  fide,  in  which  case  he  must  give  up  all  profit  which  had  accrued  to
him  thereby.  Cod.  4.  34.  4.

The  same  duties  might  be  incurred  ex  post  facto  by  the  depositor  as
by  the  commodator,  but  he  was  required  to  show  a  higher  degree  of  dili-
gentia, the  contract  being  in  his  interest  alone  :  the  depositarius,  however,
could  enforce  them  only  by  actio  depositi  (contraria),  not  by  retentio  or
lien,  Cod.  4.  34-  11.  A  peculiarity  of  the  actio  depositi  directa  was  that
in  it  no  compensatio  or  set  off  by  the  defendant  was  allowed,  Bk.  iv.  6.  30
inf.

If  the  deposit  was  occasioned  by  pressing  and  irresistible  necessity^
e.g.  by  tumultus,  incendium,  ruina,  or  naufragium— the  liability  of  the
depositarius  was  doubled  in  respect  of  damages :  this  is  usually  called
depositum  miserabile :  '  de  eo,  quod  tumultus,  incendii,  niinae,  naufragii
causa  depositum  est,  in  heredem  de  dolo  mortui  actio  est  pro  hereditaria
portione  et  in  simplum  et  intra  annum  quoque :  in  ipsum  et  in  solidum
et  in  duplum  et  in  perpetuum  datur '  Dig.  16.  3.  18 :  cf.  Bk.  iv.  6.  17  and
23  inf.    The  liability  had  always  been  in  duplum  when  the  deposit  was
made  by  fiducia :   in  other  words,  a  denial  of  the  trust  was  treated  as
a  furtum  nee  manifestum.    When  the  praetor  made  a  violation  of  the
duties  incurred  by  mere  acceptance  of  detention  actionable,  he  reduced
the  damages  by  one  half:  ^ex  causa  depositi  lege  duodecim  tabularum  in
duplum  actio  datur,  edicto  praetoris  in  simplum '  Paul.  Sent.  Rec  2. 12. 1 1.
Two  varieties  of  the  contract  are  sequestration  and  the  so-called  depo-
situm irregulare.    The  first  is  the  deposit  of  property  by  two  or  more
persons  in  order  to  withdraw  it  from  the  disposition  of  both  or  all,  espe-
cially where  the  title  to  it  is  in  dispute :  here  the  depositarius,  or,  as  he
was  specifically  called,  sequester,  might  by  special  arrangement  have
civil  possession  (p.  340  supr.)  in  order  to  prevent  acquisition  of  the  object
per  usucapionem  by  any  of  the  claimants.  Dig.  16.  3.  6.    Depositum
irregulare  exists  where  a  res  fungibilis  is  deposited  with  the  agreement
that  the  depositary  shall  become  its  owner,  and  only  be  bound  to  return
a  similar  quantity  and  quality.    The  thing  is  at  his  risk ;  i.e.  if  it  is  acci-
dentally destroyed,  lost,  or  stolen,  he  alone  suffers ;  but  he  has  the  right


Tit.  14.]  QUI  BUS  MODIS  RE  CONTRA  HITUR  OBLIGATIO.  403

id  imputare  debet  Creditor  quoque  qui  pignus  accepit  re  4
obligatur,  qui  et  ipse  de  ea  ipsa  re  quam  accepit  restituenda
tenetur  actione  pigneraticia.  sed  quia  pignus  utriusque  gratia
datur,  et  debitoris,  quo  magis  ei  pecunia  crederetur,  et  credi-
toris,  quo  magis  ei  in  tuto  sit  creditum,  placuit  sufficere,  quod
ad  earn  rem  custodiendam  exactam  diligentiam  adhiberet:

to  use  it.  The  transaction  differs  from  mutuum,  which  it  so  closely
resembles,  in  the  intention  of  the  parties :  a  matuum  is  given  in  the
interest  of  the  borrower,  or,  if  payment  of  interest  be  stipulated  for,  in
that  of  both  parties :  a  deposit  of  this  kind  is  made  in  the  interest  of  the
depositor  only  :  and  the  difference  was  material,  for  by  the  actio  deposit!,
which  was  bonae  fidei,  interest  was  recoverable,  whether  due  by  agree-
ment or  on  account  of  mora.  The  commonest  illustration  of  the  contract
is  to  be  found  in  banking ;  if  money  were  deposited  unsecured  by  key,
seal,  or  other  fastening,  it  was  presumed  to  be  a  depositum  irregulare :
'. . . .  idem  iuris  esse  in  deposito  :  nam  si  quis  pecuniam  numeratam  ita
deposuisset,  ut  neque  dausam  neque  obsignatam  traderet,  sed  adnume-
raret,  nihil  aliud  eum  debere,  apud  quem  deposita  esset,  nisi  tantundem
pecuniae  solvere'  Dig.  19.  2.  31.

§  4.  As  a  source  of  rights  in  rem,  pignus  has  been  already  discussed,
p.  332  sq.  supr.  Justinian's  requirement  of  exacta  diligentia  in  the  pledgee^
though  irreconcileable  with  Gaius  in  Dig.  13.  6.  18.  pr.  (where  only  that
qualem  in  suis  rebus  etc.  is  exacted),  is  confirmed  by  Ulpian  and  Paulus
in  Dig.  13.  7.  13.  I ;  ib.  14.  Some  difficulty  is  occasioned  by  the  word
'  sufHcere ' ;  possibly  the  jurist  (perhaps  Gaius)  from  whom  the  text  was
derived,  after  describing  commodatum,  and  saying  that  the  borrower  was
answerable  for  exacta  diligentia,  went  on  '  in  pledge,  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  sufficient  that  the  pledgee  should  be  as  careful  as  in  suis  rebus ; '
and  the  compilers  of  the  Institutes,  while  altering  the  degree  of  diligentia
to  agree  with  Ulpian  and  Paulus,  omitted  to  alter  sufficere  into  some  such
word  as  requiri  (Schrader).

The  chief  other  duties  of  the  pledgee  were  (i)  to  return  the  property
pledged  when  the  debt  was  paid,  or  the  ius  pignoris  otherwise  deter-
mined. The  general  rule  too  is  that  he  must  either  give  up  to  the
pledgor  all  the  fruits  or  other  profit  derived  from  the  property,  or  deduct
their  value  from  the  amount  of  the  debt.  Dig.  13.  7.  22.  pr.:  but  on  this
point  there  was  often  some  special  agreement,  e.  g.  antichresis.  (2)  If  he
exercised  the  right  of  sale,  he  was  bound  to  hand  over  to  the  pledgor  only
what  remained  after  discharging  the  principal  debt  with  interest,  unless
by  his  own  fault  he  sold  it  for  less  than  its  real  value :  in  which  case  he
was  liable  to  pay  the  difference  himself.

The  possible  duties  to  which  the  pledgor  might  become  liable  ex  post
facto  correspond  to  those  which  have  been  noticed  under  commodatum :
he  was  also  bound  (i)  to  indemnify  the  pledgee  against  all  liabilities
which  he  might  incur  in  his  efforts  to  sell  the  property  at  the  highest
possible  price,  Dig.  13.  7.  22.  4;  (2)  to  deliver  it  up  when  required  for

D  d  2


404  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

quam  si  praestiterit  et  aliquo  fortuito  casu   rem  amiserit,
securum  esse  nee  impediri  creditum  petere.


sale,  if  it  had  been  left  in  his  hands  on  hire  or  as  precarium  ;  (3)  to  com-
pensate his  creditor  for  any  loss  he  might  have  suffered  through  his
pledging  to  him  a  res  aliena,  and  so  constituting  in  his  favour  an  unreal
ius  pignoris,  Dig.  13.  7.  i.  2.

The  principle  of  the  real  contracts  is  part  perfonnance :  their  causa
civilis  was  the  fact  that  one  of  the  parties  had  done  all  that  he  had
primarily  undertaken,  or  rather  that  the  other  had  in  a  sense  accepted
performance  from  him.  Shortly  after  the  fall  of  the  Republic,  and  per-
haps, as  has  been  supposed,  through  the  influence  of  the  jurist  Labeo
(Dig.  19.  5.  I.  I ;  ib.  19.  pr. ;  ib.  20.  pr.),  the  Roman  contract  system
received  a  considerable  extension  by  a  more  general  recognition  of  this
principle.  Every  agreement,  even  though  not  belonging  to  any  of  the
three  hitherto  established  classes  of  contract,  in  which  an  act  on  the  one
side  was  the  consideration  for  an  act  on  the  other,  was  at  length,  though
only  by  a  gradual  development,  held  enforceable  by  action  at  the  suit  of
that  party  who  had  performed  all  to  which  he  was  bound  under  its  terms :
*  sed  et  si  in  alium  contractum  res  non  transeat,  subsit  tamen  causa,  ele-
ganter  Aristo  Celso  respondit,  esse  obligationem,  ut  puta  dedi  tibi  rem,
ut  mihi  aliam  dares,  dedi,  ut  aliquid  facias,  hoc  (rvpoXXoyfia  esse,  et  hinc
nasci  civilem  obligationem '  Dig.  2.  14.  7.  3.  The  essential  marks  of  such
actionable  agreement  thus  are  (i)  mutuality  ;  there  must  be  a  avvdk\ayixa^
e.  g.  an  act  must  be  promised  on  the  one  side  in  return  for  an  act  on  the
other ;  (2)  there  must  have  been  performance  on  one  side ;  the  mere
bilateral  agreement  gives  rise  to  no  civil  obligation :  *  item  emptio  ac
venditio  nuda  consentientium  voluntate  contrahitur,  permutatio  autem  ex
re  tradita  initium  obligationi  praebet,  alioquin,  si  res  nondum  tradita  sit,
nudo  consensu  constitui  obligationem  dicemus,  quod  in  his  duntaxat
receptum  est,  quae  nomen  suum  habent,  ut  in  emptione,  venditione,
conductione,  mandato'  Dig.  19.  4.  i.  2.

Such  agreements  are  by  the  modem  civilians  called  innominate  (real)
contracts  ;  the  Romans  themselves  do  not  call  them  '  contractus,'  and  in
foct  have  no  general  designation  for  them.  Though  they  are  roughly
classified  by  Paulus  according  to  the  possible  acts  which  might  be  the
respective  considerations  for  one  another  (*  aut  enim  do  tibi  ut  des,  aut
do  ut  facias,  aut  facio  ut  des,  aut  facio  ut  facias '  Dig.  19.  5.  5.  pr.),  the
more  usual  clue  to  their  existence  is  the  mention  of  the  action  by  which
they  were  pursued,  the  actio  civilis  in  factum  or  praescriptis  verbis  (Tit.
24.  I  and  2  infr.),  by  which  the  party  who  had  performed  could  exact
counter  performance  or  recover  damages  from  the  other ;  against  him  no
action  lay  until  such  counter  perfonnance  had  ensued,  so  that,  if  that
other  refused  to  keep  his  promise,  and  his  own  part  of  the  agreement  had
consisted  in  a  '  dare,'  he  could  redemand  what  he  had  conveyed  by  the
older  remedy  known  as  condictio  causa  data  causa  non  secuta;  or  he
was  free  to  change  his  mind,  and  sue  for  reconveyance,  as  it  is  said, '  ex


Tit.  15.]  DE   VERBORUM  OBLIGATIONE.  405

XV.

DE  VERBORUM   OBLIGATIONE.

Verbis  obligatio  contrahitur  ex  interrogatione  et  responsu,
cum  quid  dari  fierive  nobis  stipulamur.  ex  qua  duae  pro-
ficiscuntur  actiones,  tam  condictio,  si  certa  sit  stipulatio,  quam
ex  stipulatu,  si  incerta.  quae  hoc  nomine  inde  utitur,  quia
stipulum  apud  veteres  firmum  appellabatur,  forte  a  stipite
descendens.

mera  poenitentia : '  '  sed  si  tibi  dedero,  ut  Stichum  manumittas,  si  non
facis,  possum  condicere,  aut  si  me  poeniteat,  condicere  possum'  Dig.
12.  4.  3.  2.

That  the  general  principle  was  only  gradually  developed  is  dear  from
a  comparison  of  Dig.  19.  5.  5.  3  with  9.  15  and  22  of  the  same  Title,  and
with  Cod.  2.  4.  6;  in  the  first  of  these  passages  Paulus  says  the  actio
praescriptis  verbis  will  not  lie  in  a  case  of  facio  ut  des,  in  the  others  it  is
held  applicable,  so  that  probably  it  may  be  inferred  that  for  some  while
only  those  agreements  were  enforceable  by  this  remedy  in  which  the
part  performance  by  which  the  action  was  supported  was  a  conveyance
(dare).

The  commonest  examples  of  innominate  contract  are  permutatio,
exchange,  for  which  see  Tit.  23.  2  infr.  :  aestimatum,  the  acceptance  of
property  valued  at  a  certain  maximum  under  the  condition  of  either
returning  it  or  paying  the  price  at  which  it  is  valued  :  ^  actio  de  aestimato
proponitur  tollendae  dubitationis  gratia,  fuit  enim  magis  dubitatum  cum
res  aestimata  vendenda  datur,  utrum  ex  vendito  sit  actio  propter  aesti-
mationem,  an  ex  locato,  quasi  rem  vendendam  locasse  videar,  an  ex
conducto,  quasi  operas  conduxissem,  an  mandati :  melius  itaque  visum
est,  hanc  actionem  proponi :  quoties  enim  de  nomine  contractus  am-
bigeretur,  conveniret  tamen  aliquam  actionem  dari,  dandam  aestima-
toriam  praescriptis  verbis  actionem '  Dig.  19.  3.  i.  pr. :  transactio  or
compromise.  Dig.  2.  15,  Cod.  2.  4,  and  precarium  or  permissive  oc-
cupancy, at  any  rate  in  the  later  stages  of  the  law  :  '  cum  quid  precario
rogatum  est,  non  solum  interdicto  uti  possumus,  sed  et  incerti  con-
dictione,  id  est,  praescriptis  verbis'  Dig.  43.  26.  19.  2.  But  the  practical
value  of  the  actio  praescriptis  verbis  is  best  realized  in  cases  which
cannot  certainly  be  regarded  as  within  the  principle  of  any  named  (i.  e.
real  or  consensual)  contract,  and  in  which  the  jurists  said  *  tutius  esse^
praescriptis  verbis  agere.'

Tit.  XV.  As  forms  of  verbal  contract,  distinct  from  stipulatio,  are
usually  mentioned  dotis  dictio,  votum,  and  iurata  promissio  liberti.  The
first,  which  had  disappeared  before  Justinian,  was  the  constitution  of  a  dos
in  solemn  form,  open  only  to  the  woman  with  her  guardian's  auctoritas,
her  father  or  paternal  ascendant,  and  her  debtor  acting  by  her  instruc-
tions (Ulpian,  Reg.  6.  2,  Cic.  pro  Flacco  35.  86,  pro  Caec.  25.  72),  but


4o6  LWSTITLTIOMM  LIBRI  QL'ATTUOR.       [Lib.  III.

1      In    hac   re   olim   talia   verba    tradita   fuenint:    spondes?
spondeo,   promittis?    promitto,    fidepromittis  ?    fidepromitto,

binding  only  if  accepted ;  the  fonn  is  preserved  in  Terence,  Andr.  5.
4.  47  '  CAr.  dos,  Pampbile,  est  decern  t2Jenta ;  P.  accipio ; '  on  which  we
have  the  commentary,  'iUe  nisi  dim«ft  aodpio  dos  non  esset:  datio
enim  ab  acceptione  oonfirmatnr,  nee  potest  videri  datum  id,  quod  non
acceptom : '  cf.  Seneca,  Controv.  1.6  'qtiidam  dictas  non  acoepere  dotes.'
Votum  was  a  mere  promise  (pollidtatio)  made  for  a  religions  parpose,  or
in  fiivour  of  a  church  or  pioos  foundation.  Dig.  5a  12.  2.  Lastly,  a  freed-
man  on  manumission  could  effectually  bind  himself  to  certain  services  to
his  patron  by  mere  oath,  Dig.  38.  i.  7,  which  between  ordinary  persons
imposed  no  actionable  obligation  whatever :  c£  Tit.  la  i  and  note  supr.

But  the  verbal  contract  ur'  '{oj^  is  stipuiationy  a  disposition  in
which  the  promisor  bound  himself  by  returning  an  oral,  affirmative
answer  to  the  oral  question  of  the  promisee  (sdpulatDr),  Cic  pro  Caec.  3.
Its  essence  lies,  at  any  rate  in  the  later  periods  of  Roman  law,  not  in
the  necessity  of  observing  prescribed  forms  of  words,  but  in  the  sub-
stantial correspondence  between  question  and  answer,  and  in  the  formal
requirement  of  the  presence  of  both  parties:  see  on  Tit  19. 12  inf.  This
is  no  special  kind  of  contract,  diflfering  from  others  in  the  sense  in  which
sale  differs  from  hire,  or  deposit  from  pledge ;  it  is  only  a  universal  form
into  which  any  conceivable  agreement  can  be  thrown,  and  into  which
they  frequently  were  thrown  (even  though  actionable  in  thems^es,  e.  g.
sale,  apart  frt>m  the  form)  on  account  of  the  great  superiority  to  creditors
which  stipulation  possessed  over  the  real  and  consensual  contracts,  except
mutuum,  in  the  nature  of  the  action  by  which  it  could  be  enforced.  That
action,  as  is  said  in  the  text,  was  condictio :  'the  short  and  sharp  remedy '
(as  Mr.  Poste  calls  it)  *  which,  when  brought  for  certa  pecunia  credita,
was  the  more  formidable  to  a  dishonest  litigant,  as  it  was  accompanied  by
a  sponsio  poenalis,  whereby  the  vanquished  party  forfeited  a  third  of  the
sum  in  litigation,  in  addition,  if  he  was  defendant,  to  the  original  daim.'
The  action  on  the  real  and  consensual  contracts,  on  the  other  hand,  was
bonae  fidei,  and  in  many  points  favoured  the  defendant :  see  on  Bk.  iv.
6.  28  infr.  For  the  difference  between  condictio  certi,  condictio  triticaria,
and  actio  ex  stipulatu,  see  Gaius  iv.  136,  and  references  s.  v. '  condictio '  in
the  General  Index.

Ihering  (Geist,  §  46.  note  747)  considers  Justinian's  derivation  of
stipulatio  from  stipulum,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec  5.  7.  i,  in  the  sense  of  *  firm,*
<  settled,'  to  be  correct.  Savigny  connects  it  with  stips,  and  uses  Festus'
interpretation  of  the  word  (stipem  esse  nummum  signatum,  testimonium
esse  et  id,  quod  datur  stipendium  militi,  et  cum  spondetur  pecunia,  quod
stipulari  dicitur)  to  support  his  theory  that  stipulation  in  origin  rested  on
the  fiction  of  a  money  loan.  On  the  other  hand,  Isidorus  says  (Orig.  4.
24)  *  dicta  stipulatio  a  stipula :  veteres  enim,  quando  sibi  aliquid  promit-
tebant,  stipulam  tenentes  frangebant,  quam  iterum  iungentes,  sponsiones
suas  agnoscebant.'

§  L  The  only  form  in  which  a  stipulation  could  be  originally  concluded


Tit.  15.]  DE  VERBORUM  OBLIGATIONE.  407

fideiubes?  iideiubeo^  dabis?  dabo,  fades?  faciam.  utrum
autem  Latina  an  Graeca  vel  qua  alia  lingua  stipulatio  con-
cipiatur,  nihil  interest,  scilicet  si  uterque  stipulandum  inteU
lectum  huius  linguae  habeat:  nee  necesse  est  eadem  lingua
utrumque  uti,  sed  sufiicit  congruenter  ad  interrogatum  re-
spondere :  quin  etiam  duo  Graeci  Latina  lingua  obligationem
contrahere  possunt  sed  haec  soUemnia  verba  olim  quidem
in  usu  fuerunt,  postea  autem  Leoniana  constitutio  lata  est,
quae  soliemnitate  verborum  sublata  sensum  et  consonantem
intellectum  ab  utraque  parte  solum  desiderat,  licet  quibus-
cumque  verbis  expressus  est.

Omnis  stipulatio  aut  pure  aut  in  diem  aut  sub  condicione  2

was  '  spondes  ?  spondeo.'  So  long  as  this  was  the  case  the  contract  was
strictly  iuris  civilis,  and  no  one  could  be  a  party  to  it  who  was  not  a  civis :
in  fact,  Gaius  says,  so  peculiariy  Roman  was  this  form,  that  it  could  not
even  be  expressed  in  Greek,  'quamvis  dicatur  a  Graeca  voce  (igurata
esse'  (Festus,  s.v.  spondere,  cnrei^M,  cnroi^d^),  and  he  proceeds  (iii.  94)  to
criticise  as  '  nimium  subtiliter  dictum '  the  opinion  of  those  who  held  that
there  was  an  exception  to  this  rule  when  the  Roman  emperor  concluded
a  treaty  of  peace  with  an  independent  foreign  monarch ;  for,  as  he  adds,
*  si  quid  ad  versus  pactionem  fiat,  non  ex  stipulatu  agitur,  sed  iure  belli  res
vindicatur.'  The  other  forms  mentioned  in  the  text,  however,  were  iuris
gentium,  Gaius  iii.  93,  and  therefore  were  open  to  peregrini  no  less  than
to  cives,  though  it  does  not  seem  that  in  Gaius*  time  they  might  be
expressed  in  any  language;  he  mentions  only  Greek  and  Latin.  The
constitution  of  Leo,  referred  to  in  the  text,  and  issued  A.  D.  472,  ran
'omnes  stipulationes,  etiamsi  non  soUemnibus  vel  directis  sed  quibus-
cunque  verbis  consensu  contrahentium  compositae  sunt  legibus  cognitae
suam  habeant  firmitatem  *  Cod.  8.  38.  10.  As  early  as  the  time  of  Paulus,
who  flourished  about  3co  A.D.,  the  rule  had  become  established  that
a  document  stating  a  promise  made  by  one  person  to  another  established
a  presumption  that  there  had  been  a  genuine  oral  stipulation,  though  this
could  be  rebutted  by  the  defendant  proving  that  he  and  the  plaintiff  had
not  met  on  the  day  of  the  alleged  contract,  so  that  no  actual  stipulation
could  have  been  possible,  or  that  there  had  been  no  intention  of  making
a  stipulation,  but  only  a  pact,  Dig.  2.  14.  7.  12,  cited  on  Tit.  19.  17  inf.
The  rule  stated  in  that  §  is  taken  literally  from  Paulus,  Sent.  Rec.  5.  7.  2.
For  Justinian's  own  enactment  on  the  subject  of  written  stipulations  see
Tit.  19.  12  inf.  and  notes,  and  cf.  Excursus  VIII  (on  Tit.  21)  at  the  end
of  this  Book.

§  2.  For  condicio  and  dies  see  on  Bk.  i.  20.  i  supr.,  and  for  the  ex-
pressions dies  cedit,  dies  venit,  on  Bk.  ii.  20.  2a  The  sense  in  which
Justinian  here  uses  the  phrase  in  diem  is  not  uniform  :  '  circa  diem  duplex
inspectio  est :  nam  vel  ex  die  incipit  obligatio,  aut  confertur  in  diem :  ex


4d8  INSTITUTIOXUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

fit  pure  veluti  ^quinque  aureos  dare  spondes?'  idque  con-
festim  peti  potest  in  diem,  cum  adiecto  die  quo  pecunia
solvatur  stipulatio  fit:  veluti  'decern  aureos  primis  kalendis
Martiis  dare  spondes?'  id  autem,  quod  in  diem  stipulamur,
statim  quidem  debetur,  sed  peti  prius  quam  dies  veniat  non
potest :  ac  ne  eo  quidem  ipso  die,  in  quem  stipulatio  facta
est,  peti  potest,  quia  totus  dies  arbitrio  solventis  tribui  debet,
neque  enim  certum  est  eo  die,  in  quem  promissum  est,  datum
3  non  esse,  priusquam  praetereat.  At  si  ita  stipuleris,  'decem
aureos  annuos  quoad  vivam  dare  spondes?'  et  piu'e  facta
obligatio  intellegitur  et  perpetuatur,  quia  ad  tempus  deberi
non  potest,    sed  heres  petendo  pacti  exceptione  submove-

die,  veluti  KaL  Martiis  dare  spondes  ?  cuius  natura  haec  est,  ut  ante  diem
non  exigatur,  ad  diem  autem  "  usque  ad  Kalendas  dare  spondes  ?  ^ '  The
confusion  perhaps  arises  from  the  fact  that  where  a  stipulation  is  ex  die,
in  the  sense  of  the  passage  cited,  the  solutio  is  '  dilata  in  diem,'  as  is  said
in  Dig.  45.  1.  46.  pr.  The  rule  laid  down  by  Justinian  about  such  pro-
mises may  be  otherwise  expressed  by  saying  that  until  the  arrival  of  the
dies  the  obligatio  is  naturalis  only,  and  cannot  be  sued  upon  ;  but  if  the
promisor  voluntarily  pays  before  the  time,  he  cannot  recover  what  he  has
paid  as  indebitum,  and  there  is  a  commodum  repraesentationis  (ii.  2a
14  supr.)  in  favour  of  the  promisee ;  *  in  diem  debitor  adeo  debitor  est,  ut
ante  diem  solutum  repetere  non  possit'  Dig.  12.  6.  10.  With  the  latter
part  of  the  section'  cf.  Tit.  19.  26  inf.

§  8.  Dr.  Hunter  (Roman  Law  p.  465)  seems  to  be  wrong  in  affirming
this  rule  of  obligations  generally,  in  spite  of  the  universality  of  the  ex-
pression '  ad  diem  deberi  non  potest.'  In  fact,  it  is  true  only  of  stipulation,
and  its  reason  is  the  strict  nature  of  the  contract,  in  which  the  intention
was  less  regarded  than  the  words.  It  has  no  application  to  legacies,  for
'  in  condicionibus  testamentorum  voluntatem  potius  quam  verba  con-
siderari  oporteat '  Dig.  35.  i.  loi.  pr. ;  accordingly  a  bequest  of  an  annuity
for  a  person's  lifetime  was  construed  as  a  number  of  separate  bequests,
that  of  the  first  annual  payment  being  made  '  pure,'  the  following  ones
under  the  suspensive  condition  of  the  legatee's  living  to  the  day  on
which  they  respectively  fell  due,  Dig.  38.  i.  4 ;  ib.  8 ;  36.  2.  10.  For  a
case  of  innominate  contract  in  conflict  with  Dr.  Hunter  cf.  Dig.  2.  14.
52. 3  *  de  inofficioso  patris  testamento  acturis,  ut  eis  certa  quantitas,  quoad
viveret  heres,  praestaretur,  pactus  est:  produci  ad  perpetuam  praesta-
tionem  id  pactum  postulabatur :  rescriptum  est  neque  iure  ullo  neque
aequitate  tale  desiderium  admitti.'  Even  before  the  introduction  of  the
exceptiones  pacti  and  doli  the  harsh  result  of  the  rule  might  be  avoided
by  couching  the  stipulation  in  a  different  form  ;  instead  of  promising  an
annuity  of  100  aurei  for  five  years,  500  might  be  promised  in  five  equal
shares  ex  die ;  or  instead  of  promising  100  per  annum  for  a  person's


Tit.  15.]  DE  VERBORUM  OBLIGATIONE.  409

bitur.  Sub  condicione  stipulatio  fit,  cum  in  aliquem  casum  4
differtur  obligatio,  ut.  si  aliquid  factum  fuerit  aut  non  fuerit,
stipulatio  committatur,  veluti  'si  Titius  consul  factus  fuerit,
quinque  aureos  dare  spondes?'  si  quis  ita  stipuletur  'si  in
Capitolium  non  ascendero,  dare  spondes?'  perinde  erit,  ac
si  stipulatus  esset  cum  morietur  dari  sibi.  ex  condicionali
stipulatione  tantum  spes  est  debitum  iri,  eamque  ipsam  spem
transmittimus,  si,  priusquam  condicio  existat,  mors  nobis
contigerit.     Loca  etiam  inseri  stipulationi  solent,  veluti  *  Car-  5

lifetime,  a  number  of  separate  promises  of  100  might  be  made  ex  die,
each  under  the  suspensive  condition  of  the  promisee's  living  to  such  or
such  a  birthday.

§  4.  We  have  seen  (§  2  supr.)  that  an  immediate,  though  not  necessarily
a  civil,  obligation  arose  from  a  promise  ex  die  ;  e.g.  Kalendis  Martiis  dare
spondes?  A  promise  made  subject  to  a  suspensive  condition — e.g.  si
Titius  consul  fuerit  factus — might  at  first  sight  seem  to  have  no  legal
effect  at  all :  '  ante  condicionem  non  recte  agi,  cum  nihil  ad  interim
debeatur  *  Dig.  20.  i.  13.  5.  Yet  this  is  clearly  not  so  in  fact ;  for  (i)  it  is
said  in  the  text  that  the  promisee's  hope  of  the  condition  being  fulfilled,
and  of  the  debt  so  springing  into  actual  existence,  passes  to  his  heres ;
if  the  conditional  promise  had  no  effect  until  condicio  existit  there  could
be  nothing  to  pass  to  the  heir  at  all,  cf.  Tit.  19.  25  inf.  It  was  otherwise
with  legacies,  on  account  of  their  strictly  personal  nature:  unless  the
condition  were  fulfilled  before  the  legatee's  decease  the  latter's  heir  was
not  benefited.  Dig.  36.  2.  5.  pr.  and  2,  Cod.  6.  51.  7;  cf.  note  on  Bk.  ii.
20.  20  supr.  (2)  The  person  who  will  be  bound  to  an  act  or  forbearance
on  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  is  unable  by  any  act  of  his  own  to
escape  his  possible  liability  in  the  future :  pro  tanto  he  is  bound  already.
This  may  be  illustrated  by  Dig.  17.  2.  27  'si  (socius)  sub  condicione
promiserat  et  distracta  societate  condicio  extitit,  ex  communi  solvendum
est,'  Dig.  45.  I.  78.  pr.  'si  filiusfamilias  sub  condicione  stipulatus  eman-
cipatns  fuerit,  deinde  extiterit  condicio,  patri  actio  competit ; '  cf.  Dig.  20.
I.  13.  5  ;  45.  3.  36.  (3)  Even  more  direct  is  Dig.  44.  7.  42.  pr. '  is,  cui  sub
condicione  legatum  est,  pendente  condicione  non  est  creditor,  sed  tunc
cum  extiterit  condicio,  quamvis  eum,  qui  stipulatus  est  sub  condicione,
placet  etiam  pendente  oon^iQionQ  creditorem  esse.*  Dig.  12. 6.  16,  however,
shows  that  the  language  here  is  unguarded,  and  that  until  the  condition
is  fulfilled  there  was  no  real  obligatio,  even  naturalis,  for  if  payment  were
made  pendente  condicione  the  money  could  be  recovered  by  condictio
indebiti :  cf.  Dig.  ib.  18;  ib.  44;  ib.  56.  Thus  the  legal  position  of
a  promisee  sub  condicione  is  difficult  to  describe ;  there  is  as  yet  no
obligation,  and  yet  he  is  not  absolutely  without  right ;  the  effect  of  the
promise  until  the  condition  is  fulfilled  is  only,  as  Fitting  calls  it,  '  pre-
liminary '  ( Vorwirkung),

§  6.  An  obligation  may  possibly  be  performable  only  in  one  place,  as


4IO  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

thagine  dare  spondes  ?  *  quae  stipulatio  licet  pure  fieri  vide-
atur,  tamen  re  ipsa  habet  tempus  iniectum,  quo  promissor
utatur  ad  pecuniam  Carthagine  dandam.  et  ideo  si  quis  ita
Romae  stipuletur  '  hodie  Carthagine  dare  spondes? *     inutilis

6  erit  stipulatio,  cum  impossibilis  sit  repromissio.  Condi-
ciones,  quae  ad  praeteritum  vel  ad  praesens  tempus  refe-
runtur,  aut  statim  infirmant  obligrationem  aut  omnino  non
differunt :  veluti  *  si  Titius  consul  fuit  *  vel  *  si  Maevius  vivit,
dare  spondes  ? '  nam  si  ea  ita  non  sunt,  nihil  valet  stipulatio :
sin  autem  ita  se  habent,  statim  valet,  quae  enim  per  rerum
naturam  cefta  sunt,  non  morantur  obligationem,  licet  apud
nos  incerta  sint

7  Non  solum  res  in  stipulatum  deduci  possunt,  sed  etiam
facta :  ut  si  stipulemur  fieri  aliquid  vel  non  fieri,     et  in  huius-


happens  often  in  connection  with  immoveable  property.  In  some  cases
again  (as  in  the  text)  the  place  at  which  performance  should  be  made  is
fixed,  either  expressly  or  by  implication,  by  the  parties.  If  this  is  so,
the  debtor  is  neither  bound  nor  entitled  to  perform  elsewhere,  though,  if
the  action  by  which  the  obligation  was  pursued  was  bonae  fidei  (or  even
strict!  iuris,  if  demanding  a  facere)  the  creditor  might  stie  elsewhere,  the
advantage  or  disadvantage  accruing  to  the  defendant  being  taken  into
account  in  fixing  the  damages.  When  the  obligation  was  to  convey
(dare)  a  definite  object  or  quantitas  at  a  definite  place,  this  could  not  be
done  until  after  the  introduction  of  the  praetorian  arbitraria  actio  '  de  eo
quod  certo  loco  dari  oportet,'  Bk.  iv.  6.  31  and  33  inf.  In  all  other  cases
(i.e.  where  no  place  was  fixed  for  the  performance),  the  debtor  was
entitled  to  perform  wherever  he  found  the  creditor,  unless  the  place  was
bona  fide  inconvenient,  Dig.  46.  3.  39,  and  was  bound  to  perform  at  any
place  in  which,  should  he  refuse,  the  creditor  actually  obtained  a  judgment
against  him.  The  only  exceptions  to  this  are  (i)  that  an  heir  cannot  be
compelled  to  pay  legacies  elsewhere  than  where  the  greater  part  of  the
inheritance  is,  Dig.  5.  i .  50.  pr.,  (2)  that  where  a  man  has  to  deliver  a  specific
thing  or  quantity,  he  cannot  be  compelled  to  do  this  elsewhere  than  where
the  thing  or  quantity  actually  is,  unless  the  creditor  will  take  the  risk  and
pay  the  cost  of  removal.  Dig.  5.  i.  38.

§  6.  Where  a  condition  is  really  satisfied,  though  upon  this  point  there
may  be  a  subjective  uncertainty— e.g.  where  A,  not  knowing  that  Titius
has  been  consul,  promises  ten  aurei  if  such  is  the  case,  the  obligation  is
not  really  conditional,  but  absolute ;  hence  legacies  subject  to  such
apparent  conditions  devolved  on  the  heir  of  the  l^atee  if  the  latter
outlived  the  testator.

§  7.  Cf.  Dig.  45.  I.  2.  pr.  ' stipulationum  quaedam  in  dando,  quaedam
in  faciendo  consistunt'    The  advantage  of  the  course  recommended  in


Tit.  i6.]      DE  DUOBUS  REIS  STIPULANDI,  ETC,  411

modi  stipulationibus  optimum  erit  poenam  subicere,  ne
quantitas  stipulationis  in  incerto  sit  ac  necesse  sit  actori
probare,  quid  eius  intersit.  itaque  si  quis  ut  fiat  aliquid
stipuletur,  ita  adici  poena  debet:  *si  ita  factum  non  erit,
turn  poenae  nomine  decem  aureos  dare  spondes?'  sed  si
quaedam  fieri,  quaedam  non  fieri  una  eademque  conceptione
stipuletur,  clausula  erit  huiusmodi  adicienda :  '  si  adversus  ea
factum  erit  sive  quid  ita  factum  non  erit,  tunc  poenae  nomine
decem  aureos  dare  spondes  ? '

XVI.

DE  DUOBUS  REIS  STIPULANDI  ET  PROMITTENDI.

Et  stipulandi  et  promittendi  duo  pluresve  rei  fieri  possunt.
stipulandi  ita,  si  post  omnium  interrogationem  promissor
respondeat  '  spondeo.'  ut  puta  cum  duobus  separatim  stipu-
lantibus  ita  promissor  respondeat  'utrique  vestrum  dare
spondeo ; '  nam  si  prius  Titio  spoponderit,  deinde  alio  inter-

the  text  was  twofold.  The  promisee  was  saved  the  trouble  of  proving
^quid  sua  intersit'  ('plenimque  difficilis  probatio  est,  quanti  cuiusque
intersit,  et  ad  exiguam  summam  deducitur'  Dig.  46.  5.  11);  and  if  the
contract  came  to  be  sued  upon,  the  ground  of  action  was  not  the  promise
to  do,  but  the  promise  to  pay  so  much  in  default,  so  that  the  remedy,
instead  of  being  the  actio  ex  stipulatu,  was  until  Justinian's  time  condictio
certi  with  its  penal  sponsio  of  one  third  of  the  sum  in  dispute  :  '  cum  quis
non  adiecerit  poenam  . . .  incerti  agendum  esse '  Dig.  2.  5.  3.  There  is
also  reason  to  believe  that  in  the  earliest  period  of  the  contract,  stipula-
tions for  the  payment  of  a  sum  of  money  alone  were  valid,  so  that  the
only  practical  mode  of  stipulating  for  anything  else  was  to  make  the  pay-
ment of  a  sum  of  money  conditional  on  the  non-performance  of  the  act
desired.  If  no  interval  was  fixed  for  the  performance  of  an  act  secured
by  a  penalty,  the  latter  could  be  sued  for  unless  the  act  was  performed
within  a  reasonable  time :  *  intra  quantum  autem  temporis,  nisi  detur  quod
arbiter  iusserit,  oommittatur  stipulatio,  videndum  est,  et  si  quidem  dies
adiectus  non  sit,  Celsus  scribit  libro  ii''  Digestonim  inesse  quoddam
modicum  tempus :  quod  ubi  praeterierit,  poena  statim  peti  potest '  Dig.  4.
8.  21. 12.  The  amount  of  the  poena  had  no  measure  except  the  will  of  the
parties,  and  it  might  be  recovered  in  full,  even  though  largely  exceeding
the  value  of  the  act  or  forbearance  stipulated  for,  Dig.  4.  8.  32.  pr. ;  21.  2.
56.  In  English  law  this  is  different:  8  and  9  Will.  111.  c.  11  ;  4  and  5
Anne,  c  16  ;  23  and  24  Vict  c.  126 ;  c£  Sir  W.  R.  Anson's  Law  of  Contract
5th  ed.  p.  262.
Tit.  XVX  For  solidary  and  correal  obligation  (with  one  of  the  modes


412  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

rogante  spondeat,  alia  atque  alia  erit  obligatio  nee  creduntur
duo  rei  stipulandi  tss^.  duo  pluresve  rei  promittendi  ita
fiunt :  *  Maevi,  quinque  aureos  dare  spondes  ?  Sei,  eosdem
quinque  aureos  dare  spondes  ? '  respondeant  singuli  separatim

1  'spondeo.'  Ex  huiusmodi  obligationibus  et  stipulantibus
solidum  singulis  debetur  et  promittentes  singuli  in  solidum
tenentur.  in  utraque  tamen  obligatione  una  res  vertitur :  et
vel   alter  debitum    accipiendo  vel   alter    solvendo    omnium

2  peremit  obligationem  et  omnes  liberat.  Ex  duobus  reis
promittendi  alius  pure,  alius  in  diem  vel  sub  condicione
obligari  potest :  nee  impedimento  erit  dies  aut  eondieio,  quo
minus  ab  eo  qui  pure  obligatus  est  petatur.

XVII.

DE  STIPULATION E  SERVORUM.

Servus  ex  persona  domini  lus  stipulandi  habet.  sed  here-
ditas  in  plerisque  personae  defuncti  vieem  sustinet :  ideoque
quod  servus  hereditarius  ante  aditam  hercditatem  stipulatur,
adquirit  hereditati  ae  per  hoe  etiam  heredi  postea  facto
1  adquiritur.  Sive  autem  domino  sive  sibl  sive  conservo  suo
sive  impersonaliter  servus  stipuletur,  domino  adquirit.  idem
iuris  est  et  in  liberis,  qui  in  potestate  patris  sunt,  ex  quibus

of  creating  which  latter  this  Title  deals)  see  Excursus  VII  at  the  end  of
this  Book.  The  presumption  of  law  was  against  joint  liability,  but  it
could  be  rebutted  by  the  order  of  the  stipulations :  for  if  the  answer  were
made  to  the  same  question  put  by  two  stipulators  successively,  there
could  not  be  two  obligations,  because  the  first  would  be  invalidated  by
the  interposition  of  the  second,  so  that  correality  or  joint  liability  results
from  the  principle  '  ubi  ambigua  oratio  est,  commodissimum  est  id  accipi,
quo  res,  de  qua  agitur,  magis  valeat  quam  pereat '  Dig.  34.  5.  12.

§  L  The  characteristics  pointed  out  in  this  section  do  not  serve  to  draw
the  line  between  solidary  and  correal  obligation  :  see  Excursus  VII.

Tit.  XVn.  A  slave  became  personally  entitled  as  promisee  in  a  con-
tract only  where  he  had  no  master,  or  where  the  master  was  himself  the
promisor — here  because  no  one  could  simultaneously  be  debtor  and  creditor
in  the  same  obligation  :  but  in  both  cases  the  obligatio  was  naturalis  only,
and  did  not  become  civilis  even  by  the  slave's  manumission.  For  excep-
tions to  the  rule  ' hereditas  defuncti  vicem  sustinet'  see  Dig.  41.  i.  61.  I ;
45.  3.  26 ;  47.  2.  68  ;  47. 4.  i.  15.

§  1.  For  '  ex  quibus  causis  adquirere  possunt '  cf. '  si  quid  ex  re  patris


Tit.  1 8.]  DE  DIVISION E  STIPULATIONUM.  413

causis  adquirere  possunt.  Sed  cum  factum  in  stipulatione  2
continebitur,  ommmodo  persona  stipulantis  continetur,  veluti
si  servus  stipuletur,  ut  sibi  ire  agere  liceat :  ipse  enim  tantum
prohiberi  non  debet,  non  etiam  dominus  eius.  Servus  com-  3
munis  stipulando  unicuique  dominorum  pro  portione  dominii
adquirit,  nisi  si  unius  eorum  lussu  aut  nominatim  cui  eorum
stipulatus  est:  tunc  enim  soli  ei  adquiritur.  quod  servus
communis  stipulatur,  si  alteri  ex  dominis  adquiri  non  potest,
solidum  alteri  adquiritur,  veluti  si  res  quam  dari  stipulatus  est
unius  domini  sit.


XVIII.

DE  DIVISIONE  STIPULATIONUM.

Stipulationum  aliae  iudiciales  sunt,  aliae  praetoriae,  aliae
conventionales,  aliae  communes  tam  praetoriae  quam  iudiciales.


ei  obveniat,  . . .  hoc  parent!  adquirat '  Bk.  ii.  9.  i  and  notes  supr. :  note  on
Tit.  28.  pr.  inf.

§  2.  By  factum  here  is  meant  something  which  is  not  a  right,  and
therefore  cannot  become  part  of  the  property  ( Vermogen)  of  the  dominus,
e.g.  Detention,  or  the  mere  personal  license  to  cross  land  (which  is  not
a  servitude)  suggested  in  the  text :  '  quod  dicitur  patrem  filio  utiliter  stipu-
lari,  quasi  sibi  ille  stipularetur,  hoc  in  his  verum  est,  quae  iuris  sunt
quaeque  adquiri  patri  possunt :  alioquin  s\  factum  conferaturin  i>ersonam
filii,  inutilis  ent  stipulatio,  velut  ut  tenere  ei  vel  ire  agere  liceat '  Dig.  45.
I.  130 ;  ib.  38.  6-8.

§  3.  Cf.  Tit.  38.  3  inf.  In  the  time  of  Gains  (iii.  167  a)  it  was  a  question
between  the  two  schools  whether  a  stipulation  made  by  a  slave '  unius
domini  iussu '  enured  to  that  master's  sole  benefit :  the  view  adopted  by
Justinian  was  that  of  the  Sabinians.

Tit.  XVIII.  Judicial  and  praetorian  stipulations  correspond  to  some
of  the  English  contracts  of  record,  e.g.  recognisances:  they  are  so-called
contracts  entered  into  by  one  party  to  a  judicial  or  quasi-judicial  pro-
ceeding for  the  security  or  protection  of  the  other  at  the  order  of  the
judge  or  magistrate.  Dr.  Hunter  observes  (Roman  Law  p.  290)  that
their  real  meaning  is  the  weakness  of  the  executive :  '  it  is  much  easier
to  get  a  man  to  promise  not  to  do  some  particular  thing,  than,  when  it  is
done,  to  acknowledge  it  to  be  wrong,  or  to  give  compensation.*  The
division  into  judicial,  praetorian,  and  common  must  have  practically
become  unmeaning  after  the  abolition  of  the  ordo  iudiciorum  privatorum
and  with  it  of  the  d'lstinction  between  magistrate  and  index,  ius  and
indicium.


414  INS7 ITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

1  ludiciales  sunt  dumtaxat,  quae  a  mcro  iudicis  officio  pro-
ficiscuntur:  veluti  de  dolo  cautio  vel  de  persequendo  servo

2  qui  in  fuga  est  restituendove  pretio.  Praetoriae,  quae  a  mere
praetoris  officio  proficiscuntur,  veluti  damni  infecti  vel  l^a-
torum.  praetorias  autem  stipulationes  sic  exaudiri  oportet,
ut  in  his  contineantur  etiam  aedilitiae :  nam  et  hae  ab  iuris-

3  dictione  veniunt.  Conventionales  sunt,  quae  ex  conventione
utriusque  partis  concipiuntur,  hoc  est  neque  iussu  iudicis
neque  iussu  praetoris,  sed  ex  conventione  contrahentium.
quarum    totidem    genera  sunt,  quot   paene  dixerim  rerum

§  1.  The  de  dolo  cautio  seems  to  have  chiefly,  if  not  solely,  occurred  in
cases  where  bona  fide  possessors  were  sued  by  the  owner :  '  si  post
acceptum  indicium  possessor  usu  hominem  cepit,  debet  eum  tradere
eoque  nomine  de  dolo  cavere :  periculum  est  enim  ne  eum  vel  pignera-
verit  vel  manumiserit'  Dig.  6.  i.  i8,  ib.  45  ;  its  purpose  apparently  was  to
secure  the  plaintiff  against  loss  arising  from  possible  misdealing  with  the
property  in  the  past,  or  even  in  the  future,  before  it  came  into  his  hands.
The  cautio  de  persequendo,  etc.  was  employed  where  a  man  got  posses-
sion of  another's  slave,  who  then  ran  away,  Dig.  4.  2.  14.  1 1,  or  where
a  slave  bequeathed  by  a  testator  was  enabled  to  decamp  by  the  fault  of  the
heir.  Dig.  30.  47.  2.

§  2.  There  is  a  reference  in  Gains  iv.  31  to  an  obsolete  procedure  on
damnum  infectum,  which  had  been  superseded  by  the  praetor's  provision,
by  which  any  one  who  apprehended  damage  to  land  or  a  house  from  the
defective  condition  of  another  house  or  piece  of  land  could  require  certain
others,  having  rights  over  the  latter,  to  enter  into  the  cautio  damni  infecti,
i.e.  an  express  promise  to  make  compensation  for  any  such  damage  which
actually  occurred  :  the  terms  of  the  Edict  are  given  in  Dig.  39.  2.  7.  pr.
The  right  belonged  not  only  to  the  owner  of  the  threatened  tenement,  but
also  to  persons  having  other  real  rights  over  it,  or  even  detention  in  virtue
of  an  obligation.  Dig.  39.  2.  13,  ib.  38.  pr.,  but  not  to  a  bona  fide  possessor^
Dig.  ib.  II,  ib.  13.  9 :  the  cautio  could  be  exacted  from  the  owner,  bona
fide  possessor  (ib.  13.  pr.),  and  others  having  iura  in  alieno  solo,  but  it
would  not  be  granted  if  the  person  threatened  already  had  a  remedy  in
virtue  of  some  relation  actually  existing  between  him  and  the  other  (e.  g.
lessee  and  lessor.  Dig.  ib.  32,  ib.  13.  6) ;  and  it  was  not  perpetual,  bat
remained  in  force  only  for  the  period  prescribed  by  the  magistrate.  Dig.
ib.  4.  pr.  If  not  entered  into  within  the  time  fixed  at  the  hearing,  the
other  party  could  claim  to  be  put  in  possession  of  the  dangerous  tene-
ment by  a  magisterial  decree,  ni  order  to  examine  into  its  condition  and
take  measures  of  precaution,  though  without  power  to  exclude  his  oppo-
nent :  and  if,  after  the  lapse  of  another  interval,  the  latter  had  not  given
the  required  promise,  his  right  passed  by  a  second  decree  to  the  com-
plainant, or,  if  inalienable,  was  extinguished.


Tit.  19.]         J>^  INUTILIBUS  STIPULATION  IB  US.  415

contrahendarum.      Communes  sunt  stiputationes  veluti  rem  4
salvam  fore  pupilli :   nam  ct  praetor  iubet  rem  salvam  fore
pupillo  caveri  et  interdum  iudex,  si  aliter  expediri  haec  res
non  potest :  vel  de  rato  stipulatio.

XIX,

DE    INUTILIBUS  STIPULATIONIBUS.

Omnis  res,  quae  dominio  nostro  subicitur,  in  stipulationem
deduct  potest,  sive  ilia  mobilis  sive  soli  sit.     At  si  quis  rem»  1
quae  in   rerum   natura   non   est   aut  esse  non   potest,   dari
stipulatus  fuerit,  veluti  Stichum,  qui  mortuus  sit,  quem  vivere
credebat,  aut  hippocentaurum,  qui  esse  non  possit,  inutilis  erit

The  cautio  legatorum  (servandorum  causa)  was  employed  when  a  legacy
was  given  under  a  condition  or  ex  die,  or  was  disputed :  the  legatee
being  entitled  to  security  with  sureties  for  its  future  payment,  if  it  actually
became  due ;  in  default  he  could  claim  to  be  put  in  possession,  Dig.  36.
4.  5.  pr. ;  ib.  5.  ib.  16.  Through  his  charge  of  the  markets,  streets,
public  buildings,  etc  (p.  22  supr.)  the  aedile  had  frequent  occasion  to
impose  duties  by  the  means  described  in  this  Title ;  e.g.  the  stipulationes
dupli,  described  on  Tit  23.  3  inf.,  originated,  according  to  Theophilus,  in
his  Edict

§  4.  For  the  stipulatio  rem  salvam  fore  pupilli  see  Bk.  i.  24.  pr.  and  note
supr.  That  de  rato  (or  more  fully,  ratam  rem  dominum  habiturum)  was
employed  when  suits  were  conducted  by  agents,  Bk.  iv.  11.  pr.  inf.

Tit.  XTX.  The  contents  of  this  Title  are  heterogeneous  and  badly
arranged.  Some  of  the  sections,  though  professedly  dealing  with  the
grounds  on  which  stipulations  are  invalid,  relate  to  causes  affecting  all
obligations  (e.g.  i.  2.  6.  13) :  in  fact  only  §§  5.  7.  12.  17  and  18  apply  to
stipulations  exclusively :  the  rest  form  a  disconnected  account  of  some  of
the  causes  which  invalidate  contracts  in  their  inception,  especially  impos-
sibility of  performance,  §§  i  and  2  :  impossible  conditions,  §11,  and  dis-
regard of  the  general  principle  that  a  contract  can  impose  duties  and
confer  rights  only  on  those  who  are  parties  to  it,  §§  3.  4^  19-21.

By  *  res  quae  dominio  nostro  subiciuntur '  are  meant '  res  in  patrimonio
nostro : '  vpayiui,  h  rj}  rftUT€pa  vn<*7riirT€ip  di^vorai  dfaimrcifi  Theoph.

§  1.  The  ground  of  nullity  in  this  and  the  following  section  is  the
impossibility  of  performing  the  act  which  is  the  object  of  the  obligation.
An  act  or  forbearance  either  may  be  impossible  ab  initio,  i.  e.  at  the  time
at  which  the  contract  was  made;  or  it  may  become  impossible  subse-
quently and  ex  post  facto.  Original  impossibility  again  may  be  either
absolute,  as  where  no  one  can  perform  the  act  (e  g.  this  section),  or
relative,  as  where,  though  the  particular  promisor  cannot  perform  it,
another  can.


4i6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  III.

2  stipulalio.  Idem  iuris  est,  si  rem  sacram  aut  religiosam,
quam  human!  iuris  esse  credebat,  vel  publicam,  quae  usibus
populi  perpetuo  exposita  sit,  ut  forum  vel  theatrum,  vel
liberum  hominem,  quem  servum  esse  credebat,  vel  cuius
commercium  non  habuit,  vel  rem  suam  dari  quis  stipuletur.
nee  in  pendenti  erit  stipulatio  ob  id,  quod  publica  res  in
privatum  deduct  et  ex  libero  servus  fieri  potest  et  com-
mercium adipisci  stipulator  potest  et  res  stipulatoris  esse
desinere  potest:  sed  protinus  inutilis  est.  item  contra  licet
initio  utiliter  res  in  stipulatum  deducta  sit,  si  postea  in  earum
qua  causa,  de  quibus  supra  dictum  est,  sine  facto  promissoris
devenerit :  extinguitur  stipulatio.  ac  ne  statim  ab  initio
talis  stipulatio  valebit  ^  Lucium  Titium  cum  servus  erit  dare
spondes  ? '  et  similia :  quia  natura  sui  dominio  nostro  exempta

A  promise  to  perform  an  act  which  is  absolutely  impossible  ab  initio  is
void  :  it  confers  no  rights  and  imposes  no  duties  (for  '  impossibilium  nulla
obligatio  est'  Dig.  50.  17.  185),  unless  the  promisee  was  ignorant,  through
no  £Eiult  of  his  own,  of  the  impossibility,  and  through  having  acted  on  the
contract  as  though  actually  subsisting  cannot  be  restored  in  statum  quo
ante :  in  this  case  the  promisor  must  indemnify  him  for  any  loss  which
he  has  sustained,  Dig.  18.  4.  8:  cf.  Dig.  11.  7.  8.  i.  Disappearance  of
the  impossibility  validates  the  contract  only  if,  so  to  speak,  it  is  natural,
not  accidental,  §  2  inf..  Dig.  45.  i.  83.  5.  If  the  original  impossibility  is
relative  only,  the  validity  of  the  contract  is  in  no  way  affected  :  '  multum
interest,  utrum  ego  stipuler  rem,  cuius  commercium  habere  non  possum,
an  quis  promittat :  si  stipuler  .  . .  inutilem  esse  stipulationem  placet :  si
quis  promittat .  . .  ipsi  nocere,  non  mihi '  Dig.  45.  i.  34.

Where  the  impossibility  arises  ex  post  facto,  its  absoluteness  or  rela-
tivity is  immaterial :  the  only  question  is  whether  it  is  due  or  not  to  the
fault  of  the  debtor,  provided  of  course  that  it  is  a  fault  for  which,  in  the
particular  relation,  he  is  answerable  (Excursus  VI  inf.) ;  if  not,  he  is
released  (sine  facto  promissoris,  §  2  inf.) :  cf.  Tit.  14.  2  supr..  Dig.  45.  i.
37  'si  certos  nummos,  puta  qui  in  area  sint,  stipulatus  sim,  et  hi  sine
culpa  promissoris  perierint,  nihil  nobis  debetur ; '  though  this  exemption
from  performance  is  not  absolute,  but  only  coextensive  with  the  impossi-
bility. Tit.  23.  3  inf.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  impossibility  is  due  to  the
promisor's  fault,  he  is  bound  to  compensate  the  promisee,  though  he  is
entitled  to  a  transfer  of  the  latter's  rights  of  action  against  other  persons
in  respect  of  the  object:  'si  fullo  aut  sarcinator  vestimenta  perdiderit
eoque  nomine  domino  satisfecerit,  necesse  est  domino  vindicationem
eorum  et  condictionem  cedere'  Dig.  19.  2.  25.  8.

§  2.  Contracts  other  than  stipulation  in  respect  of  (e.  g.)  a  free  man,
whom  the  party  believed  to  be  a  slave,  were  valid  :  see  on  Tit.  23.  5  inf.
By '  cuius  conunercium  non  habuerit '  seems  to  be  meant  loss  of  commer-


Tit.  19.]      DE  JNUTILIBUS  STIPULATION/BUS.  417

in  obligationem  deduct  nullo  modo  possunt.  Si  quis  alium  3
daturum  facturumve  quid  spoponderit,  non  obligabitur,  veluti
si  spondeat  Titium  quinque  aureos  daturum.  quodsi  effecturum
se,  ut  Titius  daret,  spoponderit,  obligatur.  Si  quis  alii,  quam  4
cuius  luri  subiectus  sit,  stipuletur,  nihil  agit.  plane  solutio
etiam  in  extranei  personam  conferri  potest  (veluti  si  quis  ita
stipuletur  *mihi  aut  Seio  dare  spondes?'),  ut  obligatio  quidem

cium  by  the  stipulator  :  of.  inf.  *  commercium  adipisci  stipulator.'  For  the
ground  of  nullity  of  such  a  condition  as  '  si  ex  libero  servus  fiat,'  already
stated  on  §  I,  cf.  Dig.  45.  i.  83.  5  '  ut  ne  haec  quidem  stipulatio  de  homine
libero  probanda  sit,  ilium  cum  servus  erit  dare  spondes  ? .  .  .  quia  ea  dun-
taxat  quae  natura  sua  possibilia  sunt  deducuntur  in  obligationem, . . .  et
casum  adversamque  fortunam  spectari  hominis  liberi  neque  civile  neque
naturale  est,'  Dig.  50.  17.  39  *  quod  initio  vitiosum  est,  non  potest  tractu
temporis  convalescere.'  A  stipulation  for  conveyance  of  res  sua  which
the  stipulator  believed  to  be  aliena  was  void  because '  id  quod  alicuius  est
ei  dari  non  potest : '  to  make  a  man  owner  (dare)  of  what  was  already  his
own  was  an  absolute  impossibility,  Gains  iii.  99.

§  8.  A  promise  by  A  that  B  shall  do  or  forbear  as  a  rule  imposes  no
obligation  on  either  A  or  B :  but

(i)  A  will  be  bound  (a)  if  his  promise  is  secured  by  a  poena,  §  21  inf.,
Dig.  45.  I.  38. 2  :  (d)  if  he  promises  either  expressly  (as  is  said  in  the  text)
or  impliedly  to  get  B  to  do  the  act :  for  the  readiness  with  which  such
a  promise  would  be  implied  cf.  Dig.  45.  i.  81.  pr.  *  quotiens  quis  alium  sisti
(shall  appear  in  court)  promittit  nee  adicit  poenam  ....  quaeritur  an
conmiittatur  stipulatio  :  et  Celsus  ait,  etsi  non  est  huic  stipulationi  additum
'^  nisi  steterit,  poenam  dari,"  in  id,  quanti  interest  sisti,  contineri . .  nam
qui  alium  sisti  promittit,  promittit  id  se  acturum,  ut  stet.'  In  both  cases
A  really  promises  to  do  something  himself.

(2)  B  will  be  bound  (a)  if  A  is  his  messenger,  intermediary,  or  agent :
see  Excursus  IX  at  the  end  of  this  Book.  If  A  acts  as  his  negotiorum
gestor  (unauthorized  agent)  and  B  refuses  to  ratify,  A  is  answerable  for
loss  accruing  to  the  promisee  only  if  the  latter  believed  him  to  be
authorized;  (^)  if  he  is  A's  heir:  for  this  see  §  13  and  notes  inf.

Sometimes,  however,  a  person  incurred  liability  under  a  contract  in
which  he  was  not  directly  a  party,  and  was  not  even  so  much  as  named  :
in  particular  (a)  the  paterfamilias  or  dominus  on  certain  contracts  of  his
son  or  slave,  Bk.  iv.  7  inf. ;  (d)  the  principal  on  contracts  made  for  him
by  his  agent,  and  (c)  the  pupil  on  reaching  puberty  was  suable  by  actio
utilis  on  contracts  made  in  relation  to  his  affairs  by  his  guardian :
'si  impuberis  nomine  tutor  vendiderit,  evictione  secuta  Papinianus
....  ait  dari  in  eum  cuius  tutela  gesta  sit  utilem  actionem,  sed  adicit  in
id  demum,  quod  rationibus  eius  accepto  latum  est'  Dig.  21.  2.  4.  i :  cf.
Dig.  26.  7.  12.  I.

§  4.  A  promise  by  A  to  B  to  do  something  for  C  as  a  rule  (unless  B  is

£  e


4i8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

stipulator!  adquiratur,  solvi  tamen  Seio  etiam  invito  eo  recte
possit,  ut  liberatio  ipso  iure  contingat,  sed  ille  adversus  Seium
habeat  mandati  actionem,  quod  si  quis  sibi  et  alii,  cuius  iuri
subiectus  non  sit,  decern  dari  aureos  stipulatus  est,  valebit
quidem  stipulatio :  sed  utrum  totum  debetur  quod  in  stipu-
latione  deductum  est,  an  vero  pars  dimidia,  dubitatum  est:
sed  placet  non  plus  quam  partem  dimidiam  ei  adquiri.  ei
qui  tuo  iuri  subiectus  est  si  stipulatus  sis,  tibi  adquiris,  quia
vox  tua  tamquam  filii  sit,  sicuti  filii  vox  tamquam  tua  in-

C's  filiusfamilias  or  slave)  confers  no  rights  on  either  B  or  C  ;  not  on  B,
because  he  has  no  interest,  the  promise  not  being  to  do  something  for  him,
'  inventae  sunt  enim  huiusmodi  obligationes  ad  hoc  ut  unusquisque  sibi
adquirat  quod  sua  interest,'  §  19  inf.;  and  not  on  Q  because  he  is  no
party  to  the  contract    But

(i)  B  will  acquire  a  right  under  the  promise  (a)  if  by  the  performance
to  C  he  himself  obtains  a  benefit,  or  if  non-performance  will  impose  on
him  some  liability  or  cause  him  a  detriment,  §  20  inf.,  and  this  is  the
reason  why  the  pater  or  dominus  is  entitled  under  a  promise  made  to  him
of  performance  to  his  filiusfamilias  or  slave ;  the  limits  to  the  right  are
marked  by  the  passage  cited  from  Dig.  45.  i.  131.  on  Tit.  17.  2  supr. :
cf.  Cod.  8.  39.  3 ;  {b)  if  he  has  stipulated  for  a  poena  in  default  of
performance,  §  19  inf. :  for  here  the  promise  is  to  do  something  for  him
personally.

(2)  C  will  acquire  a  right  under  the  promise  not  only,  as  is  said  here,
if  he  is  the  promisee's  dominus  or  pater,  but  also  in  a  number  of  other
cases,  of  which  the  following  are^  the  most  important :  (a)  if  the  promisee
is  merely  his  messenger  or  intermediary  (but  not  agent),  and  the  contract
is  real  or  consensual  (i.e.  not  a  stipulation).  Dig.  2. 14. 2.  pr. :  13.  5- 14'  3 ;
{b)  if  the  transaction  is  a  mutuum  given,  or  an  indebitum  paid,  by  B  in
C's  name  C  can  bring  the  condictio  in  person.  Dig.  12.  i.  2.  4 ;  (c)  a  pupil
could  sue  by  actio  utilis  on  a  constitutum  made  by  his  guardian  in  his
name,  and  plead  the  exceptio  doli  if  sued  by  his  creditor  with  whom  the
guardian  had  made  a  pactum  de  non  petendo  on  his  behalf,  Dig.  2.  14. 15 ;
ib.  28. 1  ;  (d)  where  performance  was  promised  to  a  man  and  bis  heir :
'suae  personae  adiungere  quis  heredis  personam  potest'  Dig.  45.  i.  38.
14,  though  this  is  in  reality  no  exception  to  the  general  rule.  But  if  A
promised  B  to  do  so  and  so  for  his  (B's)  heir  (and  not  for  himself)  the
promise  was  void,  Gaius  iii.  158 ;  this  was  altered  by  Justinian,  Cod.  8.38.
II ;  cf .  §  13  inf.  (e)  If  a  gift  were  made  by  B  to  A  on  condition  of  its
transfer  to  C,  Cod.  8.  53.  3.  (/)  If  in  settling  a  dos  on  a  woman  its  restora-
tion to  her  or  her  descendants  was  stipulated  for.  Dig.  24.  3.  45,  Cod.  5.
14.  7.  ig)  If  property  was  deposited  with  or  lent  to  A  by  B  on  condition
of  its  being  given  up  to  C,  Cod.  3.  42.  8.

Sometimes,  however,  a  person  acquired  rights  under  a  contract  in  which


Tit.  19.]       DE  INUTILIBUS  STIPULATION  I  BUS.  419

tellegitur  in  his  rebus  quae  tibi  adquiri  possunt.  Praeterea  5
inutilis  est  stipulatio,  si  quis  ad  ea  quae  interrogatus  erit  non
responderit,  veluti  si  decern  aureos  a  te  dari  stipuletur,  ta
quinque  promittas,  vel  contra:  aut  si  ille  pure  stipuletur,
tu  sub  condicione  promittas,  vel  contra,  si  modo  scilicet  id
exprimas,  id  est  si  cui  sub  condicione  vel  in  diem  stipulanti
tu  respondeas:  'praesenti  die  spondeo.'  nam  si  hoc  solum
respondeas  *promitto,'  breviter  videris  in  eandem  dieiti  aut
condicionem  spopondisse :  nee  enim  necesse  est  in  respondendo

he  was  not  directly  a  party,  and  was  not  even  so  much  as  named :  in  par-
ticular (a)  where  the  promisee  was  a  slave  or  filiusfamilias :  see  on  Tit.
17.  I.  supr. ;  {b)  where  the  contract  was  made  by  a  guardian  with  refer-
ence to  his  pupil's  property  the  latter  could  sue  by  actio  utilis,  Dig.  12.  i.
26 ;  (c)  where  the  right  of  the  actual  promisee  would  be  deprived  of
value  unless,  if  necessary,  the  third  person  is  allowed  to  appeal  to  the
contract :  '  cum  alio  conventio  facta  prodest,  sed  tunc  demum,  cum  per
eum,  cui  exceptio  datur,  principaliter  ei,  qui  pactus  est,  proficiat '  Dig.  2.
14.  23 ;  for  an  illustration  see  what  is  said  as  to  the  pactum  de  non
petendo  concluded  by  one  of  two  or  more  correi  debendi  in  Excursus  VII
inf.

Where  a  promise  is  made  to  me  of  performance  to  me  or  Seius,  the
latter  is  said  to  be  'solutionis  causa  adiectus;'  as  Justinian  says,  the
promisor  is  entitled  to  release  himself  by  performance  to  him,  and  of
this  right  I  cannot  deprive  him ;  but  as  there  is  no  obligation  between  him
and  the  promisor  he  cannot  compel  performance,  6r  enter  into  any
disposition  with  the  promisor  affecting  it,  such  as  novatio,  acceptilatio,  or
compensatio.

But  if  a  promise  is  made  to  me  of  performance  to  me  and  Seius,  Seius
acquires  no  right  whatever ;  the  only  question  being  what  right  I  acquire
myself.  The  Sabinians  had  held  that  I  could  claim  the  whole  of  what
had  been  promised  ;  the  view  confirmed  by  Justinian  was  that  of  the  other
school.  Gains  iii.  103.  Mr.  Poste,  referring  to  Dig.  18.  i.  64,  remarks  that
the  Sabinian  rule  was  retained  in  formless  contracts ;  it  would  perhaps
be  more  correct  for  'formless'  to  substitute  'giving  rise  to  bilateral
obligation.'

Conversely,  if  A  promises  that  he  or  B  will  do  so  and  so  (he  not  being
B's  agent),  he  is  bound  to  do  the  whole ;  if  that  he  and  B  will  do  it,  he  is
liable  only  in  a  moiety,  Nov.  115.  2.

§  5.  The  statement  of  the  rule  in  the  text,  which  is  taken  from  Gaius
iii.  102,  can  hardly  stand  in  the  face  of  passages  in  the  Digest  in  which  the
contrary  doctrine  is  emphatically  laid  down  by  other  leading  jurists,  viz.
Ulpian,  '  si  stipulanti  mihi  decem  tu  viginti  respondeas,  non  esse  contrac-
tam  obligationem  nisi  in  decem  constat ;  ex  contrario  si  me  viginti  inter-
rogante  tu  decem  respondeas,  obligatio  nisi  in  decem  non  erit  contracta
....  manifestissimum  est  viginti  et  decem  inesse'  Dig.  45.  i.  i.  4 :  so

Ee  a


420  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

6  eadem  omnia  repeti,  quae  stipulator  expresserit  Item  inu-
tills  est  stipulatio,  si  ab  eo  stipuleris,  qui  iuri  tuo  subiectus
est,  vel  si  is  a  te  stipuletur.  sed  servus  quidem  non  solum
domino  suo  obligari  non  potest,  sed  ne  alii  quidem  ulli :  filii

7  vero  familias  aliis  obligari  possunt.  Mutum  neque  stipulari
neque  promittere  posse  palam  est.  quod  et  in  surdo  receptum
est :  quia  et  is  qui  stipulatur  verba  promittentis  et  is  qui
promittit  verba  stipulantis  audire  debet,  unde  apparet  non
de  eo  nos  loqui  qui  tardius  exaudit^  sed  de  eo  qui  omnino  non

8  exaudit.     Furiosus  nullum  negotium  gerere  potest,  quia  non

Paulus  in  Dig.  5a  17.  no;  45.  i.  83.  3,  and  Pomponius, ' si  ita  stipulatus
fuero,  decern  aut  quinque  dari  spondes,  quinque  debentur ;  et  si  ita,  Kalen-
dis  lanuariis  vel  Febraariis  dari  spondes,  perinde  est  quasi  Kalendis
Februanis  stipulatus  sim '  Dig.  45.  i.  12.

§  6.  Gaius  says  (iii.  104)  that  a  person  in  mancipio  resembled  a  slave  in
being  unable  to  incur  an  obligation  to  any  one.  All  that  is  meant  by  the
text  is  that  between  domestic  superior  and  inferior  there  could  be  no  civilis
obligatio ;  but  if  a  pater  stipulated  from  his  son,  or  a  master  from  his  sla\'e,
the  son  or  slave  was  bound  '  naturally ' ;  '  patre  a  filio  vel  domino  a  ser\'o
stipulato  fideiussor  acceptus  tenetur'  Dig.  46.  I.  56.  1 ;  cf.  Tit.  20.  i  inf.;
in  the  converse  case  it  seems  from  Dig.  loc.  cit.  that  no  obligation  of  any
sort  resulted.  Contracts  made  by  a  filiusfamilias  with  other  persons  than
his  pater  bound  him  civiliter  always, '  et  ob  id  agi  cum  eo  tanquam  cum
patre&milias  potest '  Dig.  44. 7. 39  ;  but  a  slave  was  bound  only  naturaliter
by  contracts  even  with  extra nei,  and  the  obligatio  incurred  by  an  extraneus
was  also,  so  far  as  the  slave  went,  naturalis  only,  though  the  dominus
could  sue  upon  it  :  'ex  contractibus  [servi]  civiliter  non  obligantur,  sed
naturaliter  et  obligantur  et  obligant '  Dig.  44.  7.  14 :  45.  I.  i.  pr.  Civil
obligation  between  paterfamilias  and  filius  seems  to  have  been  prevented
by  the  tatter's  want  of  proprietary  right ;  when  the  incapacity  was  partly
removed,  the  rule  was  pro  tanto  given  up,  and  in  respect  of  peculium  cas-
trense  there  could  be  civil  obligation  and  consequently  litigation  between
them :  '  lis  nulla  nobis  esse  potest  cum  eo  quem  in  potestate  habemus,
nisi  ex  castrensi  peculio '  Dig.  5.  1.4;  cf.  Dig.  18.  1.2.  pr. ;  47. 2.  52. 4-6.
In  respect  of  peculium  adventitium  this  relaxation  is  not  recognised  in  the
authorities.

§  8.  The  incapacity  of  furiosus  to  contract  is  in  reality  based  on  in-
capacity of  willing,  or  of  action  entailing  legal  consequences,  rather  than
on  defect  of  intelligence :  '  furiosum,  sive  stipuletur,  sive  promittat,  nihil
agere  natura  manifestum  est.  Huic  proximus  est,  qui  eius  aetatis  est  ut
nondum  intellegat,  quid  agatur,  sed  quod  ad  hunc  benignius  acceptum  est,
nam  qui  loqui  potest,  creditur  et  stipulari  et  promittere  posse '  Dig.  44.  7.
I.  12  and  13,  Mn  negotiis  contrahendis  alia  causa  habita  est  furiosorum,
alia  eorum,  qui  fari  possunt,  quamvis  actum  rei  non  intelligerent :  nam
furiosus  nullum  negotium  contrahere  potest,  pupillus  omnia  tutore  auctore


Tit.  19.]     DE  INVTILIBUS  STIPULATION/BUS.  421

intellegit  quid  agit.  Pupillus  omne  negotium  recte  gerit :  ut  9
tamen,  sicubi  tutoris  auctoritas  necessaria  sit,  adhibeatur  tutor,
veluti  si  ipse  obligetur;  nam  alium  sibi  obligare  etiam  sine
tutoris  auctoritate  potest.  Sed  quod  diximus  de  pupilHs,  10
utique  de  his  verum  est,  qui  iam  aliquem  intellectum  habent :
nam  infans  et  qui  infanti  proximus  est  non  multum  a  furioso
distant,  quia  huius  aetatis  pupilli  nullum  intellectum  habent :
sed  in  proximis  infanti  propter  utilitatem  eorum  benignior
iuris  interpretatio  facta  est,  ut  idem  iuris  habeant,  quod
pubertati  proximi.  sed  qui  in  parentis  potestate  est  impubes,
nee  auctore  quidem  patre  obligatur.     Si  impossibilis  condicio  11

agere  potest'  Dig.  50.  17.  5.  Dispositions  made  by  a  furiosus  in  ^  lucid
moment  were,  however,  completely  valid  and  binding,  Cod.  5.  70.  6 ;  cf.
Bk.  ii.  12.  I  supr.

§  10.  Infantes  are  children  under  seven  years  of  age :  '  si  infanti,  id
est  minori  septem  annis  'Cod.  6.  30.  18.  pr.,  *  prima  aetas  infantia  est . . .
quae  porrigitur  in  septem  annis'  Isidor.  Orig.  11.  2.  Pubertas  was
fourteen  in  males,  twelve  in  females,  Bk.  i.  22.  pr.  supr. ;  but  to  the
question  when  an  impubes  ceased  to  be  infanti  proximus,  and  when  he
began  to  be  pubertati  proximus,  no  clear  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the
texts.  Savigny  rejects  the  view  of  those  who  would  decide  this  by
dividing  the  seven  (or  five)  years  immediately  succeeding  infantia  into
two  equal  portions  on  the  ground  that,  on  the  clear  meaning  of  the
terms,  there  must  be  an  interval  in  every  child's  life  when  he  is  neither
infantiae  nor  pubertati  proximus,  and  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  children
would  be  infantiae  proximi  during  the  year  next  after  they  ceased  to
be  infantes,  and  pubertati  proximi  during  that  immediately  preceding
pubertas.

It  would  seem  that  originally  a  pupillus  could  perform  no  legal  act  with-
out his  guardian's  auctoritas.  The  inconvenience  which  this  entailed
under  the  old  law,  which  would  not  permit  its  solemn  dispositions,  man-
cipatio,  in  iure  cessio,  stipulatio,  etc.  to  be  made  by  agents,  led  to  a  relaxa-
tion of  the  rule  so  far  as  to  allow  an  impubes  who  was  pubertati  proximus
to  act  for  himself  in  all  transactions  whereby  he  could  not  be  pecuniarily
prejudiced  (Bk.  i.  21.  pr.  and  notes  supr.) ;  and  eventually  by  the  'benig-
nior iuris  interpretatio'  referred  to  in  the  text  the  same  privilege  was
extended  to  all  pupilli  after  attaining  their  seventh  year.  Consequently,
any  pupillus  above  that  age  could  perform  any  and  every  legal  act  with  his
guardian's  auctoritas  :  without  it  he  could  only  *  meliorem  suam  condici-
onem  facere,'  and  so  could  be  promisee,  but  not  promisor,  in  a  stipulation :
bilateral  contracts  which  he  entered  into  the  guardian  could  either  ratify
or  repudiate,  subject  to  what  has  been  already  said  on  Bk.  i.  21.  pr.  For
the  liability  of  an  impubes  on  delict  see  on  Bk.  iv.  1. 18  inf.

§  IL  For  the  effect  of  an  impossible  condition  on  testamentary  disposi-


4258  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Ub.  III.

obligationibus  adiciatur,  nihil  valet  stipulatio.  Impossibilis
autem  condicio  habetur,  cui  natura  impedlmento  est,  quo
n)inu0  existat,  veluti  si  quis  ita  dixeritj  ^si  digito  caelum
attigero,  dare  spondes?'  .at  si  ita  stipuletur,  'si  digito  caelum
non  attigero,  <Iare  spondes  ? '  pure  facta  obligatio  intellegitur
12  ideoque  statim  petere  potest  Item  verborum  obligatio  inter
absentes  concepta  inutilis  est.  sed  cum  hoc  materiam  litium
contentiosis  hominibus  praestabat,  forte  post  tempus  tales
all^ationes  opponentibus  et  noa  praesentes  esse  vel  se  vel
adversatios  suos  contendentibus :  ideo  nostra  constttutio
propter  celeritatem  dirimendarum  litium  introducta  est,  quam
ad  Caesareenses  advocatos  scripsimus,  per  quam  disposuimus
tales  scriptura3>  quae  praesto  esse  partes  indicant,  omnimodo
esse  credendas,  nisi  ipse,  qui  talibus  utitur  improbis  allega-
tionibus,  manifestissimis  probationibus  vel  per  scripturam  vet
per  testes  idoneos  approbaverit  in  ipso  toto  die  quo  con-
ficiebatur  instrumentum  sese  vel  adversarium  suum  in  aliis

.■  ■  I  ■  -  .    .  ■  I  ■  ■  ■   .      -  ■  I  '■  I  ■      8 1 1      a  a !   '  ■  ■■     »        1

tions  see  on  Bk.  ii.  14.  10  supr.  A  condition  is  impossible  (i)  which
cannot  and  never  could  have  been  fulfilled,  quia  natura  impedlmento  est
(absolute  physical  impossibility),  or  which  contemplates  the  non-occur-
rence of  the  necessary,  e.g.  si  nunquam  moriar ;  or  (2)  which  might  have
been  fulfilled  under  other  circumstances,  but  now  cannot,  for  the  same
reason  (relative  physical  impossibility),  or  (3)  the  fulfilment  of  which  is
impossible  not  by  nature  but  by  law  ('  ubi  omnino  condicio  iure  impleri
non  potest  vel  id  facere  ei  non  liceat,  nuUius  momenti  fore  stipulationem,
proinde  ac  si  ea  condicio,  quae  natura  impossibilis  est,  inserta  esset '  Dig.
45. 1. 137. 6),  or  by  positive  morality,  §  34  inf.  A  stipulation  was  regarded
as  '  pure  facta '  not  only  if  the  condition  was  necessary  by  nature  (e.  g.
si  digpto  caelum  non  attigero),  but  also  if  it  was  necessary  in  law,  Dig.
28.  7.  20.  pr.

§  12.  See  note  on  Tit.  1 5.  i  supr.  It  is  clear  from  the  text  that  the  pre-
sumption there  referred  to  was  frequently  rebutted  by  perjured  evidence,
and  it  was  enacted  by  Justinian's  own  constitution  (Cod.  8.  38.  14)  that
if  the  instrument  stated  that  the  parties  had  met,  the  evidence  required  to
rebut  the  presumption  of  a  genuine  oral  stipulation  must  be  of  the  most
convincing  character,  and  must  show  that  the  parties  were  in  different
districts  (in  aliis  civitatibus,  Cod.  loc.  cit.)  during  the  whole  day  upon
which  the  contract  was  alleged  to  have  been  made.  Practically  the
defendant  had  to  prove  that  he  and  the  plaintiff  were  so  distant  from
each  other  that  no  such  contract  could  possibly  have  been  concluded,  and
hence  it  follows  that  after  this  enactment  stipulations  could  be  made
entirely  by  writing,  without  the  parties  meeting  at  all,  if  the  instrument
recited  that  they  had  met,  and  tbey  were  '  in  eadem  civitate.'


Tit.  19.]        DE  INUTILIBUS  STIPULATION/BUS.  41*3

locis  esse.  Post  mortem  suam  dari  sibi  nemo  sttpulari  po- 13
terat,  non  magis  quam  post  eius  mortem  a  quo  stipulabatur.
ac  ne  is,  qui  in  alicuius  potestate  est,  post  mortem  eius
stipulari  poterat,  quia  patris  vel  domini  voce  loqui  videtur.
sed  et  si  quis  ita  stipuletur,  '  pridie  quam  moriar '  vel '  pridie
quam  morieris  dari?'  inutilis  erat  stipulatio.  sed  cum,  ut
iam  dictum  est,  ex  consensu  contrahentium  stipulationes
valent,  placuit  nobis  etiam  in  hunc  iuris  articulum  neces-
.sariam  inducere  emendationem,  ut,  sive  post  mortem  sive
pridie  quam  morietur  stipulator  sive  promissor  stipulatio
jconcepta  est,  valeat  stipulatio.  Item  si  quis  ita  stipulatus  14
erat :  '  si  navis  ex  Asia  venerit,  hodie  dare  spondes  ? '  inutilis
erat  stipulatio,  quia  praepostere  concepta  est.  sed  cum  Leo
inclitae  recordationis  in  dotibus  eandem  stipulationem  quae
praepostera  nuncupatur  non  esse  reiciendam  existimavit,
nobis  placuit  et  huic  perfectum  robur  accommodare,  ut  non
solum  in  dotibus,  sed   etiam  in  omnibus  valeat  huiusmodi

§  18.  A  stipulation  for  conveyance  to  one  after  one's  death  is  in  effect
one  in  fisivour  of  one's  heir,  who  is  no  party  to  the  contract,  and  for  that
reason  was  held  invalid;  see  references  on  §  4  supr.  Justinian's  change
enabled  the  obligatio  and  actio  '  a  persona  heredis  incipere '  Cod.  4«  1 1 ;
hence  if  the  deceased  stipulated  for  payment  to  one  of  his  heirs  only,  that
one  alone  was  benefited  ;  which  previously  had  not  been  always  the  case
even  where  he  had  stipulated  for  himself  ami  the  particular  heir,  which
was  perfectly  allowable  (see  note  last  referred  to),  *  quod  dari  stipulemur,
non  posse  per  nos  uni  ex  heredibus  adquiri,  sed  necesse  est,  omnibus
adquiri :  at  cum  quid  fieri  stipulemur,  etiam  unius  personam  recte  com-
prehendi'  Dig.  45.  i.  137.  8.

The  repugnance  to  aJowing  an  obligation  '  a  persona  heredis  incipere,'
Gaius  iii.  100  (as  where  A  promises  B  something  after  his  (A's)  death)  was
perhaps  partially  due,  as  is  suggested  by  Ihering,  to  a  desire  to  prevent
evasions  of  such  statutes  as  the  leges  Falcidia,  lulia,  and  Papia  Poppaea ;
see  Mr.  Poste's  note  on  the  passage  of  Gaius  referred  to.

§  14.  By  Justinian's  enactment,  Cod.  6.  23.  25,  the  promise  in  this
so-called  praepostera  stipulatio  became  binding  at  once,  but  could  not  be
sued  upon  until  after  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition :  '  reprehensionem
quam  novella  constitutio  (sc.  Leonis)  in  dotalibus  instrumentis  sustulisse
noscitur,  in  aliis  quoque  omnibus  tam  contractibus  quam  testamentts
tollimus,  ut  tali  exceptione  cessante  et  stipulatio  et  alii  contractus  et  testa-
toris  voluntas  indubitate  valeat,  exactione  videlicet  post  condicionem  vel
diem  competente.'  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  under  this  enactment
a  promisor  who  paid  before  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  could  recover
by  condictio  indebiti  after  the  condition  had  failed ;  see  on  Tit.  15.  4  supr.


424  INSTITUTION UM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

16  conceptio  stipulationis.  Ita  autem  concepta  stipulatio,  veluti
si  Titius  dicat  *  cum  moriar,  dare  spondes  ? '  vel '  cum  mo-

lerieris/  et  apud  veteres  utilis  erat  et  nunc  valet.     Item  post

17  mortem  alterius  recte  stipulamur.  Si  scriptum  fuerit  in
instrumento   promisisse  aliquem,   perinde  habetur,  atque  si

18  interrogatione  praecedente  responsum  sit.  Quotiens  plures
res  una  stipulatione  comprehenduntur,  si  quidem  promissor
simpliciter  respondeat '  dare  spondeo/  propter  omnes  tenetur :
si  vero  unam  ex  his  vel  quasdam  daturum  se  spoponderit,
obligatio  in  his  pro  quibus  spoponderit  contrahitur.  ex
pluribus  enim  stipulationibus  una  vel  quaedam  videntur  esse
perfectae:    singulas   enim   res   stipulari  et    ad    singulas   re-

19  spondere  debemus..  Alteri  stipulari,  ut  supra  dictum  est,
nemo  potest :  inventae  sunt  enim  huiusmodi  obligationes  ad
hoc,  ut  unusquisque  sibi  adquirat  quod  sua  interest :  ceterum
si  alii  detur,  nihil  interest  stipulators,  plane  si  quis  velit
hoc  facere,  poenam  stipulari  conveniet,  ut,  nisi  ita  factum
sit,  ut  comprehensum  esset,  committetur  poenae  stipulatio
etiam  ei  cuius  nihil  interest:  poenam  enim  cum  stipulatur
quis,  non  illud  inspicitur,  quid  intersit  eius,  sed  quae  sit
quantitas  in  condicione  stipulationis.  ergo  si  quis  stipuletur
Titio  dari,  nihil  agit,  sed  si  addiderit  de  poena  '  nisi  dederis,


§  16.  The  reason  why  a  stipulation  in  the  form  '  cum  moriar  (or  cum
morieris)  dari  spondes  ? '  had  been  valid  under  the  old  law,  as  stated  by
Gaius,  iii.  loo,  was  that  the  obligation  was  held  to  entitle  the  promisee,  or
bind  the  promisor,  ^  in  novissimo  vitae  suae  tempore,'  and  not '  a  persona
heredis  incipere.'  One  might  have  thought  that  the  reason  why  one  in
the  form  'pridie  quam  moriar'  was  void  ('  quia  non  potest  aliter  intellegi
pridie  quam  aliquis  morietur  quam  si  mors  secata  sit '  Gaius  1.  c.)  would
have  applied  equally  well  here:  Gaius  himself  was  sensible  of  the  un-
reasonableness of  the  distinction,  of  which  he  says  '  non  pretiosa  ratione
receptum  videtur '  ii.  232.

§  16.  A  stipulation  for  performance  after  the  death  of  a  third  person  is
merely  ex  die,  for  which  see  on  Tit.  1 5.  2  supr.

§17.  See  note  on  Tit.  15.  i  supr.  So  too  Ulpian  says 'quod  fere
novissima  parte  pactorum  ita  solet  inseri,  rogavit  Titius,  spopondit  Maevius,
haec  verba  non  tantum  pactionis  loco  accipiuntur,  sed  etiam  stipulationis :
ideoque  ex  stipulatu  nascitur  actio,  nisi  contrarium  specialiter  adprobetur,
quod  non  animo  stipulantium  hoc  factum  est,  sed  tantum  paciscentium '
Dig.  2.  14.  7.  12.

§  19.  See  on  §  4  supr.


Tit.  19.]         DE  INUTILIBUS  STIPULATIONIBUS.  425

tot  aureos  dare  spondes  ?  *   tunc  committitur  stipulatio.     Sed  20
et  si  quis  stipuletur  alii,  cum  eius  interesset,  placuit  stipu-
lationem  valere.     nam  si  is,  qui  pupilli  tutelam  administrare
coeperat,  cessit  administratione  contutori  suo  et  stipulatus  est
rem   pupilli  salvam  fore,  quoniam  interest  stipulatoris  'fieri
quod  stipulatus  est,  cum  obligatus  futurus  esset  pupillo,  si
male  res  gesserit,   tenet  obligatio.     ergo  et  si  quis  procu-
ratori   suo   dari   stipulatus  sit,   stipulatio  vires   habebit.     et
si  creditori  suo  quod  sua  interest,  ne  forte  vel  poena  com-
mittatur  vel  praedia  distrahantur  quae  pig^ori  data  erant,
valet  stipulatio.    Versa  vice  qui  alium   facturum   promisit,  21
videtur  in  ea  esse  causa,  ut  non  teneatur,  nisi  poenam  ipse
promiserit.     Item  nemo  rem  suam  futuram  in  eum  casum  quo  22
sua  fit  utiliter  stipulatur.     Si  de  alia  re  stipulator  senserit,  de  23
alia  promissor,  perinde  nulla  contrahitur  obligatio,  ac  si  ad
interrogatum  responsum  non  esset,  veluti  si  hominem  Stichum
a  te  stipulatus  quis  fuerit,  tu  de  Famphilo  senseris^  quem

§  20.  See  the  note  last  referred  to :  and  for  the  liability  of  tutor  hono-
rarius  note  on  i.  24.  i  supr.  A  guardian  'qui  administrare  tutelam  non-
dum  coeperat '  would  be  just  as  liable  as  one  who  had  for  the  faults  of  the
colleague  who  acted,  Dig.  26.  7.  55.  pr.

§  21.  See  on  §  3  supr.

§  22.  For  a  man  to  stipulate  for  conveyance  to  him,  when  he  has
become  its  owner,  of  property  which  will  be  his  hereafter,  is  the  same
thing  in  effect  as  to  stipulate  for  a  res  which  is  already  sua,  for  which  see
on  §  2  supr.

§  23.  The  two  chief  varieties  of  mistake  have  been  distinguished  on
Bk.  ii.  20.  29  supr.  To  say  of  contracts  that  they  are  void  by  reason  of
mistake  in  the  expression  of  intention  is  incorrect :  they  are  void,  if  at
all,  because  one  states  that  one  intends  what  one  does  not  really  intend,
though  it  is  true  that,  had  it  not  been  for  a  mistake,  this  statement  would
never  have  been  made.  It  is  not,  however,  enough  to  nullify  a  disposition
that  a  mistake  has  caused  a  declaration  which  was  not  really  intended  :
the  expressed  intention  must  have  been  unintended  either  altogether,  or
at  least  in  an  essential  portion  :  and  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  dic-
tum that '  essential  error  ^one  is  a  ground  of  nullity.'  By  essential  error,
in  this  sense,  is  to  be  understood  error  as  to  either  {a)  the  nature  of  the
legal  relation  or  right  to  be  produced :  '  non  satis  autem  est  dantis  esse
nummos  et  fieri  accipientis,  ut  obligatio  nascatur,  sed  etiam  hoc  animo
dari  et  accipi,  ut  obligatio  constituatur ;  itaque  si  quis  pecuniam  suam
donandi  causa  dederit  mihi,  quamquam  et  donantis  fuerit  et  mea  fiat,
tamen  non  obligabor  ei,  quia  non  hoc  inter  nos  actum  est'  Dig.  44.  7.  3.
I :  or  (b)  the  person  in  relation  to  whom  the  intention  is  declared,  pro-


426  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,     [Lib.  HI.

24  Stichum  vocari  credideris.  Quod  turpi  ex  causa  promissum
est,  veluti  si  quis  homictdium  vel  sacrilegium  se  facturum
promittat,  non  valet.

vided  this  is  material,  Dig.  28.  5.  9.  pr. :  or  {c)  the  thing  in  relation  to
which  the  intention  is  declared  (e.g.  the  text  before  us,  and  Dig.  28.  5.  9.
I  ;  30.  4.  pr. ;  45.  i.  137.  l)  :  or  {d)  the  properties,  i.e.  quality,  of  that
thing ;  as  to  which  the  rule  extracted  by  Savigny  in  respect  of  sale  from
the  cases  is  that  'the  error  avoids  the  contract  when  the  difference  in
quality  between  the  thing  bought,  and  that  which  the  purchaser  intended
to  buy,  is  such,  according  to  conunercial  usage,  as  to  put  the  one  in
a  different  category  of  merchandise  from  the  other,'  System  §§  137,  138^
for  illustrations  see  the  writer's  Contract  of  Sale  in  the  Civil  Law,
pp.  55,  56.  Conversely,  error  as  a  rule  is  non-essential,  and  does  not
affect  the  validity  oi  the  disposition,  which  relates  to  the  properties  or
name  (Bk.  ii.  20.  29  supr..  Cod.  6.  ^3.  4)  of  the  person  to  whom  the
declaration  of  intention  relates,  or  to  the  name  or  non-essential  properties
of  the  thing.  Dig.  30. 4.  pr.,  34. 5.  28,  Cod.  6.  y;,  7.  i.

In  contracts  mistake  frequently  leads  to  one  party  expressing  an  inten-
tion which  does  not  agree  with  that  expressed  by  the  other,  because  the
first  supposes  the  second's  real  intention  to  be  different  from  that  which
he  has  expressed  (e.  g.  B  offers  to  buy  A's  black  horse,  meaning  black
horse  a ;  A  thinks  he  means  black  horse  0,  and  agrees  to  sell :  he  thinks
he  is  agreeing  to  B's  proposal,  but  in  fact  he  is  agreeing  to  a  proposal
which  B  has  never  made).  Here  there  is  no  consent,  for  '  non  videntur
qui  errant  consentire'  Dig.  50.  17.  116.  2,  and  an  essential  element  of
contract  is  'duorum  pluriumve  in  idem  placitum  et  consensus'  Dig.
2.  14.  I.  2.  In  such  cases  the  contract  is  void  only  if  the  mistake
(Le.  the  absence  of  consent)  is  essential  in  the  sense  already  stated
(nature  of  the  relation.  Dig.  12.  1. 18  :  person,  ib.  y2 :  thing,  18.  i.  9.  pr.:
its  properties,  ib.  2).

Error  in  the  formation  of  intention  (or  in  motive)  does  not  necessarily
avoid  dispositions.  Because  one  is  induced  to  act  by  a  mistake  in
motive,  the  intention  is  none  the  less  real ;  or,  in  other  words,  unessen-
tial error,  as  a  rule,  leaves  the  disposition  valid,  however  strongly  it  may
have  operated  as  an  inducement  The  chief  exception  to  this  is  in
testamentary  dispositions  (Bk.  IL  20.  31  and  note  supr.) :  dispositions
inter  vivos  are  invalidated  by  such  mistake  only  if  the  latter  was  known
to  the  party  benefited  by  them,  and  this  approximates  to  fraud.  If
actual  fraud  on  the  other's  part  produces  the^  mistake,  the  disposition
is  not  ipso  facto  void  :  but  if  sued  upon  the  exceptio  doli  can  be  pleaded,
or  the  party-  deceived  can  claim  by  the  actio  doli  to  be  restored  in
statum  quo.

§  24.  Cf.  Dig.  45.  I.  26  'generaliter  novimus,  turpes  stipulationes
nullius  esse  momenti,'  12.  5.  8  '  si  ob  turpem  causam  promiseris  Titio  . . .
si  petat,  exceptione  doli  mali  summovere  eum  possis,'  Cod.  8.  38.  4  '  cum
omnia,  quae  contra  bonos  mores  vel  in  pactum  vel  in  stipulationem


Tit  19]       DE  INUTILIBUS  STIPULATIONIBUS.  427

Cum  quis  sub  aliqua  condicione  fuerit  stipulatus^  licet  ante  25
condicionem  decesserit,  poatea  existente  condicione  heres  eius
agere  potest,     idem  est  et  a  promissoris  parte.     Qui  hoc  anno  26
aut  hoc  mense  dari  stipulatua  ^it,  nisi  omnibus  partibus  prae-
teritis  anni  vel   mensis  non  recte  petet.      Si  fundum  dari  27


deducuntur,  nuUius  momenti  sint'  Unlawful  or  immoral  conditions  were
treated  in  the  same  way  as  those  which  were  impossible :  they  avoided
(Contracts  :  in  testamentary  dispositions  they  were  taken  '  pro  non  scriptis '
Dig.  28.  7.  9;  ib.  14.

§  20.  If  no  time  was  fixed,  either  expressly  or  by  implication,  for  per-
formance, the  creditor  was  entitled  to  demand  it  at  once :  as  may  be
gathered  from  §  27,  the  debtor  could  claim  only  so  much  grace  as  was
required  by  the  very  nature  of  the  act  to  be  performed :  cif.  Dig.  50.  17.
186.  Nor,  as  a  rule>  was  he  entitled  to  receive  a  demand  of  performance
from  the  creditor,  though  he  did  not  usually  incur  the  penalties  of  mora
until  such  demand  (interpellatio)  had  been  made :  '  mora  fieri  intellegitur
non  ex  re,  sed  ex  persona,  id  est,  si  interpellatus  opportuno  loco  non
solverit,  quod  apud  iudicem  examinabitur.  Nam,  ut  Pomponius  scripsit,
difficilis  est  huius  rei  definitio'  Dig.  22.  i.  32.  pr. :  cf.  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  3.
8.  4.  Such  demand,  however,  was  dispensed  with  (i)  when  a  time  was
fixed  for  performance  in  the  sense  that  the  debtor  must  perform  then,
not  merely  that  the  creditor  might  not  demand  performance  earlier.
This  is  the  true  Roman  sense  of  the  maxim  '  dies  interpellat  pro  homine,'
not  that  interpellatio  was  always  unnecessary  if  a  time  for  performance
was  agreed  upon,  though  it  is  stated  that  this  interpretation  has  been  almost
universally  adopted  in  the  practice  of  the  modern  civil  law.  (2)  Where
the  creditor  was  a  minor.  Dig.  31.  87.  i.  (3)  Where  the  obligation  was
to  give  up  property  of  which  the  creditor  had  been  deprived  by  a  delict,
Dig.  13.  I.  8. 1  ;  ib.  20 ;  43. 16.  19.  (4)  In  cases  of  bequests  to  churches
and  charitable  foundations.  Where  demand  was  impossible  owing  to  the
absence  of  the  debtor  or  some  other  cause  a  declaration  might  be  made  in
lieu  of  it  before  a  judge,  Dig.  22.  2.  2.

The  mere  fact  that  a  debtor  has  not  performed  what  is  due  from  him
does  not,  as  a  rule,  affect  his  liability :  it  does  so  only  in  virtue  of  specific
provision  in  a  contract  or  will  (as  where  it  is  agreed  that  the  promisor,
or  directed  that  the  heir,  shall  inciu'  a  penalty  unless  he  performs  within
a  prescribed  time)  or  by  law  (as  where  interest  is  due  by  statute).  In
these  exceptional  cases  the  commentators  speak  of  objective  mora.  But
any  debtor  or  any  creditor  may  become  guilty  of  mora  in  the  narrower
sense  (so-called  subjective  mora)  by  conduct  of  his  own  :  mora  in  that
sense  being  the  wrongful  refusal  to  perform  an  act,  whether  mora  debi-
toris  or  solvendi,  refusal  to  perfonn,  or  mora  creditoris  or  accipiendi,
refusal  to  accept  performance  when  due  and  properly  tendered.

Mora  debitoris  exists  only  under  the  following  conditions:  (i)  the
debtor's  obligation  must  be  valid  and  actionable,  and  he  must  not  be  able


428  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

stipuleris    vel    hominem,  non    poteris    continuo    agere,   nisi
tantum  spatii  praeterierit,  quo  traditio  fieri  possit.

to  meet  his  creditor  by  any  exceptio.  (2)  The  time  at  which  he  was
bound  to  perform  must  have  passed  without  performance.  (3)  He  must
know  that  he  is  bound  to  perform  at  the  time  and  in  the  manner  required*
or  (as  Mr.  Poste  puts  it)  a  further  condition  of  mora  is  the  absence  of  all
doubt  and  dispute,  at  least  of  all  dispute  that  is  not  frivolous  and  vexa-
tious, as  to  the  existence  and  amount  of  the  debt :  *  qui  sine  dolo  malo
ad  iudicium  provocat,  non  videtur  moram  facere  *  Dig.  50.  17.  63,  *  et  hie
moram  videtur  fecisse,  qui  [dolo,  sc.]  litigare  maluit  quam  restituere '  Dig.
45.  I.  82.  I.  (4)  He  must  have  no  other  ground  of  justification  for  his
default,  this  being  a  question  for  the  court,  *  esse  enim  banc  quaestionem
de  bono  et  aequo'  Dig.  45.  i.  91.  3  :  e.g.  impossibility  (see  on  §  I  supr.).
Whether  innocent  insolvency  was  such  a  ground  is  disputed.
The  principal  consequences  of  mora  debitoris  are  as  follow  :
(i)  The  debtor  must  compensate  the  creditor  for  the  loss  of  all
advantage  which  he  would  have  had  if  the  act  had  been  duly  performed
(omnis  causa),  especially  fruits,  Dig.  22.  i.  38.  15,  and  interest,  ib.  32.  2.
If,  however,  the  obligation  was  to  pay  certa  pecunia,  interest  on  mora
could  not  be  claimed :  see  on  Tit.  14.  pr.  supr.  (2)  After  he  is  once  in
mora,  the  debtor  is  not  released  by  performance  becoming  impossible,
even  without  his  fault,  Dig.  12.  i.  5  ;  in  other  words,  even  though  under
the  contract  he  was  liable  for  culpa  lata  only,  he  now  becomes  answerable
not  only  for  culpa  levis  but  also  for  casus :  and  if  the  object  of  the  obliga-
tion has  become  less  valuable,  he  must  pay  the  highest  value  it  has  had
since  it  became  due,  Dig.  13.  3.  3.  (3)  In  contracts  generating  bilateral
obligation  the  one  party  can  withdraw  from  the  compact,  if  to  accept
performance  after  mora  of  the  other  would  seriously  prejudice  him:  e.g.
if  possession  of  a  farm  is  not  given  to  the  lessee  at  the  date  agreed  upon,
and  in  the  meanwhile  he  has  taken  another.  Dig.  19.  2.  24.  4.  (4)  If  it
has  been  agreed  that  the  creditor's  right  shall  expire  within  a  certain
period,  mora  debitoris  occurring  within  that  period  cancels  the  agreement,

Dig.  34-  3-  3-  I  and  2.

Mora  debitoris  was  '  purged '  by  extinction  of  the  obligation,  by  the
creditor's  either  expressly  or  tacitly  granting  him  grace,  and  by  the  latter
tendering  performance  to  the  former,  including  compensation  for  all  loss
which  the  mora  had  entailed  upon  him.

The  chief  effects  of  mora  creditoris  were  (i)  that  the  debtor  was  released
by  performance  becoming  impossible  save  through  his  own  dolus  or
culpa  lata.  Dig.  18.  6.  16  and  18  ;  in  other  words,  he  became  answerable
for  culpa  lata  only,  even  though  previously  answerable  for  culpa  levis ;
(2)  that  the  creditor  has  to  compensate  the  debtor  for  any  loss  which  the
refusal  to  accept  performance  properly  tendered  entails  upon  him.  Dig.
19.  I.  3.  4-


Tit.  20.]  DE  FIDEIUSSORIBUS.  429


XX.

DE  FIDEIUSSORIBUS.


Pro  eo  qui  promittit  solent  alii  obligari,  qui  iideiussores
appellantur,  quos  homines  accipere  solent,  dum  curant,  ut
diligentius  sibi  cautum  sit.     In  omnibus  autem  obligationibus  1


Tit.  XX.  Under  the  older  law  suretyship  could  be  contracted  *  verbis  *
in  two  other  ways,  sponsio  (spondes  ?  spondeo)  and  fidepromissio  (fide-
promittis  ?  fidepromitto) ;  but  only  debts  incurred  by  stipulation  could
be  guaranteed  by  either  of  them.  No  one  could  be  a  sponsor  except
a  civis,  and  unless  both  the  parties  to  the  principal  contract  were  cives
also,  but  these  rules  did  not  apply  to  fidepromissio.  Both  were  obsolete
under  Justinian,  but  the  following  points  in  which  they  differed  from  fide-
iussio  may  be  noticed  :

(i)  The  obligation  of  sponsors  and  fidepromissors  did  not  descend  to
their  heirs,  Gains  iii.  120.  (2)  By  a  lex  Publilia  of  uncertain  date  a  sponsor
who  paid  the  debt  could,  unless  repaid  by  the  principal  within  six  months,
recover  twice  the  amount  by  actio  depensi.  Gains  iv.  22.  (3)  The  lex
Furia  de  sponsu,  which  is  conjectured  to  have  been  passed  as  early  as
345  B.C.,  but  which  extended  only  to  Italy,  limited  the  liability  of  sponsors
and  fidepromissors  to  two  years  from  the  date  of  their  contract,  and  also
(4)  where  there  were  two  or  more  of  them,  divided  the  liability  among  all
who  were  living  at  the  time  when  the  guarantee  could  be  enforced,  so
that  each  could  be  sued  for  only  an  aliquot  share,  Gains  iii.  121.  (5)  The
lex  Apuleia  (390  B.  c.  ?)  extending  also  to  the  provinces,  conferred  a  less
but  similar  boon  on  sponsors  and  fidepromissors  even  outside  Italy,  by
giving  to  any  one  of  them  who  paid  the  whole  debt  an  actio  pro  socio
against  the  rest,  by  which  he  could  recover  what  he  had  paid  in  excess
of  his  fair  share.  Gains  iii.  122.  (6)  A  lex  Cicereia,  Gains  iii.  123,  pro-
vided that  a  creditor,  on  taking  sponsors  or  fidepromissors,  should  first
state  openly  what  the  debt  to  be  guaranteed  was,  and  also  the  number  of
sureties  he  was  going  to  take ;  if  this  were  not  done,  they  could  by  taking
action  within  thirty  days  procure  their  release.  Gains  says  that  this
enactment  had  by  usage  been  extended  to  fideiussors  also,  but  it  was
obsolete  under  Justinian.

Fideiussio,  like  sponsio  and  fidepromissio,  is  a  form  of  what  is  called
cumulative  intercession,  which  may  be  defined  as  a  contract  between
a  creditor  and  a  third  person  by  which  the  latter  takes  upon  himself  the
debtor's  obligation  without  the  debtor  being  himself  released.  The  form
in  which  fideiussio  was  contracted  was  '  idem  fide  tua  esse  iubes  ?  fide-
iubeo '  (Gaius  iii.  1 16),  so  that  the  obligation  of  the  principal  and  surety
was  correal :  the  Greek  equivalents  are  given  in  §  7  inf.

§  L  It  was  not  necessary,  as  might  possibly  be  inferred  from  the  text,


430  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

adsumi  possunt,  id  est  sive  re  sive  verbis  sive  litteris  sive
consensu  contractae  fuerint.  ac  ne  illud  quidem  interest,
utrum  civilis  an  naturalis  sit  obligation  cui  adiciatur  fideiussor,
adeo  quidem,  ut  pro  servo  quoque  obligetur,  sive  extraneus
sit  qui  iideiussorem  a  servo  accipiat,  sive  ipse  dominus  in

2  id  quod  sibi  naturaliter  debetur.     Fideiussor  non  tantum  ipse

3  obligatur,  sed  etiam  heredem  obligatum  relinquit.     Fideiussor

4  et  praecedere  obligationem  et  sequi  potest  Si  plures  sint
fideiussores,  quotquot  erunt  numero,  singuli  in  solidum  te-
nentur.  itaque  liberum  est  creditori  a  quo  velit  solidum
petere.  sed  ex  epistula  divi  Hadrian!  compellitur  creditor  a
singulis,  qui  modo  solvendo  sint  litis  contestatae  tempore,
partes  petere.     ideoque  si  quis  ex  fideiussoribus  eo  tempore


that  the  guaranteed  obligation  should  arise  ex  contractu :  it  might  arise
from  delict  (though  this  was  perhaps  not  always  so ;  '  ex  delicto  magis
putamus  tencri*  Dig.  46.  i.  8.  5),  judgment,  quasi  ex  contractu,  or  any
other  source ;  but  there  must  be  an  obligatio,  even  though  it  be  naturalis
only,  and  that  obligatio  must  be  another  person's :  so  that  if  the  principal
obligation  is  or  becomes  void,  the  fideiussio  is  or  becomes  void  likewise,
Dig.  46.  I.  47.  pr.,  ib.  56.  pr.  A  curious  exception  to  this  had  existed  in
the  older  forms  of  suret>'ship ;  for  if  A  promised  payment  after  his  own
death,  the  promise  would  be  void,  Tit.  19.  13  supr.,  but  a  sponsor  or
fidepromissor  to  it  would  be  liable,  though  it  had  been  a  question  whether
he  would  be  bound  for  the  sponsio  of  a  slave  or  peregrinus,  which  would
be  void  also,  Gaius  iii.  119.

§  8.  By  saying  that  a  fideiussor  '  praecedere  obligationem  potest '  is
meant  only  that  a  man  may  on  the  occurrence  of  some  event  in  the
future  become  fideiussor  nolens  volens,  not  that  he  is  bound  before  the
principal  debtor  is.  If  the  contract  were  in  the  form  Md  quod  mihi
A  debebit,  fide  tua  esse  iubes  ? '  the  promisor  was  not  bound  at  once ;
but  if  A  subsequently  became  the  promisee's  debtor,  then  the  fideiussor
was  bound ;  the  promise  was  in  effect  made  subject  to  a  suspensive
condition:  for  the  legal  position  in  such  cases  see  on  Tit.  15.  4  supr.;
cf.  §  5  inf.

§  4.  Two  or  more  fideiussors  never  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  the  leges
Apuleia  and  Furia ;  any  one  of  them  was  liable  to  be  sued  for  the  whole
debt,  and  if  so  sued  must  pay  the  whole  of  it  Under  the  so-called
beneficium  divisionis,  which  was  introduced  by  the  epistola  Hadriani,
he  was  enabled,  when  sued,  to  demand  that  if  the  other  fideiussors  were
solvent  the  creditor  should  divide  his  claim  between  him  and  them,  this
demand  taking  the  form  of  an  exceptio  to  the  plaintiffs  contention:  'si
contendat  fideiussor  caeteros  solvendo  esse,  etiam  exceptionem  ei  dan-
dam,  *<si  non  et  iUi  solvendo  sint"'  Dig.  46.  i. 28  ;  so  that  on  the  general


Tit.2o.]  DE  FIDEIUSSORIBUS.  431

solvendo  non  sit,  hoc  ceteros  onerat.  sed  et  si  ab  uno
fideiussore  creditor  totum  consecutus  fuerit,  huius  solius  de-
trimentum  erit,  si  is  pro  quo  fideiussit  solvendo  non  sit :  et
sibi  imputare  debet,  cum  potuerit  adiuvari  ex  epistula  divi
Hadriani  et  desiderate,  ut  pro  parte  in  se  detur  actio.
Fideiussores  ita  obligari  non  possunt,  ut  plus  debeant,  quam  5
debet  is  pro  quo  obligantur:  nam  eorum  obligatio  accessio
est  principalis  obligationis  nee  plus  in  accessione  esse  potest
quam  in  principal!  re.  at  ex  diverso,  ut  minus  debeant,
obligari  possunt.  itaque  si  reus  decern  aureos  promiserit,
fideiussor  in  quinque  recte  obligatur :  contra  vero  non  potest
obligari.  item  si  ille  pure  promiserit,  fideiussor  sub  condicione
promittere  potest :  contra  vero  non  potest,  non  solum  enim
in  quantitate,  sed  etiam  in  tempore  minus  et  plus  intellegitur.


rule,  the  burden  of  proving  their  solvency  lay  on  the  defendant.  Thus  he
was  not  in  so  favourable  a  position  as  the  sponsor  and  fidepromissor
under  the  two  statutes  referred  to ;  for  the  liability  was  not  divided
between  him  and  the  other  (ideiussors  ipso  iure,  so  that  he  would  still
have  to  pay  the  whole  debt  if  (under  the  formulary  procedure)  he
neglected  to  get  the  exceptio  inserted  in  the  formula  of  the  action,  or  if
all  the  others  were  insolvent ;  in  other  words,  his  liability  was  affected
by  the  insolvency  of  the  rest,  that  of  a  sponsor  or  fidepromissor  (at  any
rate  in  Italy)  was  not.

If  one  fideiussor  paid  the  whole  debt,  he  still  had  a  remedy  against  the
others  which  Justinian  does  not  mention  ;  he  could  demand,  before  pay-
ment, that  the  creditor  should  assign  to  him  all  rights  which  he  had
against  them  no  less  than  against  the  principal  debtor  (beneficium
cedendarum  actionum).  Such  demand  after  payment  was  useless,  for  the
debt  was  then  discharged,  and  the  rights  of  action,  being  extinguished,
could  no  longer  be  assigned ;  but  if  made  before  payment  it  had  the
effect  of  preserving  them,  for  'pretium  magis  mandatarum  actionum
solutum  quam  actio,  quae  fuit,  perempta  videtur'  Dig.  46.  3.  76.  As
against  the  principal  debtor  the  cessio  carried  with  it  all  accessory  rights,
such  as  mortgages.

§  5.  The  meaning  of  plus  and  minus  in  this  kind  of  connection  may  be
illustrated  by  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  plus  petitio,  Gaius  iv.  53,  54,
Bk.  iv.  6. 33  inf.  A  somewhat  complicated  case  is  that  where  it  cannot
be  ascertained  whether  the  fideiussor  has  promised  '  more '  than  the  other
until  afterwards ;  e.g.  where  the  principal  promises  subject  to  the  fulfilment
of  a  condition,  and  the  surety  promises  subject  to  the  fulfilment  of  either
the  same  condition  or  another ;  if  the  common  condition  is  fulfilled  first,
he  is  not  bound  *  in  duriorem  causam ; '  if  the  other,  he  is.  It  seems  to  be
the  better  opinion  that  the  whole  promise  is  void  ab  initio.


432  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR     [Lib.  III.

plus  est  enim  statim  aliquid  dare,  minus  est  post  tempus  dare.

6  Si  quid  autem  fideiussor  pro   reo  solvent,  eius  reciperandi

7  causa  habet  cum  eo  mandati  iudicium.  Graece  fideiussor
plerumque  ita  accipitur :  rrj  iii%  irlarei  xcXct/o),  X^ya>,  Oikia  sive
fiovkofiai :  sed  et  si  <^i7fii  dixerit,  pro  eo  erit,  ac  si  dixerit  kiy<^.

§  6.  Independently  of  the  beneficium  cedendarum  actionum,  a  surety
who  paid  was  generally  regarded  as  the  agent  of  the  principal  debtor,
and  could  recover  from  him  the  amount  which  he  had  paid,  and  all
incidental  expenses,  by  actio  mandati  (or  actio  negotiorum  gestorum  *  si
pro  absente  fideiusserit'  Dig.  17.  i.  20.  i) ;  he  could  do  this  even  when
as  a  fact  he  had  not  paid  at  all,  if  the  creditor  had  given  him  a  release
donandi  animo.  Dig.  17.  I.  10.  13.    Where,  however,  the  debt  was  prac-
tically his  own  (e.g.  Dig.  2.  14.  24;  2.  8.  8.  i),  or  he  had  become  surety
with  the  intention,  not  of  binding  the  principal,  but   of  doing   him
a  gratuitous  service  (Dig.  14.  6.  9.  3;  17.  i.  6.  2),  this  ius  regressus  did
not  exist.    By  Nov.  4.  i  Justinian  gave  to  fideiussors  the  so-called  bene-
ficium ordinis  or  excussionis,  entitling  the  surety  to  demand  that  the
creditor  should  sue  the  principal  debtor  before  resorting  to  him,  unless
the  debtor  resided  in  a  different  jurisdiction ;  in  which  case,  unless  the
surety  produced  him  within  a  time  fixed  by  the  judge,  he  could  be
sued  himself.
The  modes  in  which  a  fideiussor*s  liability  was  terminated  are
(i)  Extinction  of  the  principal  debt  in  any  of  the  modes  enumerated  in
Tit.  29  and  notes  in£.  Dig.  46.  3.43  ;  12.  2.  28.  i ;  34.  3.  5.  pr.     It  is  only
under  very  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  surety  remains  bound  after
the  principal  obligation  has  ceased  to  exist.    Even  where  he  himself  had
brought  about  its  extinction  by  rendering  its  performance  impossible,  the
jurists  at  first  were  unable  to  admit  the  continuance  of  his  own  liability
ex  contractu,  though  they  held  him  liable  to  the  actio  de  dolo,  Dig.  4.  3.
19  :  but  later  a  utilis  actio  ex  stipulatu  was  allowed  in  lieu  of  this,  which
eventually  became  directa :  in  other  words,  the  continuing  liability  was
recognised.    So  too  if  the  principal  debtor  died,  leaving  no  successor,
the  surety  remained  bound,  Dig.  46.  3.  95.  3.    If  the  creditor  was  unable
to  sue  the  principal  with  any  effect,  because,  though  the  obligatio  was
not  extinguished,  the  latter  could  always  repel  him  by  an  exceptio,  the
surety  was  usually  able  to  use  that  exceptio  himself,  for  the  reason  stated
in  Bk.  iv.  14.  4  inf.    Among  the  defences  of  this  class  which  he  could
use  are  exceptio  pacti,  loc.  cit. :  '  exceptio  iuris  iurandi '  Dig.  12.  2.  28.  i,
and  the  plea  of  limitation.    The  following  exceptiones,  however,  though
open  to  the  debtor,  were  not  also  open  to  the  surety :  {a)  those  which
were   purely  personal  to  the  former.  Dig.  44.  i.  7.  pr.;   e. g.  'beneficii
competentiae '  D  g.  loc.  cit.,  *  pacti  de  non  petendo  in  personam '  Dig.
2.  14.  22,  'nisi  bonis  cesserit'  Bk.  iv.  14.  4.  inf.:  the  last  for  the  very
reason  that  '  is  qui  alios  pro  debitore  obligat  hoc  maxiroe  prospicit,  ut
cum  facultatibus  lapsus  fuerit  debitor,  possit  ab  iis,  quos  pro  eo  obligavit,


Tit.  2a]  DE  FIDEIUSSORIBUS.  433

In  stipulationibus  fideiussorum  sciendum  est  generaliter  hoc  g
accipt,  ut,  quodcumque  scriptum   sit  quasi   actum,  videatur


suum  consequi : '  the  very  end  of  suretyship  would  otherwise  be  defeated.
Similarly,  if  the  principal  debtor  was  a  minor,  and  could  plead  that
he  had  been  in  integrum  restitutus,  the  fideiussor  was  not  benefited
if  the  creditor  had  taken  him  for  the  express  purpose  of  protecting
himself  against  this  eventuality,  Dig.  4.  4.  13.  pr.  (b)  Such  excep-
tions as  left  a  naturalis  obligatio  still  subsisting,  e.g.  that  SC*  Mace-
doniani,  unless  the  surety  had  regressus  against  the  principal  debtor,
Dig.  14. 6.  9.  3.

(2)  Confusio,  or  concurrence  of  the  main  and  accessory  liability  in  the
same  person  :  'generaliter  lulianus  ait  eum,  qui  heres  extitit  ei  pro  quo
intervenerat,  liberari  ex  causa  accessionis  et  solummodo  quasi  heredem
rei  teneri*  Dig.  46.  i.  5.

(3)  If  the  principal  debtor  fraudulently  evaded  his  obligation,  or  squan-
dered his  means,  the  fideiussor  could  demand  his  release.  Dig.  17.  i.  38.  i,
Cod.  4.  35.  10.

§  8.  Cf.  Tit  19.  17  supr.

Besides  fideiussio,  which  was  a  formal  contract,  the  Roman  law  of
Justinian  recognised  two  other  modes  in  which  the  relation  of  suretyship
could  be  produced  :  the  one  a  consensual  contract  (the  so-called  man-
datum  qualificatum,  for  which  see  Tit.  26.  5  and  notes,  inf.),  the  other
a  mere  pact,  viz.  constitutum  debiti  alieni.

Constitutum  is  a  formless  promise  to  discharge  an  already  subsisting
obligation,  whether  it  be  one's  own  (const,  debiti  sui)  or  some  one's  else
(const,  debiti  alieni) ;  Bk.  iv.  6.  9  inf.  In  itself  it  did  not  belong  to  any
recognised  class  of  contracts,  and  therefore  did  not  give  rise  to  a  civil
obligation :  it  was  made  actionable  by  the  praetor,  because,  according  to
Theophilus,  the  want  of  a  remedy  on  this  class  of  promises  led  not  only  to
fraud  but  to  great  hardship  :  see  Hunter's  Roman  Law  p.  386.  Usually
the  promise  was  to  pay  on  a  day  certain  ;  but  if  this  was  not  so,  the  pro-
misor was  entitled  to  ten  days'  grace.  Dig.  13.  5.  21.  i.

Constitutum  debiti  alieni  resembles  fideiussio  in  presupposing  an  actual
even  though  only  '  natural '  liability  of  another  person.  Dig.  13.  5.  1. 1 ;  ib.
6-8 ;  in  the  right  of  two  or  more  constituentes  to  the  beneficium  divisionis,
Cod.  4. 18.  3 :  in  the  surety's  right  to  the  beneficium  ordinis,  Nov.  4.  i  (at
any  rate  in  those  cases  where  his  obligation  is  exactly  co-extensive  with
that  of  the  principal  debtor,  and  its  object  is  merely  the  creditor's  security),
and  as  a  rule  to  use  such  exceptiones  of  the  principal  debtor  as  practically,
though  not  formally,  annihilate  the  creditor's  right  against  him.  But
while  the  fideiussor  is  in  effect  a  correus,  and  the  sole  end  of  his  liability
is  the  creditor's  security,  constitutum  was  often  designed  to  confer  on  the
latter  further  advantages :  the  obligation  was  different  from  that  of  the
principal  debtor,  and  solidary  rather  than  correal.  Hence  the  constituens
is  not  prejudiced  by  the  latter's  culpa  or  mora :  but,  like  solidary  debtors
in  general,  he  is  not  necessarily  released  by  extinction  of  the  main  debt,

Ff


434  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

etiam  actum :  ideoque  constat,  si  quis  se  scripserit  fideiussisse,
videri  omnia  sollemniter  acta.


but  only  by  satisfaction  of  the  creditor,  so  that  (e.g.)  he  remains  liable
after  the  action  against  the  debtor  is  barred  by  lapse  of  time  (Dig.  13.  5.
18.  i),  or  even  after  the  latter  has  paid  one  of  two  correal  creditors,  with
the  other  of  whom  he  himself  made  the  constitutum.  Dig.  ib.  10.  In
respect  of  time  and  place  of  performance  he  may  be  bound  differently,  and
even  in  duriorem  causam  than  the  main  debtor,  ib.  3.  2.  Before  Justinian
a  constitutum  could  be  made  in  relation  only  to  res  fun'gibiles,  and  the
action  on  it  was  prescribed  in  an  annus  utilis  ;  both  of  these  limitations  he
abolished,  and  also  the  old  penal  wager  in  the  action  of  half  the  value  in
dispute  (Gaius  iv.  171),  Cod.  4.  18.  i ;  so  that  under  his  system  a  con-
stituens  might  be  bound  for  a  different  object  of  equal  value  with  that  for
which  the  principal  debtor  was  liable ;  if  it  was  of  greater  value,  he  was
not  answerable  for  the  excess.

One  of  the  salient  features  of  the  Roman  law  of  suretyship  is  the  prac-
tical incapacity  of  women  to  bind  themselves  by  contracts  of  this  kind.  It
seems  to  have  originated  in  edicts  of  Augustus  and  Claudius,  prohibiting
wives  from  becoming  sureties  for  their  husbands.  Dig.  16.  i.  3.  pr.  It  is
supposed,  with  considerable  probability,  that  the  cause  of  the  more  general
enactment,  the  SC.  Velleianum,  a.d.  46,  was  the  recklessness  with  which
women,  after  Claudius  had  abolished  the  tutela  legitima  of  agnates  over
them  (p.  151  supr.),  exercised  their  newly-found  control  of  their  property  on
behalf  of  others.  This  enacted  that  no  action  should  lie  on  contracts  of
suretyship  entered  into  by  women  as  promisors  ;  '  quod  ad  fideiussiones  et
mutui  dationes  pro  aliis  pro  quibus  intercesserint  feminae  pertinet,  tametsi
ante  videtur  ita  ius  dictum  esse,  ne  eo  nomine  ab  his  petitio  neve  in  eas
actio  detur,  cum  eas  virilibus  ofiiciis  fungi  et  eius  generis  obligationibus
obstringi  non  sit  aequum ;  arbitrari  senatum,  recte  atque  ordine  facturos
ad  quos  de  ea  re  in  iure  aditum  erit,  si  dederint  operam  ut  in  ea  re  senatus
voluntas  servetur'  Dig.  16.  i.  2.  i.  The  senatusconsult  thus  related  only
to  fideiussio  and  mutuum ;  but  its  principle  was  extended  to  all  forms  of
intercessio,  privative  as  well  as  cumulative,  by  responsa  of  the  jurists  and
imperial  enactments,  Dig.  loc.  dt  i.  pr.,  ib.  2.  4.  Though  it  had  refused
a  remedy  on  such  contracts,  it  would  seem  that  the  usual  practice  was  for
the  praetor  to  grant  the  action,  if  applied  for,  which  could  then  be  met  by
the  exceptio  SC  Velleiani,  frequently  mentioned  in  the  texts,  which  could
be  pleaded  against  execution  even  after  judgment  had  been  given.  Dig.  14.
6.  II.  It  must  not,  however,  be  inferred  from  this  that  the  woman  in-
curred even  a  '  natural '  obligation  to  pay  the  debt ;  for  if  she  paid  in
ignorance  of  her  right  to  the  exceptio,  she  could  recover  by  condictio
indebiti,  Dig.  12. 6. 40.  pr.  Another  view  as  to  the  history  of  the  matter,  in
some  degree  supported  by  the  terms  of  the  senatusconsult,  is  that  women
had  been  forbidden  to  become  sureties  even  by  the  old  civil  law,  and  that
the  enactments  of  the  time  of  Augustus  and  Claudius  are  merely  evidence


Tit.  21.]  DE  LITTERARUM  OBLIGATIONE.  435


XXI.
DE  LITTERARUM   OBLIGATIONE.

Olim  scriptura  iiebat  obligatio,  quae  nominibus  fieri  dice-
batur,  quae  nomina  hodie  non  sunt  in  usu.  plane  si  quis
debere  se  scripserit,  quod  numeratum  ei  non  est,  de  pecunia
minime  numerata  post  multum  temporis  exceptionem  op-
ponere  non  potest :  hoc  enim  saepissime  constitutum  est.
sic  fit,  ut  et  hodie,  dum  queri  non  potest,  scriptura  obligetur:
et  ex  ea  nascitur  condictio,  cessante  scilicet  verborum  obli-
gatione.  multum  autem  tempus  in  hac  exceptione  antea
quidem  ex  principalibus  constitutionibus  usque  ad  quin-
quennium procedebat :  sed  ne  creditores  diutius  possint  suis
pecuniis  forsitan  defraudari,  per  constitutionem  nostram  tempus
coartatum  est,  ut  ultra  biennii  metas  huiusmodi  exceptio
minime  extendatur.


of  its  evasion  through  the  rapid  decay  of  old  Roman  manners  at  the  dose
of  the  Republic.

There  are  a  number  of  exceptions  from  the  operation  of  the  senatus-
consult,  as  e.g.  where  the  woman  had  been  guilty  of  dolus  towards  the
creditor,  Dig.  16.  1.2.  3,  ib.  30.  pr.,  and  where  the  latter,  through  no  fault
of  his  own,  was  not  aware  that  the  person '  interceding '  was  a  woman,  ib.
4.  pr. :  ib.  6:  ib.  11  ;  where  the  intercessio  was  made  for  valuable  con-
sideration, Cod.  4.  29.  23.  pr. ;  where  the  creditor  was  a  minor  and  the
principal  debtor  insolvent.  Dig.  4.  4.  12  :  where  the  obligation  guaranteed
was  to  provide  a  dos,  Cod.  4.  29.  12  and  25 ;  and  where  in  order  to  obtain
the  guardianship  over  her  children  she  had  renounced  the  benefit  of  the
enactment  (p.  149  supr.).

Justinian  enacted  (i)  that  all  intercession  by  a  woman  should  be  abso-
lutely void  unless  expressed  in  a  public  document  attested  by  at  least  three
witnesses,  Cod.  4.  29. 23. 2,  and  that  even  where  this  form  was  observed  she
might  plead  the  exceptio ;  the  exceptions  which  had  previously  held  were
still  recognised,  if  this  form  was  observed,  though  its  necessity  was  dis-
pensed with  where  the  intercessio  was  made  for  valuable  consideration,  or
in  the  matter  of  a  dos.  Cod.  loc.  cit.  24.  25.  (2)  That  all  intercession  by
a  wife  on  behalf  of  her  husband,  with  a  few  exceptions,  should  be  void,
even  though  the  form  prescribed  in  other  cases  were  complied  with,
Nov.  134.  8.

Tit.  XXI.  Upon  the  subject  of  literal  contract  in  general  see  Excursus
VIII,  at  the  end  of  this  Book.

F  f  2


436  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  111.


XXII.

DE  CONSENSU  OBLIGATIONE.

Consensu  fiunt  obligationes  in  emptionibus  venditionibus,

1  locationibus  conductionibus,  societatibus,  mandatis.  Ideo
autem  istis  modis  consensu  dicitur  obligatio  contrahi,  quia
neque  scriptura  neque  praesentia  omnimodo  opus  est,  ac  ne
dari  quidquam  necesse  est,  ut  substantiam  capiat  obligatio,

2  sed  sufficit  eos  qui  negotium  gerunt  consentire.  Unde
inter  absentes  quoque  talia  negotia  contrahuntur,  veluti  per

3  epistulam  aut  per  nuntium.  Item  in  his  contractibus  alter
alteri  obligatur  in  id,  quod  alterum  alteri  ex  bono  et  aequo
praestare  oportet,  cum  alioquin  in  verborum  obligationibus
alius  stipuletur,  alius  promittat.

XXIII.

DE  EMPTIONE  ET  VENDITION E.

Emptio  et  venditio  contrahitur,  simulatque  de  pretio
convenerit,  quamvis  nondum  pretium  numeratum  sit  ac  ne
arra  quidem  data  fuerit.  nam  quod  arrae  nomine  datur,
argumentum  est  emptionis  et  venditionis  contractae.  sed
haec  quidem  de  emptionibus  et  venditionibus,  quae  sine
scriptura  consistunt,  optinere  oportet :  nam  nihil  a  nobis  in
huiusmodi  venditionibus  innovatum  est.     in  his  autem  quae


Tit.  XXm.  Before  Justinian  arra  or  earnest  money  had  been  given
mainly  for  the  purpose  of  evidence :  *  quod  saepe  arrae  nomine  datur,
non  eo  pertinet,  quod  sine  arra  conventio  nihil  proficiat,  sed  ut  evi-
dentius  probari  possit  convenisse  de  pretio*  Dig.  i8.  i.  35.  pr.,  *quod
arrae  nomine  datur  argumentum  et  emptionis  et  venditionis  contractae '
Gains  iii.  139.  By  Cod.  4.  21.  17.  3  Justinian  made  it  the  measure
of  a  penalty  to  be  paid  (additional,  in  unwritten  contracts  of  sale,  to
damages  as  assessed  by  the  judge)  by  the  party  who  refused  to  execute.
Dr.  Hunter  (Roman  Law  p.  332)  seems  clearly  to  be  wrong  in  supposing
that  in  a  sale  which  the  parties  had  not  agreed  to  reduce  to  writing  the
defaulter  could  escape  scot  free  by  forfeiting  the  arra  which  he  had  given,
or  double  that  which  he  had  received.  He  was  subject  to  the  ordinary
rule,  and  was  bound  from  the  moment  the  price  was  agreed  upon  to  do


Tit.  23.]  DE  EMPTIONE  ET  VENDITIONE,  437

■

scriptura  conHciuntur  non  aliter  perfectam  esse  emptionem
et  venditionem  constituimus,  nisi  et  instrumenta  emptionis
fuerint  conscripta  vel  manu  propria  contrahentium,  vel  ab
alio  quidem  scripta,  a  contrahente  autem  subscripta  et,  si
per  tabellionem  fiunt,  nisi  et  completiones  acceperint  et
fuerint  partibus  absoluta.  donee  enim  aliquid  ex  his  deest,
et  poenitentiae  locus  est  et  potest  emptor  vel  venditor  sine
poena  recedere  ab  emptione.  ita  tamen  impune  recedere  eis
concedimus,  nisi  iam  arrarum  nomine  aliquid  fuerit  datum:
hoc  etenim  subsecuto,  sive  in  scriptis  sive  sine  scriptis  venditio
celebrata  est,  is  qui  recusat  adimplere  contractum,  si  quidem
emptor  est,  perdit  quod  dedit,  si  vero  venditor,  duplum  resti-
tuere  compellitur,  licet  nihil  super  arris  expressum  est.
Pretium  autem  constitui  oportet :  nam  nulla  emptio  sine  1
pretio  esse  potest,  sed  et  certum  pretium  esse  debet,  alio-
quin  si   ita   inter  aliquos  convenerit,  ut,  quanti  Titius  rem

what  he  had  promised.  Justinian's  other  change  may  be  taken  to  relate
either  to  a  contract  of  sale  actually  concluded,  which  the  parties  had  agreed
should  be  reduced  to  writing :  or  merely  to  preliminary  negotiations  under-
taken with  a  view  to  a  sale.  The  latter  view  is  the  more  probable  :  'the
arra  spoken  of  is  not  given  as  evidence  that  a  contract  has  been  con-
cluded :  it  is  the  so-called  arra  contractu  imperfecto  data,  and  the  case
contemplated  is  where  there  are  negotiations  pending  for  a  sale:  the
intending  purchaser  gives  earnest,  and  it  is  agreed  that  the  contract,  if  it
comes  off,  shall  be  reduced  to  writing  and  signed  by  the  parties.  Justinian
then  gave  no  new  right  to  either  party  of  withdrawing  from  a  cotiiraci^
for  in  the  case  supposed  there  is  merely  a  refusal  to  complete  a  bargain
which  so  far  has  not  advanced  beyond  the  stage  of  pourparlers.  All  that
was  new  in  his  enactment  was  that  if  arra  had  been  given  by  the  would-
be  purchaser  in  the  course  of  such  pourparlers,  and  he  backed  out  of
them,  he  should  forfeit  it,  while,  if  it  was  the  intending  vendor,  he  should
have  to  return  it  and  its  value  besides,  whether  there  had  been  an
agreement  to  that  effect  or  not  Previously  this  had  been  so  only
when  expressly  so  agreed ' :  Moyle,  Contract  of  Sale  in  the  Civil
Law,  p.  43.

§  1.  The  price  need  not  be  absolutely  fixed:  e.g.  it  was  sufficient  to
promise  'quantum  pretii  in  area  habebo '  Dig.  18.  i.  7.  i.  The  view  con-
firmed by  Justinian  (Cod.  4.  38.  15),  as  to  the  validity  of  a  sale  in  which
the  fixing  of  a  price  had  been  left  to  a  third  person,  had  been  that  of
Proculus ;  Labeo  held  such  a  transaction  void,  Gaius  iii.  140.  If  either
of  the  parties  to  the  contract  was  left  to  ^n  the  price  at  his  own  absolute
discretion  it  was  void,  Dig.  18.  i.  35.  i,  Cod.  4.  38.  13.  Nor  must  the
price  be  illusory  or  merely  nominal,  else  the  transaction  is  a  gift,  and  not


438  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRl  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

aestimaverit,  tanti  sit  empta:  inter  veteres  satis  abundeque
hoc  dubitabatur,  sive  constat  venditio  sive  non.  scd  nostra
decisio  ita  hoc  constituit,  ut,  quotiens  sic  composita  sit
venditio  *  quanti  lUe  aestimaverit,'  sub  hac  condicione  staret
contractus,  ut,  si  quidem  ipse  qui  nominatus  est  pretium
definierit,  omnimodo  secundum  eius  aestimationem  et  pre-
tium persolvatur  et  res  tradatur,  ut  venditio  ad  effectum
perducatur,  emptore  quidem  ex  empto  actione,  venditore
autem  ex  vendito  agente.  sin  autem  ille  qui  nominatus  est
vel  noluerit  vel  non  potuerit  pretium  definire,  tunc  pro  nihilo
esse  venditionem  quasi  nullo  pretio  statuto.  quod  ius  cum  in
venditionibus  nobis  placuit,  non  est  absurdum  et  in  loca-
2  tionibus  et  conductionibus  trahere.  Item  pretium  in  numerata
pecunia  consistere  debet,     nam  in  ceteris  rebus  an  pretium


a  sale.  Dig.  i8.  l.  36,  though  this  was  not  so  if  one  sold  at  a  less  price
than  one  conld  have  got  in  the  market  from  motives  of  kindness  or
friendship :  ^  si  quis  donationis  cansa  minoris  vendat,  venditio  valet '  Dig.
ib.  38.

As  regards  the  fairness  or  adequacy  of  the  price  the  general  rule  was,
in  the  absence  of  dolus,  not  to  interfere  with  the  freedom  of  contract.
Dig.  19.  2.  22.  3  :  4. 4.  16.  4.  But  by  two  rescripts  of  Diocletian,  Cod.  4.
44.  2  and  8,  if  a  thing  were  sold  for  less  than  half  its  real  value  (laesio
enormis)  the  vendor  might  rescind  the  sale  unless  the  vendee  would  pay
as  much  in  addition  as  would  make  the  price  a  fair  one :  '  vel  si  emptor
elegerit  quod  deest  iusto  pretio  recipias.'  Mr.  Poste's  restriction  of  the
enactment  to  sales  of  land  seems  to  be  without  reason ;  it  speaks  of '  res '
generally.

§  2.  The  lines  relied  on  by  the  Sabinians  are  from  Iliad  vii.  472-5  :  the
'  alii  Homerici  versus '  supporting  the  received  opinion  are  cited  by  Paulus
in  Dig.  18.  I.  I.  I,  from  II.  vi.  235.  The  anteriores  principes  referred  to
as  having  confirmed  the  Proculian  view  are  Diocletian  and  Maximian,
Cod.  4.  64.  3.

It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  sale  and  exchange  (permutatio),
for  they  belong  to  difierent  classes  of  contract,  and  their  respective  vincula
iuris  are  imposed  by  different  causae.  Permutatio  is  one  of  the  innominate
contracts,  p.  404  supr. ;  there  is  no  obligation  till  one  of  the  two  exchanging
]>arties  has  done  what  he  has  promised ;  but  in  sale,  which  is  consensual,
the  obligation  is  independent  of  part  performance.

It  is  not,  however,  necessary  that  the  whole  price  shall  be  in  money,
Dig.  18.  I.  79;  19.  I.  6.  I  and  2 ;  and  if,  after  the  contract  is  concluded,
the  vendor  changes  his  mind,  and  agrees  to  take  goods  in  lieu  of  the
purchase  money,  it  remains  sale  and  does  not  become  exchange,  Cod.  4.
44.9.


Tit.  33.]  DE  EMPTIONE  ET  VENDITIONE.  439

esse  possit,  veluti  homo  aut  fundus  aut  toga  alterius  rei
pretium  esse  possit,  valde  quaerebatur.  Sabinus  et  Cassius
etiam  in  alia  re  putant  posse  pretium  consistere :  unde  illud
est,  quod  vulgo  dicebatur  per  permutationem  rerum  emp-
tionem  et  venditionem  contrahi  eamque  speciem  emptionis
venditionisque  vetustissimam  esse:  argrumentoque  utebantur
Graeco  poeta  Homero,  qui  aliqua  parte  exercitum  Achivorum
vinum  sibi  comparasse  ait  permutatis  quibusdam  rebus,  his
verbis :

tvB^v  &p  olviCovTO  KafniKOft6»yr€9  *A;^cuoi,
SKkoi  fuv  x^^"^)  oXXoi  d*  aWmvi  tri^ptfy
SK\oi  dc  pipoisy  aXXot  d*  avrjtn  po^trai,

Diversae  scholae  auctores  contra  sentiebant  aliudque  esse
existimabant  permutationem  rerum,  aliud  emptionem  et
venditionem.  alioquin  non  posse  rem  expediri  permutatis
rebus,  quae  videatur  res  venisse  et  quae  pretii  nomine  data
esse :  nam  utramque  videri  et  venisse  et  pretii  nomine  datam
esse  rationem  non  pati.  sed  Proculi  sententia  dicentis  per-
mutationem propriam  esse  speciem  contractus  a  venditione
separatam  merito  praevaluit,  cum  et  ipsa  aliisT  Homericis
versibus  adiuvatur  et  validioribus  rationibus  argumentatur.
quod  et  anteriores  divi  principes  admiserunt  et  in  nostris
digestis  latius  significatur.  Cum  autem  emptio  et  venditio  3
contracta  sit  (quod  efBci  diximus,  simulatque  de  pretio  con-
venerit,  cum  sine  scriptura  res  agitur),  periculum  rei  venditae
statim  ad  emptorem  pertinet,  tametsi  adhuc  ea  res  emptori
tradita  non  sit.  itaque  si  homo  mortuus  sit  vel  aliqua  parte
corporis  laesus  fuerit,  aut  aedes  totae  aut  aliqua  ex  parte
incendio  consumptae  fuerint,  aut  fundus  vi  fluminis  totus  vel
aliqua  ex  parte  ablatus  sit,  sive  etiam  inundatione  aquae  aut
arboribus  turbine  deiectis  longe  minor  aut  deterior  esse  coe-
perit:  emptoris  damnum  est,  cui  necesse  est,  licet  rem  non
fuerit  nactus,  pretium  solvere,     quidquid  enim  sine  dolo  et

§  8.  The  property  in  the  res  vendita  did  not  pass  to  the  purchaser  till  it
had  been  delivered  to  him  by  the  vendor,  provided  he  were  owner,  who
was  not  bound  to  do  this  until  he  had  received  the  whole  price,  Bk.  ii.  i.
41  supr.  Consequently,  the  rule  that,  even  before  delivery,  the '  periculum
rei '  should  fiail  upon  the  purchaser,  and  that  he  alone  should  suffer  from


440  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  III.

culpa  venditoris  accidit,  in  eo  venditor  securus  est.  sed  et  si
post  emptionem  fundo  aliquid  per  alluvionem  accessit,  ad
emptoris  commodum  pertinet :  nam  et  commodum  eius  esse
debet,  cuius  periculum  est.     Quod  si  fugerit  homo  qui  veniit

loss,  destruction,  or  even  deterioration  of  the  res  vendita  without  the
vendor's  fault,  was  an  exception  from  the  legal  maxim  'res  perit  domino.'
It  was  only  rarely  that  such  loss  fell  on  the  vendor ;  e.g.  if  the  res  vendita
was  not  specifically  ascertained,  or  if  the  sale  had  been  made  subject  to
a  suspensive  and  yet  unfulfilled  condition.  But  though  not  answerable
for  casus,  the  vendor  was  bound,  until  traditio,  to  show  in  the  case  of  the
thing  sold  the  diligentia  of  a  bonus  paterfamilias  (Excursus  VI  inf.) :
'  custodiam  autem  venditor  talem  praestare  debet  quam  praestant  hi  quibus
res  commodata  est,  ut  diligentiam  praestet  exactiorem  quam  in  suis  rebus
adhiberet '  Dig.  i8.  6.  3  ;  and  he  would  be  answerable  for  casus  as  well  if,
as  is  said  in  the  text,  he  expressly  undertook  the '  custodia,'  by  which  is
meant  'custodia  plenissima,  qua  casus  quoque,  certe  qui  humana  pru-
dentia  evitari  potest,  praestetur,'  djcpi/Seoran;  icai  vntpfiaKKovtra  napa<l>v\aKri
Theoph.

The  vendor  was  not  bound  to  make  the  vendee  owner  of  the  res  tradita,
but  only  to  give  free  and  undisturbed  possession  :  in  other  words,  a  pos-
sessor could  validly  sell  that  which  he  possessed,  and  the  purchaser  could
not  claim  to  rescind  the  contract,  or  contend  that  there  never  was  a  con-
tract at  all,  simply  because  the  other  party  turned  out  not  to  have  been
owner  of  the  thing  sold  :  *  et  imprimis  ipsam  rem  praestare  venditorcm
oportet,  id  est,  tradere  ;  quae  res,  si  quidem  dominus  fiiit  venditor,  facit
et  emptorem  dominum,  si  non  fuit,  tantum  evictionis  nomine  venditorem
obligat,  si  modo  pretium  est  numeratum  aut  eo  nomine  satisfactum.  Emp-
tor autem  nummos  venditoris  facere  cogitur'  Dig.  19.  i.  11.  2, '  verum  est
venditorem  hactenus  teneri,  ut  rem  emptori  habere  liceat,  non  etiam  ut
eius  fiat'  ib.  30.  i,  'qui  vendidit,  necesse  non  habet,  fundum  emptoris
facere,  utcogitur,  qui  fundum  stipulanti  spopondit'  Dig.  18.  i.  25.  2;  in
permutatio  the  rule  was  different,  Dig.  19.  4.  i.  3.  Dr.  Hunter  (Roman
Law,  p.  320)  accounts  for  this  peculiar  rule  of  the  Roman  law  of  sale  by
saying  '  if  the  seller  had  been  bound  to  make  a  good  title,  then  aliens  (pere-
grini)  could  neither  have  bought  nor  sold,  for  they  could  not  be  owners
(doniini  ex  iure  Quiritium).  But  aliens  could  "  possess,"  and  therefore  an
obligation  to  deliver  possession,  combined  with  wananty  against  eviction,
gave  them  as  complete  rights  as  it  was  possible  they  could  have  in  Roman
law.'  But  this  fails  to  explain  how  they  could  be  purchasers ;  for  if  they
could  not  own  the  res  vendita,  neither  could  they  own  the  money  with
which  they  paid  for  it :  '  emptor  autem  nummos  venditoris  facere  cogitur,'
supr.  Perhaps  it  is  more  correct  to  base  the  rule  upon  consideration  for
the  vendor,  and  the  desire  to  facilitate  commerce ;  supposing  that  the  thing
does  not  belong  to  the  vendor,  and  that  it  is  derelicta  by  the  owner,  or  ac-
cidentally destroyed,  or  acquired  by  the  vendee  per  usucapionem,  before
eviction,  the  vendor  is  absolved  fh>m  all  liability,  and  the  parties  have


Tit.  23.]  DE  EMPTIONE  ET  VENDITION E,  441

aut  subreptus  fuerit,  ita  ut  neque  dolus  neque  culpa  venditoris
interveniat,  animadvertendum  erit,  an  custodiam  eius  usque
ad  traditionem  venditor  susceperit.  sane  enim,  si  susceperit,
ad  ipsius  periculum  is  casus  pertinet:  si  non  susceperit,
securus  erit.  idem  et  in  ceteris  animalibus  ceterisque  rebus
intellegimus.  utique  tamen  vindicationem  rei  et  condictionem
exhibere  debebit  emptori,  quia  sane,  qui  rem  nondum  emptori
tradidit,  adhuc  ipse  dominus  est.    idem  est  etiam  de  furti  et


achieved  what  they  wished  ;  while,  under  the  same  circumstances,  if  he
had  to  make  a  good  title,  the  contract  would  be  void  ab  initio,  and  could
in  no  way  be  subsequently  validated :  see  the  writer's  Contract  of  Sale  in
the  Civil  Law,  pp.  103,  104.

If  the  vendee  did  not  pay  the  purchase  money  before  or  at  the  time  of
traditio,  he  had  to  pay  interest :  '  nam  cum  re  emptor  fruatur,  aequissimum
est  eum  usuras  pretii  pendere '  Dig.  19.  i.  13.  20.

If  the  purchaser  were  evicted  by  process  of  law,  i.  e.  if  the  res  vendita
were  recovered  from  him  by  some  one  having  higher  rights  in  it  than  he
had  himself  acquired  from  the  vendor,  the  latter  was  liable  by  the  actio
empti  in  damages.  Dig.  21.2.  The  obligation  to  compensate  on  eviction
did  not  apparently  always  exist,  except  in  sales  by  mancipation,  when  the
vendor  was  bound  communi  iure,  if  the  vendee  were  evicted,  to  return
double  the  price :  '  res  empta,  mancipatione  et  traditione  perfecta,  si
evincatur,  auctoritatis  venditor  dupli  tenus  obligatur*  Paul.  Sent.  Rec  2. 17.
3.  Ordinary  sales  seem  to  have  usually  been  accompanied  by  a  stipula-
tion, in  which  the  vendor  expressly  promised  a  similar  penalty  in  the  like
event ;  subsequently  it  became  a  general  rule  of  law  that,  apart  from  any
stipulation,  simple  damages  might  be  claimed  if  the  title  proved  defective
(simplaria  venditio) :  '  sive  tota  res  evincatur  sive  pars,  habet  regressum
emptor  in  venditorem  *  Dig.  21.  2.  i.

By  the  civil  law  the  vendor  was  held  impliedly  to  warrant  the  quantity
and  quality  of  what  he  sold  only  where  he  had  been  guilty  of  dolus,  Dig.
19.  I.  II.  5  ;  if  he  falsely  stated  the  acreage  of  land  double  damages  were
recoverable,  Paul.  Sent  Rec  i.  19,  ib.  2.  17.  4,  the  remedy  in  such  cases
being  the  actio  empti.  The  curule  aediles,  in  the  exercise  of  their  juris-
diction over  the  markets  and  market  law,  extended  the  obligation  by  im-
plying a  general  warranty  in  sales  in  open  market  of  slaves,  horses,  and
cattle,  enforceable  by  two  new  remedies ;  (i)  the  actio  redhibitoria,  which
lay  only  within  six  months  from  the  date  of  the  contract,  and  the  object  of
which  was  to  cancel  it  and  recover  the  purchase  money  with  interest ;  (2)
the  actio  aestimatoria  (or  quanti  minoris),  which  enabled  the  vendee  to
recover  a  part  of  the  purchase  money  proportionate  to  the  defects  dis-
covered, and  which  could  be  brought  at  any  time  within  a  year.  This
implied  warranty  and  the  aedilician  actions  were  extended  to  sales  of
every  kind  by  the  jurists  after  Labeo.


443  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

4  de  damn!  iniuriae  actione.  Emptio  tam  sub  condicione  quam
pure  contraht  potest,     sub  condicione  veluti '  si  Stichus  intra

5  certum  diem  tibi  placuerit,  erit  tibi  emptus  aureis  tot.'  Loca
sacra  vel  religiosa,  item  publica,  veluti  forum  basilicam,  frustra
quis  sciens  emit,  quas  tamen  si  pro  privatis  vel  profanis
deceptus  a  venditore  emerit,  habebit  actionem  ex  empto,
quod  non  habere  ei  liceat,  ut  consequatur,  quod  sua  interest
deceptum  eum  non  esse,  idem  iuris  est,  si  hominem  liberum
pro  servo  emerit.


§  4.  Sales  '  upon  approval/  as  we  call  them,  could  be  effected  by  either
a  suspensive  or  a  resolutive  condition.  For  an  instance  of  the  latter  cf.
Dig.  1 8.  5.  6  'si  convenit  ut  res  quae  venit,  si  intra  certum  teropus  dis-
plicuisset,  redderetur,  ex  empto  actio  est.'  The  condition  in  the  text  is
suspensive,  and  there  is  no  contract  until  the  would-be  purchaser  ex-
presses approval,  though  if  the  object  is  injured  or  destroyed  before  by
his  £aiult  he  is  liable  in  damages,  Dig.  19.  5.  17.  2.  Where  the  condition
is  resolutive  the  sale  is  regarded  as  pure  facta,  though  liable  to  be  cancelled
by  the  res  failing  to  give  satisfaction  ;  and  it  will  be  cancelled  even  though
the  ground  of  the  disapproval  be  injury  to  or  destruction  of  the  thing  oc-
curring without  the  vendee's  fault.  If  no  time  is  fixed  for  the  expression
of  approval  or  disapproval,  it  must  be  stated  within  a  reasonable  time
ascertained  by  local  or  commercial  usage.

§  6.  All  things,  incorporeal  (e.  g.  iura  in  re  aliena  and  debts)  as  well  as
corporeal,  and  universitates  no  less  than  res  singulae,  can  be  the  objects
of  a  contract  of  sale,  provided  they  could  be  the  objects  of  a  contract  in
general  as  between  the  particular  parties,  except  the  services  of  a  free  man.
Res  extra  commercium,  if  their  character  is  known  to  the  vendee,  are
thus  excluded  (fraud  by  the  vendor  is  not  essential,  as  might  be  inferred
from  the  text  ;  see  Dig.  18.  1.4;  ib.  6.  pr.  ;  ib.  34.  2  ;  ib.  70),  as  also  are
(i)  things  which  already  belong  to  the  purchaser  ('suae  rei  emptio  non
valet'  Dig.  18.  i.  16.  pr.)i  unless  the  possession  or  usufruct  is  vested  in
some  other  person.  Dig.  ib.  34.  4  ;  41.  2.  28  ;  (2)  things  which  are  furtivae
to  the  knowledge  of  both  parties,  Dig.  18.  i.  34.  3 ;  and  (3)  things  which
are  non-existent,  unless  their  future  existence  is  reckoned  upon  or  at
least  hoped  for.  In  the  sale  of  '  expectations '  and  things  not  yet  in  esse
the  Romans  draw  a  distinction.  An  emptio  of  a  '  res  sperata '  was  held
to  be  conditional  on  its  future  existence ;  e.  g.  a  crop  which  is  liable  to  be
destroyed  by  floods  :  an  '  emptio  spei '  was  absolute,  Dig.  18.  i.  8.


Tit.  24.]        DE  LOCATIONE  ET  CONDUCTIONE.  443

XXIV.

DE  LOCATIONE  ET  CONDUCTIONE.

Locatio  et  conductio  proxima  est  emptioni  et  venditioni
isdemque  iuris  regulis  consistunt.  nam  ut  emptio  et  venditio
ita  contrahitur,  si  de  pretio  convenerit,  sic  etiam  locatio  et
tonductio  ita  contrahi  intellegitur,  si  merces  constituta  sit.  et
competit  locator!  quidem  locati  actio,  conductor!  vero  con-
duct!. Et  quae  supra  diximus,  s!  alieno  arbitrio  pretium  1
permissum  fuerit,  eadem  et  de  locatione  et  conductione  dicta
esse  intellegamus,  si  alieno  arbitrio  merces  permissa  fuerit.
qua  de  causa  si  fulloni  polienda  curandave  aut  sarcinatori
sarcienda  vestimenta  quis  dederit  nulla  statim  mercede  consti-
tuta, sed  postea  tantum  daturus,  quantum  inter  eos  convenerit,

Tit.  XXIV.  In  many  points,  as  is  observed  in  the  text,  the  rules  of
locatio  conductio  are  (mutatis  mutandis)  identical  with  those  of  sale.
The  contract  is  concluded  as  soon  as  the  parties  are  agreed  upon  the
thing  to  be  let  and  the  hire  money  (merces),  which  must  be  pecunia
numerata,  §  2,  except  that  the  rent  of  agricultural  land  may  be  paid  in
kind,  the  amount  being  fixed  either  absolutely  or  at  a  certain  proportion
of  the  yearly  fruits,  Cod.  4.  65.  21.  So  too  the  merces,  like  the  pretium,
must  be  certa  and  vera,  but  need  not  be  iusta,  understanding  these
terms  in  the  senses  already  given  to  them  under  Tit.  23 ;  nor,  finally,
need  the  letter  be  dominus  of  that  which  he  lets  (Dig.  19.  2.  7  ;  ib.  9.  pr.
and  6) ;  else  subletting  would  have  been  impossible.

Transactions  of  three  different  kinds  are  included  under  this  contract :
(i)  Locatio  conductio  rerum,  the  letting  by  one  (locator)  and  hiring  by
another  (conductor)  of  a  thing  moveable  or  immoveable  (e.  g.  a  house
with  its  premises,  in  which  case  the  hirer  was  called  inquilinus :  or
agricultural  land,  when  he  was  called  colonus,  Bk.  ii.  i.  36  supr.),  or
even  of  a  res  incorporalis,  e.  g.  a  usufruct,  Dig.  7.  i.  12.  2 ;  ib.  38.

(2)  Locatio  conductio  operarum,  the  letting  by  one  (locator)  of  his
services  only  to  another  (conductor),  as  in  all  contracts  of  free  service.

(3)  Locatio  conductio  opens,  where  one  (conductor)  engages  to  execute
a  sp>ecific  piece  of  work,  e.  g.  build  a  house,  a  ship,  a  carriage,  etc.,  for
another  (locator)  from  materials  belonging  to  or  provided  by  the  latter.
Here  the  ordinary  use  of  the  terms  describing  the  parties  is  inverted,  the
one  who  contracts  to  do  the  work,  and  who  we  should  say  is  hired,  being
regarded  as  the  hirer.

§  L  By  the  actio  praescriptis  verbis  the  contract  is  stamped  as  in-
nominate, p.  404  supr.  If  after  having  left  the  remuneration  to  be  fixed  by
subsequent  arrangement  between  themselves  the  parties  were  imable  to


444  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

non  proprie  locatio  et  conductio  contrahi  intellegitur,  sed  eo

2  nomine  praescriptis  verbis  actio  datur.  Praeterea  sicut  vulgo
quaerebatur,  an  permutatis  rebus  emptio  et  vcnditio  con-
trahitur:  ita  quaeri  solebat  de  locatione  et  conductione,  si
forte  rem  aliquam  tibi  utendam  sive  fruendam  quis  dederit
et  invicem  a  te  aliam  utendam  sive  fruendam  acceperit  et
placuit  non  esse  locationem  et  conductionem,  sed  proprium
genus  esse  contractus,  veluti  si,  cum  unum  quis  bovem
haberet  et  vicinus  eius  unum^  placuerit  inter  eos,  ut  per  denos
dies  invicem  boves  commodarent,  ut  opus  facerent,  et  apud
alterum  bos  periit:  neque  locati  vel  conducti  neque  com-
modati  competit  actio,  quia  non  fuit  gratuitum  commodatum,

3  verum  praescriptis  verbis  agendum  est  Adeo  autem  fa-
miliaritatem  aliquam  inter  se  habere  videntur  emptio  et
venditiOy  item  locatio  et  conductio,  ut  in  quibusdam  causis
quaeri  soleat,  utrum  emptio  et  venditio  contrahatur,  an  locatio
et  conductio.  ut  ecce  de  praediis,  quae  perpetuo  quibusdam
fruenda  traduntur,  id  est  ut,  quamdiu  pensio  sive  reditus  pro
his  domino  praestetur,  neque  ipsi  conductori  neque  heredi
eius,  cuive  conductor  heresve  id  praedium  vendiderit  aut
donaverit  aut  dotis  nomine  dederit  aliove  quo  modo  alienaverit,
auferre  liceat  sed  talis  contractus,  quia  inter  veteres  du-
bitabatur  et  a  quibusdam  locatio,  a  quibusdam  venditio
existimabatur :  lex  Zenoniana  lata  est,  quae  emphyteuseos
contractui  propriam  statuit  naturam  neque  ad  locationem
neque  ad  venditionem  inclinantem,  sed  suis  pactionibus
fulciendam,  et  si  quidem  aliquid  pactum  fuerit,  hoc  ita
optinere,  ac  si  naturalis  esset  contractus,  sin  autem  nihil  de
periculo  rei  fuerit  pactum,  tunc  si  quidem  totius  rei  interitus
accesserit,  ad  dominum  super  hoc  redundare  periculum,  sin
particularis,  ad  emphyteuticarium  huiusmodi  damnum  venire.


come  to  terms,  the  fullo  or  sarcinator  cotild  bring  an  actio  mandati,
Tit  26.  13  inf.

§  2.  See  Tit.  23.  2  and  notes,  supr.

§  8.  For  the  history  and  nature  of  emphyteusis  see  p.  328  supr.  The
enactments  of  Zeno  and  Justinian  did  not  (as  Mr.  Poste,  on  Gaius  iii.
145,  supposes),  require  a  written  lease  for  the  conclusion  of  the  contract  in
all  cases,  but  only  where  the  land  belonged  to  the  church  or  a  charitable
foundation ;  if  the  landlord  was  a  lay  person,  writing  was  necessary  only


Tit.  24.]       DE  LOCATION E  ET  CONDUCTIONE.  445

quo  iure  utimur.  Item  quaeritur,  si  cum  aurifice  Titio  con-  4
venerit,  ut  is  ex  auro  suo  certt  ponderis  certaeque  formae
anulos  ei  faceret  et  acciperet  verbi  gratia  aureos  decern,
utrum  emptio  et  venditio  an  locatio  et  conductio  contrahi
videatur?  Cassius  ait  materiae  quidem  emptionem  venditio-
nemque  contrahi,  operae  autem  locationem  et  conductionem.
sed  placuit  tantum  emptionem  et  venditionem  contrahi.
quodsi  suum  aurum  Titius  dederit  mercede  pro  opera  con-
stituta,  dubium  non  est,  quin  locatio  et  conductio  sit.

Conductor   omnia    secundum    legem    conductionis    facere  5
debet  et,  si  quid  in  lege  praetermissum  fuerit,  id  ex  bono
et  aequo  debet  praestare.    qui  pro  usu  aut  vestimentorum
aut  argenti  aut  iumenti  mercedem  aut  dedit  aut  promisit,  ab

if  and  so  far  as  the  parties  wished  to  modify  the  regulations  of  the
ordinary  law  as  settled  by  those  two  emperors,  Cod.  4.  66.  i,  Nov.
120.  6.  I.

§  4.  The  opinion  of  Cassius  had  not  many  supporters  in  the  time  of
Gains,  who  says  (iii.  147)  '  plerisque  placuit  emptionem  et  venditionem
contrahi.'  The  true  criterion  in  such  cases  is  given  by  Javolenus  in  Dig.
18.  I.  65  'toties  conductio  alicuius  rei  est,  quoties  materia,  in  qua  aliquid
praestatur,  in  eodem  statu  eiusdem  permanet,  quoties  vero  et  immutatur,
et  alienatur,  emptio  magis  quam  locatio  intellegi  debet.'  In  iii.  146  Gains
puts  the  case  of  one  letting  out  gladiators  for  the  amphitheatre  upon
terms  that  a  specified  sum  should  be  paid  for  the  services  of  each  who
came  out  of  the  conflict  unhurt,  and  a  much  larger  one  for  each  who  was
killed  or  disabled  ;  though  it  was  a  moot  point,  he  says  the  better  opinion
was  that  it  was  hire  so  far  as  the  first  contingency  went,  and  sale  so  far
as  the  last,  each  gladiator  being  the  subject  of  a  conditional  hiring  and
a  conditional  sale,  the  event  determining  which  of  the  contracts  was  to
oust  the  other.

§  6.  The  rights  and  duties  of  the  parties  respectively  can  most  con-
veniently be  arranged  under  the  three  different  forms  of  the  contract.

i.  In  locatio  conductio  rerum  the  locator  must  allow  the  conductor  to
use  and  often  to  take  the  fruits  of  the  res  locata  during  the  time  agreed
upon,  unless  prevented  by  impossibility  arising  from  no  fault  of  his  own,  in
which  case  he  cannot  demand  the  merces  (Dig.  19.  2.  9.  3-4;  ib.  19.  6),
though,  if  he  has  let  a  res  aliena  which  its  owner  recovers  from  the  con-
ductor by  real  action,  he  is  liable  to  the  latter  in  damages,  whether  in
fault  or  not,  Dig.  19.  2.  7-9.  pr.  The  thing  again  must  be  let  in  such
a  condition  that  it  can  be  used  for  the  purpose  agreed  upon,  Dig.  ib.  19.  i  ;
if  there  are  defects  of  which  the  locator  was  aware,  he  is  liable  in  damages
ib. ;  if  they  were  unknown  to  him  the  merces  will  be  abated  in  proportion
to  their  importance.  Burdens  imposed  by  the  law  on  the  res  locata  itself
(e.g.  land  tax)  must  be  borne  by  him.  Dig.  43.  10.  1.3;  he  must  execute


446  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

eo  custodia  talis  desideratur,  qualem  diligentissimus  pater
famtlias  suis  rebus  adhibet    quam  si  praestiterit  et  altquo

all  repairs,  Dig.  19.  2.  15.  i ;  ib.  19.  3;  ib.  25.  2,  and  compensate  the
conductor  for  all  necessary  repairs  and  expenditure  incurred  therein
by  him  as  well  as  for  unexhausted  improvements,  Dig.  ib.  19.  4;
ib.  55. 1.

If  the  locator  disabled  himself  fh)m  assuring  the  conductor  the  quiet
use  and  enjoyment  of  the  res  locata  (e.  g.  land)  for  the  whole  of  the  time
agreed  upon,  as  by  selling  it  to  a  third  person  before  the  period  for  which
it  was  hired  had  elapsed,  he  was  of  course  answerable  in  damages.  But
the  purchaser  could  evict  the  lessee  even  without  notice  (Kauf  bricht
Miethe) :  '  qui  fundum  fruendum  vel  habitationem  alicui  locavit,  si  aliqua
ex  causa  fundum  vel  aedes  vendat,  curare  debet,  ut  apud  emptorem
quoque  eadem  pactione  et  colono  frui  et  inquilino  habitare  liceat:
alioquin  prohibitus  is  aget  cum  eo  ex  conducto'  Dig.  19.  2.  25.  i,  'emp-
torem quidem  fundi  necesse  non  est  stare  colono,  cui  prior  dominus
locavit,  nisi  ea  lege  emit'  Cod.  4.  65.  9.  If  not  evicted,  the  conductor
must  continue  to  pay  his  rent  to  his  lessor.

The  conductor,  besides  being  answerable,  as  is  said  in  the  text,  for
escacta  diligentia  in  the  care  of  the  res  locata,  must  pay  the  merces  agreed
upon,  unless  through  default  of  the  lessor  he  cannot  use  the  thing  for
the  purpose  for  which  it  was  hired.  If  any  accident  occurs  to  it  whereby
its  use  or  productive  powers  are  seriously  impaired,  he  is  entitled  to  have
the  merces  proportionately  abated.  Dig.  19.  2.  15.  7.  In  respect  of
agricultural  land  there  were  special  regulations,  the  lessee,  if  he  were
prevented  from  gathering  his  crops,  and  so  suffered  serious  loss,  by
events  which  we  describe  as  'the  act  of  God  and  the  king's  enemies'
(Dig.  19.  2.  1 5.  2-4),  being  entitled  to  a  complete  remission  of  rent  for
the  year  (Dig.  ib.  15.  7),  and  to  a  proportionate  reduction  if  the  disaster
were  partial  only :  '  ubicunque  tamen  remissionis  ratio  habetur  ex  causis
supra  relatis,  non  id,  quod  sua  interest,  conductor  consequitur,  sed
mercedis  exonerationem  pro  rata;'  but  if  his  lease  was  for  a  term  of  years
yet  unexpired,  he  must,  if  possible,  make  up  the  amount  remitted  from
unusually  good  seasons.  Dig.  19.  2.  15.  4.  The  conductor  was  also  bound
to  re-deliver  the  res  locata  at  the  end  of  the  time  for  which  he  had  hired
it  in  as  good  condition  as  when  it  came  into  his  hands,  saving  ordinary
wear  and  tear ;  if  he  groundlessly  refused  to  do  this  up  to  judgment  in
an  action  brought  for  its  recovery  Zeno  made  him  liable  in  duplum,  Cod.
4*  65.  33,  and  he  was  not  exempted  from  the  obligation  of  restitution
even  though  he  were  or  professed  to  be  its  owner ;  he  must  give  it  up,
and  then  he  may  bring  a  real  action  to  establish  his  dominium,  Cod.  ib.
25.  The  relations  of  locator  and  conductor  were  not  affected  by  the  fact
of  the  latter's  subletting,  which  created  no  '  privity '  between  locator  and
sublessee,  though  the  former  had  a  hypothec  over  the  latter*s  invecta  et
illata,  which,  however,  he  could  evade  by  paying  his  rent  to  the  superior
instead  of  the  immediate  landlord,  Dig.  13.  7.  11.  5.

The  locator  could  with  impunity  withdraw  from  the  contract  (i)  if  the


Tit.  24.]       DE  LOCATIONE  ET  CONDUCTIONE.  447

casu  rem  amiserit,  de  restituenda  ea  non  tenebitur.     Mortuo  6
conductore  intra  tempora  conductionis  heres  eius  eodem  lure
in  conductionem  succedit.


condactor  failed  to  pay  the  merces  for  two  years,  Dig.  19.  2.  54.  i,  or  used
the  res  locata  for  other  purposes  than  those  for  which  it  was  hired,  Cod.  4.
65*  3 ;  (2)  if  repairs  were  absolutely  necessary  which  would  interfere  with
Its  use,  Cod.  ib. ;  (3)  if  the  res  locata  were  a  building,  and  he  required  it
himself  for  purposes  which  could  not  have  been  foreseen  at  the  date  of  the
contract.  Cod.  ib.  Conversely  the  conductor  could  withdraw,  (i)  if  the
lessor  failed  to  deliver  the  res  locata  to  him  at  the  time  agreed  upon,  or
in  a  fit  condition  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  designed,  Dig.  19,  2.  24.  4,
ib.  25.  2,  ib.  60.  pr. ;  (2)  if  he  could  not  use  it  for  that  purpose  without
great  risk  to  himself,  Dig.  ib.  27.  i,  Dig.  39.  2.  28.

ii.  In  locatio  conductio  operarum,  which,  owing  to  the  institution  of
slavery,  is  of  far  less  importance  in  the  civil  than  in  modem  law,  the
duties  of  the  locator  (servant)  are  no  more  than  to  serve  duly  and
properly  for  the  term  agreed  upon,  though,  if  prevented  by  pure  accident,
he  will  be  excused,  Dig.  19.  2.  30.  l.  The  conductor  must  pay  the
wages  settled,  unless  the  other  fails,  even  through  accident,  to  perform
his  part  of  the  contract;  in  this  event  his  liability  is  extinguished  or
reduced  pro  rata,  and  he  must  indemnify  the  locator  for  all  reasonable
expenditure.  The  so-called  operae  locari  non  solitae,  or  operae  liberales
— the  intellectual  services  of  teachers,  advocates,  notaries,  physicians,
etc. — could  not  be  the  object  of  any  binding  contract,  Dig.  11.  6.  1.  pr.,
though  if  rendered  at  request  honoraria  could  usually  be  recovered
through  the  magistrate's  extraordinaria  cognitio,  except  by  professors  of
law  and  philosophy,  Dig.  50.  13.  1.4  and  5.

iii.  In  locatio  conductio  operis  (which  was  said  to  be  made  'per
aversionem '  if  the  agreement  was  to  do  the  whole  job  at  a  sum  absolutely
fixed,  as  distinct  from  so  much  per  diem,  or  so  much  for  each  portion
completed)  the  conductor  operis  must  execute  and  deliver  the  opus
according  to  the  specifications,  and  is  answerable  for  all  defects,  whether
due  to  his  own  want  of  skill  or  carelessness,  or  to  that  of  his  workmen
and  subordinates.  Dig.  19.  2.  25.  7,  ib.  13.  5,  ib.  62  ;  after  acceptance  and
approval  of  the  work  by  the  locator  this  liability  is  extinguished  except
where  there  has  been  dolus  on  the  conductor's  part.  Dig.  ib.  24.  pr.  If
before  completion  the  work  was  accidentally  destroyed  he  was  entitled
to  payment  so  far  as  he  had  gone.  Dig.  ib.  36.  37.  59.

The  locator  must  pay  the  merces  agreed  upon,  provided  the  work  is
satisfactorily  executed ;  but  he  may  withdraw  from  the  contract  if  the
ultimate  cost  exceeds  the  estimate  given  him  by  the  other.  Dig.  19.  2,
60.  4.

§  6.  The  death  of  either  party  did  not  dissolve  the  contract  unless  it
was  limited  either  expressly  or  by  implication  to  the  person  of  the
deceased,  which  in  locatio  conductio  operarum  was  usually  presumed;
of.  Dig.  19.  2.  4.


448  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

XXV.

DE  SOCIETATE.

Societatem  coire  solemus  aut  totorum  bonorum,  quam
Graeci  specialiter  Kowo-Kpa^iav  appellant,  aut  unius  alicuius
negotiationis,    veluti    mancipiorum    emendorum    vendendo-


In  locatio  conductio  rerum  et  operaram,  if  the  hiring  was  for  no  specific
time,  either  party  could  terminate  the  contract  by  notice  of  the  length
prescribed  by  local  or  commercial  usage.  If  the  conductor  rei  continued
to  use  the  thing,  with  the  other's  assent,  after  the  time  agreed  upon  had
expired,  a  new  contract  was  understood  to  have  been  made  (relocatio
tacita) ;  if  the  res  was  agricultural  land,  for  a  year ;  if  anything  else,
and  the  original  agreement  was  in  writing,  for  the  term  therein  specified ;
if  not,  for  the  time  during  which  the  contractor  actually  used  the  thing.

Tit.  XXV.  Before  distinguishing  the  different  forms  which  a  partner-
ship might  assume,  two  limitations  should  be  noticed  which  the  contract
might  not  transgress.  No  person  could  even  by  express  agreement  de-
prive himself  of  the  right,  noticed  in  §  4  inf.,  of  withdrawing  from  a
partnership  when  he  pleased  ;  in  other  words,  there  could  be  no  societas
in  aetemum ;  '  in  societatem  nemo  compellitur  invitus  detineri '  Cod.  3.
37.  5.  Secondly,  the  purpose  for  which  the  contract  was  formed  must  be
neither  unlawful  nor  immoral :  *  generaliter  traditur,  rerum  inhonestarum
nullam  esse  societatem*  Dig.  17.  2.  57.

A  fuller  classification  of  the  species  of  partnership  is  given  in  Dig.  17. 2.
5  and  7,  viz. :

(i)  Societas  omnium  bonorum,  in  which  all  that  previously  belonged  to
the  socii  in  severalty  becomes  their  joint  property  by  the  mere  making  of
the  contract  (see  on  Bk.  ii.  i.  40  supr.),  as  well  as  everything  which  any  of
them  may  subsequently  acquire:  Mn  societate  omnium  bonorum  omnes
res,  quae  coeuntium  sunt,  continuo  communicantur,  quia,  licet  specialiter
traditio  non  interveniat,  tacita  tamen  creditur  intervenisse ;  ea  vero,  quae
in  nominibus  sunt,  manent  in  suo  statu,  sed  actiones  invicem  praestari  de-
bent  '  Dig.  17.  2.  1-3.  This  rule  does  not  hold  in  the  remaining  kinds  of
societas.  Debts  contracted  by  one  of  the  partners,  whether  before  or
during  the  partnership,  can  be  claimed  out  of  the  joint  property,  Dig.  ib.
27,  which,  however,  is  not  liable  for  damages  incurred  ex  delicto  unless  it
has  been  augmented  from  the  proceeds  of  the  wrong,  ib.  53.

(2)  Societas  universorum  quae  ex  quaestu  veniunt,  or  ordinary  com-
mercial partnership,  which,  in  the  absence  of  express  agreement,  was
presumed  to  be  the  transaction  intended  by  the  parties.  Gains  derived
from  gift,  legacy,  or  inheritance  were  not  included  under  quaestus.  Dig.  17.

2.  7-13-

(3)  Societas  negotiationis  alicuius,  agreement  for  the  joint  conduct  of
some  special  business,  e.g.  as  com  or  wine  merchants,  Dig.  ib.  5.  pr.,  ib.


Tit  25.]  DE  SOCIETATE.  449

nimque,  aut  olei  vtni  frumenti    emendi  vendendique.      Et  1
quidem  si  nihil  de  partibus  lucri  et  damni  nominatim  con-
venerit)  aequales  scilicet  partes  €t  in  lucro  et   in    damno
spectanttiT.    quod  si  expressae  fuerint   partes,  hae    servari
debent :  nee  enim  umquam  dubium  fuit,  quin  valeat  conventio,
si  duo  inter  se  pacti  sunt,  ut  ad  unum  quidem  duae  partes  et
damni  dt  lucri  pertineant,  ad  alium  tertia.     De  ilia  sane  con-  2
v^entione  quaesitum  est,  si  Titius  et  Seius  inter  se  pacti  sunt,
ut  ad  Titium  iucri  duae  partes  pertineant,  damni  tertia,  ad
Seium  duae  partes  damni,  lucri  tertia,  an  rata  deb^  haberi
conventio  ?    Quintus  Mucins  contra  naturam  societatis  talem
pactionem  esse  existimavit  et  ob  id  non  esse  ratam  habendam.
Servius  Sulpicius,  cuius  sententia  praevaluit,  coatra  sentit,
quia  saepe  quorundam  ita  {M^etiosa  est  opera  in  societate,  ut
COS  iustum  sit  meliore  condicione  in  societatem  admitti :  nam
et  ita  coiri  posse  societatem  non  dubitatur,  ut  alter  pecuniam
conferat,  alter  non  conferat  et  tamen  lucrum  inter  eos  com-
mune sit,  quia  saepe  opera  alicuius  pro  pecunia  valet,    et  adeo
contra   Quinti  Mucii   sententiam   optinuit^   ut  illud   quoque
constiterit  posse  convenire,  ut  quis  lucri  partem  ferat,  damno
non  teneatur,  quod  et  ipsum  Servius  convenienter  sibi  existi-
mavit: quod  tamen  ita  intellegi  oportet,  ut,  si  in  aliqua  re
lucrum,  in  aliqua  damnum  allatum  sit,  compensatione  facta


52.  4  aad  5.  A  particular  form  of  this  was  societas  vectigalis,  formed  for
the  farming  of  the  public  revenue,  a  peculiarity  of  which  was  that  the  rule
stated  in  §  5  inf.  did  not  hold,  Dig.  17.  2.  59.

(4)  Societas  rei  unius,  the  object  of  which  is  a  single  transaction,  e.  g.
the  joint  purchase  of  specific  property.  Dig.  ib.  5.  pr.,  ib.  58.  pr.

§  L  As  appears  from  2  inf.  ad  fin.,  by  lucrum  and  damnum  is  meant
a  favourable  and  an  adverse  balance  at  the  time  when  the  accounts  are
taken,  e.  g.  at  the  end  of  the  year,  or  when  the  partnership  is  dissolved.
If  it  were  agreed,  in  a  partnership  between  A  and  B,  that  while  each
should  share  losses  equally,  A  should  have  a  larger  proportion  of  profits,
it  was  a  condition  that  A  should  have  contributed  more  than  B  either  of
capita],  credit,  or  management,  etc. :  *  si  vero  placuerit  ut  quis  duas  partes
vel  tres  habeat,  alius  unam,  an  valeat  ?  placet  valere,  si  modo  aliquid  plus
contulit  societati  vel  pecuniae  vel  operae  vel  cuiuscimque  aherius  rei
causa '  Dig.  17.  2. 29.  pr.  In  the  text  before  us  (nee  enim  umquam  ....
ad  alium  tertia)  the  excess  contributed  by  A  is  to  be  found  by  laying  stress
upon  the  words  '  et  damni.'

§  2.  The  earlier  part  of  this  section  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  directly

G  g


450  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

3  solum  quod  superest  intellegatur  lucrt  esse.  lUud  expeditum
est,  si  in  una  causa  pars  fuerit  expressa,  veluti  in  solo  lucro
vel  in  solo  damno,  in  altera  vero  omissa :  in  eo  quoque  quod

4  praetermissum  est  eandem  partem  servari.  Manet  autem
societas  eo  usque,  donee  in  eodem  consensu  perseveravcrint :
at  cum  aliquis  renuntiaverit  sodetati,  solvitur  societas.  sed
plane  si  quis  callide  in  hoc  renuntiaverit  societati,  ut  obveniens
aliquod  lucrum  solus  babeat,  veluti  si  totorum  bonorum  socius,
cum  ab  aliquo  heres  esset  relictus,  in  hoc  renuntiaverit
societati,  ut  hereditatem  solus  lucrifaceret,  cogitur  hoc  lucrum


contradicted  by  Dig.  17.2.  30  'Mucius  scribit,  non  posse  societatem
coiri,  ut  aliam  damni  aliam  lucri  partem  socius  feraL  Servius  in  notatis
Mucii  ait  nee  posse  societatem  ita  contrahi,  neque  enim  lucrum  intelle-
gitur,  nisi  omni  damno  deducto,  neque  damnum,  nisi  omni  lucro  deducto ;
sed  potest  coiri  societas  ita,  ut  eius  lucri,  quod  reliquum  in  societate  sit,
omni  damno  deducto,  pars  alia  feratur,  et  eius  damni,  quod  similiter
relinquatur,  pars  alia  capiatur.'  What  Servius  (Sulpicius)  meant  in  this
passage  was  that,  if  Mucius*  dictum  be  taken  literally,  it  is  true,  because
in  a  partnership  one  cannot  speak  of  lucrum  and  damnum,  but  only  of
lucrum  or  damnum ;  but  if  it  be  taken  to  mean  that  A  and  B  cannot
become  partners  upon  terms  that,  if  the  partnership  transactions  end  in  a
profit,  A  shall  have  ^  and  B  |^,  but  that  if  they  end  in  a  loss  A  shall  bear
^yi  and  B  ^,  it  is  altogether  untrue  ;  though  (as  is  implied  in  the  quia
saepe,  etc.,  of  our  text)  such  an  arrangement  is  incompatible  with  the  rules
of  societas  unless  A  contributes  more,  either  money,  skill,  credit,  manage-
ment, etc.,  to  the  business.  Sulpicius  seems  to  have  been  a  keen  critic
of  Mucius  (Scaevola)  :  '  Servius  Sulpicius  reprehensis  Mucii  capitibus '
Gell.  4.  I.

So  too  it  was  allowable  for  A  to  share  in  profits,  but  not  in  losses,  only
if  he  did  more  for  the  partnership  in  some  way  or  other  than  B,  Dig.  17.
2.  29.  I  ;  but  the  converse  agreement,  that  A  should  help  to  bear  the  loss,
but  should  have  no  share  in  the  profits  (called  leonina  societas  from
Phaedrus  i.  5)  was  void :  '  iniquissimum  enim  genus  est,  ex  quo  quis
damnum,  non  etiam  lucrum  spectet '  Dig.  ib.  29.  2.  The  reason  why
such  a  transaction  is  invalid  as  societas  is  stated  in  Dig.  24.  i.  32.  24
'  nulla  societas  est,  quae  donationis  causa  interponitur ; '  though  it  will
stand  as  a  gift,  if  so  intended,  and  the  rules  governing  such  dispositions
(p.  236  sqq.)  are  complied  with.  If  the  shares  in  lucrum  and  damnum
were  left  to  be  fixed  by  one  of  the  partners  themselves  (Dig.  17.  2.  6),  or
by  a  third  person  (ib.  76-80),  it  was  assumed  that  the  decision  would  be
that  of  a  vir  bonus :  '  unde,  si  arbitrium  ita  pravum  est,  ut  manifesta
iniquitas  eius  appareat,  corrigi  potest  per  indicium  bonae  fidei'  Dig.
loc.  cit.  79.

§  4.  The  prohibition  against '  renunciatio  callida '  may  be  more  widely


Tit.  25.]  DE  SOCIETATK.  451

communicare :  si  quid  vero  aliud  lucrifaceret,  quod  non  cap-
taverit,  ad  ipsum  solum  pertinet :  ei  vero,  cui  renuntiatum  est,
quidquid  omnino  post  renuntiatam  societatem  adquiritur,  soli
conceditur.  Solvitur  adhuc  societas  etiam  morte  socii,  quia  5
qui  societatem  contrahit  certam  personam  sibi  eligit.  sed
et  si  consensu  plurlum  societas  coita  sit,  morte  unius  socii
solvitur,  etsi  plures  supersint,  nisi  si  in  coeunda  societate
aliter  convenerit.  Item  si  alicuius  rei  contracta  societas  sit  6
et  finis  negotio  impositus  est,  finitur  societas.     Publicatione  7

stated ;  a  partner  who  withdrew  at  a  time,  or  in  a  manner  which  would
prejudice  the  interests  of  the  societas,  could  be  compelled  to  compensate
his  socii,  Dig.  17. 2. 14 ;  ib.  17.  2  ;  and  if  his  object  was  *  ut  obveniens  ali-
quod  lucrum  solus  habeat,'  and  the  expected  gain  turned  out  a  loss,  he  had
to  bear  it  alone  :  '  Cassius  scripsit  eum,  qui  renunciaverit  societati,  a  se
quidem  liberare  socios  suos,  se  autem  ab  illis  non  liberare  :  quod  utique
observandum  est,  si  dolo  malo  renunciatio  facta  sit,  veluti  si,  cum  omnium
bonorum  societatem  inissemus,  deinde  cum  obvenisset  uni  hereditas,
propter  hoc  renunciavit ;  ideoque  si  quidem  damnum  attulerit  hereditas,
hoc  ad  eum  qui  renunciavit  pertinebit,  commodum  autem  communicare
cogetur  actione  pro  socio  *  Dig.  17.  2. 65.  3.  So  too  if  one  of  two  partners
renounced  while  the  other  was  away,  the  societas  was  held  to  be  subsist-
ing as  regards  the  duties,  but  not  the  rights  of  the  former  until  the  other
had  received  notice  of  the  withdrawal,  ib.  17.  i.

§  6.  An  agreement  that  one's  heir  should  succeed  one  as  partner  (ex-
cept in  societas  vectigalis)  was  void  :  '  adeo  morte  socii  solvitur  societas,
ut  nee  ab  initio  pacisci  possimus  ut  heres  etiam  succedat  societati '  Dig.
17.  2.  59.  pr.,  ib.  35  ;  but  the  heir,  though  not  a  partner,  was  bound  to
complete  all  business  commenced  by  the  deceased,  being  herein  answer-
able for  culpa  lata  only,  Dig.  ib.  35.  36.  40.  The  death  of  one  socius  dis-
solved the  contractual  relation  even  between  the  rest,  unless  it  had  been
otherwise  agreed  at  the  outset,  ib.  65. 9 ;  but  in  no  case  had  it  any  opera-
tion until  the  other  partners  had  heard  of  the  decease,  and  transactions
entered  into  by  them  between  the  death  and  notice  of  it  were  transactions
of  the  firm,  ib.  65.  la

The  two  higher  kinds  of  capitis  deminutio  had  the  same  effect  on
societas  as  death  :  *  dicitur  et  capitis  deminutione  solvi  societatem,  quia
civili  ratione  capitis  deminutio  morti  aequiparari  dicitur :  sed  si  adhuc
consentiant  in  societatem,  nova  videtur  incipere  societas'  Gaius  iii.  153,
<  societas  quemadmodum  ad  heredes  socii  non  transit,  ita  nee  ad  adro-
gatorem,  ne  alioquin  invitus  quis  socius  efHciatur  cui  non  veiit ;  ipse  autem
adrogatus  socius  permanet,  nam  etsi  filiusfamilias  emancipatus  fuerit,
permanebit  socius '  Dig.  17. 2.  65.  1 1.

§  6.  So  too  a  societas  was  dissolved  by  the  object  for  which  it  was  formed
proving  unattainable.  Dig.  ib.  58.  pr.

§  7.  A  forfeiture  (publicatio)  might  be  partial  only  :  '  de  vi  privata  dam-

Gga


45a  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  HI.

quoque  distrahi  societatem  mantfestum  est,  scilicet  si  universa
bona  socii  publicentur :  nam  cum  in  eius  locum  alius  succedit,

8  pro  mortuo  habetur.  Item  si  quis  ex  sociis  mole  debiti  prac-
gravatus  bonis  suis  cesserit  et  ideo  propter  publica  aut
propter  privata  debita  substantia  eius  veneat,  solvitur  societas.
sed  hoc  casu  si  adhuc  consentiant  in  societatem,  nova  vide*

9  tur  indpere  societas.  Socius  socio  utrum  eo  nomine  tantum
teneatur  pro  socio  actione,  si  quid  dolo  commiserit,  sicut  is
qui  deponi  apud  se  passus  est,  an  etiam  culpae,  id  est  destdiae
atque  neglegentiae  nomine,  quaesitum  est :  praevaluit  tamen
etiam  culpae  nomine  teneri  eum.  culpa  autem  non  ad  ex-
actissimam  diligentiam  dirigenda  est :  sufficit  enim  talem
diligentiam  in  communibus  rebus  adhibere  socium,  qualem


nati  pars  tenia  bonorum  ex  \e^  lulia  publicatur '  Dig.  48.  7.  i.  pr. ;  when
total  (the  only  case  in  which  it  extinguished  societas)  it  did  so  only  by
producing  one  of  the  two  higher  kinds  of  capitis  deminutio,  and  so  is  not
a  distinct  mode  of  termination  :  '  damnatione  bona  publicantnr  cum  aut
vita  adimitur  aut  civitas,  aut  servilis  condicio  irrogatur '  Dig.  48.  20.  i.
The  '  alius '  who  succeeds  *  universally '  is  the  fiscus,  Dig.  46.  i.  71.  pr.

§  8.  For  cessio  bonorum  see  p.  395  supr.  Societas  could  be  dissolved,
besides  the  modes  mentioned  in  the  text,  {i)  by  lapse  of  the  time  for
which  it  was  originally  formed,  Dig.  17.  2.  i.  pr. ;  ib.  6$.  6.  Where  per-
sons had  become  partners  for  a  definite  term  neither  could  withdraw
during  it  except  on  a  reasonable  ground,  Dig.  ib.  14-16,  in  the  absence  of
which  it  was  open  to  the  other  to  treat  the  partnership  as  still  subsisting
in  respect  of  the  withdrawer's  duties,  ib.  65.  6 ;  (2)  By  division,  either
voluntary  and  extrajudicial,  or  enforced  through  action  by  one  of  the  socii :
for  the  form  of  this  see  next  note.

§  9.  The  rights  and  duties  of  partners  inter  se  are  mainly  as  follow.
Each  must  contribute  the  stipulated  quota  of  capital  or  labour ;  inability
arising  from  no  fault  of  his  own,  while  exempting  him  from  this  duty,  at
the  same  time  disabled  him  from  enforcing  it  against  the  rest.  Dig.  17.  3.
58.  pr.  and  i.  In  determining  what  faults  were  imputable,  the  standard
of  diligentia,  as  is  said  in  the  text,  was  merely  that  qualem  in  suis  rebus,
£xc.  VI  inf. ;  the  reason  assigned  for  this  by  Justinian  being  the  same  as
that  which  is  given  in  the  case  of  depositum  in  Tit.  14.  3  sapr.  If,  how-
ever, after  undertaking  the  conduct  of  any  particular  piece  of  partnership
business,  he  left  it  to  a  subordinate,  he  was  unconditionally  answerable  for
the  latter's  shortcomings.  Dig.  17.  2.  23.  Whatever  he  acquires  for  the
societas,  or  by  its  means,  he  is  bound  *  communicare,*  i.  e.  to  throw  into
the  common  fund,  or  to  give  his  socii  their  lair  share,  ib.  52.  pr.,  67.  pr. ;
conversely  he  can  claim  to  be  indemnified  for  all  personal  losses  and  ex-
penses incurred  in  partnership  af&irs,  ib.  38.  i  ;    52.  4,  and  in  societas


Tit  asO  DE  SOCIETATE.  453

suis  rebus  adhibere  solet.     nam  qui  parum  diligentem  socium
sibi  adsumit,  de  se  queri  debet.


omnium  bononim  to  have  aU  his  debts,  except  those  incurred  ex  delicto
(see  p.  448)  discharged  from  the  common  property.  Losses  arising  from
the  insolvency  of  one  partner  must  be  divided  among  all  according  to  the
principles  stated  in  §§  1-3  supr.  and  notes;  Dig.  17.  2.  67.  pr.

The  remedy  by  which  partners  enforced  these  duties  against  one  another
was  the  actio  pro  socio,  condemnation  in  which  entailed  iniamia,  Bk.  iv.

16.  22  inf. ;  but  the  defendant  could  claim  beneficium  competentiae  against
the  rest,  i.  e.  they  were  not  entitled  to  take  aU  his  property  in  satisfaction
of  their  claims,  but  must  leave  him*  enough  to  supply  the  bare  necessities
of  life,  Bk.  iv.  6.  38  inf.,  though  Dig.  42.  i.  16  (perhaps  incorrectly)  limits
the  beneficium  to  societas  omnium  bonorum.  Division  of  the  joint  pro*
perty  could  be  compelled  by  the  actio  communi  dividimdo,  Bk.  iv.  6.  20 ;
ib.  28;  iv.  17.  5  inf.

The  question  of  the  rights  of  partners  against,  and  their  duties  towards,
third  persons,  is  a  different  one.  If  all  the  partners  together  enter  into  a
contract  with  some  one  else,  they  are  entitled  and  bound  in  relation  to  him
in  the  ratio  of  their  shsgres  in  the  lucrum  and  damnum :  '  si  tamen  plures
per  se  navem  exerceant,  pro  portionibus  exercitionis  conveniuntur,  neque
invicem  sui  magistri  videntur'  Dig.  14.  i.  4.  pr.,  '  quamvis  actio  ex  empto
cum  singulis  sit  pro  portione,  qua  socii  fiieiunt'  Dig.  ax.  i.  44.  i.  By
special  agreement  such  contract  may  produce  an  active  or  passive  cor-
real obligation  in  favour  of  or  binding  the  partners,  and  where  they  are
bankers  such  an  obligation  results  ipso  iure  from  all  strictly  banking
transactions  entered  into  by  any  of  them :  ^  si  plures  sint  qui  eandcm
actionem  habent,  unius  loco  habentur :  utputa  plures  sunt  rei  stipulandi
vel  plures  argentarii,  quorum  nomina  simul  facta  sunt ;  unius  loco  nume-
rabimtur,  quia  unum  debitum  est '  Dig.  3.  14.  9.  pr. ;  ib.  25.  pr. ;  ib»  27.
But  if  the  contract  is  made  by  one  or  some  only  of  the  partners,,  the  ques-
tion arises  how  far  they  confer  rights  and  impose  obligations  on  the  rest.
Even  if  the  transaction  is  clearly  a  partnership  transaction,  the  latter
can  sue  upon  it  only  as  assignees,  even  though  it  was  entered  into  by
their  own  express  instructions,  though  they  are  entitled  to  a  cession  of
the  right  of  action,  which,  if  necessary,  they  can  compel  by  judicial
process.

As  regards  their  liabilities,  it  should  be  carefully  observed  that  the
partnership  is  never  conceived  as  a  fictitious  person,  capable  in  itself  of
having  rights  and  owing  duties,  as  distinct  from  the  partners  ;  the  latter
cannot  claim  that  business  creditors,  in  the  event  of  the  firm  becoming  in-
solvent, shall  limit  their  demands  to  the  partnership  assets,  though  they
can  insist  on  the  latter  being  proceeded  against  and  exhausted  first.  Dig.

17.  2.  65.  14.  Three  cases,  in  which  the  contract  is  not  made  by  all  the
partners  collectively,  need  to  be  distinguished :

\a)  If  the  partner  who  actually  makes  the  contract  was  instructed  to
do  so  by  the  rest — i.  e.  is  their  agent — they  are  each  liable  in  solid um :


454  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

XXVI.

DE   MANDATO.

Mandatum  contrahitur  quinque  modis,  sive  sua  tantum
gratia  aliquis  tibi  mandet,  sive  sua  et  tua,  sive  aliena  tantum,
sive  sua  et  aliena,  sive  tua  et  aliena.  at  si  tua  tantum  gratia
tibi  mandatum  sit,  supervacuum  est  mandatum  et  ob  id  nulla

'  sed  si  plures  exerceant,  unum  autem  de  numero  suo  magistrum  fecennt,
huius  nomine  in  solidum  poterunt  conveniri'  Dig.  14.  i.  4.  i  ;  nor  could
they  claim  the  beneficium  divisionis,  '  ne  in  plures  adversarios  distrin-
gatur  qui  cum  uno  contraxerit ; '  one  who  paid  of  course  had  regressus,
Dig.  14.  3.  13.  2 ;  ib.  14.

(b)  If  he  is  not  their  express  agent  for  the  purpose,  the  actually  con-
tracting partner  alone  incurs  liability,  even  though  the  transaction  is
entered  into  on  behalf  of  the  firm,  unless  (i)  the  rest  subsequently  ratify
it,  whereby  they  become  as  liable  as  if  it  had  been  authorized  by  them
from  the  first,  and  (2)  except  and  so  far  as  the  firm  has  been  benefited
by  the  contract :  '  iure  societatis  per  socium  aere  alieno  socius  non  obli-
gatur,  nisi  in  communem  arcam  pecuniae  versae  sunt'  Dig.  17.  2.  82.
Thus  in  Roman  law  socii  have  no  implied  authority  to  bind  one  another
even  upon  transactions  which  form  their  ordinary  business.

(c)  If  he  makes  the  contract  in  his  own  name  and  on  his  own  account,
the  rest  incur  no  liabilities  even  though  it  results  in  a  benefit  to  them.

Tit.  XXVI.  The  contract  of  mandatum  produces  effects  of  two  dif-
ferent kinds;  first,  an  obligation  between  the  principal  (mandator,
dominus)  and  the  agent  (mandatarius,  procurator ;  the  first  term  is  not
classical),  which  is  discussed  fully  in  this  Title  ;  and  second,  the  relation
of  representation;  this  subject,  which  regards  the  rights  and  duties
that  arise  immediately  for  the  principal  from  the  contracts  made  by
his  agent  on  his  behalf,  is  examined  in  Excursus  IX  at  the  end  of
this  Book.

The  scope  of  the  agent*s  commission  might  be  general  as  well  as  special,
and  so  might  extend  to  the  management  of  a  person's  entire  affairs ;  but
it  might  not  be  unlawful  or  immoral,  §  7  inf.,  Dig.  17.  i.  6.  3 :  ib.  12.  11
and  13  :  it  must  relate  only  to  future  acts,  Dig.  ib.  12.  14  and  15,  and  as
a  rule  must  be  for  the  doing  of  something  which  the  mandator  could
lawfully  do  for  himself,  Dig.  ib.  6.  6:  8.  5  :  10.  4.

Justinian's  five  species  of  mandatum  are  taken  from  the  res  quotidianae
of  Gaius  (Dig.  17.  i.  2.  1-6),  where,  as  here,  the  possible  case  is  omitted
of  a  commission  being  given  by  A  to  B  to  lend  money  at  interest  to  C,  in
order  to  enable  the  latter  to  pay  a  debt  owing  to  himself,  which  is  in  the
interest  of  all  three  (sua,  tua,  et  aliena).  Supervacuum  is  here  used  to
mean  '  void ' :  cf.  inutilis  in  Tit.  19.  supr.


Tit.  26.]  DE  MANDATO.  455

ex  eo  obligatio  nee  mandati  inter  vos  actio  nascitur.  Man-  1
dantis  tantum  gratia  intervenit  mandatum^  veluti  si  quis  tibi
mandet,  ut  negotia  eius  gereres,  vel  ut  fundum  ei  emeres,  vel
ut  pro  eo  sponderes.  Tua  et  mandantis,  veluti  si  mandet  2
tibi,  ut  pecuniam  sub  usuris  crederes  ei,  qui  in  rem  ipsius
mutuaretur,  aut  si  volente  te  agere  cum  eo  ex  iideiussoria
causa  mandet  tibi,  ut  cum  reo  agas  periculo  mandantis,  vel  ut
ipsius  periculo  stipuleris  ab  eo,  quem  tibi  deleget  in  id  quod
tibi   debuerat.     Aliena   autem   causa    intervenit    mandatum,  3

§  L  The  use  of  'sponderes'  is  mere  pedantry;  in  Dig.  17.  i.  2.  i ;
ib.  6.  2 ;  ib.  8.  8,  and  other  passages  relating  to  this  subject,  we  read  only
of  fideiussio.  The  second  of  the  three  instances  given  here  may  be
illustrated  thus.  A  becomes  surety  (fideiussor)  to  you  for  B,  who  owes
you  50/. :  on  your  proposing  to  sue  him  on  this  contract  of  suretyship,
he  commissions  you  (mandat)  to  sue  B,  the  principal  debtor,  in  lieu  of
him  at  his  (A's)  risk.  This  is  to  A's  interest,  because  he  is  protected
from  your  action  at  any  rate  for  a  time,  an  advantage  which  he  could  not
have  otherwise  secured,  as  Nov.  4  had  not  yet  introduced  the  beneficium
ordinis  (p.  432  supr.) ;  and  he  is  altogether  so  protected  if  B  proves  solvent.
It  is  to  your  interest,  because  the  mandate  may  and  probably  will  contain
more  favourable  conditions  than  the  fideiussio,  e.  g.  the  security  of  a  hy-
potheca  (vn^ov  yap  on  ff  tyyvrj  yeyoi/c  d(;(a  vjro$r)Ki]Sf  r6  d<  ytatftkirov  iitrh
vTFoBriKrif  Theoph.),  and  before  Justinian's  legislation  it  would  have  been
most  advantageous  to  you  if  you  had  been  in  doubt  which  was  solvent,
A  or  B,  for  in  virtue  of  it  you  could  first  sue  B  without  risk,  and  then,  if
he  proved  to  have  insufficient  assets,  you  could  sue  A  by  actio  mandati,
which  you  could  not  have  done  by  action  on  the  guaranty,  because  he
was  released  as  fideiussor  by  litis  contestatio  with  B.  This  was  remedied
by  Justinian  in  Cod.  8.  41.  28  'generaliter  sancimus,  quemadmodum  in
mandatoribus  statutum  est,  ut,  contestatione  contra  unum  ex  his  facta,
alter  non  liberetur,  ita  et  in  fideiussoribus  observari.*

To  explain  the  third  instance  we  will  suppose  that  A  owes  50/.  to  B,
who  owes  the  same  sum  to  C.  B  gives  a  commission  to  C  to  stipulate
from  A  at  his  (B's)  risk  that  he  (A)  will  pay  him  (C)  the  50/.  which  he
owes  B ;  '  delegare  est  vice  sua  alium  reum  dare  creditori  vel  cui  iusserit '
Dig.  46.  2.  II.  As  Mr.  Poste  points  out,  the  result  of  this  transaction,
compounded  of  mandate  and  stipulation,  is  two  novations,  extinguishing
the  original  debts  of  A  to  B,  and  B  to  C,  and  creating  two  new  liabilities,
a  debt  of  50/.  owed  by  A  to  C,  and  a  mandate  between  B  and  C  under
which  B  is  guarantor  of  A ;  it  is  to  B's  interest,  because  he  is  released
from  the  action  on  the  debt  to  C,  which  might  have  been  stricti  iuris,
and  to  which  he  was  immediately  liable,  and  can  only  be  sued,  if  at  all,
by  actio  mandati,  which  is  bonae  fidei ;  it  is  favourable  to  C,  because  he
thereby  gets  two  debtors  (a  principal  and  a  surety)  instead  of  one.

§  3.  If  A  commissioned  B  to  do  something  for  C,  he  had  no  rights


456  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

veluti  si  tibi  mandet,  ut  Titii  negotia  gereres,  vel  ut  Tttio

4  fundum  emeres^  vel  ut  pro  Titio  sponderes.  Sua  et  aliena,
veluti  si  de  communibus  suis  et  Titii  negotiis  gerendis  tibi
mandet,  vet  ut  sibi  et  Titio  funduin  emeres,  vei  ut  pro  eo  et

5  Titio  sponderes.  Tua  et  altena,  veluti  si  tibi  mandet,  ut  Titio
sub  usuris  crederes.    quodsi  ut  sine  usuris  crederes,  aliena

against  B  under  the  contract  unless  or  until  he  had  an  interest  in  the
proper  performance  of  the  act  undertaken :  *  mandati  actio  tunc  corn-
petit,  cure  coepit  interesse  eius  qui  mandavit:  ceterum  si  nihil  interest,
cessat  mandati  actio,  et  eatenus  compettt  quatenus  interest'  Dig.  17.  i.
8.  6.  This  seems  to  be  contradieted  by  6.  4  in  the  same  Title :  '  si  tibi
mandavero  quod  mea  non  intereiat,  veluti  at  pro  Seio  intervenias  vel  ut
Titio  credas^  erit  mihi  tecum  mandati  actio,  ut  Celsus  scribk,  et  ego  tibi
sum  obligatus.^  The  explanation,  as  Dr.  Walker  observes  (Selected
Titles  from  the  Digest,  Introduction  to  part  I.X  is  '  that  a  mandate  at  the
time  it  is  g^ven  may  be  aliena  tantum  gratia,  but  that  it  must  become
mandantis  gratia  also  before  it  can  be  sued  upon ;  and  it  may  become
mandantis  gratia  in  two  ways.  In  the  first  place,  this  may  be  the  resuk
of  the  mandatarius  beginning  to  act,  for  he  thus  turns  his  mandator  into
a  ncgotiorum  gestor  of  the  benefited  party ;  L  e.  he  makes  him  an  un-
solicited intermeddler  with  another's  affairs ;  and  a  negotiorum  gestor  is
answerable  to  the  stranger  for  any  mismanagement  or  k»s.  Hence,
from  the  moment  the  mandatarius  begins  to  act,  the  mandator,  by
reason  of  his  own  liability  to  the  stranger,  has  an  interest  sufficient  to
found  a  right  of  action  ^[ainst  the  mandatarius.  Secondly,  the  stranger,
because  of  his  knowledge  of  the  mandate  having  been  given,  supposing
he  hears  of  it,  may  abstain  from  executing  his  own  business,  so  that  the
non-performance  or  faulty  performance  of  the  mandate  may  do  him  hurt ;
and  for  this,  as  traceable  to  the  action  of  the  mandator,  he  can,  as  before,
hold  the  mandator  responsible  in  his  capacity  of  a  negotiorum  gestor.'

§  6.  By  the  civilians  this  is  called  mandatum  qualificatum.  If  A
advised  or  requested  (mandavit)  B  to  give  credit  to  C,  ke.  either  to
enter  into  a  contract  with  him  (as  to  lend  him  money,  §  6  inf.),  whereby
he  became  his  creditor,  or  to  defer  suing  upon  a  debt  already  owed
him  by  C  (Dig.  17.  i.  12.  14),  A  was  taken  to  warrant  C*s  honesty  and
solvency,  and  became  answerable  to  B  by  actio  mandati,  if  the  latter
took  his  advice  or  complied  with  his  request,  that  the  debt  should  be
discharged ;  and  this  even  though  B  would  have  lent  the  money,  or
deferred  the  suit,  in  any  case.  Thus  in  effect  a  contract  of  suretyship,
or  rather  of  indemnity,  can  be  made  by  means  of  a  mandatum,  which
in  this  form  is  usually  co-ordinated  in  the  Corpus  iuris  with  fideiussio
(Dig.  46.  I,  Cod.  8.  41,  de  fideiussoribus  et  mandatoribus) :  cf.  Dig.  17.  i.
32  'in  summa  quicunque  contractus  tales  sunt,  ut  quicunque  eorum
nomine  fideiussor  obligari  possit,  et  mandati  obligationem  consistere
puto  :  neque  enim  multum  referre,  praesens  quis  interrogatus  fideiubeat,
an  absens  mandet'


Til  26.1  DE  MANDATO.  457

tantum  gratia  intercedit  mandatum.  Tua  gratia  intervenit  6
mandatum,  veluti  si  tibi  mandet,  ut  pecunias  tuas  potius  in
emptiones  jMraediorum  coUoces,  quam  feneres,  vel  ex  diverso
ut  feneres  potius,  quam  in  emptiones  praedtonim  colloces.
cuius  generis  mandatum  magis  consilium  est  quam  mandatum,
et  ob  id  non  est  obligatorium,  quia  nemo  ex  consilio  mandati
obligatur,  etiamsi  non  expediat  ei  cui  dabitur,  cum  libemm
cuique  sit  apud  se  explorare,  an  expediat  consilium,  itaque
si  otiosam  pecuniam  domi  te  habentem  hortatus  fuerit  aliquis,
ut  rem  aliquam  emeres  vel  eam  credas,  quamvis  non  expediet
tibi  eam  emisse  vel  credidisse,  non  tamen  tibi  mandati  tenetur.
et  adeo  haec  ita  sunt,  ut  quaesitum  sit,  an  mandati  teneatur
qui  mandavit  tibi,  ut  Titio  pecuniam  fenerares :  sed  optinuit
Sabini  sententia  obligatorium  esse  in  hoc  casu  mandatum,
quia  non  aliter  Titio  credidisses,  quam  si  tibi  mandatum  esset.


The  peculiarities  of  mandatum  as  a  fonn  of  suretyship  are  due  to  the
Yery  fact  that  it  is  mandatum,  and  not  constitutum  or  fideiussio.  Thus,
the  mandator  is  liable  even  though  owing  to  incapacity  in  the  third  party
no  principal  obligation  is  established  between  the  latter  and  the  man-
^tarias,  Dig.  4.  4.  13.  pr. ;  he  can  save  himself  by  revoking  the  com-
roissioa  so  long  as  it  has  not  yet  been  acted  on,  §  9  inf.,  Dig.  17.  i.  12.  16,
and  the  commission  itself  is  revoked  by  the  mandator's  death  ;  payment
by  him  does  not  release  the  principal  debtor,  Dig.  ib.  28,  nor  did  an
action  brought  by  mandatarius  against  mandator  or  the  third  party
release  the  other,  as  formerly  was  the  case  with  sureties  by  verbal
obligation,  note  on  §  2  supr. ;  the  mandator,  even  after  having  paid  the
mandatarius,  can  get  an  assignment  of  the  latter's  right  of  action  against
the  debtor,  the  debt  not  being  extinguished  as  it  would  be  m  the  case  of
a  fideiussor  (see  on  Tit.  2a  4  supr.) ;  and,  finally,  the  mandator  himself
has  an  action  against  the  mandatarius  if  the  latter  accepted  the  com-
mission and  then  did  not  properly  execute  it.  Dig.  17.  i.  6.  4.

§  6.  So  strongly  was  it  felt,  Justinian  says,  that  a  mandatum  tua
tanttim  gratia  created  no  obligation,  that  people  even  extended  the
doubt  to  those  which  were  for  the  benefit  of  a  third  person  as  well  as  of
yourself:  especially  as  it  seems  not  improbable  from  Dig.  17.  i.  6>  4
(cited  on  §  3  supr.)  that  a  mandate  aliena  tanttun  gratia  was  also  originally
held  to  be  void.  Sometimes  a  person  incurred  a  liability  to  compensate
in  case  of  loss  accruing  to  the  other  party  even  upon  a  mere  consilium  ;
e.  g.  where  by  special  contract  he  expressly  undertook  responsibility  for
his  advice,  or  where  the  advice  was  given  with  evil  intent,  for  the  very
purpose  of  damaging  the  other :  '  consilii  non  fraudulenti  nulla  obligatio
est :  ceterum  si  dolus  et  calliditas  intercessit,  de  dolo  actio  competit '
Dig.  50.  17.  47.  pr. :  cf.  the  text,  *nemo  ex  consilio  mandati  tenetur.'


458  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  III.

7  Illud  quoque  mandatum  non  est  obligatorium,  quod  contra
bonos  mores  est,  veluti  si  Titius  de  furto  aut  datnno  faciendo
aut  de  iniuria  facienda  tibi  mandet.  licet  enim  poenam  istius
facti  nomine  praestiteris,  non  tamen  ullam  habes  adversus
Titium  actionem.

8  Is  qui  exsequitur  mandatum  non  debet  excedere  fines
mandati.  ut  ecce  si  quis  usque  ad  centum  aureos  mandaverit
tibi,  ut  fundum  emeres  vel  ut  pro  Titio  sponderes,  neque
pluris  emere  debes  neque  in  ampliorem  pecuniam  fideiubere,
alioquin  non  habebis  cum  eo  mandati  actionem  :  adeo  quidem,
ut  Sabino  et  Cassio  placuerit,  etiam  si  usque  ad  centum
aureos  cum  eo  agere  velis,  inutiliter  te  acturum :  diversae
scholae  auctores  recte  te  usque  ad  centum  aureos  acturum
existimant :  quae  sententia  sane  benignior  est.  quod  si  minoris
emeris,  habebis  scilicet  cum  eo  actionem,  quoniam  qui  mandat,
ut  sibi  centum  aureorum  fundus  emeretur,  is  utique  mandasse
intellegitur,  ut  minoris  si  posset  emeretur.

§  8.  Gaius  seems  to  have  been  in  two  minds  as  to  the  rights  of  an
agent  who  went  beyond  the  price  at  which  he  had  been  commissioned
to  buy  ;  in  his  Institutes  he  adopts  the  Sabinian  view  (iii.  i6i),  while  in
his  res  quotidianae  (Dig.  17.  1.4)  he  says  '  sed  Proculus  recte  eum  usque
ad  pretium  statutum  acturum  existimat,  quae  sententia  sane  benignior  est'

The  principal  duties  of  the  agent  are — to  properly  execute  his  com-
mission, Dig.  17.  I.  5.  I  :  ib.  6.  I  :  ib.  8.  2,  or  to  give  notice,  if  possible,
when  he  is  unavoidably  prevented,  ib.  27.  2  ;  in  its  execution  to  display
exacta  diligentia,  Cod.  4.  35.  13  ;  to  execute  it  himself  in  person,  unless
he  has  express  or  implied  authority  to  depute  the  business  to  an  agent  of
his  own,  in  which  case  he  is  answerable  for  all  shortcomings  of  his  subor-
dinate which  he  was  or  ought  to  have  been  aware  of  (culpa  in  eligendo),
Dig.  ib.  8.  3  ;  to  give  up  all  property  which  comes  into  his  hands  in  the
discharge  of  his  duties,  unless  lost  or  destroyed  through  no  fault  of  his
own,  ib.  8.  7  and  10,  along  with  fruits  and  interest,  if  to  produce  these
be  its  nature  ;  to  restore,  at  the  expiring  of  his  commission,  all  that  has
been  entrusted  to  him;  to  give  full  accounts  of  his  receipts  and  ex-
penditure to  the  mandator,  and  to  allow  the  latter  to  exercise  all  rights
of  action  which,  while  acting  in  his  behalf,  he  has  acquired  against  third
persons.

The  principal's  remedy  against  the  agent  for  the  breach  of  any  of  these
duties  was  the  actio  mandati  directa,  condemnation  in  which  entailed
infamia,  Book  iv.  16.  2  inf.,  though  in  Cod.  4.  35.  21  this  effect  is  said
to  ensue  only  where  the  agent  has  been  guilty  of  fraud :  cf.  Cic  pro
Rose.  Am.  38  'mandati  constitutum  est  indicium  non  minus  turpe
quam  furti.'


Tit.  26.]  DE  MANDATO.  459

Recte  quoque  mandatum  contractum,  si,  dum  adhuc  in-  9
tegra  res  sit,  revocatum  fuerit,  evanescit.  Item  si  adhuc  10
integro  mandate  mors  alterutrius  interveniat,  id  est  vel  eius
qui  mandaverit,  vel  eius  qui  mandatum  susceperit,  solvitur
mandatum.  sed  utilitatis  causa  receptum  est,  si  mortuo  eo,
qui  tibi  mandaverit,  tu  ignorans  eum  decessisse  exsecutus
fueras  mandatum,  posse  te  agere  mandati  actione:  alioquin
iusta  et  probabilis  ignorantia  damnum  tibi  afferat.  et  huic
simile  est,  quod  placuit,  si  debitores  manumisso  dispensatore
Titii  per  ignorantiam  liberto  solverint,  liberari  eos :  cum  alio-
quin stricta  iuris  ratione  non  possent  liberari,  quia  alii  solvis-

By  the  actio  mandati  contraria  the  agent  could  compel  the  principal
to  indemnify  him  (with  interest.  Dig.  17.  i.  10.  9)  for  all  reasonable  ex-
penses incurred  in  the  proper  execution  of  his  duties,  ib.  3.  2,  as  also
against  all  liabilities  which  he  had  undertaken  on  his  behalf,  ib.  28.  38 :
cf.  ib.  45.  3  *si  iudicio  te  sisti  promisero  nee  exhibuero,  et  antequam
praestem  mandati  agere  possum  ut  me  liberes :  vel  si  pro  te  reus  pro-
mittendi  factus  sim.'  The  mandator  is  also  answerable  for  all  culpa,  and
must  pay  the  honorarium,  if  any,  which  he  has  expressly  or  impliedly
promised,  Dig.  ib.  56.  3  :  Cod.  4.  35.  i :  cf.  §  13  inf.  But  the  agent  cannot
judicially  enforce  these  duties  if  he  has  exceeded  his  instructions,  unless
he  is  ready  himself  to  bear  the  loss  thereby  sustained,  §  8  supr..  Dig.  ib.
3.  2,  or  until  he  has  performed,  or  at  least  is  ready  to  perform,  all  that  he
has  undertaken.  The  liability  of  several  joint  mandators  is  solidary.  Dig.
ib.  59.  3  :  ib.  60.  2.

§  9.  By  *  dum  adhuc  res  Integra  sit '  is  meant '  before  the  agent  has
done  anything  in  the  execution  of  his  commission,*  wpU  apf/y  r^r  ayo-
paaias  Theoph.  When  he  had  once  taken  action  the  mandate  became
final,  for  the  agent  then  had  an  interest  in  the  performance  of  the  duties
engendered  by  the  contract :  *  si  mandassem  tibi  ut  fundum  emeres,
postea  scripsissem,  ne  emeres,  tu  antequam  scias  me  vetuisse  emisses,
mandati  tibi  obligatus  ero,  ne  damno  adficiatur  is  qui  suscipit  mandatum '
Dig.  17.  I.  15.

§  10.  What  is  meant  by  saying  that  mandatum  is  dissolved  by  the
death  of  either  party  is  that  the  obligatory  relation  does  not  descend  to
their  heirs,  so  far  as  any  acts  performed  after  the  decease  are  concerned  ;
rights  and  duties  which  have  already  come  into  existence  under  it  are
not  extinguished :  '  inter  causas  omittendi  mandati  etiam  mors  man-
datoris  est :  nam  mandatum  solvitur  morte :  si  tamen  per  ignorantiam
impletum  est,  competere  actionem  utilitatis  causa  dicitur.  lulianus
quoque  scripsit  mandatoris  morte  solvi  mandatum,  sed  obligationem
aliquando  durare'  Dig.  17.  i.  26.  pr.  But  a  mandate  is  not  extinguished
by  the  mandator's  death,  if  it  was  to  do  something  only  after  that  event
had  occurred:  'si  servum  ea  lege  tibi  tradidero,  ut  eum  post  mortem
meam  manumitteres,  consistit  obligatio '  Dig.  ib.  27.  i.


46o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

11  sent,  quam  cui  solvere  deberent.  Mandatum  non  suscipere
liberum  est:  susceptum  ^utem  consummandum  aut  quam
primum  renuntiandum  est,  ut  aut  per  semet  ipsum  aut  per
alium  eandem  rem  mandator  exsequatur.  nam  nisi  ita  re-
nuntiatur,  ut  integra  causa  mandatori  reservetur  eandem  rem
explicandi,  nihilo  minus  mandati  actio  locum  habet,  nisi  si
iusta  causa  intercessit  aut  non  renuntiandi  aut  intempestive
renuntiandi.

12  Mandatum  et  in  diem  differri  et  sub  condicione  fieri  potest.

13  In  summa  sciendum  est  mandatum,  nisi  gratuitum  sit,  in  aliam
formam  negotii  cadere:  nam  niercede  constituta  incipit  lo-
catio  et  conductio  esse,  et  ut  generaliter  dixerimus :  quibus
casibus  sine  mercede  suscepto  officio  mandati  aut  depostti
contrahitur  negotium,  his  casibus  interveniente  mercede  lo-
catio  et  conductio  contrahi  intellegitur.  et  ideo  si  fulloni
polienda  curandave  vestimenta  dederis  aut  sarcinatori  sar-
cienda  nulla  mercede  constituta  neque  promissa,  mandati
competit  actio.


§  IL  Cf.  Dig.  13.  6.  17.  3  'voluntatis  est .  .  .  '  suscipere  mandatum,
necessitatis  consummare.'  An  agent  might  with  impunity  throw  up  a
commission  which  he  had  once  accepted  only  if  (i)  he  had  not  proceeded
so  far  in  its  execution  as  to  make  it  extremely  inconvenient  for  the
mandator  to  intervene  in  the  business  himself,  or  through  some  other
subordinate,  Dig.  17.  i.  22. 11 ;  or  (2)  he  had  some  good  reason  for  the
withdrawal :  *  ob  subitam  valetudinem,  ob  necessariam  peregrinationem,
ob  inimicitiam  et  inanes  rex  actiones,  integra  adhuc  causa  mandati,  negotio
renunciari  potest '  Paul.  Sent,  rec  2.  15.  i :  cf.  Dig.  17.  i.  23-25.

A  mandatum  could  also  be  terminated  by  agreement  between  principal
and  agent,  by  completion  of  the  business  with  which  the  latter  was
entrusted,  by  lapse  of  the  time  for  which  he  was  appointed,  by  the  fulfil*
ment  of  a  resolutive  condition  on  which  his  commission  depended,  and
by  its  execution  becoming  impossible  through  no  fault  of  his  own,  Dig.
17.  1.  3.  2.

§  13.  Cf.  Dig.  17.  I.  I.  4  'mandatum  nisi  gratuitum  nullum  est,  nam
or^inem  ex  ofiido  atque  amidtia  trahit:  contrarium  ergo  est  officio
merces.'  This,  however,  is  true  only  in  theory,  for  Severus  and  Antoninus
provided  that  a  promised  honorarium  might  be  exacted  by  appealing  to
the  extraordinaria  cognitio  of  the  magistrate :  '  de  salario  quod  promisit
a  praeside  provindae  cognitio  praebebitur  *  Cod.  4. 35.  i :  d^  Dig.  17.  i.  7 :
but '  salarium  incertae  pollidtationis  pett  non  potest '  Cod.  ib.  17  :  cf.  Dig.
ib.  56. 3.  The  true  test  is  whether  the  parties  intended  the  remuneration  to
be  recoverable  by  action  :  if  not,  it  will  be  mandatum :  '  si  remunerandi


Tit  27.]  DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUASI  EX  CONTRACTU.  461

XXVIL

DE  OBUGATIONIBUS  QUASI  EX  CONTRACTU.

Post  genera  contractuum  enumerata  dispiciamus  etiam  de
his  obligationibus,  quae  non  proprie  quidem  ex  contractu
nasci  intelleguntur,  sed  tamen,  quia  non  ex  malefido  sub-
stantiam  capiunt,  quasi  ex  contractu  nasci  videntur.  Igitur  1
cum  quis  absentis  negotia  gesserit,  ultro  citroque  inter  eos
nascuntur  actiones^  quae  appellantur  negotiorum  gestorum :
sed  domino  quidem  rei  gestae  adversus  eum  qui  gessit  directa
competit  actio,  negoti(»iim  autem  gestori  contraria.  quas  ex
nuUo  contractu  proprie  nasci  manifestum  est :  quippe  ita  nas-
cuntur istae  actiones,  si  sine  mandato  quisque  alienis  negotiis
gerendis  se  optulerit :  ex  qua  causa  ii  quorum  negotia  gesta
fuerint  etiam  ignorantes  obligantur.  idque  utilitatis  causa
receptum  est,  ne  absentium,  qui  subita  festinatione  coacti
nulli  demandata  negotiorum  suorum  administratione  peregre
profecti  essent,  desererentur  negotia :  quae  sane  nemo  cura-
turus  esset,  si  de  eo  quod  quis  impendisset  nullam  habiturus
esset  actionem,  sicut  autem  is  qui  utiliter  gesserit  negotia
habet  obligatum  dominum  negotiorum,  ita  et  contra  iste  quo-

gratia  honor  intervenit,  erit  mandati  {not  locati  or  conducti)  actio '  Dig.
ib.  6.  pr.

The  theoreticaDy  gratuitous  nature  of  mandatum  distinguishes  it  from
the  other  consensual  contracts,  which  are  all  characterised  by  valuable
consideration.  Dr.  Walker  remarks  that  its  true  place  is  midway  between
the  consensual  and  the  real  contracts ;  it  is  not  merely  consensual,  because
either  party  can  withdraw  from  his  engagement  re  integra ;  it  is  not
merely  real,  because  the  binding  '  res '  is  not  delivery,  but  either  an  act  on
the  part  of  the  agent,  or  a  fcnrbearance  on  that  of  the  principal :  cf.  Hunter's
Roman  Law  p.  361.

Tit.  XXVn.  For  the  meaning  of  obligatio  quasi  ex  contractu  see  p.  396
supr. :  cf.  Holland's  Jurisprudence  p.  163.  The  points  in  which  the  re-
lations here  described,  though  not  contractual,  yet  resemble  contracts,  are
(i)  that  they  arise  from  lawful  acts  or  events ;  (2)  that  they  produce  civil
obligations,  though  this  is  not  their  immediate  object.  The  Roman  jurists
are  fond  of  discovering  analogies  between  them  individually  and  the  differ-
ent contracts  proper;  those  described  in  §§  i  and  4  have  an  affinity
with  mandatum,  those  in  §§  3  and  4  with  societas,  and  that  in  §  6  with
mutuum.

§  L  The  quasi-contractual  relation  of  negotiorum  gestio  was  of  prae-


462  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

que  tenetur,  ut  administrationLs  rationem  reddat.  quo  casu
ad  exactissimam  quisque  diligentiam  compellitur  reddere  ra-
tionem :  nee  sufHcit  talem  diligentiam  adhibere,  qualem  suis
rebus  adhibere  soleret,  si  modo  alius  diligentior  commodius


torian  origin  :  '  ait  praetor,  si  quis  negotia  alterius,  sive  quis  negotia,  quae
cuiusque  cum  is  moritur  fuerint  gesserit,  iudicium  eo  nomine  dabo.  Hoc
edict um  necessarium  est,  quoniam  magna  utilitas  absentium  vertitur,  ne
indefensi  rerum  possessionem  aut  venditionem  patiantur,  vel  pignoris
distractionem,  vel  poenae  committendae  actionem,  vel  iniuria  rem  suam
amittant '  Dig.  3.  5. 3.  pr. :  ib.  i.  To  constitute  the  relation  it  is  necessary
that  the  business  in  which  the  gestor  interferes  should  be  some  one's  else
and  not  his  own.  Dig.  ib.  6. 4  (no  stress  should  be  laid  on  ^  absentes '  in
our  text),  and  that  his  interference  should  not  be  grounded  on  any  office  or
express  mandate  on  which  he  can  sue ;  if  there  has  been  a  mandatum,
but  no  actio  mandati  lies,  he  can  sue  as  negotiorum  gestor,  Dig.  ib.  19.  2.
His  duties  are  in  substance  the  same  as  those  of  a  commissioned  agent,
for  which  see  on  Tit.  26.  8  supr.  Those  of  the  dominus  negotii  are  mainly
to  indemnify  the  gestor  against  all  reasonable  expenses,  with  interest,  and
to  guarantee  him  against  all  liabilities  which  he  has  incurred  on  his  behalf.
Dig.  ib.  10.  pr. ;  but  the  gestor  could  not  enforce  these  duties  by  actio
contraria,  unless

(i)  The  dominus  had  not  prohibited  his  interference,  Cod.  2.  19.  24.

(2)  His  own  intention  in  undertaking  the  business  had  been  to  lay  the
other  under  a  legal  obligation, '  negotia  eo  animo  gerit,  ut  aliquem  sibi
obliget'  Dig.  10.  3.  14.  i ;  so  that  if  his  object  was  his  own  sole  advantage
he  could  sue  the  dominus  only  so  far  as  the  latter  had  derived  material
benefit  from  his  gestio.  Dig.  3.  5.  6.  3.  If  he  unwittingly  interfered  with
another  person's  business  (e.  g.  as  being  a  bona  fide  possessor)  he  could
assert  his  claim  to  compensation  for  reasonable  outlay  only  by  exceptio,
unless  what  he  '  possessed  *  was  an  hereditas,  in  which  case  he  had  an
action,  Dig.  ib.  49 ;  10.  13.  14.  i ;  ib.  29.  pr.

(3)  The  state  of  the  dominus*  affairs  was  such  that,  except  for  the
foreign  intervention,  he  would  be  seriously  prejudiced.  Dig.  44.  7.  5.  pr. ;
if  this  is  so,  the  gestor  can  recover  even  though  the  anticipated  benefit  as
a  fact  is  not  realized,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  put,  the  negotia  need  not  have
been  utiliter  gesta,  it  is  enough  if  they  were  utiliter  coepta,  Dig.  3.  5. 10.
I  ;  ib.  12.  2.  If  the  gestio  was  not  thus  warranted,  but  the  gestor*s  object
was  to  secure  a  great  advantage  for  the  dominus,  he  could  recover  only  so
far  as  the  advantage  actually  went.  Dig.  ib.  11;  ib.  43.

Subsequent  ratification  of  the  gestio  by  the  dominus  transforms  the  re-
lation into  mandatum  according  to  Ulpian  in  Dig.  50.  17.  60,  while  Scae-
vola  in  Dig.  3.  5.  9  says  that  its  character  remains  unaltered.  The  solution
of  the  antinomy  is  probably  that  after  ratification  the  gestor  can  treat  the
dominus  as  mandator,  but  the  latter  (ratification  being  merely  a  unilateral
act)  is  not  entitled  to  treat  the  former  as  mandatarius.


Til  27.]  DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUASI  EX  CONTRACTU.  463

administraturus  esset  negotia.  Tutores  quoque,  qui  tutelae  2
iudicio  tenentur,  non  proprie  ex  contractu  obligati  intelle-
guntur  (nullum  enim  negotium  inter  tutorem  et  pupillum
contrahitur) :  sed  quia  sane  non  ex  maleficio  tenentur,  quasi
ex  contractu  teneri  videntur.  et  hoc  autem  casu  mutuae  sunt
actiones :  non  tantum  enim  pupillus  cum  tutore  habet  tutelae
actionem,  sed  et  ex  contrario  tutor  cum  pupillo  habet  con-
trariam  tutelae,  si  vel  impendent  aliquid  in  rem  pupilli  vel
pro  eo  fuerit  obligatus  aut  rem  suam  creditori  eius  obligaverit.
Item  si  inter  aliquos  communis  sit  res  sine  societate,  veluti  3
quod  pariter  eis  legata  donatave  esset,  et  alter  eorum  alteri
ideo  teneatur  communi  dividundo  iudicio,  quod  solus  fructus
ex  ea  re  perceperit,  aut  quod  socius  eius  in  eam  rem  neces-
sarias  impensas  fecerit :  non  intellegitur  proprie  ex  contractu
obligatus  esse,  quippe  nihil  inter  se  contraxerunt :  sed  quia
non  ex  maleficio  tenetur,  quasi  ex  contractu  teneri  videtur.
Idem  iuris  est  de  eo,  qui  coheredi  suo  familiae  erciscundae  4


§  2.  Cf.  Bk.  i.  20  supr.  and  note.  The  duties  which  the  pupillus  could
enforce  against  the  guardian  by  actio  tutelae  directa  were,  in  general,  those
of  maintaining  the  full  value  of  his  property,  and  to  a  certain  extent  even
of  increasing  it.  The  guardian  was  bound  to  keep  it  in  good  order  and
condition,  Cod.  5.  37.  22,  3  and  4,  and  to  sell  such  parts  of  it  as  were  liable
to  spoil ;  to  call  in  all  doubtful  debts,  Dig.  26.  7.  15  ;  if  the  property  con-
sisted mainly  of  money,  to  lay  it  out  on  land,  ib.  3.  2,  or  at  interest,  ib.  7.  3 ;
and  if  he  used  any  of  it  for  his  own  purposes,  the  rate  of  interest  which  he
had  to  pay  was  the  highest  allowed  by  law,  ib.  7.  10  and  12 ;  to  duly  con-
duct all  necessary  suits  on  the  ward's  behalf,  ib.  i,  3  and  4,  and  in  the
discharge  of  all  these  duties  to  exercise  at  least  that  degree  of  care  which
he  showed  in  his  own  affairs,  i.  e.  he  was  answerable  for  culpa  levis  in
concreto.  Dig.  27.  3.  i.  pr.  This  would  be  of  importance  where  the  ward
was  instituted  heir,  or  left  a  legacy  or  fideicommissum,  Dig.  26.  7.  39.  3.

§  8.  This  is  called  by  the  commentators  communio  incidens :  cf.  Dig.
17.  2.  31  '  cum  non  affectione  societatis  incidimus  in  communionem.'  The
rights  and  duties  of  the  colegatees,  codonees,  etc.,  inter  se  resemble  those
of  partners,  for  which  see  on  Tit.  25.  9  supr.

§  4.  Each  of  two  or  more  coheirs,  if  they  could  not  make  a  satis-
factory partition  by  agreement,  could  compel  a  judicial  division  of  the
inheritance  by  the  actio  familiae  erciscundae,  in  which  the  judge  also
adjusted  all  claims  which  each  had  acquired  against  the  rest  while
their  coheir  (e.  g.  by  paying  debts,  management,  etc.),  during  which
time  their  rights  and  duties  inter  se  are  substantially  the  same  as
those  of  partners.


464  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRJ  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

5  iudicio  ex  his  causis  obligatus  est.  Heres  quoque  l^atonim
nomine  non  proprie  ex  contractu  obligatus  inteilegitur  (neque
enim  cum  berede  neque  cum  defuncto  uUum  negotium  lega-
tarius  gessisse  proprie  dki  potest) :  et  tamen.quia  ex  maieficio
non  est  obligatus  heres,  quasi  ex  contractu  debere  inteilegitur.

6  Item  is,  cui  quis  per  errorem  non  dehttum  solvit,  quasi  ex
contractu  debere  videtur.  adeo  enim  non  inteilegitur  proprie
ex  contractu  obligatus,  ut,  si  certiorem  rationem  sequamur,
magis  ut  supra  diximus  ex  distractu,  quam  ex  contractu  possit
dici  obligatus  esse:  nam  qui  solvendt  animo  pecuniam  dat,
in  hoc  dare  videtur,  ut  distrahat  potius  negotium  quam  con*
trahat.    sed  tamen  proinde  is  qui  accepit  obligatur,  ac  si

7  mutuum  illi  daretur,  et  ideo  condictione  tenetur.  £x  qui-
busdam  tamen  causis  repeti  non  potest,  quod  per  errorem
non  debitum  solutum  sit  sic  namque  definiverunt  veteres:
ex  quibus  causis  infitiando  lis  crescit,  ex  his  causis  non  de«
bitum  solutum  repeti  non  posse,  veluti  ex  lege  Aquilia,  item
ex  legato,  quod  veteres  quidem  in  his  legatis  locum  habere
voluerunt,  quae  certa  constituta  per  damnationem  cuicumque
fuerant  legata :  nostra  autem  constitutio  cum  unam  naturam
omnibus  l^atis  et  iideicommissis  indulsit,  huiusmodi  aug-
mentum  in  omnibus  legatis  et  fideicommissis  extendi  voluit :
sed  non  omnibus  l^^tariis  praebuit,  sed  tantummodo  in  his
legatis  et  fideicommissis,  quae  sacrosanctis  ecclesiis  ceteris-
que  venerabilibus  locis,  quae  religionis  vel  pietatis  intuitu
honorificantur,  derelicta  sunt,  quae  si  indebita  solvantur,  non
repetuntur.


§  6.  In  Gaius  ii.  35  and  36,  the  adido  of  the  hereditas,  which  creates
this  quasi-contractual  relation  between  heirs  and  legatees,  is  itself  called
obligatk).  Where  the  res  legata  was  specific  property  of  the  testator's
own,  the  legatee  had  a  right  in  rem,  and  could  recover  it  by  vindicatio :
see  p.  295  supr.

§  6.  Cf.  Tit.  14.  I  and  notes,  supr.

4  7.  The  cases  of  lis  crescens  enumerated  by  Gaius  in  iv.  9  and  171  are
the  actiones  iudicati,  depensi  (note  on  Tit  20.  pr.  supr.)  damni  iniuria  ex
lege  Aquilia,  and  that  for  the  recovery  of  a  legatum  per  danmationem.
Besides  claims  for  legacies  ad  pias  causas  (for  which  cf.  Bk.  iv.  6.  19  inf.),
we  must  add  the  actions  on  depositum  miserabile  (note  on  Tit.  14. 3  supr.)
Bk.  IV.  6.  26  inf. ;  on  a  bond  whose  authenticity  is  denied  by  the  giver,
Nov.  18.  8,  and  under  some  circumstances  the  actio  redhibitona.  Dig.  21.


Tit.  28.]  PER  QUAS  PERSONAS  NOBIS  OBLIG,  ADQ.     465

XXVIII.
PER  QUAS  PERSONAS   NOBIS  OBLIGATIO  ADQUIRITUR.

Expositis  generibus  obligationum,  quae  ex  contractu  vel
quasi  ex  contractu  nascuntur,  admonendi  sumus  adquiri  vobis
non  solum  per  vosmet  ipsos,  sed  etiam  per  eas  quoque  per-
sonas,  quae  in  vestra  potestate  sunt,  veluti  per  servos  vestros
et  filios :  ut  tamen,  quod  per  servos  quidem  vobis  adquiritur,
totum  vestrum  fiat,  quod  autem  per  liberos,  quos  in  potestate
habetis,  ex  obligatione  fuerit  adquisitum,  hoc  dividatur  se-
cundum imaginem  rerum  proprietatis  et  usus  fructus,  quam
nostra  discrevit  constitutio :  ut,  quod  ab  actione  commodum
perveniat,  huius  usum  fructum  quidem  habeat  pater,  proprietas
autem  filio  servetur,  scilicet  patre  actionem  movente  secundum
novellae  nostrae  constitutionis  divisionem.  Item  per  liberos  1
homines  et  alienos  servos,  quos  bona  fide  possidetis,  adqui-
ritur  vobis,  sed  tantum  ex  duabus  causis,  id  est  si  quid  ex
operis   suis  vel   ex   re  vestra  adquirant     Per  eum  quoque  2

I.  45.  The  reason  why  condictio  indebiti  is  excluded  in  these  cases  has
been  pointed  out  on  p.  400  supr.  If  the  condictio  had  been  allowed,  the
double  damages  need  never  be  incurred ;  the  defendant  would  pay  the
simplum,  and  then  practically  deny  his  liability  by  disputing  the  correct-
ness of  the  payment  in  condictio  indebiti,  failure  in  which  would  leave  him
no  worse  off  than  he  was  before.

Tit.  Xyyin.  Obligatio  in  this  Title  means  a  right  arising  ex  contractu :
it  tells  us  who  takes  the  benefit  of  a  contract  made  by  a  filiusfamilias,  slave,
or  free  man  bona  fide  serviens  :  cf.  Tit.  17  supr.  The  converse  question,
how  far  the  superior  is  bound  by  their  promises,  is  treated  in  Bk.  iv.
7  inf.

For  the  *  divisio  rerum  proprietatis  et  ususfructus '  see  on  Bk.  ii.  9.  pr.
supr.  The  profit  arising  from  the  contracts  of  a  filiusfamilias  was  not
necessarily  divided  in  this  manner.  If  he  had  only  castrense  or  quasi-
castrense  peculium,  it  was  all  his  own,  and  on  such  contracts  he  could  sue
in  person,  Dig.  14.  6.  2.  If  his  peculium  was  profectitium  only,  it  was  all
the  father's ;  if  he  had  adventitium  as  well,  the  father  had  a  usufruct  in
the  commodum  obligationis  in  the  ratio  which  it  bore  to  the  other  peculia
'  quae  adquisitionem  eifugiunt '  Cod.  6.  61.  6.  The  action  on  these  con-
tracts must  be  brought  in  the  father's  name,  but  the  son  might  conduct
them  as  his  attorney ;  for  other  exceptional  cases  in  which  the  filiusfamilias
had  a  right  of  action  see  p.  1 29  supr.

§  1.  Cf.  Bk.  ii.  9.  4  and  notes,  supr.

§  2.  The  slave  in  whom  one  has  a  usus  is  not  mentioned  above  in  Bk.

H  h


466  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTVOR.      [Lib.  III.

servum,  in  quo  usum  fructum  vel  usum  habetis,  similiter  ex
3  duabus  istis  causis  vobis  adquiritur.  Communetn  servutn  pro
dominica  parte  dominis  adquirere  certum  est,  excepto  eo,
quod  uni  nominatim  stipulando  aut  per  traditionem  acci-
piendo  illi  soli  adquirit,  veluti,  cum  ita  stipuletur:  'Titio
domino  meo  dare  spondes  ? '  sed  si  unius  domini  iussu  servus
fuerit  stipulatus,  licet  antea  dubitabatur,  tamen  post  nostram
decisionem  res  expedita  est,  ut  illi  tantum  adquirat,  qui  hoc
ei  facere  iussit,  ut  supra  dictum  est.

XXIX.

QUIBUS  MODIS  OBLIGATIO  TOLLITUR.

ToIIitur  autem  omnis  obligatio  solutlone  eius  quod  debetur,
vel  si  quis  consentiente  creditore  aliud  pro  alio  solvent  nee
tamen  interest,  quis  solvat,  utrum  ipse  qui  debet  an  alius  pro

ii.  9.  4,  and  what  is  said  here,  that  all  commodum  arising  ex  operis  suis
accrues  to  the  person  having  the  use,  seems  irreconcileable  with  Dig.  7.
8.  14.  pr.  '  per  servum  usuarium  si  stipuler  vel  per  traditionem  accipiam,
an  adquiram,  quaeritur,  si  ex  re  mea  vel  ex  operis  eius,  et  si  quidem  ex
operis  eius,  non  valebit,  quoniam  nee  locare  eius  operas  possumus ;  sed
si  ex  re  mea,  dicimus  servum  usuarium  stipulantem  vel  per  traditionem
accipientem  mihi  adquirere,  cum  hac  opera  eius  utar.'  The  truth  seems
to  be  that  the  benefit  of  any  contract  made  by  a  slave  ex  re  usuarii
vested  in  the  latter,  though  he  could  not  let  out  the  slave's  services :  if
the  latter  let  them  out  himself  the  merces  could  be  claimed  by  the
usuary.

§  8.  Cod.  4.  27.  3  ;  cf.  Tit.  17.  3  and  notes,  supr.

Tit.  ZXIZ.  After  describing  how  obligations  may  arise  ex  contractu
and  quasi  ex  contractu,  Justinian  proceeds  to  show  how  they  are  dis-
chaiged.  Here  the  metaphor  by  which  their  creation  is  so  vividly  pre-
sented is  consistently  continued  :  an  obligation  is  dissolved  by  the  untying
of  the  knot  by  the  tying  of  which  it  was  imposed,  the  general  term  em-
ployed being  solvere,  in  the  sense  of  loosing  or  releasing :  '  solvisse  acci-
pere  debemus  non  tantum  eum,  qui  solvit,  verum  omnem  omnino  qui  ea
obligatione  liberatus  est,  quae  ex  causa  iudicati  desoendit '  Dig.  42.  i.  4. 7,
'  solvere  dicimus  eum,  qui  id  facit  quod  facere  promisit '  Dig.  50.  16.  176,
'  solutionis  verbum  pertinet  ad  omnem  liberationem  quoquo  modo  factam,
magisque  ad  substantiam  obligationis  refertur  quam  ad  nummorum  solu-
tionem'  Dig.  46.  3.  54.  In  connection  with  the  diflferent  classes  of  con-
tracts indeed  the  jurists  love  the  conceit,  that  to  the  causa  by  which  the
obligation  is  engendered  in  each  of  them  respectively  there  should  be
a  peculiarly  corresponding  mode  of  release :  *  nihil  tam  naturale  est  quam


Tit  29.]    QUIBUS  MODIS  OBLIGATIO  TOLLITUR.  467

CO :  liberatur  enim  et  alio  solvente,  sive  sciente  debitore  sivc
ignorante  vel  invito  solutio  fiat,     item  si  reus  solvent,  etiam


eo  genere  quidque  dissolvere  quo  colligatum  est.  Ideo  verborum  obligatio
verbis  tollitur;  nudi  consensus  obligatio  contrario  consensu  dissolvitur'
Dig.  50.  17.  35  ;  cf.  Dig.  46.  3.  80.  Obligations  incurred  literis  (Excursus
VIII  inf.)  could  apparently  be  extinguished  by  the  creditor's  entering  the
receipt  of  an  equivalent  sum  from  the  debtor  on  the  opposite  page  of  the
ledger  (accepti  relatio:  cf.  Gains  iv.  64);  and  Gains  tells  us  (iii.  173-5)
that  debts  incurred  in  mancipation  form  or  by  judgment  were  properly
dissolved  by  a  corresponding  nexi  liberatio,  a  '  species  imaginariae  solu-
tionis per  aes  et  libram,'  employed  even  in  his  own  day  to  acknowledge
payment  of  judgment  debts  and  legata  per  damnationem ;  see  Posters
Gains  p.  418.

But  a  more  important  distinction  between  the  modes  in  which  obliga-
tions may  be  invalidated  or  rendered  ineflfectual,  not  alluded  to  in  this
Title,  is  the  following.  To  some  events  the  law  attaches  the  effect  of
altogether  extinguishing  the  obligatio ;  it  ceases  to  exist,  and  there  is  no
longer  any  vinculum  iuris  between  the  parties ;  the  obligatio,  as  it  is  said,
ipso  iure  tollitur,  perimitur,  evanescit.  Under  the  older  law,  unless  it  was
discharged  in  this  manner,  an  obligation  was  altogether  unaffected ;  so
that  (e.  g.)  if  a  solemn  form  of  payment  was  prescribed  which  the  debtor
did  not  observe,  he  could  be  sued  and  forced  to  pay  again.  But  later
a  new  mode  arose  in  which  a  debtor  could  defeat  his  creditor ;  though
he  could  not  deny  the  existence  of  the  obligatio,  he  might  himself  have
a  right  which  he  could  set  up  against  that  of  the  other,  whereby  his  claim,
if  asserted  by  legal  process,  could  be  successfully  repelled ;  ipso  iure,  the
obligatio  still  subsists,  but  it  is  rendered  inoperative,  and  in  effect  can-
celled, by  the  counter  right  of  the  debtor,  or,  as  it  is  said,  ope  exceptionis
actor  summovetur,  removetur,  expellitur,  excluditur;  he  is  kept  at  bay
by  the  plea  of  the  defendant.  The  processual  significance  of  exceptiones
is  treated  in  the  notes  to  Bk.  iv.  13  inf. ;  here  all  that  need  be  considered
is  their  operation.  In  some  cases  this  is  stronger  and  more  potent  than
in  others ;  in  some  the  plea  will  avail  at  all  times  and  under  all  circum-
stances, in  others  it  will  be  only  temporary  (Bk.  iv.  13.  8- 11  inf.).  Those
which  have  the  stronger  effect  practically  (though  not  in  form)  extinguish
the  obligation,  or,  as  Mr.  Poste  puts  it,  they  neutralize  naturalis  as  well
as  civilis  obligatio,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  if  the  debtor  pays  by  mis-
take he  can  recover  by  condictio  indebiti;  Mndebitum  autem  solutum
accipimus  non  solum  si  omnino  non  debeatur,  sed  et  si  per  aliquam  ex-
ceptionem  peti  non  poterat ;  quare  hoc  quoque  repeti  potent,  nisi  sciens
se  tutum  exceptione  solvit '  Dig.  is.  6.  26. 3, '  adeo  autem  perpetua  exceptio
parit  condictionem,  ut  lulianus  scripsit,  si  emptor  fundi  damnaverit  here-
dem  suum  ut  venditorem  nexu  venditi  liberaret,  mox  venditor  ignorans  rem
tradiderit,  posse  eum  fundum  condicere,  idemque  et  si  debitorem  suum
damnaverit  liberare  et  ille  ignorans  solvent'  Dig.  ib.  7.  Among  excep-
tions with  this  greater  potency  are  exceptio  pacti,  Dig.  ib.  40.  2 ;  exceptio

H  h  2


468  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  III.

ii  qui  pro  eo  mtervenenint  liberantur.     idem  ex  contrario  con-
tingit,  si  fideiussor  solvent :  non  enim  solus  ipse  liberatur,  sed


doll,  ib.  65.  I ;  and  exceptio  metus,  Dig.  12.  5.  7  ;  and  tbeir  protection  is
so  nearly  on  a  par  with  that  of  extinction  ipso  iure  that  it  is  said  in  Dig.
$0.  17.  112  'nihil  interest -ipso  iure  quis  actionem  non  habeat,  an  per  ex-
ceptionem  infirmetur:'  cf.  Dig.  40.  12.20.3  'obligatum  accipere  debe-
mus,  qui  exceptione  se  tueri  non  potest ;  ceterum  si  potest,  dicendum  non
esse  obligatum.'  Those  exceptions  which  have  only  the  weaker  eflfect,
though  they  prevent  the  creditor  from  succeeding  in  an  action,  yet  leave
the  obligatio  subsisting  naturaliter,  with  all  or  most  of  the  incidents
which  characterise  such  relations  (Excursus  V  inf.).  As  a  general
rule  every  exceptio  will  have  the  stronger  efficacy  if  based  upon  the
ius  gentium  and  natural  equity:  'desinit  debitor  esse  is,  qui  nactus
est  exceptionem  iustam  nee  ab  aequitate  naturali  abhorrentem'  Dig.
50.  17.  66.

Thus  the  distinction  between  extinction  ipso  iure,  and  invalidation  ope
exceptionis,  is  not  one  of  degree,  for  some  exceptions  produce  an  effect
undistinguishable  from  extinction ;  it  consists  in  the  mode  of  their
operation.  A  right  extinguished  ipso  iure  can  never  recover  its  vitality ;  •
but,  given  an  event  which  operates  only  ope  exceptionis,  i.  e.  confers  a
countervailing  right  on  the  debtor,  the  obligatio  still  subsists,  and  should
the  debtor's  right  be  itself  destroyed,  will  once  more  become  enforceable,
and  recover  its  original  value.  In  the  first  case  only  a  new  right  can
come  into  existence,  which  implies  that  all  the  conditions  ordinarily
required  for  the  creation  of  an  obligation  must  be  satisfied,  so  that  a
mere  renunciation  by  the  debtor  of  the  benefit  which  has  accrued  to  him
in  the  destruction  of  the  creditor's  right  will  not  reestablish  the  creditor
in  statu  quo  unless  such  renunciation  suffices  in  the  particular  case  for
the  creation  of  an  obligation ;  '  si  pactum  conventum  tale  fuerit,  quod
actionem  [ipso  iure]  tolleret,  velut  iniuriarum,  non  potent,  postea  pacis-
cendo  ut  agere  possit,  agere,  quia  et  prima  actio  sublata  est,  et  posterius
pactum  ad  actionem  reparandam  inefficax  est ... .  idem  dicemus  et  in
bonae  fidei  contractibus,  si  pactum  conventum  totam  obligationem  sus-
tulerit,  veluti  empti,  non  enim  ex  novo  pacto  prior  obligatio  resuscitatur,
sed  proficiet  pactum  ad  novum  contractum'  Dig.  2.  14.  27.  2.  But  in  the
second  case  it  would  be  otherwise ;  the  old  right  is  not  destroyed,  but
only  balanced  by  a  colliding  or  countervailing  right  in  the  debtor ;  and  if
the  latter  right  is  in  any  way  extinguished,  even  by  mere  waiver,  the
former  will  recover  all  its  original  force  :  '  pactus  ne  peteret,  postea  con-
venit  ut  peteret  Prius  pactum  per  posterius  elidetur ;  non  quidem  ipso
iure,  sicut  stipulatio  tollitur  per  stipulationem,  si  hoc  actum  est,  quia  in
stipulationibus  ius  continetur,  in  pactis  factum  versatur,  et  ideo  replica-
tione  (Bk.  iv.  14.  inf)  exceptio  elidetur'  Dig.  loc.  cit.

In  this  Title  Justinian  touches  only  upon  those  modes  in  which  obliga-
tions are  extinguished  ipso  iure  and  absolutely ;  this  is  the  meaning  of
the  word  '  toUitur,'  which  apparently  is  not  used  when  the  creditor's  right


Tit  39.]    QUI  BUS  MODIS  OBLIGATIO   TOLLITUR.  469

etiam  reus.  Item  per  acceptilationem  toUitur  obligatio.  est  1
autem  acceptilatio  imaginaria  solutio.  quod  enim  ex  ver-
borum  obligatione  Titio  debetur,  id  si  velit  Titius  remittere,
poterit  sic  fieri,  ut  patiatur  haec  verba  debitorem  dicere:
'quod  ego  tibi  promisi  habesne  acceptum?'  et  Titius  re-
spondeat *habeo : '  sed  et  Graece  potest  acceptufti  fieri,  dum-
modo  sic  fiat,  ut  Latinis  verbis  solet:  Ixet?  Xafitav  brfvipia
To<ra;  ix,<o  Xafi^v,  quo  genere  ut  diximus  tantum  eae  obli-
gationes  solvuntur,  quae  ex  verbis  consistunt,  non  etiam  ce-
terae :   consentaneum  enim  visum  est  verbis  factam  obliga-


is  merely  deprived  of  its  efficacy  ope  exceptionis.  This  treatment,  how-
ever, is  open  to  the  criticism  that,  if  it  is  intended  to  relate  to  the  modes
in  which  all  obligations  may  be  dissolved,  it  is  wrongly  placed,  its  proper
position  being  between  Titles  5  and  6  of  Book  iv.,  and  also  omits  one
important  mode  in  which  some  obligations  ex  delicto  could  be  ex-
tinguished ;  while,  if  it  purports  to  describe  only  the  discharge  of  con-
tractual obligation,  it  is  pro  tanto  inadequate,  and  even  on  that  supposition
inexhaustive ;  yet  this  seems  to  be  what  was  in  fact  intended  by  Gaius,
whom  Justinian  here  follows  closely.

The  effect  of  datio  in  solutum,  the  payment  of  aliud  pro  alio  with  the
creditor's  consent,  was  in  Gaius*  time  (iii.  168)  matter  of  dispute.  The
Sabinians  (whom  Justinian  follows)  held  that  it  operated  ipso  iure,  the
Proculians,  that  it  only  gave  rise  to  an  exceptio  doli  if  an  action  were
subsequently  brought  on  the  debt.  The  creditor  must  take  'aliud  pro
alio '  nolens  volens  if  it  becomes  impossible  to  discharge  the  obligation
in  the  proper  way  without  the  debtor's  default,  and  at  the  same  time
without  entirely  releasing  the  latter;  e.g.  where  the  obligation  is  to
convey  a  res  aliena  which  the  owner  will  not  sell  (Dig.  30.  71. 3)  he  must
accept  its  value.  By  Nov.  4.  3  Justinian  enacted  that  if  a  person  was
absolutely  unable  to  pay  a  money  debt,  he  might  compel  the  creditor  to
select  an  equivalent  from  his  property,  provided  he  gave  security  against
eviction.

Solutio  must  be  made  to  either  the  creditor  in  person  or  his  agent ;
guardians  and  persons  solutionis  causa  adiecti  (e.  g.  mihi  aut  Titio  dare
spondes  ?  Tit.  19.  4  supr.)  were  regarded  as  his  mandataries.  If  the
debtor  was  unable  to  pay  the  creditor,  either  because  he  could  not  find
him,  or  because  the  latter  refused  to  accept  payment,  or  from  uncertainty
as  to  who  his  real  creditor  was,  he  could  release  himself  by  deposit  in
court.  Cod.  8.  43.  9.  Payment  by  the  fideiussor  released  the  principal
only  if  the  former  had  not  previously  procured  an  assignment  to  him-
self of  the  creditor's  rights  against  him  (p.  431  supr.).  If  the  suretyship
took  the  form  of  mandatum  it  was  never  so.  Dig.  17.  i.  28 :  cf.  note  on
Tit.  26.  5  supr.

§  L  Acceptilatio  is  a  formal  acquittance  from  an  obligation  incurred  by


470  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  III.

tionem  posse  aliis  verbis  dissolvi  :  sed  id,  quod  ex  alia  causa
debetur,  potest  in  stipulationem  deduci  et  per  acceptilationem
dissolvi.  sicut  autem  quod  debetur  pro  parte  recte  solvitur,
2  ita  in  partem  debiti  acceptilatio  fieri  potest.  Est  prodita
stipulatio,  quae  vulgo  Aquiliana  appellatur,  per  quam  stipu-
lationem contingit,  ut  omnium  rerum  obligatio  in  stipulatum
deducatur  et  ea  per  acceptilationem  tollatur.  stipulatio  enim
Aquiliana  novat  omnes  obligationes  et  a  Gallo  Aquilio  ita
composita  est :  '  quidquld  te  mihi  ex  quacumque  causa  dare
facere  oportet  oportebit  praesens  in  diemve  quanimque  rerum
mihi  tecum  actio  quaeque  abs  te  petitio  vel  adversus  te  per-
secutio  est  erit  quodque  tu  meum  habes  tenes  possides  possi-
deresve  dolove  malo  fecisti,  quo  minus  possideas:  quanti
quaeque  earum  rerum  res  erit,  tantam  pecuniam  dari  stipu-
latus  est  Aulus  Agerius,  spopondit  Numerius  Negidius.'  item
e  diverso  Numerius  Negidius  interrogavit  Aulum  Agerium  :
*  quidquid  tibi  hodierno  die  per  Aquilianam  stipulationem
spopondi,  id   omne  habesne  acceptum?'      respondit  Aulus


stipulation,  perhaps  employed  for  security's  sake  even  where  the  debt
was  otherwise  discharged  (e.  g.  by  payment),  and  not  only  (as  the  text
suggests)  when  a  gratuitous  release  was  intended.  Its  specialisation  to
the  extinction  of  obligations  incurred  verbis  is  alluded  to  in  Terence,
Adelph.  2.  I.  ID  *neque  tu  verbis  solves  unquam,  quod  mihi  re  male
fcceris.*  Whether  an  acceptilatio  in  partem  debiti  was  valid  had  been
disputed  in  Gaius'  time,  iii.  172.  Justinian's  statement  of  the  law  must
be  taken  subject  to  the  distinction  drawn  by  Ulpian:  *si  id,  quod  in
stipulationem  deductum  est,  divisionem  non  recipiat,  acceptilatio  in
partem  nuUius  erit  momenti,  ut  puta  si  servitus  fuit  praedii  rustici  vel
urbani.  Plane  si  ususfructus  sit  in  stipulationem  deductus,  puta  fundi
Titiani,  poterit  pro  parte  acceptilatio  fieri  et  erit  residuae  partis  fundi
ususfructus :  si  tamen  viam  quis  stipulatus  accepto  iter  vel  actum
fecerit,  acceptilatio  nullius  erit  momenti '  Dig.  46.  4.  13.  i.  The  words
*ut  diximus'  in  this  section  are  taken  from  Gaius  iii.  170,  and  apparently
refer  to  some  passage  in  his  Institutes  which  has  not  come  down  to  us,
or  perhaps  to  one  of  his  other  works.

§  2.  As  is  said  in  the  preceding  section,  a  debt  incurred  in  any  way
whatsoever  could  be  transformed  by  novatio  into  a  verbal  obligation  and
then  released  by  acceptilatio.  To  Gallus  Aquilius  (note  on  Bk.  ii.  13.  i
supr.)  must  be  awarded  the  merit  of  having  devised  a  formula  by  which
all  obligations  in  which  one  and  the  same  person  was  debtor,  and
another  and  the  same  creditor,  could  be  embraced  in  a  single  novatio,
and  thereby  be  converted  into  a  single  obligation,  which  could  then,  if  re-


Tit.  29.]     QUIBUS  MODIS  OBLIGA  TIO   TOLLITUR,  471

Agerius :  '  habeo  acceptumque  tuli/  Praeterea  novatione  3
tollitur  obligatio.  veluti  si  id,  quod  tu  Seio  debeas,  a  Titio
dari  stipulatus  sit.  nam  interventu  novae  personae  nova
nascitur  obligatio  et  prima  tollitur  translata  in  posteriorem,
adeo  ut  interdum,  licet  posterior  stipulatio  inutilis  sit,  tamen
prima  novationis  iure  tollatur.  veluti  si  id,  quod  Titio  tu
debebas,  a  pupillo  sine  tutoris  auctoritate  stipulatus  fuerit,
quo  casu  res  amittitur  :  nam  et  prior  debitor  liberatur  et  pos-
terior obligatio  nulla  est.  non  idem  iuris  est,  si  a  servo  quis
stipulatus  fuerit :  nam  tunc  prior  proinde  obligatus  manet,  ac
si  postea  a  nullo  stipulatus  fuisset.  sed  si  eadem  persona
sit,  a  qua  postea  stipuleris,  ita  demum  novatio  fit,  si  quid  in
posteriore  stipulatione  novi  sit,  forte  si  condicio  aut  dies  aut
iideiussor  adiciatur  aut  detrahatur.     quod  autem  diximus,  si


quired,  be  released  in  this  manner.  This,  however,  was  not  always  the
object  of  the  Aquilian  stipulation,  which,  it  is  clear,  was  not  unfrequently
employed  as  a  comprehensive  novation,  the  duties  created  by  which  were
intended  to  be,  not  released,  but  performed,  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  1. 1.  3,  Cod.
2.  4.  3,  Dig.  2.  15.  2 ;  ib.  9.  2.  In  the  stipulation  itself,  as  here  presented
to  us,  the  following  possible  claims  are  comprised :  those  arising  from
contracts  whether  strict!  iuris  or  bonae  fidei  (dare,  facere),  whether  present
or  future  (oportet,  oportebit),  and  whether  existing  and  actionable  at  once,
or  existing  but  not  yet  actionable  (praesens  in  diemve) ;  those  enforce-
able by  real  (petitio)  as  well  as  by  personal  action  (actio),  whether  now
(est)  or  in  the  future  (erit),  and  by  extraordinaria  cognitio  (persecutio)  no
less  than  by  ordinary  action  at  law,  and  whether  the  promisor  has  merely
detention  (habes,  tenes)  or  has  or  has  had  civil  possession  (possides,
possedisti).  The  omission  of  the  word  praestare  in  the  form  of  personal
action  (dare  facere  oportet)  possibly  shows  that  the  author  did  not  intend
to  include  obligations  arising  ex  delicto ;  and  the  phrase  '  dolove  malo
fecisti  quominus  possideas'  refers  to  the  dominus'  real  action  against
a  person  who  had  fraudulently  destroyed  or  conveyed  away  a  res  aliena.
This  was  first  given  by  the  SC.  Juventianum,  Dig.  5.  3.  20.  6 ;  6.  i.  27.  3,
so  that  the  words  cannot  have  formed  part  of  the  original  Aquilian  stipu-
lation, and  do  not  even  appear  in  the  form  of  it  given  by  Florentinus  in
Dig.  46. 4. 18. 1.  In  the  acceptilatio  of  Justinian's  text  the  words '  accep-
tumque tuli'  are  superfluous  (see  §1)  and  must  not  be  taken  to  refer  in
any  way  to  the  literal  contract  or  any  other  system  of  accounts.  As  Mr.
Poste  remarks,  the  narrative  form  (stipulatus  est,  spopondit,  interrogavit),
in  which  the  transaction  is  expressed  by  Justinian,  properly  belongs,  not
to  the  stipulation  and  acceptilation,  but  to  the  cautio  in  which  they  are
embodied  or  recorded.
§  3.  *  Novatio  est  prioris  debiti  in  aliam  obligationem  vel  civilem  vel


473  JNSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,     [Lib.  III.

condicio  adiciatur,  novationem  fieri,  sic  intellegi  oportet,  ut
ita  dicamus  factam  novationem,  si  condicio  extiterit :  alioquin
si  defecerit,  durat  prior  obligatio.  Sed  cum  hoc  quidem
inter  veteres  constabat  tunc  fieri  novationem,  cum  novandi
animo  in  secundam  obligationem  itum  fuerat :  per  hoc  autem
dubium  erat,  quando  novandi  animo  videretur  hoc  fieri  et
quasdam  de  hoc  praesumptiones  alii  in  aliis  casibus  intro-
ducebant :  ideo  nostra  processit  constitutio,  quae  apertissime
definivit  tunc  solum  fieri  novationem,  quotiens  hoc  ipsum
inter  contrahentes  expressum  fuerit,  quod  propter  novationem
prioris  obiigationis  convenerunt,  alioquin  manere  et  pristinam
obligationem  et  secundam  ei  accedere,  ut  maneat  ex  utraque
causa  obligatio  secundum  nostrae  constitutionis  definitiones,


naturalem  transfusio  atque  translatio,  hoc  est,  cum  ex  praecedenti  causa
ita  nova  constituatur,  ut  prior  perimatur'  Dig.  46.  2.  i.  pr.;  novation  is
the  extinction  of  one  obligation  by  the  substitution  for  it  of  another.
Originally  it  could  take  place  in  two  ways,  transcriptio  (Excursus  VIII
inf.)  and  stipulatio ;  but  in  Justinian's  time,  and  probably  in  that  of  Gaius
(iii.  176),  the  latter  was  the  only  means  available  for  the  purpose.  The
end  in  view  in  a  novation  may  be  either  to  change  one  of  the  parties  to
the  subsisting  obligation,  or  to  modify  its  terms,  or,  without  changing  the
parties,  to  alter  its  nature  by  converting  a  real  or  consensual  into  a  verbal
obligation.  The  first  of  these  ends  is  illustrated  in  the  text  by  the  words
veluti  si  id  ...  in  posteriorem ;  the  others,  by  the  paragraph  commencing
sed  si  eadem  persona  ....

The  parties  may  be  changed  in  two  ways.  Firstly,  the  creditor  may
be  changed,  the  amount  and  terms  of  the  debt  remaining  the  same.
Thus,  if  A  owes  B  5/.,  and  C  (with  B's  consent)  stipulates  from  A  for
payment  of  that  debt  to  himself,  A*s  debt  to  B  is  extinguished.  The
same  effect  might  be  produced,  though  with  a  technical  difference  of
remedy,  without  novation,  by  B's  assigning  his  rights  against  A  to  C,
Gaius  ii.  38,  39,  Excursus  V  inf.  Secondly,  the  debtor  might  be  changed,
the  creditor  remaining  the  same.  Thus,  if  under  the  circuT  stances
supposed,  B  stipulated  from  C  for  payment  to  himself  of  the  5/.  which  A
owed  him,  A's  debt  to  B  would  be  cancelled.  If  this  was  done  with  A's
assent,  it  is  usually  called  delegatio ;  if  not,  expromissio.

It  is  immaterial  whether  the  obligation  which  is  novated  be  civilis  or
merely  naturalis :  its  extinction  involves  that  of  all  rights  which  were
accessory  to  it,  such  as  guaranties,  hypothecs,  claims  for  interest  and
penalties,  etc.,  Dig.  46.  2.  15  ;  ib.  18 ;  ib.  27 ;  ib.  29.  So  too,  as  is  said
in  the  text,  the  obligation  created  by  the  novating  contract  will  ex-
tinguish the  old  one  even  though  it  be  natural  only,  i.  e.  for  some  reason
or  other  not  enforceable  by  action.    But  two  obligations  are  essential ;


Tit.  29.]    QUI  BUS  MODIS  OBLIGATIO  TOLLITUR,  473

quas  licet  ex  ipsius  lectione  apertius  cog^oscere.     Hoc  am-  4
plius  eae  obligationes,  quae  consensu  contrahuntur,  contraria
voluntate  dissolvuntur.     nam  si  Titius  et  Seius  inter  se  con-
senserunt,   ut  fundum   Tusculanum   emptum   Seius  haberet
centum  aureorum,  deinde  re  nondum  secuta,  id  est  neque


if  there  is  not  one  to  novate,  the  attempted  novation  is  null ;  if  there  is
one  to  novate,  but  the  novating  contract  is  void  (e.  g.  '  si  id  quod  tu  mihi
debeas,  a  peregrino,  cum  quo  sponsus  communio  non  est,  spondes  verbo
stipulatus  sim'  Gaius  iii.  179),  the  fonner  is  altogether  unaffected.

The  promise  of  a  slave  ordinarily  created  a  natural  obligation,  and
consequently,  as  Servius  Sulpicius  argued  (Gaius,  loc  cit),  it  is  hard  to
see  why  it  should  have  no  novative  effect ;  the  explanation  given  by
Theophilus  is  on  iroul  vofiarmva  ov  fjidvop  t6  TiXTtfrOai  0v<riJc^y  ^^^xli^*  aK\a
KCLi  TO  vTTtivai  iTp6a'vtnov'  airp6a'(anos  dc  6  bovKoi,

The  rule  that,  if  the  parties  to  the  new  contract  are  the  same,  a
novation  ensues  only  if  it  contains  'novi  quid,'  holds  only  where  the
novated  obligation  was  itself  verbal.  If  it  had  been  otherwise,  novation
would  have  been  disabled  from  discharging  one  of  its  most  valued
functions,  viz.  the  substitution  of  obligations  pursued  by  actions  stricti
iuris  for  obligations  enforceable  only  by  actio  ex  fide  bona.  The  Procu-
lians  were  of  opinion  that  the  adiectio  or  detractio  of  a  surety  in  the  new
contract  was  not  sufficient  to  support  a  novation,  Gaius  iii.  178.

For  condicio  and  dies  see  on  Tit.  15.  2  and  4  supr.

Servius  Sulpicius  had  held  that  a  conditional  stipulation  novated  an
unconditional  contract  whether  the  condition  was  fulfilled  or  not.  Gaius
(iii.  179)  thought  that  the  old  contract  subsisted  until  the  condition  of  the
new  one  was  fulfilled,  but  suggests  that  if  the  creditor  sued  upon  it  before
such  fulfilment  he  might  be  met  by  exceptio  doli  or  pacti,  and  this  was
soon  recognised  as  law,  Dig.  23.  3.  50;  ib.  83 ;  12.  i.  36 ;  though  Labeo
(Dig.  23.  3.  80)  had  thought  otherwise.

Among  the  praesumptiones  or  evidence  upon  which  the  jurists  relied
to  prove  that  there  was  animus  novandi  was,  according  to  the  Sabinian
school,  the  addition  of  a  surety  (cf.  Dig.  2. 14. 3a  i) ;  for  the  presumptions
against  such  intention  see  Dig.  46.  2.  6.  pr.  and  i ;  45.  i.  58.  Justinian's
own  enactment  is  in  Cod.  8.  42.  8 ;  his  statement  that,  unless  the  inten-
tion to  novate  was  express  ('  nisi  ipsi  specialiter  remiserint  quidem  priorem
obligationem  et  hoc.expresserint,  quod  secundam  magis  pro  anterioribus
elegerint '  Cod.  loc.  cit.),  the  two  obligations  should  subsist  side  by  side  is
apparently  subject  to  the  qualification  that  when  one  was  fulfilled  the
other  was  ipso  facto  extinguished  ;  see  Dig.  46.  2.  8.  5.

§  4.  When  the  res  was  no  longer  Integra,  an  agreement  between  the
parties  to  be  off  their  bargain  did  not  merely  extinguish  the  obligation  :
it  rather  operated  as  a  new  contract  which  bound  the  one  in  whose
favour  performance  had  taken  place  to  restore  the  other  in  statum  quo,
but  which  was  unable  to  injuriously  affect  rights  acquired  under  the


474  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  III.

pretio  soluto  neque  fundo  tradito,  placuerit  inter  eos,  ut  dis-
cederetur  ab  emptione  et  venditiooe,  invicem  liberantur.    idem


previous  contract  by  third  persons :  *  [re  secuta]  non  tarn  hoc  agitur,  ut
a  pristino  negotio  discedamus,  quam  ut  novae  obligationes  constituantur '
Dig.  2.  14.  58.

Among  the  modes  '  quibus  obligatio  tollitur '  described  by  Gaius  is
the  commencement  of  an  action,  litis  contestatio,  which,  if  the  action
were  a  iudicium  legitimum,  and  the  formula  was  in  ius  concepta,  pro-
duced a  quasi-novative  effect,  termed  by  the  commentators  novatio
necessaria ;  the  very  delivery  of  the  formula  in  the  action  by  the  praetor
to  the  iudex  extinguished  the  defendant's  debt,  and  substituted  for  it
a  new  obligation,  viz.  the  legal  liability  to  be  condemned  if  the  plaintiff
proved  his  case,  Gaius  iii.  180,  181 :  iv.  107.  It  differed,  however,  in  its
operation  from  novatio  proper  (novatio  voluntaria),  for  it  left  the  original
obligation  subsisting  naturaliter,  Dig.  12.6. 60.  pr.,  and,  as  a  consequence,
did  not  destroy  accessory  rights,  such  as  guaranties,  hypothecs,  etc,
Dig.  46.  2.  29.  Of  this  process-consumption,  as  it  is  called,  there  are
still  traces  in  the  Corpus  iuris,  but  the  general  rule  under  Justinian  is
that  litis  contestatio  no  longer  extinguishes  the  creditor's  right,  Bk.  iv.
13.  10  inf..  Cod.  3.  I.  13.  2  and  5  ;  3.  10.  i.  pr.  It  must  indeed  have
ceased  to  extinguish  it  ipso  iure  with  the  disappearance  of  indicia  legitima
under  Diocletian,  A.D.  294;  but  now  indeed  it  no  longer  enables  it  to
be  counteracted  ope  exceptionis ;  an  obligatio  is  destroyed,  not  by  the
bringing  of  an  action,  but  only  by  its  adjudication,  so  that  we  cease  to
read  of  the  exceptio  rei  in  iudicium  deductae,  which  is  swallowed  up
in  the  exceptio  rei  iudicatae.  Cod.  8.  41.  28 :  see  on  Bk.  iv.  -13.  5  inf.
Novatio  necessaria  is  also  said  by  Gaius  to  be  produced  by  judgment,
sententia,  res  iudicata;  for  its  effects,  which  do  not  belong  here,  see
Poste's  Gaius,  p.  421.

Among  modes  of  extinction  operating  ipso  iure,  which  are  not  here
noticed  by  Justinian,  are  physical  impossibility  of  performance  arising
ex  post  facto  without  default  of  the  debtor,  Dig.  46.  3.  92  ;  ib.  98.  8  ;  ib.
107 :  cf.  note  on  Tit.  19.  1  supr. ;  and  in  some  cases  death  of  one  of  the
parties  to  the  contract,  as  in  societas  (Tit.  25.  5  supr.)  and  mandatum,
(Tit.  26.  10  supr.) :  cf.  Gaius  iii.  120,  Dig.  4.  8.  32.  3,  and  Bk.  iv.  12.
I  inf.,  which  is  important  for  a  large  class  of  obligations  arising  ex
delicto.  The  operation  of  compensatio  (set-off)  is  a  matter  of  some
litde  difficulty  :  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  30  inf.  Confusio  (p.  290  supr.)  operated
in  this  way  if  the  deceased's  heir  was  the  sole  debtor  or  sole  creditor  to
the  obligation  in  question,  because  one  of  the  prime  requirements  of  an
obligatio,  two  persons,  is  no  longer  satisfied,  Dig.  46.  3.  95.  2 ;  but  this
would  be  exemplified  under  Justinian  only  when  the  heres,  being  debtor
or  creditor  of  the  deceased,  did  not  make  an  inventory,  see  p.  292  supr.
Where  the  heir  was  one  of  two  or  more  correal  or  solidary  debtors  or
creditors  of  the  deceased  it  was  otherwise:  see  Dig.  46.  1.  71.  pr.  cited
in  Excursus  VII.  inf.


Tit.  29.]     QUIBUS  MODIS  OBLIGATIO  TOLLITUR,  475

est  et  in  conductione  et  locatione  et  omnibus  contractibus,
qui  ex  consensu  descendunt,  sicut  iam  dictum  est.


Of  modes  of  invalidation  whose  effect  is  produced  only  ope  exceptionis
the  most  common  are  limitation  (6k.  iv.  12.  pr.  and  notes,  inf.),  capitis
deminutio  (note  on  Tit.  10.  3  supr.),  beneficium  competentiae  arising
upon  a  cessio  bonorum  (p.  395  supr.),  and  waiver  or  pactum  de  non
petendo  (Bk.  iv.  13.  3  inf.)  if  absolute,  i.e.  not  binding  for  a  time  only,
or  conferring  rights  upon  the  debtor  only  and  not  upon  his  heir.  An
informal  acceptilatio  was  construed  as  a  pactum  de  non  petendo,  if  the
creditor's  intention  was  really  to  release  the  debtor.  Dig.  2.  14.  27.  9.
The  obligations  involved  in  the  actiones  furti  and  iniuriarum  were
dissolved  ipso  iure  by  agreement  not  to  sue,  Dig.  2. 14.  17.  i.  Transactio
or  compromise,  by  which  two  parties  who  affirm  that  they  each  have
claims  against  the  other  mutually  surrender  somewhat  of  their  alleged
rights  in  order  to  remove  uncertainty  and  narrow  the  issues,  implied
a  pactum  de  non  petendo.  Cod.  2.  4.  17 ;  ib.  24.  The  same  result  ensued
from  compromissum,  an  agreement  to  refer  a  dispute  to  arbitration,
Dig.  4.  8.  13.  I.


EXCURSUS    IV.


ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BONORUM   POSSESSIO.

Serious  speculation  on  this  subject  commenced  about  a  century
since  with  Hugo,  who  held  that  bonorum  possessio  was  in  origin
the  system  applied  in  the  succession  to.  aliens  by  the  praetor  pere-
grinus,  from  whose  edict  it  was  gradually  transferred  to  that  of  his
urban  colleague.  But  this,  though  at  first  sight  an  attractive  hypo-
thesis, seems  untenable  on  account  of  the  tenderness  which  the
praetor  almost  o'stentatiously  showed  for  the  civil  law  and  the
agnatic  conception  of  kinship:  a  gentile  system  of  inheritance
would  more  probably  have  been  based  on  cognation  only.  Niebuhr
connected  bonorum  possessio  with  the  possession  of  ager  publicus
(p.  343  supr.),  with  the  succession  to  which  alone  he  thought  it  was
originally  concerned ;  but  his  view  is  inconsistent  with  the  very  name
bonorum  possessio,  and  has  practically  nothing  in  its  favour.  A
third  theory,  which  originated  in  1837  with  Fabricius,  finds  the  germ
of  the  institution  in  the  judicial  regulation  of  Possession  as  pre-
liminary to  an  hereditatis  petitio,  which  was  tried  in  the  centumviral
court  by  the  procedure  of  sacramentum,  and  of  which  a  prominent
feature  was  the  award  of  possession  pending  the  proceedings  (Gaius
iv.  16,  17).  Such  an  award  would  be  a  provisional  determination  of
the  right  of  inheritance,  and  it  is  suggested  that  it  was  so  often
accepted  by  the  other  litigant  as  substantial  justice  that  the  posses-
sion came  to  be  more  than  interim  possession,  and  tended  more  and
more  to  be  regarded  as  an  independent  and  impregnable  interest.
Such  bonorum  possessio  was  iuris  civilis  adiuvandi  gratia;  but  as
the  praetor's  quasi-legislative  activity  extended  itself  the  forms  iuris
civilis  supplendi  and  corrigendi  gratia  were  gradually  added.  Savigny
and  Huschke  connect  the  praetorian  scheme  of  succession  in  origin
with  the  old  usucapio  pro  herede  (Gaius  ii.  52-56),  of  which,  accord-
ing to  them,  the  praetor  laid  hold  as  the  starting-point  of  his  inno-
vations:   he  gave  the  possession  to   certain   persons  who  (it  was


ORIGIN  &  DEVELOPMENT  OF BONORUM  POSSESS  10,   477

admitted)  had  an  equitable,  though  not  a  legal,  right  to  the  estate,
and  devised,  in  the  interdict  quorum  bonorum,  a  remedy  by  which  they
could  recover  the  deceased's  property  from  other  possessors,  thus
placing  them  in  a  position  to  become  owners  by  usucapion ;  the
practical  assimilation  of  the  bonorum  possessor  to  the  heir,  and  the
introduction  of  the  possessoria  hereditatis  petitio,  being  due  to  the
identification  of  bona  fide  possession  in  most  respects  with  boni-
tarian  ownership.  But  this  hypothesis  fails  to  give  any  explanation
of  the  bonorum  possessio  iuris  civilis  adjuvandi  gratia,  which  is  on  all
hands  regarded  as  the  earliest  form  of  the  praetor's  intervention,  and
seems  in  other  ways  to  harmonise  ill  with  the  general  history  of  the
Roman  law  of  inheritance.

It  would  seem  that  more  light  is  thrown  on  the  solution  of  the
problem  by  a  consideration  of  the  oldest  evidence  which  we  possess
of  the  law  regulating  the  devolution  of  a  deceased  man's  property
on  intestacy.  The  Twelve  Tables  enacted,  *  Si  intestato  moritur,  cui
suus  heres  nee  escit,  adgnatus  proximus  familiam  habeto.  Si  adgna-
tus  nee  escit,  gentiles  familiam  habento/  Here  the  term  '  heres '  is
confined  to  the  deceased  man's  agnatic  descendant :  he  merely
assumes  on  the  ancestor's  death  the  actual  control  of  property  of
which  his  ownership  was  previously  in  a  state  of  suspended  anima-
tion (note,  p.  355  supr.).  The  law  does  not  give  him  the  inheri-
tance ;  it  recognises  it  to  be  his  already.  On  the  other  hand,  the
nearest  agnate  and  the  gentiles  are  not  called  '  heirs '  at  all :  all  that
is  said  is,  in  the  absence  of  sui  heredes,  *  familiam  habento ' :  they
acquire  nothing  ipso  jure,  but  must  take  possession  in  order  to  make
their  title  good,  whereas  it  is  clear  that  the  suus  heres  had  possession
as  heir,  without  the  necessity  of  any  act  on  his  part  \  It  is  a  familiar
rule  that  extranei  heredes  acquired  the  inheritance  only  by  accep-
tance, and  there  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  under  the  earlier  law  such
acceptance  was  required  in  all  cases  to  be  formal  and  solemn
(cretio) ;  the  cretiones  with  which  readers  of  Gaius  are  acquainted
seem  to  have  been  inserted  in  the  will  only  for  the  purpose  of  com-
pelling the  instituted  heir  to  accept  within  a  reasonable  interval*.
The  formula  of  acceptance  was  '  adeo  cernoque ' :  it  had  to  be
uttered  before  witnesses  in  the  domicile  of  the  deceased*,  and


'  Hence  when  there  was  a  suus  heres  in  existence  nsucapio  Incrativa  ^as  ipso
iure  excluded ;  the  inheritance  was  already  possessed.

'  Thus  Ulpian  (Reg.  22.  37)  defines  cretio  as  'certonim  diernm  spatium  quod
datur  instituto  heredi  ad  deliberandum,  ntmm  ezpediat  ei  adire  hereditatem  necne.'

'  Voigt,  XII  Tafeln,  ii.  p.  373,  note  la.


478  EXCURSUS  IV.

therefore  clearly  involved  a  physical  taking  possession  of  the  family
estate  or  other  property.

In  the  law  of  Attica  similar  principles  prevailed,  but  the  extranei
heredes  could  obtain  possession  of  the  inheritance  only  by  appli-
cation made  to  and  granted  by  the  archon  '.  It  is  most  interesting
to  observe  that  very  frequently  the  circumstances  of  a  Roman  suc-
cession showed  the  advantages  of  the  Attic  rule,  and  suggested  the
adoption  of  a  similar  practice.  In  the  Greek  system,  if  there  was
a  suus  heres,  his  right  was  indisputable^  and  he  was  at  once  in
possession  of  the  inheritance,  for  in  that  case  the  father  could  not
make  a  will.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  originally  the  Roman
rule  was  the  same,  at  any  rate  in  respect  of  family  property  (familia);
the  Twelve  Tables  authorised  the  bequest  only  of  the  individual
property  or  pecunia.  But  if  there  was  no  suus  heres,  there  could  well
be  a  question  as  to  who  was  entitled  to  succeed  the  deceased :  for
there  might  be  a  will,  and  between  the  heir  named  in  the  will,  and
those  who  would  take  on  intestacy  a  keen  controversy  might  easily
arise ;  and  it  was  for  the  avoidance  or  settlement  of  such  disputes
that  the  Attic  law  laid  down  the  rule  that  the  extraneous  heirs  could
obtain  no  valid  possession  save  from  a  magisterial  award.  It  seems
more  than  probable  that  the  praetorian  bonorum  possessio  was
designed  to  meet  a  similar  difficulty.  The  Edict  of  Cicero's  time
appears  to  have  run  as  follows :  Si  de  hereditate  ambigitur  et
tabulae  testamenti  obsignatae  non  minus  multis  sign  is  quam  e  lege
oportet  ad  me  proferentur,  secundum  tabulas  testamenti  potissimum
possessionem  dabo.  si  tabulae  testamenti  non  proferentur,  tum  uti
quemque  potissimum  heredem  esse  oporteret,  si  is  intestatus  mortuus
esset,  ita  secundum  eum  possessionem  dabo.  cum  hereditatis  sine
testamento  aut  sine  lege  petetur  possessio,  si  qua  mihi  iusta  causa
videbitur  esse,  possessionem  dabo '.  Where,  in  other  words,  there
was  no  suus  heres  (si  de  hereditate  ambigitur),  but  a  dispute  arose
between  extraneous  heirs  of  different  classes,  the  actual  possession
could  not  be  obtained  by  a  cretio,  but  only  by  magisterial  decree :
and  the  origin  of  the  praetorian  system  is  found  in  a  desire  to  assist
the  extraneus  heres  in  getting  actual  possession  of  the  universitas  as
against  wrongful  possessors :  '  hereditatis  autem  bonorumve  possessio,
ut  Labeo  scribit,  non  uti  rerum  possessio  accipienda  est :  est  enim

^  Leist,  Graco-ilalische  Kechtsgeschichte,  pp.  8i  sqq. :  F.  Schulin,  Das  grie-
chische  Testament,  etc.  1882.

'  Leist,  Der  romische  Erbrechtbesitz  in  seiner  nrspriinglichen  Gestalt,  1870,
i.  p.  76.


ORIGIN  &  DEVELOPMENT  OF  BONORUM  POSSESSIO.  479

iuris  magis  quam  corporis  possessio '  (Ulpian  in  Dig.  37.  i.  3.  z).   In
its  earliest  form  it  is  iuris  civilis  adiuvandi  gratia.

The  development  of  the  system  iuris  civilis  supplendi  gratia  is
probably  connected  with  other  peculiarities  of  the  old  civil  law.  If
the  nearest  agnate  would  not  take  the  inheritance,  it  is  well  known
that  the  more  remote  members  of  the  same  class  had  no  right  to  it,
nor,  according  to  the  Twelve  Tables,  had  the  gens  :  si  adgnatus  nee
escit^  gentiles  familiam  habento.  It  is  conjectured  that  the  same
rule  applied  if  the  testamentary  heir  made  no  aditio  :  the  inheritance
remained  *  iacens.'  No  doubt  here  the  usucapio  pro  herede  opened
a  door  for  the  admission  of  the  deceased  man's  kinsmen,  but  its
operation  was  arbitrary,  and  perhaps  often  benefited  persons  who  had
no  real  title  whatever.  Hence  there  is  much  to  be  said  for  the
hypothesis  that  it  was  to  meet  this  case  that  (after  dealing  with  the
will)  the  edict  continued  'si  tabulae  testamenti  non  proferentur,  turn
uti  quemque  potissimum  heredem  esse  oporteret,  si  is  intestatus
mortuus  esset,  ita  secundum  eum  possessionem  dabo.'  Connected
with  this  doubtless  was  the  fixing  of  a  time  within  which  application
for  the  bonorum  possessio  must  be  made,  and  (more  important  still)
the  arrangement  of  possible  successors  in  classes  according  to  order
of  priority :  *  successorium  edictum  idcirco  propositum  est,  ne  bona
hereditaria  vacua  sine  domino  diutius  iacerent '  (Ulpian  in  Dig.  38. 9.
I.  pr.).  If  the  testamentary  heir  did  not  apply  for  a  grant  of  posses-
sion within  the  prescribed  interval,  those  entitled  on  intestacy  might
obtain  it,  though  their  grant  would  be  invalidated  by  his  subsequent
cretio  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  will,  for  that  would  make
him  heir :  but  supposing  no  cretio  were  made,  the  bonorum  possessor
would  become  heir  by  the  operation  of  usucapion.  It  is  in  this
form  that  we  get  the  first  example  of  bonorum  possessio  iuris  civilis
supplendi  gratia.  Even  however  as  early  as  the  time  of  Cicero  the
edict  concluded  with  a  general  clause  by  which  the  praetor  declared
his  intention  of  granting  possession  at  his  discretion  to  persons  who
had  no  civil  title  whatever,  and  Gaius  (iii.  33 )  tells  us  that  he  made
free  use  of  his  power  :  '  adhuc  alios  etiam  complures  gradus  facit  in
bonorum  possessionibus  dandis,  dum  id  agit,  ne  quis  sine  successione
moriatur.'  Some  forms  of  the  institution  were  due  to  the  decay  of
principles  of  the  old  civil  law.  Thus,  when  the  disinherison  of  sui
heredes  was  once  allowed,  the  notion  that  such  heirs  were  ipso  iure
in  possession  of  the  inheritance  became  obscured,  and  bonorum
possessio  unde  liberi  made  its  appearance :  and  similarly  the  doctrine
that  by  formal  cretio  the  extraneous  heir  acquired  possession  of  the


48o  EXCURSUS  IV.

inheritance  slowly  lost  ground,  so  that  possession  secundum  tabulas
became  constantly  more  common.  By  some  such  gradual  growth
the  praetorian  reforms  at  length  assumed  the  character  of  an  in-
dependent scheme  of  inheritance,  which  its  authors  did  not  hesitate
eventually  to  prefer  to  the  civil  law  where  justice  seemed  to  re-
quire it,  and  with  the  bonorum  possessio  iuris  civilis  corrigendi
gratia,  which  in  Cicero's  day  was  quite  unknown,  the  system  was
complete  ^


*  Upon  the  whole  subject  see  Sohm,  Inslitutionen,  $  97,  pp.  423-436  in  the
English  translation  by  Ledlie.


EXCURSUS  V.

THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  OBLIGATIONS.

The  term  obligatio  properly  indicates  a  legal  relation  between  two
definite  persons,  whereby  the  one  (creditor)  is  entitled  to  a  certain
act  or  forbearance  on  the  part  of  the  other ;  *  creditonim  appel-
latione  non  hi  tantum  accipiuntur,  qui  pecuniam  crediderunt,  sed
omnes  quibus  ex  qualibet  causa  debetur :  ut  si  quis  cui  ex  empto
vel  ex  locato  vel  ex  ullo  alio  debetur.  Sed  etsi  ex  delicto  debeatur,
mihi  videtur  posse  creditoris  loco  accipi '  Dig.  50.  16.  11  and
12.  The  contrast  between  it  and  the  relation  existing  in  the  case
of  ownership,  possession,  or  other  legal  rights,  is  well  marked
by  Paulus  in  Dig.  44.  7.  3.  pr.  *  obligationum  substantia  non  in  eo
consistit,  ut  aliquod  corpus  nostrum,  aut  servitutem  nostram  faciat,
sed  ut  alium  nobis  obstringat  ad  dandum  aliquid,  vel  faciendum,
vel  praestandum,'  with  which  may  be  compared  Bk.  iv.  6.  i  inf.
'  namque  agit  unusquisque  aut  cum  eo,  qui  ei  obligatus  est .  .  .  quo
casu  proditae  sunt  actiones  in  personam  . . .  aut  cum  eo  agit  qui  nuUo
iure  ei  obligatus  est,  movet  tamen  alicui  de  aliqua  re  controversiani,
quo  casu  proditae  actiones  in  rem  sunt'  No  better  explanation  of
this  contrast  can  be  found  than  Austin's  exposition  of  the  difference
between  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  personam,  the  merit  of  which,
however,  is  marred  by  his  use  of  the  term  obligation  to  denote
the  duty  corresponding  to  rights  of  the  former  as  well  as  of  the
latter  class.

But  though  this  is  the  proper  and  normal  meaning  of  the  term,
obligatio  is  sometimes  used  in  other  senses,  and  more  especially  to
express  one  or  other  limb  of  the  relation  in  contradistinction  to  the
other ;  thus,  it  signifies  the  right  of  the  creditor  only  in  the  common
phrase  adquirere  obligationem  (Bk.  iii.  28,  Dig.  45.  i.  126,  2 ;  23.  3.
46.  pr. :  cf.  Bk.  ii.  2.  2  supr.),  and  the  duty  of  the  debtor  only  in  Dig.

12.  I.  36;  46.  3.  95.  3,  as  well  as  in  the  definition  given  in  Bk.  iii.

13.  pr.  supr.    Sometimes  it  denotes  specifically  the  act  or  event  from
which  the  relation  arises,  as  in  Cod.  11.  47.  22.  2,  as  well  as  in  the

•

I  1


482  EXCURSUS  V.

expressions  verbonim  obligatio,  litteraram  obligatio,  etc.  Again,
though  only  a  person  can  properly  be  *  obligatus,'  objects  which  are
pledged  are  occasionally  spoken  of  by  analogy  as  subject  to  an
obligation,  e.  g.  Bk.  iii.  27.  2  supr.,  Dig.  20.  6. 1 1 :  cf.  2.  14.  52.  2  ;  13.
7.  27  :  and  lastly,  in  Cod.  4.  30.  7,  the  term  bears  the  meaning  of
a  bond  or  document  attesting  an  obligation.

The  earliest  Roman  conception  of  obligation  is  exemplified  by
the  condition  of  the  debtor  under  the  form  of  contract  known  as
nexum.  His  person  was  subjected  to  the  will  of  the  creditor,  and
unless  he  duly  performed  what  he  had  undertaken  his  creditor  took
possession  of  him,  and  might  even  take  his  life  or  sell  him  into
foreign  slavery.  But  the  lex  Poetelia  forbade  the  body  to  be  taken
in  execution,  save  where  a  judgment  debt  remained  unsatisfied,  and
the  idea  of  obligation  in  the  later  Roman  jurisprudence  is  rather  the
partial  subjection,  in  law,  of  one  person's  will  to  that  of  another ;
the  partial  limitation  of  the  debtor's  freedom  of  action  in  favour  of  the
creditor*.  If  I  engage  to  buy  1000/.  Consols,  I  am  no  longer  at
liberty  to  buy  railway  stock  with  the  same  money :  I  must  take  the
Consols,  or  (which  comes  to  the  same  thing)  I  must  pay  damages :
*  debitor  intellegitur  is,  a  quo  invito  pecunia  exigi  potest'  Dig.  50.  16.
108  ;  the  prominent  conception  is  that  expressed  in  the  '  necessitate
adstringimur '  of  the  definition  of  obligation  in  the  Institutes.  As
Savigny  remarks,  the  relation  of  obligation  to  personal  freedom
resembles  that  of  servitude  to  dominium :  it  is,  as  it  were,  so  much
deducted  from  the  ideal  whole.  But,  as  he  also  points  out,  the
restriction  must  be  partial  only ;  if  a  man's  freedom  is  not  merely
curtailed  in  favour  of  another,  but  absolutely  resigned,  this  is  not
obligation,  but  slavery.

The  object  or  content  of  an  obligation  is  an  act  or  forbearance  ;
the  debtor  is  bound  either  to  do  or  not  to  do.  The  nature  of  this
act  or  forbearance  requires  some  elucidation.

(i)  The  current  Roman  classification  of  the  possible  objects  of
obligation  is  that  suggested  by  the  passage  of  Paulus  cited  above,
into  dare,  facere,  and  praestare :  cf.  Gaius  iv.  2  '  in  personam  actio
est .  . .  cum  intendimus  dare,  facere,  praestare  oportere.'  But  the
precise  meaning  of  these  terms,  especially  of  the  two  latter,  is  so

^  '  Before  the  lex  Poetelia  perfonnance  of  what  was  due  was  merely  the  price
paid  for  discharge  from  one's  bonds:  the  true  right  of  the  creditor  appeared
simply  as  a  ius  in  corpore:  but  after  that  statute  the  obligation  acquired  an
independent  existence,  and  the  person  of  the  debtor  became  merely  a  security
for  its  performance.'    (Kuntze,  Excurse,  p.  525.)


THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  OBLIGATIONS.      483

much  a  matter  of  dispute  that  it  appears  hardly  worth  while  to  con-
sider the  various  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  attach  a  deter-
minate signification  to  each  of  them.  It  is  obvious  that  this  is  not
a  scientific  classification,  and  it  originated,  in  point  of  fact,  in  the
technicalities  of  pleading  under  the  formulary  system,  apart  from
which  it  is  not  easy  to  understand:  under  Justinian  it  is  a  mere
valueless  survival  of  an  older  and  obsolete  procedure.

(2)  The  act  or  forbearance  must  have  an  appreciable  money  value
in  relation  to  the  creditor,  '  ea  enim  in  obligatione  consistere,  quae
pecunia  lui  praestarique  possunt '  Dig.  40.  7.  9.  2.  This  rule  origi-
nated in  the  fact  that  under  the  formulary  procedure  the  remedy  in
a  personal  action  was  always  damages ;  there  was  no  specific  per-
formance, and  if,  on  the  debtor's  refusal  to  do  that  to  which  he  was
bound,  the  creditor's  only  means  of  procuring  satisfaction  was  to
obtain  a  pecuniary  condemnation,  an  obligation  which  could  not  be
represented  in  a  money  value  was  clearly  no  obligation  at  all.  There
are  writers,  however,  who  deny  the  application  of  this  principle  under
Justinian,  on  the  ground  that  its  original  reason  had  disappeared
along  with  the  introduction  of  specific  performance,  but  the  better
opinion  would  seem  to  be,  that  specific  performance  had  never  been
introduced  at  all  j  others  distinguish  between  obligations  stn'cti  iuris
and  bonae  fidei  (Bk.  iv.  6.  28  inf.),  holding  that  in  the  latter  regard
was  paid  to  the  feelings  no  less  than  to  the  purse  of  the  creditor,
while  in  the  former  the  purse  alone  was  considered.

(3)  The  object  of  the  obligation  must  be  possible  of  performance
both  in  nature  and  by  law  (see  Bk.  iii.  19.  i  and  notes),  e.  g.  no  duty
would  arise  from  a  promise  to  convey  a  res  extra  commercium ;  but
one  can  be  validly  bound  to  perform  an  act  at  present  impossible
in  the  event  of  its  becoming  possible  (Dig.  45.  i.  98.  pr.) ;  further,
it  must  not  be  unlawful,  Dig.  45.  i.  26,  ib.  27.  pr.

(4)  The  act  or  forbearance  must  be  sufficiently  definite,  or  at
least  capable  of  being  rendered  so ;  e.  g.  one  cannot  be  bound  to  do
just  so  much  as  and  no  more  than  one  pleases.  Dig.  45.  i.  94,  95,
ib.  115.  pr.

The  classification  of  obligations  according  to  the  mode  in  which
they  originate  meets  us  in  Bk.  iii.  13.  2,  and  is  spoken  of  in  the
notes  to  that  passage ;  another  division,  of  great  prominence  in
Roman  law,  requires  some  explanation.  An  obligation  is  none  the
less  an  obligation  merely  because  the  creditor  is  unable  to  enforce  it
by  action ;  there  are  other  modes  in  which  the  duty  may  be  dis-
charged besides  this,  so  that  the  relation  fails  only  in  one  of  its  most

Ii2


484  EXCURSUS  V.

ordinary  incidents.  Actionability  is  only  one  of  such  usual  incidents,
though  perhaps  the  most  characteristic  of  all,  and  an  obligation  does
not  lose  its  legal  character  by  reason  of  its  absence  only.  Such
non-actionable  obligations  are  said  to  be  '  natural/  in  contrast  with
those  which  are  *  civil,'  i.e.  enforceable  by  action;  in  Dig.  46.  3.
95.  4,  the  bond  is  called  vinculum  aequitatis,  as  being  imposed
by  equity,  though  the  precise  relation  of  the  *  nature '  implied  in
a  natural  obligation,  and  the  nature  whose  law  is  identified  by  the
jurists  with  equity  and  the  ius  gentium,  is  somewhat  obscure.  That
the  jural  recognition  of  such  obligations  originated  in  the  ius  gentium
seems  to  be  affirmed  in  Dig.  50.  17.  84.  i  'is  natura  debet,  quem
iure  gentium  dare  oportet,  cuius  fidem  secuti  sumus,'  though  by  some
writers  it  is  ascribed  to  natural  law  in  a  philosophical  rather  than
a  legal  sense.

Some  obligations  are  natural  ab  initio ;  in  other  words,  an  act  or
event  produces  a  natural  obligation,  which  under  other  circumstances
would  have  been  civil :  there  is  a  reason  why  in  the  particular  case
the  creditor  is  unable  to  sue.  Two  such  reasons  have  a  very
extensive  operation,  viz. —

(i)  Insufficiency  of  form  in  contracts.  We  shall  see  that  in  Roman
law  agreements  were  actionable  only  if  they  were  clothed  in  a  definite
form,  or  belonged  to  one  or  other  of  certain  classes  specially  favoured ;
exactly  as  in  English  law  no  promise  is  legally  binding  unless  made
either  under  seal  or  for  valuable  consideration.  Agreements  which
neither  belonged  to  the  favoured  classes,  nor  were  expressed  in  the
proper  form,  were  nuda  pacta,  and  unactionable,  although  (according
to  Savigny  and  many  other  writers)  they  gave  rise  to  a  natural  obliga-
tion enforceable  in  other  ways.  This  is  inferred  in  particular  from
Dig.  2.  14.  7.  4  '  igitur  nuda  pactio  obligationem  non  parit,  sed  parit
exceptionem,'  ib.  i.  pr.  *huius  edicti  aequitas  naturalis  est:  quid
enim  tam  congruum  fidei  humanae,  quam  ea,  quae  inter  eos  placu-
erunt,  servari,'  Dig.  46.  3.  5.  2  * . . .  puta,  quaedam  earum  [usurarum]
ex  stipulatione,  quaedam  ex  pacto  naturaliter  debebantur :  . . .  et  sicut
ex  pacti  conventione  datae  repeti  non  possunt ; '  cf.  Dig.  ib.  95.  4.
On  the  other  hand,  the  passage  last  cited  is  the  only  one  in  which  the
effect  of  producing  natural  obligation  is  directly  attributed  to  a  mere
pact ;  and  on  account  of  this  insufficiency  of  evidence  there  are  many
who  hold  that  Savigny  is  not  justified  in  affirming  natural  obligation
as  an  incident  of  nuda  pacta  in  general.  Most  directly  they  are  sup-
ported by  Dig.  45.  I.  I.  2  *si  quis  ita  interroget,  dabis?  responderit,
quidni  ?  et  is  utique  in  ea  causa  est,  ut  obligetur.     Contra  si  sine


THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  OBLIGATIONS.      485

verbis  adnuisset,  non  tantum  autem  civiliter,  sed  nee  naturaliter  obli-
gatur,  qui  ita  adnuit :  et  ideo  recta  dictum  est,  non  obligari  pro  eo
nee  fideiussorem  quidem.'

(2)  A  person's  defective  capacity  of  right  or  disposition,  or  the
peculiar  relation  of  the  parties.  Thus,  between  pater  and  filius-
famih'as,  and  between  master  and  slave,  there  could  be  natural
obligation  only,  and  even  to  an  extranea  persona  a  slave  could  not
be  bound  civiliter.  The  SC.  Macedonianum  (Bk.  iv.  7.  7  and  notes
inf )  affords  another  example :  a  disputed  case  is  that  of  contracts
made  by  a  pupillus  without  his  guardian's  auctoritas :  see  on  Bk.  i.
21.  pr.  supr.

Sometimes,  moreover,  an  obligation  which  was  originally  civilis
ceased  to  be  actionable,  and  became  naturalis.  (a)  In  some  cases  the
praetor,  on  principles  of  equity,  disregarded  strict  civil  law  rules  so  far
as  to  permit  the  survival,  in  a  '  natural '  form,  of  an  obligation  which
had  iure  civili  ceased  altogether  to  exist,  e.  g.  where  a  creditor  became
heir  to  his  debtor,  and  in  capitis  deminutio,  '  hi  qui  capite  minuuntur,
ex  his  causis,  quae  capitis  deminutionem  praecesserunt,  manent  obli-
gati  naturaliter'  Dig.  4.  5.  2.  2 ;  this,  however,  ceased  to  be  of  im-
portance when  in  integrum  restitutio  of  the  creditors  had  become
usual  under  such  circumstances,  see  p.  390  supr.  {p)  Other  illustra-
tions are  supplied  by  the  law  of  procedure :  for  example,  an  obligation
continued  to  exist  as  naturalis  after  it  had  ceased  to  be  actionable
through  either  the  rules  for  the  limitation  of  actions,  or  the  opera-
tion of  litis  contestatio  (Gaius  iii.  180)  or  res  iudicata.  Dig.  12.  6.  60.
pr. ;  46.  2.  29 ;  Cod.  8.  41.  28.

The  legal  effects  of  natural  obligation  have  as  yet  been  defined
only  negatively;  it  did  not  entitle  the  creditor  to  sue.  As  to  its
positive  effects,  no  general  rule  can  be  laid  down  for  all  cases  :  they
must  be  determined  for  each  case  individually,  for  the  creditor's  right,
in  one  instance,  may  have  a  greater  or  less  orbit  than  in  another ;
in  other  words,  apart  from  the  right  of  action,  a  natural  obligation
may  possibly  entitle  him  to  all  or  any  of  the  rights  which  he  would
have  were  the  debtor  bound  civiliter,  or  possess  all  or  any  of  the
following  properties :

(i)  It  excludes  condictio  indebiti  (note  on  Bk.  iii.  14.  i),  i.e.  if
money  is  owed  naturaliter  only,  and  is  paid,  even  by  mistake,  it
cannot  be  recovered  on  the  ground  that  it  is  not  due:  'naturales
obhgationes  non  eo  solo  aestimantur,  si  actio  aliqua  earum  nomine
competit,  varum  etiam  cum  soluta  pecunia  repeti  non  potest '  Dig.
46.  I.  16.  4«


486  EXCURSUS  V.

(2)  It  can  be  set  ofT  against  an  actionable  claim  of  the  debtor  on
the  creditor,  e.  g.  if  A  owes  B  10/.  naturaliter,  and  B  owes  A  20/.
civiliter,  B  on  being  sued  by  A  can  set  the  10/.  off  against  the  20/.,
though  he  cannot  directly  sue  for  it  himself:  'etiam  quod  natura
debetur  venit  in  compensationem  *  Dig.  16.  2.  6 ;  cf.  Bk.  iv.
6.  39  inf.

(3)  It  forms  a  sufficient  basis  for  those  other  rights  which  can  only
come  into  existence  under  the  condition  that  there  is  already  an
actual  obligation  in  esse,  viz.  pledge.  Dig.  20.  i.  5  ;  guarantee  (*at  ne
illud  quidem  interest,  utrum  civilis  an  naturalis  sit  obligatio  cui  adici-
atur  fideiussor '  Bk.  iii.  20.  i ;  so  too,  with  constitutum,  for  which  see
on  Bk.  iii.  20.  9),  and  novation  (Bk.  iii.  29.  3,  Dig.  39.  5.  19.  4) ;  by
constitutum  a  natural  can  be  converted  into  a  civil  obligation  by
a  mere  formless  second  promise  by  the  debtor.  Dig.  13.  5.  i.  7.

(4)  Deductio  de  peculio.  Contracts  between  a  paterfamilias  and
his  filius,  or  between  a  master  and  his  slave,  produced  natural  obliga-
tions only,  which,  if  the  inferior  had  a  peculium,  discharged  them-
selves by  their  operation  on  the  latter,  which  was  automatically
diminished  by  the  deduction  of  what  he  owed  the  superior.  Dig.  15.
I.  9.  2-4.

In  Bk.  iii.  29  there  is  a  discussion  of  the  modes  in  which  obliga-
tions could  be  extinguished :  but  this  seems  the  most  convenient
place  for  briefly  describing  those  in  which  they  could  be  trans-
ferred.    To   this   question  there  are  two   sides ;   either  the  right
may  be  transferred,  or  the  liability.     Transference  of  the  liability,
if  by  that  we  understand  a  transaction  which  entirely  releases  the
person  who  has  hitherto  been  liable,  and  imposes  the  debt  on  some
one  else,  could  (apart  from  universal  succession)  be  effected  only  by
novatio  (Bk.  iii.  29.  3),  which,  when  employed  for  this  specific  pur-
pose, was  called  expromissio,  or  by  an  act  of  a  similar  character,
defensio.     Transference  of  the  right  also  (except  in  cases  of  uni-
versal succession)  could  at  first  be  effected  only  by  novatio.     This,
however,  is  not  assignment,  but  substituted  agreement ;  the  assent
and  co-operation  of  the  debtor  is  required,  and  the  right  does  not
pass  from  the  person  entitled  to  some  one  else,  but  is  cancelled  on
condition  of  a  new  one  being  created  in  favour  of  the  latter :  see
Gaius   ii.    38.     The  Romans,  in    fact,  struggled,   with  a  tenacity
equalled  only  by  that  of  the  English  Common  Law,  against  the
assignment  of  what  we  call  choses  in  action,  i.  e.  rights  in  personam ;
but  while  the  reason  alleged  for  his  resistance  by  the  English  judge
was  the  evil  of  *  maintenance,'  the  Romans,  with  more  lawyer-hke


THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  OBLIGATIONS.      487

instinct,  based  their  opposition  on  the  character  of  an  obh'gation  as
an  essentially  personal  relation,  the  parties  to  which  could  not  be
changed  without  destroying  its  existence '.

A  rude  species  of  assignment  became  possible  after  the  introduc-
tion of  the  formulary  procedure,  under  which  plaintiffs  were  generally
permitted  to  conduct  their  suits  through  agents  (Gaius  iv.  82).  If
A,  creditor  against  B,  debtor,  wished  to  assign  his  right  to  C,  he
could  make  the  latter  his  agent,  procurator  (in  rem  suam)  ;  C  thereby
became  entitled  to  accept  performance  from  B,  or  in  default  to
sue  him  in  A's  name,  the  condemnation  being  expressed  in  his
own  (Gaius  iv.  86,  87).  The  result,  in  the  Roman  view,  was  no
transference  of  the  obligation,  for  A  remained  the  true  and  only
creditor  ;  all  that  passed  was  the  right  of  action,  or  rather  the  capacity
to  exercise  another's  right  of  action,  and  all  that  C  asserted  or
realized  was  the  claim  of  another  person.  This  cessio  nominum
or  actionum,  as  it  was  called,  though  it  dispensed  with  the  necessity
of  the  debtor's  assent,  was  not  only  rude,  but  faulty,  especially  if
made  for  valuable  consideration.  The  appointment  of  C,  as  A's
procurator,  was  governed  by  the  usual  rules  of  mandatum,  and  con-
sequently became  void  (Bk.  iii.  26.  9  and  10)  if  before  action  brought
either  assignor  or  assignee  died,  or  if  the  former  revoked  his  com-
mission; there  was  no  legal  relation  between  assignee  and  debtor
until  litis  contestatio  had  been  reached  in  proceedings  taken  by  the
former.  At  length  this  was  obviated  by  the  assignee's  being  allowed
to  sue,  not  in  the  assignor's  name,  but  in  his  own  by  actio  utilis
(Ulpian  in  Dig.  3.  3.  55,  Cod.  4.  15.  5;  6.  37.  18),  which  he  was
enabled  by  gradual  changes  to  do  not  only  where  he  had  been
expressly  appointed  agent,  but  also  in  cases  of  a  mere  alienatory  dis-
position (Cod.  4.  10.  2,  Dig.  2.  14.  16.  pr.),  and  even  where  strictly
speaking  the  assignment  would  have  been  avoided  by  death  or  revo-
cation (Dig.  3.  3.  55,  Cod.  4.  10.  I ;  8.  54.  33).  It  is  disputed
whether  the  effect  of  the  change  was  to  make  the  assignee  sole
creditor,  or  whether,  in  relation  to  the  debtor,  he  did  not  still
legally  continue  a  mere  agent,  enforcing  by  action  in  his  own  name
the  right  of  another;  in  other  words,  whether  a  genuine  assign-
ment, by  which  the  assignee  simply  and  actually  stepped  into  the
shoes  of  his  assignor,  who  simultaneously  dropped  altogether  out
of  the  matter,  was  recognised  at  any  time  in  Roman  law.  This,
however,  is  too  minute  and  complicated  a  question  to  be  entered
upon.

^  Cf.  Mr.  O.  W.  Holmes*  Common  Law,  pp.  a39,  341.


488  EXCURSUS  V.

For  such  assignment  no  form  was  prescribed.  It  could  be  effected
(i)  by  any  expression  of  intention,  unless  it  was  of  such  a  legal
character  as  to  be  invalid  if  not  accompanied  by  certain  solemnities
(e.g.  donatio,  p.  239  supr.) ;  (2)  by  judicial  sentence,  e.g.  in  an  actio
familiae  erciscundae.  Dig.  10.  2.  3.  If  a  defendant  were  ordered  to
transfer  a  chose  in  action,  the  judge  might  add  that  unless  the  order
were  obeyed  the  assignment  should  be  taken  to  have  actually  been
made;  (3)  in  pursuance  of  a  general  rule  of  law  (cessio  legis),  e.g.
a  person  who  procures  the  rescission  of  a  will  by  querella  inofficiosi
can  recover  legacies  paid  by  the  testamentary  heir.  Dig.  5.  2.  8.  16 ;
cf.  19.  I.  13.  25.

The  following  rules  of  assignment  are  deserving  of  notice,  if  only  for
the  close  parallelism  between  some  of  them  and  those  of  English  law:

(i)  Until  the  debtor  has  received  notice  of  the  assignment,  he  is  at
liberty  to  treat  the  assignor  as  his  true  creditor ;  thus  he  is  released
by  payment  to  him  ('  ille,  cuius  nomen  tibi  pignori  datum  est,  nisi
ei  cui  debuit  solvit  nondum  certior  a  te  de  obligatione  tua  factus,
utilibus  actionibus  satis  tibi  facere  compelletur,  quatenus  tamen  ipse
debet'  Cod.  8.  17.  4),  and  is  not  prejudiced  if  (before  notice)  he
allows  the  creditor  to  set  the  claim  off  against  a  converse  one  of  his
own.  Dig.  18. 4.  23. 1.  Opinions  differ  as  to  the  necessity  of  express
notice  by  the  assignee  himself.  Many  writers  add  that  successive  and
competing  assignees  rank,  as  against  the  debtor,  in  the  order,  not  of
the  assignments,  but  of  the  notice ;  but  this  is  denied  by  others^  and
seems  to  be  unsupported  by  textual  authority.

(2)  After  notice  the  debtor  is  no  longer  entitled  to  treat  the
assignor  in  any  way  as  his  creditor^  and,  if  sued  by  him,  is  protected
by  exceptio :  Dig.  2.  14.  16.  pr.

(3)  The  right  passes  to  the  assignee  with  all  the  defects  and  all  the
advantages  incident  to  it  while  vested  in  the  original  creditor.  So
far  as  the  former  are  concerned,  this  may  be  expressed  by  saying  that
the  assignment  takes  place  '  subject  to  equities,'  Dig.  18.  4.  5,  i.e.  the
assignee  can  ordinarily  be  met  by  the  same  defences  as  might  have
been  uiged  against  the  original  creditor  at  any  moment  before  notice
of  the  assignment  was  received,  except  such  as  are  purely  personal
(e.g.  the  exceptio  pacti  de  non  petendo,  if  available  only  against  the
releasor).  Among  the  advantages  incident  to  the  chose  in  action
which  pass  with  it  are  rights  of  security,  both  real  and  personal,  and
unsatisfied  claims  to  interest ;  the  assignee  may  deal  with  it  as  if  he
himself  had  been  creditor  ab  initio :  e.  g.  he  may  assign  it  afresh,
release  it,  or  use  it  as  a  set-off.


THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  OBLIGATIONS.      489

(4)  In  respect  of  certain  assignments  for  valuable  consideration,
there  is  an  important  enactment  of  Anastasius  (lex  Anastasiana,  Cod.
4.  35.  22),  to  the  effect  that  no  purchaser  of  a  chose  in  action  should
be  able  to  recover  more  from  the  debtor  than  what  he  had  paid  him>
self,  with  ordinary  interest,  even  though  it  was  alleged  that  the
transaction  was  in  part  a  gift.  So  far  as  the  actual  debt  exceeded
the  purchase  money,  it  was  ipso  facto  cancelled.

The  Romans  did  not  carry  their  theory  of  assignment  beyond  the
actio  utilis ;  for  although  it  is  true  that  the  assignee's  right  to  sue  was
often,  and  perhaps  usually,  attested  by  a  cautio  or  bond  of  the  debtor,
transferred  by  the  assignor  for  evidentiary  purposes,  yet  this  cautio
was  no  embodiment  of  the  right  after  the  fashion  of  negotiable  in-
struments in  modern  law,  which  are  exempt  from  the  rules  relating  to
notice  and  equities.  As  Mr.  Poste  remarks  (Gaius  p.  407),  Hhe  com-
plete transferability  of  obligations  was  unknown  to  jurisprudence
until  modern  legislation  gave  validity  to  contracts  with  an  incerta
persona,  i.e.  with  a  person  unascertained  except  as  a  member  of
a  class ;  in  other  words,  to  papers  payable  to  the  holder  or  bearer.'
The  nearest  approach  to  be  found  in  Roman  law  to  this  modern
refinement  of  transferability  is  the  imposition  of  an  obligation  on
the  successive  holders  for  the  time  being  of  a  parcel  of  land :  '  im-
peratores  Antonius  et  Verus  rescripserunt,  in  vectigalibus  ipsa
praedia,  non  personas  conveniri,  et  ideo  possessores  etiam  praeteriti
temporis  vectigal  solvere  debere,  eoque  exemplo  actionem,  si  igno-
verint,  habituros '  (i.  e.  against  their  predecessors).


EXCURSUS  VI.


DOLUS,  CULPA,  AND  CASUS.

A  PARTY  to  an  obligation,  whether  it  arise  ex  contractu  or  quasi
ex  contractu,  may  commit  a  breach  of  duty,  express  or  implied,
either  intentionally  or  unintentionally.  Deliberate  breach  (dolus)
always  entailed  liability — dolus  semper  praestatur — which  could  not
be  evaded  even  by  an  explicit  agreement  to  the  contrary :  *  Celsus
putat  non  valere,  si  convenerit,  ne  dolus  praestetur :  hoc  enim  bonae
fidei  iudicio  contrarium  est :  et  ita  utimur*  Dig.  50.  17.  23  :  cf.  Dig.
2.  14.  27.  3.  Certain  unintentional  breaches  were  treated  in  the  same
manner,  whether  consisting  in  acts  of  commission  or  of  omission :
viz.  those  which  arose  from  want  of  ordinary  care,  from  a  careless-
ness so  excessive  that  no  ordinary  man  would  have  been  guilty  of  it :
this  is  called  culpa  lata,  and  for  it,  even  in  contractual  and  quasi-
contractual  relations,  one  is  always  answerable  no  less  than  for  dolus,
or  deliberate  and  intentional  breach  :  '  lata  culpa  est  nimia  negli-
gentia,  id  est,  non  intellegere  quod  omnes  intellegunt'  Dig.  50.  16.
213.  2  :  ib.  223.  pr.,  'lata  culpa  plane  dolo  comparabitur '  Dig.  11.
6.  I.  I,  *prope  dolum  est'  Dig.  17.  i.  29.  pr.,  *dolum  repraesentat '
Dig.  47.  4.  I.  2,  'dolus  est'  Dig.  50.  16.  226.

But  if  a  man's  negligence  or  culpa  is  not  of  this  extreme  degree,
the  question  whether  he  is  answerable  for  it  is  determined  by  refer-
ence to  one  or  other  of  two  standards  or  criteria  of  carefulness,  the
one  abstract  or  absolute,  the  other  relative  or  concrete.

(i)  In  some  relations  a  man  is  required  to  show  what  the  Romans
call  exacta  diligentia,  or  the  diligentia  of  a  bonus  paterfamilias,  a  care-
ful, circumspect,  sound  man  of  business ;  here  he  is  answerable  for  all
culpa,  provided  it  would  have  been  avoided  under  the  circumstances
by  a  man  of  that  kind:  'culpa  autem  abest  si  omnia  facta  sunt
quae  diligentissimus  quisque  observaturus  fuisset'  Dig.  19.  2.  25.  7.
Modem  writers  call  this  culpa  levis  in  abstracto :  in  the  authorities
it  is  usually  called  culpa  simply:  when  it  is  said  that  a  man  is
answerable  not  only  for  dolus  but  for  culpa  as  well,  what  is  meant  is


DOLUS,  CULPA,  AND  CASUS.  491

that  he  is  answerable  for  levis  culpa:  the  liability  for  lata  culpa,
being  universal,  is  implied.  Instances  in  which  this  highest  degree
of  diligence  was  demanded  are  those  of  the  coramodatarius,  Bk.  iii.
14-  2;  the  depositor,  Dig.  47.  2.61.  5;  the  pledgee  in  a  pignus,  Bk.  iii.
14.  4;  the  vendor.  Dig.  18.  6.  3;  the  hirer  (conductor),  and  letter
(locator),  Dig.  19.  2.  31 ;  the  authorized  agent  (mandatarius),  Cod.
4-  35'  13;  and  unauthorized  agent  (negotiorum  gestor),  Bk.  iii.  27.  i.

(2)  In  other  relations  the  law  was  satisfied  with  a  less  rigid  standard :
i.  e.  a  man  was  required  to  be  only  as  careful  as  he  was  in  affairs
which  concerned  no  one  but  himself,  or  in  which  he  himself  would  be
the  person  primarily  injured  by  carelessness :  *  talem  praestare  dili-
gentiam  qualem  in  suis  rebus  adhibere  solet ; '  or,  as  modern  writers
say,  he  was  held  answerable  only  for  culpa  levis  in  concreto.  This
lower  degree  of  carefulness  only  was  demanded  from  the  depositary
(Dig.  16.  3.  32:  see  note  on  p.  401  supr.);  the  tutor,  Dig.  27.  3.
I.  pr.  and  curator;  partners  (socii)  inter  se,  Dig.  17.  2.  72,  Inst.  iii.
25.  9 ;  coheirs  and  colegatees.  Dig.  10.  2.  25.  16;  and  the  husband
in  respect  of  the  dos,  Dig.  23.  3.  17.  pr.  If  one  may  lay  down  a
general  rule,  it  would  perhaps  best  be  formulated  thus :  in  contrax:tual
and  quasi-contractual  relations  the  defendant  is  usually  required  to
show  exacta  diligentia,  but  the  burden  of  proving  his  negligence  is  on
the  plaintiff;  in  some  of  them,  however,  the  defendant  is  excused  if
he  can  prove  that  he  has  shown  such  diligence  and  care  as  he  usually
displays  in  the  conduct  of  his  own  affairs.

Mr.  Poste,  in  his  note  on  this  subject  (Gaius  pp.  452-454),  criti-
cises as  unnecessary  and  complicated  the  tripartite  division  into  the
diligence  {a)  of  an  ordinary  man,  (b)  of  a  man  in  his  own  concerns,
and  (c)  of  the  bonus  paterfamilias,  and  adopts  the  two  last  criteria
only.  The  result  of  this  is  a  faulty  determination  of  culpa  lata,  which
he  defines  as  '  the  absence  of  the  degree  of  diligence  which  a  man
habitually  bestows  on  his  own  concerns ;'  that  this  is  wrong  is  clear
from  the  definition  cited  above  from  Dig.  50.  16.  213.  2.  Hence  too
arises  a  practical  difficulty  :  for  if  we  suppose  (e.  g.)  a  partner  to  be
less  careful  in  suis  rebus  than  an  ordinary  man,  and  yet  to  display  in
societatis  rebus  that  care  which  he  bestows  on  his  own,  how  is  he  to
be  judged?  He  has  been  guilty  of  culpa  lata  according  to  the
definition  of  the  Digest,  and  yet  on  Mr.  Poste's  principle  he  is  not
answerable.

No  test  has  yet  been  suggested  for  determining  the  degree  of
diligence  required  by  law  in  a  given  relation  which  is  not  marred  by
perplexing  exceptions.     Perhaps  the  one  which  covers  the  greatest


492  EXCURSUS  VI.

number  of  instances  is  that  proposed  by  Mr.  Poste,  p.  453 :  Uhe
degree  of  diligence  required  of  a  man  in  any  relation,  and  the
standard  by  which  he  is  judged,  depend  generally  on  the  question
whether  he  is  benefited  or  not  benefited  by  the  relation:'  *in  con-
tractibus  bonae  fidei  servatur,  ut  si  quidem  utriusque  contrahentis
commodum  versetur,  etiam  culpa,  si  unius  solius,  dolus  malus
tantummodo  praestetur*  Dig.  30.  108.  12 :  cf.  Dig.  13.  6.  5.  2.  Yet
there  are  some  -  cases  (e.  g.  mandatum  and  negotiorum  gestio)  in
which,  though  the  relation  is  all  for  the  interest  of  one  party,  exacta
diligentia  is  required  from  the  other ;  and  others  in  which,  though
both  parties  are  interested,  they  are  yet  expected  to  show  only  talem
diligentiam  qualem  in  suis  rebus  adhibere  solent,  e.  g.  partners,
coheirs,  and  colegatees.

Accident,  fortuitus  casus  (which  is  mentioned  in  Bk.  iti.  14.  2
and  elsewhere  in  the  Institutes)^  and  dolus  form  the  two  extremes  of
a  chain  of  possible  sets  of  circumstances,  the  responsibility  for  which
may  be  exhibited  thus.  For  accident,  and  for  such  unintentional
faults  and  mistakes  as  could  not  have  been  guarded  against  by  the
utmost  care,  no  one  is  answerable.  Culpa  levis  entails  liability  on  the
classes  of  persons  enumerated  under  (i)  supn :  they  are  required  to
show  exacta  diligentia.  The  classes  of  persons  enumerated  under  (2)
are  expected  to  display  the  lower  degree  of  diligence :  they  are
answerable  for  culpa  levis  in  concreto.  Culpa  lata  and  dolus  entail
liability  in  every  case.

The  liability  for  culpa  in  delict  is  treated  in  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  3,  and  notes.


EXCURSUS    VII.

JOINT  AND  SEVERAL  LIABILITY.      CORREALITY   AND

SOLIDARITY.

The  simplest  type  of  obligation  is  that  in  which  there  is  but
a  single  creditor  and  a  single  debtor.  There  may,  however,  possibly
be  two  or  more  creditors,  or  two  or  more  debtors,  in  the  same  obli-
gation. Sometimes,  it  is  true,  this  plurality  of  parties  is  apparent  only,
and  not  real :  it  is  seen,  on  a  closer  scrutiny,  that  there  are,  in  reality,
a  number  of  separate  obligations,  each  with  its  single  creditor  and  its
single  debtor,  and  each  distinguishable  from  each  of  the  rest :  the
misapprehension  arising  from  the  fact  that  there  is  something  which
connects  the  several  obligations  with  one  another.  For  instance,  if
A,  B,  and  C  jointly  promise  15/.  to  D,  or  if  D  promises  15/.  to  A,  B,
and  C  jointly,  D  can  claim  only  5/.  from  each  of  the  promisors  singly,
or  each  of  the  promisees  can  recover  only  5/.  from  him.  Or  again,
if  a  debtor  or  creditor  dies,  leaving  several  joint  heirs,  they  are
entitled  or  bound,  and  can  sue  or  be  sued,  only  in  the  ratio  of  their
shares  in  the  inheritance.  In  all  these  cases  there  is  no  single  obli-
gation with  a  plurality  of  parties  on  either  the  creditor  or  the  debtor
side :  there  is  a  number  of  separate  and  distinct  obligations,  which,  in
our  minds,  are  connected  together  by  the  unity  of  the  mode  in  which
they  originate.

A  different  form  of  apparent  unity  of  obligation  is  that,  where  two
or  more  persons  are  entitled  or  bound  in  the  sense  that  each  may
claim,  or  be  called  upon  to  perform,  the  whole  of  what  is  due  under
the  obligation,  that  whole  being  demandable  as  many  times  as  there
are  creditors  or  debtors  respectively.  E.  g.  the  law  imposes  a  penalty
of  10/.  on  any  one  who  steals  pheasants'  eggs.  A,  B,  and  C  together
go  and  steal  D's  pheasants'  eggs :  D  can  recover  the  10/.  penalty
from  each  of  the  three  in  succession,  exactly  as  if  he  were  the  only
delinquent,  or  as  if  the  thefts  were  independent  or  disconnected.
Roman  law  supplies  an  illustration  in  Dig.  9.  2.  11.  2  '  ex  lege  Aquilia


494  EXCURSUS  VIL

quod  alius  praestitit  alium  non  relevat,  cum  sit  poena.'  So  too  if  D
injures  A,  B,  and  C  by  the  same  act,  they  can  each  separately  recover
from  him  the  penalty  fixed  by  law :  the  obligations  are  independent,
though  arising  from  one  and  the  same  source.

But  a  third  case  is  conceivable.   There  may  be  one  creditor  entitled
by  different  obligations  against  two  or  more  debtors,  or  one  debtor
bound  by  different  obligations  to  two  or  more  creditors ;  but  these
obligations,  though  different  from  one  another,  may  have  one  and  the
same  object  (act  or  forbearance):  not  similar  objects,  such  as  the
payment  of  the  lo/.  penalty  above,  but  the  same  object :  so  that
when  that  object  is  once  attained  by  the  performance  of  one  of  the
obligations,  all  the  rest,  no  longer  having  any  object,  cease  ipso  facto
to  exist.    £.g.  A,  B,  and  C  jointly  break  my  windows.    Each  is  under
a  separate  obligation  to  pay  me  for  mending  them,  and  I  may  sue
which  I  please,  apart  from  the  rest,  for  the  expenses  to  which  I  have
been  put ;  but  if  I  recover  the  amount  of  the  glazier's  bill  from  A,
I  can  no  longer  get  it  from  B  or  C,  for  the  claim  is  a  civil  one  for
compensation,  not  a  quasi-criminal  one  for  a  penalty.   In  such  a  case,
there  are  as  many  separate  obligations  as  there  are  persons  bound,
but  the  object  of  all  these  obligations  is  the  same :  each  debtor  is,
therefore,  liable  for  the  whole  object,  or  liable  in  solidum  (as  distinct
from  the  liability  pro  parte  exemplified  by  a  joint  promise  to  pay  1 5/.),
but  as  the  object  is  only  one,  it  can  only  be  once  attained,  and  there-
fore performance  by  one  of  the  joint  debtors  releases  the  rest.     This
is  called  solidary  obligation :  and  as  two  or  more  debtors  can  be
solidarity  bound  to  one  creditor  (passive  solidarity),  so  two  or  more
creditors  can  be  solidarily  entitled  against  one  debtor  (active  soli-
darity) ;  i.  e.  either  or  any  one  of  them  can,  without  consulting  the
other  or  rest,  claim  the  whole  object  (which  forms  the  connecting  link
between  the  different  obligations)  from  the  single  debtor ;  but  as  soon
as  he  has  done  what  he  has  to  do  for  one,  the  vinculum  iuris  between
him  and  all  is  severed,  and  he  is  free.    The  predominance  of  passive
over  active  solidary  obligation  is  so  great  that  some  writers  have
supposed  the  latter  to  have  no  real  existence.     There  is  a  clear  case
of  it,  however,  in  Dig.  9.  4.  14.  pr.,  though  owing  to  its  rareness  we
need  not  concern  ourselves  with  it  here.

Cases  of  the  passive  form  are  (i)  the  joint  commission  of  a  delict :
the  obligation  of  the  co-delinquents  to  make  compensation  (though
not  that  to  pay  a  penalty)  is  solidary,  Dig.  2.  10.  i.  4;  4.  2.  14.  15.
( 2)  The  liability  of  cotutors  for  dolus  and  culpa  in  the  discharge  of
their  functions,  Dig.  16.  3.  i.  43  ;  26.  7.  18.  i ;  27.  3.  1.  13.    (3)  Where


CORREALITY  AND  SOLIDARITY.  495

two  or  more  persons  jointly  incur  a  contractual  but  not  correal
(for  which  see  below)  liability  (e.  g.  A  and  B  jointly  agree  to  act  as
agents  for  C,  Dig.  17.  i.  60.  2;  or  as  his  depositaries,  Dig.  16.  3.  i.
43 ;  or  jointly  borrow  a  thing  for  use,  Dig.  13.  6.  5.  15),  they  are
bound  solidarily  in  respect  of  the  duties  which  arise  from  the  con-
tract. Such  joint  contracts  will  not,  however,  in  themselves  create
active  solidary  obligation,  Dig.  16.  3.  i.  36  ;  ib.  14.  pr.  (4)  In  man-
datum  qualificatum  (Bk.  iii.  26.  5)  joint  mandators  incur  solidary
liability  if  the  debtor  is  unable  to  pay  himself,  Dig.  46.  i.  52.  3 :  so
too  with  constitutum  debiti  alieni  (note  on  Bk.  iii.  20.  8).  (5)  Where
one  room  is  jointly  occupied  by  two  or  more  persons  they  are  liable
in  solidum  to  the  actio  de  efTusis  et  deiectis,  Bk.  iv.  5.  i  infr.,  Dig.  9.
3.  I.  10  j  ib.  2-4.

Solidary  obligation  is  terminated — i.  e.  all  the  solidary  debtors  are
released,  and  the  right  of  all  the  solidary  creditors  is  extinguished —
by  simple  satisfaction  of  the  sole  creditor,  or  by  satisfaction  of  one  of
the  creditors  by  the  single  debtor.  This  may  occur  (i)  by  perform-
ance, solutio,  or  (2)  by  set-off  extending  to  the  whole  of  the  defit.
But  acquittal  of  one  solidary  debtor  in  an  action  brought  on  his
obligation  did  not  release  the  rest  from  theirs:  *plures  eiusdem
pecuniae  mandatores,  si  unus  iudicio  eligatur,  absolutione  quoque
secuta  non  liberantur,  sed  omnes  liberantur  pecunia  soluta  *  Dig.  46.
I.  52.  3.  Acceptilatio  (Bk.  iii.  29.  i)  was  equally  inoperative,  for  it
is  neither  payment  nor  equivalent  to  it :  and  novatio  (ib.  §  3)  extin-
guished solidary  liability  only  so  far  as  the  object  of  the  new  obliga-
tion was  quantitatively  equivalent  to  that  of  the  old.  In  short,
the  intervention  of  any  event,  which  ordinarily  destroys  an  obliga-
tion, between  the  creditor  and  one  of  the  joint  debtors,  or  between
the  debtor  and  one  of  the  joint  creditors,  does  not  affect  the  liability
of  the  other  debtors,  or  the  right  of  the  other  creditors,  unless  it
is  or  amounts  to  performance.

But,  though  the  ultimate  liability  of  each  of  several  solidary  debtors
for  the  whole  object  of  the  obligation  is  clear,  each  ordinarily  enjoyed
the  following  rights :  {a)  except  where  he  had  been  guilty  of  dolus,  or
of  culpa  in  excess  of  the  rest,  he  could  claim  to  be  primarily  sued  only
for  an  aliquot  part  of  the  debt.  Dig.  26.  7.  38.  pr.:  he  could  be  called
upon  to  pay  more  only  if  the  rest  or  some  of  them  were  insolvent
(beneficium  divisionis).  {b)  If  another  or  others  of  the  debtors  had
been  excessively  in  fault,  he  could  in  some  cases  (e.  g,  cotutors.  Dig.
26.  7.  3.  2  ;  ib.  39.  II ;  ib.  55.  2)  demand  that  he  or  they  should  be
sued  before  him  (beneficium  ordinis  sive  excussionis).    {c)  Where


496  EXCURSUS  VII.

he  had  not  been  guilty  of  dolus  (Dig.  27.  3.  i.  13  and  14^  and  paid
the  whole,  he  had  a  ius  regressus  against  the  rest  by  which  he  could
recover  their  respective  shares  of  what  he  had  paid.  In  (i)  supr.
this  right  of  course  did  not  exist :  '  in  pari  delicto  potior  est  condicio
defendentis.'

From  solidary  we  have  to  distinguish  what  is  called  correal  obliga*
tion.  This  resembles  the  former,  in  that  two  or  more  creditors  (correi
stipulandi  or  credendi)  are  entitled  against  one  debtor,  or  two  or  more
debtors  (correi  promittendi  or  debendi)  are  bound  to  one  creditor  in
respect  of  one  and  the  same  obligation-object,  and  so  far  we  may
say  that  every  correal  includes  in  itself  a  solidary  obligation,  each  of
the  two  or  more  creditors  being  entitled,  and  each  of  the  two  or  more
debtors  being  bound,  in  solidum.  But  it  differs  in  that  there  is  not
only  one  obligation-object,  but  only  one  obligation.  The  unity  of  the
object  here  follows  necessarily  from  the  unity  of  the  obligation  itself :
where  the  liability  is  solidary,  it  arises  from  extraneous  causes,  for,
given  a  variety  of  obligations,  the  natural  and  usual  consequence
would  be  a  corresponding  variety  of  objects.

It  is  thus  the  unity  or  identity  of  the  obligation  which  distinguishes
correal  from  merely  solidary  obligation :  or,  to  put  the  matter  in
another  form,  when  there  is  correality,  there  is,  objectively,  one  single
obligation,  to  which  a  variety  of  persons  are  subjectively  related  in
solidum  :  and  their  subjective  relation  may  be  different.

There  is,  objectively,  but  one  single  obligation.  Hence  any  act  or
event  (and  not  merely  performance  or  its  equivalent,  as  in  cases  of
solidarity)  which  puts  an  end  to  the  objective  existence  of  that  single
obligation  between  the  creditor  and  one  of  the  debtors,  or  the  debtor
and  one  of  the  creditors,  extinguishes  it  between  them  all ;  e.  g.  solutio
or  performance  (Inst.  iii.  16.  i.  Dig.  45.  2.  3.  i),  acceptilatio  (Dig.  46.
3.  16),  and  novatio  (Dig.  46.  2.  31.  iV  Compensatio,  or  set-off,
extinguishes  correal  obligation  only  if  it  goes  to  the  whole  debt,  Dig.
20.  4.  4 :  but  if  correal  debtor  A  is  sued  he  cannot  set  off  money
owed  to  correal  debtor  B,  unless  he  and  B  are  partners.  Dig.  45.  2.
10.  So,  too,  if  the  creditor  sued  one  of  the  debtors,  or  one  of  the
creditors  sued  the  debtor,  the  obligation  was  extinguished  for  all  by
the  action's  reaching  the  stage  of  litis  contestatio,  Gaius  iii.  180,  Dig.
45.  I.  116.  In  respect  of  passive  correal  obligation  this  was  altered
by  Justinian's  constitution  in  Cod.  8.  41.  28,  which  enacted  that  the
debt  should  not  be  extinguished  by  litis  contestatio,  but  only  by
satisfaction  of  the  creditor :  for  active  correal  obligation  the  old  rule
seems  to  have  continued.  Dig.  45.  2.  2 ;  46.  2.  31.  i.     Further  con-


CORREALITY  AND  SOLIDARITY.  497

sequences  of  the  unity  of  the  obligation  are  that  any  act  of  a  correus
debendi,  by  which  its  performance  becomes  impossible  or  more  diffi-
cult, prejudices  the  rest :  '  ex  duobus  reis  eiusdem  Stichi  promittendi
factis  alterius  factum  alteri  quoque  nocet'  Dig.  45.  2.  18:  as  also
does  the  interruption  of  prescription  by  one  of  them  only.

But  the  subjective  relation  of  the  corret  to  the  obligation  need  not
be  the  same.  Hence,  as  is  said  in  Bk.  iii.  16.  2,  one  correus  debendi
may  be  bound '  pure,'  another  sub  condicione :  one  may  be  entitled  or
bound  as  principal,  another  only  as  accessory,  as  in  the  case  of  stipu-
lator and  adstipulator,  Gaius  iii.  i  lo-i  14,  or  of  debitor  and  fideiussor,
Bk.  iii.  20 :  or  one  may  be  in  mora  without  prejudicing  the  rest,
Dig.  22.  I.  32.  4:  and  other  events,  though  not  destroying  the
objective  existence  of  the  obligation,  may  modify  the  relation  to  it
of  this  or  that  correus.  Thus,  for  the  operation  of  confusio  (p.  474
supr.)  cf  Dig.  46. 1.  71.  pr.  *  sed  cum  duo  rei  promittendi  sunt,  et  alteri
heres  extitit  creditor,  iusta  dubitatio  est,  utrum  alter  quoque  liberatus
est,  ac  si  soluta  fuisset  obligatio,  an  persona  tantum  exempta,  confusa
obligatione :  et  puto  aditione  hereditatis  confusione  obligationis  eximi
personam : .  .  .  igitur  alterum  reum  eiusdem  pecuniae  non  liberari ; '
for  capitis  deminutio.  Dig.  45.  2.  19  'cum  duo  eandem  pecuniam
debent,  si  unus  capitis  deminutione  exemptus  est  obligatione,  alter
non  liberatur;'  for  liberatio  legata  (Bk.  ii.  20.  13  supr.),  Dig.  34.  3.
3.  3  '  si  quidem  mihi  liberatio  sit  legata, . . . .  et  cum  alio  sim  debitor,
puta  duo  rei  fuimus  promittendi,  et  mihi  soli  testator  consultum
voluit,  agendo  consequar,  non  ut  accepto  liberer,  ne  etiam  correus
meus  liberetur  contra  testatoris  voluntatem,  sed  pacto  liberabor.'
Where  the  creditor  agreed  by  pactum  de  non  petendo  not  to  sue  one
of  two  or  more  correi  debendi,  the  other  or  rest  could  take  advantage
of  the  pactum  only  if,  as  it  is  said,  it  was  in  rem  (see  on  Bk.  iv.  14.  4
inf.),  even  though  partners  of  the  other,  Dig.  2.  14.  25.  i,  'multum
enim  interest,  utrum  res  ipsa  solvatur,  an  persona  liberetur '  Dig.  45.
2. 19,  Mn  rem  pacta  omnibus  prosunt,  quorum  obligationem  dissolutam
esse  eius,  qui  paciscebatur,  interfuit'  Dig.  2.  14.  21.  5.  Hence  the
pactum  de  non  petendo  in  rem  of  one  correus  debendi  benefits  the
rest  whenever  on  payment  by  one  of  them  he  would  have  regressus
against  the  others,  for  otherwise  the  pactum  would  be  practically
inoperative.  But  if,  conversely,  one  of  two  or  more  correal  creditors
concluded  a  pactum  de  non  petendo  with  their  joint  debtor,  the  latter
could  in  no  case  plead  it  in  defence  to  an  action  instituted  by  the
other  or  others :  '  si  unus  ex  argentariis  sociis  cum  debitore  pactus  sit,
an  etiam  alteri  noceat  exceptio  ?     Neratius,  Atilicinus,  Proculus,  nee

Kk


498  EXCURSUS  VII.

si  in  rem  pactus  sit,  alteri  nocere :  tantum  enim  constitutum,  ut  alter
solidum  petere  possit'  Dig.  2.  14.  27.  pr.

Correal  obligation  might  arise  (i)  from  contract,  usually  stipulation
in  the  form  given  in  Bk.  iii.  1 6.  pr.,  though  it  seems  to  have  been  also
possible,  first  to  make  an  ordinary  stipulation,  followed  by  another  in
which  the  same  performance  was  promised  by  the  same  promisor  to
another  promisee,  or  to  the  same  promisee  by  another  promisor
(e.  g.  adstipulatio  and  fideiussio):  in  bonae  iidei  contracts  correal
obligation  could  be  produced  by  a  pactum  adiectum  directed  to  this
purpose,  Dig.  16.  3.  i.  44;  45.  2.  9;  (2)  from  testament,  by  the
testator  charging  a  legacy  on  one  or  other  of  his  heirs  in  the  alterna-
tive, Dig.  30.  8.  I ;  32.  25.  pr.  To  create  an  active  correal  obligation
by  will  the  testator  must  state  this  as  his  intention  explicitly.  (3)  The
obligation  was  also  correal  in  the  cases  of  express  or  implied  agency
pursued  by  the  actiones  adiectitiae  qualitatis,  de  peculio,  de  in  rem
verso,  quod  iussu,  exercitoria  and  institoria  (see  note  on  Bk.  iv.  7.  pr.
inf.).  (4)  In  a  banking  partnership  the  socii  were  liable  correaliter  on
all  their  business  transactions,  whether  entered  into  by  one  or  all  of
them,  Dig.  2.  14.  9.  pr. ;  4.  8.  34.  pr.;  see  on  Bk.  iii.  25.  9.  (5)  Joint
owners  of  a  slave  who  committed  a  delict,  or  of  an  animal  which  did
damage,  were  correal  debtors  in  respect  of  the  noxal  action,  Bk.  iv.
8  inf. :  Dig.  9.  i.  i.  14;  9.  4.  8 ;  11.  1.  7,  ib.  8,  ib.  20.  pr.

It  appears  to  be  the  better  opinion  that  a  paying  correal  debtor
had  not,  as  such,  a  ius  regressus  against  the  rest  (Dig.  35.  2.  62  pr. ;
cf.  Tit.  20.  4  inf.),  unless  he  and  they  were  partners,  Dig.  loc.  cit.,  or
unless,  and  here  only  so  far  as,  they  had  been  benefited  by  the  debt
which  he  had  discharged.  Cod.  8.  40.  2.  Savigny  contends  (Obi.
§§  23-25)  that  the  ius  regressus  existed  in  all  cases,  on  the  ground
that  a  correal  debtor,  when  sued,  could  always  meet  the  plaintiff  by
exceptio  doli,  unless  the  latter  consented  to  transfer  to  him  his  rights
of  action  against  the  other  correi  debendi,  and  that,  when  such  a  cessio
could  be  insisted  upon,  utiles  actiones  were  in  the  later  Roman  law
always  granted  under  the  fiction  that  it  had  actually  been  made.  But
that  the  so-called  beneficium  cedendarum  actionum  belonged  to  every
correal  debtor  as  such  who  paid  is  far  from  certain :  nor  is  Savigny's
other  assumption  correct,  that  in  every  case  in  which  it  did  exist
a  fictitious  cessio  was  recognised:  for  though  a  paying  fideiussor
could  insist  on  an  actual  cessio  it  is  certain  he  had  no  regressus
against  cosureties,  Gaius  iii.  122^  Bk.  iii.  20.  4  supr..  Dig.  46.  i.  39,
Cod.  8.  41.  II.

The  beneficium  divisionis,  or  right  to  be  sued  for  only  an  aliquot


CORREALITY  AND  SOLIDARITY.  499

share  of  the  debt,  belonged  to  correi  debendi  only  in  particular
cases,  and  by  special  enactment :  it  was  granted  to  fideiussors  by  the
epistola  Hadriani,  Bk.  iii.  20.  4,  and  from  these  was  extended  to
mandators,  Cod.  4.  18.  3 :  Justinian  gave  it  to  persons  jointly  liable
on  a  constitutum,  Cod.  ib.  The  effect  of  Nov.  99  on  this  branch  of
law  is  too  much  a  matter  of  dispute  to  admit  of  discussion.


K  k  2


EXCURSUS   VIII.

THE   ROMAN   LITERAL  CONTRACT  AND  ITS  HISTORY.

The  true  old  Roman  literal  contract,  commonly  called  expensi-
latio,  which  apparently  began  to  be  disused  soon  after  the  fall  of  the
Republic,  was  concluded  by  the  creditor's  making,  with  the  debtor's
assent,  an  entry  in  his  domestic  account-book  or  ledger  (codex,
tabulae)  of  so  much  as  advanced  by  him  to  the  latter  (expensum
ferre),  the  transaction  thus  having  the  appearance  of  an  advance  or
loan.  Such  a  written  entry  was  not  mere  evidence  of  a  contract
binding  on  some  other  ground— res,  verba,  or  consensus :  by  itself  it
laid  the  debtor  under  a  legal  obligation  to  repay  the  sum  in  question :
*  in  nominibus  alius  expensum  ferendo  obligat'  Gaius  iii.  137.  There
are  at  least  two  passages  (Cic.  ad  Att.  4.  ep.  18,  Valerius  Maximus
8.  2.  2)  which  prove  that  expensilatio  was  a  mode  of  creating  a  new
and  original  obligation.  But  it  seems  most  ordinarily  to  have  been
employed  for  the  purpose  of  Novation  (Bk.  iii.  29.  3),  when  it  was
called  transcriptio,  and  the  entry  '  nomen  transcripticium '  Gaius  iii.
128  :  and  in  the  form  transcriptio  a  persona  in  personam  (*  veluti  si
id  quod  mihi  Titius  debet,  tibi  id  expensum  tulero '  Gaius  loc.  cit),
it  must  among  business  men  have  been  of  great  value  in  the  simplifi-
cation and  settlement  of  outstanding  accounts.  The  main  object  of
transcriptio  seems  to  have  been  the  substitution  of  a  strict  civil  law  for
a  iuris  gentium  contract ;  or,  as  Mr.  Poste  puts  it, '  to  metamorphose
claims  recoverable  by  actions  ex  fide  bona,  e.  g.  locati  conducti,
empti  venditi,  which  in  many  points  favoured  the  defendant,  into
debts  recoverable  by  the  short  and  sharp  remedy  of  the  civil  action
of  condictio,  which,  when  brought  for  certa  pecunia  credita,  was  the
more  formidable  to  a  dishonest  litigant,  as  it  was  accompanied  by
a  sponsio  poenalis,  whereby  the  vanquished  party  forfeited  a  third
of  the  sum  in  litigation,  in  addition,  if  he  was  the  defendant,  to  the
original  claim.'  That  this  was  its  main  use  seems  more  than  probable
on  a  priori  grounds,  for  it  is  clear  that  if  30/.  are  due  to  a  man  on
a  sale  (e.  g.),  he  will  prefer  to  secure  by  novation  a  remedy  by  which


ROMAN  LITERAL  CONTRACT  AND  ITS  HISTORY.     501

he  can  recover  40/. ;  and  the  conclusion  is  made  absolutely  certain
by  a  consideration  of  the  only  case  in  which  a  iuris  gentium  contract
was  not  'novated'  by  entry  in  the  codex.  Gaius  tells  us  (iii.  131)
that  the  entry  of  a  genuine  money  loan  left  the  transaction  a  mutuum
or  real  contract,  though  known  by  the  specific  name  of  nomen  arcarium.
The  explanation  of  this  seeming  anomaly  is  that  the  remedy  on
mutuum  alone  of  all  the  real  and  consensual  contracts  was  always
condictio :  and  as  consequently  novation  of  a  mutuum  by  transcriptio
could  give  the  creditor  no  advantage  which  he  did  not  possess  already,
its  entry  in  the  ledger  did  not 'alter  the  'causa'  of  the  obligation,  but
served  only  as  evidence,  Gaius  loc  cit

Expensilatio,  as  has  just  been  remarked,  was  a  formal  civil  law  con-
tract, confined  to  Roman  citizens,  though  the  Sabinians  had  held  that
for  transcriptio  a  re  in  personam  at  least  it  might  be  used  also  by
peregrini.  We  learn,  however,  from  Gaius  that  the  latter  had  a  form
of  literal  contract  of  Greek  origin  peculiar  to  themselves,  viz.  the  chi-
rc>grapha  and  syngraphae,  species  of  bonds  of  which  the  former  were
signed  by  the  debtor  only,  while  the  latter  were  executed  in  duplicate,
and  signed  by  both  parties.  It  seems  clear,  from  the  passage  referred
to  (iii.  134),  that,  unless  made  merely  as  evidence  of  a  stipulation,
these  had  binding  force  for  peregrini  in  themselves,  though  they  would
not  have  bound  citizens:  or,  as  Savigny  says  (verm.  Schriften  i.
p.  246),  it  was  law  in  the  provinces,  as  contrasted  with  Rome,  that
any  formless  document  attesting  an  agreement  was  actionable.

Asconius,  the  early  commentator  on  Cicero,  observes  (in  Verr.  2.  i.
23)  that  in  his  time  the  codex,  and  with  it  expensilatfo,  had  gone  out
of  use  except  among  bankers  (argentarii),  who,  as  might  have  been
expected,  continued  longer  to  keep  their  books  in  the  old  Roman
fashion,  though  Justinian  says  in  Bk.  iii.  21,  that  in  his  own  day  such
entries,  even  supposing  them  to  have  still  been  made,  had  ceased  to
create  obligations.  Whether  it  be  true  or  not,  as  Asconius  (confirmed
by  Eusebius)  says  himself,  that  he  wrote  about  the  middle  of  the  first
century  of  our  era,  the  commentary  on  the  Verrine  orations  is  of  so
different  a  character  from  the  rest  that  Savigny  and  Niebuhr  may  be
right  in  ascribing  it  to  a  rtdacteur  of  the  fourth  century,  in  which  case
the  fact  that  Gaius  describes  literal  contract  as  apparently  in  full
operation  need  create  no  difficulty.  Perhaps,  indeed,  as  was  first
suggested  by  Schiller,  the  disappearance  of  nomina  transcripticia  is  to
be  ascribed  to  the  introduction  of  constitutum,  which,  instead  of
novating  the  pre-existing  obligation,  added  to  it  a  fresh  one  upon
which  the  creditor,  if  successful,  would  recover  an  even  heavier  penal


502  EXCURSUS  VIIL

sum  than  he  would  by  condictio  certi  (p.  433  supr.),  and  which  was
superior  to  them  in  its  simplicity  and  formlessness.

But,  even  long  before  the  time  of  Gaius,  the  character  of  expen-
silatio  (with  which,  as  a  formal  contract,  stipulatio  may  be  coor-
dinated) had  been  vitally  altered.  These  two  contracts  had  for
centuries  resembled  the  English  Deed  in  imposing  an  obligation  by
their  mere  form  :  once  made,  the  debtor  was  bound,  and  must  pay,
whether  he  had  or  had  not  received  the  consideration  for  which  he
purported  to  have  made  the  promise  or  consented  to  the  entry,  and
even  though  his  promise  or  consent  had  been  obtained  by  duress,
misrepresentation,  or  undue  influence.  It  would  seem  that  this  was
remedied  first  in  65  b.c.'  when  Aquilius  Gallus,  Cicero's  colleague  in
the  praetorship,  stated  in  his  Edict  that  he  would  allow  an  exceptio
doli  mali  to  be  pleaded  in  defence  to  an  action  on  a  formal  contract.
In  contracts  which  were  bonae  fidei  such  a  fonnal  plea  was  unneces-
sary :  for  'doll  exceptio  inest  bonae  fidei  iudiciis'  Dig.  24.  3.  21 ;
and  in  a  condictio  brought  on  a  mutuum  the  defence  of  no  con-
sideration would  be  a  direct  traverse  of  the  plaintiffs  right,  upon
whom  consequently  would  fall  the  burden  of  showing  that  the  money
had  in  point  of  fact  been  advanced  to  the  defendant.  Mr.  Poste
(Gaius,  p.  368)  seems  to  think  that  the  exceptio  doli  was  not  univer-
sally pleadable  to  condictiones  until  the  time  of  Marcus  Aurelius ;
but  the  passage  in  the  Institutes  (Bk.  iv.  6.  30)  upon  which  this
supposition  is  based  relates  only  to  the  application  of  this  plea  in  the
introduction  of  a  set-off  (compensatio)  in  such  suits.  It  is  obvious
that  Aquilius'  innovation  entirely  changed  the  material  character  of
stipulatio  and  expensilatio.  Ostensibly,  they  continued  to  bind  in
virtue  of  their  form  alone  :  practically,  as  fraud,  failure  of  a  promised
consideration,  &c.  would  enable  the  promisor,  by  pleading  exceptio
doli,  to  defeat  any  action  brought  against  him  by  the  other  party,
they  were  '  transformed  into  real  (?)  contracts,  the  obligation  of  the
promisor  depending  on  the  performance  of  the  promisee  (re),  that  is,
on  the  execution  by  the  promisee  of  his  part  of  the  consideration,
not  on  the  solemnity  of  the  spoken  words  (verbis)  or  written
documents  (literis).'

Eventually,  when  the  defendant's  plea  was  in  effect  that  the  pro-
mised pecuniary  consideration,  by  which  his  own  promise  had  been


*  Id  the  first  edition  this  change  was  attributed  to  a  praetor  named  Cassias
on  the  strength  of  Dig.  44.  4.  4.  33 :  but  this  seems  to  have  been  erroneous :  see
Prof.  Muirbead's  Roman  Law,  addition  to  p.  448.


ROMAN  LITERAL  CONTRACT  AND  ITS  HISTORY.   503

obtained,  had  not,  in  point  of  fact,  been  given  (i.  e.  when  it  was  in
factum  composita),  it  came  to  be  called  the  exceptio  pecuniae  non
numeratae,  which  Justinian  says  in  the  Code  is  a  species  of  the
exceptio  doli,  with  which  indeed  it  is  in  Cod.  4.  30.  3  actually
identified :  cf.  notes  on  Bk.  iv.  13.  i  and  2  inf.  From  a  comparison
of  Gaius  iv.  116  with  those  paragraphs  it  would  seem  that  the  new
name  had  not  yet  been  given  in  the  former's  time.  Upon  the  plea
of  pecunia  non  numerata  being  entered  by  the  defendant,  the  onus
probandi,  contrary  to  the  ordinary  rule,  lay  upon  the  plaintiff:  *si  ex
cautione  tua,  licet  hypotheca  data,  conveniri  coeperis,  exceptione
opposita  seu  doli  seu  non  numeratae  pecuniae,  compellitur  petitor
probare  pecuniam  tibi  esse  numeratam :  quo  non  impleto  absolutio
sequetur '  Caracalla  in  Cod.  4.  30.  3.

From  a  careful  examination  of  Bk.  iv.  13.  2  inf.,  it  is  clear  what
was  in  the  minds  of  the  compilers  of  the  Institutes  when  they  wrote
their  Title  'de  literarum  obligatione.'  One  man  obtains  from  another
an  instrument,  amounting  to  a  stipulation  (Bk.  iii.  19.  12  and  17),
promising  payment  of  a  sum  of  money,  by  means  of  ah  unactionable
undertaking  of  his  own  to  lend  him  a  similar  sum,  which  is  not
fulfilled.  The  instrument  (or  rather  the  stipulation  of  which  it  is  the
proof)  binds  the  promisor  in  law,  although  he  has  not  received  the
consideration  for  it ;  but  when  he  is  sued  upon  it,  his  plea  of  pecunia
non  numerata  throws  on  the  plaintiff  the  onus  of  proving  that  the
money  was  really  advanced.  Persons  who  were  so  careless  as  to
put  their  names  to  such  memoranda  without  having  received  the
consideration  for  which  they  purported  to  have  been  given,  were
at  first  allowed  to  plead  the  exceptio,  so  as  to  throw  the  onus  of
proof  on  the  plaintiff,  only  within  one  year  from  their  date :  this
was  extended  by  M.  Aurelius  (Cod.  Herm.  i>  to  five  years,  which
Justinian,  as  he  says  in  Bk.  iii.  21,  again  reduced  to  two;  After  this
interval — in  the  language  of  that  passage,  dum  queri  non  potest — the
instrument  was  accepted  as  presumptive  evidence  that  the  money
had  been  advanced,  or  other  consideration  given,  so  that  the  defen-
dant might  be  said,  in  a  sense,  to  be  literis  or  scriptura  obligatus ;  for
the  rule  as  to  the  onus  of  proof  was  now  reversed :  the  plaintiff  had
not  to  prove  that  he  had  lent  the  money,  but  the  defendant  had  to
prove  that  he  had  not.  But  persons  who  had  incautiously  given  such
notes  would  still  have  been  largely  at  the  mercy  of  their  holders,  had
the  latter  been  able  to  wait  till  the  interval,  within  which  the  exceptio
could  be  pleaded,  had  elapsed,  and  then  to  sue  with  the  advantage
of  having  shifted  the  onus  probandi  on  to  their  opponents.     To  pre-


504  EXCURSUS  VIII.

vent  this  the  former  could  either  bring  condictio  ob  causam  datorum,
compelling  the  holders  to  prove  the  alleged  consideration,  or  in  default
to  deliver  up  the  memoranda  (Cod.  4.  30.  7),  or  protest  in  the  acta
of  a  court  against  their  validity,  or  make  their  exceptio  perpetual  by
serving  a  formal  written  notice  on  the  creditor.  Cod.  ib.  14.  4«

Justinian,  before  whose  legislation  the  exceptio  pecuniae  non
numeratae  could  be  used  only  where  default  had  been  made  in  the
advance  of  money  by  the  plaintiff,  gave  it  a  larger  scope  by  allowing
it  also  where  the  alleged  consideration  was  the  conveyance  of  other
things  :  '  in  contractibus,  in  quibus  pecuniae  vel  aliae  res  numeratae
vel  datae  esse  conscribuntur,  non  intra  quinquennium,  quod  antea
constitutum  erat,  non  numeratae  pecuniae  obicere  possit,  qui  acce-
pisse  pecunias  vel  alias  res  scriptus  sit,  vel  successor  eius,  sed  intra
solum  biennium  continuum'  Cod.  4.  30.  14.  pr.  Justinian^s  attempt
to  pass  off  the  instrument  as  a  ^  literal '  contract,  which  is  due
merely  to  the  habit  of  reproducing,  if  possible,  the  arrangement  and
terminology  of  Gaius,  is  forced  and  unhappy :  the  notion  of  an  obliga-
tion arising  simply  literis  does  not  appear  elsewhere  in  the  Corpus
iuris,  except  so  far  as  the  use  of  scriptura  and  literae  in  Dig.  44.  7.
2.1;  ib.  38,  and  46.  2.  17  may  be  regarded  as  a  reminiscence  of  the
old  expensilatio.  The  instrument  itself  does  not  bind  :  it  is  merely
evidence,  and  what  does  bind  is  the  stipulation  which  it  attests — or
as  Paulus  puts  it  neatly  in  Dig.  44.  7.  38  '  non  figura  literarum,  sed
oratione,  quam  exprimunt  literae,  obligamur.'  The  fact  is  that  the
compilers  of  the  Institutes,  in  working  through  the  earlier  work  of
Ctaius,  incautiously  transcribed  the  whole  of  iii.  89,  and  consequently
when  they  had  finished  the  subject  of  stipulation  felt  bound  to  make
some  sort  of  a  show  of  a  '  literal '  contract.  In  the  Digest,  which  was
meant  for  practitioners,  more  than  for  students,  no  such  mistake  was
made.  There  we  read  (44.  7.  i.  i) ' obligationes  ex  contractu  aut  re
contrahuntur  aut  verbis  aut  consensu.'  It  need  hardly  be  said  that
beyond  all  doubt  Gaius,  who  is  the  author  of  the  passage,  added  *aut
literis'  after  'vert)is,'  and  that  these  two  words  were  struck  out  as
antiquated  by  the  commission  of  compilation.


EXCURSUS   IX.

AGENCY.

The  question  of  contractual  agency  or  representation  is  this :  to
what  extent,  if  any,  was  it  possible  for  B  (not  being  a  mere  messenger
or  '  animated  letter,'  but  a  genuine  agent,  allowed  more  or  less  dis-
cretion) to  make  a  contract  with  C  for  A,  so  that  (assuming  of  course
that  B  discloses  the  fact  of  his  agency  and  his  principal's  name,  and
does  not  exceed  his  instructions)

A  alone  acquires  rights  against  and  can  sue  C  ?
C  acquires  rights  against  and  can  sue  A  only,  and
B  neither  acquires  rights  nor  incurs  liabilities  under  the  contract  ?
The  principle  of  the  old  civil  law  was  that  the  only  person  who
became  entitled  or  bound  under  a  contract  was  the  person  who  made
it,  whether  he  acted  for  himself  or  as  agent  for  some  third  party.
The  only  exception  of  any  importance  arose  from  the  proprietary
incapacity  of  persons  in  potestas,  manus,  and  mancipium  :  all  benefit
arising  from  contracts  made  by  these  vested  in  their  domestic  superior,
because  it  could  not  vest  in  them ;  so  that  if  A  wished  to  make
a  contract  in  which  he  should  be  creditor  through  an  agent,  he  need
only  get  a  slave  or  filiusfamilias  of  his  own  to  stipulate  ;  whether  he
stipulated  for  himself  or  for  his  superior  was  immaterial.  The  opera-
tion of  this,  however,  as  a  form  of  agency  must  have  been  slender,  as
the  superior  could  not  be  bound  by  the  inferior's  promises,  and
therefore  it  was  inapplicable  to  the  dispositions  of  ever)'day  life,  such
as  sale  and  hire,  all  of  which  give  rise  to  bilateral  obligation.

How  did  the  matter  stand,  if  the  agent  employed  was  an  *  extranea
persona'?  It  has  been  pointed  out,  on  Bk.  iii.  19.  4,  that  (with  a  few
exceptions)  B  could  not  make  a  contract  with  C  for  A  and  in  A's
name,  so  as  to  entitle  the  latter  against  C  :  and  the  case  in  which  B
is  A's  agent  is  not  one  of  those  exceptions.  Consequently,  if  it  is
wished  to  create  an  obligation  at  all,  it  is  essential  that  B  should  first
make  the  contract  in  his  own  name,  for  if  he  said  he  was  merely


5o6  EXCURSUS  IX,

acting  for  A,  and  that  he  made  no  promise  for  himself,  nor  intended  to
acquire  any  right  for  himself,  the  contract  would  be  void ;  to  confer
any  right  on  A  he  must  take  further  measures,  shortly  to  be  noticed.
Against  this  view,  however,  Savigny  (System  iii.  95  sq. ;  Oblig.  ii.
40  sq.),  followed  by  Mr.  Poste  on  Gaius  iii.  103  and  162,  maintains
that,  with  the  exception  of  stipulation,  the  only  formal  contract  surviv-
ing in  Justinian's  time,  B  could  make  any  contract  for  A  in  the
iatter's  name,  so  as  to  confer  rights  on  him  alone  and  enable  him
alone  to  sue.  This  is  based  on  Dig.  41.  i.  53  *ea  quae  civiliter
adquiruntur  per  eos  qui  in  potestate  nostra  sunt  adquirimus,  veluti
per  stipulationem :  quod  naturaliter  adquiritur,  sicuti  est  possessio,
per  quemlibet  volentibus  nobis  possidere  adquirimus.'  But  in  this
passage,  as  has  been  remarked  by  many  writers,  it  is  probable  that
its  author,  Modestinus,  wrote  mancipationem,  not  stipulationem,
which  the  compilers  of  the  Digest  substituted  for  it  as  being  the  only
old  formal  disposition  surviving  in  their  day  ;  and  it  is  clear,  from  its
position  in  the  Title  *  De  adquirendo  rerum  dominio,'  that  it  does  not
relate  to  contracts  at  all,  but  only  to  the  question  whether  anything
more  than  possession  in  a  res  corporaHs  could  be  acquired  per  extra-
neam  personam  :  see  note  on  Bk.  ii.  9.  5  supr.  But  after  all,  perhaps
the  best  criticism  of  this  theory  of  Savigny's  is  that  of  Dr.  Hunter,
that  if  the  Roman  law  had  really  attained  to  a  true  conception  of
agency,  the  fact  must  have  been  patent  in  many  texts ;  whereas  in
point  of  fact  its  author  is  unable  to  support  it  by  any  really  pertinent
textual  authority,  except  the  very  doubtful  passage  last  cited.

Consequently,  the  agent  must  make  the  contract  in  his  own  name  :
and  the  desired  effect — the  conferring  of  rights,  and  the  imposition  of
duties,  upon  his  principal — was  first  attained  only  after  the  introduc-
tion of  the  formulary  procedure  (Gaius  iv.  86,  87)  and  in  a  very  cum-
brous and  circuitous  manner.  If  (e.  g.)  A,  being  at  Rome,  wished  to
buy  a  house  belonging  to  C  at  Naples,  he  would  give  B  (at  Naples)
a  mandate  to  buy  it  for  him.  B  does  so,  and  then  assigns  his  rights
against  C  to  A,  i.  e.  makes  him  his  procurator  in  rem  suam  (cf.  p.  487
supr.) ;  C's  rights  against  B,  e.  g.  his  claim  for  the  purchase  money,
can  be  made  available  against  A  only  by  a  novatio :  if  this  is  not
done,  C,  if  necessary,  must  recover  from  B  by  actio  venditi,  and
B  from  A  by  actio  mandati  contraria.  Here  none  of  the  conditions
above  specified  are  realized.  A,  so  far  from  alone  acquiring  rights
against  C  under  the  contract,  acquires  them  only  indirectly  as  his
own  agent's  assignee ;  C  acquires  rights  against  A,  if  at  all,  not  by
the  contract  of  sale,  but  by  the  novation  to  which  A  is  himself


AGENCY,  507

a  party ;  and  B  is  in  fact  the  principal  and  true  vendee  throughout,
and  the  only  person  who  is  entitled  and  bound  in  that  capacity.  In
short,  the  desired  effect  is  not  attained  simply  by  A's  making  B  his
agent,  but  by  a  double  mandatum  and  a  novatio :  A  makes  B  his
agent  for  the  proposed  purchase  from  C :  B  buys  the  house :  B  then
assigns  his  rights  against  C  to  A  (result,  A  alone  is  entitled  against
C) ;  A  and  C  then  novate  B's  debt  to  C  by  A's  promising  by  stipula-
tion to  pay  it  in  lieu  of  B  :  (result,  C  is  entitled  against  A  alone).

After  becoming  B's  assignee,  the  principal  (A)  at  first  sued  only  in
B's  name,  but  later  he  was  allowed  to  sue  in  his  own  by  actio  utilis
(see  p.  487  supr.),  though  his  right  of  action  arose  only  upon  an
actual  cessio,  which  however,  if  necessary,  he  could  extort  from  B  by
actio  mandati :  '  evictionis  actio  domino  contra  venditorem  invito
procuratore  non  datur,  sed  per  actionem  mandati  ea  cedere  cogitur '
Dig.  41.  2.  49.  2.  There  is  one  passage  which  appears,  in  direct
contradiction  to  this,  to  affirm  that  the  principal  could  sue  apart
from  any  assignment ;  '  quod  procurator  ex  re  domini,  mandato  non
refragante,  stipulatur,  invito  procuratore  dominus  petere  potest '  Dig.
3.  3.  68  ;  but  here  most  of  the  commentators  are  agreed  that  a  *  non '
has  slipped  out  between  petere  and  potest ;  and  even  without  resort-
ing to  this  textual  emendation  one  may  suppose  the  passage  to  mean
'whether  the  agent  likes  it  or  not  the  dominus  can  sue,  because  he
can  compel  him  to  make  an  assignment  of  his  rights  of  action.'
Mainly  upon  the  strength  of  this  passage,  however,  Savigny  (Oblig.
i.  243  sq.  j  cf.  Posters  Gaius,  note  on  iii.  162)  has  built  up  a  theory
that  wherever  a  cessio  could  be  compelled,  it  was  implied  or  feigned
to  have  actually  taken  place  :  ergo  the  principal  could  always  sue  by
actio  utilis  without  the  necessity  for  any  actual  assignment  of  the
right  of  action  :  but  this  has  very  slender  textual  authority,  and  is
denied  by  most  of  Savigny's  most  eminent  successors.  It  would
seem  that  the  only  cases  in  which  an  actio  utilis  was  granted  to  the
principal  without  actual  cessio  (and  that  only  causa  cognita,  after  an
inquiry  into  the  facts)  are  where  the  principal  is  a  soldier.  Dig.  12.
I.  26,  where  the  agent  is  acting  for  a  person  *praesens'  in  the  sense
explained  on  Bk.  iv.  11.  4  inf.,  Dig.  45.  i.  793  where  the  agent
makes  stipulations  before  the  magistrate.  Dig.  46.  5.  5,  and  finally
in  special  cases  where  otherwise  the  principal  would  be  seriously
prejudiced.  Dig.  14.  i.  i.  18.

As  for  the  liabilities  arising  from  the  contract  made  by  the  agent
with  a  third  party,  none  of  these  directly  affected  the  principal  by  the
civil  law  at  all.     He  was  indirectly  answerable  for  them,  because


5o8  EXCURSUS  IX.

after  they  had  been  satisfied  by  the  agent  the  latter  could  sue  him  by
actio  mandati  contraria  for  all  expenses  he  had  incurred :  but  if  he
came  to  stand  in  a  direct  obligatory  relation  with  the  third  party,  he
did  so  only  in  virtue  of  an  express  contract  between  himself  and  the
latter,  producing  a  novation  of  the  agent's  debt,  not  under  that  which
the  agent  had  made  on  his  behalf.  How  far  this  was  altered  by  the
praetor  when  the  agent  was  his  slave  or  filiusfamilias  is  explained
more  fully  in  Bk.  iv.  Tit.  7  inf.  But  where  a  shipowner  (exercitor)
appointed  any  one,  whether  in  his  power  or  not,  as  captain  (magister)
of  his  ship,  the  praetor  made  him  directly  liable  in  full,  by  actio  exer-
citoria,  upon  all  business  contracts  made  by  the  magister  as  his  agent,
e.  g.  insurances,  loans  for  repairs,  &c.,  Bk.  iv.  7.  2  inf.  The  same
rule  was  applied  by  the  praetor  when  one  appointed  another,
whether  in  one's  power  or  not,  as  one's  institor,  i.  e.  to  manage
a  trade  or  business  for  one,  e.  g.  as  merchant,  tailor,  banker,  &c. ;  the
principal  was  made  directly  liable,  by  actio  institoria,  on  all  contracts
entered  into  by  the  institor  in  the  ordinary  course  of  the  business.
And  eventually,  if  the  contract  which  the  agent  made  for  the  principal
did  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  either  of  these  two  remedies,  the  latter
was  made  directly  liable  in  every  case  by  the  action  called  quasi-
institoria  or  institoria  utilis,  neither  of  which  names,  however,  is
classical.  Finally,  if  the  agent  exceeded  his  commission,  and  the
principal  was  benefited  by  the  unauthorized  contract,  he  was  directly
suable  pro  tanto  by  the  praetorian  action  de  in  rem  verso^  Dig.  15.
3  :  Cod.  4.  26.  7.  I :  Dig.  17.  2.  82.  All  four  actions  belong  to  the
class  known  as  actiones  adiectitiae  qualitatis,  because  they  were  sub-
sidiary or  additional  to  the  natural  remedy  against  the  true  contracting
party;  for  though  by  these  changes  the  principal  had  been  made
directly  liable,  the  agent  had  not  therefore  been  exonerated;  the
third  party,  who  contracted  with  him,  had  the  option  of  suing  which-
ever he  pleased,  the  agent  by  direct  action  on  the  contract,  or  the
principal  by  actio  adiectitiae  qualitatis,  these  two  being  in  fact  correi
debendi ;  *  est  autem  nobis  electio,  utrum  exercitorem  an  magistrum
convenire  velimus'  Dig.  14.  i.  i.  17,  'item  si  servus  meus  navem
exercebit,  et  cum  magistro  eius  contraxero,  nihil  obstabit  quominus
adversus  magistrum  experiar  actione,  quae  mihi  vel  iure  civili  vel
honorario  competit :  nam  et  cuivis  alii  non  obstat  hoc  edictum,  quo-
minus  cum  magistro  agere  possit :  hoc  enim  edicto  non  transfertur
actio  sed  adicitur '  Dig.  ib.  5.  i  :  and  it  does  not  seem  to  be  true,  as
some  maintain,  that  the  agent's  liability  ceases  as  soon  as  he  is  no
longer  agent,  or  is  limited  by  the  extent  of  the  principal's  assets.


INTRODUCTION   TO   BOOK   IV.

The  first  five  Titles  of  this  Book  relate  to  the  two  classes  of  Obliga-
tions which  have  not  yet  been  treated,  namely,  those  which  arise  from
Delict  and  quasi  ex  delicto.  These,  we  are  told,  are  all  of  one
character :  that  is  to  say,  the  existence  of  the  obligation  does  not
depend  in  different  cases  on  different  *  causae/  in  the  sense  in  which,
for  instance,  Sale  is  binding  so  soon  as  the  parties  have  agreed  upon
the  price,  while  Exchange  produces  no  vinculum  iuris  until  there  has
been  performance  on  one  side  ;  but  their  '  causa '  is  always  the  same,
viz.  a  wrongful  act  (res  ,  upon  the  commission  of  which  the  obliga-
tion at  once  springs  into  existence.  Of  such  wrongful  acts  four  have
specific  names,  and  are  called  Delicts :  Theft  (furtum),  Robbery
(rapina),  Injury  to  property  (damnum),  and  wilful  Injury  to  the
person  or  reputation  (iniuria).

The  precise  differentia  of  Delict,  as  compared  with  other  forms  of
legal  wrong,  and  the  reason  why  some  of  these  ofTences — notably
Theft  and  Robbery — were  ever  treated  by  the  Romans  as  civil
wrongs  at  all,  are  topics  upon  which  something  is  said  in  the  com-
mentary below.  The  text  of  the  first  Title  deals  with  Theft.  The
definition  of  this,  as  the  deliberately  wrongful  dealing  with  (moveable)
property,  is  contrasted  with  our  own  English  treatment  of  the  offence
by  its  width  and  generality.  It  is  Theft  not  merely  to  appropriate
what  one  knows  to  belong  to  another,  but  to  barely  use  a  thing  of
which  one  has  undertaken  the  custody  or  which  one  holds  in  pledge,
to  turn  what  has  been  lent  one  to  a  use  which  it  is  not  believed
the  lender  would  have  sanctioned,  or  even  to  deprive  another  of  the
possession  of  an  object  which  one  has  delivered  to  him  as  security
for  money  owed.

The  Romans  divide  the  offence  into  two  orders,  according  as  the
delinquent  is  or  is  not  detected  in  its  commission ;  the  penalty  in
the  first  case  being  a  mulct  of  four  times,  in  the  second  one  of  twice


5IO  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  /F.

the  value  of  the  property  stolen  :  besides  this,  the  person  injured  can
by  an  independent  action  recover  either  the  property  itself  or  its
value.  Certain  obsolete  varieties  of  Theft,  punished  under  the  older
law  by  penalties  quantitatively  differing  from  these,  are  incidentally
noticed  \  the  liability  of  instigators  and  accessories  is  accurately
determined  by  illustrations ;  the  necessity  of  Intent  to  constitute
the  offence  is  dwelt  upon;  and  finally  there  is  an  examination
of  the  question,  what  interest  will  suffice  to  enable  a  person  to  bring
the  penal  action.

Robbery  (Title  2)  implies  Theft ;  the  injured  person  consequently
may  proceed  by  either  actio  furti  or  bonorum  vi  raptorum,  though
the  latter,  being  praetorian,  was,  so  far  as  it  was  penal,  barred  by
limitation  in  an  annus  utilis.  The  distinction  between  the  two
offences  is  that  Robbery  is  always  accompanied  by  violence ;  there
is  also  a  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  remedy,  by  which,  should  the
offence  be  treated  as  rapina,  both  penalty  and  compensation  are
simultaneously  recovered,  whereas  the  actio  furti  is  penal  only,  com-
pensation being  obtained  by  condictio  furtiva.  A  stringent  enact-
ment of  Valentinian  is  here  noticed,  which  was  designed  to  check
violent  seizure  of  property,  moveable  or  immoveable,  under  the
pretence  that  the  seizor  believed  it  to  be  his  own;  a  plea  which
excluded  the  presumption  of  dolus  malus,  and  consequently  ex-
empted him  from  the  penalties  of  both  Theft  and  Robbery.  It  is
also  observed  that  to  enable  one  to  sue  on  the  latter  one's  interest  in
the  property  may  be  even  more  slender  than  is  required  to  support
an  actio  furti.

The  third  Title  treats  of  the  lex  Aquilia,  an  early  statute  which
practically  contains  the  whole  of  the  law  of  Injury  to  property,
damnum  iniuria  datum.  The  peculiarity  of  this  Delict  is  that  mere
negligence  is  sufficient  to  render  one  liable  to  its  penalties :  '  non
minus  quam  ex  dolo  ex  culpa  quisque  hac  lege  tenetur.'  What
amounts  to  negligence  in  this  connection  is  clearly  shown  by  a  series
of  illustrations.  The  lex  Aquilia  contained  three  chapters,  the
second  of  which  was  obsolete  under  Justinian.  The  first  dealt
with  the  killing  of  slaves  and  certain  domesticated  animals,  and
imposed  a  penalty  of  the  highest  value  such  slave  or  animal  had
borne  at  any  time  within  the  year  immediately  preceding.  The
third  related  to  almost  every  other  kind  of  damage  to  property :
its  penalty  was  such  property's  highest  value  within  the  last  thirty
days  before  the  wrong  was  done.  It  is  observed  that  the  crude
method  of  determining  the  penalty  prescribed  by  the  statute  itself  had


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IV.  511

been  very  much  altered  by  the  *  interpretatio '  of  the  older  lawyers,
expanded  by  the  commentaries  of  their  successors  under  the  empire :
certain  extensions  of  the  statute  by  the  action  of  the  praetor  to  cases
not  strictly  within  its  letter  are  noticed ;  and  the  wide  meaning  of
'  damnum  '  to  be  gathered  from  its  terms  is  illustrated  by  examples.

The  fourth  Delict  (Iniuria,  Title  4)  is  aimed  at  the  honour,  good
name,  and  reputation  of  a  free  person :  it  comprises  such  acts  as
assault  and  battery,  libel,  slander,  and  in  fact  all  treatment  of  or
demeanour  towards  a  man  by  which  his  character  is  likely  to  be
injured,  and  which  is  calculated  to  arouse  resentment.  It  is  pointed
out  that  a  wrong  of  this  sort  may  be  inflicted  upon  one  in  the  person
of  one's  wife,  children,  or  slaves ;  for  though  the  slave  himself  has
no  rights  whatever,  and  therefore  no  good  name  to  injure,  yet  the
object  of  an  attack  upon  him  may  be  to  dishonour  his  master.  The
penalty  for  this  offence,  originally  in  some  cases  retaliatory,  had
been  altered  by  the  praetor  to  a  pecuniary  mulct,  which  the  injured
person  was  allowed  within  certain  limits  to  fix  himself;  the  con-
siderations upon  which  its  amount  depended  were  in  the  main  his
rank  and  the  circumstances  under  which  the  injury  had  been  in-
flicted, which  would  sometimes  bring  it  within  the  category  of  iniuria
atrox.  Among  minor  points  touched  upon  in  the  text  are  the  bear-
ing of  the  lex  Cornelia  upon  this  subject,  the  alternative  criminal
remedy,  the  liability  of  accessories  and  instigators,  and  the  extinc-
tion of  the  actio  iniuriae  by  dissimulatio  or  condonation.

The  fifth  Title  illustrates  the  class  of  obligations  which  arise  quasi
ex  delicto,  and  which  seem  mainly  to  be  cases  of  vicarious  responsi-
bility, such  as  that  of  a  householder  for  damage  caused  by  things
^  effusa  et  deiecta '  from  his  residence,  and  of  an  inn  or  stable  keeper
for  the  delicts  of  his  employks.  The  reason  why  a  judge  was  held
liable  quasi  ex  delicto  for  loss  occasioned  to  suitors  by  his  incapacity
or  injustice  would  seem  only  to  be  that  such  an  offence  could  not
be  brought  within  the  definition  of  any  of  the  four  old  established
Delicts.

At  Title  6  we  enter  upon  the  discussion  of  the  last  department  of
Private  Law — ^the  ius  quod  ad  actiones  pertinet.  The  division  of  law
into  law  of  Persons  and  law  of  Things  is  perhaps  as  old  as  Cicero
(Invent,  i.  24),  and  apparently  was  the  basis  of  a  classification  in  the
Perpetual  Edict  (Dig.  i.  5.  2) ;  but  Gaius,  so  far  as  we  know,  was
the  first  jurist  who  added  the  third  division  of  actiones.  It  may  be
doubted  whether  his  own  conception  of  this  branch  of  his  system  was
as  clear  as  a  more  modern  writer  might  have  made  it.    The  term


512  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IK

actio,  as  is  shown  in  the  note  on  Tit.  6.  pr.,  has  a  variety  of  meanings
in  the  writings  of  the  Roman  lawyers,  and  two  of  them  seem  to  be
more  or  less  blended  in  Gaius'  fourth  Book,  which  wholly  relates  to
this  topic.  In  one  sense,  actio  is  a  right  of  action ;  and  a  treatise
upon  rights  of  action  would  correspond  with  what  writers  on  analy-
tical Jurisprudence  term  the  Law  of  Sanctioning  or  Remedial  rights.
In  another  sense  actio  means  the  Procedure  in  an  action ;  taken
thus,  the  ius  quod  ad  actiones  pertinet  would  correspond  to  what  the
same  writers  call  Adjective  Law,  and  which  it  is  perhaps  more  proper
to  regard  as  a  part  of  the  Public  rather  than  of  the  Private  code.
The  fourth  Book  of  Gaius  would  seem  to  be  an  ill-arranged  attempt
to  deal  with  actio  in  both  of  these  aspects.  It  cannot  be  contended
that  it  deals  solely  with  Remedial  rights  :  Gaius'  own  explanation  of
the  term  actio  in  his  opening  paragraphs  shows  that  he  is  thinking
of  an  '  action '  rather  than  of  a  *  right  of  action,'  based,  as  it  is,  upon
peculiarities  of  Procedure  and  Pleading.  In  point  of  fact  a  very
considerable  proportion  of  the  Book  deals  with  Procedure  pure  and
simple:  in  other  words,  'Procedure  is  treated  partly  indeed  in  its
formal  character,  but  still  more  in  its  material  character :  .  .  .  that
is  to  say,  not  so  far  as  it  is  merely  the  method  of  realizing  pre-
existing rights,  but  rather  so  far  as  its  stages  are  titles  which,  like
Dispositions  and  Torts,  themselves  originate  new  rights  and  new
obligations.'

The  compilers  of  the  Institutes,  however,  seem  to  have  had  a  very
inadequate  conception  of  Gaius*  scheme,  and  indeed  to  have  troubled
themselves  very  little  in  this  part  of  the  work  to  follow  out  consistently
the  principle  of  arrangement  for  which  they  were  indebted  to  him.
Strictly  speaking,  of  course,  all  the  Titles  between  the  fifth  and  the
end  of  the  Book  should  have  related  to  actions  in  some  sense  or
other :  but  they  seem  to  have  considered  it  better  to  give  the  heading
'  de  actionibus '  to  a  single  Title  (6),  in  which  all  conceivable  rights
of  action  are  classified  upon  various  principles  of  division,  and  to
append  to  this  a  number  of  subsidiary  Titles  dealing  mostly  with
topics  discussed  by  Gaius  in  a  far  closer  and  more  logical  connection
with  his  main  subject.  The  effect  of  this  is  to  give  an  air  of  deadness
to  the  whole  treatment,  and  to  disable  the  compilers  from  justifying
the  place  assigned  in  the  fourth  Book  to  some  matters  for  which
Gaius  himself  might  possibly  have  offered  some  reasonable  defence.
For  instance,  if  it  is  right  to  describe  in  Book  III  the  extent  to  which
a  paterfamilias  profits  by  the  contracts  of  a  son  in  his  power,  or  a
master  by  those  of  his  slave  (Tit  28),  that  too  must  be  the  proper


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IK  513

place  to  <!xp]ain  what  corresponding  liability  he  incurs  by  them  :  but
this  is  discussed  in  Book  IV,  Tit.  7,  while  Titles  8  and  9,  though
placed  where  they  are  after  Gains,  would  have  occupied  a  far  more
logical  position  between  Titles  5  and  6»  in  connection  with  obligations
arising  from  Delict  and  quasi  ex  delicto.  No  doubt  this  failure  to  carry
out  the  original  plan  of  arrangement  is  in  a  large  measure  to  be
explained  by  the  great  change  which  had  occurred  in  the  nature  of
Procedure  proper  between  the  composition  of  the  two  works.  The
mode  in  which  an  action  was  conducted  in  Justinian's  time  was  so
untechnical,  so  free  from  the  trammels  of  law,  and  so  much  was  left
to  the  discretion  of  the  judge  himself,  that  little  could  be  said  upon
the  matter :  the  litigant  was  no  longer  liable  to  be  wrecked  by  the
omission  of  some  slight  form ;  the  administraticm  of  justice  had
become  more  '  paternal,'  and  state  oifidab  saw  that  he  duly  went
through  many  stages  in  the  process  (or  went  through  them  for  him)
for  which  the  earlier  law  had  left  him  solely  responsible  in  person.
Knowledge  of  Procedure  was  therefore  of  less  importance  than  in
the  old  days^  and  what  there  was  to  know  could  be  learnt  less  satis-
factorily from  books  than  by  attending  the  courts,  to  which  Justinian
himself  refers  the  student  (e.  g.  Tit  11.  6).  Hence  it  is  impossible
to  give  a  really  connected  view  of  the  matters  discussed  in  the  last
thirteen  Titles  of  the  Book  which  lies  before  us.  So  far  as  there
ever  was  a  connection  between  them,  it  is  to  be  ascertained  by
systematically  reading  the  fourth  Book  of  Gaius,  not  that  of  his
imitator.

In  the  sixth  Title  Actions  are  divided  upon  three  main  principles.

i.  According  to  their  content  they  are  divided  {a)  into  real  and
personal.  A  real  action  is  one  in  which  the  plaintiff  affirms  a  right
in  rem,  whether  dominium  (§  i)  or  a  ius  in  re  aliena  (§  2);  in
a  personal  action  his  contention  is  that  the  defendant  is  under  some
specific  legal  obligation  to  him.  '  Prejudicial '  actions,  in  which  the
issue  usually  is  a  question  of  status,  may  be  regarded  as  a  species  of
the  former  class :  in  rem  esse  videntur,  §  13 ;  and  some  actions
'  mixtam  causam  obtinere  videntur '  (§  20),  i.  e.  are  at  once  both  real
and  personal ;  these  are  the  indicia  divisoria,  such  as  suits  for  the
partition  of  an  inheritance  or  other  joint  property,  and  for  the  r^;u-
lation  of  boundaries.  Cross  divisions  from  this  same  point  of  view
of  content  are  ip)  that  which  turns  uptf>n  the  plaintiff's  more  imme-
diate object,  according  as  it  is  to  obtain  mere  reparation  (actiones  rei
persecutoriae,  §  17),  as  in  real  actions  and  those  arising  ex  contractu ;
to  merely  recover  a  penalty  (poenae  persecutoriae,  §  18),  as  in  the

l1


w^


514  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IV.

actio  furti;  or  to  get  compensation  and  penalty  in  one  (actiones
mixtae^  §  19),  as  in  the  actions  on  robbery  and  under  the  lex  Aquilia,
(c)  according  to  the  amount  of  damages  recovered,  which  may  be
simple  (e.g.  actions  on  contract,  §  22),  double  (e.g.  the  actio  furti
nee  manifesti,  §  23),  triple  (§  24)  or  quadruple  (e.  g.  the  actio  furti
manifesti,  §  25);  (</)  that  which  depends  upon  the  possibility  of  the
plaintiffs  being  unable  to  recover  the  whole  of  what  is  his  strict  legal
due  §  (36),  owing  to  the  defendant's  liability  being  merely  partial  or
conditional  on  his  means  :  examples  of  these  are  given  in  §§  36-40.

ii.  Actions  are  called  legitimae  or  civiles  if  accorded  by  the  civil
law,  honorariae  or  praetoriae  if  their  source  is  merely  the  imperium
of  the  magistrate,  §  3.  Praetorian  real  actions  are  exemplified  by
the  actiones  Publiciana,  Serviana,  and  hypothecaria,  §§  4-7  \  among
those  which  are  personal  are  the  actiones  de  pecunia  constituta  ($  9),
de  peculio  (§  10),  and  others  which  are  penal  (§  12).

iii.  Finally,  there  is  a  division  the  origin  of  which  is  to  be  sought
in  the  formulary  period,  and  which  turns  upon  the  nature  of  the  pro-
cedure. Actiones  arbitrariae  (§31)  are  those  designed  to  enable
a  plaintiff  to  obtain  ^production,  restitution  or  delivery  of  specific
property.  Actions  in  personam  are  for  the  most  part  either  stricd
iuris  or  bonae  fidei  (§  28),  a  distinction  more  fully  explained  else-
where ' ;  the  latter  class  is  illustrated  by  examples,  and  the  extension
of  one  of  its  leading  features — set  off — to  the  former  is  noticed
in  §  30.

Lastly,  thrust  into  this  classification  of  actions,  in  deference  to
Gaius,  are  one  or  two  topics  which  would  have  been  better  discussed
in  some  other  place.  The  thirty-second  section,  which  corre-
sponds with  Gaius  iv.  52,  should  properly  form  part  of  Title  17  (*de
officio  iudicis ') ;  and  the  explanation  of  the  effects  of  plus  and  minus
petitio,  and  of  erroneous  as  distinct  from  over  claim  (§§  33-35,  cor-
responding with  Gaius  iv.  53-60),  which  really  is  a  matter  of  Proce-
dure, might  be  placed  in  several  of  the  following  Titles  as  appropri-
ately as  here.

In  the  seventh  Title  are  explained  the  so  called  '  actiones  adiecti-
tiae  qualitatis,'  by  which  the  Praetor  had  tempered  the  inequitable
doctrine  of  the  civil  law  that  a  master  or  paterfamilias,  though
entitled  to  all  benefit  under  the  contracts  of  his  slaves  or  children  in
power,  could  in  no  case  be  sued  upon  them.  By  the  actiones  quod
iussu,  exercitoria,  and  institoria  the  superior  became  liable  in  soli-

^  Note  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  28  inf.


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IV.  515

dum  whenever  it  could  be  shown  that  he  had  directed  or  authorized
the  contract.  Where  a  slave  or  filiusiamilias  embarked  a  peculium
in  trade  with  his  master's  or  father's  knowledge,  and  became  insol-
vent, the  master  or  father  was  permitted  to  distribute  the  assets
among  the  creditors,  though  any  one  of  them  who  was  dissatisfied
with  such  distribution  was  enabled  by  the  actio  tributoria  to  bring  it
under  judicial  review :  if  the  pater  or  dominus  was  himself  a  creditor,
he  was  entitled  to  no  larger  dividend  than  the  rest.  Where,  on  the
other  hand,  the  slave  or  son  made  the  contract  without  the  superior's
knowledge,  the  latter  was  liable  in  person  by  the  actio  de  in  rem
verso  so  far  as  the  transaction  had  resulted  in  a  benefit  to  himself;
otherwise  he  could  be  compelled  only  to  surrender  the  peculium,  and
had  the  privilege  of  first  deducting  from  it  debts  owed  to  himself
in  full.  There  is  also  a  discussion  of  the  relative  advantages  to  the
creditor  of  these  different  actions  and  of  a  condictio,  where  he  has
an  option ;  and  in  §  7  we  have  a  notice  of  the  SC.  Macedonianum,
which  refused  an  acdon  upon  money  loans  given  to  a  child  in  power
against  the  latter  himself  no  less  than  against  the  paterfamilias.

In  the  following  Title  (8)  there  is  a  corresponding  treatment  of  the
dominus'  and  paterfamib'as'  liability  on  the  delicts  of  those  in  their
potestas.  The  law  by  which  the  several  delicts  had  been  constituted,
whether  civil  or  praetorian,  had  given  the  superior  the  option  of  pay*
ing  damages  or  surrendering  the  delinquent,  as  a  slave  or  in  mancipio;
to  the  injured  person.  Justinian  definitely  confirmed  as  law  the
usage  which  had  grown  up  under  the  later  Empire,  and  which  limited
this  *  noxal '  surrender  to  slaves :  children  in  power  were  to  be  per-
sonally liable  on  their  delicts,  and  the  paterfamilias  free.  The  maxim
^  noxalis  actio  caput  sequitur '  is  explained  in  §  5,  and  in  §  6  there  is
a  discussion  of  the  effects  of  delicts  committed  by  slaves  against  their
own  masters.  The  application  of  noxal  surrender  in  the  case  of
pauperies,  or  damage  done  by  certain  domesticated  animals,  is  treated
in  Title  9,  which  also  gives  some  account  of  a  penal  action  intro*
duced  by  the  aedile  for  the  redress  of  injuries  or  damage  done  by
wild  animals  kept  under  insufficient  control  near  places  of  pubUc
resort.

The  Titles  between  the  9th  and  the  15th  have  a  nearer  relation
to  Procedure  proper  than  the  other  parts  of  this  Book,  and  are  all
closely  modelled  after  Gains.  The  first  of  them  deals,  though  some-
what uninstructively,  with  the  employment  of  agents  or  attorneys  in
litigation,  which,  originally  tolerated  only  in  very  few  cases,  had,  as
Justinian  remarks,  become  almost  universally  permissible  under  the

Lla


'  v»


516  INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IV.

later  practice.  Title  1 1  gives  a  historical  account  of  the  earlier  law
as  to  the  security  to  be  given  by  plaintiffs  and  defendants,  especially
when  reinresented  by  such  attorneys,  and  then  proceeds  to  state
the  rules  in  force  upon  this  subject  under  Justinian,  and  Title  12
discusses  the  active  and  passive  transmission  of  rights  of  action,
their  extinction  by  a  longer  or  shorter  limitation,  and  the  right
of  a  defendant  under  the  maxim  *  omnia  iudicia  absolutoria '  to  be
acquitted  if  he  satisfied  the  plaintiff's  claim  at  any  moment  before
judgment

Exceptiones — ^a  class  of  defences  consisting  in  the  plea  of  a  coun-
tervailing right  as  distinct  from  a  direct  denial  of  the  plaintiffs
allegations — form  the  subject  of  Title  13,  and  are  copiously  illus-
trated in  its  first  few  paragraphs.  The  most  important  classification
of  them,  which  turns  upon  the  energy  of  their  operation  in  respect  of
time  and  persons,  is  then  pointed  out  and  exemplified,  and  the  effect
of  a  plaintiff's  bringing  his  action  before  really  entided  to  do  so,  both
under  the  old  law  and  as  regulated  by  an  enactment  of  Zeno,  is
carefully  described  The  possibility  of  meeting  a  defendant's  excepdo
by  a  replicatio  on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff— a  fencing  process  which
might  be  carried  to  any  length  by  duplicationes,  triplicationes,  &c. —
is  noticed  and  iUustrated  in  Title  14,  which  concludes  with  a  state-
ment of  the  law  as  to  how  far  sureties  could  defend  themselves  by
the  exceptiones  of  their  principal  The  subject  of  die  15th  Title
is  interdicts,  a  class  of  actions  relating  for  the  most  part  to  Possession
and  Quasi-possession,  the  acquisition  and  retention  of  which  are
lightly  touched  upon  in  §  5.  The  procedure  in  interdicts,  which  in
the  formulary  period  had  been  of  a  peculiar  and  complicated  nature^
of  which  some  account  is  given  in  the  notes,  was  under  Justinian  (as
he  points  out  in  §  8)  much  the  same  as  in  an  ordinary  action.  In
general  they  are  divided  according  as  the  object  for  which  the  inter-
dict is  brought  is  the  prevention  of  some  unlawful  act,  or  the  restitu-
tion or  production  of  property :  those  which  relate  exclusively  to
possession  fall  into  three  classes,  adipiscendae,  retinendae,  and
recuperandae  possessionis  causa ;  the  first  kind  is  illustrated  by  the
interdicta  Salvianum  and  quorum  bonorum,  the  second  by  uti  possi-
detis and  utrubi  (in  describing  which  the  older  procedure  is  inci-
dentally touched  upon),  and  the  last  by  unde  vi.  Finally,  interdicts
are  divided  into  simple  and  double,  the  latter  being  those  in  which
neither  party  plays  exclusively  the  rdU  of  either  plaintiff  or  defen-
dant; a  peculiarity  from  which  had  resulted  the  very  complicated
character  of  their  procedure  as  described  by  Gains.    This  is  followed


\


INTRODUCTION  TO  BOOK  IV.  517

in  Title  16  by  an  account  of  the  precautions  taken  by  Roman  law  to
prevent  people  from  either  beginning  or  defending  actions  without
just  and  reasonable  cause.  Among  these  are  the  oath  exacted  from
both  parties  and  their  counsel  that  they  honestly  believe  their  case
to  be  a  good  one ;  the  duplication  of  damages  in  some  actions  if  the
defendant  denied  his  liability ;  the  association  of  infamia  with  con-
demnation in  others ;  and  the  obligation  of  the  losing  side  to  pay
the  other's  costs.  The  last  paragraph  relates  to  summons,  and  to  the
penalty  inflicted  on  freedmen  and  children  in  power  if  they  presumed
to  commence  litigation  against  their  patron  or  paterfamilias  without
first  obtaining  the  praetor's  permission.  Title  17  explains  the  duties
of  the  judge  in  different  kinds  of  suits,  real  and  noxal  actions  and  the
iudicia  divisoria  being  selected  for  special  treatment;  and  in  Title
18,  the  Book  concludes  with  a  short  account  of  public  prosecutions,
and  the  leading  statutes  by  which  crimes  were  defined,  and  their
punishment  prescribed.  Treason  is  dealt  with  in  §  3  :  adultery  and
similar  offences  in  §  4 :  murder  in  §  5,  and  the  peculiar  form  of  it
known  as  parricidium  in  §  6  :  forgery  in  §  7  ;  violence  to  the  person
in  §  8  :  embezzlement  in  §  9  :  manstealing  and  kidnapping  in  §  10  :
and  a  variety  of  minor  offences  punished  more  lightly  than  these
in  §  II.


LIBER  QUARTUS,


I.


DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUAE  EX  DELICTO  NASCUNTUR.

Cum  expositum  sit  superiore  libro  de  obligationibus  ex
contractu  et  quasi  ex  contractu,  sequitur  ut  de  obligationibus
ex  maleficio  dispiciamus.  sed  illae  quidem,  ut  suo  loco
tradidimus,  in  quattuor  genera  dividuntur:  hae  vero  unius
generis  sunt,  nam  omnes  ex  re  nascuntur,  id  est  ex  ipso
maleficio,  veluti  ex  furto  aut  rapina  aut  damno  aut  iniuria.

Tit.  I.  A  delict  is  usually  defined  as  a  violation  of  a  ius  in  rem  which
generates  an  obligation  remissible  by  the  private  individual  who  is  wronged.
This,  though  it  serves  to  distinguish  delict,  as  a  source  of  obligations,  from
contract,  and  as  a  private  wrong  from  a  crime,  is  insufficient  when  applied
to  Roman  law.  Such  wrongs  as  the  withholding  of  possession  by  a  de-
fendant who  bona  fide  believes  in  his  own  title  are  not  delicts,  at  any  rate
in  the  specific  sense  in  which  the  term  is  used  in  the  Institutes ;  they  give
rise,  it  is  true,  to  a  right  of  action,  but  a  right  of  action  is  a  different  thing
from  an  obligatio  ex  delicto  :  they  are  redressed  by  mere  reparation,  by
the  wrong-doer  being  compelled  to  put  the  other  in  the  position  in  which
he  would  have  been  had  the  wrong  never  been  committed.  But  delicts,
as  contrasted  with  them  and  with  contracts,  possess  three  peculiarities.
The  obligations  which  arise  from  them  are  independent,  and  do  not
merely  modify  obligations  already  subsisting :  they  always  involve  dolus
or  culpa ;  and  the  remedies  by  which  they  are  redressed  are  penal.  From
every  true  delict  arises  an  obligation  to  pay  a  penalty  to  the  person  who
pursues  it ;  and  from  every  delict  which  causes  damnum  or  proprietary
loss  arises  also  an  obligation  to  compensate  the  injured  person  for  that
loss.  This  latter  obligation,  though  it  does  not  enrich  the  person  wronged,
may  itself  be  penal— as  where  the  wrong-doer  has  derived  little  or  no
material  benefit  from  the  wrong,  so  that  after  making  compensation  he  is
poorer  than  before  he  committed  the  delict  In  such  cases  the  action  is
treated  as  a  penal  action ;  e.g.  in  not  being  passively  transmissible  except
so  far  as  the  delinquent's  property  has  been  augmented  by  the  wrong ;


Tit.  I.]  DE  OBLIGATION IBUS  QUAE,  ETC.        519

Furtum  est  contrectatio  rei  fraudulosa  vel  ipsius   rei   vel  1
etiam  usus  eius  possessionisve,  quod  lege  naturali  prohibitum

Savigny  proposes  to  term  it  'unilaterally  penal.'  The  two  obligations
arising  from  delicts  which  cause  proprietary  loss  are  not  always  pursued
by  different  remedies  ;  this  is  so  in  furtum,  but  in  rapina  and  damnum
iniuria  datum  both  penalty  and  compensation  are  recovered  by  a  single
action,  which  for  that  reason  is  called  mixta ;  i.  e.  it  is  '  tarn  rei  quam
poenae  persequendae  comparata'  Tit.  6.  19  inf.

Gains'  remark  (iii.  182)  that  all  delicts  are  of  one  kind,  which  Justinian
here  explains  by  saying  that  they  all '  ex  re  nascuntur,'  means  that  in  them
the  obligation  is  not  produced  (as  in  contracts)  by  different  causae ;  it
springs  from  the  wrongful  act  itself,  and  from  that  alone.  The  use  of
the  word  *  res '  (for  which  cf.  the  line  cited  from  Terence  p.  470  supr.)  is
unhappy,  because  it  suggests  a  reference,  as  probably  Justinian  intended,
to  the  obligations  quae  re  contrahuntur,  Bk.  iii.  14  supr. ;  in  the  Digest
the  idea  is  better  expressed  by  '  factum : '  '  ex  facto  actio  est,  quotiens  ex
eo  teneri  quis  incipit  quod  ipse  admisit,  veluti  furtum  vel  iniuriam  commi-
sit  vel  damnum  dedit'  Dig.  44.  7.  25.  i ;  ib.  52.  8.

Of  the  four  delicts  here  mentioned  furtum  and  iniuria  are  older  than
the  others,  both  being  treated  in  the  Twelve  Tables,  Gaius  iii.  189,  Tit.
4.  7  inf.  Damnum  iniuria  datum  was  constituted  a  specific  delict  by
the  lex  Aquilia,  287  B.  a,  and  rapina  or  robbery  by  the  praetor's  edict,
B.  c.  77.

§  1.  This  definition  requires  expansion  in  two  particulars.    To  rei
should  be  added  mobilis  (see  Bk.  ii.  6.  7  supr.) :  and  the  motive  must  be
gain ;  a  point  marked  in  the  counterpart  of  the  definition  given  in<  Dig.
47.  2.  I.  3  (lucri  faciendi  causa) :  cf.  Dig.  ib.  43.  4 ;  ib.  65.    Its  terms  re-
quire some  elucidation.    Contrectatio  implies  that  without  an  '  overt  act '
there  can  be  no  furtum :  cf .  §  6  inf.,  and  Dig.  47.  2.  52.  19  'neque  verbo
neque  scriptura  quis  furtum  facit,  hoc  enim  iure  utimur,  ut  furtum  sine
contrectatione  non  fiat ; '  but  the  nature  of  this  overt  act  may  be  manifold,
as  will  appear  below.    Fraudulosa  implies  unlawful  intention  ;  intention,
because  furtum  ex  affectu  consistit,  §§  7  and  18  inf. ;  and  unlawful  intention,
because  if  the  person  acting  honestly  believes  that  his  act  will  not  be  ob-
jected to  by  the  person  wronged,  it  is  not  theft :  '  si  permissurum  credant,
extra  crimen  videri'  §  7  inf.,  though  whether  in  cases  such  as  that  of  which
Justinian  is  immediately  speaking  unlawful  intention  would  not  be  a  pre-
sumption iuris  et  de  iure  is  a  question.    The  animus  lucri  faciendi  fails,  if
the  wrong-doer's  intention  is  merely  to  cause  a  damage  to  the  other ;  e.  g.
if  he  takes  property  intending  immediately  to  throw  it  into  the  sea,  Dig.
19.  5. 14. 2 ;  but  the  requirement  of  its  presence  is  satisfied  if  the  intention
is  not  to  aggrandize  oneself  pecuniarily,  but  to  benefit  oneself  in  some
other  way — e.  g.  where  one  steals  a  ring  in  order  to  make  a  present  of  it :
'  nam  species  lucri  est  ex  alieno  largiri  et  beneficii  debitorem  sibi  adqui-
rere'  Dig.  47.  2.  55.  i.    The  division  into  furtum  rei  ipsius— usus— posses-
sionisve  is  not  designed  to  distinguish  different  species  of  theft  (for  of


520  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

2  est  admittere.  Furtum  autem  vel  a  furvo  id  est  ntgro  dictum
est,  quod  clam  et  obscure  fit  et  plerumque  nocte:  vel  a
fraude :  vel  a  ferendo,  id  est  auferendo :  vel  a  Graeco  sermone,
qui  ^fHxs  appellant  fures.    immo  etiam  Graeci  iifh  rov  4^p€ip

these  there  are  but  two,  §  3  inf.),  bat  to  suggest  the  comprehensive  char-
acter of  the  delict,  and  the  chief  forms  which  the  contrectatio  might  take.
Its  meaning  in  effect  is  this  :  the  general  character  of  furtum  consists  in
intentionally  dealing  with  a  res  mobilis  in  a  wrongful  manner,  and  usually
the  res  is  aliena,  whether  the  intention  be  to  appropriate  ownership  in  it
(ipsius  rei)  or  merely  to  use  it  in  an  unauthorized  manner  (usus) ;  but  it
is  possible  to  commit  theft  on  property  of  one's  own,  though  to  do  this  it
is  as  a  rule  essential  that  the  property  should  be  in  the  lawful  possession
of  another  person,  the  intention  being  to  dispossess  the  latter  (posses-
sionis).  By  Theophilus  furtum  possessionis  is  understood  to  mean  the
wrongful  appropriation  of  a  thing  by  a  person  who  already  has  possession
or  detention  of  it  (ore  rd  doBhf  ^iri  r^  wifAnaBfu  in  tvixVP^  h  ^^  dnroo-tror
pfftofiat  nf  df<nr<(n}ff),  in  other  words,  the  arbitrary  and  wrongful  conversion
of  detention  or  civil  possession  into  usucapion  possession  corpore  et
animo;  but  this  is  rather  furtum  ipsius  rei,  and  Theophilus*  view  is
discountenanced  by  §§  6-10  inf. :  cf.  Dig.  47.  2.  74.
Furtum  then  may  occur  in  any  of  the  following  ways :
(i)  Theft  in  the  popular  sense :  *  cum  quis  rem  alienam  invito  domino
contrectat '  § 6  ;  'fur est,  qui  dolo  malo  rem  alienam  contrectat '  Paul  Sent.
Rec.  2.  31.  I.

(2)  The  wrongful  appn^ation  of  a  res  aliena  which  one  already
possesses  or  detains,  e.g.  as  depositary,  agent,  usufructuary,  etc.  (cf.
Theophilus  supr.) ;  of  this  no  illustrations  are  given  in  this  Title,  but  see
Dig.  47.  2.  I.  3 ;  ib.  33 ;  ib.  43.  i ;  16.  3.  29;  17.  i.  22.  7.

(3)  The  wrongful  appropriation  of  property  found,  Bk.  ii.  1.48  supr.,

Dig.  47.  3. 43.  4-".

(4)  The  mala  fide  alienation  of  a  res  aliena,  Bk.  \L  6.  3  supr.

(5)  The  wilful  destruction  of  bonds  in  order  to  destroy  evideaoe  of  debt.
Dig.  47.  ^'  27-  3 ;  ib.  32.

(6)  The  wrongful  using  of  a  res  aliena  of  which  one  has  possession  or
detention,  e.  g.  by  depositarius,  pledgee,  or  commodatarius,  $  6  infl

(7)  Furtum  of  res  sua,  §  10  and  notes,  inf.

For  the  prohibition  of  furtum  by  natural  law  cf.  Cic.  De  Off.  3. 5  '  illud
natura  non  patitur,  ut  aliorum  spoliis  nostras  facultates  augeamus,'
Augustin.  Confess.  2.  4.  i  'furtum  certe  punit  lex  scripta  in  cordibus
hominum.'  Among  certain  peoples  (e.  g.  the  Egyptians,  Lacedaemonians,
and  Samians)  theft  is  said  to  have  been  allowed  by  their  own  municipal
law ;  Diodor.  Sic.  i.  80,  Xenophon,  Rep.  Laced.  2. 8,  Plutarch,  Lycurgus  12.

§  2.  The  derivation  of  furtum  from  furvus,  which  is  Varro^s  (Bk.  14)
was  approved  by  Labeo,  and  apparently  by  Paulus,  Serv.  ad  Verg.  Georg.
iii.  405 ;  that  from  'fraus '  was  suggested  by  Sabinus :  ^Mp  is  connected
with  ^cpftr  in  more  than  one  old  work  on  etymology.


Tit.  I.]  DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUAE,  ETC.  521

^&pa^  dixerunt.  Furtorum  autem  genera  duo  sunt,  mani-  3
festum  et  nee  manifestum.  nam  conceptual  et  oblatum
species  potius  actionis  sunt  furto  cohaerentes  quam  genera
furtorum,  stcut  inferius  apparebit  manifestus  fur  est,  quern
Graed  iit  avro^dpi^  appellant:  nee  solum  is  qui  in  ipso
furto  deprehenditur,  sed  etiam  is  qui  eo  loco  deprehenditur,
quo  fit,  veluti  qui  in  domo  furtum  fecit  et  nondum  egressus
ianuam  deprehensus  fuerit,  et  qui  in  oliveto  olivarum  aut  in
vineto  uvarum  furtum  fecit,  quamdiu  in  eo  oliveto  aut  in
vineto  fur  deprehensus  sit :  immo  ulterius  furtum  manifestum
extendendum  est,  quamdiu  earn  rem  fur  tenens  visus  vel
deprehensus  fuerit  sive  in  publico  sive  in  privato  vel  a  domino
vel  ab  alio,  antequam  eo  perveniret,  quo  perferre  ac  deponere
rem  destinasset.  sed  si  pertulit  quo  destinavit,  tametsi  de-
prehendatur  cum  re  furtiva,  non  est  manifestus  fur.  nee
manifestum  furtum  quid  sit^  ex  his  quae  diximus  intellegitur :
nam  quod  manifestum  non  est,  id  scilicet  nee  manifestum
est.  Conceptum  furtum  dicitur,  cum  apud  aliquem  testibus  4
praesentibus  furtiva  res  quaesita  et  inventa  sit :  nam  in  eum
propria  actio  constituta  est,  quamvis   fur  non  sit,  quae  ap-


§  8.  The  jurists  seem  to  have  differed  as  to  the  true  definition  of
furtum  manifestum;  Gaius  (iii.  184)  gives  several  proposed  tests,  one  of
which  (the  finding  of  the  thief  at  any  time  with  the  stolen  property  in  his
actual  possession,  rem  tenens)  he  says  was  generally  rejected ;  while  the
qualification  of  this  with  which  Justinian  adopts  it  (that  he  must  not  yet
have  conveyed  it  where  be  intended),  though  accepted  by  Sabinus  (Gel-
lius  1 1. 18.  i),  caused  difficulty  to  Gaius  '  quia  videbatur  aliquam  admittere
dubitationem,  unius  diei  an  etiam  plurium  dierum  spatio  id  terminandum
sit ;  quod  eo  pertinet,  quia  saepe  in  aliis  civitatibus  subreptas  res  in  alias
civitates  vel  in  alias  provincias  destinat  fur  perierre.'  Paulus  gets  over
this  by  strictly  limiting  the  time:  'quo  destinaverat  quis  auferre'  sic
accipiendum  est, '  quo  destinaverat  eo  die  manere  cum  eo  furto '  Dig.  47.
3.  4.  Practically  Justinian's  definition  of  the  offence  was  accepted  in  the
time  of  Gains.

As  a  rule,  arrest  (deprehensio)  actual  or  attempted  was  necessary  to
constitute  furtum  manifestum ;  it  was  not  enough  merely  to  see  the  thief
in  the  commissi<Mi  of  the  act  or  with  the  stolen  goods  in  his  possession,
Dig.  47.  2.  7. 1  and  2.

§  4.  The  penalty  for  furtum  conceptum  and  oblatum  was  fixed  by  the
Twelve  Tables  at  three  times  the  value  of  the  property  stolen,  Gaius  iii.
191.    The  offence  of  furtum  prohibitum,  for  which  the  praetor  established


532  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  IV.

pellatur  concept!,  oblatum  furtum  dicitur,  cum  res  furtiva
ab  aliquo  tibt  oblata  sit  eaque  apud  te  concepta  sit,  utique  si
ea  mente  tibi  data  fuerit,  ut  apud  te  potius  quam  apud  eum
qui  dederit  congiperetur  :.nain  tibi,  apud  quern  concepta  sit,
propria  adversus  eum  qui  optulit,  quamvis  fur  non  sit,  con-
stituta  est  actio,  quae  appellatur  oblati.  est  etiam  prohibit!
furti  actio  adversus  eum,  qui  furtum  quaerere  testibus  prae-
sentibus  volentem  prohibuerit  praeterea  poena  constituitur
edicto  praetoris  per  actionem  furti  non  exhibit!  adversus  eum^
qui  furtivam  rem  apud  se  quaesitam  et  inventam  non  exhibuit.
sed  hae  actiones,  id  est  concepti  et  oblati  et  furti  prohibiti
nee  non  furti  non  exhibiti,  in  desuetudinem  abierunt.  cum
enim  requisitio  rei  furtivae  hodie  secundum  veterem  obser-
vationem  non  fit :  merito  ex  consequentia  etiam  praefatae
actiones  ab  usu  communi  recesserunt,  cum  manifestissimum
est,  quod  omnes,  qui  scientes  rem  furtivam  susceperint  et
5  celaverint,  furti  nee  manifest!  obnoxii  sunt.  Poena  manifest!
furti  quadrupli  est  tam  ex  servi  persona  quam  ex  liberi,  nee
manifest!  dupli.

a  penalty  of  four  times  the  value  (Gaius  iii.  192)  was  not  recognised  by
the  decemviral  legislation,  apparently,  it  has  been  suggested,  because  the
house  was  according  to  the  primitive  view  not  only  an  asylum,  but  under
the  special  protection  of  the  household  gods— Vesta  and  the  Penates —
who  dwelt  and  were  worshipped  there.  But  the  Twelve  Tables  provided
that  if,  after  search  was  resisted,  actual  search  was  made  with  peculiar
formalities,  and  the  stolen  property  was  discovered,  the  furtum  should  be
treated  as  manifestum,  Gaius  iii.  192-4.  This  was  called  furtum  lance  et
lido  conceptum,  and  must  have  become  obsolete  when  the  praetor  had
imposed  the  same  penalty  for  mere  resistance  to  search.  When
Justinian  says  that  search  for  stolen  property  was  in  his  day  no  longer
conducted  secundum  veterem  observationem  he  means,  in  the  presence
of  witnesses  (rovrctrrc  fiaprvp<»p  frap6vTtiiP  Theoph.) ;  it  was  undertaken  by
public  officers.  Dig.  1 1. 4. 3,  a  practice  which  seems  to  have  been  in  use  in
the  time  of  Plautus :  '  ad  praetorem  ibo,  ut  conquisitores  mihi  det '  Mercat.
3.  4.  yS.  Furtum  conceptum  and  oblatum  had  been  coordinated  with
manifestum  and  nee  manifestum  by  Servius  Sulpicius  and  Sabinus  as
distinct  species  of  theft ;  Gaius  agreed  with  l^sibto  that  they  were
'species  potius  actionis  furto  cohaerentes  quam  genera  furtorum'  iii.  183.
The  offence  of  furtum  non  exhibitum  is  not  mentioned  except  in  this
passage  of  the  Institutes.

§  6.  The  penalty  fixed  by  the  Twelve  Tables  for  furtum  manifestum
had  been  capitalis,  Gaius  iii.  189;   if  the  fur  was  a  free  man,  he  was


Tit.  I.]  DE  OBLIGATION IBVS  QUAE,  ETC.  523

Furtum  autem  fit  non  solum,  cum  quis  intercipiendi  causa  6
rem  alienam  amovet,  sed  generaliter  cum  quis  alienam  rem
invito  domino  contrectat.  itaque  sive  creditor  pignore  sive  is
apud  quem  res  deposita  est  ea  re  utatur  sive  is  qui  reni
utendam  accepit  in  alium  usum  earn  transferat,  quam  cuius
gratia  ei  data  est,  furtum  committit  veluti  si  quis  argentum
utendum  acceperit  quasi  amicos  ad  cenam  invitaturus  et  id
peregre  secum  tulerit,  aut  si  quis  equum  gestandi  causa
commodatum  sibi  longius  aliquo  duxerit,  quod  veteres  scrip-
serunt  de  eo,  qui  in  aciem  equum  perduxisset.  Placuit  tameii  7
iBos,  qui  rebus  commodatis  aliter  uterentur,  quam  utendas
acceperint,  ita  furtum  committere,  si  se  intellegant  id  invito
domino  facere  eumque  si  intellexisset  non  permissurum,  ac  si
permissurum  credant,  extra  crimen  videri :  optima  sane  dis-
tinctione,  quia  furtum  sine  affectu  furandi  non  committitur.
Sed  et  si  credat  aliquis  invito  domino  se  rem  commodatam  8
sibi  contrectare,  domino  autem  volente  id  fiat,  dicitur  furtum


flogged,  and  then  addictus  to  the  person  he  bad  wronged  ;  if  a  slave,  he
was  flogged  and  hurled  from  the  Tarpeian  rock ;  and  a  thief  who  resisted
arrest,  or  who  stole  by  night,  might  be  killed.  The  'asperitas*  of  this
punishment  led  to  the  praetor's  substituting  the  pecuniary  penalty
mentioned  in  the  text  in  all  cases,  Gains  ib. ;  that  for  furtum  nee  mani-
festum  was  fixed  from  the  outset  by  the  Twelve  Tables.  The  reason  why
the  two  offences  were  so  differently  treated  was  '  because  the  legislator
wished,  by  the  amplitude  of  the  legal  remedy  offered,  to  induce  the
aggrieved  party  not  to  take  the  law  into  his  own  hands  and  inflict
summary  vengeance  on  the  offender'  Mr.  Poste  on  Gains  iii.  179;  cf.
Excursus  X  in£

§  6.  Intercipere  means  the  appropriation  of  ownership,  quod  alienum
est,  sibi  habere :  the  illustrations  given  here  fall  under  (6)  p.  520  supr.
For  a  creditor  to  sell  the  pignus  against  the  terms  of  his  contract  was
no  less  theft  than  using  it,  Dig.  47.  2.  74.  The  person  '  qui  rem  utendam
accepit '  is  the  borrower  in  commodatum.

§  7.  In  the  corresponding  passage  of  Gains  (iii.  197)  for 'sine  affectu
furandi'  we  read  'sine  dolo  malo.'  Sabinus  (Gell.  11.  18),  and  perhaps
also  Labeo,  had  held  that  a  borrower  should  be  held  guilty  of  theft  in
this  case,  if  the  dominus  would  not  as  a  fact  have  consented  to  his  using
the  res  commodata  in  the  particular  way,  'cum  id  se  invito  domino
facere  iudicare  deberet.'  But  without  good  reason  for  believing  that  his
permission  would  not  have  been  given  there  could  be  no  dolus.

§  8.  After  stating  this  case  Gains  (iii.  198)  says  'responsum,  neutro
teneri :  furto,  ideo  quod  non  invito  me  rem  contrectavit :  servi  corrupt!,


\


524  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Ub.  IV.

non  fieri,    unde  illud  quaesitum  est,  cum  Titius  servum  Maevii
sollicitaverit,  ut  quasdam   res  domino  subriperet  et  ad  eum
perferret,  et  servus  id  ad  Maevium  pertulerit,  Maevius,  dum
vult  Titium   in    ipso    delicto  deprehendere,  permisit  servo
quasdam  res  ad  eum  perferre,  utrum  furti  an  servi  comipti
iudicio  teneatur  Titius,  an  neutro?  et  cum  nobis  super  hac
dubitatione  suggestum  est  et  antiquorum  prudentium  super
hoc  altercationes  perspeximus,  quibusdam  neque  furti  neque
servi  corrupti  actionem  praestantibus,  quibusdam  furti  tantum-
modo :  nos  huiusmodi  calliditati  obviam  euntes  per  nostram
decisionem  sanximus  non  solum   furti  actionem,  sed  etiam
servi  corrupti  contra  eum  dari :  licet  enim  is  servus  deterior
a   sollidtatore  minime  factus   est  et    ideo   non  concurrant
regulae,  quae  servi  corrupti  actionem  introducerent,  tamen
consilium  corruptoris  ad  perniciem  probitatis  servi  introductum
est,  ut  sit  ei  poenalis  actio  imposita,  tamquam  re  ipsa  fuisset
servus  corruptus,  ne  ex  huiusmodi  impunitate  et  in  alium
servum,  qui  possit  corrumpi,  tale  facinus  a  quibusdam  per-
9  petretur.     Interdum   etiam   liberorum   hominum  furtum   fit,
veluti  si  quis  liberorum  nostrorum,  qui  in  potestate  nostra  sit,
lOsubreptus  fuerit.      Aliquando  autem  etiam  suae  rei  quisque
furtum  committit,  veluti  si  debitor  rem  quam  creditori  pignoris
causa  dedit  subtraxerit.

ideo  quod  deterior  servus  factus  non  est : '  and  this  statement  of  the  law
seems  never  to  have  been  questioned  by  the  jurists.  Justinian's  own
enactment  is  in  Cod.  6.  2.  20.  For  concurrence  of  actions  on  the  same
set  of  circumstances  see  Tit.  9.  i  inf.

§  9.  As  free  persons  who  could  be  stolen,  besides  children  in  power,
Gaius  speaks  of  wives  in  manu,  iudicati  (insolvent  debtors  who  had  been
addicti)  and  hired  gladiators  (auctorati) :  the  offence  could  be  proceeded
against  criminally  under  the  lex  Fabia,  Tit  18. 10  inf.  Children  in  power,
if  stolen,  were  recovered  by  vindication  Dig.  6.  I.  i.  3,  damages  in  which
were  estimated  by  the  pecuniary  loss  which  the'  pater  had  suflfered,  r6
dfo^fpoy  Theoph.:  cf.  Tit.  5.  i  inf.  <ob  hominem  liberum  ....  quantum
ob  eam  rem  aequum  iudici  videtur.'

§  10.  Theft  of  a  res  sua  was  so  uncommon  a  case  that  in  defining
furtum  the  jurists  often  forget  to  take  it  into  consideration  :  §  6  supr.,  rem
alienam :  cf.  Sabinus'  definition  in  GelL  1 1. 18  and  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  2. 31. 1
cited  on  (i)  p.  520  supr.  Paulus  even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  'rei  nostrae
furtum  facere  non  possumus'  ib.  21.  An  owner  committed  theft  by
taking  his  property  away  from  a  person  who  had  mere  detention  of  it


Til.  I.]  DE  OBLIGATJONIBUS  QUAE,  ETC.  525

Interdum  furti  tenetur,  qui  ipse  furtum  non  fecerit:  qualis  11
est,  cuius  ope  et  consilio  furtum  factum  est.  in  quo  numero
est,  qui  tibi  nummos  excussit,  ut  alius  eos  raperet^  aut  obstitit
tibiy  ut  alius  rem  tuam  exciperet,  vel  oves  aut  boves  tuas
fugaverit,  ut  alius  eas  exciperet :  et  hoc  veteres  scripserunt
de  eo,  qui  panno  rubro  fugavit  armentum.  sed  si  quid
eorum  per  lasciviam  et  non  data  opera,  ut  furtum  admit*
teretnr,  factum  est,  in  factum  actio  dari  debeat.  at  ubi  ope
Maevii  Titius  furtum  fecerit,  ambo  furti  tenentur.  ope  consilio
eius  quoque  furtum  admitti  videtur,  qui  scalas  forte  fenestris
supponit  aut  ipsas  fenestras  vel  ostium  effringit,  ut  alius  fur*»
tum  faceret,  quive  ferramenta  ad  effringendum  aut  scalas  ut
fenestris  supponerentur  commodaverit,  sciens  cuius  gratia
commodaverit.  certe  qui  nuUam  operam  ad  furtum  faciendum
adhibuit,  sed  tantum  consilium  dedit  atque  hortatus  est  ad
furtum  faciendum,  non  tenetur  furti.  Hi,  qui  in  parentium  12
vel  dominorum  potestate  sunt,  si  rem  eis  subripiant,  furtum
quidem  illis  faciunt  et  res  in  furtivam  causam  cadit  nee  ob  id
ab  ullo  usucapi  potest,  antequam  in  domini  potestatem  re-
vertatur,  sed  furti  actio  non  nascitur,  quia  nee  ex  alia  ulla
causa  potest  inter  eos  actio  nasci :  si  vero  ope  consilio  alterius
furtum  factum  fuerit,  quia  utique  furtum  committitur,  con-
venienter  ille  furti  tenetur,  quia  verum  est  ope  consilio  eius
furtum  factum  esse.

only  if  the  latter  had  a  legal  right  to  detain  it,  Dig.  47.  2. 15. 2,  e.  g.  a  usu-
fructuary, Dig.  ib.  I :  ib.  30.  i,  and  a  bona  fide  possessor,  Gaius  iii.  200;
cf.  note  on  p.  233  supr.  It  was  equally  furtum  for  a  pledgor  to  alienate  the
pignus  without  the  pledgee's  consent,  Dig.  47.  2.  19.  6 :  so  too  with  pro-
perty merely  hypothecated,  ib.  66.  The  res  sua  which  was  stolen  by
a  dominus  never  became  furtiva  so  as  to  impede  usucapion,  Dig.  ib.  2a  i.

§  IL  '  Consilium  dare  videtur,  qui  persuadet  et  impellit  atque  instruit
consilio  ad  furtum  faciendum  :  opem  fert,  qui  ministerium  atque  adiuto*
rium  ad  subripiendas  res  praebet '  Dig.  47.  2.  50.  3.  Instead  of  the  actio
in  factum,  which  lay  in  the  case  of  lascivia,  there  would  be  an  actio  utilis
under  the  lex  Aquilia  if  the  alarm  of  the  cattle  at  the  red  rag  ed  to  any
of  them  being  actually  injured,  Gaius  iii.  202,  Tit.  4.  16  inf.,  Dig.  47. 2.  5a
4 ;  ib.  51 ;  9.  2.  27.  21.  Though  the  poena  could  be  recovered  from
accessories  no  less  than  from  principals,  they  could  not  be  sued  by  con-
dictio  furtiva,  for  which  see  on  §  19  inf..  Dig.  13.  i.  6.

§  12.  Cf.  Bk.  ii.  6.  8  supr.  The  master  could  not  sue  the  slave,  nor
the  fiather  the  son,  even  after  he  had  left  his  power.  Tit  8.  6  inf. :  but  the


526  INSTJTUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  IV.

13  Furti  autem  actio  ei  competit,  cuius  interest  rem  salvam
esse,  licet  dominus  non  sit :  itaque  nee  domino  aliter  competit,

1 4  quam  si  eius  intersit  rem  non  perire.  Unde  constat  creditorem
de  pignore  subrepto  furti  agere  posse,  etiamsi  idoneum  de-
bitorem  habeat,  quia  expedit  ei  pig^nori  potius  incumbere  quam
in  personam  s^ere:  adeo  quidem  ut,  quamvis  ipse  debitor
eam  rem  subripuerit,  nihilo  minus  creditor!  competit  actio

15  furti.  Item  si  fuUo  polienda  curandave  aut  sarcinator  sar«
cienda  vestimenta  mercede  certa  acceperit  eaque  furto  amiserit,
ipse  furti  habet  actionem,  non  dominus,  quia  domini  nihil
interest  eam  rem  non  perire,  cum  iudicio  locati  a  fullone  aut
sarcinatore  rem  suam  persequi  potest,  sed  et  bonae  fidei
emptori  subrepta  re  quam  emerit,  quamvis  dominus  non  sit,
omnimodo  competit  furti  actio,  quemadmodum  et  creditori.
fuUoni  vero  et  sarcinatori  non  aliter  furti  competere  placuit,
quam  si  solvendo  sint,  hoc  est  si  domino  rei  aestimationem

offender  could  be  punished  at  once  by  invoking  the  aid  of  the  praetor  if
the  theft  was  serious,  Dig.  48.  19.  11.  i.

§  18.  The  object  of  the  actio  furti  was  the  recovery  of  the  poena  dupli
or  quadrupli  fixed  by  law.  The  rule  as  to  who  could  bring  it  is  similarly
laid  down  by  Gaius  iii.  203,  and  Paulus ;  '  furti  acticme  is  agere  potest,
cuius  interest  rem  non  periisse'  Sent.  Rec  2. 31. 4*  All  of  these  statements,
however,  are  somewhat  too  wide :  '  neque  ....  cuiuscunque  intererit,
rem  non  perire,  habet  furti  actionem '  Dig.  47.  2. 14.  10 :  the  action  lay  at
the  suit  only  of  the  owner,  bona  fide  possessor,  or  person  who  had
detention  of  or  some  right  in  rem  (e.  g.  usufruct,  hypotheca)  in  the  stolen
property  less  than  ownership,  and  then  only  if  he  was  prejudiced  by  the
theft  Hence  the  vendee  before  delivery  was  debarred  fix>m  suing  in  his
own  name,  Dig.  47.  2.  14.  pr. :  ib.  8a  pr.,  as  also  was  the  depositary
under  ordinary  circumstances,  §  17  inf.,  and  all  others  who  had  merely
rights  in  personam  in  respect  of  the  property  stolen,  e.  g.  the  promisee  in
a  stipulation.  Dig.  47.  2.  86.

§  14.  It  seems  at  one  time  to  have  been  doubtful  whether  the  pledgee
ought  to  be  allowed  to  bring  actio  furti  if  the  pledgor  was  solvent
(idoneus) ;  *  sed  utrum  semper  creditoris  interest,  an  ita  demum,  si  debitor
solvendo  non  est?  et  putat  Pomponius  semper  eius  interesse  pignus
habere,  quod  et  Papinianus  . . .  probat'  Dig.  47.  2.  12.  2.  Papinian  even
thought  that  if  two  things  were  pledged  for  one  debt,  and  one  of  them
was  stolen,  the  pledgee  ought  to  be  allowed  actio  furti  even  if  the  other
alone  was  adequate  security.  Dig.  ib.  14. 5.

§  15.  The  clothes  are  at  the  risk  of  the  fullo  or  sarcinator,  Dig.  47. 2. 14.
16.  The  words  idem  est  et  si . .  •  sarcinator  apparently  refer  to  solvency,
not  insolvency ;  see  the  end  of  §  16.    A  mala  fide  possessor  had  no  actio


Tit.  I.]  DE  OBLIGATIONJBUS  QUAE,  ETC.  527

solvere  possint :  nam  si  solvendo  non  sunt,  tunc  quia  ab  eis
suum  dominus  consequi  non  possit,  ipsi  domino  furti  actio
competit,  quia  hoc  casu  ipsius  interest  rem  salvam  esse,
idem  est  et  si  in  parte  solvendo  sint  fuUo  aut  sarcinator.
Quae  de  fullone  et  sarcinatore  diximus,  eadem  et  ad  eum  16
cui  commodata  res  est  transferenda  veteres  existimabant :
nam  ut  ille  fullo  mercedem  accipiendo  custodiam  praestat,
ita  is  quoque,  qui  commodum  utendi  percipit,  similiter  necesse
habet  custodiam  praestare.  sed  nostra  providentia  etiam
hoc  in  decisionibus  nostris  emendavit,  ut  in  domini  sit  volun-
tate,  sive  commodati  actionem  adversus  eum  qui  rem  com-
modatam  accepit  movere  desiderat,  sive  furti  adversus  eum
qui  rem  subripuit,  et  alterutra  earum  electa  dominum  non
posse  ex  paenitentia  ad  alteram  venire  actionem,  sed  si
quidem  furem  elegerit,  ilium  qui  rem  utendam  accepit  penitus
liberari.  sin  autem  commodator  veniat  adversus  eum  qui
rem  utendam  accepit,  ipsi  quidem  nuUo  modo  competere
posse  adversus  furem  furti  actionem,  eum  autem,  qui  pro
re  commodata  convenitur,  posse  adversus  furem  furti  habere
actionem,  ita  tamen,  si  dominus  sciens  rem  esse  subreptam
adversus  eum  cui  res  conmiodata  fuit  pervenit :  sin  autem
nescius  et  dubitans  rem  non  esse  apud  eum  commodati  ac-
tionem instituit^  postea  autem  re  comperta  voluit  remittere
quidem  commodati  actionem,  ad  furti  autem  pervenire,  tunc
licentia  ei  concedatur  et  adversus  furem  venire  nuUo  obstaculo
et  opponendo,  quoniam  incertus  constitutus  movit  adversus
eum  qui  rem  utendam  accepit  commodati  actionem  (nisi
domino  ab  eo  satisfactum  est :  tunc  etenim  omnimodo  furem
a  domino  quidem  furti  actione  liberari,  suppositum  autem  esse
ei,  qui  pro  re  sibi  commodata  domino  satisfecit),  cum  mani-
festissimum  est,  etiam  si  ab  initio  dominus  actionem  instituit


furti,  though  the  property  was  at  his  risk,  Dig.  47.  2.  14.  4.  The  interest
of  the  bona  fide  possessor,  in  virtue  of  which  he  could  sue,  was  his  right
to  the  fruits  and  the  interruption  of  usucapio,  not  his  liability  to  the  real
dominus,  which  accrued  only  after  the  latter  had  joined  issue  with  him  in
an  action  to  establish  his  ownership,  Dig.  5-  3.  25.  7.

§  16.  The  only  jurists  who  to  our  knowledge  discussed  this  question
(Gaius  iii.  206,  Q.  Mucins,  Dig.  13.  6.  5. 3,  Celsus,  Julianus,  and  Papinian,


528  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

commodati  ignarus  rem  esse  subreptam,  postea  autem  hoc  ei
cc^nita  adversus  furem  transivit,  omnimodo  liberari  eum
qui  rem  commodatam  accepit^  quemcumque  causae  exitum
dominus  adversus  furem  babuerit:  eadem  definitione  opti-
nente,  sive  in  partem  sive  in  solidum  solvendo  sit  is  qui  rem

17  commodatam  accepit.  Sed  is>-  apud  quern  res  deposita  est,
custodiam  non  praestat,  sed  tantum  in  eo  obnoxius  est,  si
quid  ipse  dolo  malo  fecerit :  qua  de  causa  si  res  ei  subrepta
fuerit,  quia  restituendae  eius  nomine  depositi  non  tenetur  nee
ob  id  eius  interest  rem  salvam  esse,  furti  agere  non  potest,

18  sed  furti  actio  domino  competit.  In  summa  sciendum  est
quaesitum  esse,  an  impubes  rem  alienam  amovendo  furtum
faciat.  et  placet,  quia  furtum  ex  afTectu  consistit,  ita  demum
obligari  eo  crimine  impuberem,  si  proximus  pubertati  sit  et

19  ob  id  intellegat  se  delinquere.  Furti  actio  sive  dupli  sive
quadrupli  tantum  ad  poenae  persecutionem  pertinet:  nam
ipsius  rei  persecutionem  extrinsecus  habet  dominus,  quam  aut
vindicando  aut  condicendo  potest  auferre.  sed  vindicatio
quidem  adversus  possessorem  est,  sive  fur  ipse  possidet  sive
alius  quilibet :  condictio  autem  adversus  ipsum  furem  here-
demve  eius,  licet  non  possideat,  competit.

Dig.  47.  3.  14;  lb.  15.  2;  ib.  48.  4,  etc.)  were  for  observing  the  same

rules  where  a  thing  was  commodata  as  where  it  was  locata.  Justinian's
enactment  is  in  Cod.  6.  2.  22.

§  17.  If  a  depositary  fraudulently  enabled  a  depositum  to  be  stolen,  he
was  liable  to  actio  depositi,  and  could  not  sue  the  thief  himself, '  non  enim
debet  ex  dolo  suo  furti  quaerere  actionem '  Dig.  47.  2.  14.  3  and  4.  He
was  also  liable  if  he  had  undertaken  the  custodia,  note  on  Bk.  iii.  14.  3
supr.,  and  then  apparently  could  bring  the  penal  action,  Dig.  47.  2. 14.
16  ;  47.  8.  2.  23  and  24.

§  18.  For  proximus  pubertati  see  on  Bk.  iii.  19. 10  supr.

§  19.  The  option  allowed  to  the  owner  of  stolen  property  between  a
real  and  a  personal  action  is  noted  as  an  anomaly  in  Tit.  6.  14  inf.  after
Gaius  iv.  4.  Furtum  in  no  case  transferred  ownership,  so  that,  as  the
owner  of  the  goods  stolen  remained  their  owner,  the  only  action  logically
open  to  him  was  a  vindicatio.  If  the  goods  had  been  destroyed,  or  if,
being  money,  it  had  been  spent  or  mixed  with  money  belonging  to  the
thief,  his  ownership  would  have  been  extinguished,  and  (though  only  in
this  and  some  analogous  cases,  Bk.  ii.  I.  26  and  note  supr.)  a  condictio
would  have  lain ;  but  if  he  could  not  prove  this,  e.  g.  if  the  property
had  been  lost  or  concealed^e  was,  strictly  speaking,  debarred  from  a
personal  action,  which,  however,  he  was  allowed  to  institute  in  every  case,


Tit.  2.]  VI  BONORUM  RAPTORUM.  529


11.

VI   BONORUM   RAPTORUM.

Qui  res  alienas  rapit,  ten'etur  quidem  etiam  furti  (quis
enim  magis  alienam  rem  invito  doirtino  contrectat,  quam
qui  vi  rapit  ?  ideoque  recte  dictum  est  eum  improbum  furem
esse):  sed  tamen  propriam  actionem  eius  delicti  nomine
praetor  introduxit,  quae  appellatur  vi  bonorum  raptorum
et   est  intra    annum   quadrupli,  post    annum   simplt.    quae

tf  he  preferred  it  to  vindicatio,  in  order  to  relieve  him  from  the  necessity
of  ascertaining  the  facts.  If  then  the  owner  knew  who  possessed  the  stolen
property,  his  natural  remedy  was  vindicatio  against  him  ;  but  if  he  did
not  know  where  it  was,  he  could  bring  condictio  furtiva  against  the  thief
or  his  heir  for  the  recovery  either  of  it  with  fruits,  accessions,  etc.,  or  of
its  value  with  interest,  Dig.  13.  i.  3 ;  ib.  8.  2.  It  might  be  more  to  his
interest  even  to  bring  an  actio  ad  exhibendum  (Tit  6.  31  inf.),  which
would  lie  against  any  one  who  had  the  property  in  his  possession,  or  had
fraudulently  parted  with  it :  if  it  were  not  produced  the  defendant  would
have  to  pay  the  plaintiffs  *  interest '  and  this  might  be  more  than  the  value
recoverable  by  condictio  :  see  Dig.  12. 1. 1 1.  That  the  condictio  furtiva  is
not  delictal,  and  that  the  obligation  which  it  enforces  does  not  arise  ex
delicto,  is  clear  from  this  very  fact,  that  the  heir  is  liable  in  solidum,  not
merely  *  pro  eo  quo  divitior  factus  est.'

The  treatment  of  furtum  as  a  civil  wrong  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the
history  of  Roman  law,  in  which  the  notion  of  crime  was  of  exceedingly
slow  development ;  see  Hunter's  Roman  Law  p.  904,  Maine's  Ancient
Law  chap.  x.  Under  the  empire,  however,  the  general  rule  was  that  any
one  who  could  bring  a  penal  action  on  a  delict  (other  than  damnum)
might,  if  he  preferred  it,  prosecute  the  delinquent  before  a  criminal
tribunal,  Dig.  47.  i.  3,  forfeiting,  however,  thereby  his  right  to  recover  the
poena,  Dig.  47.  2.  56.  i.  Theft  indeed  was  in  the  time  of  the  classical
jurists  most  usually  made  the  subject  of  criminal  proceedings,  though
not  under  any  of  the  regular  iudicia  publica  (Tit.  18  inf.):  'meminisse
oportebit  nunc  furti  plerumque  criminaliter  agi,  et  eum  qui  agit  in  crimen
subscribere,  non  quasi  publicum  sit  indicium,  sed  quia  visum  est  temerit-
atem  agentium  etiam  extraordinaria  animadversione  coercendam'  Ulpian
in  Dig.  47.  2.  92.  For  the  nature  of  the  punishment,  which  might  be
death,  penal  servitude,  flogging,  or  relegatio,  according  to  the  character
of  the  offence,  see  Hunter's  Roman  Law  p.  911.

Tit.  II.  Robbery  was  not  originally  distinguished  from  theft;  the
robber  was  liable  to  the  penalties  of  furtum^ianifestum  or  nee  manifes-
tum  according  to  the  circumstances  under  which  he  was  detected,  Dig.

M  m


530  INSTITUTIOSUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

actio  utilis  est,  etiamsi  quis  unam  rem  licet  minimam  ra-
puerit.  quadruplum  autem  non  totum  poena  est  et  extra
poenam  rei  persecutio,  sicut  in  actione  furti  manifest!  diximus;
sed  in  quadrupio  incst  et  rei  persecutio,  ut  poena  tripli  sit,
sive  comprehendatur  raptor  in  ipso  delicto  sive  non.  ridi-
culum  est  enim  levioris  esse  condicionis  eum  qui  vi  rapit,


47.  8.  I ;  ib,  2.  26.  Cicero  tells  us  (pro  Tullio  8)  that  it  was  constituted
an  independent  delict  by  LucuUus  when  praetor  in  a  c  77,  by  reason  of
the  frequency  of  crimes  of  violence  which  ensued  upon  the  social  war.
The  terms  of  the  edict  are  preserved:  *si  cui  dolo  malo  hominibus
coactis  damni  quid  factum  esse  dicetur,  sive  cuius  bona  rapta  esse
dicentur, . . .  iudicium  dabo '  Dig.  47.  8.  2.  pr.  It  thus  introduced  a  new
penalty  for  two  classes  of  cases,  those  of  damage  to  property,  and  those
of  robbery,  *  hominibus  coactis,'  words  which  apply  to  both  offences.  Dig.
ib.  2.  3  and  12.  The  original  edict  seems  to  have  run  'hominibus  armatis
coactisque ' ;  but  the  carrying  of  arms  for  the  purposes  of  crime  became
so  rare  under  the  empire  that  the  word  was  omitted  and  the  definition
of  the  offence  thereby  extended.  Before  long  too  the  words  '  hominibus
coactis'  were  taken  pro  non  scriptis:  'hoc  enim  quod  ait,  hominibus
coactis,  sic  accipere  debemus,  etiam  hominibus  coactis :  ut  sive  solus  vim
fecerit,  sive  etiam  hominibus  coactis,  vel  armatis,  vel  inermibus,  hoc
edicto  teneatur'  (Dig.  47.  8.  2.  7  with  Heise*s  emendation).  Lastly,  the
bearing  of  the  edict  of  Lucullus  on  wilful  damage  to  property  was  lost
from  sight,  its  practical  importance  being  in  the  Corpus  iuris  confined  to
rapina,  which  indeed  seems  to  have  been  the  case  as  early  as  the  time
of  Ulpian :  '  hae  actio  vulgo  tibi  (vi })  bonorum  raptorum  dicitur '  Dig.  47.
8.  2.  17.

The  fact  that  every  case  of  robbery  was  also  a  furtum  makes  it  improb-
able that  the  actio  bonorum  vi  raptorum  was  ever  employed  except  within
an  annus  utilis  from  the  commission  of  the  offence,  and  that  only  when
the  offence  itself  did  not  come  within  the  definition  of  furtum  manifestum.
The  penalty  for  which  it  lay  being  less  than  that  recoverable  by  actio
furti  manifesti  (viz.  three  times  the  value  of  the  property),  it  is  clear  that
if  the  raptor  was  detected  'antequam  eo  pervenerit  quo  perferre  ac
deponere  rem  destinasset'  (Tit.  i.  3  supr.),  the  plaintiff  would  prefer  the
latter  remedy,  which  had  the  further  advantage  of  not  being  barred  by
the  lapse  of  such  a  year  from  the  commission  of  the  offence  (see  references
inf.) ;  and  after  the  lapse  of  the  year  the  plaintiff  could  still  bring  an  actio
furti,  which,  even  if  the  offence  were  nee  manifestum,  would  enable  him
to  recover  a  substantial  penalty,  while  by  the  actio  bonorum  vi  raptorum
he  could  get  no  penalty  at  all.

In  G'aius*  time  some  had  thought  that  the  quadruplum  recoverable  by
the  actio  bonorum  vi  raptorum  was  all  penalty,  and  that  a  vindicatio  or
condictio  lay  in  addition,  as  in  the  case  of  furtum,  Gains  iv.  8.  The  un-
certainty was  due  to  the  omission  of  the  edict  to  say  anything  precise


tit.  2.]  yi  BONORUM  RAPTORUM,  ^31

•  •  •

quam  qui  clam  amovet.  Quia  tatnen  ita  competit  haec  actio,  1
si  dolo  malo  quisque  rapuerit :  qui  aliquo  errore  inductus
suam  rem  esse  et  imprudens  iuris  eo  animo  rapuit,  quasi
domino  liceat  rem  suam  etiam  per  vim  auferre  possessoribus,
absolvi  debet,  cui  scilicet  conveniens  est  nee  furti  teneri
eum,  qui  eodem  hoc  animo  rapuit.  sed  ne,  dum  talia  ex-
cogitentur,  inveniatur  via,  per  quam  raptores  impune  suam
exerceant  avaritiam  :  melius  divalibus  constitutionibus  pro
hac  parte  prospectum  est,  ut  nemini  liceat  vi  rapere  rem'
mobilem  vel  se  moventem,  licet  suam  eandem  rem  existimet :
sed  si  quis  contra  statuta  fecerit,  rei  quidem  suae  dominio
cadere,  sin  autem  aliena  sit,  post  restitutionem  etiam  aesti-
mationem  eiusdem  rei  praestare.  quod  non  solum  in  mobilibus
rebus,  quae  rapi  possunt,  constitutiones  optinere  censuerunt,
sed  etiam  in  invasionibus,  quae  circa  res  soli  fiunt,  ut  ex  hac


about  the  matter;  and  as  the  actiones  furti  and  damni  iniuria  (which
were  relied  on  as  precedents)  were  one  of  them  purely  penal  and  the
other  mixed  (Gaius  iv.  9,  Tit.  6.  19  inf.)  it  was  natural  that  opinions
should  differ.

The  annus  within  which  the  actio  bonorum  vi  raptorum  was  genuinely
penal  was  utilis,  Dig.  47.  8.  2.  13 ;  for  the  explanation  of  the  term  see  on
Bk.  iii.  9.  9  supr.  All  praetorian  penal  actions  had  the  same  short  limi-
tation except  that  furti  manifest!,  which  was  perpetua  because  the
penalty  thereby  recoverable  was  substituted  for  capital  punishment
Gaius  iv.  no,  iii,  Tit.  12.  pr.  inf.  The  heir  of  the  robber  was  not  liable
to  actio  bonorum  vi  raptorum  in  any  case,  though  be  was  suable  by  con-
dictio  to  the  extent  to  which  the  inheritance  had  been  enriched  by  the
proceeds  of  the  wrong :  *  adversus  heredes  autem  vel  caeteros  successores
non  dabitur,  quia  poenalis  actio  in  eos  non  datur.  An  tamen  in  id,  quod
locupletiores  facti  sunt,  dari  debeat,  videamus.  et  ego  puto  ideo  praetorem
non  esse  pollicitum  in  heredes  in  id  quod  ad  eos  pervenit,  quia  putavit
sufficere  condictionem  *  Ulpian  in  Dig.  47.  8.  2. 27.

§  L  The  constitutions  referred  to  are  those  of  Valentinian,  Theodosius,
and  Arcadius  (a.d.  389),  in  Cod.  8.  4.  7  ^si  quis  in  tantam  furoris  perve-
nerit  audaciam,  ut  possessionem  rerum  apud  fiscum  vel  apud  homines
quoslibet  constitutarum  ante  adventum  iudicialis  arbitrii  violenter  inva-
serit,  dominus  quidem  constitutus  possessionem  quam  abstulit  restituat
possessori  et  dominium  eiusdem  rei  amittat.  Si  vero  alienarum  rerum
possessionem  invasit,  non  solum  eam  possidentibus  reddat,  verum  etiam
aestimationem  earundem  rerum  restituere  compellatur.'  For  the  relation
of  this  enactment  to  the  interdict  unde  vi  see  on  Tit.  15.  6  inf.  and
Mr.  Posters  note  on  Gaius  iii.  209.

M  m  2


533  JNSTJTUTJONUM  LJBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

2  causa  omni  rapina  homines  abstineant.  In  hac  actione  non
utique  exspectatur  rem  in  bonis  actoris  esse:  nam  sive  in
bonis  sit  sive  non  sit,  si  tamen  ex  bonis  sit,  locum  haec
actio  habebit.  quare  sive  commodata  sive  locata  sive  etiam
pignerata  sive  deposita  sit  apud  Titium  sic,  ut  intersit  eius
eam  non  auferri,  veluti  si  in  re  deposita  culpam  quoque
promisit,  sive  bona  fide  possideat,  sive  usum  fructum  in  ea
quis  habeat  vel  quod  aliud  ius,  ut  intersit  eius  non  rapi:
dicendum  est  competere  ei  hanc  actionem,  ut  non  dominium
accipiat,  sed  illud  solum,  quod  ex  bonis  eius  qui  rapinam
passus  est,  id  est  quod  ex  substantia  eius  ablatum  esse  pro-
ponatur.  et  generaliter  dicendum  est,  ex  quibus  causis  furti
actio  competit  in  re  clam  facta,  ex  isdem  causis  omnes  habere
hanc  actionem.

III.

DE  LEGE  AQUILIA.

Damni  iniuriae  actio  constituitur  per  legem  Aquiliam.
cuius  primo  capite  cautum  est,  ut  si  quis  hominenVvalienum

§  2.  The  expression  ex  bonis  is  here  opposed  to  dominium,  to  denote
the  bonitarian  form  of  which  the  phrase  '  in  bonis  habere '  was  employed ;
this  seems  dear  from  the  language  towards  the  end  of  the  paragraph, '  ut
non  dominium  acclpiat,  sed  illud  solum,  quod  ex  bonis  eius  . .  . .'  In
other  passages  in  bonis  and  ex  bonis  are  not  distinguished,  e.  g.  Dig.  50.
16.  49 ;  41.  I.  42 ;  35.  2.  32.  I,  where  in  bonis  has  such  a  wide  sense  that
nothing  seems  to  be  left  for  ex  bonis  to  include.  The  distinction  between
the  persons  who  could  sue  on  theft,  and  those  who  could  sue  on  robbery,
seems  to  consist  in  the  depositary  being  in  some  cases  allowed  the  latter
where  he  could  not  bring  the  former  action,  or  perhaps  in  some  persons
having  the  actio  bonorum  vi  raptor um  who,  though  having  an  interest,
have  no  real  right,  possession,  or  detention ;  '  utilius  dicendum  est,  etsi
cesset  actio  furti  ob  rem  depositam,  esse  tamen  vi  bonorum  raptorum
actionem,  quia  non  minima  differentia  est  inter  eum,  qui  clam  facit,  et
eum,  qui  rapit,  cum  ille  celet  suum  delictum,  hie  publicet  et  crimen  etiam
publicum  admittat  Si  quis  igitur  interesse  sua  vel  modice  docebit,
debet  habere  vi  bonorum  raptorum  actionem '  Dig.  47.  8.  2.  24.

The  criminal  alternative  for  the  civil  section  on  robbery  was  an  indict-
ment under  the  lex  lulia  de  vi,  for  the  penalties  inflicted  by  which  see
Tit.  18.  8  inf.

Tit.  m.  ^  Lex  Aquilia  omnibus  legibus,  quae  ante  se  de  damno  iniuria
locutae  sunt;  derogavit  (repealed),  sive  duodecim  tabulis  sive  alia  quae


Tit  3.]  DE  LEGE  AQUILIA.  533

alienamve  quadrupedem  quae  pecudum  numero  sit  iniurta
occiderit,  quanti  ea  res  in  eo  anno  plurimi  fuit,  tantum  domino
dare  damnetur.  Quod  autem  non  praecise  de  quadrupede,  1
sed  de  ea  tantum  quae  pecudum  numero  est  cavetur,  eo
pertlnet,  ut  neque  de  feris  bestiis  neque  de  canibus  cautum
esse  intellegamus,  sed  de  his  tantum^  quae  proprie  pasci
dicuntur,  quales  sunt  equi  muli  asini  boves  oves  caprae.
de  suibus  quoque  idem  placuit:  nam  et  sues  pecorum  ap-
pellatione  continentur,  quia  et  hi  gregatim  pascuntur :  sic
denique  et  Homerus  in  Odyssea  ait,  sicut  Aelius  Marcianus
in  suis  institutionibus  refert :

d^tff  T<(r  yr  avtaai  vapfffupou*  al  dc  ptftovrai
irap  K6paKos  virpny  iiri  r€  Kp^ji^  ^AptBovajj,

Iniuria  autem  occidere  intellegitur,  qui  nullo  iure  occidit.  2

fuit,  quas  leges  nunc  referre  non  est  necesse.  Quae  lex  Aquilia  plebisci-
turn  est,  cum  earn  Aquilius,  tribunus  plebis,  a  plebe  rogaverit '  Dig.  9.  2*
I  pr.  and  i ;  its  date  was  B.a  287 :  see  Grueber,  lex  Aquilia,  pp.  183-185.
The  terms  of  cap.  i.  are  preserved  by  Gaius  in  the  Digest,  loc.  cit.  2.  pr.
*  qui  servum  servamve  alienum  alienamve,  quadrupedem  vel  pecudem  in-
iuria occiderit,  quanti  id  in  eo  anno  plurimi  fuit,  tantum  aes  dare  domino
damnas  esto.*  For  the  mode  of  reckoning  the  year  cf.  Dig.  ib.  21.  i  ^  annus
retrorsus  computatur,  ex  quo  quis  occisus  est:  quod  si  mortifere  fuerit
vulneratus,  et  postea  post  longum  intervallum  mortuus  sit,  inde  annus
numerabitur  secundum  lulianum,  ex  quo  vulneratus  est,  licet  Celsus  contra
scribit.*

It  is  only  to  the  owner  ('ero,  hoc  est,  domino '  Dig.  ib.  11.  6)  that  the
action  was  granted  by  the  letter  of  both  the  first  and  third  chapters  of  the
statute,  but  in  its  spirit  an  actio  utilis  or  in  factum  (§16  inf.)  was  per-
mitted to  the  bona  fide  possessor  (Dig.  ib.  11.  8,  ib.  17),  the  usufructuary
and  usuary  (ib.  11.  10),  and  the  pledgee  (ib.  17),  though  to  the  latter  only
if  he  had  been  actually  prejudiced  by  the  damnum,  as,  e.  g.  if  the  debtor
was  insolvent,  or  if  he  had  lost  his  personal  remedy,  and  only  upon  the
condition  that  whatever  he  recovered  should  be  deducted  from  the  debt
secured  by  the  pledge.  The  only  case  in  which  a  person  having  merely
rights  in  personam  in  respect  to  the  property  injured  could  bring  the  actio
utilis  or  in  factum  was  that  of  the  colonus  or  tenant  farmer,  Dig.  9.  2.  27.
14.  All  these  persons  could  bring  their  action  against  even  the  dominus
if  it  was  he  who  had  done  the  damnum  (Dig.  ib.  12  ;  ib.  17) ;  so  that  the
word  alienum  in  the  statute  must  not  be  pressed.

§  1.  Praecise,  id  est,  breviter,  sine  additamento  (Schrader) :  cf.  '  non
praecise,  sed  sub  condicione'  Dig.  36.  3.  i.  20.  The  quotation  is  from
Od.  xiii.  407-8.

§  2.  That  the  damnum  is  'iniuria  datum'  implies  two  things :  (i)  that


534  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

itaque   qui   latronem   occidit,   non   tenctur,   utique    si   aliter

3  periculum  effugere  non  potest.  Ac  ne  is  quidcm  hac  lege
tenetur,  qui  casu  occidit,  si  modo  culpa  eius  nulla  invenitur :
nam  alioquin  non  minus  ex  dolo  quam  ex  culpa  quisque  hac

4  lege  tenetur,  Itaque  si  quis,  dum  iaculis  ludit  vel  exercitatur,
transeuntem  servum  tuum  traiecerit,  distinguitur.  nam  si  id
a  milite  quidem  in  campo  eoque,  ubi  solitum  est  exercitari,
admissum  est,  nulla  culpa  eius  intellegitur :  si  alius  tale  quid
admisit,  culpae  reus  est.  idem  iuris  est  de  milite,  si  is  in
alio  loco,  quam  qui  exercitandis  militibus  destinatus  est,  id


the  person  charged  has  no  right  to  do  the  act ;  '  nemo  damnum  facit,  nisi
qui  id  fecit  quod  facere  ius  non  habet'  Dig.  50.  17.  151.  Instances  in
which  this  condition  is  not  satisfied  are  Dig.  9.  2.  29.  7 :  18.  6.  13  and
14  (where  the  damage  results  from  lawful  exercise  of  magisterial  authority) :
ib.  29.  3  (where  it  is  done  in  averting  damnum  from  oneself) ;  ib.  5.  3
(right  to  inflict  moderate  chastisement) ;  ib.  4 ;  ib.  5.  pr. ;  ib.  45.  4  (self-
defence  :  cf.  the  text  of  this  section) :  Grueber,  lex  Aquilia,  pp.  214-222.
(2)  The  act  by  which  the  damage  is  occasioned  must  be  one  for  which  the
person  charged  is  responsible ;  it  must  be  due  at  least  to  culpa  on  his  part :
for  this  see  the  next  section.

§  8.  The  fact  that  dolus  was  not  essential  to  constitute  damnum  iniuria
datum  distinguishes  it  clearly  from  the  three  other  delicts  :  *  when  culpa
is  once  established,  the  amount  of  the  defendant's  liability  does  not  depend
on  its  degree ;'  *  in  lege  Aquilia  et  levissima  culpa  venit*  Dig.  9. 2. 44.  pr.,
'  culpam  autem  esse,  quod,  cum  a  diligente  provideri  potuerit,  non  esse
provisum'  ib.  31 :  cf .  §  8  inf.  The  idea  is  sufficiently  illustrated  in  the
next  five  sections.

It  is  a  much  argued  question  whether  very  slight  negligence  in  a  party
to  a  legal  relation  in  which  he  was  answerable  for  culpa  lata  only  would
entitle  the  other  party  to  sue  him  under  the  lex  Aquilia  ;  as  where  a  de-
positary by  slight  negligence  causes  destruction  of  or  damage  to  the  res
deposita.  The  true  answer  depends  on  the  correct  appreciation  of  a  rather
fine  distinction.  Some  acts  are  acquitted  of  culpa,  if  there  be  a  legal
relation  between  the  pardes,  which  would  otherwise  be  imputable;  e.g.
a  delicate  piece  of  glass  work  is  given  to  an  artificer  to  repair,  and  breaks
to  pieces  in  his  hands  through  no  want  of  skill  or  caution  on  his  part.  But
if  the  act  is  one  which  is  not  excused  by  virtue  of  the  legal  relation,  the
actio  legis  Aquiliae  will  lie,  because  the  delinquent  is  exempted  from
liability  for  culpa  levis  only  in  respect  of  the  specific  duties  which  that
relation  imposes  on  him.  Dig.  40.  12.  13.  pr. ;  47.  4.  i.  2  ;  9.  2.  5.  3  :  see
Grueber,  pp.  230-233.

§  4.  Where  a  man  is  killed  by  a  javelin  thrown  by  a  soldier  '  in  campo
eoque  ubi  solitum  est  exercitari '  the  culpa  is  all  his  own,  and  *  quod  quis
ex  culpa  sua  damnum  sentit  non  intellegitur  damnum  sentire'  Dig.  50. 17.


TitsJ  DE  LEGE  AQUILIA,  535

admisit.     Item  si  putator  ex  arbore  delecto   ramo  servum  5
tuum   transeuntem   occidcrit,   si    prope   viam    publicam    aut
vicinalem  id  factum  est  neque  praeclamavit,  ut  casus  evitari
possit,  culpae  reus  est :    si    praeclamavit  neque  ille  curavit
cavere,  extra  culpam  est  putator.     aeque  extra  culpam  esse
intellegitur,  si  seorsum  a  via  forte  vel  in  medio  fundo  caedebat,
licet  non  praeclamavit,  quia  eo  loco  nulli  extraneo  ius  fuerat
versandi.     Praeterea    si    medicus,  qui    servum   tuum   secuit,  6
dereliquerit  curationem  atque  ob  id  mortuus   fuerit   servus,
culpae  reus  est.     Imperitia  quoque  culpae  adnumeratur,  veluti  7
si  medicus  ideo  servum  tuum  occidcrit^  quod  eum  male  secuerit
aut  perperam  ei  medicamentum  dederit.    Impetu  quoque  mu-  8
larum,  quas  mulio  propter  imperitiam  retinere  non  potuerit,
si  servus  tuus  oppressus  fuerit,  culpae  reus  est  mulio.     sed  et
si  propter  infirmitatem  retinere  eas  non  potuerit,  cum  alius
firmior  retinere  potuisset,  aeque  culpae  tenetur.     eadem  pla-
cuerunt  de  eo  quoque,  qui,  cum  equo  veheretur,  impetum  eius
aut  propter  infirmitatem  aut  propter  imperitiam  suam  retinere
non  potuerit.     His  autem  verbis  legis  '  quanti  id  in  eo  anno  9
plurimi  fuerit '  ilia  sententia  exprimitur,  ut  si  quis  hominem
tuum,  qui  hodie  claudus  aut  luscus  aut  mancus  erit,  occiderit,

203.  Contributory  negligence  of  the  person  injured  usually  excluded  the
action,  Dig.  9.  2.  11.  pr. ;  ib.  28.  i  ;  ib.  52.  i  :  but  this  was  not  so  if  the
damage  was  wilful,  even  though  there  had  been  culpa  lata  on  the  other
side,  Dig.  ib.  9.  4.

§  6.  As  a  general  rule  the  penalty  of  the  lex  Aquilia  was  incurred  only
by  positive  acts  of  commission  :  '  sunt  casus,  quibus  cessat  Aquiliae
actio  ....  nam  qui  agrum  non  proscindit,  qui  vites  non  subserit,  item
aquarum  ductus  corrumpi  patitur,  lege  Aquilia  non  tenetur'  Dig.  7.  i.
13.  2.  But  where  a  person  had  once  commenced  a  course  of  action,
cessation  of  which  would  be  disastrous  (e.  g.  the  case  in  the  text),  an
omission  entailed  liability,  Dig.  9.  2.  8.  pr. ;  ib.  27.  9 ;  ib.  31 :  Grueber,
pp.  208-214.

§  7.  Imperitia  in  surgeons  is  treated  as  culpa  also  in  Dig.  9.  2.  7.  8 ;  in
artificers,  ib.  27.  29 ;  and  assessors,  Dig.  2.  2.  2  :  cf.  the  next  section.

§  8.  '  Nee  videtur  iniquum,  si  infirmitas  culpae  adnumeretur,  cum
affectare  quis  non  debeat,  in  quo  vel  intellexit  vel  intellegere  debet,
infirmitatem  suam  alii  periculosam  futuram '  Dig.  9.  2.  8.  i.

§  9.  The  actio  legis  Aquiliae  was  penal  not  only  for  the  reason  noticed
here,  but  also  because  the  delinquent,  unless  the  plaintiff  failed  to  prove
his  case,  was  assumed  to  be  condemned  from  the  outset  (damnas  esto


536  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

qui  in  eo  anno  int^er  aut  pretiosus  fuerit,  non  tanti  teneatur,
quanti  is  hodie  erit,  sed  quanti  in  eo  anno  plurimi  fuerit.  qua
ratione  creditum  est  poenalem  esse  huius  legis  actionem,  quia
non  solum  tanti  quisque  obligatur,  quantum  damn!  dederit,
sed  aliquando  longe  pluris :  ideoque  constat  in  heredem  earn
actionem  non  transire,quae  transitura  fuisset,  si  ultra  damnum
10  numquam  lis  aestimaretur.  I  Hud  non  ex  verbis  l^is,  sed  ex
interpretatione  placuit  non  solum  perempti  corporis  aesti-
mationem  habendam  esse  secundum  ea  quae  diximus,  sed
eo  amplius  quidquid  praeterea  perempto  eo  corpore  damn!
vobis  adlatum  fuerit^  veluti  si  servum  tuum  heredem  ab  aliquo

dare),  so  that  if  he  were  cast  in  the  suit  after  denying  his  liability,  he  was
condemned  in  duplum,  Tit.  6.  19.  23.  26.  inf.,  Gaius  iii.  216;  iv.  9.  171.

The  action  was  maintainable  against  the  delinquent's  heir  so  far  as  the
inheritance  had  been  enriched  by  the  delict :  '  in  heredem  vel  ceteros
(successores)  haec  actio  non  dabitur,  cum  sit  poenalis  (see  Tit.  12.  i  inf.),
nisi  forte  ex  damno  locupletior  heres  factus  sit'  Dig.  9.  2.  23.  8.  Justi-
nian's qualification  in  the  text  (quae  transitura  ....  aestimaretur)  is
irreconcileable  with  the  statements  of  the  older  jurists,  and  tends  only
to  confusion.

'Aliquando  longe  pluris,'  i.e.  not  always:  for  the  slave  (e.g.)  may
have  been  at  his  full  value  when  killed,  and  the  defendant  may  in  the
abstract  admit  his  liability,  the  object  of  the  suit  being  solely  to  assess  the
damages :  cf.  Tit.  6.  19  inf. '.  .  .  .  sed  interdum,'  etc.

§  10.  When  one  person  has  to  pay  another  the  value  of  a  thing  or  act,
two  standards  may  be  taken  ;  the  market  value,  verum  rei  pretium ;  or
its  value  to  the  particular  person  to  whom  the  payment  is  to  be  made,  in
other  words,  his  '  interesse.'  When  the  latter  standard  is  adopted,  allow-
ance is  made  not  only  for  the  market  value,  but  also  for  what  are  called
damnum  indirectum  or  emergens  (illustrated  by  the  team  of  mules  and
company  of  actors  in  the  text)  and  lucrum  cessans  (e.  g.  the  slave  who  has
been  instituted  heir,  and  is  killed  before  he  can  benefit  his  master  by
accepting) ;  the  damages  are  assessed  upon  the  principle  of  putting
the  plaintiff  so  far  as  possible  in  the  position  in  which  he  would  have
been  had  the  act  been  done  which  ought  to  have  been  done,  or  had  the
wrongful  act  never  been  committed.  The  expression  *  quanti  ea  est  res '
or  '  fuit '  (in  actiones  arbitrariae  ^  erit ')  is  used  to  denote  both  of  these
standards :  '  haec  verba,  quanti  earn  rem  paret  esse,  non  ad  quod  interest,
sed  ad  rei  aestimationem  referuntur'  Dig.  50.  16.  193,  'quanti  ea  res  est,
cuius  damni  infecti  nomine  cautum  non  erit,  indicium  datur,  quod  non  ad
quantitatem  refertur,  sed  ad  id,  quod  interest,  et  ad  utilltatem  venit,  non
ad  poenam  *  Dig.  39.  2.  4.  7.

The  plaintiffs  interesse  was  the  standard  in  actions  both  on  delict
(except  the  actio  bonorum  vi  raptorum.  Dig.  47.  8. 2. 13)  and  on  breaches


Tit.  3.]  DE  LEGE  AQUILIA.  537

institutum  ante  quis  occiderit,  quam  is  iussu  tuo  adiret :  nam
hereditatis  quoque  amissae  rationem  esse  habendam  constat,
item  si  ex  pari  mularum  unam  vel  ex  quadriga  equorum
unum  occiderit,  vel  ex  comoedis  unus  servus  fuerit  occisus :
non  solum  occisi  fit  aestimatio^  sed  eo  amplius  id  quoque
computatur,  quanto  depretiati  sunt  qui  supersunt.  Liberum  11
est  autem  ei,  cuius  servus  fuerit  occisus,  et  privato  iudicio
legis  Aquiliae  damnum  persequi  et  capitalis  criminis  eum
reum  facere.

Caput  secundum  l^is  Aquiliae   in  usu  non  est     Capite  12, 13

of  contract  involving  dolus  or  imputable  culpa.  Justinian  points  out  that
by  the  text  of  the  lex  Aquilia  only  the  verum  rei  pretium  could  be  claimed ;
the  change  of  standard  was  due  to  the  '  interpretatio  *  of  the  lawyers  :  cf.
Ulpian  in  Dig.  9.  2.  21.  2  'sed  utrum  corpus  eius  solum  aestimamus,
quantum  fuerit,  cum  occideretur,  an  potius  quanti  interfuit  nostra  non
esse  occisum  ?  et  hoc  iure  utimur,  ut  eius  quod  interest  fiat  aestimatio.'
But  the  plaintiff  could  not  demand  that  account  should  be  taken  of  lucrum
which,  though  hoped  for,  was  quite  uncertain,  Dig.  ib.  29.  3,  or  of  what
the  Germans  call  '  AfTectionsinteresse,'  ib.  33.  pr.  There  seems  to  be
a  general  tendency  in  Roman  law  to  favour,  in  the  earlier  periods,  the
assessment  of  damages  according  to  the  verum  rei  pretium,  and  in  the
later  to  substitute  the  alternative  method  :  for  illustrations  of  the  effect  of
the  change  in  connection  with  the  lex  Aquilia,  see  Grueber,  pp.  266-271.
By  Cod.  7.  47  Justinian  enacted  that  in  actions  on  contract  the  damages
recoverable  as  Mnteresse'  by  the  plaintiff  should  never  be  more  than
double  the  verum  rei  pretium.

§  IL  The  criminal  prosecution  would  be  under  the  lex  Cornelia  de
sicariis,  B.c.  80,  for  which  see  Tit  18.  5  inf.,  and  was  in  addition  to  the
civil  remedy :  '  ex  morte  ancillae  ....  tam  legis  Aquiliae  actionem  quam
criminalem  accusationem  competere  posse  non  ambigitur'  Cod.  3.  35.

3,  ovdf  yap  i)  privata  KivridtUra  aytdyri  rriv  publicam  a^vwa-iv  Theoph.
From  Gaius  iii.  213  it  would  seem  that  in  his  day  it  was  otherwise :
*  liberum  arbitrium  habet,  vel  capitali  crimine  ....  vel  hac  lege  damnum
persequi:'  but  Ulpian  speaks  of  the  civil  action  as  not  barring  the
prosecution :  '  in  factum  agendum,  criminali  poena  servata '  Dig.  19.
5. 14.  I.

§  12.  '  Capite  secundo  in  adstipulatorem  qui  pecuniam  in  fraudem
stipulatoris  acceptam  fecerit,  quanti  ea  res  esset,  tanti  actio  constituitur '
Gaius  iii.  215.  For  the  adstipulator  see  Gaius  iii.  i  lo-i  14.  This  chapter
had  gone  into  desuetude  at  least  as  early  as  Ulpian,  Dig.  9.  2.  27.  4.
Schrader  suggests  that  the  incorporation  of  a  rule  of  contract  law  in  an
enactment  relating  to  damage  to  property  was  due  to  the  desire  to  subject
the  fraudulent  adstipulator  to  the  procedure  by  manus  iniectio  pura :  see
Gaius  iv.  22,  and  the  General  Index.

§18.  Cap.  iii.  ran  'ceteranim  rerum,  praeter  hominem  et  pecudes


538  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV:

tertio  de  omni  cetero  damno  cavetur.  Itaque  si  quis  servuni
yel  earn  quadrupedem  quae  pecudum  numero  est  vulneraverit,
sive  earn  quadrupedem  quae  pecudum  numero  non  est,  veluti
canem  aut  feram  bestiam,  vulneraverit  aut  ocdderit,  hoc
capite  actio  constituitur.  in  ceteris  quoque  omnibus  animalibus,
item  in  omnibus  rebus  quae  anima  carent  damnum  iniuria
datum  hac  parte  vindicatur.  si  quid  enim  ustum  aut  ruptum
aut  fractum  fuerit, actio  ex  hoc  capite  constituitur:  quamquam
poterit  sola  rupti  appellatio  in  omnes  istas  causas  sufHcere  :
ruptum  enim  intellegitur,  quoquo  modo  corruptum  est  unde
non  solum  usta  aut  fracta,  sed  etiam  scissa  et  coUisa  et  efTusa
et  quoquo  modo  perempta  atque  deteriora  facta  hoc  verbo
continentur :  denique  responsum  est,  si  quis  in  alienum  vinum
aut  oleum  id  immiserit,  quo  naturalis  bonitas  vini  vel  olei  cor-

14  rumperetur,  ex  hac  parte  legis  eum  teneri.  Illud  palam  est,
sicut  ex  primo  capite  ita  demum  quisque  tenetur,  si  dolo  aut
culpa  eius  homo  aut  quadrupes  occisus  occisave  fuerit,  ita  ex
hoc  capite  ex  dolo  aut  culpa  de  cetero  damno  quemque  teneri.
hoc  tamen  capite  non  quanti  in  eo  anno,  sed  quanti  in  diebus
triginta  proximis  res  fuerit,  obligatur  is  qui  damnum  dederit.

15  Ac  ne  plurimi  quidem  verbum  adicitur.  sed  Sabino  recte
placuit  perinde  habendam  aestimationem,  ac  si  etiam  hac
parte  plurimi  verbum  adiectum  fuisset:  nam  plebem  Romanam,
quae  Aquilio  tribuno  rogante  hanc  legem  tulit,  contentam
fuisse,  quod  prima  parte  eo  verbo  usa  est.

IG  Ceterum  placuit  ita  demum  ex  hac  lege  actionem  esse,  si
quis  praecipue  corpore  suo  damnum  dederit.   ideoque  in  eum.


occisos,  si  quis  alteri  damnum  faxit,  quod  usserit,  fregerit,  ruperit  iniuria,
quanti  ea  res  ent  in  diebus  triginta  proximis,  tantum  aes  domino  dare
damnas  esto '  Dig.  9.  2.  27.  5.  The  interpretation  of  ruperit  by  corniperit
('  rupisse  verbum  fere  omnes  veteres  sic  intellexerunt,  corrupisse '  Dig.  ib.
27.  13)  brought  all  damage  caused  by  immediate  physical  contact  with
a  res  aliena  (damnum  corpore  corpori  datum,  Dig.  ib.  27.  13  sq.,  §  16  inf.)
within  the  terms  of  the  statute.

§  16.  For  actiones  in  factum  in  general  see  references  to  Excursus  X
inf.  in  the  General  Index,  and  for  the  specific  one  mentioned  in  this
section  cf.  Dig.  19.  5.  11  ^quia  actionum  non  plenus  numerus  esset,  ideo
plerumque  actiones  in  factum  desiderantur.  Sed  et  eas  actiones,  quae
legibus  proditae  sunt,  si  lex  iusta  ac  necessaria  sit,  supplet  praetor  in  eo,


Tit.  3.]  DE  LEGE  AQUILIA,  539

•

qui  alio  modo  damnum  dederit,  utiles  actiones  dari  solent :
veluti  si  quis  hominem  alienum  aut  pecus  ita  incluserit,  ut
fame  necaretur,  aut  iumentum  tam  vehementer  egerit,  ut
rumperetur,  aut  pecus  in  tantum  exiagitaverit,  ut  praeci-
pitaretur,  aut  si  quis  alieno  servo  persuaserit,  ut  in  arborem
ascenderet  vel  in  puteum  descenderet,  et  is  ascendendo  vel
descendendo  aut  mortuus  fuerit  aut  aliqua  parte  corporis
laesus  erit,  utilis  in  eum  actio  datur.  sed  si  quis  alienum
servum  de  ponte  aut  ripa  in  flumen  deiecerit  et  is  sufifocatus
fuerit,  eo  quod  proiecerit  corpore  suo  damnum  dedisse  non
difficiliter  intellegi  poterit  ideoque  ipsa  lege  Aquilia  tenetur.

quod  legi  deest ;  quod  facit  in  lege  Aquilia  reddendo  actiones  in  factum
accommodatas  legi  Aquiliae,  idque  utilitas  eius  legis  exigit.'  It  is  difficult
to  determine  at  all  precisely  the  relation  to  one  another  of  this  actio  in
factum  and  the  actio  utilis  legis  Aquiliae  also  mentioned  in  the  text.
Justinian's  own  statement  here  suggests  the  hypothesis  that  the  actio
utilis  was  the  proper  remedy  where  the  damage  was  done  corpori,  but  not
corpore,  while  where  it  was  not  even  done  corpori  the  injured  person  had
only  an  actio  in  factum ;  but  this  distinction  is  not  even  hinted  at  by
Gains  iii.  219,  and  other  passages  in  the  Digest,  some  of  which  are  cited
below,  are  strongly  against  it.  The  only  conclusion  which  seems  to  be
warranted  is  that  in  all  cases  which  had  been  brought  within  the  scope  of
the  statute  by  construction  an  actio  in  factum  lay,  but  that  the  actio
utilis  had  a  less  extensive  application,  or,  as  one  of  the  Scholiasts  puts  it,
*  nota  etiam  ex  hoc  capite,  aliud  esse  in  factum,  et  aliud  utilem  Aquiliam ;
utilis  quidem  Aquilia  est  in  factum,  at  in  factum  non  est  utilis  Aquilia ;
haec  enim  latius  patet  et  aliis  casibus  competit.'  There  seems  to  be  no
other  difference  between  the  two  remedies,  and,  in  particular,  none  in
respect  of  their  material  result,  though  some  writers  maintain  that  by  the
actio  in  fectum  only  simple  damages  were  recoverable,  but  that  the  actio
utilis  was  penal  in  both  senses  oT  the  lex  Aquilia,  §  9  supr.  and  note.  For
this  there  is  no  textual  authority,  and  the  expression  actio  in  factum
'  accommodata  legi  Aquiliae'  (Dig.  19.  5. 11,  cited  supr.)  or  'ad  exemplum
legis  Aquiliae '  (Dig.  9.  2.  53)  is  distinctly  against  it.

The  cases  to  which  the  penalties  of  the  lex  Aquilia  were  extended  by
construction,  besides  that  already  noticed  in  the  note  on  p.  533,  are  as
follow :

(i)  Indirect  killing  (corpori,  non  corpore) :  *  Celsus  autem  multum  inter-
esse  dicit,  occiderit,  an  mortis  causam  praestiterit,  ut  qui  mortis  causam
praestiterit,  non  Aquilia  sed  in  factum  actione  teneatur.  Unde  affert  eum,
qui  venenum  pro  medicamento  dederit,  et  ait  causam  mortis  praestitisse,
quemadmodum  eum,  qui  furenti  gladium  porrexit,  nam  nee  hunc  lege
Aquilia  teneri,  sed  in  factum '  Dig.  9.  2.  7.  6.  For  this  the  text  before  us
prescribes  actio  utilis :  cf.  Dig.  ib.  9.  3  ;  ib.  11.  i.


540  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  IV.

sed  si  non  corpore  damnum  fuerit  datum  neque  corpus  laesum
fuerit,  sed  alio  modo  damnum  alicui  conttgit,  cum  non  sufBcit
neque  directa  neque  utilis  Aquilia,  placuit  eum  qui  obnoxius
fuerit  in  factum  actione  teneri :  veluti  si  quis  misericordia
ductus  alienum  servum  compeditum  solvent,  ut  fugeret.


IV.

DE  INIURIIS.

Generaliter  iniuria  dicitur omne quod  non  lure  fit:  specialiter
alias  contumelia,  quae  a  contemnendo  dicta  est,  quam  Graeci
ifipiv  appellant,  alias  culpa,  quam  Graeci  abUrjixa  dicunt,  sicut
in  lege  Aquilia  damnum  iniuria  accipitur,  alias  iniquitas  et

(2)  Indirect  damage  other  than  killing  (corpori,  non  corpore) :  for  ex-
amples see  the  text,  and  Dig.  9.  2.  1 1.  5  ;  ib.  29.  5  ;  ib.  30.  3 ;  9.  i.  i.  7  ;
19.  5.  14.  3.  For  the  limitation  of  these  classes  of  wrong  by  the  require-
ment of  a  positive  act  see  on  §  6  supr.

(3)  Cases  in  which  damnum  is  not  done  corpori,  so  that  properly  speak-
ing there  is  no  rei  corruptio  at  all ;  viz.  (a)  the  wrongful  deprivation  of
property  without  animus  lucri  faciendi,  e.  g.  the  case  of  actio  in  &ctuni
cited  in  this  section :  the  knocking  of  money  out  of  a  person's  hand  ;  the
throwing  of  a  res  aliena  into  the  sea,  Dig.  19.  5.  14.  2,  cited  on  Tit.  I.  i
supr. :  cf.  Dig.  9.  2.  27.  21 ;  4.  3.  7.  7  ;  (^)  the  depreciation  of  property
without  actually  damaging  it :  *  item  si  quis  frumento  arenam  vel  aliud
quid  immiscuerit,  ut  difficilis  separatio  sit,  quasi  de  corrupto  agi  poterit '
Dig.  9.  2.  27.  20 ;  (c)  the  wrongful  consumption  of  res  quae  usu  consu-
muntur  belonging  to  another :  ^  si  quis  alienum  vinum  vel  frumentum
consumpserit,  non  videtur  damnum  iniuria  dare,  ideoque  utilis  danda  est
actio '  Dig.  ib.  30.  2.  It  is  apparently  to  such  cases  of  actual  damage,
depreciation,  or  consumption  of  property,  that  the  expression  in  the  text
(sed  alio  modo  damnum  alicui  contigerit)  must  be  restricted,  for  it  is  hardly
conceivable  that  a  penal  action  lay  wherever  mere  loss  was  occasioned
by  another's  culpa.

(4)  Personal  injury  to  a  free  man:  Miber  homo  suo  nomine  utilem
Aquiliae  habet  actionem,  directam  enim  non  habet,  quoniam  dominus
membrorum  suorum  nemo  videtur'  Dig.  9.  2.  13.  pr.  For  injuries  to
a  filiusfamilias  the  pater  could  sue,  Dig.  ib.  7.  pr.

Tit.  IV.  Having  given  the  general  sense  of  the  term  iniuria  as  *  id
quod  iure  non  fit '  (cf^  Tit.  3.  2  supr.),  Justinian  points  out  three  more
specific  significations  which  it  bears  (specialiter  alias  ....  alias  ....
alias),  viz.  (i)  vffpis  or  contumelia,  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  in  this
Title;    (2)  culpa  or  ddiKrjfjMf  as  where  one  speaks  of  damnum  iniuria


Tit,  4.]  DE  INIURIIS.  541

iniustitia,  quam  Graeci  ihiKlav  vocant  cum  enim  praetor  vel
iudex  non  iure  contra  quern  pronuntiat,  iniuriam  accepisse
dicitur.  Iniuria  autem  committitur  non  solum,  cum  quis  1
pugno  puta  aut  fustibus  caesus  vel  etiam  verberatus  erit,  sed
etiam  si  cui  convicium  factum  fuerit,  sive  cuius  bona  quasi
debitoris  possessa  fuerint  ab  eo,  qui  intellegebat  nihil  eum
sibi  debere,  vel  si  quis  ad  infamiam  alicuius  libellum  aut
carmen   scripserit  composuerit  ediderit  dolove  malo  fecerit,


datum  under  the  lex  Aqui]ia ;  and  (3)  abulia  or  injustice,  sensu  stricto^
in  one  whose  function  it  is  Mus  pronuntiare/  such  as  a  judge  or
a  magistrate.

The  delict  of  iniuria  here  treated  may  be  defined  as  a  wilful  violation
of  what  writers  on  Jurisprudence  term  the  '  primordial '  rights  oi  a  free
man— the  rights  to  personal  freedom,  safety,  and  reputation.  It  thus
stands  in  marked  contrast  with  the  three  delicts  already  discussed,  all
of  which  are  offences  against  property,  though  the  same  act  may  be
construable  as  an  offence  against  both  the  property  and  the  person :
'  et  ideo  interdum  utraque  actio  concurrit,  et  legis  Aquiliae,  et  iniuriarum :
sed  duae  erunt  aestimationes,  alia  damni,  alia  contumeliae '  Dig.  9. 2.  5.  i :
cf.  Dig.  47.  ID.  15.  46.

Intention  is  essential  to  iniuria  :  '  pati  quis  iniuriam  etiamsi  non  sentiat
potest,  facere  nemo,  nisi  qui  scit  se  iniuriam  facere,  etiamsi  nesciat  cui
faciat '  Dig.  47.  10.  3.  2 ;  hence  those  were  held  incapable  of  committing
iniuria  who  could  not  have  such  intention,  e.  g.  persons  of  weak  or  un-
sound mind,  and  children  not  yet  doli  capaces.

§  1.  The  second  condition  of  iniuria  is  an  overt  act,  which,  as  is  said
in  the  text,  might  be  directed  against  the  person  or  the  reputation :
'  iniuriam  autem  fieri  Labeo  ait  aut  re,  aut  verbis :  re,  quotiens  manus
inferuntur,  verbis  autem,  quotiens  non  manus  inferuntur,  convicium  fit :
omnemque  iniuriam  aut  in  corpus  inferri,  aut  ad  dignitatem  aut  ad
infamiam  pertinere'  Dig.  47.  10.  i.  i  and  2.  Among  acts  which  amount
to  iniuria,  besides  those  mentioned  in  the  text,  are  calling  upon  sureties
to  discharge  a  debt  which  the  debtor  is  quite  able  and  willing  to  pay
himself,  Dig.  ib.  19  and  20 ;  offering  for  sale  another's  property  under
the  pretence  that  one  has  a  mortgage  over  it,  ib.  15.  32  and  33  ;  the  pub-
lication of  a  will  whose  provisions  one  should  have  kept  secret.  Dig.  9.  2.
41.  pr. ;  unwarranted  entry  upon  another  man's  dwelling  against  his  will,
Dig.  47.  10.  5.  pr. ;  hindering  another  in  the  use  of  a  *res  publico  usui
desttnata '  ib.  13.  7,  and  unjustifiable  questioning  of  another's  status,
ib.  II.  9.

The  technical  name  for  libel  is  carmen  or  libellus  famosus ;  for  slander
there  seems  to  have  been  no  other  term  but  convicium,  which  includes
acts  which  we  should  call  by  other  names.  If  such  statements  were  true,
and  not  made  in  an  offensive  manner,  they  did  not  amount  to  iniuria :


542  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  IV,

quo  quid  eorum  fieret.  sive  quis  matrem  familias  aut  prae-
textatum  praetextatamve  adsectatus  fuerit,  sive  cuius  pudicitia
attetnptata  esse  dicetur:   et  denique  aliis  pluribus  modis  ad-

2  mitti  iniuriam  manifestum  est.  Patitur  autem  quis  iniuriam
non  solum  per  semet  ipsum,  sed  etiam  per  liberos  suos  quos
in  potestate  habet:  item  per  uxorem  suam,  id  enim  magis
praevaluit.  itaque  si  filiae  alicuius,  quae  Titio  nupta  est,
iniuriam  feceris,  non  solum  filiae  nomine  tecum  iniuriarum
agi  potest,  sed  etiam  patris  quoque  et  mariti  nomine,  contra
autem,  si  viro  iniuria  facta  sit,  uxor  iniuriarum  agere  non
potest :  defend!  enim  uxores  a  viris.  non  viros  ab  uxoribus
aequum  est.    sed  et  socer  nurus  nomine,  cuius  vir  in   po-

3  testate  est,  iniuriarum  agere  potest.  Servis  autem  ipsis
quidem  nulla  iniuria  fieri  intellegitur,  sed  domino  per  eos  fieri
videtur :  non  tamen  isdem  modis,  quibus  etiam  per  liberos  et
uxores,  sed  ita  cum  quid  atrocius  commissum  fuerit  et  quod

'eum  qui  nocentem  infamavit,  non  esse  bonum  aequum  ob  earn  rem
condemnari  :  peccata  enim  nocentium  nota  esse  et  oportere  et  expedire '
Dig.  47.  10.  18.  pr.  For  the  liability  of  instigators  and  accomplices  see
§  II  inf.  and  Paulus,  Sent.  Rec.  5.  4.  20  'non  tantum  is,  qui  maledictum
aut  convicium  ingesserit  iniuriam  convictus  famosus  ef!icitur,  sed  et  is
cuius  ope  consiliove  factum  esse  dicitur.'

§  2.  In  Gains  iii.  221  it  is  said  that  the  husband  can  suffer  iniuria
through  the  wife  in  manu ;  but  this  has  been  emended  (perhaps  rightly,
considering  the  words  which  follow)  by  reference  to  Justinian's  text,  so  as
to  read  '  immo  etiam  per  uxores,  quamvis  in  manu  nostra  non  sint,  id  enim
magis  praevaluit.*  The  actio  iniuriarum  was  one  of  the  few  actions  which
a  person  in  power  was  able  to  bring  in  his  or  her  own  name.  Dig.  44.  7.  9,
p.  129  supr.  As  a  general  rule,  iniuria  to  A  would  not  affect  B  unless  it
was  so  intended ;  but  where  the  relation  between  the  two  was  intimate,
and  such  as  to  have  been  known  to  the  delinquent,  the  intention  was
presumed :  *  maritus  in  uxoris  pudore,  pater  in  existimatione  filianim
propriam  iniuriam  pati  intelleguntur'  Cod.  9.  35  2.

§  3.  No  iniuria  could,  properly  speaking,  be  offered  to  a  slave,  because
he  was  anp6<Tmro£ ;  but  the  praetor  seems  to  have  demurred  to  the  civil
law  fiction  that  a  slave  had  no  feelings  :  ^  si  . . . .  non  ad  suggillationem
domini  fecit,  ipsi  servo  facta  iniuria  inulta  a  praetore  relinqui  non  debuit :
banc  enim  et  servum  sentire  palam  est*  Dig.  47.  la  15.  35  :  cf.  Dig.  21.
!•  43*  Si  ^°d  note  on  Bk.  i.  3.  2  supr.

It  is  doubtful  whether  the  *et'  between  'atrocius  commissum*  and
'  quod  aperte  ....  respicit  *  should  be  taken  as  conjunctive  or  disjunctive.
In  favour  of  the  former  view  is  Gains  (iii.  222),  who  omits  the  particle,  and
perhaps  Theophilus  («al  ow€p)y  but  the  latter  is  supported  by  general


Tit.4.J  DE  INIURIIS,  543

aperte  ad  contumeliam  domini  respicit.  veluti  si  quis  alienum
servum  verberaverit,  et  in  hunc  casum  actio  proponitur :  at  si
quis  servo  coavicium  fecerit  vel  pugno  eum  percusserit,  nulla
in  eum  actio  domino  competit.     Si  communi  servo  iniuria  4
facta  sit,  aequum  est  non  pro  ea  parte,  qua  dominus  quisque
est,  aestimationem  iniuriae  fieri,  sed  ex  dominorum  persona,
quia  ipsis  fit  iniuria.     Quodsi  usus  fructus  in  servo  Titii  est,  5
proprietas  Maevii  est,  magis  Maevio  iniuria  fieri  intellegitur.
Sed  si  libero>  qui  tibi  bona  fide  servit,  iniuria  facta  sit,  nulla  6
tibi  actio  dabitur,  sed  suo  nomine  is  experiri  poterit :  nisi  in
contumeliam  tuam  pulsatus  sit,  tunc  enim  competit  et  tibi
iniujriarum  actio,     idem  ergo  est  et  in  servo  alieno  bona  fide
tibi  serviente,  ut  totiens  admittatur  iniuriarum  actio,  quotiens
in  tuam  contumeliam  iniuria  ei  facta  sit.

Poena    autem    iniuriarum   ex    lege    duodecim   tabularum  7
propter  membrum  quidem  ruptum  talio  erat :  propter  os  vero
fractum  nummariae  poenae  erant  constitutae  quasi  in  magna
vetenim  paupertate.     sed  postea  praetores  permittebant  ipsis

principles  and  Dig.  47.  10.  15.  35,  according  to  which  even  slight  iniuria,
if  aimed  at  the  dominus,  was  actionable.

§  4.  This  seems  hardly  reconcileable  with  Dig.  47.  10.  16,  which  says
that  no  joint  owner  was  entitled  to  a  share  in  the  damages  in  excess  of
the  share  which  he  held  in  the  slave.  Perhaps  the  meaning  is  that  the
judge  should  consider  not  only  the  shares,  but  also  the  dignitas,  of  the
joint  owners :  so  that  if  a  more  honourable  and  a  less  honourable  man
own  a  slave  in  moieties,  and  the  former  could  recover  100/.  if  he  were
sole  dominus,  while  the  latter,  under  the  same  supposition,  would  get
only  50/.,  the  judge  ought  to  award  50/.  to  the  one,  and  25/.  to  the
other.

§  6.  But  if  the  insult  was  intended  to  be  offered  to  Titius,  he  could
sue.  Dig.  47.  10.  15.  48.

§  7.  To  fractum  Gains  (iii.  223)  adds  '  aut  collisum.'  The  difference
between  membrum  ruptum  and  os  fractum  is  not  clear ;  if  we  may  rely
on  the  interpretation  of  ruptum  under  the  lex  Aquilia  as  corruptum,  the
former  is  intended  to  express  permanent  disablement,  but  it  seems  better
to  take  membrum  to  mean  one  of  the  extremities  (head,  arm,  or  leg),  and
by  OS  to  understand  bones  in  the  body  or  trunk.  The  penalty  in  such
cases  (the  exaction  of  which  was  permitted  by  the  statute  to  the  nearest
relative  of  the  injured  person,  '  talione  proximus  CQgnatus  ulciscitur '
Cato  in  Priscian  6.  710)  was  a  limb  for  a  limb  only  if  the  parties  were
unable  to  agree  as  to  compensation:  ^si  membrum  rupit,  ni  cum  eo
pacit,  talio  esto '  (Twelve  Tables  in  Festus) ;  but  it  would  seem  that  the


544  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  IV.

qui  iniuriam  passi  sunt  earn  aestimare,  ut  iudex  vel  tanti
condemnet,  quanti  iniuriam  passus  aestimaverit,  vel  minoris
prout  ei  visum  fuerit.  sed  poena  quidem  iniuriae,  quae  ex
lege  duodecim  tabularum  introducta  est,  in  desuetudinem
abiit :  quam  autem  praetores  introduxerunt,  quae  etiam  ho-
noraria appellatur,  in  iudiciis  frequentatur.  nam  secundum
gradum  dignitatis  vitaeque  honestatem  crescit  aut  minuitur
aestimatio  iniuriae:  qui  gradus  condemnationis  et  in  servili
persona  non  immerito  servatur,  ut  aliud  in  servo  actore,  aliud
in  medii  actus  homine,  aliud  in  vilissimo  vel  compedito  con-
8  stituatur.  Sed  et  lex  Cornelia  de  iniuriis  loquitur  et  iniuriarum
actionem  introduxit.  quae  competit  ob  eam  rem,  quod  se
pulsatum  quis  verberatumve  domumve  suam  vi  introitam
esse  dicat.  domum  autem  accipimus,  sive  in  propria  domo  quis
habitat  sive  in  conducta  vel  gratis  sive  hospitio  receptus  sit.

delinquent  could  resist  talio  if  he  pleased,  and  insist  on  a  judicial  fine  :
*si  reus,  qui  depacisci  noluerat,  iudici  talionem  imperanti  non  parebat,
aestimata  lite  iudex  hominem  pecunia  damnabat'  Gell.  20.  i.  The  pecu-
niary penalties  fixed  by  the  Twelve  Tables  were  300  asses  if  the  broken
bone  were  a  free  man's,  150  if  it  were  a  slave's;  for  all  other  iniuriae
25  asses,  Gaius  loc.  cit.  That  the  grossest  libel  could  be  atoned  for  by
payment  of  this  small  sum  argues  the  old  Romans  to  have  been  not  over
sensitive  to  abuse,  unless  it  took  the  form  of  ribald  songs,  in  which  case
the  penalty  of  death,  fustuarium  supplicium,  was  ordained  by  the  Twelve
Tables ;  cf.  Cic.  de  Republ.  4.  10,  Tusc.  4.  2.  After  the  introduction  of  the
praetorian  penalties,  the  sum  to  be  paid  in  cases  of  atrox  iniuria  (§  9  inf.)
was  in  Gaius'  time  practically  fixed  by  the  praetor,  Gaius  iii.  224.  That
Justinian  does  not  mention  this  is  perhaps  to  be  accounted  for  by  sup-
posing that  atrox  iniuria  was  usually  proceeded  against  either  criminally,
§  10  inf.,  or  under  the  lex  Cornelia,  §  8  inf.  The  praetorian  action  could
be  brought  only  within  an  annus  utilis  of  the  commission  of  the  offence.
Cod.  9.  35.  5,  and  condemnation  entailed  infamia,  Tit.  16.  2  inf.  The
right  of  action  was  extinguished  by  the  death  either  of  the  person  in-
jured, or  of  the  delinquent,  the  wrong  being  purely  personal,  Dig.  47.  10.
13.  pr. ;  this  of  course  must  be  understood  to  mean  that  the  action  was
neither  actively  nor  passively  transmissible  ;  the  former,  perhaps,  because
in  many  cases  more  than  one  person  could  sue  on  the  same  iniuria.

§  8.  Whether  this  lex  Cornelia,  passed  by  Sulla  B.a  81,  was  confined
to  iniuriae,  or  was  only  a  part  of  a  larger  statute,  perhaps  the  lex  Cornelia
de  sicariis.  Tit.  18.  5  inf.,  is  doubtful ;  the  former  view  is  supported  by
the  fulness  with  which  it  seems  to  have  treated  iniuria,  Dig.  47.  la  5.
6-8 ;  48.  2.  12.  4.  Its  original  object  in  any  case  was  the  criminal  pro-
secution of  the  acts  of  violence  to  which  it  related  (^apparet  igitur  omnem


Tit  4.]  DE  INIURIIS.  545

Atrox  iniuria  aestimatur  vel  ex  facto,  veluti  si  quis  ab  aliquo  9
vulneratus  fuerit  vel  fustibus  caesus :  vel  ex  loco,  veluti  si
cui  in  theatro  vel  in  foro  vel  in  conspectu  praetoris  iniuria
facta  sit :  vel  ex  persona,  veluti  si  magistratus  iniuriam  passus
fuerit,  vel  si  senator!  ab  humili  iniuria  facta  sit,  aut  parent!
patronoque  fiat  a  liberis  vel  libertis :  aliter  enim  senatoris  et
parentis  patronique,  aliter  extranei  et  humilis  personae  iniuria
aestimatur.  nonnumquam  et  locus  vulneris  atrocem  iniuriam
facit,  veluti  si  in  oculo  quis  percussus  sit.  parvi  autem  refert,
utrum  patri  familias  an  filio  familias  talis  iniuria  facta  sit:
nam  et  haec  atrox  aestimabitur.  In  summa  sciendum  est  10
de  omni  iniuria  eum  qui  passus  est  posse  vel  criminaliter
agere  vel  civiliter.  et  si  quidem  civiliter  agatur,  aestimatione
facta  secundum  quod  dictum  est  poena  imponitur.  sin  autem
criminaliter,  officio  iudids  extraordinaria  poena  reo  irrogatur :
hoc  videlicet  observando,  quod  Zenoniana  constitutio  in-
troduxit,  ut  yiri  illustres  quique  supra  eos  sunt  et  per
procuratores  possint  actionem  iniuriarum  criminaliter  vel
persequi  vel  suscipere  secundum  eius  tenorem,  qui  ex  ipsa
manifestius  apparet.  Non  solum  autem  is  iniuriarum  tenetur  1 1
qui  fecit  iniuriam,  hoc  est  qui  percussit :   verum  ille  quoque

iniuriam,  quae  manu  fiat,  lege  Cornelia  contineri '  Dig.  47.  10.  5.  pr.),  but
by  gradual  usage  a  civil  action  was  developed  under  its  provisions,  which,
though  its  scope  was  less  than  that  of  the  older  praetorian  remedy,  had
the  advantage  of  being  perpetua,  i.e.  not  barred  by  lapse  of  a  year:
'etiam  ex  lege  Cornelia  iniuriarum  actio  civiliter  moveri  potest,  con-
demnatione  aestimadone  iudicis  facienda'  Dig.  47.  la  37.  i.  The
criminal  proceedings  under  this  statute  apparenUy  went  out  of  use.  Dig.

3.  3-  42. 1.

§  9.  Gains  (iii.  223)  and  Paulus  (Sent  Rec  5.  4. 10)  do  not  mention  the
position  of  the  wound  as  sufficient  to  make  an  iniuria  atrox.

§  10.  Criminal  prosecution  of  iniuria  was  not  under  any  recognised
indicium  publicum,  hence  the  necessity  of  an  extraordinaria  poena  (cf.
the  passage  cited  from  Dig.  47.  2.  92  on  Tit.  i.  19  supr.),  though  some
forms  of  it  would  come  under  specific  statutes,  e.g.  the  leges  luliae  de
adulteriis,  Tit  18.  4  inf.,  and  de  vi,  ib.  8 :  Cornelia  de  sicariis,  ib.  5,  or
Fabia  de  plagiariis,  ib.  10.  The  ranks  higher  than  iUustris  were  those  of
consulares  and  patricii.  For  Zeno's  constitution  cf.  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  5.  4.
12  Mniuriarum  non  nisi  praesentes  accusare  possunt :  crimen  enim,  quod
vindictae  aut  calumniae  indicium  expectat,  per  alios  intendi  non  potest,'
Dig.  48.  I.  13.  I  'ad  crimen  iudicii  publici  persequendum  frustra  procu-
rator tntervenit,  multoque  magis  ad  defendendunu'

N  n


546  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

continebitur,  qui  dolo  fecit  vel  qui  curavit,  ut  cut  mala  pugno
12  percuteretur.  Haec  actio  dissimulatione  aboletur:  et  ideo,
si  quis  iniuriam  dereliquerit,  hoc  est  statim  passus  ad  animum
suum  non  revocaveiit,  postea  ex  paenitentia  remissam  iniuriam
non  potent  recolere.

V.

DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUAE  QUASI  EX  DELICTO  NASCUNTUR.

Si  iudex  litem  suam  fecerit,  non  proprie  ex  maleficio  obli-
gatus  videtur.  sed  quia  neque  ex  contractu  obligatus  est  et
utique  peccasse  aliquid  intellegitur,  licet  per  imprudentiam :
ideo  videtur  quasi  ex  maleficio  teneri,  et  in  quantum  de  ea  re
1  aequum  religion!  iudicantis  videbitur,  poenam  sustinebit.  Item
is,  ex  cuius  cenaculo  vel  proprio  ipsius  vel  conducto  vel  in


§  12.  For  this  use  of  dissimulatio  cf.  Dig.  23. 4. 27,  Cod.  2.  22.  i ;  7. 13.
3.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  arrived  at  by  supposing  that  a  person  who,
after  at  first  letting  an  iniuria  go  by,  then  brings  his  action, '  dissembled '
his  anger.  The  reason  of  the  rule  is  that  the  actio  iniuriae  '  ex  bono  et
aequo  est '  Dig.  47.  10.  11.  i.

Tit.  V.  These  obligations  quasi  ex  delicto  are  of  two  kinds  ;  (i)  cases
of  vicarious  responsibility,  imposed  by  the  law  upon  a  man  '  quod  opera
roalorum  hominum  utitur,*  or  because  it  may  be  difficult  to  ascertain  the
real  offender,  and  (2)  wrongs  which  result  directly  from  a  man's  own
culpa,  but  which  do  not  come  under  the  definition  of  any  of  the  four
delicts  proper.  The  actions  by  which  they  are  redressed  being  bilaterally
penal,  except  perhaps  in  one  case,  they  partake  of  the  character  of
genuine  delicts ;  a  category  from  which  (as  Mr.  Poste  remarks)  they  are
excluded  apparently  only  because  they  fall  under  no  certain  statute,  or
are  recent  additions  to  the  code.

That  the  incompetence  of  a  surgeon  was  a  delict  (Tit.  3.  7  supr.),  while
that  of  a  judge  was  not,  was  due  to  the  wording  of  the  lex  Aquilia,  the
action  under  which  did  not  lie  except  in  cases  of  damage  to  tangible
objects :  '  iudex  tunc  litem  suam  facere  intellegitur,  cum  dolo  malo  in
fraudem  legis  sentendam  dixerit  Dolo  malo  autem  videtur  hoc  facere,
si  evidens  arguatur  eius  vel  gratia  vd  inimicitia  vel  etiam  sordes,  ut
veram  aestimationem  litis  praestare  cogatur'  Dig.  5.  i.  15.  i.  Where
his  offence  was  only  imprudentia  it  must  have  been  more  lightly  visited,
the  judge  here  having  a  discretion  ' .  .  .  .  quantum  aequum  religion!
iudicantis  videbitur.'

§  1.  '  Praetor  ait  de  his,  qui  deiecerint  vel  effuderint,  unde  In  eum  locum
quo  vulgo  iter  fiet,  vel  in  quo  consistetur,  deiectum  vel  effusum  quid  erit.


Tit.  5.]        DE  OBLIGATIONIBUS  QUAE  QUASI,  ETC       547

quo  gratis  habitabat  ddectum  effusumve  aliquid  est,  ita  ut
alicui  noceretur,  quasi  ex  maleficio  obligatus  intell^itur :  ideo
autem  non  proprie  ex  maleficio  obligatus  intellegitur,  quia
plerumque  ob  alterius  culpam  tenetur  aut  servi  aut  liberi.  cui
similis  est  is,  qui  ea  parte,  qua  vulgo  iter  fieri  solet,  id  positum
aut  suspensum  habet,  quod  potest,  si  ceciderit,  alicui  nocere :
quo  casu  poena  decern  aureorum  constituta  est.  de  eo  vero
quod  deiectum  effusumve  est  dupli  quanti  damnum  datum  sit
constituta  est  actio,  ob  hominem  vero  liberum  occisum  quin-
quaginta  aureorum  poena  constituitur :  si  vero  vivet  nod-
tumque  ei  esse  dicetur,  quantum  ob  eam  rem  aequum  iudici
videtur,  actio  datur :  iudex  enim  computare  debet  mercedes
medicis  praestitas  ceteraque  impendia,  quae  in  curatione  facta
sunt,  praeterea  operarum,  quibus  caruit  aut  cariturus  est  ob
id  quod  inutilis  factus  est.     Si  filius  familias  seorsum  a  patre  2

quantum  ex  ea  re  damnum  datum  factumve  erit,  in  eum,  qui  ibi
habitaverit,  in  duplum  iudicium  dabo'  Dig.  9.  3.  i.  pr.  The  action  for
the  recovery  of  the  penalty  was  popularis  (cf.  Bk.  i.  26.  3  and  note,  supr.)
if  the  offence  resulted  in  the  death  of  a  free  man — *  dummodo  sciamus,
ex  pluribus  desiderantibus  haec  actionem  ei  potissimum  dari  debere,  cuius
interest,  vel  qui  adfinitate  cognationeve  defunctum  contingit '  Dig.  ib.  5. 5  ;
like  penal  actions  in  general,  it  was  not  passively  transmissible,  and  the
time  within  which  it  could  be  brought  was  limited  to  an  annus  utilis.
A  free  man  who  was  only  injured  could  sue  at  any  length  of  time  from
the  occurrence,  and  in  such  cases  the  action  seems  also  to  have  been
popularis  for  a  year :  '  sed  si  libero  nocitum  est,  ipsi  perpetua  erit  actio  ;
sed  si  alius  velit  experiri  annua  erit  haec  actio,  nee  enim  heredibus  iure
hereditario  competit,  quippe  quod  in  corpore  libero  damni  datur,  iure
hereditario  transire  ad  successores  non  debet,  quasi  non  sit  damnum
pecuniarium,  nam  ex  bono  et  aequo  oritur '  Dig.  loc.  cit

If  the  occupier  of  the  house  were  cast  in  an  actio  de  effusis  vel  deiectis,
he  could  recover  by  actio  in  factum  from  the  actual  delinquent  unless  he
were  his  slave  or  iiliusfamilias,  in  which  case  he  could  usually  pay  the
damages  from  the  peculium.  Dig.  ib.  5.  4.

For  the  actio  positi  aut  suspensi  cf.  Dig.  9.  3.  5.  6,  '  praetor  ait,  ne
quis  in  suggrunda  protectove  supra  eum  locum,  quo  vulgo  iter  iiet  inve
quo  consistetur,  id  positum  habeat,  cuius  casus  nocere  cui  possit;  qui
adversus  ea  fecerit,  in  eum  solidorum  decem  in  factum  iudicium  dabo.'
The  action  was  popularis.  Dig.  ib.  13,  and  its  object,  besides  the  recovery
of  the  penalty,  was  the  removal  of  the  danger,  i.e.  it  lay  before  any
damage  was  actually  done.

§  2.  In  this  case  no  action  whatever  could  be  brought  against  the
father  in  the  first  instance,  *  neque  de  peculio  neque  noxalem  *  Dig.  44. 7.  5.

N  n  3


548  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

habitaverit  et  quid  ex  cenaculo  eius  deiectum  eflfusumve  sit,
sive  quid  positum  suspensumve  babuerit,  cuius  casus  peri-
culosus  est :  luliano  placuit  in  patrem  nuUam  esse  actionem,
sed  cum  ipso  filio  agendum,  quod  et  in  filio  familias  iudice
3  observandum  est,  qui  litem  suam  fecerit.  Item  exercitor
navis  aut  cauponac  aut  stabuli  de  dole  aut  furto,  quod  in  nave
aut  in  caupona  aut  in  stabulo  factum  erit,  quasi  ex  maleficio
teneri  videtur,  si  modo  ipsius  nullum  est  maleficium,  sed  ali-
cuius  eorum,  quorum  opera  navem  aut  cauponam  aut  stabulum
exerceret:  cum  enim  neque  ex  contractu  sit  adversus  eum
constituta  haec  actio  et  aliquatenus  culpae  reus  est,  quod
opera  malorum  hominum  uteretur,  ideo  quasi  ex  maleficio

5,  Me  peculio  non  datur,  quia  non  ex  contractu  venit'  Dig.  9.  3.  I.  7.
But  if  judgment  were  recovered  against  the  filiusfamilias  the  pater  was
liable  to  the  actio  tudicati,  and  must  pay  to  the  extent  of  the  peculium  ;
at  least  this  was  the  rule  in  delicts  proper:  ^quotiens  nemo  filiumfamilias
ex  causa  delicti  defendit,  in  eum  iudicium  datur;  et  si  condemnatus
fuerit,  filtus  iudicatum  facere  debet,  tenet  enim  condemnatio.  Quin
immo  etiam  illud  dtcendum  est,  patrem  quoque  post  condemnationem
duntaxat  de  peculio  posse  conveniri'  Dig.  9.  4.  34  and  35.  If  the
dangerous  object  had  been  positum  or  suspensum  by  a  slave  without  the
master's  knowledge,  the  praetor  had  allowed  a  noxal  action,  Dig.  9.  3.
I.  pr. ;  ib.  5. 6,  and  doubtless  the  practice  had  been  the  same  with  children
in  power ;  for  this  subject  see  Tit.  8  and  notes  inf.

§8.  The  penalty  to  which  shipowners,  inn  and  stable  keepers  were
liable  for  such  delicts  of  their  employes  was  twice  the  value  of  the
property  stolen  or  damaged,  Dig.  4.  9.  7.  i  ;  47>  5.  2.  The  same  classes
of  persons  were  bound  quasi  ex  contractu  to  restore  in  safety  and  uninjured
the  property  of  travellers  and  others  which  was  placed  in  their  custody
(receptum  nautarum,  cauponum  et  stabulariorum),  unless  the  loss  was
occasioned  by  vis  maior,  unavoidable  accident,  or  contributory  negligence
of  the  owner :  '  ait  praetor,  nautae,  caupones,  stabularii,  quod  cui usque
salvum  fore  receperint,  nisi  restituent,  in  eos  iudicium  dabo'  Dig.  4.  9.
I.  pr.

There  is  apparently  no  reason  why  the  liability  of  masters  for  their
slaves'  delicts  in  general  (Tit.  8  inf.)  and  of  owners  of  animals  for  damage
done  by  them  (Tit.  9)  should  not  be  considered  as  arising  quasi  ex  delicto,
for  it  was  enforced  by  special  actions,  which  were  at  least  as  penal  as
that  against  the  judge  '  qui  litem  suam  fecerit.'  The  fact  seems  to  be  that
the  cases  mentioned  in  this  Title  are  intended  only  as  examples  of  quasi -
delictal  obligation,  and  that  the  other  two  would  naturally  have  found
a  place  among  them  but  for  Justinian's  inveterate  habit  of  following  the
arrangement  of  Gains.  As  the  latter  does  not  treat  the  subject  at
all,  he  discusses  the  liability  of  masters  and  fathers  for  the  delicts  of


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  549

teneri  videtur.  in  his  autem  casibus  in  factum  actio  corn-
petit,  quae  heredi  quidem  datur,  adversus  heredem  autem
non  competit.

VI.

DE  ACTIONIBUS-

Superest,  ut  de  actionibus  loquamur.  actio  autem  nihil
aliud  est,  quam  ius  persequendi  iudicio  quod  sibi  debetun

their  slaves  and  children  in  power  in  close  connection  with  a  cognate
question-^their  hability  upon  their  contracts;  so  that  Justinian,  in  his
anxiety  to  adhere  to  the  latter  arrangement,  has  committed  a  fault  of
classification.

Before  proceeding  to  the  subject  of  actions  in  the  next  Title,  it  is
recommended  that  the  student  should  read  the  Excursus  at  the  end  of
this  Book  on  the  earlier  history  of  Roman  civil  procedure.

Tit.  VI.  Actio  is  a  term  which  has  a  variety  of  meanings,  more  or  less
cognate  to  one  another.  From  signifying  a  mere  act  (as  in  Dig.  48.  i.  7)
it  becomes  limited  to  a  processual  act,  an  act  done  as  pait  of  a  judicial
proceeding,  whether  by  one  of  the  parties  (Gaius  iv.  11  sq.,  Dig.  i.  2.
2.  6)  or  by  the  magistrate  (Dig.  i.  7.  4).  In  Dig.  47.  20.  i  it  indicates
a  public  prosecution,  and  in  Cod.  10.  i.  6  it  is  used  altogether  improperly
in  the  sense  of  an  evidentiary  document.

But  by  far  its  commonest  senses  are  two  in  number :  (i)  as  here  in  the
text,  it  means  '  a  right  of  action.'  The  expression  '  ius  persequendi  quod
sibi  debetur'  at  first  might  be  taken  to  imply  that  actio  is  here  used  as
equivalent  to  actio  in  personam,  for  it  is  difficult  to  represent  a  person
who  denies  one's  right  to  property  as  '  owing '  one  a  debt ;  but  it  is
plain  from  the  next  paragraph  that  Justinian  is  using  actio  in  its  widest
sense:  cf.  Dig.  50.  16.  178.  3  'hoc  verbum  'Mebuit"  omnem  omnino
actionem  comprehendere  intellegitur.'  (2)  The  actual  exercise  of  such
right  of  action  (as  in  the  expressions  actionem  dare,  denegare,  actione
experiri),  or,  more  generally,  a  'legal  remedy.'  This  sense  in  some
passages  is  narrower  than  in  others ;  its  extension  in  fact  is  threefold :
{a)  in  its  narrowest  signification  it  denotes  an  actio  in  personam  as
distinct  from  an  actio  in  rem  (p.  350  supr.),  and  here  there  is  a  close
correlation  between  actio  and  obligatio ;  for  every  personal  action  asserts
a  right  in  personam,  and  presupposes  an  obligatio.  A  real  action,  on  the
other  hand,  though  brought  against  a  definite  person,  does  not  (as  is
remarked  in  §  i)  presuppose  any  '  vinculum  iuris '  between  plaintiff  and
defendant ;  the  latter  is  sued,  not  because  he  '  owes '  anything,  properly
speaking,  but  because  he  will  not  recognise  a  right  which  the  plaintiff
has  and  can  assert  against  the  world.  After  such  action  has  been
definitely  commenced,  the  parties  are  in  a  sense  bound  to  one  another


550  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.  [Lib.  IV.

1  Omnium  actionum,  quibus  inter  aliquos  apud  iudices  arbi-'
trosve  de  quaque  re  quaeritur,  summa  divisio  in  duo  genera
deducitur :  aut  enim  in  rem  sunt  aut  in  personam,  namque
agit  unusquisque  aut  cum  eo,  qui  ei  obligatus  est  vel  ex  con-
tractu vel  ex  maleficio,  quo  casu  proditae  actiones  in  per-
sonam sunt,  per  quas  intendit  adversarium  ei  dare  aut  dare
facere  oportere  et  aliis  quibusdam  modis:  aut  cum  eo  agit,
qui  nullo  iure  ei  obligatus  est,  movet  tamen  alicui  de  aliqua
re  controversiam.  quo  casu  proditae  actiones  in  rem  sunt,
veluti  si  rem  corporalem  possideat  quis,  quam  Titius  suam
esse  aflirmet,  et  possessor  dominum  se  esse  dicat :   nam  si

2  Titius  suam  esse  intendat,  in  rem  actio  est.  Aeque  si  agat
ius  sibi  esse  fundo  forte  vel  aedibus  utendi  fruendi  vel  per
fundum  vicini  eundi  agendi  vel  ex  fundo  vicini  aquam  ducendi,

(Gaius  iii.  i8o) ;  but  the  action  does  not  originate  in  an  obligatio  as
personal  actions  do.  {b)  Somewhat  more  widely,  actio  denotes  a  judicial
proceeding  which  (in  the  formulary  period)  commenced  with  a  formula,
in  contradistinction  to  interdicts  and  the  extraordinaria  cognitio:  and
{c)  finally,  in  some  passages  it  bears  the  sense  of  any  legal  remedy
whatsoever :  'actionis  verbo  continetur  in  rem,  in  personam,  directa,  utilis,
praeiudicium,  sicut  ait  Pomponius  stipulationes  etiam,  quae  praetoriae
sunt,  quia  actionum  instar  obtinent,  ut  damni  infecti,  legatorum,  et  si
quae  similes  sunt.  Interdicta  quoque  actionis  verbo  continentUr'  Dig.
44.  7.  37,  'integri  restitutio  est  redintegrandae  rei  vel  causae  actio*
Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  l.  7.  i,  'agere  etiam  is  videtur,  qui  exceptione  utitur,
nam  reus  in  excipiendo  actor  est'  Dig.  44.  i.  1 :  but  cf.  Dig.  5a  16.  8.  i
'  actionis  verbo  non  continetur  exceptio.'

§  1.  The  distinction  of  actions  into  real  and  personal  is  based  in  origin
on  difference  of  formula  (Excursus  X  inf.),  to  which  there  is  an  obvious
reference  in  Justinian's  words  '  intendit . . .  dare  facere  oportere,' '  (rem)
suam  esse  intendat,'  which,  however,  have  no  technical  meaning  in  the
text,  but  merely  describe  in  general  terms  the  plaintiff's  contention,  as
expressed  in  the  libellus  conventionis,  or  writ  of  summons  by  which  the
action  was  commenced.  Other  differences,  e.  g.  in  procedure,  and  in  the
nature  of  the  security  to  be  given  by  the  parties  (Tit.  1 1  inf.),  have  now
disappeared,  and  a  real  differs  from  a  personal  action  only  in  the  nature
of  the  right  for  whose  protection  it  is  brought :  the  opposition  is  material
only,  not  formal.  It  will  be  found  that  in  §  20  inf.  Justinian  interposes  a
third  class— actiones  mixtae— between  actions  which  are  real  and  those
which  are  personal.

§  2.  For  the  rights  to  which  the  remedies  described  in  this  section  relate
see  Bk.  ii.  Titles  3-5  and  notes  supr.  The  actio  confessoria,  affirming
a  right  of  servitude  in  the  plaintiff,  lay  not  only  against  the  dominus  of
the  res  serviens,  but  against  any  one  by  whom  the  right  was  infringed,


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTION/BUS.  551

in  rem  actio  est.  eiusdem  generis  est  actio  de  iure  praediorum
urbanorum,  veluti  si  agat  ius  sibi  esse  altius  aedes  suas  tol*
lendi  prospiciendive  vel  proiciendi  aliquid  vel  immittendi  in
vicini  aedes.  contra  quoque  de  usu  fructu  et  de  servitutibus
praediorum  rusticorum,  item  praediorum  urbanorum  invicem
quoque  proditae  sunt  actiones,  ut  quis  intendat  ius  non  esse
adversario  utendi  fruendi,  eundi  agendi  aquamve  ducendi,  item
altius  toUendi  prospiciendi  proiciendi  immittendi :  istae  quoque
actiones  in  rem  sunt,  sed  negativae.  quod  genus  actionis  in
controversiis  rerum  corporalium  proditum  non  est :  nam  in  his
is  agit  qui  non  possidet:  ei  vero  qui  possidet  non  est  actio
prodita,  per  quam  neget  rem  actoris  esse,  sane  uno  casu  qui
possidet  nihilo  minus  actoris  partes  optinet,  sicut  in  latioribus
digestorum  libris  opportunius  apparebit.  Sed  istae  quidem  3
actiones,  quarum  mentionem  habuimus,  et  si  quae  sunt  similes,
ex  legitimis  et  civilibus  causis  descendunt     aliae  autem  sunt,

and  its  objects  were  recognition  of  the  right  and  damages  for  its  infringe-
ment :  in  form  it  was  arbitraria  (§  3 1  inf.).  In  many  cases,  especially  of
praedial  servitudes,  the  person  entitled  was  not  limited  to  this  remedy,
but  could  use  an  interdict,  and  thereby  compel  the  dominus,  if  he  wished
to  contest  the  right,  to  bring  the  actio  negatoria.  By  this  he  asserted
the  freedom  of  his  property  from  the  servitude  affirmed  by  the  other ;  its
object  being  restoration  of  the  property  itself  (if  the  other  claimed  a  use
or  usufruct)  or  cessation  of  the  act  by  which  the  rights  of  ownership  had
been  interfered  with ;  damages  for  what  had  been  done,  and  security  by
stipulation  against  its  repetition.  For  these  actions  generally  cf.  Mr.  Poste's
note  on  Gaius  iv.  3.

The  single  case  referred  to  at  the  end  of  the  section,  in  which  a
possessor  can  be  plaintiff  in  a  real  action,  and  of  which  Justinian  says
fuller  information  may  be  found  in  the  Digest,  may  be  either  where  a
person,  though  not  ceasing  to  *  possess'  his  property,  has  given  it  as
precarium  to  another.  Dig.  43.  26.  15.  4:  or  where  one  person  possesses
ex  iusta  causa  (i.  e.  as  dominus)  and  another  vi  aut  clam,  but  not  from
him  (so  that  the  interdict  Uti  possidetis  does  not  lie).  Dig.  43.  17.  3.  pr. ;
or  where  a  civil  possessor  brings  vindicatio  against  another  who  has
detention  in  his  name.  Dig.  6.  i.  9 ;  7.  9.  7.  pr.

§  8.  For  the  history  of  the  distinction  here  drawn  between  actiones
civiles  or  legitimae,  and  actiones  honorariae  (the  latter  comprising  the
two  classes  of  utiles  and  in  factum)  see  Excursus  X.  Actiones  honorariae
in  rem  are  exemplified  in  §§  3-7,  in  personam  in  §§  8-12  inf.

By  possessor  at  the  end  of  this  section  can  only  be  meant '  is  qui  olim
possederat '  (referring  to  §  5  inf.),  cf.  domino  for  '  ei  qui  dominus  fuerat  ^
in§s.


552  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

quas  praetor  ex  sua  iurisdictione  comparatas  habet  tarn  in
rem  quam  in  personam,  quas  et  ipsas  necessarium  est  exemplis
ostendere.  ecce  plerumque  ita  permittit  in  rem  agere,  ut  vd
actor  diceret  se  quasi  usu  cepisse,  quod  usu  non  ceperit,  vd  ex
diverso  possessor  diceret  adversariumsuum  usu  non  cepisse  quod
4  usu  ceperit.     Namque  si  cui  ex  iusta  causa  res  aliqua  trad  ita

§  4 .  The  actio  Publiciana  was  the  proper  remedy  of  any  one  who  had
commenced  the  usucapion  of  property  without  being  able  to  complete  it
because  some  other  person  had  obtained  possession,  and  so  interrupted
its  operation,  before  his  title  had  become  indefeasible,  p.  2oi  supr.  The
conditions  of  success  were  as  follow  :

(i)  The  object  must  be  capable  of  being  acquired  by  usucapio  or
prescription,  Dig.  6.  2.  9.  5.

(2)  The  plaintiff  must  have  had  possession:  'ante  tradidonem,
quamvis  bonae  fidei  quis  emptor  est,  experiri  Publiciana  non  poterit'
Dig.  ib.  7.  16.  By  the  edict  the  possession  must  have  been  acquired  by
traditio  :  ^  ait  praetor,  si  quis  id,  quod  traditur  ex  iusta  causa  non  a
domino  et  nondum  usucaptum  petet,  iudicium  dabo '  Dig.  ib.  i ;  but  by
construction  the  remedy  was  extended  to  modes  of  acquiring  possession
generally :  '  quaecunque  sunt  iustae  causae  adquirendarum  lerum,  si  ex
his  causis  nacti  res  amiserimus,  dabitur  nobis  earum  rerum  persequend-
arum  gratia  haec  actio'  Dig.  ib.  13.  pr.  This  rule,  however,  does  not
apply  in  those  exceptional  cases  (e.  g.  sometimes  in  legatum)  where
ownership  vested  without  possession  being  actually  delivered,  Dig.  ib.  i.
2  ;  ib.  7.  pr.  Moreover,  the  possession  must  be  usucapion  possession :
it  must  have  been  derived  ex  iusta  causa  (p.  230  supr.),  Gaius  iv.  36,  and
be  accompanied  by  bona  fides.  Dig.  6.  2.  3.  i ;  ib.  7.  11-16;  9.  4.  28:
whether  throughout  its  continuance,  or  only  at  its  inception,  is  matter  of
doubt.

(3)  The  action  can  be  brought  with  success  only  against  a  defendant
who  possesses  with  less  right  than  the  plaintiff,  and  therefore  neither
against  the  dominus,  Dig.  6.  2.  16  and  17  (unless  the  case  is  one  in  which,
supposing  the  owner  brought  vindicatio  against  the  possessor,  he  could
be  repelled  by  a  iusta  exceptio,  e.  g.  doli,  rei  venditae  et  traditae,  or  rei
iudicatae),  nor  against  any  other  person  whose  possession  is  as  righteous
in  respect  of  bona  fides,  iusta  causa,  etc.,  as  the  plaintiffs  had  been,
unless  both  derived  their  possession  from  the  same  person,  Dig.  6.  2.

9.4.

The  actio  Publiciana  could  be  used  to  establish  servitudes  no  less  than
dominium:  'si  de  usufructu  agatur  tradito,  Publiciana  datur,  itemque
servitutibus  urbanorum  praediorum  per  traditionem  constitutis,  vel  per
patientiam,  forte  si  per  domum  quis  suam  passus  est  aquaeductum
transduci :  item  rusticorum,  nam  et  hie  traditionem  et  padentiam
tuendam  constat '  Dig.  6.  2. 11.  i.  The  Publicius  by  whom  the  action  was
introduced  was  perhaps  the  Quintus  Publicius  who  is  mendoned  by


Til  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  553

fuerit,  veluti  ex  causa  emptionis  aut  donationis  aut  dotis  aut
I^atorum,  necdum  eius  rei  dominus  effectus  est,  si  eius  rei
casu  possessionem  amiserit,  nullam  habet  directam  in  rem
actionem  ad  eam  rem  persequendam  :  quippe  ita  proditae  sunt
iure  civili  actiones,  ut  quis  dominium  suum  vindicet.  sed  quia
sane  durum  erat  eo  casu  deficere  actionem,  inventa  est  a  prae-
tore  actio,  in  qua  dicit  is,  qui  possessionem  amisit,  eam  rem
se  usu  cepisse  et  ita  vindicat  suam  esse,  quae  actio  Publiciana
appellatur,  quoniam  primum  a  Publicio  praetore  in  edicto  pro-
posita  est.  Rursus  ex  diverso  si  quis,  cum  rei  publicae  causa  5
abesset  vel  in  hostium  potestate  esset,  rem  eius  qui  in  civitate
esset  usu  ceperit,  permittitur  domino,  si  possessor  rei  publicae
causa  abesse  desierit,  tunc  intra  annum  rescissa  usucapione
eam  petere,  id  est  ita  petere,  ut  dicat  possessorem  usu  non
cepisse  et  ob  id  suam  esse  rem.  quod  genus  aCtionis  et  aliis
quibusdam  simili  aequitate  motus  praetor  accommodat,  sicut
ex  latiore  digestorum  seu  pandectarum  volumine  intellegere
licet.  Item  si  quis  in  fraudem  creditorum  rem  suam  alicui  6
tradiderit,  bonis   eius   a   creditoribus  ex  sententia  praesidis

Cicero  as  having  been  praetor  circ  B.a  66,  pro  Cluent  45.  It  was  in
existence  certainly  in  the  time  of  Neratius,  Dig.  6.  a.  9.  3.  and  17,  who
was  consul  before  the  end  of  the  first  century.

§  5.  In  the  case  here  supposed  the  title  conferred  by  a  completed
usucapion  is  rescinded  or  cancelled  by  in  integrum  restitutio  (note  on  §  33
inf.),  and  the  plaintiff  establishes  his  right  by  an  ordinary  vindicatio  or
Publiciana  according  to  the  precise  nature  of  his  interest :  the  assumption
by  some  writers  of  an  independent  action  (rescissoria  or  contraria  Publi-
ciana) has  no  foundation.  The  text  speaks  only  of  protection  against
an  absent  person ;  but  the  principle  was  applied  equally  in  favour  of
those  whose  property,  while  they  were  absent  rei  publicae  causa,  had
been  acquired  per  usucapionem,  Dig.  4. 6. 23. 3  ;  cf.  the  note  on  in  integrum
restitutio,  §  33  inf.  For  the  old  annus  utilis  Justinian  substituted  in  all
cases  of  in  integrum  restitutio  a  quadriennium  continuum.  Cod.  2.  52.  7.
The  references  at  the  end  of  the  paragraph  are  to  Dig.  4. 6. 1. 1 ;  ib.  21.  pr. ;
ib.  26.  8 ;  17. 1.  57  :  44.  7.  35.  pr.

§  6.  The  iusta  causa  of  the  in  integrum  restitutio  in  this  case  is  the  dolus
of  the  alienee,  and  the  creditors'  action,  as  seems  clear  from  the  text,  is
in  rem:  though  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  after  restitutio  there  was
any  necessity  for  a  fiction :  cf.  Bk.  iii.  10.  3  and  notes  supr.  Whether
the  action  (as  Theophilus  says)  was  called  Pauliana  is  disputed:  it  is
certain  that  there  was  a  personal  action  of  the  same  name,  and  lying
under   similar   circumstances.    So   far   as   can    be  elicited   from  the


554  IXSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

possessis  permittitur  ipsis  creditoribus  rescissa  traditione  earn

rem  petere,  id  est  dicere  earn  rem  traditam  non  esse  et  ob  id

7  in  bonis  debitoris  mansisse.    Item  Serviana  et  quasi  Serviana,

authorities,  it  seems  probable  that  the  creditors  had,  as  against  fraudu-
lent alienation  by  the  debtor  (including  wrongful  payment  of  one  or
some  of  them  in  full  when  he  was  aware  of  his  insolvency),  (i)  an  actio
Pauliana  in  personam,  Dig.  32.  i.  38.  4,  (2)  an  interdictum  fraudatorium.
Dig.  36.  I.  69.  I,  (3)  an  actio  in  factum  available  against  a  bona  fide
alienee.  Dig.  42.  8.  10.  pr.,  (4)  the  in  btegrum  restitutio  mentioned  in
the  text,  with  a  view  to  a  real  action  (Pauliana  ?).  The  relation  between
these  remedies,  and  the  precise  purpose  for  which  they  were  respectively
employed,  are  so  variously  represented  by  the  commentators  that  it  is
impossible  here  to  go  further  into  the  question.  For  the  missio  in
possessionem  of  creditors  upon  their  debtors'  insolvency  see  p.  394  supr.

§  7.  For  pignus  and  hypotheca  see  pp.  332-336  supr.  By  the  actiones
Serviana  and  hypothecaria  the  pledgee  was  enabled,  on  proving  his  right
of  pledge  or  hypothec,  to  recover  the  property  over  which  it  existed  or
damages  against  any  one  in  whose  possession  it  was,  and  he  could  bring
the  action  even  before  the  day  fixed  for  payment  had  arrived.  Dig.  20.  1.
14.  pr.  The  formula  had  in  the  earlier  period  been  arbitraria,  and  ran
somewhat  as  follows :  '  si  paret  eam  rem,  de  qua  agitur,  ab  eo,  cuius  in
bonis  turn  fuit  (pledgor),  Aulo  Agerio  pignoris  nomine  obligatam  esse
pro  pecunia,  quam  ilium  A^*.  A®,  ex  mutuo  dare  oporteret,  eamque  pecu*
niam  solutam  non  esse,  neque  eo  nomine  satisfactum  esse,  neque  per  A"*.
A"*,  stare,  quominus  solvatur,  nisi  arbitratutuo  Numerius  Negidius  A®.  A^**
restituet  aut  pecuniam  sol  vat,  quand  ea  res  erit,  tanti  N".  N**.  A^.  A*.
condemna.'

If  the  defendant  was  the  pledgor  himself,  and  was  condemned  in  a
money  payment,  its  amount  could  not  exceed  that  of  the  debt ;  but  if  he
was  a  third  person,  the  damages  were  calculated  on  the  full  value  of  the
property,  though  the  plaindff  had  to  hand  over  to  the  pledgor  any
surplus  be>'ond  the  amount  of  the  debt.  Dig.  20.  i.  21.  3.  There  was
also  some  difference  between  this  and  an  ordinary  real  action  in  respect
of  the  defendant's  liability  for  fructus,  and  of  some  special  defences  which
were  here  open  for  him ;  for  by  Nov.  4,  by  which  Justinian  introduced  the
beneficium  ordinis  for  sureties,  p.  432  supr.,  a  similar  beneficium  by  way
of  exceptio  was  established  for  this  case ;  it  being  provided  that  any  third
person  who  was  in  possession  of  the  property  pledged  could  require  the
pledgee  to  sue  the  pledgor  and  his  sureties  by  personal  action  before
coming  upon  him  with  the  actio  hypothecaria,  and  that  when  the  debtor
as  well  as  his  surety  had  given  the  creditor  hypothecary  rights,  the
creditor  could  be  compelled  to  resort  to  those  given  by  the  former  before
he  could  insist  on  those  given  by  the  latter.

By  saying  of  these  actions  '  ex  ipsius  praetoris  iurisdictione  substantiam
capiunt'  Justinian  means  that,  unlike  those  mentioned  in  the  preceding
sections,  they  were  not  feigned  to  be  civil  actions,  but  were  bold  innova-


Tit  6.]  DE  ACTION IBVS.  555

quae  etiam  hypothecaria  vocatur,  ex  ipsius  praetoris  iuris-
dictione  substantiam  capit.  Serviana  autem  experitur  quis
de  rebus  coloni,  quae  pignoris  iure  pro  mercedibus  fundi  ei
tenentur :  quasi  Serviana  autem  qua  creditores  pignora  hypo-
thecasve  persequuntur.  inter  pignus  autem  et  hypothecam
quantum  ad  actionem  hypothecariam  nihil  interest :  nam  de
qua  re  inter  creditorem  et  debitorem  convenerit,  ut  sit  pro
debito  obligata,  utraque  hac  appellatione  continetur.  sed  in
aliis  differentia  est :  nam  pignoris  appellatione  earn  proprie
contineri  dicimus,  quae  simul  etiam  traditur  creditori,  maxime
si  mobilis  sit :  at  eam,  quae  sine  traditione  nuda  conventione
tenetur,  proprie  hypothecae  appellatione  contineri  dicimus.
In  personam  quoque  actiones  ex  sua  iurisdictione  propositas  8
habet  praetor,  veluti  de  pecunia  constituta,  cui  similis  vide-
batur  recepticia :  sed  ex  nostra  constitutione,  cum  et  si  quid
plenius  habebat,  hoc  in  pecuniam  constitutam  transfusum  est,
ea  quasi  supervacua  iussa  est  cum  sua  auctoritate  a  nostris
legibus  recedere.  item  praetor  proposuit  de  peculio  servorum
filiorumque  familias  et  ex  qua  quaeritur,  an  actor  iuraverit,  et
alias  complures.  De  pecunia  autem  constituta  cum  omnibus  9
agitur,  quicumque  vel  pro  se  vel  pro  alio  soluturos  se  con-
stituerint,  nulla  scilicet  stipulatione  interposita.  nam  alioquin
si  stipulanti  promiserint,  iure  civili  tenentur.  Actiones  autem  10
de  peculio  ideo  adversus  patrem  dominumve  comparavit  prae-
tor, quia  licet  ex  contractu  filiorum  servorumve  ipso  iure  non

tions  (actiones  in  factum) ;  see  Gaius  iv.  10,  and  Excursus  X  inf.  For  the
pledgee's  possessory  remedy  (interdictum  Salvianum)  and  its  relation  to
the  actiones  Serviana  and  hypothecaria  see  on  Tit.  15.  3  inf.

§  8.  For  constitutum  see  p.  433  supr.  Recepticia  was  an  action  on  the
formless  promise  of  a  banker  to  creditors  or  customers,  e.g.  to  return
money  or  other  property  entrusted  to  him  on  and  after  a  specified  day ;
the  name  being  perhaps  derived  from  the  sense  of  recipere  which
Nonius  Marcelius  attributes  to  recipere — promittere,  polliceri :  cf.
Asconius  Pedianus:  'recipitur,  id  est  promittitur,  id  est  pro  iudicato
respondetur.'  The  advantages  of  recepticia  over  the  actio  de  constituta
pecunia  had  been  that  it  applied  to  all  kinds  of  property,  while  the  latter
lay  only  on  promises  relating  to  res  fungibiles ;  that  it  admitted,  while
the  latter  did  not,  of  condicio  or  dies,  and  was  perpetual,  while  the  latter
was  limited  to  an  annus  utilis,  p.  434  supr.  The  reference  is  to  Cod.  4. 18.
2.  pr.  and  i.  For  the  actio  de  peculio  see  Tit.  7.  4  and  notes  inf.;  for  that
'  ex  qua  quaeritur  an  actor  iuraverit '  note  on  the  next  section.


556  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Uh.  IV.

teneantur,  aequum  tamen  esset  peculio  tenus,  quod  veluti
patrimonium  est  filiorum   filiarumquey  item  servorum,  con-

1 1  demnari  eos.  Item  si  quis  postulante  adversario  iuraverit
deberi  sibi  pecuniam  quam  peteret,  neque  ei  solvatur,  iustis-
sime  accommodat  ei   talem  actionem,  per  quam  non  illud

12  quaeritur,  au  ei  pecunia  debeatur,  sed  an  iuraverit.  Poenales
quoque  actiones  bene  multas  ex  sua  iurisdictione  introduxit :
veluti  adversus  eum  qui  quid  ex  albo  eius  corrupisset :  et  in
eum  qui  patronum  vel  pareatem  in  ius  vocasset,  cum  id  non
impetrasset :  item  adversus  eum,  qui  vi  exemerit  eum  qui  in
ius  vocaretur,  cuiusve  dolo  alius  exemerit:   et  alias  innume-

13  rabiles.     Praeiudiciales  actiones  in  rem  esse  videntur,  quales


§  11.  The  Romans  regarded  the  oadi  as  a  mode  of  proving  rights  and
duties,  no  less  than  facts,  co-ordinate  with  judgment  and  confession  ;
'post  rem  iudicatam  vel  iureiurando  decisam  vel  confessionem  in  iure
factam  nihil  quaeritur'  Dig.  42.  I.  56:  cf.  note  on  Tit.  13.  4  in£  As
appears  from  the  text,  when  a  matter  had  once  been  sworn  to  by  one  of
the  parties,  the  other  was  estopped  from  disputing  its  truth  otherwise
than  by  denying  that  the  oath  had  been  taken  at  all ;  behind  it  the  law
could  not  go :  *■  non  aliud  quaeritur  quam  an  iuratum  sit '  Dig.  12. 2.  5.  2.
The  mode  in  which  the  oath  was  used  was  by  the  plaintiff  demanding  of
his  adversary  in  the  initial  stage  of  the  proceedings  (in  iure,  in  the
formulary  period)  whether  he  would  swear  that  the  claim  had  no  founda-
tion ;  if  he  did  so,  he  was  protected  by  the  exceptio  iurisiurandi  from
further  litigation  :  but  if,  without  being  prepared  to  go  as  far  as  this,  he
challenged  the  plaintiff  to  swear  to  the  justice  of  his  claim,  and  the
latter  did  so,  he  was  debarred  from  denying  his  liability ;  if  he  refused
to  discharge  it,  he  could  be  brought  to  bay  by  the  actio  in  ikctum  referred
to  in  the  text.

§  12.  The  praetor's  edicts  and  orders  seem,  like  the  leges  (Dion.  Halic.
R.  A.  3.  36),  to  have  been  engraved  on  tablets  of  oak,  which  were  then
whitened  over  and  exposed  to  public  view.  Subsequently  other  materials
were  used  :  Mn  albo,  vel  in  charta,  vel  in  alia  materia'  Dig.  2.  i.  7.  pr.,
but  the  name  album  was  retained.  Albi  corruptio  is  used  in  a  wide
sense :  '  is  qui  album  raserit,  corruperit,  sustulerit,  mutaverit,  quidve
aliud  propositum  edicendi  causa  turbaverit,  extra  ordinem  punietur'
Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  i.  13^.  3.  For  the  action  of  a  patron  against  his  freed-
man  for  suing  him  without  first  obtaining  the  praetor's  permission  (Tit.  16.
3  inf.)  see  Gains  iv.  46,  which  also  refers  to  the  penal  actio  in  factum
'  contra  eum  qui  vi  exemerit  eum  qui  in  ius  vocatur : '  for  the  latter
cf.  also  Dig.  2.  7.  Among  the  '  alias  innumerabiles '  are  the  actions
mentioned  in  Tit.  5  supr.,  and  §  25  inf.

§  18.  For  praejudicial  actions  under  the  system  of  formulae  see  £x-


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTION  I  BUS  557

sunt,  per  quas  quaeritur,  an  aliquis  liber  vel  an  libertus  sit,
vel  de  partu  agnoscendo.  ex  quibus  fere  una  ilia  legitimam
causam  habet,  per  quam  quaeritur,  an  aliquis  liber  sit :
ceterae  ex  ipsius  praetoris  iurisdictione  substantiam  capiunt.
Sic  itaque  discretis  actionibus  certum  est  non  posse  actorem  14
rem  suam  ita  ab  aliquo  petere  ^si  paret  eum  dare  oportere* :
nee  enim  quod  actoris  est  id  ei  dari  oportet,  quia  scilicet  dari
cuiquam  id  intellegitur,  quod  ita  datur,  ut  eius  fiat,  nee  res
quae  iam  actoris  est  magis  eius  fieri  potest,  plane  odio  furum,
quo  magis  pluribus  actionibus  teneantur,  effectual  est,  ut  extra
poenanx  dupli  aut  quadrupli  rei  recipiendae  nomine  fures
etiam  hac  actione  teneantur  'si  paret  eos  dare  oportere/
quamvis  sit  adversus  eos  etiam  haec  in  rem  actio,  per  quam
rem  suam  quis  esse  petit.  Appellamus  autem  in  rem  quidem  15
actiones  vindicationes  :  in  personam  vero  actiones,  quibus  dare
facere  oportere  intenditur,  condictiones.    condicere  enim  est

cursus  X  inf.  Their  object  is  merely  to  judicially  ascertain  facts  which
are  of  legal  importance,  or  the  existence  of  alleged  legal  relations,  e.  g.  a
man's  status  or  paternity,  the  amount  of  a  dos  (Gaius  iv.  44),  whether
a  woman  is  married  or  not,  Dig.  25.  3.  3.  4,  whether  the  provisions  of  this
or  that  enactment  have  been  complied  with  (e.  g.  the  lex  Cicereia,  Gaius
iii.  123.  p.  429  supr.),  etc.  Hence  the  name  praeiudicia;  the  decision
forms  or  may  form  the  basis  of  subsequent  litigation.  As  they  do  not
result  in  condemnation,  but  merely  in  a  pronunciatio,  they  are  sometimes
said  to  be  iudicia,  but  not  actiones  (e.g.  Dig.  3.  3.  35.  2) ;  Justinian  says
of  them  'in rem  esse  videntur'  because  the  plaintiff  'cum  eo  agit  qui
nuUo  iure  ei  obligatus  est,  movet  tamen  alicui  de  aliqua  re  controversiam '
§  I  supr. :  cf.  Gaius  iv.  87 ;  though  in  some  passages  (e.  g.  Dig.  44.  7.  37.
pr. ;  6.  I.  I.  2)  they  are  opposed  to  vindicationes.  The  praeiudicium  'an
aliquis  liber  sit '  was  older  even  than  the  Twelve  Tables  :  '  ius  quod  ipse
[Appius  Claudius]  ex  vetere  iure  in  duodecim  tabulas  transtulerat '  Dig.
I.  2.  2.  24.

§  14.  Of  course  the  expression  '  si  paret,'  etc.  has  no  formal  or  pro*
cessual  signification  in  Justinian:  all  that  is  meant  is  that  a  plaintiff
cannot  by  a  real  action  demand  conveyance  (datio)  but  merely  recog-
nition of  his  ownership  or  other  ius  in  rem.  For  the  anomaly  of  allowing
a  |5erson  whose  property  has  been  stolen  the  option  between  a  real  and  a
personal  action  see  p.  528  supr.  In  this  connection  furtum  includes  not
only  rapina,  but  violent  ouster  from  land  :  '  et  ei,  qui  vi  aliquem  de  fundo
deiecit  posse  condici '  Dig.  13.  3.  2.

§  16.  For  the  origin  and  history  of  condictio  see  Excursus  X  inf.  The
grounds  upon  which  it  lay  were  the  same  in  Justinian's  time  as  in  the
formulary  period ;  viz.  mutuum,  formal  contract,  legatum,  lex  (§  24  inf.),


558  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Ub.  IV.

denuntiare  prisca  lingua  :  nunc  vero  abusive  dicimus  condic-
tionem  actionem  in  personam  esse,  qua  actor  intendit  dari  sibi
oportere :  nulla  enim  hoc  tempore  eo  nomine  denuntiatio  fit.

16  Sequens  ilia  divisio  est,  quod  quaedam  actiones  rei  per-
sequendae  gratia  comparatae  sunt,  quaedam  poenae  perse-

1 7  quendae,  quaedam  mixtae  sunt.  Rei  persequendae  causa
comparatae  sunt  omnes  in  rem  actiones.  earum  vero  actionum,
quae  in  personam  sunt,  hae  quidem  quae  ex  contractu  nas-
cuntur  fere  omnes  rei  persequendae  causa  comparatae  vi-
dentur:  veluti  quibus  mutuam  pecuniam  vel  in  stipulatum
deductam  petit  actor,  item  commodati,  depositi,  mandati,  pro
socio,  ex  empto  vendito,  locato  conducto.  plane  si  depositi
agetur  eo  nomine,  quod  tumultus  incendii  ruinae  naufragii
causa  depositum  sit,  in  duplum  actionem  praetor  reddit,  si
modo  cum  ipso  apud  quem  depositum  sit  aut  cum  herede  eius

18  ex  dolo  ipsius  agetur :  quo  casu  mixta  est  actio.  Ex  maleficiis
vero  proditae  actiones  aliae  tantum  poenae  persequendae
causa  comparatae  sunt,  aliae  tam  poenae  quam  rei  perse-
quendae et  ob  id  mixtae  sunt,  poenam  tantum  persequitur
quis  actione  furti :  sive  enim  manifest!  agatur  quadrupli  sive
nee  manifest!  dupli,  de  sola  poena  agitur:  nam  ipsam  rem
propria  actione  persequitur  quis,  id  est  suam  tss^  petens,  sive
fur  ipse  eam  rem  possideat,  sive  alius  quilibet:   eo  amplius

19  ad  versus  furem  etiam  condictio  est  rei.  Vi  autem  bonorum
raptorum  actio  mixta  est,  quia  in  quadruplo  rei  persecutio
continetur,  poena  autem  tripli  est.     sed  et  legis  Aquiliae  actio

and  enrichment  of  a  defendant  at  the  plaintiff's  cost  sine  causa  ;  but  the
penal  sponsio  tertiae  partis  in  condictio  certi  had  disappeared,  as  might
be  inferred  from  the  description  in  §  17  inf.  of  the  remedy  on  mutuum  as
merely  rei  persecutoria.

§  17.  Actions  rei  persequendae  causa  are  defined  as  those  '  quibus
persequimur  quod  ex  patrimonio  abest '  Dig.  44.  7.  35  ;  they  are  designed
merely  to  redress  and  make  reparation  for  the  wrong  by  which  they  are
called  into  operation.  For  depositum  miserabile  see  p.  402  supr.  The
contractual  actio  redhibitoria  (p.  441  supr.)  was  also  sometimes  penal.
Dig.  21.  I.  45,  and  so  too  was  the  action  quasi  ex  contractu  spoken  of  in
§  19  ad  fin.

§  18.  For  the  actio  furti  see  p.  526  supr.

§  19.  For  the  *  mixed '  character  of  the  actions  on  vi  bona  rapta  and
damnum  iniuria  datum  cf.  Tit  2.  pr.,  Tit.  3.  9  supr.  and  notes.    The  latter


Tit  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  559

de  damno  mixta  est,  non  solum  si  adversus  infitiantem  in
duplum  agatur^  sed  interdum  et  si  in  simplum  quisque  agit.
veluti  si  quis  hominem  claudum  aut  luscum  occiderit,  qui  in
eo  anno  integer  et  magni  pretii  fuerit :  tanti  enim  damnatur^
quanti  is  homo  in  eo  anno  plurimi  fuerit,  secundum  iam  tia-
ditam  divisionem.  item  mixta  est  actio  contra  eos,  qui  relicta
sacrosanctis  ecclesiis  vel  aliis  venerabilibus  locis  legati  vel
fideicommissi  nomine  dare  distulerint  usque  adeo,  ut  etiam  in
iudicium  vocarentur :  tunc  etenim  et  ipsam  rem  vel  pecuniam
quae  relicta  est  dare  compelluntur  et  aliud  tantum  pro  poena,
et  ideo  in  duplum  eius  fit  condemnatio.

^  Quaedam  actiones  mixtam  causam  optinere  videntur  tam  20
in  rem  quam  in  personam,  qualis  est  familiae  erciscundae
actio,  quae  competit  coheredibus  de  dividenda  hereditate:
item  communi  dividundo,  quae  inter  eos  redditur,  inter  quos
aliquid  commune  est,  ut  id  dividatur:  item  finium  regun-
dorum,  quae  inter  eos  agitur  qui  confines  agros  habent.  in
quibus  tribus  iudiciis  permittitur  iudici  rem  alicui  ex  litiga-
toribus  ex  bono  et  aequo  adiudicare  et,  si  unius  pars  praegra-
vari  videbitur,  eum  invicem  certa  pecunia  alter!  condemnare.

would  be  merely  rei  persecutoria  if  the  defendant  admitted  his  liability  in
the  abstract  (§  26  inf.),  the  iudicium  being  solely  for  the  purpose  of
assessing  the  damages,  and  if  the  value  of  the  slave  killed  (e.  g.)  had  not
been  higher  in  the  preceding  year  than  at  the  actual  moment  of  his  death.
For  legacies  ad  pias  causas  cf.  Bk.  iii.  27.  7  and  §  26  inf.

§  20.  The  functions  of  the  judge  in  the  iudicia  divisoria  are  more  fully
described  in  Tit.  17.  4-6  inf.  The  explanation  of  their  being  partly  real,
partly  personal,  must  be  sought  in  the  structure  of  their  formula  in  the
earlier  period.  This  seems  to  have  contained  two  intentiones,  the  first
in  rem  concepta,  and  followed  by  an  adiudicatio  ('  quantum  adiudicari  ex
aequo  et  bono  oportet  iudex  Titio  adiudicato '  Gains  iv.  42),  the  second
concepta  in  personam,  and  followed  by  a  condemnatio  (e.  g.  tum  quicquid
ob  eam  rem  alterutrum  alteri  dare  facere  oportet  ex  fide  bona,  eius  iudex
alterum  alteri  condemnato).  Mutatis  mutandis,  the  whole  formula  was
repeated  for  each  of  the  parties  (e.  g.  each  joint  owner),  whence  Ulpian
calls  these  actions  mixtae  in  another  sense :  '  mixtae  actiones,  in  quibus
uterque  actor  est  *  Dig.  44.  7.  37.  1 .  Under  Justinian  they  are  in  reality
in  personam  only,  arising  quasi  ex  contractu,  Bk.  iii.  27.  3  supr. :  '  finium
regundorum  actio  In  personam  est,  licet  pro  vindicatione  rei  est'  Dig.
10.  I.  I.

The  last  named  action,  which  was  as  old  as  the  Twelve  Tables,  and
had  been  regulated  by  a  lex  Mamilia  and  enactments  of  Constantine,


560  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

21  Omnes  autem  actiones  vel  in  simplum  conceptae  sunt  vel
in  duplum  vel  in  triplum  vel  in  quadruplum :  ulterius  autem

22  nulla  actio  extenditur.  In  simplum  agitur  veluti  ex  stipula*
tione,  ex  mutui  datione,  ex  empto  vendito,  locato  conducto,

23  mandato  et  denique  ex  aliis  compluribus  causis.  In  duplum
agimus  veluti  furti  nee  manifest!,  damni  iniuriae  ex  lege  Aquilia,
deposit!  ex  quibusdam  casibus :  item  servi  corruptly  quae
competit  in  eum,  cuius  hortatu  consiliove  servus  alienus  fu«
gerit  aut  contumax  adversus  dominum  factus  est  aut  luxuriose
vivere  coeperit  aut  denique  quolibet  modo  deterior  factus  sit
(in  qua  actione  etiam  eafum  rerum,  quas  fugiendo  servus
abstulit,  aestimatio  deducitur):  item  ex  legato,  quod  venera-
bilibus  locis  relictum  est,  secundum  ea  quae  supra  diximus.

24  Tripli  vero,  cum  quidam  maiorem  verae  aestimationis  quanti-


Valentinian  II  and  Theodosius  I,  was  in  Justinian's  time  limited  to  dis-
putes as  to  the  boundaries  of  piaedia  rusticai  Dig.  10.  1.4.  10 ;  the  judge
was  assisted  by  experts  (agrimensores)  as  assessors,  and  neither  party
could  plead  usucapio  unless  it  had  extended  to  thirty  years.

§  21.  The  expression  in  simplum,  in  duplum  etc  concepta,  which
refers  to  the  condemnatio,  is  another  trace  of  the  survival  of  the  formula
in  the  later  procedure.  Where  a  plaintiff  sues  for  *  id  quod  sua  interest '
the  action  is  in  simplum  concepta,  though  the  amount  of  this  may  far
exceed  the  verum  rei  pretium,  Dig.  19.  i.  13.  pr.  '  Ulterius  (qoam  in
quadruplum)  nulla  actio  extenditur'  means  no  more  than  that  in  no
action  does  the  law  direct  the  recovery  of  more  than  four  times  the
penal  unit ;  for  sometimes  the  penalty  will  have  no  fixed  relation  to  the
value  of  the  object,  and  so  as  a  fact  will  be  more  than  fourfold  that
value  (e.  g.  Cod.  7..ia  7),  or  there  may  be  two  condemnations  arising
ex  eadem  re,  which  added  together  exceed  the  quadruplum,  e.g.
Dig.  47.  9.  3.  8.

§  23.  The  action  under  the  lex  Aquilia  is  in  duplum  only  adversus
infitiantem,  §  19  supr.,  and  that  on  the  deposit  only  under  the  cir*
cumstances  referred  to  in  §  17.  The  actio  servi  corrupt!  (for  which
cf.  Tit.  I.  8  supr.)  is  said  to  be  in  duplum  by  the  praetor  in  Dig.  11.

3.  I.  pr.

§  24.  The  libellus  conventionis  was  a  petition  or  bill  addressed  to  the
judge,  by  which  actions  were  commenced  under  the  system  of  cog^itio
in  vogue  in  Justinian's  time ;  and  this  is  the  sole  meaning  in  his  com-
pilations of  in  ius  vocatio  and  actionis  editio.  It  bad  to  contain  short
particulars  of  the  plaintiffs  claim,  so  as  to  give  the  defendant  a  general
idea  of  the  nature  of  the  demand  made  against  him,  and  to  show  more
specifically,  (i)  the  character  of  the  right  affirmed,  e.  g.  whether  it  was  real
or  personal ;  if  the  former,  whether  dominium,  servitus,  pledge,  etc. ;  if


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  561

tatem  in  libello  conventionis  inseruit,  ut  ex  hac  causa  viatores,
id  est  exsecutores  litium,  ampliorem  summam  sportularum
nomine  exegerint :  tunc  enim  quod  propter  eorum  causam
damnum  passus  fuerit  reus,  id  triplum  ab  actore  consequetur,
ut  in  hoc  triplo  et  simplum^  in  quo  damnum  passus  est,  con-
numeretur.  quod  nostra  constitutio  induxit,  quae  in  nostro
codice  fulget,  ex  qua  dubio  procul  est  ex  lege  condicticiam
emanare.  Quadrupli  veluti  furti  manifest!,  item  de  eo,  quod  25
metus  causa  factum  sit,  deque  ea  pecunia,  quae  in  hoc  data  sit,


the  latter,  whether  arising  ex  contractu  or  delicto,  and  what  kind  of  con-
tract or  delict;  (2)  the  thing  or  the  wrongful  act  to  which  the  action
related.  This  statement  of  claim  is  what  is  now  meant  by  intentio,  e.  g.
in  §  33  inf.,  cf.  note  on  §  i  supr.  It  was  necessary  that  it  should  be
signed  by  the  plaintiff,  or  by  a  notary  on  his  behalf  if  he  could  not  write ;
by  this  he  definitely  assumed  the  responsibility  of  the  action,  which,  how-
ever, he  more  formally  acknowledged  by  entering  into  a  cautio,  in  one  of
the  forms  described  in  Tit.  11.  2  inf.,  which  was  enrolled  in  the  acta,  and
by  which  he  bound  himself  to  bring  the  cause  to  trial  within  two  months,
or  in  default  to  pay  the  defendant  double  the  costs  which  he  had  in-
curred, to  push  it  through  to  judgment,  and  to  pay  the  defendant's  costs
in  the  event  of  defeat.  Unless  the  judge  refused  the  action,  the  libellus
was  now  registered  in  the  acta,  and  the  defendant  was  summoned  (com-
monitio,  cttatio)  by  an  officer  of  the  court  (executor,  viator),  a  copy  of  the
libellus  being  at  the  same  time  served  upon  him.  In  reply  to  this  he
had  to  deliver  a  signed  and  dated  libellus  contmdictionis  or  responsionis,
stating  his  defence,  if  any;  to  pay  a  fee  (sportulae,  referred  to  in  this
section)  proportioned  to  the  value  of  the  matter  in  dispute,  and  to  bind
himself  by  a  cautio,  usually  with  sureties,  to  appear  in  court  on  the  day
fixed  for  trial,  and  '  in  iudicio  permanere  usque  ad  terminum  litis '  Tit.
II.  2.  inf. ;  in  default  of  this  security  he  was  liable  to  be  placed  under
supervision,  and  even  to  be  incarcerated,  during  the  process.  The  day
for  trial  was  fixed  by  the  plaintiff  when  he  delivered  his  bill  or  libellus,
but  by  an  enactment  of  Justinian  (Nov.  53.  3)  the  defendant  was  entitled
to  have  an  interval  of  at  least  twenty  days.

For  plus  petitio  by  the  plaintiff  in  his  libellus  conventionis  see  §  33  inf.
The  only  other  actions  apparently  which  had  been  in  triplum  conceptae
are^ those  on  furtum  conceptum  and  oblatum,  Gains  iii.  191,  iv.  173,  p.  521
supr.  For  statutory  condictions  see  Dig.  13.  2.  Justinian's  enactment
referred  to  is  in  Cod.  3.  10.  2.  2.

§  25.  For  the  actio  quod  metus  causa  see  §  27  and  notes  inf. ;  and  for
calumnia  Tit.  16.  i  mf.  The  words  *  negotium  alicui  faceret '  are  from  the
edict  (Dig.  3.  6.  i.  pr.) ;  the  jurists  seem  to  have  restricted  the  negotium
to  actual  litigation  or  prosecution,  Dig.  ib.  i.  6.  8  and  9.  Justinian's  con-
stitution is  in  Cod.  3.  2.  4.

O  O


5&  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

ut  is  cui  datur  calumniae  causa  n^otium  alicui  faceret  vel
non  faceret:  item  ex  lege  condicticia  a  nostra  constitutione
oritur,  in  quadruplum  condemnationem  imponens  his  exse-
cutoribus  litium,  qui  contra  nostrae  constitutionis  normani

26  a  reis  quicquam  exegerint  Sed  furti  quidem  nee  manifesti
actio  et  servi  corrupti  a  ceteris,  de  quibus  simul  locuti  sumus,
eo  differt,  quod  hae  actiones  omnimodo  dupli  sunt :  at  illae,
id  est  damni  iniuriae  ex  lege  Aquilia  et  interdum  deposit!,
infitiatione  duplicantur,  in  confitentem  autem  in  simplum
dantur :  sed  ilia,  quae  de  his  competit,  quae  relicta  venera-
bilibus  locis  sunt,  non  solum  infitiatione  duplicatur,  sed  et  si
distulerit  relicti  solutionem,  usque  quo  iussu  magistratuum
nostrorum  conveniatur,  in  confitentem  vero  et  antequam  iussu

27  magistratuum  conveniatur  solventem  simpli  redditur.  Item
actio  de  eo,  quod  metus  causa  factum  sit,  a  ceteris,  de  quibus
simul  locuti  sumus,  eo  differt,  quod  eius  natura  tacite  con-
tinetur,  ut,  qui  iudicis  iussu  ipsam  rem  actori  restituat,  absol-
vatur.  quod  in  ceteris  casibus  non  ita  est,  sed  omnimodo
quisque  in  quadruplum  condemnatur,  quod  est  et  in  furti
manifesti  actione.

§  26.  See  on  Bk.  iii.  27.  7  su'pr.    The  heir  charged  with  legacies  ad
pias  causas  is  penalised  not  only  for  infitiatio  but  for  mora.

§  27.  The  Romans  regarded  dispositions  made  under  the  pressure  of
intimidation  (as  distinct  from  actual  force)  as  really  voluntary :  *  coactos
volui'  Dig.  4.  2.  21.  5 ;  and  the  civil  law  therefore  upheld  them.  They
first  became  impeachable  by  the  introduction  of  the  praetorian  actio  quod
metus  causa,  to  support,  which,  however,  it  was  as  a  rule  required  that  the
threat  should  have  been  directed  against  the  life,  limb,  or  liberty  of  the
plaintiff  or  some  near  relative.  Dig.  ib.  2;  ib.  3.  i ;  ib.4-6;  ib.7.  i ;  ib.  8,
and  could  have  been  carried  out  by  the  other.  It  was  said  to  be  in  rem
scripta,  Dig.  ib.  9.  8 ;  i.  e.  it  could  be  brought  against  any  one  who  had
profited  by  the  intimidation :  '  nee  cuiquam  iniquum  videtur  ex  alieno
facto  alium  in  quadruplum  condemnari,  quia  non  statim  quadrupli  est
actio,  sed  si  res  non  restituatur'  Dig.  ib.  14.  3.  The  penal  action  in
quadruplum  was  prescribed  in  an  annus  utilis ;  after  that  it  was  merely
rei  persecutoria,  and  was  granted  only  causa  cognita,  after  a  preliminary
investigation,  Dig.  ib.  14.  i ;  against  the  heir  it  was  not  pienal :  *  licet
enim  poena  ad  heredem  non  transeat,  attamen,  quod  turpiter  vel  scelere
quaesitum  est,  ut  est  et  rescriptum,  ad  compendium  heredis  non  debet
pertinere '  Dig.  ib.  16.  2.  The  plaintiff  had  other  remedies  in  the  exceptio
metus.  Tit.  13.  9  inf. :  in  integrum  restitutio,  §  33  inf.,  and  in  the  ordinary
actions  on  many  contracts.


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  563

Actionum  autem  quaedam  bonae  fidei  sunt,  quaedam  stricti  28
luris.    bonae  fidei  sunt  hae :   ex  empto  vendito,  locato  con-
ducto,   negotiorum   gestorum,   mandati,  depositi,   pro   socio,

§  28.  The  origin  of  the  distinction  between  actions  stricti  iuris  and
bonae  fidei  is  described  in  Excursus  X  inf.  The  broad  general  diver-
gence between  them  is  well  put  by  Cicero,  pro  Rose.  4  'quid  est  in
iudicio  ?  directum,  asperum,  simplex :  si  paret  .  .  .  dari  oportere.  Quid
est  in  arbitrio  ?  mite,  moderatum,  quantum  aequius  melius,  id  dari.'  But
the  expression  actio  stricti  iuris,  which  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in  the
Corpus  iuris,  is  unhappy,  as  tending  to  obscure  the  real  character  of  the
distinction ;  the  ius  is  just  as  strictum  in  a  bonae  fidei  action ;  what  is
strictum  is  the  indicium  (§  30  inf.).  The  principal  specific  points  of
difference  are  as  follow :

(i)  Where  the  action  is  stricti  iuris,  the  judge  is  bound  by  the  strict  and
literal  words  of  the  disposition ;  where  it  is  bonae  fidei  he  may  go  behind
them  to  discover  the  real  intention  of  the  parties.  Hence,  in  the  latter
case,  he  may  take  cognisance  of  pacta  adiecta,  formless  subsidiary  con-
ventions of  the  parties,  if  substantially  a  part  of  the  disposition  upon
which  the  action  is  brought,  Dig.  2.  14.  7.  5.  In  stricti  iuris  iudicia  this
was  not  possible  under  the  older  law.  Dig.  ib.  7,  though  later  some  excep-
tions were  recognized,  Dig.  12.  i.  40,  and  by  the  insertion  of  the  clausula
doli  (Dig.  45.  I.  121 ;  50.  16.  69)  in  the  contract  upon  which  the  action
was  brought  the  judge  would  be  enabled  to  deal  with  the  case  much  as  if
the  action  had  been  bonae  fidei.  So  too  in  a  bonae  fidei  action  the  judge
may  rule  local  or  other  usages  to  be  implied  terms  in  a  contract,  Dig.  21.
I.  31.  20;  3.  5.  7.

(2)  A  bonae  fidei  action  lies  on  grounds  on  which  one  stricti  iuris  would
not,  e.  g.  dolus  and  metus :  i.  e.  a  party  who  has  been  induced  by  fraud  or
intimidation  to  make  a  disposition  may  impeach  its  validity  by. the
ordinary  action  thereon,  if  that  action  is  of  the  former,  but  not  if  it  is  of
the  latter  character.

(3)  Where  a  defendant  is  liable  for  ^  omnis  causa,*  the  value  of  the  latter
is  in  a  bonae  fidei  action  ascertained  as  from  the  date  of  mora ;  in  one  which
is  stricti  iuris  (except  possibly  where  it  is  condictio  incerti)  only  from  litis
contestatio.  Dig.  22.  I.  38.  7  and  8.

(4)  Under  the  formulary  procedure  the  judge  who  tried  a  stricti  iuris
action  could  listen  to  no  exceptio  which  had  not  been  expressly  set
forth  in  the  formula ;  in  bonae  fidei  actions  no  defences  which  could  be
included  under  the  very  comprehensive  idea  of  dolus  need  be  advanced
so  early  in  the  proceedings ;  see  Excursus  X  inf.  But  under  Justinian
the  maxim  *doli  exceptio  bonae  fidei  iudiciis  inest'  (which  occurs  in  Dig.
24.  3.  21 :  30.  84.  5)  has  no  processual  significance :  the  stage  at  which
such  defences  had  to  be  advanced  is  determined  by  other  considerations,
as  is  shown  on  Tit.  13.  pr.  inf.

(5)  In  stricti  iuris  actions  iusiurandum  or  iuramentum  in  litem  was,  as
a  rule,  inadmissible,  but  was  regularly  applied  in  such  actions  bonae  fidei

O  O  a


564  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

tutelae,  commodati,  pigneraticia,  familiae  erciscundae,  com-
muni  dividundo,  praescriptis  verbis  quae  de  aestimato  pro-
ponitur,  et  ea,  quae  ex  permutatione  competit,  et  hereditatis
petitio.  quamvis  enim  usque  adhuc  incertum  erat,  sive  inter
bonae  fidei  iudicia  connumeranda  sit  sive  non,  nostra  tamen
29  constitutio  aperte   eam  esse  bonae  fidei  disposuit.     Fuerat

as  demanded  restitution  or  production  of  property  if  the  defendant  refused
or  through  his  own  fault  was  unable  to  produce  or  restore.

(6)  In  stricti  iuris  actions  the  damages  were  assessed  (litis  aestimatio)
as  at  the  moment  of  litis  contestatio ;  in  bonae  fidei  actions  at  condem-
natio,  Dig.  13.  6.  3.  2.

(7)  If  a  place  was  fixed  for  the  performance  of  a  contract  the  remedy
upon  which  was  stricti  iuris^  it  could  originally  be  brought  at  that  place
only ;  a  bonae  fidei  action  under  similar  circumstances  lay  at  any  place
where  the  defendant  was  amenable  to  the  jurisdiction ;  see  on  Bk.  iii.  15.
5  supr.

To  Justinian*s  list  of  bonae  fidei  actions  must  be  added  (for  the  older
law)  the  actio  fiduciae  (Gaius  iv.  62) ;  and  the  action  on  innominate
contracts  generally,  not  merely  on  aestimatum  and  permutatio,  was  of
this  character.

The  SC.  Juventianum  passed  under  Hadrian  first  gave  hereditatis
petitio  a  mixed  character  (Dig.  5.  3.  20.  6)  by  enabling  the  heir  to  recover
from  other  persons  all  advantage  which  they  had  derived  from  res  here-
ditariae  which  they  no  longer  possessed  (e.  g.  which  they  had  sold) ;  they
came,  in  fact,  to  be  regarded  somewhat  in  the  light  of  the  heir's  negotio-
rum  gestores  and,  therefore,  were  bound  as  such  to  surrender  to  him  all
profit  which  they  had  made  by  interfering  in  business  which  was  not  their
own.  It  would  seem  that,  in  prosecuting  such  claims,  the  action,  being  in
effect  in  personam,  was  conducted  on  bonae  fidei  principles,  so  that  the
question  arose,  which  Justinian  determined  by  Cod.  3.  31.  12.  3,  whether
it  was  not  itself  bonae  fidei.

§  29.  The  actio  rei  uxoriae  (for  the  scope  of  which  see  p.  134  supr.)  is
not  so  often  said  to  be  bonae  fidei  as  to  belong  to  a  cognate  class  of
actions  '  in  bonum  et  aequum  conceptae '  Dig.  4.  5.  8 ;  24.  3.  66.  7,  among
which  were  also  the  actio  iniuriarum  aestimatoria,  Dig.  47.  10.  11.  i ;  the
actio  de  effusis,  Dig.  9.  3.  i.  pr.,  and  the  aedilidan  action  mentioned  in
Tit.  9.  I  inf. ;  in  these  the  discretion  of  the  judge  was  freer  even  than  in
bonae  fidei  actions  proper.  By  substituting  the  actio  ex  stipulatu  de
dotibus  exigendis  (which  naturally  was  stricti  iuris)  for  the  actio  rei
uxoriae  Justinian  fictitiously  represented  the  restoration  of  the  dos  as
having  been  promised  by  stipulation  with  a  clausula  doli,  whereby  it
acquired  the  bonae  fidei  character  which  he  here  expressly  gives  it.  The
superiority  of  the  actio  ex  stipulatu  had  consisted  in  its  being  transmissible
to  heirs  and  in  some  other  points  noticed  in  Cod.  5.  13.  i.  3-10.  For  the
wife's  right  of  hypotheca  see  p.  135  supr.


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  565

antea  et  rei  uxoriae  actio  ex  bonae  fidei  iudiciis:  sed  cum
pleniorem  esse  ex  stipulatu  actionem  invenientes  omne  ius,
quod  res  uxoria  ante  habebat,  cum  multis  divisionibus  in  ex
stipulatu  actionem,  quae  de  dotibus  exigendis  proponitur,
transtulimus,  merito  rei  uxoriae  actione  sublata  ex  stipulatu,
quae  pro  ea  introducta  est,  naturam  bonae  fidei  iudicii  tantum
in  exactione  dotis  meruit,  ut  bonae  fidei  sit.  sed  et  tacitam
ei  dedimus  hypothecam :  praeferri  autem  aliis  creditoribus  in
hypothecis  tunc  censuimus,  cum  ipsa  mulier  de  dote  sua  ex-
periatur,  cuius  solius  providentia  hoc  induximus.  In  bonae  30
fidei  autem  iudiciis  libera  potestas  permitti  videtur  iudici  ex
bono  et  aequo  aestimandi,  quantum  actori  restitui  debeat.  in
quo  et  illud  continetur,  ut,  si  quid  invicem  actorem  praestare
oporteat,  eo  compensato  in  reliquum  is  cum  quo  actum  est
condemnari  debeat.  sed  et  in  strictis  iudiciis  ex  rescripto  divi
Marci  opposita  doli  mali  exceptione  compensatio  inducebatur.
sed  nostra  constitutio  eas  compensationes,  quae  iure  aperto


§  80.  '  Compensatio  (set-ofTj  est  debiti  et  crediti  inter  se  contributio,'
Dig.  16.  3.  I.  The  full  application  of  the  principle  was  only  of  slow
development  in  Roman  law.  Gains  tells  us  (iv.  64)  that  bankers  in  suing
their  debtors  were  compelled  to  make  allowance  for  what  they  themselves
owed  the  latter,  and  to  bring  their  action  only  for  the  balance ;  and  that
the  actions  of  bonorum  emptores  (p.  394  supr.)  against  debtors  of  the
purchased  bankrupt  estate  were  governed  by  the  same  rule,  though  the
'deductio'  in  the  latter  case  had  a  wider  operation  than  the  'compen-
satio '  in  the  former  (ib.  65-68).  In  bonae  fidei  indicia  the  judge  was
bound,  as  acting  ex  fide  bona,  to  take  account  of  sets-ofT  arising  ex  eadem
causa,  from  the  same  transaction  (ib.  61) ;  and  though  Justinian  says  here
that  set-off  was  not  allowed  in  stricti  iuris  actions  till  the  rescript  of  M.
Aurelius,  and  then  only  on  the  condition  of  the  defendant's  getting  an
exceptio  doli  inserted  in  the  formula,  it  would  seem  that  this  had  been
done  before  in  some  actions  of  this  class  by  special  favour  (Dig.  16.  3.  4
and  5),  and  that  the  emperor's  enactment  only  made  the  matter  a  general
rule.  As  actions  stricti  iuris  always  lay  only  on  transactions  generating
unilateral  obligation,  it  is  obvious  that  here  the  set-off  must  arise  ex  dis-
pari  causa,  and  consequently  similar  sets-off  were  now  allowed  in  bonae
fidei  actions  if  advanced  in  the  form  of  the  same  exceptio.  The  distinc-
tion between  compensatio  effected  officio  iudicis,  and  that  resulting  from
the  use  of  the  exceptio  seems  (though  the  point  is  much  disputed)  to  have
lasted  on  in  the  new  process  after  the  disappearance  of  the  formula,  until
it  was  abolished  by  Justinian's  enactment  here  referred  to  (Cod.  4.  31.  14.
pr.  and  l),  so  that  in  his  time  set-off  of  any  kind,  whether  arising  ex


S66  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

nituntur,  latius  introduxit,  ut  actiones  ipso  iure  minuant  sive
in  rem  sive  personales  sive  alias  quascumque,  excepta  sola
deposit!  actione,  cui  aliquid  compensationis  nomine  opponi
satis  impium  esse  credidimus,  ne  sub  praetextu  compensa-

eadem  or  ex  dispari  causa,  could  be  advanced  with  effect  at  any  stage
of  the  action  up  to  judgment,  and  consequently  the  words  'ex  eadem
causa '  in  §  34  inf.  are  held  to  have  been  imported  into  the  Institutes  from
Gaius  iv.  6i  by  an  oversight.  Whether  by  this  enactment  Justinian  first
allowed  compensatio  in  real  actions  ('  sive  in  rem  sive  in  personam ')  is
also  uncertain ;  traces  of  its  earlier  application  in  such  cases  are  found  by
some  writers  in  Dig.  5.  2.  21.  2  ;  5.  3.  31.  2  ;  6.  i.  48 :  cf.  the  cases  in
Bk.  ii.  Tit.  i.  30,  32-34  supr.

It  was  esseiltial  that  the  claims  set  off  against  one  another  should
relate  to  par  niateria  or  genus  :  '  in  compensationem  hoc  solum  vocatur,
quod  eiusdem  generis  et  naturae  est,  veluti  pecunia  cum  pecunia  com-
pensatur,  triticum  cum  tritico,  vinum  cum  vino '  Gaius  iv.  66, ' .  .  •  .  si
constat,  pecuniam  invicem  deberi'  Cod.  4.  31.  4;  but  it  is  hardly  certain
how  far  it  was  required  that  the  set-off  should  be  liquidated,  i.  e.  clearly
proved  or  proveable.  The  chief  authority  on  this  point  is  Cod.  4.  31.  14.
I  'ita  tamen  compensationes  obici  iubemus,  si  causa,  ex  qua  compen-
setur,  liquida  sit,  et  non  multis  ambagibus  innodata,  sed  possit  iudici
facilem  exitum  sui  praestare.  Satis  enim  miserabile  est,  post  multa  forte
vanaque  certamina,  cum  res  iam  fuerit  approbata,  tunc  ex  altera  parte,
quae  iam  paene  convicta  est,  opponi  compensationem  iam  certo  et  in-
dubitato  debito,  et  moratoriis  ambagibus  spem  condemnationis  exdudi.'
Though  the  expression  'aperto  iure'  in  the  text  above  might  seem  to
imply  that  the  counter  claim  must  have  been  proved  and  established  in  an
independent  action,  it  seems  better  to  understand  this  passage  to  mean
that  the  proof  and  aestimatio  of  the  counter  claim  must  not  be  so  intricate
as  to  practically  reverse  the  respective  rdles  of  the  parties,  and  as  it  were
to  turn  the  defendant  into  a  plaintiff.

Great  difficulty  is  occasioned  by  the  expression  'actiones  ipso  iure
minuant'  in  the  text,  and  by  the  attribution  even  in  juristic  writings  (e.g.
Dig.  16.  2.  4 ;  ib.  10.  pr. ;  ib.  21)  to  compensatio  of  an  operation  'ipso
iure.'  The  standing  opposition,  in  modes  by  which  obligations  were  in-
validated, between  invalidation  ipso  iure  and  invalidation  ope  exceptionis
(p.  467  supr.)  has  led  some  commentators  to  interpret  these  passages  by
representing  set-off  as  by  itself  (or  'sine  facto  hominis')  absolutely
extinguishing  the  plaintiff^s  claim,  so  far  as  it  goes ;  but  if  this  were  so,
such  a  tacit  or  automatic  reduction  of  that  claim  would  take  place  in  all
cases  where  the  defendant  had  a  set-off,  whether  the  latter  wished  it  or
not;  a  hypothesis  which  is  sufficiently  disproved  by  Dig.  27.  4.  i.  4
*  praeterea  si  tutelae  iudicio  quis  convenietur,  reputare  potest  id,  quod  in
rem  pupilli  impendit,  sic  erit  arbitrii  eius,  utrum  compensare,  an  petere
velit  sumtus,'  and  Dig.  16.  2.  7.  i  'si  rationem  compensationis  iudex  non
habuerit,  salva  manet  petitio.'    The  real  meaning  of  the  expression  seems


Tit  6.]  DE  ACTIONIBUS.  567

tionis  depositarum  rerum  quis  exactione  defraudetur.  Prae-  31
terea  quasdam  actiones  arbitrarias  id  est  ex  arbitrio  iudicis
pendentes  appellamus,  in  quibus  nisi  arbitrio  iudicis  is  cum  quo
agitur  actori  satisfaciat,  veluti  rem  restituat  vel  exhibeat  vel
solvat  vel  ex  noxali  causa  servum  dedat,  condemnari  debeat.
sed  istae  actiones  tarn  in  rem  quam  in  personam  inveniuntur.
in  rem  veluti  Publiciana,  Serviana  de  rebus  coloni,  quasi  Ser-
viana^  quae  etiam  hypothecaria  vocatur:  in  personam  veluti

to  be  that,  though  the  defendant,  if  he  wishes  to  set-off  against  the
plaintiff,  must  plead  his  claim,  yet,  immediately  he  has  pleaded  and
proved  it,  its  oi)eration  relates  back  to  the  moment  at  which  the  two
claims  first  coexisted:  'si  constat,  pecuniam  invicem  deberi,  ipso  iure
pro  soluto  compensationem  haberi  oportet  ex  eo  tempore,  ex  quo  ah
utraque  debetur,  utique  quoad  concurrentes  quantitates,  eiusque  solius,
quod  amplius  apud  alterum  est,  usurae  debentur,  si  modo  earum  petitio
subsistit'  Cod.  4.  31.  4 ;  from  that  moment  no  interest  can  be  claimed,
except  on  the  balance.  Cod.  ib..  Dig.  16. 2. 1 1 ;  and  if  the  defendant  forgets
to  set-off,  he  can  recover  what  he  has  paid  in  excess  by  condictio  indebiti,
Dig.  ib.  10. 1 ;  12. 6.30.  So  far  in  fact  as  the  two  debts  coextended,  each
was  extinguished :  '  dedisse  intellegendus  est  etiam  is,  qui  compensavit '
Dig.  50.  16. 76.

§  81.  For  the  origin  and  nature  of  actiones  arbitrariae  in  the  formulary
period  see  Excursus  X  inf.  Under  Justinian  they  may  best  be  described
as  actions  in  which  delivery  or  production  of  specific  property,  and
possibly  specific  performance  of  an  agreement,  would  be  decreed,  the
defendant  being  condemned  in  fiill  damages  only  where  execution  of  this
decree  was  impossible.  Where  the  object  of  the  action  was  restitution,  it
was  enforced  by  the  strong  arm  of  the  law ;  '  qui  restituere  iussus  iudici
non  paret,  contendens  non  posse  se  restituere,  si  quidem  habeat  rem,
manu  militari  officio  iudicis  ab  eo  possessio  transfertur,  et  fructuum
duntaxat  omnisque  causae  nomine  condemnatio  fit :  si  vero  non  potest
restituere,  si  quidem  dolo  fecit,  quominus  possit,  is  quantum  adversariis  in
litem  sine  ulla  taxatione  in  infinitum  iuraverit,  damnandus  est  :  si  vero  nee
potest  restituere,  nee  dolo  fecit  quominus  possit,  non  pluris,  quam  quanti
res  est,  id  est,  quanti  adversarii  interfuit,  condemnandus  est.  Haec  sen-
tentia  generalis  est,  et  ad  omnia,  sive  interdicta,  sive  actiones,  et  sive  in
rem  sive  in  personam  sint,  ex  quibus  ex  arbitratu  iudicis  quid  restituitur,
locum  habet'  Dig.  6.  i.  68.  It  is  not  improbable  indeed  that  this  direct
intervention  of  the  state  to  compel  performance  of  the  act  demanded
occurred  whenever  such  performance  was  possible  (e.  g.  *  exhibcre  cogen-
dus  est '  Dig.  10. 4.  8).  Interdicts  which  were  restitutoria  and  exhibitoria,
and  the  actions  depositi,  commodati,  locati,  and  rei  uxoriae,  when  their
object  was  restitution,  belonged  to  this  class  of  remedy,  besides  the
instances  given  in  the  text ;  their  leading  characteristic  (apart  from  the
decree  of  specific  restitution,  production,  or  performance)  being  that,  if  the


568  INSTITUTIONUM  UBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

quibus  de  eo  agitur,  quod  aut  metus  causa  aut  dolo  malo
factum  est,  item  qua  id,  quod  certo  loco  promissum  est,  petitur.
ad  exhibendum  quoque  actio  ex  arbitrio  iudids  pendet.  in
his  enim  actionibus  et  ceteris  similibus  permittitur  iudid  ex
bono  et  aequo  secundum  cuiusque  rei  de  qua  actum  est  naturam
aestimare,  quemadmodum  actori  satisfieri  oporteaL
32  Curare  autem  debet  iudex,  ut  omnimodo,  quantum  pos-
sibile  d  sit,  certae  pecuniae  vel  rei  sententiam  ferat,  etiam  si
de  incerta  quantitate  apud  eum  actum  est


defendant  is  unable  through  his  own  fault  to  do  what  b  demanded  of  him,
the  damages  to  be  paid  are  fixed  by  the  plaindfTon  oath  (iosiurandum  in
litem).

Justinian's  mention  of  actions  demanding  payment  of  money  (solutio)
as  arbitrariae  seems  to  relate  only  to  the  actio  de  eo  quod  certo  loco,  etc,
for  which  see  on  Bk.  iii.  15.  5.  supr.    For  noxal  actions  see  Tit  8  inf

The  actio  ad  exhibendum  (for  which  cf.  Tit.  17.  3  inf.)  was  of  a  pre-
liminary nature,  enabling  a  plaintiff  who  could  not  pursue  his  right
without  the  production  of  an  object  to  enforce  such  production  upon  any
one  who  was  able  to  make  it :  *  exhibere  est  fisicere  in  publico  potestatem,
ut  ei,  qui  agat,  experiundi  sit  copia'  Dig.  10.  4.  2, '  sciendum  est  adversus
possessorem  hac  actione  agendum  non  solum  eum,  qui  civiliter,  sed  et
eum,  qui  naturaliter  incumbat  possession! '  ib.  3.  1 5.  The  right  to  which
the  action  was  subsidiary  might  be  in  personam,  as  where  a  plaintiff
wishes  to  bring  a  noxal  action,  but  is  not  sure  of  the  precise  slave
who  committed  the  offence,  Dig.  ib.  3.  7 ;  but  usually  it  was  in  rem :  e.g.
a  legatee  has  a  choice  from  several  similar  objects,  which  he  wants  to
see  before  he  can  choose,  Dig.  ib.  3.  6 ;  the  plaintiffs  property  is  on  the
land  of  another  who  will  not  allow  him  to  enter  and  take  it  away,  ib.
5.  4 ;  or  it  is  connected  or  mixed  with  a  res  aliena,  and  must  be  separated
before  he  can  bring  his  real  action,  ib.  6  and  7 :  see  note  on  p.  529  supr.

§  82.  In  the  formulary  period  the  iudex  had  no  power  to  condemn  the
defendant  except  to  a  money  payment  (Gaius  iv.  48)  even  in  the  actiones
arbitrariae ;  the  only  case  in  which  he  could  award  property  was  that  of
the  iudicia  divisoria.  When  formulae  disappeared,  the  rule  of  the  cog-
nitio  extraordinaria  was  adopted  (hence  certae  rei  in  the  text)  and  the
iudex  was  enabled  to  decree  a  dare  (transfer  of  ownership),  a  tradere  (of
possession),  a  restituere  or  an  exhibere :  '  miramur  quare  iudex,  qui  prae-
positus  est  in  praedicta  causa,  non  omnimodo  condemnationem  in  servum,
sed  in  aestimationem  eius  fecerit'  Cod.  7.  4.  17.  i.  The  iudex  was  also
as  a  rule  bound  under  Justinian  to  condenui  the  losing  party  to  pay  his
adversary's  costs,  Tit  16.  i  inf.

The  words  in  the  text  (quantum  possibile  ei  sit)  are  intended  to  except
those  cases  in  which  an  independent  arbitrium  de  aestimando,  or  in-
quiry to  assess  the  damages,  was  thought  necessary  in  order  not  to


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTION IBUS,  569

Si  quis  agens  in  intentione  sua  plus  complexus  fuerit,  quam  33
ad  eum  pertinet,  causa  cadebat,  id  est  rem  amittebat,  nee
facile  in  integrum  a  praetore  restituebatur,  nisi  minor  erat
viginti  quinque  annis.  huic  enim  sicut  in  aliis  causis  causa
cognita  succurrebatur,  si  lapsus  iuventute  fuerat,  ita  et  in  hac
causa  succurri  solitum  erat.  sane  si  tarn  magna  causa  iusti
erroris  interveniebat,  ut  etiam  constantissimus  quisque  labi
posset,  etiam  maiori  viginti  quinque  annis  succurrebatur  :
veluti  si  quis  totum  legatum  petierit,  post  deinde  prolati
fuerint  codicilli,  quibus  aut  pars  legati  adempta  sit  aut
quibusdam  aliis  legata  data  sint>  quae  efficiebant,  ut  plus
petisse  videretur  petitor  quam  dodrantem,  atque  ideo  lege
Falcidia  l^ata  minuebantur.  Plus  autem  quattuor  modis
petitur :    re,   tempore,  loco^   causa,    re :  veluti   si   quis  pro


postpone  delivery  of  judgment  in  the  main  action,  Cod.  7.  46.  3,  Dig.
6.  I.  76.  I  ;  here  there  might  be  a  condemnation,  but  the  damages
which  the  defendant  had  to  pay  would  be  ascertained  by  subsequent
aestimatio.

§  33.  Under  the  system  of  formulae  an  overclaim  (plus  petitio)  might  be
made  in  either  the  intentio,  the  condemnatio,  or  the  demonstratio.  It  could
occur  in  the  intentio  only  where  it  was  certa  (e.g.  si  paret . . .  quinqua-
ginta  aureos  dare  oportere,  when  the  defendant  really  owed  a  less  sum) ;
and  here  its  result  was  that  the  judge,  finding  the  precise  sum  claimed
was  not  in  fact  owed,  was  bound  to  absolve  the  defendant,  and  the
plaintiffs  right  of  action  was  thereby  irrevocably  gone,  because  the  res
had  been  in  iudicium  deducta,  and  either  he  could  not  sue  again  at  all,
or,  if  he  could,  the  defendant  could  repel  him  by  the  exceptio  rei  iudicatae
or  in  iudicium  deductae,  Gaius  iv.  106 :  cf.  Cic.  de  Invent.  2.  19  Mta  ius
civile  habemus  constitutum,  ut  causa  cadat  is,  qui  non,  quemadmodum
oportet,  egerit : '  cf.  Tit.  13.  10  inf.  If  there  was  plus  petitio  in  the  con-
demnatio (e.g.  si  paret  decem  dare  oportere,  iudex  viginti  condemnato)
nobody  could  suffer  but  the  defendant,  who  should  have  taken  care  that
the  sum  specified  in  the  later  did  not  exceed  that  in  the  earlier  part  of
the  formula ;  but  he  could  get  himself  in  integrum  restitutus  and  the
formula  rectified  by  the  praetor  at  any  time  before  judgment,  Gaius  iv.  57.
Overclaim  in  the  demonstratio  injured  no  one  ('  et  hoc  est  quod  dicitur,
falsa  demonstratione  rem  non  perimi '  Gaius  iv.  58) ;  the  mistake  could
be  corrected  by  the  iudex  without  the  necessity  of  any  application  to  the
praetor.  Even  after  the  disappearance  of  formulae  a  plaintiff  who  made
an  overclaim  was  punished  with  absolute  loss  of  action  on  the  ground
of  calumnia,  but  this  was  remedied  by  the  constitution  of  Zeno  referred
to  in  the  text,  by  which  it  was  provided  that  though,  if  the  plaintiff
brought  his  action  prematurely  (plus  petitio  tempore)  he  should  pay  the


570  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Ub.  IV.

decern  aureis  qui  ei  debebantur  viginti  petierit,  aut  si  is,
cuius  ex  parte  res  est,  totam  earn  vel  maiore  ex  parte  suam
esse  intenderit.  Tempore :  veluti  si  quis  ante  diem  vel  ante
condicionem  petierit.  qua  ratione  enim  qui  tardius  solvit,
quam  solvere  deberet,  minus  solvere  intellegitur,  eadem  ratione
qui  praemature  petit  plus  petere  videtur.  Loco  plus  petitur,
veluti  cum  quis  id,  quod  certo  loco  sibi  stipulatus  est,  alio  loco
petit  sine  commemoratione  illius  loci,  in  quo  sibi  dari  sti-
pulatus fuerit:  verbi  gratia  si  is,  qui  ita  stipulatus  fuerit
*  Ephesi  dare  spondes  ? '  Romae  pure  intendat  dari  sibi  opor-
tere.  ideo  autem  plus  petere  intellegitur,  quia  utilitatem,
quam  habuit  promissor,  si  Ephesi  solveret,  adimit  ei  pura
intentione :  propter  quam  causam  alio  loco  petenti  arbitraria
actio  proponitur,  in  qua  scilicet  ratio  habetur  utilitatis,  quae
promissori  competitura  fuisset,  si  illo  loco  solveret.  quae
utilitas  plenimque  in  mercibus  maxima  invenitur,  veluti  vino
oleo  frumento,  quae  per  singulas  regiones  diversa  habent
pretia :  sed  et  pecuniae  numeratae  non  in  omnibus  regionibus
sub  isdem  usuris  fenerantur.  si  quis  tamen  Ephesi  petat,  id
est  eo  loco  petat,  quo  ut  sibi  detur  stipulatus  est,  pura  actione
recte  agit :  idque  etiam  praetor  monstrat,  scilicet  quia  utilitas


defendant's  costs  hitherto  incurred,  and  the  latter  be  absolved,  he  might
sue  again,  but  not  until  twice  the  interval  had  elapsed  for  which  he  would
properly  have  bad  to  wait  (Tit.  13.  10  inf ),  and  durix^  that  interval
should  have  no  claim  to  interest.  Cod.  3.  10.  i.  Justinian  further  enacted
that  in  plus  petitio  re  the  judge  should  condemn  the  defendant,  so  far
as  he  found  him  liable,  and  the  plaintiff  in  three  times  the  excess  of  fees
exacted  from  the  other  by  the  'viator'  through  the  overclaim  (§  24  supr.).
Plus  petitio  loco  could  no  longer  prejudice  the  defendant,  because  the
judge  was  bound  to  apply  the  principles  of  the  actio  de  eo  quod  certo
loco,  and  either  condemn  the  defendant  to  discharge  his  obligation  at
the  place  agreed  upon,  or  make  allowance  for  the  loss  and  inconvenience
he  suffered  by  having  to  pay  elsewhere ;  and  plus  petitio  causa  was
equally  harmless.

In  integrum  restitutio,  to  which  there  is  a  reference  early  in  this
section,  was  an  equitable  remedy  introduced  by  the  praetor  through
the  edict,  which  in  the  formulary  period  had  been  perhaps  the  most
striking  example  of  his  extraordinaria  cognitio.  Its  function  had  been
the  rescission,  in  this  or  that  concrete  case,  of  rights  and  duties  resulting
from  the  operation  of  the  ordinary  law,  because  under  the  special  cir-
cumstances equity  so  required,  exactly  as  equity  in  England  gave  relief,


Tit  6.]  DE  ACTION/BUS.  571

solvendi  salva  est  promissori.  Huic  autem,  qui  loco  plus
petere  intellegitur,  proximus  est  is  qui  causa  plus  petit :  ut
ecce  si  quis  ita  a  te  sttpulatus  sit  'hominem  Stichum  aut
decern  aureos  dare  spondes?'  deinde  alterutrum  petat,  ve-
luti  hominem  tantum  aut  decern  tantum.  ideo  autem  plus
petere  intell^itur,  quia  in  eo  gcnere  stipulationis  promissoris
est  clectio,  utrum  pecuniam  an  hominem  solvere  malit :  qui
igitur  pecuniam  tantum  vel  hominem  tantum  sibi  dari  oportere
intendit,  eripit  electionem  adversario  et  eo  modo  suam  quidem
meliorem  condicionem  facit,  adversarii  vero  sui  deteriorem.
qua  de  causa  talis  in  ea  re  prodita  est  actio,  ut  quis  intendat

for  instance,  against  mistake,  when  law  afforded  no  remedy  whatever.
And  this  rescission  was  effected  by  the  direct  and  immediate  action  of
the  magistrate ;  it  was  an  exercise  of  his  imperium,  not  of  his  iurisdictio :
in  integrum  restitutio  in  its  proper  sense  being  thus  distinguished  fix>m
analogous  cases  in  which  a  restoration  occurred  either  ipso  iure  (as  in
postliminium)  or  by  the  remedial  process  of  the  ordinary  law.

The  conditions  under  which  in  integrum  restitutio  could  be  applied  for
are  as  follow :

(i)  The  applicant  must  have  suffered  a  prejudice  (laesio)  from  the
operation  of  law,  which  may  be  lucrum  cessans  no  less  than  damnum
incidens,  Dig.  4. 4. 7. 6;  4. 6. 27,  but  which  need  not  be  strictly  proprietary,
Dig.  4.  4.  3.  6;  for  examples  see  notes  on  §§  4  and  5  supr.,  Bk.  ii.  15.  5
supr.,  Gains  iv.  57.  On  the  principle  'de  minimis  non  curat  lex*  it
seenis  also  to  have  been  requisite  that  the  laesio  should  not  be  merely
trivial.

(2)  The  mere  existence  of  a  laesio  in  itself  is  insufficient ;  there  must
also  be  a  ground  (iusta  causa)  upon  which  the  application  is  based.
These  are  six  in  number :  *  integri  restitutionem  praetor  tribuit  ex  his
causis  quae  per  metum,  dolum,  et  status  permutationem,  et  iustum
errorem,  et  absentiam  necessariam,  et  infirmitatem  aetatis  gesta  esse
dicuntur'  Paul.  Sent  Rec.  I.  7.  2  ;  cf.  Dig.  4.  i.  i.

The  restitutio  of  a  minor  (i.e.  person  under  twenty- five  years  of  age)
was  independent,  if  he  were  also  impubes,  of  his  guardian's  auctoritas
having  been  given  to  the  disposition  against  which  he  appiealed.  Cod.  2.
25.  2.  3  and  5  ;  2.  27.  4  and  5,  except  where  it  was  payment  to  him  of
a  debt,  Dig.  4.  4.  7.  2 ;  and  under  exceptional  circumstances  he  could  not
obtain  restitutio  at  all,  e.g.  where  he  had  represented  himself  as  of  full
age,  Cod.  2.  43. 2 ;  where  the  person  against  whom  he  claimed  it  was  also
a  minor.  Dig.  4.  4.  11.  6 ;  and  where  he  had  contracted  a  money  loan  at
his  father's  order,  Dig.  ib.  3.  4.

Upon  any  of  the  remaining  five  causae  a  person  of  full  age  could  get
himself  restitutus  no  less  than  a  minor.

In  integrum  restitutio  was  not  the  only  form  of  relief  obtainable  where


573  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

hominem  Stichum  aut  aureos  decern  sibi  dari  oportere,  id  est
ut  eodem  modo  peteret,  quo  stipulatus  est.  praeterea  si  quis
generaliter  hominem  stipulatus  sit  et  specialiter  Stichum  petat,
aut  generaliter  vinum  stipulatus  specialiter  Campanum  petat,
aut  generaliter  purpuram  stipulatus  sit,  deinde  specialiter
Tyriam  petat:  plus  petere  intellegitur,  quia  electionem  ad-
versario  tollit,  cui  stipulationis  iure  liberum  fuit  aliud  solvere,
quam  quod  peteretur.    quin  etiam  licet  vilissimum  sit  quod

one  had  been  induced  to  make  a  disposition  by  intimidation  or  fraud.
Dolus  had  always  been  a  sufficient  defence  in  a  bonae  fidei  action,  and
it  was  made  pleadable  (in  the  form  of  an  exceptio)  to  actions  strict!  iuris
by  Aquilius  Gallus,  B.C.  65  (see  p.  502  supr.),  who  also  introduced  the
actio  doli.  In  B.C.  71  a  praetor  named  Octavius  introduced  the  actio
and  exceptio  quod  metus  causa.  Whether  in  integrum  restitutio  propter
dolum  and  metum  was  older  than  these  remedies,  and  was  to  a  great
extent  superseded  by  them,  as  Savigny  contends,  is  uncertain;  at  any
rate  it  seems  clear  from  Cic.  de  Off.  3.  14  that  restitutio  doli  causa  was
unknown  before  the  time  of  Gallus  Aquilius.  It  is,  however,  certain  that
their  concurrent  existence  narrowed  the  operation  of  the  equitable  rehef
'  on  these  two  causae.

An  instance  of  restitutio  propter  errorem  is  supplied  in  the  text  above ;
the  other  cases  of  its  application  suggest  the  conclusion  that  it  was
ahnost  entirely  confined  to  laesiones  incurred  in  the  progress  of  an
action,  though  examples  of  its  occurrence  in  substantive  law  are  found  in
Dig.  42.  6.  I.  17  ;  34.  9.  17.

Restitutio  propter  capitis  deminutionem  occurred  only  where  the
capitis  deminutio  was  minima:  'pertinet  hoc  edictum  ad  eas  capitis
deminutiones,  quae  salva  civitate  contingunt;  ceterum  sive  amissione
civitatis,  sive  libertatis  amissione  contingat  capitis  deminutio,  cessabit
edictum'  Dig.  4.  5.  2.  pr.  For  its  application  see  Bk.  iii.  10.  3  and  notes
supr.

Persons  who,  while  absent  either  rei  publicae  causa,  or  by  reason  of
justifiable  fear,  or  in  captivity  with  a  public  enemy,  lost  rights  of
property  or  of  action  could  obtain  restitution;  and  persons  at  home
could  get  themselves  restituti  against  others  who  had  obtained  a  pro-
prietary advantage  (e.g.  by  usucapio,  §  5  supr.)  or  release  from  an  action
while  abroad  or  imprisoned.

The  edict  upon  this  subject  terminated  with  the  so-called  generalis
clausula :  '  item  si  qua  alia  causa  videbitur,  in  integrum  restituam '  Dig.
4.  6.  I.  I ;  ib.  26.  9 ;  words  apparently  intended  to  include  all  cases,  other
than  those  already  specified,  in  which  the  realization  of  a  right  was
prevented  by  obstacles  of  fact  rather  than  of  law.

(3)  As  a  general  rule,  the  case  must  be  one  in  which  the  ordinary  law
affords  no  relief:  'in  causae  cognitione  etiam  hoc  versabitur,  num  forte
alia  actio  possit  competere  citra  in  integrum  restitutio ;  nam  si  communi


Tit.  6.]  DE  ACTION IBUS.  573

quis  petat,  nihilo  minus  plus  petere  intellegitur,  quia  saepe
accidit,  ut  promissori  facilius  sit  illud  solvere,  quod  maioris
pretii  est.  Sed  haec  quidem  antea  in  usu  fuerant:  postea
autem  lex  Zenoniana  et  nostra  rem  coartavit.  et  si  quidem
tempore  plus  fuerit  petitum,  quid  statui  oportet,  Zenonis
divae  memoriae  loquitur  constitutio  :  sin  autem  quantitate  vel
alio  modo  plus  fuerit  petitum,  omne,  si  quid  forte  damnum  ex
hac  causa  accident  ei,  contra  quem  plus  petitum  fuerit,  com-
missa  tripli  condemnatione,  sicut  supra  diximus,  puniatur.
Si  minus  in  intentione  complexus  fuerit  actor,  quam  ad  eum  34
pertineret,  veluti  si,  cum  ei  decem  deberentur,  quinque  sibi
dari  oportere  intenderit,  aut  cum  totus  fundus  eius  esset,
partem  dimidiam  suam  esse  petierit,  sine  periculo  agit:  in
reliquum  enim  nihilo  minus  index  adversarium  in  eodem
iudicio  condemnat  ex  constitutione  divae  memoriae  Zenonis.

auxilio  et  mero  iure  munitus  sit,  non  debet  ei  tribui  extraordinarium
auxiiium '  Dig.  4.  4.  16.  pr.  But  occasionally  restitutio  was  merely  an
alternative,  e.g.  to  the  actio  doli,  quod  metus  causa,  tutelae  (Dig.  4.  4.  47.
i),  and  the  bonae  fidei  actions.  Cod.  2.  54.  3  ;  4.  44.  5 ;  ib.  10.  There
are  also  a  number  of  other  exceptions  to  its  general  application ;  e.g.  no
one  could  claim  restitutio  against  penal  laws,  against  a  patron  or  ascend-
ant, or  against  his  own  dolus.

(4)  Restitutio  must  be  applied  for  within  a  period  of  limitation  fixed
originally  at  an  annus  utilis,  and  extended  by  Justinian  to  a  quadriennium
continuum  (note  on  §  5  supr.).  It  is  disputed  from  what  moment  the
period  of  limitation  began  to  run ;  according  to  some  this  is  (except  in
absentia  and  minor  aetas)  the  date  of  laesio ;  according  to  others,  the
termination  of  the  causa.

The  procedure  in  the  formulary  period  was  extra  ordinem.  The
restitutio  was  granted  only  after  a  careful  inquiry  by  the  praetor,  in
which  both  laesio  and  iusta  causa  had  to  be  proved  by  the  applicant ;
under  Justinian  the  process  was  that  of  an  ordinary  action,  the  difference
in  the  remedy  being  no  longer  formal,  but  material  only.

§  34.  In  minus  petitio,  under  the  formulary  system,  the  plaintiff  could
sue  for  the  residue  in  a  subsequent  action,  though,  if  he  attempted  to  do
this  in  the  same  year  of  praetorship,  he  would  be  defeated  by  the  exceptio
litis  dividuae,  Gaius  iv.  56,  122.  Similarly,  if,  having  several  actions
against  the  same  defendant,  he  brought  one  or  some  before  one  index,
but  postponed  the  rest  merely  to  annoy  his  opponent,  he  could  within  the
same  praetorship  be  met  by  the  exceptio  litis  residuae,  Gaius  loc.  cit.
Zeno's  enactment,  which  -enabled  the  plaintiff  to  rectify  his  error  in  the
course  of  his  original  action,  is  in  Cod.  3.  10.  i.  3.

§  86.  Though  the  rule  had  been  practically  the  same  under  the  older


574  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

35  Si  quis  aliud  pro  alio  intenderit,  nihil  eum  periclitari  placet,
sed  in  eodem  iudicto  cognita  veritate  errorem  suum  corrigere
ei  permittimus,  veluti  si  is,  qui  hominem  Stichum  petere  de-
beret,  Erotem  petierit,  aut  si  quis  ex  testamento  sibi  dari
oportere  intenderit,  quod  ex  stipulatu  debetur.

36  Sunt  praeterea  quaedam  actiones,  quibus  non  solidum  quod
debetur  nobis  persequimur,  sed  modo  solidum  consequimur,
modo  minus,  ut  eccesiinpeculiumfiliiserviveagamus:  nam  si
non  minus  in  peculio  sit,  quam  persequimur,  in  solidum  pater
dominusve  condemnatur:  si  vero  minus  inveniatur,  eatenus
condemnat  iudex,  quatenus  in  peculio  sit.  quemadmodum
autem   peculium   intell^i   debeat,   suo  ordine   proponemus.

37  Item  si  de  dote  iudicto  mulier  agat,  placet  eatenus  maritum
condemnari  debere,  quatenus  facere  possit,  id  est  quatenus
facultates  eius  patiuntur.  itaque  si  dotis  quantitati  concur-
rant  facultates  eius,  in  solidum  damnatur :  si  minus,  in  tan-
tum  quantum  facere  potest,  propter  retentionem  quoque
dotis  repetitio  minuitur:  nam  ob  impensas  in  res  dotales
factas  marito  retentio  concessa  est,  quia  ipso  iure  necessariis
sumptibus  dos  minuitur,  sicut  ex  latioribus  digestorum  libris

system,  it  was  necessary  then  to  commence  a  fresh  action  with  a
corrected  formula,  Gains  iv.  55 :  '  primo  vinculo  tenentur,  et  mutare  illis
formulam  non  licet'  Seneca,  £p.  117.  4.

§  86.  For  the  actio  de  peculio  see  Tit  7.  4  and  notes  inf.

§  87.  In  the  cases  mentioned  in  this  and  the  two  next  sections  the
defendant  was  said  to  have  a  beneficium  competentiae,  which  was
pleaded  in  defence  as  an  exceptio,  the  creditor  being  bound  to  spare  him
enough  of  his  property  to  live  on,  except  in  actions  based  on  delict  and
fraud :  '  in  condemnatione  personarum,  quae  in  id  quod  facere  possunt
damnantur,  non  totum  quod  habent  extorquendum  est,  sed  et  ipsorum
ratio  habenda  est,  ne  egeant'  Dig.  50.  17.  173;  cf.  Dig.  42.  i.  19.  i.
This  privilege  was  accorded  by  the  law  on  three  grounds.  On  account
of  the  peculiar  personal  relation  between  the  parties  it  belonged  to
husband  and  wife  against  one  another,  to  parents  against  children,
patrons  against  freedmen  (§  38  inf.),  and  to  the  £a.ther-in-law  if  sued  by
the  husband  for  a  promised  dos  durante  matrimonio.  By  reason  of  the
nature  of  the  obligation  upon  which  the  action  was  based  it  was  possessed
by  the  husband  and  his  representatives  when  sued  for  the  recovery  of  a
dos,  by  socii  inter  se,  and  by  the  promisor  of  a  gift  (§  38  inf.).  On  account
of  the  personal  position  of  the  debtor  it  belonged  to  the  insolvent  who
had  made  a  cessio  bonorum  (§  40  inf.),  to  soldiers  against  all  creditors
whatsoever,  and  to  children  who  had  been  recently  released  from  patria


Tit  7.]  QUOD  CUMEO  QUI  IN  ALIENA  POTEST  ATE,  ETC.  575

cognoscere  liceat.     Sed  et  si  quis  cum  parente  suo  patronove  38
agat,  item  si  socius  cum  socio  iudicio  societatis  agat,  non  plus
actor  consequitur,  quam  adversarius  eius  facere  potest,     idem
est,  si  quis  ex  donatione  sua  conveniatur.     Compensationes.  39
quoque  oppositae  plerumque  efficiunt,  ut  minus  quisque  con-
sequatur,  quam  ei  debeatur :  namque  ex  bono  et  aequo,  habita
ratione  eius,  quod  invicem  actorem  ex  eadem  causa  praestare
oporteret,  in  reliquum  eum  cum  quo  actum  est  condemnare
licet,  sicut  iam  dictum  est.    Eum  quoque,  qui  creditoribus  suis  40
bonis  cessit,  si  postea  aliquid  adquisierit,  quod  idoneum  emo-
lumentum  habeat,  ex  integro  in  id  quod  facere  potest  credi-
tores  cum  eo  experiuntur :  inhumanum  enim  erat  spoliatum
fortunis  suis  in  solidum  damnari.


VII.

QUOD  CUM   EO  QUI  IN  ALIENA  POTESTATE  EST
NEGOTIUM  GESTUM   ESSE  DICITUR.

Quia  tamen    superius    mentionem    habuimus  de  actione,
quae  in  peculium  filiorum  familias  servorumque  agitur :  opus

potestas  in  respect  of  debts  contracted  whiie  alieni  iuris,  unless  by  the
father's  death  they  had  come  into  substantial  property.  Finally,  the
beneficium  might  be  acquired  by  contract,  Dig.  2.  14.  49.

When  sued  for  the  recovery  of  the  dos  at  the  termination  of  the
marriage  by  the  wife,  her  heirs,  or  the  paternal  ascendant  who  had  given
it,  or  during  the  marriage  on  account  of  mismanagement  or  insolvency,
the  husband  or  his  heirs  or  representatives  could  deduct  impensae
necessariae,  by  the  sum  of  which  the  value  of  the  dos  was  held  to  have
tacitly  (ipso  iure)  diminished.  For  impensae  utiles  as  distinct  from
necessariae  the  husband  could  advance  a  claim  only  by  actio  mandati  or
negotiorum  gestorum,  Cod.  $•  ^S*  5  ^*  The  old  retentiones  propter  liberos,
propter  mores,  etc.,  described  by  Ulpian,  Reg.  6.  9-12,  were  obsolete  in
the  time  of  Justinian.

§  88.  If  the  societas  was  omnium  bonorum,  the  partner  against  whom
the  actio  pro  socio  was  brought  could  plead  beneficium  competentiae  as  a
matter  of  right ;  in  other  cases,  the  praetor  would  grant  it  only  after  inves-
tigation :  '  quod  autem  de  sociis  dictum  est,  ut  et  hi  in  quantum  facere
possint  condemnentur,  causa  cognita  se  factunim  praetor  edicit '  Dig.  42.
I.  22.  I :  see  note  on  p.  453  supr.

§  d9.  See  notes  on  §  30  supr.

§  40.  For  cessio  bonorum  see  p.  395  supr.

Tit.  VII.  The  rule  of  the  civil  law,  already  more  than  once  alluded


576  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib. IV.

est,  ut  de  hac  actione  et  de  ceteris,  quae  eorundem  nomine
in  parentes  dominosve  dari  sclent,  diligentius  admoneamus.
et  quia,  sive  cum  servis  negotium  gestum  sit  sive  cum  his,
qui  in  potestate  parentis  sunt,  fere  eadem  iura  servantur,  ne
verbosa  fiat  disputatio,  dirigamus  sermonem  in  personam  servi
dominique,  idem  intellecturi  de  liberis  quoque  et  parentibus,
quorum  in  potestate  sunt  nam  si  quid  in  his  proprie  obser-
vetur,  separatim  ostendimus.

Si  igitur  iussu  domini  cum  servo  negotium  gestum  erit,  in
solidum  praetor  adversus  dominum  actionem  pollicetur,  scilicet

to,  was  that  in  no  case  could  any  liability  attach  to  a  man  upon  the
contracts  made  by  those  in  his  power,  whether  slaves  or  children  :  '  melior
condicio  nostra  per  servos  fieri  potest,  deterior  fieri  non  potest '  Dig.  5a
17-  133  *  cf*  1*it-  6.  10  supr.  The  manifest  injustice  of  this  in  concrete
cases  led  to  a  praetorian  change,  by  which  one  with  whom  a  slave  con-
tracted, and  who  previously  had  no  remedy  against  any  one,  was  enabled,
under  certain  circumstances,  to  sue  the  master,  or  with  whom  a  filiusfamilias
contracted  could  sue  the  father  in  preference  to  the  son,  against  whom  of
course  he  had  always  had  his  remedy.  The  extent  to  which  the  pater  or
dominus  was  thus  made  answerable  varied  according  to  the  circumstances
of  the  case.  In  some  cases  he  became  liable  to  the  creditor  in  solidum,
as  where  he  had,  either  expressly  or  by  implication,  directed  or  subse-
quently adopted  the  contract ;  in  others  his  obligation  was  not  coexten-
sive with  that  of  the  son,  as  where  he  knew  nothing  of  the  transaction,  and
had  derived  no  personal  advantage  from  it.  Of  these  variations  in  the
superior's  liability  a  full  and  precise  account  is  given  in  this  Title.  The
six  praetorian  actions  by  which  he  could  be  made  to  discharge  the  obliga-
tion, and  which  are  here  discussed,  are  called  by  the  conunentators
actiones  adiectitiae  qualitatis  (after  Dig.  14.  i.  5.  i,  cited  in  Excursus  IX
supr. ;  cf.  Dig.  45.  i.  91.  5  *  filiusfamilias,  qui  iussu  patris  promistt  •  .  .
quasi  accessionem  intellegens  eum  qui  iubeat'),  because  they  are  alterna-
tive to  the  remedy  against  the  actual  contractor,  or  give  the  creditor
a  remedy  where  he  had  none  at  all  by  the  civil  law.  The  advantage  of
the  change  was  not  all  for  the  creditor,  for  it  enabled  men  to  freely
employ  their  children  and  slaves  as  agents  in  contracts  generating  bilateral
obligation,  and  so  largely  facilitated  the  business  of  every  day  life ;  the
wider  benefit  of  two  of  these  actions  in  the  same  direction  has  already
been  explained  in  the  Excursus  referred  to.

The  reference  in  the  first  line  of  the  text  is  to  Tit.  6.  8.  10  and  36  supr.
Slaves  and  children  in  power  do  not  stand  on  precisely  the  same  footing
in  this  matter  {fere  eadem  iura  servantur) ;  see  §  7  inf.  and  Bk.  iii.  19.  6
supr.

§  1.  The  actio  quod  iussu  lay  whether  the  iussus  was  given  to  the  slave
(Dig.  14.  5.  2;  15.  4.  I.  2)  or  to  the  third  party  with  whom  he  contracted,


Tit  7]  QUOD  CUM  EO  QUI  IN  ALIENA  POTEST  ATE,  ETC.^jj

quia  qui  ita  contrahit  fidem  domini  sequi'videtur.  Eadem  2
ratione  praetor  duas  alias  in  solidum  actiones  poUicetur,  qua*
rum  altera  exercitoria,  altera  institoria  appellatun  exercitoria
tunc  locum  habet,  cum  quis  servum  suum  magistrum  navis
praeposuerit  et  quid  cum  eo  eius  rei  gratia  cui  praepositus
erit  contractum  fiierit.  ideo  autem  exercitoria  vocatur,  quia
exercitor  appellatur  is,  ad  quern  cottidianus  navis  quaestus
pertinet  institoria  tunc  locum  habet,  cum  quis  tabernae
forte  aut  cuilibet  n^otiationi  servum  praeposuerit  et  quid
cum  eo  eius  rei  causa,  cui  praepositus  erit,  contractum  fuerit.
ideo  autem  institoria  appellatur,  quia  qui  negotiationibus  prae-
ponuntur  institores  vocantur.  Istas  tamen  duas  actiones  praetor
reddit  et  si  liberum  quis  hominem  aut  alienum  servum  navi
aut  tabernae  aut  cuilibet  negotiationi  praeposuerit,  scilicet
quia  eadem  aequitatis  ratio  etiam  eo  casu  interveniebat.  In-  3
troduxit  et  aliam  actionem  praetor,  quae  tributoria  vocatur.

Dig.  15.  4.  I.  I,  Cod.  4.  26.  13,  but  only  where  the  contract  was  made  on
behalf  or  in  the  interest  of  the  dominus  or  pater :  '  quid  si  dominus  fide
iusserit  pro  servo  ?  ait  Marcellus,  non  teneri  quod  iussu,  quasi  extraneus
intervenit'  Dig.  15.  4.  i.  5;  this,  however,  is  disputed,  some  maintaining
exactly  the  opposite  view,  and  others  holding  that  it  is  immaterial  whether
the  slave  or  son  makes  the  contract  for  himself  or  for  the  superior.
If  the  contract  was  in  reality  the  master*s  own,  and  he  used  the  slave
merely  as  an  instrument  (nuntius,  Bk.  iii.  22  supr.),  he  could  be  sued  by
direct  action  upon  it,  as  the  only  true  contractor,  Dig.  ib.  5.  pn  Subse-
quent ratification  had  the  same  effect  as  a  precedent  iussus :  '  si  latum
habuerit  quis  quod  servus  eius  gesserit  vel  filius,  quod  iussu  actio  in  eos
datur'  ib.  i.  6.

§  2.  The  two  actions  described  in  this  section  were  due  to  the  in-
sufficiency of  quod  iussu,  which  was  inapplicable  without  a  specific
authorization,  or  where  the  agent  was  an  extranea  persona.  The  appoint-
ment of  filiifamilias  or  slaves,  especially  the  latter,  to  manage  some
branch  of  trade  or  business  (for  examples  see  Mr.  Posters  note  on  Gains  iv.
71),  or  to  command  a  merchant  vessel  was  extremely  common  at  Rome,
and  unless  the  principal  had  been  liable  on  contracts  made  by  such
agents  within  the  scope  of  their  commission,  more  particularly  in  the
case  of  slaves,  business  would  have  been  much  hampered :  *  cum  inter-
dum  ignari,  cuius  sint  condicionis  et  quales,  cum  magistris  propter
navigandi  necessitatem  contrahamus*  Dig.  14.  i.  i.  pr.  It  would  seem
that  both  of  these  actions  were  originally  designed  to  render  only  masters
and  fathers  liable,  and  were  subsequently  extended  to  cases  where  the
agent  was  an  extranea  persona ;  Gaius  iv.  71.

§  8.  The  actio  tributoria  coiild  come  into  application  only  where  the

pp


578  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

namque  si  servus  in  peculiar!  merce  sciente  domino  nqgotietur*
et  quid  cum  eo  eius  rei  causa  contractum  erit,  ita  praetor  ius.
dicit,  ut,  quidquid  in  his  mercibus  erit  quodque  inde  receptum.
erity  id  inter  dominum,  si  quid  ei  debebitur,  et  ceteros  ere-
ditores  pro  rata  portione  distribuatur.  et  quia  ipsi  domino
distributionem  permittit,  si  quis  ex  creditoribus  queratur,-
quasi  minus  ei  tributum  sit,  quam  oportuerit,  banc  ei  ac-
4  tionem  accommodat,  quae  tributoria  appeliatun  Praeterea
introducta  est  actio  de  peculio  deque  eo,  quod  in  rem  dominL
versum  erit,  ut,  quamvis  sine  voluntate  domini  negotium
gestum  erit,  tamen  sive  quid  in  rem  eius  versum  fuerit,  id
totum  praestare  debeat,  sive  quid  non  sit  in  rem  eius  versum,
id  eatenus  praestare  debeat,  quatenus  peculium  patitur.  In
rem  autem  domini  versum  intellegitur,  quidquid  necessario'
in  rem  eius  impenderit  servus,  veluti  si  mutuatus  pecuniam
creditoribus  eius  solverit  aut  aedificia  ruentia  fulserit  aut
familiae  frumentum  emerit  vel  etiam  fundum  aut  quamlibet


slave  (or  filiusfamiiias)  who  traded  with  a  merx  peculiaris  sciente  domino
(or  patre)  found  himself  embarrassed  and  unabk  to  satisfy  his  trade
creditors  in  full;  here  the  latter  could  demand  a  distribution  among
themselves  of  that  portion  of  the  peculium  which  had  been  embarked  in
the  business  in  the  ratio  of  their  several  claims.  The  division  was  made
by  the  dominus,  who  was  treated  as  an  ordinary  creditor,  and  therefore
could  not  deduct  debts  owing  to  himself  in  full,  though  he  had  the  privilege
of  paying  all  his  own  claims  pro  rata,  whether  arising  out  of  the  business
or  not,  Dig.  14.  4.  5. 6  and  7 ;  the  actio  tributoria  lay  against  the  dominus
to  compel  the  distribution,  or  to  bring  it  under  judicial  review  if  any.
creditor  was  dissatisfied  with  it.  If  the  slave  had  his  peculium  engaged
in  different  businesses,  they  were  kept  apart,  the  creditors  in  each  being
entitled  to  satisfaction  only  out  of  the  capital  embarked  in  that  one  upon
which  these  debts  arose,  Dig.  ib.  5.  15,  16.  Any  creditor  who  got  his
debts  paid  in  full  while  the  solvency  of  the  affair  was  unsuspected  had  to
bind  himself  to  refund  in  case  any  others  should  present  their  claims:
'  non  enim  haec  actio,  sicut  de  peculio,  occupantis  mehorem  condicionem
facit,  sed  aequalem  condicionem  quandoque  agentium '  Dig.  ib.  6.

§  4.  Hitherto  we  have  had  to  consider  only  contracts  made  by  a  slave
with  his  master's  knowledge  or  even  by  his  express  authority;  upon
which,  for  that  very  reason,  the  master  was  held  liable  in  soHdum,  or  at
any  rate  was  compellable  to  pay  up  to  a  certain  limit,  without -his  own
claims  enjoying  any  priority  over  those  of  ordinary  trade  creditors.  This
section  deals  with  his  liability  on  most  of  the  slave's  other  contracts — ^
those  which  he  made  without  the  master's  knowledge,  or  even  against


Tit.  7.]  QUOD  CUM  EO  QUI  IN  ALIEN  A  POTEST  ATE,  ETC,  579

aliam  rem  necesskriam  mercatus  erit.  Itaque  si  ex  decern  ut
puta  aureis,  quo9  sefvus  tuus  a  Titio  mutuos  accepit,  creditor!
tuo  quinque  aureos  solvent,  reliquos  vero  quinque  quolibet
modo  consucnpserit,  pro  quinque  quidem  in  solidum  damnari
debes,  pro  ceteris  vero  quinque  eatenus,  quatenus  in  peculio
sit :  ex  quo  scilicet  apparet,  si  toti  decern  aurei  in  rem  tuam
versi  fuerint,  totos  decem  aureos  Titium  consequi  posse,  licet
enim  una  est  actio,  qua  de  peculio  deque  eo  quod  in  rem
domini  versum  sit  agitur,  tamen  duas  babet  condemnationes.
itaque  iudex,  apud  quern  de  ea  actione  agitur,  ante  dispicere
solet,  an  in  rem  domini  versum  sit,  nee  aliter  ad  peculii
aestimationem  transit,  quam  si  aut  nihil  in  rem  domini  versum
intell^atur  aut  non  totum.  Cum  autem  quaeritur,  quantum
in  peculio  sit^  ante  deducitur,  quidquid  servus  domino  quive

his  orders  ('  etiamsi  prohibuerit  contrahi  cum  servo  dominus,  erit  in  eum
de  pieculio  actio'  Dig.  15.  i.  29.  i),  but  not  upon  obligations  arising  from
delict  (Dig.  ib.  3. 12),  or  from  contracts  which  were  merely  gifts  to  the
other  party,  Dig^.  39.  5.  7,  or  from  those  which  a  filiusfamilias  made  on
the  strength  of  peculium  castrense  or  quasi-castrense,  Dig.  49.  17.  18.  5.
Here  the  creditor  is  enabled  to  sue  the  dominus  by  the  actio  de  peculio
et  in  rem  verso,  in  which  two  questions  usually  lie  for  the  judge's  con«*
sideration ;  (i)  has  the  master  himself  derived  any  material  advantage
from  the  contract  in  question?  No  stress  can  here  be  laid  on  the
language  of  the  text  above,  which  suggests  that  the  dominus  was  liable
only  if  the  expenditure  of  the  slave  upon  his  affairs  was  necessary  (neces-
sario  . . .  rem  necessariam) ;  in  Dig.  1 5.  3.  3.  2  and  4 ;  ib.  5.  pr.  and  2
expenditure  which  is  utilis,  and  in  3.  4  of  the  same  Title  an  outlay  which
merely  '  ad  voluptatem  domini  spectat '  is  said  to  be  recoverable  by  de  in
rem  verso ;  and  in  fact  this  action  lay  wherever  actio  mandati  or  nego-
tiorum  gestorum  would  lie :  '  et  regulariter  dicimus  totiens  de  in  rem
verso  esse  actionem,  quibus  casibus  procurator  mandati,  vd  qui  negotia
gessit,  negotiorum  gestoram  haberet  actionem,  quotiensque  aliquid  con-
sumsit  servus,  ut  aut  meliorem  rem  dominus  habuerit,  aut  non  deteriorem'
Dig.  15.  3.  3.  2.  If  in  rem  versio  in  this  sense  could  be  established,  the
master's  own  means  were  liable  pro  tanto ;  and  the  advantage  which  he
had  derived  might  have  been  so  great  that  the  creditor  might  conceivably
obtain  full  payment  in  this  manner,  as  e.  g.  where  the  slave  had  borrowed
50/.,  and  spent  the  whole  of  it  in  paying  his  master's  debts.  But  (2)  if
the  master  has  derived  no  material  benefit  from  the  slave's  contract,  or
at  least  not  enough  to  make  him  liable  to  the  creditor  in  solidum,  the
judge  has  to  inquire  into  the  amount  of  the  slave's  peculium  (deducting
the  master's  own  claims  against  it),  and  to  condemn  the  dominus  to  pay
the  creditor  from  it  what  is  due  to  him,  so  far  as  it  extends  at  the  date

P  p  a


58o  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

in  potestate  dus  sit  debet,  et  quod  superest,  id  solum  peculium
intellegitur.  aliquando  tamen  id,  quod  ei  debet  servus,  qui  in
potestate  domini  sit,  non  deducitur  ex  peculio,  veluti  si  is  in
huius  ipsius  peculio  sit.  quod  eo  pertinet,  ut,  si  quid  vicario
8uo  servus  debeat,  id  ex  peculio  eius  non  deducatur.
5  Ceterum  dubium  non  est,  quin  is  quoque,  qui  iussu  domini
Contraxerit  cuique  institoria  vel  exerdtc^-ia  actio  competit,
de  peculio  deque  eo,  quod  in  rem  domini  versuoi  >«st,  agere
possit :  sed  erit  stultissimus,  si  omissa  actione,  qua  fadUfiQe
solidum  ex  contractu  consequi  possit,  se  ad  diflficultatem^
perducat  probandi  in  rem  domini  versum  esse,  vel  habere
servum  peculium  et  tantum  habere,  ut  solidum  sibi  solvt
possit.  Is  quoque,  cui  tributoria  actio  competit,  aeque  de
peculio  et  in  rem  verso  agere  potest :  sed  sane  huic  modo
tributoria  expedit  agere,  modo  de  peculio  et  in  rem  verso,
tributoria  ideo  expedit  agere,  quia  in  ea  domini  condido
praecipua  non  est,  id  est  quod  domino  debetur  non  deducitur,
sed  dusdem  iuris  est  dominus,  cuius  et  ceteri  creditores :  at
in  actione  de  peculio  ante  deducitur  quod  domino  debetur  et
in  id  quod  reliquum  est  creditori  dominus  condemnatur.
rursus  de  peculio  ideo  expedit  agere,  quod  in  hac  actione
totius  peculii  ratio  habetur,  at  in  tributoria  eius  tantum,  quod
negotiatur,  et  potest  quisque  tertia  forte  parte  peculii  aut
quarta  vel  etiam  minima  n^otiafi^  m^iorem  autem  partem
in  praediis  et  mancipiis  aut  fenebri  pecuoia  habere,  prout
ergo  expedit,  ita  quisque  vel  banc  actionem  vel  illam  eligere


of  the  condemnation.  Dig.  15.  i.  30.  pr.  The  master's  liability  to  de
peculio  lasted  for  an  annus  utilis  after  the  slave  was  alienated  or  manu*
mitted,  Dig.  15.  2.  i.  The  reason  why  the  dominus  here  enjoyed  the
privilege,  which  he  did  not  possess  under  the  circumstances  described  in
§  3  supr.,  of  paying  his  own  claims  against  the  slave  from  the  peculium
in  full,  was  the  fact  that  here  the  contract  had  in  no  way  been  sanctioned
by  him.

For  vicarii  servi  see  on  Bk.  ii.  20.  17  supr. '  Id,  quod  ipsis  (sc.  vicariis)
debet  ordinarius  servus,  non  deducetur  de  peculio  ordinarii  servi,  quia
peculium  eorum  in  peculio  ipsius  est:'  cf.  Theophilus,  Iva  fiij  to  avro
vp&an^nov  tvptSj  6vo  ivdvTia  irocoi/y,  Ktii  aZ^ov  Koi  diro/icioOy  rh  peculium.

§  6.  An  advantage  of  de  peculio  over  tributoria  has  been  already
pointed  out  in  the  passage  cited  at  the  end  of  note  on  §  3  supr.  Gaius
(iv.  74)  thinks  the  former  remedy  as  a  rule  preferable  to  the  latter.    As


Tit.  7.]  QUOD  CUMEO  QUI  IN  ALIEN  A  POTEST  ATE,  ETC.^^x

debet :  certe  qui  potest  probare  in  rem  domini  versum  esse,
de  in  rem  verso  agere  debet  Quae  diximus  de  servo  et6
domino,  eadem  intellegimus  et  de  filio  et  filia  aut  nepote
et  nepte,  patre  avove  cuius  in  potestate  sunt.  Illud  proprie  7
servatur  in  eorum  persona,  quod  senatus  consultum  Mace-
donianum  prohibuit  mutuas  pecunias  dari  eis,  qui  in  parentis
erunt  potestate :  et  ei  qui  crediderit  denegatur  actio  tarn
adversus  ipsum  filium  filiamve  nepotem  neptemve,  sive  adhuc
in  potestate  sunt,  sive  morte  parentis  vel  emancipatione  suae


soon  as  the  action  selected  had  reached  litis  contestatio,  the  other  was
extinguished  on  account  of  the  identity  of  the  obligation  which  they  lay
to  enforce,  Dig.  14.  4.  9.  i :  p.  498  supr.

§  6.  But  the  filiusfamilias,  unlike  the  slave,  could  be  sued  in  person  on
his  own  contracts ;  for  the  effect  of  judgment  recovered  against  him  see
on  Tit.  5.  2  supr.  Sometimes  too  a  man  was  liable  on  a  contract  when
made  by  his  son,  but  not  when  made  by  his  slave :  '  sed  si  filius  fideiussor
vel  quasi  interventor  acceptus  sit,  an  de  peculio  patrem  obligat  quaeritur.
£t  est  vera  Sabini  et  Cassii  sententia  existimantium  semper  obligari
patrem  de  peculio,  et  distare  in  hoc  a  servo'  Dig.  15.  i.  3.  9.

§  7.  The  last  two  lines  of  this  section  lend  some  colour  to  the  story
related  by  Theophilus,  that  the  SC.  Macedonianum,  which  was  passed
in  the  time  of  either  Claudius  or  Vespasian,  derived  its  name  from  one
Macedo  who  committed  the  crime  of  parricide  in  order  to  relieve  himself
from  his  pecuniary  difficulties ;  cf.  p.  44  supr.  The  enactment  related  to
no  contracts  except  loans  of  money,  and  to  these  it  applied  even  if  veiled
beneath  some  transaction  ostensibly  of  a  different  nature :  '  sed  si  fraus
sit  senatus  consulto  adhibita,  puta  frumento  vel  vino  vel  oleo  mutuo  dato,
ut  his  distractis  fructibus  uteretur  pecunia,  subveniendum  est  filiofamilias'
Dig.  14.  6.  7.  3 ;  and  the  age  or  rank  of  the  filius  by  whom  the  money
was  borrowed  was  immaterial :  '  in  filiofamilias  nihil  dignitas  facit  quo-
minus  senatus  consultum  Macedonianum  locum  habeat:  nam  etiamsi
consul  sit  vel  cuiusvis  dignitatis,  senatus  consulto  locus  est '  Dig.  ib.  i.  3.
The  effect  of  the  enactment  was  not  to  avoid  the  loan  (so  that  it  is
weaker  in  its  operation  than  the  SC.  Velleianum,  p.  434  supr.),  but  simply
to  refuse  an  action  for  its  recovery,  or,  if  an  action  were  in  fact  granted
by  the  praetor  because  the  facts  were  doubtful,  to  enable  the  defendant,
if  he  could  prove  his  title  to  the  benefit  of  the  law,  to  repel  the  plaintiff
by  exceptio  SC*.  Macedonian^  Thus  the  obligation  to  repay  the  money
subsisted  naturaliter,  so  that  condictio  indebiti  was  excluded,  though  if
the  filius  paid  with  money  of  his  father*s,  the  latter  could  recover  it  by
vindicatio  so  long  as  the  creditor  still  had  it  in  his  hands.

The  senatusconsult,  however,  had  no  application  in  the  following  cases.
The  filiusfamilias  himself  was  liable  (i)  if  he  had  a  peculium  castrense
or  quasi-castrense,  Dig.  14.  6.  2 ;  (2)  if  after  becoming  sui  iuris  he  ratified


S82  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  IV.

potestatis  esse  coeperint,  quam  adversus  patrem  avumve,  sive
habeat  eoa  adhuc  in  potestate  sive  emancipaverit.  quae  ideo
senatus  prospexit,  quia  saepe  onerati  aere  alieno  creditarum
pecuniarum,  quas  in  luxuriam  consumebant,  vitae  parentium
8  insidiabantur.  lUud  in  summa  admonendi  sumus  id,  quod
iussu  patris  dominive  contractum  fuerit  quodque  in  rem  eius
versum  fuerit,  directo  quoque  posse  a  patre  dominove  condici,
tamquam  si  principaliter  cum  ipso  negotium  gestum  esset.
ci  quoque,  qui  vel  exercitoria  vel  institoria  actione  tenetur,
directo  posse  condici  placet,  quia  huius  quoque  iussu  con-
tractum intellegitur.

the  contract  (Cod.  4.  28.  2)  either  expressly  or  by  implication ;  e.  g.  by
repaying  part  of  the  loan.  And  either  the  son  could  be  sued  by  direct
action,  or  the  father  by  actio  adiectitiae  qualitatis,  (i)  if  the  lender  had
reason  for  believing  the  filiusfamilias  to  be  sui  iuris.  Dig.  14.  6.  3.  pr.
and  I.  (2)  If  and  so  far  as  the  loan  was  in  rem  patris  versum.  Dig.  ib.  7.
12-14.  (3)  If  the  paterfamilias  consented  to  the  transaction.  Cod.  4.
28.  2.  Consent  might  be  inferred  from  conduct,  such  as  standing  by  and
allowing  the  money  to  be  lent.  Dig.  ib.  12  and  16,  or  his  making  the  son
his  institor,  or  allowing  him  to  trade  with  a  peculium  profectitium.  Sub-
sequent ratification  by  the  pater,  express  or  implied,  had  the  same  effect,
Cod.  4. 28. 7.  pr.  (4)  If  the  loan  was  contracted  to  pay  a  creditor  against
whom  the  senatusconsult  could  not  be  pleaded,  Dig.  ib.  7.  14.  (5)  If  the
son  at  the  time  of  borrowing  the  money  was  a  soldier.  Cod.  4.  28.  7.  i.
(6)  If  there  was  no  genuine  loan  owing  to  the  lender's  defective  capacity
of  alienation,  as  where  he  was  a  pupillus  or  alieni  iuris.  Dig.  ib.  3.  2.  If
the  creditor  was  a  minor,  he  could  get  himself  in  integrum  restitutus  in
spite  of  the  senatusconsult.  Dig.  4.  4.  11.  7.  The  exceptio  SC*.  Macedo-
niani  could  be  pleaded  also  by  the  filiusfamilias*  surety,  if  the  latter  had
a  ius  regressus  against  him,  Dig.  14.  6.  9.  3.

§  8.  So  too  it  is  said  in  Dig.  12.  i.  29 ;  14.  3.  17.  4  and  5,  that  a  direct
condictio  will  lie  against  the  dominus  in  lieu  of  actio  institoria.  It  is,
however,  not  a  necessary  inference  from  such  passages  that  the  civil  law
modified  its  own  maxim,  stated  in  the  first  note  on  this  Title,  though
this  is  the  explanation  of  Schrader,  who  says  ^forsan  civiles  actiones,
olim  paucis  casibus  datae,  postea  demum  ita  creverunt,  ut  eundem  fere
ambitum,  quem  honorariae  statim  ab  initio  occupabant,  tenerent'  But,
as  Savigny  remarks  (Oblig.  §  54),  this  makes  it  difficult  to  understand
why  the  actiones  adiectitiae  qualitatis  should  be  described  in  the  Corpus
iuris  as  not  only  still  useful  but  indispensable;  and  Savigny  himself,
noticing  that  it  is  only  condictio  (and  not  actiones  civiles  in  general)
which  is  spoken  of  as  alternative  to  the  praetorian  remedies,  limits  its
application  to  cases  where  the  slave  or  filiusfamilias  had  borrowed  money
with  the  superior's  consent,  or  spent  it,  when  borrowed,  in  his  interest.


Tit.  8.]  DE  NOXALIBUS  ACTION/BUS.  583


VIII.
DE  NOXALIBUS  ACTIONIBUS.

Ex  maleiiciis  servorum^  veluti  si  furtum  fecertnt  aut  bona
rapuerint  aut  damnum  dederint  aut  iniuriam  commiserint,
noxales  actiones  proditae  sunt,  quibus  domino  damnato  per-
mittitur  aut  litis  aestimationem  sufferre  aut  hominem  noxae

This  conjecture  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  in  the  text  above  the  con-
currence of  condictio  with  the  actiones  adiectitiae  qualitatis  is  generally
affirmed,  with  the  exception  of  de  peculio ;  and  (as  we  have  just  seen)  if
a  filiusfamilias  borrowed  money,  both  condictio  and  de  peculio  were
barred  by  the  SC.  Macedonianum,  Cod.  4.  28.  6,  Dig.  14.  6.  7.  10,  which,
however,  did  not  exclude  institoria  and  the  rest  Another  view  is  that
the  ground  of  the  condictio  was  not  the  slave's  or  filiusfamilias'  contract,
but  the  simple  fact  that  the  superior  had  been  enriched  at  the  cost  of  the
other  contracting  party.

Tit.  vui.  If  a  slave  committed  a  delict  by  his  masters  orders,  the
latter  alone  was  answerable :  '  servus  nil  deliquit  qui  domino  iubenti  ob-
temperavit;'  and  even  in  other  cases,  if  the  master  suspected  and  could
have  prevented  the  wrong,  the  injured  person  had  his  choice  between
a  direct  and  a  noxal  action.  Dig.  9.  4.  2-5.  Otherwise  the  slave  only  was
directly  liable,  and  if  manumitted  could  be  sued,  §  5  inf.,  Dig.  ib.  6,  unless
it  was  against  his  own  master  that  the  delict  had  been  committed,  §  6  inf.
While,  however,  he  remained  a  slave  no  action  could  be  brought  against
him,  and  accordingly  the  master  could  be  sued  on  his  account,  though,
as  he  was  not  bound  to  defend,  he  would  probably  prefer  to  abandon  him
to  the  plaintiff  if  the  proofs  were  clear.  If  he  defended  the  action,  it  was
called  noxalis  because  the  defendant  had  the  option,  if  the  guilt  of  the
slave  was  proved,  of  surrendering  him  to  the  plaintiff  in  lieu  of  paying
the  damages  assessed :  '  praetor  ait . . .  si  servus  insciente  domino  fecisse
dicetur,  in  iudicio  adiciam  "aut  noxam  dedere"'  Dig.  9.  3.  i.  pr.  Noxal
actions  are  thus  not  a  class  of  remedies  apart  by  themselves,  but  only
ordinary  actions  on  a  delictal  or  quasi-delictal  obligation  (Dig.  loc.  cit.),
in  which  the  defendant,  being  sued  on  a  wrong  not  of  his  own  conunission,
IS  allowed  by  special  provision  (§  4  inf.)  a  privilege  which,  had  the  offence
been  his  own,  he  would  not  have  enjoyed.  In  principle,  though  not  in
form,  they  are  arbitrariae  (Tit  6. 31  supr.) ;  the  noxae  deditio  is  not  made
in  accordance  with  the  judge's  arbitrium,  but  the  defendant  is  condemned
in  the  alternative.  Tit.  17.  i  inf.  If  the  slave  died  before  litis  contestatio
in  the  action,  the  master's  liability  ended,  even  though  his  death  was
unknown.  Dig.  9.  4.  39.  4 ;  ib.  42.  i :  by  his  death  during  the  action  the
master's  liability  in  damages  became  absolute.

It  has  been  conjectured  that  noxal  actions  were  originally  the  exprest


584  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Ub.  IV.

1  dedere.  Noxa  autem  est  corpus  quod  nocuit,  id  est  servus  :
noxia  ipsum  maleficium,  veluti  fuitum  damnum  raptna  iniuria.

2  Summa  autem  ratione  permissum  est  noxae  deditione  de-
fungi  :  namque  erat  iniquum  nequitiam  eonim  ultra  ipsorvm

3  corpora  dominis  damnosam  esse.  Dominus  noxali  iudicio
servi  sui  nomine  conventus  servum  actori  noxae  dedendo
liberatur.  nee  minus  perpetuum  eius  dominium  a  domino
transfertur :  si  autem  damnum  ei  cui  deditus  est  resarcierit
quaesita  pecunia,  auxilio  praetoris  invito  domino  manumit-

4  tetur.  Sunt  autem  constitutae  noxales  actiones  aut  l^ibus
aut  edicto  praetoris :  legibus  veluti  furti  l^e  duodecim  tabu-
larum,  damni  iniuriae  lege  Aquilia :  edicto  praetoris  veluti  iniu-

5  riarum  et  vi  bonorum  raptorum.  Omnis  autem  noxalis  actio
caput  sequitun  nam  si  servus  tuus  noxiam  commiserit,  quamdiu
in  tua  potestate  sit,  tecum  est  actio  :  si  in  alterius  potestatem
pervenerit,  cum  illo  incipit  actio  esse,  aut  si  manumissus  fuerit,
directo  ipse  tenetur  et  extinguitur  noxae  deditio.  ex  diverse
quoque  directa  actio  noxalis  esse  incipit :  nam  si  liber  homo


sion  of  an  absolute  daim  to  have  the  oflfender  delivered  up  for  the  exercise
of  private  vengeance,  whether  his  offence  were  delictal  or  merely  breach
of  contract.  The  surrender  of  Postumius  to  the  Samnites  by  the  Romans
with  all  the  forms  of  noxae  deditio  (Livy  ix.  10)  was  made  as  atonement
for  non-observance  of  the  treaty  which  he  had  concluded  with  them,  and
from  which  the  Romans  wished  to  release  themselves — ut  populus  reli-
gione  solvatur.  Under  Roman  municipal  law  non-fulfilment  of  a  promise
made  by  sponsio  entailed,  in  the  end,  quasi-slavery  (manus  iniectio) ;
and  the  idea  was  consistently  applied  by  them  in  international  relations  ;
cf.  Ihering,  Geist  des  r.  Rechts  i.  p^  131 ;  Mr.  O.  W.  Holmes'  Common
Law  pp.  S-12,  and  Mr.  Poste's  note  on  Gains  iv,  81.

§  d.  The  rule  that  if  the  surrendered  slave  subsequently  contrived  to
pay  the  damages  he  could  demand  his  manumission,  appears  to  have
originally  held  only  where  the  deditus  was  a  child  in  power ;  '  per  homi-*
nem  liberum  noxiae  deditum  si  tantum  adquisitum  sit,  quantum  damnum
dedit,  manumittere  cogendus  est  a  praetore  qui  noxa  deditum  accepit^
sed  fiduciae  iudicio  non  tenetur'  Papinian,  ColL  2.  3.

§  4.  The  four  delicts  are  mentioned  only  exempli  gratia,  as  appears
from  veluti . . .  veluti :  a  noxal  action  was  given  upon  quasi-delictal  obli-
gations as  well.  Dig.  47. 1. 1.  2 ;  47.  7.  7.  5.

§  5.  For  the  modes  in  which  a  free  man  could  become  a  slave  see
Bk.  i.  3.  4,  and  notes  supr.

§  6.  The  first  few  lines  of  this  section  are  open  to  misconception.  It
was  not  merely  that  no  action  lay  upon  a  delict  committed  by  a  slave


Tit.  8.]  DE  NOXALIBUS  ACTION/BUS.  585

noxiam  commiserit  et  is  servus  tuus  esse  coeperit  (quod  casibus
quibusdam  effici  primo  libro  tradidimus),  incipit  tecum  esse
noxalis  actio,  quae  ante  directa  fuisset.  Si  servus  domino  6
noxiam  commiserit^  actio  nulla  nascitur:  namque  inter  do-
minum  et  eum  qui  in  dus  potestate  est  nulla  obligatio  nasci
potest,  ideoque  et  si  in  alienam  potestatem  servus  pervenerit
aut  manumissus  fuerit,  neque  cum  ipso  neque  cum  eo,  cuius
nunc  in  potestate  sit,  agi  potest,  unde  si  alienus  servus
noxiam  tibi  commiserit  et  is  postea  in  potestate  tua  esse
coeperit,  intercidit  actio,  quia  in  eum  casum  deducta  sit,  in
quo  consistere  non  potuit:  ideoque  licet  exierit  de  tua  po-
testate, agere  non  potes,  quemadmodum  si  dominus  in  servum
suum  aliquid  commiserit,  nee  si  manumissus  vel  alienatus
fuerit  servus,  ullam  actionem  contra  dominum  habere  potest.
Sed  veteres  quidem  haec  et  in  iiliis  familias  masculis  et  feminis  7
admiserunt.  nova  autem  hominum  conversatio  huiusmodi  as-
peritatem  recte  respuendam  esse  existimavit  et  ab  usu  com-
muni  haec  penitus  recessit :  quis  enim  patitur  filium  suum  et
maxime  filiam  in  noxam  alii  dare,  ut  paene  per  corpus  pater
magis  quam  iilius  periclitetur,  cum  in  filiabus  etiam  pudicitiae
favor  hoc  bene  excludit  ?  et  ideo  placuit  in  servos  tantummodo
noxales  actiones  esse  proponendas,  cum  apud  veteres  legum
commentatores  invenimus  saepius  dictum  ipsos  filios  familias
pro  suis  delictis  posse  conveniri.

against  his  domintis,  but  it  gave  rise  to  no  obligation  whatever— doubtless
because  the  master  could  get  him  punished  by  an  appeal  to  the  extra-
ordinaria  cognitio  of  the  praetor,  or  even  inflict  the  penalty  in  person  if
the  offence  were  a  light  one.  Nor  is  it  true  that '  inter  dominum  et  eum
qui  in  potestate  eius  est  nulla  obligatio  nasci  potest:'  between  master
and  slave,  pater  and  filiusfamilias,  there  could  be  naturalis  but  not  civilis
obligatio.  Tit.  7.  3  supr.,  Dig.  12.  6.  64;  44.  7.  14.

The  Proculians  had  maintained  that  the  action  for  the  delict  of  a  slave
was  not  extinguished  by  his  coming  under  the  power  of  the  injured  person,
but  only  suspended, '  cum  vero  exierit  de  mea  potestate,  tunc  earn  resus-
citari '  Gaius  iv.  78.

For  applications  of  the  rule  ^quae  in  eam  causam  pervenerunt  a  qua
incipere  non  poterant  pro  non  scriptis  habentur'  cf.  Bk.  ii.  2a  14;  iiu
19.  2  supr.,  and  Dig.  5.  1. 11 ;  8.  i.  il ;  9.  2.  16 ;  34.  8.  3.  2.

§  7.  The  noxal  surrender  of  filiifamilias  (Gaius  iv.  74,  79  speaks  only
of  sons)  was  effected  by  mancipatio ;  they  stood  in  mancipio  to  the  sur-
renderee (note  on  Bk.  i.  8  supr.),  the  Sabinians  holding  that  one  sale  was


586  INSTITUTIONUM  LlBRl  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

IX.
SI  QUADRUPES  PAUPERIEM   FECISSE   DICITUR.

Animalium  nomine,  quae  ratione  carent,  si  quidem  lascivia
aut  fervore  aut  feritate  paupcriem  fecerint,  noxalis  actio  lege
duodecim  tabularum  prodita  est  (quae  animalia  si  noxae  de-
dantur,  proficiunt  reo  ad  liberationem,  quia  ita  lex  duodecim
tabularum  scripta  est) :  puta  si  equus  calcitrosus  calce  percus-
serit  aut  bos  cornu  petere  solitus  petierit.  haec  autem  actio  in
his,  quae  contra  naturam  moventur,  locum  habet :  ceterum  si
genitalis  sit  feritas,  cessat.     Denique  si  ursus  fugit  a  domino


sufficient  for  this  purpose,  '  crediderunt  enim  tres  lege  duodecim  tabu-
larum ad  voluntarias  mancipationes  pertinere '  Gaius  iv.  79.

Among  the  'veteres  legum  commentatores '  arc  Gaius  himself,  Dig.
44-  7*  39 ;  Pomponius,  Dig.  9.  4.  33 ;  Julianus,  ib.  34,  and  Ulpian,  Dig.  5.
!•  57 ;  9«  3- 1-  7 ;  9-  4-  35«  For  Justinian's  affectation  of  legal  conservatism
cf.  Bk.  ii.  14.  pr.,  ii.  20. 34  supr.  On  the  whole  subject  of  noxal  surrender
see  a  note  in  Mr.  Roby's  edition  of  Dig.  7.  i.  pp.  132-137.

Tit.  IX.  The  conditions  under  which  the  noxal  actio  de  pauperie  lay
are  accurately  stated  in  this  Title.  By  the  Twelve  Tables  the  animal
must  be  four-footed  (Dig.  9.  i.  i.  2),  but  by  construction  the  remedy  was
extended :  '  haec  actio  utilis  competit,  si  non  quadrupes  sed  aliud  animal
pauperiem  fecit '  Dig.  ib.  4.  If  the  damage  was  done  under  provocation,
the  noxal  action  did  not  lie,  but  the  person  who  was  its  indirect  cause
was  liable:  'et  generaliter  haec  actio  locum  habet,  quotiens  contra
naturam  fera  mota  pauperiem  dedit  Ideoque  si  equus  dolore  concitatus
calce  petierit,  cessare  istam  actionem,  sed  eum,  qui  equum  percusserit
aut  vulneraverit,  in  factum  . . .  teneri  :  at  si  cum  equum  permulsisset  quis
vel  palpatus  esset,  calce  eum  percusserit,  erit  action!  locus'  Dig.  ib.  i.  7.
Damage  done  by  an  animal  which  fell  within  the  rule  was  treated  exactly
like  a  deUct  conunitted  by  a  slave :  'et  cum  etiam  in  quadrupedibus  noxa
caput  sequitur,  adversus  dominum  haec  actio  datur,  non  cuius  fuerit
quadrupes,  cum  noceret,  sed  cuius  nunc  est.  Plane  si  ante  litem  con-
testatam  decesserit  animal,  extincta  erit  actio '  Dig.  ib.  i.  12  and  13.  So
too  if  the  animal  died  naturally  or  by  accident,  the  owner's  liability  was
extinguished,  Dig.  ib.  16.

The  illustration  of  the  bear  might  lead  one  to  suppose  that  no  noxal
action  lay  where  the  animal  which  did  the  damage  was  ferae  naturae.  But
this  assumption  is  contradicted  in  the  text  bdow  (§  i  '  praeter  has  autem
aedilicias  actiones  et  de  pauperie  locum  habet ') ;  and  though  many  are
for  rejecting  this  as  bad  law,  it  seems  better  to  say  that  the  actio  de
pauperie  was  available  at  any  rate  in  the  case  of  an  animal  which,  though


Tit.  9.]  SI QUADRUPES  PAUPERIEM  FECISSE DICITUR.  587

et  SIC  nocuit,  non  potest  quondam  dominus  convcniri,  quia
desinit  dominus  esse,  ubi  fera  evasit  pauperies  autem  est
damnum  sine  iniuria  facientis  datum :  nee  enim  potest  animal
iniuriam  fecisse  diet,  quod  sensu  caret,  baec  quod  ad  noxalem
actionem  pertinet.

Ceterum  sciendum  est  aedilicio  edicto  prohiberi  nos  canem  1
verrem  aprum  ursum  leonem  ibi  habere,  qua  vulgo  iter  fit  :
et  si  adversus  ea  factum  erit  ct  nocitum  homini  libero  esse
dicetur,  quod  bonum  et  aequum  iudici  videtur,  tanti  dominus

by  birth  ferae  naturae,  no  longer  enjoyed  its  natural  liberty,  but  was  in
some  degree  tamed  or  domesticated,  and  so  in  doing  injury  might  be  said
to  be  acting  'against  its  nature.'

The  only  case  in  which  the  owner  of  a  domestic  beast  was  liable  for
damage  done  secundum  naturam  suam  was  where  grazing  animals  strayed
and  pastured  on  another's  land  (when  an  action  lay  under  the  Twelve
Tables),  or  fed  on  mast  which  fell  on  their  owner's  land  from  a  neigh-
bour's trees :  *  si  glans  ex  arbore  tua  in  meum  fundum  cadat,  eamque  ego
immisso  pecore  depascam,  Aristo  scribit,  non  sibi  occurrere  legitimam
actionem,  qua  experiri  possis,  nam  neque  ex  lege  duodecim  tabularum  de
pastu  pecoris,  quia  non  in  tuo  pascitur,  neque  de  pauperie,  neque  damni
iniuriae  agi  posse :  in  factum  itaque  erit  agendum '  Dig.  19.  5.  14.  3.

§  L  The  public  roads  were  tmder  the  special  charge  of  the  aediles.  Dig.

43.  10.    The  penalty  prescribed  in  the  edict  for  the  death  of  a  freeman  '
was  200  solidi ;  for  injury  other  than  death  a  sum  which  was  left  to  the
discretion  of  the  judge ;  for  all  other  damage  duplum.    The  action  under
this  edict  seems  to  have  been  popularis.

Two  or  more  actions  are  said  to  concur  when  one  and  the  same
material  claim  can  be  pursued  wholly  or  in  part  by  two  or  more  dis-
tinct remedies.  Examples  may  be  found  in  Tit.  6.  14,  Tit.  7.  5  supr.,  in
cases  of  passive  correal  and  solidary  obligation,  and  in  the  violation  of
different  rights  of  the  same  person  by  one  single  act,  as  where  a  borrower
damages  the  res  commodata,  thereby  exposing  himself  to  actio  commo-
dati  and  an  action  under  the  lex  Aquilia,  Dig.  13.  6.  7.  i.  The  principle
which  governs  such  cases  is  contained  in  the  maxim  'bona  fides  non
patitur,  ut  bis  idem  exigatur'  Dig.  50.  17.  57.  Hence,  if  one  action  is
brought  by  which  the  claim  is  fully  sisuisfied,  the  right  to  bring  the  other
is  extinguished ;  but  if  the  plaintiff  first  sues  by  the  one  which  gives  him
a  less  satisfaction  than  he  could  have  obtained  by  the  other,  the  other  can
yet  be  brought  for  the  difference:  'si  ex  eodem  facto  duae  competant
actiones,  postea  iudicis  potius  partes  esse,  ut  quo  plus  sit  in  reliqua
actione,  id  actor  ferat,  si  tantundem  aut  minus,  nil  consequatur'  Dig.

44.  7. 41.  I.

In  the  application  of  these  principles  to  penal  actions,  of  which  the
text  above  more  particularly  speaks,  a  distinction  must  be  drawn.    Some-


588  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRl  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

condemnetur,  ceterarum  rerum,  quanti  damnum  datum  sit,
dupli.  praeter  has  autem  aedilicias  actiones  et  de  pauperie
locum  habebit :  numquam  enim  actiones  praesertim  poenales
de  eadem  re  concurrentes  alia  aliam  consumit

times  when  more  rights  than  one  are  violated  by  one  and  the  same
unlawful  act,  this  act  can  be  analysed,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  into  as
many  separate  acts  as  there  are  rights  violated ;  and  in  such  a  case  the
penal  actions  which  lie  on  these  several  wrongs  exist  quite  independently
of  one  another,  and  can  be  separately  brought  in  solidum.  Illustrations
may  be  found  in  a  single  speech  which  slanders  two  or  more  persons.
Dig.  47.  10.  41 ;  in  the  theft  of  a  slave's  clothes,  through  which  he  dies  of
exposure,  Dig.  19.  5.  14.  i,  whene  the  actiones  fiuti  and  damni  iniuria
each  lie,  and  the  full  penalty  can  be  recovered  on  each  ;  and  in  Tit.  i.  8
supr.,  where  the  master  can  bring  both  actio  furti  and  actio  servi  cor-
rupti,  'nee  sufficiet,  alterutra  actione  egisse,  quia  altera  alterum  non
minuit'  Dig.  11.  3.  11.  2.

But  one  and  the  same  unlawful  act  may  be  ground  for  two  or  more
penal  actions  in  a  rather  different  manner ;  that  is  to  say,  each,  or  at  any
rate  one,  of  them  requires  the  whole  act  to  support  it  £.  g.  for  secretly
cutting  down  another's  trees  one  is  liable  under  both  the  Twelve  Tables
(de  arboribus  furtim  caesis)  and  the  lex  Aquilia;  and  so  too  the  same
act  will  often  support  an  action  on  either  theft  or  robbery.  To  admit
both  actions  in  such  cases  would  be  to  punish  at  least  part  of  the  un*
lawful  act  upon  which  they  are  based  twice  over ;  and  the  actual  practice
was  to  allow  the  person  wronged,  if  he  first  brought  the  action  by  which
he  could  recover  least,  to  subseqdently  bring  the  second  for  the  difference,
Dig.  44.  7.  41.  I  cited  supr.  The  application  of  this  principle  to  penal
actions  is  dearly  shown  by  the  following  passages  :  '  qui  servum  alienum
iniuriose  verberat,  ex  uno  facto  incidit  et  in  Aquiliam  et  in  actionem
iniuriarum :  iniuria  enim  ex  adfectu  fit,  damnum  ex  culpa,  et  ideo  pos*
sunt  utrae  competere :  sed  quidam  altera  electa  alteram  consumi :  alii
per  legis  Aquiliae  actionem  iniuriarum  consumi,  quoniam  desiit  bonum  et
aequum  esse  condemnari  eum,  qui  aestimationem  praestitit,  sed  si  ante
iniuriarum  actum  esset,  teneri  eum  ex  lege  Aquilia.  Sed  et  haec  sententia
per  praetorem  inhibenda  est,  nisi  in  id,  quod  amplius  ex  lege  Aquilia
competit,  agatur:  rationabilius  itaque  est,  eam  admitti  sententiam,  ut
liceat  ei  quam  voluerit  actionem  prius  exercere,  quod  autem  amplius  in
altera  est,  etiam  hoc  cixsequi'  Dig.  44.  7.  34.  pr.,  'si  furtim  arbores
caesae  sint,  et  ex  lege  Aquilia  ti  ex  duodecim  tabularum  dandam  ac-
tionem Labeo  ait.  Sed  Trebatius,  ita  utramque  dandam,  ut  index  in
posteriore  deducat  id,  quod  ex  prima  consecutus  sit,  et  reliquo  condemnet '
I^ig*  47-  ?•  I)  '  qui  rem  rapuit,  et  furti  nee  manifesti  tenetur  in  duplum,
et  vi  raptorum  in  quadruplum :  sed  si  ante  actum  sit  vi  bonorum  rap*
torum,  deneganda  est  furti,  si  ante  furti  actum  sit,  non  est  ilia  deneganda,
ut  tamen  id,  quod  amplius  in  ea  sit,  consequatur'  Dig.  47.  2.  88.  This
conclusion  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  contradicted  by  a  dictum  of  Mo*


Tit.io.]    DE  HIS  PER  QUOS  AGERE  POSSUMUS.         589

X.

DE  HIS  PER  QUOS  AGERE  POSSUMUS.

Nunc  admonendi  sumus  agere  posse  quemlibet  aut  suo
nomine  aut  alieno.  alieno  veluti  procuratorio  tutorio  cura-
torio,  cum  olim  in  usu  fuisset  alterius  nomine  agere  non  posse
nisi  pro  populo,  pro  libertate,  pro  tutela.  praeterea  lege
Hostilia  permissum  est  furti  agere  eorum  nomine,  qui  apud
hostes  essent  aut  rei  publicae  causa  abessent  quive  in  eorum
cuius  tutela  essent.  et  quia  hoc  non  minimam  incommodi-
tatem  habebat,  quod  alieno  nomine  neque  agere  neque  exci-
pere  actionem  licebat,  coeperunt  homines   per  procuratores


destinus,  'plura  delicta  in  una  re  plures  admittunt  actiones,  sed  non
posse  omnibus  uti  probatum  est:  nam  si  ex  una  obligatione  plures
actiones  nascuntur,  una  tantummodo,  non  omnibus  utendum  est'  Dig.
44*  7-  53*  pr*;  but  this  may  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  several  actions
cannot  all  be  brought  with  full  effect ;  and  the  proposition  would  be  true
invariably  if  the  injured  person,  where  he  had  an  alternative,  was  careful
enough  to  select  the  remedy  by  which  he  could  recover  the  heaviest
penalty.

•  Tit.  X.  Of  the  exceptions  to  the  old  rule  nemo  alieno  nomine  lege
agere  potest  (Dig.  50.  17.  133)  'pro  populo'  refers  to  the  actiones  popu-
lares, and  'pro  libertate'  includes  manumission  per vindictam,  p.  Ii7supr.
Nothing  further  is  known  of  the  lex  Hostilia.  What  is  meant  by  '  pro
tutela '  in  the  text  is  much  disputed :  Theophilus'  explanation  of  it  by
supposing  a  suit  between  two  or  more  persons  claiming  a  tutela  is
generally  rejected,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  right  to  understand  it  of
actions  brought  generally  by  the  tutor  in  relation  to  the  ward's  property.
The  Twelve  Tables  had  also  allowed  the  relations  of  a  person  who  had
suffered  an  aggravated  outrage  to  sue  for  talio  on  his  behalf,  p.  543  supr. ;
and  the  legis  actio  repetundarum  could,  under  the  statutes  by  which  it
was  regulated  (e.g.  Calpumia,  Servilia),  be  brought  by  a  Roman  citizen
on  behalf  of  the  persons  really  injured.

.  The  introduction  of  the  formulary  procedure  facilitated  representation
of  defendants  no  less  than  of  plaintiffs.  From  this  time  onward  it  was
allowed  by  the  praetor  with  but  slight  limitations  ;  the  desired  end  being
attained  by  the  principalis  name  appearing  in  the  intentio  of  the  formula,
the  agent's  in  the  condemnatio;  e.g.  'si  paret  Caium  Seio  (principal)
sestertium  decem  milia  dare  oportere,  index  Caium  Titio  (agent)  ses-
tertium  decem  milia  condemna  :  si  non  paret,  absolve '  (Gains  iv.  86,  87).
Of  such  agents  there  were  two  types.  The  older  of  these  is  the  cognitor,
who  was  appointed  for  a  single  action  (in  litem)  in  the  presence  of  the


590  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

litigare :  nam  et  morbus  et  aetas  et  necessaria  peregrinatio
itemque  aliae  multae  causae  saepe  impedimento  sunt,  quo
1  minus  rem  suam  ipsi  exsequi  possint.  Procurator  neque  certis
verbis  neque  praesente  adversario,  immo  plerumque  ignorante
eo  constituitur :  cuicumque  enim  permiseris  rem  tuam  agere


other  party,  certis  et  sollennibus  verbis,  the  formulae  of  which  are  pre*
served  by  Gaius  iv.  83.    There  could  thus  be  no  question  of  the  cogni tor's
authority,  and  consequently  he  was  identified  with  his  principal  through-
out ;  his  processual  acts  affected  the  latter  exactly  as  if  they  had  been  his
own  :  *  domini  loco  habetur '  Gaius  iv.  97.    The  other  is  the  procurator,
who  might  be  a  general  agent,  acting  even  without  commission  ;  '  quin
etiam  sunt  qui  putant  vel  eum  procuratorem  videri,  cui  non  sit  mandatumi
si  modo  bona  fide  accedat  ad  negotium,  et  caveat  rem  ratam  dominum
habiturum ;  igitur  etsi  non  edat  mandatum  procurator,  nihilominus  agere
posse,  quia  saepe  mandatum  initio  litis  in  obscuro  est,  et  postea  apud
tudicem  ostenditur'  Gaius  iv.  84.    The  procurator  thus  stood  upon  an
altogether  different  footing  from  the  cognitor,  for  the  alleged  principal  might
turn  out  to  be  no  principal  at  all,  or  at  any  rate  not  to  have  consented  to
the  agent's  bringing  or  defending  the  action  for  him :  consequendy,  he
was  not  identified  with  the  latter,  as  the  cognitor  was,  and  was  in  fact  the
real  party  to  the  action  himself.     Hence,  if  he  appeared  as  plaintiff,  the
principal's  right  of  action  was  not  consumed,  so  that  he  could  subse-
quently sue  upon  it  himself  (Gaius  iv.  98),  and  the  agent  alone  could
bring  actio  iudicati  against  the  defendant,  if  condemned,  Fragm.  Vat  317 ;
if  he  appeared  as  defendant,  it  was  he,  and  not  the  principal,  against
whom  the  actio  iudicati  must  be  brought  if  the  case  went  against  him*
The  general  consequence  of  this  non-identification  of  procurator  with  his
dominus  was  that  he  was  allowed  to  appear  as  plaintiff  or  defendant  only
upon  the  condition  that  the  other  party  to  the  acdon  was  fully  protected
against  the  risk  of  the  principal's  disowning  his  proceedings  by  subse-
quendy  suing  upon  the  same  ground  himself,  or  by  refusing  to  satisfy  an
adverse  judgment.    This  was  effected  by  the  system  of  security  described
in  the  next  Title.

Between  Gaius  and  Justinian  the  cognitor  disappeared,  and  when  there
was  no  doubt  that  a  procurator  really  was  what  he  held  himself  out  to  be,
this  form  of  representation  was  released  from  the  inconveniences  which
previously  had  attended  it,  Tit.  11.  3  inf.  Hence  arose  more  formal,
though  of  course  still  optional,  modes  of  appointing  such  agents,  the
observance  of  which  would  place  their  authority  beyond  all  doubt ;  e.g.
nomination  in  court,  note  on  Tit.  11.  4  inf. ;  registration  in  the  acta,  ib.  3,
or  a  written  notification  addressed  to  the  one  party  by  the  other,  coupled
with  an  undertaking  to  ratify  the  agent's  proceedings,  Dig.  3.  3.  65 ;
and  it  became  a  recognised  rule  that  where  the  piincipal's  authority  was
delegated  in  any  of  these  modes  his  right  of  action  was  consumed^
^m*  44*  2.  II.  7,  and  he  could  himself  bring,  or  be  sued  by,  the  actk»


Tit  II.]  DE  SATISDATIONIBUS.  591

aut  deferidere,  is  procurator  intell^itur.    Tutofes  et  curatoreS'2
quemadmodum  constituuntur,  primo  libro  expositum  est


XL

DE  SATISDATIONIBUS.

Satisdationum  modus  alius  antiquitati  placuit,  alium  novitas
per  usum  amplexa  est.

Olim  enim  si  in  rem  agebatur,  satisdare  possessor  com-
pellebatur,  ut,  si  victus  nee  rem  ipsam  restitueret  nee  litis
aestimationem,  potestas  esset  petitori  aut  cum  eo  agendi
aut  cum  fideiussoribus  eius.  quae  satisdatio  appellatur
iudicatum  solvi :  unde  autem  sic  appellatur,  facile  est  intel-
legere :  namque  stipulatur  quis,  ut  solveretur  sibi  quod
fuerit  iudicatum.     multo  magis  is,  qui  in  rem  actione  con-


iudicati,  Fragm.Vat.  331,  332.  The  latter  action  couid  still  be  brought
against  a  procurator  who  was  condemned  (unless  he  was  appointed  in
court,  Tit.  II.  4  inf.),  but  apparently  he  could  defend  himself  by  the
exceptio  doli.

The  word  '  quemlibet '  in  the  first  line  of  the  Title  is  not  literally  true ;
women  and  soldiers  could  be  procurators  only  in  rem  suam,  Tit.  13.  11
inf.;  and  persons  branded  with  inlamia  could  neither  be  represented
by  agents  themselves,  Frag.  Vat  333,  nor  as  a  rule  act  as  agents,  except
'  pro  libertate '  ib.  324.

§  2.  Under  the  older  law  tutors  and  curators  had  been  treated  like
procurators,  and  required  to  give  security  both  'ratam  rem  dominum
habiturum '  and  '  iudicatum  solvi ; '  though  Gaius  tells  us,  iv.  99  (cf.  Tit.
II.  pr.  inf.),  that  they  were  sometimes  excused.  Under  Justinian  they
stood  on  the  same  footing  with  procurators  whose  appointment  had  been
formal,  Dig.  26.  7.  2.  pr.

Tit.  XI.  Satisdatio  is  properly  a  species  of  recognisance  entered  into
by  stipulation  not  only  by  the  principal  party,  but  also  by  sureties  on  his
behalf,  their  liability  and  his  being  correal :  <  satisdare  dicimur  adversario
nostro  cum  pro  eo  quod  a  nobis  petiit  ita  cavit,  ut  eum  hoc  nomine
securum  faciamus  datis  fideiussoribus'  Dig.  2.  8.  i.  In  this  specific  sense
it  is  contrasted  in  §  2  inf,  with  noda  promissio  and  promissio  cum  iure-
iurando,  and  in  Dig.  46.  5.  7  with  pignoribus  datis  cavere.

In  real  actions  under  the  formulary  system  the  satisdatio  given  by
a  defendant  had  varied  with  the  form  of  the  action  itself.  If  this  was
formula  petitoria  the  name  of  the  security  was  iudicatum  solvi  (for  which
see  on  §  4  inf.) ;  if  it  was  per  sponsionem,  it  was  called  pro  praede  litis  et
vindiciarum,  Gaius  iv.  91,  94  a.    If  the  defendant  was  a  procurator,  he


593  INSTITOTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lih.IV,

veniebatur,  satisdare  cogebatur,  si  alieno  nomine  iudicium
accipiebat  Ipse  autem  qui  in  rem  agebat,  si  suo  nomine
petebat,  satisdare  non  cogebatur.  procurator  vero  si  in  rem
agebat,  satisdare  iubebatur  ratam  rem  dominum  habiturum  :
periculum  enim  erat,  ne  iterum  dominus  de  eadem  re  expe*
riatur.  tutores  et  curatores  eodem  modo  quo  et  procuratores
satisdare  debere  verba  edicti  faciebant.      sed  aliquando  his

1  agentibus  satisdatio  remittebatur.  Haec  ita  erant,  si  in  rem
agebatur.  sin  vero  in  personam,  ab  actoris  quidem  parte
eadem  optinebant,  quae  diximus  in  actione  qua  in  rem  agitur.
ab  eius  vero  parte  cum  quo  agitur  si  quidem  alieno  nomine
aliquis  intervenerit,  omnimodo  satisdaret,  quia  nemo  defensor
in  aliena  re  sine  satisdatione  idoneus  esse  creditur.  quod  si
proprio  nomine  aliquis  iudicium  accipiebat  in  personam,  iudi-
catum  solvi  satisdare  non  cogebatur.

2  Sed  haec  hodie  aliter  observantur.  sive  enim  quis  in  rem
actione  convenitur  sive  personali  suo  nomine,  nullam  satis-
dationem  propter  litis  aestimationem  dare  compellitur,  sed
pro  sua  tantum  persona,  quod  iudicio  permaneat  usque  ad

had  to  give  satisdatio  iudicatum  solvi  himself;  if  a  cognitor,'this  was  done
by  the  principal,  Gaius  iv.  loi.  A  cognitor  who  was  plaintiff  had  not,
like  a  procurator  in  the  same  position,  to  engage  *  ratam  rem  dominum
habiturum,'  because  he  was  domini  loco,  Gaius  iv.  97.

§  1.  To  Justinian's  statement  that  under  the  older  system  a  defendant
m  a  personal  action  who  appeared  himself  had  not  to  give  security  iudi-
catum solvi  there  are  some  exceptions.  He  had  to  do  so  'propter  genus
actionis'  in  the  actiones  iudicati  and  depensi;  when  he  was  sued  for
retaining  a  portion  of  the  divorced  wife's  dos  and  pleaded  her  immorality
(cum  de  moribus  mulieris  agetur) ;  and  probably  in  the  iudicium  fructua-
rium  in  a  double  interdict,  Gaius  iv.  169.  In  other  cases  the  defendant's
own  character  or  position  justified  the  suspension  of  the  ordinary  rule,
i.  e.  where  he  had  been,  was,  or  was  suspected  of  being  insolvent,  Gaius
iv.  102.

§  2.  Thus  the  engagement  entered  into  in  Justinian's  time  by  a
defendant  who  appeared  in  person  covered  the  ground  of  both  (i)  the
old  vadimonium  or  cautio  iudicio  sisti,  Gaius  iv.  185,  which  secured  the
api)earance  of  the  defendant  in  iure  in  cases  of  adjournment,  and  (2)  the
clause  de  re  defendenda  of  the  security  iudicatum  solvi ;  it  bound  him  to
appear  in  court  on  the  day  of  trial  and  defend  the  action  :  but  he  was  no
longer  required  to  guarantee  satisfaction  of  the  judgment.  The  ordinary
mode  of  entering  into  this  engagement  was  satisdatio ;  but  even  before
the  time  of  Gaius  the  praetor  had  drawn  distinctions  in  vadimonia,  being-


Tit,  11.]  DE  SATISDATIONIBUS.  593

terminum  litis,  vel  committitur  suae  promissioni  cum  iure*
iurando,  quam  iuratoriam  cautionem  vocant,  vel  nudam  pro->
missionem  vel  satisdationem  pro  qualitate  personae  suae  dare
compellitur.  Sin  autem  per  procuratorem  lis  vel  infertur  vel  3
suscipitur,  in  actoris  quidem  persona,  si  non  mandatum  actis
insinuatum  est  vel  praesens  dominus  litis  in  iudicio  procura-
toris  sui  personam  confirmaverit,  ratam  rem  dominum  habi-»
turum  satisdationem  procurator  dare  compellitur :  eodem
observando  et  si  tutor  vel  curator  vel  aliae  tales  personae,
quae  alienarum  rerum  gubernationem  receperunt,  litem  qui^
busdam  per  alium  inferunt  Sin  vero  aliquis  convenitur,  si  4
quidem  praesens  procuratorem  dare  paratus  est,  potest  vel
ipse  in  indicium  venire  et  sui  procuratoris  personam  per  iudi-
catum  solvl  satisdationis  soUemnes  stipulationes  firmare  vel
extra  indicium  satisdationem  exponere,  per  quam  ipse  sui
procuratoris  fideiussor  existit  pro  omnibus  iudicatum  solvl
satisdationis  clausulis.  ubi  et  de  hypotheca  suarum  rerum
convenire  compellitur,  sive  in  iudicio  promiserit  sive  extra
indicium  caverit,  ut  tam  ipse  quam  heredes  eius  obligentur :

satisfied  in  some  cases  with  a  merely  personal  undertaking  without  sure-*
ties  (vadimonium  purum),  and  in  others  with  such  undertaking  fortified
by  the  oath  or  by  a  summary  process  for  the  recovery  of  the  recognisance
('  recuperatoribus  suppositis '  Gains  iv.  185).  Under  Justinian  landowners
(Dig.  2.  8,  15)  and  personae  iUustres  (Cod.  12.  i.  17)  could  be  compelled
to  bind  themselves  '  in  iudicio  permanere  usque  ad  terminum  litis '  only  by
a  written  cautio  iuratoria;  it  is  not  clear  who  were  privileged  to  give
a  bare  promise  to  this  effect,  though  the  edict  seems  to  have  contained
careful  regulations  on  the  subject,  Gaius  loc.  cit. :  '  pro  tenore  generalium
edictorum'  Cod.  12.  22.  8.

§  3.  The  general  principle  as  to  when  a  procurator  who  appears  as
plaintiff  must  give  security  ratam  rem  dominum  habiturum  is  found  in
Cod.  2.  13.  I  ^cautio  ratihabitionis  tunc  exigitur  a  procuratore,  quotiens
incertum  e$t  an  ei  negotium  mandatum  est,'  cf.  Dig.  3.  4.  6.  3  '  si  de  de-
creto  dubitetur,  puto  interponendam  et  de  rato  cautionem.'  The  agent
was  also  exempted  where  his  appointment  was  notified  by  letter  to  the
other  party,  note  on  Tit.  10,  pr.  supr.,  or  was.  evidenced  by  a  libellus
addressed  to  the  emperor,  Dig.  46.  8.  21.

§  4.  The  meaning  of  ^  praesens '  is  supplied  by  Dig.  3. 3. 5*  7  :  *  praesens
habetur  et  qui  in  hortis  est  et  qui  in  urbe  et  in  continentibus  aedificiis :  et
ideo  procurator  eius  praesentis  esse  videtur/  Thus  if  the  procurator
were  appointed  by  the  defendant  himself  in  court,  he  was  in  the  same
position  as  a  defendant's  cognitor  under  the  older  system  (Gaius  iv.  loi):

Qq


594  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRl  QUATTUOR.     [Ub.  IV.

alia  insuper  caiitela  vel  satisdatione  propter  personam  ipsius
exponenda,  quod  tempore  sententiae  recitandae  in  iudido
invenietur,  vel  si  non  venerit,  omnia  dabit  fideiussor,  quae

5  condemnatione  continentur,  nisi  fuerit  provocatum.  Si  vero
reus  praesto  ex  quacumque  causa  non  fuerit  et  alius  velit
defensionem  subire,  nulla  differentia  inter  actiones  in  rem  vel
personales  introducenda  potest  hoc  facere,  ita  tamen  ut  satis-
dationem  iudicatum  solvi  pro  litis  praestet  aestimatione.
nemo  enim  secundum  veterem  r^ulam,  ut  iam  dictum  est,
alienae   rei   sine   satisdatione   defensor  idoneus   intellegitur.

6  Quae  omnia  apertius  et  perfectissime  a  cottidiano  iudiciorum

7  usu  in  ipsis  rerum  documentis  apparent.  Quam  formam  non
solum  in  hac  regia  urbe,  sed  et  in  omnibus  nostris  provinciis,


his  principal,  not  he,  had  to  give  security  iudicatum  solvi,  either  alone
(cautio)  or  with  sureties  (satisdatio).  If  he  were  appointed  out  of  court  by
a  'present'  d^endant,  he  had  to  give  security  himself^  and  his  principal
was  his  surety  (fideiussor) :  '  in  rem  suam  fideiubeant,  ut  pro  sue  procu.
ratore '  Dig.  2. 8. 8. 1.  The  security  consisted  of  three  clauses :  '  iudicatum
solvi  stipulatio  tres  clausulas  in  unum  coUatas  habet :  de  re  iudicata,  de  re
defendenda,  de  dolo  malo '  Dig.  46.  7.  6.  By  the  first  of  these  the  man
engaged,  in  case  the  action  went  against  him,  to  restore  the  property  to
which  it  related,  or  pay  the  damages  assessed  by  the  judge  (Gains  iv.  89):
by  the  second,  he  promised  to  defend  the  action :  by  the  third,  to  indem-
nify the  plaintiff  against  malicious  deterioration  of  the  disputed  property
while  in  his  hands.  A  difficulty  is  raised  by  the  passage  in  the  text  which
accounts  for  the  compulsory  hypotheca  by  the  desire  to  bind  the  real
defendant's  heirs,  for  they  were  in  point  of  fact  already  bound  by  his
engagement  iudicatum  solvi.  Perhaps  this  is  to  be  explained  by  suppose
ing  that  formerly  the  sureties  in  this  security  were  sponsors  or  fide*
promissors,  whose  liability  did  not  descend  to  their  successors  (Gains  iii.
]  20),  and  that  these  lines  have  been  transcribed  from  some  old  jurist  into
the  Institutes  by  an  oversight

§  5.  A  defensor  was  a  person  who  vinthout  commission  undertook  the
defence  of  another  who  through  absence,  insanity,  minority,  or  some
other  cause  neglected,  or  was  unable,  to  appear  for  himselL  Litis  con*
testatio  with  the  volunteer  released  the  real  defendant  from  all  liability :
'  solutione  vel  indicium  pro  nobis  accipiendo  et  inviti  et  ignorantes  liberari
possumus'  Dig.  46. 3.  23 ;  cf.  Dig.  15.  3.  10.  i.

§  7.  Cf.  Justinian's  comment  on  Zeno*s  constitution  de  aedifidis  privatis

in  Cod.  8. 10. 13  'indignum  esse  nostro  tempore  putantes  aliud  ius  in  hat

regia  civitate  de  huiusmodi  observari,  aliud  apud  nostros  esse  provinci-

ales,  sancimus  eandem  constitutionem  in  omnibus  urbibus  Romani  imperii

•optinere.'


tit.  1 2-]    DE  PERPETUIS  ET  TEMPORAL/BUS,  ETC.    595

etsi  propter  imperitiam  aliter  forte  celebrabantur,  bptinere
censetnus,  ciim  necesse  est  omnes  provincias  caput  omnium
nostrarum  civitatum,  id  est  banc  regiam  urbem,  eiusque  obser-
vantiam  sequi.

XIL

DE  PERPETUIS  ET  TEMPORALIBUS  ACTIONIBUS  ET  QUAE
AD  HEREDES  VEL  IN   HEREDES  TRANSEUNT.

Hoc  loco  admonendi  sumus  eas  quidem  actiones,  quae  ex
lege  senatusve  consulto  sive  ex  sacris  constitutionibus  profi-
ciscuntur,  perpetuo  solere  antiquitus  competere,  donee  sacrae
constitutiones  tarn  in  rem  quam  personalibus  actionibus  certos
fines  dederunt :  eas  vero,  quae  ex  propria  praetoris  iurisdic-
tione  pendent,  plerumque  intra  annum  vivere  (nam  et  ipsius
praetoris  intra  annum  erat  imperium).  aliquando  tamen  et
in  perpetuum  extenduntur,  id  est  usque  ad  finem  constitu-
tionibus introductum :  quales  sunt  hae,  quas  bonorum  pos-
sessori  ceterisque  qui  heredis  loco  sunt  accommodat  furti
quoque  manifesti  actio,  quamvis  ex  ipsius  praetoris  iurisdic-
tione  proficiscatur,  tamen  perpetuo  datur:  absurdum    enim

Tit.  XIL  Originally  all  actions  were  perpetuae.  Substantive  'ante*
cedent  or  sanctioned '  rights  might  be  destroyed  by  lapse  of  time,  e.  g.
that  of  the  dominus  by  usucapio,  and  that  of  a  creditor  against  a  sponsor
or  fidepromissor  under  the  two-year  limitation  of  the  lex  Furia,  p.  429
supr. :  but  there  was  no  rule  of  law  providing  that  rights  of  action  should
be  barred  unless  issue  were  joined  within  a  definite  period  from  their
accrual.

The  praetor,  however,  provided  that  many  of  the  new  actions  which
he  introduced  through  the  edict  should  lie  only  within  an  annus  utilis
from  the  moment  at  which  they  first  accrued,  though  between  this  period
and  his  own  limited  tenure  of  office  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the
connection  suggested  by  Justinian  in  the  text.  By  far  the  most  important
class  of  these  annales  actiones  are  the  praetorian  penal  actions,  with  the
exception  of  that  on  furtum  manifesttun,  which  remained  perpetua  be-
cause it  was  in  commutation  of  a  capital  penalty,  Gaius  iv.  iii,  iii.  189;
but  even  these  were  perpetuae  so  far  as  they  were  brought  only  to  deprive
the  delinquent  of  any  benefit  he  had  derived  from  his  wrong :  '  in  hono-
rariis  actionibus  sic  esse  definiendum  Cassius  ait,  ut  quae  rei  persecutionem
habeant,  hae  etiam  post  annum  darentur,  ceterae  intra  annum '  Dig.  44. 7.
35.  pr.  Praetorian  actions  which  were  merely  unilaterally  penal  (e.g.
actio  doli)  were  prescribed  in  such  a  year  if  contra  ius  civile,  Dig.  ib.

Qqa


596  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

1  esse  existimavit  anno  earn  terminari.  Non  omnes  autem
actiones,  quae  in  aliquem  aut  ipso  iure  competunt  aut  a  prae-
tore  dantur,  et  in  heredem  aeque  competunt  aut  dari  solent.
est  enim  certissima  iuris  regula  ex  maleficiis  poenales  actiones
in  heredem  non  competere,  veluti  furti,  vi  bonorum  raptorum,
iniuriarum,  damn!  iniuriae.    sed  heredibus  huiusmodi  actiones


Interdicts,  so  far  as  they  were  penal,  were  similarly  limited :  the  actiones
populares  were  all  annates,  Dig.  47.  23.  8 :  and  the  limitation  of  the
aedilician  actions  on  sale  has  been  already  noticed,  p.  441  supr.,  as  also
has  the  longi  temporis  praescriptio  relating  to  actions  for  the  recovery  of
property  which  had  been  for  a  defined  time  in  the  hands  of  a  bona  fide
possessor  with  iustus  titulus,  p.  231  supr.  In  course  of  time  too  a  pre-
scription was  fixed  by  disconnected  legislation  for  other  actions,  in
particular  one  of  five  years  for  the  querella  inofficiosi  testamenti,  Cod.  3.
28.  36.  2 :  Dig.  5.  2.  8.  17.  Actions  which  fell  under  the  old  rule  were
called  perpetuae,  those  which  were  limited  by  any  of  these  periods
temporales.

More  systematic  legislation  upon  this  matter  commenced  with  Con-
stantine,  who  enacted  that  all  real  actions  which  were  not  already  limited
might  be  repelled  by  an  exceptio  unless  brought  within  forty  years,  Cod.
7.  39.  2,  which  subsequently  seems  to  have  been  reduced  to  thirty,  the
time  here  being  not  utile  but  continuum.  In  A.D.  424  Theodosius  sub-
jected to  this  same  thirty  years'  limit  all  actions  whatsoever,  with  a  few
exceptions,  which  had  hitherto  been  perpetuae,  Cod.  ib.  3.  This  rule  is
in  force  under  Justinian,  the  only  actions  of  importance  which  are  not
governed  by  it  being  vindicatio  in  libertatem,  Cod.  7.  22.  3,  and  fiscal
claims  for  unpaid  taxes,  Cod.  7.  39.  6,  which  continued  perpetual  in  the
old  sense;  so  that  in  his  compilations  actio  perpetua  means  an  action
which  is  barred  by  lapse  of  not  less  than  thirty  years.

For  the  remedies  of  the  bonorum  possessor  and  other  praetorian  suc-
cessors who  feigned  themselves  heirs  see  Gains  iv.  34,  35.

§  L  A  right  of  action  which,  though  not  exercised  by  the  person  to
whom  it  originally  accrued,  may  still  be  exercised  by  his  heir,  is  said  to
be  actively  transmissible ;  one  which,  though  not  exercised  against  the
person  originally  liable,  may  still  be  exercised  against  his  heir,  is  said  to
be  passively  transmissible.

Active  transmission,  as  Justinian  remarks,  is  the  rule.  Those  rights
of  action  only  are  excepted  (of  which  the  actio  iniuriarum  is  here  taken
as  a  tyi)e)  which  are  grounded  not  on  a  damnum  or  injury  to  property,
but  on  a  grievance  or  insult  to  the  person ;  e.g.  among  others  (as  a  rule)
the  querella  inofficiosi  testamenti.  Dig.  5.  2.  6.  2,  and  the  remedy  of
a  patron  or  pater  against  a  freedman  or  child  who  commenced  legal
proceedings  against  him  without  the  praetor's  permission.  Tit  16.  3  inf.
The  point  of  the  distinction  is  well  put  by  Theophilus,  twBa  yap  rd  y€v6-
fuivop  dfjMpTfjfta  tkoTTOi  rijy  rov  luWoyros  rcXcvr^  ntpiovaittw,  r&n  mt  i


Tit  12.]    DE  PERPETUIS  ET  TEMPORAUBUS,  ETC.    597

competunt  nee  denegantur,  excepta  iniuriarum  actione  et  si
qua  alia  similis  inveniatur.  aliquando  tamen  etiam  ex  con-
tractu actio  contra  heredem  non  competit,  cum  testator  dolose
versatus  sit  et  ad  heredem  eius  nihil  ex  eo  dolo  pervenerit.
poenales  autem  actiones,  quas  supra  diximus,  si  ab  ipsis
principalibus  personis  fuerint  contestatae,  et  heredibus  dantur


K\ripow6/i09y  ttff  awabiKovfuvoty  Trjv  air6  rod  dftapT^ftaTOS  ayaryffv  iuvffa€i  •  •  .
^Entibrf  •  .  .  ov  fuiol  rriv  vnoarafTiVy  thcoTois  Kal  6  xKripoydftos  6  ffi6ty  dtf  fifj
awabucrjBtis,  Tavrtfu  ovx  c£<i«

The  chief  exceptions  to  passive  transmission  are  the  actiones  populares.
Dig.  47.  23.  7.  8,  and  (as  is  observed  in  the  text)  penal  actions  arising  ex
delicta  Actions  which  are  purely  poenae  persecutoriae  are  passively
transmissible  only  when  they  are  absolutely  the  only  remedy  on  the
wrong  (e.g.  the  actio  on  calumnia,  Dig.  3.  6.  5.  pr.),  and  then  only  so  far
as  the  inheritance  has  been  enriched  thereby ;  and  this  same  principle  of
the  liability  of  the  heir  to  the  extent  to  which  the  inheritance  has  been
benefited  applies  also  to  actions  (i)  which,  though  grounded  on  delict,
are  purely  rei  persecutoriae  (e.  g.  actio  doli,  Dig.  4.  3.  17.  I,  quod  metus
causa.  Dig.  4. 2.  16.  2) ;  (2)  which  are  mixtae,  except  where  an  action
which  is  purely  rei  persecutoria  lies  on  the  same  delict  (e.  g.  the  condictio
furtiva  on  rapina,  Dig.  47.  8.  2.  27).  Condictio  furtiva,  not  being  based
on  delict,  lies  against  the  thiefs  heir  in  solidum,  Tit.  i.  19  supr.,  Dig.  13.
I.  7.  2  ;  ib.  9.

The  examples  given  by  Gaius  (iv.  113)  of  actions  which,  though  arising
ex  contractu,  are  either  actively  or  passively  untransmissible,  create  no
difficulty :  *  adstipulatoris  heres  non  habet  actionem,  et  sponsoris  et  fide-
promissoris  non  tenetur.*  But  Justinian's  statement  in  the  text  that  where
a  party  to  a  contract  has  been  guilty  of  dolus  his  heir  is  not  suable,  if  he
has  personally  derived  no  advantage  from  the  fraud,  is  contradicted  by
a  large  number  of  passages  in  the  Corpus  iuris ;  e.g.  Dig.  50. 17. 157. 2  *in
contractibus  successores  ex  dolo  eorum,  quibus  successerunt,  non  tantum
in  id  quod  pervenit,  verum  etiam  in  solidum  tenentur,'  Dig.  44.  7.  12
(which  disproves  Theophilus'  explanation  of  this  passage  by  the  actio
depositi) '  et  depositi  et  conunodati  et  mandati  et  tqtelae  et  negotiorum
gestoram  ob  dolum  malum  defuncti  heres  in  solidum  tenetur,'  ib.  49  '  ex
contractibus  venientes  actiones  in  heredes  dantur,  licet  delictum  quoque
versetur.'  It  may  be  that  the  passage  was  taken  into  the  text  of  the
Institutes  from  Gaius  without  the  obsolete  example  which  alone  could
give  it  a  semblance  of  truth  ;  but  it  is  better  to  understand  it  of  cases  in
which  fraud  was  not  remediable  by  the  ordinary  action  on  the  contract
(i.e.  stricti  iuris  contracts)  but  only  by  the  actio  doii ;  this  being  sup-
ported by  Dig.  4.  3.  17.  I  'haec  actio  (doli)  in  heredem  datur . . .  de  eo
quod  ad  eos  pervenit.'  Upon  this  interpretation  the  expression  '  ex  con-
tractu actio'  of  course  is  loose;  all  it  means  is  that  a  delictal  action
arising  from  fraud  in  contractual  relations  lies  in  heredem  only  so  far  as


598  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

2  et  contra  heredes  transeunt.  Superest  ut  admoneamus,  quod
si  ante  rem  iudicatam  is  cum  quo  actum  est  satisfaciat  actori,
officio  iudicis  convenit  eum  absolvere,  licet  iudicii  accipiendi
tempore  in  ea  causa  fuisset,  ut  damnari  debeat :  et  hoc  est,
quod  ante  vulgo  dicebatur,  omnia  indicia  absolutoria  esse.

the  inheritance  has  been  enriched  by  the  fraud  itself— a  principle  which
has  been  already  stated.

There  is  no  question  of  transmission  when  the  action  has  once
reached  the  stage  of  litis  contestatio ;  from  that  moment,  whatever  its
character,  it  bound  and  entitled  the  heirs  of  the  defendant  and  plaintiff
respectively  in  every  case.

§  2.  The  truth  of  the  dictum  '  omnia  iudicia  esse  absolutoria,'  which
means  that  even  where  the  defendant  is  proved  to  have  been  in  the
wrong  the  trial  must  end  in  absolution  '  si  ante  rem  iudicatam  satisfaciat
actori'  (Gaius  iv.  114),  had  been  disputed  by  the  jurists.  The  Sabinians
had  affirmed  it  in  its  entirety  ;  the  other  school  admitted  it  in  real  and
bonae  fidei  actions,  Gaius  loc.  cit.,  but  from  all  others  they  had  excluded
it  as  inconsistent  with  the  duty  of  the  iudex  as  laid  down  in  the  formula.
In  this  he  was  instructed  to  condemn  the  defendant  if  he  found  that,  at
the  date  of  litis  contestatio,  he  was  bound  by  the  obligation  alleged  by  the
plaintiff:  si  paret  .  .  .  condemna.  His  duty  therefore  was  plain:  no
occurrence  subsequent  to  litis  contestatio  could  justify  him  in  absolving
the  defendant  if  the  plaintiff  made  out  his  case,  not  even  full  satisfaction
of  the  latter's  claim  before  the  termination  of  the  action.  The  cmly
liability  of  the  defendant  which  could  be  cancelled  by  such  satis&ction
was  his  liability  as  it  existed  before  litis  contestatio,  and  that  had  been
already  destroyed  by  the  novative  operation  of  litis  contestatio  itsell
Thus  the  difficulty  which  the  Proculians  felt  in  admitting  the  maxim  in
its  generality  arose  entirely  from  the  formula,  and  consequently  with  the
disappearance  of  the  formula  the  difficulty  disappeased  also,  and  the  rule
became  universal.

A  topic  treated  by  Gaius  in  close  connection  with  the  limitation  of
actions  b  their  Pendency ;  the  question  of  the  duration  of  actions  which
have  once  been  conunenced  by  litis  contestatio.  All  actions  were  for
this  purpose  divided  in  his  time  into  two  classes ;  those  '  quae  legitimo
iure  consistunt,'  and  those  '  quae  imperio  continentur.'  The  former  are
all  actions  which  were  tried  within  the  first  milestone  from  Rome  by
a  single  iudex  who  was  a  Roman  citizen,  and  all  the  parties  to  which
were  citizens  also ;  they  were  required  by  the  lex  lulia  iudiciaria  to  be
adjudged  within  eighteen  months  of  litis  contestatio,  though  previously
they  do  not  seem  to  have  been  limited,  Cic  pro  Quinctio  13  (*et  hoc  est
quod  vulgo  dicitur,  e  lege  lulia  litem  anno  et  sex  mensibus  mori '  Gaius
iv.  104).  The  latter  comprised  all  actions  tried  outside  the  first  mile-
stone, and  also  those  tried  within  it  by  more  than  one  judge  (e.g.  by
recuperatores)  or  in  which  the  judge  or  any  party  was  a  peregrinus;
they  fell  to  the  ground  unless  judgment  was  delivered  before  the  magis*


Tit.  13.1  DE  EXCEPTION IBUS  59s)


XIII.

DE  EXCEPTIONIBUS.

Sequitur^  ut  de  exceptionibus  dispiciamus.  comparatae  sunt
autem  exceptiones  defendendorum  eorum  gratia,  cum  quibus
agitur :  saepe  enim  accidit,  ut^  licet  ipsa  persecutio  qua  actor
experitur  iusta  sit,  tamen  iniqua  sit  adversus  eum  cum  quo

trate  who  gave  the  formula  vacated  office :  '  tamdiu  valent,  quamdiu  is
qui  ea  praecepit  imperium  habebit '  Gaius  ib.  105.  Where  the  iudicium
was  legitimum,  in  personam,  and  had  an  intentio  in  ius  concepta,  no
subsequent  action  would  lie  on  the  same  g^und ;  in  all  other  cases  the
plaintiff  could  sue  again,  but  could  be  repelled  by  exceptio  rei  iudicatae
or  in  iudicium  deductae,  ib.  106,  107.  The  twenty  years'  suit  spoken  of
by  Martial  (7.  65)  was  probably  prolonged  to  this  inordinate  length  by
a  series  of  appeals ;  suits  tried  extra  ordinem  (not  being  iudicia)  were  of
course  not  subject  to  these  rules,  nor  apparently  were  actions  tried  in  the
centumviral  court :  *  iudicia  centumvindia,  quibus  peragendis  vix  suffec-
tura  litigatonim  aetas  videbatur'  Suetonius,  Vesp.  la

The  rules  of  Pendency  described  by  Gaius  went  out  of  use  with  the
formulary  procedure.  Constantine  appears  to  have  put  it  in  the  power
of  a  defendant  to  compel  his  plaintiff  to  bring  the  cause  to  judgment
within  two  years  from  its  commencement  (Cod.  Theod.  2.  15),  which  was
extended  to  three  by  Justinian,  who  also  introduced  a  summary  pro*
cedure  enabling  a  party  to  put  a  stop  to  unreasonable  delay  on  the  part

of  his  opponent :   '  censemus  omnes  lites ,  exceptis  tantummodo

causis  quae  ad  ius  fiscale  pertinent,  vel  quae  ad  publicas  respiciunt
functiones,  non  ultra  triennii  metas  post  litem  contestatam  esse  protra*
hendas'  Cod.  3.  i.  13.  i.  If  both  parties  let  an  action  drop  after  its
commencement,  it  could  be  resumed  at  any  moment  within  forty  years :
'quod  tempus,  id  est,  quadraginta  annorum  spatium,  ex  eo  numerari
decemimus,  ex  quo  novissima  processit  cognitio,  postquam  utraque  pars
cessavit '  Cod.  7.  39.  9.  3.

Tit  Xm.  The  general  nature  of  exceptiones,  and  the  form  which
they  assumed  under  the  system  of  formulae,  are  described  in  Excursus  X
inf.  Under  Justinian  the  term  still  denotes  the  plea  by  which  a  defendant
who  cannot  deny  the  existence  of  the  plaintiffs  right  of  action  (ipso  iure
actionem  non  habere)  argues  that  it  cannot  be  exercised  with'  effect  in
consequence  of  his  possessing  a  countervailing  right  by  which  it  is
balanced:  'exceptio  dicta  est  quasi  quaedam  exdusio,  quae  opponi
actioni  cuiusque  rei  solet  ad  excludendum  id  quod  in  intentionem  con-
demnationemve  deductimi  est'  Dig.  44.  i.  2.  pr.  But,  besides  losing  its
old  formal  or  processual  meaning  as  an  element  in  the  formula,  even
the  old  material  signification  of  the  term,  as  a  plea  in   defence  of


6oo  IXSTITUTIOXVM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

1  agitur*  Verbi  gratia  si  mctu  coactus  aut  dolo  inductus  aut
errore  lapsus  stipulaoti  Titio  promisisd,  quod  noa  debueras
promittere,  palam  est  iure  civill  te  obligatum  esse  ct  actio.


a  cotmtervailing  right,  has  now  become  less  prominent  owing  to  a
distinction  which  has  arisen  between  defences  which  rdate  to  the  pco-
cedure,  and  defences  which  rather  meet  the  plaintiff's  case  upon  its
merits.  Among  the  former  are  objections  touching  the  competence  or
impartiality  of  the  court,  the  person  of  the  plaintiff  (e.  g.  ezceptio  procn-
ratoria),  the  fonn  of  the  action,  and  the  exceptio  piadudidL  These
must  be  advanced  and  aigued  before  litis  contesCatio,  the  opening  of  the
case  by  narratio  and  contradictio,  for  if  they  are  shown  to  be  well
grounded  the  action  cannot  proceed.  Defences  of  the  second  class,
whether  they  directly  traverse  the  plaintiff's  contention,  or  merely  allege
a  countervailing  right  in  the  defendant,  need  not  be  advanced  tiD  litis
contestatio ;  the  result  of  this  being  that  the  term  exceptio  is  sometimes
improperly  used  to  denote  what  is  really  an  absolute  denial  of  the
plaintiff^s  right ;  e.  g.  exceptio  longi  temporis  after  ten  or  twenty  years'
bona  fide  possession  by  a  defendant  with  iustus  titulus.

Dilatory  exceptions  (§  lo  inf.)  belonging  to  this  latter  class  of  defences
must  always  be  advanced  at  the  litis  contestatio,  and  any  attempt  to
bring  them  forward  for  the  first  time  at  a  later  stage  of  the  proceedings
was  punished  by  a  fine  indicted  on  the  counsel ;  but  no  evidence  need  be
given  in  their  support  till  the  plaintiff  has  proved  his  own  case :  'excep-
tionem  dilatoriam  opponi  quidem  initio,  probari  vero  postquam  actor
monstraverit  quod  asseverat  oportet'  Cod.  4.  19.  19.  For  the  general
procedure  see  §  10  inf.  and  notes.

Peremptory  exceptions  (§  9  inf.)  also  as  a  rule  are  advanced  in  the  con-
tradictio, at  the  opening  of  the  case,  and  similarly  need  not  be  proved
till  the  plaintiff  has  established  his  own  contention,  Cod.  7.  33.  9 ;  but
the  defendant  may  always  bring  them  forward  later,  and  may  even
allege  them  for  the  first  time  on  appeal :  '  si  quid  autem  in  agendo
negotio  minus  se  allegasse  litigator  crediderit,  quod  in  iudido  acto
fuerit  omissum  apud  eum  qui  de  appellatione  cognoscit  persequatur'
Cod.  7.  62.  6.  I.

§  L  For  the  introduction  of  the  exceptio  quod  metus  causa  by  the
praetor  Octavius  see  on  Tit.  6.  33  supr.  A  person  who  had  been  induced
by  intimidation  to  make  any  disposition  (and  not  merely  a  contract,  as
might  hastily  be  inferred  from  the  text ;  see  Gaius  iv.  117)  could  either
bring  the  actio  quod  metus  causa  (Tit.  6.  27  supr.)  by  which  he  might
recover  penal  damages  for  any  loss  he  had  suffered,  or  he  could  repel
any  action  brought  against  him  on  the  disposition  by  the  exceptio  (which,
however,  was  not  necessary  in  bonae  fidei  actions,  Cod.  4.  44.  S),  or
finally  he  might  get  himself  in  integrum  restitutus.  With '  palam  est  iure
civil!  te  obligatum  esse '  in  the  text  we  may  compare  Dig.  4.  2.  21.  5  'si
metu  coactus  adii  hereditatem,  puto  heredem  me  efiici,  quamvis  si
liberum  esset  noluissem,  tamen  coactus  volui.'


Tit.  13.]  DE  EXCEPTIONIBUS.  601

qua  intenditur  dare  te  oportere,  efficax  est :  sed  iniquum  est
te  condemnari  ideoque  datur  tibi  exceptio  metus  causa  aut
doll  mali  aut  in  factum  composita  ad  impugnandam  actionem.
Idem  iuris  est,  si  quis  quasi  credendi  causa  pecuniam  stipu-  2
latus  fuerit  neque  numeravit.  nam  earn  pecuniam  a  te  petere
posse  eum  certum  est :  dare  enim  te  oportet,  cum  ex  stipulatu
tenearis:  sed  quia  iniquum  est  eo  nomine  te  condemnari,
placet  exceptione  pecuniae  non  numeratae  te  defendi  debere,
cuius  tempora  nos,  secundum  quod  iam  superioribus  libris
scriptum  est,  constitutione  nostra  coartavimus,  Praeterea  3
debitor  si  pactus  fuerit  cum  creditore,  ne  a  se  peteretur,  nihilo
minus  obligatus  manet,  quia  pacto  convento  obligationes  non


What  has  been  said  of  metus  may,  mutatis  mutandis,  be  repeated  of
dolus ;  see  the  note  on  Tit.  6.  33  referred  to.  Here  the  fraud  had  to  be
alleged  specifically  against  the  plaintiff  in  the  exceptio ;  '  et  quidem  iUud
adnotandum  est,  quod  specialiter  exprimendum  est,  de  cuius  dolo  quis
queratur,  non  in  rem,  "  si  in  ea  re  nihil  dolo  malo  factum  est,"  sed  sic
"  si  in  ea  re  nihil  dolo  malo  actoris  factum  est "  '  Dig.  44.  4.  2.  i ;  cf.  (of
the  actio  doli)  '  in  haec  actione  designari  oportet  cuius  dolo  factum  sit,
quamvis  in  metu  non  sit  necesse  *  Dig.  4.  3.  1 5.  3.  Where  to  *  nihil  dolo
malo  factum  est '  was  added  ' neque  fiat'  (as  in  Gaius  iv.  119)  the  exceptio
was  said  to  be  generalis.

If  the  defendant's  plea  was  not  one  of  the  commoner  kinds  which  had
eceived  specific  names,  it  briefly  stated  the  facts  upon  which  he  relied,
and  was  then  said  to  be  in  factum  composita :  '  in  factum  Xc^erai  f trctd^
tifiyrffiariK&s  ro  y€v6fi€vop  aamriBriaip '  Theophilus  ;  so,  too,  Gaius  describes
formulae  in  &ctum  conceptae  by  saying  ^  nominato  eo  quod  factum  est '
iv.  46 ;  for  an  example  see  Fragm.  Vat.  310  '  si  non  donationis  causa  man-
cipavi  vel  promisi  me  daturum.'  In  a  loose  sort  of  way  these  except iones
in  factum  were  comprised  under  the  exceptio  doli :  '  generaliter  sciendum
est  ex  omnibus  in  factum  exceptionibus  doli  oriri  exceptionem,  quia  dolo
facit,  quicunque  id  quod  quaqua  exceptione  elidi  potest  petit '  Dig.  44.  4.
2.  5.  It  may  be,  however,  that  the  contrast  is  merely  the  old  one  between
in  ius  and  in  factum,  the  judge's  attention  being  directed  in  some  excep-
tiones  to  a  question  merely  of  law  (e.  g. '  si  in  ea  re  nihil  contra  legem
Cinciam  factum  sit '  Fragm.  Vat.  310) ;  this,  as  Keller  remarks  (Civil
Process  §  35),  would  make  most  exceptions  in  factum.

§  2.  The  appropriate  defence  in  this  case  is  said  by  Gaius  (iv.  1 16)  to
be  the  exceptio  doli.  If  the  transaction  had  purported  to  be  a  mere
mutuum,  not  a  stipulatio,  no  exceptio  would  have  been  necessary ;  the
plaintiff's  right  to  recover  lay  only  upon  the  assumption  that  the  money
had  actually  been  advanced,  so  that  the  defendant  would  simply  stand  by
and  require  him  to  prove  it,  for  otherwise  he  could  not  show  '  (reum)  dare


6o2  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

omnimodo  dissolvuntur :  qua  de  causa  efficax  est  adversus
eum  actio^  qua  actor  intendit  '  si  paret  eum  dare  oportere.*
sed  quia  iniquum  est  contra  pactionem  eum  damnari,  de-

4  fenditur  per  exceptionem  pacti  conventi.  Aeque  si  debitor
deferente  creditore  iuraverit  nihil  se  dare  oportere,  adhuc  obli-
gatus  permanet,  sed  quia  iniquum  est  de  periurio  quaeri,
defenditur  per  exceptionem  iurlsiurandi.  in  his  quoque  ac-
tionibus,  quibus  in  rem  agitur,  aeque  necessariae  sunt  excep-
tiones :  veluti  si  petitore  deferente  possessor  iuraverit  earn
rem  suam  esse  et  nihilo  minus  eandem  rem  petitor  vindicet :
licet  enim  verum  sit  quod  intendit,  id  est  rem  eius  esse,  ini-

5  quum  est  tamen  possessorem  condemnari.  Item  si  iudicio
tecum  actum  fuerit  sive  in  rem  sive  in  personam,  nihilo  minus
obligatio  durat  et  ideo  ipso  iure  postea  de  eadem  re  adversus

oportere  * ;  his  defence  was  a  direct  traverse  of  the  plain tiiT^s  case.  For
the  whole  subject  see  pp.  502,  503  supr.,  and  for  the  practice  of  accompany-
ing mutua  with  a  stipulation  for  repayment  cf.  Com.  Nepos,  Att.  9,  Dig.
12. 1.30;  46.  2.  6.  I ;  ib.  7.

§  3.  For  pactum  de  non  petendo,  and  qualifications  of  the  rule  *  pacto
convento  obligationes  non  omnimodo  dissolvuntur'  see  p.  475  supr.  The
form  of  the  exceptio  in  the  formulary  period  was  '  si  non  convenit  ne  ea
pecunia  peteretur.*

§  4.  See  Tit.  6.  ii  supr.  and  notes.  In  Dig.  12.  2. 2  the  oath  is  spoken
of  as  having  even  greater  weight  than  the  judgment  of  a  court  of  law ;
'maioremque  habet  auctoritatem  quam  res  iudicata.'  The  obligation
which  remained  after  the  debtor  had  denied  his  liability  on  oath  (adhuc
obiigatus  manet)  was  civil  only;  the  natural  obligation  was  destroyed,
Dig.  46.  3.  95.  4 ;  for  the  oath  being  an  institution  of  natural  law  it  is
'  iniquum  de  periurio  quaeri ' ;  in  the  next  paragraph,  where  he  is  speak-
ing of  the  exceptio  rei  iudicatae,  Justinian  does  not  use  the  word  iniquum,
for  res  iudicata  is  iuris  civilis.  For  the  employment  of  exceptions
generally  in  real  actions  cf.  Gaius  iv.  117,  and  for  diis  special  case  Dig.
12.  2.  3.  I  'quacunque  actione  quis  conveniatur,  si  iuraverit,  proficiat  ei
iusiurandum,  sive  in  personam  sive  in  rem  agatur.'

§  5.  Under  the  legis  actio  procedure  a  second  action  could  never  be
brought  on  the  same  ground  :  '  qua  de  re  semel  actum  erat,  de  ea  postea
ipso  iure  agi  non  poterat '  Gaius  iv.  108 ;  a  rule  which  in  the  formulary
period  was  almost  entirely  reversed ;  see  note  on  Pendency  pp.  598,  9
supr. ;  Gaius  iii.  181 ;  iv.  106;  107.  In  the  latter's  time  a  defendant  in  any
action  (putting  aside  iudicia  legitima  in  personam  with  an  intentio  in  ius
concepta,  in  which  the  right  of  action  was  consumed  ipso  iure)  could,  after
the  lis  had  once  been  contestata,  protect  himself  against  further  litigation
on  the  same  ground  by  exceptio  rei  in  indicium  deductae,  and  after


Tit.  13.]  DE  EXCEPTIONIBUS.  603

te  agi  potest :  sed  debes  per  exceptionem  rei  iudicatae  ad-
iuvarL    Haec  exempli  causa  rettulisse  sufliciet.    alioquin  quam  6

judgment  by  exceptio  rei  iudicatae.  The  first  of  these  is  no  longer
found  under  Justinian,  as  litis  contestatio  had  lost  its  novative  effect  of
destroying  the  right  of  action.  With  the  disappearance,  too,  of  the
distinction  between  indicia  kgitima  and  those  quae  impeno  continentur
the  rule  has  become  universal  that  technically  there  is  nothing  to  prevent
the  commencement  of  an  action  upon  a  ground  which  has  been  already
adjudicated  upon;  the  exceptio  rei  iudicatae  remains  in  full  operation ;
'  obstat,  quotiens  inter  easdem  personas  eadem  quaestio  revocatur  *  Dig.
44.  2.  3 ;  ib.  7.  4.  Its  operation  now,  however,  is  never  unjust,  as  it  must
often  have  been  in  the  formulary  period,  when  it  protected  a  defendant
with  equal  force  whether  the  ground  upon  which  he  had  been  absolved
was  merely  technical,  or  one  of  substantial  justice;  whether  he  was
absolved  because  he  had  already  paid  the  money  for  which  he  was  sued,
or  because  the  plaintiff  had  carelessly  brought  his  action  a  day  before
the  money  really  fell  due,  was  immaterial ;  the  plea  of  res  iudicata  or  in
iudicium  deducta  was  equally  available.  Now,  however,  as  is  remarked
by  Mr.  Poste  (Gains  p.  550)  its  rules  '  are  more  flexible  than  the  hard
and  fast  doctrine  of  necessary  novation  by  sententia  lata,'  for  now  it  is
allowed  to  prevent  a  second  action  only  so  far  as  this  is  irreconcileable
with  the  objective  grounds  upon  which  the  previous  suit  was  decided,
and,  therefore,  the  mere  fact  of  pleading  it  does  not  disarm  the  plaintiff;
it  has  to  be  shown  that  the  reason  why  the  previous  action  was  decided
against  the  plaintiff  would  operate  now  (e.  g.  A  sues  B  for  money  before
it  is  actually  due,  and  B  is  acquitted.  When  the  money  has  actually
fallen  due,  A  renews  his  action ;  a  plea  by  B  of  res  iudicata  will  not  help
him,  for  the  ground  of  the  previous  decision,  which  the  court  will  now
examine,  was  not  that  the  money  absolutely  was  not  'owed,  but  that  it
was  not  owed  then).  In  fact,  under  Justinian,  'suitors  were  merely
restrained,  in  accordance  with  the  real  object  of  the  institution,  from
harassing  their  opponents  with  renewed  litigation  on  the  precise  questions
that  had  once  been  adequately  decided '  Poste's  Gaius  loc.  cit.

More  precisely,  the  conditions  under  which  the  exceptio  rei  iudicatae
is  an  effective  defence  are  the  two  pointed  out  in  the  passage  cited  above
from  Dig.  44.  2.  3.  (i)  The  right  asserted  in  the  second  action  must  be
the  same  as  that  asserted  in  the  first.  For  instance,  the  res  has  not  been
iudicata,  because  the  quaestio  is  not  eadem,  if  what  was  decided  in  the
first  suit  was  a  question  of  possession,  while  in  the  second  we  have  a
question  of  ownership,  Dig.  44. 2. 14.  3,  or  where  an  iter  is  claimed  in  one
action,  and  an  actus  in  a  second,  Dig.  ib.  1 1.  6.  But,  granted  that  the
right  alleged  is  the  same,  it  is  immaterial  that  the  second  action  is  of
a  different  nature  firom  the  first :  '  de  eadem  re  agere  videtur  et  qui  non
eadem  actione  agit,  qua  ab  initio  agebat,  sed  etiam  si  alia  experiatur,  de
eadem  tamen  re '  Dig.  ib.  5.  For  examples  of  difference  of  actions  involving
the  same  right  d.  Dig.  44.  2.  7  (hereditatis  petitio  and  vindicatio) ;  ib.  8


6o4  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

ex  multis  variisque  causis  exceptiones  necessariae  sint,  ex
latloribus  dlgestorum  seu  pandectarum  libris  intell^  potest.

(hereditatis  petitio  and  actio  familiae  erciscundae) ;  ib.  24  (vindicatio  and
actio  Publiciana).  Granted,  again,  that  the  right  alleged  is  the  same,  it
is  immaterial  that  in  the  first  action  a  point  was  decided  incidentally  only
which  forms  the  principal  question  in  the  second,  though  by  the  piae-
scriptio  praeiudicii  or  exceptio  praeiudicialis  (Cic  de  Invent.  3.  20)  the
defendant  was  enabled  to  postpone  such  incidental  determination  of  an
issue  which  was  all-important  in  another  suit.

It  is  often  said  that  the  identity  of  the  object  to  which  the  right  in
either  action  relates  is  an  essential  condition  of  exceptio  rei  iudicatae;  e.  g.
'  cum  quaeritur,  haec  exceptio  noceat  necne  ?  inspiciendum  est  an  idem
corpus  sit'  Dig.  44.  2.  12;  but,  though  it  may  usually  be  inferred  that
the  quaestio  is  eadem  from  the  identity  of  the  res,  it  is  really  immaterial
that  the  res  are  different  if  the  right  is  substantially  identical  in  the  two
actions ;  e.  g.  if  a  plaintiff  demands  first  the  whole,  and  later  a  part  of  that
whole,  Dig.  ib.  7.  pr.,  or  if  he  claims  first  an  ancilla  praegnas,  and  then
a  child  conceived  by  her  after  litis  contestatio  in  that  action,  ib.  7.  i,  the
exceptio  can  be  pleaded  with  effect.

If  the  right  alleged  in  the  two  actions  is  the  same,  but  is  based,  in  the
second,  upon  a  different  title  from  that  affirmed  in  the  first,  a  distinction
must  be  drawn  between  real  and  personal  actions.  If  the  action  was
real,  the  defendant  was  not  estopped  from  pleading  the  exceptio  by  the
difference  of  title,  for  the  right  is  the  same  however  it  may  have  been
acquired  :  '  neque  enim  amplius  quam  semel  res  mea  esse  potest ; '  and
consequently '  omnes  causae  (titles)  una  petitione  apprehenduntur '  Dig.
44.  2.  14.  2.  The  only  exception  to  this  rule  under  the  older  law
was  where  the  title  advanced  in  the  second  had  accrued  since  the
decision  in  the  first  action  (causa  superveniens) ;  later  it  seems  to  ha^-e
been  allowable  to  specify  a  single  title  in  a  real  action  (causa  expressa
agere),  the  plaintiff  thereby  being  held  to  save  his  right  of  subsequently
claiming  the  same  property  by  a  different  one.  Dig.  44.  2.  1 1.  2 ;  ib.  14.  3.
But  in  obligations  the  plain tifTs  right  differs  with  the  mode  in  which  the
particular  obligation  arose  :  *'  actiones  in  personam  ab  actionibus  in  rem
hoc  differunt,  quod  cum  eadem  res  ab  eodem  mihi  debeatur,  singulas
obligationes  singulae  causae  sequuntur,  nee  uUa  earum  alterius  petitione
vitiatur'  Dig.  ib.  14.2;  e. g.  'si  is  qui  Stichum  dari  stlpulatus  fiierat
heres  exstiterit  ei,  cui  ex  testamento  idem  Stichus  debebatur,  si  ex  testa-
mento  Stichum  petierit,  non  consumet  stipulationem,  et  contra  si  ex
stipulatu  Stichum  petierit,  actionem  ex  testamento  salvam  habebit,  quia
initio  ita  constiterint  hae  duae  obligationes,  ut  altera  in  iudicium  deducta
altera  nihilominus  integra  maneret'  Dig.  44.  7.  18.

(2)  The  parties  in  the  second  must  be  the  same  as  in  the  first  action
(Mnter  easdem  personas'  Dig.  44.  2.  3).  In  Justinian's  time,  however,
this  rule  had  been  somewhat  modified.  A  defendant  could  plead  the
exceptio  if  he  had  previously  been  sued  on  the  same  ground  by  an  agent


Tit.  13.1  DE  EXCEPTIONIBUS.  605

Quarum  quaedam   ex  legibus  vcl  ex  his,  quae  legis  vicem  7
optinent,  vel   ex   ipsius  praetoris   iurisdictione  substantiam
capiunt.    Appellantur  autem  exceptiones  aliae  perpetuae  et  8
peremptoriae,  aliae  temporales  et  dilatoriac.      Perpetuae  et  9

of  the  present  plaintiff:  'hoc  iure  utimur,  ut  ex  parte  actoris  in  exceptione
rei  iudicatae  hae  personae  continerentur,  quae  rem  in  iudicium  deducant.
Inter  hos  erunt  procurator,  cui  mandatum  est,  tutor,  curator  furiosi  vel
pupilli,  actor  municipum ;  ex  persona  autem  rei  etiam  defensor  numera-
bitur,  quia  adversus  defensorem  qui  agit  litem  in  iudicium  deducit '  Digi
44.  2. 1 1.  7 ;  for  the  earlier  law  see  note  on  Tit.  10.  pr.  supr.  A  party  was
also  identified  with  those  whom  he  had  succeeded  either  universally  or
singularly.  Dig.  44.  2.  9.  2;  ib.  11.  3,  with  those  who  owned  jointly  with
him  land  subject  or  entitled  to  a  praedial  servitude  (though  only  in  rela-
tion thereto)  Dig.  8.  5.  4.  3  and  4,  and  with  his  coirei,  Dig.  12. 2.  28.  3.
So,  too,  if  in  an  action  between  the  testamentary  and  intestate  heirs  of
a  deceased  person  the  will  was  declared  void  or  valid,  the  judgment
bound  the  legatees  and  creditors.  Dig.  20.  i.  3.  pr. ;  30.  5.  i ;  and,  as
a  rule,  all  persons  were  bound  by  decisions  on  questions  of  status,  so  that
(e.  g.)  if  A  was  found  to  be  B's  son  by  a  praeiudicium,  all  persons  had  to
recognise  him  as  the  brother  of  B's  other  children^  whether  the  finding
was  right  or  not.  Dig.  25.  3.  1-3.

§  7.  Exceptiones  might  arise  from  any  of  the  sources  by  which  rights
in  general  were  conferred,  for  as  a  statute,  a  senatusconsult,  or  the  edict
could  create  rights,  they  could  also,  ex  vi  termini,  create  the  right  to  an
exceptio ;  but  in  form  they  may  be  said  to  be  all  praetorian,  as  it  was
the  praetor  who  enabled  them  to  be  advanced  through  the  formula,  and
in  the  legis  actio  period  they  were  unknown,  Gaius  iv.  108.  Among  those
based  on  statutes  are  the  exceptio  legis  Cinciae,  p.  238  supr.,  Fragm.
Vat.  310,  legis  Plaetoriae,  and  legis  luliae  (de  bonorum  cessione) ;  on
senatusconsulta  the  exceptiones  SC^.  Trebelliani,  Dig.  15.  2.  i.  8;  SC^.
Macedoniani,  and  SC'.  Velleiani ;  on  imperial  enactment,  the  exceptio  by
which  under  the  epistola  Hadriani  the  fideiussor  claimed  the  beneficium
divisionis,  p.  430  supr.  Those  which  are  purely  praetorian  form  a  large
portion  of  the  machinery  by  which  the  praetor  enabled  equity  to  over-
come the  hardship  and  injustice  of  the  ius  dvile ;  e.  g.  the  exceptiones
doli,  metus,  pacti,  rei  iudicatae,  and  in  factum ;  but  sometimes  a  prae*
torian  action  is  repelled  by  a  '  civil '  exception ;  e.  g.  the  actio  hypothe-
caria  or  constitutoria  by  exceptio  SC*.  Velleiani,  Dig.  16.  i.  8.  pr. ;  ib,
29.  pr.

§  8.  In  drawing  this  distinction  Justinian  would  have  done  well  to
follow  Gaius,  who  does  not  (iv.  120)  use  the  alternative  terms  temporales
and  perpetuae;  for,  as  Mr.  Poste  points  out,  in  Cod.  5.  12.  30.  2  and
elsewhere  '  temporalis  exceptio '  denotes  the  plea  of  prescription  (longi
temporis  exceptio)  which  was  perpetual  and  peremptory,

§  10.  The  enactment  of  Zeno  referred  to  (Cod.  3.  10.  i)  has  been
already  explained,  Tit.  6.  33  supr.  and  notes.    Under  Justinian,  when


6o6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV:

peremptoriae  sunt,  quae  semper  agentibus  obstant  et  semper
rem  de  qua  agitur  peremunt :  qualis  est  exceptio  doli  mali  et
quod  metus  causa  factum  est  et  pacti  conventi,  cum  ita  con-

1 0  venerit,  ne  omnino  pecunia  peteretur.  Temporales  atque
dilatoriae  sunt,  quae  ad  tempus  nocent  et  temporis  dilatioaem
tribuunt :  qualis  est  pacti  conventi,  cum  convenerit,  ne  intra
certum  tempus  ageretur,  veluti  intra  quinquennium,  nam
iinito  eo  tempore  non  impeditur  actor  rem  exsequi.  ergo  hi,
quibus  intra  tempus  agere  volentibus  obicitur  exceptio  aut
pacti  conventi  aut  alia  similis,  difierre  debent  actionem  et
post  tempus  agere :  ideo  enim  et  dilatoriae  istae  exceptiones
appellantur.  alioquin,  si  intra  tempus  ^erint  obiectaque  sit
exceptio,  neque  eo  iudicio  quidquam  consequerentur  propter
exceptionem  nee  post  tempus  olim  agere  poterant,  cum  temere
rem  in  indicium  deducebant  et  consumebant,  qua  ratione  rem
amittebant.  hodie  autem  non  ita  stricte  haec  procedere
volumus,  sed  eum,  qui  ante  tempus  pactionis  vel  obligationis
litem  inferre  ausus  est,  Zenonianae  constitutioni  subiacere
censemus,  quam  sacratissimus  legislator  de  his  qui  tempore
plus  petierunt  protulit,  ut  et  indutias,  quas,  si  ipse  actor
sponte  indulserit  vel  natura  actionis  continet,  contempserat,
in  duplum  habeant  hi,  qui  talem  iniuriam  passi  sunt,  et  post
eas  finitas  non  aliter  litem  suscipiant,  nisi  omnes  expensas
litis  antea  acceperint,  ut  actores  tali  poena  perterriti  tempora

1 1  litium  doceantur  observare.    Praeterea  etiam  ex  persona  dila-
toriae sunt  exceptiones:  quales  sunt  procuratoriae,  veluti  si

a  defendant  had  proved  his  dilatory  exception,  he  was  not  absolutdy
acquitted ;  the  judge's  sententia  (which  modern  writers  call  absolutio  ab
instantia  as  contrasted  with  absolutio  ab  actione)  was  that  at  that  time
he  did  not  owe  the  plaintiff  what  had  been  demanded  from  him,  and  the
latter  could  renew  his  action  when  the  obstacle  was  removed,  though  he
had  to  wait  twice  as  long  as  would  otherwise  have  been  necessary,  pay
all  the  plaintiffs  costs  hitherto  incurred,  and  in  the  meanwhile  could
claim  no  interest  on  the  debt.  As  appears  from  the  text  (ante  tempus
pactionis  vel  obligationis)  the  procedure  was  the  same  whether  the  obliga-
tion was  originally  ex  die,  or  payment  was  postponed  subsequently  by
a  '  pactum  de  non  petendo  intra  certum  tempus.'  Among  dilatory  pleas
'quae  ad  tempus  nocent'  were  in  Gains'  time  (iv.  122)  the  exceptiones
litis  dividuae  and  litis  residuae.
§  IL  Gains  exemplifies  exceptiones  ex  persona  dilatoriae  (iv.  124)  by


Tit.  13.]  DE  EXCEPTION/BUS  607

per  militem  aut  mulierem  agere  quis  velit :  nam  militibus  nee
pro  patre  vel  matre  vel  uxore  nee  ex  sacro  rescripto  procu-
ratorio  nomine  experiri  conceditur :  suis  vero  negotiis  super-
esse  sine  ofTensa  disciplinae  possunt  eas  vero  exceptiones,
quae  oljm  procuratoribus  propter  infamiam  vel  dantis  vel
ipsius  procuratoris  opponebantur,  cum  in  iudiciis  frequentari
nullo  perspeximus  modo,  conquiescere  sancimus,  ne,  dum  de
his  altercatur,  ipsius  negotii  disceptatio  proteletur.

the  plea  that  the  plaintiff  was  suing  by  a  cognitor  when  the  edict  dis-
qualified him  from  being  so  represented,  or  had  appointed  as  his  cognitor
a  person  similarly  disabled  from  acting  in  that  capacity ;  he  does  not
mention  the  exceptio  procuratoria,  though  infames  were  disabled  from
both  representing  others  and  being  themselves  represented  in  that  form,
Fragm.  Vat.  322.  For  infamia  generally  see  on  Tit.  16.  2  inf.  Justinian's
enactment  in  the  last  lines  of  the  paragraph  seems  merely  to  have  formally
deprived  defendants  of  a  right  which  they  had  practically  ceased  to  exer-
cise, and  not  to  have  affected  the  disability  of  infames  to  appoint  or
appear  as  procurators;  the  judge  could  still  reject  an  agent  because  either
he  could  not  act  as  such,  or  the  true  party  could  not  be  so  represented,
but  the  defendant  could  not.

Women  could  not  be  procurators  on  the  principle  of  the  SC.  Vellei-
anum,  that  all  interventio  was  a  virile  munus.  By  Cod.  2.  13.  25  state
officials  of  higher  rank  were  ordered  to  conduct  their  suits  by  agents,
lest  by  appearing  personally  they  should  disturb  the  impartiality  of  the
court

As  a  general  rule  exceptions  are  not  subject  to  limitation,  for  a  de-
fendant cannot  advance  them  when  he  will,  but  must  wait  till  he  is  sued  :
'cum  actor  quidem  in  sua  potestate  habeat,  quando  utatur  suo  iure,  is
autem,  cum  quo.  agitur,  non  habet  potestatem  quando  conveniatur'  Dig.
44.  4.  5.  6.  When,  however,  a  party  can  assert  his  right  by  either  action
or  exception  (as  e.  g.  in  dolus  and  metus),  it  is  held  by  some  writers  that
he  loses  the  latter  in  the  same  period  of  limitation  as  he  loses  the  former,
by  others  that  even  here  the  exception  is  indestructible ;  whence  the  two
opposed  maxims,  'tant  dure  Taction,  tant  dure  Texception,* — 'quae  ad
agendum  sunt  temporalia,  ad  excipiendum  sunt  perpetua.'  The  truth
seems  to  be  that  if  the  right  upon  which  both  action  and  exception  rest
is  in  rem,  the  latter  continues  to  exist  even  after  the  former  is  barred,
because  the  real  right  itself  is  not  affected  by  the  prescription;  but  if
they  both  have  their  source  in  an  obligation,  the  obligation  itself  is
in  effect  extinguished  by  the  prescription  of  the  action  (Dig.  46.  I.  37 ;
13.  5.  18.  I),  and  therefore  the  exception  expires  as  well;  cf.  Dig.  12.  2,

9.4.


6o8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV-


XIV.
DE  REPLICATIONIBUS.

Interdum  evenit,  ut  exceptio,  quae  prima  facie  lusta
videatur,  inique  noceat.  quod  cum  accidit,  alia  allegatione
opus  est  adiuvandi  actoris  gratia,  quae  replicatio  vocatur,
quia  per  eam  replicatur  atque  resolvitur  vis  exceptionis.
veluti  cum  pactus  est  aliquis  cum  debitore  suo,  ne  ab  eo
pecuniam  petat,  deinde  postea  in  contrarium  pacti  sunt,  id
est  ut  petere  creditori  liceat;  si  agat  creditor  et  excipiat
debitor,  ut  ita  demum  condemnetur,  si  non  convenerit,  ne
eam  pecuniam  creditor  petat,  nocet  ei  exceptio,  convenit  enicn
ita:  namque  nihilo  minus  hoc  verum  manet,  licet  postea  in
contrarium  pacti  sunt,  sed  quia  iniquum  est  creditorem  ex-
cludi,   replicatio   ei   dabitur   ex    posteriore   pacto  convento.

1  Rursus  interdum  evenit,  ut  replicatio,  quae  prima  facie  iusta
sit,  inique  noceat.     quod  cum  accidit,  alia  allegatione  opus

2  est  adiuvandi  rei  gratia,  quae  duplicatio  vocatur.  Et  si  rursus
ea  prima  facie  iusta  videatur,  sed  propter  aliquam  causam
inique   actori   noceat,  rursus  allegatione  alia  opus  est,  qua

3  actor  adiuvetur,  quae  dicitur  triplicatio.  Quarum  omnium
exceptionum  usum  interdum  ulterius  quam  diximus  varietas
negotiorum  introducit :   quas  omnes  apertius  ex  latiore  di*

4  gestorum  volumine  facile  est  cognoscere.     Exceptiones  autem.

Tit.  XIV.  For  the  nature  of  duplicatio,  replicatio,  &c.,  and  the  form
which  they  assumed  under  the  system  of  formulae  see  the  reference  in
the  General  Index  to  Excursus  X  inf.  Gains  (iv.  126)  further  exemplifies
duplicatio  by  an  action  brought  for  the  price  of  goods  sold  to  which  the
defendant  pleads  an  exceptio  that  as  they  have  not  yet  been  delivered  he
ought  not  to  be  condemned,  and  i^  met  by  the  plaintiff's  duplicatio  that
the  sale  was  made  upon  condition  that  there  should  be  no  delivery  until
the  price  had  been  paid.  For  other  illustrations  see  Dig.  3.  3.  48 ;  16.  !•
32.  2;  50.  17.  154.

.  §  3.  The  use  of  exceptio  here  for  duplicatio,  replicatio,  &c.,  is  justified
by  Dig.  44. 1.  2. 1  '  replicationes  (a  term  employed  by  Ulpian  and  lulianus
instead  of  duplicatio)  nihil  aliud  sunt,  quam  exceptiones  a  parte  actoris,
quae  exceptiones  excludunt,'  ib.  22  '  replicatio  est  contraria  exceptio,  quasi
exceptionis  exceptio.'

§  4.  See  on  Bk.  iii.  20.  6  supr.    The  expression  in  the  text  (plerumque


Tit.  14.]  DE  REPUCATIONIBUS.  609

quibus  debitor  defenditur,  plerumque  accommodari  solent
etiam  fideiussoribus  eius :  et  recte,  quia,  quod  ab  his  petitur,
id  ab  ipso  debitore  peti  videtur,  quia  mandati  iudicio  red-
diturus  est  eis,  quod  hi  pro  eo  solverint.  qua  ratione  et  si
de  non  petenda  pecunia  pactus  quis  cum  reo  fuerit^  placuit
proinde  succurrendum  esse  per  exceptionem  pacti  conventi
illis  quoque  qui  pro  eo  obligati  essent,  ac  si  et  cum  ipsis
pactus  esset,  ne  ab  eis  ea  pecunia  peteretur.  sane  quaedam
exceptiones  non  solent  his  accommodari.  ecce  enim  debitor
si  bonis  suis  cesserit  et  cum  eo  creditor  experiatur,  defenditur
per  exceptionem  *  nisi  bonis  cesserit ' :  sed  haec  exceptio
fideiussoribus  non  datur,  scilicet  ideo  quia,  qui  alios  pro  de-
bitore obligat,  hoc  maxime  prospicit,  ut,  cum  facultatibus
lapsus  fuerit  debitor,  possit  ab  his  quos  pro  eo  obligavit  suum
consequi.

accommodari  solent)  is  more  correct  than  that  in  Dig.  44.  i.  i^^omnes
exceptiones,  quae  reo  competunt,  fideiussori  quoque,  etiam  invito  reo,
competunt.'

Some  exceptiones  are  said  rei,  others  personae  cohaerere :  the  latter
(e.  g.  those  beneficii  competentiae  and  pacti  de  non  petendo  in  personam)
avail  only  to  the  person  immediately  concerned ;  the  former,  which  are
the  greater  number,  can  be  used  by  other  persons  also  who  can  be  sued
in  lieu  of  or  in  addition  to  the  one  immediately  liable,  e.g.  his  heirs  or
sureties:  'exceptiones  quae  personae  cuiusque  cohaerent  non  transeunt
ad  alios,  veluti  ea,  quam  socius  habet  exceptionem,  quod  facere  possit,  vel

parens  patronusve  (Tit  6.  38  supr.),  non  competit  fideiussori rei

autem  cohaerentes  exceptiones  etiam  fideiussori  competunt,  ut  rei  iudi-
catae,  doli  mall,  iurisiurandi,  quod  metus  causa  factum  est.  Igitur  et  si
reus  pactus  sit  in  rem,  omnimodo  competit  exceptio  fideiussori :  interces-
sionis  quoque  exceptio,  item  quod  libertatis  onerandae  causa  petitur,
etiam  fideiussori  competit'  Dig.  44.  i.  7.

It  is  on  the  principle  stated  in  the  text  (quia  qui  alios  ....  suum  con-
sequi) that  the  surety  remains  liable  when  his  ptincipal  has  died  without
leaving  any  successor.  Dig.  16.  3.  i.  14 ;  46.  3.  95.  i,  or  has  undergone
capitis  deminutio  maxima,  Dig.  2.  8.  5.  pr. ;  and  similarly  the  answer  to
the  question,  whether  a  surety,  when  sued,  can  defend  himself  by  plead-
ing that  his  principal  has  been  in  integrum  restitutus,  depends  upon  the
object  for  which  the  creditor  obtained  the  guaranty ;  e.  g.  if  the  principal
debtor  is  a  minor,  and  the  very  object  for  which  the  creditor  took  the
surety  was  to  protect  himself  against  his  restitutio  'propter  minorem
aetatem,'  the  surety  cannot  plead  the  exceptio :  '  si,  cum  scirem  minorem,
et  ei  fidem  non  haberem,  tu  fideiusseris  pro  eo,  non  est  aequum  fideiussori
subveniri '  Dig.  4. 4. 13.  pr.

R  r


6io  INSTlTUTiONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,      [Lib.  IV.


XV.

DE  INTERDICTIS.


Sequitur,  ut  dispiciamus  de  interdictis  seu  action ibus,  quae
pro  his   exercentur.    erant  autem    interdicta  formae  atque


A  surety  cannot  be  deprived  of  any  exceptio  to  which  he  has  once
acquired  a  right  by  any  unilateral  act  of  his  principal :  '  sed  verius  est,
semel  adquisitam  fideiussori  pacti  exceptionem  ulterius  ei  invito  extor-
queri  non  posse'  Dig.  2.  14.  62.

An  exceptio  in  rem  is  one  which  can  be  pleaded  against  any  one  who
can  sue  on  a  given  ground  of  action :  an  exceptio  in  personam  is  one
which  can  be  advanced  only  against  a  determinate  person  or  persons ;
e.g.  the  exceptio  doli,  and  sometimes  that  based  on  a  pactum  de  non
petendo,  as  where  one  of  two  or  more  correi  credendi  promises  not  to
sue  the  debtor.

Tit.  XV.  The  term  interdictum  in  origin  means  litde  more  than  edictum.
The  legis  actiones  could  not  be  employed  for  the  prevention  of  anticipated
wrong,  or  for  the  punishment  of  actual  breaches  of  the  peace ;  these  were
matters  to  be  dealt  with  by  the  imperium  of  the  magistrate  (consul  or
praetor),  who  upon  application  made  would  issue  an  injunction  (inter-
dictum)  or  order  (decretum)  disobedience  to  which,  unless  justified,
would  be  punished  by  imprisonment,  fine,  or  other  ordinary  means  at
his  disposal  for  enforcing  compliance  with  his  command.

The  chief  purposes  for  which  such  interdicta  were  issued  were  the
prevention  and  punishment  of  offences  against  loca  sacra  and  publica
(Dig.  43.  I.  I.  pr.),  and  the  protection  of  Possession  as  distinct  from
Ownership:  Mn  legitimis  actionibus  nemo  ex  iure  Quiritium  posses-
sionem suam  vocare  audet,  sed  ad  interdictum  venit,  ut  praetor  his  verbis
utatur;  uti  nunc  possidetis,'  etc.  Festus,  s.v.  Possessio.  Thus  some  of
them  fall  within  the  sphere  of  public,  others  within  that  of  private,  law ;
their  chief  characteristic  however  in  this  period  is,  that  they  are  a  class
of  remedies  standing  altogether  outside  and  apart  from  the  ordinary
method  of  redress  by  legis  actio,  the  procedure  of  which  was  inapplicable
to  them.

Under  the  formulary  system  interdicts  still  continued  to  be  issued  in
relation  to  the  same  matters,  especially  possession,  as  before,  but  their
breach  was  no  longer  tried  or  punished  in  the  old  manner;  they  were
brought  into  connection  with  the  ordinary  procedure  by  iudex  and
formula,  and  became  merely  a  peculiar  mode  of  commencing  an  ordinary
action  or  congeries  of  ordinary  actions.  The  praetor,  on  a  party's  appli-
cation, issued  the  interdict,  by  which  '  iubebat  aliquid  fieri  aut  fieri
prohibebat.'  Usually  this  was  disregarded  by  the  person  to  whom  it  was
addressed  as  a  matter  of  course  (Gains  iv.  141) ;  whereupon  the  latter


Tit.  15.1  DE  INTERDICTIS.  611

conceptiones  verborum,  quibus  praetor  aut  iubebat  aliquid
fieri  aut  fieri  prohibebat.    quod  turn  maxime  faciebat,  cum

was  brought  before  the  magistrate  by  the  plaintiff,  and  the  matter  took
the  form  of  an  action  in  which  the  question  for  decision  was  in  eflfect
whether,  in  defying  the  interdict,  the  defendant  had  really  broken
the  law.

Interdicts  which  demanded  production  or  restitution  of  property  (§  i)
could  be  tried  either  by  formula  arbitraria  or  per  sponsionem  at  the
defendant's  option,  Gains  iv.  162-165;  the  latter  procedure  involved
a  penal  wager  of  considerable  amount,  and  consequently  would  perhaps
be  preferred  by  a  defendant  who  was  convinced  of  the  justice  of  his  cause.
In  interdicta  prohibitoria  there  was  no  alternative;  the  trial  must  be
per  sponsionem,  and,  where  the  interdict  was  double  (Gains  iv,  160,  §  7
inf.),  was  peculiarly  complicated,  because  each  party  played  the  rSle  of
both  plaintiff  and  defendant,  'nee  quisquam  praecipue  reus  vel  actor
intellegitur,  sed  unusquisque  tarn  rei  quam  actons  partes  sustinet ;  quippe
praetor  pari  sermone  cum  utroque  loquitur'  Gains  loc.  cit.  The  pro-
cedure upon  a  double  is  in  fact  a  duplication  of  that  upon  a  single
interdict  when  tried  per  sponsionem,  with  one  peculiar  feature  (the  fructus
licitatio)  of  its  own.  The  circumstances  under  which  a  double  interdict
lay  were  where  two  persons  claimed  each  to  be  entitled  to  the  exclusive
present  possession  of  the  same  object,  moveable  or  immoveable.  Here,
on  their  appearance  before  him,  the  praetor  awarded  the  possession,  on
a  rough  and  ready  principle,  to  one  or  other  of  them  ;  if  the  object  was
immoveable,  and  the  interdict  was  uti  possidetis,  to  the  one  who  as
a  matter  of  fact  was  in  possession  '  nee  vi  nee  clam  nee  precario '  at  that
moment ;  if  it  was  moveable,  and  the  interdict  was  utrubi,  to  the  one  who
had  been  in  possession  the  greater  part  of  the  year  next  immediately
preceding,  Gains  iv.  148-152.  This  award  was  immediately  followed  by
the  issue  of  the  interdict  proper,  which  prohibited  all  disturbance  of  the
possession  so  adjudged.  Gains  iv.  160.

It  is  clear  that  this  adjudication  might  be  altogether  at  variance  with
the  true  rights  of  the  case,  and  it  was  to  try  the  true  rights  of  the  case—*
to  determine  which  of  the  parties  was  really  entitled  to  the  possession  in
law — that  all  the  proceedings  had  in  reality  been  taken.  Possibly  it  may
have  been  hoped  in  the  earlier  time  that  the  order  would  be  obeyed
(Gains  iv.  139),  and  had  this  been  so  interdicts  would  have  formed,
a  typical  illustration  of  a  summary  process.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
issue  of  the  interdict  was  almost  invariably  followed  at  once  by  a  fictitious
dispossession  or  ejectment  (vis  ex  conventu),  which  was  a  formal  breach
of  the  praetor's  order  ;  the  party  so  disturbed  brought  the  other  at  once
again  before  the  magistrate,  and  here,  in  iure,  the  proper  steps  were
taken  for  getting  the  real  question  at  issue  between  them  decided  by
action.

The  first  of  these  was  to  determine  which  of  them  should  have
possession  of  the  object  in  dispute  pending  litigation,  and  this  was  don^

Kt  %


6ia  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

de  possessione  aut  quasi  possessione  inter  aliquos  conten-


debatur.


by  putting  such  interim  possession  up  to  auction  between  them  (fructus
licitatio) :  the  one  who  bid  the  highest  sum  obtained  it,  subject  to  the
condition  of  paying  that  amount  to  the  other,  in  case  he  lost  the  suit,
as  liquidated  damages  for  having  been  in  possession  of  property  to  which
he  had  no  right  during  the  continuance  of  the  action.  Payment  of  this
was  secured  by  a  'fructuaria  stipulatio,'  upon  which  the  other  could  sue  by
condictio ;  or,  as  an  alternative,  he  could  bring  a  '  indicium  fhictuariuin '
on  the  fructus  licitatio  itself.

So  far  provision  had  been  made  only  for  compensating  the  party  who
was  out  of  possession  for  the  loss  which  he  sustained  in  being  deprived
of  it  pending  litigation,  supposing  he  could  prove  that  of  right  it  belonged
to  him.  For  recovering  the  possession  itself  he  had  a  indicium  secu-
torium  or  Cascellianum,  which  was  an  actio  arbitraria,  enabling  the  judge
to  condemn  the  party  in  possession  to  pay  the  value  of  the  property  in
dispute  in  default  of  restitution,  Gaius  iv.  165,  166.

None  of  these  proceedings,  however,  provided  for  the  trial  of  the  real
question  at  issue :  they  presupposed  its  decision  in  &vour  of  the  lower
bidder  at  the  fructus  licitatio,  and  were  designed  to  enable  him  in  that
event  to  recover  the  possession  and  damages  for  having  been  awhile
deprived  of  it.    The  real  question — which  of  the  parties  was,  at  the  issue  of
the  interdict,  entitled  in  law  to  the  possession  (Gaius  iv.  166),  was  brought
to  trial  in  the  form  of  an  action  on  a  wager,  or  rather  on  two  wagers,  as  each
party  played  a  double  rSle,     Now  in  Roman  law  a  wager  or  a  bet  could
be  made  only  by  two  stipulations,  each  of  which  was  ground  for  an
independent  action :  the  first  party  promised  the  second  so  much,  if  he
turned  out  to  be  in  the  wrong ;  and  then  the  second  promised  the  first
the  same  sum  in  the  contrary  event.    Thus  the  double  interdict,  in-
volving two  wagers,  involved  four   stipulations   and   four  condictiones
certi  upon  them;   and  formulae  were   delivered  to  the   index  for  the
simultaneous  trial  of  six  actions,  viz.  (a)  four  condictiones  certi  on  the
two  wagers ;  {b)  a  fifth  condictio  certi  on  the  fructuaria  stipulatio  (or,  as
alternative,  the  indicium  fructuarium) ;    and  {c)  an  actio  arbitraria,  the
indicium  secutorium.     If  the  iudex  found  in  favour  of  the  highest  bidder
at  the  fructus  licitatio,  he  absolved  him  on  f^),  (c),  and  the  two  wager-
condictions  in  which  he  was  defendant,  and  condemned  the  other  in  the
two  wager-condictions  in  which  he  was  plaintiff;   if  he  found  against
him,  he  condemned  him  to  pay  the  two  wagers,  the  sum  of  the  fructuaria
stipulatio,  and  the  value  of  the  property  in  default  of  restitution ;  the
other  party  he  absolved  altogether ;  Gaius  iv.  167,  168.

With  the  disappearance  of  the  formulary  system  this  complicated
procedure  necessarily  passed  away ;  its  very  complication  depended  on
the  formula.  Justinian  tells  us  himself  (§  8  inf.)  that  in  his  day  interdicts
(stricto  sensu)  were  no  longer  issued :  in  the  opening  paragraph  of  the
Title  he  speaks  of  interdicts  'seu  actionibus  quae. pro  his  exercentur,'


Tit  15.]  DE  INTERDICTIS.  613

Summa  autem  divisio  interdictoriim  haec  est^  quod  aut  1
prohibitoria  sunt  aut    restitutoria  aut    exhibitoria.      prohi-
bitoria  sunt,  quibus  vetat  aliquid  fieri,  veluti  vim  sine  vitio
possidenti,  vel  mortuum  inferenti,  quo  ei  lus  erit  inferendi,  vel


with  which  may  be  compared  the  Title  of  Dig.  43.  i  'de  interdictis
sive  extraordinariis  actionibus  quae  pro  his  competunt.'  An  interdict,
in  his  time,  may  fairly  be  described  as  the  trial  by  ordinary  action,
commenced  in  the  ordinary  way,  of  questions  which  in  the  formulary
period  would  have  been  tried  in  the  complicated  mode  described  by
Gaius,  and  more  particularly  of  questions  relating  to  possession—'  inter-
dicta  autem  licet  in  extraordinariis  iudiciis  proprie  locum  non  habent,
tamen  ad  exemplum  eorum  res  agitur'  Cod.  8.  1.  3.  The  only  features
of  diflference  between  them  and  an  ordinary  action  are  to  be  explained
by  supposing  that  the  questions  on  which  they  lay  were  thought  to  deserve
a  somewhat  more  summary  trial  than  others  :  hence  the  directions  in  the
code  (e.g.  8.  I.  4 ;  8.  2.  3 ;  8.  4.  8 ;  11.  47.  14),  to  judges  to  try  interdicts
with  all  possible  despatch,  and  the  rule  that  the  operation  of  a  decision
on  the  interdict  unde  vi  (which  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  rest)  shall
not  be  suspended  by  appeal ;  Cod.  7.  69.

In  qualification  of  Justinian's  description  of  interdicts  under  the  earlier
system  as  'formae  atque  conceptiones  verborum,'  it  may  be  observed
that  all  orders  of  the  praetor,  like  the  sententia  of  a  iudex,  Cod.  7.  44.  i,
had  to  be  orally  delivered,  though  the  interdict,  being  as  a  rule  extremely
precise  and  technical,  was  committed  to  a  written  form,  breviculum  or
periculum,  apparently  as  early  as  Cicero  (in  Verrem  iii.  79).  There  may
also  be  a  reference  to  the  termination  of  interdicts  (stricto  sensu)  in
a  regular  action  instituted  by  formula  ('  concepta  verba,  id  est  per  for-
mulas '  Gaius  iv.  30) :  cf.  Gaius  iv.  141 ;  Dig.  25.  5.  I.  2 ;  44.  7.  37.  pr.

The  following  sections  are  concerned  in  the  main  with  possessory
interdicts.  In  §  i  ^  some  are  specified  which  relate  to  Public  Law  :
others  protect  personal  freedom  (interdictum  'de  homine  libero  exhi-
bendo'  Dig.  43.  29),  family  rights  ('de  liberis  exhibendis  et  ducendis'
Dig.  43.  30),  and  rights  of  property  ('  de  arboribus  caedendis,  de  glande
legenda  *  Dig.  43.  27  and  28) ;  and  finally,  some  were  designed  to  *  sanc-
tion' the  praetor's  exercise  of  his  own  imperium:  e.g.  the  interdicta  'ne
vis  fiat  ei  qui  in  possessionem  missus  erit'  Dig.  43.  4,  fraudatorium,
possessorium  Gaius  iv.  145,  and  sectorium  ib.  146.

For  iuris  quasi  possessio  cf.  pp.  222, 338  supr.,  and  for  interdicts  relating
to  it  see  Dig.  43.  18  (de  superficiebus),  19  (de  itinere  actuque  privato),
and  the  other  Titles  to  23  of  the  same  book.

§  1.  Of  course  this  whole  classification  of  interdicts  as  prohibitoria,
restitutoria,  and  exhibitoria,  being  based  upon  the  tenor  of  the  praetor's
order,  and  derived  from  Gaius  (iv.  140,  142),  is  in  Justinian  a  mere
anachronism:  interdicts  aim  at  prevention,  restitution,  and  production,
no  more,  and  no  less,  than  ordinary  actions.    In  Dig.  43.  i.  i.  i  Ulpiaa


6i4  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

in  loco  sacro  aedificari,  vel  in  flumine  publico  ripave  eius
aliquid  fieri,  quo  peius  navigetur.  restitutoria  sunt,  quibus
restitui  aliquid  iubet,  veluti  cum  bonorum  possessori  pos-
sessionem eorum,  quae  quis  pro  herede  aut  pro  possessore
possidet  ex  ea  hereditate,  aut  cum  iubet  ei,  qui  vi  possessione
fundi  delectus  sit,  restitui  possessionem,  exhibitoria  sunt,
per  quae  iubet  exhiberi,  veluti  eum,  cuius  de  libertate  agitur,
^ut  libertum,  cui  patronus  operas  indicere  velit,  aut  parent!
liberos,  qui  in  potestate  eius  sunt,  sunt  tamen  qui  putant
proprie  interdicta  ea  vocari,  quae  prohibitoria  sunt,  quia  in-
terdicere  est  denuntiare  ct  prohibere :  restitutoria  autem  et
exhibitoria  proprie  decreta  vocari :  sed  tamen  optinuit  omnia

adds  a  fourth  species—  interdicts  which  are  mixed — i.e.  both  prohibitoria
and  exhibitoria.

The  interdict  forbidding  violent  ouster  of  an  innocent  possessor  is  that
known  as  uti  possidetis,  §  4  inf.  That  de  mortuo  inferendo  is  treated  in
detail  in  Dig.  11.  8;  its  formula  ran  'quo  quave  iili  mortuum  inferre
invito  te  ius  est,  quominus  illi  eo  eave  mortuum  inferre  et  ibi  sepelire
liceat  vim  fieri  veto ' ;  that  of  the  third  prohibitory  interdict  mentioned
in  the  text  *  in  loco  sacro  facere  inve  eum  immittere  quid  ve\o '  Dig.  43. 6 ;
that  of  the  fourth  ^  ne  quid  in  flumine  publico  ripave  eius  immittas,  quo
statio  iterve  navigio  deterior  sit  fiat'  Dig.  43.  12.

Restitutorium  as  applied  to  interdicts  has  the  same  wide  meaning  as
restituere  in  general ;  it  denotes,  besides  the  restitution  of  possession,  as  in
unde  vi,  §  6  inf ,  (i)  delivery  of  possession  where  none  has  preceded  (as
in  quorum  bonorum,  §  3  inf.) ;  (2)  the  removal  of  a  nuisance  or  demolition
of  an  unlawful  structure,  Dig.  43.  8.  2.  35  and  43.

For  the  meaning  of  exhibitorium  and  exhibere  see  on  Tit.  6.  31  supr.
Theophilus  illustrates  the  interdict  by  which  the  praetor  '  iubet  exhiben
eum  cuius  de  libertate  agitur'  by  saying  aircMcpufrretr  top  tfiov  adeX^p,
\iyoiV  avrhv  flvai  ^ovkov  a6py  tftov  fiovXofUvov  v«p\  r^s  avrov  diKauraaBaM,
€X€v6tpia9:  it  was  thus  a  different  remedy  from  the  interdictum  de
homine  libero  exhibendo,  which  lay  only  for  the  production  of  a  person
whose  free  status  was  not  questioned :  '  plane  si  dubitat,  utrum  liber  an
servus  sit,  vel  facit  status  controversiam,  recedendum  erit  ab  hoc  inter-
dicto  et  agenda  causa  libertatis ;  etenim  recte  placuit  tunc  demum  hoc
interdictum  locum  habere,  quotiens  quis  pro  certo  liber  est :  cetenim  si
quaeratur  de  statu,  non  oportet  praeiudicium  fieri  alienae  cognitioni '  Dig.

43-  29.  3-  7.
For  the  production  of  a  libertus  *  cui  patronus  operas  indicere  velit '

cf.  Gains  iv.  162.    Certain  services  could  be  legally  claimed  from  the

libertus  by  his  patron  if  they  had  been   promised  under  oath;    see

p.  406  supr.    The  interdict  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  Corpus

iuris.


y


Tit.  15.]  DE  INTERDICT! S,  615

interdicta  appellari,  quia  inter  duos  dicuntur.  Sequens  2
divisio  interdictorum  haec  est,  quod  quaedam  adipiscendae
possessionis  causa  comparata  sunt,  quaedam  retinendae,  quae-
dam reciperandae.  Adipiscendae  possessionis  causa  interdictum  3
accommodatur  bonorum  possessori,  quod  appellatur  quorum
bonorum,  eiusque  vis  et  potestas  haec  est,  ut,  quod  ex  his
bonis  quisque,  quorum  possessio  alicui  data  est,  pro  herede
aut  pro  possessore  possideat,  id  ei,  cui  bonorum  possessio  data
est,  restituere  debeat.  pro  herede  autem  possidere  videtur,
qui  putat  se  heredem  esse:  pro  possessore  is  possidet,  qui
nullo  lure  rem  hereditariam  vel  etiam  totam  hereditatem
sciens  ad  se  non  pertinere  possidet.  ideo  autem  adipiscendae
possessionis  vocatur  interdictum,  qui^  ei  tantum  utile  est,  qui
nunc  primum  conatur  adipisci  rei  possessionem  :  itaque  si
quis  adeptus  possessionem  amiserit  eam,  hoc  interdictum  ei
inutile  est.    interdictum  quoque,  quod  appellatur  Salvianum,

For  the  pater's  right  to  enforce  production  of  children  in  his  power  see
^^%'  43*  30 ;  the  formula  of  the  interdict  ran  '  qui  quaeve  in  potestate
Titii  est,  si  is  eave  apud  te  est  dolove  malo  tuo  factum  est  quominus
apud  te  esset,  ita  eum  eamve  exhibeas.'

Gains  (iv.  140)  says  that  orders  enjoining  restitution  or  production
were  not  improperly  called  decreta ;  cf.  the  lex  de  GalL  Cisalp. '  decemet,
interdicetve.'  For  interdicere  in  the  sense  of  '  ordering  *  cf.  *  ut  navigare
liceat . . .  interdicam'  Dig.  43.  14.  1.  pr.  Justinian's  derivation  of  inter-
dictum is  reproduced  by  Theophilus,  Ivrtpducrov  . . .  eoru/  ofuXia  Upair»pos
/lera^v  dvo  rti^tti^,  and  possibly  is  supported  by  Varro,  ling.  Lat.  4. 36  '  inter-
trimentum  ab  eo,  quod  duo  quae  inter  se  trita  et  deminuta.  • .'  Isidorus*
etymology  is  different, '  interdictum  est,  quia  ad  tempus  interim  dicitur '
Orig.  5.  25.

§  2.  This  of  course  is  a  division  only  of  Possessory  interdicts;  it  is
'sequens,'  or  subordinate;  that  into  prohibitoria,  etc.,  is  'summa'  (§  i
supr.)  or  '  principalis '  (Gains  iv.  142).

§  8.  The  formula  of  quorum  bonorum  is  given  in  Dig.  43.  2.  i  '  quorum
bonorum  ex  edicto  meo  illi  possessio  data  est,  quod  de  his  bonis  pro
herede  aut  pro  possessore  possides,  possideresve  si  nihil  usucaptum  esset,
quodque  dolo  malo  fecisti  uti  desineres  possidere,  id  illi  restituas.'  Two
views  are  held  as  to  its  nature ;  Savigny  maintains  that  it  was  a  definitive
remedy  by  which  the  bonorum  possessor  obtained  a  judicial  recognition
of  his  title  as  praetorian  heir,  while  most  other  writers  on  the  subject
are  of  opinion  that  it  was  merely  a  summary  and  provisional  machinery
by  which  he  was  enabled  to  get  actual  possession  of  the  corporeal
property  belonging  to  the  deceased's  universitas  iuris,  his  right  to  the
universitas  itself  being  established  by  hereditatis  petitio  (direct  or  pos-


6i6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.     [Lib.  IV.

adipiscendae  possessionis  causa  comparatum  est  eoque  utitur
dominus  fundi  de  rebus  coloni,  quas  is  pro  mercedibus  fundi


sessoria,  according  as  he  was  civil  heir  or  not).  The  latter  view  seems
favoured  by  the  text  above,  and  to  be  conclusively  proved  by  Dig.  43.  3.
2  Mnterdicto  quorum  bonorum  debitores  hereditarii  non  tenentur,  sed
tantum  corporum  possessores/  and  Cod.  8.  2.  3  'ergo  iubetnos,  ut
omnibus  frustrationibus  amputatis  per  inter<tictum  quorum  bonorum
in  petitorem  corpora  transferantur,  secundaria  actione  proprietatis  noa
exdusa.'

No  one  could  apply  for  the  interdict,  even  though  he  were  civil  heir
(Gains  iii.  34),  who  had  not  by  agnitio  obtained  bonorum  possessio.  On
application  made  by  such  person  it  would  be  directed  against  any  one
who  was  in  possession  of  corporeal  property  belonging  to  the  inheritance
either  pro  herede  or  pro  possessore.  Possessores  pro  herede  include
(besides  persons  'qui  putant  se  heredes  esse')  others  who  had  made
agnitio,  Dig.  5.  3.  11.  pr. ;  ib.  20.  13,  or  to  whom  the  inheritance  or  part
of  it  had  been  transferred  per  fideicommissum,  ib.  13.  5-7,  or  who  had
bought  the  inheritance  in  whole  or  part,  or  had  so  received  it  dotis  causa,
ib.  13. 4.  Possession  pro  possessore  is  defined  in  Dig.  5. 3. 1 1. 1 ;  ib.  13.  pr.
'pro  possessore  vero  possidet  praedo,  qui  interrogatus,  cur  possideac,
responsurus  sit,  quia  possideo,  nee  uUam  causam  possessionis  possit
dicere,  et  ideo  fur  et  raptor  petitione  hereditatis  tenentur.'

As  appears  from  the  text  of  the  interdict  cited  above,  any  one  could  be
proceeded  against  by  it  who  had  fraudulently  got  rid  of  the  possession  of
res  hereditariae,  and  even  a  completed  usucapion  would  not  protect  the
possessor,  the  senatusconsult  of  Hadrian  (Gains  ii.  57),  which  had  been
passed  primarily  in  the  interests  of  civil  heirs,  having  been  extended  also
to  praetorian  successors.  The  grantee  of  the  interdict  would  obtain
possession  of  the  object  in  dispute  on  proving  not  only  that  he  had
accepted  the  succession,  but  that  no  one  else  had  a  better  right  than  he :
'  quamvis  bonorum  possessionem  agnovisti,  non  aliter  possessor  constitui
poteris  quam  si  te  defuncti  filium  esse  probaveris'  Cod.  8.  2.  I.

For  the  interdictum  Salvianum  cf.  p.  555  supr.  Its  relation  to  the
actiones  Serviana  and  hypothecaria  seems  identical  with  that  of  quorum
bonorum  to  hereditatis  petitio ;  the  plaintiff,  alleging  that  he  has  a  hypo-
thec over  specific  property  of  his  debtor,  which  he  fears  may  be  made
away  with  before  he  can  prove  his  right,  obtains  possession  by  the
interdict,  and  then  proves  his  right  by  the  action;  'in  Salviano  inter-
dicto,  si  in  fundum  communem  duorum  pignora  sint  ab  aliquo  invecta,
possessor  vincet,  et  erit  iis  descendendum  ad  Servianum  indicium '  Dig.
43-  33*  2.  It  would  appear  that  the  interdict  lay  not  only  against  the
hypothecary  debtor  himself,  but  against  any  one  who  had  possession  of
the  property  subject  to  the  hypothec:  Kara  navros  Karix^vros  ra  roG
Ko\<cvov  vpayfiara  Kivrj3rja€Tai  r^  laXfiiavtiop  ivrtpducrop  Theoph. ;  cf.  Dig.

43*  33*  I  ('  et  adversus  extraneos  . . .  dari  debebit ') :  though  Cod  8.  9. 1


Tit  15.]  DE  INTERDICTIS.  617

pignori  futuras  pepigisset.  Retinendae  possession  is  causa  4
comparata  sunt  interdicta  uti  possidetis  et  utrubi,  cum  ab
utraque  parte  de  proprietate  alicuius  rei  controversia  sit  et
ante  quaeritur,  uter  ex  litigatoribus  possidere  et  uter  petere
debeat.  namque  nisi  ante  exploratum  fuerit,  utrius  eorum
possessio  sit,  non  potest  petitoria  actio  institui,  quia  et  civilis
et  naturalis  ratio  facit,  ut  alius  possideat^  alius  a  possidente
petat.  et  quia  longe  commodius  est  possidere  potius  quam
petere,  ideo  plerumque  et  fere  semper  ingens  existit  contentio
de  ipsa  possessione.  commodum  autem  possidendi  in  eo  est,
quod,  etiamsi  eius  res  non  sit  qui  possidet,  si  modo  actor
non  potuerit  suam  esse  probare,  remanet  suo  loco  possessio :
propter  quam  causam,  cum  obscura  sint  utriusque  iura,  con-
tra petitorem  iudicari  solet  Sed  interdicto  quidem  uti  pos-
sidetis de  fundi  vel  aedium  possessione  contenditur,  utrubi
vero  interdicto  de  rerum  mobilium  possessione.  quorum
vis  et  potestas  plurimam  inter  se  differentiam  apud  veteres
habebat:  nam  uti  possidetis  interdicto  is  vincebat,  qui  in-
terdict! tempore  possidebat,  si  modo  nee  vi  nee  clam  nee
precario  nanctus  fuerat  ab  adversario  possessionem,  etiamsi
alium  vi  expulerit  aut  clam  abripuerit  alienam  possessionem
aut  precarid  rogaverat  aliquem,  ut  sibi  possidere  liceret :
utrubi  vero  interdicto  is  vincebat^  qui  maiore  parte  eius  anni
nee  vi  nee  clam  nee  precario  ab  adversario  possidebat.  hodie
tamen  aliter  observatur:  nam  utriusque  interdict!  potestas
quantum  ad  possessionem  pertinet  exaequata  est,  ut  ille
vincat  et  in  re  soli  et  in  re  mobili,  qui  possessionem  nee  vi

is  irreconcileable :  'non  interdicto  Salviano,  id  enixn  tantummodo  ad-
versus  conductorem  debitoremve  competic*

Other  examples  of  interdicts  adipiscendae  possessionis  given  by  Gains
(iv.  145-6)  are  those  called  possessorium  and  sectorium,  the  first  being
the  remedy  of  the  highest  bidder  in  the  bankruptcy  procedure  called
bonorum  venditio,  p.  393  supr.,  the  second  that  of  the  sector  or  purchaser
at  a  state  auction.  •

§  4.  Opinions  have  differed  very  much  as  to  the  true  nature  and
purpose  of  the  interdicts  uti  possidetis  and  utrubi.  It  will  have  been
obvious  from  the  account  given  of  them  in  a  preceding  note  on  this  Title,
and  from  the  opening  words  of  this  section,  which  correspond  exactly
with  Gains  iv.  148,  that  their  original  object  was  to  determine  a  question
preliminary  to  a  vindication  which  of  two  parties,  each  of  whom  claims  to


6i8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

nee  clam  nee  precario  ab  adversario  litis  contestationis  tern-
5  pore  detinet.      Possidere  autem  videtur  quisque  non  soluon.


be  entitled  to  the  possession  of  specific  property,  is  actually  to  have  the
possession  during  the  vindicatio  itself,  and  so  play  the  rdle  of  defendant  ?
The  commodum  possessionis,  or  advantage  which  the  defendant  had
over  the  plaintiff,  is  clearly  put  in  the  text ;  if  the  latter  could  not  prove
his  case,  the  possession  remained  with  him;  'in  pari  causa  possessor
potior'  Dig.  50.  17.  128.  pr. ;  oror  kqX  t^  4>€vyovrt  koli  t^  dimKovri  injffMH
?(rac,  6  4>fvyw»  yiic$,  AristoUe,  Probl.  29.  12,  'necessitas  probandi  incumbit
illi,  qui  agit'  Dig.  22.  3.  21.  Of  course  the  party  vanquished  in  the  pos-
sessory process  might  acqaiesce  in  the  decision  there,  and  not  push
matters  to  a  vindicatio  at  all ;  but  the  true  function  of  the  interdict  was
to  clear  the  way  for  the  action.

This,  in  fact,  is  the  main  purpose  of  these  two  interdicts  under  Jus-
tinian. It  is  uncertain  which  of  two  parties,  each  of  whom  claims  to  be
dominus  of  specific  property,  shall  be  defendant  in  the  real  action  which
is  to  settle  the  question  of  dominium;  and  this  is  determined  by  a
preliminary  process,  the  interdict,  which  results  in  the  award  of  the
possession  (and  therefore  of  the  rS/e  of  defendant)  to  the  one  who  at
litis  contestatio  (i.  e.  at  the  time  when  the  hearing  began)  actually  had
possession  without  having  obtained  it  by  violence,  secrecy,  or  permission,
from  his  adversary ;  if  the  latter  could  prove  that  his  possession  was
defective  in  any  of  these  respects,  the  possession  was  adjudged  to  him
instead,  and  to  this  extent  the  interdict  was  recuperandae,  not  retinendae
possessionis.  Dig.  43.  17.  1.9;  ib.  3.  pr.

It  would  seem  too  that  uti  possidetis,  if  not  utrubi  as  well,  had  in
course  of  time  come  to  be  employed  when  one  person  interfered  in  any
way  whatsoever  with  the  possession  of  another,  much  in  the  same  sort  of
manner  as  the  English  assize  of  Novel  Disseisin  came  to  lie  against  any
one  who  in  any  way  whatsoever  interfered  with  the  enjoyment  of  the
freehold,  and  even  for  disturbance  of  common  (Dig.  43.  17.  3.  4).  In
this  form  it  had  lost  its  double  character,  and  was  in  effect  a  remedy  ex
delicto.  Both  interdicts  are  said  to  be  limited  to  a  year;  by  this  is
meant  that  where  brought  on  an  actual  distin-bance  of  possession,  they
must  be  brought  within  a  year  of  the  date  of  such  disturbance,  Dig.  43.
17.  I.  pr.,  except  so  far  as  the  defendant  had  been  enriched  by  his  act,
Dig.  43. 1.  4,  and  that  no  vitium  possessionis  (vi,  clam,  precario)  could  be
advanced  which  did  not  fall  within  a  year  next  immediately  preceding
litis  contestatio  in  the  interdict

The  date  of  the  assimilation  of  utrubi  to  uti  possidetis  in  the  point
noticed  at  the  end  of  the  section  is  uncertain :  that  it  had  not  been
effected  so  early  as  Diocletian  is  clear  from  Fragm.  Vat.  293,  so  that  the
passage  in  Dig.  43.  31  attributed  to  Ulpian  must  be  an  interpolation.

§  6.  For  the  Roman  theory  of  Possession  in  general  see  Excursus  III
supr.    The  following  texts  will  help  to  elucidate  the  present  passage :

Dig.  41.  2.  9  'generaliter  quisquis  omnino  nostro  nomine  sit  m  ^s-


Tit.  15.]  DE  INTERDICTIS.  619

si  ipse  possideat,  sed  $t  si  eius  nomine  aliquis  in  possessione
sit,  licet  is  eius  iuri  subiectus  non  sit,  qualis  est  colonus  et
inquilinus :  per  eos  quoque,  apud  quos  deposuerit  quis  aut
quibus  commodaverit,  ipse  possidere  videtur :  et  hoc  est,
quod  dicitur  retinere  possessionem  posse  aliquem  per  quern-
libet,  qui  eius  nomine  sit  in  possessione.  quin  etiam  animo
quoque  retineri  possessionem  placet,  id  est  ut,  quamvis  neque
ipse  sit  in  possessione  neque  eius  nomine  alius,  tamen  si  non
relinquendae  possessionis  animo,  sed  postea  reversurus  inde
discesserit,  retinere  possessionem  videtur.  adipisci  vero  pos-
sessionem per  quos  aliquis  potest,  secundo  libro  exposuimus.
nee  ulla  dubitatio  est,  quin  animo  solo  possessionem  adipisci
nemo  potest.  Reciperandae  possessionis  causa  solet  interdici,  6
si  quis  ex  possessione  fundi  vel  aedium  vi  deiectus  fuerit :
nam  ei  proponitur  interdictum  unde  vi,  per  quod  is  qui  deiecit
cogitur  ei  restituere  possessionem,  licet  is  ab  eo  qui  vi  deiecit
vi  vel  clam  vel  precario  possidebat.  sed  ex  sacris  consti-
tutionibus,  ut  supra  diximus,  si  quis  rem  per  vim  occupaverit,
si  quidem  in  bonis  eius  est,  dominio  eius  privatur,  si  aliena,
post  eius  restitutionem  etiam  aestimationem  rei  dare  vim
passo  compellitur.  qui  autem  aliquem  de  possessione  per
vim  deiecerit,  tenetur  lege  lulia  de  vi  privata  aut  de  vi  publica :
sed  de  vi  privata,  si  sine  armis  vim  fecerit,  sin  autem  cum
armis  eum  de  possessione  expulerit,  de  vi  publica.     armorum

sessiongy  veluti  procurator,  hospes,  amicus,  nos  possidere  videmur,*  ib.
10. 1  'aliud  est .  . . . possidere y  longe  aliud  in  possessione  esse*  ib.  25.  i
*  nee  inter  colonum  et  servum  nostrum,  per  quern  possessionem  retinemus,
quicquam  interest,'  Gaius  iv.  153  'quinetiam  plerique  putant,  ammo
quoque  retineri  possessionem,  quod  nostrorum  verbi  gratia  aestivorum  et
hibemorum  saltuum  animo  solo,  quia  voluerimus,  ex  quo  discessimus,
reverti,  retinere  possessionem  videamur,*  Paul.  Sent.  Rec.  5.  2.  i  *  (pos-
sessionem) retinere  nudo  animo  possumus,  sicut  in  saltibus  hibemis
aestivisque  contingit,*  Dig.  41.  2.  3.  i  *apiscimur  possessionem  corpore
et  animo,  neque  per  se  animo,  aut  per  se  corpore,'  ib.  8.

For  the  difference  between  colonus  and  inquilinus  see  p.  443  supr.  The
reference  for  acquisition  of  possession  through  others  is  to  Bk.  ii.  9.  4
supr.

§  6.  Under  the  older  law  there  were  two  interdicts  for  recovering
possession  of  land  or  buildings  from  which  a  person  had  been  violently
ejected  (ad  duas  dissimiles  res  duo  disiuncta  interdict  a  sunt,  Cic.  pro
Caec.  32) ;  one,  the  ordinary  interdict  unde  vi,  applying  where  there  had


620  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR,       [Lib.  IV.

autem  appeliatione  non  solum  scuta  et  gladios  et  galeas
7  significari  intellegimus,  sed  et  fustes  et  lapides.  Tertia  divisio
interdictorum  haec  est,  quod  aut  simplicia  sunt  aut  duplicia.
simpiicia  sunt,  veluti  in  quibus  alter  actor,  alter  reus  est:
qualia  sunt  omnia  restitutoria  aut  exhibitoria :  namque  actor
est,  qui  desiderat  aut  exhiberi  aut  restitui,  reus  is,  a  quo  de-
sideratur,  ut  restituat  aut  exhibeat.  prohibitoriorum  autem
interdictorum  alia  simplicia  sunt,  alia  duplicia.  simplicia  sunt,
veluti  cum  prohibet  praetor  in  loco  sacro  vel  in  flumine
publico  ripave  eius  aliquid  fieri  (nam  actor  est,  qui  desiderat,
ne  quid  fiat,  reus,  qui  aliquid  facere  conatur) :  duplicia  sunt
veluti  uti  possidetis  interdictum  et  utrubi.  ideo  autem  du-
plicia vocantur,  quia  par  utriusque  litigatoris  in  his  condicio
est  nee  quisquam  praecipue  reus  vel  actor  intellegitur,  sed
unusquisque  tam  rei  quam  actoris  partem  sustinet.

been  no  use  of  weapons  (vis  quotidiana) ;  the  other,  interdictum  de  vi
armata,  where  there  had.

In  the  first  case  the  ejector  could  plead  the  exceptio  vitiosae  posses-
sionis,  i.e.  the  grantee  of  the  interdict  was  successful  only  if  he  could
show  that  he  had  not  himself  obtained  possession  vi,  dam,  or  precario
from  the  other  (lex  Thoria  7,  Cic.  pro  TuUio  44-5,  Gaius  iv.  154).  In  the
second  the  mode  in  which  his  possession  had  originated  was  immaterial,
Gaius  iv.  155.  This  difference,  however,  as  appears  from  the  text,  had
disappeared  in  Justinian's  time,  possibly  in  consequence  of  Valentinian's
enactment  (Cod.  8.  4.  7)  here  referred  to,  for  which  see  on  Tit.  2.  i  supn
Originally  too  only  the  first  of  these  interdicts  had  been  barred  by  limita-
tion of  a  year,  Cic.  ad  Fam.  15,  16,  but  under  Justinian  this  distinction
too  had  ceased  to  exist,  and  there  was  only  one  interdict  de  or  unde  vi,
which  could  be  brought  after  a  year  had  elapsed  from  the  ejectment
only  so  far  as  the  ejector  had  been  thereby  enriched.  Dig.  43.  16.  i.  pr.
Justinian  allowed  unde  vi  to  be  brought  even  where  land  had  been  entered
upon  in  the  possessor's  absence.  Cod.  8.  4.  11.

The  limitation  of  this  interdict  to  res  immobiles  (Paul.  Sent  Rec  5.  6.
5,  Dig.  43.  16.  I.  6)  seems  to  hold  also  under  Justinian.  The  action
under  the  constitution  of  Valentinian  (which  applied  also  to  moveables)
would  be  one  of  the  actions  which  lay  upon  theft  in  addition  to  the  actio
furti,  Tit.  I.  19  and  notes  supr.  For  the  lex  lulia  de  vi  see  Tit  18.  8  and
notes  inf.

§  7.  For  the  sense  in  which  uti  possidetis  and  utrubi  were  '  double '  in
the  formulary  period  see  note  p.  612  supr.  Under  Justinian  they  are
double,  as  is  clear  from  the  text,  because  there  is  no  difference,  as  in
ordinary  actions  and  simple  interdicts,  between  the  respective  rSUs  of
plaintiff  and  defendant ;  the  burden  of  proof  lies  upon  the  two  parties


Tit.  1 6.]        DE  POENA    TEMERE  LITIGANTIUM.  621

De  ordine  et  veteri  exitu  interdictorum  supervacuum  est  8
hodie  dicere  :  nam  quotiens  extra  ordinem  ius  dicitur,  qualia
sunt  hodie  omnia  iudicia,  non  est  necesse  reddi  interdictum,
sed  perinde  iudicatur  sine  interdictis,  atque  si  utilis  actio  ex
causa  interdicti  reddita  fuisset.


XVI.

DE  POENA  TEMERE  LITIGANTIUM.

Nunc  admonendi  sumus  itiagnam  curam  egisse  eos,  qui  iura
sustinebant,  ne  facile  homines  ad  litigandum  procederent :
quod  et  nobis  studio  est.  idque  eo  maxime  fieri  pK>test,  quod
temeritas  tam  agentium  quam  eorum  cum  quibus  ageretur
modo  pecuniaria  poena,  modo  iurisiurandi  religione,  modo
metu  infamiae  coercetur.  Ecce  enim  iusiurandum  omnibus  1
qui  conveniuntur  ex  nostra  constitutione  defertur :  nam  reus
non  aliter  suis  allegationibus  utitur,  nisi  prius  iuraverit,  quod
putans  se  bona  instantia  uti  ad  contradicendum  pervenit.  at
adversus  infitiantes  ex  quibusdam  causis  dupli  vel  tripli  actio

equally,  and  whichever  proves  that  he  has  not  obtained  possession  vi,
clam,  or  precario  from  the  other  will  win,  and  the  other  be  condemned  ;
'hi,  quibus  competit  (interdictum)  et  actores  et  rei  sunt '  Dig.  43.  17.  3.  i.

§  8.  For  interdict  procedure  in  the  earlier  period  and  under  Justinian
see  the  first  note  upon  this  Tide.

Tit.  XVI.  1.  In  the  time  of  Gaius  the  defendant  could  be  compelled  to
swear  *non  calumniae  causa  se  ad  inficias  ire'  only  where  he  was  not
restrained  from  vexatiously  defending  the  action  by  some  other  recognised
motive,  such  as  the  penal  sponsio  in  condictio  certi  and  the  actio  de
constituta  pecunia,  the  duplication  of  damages  in  some  actions  on  denial
of  liability,  or  the  penal  nature  of  the  action  itself,  Gaius  iv.  172.  By
Cod.  2.  59.  2  Justinian  required  the  oath  from  all  defendants  and  their
advocates.

By  a  defendant's  '  allegationes '  are  to  be  understood  the  evidence  and
arguments  in  support  of  his  contradictio,  Cod.  3.  i.  14.  i.  The  oath  was
taken  on  the  Bible,  '-sacrosanctae  scripturae '  Cod.  loc.  cit. :  2.  59.  2.  pr.
The  primary  juristic  signification  of  *  instantia'  seems  to  be  'keenness,'
'energy'  ('diligenti  studio  instantiaque  complere  opera'  Cod.  8.  12.  22,
'  stricta  instantia  falsum  arguere  paratus '  Cod.  9.  22.  24),  whence  it  comes
to  mean,  as  here,  a  contention  ('  believing  that  his  contention  in  defence
is  honest ').

For  the  actions  in  which  it  was  said '  adversus  inficiantes  lis  crescit  in


632  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

constituitur,  veluti  si  damni  iniuriae  aut  l^atorum  locis  ve-
nerabilibus  relictorum  nomine  agitur.  statim  autem  ab  initio
pluris  quam  simpli  est  actio  veluti  furti  manifest!  quadrupli,
nee  manifest!  dupli :  nam  ex  his  causis  et  aliis  quibusdam,
sive  quis  neget  sive  fateatur,  pluris  quam  simpli  est  actia
item  actoris  quoque  calumnia  coercetur :  nam  etiam  actor
pro  calumnia  iurare  cogitur  ex  nostra  constitutione.  utriusque
etiam  partis  advocati  iusiurandum  subeunt,  quod  alia  nostra
constitutione  comprehensum  est.  haec  autem  omnia  pro
veteris  calumniae  actione  introducta  sunt,  quae  in  desuetu*
dinem  abiit,  quia  in  partem  decimam  litis  actorem  multabat,

duplum'  see  on  Bk.  iii.  27.  7  supr.:  cf.  Tit.  6.  19  and  26  supr.  The
actions  to  which  Justinian  alludes,  in  which  'adversus  iniiciantem  lis
crescit  in  triplum/  are  unknown  ;  those  on  furtum  conceptum  and  obla-
tum  (p.  521  supr.)  were  in  triplum  ^  sive  quis  neget  sive  fateatur,'  and  the
triple  penalty  in  Tit.  6.  24  supr.  did  not  apparently  result  from  a  denial
of  liability.

In  the  earlier  procedure  vexatious  litigation  in  plaintiffs  had  been
restrained  in  four  ways ;  '  actoris  quoque  calumnia  coercetur  modo
calumniae  iudicio,  modo  contrario,  modo  iureiurando,  modo  restipula-
tione'  Gaius  iv.  174.  In  actions  where  there  was  a  sponsio  poenalis,
the  defendant  could  require  that  the  plaintiff  should  promise  him  by
restipulatio  an  equivalent  sum  in  the  event  of  his  being  unable  to  prove
his  case.  In  other  suits,  if  absolved,  he  could  often  bring  against
him  an  action  in  the  nature  of  'malicious  prosecution.'  By  the  actio
calumniae  he  might  recover  ^  (in  interdicts  \)  of  the  value  in  dispute
in  the  previous  action,  but  had  to  prove  that  the  other  had  sued  him
knowing  that  he  had  no  ground  of  action,  'calumnia  enim  in  adfectu
est'  Gaius  iv.  178.  By  the  contrarium  indicium,  which  was  an  alter-
native to  this,  but  which  lay  only  against  an  unsuccessful  plaintiff  in
certain  specific  actions  (e.g.  iniuriae,  Gaius  iv.  177),  and  in  which  it  was
unnecessary  to  prove  malice,  he  could  similarly  recover  damages  equiva**
lent  to  some  fraction  of  the  amount  claimed  in  the  previous  action.
Neither  of  these  indicia,  however,  lay,  nor  could  the  defendant  claim
a  penal  restipulatio,  if  he  had  compelled  the  plaintiff  to  take  the  ius-
iurandum calumniae,  i.e.  to  swear  that  to  the  best  of  his  belief  he
had  a  good  ground  of  action,  Gaius  iv.  181.

Under  Justinian  the  penal  sponsio  and  restipulatio  in  the  two  actions
specified  had  disappeared,  and,  as  is  remarked  in  the  text,  the  iudicia
calumniae  and  contrarium  were  also  obsolete,  though  they  had  still  been
in  use  in  the  age  of  Diocletian,  Cod.  Hermog.  5.  3.  In  lieu  of  these
precautions  the  plaintiff  had  in  all  cases  '  pro  calumnia  iurare '  Cod.  2,
59.  2.  pr.,  and  the  unsuccessful  litigant  had  to  pay  his  adversary's  costs  ;
'  sive  autem  alterutra  parte  absente  sive  utraque  praesente  lis  fuerit  decisa,


Tit.  i6.]        DE  POENA   TEMERE  LITIGANTIUM.  623

quod  nusquam  factum  esse  invenimus :  sed  pro  his  introductum
est  et  praefatum  iusiurandum  et  ut  improbus  litigator  etiam
damnum  et  impensas  litis  inferre  adversario  suo  cogatur.  Ex  2
quibusdam  iudiciis  damnati  ignominiosi  fiunt,  veluti  furtt,  vi
bonorum  raptorum,  iniuriarum,  de  dolo,  item  tutelae,  mandati,
depositi^  directis  non  contrariis  actionibus,  item  pro  socio,  quae
ab  utraque  parte  directa  est  et  ob  id  quilibet  ex  sociis  eo
iudicio  damnatus  ignominia  notatur.  sed  furti  quidem  aut
vi  bonorum  raptorum  aut  iniuriarum  aut  de  dolo  non  solum
damnati  notantur  ignominia,  sed  etiam  pacti,  et  recte;  plu-

omnes  iudices,  qui  sub  imperio  nostro  constituti  sunt,  sciant  in  expen-
sarum  causa  victum  victori  esse  condemnandum,  quantum  pro  solitis
expensis  litium  iuraverit,  non  ignorantes  quod  si  hoc  praetermiserint,  ipsi
de  proprio  huiusmodi  poenae  subiacebunt  et  reddere  earn  parti  laesae
coartabuntur'  Cod.  3.  i.  13.  6.

§  2.  For  the  meaning  of  existimatio  see  on  Bk.  i.  16.  5  supr.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  minutio  existimationis,  which  was  generically  denoted  by
the  term  ignominia,  most  usually  resulted  from  a  citizen's  getting  into
a  position  in  which  the  Edict  branded  him  with  infamia,  Dig.  3.  2.  I.
Infamia  attached,  in  consequence  of  a  judicial  sentence  or  something
equivalent  (infamia  iuris)  to  all  persons  condemned  in  a  iudicium  pub-
licum (Dig.  48.  I.  7),  or  in  any  of  the  civil  actions  specified  in  the  text
(to  which  must  be  added  the  delictal  action  for  sepulcri  violatio,  and,
for  the  older  law,  the  actio  fiduciae.  Gains  iv.  182),  or  found  guilty  of
usury.  Cod.  2.  12.  20,  or  ignominiously  discharged  from  military  service
(Dig.  3.  2.  2),  guardians  removed  as  suspecti  ob  dolum,  Bk.  i.  26.  6  supr.,
and  bankrupts  (p.  395  supr.).  Other  persons  became  infames  apart
from  anything  in  the  nature  of  a  judicial  sentence  (infamia  immediata),
e.g.  wives  taken  in  adultery,  Dig.  23.  2.  43.  12  and  13;  guardians  or
curators  who  married  their  female  wards  while  under  the  age  of  26,
ib,  66.  pr. ;  and  persons  who  violated  a  transactio  (p.  405  supr.)  made
under  oath.  Cod.  2.  4.  41.

Under  the  Republic  the  consequence  of  infamia  had  been  serious ;  the
infamis  lost  the  political  rights  of  civitas,  viz.  suffragium  and  honores ;
was  disabled  from  applying  for  the  magistrate's  judicial  assistance  except
on  behalf  of  himself  and  specified  other  persons  ('  postulare :  postulare
autem  est,  desiderium  suum  vel  amici  sui  in  iure  apud  eum,  qui  iuris^
dictioni  praeest,  exponere  vel  alterius  desiderio  contradicere '  Dig.  3.  i.  i.
2, '  hoc  edicto  continentur  etiam  omnes,  qui  edicto  praetoris  ut  infames
notantur :  qui  omnes  nisi  pro  se  et  certis  personis  ne  postulent,'  ib.  8),
and  also  was  to  a  large  extent  incapable  of  being  represented  himself  by
an  agent  in  legal  process,  Tit.  13. 11  and  notes  supr. ;  finally  certain  matri-
monial disabilities  were  imposed  on  him  by  the  lex  lulia  de  maritandis,
Ulpian,  Reg.  13.    Under  Justinian,  however,  most  of  these  consequence^


624  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Ub.  IV.

rimum  enim  interest,  utrum  ex  delicto  aliquls  an  ex  contractu
debitor  sit.
3  Omnium  autem  actionum  instituendanim  principium  ab  ea
parte  edicti  proficiscitur,  qua  praetor  edicit  de  in  ius  vocando :
utique  enim  in  primis  adversarius  in  ius  vocandus  est,  id  est  ad
eum  vocandus  est,  qui  ius  dicturus  sit.  qua  parte  praetor
parentibus  et  patronis,  item  liberis  parentibusque  patronorum
et  patronarum  hunc  praestat  honorem,  ut  non  aliter  liceat
liberis  libertisque  eos  in  ius  vocare,  quam  si  id  ab  ipso  prae-
tore  postulaverint  et  impetraverint :  et  si  quis  aliter  vocaverit,
in  eum  poenam  solidorum  quinquaginta  constituit.


XVIL

DE  OFFICIO  lUDICIS.

Superest,  ut  de  officio  iudids  dispiciamus.    et  quidem  in
primis  illud  observare  debet  iudex,  ne  aliter  iudicet,  quam

1  legibus  aut  constitutionibus  aut  moribus  proditum  est.  Et
ideo  si  noxali  iudicio  addictus  est,  observare  debet,  ut,  si
condemnandus  videbitur  dominus,  ita  debeat  condemnare:
'  Publium  Maevium  Lucio  Titio  decem  aureis  condemno  aut

2  noxam  dedere.'     Et  si  in  rem  actum  sit,  sive  contra  petitorem

were  inoperative  or  obsolete.  On  the  whole  subject  see  Greenidge,
Infamia,  chap.  vi.

For  the  meaning  of  actio  directa  in  this  connection  see  p.  401  sopr. ;  for
'pacti'  cf.  Dig.  3.  2.  6.  3  'pactum  sic  accipimus,  si  cum  pretio  qoanto-
cunque  pactus  est,'  Cod.  2.  12.  18  'verum  pactos  eos  demum,  qui  ullos
adversariis  nummos  pro  mala  conscientia  ex  transactione  numerassent,  in
hac  causa  placuit  intellegi.'  The  compounding  of  a  delict  for  money  is  as
bad  as  being  found  guilty  of  having  committed  it.

§  8.  For  the  form  of  summons  under  Justinian  see  on  Tit.  6.  24  supr.,
and  for  the  summons  of  parents  and  patrons  without  the  praetor's  per-
mission cf.  Gains  iv.  46.

Tit.  XVII.  1.  For  noxal  actions  see  Tit  8  supr.  and  notes :  cf.  Dig.
42.  I.  6.  I  'decem  aut  noxae  dedere  condemnatus  iudicati  in  decem
tenetur,  facultatem  autem  noxae  dedendi  ex  lege  accipit :  at  is  qui  stipu«
latus  est  decem  aut  noxae  dedere  non  potest  decem  petere.'

§  2.  A  defendant  would  be  entided  to  time  for  a  restitutio,  that  is  to
say,  his  application  would  not  be  put  down  to  frustratio,  only  where  the
obstacle  was  natural, '  neque  tantum  in  ipsius  debitoris  persona  fitcohas


Tit  17.]  DE  OFFICIO  lUDICIS.  6125

iudicavit,  absolvere  debet  possessorem,  sive  contra  possessorem,
iubere  eum  debet,  ut  rem  ipsam  restituat  cum  fructibus.  sed
si  in  praesenti  neget  se  possessor  restituere  posse  et  sine
frustratione  videbitur  tempus  restituendi  causa  petere,  indul-
gendum  est  ei,  ut  tamen  de  litis  aestimatione  caveat  cum
fideiussore,  si  intra  tempus  quod  ei  datum  est  non  restituisset.
et  si  hereditas  petita  sit,  eadem  circa  fructus  interveniunt,
quae  diximus  intervenire  in  singularum  rerum  petitione.
illorum  autem  fructuum,  quos  culpa  sua  possessor  non  per-
ceperit,  in  utraque  actione  eadem  ratio  paene  fit,  si  praedo
fuerit.  si  vero  bona  fide  possessor  fuerit,  non  habetur  ratio
consumptorum  neque  non  perceptorum  :  post  inchoatam
autem  petitionem  etiam  illorum  ratio  habetur,  qui  culpa
possessoris  percepti  non  sunt  vel  percepti  consumpti  sunt.
Si  ad  exhibendum  actum  fuerit,  non  sufiicit,  si  exhibeat  rem  3
is  cum  quo  actum  est,  sed  opus  est,  ut  etiam  causam  rei
debeat  exhibere,  id  est  ut  earn  causam  habeat  actor,  quam
habiturus  esset,  si,  cum  primum  ad  exhibendum  egisset,
exhibita  res  fuisset :  ideoque  si  inter  moras  usucapta  sit  res
a  possessore,  nihilo  minus  condemnatur.  praeterea  fructuum
medii  temporis,  id  est  eius,  quod  post  acceptum  ad  exhi-
bendum iudicium  ante  rem  iudicatam  intercessit,  rationem
habere  debet  iudex.  quod  si  neget  is,  cum  quo  ad  ex-
hibendum actum  est,  in  praesenti  exhibere  se  posse  et  tempus
exhibendi  causa  petat  idque  sine  frustratione  postulare  videa-
tur,  dari  ei  debet,  ut  tamen  caveat  se  restituturum :  quod  si


dandi  deest,'  of.  Dig.  45.  i.  73.  pr.  '  interdum  pura  sttpulatio  ex  re  ipsa
dilationem  capit,  veluti  si  id  quod  in  utero  sit  aut  fructus  futures  aut
domum  aedificari  stipulatus  sit,'  ib.  137.  4  'sed  haec  recedunt  ab  im-
ped imen  to  naturali  et  respiciunt  ad  facultatem  dandi :  est  autem  facultas
personae  commodum  incommodumque,  non  rerum  quae  promittuntur/

For  the  difference  between  a  bona  fide  and  a  mala  fide  possessor
(praedo)  in  respect  of  liability  for  fructus  sec  on  Bk.  ii.  i.  35  supr.  The
former's  mental  attitude  was  by  a  fiction  represented  as  having  changed
at  litis  contestatio :  '  bonae  fidei  possessor  postea  (i.  e.  petita  hereditate)
et  ipse  praedo  est*  Dig.  5.  3.  31.  3.

§  8.  For  the  nature  of  the  actio  ad  exhibendum  see  on  Tit.  6.  31  supr.
'  Causa '  in  this  connection  does  not  seem  to  include  fructus,  which  are
mentioned  later  in  the  paragraph ;  but,  as  this  action  as  a  rule  only  paved
the  way  to  further  litigation,  it  rather  denotes  (as  seems  clear  from  the

S  s


6a6  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.       [Lib.  IV.

neque  statim  iussu  iudicis  rem  exhibeat  neque  postea  ex-
hibiturum  se  caveat,  condemnandus  sit  in  id,  quod  actoris

4  intererat  ab  initio  rem  exhibitam  esse.  Si  familiae  erciscundae
iudicio  actum  sit,  singulas  res  singulis  heredibus  adiudicare
debet  et,  si  in  alterius  persona  praegravare  videatur  adiudi-
catio,  debet  hunc  invicem  cohered!  certa  pecunia,  sicut  iam
dictum  est,  condemnare.  eo  quoque  nomine  coheredi  quisque
suo  condemnandus  est,  quod  solus  fructus  hereditarit  fundi
percepit  aut  rem  hereditariam  comipit  aut  consumpsit.  quae
quidem  similiter  inter  plures  quoque  quam  duos  coheredes

5  subsequuntur.  Eadem  interveniunt  et  si  communi  dividundo
de  pluribus  rebus  actum  fuerit.  quod  si  de  una  re,  veluti  de
fundo,  si  quidem  iste  fundus  commode  r^ionibus  divisionem
recipiat,  partes  eius  singulis  adiudicare  debet  et,  si  unius  pars
praegravare  videbitur,  is  invicem  certa  pecunia  alteri  con-
demnandus est :  quod  si  commode  dividi  non  possit,  vel
homo  forte  aut  mulus  erit  de  quo  actum  sit,  uni  totus  adiu-

^  dicandus  est  et  is  alteri  certa  pecunia  condemnandus.     Si

illustration  in  the  text,  Mdeoque  si  .  .  .  condemnabitur ')  advantages  of
legal  position :  ^  in  eadem  causa  in  qua  fuit,  cum  iudicium  acdperetur,  ut
quis  copiam  rei  habens  possit  exsequi  actione  in  nullo  casu  laesa'  Dig.
lo.  4.  9.  5.  Usucapion  was  not  properly  interrupted  by  litis  contestatio
with  the  possessor,  but,  if  the  plaintiff  proved  that,  at  that  date,  he  was
owner,  he  would  still  be  condemned,  Dig.  6.  i.  18;  41.  4.  2.  21  ;  41.
5.  2.  pr.

§  4.  For  the  general  nature  of  the  iudicia  divisoria  spoken  of  in  this
and  the  two  following  paragraphs  see  on  Tit  6.  20  supr.,  and  for  this
action  in  particular  p.  463  supr.  Debts  owed  by  and  to  the  hereditas  were
ipso  lure  divided  among  the  coheredes :  '  ea  quae  in  nominibus  sunt  non
recipiunt  divisionem,  cum  ipso  iure  in  portiones  hereditarias  ex  lege
duodecim  tabularum  divisa  sunt '  Cod.  3.  36.  6,  though  the  judge  might
properly  appoint  any  one  of  the  heirs  as  the  fit  person  to  sue  or  be  sued
on  specific  claims  or  liabilities  '  partim  suo  partim  procuratorio  nomine,
quia  saepe  et  solutio  et  exactio  partium  non  minima  incoromoda  habet '
Dig.  10.  2.  3.  Certain  other  res  hereditariae  were  exempted  from  par-
tition, either  because  they  were  in  their  very  nature  indivisible  (e.g.
praedial  servitudes)  or  from  their  having  already  been  specifically
assigned  to  this  or  that  heres  by  the  testator.  Dig.  ib.  44.  pr.

§  5.  For  the  actio  communi  dividundo  cf.  Bk.  iii.  27.  3  supr.

§  6.  For  the  actio  finium  regundorum  see  on  Tit.  6.  20  supr.  '  Hoc
iudicium  locum  habet  in  confinio  praediorum  rusticorum'  Dig.  10.  i.  4.
la    The  wilful  removal  of  boundaries   was  punished  extra  ordinem,


Tit.  1 8.]  DE  PUBLICIS  lUDICIlS.  6^27

finium  regundorum  actum  fuerit,  dispicere  debet  iudex,  an
necessaria  sit  adiudicatio.  quae  sane  uno  casu  necessaria  est,
si  evidentioribus  finibus  distingui  agros  commodius  sit,  quam
olim  fuissent  distincti :  nam  tunc  necesse  est  ex  alterius  agro
partem  aliquam  alterius  agri  domino  adiudicari.  quo  casu
conveniens  est,  ut  is  alteri  certa  pecunia  debeat  condemnarL
eo  quoque  nomine  damnandus  est  quisque  hoc  ludicio,  quod
forte  circa  fines  malitiose  aliquid  commisit,  verbi  gratia  quia
lapides  finales  furatus  est  aut  arbores  finales  cecidit  con-
tumaciae  quoque  nomine  quisque  eo  ludicio  condemnatur,
veluti  si  quis  iubente  iudice  metiri  agros  passus  non  fuerit.
Quod  autem  istis  iudiciis  alicui  adiudicatum  sit,  id  statim  7
eius  fit  cui  adiudicatum  est.


XVIII.

DE  PUBLICIS  IUDICIIS.

Publica  iudicia  neque  per  actiones  ordinantur  nee  omnino
quidquam  simile  habent  ceteris  iudiciis,  de  quibus  locuti
sumus,  magnaque  diversitas  est  eorum  et  in  instituendis  et
in  exercendis.      Publica   autem   dicta  sunt,  quod  cuivis  ex  1

Paul.  Sent.  rec.  1. 16 ;  'quod  si  per  ignorantiam  aut  fortuito  lapides  furati
sunt,  sufficit  cos  (servos)  verberibus  decidere'  Dig.  47.  21.  2.

§  7.  Hence  adiudicatio  is  a  civil  mode  of  acquisition,  p.  229  supr. '  ad-
iudicatione  dominium  nanciscimur  per  formulam  familiae  erciscundae,
communi  dividundo,  finium  regundorum'  Ulpian,  Reg.  19.  16.

Tit.  XVIII.  For  the  general  history  of  Roman  criminal  law  see
Maine*s  Ancient  Law,  chap.  x.  Iudicia  publica  in  the  later  period  were
commenced  by  an  indictment  or  information  (*  causa  criminis  ordinata,
id  est,  inscriptionibus  depositis'  Cod.  9.  45.  i),  the  form  of  which  is  pre-
served in  Dig.  48.  2.  3.  pr.  'apud  ilium  praetorem  vel  proconsulem  L.
Titius  professus  est  se  Maeviam  lege  lulia  de  adulter iis  ream  deferre,
quod  dicat  eam  cum  Gaio  Seio  in  civitate  ilia,  domo  illius,  mense  illo,
consulibus  illis  adulterium  commisisse.'  But,  the  procedure  in  Justinian's
time  being  altogether  extra  ordinem,  i.  e.  that  prescribed  for  the  several
iudicia  publica  by  statute  having  fallen  into  disuse,  the  differences  be-
tween actions  and  prosecutions  were  not  so  marked  as  might  be  inferred
from  the  text  above.

§  L  Plerumque  belongs  to  'cuivis  ex  populo.'  Impuberes,  infames,
and  the  very  poor  were  as  a  rule  disabled  from  prosecuting,  Dig.  48.  2.

S  S  12


6a8  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

2  populo  exsecutio  eorum  plerumque  datur.  Publicorum  iudi-
ciorum  quaedam  capttalia  sunt,  quacdam  non  capitalia.
capitalia  dicimus,  quae  ultimo  supplicio  adficiunt  vel  aquae
et  ignis  interdictione  vel  deportatione  vel  metallo :  cetera  si
qua  infamiam  irrogant  cum  damno  pecuniario,  haec  publica

3  quidem  sunt,  non  tamen  capitalia.  Publica  autem  iudicia
sunt  haec  lex  lulia  maiestatis,  quae  in  eos,  qui  contra  im-
peratorem  vel  rem  publicam  aliquid  moliti  sunt,  suum  vigorem
extendit.     cuius  poena  animae  amissionem  sustinet  et  me-

4  moria  rei  et  post  mortem  damnatur.  Item  lex  lulia  de
adulteriis  coercendis,  quae  non  solum  temeratores  alienarum
nuptiarum  gladio  punit,  sed   etiam  eos,  qui  cum  masculis

8  sq.,  as  also  were  women  and  soldiers  unless  the  crime  was  committed
against  either  themselves  or  some  near  relation,  Cod.  9.  i.  4  and  8.

§  2.  '  Licet  '*  capitalis "  Latine  loquentibus  omnis  causa  existimadonis
videatur,  tamen  appellatio  capitalis  mortis  vel  amissionis  civitatis  in-
tellegenda  est'  Dig.  50.  16.  103.  The  looser  use  of  the  term  is  not
uncommon  in  Cicero,  e.g.  pro  Quinctio  4.  7.  8.  9.  19,  etc.  For  the
relative  severity  of  these  punishments  of.  Dig.  48.  19.  28.  pr.  'proxima
morti  poena,  metalli  coercitio :  post  deinde  in  insulam  deportatio ; '  for
the  latter  cf.  Bk.  i.  16.  2  supr.  For  the  iudicia  publica  which  were  not
capitalia  c£  Dig.  L  c.  i  '  ceterae  poenae  ad  existimationem,  non  ad  capitis
periculum  pertinent.'  'Damno  pecuniario'  may  be  supplemented  from
Dig.  ib.  2  '  pecuniaria  aut  in  corpus  aliqua  coercitio.'

§  3.  The  lex  lulia  maiestatis  was  passed  by  Julius  Caesar,  Cic.  Philipp.
I.  9.  Previously  the  law  of  treason  had  rested  partly  on  usage  (Livy  i.
26),  partly  on  the  Twelve  Tables  (Dig.  48.  4.  3.  pr.),  and  a  lex  Cornelia
(Cic.  in  Pis.  21,  pro  Cluent.  35).  The  intention  to  commit  the  offence
was  punished  no  less  than  its  execution  (moliti  sunt) :  '  qui  cogitaveiit
.  .  .  eadem  enim  severitate  voluntatem  sceleris,  qua  effectum,  puniri
iura  voluerunt'  Cod.  9.  8.  5.  pr.  Perhaps  the  same  rule  was  observed  in
all  crimes, '  in  maleficiis  voluntas  spectatur,  non  exitus '  Dig.  ad  leg.  Com.
de  sicariis  48.  8.  14.  The  lex  lulia  had  substituted  a  perpetual  aquae  et
ignis  interdictio  for  the  older  punishment  of  death,  Paul.  Sent,  rec  5.  29.
I  ;  but  the  latter  was  re-established  as  early  as  Tiberius,  Tac.  Ann.  6.  18,
Suetonius,  Tiberius  58  sq.

Memoriae  damnatio  (for  which  cf.  Bk.  iii.  i.  5  supr.)  was  an  exception
from  the  general  rule  '  extinguitur  crimen  mortalitate '  Dig.  48.  4.  1 1 ;  its
eifect  was  bonorum  publicatio  or  confiscation,  involving  rescission  of  the
criminal's  will  and  donationes  inter  virum  et  uxorem.  A  constitution  of
M.  Aurelius  (Cod.  9.  8.  6.  2)  introduced  the  practice  of  finding  persons
guilty  of  treason  after  their  decease,  which  was  unknown  in  the  ag^  of
Tiberius,  Tac.  Ann.  6.  29.

(  4.  The  lex  lulia  de  adulteriis  was  passed  by  Augustas  Caesar,  Dig.


Tit.  i8.]  DE  PUBLICIS  lUDICIIS.  629

infandam  libidinem  exercere  audent.  sed  eadem  lege  lulia
etiam  stupri  flagitium  punitur,  cum  quis  sine  vi  vel  virgineni
vel  viduam  honeste  viventem  stupraverit,  poenam  autem
eadem  lex  irrogat  peccatoribus,  si  honesti  sunt,  publicationem
partis  dimidiae  bonorum,  si  humiles,  corporis  coercitionem
cum  relegatione.  Item  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis,  quae  homicidas  5
ultore  ferro  persequitur  vel  eos,  qui  hominis  occidendi  causa
cum  telo  ambulant,  telum  autem,  ut  Gains  noster  in  inter^
pretatione  legis  duodecim  tabularum  scriptum  reliquit,  vulgo
quidem  id  appellatur^  quod  ab  arcu  mittitur :  sed  et  omne
significatur,  quod  manu  cuiusdam  mittitur:  sequitur  ei^o,
ut  et  lapis  et  lignum  et  ferrum  hoc  nomine  contineatur.
dictumque  ab  eo,  quod  in  longinquum  mittitur,  a  Graeca
voce  figuratum,  imb  tov  tt^Xov  :  et  banc  significationem  in-
venire  possumus  et  in  Graeco  nomine :  nam  quod  nos  telum
appellamus,  illi  pi\os  appellant  dvd  tw  pdkk€(yOai.  admonet
nos  Xcnophon,  nam  ita  scripsit:  koL  to,  p4\fi  dfwv  i<l)ip€To,
Xdyxai,  ro^ei^fuira,  (rif>€vb6vai,  vkcliTToi  hi  Kal  kldoi,  sicarii  autem
appellantur  a  sica,  quod  significat  ferreum  cultrum.  eadem
lege  et  venefici  capite  damnantur,  qui  artibus  odiosis,  tam
venenis  vel  susurris  magicis  homines   occiderunt  vel   mala


48.  5.  I,  The  penalties  which  it  really  inflicted  seem  to  have  been
relegatio  in  insulam  and  partial  confiscation  of  the  property  of  both  man
and  woman,  Paul.  Sent.  rec.  2.  26.  14 :  cf.  Tac.  Ann.  2.  50.  85  '  in  insulam
.  .  .  abdita  est,'  ib.  3.  24  '(Augustus)  adulteros  morte  aut  fuga  punivit,
suas  ipse  leges  egrediens : '  ib.  4.  42.  For  these  death  was  substituted
by  Constantine,  Cod.  9.  9.  31 ;  it  seems  usually  to  have  been  inflicted
on  the  woman  as  well,  '  adulterii  damnatam  ...  si  poenam  capitalem
evaserit  *  Cod.  9.  9.  9.

'Stuprum  committit,  qui  liberam  mulierero  consuetudinis  causa  .  .  .
continet '  Dig.  48.  5.  34.  pr.  Corporis  coercitio  is  illustrated  by  Dig.  48.
19.  7  '  veluti  fustium  admonitio,  flagellorum  castigatio,  vinculorum  ver-
beratio.'

§  6.  The  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis  et  veneficis  (Dig.  48.  8)  was  passed
by  Sulla  in  the  first  or  second  year  of  his  dictatorship,  circ.  81  B.C  The
charge  on  which  Roscius  Amerinus  was  defended  by  Cicero  was  based
upon  its  provisions.  Its  penalties  were  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio,  to
which  Julius  Caesar  added  forfeiture,  Dig.  48.  8.  3.  5,  Sueton.  Jul.  42,  but
in  many  cases  death  was  inflicted :  '  sed  solent  hodie  capite  puniri,  nisi
honestiore  loco  positi  fuerint^  ut  poenam  legis  sustineant '  Dig.  loc.  dt.

The  reference  to  Xenophon  is  to  Anab.  5.  2.  14.


630  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.         [Lib.  IV.

(i  medicamenta  publice  vendiderunL  Alia  deinde  lex  asper-
rimum  crimen  nova  poena  persequitur,  quae  Poinpeia  de
parricidiis  vocatur.  qua  cavetur,  ut,  si  quis  parentis  aut  iiH
aut  omnino  adfectionis  eius,  quae  nuncupatione  parricidii
continetur,  fata  properaverit,  sive  clam  sive  palam  id  ausus
fuerit,  nee  non  is,  cuius  dolo  malo  id  factum  est,  vel  conscius
criminis  existit,  licet  extraneus  sit,  poena  parricidii  punietur
et  neque  gladio  neque  ignibus  neque  ulla  alia  soUemni  poena
subicietur,  sed  insutus  culleo  cum  cane  et  gallo  gallinaceo  et
vipera  et  simia  et  inter  eius  ferales  angustias  comprehensus.
secundum  quod  regionis  qualitas  tulerit,  vel  in  vicinum  mare
vel  in  amnem  proiciatur,  ut  omni  elementorum  usu  vivus  carere
incipiat  et  ei  coelum  superstiti,  terra  mortuo  auferatur.     si


§  6.  The  date  of  the  lex  Poinpeia  de  parricidiis  is  B.  c.  52.

By  nova  poena  is  not  meant  'recens  inventa'  but  ^strange,  unpara/-
lelled;'  its  great  antiquity  is  attested  by  Val.  Maximus  i.  i.  14.

The  wide  meaning  of  parricidium  is  perhaps  to  be  accounted  for  br
varieties  of  derivation ;  o-vorcXXovrcr  .  .  .  rriv  np^rrjv  av\\afifj9f  Kal  ffpax^**'
voiovKTtSf  Tois  yovias  (pSLrentes),  cWciyoyrcr  d«,  toxk  vmiKoovs  (parentes)
(rrjfiaiyovaivy  Laurentius  Lydus  de  mag.  Rom.  L  26 ;  '  Parricida,  quod  vel  a
pari  componitur,  vel  a  patre :  quibusdam  a  parente  videtur  esse  .  .  .
Prise.  Gram.  i.  Paricida  non  ubique  is,  qui  parentem  occidisset,  sed
qualemcunque  hominem  .  .  .  Lex  Numae ...  si  quis  hominem  liberum
morti  duit,  paricida  esto,*  Festus;  cf.  Cic.  pro  Cluent.  11,  Livy  40L  24^
Quinctil.  Inst  8. 6.  35.  The  lex  Pompeia  confined  the  term  to  the  killing
of  ascendants,  husbands,  wives,  uncles,  aunts,  consobrini,  stepfathers
and  stepmothers,  fathers-  and  mothers-in-law,  patrons  and  descendants,
except  the  killing  of  a  son  by  his  father,  Dig.  48. 9.  i.  Hadrian  sentenced
a  man  who  killed  his  son  to  deportatio.  Dig.  ib.  5,  but  this  was  not  included
under  parricide  till  the  time  of  Constantine,  p.  127  supr.

Accessories  were  punished  as  severely  as  principals  also  under  the
lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis  (Cod.  9.  16.  7)  and  the  lex  lulia  peculatus,
Dig.  48.  13.  I.

The  punishment  of  the  sack  was  very  ancient  among  the  Romans  :
*Tarquinius  res  M.  Tullium  .  .  .  culleo  insutum  in  mare  abici  iussit'
Val.  Maximus  i.  i.  13 :  cf.  more  maiorum.  Dig.  48.  9.  9.  pr.  and  i :  cf.
Cic.  pro  Rose.  Am.  25,  Epist  ad  Quint,  fratr.  i.  2,  Juvenal,  Sat.  iii.  8.
212  sq.  The  selection  of  animals  was  supposed  to  be  symbolical,  fura
.  .  .  datpSfV  {(DMoy  datpfis  ovBpanroi  Dosith.  iii.  16,  .  .  .  ra  dc  npoeipfffuva
B^pta  (fifidWrrai  6ia  roCru,  cVcidij  ofioiorpotra  avn^  iari'  to,  p€v  yap  omu^ci
rovs  yop€if,  ra  dc  r^r  irpot  avrovs  ovk  dirix^rtu  pdxfs  Theoph.  If  there  was
no  sea  or  river  near,  the  criminal  was  torn  asunder  by  wild  beasts,  ^  hoc
ita,  si  mare  proximum  sit :  alioquin  bestiis  obicitur '  Dig.  48.  9.  9.  pr.


it

.1-5  r


'-  —  —  <


Tit.  1 8.]  DE  PUBLICIS  lUDICIIS.  631

quis  autem  alias  cognatione  vel  adfinitate  coniunctas  personas
necaverit,  poenam  l^is  Corneliae  de  sicariis  sustinebit.  Item  7
lex  Cornelia  de  falsis,  quae  etiam  testamentaria  vocatur,
poenam  irrogat  ei,  qui  testamentum  vel  aliud  instrumentum
falsum  scripserit  signaverit  recitaverit  subiecerit  quive  signum
adulterinum  fecerit  sculpserit  expresserit  sciens  dolo  malo.
eiusque  legis  poena  in  servos  ultimum  supplicium  est,  quod
et  in  lege  de  sicariis  et  veneficis  servatur,  in  liberos  vero
deportatio.  Item  lex  lulia  de  vi  publica  seu  privata  adversus  8
eos  exoritur,  qui  vim  vel  armatam  vel  sine  armis  commiserint.
sed  si  quidem  armata  vis  arguatur,  deportatio  ei  ex  lege  lulia
de  vi  publica  irrogatur :  si  vero  sine  armis,  in  tertiam  partem
bonorum  publicatio  imponitur.  sin  autem  per  vim  raptus
virginis  vel  viduae  vel  sanctimonialis  vel  aliae  fuerit  per-
petratus,  tunc  et  peccatores  et  ei,  qui  opem  flagitio  dederunt,
capite  puniuntur  secundum  nostrae  constitutionis  definitionem,


§  7.  This  lex,  which  is  called  Cornelia  testamentaria  numaria  by
Cicero  (in  Verrem  21.  42),  was  passed  by  Sulla  about  the  same  time  as
that  de  sicariis  (§  5  supr.)*  The  offence  is  defined  in  Dig.  48.  10.  23  'fal-
sum videtur  id  esse,  si  quis  alienum  chirographum  imitetur,  aut  libeUum
vel  rationes  intercidat  vel  describat,  non  qui  alias  .  .  .  mentiuntur.'  In
the  coUatio  legum  Mos.  et  Rom.  (viii.  7)  Ulpian  speaks  of  a  senatus-
consult  made  when  Statilius  Taurus  and  Scribonius  Libo  were  consuls,
which  dealt  with  forgeries  of  documents  other  than  wills,  to  which,  as  is
clear  from  its  name,  die  lex  Cornelia  principally  related.  The  punishment
of  freemen  for  forgery  seems  to  have  varied  much  with  their  rank  and  the
enormity  of  the  offence, '  honestiores ...  in  insulam  deportantur . . .  humili-
ores  aut  in  metallum  damnantur,  aut  capite  puniuntur ;  servi  autem  [et]
post  admissum  manumissi  in  crucem  tolluntur'  Paul.  Sent,  rec  5.  25.  i,
'pro  modo  delicti  aut  relegantur  aut  capite  puniuntur'  ib.  13, 'capitali
supplicio,  si  id  exigat  magnitndo  commissi,  vel  deportatione  . . .  inmii-
nente  *  Cod.  9.  22.  22.  2.

§  8.  The  same  distinction  between  armed  and  unarmed  violence  was
drawn  by  the  praetor  in  interdict  law ;  see  on  Tit  16.  6  supr.  Between
the  enactment  of  the  lex  lulia  and  Justinian's  time  the  penalty  for  vis
armata  seems  often  to  have  been  death  (Paul.  Sent.  rec.  5.  26.  i,  Cod.
Theod.  9.  10.  i),  which,  however,  was  but  seldom  inflicted  in  the  tatter's
time,  Cod.  9.  12.  7  and  8,  Dig.  48.  6.  10.  2.  Sanctimonialis  is  explained
by  Augustine,  Serm.  23  *  propria  et  excellentiori  sanctitate  virgines,  quae
in  ecclesia  nominantur,  quas  .  . .  usitatiore  vocabulo  sanctimoniales  ap-
pellare  consuevimus : '  cf.  Cod.  i.  3.  54  'virginum  vel  viduarum  vel
diaconissarum,  quae  Deo  fuerint  dedicatae.'


632  INSTITUTIONUM  LIBRI  QUATTUOR.      [Lib.  IV.

9  ex  qua  haec  apertius  possibile  est  scire.  Lex  lulia  peculatus
eos  punit,  qui  pecuniam  vel  rem  publicam  vel  sacram  vel
religiosam  furati  fuerint.  sed  si  quidem  ipsi  iudices  tempore
administrationis  publicas  pecunias  subtraxerunt,  capital!  anim-
adversione  puniuntur,  et  non  solum  hi,  sed  etiam  qui
ministerium  eis  ad  hoc  adhibuerunt  vel  qui  subtracta  ab  bis
scientes  susceperunt :  alii  vero,  qui  in  banc  legem  inciderint,

lOpoenae  deportationis  subiugantur.  Est  inter  publica  iudicia
lex  Fabia  de  plagiariis,  quae  interdum  capitis  poenam   ex

11  sacris  constitutionibus  irrogat,  interdum  leviorem.  Sunt
praeterea  publica  iudicia  lex  lulia  ambitus  et  lex  lulia
repetundarum  et  lex  lulia  de  annona  et  lex  lulia  de  re-
siduis,  quae  de  certis  capitulis  loquuntur  et  animae  quidem

§  0.  The  full  title  of  this  statute  was  '  lex  lulia  peculatus  et  de  sacrilegis
et  de  residuis'  (for  the  last  see  §  11  inf.),  Dig.  48.  13.  Whether  the  un-
lawful appropriation  of  municipal  property  came  within  the  penalties  of
peculatus  was  at  first  uncertain,  but  the  question  was  decided  in  the
affirmative  by  Trajan,  Dig.  48.  13.  4.  7.  For  the  meaning  of  religiosus
see  6k.  ii.  i.  9  and  note,  supr. ;  stealing  from  tombs,  however,  does  not
seem  to  have  amounted  to  sacrilege, '  lapidem  hunc  movere  . . .  proximum
sacrilegio  maiores  habuerunt'  Cod.  9.19.  5, 'sunt  sacrilegi,  qui  publica
sacra  compilaverunt,  at  qui  privata  sacra  . . .  amplius  quam  fures,  minus
quam  sacrilegi  merentur'  Dig,  48.  13.  9.  i.

The  penalty  of  the  lex  lulia  peculatus  was  aquae  et  ignis  interdictio,
for  which  deportatio  was  substituted,  Dig.  48.  13.  3.  p.  144  supr. ;  but
sacrilegi  were  capitally  punished,  Dig.  ib.  9.  pr.  A  fine  of  four  times  the
value  of  the  property  appropriated  seems  to  have  been  commonly  inflicted
for  peculatus,  perhaps  under  the  lex  lulia  itself,  Paul.  Sent.  rec.  5.  27.
Peculation  by  judges  was  at  first  punished  only  by  fine,  for  which  death
was  substituted  by  Theodosius,  'cum  vix  par  poena  his  possit  flagitiis
inveniri '  Cod.  Theod.  9.  29.  i.  2  :  cf.  Cod.  9.  28.

§  10.  The  lex  Fabia  de  plagiariis  is  referred  to  by  Cicero^  pro  Rabirio  3,
and  there  is  a  Title  upon  it  in  the  Code  (9.  20) ;  its  content  is  described
by  Ulpian  in  the  CoUatio,  14.  2  and  3  '  lege  Fabia  tenetur,  qui  civem
Komanum,  eundemque,  qui  in  Italia  liberatus  sit,  celaverit,  vinxerit,  vine-
tumque  habuerit,  vendiderit,  emerit,  . . .  eiusdem  legis  capite  secando
tenetur,  qui  alienum  servum  invito  domino  celaverit,  vendiderit,  emerit
dolo  malo; '  as  to  its  penalties  it  is  said  in  the  same  passage,  'et  olim
quidem  huius  legis  poena  numaria  fuit,  sed  translata  est  cognitio  in  prae-
fectos  urbis,  itemque  praesidis  provinciae  extra  ordinem  meruit  animad-
versionem :  ideoque  humiliores  aut  in  metallum  damnantur,  aut  in  crucem
tolluntur:  honestiores,  adempta  dimidia  parte  bonorum,  in  perpetuum
relegantur.'

§  11.  The  lex  lulia  de  ambitu  was  enacted  by  Augustus^  Suetonius,


Tit.  i8.]  DE  PUBLICIS  lUDICIIS,  633

amissionem  non  irrogant,  aliis  autem  poenis  eos^ubiciunt,
qui  praecepta  earum  neglexerint.

Sed  de  publicis  iudiciis  haec  exposuimus,  ut  vobis  possibile  12
sit  summo  digito  et  quasi  per  indicem  ea  tetigisse.     alioquin
diligentior  eorum  scientia  vobis  ex  latioribus  digestorum  sive
pandectarum  libris  deo  propitio  adventura  est.

Octav.  34  :  upon  it  Paulus  says  (Sent,  rec  5.  30  a)  'petitunis  magistratum
vel  provinciae  sacerdotium,  si  turbam  suffragiorum  causa  conduxerit,
servos  advocaverit,  aliamve  quam  multitudinem  conduxerit,  convictus,  ut
vis  publicae  reus,  in  insulam  deportatur ; '  in  Dig.  48. 14. 1. 1  the  ordinary
penalty  is  said  to  have  been  a  fine  of  100  aurei.

The  taking  of  bribes  by  judges  and  magistrates  (repetundae)  had  been
punished  with  death  by  the  Twelve  Tables,  '  iudicem  arbitrumve  .  .  .  qui
ob  rem  dicendam  pecuniam  accepisse  convictus  est,  capite  punit'  Gell.
20.  I.  7 ;  a  quaestio  perpetua  for  the  trial  of  this  offence  was  established
by  a  lex  Calpumia,  Cic.  pro  Bruto  27.  The  ordinary  penalty  was  a  fine  of
four  times  the  bribe  taken,  Cod.  9.  27.  i  and  6. 1 ;  but  in  graver  cases  we
read  of  relegatio,  deportado,  and  even  death,  Paul.  Sent.  rec.  5.  28,  Dig.

48.  11.7.3-

Upon  the  lex  lulia  relating  to  repetundae  Paulus  says, '  indices  pedanei,
si  pecunia  corrupt!  dicantur,  plerumque  a  praeside  aut  curia  submoventur,
aut  in  exsilium  mittuntur,  aut  ad  tempus  relegantur'  Sent.  rec.  5.  28.

'Lege  lulia  de  annona  poena  statuitur  adversus  eum,  qui  contra
annonam  fecerit  societatemve  coierit  quo  annona  carior  fiat.  Eadem
lege  continetur,  ne  quis  navem  nautamve  retineat,  aut  dolo  malo  faciat,
quo  magis  detineatur,  et  poena  viginti  aureorum  statuitur'  Dig.  48.  12.  2.
Other  penalties  for  the  same  offence  were  exclusion  from  the  com  trade,
relegatio,  and  condemnation  to  public  works,  Dig.  47.  11.  6.  pr.

The  lex  lulia  de  residuis  was  part  of  the  larger  statute  noticed  in
§  9  supr.  The  offence  was  that  of  converting  to  one's  own  use  public
money  entrusted  to  one  for  a  specific  public  purpose,  *lege  lulia  de
residuis  tenetur,  qui  publicam  pecuniam  delegatam  in  usum  aliquem
retinuit  neque  in  eum  consumsit'  Dig.  48.  13.  2.  The  penalty  was  a  fine
amounting  to  a  third  of  the  money  so  converted  ;  of  course  the  principal
sum  had  to  be  restored  as  well.  Dig.  ib.  4.  5.


EXCURSUS   X.

ON   THE  EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN   CIVIL

PROCEDURE.

A  FAVOURITE  subject  of  speculation  with  the  political  philosophers
of  the  17th  and  i8th  centuries  was  the  social  condition  of  man  in
the  remote  ages  anterior  to  his  union  with  his  fellows  in  the  organi-
zation called  the  state,  and  the  process  by  which  this  latter  first  came
into  existence,  with  all  its  paraphernalia  of  legislatures,  judicial  insti-
tutions, and  political  subordination.  Upon  the  latter  question  they
agreed,  in  the  main,  in  holding  the  theory  known  as  that  of  the
'Social  Compact,'  though  their  respective  political  prejudices  led  them
to  differ  largely  as  to  the  actual  form  of  government  in  which  the
Compact  historically  resulted.  The  age  was  one  in  which  a  priori
reasoning  was  in  high  repute,  and  their  method  was  to  disregard  the
facts  of  history,  and  to  attach  no  importance  to  such  knowledge  of
primitive  societies  as  even  they  possessed :  consequently,  their  doc-
trine has  now  been  so  universally  discredited  that  modern  thinkers
find  in  it  no  value  except  '  as  a  convenient  form  for  the  expression  of
moral  truths.'  Upon  the  former  question  there  was  greater  diversity
of  opinion.  On  the  one  hand  man  was  represented  as  living  in
a  golden  age,  of  which  universal  peace,  simplicity  of  manners,  and
freedom  from  the  constant  toil  of  modern  society  were  the  leading
characteristics,  apart  from  the  absence  of  that  restraint  which  is  the
inevitable  accompaniment  of  law  and  political  organization.  On  the
other,  his  state  was  said  to  be  one  of  internecine  war  with  all  around
him ;  every  man's  hand  was  against  his  neighbour :  the  strong  man
armed  alone  was  secure  of  life  and  property,  and  that  only  so  long
as  no  one  stronger  than  himself  appeared  to  try  conclusions  with
him.

Though  the  latter  of  these  theories  is  no  less  pure  speculation  than
the  former,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  it  is  largely  supported  by  the
actual  evidence  afforded  us  by  primitive  societies.  As  by  the  fossils
which  he  finds  at  different  depths  beneath  the  earth's  surface  the


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE,  633

geologist  is  enabled  in  some  measure  to  reconstruct  the  natural  history
of  past  ages,  so  in  the  language  of  the  Romans,  as  well  as  in  their
law,  we  find  unmistakable  testimony  that,  among  the  men  from
whom  their  race  descended,  and  before  the  state  yet  existed  even  in
embryo,  the  world,  which  we  conceive  as  ruled  by  law,  was  ruled  by
force,  and  by  personal  force  alone  each  man's  position  was  determined.
Might,  a  not  rights  is  at  least  her  mother;  there  being  no  state
machinery  for  the  protection  of  life  and  property,  man  has  either  to
suffer  his  own  effacement,  or  to  keep  with  the  strong  arm  that  which
he  has  won  by  his  labour  or  his  blood :  and  the  essence  of  early
ideas  lies  in  the  absence  of  any  basis  for  right  and  law  other  than
the  individual  consciousness,  and  the  consequent  necessity  of  self-
assertion  :  '  in  sich  selbst  tragt  der  Einzelne  den  Grund  seines
Rechts,  durch  sich  selbst  muss  er  es  schiitzen  ^'

Space  does  not  allow  us  to  cite  more  than  a  few  of  the  most
striking  facts  of  law  and  language  in  support  of  this  statement.
Thus,  the  origin  and  true  ground  of  dominium,  or  lawful  control
over  objects  of  enjoyment,  is  placed  by  the  Romans  in  the  idea,  not
of  mere  occupation  or  peaceable  discovery,  but  of  *  taking '  or  forcible
seizure  :  *maxime  sua  esse  credebant/  says  Gaius  (iv.  16),  'quae  ex
hostibus  cepissent;*  and  perhaps  the  earliest  term  by  which  they
denoted  property  (mancipium)  at  once  arrests  the  attention,  combin-
ing, as  it  does,  with  the  idea  of  '  taking '  another  term,  manus,  which,
as  we  shall  see,  is  no  less  valuable  evidence  of  primitive  ideas  ;  pro-
perty is  that  which  is  taken  by  strength  of  arm ".  Precisely  the  same
thought  reappears  in  the  early  form  of  conveyance ;  the  property  was
deemed  to  pass  not  so  much  in  virtue  of  the  will  of  the  parties,  or  of
delivery  by  the  one  to  the  other,  as  by  the  *  taking '  of  the  object  by
the  latter  (mancipatio) ;  original  is  symbolised  in  derivative  acqui-
sition. Sir  Henry  Maine  (Early  History  of  Institutions,  p.  253)  refers
to  Mr.  McLennan's  work  on  *  Primitive  Marriage,'  to  show  *  that  a
large  part  of  mankind  still  simulate  in  their  marriage  ceremonies  the
carrying  off  the  bride  by  violence,  and  thus  preserve  the  memory  of
the  reign  of  force  which,  at  all  events  as  between  tribe  and  tribe,  pre-
ceded everywhere  the  reign  of  law ; '  that  this  was  usual  among  the
early  Romans  might  have  been  conjectured  from  the  legend  of  the

^  Ihering,  Geist  des  romischen  Rechts,  i.  p.  109.  I  am  indebted  to  the  following
seventy  pages  of  the  same  volume  for  many  of  the  thoughts  expressed  in  the  early
part  of  this  Excursus.

'  Cf.  what  is  said  on  the  distinction  between  res  mancipi  and  res  nee  mancipii
p.  17  snpr.


636  EXCURSUS  X.

rape  of  the  Sabine  women,  and  is  expressly  stated  by  Festus,  who
ascribes  the  custom  to  Romulus'  success  in  thus  providing  himself
with  a  wife.  Even  the  gods  were  supposed  to  get  their  earthly  minis-
ters in  much  the  same  unceremonious  manner ;  the  vestal  virgin,  ^B.ys
Gellius  (i.  12.  §  13), '  pontificis  maximi  manu  prehensa  ah  eo  parente
in  cuius  potestate  est  veluti  belio  capta  abducitur.'  The  spear  was  the
oldest  symbol  of  right ;  hence  there  was  no  stronger  title  than  pur-
chase '  sub  hasta,'  at  a  sale  held  by  state  authority ;  it  was  planted  in
the  ground  in  the  centumviral  court,  which  had  a  special  jurisdiction
in  questions  of  ownership :  it  appeared  in  the  vindicatio  or  real  action,
and  its  use  in  manumission  per  vindictam  will  occur  to  every  reader.
Property  in  land  was  never  called  anything  by  the  Romans  but  prae-
dium ;  the  analogy  with  praeda, '  booty,'  suggests  itself  at  once,  and
has  been  noticed  by  early  writers,  one  of  whom  remarks  '  antiqui
agros  quos  bello  ceperant  ut  praedae  nomine  habebant'  Again,  the
term  manus,  meaning  primarily  'hand,'  and  derivatively  'power,'
'  force,'  '  control,'  plays  an  extremely  prominent  part  in  early  legal
phraseology.  Perhaps  its  frequency  in  procedure  (e.  g.  manum  con-
serere,  manus  iniectio)  is  due  to  the  survival  in  judicial  institutions  of
traces  of  an  older  system,  namely,  violent  self-redress  of  wrong ;  but
Sir  H.  Maine  has  observed  (Ancient  Law  p.  317)  that  there  is  very
strong  reason  for  believing  that  manus  was  the  ancient  general  term
expressing  power,  whether  exercised  over  flocks,  herds,  slaves,
children,  or  wife:  and  there  is  an  affinity  between  hems,  'owner,*
and  the  Greek  x^/p,  through  the  Sanskrit  hr^  which  has  the  same
meaning  as  the  Latin  root  cap.  On  the  other  hand,  while  to  denote
man  the  Sanskrit  and  Greek  agree  (nri,  nara,  dvrip),  the  Romans  have
discarded  the  corresponding  word,  and  use  '  vir,'  which  in  Sanskrit
means  'warrior : '  they  name  him  not  from  his  sex,  but  from  his  call-
ing and  occupation :  '  virtue '  is  conceived  first  and  foremost  as
valour  in  war,  only  later  as  purity  and  honesty.  The  very  name  in
which  the  Romans  delighted,  and  which  their  satirists  cast  in  their
teeth — Quirites — may  be  taken  as  a  final  illustration :  Quiris  or
Curis  in  old  Sabine  is  equivalent  to  hasta ;  Quirites  are  'spearmen : '
and  thus  we  see  how  dominium  ex  iure  Quiritium  has  a  deeper
meaning,  as  carrying  us  back  to  the  prehistoric  time  when  the  strong
man  armed  could  alone  possess  his  goods  in  peace.

In  such  a  social  condition  the  only  mode  in  which  a  man  who
conceived  himself  wronged  by  another  could  obtain  satisfaction  was
by  taking  the  law,  as  it  is  said,  into  his  own  hands.  A  system  of
self-redress,  in  the  form  of  private  vengeance,  preceded  everywhere


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  637

the  establishment  of  a  regular  judicature ;  the  injured  person,  with
his  kinsmen  or  dependents,  made  a  foray  against  the  wrongdoer,  and
swept  away  his  cattle,  and  with  them,  perhaps,  his  wife  and  children,
or  he  threatened  him  with  supernatural  penalties  by  *  fasting '  upon
him,  as  in  the  Blast  even  at  the  present  day ;  or,  finally,  he  reduced
his  adversary  to  servitude,  or  took  his  life.  The  idea  of  such  a
procedure  was  not  compensation,  but  punishment ;  self-redress  existed
not  so  much  rei,  as  poenae  persequendae  causa ' :  and  as  there  is
no  objective  standard  of  right  and  wrong,  the  measure  of  the  injury,
and  therefore  of  the  punishment,  is  the  feeling  of  the  injured  person.
Traces  of  this  linger  on  in  Roman  Law  throughout  its  whole  history.
It  has  been  observed '  that  in  settling  the  damages  to  be  awarded  the
earliest  administrators  of  justice  took  as  their  guide  the  measure  of
vengeance  likely  to  be  exacted  by  an  aggrieved  person  under  the
circumstances  of  the  case ',  and  that  this  is  the  true  explanation  of
the  very  different  penalties  imposed  by  ancient  law  on  offenders
caught  in  the  act,  or  soon  after  it,  and  on  offenders  detected  after
considerable  delay.  Even  the  later  Roman  law  permitted  the  husband
to  kill  with  impunity  the  adulterer  taken  flagrante  delicto,  and  distin-
guished the  guilt  of  the  thief  according  as  he  was  caught  in  the  act
or  not ;  the  fur  noctumus  was  liable  to  the  same  penalty  as  the  adul-
terer :  for  certain  bodily  injuries  (Gaius  iii.  223)  the  Mosaic  law  of
retaliation  had  its  counterpart  at  Rome.  And  from  the  '  addictio '
of  the  fur  manifestus  and  the  insolvent  debtor,  and  the  commonness
of  noxal  surrender  (Gaius  iv.  75-79,  Bk.  iv.  8  supr.)  in  international  no
less  than  in  private  relations,  Ihering  conjectures  that  a  form  of  self-
redress  especially  favoured  by  usage  was  the  seizure  and  detention
of  the  person  of  the  wrongdoer,  until  he  was  ransomed  by  his  friends,
or  had  earned  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow  his  own  liberation.

From  a  comparison  of  the  different  communities  in  which  we  know
this  system  of  self-redress  to  have  prevailed,  or  even  to  obtain  at  the
present  day,  it  would  seem  that  there  are  two  alternative  connecting
links,  as  it  were,  between  it  and  the  later  remedial  process  of  ad-
vancing civilization.  The  practice  of  uncontrolled  private  vengeance,
extending  even  to  life  and  limb,  dwindles  everywhere  to  one  of  the
various  forms  of  distraint ;  the  survival,  as  at  Rome,  of  a  limited  right

'  For  the  promiiKnce  of  *  penalty '  in  primitive  law  see  Ihering  L  p.  ia6,  Maine,
Ancient  Law  p.  368  sq.     Cf.  Mr.  O.  W.  Holmes*  Common  Law  p.  2  sq.
'  Maine,  Ancient  Law  pp.  378,  381.
'  Cf.  the  sentiment  of  Cleon  in  Thuc.  iiL  33  d/ii;rcafoc  tk  r{»  vatfcTr  tn  lyyv-


638  EXCURSUS  X.

of  personal  arrest  and  detention  seems  abnormal.  From  this  point,
however,  we  find  a  well-marked  divergence.  One  alternative  *  consists
in  tolerating  distraint  up  to  a  certain  point :  it  is  connived  at  so  far
as  it  serves  to  compel  the  submission  of  defendants  to  the  jurisdiction
of  courts,  but  in  all  other  cases  it  is  treated  as  a  wilful  breach  of  the
peace.  The  other  is  the  incorporation  of  distraint  with  a  regular
procedure.  The  complainant  must  observe  a  great  number  of  forms
at  his  peril,  but  if  he  observes  them  he  can  distrain  in  the  end  V  The
first  step,  we  may  say,  in  the  process  by  which  self-redress  slowly
yielded  to  the  encroachments  of  courts  of  justice  was  the  gradual
development  of  a  body  of  custom,  in  some  cases  extremely  bulky,
precisely  defining  the  conditions  under  which  it  might  be  exacted,
and  minutely  prescribing  the  proper  stages  in  the  process,  without  the
due  observance  of  which  the  complainant  must  altogether  lose  his
remedy.  Notice  of  the  intention  to  distrain — fasting  upon  the  wrong-
doer— attendance  of  witnesses — allowance  of  a  'stay*  or  interval
between  the  earlier  and  later  steps— and  many  other  formalities  are,
or  may  be,  the  essential  conditions  of  success.  Such  limitation  by
custom  of  the  right  of  self-redress — in  other  words,  its  'incorporation
with  a  regular  procedure ' — is  most  common  in  societies,  such  as  that
of  the  Irish  as  revealed  to  us  in  the  Brehon  law  tracts,  in  which,  even
if  there  be  a  judicial  system  at  all,  its  action  is  weak  and  intermittent
or  where  *  courts  of  justice  exist  less  for  the  purpose  of  doing  right
universally  than  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  an  alternative  to  the
violent  redress  of  wrong.'  But  '  the  Roman  tribunals  became  the
organs  of  the  national  sovereignty  at  an  exceptionally  early  date,
and  the  development  of  Roman  law  and  procedure  was  exceptionally
rapid ; '  consequently,  we  are  enabled  to  bridge  over  the  gulf  between
the  primitive  system  of  private  vengeance,  and  the  earliest  Roman
civil  process  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge,  less  by  tracing  this
gradual  incorporation  of  self-redress  with  a  regular  procedure  than
by  other  indications  of  more  advanced  ideas.  These  in  the  main  are
three  in  number  :  the  introduction  and  development  of  the  idea  of
composition  for  injury ;  the  plan  of  guaranteeing  a  man's  rights  by
collective  action  through  witnesses ;  and  the  contractual  decision  of
disputes.

i.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  term  *  poena '  originally  meant
not  so  much  penalty  as  composition  for  injury ;  the  earliest  poenae
were  sums  in  consideration  of  which  the  injured  person  consented  to
forego  his  customary  right  of  self-redress,  and  the  penal  sums  re-

^  Maine,  Early  History  of  Institutions  p.  278.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE,   639

covered  by  the  plaintiff  in  a  Roman  action  on  delict  attest  the  nature
of  the  practice,  though  in  them  the  *  penalty '  is  usually  fixed  by  the
state,  and  not  by  the  parties  ^  This  less  barbarous  method  of  settling
disputes  and  claims  is  familiar  to  every  one  who  has  any  acquaintance
with  the  law  of  the  Germanic  tribes.  Mr.  Kemble  observes '  that
under  Anglo-Saxon  law  there  was  hardly  any  wrong  a  man  could  suffer
which  could  not  be  atoned  for  by  a  money  payment.  At  Rome,  so
far  as  we  can  judge,  it  was  confined  to  dehct ;  for  breach  of  contract
the  ultimate  remedy,  even  in  historical  times,  remained  the  right  of
arrest  and  detention ;  the  debtor  who  could  not,  or  would  not,  dis-
charge his  obligations  fell  a  victim  to  the  severe  process  of  manus
iniectio;  he  was  sold  into  foreign  slavery,  or  put  to  death.  Thus
*  the  remedy  for  a  wrong  to  property  was  against  the  person  :  for  a
wrong  to  the  person  it  was  against  the  property,'  and  this  explains
why  actions  on  delict,  even  when  partly  rei  persecutoriae,  *  in  heredem
non  dantur.'  A  delict  calls  for  the  exercise  of  private  vengeance,
which,  however,  has  nothing  to  act  upon  as  soon  as  the  wrongdoer  is
dead  \  his  heir  succeeds  to  his  universitas  iuris,  of  which  his  feuds
and  hostilities  are  no  part ;  and,  as  the  poena  is  paid  as  the  price  of
exemption  from  personal  hostility,  it  must  be  paid  by  the  wrongdoer
and  no  one  else.

ii.  It  is  obvious  that  the  exercise  of  self-redress  required  some
limitation,  as  anarchy  began  to  give  way  to  order,  providing  for  the
establishment  and  rendering  certain  of  claims  of  man  against  man.
In  the  case  of  a  wrong  or  a  debt  whose  existence  no  one  could  doubt,
the  system  might,  as  things  stood,  seem  tolerable  enough;  but  it
could  not  long  be  endured  if  every  pretended  injury  or  obligation
were  to  entitle  the  complainant  to  proceed  thus  against  the  object  of
his  animosity.  The  expedient  which  seems  to  have  suggested  itself
to  the  primitive  Romans  was  to  require  clear  and  adequate  evidence
of  every  right  or  wrong  which  was  not  otherwise  beyond  question,
and  to  attribute  to  the  witnesses  a  kind  of  interest  in  the  realization
of  justice,  by  identifying  them,  in  a  sense,  with  the  person  who  was
supported  by  their  testimony ;  if  the  latter  were  compelled  to  resort
to  self-redress,  they  were  under  a  moral  obligation  to  afford  him
active  assistance;  in  default  they  became  no  less  improbi  and
intestabiles  than  the  false  or  recalcitrant  witness  of  a  mancipation  \

^  In  the  delict  of  iniuria,  where  the  praetor  substituted  a  money  payment  in  lieu
of  actual  retaliation,  the  plaintiff  was  allowed  to  fix  its  amount  himself,  Gains  iii.
224.

■  Anglo-Saxons  i.  1 77.  "  Gellius  xv.  1 3. 1 1 .


640  EXCURSUS  X.

A  '  testis '  is  conceived,  originally,  less  as  a  witness,  in  the  modern
sense,  than  as  a  'guarantor'  or  'insurer'  of  the  right  which  he  has
attested — a  conception  which  we  shall  be  the  better  able  to  realize
by  remembering  they»^<Wa/ character  of  the  recognitor  in  the  Assizes
of  Henry  II — ;  verum  means  *  the  assured,'  truth  that  for  which  one
becomes  security ;  the  witnesses,  who  in  the  legis  actio  are  called
upon  '  litem  contestari,'  discharge,  upon  this  theory,  some  intelligible
function '.  Why,  we  may  ask,  could  a  woman  not  be  a  witness  to
the  transactions  of  the  ius  civile  ?  The  answer  would  seem  to  be,
because  she  lacks  the  physical  force  of  man  to  which  the  witness
must  in  the  last  resort  appeal,  if  he  is  really  to  do  his  duty  as
*  assurer.'  Why,  again,  could  many  of  a  man's  own  relations,  whose
evidence  might  incur  suspicion  on  the  ground  of  interest,  attest  his
solemn  acts  and  dispositions  ?  Because  credibiHty  is  not,  as  with  us,
the  essential ;  the  essential  is  rather  the  strong  arm.  Joint  respon-
sibility for  wrong  is  familiar  to  readers  of  Greek  legend  no  less  than
of  Anglo-Saxon  history;  joint  suretyship  for  right— the  idea  of  in-
ducing a  wrongdoer  to  submit  to  justice  by  the  moral  and  physical
force  by  which  his  adversary  is  backed — is  peculiarly  Roman.  A
strong  confirmation  of  this  theory  is  found  in  the  wQl  made  in  the
comitia  calata;  a  disposition  which  it  was  desirable  should  be
guaranteed  by  a  larger  force  than  any  ordinary  matter,  because  it
was  of  far  greater  importance,  affected,  perhaps  prejudicially,  more
interests,  and  therefore  was  more  likely  to  be  impeached,  and
exposed  to  the  chances  of  stronger  opposition :  accordingly,  it  was
witnessed,  and  so  guaranteed,  by  the  whole  Roman  populus,  and
even  when  in  the  will  made  per  aes  et  libram  the  number  of
witnesses  was  reduced  to  five,  these,  according  to  a  very  plausible
theory,  represented  the  whole  people  in  its  live  census-classes.  If
this  conjecture  be  true,  the  form  of  mancipation  was  an  easy  and
convenient  means  of  throwing  round  dispositions  the  aegis  of  a
public  guarantee :  violation  of  a  right  acquired  per  aes  et  libram
is  a  violation  of  public  order:  resistance  to  the  person  entitled  is
resistance  to  the  state.

iii.  The  contractual  decision  of  disputes  took  two  forms.  The
one  consisted  in  the  complainant's  giving  his  adversary  the  option  of
denying  his  liability  on  oath,  or  of  being  taken,  in  default,  to  admit
it :  it  remained  a  permanent  institution  at  Rome  even  to  the  time  of
Justinian,  in  whose  Digest  (12.  2.  38)  we  read  'manifestae  turpi-

*  Cf.  the  affinity  in  German  between  wahr  and  bewahren,  gewahren.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  641

tudinis  et  confessionis  est  nolle  nee  iurare  nee  iusiurandum  referred
The  other  was  reference  of  the  matter  by  common  consent  to  arbi-
tration :  from  this,  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  the  whole  Roman
system  of  actions  tried  before  a  judge  or  judges  took  its  origin.    The
earliest  judges  derived  their  judicial  authority,  such  as  it  was,  not
from  the  state,  but  from  the  voluntary  submission  of  the  parties :  and
Sir  H.  Maine  has  shown  \  by  an  examination  of  the  earliest  Roman
civil  process,  that  the  magistrate,  even  when  commissioned  by  the
state  for  the  administration  of  justice,  preserved  the  memory  of  the
actual  historical  source  of  his  functions  by  '  carefully  simulating  the
demeanour  of  a  private  arbitrator  casually  called  in.'    The  later
Roman  jurists,  though  struck  by  the  similarity  in  procedure  between
an  ordinary  action  and  a  reference  to  arbitration,  were  guilty  of  the
curious  anachronism  of  deriving  the  latter  from  the  former :  *  com-
promissum '  (one  of  them  says)  '  ad  similitudinem  iudiciorum  redigi-
tur;'  but  the  fact  is  that  action  grew  out  of  arbitration,  and  the
judge  was  originally  only  an  unofficial  referee ;  a  fact  of  which  traces
are  observable  throughout  the  legal  history  of  Rome.     Thus,  no
action  could  validly  be  commenced,  still  less  carried  through  to
judgment,  until  the  court  had  got  both  parties  before  it :  for  arbitra-
tion can  take  place  only  by  consent,  not  by  a  unilateral  act  of  either
of  them  without  the  other.    Still  more  forcibly  are  we  reminded  of
the  mode  in  which  the  early  judge  acquired  his  jurisdiction  by  the
vitality  of  the  rule  that  no  judge  could  be  forced  upon  a  party  of
whose  knowledge  and  integrity  he  was  not  satisfied:    'neminem,'
says  Cicero ',  *  voluerunt  maiores  nostri  non  modo  de  existimatione
cuiusquam,  sed  ne  pecuniaria  quidem  de  re  minima  esse  iudicem,
nisi  qui  inter  adversarios  convenisset.'    Hence  too  the  limited  au-
thority, as  we  should  deem  it,  of  the  Roman  iudex ;    he  has  no
'imperium;'  he  cannot  compel  the  parties  to  any  act  or  forbear-
ance ;  he  is  merely  a  referee  whom  they  have  chosen,  and  in  whose
appointment  the  magistrate  has  co-operated ;  all  he  has  to  do  is  to
decide  the  questions  submitted  to  him,  so  far  as  the  parties  may
enable  him  ;  he  has  to  leave  to  them  the  realization  (by  execution)
of  the  right  he  ascertains.     The  very  point  he  has  actually  to  settle
is  at  first  kept  studiously  in  the  background,  and  hidden  behind  a
wager ;  the  decision  is  not  an  order  or  injunction,  but  an  expression
of  opinion,  sententia,  pronuntiatio.

In  England  we  know  from  actual  records  with  what  rapidity  trial

^  Ancient  Law  pp.  375  sqq.  '  Pro  Clnentio  cap.  43,

Tt


642  EXCURSUS  X,

by  jury  in  civil  causes,  though  in  most  cases  optional  only,  super-
seded the  more  barbarous  methods  of  compurgation,  ordeal,  and  trial
by  battle,  and  that  this  was  largely  due  to  a  sense  of  the  greater  jus-
tice and  reasonableness  of  the  new  system.  We  can  hardly  doubt
that  upon  much  the  same  grounds  the  practice  of-  arbitration  daily
gained  greater  favour  among  the  Romans.  When  political  authority
has  at  length  obtained  a  firm  footing,  the  magistrate  is  gradually
preferred  by  litigants  to  a  citizen  arbitrator,  perhaps  from  a  convic-
tion of  his  greater  wisdom  and  impartiality ;  if  he  is  a  king,  perhaps
too  because  his  divine  descent  is  believed  to  confer  upon  him  a
sense  of  right,  and  a  kind  of  knowledge,  above  his  merely  human
fellows.  Finally,  the  judicial  function  is  recognized  as  appertaining
to  the  state ;  though  the  primitive  remedies  may  to  some  extent
survive  in  all  their  rudeness,  and  though  the  state  administration  of
justice  may  still  more  widely  bear  traces  of  the  social  condition
which  preceded  political  organization,  still  the  natural  mode  of
deciding  a  dispute  is  to  go  to  the  magistrate,  and  rules  of  civil
procedure  have  begun  to  assume  consistency.  Courts  have  become
established ;  their  mode  of  action  is  prescribed  by  law ;  any  attempt
to  evade  their  authority  by  recurring  to  other  methods  of  obtaining
satisfaction,  save  in  certain  well-defined  cases,  is  considered  a  defiance
of  law,  and  a  breach  of  the  peace.

This  is  the  condition  of  the  earliest  judicial  institutions  at  Rome
of  which  we  have  any  information.  Gaius  tells  us  that  the  formulary
procedure  which  was  in  use  in  his  time  had  superseded  a  system  of
*  Statute-Process,'  which  presents  to  us  all  the  characteristic  features
of  a  nascent  judicature.  There  were  but  five  forms  of  redress  for
wrong,  called  legis  actiones,  a  name  of  which  two  alternative  explana-
tions are  given  by  Gaius  (iv.  11).  Three  of  these  are  genuine  ac-
tions ;  the  other  two  are  anomalous,  for,  though  called  *  actiones,'
they  are  clearly  *  survivals '  from  the  older  system  of  self-redress,  and
seem  at  first  sight  to  have  little  in  common  with  an  action  in  the
ordinary  sense  of  the  word :  *  they  cannot '  (says  Sir  H.  Maine)  *  be
made  to  square  in  any  way  with  our  modem  conception  of  an  action.'
One  of  these  is  pignoris  capio,  which  Gaius  (iv.  29)  says  some  refused
to  regard  as  a  legis  actio  at  all,  among  other  reasons  because  of  its
extra-judicial  character.  In  point  of  fact,  it  is  the  old  practice  of
distraint,  restricted  by  the  encroachments  of  a  more  civilized  pro-
cess to  certain  limited  kinds  of  claims  of  a  public  or  religious  nature,
and  even  then  to  be  successfully  applied  only  by  careful  observance
of  prescribed  forms  of  speech  and  action.     It  could  be  used  by  a


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  643

soldier  against  the  tribunus  aerarius  for  arrears  of  pay  \  and  by  the
cavalry  in  order  to  procure  money  for  the  purchase  of  a  horse  and
his  corn  (aes  equestre,  aes  hordearium) ;  its  employment  in  these
cases  was  anterior  to  all  records  (Gaius  iv.  26).     By  the  Twelve  Tables
the  buyer  of  a  victim  for  sacrificial  purposes,  and  the  hirer  of  a  beast
of  burden  let  out  to  raise  money  for  the  same  object,  were  made
liable  to  distress  for  the  purchase  or  hire  money,  and  the  *  lex  cen-
soria '  enabled  publicani  to  proceed  in  this  nianner  against  persons
who  were  in  arrears  of  taxation.     Of  the  procedure  we  know  nothing :
from  the  limited  action  of  the  remedy  it  may  perhaps  be  conjectured
that  very  little  was  left  to  the  caprice  of  the  distrainor,  and  that  both
notice  and  an  interval  for  redemption  of  the  property  seized  were
requisite.    The  other  abnormal  legis  actio  was  called  manus  iniectio,
which  seems  properly  to  have  been  the  mode  of  execution  upon  a
liquidated  debt,  and  so  available  only  in  the  case  of  debtors  who  had
either  admitted  their  liability  (confess!)  or  against  whom  a  judgment
had  been  obtained  ^iudicati).    The  procedure  consisted  in  the  credi-
tor's *  laying  hands '  on  his  debtor  wherever  he  met  him,  taking  him
before  the  praetor,  and  there  solemnly  stating  the  debt,  nonsatisfac-
tion,  and  arrest  (Gaius  iv.  21).     Thereupon,  unless  the  debt  was  at
once  discharged  by  the  debtor,  or  formally  contested  by  some  one
on  his  behalf,  the  creditor  was  entitled  to  take  him  away  and  keep
him  in  strict  detention,  and  after  the  lapse  of  a  prescribed  period  to
sell  him  into  foreign  slavery  or  put  him  to  death  *.     Subsequently,
manus  iniectio  was  extended  in  all  its  severity  by  statute  to  certain
other  claims ;  in  particular,  it  was  allowed  by  the  lex  Publilia  to  the
sponsor  against  his  principal,  in  default  of  repayment  within  six
months,  and  by  the  lex  Furia  de  sponsu  against  the  creditor  who
exacted  from  one  of  several  sureties  more  than  his  aliquot  share  of
the  debt  guaranteed.     As  thus  extended  it  was  called  manus  iniectio
pro  iudicato.     In  other  cases  again  it  was  applied  by  statute  with  a
mitigation  of  its  harshness,  the  debtor  escaping  imprisonment  by
being  allowed  to  contest  his  liability  by  action  in  person ;  in  this  less
severe  form  it  was  called  manus  iniectio  pura ;  instances  of  its  use
will  be  found  in  Gaius  iv.  23.     We  read  too  of  manus  iniectio  under
other  circumstances  than  any  of  these,  especially  in  execution  for
contractual  obligations  incurred  by  nexum,  and  apparently  in  furtum
manifestum  (Gaius  iii.  189) :  and  very  often  it  is  impossible  to  say

^  Cf.  Maine,  Early  History  of  Institutions  p.  305.
■  Cf.  Poste's  Gaius  p.  326.

T  t  a


644  EXCURSUS  X,

whether  the  procedure  was  pura  or  pro  iudicato.  But  the  lex  Vallia
(iv.  25)  eventually  limited  the  operation  of  manus  iniectio  in  all  its
original  severity  to  the  cases  of  iudicatus  (including  confessus}  and  of
the  defaulting  debtor  under  the  lex  Publilia ;  wherever  else  it  was
still  available  it  was  pura,  and  its  only  peculiar  incident  was  that  the
debtor  was  cast  in  double  damages  if  he  unsuccessfully  denied  his
liability  (lis  crescens).

The  Romans  themselves  never  doubted  that  manus  iniectio  was
a  true  legis  actio,  though  it  was  no  less  a  form  of  execution  than  pig-
noris  capio :  the  former  was  Personal,  the  latter  was  Real  execution.
The  fact  would  seem  to  be,  as  is  remarked  by  Mr.  Poste\  that
manus  iniectio  has  two  meanings.  Sometimes  it  is  a  solemn  act
of  self-redress,  viz.  where  the  plaintiiTs  right  is  incontestable,  and  the
defendant  submits.  But  at  other  times  it  is  the  first  stage  in  a  legis
actio,  viz.  where  the  defendant  denies  his  liability,  and  resists  the
claim  either  in  person  or  through  a  vindex  :  and  it  seems  probable
that  it  was  called  Statute-Process  only  in  this  latter  case.  If  this  be
true,  the  application  of  the  term  '  legis  actio '  to  pignoris  capio  alone
remains  anomalous.  So  far  as  we  know  it,  pignoris  capio  was  purely
extra-judicial :  if  a  man  had  a  claim  which  the  law  allowed  him  to
enforce  an  this  manner,  he  had  no  need  of  assistance  from  the
magistrate ;  the  praetor  did  not  appear  at  any  stage  of  the  proceed-
ings, which  presented  a  picture  of  as  pure  self-redress  as  could  be
found  before  courts  and  magistrates  had  come  into  existence.  Why
then  is  it  called  an  '  actio '  at  all  ?  Arguing  from  the  analogy  of
manus  iniectio,  it  would  not  be  rash  to  conjecture  that  pignoris
capio  also  has  two  meanings,  and  that  it  was  a  legis  actio  only  when
the  person  distrained  upon  denied  his  liability,  and  pushed  proceed-
ings to  a  regular  action.  It  is  well  known  that  in  the  English  law
of  Distress  this  is  done  by  an  action  of  Replevin,  in  which  the
distrainee  is  plaintiff  and  the  distrainor  defendant :  but  the  parallel
of  manus  iniectio  makes  it  probable  that  in  Roman  law  the  rdles
were  reversed,  and  that  if  the  distress  was  alleged  to  be  unlawful  the
distrainor  was  bound  to  come  forward  as  plaintiff  in  an  action  to
justify  his  act,  by  forcing  the  other  to  redeem  his  pledge  at  a  price
double  the  amount  of  the  original  debt '.

'  Gaius  p.  479.

'  This  conjecture  is  supported  bj  the  known  facts  of  the  publicanns,  who  was
allowed  to  proceed  on  the  analogy  of  pignoris  capio  after  the  introduction  of  the
formnlaiy  system  :  and  Gaius'  words  (iv.  3a)  suggest  that  the  publicanus  sued  the
taxpayer  who  was  in  arrears  in  order  to  compel  him  to  redeem  the  property  seized


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  645

Of  the  three  other  legis  actiones  it  seems  probable  that  the  oldest
is  the  sacramentum.  Gaius  says  it  was  'actio  generalis,'  i.e.  the
proper  remedy  in  all  cases  for  which  no  other  procedure  had  been
ordained  by  statute.  Though  he  describes  it  to  us  as  a  real  action,
involving  questions  of  ownership  and  status,  it  may  be  conjectured
that  it  was  at  one  time  the  only  form  of  action  proper  known  to  the
Romans  \  for,  of  the  two  other  legis  actiones  which  we  have  still  to
examine,  we  know  one  to  have  been  of  later  introduction,  and  to  have
related  to  cases  which  previously  were  tried  by  sacramentum  (Gaius
iv.  20) ;  while  the  comparative  freedom  of  the  other  from  the  strict
punctiliousness  characteristic  of  very  early  procedure  seems  to  justify
us  in  denying  it  any  very  great  antiquity  \  All  three,  however,  being
actions  proper,  necessitated  the  attendance  of  both  parties  before  the
magistrate,  and  to  secure  this  was  the  business  of  the  plaintiff.  A
summons  from  the  court  or  magistrate,  which  we  now  regard  as  the
indispensable  mode  of  commencing  legal  proceedings,  was  at  Rome
unheard  of  for  many  centuries.  The  first  words  of  the  Twelve
Tables  which  have  survived  to  us  prescribed  the  mode  of  dealing
with  a  defendant  who  refused  to  attend  to  his  plaintiff's  summons  or
'  in  ius  vocatio ; '  the  latter,  after  appealing  to  witnesses,  could  lay
hands  upon  and  take  him  by  force  before  the  praetor.  The  *  Real '
form  of  sacramentum  is  familiar  to  every  reader  of  Sir  Henry  Maine's

*  Ancient  Law.'  It  may  be  said  to- consist  of  three  dramatic  acts  or
stages,  the  first  of  which  presents  to  us  an  oral  pleading  or  alterca-
tion. The  subject  of  dispute,  e.  g.  a  slave — or,  if  it  be  too  large,
a  portion  of  it — is  brought  into  court :  whereupon  the  plaintiff,  hold-
ing in  one  hand  the  festuca,.OF  symbol  of  absolute  dominion,  grasped
it  with  the  other,  and  touching  it  with  the  festuca  said  '  hunc  ego
hominem  (e.  g.)  ex  iure  Quiritium  meum  esse  aio  secundum  suam
causam  sicut  dixi:  ecce  tibi  vfndictam  imposui.'  This  form  was
repeated  by  the  defendant ;  and,  both  now  grasping  the  object  of
their  dispute,  we  reach  the  second  act  of  the  drama,  a  pretended  trial
by  battle,  symbolised  in  this  simultaneous  seizure  or  '  manuum  con-
sertio.'  Lastly,  to  avert  the  simulated  prospect  of  bloodshed,  the
state  steps  in  ;  the  praetor,  in  the  phrase  '  mittite  ambo  hominem,'
turns  actual  strife  into  peaceful  arbitration.  The  plaintiff  now
demands  of  the  defendant  the  ground  of  his  claim,  and  having  heard

at  a  sum  in  excess  of  that  actually  due.    Cicero  speaks  (in  Verrem  iii.  11.  27)  of

*  pnblicanus  petitor  ac  pignerator.'

^  Keller,  however  (Civil  Process  p.  77),  regards  indicis  arbitrive  postulatio  as
coeval  with  sacramentum.


646  EXCURSUS  X

it  challenges  him  to  lay  a  wager,  the  amount  of  which  was  fixed  by
the  Twelve  Tables,  on  its  justice ;  a  challenge  which  is  repeated  by
his  adversary.  It  is  from  the  stake  in  this  wager  (sacramentum)  that
the  action  got  its  name ;  it  was  forfeited  by  the  loser  to  the  aerarium,
and  originally  was  deposited,  pending  trial,  'in  sacro,'  under  the
custody  of  the  gods ;  subsequently  immediate  deposit  was  dispensed
with,  the  praetor  taking  security  (praedes  sacramenti)  from  both
parties  for  payment  in  the  event  of  defeat.  The  wager  having  been
thus  duly  laid,  the  praetor  proceeded  *vindicias  dicere,'  to  award
interim  possession  to  one  or  other  of  the  litigants,  taking  sureties
(praedes  litis  et  vindiciarum)  for  the  restoration  of  the  property  in
dispute,  and  its  mesne  profits,  if  the  other  proved  his  title.  A  iudex
was  then  appointed  by  agreement  to  try  the  question  at  issue,
namely,  which  was  the  winner  of  the  wager :  behind  which  the  real
matter  in  litigation — the  ownership  of  the  slave — lay  in  the  back-
ground. Before  this  judge  the  case  was  first  laid  in  "a.  succinct
narrative  form  (causae  collectio),  which  was  followed  by  evidence
and  arguments  in  detail  \

Both  the  remaining  legis  actiones  are  in  personam.  Of  iudicis
arbitrive  postulatio  we  have  no  records,  save  the  formula,  preserved
by  Valerius  Probus,  in  which  the  judge  or  referee  was  applied  for.
But  it  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  modification  of  the  sacramentum,
designed  for  the  settlement  of  unliquidated  claims.  The  employment
of  sacramentum  itself  was  conditional  upon  the  applicability  of  the
wager,  and  this  clearly  depended  on  precise  knowledge  of  the  pecu-
niary value  of  that  which  was  claimed  by  the  plaintiff.  In  other
words,  sacramentum,  as  an  action  in  personam,  lay  only  on  literal
contracts,  on  such  stipulations  as  were  for  a  certum,  and  on  delicts
in  which  the  pecuniary  penalty  was  fixed  by  law ;  and  iudicis  arbi-
trive postulatio  seems  to  have  been  the  remedy  on  fiducia  and  on
certain  quasi-contractual  relations,  in  which  the  plaintiff  demands,
not  something  ascertained,  but  that  it  shall  be  ascertained  to  what  he
is  in  equity  entitled  from  his  adversary'.    Of  condictio  we  have  fuller


'  For  the  significance  of  wagers  in  early  judicial  proceedings  see  Maine,  Early
History  of  Institutions  p.  259.

The  procedure  in  sacramentum  after  the  praedes  litis  et  Tindicianim  had  been
taken  is  very  obscure,  owing  to  a  lacuna  in  the  MS.  of  Gaius,  iv.  15.  Before  the
enactment  of  a  lex  Pinaria  Gains  says  (iv.  15)  that  a  judge  was  appointed  to  try
the  case  at  once :  but  that  statute  required  the  parties  to  appear  before  the  praetor
for  that  purpose  after  an  interval  of  thirty  days.

'  E.  g.  the  actio  tutelae  and  the  actio  familiae  erciscnndae.     See  Voigt,  zii.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  647

knowledge.  It  is  said  by  Gaius  (iv.  19)  to  have  been  established  by
the  lex  Silia  ^  for  the  recovery  of  liquidated  money  claims,  and  to
have  been  extended  later  by  a  lex  Calpurnia  to  res  certae  of  all  other
kinds.  He  adds  that  the  reason  of  its  introduction  was  hard  to  see,
there  being  already  a  satisfactory  remedy  in  such  cases,  viz.  the
sacramentum  in  personam.  One  possible  explanation  is  the  increase
in  judicial  business.  If  the  lex  Pinaria  had  not  yet  been  enacted,
and  Keller's  account  of  it  is  the  true  one,  we  may  ascribe  the  intro-
duction of  condictio  to  a  desire  to  relieve  the  centumviri  of  a  number
of  suits  which  could  very  well  be  tried  by  a  single  judge ;  and,  even
if  that  statute  were  already  in  existence,  it  perhaps  only  made  refer-
ence of  the  cause  to  a  single  iudex  optional  to  the  praetor,  whereas
the  lex  Silia  absolutely  required  him  to  send  condictiones  to  be  tried
in  this  manner.  It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  the  condictio
was  really  designed  in  the  interests  of  creditors  and  the  money-
lending  class,  to  whom,  as  will  be  seen,  it  was  far  more  favourable
than  the  older  procedure  by  sacramentum '.  In  its  earliest  form  it
lay  only  for  the  recovery  of  pecunia  certa  credita — money  lent,  or
promised  by  a  stipulation,  or  due  under  a  literal  contract ;  and  in
these  cases  the  plaintiff,  having  got  the  defendant  before  the  praetor
by  in  ius  vocatio,  challenged  him  to  a  wager  by  stipulatio  (sponsio
poenalis)  of  a  sum  equivalent  to  a  third  of  the  sum  in  dispute,  while
the  defendant,  by  restipulatio,  bargained  for  payment  of  a  similar
sum  by  him  in  the  event  of  his  failing  to  establish  his  case.  This
wager  did  not  go,  like  the  sacramentum,  to  the  state,  but  to  the
party  victorious  in  the  action.  Then  followed  the  'condictio'
proper',  viz.  notice  by  the  plaintiff  to  the  defendant  to  reappear
after  an  interval  of  thirty  days  for  the  appointment  of  a  iudex  to
try  the  case,  the  subsequent  procedure  being  much  the  same  as  in
sacramentum.  It  does  not  seem  that  the  sponsio  and  restipulatio,
by  which  the  wager  *  tertiae  partis '  was  entered  into,  ever  formed

Tafeln  i.  %  62.  This  is  the  point  of  contact  between  this  legfis  actio  and  the  later
bonae  fidei  indicia.  The  equitable  balancing  of  conflicting  claims  seems  to  be
charaaeristic  of  both.

^  Voigt  (Ius  Naturale  iv.  401)  believes  that  it  was  through  the  introdnction  of
condictio  that  stipulation  acquired  binding  force,  and  dates  it  between  443  and
435  B.C.  The  lex  Calpurnia  he  places  between  338  and  288  B.C.  :  but  other
writers  consider  them  to  have  been  much  later.

'  So  too  Professor  Muirhead,  Roman  Law  p.  231.  For  another  explanation  see
Maine,  Early  History  of  Institutions  p.  260.

'  Gaius  iv.  18  'et  haec  quidem  actio  proprie  condictio  vocabatur:  nam  actor
adversario  denuntiabat,  nt  ad  iudicem  capiendum  die  xxx  adesset.'


648  EXCURSUS  X.

part  of  the  condictio  to  recover  *  certa  res/  which  was  subsequently
called  condictio  triticaria.

The  defects  of  the  legis  actio  procedure  in  general  lie  upon  the
surface.     Gaius  (iv.  30)  refers  only  to  its  *  nimia  subtilitas '  or  ex-
cessive formalism.     Things  came,  he  says,  to  such  a  pass,  that  be
who  committed  the  smallest  error  failed  altogether.    Sir  H.  Maine  *
cites  a  passage  of  Blackstone  in  which  precisely  the  same  remark  is
made  of  the  English  law  of  Distress,  and  which  is  curious,  as  he  says,
because  the  later  of  the  two  writers  could  not  possibly  have  read  the
earlier.   It  was  not  so  much  the  '  nimia  subtilitas '  as  the  lack  of  safe-
guards against  errors  of  form  which  gave  the  legis  actio  its  two-edged
character.    Any  such  error,  however  trivial  it  might  be,  entailed  com-
plete and  irrevocable  loss  of  action,  for  the  maxim  '  nemo  de  eadem
re  bis  experiri  potest '  forbade  the  bringing  of  a  second  suit :  and  yet
the  chances  of  such  mistake  were  so  innumerable,  the  path  of  the
litigant  was  so  beset  with  the  pitfalls  of  formalism,  that  justice  must
have  been  only  too  often  defeated.     Thus,  in  manus  iniectio,  and
pignoris  capio,  the  proceedings  took  place  to  a  large  extent,  if  not
entirely,  out  of  court ;  and  yet  the  slightest  slip,  even  in  an  ignorant
creditor,  brought  upon  him  irremediable  defeat.     In  the  succeeding
system,  as  is  remarked  by  Mr.  Poste ',  no  litigant  could  commit  a
suicidal  error  before  the  final  moment  at  which  the  suit  was  trans-
ferred from  praetor  to  index.     In  the  same  note  he  calls  attention
to  the  rigidity  of  Statute-Process — its  want  of  power  of  expansion.
The  forms  of  action  were  crystallised  in  the  law,  and  incapable  of
multiplication ;  the  right  presupposed  the  remedy,  not  the  remedy
the  right ;  the  praetor  himself  had  his  hands  tied,  and  was  a  mere
piece  of  machinery.    A  new  order  of  things  was  inaugurated  by  the
lex  Aebutia*.

We  are  told  by  Gaius  (iv.  30)  that  owing  to  their  unpopularity  the
legis  actiones  were  for  the  most  part  *  swept  away  by  this  statute  and

*  Early  History  of  Institutions  p.  273,  *  Note  on  Gains  iv.  30.

'  For  the  date  of  the  lex  Aebntia  see  note  on  p.  31  supr.  The  only  passages  in
which  the  statute  is  mentioned  are  that  of  Gaius,  refexred  to  above,  and  one  of
Gellius  (xvi.  10).  In  the  latter  the  writer  is  investigating  the  meaning  of  the  word
proletarius  borrowed  by  Ennins  from  the  XII  Tables :  and  a  friend,  deeply  versed
in  the  civil  law,  tells  him  that,  like  many  other  words  there  used,  it  had  become
obsolete  since  the  lex  Aebulia,  except  in  legis  actiones  tried  in  the  centumviral
court.

^  Thus  the  legis  actio  procedure  continued  to  be  followed  (i)  in  the  centumviral
court,  where  actions  were  tried  by  sacramentum  as  late  as  the  reign  of  Diocletian  ;
(2)  in  the  so-called  voluntary  jurisdiction,  such  as  datio  in  adoptionem  and  in  iuxe


J


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE,  649

two  leges  luliae,  and  that  actions  tried  by  formula  took  their  place.
As  there  was  an  interval  of  probably  more  than  a  century  and  a  half
between  the  lex  Aebutia  and  these  two  laws  of  Augustus,  it  is  by
no  means  clear  what  share  in  the  result  is  to  be  attributed  to  the
earlier  and  the  later  enactments  respectively.  Trials  of  actions  by
formula  seem  to  have  been  in  vogue  in  the  courts  established  by  the
praetor  peregrinus,  perhaps  from  the  very  commencement  of  his
jurisdiction,  and  the  opinion  of  most  recent  writers  on  the  subject
is  that  the  lex  Aebutia  merely  authorised  the  praetor  urbanus  to
direct  the  trial  in  a  similar  manner  of  any  action  between  Roman
citizens  which  required  the  appointment  of  a  iudex  (which  was  not
the  case  with  those  which  fell  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  centum-
viral  court),  the  parties  having  the  option  between  this  procedure
and  that  by  legis  actio.  According  to  this  view,  the  leges  luliae
gave  the  death-blow  to  the  l^is  actiones,  which  had  practically  gone
quite  out  of  use  except  *  in  centumviralibus  iudiciis/  by  enacting  that
the  formulary  process  should  be  compulsory  wherever  it  had  pre-
viously been  optional  ^

The  new  system  has  two  leading  features.  One  is  the  division
of  nearly  every  judicial  proceeding  or  action  into  two  portions,  one
which  took  place  before  the  praetor,  in  iure,  and  the  other  which
took  place  before  the  iudex,  in  iudicio.  We  have  seen  the  growing
tendency  towards  this  in  the  legis  actio  period.  So  long  as  litigation
was  tolerably  scanty,  we  may,  perhaps,  believe  that  the  praetor
decided  most  suits  in  person,  but  the  lex  Silia  made  reference  to
a  single  judge  obligatory  in  a  large  class  of  actions,  and  an  impulse
must  also  have  been  given  to  the  practice  by  the  introduction  of
iudicis  arbitrive  postulatiok  But  after  the  lex  Aebutia  the  distinction
between  ius  and  iudicium  is  strongly  emphasised,  the  latter  acquiring
more  prominence  as  the  former  became  less  formal.  The  main
object  of  the  proceedings  in  iure,  as  of  the  pleadings  in  an  English
action,  was  to  determine  the  issues  to  be  tried;  their  actual  trial

cessio  generally,  and  manumissio  vindicta;  here  also  the  proceedings  were  by
sacramentnm,  and  took  place  entirely  in  lore,  there  being  no  necessity  for  the
appointment  of  a  iudex ;  (3)  in  damnum  infectum  (note  on  Bk.  iii.  18,  a  supr.)  where
the  better  opinion  is  that  the  legis  actio  followed  was  pignoris  capio  :  see  Sohm,
Institutionen,  §  36,  note  9  (p.  172  in  the  English  translation  by  J.  C.  Ledlie).

^  Cuq  (Institutions  juridiques  des  Remains  i.  p.  714)  suggests  that  the  lex
Aebutia  permitted  the  praetor  urbanus  to  direct  the  trial  by  formula  only  of
condictiones,  the  object  being  to  save  the  plaintiff  in  actions  of  debt  from  the
inconvenience  of  waiting  the  thirty  days  which  the  lex  Silia  had  interposed  between
the  proceedings  in  iure  and  the  appointment  of  the  iudex  (Gains  iv.  18).


650  EXCURSUS  X.

took  place  in  iudicio.  The  other  and  more  characteristic  feature  of
the  new  system  is  the  commencement  of  the  action,  after  summons
and  appearance,  by  a  written  document  (formula,  concepta  verba)
addressed  by  the  praetor  to  the  iudex  who  was  to  try  the  action,  and
containing  his  authority,  and  a  brief  statement  of  the  issues,  with
sometimes  the  principle  upon  which  he  was  to  decide  them.  The
praetor  stated  in  his  Edict  the  circumstances  under  which  he  would
grant  an  action,  e.  g.  '  if  Aulus  assaults  Titius,  or  if  Titius  refuses  to
repay  a  loan  given  him  by  Seius,  iudicium  dabo ; '  and  the  skeleton  of
the  formula  was  taken  from  the  Edict,  or  from  some  special  depart-
ment of  it  known  as  the  album,  and  filled  out  with  flesh  and  muscle
from  the  allegations  of  the  parties.  It  was  no  part  of  the  praetor's
duty  to  construct  the  formula.  It  was  incumbent  on  the  plaintiff  to
see  that  it  contained  every  word  and  letter  which  was  essential  to  his
case ;  it  was  the  defendant's  business  to  see  that  any  defence  which
he  had,  and  which  by  technical  rules  of  pleading  was  required  to  be
referred  to  in  the  formula,  should  there  be  alluded  to  accordingly.
In  a  word,  the  skilful  '  building  up '  of  a  perfect  formula  was  a  task
of  much  nicety,  in  which  a  litigant  frequently  required  considerable
technical  assistance.  When  the  parties  had  finally  agreed  upon  its
structure,  it  was  'settled'  by  the  praetor,  and  the  business  in  iure
was  over.  Thus,  the  formula  might,  and  usually  did,  contain  a
number  of  clauses,  some  of  them  due  to  and  containing,  as  it  were,
the  case  of  the  plaintiff;  others  due  to  and  to  a  certain  extent  con-
taining the  defence  of  the  defendant.

At  the  head  of  the  formula  stood  the  appointment  of  the  iudex ;
e.  g.  Aulus  Agerius  iudex  esto '.  The  other  possible  portions,  though
never  all  found  together,  usually  followed  in  much  the  same  relative
order.  We  will  first  examine  those  inserted  in  the  interest  of  the
plaintiff.


^  For  purposes  of  convenience  it  b  assnmed  thftt  the  case  is  sent  for  trial  before
a  single  iudex.  Often,  however,  it  was  heard  by  a  number  of  indices  sitting  together,
who  were  then  called  recuperatores ;  though  it  is  quite  uncertain  what  kinds
of  cases  were  usually  treated  in  this  manner.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  warn  the
reader  against  confusing  the  Roman  iudex  with  an  English  judge.  Ths  former  was
merely  a  private  citizen,  appointed  by  the  praetor  after  amicable  selection  by  the
parties,  to  determine  certain  issues  of  law  and  fact  in  accordance  with  the  evidence
laid  before  him.  Towards  the  end  of  the  republican  period  the  office,  which  had
previously  been  thought  an  honour,  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  burden  ;  and  this  led
to  the  institution  by  Augustus  of  an  *  album  iudicum  selectorum,*  from  whom  the
judge  had  to  be  chosen,  and  who  were  compellable  to  hear  cases  sent  to  them  by
the  praetor.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  651

The  Demonstration  when  found  in  a  formula^  immediately  follows
the  appointment  of  the  iudex,  and  contains  the  allegation  of  fact  upon
which  the  plaintiff  bases  his  claim.   It  invariably  begins  with  *quod,'

*  whereas ; '  e.  g.  in  Gaius  iv.  39  *  quod  Aulus  Agerius  Numerio  Ne-
gidio  hominem  vendidit ; '  or  '  apud  Numerium  Negidium  hominem
deposuit/  Occasionally  the  place  of  the  demonstratio  is  taken  by
a  praescriptio  (pro  actore),  and  sometimes  even  the  latttr  is  prefixed
to  or  worked  into  the  former ;  its  use  is  confined  to  formulae  upon
actions  in  which  the  plaintiff  is  entitled  from  the  defendant  to  a  number
or  variety  of  acts  prima  facie  hanging  together,  but  of  which  one  only,
or  at  least  not  all,  are  claimed  in  the  present  action.  By  the  prae-
scriptio, beginning  *  ea  res  agatur,  let  the  present  trial  relate  exclusively
to  so  and  so,'  the  plaintiff  reserved  his  right  of  action  upon  the  other
acts,  or  those  subsequently  to  fall  due,  which  would  otherwise  have
been  consumed ;  it  being  a  presumption  of  Roman  law  (capable,
however,  of  being  rebutted  by  the  insertion  of  a  praescriptio  in  the
formula)  that  when  a  man  instituted  an  action  it  comprised  all  his
claims  against  the  defendant,  prospective  no  less  than  present,  so  far
at  least  as  they  related  to  the  present  ground  of  action,  and  already
had  at  least  a  potential  existence.  Two  examples  are  given  by  Gaius.
In  the  one,  a  man  to  whom  an  annuity  is  payable,  say,  every  six
months,  sues  for  a  half-year's  instalment,  using  the  praescriptio  '  ea
res  agatur  cuius  rei  dies  fuit ; '  in  the  other,  the  purchaser  of  an  estate,
claiming  that  it  shall  be  conveyed  to  him  by  mancipation,  reserves
to  himself  the  right  of  subsequently  demanding  its  mere  traditio  by
a  praescriptio  in  the  form  '  ea  res  agatur  de  fundo  mancipando.'

The  Intentio,  which  follows  the  Demonstratio  if  there  be  one,  is
the  part  of  the  formula  *  qua  actor  desiderium  suum  concludit,'  in
which  the  plaintiff  either  affirms  the  legal  right  which  he  claims
against  the  defendant,  or  else  states  a  fact  or  facts  (in  which  latter
case  there  is  never  a  demonstratio)  from  which  the  right  is  to  be
inferred.  It  is  easily  to  be  distinguished  from  the  other  parts  of  the
formula  by  the  term  paret  (si  paret,  quicquid  paret) ;  and  if  it  affirms
a  right  it  is  said  to  be  *  in  ius  concepta,'  if  it  merely  implies  a  right
by  directing  the  judge  to  decide  for  or  against  the  plaintiff  according
as  he  finds  certain  alleged  facts  to  be  true  or  untrue  it  is  said  to  be

*  in  factum  concepta.'  The  numerous  divisions  of  Roman  actions
found  in  the  fourth  book  of  Gaius  are  based  almost  entirely  on  the
structure  of  the  intentio ;  for,  this  being  the  part  of  the  formula  in
which  we  find,  expressly  or  impliedly,  the  right  alleged  by  the
plaintiff,  it  is  by  reference  to  it  that  we  are  enabled  to  distinguish


652  EXCURSUS  X.

actions  according  to  the  rights  which  they  are  designed  to  protect.
If  the  intentio  of  one  formula  differs  substantially  in  structure  from
that  of  another,  we  know  at  once  that  the  actions  themselves,  and  the
rights  which  they  respectively  protect,  are  substantially  different  as  well.

The  principal  divisions  of  actions,  so  far  as  they  arise  from  differ-
ences of  structure  in  the  intentio,  are  as  follow.

i.  The  intentio  is  either  directed  against  the  person  of  the  defen-
dant, and  names  him  as  well  as  the  plaintiff  (e.  g.  si  paret  Auium
Agerium  Numeric  Negidio  sestertium  x  millia  dare  oportere),  or  it
merely  specifies  the  object  to  which  the  plaintiffs  claim  relates  and
names  the  plaintiff  only  (e.  g.  si  paret  Auli  Agerii  hominem,  fundum,
hereditatem,  ius  utendi  fruendi,  esse).  In  the  first  case  the  action
is  in  personam,  and  brought  to  enforce  an  obligation ;  it  is  called
*  actio'  KQT  €(oxrf»  (p.  350  supr.).  In  the  second  case  it  is  in  rem,
and  asserts  either  ownership  or  a  ius  in  re  aliena  as  belonging  to  the
plaintiff;  its  specific  name  is  vindicatio  or  petitio.  A  real  action
claiming  a  servitude  was  called  actio  (in  rem)  confessoria ;  one  deny-
ing the  right  of  another  person  to  a  servitude  was  called  negativa  or
negatoria.

ii.  Actions  in  personam  lie  for  the  enforcement  of  an  obligation.
Of  the  formulae  of  those  brought  upon  delict  little  is  known  * :  but
those  which  were  in  ius  conceptae  and  lay  on  contractual  or  quasi-
contractual  relations  fall  into  distinct  and  familiar  classes,  viz.  iudicia
stricti  iuris  and  iudicia  bonae  fidei.  The  intentio  of  both  can  always
be  recognised  by  the  presence  of  the  word  'oportet'  or  'oportere'
('  is  bound ').  Iudicia  stricti  iuris  are  the  same  as  condictiones :
the  cases  in  which  they  were  the  appropriate  action  are  pointed  out
in  the  note  on  p.  557  supr.  So  far  as  the  intentio  is  concerned,
they  are  of  three  kinds,  viz.  {a)  condictio  certi,  which  corresponds
tolerably  closely  with  the  old  legis  actio  introduced  by  the  lex  Silia :
it  lies  for  the  recovery  of  certa  pecunia.  The  intentio  ran  *  si  paret
A.  A. :  N»  N.  X.  millia  sestertium  dare  oportere : '  and  if  the  claim
was  for  pecunia  certa  credita  (i.  e.  due  under  a  mutuum,  a  verbal  or
a  literal  contract)  there  might  be  a  wager  (sponsio  and  restipulatio
poenalis)  between  the  parties  amounting  to  one  third  of  the  sum  in
dispute  (Gaius  iv.  171).  (b)  Condictio  triticaria  (which  derives  its
name  from  triticum,  grain^  a  loan  of  which  no  doubt  in  early  times
most  frequently  gave  rise  to  it)  corresponds  with  the  legis  actio  as
extended  by  the  lex  Calpurnia :  it  lies  for  the  recovery  of  certae  res

>  Some  evidence  as  to  the  actio  iiirti  is  found  in  Gains  iv.  37.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  653

(Dig.  13.  3),  and  its  intentio  runs  *si  paret  A.  A.:  N.  N.  fundum
[hominem,  tritici  x  modios]  dare  oportere.'  (c)  Condictio  incerti  is
the  remedy  where  the  obligation  is  to  perform  some  act  other  than
a  conveyance,  and  as  it  is  most  usually  brought  on  a  stipulation  it
is  commonly  called  actio  ex  stipulatu  (Bk.  iii.  15-  pr  supr.).  The
formula  contained  a  demonstration  and  the  intentio  ran  ^quicquid
dare  facere  ....  oportet.'

The  bonae  fidei  iudicia,  which  are  sometimes  called  arbitria  \  are
enumerated  in  Gaius  iv.  62,  Bk.  iv.  6.  28  supr.,  the  most  common
of  them  being  the  actions  on  contracts  iuris  gentium  exclusive  of
mutuum.  The  name  is  derived  from  the  addition  of  the  words  '  ex
fide  bona '  in  the  intentio  (e:  g.  quicquid  ob  eam  rem  A.  A. :  N.  N.
ex  fide  bona  dare  facere  oportet),  which  indicate  that  the  plaintiffs
demand  is  of  something  more  *  incertum '  even  than  in  condictio  in-
certi :  its  value  is  to  be  ascertained  only  by  a  careful  balancing  and
adjustment  of  conflicting  claims,  and  consequently  the  judge  is  here
allowed  a  far  greater  latitude  of  discretion ;  the  procedure  is  that  of
equity  rather  than  of  law  \

iii.  Another  division  of  actions  based  upon  structural  difference  of
intentio  is  that  into  actio  directa  and  actio  utilis,  which  grew  out  of
the  practice  of  extending  an  action  to  cases  which  did  not  come
within  its  original  scope  by  the  introduction  of  a  fiction  into  the
intentio,  whereby  the  iudex  was  instructed  to  decide  the  case  as  if
the  conditions  under  which  (in  ordinary  circumstances)  the  action
would  lie  existed,  whereas  in  point  of  fact  they  did  not.  Such  an
action  was  called  actio  fictitia,  and  is  described  by  Gaius  as  one
*  quae  ad  aliam  actionem  exprimitur,  which  is  moulded  upon  a  pre-
existing and  independent  remedy,'  the  latter  being  said  '  sua  vi  ac
potestate  constare/  Of  fictitious  real  actions  an  example  may  be
found  in  the  actio  Publiciana^  in  which  it  was  feigned  that  the
period  of  usucapio  had  run  its  full  course ;  personal  actions  contain-
ing  some  similar  fiction  may  be  illustrated  by  the  actio  Serviana
(Gaius  iv.  35),  in  which  the  bonorum  emptor  fictitiously  represented
himself  as  the  insolvent's  heir,  and  by  the  actiones  furti  and  legis
Aquiliae  when  brought  by  or  against  a  peregrinus,  where  the  latter

^  The  term  arbitrinm  in  Roman  law,  in  the  sense  of  an  action,  means  either  an
actio  arbitraria,  p.  567  snpr.,  or  a  bonae  fidei  iudidnm ;  and  the  person  who  tries
an  action  of  either  of  these  classes  is  called  arbiter  as  often  as  index.

*  For  the  principal  specific  points  of  difference  between  strict!  inris  and  bonae
fidei  indicia  see  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  aS  snpr.

'  Gains  iv.  36.    Cf.  the  description  of  this  action  given  in  Bk.  iv,  6.  4  supr.


654  EXCURSUS  X.

was  represented  as  a  civis  (ib.  37).  Where  there  was  no  fiction
whatever,  nor  the  slightest  trace  of  one,  the  action  was  said  to  be
directa ;  where  there  either  was  a  fiction,  or  some  covert  reference
in  the  intentio  showed  that  the  action  lay  on  the  case  in  question  in
virtue,  not  of  the  substantive  law,  but  of  the  praetor's  quasi-legislative
authority  as  exercised  through  the  Edict,  it  was  said  to  be  utilis.
An  actio  utilis  was  thus  always  modelled  on  an  actio  directa  ]  where
this  was  clear  upon  the  face  of  the  formula,  it  was  actio  fictitia;
where  not,  but  the  derivation  was  less  patent,  it  was  actio  utilis  pure
and  simple.  As  examples  of  the  latter  may  be  cited  the  actions
brought  by  the  fideicommissarius  under  the  SC.  Trebellianum,  by
the  assignee  of  a  chose  in  action  (p.  487  supr.),  and  that  referred  to
in  Gaius  iii.  219.

iv.  The  difference  between  an  intentio  in  ius  and  one  in  factum
concepta  has  already  been  pointed  out.  The  one  affirms  hypotheti-
cally  or  indefinitely  a  right  belonging  to  the  plaintiff  by  the  civil
law\  though  (in  actiones  fictitiae)  belonging  to  him  thus  only  by
a  fiction.  By  the  other,  the  iudex  is  directed  to  inquire,  not,
whether  so  and  so  belongs,  as  of  right,  to  the  plaintiff,  or  whether
the  defendant  is  under  a  civil  obligation  to  do  so  and  so  for  him ;
but  whether  certain  alleged  facts  are  true,  and  (if  so)  to  condemn
the  defendant ;  and  such  an  intentio  is  said  to  be  in  factum  con-
cepta because  it  does  not  directly  affirm  a  fight,  but  only  a  state  of
facts,  though,  if  the  affirmation  is  found  to  be  true,  the  implied  right
is  as  clearly  brought  out  by  the  instructions  to  the  iudex  as  if  express
reference  had  been  made  to  it  in  the  formula.

Actions  of  this  kind— in  factum  conceptae — form  the  great  illus-
tration of  the  praetorian  development  of  Substantive  through  Adjec-
tive Law.  The  earliest  mode  in  which  the  praetor  conferred  rights
unknown  to  the  ius  civile  was  by  the  employment  of  fictions.  His
instructions  to  the  iudex  might  be  paraphrased  thus :  '  The  plaintiff
has,  by  the  civil  law,  no  right  whatever  against  the  defendant ;  but
if,  supposing  so  and  so  were  the  fact,  he  would  be  entitled  iure  civili,
then  find  for  him  in  any  case.'  Sir  Henry  Maine  has  shown  *  why
this  expedient  was  at  first  adopted  in  preference  to  openly  altering


'  £.  g.  si  paret  fundnzn  . .  .  Auli  Agerii  esse,  if  it  be  proved  that  the  title  to  the
estate  is  in  Aulns  Agerius ;  si  paret  . .  .  Auluzn  dare  oportert^  if  it  be  proved  that
he  is  under  an  obligation  to  convey ;  quicqnid  paret .  .  .  dare  facere  oportert^  what-
ever it  be  proved  is  the  content  of  his  obligation.

'  Ancient  Law  pp.  26,  37.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  655

the  law.  *  Fictions  satisfy  the  desire  for  improvement,  which  is  not
quite  wanting,  at  the  same  time  that  they  do  not  offend  the  super-
stitious disrelish  for  change  which  is  always  present.  At  a  particular
stage  of  social  progress  they  are  invaluable  expedients  for  overcoming
the  rigidity  of  law.'  Eventually,  however,  the  praetor  discarded  his
original  method,  and  began  to  boldly  grant  independent  actions  in
cases  which  bore  no  analogy  whatsoever  to  other  relations  already
protected  iure  civili.  The  intentio  of  such  new  actions  could  not
allege  a  right  in  the  plaintiff,  for  there  was,  ex  hypothesis  no  right  by
the  civil  law  at  all :  but  it  could  allege  a  fact  or  facts,  and  the  judge
could  be  instructed  to  find  for  or  against  the  plaintiff  according  as
he  ascertained  the  allegation  to  be  true  or  untrue  ^  Actiones  in
factum  conceptae,  in  short,  are  not  civil  law  actions  at  all :  they  are
all  derived  from  the  imperium  of  the  magistrate*.  The  formulae
of  those  which  were  of  most  frequent  occurrence  were  permanently
incorporated  in  the  album ;  on  these  others  were  modelled,  and
thus  we  get  actiones  in  factum  directae,  and  actiones  in  factum
utiles.  All,  however,  so  far  as  we  know  them,  are  in  personam,
forming  a  third  class  of  personal  actions,  co-ordinate  with  stricti
iuris  and  bonae  fidei  indicia.  The  two  latter  are  easily  distinguish-
able from  actiones  in  factum  by  their  having  an  intentio  in  ius
concepta — which  contains,  i.e.,  the  word  *oportere:'  but  Savigny
is  of  opinion  that  the  more  equitable  rules  and  free  procedure  of
bonae  fidei  actions  were  applied,  so  far  as  was  possible,  to  actiones
in  factum  as  well.  Under  some  circumstances,  indeed,  a  plaintiff
might  proceed  either  in  ius  or  in  factum ;  Gaius  points  out  (iv.  47)
that  this  was  the  case  in  depositum  and  commodatum,  and  possibly
pignus  was  equally  privileged.  Finally,  an  ordinary  actio  in  factum,
which  was  always  of  purely  praetorian  origin,  must  carefully  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  actio  in  factum  civilis  (or  praescriptis  verbis),
the  remedy  on  an  innominate  contract.  This  was  one  of  the  bonae
fidei  actions,  all  of  which,  having  an  intentio  incerta  {quicquid
paret),  had  a  demonstratio  as  well.  But  it  was  the  function  of  a
demonstratio  to  technically  designate  the  actual  ground  of  an  action
(sale,  hire,  &c.);   and  it  was  the  very  essence   of  an  innominate

^  For  examples  of  formulae  in  factum  conceptae  see  Gains  iv.  46,  47,  and  Keller,
Civil  Process  $  33  d.

*  Hence  the  division  of  actions  into  civiles  (or  legitimae)  and  honorariae  (Bk.
iv.  6.  3  stipr.),  the  latter  being  those  which  were  referable  solely  to  the  imperium,  and
had  no  foundation  in  the  dvil  law  at  all ;  they  consist  of  the  two  classes  of  actiones
utiles  and  in  factum  conceptae.


656  EXCURSUS  X,

contract  that  it  had  no  technical  name,  so  that  the  ground  of
an  action  upon  it  could  not  be  thus  shortly  set  forth.  The  result
was  that  for  a  demonstratio  was  substituted  a  summary  statement  of
the  facts  upon  which  the  plaintiff  relied,  praescripta  verba,  and  the
name  of  the  action — civilis  in  factum — related  to  this,  though  the
intentio  was  still  in  ius  concepta.

A  third  and  rare  part  of  a  formula  (to  whose  constituent  elements
we  now  return)  is  the  Adiudicatio  (Gaius  iv.  42),  which  is  found  only
in  the  formulae  of  iudicia  divisoria,  actions  demanding  a  partition  of
jointly-owned  property  on  behalf  of  one  of  the  co-owners.  Its  form
is  given  in  the  passage  of  Gaius  referred  to — quantum  adiudicari
oportet,  iudex  Titio  adiudicato — ^and  it  empowered  the  iudex  not  only
to  divide  the  subject-matter  of  the  action,  but  also,  where  an  exact
division  was  impracticable,  to  establish  usufructs  and  other  partial
rights  in  order  to  redress  the  inequality.  As,  however,  it  could  never
be  certain,  a  priori,  that  an  equal  partition  would  be  possible,  the
adiudicatio  seems  never  to  have  stood  by  itself,  but  in  loose  com-
bination with  a  far  more  important  and  universal  element  in  a  formula,
viz.  a  condemnatio,  by  which  the  judge  was  enabled  to  impose  a
pecuniary  payment  upon  one  joint  owner  in  favour  of  another,  to
whom  a  smaller  than  his  due  portion  of  the  joint  property  had  been
awarded.

The  Condemnatio  is,  with  very  few  exceptions,  found  in  every
formula,  being  the  clause  in  which  the  iudex  is  instructed  to  condemn
or  absolve  the  defendant  according  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the
plaintiff's  allegations.  The  formulary  procedure  provided  no  direct
machinery  for  enforcing  on  a  defendant  delivery  of  specific  property,
or  specific  performance  of  a  contract,  and  consequently  the  gist  of
the  condemnatio  always  lay  in  a  money  payment  (Gaius  iv.  48).  If
the  object  of  the  action  was  a  liquidated  debt,  the  condemnatio  was
said  to  be  certa  (ib.  50),  and  the  judge  was  instructed  to  condemn
the  defendant  in  exactly  that  amount ;  if  he  awarded  a  sum  either
greater  or  less,  he  became  liable  quasi  ex  delicto,  '  ut  qui  litem  suam
fecerit '  (Bk.  iv.  5.  pr.  supr.).  This  kind  of  condemnatio,  mentioning
a  specific  sum,  is  found  in  condictio  certi  and  in  actions  in  factum
conceptae,  which  claim  a  liquidated  penalty  (as  in  Gaius  iv.  46).  In
all  other  actions  the  condemnatio  was  said  to  be  incerta,  and  it  was
the  judge's  duty  *  litem  aestimare,'  to  fix  the  sum  payable  by  the
defendant  if  the  plaintiff  succeeded  in  establishing  his  case.  Even
in  condemnatio  incerta  a  distinction  has  to  be  drawn.  It  may  be
absolutely  incerta  (or,  as  Gaius  calls  it  in  iv.  51,  infinita),  the  judge's


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  657

discretion  in  the  litis  aestimatio  being  completely  unfettered  * :  or,
secondly,  a  maximum  may  be  fixed  in  the  formula,  below  which  the
iudex  may  assess  the  damages,  but  which  he  cannot  exceed  without
exposing  himself  to  the  action  quasi  ex  delicto ;  here  the  condemnatio
was  said  to  be  incerta  cum  taxatione '.

Under  the  head  of  condemnatio  it  seems  convenient  to  describe
the  actio  and  formula  arbitraria.  As  a  general  rule,  the  condem-
nation of  the  defendant  depends  upon  one  condition  only,  and  that
a  positive  one,  viz.  satisfactory  proof  of  the  plaintiff's  right,  or  of  the
facts  alleged  in  the  intentio :  si  paret  .  .  .  ,  condemna.  But  some-
times it  was  made  to  depend  further  on  a  second  negative  con-
dition, viz.  non-performance  by  the  defendant  of  some  specific  act,
which  was  introduce.d  into  the  formula  by  the  word  nisi'.  Such
a  formula  was  called  arbitraria,  because,  if  the  plaintiff  established  his
right  against  the  defendant,  the  latter  had  the  option  of  performing
the  specific  act,  or  in  default  of  being  condemned  in  damages :  if  he
did  the  former,  he  was  entitled  to  absolution.     Though  no  defendant


*  The  following  are  examples,  (i)  In  Real  action — si  paret  .  .  .  Auli  Agerii
esse,  quanti  ea  res  est,  tantam  pecnniam  A.  Agerio  N.  Negidinm  condemna :  si
non  paret,  absolve,  (ii)  In  Personal  action — quod  .  .  .,  qaicqnid  paret  ob  earn  rem
dare  facere  oportere,  eins  rei  tantam  pecuniam  condemna :  si  non  paret,  absolve.

-  E.  g.  Index  A.  Agerio  N.  Negidiam  duntaxcU  sestertiam  x  millia  condemna.
The  commonest  form  of  taxatio  is  where  the  maximum  is  fixed  in  iure  by  the
plaintiff  subject  to  the  praetor's  approval,  as  was  the  case  in  the  actio  ininriae
(Gains  iii.  324),  and  in  penal  actions  in  which  the  penalty  depended  on  the  value
of  an  object,  e.  g.  in  fhrtnm  and  rapina.  There  was,  however,  a  different  kind  of
taxatio  in  those  cases  where  the  defendant  was  not  personally  liable  for  the  whole
of  what  is  properly  the  object  of  the  action,  bat  (e.g.)  only  so  far  as  he  has  been
enriched  at  the  plaintiff's  cost,  or  only  so  far  as  a  pecnlium  extends  (actio  de
peculio).

'  For  examples  of  formulae  arbitrariae  see  Mr.  Posters  note  on  Gains  iv.  47.  What
actions  were  arbitrariae  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Under  them  we  may  place  without
hesitation  real  actions  tried  by  formula  petitoria,  and  of  remedies  in  personam  those
praetorian  actions  which  were  brought  to  obtain  restitution  (e.  g.  doli,  metus) :
for  noxal  actions  see  on  Bk.  iv.  8  supr.  From  the  isxX  that  bonae  fidei  actions
were  sometimes  called  arbitria,  it  has  been  supposed  that  their  formula  was  always
arbitraria.  Mr.  Poste  thinks  that  only  such  of  them  as  aimed  at  restitution  (e.  g.
depositi,  commodati,  locati,  rei  uxoriae)  were  of  this  character.  This  view  is  to
some  extent  supported  by  the  formula  (in  ius  concepta)  of  the  actio  depositi  in
Gains  iv.  47,  if  the  letters  there  are  (as  is  generally  supposed)  NR,  and  mean
'  nisi  restituat ; '  but  it  may  be  argued  with  some  force  that  the  formula  of  a  bonae
fidei  action  was  not  arbitraria,  because  the  iudex  in  such  a  suit  had  already,  in
virtue  of  his  commission  to  decide  the  matter  *■  ex  fide  bona,'  all  the  power  which
such  a  formula  could  give  him,  including  that  of  absolving  the  defendant  if  he
satisfied  the  plaintiff  before  judgment.

U  U


658  EXCURSUS  X.

could  be  compelled  by  this  form  of  action  to  deliver  specific  property,
or  to  perform  his  contracts,  yet  it  was  the  nearest  approach  to
a  specific  enforcement  made  by  the  formulary  system.  The  mode,
however,  in  which  the  damages  were  assessed  was  specially  adapted
to  induce  a  defendant  to  perform  the  act  demanded  in  preference  to
paying  damages ;  for  the  plaintiff  was  allowed  to  depose  on  oath
(iusiurandum  in  litem)  as  to  the  value  to  him  of  the  object  claimed,
or  the  pecuniary  loss  which  he  would  suffer  through  the  other's
breach  of  contract  The  tendency  seems  to  have  been  to  favour
plaintiffs,  and  to  accept  their  estimate  without  qualification,  unless  it
was  outrageously  unfair,  so  that  the  system  may  be  conjectured  to
have  worked  with  tolerable  success.

So  far  we  have  been  concerned  entirely  with  actions  in  personam.
Excluding  the  old  procedure  by  sacramentum  before  the  centumviral
court,  there  were  two  forms  of  real  action,  known  respectively  as
formula  petitoria  and  the  action  per  sponsionem.  The  first  was  the
great  type  of  actio  arbitraria,  the  intentio  running  '  si  paret  earn  rem
Titii  esse  ex  iure  Quiritium  neque  eam  rem  Gaius  arbitratu  tuo
restituet  [quanti  ea  res  erit  tanti  Gaium  Titio  condemna,'  etc.].  Here
the  disputed  right  was  tried  directly  and  in  the  open  light,  instead,  as
in  sacramentum  and  the  action  per  sponsionem,  of  being  hidden
behind  a  wager ;  and  the  proceedings  in  iudicio,  if  the  plaintiff
succeeded  in  proving  his  case,  consisted  of  a  pronunciatio  by  the
index  in  his  favour,  and  an  arbitratus  (ut  reus  rem  restituat)  based
thereon  :  if  the  defendant  refused  or  was  unable  to  make  restitution,
there  followed  a  iuramentum  in  litem  and  condemnatio  \  The  action
per  sponsionem  was  closely  modelled  after  the  old  sacramentum,  the
existence  of  the  right  in  rem  which  was  at  issue  being  tried  as  inci-
dental to  a  right  in  personam  based  upon  a  sponsio.  The  claimant
of  property  challenged  his  opponent  to  promise  him  a  sum  of  money
if  he  could  prove  his  title  to  it :  si  homo,  quo  de  agitur,  ex  iure
Quiritium  meus  est,  sestertios  xxv  nummos  dare  spondes?  (Gaius
iv.  93) ;  and  it  was  upon  this  promise  that  the  suit  was  brought,  so
that  the  action,  though  its  proper  and  ultimate  object  was  a  real
right,  in  form  was  in  personam.  To  secure  delivery  of  the  object,
along  with  its  fruits  and  accessions,  in  the  event  of  the  plaintiff's


^  This  was  the  form  of  action  employed  in  hereditatis  petitio,  in  praetorian  real
actions  (e.g.  Publidana),  in  suits  relating  to  seryitndes  (confessoria  and  negatoria),
and  perhaps  in  the  actio  finitim  regundornm.  It  differed  from  the  procedure  per
sponsionem  in  the  form  of  satisdatio  entered  into  by  the  defendant,  Gaius  iv.  91.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE,  659

success,  the  defendant  had  personally  to  give  security  (pro  praede
litis  et  vindiciarum),  and  the  sum  promised,  being  merely  trifling,
was  never  exacted,  whence  its  name  sponsio  praeiudicialis.  For
the  same  reason  there  was  no  restipulatio  by  the  defendant,  as  in
condictio  for  recovery  of  pecunia  certa  credita  \

It  remains  to  notice  certain  clauses  which  were  sometimes  inserted
in  the  formula  at  the  instance  of  the  defendant,  viz.  exceptiones  and
praescriptiones  pro  reo.  It  was  a  peculiar  rule  of  the  formulary
system  that  the  defendant  was  not  allowed  to  plead  some  grounds
of  defence  in  iudicio  unless  they  had  been  alleged  in  iure,  and  the
judge's  attention  expressly  called  to  them  by  an  addition  to  the
formula.  Exceptiones  are  pleas  of  this  character :  defences  which
do  not  actually  traverse  the  allegation  of  the  plaintiff,  but  set  up  a
countervailing  right,  rendering  the  former  of  at  least  no  present  value,
and  which,  if  they  are  to  be  successfully  pleaded,  require  (though  to
a  larger  extent  in  some  classes  of  actions  than  in  others)  to  be  tersely
embodied  in  the  formula,  by  an  addition  to  the  intentio,  instructing
the  iudex  to  condemn  the  defendant  only  on  the  fulfilment  of  two
conditions  instead,  as  usual,  of  one,  viz.  (a)  a  positive  condition,  si
paret,  etc. :  {b)  a  negative  condition,  non-proof  by  the  defendant  of
his  plea  in  defence.  Thus  the  material  nature  of  an  exceptio  is  that
it  is  a  plea  of  a  countervailing  right ;  its  form  is  that  of  a  negative
condition  of  the  condemnatio,  introduced  by  the  words  *  si  non '  or
an  equivalent ;  and  its  place  in  the  formula  is  between  the  intentio
and  the  condemnatio.  A  simple  illustration  is  found  in  the  exceptio
pacti  (Gaius  iv.  116);  e.g.  Aulus  owes  Titius  money,  for  which  the

'  It  was  but  seldom,  fts  has  been  observed  above,  that  a  formula  consisted  of
all  the  four  ordinary  elements  (demonstratio,  intentio,  adiudicatio,  condemnatio)
already  described.  The  composition  of  the  different  classes  of  formula  may  be
summarised  thus : —

{a)  Those  of  (i)  real  actions,  (2)  personal  actions  which  are  certae  and  in  lus
conceptae,  and  (3)  actions  in  factum  conceptae,  have  only  intentio  and  condemnatio.

{b)  Those  of  personal  actions  which  are  in  ius  conceptae,  but  incertae,  have,  as  a
general  rule,  demonstratio,  intentio,  and  condemnatio ;  the  indicia  divisoria,  which
belong  to  this  class,  have  an  adiudicatio  as  well.

{c)  Praeiudicia  (for  which  see  Gaius  iv.  44)  have  only  an  intentio.     Thus

The  Demonstratio  never  stands  alone ;  it  occurs  only  in  personal  actions  which
have  an  intentio  incerta  in  ius  concepta,  and  a  civile  nomen  (for  in  default  of  this
its  place  is  supplied  by  praescripta  verba,  p.  656  supr.).

The  Intentio  is  found  in  every  formula.

The  Adiudicatio  occurs  only  in  formulae  of  indicia  divisoria  ;  and

The  Condemnatio  concludes  every  formula  except  those  of  praeiudicia,  but  can*
not  stand  alone.

U  U  a


i


66o  EXCURSUS  X.

latter  promises  not  to  sue,  and  then  nevertheless  brings  his  action  ;
Aulus  would  repel  him  by  the  exceptio  *  si  inter  Aulum  et  Titium  non
convenit  ne  ea  pecunia  peteretur.'  The  usual  Roman  classifications
of  exceptiones  are  noticed  in  the  text  (Bk.  iv.  13)  and  commentary ;
the  answer  to  the  question,  in  what  classes  of  actions  this  peculiar  rule
had  the  widest  operation,  depends  on  the  character  of  the  intentio.
The  more  special  and  definite  the  intentio,  the  more  likely  was  it
that  the  defence  would  consist  in  the  allegation  of  a  countervailing
right  rather  than  in  a  direct  traverse  of  the  plaintiffs  claim.  In  real
actions,  accordingly,  it  was  the  rule  that  defences  other  than  a  simple
denial  of  the  intentio  must  be  expres^kd  in  the  formula.  In  personal
actions  a  distinction  must  be  drawn.  In  condictio  the  same  rule
applied ;  but  in  bonae  fidei  indicia  the  intentio  claimed  only  what  the
defendant  owed  ex  fide  bona,  so  that  any  defence  which  alleged  want
of  good  faith  on  the  plaintiff's  part  was  ])ractically  a  complete  traverse
of  the  latter^s  claim,  and  so  need  not  be  introduced  into  the  formula
as  an  exceptio.  This  the  Romans  expressed  in  the  maxim  'doli
exceptio  bonae  fidei  iudiciis  inest ; '  which  may  perhaps  be  expanded
into  a  genera]  rule,  that  in  bonae  fidei  actions  defences  by  way  of
countervailing  right  need  not  be  alleged  in  iure  so  far  as  they  were
grounded  on  equity  and  bona  fides,  but  only  where  they  were  based
on  the  ius  civile,  or  on  rules  of  procedure  \

Sometimes  the  plaintiff  could  meet  an  exceptio  by  an  answer  of
the  same  kind;  he  did  not  deny  its  truth,  but  set  up  a  second
countervailing  right  of  his  own — an  exceptio  to  an  exceptio.  This
was  called  a  replicatio,  and  was  inserted  in  the  formula  by  the  words
*  aut  si,'  or  an  equivalent.  And  this  kind  of  sparring  between  the
parties  might  lead  further  to  a  dupHcatio,  a  triplication  and  so  on ;
illustrations  of  which  will  be  found  in  Gains  iv.  126-129.

Praescriptiones  pro  reo  do  not  differ  substantially  from  exceptiones.
In  the  earlier  part  of  the  formulary  period  many  defences  by  way  of
countervailing  right  were  clothed  in  a  peculiar  form,  being  placed  at
the  head  of  the  formula,  after  the  appointment  of  the  iudex,  whence
their  name  praescriptiones.  This  was  frequently  the  case  when  the
defendant's  contention  was  that  the  action  ought  not  to  be  tried  at
all,  because  it  would  prejudge  a  'causa  maior'  (praescriptio  prae-
iudicii) ;  and  the  purpose  of  thus  placing  the  objection  in  the  fore-

'  See  Keller,  Civil  Process  $  25.  In  this  respect  actions  with  a  formala  in
factum  concepta  do  not  seem  to  have  been  on  the  same  footing  with  those  which
were  bonae  fidei.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  66i

ground  was  to  indicate  to  the  iudex  that  he  was  iirst  to  examine  into
its  truth  or  falsehood,  and,  if  he  found  it  well  grounded,  to  suspend
the  hearing  until  it  was  removed  by  the  decision  of  the  larger  suit.
Other  objections  of  the  same  character  were  that  the  action  was
beyond  the  competence  of  the  court  (praescriptio  fori),  or  was  barred
by  lapse  of  time  (praescriptio  temporis) ;  and  the  actual  form  they
took  was  the  same  as  that  of  praescriptiones  pro  actore  (p.  65 1  supr.),
viz.  ea  res  agatur,  etc.:  see  Gains  iv.  133.  The  practice  of  formu-
lating such  objections  merely  as  exceptiones  had  commenced  as
early  as  Cicero  (de  Invent,  ii.  20),  and  Gaius  tells  us  (iv.  133)  that  in
his  time  praescriptiones  of  this  kind  were  entirely  obsolete :  in  speciem
exceptionis  deducuntur.  The  change  was  material ;  for  now,  if  the
defence  was  established,  the  defendant  was  entitled  to  acquittal ;
whereas  before,  when  it  took  the  form  of  a  praescriptio,  the  hearing
was  sometimes  only  suspended,  and  he  might  be  condemned  after  all.

The  proceedings  in  iure  may  now  be  imagined  at  an  end.  Their
object  was  to  formally  define  the  issues  to  be  tried  in  the  action ;  to
give  a  legal  form  to  a  dispute  which  had  hitherto  existed  only  as
a  matter  of  fact.  When  this  had  been  done,  and  the  formula  finally
drawn  up,  the  magistrate  had  no  more  to  do ;  he  was  said  '  iudicium
dare,'  the  'res'  was  'in  iudicium  deducta; '  iudicium  takes  the  place
of  ius.  This  stage  in  the  proceedings,  at  which  the  action  passed
from  praetor  to  iudex,  or,  according  to  Roman  ideas,  at  which  it  first
became  an  action  at  all,  was  called  litis  contestatio;  no  longer
a  solemn  appeal  to  witnesses,  but  merely  a  name  retained  for  con-
venience sake  from  the  older  system  to  mark  a  moment  most  eventful
for  the  parties,  and  attended  by  important  consequences  which  are
described  in  detail  by  Mr.  Poste '.

Of  the  proceedings  in  iudicio  Gaius  gives  us  no  information ;  they
consisted,  of  course,  of  evidence  and  argument,  and  may  be  passed
over  in  favour  of  matters  of  which  we  have  more  accurate  knowledge.

>  Note  on  Gains  iii.  180.  Briefly,  the  efifects  of  litis  contestatio  in  the  formnlary
period  are  as  follow : —

(i)  It  in  efifect  consumes  the  plaintifif's  right  of  action  :  res  in  indicium  deducta
est,  and  de  eadem  re  bis  experiri  non  licet.  (2)  It  operates  quasi-contractually  to
engender  an  obligation,  binding  on  them,  to  abide  by  the  iudicium  whatever  its
result.  (3)  It  interrupts  limitation  of  the  right  of  action.  (4)  It  affects  the
amount  of  the  condenination  by  being  supposed  to  be  followed  immediately  by
judgment :  sec  Poste,  p.  425.  (5)  It  converts  the  object  of  the  suit  into  *  res
litigiosa,'  and  thus  makes  its  alienation  unlawful  pendente  lite,  Gaius  iv.  117.
(6)  It  prevents  any  subsequent  change  in  the  parties  without  complete  reconstruction
of  the  formula  (Translatio).


662  EXCURSUS  X.

Assuming,  however^  that  they  terminate  in  a  sententia  for  the  plaintiff
(condemnatio),  two  new  questions  present  themselves.  Firstly,  is
the  judgment  final?  or  is  there  any  system  of  appeal?  And,
secondly,  how  is  the  defendant  compelled  to  pay  the  money  in
which  he  has  been  condemned  ?  in  other  words,  what  are  the  pro-
ceedings in  a  Roman  execution  ?

The  strictly  co-ordinate  authority  of  the  *  magistratus  maiores '  in
republican  Rome  excluded  the  possibility  of  a  true  appellate  juris-
diction in  the  pre-imperial  period.  At  that  time,  in  fact,  the  sententia
of  a  iudex  did  not  admit  of  revocation  or  alteration  save  by  the
process  of  in  integrum  restitutio  (note  on  Bk.  iv.  6.  33),  though  it
must  be  remembered  that  judgment  in  an  ordinary  action  was  not
absolutely  final ;  for  the  defendant,  who  was  presumptively  con-
demnatus,  could  contest  its  validity  by  refusing  to  pay  the  sum  in
which  he  had  been  condemned,  and  defending  himself,  at  the  risk
of  condemnatio  in  duplum,  against  the  actio  iudicati  brought  for  its
recovery.  This,  however,  was  not  an  appeal,  which  implies  the
rehearing  of  the  suit  by  a  higher  tribunal.  With  the  fall  of  the
Republic  a  regular  appellate  jurisdiction  was  rapidly  developed,  and
the  privilege  of  'appealing  unto  Caesar'  was  soon  understood  to  be
common  to  citizens  of  Rome  all  over  the  Empire.  Under  Augustus
the  praefectus  urbi  was  judge  of  appeal  for  Rome,  and  a  vir  con-
sularis,  though  sitting  in  the  capital,  bore  the  same  relation  to  each
of  the  provinces.  Nero  invested  the  Senate  with  a  supreme  appel-
late jurisdiction  co-ordinate  with  his  own,  and  by  the  time  of
M.  Aurelius  the  right  had  been  established  of  appealing  from  the
sententia  of  a  iudex  to  the  magistrate  who  appointed  him.  Thus  the
tribunals  had  gradually  arranged  themselves  in  a  definite  series  of
higher  and  lower  instance,  and  a  suit  might  be  carried  from  iudex  to
Emperor  through  the  appointing  municipal  magistrate,  the  praetor
or  praeses,  and  the  praefectus  urbi  or  praetorio  in  succession.  The
procedure  on  appeal  was  that  which  will  shortly  be  described  as
*  extraordinaria,'  dispensing,  in  its  commencement,  with  the  ordinary
institution  by  formula,  and  terminating  in  a  decretum,  not  a  sen-
tentia ;  definite  periods  of  time  were  prescribed  within  which  the
appeal  must  be  lodged,  and  its  various  stages  completed.  A  power-
ful check  on  rash  appeals  was  the  obligation  of  the  appellant  to  pay
quadruple  costs  to  his  opponent  if  he  failed,  in  addition  to  a  penalty
equal  in  value  to  one  third  of  the  object  in  dispute.

The  simplest  mode  of  executing  a  judgment  for  a  liquidated  sum
would  seem  to  be  to  seize,  by  state  agency,  a  sufficient  amount  of  the


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE.  663

debtor's  property,  and  from  the  proceeds  of  its  sale  to  satisfy  the
creditor's  claim  ;  should  his  property  be  insufficient,  to  make  him  a
bankrupt.  Putting  aside  the  exceptional  application  of  pignoris  capio
in  the  legis  actio  period,  this  distinction  between  execution  for  debt
and  execution  in  bankruptcy  was  not  recognised  by  the  Romans
until  the  Empire.  If  a  man  would  not  satisfy  a  judgment  which  had
been  recovered  against  him,  there  was  no  alternative  but  to  proceed
as  in  a  case  of  genuine  insolvency.  For  a  very  long  while  indeed
the  Romans  did  not  even  allow  at  all  that  direct  and  immediate
execution  upon  a  debtor's  property  which  seems  the  natural  and
reasonable  mode  of  satisfying  a  creditor's  claims :  with  true  legal
conservatism  they  clung  closely  to  the  conception  of  an  obligation
as  a  personal  right,  a  right  which  availed  only  against  the  debtor's
person,  and  not  against  property  of  any  kind :  for  immediately  it
conferred  any  right  against  the  property,  it  ceased,  pro  tanio^  to  be
an  obligation.  It  is  the  person,  they  said,  who  is  obligatus,  and  it  is
the  person  to  whom  the  creditor  must  look  to  be  paid ;  there  is  no
execution  except  personal  execution,  and  it  is  for  the  debtor  to  say
whether  he  will  save  himself  by  sacrificing  his  property  ^

The  earliest  execution  procedure  is  that  of  manus  iniectio  as
regulated  by  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  is  described  at  length  by
Mr.  Poste  in  his  note  on  Gaius  iii.  77.  As  has  already  been  observed,
its  severity  was  mitigated  by  a  lex  Poetelia,  and  no  doubt  indirectly
by  the  lex  Aebutia ;  in  its  milder  form  it  is  in  full  operation  under
the  formulary  system,  during  which  the  damnatus  in  an  actio  iudicati,
if  the  debt  remained  unpaid  for  thirty  days,  was  brought  before  the
magistrate,  and  unless  he  discharged  it  at  once,  or  gave  security
*  iudicatum  solvi  *  through  a  vindex  who  undertook  his  defence,  he
was  *  addictus '  to  the  creditor,  and  remained  in  a  condition  of  quasi-
servitude  until  by  his  own  labour  or  the  intervention  of  friends  the
debt  was  extinguished.

As  distinct  from  this  personal  execution,  execution  against  the
property  was  first  employed  only  in  the  case  of  debts  owed  to  the
state.  If  a  man  were  condemned  upon  a  criminal  charge  to  a  pecu-
niary penalty,  and  refused  or  was  unable  to  pay,  the  praetor  would
grant  possession  of  his  estate  to  the  quaestors,  who  sold  it  to  the
highest  bidder  (sector).  This  principle  was  first  extended  to  private
debts   by  a  praetor  called,  according  to  Gaius  (iv.  35),   Publius

*  As  to  the  greater  antiquity  in  the  Roman  system  of  personal  execution,  which
is  denied  by  Savigny,  see  note  on  Bk.  iii.  la  supr.


664  EXCURSUS  X.

Rutilius,  apparently  the  Rutilius  who  was  consul  b.  c.  105,  after
whose  reform  *  Proprietary '  execution  was  called  bonorum  emptio  or
venditio '.  The  procedure  is  fully  described  by  Mr.  Poste  in  the  note
already  referred  to.  The  creditor  or  creditors  were  put  in  possession
of  the  bankrupt's  estate  by  the  praetor ;  then,  at  fixed  intervals,  fol-
lowed three  decrees :  the  first  advertising  the  sale,  the  second  autho-
rising the  creditors  to  choose  from  among  themselves  a  *  magister'  to
superintend  it,  and  the  last  enabling  them  to  publish  the  leges  or
conditions  under  which  it  would  take  place.  Finally,  after  a  third
interval,  the  estate  or  universitas  iuris  was  put  up  to  auction,  and
knocked  down  to  the  highest  bidder,  i.  e.  the  person  who  practically
offered  the  creditors  the  highest  percentage  on  their  claims,  and  who
was  regarded,  by  a  fiction,  as  the  bankrupt's  heir,  in  which  character
he  sued  the  debtors  of  the  estate;  or,  as  an  alternative  for  this
fiction,  he  might  employ  the  formula  Rutiliana  (Gaius  iv.  35),  in
which  he  was  represented  as  the  insolvent's  agent,  the  insolvent  being
named  in  the  intentio,  and  himself  in  the  condemnatio.  These
proceedings  did  not  exempt  the  after-acquired  property  of  the
bankrupt  from  the  claims  of  his  creditors,  who  could  take  action
against  him  repeatedly  until  they  had  been  satisfied  in  full ;  and  in
consequence  of  them  he  became  infamis.  For  many  years  creditors
seem  to  have  had  the  privilege  of  choosing  between  the  two  systems,
the  debtor  having  no  means  of  saving  himself  from  the  semi-servitude
of  the  older  procedure  if  his  adversary  preferred  it  to  bonorum  ven-
ditio ;  but  by  the  introduction  of  cessio  bonorum,  under  one  of  the
first  two  Caesars,  this  ceased  to  be  the  case  under  ordinary  circum-
stances. The  nature  of  cessio  bonorum  has  already  been  described
in  the  note  upon  Bk.  iii.  12  supr.

It  has  been  observed  that  (apart  from  certain  exceptional  cases
under  the  legis  actio  procedure)  we  meet  with  no  execution  for  debt
proper  until  the  Empire.  It  then  became  usual  for  the  magistrate,
upon  the  application  of  a  judgment  creditor,  to  send  an  officer  of
the  court  (apparitor,  viator)  to  seize  as  much  of  the  debtor's  property
as  would  cover  the  debt  This  was  held  for  two  months  by  way  of
pledge  or  security,  at  the  end  of  which,  in  default  of  payment,  it  was
sold,  the  debt  discharged,  and  the  surplus,  if  any,  returned  to  the


'  The  acts  of  bankruptcy,  as  they  might  be  called,  upon  which  bonorum  venditio
lay  are  specified  by  Gaius  (iii.  78),  the  cases  being  those  of  a  debtor  absconding
(latitans)  or  indefensus,  a  judgment  debt  unsatisfied  for  thirty  days,  and  decease  of
the  debtor  leaving  no  lawful  successor  civil  or  praetorian.


EARLIER  HISTORY  OF  ROMAN  CIVIL  PROCEDURE,  665

debtor.  This  is  not  unfrequently  called  pignoris  capio  (e.  g.  Cod.
viii.  23  'si  in  causa  iudicati  pignus  captum  sit').  Another  change  in
this  department  of  law  is  found  in  the  procedure  in  actiones  arbi-
trariae  for  exhibition  or  restitution.  The  defendant  was  no  longer
allowed  to  retain  the  object  on  condition  of  paying  damages ;  the
plaintiff  could  demand  direct  execution  of  the  judicial  arbitratus
manu  militari,  the  defendant  being  condemned  only  in  a  sum  equi-
valent to  fruits  and  accessions  consumed  or  wasted.  We  read  of
this  first  in  Ulpian,  and  it  seems  to  have  come  into  use  only  quite  at
the  end  of  the  formulary  period :  how  far  the  principle  was  applied
to  the  specific  performance  of  contracts  is  uncertain.

Though  the  *  ordo  iudiciorum  privatorum,*  or  system  under  which
judicial  proceedings  were  divided  between  magistrate  (ius)  and  iudex
(iudicium),  was  the  regular  mode  of  trying  suits  for  centuries  after  the
practical  abolition  of  Statute-Process,  cases  not  unfrequently  occurred
which  the  praetor  reserved  altogether  for  his  own  cognisance,  and
heard  throughout  and  determined  without  reference  to  a  iudex ;  in
these  the  cognitio  was  said  to  be  '  extraordinaria/  i.  e.  outside  the
*  ordo  *  or  usual  procedure.  At  first  such  cases  were  those  only  in
which  a  iudicium  proper  was  impossible,  or  at  any  rate  would  in
some  degree  have  shocked  the  Roman  sense  of  what  was  fit  and
proper,  on  account  either  of  the  nature  of  the  application,  or  of  the
relation  between  the  parties ;  e.  g.  complaints  of  slaves  against  their
masters,  freemen  against  their  patrons,  children  against  their  pater-
familias, and  pupils  against  their  guardians,  especially  in  respect  of
maintenance,  claims  for  fees  (honoraria)  irrecoverable  at  law,  and
fideicommissa.  A  petition  addressed  to  the  praetor  on  any  of  these
matters  was  properly  called  persecution  the  other  party  was  sum-
moned before  him  by  one  of  his  lictors,  and,  though  incidental  points
(e.  g.  aestimationes  and  questions  of  account)  were  often  referred  to
arbitri  for  examination  and  report,  he  heard  and  determined  the
matter  in  person.  The  decision  was  called  decretum,  not  sententia,
a  distinction  whose  significance  will  be  readily  comprehended ;  a
decretum  depended  for  its  effect  and  validity  on  the  imperium,  not
the  iurisdictio,  of  the  magistratus  decemens ;  accordingly  it  was  not
necessarily  binding  on  any  other  magistrate  who  was  not  his  political
subordinate,  and  therefore  was  in  effect  subject  to  revocation  and
revision  by  others  as  well  as  by  himself.

^  For  one  very  important  branch  of  the  extraoxdinaria  cc^nitio  (in  int^rom
restitutio)  see  note  on  Bk.  iy.  6.  33  sapr.


666  EXCURSUS  X,

The  constant  tendency  of  the  praetor  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  his
extraordinaria  cognitio,  after  the  establishment  of  the  Empire,  at  the
expense  of  the  regular  procedure  by  formula,  paved  the  way  to  the
total  abolition  of  the  latter.     An  even  stronger  influence,  which  was
perpetually  working  against  the  ordo  iudiciorum  privatorum,  was  the
new  appellate  jurisdiction ;  for,  as  has  been  observed,  formulae  were
employed  only  in  courts  of  lowest  instance  *.     Eventually  the  formu-
lary procedure  was  abolished  by  Diocletian,  a.d.  294,  magistrates
being  compelled  to  hear  and  decide  suits  themselves  through  all  their
stages ;  and  even  when,  from  stress  of  business,  they  were  obliged  to
refer  an  occasional  action  to  a  iudex,  their  relation  to  the  latter  was
no  longer  that  of  the  older  system ;  the  proceedings  were  no  longer
divided  between  ius  and  iudicium,  but  the  whole  of  them  were  dele-
gated ;  magistratus  and  iudex,  so  far  as  the  administration  of  justice
is  concerned,  are  interchangeable  terms.   As  is  observed  by  Mr.  Poste*,
the  libellary  procedure  in  use  in  the  time  of  Justinian  was  essentially
the  same  as  cognitio  extraordinaria '.


^  A  sure  index  of  the  increasing  activity  of  the  extraordinaria  cognitio  is  the
frequent  use  of  the  expression  '  iudex  pedaneus '  (xQA'^^Sc'ccurr^,  Theophilus)  by  the
classical  jurists.  This  originated  in  the  practice  of  calling  the  magistrate  himself
'  index/  which  was  only  natural  when  he  took  to  personally  hearing  and  deciding
many  actions ;  *■  iudex  pedaneus '  is  the  index  instructed  by  formula.

•  Gains  p.  631.

'  Cf.  6k.  iv.  15.  8  supr.  Several  topics  Which  are  of  importance  in  the  formulary
procedure  have  been  omitted  in  this  Excursus  because  they  demand  discussion  under
the  later  system  as  well,  and  consequently  are  touched  upon  in  the  notes  to  tbe
text  of  Bk.  iv:  e.^.  Processual  Agency.  Title  10 ;  Satisdatio,  Title  11 ;  Limitation
and  Pendency,  Title  12;  Interdicts,  Title  15;  Restraints  upon  reckless  litigation,
Title  16.


INDEX   TO  THE   TEXT.


-*'*-


{The  references  are  to  the  respective  Books,  Titles,  and  Sections.)


-»♦■


aooeptilatio,  iii.  29.  i.

aooessio,  title  to  yonng  of  domestic
animals,  ii.  i.  19:  to  island  rising  in
river,  ib.  23:  by  river  changing  its
course,  ib.  23:  of  purple  woven  into
a  garment,  ib.  26  :  by  inaediticatio,  ib,
29:  of  plants  to  soil,  ib.  31,  and  of
crops,  ib.  32  :  of  writing  to  parch-
ment, ib,  33  :  but  by  an  anomaly
'  tabula  picturae  cedit,  ib.  34.

aoquiaition  through  slaves,  i.  8.  i :
ii.  9.  3:  iii.  17.  I  :  through  usufruc-
tuary slaves,  ii.  9. 4 :  through  alien  us
servus  bona  fide  possessed  or  free
nan  bona  fide  serviens,  ii.  9.  4:
through  children  in  power;  the  old
law  modified  by  Justinian,  ii.  9.  i :
cf.  iii.  17.  I :  through  extraneae  per-
sonae,  ii.  9.  5 :  acquisition  of  contrac-
tual rights  through  slaves  and  chil-
dren in  power,  iii.  28.  pr. :  through
free  men  and  alieni  servi  bona  fide
possessed,  ib.  i :  through  usufructuary
slave,  ib.  2 :  through  slave  jointly
owned,  ib.  3.

acta,  i.  II.  12 :  i.  12.  8 :  ii.  7.  2 :  iv.

II.  3-
actio,  defined,  iv.  6.  pr. :  divided  into  in
rem  and  in  personam,  ib.  1 :  actions
in  rem  are  for  recovery  of  property,
ib.y  or  of  iura  in  re  aliena,  ib.  2 :  ac-
tions relating  to  the  latter  either  af-
firmative or  negative,  ib. :  real  actions
introduced  by  the  praetor,  ib.  3  :  ex-
emplified by  actio  Publiciana,  ib.  4 :
the  converse  action,  ib.  5 :  actio  Ser-
viana  and  quasi-Serviana,  ib.  7  :  prae-
torian actions  in  personam  exempli-
fied by  actiones  recepticia,  de  pecunia
constituta,  de  peculio,  etc.,  ib.  8 :  prae-
torian penal  actions,  ib.  12  :  praeiudi-
cial  actions,  ib.  13:  ownership  can-
not be  claimed  by  actio  in  personam,
ib.  14 :  actions  divided  into  rei  per-
secutoriae,  poenae  persecutoriae,  and
mixtae,  ib,  16  :  actions  rei  persecuto-


riae exemplified,  ib,  17 :  so  with  those
poenae  persecutoriae,  ib.  18,  and  mix-
tae,  ib.  19 :  actions  called  mixtae  be-
cause partly  in  rem,  partly  in  perso-
nam, e.  g.  actio  familiae  erciscundae,
ib.  20:  actiones  in  simplum  concep-
tae,  ib.  22 :  in  duplum,  ib.  23 :  in
triplum,  ib.  24:  in  quadruplum,  ib.
25:  actiones  bonae  ndei  and  stricti
iuris ;  the  former  enumerated,  ib.  28,
and  characterised,  ib.  30 :  actiones
arbitrariae,  ib.  31 :  actions  in  which
the  whole  debt  is  sometimes  not  re-
covered, e.  g.  de  peculio,  ib.  36  :  de
dote,  ib.  37 :  actions  by  child  against
parent,  freedman  against  patron,  part-
ner against  partner,  etc.,  ib.  38 :  con-
currence of  actions  de  eadem  re,  iv.
p.  I  :  actions  perpetual  and  temporal,
IV.  12.  pr. :  penal  actions,  how  far
they  can  be  brought  against  the  of-
fender's heir,  ib.  1  :  may  be  brought
by  heir  of  injured  person,  except  actio
iniuriarum,  ib, :  cases  in  which  ac-
tions ex  contractu  cannot  be  brought
against  the  heir,  ib. :  defenflant  entitled
to  absolution  if  he  satisfies  the  plain-
tiff ante  rem  iudicatam,  ib.  2.

actio  ad  exhibendum,  iv.  6.  31.

bonorum  vi  raptorum,  iv.  2  :  who

can  bring  it,  ib.  2.

calumniae,  iv.  16.  i.

communi  dividundo,  iii.  27.  3  :  iv.


6.  20:  iv.  17,  5.

—  de  eo  quod  certo  loco  promissum
est,  iv.  6.  31 :  ib.  33.

—  de  eo  quod  metus  causa,  iv.  6.  25 :
ib.  27  :  ib.  31.

—  deiecti  aut  effnsi,  iv.  5.  i.

—  de  peculio,  iv.  6.  8  :  ib,  10.

—  de  peculio  et  in  rem  verso,  iv.  7.

de   pecunia   constituta,    iv.  6.  8


and  9.

—  exercitoria,  iv.  7.  2.

—  ex  stipulatu,  iii.  15.  pr.

—  familiae  erciscimdae,  iii.    27.   4:
iv.  6.  20:  iv.  17.  4.


668


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


actio  finiiim  regundoram,  it.  6.  ao :  iv.

17.  6.
ftirti,  ii.  I.  34:  IT.  I :  it.  13.  pr. :

who  can  bring  it,  it.  i.  is^iy:    is

purely  penal,  ib.  19.

—  in  factum,  iv.  3.  16 :  iT.  5.  5.

—  inttitoria.  It.  7.  a.

—— —  nozalis,  iT.  8.  pr. :  capat  scquitnr,
ib,  5 :  in  cases  of  panperies,  iT.  9.  pr. :
form  of  condemnation  in,  iT.  17.  i.

petitoria,  iT.  15.  4.

poenalis,  in  heredem  non  transit,

iT.  5.  9:    IT.   13.  I.

^-^  positi  ant  suspensi,  iT.  5.  i.

piaescriptts  verbis,  iiL  34. 1  and  2.

Publiciana,  iT.  6.  4 :  i^.  31.

qua  quaerituf  an  actor  iuraverit,

iT.  6.  8:  ib.  11.

quasi  Senriana,  iv.  6.  7 :  ti*.  31.

quod  inssu,  iv.  i,\\ib.  5.

lecepticia,  iv.  6.  8  and  9.

rei  uxoriae,  formerly  bonae  fidei :

merged  by  Justinian  in  actio  ex  sd-
pulatu  (de  dote  exigenda\  to  which  he
gives  a  bonae  Bdei  character,  it.  6.  39.

senri  corrnpti,  iv.  i.  8  :  iv.  6.  33.

Serviana,  iv.  6.  7:  ib.  31.

^-^  snspecti  tutoris,  i.  26.  3 :  ib,  8.

tribntoria,  iv.  7.  3 :  ib.  5.

utilii,  ii.  I.  34:  ii.  33.  4:  legis


Aquiliae,  iv.  3.  K

aotOT  tutoris,  i.  33.  6.

addiotio  bononun  libertatis  causa,  in-
troduced by  M.  Aurelius,  iii.  11.  pr.
and  I  :  advantages  of,  f^.  3  :  allowed
where  slaves  are  manumitted  by  codi-
cils only,  ib.  3:  limitations  on  its
application,  ib,  4 :  effect  upon,  of  in
integxiim  restitutio  of  non-accepting
heir,  ib,  5 :  extension  of  it  by  inter-
pretation, ib,  6:  Justinian*s  consti-
tution on  the  subject,  ib,  7.

ademptlo  of  l^acies,  ii.  31.  pr.

adgnatio,  iuris  nomen,  i.  15.  3,  cf.  iii.  i.
II :  effect  of  capitis  deminutio  on,  i.
15*  3  :  degrees  of,  how  reckoned,  iii.
6.  8.

aditio  of  inheritance,  ii.  19.  5 :  how
made,  ib,  7.

adiudioaUo,  iv.  17.  4-7.

adoptio,  its  two  forms,  i.  11.  i :  Jus-
tinian's changes  in  the  law  of,  ih,  3,
and  their  effect  on  the  law  uf  intestate
succession,  iii.  1. 14:  imitates  nature,
i.  1 1. 4 :  its  extent  and  limits,  ib.  4-7 :
effects  of,  ib,  8 :  who  cannot  adopt,
ib.  9  and  10:  adoption  of  slave,  ib.
13  :  adoptio  plena  extinguishes  patria
potestas,  i.  13.  8:  confers  agnatic
right,  iii.  3.  3.

adoptiTi  Uberl,  are  in  potestas,  i.  11.


pr. :  contrasted  with  natnrales  liberi
in  respect  of  intestate  sncocaiaon,  iii.
1. 13.

adquiaitio  per  adrogatiooem,  intro-
dnced  by  custom,  iii.  la  pr. :  see
adrogatio.

adquiaitio  rerum  singnlamm  inre  na-
turali :  occnpatio,  ii.  i.  13:  acoessio,
ib,  19 :  alluvio,  ib,  30  :  specificatio,
ib,  35  :  confudo,  ib.  11 :  commixtio,
ib.  38  :  tiaditio,  ib.  40.

adquiaitio  rerum  singnlarum  ioie  ci-
vili :  usucapio,  ii.  6.  pr. :  donatio,  ii.
7.  pr. :  per  ius  adcresoendi,  iL  7.  4.

adqtdattio  per  nniversitatem,  the  four
kinds  of,  ii.  9.  6.

adrogatio,  i.  11.  i :  of  impubes.  ih.  3 :
i.  33.  I  :  effect  of,  upon  children  of
adrogatus,  i.  11.  11  :  nghu  of  adro-
gatus  on  intestacy  of  natural  father,
iii.  I.  10:  effect  of,  on  property  of
adrogatus,  iii.  la  i :  change  in  tJie
law  by  Justinian,  ib,  % :  effect  of,  oa
debts  owed  by  adrogatus,  ib.  3.

adaignatio  libertorum,  iii.  8 :  introduced
by  a  senatusconsult,  ib.  pr.  and  3:
who  may  be  assigned,  and  to  whom,
ib,  I :  case  in  which  'adsignatio
evanescit,*  ib,  2  :  form  of  such  assign*
ment,  ib.  3.

Aedilas  ournles,  their  edicts,  L  3.  7  :
iv.  9.  I.

aeqnitaa,  iL  i.  40 :  iiL  i.  9.

agency,  in  acquisition  of  ownership
and  possession :  see  aoquiaition.

contractual :  see  mandatum,  and

iv.  7.

in  procedure :   formerly  permitted


only  in  four  cases:  introduction  of
procurators  as  processual  agents,  iv.
10.  pr.:  mode  of  appointment,  ib.  i.

affnatea,  who  are,  i.  15.  i :  iiL  3.  1  and
3 :  agnatorum  curatio,  i.  33.  3 :  females
as  agnates,  iii.  2.  3 :  their  rights
abridged  by  the  media  iurisprudentia,
but  the  law  of  the  XII  Tables  re-
stored by  Justinian,  ib.,  who  also
gives  agnatic  rights  to  uterine  bro-
thers and  sisters  and  their  children,
ib,  4 :  all  agnates  in  the  same  d^ree
succeed  equally,  ib.  5  :  no  limits  to
the  distance  at  which  they  may  claim
the  relationship,  iii.  5.  5.

alienation,  bv  non-owners,  e.g.  of
pledge  by  pledgee,  ii.  8.  1 :  in  some
cases  forbidden  even  to  owners,  e.g.
with  dotale  praedium,  ib.  pr. :  by
pupil  without  guardian's  auctoritas,
tb.  2 :  in  fraud  of  creditors,  iv.  6.  6.

alluvio,  defined,  IL  I.  30 :  doubtful
o^  ib.  31.


INDEX  TO   THE  TEXT,


669


animala  ferae  naturae,  ii.  i.  la:  bees,
ib.  14:  pigeons,  ib,  15:  domestic
fowls  and  geese,  ib.  16.

animiia  domini,  in  connection  with
renunciation  of  ownership,  ii.  i.  48.

animus  revertendi,  a  test  of  domes-
ticity in  animals,  ii.  i.  15.

arra,  iii.  33.  pr.

AtilicinuB,  ii.  14.  pr.

auctoritas  tutoria,  where  and  where
not  necessary,  i.  2 1 .  pr.  and  i :  ii.  8.  2  :
required  for  aditio  hereditatis  and
such  kinds  of  acts,  ib.  i  :  mode  in
which  it  should  be  given,  ib.  3.

Augustus,  i.  II.  II :  ii.  12.  pr. :  ii.  23.
I,  ib.  12 :  ii.  2>^.  pr.


B.


bankruptcy,  avoided  by  institution  of
a  necessarins  heres,  ii.  19.  i :  by
addictio  bononim  libertatis  causa,  iii.

11.  I  :   form  of,  under  Justinian,  iii.

12.  pr. :  see  bonorum  emptio,  bo-
norum  possessio,  oessio  bonorum.

benefloium  competentiae,  iv.  6.  36-
38.

divisionis,  iii.  20.  4.

separationis,  ii.  19.  i.

bona  flde  possession,  ii.  i.  33, 34, 35 :
ii.  6.  pr,  ib.  3  and  7  :  iv.  17.  a.

bona  vacantia,  ii.  6.  9.

bona  vi  rapta,  iv.  2.  pr. :  the  action  on
the  delict  praetorian,  ib  :  amount  of
the  penalty,  /A,  cf.  iv.  6.  19 :  always
implies  dolus  malus,  ib.  i :  constitu-
tions  of  earlier  emperors  as  to  the
violent  takingf  of  property  on  the  plea
that  it  is  one^s  own,  ib  :  iv.  15.  6:
the  thing  raplum  need  not  be  in  bonis
of  the  plaintiff,  iv.  a.  2.

bonorum  emptio,  obsolete  under  Jus-
tinian, iii.  12.  pr.

bonorum  possessio,  as  a  preliminary
to  bankruptcy  proceedings,  i.  26.  9 :
iii.  10.  3 :  iii.  la.  pr.

^-^  a  form  of  inheritance  introduced
by  the  praetor  to  amend  the  ins  civile,
iii.  9.  pr. :  or  in  some  cases  to  con-
firm or  supplement  it,  ib,  i :  three
kinds  of,  ib.  3:  time  fixed  by  the
praetor  within  which  it  must  be
demanded,  ib,  8:  dies  utiles  only
reckoned,  ib.  9:  imperial  constitu-
tions made  any  expression  of  inten-
tion to  accept  sufficient,  ib.  10 :  bo-
norum possessio  intestati,  its  degrees,
iii.  9.  3  :  unde  liberi,  iiL  1.9:  unde
cognati,  iii.  1. 13 :  iii.  a.  3 :  iii.  3.  pr.:
can  be  claimed   only   by   relations


within  the  sixth  degree,  with  one
exception,  iii.  5.  5:  certain  of  the
degrees  or  classes  made  unnecessary
by  Justinian,  viz.  unde  decem  per-
sonae,  iii.  9.  4,  tum  qnam  ex  familia
and  unde  liberi  patroni,  etc.,  r'^.  5,
unde  cognati  manumissoris,  ib.  6:
bonorum  possessio  contra  tabulas,  ri.
13.  3:  iii.  I.  12  :  iii.  9.  3:  bonorum
possessio  secundum  tabulas,  ii.  17.  6  :
iii.  9.  3 :  bonorum  possessio  ex  lege,
iii.  9.  7.


O.


oalumnia,  ii.  23.  12  :  iv.  16.  i.

capitis  deminutio,  defined,  i.  16.  pr. :
its  three  kinds,  ib.  :•  maxima,  defined
with  examples,  ib,  i  :  minor  or  media,
ib.  2  :  minima,  ib.  3 :  of  tutor  or
pupil,  its  effect,  i.  22.  4 :  effect  of,
on  deminutus'  will,  ii.  17.  4  and  6:
minima,  no  bar  to  succession  under
SC*.  Tertullianum  and  Orfitianum,
iii.  3.  2.

Cassius,  iii.  24.  4.

Cato,  i.  II.  13.

causa  ndrogationis,  i.  11.  3 :  manumis-
sionis,  see  iusta  causa  :  traditionis,
ii.  I.  40:  possessionis,  ii.  6.  pr. :
falsa,  in  usucapio,  ii.  6.  1 1 :  in  lega-
cies, ii.  20.  31:  lucrativa,  ii.  ao.  6:
omnis  causa  (fruits,  accessions,  etc.),
iv.  17.  3.

cautio,  as  evidence  of  stipulation,  iii.
19.  la,  ib.  17:  of  loan,  iii.  ai.

by  usufructuary  owner  of  res  quae

usn  consumuntur,  ii.  4.  2  :  in  cases  of
bonorum  addictio  libertatis  causa,  iii.
II.  I  and  a  :  de  dolo,  de  persequendo
servo,  etc.,  iii.  18. 1  :  inratoria,  iv.  11.
a :  see  satisdatio.

Celsus,  ii.  ao.  la.

cessio  bonorum,  iii.  35.  8 :  iv.  6.  40  :
iv.  14.  4.

church,  the,  legislation  in  favour  of,
iii.  37.  7  :  iv.  o.  19,  ib.  23,  ib.  a6 :  iv.
16.  I.

Claudius,  iii.  3.  i.

codex  of  The<>dosiu8,  iii.  i.  16.

codicilli,  origin  of,  in  Augustus'  reign,
ii.  35.  pr. :  no  necessity  for  preceding
will,  w.  1 :  need  not  be  expressly
confirmed  in  a  will  subsequently
made,  ib. :  hereditas  cannot  be  given,
nor  exheredatio  be  made  in,  though
both  and  other  things  may  be  done
by  codicillary  fideicommissum,  ib.  a  :
any  number  may  be  made,  and  no
solemn  form  required,  ib,  3.


670


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


oognati,  distinguished  from  agnati,  L

15-  I :  "i-  5-  1-3-
oognatio,  effects  of  capitis  deminntio

on,  i.  15.  3 :  i.  16. 6 :  the  d^rees  of,
reckoned  in  the  ascending,  descending,
and  collateral  lines,  iii.  6.  pr. :  enu-
merated, ib,  1-6 :  each  generation
removes  the  relationship  by  one  de-
£1*66,  ib,  7 :  genealogical  table  of,  ib.
9 :  cognatio  among  slaves,  ib.  10.

oolonuB,  ii.  i.  36 :  iv.  6.  7 :  iv.  15.  3.

oommixtio,  ii.  i.  38.

oominodatiiin,  iii.  14.  a  :  distinguished
from  mntnum,  ib. :  is  gratuitous,  ib. :
who  can  sue,  if  res  commodata  is
stolen,  iv.  i.  16.

oompensatio,  originally  allowed  only
in  bonae  fidei  actions:  extended  to
those  stricti  iuris  by  a  rescript  of
M.  Aurelius :  Justinian's  changes,  iv.
6.  30 :  ib.  39.

oondemnatio  in  an  action:  most  be
certae  pecuniae  or  rei,  iv.  6.  32.

oondioio,  in  connection  with  dies,  i.
ao.  I :  iii.  15.  2 :  iii.  16.  2:  iiL  19.
5 :  iii.  26.  12 :  iii.  29.  3:  iv.  6.  33.

oondiotio,  on  mntuum,  iii.  14.  pr.  and
I  :  on  stipulatio,  iii.  15.  pr.:  origin
and  definition  of;  iv.  6.  15:  furtiva,
ii.  I.  26:  iv.  I.  19:  iv.  6.  14 :  inde-
biti,  iii.  14.  i,  cf.  iii.  27.  6:  cases  of
solutio  per  errorem  in  which  it  is
excluded,  iii.  27.  7.

conditioiia  in  institution  of  heir,  ii.
14.  9 :  in  legacies,  ii.  30.  3a  and  33  :
impossible,  in  wills,  ii.  14.  10:  in
stipulations,  iii.  19.  1 1 :  alternative
and  conjunctive  conditions  in  wills,
ii.  14.  II.

ocnftisio,  ii.  i.  27.

oonailiiiin,  in  manumissions,  i.  6.  4 :
distinguished  from  mandatum,  iii.
26.  6.

consolidatio,  ii.  4.  3.

oonatitutio  Antonini,  i.  8.  a.

Justiniani,  i.  5-  3  :   i.  6.  a :  i.  7.

pr. :  L  10.  pr.  and  13:  i.  11.  3  and
1 2  :  i.  12.  4,  ib.  6:  i.  19 :  i.  20.  5  :  i.
22.  pr. :  i.  25. 13 :  ii.  1.8  and  40 :  ii.
4.  3:  ii.  6.  pr.  and  14:  ii.  7.  i,  2,  3
and  4 :  ii.  8.  i  and  2  :  ii.  9.  i :  ii.  11.
pr.  and  6:  ii.  la.  3  :  ii.  13.  5 :  ii.  14.
pr. :  ii.  16.  i:  ii.  18.  2,  3  and  6:
ii.  19.  6:  ii.  30.  a,  23,  37,  34,  35
and  36:  ii.  33.  la:  iii.  i.  a,  14  ai>d
16  :  iii.  a.  3, 4,  7  and  8 :  iii.  3.  4 :  iii.
6.  ID :  iii.  7.  3  and  4 :  iii.  9.  4  and  5 :
iii.  10.  I :  iii.  11.  7:  iii.  19.  la :  iii.
31.  pr. :  iii.  33.  pr. :  iii.  37.  7  :  iii.
a8.  pr. :  iii.  39.  3  :  iv.  6.  8,  34,  35,
30,  33  :  iv.  13.  2  :  iv.  16.  I :  iv.  18.  8.


conatitntio  Leoniana,  iii.  15.  i.

Seven,  ii.  6.  13 :  iii.  9.  5.

Zenonis,  ii.  6.  14:   iii.  24.  3:  iv.

4.  10:  iv.  6.  34:  iv.  13.  10.

oonatitationes,  defined,  i.  a.  6 :  gene-
rales  and  personales,  t'b.

conatitutum,  the  action  on,  iv.  6.  9.

conatmction  of  terms  in  a  will,  i.

oontinuatio  dominii,  in  succession  of
sui  heredes  ab  intestato,  iii.  i.  13:
temporis,  in  usucapio,  il.  6.  la  and  13.

contraots,  the  four  kinds  of,  iii.  13.  2 :
most  of  them  originate  in  the  ius  gen-
tium, i.  a.  a  :  innominate,  iii.  34.  i
and  3 :  performance  of,  in  respect  of
place,  iii.  15.  5,  and  of  time,  iii.  19.
a6  and  37:  impossibility  of  perform-
ance, t^.  a  :  see  obli^^atio.

oontracta  of  slaves  and  children  in
power,  liability  of  master  and  pater
on,  iv.  7 ;  the  actio  quod  iussu,  ib.  i :
actiones  excrdtoria  and  iiistitoria,  ib.
a  :  tributoria,  ib.  3 :  de  peculio  et  in
rem  verso,  ib.  4  :  plaintiff  generally
has  option  between  some  of  these
remedies:  their  respective  advantages,
ib.  5 :  sometimes  can  bring  condictio
as  alternative,  ib.  8.

contumacia,  iv.  17.  6.

oorrei  promittendi  and  stipulandi,  iii.
16.

costs  of  suit,  iv.  16.  1.

orifniTta>l  proseoutioiis,  see  indicia
pablioa.

oura,  a  munus  publicum,  i.  35.  pr.

curator,  i.  ai.  3  :  who  have  coiatois:
minors,  i.  23.  pr. :  furiosi  and  pro-
digi,  ib.  3 :  idiots,  deaf,  dumb,  etc,
ib.  4 :  curator,  where  appointed,  in
addition  to  tutor,  ib.  5:  mode  of
appointment,  ib.  1  and  3:  cannot  be
forced  on  a  minor  *praeterquam  in
litem,*  ib.  2  :  can  be  appointed  ad
certam  causam,  ib. :  satisdatio  of,  L
34 :  iv.  1 1,  pr. :  competition  for  sole
administration  between  two  or  more
curators,  i.  34.  i :  procedure  where
none  of  several  curatois  offers  satis-
datio, ib. :  magistrates  responsible  for
their  appointments,  ib.  a-4 :  groimds
of  excuse  from  serving  the  office  of
curator  or  tutor,  i.  35  :  viz.  having  a
certain  number  of  children,  ib.  pr. :
being  employed  by  the  fiscns,  t^.  i :
absence  rei  publicae  causa,  ib.  21  Us
de  omnibus  bonis  vel  hereditate  be-
tween ward  and  tutor  or  curator,  ib.
4 :  already  serving  three  such  offices,
ib.  5  :  poverty,  ib.  6 :  extreme  ill-
health,  ib.  7  :  want  of  educatioo,  ib.


INDEX  TO   THE  TEXT.


671


8 :  malicious  appointment  by  pater,
ib.  9 :  irreconcileable  enmity  with
pater,  ib,  1 1 ,  or  *  status  controversial
ib.  1 2  :  old  age  or  minority,  ib.  1 3 :
being  a  soldier,  ib.  14,  or  a  gramma-
ticos,  rhetorician  or  physician  'intra
numerum/  ib.  15  :  allegation  of  ex-
cuse, how  and  when  to  be  made,  ib.  16.
customary  Law  (ius  non  scriptum,  diu-
tumi  mores),  i.  3.9:  ii.  10.  pr. :  iii.
10.  pr. :  iv.  17.  pr.


D.


damnum  iniuria  datum,  governed  by
the  lex  Aquilia,  iv.  3.  pr. :  its  first
chapter  (unlawful  killing  of  slaves  and
certain  animals)  and  penalty,  ib, :
animals  hereunder  included,  ib.  i :
*  unlawful  killing '  more  precisely  de-
fined,  ib.  2 :  illustrations,  ib.  4-8  :
does  not  include  accident,  ib.  3 :  lia-
bility for  culpa  under  the  statute,  ib. :
meaning  of  the  penalty,  ib.  9 :  exten-
sion of  the  statute  by  construction,  ib.
10 :  plaintiff  may  elect  between  civil
remedy  and  a  criminal  prosecution,
ib.  1 1 :  second  chapter  of  the  statute
obsolete,  ib.  12 :  third  chapter,  relating
to  all  other  kinds  of  damnum,  ib.  13:
penalty  under,  ib.  14,  15:  iv.  6.  19:
actio  utilis  or  in  factum  under,  iv.
3.  16.

dediticii,  i-  5.  3 :  iii.  7.  4.

deductio  de  peoulio,  iv.  7.  4.

defenaor,  iv.  11.  5:  defensores  civita-
tum,  i.  20.  5.

deportatio  in  insulam,  i.  12.  i  :  i.  22.
I :  iv.  18.  2,  7,  8  and  9.

depoaitum,  iii.  14.  3 :  no  set-off  allowed
in  action  on,  iv.  6.  30 :  miserabile,
iv.  6.  17  and  23.

dereliotum,  what  is,  ii.  i.  47  and  48.

dies,  see  oondioio:  dies  cedit,  ii.  20.
20  and  32  :  venit,  iii.  15.  2.

Digest,  the,  reference  to,  i.  10.  11  :  iii.
23.  2 :  iv.  6.  2,  5  and  37 :  iv.  13.  6 :
iv.  14.  3 :  iv.  18.  12.

dignitas,  loss  of,  no  capitis  deminutio,
i.  16.  5.

diligentia,  iii.  14.  2,  3  and  4 :  iii.  24.
5  :  iii.  25.  9:  iii.  27.  i :  iv.  1.  17.

diapensator,  iii.  26. 10.

divi  ftatrea,  i.  25.  6.

dolus  and  culpa^  iii.  23.  3 :  iii.  25.  9 :
iv.  I.  17:  iv.  3.  3  and  14.

donatio,  inter  vivos,  differs  from  that
mortis  causa  in  the  difficulty  of  revo-
cation, ii.  7.  2  :  necessity  of  traditio
for,  ib,\  insinuatio  in  acta,  how  far


necessary,  ib, :  in  certain  cases  revo-
cable, ib. :  mortis  causa,  defined,  ib,
I  ;  assimilated  in  legal  treatment  to
legacy,  ib. :  propter  nuptias,  ib.  3.

dos,  i.  10.  12 :  ii.  7.  3 :  ii.  20.  15 :  iii.
I.  2 :  iii.  ip.  4:  iii.  24.  3:  actions  for
recovery  o(,  iv.  6.  39.

dotale  praedium,  lex  lulia  relating  to,
ii.  8.  pr. :  new  legislation  of  Justi-
nian, ib.

dotis  exaotio,  i.  10.  12.

retentio,  iv.  6.  37.

duplioatio,  iv.  14.  i.


E.


electio  in  legacies,  ii.  20.  22,  23 :  in

alternative  stipulation,  iv.  6.  33.

emancipati,  their  rights  in  intestate
succession,  iii.  i.  9 :  rights  of  eman-
cipator, iii.  2.  8.

emancipation,  old  form  of,  i.  12.  6:
by  imperial  rescript,  ib. :  Justinian's
changes  in  the  law  of,  ib, :  rights  of
emancipator  over  emancipatus,  ib.;
cannot  be  enforced  by  children,  ib,  9 :
its  effect  on  the  peculium,  ii.  9.  2 :
pater  allowed  to  retain  usufruct  of
half,  ib. :  emancipation  under  Justi-
nian always  implies  a  fiducia,  iii.. 2.  8.

emphyteusis,  iii.  24.  3:  the  law  of
2^no  confirmed  by  Justinian,  ib.

emptio  venditio,  the  contract  con-
cluded as  soon  as  the  price  is  agreed
on,  iii.  23.  pr.,  except  where  the  par-
ties agree  that  it  shall  be  in  writing :
Justinian's  change,  ib. :  vendor  not
bound  to  convey  unless  the  piice  is
paid,  or  security  or  credit  given,  ii.
1.  41 :  where  fixing  of  the  price  is
left  to  a  third  person,  iii.  23.  i  :  price
must  be  in  money:  former  doubts
whether  exchange  was  a  distinct  con-
tract, ib.  2 :  periculum  rei  venditae,
ib.  3 :  conditional  sales,  ib,  4 :  pur-
chase of  things  extra  commercium :
remedy  of  purchaser  if  deceived  by
vendor,  ib,  5.

exceptio,  a  form  of  defence  to  an
action,  iv.  13.  pr. :  in  some  cases
statutory,  in  others  praetorian,  ib.  7  :
perpetua  or  peremptoria,  ib,  9 :  tem-
poralis or  dilatoria,  ib,  10 :  effect  of
prosecution  of  suit  in  face  of  the
latter,  ib,^  iv.  6.  33  :  ex  persona  dila-
toria,  iv.  13.  11:  exceptio  of  prin-
cipal debtor  usually  available  to  his
surety,  iv.  14.  4.

exoeptio  doli  mali,  ii.  i.  30,  32,  33
and  34:  iv.  13.  1.


672


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


exoaptio    in    factum    oomposita,    iv.

13-  '•
iarisiuTandi,  iv.  13.  4.

— —  metui  causa,  iv.  13.  i.

nisi  bonis  cesserit,  iv.  14.  4.

pacti  conventi,  iii.  15.3:  iv.  13. 3.

pecuniae  non  numeratae,  iii.  ai :

iv.  13.  2.

procnratoria,  iv.  13.  11.

rei  a  fisco  emptae,  etc.,  ii.  6.  13.

rei  iudicatae,  iv.  13.  5.

ezheredatio,  of  filiusfamilias,  must  be
made  nominatim,  ii.  13.  pr. :  of
daughters,  grandchildren,  etc.,  in
power,  may  be  made  inter  ceteros,
ib, :  of  postumi,  ib.  i :  of  persons
postumorum  loco,  ib.  2  :  of  emanci-
pati,  required  by  the  praetor,  ib,  3
and  4 :  of  adoptive  children,  ib,  4 :
Justinian's  changes  in  the  law  of,
ib,  5  :  not  necessary  in  a  military  tes-
tament, ib.  6 :  nor  in  will  of  mother
or  maternal  ancestor,  ib.  7.

extinotae  rea,  ii.  i .  a6.


fldeloommissarii,   may    witness   will
under  which  they  take,  ii.  10.  11.

fldeioonuniasum,  impossible  condition
in,  taken  pro  non  scripto,  ii.  14.  10:
at  first  less  strictly  interpreted  than
legacy,  ii.  ao.  3 :  to  iocertae  personae,
ib,  25 :  to  be  executed  after  heir*s  or
fidticommissarius*  death,  ib.  35 :  ori-
ginally not  binding  in  law,  ii.  23  i  :
made  binding  by  Augustus,  ib. :  con-
ditions of,  under  a  will,  il*.  2  :  5dei-
commissa  pura,  sub  condicione,  and
ex  die  certo,  ib. :  position  of  fidei-
commissarius,  as  quasi  heir  or  quasi-
legatee,  ib,  3  :  relation  between  heres
and  fideicommissarius  under  the  SS*.
Trebellianum  and  Pegasianum,  ib.  5-
9:  case  of  heres  being  directed  to
retain  some  single  thing,  equal  to,
more,  or  less  than  his  fourth,  ib.  9 :
fideicommissa  ab  intestato,  ib.  10;
fideicommissarius  may  himself  be
made  fiduciarius,  ib.  11 :  method  of
proving  fideicommissa  ab  intestato,
ib.  I  a  :  fideicommissa  of  res  singulae,
may  be  imposed  on  legatee  as  well  as
on  heir,  ii.  24.  pr. :  what  may  be
given  in  this  way,  tb,  i :  usual  form
of  fideicommissa,  ib,  3.

fldeioasio,  can  precede  the  principal
obligation,  iii.  20. 3  :  mode  of  creating
in  Greek,  ib.  7  :  document  in  evidence
of,  proof  of  the  contract,  ib,  8.


fidaiuMors,  liL  ao.  pr. :  can  be  added
to  any  obligation,  civil  or  natnral,  ib.
I  :  their  contract  binds  their  heirs,
ib,  a  :  cofideiussors  bound  each  in
solidum,  ib,  4:  cannot  be  boiind  for
more  than  the  principal  debt,  i^.  5 :
meaning  of  '  more,'  ii. :  paying  fide-
iussor  bias  actio  mandati  against  his
principal,  ib,  6 :  can  generally  plead
exceptiones  open  to  his  principal,  iv.
14.4.

flducia,  in  emancipations,  iii.  2.  8.

flliaaCunilias,  contracts  of,  iiL  19.  6 :
iv.  7 :  delicts  of,  iv.  8.  7.

flflcoB,  usncapio  of  property  of.  iL  6.  9 :
purchase  of  res  alienae  finom,  ib.  14:
change  in  the  law  by  Zeno,  £S.:
succession  by,  to  reus  perduellionis.
iii.  I.  5:  to  intestate  persons,  iiL
ir.  I.

freemen,  either  ingenui  or  libertini,  i.

3-5-

fruotuB,  become  property  of  usufruc-
tuary only  by  perceptio,  ii.  i.  36:
what  the  term  comprehends,  ib.  37 :
fmctus  consumpti,  ii.  i.  35 :  iv.  17.  a
and  4:  fructns  percepti,  belong  to
bona  fide  possessor,  ii.  i.  35:  ct  iv.
17.  a  and  4.

ftuiosos,  consent  of,  not  necessary  for
his  children's  marriage,  i.  10.  pr. :  as
tutor,  i.  lA.  a  :  cannot  make  a  will,
except  in  a  lucid  interval,  ii.  i  a.  1 :
cannot  witness  a  will,  ii.  10.61  con-
tracts of,  iii.  19.  8:   curator  of,  i.

33- 3-
frurttun,  derived,  iv.  i.  a  :  defined,  ib,

I :  implies  animus  fixrandi,  ii.  6.  5 :
iv.  I.  7  and  18:  the  kinds  of,  ib.  3;
manifestum  and  nee  manifestum,  ib. :
conceptum,  oblatum,  prohibitum,  and
non  exhibitum,  obsolete  in  Justinian's
time,  ib.  4  :  penalties  for,  ib.  ^:  in
connection  with  commodatum  and
pignus,  ib.  6  and  7  :  with  servus  cor-
ruptus,  ib.  8 :  of  free  persons,  ib.  9 :
of  res  sua,  ib.  10 :  of  domestic  ani-
mals, ii.  I.  16 :  law  of,  in  relation  ^o
res  extinctae,  ib.  a6 :  furtum  of  pro-
perty thrown  out  to  lighten  a  vessel,
ib.  48  :  nsucapio  in  relation  to,  ii.  6.
a,  3,  4  and  6 :  of  immoveables,  im-
possible, ib.  7  :  accomplices  in  fur-
tum, iv.  I.  II :  asustance  necessary
as  well  as  advice  to  render  an  accom-
plice liable,  ib. :  by  filiusfaroilias  or
slave,  of  property  of  pater  or  dorai-
nus,  ib.  la  :  by  impnbes,  ib.  18  :  the
different  actions  on,  ib.  19 :  iv.  6.  14
and  18.


INDEX  TO   THE  TEXT


673


O.

Qaiua,  iv.  18.  5.

Oallus  AquiliuB,  iii.  29.  a.

Gordian,  ii.  19.  6.

H.

habitatio,  a  ius  in  re  aliena  distinct
from  usns  and  nsusfructus:  its  extent,

ii.  5-  5.
Hadrian,  ii.  i.  39:   ii.  10.  7:   ii.  12.

pr. :  ii.  19.  6 :  ii.  20.  25 :  iii.  3.  2  :

epistola  of,  iii.  20.  4.
hereditas,  either  ex  testamento  or  ab

intestato,  ii.  9. 6 :  mode  of  calculating

the  shares  in,  ii.  1 4.  5-8 :  damnosa,

iL  19.  5  :  legitima,  ii.  19.  7 :  iii.  2.
herea,  his  obligation  to  discharge  lega>

cies  quasi  contractual,  iii.  27.  5.

—  eztraneua,  ii.  19.  3:  must  have
testament! factio  at  three  times,  ib.  4 :
is  entitled  to  an  interval  for  delibera-
tion, ib.  5 :  after  aditio  made  cannot
relinquish  unless  a  minor,  ib, :  certain
earlier  exceptions  to  this  rule,  ib.  6,
which  is  much  modified  by  Justinian's
introduction  of  the  inventory,  ib. :
modes  of  acceptance  and  refusal,  ib.  7.

neoesaariufl,  ii.  14.  i :  defined,  ii.

19. 1 :  his  *  beneficium  separation  is,'  ib.

8UU8  et  neoessarius,  defined,  and

the  name  explained,  ii.  19.  a  :  iii.  i.  a
and  8:  permitted  by  the  praetor  to
abstain  from  the  inheritance,  but  not
after  immixtio,  ib,  5 :  need  not  make
aditio  on  intestacy,  but  succeeds  ipso
iure,  iii.  1.3:  females  as  sui,  repre-
sented by  their  children  alter  decease,
iii.  I.  15  and  16  :  suns  heres  iure
postliminii,  iii.  1.4:  suus  heres  barred
from  the  succes^on  where  the  ancestor
has  been  adjudged  guilty  of  treason,
ib.  5.

houaeholds  of  the  emperor  and  em-
press, ii.  6.  14.

hypotheca,  ii.  6.  14:  distinguished
from  pignus,  iv.  6.  7 :  tacit,  of  wife,
for  restoration  of  dos,  ib,  29  :  of
dotale  praedium,  ii.  8.  pr. :  as  security
in  an  action,  iv.  11.  4.

I.

inaedifloatio,  a  species  of  accessio,  ii.

I.  29  and  30.
incertae  personae,  defined,  ii.  ao.  a5  :

traditio  to,  ii.  i.  46:  sub  certa  de-

monstratione,  ii.  ao.  35.
infamia,  of  tutor  removed  for  dolus,  i.


a6.  6 :  the  penalty  of  condemnation
in  certain  actions,  iv.  16.  a.

infantia,  iii.  19.  10.

ingenui,  who  are,  i.  4.  pr.

ingenuitas,  intermediate  slavery  no
bar  to,  i.  4.  i.

iniuria,  defined,  iv.  4.  pr.:  comprises
assault,  libel,  etc.,  ib,  1 :  through
whom  it  may  be  suffered  :  children  in
power  and  wife,  ib.  a :  slaves,  ib,  3 :
to  joint-owners  through  servns  com-
munis, ib.  4 :  iniuria  through  usufruc-
tuary slave,  ib.  5  :  to  free  man  or
alienus  servus  bona  fide  serviens  or
possessed,  1^.  6:  penalty  of,  accord-
ing to  the  XII  Tables,  altered  by  the
praetor,  ib.  7  :  lex  Cornelia  on,  ib.  8 :
miuria  atrox,  defined,  ib,  9  :  plaintiff
can  choose  between  civil  and  crimi-
nal remedy,  ib.  10 :  viri  illustres  may
bring  or  defend  criminal  prosecution
through  a  procurator,  ib. :  accessories,
ib.  1 1 :  right  tu  sue  extinguished  by
dissimulatio,  ib,  i  a.

in  iua  vocatio  of  parent  or  patron
without  praetor's  permission,  iv.  6.
12:  iv.  16.  3.

insinuatio,  see  aota.

institutio  of  heir,  ii.  14 :  who  may  be
instituted,  ib.  pr.  and  la:  institution
of  servus  proprius  and  alienus,  ib,  pr. :
effect  of  manumission  and  alienation
on  institution  of  slave,  ib.  i :  institu-
tion of  servus  hereditarius,  or  one
belonging  to  an  unknown  person,  ib,
a  :  of  slave  owned  in  common,  ib.  3 :
of  postumus  alienus,  ii.  ao.  28 :  of
the  emperor  for  improper  purposes,
ii.  1 7.  8 :  any  number  of  heirs  may
be  instituted,  ii.  14.  4 :  institutio  sub
condicione,  ex  tempore,  and  ad  tem-
pus,  f^.  9 :  impossible  condition  in
mstitution  taken  pro  non  scripto,  ib,
10 ;  institution  preceded  by  legacies
or  manumissions,  ii.  ao.  34 :  poenae
nomine,  ib,  36.

interdicts,  their  nature,  iv.  15.  pr. :
most  usual  in  disputes  about  posses-
sion, ib. :  prohibitory,  restitutory  and
exhibitory,  ib,  i  :  adipiscendae  pos-
sessionis,  ib,  3:  retinendae  possessi-
onis,  ib,  4  :  recuperandae  possessionis,
lb,  6 :  simple  and  double,  ib,  7  :  pro-
cedure, ib.  8.

interdictum  quorum  bonorum,  iv.  15.3.

Salvianum,  iv.  15.  3.

unde  vi,  iv.  15.  6.

uti  possidetis,  iv.  15.  4  and  7.

utrubi,  iv.  15.  4  and  7.

interpretatio  of  the  XII  Tables,  i.  17  :
iv.  18.  5  :  of  the  lex  Aquilia,  iv.  3.  lo.


XX


674


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


intestacy,  defined,  iii.  i .  pr. :  succes-
sion on,  given  by  ibe  XII  Tables  first
to  siii  heredes,  iii.  1. 1,  division  among
them  being  per  stirpes,  ib.  6 :  time  to
ascertain  who  is  suus  heres,  ib.  7  ;
given  by  the  XII  Tables  after  sui  to
the  nearest  agnate,  iiL  3.  pr.  :  time  to
ascertain  who  is  nearest  agnate,  ib.  i
and  6 :  no  succes>io  graduiim  among
agnates  till  Jnstinian,  ib.  7  :  succes-
sion of  mother  to  children  under  SC.
Tertttllianum,  iii.  3 :  her  rights  en-
larged by  Justinian,  ib.  4  and  5,  sub-
ject to  her  duty  of  procuring  them
tutors  if  impuberes,  tb.  6 :  succession
of  children  to  mother  under  SC.  Orfi-
tiannm,  iii.  4  :  succession  after  sui
and  agnates  or  those  adgnatorum  loco
given  by  the  praetor  to  cognates,  iii.
5.  pr.  :  meaning  of  intestacy  in  con-
nection with  tntela  legitima  adgna-
torum, i.  15.  3.

inundatio,  effect  of,  on  title  to  land,  ii.
I.  24.

inventorj,  the,  ii.  19.  6.

index,  his  duties,  iv.  5.  pr. :  iv.  17 :  to
decide  according  to  law  and  custom,
ib,  pr.  :  in  noxal  actions,  ib.  i  :  in
real  actions,  ib.  2 :  in  actio  ad  exhi-
bendum,  ib.  3 :  in  actio  familiae  er-
ciscundae,  ib.  4 :  communi  dividundo,
ib.  5  :  finium  regundorum,  ib.  6.

iudioia,  omnia  absolutoria,  iv.  13.  3  :
omnia  hodie  exlraordinaria,  iii.  12.
pr, :  iv.  15.  8.

iudlcia  publica,  contrasted  with  civil
sui  Is,  iv.  1 8.  pr. :  meaning  of  the
term  '  public,'  ib.  1 :  some  of  them
are  capital,  ib.  2.

iuria  praecepta,  i.  1.3.

iurisprudentia,  defined,  i.  T.  i.

ius,  divided  into  publicum  and  priva-
tum, i.  I.  4  :  publicum  defined,  ib. :
privatum  defined  ib. :  is  tripcrtitum,
ib. :  naturale,  defined,  i.  2.  pr. :  civile,
distinguished  from  ius  gentium,  i.  2.
I :  its  two  species,  ib.  10:  subject  to
change,  ib.  11 :  gentium,  proceeds
from  natiiralis  ratio,  i.  a.  i :  is  com-
mon to  all  men,  ib.  2,  and  unchange-
able, tb.  II  :  identified  with  ius  natu-
rale, ii.  I.  II  :  older  than  ius  civile,
ib. :  scriptum  and  non  scriptum,  i.  2.
3 :  six  sources  of  the  former,  ib. :
honorarium,  i.  a.  7 :  Romanum,  its
three  main  heads,  personarum,  rerum
and  actionum,  i.  3.  pr.

ius  adoresoendi,  a  civil  mode  of  ac-
quisition, ii.  7.  4:  the  law  relating
to,  altered  by  Justinian,  ib. :  under  a
will,  in  consequence  of  praeteritio  of


suus  heres,  ii.  13.  pr. :  among  legitimi
heredes  on  intestacy,  iii.  4.  4.

iusiurandiim  taken  by  litigants^  iv.
16.  I  :  de  calumnia,  ib.

iusta  causa  manumissionis,  i.  6.  4-6 :
adquisitionis,  ii.  i.  35  :  ii-  6.  pr-  ^
possessionis,  ii.  6.  pr.  and  10.

luatmua,  ii.  7.  3 :  ii.  I3.  4.

iuatitia,  defined,  L  i.  pr.


Ii.


Labeo,  ii.  25.  pr.

Latini  lunioni,  i.  5.  3  :  succession  to,
iii.  7.  4  :  modlfie<l  by  the  SC.  Largi-
anum  and  an  edict  of  Trajan,  ib. :
Latinitas  abolished  by  Justinian,  id.

legacy,  wrongly  placed  in  the  Listi-
tntes,  ii.  30.  pr. :  defined,  ib.  1  :  the
four  old  forms  of,  ib.  2 :  all  assimi-
lated, and  made  recoverable  by  iden-
tical remedies,  ib.:  placed  by  Justi-
nian on  the  same  footing  with  fidei-
commissa,  ib.  3 :  iii.  27.  7  :  what
things  may  be  bequeathed,  ii.  20.  4 :
burden  of  proof  on  legatee,  ib.  :  le-
gacy of  thing  in  pledge,  and  heir's
obligation  to  redeem,  ib,  ^:  of  res
aliena,  when  legatee  becomes  its  owner
vivo  testatore,  ib.  6 :  legacy  of  same
thing  to  same  person  in  two  different
wills,  ib  :  of  non-existent  thing,  ib.
7  :  of  the  same  thing  to  two  persons
coniunctim  and  disiunctim,  ib.  S:  of
fundus  alienus,  in  which  legatee  al-
ready has  usufruct  by  causa  lucrativa,
ib.  9 :  of  res  legatarii,  void,  ib.  10 :
of  res  sua  quasi  aliei.a,  ib.  1 1 ;  aliena-
tion or  mortgage  in  whole'  or  part
by  testator  of  thing  previously  be-
queathed, ib.  12  :  iegacy  of  release
from  a  debt,  or  of  extension  of  time
for  pa)  ment,  ib.  13  :  of  money  already
owed,  whether  pui^,  in  diem,  or  sub
condicione,  ib.  14:  of  dos  fro:n  hus-
band to  wife,  ib.  15  :  destruction  or
deterioration  of  res  legata,  without
fault  of  the  heir,  ib.  16:  manumission
by  heir  of  slave  bequeathed  by  testa-
tor, ib. :  legacy  of  ancilla  with  chil-
dren, of  slave  with  peculium,  of  farm
with  stock,  of  ordinarius  servus  with
vicarii,  ib.  1 7 :  of  flock  of  sheep,  ib.
18 :  of  house  with  fixtures,  ib.  19  :  of
a  peculium,  ib.  20 :  of  res  incorpor-
ates, e.g.  a  nomen,  ib.  21:  election  in
legacies,  ib.  22 :  legntum  optionis,  ib.
23  :  the  law  changed  by  Justinian,
ib. :  legacies  void  from  want  of  tes-
tamentifactio  in  legatee,  ib.  24:  so


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


675


loo  formerly  if  legatee  were  an  in-
certa  persona,  ib  35,  or  a  postamus
alienus,  ib.  26 :  Justinian's  change  in
the  law,  ib.  27  :  miittake  in  name  of
heir  or  legatee,  ib.  29  :  falsa  demon-
stratio  in  legacy,  ib.  30 :  falsa  causa,
ib.  31 :  legacy  to  slave  of  the  heir,  ib.

32  :  to  master  of  instituted  slave,  ib.

33  '  legalisation  by  Jusiinian  of  legacy
before  institution  of  the  heir.  ib.  34 :
legacy  to  be  paid  after  death  of  heir
or  legatee,  not  lawful  before  Justi-
nian, ib.  35 :  legacy  ijiven  or  transferred
poenae  nomine,  ib,  36  :  impossible
condition  in  legacy,  taken  pio  non
scripto,  ii.  14.  10  :  ademptio  of  lega-
cies, ii.  21.  pr.  :  translatio,  ib.  1  :  li-
mitation of  legacies  by  leges  Furia,
Voconia,  and  Falcidia,  ii.  22.  pr. :  in
singulis  heredibus  ratio  legis  Falci-
diae  ponenda  est,  ib,  i :  time  of  esti-
mating the  Falcidian  fourth,  ib.  2  :
funeral  expenses,  etc.,  first  deducted
from  the  estate,  ib.  3 :  legacy  per
damnationem,  iii.  27.  7.

legatees,  can  witness  the  will  under
which  they  take,  ii.  10.  11 :  partiary,
ii.  25.  5.

legitima  pan :  see  quarta^  e  lege  Fal-
cidia.

legitimation,  modes  of,  L  10.  13 :
effect  of,  in  making  children  sui  he-
redes,  iii.  I.  2.

Iientulus,  ii.  25.  pr.

IiBo,  iii.  15.  I  :  iii.  19.  14.

lex,  defined,  i.  2.  4.

Aelia  Sentia,  i.  5.  3 :  i.  6.  pr. :  ib

4  and  7 :  Anastasiana,  iii.  5.  1 :
Aquilia,  iii.  27.  7 :  iv.  3  (see  damnum
iniuria  datum) :  Atilia,  i.  20.  pr.
and  3 :  Atinia,  ii.  6.  2  :  Cornelia,  de
falsis,  ii.  12.5:  iv.  18.7:  de  iniuria,
iv.  4.  8 :  de  sicariis,  iv.  18.  5  and  6:
duodecim  Tabularum,  see  Twelve
Tables:  Fabia  de  plagiariis,  iv.  18.
10  :  Falcidia,  ii.  17.  3 :  ii.  22  :  ii.  23.

5  :  iv.  6.  33  :  Furia  testamentaria,  ii.
22.  pr. :  Fufia  Caninia,  i.  7.  pr.  :
Hortensia,  1.  2.  4:  Hostilia,  iv.  10.
pr.  :  Julia,  de  ambitu,  iv.  18.  ii :  de
adulteriis,  ib.  4 :  de  annona,  ib.  1 1  :
de  praedio  dotali,  ii.  8.  pr. :  de  resi-
duis,  iv.  18.  11:  de  vi  publica  aut
privata,  iv.  15.  6:  iv.  i?.  8:  maies-
tatis,  iv.  18.  3 :  peculatus,  iv.  18.  9:
repetundarum,  ib.  1 1  :  lulia  et  Plau-
tia,  ii.  6.  2 :  Julia  et  Titia,  i.  20.  pr.
and  3  :  lunia  Norbana,  i.  5.  3  :  iii-  7.
4:  Junia  Vellaca,  ii.  13.  2:  Papia
Poppaca,  iii.  7.  2  and  3 :  Pompeia,  de
parricidLis,  iv.  18.  6 :  regia,  i.  2.  6  :


Voconia,  ii.  22.  pr. :  Zenoniana,  iii.
24.  3 :  iv.  6.  33.

libelluB  oonventionis,  iv.  6.  24.

liberatio  legata,  ii.  20.  13.

libertas,  defined,  i.  3.  i :  legacy  of,  to
incerta  persona,  once  void,  ii.  20.  25  :
given  poenae  nomine,  by  will,  ib.  36 :
given  per  fideicommissum,  ii.  24.  2.

liber tini,  defined,  i.  5.  pr. :  formerly  of
three  kinds,  ib.  3  :  liberti  cives,  ib. :
intestate  succession  to,  under  the  XII
Tables,  iii.  7.  pr. :  as  amended  by
the  praetor,  ib.  i,  and  by  the  lex
Papia,  ib.  1  :  as  finally  settled  by
Justinian,  ib.  3:  adsignatio  of,  see
adsignatio.

lis  crescens,  cases  of,  iii.  27.  7*.  iv.  6.
26:  iv.  16.  I.

looatio  conduotio,  analogy  of  its  rules
to  those  of  sale :  contract  concluded
as  soon  as  merces  is  agreed  upon,  iii.
24.  pr. :  same  rule  as  in  sale  if  merces
is  left  to  be  fixed  by  a  third  person,
iii.  23. 1  :  iii.  24.  i :  cases  resembling
locatio  conductio,  but  really  innomi-
nate contract,  ib,  1  and  2 :  cases
doubtful  whether  belonging  to  sale
or  locatio  conductio,  ib.  3  and  4 :
duties  of  conductor,  ib.  5  :  they  de-
scend to  his  heirs,  ib.  6.

lucrativae  causae,  concurrence  of,  ii.
20.  6.


M.


mancipium,  1.  3.  3.

mandatum,  a  gratuitous  contract,  iii.
26.  13  :  its  five  modes,  ib,  pr. :  man*
datum  for  sole  benefit  of  mandator,
ib,  I  :  for  joint  benefit  of  mandator
and  agent,  ib.  2 :  for  sole  benefit  of
third  person,  ib.  3 :  for  joint  benefit
of  mandator  and  third  person,  ib,  4 :
for  joint  benefit  of  agent  and  third
person  (mandatum  qualificatum),  ib.
5 :  for  benefit  of  agent  alotie,  con-
silium rather  than  mandatum,  ib.  6 :
mandatum  contra  bonos  mores,  not
obligatory,  ib.  7 :  agent  must  not
exceed  the  terms  of  his  commission,
ib.  8 :  revocation  of  mandatum  before
execution,  ib.  9:  death  of  either  party
terminates  the  commission,  except
where  subsequently  executed  through
ignorance,  ib.  10 :  mandatum  need
not  be  undertaken,  but  if  accepted
must  be  executed,  ib.  1 1  :  mandatum
in  diem  and  sub  condicione,  ib.  12.

manumissio,  defined,  i.  5.  pr. :  its
modes,  ib.  1 ;  time  of,  ib.  2  :  in  fraud
of  creditors,  avoided    by  lex   Aelia


X  X  a


676


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


Sentiai  i.  6.  pr. :  implies  animus  fraud-
andi,  ib.  3 :  change  in  law  of  manu-
mission by  minors,  ib.  7 ;  by  will,
limited  by  lex  Fufia  Caninia,  i.  7.
pr.  :  not  a  capitb  deminutio,  i.  16.

4  :  of  slave  jointly  owned,  ii.  7.  4 :
impossible  condition  in  testamentary
manumission,  taken  pro  non  scnpto,
ii.  14.  10  :  who  cannot  manumit,  1. 6.
pr.  and  4.

Maroellus,  i.  4.  pr. :  ii.  5.  5.

matrimoDiuxn,  defined,  i.  9.  i  :  pro-
hibited degrees,  i.  10.  i  sqq.

merx  peculiaris,  iv.  7.  3.

method  of  the  Institutes,  i.  i.  2.

military  testament,  does  not  reqnire
the  usnal  number  of  witnesses,  ii.  11.
pr.,  or  other  ordinary  forms,  ib. :  may
be  made  only  while  on  actual  service,
ib.  and  3 :  if  oral,  a  witness  necessary,
ib.  I :  may  be  made  by  a  deaf  or
dumb  man,  ib.  2  :  remains  in  force
only  a  year  after  discharge,  except  in
case  of  unfulfilled  condition,  ib.  3 :
confirmation  on  actual  service  of  a
non-military  will  irregularly  made,  ib.
4 :  effect  of  capitis  deminutio  on,  ib,

5  :  not  invalidated  by  absence  of  ex-
heredatio,  ii.  13.  o:  legacy  in,  to
incerta  persona,  once  void,  ii.  20.  25  :
legacy  poenae  nomine  in,  ib.  36.

minor,  as  tutor,  i.  T4.  2.

minus  petitio,  iv.  6.  34.

mistake,  in  wills,  tt.  20.  29 :  in  con-
tracts, iii.  19.  23:  in  statement  of
claim  in  an  action,  iv.  6.  35.

mutuum,  defined,  iii.  14.  pr. :  by  pupil
without  tutor's  auctoritas,  ii.  8.  a.


N.


neoessarius  heres,  i.  6.  i :  institution
of  slave  as,  equivalent  to  manumis-
sion, ib.  2 :  see  heres.

negotiorum  gestio,  iii.  27.  i.

NerOf  ii.  23.  4.

Nerva,  ii.  la.  pr.

nomen,  in  literal  contract,  iii.  21.

novatio,  iii.  29.  3.

noxae  datio,  iv.  8.  pr. :  justified  in
principle,  ib.  2  :  ownership  of  surren-
dered slave  passes  to  surrendereci  but
slave  may  demand  manumission  if  he
can  get  the  damages  paid,  ib.  3 :
some  actions  noxal  legibns^  others
edicto  praetoris,  ib.  4:  actio  noxalis
caput  sequitur,  ib.  5 :  effect  of  noxia
committed  by  slave  against  his  own
master,  ib.  6  :  noxae  datio  as  applied
to  children  in  power  obsolete  under


Justinian,  ib.  7:    its  application  in
cases  of  pauperies,  iv.  9.
nnptiae,  defined,  i.  9.  i :  iustae,  con-
ditions of,  i.  10.  pr.  :  see  matrimo-
ninm.


O.


obligatio,  defined,  iii.  13.  pr. :  divided
into  civil  and  praetorian,  ib.  i  :  into
contractual,  quasi- contractual,  delic-
tal,  and  quasi-delictal,  ib.  2  :  re
contracta,  iii.  14 :  verbis  contracta,
iii.  1 5  (see  stipulatio) :  litteris  con-
tracta,  iii.  21  :  consensu  contracta,  iii.
22.  pr.:  naturalis  and  civilis,  iii.  ao.
I  :  quasi  ex  contractu,  iii.  27 :  ex
maleficio  or  c'elicto,  four  species,  iv.
I.  pr.:  quasi  ex  maleficio  or  delicto,
iv.  5  :  obligations,  how  extinguished,
iii.  29 :  solutio,  ib.  pr. :  acceptila-
tio,  ib.  I :  novatio,  ib.  3 :  contraria
voluntas,  in  consensual  contracts,
ib,  4.

ocoupatio  of  wild  animals,  ii.  i.  12
when  complete,  ib.  13,  cf.  iv.  9.  pr.
of  bees,  iL  i.  14  :  of  pigeons,  ib.  15
of  enemies  and  their  property,  ib.  1 7
of  gems  and  stones  found  on  the  sea-
shore, ib.  18  :  of  island  rising  in  the
sea,  ib.  22:  of  treasure  trove,  ib.  39:
of  les  derelicta,  ib.^*i.

optio,  legacy  of,  ii.  20.  23.

oroinus,  ii.  24.  2.

ordinaria  and  extraordinaria  indicia,
iii.  12.  pr. :  iv.  15.  8.


P.


Fapinian,  i.  25.  2 :  i.  26.  7 :  ii.  i.  8 :
ii.  6.  9:    ii.  ao.  14:    ii.  25.  i  :   iii.

parentes,  as  tutores  legitimi,  i.  18.

partitio,  ii.  23.  5.

patriciatus,  i.  12.  4.

patroni,  as  tutores  legitimi,  L  17.

Faulus,  ii.  14.  pr.

pauperies,  iv.  9.

peouliiim,  Justinian's  changes  in  the

law  of,  ii.  9.  I :  iii.  10.  a  :  iii.  28.  pr. :

legacy  of,  ii.  20.  20 :  castrense,  ii.  9.

1 :  ii.  12.  pr.:  quasi-castrense, ii.  11. 6.
perceptio  fniotuum,  see  fructus  per-

cepti.
performance    of  contract,    impossi*

bility  of,  iii.  19.  2.
permutatio,  a  contract  distinct  from

emptio  venditio,  iii.  23.  2.
personarum  ius,  all  men  free  or  slaves,


INDEX  TO  THE   TEXT.


677


i.  3*  pr. :  sui  or  alieni  inris,  i.  8.  pr. :
those  alieni  iuris  in  either  dominica
or  patria  potestas,  ib. ;  those  sui
iuris  sometimes  in  tutela  or  cnra,
i.  13.  pr.

Fertinax,  ii.  17.  7.

pignoris  oapio,  i.  34.  3.

pignorum  distracUo,  ii.  8.  i.

pignus,  ii.  8.  i :  iii.  14.  4:  iii.  19.  20:
iv.  I.  14:  iv.  6.  7  :  iv.  15.  3.

FiuB  Antoninus,  i.  8.  2 :  i.  25.  8  and
18 :  i.  26.  3,  4  and  9 :  ii.  6. 9 :  ii.  15.
I :  ii.  20.  4.

plebiacitom,  defined,  i.  2.  4.

plebs,  distinguished  from  populus,  i.
2.4.

pliu  petitio,  formerly  had  the  effect  of
losing  plaintiff  his  case,  iv.  6.  33:
plus  petitio  re,  tempore,  loco  and
causa,  tb» :  law  of,  as  settled  by  Zeno
and  Justinian,  ib,

poenae,  in  stipulations,  iii.  15.  7:  te-
mere  litigantium,  iv.  16.

poenae  servus,  modes  of  becoming,  i.
12.3.

Fomponius,  ii.  10.  5.

poaaessio,  meaning  of  the  term,  iv.  15.

5  :  acquisition  of,  through  slaves  and
children  in  power,  ii.  9.  3 :  through
usufructuary  slaves,  alieni  send  bona
fide  possessed,  and  free  man  bona
fide  serviens,  ib,  4 :  through  extraneae
personae,  ib.  5  :  possession  bona  and
mala  fide,  ii.  i.  33-35:  ii.  6.  3  and
7:  pro  herede,  iv.  15.  3:  pro  pos-
sessore, ib. :  possessio  or  praescriptio
longi  temporis,  ii.  6.  pr. :  ii.  9.  5.

postliminium,  i.  12.  5  :  i.  20.  2  :  ii.  i.
17;  ii.  12.  5,

postumuB,  exheredatio  of,  ii.  13.  i  and
2 :  persons  postumorum  loco,  ib.  2 :
in  substitutions,  ii.  16. 4 :  alienus,  de-
fined, ii.  20.  26 :  when  a  suus  heres,
iii.  I.  2.

potestas  dominica,  is  iuris  gentium,
i.  8.  1 :  limited  by  Pius  Antoninus,
ib.  2.

patria,  i.  9  :  peculiar  to  Rome,  ib,

3 :  over  whom  it  extends,  ib  :  modes
in  which  it  is  extinguished :  death  of
paterfamilias,  i.  12.  pr. :  deportatio
of  parent  or  child,  ib.  i :  parent's  be-
coming poenae  servus,  ib.  3 :  child's
being  elevated  to  patriciate,  ib.  4 :
capture  of  parent  or  child  and  death
in  captivity,  ib.  5 :  emancipation,  ib.

6  :  adoptio  plena,  ib,  8 :  case  of  grand-
child conceived  before,  but  born  after,
son's  emancipation,  i.  1 2.  9.

praeteritio  of^  sui  heredes,  etc.,  ii.  13.
pr.


praetor,  heredem  facere  non  potest,  iii.
9.  2 :  fideicommissarius,  ii.  23.  3 :
praetor's  edict,  i.  2.  7  :  i.  12.  6  :  con-
trasted with  lex,  iii.  9.  2.

principum  plaoita,  have  the  force  of
law,  L  2.  6 :  their  species,  ib.

procurator,  acquisition  through,  ii.  9.
5 :  mode  of  appointing,  iv.  10.  i  :
satisdatio  by,  iv.  11.  pr.

prodigus,  cui  bonorum  suorum  admi-
nistratio  interdicta  est,  under  a  cura-
tor, i.  23.  3 :  cannot  make  a  will,  ii.
12.  2.

provocatio,  iv.  11.  4.

pubertas,  age  of,  exactly  fixed  by  Jus-
tinian, i.  22.  pr.

publicatio,  iii.  25.  7 :  iv.  18.  8.

pupillua,  loan  by,  without  auctoritas,
ii.  8.  2 :  pajrment  to,  without  aucto-
ritas,  ib. ;  payment  by,  without  auc-
toritas, ib. :  solutio  per  errorem  to,
iii.  14.  I :  contracts  of,  iii.  19.  9  and
10.


Q.


quarta  Antonina,  i.  11.  3-

quarta  e  lege  Palcidia,  ii.  17.  3  :  ii.  22.

pr.  and  i .
querella  inof&oiosi  testament!,  ii.  18.

pr. :  who  may  brine  it,  ib.  i :  iii.  i.

14:   may  be  brought  only  as  a  last

re§ource,  ii.  18.  2,  3  and  6.
Quirites,  Quirinus,  i.  2.  2.


B.


relegatio,  in  insulam,  i.  12.  2.

replioatio,  iv.  14.  pr.

repraesentatio,  ii.  20.  14.

rerum  ius,  ii.  i.  pr.

res,  in  patrimonio  or  extra  patrimo-
nium,  ii.  i .  pr. :  communes,  ib.  1  :
publicae,  ib,  2 :  universitatis,  ib.  6 :
res  of  which  the  use  is  public,  ib.  4  :
res  nuUius,  ib.  7,  12  sq.,  17,  18,  22 :
res  sacrae,  ib.  8 :  rcligiosae,  ib.  9 :
sanctae,  ib,  10:  res  singulorum,  be-
come so  either  inre  gentium  or  iure
civili,  ib.  11  :  res  corporales,  ii.  2.  i  :
incorporales,  ib.  2  and  3 :  legacy  oi^
ii.  20.  21  :  res  mobiles  and  immo-
biles,  different  treatment  of,  ii.  6.  pr.,
3  and  7  :  iv.  15.  4 :  res  fungibiles,  iii.
14.  pr. :  quae  nsu  consumuntur,  ii.  4. 2.

responsa  prudentium,  i.  i.  8.

restitutio  in  integrtun,  iv.  6.  33.

restitutio  of  inheritance  under  a  fidei-
commissum,  ii.  23.  2.


678


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


s.


Sabiniaois  and  Frociilians,  ii.  i.  35  :
iii.  33.  a  :  iii.  26.  8.

sanotio,  meaning  of  the  term,  ii.  i.  10.

satisdatio,  the  old  law  of,  in  real
actions,  iv.  11.  pr. :  in  personal  ac-
tions, ib.  I  :  the  law  in  Jnstinian's
time,  when  the  parties  appear  in  per-
son, ib.  2 :  where  there  is  a  procura-
tor, id.  3,  or  a  defensor,  tb.  5 :  satis-
datio  iudicatum  solvi,  ib.  pr.,  i,  4
and  5 :  ratam  rem  dominum  habitn-
nim,  lb.  pr.  and  2.

Bcaovola,  i.  25.  16.

seashore,  common  property,  ii,  i.  i  :
its  use  public,  ib.  5  :  defined,  ib.  3.

semestria,  i.  25.  i.

senatUBOonsultum,  defined,  i.  2.  5:
Afiniannm,  iii.  1. 14 :  Clandianum,  iii
1 2.  I :  Largianum,  iii.  7.  4  :  Mace-
doniannm,  iv.  7.  7  '•  Orfitianum,  iii.
4 :  Pegasianum,  ii.  23.  4  and  7 :
Kufi  et  Scapulae,  iii.  8.  pr.  and  3 :
Tertnllianum,  iii.  3:  Trebellianum,
ii.  23. 4  and  6.

servitudes,  are  res  incorporales,  ii.  2.
3:  rustic,  ii.  3.  pr.  and  2  :  urban,  ib.
I !  meaning  of  *  praedial  *  servitudes,
ib.  3:  modes  of  creating  servitudes,
ib.  4.

Servius,  i.  13.  i.

servns,  nullum  habet  caput,  i.  16.  4  :
as  heir  or  legatee,  ii.  9.  3 :  adultery
of,  with  free  woman,  ii.  14  pr. :  iii.
1 1 :  ordinarius  and  vicarins,  ii.  20.
17:  iv.  7.  4 :  stipulations  of,  iii.  1 7.

Severus,  i.  25.  18  :  i.  26.  3,  4  and  9  :
ii.  6.  9  and  13:  ii.  9.  5  :  ii.  10.  7:
ii.  14.  pr. :  ii.  17.  3  and  8  :  ii.  ao.  5,
12,  15  and  20:  ii.  25.  i.

slavery,  originates  in  ius  gentium,  but
contrary  to  ius  naturale,  i.  2.  2  :  i.  3.
2  :  modes  in  which  persons  become
slaves,  ib.  4:  slaves  all  of  one  con-
dition, ib,  5  :  see  servus.

societas,  either  totorum  bonorum  or
unius  alicuius  negotiation  is,  iii.  21:.
pr. :  shares  of  profit  and  loss,  how
ascertained,  ib.  1-3 :  modes  in  which
societas  terminates :  renunciation,  ib.
4 :  death  of  sociils,  ib.  5  :  completion
of  the  business  for  which  the  partner-
ship was  formed,  ib»  6 :  publicatio  of
the  property  of  a  partner,  ib.  7,  or
his  insolvency,  ib.  8  :  obligations  of
partners  inter  se,  ib.  9 :  beneficium
competentiae,  iv.  6.  38.

solidary  obligatioxi,  iit.  20.  4.

solum  Italicum,  ii.  6.  pr. :  ii.  8.  pr.

solutio,  iii.  29.  pr. :  per  errorem,  a  case


of  real,  iii.  14.  i,  or  rather  quasi-con-
tractual obligation,  iii.  27.  6:  solutio
per  errorem  of  legacies,  ii.  20.  25.

speciflcatio,  ii.  i.  25.

sportulae,  iv.  6.  24.

spurii,  i.  10.  2  :  have  cognates,  but  not
agnates,  iii.  5.  4.

status,  see  capitis  dexninutio :  status
controversia,  i.  25.  12.

stipendiaria  praedia,  ii.  i.  40.

stipulatlo,  defined,  iii.  15.  pr. :  form
of,  under  the  older  law,  ib.  i  :  greater
freedom  introduced  by  Leo,  ib  ,  cf.  iii.
19.  5  and  7 ;  pur^,  in  diem,  and  sub
condicione,  iii.  15.  2  :  stipulation  for
periodical  payment,  theoreticallypura,
ib.  3 :  conditional,  defined,  ib.  4  and
6:  for  factio,  as  distinguished  from
datio,  best  secured  by  a  penalty,  f^.
7  :  correi  stipulandi  and  promittendi,
iii.  16:  stipulation  of  slave,  iii.  17.
pr. :  personal  to  slave,  if  for  a  *  fac-
tum,' ib.  2  :  stipulation  of  slave  jointly
owned,  ib.  3  :  iii.  28.  3  :  stipulaliones
iudiciales,  iii.  18.  i  :  praetoriae  and
aediliciae,  ib.  2 :  conventionales,  ib.
3 :  communes,  ib.  4 :  what  may  be
stipulated  for,  iii.  19.  pr. :  stipula-
tions, why  void :  on  account  of  non-
existence of  their  subject,  ib.  i,  or
performance  being  otherwise  impos-
sible in  nature  or  law,  ib,  2  :  because
performance  is  promised  from  a  per-
son not  a  party  to  the  contract,  ib.  3,
or  to  a  person  not  a  party  to  the
contract,  nor  having  promisee  in  his
potestas,  ib.  4 :  on  account  of  want
of  correspondence  between  question
and  answer,  ib.  5,  cf.  18 :  because
made  between  master  and  slave,  or
pater  and  fiUusfamilias,  ib.  6 :  be-
cause a  party  is  deaf  or  dumb,  ib.  7,
or  insane,  ib.  8,  or  impubes  in  potes-
tas, ib.  10:  because  of  impossible
condition,  ib.  11  ^  because  inter  ab-
sentes,  ib.  1 2 :  on  account  of  mis-
understanding between  the  parties,  ib.
23:  because  immoral,  ib.  24:  stipu-
lation for  performance  to  stipulator
or  a  third  person,  or  to  stipulator
and  a  third  person,  ib.  4 :  for  per-
formance after  death  of  promisor
or  promisee,  made  valid  by  Justinian,
ib.  13 :  for  performance  after  death
of  third  person,  ib.  16  :  at  death  of
promisor  or  promisee,  ib.  15  :  prae-
postera,  ib.  14:  on  behalf  of  third
peison,  void  unless  secured  by  a
penalty,  ib.  9.  or  unlets  promisee  has
an  interest  m  performance,  ib.  ao:
promise  on  behalf  of  third  person


INDEX  TO  THE   TEXT.


679


not  binding  unless  secured  by  a
penalty,  ib,  ai :  for  conveyance  of  pro-
p>erty  on  its  becoming  promisee's
own,  ib.  22  :  death  of  promisor  before
fulfilment  of  condition,  ib,  25 :  sti-
pulatio  Aquiliana,  iii.  29.  2.

substitutio  pupillaris,  ii.  16.  pr. :  an
institution  of  customary  law,  ib. :
unum  testamentum  duarum  heredi-
tatum,  ib.  2  :  precautions  to  be  taken
in,  ib.  3 :  allowable  even  when  the
child  is  disinherited,  ib.  4:  not  al-
lowed, unless  testator  makes  a  will
for  himself,  ib.  5  :  flexibility  of,  ib.
6 :  form  of,  ib.  7  :  avoided  by  child's
reaching  puberty,  ib.  8  :  effects  of,
how  far  producible  where  an  extra-
neus  or  pubes  filius  is  instituted,
ib.  9.

substitutio  quasi-pupillaris,  ii.  16.  t.

substitutio  Tulgaris,  its  nature,  ii.  15.
pr. :  flexibility,  ib.  1.  2  and  3 :  to
servus  alienus  believed  to  be  sui  iuris,
ib.  4.

suspeoti  ozimen,  i.  26.  pr. :  see  tutor.'


telum,  defined,  iv.  18.  5.

testamentifactio,  ii.  10.  6 :  ii.  14.  a :
ii.  19.  4 :  ii.  20.  24.

testamentum,  derived,  ii.  10.  pr.  :
comitiis  calatis  and  in  procinctu,  ib.
I :  per  aes  et  libram,  ib. :  praetorian
will,  attested  by  seals  of  seven  wit-
nesses, ib.  2  :  testamentum  triperti-
turn,  ib.  3  :  further  requirement,  of
Justinian,  ib.  4 :  any  seal  sufficient,
ib.  5  :  material  on  which  will  may  be
written,  ib.  12:  duplicate  copies,  ib.
13  :  nuncupative  will,  ib.  14  :  will  of
quasi'Castrense  peculium,  ii.  11.  6:
who  cannot  make  a  will:  filiifamilias,
except  of  cast  reuse  or  quasi- castrense
peculium,  ii.  12.  pr. :  impuberes  and
furiosi,  ib.  i  :  prodigi,  ib.  2  :  deaf,
dumb,  and  blind  persons,  except
under  prescribed  special  forms,  ib.
3  and  4 :  captivi,  while  in  captivity,
ib.  5  :  how  a  testament  becomes  rup-
turn  :  by  quasi-adgnatio  of  suus  heres,
ii.  1 7.  I  :  by  execution  of  a  later  will,
ib,  2,  even  if  the  heir  of  the  latter  be
instituted  only  ex  certis  rebus,  ib.  3 :
will  becomes  irritum  by  capitis  de-
minutio  of  testator,  ib.  4,  though  in
some  cases  upheld  by  the  praetor,  ib,
6 :  not  avoided  by  mere  intention  to
revoke,  ib.  7:  will  of  libertus,  iii.  7.
I  sq.:  testamentum  inofficiosum,  see


querella :  militare,  see  military
testament.

Tiberius,  i.  11.  11 :  ii.  15.  4.

tignum,  meaning  of,  ii.  i.  29.

traditio,  a  natuial  mode  of  acquisition,
ii.  I.  40 :  the  universal  mode  of  con-
veying res  corporales.  ib.  :  may  be
made  by  an  agent  with  owner's  con-
sent, ib.  42 :  e.  g.  by  a  general  ma-
nager, ib.  43 :  where  not  necessary
for  transfer  of  ownership,  ib.  44  and
45  :  to  incerta  persona,  ib.  46.

Trajan,  ii.  11.  i :  ii.  12.  pr. :  iii.  7.  4.

translatio  of  legacies,  ii.  21.  i.

Trebatius,  ii.  25.  pr.

trespass,  in  pursuit  of  wild  animals,
ii.  I.  12.

Tribonian,  proem :  i.  5.  3 :  ii.  8.  a :
ii.  23.  12.

tributoria  praedia,  ii.  i .  40.

triplicatio,  iv.  14.  a.

tutela,  i.  13.  pr. :  defined,  ib.  i  :  ad-
gnatorum,  i.  15  :  belongs  only  to  the
nearest  degree,  i.  16.  7:  patronorum,
i.  17:  parentium,  i.  18:  fiduciaria,  i.
19 :  impnberum,  based  on  natural
law,  i.  20.  6 :  modes  in  which  tutela
terminates,  i.  22  :  by  pupil's  attaining
puberty,  ib.  pr. :  adrogatio,  deporta-
tio,  capture  in  war,  etc.,  ib.  1 :  fulfil-
ment of  condition,  etc.,  ib.  2  and  5 :
death  of  pupil  or  tutor,  ib.  3  :  capitis
deminutio,  ib.  4:  removal  on  suspi-
cion, grounds  of  excuse,  etc.,  ib.  6:
tutela  a  munus  publicum,  i.  25.  pr.

tutor,  i.  13.  2:  may  be  appointed  by
will,  ib.  3,  even  to  postumi,  ib.  4  :
to  an  emancipated  child  only  with
magistrate's  approval,  ib.  5 :  who
may  be  appointed,  i.  14:  incertae
personae  cannot,  ii.  20.  25  and  27 :
appointment  ad  tempus,  ex  tempore,
sub  condicione,  etc.,  i.  14.  3:  ap-
pointment certae  rei  or  causae  not
good,  ib.  4:  tutor  Atilianus,  i.  20.
pr. :  ex  lege  lulia  et  Titia,  ib. :  tutors
of  these  latter  kinds  often  appointed
temporarily,  ib.  i  and  2  :  later  mode
of  appointment  in  default  of  testa-
mentary tutor,  ib.  3 :  in  Justinian's
time,  ib.  4 :  responsibility  of  tutor  at
end  of  term  of  office,  ib.  7 :  case  of
action  between  tutor  and  pupil :  latter
must  have  a  curator  ad  litem,  i.  21.
3 :  tut  oris  actor,  i.  23.  6  :  tutorum
saiisdatio,  i.  24:  iv.  11.  pr. :  what
tutors  are  exempted  from  giving  satis-
datio,  i.  24.  pr. :  offer  of  satisdatio
to  secure  sole  administration,  ib,  i :
iii.  19.  20  :  procedure  where  none  of
several  tutors  offers,  i.  24. 1 :  liability


68o


INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT


of  magistrates  who  appointi  ib,  3-4 :
grounds  of  excuse  from  serving  the
office,  see  curator:  tutor  cannot  be
compelled  to  become  curator  to  same
ward,  i.  35.  18,  or  man  to  his  own
wife,  ib.  19  :  removal  of  tutor  on  sus-
picion, i.  26 :  who  can  remove,  ib.  i,
and  be  removed,  ib.  2 :  the  actio  sus-
pecti  tutoris  quasi-publica,  ib.  3,  but
cannot  be  brought  by  an  impubes,
ib,  4 :  meaning  of  suspectus,  ib.  5,  9
and  13:  interdiction  of  administration
during  the  action,  ib.  7  :  tutor's  obli-
gation to  maintain  pupil,  ib,  9  and
10 :  punishment  of,  by  praefectus
urbis,  ib.  10  and  11 :  offer  of  security
by  tutor,  no  bar  to  his  removal  on
suspicion,  ib.  12  :  tutor  and  pupil,
relation  between  is  quasi-contraaual,
iii.  27.  2.
Twelve  Tables,  the,  on  tutela,  i.  15.
pr. :  i.  17:  on  curatio  adgnatorum,  i.
23.  6 :  on  suspecti  crimen,  i.  26.  pr. :
on  the  actio  de  tigno  iniuncto,  ii.  i.
29 :  on  sale,  ii.  i .  41 :  on  usucapio  of
res  furtivae,  ii.  6.  3 :  on  legacy,  ii  22.
pr. :  on  intestate  succession,  ii.  13.  5 :
iii.  1. 1,  9  and  15:  iii.  a.  pr.,  3  and  5  :
iii.  3.  pr.  and  2  :  iii.  5.  i  and  5 :  iii.  7.
pr. :  iii.  9.  2  :  iii.  jo.  pr. :  on  iniuria,
IV.  4.  7 :  on  pauperies,  iv.  9. 4 :  Gains'
work  on,  iv.  18.  5.


V.


Qsuoapio,  a  civil  mode  of  acquisition,
ii.  6.  pr. :  Justinian  changes  in  the
law  of,  ib. :  what  cannot  be  acquired
by,  ib.  I  and  2  :  of  moveables,  rare,
ib,  3 :  cases  of  it,  ib.  4,  5  and  6  :  of
immoveables,  easier :  how  effected,  ib.
7 :  of  res  furtivae  or  vi  possessae,  how
possible,  ib.  8 :  of  res  Rsci,  ib.  9 :  the
thing  to  be  acquired  must  have  no


vitium,  ib.  10:  error  falsae  causae,
fatal  to,  ib.  1 1 :  continuatio  temporis
in,  ib.  12  and  13.

U8US,  a  personal  servitude  created  and
extinguished  in  same  ways  as  usus-
fructus,  ii.  5.  pr.:  a  less  right  than
the  latter,  ib.  1  :  rights  of  usnary  of
a  house,  ib.  a :  usus  intransferable,
ib,  3  :  usus  of  slave,  ib. :  of  cattle,  ib.
4 :  not  extinguished  by  capitis  demi-
nutio  minima,  iii.  10.  i.

ususfimotuB,  ii.  i.  36  :  duty  of  usn-
fmctuary  to  act  as  bonus  paterfami-
lias, ib.  38  :  defined,  ii.  4.  pr. :  modes
of  creating,  id,  i :  modes  of  extinc-
tion, ib,  and  3 :  of  things  quae  ipso
usn  consumuntur,  ib.  2,  only  a  quasi-
usufruct,  ib.  I  effect  of  determination
of  usufruct,  ib.  4 :  rights  of  usufruc-
tuary, ii.  5. 1 :  he  has  not  possession,
ii.  9.  4 :  usufruct  not  extinguished  by
capitis  deminutio  minima,  iii.  10.  i.


V.


Vespasian,  ii.  23.  5.

viatores,  iv.  6.  24.

vindloatio,  defined,  iv.  6.  15  :  in  cases

of  theft,  iv.  I.  19.
vis  malor,  iii.  14.  2.


witnesses  to  a  will,  must  have  testa-
menti  factio,  ii.  10.  6 :  who  cannot
be,  in  any  case,  ib.  and  7:  others
excluded  on  grounds  of  relationship,
ib.  9  and  10.


X.


Xenophon,  iv.  18.  5.


GENERAL    INDEX.


■♦•-


( The  references  are  to  the  pa^s.)


-M-


A.


Aooeptilatio,  469-471.

Aooessio,  204,  305.

temporis  or  possessionis,  234,  235.

Aoorual  between  co-legatees,  298 ;  be-
tween co-hein,  31 1,  372.

AoquiBition,  modes  of,  202  ;  civil
modes,  229.

Acta  intervenientis,  144,  561,  590.

Actio,  meaning  of  the  term,  512,  549  :
Justinian's  divisions  of  actions,  51 3  sq.

Actio  ad  ezhibendnm,  568.

ad  supplendam  legitimam,  285.

aestimatoria,  441.

bonoram  vi  raptorum,  530.

calumniae,  622.

confessoria,  550,  652.

de  dote,  300.

de  effusis  et  deiectis,  546.

de  eo  quo<l  certo  loco,  etc,  410.

de  in  rem  verso,  508,  579.

de  pauperie,  586,  587,

de  pecnlio,  579.

de  pecunia  constituta,  555.

de  rationibus  distrahendis,  166.

de  tigno  iniuncto,  208.

doli,  572.

ex  stipulatn,  653.

exercitoria,  506,  577.

familiae  erciscnndae,  463,  626.

fidnciae,  332.

fininm  regundorom,  559.

furli,  526.

hypothecaria,  554,  616.

in  factum  civilis,  404,  405,  655.

institoria,  508,  577.

legis  Aquiliae,  535,  558,  560.

negatoria,  551,  652.

Panliana,  554.

positi  aut  suspensi,  547.

praescriptis  verbis,  404,  405,  655.


Aotio  Publiciana,  201,   222,  328,  345,

55»»  553»  604,  653,  658.

quasi-institoria,  508.

quasi-Serviana,  554.

qnod  inssu,  576.

quod  metus  causa,  562,  572.

recepticia,  555.

redbibitoria,  441,  558.

rei  uxoriae,  564.

servi  corrupti,  560.

Scrviana,  554,  616,  653.

suspecti  tut  oris,  181.

tributoria,  577.

tutelac,  166,  463.

Aotionea    adiectitiae   qualitatis,    498,

506,  514.  576.
arbitrariae,  567,   568,  653,  657.

658.

bonae  fidei,  563,  564, 653,  657.

civiles  and  honorariae,  655.

directae  and  utiles,  539,  653  sq.

fictitiae,  653.

in  bonum  et  aequum  conceptae,


.*;64.

—  m  factum,  538, 539.

—  in  ius  and  in  factum  conceptae,
654  sq.

—  in  rem  and  in  personam,  550.

—  legitimae,  655.

—  noxales,  583  sq.
perpetuae    and    temporales,  595,


596.       ^

—  populares,  181,  547,  596,  597.

—  praeiudicialesy  556,  657  :  see  prae-
indicia.

strict!  iuris,  563,  564.


Aotionis  editio,  560.
Addiotio,  229.

Aditio   hereditatis,   167,   249,  270:
how  made,  293 :  effects  oU  290,  291.
Adiudioatio,  229,  627,  656.
Adoptio  naturam  imitatur,  141.


682


GENERAL  INDEX,


Adoption,  130  sq.:  form  of,  140.

Adrogation,  139,  349,  389,  390:  of
impuberes,  141.

Adrignatio  libertonun,  381,  382.

Adstipulatio,  537.

Aedile,  23,  107,  415,  441,  f^^T.

AeqTLitos  as  a  source  of  Roman  law,
39.

Aestimatoin,  405.

AflirmatoTes,  175.

Agency  in  the  accusation  of  ownership
and  possession,  343  sq. :  as  a  species
of  contract,  454  sq. :  how  far  the
agent  entitles  or  binds  his  principal,
505-508 :  agency  in  the  conduct  of
actions,  589-591.

Agnates,  defined,  1 56.

Agnitio  bonorum  possessionia,  385.

Agri  veotigalea,  329.

Albi  corruptio,  556.

Animus  domini,  339.

Appellate  Jurisdiction  under  the  Re-
public and  the  Empire,  662.

Apprehensio,  340.

Aquae  et  ignis  interdictio,  144.

Aquilian  stipulation,  the,  470,  471.

Arbitration,  its  place  in  the  history  of
Roman  civil  procedure,  64 1.

Arbltria,  cf.  actiones  arbitrariae.

Arra,  436,  437.

Assignment  of  contractual  rights,  480
sq.

Auotoratus,  114.

Austin,  Mr.,  on  the  law  of  Persons,
86,  and  of  Things,  190,  194;  on
Customary  law,  109.

B.

Bankruptcy,  392-395»  <5<53sq.
Benefioium  abstinendi,  288,  356.

cedendarum  actionum.  431,  498.

competentiae,  395,  475,  574.

divisionis,  430,  495,  498.

inventarii,  292.

ordinis  sive  excussionis,  432,  495,

554.


separation  is,  287.
Bona  fide  possessor,  211.
Bona  fides  (in  usucnpion),  230.
Bona  vacantia,  234.
Bona  vi  rapta,  510,  529  sq.
Bonorum  addiotio  liberbatis  causa,

391-
Bonorum  cessio,  395,  664.

Bonorum  distractio,  394.

Bonorum  possessio,  in  general,  383
sq. :  origin  and  development  of,  476-
480 :  ab  intestate,  383  sq. :  contra
tabulas,.  266,  267 :  cum  and  sine
re,  282,  386:  secundum  tabulas,  251,
282.


Bonorum  venditio,  287,  394,  664.
Breach  of  promise  of  maniage,  131.

C.

Cadoca,  269.

Calumnia,  633.

Capitis  deminutio,  157  sq.,  184-187,

281,  372»  45i»  572-
Capture  in  war,  1 1 3,  304.
Casus,  492.

Causa  civilis  in  contracts,  397.
Causae  probatio,  137.
Cautio   ^bond    attesting    a    contract),

489^  503.
Cautio  damni  infecti,  414.

de  dolo,  414.

de  persequendo  servo,  etc,  414.

de  rato,  415,  591  sq.

legatorum,  415.

Muciana,  273.

rem  salvam  fore  pupilli,  415.

Censors  and  the  Census,  33,  117.

Centumviri,  647,  649.

Centuries,  8.

Cessio  bonorum,  395,  664.

Cessio  nominum  or  actionum,  487.

Chirographs,  501.

Christianity,  influence  of,  on  Roman

law,  63.
Clausula  oodicillaris,  326.
Clientes,  5.
Code  of  Justinian,  70,  71,  78,  79:  of

Theodosius  II,  68.
Codex  Alaricianus,  69.

Gregorianus,  67.

Hermogenianus,  67.

repetitae  praelectionis,  78,  79.

CodicUli,  314,  334-327-

Codification,  79.

CoemptJo,  134,  15  T.

Cognatio  spiritualis,  134.

Cognitio   eztraordinaria,   315,   665,

666.
Cognitors,  589,  590.
Coheirs,  391.

Collatio  bonorum,  391,  359.
Colonatus,  114.
Coloniae  Latinae,  27.
Colonus,  114,  213.
Comitia  calata,  3.

centnriata,  8,  23-25.

curiata,  3,  36.

tiibuta,  20,  21,  33,  25.

Commercium,  37,  301.
Commodatum,  400,  401.
Commodum  repraesentationis,  301.
Compensatio,  565-567.
Composition  for  wrong,  idea  of,  63S,

639-
Compromissum,  475,  641.

Concilia  plebis,  10,  20.


GENERAL  INDEX.


683


Conoubinstiu,  137.

Conourrenoe  of  aotions  de  eadem  re,

587-589-
Conaurrenoe  of  causae  lucrativae,

296.
CondemnatiOi  656,  657.
Condioio,  163, 164;  in  wills,  373,  374,

303,  306-308  ;  in  contracts,  409.

impossibilis,  374,  432.

Condictio,  406,   500,  557,  646,  647,

653.  653
• causa  data  causa  non  secuta,  404.

furliva,  539,  5^7.

indebiti,  399,  400,  465,  485.

Confarreatio,  124,  135.

Conftuio,  323,  390,  474.

Connubium,  130.

Consistoiiuin,  107.

Consolidation  223.

Ck>nstitutions  of  the  Emperors,  104  sq.

Ck>n8titutuin,  433,  501,  555.

possessorium,  342.

Consuls,  8,  9.

Contraot,  development  of,  351  sq.,  397  :
Roman  notion  of,  396 :  place  of  per-
formance, 410:  lime  of  performance,
437,  438 :  how  far  third  persons
bound  or  entitled  nnder  contracts,
41 7  sq. :  contract  and  obligation,  193.

Contractual  decision  of  disputes,
640,  641.

Con tr aria  voluntas  as  a  mode  of  dis-
charging consensual  contracts,  473.

Contributory  negligence,  535.

Contubemium,  136.

Correal  obligation,  411,  412,  496  sq.

Costs,  623.

Cretio  continua  and  vulgaris,  389.

Culpa,  490  sq..  534.

Cura  of  minors,  171,  173:  of  furiosi
and  prodigi,  173.

Curators,  170  sq.

Customary  law,  s,  108.


D.


Damage  to  property,  law  of,  532  sq.

Damages,  measure  of,  in  actions,  536.

Damnum  indireotum,  536.

Damnum  iniuria  datum,  510,  532  sq.

Dare,  faoere,  praestare,  482.

Datio  in  solutum,  469.

Decreta,  105  sq.

Decuriones,  138.

Dediticii.  119;  succession  to,  381.

Deduotio  de  peculio,  486.

Defensio,  486.

Defensor,  594.

Delatio  hereditatis,  349.

Delict,  nature  of,  518.

Demonstratio,  651.


Deportatio  in  insulam,  145.
Depositum,  401-403.

irregulare,  403.

miserabile,  403.

Dereliction,  316.
Detention,  338,  339.

Dies,  164:  in  wills,  373  :  in  contracts,

407-409.
Dies  cedit  and  venit,  303.
Dies  interpellafc  pro  homine,  427.
Dies  nefasti  and  fasti,  48.
Diffarreatio,  132.
Digest  of  Justinian,  7 1->73.
Diligentia,  490  sq.
Distress,  law  of.  in  primitive  societies,

636-638,  643,  643.
Division  of  inheritance  among  coheirs,

371.
Divorce,  133,  133.
Dolus,  490  sq.,  572.
Dominium,  Roman  conception  of,  191,

193,  30I,  303.

Donatio,  336  sq.

inter  vivos,  238  sq.

mortis  causa,  336,  237,  310,  313.

propter  nuptias,  239,  240.

Dos,  133  sq.,  575.
Dotis  dictio,  405.
Duplioatio,  608,  660.

E.

Bdiot  of  the  Praetor,  30-43.
Edicts  of  the  Emperors,  105.
Edictum  Carbonianom,  385.

provinciale,  33.

Theodorid,  69.

Emancipation,  147.

Emperors,  their  legislative  authority,

45,  104-107.
Emphyteusis,  328-330,  444.
Empire,  establishment  of,  43.
Emptio  sub  corona,  229.
Emptio  venditio,  315,  436  sq. :    see

Sale.
Epistola  Hadrian!,  430,  605.
Epistolae,  106.
Ereption,  370.
Exceptio  doli,  503,  573,  601,  605.

in  factum  composita,  601,  605.

iurisiurandi,  603.

legis  Cinciae,  338,  605.

legis  luliae  (de  bonorum  cessionej,

605.

legis  Plaetoriae,  605.

litis  dividuae,  573,  606.

litis  residuae,  573,  606.

' longi  temporis,  6oo.

pacti,  603,  6o6,  659.

pecuniae  non  numeratae,  503,  504,


601.


684


GENERAL  INDEX.


Bxceptio  praeiudicii,  600.

procnratoria,  600,  607,

quod  metus  causa,  572,  600,  605.

rei  in  iudicium  deductae,  599, 60a.

rei  iudicataci  599,  603,  603.

SCi.  Macedoniani,  581,  605.


SCi.  Trebelliani,  605.

SCi.  Velleiani,  434,  605.

Szoeptiones,  5x6,  599  sq.,  659,  660 :
perpetuae  and  temporales,  600 :  limi-
tation of|  607 :  exceptions  opposed  to
ipsum  iusy  467.

ISxeoution  for  debt  and  in  bankruptcy,

392-395»  ^3  sq-
Szheredation,  260-365.

SxiBtimatio,  159,  633.

ISzpensilatio,  500  sq.

Sxpromisaio,  486.

Bxtension  of  the  Boman  Aranohise,

27-

F.

Faloidian  fourth,  310  sq.

Fictio  legiB  ComeUae,  360,  38  a.

Fiotions,  31,  654.

Fideioommissa,  314  sq. :  differences
between,  and  legacies,  315,  333  :
proof  of,  333.

FideioommisBaria  hereditas,  316 :
transfer  of,  how  regulated,  316-320.

FideiuBsio,  439  sq.

FidepromiBsio,  439.

Fiduda,  331,  333,  398,  403 :  in  eman-
cipation, 147,  368.

Filiusfamilias,  his  position  in  respect
of  contract,  1 38,  420,  465 :  of  pro-
perty, 243-245  :  of  capacity  to  sue,
128,  542.

Forgery,  penalties  for,  631.

Formula,  the,  650  sq. :  parts  of,  650-
661.

Formulary  procedure,  650  sq. ;  abo-
lition of,  666.

Freedom,  modes  of  obtaining,  other
than  manumission,  116.

FruotUB  oiviloB  and  naturalea,  212.

FructtiB  lioitatio,  612.

Fructuum  peroeptio,  an.

Fruita,  title  to,  211.

FurioBUB,  his  capacity  to  bind  himself
by  contract,  420.

Furtum,  509,  510,  519-529 :  concep-
tum,  521  :  lance  et  licio  conceptum,
533:  manifestnm,  531:  non  exhibi-
tum,  533  :  oblatum,  531  :  prohibi-
tum, 531.

O.

GaiuB,  54,  55,  67.

Oentiles,  373.

Gifts  between  husband  and  wife,  338.


Glossators,  80.

Guardianship,  149  sq. :  by  women,
149:  over  women,  150,  151  :  over
impuberes,  151  sq. :  duties  of  guar-
dian, 153,  463.


H.


Habitatio,  238.

Heredes  necessarii,  2S6,  287.

sui  et  necessarii,  387.

Hereditas,  348,  349.

jacens,  348.

Hunter,  Dr.,  on  the  Gaian  classifica-
tion of  law,  194,  195  :  on  Possession,

344,  345-
Husband  and  wife,  their  proprietary

relations,  133  sq.

Hypotheoa,  334,  335,  616.


I.


Ignominia,  159.
Imperium,  30.

Impossibility  of  performance,  effect
of,  on  validity  of  contract,  415,  416.
In  bonis  habere,  301,  303.
In    integrum    restitutio,    390,   553,

670-573,^-  ,  ^      ^.

In  iure   cessio,   339  :    of  hereditas,

27i»  395.
In  ius  vocatio,  560,  645.

In  libertate  esse,  114.

Inaedifioatio,  308.

Incertae  personae,  363,  369,  304.

Infamia,  159,  633.

Infantia,  431.

Ingenuitas,  modes  of  acquiring,  i  ao.

IniurU,  511,540-545.

Innominate  contract,  404,  405.

Institutes,  the,  composition  of,  73.

Institution  of  heres,  367  :  of  servns
alienus,37o,a7i :  of  postumus  alienus,
305  :  who  could  not  be  instituted,
a68 :  institution  ex  re  certa,  331.

Intentio,  651.

Interdicts,  343,  516,  610  sq. :  Inters
diet  procedure  under  the  Formulary
system,  610-613 :  under  Justinian,
613.

Interdiotum  de  arboribus  caedendis,
613.

de  homine  libero,  etc,  613.

de  liber  is  exhibendis,  613.

de  mortuo  inferendo,  614.

de  superficie,  338.

de  vi  armata,  619.

fraudatorium,  554,  613.

ne  vis  fiat,  etc.,  61 3.

possessorium,  613,  617.


GENERAL  INDEX.


685


Interdiotum  qiionim    bonorum,  384,

477»  615,  616.

Salvianum,  555.  616.

sectorium,  613,  617.

unde  vi,  613,  619.

uti  possidetis,  611,  614,  617,  618,

630.

utrubi,  611,  617,  618,  620.

Interpellation  427.

Interpretatio,  49.

IntemBuriam,  300.

Intestate  suocession,  law  relating  to,
347-349  :  to  freedmen,  348,  378  sq  :
the  law  as  regulated  by  Ihe  XII
Tables  :  of  sui,  355  :  agnates,  364  :
gentiles,  .^73  :  as  regulated  by  the
Edict :  of  liberi,  358  :  Icgitimi,  366,
367  :  cognati,  373  sq.  :  under  novel
cxviii,  388,  389.

Intestate  sucoession,  to  emancipatus,

362,  363-
to  filiusfamiliaswithpeculinm,  362.

Intimidation,  effect  of,  on  validity  of

dispositions,  562,  572.
Invecta  et  illata,  335,  446.
Inventory,  Jnstinian*s  introduction  of,

292.
ludez,   original  conception   of,  641  :

pedaneus,  666.
Indicia  divisoiia,  559,  656.

legitima.  598.

publics,  637  sq.

quae  imperio  continentur,  598.

ludiois  arbitrive  postulatio,  646.
ludioium  Cascellianum,  612.

contrarium,  622.

lura  in  re  aliena,  218.

lurata  promissio  liberti,  406,  614.

luridioi,  46,  166.

luris  quasi  possessio,  22a,  338.

lus,  signification  of,  100 :  ius  and  iudi-

oium,  649,  661.
Ius  adcrescendi,  241.

annlorum,  120.

civile,  a8.

edicendi,  30.

gentium   or  naturale,   28,  36-43,

102,  III.

Papirianum,  3.

—  praetorium,  30  sq.

quod  ad  actiones  pertinet,  511  sq.

quod  ad  personas  pertinet,  86  sq. :


changes  in,  between  Gains  and  Jus-
tinian, 94.

quod   ad  res  pertinet,    189  sq. :

changes  in,  between  Gaius  and  Jus-
tinian, 195,  196.

respondendi,  55  sq.

scriptum  and  non  scriptnm,  103.

losiurandum,  556  :  see  Oath.
in  litem,  568,  658.


Insta  oausa  tradition  is,  214.

or  iustus  titulus  in  usucapio,  33a

in  in  integrum  restitutio,  571.

luBtae  nuptiae,  130.


J.


Joint  and  several  liability,  493  sq.
Joint  guarantors  of  right,  640.
Joint  tutors  and  curators,  174.
Judgment,    effect    of,    on    rights    of

action,  603-605.
Judicial  functions,  how  acquired  by

the  state,  642.
Jurists,  their  influence  on  Roman  law,

47  sq.:  schools  of,  51 :  defect  in  their

method,  59.

Kings  of  Borne,  4  :  expelled,  8.


L.


Iiaesio  enormis,  438.

Iiatinitas,  27,  28.

Ijatini  luniani,  118,  119:  succession
to,  380,  381.

liaw  of  Citations,  65,  66.

Legacy,  nature  of,  294 :  form  of,  294,
395  :  conjunctive  and  disjunctive,  297,
298 :  remedies  for  recovery  of,  295  :
ademption  and  transference  of,  309 :
to  be  paid  after  death  of  heir,  etc.,
307  :  given  poenae  nomine,  308 :  le-
gatum  partitionis,  318.

I*egal  education  at  Borne,  49,  59,  60,
78.

Legal  terminology  of  the  Bomans,
its  evidence  as  to  their  original  con-
dition, 635-637.

Leges  curiatae,  3.

luliae  iudiciariae,  649.

Liciniae,  32,  23.

Publiliae,  23,  34.

regiae,  2.

Valeriae,  21.

Legis  actiones,  30,  642-648  :  defects
of,  648,  649 :  limited  survival  of,
648.

Legitimation  of  children,  138,  139.

Letting  and  hiring,  contract  of,  443
sq. :  rights  and  duties  of  the  parties,

445-447.
Lex  as  a  mode  of  acquisition,  229.

Lex  Aebutia,  30,  31,  35,  648  so  ,  663.

Aelia  Sentia,  119-121,  136,  287.

Anastasiana,  489.

Apuleia,  429,  430.

Aquilia,  510,  525,  532  sq. :   546,

588.


686


GENERAL  INDEX.


Itsz  Atilia,  162.

Atiiiia,  233.

Calpurnia,  589,  647,  652.

Cariuleia,  21.

Cassia,  11.

Cicereia,  429,  557.

Cincia,  236  sq.,  605.

commissoria,  332.

Coraeiia,  33.

de  falsis,  252,  a6o,  282,  631.

de  iniuriis,  544.

de  sicariis,    112,    537,   544,

645.  <>30.


maiestatis,  628.

de  impcrio,  45.

decimaria,  269.

Fabia  de  plagiariis,  524,  545»633-

—  Falcidia,  255,  381.  ZOi^-^i^,  315,

320-

—  -   Kufia  Caninia,  133.

Furia  de  sponsn,  429,  430,  595.

Furia  testamentaria,  238,  310.

Iloratia  Valeria,  21,  33.

Hortensia,  23,  104.

Hostilia,  589.

lulia  cadocaria,  384,

de  adulteriis,  118,  132,  137,

24i»  26;,  545,  628.

de  ambita,  6>2.

de  annotia,  633.

de   bonorum  cessionc,   395,


605.


de  civitate,  27.

de  fundo  dolali,  134,  239.

de  maritandis,  337,  623.

—  de  residuiSy  633.

de  vi,   232,   533,   545,  630,

631.

— • maiestatis,  628.

peculfttus,  632.

rcptrtundarum,  633.

lulia  et  Titia,  163.


lunia  Norbana,  28,  118,  119,  258,

269,  380.

lunia  VcUaea,  263.

Maenia,  26.

Mamilia,  559.

Menenia,  11.

Ovinia,  33.

Papift  Poppaca,  46,  130, 133, 151,

326,  337,  369,  297,  303,   315,  348,

369.  378,  384-
Papiria,  11.


Petronia,  113.

■ Pinaria,  11,  646,  647.

Plaetoria,  171,  605.

Poetelia,  393,  663.

Pompeia  de  parncidiis,  137,  630.

Publilia,  23,  24,  429.

Rhodia  de  iactu,  316.

Rubria,  393.


Ij8X  Scribonia,  223.

59ervilia.  589.

—     Silia,  647,  653.

Tarpeia,  II.

Voconia,  237,  369,  310,  315,  365.

Ifibel  and  Slander,  541,  544.
Libellary  prooednre.  560,  561,  666.
Ijibelliu  eonventionis,  550, 560, 561.
Iiiberiini,   34,  115  sq.,  348,  378  sq.,

406,  614.
Limitation  of  actions,  595,  596 :  of

exceptions,  607.
liia  creaoenx,  464.
Ifiteral  Contract,  500  sq.
Litis  contestatio,  640, 66 1 :  as  a  mode

in  which  obligations  are  dischaiged,

474-
Iiocatio  conductio,  443  sq.

Itongi   temporia  poasessio  or  prae-

■criptio,  331.

liucnim  oeasana,  536.


MagiBtratns  maiores  and  minorea,

30-
Mala  fide  posaesaor,  208,  an.

Mancipatio,  339,  585.

Manoipium,  135.

Mandata,  105.

Mandatum,  454  sq.

qnalificatum,  433,  456,  457.

Manas,  134.

Manns  iniectio.  393,  394,  643,  644,
663.

Marriage,  1 29  sq.

Measure  of  damages  in  an  action,
536,  537-

Metus,  562,  572.

Minus  petitio,  573.

Missio  in  possessionem,  664.

Mistake,  effect  of,  on  validity  of  testa-
mentary dispositions,  305,  306 :  of
contracts,  425,  426 :  as  a  ground  for
in  integrum  restitutio,  572.

Mora,  427,  438.

Mutuum,  399.


N".


Natural    and    Civil,  oppositioo    be-
tween, 40,  102,  103.
Naturalis  obligatio,  484  fq.
Negotiorum  gestio,  461,  46a.
Nezi  liberatio,  467.
Nexum,  351.
Nomina  aroaria,  501.
Nominatores,  175.
Novatio,  471-473,    456:    necessaria,

474.
If  ovellae  oonstitntiones,  69,  79.


GENERAL  INDEX.


687


Noxal  surrender  of  slaves,  etc.,  583
sq.

O.

Oath,  the,  ns  a  mode  of  deciding  dis-
puted questions,  556,  602,  640.

Obligatio,  meaning  of,  350,  351,  481
sq. :  relation  to  actio,  350 :  obliga-
tions civil  and  praetorian,  395  :  civil
and  nntural,  483  sq.  :  the  sources  of
obligations,  350,  351,  306,  397,  509  :
modes  of  discharge,  460  sq. :  obliga-
tio a  persona  heredis  incipere  non
potest,  423.

Oocupatio,  203,  213.

Omnia  iudioia  absolutoria,  598.

Operae  locari  non  solitaa,  447.

Operae  servorum  and  anlmalium,
228.

Orationes,  105.

Ordinaril  and  vicarii  servi,  301,  580.


P.


Pacta  nuda  and  vestita,  396.
Paotiun  de  non  petendo,  475,  497.
Papian,  70.

Partition  of  the  Smpire,  61.
Partnership,    contract    of,    448   sq. :

rights  and  duties  of  partners  inter  se,

452  :  in  relation  to  third  person,  453.
Patria  potestas,  126  sq.  :   modes  of

origination,  129  :  of  termination,  144

sq.
Patriciate,  the,  146.
Pauperies,  586,  587.
Peculium,   244,   465 :    will  of,    259 :

succession  to,  on  intestacy,  362.
Penalties,  use  of,  in  stipulation,  41 1.
Pendency  of  actions,  598,  599.
Peroeptio,  211.
PerdueUio,  356.
Periculum  rei   in   contracts  of  sale,

439-
Permutatio,  405.

Perpetua  muliemm  tutela,  150, 151.

Persona,  meaning  of,  86  sq.

Pignoris  capio,  642,  649,  665.

Pignus,  242,  333-334^  403-

Plebisoita,  21,  23.

Plebs,  5  :  its  influence  on  Roman  law,
ib. :  secessions  of,  9,  20 :  disabilities
of,  10.

Pledge,  331-335 :  right  of,  how  ex-
tinguished, 335.

Plus  petitio,  509,  570.

Poena,  original  meaning  of,  637.

Poenae  temere  litigantium,  517,
621-634.

Pontifloes,  a.


Possessio  pro  herede  and  possessore,
235,  616.

Possession,  337-346,  618-619:  deri-
vative or  representative,  340 :  how
acquired,  340-342,  619 :  through
agents,  246  sq.,  341 :  how  retained
and  lost,  342,  343,  619 :  how  pro-
tected by  law,  343,  344.

Postliminium,  146.

Postumi,  153,  262  :  institution  of  pos-
tumus  alienus,  306.

Praedia  stipendiaria  and  tributaria,
214.

Praeiudicia,  178,  556,  557,  659.

Praescriptio  longi  temporis,  231.

Praescriptio  pro  actore,  651.

pro  reo,  660.

Praetor,  22,  30  sq. :  his  influence  on
law   through  control   of  procedure,

654-
peregrinus,  36,  37.

Pragmatic  sanctions,  107.

Preoarium,  332,  405.

Prescription  :     see    Iiimitation    of

actions.
Private  law,  its  original   relation  to

Public  law,  15  sq.
Procurators,  590-594.
Prodigi,  interdiction  of,  172.
Prudentes,  47  sq.
Pubertas,  169,  421.
Public  law,  10 1.
Publioa  iudicia,  627  sq.
PublicatiOi  451.

Quanti  ea  res  est,  536.
Quarta  Antonina,  141,  284.
Quasi-contractual  obligation,   396,

461  sq.
Quasi-delictal  obligation,  397,  546-

549-
Quasi-usufruct,  225.

Querella  inofflciosi  testament!,  284

sq.,  596.

Quinquaginta  decisiones,  71.


B.


Beal    actions,    forms    of,   under    the

formulary  system,  658,  659.
Beal  and  Personal  security,  331.
Beal  contracts,  398  sq.
Beceptum  nautarum,  etc.,  548.
Beouperatores,  35,  650.
Begressus,  496,  498.
Begula  Catoniana,  299,  307.
Bslegatio  in  insulam,  145.
Beplioatio,  60S,  660.
Bepraesentatio,  300,  408.


688


GENERAL  INDEX.


\y  classilications  of,  190.
Bes  communes,  197.

corporales  and  incorporales,  3 1 7.

fongibiles,  399,  403.

in  and  extra  commercium  or  patri-

moninm,  197,  416.

mancipi  and  nee  mancipi,  I7i  aoi.

pnblicae,  197.

religiosiae,  200.

sanctae,  200.

sacrae,  199.

Bes  iudioata,  003-605.

Bes  iudicstae  as  a  source  of  Roman

law,  29.
Bes  perit  domino,  440.
Bescripta,  106.
Besponsa  prudentium,  47  sq.,  to8:

enactment  of  Hadrian  relatmg  to,  58,

64:  Law  of  Citations  respecting,  65,

66.
Bobbery,  510,  529-532.
Boman  franchise,  extension  of,  26.
Boman  Law  before  the  Twelve  Tables,

a  :  history  of,  after  Justinian,  80.
Boman  populus,  original  constitution

of,  3»  4-

S.

Sabinlans  and  Frocnlians,  53,  53.

Saoramentum,  645,  646.

Saorilege,  penalties  for,  632.

Sale,  contract  of,  215,  436  sq. :  ven-
dor's obligation  tb  compensate  on
eviction,  440, 441 :  sales  on  approval,
443.

Salvius  lulianua,  his  edictum  per-
petuum,  46.

Satio,  209.

Satisdatio,  591  sq.

Savigny,  his  arrangement  of  Private
Law,  74-77.

Seotio  bonorum,  329.

Security  real  and  personal,  331.

Security  required  from  parties  to  an
action,  591  sq.

Self-redress,  636-638.

Semel  heres  semper  heres,  249,  271,

273»  290,  3^6.
Senate,  4,  9,  23,  25,  26,  44,  45.
Senatusoonsulta,  question  as  to  their

original  force,  44.
Senatusconsultum  Afinianum,  360.

Claudianum,  112,  113,  349,  395.

luventianum,  235,  564,  616.

Largianum,  381.

Libonianum,  154,  252.

Macedonianum,  44,  399, 433,  485,

5i5»  581-583*  605.

Neronianum,  295,  297.

Orfitianum,  347,   363,   370,  371,


Senatusconmiltuxn  Pegasianum,  281,
317-320.

Silaniannm,  116.

Tertullianum,  347,  367,  369,  374,

383.


372,  374,  383.


Trebellianum,  316-320,  605,  654.
Velleianum,   149,  434,  581,  605,

607.
Separatio  bononun,  291.
Sequestration,  402.
Senri  poenae,  113.
Servi  vioarii   and    ordinarii,    301,

580.
Servitudes,  218:   praedial,  219  sq. :

modes  of  origination,  221  sq. :  modes

of  extinction,  223, 224  :  inalienability

of,  234.
Servius  Tullius,  6-8.

Set-off,  565-5<57-
Slavery, 103,  111-114.
Social  Compact  Theory,  634.
Societas,  448  sq. :  omnium  bononim,

2I4»  675  ••  leonine,  450.
Solidary  Obligation,  411,  412,  494-

496.
Solutio,  469.
Speciflcatio,  205,  206.
Sponsalia,  130.
Sponsio  as  a  form  of  suretyship,  429.

poenalis,  647,  652.

praeiudicialis,  659.

Sportulae,  561.

Statuliberi,  114.

Stifttus,  87  sq.,   157 :    of  ci vitas,   89  :

of  children,  113, 115,  148  :  of  faniilia,

90  :  of  libertas,  88.
Status  controversia,  178.
Stipulation,  derivation,  406:    nature

of,  406  :  form  of,  352,  406,  407.
Stipulations   jucUcial  and    praeto-
rian, 413.
Stoicism,  influence  of,  upon   Roman

law.  38,  39.
Subscriptiones,  106.
Substitutio,  exemplaris  or  qnasi-pupil-

laris,  277.

pupillaris,  276-278,

vulgaris,  274-276.

Superficies,  328.

Suretyship,  law  of,  439  sq.,  456,  457,

609,  610:  by  women,  434.
Syngraphae,  501.

T.
Talio,  543.  637.
Tazatio,  657.
Tempufl  utile  and  continuum,  387,

553-
Testamentifactio,  252,  258,  315.
Testamentum  in  comitiis  calatisi,  250,

640.


GENERAL  INDEX,


689


Tostamentnin  in  procinctu,  250.

inofficiosam,  383  sq.

militare,  255  sq.

per  aes  et  libram,  250,  253,  640.

praetorium,  250,  251.

tripertitnm,  251.

Testis,  original  meaning  of,  640.

Theft,  509,  519-538.

Thesaurus,  213.

Titulus  putativus,~334.

Traditio,  213-316:  brevi  mann,  340.

Transaotio,  405,  475.

Transoriptio,  500.

Transfer  of  inheritance,  370,  371.

of  rights  of  action,  486  sq.

Transmission  of  rights  of  action,  596-

598.
Tribal  Ck>nstitution  of  the  Romans,

3.  5>  7.  10.
Tribuni  militum,  23.

Tribuni  plebis,  10.

Triplioatio,  608,  660.

Tutor,  Atilianns,  150,  163:  cessicius,
'  150:  dativns,  163:  ex  lege  lulia  ct
Titia,  163  :  fiduciarins,  150,  161  :
honorarins,  174:  legitimus,  150,  160,
161,  169:  optiTus,  150:  testamento,
datus,  150, 153]:  duties  of  tutor,  463 :
see  Guardian.


Tutor  personae  non  rei  datur,  155.
Tutoris    auotoritas,  when    required,

noy  15^1  i67i  421.
Twelve  Tables,  1 3  sq.

U.

Universal  suooession,  347  sq.
XTniversitates,  198,  199.
Usuoapio,  233,  339  sq.,  636.

•^ Incrativa,  335.

pro  herede,  335,  476.

XTsufruot,  335-337.
XTsureoeptio,  336.
Usus,  T34,  135,  327.

V.

Vatican  firagments,  68.
Vindlcatio,  653.
Vis  ex  conventu,  611.
Votum,  406.

W.

Wills,  forms  of,  350  sq.  :  oral,  355  :
public,  3  K5 :  soldiers,  355  sq. :  how
privileged,  355 :  of  deaf,  dumb,  and
blind  persons,  357,  360:  how  wills
are  or  oecome  void,  379  sq.


yy


OXFORD  :  rantTFD  AT  THE  CLAKEKDON  VKSSS
BV    HOBACe  HART,   PRISmEB  TO  THE   I'KIVRRSITY


SELECT  LtST  OF  STANDARD  WORKS.

M

DIOnONARISB  .       .       .       •  page  i

LAW       ,       ...       .  •        -    •

HI8T0BT,  BIOGRAPHY,  ffTC.        •  ...   4

PHILOBOFHT,  LOQIG,  BTa 6

FHT8IGAL  SCIBNOB,  BTO.      ....  »    7

<<        ■

1.   DICTIONABIES.

A    NEW    ENGLISH    DICTIONARY

ON  HISTORICAL   PRINCIPLES,
Founded  mainly  on  the  materietle  eottecUd  by  the  FhUologieal  Soeiefy,

Imperial  4to.

Pbbbbnt  Statb  of  thb  Work.  £  9.  d.

Vol.    I«  ]  ^  I  Edited  by  Dr.  Mubbat    ....    Half-morooeo    a  19    6
VoL    II.    O    Edited  by  Dr.  Mubkat     ....    Half-morooco    a  la    6

Vol.  III.  1^1  Edited  by  Dr.  Murbat  and  Hr.  Hsvbt  Bbadlet

Half-moroooo a  la    6

/F-Field 076

VoL  IV    i  '  I  Edited  by         I  Field-Fxankish o  za    6

'   {  O  (    Mr.  Bbablbt  I  Franklaw-Fys — Gh-Gaia-ooiniiig    050

\  Oainoope-GermanlBing  ....050

iH-Havenian  ...050
Haversine-Heel.  .  .  o  a  6
Heel-Hod  .....050

(7  The  renmindtT  </  th$  teorA^  to  Ae  md  qf  the  a^phabetf  ia  in  an  advanced

state  0/ prqparatum,

*^*  The  Dietionary  ie  aleo,  as  heretofore,  issued  in  the  oriyinai  Porta —

Series    I.  Parts  I-IX.        A — DistmstftU each  o  la    6

Series    L  Part  X.  DistnutAiUy— Daiggetai 076

Series  XL  Parts  I-IIL        B— Frankiah each  o  la    6

SeriesIH.  Parti.  H— Hod o  za    6


Oxford:  daruidoii  Prtn.    London:  HnmT  Fbowi»b,  AmMi  Goner,  B  G


ENGLISH  AND  ROMAN  LA  W.


A  Hebrew  and  English  Lezioon  of  the  Old  Testament,  with

an  Appendix  containing  the  Biblical  Aramaic,  based  on  the  Thesauroa
and  Lezioon  of  Oesenius,  by  Francis  Brown,  T>J>,t  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.,
.  and  0.  A  Briggs,  D.D.    Parts  I-YI.     Small  4to,  2«.  6d.  each.
Thesanms  Syriaeus :  collegerunt  Quatrem^re,  Bernstein,  Lorsbach,
Amoldi,  Agrell,  Field,  Boediger :  edidit  B.  Payne  Smith,  S.T.P.
VoL  I,  containing  Fasciculi  I-V,  sm.  foL,  5Z.  5«.
%*  ThA  Fini  Five  Faadculi  may  also  h$  had  separaidy,
Faso.  VL  il,  u. ;  Vll.^t  1 1».  6d. ;  VIII.  if.  i(w. ;  IX.  il.  5*. ;  X  Pars.  I.  il  i6b.

A  Compendions  Syziao  Dictionary,  founded   upon  the  above.

Edited  by  Mrs.  Margolioath.    Parts  I.  and  II.    Small  4to,  St.6d,nel  each.

\*  The  Work  wiU  he  computed  in  Four  Parto.

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary.     Etymologically  and  Philologi-

cally  arranged.     By  Sir  M.  Monier- Williams,  D.C.L.    4to.    2L  as.
A    Greek-English    Lexicon.      By    H.   G.    Liddell,    D.D.,    and

Robert  Scott,  D.D.    Eighth  EdUian^  Reoiaed.    4to.     iZ.  ids.

An    Etymological    Dictionary    of   the    English    Language,

arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis.     By  W.  W.   Skeat,  LittD.      TMrd
BdUion,    4to.     2I,  48.

A  Middle-English  Dictionary.  By  F.  H.  Stratmann.  A  new
edition,  by  H.  Bradley,  M.A.    4tOy  half-morocco,  il  iis.  6d.

The  Student's  Dictionary  of  Anglo-Saxon.    By  H.  Sweety  M.A.,

Ph.D.,  LL.D.    Small  4to,  Se.  6d.  net.

An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  collections  of  the
late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.  Edited  and  enlarged  by  Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,
M.A  Parts  I-IIL  A-SAR.  4to,  stiff  covers,  i5«.  each.  Part  IV,  $  i,
SAR-SWIdRIAN.  Stiff  covers,  S$,  6d,  Part  lY,  $  a,  SWtp-SNEL-
'tTMEST,  i8».  6<t
\*  A  Supplement,  %ehich  toiU  complete  the  Work,  ie  in  active  preparation.

An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  collections  of
the  late  Richard  Gleasby.  Enlai^ged  and  completed  by  G.  Yigftisson,
M.A    4to.    3{.  7s.


2.  LAW.


Anson.      Principles    of    the

En(^iah  Law  qf  Omiradt,  and  if  Agtmey
ffi  Of  FUMian  fe  OMOrvut  By  Sir  W.
R.  Anson,  D.O.L.  m^hXh  BdiHtm.
With  Appendix  of  American  Cases.
8to.    100. 6d.

La/w  and  Custom  of  the

OoneHiuHcn,    a  toIb.     8to.

Part  L     Parliament.       Third

Edition.    las.  6d.
Part  IL    The  Grown.     Second
Edition,    I4«.


Baden-Fowell.  Land-Systems

qfBriiiah  India ;  being  a  Manual  of
the  Land-Tenores,  and  of  the  Sys>
tems  of  Land-Revenue  Adminis-
tration prevalent  in  the  several
Provinces.  By  B.  H.  Baden-Powell,
CLE.    3  vols.    8vo.     32. 3«.

Digby.     An  Introduction  to

the  Hieiory  <if  the  Law  qf  ReaH  Property,
By  Kenelm  E.  Digby,  M.A  Fifth
Edition,    Svo.     I  as.  64.


Oxford:  OUrtndon  Pren.


LAW.


Graeber.    Lex  AquUia.    By

Erwin  Graeber,  Dr.  Jnr.,  M.A.
Syo.     loa.  6<I.

Hall.      International    Law,

By  W.  E.  HaU,  M.A.  Fourth  Bditim.
8vo.    a  38. 6(1.

A  IVeatiseontJie  Foreign

Powers  a»d  Jurisdiction  qf  the  BriHth
Grown.  By  W.  £.  Hall,  M. A.  Syo.
I  OS.  6(1.

Holland.    Elementa  qf  Juris-

prudmce.  By  T.  £.  HoUand,  D.C.L.
Eighth  BdiHon.    Svo.     los.  6d,

The  European  Concert

in  the  Eastern  Question;  a  Collection
of  Treaties  and  other  Public  Acts.
Edited,  with  Introductions  and
Notes,  by  T.  £.  Holland,  D.G.L.
Syo.     i2s,  6d,

Studies  in  International

Law,  By  T.  E.  Holland,  D.G.L.
8yo.     km.  6d,

GentUis,    Alberici,   De

lure  BeUi  LibH  Tree.  Edidit  T.  E.
Holland,  LO.D.  Small  4to,  half-
morocco,  ai«.

The  Institutes  of  Jus-

(tntan,  edited  as  a  recension  of
the  Institutes  of  Gains,  by  T.  E.
Holland,  D.C.L.  Second  Edition,
Extra  foap.  8yo.    5«.

Holland  and  Shadwell.  Select

TiUesfrom  the  Digest  of  Justinian.    By
T.  E.  Holland,  D.O.L.,  and  C.  L.
Shadwell,  D.G.L.    Syo.    i^s.
Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  ooYers —
Part  I.  Introductory  l^tles.   2«.  6d,
Part  IL  Family  Law.     is.
Part  IIL  Property  Law.     as.  6d,
Partly.  LawofObUgations(Nowi),
3s.  6d.    (No.  a),  45.  6d,

Ubert.    The  Oovemment  of

,  India.  Being  a  Digest  of  the
Statute  Law  relating  thereto.
With  Historical  Introduction  and


lUustratiYe  Documents.  By  Sir
Gourtenay  Ubert,  K.G.S.I.  8yo,
half-roan.    sis.

Markby.    Elements   of  Law

considered  with  reference  to  PrirwtpUs  ^
QemeraUuriagprudmce.  By  Sir  William
Markby,  D.G.L.  Fifth  EdUwn,   8yo.
I  as.  6d.

Moyle.        Imperatoris    lus-

tiniani  Institutionum  JAM  (^uattuor;
with  Introductions,  Gommentary,
Excursus  and  Translation.  ByJ.  B,
Moyle,D.G.L.  TMrdEdUion.  aYols.
8yo.    Vol.  1. 1 6s.   Vol.  II.  6s.

Contract  qf  Sale  in  the

Oiva  Law.  By  J.  B.  Moyle,  D.G.L.
8yo.    ids.  6d.

Pollock    and    Wright.     An

Essay  on  Possession  in  the  Common  Law.
By  Sir  F.  Pollock,  Bart.,  M.A.,  and
SirB.S.Wright,B.G.Ii.  8yo.  Ss.6d.

Foste.     Oaii    Institution/u/m

Juris  OiviUs  Commeniarii  Quattuor;  or,
Elements  of  Boman  Law  by  Gains,
With  a  Translation  and  Gommen-
tary  by  Edward  Poete,  M.A.  Third
Edition,    8yo.     i8s.

Raleigh.    An  Outline  qf  the

Law  qf  Property.  By  Thos.  Baleigh,
M.A.     8yo.    7s.  6(1.

Sohm.    Institutes  of  Boman

Law.  By  Rudolph  Sohm.  Trans-
lated by  J.  G.  Ledlie,  B.G.L.  With
an  Introductory  Essay  by  Erwin
Grueber,  Dr.  Jur.,  M  JL.    8yo.    i8s.

Stokes.     The    An^glo-Indian

Codes.    By  Whitley  Stokes,  LL.D.
YoL  I.  SubstantiYeLaw.  8yo.  30s.
Vol.  IL  AdjectiYe  Law.  8to.  35s.

First  and  Second  Supplements  to

theaboYe,i887-i89i.  8yo.  6s.  6d,

Separately,  No.  i,  as.  6d. ;  No.  2, 4s.  6d.


LoadoB :  Hsnbt  Frowdb,  Amen  Comar,  B.C.


fif STORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


3.    HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


Adamnaiil  Vita  S,  Columbae.

Ed.  J.  T.  Fowler,  D.O.L.  Crown
8vo,  half-bound,  Ss.  6d.  net  (with
translation,  9s.  6d.  net),

Aubrey.   ^  Brief  Li^s,' chiefly

qA  Chntsmporaries,  tet  doum  I9  Jdkn
Jubrey^  between  the  Years  1669  and
t6g6.  Edited  from  the  Author's
MSS.,  by  AxDREW  Glabk,  HA.,
LIi.D.  With  Facsimiles.  »  vols.
8yo.     35s.

BaedaeHiatoria  Ecdesiasticay

etc.  Edited  by  C.  Plummer,  M.A.
2  Tols.     Crown  8yo,  2  is.  net,

Bedford  (W.E.B.).  Th^  Blazon

of  Epiecepaqf.  Being  the  Arms  borne
by,  or  attributed  to,  the  Arch-
bishops and  Bishops  of  England
and  Wales.  With  an  Ordinary  of
the  Coats  described  and  of  other
Episcopal  Arms.  Second  BdiHon,
Revised  and  Enlarged,  With  One
Thousand  Illustrations.  Sm.  4to,
buckmm,  310.  6d.  net.

Boswell's    Life    of    Samuel

Johneon,  LL.D,  Edited  by  G.  Birk-
beck  Hill«  D.C.L.  In  six  volumes,
medium  8yo.  With  Portraits  and
Facsimiles.    Half -bound,  ^l  3«.

Bright.     Chapters   of  Early

Enf^ieh  Church  History.  By  W.
Bright,  D.D.  Third  EdUion,  Be-
vised  and  Enlarged*  With  a  Map.
8yo.     128.

Oasaubon  (Isaac).  1559-f  614.

By  Mark  Pattison.     Svo.     i6e.

Clarendon's    History  of   the

RebtXUon  and  OivU  Wars  in  Enghmd,
Re-edited  ftx>m  a  fresh  collation  of
the  original  MS.  in  the  Bodleian
Library,  with  marginal  dates  and
occasional  notes,  by  W.  Dunn
Maeray,  M.  A.,  F.9.  A.  6  yols.  Crown
Svo.     iL  5«.

HewinB.       The      Whit^oord

Papers,    Being  the  Correspondence


and  other  Manuscripts  of  Colonel
Charles  Whxtefoosd  and  Caleb
WmfEFooRD,  from  1739  to  18 10.
Edited,  with  Introduction  and
Notes,  by  W.  A.  S.  Hewins,  M.A.
8vo.     ta.  6(1.

Barle.  Handbook  to  the  LaTul-^

Charters,  and  other  Saxcnic  DoeumentSw
ByJohnEarie,M.A.  Crown  Svo.  i6«.

Freeman.      The    Hieftory    of

SicHyfrom  the  Eariiest  Times.
Vols.  I.  and  II.    Svo,  cloth,  2I.  m.
Vol.   IIL      The   Athenian  and

Carthaginian  Invasions.    24s.
Vol.  IV.    Prom  the  Tyranny  of

Dionysios    to   the    Death    of

Agathoklte.  Edited  by  Artii«r

J.  Evan8»  MA.    ait.

Freeman.       The    Beign     of

Wmiam  12h/%u  and  the  Aoeemim'ef
Henry  the  First,  By  E.  A.  Freraoan,
D.C.L.  2  vols.    Svo.     i{.  16s,

Gktrdiner.  TheConetitutionajl

Decumenls  qf  the  Pnriian  RevohOion,
1628-1660.  Selected  and  Edited
by  Samuel  Rawson  Gardiner,  M.A.
(>own  Svo.    90.

Gfrross.     The  Oild  Merchant;

a  Contribution  to  Briti^  Municipal
History.  By  Charles  Oroas,  Ph.D.
2  vols.    Svo.    24s.

HastingpB.    Hayings  and  the

RohiUa  War,  By  Sir  John  Stracheyy
G.C.S.I.    Svo,  oloth,  los.  6d.

Hill.        Sources    for    Oreek

History  between  the  Persian  and  i^Bfopon*
nesianWars.  Collected  and  arranged
by  G.  F.  Hill,  M. A.     6vo.     tos.  6d.

Hodgkin.  Italy  and  her  In-
vaders. With  Plates  and  Maps.  By
T.  Hodgkin,  D.C.L.

Vols.  I-II.  Second  Editim.  aL  2a.
Vols.    III-IV.      aeoond  Edition,

il.  1 6a.
Vols.  V-VI.     li.  16s.
Vol.  Vlt.    In  the  Press.


Oxford:  ClaMiidonPi


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC.


^ttckson.    The  Chfirch  of  St.

Mary  the  Virgin,  Oxford,  By  T.  Gt.
JacksoB,  M.A.,  R.A.  With  Twenty-
four  fuI4«page  Illustrations,  and
numerous  Guts  ia  the  Text.  Demy
4tO|  half-boun4,  36s.  net;  or  im
vellum,  gilt  top  aBd  morocoo  labels,
&c.,  j^te,  net,

/ohnson.    Letters  of  Samuel

Jehn9onyLL,D.  Oollected  aad  Edited
by  G.  Birkbeck  Hill,  D.C JL.  a  vols,
half-roan,  28s.

JohmsonianMiscdlaniee.

By  the  sane  Editor,  a  vols.  Medium
Svo,  half-roan,  a  8$.

KitoUa.  A  History  of  Frafice.

With  Numerous  Maps,  Plans,  and
Tables.  By  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.
In  three  Volumes,  New  Bdition.
Grown  Svo,  each  los.  6d.
Vol.  L  to  1453.  Vol.  IL  1453-
i6a4«    VoL  IIL  i6a4-i793.

Ijewis    (Sir    &    CornewaXl).  \

An  Eesay  on  the  Gowmment  qf  De^
pm4enciM.  Edited  by  G.  P.  Lucas,
B.A.    8vo,  half-roaa.    144.

Iiuoas.     Introduction    to    a

Historical  Oeogrc^y  qf  the  BrUieh
Coionies.  By  G.  P.  Lucas,  B. A.  With
Eight  Maps.  Grown  Svo.    4s.  6d.

Historical  Geography  of

tkeBriii^Ooiimies:

Vol.  I.  The  Mediterranean  and
Eastern  Golonies  (exclusive  of
India).  With  Eleven  Maps.
Grown  Svo.    5«.

Vol.  II.  The  West  Indian  Golo-
nies. With  Twelve  Maps.
Grown  Svo.    75.  6d.

Vol.  III.     West  Africa*     With

Five  Maps.  Grown  Svo.  79. 6d.
Vol.  IV.    South  and  East  Africa.

Historical  and  Geographical.

With  Ten  Maps.    Grown  Svo,

gs.  6d.

Also  Vol.  IV  In  two  Parts-
Part  I.  Historical,  68.  6d.
Part  II.    (j^graphical,  3s.  6d.


Ludlow.      The   Memoirs    of

Edmund  Ludlow,  Uetctenant^Oeneral  qf
the  Hone  in  the  Army  qf  the  Otmrnm^
wealth  qfEngUmd,  162^-16'! 2.  Edited
by  G.  H.  Firth,  M.A.  1  vols.  Svo.
If.  168.

Maofaiavelli.       U    Principe.

Edited  by  L.  Arthur  Burd,  M.A.
Wi^  an  Introduction  by  Lord
Acton.    Svo.    X4S.

Frotheio.    Select  Staiutee  and

other  ConstitntUmal  Dommentey  HMtt^-
tive  ^  Vte  Beigna  qf  IKaatheth  afid.
James  I.  Edited  by  G.  W.  Protbero,
M.A.    Grown  Svo.    los.  64.

Select  Statutes  and  other


Lemments  bearing  en  A«  Oon^iteiltienal
History  qf  England,  from  aj>.  1307  fo
155S.  By  the  samo  Editor,  [in
PrepafroHfm,']

Bamsay  (Sir  J.  H.),  Lanoaeter

and  York.  A  Gentury  of  English
History  (a.d.  i  399-1485).  a  vols,
Svo.    With  Index,  37s.  (M.

Bamsay  (W.  M.).     The  CUiee

and  Bishogfrics  of  Phrygia.    By  W.  M.
Bamsay,  D.G.L.,  LL.D.
Vol.L  PartL  The  Lycos  Valley
and  South- Western  Phrygia.
Royal  Svo.     iSs.net.
VoL  I.  Part  II.  West  and  West-
Gentral  Phrygia.     a  is.  n^t*

Banko.    A  History  of  Sng^

land,  pnnc^patty  in  the  SetierUeerUh
Cenitay,  By  L.  von  Ranke.  Trans-
lated under  the  superintendence  of
G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.,  and  G.  W.
Boase,  M.A.  6  vols.  Svo.  638.
Revised  Index,  separately,  is.

Bashdall.   The  Universities  of

Europe  in  Ae  Middle  Ages,  By  Hast-
ings Rashdall,  MA.  a  vols,  (in  3
Parts)  Svo.  With  Maps.  2I,  5s.,  net.


LondoBt  HnntT  Faowmi,  Amen  OorMr,  B.O.


PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC.


Smith's  Lect'iires  on  Justice^

PDlfc0,  Bnenue  and  Arms,  Edited,
with  Introduction  and  Notes,  by
Edwin  Cannan.    Svo.   109.  6d,  net.

Wealth     of    Nations.


With  Notes,  by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogers,
M.A.     a  toIb.    Svo.    a  is.

Stephens.      The      Principal

Speeches  of  the  Statesmen  and  Orators  qf
the   French    RetohOion,    1 789-1 795.
By  H.  Morse  Stephens,      a  vols.
Grown  8to.    a  is.

StnbbB.    Select  Charters  and

other  lUustrations  qf  English  ConstUu-
tional  History,  from  the  Earliest  Times
to  the  Reign  qf  Edward  L  Arranged
and  edited  by  W.  Stnbbs,  B.D.,
Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford.  EighJIh
Edition.    Crown  8to.    8s.  6d,

ITie  Constitutional  His-
tory qf  England,  in  its  Origin  and
DevelopmenL  Library  Edition.    3  vols.
Demy  8yo.    al.  8s.
Also  in  3  Tols.  crown  8yo,  price
las.  each.


Stubbs.  SeveTVteen  Lectures  an

the  Study  qf  Mediaeffol  and   Modem
History.    Crown  8yo.    8s.  6d.

Registrv/m      Sa^crum


Anglieanum.  An  attempt  to  exhibit
the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession
in  England.  By  W.  Stubbs,  D.B.
Small  4to.    Second  Edition.    los.  6d.

Swift  (P.  D.).     The  Life  and

Times  qf  James  the  First  of  Aragon.
By  F.  D.  Swift,  B.A.  8yo.   las.  6d.

Vinogradoff.      Villainage  in

England.  Essays  in  English  Medi-
aeyal  History.  ByPaulYinogradoir,
Professor  in  the  Uniyersity  of
Mosoow.     8yo,  half-bound.    16s.

WoodhouBe.       Aetolia;     its

Oeographyf  Topography^  and  Anttqui-
ties.  By  William  J.  Woodhousb,
M.A.,  F.R.G.S.  With  Maps  and
Illustrations.  Royal  8yo,  price
flis.  net.


4.  FHILOSOFHT,  LOGIC,  ETC.


Baoon.    Novwra     Organum.

Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes,
&c,  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Second
Edition.    8yo.    15s.

Berkeley.       The    Works    of

Oeorge  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop
qfOoyne;  induding  many  qf  his  writ*
ings  hitherto  unpublished.  With  Pre-
faces, Annotations,  and  an  Account
of  his  Life  and  Philosophy.  By
A.  Campbell  Fraser,  Hon.  D.C.L.,
LL.D.  4  yols.  8yo.  al.  18s.
The  Lifh,  Letters,  dc,  separately,  i6s.

Bosanquet.     Logic;    or,  the

Morphology  qf  KnotUedge.  By  B.
Bosanquet,  H.A.    8yo.     a  is.

Butler.    The  Works  of  Joseph

Butler^  D.CL.j  sometime  Lord  Bishop
of  Durham.    Diylded  into  sections.


with  sectional  headings,  an  index
to  each  yolume,  and  some  occasional
notes;  also  prefatory  matter.  Edited
by  the  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,
a  yols.    Medium  8yo.    14s.  each.

Fowler.  The  Elements  of  De-
ductive Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the
use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities.
By  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Tenth  Edition,
with  a  Collection  of  Examples.
Extra  fcap.  8yo.    3s.  6d.

The  Etevnents  of  Induc-
tive Logic,  deeigned  mainiyfor  the  use  <^
Students  in  the  Universities.  By  the
same  Author.  Sixth  Edition.  Extra
fcap.  8yo.    6s.

Fowler.     Logic ;    Deduotive

and  Inductive,  combined  in  a  single
yolume.    Extra  fcap.  8yo.    7s.  6d.


03cf  ord :  Olarandon  Prea.


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE,  ETC.


Fowler    and    Wilson.      The

PrindpLes  ofMoraU,  By  T.  Fowler,
D.D.,  and  J.  IL  Wilson*  B.D.  8yo,
cloth,  14s.

Green.  Prolegomena  toEthics.

By  T.  H.  Green,  M.A.  Edited  by
A.  0.  Bradley,  M.A.  Fourth  Edition.
Crown  8vo.    ^8,  6d,

Hegel.     The  Logic  of  Hegel.

Translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia
ofthe  Philosophical  Sciences.  With
Prolegomena  to  the  Study  of  Hegel's
Logic  and  Philosophy.  By  W.Wal-
lace, M.A.  Second  EdUum^  Revised
and  Augmented.  2  vols.  Orown  Svo.
io«.  6d.  each.

HegePs  Philosophy  of  Mind.

Translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia
ofthe  Philosophical  Sciences.  With
Five  Introductory  Essays.  By  Wil-
liam Wallace,  M.A.,  LL.D.  Crown
Svo.     I  OS.  6d.

Hume'8  Treatise  of  Human

Nature.  Edited,  with  Analytical
Index,  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A.
Second  Edition.    Crown  8to.     Ss.

Enquiry     concerning

ike  Human  UnderelandinQj  and  an
Enquiry  concerning  the  Prindples  qf
Morals.  EditedbyL.  A.Selby-Bigge,
M.A.    Crown  8yo.    7*.  6d,

Leibniz.  The  Monadology  and

other  Philoaophical  Writings.  Trans-
lated, with  Introduction  and  Notes,


by    Robert
Crown  Svo.


Latta,    M,A.,   D.Phil.
Ss,6d.


5.    PHYSICAL

OhamberB.    A  Handbook  of

Deeeripiive   and  Praetieal  Astronomy,
By  G.F.  Chambers,  F.R.A.S.  Fowrth
Editiont  in  3  vols.    Demy  Svo.
Vol.  I.     The  Sun,  Planets,  and

Comets,    lis.
Vol.  II.    Instruments  and  Prac-
tical Astronomy.    2  is.
Vol.  IIL   The  Starry  Heavens.  14M.


Locke.  An  Essay  Concern-
ing Htanan  Understanding.  By  John
Locke.  Collated  and  Annotated,
with  Prolegomena,  Biographical,
Critical,  and  Historic,  by  A.  Camp-
bell Fraser,  Hon.  D.C.L.,  LL.I>.
a  vols.    Svo.     U.  I2s.

Lotae'B  Logic,  in  Three  Books ;

of  Thought,  of  Investigation,  and
of  Knowledge.  English  Translation;
edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A.
Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr.  Svo.  12s.


Metaphysic,    in    Three


Books;  Ontol<^Qr,  Cosmology,  and
Psychology.  English  Translation  ;
edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A.
Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr.  Svo.  I  as.

Martineau.     Types  of  Ethical

Theory.  By  James  Martineau,  D.D.
Third  Edition.   2  vols.   Cr.  Svo.    I5<.

A  Study  of  Religion:

its  Sourcesand  Contents.  Second  Edition.
2  vols.    Cr.  Svo.  I5«.

Selby-Bigge.  British  Moral-
ists. Selections  from  Writers  prin-
cipally of  the  Eighteenth  Century.
Edited  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  HJl.
2  vols.    Crown  Svo.     iSs.

Wallace.  Lectures  and  Essays

on  Natural  Theology  and  Ethics.  By
William  Wallace.  M.A.,  LL.D.
Edited,  with  a  Biographical  Intro-
ductionby  Edward  Caird,  M.A. ,  Hon.
D.C.L.  Svo,  with  a  Portrait.  las.  &1.


SCIENCE,  ETC.

De  Bary.  Comparative  Ana-
tomy qf  the  Vegetative  Organs  of  the
Phanerogams  and  Ferns.  By  Dr.  A.
de  Bary.  Translated  by  F.  O.
Bower,  M.  A.,  and  D.  H.  Scott,  M.  A.
Royal  Svo.    il.  as.  6d.

De  Bary.   Comparative  Mor*

phology  and  Biology  qf  Fungi,  Myeetoaoa


London :  HmniT  Faowos,  Amen  Oonittr,  B.G.


8


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE^  ETC.


arkd  Baderia.  By  Dr.  A.  de  Bary.
Translated  by  H.  R  F.  GarnBey,
M.A.  Beyised  by  Isaac  Bayley
Balfour,  M. A.,  M.D.,F.B.S.  Boyal
8vo,  half-moroeeo,  iL  28,6(L

Be  Bury.  Lectures  on  Bacteria.

By  Dr.  A.  de  Bary.  SmmwI  Jm-
jMwwrf  BtHiion.  Translated  by  H.
E.  F.  Gamsey,  ICA.  Revised  by
Isaae  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.RS.    Crown  Svo.    6f.

Druce.     The  Flora  of  Berk-

ehivt.  Being  a  Topographical  and
Historical  Account  of  the  Flowering
Plants  and  Ferns  found  in  the
County,  with  short  Biographical
Notices.  By  0.  C.  Druce,  Hon.
M.A.  Ozon.    Crown  Svo,  i6s.  mt.

Gk>ebel.    Ovilines  of  Classifh-

tation  and  Special  Mcrpkniogy  iif  Plants.
By  Dr.  K.  Goebel.  Translated  by
H.  £.  F.  Gamsey,  M. A.  Revised  by
Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.R.&     Royal  Svo,  half-morocco,

It  IS.

SaohB.     A  History  of  Botany.

Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Gamsey,
M.  A.  Revised  by  I.  Bayley  Balfour,
M.A.,M.D.,F.RS.  Crown  Svo.  los.

FoBBil  Botany.  Being  an  In-
troduction to  Paiaao/ph^kioj/y  from  the
Standpoint  of  the  Botanist  By  H.
Graf  zu  Solms-Laubach.  Translated
by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey,  M.  A.  Revised
by  I.  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,
F.RS.  Royal  Svo,  half-morocco,  iSs.


Biological  Series.

I.  The   PhyMUgy    of  Nerte,  of

3luade,  and  <if  tk§  EUdrical
Organ.  Edited  by  J.  Burden
Sanderson,  M.D.,  F.R.SS.  L.&E.
Medium  Svo.    i2.  is.

II.  The  Anatomy  of  the  Frojf.    By

Dr.  Alexander  Eoker,  Professor
in  the  University  of  Freiburg.
Translated,  wHh  numerous
Annotations  and  Additions,
by  G.  Haslam,  M.D.  Med.
Svo.  a  IS.

IT.  E9oe^!f8  upon  Heredity  and
Kindred  Biologicai  ProUeme.  By
Dr.  A.  Weismann.  Authorized
Translation.    Crown  Svo.

Vol.  I.  Edited  by  E.  B.  PoultoB,
S.  Sch»nland,and  A.  E.  Shipley.
Second  Edition.     7s.  6d,

Vol.  II.  Editwi  by  E.  B.  Poulton,
and  A.  £.  Shipley.    5s.

Elliott.     An  Introduction  to

the  Algebra  of  Quantics.  By
E.  B.  Elliott,  MA.    Svo.     15s.

Johnston.     An    Elementary

Treatise  on  Analytical  Geometry^  with
Numerous  Examples.  By  W.  J.
Johnston,  M.A.  (R.17.I.)  Crown
8va     Prise  rsdncsd  to  6e,

Frestwich.     Geology^  Ckemi"

cal,  Physicalf  and  StratigraphuxU.  By
Sir  Joseph  Prestwich,  M.A.,  F.R.S.
In  two  Volumes.     3L  is.

Price.     A    Treatise    on    the

Measurement  qf  EUdrical  Retdstance,
By  W.  A.  Pi'ice,  M.A.,  A.M.I.C.E.
Svo.     14s.


O;cfort
AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS

HENRY    FROWDE
